MONTHLY REPORT
AUGUST SEPTEMBER OCTOBER NOVEMBER DECEMBER
2010
Vol 62
No 8

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
EUROSYSTEM
Monthly Report
August 2010
Deutsche Bundesbank
Wilhelm-Epstein-Strasse 14
60431 Frankfurt am Main
Germany
Postal address
Postfach 10 06 02
60006 Frankfurt am Main
Germany
Tel +49 69 9566 -0
Fax +49 69 9566 3077
Telex 41227 within Germany
414431 from abroad
http://www.bundesbank.de
Reproduction permitted only if source is stated.
ISSN 0418 -8292 (print edition)
ISSN 1862 -1325 (online edition)
The German original of this Monthly Report
went to press at 4.30 pm on 17 August 2010.Annual and weekly publishing schedules for
selected statistics of the Deutsche Bundes-
bank can be downloaded from our website.
The statistical data are also published on the
website.
The Monthly Report is published by the
Deutsche Bundesbank, Frankfurt am Main,
by virtue of section 18 of the Bundesbank
Act. It is available to interested parties free of
charge.
This is a translation of the original German-
language version, which is the sole authorita-
tive text.

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2010
ContentsThe current economic situation
in Germany 5
Overview 6
Global and European setting 12
The current economic upturn in the
United States in comparison with
earlier phases of recovery 18
Monetary policy and banking business 24
Money market management
and liquidity needs 26
Third special survey on German banks’
lending to domestic enterprises 35
Financial markets 39
Economic conditions in Germany 49
Public finances 61
Statistical Section 1*
Key economic data for the euro area 5*
Overall monetary survey in the euro area 8*
Consolidated financial statement
of the Eurosystem 16*
Banks 20*
Minimum reserves 42*
Interest rates 43*
Capital market 48*
Financial accounts 52*
Public finances in Germany 54*
Economic conditions in Germany 61*
External sector 68*

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
EUROSYSTEM
Monthly Report
August 2010
Overview of publications by the
Deutsche Bundesbank 77*
Abbreviations and symbols
eEstimated
pProvisional
pePartly estimated
rRevised
...Data available at a later date
.Data unknown, not to be published or
not meaningful
0Less than 0.5 but more than nil
–Nil
Discrepancies in the totals are due to round-
ing.

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2010
5The current economic
situation in Germany

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
EUROSYSTEM
Monthly Report
August 2010
6OverviewGerman economy very buoyant
Doubts about the stability of public finances
in some euro-area countries featured promin-
ently in the second quarter. While the escalat-
ing Greek debt crisis and its knock-on effects
on other euro-area countries triggered ten-
sions in the financial markets and consider-
ably dented confidence and dampened eco-
nomic activity in the countries concerned,
real economic development in the single-
currency area as a whole and in the rest of
the world proved robust.
The upturn in global economic activity con-
tinued apace in the second quarter of 2010,
with differences between developed and
emerging economies narrowing. Several
large emerging market economies, some of
which were already displaying signs of over-
heating after a phase of very dynamic expan-
sion, moved onto a flatter growth path. This
is true, in particular, of China, where credit
standards for loans to enterprises and house-
holds were tightened significantly. In the
United States and Japan, too, growth slowed
distinctly after a strong performance in the
latter part of 2009 and early part of 2010.
The euro area, however, generated a marked-
ly stronger economic momentum, which was
largely driven by Germany.
The outlook for the second half of the year
remains favourable, although there are signs
that the dynamics of global output and inter-
national trade will slacken somewhat.
The international financial markets remained
under the influence of the debt crisis that hasGlobal
economy
Financial
market setting

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2010
7continued to affect a number of euro-area
countries even following the extensive stabil-isation measures taken by the member statesin early May. Although government bondspreads in the euro area stayed high despitenarrowing temporarily on the back of the ini-tiatives taken, overall the situation on theEuropean government bond markets haseased somewhat. This was helped by the fis-cal consolidation measures adopted by sev-eral euro-area countries, by steadier real eco-nomic developments and by the bank stresstest, which showed the European and theGerman banking system to be quite robusteven if confronted with challenging scen-arios. Buoyed by benign economic indicatorsand upbeat company reports, the Europeanstock markets have rallied since the end ofMay. The euro, too, rebounded after havingfallen to its lowest level in several years in thewake of the debt crisis, particularly in Greece.
The Governing Council of the ECB left its key
policy rates unchanged. Although the overalleconomic setting in the euro area has im-proved further, there is still considerable cap-acity underutilisation, uncertainties remain onfinancial markets, and monetary and creditgrowth is muted overall. The situation on theEuropean money market has tended to stabil-ise further during the past few months.Longer-term unsecured money market rateshave been edging upwards since the end ofApril. This dynamic accelerated when the firstone-year long-term refinancing operationmatured on 1 July 2010, as a result of whicha total of 3442 billion was withdrawn from
the banking system. The overnight moneymarket rate EONIA, too, has risen on balance,amid some volatility, since the expiry of the
first one-year refinancing operation. Highermoney market rates should not be interpret-ed as a monetary policy signal, however, butrather as a reflection of the improved situ-ation on the European money market.
As planned, the covered bonds purchase pro-
gramme was concluded on 30 June once thepre-announced 360 billion purchase volume
was reached. In addition, the volumes ofEuropean government bond purchases,which were agreed in May, were sharply cur-tailed in recent weeks.
M3 growth in the euro area accelerated dis-
tinctly during the second quarter, althoughthe underlying expansionary momentum re-mained weak. The current development islargely the result of banks’ transactions withother financial intermediaries, which haveproved very volatile in the wake of the finan-cial market tensions of the last two years. Themain counterpart of monetary expansion wasagain bank lending to the public sector. Butlending to the private sector, too, gatheredpace, turning positive again following threequarters of negative growth. Loans to non-financial corporations contracted moderately,however, after increasing slightly betweenJanuary and March following three quartersof negative growth. Overall, current monet-ary and credit developments do not signalany pronounced risks to price stability in theeuro area.
In the second quarter of 2010, the German
economy staged a clear, and, at least in thismagnitude, unexpectedly strong recovery.
Monetary
policy
German
economy

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
EUROSYSTEM
Monthly Report
August 2010
8Just as it had previously stalled in the wake of
the slump in global trade, especially in high-
quality industrial durables, the German econ-
omy is now benefiting from the strong revival
in global trade – to which it is itself contribut-
ing through sharply rising imports. According
to an initial estimate of the Federal Statistical
Office, real gross domestic product (GDP)
rose by a very strong 2.2% on the quarter in
seasonally and calendar-adjusted terms be-
tween April and June. More than half of the
fall in output attributable to the crisis has
therefore now been recouped. Besides the fa-
vourable external environment, domestic fac-
tors also played a part. For example, weather-
related output losses suffered during the win-
ter months, which primarily affected the con-
struction and transport sectors, were quickly
made good. Moreover, investment in machin-
ery and equipment rose perceptibly.
The fact that the economic upturn has
gathered pace worldwide and has acquired a
broader regional base has particularly benefit-
ed German exporters. Only uncertainty in
connection with the debt crisis in the euro
area temporarily dampened the mood some-
what. Overall, almost three-quarters of the
downturn in exports due to the crisis have
meanwhile been recovered. One indication of
increasing optimism among Germany’s trade
partners is that, for the first time since the
onset of the global economic recovery, de-
mand for German capital goods has substan-
tially outpaced that for intermediate goods.
Measured by value, imports of goods actually
rose a little more strongly than exports in the
second quarter. Germany’s European trade
partners are benefiting from the currently fastpace of economic growth in Germany, which
can, in turn, largely be attributed to its suc-
cess in exporting to markets outside Europe.
Thus, imports from other euro-area countries
expanded more than twice as rapidly as Ger-
man enterprises’ exports to these countries in
the first two quarters of 2010.
Investment in machinery and equipment
picked up noticeably in the second quarter.
Construction investment, too, rose sharply.
This was fuelled by a backlog effect following
the long cold winter as well as by the govern-
ment’s economic stimulus programmes to
renew infrastructure and renovate public
buildings.
Private consumption spending should have
risen again in real terms during the reporting
period for the first time in three quarters. Re-
tail spending was somewhat higher. More-
over, it is likely that private car purchases,
which declined much less sharply than in the
preceding quarters in terms of unit sales,
were concentrated on more up-market
models.
The consumer climate in Germany continues
to be bolstered by the very robust labour mar-
ket, which has now probably bottomed out
about a year after overall economic output
reached its trough. According to estimates by
the Federal Statistical Office, employment
rose in seasonally adjusted terms in the
second quarter of 2010 compared with the
preceding quarter. In April and May, the num-
ber of employees subject to social security
contributions in manufacturing – which has
been particularly hard hit by the financial and

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2010
9economic crisis – and the logistics sector, with
which it has close economic ties, increasedfor the first time since the fourth quarter of2008. Moreover, temporary employmentagencies hired a considerable number of add-itional staff. This, together with the steadydecline in cyclically motivated short-timeworking, is another visible sign that the re-covery is gradually starting to be felt on thelabour market, too.
Prices continued to nudge upwards at all
stages of the production chain in the secondquarter of 2010, although the magnitude ofthe respective inflationary impulse was closelyassociated with the significance and compos-ition of the energy component. Upstream en-ergy prices rose sharply again in the secondquarter of 2010, although prices temporarilyfell in the course of the quarter as crude oilprices declined. Import prices, which are par-ticularly sensitive to petroleum prices, roseagain sharply on the quarter in seasonally ad-justed terms, whereas the increase in exportprices was only roughly half as high. Quarter-on-quarter consumer price inflation wasroughly unchanged from the two previousperiods, at 0.4% on a seasonally adjustedbasis. The year-on-year rate rose to 1.0% ona quarterly average and 1.2% in July. Themoderate upward development is likely tocontinue over the next few months.
Overall, the underlying cyclical momentum in
Germany appears favourable at present, andthe economic upturn is likely to continue inthe second half of the year, although risksarising from developments on the inter-national financial markets remain a potentialthreat. The pace of expansion will normalise
following the exceptionally brisk growth ofthe second quarter. This is implied by theprobably more moderate growth path of theglobal economy in the second half of theyear. This would cause the current surgein export growth to decelerate. By contrast,commercial investment is likely to pick upsteam as replacement purchases are becom-ing more pressing and product ranges needadjusting. Another factor driving the increas-ing propensity to invest is firms’ buoyant opti-mism about their future prospects. Privateconsumption should profit from the ongoingimprovement of the labour market. As thingscurrently stand, funding constraints will poseno barrier to a continued economic recovery.Neither bank nor business surveys indicateany current or imminent credit crunch in Ger-many. Overall, gross domestic product is fore-cast to increase by around 3% in real termsthis year.
Despite the significantly brighter overall
macroeconomic setting, Germany’s public fi-nances will deteriorate considerably again in2010 owing to the expansionary fiscal policystance. The cyclical upswing will have littleimpact on the deficit as the growth structure,unlike last year, is not favourable to publicsector revenues. The deficit ratio will there-fore continue to rise appreciably. It is, how-ever, likely to be lower than initially feared, re-maining well below 5%. The debt ratio,which rose sharply last year, will increase per-ceptibly again.
Next year, the general government deficit
could decline to around 4% of GDP provided
Public finances

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
EUROSYSTEM
Monthly Report
August 2010
10that spending policy is basically restrained,
the underlying cyclical dynamics remain posi-
tive and the economic stimulus measures are
phased out. Additional consolidation meas-
ures that were announced in June could fur-
ther reduce the deficit. However, the debt
ratio is likely to rise further, largely as a result
of the still high deficit.
Although the general government deficit
could, therefore, be brought back down
below the 3% ceiling by as early as 2012,
public finances will have deteriorated dramat-
ically compared with the pre-crisis situation.
The debt ratio will have risen sharply, and
central and state government budgets will
still fall well short of the objective of achiev-
ing structurally more or less balanced
budgets, which the reform of the national
budgetary rules made a constitutional re-
quirement. The Federal government’s clear
commitment to strengthening public finances
and the recently adopted consolidation meas-
ures are therefore welcome. It is now crucial
to avoid the cardinal error committed in past
years of using a better-than-expected eco-
nomic performance to dilute the fiscal policy
stance. Should the macroeconomic outlook
turn out to be more positive, this should be
used to reach the deficit targets ahead of
schedule.
In its draft budget plan for 2011 and
medium-term financial plan up to 2014, the
German government at the beginning of July
mapped out a route to reducing the deficit in
line with the new debt rule. This is based on a
more favourable forecast for the central gov-
ernment budget this year and outlines the re-quired structural deficit reduction stages over
the next few years, which should ensure that
the budget is more or less balanced by 2016.
However, some of the planned consolidation
measures have not yet been finalised, and a
sizeable global spending cut must be
achieved towards the end of the planning
period; moreover, there is virtually no safety
margin with respect to the borrowing limit.
Hence fiscal policy measures will be required;
moreover, it must be borne in mind that a po-
tentially even more favourable macroeco-
nomic development in the current year will
not give fiscal policymakers a wider radius of
action but will merely lower the starting point
for the structural deficit reduction over the
next few years. The further updated assess-
ment of the course of economic development
will have to be factored into the central gov-
ernment budget for 2011 when it is adopted
in the autumn. State governments likewise
face the task of continuously reducing the
high structural deficits in their budgets in the
coming years in line with the new constitu-
tional debt rules.
Recent developments have made it abun-
dantly clear that sound government finances
are a key prerequisite for enabling fiscal pol-
icymakers to influence events in a crisis. Al-
though the EU budget rules do, in principle,
provide a suitable framework, they were
poorly implemented in the past. This points
to the need to strengthen the rules and
sharpen the instruments used to enforce
them. There seems to be a general consensus
about the desirability of giving greater weight
to the debt level and, in particular, to the pre-
ventive component of the Stability and

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2010
11Growth Pact. It is also intended to improve
the coordination of budgetary surveillanceand recommendations at EU level with na-tional budgetary plans. Any further-going cri-sis prevention strategies should reinforce theincentives for sustainable national fiscal pol-icy. Joint liability for other member states’debt or institutionalised automatic support
mechanisms at the European level are notcompatible with the principle of sovereign re-sponsibility for fiscal policy. Without the polit-ical will to comply with the jointly agreedframework, however, all efforts at reform willultimately fail.

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
EUROSYSTEM
Monthly Report
August 2010
12Global and European
settingWorld economic activity
The upswing in the world economy con-
tinued at a rapid pace in the second quarter
of 2010. Global industrial output has now re-
turned to pre-crisis levels. The growth forces
also now seem to be more evenly balanced
between the advanced and the emerging
economies. However, growth appears to be
slowing down in the current half of 2010.
After having already, in some cases, shown
initial signs of overheating following a period
of torrid growth, the major emerging market
countries tightened the reins of monetary
and credit policy – with fiscal policy stimuli
already weakening – and thus brought their
economies onto a flatter growth path. This is
especially true of China, where the conditions
for loans to households and enterprises were
tightened significantly. It must be noted,
though, that the Asian emerging economies’
industrial output was, at last report, one-fifth
higher than in mid-2008.
Among the group of industrial countries, the
United States economy, which had grown
quite rapidly in the last three months of 2009
and first three months of 2010, expanded
at a perceptibly more moderate pace in
the second quarter; the Japanese economy
stalled. By contrast, the euro-area economy
grew visibly more briskly. Germany accounted
for a considerable percentage of this growth;
catching-up effects in construction following
the weather-related output shortfalls in the
winter also played a role. In the industrial
countries, considerable expansionary stimuli
continued to be delivered by monetary policy
and, in part, by fiscal policy. Moreover, the in-Strong global
growth in
second quarter,
more evenly
distributed
across
individual
regions
Industrial
countries
growing as
a group at
persistently
fast pace

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2010
13ventory cycle gave economic activity a further
boost. In the spring months, according to ini-tial estimates based on provisional data forthe majority of the major economies and theeuro area, real gross domestic product (GDP)for this group of countries grew at a season-ally adjusted
3/C254% on the period, which was
the same pace as in the winter months. Itsyear-on-year growth stood at 2
1/C252%; this was
23/C254% off the cyclical peak reached in early
2008.
Although the worsening of the debt crisis in
Greece in early May and the contagion ef-fects that rippled to other countries on theeuro-area periphery led to considerable lossesof confidence and a slowdown in economicactivity in the affected countries, these re-newed tensions in the financial markets failedto have any adverse impact on real economicdevelopments in the euro area as a wholeand the rest of the world. It must be notedthat, in reaction to the turmoil, crude oilprices fell in early May.
The world economy appears to have re-
mained on a growth track after mid-year,though probably at a slower pace. The globalpurchasing managers indices for manufactur-ing and services, starting from a high level,sagged in the past few months. The Bundes-bank leading indicator is likewise signallingthat global economic activity might calmdown in the second half. However, fromtoday’s vantage point the continuation of theglobal economic recovery is not in any dan-ger.Because the world economy got the year
2010 off to such an unexpectedly good startand continued to grow at a strong pace inthe spring, in early July the InternationalMonetary Fund (IMF) once again revised up-wards its global growth forecast for 2010, byone-half percentage point to 4.6%; it left itsprojection for 2011 unchanged at 4.3%.These figures reflect growth rates for theemerging economies of 6.8% and 6.4% re-spectively and for the advanced economies of2.6% and 2.4% respectively. The IMF expectsthe euro-area economy to grow by 1.0% onaverage for the current year and the Ger-man economy by 1.4%. However, followingstrong growth in the spring, and given thatthe outlook for the current quarter remainsquite positive, this may, especially with regardto Germany, be an overly pessimistic vision of
2007 2008 2009 2010303540455055606570
1 Seasonally  adjusted.  Source:  Markit  Eco-
nomics. — 2 Seasonally and trend-adjusted.
Deutsche BundesbankGlobal economic indicators
Global purchasing manager indices 1
(Expansion threshold = 50)
9698100102104Scale enlarged
Bundesbank leading indicator
for the global economy 2
(Multi-year average = 100)Log scale
ManufacturingServices
Renewed
turbulence on
financial
markets has
so far had no
significant
impact on real
economy
Signs pointing
to steady but
moderate
growth in
second half
of yearRenewed
upward revision
of IMF forecast

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
EUROSYSTEM
Monthly Report
August 2010
14what may be achievable on average for
2010. According to the IMF, the outlook for
real global trade rose by two percentage
points to 9.0% in 2010 and by one-quarter
percentage point to 6.3% for 2011. The year
2010 is set for considerably stronger growth
in double-digit territory. Due, above all, to the
danger of renewed turmoil in the financial
markets, the risks to the recent growth pro-
jection are being assessed as much higher
than the chances of a better result.
Commodity prices reflected the increasingly
jittery mood in the financial markets. In par-
ticular, the debt crisis suffered by some Euro-
pean countries and its potential implications
for the real sector gave rise to a temporary
correction in prices. After peaking for the
year at US$89 in early May, the price of a bar-rel of Brent crude oil fell by nearly US$20
within three weeks. It then stabilised around
the level of the period spanning the fourth
quarter of 2009 and first quarter of 2010 of
between US$70 and US$80. At last report, a
barrel of crude oil was trading for a spot
price of US$75, with the futures markets in-
dicating slightly higher prices. Market uncer-
tainty about the global economic outlook
also caused the prices of industrial raw mater-
ials, especially non-ferrous metals, to fall con-
siderably in May and June before rebounding
noticeably. By contrast, hardly any falls had
preceded the considerable increases in food
prices in July. The price of cereals, in particu-
lar, rose sharply owing to weather-related
crop failure.
The temporarily distinct decline in crude oil
prices also had a marked impact on consumer
prices in the industrial countries, with energy
prices down on an average of the spring
months by a seasonally adjusted 1.6% on the
quarter following a 4.4% rise a quarter earl-
ier. Since price inflation excluding the volatile
categories of energy and food also remained
exceptionally low, headline inflation held
steady at its level of a quarter earlier. Year-on-
year consumer price inflation fell from +1.7%
to +1.5%.
Selected emerging market economies
The south and east Asian emerging markets
maintained their vigorous growth in the
spring months. However, the exceptionally
rapid pace of the first quarter has trailed off
in some countries. In China, real GDP was
101/C254% up in the second quarter comparedWorld market prices for 
crude oil and industrial raw 
materials as well as food, 
beverages and tobacco
Sources:  Thomson  Reuters  and  HWWI.  — 
 = 13 August and 16 August 2010 (crude 
oil) respectively.
Deutsche Bundesbank2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010100125150175200250300400500US dollar basis, 2000 = 100, log scale
Crude oil 
(Brent)
Industrial raw materialsFood, beverages 
and tobacco
Crude oil prices
stabilised
following visible
declineEnergy cheaper
amidst muted
overall
consumer price
inflation
Momentum in
some parts of
southern and
eastern Asia
tapered off
from very high
level

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2010
15with a year earlier, after rising by as much as
12% in the winter period. The subsiding stim-uli from the government investment pro-gramme launched in November 2008 to sta-bilise the economy are likely to have contrib-uted in key measure to the slowdown. Bycontrast, private consumption will probablyhave again risen considerably; at all events,nominal retail sales were up by nearly one-fifth on the year. Whereas Chinese exportbusiness was pointed steeply upwards in thespring, goods imports grew at a perceptiblymore sluggish pace. This is probably a reflec-tion of the diminishing investment boom.This caused the trade surplus to re-widen dis-tinctly to stand at US$41.2 billion in thesecond quarter. Consumer price inflation rosenoticeably, from 2.4% in March to 3.3% inJuly. Excluding food, it rose from 1.0% to1.6%.
India’s economy, which in the winter months
saw real GDP grow by 11
1/C254% on the year,
seems to have only slowed down slightly, if atall, in the past few months. Although year-on-year industrial output growth fell from15
1/C254% in the first quarter to 111/C252% in the
second, this is likely, in terms of overall out-put, to have been offset at least partly by anincreased expansion of output in agricultureand in the services sector. Owing to an in-crease in the supply of food, consumer priceinflation diminished slightly to 13.7% as thisreport went to press.
Most Latin American countries saw their eco-
nomic output rise distinctly once again in thesecond quarter of the year. In Brazil, the sea-sonally adjusted 1
1/C254% period-on-period growth2007 2008 2009 201090100120140160180200220240260280300Seasonally and calendar adjusted
%%
–40–200+20+40
Lin scale
Rate of change1Lin scaleRate of change
1Change from 
last cyclical peakAsian emerging market
economies
World
Advanced
economies
+ 8.5%+ 20.1%
– 2.7%
– 9.4%– 9.8%+ 0.5%Industrial output and
trade volume
100120140160180200220240260280
Source:  Centraal  Planbureau  (CPB). — 
1 Three-month  moving  averages;  annuali-
sed  change  from  the  preceding  three-month period. — 2 For advanced economies 
and Asian emerging market economies: ex-port volume. For the world: average of im-port and export volumes.
Deutsche Bundesbank–40–200+20+40+60Log scale
Industrial output
(2000 = 100)
Log scale
Trading volume 2
(2000 = 100)
Developments in
Latin America
remain pointed
upwards

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
EUROSYSTEM
Monthly Report
August 2010
16of industrial output was off somewhat from
the preceding four quarters, however. This is
probably due mainly to the expiry of tax in-
centives for purchasing consumer durables.
The very positive trend in the Brazilian labour
market continued. In June, just under 2.2 mil-
lion new jobs were created on balance com-
pared with a year earlier. Consumer price
inflation slowed down somewhat in the past
few months to stand at 4.6% in July. In
Mexico, the cyclical recovery, which had
sputtered in the first quarter of the year,
made exceptionally good progress in the
spring months; the services sector grew
particularly strongly. As food price inflation
continued to abate, the rate of inflation fell
noticeably to 3.6% in July.
In Russia, the cyclical recovery, which had
been sluggish at the beginning of the year,
picked up steam again. Real GDP was up in
the second quarter by 51/C254% on the year. The
Russian economy received a demand-side
boost from, in particular, private consump-
tion, which had been kick-started by the
introduction of a car scrappage premium,
among other things. In addition, the con-
tinued improvement in the price climate has
impacted favourably on households’ purchas-
ing power. In July, consumer price inflation
stood at 5.5%, compared with 8.9% at
the end of 2009 and 12.1% a year ago. A
drought that was still ongoing as this report
went to press caused major crop failures for
seasonal food and cereals, which is likely to
cause a perceptible resurgence of upward
price pressure in Russia.USA
The US economic upswing continued on a
sound basis in the second quarter. After ad-
justment for seasonal variations, real GDP in
the spring months was up by just over1/C252%
from the previous three-month period, and
the year-on-year growth accelerated from a
low level to nearly 31/C254%. Overall growth was
not able to maintain its rate of the winter
quarter – which, according to revised figures,
was just under 1%. However, domestic final
demand picked up several notches, with en-
terprises, in particular, setting the pace. They
increased their investment in machinery and
equipment and software by a higher rate
than at any time since the “New Economy”
boom 12 years ago (for a comparison of the
current upswing with earlier recoveries, see
box on pages 18-19). This was surely aided in
part by the ongoing recovery of their profit
margins, which was due not only to preced-
ing cost-cutting and productivity-enhancing
measures but also to improved sales figures.
Following massive cuts, commercial construc-
tion investment expanded in the spring for
the first time in two years. In addition, enter-
prises continued restocking, although the
growth stimuli from inventory movements
were considerably weaker than in the preced-
ing quarters. Government demand and hous-
ing construction likewise contributed to the
growth of overall output. However, the immi-
nent expiry of tax incentives for house pur-
chase meant that demand in the real estate
market was boosted only briefly; therefore, in
the current quarter investment in residential
construction may be expected to recede. The,
on the whole, rapid growth rate of domesticAccelerated
business activity
in RussiaEnterprises
setting the pace
of continued
upswing

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2010
17demand was also reflected in a similarly
strong import pull; real imports of goods andservices grew by +6
1/C252%, and thus consider-
ably faster than exports (+21/C252%). On balance,
net exports subtracted three-quarters of apercentage point from GDP growth, whereaspartner nations derived key stimuli from USimport demand.
In the second quarter, private consumption
grew by just under
1/C252%, roughly matching its
first-quarter rate; in addition, it was restoredto a more solid footing. The increase in em-ployment expanded households’ financialscope perceptibly. They were able not only tofund increased consumption but also to in-crease their saving ratio by three-quarters ofa percentage point to 6
1/C254%. On average over
the April to July period, private non-farm em-ployment was up by just under 450,000 fromthe winter quarter, representing an increaseof
1/C252% after seasonal adjustment. Consumer
prices excluding energy and food picked upin the second quarter by a seasonally adjusted0.2% from the preceding period, in whichthey had remained unchanged. On the year,though, they fell by 0.4 percentage point to+0.9%. Headline inflation fell even moresharply, especially owing to lower energyprices, from +2.4% to +1.8%.
JapanJapan’s economic output rose only minimally
in the second quarter of 2010, after seasonaladjustment, following strong growth in theperiod spanning the fourth quarter of 2009and first quarter of 2010. This was due chieflyto a slight decline in domestic demand. Inven-tories were once again increasingly reduced,
and public investment, which had been ex-panded significantly under government eco-nomic stimulus programmes, contracted atan accelerated pace. Moreover, householdconsumption expenditure stagnated afterhaving been stimulated in previous quartersby government purchase incentives. A rolemay have also been played here by the re-newed rise in the standardised unemploy-ment rate by 0.3 percentage point from theaverage of the first three months of the yearto 5.2% in the spring months. Whereas resi-dential construction investment was curbed,firms continued to expand their fixed capitalformation. Their export business remainedbrisk, with exports up by a seasonally adjust-ed 6%. Admittedly, foreign trade contributedless to GDP growth because imports rosemore strongly than a quarter earlier. The de-flationary tendency in the economy persisted.Over the March to June stretch, negative con-sumer price inflation contracted by a further0.4 percentage point to -0.7% on the year.Core inflation, by contrast, slid even furtherinto negative territory, standing at -1.5% inJune compared with -1.1% in March.
United KingdomIn the second quarter of 2010, the UK econo-
my’s total output, after seasonal adjustment,grew by a strong 1% on the period and by1
1/C252% on the year. The second half of the
year, however, holds more moderate growthrates in store – not least because of the newgovernment’s ambitious consolidation plans.The considerable increase in momentum inthe spring is due, for one thing, to catchingGrowth of
private
consumption
back on solid
ground
Lull in growth
despite brisk
export businessGrowth picked
up considerably
in spring

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
EUROSYSTEM
Monthly Report
August 2010
18Deuts che Bun desbankThe current e conomi c upturn in the Unite d States in comparison with earlier phases of re covery
The current upturn in the U S economy is thou ght by many 
observers to be only mo derate. In a ddition, con cerns 
have frequently been voi ced, parti cularly of late, that the 
upswin g coul d lose momentum on ce the positive stimuli 
from the inventory cycle an d the e conomi c stimulus pa ck-
age su bside. Some even warn of the possi bility of a “ dou-
ble dip” re cession. This box outlines the chara cteristi cs an d 
drivers of the current upswin g an d draws comparisons 
with previous phases of re covery in the U S economy. The 
National Bureau of E conomi c Resear ch (NBER), whi ch 
charts the cyclical hi ghs an d lows in the U S economy, has 
not yet pinpointe d a date for the en d of the re cession; 
however, as a ggregate output has alrea dy been growin g 
sin ce the summer of 2009, this investi gation will fo cus on 
the past four quarters. The seven growth phases sin ce 
1961 i dentiﬁ  ed by the NBER are use d for comparative 
purposes. As the upwar d movement is usually stron ger at 
the beginnin g of a boom than in the later sta ges owin g, 
not least, to the inventory cycle, the perio ds of comparison 
are likewise restri cted to the ﬁ  rst four quarters of ea ch 
upturn.1
In fa ct, growth in real gross domesti c pro duct (GDP) in the 
past four quarters, at 3¼ %, was si gniﬁ cantly weaker than 
the avera ge for the seven perio ds of comparison (5 %). The 
phases of re covery followin g parti cularly severe e conomi c 
slumps were all the more vi gorous (1975–7 6 an d 1983), 
with a ggregate output risin g by as mu ch as 7 % on aver-
age. At the same time, the current upturn is per cepti bly 
stron ger than those o bserve d in the comparative perio ds 
1991–92 an d 2002, when GDP grew by an avera ge of only 
2¼ % followin g relatively mil d re cessions. It must also be 
borne in min d that the growth path of potential output has 
ﬂ attene d out consi dera bly over time; a ccording to re cent 
estimates by the Con gressional Bu dget Ofﬁ  ce ( CBO), its 
increase sin ce mi d-2009 (1¾ %) has been marke dly lower 
than in the perio ds of comparison (3 %). Consequently, 
most of the differen ce in the growth rate of a ctual output 
compare d with the avera ge of all seven perio ds of re cov-
ery coul d be due to weaker potential growth.2
Lookin g at the expen diture si de of GDP, if we approxi-
mately calculate the mean of the annualise d growth 
contri butions of its in dividual components, as pu blishe d by the Bureau of E conomi c Analysis (BEA), we can see 
that the rise in a ggregate output was lar gely, but by no 
means ex clusively, driven by chan ges in inventories. Taken 
together, personal consumption an d corporate investment 
in equipment (in cluding software) – with contri butions of 
a similar size – mat ched the support to ma croe conomi c 
growth provi ded by chan ges in inventories. However, for-
eign tra de an d private constru ction spen ding (parti cularly 
spen ding on non-resi dential stru ctures) ha d a noti ceable 
dampenin g effe ct, while overall deman d from the pu blic 
sector ha d only a very minor impa ct. The growth in fe deral 
government expen diture was offset by cuts of aroun d the 
same size by state an d lo cal governments, whi ch were 
un der great pressure to a djust their budgets to the fall in 
revenue. Another important fa ctor in this respe ct is that a 
major part of the e conomi c stimulus pa ckage put to gether 
in 2009 consiste d in easin g the burden on househol ds 
throu gh tax credits an d increase d transfer in come, as well 
as provi ding support payments to the in dividual states.
The distin ctive chara cteristi cs of the current upturn are 
ma de evi dent by the differen ce in the growth contri butions 
of the expen diture-si de components from those seen in 
the comparative perio ds. The fa ct that growth is currently 
more rapi d than in 1991–92 an d 2002 can be explaine d, 
in parti cular, by a stron ger inﬂ  uen ce from the inventory 
cycle. However, as this impulse is not su bstantially different 
to those experien ced durin g the sharp upturns, the dispar-
ity is pro bably due to the generally ﬂ  at cyclical proﬁ  le in 
the early 1990s an d at the start of the new millennium. 
At that time, moreover, enterprises barely in crease d their 
expen diture on equipment an d software, whereas the 
growth contri bution of investment in equipment is now 
actually sli ghtly lar ger than on avera ge for 1975–7 6 an d 
1983. Nonetheless, a key driver of the rapi d aggregate 
growth in these perio ds was private resi dential invest-
ment, whi ch has not playe d a major part in the current 
upswin g. A mu ch more important fa ctor, thou gh, is that 
growth in personal consumption has been mute d in the 
past few quarters; a ccording to revise d ﬁ gures from the 
BEA, it contri bute d no more than just over one per centa ge 
point to GDP growth. That is only a fra ction of the size 
of its contri bution durin g the sharp upturns an d is even 
somewhat smaller than in the two most re cent perio ds of 
1 The spe ciﬁ c perio ds in question are 19 61 Q2 to 19 62 Q1, 1971 Q1 to 
Q4, 1975 Q2 to 197 6 Q1, 1980 Q4 to 1981 Q3, 1983 Q1 to Q4, 1991 Q2 
to 1992 Q1 an d 2002 Q1 to Q4. — 2 Economists at the Fe deral Reserve 
Bank of San Fran cisco arrive d at a similar con clusion in one stu dy. See J 
Wei dner un d J C Williams (2010), The Shape of Thin gs To Come, FRB SF Economi c Letter, 2010-15. However, the mem bers of the Fe deral Open 
Market Committee are currently still assumin g a lon g-term growth 
rate of real GDP – whi ch can be interprete d as a growth rate of poten-
tial output – of between 2½ % an d 2¾ % (central ten dency of expe cta-
tions). — 3 This relationship can be illustrate d usin g econometri c esti-

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2010
19recovery. On an avera ge of all the perio ds of comparison, 
moreover, government expen diture supporte d GDP 
growth more noti ceably than in the re cent past.
Overall, it can be sai d that corporate investment in inven-
tories an d equipment is almost exa ctly as stron g as it was 
in earlier phases of re covery followin g a severe e conomi c 
slump. To date, the impulses from both housin g constru c-
tion – whi ch is still sufferin g from a real estate glut an d 
thus from the effe cts of past ex cesses – an d from personal 
consumption have been insufﬁ  cient. This is likely to be 
closely conne cted with another marke d chara cteristi c of 
the current upturn, namely the on goin g difﬁ culties in the 
labour market. In the se con d quarter of 2010, for example, 
private-se ctor employment was down by ¾ % on the year. 
By contrast, at a compara ble point durin g phases of stron g 
economi c re covery, employment ha d alrea dy grown by 
3¼ %. The weak la bour market has also ha d an impa ct on 
employee compensation, the most important determinant 
for househol ds’ consumer spen ding.3 In none of the other 
recovery phases o bserve d here was there a decline in real 
employee compensation.
With re gard to the la bour market, the current upturn 
seems to share some similarities with the two most re cent 
phases of re covery, whi ch were often terme d “jo bless 
recoveries”. However, the fo cus on the overall chan ge in 
employment over four quarters o bscures varyin g develop-
ments within this perio d. After lar ge jo b losses were seen 
in the se con d half of 2009, jo bs were alrea dy bein g cre-
ate d again in the ﬁ  rst half of this year. By contrast, there 
was virtually no employment growth at that point in the 
two pre ceding expansionary phases. This is consistent with 
the fa ct that private investment in equipment, whi ch is 
usually a goo d lea ding in dicator for employment in the 
Unite d States, was low at that time. All in all, there is mu ch 
to su ggest that, if the la bour market re covery continues 
and gains stren gth, growth in personal consumption coul d 
intensify in the comin g quarters. This means that there 
will not ne cessarily be a marke d deceleration in a ggregate 
growth owin g, for example, to weakenin g impulses from 
the inventory cycle an d the e conomi c stimulus pa ckage.  
Moreover, the U S economy is unlikely to slip back into 
recession in the near future.
mates in whi ch real growth in consumption is explaine d by chan ges in 
wa ge in come, net transfers an d taxes, as well as in net wealth an d the 
unemployment rate. They show that, compare d with other re covery 
phases, growth in consumption is currently bein g hampere d, parti cu-larly by weak in come growth an d high unemployment, whi ch is pro b-
ably lea ding to pre cautionary savin g. — 4 Adjuste d usin g the Pri ce 
Deﬂ ator for Personal Consumption Expen ditures.Growth of key macroeconomic variables in 
the United States
101234567
–+++++++
54321012345
–––––+++++1991-92 and 2002
1961 to 20021975-76 and 1983
Seasonally adjusted and annualisedAverage contributions to real US GDP 
growthSeasonally adjusted, first four quarters of each growth phase
Current 
recovery1991-92
and 20021975-76
and 19831961 to
2002%
ppReal GDP Potential
outputPayroll 
employment 
(private sector, 
non-farm)Real 
compensation 
of employees 4Current recovery
Difference to subse quent phases of recoveryNet exports
Private constructionPersonal
consumptionChanges in inventory levels
Private investment in e quipment and softwareGovernment expenditure
Sources: Bureau of Economic Analysis (BEA), Bureau of Labor 
Statistics (BLS), Congressional Budget Office (CBO) and Bundes-bank calculations.

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
EUROSYSTEM
Monthly Report
August 2010
20up in construction, which posted a 61/C252% in-
crease in gross value added after seasonal
adjustment. Another reason was that the ser-
vices sector – supported by the financial in-
dustry and by business-related service pro-
viders – grew by 1%, as against +1/C254% in the
winter. Manufacturing (excluding construc-
tion) continued its rapid growth. The cyclical
upturn has now reached the labour market.
In May, the standardised unemployment rate
was 0.1 percentage point below its cyclical
peak of 7.9% reached in early 2010. By con-
trast, the price climate has remained un-
favourable through the end of the reporting
period. Consumer price inflation (HICP) once
again surpassed the 3% mark in July. Exclud-
ing energy and unprocessed food, it was simi-
larly high in the preceding months. Plans to
raise the standard rate of value-added tax
(VAT) from 17.5% to 20% at the beginning
of 2011 could mean that the Bank of Eng-
land’s inflation target of 2% will continue to
be overshot next year.
New EU member states
Real GDP growth in the new EU member
states (EU-8), which had stalled in winter
owing especially to weather-related reduc-
tions in construction output, will probably
have regained momentum in the second
quarter. Construction output rose, after sea-
sonal adjustment, by not less than 153/C254%,
nearly fully recouping the losses in the first
quarter. The industrial sector throughout the
EU-8 once again grew strongly at 21/C254%; in all
countries, particularly the Baltic nations, its
output tended distinctly upwards. The situ-
ation in the EU-8 labour markets has im-proved slightly for the first time since the out-
break of the economic crisis; the standardised
unemployment rate fell between March and
June by 0.2 percentage point to 9.7%. Con-
sumer price inflation (HICP) averaged 2.8%
over the April to July stretch.
Macroeconomic trends in the euro area
After a sluggish start to the year, the euro
area saw considerably accelerated growth.
Total economic output in the second quarter
of 2010 was up by a seasonally adjusted 1%
compared with the winter months and was
13/C254% up on its level of a year earlier, which
marks the low point of the recent recession.
One of the key factors behind the accelerated
pace was the brisk rise in exports to non-
euro-area countries. In addition, the construc-
tion sector in the northern member states
saw catching-up effects following extensive
weather-induced output losses during the
winter. In addition, investment in new ma-
chinery and equipment is likely to have gone
up perceptibly. With GDP rising by 21/C254%,
Germany has become the euro area’s growth
locomotive. The other large member states
– France, Italy and Spain – saw much more
moderate rates of economic growth, ranging
between just over1/C252% and1/C254%. In Greece,
which must undergo a radical adjustment
programme, the economy contracted by a
seasonally adjusted 11/C252%. All other countries
for which initial GDP estimates are available
posted positive growth rates. The fast pace of
growth in the euro area as a whole, however,
will most likely not be sustainable in the
second half of the year. One reason is thatStrong growth
following
weather-related
interruption in
winterStrong
economic
growth in
spring

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2010
21the economic upswing has trailed off some-
what in key destination countries. Another isthat construction output will probably leveloff.
The strong economic growth in the second
quarter was supported first and foremost byproduction. In the April-May period, con-struction output, owing to the aforemen-tioned weather-related catching-up effects inthe northern member states – as some south-ern member states were seeing continuedcontraction – rose by a seasonally adjusted2
1/C254% from the first quarter. Industrial produc-
tion in the second quarter was 21/C252% higher
than in the winter months and 91/C254% higher
than over the same period a year earlier.This includes, in the period under review,sharp rises in the production of intermediate(+4
1/C254%) and capital goods (+31/C252%). By con-
trast, consumer goods output rose just mar-ginally (+
1/C254%). Energy production fell by1/C252%
from its very high level of the winter months.Owing to increased industrial output, cap-acity utilisation continued its perceptible im-provement during the April to July period, yetit still remained clearly below its long-runaverage. In the April and May period, ordersreceived were up by 7%, seasonally adjusted,from the first quarter, which indicates con-tinued output growth in the second half ofthe year. Sentiment in the industrial sectorimproved once again perceptibly around mid-year.
The spring saw considerable demand from
non-euro-area countries, especially the emer-ging market economies in south and eastAsia and Russia. The euro area’s exports, inGrowth trends
in the euro area
Sources: national statistics, Eurostat and the 
ECB.
Deutsche Bundesbank2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 201032101
–––+
–4–3–2–10+1+2+3
2101
––+
–3–2–10+1
2101
––+Euro area
Germany
France
Italy
SpainReal GDP, seasonally adjusted,
quarter-on- quarter percentage change
Catching-up
effects in
construction
sector and lively
industrial
activity
Strong export
growth

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
EUROSYSTEM
Monthly Report
August 2010
22terms of value, rose during the reporting
period by 71/C252% from the first quarter, after
seasonal adjustment, and were up 24% on
the year. Imports from outside the euro area
rose considerably as well. However, as this
was due in part to higher commodity prices
and depreciation-related price effects, the net
trade contribution to real GDP growth in the
spring is likely to have been visibly in positive
territory. Domestic final demand was uneven.
Though the marked increase in the output of
machinery and equipment and the expansion
of construction indicate a considerable in-
crease in gross fixed capital formation, house-
hold consumption, for its part, provided no
growth stimuli in the second quarter, either.
Real retail sales were down somewhat, and
new car registrations down more significantly,
from the preceding period, after seasonal ad-
justment. The inflated figures from a year
earlier due to car scrappage schemes in some
member states were undershot by as much as
101/C252%.
The brisk output growth in the spring has
nurtured increasing signs that the labour mar-
ket has passed the worst. Over the April to
June period, unemployment growth, at an
average of 13,000 per month, was signifi-
cantly slower than in the winter (67,000) and
the second half of 2009 (92,000). Growth in
the rate of unemployment has come to a
standstill; in June – as in the three preceding
months – it stood at 10.0%. For instance,
Spain’s unemployment rate climbed by 0.6
percentage point since March 2010, whereas
Germany’s fell by 0.3 percentage point over
the same period. The number of employed
persons in the first quarter – more recentdata are not yet available – remained un-
changed since autumn 2009, when it had
dropped by1/C254%. Unit labour costs in the win-
ter months likewise remained unchanged on
the period.
As the second quarter progressed, euro-area
upward price pressures receded after having
intensified perceptibly in the March-April
period. Energy prices were the key factor: in
March and April, they trended strongly up-
wards on the heels of higher crude oil prices
and the weak euro in the foreign exchange
markets before flattening considerably and
heading downwards in June. Trends in the
other components of consumer spending
were much more restrained. Although food
prices did rise more strongly than a quarter
earlier – after seasonal adjustment – their
fluctuations were relatively constrained. Owing
to the euro’s depreciation, the prices of other
goods rose for the first time in quite a long
time. By contrast, services appreciated at a
similarly moderate pace to the preceding
periods. Overall, consumer prices were 0.6%
higher than a quarter earlier; the year-on-
year increase of HICP widened from 1.1% to
1.5%.
This trend pattern was visible in nearly all
euro-area countries, with only three countries
reporting inflation of less than +1% in the
second quarter. At the same time, in some
smaller countries the 2% mark was surpassed
yet again; the range of inflation rates even
spanned just over seven percentage points.
Although the weighted standard deviation of
annual percentage changes rose slightly, at
just around one percentage point it was onlySigns that
labour market
is bottoming
outModerate rise
in inflation

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2010
23marginally above its average of the past few
years. Euro-area consumer prices rose some-what in July after seasonal adjustment. Year-on-year headline HICP inflation was up from1.4% in June to 1.7%. A base effect resulting
from the sizeable decline in energy prices inJuly 2009 was also a major factor in this in-crease.

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
EUROSYSTEM
Monthly Report
August 2010
24Monetary policy and
banking businessInterest rate policy and the money
market
The economic recovery in the euro area con-
tinued during the second quarter of 2010. At
the same time, price developments over the
time horizon relevant to monetary policy are
expected to remain subdued owing to the
ongoing marked capacity underutilisation
and muted monetary growth. This and the, at
times, considerable tensions on the financial
markets as well as the still solidly anchored in-
flation expectation prompted the Governing
Council of the ECB to keep the Eurosystem’s
key policy rates on hold during the second
quarter of 2010. In the second quarter, the
Eurosystem’s main refinancing operations
were thus once again conducted as fixed-rate
tenders with full allotment and at a fixed
interest rate of 1%. The interest rate for re-
course to the marginal lending facility re-
mains stable at 1.75%, while the interest rate
on the deposit facility stands at 0.25%.
At the beginning of May, the escalating
government debt crisis in Greece provoked
substantial turmoil in a number of European
financial market segments. In order to pre-
vent contagion, the Governing Council of the
ECB, on the second weekend in May, resolved
to purchase public and private debt securities
from particularly hard hit market segments.
This Securities Markets Programme is predi-
cated on the credible commitment on the
part of the fiscal bodies concerned to imple-
ment adequate consolidation measures. Par-
allel to this, the Governing Council an-
nounced that it would regularly re-absorb the
liquidity injected through the purchase ofKey policy rates
unchanged
Purchase
programme
for public and
private debt
securities

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2010
25debt securities; since mid-May, this has been
instrumented once a week by means of aone-week deposit tender.
Moreover, to guarantee the continued supply
of sufficient liquidity to the banking system,the Governing Council decided to return toconducting the regular three-month longer-term refinancing operations (LTROs) as fixed-rate tenders with full allotment for the periodup to 29 September 2010 and to carry out aninterest-indexed six-month tender on 12 May.In addition, the Eurosystem reactivated swaptransactions with the US Federal Reserve inorder to ensure the provision of US dollars tothe euro-area banking system through sevenand 84-day operations.
By contrast, on 30 June 2010, the Covered
Bond Purchase Programme (CBPP) wasconcluded on schedule, having reached itsdeclared target purchase volume of 360 bil-
lion.
Thanks to the measures adopted in support
of liquidity policy, the European money mar-ket barely reacted to the renewed tensionsarising from the sovereign debt crisis. Withthe exception of some short-term spikes fol-lowing liquidity-absorbing fine-tuning oper-ations on the last day of each reserve main-tenance period and the last trading day ofthe first half of the year, the overnight rate(EONIA) remained broadly constant in thesecond quarter at around 8 basis pointsabove the interest rate on the Eurosystem’sdeposit facility. Longer-term money marketrates have been edging upwards since theend of April. When the first one-year long-term refinancing operation matured on 1 July
2010, as a result of which a total of 3442.2
billion was withdrawn from the banking sys-tem, the overnight interest rate initially roseperceptibly. It then eased back again at theend of the reserve maintenance period and,at 0.45%, stood 20 basis points above theEurosystem’s deposit facility rate as this reportwent to press. At the same time, tradingactivity on the overnight money market in-Money market interest rates
in the euro area
1 Monthly averages. — 2 Only on 8 October 
2008 2.75%. — 3 Three-month Euribor less 
three-month Eurepo. —  Average from 1 
to 16 August 2010.
Deutsche Bundesbank2007 2008 2009 201000.51.01.52.02.53.03.54.04.55.05.56.06.57.0
050100150200Marginal lending rate
Three-month Euribor1
EONIA1
Minimum bid rate or fixed
interest rate for mainrefinancing operations
Difference between 
uncollateralised and collateralised three-month interbank lending rates
 1, 32
Basis
points%
Deposit rateAdditional
measures to
guarantee the
liquidity supply
CBPP expired
Stabilisation
tendencies
in the euro
money market
situation, ...

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
EUROSYSTEM
Monthly Report
August 2010
26Deutsche BundesbankMoney market management and liquidity needs
During the three reserve maintenance periods from
14 April to 13 July 2010, euro-area credit institutions’ need
for central bank liquidity determined by autonomous li-
quidity factors grew by 531.5 billion in net terms. This was
largely owing to the increased demand for banknotes
(520.1 billion). Furthermore, the expansion in general gov-
ernment deposits withdrew liquidity from the banking sys-
tem ( 512.9 billion). Only net foreign reserves and the other
factors taken together, which eliminate liquidity-neutral
valuation effects, showed a decline in the level of liquidity
needs ( 51.5 billion) during the period under review. In add-
ition to the development of autonomous factors, a rise in
the minimum reserve requirement (by a total of 51.5 bil-
lion) also contributed to the increase in demand for central
bank liquidity.
As in previous months, the Eurosystem continued its policy
of providing a generous supply of liquidity during the
period under review in order to support the smooth func-
tioning of the money market and to satisfy the demand for
central bank liquidity from credit institutions, even if this
exceeded the benchmark level arising from autonomous
factors and the minimum reserve requirement. In April
2010, the Eurosystem initially continued the steps it had
introduced in the previous months to phase out the non-
standard monetary policy measures and – as it announced
at the start of March 2010 – carried out a regular three-
month variable rate tender for the first time since Septem-
ber 2008. At the same time, the Governing Council had de-
cided that both the main refinancing operations and the
special tenders with a maturity of one reserve maintenance
period would continue to be carried out as fixed-rate ten-
ders with full allotment until at least mid-October 2010.
After its initiation, the departure from the non-standard
monetary policy measures was discontinued in early May
2010, however, due to the worsening sovereign debt crisis,
which was causing severe tensions in certain market seg-
ments. This prompted the Council to approve a number of
non-standard measures on 9 May: the Eurosystem an-
nounced that it would intervene in euro area public and
private debt securities markets (Securities Markets Pro-
gramme, SMP), offer the regular three-month tenders as
fixed-rate tenders with full allotment again in May and
June, carry out a further six-month tender with full allot-
ment and resume US dollar liquidity providing operations.
In addition to these decisions and the implementation of
these steps, the period under review was also affected by
the expiration of the first 12-month tender, in which 5442
billion matured on 1 July. Due to supportive Eurosystem
measures, however, this passed off smoothly.
During the three reserve periods under review, the refinan-
cing volume weighting in the Eurosystem shifted from
longer-term refinancing operations to main refinancing
operations (see table on page 27), mainly because of theliquidity outflow from the maturing 12-month tender. On
average, the net long-term volume decreased by just over
577 billion, while main refinancing volume increased by
just under 590 billion. Moreover, credit institutions re-
ceived additional liquidity from the Eurosystem’s purchase
programme for covered bonds. The Eurosystem ended this
programme at the end of June 2010 as intended; the tar-
get nominal volume of 560 billion ( 561.1 billion on the bal-
ance sheet) had been reached. As planned, the balance
sheet holdings had grown by 514.7 billion during the
period under review. Although the Eurosystem generated
debt securities with a total volume of around 560 billion
from the newly introduced SMP, by the end of the period
under review the introduction of weekly, liquidity absorb-
ing fine-tuning operations with a one-week maturity had
virtually re-absorbed the resulting liquidity supply. The vol-
ume absorbed weekly by the Eurosystem almost always
matched the securities holdings booked from this SMP at
the end of the previous week in each case.
The additional provision of liquidity, which exceeded the
increase in liquidity needs arising from autonomous fac-
tors and the reserve requirement, led on balance to a high-
er degree of recourse to the deposit facility (by around
530 billion) during the reserve periods described. By con-
trast, the marginal lending facility continued to be used
sparingly. Overnight rates were also influenced by the
comfortable supply of liquidity once again. EONIA, as a ref-
erence rate for unsecured overnight deposits, remained al-
most constantly in the range between 0.32% and 0.35%
during the period under review until the maturity of the
first 12-month tender on 1 July 2010, and so was close to
the deposit facility rate of 0.25%. EONIA was only set at
higher rates of up to 0.75% on each of the final reserve
period days (due to the liquidity absorbing fine-tuning op-
erations at the end of the period), at half-year end and at
the maturity of the 12-month tender (owing to the re-
duced liquidity surplus).
During the April-May 2010 reserve period, a liquidity pro-
viding open market operation was carried out by variable-
rate tender for the first time in just over one and a half
years. The regular three-month tender was conducted as a
variable-rate tender at the end of April, but at the same
time the main refinancing rate was set as a minimum bid
rate to prevent interest rate bids that were too low for the
prevailing comfortable liquidity position. Interest from
credit institutions in this operation was low, with a bid vol-
ume of 54.8 billion. As the Eurosystem had pre-announced
an indicative allotment amount of 515 billion, all bids
could be allotted at their corresponding bid rates. The con-
tinued abundance of central bank liquidity, which was un-
affected by this, led to an average level of recourse to the
deposit facility ( 5218 billion compared with 5201 billion in
the previous period). The amply liquidity supply restricted

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2010
27EONIA turnover, which was just 526.1 billion on average
over the period and therefore remained at a low level
(527.2 billion in the previous period; by comparison: yearly
average for 2009 was 537.2 billion).
The May-June 2010 reserve period was shaped by the im-
plementation of the non-standard monetary policy meas-
ures decided upon by the Governing Council shortly be-
forehand. A six-month long-term tender was again offered
as a fixed-rate tender with an indexed interest rate in mid-
May. Around 536 billion was allotted in this operation. To
counterbalance the liquidity inflow created by the Eurosys-
tem’s securities purchases, which were beginning under
the SMP, the ECB conducted the first liquidity absorbing
tender with a maturity of one week. Credit institutions
showed a great willingness to release surplus liquidity for
one week, especially in this first liquidity absorbing quick
tender, with banks bidding a total of just under 5163 bil-
lion. Ultimately the Eurosystem only distributed 516.5 bil-
lion, as this corresponded to the countervalue of the secur-
ities purchases at that time. Although this high volume of
bids was not repeated in the subsequent one-week liquid-
ity absorbing tenders of this reserve period, the Eurosys-
tem’s target volumes could still be withdrawn smoothly.
During this reserve period, the level of liquidity which
credit institutions had at their disposal over and above the
calculated requirement was very high. As a result, the level
of recourse to the deposit facility also rose markedly to
5289 billion. Against this backdrop of liquidity surplus,
EONIA turnover once again fell slightly compared to the
previous period to 524.7 billion.
The focus of the June-July 2010 reserve period was the ma-
turity of the first 12-month tender on 1 July. In total, 5442
billion expired, around half of the outstanding refinancing
volume at that time. As early as the start of March 2010,
the Eurosystem had informed credit institutions that it
would balance out this liquidity effect by providing an
additional six-day quick tender which would bridge the
gap between the one-year tender’s maturity and the settle-
ment of the next main refinancing operation. In retro-
spect, the maturity of this 12-month tender was well com-
pensated for. Of particular importance in this context was
firstly the regular three-month tender, which has since
been reintroduced as a fixed-rate tender, whereby the
credit institutions bid 5132 billion and in doing so extend-
ed a part of the amount due. Secondly, the additional six-
day bridging tender was well used by the institutions in
the amount of 5111 billion. If one also takes each previous
and subsequent main refinancing operation into consider-
ation, the outstanding refinancing volume decreased over
the course of the maturity of this first one-year tender (ex-
cluding the one-week liquidity absorbing tenders and pur-
chase programmes) by around 5235 billion to 5635 billion.
As a result, the surplus liquidity also fell and the level of re-course to the deposit facility declined in this reserve period
to an average of 5230 billion. The liquidity constraints had
a positive effect on EONIA turnover, which was at over 540
billion almost every day from the beginning of July, thus
raising the period average to 533.6 billion. Secured over-
night trading demonstrated a similar development on GC
Pooling of Eurex Repo: secured overnight deposits rose to
an average of 58.9 billion during this period after aver-
aging just 55.9 billion in the April-May period and 56.7 bil-
lion in the May-June period.
Interbank trading continued its recovery during the subse-
quent July-August 2010 reserve period. This rise in daily
EONIA turnover proves that market participants are in-
creasing their activities in the market.Factors determining bank liquidity1
5billion; changes in the daily averages of the reserve
maintenance periods vis-/C224-vis the previous period
2010
Item14 Apr
to
11 May12 May
to
15 Jun16 Jun
to
13 Jul
I Provision (+) or absorption (–) of
central bank balances due to changes
in autonomous factors
1 Banknotes in circulation
(increase: –) – 3.7 – 9.6 – 6.8
2 General government deposits with
the Eurosystem (increase: –) + 1.5 – 11.0 – 3.4
3 Net foreign reserves2+ 17.2 + 5.4 + 38.5
4 Other factors2– 15.8 – 1.9 – 41.9
Total – 0.8 – 17.1 – 13.6
II Monetary policy operations of the
Eurosystem
1 Open market operations
(a) Main refinancing operations – 1.0 + 33.3 + 57.5
(b) Longer-term refinancing
operations + 15.9 + 40.3 – 133.5
(c) Other operations + 2.8 + 14.8 + 33.0
2 Standing facilities
(a) Marginal lending facility + 0.5 – 0.6 – 0.0
(b) Deposit facility (increase: –) – 17.5 – 70.6 + 58.4
Total + 0.7 + 17.2 + 15.4
III Change in credit institutions’ current
accounts (I + II) – 0.1 + 0.1 + 1.9
IV Change in the minimum reserve
requirement (increase: –) + 0.2 – 0.0 – 1.7
1For longer-term trends and the Deutsche Bundesbank’s contribu-
tion, see pages 14* and 15* of the Statistical Section of this Monthly
Report. — 2Including end-of-quarter valuation adjustments with no
impact on liquidity.

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
EUROSYSTEM
Monthly Report
August 2010
28creased and in so doing approached the levels
of mid-2007, albeit amid at times high volatil-
ity.
In the longer-term unsecured segments of
the euro money market, the upward price
trend has accelerated since the end of June.
At present, all unsecured interbank rates with
maturities of five months and above are once
again above the Eurosystem’s main refinan-cing rate. The unsecured three-month rate
(3M Euribor) currently stands at 0.90% and
its collateralised counterpart (3M Eurepo) at
0.50%. The risk premium, which is deter-
mined on the basis of the yield spread, is cur-
rently 40 basis points and has thus widened
compared with the end of the first quarter of
2010.Open market operations of the Eurosystem*
Value
dateType of trans-
action 1Maturity
in daysActual
allotment
in5billionDeviation
from the
benchmark 2
in5billionMarginal
rate/fixed
rate
%Allotment
ratio
%Weighted
rate
%Cover
ratio 3Number
of bidders
14.04.10 MRO (FRT) 7 70.6 212.6 1.00 100.00 – 1.00 68
14.04.10 S-LTRO (FRT) 28 15.7 – 1.00 100.00 – 1.00 12
21.04.10 MRO (FRT) 7 70.2 300.2 1.00 100.00 – 1.00 67
28.04.10 MRO (FRT) 7 75.6 332.6 1.00 100.00 – 1.00 66
29.04.10 LTRO (VRT) 91 4.8 – 1.00 100.00 1.15 1.00 24
05.05.10 MRO (FRT) 7 90.3 358.3 1.00 100.00 – 1.00 76
11.05.10 FTO (–) 1 – 319.7 – 0.80 100.00 0.76 1.00 193
12.05.10 MRO (FRT) 7 99.6 251.1 1.00 100.00 – 1.00 81
12.05.10 S-LTRO (FRT) 35 20.5 – 1.00 100.00 – 1.00 18
13.05.10 S-LTRO (FRT) 182 35.7 – 4 ... 100.00 – 1.00 56
19.05.10 FTO (–) 7 – 16.5 – 0.29 44.39 0.28 9.86 223
19.05.10 MRO (FRT) 7 104.8 433.3 1.00 100.00 – 1.00 81
26.05.10 FTO (–) 7 – 26.5 – 0.28 73.45 0.27 3.25 93
26.05.10 MRO (FRT) 7 106.0 440.5 1.00 100.00 – 1.00 83
27.05.10 LRG (MT) 91 12.2 – 1.00 100.00 – 1.00 35
02.06.10 MRO (FRT) 7 117.7 514.7 1.00 100.00 – 1.00 86
02.06.10 FTO (–) 7 – 35.0 – 0.28 95.16 0.28 2.10 68
09.06.10 MRO (FRT) 7 122.0 439.5 1.00 100.00 – 1.00 96
09.06.10 FTO (–) 7 – 40.5 – 0.35 35.89 0.31 1.87 64
15.06.10 FTO (–) 1 – 363.5 – 0.80 100.00 0.77 1.00 174
16.06.10 FTO (–) 7 – 47.0 – 0.30 85.62 0.28 1.51 66
16.06.10 MRO (FRT) 7 126.7 296.7 1.00 100.00 – 1.00 101
16.06.10 S-LTRO (FRT) 28 31.6 – 1.00 100.00 – 1.00 23
23.06.10 MRO (FRT) 7 151.5 426.0 1.00 100.00 – 1.00 114
23.06.10 FTO (–) 7 – 51.0 – 0.40 17.07 0.31 1.40 67
30.06.10 MRO (FRT) 7 162.9 134.9 1.00 100.00 – 1.00 157
30.06.10 FTO (–) 7 – 31.9 – 1.00 100.00 0.54 1.00 45
01.07.10 LRG (MT) 91 131.9 – 1.00 100.00 – 1.00 171
01.07.10 FSO (+) 6 111.2 – 1.00 100.00 – 1.00 78
07.07.10 MRO (FRT) 7 229.1 247.6 1.00 100.00 – 1.00 151
07.07.10 FTO (–) 7 – 59.0 – 0.75 83.61 0.56 1.48 88
13.07.10 FTO (–) 1 – 200.9 – 0.80 100.00 0.76 1.00 158
*For more information on the Eurosystem’s operations
from 20 January 2010 to 13 April 2010, see Deutsche
Bundesbank, Monthly Report, May 2010, p 34. — 1MRO:
main refinancing operation, LTRO: longer-term refinan-
cing operation, S-LTRO: supplementary longer-term refi-
nancing operation, FTO: fine-tuning operation (+: liquid-ity providing operation, –: liquidity absorbing operation),
FRT: fixed-rate tender, VRT: variable-rate tender. — 2Ex-
cluding (S-)LTROs allotted in the same week. — 3Ratio of
total bids to the allotment amount. — 4The interest rate
is the average minimum bid rate of the MROs over the life
of this operation.
Deutsche Bundesbank
... depo-repo
spread none-
theless slightly
up

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2010
29Monetary developments in the euro area
Monetary expansion in the euro area acceler-
ated somewhat in the second quarter of
2010, although the underlying expansionary
momentum remained weak. In seasonally
adjusted and annualised terms, the three-
month growth rate of the broad monetary
aggregate M3 amounted to 3% in the April
to June period and was thus perceptibly up
on the preceding quarter, when growth was
just over -1/C252%. The annual growth rate of M3
likewise returned to positive territory in June,
in seasonally adjusted terms, rising from an
average level of -0.2% during the January to
March period to 0.0% in the reporting
period. Nevertheless, the current momentum
should not be overstated as it is largely the
result of transactions by banks with other
financial intermediaries, which have been
highly volatile with the tensions seen on the
financial markets in the last two years.
During the second quarter, the narrow
money aggregate M1 grew at a seasonally
adjusted and annualised three-month rate of
7%, which was similar to the rates in the two
preceding quarters. At the same time, the
volume of cash in circulation increased at a
corresponding rate of 5%. Overnight de-
posits grew at a seasonally adjusted and an-
nualised three-month rate of just under 71/C252%
after rising at a rate of 51/C252% in the previous
quarter. However, this quarterly figure masks
extremely heterogeneous monthly develop-
ments, as the rise in sight deposits during the
second quarter was primarily the result of the
activities of other financial corporations,
which bolstered their stocks by an exception-Components and 
counterparts of the money 
stock in the euro area
1 12-month  flows. —  2 Taken  in  isolation, 
an  increase  curbs  M3  growth. —  3 Not 
seasonally  adjusted. —  4 Increase:  –,  de-
crease: +.
Deutsche Bundesbank2002 03 04 05 06 07 08 09 201050510152025
–+++++
–10–50+5+10+15+20+25+30
90060030003006009001,200
–––++++Seasonally adjusted, quarterly
... components of the money stock
... counterparts
of which
Net external asset position 3
External
assets 1Net external
asset position
External
liabilities 1, 4Growth rate 1 of M3 and
the contributions to growth in ...
Remaining balance
sheet items 2Net external
asset position
Longer-term financial
liabilities to other
non-MFIs 2Credit to the
private sector M2 – M1
M3 – M2M1
€ bn%%
M3
M3Monetary
expansion
accelerated
Further increase
in overnight
deposits

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
EUROSYSTEM
Monthly Report
August 2010
30ally large margin in April; in May and June, by
contrast, the private sector reduced its hold-
ings of overnight money in net terms.
The reduction in other short-term deposits,
which has been observed since the beginning
of 2009, continued to level off in the April to
June period, while the corresponding season-
ally adjusted and annualised three-month
rate rose from just under -5% in the previous
quarter to -31/C252% for the period under review.
This was due, firstly, to a slower reduction in
short-term time deposits (with an agreed
maturity of up to two years), stocks of which
declined at a seasonally adjusted and annual-
ised three-month rate of just under -91/C252%,
compared with -15% in the first quarter.
Secondly, net demand for short-term savings
deposits (with an agreed period of notice of
up to three months) was down on previous
quarters. Both developments were driven
chiefly by households’ investment behaviour.
With interest rates for short-term time de-
posits rising again during the reporting quar-
ter, it became less attractive to shift funds
from time deposits into more liquid invest-
ments, where interest rates remained low.
Second-quarter M3 growth was also bol-
stered by the momentum demonstrated by
marketable financial instruments. At a sea-
sonally adjusted and annualised three-month
rate of 9%, these recorded a perceptible ag-
gregate increase again for the first time after
negative growth in the five preceding quar-
ters. This development, however, is solely
attributable to the momentum of repo trans-
actions. The underlying highly volatile bank
transactions with other financial corporationsdominated this component of M3 growth in
April and, particularly, in June. By contrast,
money market fund shares which, in terms of
volume, constitute the largest share of mar-
ketable instruments experienced strong net
outflows for the third consecutive quarter.
These are likely to have been triggered by the
currently low short-term money market rates,
which are traditionally used to determine the
interest paid on money market funds. In add-
ition, there was a discernible net reduction in
the volume of short-term debt securities of
monetary financial institutions (with a matur-
ity of up to two years) held by non-banks.
During the reporting quarter, credit by euro-
area banks to the domestic public sector was
again the main force driving monetary expan-
sion in the euro area. In particular, net hold-
ings of securities issued by the public sector
increased at a seasonally adjusted and annu-
alised three-month rate of 10% in the euro
area, up from 71/C252% in the previous quarter.
Likewise, credit to the domestic private sector
rose; in the second quarter the corresponding
growth rate increased by 1% and thus moved
back into positive territory following three
consecutive quarters of negative growth. This
was due to bank loans, whose annualised
and seasonally adjusted three-month rate
was moderately up on the quarter from just
under1/C252% to 2%; during the same period,
the growth rate for annualised three-month
lending to the domestic private sector, adjust-
ed for credit institutions’ securitisation activ-
ities and loan sales, rose from 0% to 21/C252%.
In the reporting period, the rise in loans to
domestic private non-banks was again the re-Smaller net
reduction in
short-term
deposits other
than overnight
deposits
Marketable
financial
instruments see
substantial
inflowsSlight net
increase in
credit to the
private sector

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2010
31sult of heterogeneous sectoral developments.
As in the two preceding quarters, loans tohouseholds rose perceptibly in net terms. Thiswas again attributable to growth in loans forhouse purchase, which make up the lion’sshare of household borrowing. Conversely, ata seasonally adjusted and annualised growthrate of just over -1%, second-quarter lendingto non-financial corporations was somewhatdown, compared with a first modest upturnin the first quarter following three conse-cutive quarters of negative growth. Net re-demptions during the reporting quarter main-ly related to short-term and also, to a muchlesser extent, medium-term loans to non-financial corporations (with maturities ofmore than one year and up to five years). Bycontrast, there was a further clear increase inlong-term loans. Overall, this is consistentwith the pattern that is familiar from earlierperiods of economic recovery, with unsecuri-tised lending to non-financial corporationsrecovering more slowly from a slump in eco-nomic activity than lending to households.
In the reporting quarter, loans to the private
sector in the euro area were also strength-ened by loans to other financial intermediar-ies. Overall, these expanded significantly inthe second quarter, whereas in the first quar-ter they had placed a perceptible damper onthe growth in loans to the private sector. Thatsaid, by their very nature, the majority of suchloans take the form of indirect interbanktransactions, which in the past two yearshave been characterised by a high degree ofvolatility.In contrast with the situation in the traditional
lending business, the reporting quarter saw anet reduction in securities claims by euro-areabanks on domestic private non-banks. In thesecond quarter, the corresponding annualisedand seasonally adjusted three-month ratewent down by 4
1/C252%, following a first-quarter
decrease of -21/C252%. During the second quar-
ter, banks reduced their net holdings of, inparticular, fixed-income securities, which hadvirtually stagnated in the first quarter. Thevolume of shares and other equity issued bythe private sector and held by euro-areabanks also fell, albeit much more slowly thanin the first quarter.
In the second quarter, the net external assets
of the euro-area MFI sector rose by 315.7 bil-
lion on the quarter in seasonally adjustedterms and thus, taken in isolation, had amoderately expansionary effect on monetarygrowth. Between April and June, withoutseasonal adjustment, there were substantialoutflows of funds to non-euro-area countries,predominantly from Germany and Finland. Atthe same time, the MFI sector in Ireland,Spain and Italy recorded net inflows of fundsfrom non-euro-area countries.
After sharp increases in previous quarters,
monetary capital formation declined some-what during the reporting quarter, which,taken in isolation, tended to accelerate thepace of monetary growth. Overall, MFI long-er-term financial liabilities fell by just over
1/C252% in seasonally adjusted and annualised
terms in the second quarter of 2010, afterhaving risen by 5% in the previous quarter.This development was largely driven by anIncrease in
lending to
households;
decrease in
lending to non-
financial cor-
porations
Marked
increase in
loans granted
to financial
corporationsPurchases of
private sector
securities by
banks continue
to decline
Moderate rise
in the net
external asset
position
Slight decrease
in monetary
capital
formation

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
EUROSYSTEM
Monthly Report
August 2010
32exceptionally sharp reduction in non-banks’
holdings of bank debt securities with longer
maturities, which – in quantitative terms –
represent the largest component of monetary
capital. First, this was due to the reduced
issuance of bank debt securities in several
euro-area countries. Second, euro-area banks
increased their purchases of debt securities
issued by other institutions on the market,
which further reduced the stock of such
paper held by the non-bank sector. Moreover,
the smaller inflows – compared with previous
quarters – to long-term time and savings de-
posits, in particular from households as well
as from insurers and pension funds had a
moderately negative net impact on monetary
capital during the second quarter. This re-
flects the narrower interest rate differential
between short and long-term deposits in the
euro area during the reporting quarter. By
contrast, during the same three-month
period, banks again raised their capital and
reserves on a large scale.
Overall, the underlying monetary dynamics –
in other words, monetary growth which is
ultimately relevant to inflation – remained
weak in the reporting quarter. Although the
M3 monetary aggregate posted its first per-
ceptible gain again in the second quarter, this
growth was largely attributable to the finan-
cial corporations sector and is related to the
tensions that are still evident in several seg-
ments of the financial market. At the same
time, overall bank lending to the private sec-
tor in the euro area remained moderate dur-
ing the second quarter. That monetary expan-
sion accelerated in the reporting quarter was
also reflected in inflation projections basedon monetary data. The projected inflation
rates have risen slightly further compared to
the first quarter of 2010. Taken as a whole,
these projections nonetheless continue to in-
dicate that there is no pronounced risk to
price stability in the euro area over the next
three years.
German banks’ deposit and lending
business with domestic customers
In the second quarter of 2010, growth in Ger-
man investors’ deposits with domestic banks
accelerated, which was solely attributable to
the way in which short-term bank balances
developed. Overall, the seasonally adjusted
and annualised three-month rate for all de-
posits went up from 11/C252% in the first quarter
of 2010 to just over 3% in the reporting
quarter.
At a seasonally adjusted and annualised
three-month rate of 201/C252%, growth in over-
night deposits in the second quarter returned
to the high rates recorded the previous year,
having risen just 7% in the first quarter. The
(negative) momentum shown by short-term
time deposits (with an agreed maturity of up
to two years) likewise gathered pace in the
second quarter as the interest rate differential
between these funds and overnight deposits
narrowed slightly in Germany. In terms of vol-
umes, however, outflows from short-term
time deposits during the reporting quarter
were well below the inflows recorded for
sight deposits. In the second quarter, the for-
mer recorded a seasonally adjusted and annu-
alised three-month rate of just under -30%,No pronounced
risk to price
stability from
a monetary
perspectiveRise in domestic
investors’ bank
balances ...
... due to
inflows to
short-term
investments

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2010
33compared with just under -18% in the previ-
ous quarter, and thus lagged far behind theexceptionally high reduction rates posted inthe year before. Short-term savings deposits(with an agreed maturity of up to threemonths) merely posted a renewed slowdownin growth. The seasonally adjusted and annu-alised three-month rate was slightly morethan 6%, compared with just over 9% in thefirst quarter. As in the rest of the euro area,developments in short-term deposits duringthe period under review were determined notjust by the behaviour of households but also,to a considerable extent, by that of financialcorporations.
Long-term types of deposit, stocks of which
virtually stagnated in the first quarter, werereduced substantially in net terms during thesecond quarter. In terms of volumes, long-term savings deposits and the quantitativelymore significant long-term time depositswere equally affected. In seasonally adjustedand annualised terms, stocks of the formerdeclined by just over 10% in the reportingquarter. During the same three months, long-term time deposits fell at a correspondingthree-month rate of -1
1/C252%, one contributory
factor being the persistently sharp reductionsin these balances by insurance corporationsand pension funds. Another important factorwas that – as elsewhere in the euro area –households’ strong demand for long-termtime deposits, which has been observed sincethe final quarter of 2009, eased off whencompared with the two preceding quarters.
During the reporting quarter, overall season-
ally adjusted credit provision by domesticcredit institutions to the domestic private sec-
tor expanded more than at any other timeover the past four quarters. The seasonallyadjusted and annualised three-month rate ofchange for total credit increased from -6% inthe first quarter to 4% in the reporting quar-ter. During this period, there was a discernibleincrease in securitised net lending to the pri-vate sector, which rose by a seasonally adjust-ed and annualised 7%, after having de-creased by -15
1/C252% in the previous quarter.
Loan volumes to the domestic private sectorwere up by a more significant amount in thesecond quarter of 2010, after declining per-ceptibly for three consecutive quarters. In thesecond quarter, the corresponding annualisedand seasonally adjusted three-month ratestood at 3
1/C252%, compared with -41/C252% in the
previous quarter. It must be noted, however,Lending and deposits of monetary
financial institutions (MFIs) inGermany
*
5billion, seasonally adjusted
2010
Item Q1 Q2Deposits of domestic non-MFIs
1
Overnight 16.9 48.6
With agreed maturities
of up to 2 years – 16.5 – 27.8of over 2 years 1.3 – 3.3
Redeemable at notice
of up to 3 months 10.6 7.3of over 3 months – 1.5 – 3.1
Lending
to domestic enterprises andhouseholds
Loans – 27.6 20.8of which: to households
2 2.3 2.9
to non-financialcorporations
3 – 0.2 0.1
Securities – 14.0 5.4
to domestic general government
Loans 3.3 13.4Securities 5.5 22.5
*As well as banks (including building and loan associations,
but excluding the Bundesbank), monetary financial institu-tions (MFIs) here also include money market funds. — 1Enter-
prises, households and general government excluding centralgovernment — 2And non-profit institutions. — 3Including
non-financial quasi-corporations.
Deutsche BundesbankLong-term
deposit types
less attractive
Strong credit
provision by
German banks
to the private
sector

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
EUROSYSTEM
Monthly Report
August 2010
34that since the first quarter of 2009 this devel-
opment has largely been determined by the
dynamics of lending to financial corporations
and that these dynamics were highly volatile
on account of the turmoil in the financial
markets.
Expanded lending to financial corporations
during the reporting quarter was accom-
panied by a substantial seasonally adjusted
increase in the volume of loans granted to
households. In annualised terms, the corres-
ponding three-month rate stood at just under
1% in the second quarter, up from1/C252% in the
previous quarter. As in the first quarter of
2010, loans for house purchase virtually stag-
nated; growth was therefore largely attribut-
able to other forms of credit.After steep declines in net lending by German
banks to non-financial corporations for three
consecutive quarters in 2009, lending activity
to this sector stagnated in the first two quar-
ters of 2010. The corresponding annualised
and seasonally adjusted three-month rate for
both quarters stood at 0%. Flows were posi-
tive and negative in turn in the individual
months of the first half of the year. Hence,
looking at monthly changes, the downward
trend in lending momentum appears to have
been broken, although the turning point can-
not yet be identified. As far as the maturity
structure is concerned, short-term lending to
non-financial corporations continued to de-
cline during the reporting quarter, albeit at a
slower pace, while medium-term loans were
reduced for the second quarter in a row. In
the course of the second quarter, long-term
loans alone experienced a mild acceleration
in their – broadly moderate – expansionary
course. Overall, the real economy still pro-
vides a good explanation for developments in
loans to non-financial corporations in the
second quarter of 2010. The banking statis-
tics therefore provide no indication of a credit
crunch in Germany.
In the second quarter, German banks once
again on balance channelled more funds to
domestic general government than to the
domestic private sector. In seasonally adjusted
and annualised terms, credit provision to the
public sector rose by 311/C252%, as opposed to
more than 7% in the first quarter. This accel-
erated expansion in lending applied to both
standard loans and securitised lending. How-
ever, this pronounced increase is largely a
reflection of transactions made with a badLoans of German banks
to domestic enterprises
and households *
* End  of  month;  adjusted  for  statistical 
changes.
Deutsche Bundesbank2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 201099100101102103104105106107108
–2–10+1+2+3+4Seasonally adjusted
%Lin scale
Year-on-year changeLog scale
Loans
2005 = 100
Clear increase
in loans to
householdsLending to
non-financial
corporations
stagnated
Increased credit
to general
government

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2010
35Deuts che Bun desbankThir d spe cial survey on German banks’ len ding to domesti c enterprises
In July 2010 the Deuts che Bun desbank repeate d 
its spe cial survey amon g sele cted German banks 
and bankin g asso ciations, whi ch it ha d con ducted 
in July 2009 an d at the turn of 2009-10.1 The aim 
of this survey is to gauge how banks expe ct their 
len ding business with domesti c non-ﬁ  nan cial cor-
porations to develop over the next twelve months. 
The parti cipatin g institutions were also aske d inter 
alia to fore cast the development of their capital 
position.
The current survey provi ded no in dications of 
an imminent credit crun ch. Fears of the German 
economy bein g un dersupplie d with credit as the 
upswin g gathers steam are therefore not share d 
by the surveye d banks.
Overall, survey parti cipants expe ct the volume 
of len ding to rise over the next twelve months, 
driven mainly by loans to small an d me dium-size d 
enterprises. An optimisti c assessment of new len d-
ing is a ccompanie d by the expe ctation of hi gh 
repayments on existin g loans, espe cially by lar ge 
enterprises. In contrast to past survey roun ds, 
write- downs on the loan portfolio do not seem 
to be affe ctin g the volume of len ding over the 
fore castin g horizon. On balan ce, the small banks 
surveye d expresse d a somewhat more positive view 
of developments in their len ding volume than the 
lar ge institutions.
The fore cast in crease in len ding volume is attri b-
ute d to an improvement in the outlook for general 
economi c activity an d risin g deman d. This assess-
ment is also demonstrate d by the expe ctation of 
increasin g draw downs on existin g credit lines an d 
of a lar ger overall volume of credit appli cations. 
In response, the surveye d banks are plannin g to 
expan d the credit lines grante d, while leavin g the 
reje ction ratio un chan ged. Overall, they do not 
expe ct dampenin g fa ctors to inﬂ  uen ce len ding to 
domesti c enterprises over the next twelve months.
According to the results of the current survey, 
the tier 1 capital ratio is anti cipate d to remain 
un chan ged on avera ge over the next twelve 
months, althou gh the lar ge banks surveye d were slightly more pessimisti c on balan ce than the small 
banks that even expe ct a small rise in this ratio. As 
banks see it, the chief fa ctors wei ghin g on the tier 1 
capital ratio in the next twelve months are likely to 
be chan ges in the ratin gs of stru cture d se curities 
and poorer borrower creditworthiness. All other 
thin gs bein g equal, the surveye d institutions expe ct 
that planne d balan ce sheet re ductions an d proﬁ  t 
retention will improve their tier 1 capital ratio, 
however. The parti cipatin g banks do not expe ct 
government measures to provi de any relief.
1 See the detaile d report on our we bsite www. bundesbank.
de/volkswirts chaft/vo_veroeffentli chun gen.en.php. — 2 For this 
question, the possi ble responses ran ge from “1 = will decrease 
consi dera bly/will contri bute consi dera bly to a decrease of the tier 
1 capital ratio” to “5 = will in crease consi dera bly /will contri bute 
consi dera bly to an in crease of the tier 1 capital ratio”. When this ran ge is broken down into ﬁ  ve intervals of e qual wi dth, there 
is an area of un certainty between 2. 6 an d 3.4 (sha ded in grey), 
whi ch is interprete d as “will remain basically un chan ged/will 
have basically no impa ct on the tier 1 capital ratio”. — 3 At least 
90% of the banks surveye d gave the response “not appli cable” 
or “not state d” to this question. Forecast of the tier 1 capital ratio
for the next 12 months and key determinants
 2
1135 1.8 2.6 3.4 4.2Planned balance sheet
reductionChanges in
revaluationreservesBad Bank ActNew private equity
raisedNew capital raised by
government bodiesRating changes for
structured securitiesof which
Creditworthinessof EU countriesBorrower
creditworthinessWrite-downs on
loan portfolioTier 1 capital ratio
Will contribute
to a decrease
in the tier 1
capital ratioWill
increase
Will contribute
to an increasein the tier 1capital ratioWill
decreaseAll banks
Small banksLarge banks
3
33

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
EUROSYSTEM
Monthly Report
August 2010
36bank under German federal law that was es-
tablished on the basis of the Financial Market
Stabilisation Development Act (Gesetz zur
Fortentwicklung der Finanzmarktstabilisie-
rung) and which falls under the general gov-
ernment sector.
The results of the latest Bank Lending Survey
(BLS), which was conducted in July 2010,
indicate broadly unchanged credit supply
conditions in Germany during the second
quarter of 2010. For instance, on balance,
credit standards in corporate lending re-
mained constant while, for the first time since
the second quarter of 2007, the general out-
look for economic activity, viewed in isolation,
again had a positive effect, as did the con-
tinued strong liquidity situation of the sur-
veyed institutions. By contrast, banks’ capital
costs had no effect on credit standards in the
second quarter of 2010. According to the
special Bundesbank survey which was carried
out at the same time as the BLS, these bank-
specific factors are also unlikely to have much
impact on expected loan developments over
the next 12 months.1
Furthermore, according to the BLS data, mar-
gins were not made any more restrictive dur-
ing the second quarter of 2010, and those for
average-risk loans to large enterprises were
even tightened slightly again. While the find-
ings of the survey for the first quarter of 2010
were broadly consistent for Germany and the
euro area, developments at the current end
diverge slightly, as credit standards and mar-
gins in the euro area both rose somewhat
during the second quarter of 2010. Moreover,
on balance, banks taking part in the euro-area sample reported no change in demand
for loans to enterprises, whereas German
institutions recorded a marked increase in
demand for funds in this credit segment. Ac-
cording to the information provided by the
banks, this was, in Germany, in large part due
to a sharp increase in financing needs for in-
ventories and working capital.
Credit standards for lending to households
likewise remained broadly unchanged in the
second quarter of 2010. The surveyed banks
only effected a moderate tightening of stand-
ards for lending for consumption purposes. In
contrast to the action taken regarding credit
standards, margins for both house purchase
and consumer credit were tightened for the
first time since the second quarter of 2008.
At the same time, the surveyed banks ob-
served a sharp rise in demand from house-
holds for loans for house purchase, which
they attributed to increased risk aversion and
low interest rates, among other factors. De-
mand for consumer loans rose somewhat less
strongly.
The survey round for the second quarter of
2010 again contained additional questions
on the impact of the financial crisis on the
wholesale funding, capital costs and lending
behaviour of the participating banks. Accord-
ing to the institutions, access to wholesale
funding on the money and capital markets
was somewhat more difficult than in the pre-
vious quarter. At the same time, just over
one-third of German bank managers said
capital costs were higher in the wake of the
1See box on p 35: Third special survey on German
banks’ lending to domestic enterprises.Credit supply
conditions
virtually
unchanged ...
... and
somewhat
more difficult
access to
wholesale
funding

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2010
37Banking conditions in Germany
1 According to harmonised MFI interest rate statistics. — 2 According to the Bank Lending Survey, difference 
between the numbers of respondents reporting “tightened considerably ” and “tightened somewhat ”and the 
numbers of respondents reporting “eased somewhat ” and “eased considerably ” as a percentage of the re-
sponses given. — 3 Expectations for  2010 Q3. — 4 Reduced scale.
Deutsche Bundesbank02 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 20103.54.04.55.05.56.06.57.07.58.08.59.09.510.0
–300+30
–300+30
–60–300+30+60
–60–300+30
2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 102.02.53.03.54.04.55.05.56.06.57.0
603003060
––++
9060300306090
–––+++Credit to non-financial corporations Credit to households
% pa
%%% pa
%%
%
%Change in credit standards 2
Average loans Riskier loans
Average loansAverage loansRiskier loans
Riskier loansLoans to enterprises... with an initial rate fixation of 
    over 1 year and up to 5 years... with an initial rate fixation of 
    over 5 yearsConsumer credit ...
Consumer creditConsumer credit
Loans for house purchaseLoans for house purchaseLoans for house purchase
with an initial rate fixation of over 5 years and up to 10 years
Loans to enterprises... with an initial rate fixation
    of over 5 years ...Loans to enterprises ...
... with an initial rate fixation    of up to 1 year ...
... over €1 million... over €1 million
... up to €1 million... up to €1 millionBank interest rates (new business) 1
Change in loan margins 2, 43
333.54.04.55.05.5

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
EUROSYSTEM
Monthly Report
August 2010
38financial crisis, slightly fewer than in the pre-
vious quarter. This resulted in some lending
constraints at a number of the affected insti-
tutions.
Bank lending rates on new loans likely sup-
ported domestic lending to the private sector.
Reflecting developments on the capital mar-
ket, reporting institutions experienced declin-
ing lending rates across the board in the
second quarter of 2010. Consequently, therate of interest charged on long-term loans to
non-financial corporations fell to 3.8% for
small-scale loans and 3.6% on larger-scale
loans as this report went to press. Conversely,
in some cases, German banks charged slightly
higher interest rates for corporate loans with
short interest-rate fixation. Lastly, the cost of
bank loans for house purchase was down on
the quarter, with long-term interest rates
dropping below the 4% mark for the first
time since these statistics have been kept.Bank lending
rates mostly
declining

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2010
39Financial marketsFinancial market trends
International financial markets remained in
the thrall of the dramatic escalation of the
Greek debt crisis, which threatened to de-
velop into a confidence crisis for the entire
euro area and led to the implementation of
extensive stabilisation measures by the EU,
the IMF and the Eurosystem at the beginning
of May. Euro-area government bond spreads
remained high – despite narrowing temporar-
ily in the immediate aftermath of the initia-
tives taken. Overall, however, the situation on
the European sovereign bond markets has
eased somewhat as a result, among other
things, of the fiscal consolidation measures
adopted by several euro-area countries, by
steadier real economic developments and by
the bank stress test, which showed the Euro-
pean and the German banking system to be
robust, for the most part, under adverse scen-
arios. Buoyed by benign economic indicators
and upbeat company reports, the European
stock markets have rallied since the end of
May. The euro, too, rebounded after having
fallen to its lowest level in several years in the
wake of the Greek debt crisis.
Exchange rates
The exchange rate movements of the euro
against the US dollar were especially pro-
nounced. After the euro countries had agreed
in the first half of April to provide an aid
package for Greece, and subsequently speci-
fied the details, the euro-dollar exchange rate
strengthened to US$1.37. However, the sin-
gle currency subsequently depreciated sharp-Financial
market setting
Euro exchange
rate develop-
ments against
the US dollar, ...

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
EUROSYSTEM
Monthly Report
August 2010
40ly again. Around this time, negative headlines
on the financial situation in Greece and fears
that the debt crisis might spread to other
euro-area countries placed the single cur-
rency under a lot of pressure. The compre-
hensive rescue package agreed on at the be-
ginning of May by Ecofin and the IMF for
euro-area countries as well as the announce-
ment of additional consolidation efforts only
temporarily halted the euro’s decline. In June,
the euro-dollar exchange rate briefly touched
US$1.19, its lowest level in four years.
A recovery got underway in mid-June after
several euro-area countries were able to place
government bonds with relative ease – albeit
with high yield spreads over the correspond-
ing German bonds. Moreover, various euro
countries introduced savings measures withthe result that, on the whole, concerns over
the European debt crisis have receded some-
what into the background. Meanwhile, for-
eign exchange market players turned their at-
tention more to differences in the perception
of economic developments in the United
States and in the euro area. Whereas weak
figures from the US housing and labour mar-
kets dampened the outlook for the US econ-
omy, confidence in the economy of the euro
area was bolstered in the second half of July
by the announcement of a number of surpris-
ingly positive economic data. Furthermore,
the publication of the stress test results for
European banks helped ease pressure on the
financial markets and tended to support the
euro. In August, the euro-dollar exchange
rate pared some of its gains after the US Fed-
eral Reserve signalled that it would step in
again to support the US economy in view of
the more modest than anticipated recovery.
This is likely to have raised risk aversion on
the markets and increased demand for the
US dollar given its traditional role as a “safe
haven” currency. As this report went to press,
the euro-dollar exchange rate stood at just
under US$1.29. On balance, the single cur-
rency has lost 41/C252% against the US dollar
since end-March. This left the euro-dollar ex-
change rate more than 101/C252% below its level
at the turn of the year.
After range-trading around the ¥125 mark in
April, the euro-yen exchange rate fell to ¥109
into the first half of June. During this time,
the yen additionally benefited from rising risk
aversion, which is likely to have led to an
unwinding of risky carry trades. In the light of
the announcement of surprisingly positiveChange in the euro against 
selected currencies
1 Nominal  effective  exchange  rate  of  the 
euro as measured against the currencies of 
21 countries.
Deutsche BundesbankUS dollarPound
sterling
EER-211Swiss
francYen
0 –4 –8 –12 % –16since 31 December 2009since 31 March 2010As at 17 August 2010
... against the
yen ...

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2010
41euro-area economic data and the gradual
calming of the financial markets, the euro
had meanwhile also regained some lost
ground against the japanese currency. How-
ever, as this report went to press, the euro
stood back at almost ¥110, 171/C252% below its
level at the beginning of 2010.
The euro also depreciated considerably
against the pound sterling in spring and sum-
mer, falling from £0.91 at the beginning of
the second quarter to an exchange rate of
£0.81 in the first half of July. At first, the ten-
sions in the euro area put downward pressure
on the euro against the pound sterling.
Moreover, greater inflationary pressures in
the United Kingdom triggered speculation in
June that the Bank of England could raise
interest rates, which further bolstered the
British pound on a broad front. In addition,
the new British government’s austerity pro-
gramme restored some confidence in Britain’s
public finances and contributed to the strength
of the pound. As this report went to press,
the euro stood at £0.82, which is 71/C252% down
on the start of the year.
The euro also depreciated against the Swiss
franc in the reporting period, hitting a new
all-time low after the Swiss National Bank in-
dicated it would be discontinuing its foreign
exchange intervention. By contrast, the single
currency appreciated against a number of
central and eastern European currencies. These
changes were reflected in the euro’s average
value vis-/C224-vis the 21 major currencies in the
exchange rate index falling roughly 5% since
the end of March. At last count, the euro’s ef-
fective exchange rate was 9% below its levelat the beginning of the year and roughly 1%
lower than at the launch of the monetary
union.
Securities markets and portfolio
transactions
From the beginning of April onwards, the
European bond markets’ focus swung be-
tween the crisis of confidence in the sustain-
ability of the public finances of a number of
euro-currency countries and attempts to stem
the shock waves emanating from Greece by
implementing numerous monetary policy and
fiscal measures. Market players’ rapidly chan-
ging views are very clearly reflected in the
GDP-weighted yield spread of the other euro-
area government bonds against correspond-
ing German debt. Whereas this spread had
stood at an already fairly high 71 basis points
at the end of March, it widened to as much
as 153 basis points when the crisis was at its
worst, before narrowing to 131 basis points
by mid-August amid some volatity. The
widening was driven primarily by Greece,
which quickly lost the markets’ confidence
when, at the end of April, it again revised up-
wards its budget deficit for 2009 and public
protest mounted against the announced aus-
terity measures. Negative sentiment grew
when rating agencies downgraded, first, the
sovereign rating of Greece and Portugal and
then that of Spain and Ireland. Whereas
prices for the bonds issued by these countries
fell sharply, safe haven paper – notably the
German benchmark bond – appreciated per-
ceptibly. Even after the euro rescue package
had been set up, European government bond... and against
the pound
sterling
Effective euro
exchange rateSpotlight on
the European
debt crisis

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
EUROSYSTEM
Monthly Report
August 2010
42markets remained very heterogeneous and
volatile. The situation eased somewhat when
several euro-area countries implemented add-
itional austerity measures and several bond
auctions were successful. This positive devel-
opment was underpinned by improving real
economic conditions in the euro area and the
positive reaction to the results of the stress
test among European banks. German govern-
ment bonds were in demand throughout the
reporting period. As this report went to press,
the yield on Bunds with ten years left to
maturity stood at an historic low of 2.3%.
As long-dated German bonds rallied, the Ger-
man yield curve flattened significantly over
the quarter. Thus the interest-rate differential
between ten-year and two-year yields is, at
200 basis points, up to 40 basis points lowerthan at the end of March. The flattening of
the curve mainly reflects safe haven buying
by market players. Another factor is that the
Eurosystem’s monetary policy is expected to
remain accommodating.
The debt crisis in several euro-area countries
had a knock-on effect on the prices for se-
curitised government bonds outside of the
euro area. As market players shifted out of
euro-area bond exposures they considered to
be risky, some moved into secure investments
outside of the euro area, triggering significant
downward yield movements in the major cur-
rency areas. The yield on Japanese govern-
ment bonds fell by 44 basis points, while UK
and US government paper saw yields decline
by 88 basis points and 129 basis points re-
spectively. In the United States, the fact that a
number of indicators have, since early June,
been pointing to a slightly weaker economic
recovery than initially assumed by market par-
ticipants may also have been a factor. More-
over, the Fed has decided to use the proceeds
of maturing securities to buy US Treasuries.
On balance, 10-year paper were yielding
2.6% in mid-August.
European enterprises’ financing conditions on
the bond markets worsened initially in May as
investors’ risk aversion increased perceptibly.
However, with brighter economic prospects
and declining uncertainty on the stock mar-
kets, investors took a more optimistic view of
credit risk again. As this article went to press,
the spreads on BBB-rated corporate bonds
denominated in euro against government
bonds – as measured by the Merrill Lynch
bond indices – were, at 215 basis points,Bond yields in Germany
and the United States
Deutsche Bundesbank2007 2008 2009 20102.02.53.03.54.04.55.05.5
–1.0–0.50+0.5+1.0Weekly averages
%
Per-
centage 
pointsUS yield spread against
the German bond marketYield on ten-year 
government bonds
United States
Germany
German yield
curve flatteningInternational
bond markets
Financing
conditions for
enterprises

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2010
43roughly 10 basis points higher than at the
end of March.1While euro-area government
bond yields edged lower, BBB-rated corporatebond yields fell by 35 basis points overall. Themarkets for corporate credit default swaps(CDS), which had come under considerablepressure with the debt crisis, were normalis-ing as this report went to press and partiallyreversed the preceding rise in premiums. Asmeasured by the credit derivatives indexiTraxx Europe, which is composed of creditdefault swaps referencing investment gradecredits, CDS premiums were, at the end ofthe reporting period, some 35 basis pointshigher than at the end of March, at 115 basispoints.
The second quarter saw issuance on the Ger-
man bond market pick up for the first timesince end-2008 ( 3379 billion). However, as re-
demptions also rose, to 3375
1/C252billion, the
outstanding volume of domestic bonds fellslightly by 33 billion on balance, taking ac-
count of changes in issuers’ holdings of theirown bonds. However, looking through thequarterly figures reveals, in some cases sharp,movements in the individual months, reflect-ing the tensions on the markets for Europeangovernment bonds. For instance, domestic is-suers were in some cases noticeably reticentwith new placements at the height of thecrisis in May ( 387 billion). In June, however,
gross sales figures picked up perceptibly(3173
1/C252billion). This pattern was observed
for private issuers not only in Germany, butthroughout Europe. Foreign debtors repaid33 billion to investors in the reporting period,
meaning net redemptions on the domesticbond market totalled 36 billion.The public sector raised its capital market
debt by 321
1/C252billion in the second quarter.
The Federal states were especially active is-suers ( 313 billion), while the Federal govern-
ment tapped the market for a much smaller38
1/C252billion. The high issuance by the Federal
states can, overall, be attributed exclusivelyto the funding requirements of the FirstYield spreads
in the euro area
Sources: Thomson Reuters and Bundesbank 
calculations. — 1 Standard deviation of yield 
spreads  of  euro-area  government  bonds against German Federal bonds (Bunds).
Deutsche Bundesbank2009 201001002003004005006007008009001,000
0100200300Daily data
Spread of ten-year 
government bonds against Bunds
Dispersion of yield spreads
against German Federal bonds
 1
GDP weightedUnweightedGreeceBasis
points
Basis
pointsIreland
PortugalItaly
Spain
1The increase is probably due, in part, to a change in
index composition.Net redemptions
in the bond
market
Borrowing by
German
government

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
EUROSYSTEM
Monthly Report
August 2010
44Winding-up Agency ( Erste Abwicklungsan-
stalt or EAA), which has assumed WestLB’s
exposures and non-strategic businesses. It is
striking that the Federal government in its is-
suance continued to extend the maturity of
its debt, thereby securing the favourable fi-
nancing conditions for longer. As in the previ-
ous quarter, it issued 30-year and, in particu-
lar, 10-year Bunds ( 371/C252billion and 3121/C252bil-
lion respectively) to replace maturing Federal
Treasury discount paper (Bubills: 3111/C252bil-
lion), whose maturity spectrum had last year
been extended to up to 12 months. Issuance
of the short-dated bonds was stepped up a
year ago in order to provide funds for the
Special Fund for the Stabilisation of the Finan-
cial Market (Financial Market Stabilisation
Agency or SoFFin). In addition, the Federal
government also sold five-year Federal notes
(Bobls) and two-year Federal Treasury notes
(Sch/C228tze) for a total of 34 billion and redeemed
a US-dollar-denominated issue ( 34 billion),
which it had placed five years ago.
Non-bank domestic corporations issued
321/C252billion worth of debt securities in the
reporting quarter. Short-dated commercial
paper, a financing instrument which has
hardly been used since the collapse of the
Lehman Brothers bank, accounted for more
than half of this total ( 311/C252billion). The ma-
jority of the placements took place in April.
With the loss of confidence on the markets
for government bonds, this financing channel
for non-banks, too, temporarily dried up,
with non-financial corporations particularly
hard hit.Domestic credit institutions lowered their
capital market debt by another 3261/C252billion
in the reporting period, about the magnitude
observed since the fourth quarter of 2008
(quarterly average since then: 331 billion).
They mainly redeemed other bank debt
securities which allow flexible structuring
(3191/C252billion), the instruments that have suf-
fered the most pronounced turnaround since
the onset of the financial crisis, as well as
public Pfandbriefe ( 315 billion). On balance,
mortgage Pfandbriefe, where the Eurosystem
covered bonds purchase programme expired
on 30 June, were redeemed on a quarterly
basis ( 32 billion) despite more lively issuance
towards the end of the programme. By con-
trast, specialised credit institutions, which in-
clude the public promotional banks, issued
bonds worth 391/C252billion (net).
The debt crisis is also leaving its mark in pur-
chase figures. Overall, residents were net
sellers of German bonds ( 310 billion). How-
ever, there was major shifting among the sec-
tors, although these were mainly related to
the above-mentioned transfer of risk expos-
ures out of the banking sector. Where debt
securities were affected, this was treated as a
sale by the bank transferring the paper. More-
over, domestic credit institutions sold paper
issued by euro-area debtors that have been
particularly hard hit by the crisis, and have in-
vested some of the sales proceeds in Federal
government issues, which are, in times of cri-
sis, a liquid and safe investment vehicle of
preference. They sold 3441/C252billion worth of
fixed income securities on balance. By con-
trast, other groups of domestic buyers – in-
cluding the EAA, which is classed as the gov-Issues by
non-banksNet redemptions
by credit
institutions
Purchase of
debt securities

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2010
45ernment sector, and the Bundesbank, which
acquired securities through its monetary pol-icy operations – added debt securities wortha total of 334
1/C252billion to their portfolios. Al-
though foreign investors’ trading volumes onthe German market reached the double-digitbillion euro mark during the quarter, on bal-ance their cross-border exposure did notchange much ( 34 billion).
In the second quarter, the international stock
markets were initially also affected by the lossof confidence in the sustainability of publicdebt in some euro-area countries and con-cerns about the consequences the debt crisismight have on financial institutions and thereal economy. Fears that the crisis on someeuro-area government bond markets couldspill over to other countries and require highwrite-downs fuelled market players’ uncer-tainty about the general state of the financialsector. Market participants were also worriedthat the required consolidation measurescould place a damper on the economic out-look. Meanwhile, the rescue package passedfor ailing euro-area countries had no long-term impact on the equity markets. In thisenvironment, financials suffered particularlylarge losses. By the end of May, the broadmarket equity indices in Europe (Euro Stoxx)and the United States (S&P 500) had also fall-en by around 14% and 8% respectively fromtheir levels of end-March. Market partici-pants’ strong uncertainty was a major con-tributory factor in sending prices on the inter-national equity markets lower. As measuredby the implied volatility of equity options,share price uncertainty reached peak valuesof close to 40% on both sides of the Atlantic;this was well above its five-year average. It
was, however, still well below the recordlevels of the fourth quarter of 2008, whenimplied volatility in Europe and the UnitedStates had spiked to some 80%.
Buoyed by brighter economic prospects for
the euro area, share price uncertainty easedfrom June onwards and stock markets re-covered. Moreover, analysts raised their earn-ings estimates worldwide, further driving upprices. Optimism with regard to profit devel-opments was additionally underpinned byunexpectedly positive quarterly results for USand European enterprises towards the end ofthe reporting period. Moreover, market play-ers’ confidence in the solidity of the financialsector was strengthened by the publication ofthe results of the bank stress test in the EU,
Investment activity in the German
securities markets
5billion
2009 2010
Item Q2 Q1 Q2Debt securities
Residents 42.5 29.9 – 10.1
Credit institutions 27.4 2.1 – 44.4of which
Foreign debt securities – 5.4 1.5 – 40.3
Non-banks 15.1 27.8 34.3of which
Domestic debt securities – 14.9 11.5 – 2.8
Non-residents 27.5 8.1 4.1
Shares
Residents 10.5 7.5 7.7
Credit institutions – 2.4 3.0 – 1.6of which
Domestic shares – 2.0 3.8 – 4.6
Non-banks 12.8 4.5 9.4of which
Domestic shares 9.3 3.1 6.9
Non-residents 1.2 – 0.2 – 1.6
Mutual fund shares
Investment in specialised funds – 4.7 13.9 14.0
Investment in funds open tothe general public 5.1 7.0 0.6of which: Share-based funds 2.3 – 0.4 – 1.3
Deutsche BundesbankInternational
equity markets
between debt
crisis ...
... and
economic
recovery

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
EUROSYSTEM
Monthly Report
August 2010
46which investors largely rated positively. None-
theless, the preceding share price losses
meant German and European shares, as
measured by the CDAX and the Euro Stoxx,
were still trading 3% and 7% respectively
below their levels at the beginning of the
second quarter as this report went to press,
while US equities (S&P 500) were down
71/C252%.The excess return investors demand for an
investment in European shares (Euro Stoxx)
as compared to a secure investment, which
can be calculated using a dividend discount
model, was well above its five-year average
(around 5%), at roughly 71/C252%, as this report
went to press and thus signals that investors
are taking a relatively cautious stance. The
implied risk premium of an exposure to Euro-
pean banking stocks rose to just under 7% at
the end of the period under review, not far
off its five-year average.
Given the debt crisis and market players’ at
times heightened risk aversion, issuance on
the domestic stock market weakened signifi-
cantly in the second quarter. Domestic enter-
prises issued just 31/C252billion in new shares,
compared with 361/C252billion in the months
January to March. By contrast, the volume of
outstanding foreign equities in Germany in-
creased by 351/C252billion. Domestic non-banks
were the only net buyers of equities ( 391/C252bil-
lion), mainly focusing on German shares
(37 billion). Credit institutions sold domestic
shares (- 341/C252billion) in favour of foreign
shares ( 33 billion). Non-resident investors re-
duced their exposure to the German equity
market by 311/C252billion, all of which was port-
folio investment.2
Domestic investment companies recorded in-
flows of 3141/C252billion in the months April to
June, after 321 billion in the previous quarter.
Almost all of the fresh funds flowed into spe-
cialised funds reserved for institutional invest-
ors (314 billion). Among funds open to the3050100200300
0510152025
2007 2008 2009 2010102030405060Equity market
Sources: Thomson Reuters and Bundesbank 
calculations. —  1 Measure  of  the  risk  pre-
mium  demanded  by  investors.  Calculated 
from  three-stage  dividend  discount  model 
using three to five-year IBES expectations of 
profit  growth  and  long-term  GDP  growth 
expectations  (concensus  forecast). —  2 Ex-
pected  future  volatility,  calculated  from 
prices of options on the Euro Stoxx. Month-
ly averages.
Deutsche BundesbankEuro Stoxx banks
Lin scale
Equity risk premiums 1
Euro StoxxEuro Stoxx
Euro Stoxx banks%31 January 2005 = 100, log scale
Stock price indicesEnd-of-month levels
%
Implied volat-
ility of the 
Euro Stoxx 2
2For more details on direct investment, see p 47.Higher equity
risk premium
Stock market
funding and
stock purchases
Sales and
purchases of
mutual fund
shares

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2010
47general public, mixed securities-based funds,
bond-based funds and mixed funds attracted
inflows ( 311/C252billion, 31 billion and 31 billion
respectively). By contrast, share-based funds,
open-end real estate funds and money mar-
ket funds suffered outflows ( 311/C252billion, 31
billion and 31/C252billion respectively). Sales of
foreign mutual fund units in Germany
reached 33 billion.
As in the first quarter, mutual fund shares
were mainly bought by domestic non-banks,
which added 316 billion worth of fund shares
to their portfolios. The majority of these were
domestic fund shares ( 3141/C252billion). Credit
institutions acquired 31 billion worth of mu-
tual fund shares, buying only foreign fund
shares on balance ( 32 billion). Non-resident
investors increased their holdings of domestic
fund units by 31/C252billion.
Direct investment
Like portfolio investment ( 31/C252billion), direct
investment suffered net capital outflows in
the second quarter of 2010 ( 3221/C252billion
after 3271/C252billion from January to March).
The main reason for these capital exports was
German firms’ renewed investment abroad
(327 billion). German firms primarily supplied
their foreign branches with funds in the form
of intra-group loans ( 319 billion), but also by
increasing their equity stakes and by reinvest-
ing earnings.
Direct investment by foreign enterprises in
Germany amounted to 34 billion for the April
to June period, after 361/C252billion in the previ-Major items of the balance of
payments
5billion
2009 2010
Item Q2 Q1 Q2
I Current account 1, 2 + 23.8 + 31.7 + 26.1
Foreign trade 1, 3 + 31.7 + 37.6 + 37.0
Services 1 – 2.3 – 1.5 – 2.5
Income 1 – 0.1 + 11.5 + 0.7
Current transfers 1 – 3.5 – 13.4 – 6.0
II Capital transfers 1, 4 + 0.3 + 0.3 – 0.4
III Financial account 1
(Net capital exports: –) – 45.2 – 15.4 – 16.4
1 Direct investment – 6.7 – 27.5 – 22.6
German investment
abroad – 16.1 – 34.1 – 26.9
Foreign investment in
Germany + 9.4 + 6.6 + 4.2
2 Portfolio investment + 1.5 – 11.4 – 0.5
German investment
abroad – 27.1 – 22.1 – 3.6
Shares – 1.4 + 3.6 – 3.7
Mutual fund shares – 1.0 – 7.8 – 3.1
Debt securities – 24.6 – 17.9 + 3.2
Bonds and notes 5 – 27.4 – 18.9 – 0.2
of which
Euro-denominated
bonds and notes – 25.0 – 26.8 + 0.4
Money market
instruments + 2.8 + 1.0 + 3.4
Foreign investment
in Germany + 28.7 + 10.6 + 3.1
Shares + 1.1 + 0.8 – 1.7
Mutual fund shares – 0.0 + 1.7 + 0.7
Debt securities + 27.5 + 8.1 + 4.1
Bonds and notes 5 – 1.3 + 13.4 + 19.9
of which
Public bonds and
notes + 21.0 + 16.5 + 21.9
Money market
instruments + 28.8 – 5.3 – 15.8
3 Financial derivatives 6 + 4.1 – 4.1 – 6.4
4 Other investment 7 – 44.2 + 28.3 + 14.0
Monetary financial
institutions 8 – 10.1 + 75.3 + 49.9
of which: short-term + 9.7 + 65.3 + 41.0
Enterprises and
households + 2.2 – 17.9 – 3.2
of which: short-term – 2.8 – 9.9 + 5.3
General government – 19.5 – 0.2 + 7.5
of which: short-term – 18.1 + 0.9 + 7.3
Bundesbank – 16.8 – 28.9 – 40.2
5 Change in reserve assets at
transaction values
(increase: –) 9 + 0.0 – 0.7 – 0.8
IV Errors and omissions + 21.1 – 16.6 – 9.3
1Balance. — 2Including supplementary trade items. — 3Special
trade according to the official foreign trade statistics (source:
Federal Statistical Office). — 4Including the acquisition/disposal
of non-produced non-financial assets. — 5Original maturity of
more than one year. — 6Securitised and non-securitised options
as well as financial futures contracts. — 7Includes financial and
trade credits, bank deposits and other assets. — 8Excluding the
Bundesbank. — 9Excluding allocation of SDRs and excluding
changes due to value adjustments.
Deutsche BundesbankGerman direct
investment
abroad
Foreign direct
investment in
Germany

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
EUROSYSTEM
Monthly Report
August 2010
48ous three-month period. Foreign firms pro-
vided their branches in Germany with funds
(351/C252billion) particularly through intra-grouploans. By contrast, dividend payouts to the
parent companies caused fund outflows from
German branches.

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2010
49Economic conditions
in GermanyMacroeconomic situation
The recovery of the German economy took a
major step forward in the second quarter. Ac-
cording to an initial estimate by the Federal
Statistical Office, real gross domestic product
(GDP) in the second quarter of 2010 rose by
no less than 2.2% on the quarter in seasonal-
ly and calendar-adjusted terms. This means
that more than half of the crisis-induced de-
cline in output has now been regained. This
exceptionally sharp increase in overall output
was driven by strong impulses from the global
economy. Added to this were stimuli on the
domestic side. Temporary factors played a
role in this. This largely offset the weather-
related output losses in the construction and
transport sectors during the winter months,
which may have had a knock-on effect on
other sectors, too. Furthermore, there are
mounting signs that the cyclical recovery
in Germany is becoming increasingly self-
sustaining. Investment in new machinery and
equipment picked up considerably. Private
consumption spending is likely to have in-
creased again for the first time in three quar-
ters.
Just as it had suffered from the slump in
global trade, above all in high-quality durable
industrial goods in the final quarter of 2008
and the first quarter of 2009, the German
economy is now participating in its strong re-
vival (to which it is itself contributing through
sharply rising imports). In the second quarter,
German exporters benefited to a particularly
large extent from the fact that the economic
upturn has gathered pace worldwide and has
become more broadly based regionally. Senti-Exceptionally
sharp rise
in output
Strong impulses
from the global
economy

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
EUROSYSTEM
Monthly Report
August 2010
50ment was temporarily dampened somewhat
only by uncertainties in connection with the
crisis in public finances in a number of euro-
area countries. On a quarterly average, the
value of exports of goods went up by a
seasonally adjusted 9.4% on the preceding
three-month period. Although the increase,
at an estimated 71/C252%, was somewhat less
pronounced in real terms, almost 75% of the
crisis-induced export losses have now been
recovered.
Exports to countries outside the euro area,
which lost some momentum at the beginning
of the year, returned to a steeper growth
path in the second quarter. The emerging
market economies thus once again proved to
be the key engine of growth, even though ex-
ports to China, which grew by almost one-third in the first quarter, also remained at a
high level. Export business with customers in
the United States also increased rapidly in the
wake of the recovery in the US economy. Des-
pite the structural problems in some coun-
tries, exports to euro-area partner countries,
which are particularly important for German
foreign trade, also expanded at an acceler-
ated pace.
For the first time since the beginning of the
global economic recovery process, demand
for German capital goods increased much
faster than demand for intermediate goods,
albeit from a depressed level. The main bene-
ficiaries of this were manufacturers of ma-
chinery, who recorded exceptionally sharp
growth in exports. There was also a sharp
pick-up in exports of motor vehicles, which
had temporarily lost momentum after gov-
ernment funding made available in a large
number of countries for the purchase of new
cars had been used up. This suggests that the
major trading partners are, for the most part,
increasingly optimistic in their assessments
about the future.
The increase in the value of goods imports, at
a seasonally adjusted 10.5%, was, in fact,
somewhat sharper than that in exports in the
second quarter. Although a large part of this
increase was due to higher prices, there was
still a marked rise of around 7% in real terms.
Most of this stronger import activity is linked
directly to the considerable rise in exports.
Marked growth in domestic output was ac-
companied by a substantial rise in demand
for imported intermediate goods, especially
metals and metal products. Imports of capitalOverall output
1 Price-adjusted.
Deutsche Bundesbank2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010102104106108110112114
–6–4–20+2+42000 = 100, seasonally adjusted
Log scale
GDP 1
Year-on-year change%Lin scale
Imports
also rose
considerably

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2010
51goods grew even more rapidly in real terms.
This applies to both machines and motor ve-hicles. A large part of the additional importsagain came from South-East Asia and China,but also from the Russian Federation. Withregard to foreign trade with euro-area coun-tries, it is striking that German imports fromthese countries in the first two quarters of2010 expanded more than twice as rapidly asGerman exports to these regions. The Euro-pean trade partners are therefore benefitingto a considerable degree from the currentrapid pace of growth in the Germany econ-omy, which is largely determined by its suc-cess in exporting to third markets.
Investment in machinery and equipment
picked up noticeably in the second quarter.This is indicated by the rise in imports of cap-ital goods and the increase in domestic salesof German manufacturers. Given the con-tinued below-average degree of industrialcapacity utilisation, purchases are likely tohave been concentrated primarily on the ne-cessary and previously deferred replacementof existing assets. Purchases of machineryand equipment by commercial customerswere focused mainly on motor vehicles. Ex-penditure on new machinery also seems tohave increased perceptibly for the first time,however.
Construction investment also received a
sharp boost in the second quarter. This waspartly due to the rapid recovery of theweather-related output losses in the con-struction sector at the beginning of the year.Added to this was a sharp rise in the firstquarter in both industrial and public sectororders, most of which were in connection
with the government economic stimulus pro-grammes to renew infrastructure and reno-vate public buildings. The volume of housingconstruction orders also increased sharply,providing a boost to output in the secondquarter. Additional expansionary stimuli wereprobably generated by the finishing trades,which had already recorded sharp growth inthe first quarter.Underlying trends
in foreign trade
Deutsche Bundesbank2007 2008 2009 201090100110120130
100110120Seasonally adjusted, quarterly
to non-euro-area countries
to euro-area
countries2005 = 100, log scale
Exports of goods (price-adjusted)
Imports of goods in total
(price-adjusted)Total
pe0102030405060Lin scale
Foreign trade balance€ bn90100110120130
90100110120
Strong growth
in investment in
machinery and
equipment
Rapid catch-up
in construction
investment
following
downturn in Q1

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
EUROSYSTEM
Monthly Report
August 2010
52After adjustment for seasonal and calendar
variations, private consumption is likely to
have risen again in real terms during the re-
porting period for the first time in three quar-
ters. Retail spending increased slightly. One
contributory factor in this was that sales of
information and communication technology
(ICT) products were given a boost by the FIFA
World Cup. Although the number of new
cars registered to households was down on
the quarter owing to a number of car pur-
chases having been brought forward to the
previous year, more higher-quality vehicles
than usual are likely to have been procured.
Sectoral trends
The upward trend in industry strengthened
considerably in the second quarter of 2010.
Output in the manufacturing sector expand-
ed by a seasonally adjusted 5.2% after rising
by 2.4% in the first quarter. With the excep-
tion of output in consumer goods, which was
only slightly up on the level of the first quar-
ter, the increase in output was broadly based
in sectoral terms. Once again, it was produ-
cers of intermediate goods that recorded the
sharpest increase (6.9%). The rise in the out-
put of capital goods, at a seasonally adjusted
5.5%, was considerably stronger than in the
previous three-month period. The production
of machinery (+5.7%) and electrical goods
(+7.5%) picked up significantly. Output in the
automotive industry also went up by 10.6%.
Manufacturers of metals and metal products
also benefited from this; they increased their
output by a seasonally adjusted 9.8% in the
second quarter.The faster pace of industrial activity – a trend
which is likely to have continued in the
second half of the year – is reflected in the
sharp rise in manufacturing capacity utilisa-
tion. Following an increase of 41/C252percentage
points between January and April, it had
gone up by a further 21/C252percentage points
by July. Further ground was made up primar-
ily in those sectors which are particularly
sensitive to the business cycle, intermediate
(+23/C254percentage points) and capital goods
– including cars (+33/C254percentage points). In
the intermediate goods sector, the degree of
utilisation is again already slightly above the
longer-term average. By contrast, the capital
goods industry has not yet progressed quite
as far; according to corporate surveys, the
gap compared with normal utilisation still
amounts to 41/C254percentage points.
The divergent developments in the energy
and construction sectors in the second quar-
ter of 2010 are to be seen against the back-
drop of changing weather conditions. Energy
production, which reached a very high level
in the first two months of the year owing to
the exceptionally cold weather, fell again for
a time afterwards before reaching an even
higher level in June owing to the hot weather
conditions. There was also a slight quarter-
on-quarter increase (1.1%) owing to the eco-
nomically induced rise in industrial demand
for energy. By contrast, construction output,
which suffered as a result of the very cold
winter, rose by a seasonally adjusted 16.1%
in the second quarter. The average level of
output of the previous year, which can be
used as a rough estimate of the normal level
when not affected by special factors, was ex-Further rise
in private
consumption
Broad-based
recovery in
industrial
outputSharp rise in
industrial
capacity
utilisation
Increase in
energy
production and
strong growth
in construction
activity

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2010
53ceeded by 6.0%. Output in civil engineering,
which had benefited mainly from public sec-
tor orders as a result of the government fiscal
stimulus programmes, expanded somewhat
more strongly on the quarter than it did in
the building industry. Construction activity re-
turned to a normal level to some extent dur-
ing the second quarter, which indicates that a
large part of the output losses from the first
quarter were quickly offset.
Within the services sector, it was primarily the
industry-related areas that recorded an up-
swing. According to the statistics on motor-
way tolls, German transport and logistics en-
terprises are showing strong growth, which is
consistent with the faster pace of domestic
production and cross-border transactions in
goods. Business-related services – judging by
the available survey results for these sectors –
were also performing significantly better dur-
ing the period under review. There was strong
growth in motor vehicle sales as the increase
in commercial business far outweighed the
decline in sales of new vehicles to house-
holds. A sizeable increase in turnover in price-
adjusted terms was also recorded in the hotel
and restaurant sector. Furthermore, there was
a slight seasonally adjusted increase in sales in
the wholesale and retail trades in real terms.
Employment and unemployment
Roughly one year after overall economic out-
put, the German labour market has probably
now also bottomed out in cyclical terms. By
historical standards, the time lag is, per se ,i n
line with the customary pattern. Neverthe-less, it is notable that, despite sharp growth
in the second quarter of 2010, output is still
well down on its pre-crisis level and that the
earlier decline in employment was extremely
subdued in comparison with earlier economic
downturns. Job shedding in the manufactur-
ing sector came to an end and temporary em-
ployment agencies hired a considerable num-
ber of new staff. This, together with the
steady decline in cyclically motivated short-Output in industry
and in construction
Deutsche Bundesbank2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 20109095100105110115120
–25–20–15–10–50+5+10+15
95100105110115120
–15–10–50+5+10+15+20+25+302005 = 100, seasonally adjusted, quarterly
Log scale
Industry
Lin scale
Year-on-year change
Log scale
Construction
Lin scale
Year-on-year
change%%
Upswing in
industry-related
services sectors
Labour market
likely to have
bottomed out

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
EUROSYSTEM
Monthly Report
August 2010
54time work, is a clear sign that the recovery is
gradually starting to be felt on the labour
market.
According to estimates by the Federal Statis-
tical Office, employment in the second quar-
ter of 2010 rose by 81,000, or 0.2%, on the
quarter after adjustment for seasonal vari-
ations. The number of employees subject to
social security contributions in manufactur-
ing, which has been particularly hard hit by
the financial and economic crisis, and in the
logistics sector, with which manufacturing
has close economic ties, increased again
slightly in April-May for the first time since
the fourth quarter of 2008. There was a
sharp expansion in hired labour, much of
which is generally used by industrial enter-
prises. Since the low point one year earlier,
the number of persons in temporary employ-
ment went up by around 150,000 following
a decline of 170,000 in the previous 12-month
period. The rise in April-May 2010 compared
with the previous three-month period ac-
counted for almost half of the total increase
in employment subject to social security con-
tributions (+132,000). In addition, there was
a further considerable rise in the number of
new jobs created in the health and social
work sector. By contrast, there was a slight
decline in the number of persons working in
low-paid part-time employment as their main
source of income.
The fundamental improvement in the busi-
ness situation in many parts of the economy
led to a massive reduction in the use of cyclic-
ally induced short-time work. According to
initial estimates by the Federal EmploymentAgency, 481,000 persons were still affected
by this in May 2010, compared with 809,000
in the first quarter. This development is likely
to have continued, especially as the number
of new registrations has been falling steadily
in recent months and, with just 27,000 cases
in July, was only slightly above the pre-crisis
level.
There was a perceptible decline in unemploy-
ment in the second quarter of 2010. At 3.26
million, there were 128,000 fewer persons
registered as unemployed in the reporting
period (seasonally adjusted) than in the first
quarter of 2010; in year-on-year terms, the
figure fell by as much as 217,000. A signifi-
cant cyclical effect is indicated by the fact
that the second-quarter decline of 83,000 in
the number of persons receiving unemploy-
ment benefits under the statutory insurance
scheme was almost twice as large as the de-
cline in the number of persons receiving basic
welfare allowance. The official unemploy-
ment rate in the second quarter of 2010
stood at a seasonally adjusted 7.7% and was
therefore 0.4 percentage point down on its
level in the previous quarter. Compared with
the same period last year, which also marked
the peak level of the cyclical downturn, the
unemployment rate fell by 0.5 percentage
point in the official statistics. Even according
to the extended concept of the Federal Em-
ployment Agency, the unemployment rate
would no longer have shown an increase on
the year. There was a further perceptible de-
cline in the official unemployment figure in
July, although the fall was somewhat smaller
than in the second quarter. The unemploy-
ment rate went down to 7.6%.Subdued, but
broadly based
growth in
employment
across sectors
Decline in
short-time
workSharp reduction
in unemploy-
ment

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2010
55The economic upturn is likely to continue
making itself felt on the labour market overthe coming months. Owing to the perceptiblecyclical recovery, the profile of the workforcein the manufacturing and services sectors,both of which were affected by the economiccrisis, is being shaped less and less by meas-ures and instruments which served to safe-guard existing jobs during the period of reces-sion. The use of short-time work is thereforelikely to be reduced further. Furthermore,regular weekly working hours are likely to in-crease again for a large number of employ-ees, as are the number of overtime hoursworked. According to the monthly survey re-sults, the number of hours worked per em-ployee in the manufacturing sector went upby a seasonally adjusted 2% in the secondquarter.
The already rather high degree of utilisation
in some areas of the production sector is like-ly to have benefited temporary employmentfirst. The stabilisation of the recovery processhas also increased planning certainty for alarge number of enterprises, which is usuallya precondition for increasing the number ofcore staff. This was probably a factor behindthe sharp rise in the Ifo Employment Barom-eter for trade and industry, which is again al-ready showing a comparatively high willing-ness to recruit new staff. Moreover, accordingto the survey conducted by the GermanChamber of Industry and Commerce (DIHK)in the early summer, the number of enter-prises wishing to increase their staffing levelsis slightly higher than those planning to re-duce their staffing levels. Furthermore, in thesecond quarter there was a discernible in-Labour market
1 Only short-time work for economic reas-
ons  pursuant  to  section  170  of  the  Third Book of the Social Security Code ( Sozialge-
setzbuch  (SGB III)). — 2 From May 2009, un-
employed  excluding  persons  newly  re-gistered  on  the  books  of  private  employ-ment agencies.
Deutsche Bundesbank2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 201038.539.039.540.040.5
05001,0001,500
3.03.54.04.55.0
1,00050005001,000
––++
681012Seasonally adjusted, quarterly
Million
Million
0Thou-
sandThou-
sand
Thou-
sand
%Employed
Short-time workers 1
Unemployed 2Year-on-year change
Year-on-year change
Unemployment rate 2Apr–
May
July
July
July–5000+500+1,000
Advance notification
of short-time work 1
JulyBrighter labour
market outlook

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
EUROSYSTEM
Monthly Report
August 2010
56crease in the supply of jobs subject to social
security contributions in the more cyclically
volatile economic sectors. By contrast, the
stagnation of vacancies in the health and so-
cial work sector as well as in the education
sector indicates that there might be a slowing
expansion of vacancies in these sectors.
These trends are confirmed by the IAB Job
Vacancy Survey. On balance, the increase in
aggregate employment is therefore likely to
remain subdued.
Wages and prices
As in the first few months of the year, a num-
ber of collective pay agreements were con-
cluded in the second quarter as well. These
do not provide for any or only very moderateincreases in regular rates of pay (at least for
2010). The efforts of the wage bargainers are
still focused on enterprises not being placed
under excessive strains during the phase of
economic recovery. In the private banking in-
dustry, only a one-off payment was agreed
for the current year. A permanent rise in
wages will not take place until January 2011.
Following a moderate increase in scheduled
rates of pay this year, the outcome of the
negotiations in the German motor vehicle in-
dustry do not provide for a significant rise
until 2011 either. Following the low wage
settlements of the past few years, however,
somewhat larger graduated pay increases
were agreed in the hotel and catering trade.
The Bundesbank’s pay rate statistics show
that the year-on-year increase in negotiated
pay rates in the second quarter of 2010, at
2.1% on average, was sharper than in the
first three months of the year (+1.8%). The
year-on-year increase in the basic negotiated
rates of pay rose by just 1.7%, compared
with 2.2% in the first quarter. The increase
was therefore more or less as sharp as it was
according to the index of the Federal Statistic-
al Office, which shows a year-on-year rate of
change of 1.9% for April. Actual earnings
(on a monthly basis) are likely to have risen
somewhat more sharply than negotiated
rates of pay in the second quarter owing to
the gradual return to normal working hours.
In the second quarter of 2010, price trends
continued to point upwards at all stages of
the economy, although the strength of the
price movement varied depending on the sig-
nificance and composition of the energyNegotiated rates of pay
1 Excluding additional benefits and lump-
sum payments.
Deutsche Bundesbank2003 04 05 06 07 08 09 201000.51.01.52.02.53.03.5Year-on-year change, on monthly basis
Negotiated rates of pay total
Basic pay 1%
H1
Moderate rise
in negotiated
rates of paySome sharp
price rises at
the upstream
stages of the
economy

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2010
57component. Import prices, which are particu-
larly dependent on mineral oil prices, in-creased quite sharply on the quarter (+3.3%),while the increase in export prices, at 1.8%,was roughly only half as large. Accordingly,there was a further marked deterioration inthe terms of trade. Domestic industrial produ-cer prices rose by 1.3%.
Energy prices at the upstream stages of the
economy rose quite sharply again in thesecond quarter of 2010, even though pricesfell temporarily over the quarter as a result ofdeclining crude oil prices. As regards theother components, the depreciation of theeuro over the past few months was being in-creasingly reflected in higher prices. The in-crease in the cost of intermediate goods wasespecially pronounced. The prices of import-ed capital goods continued to accelerate. Thecost of consumer goods went up quite mark-edly on the whole and at an increasing rate,although price rises in the case of dairy prod-ucts played a major part in this. Given risinginput prices and quite favourable construc-tion activity, domestic construction prices roseby 0.6% on the previous period and werethus 0.9% up on the year. According to vdp,prices of owner-occupied housing also roseonly moderately on the year (0.7%).
As in the first quarter, the rise in consumer
prices in the second quarter was character-ised by price increases for energy and food.Unlike in the previous quarter, the prices ofthe other major components also went upsomewhat, although the rise in import pricesowing to the depreciation of the euro mighthave played a part in this. Consequently, con-sumers had to pay somewhat more again for
other durable and non-durable goods. Des-pite a reduction in the cost of package holi-days, the prices of services went up marginal-ly. Housing rents continued on a slight up-ward trend. On the whole, consumer priceswere 0.4% up on the quarter in seasonallyadjusted terms, which was much the samerate of increase as in the two preceding quar-ters. The year-on-year increase in both theImport, producer and
consumer prices
1 Not  seasonally  adjusted,  quarterly. — 
2 National consumer price index.
Deutsche Bundesbank2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 201095100105110115
95100105 105110115
100105 105110115
100105110
10123
–+++2005 = 100, seasonally adjusted
Lin scale
Year-on-year change 1Consumer prices 2Construction
prices 1Producer prices
of industrialproductsImport pricesLog scale
%
July
Moderate rise
in consumer
prices

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
EUROSYSTEM
Monthly Report
August 2010
58national Consumer Price Index (CPI) and the
Harmonised Index of Consumer Prices (HICP)
went up to 1.0%, compared with 0.7% and
0.8% respectively in the first quarter. The
cost of living increased slightly in July in sea-
sonally adjusted terms. Annual CPI inflation
also rose by 0.3 percentage point to 1.2%
owing to a base effect. (The HICP figure was
1.2% after 0.8%.) Despite the strains on the
import side, a further moderate rise in con-
sumer prices is still to be expected over the
next few months.
Orders received and outlook
The upturn in domestic economic output
should continue in the second half of 2010,
although the pace of expansion will return to
normal. It is to be expected that the growth
path of South and East Asian countries will
level off. The cyclical outlook for the industrial
countries is to be rated as moderate for the
second half of 2010. The pace of German ex-
ports is therefore likely to be more subdued.
Added to this is the fact that weather-related
catching-up effects in the construction sector
and stimuli from public sector projects are
waning. By contrast, commercial investment
is likely to develop greater intrinsic momen-
tum as replacement purchases are becoming
more pressing and product ranges need ad-
justing. Private consumption is likely to bene-
fit from the recovery on the labour market.
The inflow of new orders in the second quar-
ter was up on the already rapid pace of the
first quarter. After adjustment for seasonal
variations, German industrial enterprises re-corded a 7.7% increase in their volume of
orders. The increase in export orders, at 9.0%,
was therefore once again significantly higher
than that in domestic orders (5.9%). Here,
there was a continuation in the characteristic
trend observed during the recovery process
so far that demand from customers outside
the euro area has been rising significantly
faster than demand from euro-area partner
countries. Producers of capital goods who, in
price-adjusted terms, suffered the greatest
slump in exports during the crisis, were the
main beneficiaries of the rise in export orders
from non-euro-area countries recently. In
addition to computers and aircraft, motor
vehicles were in particular demand. The large
exports orders that were received by manu-
facturers of other transport equipment to-
wards the end of the second quarter will not
boost productivity in the immediate future,
however, but over an extended period of
time. Furthermore, the recovery in domestic
investment activity had a positive impact. In
the intermediate goods sector, which had
been at the forefront of the cyclical recovery,
stimuli from abroad eased off somewhat. Ex-
port demand for German consumer goods
has also increased noticeably of late.
The greatly improved situation in orders has
further uplifted business sentiment. Accord-
ing to the Ifo business survey, firms’ assess-
ments of their current and future business
situation improved significantly in July follow-
ing a two-month period of sideways move-
ment. The more optimistic expectations are
largely due to the fact that enterprises are still
expecting further growth in their export busi-
ness. The corporate surveys conducted by theEconomic
recovery likely
to continue in
2010 H2
Inflow of
orders remains
buoyant,
especially from
abroadMore optimistic
sentiment and
greater
propensity to
invest

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2010
59German Chamber of Industry and Commerce
(DIHK) present a similar picture. This im-proved outlook is likely to be the primary rea-son why – as reported by the Ifo InvestmentSurvey – the majority of west German indus-trial enterprises are intending to increase theirinvestment expenditure as early as this year.Here, the focus is increasingly on expandingand modernising the production programme,which is usually the case during periods ofeconomic recovery. By contrast, rationalisa-tion projects continue to play a subordinaterole, which is in line with the favourablelabour market development during the crisis.Given the persistent underutilisation in manyareas, primarily in the case of manufacturersof capital goods, it will probably take a whilebefore domestic investment activity reaches anormal level again. As things stand, however,funding constraints are unlikely to stand inthe way of an expansion of fixed capital for-mation.
The construction industry will benefit to a
much lesser extent from the special factorswhich boosted output in the second quarter.The weather-related production shortfallsfrom the first quarter have probably alreadybeen recovered to a large extent, for ex-ample. Furthermore, the positive impetusgenerated by the government fiscal stimulusprogrammes to renovate public buildings isgradually waning. However, a greater num-ber of housing construction orders wereplaced by persons wishing to benefit fromthe current exceptionally low mortgage lend-ing rates.Demand for industrial goods 
and construction work
Deutsche Bundesbank8090100110120130
2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010–40–30–20–1000+10+20+30
100110120130
758090100
90100110120
–20–100+10+20100110120
8090100Volume, 2005 = 100,
seasonally adjusted, quarterly
DomesticForeignLog scaleLog scale
Total industrial 
orders
Lin scale
Year-on-year change
Total construction orders
Lin scale
Year-on-year change%
%Apr-
May
Apr-
MayConstruction
demand
supported by
commercial and
residential
construction

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
EUROSYSTEM
Monthly Report
August 2010
60The cyclical recovery and the optimistic busi-
ness climate in trade and industry are being
reflected in the increasing optimism of con-
sumers. According to the surveys of the
consumer research institution, Gesellschaft
f/C252r Konsumforschung (GfK), consumer senti-
ment showed a further slight improvement.
The decline in short-time work and the in-
crease in employment have led to a consider-
able improvement in income expectations. As
a result, households have expanded their
spending plans. The general propensity to
purchase has also remained at a high level.
Furthermore, there are signs that new pas-
senger car registrations by households are
bottoming out. A good foundation is there-
fore in place to prevent private consumption
from having a negative impact on economic
growth in the second half of the year.The economic prospects identified in the June
forecast1have been realised with unexpected
speed and force. Including the revision of the
GDP calculation, mainly for the first quarter
of 2010 (+0.5% instead of +0.2% owing to
a sharp upward revision of industrial output
and a perceptibly more favourable than ex-
pected development in the finishing trades)
and assuming a further moderate expansion
of total economic value added in the second
half of the year, real GDP in Germany, as
things stand, is expected to rise by around
3% on an annual average in 2010, after an
estimate of just under 2% in the June fore-
cast.
1See Deutsche Bundesbank, Outlook for the German
economy – macroeconomic projections for 2010 and
2011, Monthly Report, June 2010, pp 15-27.High level of
consumer
confidenceSignificantly
higher annual
GDP result to
be expected

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2010
61Public finances* General government budget
Germany’s public finances will deteriorate
considerably again this year owing to the ex-
pansionary fiscal policy stance. The deficit
ratio is continuing to increase noticeably from
its level of 3.1% in 2009, although the result
for 2010 will probably be significantly lower
than initially expected and markedly below
5%. While in 2009 more than half of the
sharp rise in the deficit was due to the auto-
matic stabilisers and the decline in revenue
from profit-related taxes (which had previous-
ly been extraordinarily high), the deterioration
in 2010 is mainly attributable to fiscal policy
measures. These are leading to substantial
revenue shortfalls, as well as expenditure
increases. Despite significantly above-trend
growth in gross domestic product (GDP), the
favourable cyclical influences could continue
to be dampened as major macroeconomic
reference variables for revenue (gross wages
and salaries, private consumption) are in-
creasing at a much weaker pace. After largely
returning to normal levels in 2009, profit-
related taxes could now see a stable develop-
ment. The debt ratio, which had risen sharply
to 73.1% in 2009, will continue to increase
perceptibly.
As a result of the extensive tax cuts in 2010,
the government revenue ratio is likely to de-
crease significantly. The greater tax deduct-
ibility of contributions to the health and long-
*The analysis in the “General government budget” sec-
tion is based on data contained in the national accounts
and on the Maastricht ratios. Subsequent reporting on
the budgets of the various levels of government and so-
cial security schemes is based on the budgetary figures as
defined in the government’ s (budgetary) financial statis-
tics.Considerable
deterioration in
2010, but more
favourable than
initially
expected
Tax cuts cause
reduction in
revenue ratio

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
EUROSYSTEM
Monthly Report
August 2010
62term care insurance schemes and the various
tax relief measures adopted in response to
the crisis (most notably the lowering of in-
come tax rates and corporate taxation relief
measures) have thus produced considerable
and, for the most part, permanent revenue
shortfalls. By contrast, in the case of social
security contributions, the financial effects of
the various measures largely balance each
other out. The fact that, unlike in 2009,
major macroeconomic reference variables for
revenue are developing less strongly than
overall GDP is also having a dampening effect
on the ratio.
Following a strong increase in 2009, the
expenditure ratio could fall somewhat in
2010, despite marked growth in individual
areas. Although government investment is
being considerably increased as part of the
fiscal stimulus packages, child benefit was
raised again and spending on healthcare
services will probably also continue to grow
significantly, there will be an alleviating effect
from the economic recovery (above all via
higher GDP in the denominator), the discon-
tinuation of both the car scrappage scheme
and the child bonus, as well as proceeds from
the frequency auction concluded in May
being booked as reducing expenditure.1
In 2011, provided that spending policy is
basically restrained, the general government
deficit could decline to around 4% of GDP
even without allowing for the more extensive
consolidation measures adopted by the Fed-
eral Government in June. Although the one-
off gains from insolvency benefit contribu-
tions, which are temporarily higher in 2010,and the frequency auction will no longer
have an effect, the cyclical influence could
be slightly positive from today’s perspective.
Furthermore, various temporary economic
stimulus measures will be discontinued. In
particular, government investment is likely to
decline following the expected increase in
2010.2However, the debt ratio is likely to rise
further, primarily as a result of the deficit
remaining high.
Although, as things currently stand, the gen-
eral government deficit could be brought
back below the 3% ceiling by as early as
2012, public finances will by then have
deteriorated dramatically compared with the
pre-crisis situation. The debt ratio will have
risen sharply and central and state govern-
ment budgets will still fall well short of the
objective of bringing budgets close to bal-
ance in structural terms, which the reform of
the national budgetary rules has made a con-
stitutional requirement. The Federal Govern-
ment’ s clear commitment to strengthening
public finances and the consolidation meas-
ures adopted in June are therefore welcome.
However, for the most part, the announce-
ments still need to be clarified. Overall, the
Federal Government is taking the path of a
restrained and efficient use of funds, includ-
ing reductions in staff levels, various increases
1In the government’s national accounts, the purchase
and sale of non-financial assets are netted out and re-
corded on the expenditure side. Thus the auction pro-
ceeds reduce expenditure (as was the case with the pro-
ceeds from the sales of UMTS mobile telephone licences
in 2000), whereas in the government’s (budgetary) finan-
cial statistics they increase revenue.
2In the national accounts, investments are recorded in
accordance with construction progress and are thus
booked earlier than in the cash statistics (particularly
those of the Investment and Repayment Fund).Expenditure
ratio could fall
Improvement
from 2011
onwards due to
discontinuation
of temporary
measures, ...... but without
additional
consolidation,
structural
problems
remain in
medium term

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2010
63in taxes and social security contributions, as
well as expenditure cuts in the field of trans-fer payments. Nonetheless, on the one hand,burdens are being shifted from the centralgovernment budget to the statutory pensioninsurance scheme and, on the other, thehealth insurance institutions are once morebeing given non-recurring grants to avoidthem having to demand additional contribu-tions or make savings on the expenditureside. No comprehensive review of tax subsid-ies and financial assistance has been carriedout. However, from the autumn onwards, acommission is to look at turnover tax conces-sions. Given the more favourable than ex-pected macroeconomic development, thetemptation to dilute the fiscal policy stance(by means of tax cuts or increases in expend-iture, for example) should be resisted and thedeficit targets should be achieved sooner.
The recent crisis has made it clear that sound
public finances are also a key prerequisite forenabling fiscal policymakers to influenceevents in a crisis. Although the EU budgetaryrules do, in principle, provide a suitableframework, they have been poorly imple-mented in the past. Furthermore, the no-bailout clause of the Treaty on the Function-ing of the European Union, which is intendedto maintain market-based incentives for sus-tainable national fiscal policies in monetaryunion, has been weakened by decisions tosupport individual euro-area countries. Thispoints to the need to strengthen the EUbudgetary rules and sharpen the instrumentsused to enforce them.
3There seems to be a
general consensus that it is desirable to givegreater weight to the debt level and, in par-ticular, to the preventive arm of the Stability
and Growth Pact, ie, among other things,correcting distortions at an early stage. Thereis also a wish to improve the coordination ofbudgetary surveillance and recommendationsat EU level with the national budgetary plans.Furthermore, there are plans to improve themonitoring of economic imbalances in indi-vidual euro-area countries. Given the macro-economic distortions that have becomeevident in some euro-area countries, this isnecessary, but the effectiveness of relevantpolitical control mechanisms should not beoverestimated. Overall, it is particularly im-portant to increase the incentives for adher-ing to the provisions for public finances, inter
alia, by appropriate sanctioning of non-com-
pliance. However, as fiscal policy will ultimat-ely remain under national jurisdiction, it ap-pears necessary to improve the anchoring ofregulations aimed at sustainable public fi-nances at this level too. Furthermore, limitingthe moral hazard stemming, in particular,from institutionalised crisis resolution mech-anisms at European level is likely to be crucial.Without the political will to comply with thejointly agreed fiscal policy framework in mon-etary union, however, all efforts at reform willultimately come to nothing. An importanttest will be whether compliance with theagreements within the framework of the on-going excessive deficit procedure is rigorous.However, in its assessment of the develop-ment of public finances and the correctiveaction taken in some countries, the EcofinCouncil has not always pushed for a rigorousimplementation of the provisions.
3See also Deutsche Bundesbank, Fiscal developments in
the euro area, Monthly Report, May 2010, p 27.Strengthen EU
rules

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
EUROSYSTEM
Monthly Report
August 2010
64Budgetary development of central, state
and local government
Tax revenue
In the second quarter, tax revenue4was up by
3% on the year (see above chart and table on
page 65). In addition to the underlying dy-
namics once again being more favourable,
the fact that the same quarter in 2009 was
affected by particular burdens (including the
one-off child bonus) is also of significance
here. Overall, this more than compensated
for the shortfalls arising from legislative
changes – in particular, the greater tax
deductibility of contributions to the health
and long-term care insurance schemes, the
second stage of the reduction in the incometax rates, corporate taxation relief measures
and the increase in child benefit.5
Revenue from income-related taxes rose by
6% in total. Wage tax receipts were at about
the same level as a year earlier, with the posi-
tive impact of wage developments and the
overall negative effect of legislative changes
offsetting each other. Profit-related taxes re-
corded strong growth overall (+171/C252%).
There was a stable underlying trend in the re-
ceipts from assessed income tax, while de-
ductions (refunds made to employees and
grants to investors and homebuyers) fell. Cor-
poration tax revenue increased strongly from
the very low level recorded one year previous-
ly. In contrast to the assessed taxes, invest-
ment income tax continued to post consider-
able shortfalls. Receipts from consumption-
related taxes rose slightly (+1/C252%). This modest
increase is consistent with the subdued devel-
opment of private consumption.
According to the latest official tax estimate in
May, a decline of 21/C252% (including local gov-
ernment taxes) is expected for 2010 as a
whole. Although tax revenue fell by only 1%
in the first half of the year, various factors
accounting for this should be noted. For ex-
ample, the relief provided by the discontinu-
ation of the grant to homebuyers (which is
deducted from the revenue total) was mainly
felt in March. Furthermore, the base figures
in the first two quarters of 2009 were particu-Tax revenue *
* Including  EU  shares  in  German  tax  rev-
enue, excluding receipts from local govern-
ment taxes.
Deutsche Bundesbank2008 2009 2010864202468
––––++++Year-on-year change, quarterly
%
4Including EU shares in German tax revenue but exclud-
ing receipts from local government taxes, which are not
yet known for the last quarter recorded.
5Unlike in the national accounts, in the government’s
financial statistics, child benefit payments are not record-
ed on the expenditure side, but are deducted from wage
tax receipts.Marked rise
in tax revenue
in Q2Substantial
increase in
income-related
taxes
Only slight rise
in consump-
tion-related
taxes
Decline in
revenue in
2010 as a
whole could be
somewhat
smaller than
expected

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2010
65larly low as the child bonus payments, as well
as a large part of the tax refunds in connec-tion with the ruling on the standard travelallowance for commuters, were booked dur-ing this period. However, amid all the uncer-tainty, there are indications that the expect-ations of the tax estimate could be exceeded.
Central government budgetThe central government budget recorded a
deficit of 35 billion in the second quarter of
2010, compared with a surplus of just over32
1/C252billion one year earlier. Revenue rose by
6% ( 341/C252billion) on balance due to inflows
from the frequency auction. However, at17
1/C252%(312 billion), spending growth con-
tinued to far outweigh the increase in rev-enue. At 37 billion, grants to the social insur-ance schemes made the largest contribution
to this expansion in expenditure. The FederalEmployment Agency alone received 33
1/C252bil-
lion in additional funds. Furthermore, it was,above all, the payments to the health insur-ance fund that were increased sharply – tooffset the cut in the contribution rate fromJuly 2009 onwards, but also as a result of aregular rise and the special grant to offsetcrisis-induced contribution shortfalls.
When drafting its budget for 2011, central
government presented a significantly morefavourable estimate for 2010 as a whole thanhad been used as a basis at the adjustmentmeeting in March. At 365 billion, net borrow-
ing is expected to be 315 billion lower than
planned. The main reasons for the improve-ment are additional revenue pursuant to theTax revenue
H1 Q2Estimate
for2010
1, 2
2009 2010 2009 2010
Year-on-year
changeYear-on-year
changeYear-on-
year per-centage
Type of tax 5billion 5billion as % 5billion 5billion as % change
Tax revenue,
total
2 237.3 235.0 – 2.3 – 0.9 120.5 123.9 + 3.3 + 2.8 – 2.6
of which
Wage tax 64.5 60.7 – 3.8 – 5.8 30.5 30.4 – 0.0 – 0.1 – 7.4Profit-related taxes
3 34.0 36.1 + 2.0 + 6.0 18.0 21.2 + 3.2 + 17.7 – 6.7
Assessed income tax 12.1 15.8 + 3.7 + 30.8 9.1 9.7 + 0.5 + 5.9 + 0.1Corporation tax 4.7 5.8 + 1.0 + 21.9 0.3 3.8 + 3.5 . – 2.1Investment incometax
4 17.2 14.5 – 2.7 – 15.8 8.5 7.7 – 0.8 – 9.7 – 15.2
Turnover taxes 5 86.5 87.2 + 0.7 + 0.8 43.4 44.3 + 0.9 + 2.1 + 1.6
Energy tax 14.8 14.0 – 0.8 – 5.4 10.1 9.6 – 0.5 – 4.6 – 1.6Tobacco tax 5.9 5.8 – 0.1 – 2.3 3.6 3.3 – 0.2 – 6.5 – 1.2
1According to official tax estimate of May 2010. — 2In-
cluding EU shares in German tax revenue, excluding re-ceipts from local government taxes. — 3Employee re-
funds, grants paid to homebuyers and investors deductedfrom revenue. — 4Withholding tax on interest income
and capital gains, non-assessed taxes on earnings. —5Turnover tax and import turnover tax.
Deutsche Bundesbank
Marked
deterioration
in budget
balance in Q2However,
deficit for 2010
as a whole
considerably
lower than
forecast

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
EUROSYSTEM
Monthly Report
August 2010
66May tax estimate and from the frequency
auction ( 341/C252billion in each case), as well as
cost savings of 36 billion, particularly in the
area of labour market-related expenses (ex-
penditure to offset the Federal Employment
Agency’s deficit and benefits for the long-
term unemployed), and in the areas of inter-
est costs and calls on guarantees. The central
government budget’s structural deficit (which
is relevant in the context of the new debt
rule) is expected to amount to 353 billion. Ex-
penditure on acquisitions and revenue from
the realisation of financial assets, which are
to be excluded from the calculation of the
structural deficit, more or less balance each
other out, and the cyclically induced budget-
ary burdens are estimated at 312 billion.
From today’s perspective, net borrowing
could be approximately 35 billion lower thanforecast and the structural value could also
be considerably more favourable. Owing, in
particular, to the continued positive develop-
ments on the labour market, there are signs
of a further easing of budgetary burdens and
of considerable additional relief, above all
with regard to interest expenditure. After de-
ducting the transfers to the EU budget, the
remaining tax revenue also appears to be
higher than expected.
When drawing up its budget for 2011, cen-
tral government had to comply with the pro-
visions of the new debt rule for the first time.
The rule states that the structural deficit in
the base year 2010 must be reduced in equal
annual steps to a maximum of 0.35% of GDP
by 2016. Central government is taking the
updated forecast for 2010, rather than the
very cautiously estimated budget target, as a
basis. This is to be welcomed, as it demon-
strates central government’s commitment to
the intention of the debt brake. However,
compliance with the provisions is not yet
guaranteed, as a sizeable chunk of the total
budgetary relief of 311 billion is based on
Federal Cabinet decisions that have yet to be
adequately defined. Thus, additional tax
revenue of 35 billion is forecast on the basis
of plans in connection with a nuclear fuel
elements tax, an ecological aviation tax, the
abolition of the “free-rider” effects with
regard to energy tax benefits, and awarding
privilege to state creditors in insolvency cases,
even though the relevant draft laws have not
yet been passed. Furthermore, the bulk of the
agreed savings of 321/C252in the area of adminis-
tration included in the draft budget were
merely global cuts in expenditure. AlthoughCentral government fiscal 
deficit / surplus
Deutsche BundesbankQ1 Q2 Q3 Q4252015105051015
–––––+++
–35–30–25–20–15–10–5€ bnCumulative from start of year
20092010
20082009
20102008Quarterly results€ bn
Clear commit-
ment to new
borrowing limit
in draft budget
for 2011, ...
... but clarifi-
cation still
required

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2010
67the planned discontinuation of pension con-
tributions for recipients of unemploymentbenefit II will ease the strain on the centralgovernment budget by 32 billion, it will place
an equal-sized burden on the pension insur-ance scheme and will thus initially make nocontribution to reducing the general govern-ment deficit, which is also necessary. Centralgovernment’s structural deficit will be influ-enced by a few special transactions. Thus,from 2011 onwards, the Federal EmploymentAgency will only receive loans to balance itsbudget. As they are classified as financialtransactions, these loans are not relevant tothe new borrowing limit, whereas the 2010grant to the Federal Employment Agencywill increase central government’s structuraldeficit by around 35 billion on a one-off
basis.
6However, in 2010 this will be compen-
sated for by a windfall of around the sameamount from the frequency auction.
7
Overall, at 346 billion (with net borrowing of
3571/C252billion), the level of the structural def-
icit recorded in the draft budget is 371/C252billion
lower than in central government’s revisedestimate for 2010. However, this means thatthe borrowing limit is undershot by only30.015 billion. Even individual items that
were cautiously estimated in the draft budgetfor 2011, such as, in particular, interestexpenditure and possibly tax revenue, areultimately likely to form hardly any bufferhere, as the foreseeable further improvementin financial developments in 2010 by the timethe budget is planned to be passed (Novem-ber) would have to taken into account whencalculating the borrowing limit up to 2016.Such reduced scope for new borrowing from2011 onwards could even make further con-
solidation measures necessary. Moreover, ifthe extensive, but in some cases controver-sial, consolidation plans cannot be fully imple-mented through the parliamentary process,there would be a need to find a suitable alter-native within a relatively short space of time.An adequate safety margin with respect tothe borrowing limit is also fundamentallynecessary in light of the high degree of uncer-tainty regarding economic and budgetarydevelopments. Without such a margin, thereis a risk that possible revisions will make itnecessary to introduce consolidation meas-ures at short notice.
The financial plan up to 2014 shows the add-
itional adjustment steps required owing tothe new borrowing limit. Provided that thenegative cyclical influence on the central gov-ernment budget has completely disappearedby the final year (2016) and that from 2013onwards there are slight surpluses from therealisation of financial assets as a result ofassumed loan repayments from the FederalEmployment Agency, the plan foresees a
6There is a danger that, across the economic cycle, the
Federal Employment Agency’s funds may not actually be
sufficient to repay the loans, as is currently hoped will be
the case. If the option of waiving central government
claims is then considered, it is paramount that this be
taken into account when calculating the debt brake, so
that the latter is not circumvented.
7The decline in the structural deficit is also amplified as a
result of a change in the way it is calculated. Thus, in the
2011 budget plan, profit distributions of 31/C252billion are
no longer recorded as privatisation proceeds, ie financial
transactions that do not influence the structural deficit.
Although, in principle, this is justified, as they represent
current income from business activities, the fact that the
change is not being introduced this year but in 2011 –
the launch year for the new borrowing limit – should be
viewed critically. Consequently, the level recorded for the
2010 structural deficit, and thus also for the scope for
borrowing and the reduction in the structural deficit in
2011, will be artificially high.Despite
substantial
budgetary risks,
borrowing limit
largely
exhaustedFinancial plan
up to 2014 in
line with debt
brake but
austerity
measures still
need to be
clearly defined

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
EUROSYSTEM
Monthly Report
August 2010
68steady reduction in the structural deficit to
325 billion. The austerity measures, which
have yet to be clearly defined, have been in-
cluded in this calculation. Furthermore, there
is a remaining gap of 35 billion in 2014,
which is only covered by global cuts in ex-
penditure. With the exception of 2012, the
permissible limit for the structural deficit is ex-
hausted throughout virtually the entire plan-
ning period. Thus, as is the case for the 2011
draft budget, there is no safety margin with
respect to the borrowing limit, as would be
advisable given the high degree of estimation
uncertainty.8With regard to central govern-
ment’s future savings potential, it should be
noted that, following the conversion of the
grant to the Federal Employment Agency to
offset its deficit into a loan, labour market-related savings can only be included if they
fall under central government’s core budget.9
At around 33 billion, the deficit recorded
by the central government’s off-budget
entities in the second quarter was significant-
ly lower than in the same period one year
previously ( 314 billion). This was ultimatelyMedium-term financial plan and permissible net borrowing
of central government under the debt rule
5billion
Financial plan
Actual
result
2009Target
2010Expected
actual
result
2010 1 Draft 2011 2012 2013 2014
Expenditure 2 292.3 319.5 – 307.4 301.0 301.5 301.1
of which
Investment 3 27.1 28.3 – 27.3 26.9 26.4 26.0
Revenue 2, 4 258.0 239.3 – 249.9 260.9 269.9 277.0
of which
Tax revenue 2 227.8 211.9 – 221.8 232.8 241.8 250.3
Revenue from capital assets
(including privatisations) 2.2 2.3 – 2.6 3.3 3.3 0.2
Net borrowing 34.1 80.2 65.2 57.5 40.1 31.6 24.1
Memo item
Structural net borrowing
(from 2011 onwards: upper limit) – 66.6 53.2 45.8 39.0 32.1 25.1
as a percentage of GDP 5 – 2.8 2.2 1.9 1.6 1.3 1.0
Less cyclical component – – 13.6 – 12.0 – 5.5 – 3.3 – 1.3 0.4
Less balance of financial transactions – 0.0 0.0 – 6.2 – 0.9 1.8 0.6
Net borrowing
(from 2011 onwards: upper limit) – 80.2 65.2 57.5 43.1 31.6 24.1
Percentage increase in expenditure + 3.5 + 9.3 – – 3.8 – 2.1 + 0.2 – 0.1
1Estimated by central government on the basis of
the current budget implementation (date: June 2010).
Used when drafting the central government budget to
determine the starting structural deficit value for the
mandatory path to reduce the deficit within the frame-
work of the new debt rule. — 2After deducting supple-
mentary central government grants, shares in energy taxrevenue, compensation as part of the 2009 motor vehicle
tax reform and consolidation assistance from 2011 on-
wards, which are all remitted to state government. —
3Excluding loans to the Federal Employment Agency. —
4Including proceeds from coin seigniorage. — 5Nominal
GDP in the year preceding the drafting of the budget
(date: spring forecast 2010).
Deutsche Bundesbank
8See also Deutsche Bundesbank, The reform of the bor-
rowing limits for central and state government, Monthly
Report, May 2009, pp 78-79 and J Kremer and D Stegar-
escu (2009), Neue Schuldenregeln: Sicherheitsabstand
f/C252r eine stetige Finanzpolitik, Wirtschaftsdienst, Vol 89/9,
pp 630 ff (in German only).
9Thus, for example, although the Federal Employment
Agency’s savings with regard to active labour market pol-
icy measures, which are included in the list of austerity
measures from June, reduce its loan requirements or in-
crease the scope for it to make loan repayments to cen-
tral government, they have no influence on central gov-
ernment’s structural budgetary situation in terms of the
debt rule. By contrast, any revenue shortfalls resulting
from induced lower reintegration payments from the
Federal Employment Agency, are to be viewed as placing
a burden on the (core) budget.Off-budget
entities record
lower deficit in
Q2

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2010
69due mainly to the fact that the extensive
capital injections that SoFFin had made tocredit institutions during the same period of2009 were no longer a factor. With lowerlevels of capital injections, SoFFin’s deficitamounted to 32 billion in the second quarter.
After already recording a deficit of 31 billion
in the same period of 2009, predominantly asa result of the car scrappage scheme, the In-vestment and Repayment Fund once againrecorded a deficit of 31 billion, owing mainly
to payments made for state and local govern-ment investment projects. However, it is nowexpected that a large proportion of the in-vestment funds will not be paid out untilsome time in 2011. Excluding further burdensarising from support given to credit institu-tions, the off-budget entities are expected torecord a deficit of around 310 billion in 2010,
compared with more than 320 billion in
2009.
State government
10
In the second quarter of 2010, state govern-
ment recorded a decline in its deficit from32
1/C252billion one year previously to 31/C252billion.
A prominent contributory factor was the risein receipts (of 4% or 32
1/C252billion). Despite
revenue shortfalls due to the transfer ofreceipts from motor vehicle tax to centralgovernment – for which, in return, compen-sation of 32
1/C254billion per quarter is paid – tax
revenue fell only slightly overall (-1/C252%). At the
same time, expenditure went up by just over1% (31 billion). Personnel expenses continued
to rise (+2
1/C254%), not least as a result of the
second stage of the wage adjustment agreedin 2009 and the associated pay increases.Despite this somewhat more favourable
development and the fact that the budget isnot burdened with extensive bank recapitalisa-tions as it was in 2009, a very high deficit ofaround the same size as in 2009 ( 325 billion) is
expected for 2010 as a whole. A drop in taxreceipts due to tax cuts, higher expenditure onstaff and other operating expenses and stategovernment’ s participation in investments aspart of the second fiscal stimulus package,which are gaining momentum, largely accountfor this. At present, the budget plans evenforecast an increase in the deficit to just under333
1/C252billion. Only Bavaria, Mecklenburg-West
Pomerania and Saxony do not intend to takeon additional debts. All other federal statesare planning to increase their net borrowing(which was already very high in 2009) – insome cases, considerably.
In May this year, Schleswig-Holstein was the
first federal state to bring the borrowing limitin its state government constitution in linewith the new debt brake pursuant toArticle 109 of the German Basic Law (Grund-
gesetz) , thereby also enshrining the condi-
tions for receiving consolidation assistanceduring the transitional period in its constitu-tion.
11Irrespective of the fundamentally
10The development of local government finances in the
first quarter was analysed in greater detail in the short
articles in the Bundesbank Monthly Report of July. These
are the most recent data available.
11However, at the same time, the state parliament of
Schleswig-Holstein reiterated the position stated in the
case it had filed with the Federal Constitutional Court op-
posing the state government debt brake in the German
constitution (Basic Law). This case opposes the restriction
of the state of Schleswig-Holstein’s budgetary autonomy
through central government legislation. Nonetheless, if
this case is successful and the provision requiring the
federal states to achieve a structurally balanced budget is
reversed, the basis for consolidation assistance would be
called into question.Lower deficit
in Q2, ...... nevertheless,
very high
deficit, as in
2009, expected
for 2010 as a
whole
Schleswig-
Holstein
implements
new debt rule

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
EUROSYSTEM
Monthly Report
August 2010
70stricter provision requiring the federal states
to achieve a fully structurally balanced
budget, the new regulation is, in part, even
more restrictive than at central government
level. At the same time, a relatively compre-
hensive austerity package to gradually reduce
the high structural deficit was drawn up. The
other federal states have yet to implement
the new debt rules in this way. Particularly
given the limited fiscal leeway in individual
federal states, measures to achieve the pre-
scribed structurally balanced budget by 2020
will have to fall mainly on the expenditure
side. In light of this, the fact that the federal
state of North Rhine-Westphalia, which has
the largest population, has even announced
that it will significantly raise its already con-
siderable net borrowing in 2010 by means of
discretionary measures is a cause for concern.The transitional assistance for the five particu-
larly highly indebted federal states is to be
paid from as early as 2011, while the 2010
structural deficit will form the starting value
for the consolidation that is required in
return. To aid the further budgetary and
medium-term financial planning of the recipi-
ent federal states and ensure the concrete
implementation of measures, it is therefore
important that the relevant administrative
agreements are concluded as soon as pos-
sible. Some important issues are still out-
standing in this respect. In particular, it still
needs to be decided how the structural
budgetary balance (especially the cyclical
component) should be calculated. It would
appear desirable to agree on a uniform proce-
dure for all the federal states, in order to pro-
mote transparency and ensure comparable
results.
Social security funds12
Statutory pension insurance scheme
At31/C252billion, the statutory pension insurance
scheme’s surplus in the second quarter of
2010 was virtually unchanged on the year.
Growth in revenue (+21/C252%) was only slightly
slower than that in expenditure (+3%). At
just over 2%, employees’ compulsory contri-
butions increased significantly more sharply
than in previous quarters. The favourable
labour market and pay developments evidentFinances of the
German statutory
pension insurance scheme
Deutsche Bundesbank2008 2009 20105860626466
–20+2+4Quarterly
€ bn€ bn
Lin scale
Surplus (+) or deficit (–)ExpenditureLog scale
Revenue
12The financial development of the statutory health and
public long-term care insurance schemes in the first quar-
ter of 2010 was analysed in the short articles of the
Monthly Reports of June and July. These are the most re-
cent data available.Surplus only
slightly lower
in Q2

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2010
71here are also reflected in the fact that, for the
first time since the start of 2009, contribu-tions for recipients of unemployment benefitswere no longer up on the year. The expend-iture developments are mainly attributable tothe high pension increase in mid-2009. Therewas still only a marginal expansion in thenumber of pensions.
A perceptible financial improvement is ex-
pected in the second half of 2010. Onereason for this is that there was no pensionincrease on 1 July.
13Furthermore, contribu-
tion receipts will increase further and, particu-larly in the final quarter, a clear surplus isexpected. Therefore, it now appears entirelypossible that the statutory pension insurancescheme will end the year without a deficit.
As part of its austerity package, central gov-
ernment plans to stop paying pension con-tributions on behalf of recipients of un-employment benefit II from 2011 onwards.As a result, the pension insurance scheme willsee a direct loss in revenue of just under 32
billion and it will ultimately be necessary toput up contributions sooner. However, in thelong-term, pension claims will thus also belower. This may then lead, in cases of individ-ual need, to claims for the basic allowancebeing made or being higher in old age. None-theless, the new regulation means thatmeans-tested transfer payments will be madein a more targeted manner overall, as contri-bution payments will no longer be made onbehalf of those recipients of unemploymentbenefit II who will no longer need assistancewhen they reach retirement age. This willhelp to ease the burden on public finances,which face major challenges in the light of
demographic change.Finances of the
Federal Employment Agency
1 Excluding central government liquidity as-
sistance. — 2 Including transfers to the civil 
servants’ pension fund set up in 2008.
Deutsche Bundesbank2008 2009 20106810121416
1.82.43.03.64.24.85.46.06.6
642024
–––++Quarterly
€ bn€ bnLog scale
Expenditure, 
total 2
Revenue 1
Expenditure on ...
... vocational training... unemployment benefit and
    short-time working    benefits
Lin scale
Surplus (+) or deficit (–)€ bn
13However, without the extended pension guarantee,
the drop in average remuneration in 2009 would have re-
sulted in pensions being cut by around1/C252% in western
Germany.Balanced
financial result
for 2010 as a
whole appears
possible
Financial
burden due
to austerity
package

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
EUROSYSTEM
Monthly Report
August 2010
72Federal Employment Agency
In the second quarter of 2010, the Federal
Employment Agency recorded a slight sur-
plus, compared with a deficit of 36 billion
one year previously. This marked improve-
ment is, of course, largely due to the fact that
the burden on the Federal Employment
Agency was considerably eased in the first
half of the year by central government grants
being brought forward and reintegration pay-
ment instalments, which the Federal Employ-
ment Agency has to transfer to central gov-
ernment, being deferred until the second half
of the year. Without these special effects, the
Federal Employment Agency would have re-
corded a deficit of around 341/C252billion.
However, even after adjustment for the
central government funds that were brought
forward, revenue still went up by 11%. Al-
though the marked increase of 31/C252% in con-
tribution receipts was also a contributory
factor, growth in revenue resulting from the
sharp rise in insolvency benefit contributions
played a more significant role.14After adjust-
ment for the deferred reintegration pay-
ments, the Federal Employment Agency’s
expenditure was down by just over 4% on
the year. While only slightly less was spent on
unemployment benefit I and active labour
market policy measures, there was, in par-
ticular, a significant decline in expenditure on
short-time working benefits.Over the remainder of the year, the reintegra-
tion payments will be due and the regular
central government grants, which were
brought forward, will not appear on the rev-
enue side. The Federal Employment Agency
can therefore be expected to record a signifi-
cant deficit, which this year, on an exception-
al basis, will not be offset by a loan but by a
grant from central government. However, the
required grant is likely to be considerably
lower than the almost 313 billion that was
forecast in the central government budget
plan passed in March. The Federal Employ-
ment Agency recently estimated that it would
require a grant of 381/C252billion.
In 2011, the contribution rate to the Federal
Employment Agency will be raised from
2.8% to 3.0%. However, the level of receipts
achieved in this way will only suffice over the
economic cycles if expenditure – particularly
on active labour market policy measures – is
drastically reduced on a permanent basis, as
announced, in principle, by the Federal
Government. Otherwise, the Federal Employ-
ment Agency will not be able to repay future
central government loans in full.
14As expenditure on insolvency benefit payments sub-
stantially exceeded contribution receipts in 2009, the
contribution rate was raised at the start of 2010 from
0.1% to 0.41 %. In accordance with the legal require-
ments, this should thus offset the 2009 deficit and cover
expenditure in 2010. Owing to expenditure on insolvency
benefit payments being lower than expected, the result-
ing surplus should be more than enough to offset the
2009 deficit.Financial
improvement
in Q2
Strong revenue
growth due to
Federal Employ-
ment Agency
contributions
and insolvency
benefit contri-
butions ...
... alongside
drop in expend-
iture on short-
time working
benefitsGrant required
for 2010
considerably
lower than
forecast
Size of 2011
contribution
rate increase
only sufficient if
there is a sharp
cut in expend-
iture

Statistical
Section
1*DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2010

ContentsI Key economic data for the euro area
1 Monetary developments and interest
rates 5*
2 External transactions and positions 5*
3 General economic indicators 6*
II Overall monetary survey in the
euro area
1 The money stock and its counterparts 8*
2 Consolidated balance sheet of mon-
etary financial institutions (MFIs) 10*
3 Banking system’s liquidity position 14*
III Consolidated financial statement
of the Eurosystem
1 Assets 16*2 Liabilities 18*
IV Banks
1 Assets and liabilities of monetary
financial institutions (excluding theBundesbank) in Germany 20*
2 Principal assets and liabilities of banks
(MFIs) in Germany, by category ofbanks 24*
3 Assets and liabilities of banks (MFIs)
in Germany vis-/C224-vis residents 26*
4 Assets and liabilities of banks (MFIs)
in Germany vis-/C224-vis non-residents 28*
2*DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
EUROSYSTEM
Monthly Report
August 2010

5 Lending by banks (MFIs) in Germany
to domestic non-banks (non-MFIs) 30*
6 Lending by banks (MFIs) in Germany
to domestic enterprises and house-
holds, housing loans, sectors of
economic activity 32*
7 Deposits of domestic non-banks
(non-MFIs) at banks (MFIs)
in Germany 34*
8 Deposits of domestic households
and non-profit institutions atbanks (MFIs) in Germany 36*
9 Deposits of domestic government
at banks (MFIs) in Germany, bycreditor group 36*
10 Savings deposits and bank savings
bonds of banks (MFIs) in Germanysold to non-banks (non-MFIs) 38*
11 Debt securities and money market
paper outstanding of banks (MFIs)in Germany 38*
12 Building and loan associations (MFIs)
in Germany 39*
13 Assets and liabilities of the foreign
branches and foreign subsidiaries ofGerman banks (MFIs) 40*
V Minimum reserves
1 Reserve ratios 42*2 Reserve maintenance in Germany up
to the end of 1998 42*
3 Reserve maintenance in the euro
area 42*VI Interest rates
1 ECB interest rates 43*
2 Base rates 43*3 Eurosystem monetary policy oper-
ations allotted through tenders 43*
4 Money market rates, by month 43*
5 Interest rates for outstanding
amounts and new business ofbanks (MFIs) in the Europeanmonetary union 44*
6 Interest rates and volumes for out-
standing amounts and new business
of German banks (MFIs) 45*
VII Capital market
1 Sales and purchases of debt securities
and shares in Germany 48*
2 Sales of debt securities issued by
residents 49*
3 Amounts outstanding of debt
securities issued by residents 50*
4 Shares in circulation issued by
residents 50*
5 Yields and indices on German
securities 51*
6 Sales and purchases of mutual
fund shares in Germany 51*
VIII Financial accounts
1 Acquisition of financial assets and
financing of private non-financialsectors 52*
2 Financial assets and liabilities of private
non-financial sectors 53*
3*DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2010

IX Public finances in Germany
1 General government: deficit and debt
level as defined in the Maastricht Treaty 54*
2 General government: revenue,
expenditure and fiscal deficit/surplus
as shown in the national accounts 54*
3 General government: budgetary
development (as per government’sfinancial statistics) 55*
4 Central, state and local government:
budgetary development (as per
government’s financial statistics) 55*
5 Central, state and local government:
tax revenue 56*
6 Central and state government and
European Union: tax revenue, by type 56*
7 Central, state and local government:
individual taxes 57*
8 German pension insurance scheme:
budgetary development and assets 57*
9 Federal Employment Agency:
budgetary development 58*
10 Statutory health insurance scheme:
budgetary development 58*
11 Statutory long-term care insurance
scheme: budgetary development 59*
12 Central government: borrowing in
the market 59*
13 Central, state and local government:
debt by creditor 59*
14 Central, state and local government:
debt by category 60*
X Economic conditions in Germany
1 Origin and use of domestic product,
distribution of national income 61*
2 Output in the production sector 62*3 Orders received by industry 63*
4 Orders received by construction 64*5 Retail trade turnover 64*6 Labour market 65*7 Prices 66*8 Households’ income 67*9 Pay rates and actual earnings 67*
XI External sector
1 Major items of the balance of
payments of the euro area 68*
2 Major items of the balance of
payments of the Federal Republic
of Germany 69*
3 Foreign trade (special trade) of the
Federal Republic of Germany, bycountry and group of countries 70*
4 Services and income of the
Federal Republic of Germany 71*
5 Current transfers of the Federal
Republic of Germany 71*
6 Capital transfers 71*7 Financial account of the Federal
Republic of Germany 72*
8 External position of the Bundesbank 73*9 External position of the Bundesbank
in the euro area 73*
10 Assets and liabilities of enterprises
in Germany (other than banks)vis-/C224-vis non-residents 74*
11 ECB euro reference exchange rates
of selected currencies 75*
12 Euro member countries and
irrevocable euro conversion ratesin the third stage of EuropeanEconomic and Monetary Union 75*
13 Effective exchange rates of the euro
and indicators of the Germaneconomy’s price competitiveness 76*
4*DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
EUROSYSTEM
Monthly Report
August 2010

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2010
 I Key economic data for the euro area  
 
1 Monetary developments and interest rates
 
 
 
 
 Money stock in various definitions  1,2 Determinants of the money stock  1 Interest rates
 M 3  3 
MFI lending to Yield on Euro-
 3-month enterprises Monetary pean govern-
MFI lending, and capital 3-month ment bonds moving  average
M1 M2 (centred) total households formation  4 Eonia  5,7 Euribor  6,7 outstanding  8 
Period Annual percentage change % per annum as a monthly average
2008          Oct 3.6 9.3 8.7 8.4 8.2 9.5 4.5 3.82 5.11 4.3
         Nov 2.2 8.8 7.7 8.0 8.2 9.1 5.1 3.15 4.24 4.1
         Dec 3.4 8.3 7.6 7.1 7.2 7.8 4.3 2.49 3.29 3.7
2009          Jan 5.1 7.5 6.0 6.5 6.9 7.1 4.8 1.81 2.46 3.9
         Feb 6.2 7.0 5.8 5.7 6.6 6.4 5.6 1.26 1.94 4.0
         Mar 6.1 6.3 5.2 5.3 5.8 5.3 5.2 1.06 1.64 3.9
         Apr 8.4 6.0 4.9 4.6 5.0 4.2 5.1 0.84 1.42 3.9
         May 8.1 5.2 3.9 4.1 4.5 3.6 5.5 0.78 1.28 4.0
         June 9.5 5.0 3.6 3.5 4.8 3.4 6.0 0.70 1.23 4.2
         July 12.0 4.6 2.9 3.0 3.8 2.3 5.9 0.36 0.97 4.0
         Aug 13.4 4.5 2.4 2.4 3.3 1.6 6.2 0.35 0.86 3.8
         Sep 12.8 3.6 1.8 1.5 3.5 1.4 6.4 0.36 0.77 3.8
         Oct 11.8 2.3 0.3 0.6 3.4 0.9 7.2 0.36 0.74 3.7
         Nov 12.5 1.8 − 0.2 − 0.1 2.8 0.7 7.0 0.36 0.72 3.7
         Dec 12.4 1.6 − 0.3 − 0.2 2.6 0.7 6.7 0.35 0.71 3.7
2010          Jan 11.5 1.8 0.0 − 0.2 1.8 0.2 6.4 0.34 0.68 3.8
         Feb 11.0 1.6 − 0.4 − 0.2 1.8 0.2 5.7 0.34 0.66 3.8
         Mar 10.8 1.6 − 0.1 − 0.2 1.8 0.2 5.9 0.35 0.64 3.7
         Apr 10.7 1.3 − 0.2 − 0.1 1.8 0.4 6.0 0.35 0.64 3.7
         May 10.3 1.5 − 0.1 0.0 1.7 0.1 5.1 0.34 0.69 3.6
         June 9.2 1.4 0.2 ... 1.5 0.0 3.7 0.35 0.73 3.6
         July ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 0.48 0.85 3.6
1 Source: ECB. — 2 Seasonally adjusted. — 3 Excluding money market fund euro-area non-MFIs. — 5 Euro OverNight Index Average. — 6 Euro
shares/units, money market paper and debt securities with a maturity of up Interbank Offered Rate. — 7 See also footnotes to Table VI.4, p 43*. —
to two years held by non-euro-area residents. — 4 Longer-term liabilities to 8  GDP-weighted yield on ten-year government bonds. 
 
 
2 External transactions and positions  * 
 
 
 
Selected items of the euro-area balance of payments Euro exchange rates  1 
Current account Capital account Effective exchange rate  3 
of which Direct Securities Other Reserve
Balance Trade balance Balance investment investment assets Dollar rate Nominal Real  4 transactions  2 
Period € million Euro/US-$ Q1 1999 = 100
2008          Oct − 10,944 + 2,307 + 17,155 − 1,119 + 97,035 − 70,777 − 7,985 1.3322 105.8 105.2
         Nov − 18,055 − 5,245 + 7,280 − 51,660 + 36,103 + 23,245 − 408 1.2732 105.0 104.5
         Dec − 4,975 − 437 + 15,161 + 921 − 3,150 + 9,536 + 7,855 1.3449 110.2 109.7
2009          Jan − 23,567 − 10,548 + 31,581 − 21,454 − 3,474 + 51,278 + 5,231 1.3239 109.8 109.2
         Feb − 5,738 + 61 + 8,457 − 15,583 + 66,238 − 43,465 + 1,267 1.2785 108.7 108.0
         Mar − 7,929 + 2,872 + 10,851 − 27,565 + 58,853 − 19,579 − 858 1.3050 111.1 110.3
         Apr − 9,794 + 4,110 + 18,083 + 7,680 + 7,718 + 1,502 + 1,182 1.3190 110.3 109.5
         May − 13,697 + 2,593 + 9,398 + 17,466 + 43,195 − 49,092 − 2,171 1.3650 110.8 109.9
         June + 1,537 + 7,264 − 16,600 − 24,798 + 42,769 − 34,152 − 418 1.4016 112.0 111.1
         July + 8,088 + 14,115 − 19,404 + 7,209 − 20,022 − 2,893 − 3,698 1.4088 111.6 110.5
         Aug − 6,059 − 1,853 − 10,785 + 1,706 + 15,914 − 29,161 + 756 1.4268 111.7 110.6
         Sep − 5,608 + 1,535 + 17,568 − 32,628 + 77,734 − 30,809 + 3,270 1.4562 112.9 111.6
         Oct − 1,300 + 8,721 + 1,065 + 3,794 + 7,754 − 9,846 − 636 1.4816 114.3 112.8
         Nov − 2,415 + 5,464 + 3,382 − 3,547 − 7,417 + 12,963 + 1,382 1.4914 114.0 112.5
         Dec + 10,556 + 6,358 − 10,620 + 8,780 + 61,499 − 80,064 − 834 1.4614 113.0 111.2
2010          Jan − 14,445 − 7,667 + 32,028 + 9,156 + 24,963 − 3,600 + 1,509 1.4272 110.8 108.9
         Feb − 8,737 + 4,217 − 8,379 − 17,624 + 1,626 + 11,272 − 3,652 1.3686 108.0 106.1
         Mar − 2,234 + 6,214 + 778 − 26,480 − 2,367 + 32,118 − 2,494 1.3569 107.4 105.7
         Apr − 7,467 + 2,874 + 8,620 − 11,416 + 32,602 − 12,530 − 36 1.3406 106.1 104.5
         May − 16,706 + 624 + 17,791 − 17,213 + 61,701 − 26,601 − 96 1.2565 102.8 101.4
         June ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 1.2209 100.7 99.4
         July ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 1.2770 102.5 101.2
*  Source: ECB. — 1  See also Tables XI.12 and 13, pp 75−76. — 2  Including
financial derivatives. — 3  Vis-à-vis the currencies of The-EER-21 group. —
4  Based on consumer prices. 
5* I Key economic data for the euro area 

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
E U R O S Y S T E M
Monthly Report
August 2010
I. Key economic data for the euro area 
 
3  General economic indicators
 
 
                   
 
Period Euro area Belgium Germany Finland France Greece Ireland Italy
 
Real gross domestic product 1,2
 
2007 2.8 2.9 2.7 5.3 2.4 4.5 5.6 1.5
2008 0.6 1.0 1.0 0.9 0.2 2.0 − 3.5 − 1.3
2009 − 4.1 − 2.7 − 4.7 − 8.0 − 2.6 − 2.0 − 7.6 − 5.0
2009          Q1 − 5.2 − 4.3 − 6.3 − 9.0 − 3.6 − 1.0 − 9.2 − 6.9
         Q2 − 4.9 − 4.0 − 6.8 − 9.6 − 3.8 − 1.9 − 7.8 − 6.5
         Q3 − 4.1 − 2.5 − 4.4 − 8.1 − 2.5 − 2.4 − 7.4 − 4.1
         Q4 − 2.1 − 0.2 − 1.3 − 5.4 − 0.6 − 2.5 − 5.8 − 2.6
2010          Q1 0.6 1.6 2.1 − 0.6 1.1 − 2.5 − 0.7 0.8
         Q2 1.7 ... 4.1 ... 2.1 ... ... ...
 
Industrial production 1,3
 
2007 3.7 2.9 6.1 4.8 1.3 2.3 5.0 1.8
2008 − 1.8 − 0.6 0.0 1.1 − 2.8 − 4.2 − 1.5 − 3.5
2009 − 14.9 − 14.0 − 16.4 − 21.2 − 12.2 − 9.2 − 4.1 − 18.4
2009          Q1 − 18.5 − 16.5 − 20.0 − 21.9 − 15.8 − 8.1 − 3.6 − 22.4
         Q2 − 18.7 − 17.5 − 20.2 − 24.0 − 16.0 − 11.3 − 2.4 − 23.2
         Q3 − 14.4 − 13.8 − 16.0 − 22.3 − 11.3 − 9.9 − 4.1 − 17.2
         Q4 − 7.4 − 7.4 − 8.8 − 16.3 − 5.4 − 7.2 − 6.6 − 9.4
2010          Q1 4.9 2.5 7.1 2.7 5.2 − 7.2 7.5 3.2
         Q2 e 9.2 ... p 13.2 11.8 7.2 p − 6.5 p 4.6 7.7
 
Capacity utilisation in industry 4
 
2007 84.3 83.2 87.5 87.3 86.6 76.9 76.6 78.2
2008 83.0 82.9 86.5 84.4 85.8 76.4 ... 75.9
2009 71.4 72.3 72.8 67.7 73.0 70.7 ... 66.7
2009          Q2 70.2 70.4 71.8 66.5 71.2 70.3 ... 66.2
         Q3 69.6 71.5 71.1 65.3 70.8 68.3 ... 64.6
         Q4 71.0 72.0 72.1 67.0 74.1 70.6 ... 65.6
2010          Q1 72.3 73.7 73.9 74.6 74.6 69.0 ... 66.7
         Q2 75.5 76.9 79.8 74.6 76.4 69.7 ... 68.6
         Q3 77.4 79.0 82.1 79.5 78.8 66.6 ... 69.6
 
Standardised unemployment rate 5
 
2007 7.5 7.5 8.4 6.9 8.4 8.3 4.6 6.1
2008 7.5 7.0 7.3 6.4 7.8 7.7 6.3 6.7
2009 9.4 7.9 7.5 8.2 9.5 9.5 11.9 7.8
2010          Jan 9.9 8.3 7.4 8.9 9.9 11.0 12.9 8.3
         Feb 9.9 8.4 7.3 8.9 9.9 11.0 12.8 8.4
         Mar 10.0 8.5 7.3 9.0 9.9 11.0 12.8 8.6
         Apr 10.0 8.5 7.1 8.8 9.9 ... 12.9 8.6
         May 10.0 8.6 7.0 8.6 9.9 ... 13.2 8.6
         June 10.0 8.6 7.0 8.5 10.0 ... 13.3 8.5
 
Harmonised Index of Consumer Prices 1
 
2007 6 2.1 1.8 2.3 1.6 1.6 3.0 2.9 2.0
2008 7 3.3 4.5 2.8 3.9 3.2 4.2 3.1 3.5
2009 8 0.3 0.0 0.2 1.6 0.1 1.3 − 1.7 0.8
2010          Feb 0.9 0.8 0.5 1.3 1.4 2.9 − 2.4 1.1
         Mar 1.4 1.9 1.2 1.5 1.7 3.9 − 2.4 1.4
         Apr 1.5 2.1 1.0 1.6 1.9 4.7 − 2.5 1.6
         May 1.6 2.5 1.2 1.4 1.9 5.3 − 1.9 1.6
         June 1.4 2.7 0.8 1.3 1.7 5.2 − 2.0 1.5
         July p 1.7 2.4 1.2 1.3 1.9 5.5 − 1.2 1.8
 
General government financial balance 9
 
2007 − 0.6 − 0.2 0.2 5.2 − 2.7 − 5.1 0.1 − 1.5
2008 − 2.0 − 1.2 0.0 4.2 − 3.3 − 7.7 − 7.3 − 2.7
2009 − 6.2 − 6.0 − 3.1 − 2.2 − 7.5 − 13.6 − 14.3 − 5.3
 
General government debt 9
 
2007 65.9 84.2 65.0 35.2 63.8 95.7 25.0 103.5
2008 69.3 89.8 66.0 34.2 67.5 99.2 43.9 106.1
2009 78.7 96.7 73.1 44.0 77.6 115.1 64.0 115.8
Sources: National data, European Commission, Eurostat, European Central for working-day variations. — 4  Manufacturing, in %; seasonally adjusted;
Bank. Latest data are partly based on press reports and are provisional. — data are collected in January, April, July and October. — 5  As a percentage
1  Annual percentage change. — 2  GDP of the euro area calculated from of the civilian labour force; seasonally adjusted. — 6  Including Slovenia
seasonally adjusted data. — 3  Manufacturing, mining and energy; adjusted
6*I. Key economic data for the euro area 

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2010
I.  Key economic data for the euro area 
 
3  General economic indicators
 
 
                   
 
Luxembourg Malta Netherlands Austria Portugal Slovakia Slovenia Spain Cyprus Period
 
Real gross domestic product 1,2
 
6.5 3.8 3.9 3.7 2.4 10.6 6.8 3.6 5.1 2007
0.0 1.7 1.9 2.2 0.0 6.2 3.5 0.9 3.6 2008
− 4.1 − 1.5 − 3.9 − 3.9 − 2.6 − 4.7 − 7.8 − 3.6 − 1.7 2009
− 6.6 − 2.0 − 4.5 − 5.4 − 4.1 − 5.7 − 8.2 − 3.8 0.6 2009          Q1
− 8.4 − 3.4 − 5.3 − 5.7 − 3.0 − 5.5 − 9.2 − 4.8 − 1.8          Q2
− 2.1 − 2.0 − 3.7 − 3.6 − 2.5 − 4.9 − 8.3 − 3.8 − 2.7          Q3
1.1 1.3 − 2.2 − 0.9 − 0.9 − 2.6 − 5.5 − 2.2 − 2.9          Q4
2.9 3.4 0.6 0.0 1.7 4.8 − 1.2 − 1.2 − 1.5 2010          Q1
... ... 2.1 1.9 ... 4.6 ... ... 0.1          Q2
 
Industrial production1,3
 
− 0.6 − 2.3 5.9 0.1 16.6 7.4 2.0 4.3 2007
− 5.2 − 1.4 1.2 − 4.1 3.2 1.7 − 7.3 3.9 2008
− 15.8 − − 7.6 − 11.9 − 8.6 − 14.2 − 17.5 − 15.8 − 8.7 2009
− 24.9 − − 9.8 − 12.5 − 12.3 − 22.0 − 18.0 − 22.6 − 7.3 2009          Q1
− 21.3 − − 12.5 − 16.6 − 9.9 − 21.5 − 23.9 − 18.6 − 9.6          Q2
− 16.4 − − 6.9 − 13.1 − 7.4 − 12.8 − 18.9 − 14.6 − 8.9          Q3
2.7 − − 1.4 − 5.3 − 4.5 1.1 − 8.2 − 5.6 − 8.8          Q4
15.5 − 7.1 1.2 3.7 20.2 − 0.4 0.3 − 2.2 2010          Q1
... − 10.5 ... 2.7 25.3 10.6 2.8 ...          Q2
 
Capacity utilisation in industry 4
 
87.3 80.8 83.6 85.2 81.8 73.6 85.9 81.0 70.0 2007
85.1 79.0 83.4 83.0 79.8 72.0 84.1 79.2 72.0 2008
69.2 69.7 75.9 74.8 72.6 53.7 71.1 70.0 66.3 2009
65.2 65.9 74.6 73.2 70.6 50.9 69.1 69.8 66.7 2009          Q2
67.4 71.0 75.5 73.5 71.5 51.9 69.3 67.9 64.8          Q3
71.6 73.0 76.0 75.2 72.0 58.8 70.7 68.8 64.3          Q4
77.5 77.3 77.3 75.8 75.1 58.1 73.0 68.9 61.7 2010          Q1
79.3 75.7 78.8 79.4 75.7 55.4 75.3 70.9 63.1          Q2
80.2 78.7 78.4 82.6 75.0 59.7 77.6 72.7 61.4          Q3
 
Standardised unemployment rate 5
 
4.2 6.4 3.2 4.4 8.1 11.1 4.9 8.3 4.0 2007
4.9 5.9 2.8 3.8 7.7 9.5 4.4 11.3 3.6 2008
5.2 7.0 3.4 4.8 9.6 12.0 5.9 18.0 5.3 2009
5.1 7.0 4.1 4.6 10.4 14.5 6.6 19.0 6.3 2010          Jan 
5.2 7.0 4.2 4.5 10.4 14.7 6.7 19.2 6.4          Feb 
5.2 6.9 4.2 4.2 10.6 14.7 6.9 19.4 6.7          Mar 
5.2 6.9 4.3 4.1 10.8 14.8 7.0 19.6 6.9          Apr 
5.2 6.7 4.3 4.0 10.9 14.8 7.0 19.8 7.1          May
5.3 6.5 4.4 3.9 10.8 15.0 7.0 20.0 7.3          June
 
Harmonised Index of Consumer Prices 1
 
2.7 0.7 1.6 2.2 2.4 1.9 3.8 2.8 2.2 2007
4.1 4.7 2.2 3.2 2.7 3.9 5.5 4.1 4.4 2008
0.0 1.8 1.0 0.4 − 0.9 0.9 0.9 − 0.2 0.2 2009
2.3 0.7 0.3 0.9 0.2 − 0.2 1.6 0.9 2.8 2010          Feb 
3.2 0.6 0.7 1.8 0.6 0.3 1.8 1.5 2.3          Mar 
3.1 0.8 0.6 1.8 0.7 0.7 2.7 1.6 2.5          Apr 
3.1 1.8 0.4 1.7 1.1 0.7 2.4 1.8 1.8          May
2.3 1.8 0.2 1.8 1.1 0.7 2.1 1.5 2.1          June
2.9 2.5 p 1.3 p 1.7 1.9 1.0 2.3 1.9 2.7          July
 
General government financial balance 9
 
3.6 − 2.2 0.2 − 0.4 − 2.6 − 1.9 0.0 1.9 3.4 2007
2.9 − 4.5 0.7 − 0.4 − 2.8 − 2.3 − 1.7 − 4.1 0.9 2008
− 0.7 − 3.8 − 5.3 − 3.4 − 9.4 − 6.8 − 5.5 − 11.2 − 6.1 2009
 
General government debt 9
 
6.7 61.9 45.5 59.5 63.6 29.3 23.4 36.2 58.3 2007
13.7 63.7 58.2 62.6 66.3 27.7 22.6 39.7 48.4 2008
14.5 69.1 60.9 66.5 76.8 35.7 35.9 53.2 56.2 2009
from 2007 onwards. — 7  Including Malta and Cyprus from 2008 states: European Commission (Maastricht Treaty definition), for Germany in
onwards. — 8  Including Slovakia from 2009 onwards. — 9  As a percentage accordance with the revision of the national accounts in May 2010,
of GDP; euro-area aggregate: European Central Bank (ESA 1995), member Bundesbank calculation. 
7*I.  Key economic data for the euro area 

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
E U R O S Y S T E M
Monthly Report
August 2010
II Overall monetary survey in the euro area 
 
1 The money stock and its counterparts *
  
(a) Euro area 
  
€ billion
I Lending to non-banks (non-MFIs) II Net claims on III Monetary capital formation at monetary
in the euro area non-euro-area residents financial institutions (MFIs) in the euro area
Enterprises General
and households government Debt
Deposits securities
Liabil- with an Deposits with
Claims ities to agreed at agreed maturities
on non- non-euro- maturity notice of of over Capital
of which of which euro-area area of over over 2 years and
Period Total Total Total Total residents residents Total 2 years 3 months (net)  2 Securities Securities reserves  3 
2008          Nov 117.3 78.6 60.0 38.8 41.0 5.5 − 84.7 − 90.2 40.6 26.0 3.4 − 9.0 20.2
         Dec 8.4 − 9.0 61.5 17.4 23.5 − 47.3 − 198.8 − 151.5 54.9 43.0 3.7 6.7 1.6
2009          Jan 103.3 34.1 8.5 69.2 55.2 − 70.7 − 31.4 39.2 46.7 31.7 2.1 6.7 6.2
         Feb 28.6 − 8.7 13.6 37.3 40.6 46.8 − 108.6 − 155.4 44.1 13.2 − 0.3 24.3 6.9
         Mar 50.9 14.9 12.8 36.1 44.7 − 30.6 − 132.9 − 102.3 19.3 22.9 0.4 2.2 − 6.2
         Apr 84.5 42.2 46.1 42.3 31.0 41.4 41.6 0.1 15.9 15.0 0.1 − 5.4 6.2
         May 33.8 22.2 8.6 11.6 19.0 16.9 − 54.8 − 71.8 57.5 23.7 1.3 23.5 9.0
         June 110.8 37.9 6.8 72.9 49.9 44.0 − 50.7 − 94.6 76.4 20.7 0.8 14.5 40.3
         July − 34.8 − 40.2 − 9.5 5.4 4.7 10.7 − 39.2 − 49.9 28.6 12.1 1.1 14.2 1.1
         Aug − 52.7 − 62.0 − 0.7 9.3 4.9 25.6 − 22.3 − 47.8 37.3 6.7 0.7 16.9 13.0
         Sep 72.6 50.8 6.0 21.7 31.1 − 13.6 − 34.5 − 20.9 22.4 16.3 1.0 − 8.4 13.5
         Oct − 5.9 − 39.6 − 1.4 33.7 14.1 9.6 10.8 1.2 5.1 1.6 2.2 − 0.7 1.9
         Nov 42.5 44.9 13.8 − 2.4 2.4 − 6.4 5.9 12.4 29.1 9.4 0.6 4.6 14.5
         Dec − 35.8 − 3.4 2.9 − 32.4 − 27.8 49.7 − 51.5 − 101.2 41.9 19.7 − 1.1 − 13.1 36.4
2010          Jan − 11.0 − 31.0 − 1.5 19.9 8.6 6.3 62.5 56.3 33.7 11.0 1.0 30.5 − 8.8
         Feb 20.7 − 6.2 − 9.5 26.9 31.9 − 12.2 16.7 28.9 − 2.1 6.3 − 0.7 − 6.6 − 1.0
         Mar 61.2 6.5 − 20.6 54.8 31.1 − 16.8 − 26.5 − 9.7 36.1 2.5 − 0.1 23.3 10.4
         Apr 89.0 72.1 42.0 16.9 13.3 − 25.0 71.5 96.5 20.9 16.3 − 0.9 6.5 − 1.0
         May 15.8 − 18.8 − 41.9 34.6 20.9 33.5 37.5 4.0 0.4 − 4.3 − 1.8 − 7.5 14.0
         June 73.2 30.3 − 6.3 42.9 25.5 13.0 − 145.6 − 158.6 − 8.0 2.0 − 3.0 − 23.6 16.5
  
  
(b) German contribution
 
I Lending to non-banks (non-MFIs) II Net claims on III Monetary capital formation at monetary
in the euro area non-euro-area residents financial institutions (MFIs) in the euro area
Enterprises General
and households government Debt
Deposits securities
Liabil- with an Deposits with
Claims ities to agreed at agreed maturities
on non- non-euro- maturity notice of of over Capital
of which of which euro-area area of over over 2 years and
Period Total Total Total Total residents residents Total 2 years 3 months (net)  2 Securities Securities reserves  3 
2008          Nov 7.4 12.0 1.2 − 4.6 − 2.5 − 38.2 − 76.5 − 38.3 − 5.6 0.8 3.7 − 9.9 − 0.3
         Dec 13.7 15.4 30.8 − 1.7 − 0.8 − 6.5 − 31.1 − 24.7 27.3 29.8 3.8 − 18.0 11.7
2009          Jan 36.2 29.7 7.1 6.5 6.9 − 59.8 − 54.4 5.4 0.4 3.7 0.0 − 0.6 − 2.8
         Feb − 9.1 − 6.6 6.7 − 2.4 − 0.3 − 1.9 − 24.9 − 23.0 − 13.7 6.8 − 0.0 − 9.8 − 10.7
         Mar 9.2 13.7 − 3.6 − 4.6 − 0.1 − 30.8 − 35.1 − 4.4 − 3.0 2.6 0.8 − 6.8 0.4
         Apr 20.1 13.4 12.0 6.7 4.9 19.7 40.7 21.0 − 8.3 3.9 0.2 − 5.9 − 6.5
         May − 3.3 − 4.2 − 8.5 1.0 5.1 28.0 − 5.7 − 33.7 2.9 2.6 1.5 2.4 − 3.6
         June 15.8 16.1 5.0 − 0.3 1.6 − 22.9 − 19.2 3.8 34.5 13.6 1.0 − 3.0 23.0
         July − 8.5 − 23.3 − 3.6 14.8 1.9 − 25.3 − 31.6 − 6.3 − 7.1 0.9 1.2 − 9.0 − 0.2
         Aug − 27.5 − 18.8 − 6.4 − 8.7 − 3.2 1.9 − 13.3 − 15.2 1.5 1.9 0.8 1.8 − 2.9
         Sep 22.3 18.7 0.5 3.6 6.5 − 6.7 − 28.0 − 21.3 − 12.0 2.9 1.2 − 17.1 0.9
         Oct − 0.1 − 19.2 − 5.1 19.1 7.3 9.2 − 0.9 − 10.1 − 0.5 − 0.9 2.4 − 1.3 − 0.7
         Nov − 0.4 6.6 2.4 − 7.0 1.3 − 0.4 − 1.2 − 0.8 − 0.9 2.2 0.9 − 10.0 6.0
         Dec − 37.4 − 30.0 − 9.7 − 7.4 − 1.4 10.6 − 9.3 − 20.0 − 12.5 0.7 − 1.1 − 12.8 0.6
2010          Jan 16.6 5.4 8.1 11.1 8.1 − 15.1 6.8 21.9 − 6.2 2.4 − 1.6 − 0.3 − 6.7
         Feb − 12.8 − 15.3 − 11.1 2.5 5.7 − 22.1 − 18.4 3.8 − 6.8 0.5 − 0.7 − 6.3 − 0.4
         Mar − 2.5 − 8.8 − 5.2 6.2 7.0 − 14.0 2.8 16.8 2.9 1.1 0.1 2.7 − 0.9
         Apr 54.7 50.6 24.6 4.1 2.3 − 13.0 40.5 53.5 − 3.7 0.1 − 1.9 − 0.6 − 1.4
         May − 36.4 − 54.5 − 52.3 18.1 7.7 − 35.4 13.5 48.9 − 16.9 − 5.3 − 1.8 1.8 − 11.6
         June 14.9 − 10.5 − 9.8 25.3 20.5 − 6.7 − 52.1 − 45.4 − 6.3 0.7 − 1.3 − 4.0 − 1.7
*The data in this table are based on the consolidated balance sheet of deduction of inter-MFI participations. — 4Including the counterparts of
monetary financial institutions (MFIs) (Table II.2); statistical breaks have monetary liabilities of central governments. — 5Including the monetary
been eliminated from the flow figures (see also the “Notes on the figures“ liabilities of central governments (Post Office, Treasury). — 6In Germany,
in the “Explanatory notes“ in the Statistical Supplement to the Monthly only savings deposits. — 7Paper held by residents outside the euro area has
Report 1, p 30). — 1Source: ECB. — 2Excluding MFIs’ portfolios. — 3After been eliminated. — 8Less German MFIs’ holdings of paper issued by
8*II Overall monetary survey in the euro area 

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2010
II Overall monetary survey in the euro area
 
 
 
(a) Euro area 
 
V Other factors VI Money stock M3 (balance I plus II less III less IV less V)
Money stock M2 Debt secur-
of which ities with
Intra- Money stock M1 maturities
Eurosystem Deposits of up to
liability/ with an Deposits Money 2 years
IV De- claim agreed at agreed market (incl money
posits of related to Currency maturity notice of Repo fund market    
banknote in circu- Overnight of up to up to 3 transac- shares paper)    central  gov-
ernments Total  4 issue Total Total Total lation deposits  5 2 years  5 tions (net)  2,7  Period (net)  2,7,8 months  5,6 
69.9 − 31.9 − 44.3 49.6 25.5 4.8 20.7 19.7 4.4 − 12.6 10.1 − 2.8 2008          Nov 
− 66.5 − 99.8 − 72.6 103.3 74.7 19.2 55.5 − 15.5 44.2 − 6.3 − 19.6 − 4.9          Dec 
62.5 9.0 − − 85.6 − 64.1 22.1 − 11.9 34.0 − 131.3 45.1 − 6.4 34.9 − 50.0 2009          Jan 
14.0 2.0 − 15.3 − 6.8 4.5 3.6 0.9 − 34.4 23.0 3.4 20.2 − 1.5          Feb 
12.7 − 12.1 − 0.4 10.3 33.5 4.0 29.5 − 43.6 20.5 11.2 0.9 − 22.0          Mar 
− 14.0 39.9 − 84.1 71.1 82.6 9.3 73.3 − 36.0 24.6 − 0.3 2.3 11.0          Apr 
− 5.9 6.7 − − 7.6 2.5 26.9 2.8 24.1 − 38.7 14.3 − 1.9 0.6 − 8.8          May
20.4 56.2 − 1.8 28.6 91.0 3.0 88.0 − 74.1 11.7 11.1 − 22.6 − 15.3          June
− 54.1 38.8 − − 37.5 − 15.9 − 0.8 10.5 − 11.2 − 34.0 18.9 − 25.9 16.0 − 11.6          July
− 12.3 − 12.6 − − 39.5 − 15.5 7.4 − 4.3 11.7 − 39.9 16.9 − 10.5 1.1 − 14.6          Aug 
20.7 9.2 − 6.6 9.5 62.4 − 0.5 63.0 − 59.6 6.7 24.5 − 19.5 − 8.0          Sep 
22.3 − 9.5 − − 14.2 26.2 55.6 4.8 50.8 − 44.1 14.7 − 25.8 − 4.8 − 9.8          Oct 
− 13.6 40.8 − − 20.2 − 7.1 38.4 4.6 33.7 − 49.2 3.8 5.5 − 15.0 − 3.7          Nov 
− 57.3 − 53.7 − 83.0 97.0 84.5 20.0 64.5 − 24.1 36.6 12.5 − 26.3 − 0.2          Dec 
30.7 − 8.0 − − 61.1 − 46.6 − 4.3 − 12.8 8.5 − 71.3 29.1 − 19.9 4.7 0.7 2010          Jan 
− 3.9 43.0 − − 28.5 − 28.9 − 16.7 2.4 − 19.1 − 21.3 9.1 15.3 − 8.2 − 6.7          Feb 
− 6.0 4.9 − 9.5 − 2.9 4.5 9.1 − 4.5 − 16.2 8.8 19.6 − 16.6 9.3          Mar 
− 20.0 − 14.2 − 77.2 54.0 81.1 4.0 77.1 − 35.4 8.3 19.8 1.6 1.9          Apr 
36.8 4.1 − 8.0 15.2 26.8 6.4 20.4 − 11.0 − 0.6 4.1 − 4.0 − 7.3          May
20.9 43.1 − 30.1 21.7 43.6 6.5 37.0 − 18.2 − 3.7 36.5 − 24.9 − 3.1          June
 
 
 (b) German contribution 
 
V Other factors VI Money stock M3 (balance I plus II less III less IV less V)  10 
of which Components of the money stock
Intra- Debt securities
Eurosystem Deposits with
liability/ with an Deposits Money maturities
IV De- claim agreed at agreed market of up to 2 years
posits of related to Currency maturity notice of Repo fund (incl money    
banknote in circu- Overnight of up to up to 3 transac- shares market    central  gov-
ernments Total issue  9,11 lation Total deposits 2 years months  6 tions (net)  7,8 paper)(net)  7  Period
0.2 − 59.5 1.3 1.3 34.2 9.2 9.9 − 1.1 2.8 − 0.8 14.1 2008          Nov 
− 0.0 − 17.3 1.1 5.6 − 2.7 1.5 − 2.2 8.1 − 9.9 − 0.8 0.6          Dec 
0.6 − 31.3 17.5 − 18.2 6.7 57.9 − 47.7 3.8 6.3 − 0.3 − 13.3 2009          Jan 
8.1 − 14.1 1.5 0.7 8.8 17.2 − 23.1 5.3 6.6 0.8 1.9          Feb 
3.2 0.7 − 0.3 1.3 − 22.5 − 1.8 − 19.4 2.8 13.7 − 0.6 − 17.2          Mar 
14.4 7.2 1.3 1.6 26.5 32.1 − 20.8 3.1 4.9 − 0.1 7.3          Apr 
12.0 19.8 0.4 0.1 − 10.0 4.1 − 15.0 2.4 − 1.7 − 0.3 0.5          May
− 9.2 − 15.3 − 0.3 1.5 − 17.1 20.0 − 33.9 3.7 2.5 − 0.2 − 9.2          June
− 5.8 3.7 − 0.1 3.3 − 24.6 2.3 − 19.0 4.6 − 11.0 − 1.1 − 0.2          July
1.7 − 18.5 1.6 − 1.4 − 10.2 12.8 − 18.0 4.5 − 10.6 − 0.1 1.1          Aug 
− 2.3 20.1 1.6 0.1 9.6 20.5 − 26.1 3.1 11.9 0.1 0.0          Sep 
1.4 11.1 1.5 0.8 − 3.1 27.9 − 30.7 4.2 − 0.4 − 0.1 − 3.9          Oct 
− 7.8 2.0 0.3 1.5 5.9 24.0 − 16.8 3.0 − 2.3 − 0.2 − 1.7          Nov 
− 8.9 2.5 0.0 4.3 − 7.8 − 16.6 3.7 10.0 − 0.5 − 0.6 − 3.8          Dec 
− 6.1 16.4 0.7 − 2.9 − 2.7 29.3 − 27.6 4.7 − 12.3 0.7 2.5 2010          Jan 
− 3.8 − 30.9 2.1 0.6 6.6 0.3 − 11.6 5.9 10.7 − 0.2 1.5          Feb 
− 1.6 − 3.3 0.5 2.9 − 14.6 − 14.7 − 0.0 1.8 1.0 − 0.5 − 2.1          Mar 
0.2 4.5 0.9 0.6 40.8 40.5 − 21.9 2.0 20.8 − 0.2 − 0.4          Apr 
1.6 − 65.8 0.6 1.2 9.3 11.8 − 5.3 2.0 0.7 0.4 − 0.3          May
− 1.0 18.2 − 0.8 2.3 − 2.8 1.2 0.2 0.7 1.2 − 0.7 − 5.4          June
euro-area MFIs. — 9Including national banknotes still in circulation. — M2 or M3. — 11The difference between the volume of euro banknotes
10The German contributions to the Eurosystem’s monetary aggregates actually issued by the Bundesbank and the amount disclosed in accordance
should on no account be interpreted as national monetary aggregates and with the accounting regime chosen by the Eurosystem (see also footnote 2
are therefore not comparable with the erstwhile German money stocks M1, on banknote circulation in Table III.2). 
9*II Overall monetary survey in the euro area

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
E U R O S Y S T E M
Monthly Report
August 2010
II Overall monetary survey in the euro area
 
2 Consolidated balance sheet of monetary financial institutions (MFIs) *
 
 
 
Assets
Lending to non-banks (non-MFIs) in the euro area
Enterprises and households General government
Claims
Total Shares and on non-
End of assets or Debt other Debt euro-area Other
year/month liabilities Total Total Loans securities  2 equities Total Loans securities  3 residents assets
 Euro area ( € billion) 1
 
2008          May 23,461.1 15,154.0 12,657.3 10,583.2 1,157.1 917.0 2,496.7 982.5 1,514.2 5,522.4 2,784.6
         June 23,408.5 15,199.5 12,693.9 10,646.6 1,188.6 858.7 2,505.6 994.4 1,511.1 5,365.2 2,843.8
         July 23,406.6 15,305.4 12,788.2 10,701.5 1,209.6 877.1 2,517.2 995.5 1,521.8 5,408.6 2,692.6
         Aug 23,628.5 15,348.9 12,833.4 10,709.0 1,246.2 878.1 2,515.5 988.9 1,526.5 5,512.4 2,767.3
         Sep 23,894.6 15,389.9 12,898.2 10,804.8 1,219.1 874.3 2,491.7 999.3 1,492.4 5,608.4 2,896.4
         Oct 24,579.7 15,444.8 12,955.7 10,860.9 1,259.8 835.0 2,489.0 999.6 1,489.5 5,794.7 3,340.1
         Nov 24,737.2 15,551.7 13,015.9 10,870.3 1,322.1 823.5 2,535.8 997.2 1,538.6 5,681.2 3,504.3
         Dec 24,127.6 15,521.6 12,967.1 10,772.8 1,410.1 784.2 2,554.5 989.0 1,565.5 5,239.0 3,367.1
2009          Jan 24,494.2 15,702.9 13,062.0 10,860.9 1,413.8 787.2 2,640.9 1,004.5 1,636.4 5,397.6 3,393.7
         Feb 24,438.1 15,726.2 13,046.8 10,837.5 1,434.5 774.7 2,679.3 1,001.2 1,678.2 5,309.3 3,402.7
         Mar 24,164.2 15,751.2 13,034.9 10,816.0 1,451.4 767.5 2,716.3 992.1 1,724.3 5,041.0 3,371.9
         Apr 24,246.4 15,843.6 13,084.3 10,813.1 1,476.8 794.4 2,759.3 1,003.2 1,756.1 5,103.6 3,299.1
         May 23,925.4 15,850.5 13,087.6 10,810.4 1,484.9 792.4 2,762.9 995.5 1,767.3 4,969.5 3,105.4
         June 24,091.5 15,954.9 13,119.3 10,836.6 1,500.2 782.4 2,835.7 1,018.5 1,817.1 4,916.9 3,219.6
         July 24,044.2 15,922.7 13,078.1 10,799.4 1,499.9 778.8 2,844.5 1,019.2 1,825.3 4,879.5 3,242.0
         Aug 23,959.7 15,871.5 13,016.8 10,735.1 1,499.8 781.9 2,854.7 1,023.5 1,831.2 4,868.8 3,219.4
         Sep 23,912.5 15,946.7 13,066.2 10,769.1 1,499.7 797.4 2,880.5 1,014.0 1,866.5 4,786.5 3,179.2
         Oct 23,858.0 15,932.7 13,019.6 10,723.1 1,497.6 798.9 2,913.0 1,033.6 1,879.4 4,793.1 3,132.2
         Nov 24,013.3 15,971.3 13,061.9 10,752.4 1,498.1 811.3 2,909.4 1,026.1 1,883.3 4,800.4 3,241.6
         Dec 23,866.5 15,970.9 13,096.9 10,781.0 1,504.2 811.8 2,874.0 1,021.7 1,852.2 4,815.8 3,079.8
2010          Jan 24,094.3 15,981.7 13,087.6 10,770.9 1,501.1 815.6 2,894.1 1,033.3 1,860.7 4,946.7 3,165.9
         Feb 24,264.8 16,006.9 13,080.9 10,774.2 1,505.4 801.4 2,926.0 1,028.5 1,897.4 5,017.8 3,240.2
         Mar 24,314.2 16,062.5 13,082.6 10,798.1 1,491.1 793.5 2,979.9 1,052.3 1,927.6 5,003.7 3,247.9
         Apr 24,636.5 16,138.9 13,143.5 10,819.5 1,498.8 825.2 2,995.4 1,056.2 1,939.2 5,127.4 3,370.2
         May 25,240.0 16,172.4 13,140.5 10,861.7 1,478.2 800.6 3,032.0 1,070.4 1,961.6 5,353.8 3,713.7
         June 25,260.5 16,348.8 13,276.7 10,958.6 1,532.2 786.0 3,072.1 1,085.7 1,986.4 5,269.9 3,641.8
 German contribution ( € billion) 
2008          May 5,283.0 3,600.6 2,951.1 2,473.1 162.5 315.5 649.5 381.1 268.4 1,436.0 246.5
         June 5,230.1 3,581.4 2,944.7 2,491.9 162.8 290.0 636.6 380.1 256.6 1,399.5 249.2
         July 5,239.5 3,592.2 2,959.4 2,503.6 162.1 293.7 632.9 380.0 252.9 1,394.5 252.8
         Aug 5,284.5 3,623.9 2,995.2 2,511.9 187.2 296.1 628.8 379.8 249.0 1,410.0 250.6
         Sep 5,383.1 3,627.7 3,016.0 2,530.7 188.4 296.9 611.7 377.3 234.4 1,501.9 253.5
         Oct 5,457.7 3,632.1 3,016.4 2,540.2 186.7 289.5 615.7 379.4 236.3 1,554.5 271.1
         Nov 5,385.6 3,637.4 3,026.4 2,549.0 191.6 285.8 611.1 377.3 233.8 1,463.2 285.0
         Dec 5,310.8 3,642.6 3,035.0 2,529.4 224.5 281.1 607.6 374.9 232.8 1,379.1 289.1
2009          Jan 5,343.8 3,682.0 3,065.9 2,557.6 219.9 288.4 616.1 374.8 241.3 1,367.2 294.6
         Feb 5,315.0 3,672.2 3,058.5 2,544.1 235.8 278.6 613.8 372.8 241.0 1,348.2 294.6
         Mar 5,282.0 3,674.0 3,065.2 2,555.9 235.1 274.3 608.8 368.1 240.7 1,278.5 329.5
         Apr 5,330.0 3,694.6 3,079.0 2,557.4 234.9 286.8 615.6 369.8 245.8 1,319.6 315.8
         May 5,261.9 3,684.9 3,068.7 2,556.8 234.0 277.8 616.2 365.5 250.8 1,292.8 284.3
         June 5,220.8 3,698.7 3,082.9 2,566.5 246.0 270.4 615.8 363.7 252.1 1,270.5 251.6
         July 5,173.5 3,689.5 3,059.0 2,545.9 245.8 267.3 630.6 376.6 254.0 1,238.5 245.5
         Aug 5,149.9 3,660.3 3,038.5 2,532.0 242.9 263.6 621.8 371.0 250.7 1,223.4 266.3
         Sep 5,131.7 3,679.7 3,054.4 2,548.0 242.8 263.6 625.2 368.1 257.1 1,186.5 265.5
         Oct 5,128.8 3,677.6 3,033.3 2,532.0 240.4 260.9 644.2 379.8 264.4 1,184.0 267.3
         Nov 5,131.5 3,675.6 3,041.1 2,537.6 240.3 263.2 634.6 368.9 265.7 1,184.3 271.6
         Dec 5,084.8 3,642.7 3,015.1 2,520.4 235.5 259.1 627.6 363.0 264.6 1,188.8 253.3
2010          Jan 5,123.4 3,660.2 3,021.3 2,516.0 239.8 265.5 638.8 366.1 272.7 1,211.6 251.5
         Feb 5,099.1 3,649.6 3,008.2 2,513.7 237.7 256.8 641.4 362.9 278.5 1,208.0 241.5
         Mar 5,105.8 3,638.3 2,993.1 2,509.7 233.9 249.6 645.2 362.2 283.0 1,209.3 258.2
         Apr 5,210.6 3,693.3 3,044.0 2,535.9 231.3 276.8 649.3 364.1 285.2 1,262.7 254.6
         May 5,259.6 3,664.4 2,996.6 2,539.6 209.1 247.9 667.8 374.7 293.1 1,324.9 270.3
         June 5,244.2 3,680.1 2,988.0 2,540.8 205.5 241.7 692.1 377.7 314.4 1,282.2 281.9
*Monetary financial institutions (MFIs) comprise banks (including building and other money market paper issued by general government. — 4Euro
and loan associations), money market funds, and the European Central currency in circulation (see also footnote 8 on p 12*). Excluding MFIs‘ cash in
Bank and national central banks (the Eurosystem). — 1Source: ECB. — hand (in euro). The German contribution includes the volume of euro bank-
2Including money market paper of enterprises. — 3Including Treasury bills notes put into circulation by the Bundesbank in accordance with
10*II Overall monetary survey in the euro area

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2010
II Overall monetary survey in the euro area
 
 
 
 
 
Liabilities
Deposits of non-banks (non-MFIs) in the euro area
Enterprises and households
With agreed At agreed
maturities of notice of  6 
over
Currency 1 year and
in of which up to up to over up to over  End of
Total in euro  5 Total Overnight 1 year 2 years 2 years 3 months 3 months year/month circulation  4 
Euro area ( € billion) 1
 
645.8 9,134.1 8,631.1 8,696.7 3,027.1 1,949.3 208.6 1,894.1 1,508.1 109.6 2008          May
652.1 9,224.9 8,681.5 8,743.5 3,063.1 1,941.1 215.5 1,910.0 1,505.1 108.9          June
658.8 9,207.3 8,687.5 8,760.7 2,986.3 2,031.6 225.1 1,913.3 1,496.2 108.3          July
656.1 9,230.3 8,695.3 8,776.7 2,942.3 2,081.1 233.3 1,918.5 1,494.4 107.2          Aug 
657.2 9,302.0 8,759.5 8,840.7 3,025.4 2,081.6 236.5 1,906.6 1,484.6 106.1          Sep 
698.9 9,467.0 8,856.6 8,941.8 3,049.8 2,151.7 237.6 1,911.0 1,482.7 109.0          Oct 
703.7 9,601.2 8,935.7 8,997.5 3,060.0 2,164.4 239.4 1,933.7 1,487.3 112.6          Nov 
722.9 9,636.8 9,075.0 9,113.5 3,105.8 2,151.5 235.6 1,972.7 1,531.4 116.5          Dec 
712.3 9,761.6 9,115.3 9,171.1 3,184.2 2,040.4 241.3 2,011.0 1,576.9 117.3 2009          Jan 
716.0 9,780.7 9,127.3 9,173.9 3,185.1 1,996.9 250.2 2,024.7 1,599.9 117.2          Feb 
719.9 9,809.6 9,155.0 9,193.5 3,203.3 1,954.7 251.8 2,045.9 1,620.0 117.8          Mar 
729.2 9,874.4 9,235.9 9,272.9 3,254.9 1,938.7 253.4 2,063.4 1,643.9 118.8          Apr 
732.0 9,879.9 9,251.8 9,285.0 3,275.9 1,893.7 252.0 2,085.3 1,657.9 120.2          May
735.0 9,947.4 9,291.9 9,328.7 3,354.1 1,835.5 241.6 2,106.6 1,669.7 121.3          June
745.5 9,878.9 9,276.5 9,318.4 3,341.7 1,794.1 254.0 2,118.0 1,688.2 122.4          July
741.2 9,849.0 9,273.0 9,312.1 3,350.5 1,752.5 257.2 2,123.7 1,704.9 123.2          Aug 
740.6 9,887.3 9,295.0 9,329.7 3,406.9 1,694.4 254.0 2,138.5 1,711.5 124.4          Sep 
745.5 9,932.9 9,313.6 9,356.5 3,460.6 1,647.9 256.0 2,139.1 1,726.0 126.9          Oct 
750.1 9,913.8 9,315.0 9,348.2 3,485.2 1,598.6 259.1 2,147.6 1,730.0 127.7          Nov 
770.1 9,976.5 9,431.5 9,486.1 3,559.6 1,584.1 261.4 2,187.3 1,767.0 126.9          Dec 
757.2 10,002.9 9,423.1 9,478.4 3,579.2 1,514.4 264.2 2,198.2 1,796.9 125.4 2010          Jan 
759.7 9,986.2 9,415.1 9,463.1 3,559.5 1,495.5 268.2 2,209.1 1,805.9 124.9          Feb 
768.7 9,973.1 9,404.9 9,458.5 3,560.7 1,478.7 267.4 2,211.9 1,814.8 125.1          Mar 
772.7 10,020.8 9,468.6 9,527.4 3,638.1 1,443.4 269.3 2,230.1 1,823.3 123.2          Apr 
779.1 10,078.3 9,469.5 9,540.7 3,659.5 1,435.6 269.2 2,232.9 1,823.1 120.4          May
785.6 10,214.6 9,587.1 9,648.1 3,700.8 1,425.3 268.2 2,323.2 1,811.5 119.1          June
 German contribution ( € billion) 
174.0 2,671.0 2,591.1 2,508.4 763.8 435.1 46.3 725.8 433.7 103.7 2008          May
176.2 2,671.2 2,589.5 2,502.9 770.0 425.7 47.4 725.3 431.6 102.9          June
178.2 2,676.3 2,596.5 2,512.2 750.5 458.7 49.2 724.8 426.5 102.5          July
177.2 2,688.5 2,608.0 2,522.6 751.6 472.1 50.3 724.0 423.4 101.3          Aug 
177.7 2,698.7 2,618.7 2,532.2 768.0 471.5 51.5 720.9 420.1 100.3          Sep 
188.3 2,742.6 2,664.9 2,580.8 798.6 489.4 52.8 718.1 418.8 103.2          Oct 
189.6 2,760.1 2,685.4 2,592.5 804.1 492.9 54.6 716.3 417.6 106.9          Nov 
195.2 2,799.3 2,728.0 2,632.6 800.8 493.7 54.4 747.3 425.7 110.7          Dec 
177.0 2,819.7 2,748.0 2,657.0 859.6 452.3 53.7 751.4 429.4 110.7 2009          Jan 
177.7 2,834.1 2,754.4 2,660.1 872.0 432.0 52.8 758.1 434.7 110.6          Feb 
179.0 2,821.3 2,740.2 2,650.6 870.1 418.5 52.7 760.7 437.3 111.3          Mar 
180.6 2,854.6 2,759.1 2,667.2 880.6 418.0 52.0 764.7 439.8 112.1          Apr 
180.7 2,860.9 2,753.2 2,661.0 884.4 401.8 51.8 767.2 442.2 113.6          May
182.2 2,856.1 2,755.9 2,666.6 902.2 372.6 50.8 780.8 445.7 114.6          June
185.6 2,840.1 2,747.1 2,663.6 907.2 358.8 50.2 781.5 450.2 115.7          July
184.2 2,832.1 2,748.8 2,667.0 919.1 344.4 49.1 783.3 454.6 116.5          Aug 
184.3 2,830.8 2,750.2 2,671.8 937.9 324.4 47.9 786.2 457.7 117.7          Sep 
185.0 2,834.4 2,752.2 2,676.5 966.4 295.8 47.6 784.8 461.8 120.1          Oct 
186.5 2,839.6 2,767.0 2,687.1 987.8 280.1 46.6 787.0 464.7 120.9          Nov 
190.8 2,828.4 2,763.3 2,688.5 975.3 283.8 46.9 788.0 474.6 119.8          Dec 
187.9 2,830.4 2,772.0 2,696.8 1,005.5 261.0 44.4 788.2 479.4 118.3 2010          Jan 
188.5 2,829.6 2,776.4 2,695.8 1,003.1 253.7 43.7 792.4 485.3 117.6          Feb 
191.4 2,816.4 2,765.5 2,687.3 992.2 254.0 42.8 793.5 487.1 117.7          Mar 
192.1 2,836.8 2,782.6 2,710.0 1,035.2 234.4 42.0 793.6 489.0 115.8          Apr 
193.2 2,841.8 2,783.5 2,706.9 1,043.4 229.2 40.8 788.5 490.9 114.0          May
195.5 2,842.9 2,787.0 2,702.2 1,041.7 229.2 39.0 787.9 491.6 112.7          June
the accounting regime chosen by the Eurosystem (see footnote 3 on item “Intra-Eurosystem liability/claim related to banknote issue“ (see “Other
banknote circulation in Table III.2). The volume of currency actually put into liability items“). — 5Excluding central governments’ deposits. — 6In
circulation by the Bundesbank can be calculated by adding to this total the Germany, only saving deposits. 
11*II Overall monetary survey in the euro area

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
E U R O S Y S T E M
Monthly Report
August 2010
II Overall monetary survey in the euro area
 
2 Consolidated balance sheet of monetary financial institutions (MFIs) (cont’d) *
 
 
 
Liabilities (cont’d)
Deposits of non-banks (non-MFIs) in the euro area (cont’d)  
 
General government Repo transactions Debt securities
with non-banks
Other general government in the euro area
With agreed At agreed
maturities of notice of  2 
Money
over of which market of which
Central 1 year and Enterprises fund denom-
End of govern- up to up to over up to over and shares inated
year/month ments Total Overnight 1 year 2 years 2 years 3 months 3 months Total households (net)  3 Total in euro
 Euro area ( € billion) 1
 
2008          May 173.9 263.5 120.8 103.6 5.3 24.5 1.6 7.6 333.3 327.3 755.8 2,845.5 2,227.6
         June 211.2 270.1 124.0 106.9 5.8 24.4 1.6 7.4 330.3 324.5 733.0 2,857.4 2,242.7
         July 180.8 265.7 118.8 107.9 5.8 24.4 1.6 7.2 333.1 329.0 743.2 2,879.1 2,261.7
         Aug 186.7 266.8 117.5 110.3 5.9 24.4 1.6 7.1 343.1 338.3 757.9 2,889.7 2,262.2
         Sep 191.2 270.1 121.1 110.1 5.9 24.6 1.5 6.8 345.6 341.0 731.1 2,907.8 2,268.8
         Oct 256.3 268.9 122.9 107.4 5.8 24.8 1.5 6.6 351.0 347.4 729.8 2,891.8 2,210.8
         Nov 326.2 277.6 129.3 110.2 5.7 24.5 1.5 6.4 336.6 333.4 739.7 2,872.1 2,208.8
         Dec 259.8 263.5 124.4 101.7 4.9 24.7 1.6 6.1 330.1 327.4 725.7 2,831.6 2,227.4
2009          Jan 325.3 265.1 125.9 99.4 5.0 24.6 2.0 8.2 324.0 321.4 759.7 2,825.3 2,195.2
         Feb 339.3 267.4 130.3 97.0 5.2 24.6 2.3 8.0 327.4 324.6 779.7 2,849.5 2,216.1
         Mar 351.9 264.2 134.9 89.3 4.6 24.9 2.6 7.9 338.5 335.5 780.6 2,802.6 2,201.2
         Apr 337.6 263.8 139.9 83.8 4.8 24.9 2.8 7.7 338.2 335.4 781.5 2,813.4 2,197.5
         May 331.7 263.2 138.1 84.7 4.9 25.0 3.0 7.5 336.2 333.4 771.3 2,809.1 2,216.3
         June 352.4 266.3 146.0 80.3 4.6 25.0 3.1 7.3 347.3 344.5 741.7 2,807.9 2,205.1
         July 298.4 262.1 146.0 74.9 4.9 25.5 3.5 7.2 321.3 318.9 758.0 2,811.2 2,210.5
         Aug 274.6 262.3 148.3 72.3 5.1 25.7 3.8 7.1 310.8 308.8 759.4 2,807.5 2,204.3
         Sep 295.3 262.3 154.7 65.9 5.2 25.7 3.9 6.8 335.2 333.0 740.5 2,778.6 2,194.4
         Oct 317.7 258.8 151.7 65.1 5.2 26.0 4.2 6.6 309.4 307.2 734.9 2,765.6 2,183.8
         Nov 304.1 261.5 158.1 61.8 5.0 26.1 4.1 6.4 314.9 312.7 721.8 2,760.5 2,180.2
         Dec 246.8 243.6 143.9 58.8 4.8 25.9 4.0 6.2 327.5 324.8 646.9 2,762.4 2,175.5
2010          Jan 277.4 247.1 144.4 56.8 4.8 28.2 4.3 8.6 307.7 306.1 651.9 2,808.9 2,191.7
         Feb 273.5 249.6 146.6 56.8 4.8 28.4 4.7 8.4 323.0 321.5 643.7 2,803.6 2,170.3
         Mar 267.5 247.1 142.2 58.8 4.6 28.5 4.9 8.1 342.6 340.8 628.1 2,837.9 2,199.9
         Apr 247.6 245.9 141.1 58.6 4.5 28.6 5.1 7.9 362.5 360.4 633.7 2,853.2 2,201.8
         May 284.3 253.4 145.7 61.6 4.4 28.4 5.4 7.8 366.8 364.8 629.8 2,877.9 2,188.2
         June 305.3 261.2 149.9 64.4 3.9 30.0 5.5 7.6 403.3 401.8 604.8 2,857.5 2,170.9
 German contribution ( € billion) 
2008          May 39.7 122.9 24.3 72.2 4.3 20.8 0.9 0.4 56.0 56.0 17.8 848.4 630.4
         June 39.4 128.8 26.3 75.5 4.8 21.0 0.9 0.4 63.9 63.9 17.7 842.9 626.2
         July 37.3 126.9 23.4 76.7 4.5 21.1 0.8 0.3 58.1 58.1 17.7 842.4 619.3
         Aug 37.3 128.6 24.6 77.1 4.6 21.1 0.8 0.3 63.1 63.1 17.3 846.5 619.4
         Sep 38.0 128.4 25.0 76.4 4.6 21.3 0.8 0.3 70.9 70.9 16.9 845.5 607.4
         Oct 36.6 125.1 25.0 73.2 4.5 21.3 0.8 0.3 69.8 69.8 13.0 853.5 600.2
         Nov 36.7 130.8 28.7 75.7 4.4 21.0 0.8 0.3 71.0 71.0 12.3 854.6 607.1
         Dec 36.7 129.9 32.0 72.0 3.6 21.2 0.8 0.3 61.1 61.1 11.5 819.1 596.4
2009          Jan 37.3 125.4 32.2 67.2 3.6 21.1 1.0 0.4 67.4 67.4 11.1 822.0 575.4
         Feb 45.4 128.6 37.1 65.0 3.9 21.1 1.0 0.4 74.0 74.0 12.0 814.7 563.9
         Mar 48.6 122.2 36.3 59.5 3.4 21.4 1.1 0.5 87.7 87.7 11.4 779.4 542.7
         Apr 62.7 124.6 41.4 56.8 3.5 21.3 1.2 0.5 92.6 92.6 11.2 782.5 531.5
         May 74.7 125.1 41.0 57.6 3.5 21.3 1.2 0.5 90.9 90.9 10.9 776.7 538.0
         June 65.8 123.7 43.0 54.3 3.2 21.3 1.3 0.6 93.4 93.4 10.7 764.5 521.5
         July 60.0 116.5 40.3 49.4 3.3 21.5 1.4 0.6 82.4 82.4 9.6 754.9 510.6
         Aug 50.2 114.9 41.1 46.6 3.4 21.5 1.6 0.6 71.7 71.7 9.5 755.1 507.7
         Sep 47.9 111.2 42.4 41.7 3.4 21.5 1.6 0.7 83.7 83.7 9.6 734.0 498.1
         Oct 49.3 108.5 41.6 39.5 3.4 21.7 1.6 0.7 83.3 83.3 9.5 727.1 492.8
         Nov 41.6 110.9 44.1 39.3 3.3 21.7 1.7 0.7 81.0 81.0 9.3 713.6 483.0
         Dec 32.7 107.3 40.7 39.5 3.2 21.4 1.8 0.7 80.5 80.5 8.7 703.3 470.7
2010          Jan 26.6 107.0 40.3 37.4 3.1 23.7 1.7 0.7 68.2 68.2 9.4 712.0 466.2
         Feb 22.7 111.1 43.4 38.4 3.1 23.7 1.7 0.7 78.9 78.9 9.2 711.0 456.3
         Mar 21.2 107.9 39.6 39.1 3.0 23.7 1.8 0.7 79.8 79.8 8.6 714.4 458.2
         Apr 21.4 105.4 37.4 38.8 2.9 23.8 1.8 0.7 100.7 100.7 8.4 715.8 451.0
         May 23.0 112.0 42.2 40.6 2.8 23.7 2.0 0.7 101.4 101.4 8.8 733.9 451.9
         June 21.9 118.8 45.4 43.2 2.4 25.0 2.0 0.7 102.7 102.7 8.1 729.1 450.8
*Monetary financial institutions (MFIs) comprise banks (including building 5Excluding liabilities arising from securities issued. — 6After deduction of
and loan associations), money market funds, and the European Central inter-MFI participations. — 7The German contributions to the Eurosystem’s
Bank and national central banks (the Eurosystem). — 1Source: ECB. — 2In monetary aggregates should on no account be interpreted as national
Germany, only savings deposits. — 3Excluding holdings of MFIs; for the monetary aggregates and are therefore not comparable with the erstwhile
German contribution, excluding German MFIs’ portfolios of securities issued German money stocks M1, M2 or M3. — 8including DM banknotes still in
by MFIs in the euro area. — 4In Germany, bank debt securities with circulation (see also footnote 4 on p 10*). — 9For the German contribution,
maturities of up to one year are classed as money market paper. — the difference between the volume of euro banknotes actually issued
12*II Overall monetary survey in the euro area

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2010
II Overall monetary survey in the euro area
 
 
 
 
 
 Memo item
 Other liability items Monetary aggregates  7 
 (From 2002, German contribution
issued (net)  3 excludes currency in circulation)
With maturities of
of which Monetary
Intra- liabilities
Eurosystem- of central
liability/ govern-
over Liabilities Excess claim Monetary ments
1 year and to non- Capital of related to capital (Post
up to up to over euro-area and inter-MFI banknote forma- Office, End of
1 year  4 2 years 2 years residents  5 reserves  6 liabilities Total  8 issue  9 M1 10 M2 11 M3 12 tion 13 year/month Treasury)  14 
Euro area ( € billion) 1
 
159.6 125.5 2,560.4 5,134.8 1,488.0 − 33.8 3,157.3 − 3,867.3 7,681.2 9,054.3 6,084.2 110.9 2008          May
151.9 130.3 2,575.2 4,962.7 1,494.4 − 50.6 3,204.0 − 3,914.3 7,727.1 9,071.2 6,120.3 112.0          June
149.1 137.7 2,592.3 5,005.3 1,517.5 − 48.6 3,110.4 − 3,838.3 7,743.1 9,104.9 6,163.0 111.0          July
140.5 137.4 2,611.8 5,119.4 1,528.7 − 39.3 3,142.4 − 3,789.7 7,752.3 9,129.9 6,197.7 109.9          Aug 
146.9 140.3 2,620.6 5,179.1 1,563.8 − 33.9 3,241.5 − 3,876.4 7,832.7 9,195.3 6,228.6 108.8          Sep 
140.4 136.4 2,615.0 5,291.3 1,570.2 − 11.3 3,590.6 − 3,944.0 7,964.6 9,321.2 6,236.5 106.3          Oct 
136.8 137.9 2,597.4 5,166.7 1,609.1 − 37.0 3,744.8 − 3,969.0 8,011.1 9,361.5 6,283.7 109.5          Nov 
138.5 129.1 2,564.1 4,782.1 1,615.2 − 79.9 3,562.7 − 4,035.3 8,095.0 9,417.6 6,299.3 115.1          Dec 
93.7 123.6 2,607.9 5,001.0 1,652.2 − 100.0 3,557.8 − 4,095.8 8,094.0 9,394.6 6,421.3 106.6 2009          Jan 
88.7 126.7 2,634.1 4,863.6 1,666.0 − 98.4 3,553.4 − 4,102.1 8,086.5 9,408.5 6,474.6 103.6          Feb 
66.2 128.7 2,607.7 4,646.8 1,643.4 − 88.7 3,511.1 − 4,131.0 8,086.6 9,399.9 6,447.6 105.5          Mar 
65.8 140.2 2,607.4 4,674.2 1,646.1 − 87.3 3,476.2 − 4,197.7 8,157.5 9,482.6 6,468.2 106.2          Apr 
53.8 145.1 2,610.2 4,516.7 1,656.6 − 108.3 3,331.6 − 4,220.9 8,149.7 9,455.5 6,504.7 107.4          May
38.9 143.6 2,625.4 4,439.5 1,689.6 − 69.4 3,452.3 − 4,311.7 8,178.6 9,449.5 6,575.0 108.7          June
25.6 146.0 2,639.7 4,386.5 1,697.9 − 65.0 3,509.5 − 4,311.0 8,162.5 9,412.9 6,610.8 109.7          July
12.3 144.7 2,650.4 4,311.9 1,716.7 − 75.2 3,538.1 − 4,317.6 8,145.3 9,372.0 6,647.0 109.6          Aug 
7.3 141.6 2,629.7 4,238.8 1,739.9 − 71.4 3,522.6 − 4,379.3 8,145.9 9,370.2 6,665.1 108.7          Sep 
− 1.4 140.9 2,626.1 4,229.8 1,746.8 − 97.6 3,490.5 − 4,434.5 8,170.7 9,354.2 6,671.5 108.6          Oct 
− 2.2 137.0 2,625.7 4,216.4 1,780.6 − 61.4 3,616.3 − 4,472.1 8,162.2 9,333.0 6,714.1 110.2          Nov 
3.9 129.5 2,629.0 4,240.0 1,802.3 − 29.0 3,369.6 − 4,559.5 8,270.7 9,377.7 6,777.4 117.2          Dec 
2.6 129.7 2,676.6 4,360.4 1,798.1 − 29.1 3,436.2 − 4,557.3 8,230.0 9,321.9 6,835.2 107.8 2010          Jan 
1.2 124.6 2,677.8 4,423.5 1,814.1 − 12.2 3,523.4 − 4,542.5 8,209.2 9,301.8 6,862.7 107.8          Feb 
12.0 122.9 2,703.0 4,424.5 1,831.7 − 49.0 3,556.6 − 4,547.0 8,206.9 9,312.4 6,908.3 106.1          Mar 
16.2 120.4 2,716.6 4,550.2 1,840.5 − 67.2 3,669.7 − 4,629.1 8,264.0 9,396.8 6,946.9 107.8          Apr 
22.2 107.1 2,748.6 4,705.7 1,877.4 − 49.0 3,973.7 − 4,663.1 8,293.0 9,418.9 7,015.5 109.4          May
22.6 102.3 2,732.6 4,619.5 1,947.1 − 20.3 3,848.1 − 4,716.4 8,325.3 9,458.3 7,159.6 110.2          June
 German contribution ( € billion) 
19.6 51.6 777.3 824.7 369.6 − 197.6 693.0 106.3 788.1 1,780.6 1,925.6 1,997.6 − 2008          May
13.3 53.9 775.8 789.2 375.0 − 228.6 698.8 107.2 796.3 1,782.2 1,931.0 2,000.4 −          June
12.2 54.3 775.9 783.7 381.7 − 223.0 702.7 107.4 773.9 1,790.4 1,932.6 2,006.2 −          July
13.7 50.9 782.0 803.1 382.3 − 241.0 724.7 109.8 776.2 1,804.4 1,949.4 2,011.0 −          Aug 
13.5 49.5 782.5 850.4 391.3 − 238.3 747.6 111.8 793.1 1,817.9 1,968.8 2,016.5 −          Sep 
19.2 45.6 788.7 862.4 388.3 − 248.6 776.8 119.3 823.6 1,863.0 2,010.7 2,019.9 −          Oct 
33.2 45.7 775.7 815.4 395.6 − 309.6 786.2 120.6 832.8 1,878.8 2,040.9 2,015.9 −          Nov 
41.9 37.5 739.8 762.8 406.3 − 334.6 785.4 121.8 832.8 1,883.0 2,034.9 2,025.6 −          Dec 
32.7 33.5 755.8 791.6 414.8 − 353.2 770.3 139.2 891.8 1,898.9 2,043.7 2,054.1 − 2009          Jan 
34.5 33.5 746.8 770.8 407.4 − 376.1 778.2 140.7 909.1 1,898.4 2,052.3 2,044.4 −          Feb 
19.3 31.4 728.8 751.2 400.0 − 382.6 813.6 140.4 906.4 1,878.9 2,028.6 2,022.7 −          Mar 
24.5 33.4 724.5 774.4 390.7 − 373.8 797.8 141.8 922.0 1,893.1 2,054.9 2,013.9 −          Apr 
25.8 32.5 718.4 727.4 389.3 − 361.3 767.1 142.2 925.5 1,883.5 2,043.6 2,010.3 −          May
22.0 26.6 715.9 731.4 407.9 − 390.7 747.5 141.9 945.2 1,873.0 2,025.8 2,041.0 −          June
23.3 25.1 706.4 724.8 408.0 − 397.8 751.5 141.8 947.5 1,860.8 2,001.2 2,033.8 −          July
24.7 24.9 705.6 718.3 408.3 − 407.6 762.6 143.4 960.2 1,859.9 1,990.7 2,035.8 −          Aug 
26.3 23.2 684.5 690.3 409.6 − 396.2 769.8 144.9 980.3 1,856.9 1,999.7 2,020.1 −          Sep 
23.7 21.9 681.5 678.5 411.0 − 388.6 773.6 146.5 1,008.0 1,857.8 1,996.2 2,019.8 −          Oct 
21.5 22.4 669.7 674.6 424.7 − 384.9 773.7 146.8 1,031.9 1,867.7 2,001.8 2,024.8 −          Nov 
23.1 17.0 663.2 663.8 423.6 − 390.1 766.7 146.8 1,015.9 1,865.7 1,994.9 2,016.8 −          Dec 
25.4 17.2 669.3 693.8 419.4 − 364.7 755.0 147.6 1,045.8 1,872.9 1,993.1 2,019.7 − 2010          Jan 
27.4 16.7 666.9 703.0 424.6 − 394.6 737.4 149.6 1,046.5 1,872.4 2,004.6 2,026.0 −          Feb 
27.3 15.3 671.8 721.0 424.3 − 419.9 761.1 150.2 1,031.8 1,859.6 1,990.6 2,031.8 −          Mar 
27.5 14.7 673.7 777.7 429.9 − 411.7 753.1 151.1 1,072.5 1,881.6 2,032.7 2,037.4 −          Apr 
26.7 15.3 692.0 847.8 431.1 − 469.8 764.6 151.7 1,085.6 1,891.9 2,044.0 2,050.0 −          May
23.4 13.1 692.6 806.4 431.2 − 480.3 804.2 150.9 1,087.1 1,894.5 2,041.8 2,050.1 −          June
by the Bundesbank and the amount disclosed in accordance with the (excluding central governments’ deposits) and (for the euro area) central
accounting regime chosen by the Eurosystem (see also footnote 3 on governments’ monetary liabilities with such maturities. — 12M2 plus repo
banknote circulation in Table III.2). — 10Overnight deposits (excluding transactions, money market fund shares, money market paper and debt
central governments’ deposits), and (for the euro area) currency in securities up to 2 years. — 13Deposits with agreed maturities of over 2
circulation, central governments’ overnight monetary liabilities, which are years and at agreed notice of over 3 months, debt securities with matur ities
not included in the consolidated balance sheet. — 11M1 plus deposits with of over 2 years, capital and reserves. — 14 Non-existent in Germany. 
agreed maturities of up to 2 years and at agreed notice of up to 3 months
13*II Overall monetary survey in the euro area

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
E U R O S Y S T E M
Monthly Report
August 2010
II  Overall monetary survey in the euro area
  
 3  Banking system’s liquidity position  * 
Stocks
  
€ billion; period averages of daily positions
Liquidity-providing factors Liquidity-absorbing factors
Monetary policy operations of the Eurosystem
Credit
institutions‘
current
account
Net assets Longer- Other Other balances
Reserve in gold Main term Marginal liquidity- liquidity- Banknotes Central Other (including
maintenance and foreign refinancing refinancing lending providing Deposit absorbing in government factors minimum Base
period currency operations operations facility facility deposits (net)  6 reserves)  7 money  8 operations  3 operations  4 circulation  5 
ending in  1 
Eurosystem  2  
  
2008          Jan 343.8 255.7 268.8 0.3 − 1.1 68.4 668.2 46.4 − 116.4 200.9 870.2
         Feb 353.6 173.8 268.5 0.2 − 0.4 0.6 651.7 51.7 − 110.7 202.4 854.5
         Mar 343.3 181.3 268.5 0.1 0.3 0.3 − 653.2 59.7 − 125.0 205.3 858.7
         Apr 349.4 181.5 278.6 0.1 2.6 0.6 0.4 662.1 66.4 − 124.8 207.5 870.3
         May 364.5 174.4 295.0 0.1 − 0.3 0.8 667.6 68.8 − 112.2 208.6 876.6
         June 375.0 172.8 287.9 0.3 − 0.2 0.5 671.4 67.3 − 111.5 208.1 879.7
         July 376.4 185.4 275.4 0.1 − 0.4 0.5 677.2 64.9 − 118.3 212.7 890.3
         Aug 374.5 166.3 299.3 0.1 − 0.3 0.6 686.1 61.3 − 123.0 214.8 901.2
         Sep 376.6 163.5 300.0 0.1 − 0.6 0.7 685.0 61.1 − 121.2 214.0 899.5
         Oct 417.3 174.1 334.3 7.5 5.9 19.9 45.5 684.3 55.2 − 82.6 216.8 921.0
         Nov 549.0 301.6 452.5 12.7 4.2 213.7 2.3 722.1 85.0 78.2 218.6 1 154.4
         Dec 580.5 337.3 457.2 2.7 − 200.9 4.9 731.1 107.8 114.3 218.7 1 150.7
2009          Jan 581.3 219.2 613.6 2.9 − 238.5 3.3 753.1 99.9 100.6 221.5 1 213.1
         Feb 547.4 224.9 551.4 2.1 − 175.4 6.1 740.2 102.7 79.3 222.1 1 137.7
         Mar 512.7 224.3 472.4 1.6 − 95.5 4.0 741.5 110.1 41.4 218.6 1 055.5
         Apr 508.0 230.5 443.1 1.1 − 57.8 3.7 747.3 139.0 13.3 221.6 1 026.6
         May 512.4 239.7 426.9 0.7 − 42.7 3.1 757.5 141.9 13.7 220.8 1 021.0
         June 487.9 238.8 400.6 0.7 − 22.3 2.1 759.8 141.7 − 15.8 217.9 1 000.0
         July 457.1 221.4 504.9 1.3 − 119.7 9.9 763.1 137.9 − 65.1 219.2 1 102.0
         Aug 433.6 94.1 694.0 0.3 2.8 185.1 22.1 770.8 133.9 − 103.9 216.9 1 172.8
         Sep 427.6 74.8 645.4 0.3 8.4 136.7 18.5 769.1 125.7 − 110.4 216.9 1 122.7
         Oct 421.4 79.1 616.9 0.3 14.3 109.6 12.9 768.8 139.0 − 113.1 214.7 1 093.1
         Nov 413.0 52.3 626.1 0.3 20.1 86.5 12.0 770.7 148.7 − 118.9 212.8 1 070.0
         Dec 407.6 55.8 593.4 0.7 24.6 65.7 9.9 775.2 150.1 − 130.2 211.4 1 052.3
2010          Jan 413.0 60.6 648.4 0.4 28.4 147.0 8.1 796.8 119.8 − 132.1 211.2 1 155.0
         Feb 425.6 59.7 662.2 0.2 33.5 168.3 13.3 783.6 122.6 − 117.5 210.9 1 162.8
         Mar 426.9 80.5 641.1 0.9 38.0 186.4 10.5 784.6 113.2 − 119.3 211.8 1 182.9
         Apr 439.8 77.7 650.5 0.4 43.6 200.7 8.4 792.9 113.6 − 116.1 212.5 1 206.1
         May 457.0 76.7 666.4 0.9 49.4 218.2 11.4 796.6 112.1 − 100.3 212.4 1 227.2
         June 462.4 110.0 706.7 0.3 86.9 288.8 34.1 806.2 123.1 − 98.4 212.5 1 307.5
         July 500.9 167.5 573.2 0.3 140.2 230.4 54.4 813.0 126.5 − 56.5 214.4 1 257.8
Deutsche Bundesbank
2008          Jan 91.5 102.1 134.6 0.1 − 0.6 26.4 180.6 0.1 73.7 46.9 228.1
         Feb 96.0 60.8 130.6 0.0 − 0.2 0.1 176.2 0.0 63.3 47.7 224.1
         Mar 90.8 59.8 122.5 0.0 0.1 0.2 − 177.5 0.1 46.9 48.6 226.3
         Apr 92.9 76.7 109.9 0.0 1.5 0.5 − 179.7 0.0 52.4 48.6 228.7
         May 99.6 75.7 112.7 0.0 − 0.2 0.2 181.0 0.0 57.9 48.6 229.8
         June 104.4 73.5 112.8 0.1 − 0.1 0.1 182.7 0.1 58.9 49.1 231.8
         July 102.8 79.4 107.2 0.0 − 0.1 0.1 183.6 0.1 55.9 49.5 233.2
         Aug 99.6 70.8 111.9 0.0 − 0.1 0.0 185.5 0.0 46.5 50.1 235.7
         Sep 100.6 76.7 105.2 0.1 − 0.2 0.1 185.7 0.1 46.2 50.2 236.2
         Oct 114.4 74.8 118.6 0.9 3.6 10.1 8.6 186.2 0.2 55.9 51.2 247.5
         Nov 138.6 103.6 163.2 2.7 2.0 88.8 1.1 198.9 0.3 68.7 52.3 339.9
         Dec 146.9 105.1 158.5 2.0 − 84.2 1.1 197.9 0.2 77.2 52.0 334.0
2009          Jan 141.2 72.4 198.1 2.4 − 91.5 1.2 195.8 4.1 68.5 52.8 340.2
         Feb 132.9 79.4 178.5 1.3 − 77.9 2.2 185.0 2.5 71.4 53.2 316.1
         Mar 135.3 72.9 147.8 1.2 − 51.9 1.7 185.3 9.6 55.7 52.9 290.1
         Apr 142.9 74.7 122.8 0.7 − 38.9 1.6 186.3 14.6 46.2 53.4 278.7
         May 150.7 87.5 111.9 0.1 − 24.1 1.3 189.1 26.2 56.3 53.3 266.5
         June 145.7 95.0 103.4 0.7 − 15.4 0.6 189.3 32.3 54.3 52.8 257.4
         July 138.0 81.0 141.5 0.6 − 49.4 4.5 190.2 23.5 40.4 53.2 292.8
         Aug 128.6 47.6 189.1 0.1 0.8 70.1 4.9 192.0 23.5 23.6 52.2 314.2
         Sep 126.0 40.6 178.0 0.1 2.9 51.8 4.3 192.3 23.6 23.4 52.2 296.4
         Oct 124.2 37.3 175.9 0.2 4.9 49.4 3.0 192.5 23.7 22.4 51.5 293.3
         Nov 120.7 34.6 178.8 0.2 6.2 34.2 4.3 192.5 23.6 34.8 51.0 277.7
         Dec 116.3 33.7 171.1 0.6 7.2 25.7 2.7 193.3 18.8 37.8 50.5 269.5
2010          Jan 112.1 42.8 168.9 0.1 7.9 44.8 2.3 198.4 10.7 25.3 50.3 293.5
         Feb 112.3 42.2 168.6 0.1 8.9 50.3 5.2 195.6 5.4 25.4 50.2 296.1
         Mar 112.6 51.8 157.9 0.8 10.0 67.8 5.0 196.5 2.1 11.8 50.0 314.3
         Apr 116.2 40.9 164.9 0.2 11.5 69.8 3.4 198.0 0.3 11.9 50.3 318.2
         May 121.1 40.5 164.7 0.1 12.8 74.9 4.2 199.0 0.7 10.2 50.2 324.1
         June 122.2 43.0 166.4 0.0 22.1 113.1 17.1 201.5 0.8 − 29.2 50.5 365.0
         July 133.9 55.2 112.8 0.1 32.7 81.0 22.3 202.5 0.4 − 22.7 51.2 334.7
Discrepancies may arise from rounding. — *The banking system’s liquidity programme and the Eurosystem’s securities markets programme. — 4From
position is defined as the current account holdings in euro of euro-area Aug. 2009, includes liquidity absorbed as a result of the Eurosystem’s
credit institutions with the Eurosystem. Amounts are derived from the conso- foreign exchange swap operations. — 5From 2002, euro banknotes and oth-
lidated financial statement of the Eurosystem and the financial statement er banknotes which have been issued by the national central banks of the
of the Bundesbank. — 1Figures are daily averages for the reserve mainte- Eurosystem and which are still in circulation. In accordance with the ac-
nance period ending in the month indicated. — 2Source: ECB. — 3Includes counting procedure chosen by the Eurosystem for the issue of euro bank-
liquidity provided under the Eurosystem’s covered bond purchase notes, 8% of the total value of the euro banknotes in circulation are alloca-
14*II  Overall monetary survey in the euro area

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2010
II  Overall monetary survey in the euro area
  
  
Flows
  
Liquidity-providing factors Liquidity-absorbing factors
Monetary policy operations of the Eurosystem
Credit
institutions‘
current
account
Net assets Longer- Other Other balances
in gold Main term Marginal liquidity- liquidity- Banknotes Central Other (including Reserve
and foreign refinancing refinancing lending providing Deposit absorbing in government factors minimum Base maintenance
currency operations operations facility facility deposits (net)  6 reserves)  7 money  8 period operations  3 operations  4 circulation  5 
ending in  1 
Eurosystem  2  
  
+ 16.3 + 82.7 − 9.8 − 0.0 − + 0.7 + 66.2 + 23.6 − 15.5 + 10.2 + 4.1 + 28.3 2008          Jan 
+ 9.8 − 81.9 − 0.3 − 0.1 − − 0.7 − 67.8 − 16.5 + 5.3 + 5.7 + 1.5 − 15.7          Feb 
− 10.3 + 7.5 − 0.0 − 0.1 + 0.3 − 0.1 − 0.6 + 1.5 + 8.0 − 14.3 + 2.9 + 4.2          Mar 
+ 6.1 + 0.2 + 10.1 + 0.0 + 2.3 + 0.3 + 0.4 + 8.9 + 6.7 + 0.2 + 2.2 + 11.6          Apr 
+ 15.1 − 7.1 + 16.4 − 0.0 − 2.6 − 0.3 + 0.4 + 5.5 + 2.4 + 12.6 + 1.1 + 6.3          May
+ 10.5 − 1.6 − 7.1 + 0.2 − − 0.1 − 0.3 + 3.8 − 1.5 + 0.7 − 0.5 + 3.1          June
+ 1.4 + 12.6 − 12.5 − 0.2 − + 0.2 + 0.0 + 5.8 − 2.4 − 6.8 + 4.6 + 10.6          July
− 1.9 − 19.1 + 23.9 − 0.0 − − 0.1 + 0.1 + 8.9 − 3.6 − 4.7 + 2.1 + 10.9          Aug 
+ 2.1 − 2.8 + 0.7 + 0.0 − + 0.3 + 0.1 − 1.1 − 0.2 + 1.8 − 0.8 − 1.7          Sep 
+ 40.7 + 10.6 + 34.3 + 7.4 + 5.9 + 19.3 + 44.8 − 0.7 − 5.9 + 38.6 + 2.8 + 21.5          Oct 
+ 131.7 + 127.5 + 118.2 + 5.2 − 1.7 +193.8 − 43.2 + 37.8 + 29.8 +160.8 + 1.8 + 233.4          Nov 
+ 31.5 + 35.7 + 4.7 − 10.0 − 4.2 − 12.8 + 2.6 + 9.0 + 22.8 + 36.1 + 0.1 − 3.7          Dec 
+ 0.8 − 118.1 + 156.4 + 0.2 − + 37.6 − 1.6 + 22.0 − 7.9 − 13.7 + 2.8 + 62.4 2009          Jan 
− 33.9 + 5.7 − 62.2 − 0.8 − − 63.1 + 2.8 − 12.9 + 2.8 − 21.3 + 0.6 − 75.4          Feb 
− 34.7 − 0.6 − 79.0 − 0.5 − − 79.9 − 2.1 + 1.3 + 7.4 − 37.9 − 3.5 − 82.2          Mar 
− 4.7 + 6.2 − 29.3 − 0.5 − − 37.7 − 0.3 + 5.8 + 28.9 − 28.1 + 3.0 − 28.9          Apr 
+ 4.4 + 9.2 − 16.2 − 0.4 − − 15.1 − 0.6 + 10.2 + 2.9 + 0.4 − 0.8 − 5.6          May
− 24.5 − 0.9 − 26.3 − 0.0 − − 20.4 − 1.0 + 2.3 − 0.2 − 29.5 − 2.9 − 21.0          June
− 30.8 − 17.4 + 104.3 + 0.6 − + 97.4 + 7.8 + 3.3 − 3.8 − 49.3 + 1.3 + 102.0          July
− 23.5 − 127.3 + 189.1 − 1.0 + 2.8 + 65.4 + 12.2 + 7.7 − 4.0 − 38.8 − 2.3 + 70.8          Aug 
− 6.0 − 19.3 − 48.6 − 0.0 + 5.6 − 48.4 − 3.6 − 1.7 − 8.2 − 6.5 − 0.0 − 50.1          Sep 
− 6.2 + 4.3 − 28.5 + 0.0 + 5.9 − 27.1 − 5.6 − 0.3 + 13.3 − 2.7 − 2.2 − 29.6          Oct 
− 8.4 − 26.8 + 9.2 − 0.0 + 5.8 − 23.1 − 0.9 + 1.9 + 9.7 − 5.8 − 1.9 − 23.1          Nov 
− 5.4 + 3.5 − 32.7 + 0.4 + 4.5 − 20.8 − 2.1 + 4.5 + 1.4 − 11.3 − 1.4 − 17.7          Dec 
+ 5.4 + 4.8 + 55.0 − 0.3 + 3.8 + 81.3 − 1.8 + 21.6 − 30.3 − 1.9 − 0.2 + 102.7 2010          Jan 
+ 12.6 − 0.9 + 13.8 − 0.2 + 5.1 + 21.3 + 5.2 − 13.2 + 2.8 + 14.6 − 0.3 + 7.8          Feb 
+ 1.3 + 20.8 − 21.1 + 0.7 + 4.5 + 18.1 − 2.8 + 1.0 − 9.4 − 1.8 + 0.9 + 20.1          Mar 
+ 12.9 − 2.8 + 9.4 − 0.5 + 5.6 + 14.3 − 2.1 + 8.3 + 0.4 + 3.2 + 0.7 + 23.2          Apr 
+ 17.2 − 1.0 + 15.9 + 0.5 + 5.8 + 17.5 + 3.0 + 3.7 − 1.5 + 15.8 − 0.1 + 21.1          May
+ 5.4 + 33.3 + 40.3 − 0.6 + 37.5 + 70.6 + 22.7 + 9.6 + 11.0 + 1.9 + 0.1 + 80.3          June
+ 38.5 + 57.5 − 133.5 − 0.0 + 53.3 − 58.4 + 20.3 + 6.8 + 3.4 + 41.9 + 1.9 − 49.7          July
Deutsche Bundesbank
+ 6.9 + 28.9 + 1.0 − 0.1 − + 0.4 + 25.6 + 5.4 + 0.0 + 5.1 + 0.2 + 6.0 2008          Jan 
+ 4.5 − 41.3 − 4.0 − 0.1 − − 0.4 − 26.3 − 4.4 − 0.0 − 10.5 + 0.8 − 4.0          Feb 
− 5.2 − 1.0 − 8.1 + 0.0 + 0.1 − 0.0 − 0.1 + 1.3 + 0.0 − 16.3 + 0.9 + 2.2          Mar 
+ 2.1 + 16.9 − 12.5 + 0.0 + 1.4 + 0.3 − + 2.2 − 0.0 + 5.4 − 0.0 + 2.4          Apr 
+ 6.7 − 1.1 + 2.7 − 0.0 − 1.5 − 0.3 + 0.2 + 1.3 − 0.0 + 5.5 + 0.0 + 1.1          May
+ 4.8 − 2.1 + 0.1 + 0.1 − − 0.2 − 0.1 + 1.7 + 0.0 + 1.0 + 0.5 + 2.0          June
− 1.7 + 5.9 − 5.6 − 0.1 − + 0.1 − 0.0 + 0.9 + 0.0 − 2.9 + 0.4 + 1.4          July
− 3.2 − 8.6 + 4.7 − 0.0 − − 0.1 − 0.0 + 2.0 − 0.1 − 9.4 + 0.6 + 2.5          Aug 
+ 1.0 + 5.9 − 6.7 + 0.1 − + 0.1 + 0.1 + 0.2 + 0.0 − 0.3 + 0.1 + 0.4          Sep 
+ 13.8 − 1.9 + 13.5 + 0.8 + 3.6 + 10.0 + 8.5 + 0.5 + 0.1 + 9.7 + 0.9 + 11.4          Oct 
+ 24.2 + 28.8 + 44.6 + 1.9 − 1.6 + 78.6 − 7.5 + 12.7 + 0.1 + 12.8 + 1.1 + 92.4          Nov 
+ 8.3 + 1.5 − 4.6 − 0.8 − 2.0 − 4.6 + 0.0 − 1.0 − 0.2 + 8.5 − 0.3 − 5.9          Dec 
− 5.7 − 32.7 + 39.5 + 0.4 − + 7.3 + 0.1 − 2.1 + 4.0 − 8.7 + 0.9 + 6.1 2009          Jan 
− 8.3 + 7.0 − 19.5 − 1.0 − − 13.6 + 0.9 − 10.8 − 1.7 + 2.9 + 0.3 − 24.0          Feb 
+ 2.3 − 6.4 − 30.7 − 0.2 − − 26.1 − 0.4 + 0.3 + 7.2 − 15.7 − 0.2 − 26.0          Mar 
+ 7.6 + 1.8 − 25.1 − 0.5 − − 12.9 − 0.1 + 1.0 + 5.0 − 9.5 + 0.5 − 11.4          Apr 
+ 7.8 + 12.8 − 10.9 − 0.6 − − 14.8 − 0.3 + 2.7 + 11.6 + 10.1 − 0.2 − 12.2          May
− 5.0 + 7.5 − 8.5 + 0.5 − − 8.7 − 0.6 + 0.2 + 6.2 − 2.0 − 0.5 − 9.1          June
− 7.7 − 13.9 + 38.1 − 0.0 − + 34.1 + 3.8 + 0.9 − 8.9 − 13.9 + 0.4 + 35.4          July
− 9.3 − 33.5 + 47.6 − 0.5 + 0.8 + 20.6 + 0.4 + 1.8 + 0.0 − 16.8 − 1.0 + 21.5          Aug 
− 2.6 − 7.0 − 11.1 + 0.0 + 2.1 − 18.2 − 0.6 + 0.3 + 0.1 − 0.2 + 0.1 − 17.9          Sep 
− 1.8 − 3.3 − 2.1 + 0.0 + 2.0 − 2.5 − 1.2 + 0.2 + 0.1 − 1.0 − 0.8 − 3.1          Oct 
− 3.5 − 2.7 + 3.0 − 0.0 + 1.3 − 15.2 + 1.2 + 0.1 − 0.1 + 12.5 − 0.4 − 15.6          Nov 
− 4.4 − 0.9 − 7.7 + 0.4 + 1.0 − 8.5 − 1.6 + 0.7 − 4.8 + 3.0 − 0.5 − 8.2          Dec 
− 4.2 + 9.1 − 2.2 − 0.5 + 0.7 + 19.1 − 0.4 + 5.1 − 8.1 − 12.6 − 0.2 + 24.0 2010          Jan 
+ 0.2 − 0.6 − 0.3 + 0.0 + 1.0 + 5.5 + 3.0 − 2.8 − 5.2 + 0.1 − 0.1 + 2.6          Feb 
+ 0.3 + 9.6 − 10.6 + 0.7 + 1.1 + 17.4 − 0.3 + 0.9 − 3.3 − 13.6 − 0.1 + 18.2          Mar 
+ 3.6 − 10.8 + 7.0 − 0.7 + 1.5 + 2.0 − 1.6 + 1.6 − 1.8 + 0.1 + 0.3 + 3.9          Apr 
+ 4.9 − 0.4 − 0.2 − 0.1 + 1.3 + 5.0 + 0.8 + 1.0 + 0.5 − 1.7 − 0.1 + 5.9          May
+ 1.1 + 2.5 + 1.7 − 0.0 + 9.3 + 38.2 + 12.9 + 2.5 + 0.1 − 39.4 + 0.3 + 40.9          June
+ 11.7 + 12.2 − 53.6 + 0.0 + 10.7 − 32.1 + 5.1 + 1.0 − 0.4 + 6.5 + 0.8 − 30.3          July
ted on a monthly basis to the ECB. The counterpart of this adjustment is has put into circulation is likewise shown under “Other factors”. From 2003
shown under “Other factors”. The remaining 92% of the value of the euro euro banknotes only. — 6Remaining items in the consolidated financial
banknotes in circulation is allocated, likewise on a monthly basis, to the statement of the Eurosystem and the financial statement of the
NCBs, with each NCB showing in its balance sheet the percentage of the Bundesbank. — 7Equal to the difference between the sum of liquidity-pro-
euro banknotes in circulation that corresponds to its paid-up share in the viding factors and the sum of liquidity-absorbing factors. — 8Calculated as
ECB’s capital. The difference between the value of the euro banknotes the sum of the “deposit facility”, “banknotes in circulation” and “credit
allocated to an NCB and the value of the euro banknotes which that NCB institutions’ current account holdings”. 
15*II  Overall monetary survey in the euro area

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
E U R O S Y S T E M
Monthly Report
August 2010
III Consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem
 
1 Assets *
 
 
€ billion
Claims on non-euro area Claims on non-euro area residents denominated
in foreign currency residents denominated in euro
Balances with
Claims on banks, security
On investments, euro area Balances Claims
reporting external loans residents with banks, arising from
date/ Gold and other denominated security the credit
End of Total and gold Receivables external in foreign investments facility under
month  1 assets receivables Total from the IMF assets currency Total and loans ERM II
 Eurosystem 2
 
2009 Dec                  4 1,759.4 238.1 192.7 62.2 130.4 36.0 15.7 15.7 −
                              11 1,744.5 238.1 191.9 62.2 129.7 34.9 15.2 15.2 −
                              18 1,842.4 238.1 192.1 62.3 129.8 33.3 15.7 15.7 −
                              25 1,852.5 238.1 191.9 61.4 130.6 31.7 15.7 15.7 −
2010 Jan                  1 3 1,904.9 3 266.9 3 195.5 62.8 3 132.7 3 32.2 15.2 15.2 −
                                8 1,879.6 266.9 196.1 62.8 133.3 31.4 16.2 16.2 −
                              15 1,870.6 266.9 196.4 62.8 133.6 28.2 17.3 17.3 −
                              22 1,870.3 266.9 195.1 62.8 132.3 27.8 17.4 17.4 −
                              29 1,877.7 266.9 193.8 62.8 130.9 28.3 18.1 18.1 −
         Feb                  5 1,874.5 266.9 194.5 62.8 131.7 29.0 17.8 17.8 −
                              12 1,874.7 266.9 193.4 62.8 130.6 29.2 17.1 17.1 −
                              19 1,880.9 266.9 195.7 63.0 132.7 28.8 17.3 17.3 −
                              26 1,889.0 266.9 197.6 64.4 133.2 28.3 15.4 15.4 −
         Mar                  5 1,890.3 266.9 197.5 64.4 133.1 27.8 16.1 16.1 −
                              12 1,886.7 266.9 197.2 64.3 132.9 28.3 15.7 15.7 −
                              19 1,889.7 266.9 198.0 64.2 133.8 28.4 16.1 16.1 −
                              26 1,894.9 266.9 198.6 64.4 134.2 28.5 15.7 15.7 −
2010 Apr                  1 3 1,942.5 3 286.7 3 210.6 3 66.5 3 144.1 3 29.3 17.6 17.6 −
                                9 1,936.7 286.7 209.4 66.7 142.7 28.5 17.2 17.2 −
                              16 1,940.0 286.7 209.9 66.6 143.3 28.4 16.8 16.8 −
                              23 1,943.3 286.7 209.3 66.6 142.7 28.0 17.3 17.3 −
                              30 1,956.8 286.7 211.7 66.5 145.2 27.2 17.5 17.5 −
         May                 7 1,983.2 286.7 209.6 66.5 143.1 28.8 16.8 16.8 −
                              14 2,062.9 286.7 215.0 69.7 145.3 35.2 16.4 16.4 −
                              21 2,070.0 286.7 211.7 69.6 142.1 29.8 19.3 19.3 −
                              28 2,088.5 286.7 212.3 69.5 142.8 33.7 18.1 18.1 −
         June                 4 2,098.5 286.7 213.0 69.4 143.6 28.7 17.8 17.8 −
                              11 2,107.1 286.7 213.7 69.4 144.3 28.6 17.0 17.0 −
                              18 2,124.7 286.7 213.7 69.4 144.4 27.9 16.5 16.5 −
                              25 2,154.2 286.7 213.0 69.3 143.6 28.3 16.3 16.3 −
         July                 2 3 2,049.8 3 352.1 3 232.6 3 74.1 3 158.6 3 31.3 16.9 16.9 −
                                9 2,004.7 352.1 234.2 74.0 160.2 30.8 17.5 17.5 −
                              16 1,987.0 352.1 234.1 74.0 160.1 30.5 19.7 19.7 −
                              23 1,993.6 352.0 235.6 74.0 161.6 29.8 18.1 18.1 −
                              30 2,001.7 352.0 236.3 74.1 162.2 29.5 17.9 17.9 −
         Aug                  6 1,964.9 352.0 236.1 74.1 162.0 30.4 17.6 17.6 −
 Deutsche Bundesbank
2008          Sep 3 519.7 3 68.8 3 31.1 2.6 3 28.5 3 39.1 0.3 0.3 −
         Oct 591.6 68.8 34.5 2.6 31.9 50.5 0.3 0.3 −
         Nov 577.1 68.8 34.8 3.3 31.5 61.1 0.3 0.3 −
         Dec 3 612.9 3 68.2 3 31.0 3.3 3 27.7 63.3 0.3 0.3 −
2009          Jan 560.5 68.2 28.7 3.3 25.5 46.7 0.3 0.3 −
         Feb 547.5 68.2 29.0 3.3 25.7 45.3 0.3 0.3 −
         Mar 3 539.7 3 75.7 3 32.1 3.5 3 28.6 3 50.7 0.3 0.3 −
         Apr 540.5 75.7 32.7 3.5 29.2 42.0 0.3 0.3 −
         May 555.9 75.7 32.3 4.7 27.6 37.5 0.3 0.3 −
         June 3 628.3 3 73.0 31.7 4.5 27.2 3 30.8 0.3 0.3 −
         July 572.3 73.0 31.8 4.7 27.1 25.3 0.3 0.3 −
         Aug 571.2 73.0 41.6 15.1 26.5 24.0 0.3 0.3 −
         Sep 3 577.7 3 74.9 3 41.9 16.3 3 25.6 3 21.6 0.3 0.3 −
         Oct 557.2 74.9 42.5 16.6 25.9 16.9 0.3 0.3 −
         Nov 551.7 74.9 41.0 15.9 25.1 13.0 0.3 0.3 −
         Dec 3 588.2 3 83.9 41.6 16.0 25.6 4.4 0.3 0.3 −
2010          Jan 571.8 83.9 41.7 16.0 25.7 − 0.3 0.3 −
         Feb 591.6 83.9 42.4 16.7 25.7 −−−−
         Mar 3 608.6 3 90.2 3 44.7 3 17.2 3 27.5 −−−−
         Apr 615.5 90.2 44.8 17.2 27.6 −−−−
         May 673.4 90.2 45.5 17.9 27.6 0.1 − − −
         June 3 713.7 3 110.7 3 49.9 3 19.0 3 30.9 0.2 − − −
         July 625.3 110.6 49.9 19.1 30.8 0.2 − − −
 
*The consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem comprises the statements of the national central banks of the euro area member states
financial statement of the European Central Bank (ECB) and the financial (NCBs). The balance sheet items for foreign currency, securities, gold
16*III Consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2010
III Consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem
 
 
 
 
 
Lending to euro area credit institutions related to monetary policy operations Securities of euro area residents
denominated in euro in euro
 Other
 claims on
 euro area
Longer- Fine-  credit Securities General    On
Main re- term re- tuning Structural Credits institutions held for government    reporting
financing financing reverse reverse Marginal related denomi- monetary debt deno-    date/
opera- opera- opera- opera- lending to margin nated in policy Other minated in Other    End of
Total tions tions tions tions facility calls euro Total purposes securities euro assets    month  1 
Eurosystem 2
 
648.1 58.8 589.1 − − 0.1 0.0 22.6 328.2 26.2 302.0 36.2 241.9 2009 Dec                  4
629.3 56.5 572.6 − − 0.2 0.0 24.4 328.9 26.7 302.3 36.2 245.5                               11
722.9 53.6 669.3 − − 0.0 0.0 24.8 329.2 27.7 301.5 36.2 250.0                               18
728.6 59.2 669.3 − − 0.0 0.0 25.8 329.5 28.5 301.0 36.2 254.9                               25
749.9 79.3 669.3 − − 1.3 0.0 26.3 3 328.7 28.8 3 299.9 36.2 3 254.2 2010 Jan                  1
724.0 54.7 669.3 − − 0.0 0.0 26.9 329.6 29.1 300.5 36.2 252.2                                 8
719.9 60.7 659.1 − − 0.0 0.0 27.3 327.2 29.9 297.3 36.2 251.3                               15
720.9 58.6 662.2 − − 0.1 0.0 28.5 328.8 32.1 296.8 36.2 248.7                               22
726.3 64.0 662.2 − − 0.1 0.0 26.7 331.2 33.5 297.7 36.2 250.2                               29
718.7 56.4 662.2 − − 0.1 0.0 26.9 332.6 34.8 297.8 36.1 251.9          Feb                  5
717.1 76.7 636.5 − − 3.9 0.0 27.4 334.0 36.1 297.9 36.1 253.4                               12
719.2 82.5 636.5 − − 0.1 0.0 27.6 333.9 37.4 333.9 36.1 255.4                               19
726.9 82.0 644.7 − − 0.2 0.0 26.7 335.8 38.7 297.1 36.1 255.3                               26
724.9 80.5 644.4 − − 0.1 0.0 26.4 336.7 39.6 297.1 36.1 257.9          Mar                  5
722.8 78.4 644.3 − − 0.1 0.0 27.2 338.9 41.5 297.3 36.1 253.5                               12
723.4 79.0 644.3 − − 0.1 0.0 25.4 340.3 42.4 297.8 36.1 255.0                               19
725.4 81.1 644.3 − − 0.0 0.0 27.2 342.9 43.5 299.4 36.1 253.6                               26
740.0 78.3 661.7 − − 0.1 0.0 26.7 345.2 44.4 300.8 36.1 3 250.4 2010 Apr                  1
730.9 71.5 659.3 − − 0.0 0.0 29.0 348.5 46.1 302.4 36.1 250.4                                 9
736.3 70.6 665.7 − − 0.0 0.0 31.7 351.0 47.2 303.8 36.1 243.1                               16
735.9 70.2 665.7 − − 0.0 0.0 32.7 352.1 48.5 303.6 36.1 245.0                               23
743.6 75.6 667.2 − − 0.8 0.0 32.7 354.7 50.2 304.5 35.6 247.0                               30
760.0 90.3 667.2 − − 2.4 0.0 33.9 360.2 51.6 308.5 35.6 251.7          May                  7
806.7 99.6 706.9 − − 0.2 0.0 36.7 377.3 68.7 308.6 35.6 253.4                               14
811.7 104.8 706.9 − − 0.0 0.0 39.9 387.1 79.8 307.3 35.6 248.2                               21
815.1 106.0 708.8 − − 0.3 0.0 40.4 398.2 90.0 308.2 35.6 248.3                               28
826.6 117.7 708.8 − − 0.0 0.0 37.6 400.7 96.2 304.5 35.6 251.9          June                  4
829.5 122.0 707.1 − − 0.4 0.0 40.5 406.5 103.7 302.7 35.6 249.1                               11
844.9 126.7 718.2 − − 0.0 0.0 39.4 410.4 109.6 300.8 35.6 249.8                               18
870.4 151.5 718.2 − − 0.6 0.0 42.2 414.4 115.1 299.4 35.6 247.4                               25
680.6 162.9 405.9 111.2 − 0.5 0.0 43.8 3 416.7 120.1 3 296.7 35.1 3 240.7          July                  2
635.0 229.1 405.9 − − 0.0 0.0 43.0 418.0 120.9 297.1 35.0 239.0                                 9
619.4 195.7 423.7 − − 0.0 0.0 42.6 417.1 121.2 295.9 35.0 236.5                               16
625.2 201.3 423.7 − − 0.0 0.2 44.4 418.5 121.4 297.1 35.0 235.0                               23
632.5 190.0 442.0 − − 0.4 0.1 42.9 417.8 121.5 296.3 35.0 237.7                               30
597.1 154.8 442.0 − − 0.1 0.1 41.2 418.7 121.5 297.3 35.0 236.9          Aug                  6
 Deutsche Bundesbank
223.5 69.2 153.5 − − 0.8 − 25. 2−−− 4 . 4 3 127.2 2008          Sep 
297.1 107.2 186.4 − − 3.5 − 38. 5−−− 4 . 4 97.4          Oct 
263.3 101.4 159.7 − − 2.2 − 23. 5−−− 4 . 4 120.9          Nov 
277.7 75.3 201.6 − − 0.8 − 22. 0−−− 4 . 4 3 146.0          Dec 
245.4 74.4 169.2 − − 1.8 − 3. 9−−− 4 . 4 162.9 2009          Jan 
219.4 75.4 143.4 − − 0.6 − 4. 4−−− 4 . 4 176.4          Feb 
186.7 71.6 114.6 − − 0.6 − 5. 0−−− 4 . 4 3 184.6          Mar 
194.6 83.6 110.6 − − 0.4 − 6. 0−−− 4 . 4 184.8          Apr 
225.0 121.5 103.4 − − 0.2 − 5.9 2.1 − 2.1 4.4 172.6          May
273.5 71.6 201.6 − − 0.3 − 6.5 4.4 − 4.4 4.4 3 203.8          June
231.8 48.8 182.9 − − 0.1 − 4.5 6.5 1.2 5.3 4.4 194.6          July
220.9 45.9 175.0 − − 0.1 − 6.0 8.5 3.2 5.3 4.4 192.4          Aug 
205.6 33.0 168.8 − − 3.8 − 6.8 10.6 5.3 5.3 4.4 211.6          Sep 
212.9 35.1 177.7 − − 0.1 − 6.8 11.6 6.4 5.3 4.4 186.8          Oct 
206.0 35.3 170.6 − − 0.0 − 6.9 12.9 7.6 5.3 4.4 192.3          Nov 
223.6 53.6 170.0 − − 0.0 − 7.1 13.2 7.9 5.3 4.4 209.6          Dec 
210.3 41.7 168.5 − − 0.0 − 7.7 14.1 8.8 5.3 4.4 209.4 2010          Jan 
209.1 51.6 157.3 − − 0.1 − 7.2 15.6 10.3 5.3 4.4 228.9          Feb 
206.1 40.9 164.7 − − 0.6 − 7.3 17.0 11.8 5.3 4.4 239.0          Mar 
206.1 41.6 164.5 − − 0.0 − 7.8 18.1 12.9 5.3 4.4 244.2          Apr 
210.2 43.3 166.8 − − 0.1 − 8.4 28.4 23.1 5.3 4.4 286.3          May
225.6 58.6 167.0 − − 0.0 − 8.8 33.4 28.1 5.3 4.4 280.8          June
115.0 61.7 53.3 − − 0.0 − 9.3 33.7 28.4 5.3 4.4 302.3          July
 
and financial instruments are valued at market rates at the end of the quar- for the Bundesbank: end-of month financial statement. — 2Source: ECB. —
ter.— 1For the Eurosystem: financial statements for specific weekly dates; 3 Changes are due mainly to revalutions at the end of the quarter. 
17*III Consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
E U R O S Y S T E M
Monthly Report
August 2010
III Consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem
 
2 Liabilities *
 
 
€ billion
Liabilities to euro area credit institutions related to Liabilities to
monetary policy operations denominated in euro other euro area residents
denominated in euro
 
Other
Current liabilities
accounts to euro-
On (covering Fine- area credit
reporting the tuning Deposits institutions Debt
date/ Banknotes minimum Fixed- reverse deno- certifi- General related to
End of Total in circu- reserve Deposit term opera- margin minated cates govern- Other
month  1 liabilities lation  2 Total system) facility deposits tions calls in euro issued Total ment liabilities
 Eurosystem 4
 
2009 Dec                  4 1,759.4 785.2 282.7 159.4 123.4 − − 0.0 0.4 − 150.9 142.2 8.7
                              11 1,744.5 789.4 274.7 242.6 32.1 − − 0.0 0.3 − 139.8 131.1 8.7
                              18 1,842.4 797.5 389.3 252.8 136.5 − − 0.0 0.3 − 113.3 104.6 8.7
                              25 1,852.5 807.2 368.7 204.6 164.1 − − 0.0 0.3 − 133.8 125.7 8.1
2010 Jan                  1 5 1,904.9 806.5 395.6 233.5 162.1 − − 0.0 0.3 − 129.7 120.5 9.3
                                8 1,879.6 796.4 387.8 160.7 227.1 − − 0.0 0.5 − 123.4 114.9 8.4
                              15 1,870.6 787.9 394.5 162.4 232.1 − − 0.0 0.5 − 119.1 110.5 8.6
                              22 1,870.3 783.4 387.3 244.2 143.1 − − − 0.3 − 133.0 124.4 8.6
                              29 1,877.7 783.5 384.8 219.5 165.3 − − 0.0 0.4 − 143.6 135.2 8.3
         Feb                  5 1,874.5 785.2 398.6 169.3 229.4 − − − 0.5 − 121.6 113.4 8.3
                              12 1,874.7 785.2 404.8 254.7 150.1 − − − 0.5 − 115.7 107.5 8.2
                              19 1,880.9 782.8 394.8 207.8 187.0 − − 0.0 0.4 − 131.5 123.5 8.1
                              26 1,889.0 784.3 402.5 199.8 202.7 − − − 0.6 − 134.3 126.2 8.1
         Mar                  5 1,890.3 788.4 423.7 164.0 259.8 − − 0.0 0.4 − 109.5 101.3 8.2
                              12 1,886.7 788.1 423.0 262.6 160.3 − − 0.0 2.4 − 112.9 104.9 8.1
                              19 1,889.7 787.7 418.2 223.1 195.1 − − 0.0 0.6 − 121.6 113.5 8.1
                              26 1,894.9 791.3 413.8 199.9 213.9 − − 0.0 0.8 − 128.2 120.2 8.0
2010 Apr                  1 5 1,942.5 801.7 421.8 179.2 242.7 − − 0.0 0.7 − 126.3 118.2 8.2
                                9 1,936.7 797.5 427.2 177.9 249.3 − − 0.0 0.6 − 120.4 112.4 8.1
                              16 1,940.0 794.5 430.9 259.7 171.1 − − 0.0 0.5 − 125.6 117.5 8.1
                              23 1,943.3 792.8 421.5 204.1 217.4 − − − 0.7 − 137.8 129.9 7.9
                              30 1,956.8 798.1 449.1 197.5 251.6 − − − 0.5 − 113.1 104.9 8.1
         May                 7 1,983.2 802.6 454.2 172.2 282.0 − − 0.0 0.6 − 107.9 98.6 9.3
                              14 2,062.9 805.0 527.4 301.8 225.6 − − 0.0 0.6 − 117.2 109.2 8.1
                              21 2,070.0 804.6 516.2 246.2 253.5 16.5 − 0.0 0.4 − 126.5 118.3 8.2
                              28 2,088.5 804.7 526.3 183.7 316.2 26.5 − 0.0 0.5 − 145.7 137.7 8.0
         June                 4 2,098.5 809.4 557.3 171.3 350.9 35.0 − 0.0 0.6 − 125.4 117.2 8.2
                              11 2,107.1 809.7 562.6 137.8 384.3 40.5 − 0.0 0.7 − 130.6 122.5 8.1
                              18 2,124.7 808.9 574.9 295.7 232.0 47.0 − 0.2 1.0 − 139.6 131.0 8.5
                              25 2,154.2 809.8 580.6 245.1 284.4 51.0 − 0.1 1.0 − 163.5 155.4 8.1
         July                 2 5 2,049.8 816.5 424.0 160.4 231.7 31.9 − 0.1 0.8 − 123.8 115.7 8.1
                                9 2,004.7 818.8 391.4 126.8 205.5 59.0 − 0.1 0.6 − 108.9 100.8 8.1
                              16 1,987.0 819.0 384.4 265.9 58.6 60.0 − 0.0 0.6 − 100.0 91.9 8.1
                              23 1,993.6 817.5 366.6 245.3 61.3 60.0 − 0.0 1.4 − 124.8 116.9 7.9
                              30 2,001.7 820.6 377.3 195.8 120.9 60.5 − 0.1 1.8 − 118.1 110.8 7.3
         Aug                  6 1,964.9 822.6 376.1 154.2 161.3 60.5 − 0.1 0.8 − 83.1 76.0 7.1
 Deutsche Bundesbank
2008          Sep 5 519.7 185.3 111.5 65.8 45.7 − − − − − 0.7 0.1 0.6
         Oct 591.6 197.1 146.4 48.4 98.0 − − − − − 7.9 0.2 7.7
         Nov 577.1 198.1 138.3 52.5 85.7 − − − − − 2.9 0.1 2.8
         Dec 5 612.9 206.6 166.9 100.7 66.3 − − − − − 1.1 0.2 0.9
2009          Jan 560.5 184.7 127.2 49.3 77.8 − − − − − 2.6 2.2 0.5
         Feb 547.5 185.2 106.6 54.2 52.4 − − − − − 12.5 11.9 0.6
         Mar 5 539.7 186.5 100.0 53.1 46.9 − − − − − 15.7 15.4 0.3
         Apr 540.5 189.5 80.0 48.3 31.7 − − − − − 30.8 30.2 0.6
         May 555.9 190.0 87.2 71.1 16.1 − − − − − 36.8 36.2 0.5
         June 5 628.3 190.6 176.7 75.1 101.5 − − − − − 23.7 23.4 0.4
         July 572.3 192.9 120.7 44.5 76.2 − − − − − 23.9 23.5 0.4
         Aug 571.2 191.6 107.4 46.2 61.2 − − − − − 24.0 23.5 0.4
         Sep 5 577.7 191.5 109.7 76.1 33.6 − − − − − 24.0 23.6 0.4
         Oct 557.2 192.6 86.5 50.7 35.9 − − − − − 24.0 23.6 0.4
         Nov 551.7 193.7 87.0 59.0 28.0 − − − − − 16.0 15.6 0.4
         Dec 5 588.2 201.3 112.2 76.7 35.5 − − − − − 10.4 10.0 0.4
2010          Jan 571.8 195.6 106.3 60.9 45.4 − − − − − 4.1 3.7 0.4
         Feb 591.6 195.8 127.6 55.2 72.3 − − − − − 0.7 0.3 0.4
         Mar 5 608.6 199.0 135.7 82.3 53.4 − − − − − 0.6 0.2 0.4
         Apr 615.5 199.2 139.1 58.6 80.5 − − − − − 0.7 0.2 0.5
         May 673.4 201.0 193.0 52.8 123.9 16.2 − − − − 0.9 0.3 0.6
         June 5 713.7 202.7 208.8 108.6 82.9 17.3 − − − − 0.6 0.1 0.4
         July 625.3 204.8 115.9 61.8 34.7 19.4 − − − − 1.0 0.5 0.5
 
*The consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem comprises the the Bundesbank: end-of-month financial statements. — 2According to the
financial statement of the European Central Bank (ECB) and the financial accounting regime chosen by the Eurosystem on the issue of euro bank-
statements of the national central banks of the euro area member states notes, a share of 8% of the total value of the euro banknotes in circulation
(NCBs). The balance sheet items for foreign currency, securities, gold and is allocated to the ECB on a monthly basis. The counterpart of this
financial instruments are valued at market rates at the end of the quar- adjustment is disclosed as an “Intra-Eurosystem liability related to euro
ter. — 1For Eurosystem: financial statements for specific weekly dates; for
18*III Consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2010
III Consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem
 
 
 
 
 
Liabilities to non-euro area
residents denominated in
foreign currency
Intra-  
Eurosystem  
Liabilities Liabilities Liabilities Counterpart liability     On
to non-euro to euro area Deposits, arising of special related to     reporting
area residents residents balances from the drawing euro  Capital    date/
denominated in foreign and other rights allocated Other banknote Revaluation and    End of credit facility
in euro currency Total liabilities under ERM II by the IMF issue  2 accounts reserves    month  1 liabilities  3 
Eurosystem 4
 
49.6 3.2 10.0 10.0 − 50.9 161.2 − 192.3 73.0 2009 Dec                  4
48.9 3.6 9.0 9.0 − 50.9 162.8 − 192.3 73.0                               11
47.4 3.3 9.3 9.3 − 50.9 165.8 − 192.3 73.0                               18
46.5 3.7 9.6 9.6 − 50.9 166.6 − 192.3 73.0                               25
46.8 4.0 9.6 9.6 − 51.2 167.8 − 5 220.2 73.0 2010 Jan                  1
46.3 4.7 9.6 9.6 − 51.2 166.5 − 220.2 73.0                                 8
43.4 5.0 9.2 9.2 − 51.2 165.5 − 220.2 74.0                               15
41.0 5.0 8.4 8.4 − 51.2 166.5 − 220.2 74.0                               22
40.2 2.7 9.4 9.4 − 51.2 167.5 − 220.2 74.0                               29
40.0 2.9 10.4 10.4 − 51.2 169.7 − 220.2 74.0          Feb                  5
40.1 2.6 9.9 9.9 − 51.2 170.1 − 220.2 74.5                               12
40.0 2.8 11.1 11.1 − 51.2 171.5 − 220.2 74.5                               19
40.5 1.9 12.1 12.1 − 51.2 166.5 − 220.2 75.0                               26
39.8 1.8 11.4 11.4 − 51.2 168.8 − 220.2 75.0          Mar                  5
38.8 1.3 12.1 12.1 − 51.2 161.6 − 220.2 75.0                               12
37.9 1.6 12.6 12.6 − 51.2 163.1 − 220.2 75.0                               19
37.6 1.6 12.9 12.9 − 51.2 160.6 − 220.2 76.4                               26
37.2 1.4 5 14.5 5 14.5 − 5 53.0 5 160.2 − 5 249.2 76.4 2010 Apr                  1
36.5 0.9 13.0 13.0 − 53.0 161.6 − 249.2 76.7                                 9
36.4 1.1 13.4 13.4 − 53.0 158.8 − 249.2 76.7                               16
36.2 1.0 13.0 13.0 − 53.0 161.4 − 249.2 76.7                               23
40.1 1.1 14.5 14.5 − 53.0 161.4 − 249.2 76.7                               30
56.7 2.8 12.7 12.7 − 53.0 167.0 − 249.2 76.7          May                  7
45.6 3.4 13.4 13.4 − 53.0 171.4 − 249.2 76.7                               14
59.2 2.4 12.6 12.6 − 53.0 169.2 − 249.2 76.7                               21
48.5 2.1 13.1 13.1 − 53.0 167.9 − 249.2 77.3                               28
40.6 2.2 13.3 13.3 − 53.0 170.2 − 249.2 77.3          June                  4
41.1 1.1 15.4 15.4 − 53.0 165.6 − 249.2 77.9                               11
41.8 1.1 14.7 14.7 − 53.0 162.6 − 249.2 77.9                               18
41.4 1.0 14.6 14.6 − 53.0 162.2 − 249.2 77.9                               25
41.9 0.9 5 15.5 5 15.5 − 5 56.7 5 162.6 − 5 328.8 78.2          July                  2
42.2 0.9 16.3 16.3 − 56.7 161.8 − 328.8 78.2                                 9
42.8 0.9 15.7 15.7 − 56.7 159.8 − 328.8 78.2                               16
42.2 0.9 16.6 16.6 − 56.7 159.8 − 328.8 78.2                               23
42.2 1.3 16.1 16.1 − 56.7 160.5 − 328.8 78.2                               30
41.4 1.0 17.0 17.0 − 56.7 159.2 − 328.8 78.2          Aug                  6
 Deutsche Bundesbank
24.7 0.0 2.1 2.1 − 1.3 5 15.1 111.8 5 62.2 5.0 2008          Sep 
21.7 11.9 3.8 3.8 − 1.3 14.8 119.3 62.2 5.0          Oct 
16.1 13.5 3.0 3.0 − 1.3 15.9 120.6 62.2 5.0          Nov 
9.2 18.4 2.5 2.5 − 1.3 16.9 121.8 5 63.1 5.0          Dec 
6.9 13.4 0.1 0.1 − 1.3 17.0 139.2 63.1 5.0 2009          Jan 
7.5 7.6 0.2 0.2 − 1.3 17.7 140.7 63.1 5.0          Feb 
7 . 5 0 . 0−−− 1 . 4 5 11.6 140.4 5 71.5 5.0          Mar 
8.3 0.0 0.2 0.2 − 1.4 12.1 141.8 71.5 5.0          Apr 
8.7 0.1 0.5 0.5 − 1.4 12.6 142.2 71.5 5.0          May
9.3 0.0 0.8 0.8 − 1.3 5 12.4 141.9 5 66.6 5.0          June
6.7 0.0 1.2 1.2 − 1.3 12.2 141.8 66.6 5.0          July
8.1 0.0 0.9 0.9 − 11.9 12.4 143.4 66.6 5.0          Aug 
8.6 0.0 0.1 0.1 − 13.0 5 13.2 144.9 5 67.6 5.0          Sep 
8.5 0.0 0.5 0.5 − 13.0 12.9 146.5 67.6 5.0          Oct 
9.3 0.0 0.0 0.0 − 13.0 13.2 146.8 67.6 5.0          Nov 
9 . 1 0 . 0−−− 13.1 13.5 146.8 5 76.8 5.0          Dec 
9.8 0.0 0.2 0.2 − 13.1 13.2 147.6 76.8 5.0 2010          Jan 
9.3 0.0 0.3 0.3 − 13.1 13.4 149.6 76.8 5.0          Feb 
9.3 0.0 0.1 0.1 − 13.6 10.3 150.2 5 84.8 5.0          Mar 
11.5 0.0 0.3 0.3 − 13.6 10.2 151.1 84.8 5.0          Apr 
12.8 0.0 0.2 0.2 − 13.6 10.4 151.7 84.8 5.0          May
11.0 0.0 0.2 0.2 − 5 14.5 5 11.3 150.9 5 108.8 5.0          June
11.2 0.0 0.3 0.3 − 14.5 12.5 151.2 108.8 5.0          July
 
banknote issue“. The remaining 92 % of the value of the euro banknote in the aforementioned accounting regime and the value of euro banknotes
circulation is also allocated to the NCBs on a monthly basis, and each NCB put into circulation is also disclosed as an “Intra-Eurosystem claim/ liabil ity
shows in its balance sheet the share of the euro banknotes issued which related to banknote issue“. — 3For the Deutsche Bundesbank: including
corresponds to its paid-up share in the ECB’s capital. The difference DM banknotes still in circulation. — 4Source: ECB. — 5Changes are due
between the value of the euro banknotes allocated to the NCB according to mainly to revaluations at the end of the quarter. 
19*III Consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
E U R O S Y S T E M
Monthly Report
August 2010
IV Banks
 
1 Assets and liabilities of monetary financial institutions (excluding the Bundesbank) in Germany *
  Assets
 
 
Lending to banks (MFIs) in the euro area Lending to non-banks (non-MFIs) in the
to banks in the home country to banks in other member states to non-banks in the home country
Enterprises and house-
holds
Secur- Secur-
Balance ities ities
sheet Cash issued issued
Period total in hand Total Total Loans by banks Total Loans by banks Total Total Total Loans
 End of year or month
 
2001 6,303.1 14.6 2,069.7 1,775.5 1,140.6 634.9 294.2 219.8 74.4 3,317.1 3,084.9 2,497.1 2,235.7
2002 6,394.2 17.9 2,118.0 1,769.1 1,164.3 604.9 348.9 271.7 77.2 3,340.2 3,092.2 2,505.8 2,240.8
2003 6,432.0 17.3 2,111.5 1,732.0 1,116.8 615.3 379.5 287.7 91.8 3,333.2 3,083.1 2,497.4 2,241.2
2004 6,617.4 15.1 2,174.3 1,750.2 1,122.9 627.3 424.2 306.3 117.9 3,358.7 3,083.4 2,479.7 2,223.8
2005 6,859.4 15.3 2,276.0 1,762.5 1,148.4 614.1 513.5 356.3 157.2 3,407.6 3,085.2 2,504.6 2,226.3
2006 7,154.4 16.4 2,314.4 1,718.6 1,138.6 580.0 595.8 376.8 219.0 3,462.1 3,085.5 2,536.1 2,241.9
2007 7,592.4 17.8 2,523.4 1,847.9 1,290.4 557.5 675.4 421.6 253.8 3,487.3 3,061.8 2,556.0 2,288.8
2008 7,892.7 17.8 2,681.8 1,990.2 1,404.3 585.8 691.6 452.9 238.8 3,638.2 3,163.0 2,686.9 2,357.3
2009 7,436.1 17.2 2,480.5 1,813.2 1,218.4 594.8 667.3 449.5 217.8 3,638.3 3,187.9 2,692.9 2,357.5
2008          Sep 7,896.2 13.7 2,614.7 1,918.3 1,351.8 566.6 696.3 431.1 265.2 3,623.3 3,134.6 2,657.2 2,354.8
         Oct 8,030.2 15.4 2,670.4 1,962.1 1,399.6 562.5 708.3 453.2 255.1 3,627.7 3,135.2 2,653.3 2,357.7
         Nov 7,985.4 15.1 2,705.1 1,995.0 1,408.3 586.8 710.1 462.5 247.6 3,633.0 3,134.5 2,657.2 2,362.4
         Dec 7,892.7 17.8 2,681.8 1,990.2 1,404.3 585.8 691.6 452.9 238.8 3,638.2 3,163.0 2,686.9 2,357.3
2009          Jan 7,906.4 14.0 2,676.9 1,975.0 1,382.5 592.5 701.9 465.2 236.7 3,677.6 3,189.7 2,706.2 2,375.7
         Feb 7,846.4 13.9 2,649.2 1,950.8 1,357.1 593.7 698.4 466.0 232.4 3,667.8 3,183.1 2,702.3 2,368.3
         Mar 7,777.1 13.9 2,611.1 1,923.6 1,312.9 610.7 687.4 458.5 228.9 3,669.6 3,193.6 2,716.4 2,383.4
         Apr 7,802.2 15.3 2,584.9 1,902.2 1,295.0 607.1 682.7 454.9 227.8 3,690.1 3,216.1 2,730.5 2,385.5
         May 7,685.1 15.8 2,537.1 1,869.2 1,263.7 605.5 667.9 444.2 223.7 3,680.5 3,198.6 2,714.9 2,384.7
         June 7,710.6 15.0 2,601.5 1,943.5 1,333.1 610.4 658.0 436.9 221.2 3,694.3 3,211.7 2,725.6 2,388.3
         July 7,619.1 14.0 2,558.6 1,890.7 1,277.0 613.7 667.8 448.3 219.5 3,685.1 3,205.7 2,706.7 2,372.4
         Aug 7,590.2 14.0 2,563.6 1,886.5 1,270.3 616.2 677.2 458.7 218.4 3,655.8 3,183.7 2,691.4 2,361.6
         Sep 7,519.5 13.9 2,512.5 1,862.6 1,253.1 609.6 649.9 432.3 217.6 3,675.2 3,199.8 2,705.4 2,375.4
         Oct 7,498.4 14.2 2,496.7 1,824.6 1,219.2 605.4 672.2 456.2 216.0 3,673.1 3,202.2 2,692.0 2,365.5
         Nov 7,493.5 13.8 2,496.0 1,826.7 1,224.7 602.0 669.4 448.7 220.6 3,671.2 3,201.7 2,700.0 2,372.5
         Dec 7,436.1 17.2 2,480.5 1,813.2 1,218.4 594.8 667.3 449.5 217.8 3,638.3 3,187.9 2,692.9 2,357.5
2010          Jan 7,452.7 14.3 2,465.1 1,806.6 1,220.4 586.2 658.5 440.7 217.8 3,655.8 3,198.2 2,695.9 2,354.2
         Feb 7,449.5 14.2 2,491.6 1,830.8 1,250.2 580.5 660.8 444.5 216.3 3,645.2 3,184.7 2,682.5 2,350.8
         Mar 7,454.6 14.4 2,489.7 1,832.0 1,250.3 581.7 657.7 440.2 217.5 3,633.9 3,180.8 2,673.6 2,347.0
         Apr 7,570.0 14.0 2,507.1 1,843.7 1,263.9 579.8 663.5 448.2 215.3 3,688.9 3,222.8 2,711.0 2,360.2
         May 7,681.0 14.7 2,593.2 1,897.6 1,326.4 571.2 695.6 480.6 215.0 3,650.9 3,211.1 2,688.9 2,364.6
         June 7,654.9 14.2 2,589.5 1,905.1 1,347.0 558.2 684.4 465.0 219.4 3,663.9 3,228.1 2,684.9 2,368.0
 Changes 1
2002 165.7 3.3 63.6 6.5 23.7 − 17.1 57.1 51.9 5.2 34.1 15.7 16.5 10.4
2003 90.7 − 0.6 − 12.2 − 44.1 − 42.6 − 1.5 31.9 18.8 13.1 30.0 23.6 22.8 26.4
2004 209.7 − 2.1 71.6 24.0 10.9 13.1 47.6 17.1 30.5 44.0 17.4 − 0.4 − 1.3
2005 191.4 0.1 96.5 10.3 22.8 − 12.5 86.2 48.1 38.0 59.7 14.1 37.1 15.5
2006 353.9 1.1 81.2 0.5 28.0 − 27.6 80.8 19.5 61.3 55.9 1.5 32.5 13.2
2007 515.3 1.5 215.6 135.5 156.2 − 20.8 80.1 44.1 36.0 54.1 − 1.0 38.6 53.2
2008 314.0 − 0.1 184.4 164.2 127.3 36.9 20.2 34.6 − 14.4 140.2 102.5 130.8 65.4
2009 −454.8 − 0.5 −189.5 −166.4 −182.1 15.8 − 23.2 − 2.5 − 20.7 17.3 38.2 16.9 6.5
2008          Oct 47.4 1.7 42.7 34.0 38.6 − 4.6 8.7 19.3 − 10.6 − 9.9 − 6.9 − 11.0 − 4.6
         Nov − 9.6 − 0.4 45.7 43.2 18.9 24.3 2.5 9.9 − 7.4 7.4 0.9 5.6 6.4
         Dec − 30.1 2.7 − 9.2 5.5 5.9 − 0.4 − 14.7 − 7.1 − 7.6 13.5 30.4 30.3 − 4.9
2009          Jan − 43.6 − 3.8 − 14.8 − 23.0 − 29.4 6.4 8.2 10.0 − 1.8 36.2 27.8 20.8 16.5
         Feb − 76.0 − 0.1 − 28.3 − 25.2 − 26.4 1.2 − 3.1 0.6 − 3.7 − 9.1 − 5.2 − 2.5 − 6.7
         Mar − 51.3 0.1 − 31.5 − 22.4 − 39.6 17.2 − 9.1 − 5.9 − 3.2 9.2 13.9 17.4 18.4
         Apr 19.9 1.4 − 27.3 − 21.9 − 18.3 − 3.6 − 5.4 − 3.9 − 1.6 20.1 22.4 13.9 2.2
         May − 75.1 0.5 − 32.8 − 19.4 − 24.0 4.6 − 13.4 − 9.3 − 4.1 − 3.3 − 13.7 − 11.9 2.1
         June 25.3 − 0.8 64.3 74.4 69.5 4.9 − 10.1 − 7.2 − 2.9 15.8 14.8 12.4 4.8
         July − 93.3 − 1.1 − 42.9 − 52.7 − 56.1 3.3 9.8 11.4 − 1.6 − 8.5 − 5.2 − 18.1 − 15.1
         Aug − 9.7 0.0 6.0 − 3.5 − 6.0 2.5 9.5 10.6 − 1.1 − 27.5 − 20.9 − 14.3 − 9.8
         Sep − 57.5 − 0.0 − 49.6 − 23.0 − 16.5 − 6.5 − 26.6 − 25.9 − 0.7 22.3 17.5 15.4 15.0
         Oct − 16.3 0.3 − 15.2 − 37.5 − 33.4 − 4.2 22.4 24.1 − 1.7 − 0.1 3.5 − 12.4 − 8.6
         Nov 2.5 − 0.4 0.4 2.9 6.1 − 3.1 − 2.6 − 7.2 4.6 − 0.4 0.2 6.1 5.1
         Dec − 79.7 3.4 − 17.7 − 14.9 − 8.0 − 6.9 − 2.8 0.2 − 3.1 − 37.4 − 16.8 − 9.9 − 17.4
2010          Jan − 8.8 − 2.9 − 17.4 − 8.1 0.8 − 8.9 − 9.3 − 9.4 0.1 16.6 11.3 3.9 − 1.7
         Feb − 7.0 − 0.2 25.8 24.0 29.6 − 5.6 1.8 3.4 − 1.7 − 12.8 − 14.6 − 14.4 − 4.4
         Mar 4.9 0.3 0.5 2.6 − 0.3 2.9 − 2.1 − 4.4 2.3 − 2.5 1.2 − 4.5 − 3.2
         Apr 107.9 − 0.5 16.4 11.0 13.1 − 2.1 5.4 7.7 − 2.3 54.7 42.4 37.9 13.2
         May 63.7 0.7 80.7 50.4 59.5 − 9.1 30.3 30.9 − 0.6 − 45.7 − 15.3 − 25.5 1.1
         June − 26.1 − 0.6 − 3.7 7.5 20.5 − 13.0 − 11.2 − 15.6 4.5 13.9 17.8 − 3.2 4.1
*This table serves to supplement the “Overall monetary survey“ in section the figures reported by banks (including building and loan associations) −
II. Unlike the other tables in section IV, this table includes − in addition to data from money market funds. — 1Statistical breaks have been eliminated
20*IV Banks

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2010
IV Banks
 
 
 
 
 
euro area Claims on
non-euro-area
to non-banks in other member states residents
 General Enterprises and General
 government households government
Secur- Secur- of which Secur- of which Other
ities Total Loans ities  2 Total Total Loans Total Loans ities Total Loans assets   Period
End of year or month
 
261.3 587.8 468.7 119.1 232.3 111.3 53.7 121.0 26.2 94.8 727.3 572.0 174.3 2001
265.0 586.4 448.5 137.9 248.0 125.0 63.6 123.0 25.5 97.5 738.1 589.2 179.9 2002
256.2 585.6 439.6 146.1 250.2 133.5 62.7 116.6 25.9 90.7 806.4 645.6 163.6 2003
255.9 603.8 423.0 180.8 275.3 140.6 61.9 134.7 25.7 109.0 897.8 730.4 171.4 2004
278.2 580.7 408.7 171.9 322.4 169.1 65.0 153.3 30.7 122.6 993.8 796.8 166.7 2005
294.1 549.5 390.2 159.2 376.6 228.1 85.2 148.5 26.1 122.4 1,172.7 936.2 188.8 2006
267.3 505.8 360.7 145.0 425.5 294.6 124.9 130.9 26.0 104.9 1,339.5 1,026.9 224.4 2007
329.6 476.1 342.8 133.4 475.1 348.1 172.1 127.0 27.6 99.4 1,279.2 1,008.6 275.7 2008
335.4 495.0 335.1 160.0 450.4 322.2 162.9 128.2 23.5 104.7 1,062.6 821.1 237.5 2009
302.4 477.5 344.8 132.7 488.7 358.9 175.9 129.8 28.0 101.8 1,401.2 1,106.2 243.3 2008          Sep 
295.6 481.9 346.7 135.2 492.5 363.1 182.5 129.3 28.3 101.1 1,455.9 1,166.6 260.8          Oct 
294.8 477.2 344.2 133.0 498.5 369.2 186.6 129.4 28.6 100.8 1,357.6 1,078.6 274.7          Nov 
329.6 476.1 342.8 133.4 475.1 348.1 172.1 127.0 27.6 99.4 1,279.2 1,008.6 275.7          Dec 
330.5 483.5 344.3 139.2 487.9 359.7 182.0 128.3 26.1 102.1 1,256.5 991.4 281.4 2009          Jan 
334.1 480.8 342.4 138.3 484.7 356.1 175.8 128.5 25.9 102.7 1,233.9 974.1 281.6          Feb 
333.0 477.1 338.1 139.0 476.0 348.8 172.5 127.2 25.5 101.7 1,169.9 916.9 312.7          Mar 
345.0 485.6 340.5 145.1 474.1 348.6 171.9 125.5 24.8 100.7 1,213.3 961.0 298.7          Apr 
330.1 483.7 336.6 147.0 481.9 353.8 172.1 128.1 24.4 103.7 1,184.7 933.9 267.1          May
337.3 486.1 336.5 149.7 482.5 357.3 178.2 125.2 22.7 102.5 1,165.0 912.3 234.8          June
334.3 499.0 348.5 150.5 479.4 352.3 173.5 127.1 23.6 103.5 1,132.8 882.1 228.8          July
329.8 492.4 342.9 149.5 472.1 347.1 170.4 124.9 23.7 101.2 1,107.4 856.8 249.5          Aug 
330.0 494.3 340.0 154.3 475.4 349.0 172.6 126.4 23.6 102.8 1,069.0 822.5 248.8          Sep 
326.5 510.2 351.7 158.5 470.9 341.3 166.5 129.6 23.7 105.9 1,063.7 822.7 250.7          Oct 
327.5 501.7 340.9 160.8 469.5 341.0 165.1 128.4 23.5 105.0 1,057.5 818.6 255.0          Nov 
335.4 495.0 335.1 160.0 450.4 322.2 162.9 128.2 23.5 104.7 1,062.6 821.1 237.5          Dec 
341.7 502.3 338.0 164.4 457.5 325.5 161.9 132.1 23.7 108.3 1,081.5 838.8 236.0 2010          Jan 
331.7 502.2 334.8 167.4 460.5 325.7 162.9 134.8 23.7 111.1 1,072.7 832.8 225.9          Feb 
326.6 507.3 335.5 171.8 453.1 319.6 162.7 133.5 22.3 111.2 1,073.9 833.9 242.6          Mar 
350.8 511.8 337.7 174.1 466.1 332.9 175.7 133.1 22.0 111.2 1,120.2 879.4 239.8          Apr 
324.3 522.2 343.8 178.4 439.8 307.7 175.0 132.1 26.4 105.7 1,167.0 923.7 255.2          May
316.9 543.2 349.1 194.1 435.8 303.1 172.8 132.7 24.2 108.5 1,121.1 874.9 266.3          June
Changes 1
6.2 − 0.8 − 20.2 19.4 18.3 15.9 12.0 2.4 − 0.6 3.0 65.7 64.1 − 0.4 2002
− 3.6 0.8 − 8.7 9.6 6.4 13.1 2.6 − 6.8 − 0.8 − 6.0 115.4 97.7 − 42.0 2003
0.9 17.8 − 17.0 34.9 26.6 8.2 3.1 18.4 0.0 18.4 111.0 100.2 − 14.7 2004
21.7 − 23.0 − 14.3 − 8.6 45.5 27.4 2.2 18.2 4.6 13.5 57.2 31.3 − 22.2 2005
19.3 − 31.0 − 18.6 − 12.4 54.5 59.6 20.9 − 5.2 − 1.3 − 3.8 205.8 165.7 9.8 2006
− 14.6 − 39.6 − 29.3 − 10.3 55.1 73.7 41.5 − 18.6 0.0 − 18.6 223.0 136.7 21.1 2007
65.4 − 28.3 − 16.9 − 11.5 37.7 42.2 40.3 − 4.5 1.6 − 6.1 − 40.1 − 7.5 29.7 2008
10.5 21.3 − 5.1 26.4 − 20.9 − 21.0 − 7.1 0.0 − 3.9 3.9 −182.2 −162.2 − 99.8 2009
− 6.4 4.0 1.8 2.3 − 3.0 − 1.9 2.5 − 1.1 − 0.0 − 1.0 − 2.8 7.6 15.8 2008          Oct 
− 0.8 − 4.7 − 2.5 − 2.2 6.5 6.4 4.4 0.1 0.4 − 0.2 − 75.6 − 65.5 13.2          Nov 
35.2 0.2 − 0.2 0.3 − 16.9 − 15.1 − 10.7 − 1.8 − 0.7 − 1.1 − 34.0 − 30.0 − 3.1          Dec 
4.4 7.0 1.3 5.6 8.3 8.8 6.1 − 0.5 − 1.7 1.2 − 52.0 − 48.0 − 9.1 2009          Jan 
4.2 − 2.7 − 1.8 − 0.9 − 3.9 − 4.2 − 6.7 0.3 − 0.3 0.5 − 24.8 − 20.7 − 13.7          Feb 
− 1.0 − 3.5 − 4.2 0.7 − 4.7 − 3.6 − 1.1 − 1.1 − 0.2 − 0.9 − 38.3 − 35.2 9.3          Mar 
11.7 8.5 2.4 6.1 − 2.3 − 0.6 − 0.8 − 1.7 − 0.5 − 1.2 40.2 41.5 − 14.5          Apr 
− 14.0 − 1.8 − 3.8 2.0 10.5 7.7 2.2 2.7 − 0.3 3.1 − 7.0 − 7.5 − 32.6          May
7.5 2.5 − 0.2 2.6 1.0 3.7 6.3 − 2.7 − 1.7 − 1.1 − 19.1 − 21.2 − 35.0          June
− 3.0 12.9 12.0 0.9 − 3.3 − 5.2 − 4.6 1.9 0.9 1.0 − 31.6 − 29.5 − 9.1          July
− 4.4 − 6.7 − 5.6 − 1.0 − 6.6 − 4.5 − 2.6 − 2.1 0.1 − 2.2 − 9.6 − 9.8 21.5          Aug 
0.5 2.0 − 2.8 4.9 4.8 3.2 3.2 1.6 − 0.0 1.6 − 28.4 − 25.3 − 1.8          Sep 
− 3.8 15.9 11.7 4.2 − 3.6 − 6.8 − 5.5 3.2 0.0 3.1 − 1.8 3.2 0.5          Oct 
1.0 − 5.9 − 8.2 2.3 − 0.5 0.5 − 0.9 − 1.1 − 0.1 − 0.9 − 0.7 0.9 3.6          Nov 
7.5 − 6.9 − 5.9 − 1.0 − 20.6 − 20.1 − 2.9 − 0.4 − 0.1 − 0.4 − 9.0 − 10.7 − 18.9          Dec 
5.6 7.3 2.8 4.5 5.3 1.5 − 1.0 3.8 0.2 3.6 6.1 6.3 − 11.2 2010          Jan 
− 10.0 − 0.2 − 3.2 3.0 1.8 − 0.9 0.3 2.7 − 0.0 2.7 − 17.1 − 13.7 − 2.7          Feb 
− 1.3 5.7 0.7 5.0 − 3.7 − 4.2 − 0.4 0.5 − 1.4 2.0 3.1 − 1.2 3.7          Mar 
24.7 4.5 2.2 2.3 12.3 12.7 12.7 − 0.4 − 0.4 0.0 40.7 40.7 − 3.4          Apr 
− 26.7 10.2 6.0 4.2 − 30.3 − 29.0 − 3.3 − 1.4 4.4 − 5.8 14.0 15.2 13.9          May
− 7.4 21.1 5.3 15.7 − 4.0 − 4.5 − 2.1 0.6 − 0.3 0.9 − 45.8 − 48.8 10.1          June
from the flow figures (see also footnote * in Table II.1). — 2Including debt
securities arising from the exchange of equalisation claims.
21*IV Banks

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
E U R O S Y S T E M
Monthly Report
August 2010
IV Banks
 
1 Assets and liabilities of monetary financial institutions (excluding the Bundesbank) in Germany *
  Liabilities
 
Deposits of banks (MFIs) Deposits of non-banks (non-MFIs) in the euro area
in the euro area
Deposits of non-banks in the home country Deposits of non-banks
With agreed At agreed
of banks maturities notice
Balance in the in other of which of which
sheet home member Over- up to up to Over-
Period total Total country states Total Total night Total 2 years Total 3 months Total night
 End of year or month
 
2001 6,303.1 1,418.0 1,202.1 215.9 2,134.0 1,979.7 525.0 880.2 290.6 574.5 461.9 105.2 7.6
2002 6,394.2 1,478.7 1,236.2 242.4 2,170.0 2,034.9 574.8 884.9 279.3 575.3 472.9 87.4 8.1
2003 6,432.0 1,471.0 1,229.4 241.6 2,214.6 2,086.9 622.1 874.5 248.0 590.3 500.8 81.8 9.3
2004 6,617.4 1,528.4 1,270.8 257.6 2,264.2 2,148.5 646.2 898.9 239.9 603.5 515.5 71.9 8.8
2005 6,859.4 1,569.6 1,300.8 268.8 2,329.1 2,225.4 715.8 906.2 233.4 603.4 519.1 62.2 9.6
2006 7,154.4 1,637.7 1,348.6 289.0 2,449.2 2,341.6 745.8 1,009.3 310.1 586.5 487.4 62.0 13.9
2007 7,592.4 1,778.6 1,479.0 299.6 2,633.6 2,518.3 769.6 1,193.3 477.9 555.4 446.0 75.1 19.6
2008 7,892.7 1,827.7 1,583.0 244.7 2,798.2 2,687.3 809.5 1,342.7 598.7 535.2 424.8 74.2 22.4
2009 7,436.1 1,589.7 1,355.6 234.0 2,818.0 2,731.3 997.8 1,139.1 356.4 594.4 474.4 63.9 17.7
2008          Sep 7,896.2 1,832.7 1,529.1 303.5 2,698.0 2,573.6 758.0 1,296.4 578.4 519.2 419.2 86.4 34.4
         Oct 8,030.2 1,913.9 1,642.3 271.6 2,734.7 2,620.5 786.9 1,312.8 598.0 520.8 417.8 77.6 28.8
         Nov 7,985.4 1,862.4 1,595.7 266.7 2,757.2 2,645.5 804.3 1,317.8 603.6 523.4 416.7 75.0 25.6
         Dec 7,892.7 1,827.7 1,583.0 244.7 2,798.2 2,687.3 809.5 1,342.7 598.7 535.2 424.8 74.2 22.4
2009          Jan 7,906.4 1,794.4 1,533.3 261.1 2,817.1 2,701.2 857.7 1,304.6 557.0 539.0 428.6 80.7 33.6
         Feb 7,846.4 1,760.2 1,509.8 250.4 2,821.6 2,714.6 882.6 1,287.7 534.4 544.3 433.9 73.4 25.7
         Mar 7,777.1 1,693.9 1,456.2 237.6 2,805.6 2,699.1 879.3 1,272.1 515.8 547.8 436.6 73.2 26.8
         Apr 7,802.2 1,701.3 1,458.7 242.6 2,823.8 2,716.8 895.8 1,269.8 509.3 551.1 439.1 74.4 25.4
         May 7,685.1 1,678.3 1,445.4 232.9 2,824.1 2,711.3 898.8 1,257.5 494.8 555.0 441.5 74.2 26.0
         June 7,710.6 1,695.3 1,469.0 226.3 2,832.4 2,716.6 918.7 1,238.2 461.7 559.7 445.1 73.2 26.0
         July 7,619.1 1,641.3 1,417.8 223.4 2,816.2 2,706.5 922.3 1,218.7 442.0 565.5 449.7 73.2 24.7
         Aug 7,590.2 1,635.5 1,414.6 220.8 2,808.1 2,707.6 933.8 1,203.1 424.4 570.8 454.3 73.7 25.8
         Sep 7,519.5 1,603.4 1,381.3 222.1 2,806.8 2,706.2 953.3 1,177.9 398.2 575.1 457.4 76.2 26.5
         Oct 7,498.4 1,602.0 1,373.6 228.4 2,797.5 2,696.7 981.3 1,133.7 367.5 581.7 461.5 74.9 26.2
         Nov 7,493.5 1,599.1 1,375.7 223.4 2,823.6 2,724.5 1,005.5 1,133.4 353.0 585.6 464.5 73.0 25.9
         Dec 7,436.1 1,589.7 1,355.6 234.0 2,818.0 2,731.3 997.8 1,139.1 356.4 594.4 474.4 63.9 17.7
2010          Jan 7,452.7 1,596.8 1,348.9 247.9 2,826.3 2,736.7 1,025.2 1,113.9 330.5 597.6 479.2 66.6 20.1
         Feb 7,449.5 1,597.3 1,361.7 235.6 2,828.9 2,736.7 1,025.5 1,108.4 323.8 602.9 485.1 69.6 20.4
         Mar 7,454.6 1,566.6 1,328.7 237.9 2,815.8 2,725.0 1,009.4 1,110.9 325.3 604.7 486.8 69.7 21.9
         Apr 7,570.0 1,599.7 1,340.9 258.7 2,836.1 2,737.0 1,044.7 1,087.5 301.4 604.8 488.8 77.9 27.3
         May 7,681.0 1,629.3 1,356.0 273.3 2,840.9 2,749.1 1,063.1 1,081.1 299.5 605.0 490.8 69.1 21.9
         June 7,654.9 1,617.7 1,366.6 251.1 2,842.3 2,750.9 1,064.3 1,082.2 299.7 604.4 491.5 69.5 22.3
 Changes 1
2002 165.7 70.2 37.2 33.1 53.0 57.0 50.3 5.9 − 11.0 0.8 11.0 − 2.6 0.6
2003 90.7 3.8 − 3.3 7.1 44.7 50.3 48.8 − 13.6 − 31.6 15.1 28.0 − 3.8 1.4
2004 209.7 62.3 42.8 19.6 53.5 64.9 26.3 25.5 − 8.3 13.1 14.7 − 9.3 − 0.4
2005 191.4 32.8 26.9 5.8 65.0 75.5 69.4 7.3 − 6.9 − 1.2 2.9 − 8.0 0.5
2006 353.9 105.6 81.5 24.1 122.9 118.6 30.4 105.0 77.1 − 16.8 − 31.7 0.5 4.4
2007 515.3 148.3 134.8 13.5 185.1 177.3 24.6 183.9 167.8 − 31.1 − 41.4 13.6 5.6
2008 314.0 65.8 121.5 − 55.8 162.4 173.1 38.8 154.6 123.5 − 20.2 − 21.2 − 7.4 − 0.1
2009 −454.8 −235.3 −224.5 − 10.8 31.9 43.9 205.0 −220.4 −259.3 59.3 50.3 − 9.6 − 4.1
2008          Oct 47.4 67.5 103.9 − 36.3 32.0 44.4 27.1 15.7 18.9 1.5 − 1.4 − 11.0 − 6.2
         Nov − 9.6 − 36.3 − 30.0 − 6.2 27.8 29.9 17.5 9.8 7.8 2.6 − 1.1 − 2.2 − 3.2
         Dec − 30.1 − 26.1 − 4.5 − 21.6 42.7 44.4 6.4 26.2 − 3.5 11.8 8.1 − 1.6 − 3.0
2009          Jan − 43.6 − 42.8 − 57.3 14.5 16.7 12.4 47.1 − 38.5 − 42.1 3.8 3.8 5.8 11.2
         Feb − 76.0 − 35.3 − 24.5 − 10.8 4.4 13.2 24.8 − 16.9 − 22.7 5.3 5.3 − 7.2 − 7.8
         Mar − 51.3 − 60.9 − 49.1 − 11.8 − 15.1 − 14.9 − 2.6 − 15.8 − 18.5 3.5 2.8 0.1 1.2
         Apr 19.9 6.5 1.7 4.8 17.9 17.2 33.2 − 19.3 − 23.6 3.3 3.1 1.1 − 1.4
         May − 75.1 − 14.8 − 5.9 − 8.8 1.6 − 4.6 3.5 − 11.9 − 14.1 3.9 2.4 0.2 0.7
         June 25.3 17.1 23.7 − 6.5 8.2 5.3 19.9 − 19.3 − 33.1 4.7 3.6 − 0.8 0.3
         July − 93.3 − 54.0 − 51.1 − 2.9 − 16.1 − 10.1 3.5 − 19.4 − 19.7 5.8 4.6 0.0 − 1.3
         Aug − 9.7 − 5.1 − 2.6 − 2.4 3.6 1.3 11.6 − 15.6 − 17.6 5.3 4.5 0.6 1.1
         Sep − 57.5 − 31.3 − 33.0 1.7 − 0.7 − 1.0 19.8 − 25.1 − 26.1 4.3 3.1 2.8 0.8
         Oct − 16.3 − 1.0 − 7.3 6.3 4.3 3.8 28.1 − 31.0 − 30.6 6.6 4.2 − 1.0 − 0.3
         Nov 2.5 − 2.1 2.8 − 4.9 13.5 15.1 24.4 − 13.1 − 14.4 3.8 3.0 − 1.8 − 0.3
         Dec − 79.7 − 11.8 − 21.8 10.0 − 6.5 6.1 − 8.3 5.5 3.2 8.9 9.9 − 9.3 − 8.3
2010          Jan − 8.8 5.3 − 7.9 13.2 7.3 4.8 26.9 − 25.3 − 26.0 3.2 4.7 2.4 2.3
         Feb − 7.0 3.6 12.0 − 8.4 − 6.0 − 0.4 − 0.1 − 5.6 − 6.8 5.2 5.9 − 5.2 0.3
         Mar 4.9 − 15.7 − 17.8 2.1 − 13.3 − 11.8 − 16.1 2.4 1.5 1.8 1.8 0.1 1.4
         Apr 107.9 33.5 12.9 20.6 18.9 10.6 35.1 − 24.5 − 25.0 0.1 2.0 8.2 5.4
         May 63.7 25.0 11.9 13.1 2.9 10.7 17.3 − 6.8 − 2.1 0.2 2.0 − 9.4 − 5.6
         June − 26.1 − 11.6 10.6 − 22.2 1.4 1.8 1.3 1.1 0.2 − 0.6 0.6 0.5 0.4
*This table serves to supplement the “Overall monetary survey“ in section data from money market funds. — 1Statistical breaks have been eliminated
II. Unlike the other tables in section IV, this table includes − in addition to from the flow figures (see also footnote * in Table II.1). —
the figures reported by banks (including building and loan associations) −
22*IV Banks

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2010
IV Banks
 
 
 
 
 
 Debt securities
issued  3 
in other member states  2 Deposits of
central governments
With agreed At agreed Liabilities
maturities notice arising
of which from Money of which Liabilities
domestic market with to non- repos with
of which of which central non-banks fund euro- Capital maturities
up to up to govern- in the shares of up to area and Other
Total 2 years Total 3 months Total ments euro area issued  3 Total reserves   Period 2 years  3 residents Liabilities
End of year or month
 
92.4 9.0 5.2 3.8 49.1 46.9 4.9 33.2 1,445.4 129.3 647.6 319.2 300.8 2001
74.6 9.9 4.7 3.6 47.7 45.6 3.3 36.7 1,468.2 71.6 599.2 343.0 309.8 2002
68.6 11.4 3.9 3.1 45.9 44.2 14.1 36.7 1,486.9 131.3 567.8 340.2 300.8 2003
59.8 9.8 3.3 2.7 43.8 41.4 14.8 31.5 1,554.8 116.9 577.1 329.3 317.2 2004
50.2 9.8 2.4 2.0 41.6 38.8 19.5 31.7 1,611.9 113.8 626.2 346.8 324.5 2005
45.9 9.3 2.3 1.9 45.5 41.9 17.1 32.0 1,636.7 136.4 638.5 389.6 353.7 2006
53.2 22.0 2.3 1.8 40.1 38.3 26.6 28.6 1,637.6 182.3 661.0 428.2 398.2 2007
49.5 24.9 2.4 1.8 36.6 34.8 61.1 16.4 1,609.9 233.3 666.3 461.7 451.5 2008
43.7 17.0 2.5 2.0 22.8 22.2 80.5 11.4 1,500.5 146.3 565.6 454.8 415.6 2009
49.7 25.5 2.3 1.7 38.0 37.5 70.9 22.4 1,642.2 219.9 741.6 445.3 443.0 2008          Sep 
46.5 21.8 2.3 1.7 36.6 35.5 69.8 18.6 1,637.0 214.5 747.9 453.9 454.4          Oct 
47.1 23.9 2.3 1.7 36.7 34.4 71.0 17.5 1,655.9 242.5 713.2 448.2 460.1          Nov 
49.5 24.9 2.4 1.8 36.6 34.8 61.1 16.4 1,609.9 233.3 666.3 461.7 451.5          Dec 
44.6 19.7 2.4 1.8 35.2 33.0 67.4 15.9 1,614.6 215.8 697.5 462.3 437.1 2009          Jan 
45.2 19.3 2.5 1.8 33.6 32.7 74.0 15.4 1,604.9 211.4 686.7 441.5 442.1          Feb 
44.0 18.2 2.5 1.8 33.2 32.0 87.7 14.8 1,580.2 201.3 664.6 447.9 482.5          Mar 
46.5 21.0 2.5 1.9 32.6 32.0 92.6 14.4 1,579.0 203.6 697.7 430.2 463.3          Apr 
45.7 19.9 2.5 1.9 38.5 36.5 90.9 14.1 1,574.2 196.6 646.6 425.4 431.7          May
44.7 19.1 2.5 1.9 42.6 40.6 93.4 13.6 1,571.0 185.5 652.1 441.8 411.0          June
46.0 19.7 2.5 1.9 36.6 34.6 82.4 12.4 1,565.9 181.1 647.3 441.5 412.0          July
45.3 19.2 2.5 1.9 26.8 25.0 71.7 12.2 1,570.3 177.8 626.3 443.6 422.6          Aug 
47.1 19.2 2.5 1.9 24.4 22.7 83.7 12.4 1,543.3 171.9 599.7 442.8 427.3          Sep 
46.2 18.8 2.5 1.9 25.9 23.2 83.3 12.3 1,530.6 161.7 591.4 439.4 442.0          Oct 
44.6 16.3 2.5 1.9 26.1 24.2 81.0 12.0 1,518.8 158.0 589.4 440.6 429.1          Nov 
43.7 17.0 2.5 2.0 22.8 22.2 80.5 11.4 1,500.5 146.3 565.6 454.8 415.6          Dec 
44.0 15.5 2.5 2.0 23.0 21.3 68.2 12.2 1,503.2 142.7 598.0 441.8 406.3 2010          Jan 
46.6 15.1 2.5 2.0 22.6 20.7 78.9 12.0 1,496.5 140.1 608.5 441.6 385.9          Feb 
45.2 13.6 2.6 2.0 21.1 20.4 79.8 11.6 1,503.2 138.0 622.6 445.8 409.3          Mar 
48.0 16.8 2.6 2.0 21.2 19.8 100.7 11.3 1,501.9 132.1 672.6 448.0 399.8          Apr 
44.5 13.9 2.6 2.1 22.7 20.6 101.4 11.3 1,503.4 127.7 738.4 447.0 409.4          May
44.6 14.1 2.7 2.1 21.9 20.8 102.7 11.0 1,486.7 111.2 704.4 443.4 446.7          June
Changes 1
− 2.6 1.1 − 0.5 − 0.3 − 1.4 − 1.3 − 1.6 4.1 18.8 14.8 − 2.1 25.6 − 2.7 2002
− 4.4 2.0 − 0.8 − 0.4 − 1.8 − 1.4 10.7 − 0.5 49.6 − 2.2 4.9 − 3.3 − 19.4 2003
− 8.3 − 1.4 − 0.6 − 0.4 − 2.1 − 2.8 0.8 − 5.2 73.2 − 14.8 21.7 − 10.5 14.0 2004
− 7.7 − 0.4 − 0.9 − 0.7 − 2.5 − 3.0 4.7 0.2 39.1 − 9.5 22.0 14.4 13.3 2005
− 3.9 − 0.3 − 0.1 − 0.2 3.9 3.1 − 3.3 0.3 34.4 21.7 32.4 27.9 33.7 2006
8.0 13.0 0.0 − 0.1 − 5.8 − 4.3 8.1 − 3.4 20.3 48.7 48.8 42.9 65.1 2007
− 7.4 0.7 0.1 − 0.0 − 3.3 − 3.2 36.1 − 12.2 − 33.8 50.4 − 0.0 39.2 56.6 2008
− 5.6 − 7.6 0.1 0.2 − 2.4 − 0.8 19.4 − 5.0 −105.0 − 87.3 − 95.5 − 0.1 − 65.1 2009
− 4.9 − 5.0 0.1 0.0 − 1.4 − 2.0 − 1.1 − 3.8 − 29.6 − 5.6 − 26.3 3.8 5.0 2008          Oct 
1.0 2.2 0.0 0.0 0.1 − 1.1 2.8 − 1.1 21.3 28.0 − 26.5 − 4.3 6.7          Nov 
1.3 1.3 0.1 0.0 − 0.1 0.4 − 9.9 − 1.1 − 27.1 − 9.0 − 24.2 17.3 − 1.8          Dec 
− 5.5 − 5.7 0.0 0.0 − 1.5 − 1.8 6.3 − 0.5 − 12.5 − 17.7 11.9 − 3.2 − 19.6 2009          Jan 
0.6 − 0.4 0.0 0.0 − 1.6 − 0.3 6.6 − 0.5 − 9.7 − 4.7 − 13.1 − 20.8 − 7.5          Feb 
− 1.1 − 0.9 0.0 0.0 − 0.3 − 0.6 13.7 − 0.6 − 12.9 − 9.9 − 9.5 8.9 25.1          Mar 
2.4 2.7 0.0 0.0 − 0.3 0.4 4.9 − 0.4 − 3.4 2.3 31.4 − 18.2 − 18.9          Apr 
− 0.5 − 0.9 0.0 0.0 5.9 4.4 − 1.7 − 0.3 4.2 − 6.9 − 39.9 3.1 − 27.3          May
− 1.1 − 0.8 − 0.0 0.0 3.8 4.1 2.5 − 0.4 − 3.5 − 11.1 5.4 16.3 − 20.4          June
1.3 0.6 0.0 0.0 − 6.0 − 6.0 − 11.0 − 1.2 − 4.8 − 4.4 − 4.6 − 0.2 − 1.4          July
− 0.5 − 0.4 0.0 0.0 1.7 1.9 − 10.6 − 0.3 6.1 − 3.3 − 18.2 2.5 12.4          Aug 
2.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 − 2.5 − 2.3 11.9 0.2 − 22.7 − 5.9 − 21.3 0.2 6.1          Sep 
− 0.7 − 0.1 0.0 0.0 1.5 0.5 − 0.4 − 0.1 − 11.0 − 10.2 − 7.1 − 3.1 2.1          Oct 
− 1.5 − 2.4 − 0.0 0.0 0.2 0.9 − 2.3 − 0.2 − 10.1 − 3.7 0.8 1.5 1.4          Nov 
− 1.1 0.6 0.0 0.0 − 3.3 − 1.9 − 0.5 − 0.6 − 24.6 − 11.8 − 31.4 12.8 − 17.1          Dec 
0.1 − 1.6 0.0 0.0 0.2 − 0.9 − 12.3 0.8 − 6.2 − 5.3 26.3 − 13.0 − 17.0 2010          Jan 
− 5.5 − 4.8 0.0 0.0 − 0.4 − 0.6 10.7 − 0.1 − 10.9 − 2.7 6.4 − 1.2 − 9.4          Feb 
− 1.4 − 1.5 0.0 0.0 − 1.5 − 0.4 1.0 − 0.4 6.0 − 2.0 13.0 4.0 10.3          Mar 
2.7 3.1 0.0 0.0 0.1 − 0.5 20.8 − 0.3 − 4.0 − 6.0 47.5 1.6 − 10.1          Apr 
− 3.9 − 3.2 0.0 0.0 1.5 0.8 0.7 − 0.0 − 16.0 − 4.4 49.6 − 5.3 6.8          May
0.1 0.2 0.0 0.0 − 0.9 0.2 1.3 − 0.3 − 15.6 − 15.4 − 33.9 − 4.6 37.3          June
2Excluding deposits of central governments. — 3In Germany, debt paper; up to the January 2002 Monthly Report they were published
securities with maturities of up to one year are classed as money market together with money market fund shares. 
23*IV Banks

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
E U R O S Y S T E M
Monthly Report
August 2010
IV Banks
 
2 Principal assets and liabilities of banks (MFIs) in Germany, by category of banks *
 
 
€ billion
  Lending to banks (MFIs)  Lending to non-banks (non-MFIs)
 
 of which of which
 
Loans
 Cash in
 hand and
 credit
Number of balances for
reporting Balance with Balances up to and for Partici- Securities Securities
End of institu- sheet central and issued by including more than issued by pating Other
month tions total banks Total loans banks Total 1 year 1 year Bills non-banks interests assets
All categories of banks
 
2010          Jan 1,938 7,525.5 75.2 3,001.4 2,144.5 821.7 3,940.7 465.7 2,702.4 1.1 755.4 152.4 355.8
         Feb 1,938 7,522.7 73.4 3,018.4 2,168.9 816.8 3,938.4 461.9 2,705.7 1.0 756.1 146.6 346.0
         Mar 1,938 7,527.9 104.0 2,992.2 2,138.8 821.4 3,921.3 464.4 2,695.8 1.0 746.0 147.9 362.5
         Apr 1,937 7,643.7 80.4 3,061.8 2,214.9 815.8 3,993.1 499.4 2,702.9 0.9 776.5 148.5 359.8
         May 1,937 7,755.8 72.3 3,174.3 2,340.9 800.3 3,984.5 514.5 2,724.2 0.9 731.8 147.7 377.0
         June 1,937 7,715.7 130.3 3,062.2 2,243.1 786.4 3,980.2 501.8 2,720.8 0.8 737.4 153.5 389.6
Commercial banks 5
2010          May 278 2,376.5 29.7 1,043.8 911.5 113.1 1,085.9 259.3 624.3 0.4 194.8 73.9 143.2
         June 279 2,311.0 68.5 958.3 829.9 110.6 1,063.2 238.2 620.3 0.4 193.6 80.2 140.8
   Big banks 6
2010          May 4 1,374.9 17.4 631.8 554.5 58.5 545.7 164.4 265.8 0.3 108.8 66.5 113.6
         June 4 1,329.8 56.0 560.3 484.7 58.1 528.5 145.5 262.1 0.3 110.6 72.8 112.3
   Regional banks and other commercial banks
2010          May 170 776.3 10.3 265.7 212.9 52.4 468.0 72.5 313.2 0.1 81.9 7.1 25.2
         June 170 768.0 10.6 262.3 211.2 50.9 463.8 68.9 314.2 0.1 80.2 7.1 24.1
   Branches of foreign banks
2010          May 104 225.3 2.0 146.4 144.2 2.2 72.2 22.3 45.2 0.0 4.2 0.3 4.4
         June 105 213.1 2.0 135.7 134.1 1.6 70.9 23.8 43.9 0.0 2.8 0.3 4.3
Landesbanken
2010          May 10 1,439.3 4.9 660.4 501.9 149.5 680.5 103.6 447.5 0.1 123.7 21.2 72.3
         June 10 1,445.0 12.0 647.3 491.8 145.3 695.0 110.5 443.2 0.1 132.9 20.6 70.1
Savings banks
2010          May 430 1,071.2 21.3 264.3 93.6 169.7 751.5 61.7 586.6 0.2 102.8 17.3 16.8
         June 430 1,072.7 23.2 259.7 92.0 166.5 755.4 62.9 588.8 0.2 103.4 17.3 17.1
 
Regional institutions of credit cooperatives  
 
2010          May 2 267.1 0.1 166.0 121.4 42.8 65.2 16.1 20.6 0.0 28.2 14.9 21.0
         June 2 263.2 1.5 167.4 123.3 42.6 59.0 12.8 20.2 0.0 26.0 14.9 20.4
Credit cooperatives
2010          May 1,157 701.7 14.4 198.6 76.0 122.1 458.5 34.0 361.2 0.1 63.2 11.5 18.7
         June 1,156 703.8 16.3 196.2 75.0 120.6 460.9 34.6 363.1 0.1 63.2 11.5 18.8
Mortgage banks
2010          May 18 768.5 0.4 276.5 183.9 92.4 477.1 10.9 349.6 − 116.6 1.4 13.1
         June 18 778.1 1.1 280.2 189.6 90.2 477.9 11.5 349.8 − 116.5 1.4 17.6
Building and loan associations
2010          May 24 195.5 0.0 56.7 37.5 19.2 126.5 1.5 111.2 . 13.8 0.3 11.9
         June 24 196.2 0.2 56.4 37.5 18.8 127.2 1.7 111.7 . 13.9 0.3 12.1
Special purpose banks
2010          May 18 936.0 1.6 507.9 415.2 91.6 339.3 27.3 223.3 − 88.7 7.3 80.0
         June 18 945.6 7.4 496.6 403.8 91.8 341.6 29.8 223.8 − 87.9 7.3 92.8
Memo item: Foreign banks 7
2010          May 145 883.1 12.2 400.3 344.1 54.0 435.7 77.9 270.8 0.2 84.0 5.3 29.5
         June 149 898.5 12.1 400.5 343.0 55.3 437.8 79.7 272.2 0.2 83.0 12.3 35.8
  of which:  Banks majority-owned by foreign banks 8
2010          May 41 657.8 10.2 253.9 199.9 51.8 363.5 55.5 225.6 0.2 79.9 5.1 25.1
         June 44 685.4 10.2 264.8 208.9 53.7 366.8 56.0 228.3 0.1 80.2 12.0 31.5
*For the period up to December 1998, section IV (except for Table IV.1) MFIs) and of the Bundesbank are not included. For the definitions of the
shows the assets and liabilities of banks (excluding building and loan respective items, see the footnotes to Table IV.3. — 1For building and loan
associations) in Germany; from January 1999, the assets and liabilities of associations: Including deposits under savings and loan contracts (see T able
monetary financial institutions (MFIs) in Germany. The assets and liabilities IV.12). — 2Included in time deposits. — 3Excluding deposits under savings
of foreign branches, of money market funds (which are also classified as and loan contracts (see also footnote 2). — 4Including subordinated
24*IV Banks

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2010
IV Banks
 
 
 
 
 
Deposits of banks (MFIs) Deposits of non-banks (non-MFIs) Capital
 including  
of which of which published
reserves,
Time deposits  1 Savings deposits  3 partici-
pation
Memo rights
item Bearer capital,
for for of which debt Liabilities funds for
up to and more arising At three Bank general securities
Sight Time Sight including than from savings out- banking Other   End of months’
Total deposits deposits Total deposits 1 year 1 year  1 repos  2 Total notice bonds risks   month standing  4 liabilities
All categories of banks
 
2,031.8 396.3 1,635.4 3,057.4 1,147.5 377.2 808.0 118.8 607.3 486.3 117.5 1,574.9 369.5 491.9 2010          Jan 
2,038.8 404.0 1,634.8 3,074.7 1,148.5 385.7 810.9 140.4 612.5 492.2 117.1 1,567.3 370.3 471.7          Feb 
2,029.6 407.8 1,621.8 3,055.2 1,132.5 384.5 807.0 137.2 614.4 494.1 116.9 1,578.0 370.4 494.8          Mar 
2,090.6 411.1 1,679.4 3,118.4 1,181.7 400.3 805.5 173.3 614.5 496.1 116.4 1,580.9 368.4 485.4          Apr 
2,171.3 450.6 1,720.7 3,138.7 1,205.6 402.9 799.0 188.5 614.7 498.1 116.6 1,584.8 365.0 495.9          May
2,145.3 472.0 1,673.3 3,121.9 1,200.8 393.3 797.2 174.0 614.1 498.8 116.4 1,562.9 367.2 518.5          June
Commercial banks 5
840.9 313.5 527.4 1,045.0 559.3 166.1 168.8 94.5 123.5 103.5 27.2 211.5 117.1 162.0 2010          May
801.1 315.4 485.7 1,015.2 533.2 162.7 168.8 75.7 122.1 102.1 28.3 208.5 117.8 168.4          June
Big banks 6
478.3 175.7 302.6 560.8 281.7 95.4 96.1 90.3 77.3 73.7 10.3 174.4 70.6 90.7 2010          May
454.1 182.3 271.8 536.7 262.0 92.3 95.9 70.0 76.3 72.7 10.3 170.8 70.6 97.6          June
Regional banks and other commercial banks
202.5 87.5 115.0 432.6 250.5 60.0 59.7 4.2 46.2 29.8 16.2 37.1 39.5 64.6 2010          May
198.9 83.1 115.8 427.0 244.8 60.2 58.9 5.7 45.8 29.4 17.3 37.7 40.2 64.3          June
Branches of foreign banks
160.1 50.3 109.9 51.6 27.1 10.8 13.0 − 0.0 0.0 0.7 0.0 6.9 6.7 2010          May
148.1 50.0 98.1 51.5 26.5 10.2 14.0 − 0.0 0.0 0.7 0.0 7.0 6.5          June
Landesbanken
446.3 58.9 387.3 406.9 88.6 115.0 188.0 79.6 13.9 11.3 1.5 420.5 65.9 99.7 2010          May
455.1 72.9 382.2 419.9 109.2 108.3 187.0 83.9 13.9 11.2 1.5 409.1 65.8 95.1          June
Savings banks
196.5 16.4 180.1 736.6 321.3 40.7 15.9 − 294.0 232.4 64.7 27.5 58.6 52.0 2010          May
197.6 16.7 180.9 735.1 320.5 40.4 15.9 − 294.6 233.8 63.8 27.0 59.3 53.6          June
 
Regional institutions of credit cooperatives
 
136.2 31.8 104.4 36.9 10.3 9.8 14.5 5.4 − − 2.3 58.7 11.8 23.4 2010          May
134.5 31.6 102.9 36.6 9.7 10.2 14.5 5.4 − − 2.3 57.8 11.8 22.4          June
Credit cooperatives
109.8 4.4 105.4 492.9 213.9 47.7 29.1 − 182.6 150.2 19.6 26.6 40.5 31.9 2010          May
110.7 4.1 106.6 493.4 214.9 47.2 29.0 − 182.9 151.1 19.4 26.0 41.1 32.6          June
Mortgage banks
237.0 6.8 230.2 193.7 5.1 15.9 172.3 7.2 0.4 0.4 0.0 296.9 18.5 22.4 2010          May
244.9 7.9 237.0 193.2 5.5 16.0 171.4 7.6 0.4 0.4 − 292.9 18.8 28.3          June
Building and loan associations
27.7 1.3 26.4 133.3 0.4 1.4 130.2 − 0.3 0.3 1.0 5.0 7.5 21.9 2010          May
27.4 1.7 25.7 133.7 0.4 1.3 130.6 − 0.3 0.3 1.0 5.3 7.5 22.3          June
Special purpose banks
176.8 17.4 159.5 93.3 6.7 6.2 80.1 1.8 − − 0.4 538.0 45.0 82.8 2010          May
173.9 21.7 152.2 94.7 7.2 7.1 80.2 1.4 − − 0.2 536.3 45.1 95.7          June
Memo item:   Foreign banks 7
352.1 150.0 202.1 373.0 191.9 66.7 84.6 18.2 20.6 20.3 9.2 68.2 42.2 47.6 2010          May
345.3 149.6 195.6 381.2 197.3 67.0 86.3 20.0 20.4 20.2 10.2 69.0 45.0 58.0          June
of which:   Banks majority-owned by foreign banks 8
192.0 99.8 92.2 321.4 164.8 56.0 71.5 18.2 20.5 20.3 8.6 68.2 35.3 40.9 2010          May
197.2 99.6 97.5 329.7 170.8 56.8 72.2 20.0 20.4 20.2 9.5 69.0 38.0 51.5          June
negotiable bearer debt securities; excluding non-negotiable bearer debt Vereinsbank AG) and Deutsche Postbank AG. — 7Sum of the banks
securities. — 5Commercial banks comprise the sub-groups ”Big banks”, majority-owned by foreign banks and included in other categories of banks
”Regional banks and other commercial banks” and ”Branches of foreign and the category ”Branches (with dependent legal status) of foreign
banks”. — 6Deutsche Bank AG, Dresdner Bank AG (up to Nov. 2009), banks”. — 8Separate presentation of the banks majority-owned by foreign
Commerzbank AG, UniCredit Bank AG (formerly Bayerische Hypo- und banks included in other banking categories. 
25*IV Banks

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
E U R O S Y S T E M
Monthly Report
August 2010
IV Banks
 
3 Assets and liabilities of banks (MFIs) in Germany vis-à-vis residents *
 
€ billion
Lending to domestic banks (MFIs)  2,3 Lending to domestic non-banks (non-MFIs)  3,6 
Treasury
Cash in Negotiable bills and
hand Credit money negotiable
balances market Memo money mar- (euro-area Securities
banknotes with the Credit paper item ket paper issued Securities
and Bundes- balances issued by issued by Fiduciary issued by by non-
Period coins)  1 bank Total and loans Bills  4 banks banks loans  5 Total Loans Bills  4 non-banks banks  7 
End of year or month *
 
2000 15.6 50.8 1,639.6 1,056.1 0.0 26.8 556.6 3.6 3,003.7 2,657.3 6.5 2.3 304.7
2001 14.2 56.3 1,676.0 1,078.9 0.0 5.6 591.5 2.8 3,014.1 2,699.4 4.8 4.4 301.5
2002 17.5 45.6 1,691.3 1,112.3 0.0 7.8 571.2 2.7 2,997.2 2,685.0 4.1 3.3 301.9
2003 17.0 46.7 1,643.9 1,064.0 0.0 8.8 571.0 2.3 2,995.6 2,677.0 3.7 3.4 309.6
2004 14.9 41.2 1,676.3 1,075.8 0.0 7.4 592.9 2.1 3,001.3 2,644.0 2.7 2.6 351.0
2005 15.1 47.9 1,684.5 1,096.8 0.0 6.7 580.9 2.1 2,995.1 2,632.7 2.4 2.4 357.6
2006 16.0 49.4 1,637.8 1,086.3 − 9.3 542.2 1.9 3,000.7 2,630.3 1.9 2.0 366.5
2007 17.5 64.6 1,751.8 1,222.5 0.0 25.3 504.0 2.3 2,975.7 2,647.9 1.6 1.5 324.7
2008 17.4 102.6 1,861.7 1,298.1 0.0 55.7 507.8 2.0 3,071.1 2,698.9 1.2 3.1 367.9
2009 16.9 78.9 1,711.5 1,138.0 − 31.6 541.9 2.2 3,100.1 2,691.8 0.8 4.0 403.5
2009          Jan 13.5 51.8 1,893.6 1,327.3 0.0 54.5 511.8 1.9 3,097.3 2,718.9 1.1 3.1 374.3
         Feb 13.4 54.4 1,865.5 1,299.3 0.0 52.2 514.0 1.9 3,091.2 2,709.8 0.9 3.2 377.2
         Mar 13.5 54.1 1,835.7 1,255.7 0.0 35.9 544.2 1.7 3,101.4 2,720.6 0.9 3.7 376.2
         Apr 14.9 48.5 1,819.9 1,243.3 0.0 32.5 544.1 1.7 3,124.3 2,725.1 0.9 5.4 392.9
         May 15.4 73.3 1,771.0 1,187.2 0.0 29.3 554.6 1.6 3,106.5 2,720.5 0.9 5.8 379.3
         June 14.6 78.1 1,840.0 1,251.2 0.0 26.3 562.4 1.6 3,121.8 2,724.0 0.8 3.7 393.3
         July 13.5 55.4 1,811.6 1,219.6 0.0 24.6 567.4 1.7 3,116.5 2,720.1 0.8 5.3 390.3
         Aug 13.6 61.2 1,801.7 1,207.4 0.0 22.9 571.3 1.7 3,094.1 2,703.8 0.7 4.8 384.8
         Sep 13.5 88.1 1,751.1 1,163.2 0.0 19.0 568.9 1.8 3,110.3 2,714.8 0.7 7.0 387.9
         Oct 13.8 61.2 1,739.8 1,156.2 0.0 15.8 567.8 1.8 3,116.9 2,716.5 0.7 5.3 394.4
         Nov 13.5 73.8 1,729.6 1,149.1 0.0 13.6 566.9 1.9 3,117.3 2,712.8 0.7 5.4 398.4
         Dec 16.9 78.9 1,711.5 1,138.0 − 31.6 541.9 2.2 3,100.1 2,691.8 0.8 4.0 403.5
2010          Jan 13.9 60.9 1,723.0 1,157.7 0.0 29.8 535.5 2.0 3,111.5 2,691.3 0.8 4.0 415.3
         Feb 13.6 59.2 1,748.8 1,188.8 0.0 28.2 531.8 2.0 3,103.1 2,684.8 0.7 3.2 414.4
         Mar 13.9 89.5 1,720.0 1,158.7 − 27.2 534.1 1.9 3,098.8 2,681.7 0.8 3.1 413.3
         Apr 13.6 66.4 1,754.8 1,195.3 − 26.5 533.0 1.9 3,140.8 2,697.2 0.7 2.0 440.9
         May 14.2 57.5 1,817.8 1,267.0 − 26.5 524.3 1.9 3,130.1 2,707.8 0.6 2.5 419.2
         June 13.7 116.1 1,761.1 1,223.2 0.0 26.5 511.3 1.9 3,147.5 2,716.5 0.6 7.9 422.5
Changes *
2001 − 1.4 + 5.5 + 34.6 + 20.1 − 0.0 − 21.3 + 35.8 − 0.9 + 11.9 + 40.8 − 1.6 + 1.6 + 0.3
2002 + 3.3 − 10.7 + 15.0 + 33.1 + 0.0 + 2.3 − 20.3 − 0.2 − 19.2 − 18.0 − 0.8 − 1.1 + 1.7
2003 − 0.5 + 1.1 − 47.2 − 48.2 + 0.0 + 1.0 + 0.1 − 0.3 + 0.1 − 8.0 − 0.4 + 0.3 + 9.3
2004 − 2.1 − 5.5 + 35.9 + 15.1 + 0.0 − 1.4 + 22.1 − 0.2 + 3.3 − 35.0 − 1.0 + 1.1 + 39.2
2005 + 0.2 + 6.7 + 8.4 + 21.0 − 0.0 − 0.8 − 11.9 − 0.0 − 6.7 − 11.8 − 0.3 − 0.2 + 6.6
2006 + 0.9 + 1.5 − 3.6 + 24.5 − 0.0 + 2.6 − 30.6 − 0.2 − 12.4 − 20.3 − 0.5 − 0.4 + 8.8
2007 + 1.5 + 15.2 + 114.8 + 137.6 + 0.0 + 17.0 − 39.8 + 0.4 − 15.9 + 12.1 − 0.3 − 0.5 − 27.2
2008 − 0.1 + 39.4 + 125.9 + 90.1 + 0.0 + 30.6 + 5.2 − 0.8 + 92.0 + 47.3 − 0.4 + 1.8 + 43.3
2009 − 0.5 − 23.6 − 147.2 − 157.3 − 0.0 − 24.1 + 34.3 + 0.2 + 25.7 − 11.2 − 0.4 + 1.4 + 35.9
2009          Jan − 3.9 − 50.8 + 31.9 + 29.2 + 0.0 − 1.3 + 4.0 − 0.1 + 26.2 + 20.0 − 0.1 − 0.1 + 6.4
         Feb − 0.1 + 2.6 − 28.1 − 28.0 − 0.0 − 2.3 + 2.2 + 0.0 − 6.1 − 9.1 − 0.1 + 0.2 + 2.9
         Mar + 0.0 − 0.3 − 29.8 − 43.6 − − 16.3 + 30.1 − 0.2 + 9.2 + 9.8 − 0.0 + 0.4 − 1.0
         Apr + 1.5 − 5.5 − 15.9 − 12.4 − − 3.3 − 0.1 − 0.0 + 22.8 + 4.5 + 0.0 + 1.7 + 16.7
         May + 0.5 + 24.7 − 45.4 − 52.6 − − 3.2 + 10.5 − 0.1 − 16.9 − 4.6 − 0.1 + 0.5 − 12.8
         June − 0.9 + 4.8 + 69.0 + 64.0 + 0.0 − 3.0 + 7.9 − 0.0 + 15.8 + 3.5 − 0.1 − 1.6 + 14.0
         July − 1.1 − 22.6 − 28.4 − 31.6 − − 1.8 + 5.0 + 0.1 − 5.4 − 3.9 − 0.0 + 1.5 − 3.1
         Aug + 0.1 + 5.7 − 9.9 − 12.2 − 0.0 − 1.6 + 3.9 − 0.0 − 22.4 − 16.4 − 0.0 − 0.5 − 5.5
         Sep − 0.1 + 26.9 − 51.3 − 44.9 − 0.0 − 3.9 − 2.5 + 0.2 + 15.9 + 10.7 − 0.0 + 2.2 + 3.1
         Oct + 0.3 − 26.9 − 11.3 − 7.0 + 0.0 − 3.2 − 1.1 − 0.0 + 6.4 + 1.8 + 0.0 − 1.7 + 6.3
         Nov − 0.3 + 12.6 − 10.2 − 7.1 + 0.0 − 2.3 − 0.9 + 0.0 + 0.4 − 3.7 − 0.0 + 0.1 + 4.0
         Dec + 3.4 + 5.1 − 17.9 − 11.1 − 0.0 + 18.1 − 24.8 + 0.3 − 20.2 − 23.8 + 0.1 − 1.4 + 4.9
2010          Jan − 3.0 − 18.1 + 11.5 + 19.7 + 0.0 − 1.8 − 6.4 − 0.2 + 11.2 − 0.6 + 0.0 + 0.0 + 11.8
         Feb − 0.4 − 1.7 + 26.3 + 31.7 − 0.0 − 1.6 − 3.7 − 0.0 − 8.9 − 7.0 − 0.1 − 0.9 − 1.0
         Mar + 0.4 + 30.3 − 27.0 − 30.1 − 0.0 − 0.5 + 3.6 − 0.0 + 0.2 − 3.2 + 0.0 − 0.1 + 3.4
         Apr − 0.4 − 23.1 + 34.8 + 36.5 − − 0.7 − 1.1 − 0.0 + 42.1 + 15.5 − 0.1 − 1.1 + 27.7
         May + 0.7 − 8.9 + 63.0 + 71.7 − − 0.0 − 8.7 − 0.0 − 10.7 + 10.5 − 0.0 + 0.5 − 21.8
         June − 0.5 + 58.6 − 56.7 − 43.7 + 0.0 − 0.4 − 12.6 + 0.0 + 17.4 + 8.7 − 0.0 + 5.4 + 3.4
*See Table IV.2, footnote*; statistical breaks have been eliminated from the rediscounted bills and bills sent for collection from the banks’ portfol ios
changes. The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as prior to maturity). — 5From 1999, no longer included in loans or deposits
provisional. Subsequent revisions which appear in the following Monthly (see also footnote 3). — 6Up to December 1998, including loans to domestic
Report, are not specially marked. — 1Up to December 1998, domestic building and loan associations. — 7Excluding debt securities arising from
banknotes and coins. — 2Up to December 1998, excluding loans to the exchange of equalisation claims (see also footnote 8). — 8Including
domestic building and loan associations. — 3Up to December 1998, debt securities arising from the exchange of equalisation claims. —
including fiduciary loans (see also footnote 5). — 4Up to December 1998, 9Including liabilities arising from registered debt securities, registered
bill-based lending (bill holdings plus endorsement liabilities arising from money market paper and non-negotiable bearer debt securities;
26*IV Banks

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2010
IV Banks
 
 
 
 
 Deposits of domestic banks (MFIs)  3,9,10  Deposits of domestic non-banks (non-MFIs)  3,15 
Partici-
pating
interests
in
Memo domestic Memo Memo
item banks Sight Time Redis- item Sight Time Savings Bank item Equalisa-
tion Fiduciary and deposits deposits counted Fiduciary de- deposits de- savings Fiduciary
claims  8 loans  5 Total 11,12  12,13  bills 14 loans  5 Total 13,16  bonds  18 loans  5   Period enterprises posits  11 posits  17 
End of year or month *
 
33.1 58.5 82.7 1,189.2 113.4 1,075.3 0.4 30.1 1,945.8 443.4 819.9 573.5 109.0 42.1 2000
4.0 57.0 95.9 1,204.9 123.1 1,081.6 0.3 27.2 2,034.0 526.4 827.0 574.5 106.0 43.3 2001
3.0 54.8 119.0 1,244.0 127.6 1,116.2 0.2 25.6 2,085.9 575.6 830.6 575.3 104.4 42.1 2002
2.0 56.8 109.2 1,229.6 116.8 1,112.6 0.2 27.8 2,140.3 624.0 825.7 590.3 100.3 40.5 2003
1.0 61.8 99.6 1,271.2 119.7 1,151.4 0.1 30.3 2,200.0 646.9 851.2 603.5 98.4 43.7 2004
− 56.6 108.5 1,300.0 120.5 1,179.4 0.1 26.5 2,276.6 717.0 864.4 603.4 91.9 42.4 2005
− 53.0 106.3 1,348.2 125.4 1,222.7 0.0 22.3 2,394.6 747.7 962.8 586.5 97.5 37.8 2006
− 51.1 109.4 1,478.6 122.1 1,356.5 0.0 20.0 2,579.1 779.9 1,125.4 555.4 118.4 36.4 2007
− 47.2 111.2 1,582.5 138.5 1,444.0 0.0 41.6 2,781.4 834.6 1,276.1 535.2 135.4 32.3 2008
− 43.9 106.1 1,355.1 128.9 1,226.2 0.0 35.7 2,829.7 1,029.5 1,102.6 594.5 103.2 43.4 2009
− 46.9 115.6 1,532.6 155.0 1,377.6 0.0 41.9 2,799.9 884.4 1,242.7 539.0 133.8 31.9 2009          Jan 
− 46.5 116.4 1,509.5 159.0 1,350.4 0.0 42.0 2,820.0 912.1 1,231.8 544.3 131.9 31.8          Feb 
− 46.4 119.5 1,455.9 138.3 1,317.7 0.0 40.6 2,817.3 914.0 1,226.4 547.8 129.1 30.9          Mar 
− 45.5 119.1 1,458.0 153.2 1,304.8 0.0 39.6 2,839.6 932.2 1,231.1 551.1 125.2 31.1          Apr 
− 44.7 110.6 1,444.8 121.6 1,323.1 0.0 38.3 2,837.0 935.4 1,224.4 555.1 122.1 31.2          May
− 44.2 108.4 1,467.8 117.4 1,350.4 0.0 37.6 2,847.3 956.0 1,213.1 559.7 118.5 31.1          June
− 43.8 107.5 1,417.1 119.2 1,297.9 0.0 37.2 2,819.9 954.4 1,185.6 565.5 114.4 31.2          July
− 43.5 108.0 1,413.9 125.7 1,288.2 0.0 36.9 2,801.5 962.4 1,157.0 570.8 111.2 42.0          Aug 
− 43.2 107.7 1,380.6 129.9 1,250.7 0.0 36.3 2,810.6 987.2 1,139.6 575.1 108.6 42.2          Sep 
− 42.9 103.7 1,372.8 126.2 1,246.7 0.0 35.8 2,812.0 1,014.0 1,110.4 581.8 105.9 42.2          Oct 
− 42.8 102.7 1,375.3 150.5 1,224.8 0.0 35.5 2,825.5 1,037.6 1,098.1 585.6 104.2 42.2          Nov 
− 43.9 106.1 1,355.1 128.9 1,226.2 0.0 35.7 2,829.7 1,029.5 1,102.6 594.5 103.2 43.4          Dec 
− 43.4 104.3 1,348.2 142.4 1,205.8 0.0 35.7 2,820.3 1,051.3 1,070.0 597.7 101.3 43.0 2010          Jan 
− 43.3 98.9 1,360.7 150.4 1,210.3 0.0 36.0 2,830.1 1,055.9 1,070.5 602.9 100.8 43.0          Feb 
− 42.9 98.7 1,327.9 129.4 1,198.5 0.0 36.1 2,819.0 1,040.0 1,073.7 604.7 100.5 42.8          Mar 
− 42.8 98.6 1,340.4 140.3 1,200.1 0.0 36.1 2,852.0 1,070.3 1,077.0 604.8 99.9 42.7          Apr 
− 42.8 97.8 1,355.5 139.6 1,215.9 0.0 37.1 2,867.5 1,089.6 1,073.1 605.1 99.7 42.7          May
− 42.5 97.6 1,365.2 140.1 1,225.0 0.0 36.8 2,867.5 1,090.5 1,073.1 604.4 99.5 42.4          June
Changes *
− 29.1 − 1.5 + 13.3 + 9.6 + 7.4 + 2.3 − 0.2 − 2.9 + 88.5 + 82.3 + 8.1 + 1.1 − 2.9 + 1.0 2001
− 1.0 − 2.1 + 24.2 + 37.9 + 1.7 + 36.3 − 0.1 − 1.5 + 51.7 + 48.4 + 4.1 + 0.8 − 1.6 − 1.1 2002
− 1.0 + 2.1 − 9.8 − 5.6 − 9.5 + 3.9 + 0.0 + 2.4 + 54.0 + 48.4 − 4.8 + 15.1 − 4.8 − 1.2 2003
− 1.1 + 3.0 − 9.6 + 41.3 + 2.9 + 38.5 − 0.1 + 2.4 + 62.0 + 24.4 + 25.9 + 13.1 − 1.5 + 1.2 2004
− 1.0 − 4.9 + 8.9 + 28.9 + 0.8 + 28.0 + 0.0 − 3.5 + 76.6 + 70.7 + 12.4 − 1.2 − 5.4 − 1.2 2005
− − 3.7 − 2.2 + 79.0 + 8.6 + 70.5 − 0.1 − 4.5 + 118.0 + 30.0 + 97.7 − 16.8 + 7.2 − 4.1 2006
− − 2.3 + 3.1 + 132.0 − 3.3 + 135.3 − 0.0 − 2.3 + 181.1 + 31.6 + 160.5 − 31.1 + 20.1 − 2.0 2007
− − 5.4 + 7.8 + 124.3 + 23.0 + 101.3 − 0.0 − 3.6 + 207.6 + 54.3 + 156.6 − 20.2 + 17.0 − 1.3 2008
− − 4.2 + 0.7 − 225.4 − 9.7 − 215.7 − 0.0 − 5.7 + 59.7 + 211.4 − 179.3 + 59.3 − 31.6 − 0.9 2009
− − 0.3 + 4.4 − 49.9 + 16.5 − 66.4 − 0.0 + 0.3 + 18.5 + 49.7 − 33.5 + 3.8 − 1.5 − 0.4 2009          Jan 
− − 0.3 + 0.7 − 23.1 + 4.0 − 27.1 − + 0.1 + 20.2 + 27.7 − 10.9 + 5.3 − 2.0 − 0.1          Feb 
− − 0.6 + 3.2 − 53.6 − 20.7 − 32.8 − 0.0 − 1.4 − 3.0 + 1.9 − 6.1 + 3.5 − 2.4 − 0.9          Mar 
− − 0.9 − 0.4 + 1.8 + 14.9 − 13.2 + 0.0 − 1.0 + 22.3 + 34.9 − 12.0 + 3.3 − 3.9 + 0.2          Apr 
− − 0.2 − 2.6 − 9.8 − 31.6 + 21.8 − 0.0 − 1.1 − 2.6 + 3.0 − 6.5 + 3.9 − 3.1 − 0.0          May
− − 0.4 − 2.2 + 23.0 − 4.3 + 27.3 − 0.0 − 0.7 + 10.3 + 20.6 − 11.3 + 4.7 − 3.7 − 0.1          June
− − 0.4 − 0.8 − 50.6 + 1.9 − 52.5 − − 0.4 − 27.4 − 1.7 − 27.4 + 5.8 − 4.1 + 0.1          July
− − 0.3 + 0.5 − 3.3 + 6.4 − 9.7 − 0.0 − 0.3 − 7.0 + 8.0 − 17.2 + 5.3 − 3.1 + 0.0          Aug 
− − 0.3 − 0.3 − 34.3 + 4.3 − 38.5 − 0.0 − 0.6 + 9.1 + 24.7 − 17.4 + 4.3 − 2.6 + 0.2          Sep 
− − 0.3 − 4.1 − 7.8 − 3.8 − 4.1 + 0.0 − 0.5 + 1.7 + 26.8 − 29.3 + 6.6 − 2.5 + 0.1          Oct 
− − 0.1 − 0.9 + 2.5 + 24.4 − 21.9 − 0.0 − 0.3 + 13.5 + 23.6 − 12.3 + 3.8 − 1.7 + 0.0          Nov 
− + 0.0 + 3.3 − 20.2 − 21.7 + 1.5 + 0.0 + 0.2 + 4.3 − 8.1 + 4.5 + 8.9 − 1.0 + 0.1          Dec 
− − 0.5 − 1.7 − 6.9 + 13.6 − 20.4 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 9.5 + 21.9 − 32.6 + 3.2 − 1.9 − 0.5 2010          Jan 
− − 0.1 − 5.4 + 12.4 + 7.9 + 4.5 + 0.0 + 0.3 + 9.9 + 4.6 + 0.5 + 5.2 − 0.5 − 0.0          Feb 
− − 0.4 − 0.2 − 17.2 − 5.4 − 11.8 − 0.0 + 0.0 − 11.2 − 15.9 + 3.2 + 1.8 − 0.4 − 0.2          Mar 
− − 0.1 − 0.1 + 13.6 + 10.9 + 2.7 − 0.0 + 0.0 + 32.0 + 30.3 + 2.2 + 0.1 − 0.6 − 0.0          Apr 
− − 0.0 − 0.9 + 15.1 − 0.7 + 15.8 − 0.0 + 1.0 + 15.4 + 19.3 − 3.9 + 0.2 − 0.2 − 0.0          May
− − 0.3 − 0.2 + 9.7 + 0.5 + 9.1 + 0.0 − 0.3 + 0.1 + 1.4 − 0.5 − 0.6 − 0.3 − 0.3          June
including subordinated liabilities. — 10Up to December 1998, excluding endorsement liabilities arising from rediscounted bills. — 15Up to
liabilities to domestic building and loan associations and money market December 1998, including liabilities to domestic building and loan
funds. — 11Up to December 1998, including time deposits with terms of associations and money market funds. — 16Since the inclusion of building
less than one month. — 12Including liabilities arising from monetary policy and loan associations in January 1999, including deposits under savings and
operations with the Bundesbank. — 13Up to December 1998, excluding loan contracts (see Table IV.12). — 17Excluding deposits under savings and
time deposits with terms of less than one month. — 14Own acceptances loan contracts (see also footnote 16). — 18Including liabilities arising from
and promissory notes outstanding and, up to December 1998, including non-negotiable bearer debt securities. 
27*IV Banks

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
E U R O S Y S T E M
Monthly Report
August 2010
IV Banks
 
4 Assets and liabilities of banks (MFIs) in Germany vis-à-vis non-residents *
 
€ billion
Lending to foreign banks (MFIs)  2 Lending to foreign non-banks (non-MFIs)  2 
Treasury
Cash in bills and
hand Loans and bills  3 negotiable Credit balances and loans, bills  3 Negotiable
(non- money money
euro-area Medium market Memo Medium market
banknotes and paper item and paper Securities Securities
and Short- long- issued by issued by Fiduciary Short- long- issued by issued by
Period coins)  1 Total Total term term banks banks loans  4 Total Total term term non-banks non-banks
End of year or month *
 
2000 0.4 507.7 441.4 325.4 116.0 1.3 65.0 3.6 475.8 286.8 71.1 215.7 6.5 182.5
2001 0.4 596.1 521.7 383.7 138.0 0.8 73.6 3.5 570.3 347.2 99.7 247.5 5.2 217.9
2002 0.3 690.6 615.3 468.0 147.2 0.9 74.4 2.7 558.8 332.6 92.6 240.0 9.3 216.9
2003 0.3 769.6 675.8 515.7 160.1 1.5 92.3 1.6 576.3 344.8 110.9 233.9 6.0 225.4
2004 0.2 889.4 760.2 606.5 153.7 2.8 126.3 1.5 629.5 362.5 136.6 225.9 10.9 256.1
2005 0.2 1,038.8 860.0 648.5 211.5 5.8 173.0 1.5 712.0 387.9 132.8 255.1 9.3 314.8
2006 0.4 1,266.9 1,003.2 744.5 258.7 13.3 250.4 0.8 777.0 421.0 156.0 264.9 7.2 348.9
2007 0.3 1,433.5 1,105.9 803.6 302.4 13.4 314.2 0.5 908.3 492.9 197.5 295.4 27.5 387.9
2008 0.3 1,446.6 1,131.6 767.2 364.3 15.6 299.5 1.9 908.4 528.9 151.4 377.5 12.9 366.6
2009 0.3 1,277.4 986.1 643.5 342.6 6.2 285.0 2.9 815.7 469.6 116.9 352.7 9.8 336.3
2009          Jan 0.4 1,433.6 1,122.7 743.9 378.8 14.8 296.1 1.9 915.4 541.1 153.8 387.3 12.2 362.1
         Feb 0.4 1,416.2 1,111.4 733.1 378.3 12.2 292.6 1.9 905.6 529.5 141.1 388.4 11.3 364.7
         Mar 0.5 1,357.7 1,058.2 686.2 372.0 10.0 289.5 1.9 880.9 514.4 135.4 379.1 9.8 356.6
         Apr 0.4 1,378.9 1,081.8 713.6 368.2 9.2 287.9 1.9 896.0 530.1 147.2 382.9 11.6 354.3
         May 0.4 1,355.9 1,057.7 691.4 366.3 6.7 291.4 2.0 884.5 516.3 143.5 372.8 12.3 355.9
         June 0.5 1,332.8 1,036.7 653.2 383.5 8.2 287.8 2.0 879.9 513.5 142.6 370.9 11.6 354.7
         July 0.4 1,310.8 1,016.8 639.5 377.3 8.6 285.5 2.0 875.4 510.3 136.8 373.5 13.8 351.3
         Aug 0.3 1,311.7 1,017.4 647.4 370.0 8.3 286.1 3.1 851.5 491.7 130.6 361.1 13.1 346.6
         Sep 0.4 1,261.1 967.7 608.1 359.6 8.1 285.2 3.0 840.2 482.3 125.6 356.7 11.1 346.8
         Oct 0.4 1,278.7 987.6 637.1 350.5 7.8 283.3 3.0 836.3 480.4 127.2 353.3 13.1 342.7
         Nov 0.3 1,274.1 981.6 637.6 344.1 9.0 283.5 3.0 828.7 473.2 124.5 348.8 13.2 342.3
         Dec 0.3 1,277.4 986.1 643.5 342.6 6.2 285.0 2.9 815.7 469.6 116.9 352.7 9.8 336.3
2010          Jan 0.4 1,278.4 986.8 647.2 339.6 5.3 286.2 2.9 829.2 477.1 121.1 356.0 12.1 340.1
         Feb 0.6 1,269.6 980.1 640.5 339.5 4.5 285.0 2.9 835.3 483.0 122.5 360.5 10.5 341.8
         Mar 0.5 1,272.2 980.1 640.2 339.8 4.8 287.3 3.0 822.5 478.7 119.5 359.2 11.1 332.7
         Apr 0.4 1,307.0 1,019.7 681.4 338.3 4.6 282.8 3.0 852.3 505.3 143.7 361.7 11.4 335.6
         May 0.5 1,356.5 1,073.9 725.7 348.3 6.6 276.0 3.0 854.4 531.2 156.2 375.0 10.6 312.7
         June 0.4 1,301.1 1,019.9 678.6 341.2 6.1 275.1 3.0 832.7 506.4 134.6 371.8 11.5 314.9
Changes *
2001 + 0.0 + 83.7 + 75.6 + 54.4 + 21.2 − 0.5 + 8.5 − 0.2 + 88.3 + 53.4 + 27.0 + 26.4 − 1.5 + 36.3
2002 − 0.1 + 120.3 + 118.0 + 99.4 + 18.6 + 0.1 + 2.2 − 0.9 + 21.2 + 12.7 − 0.4 + 13.2 + 4.6 + 3.9
2003 − 0.1 + 103.8 + 84.6 + 65.2 + 19.3 + 0.6 + 18.7 − 0.4 + 46.3 + 35.1 + 24.0 + 11.0 − 2.7 + 13.9
2004 − 0.1 + 128.3 + 89.4 + 95.3 − 5.9 + 1.3 + 37.6 − 0.1 + 65.8 + 29.5 + 31.7 − 2.2 + 5.1 + 31.1
2005 + 0.0 + 127.3 + 78.9 + 26.3 + 52.6 + 2.9 + 45.4 − 0.0 + 59.4 + 7.3 − 9.4 + 16.7 − 1.8 + 54.0
2006 + 0.1 + 238.3 + 153.5 + 109.7 + 43.8 + 7.5 + 77.2 − 0.7 + 81.4 + 51.6 + 25.9 + 25.8 − 1.8 + 31.5
2007 − 0.0 + 190.3 + 123.7 + 72.9 + 50.8 + 7.5 + 59.1 − 0.4 + 167.7 + 94.3 + 50.1 + 44.2 + 20.1 + 53.3
2008 + 0.0 + 8.5 + 20.2 − 43.0 + 63.2 + 2.1 − 13.7 − 0.0 + 4.3 + 45.1 − 31.9 + 77.0 − 14.5 − 26.3
2009 − 0.0 − 170.0 − 141.3 − 122.5 − 18.8 −10.3 − 18.4 − 0.2 − 72.8 − 43.8 − 31.7 − 12.1 − 3.3 − 25.7
2009          Jan + 0.1 − 39.9 − 34.8 − 39.1 + 4.2 − 0.8 − 4.2 + 0.1 − 15.8 − 5.3 − 1.5 − 3.9 − 0.7 − 9.7
         Feb − 0.0 − 19.3 − 13.5 − 12.0 − 1.5 − 3.1 − 2.7 + 0.0 − 12.8 − 13.6 − 13.3 − 0.4 − 0.9 + 1.8
         Mar + 0.1 − 42.4 − 37.7 − 38.1 + 0.4 − 2.2 − 2.5 − 0.0 − 9.8 − 3.7 − 3.2 − 0.5 − 1.5 − 4.7
         Apr − 0.1 + 18.4 + 21.3 + 26.0 − 4.7 − 0.8 − 2.1 − 0.0 + 13.0 + 14.5 + 11.6 + 2.9 + 1.5 − 3.0
         May − 0.0 − 14.1 − 10.9 − 14.3 + 3.5 − 2.5 − 0.7 − 0.1 + 6.3 − 2.9 − 1.1 − 1.8 + 0.8 + 8.4
         June + 0.1 − 23.9 − 21.2 − 38.2 + 17.0 + 1.0 − 3.7 − 0.0 − 4.3 − 2.5 − 0.2 − 2.3 − 0.7 − 1.0
         July − 0.0 − 21.8 − 19.9 − 13.7 − 6.1 + 0.3 − 2.3 + 0.0 − 5.0 − 3.4 − 5.8 + 2.4 + 2.2 − 3.8
         Aug − 0.1 + 4.9 + 4.7 + 9.7 − 5.0 − 0.3 + 0.5 + 0.0 − 10.9 − 6.4 − 5.0 − 1.4 − 0.7 − 3.7
         Sep + 0.1 − 43.7 − 43.5 − 35.9 − 7.6 − 0.1 − 0.1 − 0.1 − 5.5 − 4.6 − 3.9 − 0.8 − 2.0 + 1.1
         Oct − 0.0 + 19.4 + 21.7 + 30.1 − 8.4 − 0.4 − 2.0 − 0.0 − 1.2 − 0.1 + 1.9 − 1.9 + 2.1 − 3.2
         Nov − 0.0 − 1.3 − 2.8 + 2.2 − 5.1 + 1.2 + 0.3 − 0.0 − 4.3 − 4.6 − 2.1 − 2.5 + 0.0 + 0.2
         Dec + 0.0 − 6.4 − 4.8 + 0.8 − 5.6 − 2.8 + 1.1 − 0.1 − 22.6 − 11.2 − 9.2 − 2.0 − 3.4 − 8.1
2010          Jan + 0.1 − 7.4 − 7.5 − 1.0 − 6.5 − 0.9 + 1.0 + 0.0 + 5.4 + 2.5 + 2.8 − 0.3 + 2.3 + 0.5
         Feb + 0.2 − 14.1 − 11.8 − 9.2 − 2.6 − 0.9 − 1.5 − 0.0 − 0.0 + 1.2 + 0.6 + 0.6 − 1.6 + 0.4
         Mar − 0.1 + 2.5 − 1.5 − 1.1 − 0.4 + 0.3 + 3.7 + 0.1 − 6.7 − 5.8 − 3.3 − 2.5 + 0.7 − 1.6
         Apr − 0.1 + 34.9 + 36.3 + 39.4 − 3.1 − 0.3 − 1.1 − 0.0 + 23.0 + 24.0 + 23.5 + 0.5 + 0.3 − 1.3
         May + 0.1 + 30.6 + 35.8 + 34.5 + 1.2 + 2.0 − 7.1 + 0.0 − 18.3 + 10.2 + 8.8 + 1.4 − 0.8 − 27.7
         June − 0.1 − 55.9 − 54.1 − 48.3 − 5.8 − 1.1 − 0.7 − 0.0 − 24.8 − 27.2 − 24.5 − 2.7 + 0.9 + 1.5
*See Table IV.2, footnote*; statistical breaks have been eliminated from the banknotes and coins. — 2Up to December 1998, including fiduciary loans
changes. The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as (see also footnote 4). — 3Up to December 1998, bill-based lending (bill
provisional. Subsequent revisions, which appear in the following Monthly holdings plus endorsement liabilities arising from rediscounted bills a nd bills
Report, are not specially marked. — 1Up to December 1998, foreign sent for collection from the banks’ portfolios prior to maturity). —
28*IV Banks

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2010
IV Banks
 
 
 
 
 Deposits of foreign banks (MFIs)  2 Deposits of foreign non-banks (non-MFIs)  2 
 Partici- Time deposits (including
pating Time deposits (including bank savings deposits and bank
interests savings bonds) savings bonds)
in foreign
Memo banks Medium Memo Medium Memo
item and and item and item
Fiduciary enter- Sight Short- long- Fiduciary Sight Short- long- Fiduciary
loans  4 prises  5 Total Total  7 term  7 term loans  4 Total Total  7 term  7 term loans  4   Period deposits  6 deposits  6 
End of year or month *
 
13.9 47.4 586.0 113.7 472.2 382.9 89.3 1.7 314.9 35.4 279.5 62.5 217.0 5.6 2000
13.8 47.6 622.7 91.9 530.8 434.5 96.3 1.4 350.6 34.0 316.6 97.6 219.0 5.3 2001
15.6 44.8 614.2 101.6 512.7 410.4 102.3 1.1 319.2 33.5 285.7 87.0 198.7 4.5 2002
11.6 41.4 590.7 95.1 495.6 387.7 107.9 0.4 307.3 32.2 275.1 102.4 172.7 3.6 2003
9.8 39.3 603.3 87.0 516.2 403.2 113.0 0.5 311.2 36.6 274.7 123.4 151.2 0.8 2004
10.6 37.2 651.7 102.9 548.8 420.4 128.4 0.6 316.4 62.0 254.4 119.4 135.0 1.2 2005
5.8 50.4 689.7 168.1 521.6 397.3 124.3 0.4 310.1 82.1 228.0 111.5 116.5 1.5 2006
5.7 48.3 738.9 164.7 574.1 461.2 113.0 0.2 303.1 76.0 227.1 122.3 104.8 3.1 2007
25.5 45.1 703.3 218.1 485.1 362.3 122.9 0.3 286.1 92.2 193.9 95.1 98.8 2.5 2008
32.1 45.4 652.6 213.6 439.0 307.4 131.6 0.2 216.3 78.1 138.2 73.7 64.5 1.9 2009
25.9 50.9 737.2 253.1 484.1 359.6 124.6 0.3 306.8 123.8 183.0 82.4 100.7 2.6 2009          Jan 
26.1 49.4 733.1 251.7 481.4 356.7 124.6 0.3 279.9 100.5 179.4 78.5 100.9 2.5          Feb 
24.1 49.5 705.4 266.8 438.7 315.7 122.9 0.3 273.0 103.7 169.3 71.3 98.0 2.5          Mar 
24.2 50.0 729.0 228.6 500.4 378.6 121.8 0.3 288.8 100.4 188.4 91.5 96.9 2.4          Apr 
23.8 49.7 718.8 214.4 504.4 353.6 150.8 0.3 239.2 102.5 136.7 72.1 64.7 2.3          May
23.3 49.7 720.6 247.2 473.4 321.9 151.5 0.3 237.5 102.5 135.0 70.9 64.1 2.1          June
23.2 49.7 699.5 227.9 471.7 321.9 149.8 0.3 250.7 112.3 138.3 73.2 65.1 2.0          July
32.9 49.6 682.3 215.3 467.1 321.8 145.2 0.3 243.9 100.5 143.4 79.7 63.7 2.0          Aug 
32.5 49.3 665.4 218.9 446.5 304.7 141.9 0.2 237.0 94.7 142.3 76.1 66.2 2.0          Sep 
32.3 49.2 657.2 226.4 430.9 291.5 139.4 0.2 245.0 103.8 141.1 75.5 65.7 1.9          Oct 
32.1 51.1 651.3 235.9 415.4 281.6 133.7 0.2 241.0 93.2 147.8 82.1 65.7 1.9          Nov 
32.1 45.4 652.6 213.6 439.0 307.4 131.6 0.2 216.3 78.1 138.2 73.7 64.5 1.9          Dec 
32.4 48.0 683.5 253.9 429.6 299.0 130.6 0.2 237.2 96.1 141.0 74.7 66.4 1.9 2010          Jan 
32.8 47.7 678.1 253.6 424.5 293.3 131.2 0.2 244.5 92.6 152.0 82.3 69.7 1.9          Feb 
32.8 49.2 701.7 278.4 423.3 289.7 133.6 0.1 236.2 92.4 143.8 76.8 67.0 1.8          Mar 
32.9 49.9 750.2 270.8 479.3 345.4 134.0 0.1 266.4 111.4 155.0 88.8 66.2 1.8          Apr 
33.9 49.9 815.8 311.0 504.8 367.4 137.4 0.1 271.2 116.0 155.2 88.7 66.5 1.7          May
33.6 55.9 780.1 331.9 448.2 310.4 137.8 0.1 254.3 110.3 144.1 77.7 66.4 1.7          June
Changes *
− 0.5 − 0.5 + 23.5 − 23.6 + 47.0 + 42.4 + 4.6 − 0.4 + 30.8 − 1.8 + 32.6 + 33.3 − 0.7 − 0.6 2001
+ 1.7 + 1.6 + 22.7 + 14.6 + 8.1 − 1.3 + 9.4 − 0.3 + 4.6 + 0.8 + 3.8 − 4.6 + 8.4 − 0.9 2002
− 0.7 − 1.9 + 5.7 − 2.0 + 7.7 − 2.4 + 10.0 − 0.0 + 4.5 + 0.4 + 4.1 + 20.6 − 16.5 + 1.9 2003
+ 0.7 − 1.5 + 19.8 − 6.1 + 25.9 + 21.1 + 4.8 + 0.1 + 13.0 + 5.4 + 7.6 + 22.8 − 15.2 − 0.3 2004
+ 0.8 − 3.5 + 28.6 + 12.6 + 16.0 + 4.9 + 11.1 + 0.1 − 4.9 + 23.9 − 28.8 − 7.7 − 21.1 + 0.4 2005
− 5.1 + 13.8 + 56.2 + 68.3 − 12.1 − 13.7 + 1.6 − 0.2 − 0.8 + 21.2 − 22.0 − 5.1 − 17.0 − 0.2 2006
− 0.1 − 0.8 + 67.3 + 1.5 + 65.8 + 74.0 − 8.3 − 0.1 + 4.6 − 5.5 + 10.2 + 16.6 − 6.4 + 1.6 2007
+ 0.7 − 3.1 − 50.1 + 52.2 − 102.3 − 120.7 + 18.5 + 0.1 − 12.4 + 16.1 − 28.5 − 19.4 − 9.1 − 0.6 2008
− 3.2 + 0.1 − 81.4 − 2.1 − 79.3 − 57.5 − 21.7 − 0.2 − 33.5 − 13.3 − 20.1 − 17.0 − 3.1 − 0.6 2009
+ 0.3 + 4.6 + 18.3 + 32.1 − 13.8 − 12.9 − 0.9 − 0.0 + 14.2 + 30.4 − 16.3 − 14.8 − 1.4 + 0.1 2009          Jan 
+ 0.3 − 1.6 − 5.9 − 1.8 − 4.0 − 3.8 − 0.2 − 0.0 − 27.4 − 23.4 − 4.0 − 3.9 − 0.1 − 0.1          Feb 
− 1.6 + 0.8 − 17.5 + 17.9 − 35.4 − 35.3 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 3.1 + 4.0 − 7.1 − 6.0 − 1.1 − 0.1          Mar 
+ 0.0 + 0.3 + 22.5 − 37.8 + 60.3 + 60.8 − 0.5 − + 14.8 − 3.3 + 18.1 + 19.8 − 1.6 − 0.1          Apr 
− 0.9 + 0.1 − 36.3 − 11.5 − 24.9 − 23.8 − 1.0 − 0.0 − 10.5 + 3.1 − 13.6 − 14.3 + 0.7 − 0.1          May
− 0.5 − 0.1 + 1.9 + 32.8 − 30.9 − 30.7 − 0.2 − 0.0 − 1.9 + 0.1 − 2.0 − 1.3 − 0.6 − 0.1          June
− 0.1 − − 21.0 − 19.4 − 1.7 + 0.0 − 1.7 − 0.0 + 13.2 + 9.8 + 3.4 + 2.3 + 1.1 − 0.1          July
+ 0.0 + 0.1 − 15.1 − 12.8 − 2.3 + 1.6 − 4.0 − 0.0 − 5.6 − 11.7 + 6.1 + 6.9 − 0.7 + 0.0          Aug 
− 0.4 + 0.0 − 12.2 + 4.7 − 16.9 − 14.6 − 2.3 − 0.1 − 5.6 − 5.5 − 0.1 − 2.9 + 2.9 − 0.1          Sep 
− 0.2 − 0.1 − 6.9 + 7.9 − 14.8 − 12.5 − 2.3 − + 8.2 + 9.3 − 1.1 − 0.4 − 0.7 − 0.1          Oct 
− 0.2 + 2.0 − 3.6 + 10.2 − 13.9 − 8.8 − 5.1 − − 3.3 − 10.4 + 7.1 + 6.9 + 0.2 − 0.0          Nov 
− 0.0 − 6.1 − 5.4 − 24.4 + 19.0 + 22.5 − 3.5 − 0.0 − 26.4 − 15.6 − 10.8 − 9.1 − 1.7 − 0.0          Dec 
+ 0.3 + 2.2 + 25.6 + 39.0 − 13.3 − 11.3 − 2.0 − 0.0 + 19.4 + 17.7 + 1.7 + 0.4 + 1.3 + 0.1 2010          Jan 
+ 0.4 − 0.5 − 5.0 − 1.5 − 3.5 − 3.6 + 0.1 − 0.0 − 1.4 − 3.9 + 2.5 + 3.0 − 0.5 − 0.0          Feb 
+ 0.0 + 1.4 + 22.4 + 24.4 − 2.0 − 4.2 + 2.2 − 0.0 − 8.6 − 0.2 − 8.4 − 5.6 − 2.8 − 0.1          Mar 
+ 0.1 + 0.5 + 46.4 − 8.3 + 54.6 + 54.8 − 0.1 − + 29.5 + 18.8 + 10.7 + 11.7 − 1.0 − 0.0          Apr 
+ 1.0 − 1.0 + 52.5 + 36.3 + 16.2 + 15.1 + 1.1 − 0.0 + 0.2 + 2.8 − 2.6 − 1.9 − 0.8 − 0.0          May
− 0.3 + 5.7 − 37.4 + 20.7 − 58.1 − 58.1 + 0.0 − 0.0 − 17.8 − 6.0 − 11.8 − 11.4 − 0.4 − 0.0          June
4From 1999, no longer included in loans and deposits (see also footnote terms of less than one month. — 7Up to December 1998, excluding time
2). — 5Up to December 1998, including working capital supplied to deposits with terms of less than one month. 
branches abroad. — 6Up to December 1998, including time deposits with
29*IV Banks

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
E U R O S Y S T E M
Monthly Report
August 2010
IV Banks
 
5 Lending by banks (MFIs) in Germany to domestic non-banks (non-MFIs) *
 
€ billion
Lending to domestic Short-term lending Medium and long-term
non-banks, total  1,2 
      to general government to enter- to enterprises and households  1 
 
including excluding Negoti-
negotiable money able
market paper, Loans money
Period securities, and market Treasury
equalisation claims Total Total paper Total Loans bills Total Total bills 3,4 
End of year or month *
 
2000 3,003.7 2,663.7 371.2 348.2 347.7 0.5 22.9 21.2 1.7 2,632.5 2,038.6
2001 3,014.1 2,704.2 387.9 356.7 355.2 1.5 31.2 28.2 2.9 2,626.2 2,070.2
2002 2,997.2 2,689.1 365.4 331.9 331.0 1.0 33.5 31.1 2.4 2,631.8 2,079.7
2003 2,995.6 2,680.6 355.2 315.0 313.4 1.6 40.2 38.4 1.8 2,640.4 2,096.1
2004 3,001.3 2,646.7 320.9 283.8 283.0 0.8 37.1 35.3 1.8 2,680.4 2,114.2
2005 2,995.1 2,635.1 309.7 273.5 272.9 0.6 36.2 34.4 1.8 2,685.4 2,141.3
2006 3,000.7 2,632.2 303.1 269.8 269.3 0.6 33.3 31.9 1.4 2,697.6 2,181.8
2007 2,975.7 2,649.5 331.2 301.8 301.5 0.3 29.4 28.2 1.2 2,644.6 2,168.3
2008 3,071.1 2,700.1 373.0 337.5 335.3 2.2 35.5 34.5 1.0 2,698.1 2,257.8
2009 3,100.1 2,692.6 347.3 306.3 306.2 0.1 41.0 37.1 3.9 2,752.8 2,299.7
2009          Jan 3,097.3 2,719.9 395.2 353.9 353.2 0.7 41.4 39.0 2.4 2,702.0 2,260.4
         Feb 3,091.2 2,710.7 386.9 344.0 343.6 0.5 42.8 40.1 2.8 2,704.3 2,266.9
         Mar 3,101.4 2,721.5 410.5 368.3 367.9 0.4 42.2 39.0 3.3 2,690.9 2,256.7
         Apr 3,124.3 2,726.0 408.5 362.5 362.1 0.4 46.0 41.0 5.0 2,715.8 2,276.8
         May 3,106.5 2,721.4 401.9 360.4 359.5 0.9 41.4 36.5 5.0 2,704.6 2,263.1
         June 3,121.8 2,724.8 401.8 362.3 362.0 0.3 39.5 36.0 3.4 2,720.0 2,274.1
         July 3,116.5 2,720.9 387.8 336.5 336.1 0.3 51.3 46.4 4.9 2,728.7 2,281.7
         Aug 3,094.1 2,704.5 367.4 321.9 321.7 0.3 45.5 40.9 4.6 2,726.7 2,280.6
         Sep 3,110.3 2,715.5 383.3 337.5 337.2 0.3 45.8 39.1 6.7 2,727.1 2,279.4
         Oct 3,116.9 2,717.2 381.6 326.3 325.9 0.4 55.3 50.4 4.9 2,735.3 2,281.4
         Nov 3,117.3 2,713.4 374.5 327.2 327.0 0.2 47.4 42.1 5.2 2,742.7 2,289.4
         Dec 3,100.1 2,692.6 347.3 306.3 306.2 0.1 41.0 37.1 3.9 2,752.8 2,299.7
2010          Jan 3,111.5 2,692.1 349.7 305.0 304.8 0.2 44.7 40.9 3.8 2,761.8 2,305.2
         Feb 3,103.1 2,685.6 343.5 299.8 299.6 0.2 43.7 40.8 2.9 2,759.6 2,302.2
         Mar 3,098.8 2,682.4 348.9 302.9 302.6 0.3 46.1 43.2 2.8 2,749.9 2,290.3
         Apr 3,140.8 2,697.9 358.7 311.7 311.5 0.3 46.9 45.2 1.7 2,782.2 2,318.9
         May 3,130.1 2,708.4 361.7 310.6 310.3 0.2 51.1 48.8 2.3 2,768.4 2,298.8
         June 3,147.5 2,717.1 376.0 313.2 312.9 0.3 62.8 55.2 7.7 2,771.5 2,292.6
Changes *
2001 + 11.9 + 39.2 + 15.3 + 7.0 + 5.9 + 1.0 + 8.4 + 7.8 + 0.6 − 3.4 + 32.0
2002 − 19.2 − 18.8 − 23.4 − 25.7 − 25.2 − 0.5 + 2.3 + 2.9 − 0.6 + 4.3 + 7.6
2003 + 0.1 − 8.4 − 10.0 − 16.7 − 17.5 + 0.9 + 6.7 + 7.3 − 0.6 + 10.1 + 16.0
2004 + 3.3 − 36.0 − 31.7 − 30.5 − 29.7 − 0.8 − 1.2 − 3.2 + 1.9 + 35.0 + 15.6
2005 − 6.7 − 12.1 − 11.5 − 10.6 − 10.4 − 0.2 − 0.9 − 0.9 + 0.0 + 4.8 + 26.8
2006 − 12.4 − 20.8 − 7.1 − 4.5 − 4.4 − 0.0 − 2.7 − 2.3 − 0.4 − 5.2 + 23.6
2007 − 15.9 + 11.8 + 27.6 + 31.5 + 31.7 − 0.2 − 3.9 − 3.7 − 0.3 − 43.5 − 7.1
2008 + 92.0 + 46.9 + 43.1 + 36.8 + 34.9 + 1.8 + 6.3 + 6.3 − 0.0 + 48.9 + 83.4
2009 + 25.7 − 11.6 − 26.1 − 31.5 − 30.0 − 1.5 + 5.5 + 2.5 + 2.9 + 51.8 + 36.6
2009          Jan + 26.2 + 19.8 + 21.0 + 15.1 + 16.7 − 1.5 + 5.8 + 4.4 + 1.4 + 5.2 + 3.9
         Feb − 6.1 − 9.2 − 8.3 − 9.8 − 9.6 − 0.2 + 1.5 + 1.1 + 0.4 + 2.3 + 6.5
         Mar + 9.2 + 9.7 + 23.6 + 24.2 + 24.3 − 0.1 − 0.6 − 1.1 + 0.5 − 14.4 − 11.3
         Apr + 22.8 + 4.5 − 2.0 − 5.8 − 5.7 − 0.0 + 3.7 + 2.0 + 1.7 + 24.9 + 20.2
         May − 16.9 − 4.6 − 6.6 − 2.1 − 2.6 + 0.5 − 4.5 − 4.5 − 0.0 − 10.4 − 12.9
         June + 15.8 + 3.4 + 0.7 + 2.7 + 2.8 − 0.1 − 1.9 − 0.4 − 1.5 + 15.1 + 10.7
         July − 5.4 − 3.9 − 14.1 − 25.9 − 25.9 + 0.0 + 11.8 + 10.3 + 1.5 + 8.6 + 7.5
         Aug − 22.4 − 16.4 − 20.4 − 14.5 − 14.4 − 0.1 − 5.8 − 5.5 − 0.4 − 2.0 − 1.1
         Sep + 15.9 + 10.7 + 15.9 + 15.5 + 15.5 + 0.1 + 0.3 − 1.8 + 2.1 + 0.1 − 1.5
         Oct + 6.4 + 1.8 − 1.6 − 11.1 − 11.2 + 0.0 + 9.5 + 11.2 − 1.7 + 8.0 + 1.7
         Nov + 0.4 − 3.7 − 7.0 + 0.9 + 1.1 − 0.2 − 7.9 − 8.2 + 0.3 + 7.4 + 5.4
         Dec − 20.2 − 23.7 − 27.2 − 20.8 − 20.8 − 0.0 − 6.4 − 5.0 − 1.4 + 7.1 + 7.5
2010          Jan + 11.2 − 0.6 + 2.3 − 1.5 − 1.6 + 0.1 + 3.8 + 3.8 − 0.1 + 9.0 + 5.5
         Feb − 8.9 − 7.1 − 6.2 − 5.1 − 5.2 + 0.0 − 1.0 − 0.1 − 0.9 − 2.8 − 3.5
         Mar + 0.2 − 3.1 + 5.4 + 3.0 + 3.0 + 0.0 + 2.4 + 2.5 − 0.1 − 5.2 − 8.1
         Apr + 42.1 + 15.5 + 9.7 + 8.9 + 8.9 − 0.0 + 0.9 + 2.0 − 1.1 + 32.3 + 28.6
         May − 10.7 + 10.5 + 3.0 − 1.2 − 1.1 − 0.0 + 4.2 + 3.6 + 0.6 − 13.7 − 20.0
         June + 17.4 + 8.7 + 12.3 + 0.7 + 0.7 + 0.0 + 11.7 + 6.3 + 5.4 + 5.1 − 4.4
*See Table IV.2, footnote*; statistical breaks have been eliminated from the including fiduciary loans (see also footnote 9). — 3Up to December 1998,
changes. The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as bill-based lending (bill holdings plus endorsement liabilities arising from
provisional. Subsequent revisions, which appear in the following Monthly rediscounted bills and bills sent for collection from the banks’ portfoli os
Report, are not specially marked. — 1Up to December 1998, including loans prior to maturity). — 4From 1999, including small amounts of medium-term
to domestic building and loan associations. — 2Up to December 1998, series of bills. — 5From 1999, breakdown of securities by medium
30*IV Banks

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2010
IV Banks
 
 
 
 
lending  2,5 
prises and households  1,2 to general government  2 
Loans Loans
Memo Memo
item Equal- item
Medium- Long- Fiduciary Medium- Long- Secur- isation Fiduciary
Total term  6 term  7 loans  8 Total Total term  6 term  7 loans  8   Period Securities  5 ities 5,9 claims  10 
End of year or month *
 
1,838.9 192.8 1,646.0 199.7 50.1 593.9 455.9 30.4 425.5 104.9 33.1 8.4 2000
1,880.5 191.1 1,689.4 189.7 48.9 556.0 440.3 25.6 414.6 111.8 4.0 8.0 2001
1,909.8 193.5 1,716.3 169.9 47.3 552.1 417.1 27.4 389.7 132.0 3.0 7.5 2002
1,927.7 195.0 1,732.8 168.3 49.9 544.3 401.0 34.6 366.4 141.3 2.0 7.0 2003
1,940.8 194.3 1,746.5 173.5 55.3 566.1 387.7 32.9 354.8 177.5 1.0 6.5 2004
1,953.4 194.7 1,758.8 187.9 52.1 544.1 374.4 32.9 341.4 169.7 − 4.5 2005
1,972.7 194.5 1,778.1 209.1 48.2 515.8 358.4 31.7 326.6 157.4 − 4.8 2006
1,987.3 207.7 1,779.6 181.1 46.5 476.2 332.5 31.9 300.6 143.7 − 4.7 2007
2,022.0 222.0 1,800.0 235.8 42.8 440.3 308.2 29.7 278.5 132.1 − 4.5 2008
2,051.3 242.7 1,808.6 248.4 39.6 453.1 298.0 32.2 265.8 155.1 − 4.3 2009
2,022.5 222.9 1,799.5 238.0 42.5 441.6 305.3 29.7 275.6 136.3 − 4.4 2009          Jan 
2,024.7 225.8 1,799.0 242.2 42.2 437.4 302.4 29.2 273.2 135.0 − 4.4          Feb 
2,015.5 224.4 1,791.1 241.1 42.0 434.3 299.2 28.8 270.4 135.1 − 4.4          Mar 
2,023.4 229.0 1,794.4 253.5 41.1 439.0 299.5 29.2 270.3 139.4 − 4.4          Apr 
2,025.2 230.2 1,795.0 237.9 40.3 441.5 300.2 30.4 269.8 141.4 − 4.4          May
2,026.3 233.0 1,793.3 247.8 39.9 445.9 300.4 30.8 269.6 145.5 − 4.3          June
2,036.3 236.7 1,799.5 245.5 39.5 447.0 302.1 31.8 270.3 144.9 − 4.3          July
2,039.9 237.1 1,802.9 240.7 39.2 446.1 302.0 31.9 270.1 144.1 − 4.3          Aug 
2,038.3 237.2 1,801.0 241.1 38.9 447.7 300.9 32.5 268.4 146.8 − 4.3          Sep 
2,039.6 236.9 1,802.7 241.8 38.7 453.9 301.3 32.5 268.8 152.6 − 4.2          Oct 
2,045.5 236.9 1,808.6 243.9 38.5 453.4 298.8 32.6 266.2 154.6 − 4.3          Nov 
2,051.3 242.7 1,808.6 248.4 39.6 453.1 298.0 32.2 265.8 155.1 − 4.3          Dec 
2,049.4 241.4 1,808.0 255.8 39.2 456.6 297.0 31.5 265.5 159.5 − 4.2 2010          Jan 
2,051.2 241.9 1,809.4 251.0 39.1 457.3 294.0 30.8 263.2 163.4 − 4.2          Feb 
2,044.4 237.5 1,806.9 245.9 38.7 459.6 292.2 30.5 261.8 167.4 − 4.1          Mar 
2,048.7 237.7 1,811.0 270.1 38.7 463.3 292.5 30.9 261.6 170.8 − 4.1          Apr 
2,054.3 237.6 1,816.7 244.6 38.6 469.6 295.0 31.4 263.6 174.6 − 4.1          May
2,055.1 237.2 1,817.9 237.5 38.4 479.0 293.9 31.3 262.6 185.0 − 4.1          June
Changes *
+ 41.9 − 2.8 + 44.7 − 9.8 − 1.2 − 35.4 − 16.5 − 5.5 − 10.9 + 10.1 − 29.1 − 0.4 2001
+ 26.6 − 2.1 + 28.7 − 19.0 − 1.6 − 3.4 − 23.1 + 1.0 − 24.1 + 20.7 − 1.0 − 0.5 2002
+ 17.9 + 0.2 + 17.8 − 1.9 + 2.6 − 5.9 − 16.1 + 4.9 − 21.0 + 11.2 − 1.0 − 0.5 2003
+ 10.7 + 0.2 + 10.5 + 4.9 + 3.6 + 19.4 − 13.8 − 0.9 − 12.9 + 34.3 − 1.1 − 0.6 2004
+ 12.5 + 1.7 + 10.8 + 14.3 − 3.0 − 22.1 − 13.4 + 0.9 − 14.2 − 7.7 − 1.0 − 2.0 2005
+ 2.3 + 0.2 + 2.2 + 21.2 − 3.9 − 28.8 − 16.4 − 1.4 − 15.0 − 12.4 − + 0.3 2006
+ 9.6 + 10.1 − 0.6 − 16.7 − 2.2 − 36.3 − 25.8 + 0.1 − 26.0 − 10.5 − − 0.1 2007
+ 28.8 + 12.0 + 16.8 + 54.7 − 5.3 − 34.5 − 23.2 − 2.3 − 20.8 − 11.4 − − 0.1 2008
+ 23.5 + 17.3 + 6.3 + 13.1 − 3.9 + 15.2 − 7.6 + 2.5 − 10.2 + 22.8 − − 0.2 2009
+ 1.7 + 2.2 − 0.5 + 2.2 − 0.3 + 1.3 − 2.9 − 0.1 − 2.9 + 4.2 − − 0.0 2009          Jan 
+ 2.3 + 2.8 − 0.6 + 4.2 − 0.3 − 4.2 − 2.9 − 0.4 − 2.5 − 1.3 − − 0.0          Feb 
− 10.2 − 3.1 − 7.2 − 1.1 − 0.5 − 3.1 − 3.2 − 0.4 − 2.9 + 0.1 − − 0.0          Mar 
+ 7.8 + 4.6 + 3.2 + 12.3 − 0.9 + 4.7 + 0.4 + 0.4 − 0.1 + 4.3 − + 0.0          Apr 
+ 1.8 + 1.2 + 0.7 − 14.8 − 0.1 + 2.6 + 0.6 + 1.2 − 0.5 + 1.9 − − 0.0          May
+ 0.8 + 2.6 − 1.8 + 9.9 − 0.4 + 4.4 + 0.3 + 0.5 − 0.2 + 4.1 − − 0.0          June
+ 10.0 + 3.8 + 6.2 − 2.4 − 0.4 + 1.1 + 1.7 + 1.0 + 0.7 − 0.6 − − 0.0          July
+ 3.7 + 0.3 + 3.4 − 4.8 − 0.3 − 0.9 − 0.2 + 0.1 − 0.2 − 0.7 − − 0.0          Aug 
− 2.0 + 0.2 − 2.1 + 0.5 − 0.3 + 1.6 − 1.1 + 0.6 − 1.7 + 2.6 − − 0.0          Sep 
+ 1.3 − 0.3 + 1.6 + 0.4 − 0.2 + 6.3 + 0.5 + 0.1 + 0.4 + 5.8 − − 0.0          Oct 
+ 3.3 + 0.0 + 3.3 + 2.1 − 0.2 + 2.0 + 0.1 + 0.0 + 0.0 + 2.0 − + 0.0          Nov 
+ 3.0 + 3.0 + 0.0 + 4.5 + 0.1 − 0.4 − 0.8 − 0.4 − 0.4 + 0.4 − − 0.0          Dec 
− 1.9 − 1.3 − 0.6 + 7.4 − 0.4 + 3.4 − 0.9 − 0.7 − 0.3 + 4.4 − − 0.1 2010          Jan 
+ 1.3 − 0.1 + 1.4 − 4.8 − 0.1 + 0.8 − 3.1 − 0.7 − 2.4 + 3.8 − − 0.0          Feb 
− 6.8 − 4.4 − 2.5 − 1.2 − 0.4 + 2.8 − 1.8 − 0.4 − 1.4 + 4.6 − − 0.0          Mar 
+ 4.4 + 0.2 + 4.2 + 24.2 − 0.1 + 3.7 + 0.3 + 0.5 − 0.2 + 3.5 − − 0.0          Apr 
+ 5.5 − 0.1 + 5.6 − 25.6 − 0.0 + 6.3 + 2.5 + 0.4 + 2.0 + 3.8 − − 0.0          May
+ 2.7 + 0.6 + 2.1 − 7.1 − 0.3 + 9.5 − 1.0 − 0.4 − 0.6 + 10.4 − − 0.0          June
and long-term lending no longer possible. — 6Up to December 1998, 1999, of more than five years. — 8From 1999, no longer included in lending
maturity or period of notice of more than one year to less than four years; (see also footnote 2). — 9Excluding debt securities arising from the
from 1999, more than one year up to and including five years. — 7Up to exchange of equalisation claims (see also footnote 10). — 10Including debt
December 1998, maturity or period of notice of four years and more; from securities arising from the exchange of equalisation claims. 
31*IV Banks

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
E U R O S Y S T E M
Monthly Report
August 2010
IV Banks
 
6 Lending by banks (MFIs) in Germany to domestic enterprises and households, housing loans,
sectors of economic activity *x
 
€ billion
Lending to domestic enterprises and households (excluding holdings of negotiable money market paper and excluding securities po rtfolios)  1 
of which  
 
Housing loans Lending to enterprises and self-employed persons
 
Whole-
sale and Electricity,
gas and retail Financial
Mortgage water trade; Agri- Transport- intermedi-
loans supply; repair of culture, ation and ation
secured refuse motor forestry, storage; (excluding
by disposal, vehicles fishing post and MFIs) and
Mortgage residen- Other of which mining and and telecom- insurance
loans, tial real housing Housing Manufac- and Construc- motor- aqua- munica- com-
Period Total total Total estate loans Total loans turing quarrying tion cycles culture tions panies
Lending, total End of year or quarter *
 
2008 2,357.5 1,157.4 1,093.4 907.1 186.3 1,332.6 302.8 157.4 56.1 52.1 138.9 34.6 74.0 127.6
2009          June 2,388.5 1,149.7 1,087.4 899.6 187.7 1,365.5 300.9 160.4 62.7 63.4 128.8 34.8 74.7 173.3
         Sep 2,375.6 1,149.2 1,092.1 900.2 191.9 1,346.7 300.7 155.4 63.1 62.7 126.2 36.0 73.6 165.7
         Dec 2,357.6 1,155.1 1,094.7 905.0 189.7 1,327.1 301.4 145.8 68.5 63.2 122.1 36.4 74.7 165.2
2010          Mar 2,347.1 1,151.5 1,090.4 902.0 188.5 1,320.8 299.6 143.9 69.5 63.7 122.2 37.6 77.2 162.7
         June 2,368.1 1,145.9 1,091.0 901.8 189.2 1,339.2 299.0 143.5 72.3 64.2 120.6 39.6 81.5 171.8
 Short-term lending
2008 335.5 − 8.4 − 8.4 294.8 4.5 51.4 5.4 10.4 54.7 3.1 7.4 70.9
2009          June 362.2 − 8.8 − 8.8 322.3 4.8 51.5 6.2 15.8 46.8 3.7 7.8 109.2
         Sep 337.3 − 8.8 − 8.8 296.9 4.8 46.4 5.4 15.1 44.0 3.9 7.3 98.4
         Dec 306.3 − 8.4 − 8.4 266.9 4.5 36.3 6.0 14.2 39.7 3.0 7.1 90.7
2010          Mar 302.7 − 8.1 − 8.1 264.2 4.3 36.6 6.1 15.1 39.7 3.5 7.7 87.3
         June 313.0 − 7.4 − 7.4 272.6 3.8 36.4 6.4 14.9 38.8 3.9 7.9 95.6
 Medium-term lending
2008 222.0 − 30.3 − 30.3 159.1 10.9 27.1 2.7 6.6 13.8 3.1 14.5 18.0
2009          June 233.0 − 31.6 − 31.6 167.1 11.5 31.6 3.6 8.8 13.2 3.0 14.6 21.0
         Sep 237.2 − 32.0 − 32.0 169.6 11.6 32.2 4.0 8.8 13.4 3.3 14.1 21.7
         Dec 242.7 − 32.4 − 32.4 173.9 11.8 32.6 4.8 9.0 13.9 3.7 13.6 25.5
2010          Mar 237.5 − 32.2 − 32.2 168.9 11.6 30.4 5.1 8.9 14.6 3.7 13.2 26.1
         June 237.2 − 32.4 − 32.4 169.3 11.8 30.3 5.2 9.3 13.6 3.8 13.5 26.9
 Long-term lending
2008 1,800.0 1,157.4 1,054.6 907.1 147.5 878.7 287.5 78.9 48.0 35.2 70.4 28.4 52.1 38.6
2009          June 1,793.3 1,149.7 1,047.0 899.6 147.4 876.2 284.5 77.3 52.9 38.8 68.8 28.0 52.2 43.0
         Sep 1,801.0 1,149.2 1,051.3 900.2 151.1 880.2 284.3 76.8 53.8 38.9 68.8 28.8 52.2 45.6
         Dec 1,808.6 1,155.1 1,053.9 905.0 148.9 886.4 285.1 76.9 57.7 40.0 68.5 29.8 54.0 49.0
2010          Mar 1,806.9 1,151.5 1,050.1 902.0 148.1 887.7 283.6 77.0 58.3 39.8 67.9 30.3 56.3 49.3
         June 1,817.9 1,145.9 1,051.1 901.8 149.3 897.2 283.4 76.8 60.7 40.0 68.2 32.0 60.2 49.2
 
Lending, total Change during quarter *
 
2009          Q2 + 4.9 − 0.5 + 0.7 − 0.5 + 1.2 + 3.8 + 0.4 − 0.5 + 1.1 + 0.4 − 2.2 + 0.7 − 0.4 + 10.1
         Q3 − 13.2 − 0.7 + 3.3 + 0.3 + 3.0 − 19.2 − 0.2 − 4.3 + 0.3 − 0.7 − 2.7 + 1.3 − 1.1 − 7.6
         Q4 − 23.3 + 3.3 + 2.6 + 2.3 + 0.3 − 23.9 + 0.7 − 9.7 + 3.8 + 0.2 − 4.3 + 0.4 + 1.1 − 7.7
2010          Q1 − 11.2 − 3.4 − 4.7 − 3.0 − 1.7 − 6.3 − 1.4 − 1.9 + 1.0 + 0.5 + 0.1 + 0.5 + 2.5 − 4.5
         Q2 + 21.0 − 3.8 + 0.5 + 0.6 − 0.1 + 18.2 − 0.6 − 0.4 + 2.7 + 0.4 − 1.6 + 2.1 + 4.4 + 8.7
 Short-term lending
2009          Q2 − 5.6 − + 0.0 − + 0.0 − 5.6 + 0.0 − 3.1 − 0.3 + 0.3 − 1.9 + 0.3 + 0.2 + 2.6
         Q3 − 24.9 − + 0.0 − + 0.0 − 25.3 − 0.1 − 4.4 − 0.9 − 0.7 − 2.9 + 0.1 − 0.5 − 10.9
         Q4 − 30.9 − − 0.3 − − 0.3 − 29.9 − 0.3 − 10.1 + 0.6 − 0.9 − 4.2 − 0.9 − 0.2 − 10.6
2010          Q1 − 3.8 − − 0.3 − − 0.3 − 2.9 − 0.2 + 0.3 + 0.1 + 0.8 − 0.0 + 0.4 + 0.6 − 3.5
         Q2 + 8.4 − − 0.7 − − 0.7 + 7.9 − 0.6 − 0.2 + 0.3 − 0.2 − 0.9 + 0.3 + 0.2 + 8.1
 Medium-term lending
2009          Q2 + 8.4 − + 0.2 − + 0.2 + 6.9 + 0.2 + 2.5 + 0.2 + 0.6 − 0.1 + 0.1 + 0.2 + 3.0
         Q3 + 4.3 − + 0.4 − + 0.4 + 2.5 + 0.1 + 0.6 + 0.4 − 0.0 + 0.2 + 0.3 − 0.5 + 0.7
         Q4 + 2.7 − + 0.3 − + 0.3 + 2.4 + 0.2 + 0.2 + 0.9 − 0.1 + 0.3 + 0.3 − 0.5 + 2.4
2010          Q1 − 5.8 − − 0.2 − − 0.2 − 5.6 − 0.2 − 2.3 + 0.3 − 0.1 + 0.6 − 0.1 − 0.3 − 1.6
         Q2 + 0.7 − + 0.5 − + 0.5 − 0.1 + 0.2 − 0.0 − 0.1 + 0.3 − 1.0 + 0.1 − 0.1 + 0.7
 Long-term lending
2009          Q2 + 2.1 − 0.5 + 0.4 − 0.5 + 0.9 + 2.4 + 0.2 + 0.1 + 1.2 − 0.6 − 0.2 + 0.3 − 0.7 + 4.5
         Q3 + 7.4 − 0.7 + 2.8 + 0.3 + 2.6 + 3.7 − 0.3 − 0.5 + 0.8 + 0.0 − 0.0 + 0.8 − 0.0 + 2.6
         Q4 + 4.9 + 3.3 + 2.6 + 2.3 + 0.3 + 3.6 + 0.8 + 0.1 + 2.3 + 1.1 − 0.3 + 1.0 + 1.8 + 0.4
2010          Q1 − 1.7 − 3.4 − 4.2 − 3.0 − 1.2 + 2.1 − 1.1 + 0.1 + 0.6 − 0.2 − 0.5 + 0.3 + 2.3 + 0.6
         Q2 + 11.9 − 3.8 + 0.6 + 0.6 + 0.1 + 10.4 − 0.2 − 0.2 + 2.4 + 0.2 + 0.2 + 1.6 + 4.3 − 0.1
*Excluding lending by foreign branches. Breakdown of lending by building appear in the following Monthly Report, are not specially marked. —
and loan associations by areas and sectors estimated. Statistical alterations 1Excluding fiduciary loans. — 2Including sole proprietors. — 3Excluding
have been eliminated from the changes. The figures for the latest date are mortgage loans and housing loans, even in the form of instalment credit.
always to be regarded as provisional; subsequent alterations, which will x As of December 2008, the data are collected according to the
32*IV Banks

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2010
IV Banks
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Lending to
 Lending to employees and other individuals non-profit institutions
Memo items Other lending Services sector (including the professions)
of which of which
Debit
balances
on wage,
Other Lending salary
real to self- Lending and of which
Housing Holding estate employed to craft Housing pension Housing Instalment
Total companies Total loans Total loans  3 accounts Total loans   Period enterprises activities persons  2 enterprises
End of year or quarter * Lending, total 
 
691.9 169.4 51.7 190.2 381.4 58.2 1,011.4 787.3 224.0 132.1 17.1 13.5 3.3 2008
667.5 181.2 50.7 171.3 380.3 55.7 1,010.3 783.4 226.8 137.2 16.1 12.7 3.1 2009          June
663.9 180.9 50.0 172.3 379.7 55.1 1,015.9 788.1 227.8 140.3 16.2 13.0 3.3          Sep 
651.2 181.2 46.5 170.5 378.9 54.3 1,017.5 790.0 227.5 142.0 15.8 13.0 3.3          Dec 
643.9 179.5 44.9 171.7 378.1 54.4 1,013.4 787.5 225.8 141.8 15.0 13.0 3.3 2010          Mar 
645.7 177.3 44.1 175.0 381.1 55.1 1,016.0 788.6 227.4 143.9 14.2 12.9 3.4          June
Short-term lending
91.4 13.4 17.0 19.3 35.4 9.4 39.7 3.9 35.8 2.8 17.1 1.0 0.0 2008
81.0 12.0 15.5 16.4 35.5 9.8 39.2 3.9 35.3 3.1 16.1 0.7 0.0 2009          June
76.5 11.5 15.1 15.8 34.6 9.2 39.7 4.0 35.7 3.0 16.2 0.7 0.0          Sep 
69.9 11.1 12.1 14.6 33.3 8.3 38.7 4.0 34.7 3.0 15.8 0.7 0.0          Dec 
68.2 10.6 11.7 14.8 33.8 8.9 37.8 3.8 34.0 3.0 15.0 0.7 0.0 2010          Mar 
68.7 10.5 11.7 14.5 34.1 8.8 39.6 3.7 35.9 2.8 14.2 0.8 0.0          June
Medium-term lending
73.3 8.2 9.2 21.3 26.7 4.0 62.3 19.5 42.8 35.1 − 0.6 0.0 2008
71.3 7.9 10.3 20.8 26.8 4.1 65.4 20.1 45.2 38.1 − 0.5 0.0 2009          June
72.1 8.3 10.5 21.9 27.2 4.0 67.0 20.4 46.6 39.6 − 0.6 0.0          Sep 
70.8 8.5 11.0 21.7 27.6 4.0 68.2 20.5 47.7 40.9 − 0.6 0.0          Dec 
66.9 8.4 9.5 21.7 27.4 3.9 68.1 20.5 47.6 40.9 − 0.6 0.0 2010          Mar 
66.8 8.5 8.8 21.8 27.8 3.8 67.4 20.6 46.8 41.5 − 0.5 0.0          June
Long-term lending
527.2 147.8 25.6 149.7 319.3 44.8 909.4 763.9 145.4 94.2 − 11.9 3.2 2008
515.2 161.3 24.8 134.2 318.1 41.9 905.7 759.4 146.3 96.0 − 11.4 3.0 2009          June
515.3 161.1 24.4 134.6 317.9 41.9 909.2 763.7 145.5 97.7 − 11.7 3.3          Sep 
510.4 161.6 23.5 134.1 318.0 42.0 910.6 765.5 145.0 98.0 − 11.7 3.3          Dec 
508.8 160.5 23.7 135.1 316.9 41.6 907.5 763.2 144.3 97.9 − 11.7 3.3 2010          Mar 
510.2 158.3 23.6 138.7 319.1 42.4 909.1 764.3 144.8 99.6 − 11.6 3.3          June
 
Change during quarter * Lending, total 
 
− 5.5 − 2.2 − 1.3 + 3.6 + 1.1 − 0.9 + 1.6 + 0.4 + 1.2 + 2.2 − 0.1 − 0.5 − 0.2 2009          Q2
− 4.5 − 0.3 − 1.5 + 0.9 − 0.6 − 0.6 + 5.7 + 3.2 + 2.4 + 3.1 + 0.1 + 0.3 + 0.2          Q3
− 7.6 + 0.5 − 2.9 + 0.3 − 1.0 − 0.8 + 0.6 + 1.9 − 1.3 + 0.7 − 0.4 − 0.0 + 0.0          Q4
− 4.6 − 1.8 − 1.6 + 0.9 − 0.8 + 0.2 − 4.9 − 3.3 − 1.6 − 0.2 − 0.8 − 0.0 + 0.0 2010          Q1
+ 2.1 − 2.0 − 0.9 + 3.2 + 2.7 − 0.0 + 2.9 + 1.1 + 1.8 + 1.9 − 0.7 − 0.1 + 0.0          Q2
Short-term lending
− 3.7 − 0.6 − 1.0 + 0.2 − 0.3 − 0.2 + 0.1 − 0.0 + 0.1 + 0.1 − 0.1 − 0.1 − 0.0 2009          Q2
− 5.2 − 0.5 − 1.2 − 0.5 − 0.8 − 0.6 + 0.5 + 0.1 + 0.4 − 0.1 + 0.1 − 0.0 − 0.0          Q3
− 3.7 − 0.3 − 2.4 − 0.4 − 1.3 − 0.9 − 1.0 − 0.1 − 1.0 + 0.0 − 0.4 + 0.0 − 0.0          Q4
− 1.5 − 0.5 − 0.4 + 0.2 + 0.5 + 0.7 − 0.9 − 0.1 − 0.8 − 0.0 − 0.8 − + 0.0 2010          Q1
+ 0.2 − 0.1 + 0.0 − 0.3 + 0.1 − 0.1 + 0.4 − 0.1 + 0.6 − 0.2 − 0.7 + 0.0 − 0.0          Q2
Medium-term lending
+ 0.4 − 0.4 + 0.6 + 0.8 + 0.3 + 0.0 + 1.5 + 0.0 + 1.5 + 1.6 − − 0.0 − 0.0 2009          Q2
+ 0.8 + 0.4 + 0.1 + 1.1 + 0.4 − 0.0 + 1.7 + 0.3 + 1.4 + 1.5 − + 0.1 + 0.0          Q3
− 1.1 + 0.2 + 0.2 + 0.2 + 0.2 − 0.1 + 0.3 + 0.1 + 0.1 + 0.3 − − 0.0 + 0.0          Q4
− 2.1 − 0.1 − 1.5 − 0.0 − 0.2 − 0.1 − 0.2 − 0.0 − 0.1 + 0.0 − − 0.0 − 0.0 2010          Q1
+ 0.0 − 0.1 − 0.5 − 0.1 + 0.4 − 0.1 + 0.9 + 0.4 + 0.5 + 0.6 − − 0.1 + 0.0          Q2
Long-term lending
− 2.2 − 1.2 − 0.8 + 2.6 + 1.1 − 0.7 + 0.1 + 0.4 − 0.3 + 0.5 − − 0.4 − 0.2 2009          Q2
− 0.0 − 0.2 − 0.4 + 0.4 − 0.2 − 0.0 + 3.5 + 2.9 + 0.6 + 1.6 − + 0.3 + 0.2          Q3
− 2.9 + 0.6 − 0.7 + 0.5 + 0.1 + 0.1 + 1.4 + 1.9 − 0.5 + 0.3 − − 0.0 + 0.0          Q4
− 1.0 − 1.2 + 0.2 + 0.7 − 1.1 − 0.4 − 3.9 − 3.1 − 0.7 − 0.1 − + 0.0 + 0.0 2010          Q1
+ 1.8 − 1.8 − 0.4 + 3.7 + 2.3 + 0.1 + 1.6 + 0.8 + 0.7 + 1.5 − − 0.0 + 0.0          Q2
Federal Statistical Office’s "Classification of Economic Activities", Edition breaks could only be statistically adjusted in part, the data from 2 008 Q4
2008 (WZ 2008). The changeover from the "old" to the "new" classification onwards are not fully comparable with those from preceding quarte rs. 
resulted in many changes within the individual sectors. As the resulting
33*IV Banks

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
E U R O S Y S T E M
Monthly Report
August 2010
IV Banks
 
7 Deposits of domestic non-banks (non-MFIs) at banks (MFIs) in Germany *
 
 
€ billion
Time deposits  1,2   Memo item
  
 for more than 1 year  2 Included Subordinated
 liabilities in time
for up for up (excluding deposits:
to and to and for more Bank negotiable liabilities
Deposits, Sight including including than Savings savings Fiduciary debt arising
Period total deposits Total 1 year Total 2 years 2 years bonds  4 loans securities) from repos deposits  3 
Domestic non-banks, total End of year or month *
 
2007 2,579.1 779.9 1,125.4 418.9 706.5 22.8 683.7 555.4 118.4 36.4 35.0 22.6
2008 2,781.4 834.6 1,276.1 530.6 745.6 32.6 713.0 535.2 135.4 32.3 34.4 59.3
2009 2,829.7 1,029.5 1,102.6 339.5 763.1 32.1 731.0 594.5 103.2 43.4 35.6 76.8
2009          July 2,819.9 954.4 1,185.6 409.5 776.1 33.7 742.4 565.5 114.4 31.2 35.1 81.1
         Aug 2,801.5 962.4 1,157.0 390.8 766.2 33.1 733.1 570.8 111.2 42.0 35.2 72.7
         Sep 2,810.6 987.2 1,139.6 374.1 765.5 32.4 733.2 575.1 108.6 42.2 35.4 83.5
         Oct 2,812.0 1,014.0 1,110.4 347.2 763.2 32.3 730.9 581.8 105.9 42.2 35.3 82.0
         Nov 2,825.5 1,037.6 1,098.1 336.0 762.1 31.7 730.4 585.6 104.2 42.2 35.6 80.2
         Dec 2,829.7 1,029.5 1,102.6 339.5 763.1 32.1 731.0 594.5 103.2 43.4 35.6 76.8
2010          Jan 2,820.3 1,051.3 1,070.0 309.9 760.1 30.3 729.8 597.7 101.3 43.0 38.1 63.5
         Feb 2,830.1 1,055.9 1,070.5 310.8 759.7 29.9 729.8 602.9 100.8 43.0 38.1 73.3
         Mar 2,819.0 1,040.0 1,073.7 315.1 758.6 29.1 729.6 604.7 100.5 42.8 38.1 74.5
         Apr 2,852.0 1,070.3 1,077.0 319.0 758.1 28.6 729.5 604.8 99.9 42.7 38.1 95.3
         May 2,867.5 1,089.6 1,073.1 321.6 751.5 27.3 724.2 605.1 99.7 42.7 38.0 97.8
         June 2,867.5 1,090.5 1,073.1 323.1 750.0 25.8 724.2 604.4 99.5 42.4 37.8 96.1
Changes *
2008 + 207.6 + 54.3 + 156.6 + 114.5 + 42.1 + 10.0 + 32.0 − 20.2 + 17.0 − 1.3 − 0.6 + 36.7
2009 + 59.7 + 211.4 − 179.3 − 207.5 + 28.2 − 0.5 + 28.7 + 59.3 − 31.6 − 0.9 + 1.4 + 17.5
2009          July − 27.4 − 1.7 − 27.4 − 27.3 − 0.1 + 0.3 − 0.4 + 5.8 − 4.1 + 0.1 + 0.4 − 12.6
         Aug − 7.0 + 8.0 − 17.2 − 18.7 + 1.5 − 0.6 + 2.1 + 5.3 − 3.1 + 0.0 + 0.1 − 8.4
         Sep + 9.1 + 24.7 − 17.4 − 16.7 − 0.7 − 0.8 + 0.1 + 4.3 − 2.6 + 0.2 + 0.2 + 10.8
         Oct + 1.7 + 26.8 − 29.3 − 26.9 − 2.3 − 0.0 − 2.3 + 6.6 − 2.5 + 0.1 + 0.2 − 1.5
         Nov + 13.5 + 23.6 − 12.3 − 11.1 − 1.1 − 0.7 − 0.5 + 3.8 − 1.7 + 0.0 + 0.3 − 1.8
         Dec + 4.3 − 8.1 + 4.5 + 3.5 + 1.0 + 0.4 + 0.6 + 8.9 − 1.0 + 0.1 + 0.0 − 3.4
2010          Jan − 9.5 + 21.9 − 32.6 − 29.6 − 3.0 − 1.8 − 1.2 + 3.2 − 1.9 − 0.5 + 2.5 − 13.3
         Feb + 9.9 + 4.6 + 0.5 + 0.9 − 0.4 − 0.4 + 0.0 + 5.2 − 0.5 − 0.0 + 0.0 + 9.8
         Mar − 11.2 − 15.9 + 3.2 + 4.3 − 1.0 − 0.8 − 0.2 + 1.8 − 0.4 − 0.2 − 0.0 + 1.3
         Apr + 32.0 + 30.3 + 2.2 + 2.8 − 0.6 − 0.5 − 0.1 + 0.1 − 0.6 − 0.0 − 0.1 + 20.8
         May + 15.4 + 19.3 − 3.9 + 2.7 − 6.6 − 1.2 − 5.3 + 0.2 − 0.2 − 0.0 − 0.1 + 2.5
         June + 0.1 + 1.4 − 0.5 + 1.1 − 1.6 − 1.6 + 0.1 − 0.6 − 0.3 − 0.3 − 0.2 − 1.7
Domestic government End of year or month *
2007 158.5 28.0 127.7 71.9 55.8 3.7 52.1 1.4 1.5 27.6 4.5 −
2008 164.7 34.2 127.8 75.4 52.5 3.6 48.8 1.2 1.5 24.2 3.9 −
2009 129.3 41.8 83.4 43.0 40.4 3.6 36.8 2.6 1.5 35.7 3.9 0.5
2009          July 151.0 41.6 105.8 54.1 51.7 3.9 47.9 2.1 1.5 24.1 3.9 2.2
         Aug 139.8 42.2 93.8 52.7 41.1 3.9 37.3 2.2 1.5 34.7 3.9 3.8
         Sep 133.7 43.6 86.3 45.2 41.1 3.9 37.1 2.3 1.5 34.9 3.9 1.8
         Oct 131.0 42.6 84.5 43.6 40.9 3.9 37.0 2.4 1.6 34.9 3.9 2.7
         Nov 134.4 44.9 85.4 44.6 40.9 3.8 37.1 2.5 1.5 34.9 3.9 3.3
         Dec 129.3 41.8 83.4 43.0 40.4 3.6 36.8 2.6 1.5 35.7 3.9 0.5
2010          Jan 127.7 41.1 82.6 40.0 42.6 3.6 39.1 2.5 1.5 35.6 6.3 1.2
         Feb 130.6 43.7 82.9 40.1 42.7 3.6 39.2 2.5 1.5 35.6 6.3 0.5
         Mar 127.6 40.3 83.3 41.3 42.0 3.4 38.5 2.5 1.5 35.4 6.3 0.9
         Apr 124.4 39.2 81.2 39.6 41.6 3.3 38.3 2.6 1.5 35.4 6.3 −
         May 131.9 43.8 83.9 42.6 41.3 3.1 38.3 2.8 1.5 35.4 6.2 −
         June 139.0 47.1 87.5 45.4 42.1 2.5 39.6 2.8 1.6 35.3 6.2 0.2
Changes *
2008 + 8.5 + 6.2 + 2.5 + 5.1 − 2.6 + 0.0 − 2.6 − 0.3 − 0.0 − 0.6 − 0.6 + 0.0
2009 − 23.9 + 7.5 − 32.9 − 32.2 − 0.7 − 0.0 − 0.7 + 1.4 + 0.1 − 0.5 + 0.0 + 0.5
2009          July − 13.1 − 3.4 − 10.0 − 10.4 + 0.5 + 0.3 + 0.1 + 0.2 + 0.0 + 0.0 + 0.0 − 1.3
         Aug + 0.2 + 0.6 − 0.6 − 1.4 + 0.8 − 0.0 + 0.8 + 0.2 − 0.0 − 0.1 + 0.0 + 1.6
         Sep − 6.0 + 1.4 − 7.5 − 7.5 − 0.1 + 0.1 − 0.1 + 0.0 + 0.0 + 0.1 − 0.0 − 2.0
         Oct − 2.7 − 1.0 − 1.8 − 1.6 − 0.2 − 0.0 − 0.2 + 0.1 + 0.0 + 0.1 − + 0.9
         Nov + 3.6 + 2.3 + 1.1 + 1.2 − 0.0 − 0.1 + 0.1 + 0.2 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.0 + 0.5
         Dec − 5.1 − 3.1 − 2.1 − 1.6 − 0.5 − 0.2 − 0.3 + 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.2 + 0.0 − 2.7
2010          Jan − 1.6 − 0.8 − 0.7 − 3.0 + 2.3 − 0.1 + 2.3 − 0.1 − 0.0 − 0.1 + 2.4 + 0.6
         Feb + 2.9 + 2.6 + 0.3 + 0.1 + 0.1 + 0.0 + 0.1 + 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.6
         Mar − 3.0 − 3.4 + 0.4 + 1.2 − 0.8 − 0.2 − 0.6 + 0.0 + 0.0 − 0.2 − 0.0 + 0.3
         Apr − 3.2 − 1.1 − 2.1 − 1.7 − 0.4 − 0.2 − 0.3 + 0.0 + 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.9
         May + 7.3 + 4.4 + 2.7 + 3.0 − 0.2 − 0.2 − 0.0 + 0.2 − − 0.0 − 0.0 −
         June + 7.1 + 3.3 + 3.6 + 2.8 + 0.8 − 0.5 + 1.3 + 0.0 + 0.1 − 0.1 − 0.0 + 0.2
*See Table IV.2, footnote *; statistical breaks have been eliminated from provisional. Subsequent revisions, which appear in the following Monthly
the changes. The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as Report, are not specially marked. — 1Including subordinated liabilities and
34*IV Banks

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2010
IV Banks
 
7 Deposits of domestic non-banks (non-MFIs) at banks (MFIs) in Germany * (cont’d)
 
 
€ billion
Time deposits  1,2   Memo item
  
 for more than 1 year  2 Included Subordinated
 liabilities in time
for up for up (excluding deposits:
to and to and for more Bank negotiable liabilities
Deposits, Sight including including than Savings savings Fiduciary debt arising
Period total deposits Total 1 year Total 2 years 2 years bonds  4 loans securities) from repos deposits  3 
Domestic enterprises and households End of year or month *
 
2007 2,420.6 752.0 997.7 347.0 650.7 19.0 631.7 554.0 116.9 8.8 30.5 22.6
2008 2,616.7 800.5 1,148.3 455.2 693.1 29.0 664.1 534.0 133.9 8.1 30.5 59.3
2009 2,700.4 987.6 1,019.2 296.5 722.7 28.5 694.2 591.9 101.6 7.7 31.7 76.3
2009          July 2,668.9 912.8 1,079.8 355.4 724.4 29.9 694.5 563.5 112.8 7.2 31.2 78.9
         Aug 2,661.7 920.2 1,063.2 338.1 725.1 29.3 695.8 568.5 109.7 7.2 31.3 68.9
         Sep 2,676.8 943.5 1,053.3 328.8 724.5 28.4 696.0 572.9 107.1 7.3 31.4 81.7
         Oct 2,681.0 971.4 1,025.9 303.6 722.3 28.4 693.9 579.4 104.3 7.3 31.4 79.3
         Nov 2,691.1 992.6 1,012.7 291.5 721.2 27.9 693.3 583.1 102.7 7.3 31.7 76.9
         Dec 2,700.4 987.6 1,019.2 296.5 722.7 28.5 694.2 591.9 101.6 7.7 31.7 76.3
2010          Jan 2,692.6 1,010.3 987.3 269.9 717.4 26.7 690.7 595.2 99.8 7.4 31.8 62.3
         Feb 2,699.6 1,012.3 987.6 270.7 716.9 26.3 690.6 600.4 99.3 7.4 31.8 72.7
         Mar 2,691.4 999.8 990.4 273.7 716.7 25.6 691.1 602.2 99.0 7.3 31.8 73.7
         Apr 2,727.6 1,031.1 995.9 279.4 716.5 25.3 691.2 602.3 98.3 7.3 31.8 95.3
         May 2,735.5 1,045.8 989.2 279.0 710.2 24.3 685.9 602.3 98.2 7.3 31.7 97.8
         June 2,728.5 1,043.4 985.6 277.7 707.9 23.2 684.6 601.7 97.9 7.1 31.6 95.9
Changes *
2008 + 199.1 + 48.1 + 154.0 + 109.4 + 44.6 + 10.0 + 34.6 − 20.0 + 17.0 − 0.7 + 0.0 + 36.7
2009 + 83.6 + 203.8 − 146.4 − 175.3 + 28.9 − 0.5 + 29.4 + 57.9 − 31.7 − 0.4 + 1.4 + 17.0
2009          July − 14.3 + 1.7 − 17.4 − 16.9 − 0.5 − 0.0 − 0.5 + 5.6 − 4.1 + 0.1 + 0.4 − 11.3
         Aug − 7.2 + 7.4 − 16.6 − 17.3 + 0.7 − 0.6 + 1.3 + 5.1 − 3.1 + 0.1 + 0.1 − 10.0
         Sep + 15.1 + 23.3 − 9.9 − 9.3 − 0.6 − 0.9 + 0.2 + 4.3 − 2.6 + 0.1 + 0.2 + 12.8
         Oct + 4.4 + 27.8 − 27.4 − 25.3 − 2.1 − 0.0 − 2.1 + 6.5 − 2.5 + 0.0 + 0.2 − 2.4
         Nov + 9.9 + 21.3 − 13.4 − 12.3 − 1.1 − 0.6 − 0.6 + 3.7 − 1.7 + 0.0 + 0.3 − 2.3
         Dec + 9.4 − 5.0 + 6.5 + 5.0 + 1.5 + 0.6 + 0.9 + 8.9 − 1.0 + 0.3 − 0.0 − 0.7
2010          Jan − 7.8 + 22.6 − 31.9 − 26.6 − 5.3 − 1.8 − 3.5 + 3.2 − 1.8 − 0.3 + 0.1 − 13.9
         Feb + 7.0 + 2.0 + 0.3 + 0.8 − 0.5 − 0.4 − 0.1 + 5.2 − 0.5 + 0.0 + 0.0 + 10.4
         Mar − 8.2 − 12.5 + 2.8 + 3.1 − 0.3 − 0.7 + 0.4 + 1.8 − 0.4 − 0.0 + 0.0 + 0.9
         Apr + 35.1 + 31.3 + 4.3 + 4.5 − 0.2 − 0.3 + 0.2 + 0.1 − 0.6 − 0.0 − 0.1 + 21.6
         May + 8.1 + 14.9 − 6.6 − 0.3 − 6.3 − 1.0 − 5.3 + 0.0 − 0.2 + 0.0 − 0.1 + 2.5
         June − 7.0 − 1.9 − 4.1 − 1.8 − 2.4 − 1.1 − 1.3 − 0.7 − 0.3 − 0.2 − 0.2 − 1.9
of which:  Domestic enterprises End of year or month *
2007 961.9 264.9 672.9 178.6 494.3 5.5 488.8 3.9 20.1 8.3 21.5 22.6
2008 1,073.5 292.6 757.7 223.7 534.0 7.7 526.3 3.8 19.3 7.8 22.0 59.3
2009 1,105.6 336.4 743.6 187.5 556.1 9.1 547.0 5.5 20.2 7.6 21.8 76.3
2009          July 1,100.5 313.2 763.1 199.9 563.2 9.1 554.0 4.9 19.3 7.1 21.8 78.9
         Aug 1,093.6 311.2 758.0 194.2 563.8 9.1 554.7 5.0 19.4 7.1 21.8 68.9
         Sep 1,109.2 326.3 758.1 195.5 562.6 8.5 554.1 5.1 19.6 7.2 21.9 81.7
         Oct 1,107.8 342.8 740.1 180.6 559.5 8.4 551.0 5.2 19.7 7.2 21.8 79.3
         Nov 1,106.2 346.5 734.6 176.4 558.2 8.5 549.7 5.3 19.8 7.2 22.0 76.9
         Dec 1,105.6 336.4 743.6 187.5 556.1 9.1 547.0 5.5 20.2 7.6 21.8 76.3
2010          Jan 1,089.1 343.0 720.2 169.0 551.1 8.6 542.6 5.7 20.2 7.2 21.8 62.3
         Feb 1,087.3 337.2 723.9 174.3 549.6 8.5 541.2 5.9 20.3 7.3 21.8 72.7
         Mar 1,083.5 329.6 727.5 178.7 548.8 8.4 540.4 6.2 20.2 7.2 21.8 73.7
         Apr 1,110.4 349.3 734.6 186.4 548.2 8.4 539.8 6.2 20.2 7.2 21.7 95.3
         May 1,115.0 357.5 731.0 188.7 542.3 8.2 534.1 6.3 20.2 7.2 21.7 97.8
         June 1,105.6 351.6 727.4 187.5 539.9 7.6 532.3 6.4 20.1 7.0 21.8 95.9
Changes *
2008 + 110.4 + 27.0 + 84.4 + 45.0 + 39.3 + 2.1 + 37.2 − 0.1 − 0.8 − 0.5 + 0.4 + 36.7
2009 + 32.6 + 61.6 − 31.5 − 53.1 + 21.6 + 1.4 + 20.3 + 1.6 + 0.9 − 0.4 − 0.3 + 17.0
2009          July − 15.5 − 6.5 − 9.2 − 8.3 − 0.9 + 0.1 − 1.0 + 0.2 + 0.0 + 0.1 + 0.3 − 11.3
         Aug − 6.9 − 2.0 − 5.1 − 5.7 + 0.7 − 0.0 + 0.7 + 0.1 + 0.1 + 0.1 + 0.0 − 10.0
         Sep + 15.6 + 15.1 + 0.1 + 1.3 − 1.2 − 0.6 − 0.6 + 0.1 + 0.2 + 0.1 + 0.0 + 12.8
         Oct − 1.4 + 16.4 − 18.0 − 14.9 − 3.1 − 0.0 − 3.1 + 0.1 + 0.1 + 0.0 − 0.1 − 2.4
         Nov − 1.9 + 3.8 − 5.8 − 4.4 − 1.4 + 0.1 − 1.4 + 0.0 + 0.1 − + 0.1 − 2.3
         Dec − 0.6 − 10.2 + 9.0 + 11.1 − 2.1 + 0.6 − 2.7 + 0.2 + 0.4 + 0.3 − 0.2 − 0.7
2010          Jan − 16.5 + 6.6 − 23.4 − 18.5 − 5.0 − 0.5 − 4.4 + 0.3 + 0.0 − 0.3 − 0.0 − 13.9
         Feb − 1.8 − 5.8 + 3.7 + 5.2 − 1.5 − 0.1 − 1.4 + 0.2 + 0.1 + 0.0 − 0.0 + 10.4
         Mar − 3.8 − 7.5 + 3.6 + 4.4 − 0.8 − 0.1 − 0.7 + 0.2 − 0.0 − 0.0 + 0.0 + 0.9
         Apr + 25.8 + 19.7 + 6.0 + 6.6 − 0.6 + 0.0 − 0.6 + 0.1 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.1 + 21.6
         May + 4.8 + 8.4 − 3.6 + 2.3 − 6.0 − 0.2 − 5.7 + 0.1 − 0.0 + 0.0 − 0.0 + 2.5
         June − 9.4 − 5.4 − 4.0 − 1.6 − 2.4 − 0.7 − 1.8 + 0.1 − 0.0 − 0.2 + 0.1 − 1.9
liabilities arising from registered debt securities. — 2Including deposits under savings and loan contracts (see also footnote 2). — 4Including
under savings and loan contracts (see Table IV.12). — 3Excluding deposits liabilities arising from non-negotiable bearer debt securities. 
35*IV Banks

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
E U R O S Y S T E M
Monthly Report
August 2010
IV Banks
 
8 Deposits of domestic households and non-profit institutions at banks (MFIs) in Germany *
 
 
€ billion
Sight deposits Time deposits  1,2 
by creditor group by creditor group
Deposits of Domestic households Domestic households
domestic
households
and Domestic
non-profit Self- non-profit Self-
employed Other institu- employed Other institutions,
Period total Total Total persons Employees tions Total Total persons Employees individuals individuals
End of year or month *
 
2007 1,458.7 487.1 472.1 83.9 320.9 67.2 15.0 324.8 300.7 41.7 234.3 24.7
2008 1,543.2 507.8 491.8 85.1 336.5 70.3 16.0 390.6 367.2 50.4 281.0 35.8
2009 1,594.9 651.3 631.3 112.5 424.6 94.3 19.9 275.6 258.5 24.5 213.2 20.7
2010          Jan 1,603.5 667.3 645.3 115.2 432.7 97.4 22.0 267.2 250.7 22.7 208.4 19.5
         Feb 1,612.3 675.1 652.9 115.0 439.0 98.9 22.2 263.7 247.3 22.4 205.8 19.2
         Mar 1,607.9 670.1 648.5 112.8 437.1 98.6 21.7 263.0 246.6 21.9 205.4 19.4
         Apr 1,617.2 681.8 659.8 116.8 442.3 100.8 22.0 261.2 245.0 21.7 204.1 19.1
         May 1,620.5 688.3 665.2 118.0 446.1 101.1 23.1 258.2 242.2 21.0 202.5 18.7
         June 1,622.9 691.8 668.0 116.9 456.1 95.0 23.8 258.2 241.9 21.7 201.9 18.3
Changes *
2008 + 88.7 + 21.1 + 19.5 + 1.2 + 15.2 + 3.2 + 1.5 + 69.7 + 66.6 + 9.4 + 46.1 + 11.1
2009 + 51.0 + 142.2 + 138.3 + 27.4 + 88.3 + 22.6 + 4.0 − 115.0 − 108.7 − 25.8 − 67.7 − 15.2
2010          Jan + 8.6 + 16.0 + 13.9 + 2.7 + 8.1 + 3.1 + 2.1 − 8.5 − 7.8 − 1.8 − 4.8 − 1.2
         Feb + 8.8 + 7.8 + 7.6 − 0.2 + 6.3 + 1.5 + 0.2 − 3.5 − 3.4 − 0.4 − 2.7 − 0.4
         Mar − 4.4 − 4.9 − 4.4 − 2.2 − 1.9 − 0.3 − 0.5 − 0.7 − 0.6 − 0.5 − 0.4 + 0.2
         Apr + 9.3 + 11.6 + 11.4 + 4.0 + 5.2 + 2.2 + 0.3 − 1.7 − 1.7 − 0.2 − 1.2 − 0.2
         May + 3.4 + 6.5 + 5.4 + 1.3 + 3.8 + 0.3 + 1.1 − 3.0 − 2.8 − 0.7 − 1.6 − 0.5
         June + 2.4 + 3.5 + 2.8 − 1.1 + 4.3 − 0.4 + 0.7 − 0.1 − 0.3 + 0.7 − 0.6 − 0.4
*See Table IV.2, footnote*; statistical breaks have been eliminated from the Report, are not specially marked. — 1Including subordinated liabilities and
changes. The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as liabilities arising from registered debt securities. — 2Including deposits
provisional. Subsequent revisions, which appear in the following MonthlyDEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
E U R O S Y S T E M
Monthly Report
August 2010
 
 
 
9 Deposits of domestic government at banks (MFIs) in Germany, by creditor group *
 
€ billion
Deposits
   
Federal Government and its special funds  1 State governments
Time deposits Time deposits
Savings Savings
for up deposits Memo for up deposits Memo
Domestic to and for more and bank item to and for more and bank item
government, Sight including than savings Fiduciary Sight including than savings Fiduciary
Period total Total deposits 1 year 1 year bonds  2 loans Total deposits 1 year 1 year bonds  2 loans
End of year or month *
 
2007 158.5 38.3 1.9 3.1 33.2 0.0 8.2 27.9 6.0 11.2 10.6 0.1 19.1
2008 164.7 34.8 2.3 3.7 28.9 0.0 6.6 28.2 6.9 9.9 11.3 0.1 17.3
2009 129.3 22.2 1.3 3.7 17.1 0.1 17.3 23.1 7.1 5.8 10.1 0.1 18.0
2010          Jan 127.7 21.3 1.3 2.8 17.1 0.1 17.3 27.2 8.4 6.2 12.4 0.1 17.9
         Feb 130.6 20.7 1.5 2.0 17.2 0.1 17.3 29.6 9.2 7.8 12.4 0.2 17.9
         Mar 127.6 20.4 1.3 2.4 16.6 0.1 17.3 30.6 8.6 9.6 12.3 0.2 17.7
         Apr 124.4 19.8 1.9 1.6 16.3 0.1 17.3 28.0 6.7 8.8 12.3 0.2 17.7
         May 131.9 20.6 2.1 2.2 16.2 0.1 17.3 27.8 6.7 8.6 12.4 0.2 17.6
         June 139.0 20.8 2.3 2.4 16.1 0.1 17.3 36.1 11.8 10.6 13.5 0.3 17.6
Changes *
2008 + 8.5 − 3.2 + 0.3 + 0.6 − 4.2 + 0.0 − 0.0 + 0.5 + 0.9 − 1.1 + 0.7 − 0.0 − 0.6
2009 − 23.9 − 0.8 − 1.0 + 0.4 − 0.3 + 0.0 − 0.1 − 5.1 + 0.2 − 4.1 − 1.1 + 0.0 − 0.4
2010          Jan − 1.6 − 0.9 + 0.0 − 1.0 − 0.0 + 0.0 − 0.0 + 4.1 + 1.4 + 0.4 + 2.3 + 0.0 − 0.1
         Feb + 2.9 − 0.6 + 0.2 − 0.8 + 0.1 + 0.0 − 0.0 + 2.4 + 0.8 + 1.6 − 0.0 + 0.0 − 0.0
         Mar − 3.0 − 0.4 − 0.2 + 0.4 − 0.6 + 0.0 − + 1.0 − 0.7 + 1.8 − 0.1 + 0.0 − 0.2
         Apr − 3.2 − 0.5 + 0.6 − 0.8 − 0.4 − − 0.0 − 2.6 − 1.8 − 0.8 + 0.0 + 0.0 − 0.0
         May + 7.3 + 0.8 + 0.2 + 0.6 − 0.1 − + 0.0 − 0.2 + 0.0 − 0.2 + 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.1
         June + 7.1 + 0.2 + 0.1 + 0.2 − 0.1 + 0.0 − 0.0 + 8.3 + 5.0 + 2.0 + 1.1 + 0.1 − 0.1
*See Table IV.2, footnote *; excluding deposits of the Treuhand agency and which are included in ”Enterprises”. Statistical breaks have been eliminat ed
its successor organisations, of the Federal Railways, east German Railways from the changes. The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded
and Federal Post Office, and, from 1995, of Deutsche Bahn AG, Deutsche as provisional. Subsequent revisions, which appear in the following
Post AG and Deutsche Telekom AG, and of publicly owned enterprises,
36*IV Banks

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2010
IV Banks
 
 
 
 
 
 Savings deposits  3  Memo item
 
 by maturity
 more than 1 year  2 
Included Subordinated
of which liabilities in time
Domestic Domestic (excluding deposits:
up to and up to and Bank negotiable liabilities non-profit non-profit
institu- including including more than Domestic institu- savings Fiduciary debt arising
tions 1 year Total 2 years 2 years Total tions bonds  4 loans from repos   Period households securities)  5 
End of year or month *
 
24.1 168.4 156.4 13.5 142.8 550.1 542.4 7.7 96.8 0.5 9.0 − 2007
23.4 231.5 159.2 21.3 137.9 530.2 523.1 7.1 114.6 0.3 8.5 − 2008
17.2 109.0 166.6 19.4 147.2 586.5 577.5 9.0 81.5 0.1 9.8 − 2009
16.5 100.8 166.3 18.2 148.2 589.5 580.4 9.1 79.6 0.1 9.9 0.0 2010          Jan 
16.4 96.4 167.3 17.8 149.5 594.5 585.2 9.3 79.1 0.1 10.0 −          Feb 
16.3 95.1 167.9 17.2 150.6 596.0 586.5 9.5 78.7 0.1 10.1 −          Mar 
16.3 93.0 168.3 16.9 151.4 596.0 586.4 9.6 78.2 0.1 10.1 −          Apr 
16.0 90.3 167.9 16.0 151.8 596.0 586.2 9.8 78.0 0.1 10.0 −          May
16.3 90.2 168.0 15.6 152.3 595.3 585.3 9.9 77.7 0.1 9.8 −          June
Changes *
+ 3.1 + 64.4 + 5.3 + 7.9 − 2.6 − 19.9 − 19.3 − 0.6 + 17.8 − 0.2 − 0.4 − 2008
− 6.2 −122.2 + 7.2 − 1.9 + 9.1 + 56.3 + 54.4 + 1.9 − 32.6 + 0.0 + 1.7 − 2009
− 0.7 − 8.2 − 0.3 − 1.2 + 0.9 + 3.0 + 2.9 + 0.1 − 1.9 + 0.0 + 0.1 + 0.0 2010          Jan 
− 0.1 − 4.5 + 1.0 − 0.4 + 1.3 + 5.0 + 4.8 + 0.2 − 0.5 − 0.0 + 0.1 − 0.0          Feb 
− 0.1 − 1.3 + 0.6 − 0.6 + 1.1 + 1.6 + 1.3 + 0.2 − 0.3 − 0.0 + 0.0 −          Mar 
− 0.0 − 2.1 + 0.4 − 0.4 + 0.8 − 0.0 − 0.1 + 0.1 − 0.6 − 0.0 + 0.0 −          Apr 
− 0.3 − 2.6 − 0.4 − 0.8 + 0.5 − 0.0 − 0.2 + 0.2 − 0.1 − 0.0 − 0.0 −          May
+ 0.3 − 0.1 + 0.1 − 0.4 + 0.5 − 0.8 − 0.9 + 0.1 − 0.3 − 0.0 − 0.2 −          June
under savings and loan contracts (see Table IV.12). — 3Excluding deposits liabilities arising from non-negotiable bearer debt securities. — 5Included in
under savings and loan contracts (see also footnote 2). — 4Including time deposits. DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2010
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Local government and local government associations
(including municipal special-purpose associations) Social security funds
Time deposits  3 Time deposits
Savings Savings
for up deposits Memo for up deposits Memo
to and for more and bank item to and for more and bank item
Sight including than savings Fiduciary Sight including than savings Fiduciary
Total deposits 1 year 1 year bonds  2,4 loans Total deposits 1 year 1 year bonds  2 loans   Period
End of year or month *
 
37.8 12.3 19.5 3.6 2.5 0.3 54.5 7.7 38.1 8.4 0.3 0.0 2007
42.5 14.3 22.0 3.9 2.2 0.2 59.2 10.7 39.8 8.4 0.3 0.0 2008
38.0 20.2 10.3 4.2 3.3 0.4 46.0 13.3 23.1 8.9 0.6 0.0 2009
34.1 17.2 9.3 4.3 3.3 0.4 45.2 14.1 21.8 8.7 0.5 0.0 2010          Jan 
35.8 18.9 9.3 4.3 3.3 0.4 44.4 14.1 21.1 8.8 0.5 0.0          Feb 
34.4 17.9 8.7 4.4 3.4 0.4 42.3 12.5 20.6 8.6 0.4 0.0          Mar 
34.4 17.9 8.7 4.3 3.4 0.4 42.2 12.6 20.5 8.6 0.5 0.0          Apr 
37.3 19.9 9.6 4.4 3.5 0.4 46.2 15.0 22.2 8.4 0.5 0.0          May
35.2 18.2 9.1 4.5 3.5 0.4 46.9 14.9 23.3 8.1 0.6 0.0          June
Changes *
+ 5.4 + 2.0 + 3.3 + 0.4 − 0.3 − 0.0 + 5.9 + 3.0 + 2.3 + 0.6 − 0.0 − 0.0 2008
− 4.4 + 5.9 −11.7 + 0.3 + 1.1 − 0.0 − 13.6 + 2.5 − 16.8 + 0.4 + 0.3 − 0.0 2009
− 4.0 − 3.0 − 1.0 + 0.1 − 0.0 − − 0.8 + 0.8 − 1.3 − 0.1 − 0.1 − 2010          Jan 
+ 1.8 + 1.7 + 0.0 + 0.0 + 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.7 − 0.0 − 0.7 + 0.0 − 0.0 −          Feb 
− 1.4 − 1.0 − 0.6 + 0.0 + 0.1 + 0.0 − 2.2 − 1.5 − 0.4 − 0.1 − 0.1 − 0.0          Mar 
− 0.0 + 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.0 + 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.0 + 0.1 − 0.1 − 0.0 + 0.0 −          Apr 
+ 3.0 + 1.9 + 0.9 + 0.1 + 0.1 − 0.0 + 3.8 + 2.2 + 1.7 − 0.3 + 0.1 −          May
− 2.1 − 1.7 − 0.5 + 0.1 − 0.0 − + 0.7 − 0.1 + 1.1 − 0.3 + 0.0 −          June
Monthly Report, are not specially marked. — 1Federal Railways Fund, liabilities arising from non-negotiable bearer debt securities. — 3Including
Indemnification Fund, Redemption Fund for Inherited Liabilities, ERP Special deposits under savings and loan contracts. — 4Excluding deposits under
Fund, German Unity Fund, Equalisation of Burdens Fund. — 2Including savings and loan contracts (see also footnote 3). 
37*IV Banks

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
E U R O S Y S T E M
Monthly Report
August 2010
IV Banks
 
10 Savings deposits and bank savings bonds of banks (MFIs) in Germany sold to non-banks (non-MFIs) *
 
 
€ billion
Savings deposits  1 Bank savings bonds,  3  sold to
of residents of non-residents domestic non-banks
at three months’ at more than three Memo
notice months’ notice item of which
Interest With
of which of which of which credited maturities
Special Special At three on of more
savings savings savings non-banks, than foreign months’
Period Total Total Total Total Total notice deposits total Total 2 years facilities  2 facilities  2 non-banks
End of year or month *
 
2007 563.8 555.4 446.0 354.6 109.4 101.4 8.4 6.1 14.2 130.7 118.4 64.5 12.3
2008 544.1 535.2 424.8 344.0 110.4 103.2 8.9 6.3 14.9 150.8 135.4 59.6 15.4
2009 604.1 594.5 474.5 379.4 120.0 112.1 9.6 7.0 13.8 118.8 103.2 68.3 15.6
2010          Feb 612.5 602.9 485.1 387.3 117.8 110.0 9.6 7.1 0.3 117.1 100.8 71.4 16.3
         Mar 614.4 604.7 486.9 389.4 117.9 109.4 9.6 7.2 0.3 116.9 100.5 72.0 16.4
         Apr 614.5 604.8 488.9 390.9 116.0 107.4 9.7 7.2 0.3 116.4 99.9 72.4 16.5
         May 614.7 605.1 490.9 392.6 114.2 105.3 9.6 7.2 0.3 116.6 99.7 73.1 16.9
         June 614.2 604.4 491.5 392.8 112.9 104.1 9.7 7.3 0.3 116.4 99.5 74.0 16.9
Changes *
2008 − 19.7 − 20.2 − 21.2 − 11.1 + 1.0 + 1.6 + 0.5 + 0.1 . + 20.1 + 17.0 − 4.9 + 3.2
2009 + 60.0 + 59.3 + 50.3 + 35.8 + 8.9 + 7.8 + 0.7 + 0.8 . − 30.6 − 31.6 + 9.5 + 1.0
2010          Feb + 5.2 + 5.2 + 5.9 + 5.1 − 0.7 − 0.7 − 0.0 + 0.0 . − 0.4 − 0.5 + 1.2 + 0.1
         Mar + 1.9 + 1.8 + 1.8 + 2.2 + 0.1 − 0.5 + 0.0 + 0.1 . − 0.2 − 0.4 + 0.6 + 0.2
         Apr + 0.1 + 0.1 + 2.0 + 1.5 − 1.9 − 2.0 + 0.0 + 0.1 . − 0.5 − 0.6 + 0.4 + 0.1
         May + 0.2 + 0.2 + 2.0 + 1.7 − 1.8 − 2.1 − 0.0 + 0.0 . + 0.2 − 0.2 + 0.7 + 0.4
         June − 0.6 − 0.6 + 0.7 + 0.2 − 1.3 − 1.2 + 0.1 + 0.1 . − 0.2 − 0.3 + 0.9 + 0.1
*See Table IV.2, footnote*; statistical breaks have been eliminated from the loan contracts, which are classified as time deposits. — 2Savings deposits
changes. The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as bearing interest at a rate which exceeds the minimum or basic rate of
provisional. Subsequent revisions, which appear in the following Monthly interest. — 3Including liabilities arising from non-negotiable bearer debt
Report, are not specially marked. — 1Excluding deposits under savings and securities. 
 
 
 
 
11 Debt securities and money market paper outstanding of banks (MFIs) in Germany *
 
€ billion
Non-negotiable bearer debt securities
Negotiable bearer debt securities and money market paper and money market paper  5 
of which of which
with maturities of Subordinated
with maturities of
Certifi- more more non-
Floating Zero Foreign cates up to and more up to and more than 1 year than 1 year negotiable negotiable
rate coupon currency of including including than including including than debt debt
Period Total bonds  1 deposit 1 year 2 years 2 years Total 1 year 2 years 2 years bonds  1,2 bonds  3,4 securities securities
End of year or month *
 
2007 1,659.1 375.7 54.2 305.1 51.2 109.6 147.5 1,402.0 1.9 0.1 1.1 0.7 53.6 1.4
2008 1,640.1 395.9 50.7 314.1 64.0 162.6 153.3 1,324.2 2.3 0.2 1.3 0.8 52.5 1.6
2009 1,529.8 380.6 43.9 317.4 70.4 115.9 105.8 1,308.2 0.9 0.0 0.3 0.6 46.1 1.8
2010          Feb 1,521.9 380.7 46.2 335.0 74.7 116.4 94.5 1,311.1 0.7 0.0 0.1 0.6 45.3 1.8
         Mar 1,532.8 385.9 45.2 340.3 75.5 118.5 94.4 1,319.9 0.7 0.0 0.1 0.6 45.1 1.8
         Apr 1,536.0 389.9 40.0 353.8 80.5 122.7 88.4 1,324.9 0.7 0.0 0.1 0.6 44.9 1.8
         May 1,540.0 388.5 40.9 375.3 79.6 123.9 85.3 1,330.8 0.7 0.0 0.1 0.6 44.9 1.9
         June 1,517.0 394.5 39.1 370.3 73.2 116.6 70.8 1,329.6 0.6 0.0 0.1 0.6 45.9 1.6
Changes *
2008 − 17.0 + 18.2 − 3.7 + 9.0 + 12.8 + 53.1 + 5.8 − 75.9 + 0.4 + 0.1 + 0.2 + 0.1 − 1.1 + 0.1
2009 − 110.1 − 15.3 − 6.8 + 4.7 + 6.4 − 46.7 − 47.8 − 15.6 − 1.4 − 0.2 − 1.0 − 0.2 − 6.4 + 0.5
2010          Feb − 7.3 − 3.5 + 2.0 + 7.8 + 2.8 + 2.4 − 6.0 − 3.6 − 0.1 − − 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.4 − 0.0
         Mar + 10.9 + 5.2 − 1.0 + 5.3 + 0.8 + 2.1 − 0.1 + 8.8 − 0.0 − − 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.2 + 0.0
         Apr + 3.2 + 0.4 + 0.2 + 13.5 + 5.0 + 4.3 − 6.0 + 4.9 − 0.0 − − 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.3 + 0.0
         May + 3.9 − 1.3 + 1.0 + 21.5 − 0.9 + 1.2 − 3.1 + 5.9 − 0.0 − − 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.0 + 0.0
         June − 23.0 + 6.0 − 1.8 − 5.0 − 6.4 − 7.3 − 14.5 − 1.2 − 0.0 − − 0.0 − 0.0 + 1.0 − 0.2
*See Table IV.2, footnote*; statistical breaks have been eliminated from the rate notes and zero coupon bonds denominated in foreign currencies. —
changes. The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as 4Bonds denominated in non-euro-area currencies. — 5Non-negotiable
provisional. Subsequent revisions, which appear in the following Monthly bearer debt securities are classified among bank savings bonds (see also
Report, are not specially marked. — 1Including debt securities denominated Table IV.10, footnote 2). 
in foreign currencies. — 2Issue value when floated. — 3Including floating
38*IV Banks

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2010
IV  Banks
  
12  Building  and  loan  associations (MFIs) in Germany *
  Interim statements
  
€ billion
Lending to banks (MFIs) Lending to non-banks (non-MFIs) Deposits of banks Deposits of non-
(MFIs)  5 banks (non-MFIs)
Credit Building loans Secur- Memo
bal- item ities (in-
ances cluding Bearer New
and Loans Treasury Deposits Deposits debt Capital con-
Num- loans under bills under under secur- (includ- tracts
ber (ex- Bank savings Interim and savings savings ities ing pub- entered
of Balance cluding debt and loan and Other Treasury and loan Sight and loan Sight and out- lished into in
End of sheet building Building secur- con- bridging building discount con- and time con- time de- stand- re- year or associ-
year/month ations total loans  2 ities 3 tracts loans loans tracts deposits tracts posits  6 ing month  8 loans)  1 paper)  4 serves)  7 
All  building  and  loan  associations
2009 25 193.6 37.2 0.0 19.1 29.4 70.7 12.6 12.2 0.4 27.8 123.4 7.4 6.3 7.3 87.5
2010          Apr 24 194.9 37.2 0.0 19.2 29.2 70.5 13.0 13.6 0.5 27.5 125.5 7.4 5.0 7.5 7.3
         May 24 195.5 37.5 0.0 19.2 29.1 70.6 13.0 13.8 0.5 27.2 125.9 7.5 5.0 7.5 7.5
         June 24 196.2 37.7 0.0 18.8 29.0 71.0 13.4 13.9 0.5 26.9 126.3 7.4 5.3 7.5 7.9
Private  building  and  Ioan  associations
  
2010          Apr 14 142.1 21.4 0.0 14.5 18.8 56.0 11.6 8.3 0.3 24.1 82.3 7.2 5.0 4.9 4.6
         May 14 142.3 21.5 0.0 14.3 18.7 56.1 11.7 8.5 0.3 23.7 82.6 7.3 5.0 4.9 4.6
         June 14 142.9 21.7 0.0 14.0 18.6 56.4 12.0 8.5 0.3 23.3 82.9 7.2 5.3 4.9 4.8
Public  building  and  Ioan  associations
  
2010          Apr 10 52.9 15.8 0.0 4.8 10.5 14.6 1.4 5.2 0.2 3.4 43.2 0.2 − 2.7 2.8
         May 10 53.1 15.9 0.0 4.9 10.4 14.5 1.4 5.3 0.2 3.5 43.3 0.2 − 2.7 2.9
         June 10 53.3 16.1 0.0 4.9 10.4 14.5 1.4 5.3 0.2 3.5 43.4 0.2 − 2.7 3.1
Trends in building and loan association business
  
€ billion
Changes in deposits Capital promised Capital disbursed Disbursement Interest and
under savings and commitments repayments
loan contracts Allocations outstanding at received on
end of period building loans  10 
Deposits under Loans under
Repay- savings and savings and
ments loan contracts loan contracts  9 Newly
Interest of granted
credited interim deposits of which of which
on under Applied Applied and of
which of Memo Amounts deposits cancelled to settle- to settle- bridging
under savings of ment of ment of loans Under which item paid into
savings savings and which interim interim and alloc- Repay- Housing
and and loan loan Net and and other ated ments bonuses
loan ac- con- con- alloca- bridging bridging building con- during re-
Period tracts tracts Total Total Total loans Total loans loans Total tracts Total quarter counts  9 tions  11 ceived  12 
All  building  and  loan  associations
2009 25.4 2.5 5.8 46.6 31.6 41.3 18.4 4.2 9.1 3.9 13.7 10.9 7.5 11.4 9.3 0.4
2010          Apr 2.3 0.0 0.4 4.0 2.9 3.4 1.6 0.5 0.8 0.5 1.0 11.2 7.7 1.0 0.0
         May 2.2 0.0 0.4 3.6 2.4 3.0 1.4 0.3 0.6 0.3 1.0 11.4 7.8 0.9 0.0
         June 2.3 0.0 0.5 3.9 2.6 3.4 1.5 0.3 0.7 0.3 1.2 11.5 7.8 1.0 ... 0.0
Private  building  and  Ioan  associations
  
2010          Apr 1.5 0.0 0.2 2.9 2.0 2.6 1.1 0.4 0.6 0.4 0.8 6.9 4.0 0.7 0.0
         May 1.4 0.0 0.2 2.4 1.5 2.2 0.9 0.2 0.4 0.2 0.8 7.0 4.0 0.6 0.0
         June 1.5 0.0 0.2 2.7 1.6 2.4 1.0 0.3 0.4 0.2 1.0 7.0 4.0 0.7 ... 0.0
Public  building  and  Ioan  associations
  
2010          Apr 0.9 0.0 0.2 1.1 0.9 0.8 0.4 0.1 0.2 0.1 0.2 4.3 3.7 0.3 0.0
         May 0.8 0.0 0.2 1.2 0.9 0.9 0.5 0.1 0.2 0.1 0.2 4.4 3.8 0.3 0.0
         June 0.8 0.0 0.2 1.2 0.9 0.9 0.5 0.1 0.2 0.1 0.2 4.4 3.8 0.3 ... 0.0
*Excluding assets and liabilities and/or transactions of foreign branches. amount covered by the contracts; only contracts newly entered into, for
The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as provisional. which the contract fee has been fully paid. Increases in the sum contracted
Subsequent revisions, which appear in the following Monthly Report, are count as new contracts. — 9For disbursements of deposits under savings
not specially marked. — 1Including postal giro account balances, claims on and loan contracts arising from the allocation of contracts see “Capital
building and loan associations, claims arising from registered debt securities disbursed“. — 10Including housing bonuses credited. — 11Only allocations
and central bank credit balances. — 2Loans under savings and loan accepted by the beneficiaries; including allocations applied to settlement of
contracts and interim and bridging loans. — 3Including money market interim and bridging loans. — 12The amounts already credited to the
paper and small amounts of other securities issued by banks. — 4Including accounts of savers or borrowers are also included in “Amounts paid into
equalisation claims. — 5Including liabilities to building and loan savings and loan accounts“ and “Interest and repayments received on
associations. — 6Including small amounts of savings deposits. — 7Including building loans“. 
participation rights capital and fund for general banking risks. — 8Total
39*IV  Banks

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
E U R O S Y S T E M
Monthly Report
August 2010
IV  Banks
  
13 Assets and liabilities of the foreign branches and foreign subsidiaries of German banks (MFIs) *
  
  
€ billion
Number of Lending to banks (MFIs) Lending to non-banks (non-MFIs)
Loans Credit  balances and loans
German   
banks to German
(MFIs)   non-banks
with
foreign foreign of which
branches Money enter- Money branches  1 
and/or and/or market prises to market
foreign foreign Balance paper, and foreign paper,
subsi- subsi- sheet German Foreign secur- house- non- secur- Other
Period diaries diaries total Total Total banks banks Total Total Total holds banks ities  2 assets ities 2,3 
Foreign  branches End of year or month *
  
2007 52 218 2,042.4 813.8 743.1 238.6 504.5 70.7 1,066.8 811.4 21.6 20.7 789.8 255.3 161.8
2008 56 226 1,715.5 730.7 669.1 244.9 424.2 61.6 825.3 630.4 20.2 19.2 610.3 194.9 159.5
2009 51 211 1,461.6 579.2 539.1 210.1 328.9 40.2 691.5 534.7 20.7 19.7 514.0 156.7 190.9
2009          Aug 54 225 1,586.8 663.4 617.1 248.1 369.0 46.3 720.8 555.7 21.5 20.5 534.2 165.1 202.6
         Sep 54 224 1,546.2 627.7 582.6 230.6 352.0 45.1 724.9 559.1 20.1 19.0 539.1 165.8 193.5
         Oct 54 225 1,552.6 612.5 569.0 229.1 339.9 43.4 720.6 553.1 20.0 18.9 533.1 167.5 219.5
         Nov 53 222 1,530.0 581.5 540.0 205.6 334.4 41.5 710.1 547.5 19.9 18.9 527.6 162.6 238.4
         Dec 51 211 1,461.6 579.2 539.1 210.1 328.9 40.2 691.5 534.7 20.7 19.7 514.0 156.7 190.9
2010          Jan 53 212 1,557.1 609.7 570.4 214.8 355.6 39.3 715.9 552.3 20.7 19.7 531.6 163.6 231.5
         Feb 53 213 1,539.5 604.8 565.7 211.5 354.3 39.1 709.5 547.7 19.7 18.6 528.0 161.8 225.3
         Mar 53 212 1,523.3 614.4 578.4 219.0 359.4 36.0 726.5 559.0 18.9 17.9 540.0 167.5 182.4
         Apr 55 214 1,641.2 648.4 613.8 239.2 374.6 34.6 804.7 620.3 19.9 18.9 600.4 184.4 188.2
         May 55 215 1,695.9 691.9 659.0 233.3 425.7 32.9 807.2 622.2 37.4 20.4 584.8 185.0 196.8
Changes *
2008 + 4 + 8 −359.4 − 98.5 − 89.3 + 6.3 − 95.5 − 9.2 −256.8 −190.7 − 1.5 − 1.6 −189.3 − 66.1 − 4.1
2009 − 5 − 15 −247.9 −148.8 −127.3 − 34.7 − 92.6 − 21.5 −131.7 − 94.6 + 0.5 + 0.5 − 95.1 − 37.1 + 32.6
2009          Sep − − 1 − 24.6 − 30.5 − 29.5 − 17.5 − 12.1 − 1.0 + 14.3 + 11.6 − 1.5 − 1.5 + 13.1 + 2.7 − 8.4
         Oct − + 1 + 11.6 − 12.9 − 11.3 − 1.5 − 9.8 − 1.6 − 1.6 − 4.1 − 0.1 − 0.1 − 4.0 + 2.5 + 26.1
         Nov − 1 − 3 − 15.0 − 28.8 − 27.0 − 23.5 − 3.5 − 1.9 − 5.3 − 1.4 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 1.3 − 3.9 + 19.1
         Dec − 2 − 11 − 92.6 − 10.5 − 8.9 + 4.5 − 13.4 − 1.6 − 33.5 − 24.5 + 0.8 + 0.8 − 25.2 − 9.0 − 48.6
2010          Jan + 2 + 1 + 74.7 + 23.4 + 24.5 + 4.6 + 19.9 − 1.1 + 11.6 + 7.5 + 0.0 + 0.0 + 7.4 + 4.1 + 39.7
         Feb − + 1 − 32.8 − 11.8 − 11.4 − 3.3 − 8.1 − 0.4 − 14.1 − 10.2 − 1.1 − 1.1 − 9.2 − 3.9 − 6.9
         Mar − − 1 − 19.3 + 8.3 + 11.4 + 7.5 + 3.9 − 3.1 + 15.0 + 9.6 − 0.7 − 0.7 + 10.3 + 5.4 − 42.6
         Apr + 2 + 2 +108.8 + 30.9 + 32.5 + 20.2 + 12.3 − 1.6 + 72.4 + 56.5 + 1.0 + 0.9 + 55.6 + 15.9 + 5.5
         May − + 1 − 5.5 + 21.3 + 23.5 − 5.9 + 29.4 − 2.2 − 32.8 − 26.2 + 17.5 + 1.5 − 43.7 − 6.6 + 6.1
  
  
Foreign  subsidiaries End of year or month *
  
2007 39 120 590.8 267.8 202.4 104.8 97.5 65.5 263.9 176.0 37.8 36.8 138.1 87.9 59.0
2008 38 116 594.9 244.9 183.1 85.5 97.6 61.8 267.8 196.5 42.2 41.6 154.3 71.3 82.2
2009 36 97 474.1 205.4 157.0 87.4 69.6 48.4 217.0 154.7 38.7 38.4 115.9 62.4 51.7
2009          Aug 37 112 523.9 211.8 158.0 71.6 86.4 53.8 257.1 189.7 41.0 40.5 148.8 67.4 55.0
         Sep 36 112 531.3 214.0 163.3 73.8 89.5 50.7 251.6 186.9 40.9 40.4 146.0 64.7 65.8
         Oct 36 110 517.3 210.3 160.6 77.6 83.0 49.7 251.1 186.6 40.9 40.4 145.7 64.5 56.0
         Nov 36 108 516.5 212.8 163.7 77.5 86.2 49.1 247.0 183.5 41.0 40.5 142.5 63.4 56.7
         Dec 36 97 474.1 205.4 157.0 87.4 69.6 48.4 217.0 154.7 38.7 38.4 115.9 62.4 51.7
2010          Jan 36 97 476.5 206.1 158.2 84.9 73.2 48.0 219.1 155.5 38.9 38.5 116.6 63.6 51.3
         Feb 36 96 480.5 211.7 163.8 85.4 78.4 47.9 218.9 155.7 38.6 38.2 117.1 63.2 49.9
         Mar 36 96 476.9 209.7 162.0 87.2 74.8 47.7 217.7 154.7 37.8 37.4 116.9 63.0 49.6
         Apr 36 99 514.1 211.1 163.2 86.2 77.0 48.0 230.4 165.9 38.1 37.7 127.8 64.6 72.5
         May 37 98 521.0 224.0 176.7 98.9 77.9 47.3 222.2 166.3 38.3 38.0 128.0 55.9 74.7
Changes *
2008 − 1 − 4 − 0.2 − 24.2 − 19.8 − 19.3 − 0.5 − 4.4 + 1.1 + 17.5 + 4.4 + 4.8 + 13.2 − 16.4 + 22.9
2009 − 2 − 19 −120.2 − 39.8 − 26.9 + 1.9 − 28.8 − 12.9 − 50.0 − 41.1 − 3.5 − 3.3 − 37.6 − 8.9 − 30.4
2009          Sep − 1 − + 9.7 + 3.5 + 6.0 + 2.2 + 3.8 − 2.6 − 4.7 − 2.0 − 0.1 − 0.1 − 1.9 − 2.7 + 10.9
         Oct − − 2 − 13.3 − 3.3 − 2.5 + 3.8 − 6.3 − 0.8 − 0.2 + 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.0 + 0.0 − 0.2 − 9.8
         Nov − − 2 + 0.2 + 3.1 + 3.4 − 0.1 + 3.5 − 0.3 − 3.7 − 2.7 + 0.2 + 0.1 − 2.8 − 1.0 + 0.8
         Dec − − 11 − 46.0 − 9.3 − 7.8 + 9.9 − 17.7 − 1.5 − 31.4 − 30.4 − 2.3 − 2.1 − 28.1 − 1.1 − 5.2
2010          Jan − − − 0.7 − 0.9 + 0.3 − 2.5 + 2.7 − 1.2 + 0.7 − 0.5 + 0.1 + 0.1 − 0.6 + 1.2 − 0.5
         Feb − − 1 + 2.0 + 4.4 + 5.2 + 0.5 + 4.7 − 0.7 − 1.0 − 0.6 − 0.2 − 0.3 − 0.4 − 0.4 − 1.5
         Mar − − − 4.4 − 2.4 − 2.1 + 1.8 − 3.9 − 0.3 − 1.6 − 1.4 − 0.8 − 0.8 − 0.6 − 0.2 − 0.4
         Apr − + 3 + 35.9 + 0.7 + 0.8 − 1.0 + 1.8 − 0.0 + 12.3 + 10.8 + 0.3 + 0.3 + 10.5 + 1.6 + 22.9
         May + 1 − 1 − 0.7 + 8.6 + 11.1 + 12.7 − 1.6 − 2.5 − 11.2 − 2.6 + 0.2 + 0.2 − 2.8 − 8.6 + 1.9
*In this table “foreign“ also includes the country of domicile of the foreign ies.) The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as provision al;
branches and foreign subsidiaries. Statistical revisions have been eliminated subsequent revisions, which appear in the following Monthly Report , are
from the changes. (Breaks owing to changes in the reporting population not specially marked. — 1Several branches in a given country of domicile
have not been eliminated from the flow figures for the foreign subsidiar-
40*IV  Banks

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2010
IV  Banks
  
  
  
  
  
Deposits
of banks (MFIs) of non-banks (non-MFIs)
German non-banks  4 
Money
Short-term market Medium  and long-term
paper
of which of which and debt
enter- enter- Working securities
out- capital Other prises  and prises  and
German Foreign house- house- Foreign stand- and own liabil-
Total Total banks Total Total Total holds Total holds ing  5 funds ities  6   Period banks non-banks
End of year or month * Foreign  branches
  
1,723.7 1,191.0 547.7 643.3 532.7 55.3 51.2 47.5 4.1 3.9 477.4 186.0 29.2 103.5 2007
1,446.1 1,070.4 554.3 516.1 375.7 45.0 36.5 34.6 8.5 8.0 330.7 126.6 35.6 107.2 2008
1,125.9 798.0 449.6 348.4 327.9 37.4 33.8 31.6 3.5 3.3 290.5 157.5 33.9 144.4 2009
1,250.3 875.2 465.5 409.7 375.1 38.3 33.8 33.4 4.4 3.9 336.8 157.8 35.8 142.9 2009          Aug 
1,206.4 851.8 446.3 405.5 354.6 38.1 33.7 32.9 4.4 3.9 316.4 166.3 35.7 137.8          Sep 
1,203.4 822.4 441.1 381.3 381.1 36.9 32.5 32.2 4.4 3.9 344.2 169.4 34.7 145.1          Oct 
1,172.1 829.1 434.1 395.0 343.0 36.5 32.2 31.6 4.3 3.8 306.5 169.0 34.6 154.3          Nov 
1,125.9 798.0 449.6 348.4 327.9 37.4 33.8 31.6 3.5 3.3 290.5 157.5 33.9 144.4          Dec 
1,195.5 824.5 444.2 380.3 371.1 36.3 32.9 32.3 3.5 3.2 334.7 171.2 34.2 156.3 2010          Jan 
1,178.0 801.9 431.4 370.5 376.1 38.9 35.4 34.8 3.5 3.3 337.2 168.2 34.3 159.2          Feb 
1,168.0 802.6 437.8 364.8 365.4 41.6 38.2 37.6 3.5 3.2 323.8 171.0 34.1 150.2          Mar 
1,284.0 860.7 440.4 420.3 423.2 41.2 37.8 37.7 3.4 3.1 382.1 173.6 34.2 149.5          Apr 
1,328.6 877.4 446.3 431.1 451.2 38.9 35.4 33.5 3.5 3.2 412.3 178.0 35.2 154.0          May
Changes *
− 304.0 −139.7 + 6.5 −146.3 −164.3 − 10.3 − 14.7 − 12.9 + 4.4 + 4.1 −153.9 − 59.4 + 6.5 − 2.4 2008
− 312.0 −267.8 −104.7 −163.1 − 44.2 − 7.6 − 2.6 − 3.0 − 5.0 − 4.7 − 36.6 + 30.9 − 1.7 + 34.9 2009
− 32.7 − 17.3 − 19.2 + 1.9 − 15.4 − 0.1 − 0.1 − 0.5 − 0.0 + 0.0 − 15.3 + 8.4 − 0.1 − 0.2 2009          Sep 
+ 1.2 − 26.6 − 5.3 − 21.3 + 27.8 − 1.2 − 1.2 − 0.7 − 0.0 − 0.0 + 29.0 + 3.1 − 1.0 + 8.3          Oct 
− 25.8 + 9.4 − 7.0 + 16.4 − 35.2 − 0.4 − 0.4 − 0.6 − 0.1 − 0.0 − 34.8 − 0.4 − 0.1 + 11.2          Nov 
− 62.4 − 40.1 + 15.5 − 55.6 − 22.4 + 0.9 + 1.7 + 0.0 − 0.8 − 0.6 − 23.2 − 11.5 − 0.7 − 17.9          Dec 
+ 56.3 + 18.9 − 5.4 + 24.3 + 37.4 − 1.0 − 1.0 + 0.7 − 0.1 − 0.1 + 38.4 + 13.7 + 0.2 + 4.5 2010          Jan 
− 28.5 − 29.2 − 12.8 − 16.4 + 0.7 + 2.6 + 2.5 + 2.5 + 0.1 + 0.1 − 1.9 − 3.0 + 0.1 − 1.4          Feb 
− 11.9 − 0.0 + 6.5 − 6.5 − 11.9 + 2.7 + 2.8 + 2.7 − 0.1 − 0.1 − 14.6 + 2.8 − 0.2 − 10.1          Mar 
+ 110.2 + 55.3 + 2.6 + 52.7 + 54.9 − 0.4 − 0.3 + 0.1 − 0.1 − 0.1 + 55.3 + 2.6 + 0.1 − 4.1          Apr 
+ 2.2 − 6.6 + 5.9 − 12.5 + 8.8 − 2.2 − 2.4 − 4.2 + 0.2 + 0.2 + 11.0 + 4.4 + 1.1 − 13.1          May
  
  
End of year or month * Foreign  subsidiaries
  
437.3 270.1 118.2 151.9 167.2 37.1 30.3 29.5 6.8 6.7 130.1 69.5 28.6 55.4 2007
453.7 277.7 145.1 132.7 176.0 32.8 24.1 23.6 8.7 8.6 143.2 57.7 30.5 52.9 2008
377.6 218.5 125.4 93.1 159.1 37.0 29.6 29.4 7.4 7.3 122.1 33.3 24.3 38.9 2009
394.9 235.3 122.7 112.5 159.7 30.8 22.4 21.8 8.4 8.3 128.9 55.2 28.0 45.8 2009          Aug 
403.7 239.7 128.2 111.5 164.0 31.0 22.5 21.7 8.5 8.4 133.0 54.6 28.0 45.1          Sep 
387.8 228.3 121.7 106.6 159.5 31.7 23.2 22.3 8.5 8.4 127.8 53.7 27.9 47.9          Oct 
387.2 227.1 119.9 107.2 160.1 30.0 21.5 21.1 8.5 8.4 130.0 53.3 28.9 47.1          Nov 
377.6 218.5 125.4 93.1 159.1 37.0 29.6 29.4 7.4 7.3 122.1 33.3 24.3 38.9          Dec 
378.1 220.5 121.5 99.1 157.5 34.2 26.9 26.6 7.4 7.3 123.3 33.5 24.4 40.7 2010          Jan 
382.4 219.9 121.9 98.0 162.5 35.3 27.6 27.3 7.7 7.6 127.2 33.9 24.4 39.8          Feb 
377.9 216.7 119.7 96.9 161.2 35.3 27.9 27.3 7.3 7.3 126.0 34.4 24.8 39.8          Mar 
409.4 242.0 137.1 104.9 167.4 34.6 27.3 26.7 7.3 7.2 132.9 33.3 27.6 43.8          Apr 
414.7 239.0 139.8 99.2 175.7 31.5 24.2 23.5 7.3 7.2 144.1 31.0 27.4 47.8          May
Changes *
+ 12.1 + 4.8 + 26.9 − 22.1 + 7.3 − 4.3 − 6.3 − 5.9 + 2.0 + 2.0 + 11.6 − 11.8 + 1.9 − 2.4 2008
− 76.0 − 59.1 − 19.7 − 39.5 − 16.9 + 4.2 + 5.5 + 5.8 − 1.4 − 1.4 − 21.1 − 24.3 − 6.2 − 13.6 2009
+ 10.3 + 5.1 + 5.4 − 0.4 + 5.2 + 0.2 + 0.1 − 0.2 + 0.0 + 0.0 + 5.1 − 0.6 − 0.0 − 0.0 2009          Sep 
− 15.3 − 11.0 − 6.4 − 4.6 − 4.3 + 0.7 + 0.7 + 0.6 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 5.0 − 0.9 − 0.1 + 3.0          Oct 
+ 0.2 − 0.9 − 1.9 + 1.0 + 1.1 − 1.7 − 1.7 − 1.2 + 0.0 + 0.0 + 2.7 − 0.4 + 1.0 − 0.5          Nov 
− 12.2 − 9.8 + 5.5 − 15.4 − 2.4 + 6.9 + 8.1 + 8.3 − 1.1 − 1.1 − 9.3 − 19.9 − 4.6 − 9.3          Dec 
− 1.8 + 0.9 − 4.0 + 4.9 − 2.8 − 2.7 − 2.7 − 2.7 + 0.0 + 0.0 − 0.1 + 0.1 + 0.0 + 0.9 2010          Jan 
+ 2.9 − 1.4 + 0.5 − 1.9 + 4.3 + 1.0 + 0.7 + 0.7 + 0.3 + 0.3 + 3.2 + 0.4 + 0.0 − 1.4          Feb 
− 5.1 − 3.5 − 2.2 − 1.3 − 1.6 − 0.0 + 0.4 − 0.0 − 0.4 − 0.4 − 1.6 + 0.5 + 0.4 − 0.2          Mar 
+ 30.6 + 24.9 + 17.4 + 7.6 + 5.7 − 0.7 − 0.7 − 0.6 − 0.0 − 0.0 + 6.4 − 1.1 + 2.8 + 3.7          Apr 
− 0.4 − 5.7 + 2.7 − 8.4 + 5.3 − 3.1 − 3.0 − 3.2 − 0.0 − 0.0 + 8.3 − 2.3 − 0.1 + 2.1          May
are regarded as a single branch. — 2Treasury bills, Treasury discount non-negotiable debt securities. — 5Issues of negotiable and
paper and other money market paper, debt securities. — 3Including non-negotiable debt securities and money market paper. — 6Including
own debt securities. — 4Excluding subordinated liabilities and subordinated liabilities. 
41*IV  Banks

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
E U R O S Y S T E M
Monthly Report
August 2010
V  Minimum reserves
 
1  Reserve ratios
Germany Euro area
 
% of liabilities subject to reserve requirements % of reserve base  1 
Sight Time
Applicable from liabilities liabilities Applicable from Ratio Savings deposits
1995  Aug 1 2    2    1.5    1999  Jan 1 2    
 
 
 
 
1Article 3 of the Regulation of the European Central Bank on the appli-
cation of minimum reserves (excluding liabilities to which a reserve ratio of
0% applies pursuant to Article 4 (1)). 
 
 
 
2  Reserve maintenance in Germany up to the end of 1998
− pursuant to the Minimum Reserves Order of the Bundesbank 
 
DM million
Liabilities subject to reserve requirements Excess reserves  4 
Monthly Required % of the
average  1 Total reserves  2 Level Deficiencies Sight liabilities Time liabilities Savings deposits Actual reserves  3 required  reserves
1995          Dec 2,066,565 579,337 519,456 967,772 36,492 37,337 845 2.3 3
1996          Dec 2,201,464 655,483 474,342 1,071,639 38,671 39,522 851 2.2 4
1997          Dec 2,327,879 734,986 476,417 1,116,477 40,975 41,721 745 1.8 3
1998          Dec 2,576,889 865,444 564,878 1,146,567 45,805 46,432 627 1.4 4
1Pursuant to sections 5 to 7 of the Minimum Reserves Order. 2Amount balances of the credit institutions subject to reserve requirements on their
after applying the reserve ratios to the liabilities subject to reserve require- giro accounts at the Bundesbank. — 4 Actual reserves less required reserves. 
ments (section 5 (1) of the Minimum Reserves Order). — 3Average credit
 
 
3  Reserve maintenance in the euro area
− from 1999, pursuant to the ECB Regulation on the application of minimum reserves in accordance with
Article 19.1 of the Statute of the ESCB 
 
Maintenance Required reserves
period before deduction Required reserves
of lump-sum Lump-sum beginning in  1 after deduction of
Reserve base  2 allowance  3 allowance  4 Deficiencies  7 lump-sum allowance Current account  5 Excess reserves  6 
Euro area ( € billion)
 
2009          Dec 10,530.2 210.6 0.5 210.1 211.3 1.2 0.0
2010          Jan 10,499.6 210.0 0.5 209.5 210.9 1.4 0.0
         Feb 10,568.9 211.4 0.5 210.9 211.8 1.0 0.0
         Mar 10,595.2 211.9 0.5 211.4 212.5 1.2 0.0
         Apr 10,587.4 211.7 0.5 211.2 212.4 1.2 0.0
         May 10,590.1 211.8 0.5 211.3 212.5 1.3 0.0
         June  p 10,676.4 213.5 0.5 213.0 214.4 1.4 0.0
         July  p,8 10,739.9 214.8 0.5 214.3 215.7 1.4 ...
         Aug  p ... ... ... 213.9 ... ... ...
Of which:  Germany ( € million)
2009          Dec 2,507,906 50,158 187 49,971 50,297 326 0
2010          Jan 2,496,117 49,922 187 49,735 50,168 433 2
         Feb 2,496,911 49,938 187 49,751 50,044 293 0
         Mar 2,508,645 50,173 187 49,985 50,295 310 0
         Apr 2,504,766 50,095 187 49,908 50,213 305 0
         May 2,510,392 50,208 187 50,020 50,473 453 0
         June  p 2,553,393 51,068 188 50,880 51,229 349 1
         July  p 2,602,742 52,055 187 51,868 52,276 408 0
         Aug  p 2,587,031 51,741 187 51,554 ... ... ...
1From March 2004, the reserve maintenance period will start on the reserve base. — 4Article 5 (2) of the Regulation of the European Central
settlement day of the main refinancing operation immediately following Bank on the application of minimum reserves. — 5Average credit balances
the meeting of the Governing Council of the ECB for which the monthly of the credit institutions at the national central banks. — 6Average credit
discussion of the monetary policy stance is scheduled. — 2Article 3 of the balances less required reserves after deduction of the lump-sum
Regulation of the European Central Bank on the application of minimum allowance. — 7Required reserves after deduction of the lump-sum
reserves (excluding liabilities to which a reserve ratio of 0% applies, pur- allowance. — 8The total number of deficiencies was not available when
suant to Article 4 (1)). — 3Amount after applying the reserve ratios to the this report went to press. 
42*V  Minimum reserves

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2010
VI Interest rates
 
1 ECB interest rates 2 Base rates
 
 
% per annum % per annum
Main refinancing Main refinancing
operations operations Base Base
Mar- Mar- rate rate
ginal ginal as per as per Minimum Minimum
Applicable Deposit Fixed bid lending Applicable Deposit Fixed bid lending Applicable Civil Applicable Civil
from facility rate rate facility from facility rate rate facility from Code  1 from Code  1 
2002 Dec                  6 1.75 − 2.75 3.75 2008 July                  9 3.25 − 4.25 5.25 2002 Jan                1 2.57 2007 Jan                1 2.70
         Oct                  8 2.75 − 3.75 4.75          July                1 2.47          July                1 3.19
2003 Mar                  7 1.50 − 2.50 3.50          Oct                  9 3.25 3.75 − 4.25
         June                 6 1.00 − 2.00 3.00          Nov                12 2.75 3.25 − 3.75 2003 Jan                1 1.97 2008 Jan                1 3.32
         Dec                10 2.00 2.50 − 3.00          July                1 1.22          July                1 3.19
2005 Dec                  6 1.25 − 2.25 3.25
2009 Jan                21 1.00 2.00 − 3.00 2004 Jan                1 1.14 2009 Jan                1 1.62
2006 Mar                  8 1.50 − 2.50 3.50          Mar                11 0.50 1.50 − 2.50          July                1 1.13          July                1  2 0.12
         June               15 1.75 − 2.75 3.75          Apr                  8 0.25 1.25 − 2.25
         Aug                  9 2.00 − 3.00 4.00          May                13 0.25 1.00 − 1.75 2005 Jan                1 1.21
         Oct                11 2.25 − 3.25 4.25          July                1 1.17
         Dec                13 2.50 − 3.50 4.50
2006 Jan                1 1.37
2007 Mar                14 2.75 − 3.75 4.75          July                1 1.95
         June               13 3.00 − 4.00 5.00
1Pursuant to section 247 of the Civil Code. — 2Since 1 July 2009  
unchanged. 
 
 
 
3 Eurosystem monetary policy operations allotted through tenders
 
 
Fixed rate tenders Variable rate tenders
Bid Allotment Minimum Weighted
amount amount Fixed rate bid rate Marginal rate  1 average rate
Date of Running for
settlement € million % per annum ... days
Main refinancing operations
2010 June               16 126,672 126,672 1.00 − − − 7
         June               23 151,511 151,511 1.00 − − − 7
         June               30 162,912 162,912 1.00 − − − 7
         July                 7 229,070 229,070 1.00 − − − 7
         July               14 195,661 195,661 1.00 − − − 7
         July               21 201,286 201,286 1.00 − − − 7
         July               28 189,986 189,986 1.00 − − − 7
         Aug                  4 154,844 154,844 1.00 − − − 7
         Aug                11 153,747 153,747 1.00 − − − 7
Longer-term refinancing operations
2010 May               27 12,163 12,163 1.00 − − − 91
         June               16 31,603 31,603 1.00 − − − 28
         July                 1 131,933 131,933 1.00 − − − 91
         July               14 49,399 49,399 1.00 − − − 28
         July               29 23,166 23,166 1.00 − − − 91
         Aug                11 39,148 39,148 1.00 − − − 28
Source: ECB. — 1Lowest or highest interest rate at which funds were   
allotted or collected.  
 
 
 
4 Money market rates, by month
 
 
% per annum
Money market rates reported by Frankfurt banks  1 EURIBOR  3 
One-week One-month Six-month Nine-month Twelve- Three-month
Overnight money Three-month funds EONIA  2 funds funds funds funds funds month funds
Reporting Monthly Lowest and Monthly Lowest and
period averages highest rates averages highest rates Monthly averages
2010          Jan 0.28 0.23 − 0.70 0.62 0.52 − 0.71 0.34 0.36 0.44 0.68 0.98 1.11 1.23
         Feb 0.30 0.24 − 0.75 0.60 0.51 − 0.69 0.34 0.34 0.42 0.66 0.96 1.10 1.23
         Mar 0.28 0.23 − 0.75 0.57 0.49 − 0.66 0.35 0.34 0.41 0.64 0.95 1.09 1.22
         Apr 0.29 0.24 − 0.75 0.58 0.49 − 0.67 0.35 0.35 0.40 0.64 0.96 1.10 1.23
         May 0.29 0.24 − 0.65 0.61 0.51 − 0.71 0.34 0.36 0.42 0.69 0.98 1.12 1.25
         June 0.30 0.25 − 0.70 0.65 0.55 − 0.77 0.35 0.38 0.45 0.73 1.01 1.15 1.28
         July 0.46 0.25 − 0.85 0.79 0.62 − 0.92 0.48 0.53 0.58 0.85 1.10 1.25 1.37
1Money market rates are not fixed or quoted officially; the monthly aver- of real turnover according to the act/360 method and published via
ages computed from daily quotations are unweighted. — 2Euro OverNight Moneyline Telerate. — 3Euro Interbank Offered Rate: unweighted average
Index Average: weighted average overnight rate for interbank operations rate calculated by Moneyline Telerate since 30 December 1998 according to
calculated by the European Central Bank since 4 January 1999 on the basis the act/360 method. 
43*VI Interest rates

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
E U R O S Y S T E M
Monthly Report
August 2010
VI Interest rates
 
5 Interest rates for outstanding amounts and new business of banks (MFIs) in the European monetary union *
(a) Outstanding amounts o
 
Effective interest rate % per annum  1 
Non-financial Loans to households Loans to
Households’ corporations’ non-financial
deposits deposits Housing loans Consumer credit and other loans corporations
with an agreed maturity of with a maturity of
over 1 year over 1 year over 1 year
End of up to over up to over up to and up to over up to and up to over up to and up to over
month 2 years 2 years 2 years 2 years 1 year 5 years 5 years 1 year 5 years 5 years 1 year 5 years 5 years
2009          Oct 2.64 2.96 1.70 3.34 4.05 4.19 4.18 7.69 6.66 5.54 3.56 3.37 3.60
         Nov 2.51 2.95 1.62 3.37 4.01 4.15 4.12 7.56 6.66 5.51 3.53 3.36 3.57
         Dec 2.36 2.91 1.56 3.30 4.07 4.11 4.07 7.55 6.57 5.43 3.46 3.35 3.50
2010          Jan 2.20 2.80 1.45 3.23 3.99 4.05 4.00 7.51 6.52 5.38 3.47 3.31 3.45
         Feb 2.15 2.84 1.42 3.31 4.04 4.11 4.03 7.49 6.61 5.43 3.45 3.33 3.43
         Mar 2.13 2.75 1.38 3.26 3.98 4.04 3.98 7.44 6.52 5.36 3.43 3.26 3.37
         Apr 2.13 2.75 1.37 3.24 3.89 4.01 3.92 7.38 6.51 5.30 3.42 3.21 3.33
         May 2.13 2.71 1.42 3.22 3.87 3.97 3.89 7.40 6.46 5.29 3.41 3.20 3.31
         June 2.13 2.72 1.45 3.11 3.79 3.96 3.83 7.59 6.43 5.25 3.27 3.20 3.29
 
 
(b) New business +
 
Effective interest rate % per annum  1 
Households’ deposits Non-financial corporations’ deposits
with an agreed maturity of redeemable at notice of with an agreed maturity of
over 1 year over 1 year
Reporting up to and up to over up to over up to and up to over
period Overnight 1 year 2 years 2 years 3 months 3 months Overnight 1 year 2 years 2 years
2009          Oct 0.46 1.68 2.11 2.55 1.55 2.97 0.49 0.66 1.99 2.72
         Nov 0.46 1.67 2.23 2.56 1.52 2.76 0.48 0.70 2.11 2.92
         Dec 0.45 1.67 2.31 2.40 1.53 2.45 0.47 0.77 2.00 2.53
2010          Jan 0.43 1.74 2.33 2.52 1.47 2.23 0.45 0.72 1.95 2.44
         Feb 0.42 1.75 2.24 2.36 1.45 2.11 0.44 0.73 2.11 2.39
         Mar 0.42 1.90 2.38 2.24 1.45 2.05 0.44 0.80 2.73 2.34
         Apr 0.41 2.02 2.64 2.14 1.42 2.01 0.43 0.78 2.78 2.30
         May 0.40 2.04 2.73 2.24 1.40 1.98 0.43 0.77 2.78 2.26
         June 0.42 2.15 2.10 2.48 1.41 1.95 0.43 0.87 1.81 2.40
 
 
Loans to households
Consumer credit Housing loans Other loans
with an initial rate fixation with an initial rate fixation
floating floating floating over 1 year over 1 year over 5 years over 1 year
Reporting Over- rate or up and up to over rate or up and up to and up to over and up to over rate or up
period drafts  2 Total  3 to 1 year 5 years 5 years Total  3 to 1 year 5 years 10 years 10 years to 1 year 5 years 5 years
2009          Oct 9.16 7.87 7.32 6.38 7.94 3.85 2.77 4.02 4.45 4.40 3.21 4.73 4.72
         Nov 9.07 7.76 7.03 6.29 7.87 3.78 2.71 3.97 4.46 4.32 3.16 4.57 4.66
         Dec 8.99 7.43 6.42 6.26 7.56 3.81 2.71 3.96 4.42 4.26 3.08 4.40 4.35
2010          Jan 8.94 7.86 6.83 6.42 8.04 3.79 2.71 3.94 4.38 4.26 3.13 4.45 4.46
         Feb 9.02 7.78 6.72 6.25 7.98 3.74 2.68 3.83 4.32 4.18 3.17 4.48 4.74
         Mar 8.82 7.59 6.35 6.21 7.94 3.66 2.63 3.72 4.21 4.15 3.05 4.61 4.55
         Apr 8.77 7.66 6.77 6.12 7.92 3.67 2.62 3.70 4.18 4.12 3.06 4.32 4.53
         May 8.78 7.62 6.69 6.14 7.84 3.58 2.58 3.65 4.14 4.02 3.09 4.45 4.50
         June 9.02 7.14 5.23 6.06 7.89 3.52 2.55 3.60 4.08 3.91 3.03 4.25 4.27
 
 
Loans to non-financial corporations
Loans up to €1 million with an initial rate fixation Loans over €1 million with an initial rate fixation
Reporting floating rate or over 1 year and floating rate or over 1 year and
period Overdrafts  2 up to 1 year up to 5 years over 5 years up to 1 year up to 5 years over 5 years
2009          Oct 4.18 3.33 4.49 4.18 2.14 2.73 3.64
         Nov 4.11 3.34 4.49 4.10 2.22 2.74 3.80
         Dec 4.06 3.28 4.22 3.96 2.19 3.15 3.58
2010          Jan 4.05 3.25 4.20 3.99 2.02 2.88 3.65
         Feb 4.03 3.25 4.22 4.05 1.94 2.90 3.61
         Mar 3.98 3.24 4.21 4.00 1.99 2.54 3.44
         Apr 3.98 3.19 4.17 3.90 2.00 2.73 3.45
         May 3.97 3.25 4.12 3.86 1.96 2.83 3.41
         June 3.73 3.25 4.10 3.81 2.17 2.92 3.33
Source: ECB. — For footnotes *, o, 1see p 45*. For footnote + see p 46*. — Directive 2008/48/EC, which contains other related charges which may occur
2From June 2010 including revolving loans, convenience and extended for enquiries, administration, preparation of the documents, guarantees
credit card debt. — 3Annual percentage rate of charge as defined in and credit insurance. 
44*VI Interest rates

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2010
VI Interest rates
 
6 Interest rates and volumes for outstanding amounts and new business of German banks (MFIs) *
(a) Outstanding amounts o
 
 
Households’ deposits Non-financial corporations’ deposits
with an agreed maturity of
up to 2 years over 2 years up to 2 years over 2 years
Effective Effective Effective Effective
End of interest rate  1 Volume  2 interest rate  1 Volume  2 interest rate  1 Volume  2 interest rate  1 Volume  2 
month % pa € million % pa € million % pa € million % pa € million
2009          June 3.32 240,427 2.44 183,008 1.52 101,792 4.25 23,871
         July 3.10 226,909 2.43 184,056 1.30 101,908 4.17 24,569
         Aug 2.91 211,060 2.43 185,213 1.20 102,191 4.03 25,351
         Sep 2.75 196,660 2.42 186,698 1.09 99,264 3.99 25,666
         Oct 2.59 182,143 2.42 188,911 1.06 93,477 3.95 25,921
         Nov 2.39 170,152 2.41 191,395 1.01 92,010 3.92 26,499
         Dec 2.18 161,018 2.40 196,621 0.95 88,785 3.99 26,227
2010          Jan 1.92 148,065 2.40 199,231 0.91 87,339 3.93 25,855
         Feb 1.80 141,541 2.40 201,737 0.88 86,509 4.16 24,504
         Mar 1.77 138,799 2.38 203,418 0.83 86,535 4.04 24,304
         Apr 1.74 135,398 2.37 204,546 0.83 87,161 4.05 24,331
         May 1.70 130,925 2.37 205,790 0.83 85,444 4.06 24,284
         June 1.70 129,294 2.47 207,115 0.85 83,947 3.92 22,692
 
 
Housing loans to households  3 Consumer credit and other loans to households  4, 5 
with a maturity of
over 1 year and over 1 year and
up to 1 year  6 up to 5 years over 5 years up to 1 year  6 up to 5 years over 5 years
Effective Effective Effective Effective Effective Effective
interest interest interest interest interest interest
End of rate  1 Volume  2 rate 1 Volume  2 rate 1 Volume  2 rate 1 Volume  2 rate 1 Volume  2 rate 1 Volume  2 
month % pa % pa % pa % pa % pa % pa € million € million € million € million € million € million
2009          June 4.86 5,605 4.49 25,260 4.95 916,103 8.98 69,625 5.49 66,936 5.98 313,433
         July 4.64 5,645 4.44 25,362 4.93 917,085 8.74 67,655 5.44 67,784 5.95 314,065
         Aug 4.56 5,590 4.41 25,463 4.92 919,804 8.67 67,279 5.41 68,040 5.94 313,043
         Sep 4.51 5,673 4.38 25,577 4.91 920,688 8.67 69,218 5.36 68,844 5.94 312,413
         Oct 4.37 5,595 4.35 25,653 4.89 922,437 8.53 67,505 5.33 69,092 5.90 312,661
         Nov 4.38 5,539 4.33 25,786 4.88 923,421 8.40 66,513 5.29 69,197 5.89 312,363
         Dec 4.46 5,548 4.28 25,772 4.86 922,968 8.53 67,071 5.30 70,265 5.88 311,657
2010          Jan 4.37 5,331 4.26 25,666 4.85 920,635 8.44 65,619 5.28 69,803 5.86 310,801
         Feb 4.36 5,265 4.25 25,617 4.84 919,585 8.30 64,998 5.26 69,606 5.85 310,649
         Mar 4.34 5,409 4.22 25,698 4.83 919,684 8.40 66,783 5.22 69,966 5.83 310,443
         Apr 4.19 5,308 4.20 25,751 4.81 920,311 8.31 65,798 5.21 69,811 5.82 311,285
         May 4.16 5,432 4.17 25,886 4.80 920,455 8.34 65,888 5.18 69,992 5.79 311,983
         June 4.08 5,033 4.17 25,741 4.74 920,875 8.31 69,249 5.96 69,417 5.79 312,634
 
 
Loans to non-financial corporations with a maturity of
up to 1 year  6 over 1 year and up to 5 years over 5 years
End of Volume  2 Volume  2 Volume  2 Effective interest rate  1 Effective interest rate  1 Effective interest rate  1 
month % pa € million % pa € million % pa € million
2009          June 4.09 174,044 3.87 142,643 4.27 539,830
         July 3.92 164,009 3.76 144,430 4.18 542,592
         Aug 3.85 162,055 3.72 144,119 4.15 543,900
         Sep 3.87 160,310 3.65 144,402 4.10 542,542
         Oct 3.83 154,789 3.61 143,106 4.06 542,895
         Nov 3.82 152,333 3.61 142,207 4.06 547,731
         Dec 3.68 140,178 3.66 144,786 4.01 545,324
2010          Jan 3.66 140,783 3.61 143,161 3.98 545,782
         Feb 3.67 140,023 3.62 143,854 3.96 547,450
         Mar 3.77 139,354 3.49 139,466 3.93 544,224
         Apr 3.77 135,797 3.45 138,677 3.92 546,900
         May 3.76 136,914 3.44 137,604 3.91 547,945
         June 3.78 137,260 3.52 136,191 3.85 549,037
*The MFI interest rate statistics are based on the interest rates applied by interest rates are calculated either as annualised agreed interest rates o ra s
MFIs and the related volumes of euro-denominated deposits and loans to narrowly defined effective rates. Both calculation methods cover all interes t
households and non-financial corporations domiciled in the euro area. The payments on deposits and loans but not any other related charges which
household sector comprises individuals (including sole proprietors) and may occur for enquiries, administration, preparation of the documents,
non-profit institutions serving households. Non-financial corporations in- guarantees and credit insurance. — 2Data based on monthly balance sheet
clude all enterprises other than insurance companies, banks and other finan- statistics. — 3Secured and unsecured loans for home purchase, including
cial institutions. The interest rate statistics gathered on a harmonised basis building and home improvements; including loans granted by building and
in the euro area from January 2003 are being collected in Germany on a loan associations and interim credits as well as transmitted loans granted by
sample basis. The most recent figures are in all cases to be regarded as provi- the reporting agents in their own name and for their own account. —
sional. Subsequent revisions appearing in the following Monthly Report are 4Consumer credit is defined as loans granted for the purpose of personal
not specially marked. Further information on the MFI interest rate statistics use in the consumption of goods and services. — 5For the purpose of these
can be found on the Bundesbank’s website (Statistics / Reporting system / statistics, other loans are loans granted for other purposes such as busines s,
Banking statistics / MFI interest rate statistics). — oThe statistics on out- debt consolidation, education etc. — 6Including overdrafts (see also
standing amounts are collected at the end of the month. — 1The effective footnotes 11 and 12 p 47*). 
45*VI Interest rates

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
E U R O S Y S T E M
Monthly Report
August 2010
VI Interest rates
 
6 Interest rates and volumes for outstanding amounts and new business of German banks (MFIs) *  (cont’d)
(b) New business +
 
 
Households’ deposits
with an agreed maturity of redeemable at notice of  8 
over 1 year and
Overnight up to 1 year up to 2 years over 2 years up to 3 months over 3 months
Effective Effective Effective Effective Effective Effective
interest interest interest interest interest interest
Reporting rate  1 Volume  2 rate 1 Volume  7 rate 1 Volume  7 rate 1 Volume  7 rate 1 Volume  2 rate 1 Volume  2 
period % pa % pa % pa % pa % pa % pa € million € million € million € million € million € million
2009          June 0.94 591,673 1.29 25,435 2.28 1,293 2.74 2,592 1.82 445,518 3.55 114,481
         July 0.88 599,922 1.45 28,372 2.29 2,077 2.77 2,947 1.79 450,019 3.41 115,616
         Aug 0.84 609,242 1.18 21,694 2.14 1,393 2.83 2,866 1.62 454,401 3.25 116,343
         Sep 0.82 617,597 1.01 19,325 2.02 1,584 2.61 2,779 1.61 457,521 3.14 117,556
         Oct 0.79 629,015 1.03 19,145 1.97 1,868 2.75 3,393 1.49 461,657 2.99 119,952
         Nov 0.75 646,360 1.04 17,401 1.92 1,801 2.80 3,572 1.47 464,488 2.77 120,775
         Dec 0.75 651,570 0.87 19,427 1.94 1,704 2.69 3,516 1.52 474,429 2.44 119,702
2010          Jan 0.73 667,262 1.12 20,151 1.88 1,645 2.93 3,755 1.37 479,240 2.22 118,141
         Feb 0.71 675,402 1.21 17,884 1.87 1,287 2.80 2,873 1.34 485,075 2.09 117,491
         Mar 0.70 670,474 1.35 18,487 1.90 1,418 2.43 2,485 1.40 486,809 2.03 117,551
         Apr 0.69 681,563 1.07 15,049 1.83 935 2.36 1,946 1.31 488,783 1.98 115,665
         May 0.69 688,068 0.96 13,756 1.78 701 3.16 2,319 1.31 490,706 1.95 113,839
         June 0.74 691,839 0.94 13,722 1.45 582 3.18 2,474 1.36 491,359 1.95 112,571
 
 
Non-financial corporations’ deposits
with an agreed maturity of
Overnight up to 1 year over 1 year and up to 2 years over 2 years
Effective Effective Effective Effective
Reporting interest rate  1 Volume  2 interest rate  1 Volume  7 interest rate  1 Volume  7 interest rate  1 Volume  7 
period % pa € million % pa € million % pa € million % pa € million
2009          June 0.61 217,069 0.78 42,875 1.77 279 2.11 917
         July 0.55 222,639 0.54 46,924 2.22 356 2.91 1,713
         Aug 0.53 228,457 0.46 34,238 1.75 326 3.63 792
         Sep 0.51 234,141 0.42 38,890 1.78 325 2.91 565
         Oct 0.48 244,464 0.42 40,077 1.79 229 3.20 513
         Nov 0.47 249,011 0.48 41,382 1.75 301 3.59 559
         Dec 0.46 249,139 0.47 37,933 2.20 460 3.24 844
2010          Jan 0.48 245,835 0.45 36,579 1.38 256 2.57 539
         Feb 0.47 238,889 0.46 30,650 1.57 200 2.76 294
         Mar 0.45 243,829 0.47 34,452 1.87 344 3.04 473
         Apr 0.45 248,053 0.44 34,914 1.79 334 3.29 281
         May 0.44 249,328 0.43 32,850 1.79 185 2.89 193
         June 0.43 247,746 0.51 29,462 1.76 331 2.29 175
 
 
Loans to households
Consumer credit with an initial rate fixation of  4 Other loans with an initial rate fixation of  5 
floating rate or over 1 year and floating rate or over 1 year and
Total up to 1 year  10 up to 5 years over 5 years up to 1 year  10 up to 5 years over 5 years
Annual
Effective Effective Effective Effective Effective Effective percentage
rate of interest interest interest interest interest interest
Reporting charge  9 rate 1 Volume  7 rate 1 Volume  7 rate 1 Volume  7 rate 1 Volume  7 rate 1 Volume  7 rate 1 Volume  7 
period % pa % pa % pa % pa % pa % pa % pa € million € million € million € million € million € million
2009          June 6.79 5.20 1,484 4.99 3,097 8.19 2,347 2.65 6,020 4.66 1,419 4.83 2,407
         July 7.02 5.52 1,242 5.15 3,184 8.25 2,607 2.49 6,809 4.73 1,468 4.84 2,800
         Aug 7.19 5.55 1,187 5.28 2,401 8.24 1,958 2.38 5,529 4.62 1,119 4.82 1,825
         Sep 6.93 5.32 1,322 5.10 2,294 8.20 2,007 2.17 6,690 4.61 1,043 4.60 2,043
         Oct 6.84 4.90 1,651 5.05 2,386 8.29 2,018 2.24 6,626 4.65 1,208 4.52 2,480
         Nov 6.47 4.55 2,065 4.96 2,242 8.05 1,733 2.08 5,102 4.47 1,225 4.39 1,859
         Dec 6.06 4.04 2,385 4.83 2,027 7.57 1,789 2.40 6,198 4.41 1,495 4.25 2,902
2010          Jan 6.95 4.36 2,233 5.30 1,775 8.45 1,889 2.30 5,417 4.43 1,422 4.37 1,894
         Feb 6.91 4.32 2,127 5.31 1,759 8.37 1,834 2.23 4,795 4.62 977 4.57 1,634
         Mar 6.72 4.13 2,685 5.14 2,385 8.20 2,179 2.22 7,183 4.48 1,205 4.41 2,487
         Apr 6.74 4.27 2,297 5.14 2,247 8.24 1,979 2.26 6,504 4.12 1,307 4.42 2,110
         May 6.61 4.31 2,041 5.04 2,074 8.09 1,719 2.17 5,191 4.26 1,082 4.32 2,021
         June 6.82 3.39 1,056 5.49 3,146 8.27 2,208 2.22 5,781 4.09 1,100 4.05 2,422
For footnotes *, 1−6, see p 45*. — +In the case of deposits with an agreed ing deposit and lending business at the end of the month has to be incorpor-
maturity and all loans excluding revolving loans and overdrafts, new busi- ated in the calculation of average rates of interest. — 7Estimated. The
ness covers all new agreements between households or non-financial corpor- volume of new business is extrapolated to form the underlying total using
ations and the bank. The interest rates are calculated as volume-weighted the Horvitz-Thompson estimator. — 8Including non-financial corporations’
average rates across all new agreements concluded during the reporting deposits; including fidelity and growth premia. — 9Annual percentage rate
month. In the case of overnight deposits, deposits redeemable at notice, of charge as defined in Directive 2008/48/EC, which contains other related
revolving loans and overdrafts, new business is collected in the same way as charges which may occur for enquiries, administration, preparation of th e
outstanding amounts for the sake of simplicity. This means that all outstand- documents, guarantees and credit insurance. — 10 Excluding overdrafts. 
46*VI Interest rates

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2010
VI Interest rates
 
6 Interest rates and volumes for outstanding amounts and new business of German banks (MFIs) *  (cont’d)
(b) New business +
 
 
Loans to households (cont’d)
Housing loans with an initial rate fixation of  3 
Revolving loans  11 floating rate or over 1 year and over 5 years and
and overdrafts  12 Total up to 1 year  10 up to 5 years up to 10 years over 10 years
Annual per-
Effective Effective Effective Effective Effective centage rate
Reporting Volume  13 Volume  7 Volume  7 Volume  7 Volume  7 interest rate  1 of charge  9 interest rate  1 interest rate  1 interest rate  1 interest rate  1 
period % pa € million % pa % pa € milion % pa € million % pa € million % pa € million
2009          June 10.85 45,907 4.31 3.73 2,654 3.88 3,410 4.39 7,491 4.53 4,261
         July 10.58 44,140 4.31 3.56 3,374 3.89 3,747 4.45 8,321 4.54 4,424
         Aug 10.58 43,846 4.28 3.47 2,931 3.87 2,812 4.46 6,269 4.51 3,767
         Sep 10.61 45,022 4.22 3.38 2,256 3.81 2,587 4.37 5,904 4.45 4,060
         Oct 10.53 43,311 4.17 3.28 2,956 3.83 2,707 4.34 6,512 4.41 3,780
         Nov 10.36 41,858 4.14 3.24 2,214 3.78 2,462 4.35 5,363 4.32 3,681
         Dec 10.38 43,670 4.13 3.36 2,530 3.76 2,741 4.29 5,547 4.38 3,668
2010          Jan 10.33 42,165 4.08 3.20 2,978 3.71 2,512 4.27 5,293 4.49 3,006
         Feb 10.28 41,795 4.06 3.16 2,057 3.67 2,096 4.22 4,389 4.34 3,354
         Mar 10.36 43,281 3.96 3.04 2,660 3.56 2,470 4.09 5,889 4.30 4,291
         Apr 10.34 41,655 3.97 3.08 2,723 3.56 2,485 4.07 5,485 4.36 4,104
         May 10.38 41,645 3.89 3.16 2,233 3.42 2,271 4.01 5,238 4.10 4,104
         June 10.13 40,781 3.75 3.19 2,212 3.36 2,323 3.90 5,504 3.90 4,867
 
 
Loans to non-financial corporations
Loans up to €1 million with an initial rate fixation of  14 
Revoling loans  11 
and overdrafts  12 floating rate or up to 1 year  10 over 1 year and up to 5 years over 5 years
Effective Effective Effective Effective
Reporting interest rate  1 Volume  13 interest rate  1 Volume  7 interest rate  1 Volume  7 interest rate  1 Volume  7 
period % pa € million % pa € million % pa € million % pa € million
2009          June 5.14 82,602 3.36 11,556 4.82 1,090 4.61 1,392
         July 5.01 76,756 3.36 11,383 4.73 1,398 4.54 1,680
         Aug 4.86 77,358 3.26 8,654 4.80 990 4.43 1,155
         Sep 5.05 76,050 3.28 11,592 4.72 986 4.35 1,283
         Oct 5.02 72,593 3.37 11,279 4.54 1,133 4.37 1,403
         Nov 4.99 72,412 3.37 8,729 4.70 965 4.22 1,252
         Dec 4.84 67,483 3.36 9,502 4.23 1,426 3.98 1,719
2010          Jan 4.70 69,286 3.19 7,819 4.54 1,047 4.20 1,124
         Feb 4.82 68,416 3.43 7,546 4.63 943 4.17 940
         Mar 5.03 66,593 3.41 11,490 4.70 1,076 4.16 1,337
         Apr 5.06 64,035 3.28 9,965 4.52 1,147 4.08 1,180
         May 5.09 63,191 3.45 10,055 4.52 897 3.94 1,304
         June 4.87 70,490 3.55 7,482 4.66 939 3.81 1,456
 
 
Loans to non-financial corporations (cont’d)
Loans over €1 million with an initial rate fixation of  14 
floating rate or up to 1 year  10 over 1 year and up to 5 years over 5 years
Reporting Volume  7 Volume  7 Volume  7 Effective interest rate  1 Effective interest rate  1 Effective interest rate  1 
period % pa € million % pa € million % pa € million
2009          June 2.93 69,989 4.33 2,229 4.69 4,190
         July 2.74 70,243 3.85 3,615 4.52 4,734
         Aug 2.80 54,832 4.18 1,771 4.40 3,281
         Sep 2.26 59,657 4.23 2,479 4.12 3,334
         Oct 2.59 58,565 3.88 2,149 4.29 3,158
         Nov 2.95 51,190 3.87 1,858 4.20 3,859
         Dec 2.57 67,036 3.88 3,644 4.07 5,099
2010          Jan 2.45 49,385 3.90 2,333 4.23 3,270
         Feb 2.43 37,997 4.54 1,840 4.07 3,029
         Mar 2.32 50,429 3.69 1,629 3.81 6,274
         Apr 2.35 50,433 3.92 1,730 4.06 3,542
         May 2.45 42,240 3.59 1,102 3.74 3,990
         June 2.36 49,100 3.29 1,939 3.62 4,639
For footnotes *and 1to6, see p 45*. For footnotes +and 7to10, see balances on current accounts. They include all bank overdrafts regardless of
p 46*. — 11From June 2010 including revolving loans which have all the whether they are within or beyond the limits agreed between customers
following features: (a) the borrower may use or withdraw the funds to a and the bank. — 13From January 2003 up to May 2010 estimated. The
pre-approved credit limit without giving prior notice to the lender; (b) the volume of outstanding amounts reported was extrapolated to form the
amount of available credit can increase and decrease as funds are borrowed underlying total using the Horvitz-Thompson estimator. From June 2010 the
and repaid; (c) the loan may be used repeatedly; (d) there is no obligation data are based on monthly balance sheet statistics. — 14The amount refers
of regular repayment of funds. — 12Overdrafts are defined as debit to the single loan transaction considered as new business. 
47*VI Interest rates

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
E U R O S Y S T E M
Monthly Report
August 2010
VII Capital market
 
1 Sales and purchases of debt securities and shares in Germany *
 
 
 
Debt securities
Sales Purchases
Domestic debt securities  1 Residents
Credit in- Bundes-
Sales stitutions bank
= Public Foreign including open
total Bank Corporate debt debt building market
pur- debt bonds secur- secur- and loan Non- oper- Non-
Period chases Total securities (non-MFIs) ities  2 ities 3 Total  4 banks  6 ations  5 residents  7 associations  5 
DM million
1997 332,655 250,688 184,911 1,563 64,214 81,967 204,378 144,177 60,201 − 128,276
1998 418,841 308,201 254,367 3,143 50,691 110,640 245,802 203,342 42,460 − 173,038
€ million
1999 292,663 198,068 156,399 2,184 39,485 94,595 155,766 74,728 81,038 − 136,898
2000 226,393 157,994 120,154 12,605 25,234 68,399 151,568 91,447 60,121 − 74,825
2001 180,227 86,656 55,918 14,473 16,262 93,571 111,281 35,848 75,433 − 68,946
2002 175,396 124,035 47,296 14,506 62,235 51,361 60,476 13,536 46,940 − 114,920
2003 184,679 134,455 31,404 30,262 72,788 50,224 105,557 35,748 69,809 − 79,122
2004 233,890 133,711 64,231 10,778 58,703 100,179 108,119 121,841 − 13,723 − 125,772
2005 252,658 110,542 39,898 2,682 67,965 142,116 94,718 61,740 32,978 − 157,940
2006 242,006 102,379 40,995 8,943 52,446 139,627 125,423 68,893 56,530 − 116,583
2007 217,859 90,270 42,034 20,123 28,111 127,589 − 28,853 96,476 − 125,329 − 246,712
2008 72,358 66,139 − 45,712 86,527 25,322 6,219 21,032 68,049 − 47,017 − 51,326
2009 70,433 − 538 − 114,902 22,709 91,655 70,971 96,606 12,973 83,633 − − 26,173
2010          Apr 14,087 15,905 5,196 4,878 5,831 − 1,818 − 9,010 − 1,145 − 7,865 − 23,097
         May 3,175 3,028 − 7,382 1,059 9,352 147 − 7,121 − 44,398 37,277 − 10,296
         June − 23,284 − 21,782 − 24,526 − 3,637 6,380 − 1,502 6,046 1,165 4,881 − − 29,330
 
 
 
Shares
Sales Purchases
Sales Residents
=
total Domestic Foreign Credit insti- Non-
purchases shares  8 shares  9 Total  10 tutions  5,11 Non-banks  6 residents  12 
Period
DM million
1997 119,522 22,239 97,280 96,844 8,547 88,297 22,678
1998 249,504 48,796 200,708 149,151 20,252 128,899 100,353
€ million
1999 150,013 36,010 114,003 103,136 18,637 84,499 46,877
2000 140,461 22,733 117,729 164,654 23,293 141,361 − 24,194
2001 82,665 17,575 65,091 − 2,252 − 14,714 12,462 84,918
2002 39,338 9,232 30,106 18,398 − 23,236 41,634 20,941
2003 11,896 16,838 − 4,946 − 15,121 7,056 − 22,177 27,016
2004 − 3,317 10,157 − 13,474 7,432 5,045 2,387 − 10,748
2005 32,364 13,766 18,597 1,036 10,208 − 9,172 31,329
2006 26,276 9,061 17,214 7,528 11,323 − 3,795 18,748
2007 − 3,722 10,053 − 13,773 − 48,183 − 6,702 − 41,481 44,461
2008 − 20,326 11,326 − 31,651 10,417 − 23,079 33,496 − 30,742
2009 36,217 23,962 12,254 24,015 − 8,335 32,350 12,201
2010          Apr − 3,504 143 − 3,647 30,104 21,672 8,432 − 33,608
         May 2,804 160 2,644 − 16,096 − 20,952 4,856 18,900
         June 6,869 439 6,430 − 6,284 − 2,360 − 3,924 13,153
*Up to end-1999, debt securities in this table comprise bonds and money funds. — 7Net purchases or net sales (−) of domestic debt securities by
market paper issued by domestic banks; from January 2000, they comprise non-residents; transaction values. — 8Excluding shares of public limited
all debt securities. For mutual fund shares, see Table VII.6. — 1Net sales at investment companies; at issue prices. — 9Net purchases or net sales (−) of
market values plus/minus changes in issuers’ portfolios of their own debt foreign shares (including direct investment)  by  residents;  transa ction  val-
securities. — 2Including Federal Railways Fund, Federal Post Office and ues. — 10Domestic and foreign shares. — 11Up to end-1998, excluding
Treuhand agency. — 3Net purchases or net sales (−) of foreign debt syndicated shares. — 12Net purchases or net sales (−) of domestic shares
securities by residents; transaction values. — 4Domestic and foreign debt (including direct investment) by non-residents; transaction values. — The
securities. — 5Book values; statistically adjusted. — 6Residual; also figures for the most recent date are provisional; revisions are not specially
including purchases of domestic and foreign securities by domestic mutual marked. 
48*VII Capital market

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2010
VII Capital market
 
2 Sales of debt securities issued by residents * 
 
 
Up to end-1998, DM nominal million value; from 1999, € million nominal value
Bank debt securities  1 Memo item
 Foreign  DM/euro
bonds issued Debt securities
Corporate by German- issued by special
Mortgage Public purpose credit Other bank bonds Public managed
Period Total Total Pfandbriefe Pfandbriefe institutions (non-MFIs) syndicates debt securities debt securities  2 
Gross sales  3 
1997 846,567 621,683 53,168 276,755 54,829 236,933 1,915 222,972 114,813
1998 1,030,827 789,035 71,371 344,609 72,140 300,920 3,392 238,400 149,542
€ million
1999 571,269 448,216 27,597 187,661 59,760 173,200 2,570 120,483 57,202
2000 659,148 500,895 34,528 143,107 94,556 228,703 8,114 150,137 31,597
2001 687,988 505,646 34,782 112,594 106,166 252,103 11,328 171,012 10,605
2002 818,725 569,232 41,496 119,880 117,506 290,353 17,574 231,923 10,313
2003 958,917 668,002 47,828 107,918 140,398 371,858 22,510 268,406 2,850
2004 990,399 688,844 33,774 90,815 162,353 401,904 31,517 270,040 12,344
2005 988,911 692,182 28,217 103,984 160,010 399,969 24,352 272,380 600
2006 925,863 622,055 24,483 99,628 139,193 358,750 29,975 273,834 69
2007 1,021,533 743,616 19,211 82,720 195,722 445,963 15,043 262,872 −
2008 1,337,337 961,271 51,259 70,520 382,814 456,676 95,093 280,974 −
2009 1,533,616 1,058,815 40,421 37,615 331,566 649,215 76,379 398,423 −
2010          Mar 109,558 67,153 3,671 3,161 36,175 24,146 7,182 35,223 −
         Apr 107,013 62,268 1,827 2,664 38,529 19,248 4,277 40,468 −
         May 78,413 48,079 3,628 1,227 25,231 17,993 1,422 28,912 −
         June 166,968 115,898 7,875 4,374 24,861 78,788 3,220 47,850 −
of which:  Debt securities with maturities of more than four years  4 
1997 563,333 380,470 41,189 211,007 41,053 87,220 1,820 181,047 98,413
1998 694,414 496,444 59,893 288,619 54,385 93,551 2,847 195,122 139,645
€ million
1999 324,888 226,993 16,715 124,067 37,778 48,435 2,565 95,331 44,013
2000 319,330 209,187 20,724 102,664 25,753 60,049 6,727 103,418 27,008
2001 299,751 202,337 16,619 76,341 42,277 67,099 7,479 89,933 6,480
2002 309,157 176,486 16,338 59,459 34,795 65,892 12,149 120,527 9,213
2003 369,336 220,103 23,210 55,165 49,518 92,209 10,977 138,256 2,850
2004 424,769 275,808 20,060 48,249 54,075 153,423 20,286 128,676 4,320
2005 425,523 277,686 20,862 63,851 49,842 143,129 16,360 131,479 400
2006 337,969 190,836 17,267 47,814 47,000 78,756 14,422 132,711 69
2007 315,418 183,660 10,183 31,331 50,563 91,586 13,100 118,659 −
2008 387,516 190,698 13,186 31,393 54,834 91,289 84,410 112,407 −
2009 361,999 185,575 20,235 20,490 59,809 85,043 55,240 121,185 −
2010          Mar 40,201 17,875 2,422 873 7,418 7,162 5,065 17,262 −
         Apr 42,568 18,824 927 2,240 10,000 5,657 3,701 20,043 −
         May 20,788 7,600 1,692 218 2,108 3,581 799 12,389 −
         June 30,526 14,178 3,595 1,295 3,428 5,859 2,148 14,200 −
Net sales  5 
1997 257,521 188,525 16,471 115,970 12,476 43,607 1,560 67,437 63,181
1998 327,991 264,627 22,538 162,519 18,461 61,111 3,118 60,243 84,308
€ million
1999 209,096 170,069 2,845 80,230 31,754 55,238 2,185 36,840 22,728
2000 155,615 122,774 5,937 29,999 30,089 56,751 7,320 25,522 − 16,705
2001 84,122 60,905 6,932 − 9,254 28,808 34,416 8,739 14,479 − 30,657
2002 131,976 56,393 7,936 − 26,806 20,707 54,561 14,306 61,277 − 44,546
2003 124,556 40,873 2,700 − 42,521 44,173 36,519 18,431 65,253 − 54,990
2004 167,233 81,860 1,039 − 52,615 50,142 83,293 18,768 66,605 − 22,124
2005 141,715 65,798 − 2,151 − 34,255 37,242 64,962 10,099 65,819 − 35,963
2006 129,423 58,336 − 12,811 − 20,150 44,890 46,410 15,605 55,482 − 19,208
2007 86,579 58,168 − 10,896 − 46,629 42,567 73,127 − 3,683 32,093 − 29,750
2008 119,472 8,517 15,052 − 65,773 25,165 34,074 82,653 28,302 − 31,607
2009 76,441 − 75,554 858 − 80,646 25,579 − 21,345 48,508 103,482 − 21,037
2010          Mar 14,754 7,111 2,481 − 4,517 7,669 1,479 5,318 2,325 − 1,282
         Apr 15,260 7,303 − 4,543 − 1,744 12,439 1,150 2,958 5,000 − 882
         May 6,022 − 891 − 401 − 4,047 2,743 814 − 837 7,750 − 2,832
         June − 18,047 − 23,496 3,447 − 8,610 − 2,831 − 15,503 − 1,172 6,621 − 779
*For definitions, see the explanatory notes in the Statistical Supplement 2 Treuhand agency. — 3Gross sales means only initial sales of newly issued
Capital market statistics on p 21 ff. — 1Excluding registered bank debt securities. — 4Maximum maturity according to the terms of issue. — 5Gross
securities. — 2Including Federal Railways Fund, Federal Post Office and sales less redemptions. 
49*VII Capital market

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
E U R O S Y S T E M
Monthly Report
August 2010
VII Capital market
 
3 Amounts outstanding of debt securities issued by residents  * 
 
 
Up to end-1998, DM million nominal value; from 1999, € million nominal value
Bank debt securities  1 Memo item
 Foreign  DM/euro
End of year Debt securities bonds issued
or month/ issued by Corporate by German-
Maturity Mortgage Public Other bank bonds Public managed special purpose
in years Total Total (non-MFIs) syndicates credit institutions debt securities debt securities Pfandbriefe Pfandbriefe
DM million
1998 3,694,234 2,254,668 265,721 1,124,198 259,243 605,507 8,009 1,431,558 619,668
€ million
1999 2,097,926 1,322,863 134,814 655,024 163,284 369,741 6,280 768,783 339,560
2000 2,265,121 1,445,736 140,751 685,122 157,374 462,488 13,599 805,786 322,856
2001 2,349,243 1,506,640 147,684 675,868 201,721 481,366 22,339 820,264 292,199
2002 2,481,220 1,563,034 155,620 649,061 222,427 535,925 36,646 881,541 247,655
2003 2,605,775 1,603,906 158,321 606,541 266,602 572,442 55,076 946,793 192,666
2004 2,773,007 1,685,766 159,360 553,927 316,745 655,734 73,844 1,013,397 170,543
2005 2,914,723 1,751,563 157,209 519,674 323,587 751,093 83,942 1,079,218 134,580
2006 3,044,145 1,809,899 144,397 499,525 368,476 797,502 99,545 1,134,701 115,373
2007 3,130,723 1,868,066 133,501 452,896 411,041 870,629 95,863 1,166,794 85,623
2008 3,250,195 1,876,583 150,302 377,091 490,641 858,550 178,515 1,195,097 54,015
2009 3,326,635 1,801,029 151,160 296,445 516,221 837,203 227,024 1,298,581 32,978
2010          Apr 3,364,199 1,789,008 149,283 277,609 540,429 821,688 245,143 1,330,047 28,275
         May 3,370,220 2 1,776,684 148,882 273,562 543,171 2 811,068 244,307 2 1,349,230 25,443
         June 3,352,173 1,753,187 152,329 264,952 540,340 795,565 243,135 1,355,851 24,664
Breakdown by remaining period to maturity  3 Position at end-June 2010 
1,292,002 785,189 61,123 125,716 219,493 378,856 38,648 468,166 8,633    less than 2
741,781 428,142 48,087 75,863 134,288 169,906 34,263 279,376 7,730 2 to less than 4
536,709 287,631 29,862 32,195 67,559 158,015 37,812 211,267 2,684 4 to less than 6
215,168 86,986 7,217 20,376 32,964 26,431 15,204 112,978 1,935 6 to less than 8
170,849 54,574 5,231 5,914 31,887 11,540 7,782 108,494 204 8 to less than 10
74,224 28,835 777 2,450 18,988 6,619 12,922 32,469 1,782 10 to less than 15
69,480 17,702 34 1,229 11,403 5,037 3,299 48,479 632 15 to less than 20
251,960 64,130 0 1,206 23,761 39,161 93,207 94,623 1,064 20 and more
*Including debt securities temporarily held in the issuers’ portfolios. — month under review until final maturity for debt securities falling due en
1Excluding debt securities handed to the trustee for temporary safe bloc and until mean maturity of the residual amount outstanding for debt
custody. — 2Sectoral reclassification of debt securities. — 3Calculated from securities not falling due en bloc. 
50* 
 
4 Shares in circulation issued by residents  * 
 
 
Up to end-1998, DM million nominal value; from 1999, € million nominal value
Change in domestic public limited companies’ capital due to
Memo item
Share circulation
at market values
cash payments contribution (market capita-
and ex- merger reduction lisation) Share capital = Net increase or contribution of shares,
change of of claims and circulation at net decrease (−) mining shares, of capital level at end
issue of and other transfer change of and of period end of period during period convertible GmbH shares,
Period under review under review bonds  1 etc of assets bonus shares real assets legal form liquidation under review  2 
DM million
1998 238,156 16,578 6,086 2,566 658 8,607 − 4,055 3,905 − 1,188 1,258,042
€ million
1999 133,513 11,747 5,519 2,008 190 1,075 2,099 1,560 − 708 1,603,304
2000 147,629 14,115 3,620 3,694 618 8,089 − 1,986 1,827 − 1,745 1,353,000
2001 166,187 18,561 7,987 4,057 1,106 8,448 1,018 − 905 − 3,152 1,205,613
2002 168,716 2,528 4,307 1,291 486 1,690 − 868 − 2,152 − 2,224 647,492
2003 162,131 − 6,585 4,482 923 211 513 − 322 − 10,806 − 1,584 851,001
2004 164,802 2,669 3,960 1,566 276 696 220 − 1,760 − 2,286 887,217
2005 163,071 − 1,733 2,470 1,040 694 268 − 1,443 − 3,060 − 1,703 1,058,532
2006 163,764 695 2,670 3,347 604 954 − 1,868 − 1,256 − 3,761 1,279,638
2007 164,560 799 3,164 1,322 200 269 − 682 − 1,847 − 1,636 1,481,930
2008 168,701 4,142 5,006 1,319 152 0 − 428 − 608 − 1,306 830,622
2009 175,691 6,989 12,476 398 97 − − 3,741 − 1,269 − 974 927,256
2010          Apr 174,369 − 1,330 78 6 36 − − 138 7 − 1,319 970,369
         May 174,492 123 148 54 − − − 3 − 45 − 31 927,684
         June 174,756 264 249 265 − − − 35 − 90 − 125 931,277
*Excluding shares of public limited investment companies. — 1Including ber 2007) or the Neuer Markt (stock market segment was closed down on
shares issued out of company profits. — 2Enterprises listed on the Regulated 24 March 2003) are included as well as enterprises listed on the Open Market.
Market (the introduction of which marked the end of the division of organ- Source: Bundesbank calculations based on data of the Herausgebergemein-
ised trading segments into an official and a regulated market on 1 Novem- schaft Wertpapier-Mitteilungen and the Deutsche Börse AG. 
50*VII Capital market

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2010
VII Capital market
 
5 Yields and indices on German securities
 
 
               
Yields on debt securities outstanding issued by residents  1 Price indices  2,3 
Public debt securities Bank debt securities Debt securities Shares
Listed
Federal securities
With a residual With a residual
maturity of maturity of Corporate German German
more than 9 more than 9 bonds bond iBoxx CDAX share
and including and including (non- index share price index € Germany
Total Total Total 10 years  4 Total 10 years MFIs) (REX) price index index (DAX)
Average End-1998 End-1987 End-1987
Period % per annum daily rate = 100 = 100 = 1000
1998 4.5 4.4 4.4 4.6 4.5 4.9 5.0 118.18 100.00 343.64 5,002.39
1999 4.3 4.3 4.3 4.5 4.3 4.9 5.0 110.60 92.52 445.95 6,958.14
2000 5.4 5.3 5.2 5.3 5.6 5.8 6.2 112.48 94.11 396.59 6,433.61
2001 4.8 4.7 4.7 4.8 4.9 5.3 5.9 113.12 94.16 319.38 5,160.10
2002 4.7 4.6 4.6 4.8 4.7 5.1 6.0 117.56 97.80 188.46 2,892.63
2003 3.7 3.8 3.8 4.1 3.7 4.3 5.0 117.36 97.09 252.48 3,965.16
2004 3.7 3.7 3.7 4.0 3.6 4.2 4.0 120.19 99.89 268.32 4,256.08
2005 3.1 3.2 3.2 3.4 3.1 3.5 3.7 120.92 101.09 335.59 5,408.26
2006 3.8 3.7 3.7 3.8 3.8 4.0 4.2 116.78 96.69 407.16 6,596.92
2007 4.3 4.3 4.2 4.2 4.4 4.5 5.0 114.85 94.62 478.65 8,067.32
2008 4.2 4.0 4.0 4.0 4.5 4.7 6.3 121.68 102.06 266.33 4,810.20
2009 3.2 3.1 3.0 3.2 3.5 4.0 5.5 123.62 100.12 320.32 5,957.43
2010          Apr 2.8 2.7 2.7 3.1 2.8 3.5 4.3 125.47 102.86 329.26 6,135.70
         May 2.5 2.4 2.4 2.7 2.6 3.3 4.3 127.57 105.13 313.44 5,964.33
         June 2.3 2.2 2.2 2.5 2.5 3.2 4.4 127.85 105.41 313.07 5,965.52
         July 2.4 2.3 2.3 2.6 2.5 3.1 4.0 125.75 104.43 322.99 6,147.97
1Bearer debt securities with maximum maturities according to the terms of the calculation. Monthly figures are calculated on the basis of the yields on
issue of over 4 years if their mean residual maturities exceed 3 years. Conver- all the business days in a month. The annual figures are the unweighted
tible debt securities, etc. debt securities with unscheduled redemption, zero means of the monthly figures. — 2End of year or month. — 3Source:
-coupon bonds, floating -rate notes and bonds not denominated in DM or Deutsche Börse AG. — 4Only debt securities eligible as underlying
euro are not included. Group yields for the various categories of securities instruments for futures contracts; calculated as unweighted averages.
are weighted by the amounts outstanding of the debt securities included in
 
 
6 Sales and purchases of mutual fund shares in Germany
 
 
Sales Purchases
Domestic mutual funds  1  (sales receipts) Residents
Mutual funds open to the Credit institutions
general public including building
Non-banks  3 and loan associations  2 
of which
Sales Open- of which of which
= Secur- end Foreign Foreign
total Money ities- real Special- mutual mutual
pur- market based estate ised Foreign fund fund Non-resi-
chases Total Total funds funds funds funds funds  4 Total Total shares Total shares dents  5 
Period
DM million
1998 187,641 169,748 38,998 5,772 27,814 4,690 130,750 17,893 190,416 43,937 961 146,479 16,507 − 2,775
€ million
1999 111,282 97,197 37,684 3,347 23,269 7,395 59,513 14,086 105,521 19,862 − 637 85,659 14,722 5,761
2000 118,021 85,160 39,712 − 2,188 36,818 − 2,824 45,448 32,861 107,019 14,454 92 92,565 32,769 11,002
2001 97,077 76,811 35,522 12,410 9,195 10,159 41,289 20,266 96,127 10,251 2,703 85,876 17,563 951
2002 66,571 59,482 25,907 3,682 7,247 14,916 33,575 7,089 67,251 2,100 3,007 65,151 4,082 − 680
2003 47,754 43,943 20,079 − 924 7,408 14,166 23,864 3,811 49,547 − 2,658 734 52,205 3,077 − 1,793
2004 14,435 1,453 − 3,978 − 6,160 − 1,246 3,245 5,431 12,982 10,267 8,446 3,796 1,821 9,186 4,168
2005 85,268 41,718 6,400 − 124 7,001 − 3,186 35,317 43,550 79,252 21,290 7,761 57,962 35,789 6,016
2006 47,264 19,535 − 14,257 490 − 9,362 − 8,814 33,791 27,729 39,006 14,676 5,221 24,330 22,508 8,258
2007 55,695 13,436 − 7,872 − 4,839 − 12,848 6,840 21,307 42,259 50,925 − 229 4,240 51,154 38,019 4,770
2008 514 − 7,911 − 14,409 − 12,171 − 11,149 799 6,498 8,425 9,154 − 16,625 − 9,252 25,779 17,677 − 8,640
2009 43,139 43,747 10,966 − 5,047 11,749 2,686 32,780 − 609 42,984 − 14,995 − 8,178 57,979 7,569 155
2010          Apr 11,028 8,350 983 − 282 − 274 214 7,366 2,678 10,141 1,883 1,269 8,258 1,409 887
         May 6,269 8,464 4,938 178 6,183 − 1,535 3,526 − 2,195 4,482 1,721 488 2,761 − 2,683 1,787
         June 479 − 2,154 − 5,277 − 299 − 4,661 289 3,123 2,633 2,425 − 2,426 87 4,851 2,546 − 1,946
1Including public limited investment companies. — 2Book values. — fund shares by non-residents; transaction values. — The figures for the most
3Residual. — 4Net purchases or net sales (−) of foreign fund shares by recent date are provisional; revisions are not specially marked. 
residents; transaction values. — 5Net purchases or net sales (−) of domestic
51*VII Capital market

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
E U R O S Y S T E M
Monthly Report
August 2010
VIII  Financial accounts
  
1  Acquisition of financial assets and financing of private non-financial sectors
  
  
  € billion
2008 2009 2010 
Item 2007 2008 2009 Q2 Q3 Q4 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 Q1
Households 1 
  I  Acquisition of financial assets
Currency and deposits 85.9 121.0 49.9 14.6 12.9 87.1 9.4 15.2 5.5 19.8 16.5
Bonds  2 − 53.6 1.7 − 5.3 1.2 6.6 − 25.4 9.7 0.1 1.5 − 16.7 2.5
Shares − 16.5 − 45.5 − 1.0 − 2.5 − 9.0 − 33.0 − 2.0 − 1.0 1.0 1.0 1.0
Other equity 2.9 3.0 3.0 0.7 0.8 0.8 0.7 0.8 0.8 0.8 0.7
Mutual funds shares 24.3 9.3 29.2 7.6 1.7 − 13.4 9.3 5.4 7.6 6.8 6.1
Claims on insurance
corporations  3 71.9 31.7 69.0 8.3 7.3 9.1 23.8 14.5 12.9 17.7 23.9
Short-term claims 1.1 0.4 3.4 − 0.2 0.1 0.1 0.8 0.9 0.8 0.9 0.9
Longer-term claims 70.8 31.2 65.6 8.5 7.2 9.0 23.0 13.6 12.1 16.9 23.0
Claims from company
pension commitments 4.3 7.3 7.7 1.8 1.8 1.9 1.9 2.0 1.9 1.9 2.0
Other claims  4 − 4.1 − 2.8 − 5.5 − 0.7 − 0.7 − 0.7 − 1.3 − 1.4 − 1.4 − 1.4 − 1.3
Total 115.1 125.7 146.9 30.9 21.5 26.3 51.6 35.6 29.8 30.0 51.4
  II Financing
Loans − 20.7 − 16.0 − 4.4 0.8 − 1.2 − 5.7 − 7.6 2.4 4.6 − 3.9 − 7.1
Short-term loans − 1.2 1.2 − 4.3 − 0.0 0.6 1.4 − 0.4 − 0.1 − 1.3 − 2.5 − 0.3
Longer-term loans − 19.5 − 17.2 − 0.1 0.9 − 1.8 − 7.1 − 7.1 2.6 5.8 − 1.4 − 6.8
Other liabilities − 0.4 0.4 1.2 0.1 − 0.1 0.4 0.3 0.2 − 0.2 0.9 − 0.7
Total − 21.1 − 15.5 − 3.2 0.9 − 1.3 − 5.3 − 7.2 2.7 4.4 − 3.0 − 7.8
Corporations
I  Acquisition of financial assets
Currency and deposits 71.2 22.8 47.7 − 15.5 33.5 − 3.7 13.2 − 1.4 14.5 21.4 − 0.7
Bonds  2 −115.6 3.5 3.9 − 24.2 − 3.7 73.0 1.0 − 16.1 − 20.3 39.3 16.5
Financial derivatives 44.9 14.3 − 10.3 8.3 0.1 − 4.4 − 11.4 − 2.0 3.0 0.2 2.1
Shares 39.5 100.2 73.7 48.3 15.2 23.7 13.2 39.9 29.5 − 8.9 6.8
Other equity 17.4 18.5 19.0 17.7 − 8.5 − 3.0 11.2 6.4 3.7 − 2.3 27.9
Mutual funds shares − 2.9 − 8.2 − 41.4 − 2.8 5.6 − 7.2 − 3.0 − 10.1 − 15.5 − 12.8 − 1.2
Loans 9.7 32.1 12.4 12.3 9.7 3.9 3.3 − 1.4 − 2.0 12.5 8.3
Short-term loans 5.0 23.7 − 1.3 12.7 6.5 4.8 1.0 − 3.0 − 3.1 3.9 7.3
Longer-term loans 4.6 8.4 13.7 − 0.4 3.2 − 0.9 2.3 1.6 1.2 8.6 0.9
Claims on insurance
corporations  3 1.0 0.4 0.4 0.1 0.1 0.1 0.1 0.1 0.1 0.1 0.1
Short-term claims 1.0 0.4 0.4 0.1 0.1 0.1 0.1 0.1 0.1 0.1 0.1
Longer-term claims . . . . . . . . . . .
Other claims 104.0 − 51.8 − 67.9 − 11.8 − 29.3 − 34.4 − 44.8 − 18.8 − 25.1 20.8 − 53.2
Total 169.1 131.8 37.4 32.4 22.6 48.0 − 17.3 − 3.5 − 12.2 70.5 6.6
  II Financing
Bonds  2 7.2 9.6 − 7.1 − 4.9 1.9 5.6 − 9.9 − 1.8 3.5 1.2 8.7
Financial derivatives . . . . . . . . . . .
Shares 6.8 3.6 5.5 1.4 0.7 0.5 1.9 0.3 2.3 1.0 6.1
Other equity 34.9 14.9 8.1 5.7 0.2 2.8 3.7 0.7 1.1 2.6 1.5
Loans 51.5 73.9 − 19.3 20.8 24.7 31.9 18.1 − 6.7 − 24.7 − 6.0 5.0
Short-term loans 16.4 18.7 − 36.8 14.9 1.2 8.5 3.6 − 14.1 − 18.0 − 8.2 − 3.9
Longer-term loans 35.1 55.3 17.5 5.9 23.4 23.4 14.5 7.5 − 6.7 2.2 8.9
Claims from company
pension commitments 1.3 2.9 2.9 0.7 0.7 0.7 0.7 0.7 0.7 0.7 0.7
Other liabilities 13.3 − 0.7 9.6 − 0.8 5.4 − 14.5 15.3 − 6.4 0.8 − 0.1 − 4.1
Total 114.9 104.2 − 0.3 23.1 33.5 26.9 29.8 − 13.1 − 16.3 − 0.7 17.9
1Including non-profit institutions serving households. — 2Including money 4Including accumulated interest-bearing surplus shares with insurance
market paper. — 3Including private pension funds, burial funds, corporations. 
occupational pension schemes and supplementary pension funds. —
52*VIII  Financial accounts

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2010
VIII  Financial accounts
  
2  Financial assets and liabilities of private non-financial sectors
  
  
  End-of-year level, end-of-quarter level; € billion
2008 2009 2010 
Item 2007 2008 2009 Q2 Q3 Q4 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 Q1
Households 1 
  I  Financial assets
Currency and deposits 1,620.8 1,737.5 1,788.1 1,642.0 1,650.6 1,737.5 1,746.8 1,762.9 1,768.4 1,788.1 1,804.6
Bonds  2 345.4 326.2 363.6 353.0 330.5 326.2 316.5 322.8 369.5 363.6 362.1
Shares 368.5 169.4 181.3 302.0 259.8 169.4 142.6 155.1 161.3 181.3 192.7
Other equity 187.8 177.5 183.8 189.3 194.4 177.5 178.3 179.8 179.7 183.8 186.8
Mutual funds shares 549.4 503.6 555.3 543.4 530.8 503.6 502.6 526.0 542.9 555.3 568.2
Claims on insurance
corporations  3 1,190.4 1,216.9 1,295.3 1,203.5 1,209.8 1,216.9 1,234.6 1,255.0 1,275.8 1,295.3 1,319.2
Short-term claims 80.8 81.3 84.7 81.0 81.1 81.3 82.1 83.0 83.8 84.7 85.5
Longer-term claims 1,109.6 1,135.7 1,210.6 1,122.5 1,128.6 1,135.7 1,152.5 1,172.0 1,192.0 1,210.6 1,233.7
Claims from company
pension commitments 255.1 262.4 270.1 258.7 260.5 262.4 264.3 266.3 268.2 270.1 272.1
Other claims  4 42.6 39.8 34.2 41.2 40.5 39.8 38.4 37.0 35.6 34.2 32.9
Total 4,559.8 4,433.4 4,671.7 4,533.2 4,476.8 4,433.4 4,424.1 4,505.0 4,601.4 4,671.7 4,738.6
  II Liabilities
Loans 1,536.7 1,520.8 1,520.7 1,526.4 1,525.1 1,520.8 1,513.4 1,518.2 1,522.8 1,520.7 1,514.4
Short-term loans 78.9 80.0 75.7 78.1 78.7 80.0 79.6 79.5 78.2 75.7 75.4
Longer-term loans 1,457.9 1,440.8 1,444.9 1,448.3 1,446.5 1,440.8 1,433.8 1,438.7 1,444.6 1,444.9 1,439.0
Other liabilities 9.1 10.2 11.4 10.2 10.6 10.2 11.4 11.5 11.2 11.4 11.8
Total 1,545.8 1,531.0 1,532.0 1,536.6 1,535.7 1,531.0 1,524.8 1,529.7 1,534.0 1,532.0 1,526.1
Corporations
I  Financial assets
Currency and deposits 477.0 507.3 560.7 470.0 502.5 507.3 517.4 517.5 539.9 560.7 558.2
Bonds  2 120.0 113.5 125.7 47.1 50.7 113.5 114.1 92.2 82.0 125.7 146.0
Financial derivatives . . . . . . . . . . .
Shares 1,024.3 644.2 800.4 933.5 861.4 644.2 575.1 668.3 718.3 800.4 845.2
Other equity 297.2 293.7 318.4 327.4 326.4 293.7 305.0 312.7 314.9 318.4 350.2
Mutual funds shares 109.5 67.9 61.6 81.0 85.3 67.9 63.0 58.0 83.4 61.6 79.1
Loans 152.2 184.1 200.7 172.3 179.4 184.1 187.5 186.4 188.2 200.7 211.7
Short-term loans 103.0 126.3 123.7 115.9 119.8 126.3 126.2 124.2 120.3 123.7 130.0
Longer-term loans 49.2 57.8 77.0 56.5 59.6 57.8 61.3 62.2 67.9 77.0 81.7
Claims on insurance
corporations  3 43.8 44.2 44.6 44.0 44.1 44.2 44.3 44.4 44.5 44.6 44.7
Short-term claims 43.8 44.2 44.6 44.0 44.1 44.2 44.3 44.4 44.5 44.6 44.7
Longer-term claims . . . . . . . . . . .
Other claims 500.2 576.9 525.9 536.7 569.4 576.9 588.9 513.0 521.8 525.9 513.4
Total 2,724.1 2,431.8 2,637.9 2,611.9 2,619.2 2,431.8 2,395.3 2,392.4 2,493.0 2,637.9 2,748.4
  II Liabilities
Bonds  2 118.7 137.0 136.9 118.4 126.6 137.0 129.2 124.5 132.8 136.9 146.9
Financial derivatives . . . . . . . . . . .
Shares 1,564.3 963.5 1,081.3 1,266.1 1,154.1 963.5 814.4 948.4 1,043.3 1,081.3 1,118.8
Other equity 670.4 685.3 693.4 682.3 682.5 685.3 688.9 689.7 690.8 693.4 694.9
Loans 1,392.9 1,470.0 1,450.6 1,414.9 1,437.2 1,470.0 1,488.1 1,479.4 1,454.6 1,450.6 1,447.5
Short-term loans 380.3 390.7 356.4 383.8 381.5 390.7 392.2 378.1 361.8 356.4 350.5
Longer-term loans 1,012.6 1,079.2 1,094.2 1,031.2 1,055.7 1,079.2 1,095.9 1,101.4 1,092.9 1,094.2 1,097.0
Claims from company
pension commitments 215.5 218.4 221.3 216.9 217.7 218.4 219.1 219.8 220.6 221.3 222.0
Other liabilities 446.8 490.8 475.9 465.5 474.4 490.8 552.8 470.1 482.5 475.9 474.0
Total 4,408.4 3,964.8 4,059.4 4,164.2 4,092.4 3,964.8 3,892.4 3,931.9 4,024.6 4,059.4 4,104.1
1Including non-profit institutions serving households. — 2Including money 4Including accumulated interest-bearing surplus shares with insurance
market paper. — 3Including private pension funds, burial funds, corporations. 
occupational pension schemes and supplementary pension funds. —
53*VIII  Financial accounts

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
E U R O S Y S T E M
Monthly Report
August 2010
IX Public finances in Germany
 
1 General government: deficit and debt level as defined in the Maastricht Treaty
 
 
 
Social Social
General Central State Local security General Central State Local security
government government government government funds government government government government funds
Period € billion as a percentage of GDP
Deficit / surplus 1
2004 − 83.5 − 52.0 − 27.9 − 2.4 − 1.2 − 3.8 − 2.4 − 1.3 − 0.1 − 0.1
2005 − 74.0 − 47.4 − 22.5 − 0.2 − 3.9 − 3.3 − 2.1 − 1.0 − 0.0 − 0.2
2006 p − 37.8 − 34.5 − 11.3 + 3.0 + 5.0 − 1.6 − 1.5 − 0.5 + 0.1 + 0.2
2007 p + 4.9 − 18.9 + 4.6 + 8.3 + 10.9 + 0.2 − 0.8 + 0.2 + 0.3 + 0.4
2008 p + 1.0 − 14.2 + 1.2 + 5.8 + 8.2 + 0.0 − 0.6 + 0.0 + 0.2 + 0.3
2009 pe − 75.4 − 39.3 − 18.7 − 4.1 − 13.3 − 3.1 − 1.6 − 0.8 − 0.2 − 0.6
2008          H1  p + 7.3 − 7.0 + 3.6 + 5.7 + 4.9 + 0.6 − 0.6 + 0.3 + 0.5 + 0.4
         H2  p − 6.3 − 7.2 − 2.5 + 0.1 + 3.3 − 0.5 − 0.6 − 0.2 + 0.0 + 0.3
2009          H1  pe − 20.8 − 10.6 − 6.6 + 0.0 − 3.7 − 1.8 − 0.9 − 0.6 + 0.0 − 0.3
         H2  pe − 54.5 − 28.6 − 12.1 − 4.2 − 9.6 − 4.4 − 2.3 − 1.0 − 0.3 − 0.8
Debt level 2 End of year or quarter
2004 1,453.8 889.5 459.8 116.3 4.2 65.8 40.2 20.8 5.3 0.2
2005 1,524.4 935.3 482.3 120.0 2.7 68.0 41.7 21.5 5.4 0.1
2006 1,571.7 970.7 492.1 122.4 1.7 67.6 41.7 21.2 5.3 0.1
2007 1,578.8 977.9 494.0 120.2 1.6 65.0 40.3 20.3 4.9 0.1
2008 1,646.2 1,006.8 533.3 118.8 1.5 66.0 40.3 21.4 4.8 0.1
2009 pe 1,762.2 1,077.1 575.2 122.6 1.3 73.1 44.7 23.9 5.1 0.1
2008          Q1 1,598.5 989.0 504.3 118.3 1.6 65.3 40.4 20.6 4.8 0.1
         Q2 1,634.3 997.0 531.4 118.7 1.6 66.0 40.2 21.5 4.8 0.1
         Q3 1,628.4 995.1 528.1 117.6 2.0 65.3 39.9 21.2 4.7 0.1
         Q4 1,646.2 1,006.8 533.3 118.8 1.5 66.0 40.3 21.4 4.8 0.1
2009          Q1  pe 1,677.5 1,028.2 542.0 119.6 1.6 68.0 41.7 22.0 4.9 0.1
         Q2  pe 1,742.9 1,073.6 561.5 120.3 1.4 71.7 44.2 23.1 5.0 0.1
         Q3  pe 1,750.8 1,077.0 564.8 121.1 1.5 72.6 44.7 23.4 5.0 0.1
         Q4  pe 1,762.2 1,077.1 575.2 122.6 1.3 73.1 44.7 23.9 5.1 0.1
2010          Q1  pe 1,782.4 1,088.5 581.8 125.0 1.3 73.4 44.8 24.0 5.1 0.1
Source: Federal Statistical Office and Bundesbank calculations. — 1Unlike rate agreements. The half-year figures correspond to the deficit / surplus
the fiscal balance as shown in the national accounts, the deficit as defined according to the national accounts. — 2Quarterly GDP ratios are based on
in the Maastricht Treaty includes interest flows from swaps and forward the national output of the four preceding quarters. 
 
 
2 General government: revenue, expenditure and fiscal deficit / surplus as shown in the national accounts *
 
 
 
Revenue Expenditure
of which of which
Compen- Gross Memo item
Social con- Social sation of capital Deficit / Total tax
Period Total Taxes tributions Other Total benefits employees Interest formation Other surplus burden  1 
€ billion
2004 957.7 481.3 396.5 79.9 1,041.2 592.0 169.6 62.4 31.7 185.5 − 83.5 888.0
2005 976.1 493.2 396.5 86.4 1,050.3 597.0 168.9 62.6 30.3 191.5 − 74.2 900.5
2006 p 1,016.4 530.6 400.0 85.8 1,054.5 598.4 167.9 65.5 32.4 190.3 − 38.1 941.9
2007 p 1,065.3 576.3 399.8 89.2 1,060.7 596.8 168.4 67.3 34.3 193.9 + 4.7 988.2
2008 p 1,091.8 592.6 408.1 91.1 1,090.8 607.4 172.1 67.1 37.4 206.8 + 1.0 1,013.6
2009 pe 1,065.2 564.1 410.2 90.9 1,140.5 640.7 178.1 61.1 39.9 220.7 − 75.3 984.4
as a percentage of GDP
2004 43.3 21.8 17.9 3.6 47.1 26.8 7.7 2.8 1.4 8.4 − 3.8 40.2
2005 43.5 22.0 17.7 3.9 46.8 26.6 7.5 2.8 1.4 8.5 − 3.3 40.2
2006 p 43.7 22.8 17.2 3.7 45.4 25.7 7.2 2.8 1.4 8.2 − 1.6 40.5
2007 p 43.9 23.7 16.5 3.7 43.7 24.6 6.9 2.8 1.4 8.0 + 0.2 40.7
2008 p 43.7 23.7 16.4 3.7 43.7 24.3 6.9 2.7 1.5 8.3 + 0.0 40.6
2009 pe 44.2 23.4 17.0 3.8 47.3 26.6 7.4 2.5 1.7 9.2 − 3.1 40.9
Percentage growth rates
2004 − 0.4 − 0.1 + 0.1 − 4.8 − 0.8 − 0.4 + 0.2 − 3.0 − 6.4 − 1.1 . − 0.1
2005 + 1.9 + 2.5 + 0.0 + 8.1 + 0.9 + 0.8 − 0.4 + 0.4 − 4.4 + 3.2 . + 1.4
2006 p + 4.1 + 7.6 + 0.9 − 0.7 + 0.4 + 0.2 − 0.6 + 4.6 + 7.0 − 0.6 . + 4.6
2007 p + 4.8 + 8.6 − 0.0 + 4.0 + 0.6 − 0.3 + 0.3 + 2.7 + 6.0 + 1.9 . + 4.9
2008 p + 2.5 + 2.8 + 2.1 + 2.2 + 2.8 + 1.8 + 2.2 − 0.3 + 9.1 + 6.6 . + 2.6
2009 pe − 2.4 − 4.8 + 0.5 − 0.2 + 4.6 + 5.5 + 3.5 − 8.9 + 6.7 + 6.7 . − 2.9
Source: Federal Statistical Office. — *Figures in accordance with ESA 1995. data (without affecting the fiscal deficit / surplus). This information can still
In the Monthly Reports up to December 2006, customs duties, the EU share be found on the Bundesbank’s website. — 1Taxes and social contributions
in VAT revenue and EU subsidies were included in the national accounts’ plus customs duties and the EU share in VAT revenue. 
54*IX Public finances in Germany

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2010
IX Public finances in Germany
 
3 General government: budgetary development (as per government’s financial statistics)
 
 
€ billion
Central, state and local government  1 Social security funds  2 General government, total
Revenue Expenditure
of which of which 3 
Finan- Person- Fixed Finan-
cial nel asset cial
transac- expend- Current forma- transac- Deficit / Rev- Expend- Deficit / Rev- Expend- Deficit /
Period Total  4 Taxes tions  5 Total  4 iture grants Interest tion tions  5 surplus enue  6 iture surplus enue iture surplus
2003 pe 547.0 442.2 21.5 614.2 174.0 235.0 65.6 36.3 10.0 − 67.2 467.6 474.4 − 6.8 925.2 999.1 − 73.9
2004 pe 545.9 442.8 24.1 610.4 173.4 236.9 64.8 34.3 9.6 − 64.5 469.7 468.6 + 1.1 926.8 990.2 − 63.4
2005 pe 568.9 452.1 31.3 620.6 172.1 245.3 64.0 33.0 14.3 − 51.7 467.8 471.3 − 3.4 947.4 1,002.5 − 55.1
2006 pe 590.9 488.4 18.8 626.2 169.7 252.1 64.4 33.7 11.6 − 35.3 486.3 466.6 + 19.7 988.2 1,003.8 − 15.6
2007 pe 644.8 538.2 17.7 644.2 182.2 250.0 66.2 34.6 9.5 + 0.6 475.3 466.4 + 8.9 1,025.6 1,016.1 + 9.6
2008 pe 668.9 561.2 13.4 677.4 187.3 259.9 67.3 36.4 18.6 − 8.5 485.7 478.9 + 6.9 1,058.8 1,060.4 − 1.7
2009 pe 634.3 524.0 9.1 722.8 195.2 271.1 64.0 39.3 38.0 − 88.5 491.6 506.0 − 14.4 1,024.2 1,127.1 −102.9
2008          Q1 p 160.0 130.8 3.0 164.5 43.7 65.5 24.7 5.3 2.0 − 4.5 114.1 119.4 − 5.3 250.4 260.2 − 9.8
         Q2 p 166.1 143.5 2.1 151.5 44.9 61.4 11.1 7.2 1.7 + 14.6 120.6 120.1 + 0.5 263.0 247.9 + 15.1
         Q3 p 159.7 137.2 1.3 167.1 45.9 62.6 21.2 9.0 1.5 − 7.4 118.6 118.9 − 0.3 254.5 262.2 − 7.7
         Q4 p 180.9 149.4 6.7 192.4 51.2 68.7 10.0 13.6 13.3 − 11.5 130.4 121.7 + 8.7 287.4 290.2 − 2.8
2009          Q1 p 157.0 128.9 1.8 175.7 45.9 67.4 22.8 5.0 10.0 − 18.7 117.9 122.3 − 4.4 251.2 274.4 − 23.1
         Q2 p 154.4 130.4 3.3 169.2 47.2 60.4 10.7 7.4 16.9 − 14.8 120.5 125.5 − 5.0 251.4 271.2 − 19.8
         Q3 p 148.8 124.4 2.1 174.9 47.6 65.0 19.8 10.5 4.5 − 26.0 120.1 127.6 − 7.5 245.2 278.7 − 33.5
         Q4 p 172.2 140.6 1.8 201.3 52.8 76.6 10.5 15.2 6.4 − 29.1 132.3 130.1 + 2.2 273.4 300.3 − 26.9
Source: Bundesbank calculations based on the data from the Federal Stat- are estimated. — 3The development of the types of expenditure recorded
istical Office. — 1Including subsidiary budgets but excluding the Post Office here is influenced in part by statistical changeovers. — 4Including discrep-
pension funds. Unlike the annual figures based on the annual calculations ancies in clearing transactions between central, state and local govern-
of the Federal Statistical Office, the quarterly figures do not include muni- ment. — 5On the revenue side, this contains proceeds booked as disposals
cipal special purpose associations and various special accounts. — 2The of equity interests and as loan repayments. On the expenditure side, this con-
annual figures do not tally with the sum of the quarterly figures, as the tains the acquisition of equity interests and loans granted. — 6Including Fed-
latter are all provisional. The quarterly figures for some insurance sectors eral Government liquidity assistance to the Federal Labour Of fice. 
4 Central, state and local government: budgetary development (as per government’s financial statistics)
 
 
€ billion
Central government State government  2,3 Local government  3 
Period Revenue  1 Expenditure Deficit / surplus Revenue Expenditure Deficit / surplus Revenue Expenditure Deficit / surplus
2003 239.6 278.8 − 39.2 229.2 259.7 − 30.5 142.1 149.9 − 7.8
2004 233.9 273.6 − 39.7 233.5 257.1 − 23.6 147.0 150.1 − 3.1
2005 250.0 281.5 − 31.5 237.4 259.6 − 22.2 151.3 153.2 − 1.9
2006 254.6 282.8 − 28.2 249.8 260.1 − 10.3 161.1 157.4 + 3.7
2007 pe 277.4 292.1 − 14.7 275.9 267.5 + 8.4 171.3 162.4 + 8.9
2008 pe 292.0 303.8 − 11.8 279.3 278.0 + 1.3 176.9 169.0 + 7.9
2009 pe 282.6 317.1 − 34.5 269.9 295.0 − 25.1 171.7 178.6 − 6.9
2008          Q1 p 64.1 75.6 − 11.5 67.7 67.7 − 0.1 37.3 37.4 − 0.1
         Q2 p 73.0 68.3 + 4.7 70.7 64.2 + 6.5 42.7 39.7 + 3.0
         Q3 p 71.2 82.7 − 11.4 67.3 66.3 + 1.0 43.8 41.1 + 2.7
         Q4 p 83.7 77.3 + 6.4 72.6 78.7 − 6.0 51.0 49.0 + 2.0
2009          Q1 p 65.8 76.8 − 11.0 65.3 75.9 − 10.6 36.3 39.3 − 3.0
         Q2 p 71.3 68.6 + 2.7 66.1 67.9 − 1.8 40.7 41.9 − 1.2
         Q3 p 68.6 84.5 − 15.9 63.1 69.4 − 6.3 42.5 45.1 − 2.6
         Q4 p 77.0 87.2 − 10.2 74.4 80.7 − 6.3 50.6 51.0 − 0.4
2010          Q1 p 61.1 82.6 − 21.5 65.0 73.5 − 8.5 34.6 41.2 − 6.6
Source: Bundesbank calculations based on the data from the Federal Stat- local authority level of the city-states Berlin, Bremen and Hamburg. —
istical Office. — 1Any amounts of the Bundesbank’s profit distribution 3Unlike the annual figure based on the annual calculations of the Federal
exceeding the reference value that were used to repay parts of the debt of Statistical Office, the quarterly figures do not include various special ac-
central government’s special funds are not included here. — 2Including the counts and municipal special purpose associations. 
55*IX Public finances in Germany

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
E U R O S Y S T E M
Monthly Report
August 2010
IX Public finances in Germany
 
5 Central, state and local government: tax revenue
 
 
€ million
Central and state government and European Union Memo item
Supplementary
central govern-
Balance of ment grants, state
Central State Local untransferred government’s share
Period Total Total government  1 government European Union  2 government  3 tax shares  4 of energy tax
2003 442,238 390,438 214,002 155,510 20,926 51,673 + 127 22,067
2004 442,838 386,459 208,920 157,898 19,640 56,237 + 142 21,967
2005 452,078 392,313 211,779 158,823 21,711 59,750 + 16 21,634
2006 488,444 421,151 225,634 173,374 22,142 67,316 − 22 21,742
2007 538,243 465,554 251,747 191,558 22,249 72,551 + 138 21,643
2008 561,182 484,182 260,690 200,411 23,081 77,190 − 190 21,510
2009 524,000 455,615 252,842 182,273 20,501 68,419 − 34 20,275
2008          Q1 131,507 111,845 56,179 47,660 8,006 14,148 + 5,513 5,272
         Q2 143,006 122,931 66,952 51,585 4,394 19,614 + 461 5,324
         Q3 137,454 117,861 65,380 48,667 3,814 19,715 − 122 5,503
         Q4 149,216 131,545 72,178 52,500 6,867 23,712 − 6,042 5,411
2009          Q1 128,787 109,674 55,941 46,212 7,521 13,289 + 5,824 5,154
         Q2 130,491 113,442 65,247 46,653 1,541 17,397 − 347 5,140
         Q3 124,437 108,572 62,354 42,335 3,883 15,865 − 1 5,048
         Q4 140,285 123,928 69,299 47,073 7,556 21,868 − 5,511 4,933
2010          Q1 121,321 104,370 54,316 41,777 8,278 11,299 + 5,652 4,885
         Q2 ... 116,767 66,331 46,516 3,919 ... ... 4,879
2009          June . 44,007 27,394 18,193 −1,580 . . 1,713
2010          June . 45,166 25,843 18,319 1,004 . . 1,626
Source: Federal Ministry of Finance, Federal Statistical Office and Bundes- cruing to the EU from central government tax revenue. — 3Including local
bank calculations. — 1Before deducting supplementary central government government taxes in the city-states Berlin, Bremen and Hamburg. — 4Differ-
grants, shares in energy tax revenue and compensation for the transfer of ence between local government’s share in the joint taxes received by the
motor vehicle tax to central government, which are remitted to state govern- state government cash offices in the period in question (see Table IX. 6) a nd
ment. — 2Custom duties and shares in VAT and gross national income ac- the amounts passed on to local government in the same period. 
 
 
6 Central and state government and European Union: tax revenue, by type
 
 
€ million
Joint taxes
Memo
Income taxes  2 Turnover taxes  5 item
Local
Local govern-
Invest- business Central State ment
Assessed ment Turnover tax govern- govern- EU share in
Wage income Corpora- income Turnover tax on trans- ment ment customs joint
Period Total  1 Total tax  3 tax tion tax tax  4 Total tax imports fers  6 taxes  7 taxes  7 duties taxes
2003 414,846 162,567 133,090 4,568 8,275 16,633 136,996 103,162 33,834 7,085 86,609 18,713 2,877 24,409
2004 409,517 159,104 123,896 5,394 13,123 16,691 137,366 104,715 32,651 5,661 84,554 19,774 3,059 23,058
2005 415,355 161,960 118,919 9,766 16,333 16,943 139,713 108,440 31,273 6,218 83,508 20,579 3,378 23,042
2006 446,139 182,614 122,612 17,567 22,898 19,537 146,688 111,318 35,370 7,013 84,215 21,729 3,880 24,988
2007 493,817 204,698 131,774 25,027 22,929 24,969 169,636 127,522 42,114 6,975 85,690 22,836 3,983 28,263
2008 515,498 220,483 141,895 32,685 15,868 30,035 175,989 130,789 45,200 6,784 86,302 21,937 4,002 31,316
2009 484,880 193,684 135,165 26,430 7,173 24,916 176,991 141,907 35,084 4,908 89,318 16,375 3,604 29,265
2008          Q1 118,847 49,649 32,793 3,668 4,727 8,462 44,294 33,488 10,806 297 17,515 6,114 980 7,002
         Q2 130,829 60,000 34,700 10,398 4,821 10,080 41,890 30,645 11,244 1,636 20,700 5,676 927 7,898
         Q3 125,510 52,135 34,063 8,878 4,086 5,109 44,338 32,705 11,633 1,690 20,888 5,442 1,017 7,648
         Q4 140,312 58,699 40,339 9,741 2,235 6,384 45,468 33,951 11,517 3,161 27,200 4,705 1,080 8,767
2009          Q1 116,731 50,001 33,975 2,971 4,399 8,657 43,087 34,234 8,853 − 36 17,361 5,351 966 7,057
         Q2 120,543 48,503 30,481 9,141 342 8,539 43,424 35,176 8,248 1,499 21,085 5,186 846 7,102
         Q3 115,567 43,486 32,150 6,732 592 4,011 44,365 35,717 8,649 1,346 22,427 3,023 920 6,994
         Q4 132,040 51,695 38,559 7,586 1,841 3,708 46,114 36,780 9,334 2,099 28,445 2,815 872 8,112
2010          Q1 111,163 45,127 30,255 6,155 1,951 6,766 42,891 34,054 8,837 215 19,001 2,814 1,115 6,793
         Q2 123,859 51,667 30,447 9,681 3,830 7,710 44,343 33,779 10,564 1,311 22,682 2,914 943 7,092
2009          June 47,285 23,205 11,360 7,964 2,395 1,486 14,498 11,911 2,587 10 7,623 1,684 266 3,278
2010          June 48,436 24,799 10,959 8,569 3,788 1,483 14,346 10,865 3,481 5 7,997 986 303 3,270
Source: Federal Ministry of Finance and Bundesbank calculations. — 1This sion plans. — 4Final withholding tax on interest income and capital gains,
total, unlike that in Table IX. 5, does not include the receipts from the equal- non-assessed taxes on earnings. — 5The allocation of revenue to central,
isation of burdens levies, local business tax (less local business tax transfers state and local government, which is adjusted at more regular interv als, is
to central and state government), real property taxes and other local govern- regulated in section 1 of the Revenue Adjustment Act. Respective percen t-
ment taxes, or the balance of untransferred tax shares. — 2Respective age share of central, state and local government in revenue for 2009:
percentage share of central, state and local government in revenue: wage 53.9:44.1:2. The EU share is deducted from central government’s share. —
tax and assessed income tax 42.5:42.5:15, corporation tax and non-assessed 6Respective percentage share of central and state government for 2009:
taxes on earnings 50:50:-, withholding tax on interest income 44:44:12. — 21.3:78.7. — 7 For the breakdown, see Table IX. 7. 
3After deducting child benefit and subsidies for supplementary private pen-
56*IX Public finances in Germany

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2010
IX Public finances in Germany
  
7 Central, state and local government: individual taxes   
  
€ million
Central government taxes  1 State government taxes  1 Local government taxes
Tax on of which
the acqui-
Soli- Motor Motor sition of Inher- Local Real
Period Energy Tobacco darity Insurance vehicle Electri- Spirits vehicle land and itance business property
tax tax surcharge tax tax  2 city tax tax Other tax  2 buildings tax Other  3 Total tax taxes
2003 43,188 14,094 10,280 8,870 . 6,531 2,204 1,442 7,336 4,800 3,373 3,205 34,477 24,139 9,658
2004 41,782 13,630 10,108 8,751 . 6,597 2,195 1,492 7,740 4,646 4,284 3,105 38,982 28,373 9,939
2005 40,101 14,273 10,315 8,750 . 6,462 2,142 1,465 8,674 4,791 4,097 3,018 42,941 32,129 10,247
2006 39,916 14,387 11,277 8,775 . 6,273 2,160 1,428 8,937 6,125 3,763 2,904 49,319 38,370 10,399
2007 38,955 14,254 12,349 10,331 . 6,355 1,959 1,488 8,898 6,952 4,203 2,783 51,401 40,116 10,713
2008 39,248 13,574 13,146 10,478 . 6,261 2,126 1,470 8,842 5,728 4,771 2,596 52,468 41,037 10,807
2009 39,822 13,366 11,927 10,548 3,803 6,278 2,101 1,473 4,398 4,857 4,550 2,571 44,028 32,421 10,936
2008          Q1 4,668 2,547 3,192 4,540 . 1,547 626 394 2,590 1,676 1,087 761 12,956 10,330 2,444
         Q2 9,570 3,267 3,502 1,950 . 1,594 479 338 2,290 1,461 1,301 624 13,813 10,850 2,815
         Q3 9,807 3,649 3,059 2,078 . 1,464 488 343 2,050 1,398 1,361 632 13,634 10,281 3,184
         Q4 15,203 4,111 3,392 1,911 . 1,655 533 396 1,912 1,193 1,022 579 12,065 9,577 2,364
2009          Q1 4,777 2,365 3,191 4,502 . 1,560 594 372 2,284 1,165 1,144 758 12,021 9,370 2,452
         Q2 10,059 3,560 3,057 1,999 . 1,569 478 363 2,114 1,131 1,334 608 11,447 8,433 2,860
         Q3 9,883 3,499 2,638 2,096 1,907 1,582 488 335 0 1,297 1,123 604 10,216 6,800 3,233
         Q4 15,103 3,942 3,040 1,952 1,897 1,567 542 402 − 1,264 950 601 10,344 7,818 2,391
2010          Q1 4,446 2,462 2,856 4,496 2,345 1,498 526 372 − 1,229 918 667 10,374 7,641 2,518
         Q2 9,596 3,327 3,100 2,060 2,235 1,570 437 357 − 1,207 1,115 591 ... ... ...
2009          June 3,641 1,166 1,334 595 . 611 162 114 688 386 408 202 . . .
2010          June 3,357 1,114 1,394 605 714 587 116 110 − 437 352 198 . . .
Source: Federal Ministry of Finance, Federal Statistical Office and Bundes- ment. Postings to state government shown thereafter relate to the booki ng
bank calculations. — 1For the sum total, see Table IX. 6. — 2As of of cash flows. — 3 Notably betting, lottery and beer tax.   
1 July 2009, motor vehicle tax revenue is attributable to central govern-
 
 
8 German pension insurance scheme: budgetary development and assets *
 
 
€ million
Revenue  1,2 Expenditure  1,2 Assets  1,5 
of which of which
Equity
Payments interests, Memo
from Pen- mort- item
central sioners’ gages Adminis-
Contri- govern- Pension health Deficit / and other Real trative
Period Total butions  3 ment Total payments insurance  4 surplus Total Deposits  6 Securities loans  7 estate assets
2003 229,371 156,510 71,447 231,362 196,038 15,178 − 1,991 7,641 5,017 816 1,682 126 4,862
2004 8 231,684 156,535 71,680 233,011 198,587 14,258 − 1,327 5,158 4,980 19 41 118 4,834
2005 229,428 156,264 71,917 233,357 199,873 13,437 − 3,929 1,976 1,794 16 42 123 4,888
2006 241,231 168,083 71,773 233,668 200,459 13,053 + 7,563 10,047 9,777 115 46 109 4,912
2007 236,642 162,225 72,928 235,459 201,642 13,665 + 1,183 12,196 11,270 765 46 115 4,819
2008 242,770 167,611 73,381 238,995 204,071 14,051 + 3,775 16,531 16,313 36 56 126 4,645
2009 244,689 169,183 74,313 244,478 208,475 14,431 + 211 16,821 16,614 23 64 120 4,525
2008          Q1 57,611 39,028 18,241 58,952 50,795 3,473 − 1,341 10,730 9,459 1,095 46 130 4,792
         Q2 60,574 41,958 18,241 59,346 50,714 3,482 + 1,228 11,923 10,267 1,466 61 128 4,704
         Q3 59,525 40,769 18,215 60,124 51,418 3,539 − 599 11,727 10,421 1,128 50 127 4,690
         Q4 64,495 45,851 18,231 60,100 51,301 3,548 + 4,395 16,912 16,399 336 50 126 4,677
2009          Q1 58,681 39,891 18,500 60,105 51,554 3,633 − 1,424 14,902 14,699 15 56 132 4,618
         Q2 60,812 42,140 18,384 60,263 51,410 3,626 + 549 15,280 15,082 15 59 124 4,593
         Q3 59,783 41,142 18,364 61,841 52,869 3,580 − 2,058 13,647 13,428 40 60 119 4,585
         Q4 64,864 46,005 18,594 61,993 52,917 3,583 + 2,871 16,812 16,608 23 61 120 4,582
2010          Q1 59,761 40,601 18,917 61,861 53,059 3,582 − 2,100 14,922 14,717 20 64 120 4,490
         Q2 62,249 43,054 18,923 61,999 53,006 3,585 + 250 15,254 15,053 20 69 112 4,478
Source: Federal Ministry of Labour and Social Affairs and German pension ing and proceeds. — 3Including contributions for recipients of government
insurance scheme. — *Excluding the German pension insurance scheme for cash benefits. — 4Including long-term care insurance for pensioners until
the mining, railway and maritime industries. — 1The final annual figures 2004 Q1. — 5Largely corresponds to the sustainability reserves. End of year
do not tally with the quarterly figures, as the latter are all provisional. — or quarter. — 6Including cash. — 7Excluding loans to other social security
2Including financial compensation payments. Excluding investment spend- funds. — 8 Revenue includes proceeds from the disposal of equity interests. 
57*IX Public finances in Germany

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
E U R O S Y S T E M
Monthly Report
August 2010
IX Public finances in Germany
 
9 Federal Employment Agency: budgetary development
 
 
€ million
Revenue Expenditure
Grant or
of which of which working
capital
of which of which loans
from
Unemploy- Measures central
Contri- ment sup- Western Eastern Job promo- Western Eastern financed Deficit / govern-
Period Total  1 butions Levies  2 Total  3 port 4,5 Germany Germany tion  5,6 Germany Germany by levies  7 surplus ment
2003 50,635 47,337 2,081 56,850 29,735 21,528 8,207 19,155 10,564 8,591 1,948 − 6,215 6,215
2004 50,314 47,211 1,674 54,490 29,746 21,821 7,925 16,843 9,831 7,011 1,641 − 4,176 4,175
2005 52,692 46,989 1,436 53,089 27,654 20,332 7,322 11,590 7,421 4,169 1,450 − 397 397
2006 55,384 51,176 1,123 44,162 23,249 17,348 5,901 9,259 6,185 3,074 1,089 + 11,221 0
2007 42,838 32,264 971 36,196 17,356 13,075 4,282 8,370 5,748 2,623 949 + 6,643 −
2008 38,289 26,452 974 39,407 14,283 10,652 3,631 8,712 6,222 2,490 920 − 1,118 −
2009 34,254 22,046 1,000 48,057 20,866 16,534 4,332 11,595 8,794 2,801 1,946 − 13,803 −
2008          Q1 8,714 5,955 83 11,295 4,299 3,183 1,116 2,088 1,473 615 327 − 2,581 −
         Q2 9,690 6,931 211 10,367 3,739 2,761 978 2,182 1,556 626 255 − 677 −
         Q3 9,330 6,317 272 8,648 3,245 2,442 804 2,053 1,462 592 149 + 683 −
         Q4 10,555 7,248 409 9,098 3,001 2,267 733 2,389 1,731 657 189 + 1,458 −
2009          Q1 6,283 5,248 192 10,396 4,723 3,556 1,167 2,318 1,688 630 480 − 4,113 −
         Q2 6,490 5,421 261 12,391 5,563 4,376 1,187 2,893 2,193 700 491 − 5,901 −
         Q3 6,853 5,316 250 12,480 5,465 4,439 1,026 3,026 2,325 701 630 − 5,626 −
         Q4 14,627 6,061 296 12,790 5,115 4,163 951 3,358 2,588 770 345 + 1,837 −
2010          Q1 10,020 5,196 714 11,681 6,475 5,112 1,362 2,957 2,263 694 208 − 1,661 −
         Q2 10,649 5,601 784 10,501 5,264 4,148 1,116 2,872 2,204 668 184 + 148 −
Source: Federal Employment Agency. — 1Excluding central government schemes. 6Vocational training, measures to encourage job take-up, rehabili-
liquidity assistance. — 2Levies to promote winter construction and to pay in- tation, job creation measures, subsidies granted to Personnel Service Agen-
solvency compensation to employees. — 3From 2005, including a compen- cies, compensation top-up payments and business start-up grants. —
satory amount or a reintegration payment to central government. — 4Un- 7Promotion of winter construction and insolvency compensation for em-
employment benefit and short-time working benefit. — 5Including contri- ployees. 
butions to the statutory health, pension and long-term care insurance
 
 
10 Statutory health insurance scheme: budgetary development
 
 
€ million
Revenue  1 Expenditure  1 
of which of which
Central Thera- Adminis-
govern- peutical trative
Contri- ment Hospital Pharma- Medical Dental treatment Sickness expend- Deficit /
Period Total butions  2 funds  3 Total treatment ceuticals treatment treatment  4 and aids benefits iture  5 surplus
2003 141,654 138,383 . 145,095 46,800 24,218 24,301 11,819 9,409 6,973 8,206 − 3,441
2004 144,279 140,120 1,000 140,260 47,594 21,811 22,955 11,263 8,281 6,367 8,196 + 4,020
2005 145,742 140,250 2,500 144,071 48,959 25,358 23,096 9,928 8,284 5,868 8,303 + 1,671
2006 149,929 142,183 4,200 148,297 50,327 25,835 23,896 10,364 8,303 5,708 8,319 + 1,632
2007 156,058 149,964 2,500 154,314 50,850 27,791 24,788 10,687 8,692 6,017 8,472 + 1,744
2008 162,763 156,130 2,500 161,334 52,623 29,145 25,889 10,926 9,095 6,583 8,680 + 1,429
2009 p 169,430 158,607 7,200 170,825 56,105 30,742 27,782 11,242 9,532 7,241 8,989 − 1,396
2008          Q1 37,937 37,136 − 39,010 13,410 7,084 6,409 2,711 2,011 1,643 1,898 − 1,073
         Q2 40,361 38,491 1,250 40,232 13,387 7,339 6,434 2,728 2,292 1,644 2,021 + 129
         Q3 39,185 38,338 − 39,733 13,012 7,215 6,415 2,660 2,271 1,602 2,045 − 548
         Q4 44,387 41,838 1,250 42,165 12,913 7,588 6,812 2,894 2,461 1,672 2,704 + 2,222
2009          Q1 42,502 39,324 2,575 41,432 14,154 7,463 6,969 2,797 2,095 1,822 1,977 + 1,069
         Q2 42,540 40,464 1,377 42,400 14,092 7,652 6,810 2,857 2,392 1,779 2,083 + 140
         Q3 42,752 38,827 3,002 42,548 13,967 7,574 6,981 2,684 2,437 1,746 2,324 + 204
         Q4 41,635 39,992 246 44,445 13,892 8,052 7,021 2,904 2,607 1,895 2,604 − 2,809
2010          Q1 6 43,183 38,542 3,878 43,274 14,769 7,555 6,933 2,871 2,197 1,996 2,130 − 91
Source: Federal Ministry of Health. — 1The final annual figures do not tally tures. — 5Net, ie after deducting reimbursements for expenses for levying
with the sum of the quarterly figures, as the latter are all provisional. Ex- contributions incurred by other social insurance funds. Including admin is-
cluding revenue and expenditure as part of the risk structure compensation trative expenditure on disease management programmes. — 6Data on indi-
scheme. — 2Including contributions from subsidised low-paid part-time vidual expenditure categories for 2010 only partly comparable with
employment. — 3Federal grant and liquidity assistance. — 4Including den- prior-year figures owing to a change in the statistical definition. 
58*IX Public finances in Germany

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2010
IX Public finances in Germany
 
11 Statutory long-term care insurance scheme: budgetary development
 
 
€ million
Revenue  1 Expenditure  1 
of which
Contributions to
of which Non-cash In-patient Nursing pension insur- Administrative Deficit /
Period Total Contributions  2 Total care benefits care benefit ance scheme  3 expenditure surplus
2003 16,844 16,665 17,468 2,361 8,183 4,090 951 853 − 624
2004 16,817 16,654 17,605 2,365 8,349 4,049 925 851 − 788
2005 17,526 17,385 17,891 2,409 8,516 4,050 890 875 − 366
2006 17,749 17,611 18,064 2,437 8,671 4,017 862 886 − 315
2007 18,036 17,858 18,385 2,475 8,831 4,050 861 896 − 350
2008 19,785 19,608 19,163 2,605 9,054 4,225 868 941 + 622
2009 p 21,314 21,189 20,327 2,754 9,288 4,467 877 996 + 987
2008          Q1 4,421 4,381 4,681 641 2,229 1,022 210 255 − 261
         Q2 4,597 4,563 4,703 634 2,251 1,025 221 230 − 106
         Q3 5,167 5,133 4,872 665 2,280 1,089 218 234 + 295
         Q4 5,583 5,535 4,884 662 2,293 1,103 219 220 + 698
2009          Q1 5,110 5,082 4,970 676 2,284 1,104 215 274 + 139
         Q2 5,275 5,253 4,977 662 2,308 1,100 217 248 + 298
         Q3 5,279 5,239 5,157 706 2,338 1,115 219 246 + 122
         Q4 5,650 5,614 5,223 710 2,358 1,148 225 228 + 427
2010          Q1 5,241 5,175 5,298 722 2,362 1,151 217 264 − 56
Source: Federal Ministry of Health. — 1The final annual figures do not tally 2Since 2005 including special contributions for childless persons (0.25% of
with the sum of the quarterly figures, as the latter are all provisional. — income subject to insurance contributions). — 3 For non-professional carers. 
 
 
12 Central government: borrowing in 13 Central, state and local government: debt by
the market creditor *
 
€ million € million
Total new borrowing  1 of which of which Banking system Domestic non-banks
Change Change
in money in money Social
market market End of year Bundes- Credit security Foreign
Period Gross  2 Net loans deposits or quarter Total bank institutions funds Other  1 creditors  pe 
2003 + 227,483 + 42,270 + 1,236 + 7,218 2003 1,358,137 4,440 530,700 341 301,956 520,700
2004 + 227,441 + 44,410 + 1,844 + 802 2004 1,430,582 4,440 544,200 430 306,912 574,600
2005 + 224,922 + 35,479 + 4,511 + 6,041 2005 1,489,029 4,440 518,500 488 312,201 653,400
2006 + 221,873 + 32,656 + 3,258 + 6,308 2006 1,533,697 4,440 496,900 480 329,177 702,700
2007 + 214,995 + 6,996 + 1,086 − 4,900 2007 1,540,381 4,440 457,000 476 312,265 766,200
2008 + 233,356 + 26,208 + 6,888 + 9,036 2008 1,564,590 4,440 435,700 510 323,240 800,700
2009 + 312,729 + 66,821 − 8,184 + 106 2009 p 1,656,508 4,440 441,400 516 331,452 878,700
2008          Q1 + 69,510 + 10,443 + 12,306 − 705 2008          Q1 1,541,759 4,440 467,300 475 305,344 764,200
         Q2 + 52,618 + 7,478 + 4,872 + 10,289          Q2 1,554,151 4,440 462,200 506 291,906 795,100
         Q3 + 53,933 − 2,231 − 10,736 − 12,088          Q3 1,547,336 4,440 431,900 506 298,490 812,000
         Q4 + 57,296 + 10,519 + 447 + 11,541          Q4 1,564,590 4,440 435,700 510 323,240 800,700
2009          Q1 + 66,560 + 20,334 − 2,256 − 7,856 2009          Q1 r 1,594,403 4,440 426,500 514 324,349 838,600
         Q2 + 96,270 + 46,283 − 2,791 + 26,434          Q2 1,646,307 4,440 430,400 520 327,047 883,900
         Q3 + 82,451 + 1,343 + 1,268 − 15,901          Q3 1,651,955 4,440 439,600 520 322,995 884,400
         Q4 + 67,448 − 1,139 − 4,406 − 2,572          Q4 p 1,656,508 4,440 441,400 516 331,452 878,700
2010          Q1 + 74,369 + 12,637 − 5,322 − 1,520 2010          Q1 pe 1,678,100 4,440 450,100 518 341,342 881,700
Source:  Federal  Republic  of  Germany  -  Finance Source: Bundesbank calculations based on data from the Federal Statistical 
Agency. — 1 Including the Financial  Market  Stabil- Office. — * Excluding direct intergovernmental borrowing. — 1 Calculated 
isation Fund (SoFFin) and the Investment and Repay- as a residual. 
ment Fund. — 2 After deducting repurchases. 
59*IX Public finances in Germany

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
E U R O S Y S T E M
Monthly Report
August 2010
IX Public finances in Germany
 
14 Central, state and local government: debt by category *
 
 
€ million
Loans from non-banks Old debt
Direct
Treasury Five-year lending
discount Federal Federal Federal by credit Social Equal-
End of year paper Treasury notes savings bonds institu- security isation
or quarter Total (Bubills)  1 notes  2,3 (Bobls)  2 notes (Bunds)  2 Day-bond tions  4 funds Other  4 claims  5 Other  5,6 
Central, state and local government
2004 1,430,582 35,722 279,796 168,958 10,817 495,547 . 379,984 430 53,672 5,572 84
2005 1,489,029 36,945 310,044 174,423 11,055 521,801 . 366,978 488 62,765 4,443 88
2006 1,533,697 37,834 320,288 179,940 10,199 552,028 . 356,514 480 71,889 4,443 82
2007 1,540,381 39,510 329,108 177,394 10,287 574,512 . 329,588 476 74,988 4,443 76
2008          Q4 1,564,590 44,870 337,261 172,037 9,649 584,144 3,174 325,648 510 82,781 4,443 73
2009          Q1 r 1,594,403 70,315 341,169 177,859 9,436 586,340 3,413 320,277 514 80,564 4,443 74
         Q2 1,646,307 99,170 353,904 174,146 9,490 600,012 3,185 310,665 520 90,699 4,443 73
         Q3 1,651,955 110,126 346,833 181,326 9,450 587,608 2,746 315,889 520 92,945 4,443 72
         Q4 p 1,656,508 106,220 361,475 174,219 9,471 594,999 2,495 303,570 516 99,031 4,442 71
2010          Q1 pe 1,678,100 94,080 373,838 191,722 9,441 602,650 2,286 297,773 518 101,276 4,442 73
Central government 7,8,9,10,11
2004 812,123 34,440 95,638 159,272 10,817 460,380 . 34,835 333 10,751 5,572 83
2005 886,254 36,098 108,899 174,371 11,055 510,866 . 29,318 408 10,710 4,443 87
2006 918,911 37,798 103,624 179,889 10,199 541,404 . 30,030 408 11,036 4,443 82
2007 939,988 37,385 102,083 177,394 10,287 574,156 . 22,829 408 10,928 4,443 75
2008          Q4 966,197 40,795 105,684 172,037 9,649 583,930 3,174 35,291 448 10,674 4,443 72
2009          Q1 986,530 64,653 104,571 177,859 9,436 586,225 3,413 24,804 448 10,605 4,443 74
         Q2 1,032,813 95,758 113,060 174,146 9,490 599,898 3,185 21,634 448 10,680 4,443 72
         Q3 1,034,156 107,415 107,171 181,326 9,450 587,493 2,746 22,877 448 10,718 4,443 71
         Q4 1,033,017 104,409 113,637 174,219 9,471 594,780 2,495 18,347 448 10,700 4,442 70
2010          Q1 1,045,654 93,630 117,695 191,722 9,441 602,345 2,286 13,303 448 10,270 4,442 73
State government
2004 448,672 1,282 179,620 .... 228,644 3 39,122 . 1
2005 471,375 847 201,146 .... 221,163 3 48,216 . 1
2006 481,850 36 216,665 .... 209,270 2 55,876 . 1
2007 484,373 2,125 227,025 .... 194,956 2 60,264 . 1
2008          Q4 483,875 4,075 231,577 .... 179,978 3 68,241 . 1
2009          Q1 492,771 5,661 236,599 .... 184,415 6 66,090 . 1
         Q2 497,725 3,411 240,844 .... 177,307 12 76,149 . 1
         Q3 501,092 2,711 239,661 .... 180,349 12 78,358 . 1
         Q4 p 505,231 1,811 247,838 .... 171,112 8 84,461 . 1
2010          Q1 p 511,619 450 256,143 .... 167,878 10 87,137 . 1
Local government 12
2004 112,538 . − . . 812 . 108,231 86 3,410 . .
2005 116,033 . − . . 466 . 111,889 77 3,601 . .
2006 118,380 . − . . 256 . 113,265 70 4,789 . .
2007 115,920 . − . . 256 . 111,803 66 3,796 . .
2008          Q4 114,518 . − . . 214 . 110,379 60 3,866 . .
2009          Q1 r 115,102 . − . . 114 . 111,058 60 3,870 . .
         Q2 115,769 . − . . 114 . 111,725 60 3,870 . .
         Q3 116,707 . − . . 114 . 112,663 60 3,870 . .
         Q4 p 118,260 . − . . 219 . 114,111 60 3,870 . .
2010          Q1 pe 120,827 . − . . 305 . 116,592 60 3,870 . .
Special funds 7,8,9,13
2004 57,250 − 4,538 9,685 . 34,355 . 8,274 8 389 . .
2005 15,367 . − 51 . 10,469 . 4,609 − 238 . .
2006 14,556 . − 51 . 10,368 . 3,950 − 188 . .
2007 100 . − − . 100 . − − − . .
2008          Q4 − . − − . − . − − − . .
2009          Q1 − . − − . − . − − − . .
         Q2 − . − − . − . − − − . .
         Q3 − . − − . − . − − − . .
         Q4 − . − − . − . − − − . .
2010          Q1 − . − − . − . − − − . .
Source: Bundesbank calculations based on data from the Federal Statistical trast to the capital market statistics, the debt incurred through the joi nt issu-
Office. — *Excluding direct intergovernmental borrowing. — 1Including ance of Federal securities is recorded here under central government and its
Treasury financing paper. — 2Excluding issuers’ holdings of their own secur- special funds in accordance with the agreed allocation ratios. — 8On 1
ities. — 3Treasury notes issued by state government include long-term January 2005 central government assumed joint responsibility for the debts
notes. — 4Mainly loans against borrowers’ notes and cash advances. In- of the German Unity Fund. From that date on, the aforementioned special
cluding loans raised abroad. Other loans from non-banks, including loans fund is recorded under central government. — 9On 1 July 2007 central
from public supplementary pension funds and liabilities arising from the in- government assumed joint responsibility for the debts of the ERP Specia l
vestment assistance levy. — 5Excluding offsets against outstanding Fund. From that date on, the aforementioned special fund is recorded
claims. — 6Old debt mainly denominated in foreign currency, in accordance under central government. — 10From December 2008, including debt of
with the London Debts Agreement, old liabilities arising from housing con- the Financial Market Stabilisation Fund (SoFFin). — 11From March 2009, in-
struction and liabilities arising from housing construction by the former cluding debt of the Investment and Repayment Fund. — 12Including debt
GDR’s armed forces and from housing construction in connection with the of municipal special purpose associations. Data other than year-end figures
return of the troops of the former USSR stationed in eastern Germany to have been estimated. — 13ERP Special Fund (up to the end of June 2007),
their home country; excluding debt securities in own portfolios. — 7In con- German Unity Fund (up to the end of 2004) and Indemnification Fund. 
60*IX Public finances in Germany

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2010
X Economic conditions in Germany
  
1 Origin and use of domestic product, distribution of national income
  
  
  
  2008   2009   2010
  2007   2008   2009   2007   2008   2009   Q3   Q4   Q1   Q2   Q3   Q4   Q1
Item Index 2000=100 Annual percentage change
At  constant  prices,  chained
  I Origin of domestic product
Production sector
(excluding construction) 114.0 114.2 94.7 1.8 0.2 − 17.1 0.6 − 8.5 − 20.3 − 23.2 − 16.4 − 7.5 6.8
Construction 79.2 81.9 80.7 0.8 3.5 − 1.5 3.2 0.7 − 5.9 − 2.9 0.9 1.7 − 3.7
Wholesale/retail trade, hotel and
restaurant services, transport
and storage  1 112.5 114.3 107.7 2.9 1.5 − 5.8 1.6 − 1.5 − 6.6 − 7.5 − 5.7 − 3.3 − 0.2
Financing, renting and business
services  2 115.6 117.5 115.6 4.8 1.6 − 1.6 1.4 0.2 − 1.3 − 2.2 − 2.0 − 0.9 0.9
Public and private services  3 106.6 108.6 110.1 2.1 1.9 1.4 2.1 2.0 0.7 1.1 1.4 2.2 2.3
Gross value added 110.5 112.0 105.8 2.9 1.4 − 5.5 1.5 − 2.0 − 6.9 − 7.9 − 5.3 − 2.0 2.2
Gross domestic product  4 108.9 110.3 104.8 2.5 1.3 − 4.9 1.4 − 1.7 − 6.4 − 7.0 − 4.7 − 1.5 1.7
 II Use of domestic product
Private consumption  5 102.6 102.9 102.9 − 0.3 0.4 − 0.1 0.4 − 0.6 − 0.3 0.4 − 0.5 − 0.0 − 1.2
Government consumption 104.8 107.0 110.6 1.7 2.1 3.4 2.2 2.3 3.4 3.4 4.0 2.7 2.4
Machinery and equipment 123.2 127.3 101.1 11.0 3.3 − 20.5 5.8 − 3.0 − 20.1 − 23.4 − 20.8 − 17.9 0.8
Premises 86.2 88.4 87.4 0.0 2.6 − 1.1 2.7 0.3 − 5.7 − 3.0 1.2 2.5 − 3.1
Other investment  6 135.9 143.2 150.3 6.5 5.3 4.9 5.6 4.7 4.4 4.5 5.3 5.5 6.0
Changes in inventories  7  8 . . . 0.0 0.4 − 0.9 0.3 1.7 0.0 − 1.2 − 0.8 − 1.5 0.5
Domestic use 101.1 102.9 100.7 1.0 1.7 − 2.1 1.8 1.7 − 1.6 − 2.7 − 1.8 − 2.4 0.1
Net exports  8 . . . 1.5 − 0.3 − 2.9 − 0.4 − 3.3 − 5.0 − 4.4 − 3.1 0.8 1.6
Exports 164.0 168.7 144.3 7.5 2.9 − 14.5 4.2 − 5.7 − 16.9 − 20.1 − 15.5 − 4.8 7.5
Imports 141.1 147.1 133.1 4.8 4.3 − 9.5 5.8 1.2 − 8.0 − 12.9 − 10.1 − 7.1 4.2
Gross domestic product  4 108.9 110.3 104.8 2.5 1.3 − 4.9 1.4 − 1.7 − 6.4 − 7.0 − 4.7 − 1.5 1.7
At  current  prices  (€ billion)
III Use of domestic product
Private consumption  5 1,375.4 1,409.7 1,410.8 1.4 2.5 0.1 3.0 0.8 − 0.3 0.5 − 0.7 0.7 0.7
Government consumption 435.6 451.8 473.5 2.2 3.7 4.8 3.8 3.6 5.3 4.7 5.9 3.5 3.6
Machinery and equipment 196.5 201.8 158.2 10.2 2.7 − 21.6 5.3 − 3.5 − 21.1 − 24.4 − 21.9 − 19.1 − 0.5
Premises 231.5 245.0 244.4 6.3 5.8 − 0.2 6.4 3.4 − 3.5 − 2.1 1.1 3.0 − 2.8
Other investment  6 27.5 27.9 27.3 3.4 1.6 − 2.2 1.6 0.7 − 2.5 − 2.3 − 2.3 − 1.7 0.8
Changes in inventories  7 − 10.0 3.9 − 18.2 . . . . . . . . . .
Domestic use 2,256.5 2,340.1 2,296.0 2.9 3.7 − 1.9 4.3 3.0 − 1.1 − 2.5 − 1.7 − 2.1 1.5
Net exports 171.7 155.7 113.1 . . . . . . . . . .
Exports 1,139.5 1,179.4 979.3 8.0 3.5 − 17.0 5.3 − 5.5 − 19.0 − 23.1 − 18.5 − 6.5 8.9
Imports 967.8 1,023.7 866.2 4.9 5.8 − 15.4 9.4 − 0.1 − 13.0 − 19.1 − 17.6 − 11.5 5.3
Gross domestic product  4 2,428.2 2,495.8 2,409.1 4.4 2.8 − 3.5 2.8 0.2 − 5.0 − 5.8 − 2.9 − 0.3 3.2
IV Prices (2000 = 100)
Private consumption 110.5 112.8 113.0 1.8 2.1 0.2 2.6 1.3 0.0 0.1 − 0.2 0.7 1.9
Gross domestic product 108.1 109.8 111.4 1.9 1.5 1.5 1.4 2.0 1.6 1.3 1.9 1.2 1.4
Terms of trade 100.2 99.4 103.2 0.4 − 0.8 3.8 − 2.2 1.6 3.1 3.6 5.2 3.1 0.2
V Distribution of national income
Compensation of employees 1,180.9 1,225.1 1,223.3 2.8 3.7 − 0.1 4.1 3.5 1.1 − 0.0 − 0.6 − 0.9 0.9
Entrepreneurial and property
income 659.4 661.0 583.2 4.8 0.2 − 11.8 − 0.2 − 9.8 − 19.5 − 20.0 − 7.5 1.5 15.2
National income 1,840.3 1,886.0 1,806.6 3.5 2.5 − 4.2 2.5 − 0.9 − 6.8 − 7.1 − 3.1 − 0.2 5.6
Memo item: Gross national
income 2,477.7 2,537.0 2,444.0 4.4 2.4 − 3.7 2.7 − 0.4 − 5.3 − 5.7 − 3.2 − 0.5 3.1
Source: Federal Statistical Office; figures computed in May 2010. — 1Includ- ucts). — 5Including non-profit institutions serving households. — 6Intangi-
ing communication services. — 2Financial intermediation, real estate activi- ble fixed asset formation (inter alia, computer software and entertainment,
ties, renting and business services. — 3Including care-at-home services. — literary or artistic originals) and cultivated assets. — 7Including net increase
4Gross value added plus taxes on products (netted with subsidies on prod- in valuables. — 8 Contribution of growth to GDP. 
61*X Economic conditions in Germany

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
E U R O S Y S T E M
Monthly Report
August 2010
 X Economic conditions in Germany
 
2 Output in the production sector  * 
 
 
Adjusted for working-day variations  o 
of which
Industry
of which:   by main industrial grouping of which:   by economic sector
Manu-
Manu- facture of
facture of computers,
Motor basic metals electronic
and vehicles, and optical
Production Inter- Non- fabricated products Machinery trailers
sector, Construc- mediate Capital Durable durable metal and and semi- and electrical
total tion Energy Total goods goods goods goods products equipment equipment trailers
2005=100  
  
% of total  1 100.00 5.56 8.76 85.69 33.96 35.37 2.78 13.58 12.15 10.82 12.48 12.34
Period
2005 99.7 99.5 100.1 99.7 99.7 99.6 99.7 99.6 99.6 99.8 99.5 99.6
2006 105.4 105.8 101.0 105.8 107.1 106.0 107.3 101.7 107.3 112.9 107.5 102.6
2007 111.6 108.9 98.2 113.1 114.6 114.9 108.4 105.8 114.0 124.4 119.4 109.7
2008 111.5 108.3 95.6 113.4 114.2 116.8 104.0 104.4 114.4 128.8 124.5 104.5
2009 94.3 108.2 90.7 93.7 93.3 92.0 87.6 100.6 87.5 100.8 92.2 82.0
2008          Oct 115.7 123.2 98.0 117.1 117.4 119.2 113.3 111.6 117.6 133.0 125.9 104.4
         Nov 112.2 116.9 97.5 113.4 108.8 119.7 111.7 108.7 109.4 133.5 126.5 100.9
         Dec 95.5 84.9 99.8 95.7 82.6 107.6 84.6 99.6 80.1 109.7 136.3 61.6
2009          Jan 86.8 58.9 105.4 86.7 86.8 82.0 84.8 98.8 82.3 95.7 86.2 67.9
         Feb 86.4 67.5 93.2 86.9 86.8 84.0 85.1 95.4 82.3 96.6 90.4 65.4
         Mar 97.3 104.3 92.6 97.3 93.8 99.0 93.2 102.3 87.4 104.3 105.0 84.4
         Apr 89.0 117.6 82.4 87.8 87.1 84.6 83.6 98.9 81.0 91.3 86.9 70.2
         May 91.8 117.7 80.9 91.3 90.6 90.2 83.2 97.8 84.0 93.7 89.1 83.5
         June 96.4 123.8 84.2 95.9 94.7 97.0 83.9 98.3 88.6 98.6 95.2 91.1
         July 94.6 126.2 86.1 93.4 95.6 89.9 80.1 99.7 87.8 99.2 86.0 83.7
         Aug 88.9 122.0 84.4 87.2 92.3 79.1 74.0 98.0 84.6 95.9 78.6 65.1
         Sep 103.3 129.1 85.9 103.4 102.0 104.2 99.4 105.8 96.0 109.2 102.5 103.2
         Oct 102.0 126.1 93.5 101.3 103.5 97.5 98.5 106.6 97.1 111.8 89.9 97.9
         Nov 103.7 121.2 95.7 103.4 103.4 101.8 102.7 107.8 99.3 113.9 93.0 99.8
         Dec 91.1 83.9 103.6 90.3 83.1 94.8 82.8 98.0 79.4 99.7 103.4 71.3
2010          Jan 89.8 49.4 110.4 90.3 95.4 82.7 89.0 97.7 88.3 99.7 77.6 82.4
         Feb 91.6 55.4 99.8 93.1 96.0 89.9 91.8 94.2 91.0 103.3 83.2 91.8
         Mar 106.3 105.0 98.1 107.2 109.2 106.5 99.7 105.6 105.4 115.7 103.4 108.3
         Apr  x 101.4 123.2 90.1 101.1 106.5 97.4 91.5 99.1 102.6 109.4 92.9 99.4
         May  x 103.6 122.7 91.3 103.6 109.3 100.4 92.8 99.7 105.0 112.5 95.8 104.4
         June  x p 106.9 127.9 90.5 107.2 110.8 107.0 96.5 101.1 107.8 118.7 102.9 108.9
 
Annual percentage change  
  
2005 + 3.0 − 5.4 + 0.4 + 3.9 + 3.0 + 5.0 + 0.1 + 3.9 + 1.4 + 8.8 + 5.1 + 4.1
2006 + 5.7 + 6.3 + 0.9 + 6.1 + 7.4 + 6.4 + 7.6 + 2.1 + 7.7 + 13.1 + 8.0 + 3.0
2007 + 5.9 + 2.9 − 2.8 + 6.9 + 7.0 + 8.4 + 1.0 + 4.0 + 6.2 + 10.2 + 11.1 + 6.9
2008 − 0.1 − 0.6 − 2.6 + 0.3 − 0.3 + 1.7 − 4.1 − 1.3 + 0.4 + 3.5 + 4.3 − 4.7
2009 − 15.4 − 0.1 − 5.1 − 17.4 − 18.3 − 21.2 − 15.8 − 3.6 − 23.5 − 21.7 − 25.9 − 21.5
 
2008          Oct − 3.7 − 2.4 − 5.0 − 3.6 − 3.7 − 3.9 − 6.6 − 1.8 − 3.2 − 2.7 − 1.0 − 12.4
         Nov − 7.1 − 1.1 − 9.6 − 7.4 − 9.4 − 6.8 − 7.6 − 3.5 − 10.0 − 5.1 − 2.5 − 17.3
         Dec − 11.3 − 4.0 − 9.0 − 12.0 − 18.9 − 9.5 − 14.8 − 2.0 − 20.6 − 11.4 − 0.5 − 31.6
2009          Jan − 18.4 − 24.9 + 0.6 − 20.0 − 22.7 − 23.6 − 16.8 − 3.9 − 26.4 − 22.0 − 20.5 − 35.0
         Feb − 21.0 − 20.6 − 4.8 − 22.4 − 23.9 − 27.0 − 20.8 − 4.8 − 28.2 − 23.2 − 21.8 − 44.0
         Mar − 19.6 + 4.0 − 12.0 − 21.5 − 25.5 − 22.8 − 20.5 − 6.2 − 31.3 − 25.8 − 21.5 − 32.3
         Apr − 22.0 + 6.4 − 17.4 − 24.2 − 26.8 − 28.9 − 22.1 − 2.6 − 32.4 − 28.4 − 29.9 − 39.8
         May − 17.4 + 2.9 − 12.8 − 19.0 − 22.7 − 21.1 − 14.2 − 2.8 − 28.6 − 25.8 − 25.4 − 21.6
         June − 17.1 + 2.7 − 3.3 − 19.3 − 21.3 − 22.3 − 21.1 − 4.2 − 27.8 − 26.3 − 29.1 − 20.6
         July − 16.4 + 2.9 − 3.3 − 18.8 − 19.8 − 22.9 − 15.8 − 4.4 − 25.9 − 24.4 − 32.0 − 20.2
         Aug − 16.1 + 3.8 − 1.5 − 18.7 − 19.0 − 23.8 − 17.7 − 5.3 − 25.0 − 23.8 − 30.9 − 22.7
         Sep − 12.2 + 3.1 − 4.1 − 13.8 − 14.4 − 17.2 − 14.1 − 1.8 − 19.9 − 19.6 − 20.8 − 9.4
         Oct − 11.8 + 2.4 − 4.6 − 13.5 − 11.8 − 18.2 − 13.1 − 4.5 − 17.4 − 15.9 − 28.6 − 6.2
         Nov − 7.6 + 3.7 − 1.8 − 8.8 − 5.0 − 15.0 − 8.1 − 0.8 − 9.2 − 14.7 − 26.5 − 1.1
         Dec − 4.6 − 1.2 + 3.8 − 5.6 + 0.6 − 11.9 − 2.1 − 1.6 − 0.9 − 9.1 − 24.1 + 15.7
2010          Jan + 3.5 − 16.1 + 4.7 + 4.2 + 9.9 + 0.9 + 5.0 − 1.1 + 7.3 + 4.2 − 10.0 + 21.4
         Feb + 6.0 − 17.9 + 7.1 + 7.1 + 10.6 + 7.0 + 7.9 − 1.3 + 10.6 + 6.9 − 8.0 + 40.4
         Mar + 9.2 + 0.7 + 5.9 + 10.2 + 16.4 + 7.6 + 7.0 + 3.2 + 20.6 + 10.9 − 1.5 + 28.3
         Apr  x + 13.9 + 4.8 + 9.3 + 15.1 + 22.3 + 15.1 + 9.4 + 0.2 + 26.7 + 19.8 + 6.9 + 41.6
         May  x + 12.9 + 4.2 + 12.9 + 13.5 + 20.6 + 11.3 + 11.5 + 1.9 + 25.0 + 20.1 + 7.5 + 25.0
         June  x p + 10.9 + 3.3 + 7.5 + 11.8 + 17.0 + 10.3 + 15.0 + 2.8 + 21.7 + 20.4 + 8.1 + 19.5
Source of the unadjusted figures: Federal Statistical Office. — *For explan- duction sector in the base year 2005. — xProvisional; adjusted in advance by
atory notes, see Statistical Supplement "Seasonally adjusted business the Federal Statistical Office, by way of estimates, to the results of the
statistics", Tables II.10 to II.12. — oUsing the Census X-12-ARIMA method, Quarterly Production Survey. 
version 0.2.8. — 1Share of gross value added at factor cost of the pro-
62* X Economic conditions in Germany

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2010
 X Economic conditions in Germany
 
3 Orders received by industry *
 
 
Adjusted for working-day variations  o 
of which
of which
Industry Intermediate goods Capital goods Consumer goods Durable goods Non-durable goods
Annual Annual Annual Annual Annual Annual
percent- percent- percent- percent- percent- percent-
age age age age age age
Period 2005=100 change 2005=100 change 2005=100 change 2005=100 change 2005=100 change 2005=100 change
total  
  
2005 99.7 + 6.5 99.7 + 5.6 99.7 + 7.3 99.7 + 5.5 99.7 − 1.5 99.8 + 8.1
2006 110.7 + 11.0 113.9 + 14.2 109.4 + 9.7 105.3 + 5.6 108.4 + 8.7 104.3 + 4.5
2007 123.0 + 11.1 125.2 + 9.9 123.3 + 12.7 111.9 + 6.3 110.3 + 1.8 112.5 + 7.9
2008 115.5 − 6.1 121.2 − 3.2 112.9 − 8.4 108.1 − 3.4 103.5 − 6.2 109.7 − 2.5
2009 87.5 − 24.2 89.3 − 26.3 85.2 − 24.5 94.8 − 12.3 88.5 − 14.5 96.9 − 11.7
 
2009          June 89.7 − 26.4 91.7 − 29.5 88.2 − 25.8 90.9 − 13.0 87.7 − 18.1 91.9 − 11.3
         July 90.2 − 23.8 91.7 − 28.5 88.1 − 21.8 97.6 − 12.1 85.7 − 12.4 101.7 − 11.9
         Aug 83.9 − 24.3 87.7 − 25.7 80.1 − 24.5 93.0 − 16.2 76.0 − 20.7 98.8 − 15.0
         Sep 95.3 − 16.3 97.6 − 20.0 92.9 − 14.6 101.7 − 9.3 110.6 − 3.7 98.7 − 11.2
         Oct 92.0 − 12.6 98.1 − 14.6 86.9 − 11.8 99.2 − 9.2 100.9 − 8.8 98.5 − 9.4
         Nov 96.8 − 1.6 101.0 − 1.5 93.6 − 1.0 99.7 − 6.4 99.4 − 4.1 99.7 − 7.3
         Dec 89.5 + 4.8 87.3 + 4.8 91.4 + 6.3 87.0 − 4.0 86.9 + 5.7 87.0 − 6.9
2010          Jan 97.5 + 19.9 104.8 + 22.9 92.5 + 20.8 99.0 + 3.3 93.5 + 11.4 100.9 + 1.0
         Feb 98.5 + 24.5 103.8 + 32.7 94.6 + 22.7 100.9 + 3.1 94.1 + 19.4 103.3 − 1.0
         Mar 113.3 + 27.3 119.4 + 38.0 110.0 + 22.9 107.6 + 9.7 107.3 + 21.2 107.7 + 6.2
         Apr 106.1 + 33.0 115.7 + 40.8 101.6 + 31.8 94.3 + 7.9 99.5 + 23.6 92.6 + 3.1
         May 106.7 + 28.6 114.4 + 36.0 103.0 + 26.5 97.6 + 9.4 104.4 + 25.9 95.4 + 4.5
         June  p 115.4 + 28.7 118.6 + 29.3 115.5 + 31.0 100.6 + 10.7 106.9 + 21.9 98.5 + 7.2
from the domestic market  
  
2005 99.7 + 3.4 99.7 + 4.0 99.6 + 2.8 99.7 + 4.2 99.7 − 3.2 99.7 + 6.7
2006 109.0 + 9.3 113.3 + 13.6 106.4 + 6.8 103.3 + 3.6 111.0 + 11.3 100.9 + 1.2
2007 118.7 + 8.9 124.7 + 10.1 115.8 + 8.8 106.9 + 3.5 109.6 − 1.3 106.1 + 5.2
2008 113.1 − 4.7 121.8 − 2.3 107.5 − 7.2 103.9 − 2.8 107.1 − 2.3 102.9 − 3.0
2009 88.0 − 22.2 89.9 − 26.2 86.5 − 19.5 87.4 − 15.9 89.9 − 16.1 86.6 − 15.8
 
2009          June 87.6 − 26.8 90.9 − 30.8 85.9 − 24.3 82.0 − 18.2 85.7 − 20.6 80.8 − 17.4
         July 94.2 − 19.6 92.7 − 28.9 96.6 − 10.7 87.8 − 16.5 84.9 − 17.0 88.8 − 16.2
         Aug 86.8 − 22.5 89.6 − 26.9 84.1 − 19.0 88.8 − 17.7 81.9 − 14.2 91.1 − 18.7
         Sep 93.1 − 18.9 97.6 − 20.8 88.3 − 18.7 98.4 − 10.5 121.9 + 1.1 90.7 − 14.8
         Oct 92.7 − 13.1 101.2 − 11.8 85.8 − 14.3 90.7 − 14.0 103.7 − 9.5 86.4 − 15.7
         Nov 95.1 − 1.9 103.9 + 2.6 88.6 − 3.9 89.6 − 12.8 97.4 − 12.3 87.0 − 13.0
         Dec 84.5 + 2.1 87.5 + 7.9 82.8 − 0.6 79.4 − 9.4 82.6 − 3.6 78.3 − 11.2
2010          Jan 96.2 + 12.0 105.0 + 21.5 90.2 + 6.4 88.8 − 1.4 86.8 − 1.6 89.5 − 1.3
         Feb 94.7 + 17.5 103.3 + 32.6 88.3 + 8.5 89.5 + 0.3 86.0 + 7.5 90.6 − 1.7
         Mar 110.0 + 22.1 120.1 + 40.0 104.1 + 11.1 95.9 + 5.7 99.8 + 12.4 94.6 + 3.6
         Apr 104.2 + 28.0 118.9 + 45.0 95.7 + 18.0 82.7 + 3.0 87.7 + 9.5 81.1 + 0.9
         May 103.2 + 22.7 116.2 + 39.5 95.5 + 12.0 84.9 + 4.0 94.5 + 13.4 81.8 + 1.0
         June  p 107.9 + 23.2 120.7 + 32.8 101.1 + 17.7 85.9 + 4.8 91.2 + 6.4 84.2 + 4.2
from abroad  
  
2005 99.7 + 9.6 99.8 + 7.8 99.7 + 10.9 99.8 + 7.2 99.6 + 0.3 99.8 + 9.8
2006 112.2 + 12.5 114.6 + 14.8 111.5 + 11.8 107.5 + 7.7 105.7 + 6.1 108.1 + 8.3
2007 126.8 + 13.0 125.7 + 9.7 128.5 + 15.2 117.3 + 9.1 111.0 + 5.0 119.6 + 10.6
2008 117.6 − 7.3 120.6 − 4.1 116.6 − 9.3 112.6 − 4.0 99.9 − 10.0 117.1 − 2.1
2009 87.0 − 26.0 88.6 − 26.5 84.3 − 27.7 102.8 − 8.7 87.1 − 12.8 108.4 − 7.4
 
2009          June 91.5 − 26.0 92.6 − 28.0 89.9 − 26.7 100.4 − 7.9 89.7 − 15.5 104.2 − 5.3
         July 86.7 − 27.3 90.6 − 28.0 82.1 − 29.2 108.2 − 7.8 86.6 − 7.2 115.9 − 7.9
         Aug 81.3 − 26.0 85.5 − 24.3 77.3 − 28.2 97.5 − 14.8 70.1 − 27.1 107.2 − 11.3
         Sep 97.2 − 14.1 97.5 − 19.2 96.1 − 11.8 105.3 − 8.0 99.2 − 9.0 107.5 − 7.6
         Oct 91.3 − 12.3 94.5 − 17.8 87.6 − 10.0 108.3 − 4.2 98.1 − 7.9 111.9 − 3.1
         Nov 98.3 − 1.4 97.6 − 6.1 97.2 + 1.0 110.6 + 0.0 101.4 + 5.4 113.8 − 1.7
         Dec 93.9 + 7.1 87.0 + 1.5 97.4 + 10.8 95.2 + 1.5 91.3 + 16.0 96.6 − 2.6
2010          Jan 98.7 + 27.7 104.5 + 24.3 94.2 + 33.1 110.1 + 7.9 100.3 + 26.2 113.5 + 3.2
         Feb 101.8 + 30.8 104.4 + 33.0 99.0 + 33.8 113.3 + 5.7 102.3 + 31.8 117.3 − 0.3
         Mar 116.1 + 31.8 118.5 + 35.9 114.2 + 32.0 120.2 + 13.3 114.8 + 30.3 122.1 + 8.4
         Apr 107.8 + 37.5 112.0 + 35.8 105.8 + 42.4 106.8 + 12.3 111.5 + 37.7 105.2 + 5.0
         May 109.7 + 33.6 112.3 + 32.1 108.2 + 37.5 111.4 + 14.5 114.4 + 38.7 110.4 + 7.6
         June  p 122.0 + 33.3 116.2 + 25.5 125.7 + 39.8 116.5 + 16.0 122.7 + 36.8 114.3 + 9.7
Source of the unadjusted figures: Federal Statistical Office. — *For explana- statistics", Tables II.14 to II.16. — oUsing the Census X-12-ARIMA method,
tory notes, see Statistical Supplement "Seasonally adjusted business version 0.2.8. 
63* X Economic conditions in Germany

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
E U R O S Y S T E M
Monthly Report
August 2010
 X Economic conditions  in Germany
 
4 Orders received by construction *   
 
 
Adjusted for working-day variations  o 
Breakdown by type of construction Breakdown by client  1 
 Building    
Housing Industrial Public sector Civil Public
Total Total construction construction construction engineering Industry sector
Annual Annual Annual Annual Annual Annual Annual Annual
percent- percent- percent- percent- percent- percent- percent- percent-
age age age age age age age age
Period change change change change change change change change 2005 = 100 2005 = 100 2005 = 100 2005 = 100 2005 = 100 2005 = 100 2005 = 100 2005 = 100
2006 105.1 + 5.2 106.6 + 6.7 104.3 + 4.4 109.6 + 9.7 101.7 + 1.7 103.5 + 3.7 109.0 + 9.1 101.6 + 1.7
2007 113.9 + 8.4 112.5 + 5.5 98.5 − 5.6 123.2 + 12.4 108.5 + 6.7 115.4 + 11.5 120.7 + 10.7 113.7 + 11.9
2008 113.4 − 0.4 114.7 + 2.0 94.4 − 4.2 127.9 + 3.8 116.7 + 7.6 112.0 − 2.9 123.3 + 2.2 111.4 − 2.0
2009 107.4 − 5.3 100.7 − 12.2 94.2 − 0.2 100.7 − 21.3 115.5 − 1.0 114.4 + 2.1 104.9 − 14.9 115.5 + 3.7
 
2009          May 115.9 − 2.6 106.6 − 5.9 96.5 − 0.7 105.9 − 14.6 132.1 + 16.2 125.5 + 0.5 111.2 − 9.8 128.7 + 3.9
         June 130.0 − 4.2 110.4 − 19.7 108.3 − 2.2 104.7 − 34.1 134.5 + 6.2 150.3 + 12.3 119.2 − 17.8 150.0 + 9.7
         July 123.7 − 7.1 109.8 − 8.4 107.7 + 3.8 106.3 − 17.1 126.4 − 1.6 138.2 − 5.9 112.0 − 13.9 142.3 − 4.2
         Aug 118.4 + 2.1 110.5 − 2.5 97.4 + 3.9 116.2 − 8.0 120.8 + 5.8 126.7 + 6.6 117.3 − 6.5 128.5 + 10.7
         Sep 123.2 − 6.1 115.8 − 14.9 109.8 − 3.2 110.8 − 26.2 146.0 + 4.4 130.8 + 3.7 116.0 − 17.1 136.0 + 4.7
         Oct 109.2 + 0.0 104.1 − 5.2 103.0 + 9.7 101.7 − 12.6 114.5 − 7.7 114.5 + 5.3 109.5 − 9.4 111.4 + 6.9
         Nov 90.6 − 1.9 93.1 − 2.8 89.6 + 1.0 92.8 − 11.7 102.3 + 26.6 88.0 − 1.0 96.7 − 8.4 84.9 + 5.2
         Dec 99.0 + 5.8 99.2 − 0.5 89.1 + 12.1 97.3 − 7.7 128.2 + 1.3 98.8 + 13.3 101.8 − 5.7 100.3 + 17.9
2010          Jan 71.2 − 5.2 69.8 − 4.1 56.1 − 2.6 75.2 − 11.6 82.4 + 24.7 72.7 − 6.1 79.0 − 5.4 69.8 − 5.7
         Feb 90.9 + 18.2 87.4 + 16.7 76.2 + 8.9 88.1 + 18.3 110.2 + 26.2 94.5 + 19.6 90.6 + 16.0 97.4 + 23.8
         Mar 126.8 + 11.9 121.6 + 11.5 114.5 + 19.8 122.7 + 7.3 134.2 + 10.3 132.2 + 12.2 130.0 + 16.6 128.8 + 4.9
         Apr 114.1 + 0.5 111.4 + 9.5 113.2 + 7.6 103.8 + 5.8 132.6 + 25.7 117.0 − 7.1 107.7 + 5.8 121.0 − 6.1
         May 116.0 + 0.1 108.4 + 1.7 108.8 + 12.7 103.3 − 2.5 124.3 − 5.9 124.0 − 1.2 112.2 + 0.9 122.9 − 4.5
Source of the unadjusted figures: Federal Statistical Office. — *Values exclu- X-12-ARIMA method, version 0.2.8. — 1Excluding housing construction
sive of value-added tax; for explanatory notes, see Statistical Supplement orders. 
"Seasonally adjusted business statistics", Tables II.21. — oUsing the Census
 
 
5. Retail trade turnover, sales of motor vehicles *
 
 
Adjusted for calendar variations  o 
Retail trade
of which:  by enterprises’ main product range  1 
Construction Retail sale of
and flooring pharmaceutical Wholesale
Textiles, Information materials and medical and retail trade
clothing and household goods, cosmetic and repair of
Food, beverages, foodwear and communications appliances and toilet motor vehicles
Total tobacco  2 leather goods equipment furniture articles and motorcycles
At current At prices in
prices year 2005 At current prices
Annual Annual Annual Annual Annual Annual Annual Annual
percent- percent- percent- percent- percent- percent- percent- percent-
age age age age age age age age
change change change change change change change change
Period % % % % % % % % 2005 = 100 2005 = 100 2005 = 100 2005 = 100 2005 = 100 2005 = 100 2005 = 100 2005 = 100
2005 99.9 + 1.8 99.9 + 1.2 100.0 + 3.0 100.0 + 2.0 100.0 + 7.8 99.9 − 1.9 99.9 + 4.6 99.5 + 1.5
2006 3 101.0 + 1.1 100.3 + 0.4 100.1 + 0.1 102.4 + 2.4 102.3 + 2.3 103.4 + 3.5 102.1 + 2.2 106.8 + 7.3
2007 3 99.4 − 1.6 99.0 − 1.3 99.5 − 0.6 103.6 + 1.2 110.1 + 7.6 98.5 − 4.7 104.2 + 2.1 100.7 − 5.7
2008 101.5 + 2.1 98.9 − 0.1 100.7 + 1.2 104.7 + 1.1 116.3 + 5.6 99.7 + 1.2 107.1 + 2.8 95.8 − 4.9
2009 4 98.7 − 2.8 96.8 − 2.1 99.1 − 1.6 104.1 − 0.6 117.1 + 0.7 97.9 − 1.8 110.0 + 2.7 96.9 + 1.1
 
2009          June  4 94.1 − 3.3 91.6 − 2.7 96.7 − 1.5 95.5 + 0.1 102.3 − 3.3 94.1 − 1.7 106.2 + 2.2 105.5 + 4.2
         July 97.5 − 2.4 95.9 − 0.8 97.8 − 1.9 103.2 + 2.6 106.3 + 1.5 98.2 + 0.5 111.6 + 3.0 100.2 + 2.2
         Aug 95.0 − 4.6 93.1 − 3.5 99.3 − 0.5 93.1 − 5.9 105.8 + 0.2 94.8 − 2.0 106.4 + 3.5 89.9 + 1.9
         Sep 96.1 − 4.9 94.2 − 3.6 94.8 − 2.9 110.8 − 4.9 109.5 + 1.0 97.3 − 1.6 107.2 + 1.4 94.1 + 0.2
         Oct 103.0 − 2.4 100.8 − 1.6 99.1 − 3.6 127.5 + 7.2 124.3 + 4.0 104.6 + 0.1 112.2 + 2.2 98.1 + 0.1
         Nov 102.3 − 3.3 100.9 − 2.9 98.8 − 3.4 104.6 − 4.3 137.6 + 5.4 106.3 − 0.7 116.7 + 5.3 91.3 − 1.9
         Dec 118.8 − 1.2 117.1 − 1.7 116.4 − 0.2 131.1 + 1.5 192.3 + 6.1 106.0 − 1.2 127.4 + 2.6 80.2 − 3.4
2010          Jan 89.5 − 1.5 88.0 − 2.0 91.6 + 0.8 86.4 − 0.6 121.9 − 1.5 81.9 − 0.5 105.3 − 0.1 70.3 − 7.4
         Feb 87.1 + 0.2 85.0 − 0.2 89.5 + 0.3 77.9 − 0.8 104.5 + 2.4 83.8 + 1.5 103.4 + 3.2 74.9 − 21.7
         Mar 101.5 + 1.2 98.2 − 0.3 102.1 + 1.1 107.2 + 5.9 108.7 − 3.3 108.0 + 4.1 114.4 + 3.9 99.4 − 15.7
         Apr 99.6 − 1.2 95.7 − 2.3 98.4 − 3.6 110.0 − 2.9 98.7 + 4.7 105.7 − 0.1 110.7 + 0.6 96.8 − 11.7
         May 100.9 + 2.2 97.2 + 1.1 102.6 − 0.1 103.9 + 1.0 108.3 + 14.6 105.2 + 5.9 110.9 + 3.9 93.0 − 11.3
         June  e 95.8 + 1.8 92.6 + 1.1 96.7 + 0.0 101.6 + 6.4 110.4 + 7.9 95.4 + 1.4 107.6 + 1.3 94.5 − 10.4
Source of the unadjustded figures: Federal Statistical Office. — *Excluding in January 2006 and January 2007; statistical breaks in reporting population
value-added tax;  For explanatory notes, see Statistical Supplement "Sea- eliminated by chain-linking. — 4From January 2009 figures are provisional
sonally adjusted business statistics", Tables II.24. — oUsing the Census and particularly uncertain in recent months owing to estimates for missing
X-12-ARIMA method, version 0.2.8. — 1In stores. — 2Including stalls and reports. — eUnadjusted figures from the Federal Statistical Office estimated
markets. — 3Expansion of the reporting population to include new entities; on the basis of a new reporting group. 
64* X Economic conditions in Germany

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2010
 X Economic conditions  in Germany
 
6 Labour market * 
 
 
 
Persons in
Employment  1,r Employees  1 employment  2 Persons Unemployment  7 
employed
Mining under Persons
and employ- under-
manu- ment pro- going  vo-
factur- Short- motion cational
ing Con- time schemes further
Annual change Annual sector  3 6,7 Annual Vacan- workers  5 struction  4 training  7 
percent- change, Unemploy- cies,  7,9 
Thou- Thou- Thou- age Thou- thou- ment rate thou-
Period sands in % sands sands change Thousands sands sands 7,8  in % sands
Germany  
  
2007 39,724 + 1.7 + 650 35,288 + 1.7 5,158 714 68 43 149 3,777 − 711 9.0 423
2008 40,277 + 1.4 + 553 r 35,843 r + 1.6 5,276 706 102 40 171 3,268 − 509 7.8 389
2009 40,271 + 0.0 − 6 r 35,862 r + 0.1 5,134 705 1,143 16 216 10 3,423 10 + 155 10 8.2 301
2009          July 40,214 − 0.2 − 78 5,094 716 1,236 13 213 3,462 + 252 8.2 298
         Aug 40,271 − 0.2 − 77 r 35,925 r − 0.2 5,090 723 1,050 11 201 3,472 + 276 8.3 300
         Sep 40,554 − 0.3 − 103 5,099 726 1,074 9 218 3,346 + 266 8.0 302
         Oct 40,684 − 0.4 − 159 5,074 717 1,084 7 231 3,229 + 232 7.7 298
         Nov 40,663 − 0.3 − 136 r 36,178 r − 0.4 5,059 714 976 6 234 3,215 + 227 7.6 291
         Dec 40,490 − 0.2 − 68 5,035 701 890 5 226 3,276 + 173 7.8 281
2010          Jan 39,832 − 0.2 − 88 4,971 673 1,009 4 207 3,617 + 129 8.6 271
         Feb 39,816 − 0.3 − 100 r 35,438 r − 0.4 4,971 667 961 4 206 3,643 + 91 8.7 298
         Mar 39,920 − 0.1 − 56 4,968 11 680 830 4 211 3,568 − 18 8.5 320
         Apr 40,127 + 0.0 + 13 4,965 11 694 ... 3 215 3,406 − 178 8.1 335
         May 40,279 + 0.2 + 79 35,814 + 0.1 4,965 11 699 ... 12 312 212 3,242 − 217 13 7.7 355
         June 14 40,368 14 + 0.3 14 + 124 4,976 ... ... 12 312 208 3,153 − 257 7.5 370
         July ... ... ... ... ... ... 12 312 192 3,192 − 271 7.6 391
Western Germany    o  
  
2007 . . . . . 4,560 529 52 9 103 2,486 − 521 7.5 359
2008 . . . . . 4,651 527 80 7 118 2,145 − 341 6.4 333
2009 . . . . . 4,517 . 980 4 150 10 2,320 10 + 176 10 6.9 250
2009          July . . . . . 4,480 . 1,070 4 151 2,368 + 248 7.0 247
         Aug . . . . . 4,478 . 893 3 141 2,389 + 281 7.1 250
         Sep . . . . . 4,485 . 926 3 151 2,307 + 265 6.9 252
         Oct . . . . . 4,462 . 935 2 157 2,229 + 239 6.6 248
         Nov . . . . . 4,448 . 845 2 158 2,216 + 230 6.6 242
         Dec . . . . . 4,427 . 757 2 151 2,248 + 189 6.7 234
2010          Jan . . . . . 4,370 . 827 1 137 2,470 + 163 7.4 225
         Feb . . . . . 4,367 . 776 1 138 2,482 + 134 7.4 246
         Mar . . . . . 4,363 . 665 1 142 2,428 + 49 7.2 262
         Apr . . . . . 4,359 . ... 1 145 2,329 − 70 6.9 275
         May . . . . . 4,358 . ... 12 112 145 2,224 − 110 13 6.6 294
         June . . . . . 4,366 . ... 12 112 143 2,176 − 143 6.5 308
         July . . . . . ... . ... 12 112 133 2,209 − 159 6.6 327
Eastern Germany    +  
  
2007 . . . . . 597 185 16 33 46 1,291 − 190 15.1 63
2008 . . . . . 625 179 21 33 53 1,123 − 167 13.1 55
2009 . . . . . 617 . 152 13 66 10 1,103 10 −2 0 10 13.0 50
2009          July . . . . . 614 . 155 9 61 1,094 + 4 12.9 50
         Aug . . . . . 612 . 148 8 60 1,082 − 5 12.8 50
         Sep . . . . . 614 . 140 7 68 1,040 + 1 12.3 50
         Oct . . . . . 612 . 141 5 73 1,000 − 7 11.8 50
         Nov . . . . . 611 . 126 4 76 1,000 − 3 11.8 49
         Dec . . . . . 608 . 128 3 75 1,027 − 16 12.1 47
2010          Jan . . . . . 601 . 172 2 70 1,148 − 34 13.5 47
         Feb . . . . . 603 . 177 2 68 1,162 − 42 13.7 52
         Mar . . . . . 604 . 157 2 69 1,140 − 67 13.5 58
         Apr . . . . . 606 . ... 2 69 1,077 − 108 12.7 60
         May . . . . . 608 . ... 12 212 67 1,017 − 107 13 12.1 62
         June . . . . . 610 . ... 12 212 66 978 − 114 11.6 62
         July . . . . . ... . ... 12 212 60 983 − 111 11.6 64
Sources: Federal Statistical Office; Federal Employment Agency. — *Annual volved in structural adjustment measures (SAM). — 7Mid-month level. —
and quarterly figures: averages; annual figures: calculated by the Bundes- 8Relative to the total civilian labour force. — 9Excluding promoted jobs
bank; deviations from the official figures are due to rounding. — oExclud- and excluding seasonal jobs. — 10From May 2009, unemployed excluding
ing West Berlin. — +Including West Berlin. — 1Workplace concept; aver- persons formally on the books of private employment agencies. — 11Pro-
ages. — 2Including active proprietors; monthly figures: end of month. — visional up to adjustment to the figures of the annual overall survey. —
3Enterprises with at least 50 employees. — 4The figures refer to enter- 12Annualised data from the Federal Employment Agency based on informa-
prises from Nace Rev.2 items 41.2, 42, 43.1 and 43.9. — 5Number within a tion received so far. — 13From May 2010, calculated on the basis of new la-
given month; from January 2009, results for Germany contain data from bour force figures. — 14Initial preliminary estimate by the Federal Statis-
operational reports, which cannot be assigned to a region. — 6Employees in- tical Office. 
volved in job creation schemes; up to December 2008 including employees in-
65* X Economic conditions in Germany

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
E U R O S Y S T E M
Monthly Report
August 2010
 X Economic conditions  in Germany
 
7 Prices
 
 
 
Consumer price index HWWI
Indices of Index of World Market
of which foreign trade prices Prices  of Raw Materials  5 
Other Index of
durable producer
and non- prices of
durable industrial Index of
consumer Services Con- products producer
goods excluding prices of sold on the struction
excluding house House price domestic Other raw agricultural
Total Food Energy  1 rents  3 rents  3 index  2 market  4 Exports Imports Energy  6 products  4 materials  7 energy  1,2 
Period 2005 = 100 2000 = 100 2005 = 100 2000 = 100
Index level  
  
2005 8 100.0 100.0 100.0 100.0 100.0 100.0 100.0 8 100.0 98.8 100.0 100.0 139.5 105.4
2006 9 101.6 101.9 100.3 108.5 101.0 101.1 102.4 9 105.4 107.1 101.8 104.4 163.9 131.5
2007 10 11  103.9 105.9 101.7 112.8 103.9 102.2 109.3 106.8 118.2 103.0 105.1 166.6 143.7
2008 106.6 112.7 102.5 123.6 105.8 103.5 113.0 112.7 121.2 104.8 109.9 217.1 150.3
2009 107.0 111.2 103.9 116.9 107.4 104.6 114.4 108.0 102.6 102.5 100.5 144.5 124.3
 
2008          Sep 107.2 112.6 102.9 127.9 105.9 103.8 115.2 119.8 105.8 112.7 232.7 150.8
         Oct 107.0 112.8 103.2 124.9 105.6 103.9 115.2 115.1 105.1 109.1 180.2 133.3
         Nov 106.5 112.0 103.1 119.9 105.6 104.0 114.0 113.3 110.7 104.3 106.0 142.7 126.9
         Dec 106.8 112.7 103.0 114.8 108.3 104.0 112.4 107.7 103.1 102.2 107.3 114.6
2009          Jan 106.3 113.3 102.7 117.4 106.0 104.1 111.1 105.7 102.9 101.5 112.8 114.9
         Feb 106.9 113.3 103.4 117.4 107.1 104.3 114.4 110.5 106.5 102.9 101.3 112.1 116.2
         Mar 106.8 112.8 103.7 116.0 106.7 104.4 109.7 104.4 102.5 100.7 118.8 113.8
         Apr 106.8 112.3 103.9 116.2 106.8 104.5 108.2 103.3 102.4 99.9 125.8 120.1
         May 106.7 111.7 103.7 116.8 106.7 104.5 114.2 108.2 102.9 102.3 99.9 139.6 123.2
         June 107.1 112.1 103.9 119.1 106.9 104.6 108.1 103.7 102.4 100.3 160.7 125.8
         July 107.1 110.7 103.3 116.0 108.8 104.7 106.5 103.3 102.2 99.4 150.1 123.9
         Aug 107.3 109.5 103.8 118.2 108.7 104.8 114.4 107.0 102.1 102.5 100.7 163.2 131.3
         Sep 106.9 109.2 104.4 116.4 107.3 104.8 106.5 100.6 102.4 99.8 152.0 126.4
         Oct 107.0 109.0 104.7 116.2 107.3 104.9 106.5 100.4 102.4 100.3 161.7 127.9
         Nov 106.9 109.5 104.2 116.9 106.9 105.0 114.4 106.6 103.4 102.5 100.7 168.6 130.6
         Dec 107.8 110.4 104.5 115.9 109.5 105.1 106.5 104.6 102.7 101.2 166.6 138.0
2010          Jan 107.1 111.7 103.7 118.5 106.9 105.2 107.3 104.6 103.3 102.9 178.4 143.6
         Feb 107.5 112.0 104.1 117.5 107.7 105.3 114.5 107.3 105.7 103.7 103.9 179.5 144.5
         Mar 108.0 113.1 104.5 120.6 107.9 105.5 108.0 105.3 104.5 105.7 191.7 151.0
         Apr 107.9 114.0 104.5 122.2 106.7 105.6 108.9 106.2 105.5 107.8 206.9 172.1
         May 108.0 113.2 104.4 122.5 107.2 105.7 115.2 109.2 p 108.4 106.0 108.4 199.7 175.7
         June 108.1 113.4 104.2 122.4 107.5 105.8 109.9 p 110.6 106.4 109.4 203.4 179.3
         July 108.4 113.6 103.6 121.4 109.2 105.9 ... ... ... ... 194.0 182.5
Annual percentage change  
  
2005 8 + 1.5 − 0.2 + 0.5 + 9.8 + 0.7 + 0.9 + 1.1 8 + 4.4 − 0.9 + 0.9 + 3.4 + 37.6 + 9.4
2006 9 + 1.6 + 1.9 + 0.3 + 8.5 + 1.0 + 1.1 + 2.4 9 + 5.4 + 8.4 + 1.8 + 4.4 + 17.5 + 24.8
2007 10 11  + 2.3 + 3.9 + 1.4 + 4.0 + 2.9 + 1.1 + 6.7 + 1.3 + 10.4 + 1.2 + 0.7 + 1.6 + 9.3
2008 + 2.6 + 6.4 + 0.8 + 9.6 + 1.8 + 1.3 + 3.4 + 5.5 + 2.5 + 1.7 + 4.6 + 30.3 + 4.6
2009 + 0.4 − 1.3 + 1.4 − 5.4 + 1.5 + 1.1 + 1.2 − 4.2 − 15.3 − 2.2 − 8.6 − 33.4 − 17.3
 
2008          Sep + 2.9 + 6.4 + 1.1 + 12.2 + 1.5 + 1.3 + 7.9 − 5.4 + 2.5 + 7.0 + 31.2 + 5.5
         Oct + 2.4 + 4.3 + 1.0 + 9.8 + 1.5 + 1.3 + 7.3 − 10.9 + 1.8 + 2.8 − 3.4 − 7.4
         Nov + 1.4 + 2.1 + 0.7 + 1.4 + 1.7 + 1.3 + 3.4 + 4.7 − 15.0 + 1.1 − 0.7 − 29.4 − 7.7
         Dec + 1.1 + 2.1 + 0.8 − 0.9 + 1.8 + 1.2 + 4.0 − 17.7 + 0.0 − 4.1 − 46.2 − 17.1
2009          Jan + 0.9 + 1.1 + 0.8 − 0.8 + 1.6 + 1.1 + 2.0 − 19.3 − 0.9 − 5.6 − 43.9 − 25.0
         Feb + 1.0 + 1.2 + 1.1 − 1.2 + 1.7 + 1.2 + 2.6 + 0.9 − 19.1 − 1.2 − 6.7 − 46.8 − 28.8
         Mar + 0.5 + 0.2 + 1.2 − 4.5 + 0.9 + 1.2 − 0.5 − 20.6 − 1.7 − 7.5 − 45.1 − 29.1
         Apr + 0.7 − 0.6 + 1.3 − 5.2 + 2.5 + 1.2 − 2.7 − 18.5 − 2.0 − 9.0 − 44.1 − 23.8
         May + 0.0 − 1.2 + 1.3 − 8.0 + 1.6 + 1.1 + 1.5 − 3.6 − 18.0 − 2.7 − 10.9 − 46.1 − 22.8
         June + 0.1 − 0.9 + 1.6 − 7.9 + 1.5 + 1.1 − 4.6 − 18.0 − 2.9 − 11.7 − 42.3 − 22.7
         July − 0.5 − 2.4 + 1.5 − 11.5 + 1.6 + 1.1 − 7.8 − 18.7 − 3.6 − 13.0 − 46.4 − 22.9
         Aug + 0.0 − 3.0 + 1.6 − 7.0 + 1.6 + 1.1 + 0.4 − 6.9 − 17.7 − 3.2 − 11.4 − 35.9 − 16.0
         Sep − 0.3 − 3.0 + 1.5 − 9.0 + 1.3 + 1.0 − 7.6 − 16.0 − 3.2 − 11.4 − 34.7 − 16.2
         Oct + 0.0 − 3.4 + 1.5 − 7.0 + 1.6 + 1.0 − 7.6 − 12.8 − 2.6 − 8.1 − 10.3 − 4.1
         Nov + 0.4 − 2.2 + 1.1 − 2.5 + 1.2 + 1.0 + 0.4 − 5.9 − 6.6 − 1.7 − 5.0 + 18.1 + 2.9
         Dec + 0.9 − 2.0 + 1.5 + 1.0 + 1.1 + 1.1 − 5.2 − 2.9 − 0.4 − 1.0 + 55.3 + 20.4
2010          Jan + 0.8 − 1.4 + 1.0 + 0.9 + 0.8 + 1.1 − 3.4 − 1.0 + 0.4 + 1.4 + 58.2 + 25.0
         Feb + 0.6 − 1.1 + 0.7 + 0.1 + 0.6 + 1.0 + 0.1 − 2.9 − 0.8 + 0.8 + 2.6 + 60.1 + 24.4
         Mar + 1.1 + 0.3 + 0.8 + 4.0 + 1.1 + 1.1 − 1.5 + 0.9 + 2.0 + 5.0 + 61.4 + 32.7
         Apr + 1.0 + 1.5 + 0.6 + 5.2 − 0.1 + 1.1 + 0.6 + 2.8 + 3.0 + 7.9 + 64.5 + 43.3
         May + 1.2 + 1.3 + 0.7 + 4.9 + 0.5 + 1.1 + 0.9 + 0.9 p + 5.3 + 3.6 + 8.5 + 43.1 + 42.6
         June + 0.9 + 1.2 + 0.3 + 2.8 + 0.6 + 1.1 + 1.7 p + 6.7 + 3.9 + 9.1 + 26.6 + 42.5
         July + 1.2 + 2.6 + 0.3 + 4.7 + 0.4 + 1.1 ... ... ... ... + 29.2 + 47.3
Source: Federal Statistical Office; HWWI Index of World Market Prices. — September 2005, increase in tobacco tax. — 9From October 2006, increase
1Electricity, gas and other fuels. — 2Bundesbank calculation based on data in the prices of tobacco products. — 10From January 2007, increase in the
provided by the Federal Statistical Office. — 3Net rents. — 4Excluding standard rate of VAT and in insurance tax from 16% to 19%. —
value-added tax. — 5For the euro area, in euro. — 6Coal and crude oil. — 11 Introduction of university tuition fees in some federal states. 
7Food, beverages and tobacco as well as industrial raw materials. — 8From
66* X Economic conditions in Germany

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2010
X Economic conditions in Germany
  
8 Households’ income *
  
  
  
Gross wages and Net wages and Monetary social Saving
salaries  1 salaries  2 Mass income  4 Saving  6 ratio  7 benefits received  3 Disposable income  5 
Annual Annual Annual Annual Annual Annual
percent- percent- percent- percent- percent- percent-
age age age age age age
Period change change change change change change % € billion € billion € billion € billion € billion € billion
2002 908.2 0.7 591.9 0.3 367.7 3.9 959.6 1.7 1,402.8 1.0 139.3 6.4 9.9
2003 908.3 0.0 589.0 − 0.5 378.3 2.9 967.2 0.8 1,431.8 2.1 147.2 5.6 10.3
2004 914.6 0.7 603.3 2.4 378.2 − 0.0 981.5 1.5 1,454.5 1.6 151.4 2.9 10.4
2005 912.1 − 0.3 602.4 − 0.2 378.6 0.1 981.0 − 0.1 1,481.0 1.8 155.6 2.7 10.5
2006 926.2 1.6 604.7 0.4 378.1 − 0.1 982.8 0.2 1,516.2 2.4 160.0 2.8 10.5
2007 957.8 3.4 623.0 3.0 372.8 − 1.4 995.9 1.3 1,541.1 1.6 165.7 3.6 10.8
2008 995.8 4.0 642.7 3.2 374.4 0.4 1,017.1 2.1 1,588.2 3.1 178.5 7.7 11.2
2009 992.2 − 0.4 638.9 − 0.6 403.4 7.7 1,042.3 2.5 1,591.2 0.2 180.4 1.0 11.3
2008          Q4 275.6 3.5 176.3 2.4 93.2 0.8 269.5 1.8 402.2 1.3 40.5 6.9 10.1
2009          Q1 232.8 0.8 149.1 − 0.4 98.8 4.4 247.9 1.5 396.4 0.0 59.3 1.5 15.0
         Q2 239.8 − 0.4 151.0 − 0.7 101.6 9.0 252.5 2.9 395.9 0.5 42.0 − 0.1 10.6
         Q3 246.4 − 0.8 163.4 − 0.8 102.4 9.8 265.8 3.0 393.9 − 0.4 38.3 2.2 9.7
         Q4 273.2 − 0.9 175.5 − 0.5 100.6 7.9 276.1 2.4 404.9 0.7 40.8 0.6 10.1
2010          Q1 234.8 0.9 153.6 3.0 103.1 4.4 256.8 3.6 400.4 1.0 60.9 2.8 15.2
Source: Federal Statistical Office; figures computed in May 2010. — *House- plus monetary social benefits received. — 5Mass income plus operating
holds including non-profit institutions serving households. — 1Residence surplus, mixed income, property income (net), other current transfers
concept. — 2After deducting the wage tax payable on gross wages and received, income of non-profit institutions serving households, less taxes (ex-
salaries and employees’ contributions to the social security funds. — 3Social cluding wage tax and consumption-related taxes) and other current trans-
security benefits in cash from the social security funds, central, state and fers paid. Including the increase in claims on company pension funds. — 6In-
local government and foreign countries, pension payments (net), private cluding the increase in claims on company pension funds. — 7Saving as a
funded social benefits, less social contributions on social benefits, percentage of disposable income. 
consumption-related taxes and public charges. — 4Net wages and salaries
  
  
  
9 Pay rates (overall economy)
  
  
  
Index of negotiated wages 1 
on a monthly basis
Memo item:
Total excluding Wages and salaries
on an hourly basis Total one-off payments Basic pay rates  2 per employee  3 
Annual Annual Annual Annual Annual
Period percentage percentage percentage percentage percentage
2000 = 100 change 2000 = 100 change 2000 = 100 change 2000 = 100 change 2000 = 100 change
2002 104.7 2.6 104.5 2.6 104.5 2.2 104.4 2.2 103.2 1.3
2003 106.7 2.0 106.6 2.0 106.8 2.2 106.9 2.4 104.5 1.3
2004 107.9 1.1 108.0 1.3 108.1 1.3 108.6 1.6 105.1 0.6
2005 108.9 0.9 109.1 1.1 109.1 0.9 109.8 1.0 105.4 0.3
2006 109.9 1.0 110.5 1.2 110.0 0.8 110.7 0.9 106.4 0.9
2007 111.2 1.2 112.0 1.3 111.6 1.5 112.4 1.5 108.1 1.6
2008 114.3 2.8 115.1 2.8 114.9 3.0 115.9 3.2 110.5 2.3
2009 116.9 2.3 117.8 2.3 117.9 2.5 119.0 2.7 110.2 − 0.3
2009          Q1 108.2 3.1 109.0 3.1 108.9 2.7 117.9 2.8 104.0 0.1
         Q2 109.0 2.7 109.8 2.8 110.0 2.8 118.9 2.8 106.7 − 0.6
         Q3 119.6 2.1 120.5 2.1 120.5 2.6 119.4 2.6 109.5 − 0.4
         Q4 130.8 1.5 131.8 1.4 132.0 2.2 119.8 2.6 120.5 − 0.2
2010          Q1 110.2 1.8 111.0 1.8 111.2 2.2 120.5 2.2 105.3 1.3
         Q2 111.3 2.1 112.1 2.1 111.8 1.6 120.9 1.7 . .
2009          Dec 112.0 − 0.5 112.8 − 0.5 112.9 2.3 119.9 2.6 . .
2010          Jan 110.0 1.0 110.8 1.1 111.2 2.5 120.4 2.5 . .
         Feb 110.2 2.4 111.1 2.4 111.2 2.2 120.4 2.2 . .
         Mar 110.4 2.0 111.2 2.0 111.4 1.8 120.6 1.8 . .
         Apr 110.8 2.2 111.6 2.3 111.5 1.9 120.8 1.9 . .
         May 111.7 2.0 112.6 2.0 112.0 1.3 120.9 1.6 . .
         June 111.3 2.0 112.2 2.1 111.9 1.7 121.0 1.5 . .
1Current data are normally revised on account of additional reports. — (13 thmonthly salary payment) and retirement provisions). — 3Source:
2Excluding one-off payments and covenants (capital formation benefits, Federal Statistical Office; figures computed in May 2010. 
special payments, such as annual bonuses, holiday pay, Christmas bonuses
67*X Economic conditions in Germany

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
E U R O S Y S T E M
Monthly Report
August 2010
XI External sector
 
1 Major items of the balance of payments of the euro area *
 
 
€ million
2009 2010
Item 2007 2008 2009 Q3 Q4 Q1 Mar Apr May
Current account + 13,493 − 153,805 − 55,926 − 3,579 + 6,841 − 25,416 − 2,234 − 7,467 − 16,706A
1 Goods
Exports (fob) 1,518,025 1,580,431 1,291,213 322,518 348,757 348,735 136,559 122,873 123,975
Imports (fob) 1,470,068 1,599,530 1,250,519 308,722 328,213 345,969 130,344 119,999 123,351
Balance + 47,958 − 19,096 + 40,692 + 13,797 + 20,543 + 2,764 + 6,214 + 2,874 + 624
2 Services
Receipts 494,918 517,570 469,809 124,034 120,598 110,148 39,207 38,233 40,079
Expenditure 445,275 476,182 439,942 111,867 111,543 106,822 37,903 35,037 36,392
Balance + 49,639 + 41,388 + 29,870 + 12,167 + 9,056 + 3,326 + 1,304 + 3,197 + 3,686
3 Income + 2,931 − 76,560 − 38,237 − 6,707 − 3,055 + 3,303 + 448 − 5,807 − 15,625
4 Current transfers
Transfers from non-residents 91,023 88,467 92,868 14,329 31,727 21,031 4,195 4,109 7,543
Transfers to non-residents 178,055 188,001 181,118 37,165 51,431 55,840 14,396 11,840 12,935
Balance − 87,034 − 99,536 − 88,248 − 22,835 − 19,704 − 34,810 − 10,200 − 7,731 − 5,392
Capital account + 5,015 + 9,765 + 6,186 + 1,419 + 1,161 + 2,556 + 148 − 198 + 1,964B
Financial account (net capital exports: − − 10,669 + 163,207 + 42,976 − 12,621 − 6,173 + 24,427 + 778 + 8,620 + 17,791C)
1 Direct investment − 73,696 − 198,689 − 78,940 − 23,713 + 9,027 − 34,948 − 26,480 − 11,416 − 17,213
By resident units abroad − 476,544 − 323,796 − 289,844 − 61,954 − 38,267 − 40,417 − 30,588 − 15,728 − 14,281
By non-resident units in the euro area + 402,850 + 125,111 + 210,905 + 38,242 + 47,294 + 5,470 + 4,108 + 4,312 − 2,932
2 Portfolio investment + 151,493 + 344,074 + 308,697 + 78,154 + 53,899 + 22,383 − 1,354 + 32,278 + 63,867
By resident units abroad − 438,456 + 10,201 − 68,227 − 45,568 − 32,036 − 64,881 − 25,240 − 17,282 + 12,259
Equity − 64,685 + 103,949 − 45,126 − 39,551 − 34,350 − 34,539 − 18,376 − 6,422 + 14,569
Bonds and notes − 290,454 − 96,736 − 24,327 − 27,392 − 20,078 − 51,708 − 33,481 − 14,292 + 1,956
Money market instruments − 83,318 + 2,986 + 1,225 + 21,375 + 22,392 + 21,365 + 26,617 + 3,433 − 4,265
By non-resident units in the euro area + 589,949 + 333,873 + 376,925 + 123,724 + 85,934 + 87,264 + 23,886 + 49,559 + 51,608
Equity + 167,969 − 107,113 + 123,708 + 89,453 + 34,236 + 4,902 − 63 − 3,908 + 7,150
Bonds and notes + 362,509 + 236,328 + 119,069 − 19,242 + 27,343 + 72,200 + 31,090 + 49,705 + 37,388
Money market instruments + 59,468 + 204,657 + 134,148 + 53,512 + 24,356 + 10,162 − 7,141 + 3,763 + 7,069
3 Financial derivatives − 63,743 − 62,476 + 42,064 − 4,528 + 7,937 + 1,839 − 1,013 + 324 − 2,166
4 Other investment − 19,637 + 83,677 − 233,318 − 62,863 − 76,947 + 39,790 + 32,118 − 12,530 − 26,601
Eurosystem + 67,582 + 290,011 − 225,866 − 36,784 − 18,782 + 1,753 − 1,492 + 817 + 13,435
General government + 6,835 + 16,413 − 16,510 + 720 − 10,615 + 13,065 + 1,973 − 3,887 + 6,478
MFIs (excluding the Eurosystem) + 78,364 − 130,518 + 60,237 + 4,109 − 76,626 + 44,894 + 20,136 + 19,660 − 39,464
Long-term − 112,471 − 227,007 − 27,855 + 7,576 + 16,438 + 1,801 + 6,009 + 13,167 − 12,817
Short-term + 190,835 + 96,490 + 88,094 − 3,467 − 93,063 + 43,092 + 14,127 + 6,494 − 26,647
Other sectors − 172,415 − 92,229 − 51,179 − 30,909 + 29,074 − 19,922 + 11,501 − 29,121 − 7,051
5 Reserve assets (Increase: −) − 5,087 − 3,381 + 4,473 + 328 − 88 − 4,637 − 2,494 − 36 − 96
Errors and omissions − 7,839 − 19,169 + 6,761 + 14,781 − 1,830 − 1,567 + 1,308 − 954 − 3,050D
* Source: European Central Bank.  
  
68*XI External sector

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2010
XI External sector
 
2 Major items of the balance of payments of the Federal Republic of Germany
(balances)
 
 
Current account Financial account Capital trans-
fers and
of which acquisition/
disposal of Change in
Supple- non- reserve assets
Balance mentary produced at trans- Errors
on current Foreign trade Current action and non-financial
Period account trade  1 items  2 Services  3 Income transfers assets Total  4 value  5 Omissions
DM million
1996 − 21,086 + 98,538 − 4,941 − 64,743 + 1,052 − 50,991 − 3,283 + 24,290 + 1,882 + 79
1997 − 17,336 + 116,467 − 7,875 − 68,692 − 4,740 − 52,496 + 52 + 6,671 + 6,640 + 10,613
1998 − 28,696 + 126,970 − 8,917 − 75,053 − 18,635 − 53,061 + 1,289 + 25,683 − 7,128 + 1,724
1999 − 49,241 + 127,542 − 15,947 − 90,036 − 22,325 − 48,475 − 301 − 20,332 + 24,517 + 69,874
2000 − 68,913 + 115,645 − 17,742 − 95,848 − 16,302 − 54,666 + 13,345 + 66,863 + 11,429 − 11,294
2001 + 830 + 186,771 − 14,512 − 97,521 − 21,382 − 52,526 − 756 − 23,068 + 11,797 + 22,994
€ million
1999 − 25,177 + 65,211 − 8,153 − 46,035 − 11,415 − 24,785 − 154 − 10,396 + 12,535 + 35,726
2000 − 35,235 + 59,128 − 9,071 − 49,006 − 8,335 − 27,950 + 6,823 + 34,187 + 5,844 − 5,775
2001 + 424 + 95,495 − 7,420 − 49,862 − 10,932 − 26,856 − 387 − 11,794 + 6,032 + 11,757
2002 + 42,973 + 132,788 − 8,552 − 35,728 − 18,019 − 27,517 − 212 − 38,448 + 2,065 − 4,313
2003 + 40,917 + 129,921 − 11,148 − 34,506 − 15,067 − 28,283 + 311 − 61,758 + 445 + 20,529
2004 + 102,833 + 156,096 − 16,470 − 29,375 + 20,431 − 27,849 + 435 − 122,984 + 1,470 + 19,717
2005 + 114,630 + 158,179 − 14,057 − 25,677 + 24,896 − 28,712 − 1,369 − 129,635 + 2,182 + 16,374
2006 + 150,106 + 159,048 − 12,888 − 13,740 + 44,893 − 27,206 − 258 − 174,133 + 2,934 + 24,285
2007 + 185,137 + 195,348 − 9,907 − 11,603 + 43,506 − 32,206 + 110 − 219,502 − 953 + 34,254
2008 + 166,963 + 178,297 − 12,618 − 7,031 + 42,617 − 34,303 − 209 − 197,330 − 2,008 + 30,576
2009 + 119,000 + 136,081 − 9,225 − 9,662 + 33,797 − 31,991 − 186 − 130,559 + 3,200 + 11,746
2007          Q3 + 41,438 + 50,181 − 2,718 − 9,013 + 12,382 − 9,393 + 299 − 24,575 − 347 − 17,162
         Q4 + 55,775 + 48,745 − 2,182 + 502 + 15,175 − 6,466 − 687 − 73,457 + 653 + 18,369
2008          Q1 + 48,581 + 50,934 − 3,561 + 77 + 13,387 − 12,255 + 502 − 64,083 − 1,165 + 15,000
         Q2 + 43,797 + 53,167 − 2,818 − 2,425 + 1,470 − 5,597 + 245 − 61,132 − 889 + 17,090
         Q3 + 35,091 + 40,225 − 2,873 − 6,331 + 13,301 − 9,231 − 299 − 18,169 + 1,630 − 16,623
         Q4 + 39,494 + 33,972 − 3,365 + 1,649 + 14,458 − 7,219 − 658 − 53,946 − 1,584 + 15,109
2009          Q1 + 22,576 + 27,506 − 2,711 − 1,253 + 11,949 − 12,916 + 25 + 4,239 + 321 − 26,841
         Q2 + 23,762 + 31,686 − 2,048 − 2,261 − 93 − 3,522 + 290 − 45,176 + 41 + 21,124
         Q3 + 25,329 + 32,816 − 2,291 − 7,752 + 10,714 − 8,159 − 42 − 14,521 + 2,269 − 10,766
         Q4 + 47,332 + 44,073 − 2,176 + 1,604 + 11,226 − 7,395 − 459 − 75,101 + 569 + 28,228
2010          Q1 + 31,726 + 37,592 − 2,458 − 1,467 + 11,475 − 13,416 + 293 − 15,402 − 651 − 16,617
         Q2  p + 26,086 + 36,985 − 3,020 − 2,496 + 662 − 6,044 − 435 − 16,390 − 801 − 9,261
2008          Jan + 14,847 + 17,063 − 1,081 − 672 + 3,458 − 3,920 + 438 − 4,667 − 311 − 10,618
         Feb + 16,196 + 17,103 − 1,528 + 817 + 4,920 − 5,117 + 214 − 29,183 − 349 + 12,773
         Mar + 17,538 + 16,768 − 952 − 68 + 5,010 − 3,219 − 150 − 30,233 − 504 + 12,845
         Apr + 15,765 + 19,035 − 918 + 44 − 287 − 2,109 − 140 − 11,569 − 1,089 − 4,056
         May + 8,741 + 14,371 − 1,040 − 1,827 − 2,228 − 535 + 406 − 26,656 + 913 + 17,509
         June + 19,291 + 19,761 − 860 − 642 + 3,985 − 2,953 − 21 − 22,907 − 713 + 3,637
         July + 11,269 + 14,139 − 919 − 3,006 + 4,066 − 3,011 − 127 + 1,300 + 1,225 − 12,442
         Aug + 8,075 + 10,813 − 1,082 − 2,647 + 4,356 − 3,365 − 50 − 7,407 − 82 − 618
         Sep + 15,747 + 15,273 − 873 − 677 + 4,878 − 2,854 − 122 − 12,062 + 487 − 3,563
         Oct + 14,379 + 16,666 − 1,008 − 1,836 + 4,696 − 4,139 − 201 − 22,465 − 3,373 + 8,286
         Nov + 9,800 + 9,967 − 1,737 + 578 + 4,833 − 3,841 − 85 − 10,041 − 269 + 326
         Dec + 15,315 + 7,339 − 621 + 2,907 + 4,930 + 761 − 371 − 21,441 + 2,058 + 6,497
2009          Jan + 3,186 + 7,083 − 955 − 2,121 + 3,348 − 4,170 − 52 + 22,528 + 2,245 − 25,662
         Feb + 7,082 + 8,873 − 901 + 248 + 4,008 − 5,147 − 86 − 435 − 271 − 6,561
         Mar + 12,309 + 11,550 − 855 + 620 + 4,593 − 3,599 + 163 − 17,854 − 1,652 + 5,382
         Apr + 6,190 + 9,657 − 538 + 480 − 553 − 2,856 + 314 − 8,857 − 590 + 2,353
         May + 4,746 + 9,688 − 781 − 56 − 3,221 − 883 + 99 − 7,034 + 342 + 2,188
         June + 12,826 + 12,341 − 728 − 2,686 + 3,681 + 217 − 123 − 29,286 + 288 + 16,583
         July + 10,619 + 14,309 − 991 − 3,687 + 3,536 − 2,548 − 56 + 1,278 − 92 − 11,841
         Aug + 5,122 + 8,069 − 731 − 2,803 + 3,556 − 2,969 − 10 − 5,946 + 743 + 833
         Sep + 9,588 + 10,438 − 569 − 1,262 + 3,622 − 2,642 + 24 − 9,854 + 1,618 + 242
         Oct + 10,726 + 13,447 − 247 − 1,422 + 3,846 − 4,898 − 235 − 21,947 − 651 + 11,457
         Nov + 16,448 + 17,191 − 1,197 + 493 + 3,805 − 3,844 + 89 − 22,585 + 1,522 + 6,048
         Dec + 20,158 + 13,435 − 733 + 2,532 + 3,576 + 1,348 − 313 − 30,569 − 302 + 10,723
2010          Jan + 4,398 + 8,014 − 882 − 1,885 + 3,504 − 4,353 + 82 + 19,651 − 55 − 24,131
         Feb + 9,261 + 12,654 − 316 − 407 + 3,657 − 6,328 + 432 − 14,925 − 782 + 5,232
         Mar + 18,067 + 16,923 − 1,260 + 825 + 4,314 − 2,735 − 220 − 20,128 + 187 + 2,281
         Apr + 11,309 + 13,099 − 855 + 275 + 825 − 2,034 − 197 − 9,585 − 116 − 1,527
         May + 1,831 + 9,775 − 1,277 − 1,685 − 3,464 − 1,519 − 50 − 10,773 − 671 + 8,992
         June  p + 12,946 + 14,110 − 888 − 1,085 + 3,301 − 2,491 − 188 + 3,968 − 14 − 16,726
1Special trade according to the official foreign trade statistics: imports cif, the account of residents and deduction of goods returned. — 3Excluding
exports fob. From January 2007 onwards, excluding supplies of goods the expenditure on freight and insurance included in the cif import
for/after repair/maintenance, which, up to December 2006, were deducted figure. — 4Financial account balance including change in reserve assets.
via supplementary trade items. — 2Inter alia warehouse transactions for Capital exports: − . — 5 Increase: − . 
69*XI External sector

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
E U R O S Y S T E M
Monthly Report
August 2010
XI External sector
 
3 Foreign trade (special trade) of the Federal Republic of Germany,
by country and group of countries *
 
 € million
 2010
Country / group of countries  2007  2008  2009 Jan Feb Mar Apr May Jun  p 
All countries  1 Exports 965,236 984,140 803,476 63,823 70,028 85,625 74,976 77,441 86,461
Imports 769,887 805,842 667,395 55,809 57,373 68,701 61,877 67,665 72,351
Balance + 195,348 + 178,297 + 136,081 + 8,014 + 12,654 + 16,923 + 13,099 + 9,775 + 14,110
I Exports 726,518 733,092 593,030 47,017 50,287 60,435 53,455 55,027 ...European countries
Imports 541,650 567,062 475,403 38,248 41,111 47,302 42,724 47,131 ...
Balance + 184,867 + 166,031 + 117,627 + 8,769 + 9,176 + 13,132 + 10,731 + 7,896 ...
Exports 623,837 622,637 508,395 40,735 43,088 51,392 45,008 47,058 ... 1 EU member states (27)
Imports 449,691 460,887 392,637 31,453 34,214 38,643 34,839 38,428 ...
Balance + 174,147 + 161,750 + 115,758 + 9,282 + 8,874 + 12,750 + 10,168 + 8,630 ...
Euro-area (16) Exports 421,570 419,597 347,943 27,899 29,590 35,195 30,766 32,127 ...
countries Imports 307,188 315,052 268,205 21,425 23,252 26,079 23,917 26,010 ...
Balance + 114,383 + 104,545 + 79,738 + 6,474 + 6,338 + 9,116 + 6,849 + 6,117 ...
of which
Austria Exports 52,813 54,689 48,235 3,702 3,877 4,719 4,177 4,490 ...
Imports 32,091 33,180 29,084 2,257 2,440 2,865 2,644 2,918 ...
Balance + 20,722 + 21,509 + 19,151 + 1,445 + 1,437 + 1,853 + 1,532 + 1,572 ...
Belgium and Exports 55,397 55,230 46,808 3,738 4,109 4,955 4,204 4,389 ...
Luxembourg Imports 39,455 39,959 32,092 2,490 2,617 3,094 2,777 3,116 ...
Balance + 15,942 + 15,271 + 14,717 + 1,248 + 1,492 + 1,861 + 1,426 + 1,273 ...
France Exports 91,665 93,718 81,941 6,781 7,056 8,010 7,362 7,292 ...
Imports 62,873 63,369 54,559 4,629 4,728 5,044 4,738 4,947 ...
Balance + 28,792 + 30,349 + 27,382 + 2,153 + 2,328 + 2,966 + 2,623 + 2,346 ...
Italy Exports 64,499 62,015 51,050 4,093 4,348 5,080 4,563 4,766 ...
Imports 44,694 46,842 39,684 2,848 3,219 3,741 3,481 3,990 ...
Balance + 19,805 + 15,173 + 11,367 + 1,245 + 1,128 + 1,339 + 1,082 + 775 ...
Netherlands Exports 62,948 65,799 54,142 4,313 4,629 5,726 4,706 5,171 ...
Imports 61,951 67,971 58,044 4,816 5,297 6,110 5,251 5,749 ...
Balance + 997 − 2,172 − 3,902 − 503 − 668 − 384 − 545 − 579 ...
Spain Exports 47,631 42,676 31,296 2,610 2,706 3,252 2,898 2,850 ...
Imports 20,687 20,701 19,257 1,592 1,858 1,929 1,915 1,964 ...
Balance + 26,944 + 21,975 + 12,040 + 1,018 + 848 + 1,323 + 983 + 887 ...
Other EU member Exports 202,267 203,040 160,451 12,836 13,498 16,197 14,241 14,931 ...
states Imports 142,503 145,836 124,432 10,028 10,963 12,564 10,922 12,418 ...
Balance + 59,764 + 57,204 + 36,020 + 2,808 + 2,536 + 3,633 + 3,319 + 2,513 ...
of which
United Exports 69,760 64,175 53,156 4,447 4,611 5,289 4,573 4,490 ...
Kingdom Imports 41,966 41,646 33,174 2,679 2,916 3,252 2,781 3,144 ...
Balance + 27,794 + 22,529 + 19,982 + 1,768 + 1,695 + 2,037 + 1,792 + 1,345 ...
Exports 102,680 110,455 84,636 6,282 7,199 9,042 8,447 7,969 ... 2 Other European
Imports 91,960 106,174 82,766 6,795 6,897 8,660 7,885 8,703 ... countries
Balance + 10,721 + 4,281 + 1,869 − 513 + 302 + 382 + 563 − 733 ...
of which
Switzerland Exports 36,373 39,027 35,324 2,865 3,126 3,818 3,437 3,186 ...
Imports 29,822 31,299 28,071 2,280 2,244 2,923 2,582 3,023 ...
Balance + 6,551 + 7,728 + 7,252 + 585 + 882 + 895 + 855 + 163 ...
II Exports 237,139 249,199 213,841 16,797 19,724 25,171 21,507 22,394 ...Non-European
Imports 227,569 238,050 197,924 17,560 16,260 21,396 19,151 20,533 ... countries
Balance + 9,570 + 11,150 + 15,917 − 763 + 3,464 + 3,776 + 2,356 + 1,860 ...
Exports 17,575 19,636 17,200 1,286 1,518 1,868 1,609 1,627 ... 1 Africa
Imports 16,457 20,661 14,211 1,246 1,080 1,288 1,760 1,414 ...
Balance + 1,118 − 1,024 + 2,990 + 41 + 438 + 580 − 152 + 213 ...
Exports 100,769 101,866 77,903 5,804 6,811 9,317 7,993 8,171 ... 2 America
Imports 71,276 73,884 60,909 5,221 4,544 6,024 5,395 5,589 ...
Balance + 29,493 + 27,982 + 16,993 + 583 + 2,266 + 3,293 + 2,599 + 2,582 ...
of which
Exports 73,327 71,428 53,835 3,839 4,459 6,347 5,141 5,183 ... United States
Imports 45,993 46,464 39,915 3,352 2,870 3,821 3,457 3,519 ...
Balance + 27,334 + 24,965 + 13,920 + 487 + 1,588 + 2,526 + 1,684 + 1,665 ...
Exports 111,691 120,102 111,653 9,142 10,679 13,190 11,211 11,888 ... 3 Asia
Imports 136,411 140,585 120,096 10,932 10,436 13,889 11,758 13,243 ...
Balance − 24,721 − 20,483 − 8,443 − 1,790 + 242 − 699 − 548 − 1,355 ...
of which
Middle East Exports 23,709 27,498 23,334 1,714 2,033 2,341 1,997 2,206 ...
Imports 6,444 7,943 5,492 448 458 383 412 594 ...
Balance + 17,265 + 19,555 + 17,841 + 1,266 + 1,576 + 1,957 + 1,585 + 1,612 ...
Japan Exports 13,022 12,732 10,787 1,005 977 1,172 992 1,001 ...
Imports 24,381 23,130 18,116 1,556 1,424 2,166 1,676 1,735 ...
Balance − 11,359 − 10,398 − 7,329 − 551 − 447 − 994 − 684 − 735 ...
Exports 29,902 34,065 36,460 3,121 4,010 4,896 4,123 4,396 ... People‘s Republic
Imports 56,417 60,825 55,447 5,011 4,817 6,612 5,206 6,158 ... of China  2 
Balance − 26,515 − 26,760 − 18,988 − 1,890 − 807 − 1,716 − 1,082 − 1,762 ...
Exports 32,284 32,572 28,309 2,395 2,623 3,469 2,935 3,084 ... Emerging markets
Imports 35,357 33,152 27,756 2,817 2,435 3,309 3,192 3,318 ... in South-East Asia  3 
Balance − 3,073 − 580 + 553 − 423 + 188 + 160 − 257 − 234 ...
Exports 7,104 7,595 7,085 564 717 796 695 708 ... 4 Oceania and
Imports 3,425 2,920 2,707 162 199 195 238 288 ... polar regions
Balance + 3,679 + 4,674 + 4,378 + 403 + 517 + 602 + 457 + 420 ...
 
*Source: Federal Statistical Office. Exports (fob) by country of destination, region. Excluding repair and maintenance operations from January 200 7 on-
imports (cif) by country of origin. Individual countries and groups of wards. — 2Excluding Hong Kong. — 3Brunei Darussalam, Hong Kong, Indo-
countries according to the current position. — 1Including fuel and other nesia, Malaysia, Philippines, Republic of Korea, Singapore, Taiwan and
supplies for ships and aircraft and other data not classifiable by Thailand. 
70*XI External sector

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2010
XI External sector
 
4 Services and income of the Federal Republic of Germany
(balances)
 
€ million
Services
Other services
of which
 
Patents Compen- Services  of Construction
Trans- Financial and sation of Investment Government self-employed and  assembly
Period Total Travel  1 services licences Total income portation  2 services  3 persons  4 work,  repairs employees  5 
2005 − 25,677 − 36,317 + 6,379 + 1,622 − 1,203 + 3,688 + 153 − 1,638 + 3,086 − 1,285 + 26,182
2006 − 13,740 − 32,771 + 5,723 + 2,232 − 1,895 + 3,736 + 9,235 − 1,790 + 3,980 − 773 + 45,666
2007 − 11,603 − 34,324 + 6,770 + 2,886 − 2,192 + 3,309 + 11,947 − 1,977 + 3,089 + 342 + 43,163
2008 − 7,031 − 34,644 + 8,312 + 4,067 − 1,715 + 2,351 + 14,598 − 1,583 + 3,059 + 523 + 42,094
2009 − 9,662 − 33,299 + 6,877 + 3,941 − 357 + 2,315 + 10,861 − 1,164 + 2,165 − 344 + 34,142
2008          Q4 + 1,649 − 5,221 + 2,197 + 1,600 − 183 + 542 + 2,713 − 501 + 748 + 189 + 14,269
2009          Q1 − 1,253 − 5,410 + 2,260 + 921 − 994 + 615 + 1,355 − 342 + 311 + 677 + 11,273
         Q2 − 2,261 − 8,308 + 1,855 + 697 − 343 + 644 + 3,193 − 254 + 467 + 269 − 362
         Q3 − 7,752 − 13,821 + 1,325 + 732 + 103 + 577 + 3,332 − 276 + 585 − 720 + 11,435
         Q4 + 1,604 − 5,760 + 1,437 + 1,591 + 877 + 478 + 2,981 − 291 + 802 − 570 + 11,796
2010          Q1 − 1,467 − 5,465 + 1,399 + 905 + 1 + 585 + 1,109 − 237 + 457 + 812 + 10,663
         Q2 − 2,496 − 8,269 + 1,994 + 716 + 229 + 600 + 2,235 − 269 + 570 + 366 + 296
2009          Aug − 2,803 − 4,870 + 416 + 254 + 249 + 210 + 937 − 95 + 136 − 237 + 3,793
         Sep − 1,262 − 3,924 + 385 + 211 − 30 + 203 + 1,893 − 73 + 145 − 236 + 3,858
         Oct − 1,422 − 3,872 + 466 + 373 − 80 + 154 + 1,537 − 67 + 374 − 224 + 4,069
         Nov + 493 − 1,430 + 517 + 314 + 368 + 183 + 541 − 102 + 153 − 215 + 4,020
         Dec + 2,532 − 457 + 454 + 904 + 588 + 141 + 903 − 121 + 275 − 132 + 3,707
2010          Jan − 1,885 − 1,872 + 361 + 303 − 560 + 154 − 271 − 81 + 136 + 250 + 3,255
         Feb − 407 − 1,597 + 475 + 289 + 397 + 213 − 184 − 70 + 111 + 270 + 3,387
         Mar + 825 − 1,997 + 563 + 314 + 164 + 218 + 1,563 − 86 + 209 + 292 + 4,022
         Apr + 275 − 1,999 + 660 + 414 + 381 + 182 + 636 − 79 + 176 + 112 + 712
         May − 1,685 − 2,946 + 637 + 117 + 44 + 231 + 233 − 80 + 57 + 134 − 3,598
         June − 1,085 − 3,325 + 697 + 184 − 195 + 187 + 1,366 − 110 + 338 + 120 + 3,181
1From January 2001, figures subject to significant uncertainty. — 2Ex- vices supplied. — 4Engineering and other technical services, research and
cluding the expenditure on freight included in the cif import figure. — development, commercial services, etc. — 5 Wages and salaries. 
3Including the receipts from foreign military agencies for goods and ser-
5 Current transfers of the Federal Republic of Germany 6 Capital transfers
(balances) (balances)
€ million € million
Public  1 Private  1 
International
organisations  2 
 
of which Other Other
European current Workers’ current
Period Total Total Total Communities Total remittances transfers Total  4 Public  1 Private  1 transfers  3 
2005 − 28,712 − 17,588 − 16,264 − 14,687 − 1,324 − 11,124 − 2,926 − 8,198 − 1,369 − 3,419 + 2,050
2006 − 27,206 − 14,496 − 14,902 − 13,348 + 406 − 12,710 − 2,927 − 9,783 − 258 − 1,947 + 1,689
2007 − 32,206 − 16,752 − 18,659 − 16,876 + 1,908 − 15,454 − 2,997 − 12,458 + 110 − 2,034 + 2,145
2008 − 34,303 − 17,907 − 19,611 − 17,536 + 1,704 − 16,395 − 3,079 − 13,316 − 209 − 1,857 + 1,648
2009 − 31,991 − 17,750 − 17,921 − 15,581 + 171 − 14,241 − 2,995 − 11,247 − 186 − 1,645 + 1,459
2008          Q4 − 7,219 − 3,034 − 2,045 − 1,582 − 989 − 4,185 − 770 − 3,415 − 658 − 792 + 134
2009          Q1 − 12,916 − 9,286 − 8,689 − 7,827 − 597 − 3,629 − 749 − 2,881 + 25 − 407 + 432
         Q2 − 3,522 + 351 − 2,109 − 1,630 + 2,460 − 3,873 − 749 − 3,124 + 290 − 303 + 592
         Q3 − 8,159 − 5,019 − 4,288 − 3,766 − 731 − 3,140 − 749 − 2,392 − 42 − 360 + 318
         Q4 − 7,395 − 3,796 − 2,834 − 2,358 − 962 − 3,599 − 749 − 2,850 − 459 − 576 + 117
2010          Q1 − 13,416 − 9,954 − 8,959 − 8,268 − 994 − 3,463 − 759 − 2,704 + 293 − 376 + 669
         Q2 − 6,044 − 2,275 − 4,169 − 3,763 + 1,894 − 3,769 − 759 − 3,011 − 435 − 395 − 40
2009          Aug − 2,969 − 2,040 − 1,716 − 1,538 − 324 − 930 − 250 − 680 − 10 − 100 + 91
         Sep − 2,642 − 1,657 − 1,462 − 1,356 − 194 − 985 − 250 − 735 + 24 − 142 + 166
         Oct − 4,898 − 3,974 − 3,557 − 3,350 − 418 − 924 − 250 − 674 − 235 − 148 − 88
         Nov − 3,844 − 2,517 − 2,077 − 1,991 − 441 − 1,327 − 250 − 1,077 + 89 − 198 + 287
         Dec + 1,348 + 2,696 + 2,799 + 2,982 − 103 − 1,348 − 250 − 1,098 − 313 − 230 − 83
2010          Jan − 4,353 − 3,179 − 2,952 − 2,716 − 227 − 1,175 − 253 − 922 + 82 − 112 + 193
         Feb − 6,328 − 5,137 − 4,696 − 4,358 − 442 − 1,191 − 253 − 938 + 432 − 108 + 540
         Mar − 2,735 − 1,638 − 1,312 − 1,194 − 326 − 1,097 − 253 − 844 − 220 − 156 − 64
         Apr − 2,034 − 711 − 1,349 − 1,166 + 638 − 1,324 − 253 − 1,071 − 197 − 115 − 82
         May − 1,519 − 284 − 1,642 − 1,589 + 1,358 − 1,234 − 253 − 982 − 50 − 124 + 74
         June − 2,491 − 1,280 − 1,178 − 1,008 − 103 − 1,211 − 253 − 958 − 188 − 156 − 32
1The classification of “public” and “private” transfers depends on the (excluding capital transfers). — 3Payments to developing countries, pension
sector to which the participating domestic body belongs. — 2Current contri- payments, tax revenue and refunds, etc. — 4Where identifiable; in
butions to the budgets of international organisations and to the EU budget particular, debt forgiveness. 
71*XI External sector

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
E U R O S Y S T E M
Monthly Report
August 2010
XI External sector
 
7 Financial account of the Federal Republic of Germany
 
 
€ million
2009 2010
Item 2007 2008 2009 Q3 Q4 Q1 Q2 Apr May June
I Net German investment abroad
(Increase/capital exports: −) − 687,629 − 233,154 + 9,612 + 40,831 − 22,687 − 73,008 − 109,857 − 78,288 − 104,872 + 73,302
1 Direct investment  1 − 118,723 − 91,882 − 45,138 − 17,247 + 1,855 − 34,144 − 26,860 − 81 − 9,833 − 16,946
Equity capital − 43,692 − 61,067 − 47,617 − 14,892 + 2,563 − 16,335 − 5,672 − 1,946 − 1,003 − 2,722
Reinvested earnings  2 − 30,853 − 11,852 − 14,431 − 5,584 − 4,649 − 5,303 − 2,266 − 1,526 − 5 − 734
Other capital transactions
of German direct investors − 44,178 − 18,964 + 16,910 + 3,228 + 3,941 − 12,507 − 18,923 + 3,392 − 8,825 − 13,490
2 Portfolio investment − 148,706 + 24,956 − 72,571 − 18,369 − 17,979 − 22,086 − 3,594 + 2,884 − 362 − 6,117
Shares 3 + 21,141 + 39,598 − 2,208 − 253 − 771 + 3,584 − 3,652 + 3,744 − 2,410 − 4,986
Mutual fund shares  4 − 42,259 − 8,425 + 608 − 865 + 2,995 − 7,786 − 3,115 − 2,678 + 2,195 − 2,633
Bonds and notes  5 − 101,167 − 23,905 − 83,507 − 19,949 − 21,596 − 18,862 − 190 + 885 + 1,130 − 2,204
Money market instruments − 26,422 + 17,688 + 12,536 + 2,698 + 1,393 + 978 + 3,362 + 933 − 1,277 + 3,706
3 Financial derivatives  6 − 85,170 − 25,449 + 20,415 − 5,902 − 377 − 4,081 − 6,445 − 2,588 − 3,804 − 53
4 Other investment − 334,077 − 138,770 + 103,706 + 80,081 − 6,755 − 12,047 − 72,157 − 78,387 − 90,201 + 96,431
MFIs  7,8 − 226,871 − 71,875 + 176,593 + 71,065 − 772 + 23,638 − 23,038 − 60,037 − 46,546 + 83,546
Long-term − 98,835 − 142,257 + 25,819 + 18,219 + 23,670 + 11,601 + 10,160 + 2,566 − 2,621 + 10,215
Short-term − 128,036 + 70,382 + 150,774 + 52,846 − 24,442 + 12,037 − 33,198 − 62,603 − 43,925 + 73,331
Enterprises and households − 49,908 − 25,105 − 13,625 + 2,839 − 5,636 − 4,828 − 13,337 − 16,202 + 469 + 2,397
Long-term − 47,586 − 22,745 − 16,747 − 11,394 − 5,611 − 8,307 − 6,370 − 7,924 − 1,440 + 2,994
Short-term  7 − 2,321 − 2,360 + 3,122 + 14,232 − 24 + 3,479 − 6,966 − 8,278 + 1,909 − 597
General government + 8,426 + 2,809 + 2,005 + 14,159 − 1,446 − 1,677 + 6,217 + 4,112 − 2,336 + 4,441
Long-term + 309 − 325 − 652 − 43 + 130 − 519 + 18 − 42 − 45 + 106
Short-term  7 + 8,117 + 3,135 + 2,657 + 14,203 − 1,577 − 1,158 + 6,199 + 4,154 − 2,291 + 4,335
Bundesbank − 65,724 − 44,600 − 61,267 − 7,982 + 1,099 − 29,181 − 42,000 − 6,260 − 41,788 + 6,048
5 Change in reserve assets at
transaction values (Increase:-) − 953 − 2,008 + 3,200 + 2,269 + 569 − 651 − 801 − 116 − 671 − 14
II Net foreign investment in Germany
(Increase/capital imports: +) + 468,128 + 35,823 − 140,172 − 55,353 − 52,414 + 57,607 + 93,467 + 68,703 + 94,099 − 69,335
1 Direct investment  1 + 55,925 + 18,081 + 28,187 + 6,782 + 8,194 + 6,631 + 4,243 − 1,513 + 4,143 + 1,612
Equity capital + 39,980 + 17,536 + 8,976 + 2,310 + 2,402 − 253 + 180 + 266 + 176 − 262
Reinvested earnings  2 + 5,487 − 1,802 + 2,322 + 481 − 5 + 3,844 − 1,213 + 537 − 2,549 + 799
Other capital transactions
of foreign direct investors + 10,458 + 2,347 + 16,890 + 3,991 + 5,797 + 3,041 + 5,276 − 2,316 + 6,516 + 1,076
2 Portfolio investment + 291,455 + 10,068 − 18,227 − 5,296 − 18,788 + 10,647 + 3,107 − 9,718 + 30,982 − 18,157
Shares  3 + 39,971 − 32,619 + 7,791 + 11,807 − 700 + 838 − 1,684 − 33,702 + 18,899 + 13,119
Mutual fund shares + 4,771 − 8,639 + 155 − 612 + 475 + 1,732 + 728 + 887 + 1,787 − 1,946
Bonds and notes  5 + 199,219 + 13,894 − 75,383 − 27,423 − 14,156 + 13,382 + 19,893 + 15,222 + 17,743 − 13,072
Money market instruments + 47,493 + 37,432 + 49,210 + 10,933 − 4,407 − 5,304 − 15,829 + 7,875 − 7,446 − 16,258
3 Other investment + 120,748 + 7,674 − 150,132 − 56,839 − 41,821 + 40,328 + 86,118 + 79,934 + 58,974 − 52,790
MFIs  7,8 + 73,212 − 58,201 − 115,410 − 45,741 − 36,894 + 51,662 + 72,897 + 75,900 + 52,671 − 55,674
Long-term − 14,201 + 11,871 − 24,386 − 4,564 − 12,456 − 1,603 − 1,317 − 1,120 + 378 − 575
Short-term + 87,413 − 70,073 − 91,024 − 41,176 − 24,438 + 53,265 + 74,214 + 77,020 + 52,294 − 55,100
Enterprises and households + 39,667 + 45,177 − 7,706 − 10,360 + 8,489 − 13,106 + 10,162 − 967 + 5,887 + 5,243
Long-term + 20,003 + 24,555 + 168 − 1,046 − 1,836 + 280 − 2,064 − 1,071 + 261 − 1,254
Short-term  7 + 19,664 + 20,623 − 7,874 − 9,314 + 10,324 − 13,387 + 12,226 + 104 + 5,625 + 6,497
General government − 3,480 + 6,347 − 5,235 + 711 − 13,904 + 1,496 + 1,275 + 2,595 − 764 − 556
Long-term − 3,204 − 1,048 − 1,959 − 180 − 355 − 521 + 126 − 35 − 215 + 376
Short-term  7 − 276 + 7,396 − 3,276 + 891 − 13,549 + 2,016 + 1,149 + 2,630 − 550 − 932
Bundesbank + 11,349 + 14,351 − 21,782 − 1,449 + 489 + 277 + 1,784 + 2,406 + 1,180 − 1,803
III Financial account balance  9 
(Net capital exports: −) − 219,502 − 197,330 − 130,559 − 14,521 − 75,101 − 15,402 − 16,390 − 9,585 − 10,773 + 3,968
1From 1996, new definition for direct investment. — 2Estimated. — action values shown here are mostly derived from changes in stocks. Purely
3Including participation rights. — 4From 1991, including retained statistical changes have been eliminated as far as possible. — 8Excluding
earnings. — 5From 1975, excluding accrued interest. — 6Options, whether the Deutsche Bundesbank. — 9Financial account balance including change
evidenced by securities or not, and financial futures contracts. — 7The trans- in reserve assets. 
72*XI External sector

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2010
XI External sector
 
8 External position of the Bundesbank *
 
 
DM million
Reserve assets and other claims on non-residents Liabilities vis-à-vis non-residents
Reserve assets
Reserve
position
in the
Inter- Liabilities
national arising Net Liabilities
Monetary arising from external
Fund and Claims Loans and from liquidity position
Foreign special on the external Treasury (col 1 other claims
End of year currency drawing ECB  2 on non- trans- discount less
or month Total Total Gold rights (net) Total paper col 8) balances  1 residents  3 actions  4 
1234567891 0 1 1
1996 120,985 119,544 13,688 72,364 11,445 22,048 1,441 15,604 15,604 − 105,381
1997 127,849 126,884 13,688 76,673 13,874 22,649 966 16,931 16,931 − 110,918
1998 135,085 134,005 17,109 100,363 16,533 − 1,079 15,978 15,978 − 119,107
*Valuation of the gold holdings and the claims on non-residents in Monetary Cooperation Fund (EMCF)). — 3Including loans to the World
accordance with section 26 (2) of the Bundesbank Act and the provisions of Bank. — 4Including liquidity paper sold to non-residents by the
the Commercial Code, especially section 253. In the course of the year, Bundesbank; excluding the liquidity Treasury discount paper sold to
valuation at the preceding year’s balance sheet rates. — 1Mainly US dollar non-residents between March 1993 and March 1995, as shown in column 10. 
assets. — 2European Central Bank (up to 1993, claims on the European
 
 
 
9 External position of the Bundesbank in the euro area o
€ million
Reserve assets and other claims on non-residents
Reserve assets
Reserve
position
Other in the Inter-
national claims on
Monetary Other residents
Fund and claims on Claims in other Net external
Gold special Foreign non-euro- within the euro-area position Liabilities
End of year and gold drawing currency area Eurosystem member vis-à-vis non- (col 1 less
or month Total Total rights reserves (net)  2 states col 9) receivables residents  1,3 residents  3,4 
1234567891 0
1999          Jan  5 95,316 93,940 29,312 8,461 56,167 140 1,225 11 8,169 87,146
1999 141,958 93,039 32,287 8,332 52,420 9,162 39,746 11 6,179 135,779
2000 100,762 93,815 32,676 7,762 53,377 313 6,620 14 6,592 94,170
2001 76,147 93,215 35,005 8,721 49,489 312 − 17,385 5 8,752 67,396
2002 103,948 85,002 36,208 8,272 40,522 312 18,466 167 9,005 94,942
2003 95,394 76,680 36,533 7,609 32,538 312 17,945 456 10,443 84,951
2004 93,110 71,335 35,495 6,548 29,292 312 20,796 667 7,935 85,175
2005 130,268 86,181 47,924 4,549 33,708 350 42,830 906 6,285 123,983
2006 104,389 84,765 53,114 3,011 28,640 350 18,344 931 4,819 99,570
2007 179,492 92,545 62,433 2,418 27,694 350 84,064 2,534 16,005 163,488
2008 230,775 99,185 68,194 3,285 27,705 350 128,668 2,573 30,169 200,607
2009 323,286 125,541 83,939 15,969 25,634 350 189,936 7,460 9,126 314,160
2009          Mar 274,458 107,809 75,726 3,463 28,620 350 163,681 2,618 7,527 266,931
         Apr 272,318 105,577 73,476 3,482 28,619 350 163,774 2,618 8,538 263,781
         May 261,878 107,375 75,646 4,599 27,130 350 151,664 2,490 9,175 252,703
         June 290,738 104,691 72,955 4,493 27,243 350 183,052 2,645 10,121 280,617
         July 282,460 104,931 72,586 4,694 27,651 350 173,956 3,222 7,900 274,560
         Aug 291,882 115,309 72,998 15,186 27,124 350 171,719 4,506 8,972 282,910
         Sep 314,396 116,785 74,913 16,268 25,604 350 191,035 6,227 8,641 305,756
         Oct 292,775 119,584 77,320 16,501 25,763 350 166,341 6,500 9,038 283,737
         Nov 306,623 126,129 85,449 15,723 24,957 350 172,779 7,366 9,274 297,349
         Dec 323,286 125,541 83,939 15,969 25,634 350 189,936 7,460 9,126 314,160
2010          Jan 326,161 127,966 84,917 16,350 26,699 350 189,759 8,086 10,066 316,095
         Feb 352,969 134,669 89,796 17,327 27,546 50 209,481 8,770 9,573 343,396
         Mar 364,072 134,826 90,158 17,176 27,491 50 219,417 9,780 9,421 354,651
         Apr 377,729 142,021 96,677 17,290 28,054 50 225,677 9,982 11,833 365,897
         May 444,480 157,385 108,045 18,854 30,486 50 267,464 19,580 13,024 431,455
         June 444,756 160,629 110,727 19,039 30,863 50 261,416 22,662 11,220 433,536
         July 452,125 145,637 98,074 18,507 29,056 50 283,223 23,216 11,557 440,569
oClaims and liabilities vis-à-vis all countries within and outside the euro November 2000, including the TARGET positions which were previously
area. Up to December 2000, the levels at the end of each quarter are shown, shown (in columns 6 and 9) as bilateral assets and liabilities vis-à-vis natio nal
owing to revaluations, at market prices; within each quarter, however, the central banks outside the Eurosystem. — 3See footnote 2. — 4Excluding
levels are computed on the basis of cumulative transaction values. From allocations of special drawing rights (SDR) by the International Monetary
January 2001, all end-of-month levels are valued at market prices. — Fund (IMF) for an amount of SDR 12,059 million. — 5Euro opening balance
1Including loans to the World Bank. — 2Including the balances in the sheet of the Bundesbank as at 1 January 1999. 
Bundesbank’s cross-border payments within the Eurosystem. From
73*XI External sector

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
E U R O S Y S T E M
Monthly Report
August 2010
XI External sector
 
10 Assets and liabilities of enterprises in Germany (other than banks)
vis-à-vis non-residents *
 
€ million
Claims on non-residents Liabilities vis-à-vis non-residents
Claims on foreign non-banks Liabilities  vis-à-vis foreign non-banks
from trade credits from trade credits
Balances Loans
with from Credit Advance from from Credit Advance
End of year foreign financial terms payments foreign financial terms payments
or month Total banks Total Total granted effected Total banks Total Total used received operations operations
All countries
 
2006 450,228 117,723 332,505 190,300 142,205 134,057 8,148 624,790 95,019 529,771 408,907 120,864 79,900 40,964
2007 509,178 162,654 346,524 196,178 150,346 139,842 10,504 650,966 111,543 539,423 404,904 134,519 82,979 51,540
2008 553,465 173,255 380,210 227,055 153,155 140,520 12,635 707,704 147,242 560,462 424,211 136,251 79,980 56,271
2009  r 593,591 209,729 383,862 240,727 143,135 130,605 12,530 754,355 159,667 594,688 457,468 137,220 80,759 56,461
2010          Jan  r 584,887 205,776 379,111 244,509 134,602 122,038 12,564 727,667 145,359 582,308 454,781 127,527 70,475 57,052
         Feb  r 597,003 214,474 382,529 244,980 137,549 124,929 12,620 731,386 143,824 587,562 457,848 129,714 72,228 57,486
         Mar  r 618,272 216,334 401,938 254,563 147,375 134,605 12,770 746,898 146,788 600,110 463,891 136,219 78,321 57,898
         Apr  r 629,628 230,422 399,206 252,797 146,409 133,565 12,844 743,754 146,968 596,786 462,186 134,600 75,994 58,606
         May  r 639,878 227,856 412,022 262,050 149,972 136,999 12,973 759,508 151,096 608,412 470,547 137,865 79,522 58,343
         June 647,735 223,126 424,609 269,377 155,232 142,332 12,900 760,309 154,287 606,022 463,737 142,285 83,707 58,578
Industrial countries 1
 
2006 396,649 115,269 281,380 174,784 106,596 100,541 6,055 570,675 93,560 477,115 389,770 87,345 66,210 21,135
2007 452,354 160,666 291,688 180,564 111,124 103,104 8,020 590,245 110,291 479,954 384,024 95,930 69,347 26,583
2008 489,430 171,387 318,043 207,807 110,236 101,002 9,234 643,652 145,045 498,607 402,020 96,587 68,148 28,439
2009  r 531,796 208,571 323,225 220,778 102,447 93,566 8,881 684,984 157,343 527,641 431,525 96,116 68,912 27,204
2010          Jan  r 522,997 204,714 318,283 223,825 94,458 85,434 9,024 658,172 143,042 515,130 428,816 86,314 58,787 27,527
         Feb  r 533,432 213,467 319,965 223,820 96,145 87,103 9,042 661,385 141,525 519,860 431,799 88,061 60,308 27,753
         Mar  r 552,702 215,282 337,420 233,528 103,892 95,019 8,873 675,522 144,474 531,048 437,239 93,809 65,980 27,829
         Apr  r 562,101 229,397 332,704 231,182 101,522 92,600 8,922 672,075 144,684 527,391 435,750 91,641 63,617 28,024
         May  r 570,078 226,767 343,311 239,469 103,842 94,791 9,051 682,625 148,798 533,827 440,453 93,374 65,577 27,797
         June 575,873 221,970 353,903 246,115 107,788 98,795 8,993 681,611 151,886 529,725 432,224 97,501 69,743 27,758
EU member states 1
 
2006 308,720 108,982 199,738 121,929 77,809 72,902 4,907 479,025 86,343 392,682 332,871 59,811 45,202 14,609
2007 364,105 154,644 209,461 127,080 82,381 75,942 6,439 489,234 105,022 384,212 318,769 65,443 46,262 19,181
2008 398,833 164,762 234,071 151,391 82,680 75,192 7,488 536,351 137,208 399,143 331,498 67,645 46,188 21,457
2009 443,431 200,400 243,031 165,986 77,045 70,051 6,994 579,596 141,633 437,963 367,980 69,983 48,977 21,006
2010          Jan  r 433,828 196,101 237,727 167,533 70,194 62,993 7,201 562,494 136,135 426,359 364,898 61,461 40,126 21,335
         Feb  r 444,457 205,203 239,254 168,584 70,670 63,493 7,177 565,567 134,856 430,711 368,109 62,602 41,244 21,358
         Mar  r 455,654 205,972 249,682 173,289 76,393 69,401 6,992 573,456 134,321 439,135 372,210 66,925 45,555 21,370
         Apr  r 466,591 219,833 246,758 172,354 74,404 67,387 7,017 574,971 136,362 438,609 372,949 65,660 44,149 21,511
         May  r 470,610 217,185 253,425 176,747 76,678 69,597 7,081 583,792 140,748 443,044 376,505 66,539 45,294 21,245
         June 470,795 211,242 259,553 180,372 79,181 72,146 7,035 582,443 143,344 439,099 369,428 69,671 48,589 21,082
of which:  Euro-area member states 2
 
2006 207,868 77,056 130,812 79,901 50,911 47,614 3,297 369,648 38,878 330,770 292,178 38,592 28,340 10,252
2007 251,718 118,112 133,606 79,745 53,861 49,537 4,324 367,318 56,632 310,686 269,095 41,591 28,964 12,627
2008 281,518 130,226 151,292 96,968 54,324 49,408 4,916 415,221 81,703 333,518 290,093 43,425 29,768 13,657
2009 321,991 159,740 162,251 114,378 47,873 43,179 4,694 466,064 91,792 374,272 332,280 41,992 28,397 13,595
2010          Jan  r 317,632 156,956 160,676 113,398 47,278 42,399 4,879 458,285 88,596 369,689 329,104 40,585 26,443 14,142
         Feb  r 325,121 163,628 161,493 113,584 47,909 43,074 4,835 460,580 88,218 372,362 330,489 41,873 27,939 13,934
         Mar  r 328,972 160,720 168,252 116,817 51,435 46,614 4,821 462,560 84,275 378,285 334,050 44,235 30,531 13,704
         Apr  r 337,073 170,838 166,235 115,723 50,512 45,680 4,832 463,120 85,560 377,560 333,948 43,612 29,927 13,685
         May  r 340,376 170,047 170,329 118,490 51,839 47,022 4,817 468,812 88,158 380,654 336,094 44,560 31,022 13,538
         June 342,718 168,550 174,168 120,566 53,602 48,803 4,799 466,854 91,152 375,702 329,293 46,409 32,808 13,601
Emerging economies and developing countries 3
 
2006 53,579 2,454 51,125 15,516 35,609 33,516 2,093 54,115 1,459 52,656 19,137 33,519 13,690 19,829
2007 56,824 1,988 54,836 15,614 39,222 36,738 2,484 60,721 1,252 59,469 20,880 38,589 13,632 24,957
2008 64,035 1,868 62,167 19,248 42,919 39,518 3,401 64,052 2,197 61,855 22,191 39,664 11,832 27,832
2009 61,795 1,158 60,637 19,949 40,688 37,039 3,649 69,371 2,324 67,047 25,943 41,104 11,847 29,257
2010          Jan 61,890 1,062 60,828 20,684 40,144 36,604 3,540 69,495 2,317 67,178 25,965 41,213 11,688 29,525
         Feb 63,571 1,007 62,564 21,160 41,404 37,826 3,578 70,001 2,299 67,702 26,049 41,653 11,920 29,733
         Mar 65,570 1,052 64,518 21,035 43,483 39,586 3,897 71,376 2,314 69,062 26,652 42,410 12,341 30,069
         Apr 67,527 1,025 66,502 21,615 44,887 40,965 3,922 71,679 2,284 69,395 26,436 42,959 12,377 30,582
         May 69,800 1,089 68,711 22,581 46,130 42,208 3,922 76,883 2,298 74,585 30,094 44,491 13,945 30,546
         June 71,862 1,156 70,706 23,262 47,444 43,537 3,907 78,698 2,401 76,297 31,513 44,784 13,964 30,820
* Up to and including November 2009 the assets and liabilities vis-à-vis shown in Table XI.7. — 1From January 2007, including Bulgaria and
non-residents of households in Germany. The assets and liabilities vis-à-vis Romania. — 2From January 2007, including Slovenia; from January 2008,
non-residents of banks (MFIs) in Germany are shown in Table 4 of Section IV, including Cyprus and Malta; from January 2009, including Slovakia. — 3All
“Banks”. Statistical increases and decreases have not been eliminated; to countries that are not regarded as industrial countries. 
this extent, the changes in totals are not comparable with the figures
74*XI External sector

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2010
XI External sector
 
11 ECB euro reference exchange rates of selected currencies *
 
 
EUR 1 = currency units ...
Yearly Australia Canada China Denmark Japan Norway Sweden Switzerland United States United Kingdom
or monthly       
average AUD CAD CNY  1 DKK JPY NOK SEK CHF GBP USD
1999 1.6523 1.5840 . 7.4355 121.32 8.3104 8.8075 1.6003 0.65874 1.0658
2000 1.5889 1.3706 2 7.6168 7.4538 99.47 8.1129 8.4452 1.5579 0.60948 0.9236
2001 1.7319 1.3864 7.4131 7.4521 108.68 8.0484 9.2551 1.5105 0.62187 0.8956
2002 1.7376 1.4838 7.8265 7.4305 118.06 7.5086 9.1611 1.4670 0.62883 0.9456
2003 1.7379 1.5817 9.3626 7.4307 130.97 8.0033 9.1242 1.5212 0.69199 1.1312
2004 1.6905 1.6167 10.2967 7.4399 134.44 8.3697 9.1243 1.5438 0.67866 1.2439
2005 1.6320 1.5087 10.1955 7.4518 136.85 8.0092 9.2822 1.5483 0.68380 1.2441
2006 1.6668 1.4237 10.0096 7.4591 146.02 8.0472 9.2544 1.5729 0.68173 1.2556
2007 1.6348 1.4678 10.4178 7.4506 161.25 8.0165 9.2501 1.6427 0.68434 1.3705
2008 1.7416 1.5594 10.2236 7.4560 152.45 8.2237 9.6152 1.5874 0.79628 1.4708
2009 1.7727 1.5850 9.5277 7.4462 130.34 8.7278 10.6191 1.5100 0.89094 1.3948
2008          Dec 2.0105 1.6600 9.2205 7.4503 122.51 9.4228 10.7538 1.5393 0.90448 1.3449
2009          Jan 1.9633 1.6233 9.0496 7.4519 119.73 9.2164 10.7264 1.4935 0.91819 1.3239
         Feb 1.9723 1.5940 8.7406 7.4514 118.30 8.7838 10.9069 1.4904 0.88691 1.2785
         Mar 1.9594 1.6470 8.9210 7.4509 127.65 8.8388 11.1767 1.5083 0.91966 1.3050
         Apr 1.8504 1.6188 9.0110 7.4491 130.25 8.7867 10.8796 1.5147 0.89756 1.3190
         May 1.7831 1.5712 9.3157 7.4468 131.85 8.7943 10.5820 1.5118 0.88445 1.3650
         June 1.7463 1.5761 9.5786 7.4457 135.39 8.9388 10.8713 1.5148 0.85670 1.4016
         July 1.7504 1.5824 9.6246 7.4458 133.09 8.9494 10.8262 1.5202 0.86092 1.4088
         Aug 1.7081 1.5522 9.7485 7.4440 135.31 8.6602 10.2210 1.5236 0.86265 1.4268
         Sep 1.6903 1.5752 9.9431 7.4428 133.14 8.5964 10.1976 1.5148 0.89135 1.4562
         Oct 1.6341 1.5619 10.1152 7.4438 133.91 8.3596 10.3102 1.5138 0.91557 1.4816
         Nov 1.6223 1.5805 10.1827 7.4415 132.97 8.4143 10.3331 1.5105 0.89892 1.4914
         Dec 1.6185 1.5397 9.9777 7.4419 131.21 8.4066 10.4085 1.5021 0.89972 1.4614
2010          Jan 1.5624 1.4879 9.7436 7.4424 130.34 8.1817 10.1939 1.4765 0.88305 1.4272
         Feb 1.5434 1.4454 9.3462 7.4440 123.46 8.0971 9.9505 1.4671 0.87604 1.3686
         Mar 1.4882 1.3889 9.2623 7.4416 123.03 8.0369 9.7277 1.4482 0.90160 1.3569
         Apr 1.4463 1.3467 9.1505 7.4428 125.33 7.9323 9.6617 1.4337 0.87456 1.3406
         May 1.4436 1.3060 8.5794 7.4413 115.83 7.8907 9.6641 1.4181 0.85714 1.2565
         June 1.4315 1.2674 8.3245 7.4409 110.99 7.9062 9.5723 1.3767 0.82771 1.2209
         July 1.4586 1.3322 8.6538 7.4522 111.73 8.0201 9.4954 1.3460 0.83566 1.2770
*Averages: Bundesbank calculations based on the daily euro reference to March 2005, ECB indicative rates. — 2Average from 13 January to
exchange rates published by the ECB; for additional euro reference 29 December 2000. 
exchange rates, see Statistical Supplement 5 Exchange rate statistics. — 1Up
12 Euro member countries and irrevocable euro conversion rates in the third stage
of European Economic and Monetary Union
From Country Currency ISO currency code EUR 1 = currency units ...
1999  January 1 Austria Austrian schilling ATS 13.7603
Belgium Belgian franc BEF 40.3399
Finland Finnish markka FIM 5.94573
France French franc FRF 6.55957
Germany Deutsche Mark DEM 1.95583
Ireland Irish pound IEP 0.787564
Italy Italian lira ITL 1,936.27
Luxembourg Luxembourg franc LUF 40.3399
Netherlands Dutch guilder NLG 2.20371
Portugal Portuguese escudo PTE 200.482
Spain Spanish peseta ESP 166.386
2001  January 1 Greece Greek drachma GRD 340.750
2007  January 1 Slovenia Slovenian tolar SIT 239.640
2008  January 1 Cyprus Cyprus pound CYP 0.585274
Malta Maltese lira MTL 0.429300
2009  January 1 Slovakia Slovak koruna SKK 30.1260
2011  January 1 Estonia Estonian kroon EEK 15.6466
75*XI External sector

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
E U R O S Y S T E M
Monthly Report
August 2010
XI  External  sector
 
13  Effective exchange rates of the Euro and indicators of the German economy’s price competitiveness *
 
 
1999 Q1 = 100
Effective exchange rate of the Euro Indicators of the German economy’s price competitiveness
EER-21  1 EER-41  2 Based on the deflators of total sales  3 Based on consumer price indices
23 selected industrial countries  4 In real terms
In real terms based on
In real based on unit In real
23 terms the deflators labour terms Non-
based on of gross costs of based on Euro- euro- selected
36 36 56 consumer domestic national consumer area area industrial
Zeit Nominal price indices product  3 economy  3 Nominal price indices Total countries countries countries  5 6 countries  4 countries  5 countries  7 
1999 96.1 96.0 95.8 96.5 96.5 95.8 97.7 99.5 95.5 97.6 98.1 98.0 97.7
2000 86.8 86.5 85.9 85.5 87.9 85.8 91.5 97.1 85.0 90.9 92.8 91.8 90.8
2001 87.3 87.0 86.3 84.4 90.2 86.9 91.2 95.9 85.7 90.3 92.9 91.4 90.8
2002 89.7 90.1 89.3 87.4 94.7 90.5 92.0 95.1 88.4 90.9 93.6 92.0 91.9
2003 100.3 101.3 100.1 97.8 106.6 101.3 95.5 94.1 97.4 94.8 97.3 96.6 96.9
2004 104.2 105.1 102.9 101.8 111.2 105.0 95.9 93.0 99.9 95.2 98.8 98.2 98.6
2005 102.7 103.7 101.1 99.6 109.2 102.5 94.7 91.5 98.9 93.3 98.9 97.4 97.3
2006 102.6 103.7 100.3 98.9 109.3 101.8 93.7 90.0 98.7 92.1 99.1 97.2 96.8
2007 106.3 106.8 102.6 100.8 113.0 104.2 95.1 89.3 103.1 93.1 101.7 99.2 98.6
2008 110.5 110.1 105.4 104.6 118.0 107.0 95.6 87.9 106.6 93.3 103.5 100.1 99.6
2009 111.7 110.6 106.3 p 106.9 120.6 p 107.8 95.2 88.1 105.1 p 93.7 102.8 100.0 99.7
2006          Nov 103.4 104.3 100.4 98.7 110.4 102.4 93.9 89.6 99.7 92.2 99.7 97.6 97.2
         Dec 104.4 105.0 111.5 103.2 100.3 98.1 97.8
2007          Jan 103.8 104.5 110.6 102.5 100.3 98.0 97.6
         Feb 104.3 104.9 101.3 99.2 111.0 102.7 94.6 89.9 101.1 92.8 100.6 98.3 97.8
         Mar 105.0 105.5 111.9 103.3 100.7 98.4 98.0
         Apr 105.9 106.7 112.7 104.2 101.3 98.9 98.5
         May 106.0 106.6 102.5 100.5 112.5 103.9 95.2 89.6 102.8 93.3 101.5 99.0 98.4
         June 105.6 106.1 112.0 103.4 101.4 98.8 98.2
         July 106.2 106.7 112.6 103.9 101.9 99.2 98.6
         Aug 105.8 106.1 102.4 100.3 112.6 103.7 94.9 89.0 103.0 92.9 101.4 98.8 98.2
         Sep 106.8 107.2 113.5 104.5 102.1 99.5 98.9
         Oct 107.9 108.1 114.4 105.1 102.6 99.8 99.1
         Nov 109.4 109.6 104.4 103.2 116.2 106.6 95.5 88.5 105.4 93.4 103.6 100.9 100.3
         Dec 109.5 109.4 116.0 106.2 103.5 100.5 99.9
2008          Jan 110.1 109.9 116.6 106.6 103.6 100.5 99.9
         Feb 109.8 109.3 105.7 104.5 116.5 106.0 96.2 88.4 107.3 94.0 103.6 100.3 99.6
         Mar 112.6 112.3 119.9 109.2 104.6 101.5 101.1
         Apr 113.7 113.2 121.2 110.1 105.0 101.6 101.3
         May 113.2 112.9 108.0 107.4 120.5 109.5 97.2 88.1 110.3 94.7 105.0 101.5 101.0
         June 113.0 112.7 120.4 109.4 104.9 101.2 100.7
         July 113.2 112.7 120.6 109.4 105.3 101.3 100.8
         Aug 110.9 110.3 105.7 105.0 117.8 106.6 96.0 87.5 108.1 93.3 104.0 100.1 99.3
         Sep 109.3 108.5 116.4 105.2 103.0 99.3 98.6
         Oct 105.8 105.2 113.8 102.7 100.5 97.3 96.8
         Nov 105.0 104.5 102.3 101.6 113.0 102.0 93.0 87.4 100.8 91.2 100.3 97.1 96.6
         Dec 110.2 109.7 118.7 107.1 102.5 99.5 99.3
2009          Jan 109.8 109.2 118.6 106.8 102.2 99.5 99.2
         Feb 108.7 108.0 104.7 104.9 117.7 105.9 93.8 87.8 102.1 92.6 101.2 99.0 98.8
         Mar 111.1 110.3 120.4 108.0 102.3 99.8 99.7
         Apr 110.3 109.5 119.1 106.9 102.3 99.6 99.2
         May 110.8 109.9 106.0 106.3 119.5 107.1 95.2 88.3 104.8 93.7 102.5 99.7 99.3
         June 112.0 111.1 120.7 108.2 102.9 100.2 99.9
         July 111.6 110.5 120.5 107.7 102.8 99.9 99.5
         Aug 111.7 110.6 106.8 106.8 120.6 107.8 95.8 88.4 106.2 p 94.1 103.0 100.1 99.7
         Sep 112.9 111.6 122.0 108.7 103.3 100.4 100.0
         Oct 114.3 112.8 123.0 p 109.5 104.0 101.0 100.5
         Nov 114.0 112.5 107.5 p 109.4 122.9 p 109.2 96.0 88.0 107.4 p 94.3 103.8 100.9 100.5
         Dec 113.0 111.2 121.7 p 107.8 103.5 100.5 99.9
2010          Jan 110.8 108.9 119.1 p 105.4 102.4 99.2 98.4
         Feb 108.0 p 106.1 p 102.4 p 104.1 116.2 p 102.5 p 94.6 p 88.3 103.3 p 92.7 101.2 97.9 96.9
         Mar 107.4 p 105.7 115.2 p 101.8 101.2 97.6 96.4
         Apr 106.1 p 104.5 113.5 p 100.3 100.5 96.8 95.4
         May 102.8 p 101.4 ... ... 109.9 p 97.1 ... ... ... ... 98.8 95.3 93.7
         June 100.7 p 99.4 107.7 p 95.2 97.4 94.0 92.4
         July 102.5 p 101.2 109.9 p 97.1 98.3 94.9 93.5
*The effective exchange rate corresponds to the weighted external value of Kingdom and United States. Where price and wage indices were not avai-
the currency concerned. The method of calculating the indicators of the lable, estimates were used. — 2ECB calculations. This group includes not
German economy’s price competitiveness is consistent with the procedure only the countries belonging to the EER-21 group (see footnote 1) but also
used by the ECB to compute the effective exchange rates of the euro except Algeria, Argentina, Brazil, Chile, Croatia, Iceland, India, Indonesia, Isr ael,
for the used trade weights (see Monthly Report, November 2001, pp  50-53, Malaysia, Mexico, Morocco, New Zealand, Philippines, Russian Federation ,
May 2007, pp  31-35 and May 2008, p  40). For details of the methodology South Africa, Taiwan, Thailand, Turkey and Venezuela. — 3Annual and
see ECB, Monthly Bulletin, January 2010, pp S93 − S94 as well as the ECB’s quarterly averages. — 4Euro-area countries (from 2001 including Greece,
Occasional Paper No  2, which can be downloaded from the ECB’s website from 2007 including Slovenia, from 2008 including Cyprus and Malta, from
(www.ecb.int). A decline in the figures implies an increase in competitive- 2009 including Slovakia) as well as the non-euro-area countries (Canada ,
ness. — 1ECB calculations are based on the weighted averages of the Denmark, Japan, Norway, Sweden, Switzerland, United Kingdom and
changes in the bilateral exchange rates of the euro against the currencies of United States). — 5Euro-area countries and countries belonging to the
the following countries: Australia, Bulgaria, Canada, China, Czech Republic, EER-21 group. — 6Owing to missing data for the deflator of total sales,
Denmark, Estonia, Hong Kong, Hungary, Japan, Latvia, Lithuania, Norway, China is not included in this calculation. — 7Euro-area countries and
Poland, Romania, Singapore, South Korea, Sweden, Switzerland, United countries belonging to the EER-41 group (see footnote 2). 
76*XI  External sector

Overview of
publications
by the Deutsche
BundesbankThis overview provides information
about selected recent economic and
statistical publications by the Deutsche
Bundesbank. Unless otherwise indi-
cated, these publications are available
in both English and German, in printed
form and on the Bundesbank’s web-
site.
The publications are available free of
charge from the Communication Div-
ision. For a small fee to cover costs, a
file which is updated monthly and
contains approximately 40,000 time
series published by the Bundesbank
can be obtained on magnetic tape cas-
sette or CD-ROM from the Division
Statistical data processing, math-
ematical methods. Orders should be
sent, in writing, to one of the ad-
dresses listed on the reverse of the title
page. Selected time series can also be
downloaded from the internet.
Annual Report
Financial Stability Review
Monthly Report
For information on the articles published between
1990 and 2009 see the index attached to the Janu-
ary 2010 Monthly Report.
77*DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2010

Monthly Report articles
September 2009
– Developments in lending to the German pri-
vate sector during the global financial crisis
– The performance of German credit institutions
in 2008
– Amendments to the new EU Capital Require-
ments Directive and the Minimum Require-
ments for Risk Management
October 2009
– The development of government investment
– Firm-level and aggregate output volatility
November 2009
– The current economic situation in Germany
December 2009
– Outlook for the German economy – macroeco-
nomic projections for 2010 and 2011
– Financial integration and risk sharing in the
euro area – longer-term trends and impact of
the financial crisis
– International cooperation in the area of
ongoing banking supervision
January 2010
– German enterprises’ profitability and financing
in 2008
– Price-level targeting as a monetary policy strat-
egy
February 2010
– The current economic situation in GermanyMarch 2010
– German balance of payments in 2009
– The use of cash and other payment instru-
ments – a behavioural study using micro data
– The Treaty of Lisbon
– Financing and representation in the Inter-
national Monetary Fund
April 2010
– Government debt and interest payment
burden in Germany
– Emerging markets in the financial crisis: the
effect of cross-border bank loans
May 2010
– The current economic situation in Germany
June 2010
– Outlook for the German economy – macroeco-
nomic projections for 2010 and 2011
– Uncertainty of macroeconomic forecasts
– Extended investment cycle with stable prices:
supply and demand in the German housing
market from a longer-term perspective
– The whole and its parts: problems with the
aggregation of seasonally adjusted data
July 2010
– On the problems of macroeconomic imbal-
ances in the euro area
– Nominal and real exchange rate movements
during the financial crisis
– Deutsche Bundesbank Spring Conference
2010 – International risk sharing and global
imbalances
August 2010
– The current economic situation in Germany
78*DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
EUROSYSTEM
Monthly Report
August 2010

Statistical Supplements to the
Monthly Report
1 Banking statistics1, 2
2 Capital market statistics1, 2
3 Balance of payments statistics1, 2
4 Seasonally adjusted business statistics1, 2
5 Exchange rate statistics2
Special Publications
Makro-/C246konometrisches Mehr-L/C228nder-Modell,
November 19963
Europ/C228ische Organisationen und Gremien im Be-
reich von W/C228hrung und Wirtschaft, May 19973
Die Zahlungsbilanz der ehemaligen DDR 1975 bis
1989, August 19993
The market for German Federal securities,
May 2000
Macro-Econometric Multi-Country Model: MEMMOD,
June 2000
Bundesbank Act, September 2002
Weltweite Organisationen und Gremien im Bereich
von W/C228hrung und Wirtschaft, March 20033
Die Europ/C228ische Union: Grundlagen und Politik-
bereiche außerhalb der Wirtschafts- und W/C228h-
rungsunion, April 20053
Die Deutsche Bundesbank – Aufgabenfelder,
rechtlicher Rahmen, Geschichte, April 20063
European economic and monetary union,
April 2008
Special Statistical Publications*o
1 Banking statistics guidelines and customer clas-
sification, July 200822 Bankenstatistik Kundensystematik Firmenver-
zeichnisse, June 20102, 3
3 Aufbau der bankstatistischen Tabellen,
July 20082, 3
4 Financial accounts for Germany 1991 to 2009,
June 20102
5 Extrapolated results from financial statements
of German enterprises 1994 to 2003, March
20062
6 Verh/C228ltniszahlen aus Jahresabschl/C252ssen deut-
scher Unternehmen von 2006 bis 2007, May
20102, 3
7 Notes on the coding list for the balance of pay-
ments statistics, March 20092
8 The balance of payments statistics of the Fed-
eral Republic of Germany, 2nd edition,
February 1991o
9 Securities deposits,
August 2005
10 Foreign direct investment stock statistics,
April 20101, 2
11 Balance of payments by region,
August 20092
12 Technologische Dienstleistungen in der Zah-
lungsbilanz, June 20083
79*DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2010
1Only the headings and explanatory notes to the data
contained in the German originals are available in English.
2Available on the website only.
3Available in German only.*Unless stated otherwise, these publications are avail-
able on the Bundesbank’s website in German and Eng-
lish.
oNot available on the website.

80*DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
EUROSYSTEM
Monthly Report
August 2010
Discussion Papers*
Series 1
Economic Studies
08/2010
On the nonlinear influence of Reserve Bank of
Australia Interventions on exchange rates
09/2010
Banking and sovereign risk in the euro area
10/2010
Trend and cycle features in German residential
investment before and after reunification
11/2010
What can EMU countries’ sovereign bond spreads
tell us about market perceptions of default prob-
abilities during the recent financial crisis?
12/2010
User costs of housing when households face a
credit constraint – evidence for Germany
13/2010
Extraordinary measures in extraordinary times –
public measures in support of the financial sector
in the EU and the United States
14/2010
The discontinuous integration of Western Europe’s
heterogeneous market for corporate control from
1995 to 2007
15/2010
Bubbles and incentives: a post-mortem of the
Neuer Markt in Germany
16/2010
Rapid demographic change and the allocation of
public education resources: evidence from East
Germany
17/2010
The determinants of cross-border bank flows to
emerging markets – new empirical evidence on
the spread of financial crisisSeries 2
Banking and Financial Studies
15/2009
What macroeconomic shocks affect the German
banking system? Analysis in an integrated micro-
macro model
01/2010
Deriving the term structure of banking crisis risk
with a compound option approach: the case of
Kazakhstan
02/2010
Recovery determinants of distressed banks: Regu-
lators, market discipline, or the environment?
03/2010
Purchase and redemption decisions of mutual fund
investors and the role of fund families
04/2010
What drives portfolio investments of German
banks in emerging capital markets?
05/2010
Bank liquidity creation and risk taking during dis-
tress
Banking legislation
1 Bundesbank Act and Statute of the European
System of Central Banks and of the European
Central Bank, June 1998
2 Gesetz /C252ber das Kreditwesen, February 20093
2a Solvabilit/C228ts- und Liquidit/C228tsverordnung, Feb-
ruary 20083
*Discussion Papers which appeared from 2000 onwards
are available on the website.
For footnotes, see p 79*.

