MONTHLY REPORT
MAY JUNE JULY AUGUST SEPTEMBER
2010
Vol 62
No 5

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
EUROSYSTEM
Monthly Report
May 2010
Deutsche Bundesbank
Wilhelm-Epstein-Strasse 14
60431 Frankfurt am Main
Germany
Postal address
Postfach 10 06 02
60006 Frankfurt am Main
Germany
Tel +49 69 9566 -0
Fax +49 69 9566 3077
Telex 41227 within Germany
414431 from abroad
http://www.bundesbank.de
Reproduction permitted only if source is stated.
ISSN 0418 -8292 (print edition)
ISSN 1862 -1325 (online edition)
The German original of this Monthly Report
went to press at 2 pm on 25 May 2010.Annual and weekly publishing schedules for
selected statistics of the Deutsche Bundes-
bank can be downloaded from our website.
The statistical data are also published on the
website.
The Monthly Report is published by the
Deutsche Bundesbank, Frankfurt am Main,
by virtue of section 18 of the Bundesbank
Act. It is available to interested parties free of
charge.
This is a translation of the original German-
language version, which is the sole authorita-
tive text.

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
May 2010
ContentsThe current economic situation
in Germany 5
Overview 6
The assumption of guarantees in
connection with the European
Stabilisation Mechanism 12
Global and European setting 15
Constructing a new leading indicator
for the global economy 18
Fiscal developments in the euro area 26
Monetary policy and banking business 30
Money market management
and liquidity needs 32
The impact of the financial and
economic crisis on the 2009
financial accounts 40
Financial markets 46
The European Systemic Risk Board 54
Economic conditions in Germany 57
Information content of toll
statistics for economic analysis 64
Public finances 72
Statistical Section 1*
Key economic data for the euro area 5*
Overall monetary survey in the euro area 8*
Consolidated financial statement
of the Eurosystem 16*
Banks 20*
Minimum reserves 42*
Interest rates 43*

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
EUROSYSTEM
Monthly Report
May 2010
Capital market 48*
Financial accounts 52*
Public finances in Germany 54*
Economic conditions in Germany 61*
External sector 68*
Overview of publications by the
Deutsche Bundesbank 77*
Abbreviations and symbols
eEstimated
pProvisional
pePartly estimated
rRevised
...Data available at a later date
.Data unknown, not to be published or
not meaningful
0Less than 0.5 but more than nil
–Nil
Discrepancies in the totals are due to round-
ing.

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
May 2010
5The current economic
situation in Germany

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
EUROSYSTEM
Monthly Report
May 2010
6OverviewEuropean monetary union facing crucial
challenges
The international financial markets came
under considerable tension in the early part
of the year as Greece’s sovereign debt crisis
deteriorated. Over the preceding months, the
developments in Greece had ballooned into a
crisis of confidence from which the country
was unable to liberate itself single-handedly.
Given that Greece had breached the Euro-
pean rules for many years prior to the crisis,
its plight is not comparable with the fiscal
policy problems of other euro-area countries.
However, in a market environment character-
ised by heightened uncertainty about the de-
terioration of public finances, this resulted in
contagion effects and losses of confidence in
other euro-area countries as well. This led in
early May to an escalation of the situation in
the markets for these countries’ government
bonds. Despite the policy decisions taken at
this time to support Greece, the tensions
threatened to snowball into an unstoppable
avalanche which would have jeopardised the
stability of European monetary union and the
global financial markets. Against that back-
ground, in mid-May the EU finance ministers,
after finalising financial assistance for Greece,
agreed on extensive additional assistance
measures and mechanisms.
The precariousness of the situation necessi-
tated a prompt and far-reaching response.
The policy measures taken have nevertheless
put a considerable strain on the institutional
foundations of monetary union. It is therefore
vital that the appropriate lessons from devel-
opments over the past few weeks are swiftlyMonetary
union facing
severe test

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
May 2010
7drawn and speedily implemented. However,
the tensions in the financial markets are notthe cause of the problem but a rather a mani-festation of worries about the perceivedunsustainability of public finances in someeuro-area member states as well as the result-ant uncertainty. Therefore, it is primarily theresponsibility of the countries concerned toresolutely implement a credible consolidationstrategy and to embed this within a macro-economic reform package with a view to rap-idly regaining the confidence that has beenlost.
Recent developments have, in addition, re-
vealed weaknesses in the euro area’s currentfiscal policy rules. Reform in this area is there-fore urgently required. Central aspects of theframework must be re-tightened, and incen-tives for encouraging national responsibilityto safeguard sound public finances need tobe strengthened significantly. One crucialneed is to ensure comprehensive consolida-tion of public finances and to anchor the fis-cal procedures, which do not appear to havehad a sufficiently disciplining effect in thepast, in a tighter and more automated frame-work at arm’s length from the political bar-gaining process. Another key requirement, ina potential assistance case, is to increase theresponsibility of and incentives for the coun-try concerned to return to a sound budgetaryposition. The granting of assistance has to besubject to strict conditions which must beclosely monitored and scrupulously compliedwith. In addition, the scenario of a paymentdefault must remain possible and the intro-duction of a sovereign insolvency procedureseriously considered. Lastly, it is necessary toput in place institutional arrangements ensur-
ing that a member state which draws on anassistance programme implements the meas-ures necessary to safeguard stability and doesnot, for instance, consciously incur a risk ofjeopardising the union’s existence. The rapidimplementation of such a package of pro-posals in the context of a reformed regulatoryframework would make a crucial contributionto safeguarding monetary union as a commu-nity of stability also in a changed underlyingsetting. To ensure that monetary union isplaced on a sound long-term footing, it isvital that policymakers use the current briefrespite in order to initiate reforms.
Confidence in stable and reliable underlying
conditions in the euro area is, moreover, a keybasis for underpinning the recovery of theglobal economy. The real economic environ-ment is currently looking relatively favour-able. The worldwide economic upswing hascontinued to strengthen since the beginningof the year, and the recent rise in uncertaintyin the international financial markets has notyet impacted on the real sector. Against thisbackground, numerous international organ-isations – including the International Monet-ary Fund – have noticeably revised upwardstheir forecasts for the growth of the worldeconomy and world trade for this year.
The overall robust global economic momen-
tum, however, is masking perceptible regionaldifferences in growth rates. These disparitieshad already emerged at the end of lastyear and persisted throughout the report-ing period. The emerging market economies– especially in East Asia – continued to grow
Global
economy

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
EUROSYSTEM
Monthly Report
May 2010
8at an impressive pace, with some economies
even beginning to show signs of overheating.
By contrast, the industrial countries, on the
whole, maintained their much more moder-
ate rate of overall economic growth in the
first few months of this year. Within this
group of countries, Japan and the United
States achieved quite strong GDP growth,
whereas the euro area’s aggregate output
expanded only slightly. In some euro-area
states, however, the perceptible dampening
effects of the unusually cold winter also
played a role. The leading indicators for the
global economy point to a continuation of
the brisk recovery during the second and
third quarters, with expectations rising stead-
ily throughout the reporting period.
In the financial markets, the escalation of the
debt crisis in Greece triggered a fundamental
reassessment of the risks emanating from
public indebtedness in other euro-area coun-
tries, too. This increasingly depressed senti-
ment in the international financial markets,
which had still been benign at the beginning
of the year – not least against the backdrop
of the robust outlook for the real economy.
Eventually, the prices of government bonds in
various euro-area countries plummeted dras-
tically and sovereign yield spreads widened to
unprecedented levels. In turn, the attendant
risks to the stability of the financial systems in
the countries concerned dragged down Euro-
pean and global stock markets. The euro’s ex-
change rate likewise came under pressure.
Since the root causes of the problem are to
be found in the euro area itself, the euro
depreciated across a broad front, effectivelylosing 81/C252% of its value vis-/C224-vis the curren-
cies of the euro area’s major trading partners
since the beginning of the year. The euro’s
slide against the US dollar during this period
was particularly pronounced.
The stabilisation package adopted in mid-
May briefly halted the drop in prices in the
markets for south European countries’ sover-
eign bonds. It has not yet lastingly eased the
tensions on the financial markets, however.
This will only occur after credible consolida-
tion measures have been taken to restore
confidence in the sustainability of public fi-
nances in the countries concerned.
Macroeconomic recovery in the euro area
proceeded merely at a moderate pace, owing
in part to weather-related factors. Given the
ongoing marked underutilisation of output
capacity and muted monetary and credit
growth, there was no reason to change the
key monetary policy interest rates. However,
in the past few months, some marked adjust-
ments were made to the monetary policy
operational setting. After continuing to exit
from its non-standard monetary policy meas-
ures in the first few months of the year
amidst the recovery in the money and finan-
cial markets observable up to then, the Gov-
erning Council of the ECB responded to the
resurgence of tension in the financial markets
by halting the exit process and actually revers-
ing it in some areas. It thus resumed full allot-
ment for three-month longer-term refinan-
cing operations (LTRO), launched a renewed
indexed six-month LTRO in mid-May and re-
opened a US dollar swap window in response
to emerging strains in the supply of foreignFinancial
market
environmentMonetary
policy

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
May 2010
9currency-denominated liquidity. Moreover,
the Governing Council adopted a reform ofits collateral framework, introducing a transi-tion to a graduated haircut regime extendingdown to a BBB- rating (or equivalent) to takeeffect on 1 January 2011. This floor was sus-pended, however, until further notice formarketable debt instruments issued or guar-anteed by the Greek government after theGoverning Council assessed Greece’s consoli-dation programme as being appropriate.
In the light of the tense situation in the mar-
kets for government bonds issued by someeuro-area countries, the Governing Councilof the ECB also approved, with effect from10 May 2010, the purchase of private andpublic debt securities in dysfunctional marketsegments. This measure harbours substantialstability policy risks. Maximum efforts mustbe made to minimise these risks in the courseof implementing the measures and, in par-ticular, to clearly segregate the spheres of re-sponsibility for monetary policy and fiscal pol-icy.
During the period under review, both monet-
ary and credit growth remained subdued.However, loans to non-financial corporationsvirtually levelled off following three quartersof sharp falls. This is consistent with the em-pirical finding of a lagged reaction of thiscredit component during the business cycle.All in all, the medium-term dynamics of mon-etary and credit expansion do not indicateany pronounced danger to euro-area pricestability.The renewed turmoil in the financial markets
has so far had no impact on real economicdevelopments in Germany. The Germaneconomy’s upturn continued into 2010, des-pite temporary strains, and seems to have ac-celerated distinctly in spring. In the secondquarter, economic output is likely to seestrong growth.
In a global economic environment that re-
mains favourable, the German recovery is stillbeing fuelled by exports. Owing not least tothe dynamic growth of the emerging marketeconomies and the increasingly entrenchedupswing in the United States, the Germaneconomy has already reversed half of the de-cline in exports to non-euro-area countrieswhich resulted from the global economicslump. By contrast, much less progress hasbeen made in the recovery of its exports to itseuro-area trading partners. The short-termdampening in the overall economic outlookfor numerous euro-area countries that willprobably occur owing to the urgent need forfiscal consolidation suggests that this situ-ation is unlikely to change quickly or radically.
The decline in investment in machinery and
equipment at the end of last year was can-celled out by a surplus in the first quarter. Ithas largely stabilised since the significant cor-rection that occurred at the beginning of2009. This is quite noteworthy from a cyclicalperspective considering that output capacityis still being underutilised. Although construc-tion investment was perceptibly squeezed bythe cold and snowy winter weather at the be-ginning of the year, the fall-off was morelimited than might have been expected given
German
economy

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
EUROSYSTEM
Monthly Report
May 2010
10the severe weather. In addition, recent data
indicate that part of the shortfall might have
already been recouped in March.
Apart from some exceptional strains, the
underlying trend in private consumption has
remained quite stable. Although households
curtailed their real consumer spending in the
first quarter, this reduction may have been
partly attributable to the downturn in car
purchases, which lasted into February, follow-
ing the expiry of the government incentive to
replace older vehicles (“environmental pre-
mium”). By contrast, retail sales, at least,
more or less maintained their pre-quarter
level.
One significant factor which might explain
the relative robustness of consumption is the
continued remarkable resilience of the Ger-
man labour market. After stripping out sea-
sonal factors, the level of employment re-
mained virtually unchanged. The number of
jobs subject to social insurance contributions
even picked up slightly, while unemployment
was down on the quarter. Although the job-
less figures rose slightly after taking labour
market support measures into account, the
surprisingly muted labour market response to
both the severe slump in the real economy
and the ongoing underutilisation of capacity
remains essentially valid.
In the first quarter of 2010, prices tended to
point upwards again at all production and
distribution stages. The disinflation process
that had been evident since the end of 2008,
and which had emanated from commodity
prices and subsequently worked through tofinished products, has thus come to an end
and been superseded by a rising tendency. At
the upstream stages of production, energy
prices, in particular, rose sharply. This is being
reflected in the corresponding components of
import prices. At the consumer price level,
too, the seasonally adjusted rate of price in-
creases has been appreciably affected by
higher energy prices along with weather-
related rises in food prices. Domestically in-
duced inflation, by contrast, is likely to remain
extremely subdued for the time being.
Germany’s economy is thus on a recovery
path, the underlying dynamics of which, ac-
cording to current indicators, do not appear
to be at risk. The main momentum propelling
the upturn will continue to come from the ex-
ternal sector, especially from non-European
sales markets, which are currently recording
unbridled growth. In addition, German ex-
ports to those markets are benefiting from
shifts in international currency parities, al-
though the importance of the price compon-
ent as a determinant of German exports
should not be overstated. The positive senti-
ment in the manufacturing industry is, more-
over, being supported by a regionally broadly
based surge in new orders. Demand from the
rest of the euro area likewise rose sharply at
the beginning of the year. Moreover, the de-
velopment of credit to non-financial corpor-
ations continues to show no indication of any
credit crunch. Along with the stable labour
market situation, the upbeat mood in the
manufacturing sector is also due in part to
current household optimism. Given the stable
labour market situation, the fear of being laid
off does not appear to be a paramount con-

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
May 2010
11cern at the moment. This gives grounds for
hoping that the export-led recovery will beadditionally buoyed by domestic demandgoing forward. On the whole, however, itmust be borne in mind that the situation re-mains fragile and uncertainty in the financialmarkets is high; these factors represent astrain on, and risk to, such a positive scen-ario.
Despite the stable cyclical outlook, the slump
in macroeconomic activity and the fiscal pol-icy response to the slump have left deep scarson German public budgets. The deficit ratiocould surge from 3.1% last year to some-where approaching the 5% mark this year.This development is primarily the result of ex-tensive fiscal policy measures, particularly taxrelief and higher public investment spending,not least with a view to stabilising economicmomentum.
But on balance, in view of the more favour-
able macroeconomic setting, the outturn for2010 could well be more favourable than theprojection in the Federal Government’s stabil-ity programme of January 2010 (deficit ratioof 5
1/C252%). Given the very high deficits and a
continued rapid rise in indebtedness, a morepositive-than-planned development shouldbe used, however, not for relaxing budgetarydiscipline but instead for faster fiscal consoli-dation. This is also required by the conditionsimposed by the excessive deficit procedureand the continuing need for extensive con-solidation at all levels of government.
This concerns not least the central govern-
ment budget. The associated budget planpresented in March included an extraordinar-
ily high deficit appropriation which in thecourse of budget implementation is likely tobe much lower. For instance, the latest tax es-timate projects additional revenue of around34
1/C252billion compared with the budgeted
amount; an additional 341/C252billion in revenue
from mobile phone licence auctions will alsohave an impact; and on the expenditure side,too, lower-than-expected spending is fore-seeable given the robust labour market situ-ation. The actual central government deficit islikely to be well under 370 billion. The budget
plan, however, envisages net borrowing of380 billion.
The structural deficit, too, will be much lower
than estimated ( 366
1/C252billion). According to
the new debt rule, the 2010 structural deficitwill form the basis for the prescribed declin-ing annual borrowing limit in the transitionalperiod up to 2016. The higher this startinglevel, the greater the leeway for borrowingwill be during that period. In order not to en-danger the credibility of the new rule, policy-makers must resist the temptation to temperand tamper with it prior to its initial imple-mentation by creating loopholes and to delaythe necessary consolidation, as has happenedso often in the past. The “reduction of theexisting deficit” criterion enshrined in theGerman constitution requires that the budgetbe based at least on a current estimate of thestructural deficit for 2010 rather than thebudget target. Moreover, in keeping with thespirit of the new budget rule, one-off grantsto social insurance schemes should not becounted against the structural deficit.Public finances

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
EUROSYSTEM
Monthly Report
May 2010
12Deutsche BundesbankThe assumption of guarantees in connection with a European Stabilisation Mechanism*
At the end of April, the deteriorating budget and econom-
ic situation in Greece ballooned into a crisis of confidence
from which the country was unable to liberate itself single-
handedly. This was the upshot of developments over many
years during which Greece had massively and irresponsibly
breached European agreements and rules. Looking back,
its budgetary and economic policies stood in stark contrast
to the stability requirements of a single currency area.
Once the full extent of these failings had come to light,
the financial markets began to fundamentally question
Greece’s ability to continue to meet its debt-servicing and
repayment obligations in future without a comprehensive
correction of its fiscal and economic policies, in the wake
of which Greece found it virtually impossible to raise new
funds on the capital markets. In this very fragile situation,
a sovereign default by Greece could have triggered a con-
siderable contagion risk for other member states of the
euro area. The euro-area finance ministers therefore de-
cided to grant financial assistance to Greece based on strict
conditionality, and in Germany this assistance was ap-
proved by the Bundestag on 7 May 2010. In its opinion on
the relevant draft legislation, the Bundesbank put aside its
fundamental reservations and assessed Germany’s partici-
pation in this assistance package as being justifiable under
the exceptional circumstances, despite the high risks in-
volved.
Before the package was definitively approved, the situ-
ation in the capital markets worsened further. The aim of
containing the threat of contagion emanating from Greece
was not attained. Despite the decisions taken, there was a
growing danger that the swelling tensions might snowball
into an unstoppable avalanche which could have impaired
the stability of European monetary union and might also
have entailed grave consequences for the entire global
economy. This was the unanimous conclusion reached on
the weekend of 8-9 May 2010 by numerous international
institutions and the major central banks – including the
Deutsche Bundesbank. Given this serious and immediate
danger, the EU finance ministers adopted a package of sta-
bilisation measures on 10 May 2010. This package finalised
the assistance for Greece that had been agreed earlier. The
announcement of the support programme was accompan-
ied by a pledge to accelerate the consolidation of public
budgets and reform the fiscal rules and by the intention toset up a European financial stabilisation mechanism. There
are two purposes to this stabilisation mechanism. One is to
enable the EU to provide financial assistance to member
states seriously threatened with severe difficulties caused
by exceptional occurrences beyond their control. The other
is, should the envisaged funds not suffice, to set up a spe-
cial purpose vehicle, due to expire after three years, which
can grant loans to euro-area member states. The necessary
resources would be raised in the capital market and guar-
anteed on a pro rata basis by the other euro-area coun-
tries. The European Financial Stabilisation Mechanism is to
be supplemented by credit lines from the International
Monetary Fund.
With regard to the envisaged European Stabilisation
Mechanism, it is important that any drawdown of funds be
subject to strict economic and fiscal policy conditionality.
The intended financial and material involvement of the
International Monetary Fund in the agreed assistance pro-
grammes, such as in the Greek precedent, is therefore
logical. Moreover, it is also important that the granting of
assistance be subject to agreement with the guarantors –
especially Germany as the largest single contributor. The
interest terms must be designed to create a tangible incen-
tive to rapidly regain the confidence of potential donors
and resume capital market financing. The terms and condi-
tions of assistance to Greece are a suitable benchmark. It is
equally important that the special purpose vehicle which
forms the second part of the European Stabilisation Mech-
anism is a limited-term facility. By contrast, the first part of
the mechanism is of unlimited duration and thus, despite
its limited volume, opens the door to a permanent arrange-
ment financed by EU borrowing. The provision of such a
permanent safety net for countries threatened with insolv-
ency severely strains the underlying principle of monetary
union, namely that member states are individually respon-
sible for their own public finances; it is therefore more
problematic than the assistance given to Greece, which
was ad hoc and granted only on very specific terms and
conditions, or the temporary assistance offered by the spe-
cial purpose vehicle. This creates moral hazard both for
governments and for holders of government bonds. This
moral hazard can be contained by attaching strict condi-
tionality to drawings on these resources and imposing far-
reaching consequences for violations of this conditionality
*Opinion expressed by Professor Axel A Weber, President of the
Deutsche Bundesbank, at the 19 May 2010 public hearing of the
Budget Committee of the German Bundestag on the Draft Act Assum-ing Guarantees in Connection with a European Stabilisation Mech-
anism.

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
May 2010
13on the member state in question. For instance, the mech-
anism should only be capable of being activated if finan-cial stability is in jeopardy throughout the euro area. Theaim must under no circumstances be to mitigate a member
state’s financing problems on a discretionary basis. On the
contrary: strict fiscal and economic policy conditionalityshould motivate the member state to quickly return to asound budgetary position and regain access to capital mar-
ket financing.
All in all, the decisions taken on 10 May 2010 by the EU fi-
nance ministers appear justifiable in the light of the risks
to the stability of European monetary union and the devel-
opment of the global economy. The decisions, however,place a severe strain on the foundations of monetaryunion. Rapid and resolute action is therefore necessary to
stabilise and reinforce the weakened foundations of mon-
etary union so that similar escalations can be avoided infuture. It is particularly crucial to underpin the rescuemeasures, as envisaged, with moves to improve statistical
reporting and especially to tighten the existing fiscal rules.
A major requirement is to attach greater importance tothe debt criterion in future. Rules should be laid down fordebt ratios in excess of 60% spelling out a timetable for
their reduction and the sanctions for non-compliance. The
deficit criterion can be strengthened by closing the loop-holes introduced by the last reform of the Stability andGrowth Pact and attaching greater importance to ex ante
compliance with the rules. In general, responses to policy
aberrations must be expedited and hence the current pro-cedure accelerated. A key need is to improve the hithertooften inadequate implementation of the rules, eg by mak-
ing the imposition of sanctions less subject to political bar-
gaining and more rule-bound. Another sensible measurewould be a commitment to anchor the European fiscalframework – especially the medium-term budgetary ob-
jectives – more strongly in national budgetary legislation,
as Germany has done with the introduction of a debtbrake. In clear cases of misguided policies, increasedmacroeconomic surveillance at the European level is
doubtless also called for. However, in the current frame-
work, not only the independence of monetary policy butalso the subsidiarity principle need to be observed. Whole-sale moves towards centralisation and fine-tuning would
be worryingly dubious. For instance, the relatively broad-brush expansion of deficits and debt in the context of the
European Economic Recovery Programme needs to be crit-ically appraised in the light of whether it may, in fact, havehelped to worsen the current problems in some countries.
Recent calls for a more expansionary fiscal policy and wage
increases in Germany likewise give reason to doubt thatstronger policy coordination would necessarily contributeto tackling the root causes of the crisis.
If the support measures necessitated by the debt crisis in
some countries are not followed up in the foreseeablefuture by efforts to create a far-reaching, democratically
legitimised political union and, instead, member states
themselves continue to retain ultimate decision-makingauthority for their national fiscal and economic policies,monetary union will have to be reinforced as a community
of stability by additional reforms that extend beyond tight-
ening the current fiscal framework. A variety of possiblemeasures have already been suggested. Thus, besidesmoves to strengthen the existing arrangements in the Sta-
bility and Growth Pact, the establishment of a sovereign in-
solvency procedure has also been put forward as a keyelement of a reformed framework. In addition, further-reaching sanction mechanisms should be considered in the
event that a member state which draws on a support pro-
gramme fails to implement the necessary measures tomaintain its stability and thereby consciously jeopardisesthe union’s existence. In the light of the recently agreed
decisions, implementation of these proposals would make
an important contribution to safeguarding monetaryunion as a community of stability also in a changed overallenvironment.
The Eurosystem, with its single monetary policy, will re-
main committed to the goal of ensuring price stability inthe euro area. It is the task of fiscal policy, through sound
public finances and a suitable institutional framework, to
ensure that monetary policy is appropriately supported ina monetary union that rests on a foundation of stability.Recent developments have revealed weaknesses in the
existing fiscal framework and exposed the economic conse-
quences of many years of diverging competitive positionsacross the euro area. If monetary union is to be placed on afirm long-term footing, it is vital that policymakers use the
current brief respite to initiate reforms.

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
EUROSYSTEM
Monthly Report
May 2010
14Developments over the past few weeks have
once again forcefully driven home the point
that the safeguarding of sustainable public fi-
nances and the reduction of the high debt
levels are crucial prerequisites for the stability
of European monetary union. The European
fiscal framework is currently being put to its
severest test since the launch of monetary
union. It will be especially important not onlyto shore up the damaged institutional foun-
dations but also for those member states
which are currently confronted with particu-
larly challenging fiscal problems to live up to
their responsibilities and to regain lost confi-
dence. However, German fiscal policymakers,
too, should play a prominent role in ensuring
that the fiscal framework in the euro area is
made truly binding on the member states.

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
May 2010
15Global and European
settingWorld economic activity
The global upswing became increasingly en-
trenched starting from the beginning of the
year. Monetary policy and the inventory cycle
continued to provide strong stimuli, whereas
the expansionary fiscal policy effects abated.
In addition, continued sharp price rises in the
equity markets lasting into April indicated
growing confidence in a sustained global up-
swing. In the past few weeks, however, the
financial markets have been dominated by
the debt crisis in Greece, which caused
contagion effects that spilled over to other
countries. The heightened uncertainty in the
international equity and bond markets has
not, so far, impacted on the real economy.
However, it represents a risk, particularly to
the euro area.
Global industrial output was up in January–
February by 21/C254% from the fourth quarter, in
which it had risen by 21/C252%. Following a year
marked by recession, its year-on-year growth
was no less than 101/C254%. In the current
quarter, it may well already return to its
cyclical peak from the second quarter of
2008. The volume of world trade, having ex-
perienced continuous buoyant growth in the
past few months, has not recovered fully yet;
in January–February it was still 61/C254% down
on the first quarter of 2008.
The great differences in growth rates be-
tween the individual regions which had
opened up in 2009 persisted throughout the
reporting period. In the meantime, the econ-
omies of some east Asian emerging markets
and Brazil are again facing the threat of over-World
economic
activity still
improving, ...
... though
regional
differences still
considerable

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
EUROSYSTEM
Monthly Report
May 2010
16heating. In several countries, central banks
have therefore raised their interest rates in
the past few months; China has imposed
administrative restrictions on lending. The in-
dustrial countries, on the whole, maintained
their much more moderate rate of economic
growth in the first-quarter months. Of those
countries, it was Japan that saw the strongest
growth in economic output. The United
States, too, saw good progress in its cyclical
recovery. By contrast, overall output in the
euro area grew only sluggishly. However,
account needs to be taken of the adverse
weather-related effects which affected, above
all, construction output in the northern mem-
ber states. Real gross domestic product (GDP)
for the United States, the EU and Japan taken
together rose by1/C252% after seasonal adjust-
ment, which was not quite as strong as a
quarter earlier; it was up by 13/C254% on the
year.
The leading indicators for the world economy
are pointing to a continuation of the strong
recovery in the second and third quarters of
2010. The forward-looking components of
the global Purchasing Managers’ Indices for
manufacturing and services went up once
again in the first-quarter months. A new lead-
ing indicator developed by the Bundesbank is
pointing in the same direction (see box on
pages 18-19). In addition, according to the
ifo institute, the global economic climate has
of late improved once again, owing mainly to
a much more favourable assessment of the
current situation and continued optimism
regarding future expectations. The indicator
has pulled away even further from its multi-
year average. This is due in particular toIndustrial output *
Sources:  national  statistics,  Eurostat  and 
Centraal  Planbureau  (CPB). —  * Including 
mining and energy, excluding construction.
Deutsche Bundesbank2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 201095100105110115120
889296100104108
889296100104108112
889296100104
7680848892961001041081122005 = 100, seasonally adjusted,
quarterly, log scale
JapanUnited KingdomEuro areaUSAWorld
of which
AprJan-
Feb
Positive signals
for the Q2–Q3
period

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
May 2010
17developments in Asia and North America,
whereas western Europe has made virtuallyno progress.
Owing to the extremely buoyant global
economic activity, in April the InternationalMonetary Fund (IMF) revised its forecast ofglobal growth for 2010 upwards by 0.3 per-centage point from its January forecast to4.2%. In spring 2009 its forecast had been aslow as 1.9%. The latest correction applies tothe industrial countries and emerging mar-kets alike; output growth in these regions isnow expected to run at 2.3% and 6.3%respectively. Of the emerging markets, theforecasts were increased particularly sharplyfor the central and east European countries(to 2.8%), India (to 8.8%) and Brazil(to 5.5%). China, however, still leads thepack at 10.0%. For 2011, the forecast for theglobal economy from the beginning of theyear (+4.3%) has been retained. World tradeis forecast to grow this year and next by7.0% and 6.1% respectively. With respect toconsumer prices, the IMF expects them to risemoderately in the industrial countries atan annual rate of 1
1/C252% during the forecast
period. In the emerging markets, however,inflation will pick up perceptibly for cyclicalreasons to 6.2% in 2010 but recede to 4.7%next year. On the whole, though, the IMFregards the risks to growth as being on thedownside, with particular emphasis in thiscontext resting on the significant growth ofpublic debt in the industrial countries.
The price of Brent crude oil fluctuated in the
three first-quarter months in a corridor ofbetween US$70 and US$80 per barrel. Inearly April, however, it picked up rapidly and
was then hovering over the US$85 mark.Amidst the financial market turmoil, however,the price of oil retreated sharply in May, toUS$71
1/C254as this report went to press. Owing
to the euro’s depreciation, the price of crudeoil in euro did not fall quite as heavily; at theend of the reporting period a barrel was sell-ing for 357
3/C254. Since the fourth quarter of
2009, global demand for oil has been goingback up owing, above all, to the surge in de-mand from the emerging markets, particu-larly China. However, the supply of oil is alsoon the rise; owing to an increase in deliveriesby Iraq, OPEC production in February was atits highest since the fourth quarter of 2008.The relatively moderate mark-ups in the for-ward markets indicate a slightly rising pricetrend for the rest of 2010 and 2011. Develop-World market prices for 
crude oil and industrial raw materials as well as food, beverages and tobacco
Sources:  Thomson  Reuters  and  HWWI.  — 
 = 14 May or 24 May 2010 (crude oil).
Deutsche Bundesbank2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010100125150175200250300400500US dollar basis, 2000 = 100, log scale
Crude oil 
(Brent)
Industrial raw materialsFood, beverages 
and tobaccoFavourable IMF
spring forecast
Prices of crude
oil and
industrial raw
materials
initially
continued to
rise

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
EUROSYSTEM
Monthly Report
May 2010
18Deuts che Bun desbankConstru ctin g a new lea ding indicator for the global e conomy
After plummetin g almost syn chronously a cross countries 
in the last few months of 2008 an d the ﬁ  rst few months 
of 2009, the global e conomy has rapi dly re gaine d 
momentum an d has been on a remarka bly dynami c 
growth path sin ce the se con d quarter of 2009. Since then, 
the stron gest stimuli for the global re covery have been 
comin g from the emer ging market e conomies in South 
and South East Asia, parti cularly China, whereas the 
cyclical re covery in the in dustrial countries, whi ch were 
hit mu ch har der by the ﬁ  nan cial crisis, began later. The 
cyclical re covery in Germany, whi ch has a gain been more 
export- driven of late, is beneﬁ tin g from a rise in deman d 
both from in dustrial countries an d from the emer ging 
market e conomies. Lea ding indicators of global e conomi c 
development, whi ch by deﬁ nition provi de early si gnals of 
chan ges in e conomi c activity, are therefore of parti cular 
interest when analysin g an d fore castin g ma croe conomi c 
momentum in Germany.
Lea ding in dicators are generally use d to o bserve e co-
nomi c activity in a given e conomi c area over time an d, 
in parti cular, to i dentify cyclical turnin g points ex ante . 
Usually, however, there are a lar ge num ber of varia bles 
with lea ding indicator properties availa ble that exhi bit a 
fairly hi gh level of in dividual volatility. These in dividual 
indicators are, therefore, often compile d into composite 
lea ding in dicators ( CLIs) usin g statisti cal metho ds. For 
some time now, the OE CD‘s cyclical composite lea ding 
indicators have been attra ctin g mu ch attention. The staff 
at the OE CD constru ct country-spe ciﬁ c CLIs whi ch usually 
draw on between six an d eight in dividual in dicators that 
differ from country to country.1 After detren ding, these 
indicators are a ggregate d into a composite in dicator 
usin g statisti cal data re duction metho ds. A dditionally, 
the OE CD generates a ggregate composite in dicators for 
sele cted economi c re gions from the country-spe ciﬁ c CLIs. 
The in dicator for 29 OE CD countries an d the six BRII CS 
countries2 is of parti cular interest. Over 80% of worl d-
wide GDP is generate d by this group of countries, whi ch 
indeed makes it a global lea ding indicator. It serves below 
as a benchmark for the properties of a new Bun desbank 
indicator for the global e conomy (BBk in dicator).
The Bun desbank‘s global lea ding indicator was essentially 
mo delle d on the OE CD‘s metho dolo gy, but with one fun-
damental differen ce. Instea d of ﬁ  rst calculatin g lea ding 
indicators for in dividual countries an d then a ggregatin g these, global series were use d dire ctly, the availa bility of 
whi ch has been stea dily in creasin g. This approa ch has 
the dual a dvanta ge that it covers a broa der ran ge of 
countries an d, compare d with the OE CD in dicator, also 
allows greater emphasis to be pla ced on components 
with timely an d fre quent availa bility.
Various statisti cal data re duction metho ds are availa ble 
for constru ctin g a composite in dicator from a num ber of 
time series.3 Prin cipal component analysis is the metho d 
use d here. The basi c idea behin d this metho d is that 
each varia ble contains partial information whi ch is not 
containe d in other time series. This “new” information 
constitutes the element of a varia ble that is in depen dent 
of the other varia bles or, put differently, it has an un corre-
late d or ortho gonal relationship to these other varia bles. 
In prin cipal component analysis, the ortho gonal elements 
of the various in dividual varia bles are calculate d ﬁ rst 
and then, in a se con d step, a small num ber of informa-
tive linear com binations – the prin cipal components 
– are forme d. The ﬁ  rst prin cipal component explains the 
bulk of the variation in the data, while ea ch a dditional 
component su ccessively explains as mu ch of the remain-
ing variation as possi ble. This allows a small num ber of 
un correlate d components to be generate d from several 
correlate d in dividual varia bles. The in dicator presente d 
here is generate d from the ﬁ  rst prin cipal component.
The in dividual varia bles for prin cipal component analysis 
were chosen partly on the basis of statisti cal perform-
ance analyses. The timeliness an d fre quen cy of the data 
also playe d a role in the sele ction pro cess. A total of 14 
global (seasonally a djuste d) time series were consi dere d. 
After detren ding, smoothin g an d normalisation, the vari-
ables were examine d over the entire estimation perio d 
(January 2003 to April 2010) in terms of their statisti cal 
lea ding in dicator properties in relation to the refer-
ence series, namely global in dustrial pro duction.4 Nine 
time series in dicate a hi gh cross- correlation with global 
industrial pro duction – whi ch was also sta ble durin g the 
estimation perio d – an d they were thus in cluded in the 
followin g prin cipal component analysis. Overall, it turns 
out that, compare d with alternative mo dellin g schemes 
for the nine time series un der consi deration, the lea ding 
indicator with the best lea ding in dicator properties an d 
whi ch can most a ccurately fore cast cyclical turnin g points 
is the one pro duced from the followin g six time series: 
1 The OE CD lea ding indicator for Germany is compute d from six in dica-
tors: four in dicators of the Ifo institute ( business climate, deman d situ-
ation, level of export or ders, level of inventories), or ders re ceive d in manufa cturin g an d an (unspe ciﬁ ed) interest rate mar gin. — 2 BRII CS: 
Brazil, Russia, In dia, In donesia, China an d South Afri ca. — 3 See “Han d-
book on Constru ctin g Composite In dicators” OE CD, 2008. — 4 Glo bal 

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
May 2010
19the global Pur chasin g Mana gers’ In dex (PMI) for manu-
facturin g, where, in a ddition to the overall in dicator, 
the su b-component “assessment of new export or ders” 
was also taken into consi deration; the global PMI for the 
servi ces se ctor; the Sentix consumer climate “ current situ-
ation in dex”;5 the Sentix consumer climate “expe ctations 
index” (six months) an d the S&P Glo bal 1200 share pri ce 
index.
As in the case of the OE CD lea ding in dicators, the Bun-
desbank‘s BBk in dicator has been optimise d so that it can 
pre dict cyclical turnin g points in a timely an d accurate 
fashion. However, the detren ding require d for this means 
that only qualitative comparisons with the tren ded ref-
eren ce series, namely global in dustrial pro duction, are 
possi ble. This is why the OE CD assesses the quality of 
its CLIs ex clusively in terms of their fore cast quality for 
cyclical turnin g points an d not in terms of their pre dictive 
property with re gard to the referen ce series. The descrip-
tive metho d applie d by the OE CD was use d to compare 
the Bun desbank‘s BBk lea ding in dicator with the OE CD 
indicator.6 The results in dicate that, for the time perio d 
un der consi deration, the avera ge lea ding in dicator 
property of the Bun desbank‘s BBk in dicator for cyclical 
turnin g points is sli ghtly greater an d is su bject to some-
what less dispersion. At the same time, the Bun desbank‘s 
BBk in dicator has a hi gher cross- correlation with the 
referen ce series. However, the greatest a dvanta ge of the 
index as a lea ding indicator is its timely availa bility. While 
the OE CD in dicator is generally pu blishe d 1½ months 
after the reportin g perio d, the in dicator presente d here 
is availa ble as soon as the thir d workin g day of the fol-
lowin g month an d therefore aroun d six weeks earlier. 
Nevertheless, the relatively short estimation perio d of 
the Bun desbank‘s BBk in dicator constitutes a si gniﬁ cant 
draw back at present. It is likely to become less si gniﬁ cant 
over time, however.
When interpretin g the in dicator, the fo cus is on momen-
tum an d the respe ctive cyclical phase. In line with the 
OE CD’s metho dolo gy, a distin ction is ma de between four 
cyclical phases: 1. Expansion (in dicator in creasin g an d 
above 100); 2. Downturn (in dicator decreasin g an d above 
100); 3. Slow down (in dicator decreasin g an d below 100); 
4. Re covery (in dicator in creasin g an d below 100). When 
the value for Fe bruary 2009 was pu blishe d, both the 
Bun desbank‘s BBk lea ding in dicator an d the OE CD in di-cator si gnalle d an imminent cyclical bottomin g-out in the 
recent re cession.7 The fun damental differen ce, however, 
was that the Fe bruary value of the Bun desbank‘s BBk 
indicator was availa ble six weeks earlier ( beginnin g of 
Mar ch). The Bun desbank‘s BBk in dicator for the global 
economy si gnalle d the chan geover from a “re covery” 
phase to an “expansion” phase as early as Au gust 2009, 
whereas the OE CD in dicator did not ex ceed 100 until 
October 2009.
The positive tren d of the Bun desbank‘s BBk in dicator 
continue d up to the en d of the perio d un der review, even 
thou gh the upwar d curve has sin ce become somewhat 
ﬂ atter compare d with the steep slope in the se con d an d 
thir d quarters of 2009. Given its fun ction as a lea ding 
indicator, it is to be expe cted that the upturn in the global 
economy, whi ch ma de goo d pro gress in the ﬁ  rst quarter 
of 2010, will continue at a rapi d pa ce in the se con d half 
of the year.
industrial pro duction a ccording to CPB estimate. — 5 See www.
sentix. de/in dex.php?pa gename= documentation/e cowin.htm. — 6 See 
“Pre dictin g the Business Cycle - How goo d are early estimates of OE CD Composite Lea ding In dicators?” OE CD Statisti cs Brief, Fe bruary 
2008. — 7 Re cursive estimations of the in dicator have shown that cycli-
cal turnin g points did not have to be revise d ex post.Bundesbank leading indicator
for the global economy
2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 201092949698100102104Multi-year average = 100, log scale
OECD indicatorBundesbank
BBk indicator
Global industrial output

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
EUROSYSTEM
Monthly Report
May 2010
20ments were highly uneven with regard to
other commodities. The prices of industrial
raw materials advanced once again in April,
especially those of non-ferrous metals and
agricultural raw materials. However, they
receded distinctly in May amidst heightened
uncertainty in the financial markets and a
dampened outlook for demand from China.
The prices of food, beverages and tobacco,
however, remained stable in April and May
after having fallen perceptibly in the first
quarter.
Consumer prices in the industrial countries
were up once again in the first quarter of
2010, by 0.6% on the period after seasonal
adjustment. This is the average of a distinct
rise around the turn of 2009–10, largely as a
result of higher energy prices and the re-
newed value-added tax hike in the United
Kingdom, and a more moderate development
in February and March. Since December,
year-on-year inflation has fluctuated between
1.5% and 1.8%. At 1.7% on average for the
quarter, however, it was around twice as high
as in the last quarter of 2009, the beginning
of which had even been marked by a slight
decline in prices. Core inflation (excluding
energy and food) averaged 1.1% over the
first-quarter months. Excluding Japan, both
rates are each 0.3 percentage point higher. In
April, for which no data for Japan were
available as this report went to press, overall
consumer price inflation, at 2.0% year-on-
year, remained unchanged from the first
quarter. Core inflation fell further to 1.0%.Selected emerging market economies
The south and east Asian emerging markets
maintained their vigorous growth in the first-
quarter months. First-quarter real GDP in
China was up by 12% on the year. According
to an estimate by the Chinese central bank,
economic output rose by 3% on the quarter
after seasonal adjustment. Government in-
vestment, which was sharply increased under
the fiscal programme adopted in November
2008, once again contributed to maintaining
the strong cyclical growth. Household con-
sumption also provided positive stimuli, with
nominal retail sales in the first quarter up by
18% on the year. Sales of cars, which con-
tinued to be buoyed by a tax cut for environ-
mentally friendly new cars, even shot up by
77% over the same period. Owing to lively
growth of domestic demand and higher com-
modity prices, imports rose more sharply in
terms of value than exports, which meant
that China had only a relatively low trade
surplus in the first quarter. According to the
leading indicators, the rapid pace of econom-
ic expansion in China is set to continue in the
coming months, which will probably also
cause the risks of an overheating economy to
increase further. Since the beginning of the
year, consumer price inflation has picked up
significantly, owing especially to weather-
induced increases in food prices; in April it
stood at 2.8%. Excluding food, however, in-
flation was still moderate, at 1.3%.
India’s economy, according to available data,
remained on a steep expansionary track in
the first quarter. Owing to a slight easing ofEnergy more
expensive but
price climate in
industrial
countries
generally calmContinued
strong
expansion in
south and east
Asian emerging
markets ...

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
May 2010
21food prices, inflation fell slightly at last report,
to 14.9% in March.
Many Latin American countries likewise saw
their economic output rise distinctly onceagain in the first quarter of the year. Industrialoutput in Brazil was 3% up on its level of thefourth quarter of 2009 after seasonal adjust-ment. Positive demand stimuli came, aboveall, from household consumption. Real retailsales in the first quarter were up by 5% onthe period after seasonal adjustment follow-ing a 3% rise a period earlier. Consumer priceinflation accelerated further from the begin-ning of the year to 5.3% in April.
In Mexico, however, the cyclical recovery has
begun to sputter. Real GDP , after seasonal ad-justment, even fell slightly on the quarter.This, however, is probably only a temporarylull in growth against the background of thevery lively expansion in the second half of2009. An easing of the rise in food pricescaused the rate of inflation to fall noticeablyto 4.3% at the end of the reporting period.
In Russia, the cyclical recovery that had begun
in the second half of 2009 diminished in thefirst quarter of 2010. Although real GDP roseon the year again for the first time since theend of 2008 (+3%), this improvement is likelyto be due to a base effect following a severeslump in economic output in the same perioda year earlier. Investment, in particular, hasnot yet gained any momentum, according tothe available data. At least household con-sumption, however, appears to have re-covered perceptibly, if one uses real retailsales as a benchmark. In addition, Russianexport revenue remained on a steep upward
path owing to higher intake from deliveriesof crude oil and natural gas. Disinflation con-tinued throughout the reporting period. Con-sumer price inflation stood at 6.0% in April,its lowest level since July 1998.
USAThe engine of the United States economy
continued to run at an accelerated pace inthe first three months of the year, with overalleconomic output up by
3/C254% on the quarter
after seasonal adjustment, though it failed tomatch the pace of the final quarter of 2009(+1
1/C252%). That was because inventory move-
ments in the first quarter provided a muchsmaller boost than previously, contributingonly just under
1/C252percentage point. Domestic
private final demand, by contrast, acceleratedperceptibly.
In the first quarter of 2010, it was households
that made the greatest contribution to overalleconomic growth. Higher advance tax pay-ments tightly confined the growth of house-holds’ disposable income yet failed to keeptheir consumption from surging. At nearly1% on the period, price-adjusted consumerspending growth was twice as strong as inthe last quarter of 2009. In return, admittedly,the household savings rate was reduced from4% to 3%. The continued improvement inthe labour market, in particular, is likely tohave fuelled consumer spending. Following a6% decline in total employment, the firstquarter saw a slight period-on-period in-crease in non-farm employment for the firsttime in two years. In the second-quarter... and in many
Latin American
countries
Russian
recovery
weakerStrong
growth ...
... supported by
households

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
EUROSYSTEM
Monthly Report
May 2010
22months, the census currently in progress will
lead to the creation of a large number of tem-
porary jobs in the public sector. However, the
private sector, too, has increasingly become a
net creator of new jobs. The unemployment
rate, which in October 2009 had peaked at
10.1% and held steady at 9.7% in the first-
quarter months, climbed back up to 9.9% in
April. This was mainly because many people
who had exited the job market during the lat-
est recession are now actively seeking em-
ployment. The continued decline in inflation
provided additional relief to households. CPI
inflation in April, after adjustment for season-
al factors, was only 0.2% higher than at the
end of 2009; excluding energy and food, it
even remained unchanged. The correspond-
ing year-on-year inflation rates fell consider-ably to 2.2% and 0.9% respectively at the
end of the reporting period.
Not only households but also enterprises con-
tinued to drive the overall economic recovery.
Although investment in machinery and equip-
ment, on the whole, was no longer quite as
strong as in the fourth quarter, it was specific-
ally spending on machinery and other indus-
trial equipment which halted its two-year
slide. However, commercial construction,
which lags the cycle, plummeted almost
unhindered. The fragility of the recovery in
the real estate market to date, moreover, is
documented by a renewed decline in residen-
tial housing construction. Foreign trade flows
were calmer in the first quarter of 2010
following strong growth a quarter earlier.
Amidst a perceptible recovery of domestic
private final demand, imports grew more
strongly than exports. Apart from foreign
trade, demand from the public sector also
dampened overall economic output. At the
downstream levels of government, in parti-
cular, spending is increasingly being adjusted
to reduced revenues. Although the economic
stimulus programme adopted early last year
may initially continue to have a supporting
impact, its focus was not only on tax relief
but also on transfer payments to regional and
local governments and households, as a large
part of the programme is designed as a sub-
stitute for the automatic stabilisers, which
tend to be relatively unimportant in the
United States.2007 2008 2009 201010864202468
–––––++++Contributions to real GDP 
growth in the United States
Seasonally adjusted at annual rates
Source: Global Insight.
Deutsche BundesbankChange in private inventories
Net exports
Government expenditures
Personal consumption expenditures
Private fixed investment in equipment & software
Private construction expenditures
Quarterly percentage change in GDPPer-
centage
points... and
enterprises

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
May 2010
23Japan
Japan’s cyclical recovery progressed by leaps
and bounds in the first quarter of the year.According to a preliminary estimate, real GDP ,seasonally adjusted, was up by 1
1/C254% since
the final quarter of 2009, in which it hadrisen by 1%. Year-on-year real GDP growthwas 4
1/C252%; however, overall economic output
was still 43/C254% less than its level of the first
quarter of 2008. The buoyant recovery, likethe severe slump that preceded it, is beingsupported mainly by foreign demand. Indus-trial output was up in the first quarter by justunder 7% on the period after seasonal ad-justment, thereby keeping up with the rapidgrowth of real exports as defined in thenational accounts. Because imports grew at arate of 2
1/C254% and, hence, by less than
exports, foreign trade once again made aconsiderable (
3/C254percentage point) contribu-
tion to GDP growth.
Although a slowdown in the destocking of
inventories was the main reason for theincrease in the rate of quarter-on-quarteroverall economic growth, domestic finaldemand seems to have regained its footingas well. Private housing investment pointedupwards for the first time since the fourthquarter of 2008. In an environment ofimproved earnings and growing confidence,enterprises once again stepped up their grossfixed capital formation distinctly. In addition,households once again increased their realconsumption, which had already risen sharplyowing to government purchase incentives.They are now also being given relief by animprovement in the labour market situation.Employment grew perceptibly in the first
quarter compared with the final quarter of2009, and the unemployment rate in March,at 5.0%, was
1/C254percentage point lower than
in December. Lastly, the deflationary tenden-cies in consumer prices seem to be slowlyebbing. Negative year-on-year inflation ac-cording to the consumer price index con-tracted from -1.7% in December to -1.1% inMarch. Core inflation (excluding food andenergy) stood at -1.1% at the end of thereporting period, as compared with -1.2% atthe end of the past year.
United KingdomThe UK economic recovery which got under
way in the fourth quarter of last yearcontinued at a muted pace in the first quarterof 2010, with real GDP , according to thelatest estimates, up by a seasonally adjusted
1/C254% on the period after increasing by1/C252%i n
the fourth quarter. Disparities among themajor sectors persisted. In the manufacturingsector (excluding construction), real grossvalue added rose sharply (+1
1/C254%). Activity in
the services sector – which was supported bythe financial sector and the business-relatedservice providers – grew by only
1/C254%. By con-
trast, construction activity contracted – prob-ably due in part to weather conditions – by
1/C252%. The standardised unemployment rate
climbed by 0.2 percentage point to 7.9% inthe first two months of 2010. However,following a trend turnaround in the fourthquarter, the number of people claimingunemployment benefits fell significantlythroughout the reporting period. Consumerprices were 3.7% higher in April than a yearForeign trade
recovery
continuing ...
... but also
signs that
domestic
activity is
stabilisingStill on path of
moderate
recovery at
beginning of
year

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
EUROSYSTEM
Monthly Report
May 2010
24earlier. Inflation was thus holding steady
above the Bank of England’s target range of
one percentage point on either side of the
2% mark. Not only the renewed value-added
tax hike at the turn of 2009–10 and the
surge in oil prices but also the downstream
effects of the pound sterling’s depreciation
are likely to have contributed to the price
increases.
New EU member states
The moderate cyclical upturn in the new EU
member states (EU-8) picked up momentum
in the first quarter, though the positive overall
picture continues to mask disparate develop-
ments in the individual member states.
Whereas overall economic output continued
to recover in Poland, the Czech Republic and
Hungary, it does not appear to have bot-
tomed out yet in the Baltic states of Estonia
and Lithuania and the Black Sea countries of
Bulgaria and Romania. It is questionable
whether the slight GDP growth in Latvia
marks the beginning of a sustained recovery.
Industrial activity in the EU-8 is growing at an
accelerated pace. In this group of countries,
industrial output in the first quarter was up
by 51/C254% on the quarter after seasonal adjust-
ment. Retail sales (excluding cars) likewise ex-
panded perceptibly, by 13/C254% on the period.
The labour market situation remained tense,
though. The number of unemployed persons
rose in the winter months – partly as a result
of weather-related effects – by some 165,000
to 4.1 million. Since its cyclical low in Septem-
ber 2008, the number of unemployed per-
sons has risen by more than 50% and the
standardised unemployment rate by 3.2 per-centage points to 9.5%. Harmonised Index of
Consumer Prices (HICP) inflation was running
at 2.9% in April after falling to a new low of
2.6% in March.
Macroeconomic trends in the euro area
The cyclical recovery in the euro area, which
had begun to stall in the fourth quarter of
2009 amidst, among other things, the in-
fluence of temporary strains, remained listless
in the first-quarter months. Real GDP rose by
only1/C254% after seasonal adjustment and was
thus1/C252% above its low level of a year earlier.
Of the major member states, Italy saw the
strongest growth (+1/C252% after seasonal ad-
justment), followed by Germany at1/C254%a n d
then France and Spain, which grew only min-
imally. The damage to construction output in
Germany and other member states caused by
the harsh winter put a visible damper on the
euro area’s result. The catch-up effects in
construction alone will probably be enough
to spur faster euro-area growth in the second
quarter. Despite the fact that the fiscal assist-
ance packages are expiring and the stimuli
provided by the inventory cycle are subsiding,
the underlying trend in business activity is
likely to maintain its moderate upward tilt as
2010 progresses. The escalation of the debt
problems in some periphery countries and the
announcement of additional consolidation
measures by the affected countries against
that background, however, will probably tend
to curb euro-area growth for the time being.
In its spring forecast, the European Commis-
sion is expecting growth of 0.9% in 2010
and 1.5% in 2011.Economic
picture positive
overallMuted growth
at beginning of
year ...

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
May 2010
25GDP growth in the first quarter was gener-
ated in great measure by the industrial sector(including energy production). Production inthis sector rose by 3
3/C254% after seasonal ad-
justment; although it was up 41/C254% on the
year, it was still 91/C252% lower than before the
beginning of the crisis. The quarter-on-quar-ter rise is attributable in part to a substantialincrease in energy production. This reveals apositive weather effect which is making itselffelt particularly in France, Germany, theNetherlands and Finland. With regard tooverall economic growth, however, this effectcontrasts with adverse weather-related im-pacts on construction activity. The productionof intermediate goods and consumer goodseach rose by 1
1/C252% in the first quarter, where-
as the manufacture of capital goods went uponly slightly. As industrial output increased,capacity utilisation in the manufacturingindustry showed a visible further improve-ment in the January to April period, though itwas still perceptibly below its long-run aver-age.
The leading indicators point to a continuation
of the upward trend in manufacturing at asomewhat accelerated pace. Industrial con-fidence has improved considerably in the pastfew months and has now nearly returned toits long-term average. Among its compon-ents, production expectations have bright-ened considerably, and pressure on inventor-ies is regarded as minimal. The assessment ofthe orders situation is less gloomy than be-fore, yet the balance of responses is still deepin negative territory. Fittingly, new orders inthe first quarter were more than one-fifthlower than their early 2008 peak. Admittedly,orders in the first quarter were up by 3
1/C252%
on the quarter; excluding the manufacture ofother transport equipment, which is usuallystrongly characterised by large orders, theincrease amounted to 3
3/C254%.
The primary meaningful stimulant of demand
at the beginning of the year was exports tonon-euro-area countries, which in the firstquarter were up by 9
1/C254% on the quarter afterSelected indicators of 
industrial activityin the euro area
Deutsche Bundesbank2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010859095100105110115
67707376798285
80859095100105110115120125130130Seasonally adjusted, quarterly
Lin scale
Capacity utilisation
Log scale
New orders received
by order-based manufacturingindustry
2005 = 100Log scale
Industrial output
2005 = 100
1994 - 2009
average%
0
of which
Excluding 
other transportequipmentTotal... supported by
the industrial
sector
Exports
buoyant but
domestic
demand weak

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
EUROSYSTEM
Monthly Report
May 2010
26Deutsche BundesbankFiscal developments in the euro area
After a drastic deterioration in 2009, euro-area budgetary devel-
opments still expected to be unfavourable
At the end of April, Eurostat published the general government
deficits and debt figures of the EU member states that had re-
ported these figures as part of the European budgetary surveil-
lance process. According to these reports, the euro-area deficit
rose dramatically last year from 2.0% of GDP to 6.3%.
Developments were decisively shaped by the financial and eco-
nomic crisis. The European Commission’s calculations show that
roughly half of the rise in the deficit ratio is due to the economic
downturn. The effect of discretionary fiscal policy measures, such
as those taken as part of the European Economic Recovery Plan,
was also felt. Furthermore, revenue in some member states fell
more sharply than would be expected on the basis of legislative
changes and the decline in GDP alone. Revenue decreased by a
total of 4% and the revenue ratio fell by 0.5 percentage point to
44.4%. By contrast, expenditure rose by 5% and the expenditure
ratio increased sharply by 3.9 percentage points to 50.7%. The
debt ratio also soared from 69.4% to 78.7%. This jump was large-
ly due to high primary deficits, rising interest expenditure and
falling GDP. In addition there were government support meas-
ures for financial institutions, such as bank recapitalisations, that
did not affect the deficit but did push up the debt level. By con-
trast, guarantees and support measures similar to guarantees,
which were also deployed during the financial crisis, are mainly
not shown in the figures if they have not (yet) been taken up.
In its spring forecast, the European Commission expects the
euro-area deficit ratio to continue to rise slightly, reaching 6.6%
in 2010 – the highest level since the launch of monetary union.
This deterioration is driven not by cyclical influences but by add-
itional tax cuts. Overall, revenue is expected to increase by ap-
proximately 1% and expenditure by just under 2%. The revenue
ratio will thus slip to 44.2% while the expenditure ratio will re-
main at a high level of 50.8%. The European Commission fore-
casts a slight decline in the deficit to 6.1% of GDP in 2011, which
is attributable in virtually equal parts to the phasing out of tem-
porary stabilisation measures and to a slight improvement in the
cyclical impact. Stronger revenue growth (21/C252%) than in 2010 is
expected, meaning that the ratio will remain more or less con-
stant. With no year-on-year change in expenditure growth, the
expenditure ratio will fall by approximately half a percentage
point. According to the Commission’s forecast, between the end
of 2009 and the end of 2011, general government debt in the
euro area relative to GDP will again shoot up by roughly 10 per-
centage points to just under 90%. This sizeable increase is due
primarily to high deficit ratios.Most countries are in clear breach of the reference values for the
deficit and debt ratios
The European Commission estimates that all euro-area countries
will overshoot the 3% deficit limit in 2010. At around 12%, Ire-
land is forecast to record the highest deficit ratio, followed by
Spain and Greece, both with almost 10%. Portugal, Cyprus and
France are expected to record deficits of between 81/C252% and 7%
of GDP. However, as is standard practice, calculations are based
on the laws applicable at the time of estimation, meaning that
consolidation measures which had been planned but not yet im-
plemented were not included in the calculations. Spain and Por-
tugal have since provided details of additional consolidation
measures as agreed in the package of measures approved by the
Ecofin Council on 10 May. Greece has also implemented the add-
itional measures set out in the support package from the begin-
ning of May.
An excessive deficit procedure has already been initiated for
most euro-area countries,1and the forecast shows that many of
these countries have a considerable need for action if they are to
meet the minimum budgetary requirements stipulated in this
procedure. Given that the deficit ratio in Cyprus was well in ex-
cess of 3% in 2009 and that Finland is planning to overstep the
reference value this year, the Council is soon likely to rule that an
excessive deficit exists in these countries, too. Subsequently, with
the exception of Luxembourg, all euro-area countries would be
in an excessive deficit procedure.
According to the Commission’s forecast, the debt ratios will rise
in all euro-area countries up to 2011, and in some cases this in-
crease will be dramatic. Compared with 2009, the debt ratio in
Ireland, Spain and Greece is forecast to climb by around 20 per-
centage points, followed by Portugal, Cyprus, France and Finland
with a plus of between 141/C252and 11 percentage points. In 2011,
only four countries (Luxembourg, Slovenia, Slovakia and Finland)
are likely to comply with the reference value of 60% for the debt
ratio.
Critical escalation in some countries
In the past few years, Greece has repeatedly failed to meet its ob-
ligation to provide reliable statistics. Furthermore, its budgetary
and economic policies were inappropriate given the stability re-
quirements of a single currency area and it grossly breached
European commitments and rules. In February 2010, the ongoing
excessive deficit procedure was stepped up and Greece was in-
structed to correct its excessive deficit by 2012 at the latest. Dur-
ing a visit by a delegation from the European Commission, ECB
and IMF to Greece this March, additional consolidation steps
were agreed to ensure that the deficit can be corrected as
planned. In spite of implementing consolidation measures, the
funding of government borrowing requirements on the capital
1For information about the excessive deficit procedure, see also
Deutsche Bundesbank, Excessive deficit procedure against 13 euro-area member states, Monthly Report, November 2009, pp 64-65. —
2See the statement by Professor Axel Weber, President of the

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
May 2010
27market was in serious jeopardy at the end of April. In the current
very fragile situation, a sovereign default would have posed aconsiderable threat to the stability of the financial system and ofmonetary union. As a result, the IMF, European Commission andECB agreed at the beginning of May to provide Greece with ex-tensive loans to safeguard its solvency. These loans are to bearinterest on the basis of three-month EURIBOR rates, and an add-itional charge of 300 to 400 basis points will be applied. In re-turn, the Greek government has committed to an additional con-solidation and reform programme. Overall, measures amountingto 7
1/C252% of GDP in 2010, 4% in 2011 and 2% both in 2012 and in
2013 are to be implemented to reduce the deficit ratio so that itreaches 2.6% of GDP in 2014. The loans will be paid in instal-ments and are conditional on the strict implementation of theconditions agreed, in particular the extensive consolidationmeasures that have already been stipulated. In light of the factthat economic developments in Greece are now estimated to besignificantly more unfavourable and of the additional measuresto be taken in 2010 as well as the further consolidation measuresalready stipulated, it is justifiable that Greece’s deadline for cor-recting the excessive deficit has been delayed until 2014.
Tensions in the markets for some other countries’ government
bonds also increasingly escalated at the beginning of May on anunexpected scale. Given the serious and immediate danger, theEU finance ministers decided to set up a European financial sta-bilisation mechanism.
2At the same time, they pledged to reform
the fiscal rules and accelerate the consolidation of publicbudgets, especially in the countries facing a serious threat. In thiscontext, the latest additional consolidation measures in Portugaland Spain are a welcome development. Portugal has stated thatit plans to reduce its deficit sooner than envisaged in the stability
programme and to curb its rising debt ratio. In addition to bring-ing forward consolidation efforts as announced previously, fur-ther measures are to be implemented so that the deficit rationow planned for 2010 (7.3%) is brought down one percentagepoint below the previous plan. It is then to be cut to 4.6% in2011 (compared with the previously planned figure of 6.6%).According to information from the Spanish government,additional measures are to further reduce the deficit ratio by 0.5percentage point in 2010 and 1.5 percentage points in 2011.Spain’s deficit ratio is therefore expected to amount to 9.3% in2010 and 6.0% in 2011.
Without decisive counter steering, there is – as observed in
Greece – a danger of a spiral of increasing risk premiums and ris-ing debt which may give rise to negative growth effects. The cur-rent crisis has shown just how important it is to comply with thereference values specified in the Treaty on the Functioning ofthe European Union. Efforts to strengthen the rules and ensureadherence thereto, which are now underway, are thus vital. Thisis not just a matter of rapidly correcting excessive deficits. Agreater focus has to be placed on achieving and maintaining asound budgetary position in the first place (preventive arm ofthe Stability and Growth Pact) than has previously been the case.Moreover, the debt level has to be expressly incorporated intosurveillance and correction procedures, with the possibility ofsanctions in the event of infringements. Another task will be tocomplement the weakened non-liability clause of the Treaty onthe Functioning of the European Union with suitable provisionsthat substantially increase incentives for a sound fiscal policy atnational level.
Deutsche Bundesbank, at the public hearing of the Budget Commit- tee of the German Bundestag on 19 May 2010 on pages 12-13 of this
report.European Commission, Economic Forecast Spring 2010Stability programme,
beginning of 2010
Budget balance as % of GDP Government debt as % of GDP Budget balance as % of GDP
Country 2008 2009 2010 2011 2008 2009 2010 2011 2010 2011 2012Austria – 0.4 – 3.4 – 4.7 – 4.6 62.6 66.5 70.2 72.9 – 4.7 – 4.0 – 3.3
Belgium – 1.2 – 6.0 – 5.0 – 5.0 89.8 96.7 99.0 100.9 – 4.8 – 4.1 – 3.0Cyprus 0.9 – 6.1 – 7.1 – 7.7 48.4 56.2 62.3 67.6 – 6.0 – 4.5 – 3.4Finland 4.2 – 2.2 – 3.8 – 2.9 34.2 44.0 50.5 54.9 – 3.6 – 3.0 – 2.3France – 3.3 – 7.5 – 8.0 – 7.4 67.5 77.6 83.6 88.6 – 8.2 – 6.0 – 4.6Germany 0.0 – 3.3 – 5.0 – 4.7 66.0 73.2 78.8 81.6 – 5
1/C252 –41/C252 –31/C252
Greece – 7.7 – 13.6 – 9.3 – 9.9 99.2 115.1 124.9 133.9 – 8.7 – 5.6 2.8Ireland – 7.3 – 14.3 – 11.7 – 12.1 43.9 64.0 77.3 87.3 – 11.6 – 10.0 – 7.2Italy – 2.7 – 5.3 – 5.3 – 5.0 106.1 115.8 118.2 118.9 – 5.0 – 3.9 – 2.7Luxembourg 2.9 – 0.7 – 3.5 – 3.9 13.7 14.5 19.0 23.6 – 3.9 – 5.0 – 4.6Malta – 4.5 – 3.8 – 4.3 – 3.6 63.7 69.1 71.5 72.5 – 3.9 – 2.9 – 2.8Netherlands 0.7 – 5.3 – 6.3 – 5.1 58.2 60.9 66.3 69.6 – 6.1 – 5.0 – 4.5Portugal – 2.8 – 9.4 – 8.5 – 7.9 66.3 76.8 85.8 91.1 – 8.3 – 6.6 – 4.6Slovakia – 2.3 – 6.8 – 6.0 – 5.4 27.7 35.7 40.8 44.0 – 5.5 – 4.2 – 3.0Slovenia – 1.7 – 5.5 – 6.1 – 5.2 22.6 35.9 41.6 45.4 – 5.7 – 4.2 – 3.1Spain – 4.1 – 11.2 – 9.8 – 8.8 39.7 53.2 64.9 72.5 – 9.8 – 7.5 – 5.3Euro area – 2.0 – 6.3 – 6.6 – 6.1 69.4 78.7 84.7 88.5 . . .

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
EUROSYSTEM
Monthly Report
May 2010
28seasonal adjustment. Imports, however, rose
even more strongly in terms of value
(+101/C252%), which was attributable mainly to
higher energy import volumes and also to
price increases. If the deterioration in the
terms of trade is taken into account, the
contribution of foreign trade to GDP growth
is likely to be minimal at best. Domestic final
demand was probably likewise very muted in
the first quarter of the year. Real retail sales
(excluding cars) remained virtually un-
changed, after seasonal adjustment, in the
first quarter. In addition, the reduction or
expiry of environmental premiums in some
countries at the end of the year caused a
71/C254% period-on-period decline in new car
registrations in the first quarter. Consumer
confidence was also still at a relatively low
ebb as the second quarter began. According
to output figures, investment in new build-
ings is likely to have contracted sharply in the
first quarter on account of the weather and
the lack of demand for capacity extension.
According to the data on production, there
has been no increase in expenditure on
machinery and equipment, either.
The labour market situation in the euro area
worsened only slightly in the first-quarter
months. Owing in part to the unusually cold
winter weather, the seasonally adjusted un-
employment rate rose slightly from 9.9% in
December 2009 to 10.0% in March 2010.
The individual euro-area countries’ rates,
however, ranged very widely, from 4.1% in
the Netherlands to 19.1% in Spain. The
number of employed persons fell in the
fourth quarter of 2009 (more recent data are
not available) by 0.3 % on the period afterseasonal adjustment following a period-on-
period decline of 0.5% a quarter earlier.
Whereas Slovenia (at -1.0%) and Spain and
Greece (-0.8% each) saw higher-than-aver-
age falls in employment, the number of em-
ployed persons remained unchanged in Ger-
many and Portugal, whereas in Austria and
Luxembourg there was even a slight trend in-
crease in employment. The decline in hours
worked in the euro area likewise abated in
the fourth quarter of 2009. Owing in part to
the decline in short-time work, the number of
hours worked even increased in Germany
(0.4%) and Italy (0.1%) on the quarter.
Euro-area consumer prices rose by 0.5% in
the first quarter after seasonal adjustment,
the largest increase since the third quarter of
2008. Much higher energy prices as a result
of crude oil price hikes were the main reason.
The price of unprocessed food, however,
likewise rose again for the first time in a year,
especially owing to the unusually cold winter
weather. Processed food prices, however,
remained unchanged, as did the prices of
industrial goods excluding energy. Of the
core components, only services saw prices
increase, though not as sharply as in the
preceding quarters. Excluding energy and
unprocessed food, annual HICP inflation, at
+0.9%, was slightly lower than in the fourth
quarter of 2009 (+1.0%). Overall year-on-
year HICP , by contrast, saw a quite strong rise
of 0.7 percentage point to +1.1%. This was
due mainly to a substantial increase in up-
ward price pressures in nearly all euro-area
member states. Ireland is now the only coun-
try left with negative year-on-year inflation,
and only five other countries have an inflationLabour market
collapse abatedDistinct rise in
energy and
food prices

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
May 2010
29rate of less than 1%. In some of the smaller
member states, inflation has already passedthe 2% mark. Euro-area consumer pricesalso rose slightly in April after seasonal ad-justment. Annual HICP inflation overall was+1.5% following +1.4% a month earlier.
In the past year, the development of euro-
area public finances was characterised to asignificant degree by the financial and eco-
nomic crisis. The euro-area member states’government deficits and debt levels soared.An excessive deficit procedure has beenlaunched against nearly all of these countries.The European Commission forecast under-scores the need for substantial action in orderto meet the envisaged correction targets (seealso box on pages 26-27).
Deterioration of
public finances

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
EUROSYSTEM
Monthly Report
May 2010
30Monetary policy and
banking businessInterest rate policy and the money market
Given weak macroeconomic growth at the
beginning of the year, persistent marked cap-
acity underutilisation and subdued monetary
and credit growth, the Governing Council of
the ECB decided to leave the Eurosystem’s
key policy rates on hold between January and
May. The interest rate on central bank liquid-
ity as part of main refinancing operations,
which were once again conducted as fixed-
rate tenders with full allotment in the first
quarter of 2010, thus remained at 1%; the
interest rate on the marginal lending facility
was 1.75%. Deposits held under the deposit
facility were remunerated at 0.25%.
In light of the recovery on the financial mar-
kets during the first few months of 2010, the
Governing Council continued to phase out
non-standard monetary policy measures. For
example, in conjunction with the Federal
Reserve and the Swiss National Bank, it
stopped conducting liquidity swap transac-
tions in US dollars and Swiss francs. The Euro-
system then discontinued six-month refinan-
cing operations at the end of March. The last
operation of this kind, like the third and last
12-month tender at the end of December
2009, was interest-indexed. From the end of
April, regular three-month operations were
once again conducted at a variable interest
rate, although – in contrast to the usual prac-
tice prior to the financial crisis – the main
refinancing rate was applied as the minimum
bid rate. The aim of this was to prevent inter-
est rate bids from being too low in view of
the ample liquidity in the banking sector.
With a volume of around 34.8 billion, de-Main refinan-
cing rate
remains at 1%
Initial
phasing-out
of individual
non-standard
measures

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
May 2010
31mand for this three-month operation was
subdued, remaining well below the Eurosys-tem’s reference volume of 315 billion.
In parallel with the phasing out of the cited
non-standard monetary policy measures,however, the Governing Council announcedthat main refinancing operations and refinan-cing operations with a maturity of onemaintenance period are to be conducted asfixed-rate tenders with full allotment until atleast mid-October 2010.
In addition, the Governing Council decided in
April to introduce, as of 1 January 2011, aschedule of graduated valuation haircuts formarketable and non-marketable assets (ex-cluding asset-backed securities) with a BBB+to BBB- (or equivalent) rating. Eligible debtsecurities with a BBB rating can therefore beused as collateral for Eurosystem refinancingoperations beyond the end of 2010. Debtsecurities which are not denominated in euroas well as subordinated debt instruments orsecurities traded on unregulated markets will,as of January 2011, no longer be accepted aseligible collateral. Furthermore, given what itdeemed to be an appropriate Greek consoli-dation and reform programme, the Govern-ing Council resolved at the beginning of Mayto suspend the minimum ratings require-ments for debt securities issued or guaran-teed by the Greek government.
Owing to the escalating debt crisis in Greece,
which gave rise to contagion effects for othereuro-area countries, there were severe ten-sions in some segments of the Europeanfinancial markets before the second weekendin May. On 9 May, the Governing Council
therefore decided to reintroduce selectednon-standard monetary policy measures andto purchase public and private-sector debtinstruments.
In conjunction with other central banks, the
Eurosystem is thus once again working withthe Federal Reserve to offer liquidity swaptransactions in US dollars with maturities ofMoney market interest rates
in the euro area
1 Monthly averages. — 2 Only on 8 October 
2008 2.75%. — 3 Three-month Euribor less 
three-month Eurepo. —  Average from 1 
to 20 May 2010.
Deutsche Bundesbank2007 2008 2009 201000.51.01.52.02.53.03.54.04.55.05.56.06.57.0
050100150200Marginal lending rate
Three-month Euribor1
EONIA1
Minimum bid rate or fixed
interest rate for mainrefinancing operations
Difference between
uncollateralised andcollateralised three-monthinterbank lendingrates
 1, 32
Basis
points%
Deposit rateMain refinan-
cing operations
still conducted
as fixed-rate
tenders
Decisions on
collateral
framework
Decisions
owing to the
exceptional
market
situation in
early May

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
EUROSYSTEM
Monthly Report
May 2010
32Deutsche BundesbankMoney market management and liquidity needs
During the three reserve maintenance periods from
20 January to 13 April 2010, euro-area credit institu-
tions’ need for central bank liquidity determined by
autonomous liquidity factors fell by 520.9 billion in
net terms. The demand for liquidity from banknotes
in circulation declined by 53.9 billion during the
period under review, owing to the usual seasonal fall
in demand for banknotes in the January-February
2010 maintenance period following the sharp rise in
the pre-Christmas period. The remaining autonomous
factors also contributed to the decline in demand for
liquidity in the period under review. First, general
government deposits with the Eurosystem went down
by a total of 56.2 billion and, second, if the net for-
eign reserves and the other factors are taken to-
gether, a move which eliminates liquidity-neutral
valuation effects, there was a decrease in the liquidity
needs of 510.8 billion. Factors such as the disburse-
ments of central bank profits, which have an effect on
liquidity, including the Bundesbank profit of 54.1 bil-
lion paid on 9 March 2010, contributed to this devel-
opment. In addition to the development of autono-
mous factors, a decline in the minimum reserve re-
quirement ( 51.3 billion net) also contributed to the
fall in demand for central bank liquidity.
As was the case in previous months, the Eurosystem
continued to provide a generous supply of liquidity
during the period under review. All liquidity-provid-
ing open market operations were carried out as fixed-
rate tenders with full allotment (see table on page 34),
thus enabling credit institutions to decide for them-
selves how much liquidity they required from the
Eurosystem and even to exceed the benchmark level.
Given the still limited functioning of the money mar-
ket, this considerably improved the banking system’s
refinancing opportunities. During the period under
review, credit institutions’ demand for central bank
money in liquidity-providing open market operations
increased by around 519 billion in net terms. This rise
was largely attributable to main refinancing oper-
ations ( 517 billion). Moreover, credit institutions re-
ceived additional liquidity from the Eurosystem’s pur-
chase programme for covered bonds, which will be
continued until the end of June 2010. During the
three reserve periods under review, holdings in-
creased as planned by just over 515 billion to 546.4 bil-
lion. The reduced demand for liquidity from autono-
mous factors in conjunction with the additional provi-
sion of liquidity as part of the open market operations
as well as the inflow of liquidity from the purchaseprogramme for covered bonds led to a discernible in-
crease in recourse to the deposit facility (+ 554 billion
in net terms during the period under review). By con-
trast, the marginal lending facility continued to be
used sparingly. The abundant supply of liquidity was
also reflected in the EONIA fixings. The reference rate
for unsecured overnight money was set at around
0.33% throughout most of the three reserve periods
under review. Noticeable increases could only be ob-
served on the last day of each reserve period, when
EONIA rose to as much as 0.66% owing to the liquid-
ity-absorbing fine-tuning operations of the Eurosys-
tem. Apart from this exception, the overnight rate
continued to be oriented to the interest rate on the
Eurosystem deposit facility (0.25%).
After deciding on initial steps to facilitate a move
away from its liquidity policy characterised by non-
standard measures (including the discontinuation of
the supplementary three-month tenders and the 12-
month operations) in December 2009, the ECB Gov-
erning Council announced further measures in the
first quarter of 2010. Liquidity-providing operations in
US dollars and Swiss francs were not extended further
and were offered to the Eurosystem’s counterparties
for the last time in January 2010. Furthermore, at the
beginning of March, the ECB Governing Council
decided to switch from fixed-rate tenders to variable-
rate tenders with target allotment volumes (and a
minimum bid rate) for three-month tenders from
April 2010 onwards. At the same time, the Council an-
nounced that both the main refinancing operations
and the special tender with a maturity of one reserve
maintenance period will continue to be carried out as
fixed-rate tenders with full allotment until at least the
beginning of October 2010. Furthermore, according
to a Council decision, on 1 July 2010, a fine-tuning
operation with a maturity of six days should help to
(partly) offset the liquidity outflow of 5442 billion
resulting from the first 12-month tender which ma-
tures on this day.
In the January-February 2010 reserve maintenance
period, which only lasted three weeks, the average
outstanding refinancing volume amounted to around
5710 billion and was thus considerably higher than
credit institutions in the Eurosystem would need cal-
culated on the basis of the liquidity needs arising
from autonomous factors and the reserve require-
ment. As a result, the excess liquidity (on the basis of
the benchmark amount) amounted to 5230 billion on

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
May 2010
33average, which was also reflected in the high average
degree of recourse to the deposit facility ( 5168 bil-
lion). EONIA turnover averaged 527.0 billion per day
and was thus again somewhat below the already
quite low average trading volume of 529.1 billion in
the previous period.
In the February-March reserve period, the demand for
liquidity in the main refinancing operations increased
perceptibly. The average allotment volume in the
main refinancing operations, which had remained at
around 560 billion in the previous period, rose signifi-
cantly to 580 billion in the period under review. At
the same time, the outstanding refinancing volume in
the longer-term refinancing operations fell by a simi-
lar degree, supported by the phasing-out of supple-
mentary long-term tenders, the due volumes of which
could no longer be extended by credit institutions as
a result of the start of the move away from non-stand-
ard measures. There continued to be a high level of
recourse to the deposit facility ( 5186 billion on aver-
age), which was a consequence of liquidity conditions
remaining very comfortable (excess liquidity of 5258
billion on average).
The main focus of the March-April reserve period was
the allotment of the six-month tender. At the time, no
further operation with this maturity was planned. As
in the case of the last 12-month tender in December
2009, this fixed-rate tender was allocated at an inter-
est rate corresponding to the average minimum bid
rate of the main refinancing operations carried out
during the life of this operation. In the run-up to the
tender, there was uncertainty among the market par-
ticipants regarding the total demand volume for the
six-month tender. This was reflected, inter alia ,i na
wide range of forecasts ( 520 billion to 5150 billion).
However, the actual bidding and allotment volume of
517.9 billion was below even the lowest expectations
and made it clear that credit institutions now had
hardly any interest in additional central bank liquid-
ity. The further increase in excess liquidity in this re-
serve period ( 5283 billion on average) and the associ-
ated high level of recourse to the deposit facility
(5201 billion on average), provide further evidence of
this liquidity saturation. Trade in the (short-term)
money market continued to be impaired by the exist-
ing liquidity surpluses. (Unsecured) EONIA turnover
averaged only 527.2 billion per day (previous period:
527.0 billion) and turnover from secured overnight
money on Eurex Repo’s Euro GC Pooling also amount-ed to just 55.6 billion (previous periods: 56.2 billion
and 55.4 billion). In comparison, this segment had re-
corded an average daily trading volume of 59.0 billion
in 2009.
At the end of the subsequent April-May reserve
period, the ECB Governing Council passed several
measures to address the marked increase in tension in
the financial markets. In this context, the Eurosystem
announced that it would intervene in the euro area
public and private debt securities markets, offer the
regular three-month tenders as fixed-rate tenders
with full allotment again in May and June 2010, carry
out a further six-month tender with full allotment
and resume US dollar liquidity-providing operations.Factors determining bank liquidity1
5billion; changes in the daily averages of the reserve
maintenance periods vis-/C224-vis the previous period
2010
Item20 Jan
to
9 Feb10 Feb
to
9 Mar10 Mar
to
13 Apr
I Provision (+) or absorption (–) of
central bank balances due to changes
in autonomous factors
1 Banknotes in circulation
(increase: –) + 13.2 – 1.0 – 8.3
2 General government deposits with
the Eurosystem (increase: –) – 2.8 + 9.4 – 0.4
3 Net foreign reserves2+ 12.6 + 1.3 + 12.9
4 Other factors2– 14.6 + 1.8 – 3.2
Total + 8.4 + 11.5 + 1.0
II Monetary policy operations of the
Eurosystem
1 Open market operations
(a) Main refinancing operations – 0.9 + 20.8 – 2.8
(b) Longer-term refinancing
operations + 13.8 – 21.1 + 9.4
(c) Other operations – 0.1 + 7.3 + 7.7
2 Standing facilities
(a) Marginal lending facility – 0.2 + 0.7 – 0.5
(b) Deposit facility (increase: –) – 21.3 – 18.1 – 14.3
Total – 8.7 – 10.4 – 0.5
III Change in credit institutions’ current
accounts (I + II) – 0.3 + 0.9 + 0.7
IV Change in the minimum reserve
requirement (increase: –) – 0.6 + 1.4 + 0.5
1For longer-term trends and the Deutsche Bundesbank’s contribu-
tion, see pages 14* and 15* of the Statistical Section of this Monthly
Report. — 2Including end-of-quarter valuation adjustments with no
impact on liquidity.

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
EUROSYSTEM
Monthly Report
May 2010
34seven and 84 days, which are being conduct-
ed as fixed-rate tenders with full allotment.
Moreover, a further interest-indexed six-
month refinancing operation was conducted
in mid-May, and the regular three-month
refinancing operations scheduled for the end
of May and the end of June are to be con-
ducted once again as fixed-rate tenders with
full allotment.The Governing Council also resolved to coun-
teract the severe tensions in the financial
markets through targeted purchases of public
and private-sector debt securities in the euro
area. This decision should be seen in close
connection with the announcement of add-
itional consolidation measures in the relevant
euro-area countries to safeguard the sustain-
ability of public finances. In order to ensure
that the measures adopted by the GoverningOpen market operations of the Eurosystem*
Value
dateType of trans-
action 1Maturity
in daysActual
allotment
in5billionDeviation
from the
benchmark 2
in5billionMarginal
rate/fixed
rate
%Allotment
ratio
%Weighted
rate
%Cover
ratio 3Number
of bidders
20.01.10 MRO (FRT) 7 58.0 172.0 1.00 100.00 – 1.00 101
20.01.10 S-LTRO (FRT) 21 5.7 – 1.00 100.00 – 1.00 7
27.01.10 MRO (FRT) 7 63.4 245.9 1.00 100.00 – 1.00 83
28.01.10 LTRO (FRT) 91 3.3 – 1.00 100.00 – 1.00 22
03.02.10 MRO (FRT) 7 55.8 264.8 1.00 100.00 – 1.00 74
09.02.10 FTO (–) 1 – 270.6 – 0.80 100.00 0.76 1.00 187
10.02.10 S-LTRO (FRT) 28 2.8 – 1.00 100.00 – 1.00 14
10.02.10 MRO (FRT) 7 76.1 186.6 1.00 100.00 – 1.00 79
17.02.10 MRO (FRT) 7 81.9 260.9 1.00 100.00 – 1.00 78
24.02.10 MRO (FRT) 7 81.4 277.9 1.00 100.00 – 1.00 71
25.02.10 LTRO (FRT) 91 10.2 – 1.00 100.00 – 1.00 23
03.03.10 MRO (FRT) 7 80.5 297.0 1.00 100.00 – 1.00 65
09.03.10 FTO (–) 1 – 294.5 – 0.80 100.00 0.76 1.00 193
10.03.10 MRO (FRT) 7 78.4 206.4 1.00 100.00 – 1.00 71
10.03.10 S-LTRO (FRT) 35 9.3 – 1.00 100.00 – 1.00 11
17.03.10 MRO (FRT) 7 79.0 297.0 1.00 100.00 – 1.00 79
24.03.10 MRO (FRT) 7 81.1 312.1 1.00 100.00 – 1.00 81
31.03.10 MRO (FRT) 7 78.3 295.3 1.00 100.00 – 1.00 73
01.04.10 S-LTRO (FRT) 182 17.9 – ... 4 100.00 – 1.00 62
01.04.10 LTRO (FRT) 91 2.0 – 1.00 100.00 – 1.00 11
07.04.10 MRO (FRT) 7 71.5 281.5 1.00 100.00 – 1.00 67
13.04.10 FTO (–) 1 – 292.3 – 0.80 100.00 0.76 1.00 186
*For more information on the Eurosystem’s operations
from 14 October 2009 to 19 January 2010, see Deutsche
Bundesbank, Monthly Report, February 2010, p 27. —
1MRO: main refinancing operation, LTRO: longer-term
refinancing operation, S-LTRO: supplementary longer-
term refinancing operation, FTO: fine-tuning operation(+: liquidity providing operation, –: liquidity absorbing
operation), FRT: fixed-rate tender. — 2Excluding
(S-)LTROs allotted in the same week. — 3Ratio of total
bids to the allotment amount. — 4The interest rate is the
average minimum bid rate of the MROs over the life of
this operation.
Deutsche Bundesbank

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
May 2010
35Council have no additional impact on the
monetary policy stance, the liquidity gener-
ated by the purchase programme is to be re-
absorbed by targeted absorption operations.
The euro money market’s response in the
year to date has been reserved overall, both
with regard to the initial phasing-out of indi-
vidual non-standard monetary policy meas-
ures and to the severe tensions in the finan-
cial markets at the beginning of May. As in
the second half of 2009, the overnight inter-
est rate (EONIA) continued to be around
0.1 percentage point above the interest rate
on the Eurosystem’s deposit facility between
January and May, fluctuating only marginally.
The persistently low overnight rate is due,
furthermore, to generous lending by the
Eurosystem.
There was a sideways trend in longer-term
money market rates, too, from January to
April. Tendencies to a slight upward move-
ment have been noticeable since the end of
April, although these weakened following
the announcement of the non-standard
measures of the second weekend in May.
Since the beginning of the year, uncollatera-
lised interbank rates with maturities of up to
and including six months have been consist-
ently quoted below the Eurosystem’s main
refinancing rate. The uncollateralised three-
month rate (3M Euribor) currently stands at
0.70% and its collateralised counterpart (3M
Eurepo) at 0.35%. The risk premium on the
euro money market, which is determined on
the basis of their yield spread, is currently
0.35 percentage point and has thus increased
slightly since the beginning of May.Monetary developments in the euro area
There was no further weakening of monetary
expansion in the euro area between January
and March 2010. In seasonally adjusted and
annualised terms, the three-month rate of
the broad monetary aggregate M3 amounted
to -1/C252% in the reporting quarter. While still
negative, this was nonetheless an improve-
ment on the corresponding rate of -11/C252%i n
the final quarter of 2009, which was the
lowest quarterly value since the launch of
monetary union. Owing to base effects, the
average of the annual M3 growth rates for
the first quarter of 2010 remained at its prior-
quarter level of -0.1%.
The interest rate environment, characterised
by assets with a maturity of up to two years
having a comparatively small interest rate
advantage over overnight deposits and by a
steep yield curve for maturities of over two
years, has had a major impact on monetary
growth since the fourth quarter of 2008. This
constellation led to shifts from short-term
time deposits (with an agreed maturity of up
to two years) remunerated at close-to-market
rates into the most liquid components of M3,
although these were less pronounced in the
last quarter of 2009 and the first quarter of
2010. At a seasonally adjusted and annual-
ised three-month rate of 6% in the first quar-
ter of 2010, the rise in overnight deposits
was marked, but remained below the rate
(9%) of the previous quarter. By contrast,
there was an accelerated annualised increase
in quantitatively less significant cash in circu-
lation in the first quarter, from just under 5%
in the previous three-month period to moreEONIA still just
above interest
rate on deposit
facility
Longer-term
money market
rates showing
slight upwards
trend at end of
2010 Q1No further
weakening of
monetary
expansion
Demand for
highly liquid
M3 compon-
ents weaker,
but still
buoyant

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
EUROSYSTEM
Monthly Report
May 2010
36than 11%. As a result, expansion of the
narrow monetary aggregate M1 slowed over-
all. It was still strong, however, growing by a
seasonally adjusted and annualised three-
month rate of 7%, compared with over 15%
and almost 81/C252% in the third and fourth
quarters of 2009 respectively.
At the same time, there was a slower reduc-
tion in short-term deposits other than over-
night deposits; at a seasonally adjusted and
annualised three-month rate of -5%, the
decline was more muted than in the preced-
ing four quarters. This was due mainly to the
significant reduction in the release of short-
term time deposits, even though holdings of
such deposits still fell perceptibly at a season-
ally adjusted and annualised rate of 15%,
compared with -26% in the previous quarter.
This development was driven chiefly by
households. On the back of substantial shifts
in recent years, households released a smaller
amount of time deposits in the reporting
quarter due to the currently rising interest
rates for time deposits with a maturity of up
to one year. Short-term savings deposits (with
an agreed period of notice of up to three
months) continued to be in demand, but to a
lesser extent than in the preceding quarters.
At a seasonally adjusted and annualised
three-month rate of -14%, there was little
aggregate change in the development of
marketable financial instruments compared
with the preceding quarters. Between Janu-
ary and March, this was due to strong net
outflows from money market funds, which
account for the largest share of marketable
instruments. Transfers from liquid money toComponents and 
counterparts of the money 
stock in the euro area
1 12-month  flows. —  2 Taken  in  isolation, 
an  increase  curbs  M3  growth. —  3 Not 
seasonally  adjusted. —  4 Increase:  –,  de-
crease: +.
Deutsche Bundesbank2002 03 04 05 06 07 08 09 201050510152025
–+++++
–10–50+5+10+15+20+25+30
90060030003006009001,200
–––++++Seasonally adjusted, quarterly
... components of the money stock
... counterparts
of which
Net external asset position 3
External
assets 1Net external
asset position
External
liabilities 1 4Growth rate 1 of M3 and
the contributions to growth in ...
Remaining balance
sheet items 2Net external
asset position
Longer-term financial
liabilities to other
non-MFIs 2Credit to the
private sector M2 – M1
M3 – M2M1
€ bn%%
M3
M3Another net
reduction in
short-term
deposits other
than overnight
deposits ...
... and in
marketable
instruments

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
May 2010
37longer-term types of investment probably
played a major part in this. By contrast, repotransactions, which are usually very volatile,virtually stagnated on balance in the report-ing quarter. Furthermore, for the first time insix quarters, slightly positive net inflows ofshort-term debt securities of monetary finan-cial institutions held by non-banks (with amaturity of up to two years) were recorded.
In the reporting quarter, weak monetary
growth was again accompanied by slightlynegative net lending to the private sector; theseasonally adjusted and annualised three-month rate fell from -
1/C252% in the final quarter
of 2009 to -1% at the end of the reportingperiod. In the first quarter of 2010, this devel-opment was accompanied by a net reductionin securities held by euro-area banks andissued by domestic private non-banks as wellas by stagnating lending in the form of loans.At 0%, its annualised and seasonally adjustedthree-month rate almost matched the annu-alised three-month rate of lending to the do-mestic private sector adjusted for credit insti-tutions’ securitisation activities and loan sales.This was due to the current low level of se-curitisation activity in the banking sector.
In the reporting period, stagnation in loans to
domestic private non-banks was again theoutcome of heterogeneous sectoral develop-ments. Loans to households rose significantlyin net terms, with the positive developmentof the previous three quarters becoming in-creasingly firmer. This was again attributableto growth in loans for house purchase, whichmake up the lion’s share of householdborrowing, and to which government assist-ance programmes also contributed. However,
other lending to households also rose percep-tibly, while consumer credit declined mark-edly in the reporting quarter following slightgrowth in the two preceding quarters.
Following three quarters of strong decline in
loans to non-financial corporations, their sea-sonally adjusted volume remained virtuallyunchanged in the first quarter, chiefly as aresult of noticeably positive net lending inFebruary. For the first time since the finalquarter of 2008, medium-term loans (withmaturities of more than one year and up tofive years) fell significantly more sharply in thereporting quarter than short-term loans. Bycontrast, there was a further marked expan-sion in long-term loans. Overall, this is con-sistent with the pattern that is familiar fromearlier periods of economic recovery, withunsecuritised lending to non-financial corpor-ations recovering more slowly from the slumpin economic activity than lending to house-holds.
In the reporting quarter, loans to the private
sector in the euro area were dampened forthe most part by loans to other financial inter-mediaries. Overall, these fell significantly inthe first quarter, while they had a slightlypositive influence on growth in loans to theprivate sector in the fourth quarter of 2009.Many of these transactions are highly volatileindirect interbank operations; therefore, re-stricted lending to this sector does not, initself, represent a classical withdrawal offunds for the private non-banking sector.
Lending to the
private sector
again slightly
negative
Continuing
upwards
movement in
loans to
householdsVirtual stagna-
tion of loans to
non-financial
corporations
Marked decline
in loans
granted to
other financial
intermediaries

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
EUROSYSTEM
Monthly Report
May 2010
38Funds made available to the private sector in
the euro area as a result of securities acquisi-
tions by domestic banks fell at an annualised
and seasonally adjusted three-month rate of
61/C252% in the first quarter following a decline
of more than 21/C252% in the preceding three-
month period. This accelerated decrease was
due largely to special national factors. In the
first quarter of 2010, a decline in securities
issued by the private sector was again accom-
panied by a recognisable increase in banks’
holdings of securities issued by the public
sector (loans issued by banks to the public
sector were at a comparable level in the re-
porting quarter); the corresponding seasonal-
ly adjusted and annualised three-month rate
went up from just over 21/C252% in the previous
quarter to almost 81/C252% at the end of the
reporting period.
In the first quarter of 2010, the net external
assets of the euro-area MFI sector rose by
311.6 billion on the quarter in seasonally ad-
justed terms and, thus, taken in isolation, had
an expansionary effect on monetary growth.
This means that there was a significant drop
in funds provided through foreign payment
transactions by non-banks in the euro area
compared with each of the previous three
quarters.
As in the previous quarter, monetary capital
formation was relatively moderate. MFI
longer-term financial liabilities rose by 31/C252%
in seasonally adjusted and annualised terms
in the first quarter of 2010, compared with
just over 3% in the previous quarter. This has
tended to slow the pace of monetary growth.
The increase affected all components; inparticular, euro-area credit institutions raised
funds from non-banks in the form of bank
debt securities with longer maturities. Banks
also topped up their capital and reserves in
the reporting period, albeit to a somewhat
smaller extent than in the preceding quarters.
Furthermore, long-term time deposits re-
mained attractive – especially for house-
holds – given the continued steep yield curve.
As in the fourth quarter of 2009, however,
the resulting inflows were largely masked by
special-purpose vehicles reducing their hold-
ings of time deposits in connection with the
scaling-back of banks’ securitisation activities.
Domestic non-banks increased their holdings
of long-term savings deposits only slightly in
the reporting quarter.
Overall, there was no further weakening of
the underlying monetary dynamics – in other
words, monetary growth which is ultimately
relevant to inflation – in the reporting quarter.
M3 once again declined slightly between
January and March, not least owing to the
particular interest rate environment. At the
same time, loans to the private sector in the
euro area stagnated. Inflation projections
based on monetary data, taken as a whole,
also continue to indicate that there will be no
pronounced risk to price stability in the euro
area in the next three years. Nevertheless, as
in the preceding quarters, the dispersion of
these projections is relatively high. This under-
lines the fact that there is currently still a high
degree of uncertainty associated with such
an outlook.Slight drop in
securities acqui-
sitions by banks
Slight increase
in net external
assets
Moderate
monetary
capital
formationNo pronounced
risk to price
stability from a
monetary
perspective

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
May 2010
39German banks’ deposit and lending
business with domestic customers
After two quarters of decline, domestic in-
vestors again started to increase their de-
posits held by German banks in the first
quarter of 2010. The seasonally adjusted and
annualised three-month rate rose from just
over -1% in the fourth quarter of 2009 to
almost 21/C252% in the period from January to
March. It is not yet clear, however, whether
this means that the negative growth in de-
posits observed in the second half of 2009
has finally come to an end.
Overall, there was a clear quarter-on-quarter
decline in the growth of almost all deposit
types in the first three months of 2010.
Short-term time deposits shrank at a season-
ally adjusted and annualised three-month
rate of -13% in the reporting quarter, which
was a considerably slower rate than in the
fourth quarter of 2009 (-45%). Overnight
deposits grew at a corresponding rate of only
slightly more than 61/C252% in the first quarter
on the back of just under 141/C252% in the pre-
ceding quarter. The behaviour of households
and financial corporations was largely respon-
sible for the development of both types of de-
posit. Only the increase in short-term savings
deposits (mainly by households) was almost
as strong as in the preceding quarter, growing
at a seasonally adjusted and annualised
three-month rate of just under 10%, com-
pared with just over 11% in the final quarter
of 2009.
While there was a net quarter-on-quarter in-
crease in demand for short-term deposits inthe first three months of 2010, there was a
net decrease in long-term deposit types fol-
lowing net growth in the previous quarters.
This chiefly affected long-term savings de-
posits (with an agreed period of notice of
over three months), which shrank by 41/C252%i n
seasonally adjusted and annualised terms in
the reporting quarter. While there was a
slight increase in the quantitatively more
significant long-term time deposits (with an
agreed maturity of over two years) during the
same period, the corresponding three-month
rate had fallen further to1/C252% by the end of
the reporting period. This waning momentum
reflects, first, the slower but still sharp re-
duction in these balances by insurance com-
panies and pension fund reserves and,
second, the fact that households’ strong
demand for long-term time deposits since theLending and deposits of monetary
financial institutions (MFIs)
in Germany*
5billion
2010 2009
ItemJan to
MarJan to
Mar
Deposits of domestic non-MFIs 1
Overnight 11.4 69.3
With agreed maturities
of up to 2 years – 30.5 – 83.3
of over 2 years 2.8 12.1
Redeemable at notice
of up to 3 months 12.4 11.8
of over 3 months – 2.2 0.8
Lending
to domestic enterprises and
households
Loans – 23.5 4.9
Securities – 6.4 7.5
to domestic general government
Loans 0.3 – 4.7
Securities 13.8 5.5
*As well as banks (including building and loan associ-
ations, but excluding the Bundesbank), monetary finan-
cial institutions (MFIs) here also include money market
funds; see also Table IV.1 in the Statistical Section of the
Monthly Report. — 1Enterprises, households and gen-
eral government excluding central government.
Deutsche BundesbankRise in domestic
investors’
balances at
German
banks, ...
... at slower
pace in almost
all deposit types
Long-term
deposit types
attracting less
attention

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
EUROSYSTEM
Monthly Report
May 2010
40Deutsche BundesbankThe impact of the financial and economic crisis on the 2009 financial accounts
The global financial and economic crisis has caused severe
turmoil in the financial sector and has hit the real economy
hard. This article will examine recent financial accounts data
to determine how far these developments are reflected in
the financial transactions and asset holdings of the domestic
sectors.1
Sharp decline in corporate financial flows
According to the available financial accounts data, the finan-
cial flows of the non-financial sectors as a whole, ie house-
holds, producing enterprises and general government, fell
appreciably in 2009. This is fairly typical of economic down-
turns. In 2009, the acquisition of financial assets in these
sectors dropped by almost 5100 billion to 5225 billion, and
demand for funds was 540 billion lower at 5117 billion.
A sectoral breakdown shows that this negative development
in financial flows was driven mainly by non-financial corpor-
ations. They reduced their financial transactions by a total of
some 5200 billion, or just short of 90%, compared with 2008.
Their external financing needs were even slightly negative in
2009 (- 50.3 billion), ie they reduced their liabilities slightly in
net terms. One year previously, inflows of external finance
had stood at more than 5100 billion. Although this contrast-
ed with positive financial investment on the asset side, at
around 537 billion it was significantly lower than in 2008,
when a figure of 5132 billion was recorded. This curtailment
of financial activities, which set in as early as the beginning
of 2009, was also in evidence in the first half of the last dec-
ade as enterprises attempted to consolidate their balance
sheets after the end of the stock market boom. Up until the
onset of the financial and economic crisis, non-financial
corporations – and, in particular, small and medium-sized
enterprises – bolstered their capital base significantly, there-
by further improving their resilience. By contrast, the reduc-
tion in financial flows seen in 2009 was not the result of
enterprises’ attempts to clean up their balance sheets, but
rather a reflection of the severe economic downturn.
The main reason for the poor development in liabilities in
2009 was the reduction of loans from domestic and foreign
banks by some 550 billion net. In each of the previous two
years, loan demand had been at this level. By contrast, finan-
cing through foreign loans to group affiliates, an instrument
used mainly by relatively large and internationally active en-
terprises, was positive, albeit, at 517 billion, lower than in
2008. Developments in external funding via the capital mar-
kets were also mixed. For the first time since 2007, equityfinancing was fairly abundant again in the reporting year, as
stock market prices had risen, and stood at 551/C252billion net.
Moreover, significantly more funds were raised by issuing
longer-term bonds than in 2008, namely just under 520 bil-
lion. At the same time, however, almost 527 billion worth of
short-dated money market paper were redeemed in net
terms. As a result of the weak overall demand for external
financing in the form of bank loans and debt securities, the
financial debt of producing enterprises had fallen to just
under 51,590 billion by the end of 2009 and was consequent-
ly 11/C252% down on the year. Nonetheless, their debt ratio rose
appreciably, from 112% to 119% of gross value added. This
was because the economic slump caused enterprises’ output
to fall sharply.
According to the national accounts data published by the
Federal Statistical Office, there was a sharp decline not only
in external financing requirements but also in financing
using profits and depreciation. Both items added up to 5234
billion in the reporting year, some 550 billion less than in
2008. Almost nine-tenths of internal funds were attributable
to depreciation on tangible fixed assets, which fell only
slightly in 2009. Although producing enterprises generated
retained earnings despite the difficult economic environ-
ment, these, at 512 billion, were significantly lower than in
2008, when they had been almost five times as high. As
enterprises simultaneously slashed spending on real invest-
ment from almost 5280 billion in 2008 to 5213 billion at the
end of the period under review, they were able to fund more
than 90% of their financial and real investment internally.
This ratio is extremely high in a longer-term comparison. In
nominal terms, aggregate retained earnings and depreci-
ation were therefore sufficient to finance all investment in
the capital stock internally. This means that enterprises as a
whole were net acquirers of financial assets in the economic-
ally difficult year of 2009, and were therefore, on balance,
not reliant on funds from other sectors. This may be seen as
an indication that there was no broad-based credit crunch
last year.
Considerable increase in public debt
In contrast to enterprises, general government’s financial
activities were at an extremely high level in 2009, especially
their external financing requirements. The latter amounted
to5120 billion net and was, for the most part, covered by
securities issuance. General government’s debt financing was
therefore appreciably higher than at any time since reunifi-
cation – with the exception of 1995, when it had stood at al-
1For the most recent financial accounts figures, see Table VIII in the
statistical section at the back of this Monthly Report.

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
May 2010
41most 5170 billion owing to the integration of the Treuhand
agency into the government sector. Overall, public debttotalled around 51,830 billion at the end of 2009 (calculated
at current prices in line with the financial accounts). On theasset side, government (as in 2008) expanded its financialassets substantially by just over 540 billion to a total of 5670
billion – principally as a result of support measures for creditinstitutions. Accordingly, the government’s fiscal deficit, atalmost 580 billion, was significantly lower than its external
financing requirements. However, a comparison with 2007and 2008, when government posted slight surpluses, showshow severely public finances have deteriorated in the wakeof the financial and economic crisis.
Improvement in households’ financial assetsHouseholds acquired substantially more financial assets, at
5147 billion, than one year earlier ( 5126 billion). These in-
tensified saving efforts – the savings rate rose to 11.3% ofdisposable income – were accompanied by a correction ofthe considerable portfolio shifts, most of which had beenundertaken at the height of the financial crisis. For instance,net inflows to bank deposits (including cash), at 550 billion,
were significantly more moderate than in 2008, when arecord figure of more than 5120 billion was reached. This can
be attributed to a normalisation in cash holdings, which roseby57
1/C252billion in the full year 2009, having been boosted by
517 billion in the final quarter of 2008 alone. Moreover,
households substantially reduced their time deposits by 5124
billion, which they had expanded considerably in 2008, by577 billion – not least because of relatively favourable condi-
tions. The main beneficiaries of this were sight and savingsdeposits, which attracted net funds of 5141
1/C252billion and 556
billion respectively in 2009. The main reasons for this pro-nounced restructuring were probably the very low interestrates available on time deposits and the greater liquidity ofsight and savings deposits.
Households’ investment behaviour in terms of securities has
also returned to normal again. Compared to 2008, whenhouseholds sold mainly stocks across the board in responseto the financial crisis, there was only a marginal decline inthis segment in 2009. By contrast, households acquired a con-siderable volume of mutual fund shares (+ 529 billion). Given
a rise in share prices, domestic equity-based funds open tothe general public also recorded significant net inflows of 56
billion – which was previously not the case. Furthermore,households acquired other equity directly, though only on asmall scale (+ 53 billion). By contrast, debt securities werereduced by 54
1/C252billion net. In 2009, inflows to the entitle-
ments on insurance corporations, which mainly compriseregular premiums payments but may also include one-offpayments, were roughly twice as high as one year earlier atmore than 563 billion. They were thus back at their 2006 and
2007 level.
Overall, households’ financial assets had risen appreciably by
end-2009 to around 54,670 billion, or 5116,000 per house-
hold. Financial assets were thus 5240 billion or, per house-
hold, more than 55,000 higher than one year earlier when
investment had dropped sharply as a result of the financialcrisis. Besides their own savings efforts, this can also beattributed to large average gains in share and securitiesprices. The latter totalled roughly 590 billion. Households’
debt to banks and insurance corporations remained virtuallyunchanged in the reporting year, however, amounting to51,530 billion, or an average of 538,000 per household, at
the end of last year. On balance, the net asset position ofhouseholds improved considerably in 2009. At 293% of dis-posable income, net financial assets were almost back attheir 2007 record high of 296%.
SummaryOverall, the financial accounts for 2009 bear testimony to
large-scale adjustments in the individual domestic sectors inresponse to the financial and economic crisis. These relate toboth investment volume and investment structure. The latteris particularly pronounced for households, which last yearreversed the considerable portfolio restructuring of end-2008. In addition, they substantially improved their overallasset position. By contrast, the financial activities of generalgovernment and producing enterprises were characterisedby considerable turmoil in 2009. While the latter massivelycurtailed their financial transactions in the wake of the eco-nomic slump, lower tax revenues and higher spending tosupport the economy and the financial sector meant that thepublic sector was forced to sharply expand borrowing. Basedon recent positive economic data and the latest forecasts,corporate financial flows are also likely to rise in future. Pub-lic finances, which are currently subject to various strains, areundoubtedly in a more difficult situation. Despite all theproblems, there is no alternative to a credible return to sus-tainable public finances – while maintaining stable prices.This is the only way to create confidence on a broad frontand eliminate uncertainty in the financial markets.

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
EUROSYSTEM
Monthly Report
May 2010
42final quarter of 2009 was easing off during
the reporting period.
Overall credit provision by domestic credit
institutions to the domestic private sector
contracted sharply in seasonally adjusted
terms in the reporting quarter, falling well
into negative territory. The seasonally adjust-
ed and annualised three-month rate for total
credit fell from 0% in the fourth quarter of
2009 to -51/C252% in the reporting quarter. This
development was caused primarily by the
dynamics of credit to financial corporations. It
should be borne in mind, however, that the
seasonal adjustment of current data is subject
to increased uncertainty insofar as the finan-
cial crisis has led to a change from earlier
usual seasonal behaviour.In the first quarter, there was a strong season-
ally adjusted net decrease in securitised lend-
ing to the private sector. In annualised terms,
it shrank by 141/C252% in the first quarter, com-
pared with a rise of 21/C252% in the preceding
three-month period.
Overall, there was a significant decline in
loans to the domestic private sector in the first
quarter of 2010. In seasonally adjusted terms,
they shrank considerably more sharply than in
the two preceding quarters. The annualised
and seasonally adjusted three-month rate
went down from -1/C252% to just over -4%. The
reduction in loans to private borrowers again
chiefly affected the short-term segment with
maturities of up to one year, especially loans
to financial corporations.
Following a decline in lending to the private
sector in the fourth quarter of 2009 that was
due solely to perceptible net redemptions of
loans granted by German banks to domestic
non-financial corporations, lending to this
sector clearly bounced back at the beginning
of the year. In March, however, there was
another marked net reduction in loans, sig-
nalling that it is not yet possible to assume
that there has been a definite turning point
with regard to the development of loans to
non-financial corporations. The correspond-
ing seasonally adjusted and annualised three-
month rate went up from just over -61/C252%i n
the final quarter of 2009 to -1/C252% in the
reporting quarter. This slower decline is due
to the reduction in short-term loans that took
place over the preceding four quarters losing
momentum in the reporting period and a
continuing slight expansion of long-termLoans of German banks
to domestic enterprises
and households *
* End  of  month;  adjusted  for  statistical 
changes.
Deutsche Bundesbank2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 201099100101102103104105106107108
–2–10+1+2+3+4Seasonally adjusted
%Lin scale
Year-on-year changeLog scale
Loans
2005 = 100
Declining credit
provision by
German banksMassive
reduction in
private-sector
securities
holdings
Continuing
decline in loans
to the private
sector
Only slight drop
in unsecuritised
lending to
non-financial
corporations

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
May 2010
43loans. Only medium-term loans contracted to
a somewhat greater extent than in the pre-ceding quarters. Overall, developments inloans to non-financial corporations in the firstquarter of 2010 can still be explained well interms of developments in the real economy.These figures therefore continue to provideno indication of a credit crunch in Germany.
Total loans to households increased slightly in
seasonally adjusted terms between Januaryand March. As in the previous quarter, theirseasonally adjusted and annualised three-month rate amounted to
1/C252%. In contrast to
the fourth quarter of 2009, loans for housepurchase virtually stagnated in seasonallyadjusted terms; growth was therefore largelyattributable to other credit.
Unlike lending to the private sector, lending
to general government expanded stronglybetween January and March 2010. In season-ally adjusted and annualised terms, it in-creased by just over 7
1/C252%. Specifically, loans
increased at a seasonally adjusted and annu-alised three-month rate of 3% in the firstquarter following an obvious decline in thefourth quarter of 2009. At the same time,securitised lending increased by almost 17
1/C252%.
The Bank Lending Survey (BLS) for the first
quarter of 2010, which was conducted inApril 2010, confirms the impression gained inthe previous two quarters that the tighteningof credit standards in the preceding periodwas no being longer continued on a broadfront. It was only in isolated cases that thesurveyed banks tightened their credit stand-ards for loans to enterprises, although, over-all, the tighter standards – again, resulting
from sector-specific and firm-specific factors –were counteracted by the improved liquidityposition of the institutions. By contrast, ac-cording to the surveyed institutions, marginswere generally more restrictive than in thepreceding quarter. Specifically, the tighteningof standards was reflected in a considerableexpansion of margins on both average-riskand riskier loans. While developments incredit standards in Germany were broadlyconsistent with those in the rest of the euroarea, margins in the EMU sample were ad-justed more moderately, albeit still with re-strictions.
The surveyed banks had been noting a declin-
ing demand for credit from enterprises in theeuro area as a whole for some time, Germanbanks, too, now reported a slight drop in netdemand for bank loans for the first time since2008. This development was driven pre-dominantly by declining borrowing require-ments for fixed investment as well as im-proved access to corporate financing on thecapital market. Overall, households werefaced with somewhat tighter lending condi-tions by the German banks participating inthe BLS. These conditions were shaped,above all, by noticeably tighter standards forconsumer credit and somewhat tighter stand-ards for loans for house purchase. Margins– with the exception of average-risk loans forhouse purchase – were also tightened. At thesame time, institutions reported a sharp netdecline in households’ funding requirements.Mainly fiercer competition in this creditsegment was said to be responsible for thisdevelopment.
Slight increase
in loans to
households
Dynamic
growth of
credit to
general
government
Little change in
credit standards

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
EUROSYSTEM
Monthly Report
May 2010
44Banking conditions in Germany
1 According to harmonised MFI interest rate statistics. — 2 According to the Bank Lending Survey, difference 
between the numbers of respondents reporting “tightened considerably” and “tightened somewhat” and the 
numbers of respondents reporting “eased somewhat” and “eased considerably” as a percentage of the re-
sponses given. — 3 Expectations for 2010 Q2. — 4 Reduced scale.
Deutsche Bundesbank02 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 20103.54.04.55.05.56.06.57.07.58.08.59.09.510.0
–300+30
–300+30
–60–300+30+60
–60–300+30
2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 102.02.53.03.54.04.55.05.56.06.57.0
603003060
––++
9060300306090
–––+++Credit to non-financial corporations Credit to households
% pa
%% pa
%
%%
%Changes in credit standards 2
Average loansRiskier loans
Average loansAverage loansRiskier loans
Riskier loansLoans to enterprises... with an initial rate fixation of
    over 1 year and up to 5 years... with an initial rate fixation of
    over 5 yearsConsumer credit ...
Consumer creditConsumer credit
Loans for house purchaseLoans for house purchaseLoans for house purchase
with an initial rate fixation of
over 5 years and up to 10 years
Loans to enterprises... with an initial rate fixation
    of over 5 years ...Loans to enterprises ...
... with an initial rate fixation
    of up to 1 year ...
... over €1 million... over €1 million
... up to €1 million... up to €1 millionBank interest rates (new business) 1
Changes in loan margins 2, 43
333.54.04.55.05.5
%

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
May 2010
45The survey round for the first quarter of 2010
again contained additional questions on theimpact of the financial crisis on the wholesalefunding, capital costs and lending behaviourof the participating banks. According to thesurveyed banks, there was a marked improve-ment in access to wholesale funding on themoney and capital markets compared withthe previous quarter. Moreover, almost half ofthe surveyed institutions reported highercapital costs in the wake of the financialcrisis, which also caused some banks to placecertain restrictions on their lending.
Despite the considerable expansion of mar-
gins reported in the BLS, the interest rate stat-istics suggest that German institutions passed
on part of the more favourable conditions inthe capital market to domestic private cus-tomers in the first quarter of 2010, too. In theperiod under review, the reporting institu-tions were charging interest of 3.4% forsmall short-term loans to enterprises and2.3% for large short-term loans to enter-prises. For long-term loans, they charged4.2% and 3.8%, respectively. With regard toloans to households, consumer loans weremore expensive than in the previous quarter,while the interest rates on loans for housepurchase fell across the board. The long-terminterest rate on loans for house purchasestood at 4.3% at the end of March.
Bank lending
rates mostly
declining

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
EUROSYSTEM
Monthly Report
May 2010
46Financial marketsFinancial market trends
Greece’s debt crisis triggered considerable
tensions on the financial markets in the
second quarter of 2010, particularly when
fears of contagion to other euro-area coun-
tries arose. Yields on southern European gov-
ernment bonds in particular rose sharply as a
result from mid-April onwards, and the gap
between euro-area yields widened to unpre-
cedented levels. On the market for credit
default swaps, too, the creditworthiness of
sovereign issuers was subjected to a funda-
mental reassessment. In a setting of height-
ened uncertainty, the euro also came under
considerable pressure; moreover, the func-
tioning of various markets was seriously im-
paired. The crisis risked gaining an uncon-
trolled momentum that would have jeopard-
ised the stability of the European Monetary
Union and depressed the global economy.
The large-scale support measures agreed on
by the Ecofin Council and the IMF on 9 and
10 May, the announcement of additional
consolidation efforts and the decisions by the
ECB Governing Council, which include the
Eurosystem’s purchases of government bonds
on the secondary market, finally halted briefly
the dramatic slide of prices on southern Euro-
pean bond markets. On the European stock
markets, these measures, paired with expect-
ations that the current low-interest-rate envir-
onment would persist, caused equity prices
to rise. Financial stocks, considered by invest-
ors to be especially sensitive to government
bond market developments, advanced strong-
ly.Financial
market setting

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
May 2010
47Exchange rates
The tensions within the euro area had a
knock-on effect on the foreign exchange
markets, too, pushing the euro lower. The
single currency has depreciated sharply, par-
ticularly against the US dollar, since the turn
of the year. Besides the dramatic events de-
scribed above, the gradual economic recovery
in the United States has exerted additional
pressure on the euro-US dollar exchange rate.
At the end of January, for example, it was an-
nounced that, in the final quarter of 2009,
the US economy had grown more strongly
than anticipated, and at a rate that far ex-
ceeded the corresponding figure for the euro
area, which was published later. Encouraging
economic reports and the phasing-out of
non-standard monetary policy measures to
supply the US financial sector with liquidity
fuelled market speculation that US key inter-
est rates might be raised sooner than previ-
ously expected. This, too, helped to push the
euro lower. When, at the end of February, cit-
ing the fragile state of the US labour market,
the Fed assured Congress that key rates
would remain decidedly low for an extended
period, the euro finally stabilised temporarily
at US$1.36.
In March, the transatlantic interest rate differ-
ential on the capital market, which had previ-
ously been close to zero, widened in favour
of US government bonds, however. This gen-
erated renewed pressure on the euro. More-
over, the market increasingly focused its
attention on the ongoing uncertainty sur-
rounding the funding of the Greek budget.
This accelerated the decline of the euro inMay, probably not least because the Greek
fiscal crisis was increasingly impacting on the
country’s banking sector and because conta-
gion effects threatened to spill over into other
euro-area countries by way of higher interest
rate spreads. The single currency recovered
after agreement in principle was reached to
provide a support package for Greece, after
details of this package were specified two
weeks later, and again after the decision wasExchange rate of the euro
1 Exchange  rate  at  the  start  of  monetary 
union on 4 January 1999. — 2 As calculated 
by  the  ECB  against  the  currencies  of 
21 countries.
Deutsche BundesbankJ FMAM J J A S OND J FMAM J
2009 20101.201.301.401.501.60
110120130140
0.700.750.800.850.900.951.00
100105110115120125Daily data; log scale
US$
¥
£against the ...
... US dollar
US$1.1789 1
... yen
¥133.73 1
... pound sterling
£0.7111 1
Nominal effective exchange rate 2
1999 Q1 = 100
103.03 1Euro exchange
rate develop-
ments against
the US dollar, ...

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
EUROSYSTEM
Monthly Report
May 2010
48taken to implement extensive monetary and
fiscal policy support measures in the euro
area. Yet this had no lasting effect against the
background of intensified nervousness on the
foreign exchange market. As this report went
to press, the euro stood at US$1.24, or 14%
down on the beginning of the year.
The single currency depreciated against the
yen, too, due to the tensions in the euro area,
falling from ¥134 to ¥120 between the turn
of the year and end-February. At that time,
the media were reporting on differences be-
tween the Japanese government and the
Bank of Japan regarding the need for further
monetary policy measures to fight deflation.
Boosted by the uncertainties surrounding the
adequacy of Japanese economic policy, the
euro gained ground again in March. The
euro-yen exchange rate stabilised in April
after speculation arose regarding the resump-
tion of the renminbi’s appreciation against
the US dollar and both the Japanese govern-
ment and the Bank of Japan expressed opti-
mism about the country’s economic outlook
following upbeat economic reports. In May,
growing concern about the fiscal policy
soundness of a number of euro-area coun-
tries sent the euro lower against the yen,
amongst others, while the resultant increase
in risk aversion benefited the yen further. As
this report went to press the euro stood at
¥112, 16% below its level at the turn of the
year.
Since the beginning of 2010, the euro-
sterling exchange rate has presented a mixed
picture. The euro lost ground to the pound
sterling, particularly in January and from mid-March onwards, but has appreciated notice-
ably in the meantime. This was due, on the
one hand, to disappointment about the
rather sluggish pace of economic recovery in
the United Kingdom. On the other hand, the
UK’s precarious budget situation also attract-
ed the markets’ attention as a result,
amongst other things, of rating agencies’
warnings about the credit rating of British
government bonds. These fears were fanned
further when a sharp drop in UK tax revenue
was reported for January. Later, opinion polls
indicated that the forthcoming general elec-
tion might not produce a clear majority; this
– it was suspected for a while – would im-
pede resolute consolidation efforts. Against
this backdrop, despite its weakness due to
Greece’s budgetary problems, the euro post-
ed only comparatively minor losses against
the pound sterling of 3% on balance since
end-2009. It stood at £0.86 as this report
went to press.
Since the beginning of 2010, the euro’s aver-
age value vis-/C224-vis the currencies of 21 major
trading partners has fallen by 81/C252%. Given
that the main reasons for these developments
are to be found in the euro area itself, ex-
change rate losses were broad based. Besides
the above-mentioned losses vis-/C224-vis the US
dollar and the yen, demand for which is
stronger given their market depth and liquid-
ity, the euro sustained particularly heavy
losses against the Canadian dollar (of 131/C252%)
and against a number of Far Eastern curren-
cies (eg falling by 10% against the Korean
won and by 14% against the Singapore dol-
lar). In these countries, a strong upswing has
already set in, which is stimulating capital... against the
yen ...
... and against
the pound
sterlingEffective euro
exchange rate

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
May 2010
49inflows, contributing to the appreciation of
their respective currencies. In the reporting
period, the euro fell to all-time lows against
the Australian dollar and the Swiss franc. The
price competitiveness of euro-area suppliers
compared with important trading partners
improved as the euro depreciated, yet from a
longer-term perspective it still cannot be con-
sidered favourable overall.
Securities markets and portfolio
transactions
In recent months, developments on the Euro-
pean bond markets have been determined by
the Greek debt crisis and its escalation into a
crisis of confidence in bonds of other euro-
area countries, too. Since the beginning of
this year, the GDP-weighted yield differential
of the other euro-area government bonds
over the corresponding Federal bonds
(Bunds) has more than doubled at times;
when this report went to press it was, at 107
basis points, still nearly two-thirds above the
end-2009 level. The widening was driven
primarily by the increase in Greek ten-year
government bond yields, which peaked at
almost 13% (1,000 basis points over Bunds
of comparable maturity). This was largely due
to a renewed correction of the Greek budget
deficit, strikes in protest against planned con-
solidation measures and credit downgrades
by rating agencies. Greek government bonds
last yielded, at just over 8% (premium over
Bunds of 540 basis points), markedly less
again, although still more than at the begin-
ning of the year. In between, a 3110 billion
conditional support package was adopted tokeep the Hellenic Republic solvent, a euro res-
cue package was decided on with a planned
volume of up to 3750 billion and a scheme
was launched for the purchase of govern-
ment bonds by the Eurosystem. The increas-
ing loss of investor confidence resulted in ris-
ing government bond yields for Portugal, Ire-
land and Spain, too, though not to the extent
witnessed in Greece. At the same time, yields
on government bonds from countries such as
Germany and France declined. As this report
went to press, ten-year Bunds were yielding
21/C252%, or just over3/C254percentage point less
than at end-2009; they acted as a “safe
haven” for the increasingly unsettled investors.
Yields in the short to medium-term segment
have fallen even more sharply than at the
long end. As a result, the yield curve on theBond yields in Germany
and the United States
Deutsche Bundesbank2007 2008 2009 20102.02.53.03.54.04.55.05.5
–1.0–0.50+0.5+1.0Weekly averages
%
Per-
centage 
pointsUS yield advantage over
the German bond marketYield on ten-year 
government bonds
United States
Germany
Spotlight on
spread of the
Greek debt
crisis
German yield
curve steeper

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
EUROSYSTEM
Monthly Report
May 2010
50German bond market grew even steeper
compared with the end of 2009. Based on
German Bunds, the spread between ten and
two-year yields was, at 237 basis points, very
high by historical standards as this report
went to press. The renewed steepening of
the yield curve mirrors expectations that the
Eurosystem will continue to implement its
low-interest-rate policy and market players’growing preference for short-dated interest-
bearing securities.
Outside of Europe, bond yield volatility has
been considerably more moderate since the
beginning of the year than in the euro area.
After falling until mid-February, the average
yield on ten-year US government bonds rose
substantially again at the end of February and
in March on the back of improved growth
prospects, expectations of record issuance of
US Treasuries and the passage of the health
reform. In early April it even breached the 4%
mark for a while before dropping by more
than3/C254percentage point as a result of the un-
certainty caused by the Greek debt crisis and
the investigations by the Securities Exchange
Commission (SEC) into a number of large
banks. As this report went to press, it stood
at 31/C254%, which is not only below the level at
the end of 2009 but is also lower than the
GDP-weighted yield on euro-area govern-
ment bonds outstanding. In the reporting
period, yields on Japanese government bonds
slipped slightly on balance and stood at 11/C254%
at the time of going to press.
In keeping with the brighter economic out-
look and the upward movement on the stock
markets, the financing conditions for enter-
prises at first continued to improve on the
euro-area credit markets. Since the beginning
of the year, yields on BBB-rated, euro-denom-
inated corporate bonds have fallen by roughly
1/C252percentage point. Yield spreads over sover-
eign bonds, too, have narrowed slightly by
4 basis points. The more favourable con-
ditions supported the continued strong issu-
ance activity by firms on the capital marketsYield differentials
in the euro area
Sources: Thomson Reuters and Bundesbank 
calculations. — 1 Standard deviation of yield 
advantages of euro-area government bonds 
over German Federal bonds (Bunds).
Deutsche Bundesbank2009 201001002003004005006007008009001,000
0100200300Daily data
Spread of ten-year government
bonds over Bunds
Dispersion of yield differentials
vis-à-vis German Federal bonds 1
GDP weightedUnweightedGreeceBasis
points
Basis
pointsIreland
Portugal ItalySpainInternational
bond markets
Financing
conditions for
enterprises
improved
further

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
May 2010
51in the first quarter of 2010. On the credit
derivatives markets, however, the assessmentof public sector default risk deteriorated. Thisalso affected the evaluation of enterprises; asa result there was no reduction in creditdefault risk as measured by credit derivativeindices (iTraxx).
In the first quarter of 2010, debt securities
worth 3335
1/C252billion gross were issued in the
German bond market, so that issuance wasagain down on the previous quarters. How-ever, net of redemptions, which also de-creased, and after taking account of changesin issuers’ holdings of their own bonds, secur-ities worth 320 billion were sold, whereas net
redemptions were made in the previous quar-ters. In addition, foreign borrowers sold debtsecurities for 315 billion on the German mar-
ket. These were solely euro-denominatedpaper on balance. With that, funds totalling335 billion were raised in the German bond
market in the reporting period.
In the first quarter of 2010, the public sector
tapped the bond market for 332 billion, com-
pared with 36
1/C252billion in the previous quar-
ter. Above all, the German Federal govern-ment issued five-year Federal notes (Bobls)worth 316
1/C252billion and ten-year Federal
bonds (Bunds) worth 310 billion as well as
smaller volumes of two-year Federal Treasurynotes (Sch/C228tze) for 34
1/C252billion and 30-year
Bunds for 331/C252billion. By contrast, the Ger-
man Federal government redeemed FederalTreasury discount paper (Bubills) totalling310
1/C252billion net. On balance, the state gov-
ernments issued debt securities worth 371/C252
billion.In the reporting quarter, domestic credit insti-
tutions reduced their capital market debtfurther, namely by 327 billion (fourth quarter
of 2009: 328
1/C252billion). In particular, they
redeemed other bank debt securities, whichcan be structured flexibly, ( 321 billion net)
and public Pfandbriefe ( 318
1/C252billion net).
Specialised credit institutions, meanwhile,issued debt securities to the tune of 39 bil-
lion, and mortgage Pfandbrief sales totalled33 billion. Of issues placed by credit institu-
tions, a volume of 33 billion was backed by
state guarantees.
As financing conditions on the capital market
improved further, domestic non-bank corpor-ations issued debt securities amounting to315 billion net in the reporting quarter. In this
issuer group, non-bank financial corporationsInvestment activity in the German
securities markets
5billion
2009 2010
Item Q1 Q4 Q1Debt securities
Residents 23.2 19.7 25.8
Credit institutions 10.1 – 19.1 2.1of which
Foreign debt securities – 25.5 – 9.0 1.5
Non-banks 13.1 38.8 23.7of which
Domestic debt securities – 21.3 9.6 10.4
Non-residents – 18.7 – 18.6 9.1
Shares
Residents 13.4 7.6 6.7
Credit institutions – 5.1 7.1 3.0of which
Domestic shares – 3.6 4.8 3.8
Non-banks 18.5 0.5 3.7of which
Domestic shares 12.8 – 1.3 2.4
Non-residents – 0.9 – 1.1 0.5
Mutual fund shares
Investment in specialised funds 5.9 19.3 13.9
Investment in funds open to thegeneral public 1.8 3.2 7.0of which: Share-based funds 0.7 1.6 – 0.4
Deutsche BundesbankNet sales in the
bond market
up
Borrowing
by German
governmentNet redemp-
tions by credit
institutions
Issues by
non-banks

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
EUROSYSTEM
Monthly Report
May 2010
52tapped the capital market for 381/C252billion; for
the most part, they issued longer-dated
paper ( 361/C252billion).
In the first quarter of 2010, German non-
banks and foreign investors were the main
buyers of domestic debt securities, adding
paper worth 3101/C252billion and 39 billion, re-
spectively, to their portfolios. In net terms,
domestic credit institutions invested in Ger-man interest-bearing paper only on a small
scale ( 31/C252billion). In addition, German non-
banks and credit institutions invested in
foreign debt securities to the tune of 3131/C252
billion and 311/C252billion, respectively.
At the beginning of the reporting period,
Greece’s financial problems and talk of a levy
on banks set the mood on the international
stock markets, driving equity prices on the
main stock exchanges down until mid-
February. This put pressure on financial stocks
in particular, which fell to their lowest levels
in several months. All in all, the broad Ger-
man stock market index CDAX and the Euro-
pean Euro Stoxx index each shed roughly 8%
between the beginning of January and early
February. Over the same period, Japan’s
Nikkei index and the US S&P 500 each de-
clined by about 4%. Growing investor uncer-
tainty is also reflected in the implied volatility
of equity index options, which rose percep-
tibly during this time. Positive economic re-
ports triggered a turnaround in stock market
sentiment in the following weeks, however.
Thus, April business surveys regarding expect-
ed GDP growth in the current year on both
sides of the Atlantic produced somewhat
better results than in March. However, stock
prices were probably driven, above all, by
longer-term expectations of earnings growth,
which have improved since early March. IBES
analyst estimates for the Euro Stoxx were
raised from 7% to 91/C252% as this report went
to press. In return, the broad Euro Stoxx and
the CDAX index posted gains of 121/C252%a n d
14%, respectively, between mid-February
and mid-April. Since then, however, investors’
assessment of stock market developments3050100200300
0510152025
102030405060
2007 2008 2009 2010Equity market
Sources: Thomson Reuters and Bundesbank 
calculations. —  1 Measure  of  the  risk  pre-
mium  demanded  by  investors.  Calculated 
from  three-stage  dividend  discount  model 
using three to five-year IBES expectations of 
profit  growth  and  long-term  GDP  growth 
expectations  (concensus  forecast). —  2 Ex-
pected  future  volatility,  calculated  from 
prices of options on the Euro Stoxx.
Deutsche BundesbankEuro Stoxx banks
Lin scale
Equity risk premiums 1
Euro StoxxEuro Stoxx
Euro Stoxx banks%31 January 2005 = 100, log scale
Stock price indicesEnd-of-month levels
%
Monthly averages,
lin scale
Implied
volatility of the
Euro Stoxx 2
Purchase of
debt securitiesInternational
stock markets
hit by Greek
debt crisis

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
May 2010
53has mainly been shaped by the dramatic in-
tensification of the Greek crisis and the mas-sive loss of confidence in the markets forsouthern European government bonds in par-ticular. Thus, the Euro Stoxx and CDAX in-dices lost 15% and 11% of their value, re-spectively, between mid-April and 7 May.Stock price uncertainty as measured by theimplied volatility of options on stock price in-dices has likewise increased sharply sinceend-April, when Greece requested financialaid. The measures adopted on 9 and 10 May,which include a European financial stabilitymechanism, sent European stock prices 9%– and, notably, financial stocks 16% – higher.At going to press, the Euro Stoxx and theCDAX were nevertheless roughly 11% and6% below their respective levels at the begin-ning of the year.
The risk premium demanded by investors for
holding stocks – which can be determinedusing a dividend discount model – has risensince January. At the end of April the impliedequity risk premium for the market as awhole was, at almost 6%, at the level record-ed before the insolvency of the LehmanBrothers investment bank. By comparison,the figure for bank stocks was, at 5
3/C254%, well
below the corresponding level (83/C254%). This
indicates that investors, taking into accountexpected earnings developments on themarket for bank stocks, are prepared to takeconsiderably more risks than in mid-2008.
Amidst expectations of a recovery, issuing
activity on the domestic stock market pickedup again in the first quarter of 2010. Domes-tic enterprises placed 36
1/C252billion worth ofMajor items of the balance of
payments
5billion
2009 2010
Item Q1 Q4 Q1
I Current account 1, 2 + 22.6 + 47.5 + 31.7
Foreign trade 1, 3 + 27.5 + 44.1 + 37.8
Services 1 – 1.3 + 1.8 – 1.5
Income 1 + 11.9 + 11.2 + 11.2
Current transfers 1 – 12.9 – 7.4 – 13.4
II Capital transfers 1, 4 + 0.0 – 0.5 + 0.3
III Financial account 1
(Net capital exports: –) + 4.1 – 81.2 – 9.1
1 Direct investment – 9.9 + 8.6 – 25.2
German investment
abroad – 13.6 + 1.9 – 32.0
Foreign investment in
Germany + 3.7 + 6.8 + 6.8
2 Portfolio investment – 31.9 – 36.8 – 7.6
German investment
abroad – 9.1 – 18.0 – 19.3
Shares + 0.3 – 0.8 + 3.6
Mutual fund shares – 0.5 + 3.0 – 8.0
Debt securities – 8.9 – 20.2 – 14.8
Bonds and notes 5 – 14.5 – 21.6 – 18.1
of which
Euro-denominated
bonds and notes – 18.6 – 19.9 – 25.9
Money market
instruments + 5.6 + 1.4 + 3.3
Foreign investment
in Germany – 22.8 – 18.8 + 11.6
Shares – 4.4 – 0.7 + 0.8
Mutual fund shares + 0.3 + 0.5 + 1.8
Debt securities – 18.7 – 18.6 + 9.1
Bonds and notes 5 – 32.5 – 14.2 + 14.6
of which
Public bonds and
notes + 8.0 + 2.6 + 16.4
Money market
instruments + 13.9 – 4.4 – 5.4
3 Financial derivatives 6 + 22.6 – 0.4 – 4.1
4 Other investment 7 + 23.1 – 53.2 + 28.4
Monetary financial
institutions 8 + 83.7 – 37.7 + 75.3
of which: short-term + 87.3 – 48.9 + 65.3
Enterprises and
households – 18.9 – 1.8 – 17.8
of which: short-term – 17.2 + 5.6 – 9.9
General government + 16.7 – 15.4 – 0.2
of which: short-term + 17.5 – 15.1 + 0.9
Bundesbank – 58.5 + 1.6 – 28.9
5 Change in reserve assets at
transaction values
(increase: –) 9 + 0.3 + 0.6 – 0.7
IV Errors and omissions – 26.7 + 34.1 – 22.8
1Balance. — 2Including supplementary trade items. — 3Special
trade according to the official foreign trade statistics (source:
Federal Statistical Office). — 4Including the acquisition/disposal
of non-produced non-financial assets. — 5Original maturity of
more than one year. — 6Securitised and non-securitised options
as well as financial futures contracts. — 7Includes financial and
trade credits, bank deposits and other assets. — 8Excluding the
Bundesbank. — 9Excluding allocation of SDRs and excluding
changes due to value adjustments.
Deutsche BundesbankHigher risk
premium
Stock market
funding and
stock purchases

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
EUROSYSTEM
Monthly Report
May 2010
54Deutsche BundesbankThe European Systemic Risk Board
The financial crisis triggered a series of international-
level political initiatives aimed at preventing such
crises from recurring.
In October 2008, the European Commission mandated
a high-level group of experts chaired by the former
French Central Bank Governor and ex-Managing
Director of the International Monetary Fund, Jacques
de Larosi/C155re, to make recommendations on the future
regulation and supervision of the European financial
markets. In its report of 25 February 2009, the group
of experts concluded, among other things, that the
regulatory and supervisory bodies had, to date,
placed too much emphasis on microprudential super-
vision, ie monitoring individual institutions, while not
enough attention had been paid to the macropruden-
tial risks to the financial system as a whole. The group
therefore recommended establishing a Systemic Risk
Council charged with analysing the stability of the
financial system, developing early warning systems for
emerging risks and weaknesses within the financial
system and conducting stress tests at the macro level
in order to determine the resilience of the financial
sector to certain shocks or developments. The group
of experts proposed that the council should be placed
under the auspices of the European Central Bank
(ECB), and that the ECB should, together with the
European System of Central Banks (ESCB), be given
this responsibility.
The European Council supported this recommendation
in June 2009 and asked the European Commission to
draw up legislative proposals. The European Commis-
sion therefore on 23 September 2009 published pro-
posals for legislation to set up a European Systemic
Risk Board (ESRB). The ECOFIN Council reached broad
agreement on these proposals on 20 October 2009.
The proposals have not yet been discussed by the
European Parliament. However, the political objective
that the ESRB be operational by 1 January 2011 no
longer appears realistic should the European Parlia-
ment agree to the large-scale and far-reaching pro-
posals for change put forward by the rapporteurs in its
Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs.
The European Commission has proposed a regulation
of the European Parliament and of the Council based
on Article 114 of the Treaty on the Functioning of theEuropean Union (TFEU) as the legal basis for the new
body without legal personality. Under Article 114
TFEU, the Union may adopt measures for the approxi-
mation of provisions laid down by law which have as
their object realising the internal market. It is against
this backdrop that the ESRB’s mandate to contribute
to a smooth functioning of the internal market by
preventing or mitigating systemic risks should be
seen.
The instruments at the ESRB’s disposal are, in the
main, risk warnings and recommendations for action
to address such risks. These may be directed at the EU,
the European Commission, the EU member states, na-
tional supervisory authorities or the yet to be estab-
lished European authorities for microprudential
supervision, which were also recommended in the de
Larosi/C155re report and feature in the European Commis-
sion proposals. Although the ESRB measures are not
legally binding, the ESRB should monitor whether
and to what extent the addressees implement the
measures within the prescribed time frame. The latter
are obliged to present and explain why they choose
not, or only partially, to comply with a recommenda-
tion.
The ESRB should initially be able to request from the
three new European supervisory authorities necessary
banking supervision-related information. In any case,
existing data should be used where possible to avoid
creating an additional burden for the banking indus-
try. The information should generally be presented in
such a way as to prevent individual institutions from
being identified. Moreover, the ESRB may use statistic-
al data that the ECB collects via the Eurosystem central
banks.
The ESRB will cooperate closely with the national
supervisory authorities and the new European bodies
as well as, at the international level, with the insti-
tutions with responsibility for financial stability, for
instance the International Monetary Fund and the
Financial Stability Board.
The persons acting for the ESRB will be drawn mainly
from the EU central banks, most of which already per-
form financial stability-related tasks at the national
level – though the scale of these activities differs.

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
May 2010
55Since the start of the monetary union, the Treaty on
the Functioning of the European Union (Article 127(5) TFEU) gives Eurosystem central banks a mandatefor financial stability.
The ESRB’s decision-making body is the General
Board. It will be composed of the President and Vice-President of the ECB and the Governors of the centralbanks of all EU member states, which are as such alsomembers of the ECB General Council. Further mem-bers include a representative of the European Com-mission and the chairpersons of the new Europeansupervisory authorities as well as one representativeper member state of the national supervisory author-ities and the President of the EU’s Economic andFinancial Committee, though these will have no vot-ing rights. The chair of the General Board can only beelected from those members who represent an EUcentral bank. It is expected that the ECB President willbe nominated the Chair of the General Board.
The General Board, in which members not from EU
central banks will be in the clear minority, will besupported by a Steering Committee, whose compos-ition does not reflect that of the General Board. Ofthe 12 members of the Steering Committee, only fivebesides the Chair and Vice-Chair of the General Boardare representatives of EU central banks. Representa-tives of Eurosystem central banks will probably be inthe minority on the Steering Committee.
ESRB members are obliged to act impartially and
solely in the interests of the European Union.
The ESRB will be aided by the Advisory Technical Com-
mittee comprising technical specialists from the insti-tutions and organs that belong to the General Board.The Banking Supervision Committee (BSC), in whichall EU central banks and banking supervisory author-ities are represented, has, since 1998, supported theECB and ESCB by providing analyses of the stabilityand structure of the EU banking sector. The BSC couldtherefore form the core of the ESRB’s new advisorycommittee.
The European Parliament is considering reducing the
number of central bank representatives in the bodiesin favour of academics and people with an industry ortrade union background or providers or consumers of
financial services. This would go against the proposalsput forward in the de Larosi/C155re report that the ESRBshould be set up under the sole auspices of the centralbanks due to their expertise.
The secretariat of the ESRB should be ensured by the
ECB and provide analytical, statistical, logistical andadministrative support to the ESRB. The EuropeanCommission has proposed an additional regulation,based on Article 127 (6) TFEU, to establish the secre-tariat. According to Article 127 (6) TFEU, the Councilmay, acting unanimously and after consulting theEuropean Parliament and the ECB, confer upon theECB specific tasks relating to the prudential super-vision of credit institutions and other financial institu-tions with the exception of insurance undertakings.
The Governing Council of the ECB has already stated
that the ECB stands ready to ensure the secretariat forthe ESRB. Under Article 127 (5) TFEU, the Eurosystemalready has a mandate to support the competentauthorities for financial stability, which will includethe ESRB once it has been set up. This, and an ECBGoverning Council decision, could therefore havebeen used as the legal basis for the provision by theECB of the secretariat for the ESRB. This would, more-over, have eliminated the need for a unanimous deci-sion by all EU member states, particularly as the rele-vant regulation of the European Parliament and ofthe Council can be passed by qualified majority deci-sion in the Council according to Article 114 TFEU.
Particular attention will have to be paid to ensuring
that the new dual role played by ESRB members rep-resenting EU central banks and, in particular, Eurosys-tem central banks does not lead to conflicts of interestin the performance of existing tasks within the Euro-system/ESCB. This is especially true of the Eurosystem’sobjective of maintaining price stability. It also appliesto the Eurosystem’s ongoing financial stability-relatedtasks. This may be of particular relevance as Article130 TFEU guarantees independence in performingthese tasks. The ECB, too, will have to take this intoconsideration when making organisational arrange-ments for providing the ESRB’s secretariat.

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
EUROSYSTEM
Monthly Report
May 2010
56new shares, the vast majority of which were
listed equities. The volume of foreign shares
outstanding in the German market rose only
slightly ( 31/C252billion). Equities were purchased
above all by resident non-banks and credit
institutions ( 331/C252billion and 33 billion, re-
spectively), which invested primarily in do-
mestic paper ( 321/C252billion and 34 billion, re-
spectively). Foreign investors added German
stocks worth 31/C252billion to their portfolios
(see Direct investment).
During the reporting period, domestic invest-
ment companies recorded inflows of 321 bil-
lion, after raising funds totalling 3221/C252billion
in the previous three months. The fresh funds
benefited mainly specialised funds reserved
for institutional investors ( 314 billion). Of the
mutual funds open to the general public, in
particular open-end real estate funds and
mixed securities-based funds were able to
place own shares ( 331/C252billion and 321/C252bil-
lion, respectively); mixed funds and fixed
income funds sold smaller volumes of certifi-
cates ( 31 billion and 31/C252billion, respectively).
By contrast, equity funds suffered slight out-
flows ( 31/C252billion). Foreign funds traded in the
German market acquired new resources to-
talling 38 billion net in the first quarter.
The principal investors in mutual funds were
domestic non-banks, adding certificates
worth 327 billion to their portfolios – for the
most part domestic paper. Foreign investors,
meanwhile, invested 32 billion in domestic
funds. German credit institutions boughtmutual fund shares for 31/C252billion net; on
balance, these were exclusively foreign secur-
ities.
Direct investment
As in portfolio investment, which in the first
quarter of 2010 recorded net capital exports
of371/C252billion, cross-border transactions in
direct investment resulted in capital outflows
of325 billion. German parent companies
provided their foreign branches with funds
amounting to 332 billion, both in the form of
equity capital ( 314 billion) and via intra-group
credit transactions ( 3121/C252billion). Besides the
manufacture of transport equipment sector,
Germany’s banking and insurance industry
(313 billion) were the main direct investors
abroad. In this context, an increase by a Ger-
man credit institution of the capital reserves
at a subsidiary played an important role.
From January to March 2010, foreign firms’
investment in their branches in Germany was
roughly at the levels recorded in the previous
quarter. In net terms, German direct invest-
ment enterprises received resources – primar-
ily from the euro area – totalling 37 billion.
Whereas equity capital was increased only
slightly, reinvested profit shares remained
with the German subsidiaries. Moreover,
funds were made available in the form of
– mostly long-term – intra-group loans. This
was true, above all, of the manufacture of
transport equipment industry.Sales and
purchases of
mutual fund
sharesGerman direct
investment
abroad
Foreign direct
investment in
Germany

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
May 2010
57Economic conditions
in GermanyMacroeconomic situation
The upturn in the German economy con-
tinued after the start of 2010 despite tempor-
ary negative factors. The considerable ten-
sions in the international financial markets in
the wake of the escalating debt crisis in
Greece and the resulting contagion effects on
other euro-area countries have not, so far,
been reflected in the real economy. According
to the Federal Statistical Office, real gross do-
mestic product (GDP) was 0.2% up on the
quarter after seasonal and calendar adjust-
ment. Following an upward revision of the
data, a similar increase is now shown for the
final quarter of 2009. This means that, on
balance, the export-driven trend recovery in
the economy outweighed the temporary re-
tarding effects on domestic activity. The ex-
ceptionally cold weather and heavy snowfalls
in January and February hampered activity in
the construction and transport sectors consid-
erably, and the indirect effects of this are like-
ly to have made themselves felt in industry,
too. However, not least given the rather fa-
vourable orders situation, enterprises rapidly
stepped up their production again in March.
Households continued to reduce their con-
sumption expenditure following the expiry of
the environmental premium for scrapping old
cars. Overall output in the reporting period
was a calendar-adjusted 1.6% up on the cyc-
lical low of one year earlier.
In the first quarter of 2010, the German
economy continued to benefit, first and fore-
most, from the pick-up in export business.
There was a seasonally adjusted 2.6% rise in
exports of goods and services on top of aRecovery
process held up
by weather
Exports again
up considerably

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
EUROSYSTEM
Monthly Report
May 2010
58marked increase in the second half of 2009.
Measured in terms of real flows of goods,
exports to other euro-area countries grew
somewhat more sharply in the reporting
period than did exports to countries outside
the euro area. However, demand for German
products in non-euro-area markets had al-
ready risen strongly in the final quarter of
2009. This early turnaround and the rapid
pace of economic growth in the emerging
market economies (Asia, in particular) along
with the increasingly entrenched upswing in
the US economy have played a key part in re-
covering, to date, roughly one-half of the
massive downturn in the volume of non-
euro-area exports suffered during the finan-
cial and economic crisis. By contrast, much
less progress has been made in the recovery
of exports to euro-area trading partners.Imports of goods and services increased very
sharply in the first quarter of 2010 at a sea-
sonally adjusted 6.1% following a decline of
1.6% in the preceding quarter. It is striking
that, after the turn of the year, the German
economy increased its real imports of goods
from the rest of the euro area by 111/C254%;
admittedly, the volume of imports from other
euro-area countries had been very low be-
fore. Imports of goods from non-euro-area
countries also increased following the down-
turn in the preceding quarter and, in the re-
porting period, were marginally up on their
level in the third quarter of 2009. Since the
cyclical low, the trend in imports has been
only slightly weaker than in exports. Notwith-
standing its sharp decline in the period under
review, which almost entirely negated the ex-
ceptional increase one quarter earlier, the for-
eign trade surplus was tending to grow again
in seasonally adjusted terms, but was, on
average, well down on the level reached at
the end of the preceding boom.
Investment in machinery and equipment in-
creased by a seasonally adjusted 1.6% during
the reporting period, offsetting the decline in
the final quarter of 2009. With regard to
movable fixed assets, the underlying trend in
investment is characterised by a sideways
movement following the massive correction
of investment one year earlier. Among other
things, the reporting period saw an increased
acquisition of motor vehicles for fleets of pas-
senger cars and pools of commercial vehicles.
Evidently, many enterprises were no longer
able to defer the necessary investment in re-
placements in this area. This motive may have
also been one of the factors that led to moreOverall output
1 Price-adjusted.
Deutsche Bundesbank2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010102104106108110112114
–8–6–4–20+2+42000 = 100, seasonally adjusted
Log scale
GDP 1
Year-on-year change%
Lin scaleVery sharp
growth in
imports
Increased
investment in
machinery and
equipment

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
May 2010
59machinery and equipment being procured.
Given the perceptible underutilisation ofoverall production capacity, the increase inthis category of goods was comparativelysmall, however.
Although construction investment was clearly
hampered by the cold winter weather andheavy snowfalls, the decline, at 3.8%, wason a limited scale in contrast to comparablefrosty spells. In the first quarter of 2010, thenumber of days of ice – measured as an aver-age for Germany as a whole
1– was more
than twice as high as the multi-year seasonalaverage. The weather-enforced break in out-door industries was essentially concentratedon the first two months of the year. As earlyas March it was possible to start catching upon the backlog. Moreover, further construc-tion measures were being planned on a con-siderable scale during the winter months. Ac-cording to Ifo surveys, there was only a mar-ginal deterioration in the business situation ofarchitects at the start of the first quarter afterthe stock of orders at the end of 2009 hadreached its highest level for 15 years. Further-more, construction investment was buoyedup by the fact that the building completionsector – which is much less dependent onweather conditions – was encountering quitea favourable orders situation, not least owingto the government economic stimulus pack-ages, which also provide funds for the reno-vation of public buildings.
In the first quarter of 2010, households cut
back their consumer spending by a seasonallyadjusted 0.8% on the quarter in real terms.This was due mainly to the fact that deliveriesof cars to households continued their steep
downward trend up to February. Since then,the number of new registrations of non-commercial vehicles has largely remainedbelow its level prior to the introduction of thecar scrappage scheme. There was a sharp in-Underlying trends in
foreign trade
Deutsche Bundesbank2007 2008 2009 2010100105110115120125130135
95100105110115120Seasonally adjusted
Euro area
Imports of goods (real)Non-euro-areaTotal2009 Q2 = 100, log scale
Exports of goods  (real)
pe0102030405060Lin scale
Foreign trade balance€ bn
1A “day of ice” is defined as a day on which the highest
temperature does not go above freezing point. The indi-
cator used here weights the results of various monitoring
stations in accordance with the regional employment
structure in the construction sector.Weather-
related decline
in construction
activity
Private
consumption
down owing to
drop in demand
for cars

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
EUROSYSTEM
Monthly Report
May 2010
60crease in sales of light heating oil during the
reporting period. This may be connected with
the fact that many households had to fill up
their tanks early owing to the high level of oil
consumption during the cold winter months.
Seasonally adjusted retail sales more or less
maintained their prior-quarter level. Apart
from the above-mentioned special factors,
the underlying trend in consumer sentiment
appears to be still quite resilient.Sectoral trends
Industrial output continued its recovery in the
first quarter of 2010. With growth at a
seasonally adjusted 1.3% on the quarter, the
pace of economic activity in this sector
showed hardly any change compared with
the last three months of 2009 and was there-
fore still well down on the rate of expansion
in the third quarter of last year. One likely
contributory factor is that the increase in the
flow of orders was somewhat weaker in the
fourth quarter of 2009. The very sharp in-
crease in output in March might be an indica-
tion that production had not been stepped
up at the beginning of 2010 owing, in part,
to weather-related delays in the transporta-
tion of goods. This is consistent with the find-
ing of the Ifo surveys that manufacturing cap-
acity utilisation shot up by 41/C252percentage
points to 793/C254% of normal full capacity at the
beginning of the second quarter.
At a seasonally adjusted +2% on the quarter,
it was again producers of intermediate goods
that recorded the sharpest increase during
the reporting period. While output of capital
goods showed a rise of just under 1%, the in-
crease in the consumer goods sector was
moderate. Moreover, identifiable differences
exist in sectoral terms with regard to the
stage of the cyclical recovery. In the inter-
mediate goods sector, it was the chemicals in-
dustry that continued to pick up most; it was
the first major industrial sector to have
ushered in the trend turnaround and has al-
ready made up roughly three-quarters of the
loss of output suffered as a result of the re-
cession. In the basic metals sector as in theImpact of weather on 
construction: a comparison
of severe winters
1 Construction. —  2 Seasonally  adjusted;  le-
vel in preceding Q3 = 100.
Deutsche BundesbankOct Nov Dec Jan Feb Mar Apr May Jun05101520
Days of iceDays
90951001057580859095100105110Multi-year
monthly average1995-96 2005-06 2009-10
Construction investment 2
(quarterly)Log scale
Construction output 1,2
2009-102005-06
1995-96Further upturn
in industrial
output ...
... with sectoral
discrepancies

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
May 2010
61automotive industry, the recovery resumed
only after a period of stagnation, which wasdue mainly to the waning impact of the envir-onmental premium; the upturn had beenrelatively steep initially owing to the stimulusfrom the demand for cars. The pick-up in theelectrical and mechanical engineering sectorshas been rather subdued so far. The fact thatproduction of machinery and equipment hasmade little progress since its cyclical low isalso due the cyclical lag in this sector of indus-try.
Energy production and construction activity
were affected by the weather in the firstquarter of 2010. The cold winter led to amarked seasonally adjusted increase in en-ergy production. Construction output, how-ever, was 7.7% down on the quarter, al-though the building industry had to contendwith somewhat smaller losses than the civilengineering sector.
Business activity picked up in most services
sectors at the beginning of the year. In sea-sonally adjusted terms, real wholesale sales,which are shaped by business with trade andindustry, gained momentum in the first quar-ter of 2010. In addition, retail sales remainedquite stable. Overall, there was a slight fall insales of motor vehicles, with the decline insales of new vehicles to households, whichno longer had the stimulus of the environ-mental premium, outweighing the increase insales to commercial customers. The turnoverof hotels and restaurants, which had droppedconsiderably in the final quarter of 2009, didnot show any meaningful improvement in thefirst quarter of 2010. According to the na-tional accounts data, the transport and com-
munication sectors suffered losses in the firstquarter in seasonally adjusted terms. Theweather is likely to have played a part in this,too. The monthly statistics on motorway tolls,for example, indicate that driving was severe-ly hampered by snow and ice in January andFebruary, but increased sharply in March andApril. (For more details on the use of motor-way toll statistics in the economic analysis,see the box on pages 64-65.) Value added inthe financial intermediation sectors and inbusiness-related services showed a percep-tible increase after the start of the year. Theincrease in the public and private services sec-tors was smaller than in the preceding quar-ters, however.
Sectoral profile of
industrial output *
* Moving two-month averages; low in each 
case = 100; time lag/lead (in months) in par-entheses.
Deutsche Bundesbank100110120130140150160170Seasonally adjusted, log scale
Chemicals (+3)
Computers,
electronicand opticalequipment (0)Machinery
(–3)Motor vehicles (+2)Basic metals (0)
t–16 t+4 t+12 t+8 t t–4 t–8 t–12
Month before (+) or after (–) the low
in industrial output in April 2009Construction
activity and
energy produc-
tion affected by
winter weather
Upturn in most
services sectors

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
EUROSYSTEM
Monthly Report
May 2010
62Employment and unemployment
The labour market situation is still remarkably
robust. According to estimates by the Federal
Statistical Office, employment in Germany re-
mained virtually unchanged in the first quar-
ter of 2010. While there was a reduction in
low-paid part-time jobs, there was a slight in-
crease in employment subject to social secur-
ity contributions. One factor in this is likely tohave been that weather-related cutbacks in
employment in the construction sector were
largely offset by seasonal short-time work.
Activity in the labour market after the start of
the year was still being shaped by diverging
trends which, so far, have largely cancelled
each other out. There continued to be marked
increases in staffing levels in wholly or partly
publicly financed services, while there was a
further reduction in employment in the pro-
duction sector, where the fall in the number
of jobs subject to social security contributions
was similar in scale to that in the final quarter
of 2009. Although the recovery in industrial
activity has already made marked progress in
some cases, the process of adjusting staff
levels appears not to have been completed
yet in a number of major sectors. Neverthe-
less, the number of temporary workers – usu-
ally employed, to a large extent, in industry –
has been going back up since the second half
of 2009.
The fact that there is still a considerable em-
ployment overhang when measured against
current output is revealed, furthermore, by
the fact that short-time work for economic
reasons is declining only slowly. In December
2009, this affected 810,000 members of
staff; this corresponds roughly to 238,000
employees’ work being lost completely. New
registrations for short-time work fell by one-
third in the first quarter of 2010. Neverthe-
less, a still quite high level is suggested by the
fact that the resources spent for this purpose
by the Federal Employment Agency have
hardly fallen since the start of the year andOutput in industry
and in construction
Deutsche Bundesbank2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 20109095100105110115120
–25–20–15–10–50+5+10
95100105110115120
–15–10–50+5+10+15+20+25+302005 = 100, seasonally adjusted, quarterly
Log scale
Industry
Lin scale
Year-on-year change
Log scale
Construction
Lin scale
Year-on-year
change%%
Employment
in 2010
Q1 stable
overall ...... but growing
gap between
sectors
Cyclically
induced short-
time work still
at a high level

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
May 2010
63were still around one-half of their peak
amount in the second quarter of 2009.
In the first quarter of 2010, the seasonally ad-
justed number of persons registered as un-employed was 3.38 million. Despite the verycold winter weather, this was 42,000 fewerthan in the preceding quarter. This decline islikely to have been due chiefly to the expan-sion of labour market policy measures. How-ever, seasonally adjusted unemployment inthe broader sense, which additionally coversjob seekers on the books of employmentagencies, participants in training schemes,and the long-term unemployed of more than58 years of age without the prospect of a joboffer, was 9,000 persons higher than in thefourth quarter of 2009. The lower commuterbalance may also have had a dampening im-pact on the unemployment figure. The officialunemployment rate stood at a seasonally ad-justed 8.0% in the reporting period, and wasthus only marginally (0.1 percentage point)higher than the comparable 2009 level. Theunemployment rate in the broader senseshowed a year-on-year increase of 0.7 per-centage point.
In April 2010, the seasonally adjusted un-
employment figure showed a marked fall of68,000 on the month to 3.29 million. The un-employment rate went down to 7.8%. Onereason why the decline was so sharp is likelyto be that the relevant reference date for thestatistics in that month fell within a period ofincreased recruitment after the end of theEaster holidays.Labour market
1 Not seasonally adjusted. — 2 Introduction 
of seasonal short-time working benefits at the end of 2006. — 3 From May 2009, un-
employed  excluding  persons  newly  re-gistered  on  the  books  of  private  employ-ment agencies.
Deutsche Bundesbank2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 201038.539.039.540.040.5
05001,0001,500
3.03.54.04.55.0
1,00050005001,000
––++
681012Seasonally adjusted, quarterly
Million
Million
0Thou-
sandThou-
sand
Thou-
sand
%Employed
2Short-time workers 1
Unemployed 3Year-on-year change
Year-on-year change
Unemployment rate 3Apr
Apr
Apr–5000+500+1,000
Advance notification 
of short-time work 1
AprUnemployment
down minimally
after the start
of the year ...
... and
perceptible
decline at the
beginning
of Q2

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
EUROSYSTEM
Monthly Report
May 2010
64Deuts che Bun desbankInformation content of toll statisti cs for e conomi c analysis
In January 2005, Germany implemente d a distan ce-base d 
toll on tru cks with a gross vehi cle wei ght ex ceeding 
12 tonnes (heavy tru cks). Tolls are colle cted on all German 
motorways ( Autobahnen ) as well as on in dividual stret ches 
of three trunk roa ds (Bundesstrassen ). The Fe deral Ofﬁ  ce 
for Goo ds Transport ( Bundesamt für Güterverkehr , BA G), 
whi ch is responsi ble for colle ctin g tolls, compiles statisti cs 
from whi ch it pu blishes re gular monthly ﬁ  ndings, begin-
nin g with the survey perio d January 2007. Amon g other 
thin gs, the toll statisti cs cover the milea ge of toll-lia ble 
heavy tru cks by country of ori gin. This not only makes 
it possi ble to con duct stru ctural stu dies of roa d goo ds 
transport; sin ce the BA G usually pu blishes its evaluations 
extremely quickly, only 15 workin g days after the en d of 
each reportin g perio d, this information is also of relevan ce 
to short-term business cycle analysis.
In the last three years, commer cial vehi cles re gistere d in 
Germany a ccounte d for almost two-thir ds of total toll 
milea ge. For geographi cal reasons, the vast majority of 
the remainin g milea ge was a ccounte d for by tru cks from 
other EU countries. Of the commer cial vehi cles from non-
German EU countries, those re gistere d in the new mem ber 
states of central an d eastern Europe travelle d appre ciably greater distan ces in Germany than tru cks from western 
Europe: in the ﬁ  rst group, Polish an d Czech vehi cles take 
an outstan ding share, while in the se con d, that of Dut ch 
tru cks is comparatively lar ge.
Consi dera ble deviations are to be foun d in terms of re gional 
stru cture between the milea ge travelle d by forei gn tru cks 
and the ﬂ  ows of goo ds in German forei gn tra de. Given that 
only a fra ction of the goo ds tra ded within the EU is trans-
porte d by roa d an d, moreover, that Germany is only the 
transit country for a part of the goo ds transferre d, certain 
discrepan cies are to be expe cted. However, the relatively 
lar ge shares a ccounte d for by some central an d eastern 
European countries in dicate that transport servi ce provi d-
ers from those countries are overrepresente d in terms of 
roa d haula ge journeys to an d from Germany in relation to 
tra de in goo ds. A further relevant fa ctor is pro bably that 
central an d eastern European roa d hauliers are also hire d 
to transport goo ds within Germany.
Since the minimum num ber of o bserve d values was 
obtaine d, the Bun desbank has calculate d the monthly 
milea ge by toll-lia ble vehi cles a djuste d for seasonal an d 
calen dar effe cts. In a ddition to total milea ge, data are 
provi ded broken down by commer cial vehi cles re gistere d 
in Germany an d a broa d, respe ctively. The time series 
poi gnantly reﬂ  ect the slump in tra de in goo ds due to the 
sharp re cession in the fourth quarter of 2008 an d the ﬁ  rst 
quarter of 2009. Between O ctober 2008 an d Mar ch 2009, 
the total toll milea ge travelle d by heavy tru cks per month 
fell by one-ei ghth. The onset of e conomi c re covery in the 
secon d quarter of 2009 initially brou ght a rather tentative 
increase in milea ge. Not until Mar ch an d April 2010 was a 
clear upwar d tren d re corded.
Althou gh the o bservation perio d is still fairly short, the 
results of the toll statisti cs tra ce a fairly a ccurate pi cture of 
general e conomi c activity. Yet the question whether, gen-
erally speakin g, the milea ge travelle d by heavy tru cks is 
suita ble as a lea ding in dicator of e conomi c developments 
must also be examine d rationally. The transport of goo ds is 
dire ctly linke d to overall e conomi c output throu gh its se c-
toral contri bution to value a dded an d in dire ctly throu gh 
the relationship between the pro duction of goo ds an d the 
transport of goo ds. 
1 Total exports an d imports of goo ds. — 2 Where not a mem ber of the 
euro area. — 3 The transport of goo ds by non-resi dents – whi ch may 
be assume d in the case of forei gn-re gistere d toll-lia ble vehi cles – is 
classiﬁ  ed in national a ccounts as the import of transport servi ces, even if goo ds are neither importe d nor exporte d. — 4 Besi des frei ght trans-
port by roa d, the transport se ctor as deﬁ ne d by the national a ccounts 
also in cludes the conveyan ce of passen gers by roa d as well as all trans-
port by rail, ship an d air. Also in cluded, moreover, are auxiliary trans-Transport of goods by foreign-registered trucks
on German toll roads, by country or region
of origin
Average 2007 to 2009; percentage shares
Country or region of origin MileageBy comparison:
trade in goods1
EU 91.9 84.1
Euro area 39.6 57.2
of which
France 1.0 12.3
Italy 3.7 8.5
Spain 2.2 5.0
Netherlands 13.5 10.2
Central and East European
EU countries249.5 13.8
of which
Poland 24.6 5.0
Czech Republic 10.9 4.3
Hungary 4.8 2.6
Baltic states 5.1 0.6
Other EU countries 2.9 13.1
Non-EU countries 8.1 15.9

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
May 2010
65The milea ge of German-re gistere d toll-lia ble vehi cles is 
likely to be closely correlate d with the value a dded of car-
riers an d forwar ding agents.3 Assumin g that the transport 
of goo ds by rail, ship an d air develops alon g similar lines 
because short-term su bstitution possi bilities are limite d, 
the ﬁ  ndings of the toll statisti cs mi ght offer a suita ble 
approa ch for assessin g the a ctivities in this se ctor of the 
economy.4 However, the share a ccounte d for by the frei ght 
transport in dustry as a whole in the output of all e conomi c 
sectors (at basi c pri ces) is rather small at an estimate d 
2½ %. 
For this reason, the suita bility of toll statisti cs as an e co-
nomi c indicator is pro bably better explaine d by the servi ce 
fun ction of goo ds transport for in dustrial output. Since 
both in materials mana gement an d in pro duction control, 
lar ge inventories are to day for the most part dispense d 
with, the delivery of commo dities an d interme diate pro d-
ucts – like the su bsequent transport of ﬁ  nishe d goo ds 
– is closely linke d to the pro duction pro cess as re gards 
the time fa ctor. Thus, the total milea ge travelle d by all 
heavy tru cks coul d be a lea ding in dicator of in dustrial 
output, an d even in the event of a hi gh contemporane-
ous correlation between the two series a (pseu do) lea ding 
indicator property coul d just result from the fa ct that the 
toll statisti cs are pu blishe d about three weeks before the 
correspon ding monthly output data. A ccording to the 
Federal Statisti cal Ofﬁ  ce‘s input-output ta bles for 200 6, 
the manufa cturin g in dustry a ccounte d for deman d for 
about one-thir d of all dire ct transport servi ces by lan d (ie 
roa d an d rail to gether). Moreover, only use in tra de an d in 
indire ct transport servi ces is of quantitative si gniﬁ cance.5 
The relationship between the pro duction of goo ds an d the 
transport of goo ds – at least insofar as goo ds pro duced 
in Germany are transferre d for commer cial enterprises 
– shoul d ten d to grow even closer via the tra de channel. In 
prin ciple, the same applies to the share of the forwar ding 
business, whi ch (in terms of turnover) a ccounts for a bout 
three-ﬁ  fths of in dire ct transport servi ces.
According to the statisti cal analyses in the sample from 
January 2007 until Mar ch 2010, the seasonally a djuste d 
monthly rates of chan ge of toll milea ge an d in dustrial 
output are marke dly correlate d. Compare d with the con-
temporaneous relationship, the link is even somewhat greater assumin g either a lea d or a la g of one month. This 
is consistent with the fa ct that frei ght servi ces are usually 
provi ded before an d after the goo ds pro duction pro cess. 
The hi ghest correlation, whi ch is base d on the role of input 
supplier, su ggests a lea ding in dicator fun ction for in dus-
trial output. Thus, fore casts of the tren d rate of in dustrial 
output shoul d improve if the rate of chan ge of the total 
milea ge travelle d by heavy tru cks from the previous month 
is in cluded in the information on whi ch the fore cast mo dels 
are base d. Initial e conometri c results, thou gh promisin g, 
must be deeme d provisional given the short o bservation 
perio d.
port a ctivities (e g cargo han dling an d stora ge) an d the a ctivities of 
transport a gents su ch as frei ght forwar ders as well as of travel a gents 
and operators. — 5 It must be note d, however, that input-output tables do not provi de separate data for the transport of passen gers 
and goo ds, respe ctively.Mileage travelled by heavy trucks on 
German toll roads
2007 2008 2009 201080859095100105110
00.20.40.60.8Seasonally adjusted, January 2007 = 100, log scale
Cross-correlation between the monthly rates of 
change of mileage and industrial output Trucks registered outside Germany
Trucks registered
in Germany
Memo item
industrial outputTotal
Lin scale
+ 4 + 3 + 2 + 1 0 – 1 – 2 – 3 – 4
Time shift of mileage vis-à-vis industrial output
in months

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
EUROSYSTEM
Monthly Report
May 2010
66Following major improvements over the past
months, both the Ifo employment barometer
for trade and industry and the BA-X have
now reached values which, in the last up-
swing, marked the start of a perceptible
increase in employment. In contrast to the
present situation, utilisation of staffing levels
in parts of the economy was significantly
higher then – as can be seen from the num-
ber of working hours of full-time employees.
It may therefore be expected that, this time,
firms’ and employees’ efforts to reduce short-
time work, offset negative balances in work-
ing hours accounts and increase regular
weekly working hours will appreciably delay
the positive impact of the cyclical recovery on
the labour market. Furthermore, it is mainly
temporary work that will benefit initially. This
is revealed, not least, by the fact that, accord-
ing to IAB Job Vacancy Survey, labour de-
mand in the temporary employment sector in
the first quarter of 2010 was already well up
on the same period of 2009, even though the
total number of vacancies actually fell slightly
on the year. Even so, the brighter overall eco-
nomic setting offers the prospect of markedly
decreased adjustment pressure even in those
sectors hit hard by the economic crisis. Seen
in that light, the Federal Government’s plans
to prolong the extended possibilities of short-
time work now until March 2012 harbours
the risk that this instrument, designed to
bridge temporary losses in production, will in
future be used by a greater number of firms
which suffer more from structural problems.Wages and prices
The 2010 pay round was shaped mainly by
the currently still depressed level of capacity
utilisation, although some settlements also
reflect the expectation that the economic re-
covery will continue. The dominant objective
in negotiations in the manufacturing sectors
was to safeguard employment. As a result,
some of the settlements include extended op-
tions for a temporary reduction of weekly
working hours. Employee representatives in
the metal and chemicals industries entered
into pay negotiations without any specific
wage demands this time, and wage discus-
sions were concluded comparatively quickly
and without fuss. In both of these sectors,
there were no increases in scheduled rates of
pay for the current year. Instead, one-off pay-
ments were agreed, some of which can be
staggered according to firms’ performance
and profitability. While the very short dur-
ation of the most recent settlement for the
chemicals industry avoids making any com-
mitment for the coming year, rates of negoti-
ated pay in the metal industry have been in-
creased quite considerably, although account
has been taken of the continued heightened
uncertainty in the business outlook by incorp-
orating into the settlements elements of flexi-
bility for special operational situations. In con-
trast to the settlements in the private sector,
the new pay settlement for central and local
government employees provides for sched-
uled rates of pay rising somewhat more
sharply this year than in 2011.
The pattern of the wage settlements is
reflected in the Bundesbank’s statistics onIncreasing
employment
intentions
boosting mainly
temporary
employment2010 pay
round with very
moderate
settlements

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
May 2010
67negotiated pay rates inasmuch as, in the re-
porting quarter, there was a further declineon the year in the monthly rates of basic pay(+2.2%, compared with +2.6% in the finalquarter of 2009). This is also shown by thefigures of the Federal Statistical Office. How-ever, the year-on-year increase in overallnegotiated wages in the first quarter of 2010,at 1.8%, was moderate, as in the previousquarter. Actual earnings (on a monthly basis)went up 1.3% on the year in the reportingperiod after declining slightly on the whole in2009. Wage drift fell from -1.6 percentagepoints in the fourth quarter of 2009 to -0.5percentage point in the first quarter of 2010.
Minimum wages in the office cleaning and
roofing industries were declared generallybinding in the period under review. Industry-wide minimum wage levels are likewiseplanned in the security industry and the caresector. Negotiations on minimum wages havebeen initiated in other sectors, possibly outof fear of increasing low-wage competitionfrom May 2011 onwards when the last re-strictions on the free movement of workersfrom other EU countries will be abolished inGermany.
In the first quarter of 2010, prices tended to
point back up at all production and distribu-tion stages. The disinflation process observ-able since the third quarter of 2008 stemmingfrom commodities and ranging through inter-mediate goods to final products has thereforecome to an end and is leading into a similarlygradual countermovement. This developmenthas recently been reinforced by the depreci-ation of the euro. Overall, import prices werenoticeably up on the quarter in seasonally ad-
justed terms at 3.9%, and export prices roseby 1.3%. Domestic industrial producer priceswere also up sharply at 1.1% with a further0.7% rise in April. This means that prices arenow showing an increase on the year again,although they are still well below the peaklevels in the third quarter of 2008. There wasa deterioration in the terms of trade owing tothe disproportionate rise in import prices. Atthe consumer level, the sharp increase incrude oil prices and the (principally weather-related) higher cost of food more than offsetthe slight decline in other goods and services.
At the upstream stages of production, energy
prices, in particular, rose sharply. The subin-dex for exports went up by no less than12.4% on the quarter in seasonally adjusted
Negotiated rates of pay
1 Excluding additional benefits and lump-
sum payments.
Deutsche Bundesbank2003 04 05 06 07 08 09 201000.51.01.52.02.53.03.5Year-on-year change, on monthly basis
Negotiated rates of pay total
Basic pay 1%
Q1Moderate
wage increase
in 2010 Q1 ...
Growing
expansion of
sector-specific
minimum
wages
Price trends
generally
pointing back
up
Rising prices at
all stages of the
economy

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
EUROSYSTEM
Monthly Report
May 2010
68terms. In domestic sales, where price fluctu-
ations are usually more moderate owing to
the lower percentage of crude oil, the figure
was 2.3%. There was also a rise in the prices
of intermediate goods. In this case, too, in-
dustrial producer prices followed the import
sector with a slight time lag and smaller fluc-
tuations (seasonally adjusted +1.2%, com-
pared with +4.5%). In the first quarter, the
reversal in the general price trend also led tothe first increase for some while in the prices
for final products. It was, above all, the cost
of imported consumer goods that went up
quite markedly. Even the import prices of cap-
ital goods showed a slight increase. Domestic
sales present a similar picture. Construction
prices were virtually unchanged on the quar-
ter and were only 0.1% up on the year.
According to the index of the Association
of German Pfandbriefbanks (vdp-Index), the
sales prices of residential property fell some-
what in the first quarter of 2010 with a 11/C252%
decline on the year.
Consumer prices were 0.3% up on the quar-
ter in seasonally adjusted terms, which was
much the same rate of increase as in the two
preceding quarters. As in the final quarter of
2009, this was due in large part to higher en-
ergy prices. In addition, food prices went up
owing to the weather. The other main com-
ponents – apart from rents – were down
slightly. The increased cost of energy was due
chiefly to higher international crude oil prices,
which rose at a faster pace owing to the de-
preciation of the euro, with the prices of
heating oil and fuel generally quickly follow-
ing suit. Added to this was a marked expan-
sion of margins in March. In the case of gas,
the delayed adjustment of prices to the fall in
crude oil prices in 2008 came to an end. The
very cold winter weather impacted, above all,
on food prices, especially vegetables. Overall,
food was still cheaper than one year earlier,
however. Consumers had to pay somewhat
less for other durables and semi durables –
principally clothing and shoes. The subindex
for services also showed a slight decline,
mainly because of lower prices in the financialImport, producer and
consumer prices
1 Not  seasonally  adjusted,  quarterly. — 
2 National consumer price index.
Deutsche Bundesbank2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 201095100105110115
95100105 105110115
95100105 105110115
95100105110
10123
–+++2005 = 100, seasonally adjusted
Lin scale
Year-on-year change 1Consumer prices 2Construction
prices 1Producer prices
of industrial
productsImport pricesLog scale
%
AprConsumer
prices affected
by energy and
food

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
May 2010
69and health sectors as well as cheaper package
holidays. The cut in the rate of VAT for ac-
commodation services from 19% to 7% as of
1 January 2010 was not passed on to con-
sumers, however. Housing rents continued
their moderate upward trend with an un-
changed 1% year-on-year increase. The na-
tional consumer price index (CPI) rose 0.7%
on the year in the first quarter of 2010, com-
pared with 0.4% in the final quarter of 2009;
the HICP inflation rates were 0.8% and 0.4%
respectively. The early date of Easter is likely
to have been significant in this context.
In April, the cost of living increased further by
a seasonally adjusted 0.2%, compared with
an increase of 0.6% in May. Annual CPI infla-
tion nevertheless fell by 0.1 percentage point
to 1.0%. (The HICP figure was likewise 1.0%,
compared with 1.2%). It was mainly energy
prices that continued to rise. Seasonally ad-
justed food items were affected by the very
cold winter weather. The slight decline in the
annual rate was due, above all, to the coun-
termovement to the effect of Easter. Over the
short to medium term, prices will be shaped
chiefly by the ups and downs on the inter-
national forex and commodities markets,
whereas upward price pressure stemming
from domestic activity is likely to be remain
limited for the time being.
Orders received and outlook
The cyclical upturn will gain obvious momen-
tum in the second quarter of 2010, not least
owing to the elimination of the temporary
negative factors in the first few months ofthe year. Economic output is likely to grow
strongly. Given the quite favourable orders
situation, weather-related output losses are
likely to be made up quickly. Furthermore,
the leading indicators suggest that industrial
output will pick up markedly in the second
quarter, especially as demand has been well
ahead of production during the past few
months. Finally, the pattern of private con-
sumption will no longer be impaired as much
as it was in the preceding quarters by the fact
that new car registrations are returning to
normal after the discontinuation of the envir-
onmental premium.
Exports remain the main driving force behind
the upturn, with firms expecting even strong-
er stimuli from export business. This applies
especially if they have a presence in non-
European sales markets, which are currently
displaying a rapid pace of economic growth.
Moreover, German exporters are benefiting in
those countries from the recent shifts in inter-
national exchange rates. According to the
surveys by the Ifo institute, export expect-
ations in manufacturing have recently ad-
vanced into territory where this indicator had
last stood during the big export boom of the
last upswing. This is also likely to have sup-
ported the continued improvement in the
business climate in trade and industry as a
whole. What should not be overlooked when
interpreting the survey indicators, however, is
that they generally represent the balance of
trend assessments in a condensed form. High
index levels therefore mainly reflect the fact
that there is a widespread improvement in
sentiment in the economy. The surveys doFurther rise in
prices in April
mainly due to
energy
Cyclical upturn
in Q2Favourable
export outlook

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
EUROSYSTEM
Monthly Report
May 2010
70not take account of either the starting level
of the boost or of its strength.
New orders were more buoyant again at the
start of 2010. In the first quarter, orders rose
by 6.5% in seasonally adjusted terms follow-
ing a moderate increase of 0.9% in the pre-
ceding three-month period. The surge in
orders was broadly based across regions. In
addition, large orders were received both do-
mestically and from export customers. There
was recently a surge in demand from other
euro-area countries, which – like domestic
demand – had been comparatively weak in
the fourth quarter of last year. Orders from
non-euro-area countries continued their sharp
upward trend. In the reporting period, there
was an increase in demand for both inter-
mediate and capital goods. There were, how-
ever, somewhat fewer orders of consumer
goods in the first quarter of 2010 than in
the preceding quarter. Despite this sharp in-
crease, the recovery in the intake of industrial
orders has made less progress than is shown
by the sentiment indicators. One-half of the
overall decline in demand suffered during the
downturn has been recovered to date.
Construction output is likely to be character-
ised by further catch-up effects in the spring
months after already recovering strongly in
March. A large number of projects, especially
in the building industry, were approved to-
wards the end of last year; the start of con-
struction was delayed, however, by the long
period of frost this winter. The orders situ-
ation in public sector construction continues
to benefit from the boost provided by the
economic stimulus packages despite financialDemand for industrial goods 
and construction work
Deutsche Bundesbank2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 20108090100110120130
–40–30–20–1000+10+20+30
100110120130
758090100
100110120
8090100
90100110120
–20–100+10+20Volume, 2005 = 100,
seasonally adjusted, quarterly
DomesticForeignLog scaleLog scale
Total industrial 
orders
Lin scale
Year-on-year change
Total construction orders
Lin scale
Year-on-year change%
%Industrial orders
more buoyant
again
Catch-up
effects in
construction

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
May 2010
71constraints at local government level. De-
mand for residential buildings was lower atthe start of the year than in the final quarterof 2009, however.
Industry’s optimism regarding the future out-
look for the economy is also shaping house-holds’ sentiment. Given the stable labourmarket situation, the risk of redundancy doesnot appear to be a paramount concern formany employees. The losses in pay associatedwith short-time work and the reduction ofregular weekly working hours, like the rathermoderate prospects for wages and salaries,are exerting no more than a subdued impact
on households’ income expectations. Thisprobably also reflects the perceptible increasein their scope for expenditure per se owing to
the further fiscal policy relief afforded at thebeginning of the year. The propensity to pur-chase is therefore still at a comparatively highlevel. This represents a good foundation forthe consumer climate to go on reinforcingthe export-led cyclical upturn on the domesticside. The risk of negative confidence effectsstemming from the recent dramatically escal-ating tensions in the euro area might prove tobe a limiting factor in this regard, however.
Households’
sentiment
undimmed

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
EUROSYSTEM
Monatsbericht
May 2010
72Public finances* General government budget
The public finance situation in Germany
already took a significant turn for the worse
last year in the wake of the financial and eco-
nomic crisis. Owing to the automatic stabil-
isers, a collapse in revenue from profit-related
taxes and extensive support measures, the
deficit ratio (3.1%) exceeded the EU refer-
ence value and the debt ratio reached a
record high of 73.1%. This deterioration will
continue in 2010, and the deficit ratio may
reach almost 5%. In contrast to the previous
year, this development is primarily due to
fiscal policy measures amounting to 11/C254%o f
gross domestic product (GDP), while the
cyclical component remains largely un-
changed if account is taken of the growth
structure.1Various (mainly permanent) tax
relief measures and sharply rising investment
are having a particularly strong impact in this
respect. The clear rise in the debt ratio is set
to continue.2
*The “General government budget” section starts with
an analysis based on data contained in the national ac-
counts and on the Maastricht ratios. Subsequent report-
ing on budgets of the various levels of government and
social security schemes is based on the budgetary figures
as defined in the government’ s (budgetary) financial stat-
istics.
1During the crisis, the macroeconomic reference vari-
ables that are particularly relevant to public finances
(gross wages and salaries, private consumption, un-
employment) have experienced a more stable develop-
ment than GDP . Cyclical adjustment procedures oriented
to the output gap (disregarding the growth structure)
therefore record a more negative cyclical influence for
2009 and an easing effect for 2010, whereas the “disag-
gregated method” applied here, which takes account of
the effect of the growth structure, records a lesser impact
for 2009 and a broadly unchanged cyclical component
for 2010.
2The debt ratio is affected, among other things, by the
support measures for the financial sector, although Euro-
stat has not yet finalised its decision on how they should
be booked. While the bulk of the measures will probably
have no impact on the national accounts deficit, they
could considerably increase the government debt level.Public finances
deteriorating
again signifi-
cantly in 2010

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monatsbericht
May 2010
73The government revenue ratio is likely to
decline significantly in 2010. This is due tofiscal policy measures, such as the greater taxdeductibility of contributions to the healthand long-term care insurance schemes andthe various tax relief measures adopted inresponse to the crisis (most notably thelowering of income tax rates, corporate tax-ation relief measures and the new preferentialturnover tax treatment for the hotel trade). Inthe area of social contributions, by contrast,the revenue shortfalls caused by the lowerannual average contribution rate to thehealth insurance fund were broadly offset byhealth insurance institutions charging insur-ees additional contributions and the one-offeffect of particularly high insolvency benefitcontributions to the Federal EmploymentAgency. In addition, the ratio is likely to bereduced owing, in particular, to the fact that,unlike in 2009, wages and salaries are nowgrowing at a slower pace than nominal GDP .
The general government expenditure ratio
already experienced an upsurge in 2009 andis likely to expand again somewhat this year.Since the outbreak of the crisis, substantialincreases in expenditure have been agreed(especially on investment and the rise in childbenefit), and spending on healthcare serviceswill also probably continue to grow signifi-cantly. The discontinuation of the car scrap-page scheme and the child bonus form only alimited counterweight to this development.Booked in such a way as to reduce expend-iture, the proceeds from the auction of UMTSmobile telephone licences constitute consid-erable one-off windfalls.
3There are signs that the government deficitwill see a limited decline in the coming year.Although some one-off gains (higher insolv-ency benefit contributions, proceeds from thefrequency auctions) will no longer have aneffect, a number of assistance programmeswill come to an end. Investment, in particular,is likely to fall back significantly from thecomparatively high level reached in 2010. Ifthe discontinuation of the one-off centralgovernment grants to the statutory healthinsurance scheme is offset by curbing spend-ing or raising contributions, this will also leadto a certain improvement in public finances.Nonetheless, the overall public finance situ-ation remains considerably worse than beforethe crisis. Since the crisis broke out, extensivepermanent tax relief measures (amounting toaround 1
1/C252% of GDP) have been adopted,
revenue from profit-related taxes has fallenback to its long-term trend following the col-lapse in 2009, and the scope for expenditurehas narrowed due to the downward revisionof estimated output potential. In addition,the debt ratio, which is already high, will con-tinue to rise owing to the substantial deficit,and an increase in the currently very low ratesof interest would lead relatively quickly to bil-lions of euros of additional expenditure.
4
As things stand, the deficit ratio might initiallybe lower than forecast in the Federal Govern-
3In the national accounts, purchases and sales of non-
financial assets are netted out and recorded on the ex-
penditure side. Consequently, the proceeds from the auc-
tion (as in 2000), being the result of an asset sale, reduce
expenditure in the national accounts, whereas they are
posted on the revenue side in the government’s (budget-
ary) financial statistics.
4See also Deutsche Bundesbank, Government debt and
interest payment burden in Germany, Monthly Report,
April 2010, pp 15-33.Government
measures
reduce revenue
ratio and ...
... drive up
expenditure
ratioLimited
improvement
in 2011 due to
discontinuation
of temporary
measures
Priority for
rapid debt
reduction

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
EUROSYSTEM
Monatsbericht
May 2010
74ment’s stability programme of January 2010,
aided in particular by the fact that the macro-
economic trend is likely to be more favour-
able. However, using better-than-expected
budgetary developments as an opportunity
for tax relief measures or spending increases
would run counter to the spirit of both the
national and the European rules, as well as
the agreements that tie in with them. In view
of the still very high deficit ratio and the
growing debt ratio, a rapid consolidation of
public finances must instead be given priority.
The excessive deficit procedure also stipulates
that better-than-expected economic develop-
ments must be used for faster debt reduction.
Moreover, this would constitute an important
step towards complying with the new nation-
al budgetary rules, which require central
government to have a structurally close-to-
balance budget from 2016 onward.
Recent developments in the euro area have
demonstrated just how dramatic the conse-
quences of unsound budgetary policy can be,
and they have underscored the important
role played by Germany as an anchor of
stability (see box “Fiscal developments in the
euro area” on pages 26-27). At the end of
April, the deteriorating budgetary and eco-
nomic situation in Greece led to a crisis of
confidence from which the country was
unable to liberate itself single-handedly. As,
in this very fragile situation, a sovereign
default by Greece would have posed a con-
siderable contagion risk for other euro-area
member states, the euro-area finance minis-
ters decided to grant financial assistance to
Greece based on strict conditionality. As little
as a week later, however, the situation on thefinancial markets had deteriorated again. In
response, the Ecofin Council adopted an
extensive package of measures, which envis-
ages not only accelerated consolidation of
public budgets in particularly vulnerable
countries and the reform of fiscal rules but
above all the establishment of a European
financial stabilisation mechanism. While the
package as a whole – like the assistance for
Greece – is justifiable given the acute dan-
gers, it weakens the member states’ individ-
ual responsibility for their own budgetary
policy stipulated in the Treaty on the Func-
tioning of the European Union (TFEU) and
undermines the institutional foundations of
monetary union. An extensive tightening of
the European rules is therefore urgently need-
ed in order to provide strong incentives for
the member states to maintain a sound
budgetary policy. Otherwise, the aim pursued
through the TFEU of shielding monetary
policy from unsound public finances (see also
box on pages 12-13) will be jeopardised.
Budgetary development of central, state
and local government
Tax revenue
In the first quarter of 2010, tax revenue5fell
by 5% on the year (see chart on page 75 and
table on page 76). The shortfalls for income-
related taxes were particularly high (-10%).
Most notably, there was a steep decline in
wage tax receipts (-11%), a large part of
5Including EU shares in German tax revenue but exclud-
ing receipts from local government taxes, which are not
yet known for the last quarter recorded.Fiscal measures
to stabilise
monetary union
justifiable ...... but under-
mining of
fundamental
principles now
necessitates
drastic tighten-
ing of European
rules
Substantial
decline in tax
revenue in Q1

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monatsbericht
May 2010
75which is attributable to the increase in child
benefit, which was deducted from wage taxreceipts, and to tax cuts (above all, expandeddeduction of insurance contributions and fullimpact of the two rate reductions in 2009and 2010). A considerable revenue shortfallwas likewise recorded for profit-related taxes(-7%). With the underlying trend still declin-ing, tax relief measures (as well as thosealready mentioned, in particular the reliefmeasures for enterprises adopted in the wakeof the financial and economic crisis) had anegative impact in this respect. In contrast tothe previous year, the tax refunds madefollowing the Federal Constitutional Court’sruling of December 2008 on the standardtravel allowance for commuters had come toan end and, due to the phasing out of grantsto homebuyers – which are deducted fromrevenue – payments for this purpose werelower. Revenue from consumption-relatedtaxes likewise decreased (-1%), althoughdevelopments over the course of the year are,in part, very volatile.
According to the latest official tax estimate,
tax receipts (including local governmenttaxes) for the year as a whole are expected tocontract again significantly compared with2009 (by 2
1/C252%).6The negative special effect
that arose in 2009 in connection with thestandard travel allowance for commuters isno longer a factor and the macroeconomicreference variables are increasing again withthe economic recovery. In addition, the cor-rection of the trend in profit-related taxes,whose revenue collapsed last year followingthe exceptional rise up to 2008, may be moreor less complete. Nonetheless, cash receiptsare lagging behind the economic trend, and
the changes in tax legislation are leading, onbalance, to large shortfalls (around 4% ofrevenue, or 320 billion).
7
In 2011, revenue is expected to increase by
only 1% based on current tax legislation.Although the economy is continuing togather momentum, additional revenue short-Tax revenue *
* Including  EU  shares  in  German  tax  rev-
enue, excluding receipts from local govern-ment taxes.
Deutsche Bundesbank2008 2009 2010864202468
––––++++Year-on-year change, quarterly
%
6The estimate is based on the Federal Government’s cur-
rent macroeconomic projection, which foresees real GDP
growth of 1.4% and nominal GDP growth of 1.8% for
2010 (November 2009: 1.2% and 1.6%). In 2011, real
growth is expected to be 1.6% and nominal growth
2.4%. In the medium term (up to 2014), nominal growth
of 2.9% per year is forecast.
7The Federal Government is expecting a further ruling
this year in the Meilicke case regarding the treatment of
corporation tax paid abroad in the taxation of dividends
under the tax imputation procedure that was abolished
in 2001. Temporary burdens arising from tax refunds are
therefore included in the official tax estimate (a total of
35 billion, of which around 331/C252billion in 2011 and 311/C252
billion in 2012).Significant drop
in revenue
expected for
2010Without further
tax relief, return
to growth from
2011 onward

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
EUROSYSTEM
Monatsbericht
May 2010
76falls resulting from tax relief measures will
reduce receipts by around1/C252%(331/C252billion)
owing to time lags until the measures take
full financial effect. Average revenue growth
of 4% is forecast for the medium-term plan-
ning period up to 2014. Fiscal drag will lead,
on balance, to additional receipts, as the posi-
tive revenue effect of the progressive struc-
ture of the income tax schedule will outweigh
the negative revenue effect arising from the
extensive price inelasticity of excise duties.
Legislative changes will have a relatively low
impact, as growth resulting from factors such
as the phasing out of grants to homebuyers
and the more favourable depreciation rules
(first economic stimulus package) will be off-
set by rising shortfalls caused by factors such
as tax exemption for pension insurance con-
tributions in connection with the conversionto the downstream taxation of pension out-
flows, and government sponsorship of pri-
vate Riester pension plans.
Although expectations regarding the macro-
economic trend have improved compared
with those in the latest official tax estimate in
November 2009, the shortfalls of 36 billion
caused by the Act to Accelerate Growth
(Wachstumsbeschleunigungsgesetz) will lead
to a revenue loss of 31 billion for 2010.8One
key difference compared with the latest me-
dium-term forecast (May 2009) is the fact
that, given the collapse in 2009, the longer-
term trend for revenue from profit-related
taxes, for which predictions are subject to
very great uncertainty, is now estimated to be
weaker (adjusted for the correction of the
macroeconomic benchmarks and for new
legislative changes); another is that further
tax relief measures will lead to shortfalls of 38
billion in the medium term. In the first years
of the projection period, this will be offset by
upward revisions due to more favourable
macroeconomic assumptions; however, it is
predicted that they will cease to have an
impact in the final year (2013). The revenue
shortfalls vis-/C224-vis the official May 2009 fore-
cast are therefore considerable and are pre-
dicted to rise from 3111/C252billion in 2011 to
3131/C252billion in 2013.Tax revenue
Q1
2009 2010Estimate
for
2010 1, 2
Type of tax 5billionYear-
on-year
percent-
age
changeYear-
on-year
percent-
age
change
Tax revenue,
total 2 116.7 111.2 – 4.8 – 2.6
of which
Wage tax 34.0 30.3 – 10.9 – 7.4
Profit-related
taxes 3 16.0 14.9 – 7.2 – 6.7
Assessed
income tax 3.0 6.2 . + 0.1
Corporation
tax 4.4 2.0 – 55.6 – 2.1
Investment
income tax 4 8.7 6.8 – 21.8 – 15.2
Turnover taxes 5 43.1 42.9 – 0.5 + 1.6
Energy tax 4.8 4.4 – 6.9 – 1.6
Tobacco tax 2.4 2.5 + 4.1 – 1.2
1According to official tax estimate of May 2010. — 2Includ-
ing EU shares in German tax revenue, excluding receipts
from local government taxes. — 3Employee refunds, grants
paid to homebuyers and investors deducted from
revenue. — 4Withholding tax on interest income and cap-
ital gains, non-assessed taxes on earnings. — 5Turnover tax
and import turnover tax.
Deutsche Bundesbank
8Forecasting uncertainty for tax estimation is generally
very high. Alongside forecasts regarding the macroeco-
nomic trend or the financial impact of legislative changes,
predictions concerning fluctuations in revenue from
profit-related taxes that are independent of the afore-
mentioned explanatory factors also tend to be inaccur-
ate. See also Deutsche Bundesbank, Development of tax
revenue in Germany and current tax policy issues, Month-
ly Report, October 2008, pp 33-57.Revenue short-
falls vis-/C224-vis
earlier expect-
ations

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monatsbericht
May 2010
77Central government budget
In the first three months of this year, the cen-
tral government deficit almost doubled year-on-year to 321
1/C252billion. Revenue was down
by just over 7% on the year (- 341/C252billion).
Despite the fact that central government hasbeen receiving motor vehicle tax revenuesince summer 2009, tax receipts fell by 3%(-31
1/C252billion) owing, among other things, to
a larger transfer for financing the EU budget.The contraction in non-tax revenue wasconsiderably sharper, as the positive one-offeffect experienced in 2009 as a result of theBundesbank’s profit distribution – which, con-trary to usual practice, was used entirely forthe central government budget despite ex-ceeding the relevant threshold – had come toan end. By contrast, spending grew stronglyby 7
1/C252%( + 36 billion). This was primarily due
to higher payments to the social securityfunds (+ 35 billion), especially to the Federal
Employment Agency, which was in deficitand had largely depleted its liquid reserves,and to the health insurance fund. In addition,transfers to other levels of government were32 billion higher owing principally to pay-
ments to state government in compensationfor the transfer of motor vehicle tax revenue.Despite the high deficits, however, interestexpenditure saw a further significant declineof 8% (- 31 billion) as a result of the very
favourable refinancing conditions.
The draft central government budget for
2010 presented by the new Federal Govern-ment at the start of the year was revisedagain at the beginning of March in the courseof parliamentary consultations. Nonetheless,the exceptionally high deficit was reduced
only moderately. The expenditure appropri-ations were cut by 36 billion. In particular, the
revised draft budget included more favour-able developments with regard to the pay-ment to offset the Federal EmploymentAgency’s deficit (- 33 billion), interest expend-
iture (- 31
1/C252billion) and spending in connec-
tion with long-term unemployment (- 31/C252bil-
lion). On balance, the authorisation for netnew borrowing was reduced by 35
1/C252billion
to380 billion. However, compared with
actual net new borrowing in 2009, this con-stitutes an exceptionally sharp rise of 346 bil-
lion. Central government’s structural deficit,which is calculated by deducting the cyclicalcomponent and financial transactions andwhich must be reduced to no more than0.35% of GDP by 2016 under the new debtrule, was estimated at 366
1/C252billion, or 2.8%
of GDP . Nonetheless, it must be borne inmind that the central government structuraldeficit estimated for 2010 was inflated owingmainly to non-recurring grants (totalling justover 316
1/C252billion) to the Federal Employment
Agency and the health insurance fund.
Overall, the actual development of this year’s
central government budget is likely to beconsiderably more favourable than predicted.The latest tax estimate projects additionalrevenue of 34
1/C252billion compared with
the budgeted amount. Furthermore, thefrequency auction by the Federal NetworkAgency brought in proceeds of 34
1/C252billion,
while the estimate in the central governmentbudget merely matches the minimum bid(just under 3100 million). On the expenditure
side, too, it seems likely that actual figuresStrong growth
in deficit in Q1,
with falling
revenue and
rising expend-
iture
Budget plan
with exception-
ally high deficit
estimate ...... but deficit
likely to be
significantly
lower during
budget imple-
mentation

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
EUROSYSTEM
Monatsbericht
May 2010
78will be substantially better than the estimates.
Given that forecasts of labour market devel-
opments have again been revised upward sig-
nificantly, the payment needed to offset the
Federal Employment Agency’s deficit is likely
to be considerably lower, and the budgetary
authorisations for costs arising in connection
with long-term unemployment should not
need to be used in full. Moreover, there are
signs that there will be further noticeable cost
savings, not least for interest expenditure,
meaning that the deficit could remain mark-
edly below 370 billion. The structural com-
ponent would probably then also be signifi-
cantly lower than estimated.
Under the new debt rule, the 2010 structural
deficit will, as the starting value, determine
the gradual decline in the borrowing limit inthe transitional period up to 2016. In order to
avoid jeopardising its credibility, policymakers
must resist the temptation to weaken the rule
prior to its initial implementation in the 2011
budget by creating loopholes in the form of
additional scope for borrowing and to delay
the necessary consolidation, as has happened
so often in the past. With regard to the
adjustment path from 2011 onward, the
“reduction of the existing deficit” criterion
enshrined in Article 143d of the German
Basic Law requires that the budget be based
at least on a current estimate of the structural
deficit for 2010 rather than on the budget
target. Moreover, in keeping with the spirit of
the new budget rule, one-off grants to social
insurance schemes should not increase the
structural deficit.9
The need to consolidate the central govern-
ment budget until the constitutional limit of
0.35% of GDP applicable from 2016 onward
is reached poses an exceptionally large fiscal
policy challenge. In addition, if account is
taken of the great uncertainty of budgetary
forecasts, a significant safety margin with
respect to the borrowing limit would seem
necessary in order to avoid the need for
short-term and unexpected consolidation
measures, which tends to arise during eco-
nomic downturns.10It is therefore unlikelyCentral government fiscal 
deficit / surplus
Deutsche BundesbankQ1 Q2 Q3 Q4252015105051015
–––––+++
–35–30–25–20–15–10–5€ bnCumulative from start of year
20092010
20082009
20102008Quarterly results€ bn
9See also Deutsche Bundesbank, Federal budget for
2010 and scope for borrowing up to 2016, Monthly Re-
port, February 2010, pp 72-73.
10See also Deutsche Bundesbank, The reform of the
borrowing limits for central and state government,
Monthly Report, May 2009, pp 78-79 and J Kremer and
D Stegarescu (2009), Neue Schuldenregeln: Sicherheits-
abstand f/C252r eine stetige Finanzpolitik, Wirtschaftsdienst,
Vol 89/9, pp 630 ff (in German only).Credibility of
new debt limit
must not be
jeopardisedNeed for
consolidation a
major challenge

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monatsbericht
May 2010
79that there will be any leeway for additional
budgetary burdens in the coming years.
Central government’s off-budget entities re-
corded a deficit of 311/C252billion in the first
quarter of 2010 after breaking even in thesame period last year. This was chiefly due tothe developments in the Financial MarketStabilisation Fund. Higher acquisitions of par-ticipating interests led to a deficit of 31
1/C252bil-
lion, compared with 31/C252billion in the first
quarter of 2009. In addition, the Investmentand Repayment Fund established in spring2009 as part of the second economic stimu-lus package recorded a deficit of 3
1/C252billion,
as outflows for investments and the carscrappage scheme (just over 3
1/C252billion in
each case) exceeded its share of just over3
1/C252billion in the Bundesbank’s profit distri-
bution. As in the same period last year, theFederal Pension Service for Post and Telecom-munications posted a surplus of 3
1/C252billion
arising from contribution payments fromDeutsche Bundespost’s successor enterprises,which must be put aside for repaying bondsoriginating from their securitisation. After adeficit of 321 billion was recorded in 2009, a
funding gap of well above 310 billion is
anticipated for 2010 as a whole owing to stilloutstanding drawdowns of funds from theInvestment and Repayment Fund and theexpected further acquisitions of participatinginterests by the Financial Market StabilisationFund.
State government
11
In the first quarter, state government record-
ed a deficit of just over 37 billion, comparedwith just under 3101/C252billion a year earlier.
However, excluding the substantial recapital-isation of BayernLB in 2009 ( 37 billion), which
no longer had an impact in the first quarterof 2010, the deficit rose significantly.Revenue receded further by just under 3%(nearly 32 billion). Although tax revenue still
decreased perceptibly (-8
1/C252%), it should be
remembered that a large part of this declinewas due to the transfer of receipts frommotor vehicle tax to central government fromJuly 2009 onward. The related compensationpayments from central to state government(32
1/C254billion per quarter) were reflected in a
rise in other revenue. Expenditure fell backsignificantly by 6
1/C252%. After adjustment for
the bank recapitalisations in 2009, however,it climbed by 3%. Personnel expenses grewstrongly (+5%) owing to the wage adjust-ments agreed in spring 2009 (including theeast-west pay equalisation) and their exten-sion to public sector employees with civilservant status and retired civil servants.
12
Particularly given the further revenue short-falls caused by tax relief measures, the deficitof the federal states’ core budgets is expectedto increase further for 2010 as a whole des-
11The development of local government finances in
2009 was analysed in greater detail in the short articles in
the Bundesbank’ s April Monthly Report. These are the
most recent data available.
12In an expansion of the monthly statistics, since the be-
ginning of 2010 more detailed data have now also been
published on the expenditure and revenue positions of
the federal states. In future, this will allow a considerably
improved, prompt analysis of budgetary developments
(see Federal Ministry of Finance, Monthly Report, April
2010; in German only). The newly recorded items in-
clude, most notably, revenue from sales, the receipts of
public administrations, expenditure on pensions and
healthcare subsidies and other operating expenditure, as
well as spending on interest, payments to public adminis-
trations, fixed asset formation and other investment.High deficit
for off-budget
entities in
2010, tooExcluding 2009
special effect,
significant rise
in Q1 deficit
Further deficit
increase expect-
ed for 2010 as
a whole

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
EUROSYSTEM
Monatsbericht
May 2010
80pite the drop-out of the extensive bank reca-
pitalisations vis-/C224-vis 2009. According to the
plans available to date, the deficit is even
set to reach a record high of just under
3331/C252billion. Although Bavaria, Mecklenburg-
Vorpommern and Saxony are to manage
without additional new borrowing (partly
through extensive withdrawals of reserves),
the particularly highly indebted federal states
of Bremen, Saarland, Schleswig-Holstein and
Berlin, along with all the other western Ger-
man federal states, are planning to exceed
their borrowing limits – in some cases very
substantially. Not least owing to further tax
cuts, the latest tax estimate for state govern-
ment foresees an improvement of only 31 bil-
lion compared with the November 2009 esti-
mate despite the rather more favourable
macroeconomic conditions. However, com-
pared with the latest medium-term forecast
of May 2009, for which the need for adjust-
ment was significantly greater than for the
November estimate, there will be shortfalls of
around 34 billion in each of the years from
2011 to 2013. All in all, the structurally bal-
anced budget prescribed from 2020 onward
is likely to be very difficult to achieve – par-
ticularly for some highly indebted federal
states – without major consolidation efforts,
which will mainly have to be focused on the
expenditure side.
As in the case of central government, for the
five states with a fundamental entitlement to
transitional assistance, the structural deficit
for 2010 constitutes the starting value for the
gradual reduction prescribed for the coming
years. As the successor to the Financial Plan-
ning Council, the recently established StabilityCouncil has a key role to play in monitoring
budgetary developments and evaluating con-
solidation progress before financial assistance
is provided.
Social security funds13
Statutory pension insurance scheme
The statutory pension insurance scheme post-
ed a deficit of just over 32 billion in the first
quarter of 2010, which was thus just over 31/C252
billion larger than in the first quarter of 2009.
Growth of almost 2% was recorded on the
revenue side. While employees’ compulsory
contributions (including contributions for
recipients of short-time working benefits)
climbed by only 1%, the contributions for
recipients of unemployment benefits in-
creased again very sharply (+181/C252%). At
21/C252%, the rise in transfers from the central
government budget was comparatively
steep, as the majority will be adjusted in
2010 in line with the considerable wage
growth in 2008. At almost 3%, the increase
in expenditure was sharper than that in rev-
enue. This was mainly attributable to the
growth in pension expenditure caused by the
relatively large pension increase in mid-2009.
By contrast, there was still only a marginal ex-
pansion in the number of pensions. Spending
on rehabilitation measures saw a further
surge (+20%).
13The financial development of the statutory health and
public long-term care insurance schemes in 2009 was
analysed in the short articles of the March Monthly Re-
port. These are the most recent data available.Deficit expan-
sion despite
positive
revenue trend

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monatsbericht
May 2010
81The statutory pension insurance scheme will
probably record a deficit for this year, al-though it is likely to be considerably lowerthan expected in the Old-age Provision Reportof autumn 2009 ( 33
1/C252billion). This is due, in
particular, to the improved assessment withregard to employment and employee com-pensation.
14Pensions will not be cut at mid-
year even though average remuneration fellby almost
1/C252% last year. In the absence of the
safeguard clause,15pensions would have
been reduced by 2.1% in western Germanyand by 0.5% in eastern Germany. It isplanned that all pension cuts that have beenwaived (a cumulative adjustment requirementof 3.8% in western Germany and 1.8% ineastern Germany) will be clawed back in thecoming years by halving pension increases,thus enabling medium-term contribution ratetargets to be met.
Federal Employment AgencyThe Federal Employment Agency recorded a
deficit of just over 31
1/C252billion in the first
quarter. At just over 34 billion, it was signifi-
cantly higher in the same period last year.However, the agency already received size-able grants amounting to 33
1/C252billion from
central government in the first quarter of2010, whereas, in 2009, transfers of theregular Federal grant did not begin untilSeptember. In addition, no reintegrationpayments were made to central governmentin the first quarter of 2010 (2009: almost 31
billion). After adjustment for these specialeffects, the Federal Employment Agency’sfinancial situation deteriorated significantly.Among other things, the decline of 1% incontribution receipts played a role in this
development. By contrast, considerable add-itional revenue from insolvency benefit contri-butions was generated by the increase in thecontribution rate from 0.1% to 0.41% ofgross wages and salaries at the beginning ofthe year.
16Finances of the
German statutorypension insurance scheme
Deutsche Bundesbank2007 2008 2009 20105658606264
–20+2+4Quarterly
€ bn€ bn
Lin scale
Surplus (+) or deficit (–)ExpenditureLog scale
Revenue
14In the 2009 Old-age Provision Report, the Federal
Government still expected a rise of 0.7% in gross wages
and salaries per employee and a decline of 2.0% in the
number of employed persons for 2010. At the end of
April 2010, these assumptions were revised upward (to
+1.0% for average remuneration and -0.2% for the
number of employed persons). On the basis of this re-
assessment alone there is likely to be an improvement of
around 32 billion in the financial outturn for 2010.
15Particularly the presumed contribution to a supple-
mentary private pension scheme (“Riester reform steps”),
but also the sustainability factor would have led to a pen-
sion cut in the absence of the safeguard clause. In west-
ern Germany, the marked decline in per capita earnings
would have had an additional effect.
16After insolvency benefit payments exceeded contribu-
tions by almost 31 billion in 2009, the gap is to be closed
by recording a surplus this year.Deficit in 2010
lower than
expected
Sustained year-
on-year deteri-
oration in finan-
cial situation ...

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
EUROSYSTEM
Monatsbericht
May 2010
82Spending was up by 121/C252% on the year in
the first quarter. However, had the first instal-
ment of the reintegration payment not been
deferred, expenditure would have climbed byalmost one-quarter. This growth was again
driven largely by benefits for the unemployed
and short-time workers, on which almost 31
billion more was spent. Moreover, outlays on
active labour market policy measures (includ-
ing refunds of social security contributions for
short-time working made to employers,
which fall into this category) rose by just over
31/C252billion. Compared with the preceding
quarters, year-on-year expenditure growth
was markedly slower towards the end of the
reporting period, and spending on short-time
working benefits had already peaked in sum-
mer 2009.
The Federal Employment Agency already
relied quite heavily on financial assistance
from central government in the first three
months of 2010. The 2010 central govern-
ment budget envisages offsetting this year’s
deficit using grants amounting to just under
313 billion instead of loans. Combined with
the33 billion in reserves available at the end
of 2009, this would cover a Federal Employ-
ment Agency deficit of almost 316 billion. In
view of the recent improvement in the eco-
nomic and labour market outlook, the deficit
could turn out to be substantially lower. All in
all, however, it is clear that a contribution rate
of 2.8%, or 3.0% from 2011 onward, is not
sufficient to ensure that the Federal Employ-
ment Agency is able to finance itself inde-
pendently across the business cycle.Finances of the
Federal Employment Agency
1 Excluding central government liquidity as-
sistance. — 2 Including transfers to the civil 
servants’ pension fund set up in 2008.
Deutsche Bundesbank2007 2008 2009 20106810121416
1.82.43.03.64.24.85.46.06.6
6420246
–––+++Quarterly
€ bn€ bnLog scale
Expenditure, 
total 2Revenue 1
Expenditure on ...
... vocational training... unemployment
    benefit and short-time
    working benefits
Lin scale
Surplus (+) or deficit (–)€ bn
... but expend-
iture growth
decelerated at
end of report-
ing periodNeed for grants
probably signifi-
cantly smaller
than previously
estimated

Statistical
Section
1*DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
May 2010

ContentsI Key economic data for the euro area
1 Monetary developments and interest
rates 5*
2 External transactions and positions 5*
3 General economic indicators 6*
II Overall monetary survey in the
euro area
1 The money stock and its counterparts 8*
2 Consolidated balance sheet of mon-
etary financial institutions (MFIs) 10*
3 Banking system’s liquidity position 14*
III Consolidated financial statement
of the Eurosystem
1 Assets 16*2 Liabilities 18*
IV Banks
1 Assets and liabilities of monetary
financial institutions (excluding theBundesbank) in Germany 20*
2 Principal assets and liabilities of banks
(MFIs) in Germany, by category ofbanks 24*
3 Assets and liabilities of banks (MFIs)
in Germany vis-/C224-vis residents 26*
4 Assets and liabilities of banks (MFIs)
in Germany vis-/C224-vis non-residents 28*
2*DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
EUROSYSTEM
Monthly Report
May 2010

5 Lending by banks (MFIs) in Germany
to domestic non-banks (non-MFIs) 30*
6 Lending by banks (MFIs) in Germany
to domestic enterprises and house-
holds, housing loans, sectors of
economic activity 32*
7 Deposits of domestic non-banks
(non-MFIs) at banks (MFIs)
in Germany 34*
8 Deposits of domestic households
and non-profit institutions atbanks (MFIs) in Germany 36*
9 Deposits of domestic government
at banks (MFIs) in Germany, bycreditor group 36*
10 Savings deposits and bank savings
bonds of banks (MFIs) in Germanysold to non-banks (non-MFIs) 38*
11 Debt securities and money market
paper outstanding of banks (MFIs)in Germany 38*
12 Building and loan associations (MFIs)
in Germany 39*
13 Assets and liabilities of the foreign
branches and foreign subsidiaries ofGerman banks (MFIs) 40*
V Minimum reserves
1 Reserve ratios 42*2 Reserve maintenance in Germany up
to the end of 1998 42*
3 Reserve maintenance in the euro
area 42*VI Interest rates
1 ECB interest rates 43*
2 Base rates 43*3 Eurosystem monetary policy oper-
ations allotted through tenders 43*
4 Money market rates, by month 43*
5 Interest rates for outstanding
amounts and new business ofbanks (MFIs) in the Europeanmonetary union 44*
6 Interest rates and volumes for out-
standing amounts and new business
of German banks (MFIs) 45*
VII Capital market
1 Sales and purchases of debt securities
and shares in Germany 48*
2 Sales of debt securities issued by
residents 49*
3 Amounts outstanding of debt
securities issued by residents 50*
4 Shares in circulation issued by
residents 50*
5 Yields and indices on German
securities 51*
6 Sales and purchases of mutual
fund shares in Germany 51*
VIII Financial accounts
1 Acquisition of financial assets and
financing of private non-financialsectors 52*
2 Financial assets and liabilities of private
non-financial sectors 53*
3*DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
May 2010

IX Public finances in Germany
1 General government: deficit and debt
level as defined in the Maastricht Treaty 54*
2 General government: revenue,
expenditure and fiscal deficit/surplus
as shown in the national accounts 54*
3 General government: budgetary
development (as per government’sfinancial statistics) 55*
4 Central, state and local government:
budgetary development (as per
government’s financial statistics) 55*
5 Central, state and local government:
tax revenue 56*
6 Central and state government and
European Union: tax revenue, by type 56*
7 Central, state and local government:
individual taxes 57*
8 German pension insurance scheme:
budgetary development and assets 57*
9 Federal Employment Agency:
budgetary development 58*
10 Statutory health insurance scheme:
budgetary development 58*
11 Statutory long-term care insurance
scheme: budgetary development 59*
12 Central government: borrowing in
the market 59*
13 Central, state and local government:
debt by creditor 59*
14 Central, state and local government:
debt by category 60*
X Economic conditions in Germany
1 Origin and use of domestic product,
distribution of national income 61*
2 Output in the production sector 62*3 Orders received by industry 63*
4 Orders received by construction 64*5 Retail trade turnover 64*
6 Labour market 65*
7 Prices 66*8 Households’ income 67*9 Pay rates and actual earnings 67*
XI External sector
1 Major items of the balance of
payments of the euro area 68*
2 Major items of the balance of
payments of the Federal Republicof Germany 69*
3 Foreign trade (special trade) of the
Federal Republic of Germany, bycountry and group of countries 70*
4 Services and income of the
Federal Republic of Germany 71*
5 Current transfers of the Federal
Republic of Germany 71*
6 Capital transfers 71*7 Financial account of the Federal
Republic of Germany 72*
8 External position of the Bundesbank 73*9 External position of the Bundesbank
in the euro area 73*
10 Assets and liabilities of enterprises
in Germany (other than banks)vis-/C224-vis non-residents 74*
11 ECB euro reference exchange rates
of selected currencies 75*
12 Irrevocable euro conversion rates in
Stage III of European Economic and
Monetary Union 75*
13 Effective exchange rates of the euro
and indicators of the Germaneconomy’s price competitiveness 76*
4*DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
EUROSYSTEM
Monthly Report
May 2010

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
May 2010
 I Key economic data for the euro area  
 
1 Monetary developments and interest rates
 
 
 
 
 Money stock in various definitions  1,2 Determinants of the money stock  1 Interest rates
 M 3  3 
MFI lending to Yield on Euro-
 3-month enterprises Monetary pean govern-
MFI lending, and capital 3-month ment bonds moving  average
M1 M2 (centred) total households formation  4 Eonia  5,7 Euribor  6,7 outstanding  8 
Period Annual percentage change % per annum as a monthly average
2008          July 0.3 9.2 9.2 9.3 9.9 11.7 6.0 4.19 4.96 4.7
         Aug 0.2 8.9 8.9 9.0 10.1 11.6 6.3 4.30 4.97 4.5         Sep 1.2 9.0 8.7 8.8 9.4 10.8 6.2 4.27 5.02 4.4
         Oct 3.6 9.3 8.7 8.4 8.2 9.5 4.5 3.82 5.11 4.3
         Nov 2.2 8.8 7.7 8.0 8.2 9.1 5.1 3.15 4.24 4.1         Dec 3.4 8.3 7.6 7.1 7.2 7.8 4.3 2.49 3.29 3.7
2009          Jan 5.1 7.5 6.0 6.5 6.9 7.1 5.0 1.81 2.46 3.9
         Feb 6.2 7.0 5.8 5.7 6.6 6.4 5.8 1.26 1.94 4.0         Mar 6.1 6.3 5.2 5.3 5.8 5.2 5.4 1.06 1.64 3.9
         Apr 8.4 6.0 4.9 4.6 5.0 4.2 5.3 0.84 1.42 3.9
         May 8.1 5.2 3.9 4.1 4.5 3.6 5.7 0.78 1.28 4.0         June 9.5 5.0 3.6 3.5 4.8 3.4 6.2 0.70 1.23 4.2
         July 12.0 4.6 2.9 3.0 3.8 2.3 6.1 0.36 0.97 4.0
         Aug 13.4 4.5 2.4 2.4 3.3 1.6 6.4 0.35 0.86 3.8         Sep 12.8 3.6 1.8 1.5 3.5 1.4 6.6 0.36 0.77 3.8
         Oct 11.8 2.3 0.3 0.6 3.3 0.9 7.4 0.36 0.74 3.7
         Nov 12.5 1.8 − 0.2 − 0.1 2.8 0.7 7.1 0.36 0.72 3.7         Dec 12.4 1.6 − 0.3 − 0.2 2.6 0.7 6.8 0.35 0.71 3.7
2010          Jan 11.4 1.8 0.1 − 0.2 1.7 − 0.0 6.1 0.34 0.68 3.8
         Feb 11.0 1.6 − 0.3 − 0.1 1.6 − 0.0 5.3 0.34 0.66 3.8         Mar 10.9 1.7 − 0.1 ... 1.7 − 0.1 5.5 0.35 0.64 3.7
         Apr ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 0.35 0.64 3.7
1 Source: ECB. — 2 Seasonally adjusted. — 3 Excluding money market fund euro-area non-MFIs. — 5 Euro OverNight Index Average. — 6 Euro
shares
/units, money market paper and debt securities with a maturity of up Interbank Offered Rate. — 7 See also footnotes to Table VI.4, p 43*. —
to two years held by non-euro-area residents. — 4 Longer-term liabilities to 8  GDP-weighted yield on ten-year government bonds. 
 
 
2 External transactions and positions  * 
  
 
Selected items of the euro-area balance of payments Euro exchange rates  1 
Current account Capital account Effective exchange rate  3 
of which Direct Securities Other Reserve
Balance Trade balance Balance investment investment assets Dollar rate Nominal Real  4 transactions  2 
Period € million Euro/US-$ Q1 1999 = 100
2008          July − 9,620 − 739 + 28,734 + 10,379 + 11,151 + 8,921 − 1,717 1.5770 113.2 112.7
         Aug − 16,023 − 8,376 + 9,018 − 22,335 + 16,362 + 12,700 + 2,290 1.4975 110.9 110.3
         Sep − 12,374 − 3,501 + 18,219 − 30,426 + 89,262 − 42,237 + 1,620 1.4370 109.3 108.5
         Oct − 10,944 + 2,307 + 17,155 − 1,119 + 97,035 − 70,777 − 7,985 1.3322 105.8 105.2
         Nov − 18,055 − 5,245 + 7,280 − 51,660 + 36,103 + 23,245 − 408 1.2732 105.0 104.5         Dec − 4,975 − 437 + 15,161 + 921 − 3,150 + 9,536 + 7,855 1.3449 110.2 109.7
2009          Jan − 23,567 − 10,548 + 31,581 − 21,454 − 3,474 + 51,278 + 5,231 1.3239 109.8 109.2
         Feb − 5,738 + 61 + 8,457 − 15,583 + 66,238 − 43,465 + 1,267 1.2785 108.7 108.0         Mar − 7,929 + 2,872 + 10,851 − 27,565 + 58,853 − 19,579 − 858 1.3050 111.1 110.3
         Apr − 9,794 + 4,110 + 18,083 + 7,680 + 7,718 + 1,502 + 1,182 1.3190 110.3 109.5
         May − 13,697 + 2,593 + 9,398 + 17,466 + 43,195 − 49,092 − 2,171 1.3650 110.8 109.9         June + 1,537 + 7,264 − 16,600 − 24,798 + 42,769 − 34,152 − 418 1.4016 112.0 111.1
         July + 8,088 + 14,115 − 19,404 + 7,209 − 20,022 − 2,893 − 3,698 1.4088 111.6 110.5
         Aug − 6,059 − 1,853 − 10,785 + 1,706 + 15,914 − 29,161 + 756 1.4268 111.7 110.6         Sep − 5,608 + 1,535 + 17,568 − 32,628 + 77,734 − 30,809 + 3,270 1.4562 112.9 111.6
         Oct − 153 + 8,534 + 1,519 − 3,001 + 10,004 − 4,848 − 636 1.4816 114.3 112.8
         Nov − 2,378 + 4,984 + 2,770 − 7,436 − 6,282 + 15,105 + 1,382 1.4914 114.0 112.5         Dec + 9,498 + 5,873 − 8,063 + 2,661 + 65,156 − 75,046 − 834 1.4614 113.0 111.3
2010          Jan − 14,743 − 7,358 + 14,488 − 3,107 + 4,382 + 11,742 + 1,470 1.4272 110.8 108.9
         Feb − 5,161 + 5,325 + 7,160 + 175 + 9,711 + 922 − 3,648 1.3686 108.0 106.0         Mar ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 1.3569 107.4 105.7
         Apr ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 1.3406 106.1 104.4
*  Source: ECB. — 1  See also Tables XI.12 and 13, pp 75−76. — 2  Including
financial derivatives. — 3  Vis-à-vis the currencies of The-EER-21 group. —
4  Based on consumer prices. 
5* I Key economic data for the euro area 

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
E U R O S Y S T E M
Monthly Report
May 2010
I. Key economic data for the euro area 
 
3  General economic indicators
 
 
                   
 
Period Euro area Belgium Germany Finland France Greece Ireland Italy
 
Real gross domestic product 1,2
 
2007 2.8 2.9 2.5 4.9 2.4 4.5 6.0 1.5
2008 0.6 1.0 1.3 1.2 0.2 2.0 − 3.0 − 1.3
2009 − 4.1 − 3.0 − 4.9 − 7.8 − 2.6 − 2.0 − 7.1 − 5.0
2008          Q4 − 1.9 − 0.9 − 1.7 − 2.7 − 1.8 0.7 − 8.0 − 3.22009          Q1 − 5.0 − 4.0 − 6.4 − 7.8 − 3.3 − 1.0 − 8.7 − 6.7
         Q2 − 4.9 − 4.4 − 7.0 − 9.3 − 3.4 − 1.9 − 7.4 − 6.4
         Q3 − 4.1 − 2.9 − 4.7 − 8.9 − 2.1 − 2.4 − 7.1 − 4.4
         Q4 − 2.2 − 1.1 − 1.5 − 5.1 − 0.3 − 2.5 − 5.1 − 2.7
2010          Q1 0.5 ... 1.7 ... ... ... ... ...
 
Industrial production 1,3
 
2007 3.7 2.9 6.0 4.8 1.2 2.3 5.0 1.8
2008 − 1.7 − 0.6 0.0 1.1 − 2.5 − 4.2 − 1.5 − 3.52009 − 15.1 − 14.0 − 16.8 − 21.2 − 12.0 − 9.2 − 3.9 − 18.4
2008          Q4 − 8.9 − 7.8 − 7.6 − 6.8 − 8.9 − 7.5 − 7.1 − 10.3
2009          Q1 − 18.6 − 16.5 − 20.5 − 21.9 − 15.7 − 8.1 − 3.6 − 22.4
         Q2 − 18.8 − 17.5 − 20.6 − 24.0 − 15.8 − 11.3 − 2.4 − 23.2
         Q3 − 14.5 − 13.8 − 16.5 − 22.3 − 11.0 − 9.9 − 4.1 − 17.2
         Q4 − 7.6 − 7.4 − 9.4 − 16.3 − 5.2 − 7.2 − 5.5 − 9.4
2010          Q1
e 4.3 ... 10p 6.3 3.3 4.0 p − 6.8 p 5.9 3.0
 
Capacity utilisation in industry 4
 
2007 84.3 83.2 87.5 87.3 86.6 76.9 76.6 78.2
2008 83.0 82.9 86.5 84.4 85.8 76.4 ... 75.9
2009 71.4 72.3 72.8 67.7 73.0 70.7 ... 66.7
2009          Q1 74.6 75.4 76.2 72.0 76.0 73.4 ... 70.4
         Q2 70.2 70.4 71.8 66.5 71.2 70.3 ... 66.2         Q3 69.6 71.5 71.1 65.3 70.8 68.3 ... 64.6         Q4 71.0 72.0 72.1 67.0 74.1 70.6 ... 65.6
2010          Q1 72.3 73.7 73.9 74.6 74.6 69.0 ... 66.7
         Q2 75.5 76.9 79.8 74.6 76.4 69.7 ... 68.6
 
Standardised unemployment rate 5
 
2007 7.5 7.5 8.4 6.9 8.4 8.3 4.6 6.1
2008 7.5 7.0 7.3 6.4 7.8 7.7 6.3 6.7
2009 9.4 7.9 7.5 8.2 9.5 9.5 11.9 7.8
2009          Oct 9.8 8.0 7.5 8.7 9.9 10.2 13.0 8.1
         Nov 9.8 8.0 7.5 8.8 10.0 10.2 13.1 8.1         Dec 9.9 8.0 7.4 8.8 9.9 10.2 12.9 8.4
2010          Jan 9.9 8.0 7.4 8.9 10.0 ... 13.1 8.5
         Feb 10.0 8.0 7.4 8.9 10.1 ... 13.1 8.6         Mar 10.0 8.1 7.3 9.0 10.1 ... 13.2 8.8
 
Harmonised Index of Consumer Prices 1
 
2007 6 2.1 1.8 2.3 1.6 1.6 3.0 2.9 2.0
2008 7 3.3 4.5 2.8 3.9 3.2 4.2 3.1 3.5
2009 8 0.3 0.0 0.2 1.6 0.1 1.3 − 1.7 0.8
2009          Nov 0.5 0.0 0.3 1.3 0.5 2.1 − 2.8 0.8
         Dec 0.9 0.3 0.8 1.8 1.0 2.6 − 2.6 1.1
2010          Jan 1.0 0.8 0.8 1.6 1.2 2.3 − 2.4 1.3
         Feb 0.9 0.8 0.5 1.3 1.4 2.9 − 2.4 1.1         Mar 1.4 1.9 1.2 1.5 1.7 3.9 − 2.4 1.4
         Apr 
p 1.5 2.1 1.0 1.6 1.9 4.7 − 2.5 1.6
 
General government financial balance 9
 
2007 − 0.6 − 0.2 0.2 5.2 − 2.7 − 5.1 0.1 − 1.5
2008 − 2.0 − 1.2 0.0 4.2 − 3.3 − 7.7 − 7.3 − 2.7
2009 − 6.3 − 6.0 − 3.3 − 2.2 − 7.5 − 13.6 − 14.3 − 5.3
 
General government debt 9
 
2007 65.9 84.2 65.0 35.2 63.8 95.7 25.0 103.5
2008 69.4 89.8 66.0 34.2 67.5 99.2 43.9 106.1
2009 78.6 96.7 73.2 44.0 77.6 115.1 64.0 115.8
Sources: National data, European Commission, Eurostat, European Central for working-day variations. — 4  Manufacturing, in %; seasonally adjusted;
Bank. Latest data are partly based on press reports and are provisional. — data are collected in January, April, July and October. — 5  As a percentage
1  Annual percentage change. — 2  GDP of the euro area calculated from of the civilian labour force; seasonally adjusted. — 6  Including Slovenia
seasonally adjusted data. — 3  Manufacturing, mining and energy; adjusted from 2007 onwards. — 7  Including Malta and Cyprus from 2008
6*I. Key economic data for the euro area 

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
May 2010
I.  Key economic data for the euro area 
 
3  General economic indicators
 
 
                   
 
Luxembourg Malta Netherlands Austria Portugal Slovakia Slovenia Spain Cyprus Period
 
Real gross domestic product 1,2
 
6.5 3.8 3.6 3.5 1.9 10.6 6.8 3.6 5.1 2007
0.0 2.1 2.0 2.0 0.0 6.2 3.5 0.9 3.6 2008
− 3.4 − 1.9 − 4.0 − 3.6 − 2.7 − 4.7 − 7.8 − 3.6 − 1.7 2009
− 4.1 0.7 − 0.7 − 0.3 − 1.6 1.6 − 0.8 − 0.9 2.2 2008          Q4
− 6.1 − 2.0 − 4.5 − 4.7 − 4.1 − 5.7 − 8.2 − 3.8 0.6 2009          Q1
− 7.6 − 3.9 − 5.5 − 4.9 − 3.6 − 5.5 − 9.2 − 4.8 − 1.6          Q2
− 1.1 − 2.4 − 3.7 − 3.1 − 2.2 − 4.9 − 8.3 − 3.8 − 2.7          Q3
1.5 0.5 − 2.2 − 1.2 − 0.9 − 2.6 − 5.5 − 2.2 − 3.1          Q4
... ... 0.1 0.4 ... 4.6 ... − 1.2 − 2.4 2010          Q1
 
Industrial production1,3
 
− 0.6 − 2.3 5.9 0.1 16.5 7.4 2.0 4.3 2007
− 5.3 − 1.4 1.2 − 4.1 3.2 1.7 − 7.3 4.0 2008− 15.9 − − 7.6 − 11.9 − 8.6 − 14.2 − 17.5 − 15.8
p − 8.6 2009
− 17.9 − − 6.5 − 4.5 − 6.8 − 11.3 − 8.2 − 16.6 − 0.1 2008          Q4
− 24.8 − − 9.8 − 12.4 − 12.3 − 22.0 − 18.0 − 22.6 − 7.2 2009          Q1
− 21.3 − − 12.5 − 16.7 − 9.9 − 21.5 − 23.9 − 18.6 − 9.6          Q2
− 16.4 − − 6.9 − 13.2 − 7.4 − 12.8 − 18.9 − 14.6 − 8.8          Q3
2.5 − − 1.4 − 5.3 − 4.5 1.1 − 8.3 − 5.6 p − 8.6          Q4
p 15.3 − 6.0 ... 4.0 20.2 − 0.1 0.3 ... 2010          Q1
 
Capacity utilisation in industry 4
 
87.3 80.8 83.6 85.2 81.8 73.6 85.9 81.0 70.0 2007
85.1 79.0 83.4 83.0 79.8 72.0 84.1 79.2 72.0 2008
69.2 69.7 75.9 74.8 72.6 53.7 71.1 70.0 66.3 2009
72.6 69.0 77.5 77.2 76.4 53.3 75.2 73.5 69.5 2009          Q1
65.2 65.9 74.6 73.2 70.6 50.9 69.1 69.8 66.7          Q2
67.4 71.0 75.5 73.5 71.5 51.9 69.3 67.9 64.8          Q3
71.6 73.0 76.0 75.2 72.0 58.8 70.7 68.8 64.3          Q4
77.5 77.3 77.3 75.8 75.1 58.1 73.0 68.9 61.7 2010          Q1
79.3 75.7 78.8 79.4 75.7 55.4 75.3 70.9 63.1          Q2
 
Standardised unemployment rate 5
 
4.2 6.4 3.2 4.4 8.1 11.1 4.9 8.3 4.0 2007
4.9 5.9 2.8 3.8 7.7 9.5 4.4 11.3 3.6 20085.4 6.9 3.4 4.8 9.6 12.0 5.9 18.0 5.3 2009
5.5 6.9 3.8 5.0 10.2 13.8 6.5 19.0 6.0 2009          Oct 
5.5 7.0 3.8 4.8 10.1 14.1 6.4 19.0 6.2          Nov 
5.5 7.1 3.9 4.8 10.2 14.2 6.3 18.9 6.2          Dec 
5.4 7.0 3.9 4.8 10.3 14.1 6.2 18.9 6.3 2010          Jan 
5.6 7.1 4.0 4.9 10.3 14.1 6.1 19.0 6.4          Feb 
5.6 6.9 4.1 4.9 10.5 14.1 6.2 19.1 6.7          Mar 
 
Harmonised Index of Consumer Prices 1
 
2.7 0.7 1.6 2.2 2.4 1.9 3.8 2.8 2.2 2007
4.1 4.7 2.2 3.2 2.7 3.9 5.5 4.1 4.4 20080.0 1.8 1.0 0.4 − 0.9 0.9 0.9 − 0.2 0.2 2009
1.7 − 0.1 0.7 0.6 − 0.8 0.0 1.8 0.4 1.0 2009          Nov 
2.5 − 0.4 0.7 1.1 − 0.1 0.0 2.1 0.9 1.6          Dec 
3.0 1.2 0.4 1.2 0.1 − 0.2 1.8 1.1 2.5 2010          Jan 
2.3 0.7 0.3 0.9 0.2 − 0.2 1.6 0.9 2.8          Feb 
3.2 0.6 0.7 1.8 0.6 0.3 1.8 1.5 2.3          Mar 
3.1 0.8
p 0.6 p 1.8 0.7 0.7 2.7 1.6 2.5          Apr 
 
General government financial balance 9
 
3.6 − 2.2 0.2 − 0.4 − 2.6 − 1.9 0.0 1.9 3.4 2007
2.9 − 4.5 0.7 − 0.4 − 2.8 − 2.3 − 1.7 − 4.1 0.9 2008
− 0.7 − 3.8 − 5.3 − 3.4 − 9.4 − 6.8 − 5.5 − 11.2 − 6.1 2009
 
General government debt 9
 
6.7 61.9 45.5 59.5 63.6 29.3 23.4 36.2 58.3 2007
13.7 63.7 58.2 62.6 66.3 27.7 22.6 39.7 48.4 2008
14.5 69.1 60.9 66.5 76.8 35.7 35.9 53.2 56.2 2009
onwards. — 8  Including Slovakia from 2009 onwards. — 9  As a percentage 10  Provisional; adjusted in advance by the Federal Statistical Office by way
of GDP; euro-area aggregate: European Central Bank (ESA 1995), member of estimates to the results of the Quarterly Production Survey. 
states: European Commission (Maastricht Treaty definition). —
7*I.  Key economic data for the euro area 

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
E U R O S Y S T E M
Monthly Report
May 2010
II Overall monetary survey in the euro area 
 
1 The money stock and its counterparts *
  
(a) Euro area 
  
€ billion
I Lending to non-banks (non-MFIs) II Net claims on III Monetary capital formation at monetary
in the euro area non-euro-area residents financial institutions (MFIs) in the euro area
Enterprises General
and households government Debt
Deposits securities
Liabil- with an Deposits with
Claims ities to agreed at agreed maturitieson non- non-euro- maturity notice of of over Capital
of which of which euro-area area of over over 2 years and
Period Total Total Total Total residents residents Total 2 years 3 months (net)  
2 Securities Securities reserves  3 
2008          Aug 24.9 30.9 34.4 − 6.0 0.7 3.0 15.9 12.9 15.8 3.0 − 1.3 − 0.5 14.6
         Sep 41.3 67.8 − 19.5 − 26.5 − 36.8 28.2 9.9 − 18.3 8.3 − 13.4 − 1.3 − 10.8 33.9
         Oct 17.4 25.3 8.4 − 7.9 − 7.4 103.7 − 36.1 − 139.7 − 40.8 − 0.7 2.6 − 66.3 23.6
         Nov 117.3 78.6 60.0 38.8 41.0 5.5 − 84.7 − 90.2 40.6 26.0 3.4 − 9.0 20.2         Dec 6.2 − 8.9 62.4 15.1 21.6 − 45.9 − 199.0 − 153.1 59.2 43.0 3.7 11.5 1.0
2009          Jan 102.3 32.1 6.6 70.2 56.2 − 69.6 − 29.5 40.1 54.9 31.7 2.1 6.8 14.3
         Feb 28.9 − 8.5 13.8 37.4 40.7 46.2 − 109.6 − 155.8 43.5 13.2 − 0.3 23.8 6.8         Mar 51.3 14.3 12.2 37.0 45.7 − 30.6 − 132.7 − 102.1 18.9 22.9 0.4 1.8 − 6.2
         Apr 86.9 44.2 48.3 42.6 31.4 40.6 41.6 1.0 16.2 15.0 0.1 − 5.3 6.3
         May 34.8 22.6 8.8 12.1 19.5 17.1 − 54.6 − 71.6 57.4 23.7 1.3 23.3 9.1         June 108.5 35.6 3.9 72.9 49.9 44.1 − 50.6 − 94.7 75.9 20.7 0.8 14.1 40.3
         July − 34.9 − 40.3 − 10.1 5.4 4.7 10.5 − 39.4 − 49.8 28.0 12.1 1.1 13.7 1.1
         Aug − 52.9 − 62.7 − 1.0 9.8 4.9 25.5 − 22.3 − 47.8 37.1 6.7 0.7 16.7 13.0         Sep 72.2 50.4 5.5 21.8 31.2 − 13.7 − 34.6 − 21.0 21.3 16.3 1.0 − 9.5 13.6
         Oct − 5.9 − 39.8 − 1.6 33.9 14.3 9.6 10.8 1.2 5.4 1.6 2.2 − 0.4 1.9
         Nov 42.4 44.8 13.8 − 2.4 2.4 − 6.3 6.0 12.3 28.5 9.4 0.6 4.0 14.4         Dec − 36.4 − 4.1 1.9 − 32.3 − 27.7 49.2 − 52.9 − 102.1 41.3 19.1 − 1.1 − 13.5 36.8
2010          Jan − 36.0 − 58.2 − 26.7 22.2 10.9 18.5 69.7 51.2 13.4 − 14.6 1.0 31.5 − 4.4
         Feb 18.0 − 7.5 − 10.1 25.5 30.3 − 24.9 6.5 31.4 − 0.5 5.3 − 0.7 − 7.6 2.5         Mar 63.1 6.0 − 19.1 57.1 33.8 − 13.7 − 13.5 0.2 28.0 1.7 − 0.1 16.3 10.0
  
  
(b) German contribution
 
I Lending to non-banks (non-MFIs) II Net claims on III Monetary capital formation at monetary
in the euro area non-euro-area residents financial institutions (MFIs) in the euro area
Enterprises Generaland households government Debt
Deposits securities
Liabil- with an Deposits with
Claims ities to agreed at agreed maturitieson non- non-euro- maturity notice of of over Capital
of which of which euro-area area of over over 2 years and
Period Total Total Total Total residents residents Total 2 years 3 months (net)  
2 Securities Securities reserves  3 
2008          Aug 25.7 30.3 25.8 − 4.6 − 4.2 − 10.2 − 5.1 5.1 − 1.5 − 1.0 − 1.1 − 1.7 2.3
         Sep 1.3 18.6 2.2 − 17.3 − 14.8 34.7 71.4 36.7 − 7.4 − 3.0 − 1.1 − 6.3 2.9
         Oct − 9.9 − 12.8 − 10.7 3.0 1.2 23.2 − 2.8 − 26.0 − 14.2 − 3.1 3.0 − 16.8 2.8
         Nov 7.4 12.0 1.2 − 4.6 − 2.5 − 38.2 − 76.5 − 38.3 − 5.6 0.8 3.7 − 9.9 − 0.3         Dec 13.7 15.4 30.8 − 1.7 − 0.8 − 6.5 − 31.1 − 24.7 27.3 29.8 3.8 − 18.0 11.7
2009          Jan 36.2 29.7 7.1 6.5 6.9 − 59.8 − 54.4 5.4 0.4 3.7 0.0 − 0.6 − 2.8
         Feb − 9.1 − 6.6 6.7 − 2.4 − 0.3 − 1.8 − 24.9 − 23.0 − 13.7 6.8 − 0.0 − 9.8 − 10.7         Mar 9.2 13.7 − 3.6 − 4.6 − 0.1 − 30.8 − 35.1 − 4.4 − 3.0 2.6 0.8 − 6.8 0.4
         Apr 20.1 13.4 12.0 6.7 4.9 19.7 40.7 21.0 − 8.3 3.9 0.2 − 5.9 − 6.5
         May − 3.3 − 4.2 − 8.5 1.0 5.1 28.0 − 5.7 − 33.7 2.9 2.6 1.5 2.4 − 3.6         June 15.8 16.1 5.0 − 0.3 1.6 − 22.9 − 19.2 3.8 34.5 13.6 1.0 − 3.0 23.0
         July − 8.5 − 23.3 − 3.6 14.8 1.9 − 25.3 − 31.6 − 6.3 − 7.1 0.9 1.2 − 9.0 − 0.2
         Aug − 27.5 − 18.8 − 6.4 − 8.7 − 3.2 1.9 − 13.3 − 15.2 1.5 1.9 0.8 1.8 − 2.9         Sep 22.3 18.7 0.5 3.6 6.5 − 6.7 − 28.0 − 21.3 − 12.0 2.9 1.2 − 17.1 0.9
         Oct − 0.1 − 19.2 − 5.1 19.1 7.3 9.2 − 0.9 − 10.1 − 0.5 − 0.9 2.4 − 1.3 − 0.7
         Nov − 0.4 6.6 2.4 − 7.0 1.3 − 0.4 − 1.2 − 0.8 − 0.9 2.2 0.9 − 10.0 6.0         Dec − 37.4 − 30.0 − 9.7 − 7.4 − 1.4 10.6 − 9.3 − 20.0 − 12.5 0.7 − 1.1 − 12.8 0.6
2010          Jan 16.6 5.4 8.1 11.1 8.1 − 16.7 6.8 23.5 − 6.2 2.4 − 1.6 − 0.3 − 6.7
         Feb − 12.8 − 14.5 − 10.4 1.7 5.0 − 23.1 − 18.2 5.0 − 6.8 0.5 − 0.7 − 6.3 − 0.4         Mar − 2.0 − 9.5 − 5.9 7.5 8.2 − 13.6 3.0 16.6 3.5 1.1 0.1 3.2 − 0.9
*The data in this table are based on the consolidated balance sheet of deduction of inter-MFI participations. — 4Including the counterparts of
monetary financial institutions (MFIs) (Table II.2); statistical breaks have monetary liabilities of central governments. — 5Including the monetary
been eliminated from the flow figures (see also the “Notes on the figures“ liabilities of central governments (Post Office, Treasury). — 6In Germany,
in the “Explanatory notes“ in the Statistical Supplement to the Monthly only savings deposits. — 7Paper held by residents outside the euro area has
Report 1, p 30). — 1Source: ECB. — 2Excluding MFIs’ portfolios. — 3After been eliminated. — 8Less German MFIs’ holdings of paper issued by
8*II Overall monetary survey in the euro area 

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
May 2010
II Overall monetary survey in the euro area
 
 
 
(a) Euro area 
 
V Other factors VI Money stock M3 (balance I plus II less III less IV less V)
Money stock M2 Debt secur-
of which ities with
Intra- Money stock M1 maturities
Eurosystem Deposits of up toliability/ with an Deposits Money 2 years
IV De- claim agreed at agreed market (incl money
posits of related to Currency maturity notice of Repo fund market    
banknote in circu- Overnight of up to up to 3 transac-
shares paper)    central  gov-
ernments Total  4 issue Total Total Total lation deposits  5 2 years  5 tions (net)  2,7  Period (net)  2,7,8 months  5,6 
5.9 − 9.6 − 15.7 − 0.9 − 52.6 − 2.7 − 49.9 54.2 − 2.5 9.8 14.6 − 7.7 2008          Aug 
4.5 − 0.7 − 57.5 72.0 83.5 1.1 82.4 − 1.5 − 10.1 2.4 − 27.6 10.8          Sep 
65.1 − 4.3 − 101.1 104.3 56.4 41.7 14.7 52.4 − 4.6 5.0 − 1.3 − 7.0          Oct 
69.9 − 31.9 − 44.3 49.6 25.5 4.8 20.7 19.7 4.4 − 12.6 10.1 − 2.8          Nov 
− 66.5 − 102.6 − 70.2 103.7 74.7 19.2 55.5 − 15.1 44.2 − 6.3 − 19.5 − 7.7          Dec 
62.5 − 3.1 − − 81.6 − 64.6 22.1 − 11.9 34.0 − 131.7 45.1 − 6.4 34.9 − 45.6 2009          Jan 
14.0 2.5 − 15.1 − 6.7 4.5 3.6 0.9 − 34.3 23.0 3.4 20.2 − 1.7          Feb 
12.7 − 11.4 − 0.4 10.7 33.5 4.0 29.5 − 43.2 20.5 11.2 0.9 − 22.4          Mar 
− 14.0 43.7 − 81.6 68.9 82.6 9.3 73.3 − 36.4 22.8 − 0.3 2.3 10.7          Apr − 5.9 6.2 − − 5.8 4.3 26.9 2.8 24.1 − 38.7 16.1 − 1.9 0.6 − 8.8          May
20.4 55.0 − 1.2 28.6 91.0 3.0 88.0 − 74.1 11.7 11.1 − 22.6 − 15.9          June
− 54.1 40.5 − − 38.9 − 15.9 − 0.8 10.5 − 11.3 − 34.0 18.9 − 27.3 16.0 − 11.6          July− 12.3 − 14.0 − − 38.2 − 15.5 7.4 − 4.3 11.7 − 39.9 16.9 − 9.2 1.1 − 14.7          Aug 
20.7 10.1 − 6.4 9.5 62.4 − 0.5 63.0 − 59.6 6.7 24.5 − 19.5 − 8.1          Sep 
22.3 − 9.4 − − 14.6 26.2 55.6 4.8 50.8 − 44.1 14.7 − 25.8 − 4.8 − 10.3          Oct 
− 13.6 40.8 − − 19.7 − 7.0 38.4 4.6 33.7 − 49.2 3.8 5.5 − 15.0 − 3.2          Nov 
− 57.2 − 55.2 − 83.9 96.4 83.0 20.0 63.0 − 23.8 37.3 13.7 − 26.3 0.1          Dec 
30.6 − 3.4 − − 58.2 − 47.2 − 4.1 − 12.9 8.7 − 71.5 28.4 − 21.1 9.6 0.4 2010          Jan 
− 3.9 24.9 − − 27.4 − 27.8 − 15.2 2.5 − 17.7 − 21.7 9.1 16.0 − 9.6 − 6.0          Feb − 6.1 16.3 − 11.2 1.0 7.8 9.2 − 1.4 − 14.6 7.8 16.4 − 13.6 7.5          Mar 
 
 
 (b) German contribution 
 
V Other factors VI Money stock M3 (balance I plus II less III less IV less V)  10 
of which Components of the money stock
Intra- Debt securities
Eurosystem Deposits with
liability/ with an Deposits Money maturities
IV De- claim agreed at agreed market of up to 2 years
posits of related to Currency maturity notice of Repo fund (incl money    
banknote in circu- Overnight of up to up to 3 transac- shares market    central  gov-
ernments Total issue  9,11 lation Total deposits 2 years months  6 tions (net)  7,8 paper)(net)  7  Period
0.1 2.1 2.4 − 1.0 14.9 1.4 14.1 − 3.2 5.0 − 0.3 − 2.1 2008          Aug 
0.7 24.9 2.1 0.5 17.9 16.3 − 0.8 − 3.3 7.8 − 0.4 − 1.7          Sep 
− 1.4 − 8.6 7.5 10.6 37.5 28.2 13.9 − 1.4 − 1.2 − 3.9 1.8          Oct 
0.2 − 59.5 1.3 1.3 34.2 9.2 9.9 − 1.1 2.8 − 0.8 14.1          Nov 
− 0.0 − 17.3 1.1 5.6 − 2.7 1.5 − 2.2 8.1 − 9.9 − 0.8 0.6          Dec 
0.6 − 31.3 17.5 − 18.2 6.7 57.9 − 47.7 3.8 6.3 − 0.4 − 13.3 2009          Jan 
8.1 − 14.1 1.5 0.7 8.8 17.2 − 23.1 5.3 6.6 0.8 1.9          Feb 
3.2 0.7 − 0.3 1.3 − 22.5 − 1.8 − 19.4 2.8 13.7 − 0.6 − 17.2          Mar 
14.4 7.2 1.3 1.6 26.5 32.1 − 20.8 3.1 4.9 − 0.1 7.3          Apr 12.0 19.8 0.4 0.1 − 10.0 4.1 − 15.0 2.4 − 1.7 − 0.3 0.5          May
− 9.2 − 15.3 − 0.3 1.5 − 17.1 20.0 − 33.9 3.7 2.5 − 0.2 − 9.2          June
− 5.8 3.7 − 0.1 3.3 − 24.6 2.3 − 19.0 4.6 − 11.0 − 1.1 − 0.2          July
1.7 − 18.5 1.6 − 1.4 − 10.2 12.8 − 18.0 4.5 − 10.6 − 0.1 1.1          Aug 
− 2.3 20.1 1.6 0.1 9.6 20.5 − 26.1 3.1 11.9 0.1 0.0          Sep 
1.4 11.1 1.5 0.8 − 3.1 27.9 − 30.7 4.2 − 0.4 − 0.1 − 3.9          Oct 
− 7.8 2.0 0.3 1.5 5.9 24.0 − 16.8 3.0 − 2.3 − 0.2 − 1.7          Nov 
− 8.9 2.5 0.0 4.3 − 7.8 − 16.6 3.7 10.0 − 0.5 − 0.6 − 3.8          Dec 
− 6.1 16.6 0.7 − 2.9 − 4.4 29.3 − 27.6 4.7 − 12.3 0.7 0.8 2010          Jan 
− 3.8 − 30.9 2.1 0.6 5.5 0.3 − 11.6 5.9 10.7 − 0.2 0.5          Feb 
− 1.6 − 2.9 0.5 3.1 − 14.6 − 14.2 0.8 1.8 − 0.4 − 0.5 − 2.1          Mar 
euro-area MFIs. — 9Including national banknotes still in circulation. — M2 or M3. — 11The difference between the volume of euro banknotes
10The German contributions to the Eurosystem’s monetary aggregates actually issued by the Bundesbank and the amount disclosed in accordance
should on no account be interpreted as national monetary aggregates and with the accounting regime chosen by the Eurosystem (see also footnote 2
are therefore not comparable with the erstwhile German money stocks M1, on banknote circulation in Table III.2). 
9*II Overall monetary survey in the euro area

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
E U R O S Y S T E M
Monthly Report
May 2010
II Overall monetary survey in the euro area
 
2 Consolidated balance sheet of monetary financial institutions (MFIs) *
 
 
 
Assets
Lending to non-banks (non-MFIs) in the euro area
Enterprises and households General government
Claims
Total Shares and on non-
End of assets or Debt other Debt euro-area Other
year/month liabilities Total Total Loans securities  2 equities Total Loans securities  3 residents assets
 Euro area ( € billion) 1
 
2008          Feb 23,026.4 14,732.6 12,267.0 10,342.7 1,053.9 870.5 2,465.6 971.1 1,494.5 5,595.8 2,698.0
         Mar 23,065.5 14,868.1 12,396.6 10,443.2 1,084.6 868.9 2,471.5 977.7 1,493.7 5,429.5 2,767.9
         Apr 23,259.2 15,058.8 12,564.5 10,517.8 1,122.3 924.4 2,494.3 990.1 1,504.2 5,530.7 2,669.7
         May 23,460.3 15,153.2 12,656.5 10,583.2 1,156.3 917.0 2,496.7 982.5 1,514.2 5,522.4 2,784.6         June 23,407.6 15,198.6 12,693.0 10,646.6 1,187.7 858.7 2,505.6 994.4 1,511.1 5,365.2 2,843.8
         July 23,405.7 15,304.5 12,787.3 10,701.5 1,208.8 877.1 2,517.2 995.5 1,521.8 5,408.6 2,692.6
         Aug 23,627.6 15,348.0 12,832.5 10,709.0 1,245.3 878.1 2,515.5 988.9 1,526.5 5,512.4 2,767.3
         Sep 23,893.7 15,389.0 12,897.3 10,804.8 1,218.2 874.3 2,491.7 999.3 1,492.4 5,608.4 2,896.4
         Oct 24,578.8 15,443.9 12,954.8 10,860.9 1,258.9 835.0 2,489.0 999.6 1,489.5 5,794.7 3,340.1
         Nov 24,736.3 15,550.8 13,015.0 10,870.3 1,321.2 823.5 2,535.8 997.2 1,538.6 5,681.2 3,504.3         Dec 24,116.3 15,520.2 12,967.3 10,772.0 1,409.1 786.1 2,552.9 988.6 1,564.3 5,239.1 3,357.1
2009          Jan 24,498.5 15,700.1 13,061.2 10,860.1 1,411.9 789.1 2,638.9 1,004.1 1,634.9 5,400.0 3,398.4
         Feb 24,441.8 15,723.5 13,046.5 10,836.8 1,432.9 776.8 2,676.9 1,000.7 1,676.2 5,311.2 3,407.1
         Mar 24,162.3 15,748.5 13,034.5 10,815.3 1,449.4 769.9 2,713.9 991.6 1,722.3 5,043.4 3,370.4
         Apr 24,244.9 15,839.8 13,083.0 10,812.2 1,475.4 795.4 2,756.8 1,002.7 1,754.1 5,105.9 3,299.3
         May 23,924.1 15,847.4 13,086.2 10,809.8 1,483.6 792.9 2,761.2 995.1 1,766.1 4,971.2 3,105.5         June 24,089.7 15,951.0 13,116.1 10,836.5 1,498.9 780.7 2,834.9 1,018.1 1,816.8 4,918.9 3,219.8
         July 24,038.5 15,918.9 13,074.3 10,799.8 1,496.8 777.7 2,844.6 1,018.7 1,825.8 4,880.7 3,239.0
         Aug 23,956.5 15,867.8 13,012.9 10,735.1 1,496.0 781.8 2,854.9 1,023.5 1,831.3 4,869.2 3,219.5         Sep 23,908.3 15,942.6 13,062.6 10,769.1 1,496.1 797.4 2,880.0 1,014.0 1,866.0 4,786.5 3,179.2
         Oct 23,859.1 15,928.9 13,016.1 10,723.2 1,493.8 799.1 2,912.8 1,033.6 1,879.2 4,792.9 3,137.3
         Nov 24,010.8 15,967.5 13,058.5 10,752.5 1,494.4 811.6 2,909.0 1,026.1 1,882.9 4,800.3 3,243.0         Dec 23,828.6 15,930.7 13,057.3 10,745.1 1,500.5 811.7 2,873.4 1,021.7 1,851.8 4,814.8 3,083.0
2010          Jan 24,034.4 15,915.5 13,020.5 10,733.7 1,471.1 815.7 2,895.0 1,033.2 1,861.9 4,951.3 3,167.6
         Feb 24,196.0 15,937.4 13,012.6 10,737.0 1,474.1 801.4 2,924.8 1,028.5 1,896.3 5,009.1 3,249.6         Mar 24,250.2 15,994.3 13,014.2 10,759.6 1,461.0 793.6 2,980.1 1,051.8 1,928.2 5,005.0 3,250.9
 German contribution ( € billion) 
2008          Feb 5,186.3 3,525.7 2,879.9 2,442.3 144.4 293.3 645.8 383.9 261.9 1,427.6 233.0
         Mar 5,222.7 3,565.8 2,919.8 2,456.6 163.7 299.5 646.0 381.6 264.4 1,422.9 234.1
         Apr 5,300.6 3,614.0 2,958.7 2,466.4 161.4 330.8 655.4 386.3 269.0 1,441.3 245.3
         May 5,283.0 3,600.6 2,951.1 2,473.1 162.5 315.5 649.5 381.1 268.4 1,436.0 246.5
         June 5,230.1 3,581.4 2,944.7 2,491.9 162.8 290.0 636.6 380.1 256.6 1,399.5 249.2
         July 5,239.5 3,592.2 2,959.4 2,503.6 162.1 293.7 632.9 380.0 252.9 1,394.5 252.8
         Aug 5,284.5 3,623.9 2,995.2 2,511.9 187.2 296.1 628.8 379.8 249.0 1,410.0 250.6         Sep 5,383.1 3,627.7 3,016.0 2,530.7 188.4 296.9 611.7 377.3 234.4 1,501.9 253.5
         Oct 5,457.7 3,632.1 3,016.4 2,540.2 186.7 289.5 615.7 379.4 236.3 1,554.5 271.1
         Nov 5,385.6 3,637.4 3,026.4 2,549.0 191.6 285.8 611.1 377.3 233.8 1,463.2 285.0         Dec 5,310.8 3,642.6 3,035.0 2,529.4 224.5 281.1 607.6 374.9 232.8 1,379.1 289.1
2009          Jan 5,343.8 3,682.0 3,065.9 2,557.6 219.9 288.4 616.1 374.8 241.3 1,367.2 294.6
         Feb 5,315.0 3,672.2 3,058.5 2,544.1 235.8 278.6 613.8 372.8 241.0 1,348.2 294.6
         Mar 5,282.0 3,674.0 3,065.2 2,555.9 235.1 274.3 608.8 368.1 240.7 1,278.5 329.5
         Apr 5,330.0 3,694.6 3,079.0 2,557.4 234.9 286.8 615.6 369.8 245.8 1,319.6 315.8
         May 5,261.9 3,684.9 3,068.7 2,556.8 234.0 277.8 616.2 365.5 250.8 1,292.8 284.3         June 5,220.8 3,698.7 3,082.9 2,566.5 246.0 270.4 615.8 363.7 252.1 1,270.5 251.6
         July 5,173.5 3,689.5 3,059.0 2,545.9 245.8 267.3 630.6 376.6 254.0 1,238.5 245.5
         Aug 5,149.9 3,660.3 3,038.5 2,532.0 242.9 263.6 621.8 371.0 250.7 1,223.4 266.3         Sep 5,131.7 3,679.7 3,054.4 2,548.0 242.8 263.6 625.2 368.1 257.1 1,186.5 265.5
         Oct 5,128.8 3,677.6 3,033.3 2,532.0 240.4 260.9 644.2 379.8 264.4 1,184.0 267.3
         Nov 5,131.5 3,675.6 3,041.1 2,537.6 240.3 263.2 634.6 368.9 265.7 1,184.3 271.6         Dec 5,084.8 3,642.7 3,015.1 2,520.4 235.5 259.1 627.6 363.0 264.6 1,188.8 253.3
2010          Jan 5,123.4 3,660.2 3,021.3 2,516.0 239.8 265.5 638.8 366.1 272.7 1,211.6 251.5
         Feb 5,099.1 3,649.6 3,008.2 2,513.7 237.7 256.8 641.4 362.9 278.5 1,208.0 241.5         Mar 5,106.0 3,638.3 2,993.1 2,509.7 233.9 249.6 645.2 362.2 283.0 1,209.5 258.2
*Monetary financial institutions (MFIs) comprise banks (including building and other money market paper issued by general government. — 4Euro
and loan associations), money market funds, and the European Central currency in circulation (see also footnote 8 on p 12*). Excluding MFIs‘ cash in
Bank and national central banks (the Eurosystem). — 1Source: ECB. — hand (in euro). The German contribution includes the volume of euro bank-
2Including money market paper of enterprises. — 3Including Treasury bills notes put into circulation by the Bundesbank in accordance with
10*II Overall monetary survey in the euro area

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
May 2010
II Overall monetary survey in the euro area
 
 
 
 
 
Liabilities
Deposits of non-banks (non-MFIs) in the euro area
Enterprises and households
With agreed At agreed
maturities of notice of  6 
over
Currency 1 year and
in of which up to up to over up to over  End of
Total in euro  5 Total Overnight 1 year 2 years 2 years 3 months 3 months year/month circulation  4 
Euro area ( € billion) 1
 
628.8 8,906.7 8,389.3 8,461.9 2,973.7 1,814.1 205.0 1,849.1 1,505.7 114.4 2008          Feb 
632.9 8,997.0 8,475.7 8,547.8 3,024.7 1,834.5 203.1 1,861.5 1,511.7 112.3          Mar 
641.4 9,077.2 8,555.9 8,627.0 3,002.6 1,922.9 208.1 1,871.1 1,511.3 111.0          Apr 
645.8 9,134.1 8,631.1 8,696.7 3,027.1 1,949.3 208.6 1,894.1 1,508.1 109.6          May652.1 9,224.9 8,681.5 8,743.5 3,063.1 1,941.1 215.5 1,910.0 1,505.1 108.9          June
658.8 9,207.3 8,687.5 8,760.7 2,986.3 2,031.6 225.1 1,913.3 1,496.2 108.3          July
656.1 9,230.3 8,695.3 8,776.7 2,942.3 2,081.1 233.3 1,918.5 1,494.4 107.2          Aug 
657.2 9,302.0 8,759.5 8,840.7 3,025.4 2,081.6 236.5 1,906.6 1,484.6 106.1          Sep 
698.9 9,467.0 8,856.6 8,941.8 3,049.8 2,151.7 237.6 1,911.0 1,482.7 109.0          Oct 
703.7 9,601.2 8,935.7 8,997.5 3,060.0 2,164.4 239.4 1,933.7 1,487.3 112.6          Nov 722.9 9,637.2 9,075.4 9,113.9 3,105.8 2,151.9 235.6 1,972.7 1,531.4 116.5          Dec 
712.3 9,761.5 9,115.3 9,171.1 3,184.2 2,040.4 241.3 2,011.1 1,576.9 117.3 2009          Jan 
716.0 9,780.6 9,127.3 9,173.9 3,185.1 1,996.9 250.2 2,024.7 1,599.9 117.2          Feb 
719.9 9,810.0 9,155.3 9,193.9 3,203.3 1,955.1 251.8 2,045.9 1,620.0 117.8          Mar 
729.2 9,874.4 9,235.9 9,273.0 3,254.9 1,938.7 253.4 2,063.4 1,643.9 118.8          Apr 
732.0 9,879.9 9,251.8 9,285.0 3,275.9 1,893.7 252.0 2,085.3 1,657.9 120.2          May735.0 9,947.4 9,291.9 9,328.7 3,354.1 1,835.5 241.6 2,106.6 1,669.7 121.3          June
745.5 9,878.9 9,276.5 9,318.4 3,341.7 1,794.1 254.0 2,118.0 1,688.2 122.4          July
741.2 9,849.1 9,273.0 9,312.2 3,350.5 1,752.5 257.2 2,123.8 1,704.9 123.2          Aug 740.6 9,887.3 9,295.0 9,329.7 3,406.9 1,694.4 254.0 2,138.5 1,711.5 124.4          Sep 
745.5 9,932.9 9,313.6 9,356.5 3,460.6 1,648.0 256.0 2,139.1 1,726.0 126.9          Oct 
750.1 9,913.8 9,315.0 9,348.2 3,485.2 1,598.6 259.1 2,147.6 1,730.0 127.7          Nov 770.1 9,955.3 9,410.2 9,464.9 3,558.1 1,582.3 259.7 2,170.3 1,767.6 126.9          Dec 
757.2 9,955.4 9,375.6 9,430.9 3,578.0 1,512.8 262.2 2,155.6 1,796.9 125.4 2010          Jan 
759.6 9,938.7 9,367.7 9,415.6 3,559.6 1,493.5 266.2 2,165.6 1,805.9 124.9          Feb 
768.9 9,927.2 9,359.1 9,412.9 3,562.6 1,478.3 265.6 2,167.4 1,813.8 125.1          Mar 
 German contribution ( € billion) 
169.4 2,638.9 2,559.5 2,487.6 764.9 402.2 45.8 726.2 440.0 108.5 2008          Feb 
170.8 2,645.3 2,564.1 2,492.0 773.5 402.6 45.5 725.5 438.4 106.5          Mar 
173.6 2,650.1 2,574.0 2,498.9 760.6 425.8 46.0 725.6 435.7 105.1          Apr 
174.0 2,671.0 2,591.1 2,508.4 763.8 435.1 46.3 725.8 433.7 103.7          May
176.2 2,671.2 2,589.5 2,502.9 770.0 425.7 47.4 725.3 431.6 102.9          June
178.2 2,676.3 2,596.5 2,512.2 750.5 458.7 49.2 724.8 426.5 102.5          July
177.2 2,688.5 2,608.0 2,522.6 751.6 472.1 50.3 724.0 423.4 101.3          Aug 177.7 2,698.7 2,618.7 2,532.2 768.0 471.5 51.5 720.9 420.1 100.3          Sep 
188.3 2,742.6 2,664.9 2,580.8 798.6 489.4 52.8 718.1 418.8 103.2          Oct 
189.6 2,760.1 2,685.4 2,592.5 804.1 492.9 54.6 716.3 417.6 106.9          Nov 195.2 2,799.3 2,728.0 2,632.6 800.8 493.7 54.4 747.3 425.7 110.7          Dec 
177.0 2,819.7 2,748.0 2,657.0 859.6 452.3 53.7 751.4 429.4 110.7 2009          Jan 
177.7 2,834.1 2,754.4 2,660.1 872.0 432.0 52.8 758.1 434.7 110.6          Feb 
179.0 2,821.3 2,740.2 2,650.6 870.1 418.5 52.7 760.7 437.3 111.3          Mar 
180.6 2,854.6 2,759.1 2,667.2 880.6 418.0 52.0 764.7 439.8 112.1          Apr 
180.7 2,860.9 2,753.2 2,661.0 884.4 401.8 51.8 767.2 442.2 113.6          May182.2 2,856.1 2,755.9 2,666.6 902.2 372.6 50.8 780.8 445.7 114.6          June
185.6 2,840.1 2,747.1 2,663.6 907.2 358.8 50.2 781.5 450.2 115.7          July
184.2 2,832.1 2,748.8 2,667.0 919.1 344.4 49.1 783.3 454.6 116.5          Aug 184.3 2,830.8 2,750.2 2,671.8 937.9 324.4 47.9 786.2 457.7 117.7          Sep 
185.0 2,834.4 2,752.2 2,676.5 966.4 295.8 47.6 784.8 461.8 120.1          Oct 
186.5 2,839.6 2,767.0 2,687.1 987.8 280.1 46.6 787.0 464.7 120.9          Nov 190.8 2,828.4 2,763.3 2,688.5 975.3 283.8 46.9 788.0 474.6 119.8          Dec 
187.9 2,830.4 2,772.0 2,696.8 1,005.5 261.0 44.4 788.2 479.4 118.3 2010          Jan 
188.5 2,829.6 2,776.4 2,695.8 1,003.1 253.7 43.7 792.4 485.3 117.6          Feb 
191.6 2,817.8 2,766.9 2,688.9 992.7 255.1 42.8 793.5 487.1 117.7          Mar 
the accounting regime chosen by the Eurosystem (see footnote 3 on item “Intra-Eurosystem liability/claim related to banknote issue“ (see “Other
banknote circulation in Table III.2). The volume of currency actually put into liability items“). — 5Excluding central governments’ deposits. — 6In
circulation by the Bundesbank can be calculated by adding to this total the Germany, only saving deposits. 
11*II Overall monetary survey in the euro area

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
E U R O S Y S T E M
Monthly Report
May 2010
II Overall monetary survey in the euro area
 
2 Consolidated balance sheet of monetary financial institutions (MFIs) (cont’d) *
 
 
 
Liabilities (cont’d)
Deposits of non-banks (non-MFIs) in the euro area (cont’d)  
 
General government Repo transactions Debt securitieswith non-banks
Other general government in the euro area
With agreed At agreedmaturities of notice of  
2 
Money
over of which market of which
Central 1 year and Enterprises fund denom-
End of govern- up to up to over up to over and shares inatedyear/month ments Total Overnight 1 year 2 years 2 years 3 months 3 months Total households (net)  
3 Total in euro
 Euro area ( € billion) 1
 
2008          Feb 189.0 255.8 122.1 95.0 4.1 24.6 1.7 8.3 314.3 309.9 749.6 2,803.2 2,178.4
         Mar 199.9 249.2 118.5 91.5 5.1 24.4 1.7 8.1 314.0 309.9 742.5 2,809.3 2,200.4
         Apr 197.5 252.7 119.0 94.4 5.2 24.6 1.7 7.9 328.9 322.8 751.3 2,812.4 2,197.1
         May 173.9 263.5 120.8 103.6 5.3 24.5 1.6 7.6 333.3 327.3 755.8 2,844.7 2,226.8         June 211.2 270.1 124.0 106.9 5.8 24.4 1.6 7.4 330.3 324.5 733.0 2,856.5 2,241.8
         July 180.8 265.7 118.8 107.9 5.8 24.4 1.6 7.2 333.1 329.0 743.2 2,878.2 2,260.8
         Aug 186.7 266.8 117.5 110.3 5.9 24.4 1.6 7.1 343.1 338.3 757.9 2,888.8 2,261.3         Sep 191.2 270.1 121.1 110.1 5.9 24.6 1.5 6.8 345.6 341.0 731.1 2,906.9 2,267.9
         Oct 256.3 268.9 122.9 107.4 5.8 24.8 1.5 6.6 351.0 347.4 729.8 2,890.9 2,209.9
         Nov 326.2 277.6 129.3 110.2 5.7 24.5 1.5 6.4 336.6 333.4 739.7 2,871.2 2,207.9         Dec 259.8 263.5 124.4 101.7 4.9 24.7 1.6 6.1 330.1 327.4 725.7 2,828.6 2,224.4
2009          Jan 325.3 265.1 125.9 99.4 5.0 24.6 2.0 8.2 324.0 321.4 759.7 2,824.7 2,194.6
         Feb 339.3 267.4 130.3 97.0 5.3 24.6 2.3 8.0 327.4 324.6 779.7 2,849.1 2,215.7         Mar 351.9 264.2 134.9 89.3 4.6 24.9 2.6 7.9 338.5 335.5 780.6 2,801.5 2,200.0
         Apr 337.6 263.8 139.9 83.8 4.8 24.9 2.8 7.7 338.2 335.4 781.5 2,811.9 2,196.0
         May 331.7 263.2 138.1 84.7 4.9 25.0 3.0 7.5 336.2 333.4 771.3 2,807.5 2,214.7         June 352.5 266.3 146.0 80.3 4.6 25.0 3.1 7.3 347.3 344.5 741.7 2,805.9 2,203.1
         July 298.4 262.1 146.0 74.9 4.9 25.5 3.5 7.2 320.0 317.6 758.0 2,808.7 2,207.9
         Aug 274.6 262.3 148.3 72.3 5.1 25.7 3.8 7.1 310.8 308.8 759.3 2,804.7 2,201.6         Sep 295.3 262.3 154.7 65.9 5.2 25.7 3.9 6.8 335.2 333.0 740.5 2,775.6 2,191.4
         Oct 317.7 258.8 151.7 65.1 5.2 26.0 4.2 6.6 309.4 307.2 734.9 2,762.3 2,180.5
         Nov 304.1 261.5 158.1 61.8 5.0 26.1 4.1 6.4 314.9 312.7 721.8 2,757.1 2,176.8         Dec 246.9 243.6 143.9 58.8 4.8 25.9 4.0 6.2 328.7 326.0 646.9 2,759.0 2,172.1
2010          Jan 277.4 247.1 144.4 56.8 4.8 28.2 4.3 8.6 307.7 306.1 657.1 2,806.0 2,189.4
         Feb 273.5 249.6 146.6 56.8 4.8 28.4 4.7 8.4 323.7 322.2 647.5 2,800.5 2,168.5         Mar 267.4 246.9 142.3 58.6 4.6 28.5 4.9 8.1 340.1 338.3 628.7 2,826.7 2,188.7
 German contribution ( € billion) 
2008          Feb 38.7 112.6 23.5 63.9 3.2 20.6 0.9 0.4 45.9 45.9 21.5 862.3 642.2         Mar 40.8 112.4 23.1 63.2 4.2 20.7 0.9 0.4 46.7 46.7 20.0 854.3 648.3
         Apr 37.5 113.7 22.8 64.5 4.2 20.9 0.9 0.4 55.7 55.7 18.4 859.7 644.1
         May 39.7 122.9 24.3 72.2 4.3 20.8 0.9 0.4 56.0 56.0 17.8 848.4 630.4         June 39.4 128.8 26.3 75.5 4.8 21.0 0.9 0.4 63.9 63.9 17.7 842.9 626.2
         July 37.3 126.9 23.4 76.7 4.5 21.1 0.8 0.3 58.1 58.1 17.7 842.4 619.3
         Aug 37.3 128.6 24.6 77.1 4.6 21.1 0.8 0.3 63.1 63.1 17.3 846.5 619.4         Sep 38.0 128.4 25.0 76.4 4.6 21.3 0.8 0.3 70.9 70.9 16.9 845.5 607.4
         Oct 36.6 125.1 25.0 73.2 4.5 21.3 0.8 0.3 69.8 69.8 13.0 853.5 600.2
         Nov 36.7 130.8 28.7 75.7 4.4 21.0 0.8 0.3 71.0 71.0 12.3 854.6 607.1         Dec 36.7 129.9 32.0 72.0 3.6 21.2 0.8 0.3 61.1 61.1 11.5 819.1 596.4
2009          Jan 37.3 125.4 32.2 67.2 3.6 21.1 1.0 0.4 67.4 67.4 11.1 822.0 575.4
         Feb 45.4 128.6 37.1 65.0 3.9 21.1 1.0 0.4 74.0 74.0 12.0 814.7 563.9         Mar 48.6 122.2 36.3 59.5 3.4 21.4 1.1 0.5 87.7 87.7 11.4 779.4 542.7
         Apr 62.7 124.6 41.4 56.8 3.5 21.3 1.2 0.5 92.6 92.6 11.2 782.5 531.5
         May 74.7 125.1 41.0 57.6 3.5 21.3 1.2 0.5 90.9 90.9 10.9 776.7 538.0         June 65.8 123.7 43.0 54.3 3.2 21.3 1.3 0.6 93.4 93.4 10.7 764.5 521.5
         July 60.0 116.5 40.3 49.4 3.3 21.5 1.4 0.6 82.4 82.4 9.6 754.9 510.6
         Aug 50.2 114.9 41.1 46.6 3.4 21.5 1.6 0.6 71.7 71.7 9.5 755.1 507.7         Sep 47.9 111.2 42.4 41.7 3.4 21.5 1.6 0.7 83.7 83.7 9.6 734.0 498.1
         Oct 49.3 108.5 41.6 39.5 3.4 21.7 1.6 0.7 83.3 83.3 9.5 727.1 492.8
         Nov 41.6 110.9 44.1 39.3 3.3 21.7 1.7 0.7 81.0 81.0 9.3 713.6 483.0         Dec 32.7 107.3 40.7 39.5 3.2 21.4 1.8 0.7 80.5 80.5 8.7 703.3 470.7
2010          Jan 26.6 107.0 40.3 37.4 3.1 23.7 1.7 0.7 68.2 68.2 9.4 712.0 466.2
         Feb 22.7 111.1 43.4 38.4 3.1 23.7 1.7 0.7 78.9 78.9 9.2 711.0 456.3         Mar 21.2 107.7 39.6 38.9 3.0 23.7 1.8 0.7 78.4 78.4 8.6 714.4 458.2
*Monetary financial institutions (MFIs) comprise banks (including building 5Excluding liabilities arising from securities issued. — 6After deduction of
and loan associations), money market funds, and the European Central inter-MFI participations. — 7The German contributions to the Eurosystem’s
Bank and national central banks (the Eurosystem). — 1Source: ECB. — 2In monetary aggregates should on no account be interpreted as national
Germany, only savings deposits. — 3Excluding holdings of MFIs; for the monetary aggregates and are therefore not comparable with the erstwhile
German contribution, excluding German MFIs’ portfolios of securities issued German money stocks M1, M2 or M3. — 8including DM banknotes still in
by MFIs in the euro area. — 4In Germany, bank debt securities with circulation (see also footnote 4 on p 10*). — 9For the German contribution,
maturities of up to one year are classed as money market paper. — the difference between the volume of euro banknotes actually issued
12*II Overall monetary survey in the euro area

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
May 2010
II Overall monetary survey in the euro area
 
 
 
 
 
 Memo item
 Other liability items Monetary aggregates  7 
 (From 2002, German contribution
issued (net)  3 excludes currency in circulation)
With maturities of
of which Monetary
Intra- liabilities
Eurosystem- of centralliability/ govern-
over Liabilities Excess claim Monetary ments1 year and to non- Capital of related to capital (Post
up to up to over euro-area and inter-MFI banknote forma- Office, End of1 year  
4 2 years 2 years residents  5 reserves  6 liabilities Total  8 issue  9 M1 10 M2 11 M3 12 tion 13 year/month Treasury)  14 
Euro area ( € billion) 1
 
173.2 98.9 2,531.1 4,983.3 1,519.8 − 23.4 3,143.9 − 3,800.4 7,464.3 8,799.5 6,047.2 114.2 2008          Feb 
165.7 111.7 2,531.9 4,896.2 1,506.7 − 12.9 3,179.6 − 3,852.0 7,537.6 8,870.7 6,044.8 113.8          Mar 
155.7 112.8 2,543.9 5,079.2 1,500.1 − 25.2 3,093.7 − 3,836.8 7,618.1 8,965.9 6,058.4 111.5          Apr 
159.6 125.5 2,559.6 5,134.8 1,488.0 − 33.8 3,157.3 − 3,867.3 7,681.2 9,054.3 6,083.4 110.9          May151.9 130.3 2,574.3 4,962.7 1,494.4 − 50.6 3,204.0 − 3,914.3 7,727.1 9,071.2 6,119.4 112.0          June
149.1 137.7 2,591.4 5,005.3 1,517.5 − 48.6 3,110.4 − 3,838.3 7,743.1 9,104.9 6,162.1 111.0          July
140.5 137.4 2,610.9 5,119.4 1,528.7 − 39.3 3,142.4 − 3,789.7 7,752.3 9,129.9 6,196.8 109.9          Aug 146.9 140.3 2,619.7 5,179.1 1,563.8 − 33.9 3,241.5 − 3,876.4 7,832.7 9,195.3 6,227.6 108.8          Sep 
140.4 136.4 2,614.1 5,291.3 1,570.2 − 11.3 3,590.6 − 3,944.0 7,964.6 9,321.2 6,235.6 106.3          Oct 
136.8 137.9 2,596.5 5,166.7 1,609.1 − 37.0 3,744.8 − 3,969.0 8,011.1 9,361.5 6,282.8 109.5          Nov 138.5 129.1 2,561.1 4,780.5 1,613.6 − 79.3 3,556.5 − 4,035.3 8,095.4 9,418.0 6,294.8 115.1          Dec 
93.7 123.6 2,607.3 5,000.3 1,658.4 − 100.1 3,557.4 − 4,095.8 8,094.0 9,394.5 6,427.0 106.6 2009          Jan 
88.7 126.8 2,633.6 4,862.5 1,670.0 − 98.2 3,554.4 − 4,102.1 8,086.5 9,408.5 6,478.2 103.6          Feb 66.2 128.8 2,606.5 4,645.8 1,645.1 − 89.0 3,509.6 − 4,131.0 8,087.0 9,400.4 6,448.0 105.5          Mar 
65.8 140.2 2,606.0 4,674.1 1,646.7 − 87.9 3,476.3 − 4,197.7 8,155.7 9,480.8 6,467.4 104.4          Apr 
53.7 145.3 2,608.5 4,516.7 1,657.0 − 108.8 3,332.0 − 4,220.9 8,149.7 9,455.5 6,503.4 107.4          May38.9 143.7 2,623.4 4,439.5 1,689.9 − 70.2 3,453.0 − 4,311.7 8,178.6 9,449.5 6,573.3 108.7          June
25.6 146.1 2,637.1 4,386.6 1,697.4 − 63.6 3,506.9 − 4,311.0 8,162.5 9,411.6 6,607.7 109.7          July
12.3 144.8 2,647.6 4,312.0 1,715.9 − 75.2 3,538.4 − 4,317.6 8,145.3 9,372.1 6,643.4 109.6          Aug 
7.2 141.8 2,626.5 4,238.8 1,738.7 − 71.4 3,522.7 − 4,379.3 8,145.9 9,370.4 6,660.7 108.7          Sep 
− 1.4 141.1 2,622.6 4,229.7 1,745.9 − 97.6 3,495.8 − 4,434.5 8,170.7 9,354.4 6,667.2 108.6          Oct − 2.2 137.3 2,622.0 4,216.3 1,780.2 − 61.3 3,617.6 − 4,472.1 8,162.2 9,333.4 6,710.0 110.2          Nov 
3.8 130.0 2,625.2 4,239.1 1,801.8 − 44.6 3,372.0 − 4,558.1 8,266.5 9,375.0 6,756.2 117.2          Dec 
1.9 130.1 2,674.0 4,354.5 1,798.8 − 39.9 3,437.7 − 4,556.0 8,225.1 9,321.9 6,790.7 107.8 2010          Jan 
0.7 125.7 2,674.2 4,419.5 1,814.1 − 29.8 3,522.0 − 4,542.6 8,205.4 9,303.0 6,815.6 107.8          Feb 
12.2 121.7 2,692.8 4,427.6 1,831.3 − 60.1 3,559.9 − 4,550.3 8,206.9 9,309.6 6,853.2 107.4          Mar 
 German contribution ( € billion) 
27.2 48.2 787.0 794.7 377.0 − 228.9 674.8 102.4 788.4 1,744.4 1,887.1 2,019.8 − 2008          Feb 
25.0 48.8 780.6 813.3 379.8 − 212.8 676.2 103.7 796.6 1,751.3 1,891.8 2,013.5 −          Mar 
24.7 52.5 782.5 837.1 375.4 − 187.9 692.0 104.1 783.4 1,760.6 1,911.9 2,009.9 −          Apr 
19.6 51.6 777.3 824.7 369.6 − 197.6 693.0 106.3 788.1 1,780.6 1,925.6 1,997.6 −          May13.3 53.9 775.8 789.2 375.0 − 228.6 698.8 107.2 796.3 1,782.2 1,931.0 2,000.4 −          June
12.2 54.3 775.9 783.7 381.7 − 223.0 702.7 107.4 773.9 1,790.4 1,932.6 2,006.2 −          July
13.7 50.9 782.0 803.1 382.3 − 241.0 724.7 109.8 776.2 1,804.4 1,949.4 2,011.0 −          Aug 13.5 49.5 782.5 850.4 391.3 − 238.3 747.6 111.8 793.1 1,817.9 1,968.8 2,016.5 −          Sep 
19.2 45.6 788.7 862.4 388.3 − 248.6 776.8 119.3 823.6 1,863.0 2,010.7 2,019.9 −          Oct 
33.2 45.7 775.7 815.4 395.6 − 309.6 786.2 120.6 832.8 1,878.8 2,040.9 2,015.9 −          Nov 41.9 37.5 739.8 762.8 406.3 − 334.6 785.4 121.8 832.8 1,883.0 2,034.9 2,025.6 −          Dec 
32.7 33.5 755.8 791.6 414.8 − 353.2 770.3 139.2 891.8 1,898.9 2,043.7 2,054.1 − 2009          Jan 
34.5 33.5 746.8 770.8 407.4 − 376.1 778.2 140.7 909.1 1,898.4 2,052.3 2,044.4 −          Feb 
19.3 31.4 728.8 751.2 400.0 − 382.6 813.6 140.4 906.4 1,878.9 2,028.6 2,022.7 −          Mar 
24.5 33.4 724.5 774.4 390.7 − 373.8 797.8 141.8 922.0 1,893.1 2,054.9 2,013.9 −          Apr 
25.8 32.5 718.4 727.4 389.3 − 361.3 767.1 142.2 925.5 1,883.5 2,043.6 2,010.3 −          May22.0 26.6 715.9 731.4 407.9 − 390.7 747.5 141.9 945.2 1,873.0 2,025.8 2,041.0 −          June
23.3 25.1 706.4 724.8 408.0 − 397.8 751.5 141.8 947.5 1,860.8 2,001.2 2,033.8 −          July
24.7 24.9 705.6 718.3 408.3 − 407.6 762.6 143.4 960.2 1,859.9 1,990.7 2,035.8 −          Aug 26.3 23.2 684.5 690.3 409.6 − 396.2 769.8 144.9 980.3 1,856.9 1,999.7 2,020.1 −          Sep 
23.7 21.9 681.5 678.5 411.0 − 388.6 773.6 146.5 1,008.0 1,857.8 1,996.2 2,019.8 −          Oct 
21.5 22.4 669.7 674.6 424.7 − 384.9 773.7 146.8 1,031.9 1,867.7 2,001.8 2,024.8 −          Nov 23.1 17.0 663.2 663.8 423.6 − 390.1 766.7 146.8 1,015.9 1,865.7 1,994.9 2,016.8 −          Dec 
25.4 17.2 669.3 693.8 419.4 − 364.7 755.0 147.6 1,045.8 1,872.9 1,993.1 2,019.7 − 2010          Jan 
27.4 16.7 666.9 703.0 424.6 − 394.6 737.4 149.6 1,046.5 1,872.4 2,004.6 2,026.0 −          Feb 
27.3 15.3 671.8 721.0 424.3 − 419.9 761.3 150.2 1,032.4 1,861.0 1,990.6 2,031.8 −          Mar 
by the Bundesbank and the amount disclosed in accordance with the (excluding central governments’ deposits) and (for the euro area) central
accounting regime chosen by the Eurosystem (see also footnote 3 on governments’ monetary liabilities with such maturities. — 12M2 plus repo
banknote circulation in Table III.2). — 10Overnight deposits (excluding transactions, money market fund shares, money market paper and debt
central governments’ deposits), and (for the euro area) currency in securities up to 2 years. — 13Deposits with agreed maturities of over 2
circulation, central governments’ overnight monetary liabilities, which are years and at agreed notice of over 3 months, debt securities with matur ities
not included in the consolidated balance sheet. — 11M1 plus deposits with of over 2 years, capital and reserves. — 14 Non-existent in Germany. 
agreed maturities of up to 2 years and at agreed notice of up to 3 months
13*II Overall monetary survey in the euro area

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
E U R O S Y S T E M
Monthly Report
May 2010
II  Overall monetary survey in the euro area
  
 3  Banking system’s liquidity position  * 
Stocks
  
€ billion; period averages of daily positions
Liquidity-providing factors Liquidity-absorbing factors
Monetary policy operations of the Eurosystem
Credit
institutions‘
currentaccount
Net assets Longer- Other Other balances
Reserve in gold Main term Marginal liquidity- liquidity- Banknotes Central Other (including
maintenance and foreign refinancing refinancing lending providing Deposit absorbing in government factors minimum Baseperiod currency operations operations facility facility deposits (net)  
6 reserves)  7 money  8 operations  3 operations  4 circulation  5 
ending in  1 
Eurosystem  2  
  
2007          Oct 321.9 194.3 262.3 0.3 − 1.6 0.9 637.3 63.7 − 118.0 193.4 832.3
         Nov 327.6 180.2 265.0 0.1 − 0.6 5.1 640.1 55.9 − 123.3 194.4 835.1
         Dec 327.5 173.0 278.6 0.3 − 0.4 2.2 644.6 61.9 − 126.6 196.8 841.9
2008          Jan 343.8 255.7 268.8 0.3 − 1.1 68.4 668.2 46.4 − 116.4 200.9 870.2
         Feb 353.6 173.8 268.5 0.2 − 0.4 0.6 651.7 51.7 − 110.7 202.4 854.5
         Mar 343.3 181.3 268.5 0.1 0.3 0.3 − 653.2 59.7 − 125.0 205.3 858.7
         Apr 349.4 181.5 278.6 0.1 2.6 0.6 0.4 662.1 66.4 − 124.8 207.5 870.3
         May 364.5 174.4 295.0 0.1 − 0.3 0.8 667.6 68.8 − 112.2 208.6 876.6
         June 375.0 172.8 287.9 0.3 − 0.2 0.5 671.4 67.3 − 111.5 208.1 879.7
         July 376.4 185.4 275.4 0.1 − 0.4 0.5 677.2 64.9 − 118.3 212.7 890.3
         Aug 374.5 166.3 299.3 0.1 − 0.3 0.6 686.1 61.3 − 123.0 214.8 901.2
         Sep 376.6 163.5 300.0 0.1 − 0.6 0.7 685.0 61.1 − 121.2 214.0 899.5
         Oct 417.3 174.1 334.3 7.5 5.9 19.9 45.5 684.3 55.2 − 82.6 216.8 921.0
         Nov 549.0 301.6 452.5 12.7 4.2 213.7 2.3 722.1 85.0 78.2 218.6 1 154.4
         Dec 580.5 337.3 457.2 2.7 − 200.9 4.9 731.1 107.8 114.3 218.7 1 150.7
2009          Jan 581.3 219.2 613.6 2.9 − 238.5 3.3 753.1 99.9 100.6 221.5 1 213.1
         Feb 547.4 224.9 551.4 2.1 − 175.4 6.1 740.2 102.7 79.3 222.1 1 137.7         Mar 512.7 224.3 472.4 1.6 − 95.5 4.0 741.5 110.1 41.4 218.6 1 055.5
         Apr 508.0 230.5 443.1 1.1 − 57.8 3.7 747.3 139.0 13.3 221.6 1 026.6
         May 512.4 239.7 426.9 0.7 − 42.7 3.1 757.5 141.9 13.7 220.8 1 021.0
         June 487.9 238.8 400.6 0.7 − 22.3 2.1 759.8 141.7 − 15.8 217.9 1 000.0
         July 457.1 221.4 504.9 1.3 − 119.7 9.9 763.1 137.9 − 65.1 219.2 1 102.0
         Aug 433.6 94.1 694.0 0.3 2.8 185.1 22.1 770.8 133.9 − 103.9 216.9 1 172.8
         Sep 427.6 74.8 645.4 0.3 8.4 136.7 18.5 769.1 125.7 − 110.4 216.9 1 122.7
         Oct 421.4 79.1 616.9 0.3 14.3 109.6 12.9 768.8 139.0 − 113.1 214.7 1 093.1
         Nov 413.0 52.3 626.1 0.3 20.1 86.5 12.0 770.7 148.7 − 118.9 212.8 1 070.0
         Dec 407.6 55.8 593.4 0.7 24.6 65.7 9.9 775.2 150.1 − 130.2 211.4 1 052.3
2010          Jan 413.0 60.6 648.4 0.4 28.4 147.0 8.1 796.8 119.8 − 132.1 211.2 1 155.0
         Feb 425.6 59.7 662.2 0.2 33.5 168.3 13.3 783.6 122.6 − 117.5 210.9 1 162.8
         Mar 426.9 80.5 641.1 0.9 38.0 186.4 10.5 784.6 113.2 − 119.3 211.8 1 182.9
         Apr 439.8 77.7 650.5 0.4 43.6 200.7 8.4 792.9 113.6 − 116.1 212.5 1 206.1
Deutsche Bundesbank
2007          Oct 82.4 93.2 142.9 0.2 − 0.9 0.2 173.5 0.1 98.8 45.2 219.6
         Nov 84.6 78.3 139.0 0.0 − 0.4 1.5 174.1 0.0 80.0 45.9 220.5
         Dec 84.6 73.2 133.6 0.3 − 0.3 0.7 175.2 0.1 68.7 46.7 222.1
2008          Jan 91.5 102.1 134.6 0.1 − 0.6 26.4 180.6 0.1 73.7 46.9 228.1
         Feb 96.0 60.8 130.6 0.0 − 0.2 0.1 176.2 0.0 63.3 47.7 224.1
         Mar 90.8 59.8 122.5 0.0 0.1 0.2 − 177.5 0.1 46.9 48.6 226.3
         Apr 92.9 76.7 109.9 0.0 1.5 0.5 − 179.7 0.0 52.4 48.6 228.7
         May 99.6 75.7 112.7 0.0 − 0.2 0.2 181.0 0.0 57.9 48.6 229.8
         June 104.4 73.5 112.8 0.1 − 0.1 0.1 182.7 0.1 58.9 49.1 231.8
         July 102.8 79.4 107.2 0.0 − 0.1 0.1 183.6 0.1 55.9 49.5 233.2
         Aug 99.6 70.8 111.9 0.0 − 0.1 0.0 185.5 0.0 46.5 50.1 235.7
         Sep 100.6 76.7 105.2 0.1 − 0.2 0.1 185.7 0.1 46.2 50.2 236.2
         Oct 114.4 74.8 118.6 0.9 3.6 10.1 8.6 186.2 0.2 55.9 51.2 247.5
         Nov 138.6 103.6 163.2 2.7 2.0 88.8 1.1 198.9 0.3 68.7 52.3 339.9         Dec 146.9 105.1 158.5 2.0 − 84.2 1.1 197.9 0.2 77.2 52.0 334.0
2009          Jan 141.2 72.4 198.1 2.4 − 91.5 1.2 195.8 4.1 68.5 52.8 340.2
         Feb 132.9 79.4 178.5 1.3 − 77.9 2.2 185.0 2.5 71.4 53.2 316.1
         Mar 135.3 72.9 147.8 1.2 − 51.9 1.7 185.3 9.6 55.7 52.9 290.1
         Apr 142.9 74.7 122.8 0.7 − 38.9 1.6 186.3 14.6 46.2 53.4 278.7
         May 150.7 87.5 111.9 0.1 − 24.1 1.3 189.1 26.2 56.3 53.3 266.5
         June 145.7 95.0 103.4 0.7 − 15.4 0.6 189.3 32.3 54.3 52.8 257.4
         July 138.0 81.0 141.5 0.6 − 49.4 4.5 190.2 23.5 40.4 53.2 292.8
         Aug 128.6 47.6 189.1 0.1 0.8 70.1 4.9 192.0 23.5 23.6 52.2 314.2
         Sep 126.0 40.6 178.0 0.1 2.9 51.8 4.3 192.3 23.6 23.4 52.2 296.4
         Oct 124.2 37.3 175.9 0.2 4.9 49.4 3.0 192.5 23.7 22.4 51.5 293.3
         Nov 120.7 34.6 178.8 0.2 6.2 34.2 4.3 192.5 23.6 34.8 51.0 277.7
         Dec 116.3 33.7 171.1 0.6 7.2 25.7 2.7 193.3 18.8 37.8 50.5 269.5
2010          Jan 112.1 42.8 168.9 0.1 7.9 44.8 2.3 198.4 10.7 25.3 50.3 293.5
         Feb 112.3 42.2 168.6 0.1 8.9 50.3 5.2 195.6 5.4 25.4 50.2 296.1         Mar 112.6 51.8 157.9 0.8 10.0 67.8 5.0 196.5 2.1 11.8 50.0 314.3
         Apr 116.2 40.9 164.9 0.2 11.5 69.8 3.4 198.0 0.3 11.9 50.3 318.2
Discrepancies may arise from rounding. — *The banking system’s liquidity purchase programme. — 4From Aug. 2009, includes liquidity absorbed as a
position is defined as the current account holdings in euro of euro-area result of the Eurosystem’s foreign exchange swap operations. — 5From
credit institutions with the Eurosystem. Amounts are derived from the conso- 2002, euro banknotes and other banknotes which have been issued by the
lidated financial statement of the Eurosystem and the financial statement national central banks of the Eurosystem and which are still in circulatio n. In
of the Bundesbank. — 1Figures are daily averages for the reserve mainte- accordance with the accounting procedure chosen by the Eurosystem for
nance period ending in the month indicated. — 2Source: ECB. — 3From the issue of euro banknotes, 8% of the total value of the euro banknotes in
Aug. 2009, includes liquidity provided under Eurosystem’s covered bond circulation are allocated on a monthly basis to the ECB. The counterpart of
14*II  Overall monetary survey in the euro area

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
May 2010
II  Overall monetary survey in the euro area
  
  
Flows
  
Liquidity-providing factors Liquidity-absorbing factors
Monetary policy operations of the Eurosystem
Credit
institutions‘
currentaccount
Net assets Longer- Other Other balances
in gold Main term Marginal liquidity- liquidity- Banknotes Central Other (including Reserveand foreign refinancing refinancing lending providing Deposit absorbing in government factors minimum Base maintenancecurrency operations operations facility facility deposits (net)  
6 reserves)  7 money  8 period operations  3 operations  4 circulation  5 
ending in  1 
Eurosystem  2  
  
+ 4.6 − 74.4 + 90.6 + 0.1 − 10.7 + 1.2 − 0.8 − 1.9 + 11.4 − 0.2 + 0.7 − 0.1 2007          Oct 
+ 5.7 − 14.1 + 2.7 − 0.2 − − 1.0 + 4.2 + 2.8 − 7.8 − 5.3 + 1.0 + 2.8          Nov 
− 0.1 − 7.2 + 13.6 + 0.2 − − 0.2 − 2.9 + 4.5 + 6.0 − 3.3 + 2.4 + 6.8          Dec 
+ 16.3 + 82.7 − 9.8 − 0.0 − + 0.7 + 66.2 + 23.6 − 15.5 + 10.2 + 4.1 + 28.3 2008          Jan 
+ 9.8 − 81.9 − 0.3 − 0.1 − − 0.7 − 67.8 − 16.5 + 5.3 + 5.7 + 1.5 − 15.7          Feb 
− 10.3 + 7.5 − 0.0 − 0.1 + 0.3 − 0.1 − 0.6 + 1.5 + 8.0 − 14.3 + 2.9 + 4.2          Mar 
+ 6.1 + 0.2 + 10.1 + 0.0 + 2.3 + 0.3 + 0.4 + 8.9 + 6.7 + 0.2 + 2.2 + 11.6          Apr 
+ 15.1 − 7.1 + 16.4 − 0.0 − 2.6 − 0.3 + 0.4 + 5.5 + 2.4 + 12.6 + 1.1 + 6.3          May
+ 10.5 − 1.6 − 7.1 + 0.2 − − 0.1 − 0.3 + 3.8 − 1.5 + 0.7 − 0.5 + 3.1          June
+ 1.4 + 12.6 − 12.5 − 0.2 − + 0.2 + 0.0 + 5.8 − 2.4 − 6.8 + 4.6 + 10.6          July
− 1.9 − 19.1 + 23.9 − 0.0 − − 0.1 + 0.1 + 8.9 − 3.6 − 4.7 + 2.1 + 10.9          Aug 
+ 2.1 − 2.8 + 0.7 + 0.0 − + 0.3 + 0.1 − 1.1 − 0.2 + 1.8 − 0.8 − 1.7          Sep 
+ 40.7 + 10.6 + 34.3 + 7.4 + 5.9 + 19.3 + 44.8 − 0.7 − 5.9 + 38.6 + 2.8 + 21.5          Oct 
+ 131.7 + 127.5 + 118.2 + 5.2 − 1.7 +193.8 − 43.2 + 37.8 + 29.8 +160.8 + 1.8 + 233.4          Nov 
+ 31.5 + 35.7 + 4.7 − 10.0 − 4.2 − 12.8 + 2.6 + 9.0 + 22.8 + 36.1 + 0.1 − 3.7          Dec 
+ 0.8 − 118.1 + 156.4 + 0.2 − + 37.6 − 1.6 + 22.0 − 7.9 − 13.7 + 2.8 + 62.4 2009          Jan 
− 33.9 + 5.7 − 62.2 − 0.8 − − 63.1 + 2.8 − 12.9 + 2.8 − 21.3 + 0.6 − 75.4          Feb 
− 34.7 − 0.6 − 79.0 − 0.5 − − 79.9 − 2.1 + 1.3 + 7.4 − 37.9 − 3.5 − 82.2          Mar 
− 4.7 + 6.2 − 29.3 − 0.5 − − 37.7 − 0.3 + 5.8 + 28.9 − 28.1 + 3.0 − 28.9          Apr 
+ 4.4 + 9.2 − 16.2 − 0.4 − − 15.1 − 0.6 + 10.2 + 2.9 + 0.4 − 0.8 − 5.6          May
− 24.5 − 0.9 − 26.3 − 0.0 − − 20.4 − 1.0 + 2.3 − 0.2 − 29.5 − 2.9 − 21.0          June
− 30.8 − 17.4 + 104.3 + 0.6 − + 97.4 + 7.8 + 3.3 − 3.8 − 49.3 + 1.3 + 102.0          July
− 23.5 − 127.3 + 189.1 − 1.0 + 2.8 + 65.4 + 12.2 + 7.7 − 4.0 − 38.8 − 2.3 + 70.8          Aug 
− 6.0 − 19.3 − 48.6 − 0.0 + 5.6 − 48.4 − 3.6 − 1.7 − 8.2 − 6.5 − 0.0 − 50.1          Sep 
− 6.2 + 4.3 − 28.5 + 0.0 + 5.9 − 27.1 − 5.6 − 0.3 + 13.3 − 2.7 − 2.2 − 29.6          Oct 
− 8.4 − 26.8 + 9.2 − 0.0 + 5.8 − 23.1 − 0.9 + 1.9 + 9.7 − 5.8 − 1.9 − 23.1          Nov 
− 5.4 + 3.5 − 32.7 + 0.4 + 4.5 − 20.8 − 2.1 + 4.5 + 1.4 − 11.3 − 1.4 − 17.7          Dec 
+ 5.4 + 4.8 + 55.0 − 0.3 + 3.8 + 81.3 − 1.8 + 21.6 − 30.3 − 1.9 − 0.2 + 102.7 2010          Jan 
+ 12.6 − 0.9 + 13.8 − 0.2 + 5.1 + 21.3 + 5.2 − 13.2 + 2.8 + 14.6 − 0.3 + 7.8          Feb 
+ 1.3 + 20.8 − 21.1 + 0.7 + 4.5 + 18.1 − 2.8 + 1.0 − 9.4 − 1.8 + 0.9 + 20.1          Mar 
+ 12.9 − 2.8 + 9.4 − 0.5 + 5.6 + 14.3 − 2.1 + 8.3 + 0.4 + 3.2 + 0.7 + 23.2          Apr 
Deutsche Bundesbank
+ 1.3 − 31.9 + 28.7 + 0.1 − 4.1 + 0.6 − 0.4 − 0.6 − 0.0 − 5.6 − 0.0 + 0.1 2007          Oct 
+ 2.2 − 14.9 − 3.8 − 0.2 − − 0.5 + 1.2 + 0.6 − 0.0 − 18.8 + 0.7 + 0.9          Nov 
− 0.0 − 5.2 − 5.5 + 0.2 − − 0.1 − 0.8 + 1.0 + 0.0 − 11.3 + 0.8 + 1.6          Dec 
+ 6.9 + 28.9 + 1.0 − 0.1 − + 0.4 + 25.6 + 5.4 + 0.0 + 5.1 + 0.2 + 6.0 2008          Jan 
+ 4.5 − 41.3 − 4.0 − 0.1 − − 0.4 − 26.3 − 4.4 − 0.0 − 10.5 + 0.8 − 4.0          Feb 
− 5.2 − 1.0 − 8.1 + 0.0 + 0.1 − 0.0 − 0.1 + 1.3 + 0.0 − 16.3 + 0.9 + 2.2          Mar 
+ 2.1 + 16.9 − 12.5 + 0.0 + 1.4 + 0.3 − + 2.2 − 0.0 + 5.4 − 0.0 + 2.4          Apr 
+ 6.7 − 1.1 + 2.7 − 0.0 − 1.5 − 0.3 + 0.2 + 1.3 − 0.0 + 5.5 + 0.0 + 1.1          May
+ 4.8 − 2.1 + 0.1 + 0.1 − − 0.2 − 0.1 + 1.7 + 0.0 + 1.0 + 0.5 + 2.0          June
− 1.7 + 5.9 − 5.6 − 0.1 − + 0.1 − 0.0 + 0.9 + 0.0 − 2.9 + 0.4 + 1.4          July
− 3.2 − 8.6 + 4.7 − 0.0 − − 0.1 − 0.0 + 2.0 − 0.1 − 9.4 + 0.6 + 2.5          Aug 
+ 1.0 + 5.9 − 6.7 + 0.1 − + 0.1 + 0.1 + 0.2 + 0.0 − 0.3 + 0.1 + 0.4          Sep 
+ 13.8 − 1.9 + 13.5 + 0.8 + 3.6 + 10.0 + 8.5 + 0.5 + 0.1 + 9.7 + 0.9 + 11.4          Oct 
+ 24.2 + 28.8 + 44.6 + 1.9 − 1.6 + 78.6 − 7.5 + 12.7 + 0.1 + 12.8 + 1.1 + 92.4          Nov + 8.3 + 1.5 − 4.6 − 0.8 − 2.0 − 4.6 + 0.0 − 1.0 − 0.2 + 8.5 − 0.3 − 5.9          Dec 
− 5.7 − 32.7 + 39.5 + 0.4 − + 7.3 + 0.1 − 2.1 + 4.0 − 8.7 + 0.9 + 6.1 2009          Jan 
− 8.3 + 7.0 − 19.5 − 1.0 − − 13.6 + 0.9 − 10.8 − 1.7 + 2.9 + 0.3 − 24.0          Feb 
+ 2.3 − 6.4 − 30.7 − 0.2 − − 26.1 − 0.4 + 0.3 + 7.2 − 15.7 − 0.2 − 26.0          Mar 
+ 7.6 + 1.8 − 25.1 − 0.5 − − 12.9 − 0.1 + 1.0 + 5.0 − 9.5 + 0.5 − 11.4          Apr 
+ 7.8 + 12.8 − 10.9 − 0.6 − − 14.8 − 0.3 + 2.7 + 11.6 + 10.1 − 0.2 − 12.2          May
− 5.0 + 7.5 − 8.5 + 0.5 − − 8.7 − 0.6 + 0.2 + 6.2 − 2.0 − 0.5 − 9.1          June
− 7.7 − 13.9 + 38.1 − 0.0 − + 34.1 + 3.8 + 0.9 − 8.9 − 13.9 + 0.4 + 35.4          July
− 9.3 − 33.5 + 47.6 − 0.5 + 0.8 + 20.6 + 0.4 + 1.8 + 0.0 − 16.8 − 1.0 + 21.5          Aug 
− 2.6 − 7.0 − 11.1 + 0.0 + 2.1 − 18.2 − 0.6 + 0.3 + 0.1 − 0.2 + 0.1 − 17.9          Sep 
− 1.8 − 3.3 − 2.1 + 0.0 + 2.0 − 2.5 − 1.2 + 0.2 + 0.1 − 1.0 − 0.8 − 3.1          Oct 
− 3.5 − 2.7 + 3.0 − 0.0 + 1.3 − 15.2 + 1.2 + 0.1 − 0.1 + 12.5 − 0.4 − 15.6          Nov 
− 4.4 − 0.9 − 7.7 + 0.4 + 1.0 − 8.5 − 1.6 + 0.7 − 4.8 + 3.0 − 0.5 − 8.2          Dec 
− 4.2 + 9.1 − 2.2 − 0.5 + 0.7 + 19.1 − 0.4 + 5.1 − 8.1 − 12.6 − 0.2 + 24.0 2010          Jan 
+ 0.2 − 0.6 − 0.3 + 0.0 + 1.0 + 5.5 + 3.0 − 2.8 − 5.2 + 0.1 − 0.1 + 2.6          Feb 
+ 0.3 + 9.6 − 10.6 + 0.7 + 1.1 + 17.4 − 0.3 + 0.9 − 3.3 − 13.6 − 0.1 + 18.2          Mar 
+ 3.6 − 10.8 + 7.0 − 0.7 + 1.5 + 2.0 − 1.6 + 1.6 − 1.8 + 0.1 + 0.3 + 3.9          Apr 
this adjustment is shown under “Other factors”. The remaining 92% of the factors”. From 2003 euro banknotes only. — 6Remaining items in the
value of the euro banknotes in circulation is allocated, likewise on a consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem and the financial
monthly basis, to the NCBs, with each NCB showing in its balance sheet the statement of the Bundesbank. — 7Equal to the difference between the
percentage of the euro banknotes in circulation that corresponds to its sum of liquidity-providing factors and the sum of liquidity-absorbingpaid-up share in the ECB’s capital. The difference between the value of the factors. — 8Calculated as the sum of the “deposit facility”, “banknotes in
euro banknotes allocated to an NCB and the value of the euro banknotes circulation” and “credit institutions’ current account holdings”. 
which that NCB has put into circulation is likewise shown under “Other
15*II  Overall monetary survey in the euro area

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
E U R O S Y S T E M
Monthly Report
May 2010
III Consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem
 
1 Assets *
 
 
€ billion
Claims on non-euro area Claims on non-euro area residents denominated
in foreign currency residents denominated in euro
Balances with
Claims on banks, security
On investments, euro area Balances Claims
reporting external loans residents with banks, arising from
date/ Gold and other denominated security the credit
End of Total and gold Receivables external in foreign investments facility undermonth  
1 assets receivables Total from the IMF assets currency Total and loans ERM II
 Eurosystem 2
 
2009 Sep                  4 1,819.5 232.1 196.3 58.0 138.2 58.9 17.0 17.0 −
                              11 1,802.5 232.0 198.1 63.3 134.8 58.2 16.3 16.3 −
                              18 1,793.0 232.0 196.7 63.3 133.4 59.1 15.6 15.6 −
                              25 1,790.2 231.9 196.3 63.6 132.7 58.1 15.0 15.0 −
         Oct                  2 3 1,844.6 3 238.2 3 194.4 3 62.9 3 131.5 3 52.3 15.1 15.1 −
                                9 1,802.7 238.2 193.7 62.9 130.8 48.9 15.4 15.4 −
                              16 1,801.4 238.2 194.3 62.9 131.5 47.7 15.0 15.0 −
                              23 1,786.1 238.2 195.0 63.1 131.9 44.1 15.3 15.3 −
                              30 1,779.0 238.2 194.7 63.2 131.5 43.0 16.4 16.4 −
         Nov                  6 1,773.7 238.1 193.0 61.8 131.2 42.6 16.5 16.5 −
                              13 1,759.6 238.2 194.0 62.2 131.8 41.9 16.7 16.7 −
                              20 1,761.5 238.1 193.8 62.2 131.6 41.2 17.1 17.1 −
                              27 1,759.2 238.1 192.2 62.1 130.1 39.7 17.4 17.4 −
         Dec                  4 1,759.4 238.1 192.7 62.2 130.4 36.0 15.7 15.7 −
                              11 1,744.5 238.1 191.9 62.2 129.7 34.9 15.2 15.2 −
                              18 1,842.4 238.1 192.1 62.3 129.8 33.3 15.7 15.7 −
                              25 1,852.5 238.1 191.9 61.4 130.6 31.7 15.7 15.7 −
2010 Jan                  1 3 1,904.9 3 266.9 3 195.5 62.8 3 132.7 3 32.2 15.2 15.2 −
                                8 1,879.6 266.9 196.1 62.8 133.3 31.4 16.2 16.2 −
                              15 1,870.6 266.9 196.4 62.8 133.6 28.2 17.3 17.3 −
                              22 1,870.3 266.9 195.1 62.8 132.3 27.8 17.4 17.4 −
                              29 1,877.7 266.9 193.8 62.8 130.9 28.3 18.1 18.1 −
         Feb                  5 1,874.5 266.9 194.5 62.8 131.7 29.0 17.8 17.8 −
                              12 1,874.7 266.9 193.4 62.8 130.6 29.2 17.1 17.1 −
                              19 1,880.9 266.9 195.7 63.0 132.7 28.8 17.3 17.3 −
                              26 1,889.0 266.9 197.6 64.4 133.2 28.3 15.4 15.4 −
         Mar                  5 1,890.3 266.9 197.5 64.4 133.1 27.8 16.1 16.1 −
                              12 1,886.7 266.9 197.2 64.3 132.9 28.3 15.7 15.7 −
                              19 1,889.7 266.9 198.0 64.2 133.8 28.4 16.1 16.1 −
                              26 1,894.9 266.9 198.6 64.4 134.2 28.5 15.7 15.7 −
         Apr                  1 3 1,942.5 3 286.7 3 210.6 3 66.5 3 144.1 3 29.3 17.6 17.6 −
                                9 1,936.7 286.7 209.4 66.7 142.7 28.5 17.2 17.2 −
                              16 1,940.0 286.7 209.9 66.6 143.3 28.4 16.8 16.8 −
                              23 1,943.3 286.7 209.3 66.6 142.7 28.0 17.3 17.3 −
                              30 1,956.8 286.7 211.7 66.5 145.2 27.2 17.5 17.5 −
         May                 7 1,983.2 286.7 209.6 66.5 143.1 28.8 16.8 16.8 −
 Deutsche Bundesbank
2008          June 447.2 64.9 3 30.3 2.5 3 27.8 12.2 0.3 0.3 −
         July 435.9 64.9 29.1 2.5 26.6 9.4 0.3 0.3 −
         Aug 449.0 64.9 29.1 2.5 26.7 10.1 0.3 0.3 −
         Sep 3 519.7 3 68.8 3 31.1 2.6 3 28.5 3 39.1 0.3 0.3 −
         Oct 591.6 68.8 34.5 2.6 31.9 50.5 0.3 0.3 −
         Nov 577.1 68.8 34.8 3.3 31.5 61.1 0.3 0.3 −
         Dec 3 612.9 3 68.2 3 31.0 3.3 3 27.7 63.3 0.3 0.3 −
2009          Jan 560.5 68.2 28.7 3.3 25.5 46.7 0.3 0.3 −
         Feb 547.5 68.2 29.0 3.3 25.7 45.3 0.3 0.3 −
         Mar 3 539.7 3 75.7 3 32.1 3.5 3 28.6 3 50.7 0.3 0.3 −
         Apr 540.5 75.7 32.7 3.5 29.2 42.0 0.3 0.3 −
         May 555.9 75.7 32.3 4.7 27.6 37.5 0.3 0.3 −
         June 3 628.3 3 73.0 31.7 4.5 27.2 3 30.8 0.3 0.3 −
         July 572.3 73.0 31.8 4.7 27.1 25.3 0.3 0.3 −
         Aug 571.2 73.0 41.6 15.1 26.5 24.0 0.3 0.3 −
         Sep 3 577.7 3 74.9 3 41.9 16.3 3 25.6 3 21.6 0.3 0.3 −
         Oct 557.2 74.9 42.5 16.6 25.9 16.9 0.3 0.3 −
         Nov 551.7 74.9 41.0 15.9 25.1 13.0 0.3 0.3 −
         Dec 3 588.2 3 83.9 41.6 16.0 25.6 4.4 0.3 0.3 −
2010          Jan 571.8 83.9 41.7 16.0 25.7 − 0.3 0.3 −
         Feb 591.6 83.9 42.4 16.7 25.7 −−−−
         Mar 3 608.6 3 90.2 3 44.7 3 17.2 3 27.5 −−−−
         Apr 615.5 90.2 44.8 17.2 27.6 −−−−
 
*The consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem comprises the statements of the national central banks of the euro area member states
financial statement of the European Central Bank (ECB) and the financial (NCBs). The balance sheet items for foreign currency, securities, gold
16*III Consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
May 2010
III Consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem
 
 
 
 
 
Lending to euro area credit institutions related to monetary policy operations Securities of euro area residents
denominated in euro in euro
 Other
 claims on euro area
Longer- Fine-  credit Securities General    On
Main re- term re- tuning Structural Credits institutions held for government    reportingfinancing financing reverse reverse Marginal related denomi- monetary debt deno-    date/opera- opera- opera- opera- lending to margin nated in policy Other minated in Other    End of
Total tions tions tions tions facility calls euro Total purposes securities euro assets    month  
1 
Eurosystem 2
 
706.7 72.1 634.4 − − 0.1 0.1 23.3 315.4 10.2 305.2 36.2 233.6 2009 Sep                  4
689.3 93.3 595.9 − − 0.1 0.0 24.0 316.6 11.1 305.5 36.2 231.7                               11
683.8 87.8 595.9 − − 0.1 0.0 24.7 317.5 12.8 304.7 36.2 227.4                               18
681.0 85.0 595.9 − − 0.1 0.0 26.4 319.1 14.2 304.8 36.2 226.2                               25
734.3 66.8 667.4 − − 0.1 0.0 24.7 3 320.8 15.6 3 305.2 36.2 3 228.6          Oct                  2
694.6 62.6 631.9 − − 0.1 0.0 24.0 322.9 17.4 305.5 36.2 228.9                                 9
691.4 62.3 629.0 − − 0.1 0.0 22.2 324.2 18.3 305.9 36.2 232.3                               16
679.6 50.5 629.0 − − 0.1 0.0 21.1 325.4 19.7 305.7 36.2 231.2                               23
672.3 49.4 622.7 − − 0.1 0.1 19.9 323.5 20.6 302.9 36.2 234.8                               30
669.9 46.9 622.7 − − 0.1 0.1 20.2 324.1 21.6 302.5 36.2 233.2          Nov                  6
649.9 52.0 595.4 − − 2.5 0.0 21.8 325.8 22.7 303.0 36.2 235.2                               13
649.5 53.3 595.4 − − 0.8 0.1 22.1 326.1 24.2 301.9 36.2 237.5                               20
649.0 59.7 589.1 − − 0.1 0.0 20.6 327.9 25.3 302.6 36.2 238.1                               27
648.1 58.8 589.1 − − 0.1 0.0 22.6 328.2 26.2 302.0 36.2 241.9          Dec                  4
629.3 56.5 572.6 − − 0.2 0.0 24.4 328.9 26.7 302.3 36.2 245.5                               11
722.9 53.6 669.3 − − 0.0 0.0 24.8 329.2 27.7 301.5 36.2 250.0                               18
728.6 59.2 669.3 − − 0.0 0.0 25.8 329.5 28.5 301.0 36.2 254.9                               25
749.9 79.3 669.3 − − 1.3 0.0 26.3 3 328.7 28.8 3 299.9 36.2 3 254.2 2010 Jan                  1
724.0 54.7 669.3 − − 0.0 0.0 26.9 329.6 29.1 300.5 36.2 252.2                                 8
719.9 60.7 659.1 − − 0.0 0.0 27.3 327.2 29.9 297.3 36.2 251.3                               15
720.9 58.6 662.2 − − 0.1 0.0 28.5 328.8 32.1 296.8 36.2 248.7                               22
726.3 64.0 662.2 − − 0.1 0.0 26.7 331.2 33.5 297.7 36.2 250.2                               29
718.7 56.4 662.2 − − 0.1 0.0 26.9 332.6 34.8 297.8 36.1 251.9          Feb                  5
717.1 76.7 636.5 − − 3.9 0.0 27.4 334.0 36.1 297.9 36.1 253.4                               12
719.2 82.5 636.5 − − 0.1 0.0 27.6 333.9 37.4 333.9 36.1 255.4                               19
726.9 82.0 644.7 − − 0.2 0.0 26.7 335.8 38.7 297.1 36.1 255.3                               26
724.9 80.5 644.4 − − 0.1 0.0 26.4 336.7 39.6 297.1 36.1 257.9          Mar                  5
722.8 78.4 644.3 − − 0.1 0.0 27.2 338.9 41.5 297.3 36.1 253.5                               12
723.4 79.0 644.3 − − 0.1 0.0 25.4 340.3 42.4 297.8 36.1 255.0                               19
725.4 81.1 644.3 − − 0.0 0.0 27.2 342.9 43.5 299.4 36.1 253.6                               26
740.0 78.3 661.7 − − 0.1 0.0 26.7 345.2 44.4 300.8 36.1 3 250.4          Apr                  1
730.9 71.5 659.3 − − 0.0 0.0 29.0 348.5 46.1 302.4 36.1 250.4                                 9
736.3 70.6 665.7 − − 0.0 0.0 31.7 351.0 47.2 303.8 36.1 243.1                               16
735.9 70.2 665.7 − − 0.0 0.0 32.7 352.1 48.5 303.6 36.1 245.0                               23
743.6 75.6 667.2 − − 0.8 0.0 32.7 354.7 50.2 304.5 35.6 247.0                               30
760.0 90.3 667.2 − − 2.4 0.0 33.9 360.2 51.6 308.5 35.6 251.7          May                  7
 Deutsche Bundesbank
192.4 86.5 105.9 − − 0.0 − 18. 4−−− 4 . 4 124.3 2008          June
184.5 75.5 109.0 − − 0.0 − 20. 3−−− 4 . 4 122.9          July
180.4 76.6 103.8 − − 0.0 − 22. 9−−− 4 . 4 136.8          Aug 
223.5 69.2 153.5 − − 0.8 − 25. 2−−− 4 . 4 3 127.2          Sep 
297.1 107.2 186.4 − − 3.5 − 38. 5−−− 4 . 4 97.4          Oct 
263.3 101.4 159.7 − − 2.2 − 23. 5−−− 4 . 4 120.9          Nov 
277.7 75.3 201.6 − − 0.8 − 22. 0−−− 4 . 4 3 146.0          Dec 
245.4 74.4 169.2 − − 1.8 − 3. 9−−− 4 . 4 162.9 2009          Jan 
219.4 75.4 143.4 − − 0.6 − 4. 4−−− 4 . 4 176.4          Feb 
186.7 71.6 114.6 − − 0.6 − 5. 0−−− 4 . 4 3 184.6          Mar 
194.6 83.6 110.6 − − 0.4 − 6. 0−−− 4 . 4 184.8          Apr 
225.0 121.5 103.4 − − 0.2 − 5.9 2.1 − 2.1 4.4 172.6          May
273.5 71.6 201.6 − − 0.3 − 6.5 4.4 − 4.4 4.4 3 203.8          June
231.8 48.8 182.9 − − 0.1 − 4.5 6.5 1.2 5.3 4.4 194.6          July
220.9 45.9 175.0 − − 0.1 − 6.0 8.5 3.2 5.3 4.4 192.4          Aug 
205.6 33.0 168.8 − − 3.8 − 6.8 10.6 5.3 5.3 4.4 211.6          Sep 
212.9 35.1 177.7 − − 0.1 − 6.8 11.6 6.4 5.3 4.4 186.8          Oct 
206.0 35.3 170.6 − − 0.0 − 6.9 12.9 7.6 5.3 4.4 192.3          Nov 223.6 53.6 170.0 − − 0.0 − 7.1 13.2 7.9 5.3 4.4 209.6          Dec 
210.3 41.7 168.5 − − 0.0 − 7.7 14.1 8.8 5.3 4.4 209.4 2010          Jan 
209.1 51.6 157.3 − − 0.1 − 7.2 15.6 10.3 5.3 4.4 228.9          Feb 
206.1 40.9 164.7 − − 0.6 − 7.3 17.0 11.8 5.3 4.4 239.0          Mar 
206.1 41.6 164.5 − − 0.0 − 7.8 18.1 12.9 5.3 4.4 244.2          Apr 
 
and financial instruments are valued at market rates at the end of the quar- for the Bundesbank: end-of month financial statement. — 2Source: ECB. —
ter.— 1For the Eurosystem: financial statements for specific weekly dates; 3 Changes are due mainly to revalutions at the end of the quarter. 
17*III Consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
E U R O S Y S T E M
Monthly Report
May 2010
III Consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem
 
2 Liabilities *
 
 
€ billion
Liabilities to euro area credit institutions related to Liabilities to
monetary policy operations denominated in euro other euro area residents
denominated in euro
 
Other
Current liabilities
accounts to euro-
On (covering Fine- area creditreporting the tuning Deposits institutions Debtdate/ Banknotes minimum Fixed- reverse deno- certifi- General related to
End of Total in circu- reserve Deposit term opera- margin minated cates govern- Othermonth  
1 liabilities lation  2 Total system) facility deposits tions calls in euro issued Total ment liabilities
 Eurosystem 4
 
2009 Sep                  4 1,819.5 770.0 339.7 199.6 140.1 − − 0.0 0.2 − 145.3 134.6 10.7
                              11 1,802.5 769.2 331.9 243.0 88.8 − − 0.0 0.2 − 138.4 127.7 10.7
                              18 1,793.0 767.5 325.2 236.2 89.0 − − 0.0 0.2 − 145.7 134.4 11.4
                              25 1,790.2 766.1 306.5 189.8 116.8 − − 0.0 0.2 − 160.7 145.0 15.7
         Oct                  2 5 1,844.6 770.9 368.9 218.3 150.6 − − 0.0 0.2 − 151.8 140.8 10.9
                                9 1,802.7 772.3 321.3 176.5 144.8 − − 0.0 0.2 − 152.3 138.4 13.9
                              16 1,801.4 770.9 322.0 254.0 68.0 − − 0.0 0.3 − 158.3 144.4 13.9
                              23 1,786.1 768.7 300.3 219.6 80.7 − − 0.0 0.4 − 167.4 153.1 14.2
                              30 1,779.0 771.6 277.3 189.5 87.8 − − 0.0 0.4 − 182.3 173.9 8.3
         Nov                  6 1,773.7 773.8 309.8 180.9 128.9 − − 0.0 0.5 − 146.0 137.5 8.4
                              13 1,759.6 773.2 286.5 232.2 54.3 − − 0.0 0.4 − 155.5 147.3 8.2
                              20 1,761.5 771.6 275.9 229.8 46.1 − − 0.0 0.4 − 163.6 155.4 8.2
                              27 1,759.2 774.4 273.4 205.1 68.3 − − 0.0 0.2 − 166.6 158.4 8.2
         Dec                  4 1,759.4 785.2 282.7 159.4 123.4 − − 0.0 0.4 − 150.9 142.2 8.7
                              11 1,744.5 789.4 274.7 242.6 32.1 − − 0.0 0.3 − 139.8 131.1 8.7
                              18 1,842.4 797.5 389.3 252.8 136.5 − − 0.0 0.3 − 113.3 104.6 8.7
                              25 1,852.5 807.2 368.7 204.6 164.1 − − 0.0 0.3 − 133.8 125.7 8.1
2010 Jan                  1 5 1,904.9 806.5 395.6 233.5 162.1 − − 0.0 0.3 − 129.7 120.5 9.3
                                8 1,879.6 796.4 387.8 160.7 227.1 − − 0.0 0.5 − 123.4 114.9 8.4
                              15 1,870.6 787.9 394.5 162.4 232.1 − − 0.0 0.5 − 119.1 110.5 8.6
                              22 1,870.3 783.4 387.3 244.2 143.1 − − − 0.3 − 133.0 124.4 8.6
                              29 1,877.7 783.5 384.8 219.5 165.3 − − 0.0 0.4 − 143.6 135.2 8.3
         Feb                  5 1,874.5 785.2 398.6 169.3 229.4 − − − 0.5 − 121.6 113.4 8.3
                              12 1,874.7 785.2 404.8 254.7 150.1 − − − 0.5 − 115.7 107.5 8.2
                              19 1,880.9 782.8 394.8 207.8 187.0 − − 0.0 0.4 − 131.5 123.5 8.1
                              26 1,889.0 784.3 402.5 199.8 202.7 − − − 0.6 − 134.3 126.2 8.1
         Mar                  5 1,890.3 788.4 423.7 164.0 259.8 − − 0.0 0.4 − 109.5 101.3 8.2
                              12 1,886.7 788.1 423.0 262.6 160.3 − − 0.0 2.4 − 112.9 104.9 8.1
                              19 1,889.7 787.7 418.2 223.1 195.1 − − 0.0 0.6 − 121.6 113.5 8.1
                              26 1,894.9 791.3 413.8 199.9 213.9 − − 0.0 0.8 − 128.2 120.2 8.0
         Apr                  1 5 1,942.5 801.7 421.8 179.2 242.7 − − 0.0 0.7 − 126.3 118.2 8.2
                                9 1,936.7 797.5 427.2 177.9 249.3 − − 0.0 0.6 − 120.4 112.4 8.1
                              16 1,940.0 794.5 430.9 259.7 171.1 − − 0.0 0.5 − 125.6 117.5 8.1
                              23 1,943.3 792.8 421.5 204.1 217.4 − − − 0.7 − 137.8 129.9 7.9
                              30 1,956.8 798.1 449.1 197.5 251.6 − − − 0.5 − 113.1 104.9 8.1
         May                 7 1,983.2 802.6 454.2 172.2 282.0 − − 0.0 0.6 − 107.9 98.6 9.3
 Deutsche Bundesbank
2008          June 447.2 183.8 56.0 55.1 0.9 − − − − − 0.5 0.0 0.4
         July 435.9 186.0 41.2 40.9 0.4 − − − − − 0.4 0.0 0.4
         Aug 449.0 185.1 50.6 50.5 0.1 − − − − − 0.4 0.0 0.3
         Sep 5 519.7 185.3 111.5 65.8 45.7 − − − − − 0.7 0.1 0.6
         Oct 591.6 197.1 146.4 48.4 98.0 − − − − − 7.9 0.2 7.7
         Nov 577.1 198.1 138.3 52.5 85.7 − − − − − 2.9 0.1 2.8
         Dec 5 612.9 206.6 166.9 100.7 66.3 − − − − − 1.1 0.2 0.9
2009          Jan 560.5 184.7 127.2 49.3 77.8 − − − − − 2.6 2.2 0.5
         Feb 547.5 185.2 106.6 54.2 52.4 − − − − − 12.5 11.9 0.6
         Mar 5 539.7 186.5 100.0 53.1 46.9 − − − − − 15.7 15.4 0.3
         Apr 540.5 189.5 80.0 48.3 31.7 − − − − − 30.8 30.2 0.6
         May 555.9 190.0 87.2 71.1 16.1 − − − − − 36.8 36.2 0.5
         June 5 628.3 190.6 176.7 75.1 101.5 − − − − − 23.7 23.4 0.4
         July 572.3 192.9 120.7 44.5 76.2 − − − − − 23.9 23.5 0.4
         Aug 571.2 191.6 107.4 46.2 61.2 − − − − − 24.0 23.5 0.4
         Sep 5 577.7 191.5 109.7 76.1 33.6 − − − − − 24.0 23.6 0.4
         Oct 557.2 192.6 86.5 50.7 35.9 − − − − − 24.0 23.6 0.4
         Nov 551.7 193.7 87.0 59.0 28.0 − − − − − 16.0 15.6 0.4
         Dec 5 588.2 201.3 112.2 76.7 35.5 − − − − − 10.4 10.0 0.4
2010          Jan 571.8 195.6 106.3 60.9 45.4 − − − − − 4.1 3.7 0.4
         Feb 591.6 195.8 127.6 55.2 72.3 − − − − − 0.7 0.3 0.4
         Mar 5 608.6 199.0 135.7 82.3 53.4 − − − − − 0.6 0.2 0.4
         Apr 615.5 199.2 139.1 58.6 80.5 − − − − − 0.7 0.2 0.5
 
*The consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem comprises the the Bundesbank: end-of-month financial statements. — 2According to the
financial statement of the European Central Bank (ECB) and the financial accounting regime chosen by the Eurosystem on the issue of euro bank-
statements of the national central banks of the euro area member states notes, a share of 8% of the total value of the euro banknotes in circulation(NCBs). The balance sheet items for foreign currency, securities, gold and is allocated to the ECB on a monthly basis. The counterpart of thisfinancial instruments are valued at market rates at the end of the quar- adjustment is disclosed as an “Intra-Eurosystem liability related to euroter. — 1For Eurosystem: financial statements for specific weekly dates; for
18*III Consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
May 2010
III Consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem
 
 
 
 
 
Liabilities to non-euro area
residents denominated in
foreign currency
Intra-  Eurosystem  
Liabilities Liabilities Liabilities Counterpart liability     Onto non-euro to euro area Deposits, arising of special related to     reportingarea residents residents balances from the drawing euro  Capital    date/denominated in foreign and other rights allocated Other banknote Revaluation and    End of credit facility
in euro currency Total liabilities under ERM II by the IMF issue  
2 accounts reserves    month  1 liabilities  3 
Eurosystem 4
 
94.1 1.8 12.7 12.7 − 46.3 148.7 − 187.8 73.0 2009 Sep                  4
89.3 2.1 12.1 12.1 − 51.5 147.0 − 187.8 73.0                               11
83.4 3.2 11.0 11.0 − 51.5 144.6 − 187.8 73.0                               18
85.7 3.0 10.7 10.7 − 51.5 145.0 − 187.8 73.0                               25
76.3 3.9 8.8 8.8 − 5 50.9 5 147.6 − 5 192.3 73.0          Oct                  2
78.9 4.6 8.1 8.1 − 50.9 149.0 − 192.3 73.0                                 9
70.9 4.0 9.3 9.3 − 50.9 149.7 − 192.3 73.0                               16
69.7 2.5 11.0 11.0 − 50.9 150.1 − 192.3 73.0                               23
65.8 4.5 8.1 8.1 − 50.9 152.8 − 192.3 73.0                               30
61.8 3.3 9.5 9.5 − 50.9 152.9 − 192.3 73.0          Nov                  6
58.2 4.2 8.9 8.9 − 50.9 156.5 − 192.3 73.0                               13
62.1 3.6 9.7 9.7 − 50.9 158.5 − 192.3 73.0                               20
57.0 3.2 9.0 9.0 − 50.9 159.2 − 192.3 73.0                               27
49.6 3.2 10.0 10.0 − 50.9 161.2 − 192.3 73.0          Dec                  4
48.9 3.6 9.0 9.0 − 50.9 162.8 − 192.3 73.0                               11
47.4 3.3 9.3 9.3 − 50.9 165.8 − 192.3 73.0                               18
46.5 3.7 9.6 9.6 − 50.9 166.6 − 192.3 73.0                               25
46.8 4.0 9.6 9.6 − 51.2 167.8 − 5 220.2 73.0 2010 Jan                  1
46.3 4.7 9.6 9.6 − 51.2 166.5 − 220.2 73.0                                 8
43.4 5.0 9.2 9.2 − 51.2 165.5 − 220.2 74.0                               15
41.0 5.0 8.4 8.4 − 51.2 166.5 − 220.2 74.0                               22
40.2 2.7 9.4 9.4 − 51.2 167.5 − 220.2 74.0                               29
40.0 2.9 10.4 10.4 − 51.2 169.7 − 220.2 74.0          Feb                  5
40.1 2.6 9.9 9.9 − 51.2 170.1 − 220.2 74.5                               12
40.0 2.8 11.1 11.1 − 51.2 171.5 − 220.2 74.5                               19
40.5 1.9 12.1 12.1 − 51.2 166.5 − 220.2 75.0                               26
39.8 1.8 11.4 11.4 − 51.2 168.8 − 220.2 75.0          Mar                  5
38.8 1.3 12.1 12.1 − 51.2 161.6 − 220.2 75.0                               12
37.9 1.6 12.6 12.6 − 51.2 163.1 − 220.2 75.0                               19
37.6 1.6 12.9 12.9 − 51.2 160.6 − 220.2 76.4                               26
37.2 1.4 5 14.5 5 14.5 − 5 53.0 5 160.2 − 5 249.2 76.4          Apr                  1
36.5 0.9 13.0 13.0 − 53.0 161.6 − 249.2 76.7                                 9
36.4 1.1 13.4 13.4 − 53.0 158.8 − 249.2 76.7                               16
36.2 1.0 13.0 13.0 − 53.0 161.4 − 249.2 76.7                               23
40.1 1.1 14.5 14.5 − 53.0 161.4 − 249.2 76.7                               30
56.7 2.8 12.7 12.7 − 53.0 167.0 − 249.2 76.7          May                  7
 Deutsche Bundesbank
19.6 0.0 3.9 3.9 − 1.3 12.5 107.2 5 57.4 5.0 2008          June
22.1 0.0 3.0 3.0 − 1.3 12.2 107.4 57.4 5.0          July
24.0 0.0 2.4 2.4 − 1.3 13.1 109.8 57.4 5.0          Aug 
24.7 0.0 2.1 2.1 − 1.3 5 15.1 111.8 5 62.2 5.0          Sep 
21.7 11.9 3.8 3.8 − 1.3 14.8 119.3 62.2 5.0          Oct 
16.1 13.5 3.0 3.0 − 1.3 15.9 120.6 62.2 5.0          Nov 
9.2 18.4 2.5 2.5 − 1.3 16.9 121.8 5 63.1 5.0          Dec 
6.9 13.4 0.1 0.1 − 1.3 17.0 139.2 63.1 5.0 2009          Jan 
7.5 7.6 0.2 0.2 − 1.3 17.7 140.7 63.1 5.0          Feb 
7 . 5 0 . 0−−− 1 . 4 5 11.6 140.4 5 71.5 5.0          Mar 
8.3 0.0 0.2 0.2 − 1.4 12.1 141.8 71.5 5.0          Apr 
8.7 0.1 0.5 0.5 − 1.4 12.6 142.2 71.5 5.0          May
9.3 0.0 0.8 0.8 − 1.3 5 12.4 141.9 5 66.6 5.0          June
6.7 0.0 1.2 1.2 − 1.3 12.2 141.8 66.6 5.0          July
8.1 0.0 0.9 0.9 − 11.9 12.4 143.4 66.6 5.0          Aug 
8.6 0.0 0.1 0.1 − 13.0 5 13.2 144.9 5 67.6 5.0          Sep 
8.5 0.0 0.5 0.5 − 13.0 12.9 146.5 67.6 5.0          Oct 
9.3 0.0 0.0 0.0 − 13.0 13.2 146.8 67.6 5.0          Nov 
9 . 1 0 . 0−−− 13.1 13.5 146.8 5 76.8 5.0          Dec 
9.8 0.0 0.2 0.2 − 13.1 13.2 147.6 76.8 5.0 2010          Jan 
9.3 0.0 0.3 0.3 − 13.1 13.4 149.6 76.8 5.0          Feb 9.3 0.0 0.1 0.1 − 13.6 10.3 150.2
5 84.8 5.0          Mar 
11.5 0.0 0.3 0.3 − 13.6 10.2 151.1 84.8 5.0          Apr 
 
banknote issue“. The remaining 92 % of the value of the euro banknote in the aforementioned accounting regime and the value of euro banknotes
circulation is also allocated to the NCBs on a monthly basis, and each NCB put into circulation is also disclosed as an “Intra-Eurosystem claim/ liabil ity
shows in its balance sheet the share of the euro banknotes issued which related to banknote issue“. — 3For the Deutsche Bundesbank: including
corresponds to its paid-up share in the ECB’s capital. The difference DM banknotes still in circulation. — 4Source: ECB. — 5Changes are due
between the value of the euro banknotes allocated to the NCB according to mainly to revaluations at the end of the quarter. 
19*III Consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
E U R O S Y S T E M
Monthly Report
May 2010
IV Banks
 
1 Assets and liabilities of monetary financial institutions (excluding the Bundesbank) in Germany *
  Assets
 
 
Lending to banks (MFIs) in the euro area Lending to non-banks (non-MFIs) in the
to banks in the home country to banks in other member states to non-banks in the home country
Enterprises and house-
holds
Secur- Secur-
Balance ities ities
sheet Cash issued issued
Period total in hand Total Total Loans by banks Total Loans by banks Total Total Total Loans
 End of year or month
 
2001 6,303.1 14.6 2,069.7 1,775.5 1,140.6 634.9 294.2 219.8 74.4 3,317.1 3,084.9 2,497.1 2,235.7
2002 6,394.2 17.9 2,118.0 1,769.1 1,164.3 604.9 348.9 271.7 77.2 3,340.2 3,092.2 2,505.8 2,240.82003 6,432.0 17.3 2,111.5 1,732.0 1,116.8 615.3 379.5 287.7 91.8 3,333.2 3,083.1 2,497.4 2,241.22004 6,617.4 15.1 2,174.3 1,750.2 1,122.9 627.3 424.2 306.3 117.9 3,358.7 3,083.4 2,479.7 2,223.8
2005 6,859.4 15.3 2,276.0 1,762.5 1,148.4 614.1 513.5 356.3 157.2 3,407.6 3,085.2 2,504.6 2,226.3
2006 7,154.4 16.4 2,314.4 1,718.6 1,138.6 580.0 595.8 376.8 219.0 3,462.1 3,085.5 2,536.1 2,241.92007 7,592.4 17.8 2,523.4 1,847.9 1,290.4 557.5 675.4 421.6 253.8 3,487.3 3,061.8 2,556.0 2,288.82008 7,892.7 17.8 2,681.8 1,990.2 1,404.3 585.8 691.6 452.9 238.8 3,638.2 3,163.0 2,686.9 2,357.32009 7,436.1 17.2 2,480.5 1,813.2 1,218.4 594.8 667.3 449.5 217.8 3,638.3 3,187.9 2,692.9 2,357.5
2008          June 7,688.7 13.8 2,556.9 1,855.1 1,281.7 573.3 701.8 436.9 265.0 3,576.9 3,098.7 2,604.6 2,333.7
         July 7,675.4 14.2 2,532.5 1,833.9 1,263.1 570.8 698.6 430.6 268.1 3,587.8 3,110.1 2,616.3 2,341.6
         Aug 7,744.7 14.2 2,556.0 1,860.3 1,284.2 576.2 695.7 427.4 268.3 3,619.5 3,137.0 2,645.3 2,344.2         Sep 7,896.2 13.7 2,614.7 1,918.3 1,351.8 566.6 696.3 431.1 265.2 3,623.3 3,134.6 2,657.2 2,354.8
         Oct 8,030.2 15.4 2,670.4 1,962.1 1,399.6 562.5 708.3 453.2 255.1 3,627.7 3,135.2 2,653.3 2,357.7
         Nov 7,985.4 15.1 2,705.1 1,995.0 1,408.3 586.8 710.1 462.5 247.6 3,633.0 3,134.5 2,657.2 2,362.4         Dec 7,892.7 17.8 2,681.8 1,990.2 1,404.3 585.8 691.6 452.9 238.8 3,638.2 3,163.0 2,686.9 2,357.3
2009          Jan 7,906.4 14.0 2,676.9 1,975.0 1,382.5 592.5 701.9 465.2 236.7 3,677.6 3,189.7 2,706.2 2,375.7
         Feb 7,846.4 13.9 2,649.2 1,950.8 1,357.1 593.7 698.4 466.0 232.4 3,667.8 3,183.1 2,702.3 2,368.3         Mar 7,777.1 13.9 2,611.1 1,923.6 1,312.9 610.7 687.4 458.5 228.9 3,669.6 3,193.6 2,716.4 2,383.4
         Apr 7,802.2 15.3 2,584.9 1,902.2 1,295.0 607.1 682.7 454.9 227.8 3,690.1 3,216.1 2,730.5 2,385.5
         May 7,685.1 15.8 2,537.1 1,869.2 1,263.7 605.5 667.9 444.2 223.7 3,680.5 3,198.6 2,714.9 2,384.7         June 7,710.6 15.0 2,601.5 1,943.5 1,333.1 610.4 658.0 436.9 221.2 3,694.3 3,211.7 2,725.6 2,388.3
         July 7,619.1 14.0 2,558.6 1,890.7 1,277.0 613.7 667.8 448.3 219.5 3,685.1 3,205.7 2,706.7 2,372.4
         Aug 7,590.2 14.0 2,563.6 1,886.5 1,270.3 616.2 677.2 458.7 218.4 3,655.8 3,183.7 2,691.4 2,361.6         Sep 7,519.5 13.9 2,512.5 1,862.6 1,253.1 609.6 649.9 432.3 217.6 3,675.2 3,199.8 2,705.4 2,375.4
         Oct 7,498.4 14.2 2,496.7 1,824.6 1,219.2 605.4 672.2 456.2 216.0 3,673.1 3,202.2 2,692.0 2,365.5
         Nov 7,493.5 13.8 2,496.0 1,826.7 1,224.7 602.0 669.4 448.7 220.6 3,671.2 3,201.7 2,700.0 2,372.5         Dec 7,436.1 17.2 2,480.5 1,813.2 1,218.4 594.8 667.3 449.5 217.8 3,638.3 3,187.9 2,692.9 2,357.5
2010          Jan 7,452.7 14.3 2,465.1 1,806.6 1,220.4 586.2 658.5 440.7 217.8 3,655.8 3,198.2 2,695.9 2,354.2
         Feb 7,449.5 14.2 2,491.6 1,830.8 1,250.2 580.5 660.8 444.5 216.3 3,645.2 3,184.7 2,682.5 2,350.8         Mar 7,454.6 14.4 2,489.7 1,832.0 1,250.3 581.7 657.7 440.2 217.5 3,633.9 3,180.8 2,673.6 2,347.0
 Changes 1
2002 165.7 3.3 63.6 6.5 23.7 − 17.1 57.1 51.9 5.2 34.1 15.7 16.5 10.4
2003 90.7 − 0.6 − 12.2 − 44.1 − 42.6 − 1.5 31.9 18.8 13.1 30.0 23.6 22.8 26.42004 209.7 − 2.1 71.6 24.0 10.9 13.1 47.6 17.1 30.5 44.0 17.4 − 0.4 − 1.3
2005 191.4 0.1 96.5 10.3 22.8 − 12.5 86.2 48.1 38.0 59.7 14.1 37.1 15.5
2006 353.9 1.1 81.2 0.5 28.0 − 27.6 80.8 19.5 61.3 55.9 1.5 32.5 13.2
2007 515.3 1.5 215.6 135.5 156.2 − 20.8 80.1 44.1 36.0 54.1 − 1.0 38.6 53.22008 314.0 − 0.1 184.4 164.2 127.3 36.9 20.2 34.6 − 14.4 140.2 102.5 130.8 65.42009 −454.8 − 0.5 −189.5 −166.4 −182.1 15.8 − 23.2 − 2.5 − 20.7 17.3 38.2 16.9 6.5
2008          July − 1.5 0.4 − 8.8 − 5.6 − 5.4 − 0.2 − 3.2 − 6.4 3.2 10.1 11.3 11.7 7.8
         Aug 47.7 − 0.0 25.7 29.7 24.6 5.1 − 4.0 − 4.2 0.2 25.6 24.1 26.4 0.4         Sep 129.0 − 0.5 55.9 56.1 65.8 − 9.7 − 0.3 2.9 − 3.2 1.2 − 3.5 10.7 9.2
         Oct 47.4 1.7 42.7 34.0 38.6 − 4.6 8.7 19.3 − 10.6 − 9.9 − 6.9 − 11.0 − 4.6
         Nov − 9.6 − 0.4 45.7 43.2 18.9 24.3 2.5 9.9 − 7.4 7.4 0.9 5.6 6.4         Dec − 30.1 2.7 − 9.2 5.5 5.9 − 0.4 − 14.7 − 7.1 − 7.6 13.5 30.4 30.3 − 4.9
2009          Jan − 43.6 − 3.8 − 14.8 − 23.0 − 29.4 6.4 8.2 10.0 − 1.8 36.2 27.8 20.8 16.5
         Feb − 76.0 − 0.1 − 28.3 − 25.2 − 26.4 1.2 − 3.1 0.6 − 3.7 − 9.1 − 5.2 − 2.5 − 6.7         Mar − 51.3 0.1 − 31.5 − 22.4 − 39.6 17.2 − 9.1 − 5.9 − 3.2 9.2 13.9 17.4 18.4
         Apr 19.9 1.4 − 27.3 − 21.9 − 18.3 − 3.6 − 5.4 − 3.9 − 1.6 20.1 22.4 13.9 2.2
         May − 75.1 0.5 − 32.8 − 19.4 − 24.0 4.6 − 13.4 − 9.3 − 4.1 − 3.3 − 13.7 − 11.9 2.1         June 25.3 − 0.8 64.3 74.4 69.5 4.9 − 10.1 − 7.2 − 2.9 15.8 14.8 12.4 4.8
         July − 93.3 − 1.1 − 42.9 − 52.7 − 56.1 3.3 9.8 11.4 − 1.6 − 8.5 − 5.2 − 18.1 − 15.1
         Aug − 9.7 0.0 6.0 − 3.5 − 6.0 2.5 9.5 10.6 − 1.1 − 27.5 − 20.9 − 14.3 − 9.8         Sep − 57.5 − 0.0 − 49.6 − 23.0 − 16.5 − 6.5 − 26.6 − 25.9 − 0.7 22.3 17.5 15.4 15.0
         Oct − 16.3 0.3 − 15.2 − 37.5 − 33.4 − 4.2 22.4 24.1 − 1.7 − 0.1 3.5 − 12.4 − 8.6
         Nov 2.5 − 0.4 0.4 2.9 6.1 − 3.1 − 2.6 − 7.2 4.6 − 0.4 0.2 6.1 5.1         Dec − 79.7 3.4 − 17.7 − 14.9 − 8.0 − 6.9 − 2.8 0.2 − 3.1 − 37.4 − 16.8 − 9.9 − 17.4
2010          Jan − 8.8 − 2.9 − 17.4 − 8.1 0.8 − 8.9 − 9.3 − 9.4 0.1 16.6 11.3 3.9 − 1.7
         Feb − 7.0 − 0.2 25.8 24.0 29.6 − 5.6 1.8 3.4 − 1.7 − 12.8 − 14.6 − 14.4 − 4.4         Mar 8.9 0.3 − 0.2 2.5 0.1 2.4 − 2.7 − 4.3 1.6 − 3.3 2.2 − 4.8 − 2.7
*This table serves to supplement the “Overall monetary survey“ in section the figures reported by banks (including building and loan associations) −
II. Unlike the other tables in section IV, this table includes − in addition to data from money market funds. — 1Statistical breaks have been eliminated
20*IV Banks

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
May 2010
IV Banks
 
 
 
 
 
euro area Claims on
non-euro-area
to non-banks in other member states residents
 General Enterprises and General
 government households government
Secur- Secur- of which Secur- of which Other
ities Total Loans ities  2 Total Total Loans Total Loans ities Total Loans assets   Period
End of year or month
 
261.3 587.8 468.7 119.1 232.3 111.3 53.7 121.0 26.2 94.8 727.3 572.0 174.3 2001
265.0 586.4 448.5 137.9 248.0 125.0 63.6 123.0 25.5 97.5 738.1 589.2 179.9 2002256.2 585.6 439.6 146.1 250.2 133.5 62.7 116.6 25.9 90.7 806.4 645.6 163.6 2003255.9 603.8 423.0 180.8 275.3 140.6 61.9 134.7 25.7 109.0 897.8 730.4 171.4 2004
278.2 580.7 408.7 171.9 322.4 169.1 65.0 153.3 30.7 122.6 993.8 796.8 166.7 2005
294.1 549.5 390.2 159.2 376.6 228.1 85.2 148.5 26.1 122.4 1,172.7 936.2 188.8 2006267.3 505.8 360.7 145.0 425.5 294.6 124.9 130.9 26.0 104.9 1,339.5 1,026.9 224.4 2007329.6 476.1 342.8 133.4 475.1 348.1 172.1 127.0 27.6 99.4 1,279.2 1,008.6 275.7 2008335.4 495.0 335.1 160.0 450.4 322.2 162.9 128.2 23.5 104.7 1,062.6 821.1 237.5 2009
270.9 494.1 349.4 144.7 478.3 340.1 158.3 138.1 26.2 111.9 1,303.5 1,013.6 237.6 2008          June
274.7 493.8 349.6 144.2 477.7 343.1 161.9 134.6 26.0 108.7 1,299.8 1,011.4 241.2          July
301.1 491.7 349.0 142.8 482.4 349.9 167.7 132.6 26.4 106.2 1,316.1 1,027.0 239.0          Aug 302.4 477.5 344.8 132.7 488.7 358.9 175.9 129.8 28.0 101.8 1,401.2 1,106.2 243.3          Sep 
295.6 481.9 346.7 135.2 492.5 363.1 182.5 129.3 28.3 101.1 1,455.9 1,166.6 260.8          Oct 
294.8 477.2 344.2 133.0 498.5 369.2 186.6 129.4 28.6 100.8 1,357.6 1,078.6 274.7          Nov 329.6 476.1 342.8 133.4 475.1 348.1 172.1 127.0 27.6 99.4 1,279.2 1,008.6 275.7          Dec 
330.5 483.5 344.3 139.2 487.9 359.7 182.0 128.3 26.1 102.1 1,256.5 991.4 281.4 2009          Jan 
334.1 480.8 342.4 138.3 484.7 356.1 175.8 128.5 25.9 102.7 1,233.9 974.1 281.6          Feb 
333.0 477.1 338.1 139.0 476.0 348.8 172.5 127.2 25.5 101.7 1,169.9 916.9 312.7          Mar 
345.0 485.6 340.5 145.1 474.1 348.6 171.9 125.5 24.8 100.7 1,213.3 961.0 298.7          Apr 
330.1 483.7 336.6 147.0 481.9 353.8 172.1 128.1 24.4 103.7 1,184.7 933.9 267.1          May337.3 486.1 336.5 149.7 482.5 357.3 178.2 125.2 22.7 102.5 1,165.0 912.3 234.8          June
334.3 499.0 348.5 150.5 479.4 352.3 173.5 127.1 23.6 103.5 1,132.8 882.1 228.8          July
329.8 492.4 342.9 149.5 472.1 347.1 170.4 124.9 23.7 101.2 1,107.4 856.8 249.5          Aug 330.0 494.3 340.0 154.3 475.4 349.0 172.6 126.4 23.6 102.8 1,069.0 822.5 248.8          Sep 
326.5 510.2 351.7 158.5 470.9 341.3 166.5 129.6 23.7 105.9 1,063.7 822.7 250.7          Oct 
327.5 501.7 340.9 160.8 469.5 341.0 165.1 128.4 23.5 105.0 1,057.5 818.6 255.0          Nov 335.4 495.0 335.1 160.0 450.4 322.2 162.9 128.2 23.5 104.7 1,062.6 821.1 237.5          Dec 
341.7 502.3 338.0 164.4 457.5 325.5 161.9 132.1 23.7 108.3 1,081.5 838.8 236.0 2010          Jan 
331.7 502.2 334.8 167.4 460.5 325.7 162.9 134.8 23.7 111.1 1,072.7 832.8 225.9          Feb 
326.6 507.3 335.5 171.8 453.1 319.6 162.7 133.5 22.3 111.2 1,073.9 833.9 242.6          Mar 
Changes 1
6.2 − 0.8 − 20.2 19.4 18.3 15.9 12.0 2.4 − 0.6 3.0 65.7 64.1 − 0.4 2002
− 3.6 0.8 − 8.7 9.6 6.4 13.1 2.6 − 6.8 − 0.8 − 6.0 115.4 97.7 − 42.0 2003
0.9 17.8 − 17.0 34.9 26.6 8.2 3.1 18.4 0.0 18.4 111.0 100.2 − 14.7 2004
21.7 − 23.0 − 14.3 − 8.6 45.5 27.4 2.2 18.2 4.6 13.5 57.2 31.3 − 22.2 2005
19.3 − 31.0 − 18.6 − 12.4 54.5 59.6 20.9 − 5.2 − 1.3 − 3.8 205.8 165.7 9.8 2006
− 14.6 − 39.6 − 29.3 − 10.3 55.1 73.7 41.5 − 18.6 0.0 − 18.6 223.0 136.7 21.1 2007
65.4 − 28.3 − 16.9 − 11.5 37.7 42.2 40.3 − 4.5 1.6 − 6.1 − 40.1 − 7.5 29.7 2008
10.5 21.3 − 5.1 26.4 − 20.9 − 21.0 − 7.1 0.0 − 3.9 3.9 −182.2 −162.2 − 99.8 2009
3.9 − 0.4 0.2 − 0.6 − 1.3 2.2 3.4 − 3.5 − 0.3 − 3.2 − 6.1 − 4.3 2.8 2008          July
26.0 − 2.2 − 0.6 − 1.6 1.5 3.8 4.0 − 2.3 0.3 − 2.6 − 5.5 − 4.1 1.9          Aug 
1.6 − 14.2 − 4.1 − 10.1 4.7 7.8 7.1 − 3.1 1.6 − 4.7 70.3 65.5 2.1          Sep 
− 6.4 4.0 1.8 2.3 − 3.0 − 1.9 2.5 − 1.1 − 0.0 − 1.0 − 2.8 7.6 15.8          Oct − 0.8 − 4.7 − 2.5 − 2.2 6.5 6.4 4.4 0.1 0.4 − 0.2 − 75.6 − 65.5 13.2          Nov 
35.2 0.2 − 0.2 0.3 − 16.9 − 15.1 − 10.7 − 1.8 − 0.7 − 1.1 − 34.0 − 30.0 − 3.1          Dec 
4.4 7.0 1.3 5.6 8.3 8.8 6.1 − 0.5 − 1.7 1.2 − 52.0 − 48.0 − 9.1 2009          Jan 
4.2 − 2.7 − 1.8 − 0.9 − 3.9 − 4.2 − 6.7 0.3 − 0.3 0.5 − 24.8 − 20.7 − 13.7          Feb 
− 1.0 − 3.5 − 4.2 0.7 − 4.7 − 3.6 − 1.1 − 1.1 − 0.2 − 0.9 − 38.3 − 35.2 9.3          Mar 
11.7 8.5 2.4 6.1 − 2.3 − 0.6 − 0.8 − 1.7 − 0.5 − 1.2 40.2 41.5 − 14.5          Apr 
− 14.0 − 1.8 − 3.8 2.0 10.5 7.7 2.2 2.7 − 0.3 3.1 − 7.0 − 7.5 − 32.6          May
7.5 2.5 − 0.2 2.6 1.0 3.7 6.3 − 2.7 − 1.7 − 1.1 − 19.1 − 21.2 − 35.0          June
− 3.0 12.9 12.0 0.9 − 3.3 − 5.2 − 4.6 1.9 0.9 1.0 − 31.6 − 29.5 − 9.1          July
− 4.4 − 6.7 − 5.6 − 1.0 − 6.6 − 4.5 − 2.6 − 2.1 0.1 − 2.2 − 9.6 − 9.8 21.5          Aug 
0.5 2.0 − 2.8 4.9 4.8 3.2 3.2 1.6 − 0.0 1.6 − 28.4 − 25.3 − 1.8          Sep 
− 3.8 15.9 11.7 4.2 − 3.6 − 6.8 − 5.5 3.2 0.0 3.1 − 1.8 3.2 0.5          Oct 
1.0 − 5.9 − 8.2 2.3 − 0.5 0.5 − 0.9 − 1.1 − 0.1 − 0.9 − 0.7 0.9 3.6          Nov 7.5 − 6.9 − 5.9 − 1.0 − 20.6 − 20.1 − 2.9 − 0.4 − 0.1 − 0.4 − 9.0 − 10.7 − 18.9          Dec 
5.6 7.3 2.8 4.5 5.3 1.5 − 1.0 3.8 0.2 3.6 6.1 6.3 − 11.2 2010          Jan 
− 10.0 − 0.2 − 3.2 3.0 1.8 − 0.9 0.3 2.7 − 0.0 2.7 − 17.1 − 13.7 − 2.7          Feb 
− 2.1 7.0 0.7 6.3 − 5.5 − 4.1 − 0.1 − 1.3 − 1.4 0.1 8.4 1.1 3.7          Mar 
from the flow figures (see also footnote * in Table II.1). — 2Including debt
securities arising from the exchange of equalisation claims.
21*IV Banks

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
E U R O S Y S T E M
Monthly Report
May 2010
IV Banks
 
1 Assets and liabilities of monetary financial institutions (excluding the Bundesbank) in Germany *
  Liabilities
 
Deposits of banks (MFIs) Deposits of non-banks (non-MFIs) in the euro area
in the euro area
Deposits of non-banks in the home country Deposits of non-banks
With agreed At agreed
of banks maturities notice
Balance in the in other of which of which
sheet home member Over- up to up to Over-
Period total Total country states Total Total night Total 2 years Total 3 months Total night
 End of year or month
 
2001 6,303.1 1,418.0 1,202.1 215.9 2,134.0 1,979.7 525.0 880.2 290.6 574.5 461.9 105.2 7.6
2002 6,394.2 1,478.7 1,236.2 242.4 2,170.0 2,034.9 574.8 884.9 279.3 575.3 472.9 87.4 8.1
2003 6,432.0 1,471.0 1,229.4 241.6 2,214.6 2,086.9 622.1 874.5 248.0 590.3 500.8 81.8 9.3
2004 6,617.4 1,528.4 1,270.8 257.6 2,264.2 2,148.5 646.2 898.9 239.9 603.5 515.5 71.9 8.8
2005 6,859.4 1,569.6 1,300.8 268.8 2,329.1 2,225.4 715.8 906.2 233.4 603.4 519.1 62.2 9.6
2006 7,154.4 1,637.7 1,348.6 289.0 2,449.2 2,341.6 745.8 1,009.3 310.1 586.5 487.4 62.0 13.92007 7,592.4 1,778.6 1,479.0 299.6 2,633.6 2,518.3 769.6 1,193.3 477.9 555.4 446.0 75.1 19.62008 7,892.7 1,827.7 1,583.0 244.7 2,798.2 2,687.3 809.5 1,342.7 598.7 535.2 424.8 74.2 22.4
2009 7,436.1 1,589.7 1,355.6 234.0 2,818.0 2,731.3 997.8 1,139.1 356.4 594.4 474.4 63.9 17.7
2008          June 7,688.7 1,764.2 1,448.9 315.3 2,670.8 2,551.5 768.8 1,249.3 530.1 533.4 430.7 79.8 27.1         July 7,675.4 1,749.7 1,439.1 310.6 2,675.9 2,557.0 746.2 1,283.0 563.6 527.9 425.6 81.7 27.3
         Aug 7,744.7 1,753.3 1,446.9 306.3 2,688.1 2,569.2 748.7 1,296.8 577.6 523.6 422.5 81.6 27.1         Sep 7,896.2 1,832.7 1,529.1 303.5 2,698.0 2,573.6 758.0 1,296.4 578.4 519.2 419.2 86.4 34.4
         Oct 8,030.2 1,913.9 1,642.3 271.6 2,734.7 2,620.5 786.9 1,312.8 598.0 520.8 417.8 77.6 28.8
         Nov 7,985.4 1,862.4 1,595.7 266.7 2,757.2 2,645.5 804.3 1,317.8 603.6 523.4 416.7 75.0 25.6         Dec 7,892.7 1,827.7 1,583.0 244.7 2,798.2 2,687.3 809.5 1,342.7 598.7 535.2 424.8 74.2 22.4
2009          Jan 7,906.4 1,794.4 1,533.3 261.1 2,817.1 2,701.2 857.7 1,304.6 557.0 539.0 428.6 80.7 33.6
         Feb 7,846.4 1,760.2 1,509.8 250.4 2,821.6 2,714.6 882.6 1,287.7 534.4 544.3 433.9 73.4 25.7         Mar 7,777.1 1,693.9 1,456.2 237.6 2,805.6 2,699.1 879.3 1,272.1 515.8 547.8 436.6 73.2 26.8
         Apr 7,802.2 1,701.3 1,458.7 242.6 2,823.8 2,716.8 895.8 1,269.8 509.3 551.1 439.1 74.4 25.4
         May 7,685.1 1,678.3 1,445.4 232.9 2,824.1 2,711.3 898.8 1,257.5 494.8 555.0 441.5 74.2 26.0         June 7,710.6 1,695.3 1,469.0 226.3 2,832.4 2,716.6 918.7 1,238.2 461.7 559.7 445.1 73.2 26.0
         July 7,619.1 1,641.3 1,417.8 223.4 2,816.2 2,706.5 922.3 1,218.7 442.0 565.5 449.7 73.2 24.7
         Aug 7,590.2 1,635.5 1,414.6 220.8 2,808.1 2,707.6 933.8 1,203.1 424.4 570.8 454.3 73.7 25.8         Sep 7,519.5 1,603.4 1,381.3 222.1 2,806.8 2,706.2 953.3 1,177.9 398.2 575.1 457.4 76.2 26.5
         Oct 7,498.4 1,602.0 1,373.6 228.4 2,797.5 2,696.7 981.3 1,133.7 367.5 581.7 461.5 74.9 26.2
         Nov 7,493.5 1,599.1 1,375.7 223.4 2,823.6 2,724.5 1,005.5 1,133.4 353.0 585.6 464.5 73.0 25.9         Dec 7,436.1 1,589.7 1,355.6 234.0 2,818.0 2,731.3 997.8 1,139.1 356.4 594.4 474.4 63.9 17.7
2010          Jan 7,452.7 1,596.8 1,348.9 247.9 2,826.3 2,736.7 1,025.2 1,113.9 330.5 597.6 479.2 66.6 20.1
         Feb 7,449.5 1,597.3 1,361.7 235.6 2,828.9 2,736.7 1,025.5 1,108.4 323.8 602.9 485.1 69.6 20.4         Mar 7,454.6 1,566.6 1,328.7 237.9 2,817.1 2,726.4 1,010.0 1,111.7 326.1 604.7 486.8 69.7 21.9
 Changes 1
2002 165.7 70.2 37.2 33.1 53.0 57.0 50.3 5.9 − 11.0 0.8 11.0 − 2.6 0.6
2003 90.7 3.8 − 3.3 7.1 44.7 50.3 48.8 − 13.6 − 31.6 15.1 28.0 − 3.8 1.42004 209.7 62.3 42.8 19.6 53.5 64.9 26.3 25.5 − 8.3 13.1 14.7 − 9.3 − 0.4
2005 191.4 32.8 26.9 5.8 65.0 75.5 69.4 7.3 − 6.9 − 1.2 2.9 − 8.0 0.5
2006 353.9 105.6 81.5 24.1 122.9 118.6 30.4 105.0 77.1 − 16.8 − 31.7 0.5 4.4
2007 515.3 148.3 134.8 13.5 185.1 177.3 24.6 183.9 167.8 − 31.1 − 41.4 13.6 5.62008 314.0 65.8 121.5 − 55.8 162.4 173.1 38.8 154.6 123.5 − 20.2 − 21.2 − 7.4 − 0.12009 −454.8 −235.3 −224.5 − 10.8 31.9 43.9 205.0 −220.4 −259.3 59.3 50.3 − 9.6 − 4.1
2008          July − 1.5 − 1.8 3.0 − 4.7 5.1 5.4 − 22.7 33.6 33.5 − 5.6 − 5.1 1.9 0.3
         Aug 47.7 5.2 11.3 − 6.1 10.3 11.1 1.9 13.6 13.7 − 4.3 − 3.1 − 0.9 − 0.4         Sep 129.0 76.2 80.4 − 4.2 8.4 3.7 8.8 − 0.7 0.6 − 4.4 − 3.3 4.0 7.2
         Oct 47.4 67.5 103.9 − 36.3 32.0 44.4 27.1 15.7 18.9 1.5 − 1.4 − 11.0 − 6.2
         Nov − 9.6 − 36.3 − 30.0 − 6.2 27.8 29.9 17.5 9.8 7.8 2.6 − 1.1 − 2.2 − 3.2         Dec − 30.1 − 26.1 − 4.5 − 21.6 42.7 44.4 6.4 26.2 − 3.5 11.8 8.1 − 1.6 − 3.0
2009          Jan − 43.6 − 42.8 − 57.3 14.5 16.7 12.4 47.1 − 38.5 − 42.1 3.8 3.8 5.8 11.2
         Feb − 76.0 − 35.3 − 24.5 − 10.8 4.4 13.2 24.8 − 16.9 − 22.7 5.3 5.3 − 7.2 − 7.8         Mar − 51.3 − 60.9 − 49.1 − 11.8 − 15.1 − 14.9 − 2.6 − 15.8 − 18.5 3.5 2.8 0.1 1.2
         Apr 19.9 6.5 1.7 4.8 17.9 17.2 33.2 − 19.3 − 23.6 3.3 3.1 1.1 − 1.4
         May − 75.1 − 14.8 − 5.9 − 8.8 1.6 − 4.6 3.5 − 11.9 − 14.1 3.9 2.4 0.2 0.7         June 25.3 17.1 23.7 − 6.5 8.2 5.3 19.9 − 19.3 − 33.1 4.7 3.6 − 0.8 0.3
         July − 93.3 − 54.0 − 51.1 − 2.9 − 16.1 − 10.1 3.5 − 19.4 − 19.7 5.8 4.6 0.0 − 1.3
         Aug − 9.7 − 5.1 − 2.6 − 2.4 3.6 1.3 11.6 − 15.6 − 17.6 5.3 4.5 0.6 1.1         Sep − 57.5 − 31.3 − 33.0 1.7 − 0.7 − 1.0 19.8 − 25.1 − 26.1 4.3 3.1 2.8 0.8
         Oct − 16.3 − 1.0 − 7.3 6.3 4.3 3.8 28.1 − 31.0 − 30.6 6.6 4.2 − 1.0 − 0.3
         Nov 2.5 − 2.1 2.8 − 4.9 13.5 15.1 24.4 − 13.1 − 14.4 3.8 3.0 − 1.8 − 0.3         Dec − 79.7 − 11.8 − 21.8 10.0 − 6.5 6.1 − 8.3 5.5 3.2 8.9 9.9 − 9.3 − 8.3
2010          Jan − 8.8 5.3 − 7.9 13.2 7.3 4.8 26.9 − 25.3 − 26.0 3.2 4.7 2.4 2.3
         Feb − 7.0 3.6 12.0 − 8.4 − 6.0 − 0.4 − 0.1 − 5.6 − 6.8 5.2 5.9 − 5.2 0.3         Mar 8.9 − 15.1 − 17.4 2.3 − 11.7 − 10.4 − 15.5 3.3 2.3 1.8 1.8 0.1 1.4
*This table serves to supplement the “Overall monetary survey“ in section data from money market funds. — 1Statistical breaks have been eliminated
II. Unlike the other tables in section IV, this table includes − in addition to from the flow figures (see also footnote * in Table II.1). —
the figures reported by banks (including building and loan associations) −
22*IV Banks

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
May 2010
IV Banks
 
 
 
 
 
 Debt securities
issued  3 
in other member states  2 Deposits of
central governments
With agreed At agreed Liabilities
maturities notice arising
of which from Money of which Liabilities
domestic market with to non- repos with
of which of which central non-banks fund euro- Capital maturities
up to up to govern- in the shares of up to area and Other
Total 2 years Total 3 months Total ments euro area issued  3 Total reserves   Period 2 years  3 residents Liabilities
End of year or month
 
92.4 9.0 5.2 3.8 49.1 46.9 4.9 33.2 1,445.4 129.3 647.6 319.2 300.8 2001
74.6 9.9 4.7 3.6 47.7 45.6 3.3 36.7 1,468.2 71.6 599.2 343.0 309.8 2002
68.6 11.4 3.9 3.1 45.9 44.2 14.1 36.7 1,486.9 131.3 567.8 340.2 300.8 2003
59.8 9.8 3.3 2.7 43.8 41.4 14.8 31.5 1,554.8 116.9 577.1 329.3 317.2 2004
50.2 9.8 2.4 2.0 41.6 38.8 19.5 31.7 1,611.9 113.8 626.2 346.8 324.5 2005
45.9 9.3 2.3 1.9 45.5 41.9 17.1 32.0 1,636.7 136.4 638.5 389.6 353.7 200653.2 22.0 2.3 1.8 40.1 38.3 26.6 28.6 1,637.6 182.3 661.0 428.2 398.2 200749.5 24.9 2.4 1.8 36.6 34.8 61.1 16.4 1,609.9 233.3 666.3 461.7 451.5 2008
43.7 17.0 2.5 2.0 22.8 22.2 80.5 11.4 1,500.5 146.3 565.6 454.8 415.6 2009
50.5 23.4 2.3 1.8 39.4 37.8 63.9 23.8 1,641.4 217.1 679.2 442.6 402.9 2008          June
52.0 25.5 2.3 1.7 37.2 35.2 58.1 23.5 1,644.8 222.2 674.8 443.6 405.0          July
52.3 26.4 2.3 1.7 37.3 36.3 63.1 23.2 1,655.8 224.7 687.9 448.7 424.6          Aug 49.7 25.5 2.3 1.7 38.0 37.5 70.9 22.4 1,642.2 219.9 741.6 445.3 443.0          Sep 
46.5 21.8 2.3 1.7 36.6 35.5 69.8 18.6 1,637.0 214.5 747.9 453.9 454.4          Oct 
47.1 23.9 2.3 1.7 36.7 34.4 71.0 17.5 1,655.9 242.5 713.2 448.2 460.1          Nov 49.5 24.9 2.4 1.8 36.6 34.8 61.1 16.4 1,609.9 233.3 666.3 461.7 451.5          Dec 
44.6 19.7 2.4 1.8 35.2 33.0 67.4 15.9 1,614.6 215.8 697.5 462.3 437.1 2009          Jan 
45.2 19.3 2.5 1.8 33.6 32.7 74.0 15.4 1,604.9 211.4 686.7 441.5 442.1          Feb 
44.0 18.2 2.5 1.8 33.2 32.0 87.7 14.8 1,580.2 201.3 664.6 447.9 482.5          Mar 
46.5 21.0 2.5 1.9 32.6 32.0 92.6 14.4 1,579.0 203.6 697.7 430.2 463.3          Apr 
45.7 19.9 2.5 1.9 38.5 36.5 90.9 14.1 1,574.2 196.6 646.6 425.4 431.7          May44.7 19.1 2.5 1.9 42.6 40.6 93.4 13.6 1,571.0 185.5 652.1 441.8 411.0          June
46.0 19.7 2.5 1.9 36.6 34.6 82.4 12.4 1,565.9 181.1 647.3 441.5 412.0          July
45.3 19.2 2.5 1.9 26.8 25.0 71.7 12.2 1,570.3 177.8 626.3 443.6 422.6          Aug 47.1 19.2 2.5 1.9 24.4 22.7 83.7 12.4 1,543.3 171.9 599.7 442.8 427.3          Sep 
46.2 18.8 2.5 1.9 25.9 23.2 83.3 12.3 1,530.6 161.7 591.4 439.4 442.0          Oct 
44.6 16.3 2.5 1.9 26.1 24.2 81.0 12.0 1,518.8 158.0 589.4 440.6 429.1          Nov 43.7 17.0 2.5 2.0 22.8 22.2 80.5 11.4 1,500.5 146.3 565.6 454.8 415.6          Dec 
44.0 15.5 2.5 2.0 23.0 21.3 68.2 12.2 1,503.2 142.7 598.0 441.8 406.3 2010          Jan 
46.6 15.1 2.5 2.0 22.6 20.7 78.9 12.0 1,496.5 140.1 608.5 441.6 385.9          Feb 
45.2 13.6 2.6 2.0 21.1 20.4 78.4 11.6 1,503.2 138.0 622.6 445.8 409.3          Mar 
Changes 1
− 2.6 1.1 − 0.5 − 0.3 − 1.4 − 1.3 − 1.6 4.1 18.8 14.8 − 2.1 25.6 − 2.7 2002
− 4.4 2.0 − 0.8 − 0.4 − 1.8 − 1.4 10.7 − 0.5 49.6 − 2.2 4.9 − 3.3 − 19.4 2003− 8.3 − 1.4 − 0.6 − 0.4 − 2.1 − 2.8 0.8 − 5.2 73.2 − 14.8 21.7 − 10.5 14.0 2004
− 7.7 − 0.4 − 0.9 − 0.7 − 2.5 − 3.0 4.7 0.2 39.1 − 9.5 22.0 14.4 13.3 2005
− 3.9 − 0.3 − 0.1 − 0.2 3.9 3.1 − 3.3 0.3 34.4 21.7 32.4 27.9 33.7 2006
8.0 13.0 0.0 − 0.1 − 5.8 − 4.3 8.1 − 3.4 20.3 48.7 48.8 42.9 65.1 2007
− 7.4 0.7 0.1 − 0.0 − 3.3 − 3.2 36.1 − 12.2 − 33.8 50.4 − 0.0 39.2 56.6 2008
− 5.6 − 7.6 0.1 0.2 − 2.4 − 0.8 19.4 − 5.0 −105.0 − 87.3 − 95.5 − 0.1 − 65.1 2009
1.6 2.1 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 2.2 − 2.6 − 5.8 − 0.3 4.5 5.7 − 5.8 1.5 1.0 2008          July
− 0.5 0.4 − 0.0 − 0.0 0.1 1.1 5.0 − 0.3 2.7 2.3 0.4 3.3 21.0          Aug 
− 3.1 − 1.4 − 0.0 − 0.0 0.7 1.3 7.8 − 0.8 − 20.9 − 5.0 44.7 − 4.9 18.5          Sep 
− 4.9 − 5.0 0.1 0.0 − 1.4 − 2.0 − 1.1 − 3.8 − 29.6 − 5.6 − 26.3 3.8 5.0          Oct 
1.0 2.2 0.0 0.0 0.1 − 1.1 2.8 − 1.1 21.3 28.0 − 26.5 − 4.3 6.7          Nov 
1.3 1.3 0.1 0.0 − 0.1 0.4 − 9.9 − 1.1 − 27.1 − 9.0 − 24.2 17.3 − 1.8          Dec 
− 5.5 − 5.7 0.0 0.0 − 1.5 − 1.8 6.3 − 0.5 − 12.5 − 17.7 11.9 − 3.2 − 19.6 2009          Jan 
0.6 − 0.4 0.0 0.0 − 1.6 − 0.3 6.6 − 0.5 − 9.7 − 4.7 − 13.1 − 20.8 − 7.5          Feb 
− 1.1 − 0.9 0.0 0.0 − 0.3 − 0.6 13.7 − 0.6 − 12.9 − 9.9 − 9.5 8.9 25.1          Mar 
2.4 2.7 0.0 0.0 − 0.3 0.4 4.9 − 0.4 − 3.4 2.3 31.4 − 18.2 − 18.9          Apr 
− 0.5 − 0.9 0.0 0.0 5.9 4.4 − 1.7 − 0.3 4.2 − 6.9 − 39.9 3.1 − 27.3          May
− 1.1 − 0.8 − 0.0 0.0 3.8 4.1 2.5 − 0.4 − 3.5 − 11.1 5.4 16.3 − 20.4          June
1.3 0.6 0.0 0.0 − 6.0 − 6.0 − 11.0 − 1.2 − 4.8 − 4.4 − 4.6 − 0.2 − 1.4          July
− 0.5 − 0.4 0.0 0.0 1.7 1.9 − 10.6 − 0.3 6.1 − 3.3 − 18.2 2.5 12.4          Aug 
2.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 − 2.5 − 2.3 11.9 0.2 − 22.7 − 5.9 − 21.3 0.2 6.1          Sep 
− 0.7 − 0.1 0.0 0.0 1.5 0.5 − 0.4 − 0.1 − 11.0 − 10.2 − 7.1 − 3.1 2.1          Oct − 1.5 − 2.4 − 0.0 0.0 0.2 0.9 − 2.3 − 0.2 − 10.1 − 3.7 0.8 1.5 1.4          Nov − 1.1 0.6 0.0 0.0 − 3.3 − 1.9 − 0.5 − 0.6 − 24.6 − 11.8 − 31.4 12.8 − 17.1          Dec 
0.1 − 1.6 0.0 0.0 0.2 − 0.9 − 12.3 0.8 − 6.2 − 5.3 26.3 − 13.0 − 17.0 2010          Jan 
− 5.5 − 4.8 0.0 0.0 − 0.4 − 0.6 10.7 − 0.1 − 10.9 − 2.7 6.4 − 1.2 − 9.4          Feb − 1.3 − 1.5 0.0 0.0 − 1.5 − 0.4 − 0.4 − 0.4 6.7 − 1.9 14.1 4.1 11.7          Mar 
2Excluding deposits of central governments. — 3In Germany, debt paper; up to the January 2002 Monthly Report they were published
securities with maturities of up to one year are classed as money market together with money market fund shares. 
23*IV Banks

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
E U R O S Y S T E M
Monthly Report
May 2010
IV Banks
 
2 Principal assets and liabilities of banks (MFIs) in Germany, by category of banks *
 
 
€ billion
  Lending to banks (MFIs)  Lending to non-banks (non-MFIs)
 
 of which of which 
Loans
 Cash in hand and credit
Number of balances forreporting Balance with Balances up to and for Partici- Securities Securities
End of institu- sheet central and issued by including more than issued by pating Othermonth tions total banks Total loans banks Total 1 year 1 year Bills non-banks interests assets
All categories of banks
 
2009          Oct 1,945 7,570.4 75.4 3,018.5 2,143.8 851.1 3,953.2 502.4 2,694.2 1.0 737.1 152.9 370.4
         Nov 1,937 7,565.4 87.6 3,003.7 2,130.7 850.4 3,945.9 492.6 2,693.1 0.9 740.7 153.8 374.3
         Dec 1,939 7,509.8 96.2 2,988.9 2,124.1 826.9 3,915.8 459.2 2,702.0 1.0 739.8 151.4 357.5
2010          Jan 1,938 7,525.5 75.2 3,001.4 2,144.5 821.7 3,940.7 465.7 2,702.4 1.1 755.4 152.4 355.8
         Feb 1,938 7,522.7 73.4 3,018.4 2,168.9 816.8 3,938.4 461.9 2,705.7 1.0 756.1 146.6 346.0         Mar 1,938 7,527.9 104.0 2,992.2 2,138.8 821.4 3,921.3 464.4 2,695.8 1.0 746.0 147.9 362.5
Commercial banks 5
2010          Feb 277 2,207.6 26.7 919.0 788.3 111.7 1,063.8 223.2 624.4 0.5 209.0 72.1 126.0
         Mar 278 2,204.1 61.5 894.7 765.8 111.5 1,040.5 215.2 620.3 0.5 197.3 73.5 133.9
   Big banks 6
2010          Feb 4 1,298.2 15.9 575.5 498.0 59.2 542.1 139.8 270.4 0.4 125.5 65.2 99.6         Mar 4 1,279.7 49.0 542.9 467.5 58.4 514.1 130.2 265.4 0.4 111.9 66.6 107.0
   Regional banks and other commercial banks
2010          Feb 170 714.9 9.6 224.5 172.9 51.0 451.8 61.5 308.7 0.1 81.2 6.6 22.5         Mar 170 724.5 10.6 228.6 176.8 51.4 456.2 63.3 309.9 0.1 82.5 6.6 22.5
   Branches of foreign banks
2010          Feb 103 194.5 1.3 119.1 117.5 1.6 69.9 22.0 45.3 0.0 2.3 0.3 3.9         Mar 104 199.9 1.9 123.2 121.4 1.8 70.1 21.7 45.1 0.0 2.9 0.3 4.3
Landesbanken
2010          Feb 10 1,450.1 9.2 662.4 494.1 159.5 684.2 93.4 444.7 0.1 139.5 22.0 72.4         Mar 10 1,447.0 7.5 660.5 489.5 160.8 680.6 93.7 440.5 0.1 140.3 21.9 76.4
Savings banks
2010          Feb 431 1,066.9 21.3 265.5 95.7 169.0 744.8 62.0 581.1 0.2 101.3 17.4 18.0         Mar 431 1,064.7 19.6 262.9 91.3 170.9 747.2 63.1 581.6 0.2 102.2 17.3 17.6
 
Regional institutions of credit cooperatives  
 
2010          Feb 2 256.0 0.8 160.4 115.6 43.9 66.6 16.8 20.2 0.0 29.4 14.8 13.4         Mar 2 260.7 0.4 161.5 116.4 44.3 64.9 15.9 19.9 0.0 28.3 14.8 19.1
Credit cooperatives
2010          Feb 1,157 693.4 13.7 198.6 76.1 121.7 450.7 33.7 356.3 0.1 60.5 11.5 18.8         Mar 1,157 694.8 13.5 197.9 73.5 123.7 453.4 34.3 357.2 0.1 61.6 11.5 18.6
Mortgage banks
2010          Feb 18 762.9 0.6 263.4 165.9 96.5 482.7 10.6 353.5 − 118.5 1.3 14.9         Mar 18 760.4 0.5 266.9 170.0 95.9 477.9 10.3 350.6 − 117.0 1.3 13.8
Building and loan associations
2010          Feb 25 195.2 0.1 58.0 39.0 19.0 124.9 1.4 110.9 . 12.6 0.3 11.9         Mar 24 194.5 0.1 56.8 37.6 19.2 125.5 1.4 111.1 . 13.0 0.3 11.8
Special purpose banks
2010          Feb 18 890.6 1.1 491.0 394.3 95.3 320.7 20.8 214.6 − 85.3 7.2 70.6         Mar 18 901.8 0.9 491.0 394.7 95.0 331.3 30.4 214.5 − 86.3 7.2 71.3
Memo item: Foreign banks 7
2010          Feb 147 815.6 8.9 337.6 280.3 54.8 431.7 72.8 274.0 0.2 82.4 6.1 31.3         Mar 145 814.3 18.4 342.7 289.6 51.0 420.9 69.0 269.1 0.2 80.0 4.9 27.4
  of which:  Banks majority-owned by foreign banks 8
2010          Feb 44 621.1 7.6 218.6 162.8 53.3 361.7 50.8 228.7 0.2 80.1 5.8 27.4         Mar 41 614.4 16.5 219.5 168.1 49.2 350.7 47.3 224.1 0.2 77.1 4.7 23.1
*For the period up to December 1998, section IV (except for Table IV.1) MFIs) and of the Bundesbank are not included. For the definitions of the
shows the assets and liabilities of banks (excluding building and loan respective items, see the footnotes to Table IV.3. — 1For building and loan
associations) in Germany; from January 1999, the assets and liabilities of associations: Including deposits under savings and loan contracts (see T able
monetary financial institutions (MFIs) in Germany. The assets and liabilities IV.12). — 2Included in time deposits. — 3Excluding deposits under savings
of foreign branches, of money market funds (which are also classified as and loan contracts (see also footnote 2). — 4Including subordinated
24*IV Banks

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
May 2010
IV Banks
 
 
 
 
 
Deposits of banks (MFIs) Deposits of non-banks (non-MFIs) Capital
 including  
of which of which published
reserves,
Time deposits  1 Savings deposits  3 partici-
pation
Memo rights
item Bearer capital,
for for of which debt Liabilities funds for
up to and more arising At three Bank general securities
Sight Time Sight including than from savings out- banking Other   End of months’
Total deposits deposits Total deposits 1 year 1 year  1 repos  2 Total notice bonds risks   month standing  4 liabilities
All categories of banks
 
2,030.1 352.6 1,677.5 3,057.0 1,117.8 415.3 810.9 135.9 591.3 468.4 121.6 1,595.0 374.3 514.0 2009          Oct 
2,026.6 386.4 1,640.1 3,066.5 1,130.8 410.9 810.0 134.4 595.1 471.4 119.7 1,581.1 377.6 513.7          Nov 
2,007.7 342.5 1,665.2 3,046.0 1,107.6 405.9 809.7 116.3 604.1 481.5 118.8 1,575.9 378.8 501.3          Dec 
2,031.8 396.3 1,635.4 3,057.4 1,147.5 377.2 808.0 118.8 607.3 486.3 117.5 1,574.9 369.5 491.9 2010          Jan 
2,038.8 404.0 1,634.8 3,074.7 1,148.5 385.7 810.9 140.4 612.5 492.2 117.1 1,567.3 370.3 471.7          Feb 
2,029.6 407.8 1,621.8 3,055.2 1,132.5 384.5 807.0 137.2 614.4 494.1 116.9 1,578.0 370.4 494.8          Mar 
Commercial banks 5
731.4 268.9 462.5 994.6 516.5 152.2 174.0 55.3 126.7 105.9 25.2 208.6 115.3 157.7 2010          Feb 
731.2 271.7 459.4 983.3 504.1 156.2 171.3 55.3 126.3 105.8 25.5 210.2 115.7 163.7          Mar 
Big banks 6
448.0 187.7 260.4 522.1 248.6 84.6 100.5 49.9 78.8 74.9 9.7 171.3 70.0 86.7 2010          Feb 
431.4 170.2 261.2 511.8 239.3 86.4 97.6 49.8 78.8 75.0 9.8 173.8 70.0 92.7          Mar 
Regional banks and other commercial banks
151.7 39.3 112.4 422.2 241.6 56.7 61.1 5.4 47.9 30.9 14.8 37.3 39.0 64.8 2010          Feb 
162.0 53.7 108.2 422.1 239.5 59.5 60.7 5.4 47.5 30.8 15.0 36.4 39.3 64.8          Mar 
Branches of foreign banks
131.6 41.9 89.7 50.3 26.4 10.8 12.4 − 0.0 0.0 0.6 0.0 6.3 6.2 2010          Feb 
137.8 47.8 90.0 49.4 25.4 10.3 13.0 − 0.0 0.0 0.7 0.0 6.4 6.3          Mar 
Landesbanken
441.0 63.6 377.4 412.2 88.5 113.2 195.1 75.5 13.9 11.9 1.5 437.4 73.8 85.7 2010          Feb 
436.5 61.8 374.7 405.5 88.8 107.8 193.5 71.6 13.9 11.4 1.5 437.0 73.3 94.7          Mar 
Savings banks
198.7 17.9 180.8 731.4 314.0 43.1 15.8 − 291.8 227.3 66.9 29.1 58.1 49.6 2010          Feb 
198.4 18.8 179.7 729.0 311.9 42.1 15.9 − 292.6 228.4 66.4 28.6 58.2 50.4          Mar 
 
Regional institutions of credit cooperatives
 
132.2 31.8 100.4 36.2 11.5 8.2 14.3 4.3 − − 2.3 58.9 12.0 16.6 2010          Feb 
133.0 30.7 102.3 34.5 9.6 8.5 14.1 3.1 − − 2.3 58.1 12.1 23.0          Mar 
Credit cooperatives
107.1 3.4 103.7 487.6 208.0 50.9 29.2 − 179.5 146.4 20.0 28.2 39.8 30.7 2010          Feb 
107.8 3.9 103.9 487.4 207.7 49.7 29.3 − 180.9 147.8 19.9 27.7 40.1 31.8          Mar 
Mortgage banks
225.6 5.6 220.0 190.7 5.1 11.7 173.6 4.7 0.4 0.4 0.0 304.5 20.2 21.9 2010          Feb 
222.2 7.1 215.1 191.7 5.1 12.5 173.6 5.1 0.4 0.4 0.0 306.2 18.4 21.9          Mar 
Building and loan associations
28.8 2.3 26.4 131.8 0.5 1.6 128.5 − 0.3 0.3 0.9 5.7 7.5 21.4 2010          Feb 
27.5 1.2 26.3 132.6 0.4 1.6 129.3 − 0.3 0.3 0.9 5.5 7.4 21.5          Mar 
Special purpose banks
174.1 10.5 163.5 90.1 4.6 4.9 80.3 0.6 − − 0.4 494.9 43.5 88.0 2010          Feb 
173.0 12.6 160.4 91.1 4.8 6.1 79.9 2.0 − − 0.4 504.6 45.3 87.8          Mar 
Memo item:   Foreign banks 7
273.7 96.5 177.1 372.0 190.6 65.1 87.2 15.7 20.9 20.6 8.2 73.2 43.1 53.6 2010          Feb 
291.6 113.2 178.4 359.6 179.9 65.1 85.6 15.1 20.8 20.6 8.2 71.8 40.9 50.5          Mar 
of which:   Banks majority-owned by foreign banks 8
142.0 54.6 87.4 321.8 164.2 54.3 74.8 15.7 20.8 20.6 7.6 73.2 36.8 47.3 2010          Feb 
153.8 65.4 88.4 310.2 154.5 54.8 72.5 15.1 20.8 20.6 7.6 71.8 34.5 44.2          Mar 
negotiable bearer debt securities; excluding non-negotiable bearer debt Vereinsbank AG) and Deutsche Postbank AG. — 7Sum of the banks
securities. — 5Commercial banks comprise the sub-groups ”Big banks”, majority-owned by foreign banks and included in other categories of banks
”Regional banks and other commercial banks” and ”Branches of foreign and the category ”Branches (with dependent legal status) of foreign
banks”. — 6Deutsche Bank AG, Dresdner Bank AG (up to Nov. 2009), banks”. — 8Separate presentation of the banks majority-owned by foreign
Commerzbank AG, UniCredit Bank AG (formerly Bayerische Hypo- und banks included in other banking categories. 
25*IV Banks

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
E U R O S Y S T E M
Monthly Report
May 2010
IV Banks
 
3 Assets and liabilities of banks (MFIs) in Germany vis-à-vis residents *
 
€ billion
Lending to domestic banks (MFIs)  2,3 Lending to domestic non-banks (non-MFIs)  3,6 
Treasury
Cash in Negotiable bills and
hand Credit money negotiable
balances market Memo money mar- (euro-area Securities
banknotes with the Credit paper item ket paper issued Securities
and Bundes- balances issued by issued by Fiduciary issued by by non-
Period coins)  1 bank Total and loans Bills  4 banks banks loans  5 Total Loans Bills  4 non-banks banks  7 
End of year or month *
 
2000 15.6 50.8 1,639.6 1,056.1 0.0 26.8 556.6 3.6 3,003.7 2,657.3 6.5 2.3 304.7
2001 14.2 56.3 1,676.0 1,078.9 0.0 5.6 591.5 2.8 3,014.1 2,699.4 4.8 4.4 301.52002 17.5 45.6 1,691.3 1,112.3 0.0 7.8 571.2 2.7 2,997.2 2,685.0 4.1 3.3 301.92003 17.0 46.7 1,643.9 1,064.0 0.0 8.8 571.0 2.3 2,995.6 2,677.0 3.7 3.4 309.62004 14.9 41.2 1,676.3 1,075.8 0.0 7.4 592.9 2.1 3,001.3 2,644.0 2.7 2.6 351.0
2005 15.1 47.9 1,684.5 1,096.8 0.0 6.7 580.9 2.1 2,995.1 2,632.7 2.4 2.4 357.6
2006 16.0 49.4 1,637.8 1,086.3 − 9.3 542.2 1.9 3,000.7 2,630.3 1.9 2.0 366.5
2007 17.5 64.6 1,751.8 1,222.5 0.0 25.3 504.0 2.3 2,975.7 2,647.9 1.6 1.5 324.72008 17.4 102.6 1,861.7 1,298.1 0.0 55.7 507.8 2.0 3,071.1 2,698.9 1.2 3.1 367.92009 16.9 78.9 1,711.5 1,138.0 − 31.6 541.9 2.2 3,100.1 2,691.8 0.8 4.0 403.5
2008          Oct 14.6 51.4 1,884.6 1,343.9 0.0 39.3 501.4 1.9 3,045.1 2,703.4 1.0 2.3 338.4
         Nov 14.4 54.7 1,914.5 1,349.3 0.0 57.6 507.6 1.9 3,044.6 2,705.5 1.1 2.0 336.1
         Dec 17.4 102.6 1,861.7 1,298.1 0.0 55.7 507.8 2.0 3,071.1 2,698.9 1.2 3.1 367.9
2009          Jan 13.5 51.8 1,893.6 1,327.3 0.0 54.5 511.8 1.9 3,097.3 2,718.9 1.1 3.1 374.3
         Feb 13.4 54.4 1,865.5 1,299.3 0.0 52.2 514.0 1.9 3,091.2 2,709.8 0.9 3.2 377.2         Mar 13.5 54.1 1,835.7 1,255.7 0.0 35.9 544.2 1.7 3,101.4 2,720.6 0.9 3.7 376.2
         Apr 14.9 48.5 1,819.9 1,243.3 0.0 32.5 544.1 1.7 3,124.3 2,725.1 0.9 5.4 392.9
         May 15.4 73.3 1,771.0 1,187.2 0.0 29.3 554.6 1.6 3,106.5 2,720.5 0.9 5.8 379.3         June 14.6 78.1 1,840.0 1,251.2 0.0 26.3 562.4 1.6 3,121.8 2,724.0 0.8 3.7 393.3
         July 13.5 55.4 1,811.6 1,219.6 0.0 24.6 567.4 1.7 3,116.5 2,720.1 0.8 5.3 390.3
         Aug 13.6 61.2 1,801.7 1,207.4 0.0 22.9 571.3 1.7 3,094.1 2,703.8 0.7 4.8 384.8         Sep 13.5 88.1 1,751.1 1,163.2 0.0 19.0 568.9 1.8 3,110.3 2,714.8 0.7 7.0 387.9
         Oct 13.8 61.2 1,739.8 1,156.2 0.0 15.8 567.8 1.8 3,116.9 2,716.5 0.7 5.3 394.4
         Nov 13.5 73.8 1,729.6 1,149.1 0.0 13.6 566.9 1.9 3,117.3 2,712.8 0.7 5.4 398.4         Dec 16.9 78.9 1,711.5 1,138.0 − 31.6 541.9 2.2 3,100.1 2,691.8 0.8 4.0 403.5
2010          Jan 13.9 60.9 1,723.0 1,157.7 0.0 29.8 535.5 2.0 3,111.5 2,691.3 0.8 4.0 415.3
         Feb 13.6 59.2 1,748.8 1,188.8 0.0 28.2 531.8 2.0 3,103.1 2,684.8 0.7 3.2 414.4         Mar 13.9 89.5 1,720.0 1,158.7 − 27.2 534.1 1.9 3,098.8 2,681.7 0.8 3.1 413.3
Changes *
2001 − 1.4 + 5.5 + 34.6 + 20.1 − 0.0 − 21.3 + 35.8 − 0.9 + 11.9 + 40.8 − 1.6 + 1.6 + 0.3
2002 + 3.3 − 10.7 + 15.0 + 33.1 + 0.0 + 2.3 − 20.3 − 0.2 − 19.2 − 18.0 − 0.8 − 1.1 + 1.72003 − 0.5 + 1.1 − 47.2 − 48.2 + 0.0 + 1.0 + 0.1 − 0.3 + 0.1 − 8.0 − 0.4 + 0.3 + 9.32004 − 2.1 − 5.5 + 35.9 + 15.1 + 0.0 − 1.4 + 22.1 − 0.2 + 3.3 − 35.0 − 1.0 + 1.1 + 39.2
2005 + 0.2 + 6.7 + 8.4 + 21.0 − 0.0 − 0.8 − 11.9 − 0.0 − 6.7 − 11.8 − 0.3 − 0.2 + 6.6
2006 + 0.9 + 1.5 − 3.6 + 24.5 − 0.0 + 2.6 − 30.6 − 0.2 − 12.4 − 20.3 − 0.5 − 0.4 + 8.82007 + 1.5 + 15.2 + 114.8 + 137.6 + 0.0 + 17.0 − 39.8 + 0.4 − 15.9 + 12.1 − 0.3 − 0.5 − 27.22008 − 0.1 + 39.4 + 125.9 + 90.1
+ 0.0 + 30.6 + 5.2 − 0.8 + 92.0 + 47.3 − 0.4 + 1.8 + 43.3
2009 − 0.5 − 23.6 − 147.2 − 157.3 − 0.0 − 24.1 + 34.3 + 0.2 + 25.7 − 11.2 − 0.4 + 1.4 + 35.9
2008          Oct + 1.3 − 17.1 + 61.1 + 64.7 − 0.0 + 1.3 − 4.9 − 0.0 + 0.4 + 4.8 + 0.0 − 0.2 − 4.3
         Nov − 0.2 + 4.8 + 38.0 + 13.6 − + 18.3 + 6.1 + 0.1 − 0.5 + 2.2 + 0.0 − 0.3 − 2.4         Dec + 3.0 + 47.8 − 51.3 − 49.7 − − 1.8 + 0.3 + 0.0 + 23.2 − 9.7 + 0.1 + 1.1 + 31.7
2009          Jan − 3.9 − 50.8 + 31.9 + 29.2 + 0.0 − 1.3 + 4.0 − 0.1 + 26.2 + 20.0 − 0.1 − 0.1 + 6.4
         Feb − 0.1 + 2.6 − 28.1 − 28.0 − 0.0 − 2.3 + 2.2 + 0.0 − 6.1 − 9.1 − 0.1 + 0.2 + 2.9         Mar + 0.0 − 0.3 − 29.8 − 43.6 − − 16.3 + 30.1 − 0.2 + 9.2 + 9.8 − 0.0 + 0.4 − 1.0
         Apr + 1.5 − 5.5 − 15.9 − 12.4 − − 3.3 − 0.1 − 0.0 + 22.8 + 4.5 + 0.0 + 1.7 + 16.7
         May + 0.5 + 24.7 − 45.4 − 52.6 − − 3.2 + 10.5 − 0.1 − 16.9 − 4.6 − 0.1 + 0.5 − 12.8
         June − 0.9 + 4.8 + 69.0 + 64.0 + 0.0 − 3.0 + 7.9 − 0.0 + 15.8 + 3.5 − 0.1 − 1.6 + 14.0
         July − 1.1 − 22.6 − 28.4 − 31.6 − − 1.8 + 5.0 + 0.1 − 5.4 − 3.9 − 0.0 + 1.5 − 3.1
         Aug + 0.1 + 5.7 − 9.9 − 12.2 − 0.0 − 1.6 + 3.9 − 0.0 − 22.4 − 16.4 − 0.0 − 0.5 − 5.5
         Sep − 0.1 + 26.9 − 51.3 − 44.9 − 0.0 − 3.9 − 2.5 + 0.2 + 15.9 + 10.7 − 0.0 + 2.2 + 3.1
         Oct + 0.3 − 26.9 − 11.3 − 7.0 + 0.0 − 3.2 − 1.1 − 0.0 + 6.4 + 1.8 + 0.0 − 1.7 + 6.3
         Nov − 0.3 + 12.6 − 10.2 − 7.1 + 0.0 − 2.3 − 0.9 + 0.0 + 0.4 − 3.7 − 0.0 + 0.1 + 4.0         Dec + 3.4 + 5.1 − 17.9 − 11.1 − 0.0 + 18.1 − 24.8 + 0.3 − 20.2 − 23.8 + 0.1 − 1.4 + 4.9
2010          Jan − 3.0 − 18.1 + 11.5 + 19.7 + 0.0 − 1.8 − 6.4 − 0.2 + 11.2 − 0.6 + 0.0 + 0.0 + 11.8
         Feb − 0.4 − 1.7 + 26.3 + 31.7 − 0.0 − 1.6 − 3.7 − 0.0 − 8.9 − 7.0 − 0.1 − 0.9 − 1.0         Mar + 0.4 + 30.3 − 27.0 − 30.1 − 0.0 − 0.5 + 3.6 − 0.0 + 0.2 − 3.1 + 0.0 − 0.1 + 3.4
*See Table IV.2, footnote*; statistical breaks have been eliminated from the rediscounted bills and bills sent for collection from the banks’ portfol ios
changes. The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as prior to maturity). — 5From 1999, no longer included in loans or deposits
provisional. Subsequent revisions which appear in the following Monthly (see also footnote 3). — 6Up to December 1998, including loans to domestic
Report, are not specially marked. — 1Up to December 1998, domestic building and loan associations. — 7Excluding debt securities arising from
banknotes and coins. — 2Up to December 1998, excluding loans to the exchange of equalisation claims (see also footnote 8). — 8Including
domestic building and loan associations. — 3Up to December 1998, debt securities arising from the exchange of equalisation claims. —
including fiduciary loans (see also footnote 5). — 4Up to December 1998, 9Including liabilities arising from registered debt securities, registered
bill-based lending (bill holdings plus endorsement liabilities arising from money market paper and non-negotiable bearer debt securities;
26*IV Banks

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
May 2010
IV Banks
 
 
 
 
 Deposits of domestic banks (MFIs)  3,9,10  Deposits of domestic non-banks (non-MFIs)  3,15 
Partici-
pating
interests
in
Memo domestic Memo Memo
item banks Sight Time Redis- item Sight Time Savings Bank item Equalisa-tion Fiduciary and deposits deposits counted Fiduciary de- deposits de- savings Fiduciary
claims  
8 loans  5 Total 11,12  12,13  bills 14 loans  5 Total 13,16  bonds  18 loans  5   Period enterprises posits  11 posits  17 
End of year or month *
 
33.1 58.5 82.7 1,189.2 113.4 1,075.3 0.4 30.1 1,945.8 443.4 819.9 573.5 109.0 42.1 2000
4.0 57.0 95.9 1,204.9 123.1 1,081.6 0.3 27.2 2,034.0 526.4 827.0 574.5 106.0 43.3 2001
3.0 54.8 119.0 1,244.0 127.6 1,116.2 0.2 25.6 2,085.9 575.6 830.6 575.3 104.4 42.1 20022.0 56.8 109.2 1,229.6 116.8 1,112.6 0.2 27.8 2,140.3 624.0 825.7 590.3 100.3 40.5 20031.0 61.8 99.6 1,271.2 119.7 1,151.4 0.1 30.3 2,200.0 646.9 851.2 603.5 98.4 43.7 2004
− 56.6 108.5 1,300.0 120.5 1,179.4 0.1 26.5 2,276.6 717.0 864.4 603.4 91.9 42.4 2005− 53.0 106.3 1,348.2 125.4 1,222.7 0.0 22.3 2,394.6 747.7 962.8 586.5 97.5 37.8 2006
− 51.1 109.4 1,478.6 122.1 1,356.5 0.0 20.0 2,579.1 779.9 1,125.4 555.4 118.4 36.4 2007− 47.2 111.2 1,582.5 138.5 1,444.0 0.0 41.6 2,781.4 834.6 1,276.1 535.2 135.4 32.3 2008− 43.9 106.1 1,355.1 128.9 1,226.2 0.0 35.7 2,829.7 1,029.5 1,102.6 594.5 103.2 43.4 2009
− 48.1 108.8 1,641.8 162.0 1,479.7 0.0 43.2 2,719.2 812.8 1,252.5 520.8 133.1 32.3 2008          Oct 
− 47.8 108.4 1,595.2 155.9 1,439.3 0.0 43.2 2,748.8 832.8 1,257.9 523.4 134.7 32.2          Nov 
− 47.2 111.2 1,582.5 138.5 1,444.0 0.0 41.6 2,781.4 834.6 1,276.1 535.2 135.4 32.3          Dec 
− 46.9 115.6 1,532.6 155.0 1,377.6 0.0 41.9 2,799.9 884.4 1,242.7 539.0 133.8 31.9 2009          Jan 
− 46.5 116.4 1,509.5 159.0 1,350.4 0.0 42.0 2,820.0 912.1 1,231.8 544.3 131.9 31.8          Feb 
− 46.4 119.5 1,455.9 138.3 1,317.7 0.0 40.6 2,817.3 914.0 1,226.4 547.8 129.1 30.9          Mar 
− 45.5 119.1 1,458.0 153.2 1,304.8 0.0 39.6 2,839.6 932.2 1,231.1 551.1 125.2 31.1          Apr 
− 44.7 110.6 1,444.8 121.6 1,323.1 0.0 38.3 2,837.0 935.4 1,224.4 555.1 122.1 31.2          May− 44.2 108.4 1,467.8 117.4 1,350.4 0.0 37.6 2,847.3 956.0 1,213.1 559.7 118.5 31.1          June
− 43.8 107.5 1,417.1 119.2 1,297.9 0.0 37.2 2,819.9 954.4 1,185.6 565.5 114.4 31.2          July
− 43.5 108.0 1,413.9 125.7 1,288.2 0.0 36.9 2,801.5 962.4 1,157.0 570.8 111.2 42.0          Aug − 43.2 107.7 1,380.6 129.9 1,250.7 0.0 36.3 2,810.6 987.2 1,139.6 575.1 108.6 42.2          Sep 
− 42.9 103.7 1,372.8 126.2 1,246.7 0.0 35.8 2,812.0 1,014.0 1,110.4 581.8 105.9 42.2          Oct 
− 42.8 102.7 1,375.3 150.5 1,224.8 0.0 35.5 2,825.5 1,037.6 1,098.1 585.6 104.2 42.2          Nov − 43.9 106.1 1,355.1 128.9 1,226.2 0.0 35.7 2,829.7 1,029.5 1,102.6 594.5 103.2 43.4          Dec 
− 43.4 104.3 1,348.2 142.4 1,205.8 0.0 35.7 2,820.3 1,051.3 1,070.0 597.7 101.3 43.0 2010          Jan 
− 43.3 98.9 1,360.7 150.4 1,210.3 0.0 36.0 2,830.1 1,055.9 1,070.5 602.9 100.8 43.0          Feb 
− 42.9 98.7 1,327.9 129.4 1,198.5 0.0 36.1 2,819.0 1,040.0 1,073.7 604.7 100.5 42.8          Mar 
Changes *
− 29.1 − 1.5 + 13.3 + 9.6 + 7.4 + 2.3 − 0.2 − 2.9 + 88.5 + 82.3 + 8.1 + 1.1 − 2.9 + 1.0 2001
− 1.0 − 2.1 + 24.2 + 37.9 + 1.7 + 36.3 − 0.1 − 1.5 + 51.7 + 48.4 + 4.1 + 0.8 − 1.6 − 1.1 2002− 1.0 + 2.1 − 9.8 − 5.6 − 9.5 + 3.9 + 0.0 + 2.4 + 54.0 + 48.4 − 4.8 + 15.1 − 4.8 − 1.2 2003− 1.1 + 3.0 − 9.6 + 41.3 + 2.9 + 38.5 − 0.1 + 2.4 + 62.0 + 24.4 + 25.9 + 13.1 − 1.5 + 1.2 2004
− 1.0 − 4.9 + 8.9 + 28.9 + 0.8 + 28.0 + 0.0 − 3.5 + 76.6 + 70.7 + 12.4 − 1.2 − 5.4 − 1.2 2005
− − 3.7 − 2.2 + 79.0 + 8.6 + 70.5 − 0.1 − 4.5 + 118.0 + 30.0 + 97.7 − 16.8 + 7.2 − 4.1 2006
− − 2.3 + 3.1 + 132.0 − 3.3 + 135.3 − 0.0 − 2.3 + 181.1 + 31.6 + 160.5 − 31.1 + 20.1 − 2.0 2007− − 5.4 + 7.8 + 124.3 + 23.0 + 101.3 − 0.0 − 3.6 + 207.6 + 54.3 + 156.6 − 20.2 + 17.0 − 1.3 2008
− − 4.2 + 0.7 − 225.4 − 9.7 − 215.7 − 0.0 − 5.7 + 59.7 + 211.4 − 179.3 + 59.3 − 31.6 − 0.9 2009
− − 0.3 + 0.5 + 113.0 + 11.1 + 101.9 − 0.0 + 1.2 + 43.2 + 28.1 + 10.1 + 1.5 + 3.5 − 0.1 2008          Oct 
− − 0.3 − 0.3 − 30.7 − 3.3 − 27.4 + 0.0 + 0.0 + 34.3 + 20.0 + 10.1 + 2.6 + 1.7 − 0.0          Nov 
− − 0.6 + 2.8 − 12.7 − 17.4 + 4.7 − 0.0 − 1.6 + 33.5 + 1.8 + 19.2 + 11.8 + 0.6 + 0.1          Dec 
− − 0.3 + 4.4 − 49.9 + 16.5 − 66.4 − 0.0 + 0.3 + 18.5 + 49.7 − 33.5 + 3.8 − 1.5 − 0.4 2009          Jan 
− − 0.3 + 0.7 − 23.1 + 4.0 − 27.1 − + 0.1 + 20.2 + 27.7 − 10.9 + 5.3 − 2.0 − 0.1          Feb 
− − 0.6 + 3.2 − 53.6 − 20.7 − 32.8 − 0.0 − 1.4 − 3.0 + 1.9 − 6.1 + 3.5 − 2.4 − 0.9          Mar 
− − 0.9 − 0.4 + 1.8 + 14.9 − 13.2 + 0.0 − 1.0 + 22.3 + 34.9 − 12.0 + 3.3 − 3.9 + 0.2          Apr 
− − 0.2 − 2.6 − 9.8 − 31.6 + 21.8 − 0.0 − 1.1 − 2.6 + 3.0 − 6.5 + 3.9 − 3.1 − 0.0          May− − 0.4 − 2.2 + 23.0 − 4.3 + 27.3 − 0.0 − 0.7 + 10.3 + 20.6 − 11.3 + 4.7 − 3.7 − 0.1          June
− − 0.4 − 0.8 − 50.6 + 1.9 − 52.5 − − 0.4 − 27.4 − 1.7 − 27.4 + 5.8 − 4.1 + 0.1          July
− − 0.3 + 0.5 − 3.3 + 6.4 − 9.7 − 0.0 − 0.3 − 7.0 + 8.0 − 17.2 + 5.3 − 3.1 + 0.0          Aug − − 0.3 − 0.3 − 34.3 + 4.3 − 38.5 − 0.0 − 0.6 + 9.1 + 24.7 − 17.4 + 4.3 − 2.6 + 0.2          Sep 
− − 0.3 − 4.1 − 7.8 − 3.8 − 4.1 + 0.0 − 0.5 + 1.7 + 26.8 − 29.3 + 6.6 − 2.5 + 0.1          Oct 
− − 0.1 − 0.9 + 2.5 + 24.4 − 21.9 − 0.0 − 0.3 + 13.5 + 23.6 − 12.3 + 3.8 − 1.7 + 0.0          Nov − + 0.0 + 3.3 − 20.2 − 21.7 + 1.5 + 0.0 + 0.2 + 4.3 − 8.1 + 4.5 + 8.9 − 1.0 + 0.1          Dec 
− − 0.5 − 1.7 − 6.9 + 13.6 − 20.4 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 9.5 + 21.9 − 32.6 + 3.2 − 1.9 − 0.5 2010          Jan 
− − 0.1 − 5.4 + 12.4 + 7.9 + 4.5 + 0.0 + 0.3 + 9.9 + 4.6 + 0.5 + 5.2 − 0.5 − 0.0          Feb 
− − 0.4 − 0.2 − 17.2 − 5.4 − 11.8 − 0.0 + 0.0 − 11.2 − 15.9 + 3.2 + 1.8 − 0.4 − 0.2          Mar 
including subordinated liabilities. — 10Up to December 1998, excluding endorsement liabilities arising from rediscounted bills. — 15Up to
liabilities to domestic building and loan associations and money market December 1998, including liabilities to domestic building and loan
funds. — 11Up to December 1998, including time deposits with terms of associations and money market funds. — 16Since the inclusion of building
less than one month. — 12Including liabilities arising from monetary policy and loan associations in January 1999, including deposits under savings and
operations with the Bundesbank. — 13Up to December 1998, excluding loan contracts (see Table IV.12). — 17Excluding deposits under savings and
time deposits with terms of less than one month. — 14Own acceptances loan contracts (see also footnote 16). — 18Including liabilities arising from
and promissory notes outstanding and, up to December 1998, including non-negotiable bearer debt securities. 
27*IV Banks

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
E U R O S Y S T E M
Monthly Report
May 2010
IV Banks
 
4 Assets and liabilities of banks (MFIs) in Germany vis-à-vis non-residents *
 
€ billion
Lending to foreign banks (MFIs)  2 Lending to foreign non-banks (non-MFIs)  2 
Treasury
Cash in bills and
hand Loans and bills  3 negotiable Credit balances and loans, bills  3 Negotiable
(non- money money
euro-area Medium market Memo Medium market
banknotes and paper item and paper Securities Securities
and Short- long- issued by issued by Fiduciary Short- long- issued by issued by
Period coins)  1 Total Total term term banks banks loans  4 Total Total term term non-banks non-banks
End of year or month *
 
2000 0.4 507.7 441.4 325.4 116.0 1.3 65.0 3.6 475.8 286.8 71.1 215.7 6.5 182.5
2001 0.4 596.1 521.7 383.7 138.0 0.8 73.6 3.5 570.3 347.2 99.7 247.5 5.2 217.9
2002 0.3 690.6 615.3 468.0 147.2 0.9 74.4 2.7 558.8 332.6 92.6 240.0 9.3 216.9
2003 0.3 769.6 675.8 515.7 160.1 1.5 92.3 1.6 576.3 344.8 110.9 233.9 6.0 225.42004 0.2 889.4 760.2 606.5 153.7 2.8 126.3 1.5 629.5 362.5 136.6 225.9 10.9 256.1
2005 0.2 1,038.8 860.0 648.5 211.5 5.8 173.0 1.5 712.0 387.9 132.8 255.1 9.3 314.8
2006 0.4 1,266.9 1,003.2 744.5 258.7 13.3 250.4 0.8 777.0 421.0 156.0 264.9 7.2 348.9
2007 0.3 1,433.5 1,105.9 803.6 302.4 13.4 314.2 0.5 908.3 492.9 197.5 295.4 27.5 387.92008 0.3 1,446.6 1,131.6 767.2 364.3 15.6 299.5 1.9 908.4 528.9 151.4 377.5 12.9 366.62009 0.3 1,277.4 986.1 643.5 342.6 6.2 285.0 2.9 815.7 469.6 116.9 352.7 9.8 336.3
2008          Oct 0.8 1,571.1 1,232.6 859.9 372.7 27.3 311.3 2.0 990.1 597.4 208.6 388.8 17.0 375.6
         Nov 0.7 1,509.6 1,181.4 807.5 373.9 21.5 306.7 2.0 961.6 574.4 183.8 390.5 12.8 374.4
         Dec 0.3 1,446.6 1,131.6 767.2 364.3 15.6 299.5 1.9 908.4 528.9 151.4 377.5 12.9 366.6
2009          Jan 0.4 1,433.6 1,122.7 743.9 378.8 14.8 296.1 1.9 915.4 541.1 153.8 387.3 12.2 362.1
         Feb 0.4 1,416.2 1,111.4 733.1 378.3 12.2 292.6 1.9 905.6 529.5 141.1 388.4 11.3 364.7         Mar 0.5 1,357.7 1,058.2 686.2 372.0 10.0 289.5 1.9 880.9 514.4 135.4 379.1 9.8 356.6
         Apr 0.4 1,378.9 1,081.8 713.6 368.2 9.2 287.9 1.9 896.0 530.1 147.2 382.9 11.6 354.3
         May 0.4 1,355.9 1,057.7 691.4 366.3 6.7 291.4 2.0 884.5 516.3 143.5 372.8 12.3 355.9         June 0.5 1,332.8 1,036.7 653.2 383.5 8.2 287.8 2.0 879.9 513.5 142.6 370.9 11.6 354.7
         July 0.4 1,310.8 1,016.8 639.5 377.3 8.6 285.5 2.0 875.4 510.3 136.8 373.5 13.8 351.3
         Aug 0.3 1,311.7 1,017.4 647.4 370.0 8.3 286.1 3.1 851.5 491.7 130.6 361.1 13.1 346.6         Sep 0.4 1,261.1 967.7 608.1 359.6 8.1 285.2 3.0 840.2 482.3 125.6 356.7 11.1 346.8
         Oct 0.4 1,278.7 987.6 637.1 350.5 7.8 283.3 3.0 836.3 480.4 127.2 353.3 13.1 342.7
         Nov 0.3 1,274.1 981.6 637.6 344.1 9.0 283.5 3.0 828.7 473.2 124.5 348.8 13.2 342.3
         Dec 0.3 1,277.4 986.1 643.5 342.6 6.2 285.0 2.9 815.7 469.6 116.9 352.7 9.8 336.3
2010          Jan 0.4 1,278.4 986.8 647.2 339.6 5.3 286.2 2.9 829.2 477.1 121.1 356.0 12.1 340.1
         Feb 0.6 1,269.6 980.1 640.5 339.5 4.5 285.0 2.9 835.3 483.0 122.5 360.5 10.5 341.8         Mar 0.5 1,272.2 980.1 640.2 339.8 4.8 287.3 3.0 822.5 478.7 119.5 359.2 11.1 332.7
Changes *
2001 + 0.0 + 83.7 + 75.6 + 54.4 + 21.2 − 0.5 + 8.5 − 0.2 + 88.3 + 53.4 + 27.0 + 26.4 − 1.5 + 36.3
2002 − 0.1 + 120.3 + 118.0 + 99.4 + 18.6 + 0.1 + 2.2 − 0.9 + 21.2 + 12.7 − 0.4 + 13.2 + 4.6 + 3.92003 − 0.1 + 103.8 + 84.6 + 65.2 + 19.3 + 0.6 + 18.7 − 0.4 + 46.3 + 35.1 + 24.0 + 11.0 − 2.7 + 13.9
2004 − 0.1 + 128.3 + 89.4 + 95.3 − 5.9 + 1.3 + 37.6 − 0.1 + 65.8 + 29.5 + 31.7 − 2.2 + 5.1 + 31.1
2005 + 0.0 + 127.3 + 78.9 + 26.3 + 52.6 + 2.9 + 45.4 − 0.0 + 59.4 + 7.3 − 9.4 + 16.7 − 1.8 + 54.0
2006 + 0.1 + 238.3 + 153.5 + 109.7 + 43.8 + 7.5 + 77.2 − 0.7 + 81.4 + 51.6 + 25.9 + 25.8 − 1.8 + 31.52007 − 0.0 + 190.3 + 123.7 + 72.9 + 50.8 + 7.5 + 59.1 − 0.4 + 167.7 + 94.3 + 50.1 + 44.2 + 20.1 + 53.3
2008 + 0.0 + 8.5 + 20.2 − 43.0 + 63.2 + 2.1 − 13.7 − 0.0 + 4.3 + 45.1 − 31.9 + 77.0 − 14.5 − 26.3
2009 − 0.0 − 170.0 − 141.3 − 122.5 − 18.8 −10.3 − 18.4 − 0.2 − 72.8 − 43.8 − 31.7 − 12.1 − 3.3 − 25.7
2008          Oct + 0.4 + 9.5 + 21.6 + 19.2 + 2.5 − 5.0 − 7.2 + 0.0 − 10.3 + 3.6 − 1.1 + 4.7 − 2.0 − 11.8
         Nov − 0.2 − 53.9 − 43.8 − 46.5 + 2.8 − 5.7 − 4.4 − 0.0 − 12.5 − 7.4 − 10.3 + 2.9 − 4.2 − 0.9         Dec − 0.3 − 31.8 − 19.9 − 22.1 + 2.2 − 5.9 − 6.0 − 0.1 − 27.1 − 25.2 − 27.6 + 2.4 + 0.2 − 2.0
2009          Jan + 0.1 − 39.9 − 34.8 − 39.1 + 4.2 − 0.8 − 4.2 + 0.1 − 15.8 − 5.3 − 1.5 − 3.9 − 0.7 − 9.7
         Feb − 0.0 − 19.3 − 13.5 − 12.0 − 1.5 − 3.1 − 2.7 + 0.0 − 12.8 − 13.6 − 13.3 − 0.4 − 0.9 + 1.8         Mar + 0.1 − 42.4 − 37.7 − 38.1 + 0.4 − 2.2 − 2.5 − 0.0 − 9.8 − 3.7 − 3.2 − 0.5 − 1.5 − 4.7
         Apr − 0.1 + 18.4 + 21.3 + 26.0 − 4.7 − 0.8 − 2.1 − 0.0 + 13.0 + 14.5 + 11.6 + 2.9 + 1.5 − 3.0
         May − 0.0 − 14.1 − 10.9 − 14.3 + 3.5 − 2.5 − 0.7 − 0.1 + 6.3 − 2.9 − 1.1 − 1.8 + 0.8 + 8.4         June + 0.1 − 23.9 − 21.2 − 38.2 + 17.0 + 1.0 − 3.7 − 0.0 − 4.3 − 2.5 − 0.2 − 2.3 − 0.7 − 1.0
         July − 0.0 − 21.8 − 19.9 − 13.7 − 6.1 + 0.3 − 2.3 + 0.0 − 5.0 − 3.4 − 5.8 + 2.4 + 2.2 − 3.8
         Aug − 0.1 + 4.9 + 4.7 + 9.7 − 5.0 − 0.3 + 0.5 + 0.0 − 10.9 − 6.4 − 5.0 − 1.4 − 0.7 − 3.7         Sep + 0.1 − 43.7 − 43.5 − 35.9 − 7.6 − 0.1 − 0.1 − 0.1 − 5.5 − 4.6 − 3.9 − 0.8 − 2.0 + 1.1
         Oct − 0.0 + 19.4 + 21.7 + 30.1 − 8.4 − 0.4 − 2.0 − 0.0 − 1.2 − 0.1 + 1.9 − 1.9 + 2.1 − 3.2
         Nov − 0.0 − 1.3 − 2.8 + 2.2 − 5.1 + 1.2 + 0.3 − 0.0 − 4.3 − 4.6 − 2.1 − 2.5 + 0.0 + 0.2         Dec + 0.0 − 6.4 − 4.8 + 0.8 − 5.6 − 2.8 + 1.1 − 0.1 − 22.6 − 11.2 − 9.2 − 2.0 − 3.4 − 8.1
2010          Jan + 0.1 − 7.4 − 7.5 − 1.0 − 6.5 − 0.9 + 1.0 + 0.0 + 5.4 + 2.5 + 2.8 − 0.3 + 2.3 + 0.5
         Feb + 0.2 − 14.1 − 11.8 − 9.2 − 2.6 − 0.9 − 1.5 − 0.0 − 0.0 + 1.2 + 0.6 + 0.6 − 1.6 + 0.4         Mar − 0.1 + 2.5 − 1.5 − 1.1 − 0.4 + 0.3 + 3.7 + 0.1 − 6.7 − 5.8 − 3.3 − 2.5 + 0.7 − 1.6
*See Table IV.2, footnote*; statistical breaks have been eliminated from the banknotes and coins. — 2Up to December 1998, including fiduciary loans
changes. The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as (see also footnote 4). — 3Up to December 1998, bill-based lending (bill
provisional. Subsequent revisions, which appear in the following Monthly holdings plus endorsement liabilities arising from rediscounted bills a nd bills
Report, are not specially marked. — 1Up to December 1998, foreign sent for collection from the banks’ portfolios prior to maturity). —
28*IV Banks

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
May 2010
IV Banks
 
 
 
 
 Deposits of foreign banks (MFIs)  2 Deposits of foreign non-banks (non-MFIs)  2 
 Partici- Time deposits (including
pating Time deposits (including bank savings deposits and bank
interests savings bonds) savings bonds)in foreign
Memo banks Medium Memo Medium Memo
item and and item and item
Fiduciary enter- Sight Short- long- Fiduciary Sight Short- long- Fiduciaryloans  
4 prises  5 Total Total  7 term  7 term loans  4 Total Total  7 term  7 term loans  4   Period deposits  6 deposits  6 
End of year or month *
 
13.9 47.4 586.0 113.7 472.2 382.9 89.3 1.7 314.9 35.4 279.5 62.5 217.0 5.6 2000
13.8 47.6 622.7 91.9 530.8 434.5 96.3 1.4 350.6 34.0 316.6 97.6 219.0 5.3 2001
15.6 44.8 614.2 101.6 512.7 410.4 102.3 1.1 319.2 33.5 285.7 87.0 198.7 4.5 2002
11.6 41.4 590.7 95.1 495.6 387.7 107.9 0.4 307.3 32.2 275.1 102.4 172.7 3.6 2003
9.8 39.3 603.3 87.0 516.2 403.2 113.0 0.5 311.2 36.6 274.7 123.4 151.2 0.8 2004
10.6 37.2 651.7 102.9 548.8 420.4 128.4 0.6 316.4 62.0 254.4 119.4 135.0 1.2 2005
5.8 50.4 689.7 168.1 521.6 397.3 124.3 0.4 310.1 82.1 228.0 111.5 116.5 1.5 20065.7 48.3 738.9 164.7 574.1 461.2 113.0 0.2 303.1 76.0 227.1 122.3 104.8 3.1 2007
25.5 45.1 703.3 218.1 485.1 362.3 122.9 0.3 286.1 92.2 193.9 95.1 98.8 2.5 200832.1 45.4 652.6 213.6 439.0 307.4 131.6 0.2 216.3 78.1 138.2 73.7 64.5 1.9 2009
26.3 49.2 780.1 243.5 536.6 415.1 121.5 0.3 325.3 103.6 221.7 117.9 103.8 2.7 2008          Oct 
26.5 49.0 752.0 254.4 497.6 369.7 127.9 0.3 307.8 103.7 204.1 101.4 102.7 2.6          Nov 
25.5 45.1 703.3 218.1 485.1 362.3 122.9 0.3 286.1 92.2 193.9 95.1 98.8 2.5          Dec 
25.9 50.9 737.2 253.1 484.1 359.6 124.6 0.3 306.8 123.8 183.0 82.4 100.7 2.6 2009          Jan 
26.1 49.4 733.1 251.7 481.4 356.7 124.6 0.3 279.9 100.5 179.4 78.5 100.9 2.5          Feb 
24.1 49.5 705.4 266.8 438.7 315.7 122.9 0.3 273.0 103.7 169.3 71.3 98.0 2.5          Mar 
24.2 50.0 729.0 228.6 500.4 378.6 121.8 0.3 288.8 100.4 188.4 91.5 96.9 2.4          Apr 
23.8 49.7 718.8 214.4 504.4 353.6 150.8 0.3 239.2 102.5 136.7 72.1 64.7 2.3          May23.3 49.7 720.6 247.2 473.4 321.9 151.5 0.3 237.5 102.5 135.0 70.9 64.1 2.1          June
23.2 49.7 699.5 227.9 471.7 321.9 149.8 0.3 250.7 112.3 138.3 73.2 65.1 2.0          July
32.9 49.6 682.3 215.3 467.1 321.8 145.2 0.3 243.9 100.5 143.4 79.7 63.7 2.0          Aug 32.5 49.3 665.4 218.9 446.5 304.7 141.9 0.2 237.0 94.7 142.3 76.1 66.2 2.0          Sep 
32.3 49.2 657.2 226.4 430.9 291.5 139.4 0.2 245.0 103.8 141.1 75.5 65.7 1.9          Oct 
32.1 51.1 651.3 235.9 415.4 281.6 133.7 0.2 241.0 93.2 147.8 82.1 65.7 1.9          Nov 
32.1 45.4 652.6 213.6 439.0 307.4 131.6 0.2 216.3 78.1 138.2 73.7 64.5 1.9          Dec 
32.4 48.0 683.5 253.9 429.6 299.0 130.6 0.2 237.2 96.1 141.0 74.7 66.4 1.9 2010          Jan 
32.8 47.7 678.1 253.6 424.5 293.3 131.2 0.2 244.5 92.6 152.0 82.3 69.7 1.9          Feb 
32.8 49.2 701.7 278.4 423.3 289.7 133.6 0.1 236.2 92.4 143.8 76.8 67.0 1.8          Mar 
Changes *
− 0.5 − 0.5 + 23.5 − 23.6 + 47.0 + 42.4 + 4.6 − 0.4 + 30.8 − 1.8 + 32.6 + 33.3 − 0.7 − 0.6 2001
+ 1.7 + 1.6 + 22.7 + 14.6 + 8.1 − 1.3 + 9.4 − 0.3 + 4.6 + 0.8 + 3.8 − 4.6 + 8.4 − 0.9 2002− 0.7 − 1.9 + 5.7 − 2.0 + 7.7 − 2.4 + 10.0 − 0.0 + 4.5 + 0.4 + 4.1 + 20.6 − 16.5 + 1.9 2003
+ 0.7 − 1.5 + 19.8 − 6.1 + 25.9 + 21.1 + 4.8 + 0.1 + 13.0 + 5.4 + 7.6 + 22.8 − 15.2 − 0.3 2004
+ 0.8 − 3.5 + 28.6 + 12.6 + 16.0 + 4.9 + 11.1 + 0.1 − 4.9 + 23.9 − 28.8 − 7.7 − 21.1 + 0.4 2005
− 5.1 + 13.8 + 56.2 + 68.3 − 12.1 − 13.7 + 1.6 − 0.2 − 0.8 + 21.2 − 22.0 − 5.1 − 17.0 − 0.2 2006− 0.1 − 0.8 + 67.3 + 1.5 + 65.8 + 74.0 − 8.3 − 0.1 + 4.6 − 5.5 + 10.2 + 16.6 − 6.4 + 1.6 2007
+ 0.7 − 3.1 − 50.1 + 52.2 − 102.3 − 120.7 + 18.5 + 0.1 − 12.4 + 16.1 − 28.5 − 19.4 − 9.1 − 0.6 2008
− 3.2 + 0.1 − 81.4 − 2.1 − 79.3 − 57.5 − 21.7 − 0.2 − 33.5 − 13.3 − 20.1 − 17.0 − 3.1 − 0.6 2009
+ 1.6 − 0.8 − 61.4 − 22.2 − 39.2 − 40.1 + 0.9 + 0.0 − 13.0 + 0.1 − 13.2 − 13.3 + 0.1 + 0.1 2008          Oct 
+ 0.2 + 0.1 − 26.4 + 11.0 − 37.3 − 44.0 + 6.6 − 0.0 − 10.4 + 2.9 − 13.3 − 13.5 + 0.2 − 0.1          Nov 
− 1.0 − 2.6 − 38.1 − 31.8 − 6.3 − 4.2 − 2.1 − 0.0 − 7.6 − 9.8 + 2.2 + 3.4 − 1.2 − 0.1          Dec 
+ 0.3 + 4.6 + 18.3 + 32.1 − 13.8 − 12.9 − 0.9 − 0.0 + 14.2 + 30.4 − 16.3 − 14.8 − 1.4 + 0.1 2009          Jan 
+ 0.3 − 1.6 − 5.9 − 1.8 − 4.0 − 3.8 − 0.2 − 0.0 − 27.4 − 23.4 − 4.0 − 3.9 − 0.1 − 0.1          Feb 
− 1.6 + 0.8 − 17.5 + 17.9 − 35.4 − 35.3 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 3.1 + 4.0 − 7.1 − 6.0 − 1.1 − 0.1          Mar 
+ 0.0 + 0.3 + 22.5 − 37.8 + 60.3 + 60.8 − 0.5 − + 14.8 − 3.3 + 18.1 + 19.8 − 1.6 − 0.1          Apr 
− 0.9 + 0.1 − 36.3 − 11.5 − 24.9 − 23.8 − 1.0 − 0.0 − 10.5 + 3.1 − 13.6 − 14.3 + 0.7 − 0.1          May− 0.5 − 0.1 + 1.9 + 32.8 − 30.9 − 30.7 − 0.2 − 0.0 − 1.9 + 0.1 − 2.0 − 1.3 − 0.6 − 0.1          June
− 0.1 − − 21.0 − 19.4 − 1.7 + 0.0 − 1.7 − 0.0 + 13.2 + 9.8 + 3.4 + 2.3 + 1.1 − 0.1          July
+ 0.0 + 0.1 − 15.1 − 12.8 − 2.3 + 1.6 − 4.0 − 0.0 − 5.6 − 11.7 + 6.1 + 6.9 − 0.7 + 0.0          Aug − 0.4 + 0.0 − 12.2 + 4.7 − 16.9 − 14.6 − 2.3 − 0.1 − 5.6 − 5.5 − 0.1 − 2.9 + 2.9 − 0.1          Sep 
− 0.2 − 0.1 − 6.9 + 7.9 − 14.8 − 12.5 − 2.3 − + 8.2 + 9.3 − 1.1 − 0.4 − 0.7 − 0.1          Oct 
− 0.2 + 2.0 − 3.6 + 10.2 − 13.9 − 8.8 − 5.1 − − 3.3 − 10.4 + 7.1 + 6.9 + 0.2 − 0.0          Nov − 0.0 − 6.1 − 5.4 − 24.4 + 19.0 + 22.5 − 3.5 − 0.0 − 26.4 − 15.6 − 10.8 − 9.1 − 1.7 − 0.0          Dec 
+ 0.3 + 2.2 + 25.6 + 39.0 − 13.3 − 11.3 − 2.0 − 0.0 + 19.4 + 17.7 + 1.7 + 0.4 + 1.3 + 0.1 2010          Jan 
+ 0.4 − 0.5 − 5.0 − 1.5 − 3.5 − 3.6 + 0.1 − 0.0 − 1.4 − 3.9 + 2.5 + 3.0 − 0.5 − 0.0          Feb 
+ 0.0 + 1.4 + 22.4 + 24.4 − 2.0 − 4.2 + 2.2 − 0.0 − 8.6 − 0.2 − 8.4 − 5.6 − 2.8 − 0.1          Mar 
4From 1999, no longer included in loans and deposits (see also footnote terms of less than one month. — 7Up to December 1998, excluding time
2). — 5Up to December 1998, including working capital supplied to deposits with terms of less than one month. 
branches abroad. — 6Up to December 1998, including time deposits with
29*IV Banks

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
E U R O S Y S T E M
Monthly Report
May 2010
IV Banks
 
5 Lending by banks (MFIs) in Germany to domestic non-banks (non-MFIs) *
 
€ billion
Lending to domestic Short-term lending Medium and long-term
non-banks, total  1,2 
      to general government to enter- to enterprises and households  1 
 
including excluding Negoti-
negotiable money able
market paper, Loans money
Period securities, and market Treasury
equalisation claims Total Total paper Total Loans bills Total Total bills 3,4 
End of year or month *
 
2000 3,003.7 2,663.7 371.2 348.2 347.7 0.5 22.9 21.2 1.7 2,632.5 2,038.6
2001 3,014.1 2,704.2 387.9 356.7 355.2 1.5 31.2 28.2 2.9 2,626.2 2,070.2
2002 2,997.2 2,689.1 365.4 331.9 331.0 1.0 33.5 31.1 2.4 2,631.8 2,079.7
2003 2,995.6 2,680.6 355.2 315.0 313.4 1.6 40.2 38.4 1.8 2,640.4 2,096.12004 3,001.3 2,646.7 320.9 283.8 283.0 0.8 37.1 35.3 1.8 2,680.4 2,114.2
2005 2,995.1 2,635.1 309.7 273.5 272.9 0.6 36.2 34.4 1.8 2,685.4 2,141.3
2006 3,000.7 2,632.2 303.1 269.8 269.3 0.6 33.3 31.9 1.4 2,697.6 2,181.8
2007 2,975.7 2,649.5 331.2 301.8 301.5 0.3 29.4 28.2 1.2 2,644.6 2,168.32008 3,071.1 2,700.1 373.0 337.5 335.3 2.2 35.5 34.5 1.0 2,698.1 2,257.82009 3,100.1 2,692.6 347.3 306.3 306.2 0.1 41.0 37.1 3.9 2,752.8 2,299.7
2008          Oct 3,045.1 2,704.4 374.5 337.9 337.5 0.4 36.7 34.8 1.9 2,670.6 2,225.5
         Nov 3,044.6 2,706.6 375.8 341.3 340.9 0.4 34.5 32.9 1.6 2,668.8 2,226.4
         Dec 3,071.1 2,700.1 373.0 337.5 335.3 2.2 35.5 34.5 1.0 2,698.1 2,257.8
2009          Jan 3,097.3 2,719.9 395.2 353.9 353.2 0.7 41.4 39.0 2.4 2,702.0 2,260.4
         Feb 3,091.2 2,710.7 386.9 344.0 343.6 0.5 42.8 40.1 2.8 2,704.3 2,266.9         Mar 3,101.4 2,721.5 410.5 368.3 367.9 0.4 42.2 39.0 3.3 2,690.9 2,256.7
         Apr 3,124.3 2,726.0 408.5 362.5 362.1 0.4 46.0 41.0 5.0 2,715.8 2,276.8
         May 3,106.5 2,721.4 401.9 360.4 359.5 0.9 41.4 36.5 5.0 2,704.6 2,263.1         June 3,121.8 2,724.8 401.8 362.3 362.0 0.3 39.5 36.0 3.4 2,720.0 2,274.1
         July 3,116.5 2,720.9 387.8 336.5 336.1 0.3 51.3 46.4 4.9 2,728.7 2,281.7
         Aug 3,094.1 2,704.5 367.4 321.9 321.7 0.3 45.5 40.9 4.6 2,726.7 2,280.6         Sep 3,110.3 2,715.5 383.3 337.5 337.2 0.3 45.8 39.1 6.7 2,727.1 2,279.4
         Oct 3,116.9 2,717.2 381.6 326.3 325.9 0.4 55.3 50.4 4.9 2,735.3 2,281.4
         Nov 3,117.3 2,713.4 374.5 327.2 327.0 0.2 47.4 42.1 5.2 2,742.7 2,289.4
         Dec 3,100.1 2,692.6 347.3 306.3 306.2 0.1 41.0 37.1 3.9 2,752.8 2,299.7
2010          Jan 3,111.5 2,692.1 349.7 305.0 304.8 0.2 44.7 40.9 3.8 2,761.8 2,305.2
         Feb 3,103.1 2,685.6 343.5 299.8 299.6 0.2 43.7 40.8 2.9 2,759.6 2,302.2         Mar 3,098.8 2,682.4 348.9 302.9 302.6 0.3 46.1 43.2 2.8 2,749.9 2,290.3
Changes *
2001 + 11.9 + 39.2 + 15.3 + 7.0 + 5.9 + 1.0 + 8.4 + 7.8 + 0.6 − 3.4 + 32.0
2002 − 19.2 − 18.8 − 23.4 − 25.7 − 25.2 − 0.5 + 2.3 + 2.9 − 0.6 + 4.3 + 7.62003 + 0.1 − 8.4 − 10.0 − 16.7 − 17.5 + 0.9 + 6.7 + 7.3 − 0.6 + 10.1 + 16.0
2004 + 3.3 − 36.0 − 31.7 − 30.5 − 29.7 − 0.8 − 1.2 − 3.2 + 1.9 + 35.0 + 15.6
2005 − 6.7 − 12.1 − 11.5 − 10.6 − 10.4 − 0.2 − 0.9 − 0.9 + 0.0 + 4.8 + 26.8
2006 − 12.4 − 20.8 − 7.1 − 4.5 − 4.4 − 0.0 − 2.7 − 2.3 − 0.4 − 5.2 + 23.62007 − 15.9 + 11.8 + 27.6 + 31.5 + 31.7 − 0.2 − 3.9 − 3.7 − 0.3 − 43.5 − 7.1
2008 + 92.0 + 46.9 + 43.1 + 36.8 + 34.9 + 1.8 + 6.3 + 6.3 − 0.0 + 48.9 + 83.4
2009 + 25.7 − 11.6 − 26.1 − 31.5 − 30.0 − 1.5 + 5.5 + 2.5 + 2.9 + 51.8 + 36.6
2008          Oct + 0.4 + 4.8 − 3.1 − 7.1 − 6.6 − 0.5 + 4.0 + 3.7 + 0.3 + 3.4 + 3.0
         Nov − 0.5 + 2.2 + 1.3 + 3.4 + 3.5 − 0.0 − 2.1 − 1.9 − 0.2 − 1.7 + 0.9         Dec + 23.2 − 9.6 − 2.8 − 3.8 − 5.6 + 1.8 + 1.0 + 1.6 − 0.6 + 26.0 + 26.9
2009          Jan + 26.2 + 19.8 + 21.0 + 15.1 + 16.7 − 1.5 + 5.8 + 4.4 + 1.4 + 5.2 + 3.9
         Feb − 6.1 − 9.2 − 8.3 − 9.8 − 9.6 − 0.2 + 1.5 + 1.1 + 0.4 + 2.3 + 6.5         Mar + 9.2 + 9.7 + 23.6 + 24.2 + 24.3 − 0.1 − 0.6 − 1.1 + 0.5 − 14.4 − 11.3
         Apr + 22.8 + 4.5 − 2.0 − 5.8 − 5.7 − 0.0 + 3.7 + 2.0 + 1.7 + 24.9 + 20.2
         May − 16.9 − 4.6 − 6.6 − 2.1 − 2.6 + 0.5 − 4.5 − 4.5 − 0.0 − 10.4 − 12.9         June + 15.8 + 3.4 + 0.7 + 2.7 + 2.8 − 0.1 − 1.9 − 0.4 − 1.5 + 15.1 + 10.7
         July − 5.4 − 3.9 − 14.1 − 25.9 − 25.9 + 0.0 + 11.8 + 10.3 + 1.5 + 8.6 + 7.5
         Aug − 22.4 − 16.4 − 20.4 − 14.5 − 14.4 − 0.1 − 5.8 − 5.5 − 0.4 − 2.0 − 1.1         Sep + 15.9 + 10.7 + 15.9 + 15.5 + 15.5 + 0.1 + 0.3 − 1.8 + 2.1 + 0.1 − 1.5
         Oct + 6.4 + 1.8 − 1.6 − 11.1 − 11.2 + 0.0 + 9.5 + 11.2 − 1.7 + 8.0 + 1.7
         Nov + 0.4 − 3.7 − 7.0 + 0.9 + 1.1 − 0.2 − 7.9 − 8.2 + 0.3 + 7.4 + 5.4         Dec − 20.2 − 23.7 − 27.2 − 20.8 − 20.8 − 0.0 − 6.4 − 5.0 − 1.4 + 7.1 + 7.5
2010          Jan + 11.2 − 0.6 + 2.3 − 1.5 − 1.6 + 0.1 + 3.8 + 3.8 − 0.1 + 9.0 + 5.5
         Feb − 8.9 − 7.1 − 6.2 − 5.1 − 5.2 + 0.0 − 1.0 − 0.1 − 0.9 − 2.8 − 3.5         Mar + 0.2 − 3.1 + 5.4 + 3.0 + 3.0 + 0.0 + 2.4 + 2.5 − 0.1 − 5.2 − 8.0
*See Table IV.2, footnote*; statistical breaks have been eliminated from the including fiduciary loans (see also footnote 9). — 3Up to December 1998,
changes. The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as bill-based lending (bill holdings plus endorsement liabilities arising from
provisional. Subsequent revisions, which appear in the following Monthly rediscounted bills and bills sent for collection from the banks’ portfoli os
Report, are not specially marked. — 1Up to December 1998, including loans prior to maturity). — 4From 1999, including small amounts of medium-term
to domestic building and loan associations. — 2Up to December 1998, series of bills. — 5From 1999, breakdown of securities by medium
30*IV Banks

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
May 2010
IV Banks
 
 
 
 
lending  2,5 
prises and households  1,2 to general government  2 
Loans Loans
Memo Memo
item Equal- item
Medium- Long- Fiduciary Medium- Long- Secur- isation Fiduciary
Total term  6 term  7 loans  8 Total Total term  6 term  7 loans  8   Period Securities  5 ities 5,9 claims  10 
End of year or month *
 
1,838.9 192.8 1,646.0 199.7 50.1 593.9 455.9 30.4 425.5 104.9 33.1 8.4 2000
1,880.5 191.1 1,689.4 189.7 48.9 556.0 440.3 25.6 414.6 111.8 4.0 8.0 2001
1,909.8 193.5 1,716.3 169.9 47.3 552.1 417.1 27.4 389.7 132.0 3.0 7.5 2002
1,927.7 195.0 1,732.8 168.3 49.9 544.3 401.0 34.6 366.4 141.3 2.0 7.0 20031,940.8 194.3 1,746.5 173.5 55.3 566.1 387.7 32.9 354.8 177.5 1.0 6.5 2004
1,953.4 194.7 1,758.8 187.9 52.1 544.1 374.4 32.9 341.4 169.7 − 4.5 2005
1,972.7 194.5 1,778.1 209.1 48.2 515.8 358.4 31.7 326.6 157.4 − 4.8 2006
1,987.3 207.7 1,779.6 181.1 46.5 476.2 332.5 31.9 300.6 143.7 − 4.7 20072,022.0 222.0 1,800.0 235.8 42.8 440.3 308.2 29.7 278.5 132.1 − 4.5 20082,051.3 242.7 1,808.6 248.4 39.6 453.1 298.0 32.2 265.8 155.1 − 4.3 2009
2,020.3 218.1 1,802.1 205.3 43.6 445.0 311.9 29.8 282.1 133.2 − 4.5 2008          Oct 
2,021.5 218.7 1,802.8 204.9 43.3 442.4 311.3 29.9 281.4 131.2 − 4.5          Nov 
2,022.0 222.0 1,800.0 235.8 42.8 440.3 308.2 29.7 278.5 132.1 − 4.5          Dec 
2,022.5 222.9 1,799.5 238.0 42.5 441.6 305.3 29.7 275.6 136.3 − 4.4 2009          Jan 
2,024.7 225.8 1,799.0 242.2 42.2 437.4 302.4 29.2 273.2 135.0 − 4.4          Feb 
2,015.5 224.4 1,791.1 241.1 42.0 434.3 299.2 28.8 270.4 135.1 − 4.4          Mar 
2,023.4 229.0 1,794.4 253.5 41.1 439.0 299.5 29.2 270.3 139.4 − 4.4          Apr 
2,025.2 230.2 1,795.0 237.9 40.3 441.5 300.2 30.4 269.8 141.4 − 4.4          May2,026.3 233.0 1,793.3 247.8 39.9 445.9 300.4 30.8 269.6 145.5 − 4.3          June
2,036.3 236.7 1,799.5 245.5 39.5 447.0 302.1 31.8 270.3 144.9 − 4.3          July
2,039.9 237.1 1,802.9 240.7 39.2 446.1 302.0 31.9 270.1 144.1 − 4.3          Aug 2,038.3 237.2 1,801.0 241.1 38.9 447.7 300.9 32.5 268.4 146.8 − 4.3          Sep 
2,039.6 236.9 1,802.7 241.8 38.7 453.9 301.3 32.5 268.8 152.6 − 4.2          Oct 
2,045.5 236.9 1,808.6 243.9 38.5 453.4 298.8 32.6 266.2 154.6 − 4.3          Nov 
2,051.3 242.7 1,808.6 248.4 39.6 453.1 298.0 32.2 265.8 155.1 − 4.3          Dec 
2,049.4 241.4 1,808.0 255.8 39.2 456.6 297.0 31.5 265.5 159.5 − 4.2 2010          Jan 
2,051.2 241.9 1,809.4 251.0 39.1 457.3 294.0 30.8 263.2 163.4 − 4.2          Feb 
2,044.4 237.5 1,806.9 245.9 38.7 459.6 292.2 30.5 261.8 167.4 − 4.1          Mar 
Changes *
+ 41.9 − 2.8 + 44.7 − 9.8 − 1.2 − 35.4 − 16.5 − 5.5 − 10.9 + 10.1 − 29.1 − 0.4 2001
+ 26.6 − 2.1 + 28.7 − 19.0 − 1.6 − 3.4 − 23.1 + 1.0 − 24.1 + 20.7 − 1.0 − 0.5 2002+ 17.9 + 0.2 + 17.8 − 1.9 + 2.6 − 5.9 − 16.1 + 4.9 − 21.0 + 11.2 − 1.0 − 0.5 2003
+ 10.7 + 0.2 + 10.5 + 4.9 + 3.6 + 19.4 − 13.8 − 0.9 − 12.9 + 34.3 − 1.1 − 0.6 2004
+ 12.5 + 1.7 + 10.8 + 14.3 − 3.0 − 22.1 − 13.4 + 0.9 − 14.2 − 7.7 − 1.0 − 2.0 2005
+ 2.3 + 0.2 + 2.2 + 21.2 − 3.9 − 28.8 − 16.4 − 1.4 − 15.0 − 12.4 − + 0.3 2006+ 9.6 + 10.1 − 0.6 − 16.7 − 2.2 − 36.3 − 25.8 + 0.1 − 26.0 − 10.5 − − 0.1 2007
+ 28.8 + 12.0 + 16.8 + 54.7 − 5.3 − 34.5 − 23.2 − 2.3 − 20.8 − 11.4 − − 0.1 2008
+ 23.5 + 17.3 + 6.3 + 13.1 − 3.9 + 15.2 − 7.6 + 2.5 − 10.2 + 22.8 − − 0.2 2009
+ 9.6 + 1.8 + 7.8 − 6.6 − 0.4 + 0.5 − 1.8 − 1.2 − 0.7 + 2.3 − + 0.1 2008          Oct 
+ 1.2 + 0.6 + 0.7 − 0.4 − 0.3 − 2.6 − 0.6 + 0.2 − 0.8 − 2.0 − + 0.0          Nov 
− 3.8 + 2.3 − 6.1 + 30.7 − 0.5 − 0.9 − 1.9 − 0.2 − 1.7 + 1.0 − − 0.0          Dec 
+ 1.7 + 2.2 − 0.5 + 2.2 − 0.3 + 1.3 − 2.9 − 0.1 − 2.9 + 4.2 − − 0.0 2009          Jan 
+ 2.3 + 2.8 − 0.6 + 4.2 − 0.3 − 4.2 − 2.9 − 0.4 − 2.5 − 1.3 − − 0.0          Feb 
− 10.2 − 3.1 − 7.2 − 1.1 − 0.5 − 3.1 − 3.2 − 0.4 − 2.9 + 0.1 − − 0.0          Mar 
+ 7.8 + 4.6 + 3.2 + 12.3 − 0.9 + 4.7 + 0.4 + 0.4 − 0.1 + 4.3 − + 0.0          Apr 
+ 1.8 + 1.2 + 0.7 − 14.8 − 0.1 + 2.6 + 0.6 + 1.2 − 0.5 + 1.9 − − 0.0          May+ 0.8 + 2.6 − 1.8 + 9.9 − 0.4 + 4.4 + 0.3 + 0.5 − 0.2 + 4.1 − − 0.0          June
+ 10.0 + 3.8 + 6.2 − 2.4 − 0.4 + 1.1 + 1.7 + 1.0 + 0.7 − 0.6 − − 0.0          July
+ 3.7 + 0.3 + 3.4 − 4.8 − 0.3 − 0.9 − 0.2 + 0.1 − 0.2 − 0.7 − − 0.0          Aug − 2.0 + 0.2 − 2.1 + 0.5 − 0.3 + 1.6 − 1.1 + 0.6 − 1.7 + 2.6 − − 0.0          Sep 
+ 1.3 − 0.3 + 1.6 + 0.4 − 0.2 + 6.3 + 0.5 + 0.1 + 0.4 + 5.8 − − 0.0          Oct 
+ 3.3 + 0.0 + 3.3 + 2.1 − 0.2 + 2.0 + 0.1 + 0.0 + 0.0 + 2.0 − + 0.0          Nov + 3.0 + 3.0 + 0.0 + 4.5 + 0.1 − 0.4 − 0.8 − 0.4 − 0.4 + 0.4 − − 0.0          Dec 
− 1.9 − 1.3 − 0.6 + 7.4 − 0.4 + 3.4 − 0.9 − 0.7 − 0.3 + 4.4 − − 0.1 2010          Jan 
+ 1.3 − 0.1 + 1.4 − 4.8 − 0.1 + 0.8 − 3.1 − 0.7 − 2.4 + 3.8 − − 0.0          Feb 
− 6.8 − 4.4 − 2.5 − 1.2 − 0.4 + 2.8 − 1.8 − 0.4 − 1.4 + 4.6 − − 0.0          Mar 
and long-term lending no longer possible. — 6Up to December 1998, 1999, of more than five years. — 8From 1999, no longer included in lending
maturity or period of notice of more than one year to less than four years; (see also footnote 2). — 9Excluding debt securities arising from the
from 1999, more than one year up to and including five years. — 7Up to exchange of equalisation claims (see also footnote 10). — 10Including debt
December 1998, maturity or period of notice of four years and more; from securities arising from the exchange of equalisation claims. 
31*IV Banks

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
E U R O S Y S T E M
Monthly Report
May 2010
IV Banks
 
6 Lending by banks (MFIs) in Germany to domestic enterprises and households, housing loans,
sectors of economic activity *x
 
€ billion
Lending to domestic enterprises and households (excluding holdings of negotiable money market paper and excluding securities po rtfolios)  1 
of which  
 
Housing loans Lending to enterprises and self-employed persons
 
Whole-
sale and Electricity,gas and retail Financial
Mortgage water trade; Agri- Transport- intermedi-
loans supply; repair of culture, ation and ationsecured refuse motor forestry, storage; (excludingby disposal, vehicles fishing post and MFIs) and
Mortgage residen- Other of which mining and and telecom- insurance
loans, tial real housing Housing Manufac- and Construc- motor- aqua- munica- com-
Period Total total Total estate loans Total loans turing quarrying tion cycles culture tions panies
Lending, total End of year or quarter *
 
2008 2,357.5 1,157.4 1,093.4 907.1 186.3 1,332.6 302.8 157.4 56.1 52.1 138.9 34.6 74.0 127.6
2009          Mar 2,383.5 1,150.8 1,087.5 901.5 186.0 1,363.1 301.2 160.9 61.7 62.8 131.0 34.0 74.5 161.5
         June 2,388.5 1,149.7 1,087.4 899.6 187.7 1,365.5 300.9 160.4 62.7 63.4 128.8 34.8 74.7 173.3         Sep 2,375.6 1,149.2 1,092.1 900.2 191.9 1,346.7 300.7 155.4 63.1 62.7 126.2 36.0 73.6 165.7
         Dec 2,357.6 1,155.1 1,094.7 905.0 189.7 1,327.1 301.4 145.8 68.5 63.2 122.1 36.4 74.7 165.2
2010          Mar 2,347.1 1,151.5 1,090.4 902.0 188.5 1,320.8 299.6 143.9 69.5 63.7 122.2 37.6 77.2 162.7
 Short-term lending
2008 335.5 − 8.4 − 8.4 294.8 4.5 51.4 5.4 10.4 54.7 3.1 7.4 70.9
2009          Mar 368.0 − 8.7 − 8.7 328.1 4.8 54.6 6.5 15.2 48.9 3.4 7.6 106.1
         June 362.2 − 8.8 − 8.8 322.3 4.8 51.5 6.2 15.8 46.8 3.7 7.8 109.2         Sep 337.3 − 8.8 − 8.8 296.9 4.8 46.4 5.4 15.1 44.0 3.9 7.3 98.4         Dec 306.3 − 8.4 − 8.4 266.9 4.5 36.3 6.0 14.2 39.7 3.0 7.1 90.7
2010          Mar 302.7 − 8.1 − 8.1 264.2 4.3 36.6 6.1 15.1 39.7 3.5 7.7 87.3
 Medium-term lending
2008 222.0 − 30.3 − 30.3 159.1 10.9 27.1 2.7 6.6 13.8 3.1 14.5 18.0
2009          Mar 224.4 − 31.4 − 31.4 160.0 11.3 29.0 3.4 8.2 13.2 2.9 14.5 16.9
         June 233.0 − 31.6 − 31.6 167.1 11.5 31.6 3.6 8.8 13.2 3.0 14.6 21.0         Sep 237.2 − 32.0 − 32.0 169.6 11.6 32.2 4.0 8.8 13.4 3.3 14.1 21.7         Dec 242.7 − 32.4 − 32.4 173.9 11.8 32.6 4.8 9.0 13.9 3.7 13.6 25.5
2010          Mar 237.5 − 32.2 − 32.2 168.9 11.6 30.4 5.1 8.9 14.6 3.7 13.2 26.1
 Long-term lending
2008 1,800.0 1,157.4 1,054.6 907.1 147.5 878.7 287.5 78.9 48.0 35.2 70.4 28.4 52.1 38.6
2009          Mar 1,791.1 1,150.8 1,047.3 901.5 145.8 875.1 285.1 77.2 51.8 39.4 68.9 27.7 52.4 38.5
         June 1,793.3 1,149.7 1,047.0 899.6 147.4 876.2 284.5 77.3 52.9 38.8 68.8 28.0 52.2 43.0
         Sep 1,801.0 1,149.2 1,051.3 900.2 151.1 880.2 284.3 76.8 53.8 38.9 68.8 28.8 52.2 45.6
         Dec 1,808.6 1,155.1 1,053.9 905.0 148.9 886.4 285.1 76.9 57.7 40.0 68.5 29.8 54.0 49.0
2010          Mar 1,806.9 1,151.5 1,050.1 902.0 148.1 887.7 283.6 77.0 58.3 39.8 67.9 30.3 56.3 49.3
 
Lending, total Change during quarter *
 
2009          Q1 + 25.0 − 5.4 − 5.9 − 4.4 − 1.6 + 29.5 − 1.6 + 4.4 + 2.6 + 2.0 − 7.5 − 0.2 + 0.6 + 33.8
         Q2 + 4.9 − 0.5 + 0.7 − 0.5 + 1.2 + 3.8 + 0.4 − 0.5 + 1.1 + 0.4 − 2.2 + 0.7 − 0.4 + 10.1         Q3 − 13.2 − 0.7 + 3.3 + 0.3 + 3.0 − 19.2 − 0.2 − 4.3 + 0.3 − 0.7 − 2.7 + 1.3 − 1.1 − 7.6         Q4 − 23.3 + 3.3 + 2.6 + 2.3 + 0.3 − 23.9 + 0.7 − 9.7 + 3.8 + 0.2 − 4.3 + 0.4 + 1.1 − 7.7
2010          Q1 − 11.2 − 3.4 − 4.7 − 3.0 − 1.7 − 6.3 − 1.4 − 1.9 + 1.0 + 0.5 + 0.1 + 0.5 + 2.5 − 4.5
 Short-term lending
2009          Q1 + 31.3 − + 0.3 − + 0.3 + 32.1 + 0.3 + 2.9 + 1.1 + 1.7 − 5.8 + 0.3 + 0.2 + 33.9
         Q2 − 5.6 − + 0.0 − + 0.0 − 5.6 + 0.0 − 3.1 − 0.3 + 0.3 − 1.9 + 0.3 + 0.2 + 2.6         Q3 − 24.9 − + 0.0 − + 0.0 − 25.3 − 0.1 − 4.4 − 0.9 − 0.7 − 2.9 + 0.1 − 0.5 − 10.9         Q4 − 30.9 − − 0.3 − − 0.3 − 29.9 − 0.3 − 10.1 + 0.6 − 0.9 − 4.2 − 0.9 − 0.2 − 10.6
2010          Q1 − 3.8 − − 0.3 − − 0.3 − 2.9 − 0.2 + 0.3 + 0.1 + 0.8 − 0.0 + 0.4 + 0.6 − 3.5
 Medium-term lending
2009          Q1 + 1.9 − − 0.4 − − 0.4 + 1.7 + 0.1 + 2.1 + 0.6 + 0.4 − 0.7 − 0.2 + 0.1 + 0.0
         Q2 + 8.4 − + 0.2 − + 0.2 + 6.9 + 0.2 + 2.5 + 0.2 + 0.6 − 0.1 + 0.1 + 0.2 + 3.0         Q3 + 4.3 − + 0.4 − + 0.4 + 2.5 + 0.1 + 0.6 + 0.4 − 0.0 + 0.2 + 0.3 − 0.5 + 0.7         Q4 + 2.7 − + 0.3 − + 0.3 + 2.4 + 0.2 + 0.2 + 0.9 − 0.1 + 0.3 + 0.3 − 0.5 + 2.4
2010          Q1 − 5.8 − − 0.2 − − 0.2 − 5.6 − 0.2 − 2.3 + 0.3 − 0.1 + 0.6 − 0.1 − 0.3 − 1.6
 Long-term lending
2009          Q1 − 8.2 − 5.4 − 5.9 − 4.4 − 1.5 − 4.2 − 2.1 − 0.6 + 0.9 − 0.1 − 1.0 − 0.4 + 0.3 − 0.1
         Q2 + 2.1 − 0.5 + 0.4 − 0.5 + 0.9 + 2.4 + 0.2 + 0.1 + 1.2 − 0.6 − 0.2 + 0.3 − 0.7 + 4.5         Q3 + 7.4 − 0.7 + 2.8 + 0.3 + 2.6 + 3.7 − 0.3 − 0.5 + 0.8 + 0.0 − 0.0 + 0.8 − 0.0 + 2.6         Q4 + 4.9 + 3.3 + 2.6 + 2.3 + 0.3 + 3.6 + 0.8 + 0.1 + 2.3 + 1.1 − 0.3 + 1.0 + 1.8 + 0.4
2010          Q1 − 1.7 − 3.4 − 4.2 − 3.0 − 1.2 + 2.1 − 1.1 + 0.1 + 0.6 − 0.2 − 0.5 + 0.3 + 2.3 + 0.6
*Excluding lending by foreign branches. Breakdown of lending by building appear in the following Monthly Report, are not specially marked. —
and loan associations by areas and sectors estimated. Statistical alterations 1Excluding fiduciary loans. — 2Including sole proprietors. — 3Excluding
have been eliminated from the changes. The figures for the latest date are mortgage loans and housing loans, even in the form of instalment credit.
always to be regarded as provisional; subsequent alterations, which will x As of December 2008, the data are collected according to the
32*IV Banks

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
May 2010
IV Banks
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Lending to
 Lending to employees and other individuals non-profit institutions
Memo items Other lending Services sector (including the professions)
of which of which
Debitbalanceson wage,
Other Lending salary
real to self- Lending and of which
Housing Holding estate employed to craft Housing pension Housing Instalment
Total companies Total loans Total loans  
3 accounts Total loans   Period enterprises activities persons  2 enterprises
End of year or quarter * Lending, total 
 
691.9 169.4 51.7 190.2 381.4 58.2 1,011.4 787.3 224.0 132.1 17.1 13.5 3.3 2008
676.8 183.9 51.9 168.0 378.3 58.2 1,007.2 783.0 224.2 134.7 16.2 13.2 3.2 2009          Mar 
667.5 181.2 50.7 171.3 380.3 55.7 1,010.3 783.4 226.8 137.2 16.1 12.7 3.1          June
663.9 180.9 50.0 172.3 379.7 55.1 1,015.9 788.1 227.8 140.3 16.2 13.0 3.3          Sep 
651.2 181.2 46.5 170.5 378.9 54.3 1,017.5 790.0 227.5 142.0 15.8 13.0 3.3          Dec 
643.9 179.5 44.9 171.7 378.1 54.4 1,013.4 787.5 225.8 141.8 15.0 13.0 3.3 2010          Mar 
Short-term lending
91.4 13.4 17.0 19.3 35.4 9.4 39.7 3.9 35.8 2.8 17.1 1.0 0.0 2008
85.7 12.9 16.6 16.2 35.8 10.0 39.1 3.9 35.2 3.0 16.2 0.8 0.0 2009          Mar 
81.0 12.0 15.5 16.4 35.5 9.8 39.2 3.9 35.3 3.1 16.1 0.7 0.0          June
76.5 11.5 15.1 15.8 34.6 9.2 39.7 4.0 35.7 3.0 16.2 0.7 0.0          Sep 69.9 11.1 12.1 14.6 33.3 8.3 38.7 4.0 34.7 3.0 15.8 0.7 0.0          Dec 
68.2 10.6 11.7 14.8 33.8 8.9 37.8 3.8 34.0 3.0 15.0 0.7 0.0 2010          Mar 
Medium-term lending
73.3 8.2 9.2 21.3 26.7 4.0 62.3 19.5 42.8 35.1 − 0.6 0.0 2008
71.9 8.3 9.8 20.0 26.5 4.1 63.9 20.1 43.8 36.7 − 0.5 0.0 2009          Mar 
71.3 7.9 10.3 20.8 26.8 4.1 65.4 20.1 45.2 38.1 − 0.5 0.0          June
72.1 8.3 10.5 21.9 27.2 4.0 67.0 20.4 46.6 39.6 − 0.6 0.0          Sep 70.8 8.5 11.0 21.7 27.6 4.0 68.2 20.5 47.7 40.9 − 0.6 0.0          Dec 
66.9 8.4 9.5 21.7 27.4 3.9 68.1 20.5 47.6 40.9 − 0.6 0.0 2010          Mar 
Long-term lending
527.2 147.8 25.6 149.7 319.3 44.8 909.4 763.9 145.4 94.2 − 11.9 3.2 2008
519.1 162.7 25.6 131.8 316.0 44.1 904.3 759.0 145.2 95.0 − 11.8 3.2 2009          Mar 
515.2 161.3 24.8 134.2 318.1 41.9 905.7 759.4 146.3 96.0 − 11.4 3.0          June
515.3 161.1 24.4 134.6 317.9 41.9 909.2 763.7 145.5 97.7 − 11.7 3.3          Sep 
510.4 161.6 23.5 134.1 318.0 42.0 910.6 765.5 145.0 98.0 − 11.7 3.3          Dec 
508.8 160.5 23.7 135.1 316.9 41.6 907.5 763.2 144.3 97.9 − 11.7 3.3 2010          Mar 
 
Change during quarter * Lending, total 
 
− 6.1 − 0.3 + 0.3 − 2.3 − 3.2 − 0.0 − 4.3 − 4.3 + 0.0 + 2.4 − 0.9 − 0.3 − 0.0 2009          Q1
− 5.5 − 2.2 − 1.3 + 3.6 + 1.1 − 0.9 + 1.6 + 0.4 + 1.2 + 2.2 − 0.1 − 0.5 − 0.2          Q2
− 4.5 − 0.3 − 1.5 + 0.9 − 0.6 − 0.6 + 5.7 + 3.2 + 2.4 + 3.1 + 0.1 + 0.3 + 0.2          Q3− 7.6 + 0.5 − 2.9 + 0.3 − 1.0 − 0.8 + 0.6 + 1.9 − 1.3 + 0.7 − 0.4 − 0.0 + 0.0          Q4
− 4.6 − 1.8 − 1.6 + 0.9 − 0.8 + 0.2 − 4.9 − 3.3 − 1.6 − 0.2 − 0.8 − 0.0 + 0.0 2010          Q1
Short-term lending
− 2.3 − 0.5 − 0.4 − 0.5 + 0.4 + 0.6 − 0.6 − 0.0 − 0.6 + 0.2 − 0.9 − 0.2 + 0.0 2009          Q1
− 3.7 − 0.6 − 1.0 + 0.2 − 0.3 − 0.2 + 0.1 − 0.0 + 0.1 + 0.1 − 0.1 − 0.1 − 0.0          Q2
− 5.2 − 0.5 − 1.2 − 0.5 − 0.8 − 0.6 + 0.5 + 0.1 + 0.4 − 0.1 + 0.1 − 0.0 − 0.0          Q3− 3.7 − 0.3 − 2.4 − 0.4 − 1.3 − 0.9 − 1.0 − 0.1 − 1.0 + 0.0 − 0.4 + 0.0 − 0.0          Q4
− 1.5 − 0.5 − 0.4 + 0.2 + 0.5 + 0.7 − 0.9 − 0.1 − 0.8 − 0.0 − 0.8 − + 0.0 2010          Q1
Medium-term lending
− 0.6 − 0.2 + 0.6 + 0.0 − 0.5 + 0.0 + 0.3 − 0.6 + 0.9 + 1.6 − − 0.1 + 0.0 2009          Q1
+ 0.4 − 0.4 + 0.6 + 0.8 + 0.3 + 0.0 + 1.5 + 0.0 + 1.5 + 1.6 − − 0.0 − 0.0          Q2
+ 0.8 + 0.4 + 0.1 + 1.1 + 0.4 − 0.0 + 1.7 + 0.3 + 1.4 + 1.5 − + 0.1 + 0.0          Q3− 1.1 + 0.2 + 0.2 + 0.2 + 0.2 − 0.1 + 0.3 + 0.1 + 0.1 + 0.3 − − 0.0 + 0.0          Q4
− 2.1 − 0.1 − 1.5 − 0.0 − 0.2 − 0.1 − 0.2 − 0.0 − 0.1 + 0.0 − − 0.0 − 0.0 2010          Q1
Long-term lending
− 3.2 + 0.3 + 0.1 − 1.9 − 3.0 − 0.7 − 3.9 − 3.7 − 0.2 + 0.6 − − 0.1 − 0.1 2009          Q1
− 2.2 − 1.2 − 0.8 + 2.6 + 1.1 − 0.7 + 0.1 + 0.4 − 0.3 + 0.5 − − 0.4 − 0.2          Q2
− 0.0 − 0.2 − 0.4 + 0.4 − 0.2 − 0.0 + 3.5 + 2.9 + 0.6 + 1.6 − + 0.3 + 0.2          Q3− 2.9 + 0.6 − 0.7 + 0.5 + 0.1 + 0.1 + 1.4 + 1.9 − 0.5 + 0.3 − − 0.0 + 0.0          Q4
− 1.0 − 1.2 + 0.2 + 0.7 − 1.1 − 0.4 − 3.9 − 3.1 − 0.7 − 0.1 − + 0.0 + 0.0 2010          Q1
Federal Statistical Office’s "Classification of Economic Activities", Edition breaks could only be statistically adjusted in part, the data from 2 008 Q4
2008 (WZ 2008). The changeover from the "old" to the "new" classification onwards are not fully comparable with those from preceding quarte rs. 
resulted in many changes within the individual sectors. As the resulting
33*IV Banks

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
E U R O S Y S T E M
Monthly Report
May 2010
IV Banks
 
7 Deposits of domestic non-banks (non-MFIs) at banks (MFIs) in Germany *
 
 
€ billion
Time deposits  1,2   Memo item
  
 for more than 1 year  2 Included Subordinated
 liabilities in time
for up for up (excluding deposits:
to and to and for more Bank negotiable liabilities
Deposits, Sight including including than Savings savings Fiduciary debt arising
Period total deposits Total 1 year Total 2 years 2 years bonds  4 loans securities) from repos deposits  3 
Domestic non-banks, total End of year or month *
 
2007 2,579.1 779.9 1,125.4 418.9 706.5 22.8 683.7 555.4 118.4 36.4 35.0 22.6
2008 2,781.4 834.6 1,276.1 530.6 745.6 32.6 713.0 535.2 135.4 32.3 34.4 59.3
2009 2,829.7 1,029.5 1,102.6 339.5 763.1 32.1 731.0 594.5 103.2 43.4 35.6 76.8
2009          Apr 2,839.6 932.2 1,231.1 469.7 761.4 32.9 728.4 551.1 125.2 31.1 34.0 91.9
         May 2,837.0 935.4 1,224.4 461.0 763.4 33.7 729.7 555.1 122.1 31.2 34.6 91.4         June 2,847.3 956.0 1,213.1 436.9 776.2 33.4 742.8 559.7 118.5 31.1 34.7 93.6
         July 2,819.9 954.4 1,185.6 409.5 776.1 33.7 742.4 565.5 114.4 31.2 35.1 81.1
         Aug 2,801.5 962.4 1,157.0 390.8 766.2 33.1 733.1 570.8 111.2 42.0 35.2 72.7         Sep 2,810.6 987.2 1,139.6 374.1 765.5 32.4 733.2 575.1 108.6 42.2 35.4 83.5
         Oct 2,812.0 1,014.0 1,110.4 347.2 763.2 32.3 730.9 581.8 105.9 42.2 35.3 82.0
         Nov 2,825.5 1,037.6 1,098.1 336.0 762.1 31.7 730.4 585.6 104.2 42.2 35.6 80.2         Dec 2,829.7 1,029.5 1,102.6 339.5 763.1 32.1 731.0 594.5 103.2 43.4 35.6 76.8
2010          Jan 2,820.3 1,051.3 1,070.0 309.9 760.1 30.3 729.8 597.7 101.3 43.0 38.1 63.5
         Feb 2,830.1 1,055.9 1,070.5 310.8 759.7 29.9 729.8 602.9 100.8 43.0 38.1 73.3
         Mar 2,819.0 1,040.0 1,073.7 315.1 758.6 29.1 729.6 604.7 100.5 42.8 38.1 74.5
Changes *
2008 + 207.6 + 54.3 + 156.6 + 114.5 + 42.1 + 10.0 + 32.0 − 20.2 + 17.0 − 1.3 − 0.6 + 36.7
2009 + 59.7 + 211.4 − 179.3 − 207.5 + 28.2 − 0.5 + 28.7 + 59.3 − 31.6 − 0.9 + 1.4 + 17.5
2009          Apr + 22.3 + 34.9 − 12.0 − 16.1 + 4.1 + 0.5 + 3.6 + 3.3 − 3.9 + 0.2 − 0.1 + 5.5
         May − 2.6 + 3.0 − 6.5 − 8.5 + 2.0 + 0.7 + 1.3 + 3.9 − 3.1 − 0.0 + 0.6 − 0.5         June + 10.3 + 20.6 − 11.3 − 24.1 + 12.8 − 0.3 + 13.1 + 4.7 − 3.7 − 0.1 + 0.1 + 2.2
         July − 27.4 − 1.7 − 27.4 − 27.3 − 0.1 + 0.3 − 0.4 + 5.8 − 4.1 + 0.1 + 0.4 − 12.6
         Aug − 7.0 + 8.0 − 17.2 − 18.7 + 1.5 − 0.6 + 2.1 + 5.3 − 3.1 + 0.0 + 0.1 − 8.4         Sep + 9.1 + 24.7 − 17.4 − 16.7 − 0.7 − 0.8 + 0.1 + 4.3 − 2.6 + 0.2 + 0.2 + 10.8
         Oct + 1.7 + 26.8 − 29.3 − 26.9 − 2.3 − 0.0 − 2.3 + 6.6 − 2.5 + 0.1 + 0.2 − 1.5
         Nov + 13.5 + 23.6 − 12.3 − 11.1 − 1.1 − 0.7 − 0.5 + 3.8 − 1.7 + 0.0 + 0.3 − 1.8         Dec + 4.3 − 8.1 + 4.5 + 3.5 + 1.0 + 0.4 + 0.6 + 8.9 − 1.0 + 0.1 + 0.0 − 3.4
2010          Jan − 9.5 + 21.9 − 32.6 − 29.6 − 3.0 − 1.8 − 1.2 + 3.2 − 1.9 − 0.5 + 2.5 − 13.3
         Feb + 9.9 + 4.6 + 0.5 + 0.9 − 0.4 − 0.4 + 0.0 + 5.2 − 0.5 − 0.0 + 0.0 + 9.8         Mar − 11.2 − 15.9 + 3.2 + 4.3 − 1.0 − 0.8 − 0.2 + 1.8 − 0.4 − 0.2 − 0.0 + 1.3
Domestic government End of year or month *
2007 158.5 28.0 127.7 71.9 55.8 3.7 52.1 1.4 1.5 27.6 4.5 −
2008 164.7 34.2 127.8 75.4 52.5 3.6 48.8 1.2 1.5 24.2 3.9 −2009 129.3 41.8 83.4 43.0 40.4 3.6 36.8 2.6 1.5 35.7 3.9 0.5
2009          Apr 156.6 42.0 111.3 59.7 51.6 3.6 48.0 1.7 1.5 24.1 3.9 1.1
         May 161.5 42.5 115.7 63.9 51.8 3.8 48.0 1.8 1.5 24.1 3.9 2.2         June 164.1 44.9 115.8 64.5 51.3 3.6 47.7 1.9 1.5 24.0 3.9 3.5
         July 151.0 41.6 105.8 54.1 51.7 3.9 47.9 2.1 1.5 24.1 3.9 2.2
         Aug 139.8 42.2 93.8 52.7 41.1 3.9 37.3 2.2 1.5 34.7 3.9 3.8
         Sep 133.7 43.6 86.3 45.2 41.1 3.9 37.1 2.3 1.5 34.9 3.9 1.8
         Oct 131.0 42.6 84.5 43.6 40.9 3.9 37.0 2.4 1.6 34.9 3.9 2.7
         Nov 134.4 44.9 85.4 44.6 40.9 3.8 37.1 2.5 1.5 34.9 3.9 3.3         Dec 129.3 41.8 83.4 43.0 40.4 3.6 36.8 2.6 1.5 35.7 3.9 0.5
2010          Jan 127.7 41.1 82.6 40.0 42.6 3.6 39.1 2.5 1.5 35.6 6.3 1.2
         Feb 130.6 43.7 82.9 40.1 42.7 3.6 39.2 2.5 1.5 35.6 6.3 0.5         Mar 127.6 40.3 83.3 41.3 42.0 3.4 38.5 2.5 1.5 35.4 6.3 0.9
Changes *
2008 + 8.5 + 6.2 + 2.5 + 5.1 − 2.6 + 0.0 − 2.6 − 0.3 − 0.0 − 0.6 − 0.6 + 0.0
2009 − 23.9 + 7.5 − 32.9 − 32.2 − 0.7 − 0.0 − 0.7 + 1.4 + 0.1 − 0.5 + 0.0 + 0.5
2009          Apr + 2.4 + 4.7 − 2.4 − 2.2 − 0.2 + 0.2 − 0.4 + 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.0 + 0.0 + 0.9
         May + 4.9 + 0.5 + 4.4 + 4.2 + 0.1 + 0.2 − 0.0 + 0.1 + 0.0 + 0.0 + 0.0 + 1.2         June + 2.6 + 2.4 + 0.1 + 0.6 − 0.5 − 0.2 − 0.3 + 0.1 − 0.0 − 0.1 − 0.0 + 1.3
         July − 13.1 − 3.4 − 10.0 − 10.4 + 0.5 + 0.3 + 0.1 + 0.2 + 0.0 + 0.0 + 0.0 − 1.3
         Aug + 0.2 + 0.6 − 0.6 − 1.4 + 0.8 − 0.0 + 0.8 + 0.2 − 0.0 − 0.1 + 0.0 + 1.6         Sep − 6.0 + 1.4 − 7.5 − 7.5 − 0.1 + 0.1 − 0.1 + 0.0 + 0.0 + 0.1 − 0.0 − 2.0
         Oct − 2.7 − 1.0 − 1.8 − 1.6 − 0.2 − 0.0 − 0.2 + 0.1 + 0.0 + 0.1 − + 0.9
         Nov + 3.6 + 2.3 + 1.1 + 1.2 − 0.0 − 0.1 + 0.1 + 0.2 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.0 + 0.5         Dec − 5.1 − 3.1 − 2.1 − 1.6 − 0.5 − 0.2 − 0.3 + 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.2 + 0.0 − 2.7
2010          Jan − 1.6 − 0.8 − 0.7 − 3.0 + 2.3 − 0.1 + 2.3 − 0.1 − 0.0 − 0.1 + 2.4 + 0.6
         Feb + 2.9 + 2.6 + 0.3 + 0.1 + 0.1 + 0.0 + 0.1 + 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.6         Mar − 3.0 − 3.4 + 0.4 + 1.2 − 0.8 − 0.2 − 0.6 + 0.0 + 0.0 − 0.2 − 0.0 + 0.3
*See Table IV.2, footnote *; statistical breaks have been eliminated from provisional. Subsequent revisions, which appear in the following Monthly
the changes. The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as Report, are not specially marked. — 1Including subordinated liabilities and
34*IV Banks

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
May 2010
IV Banks
 
7 Deposits of domestic non-banks (non-MFIs) at banks (MFIs) in Germany * (cont’d)
 
 
€ billion
Time deposits  1,2   Memo item
  
 for more than 1 year  2 Included Subordinated
 liabilities in time
for up for up (excluding deposits:
to and to and for more Bank negotiable liabilities
Deposits, Sight including including than Savings savings Fiduciary debt arising
Period total deposits Total 1 year Total 2 years 2 years bonds  4 loans securities) from repos deposits  3 
Domestic enterprises and households End of year or month *
 
2007 2,420.6 752.0 997.7 347.0 650.7 19.0 631.7 554.0 116.9 8.8 30.5 22.6
2008 2,616.7 800.5 1,148.3 455.2 693.1 29.0 664.1 534.0 133.9 8.1 30.5 59.3
2009 2,700.4 987.6 1,019.2 296.5 722.7 28.5 694.2 591.9 101.6 7.7 31.7 76.3
2009          Apr 2,683.0 890.1 1,119.7 410.0 709.7 29.3 680.4 549.4 123.7 7.0 30.1 90.9
         May 2,675.4 892.9 1,108.7 397.1 711.6 29.9 681.7 553.3 120.6 7.1 30.7 89.2         June 2,683.2 911.1 1,097.3 372.4 724.9 29.9 695.1 557.8 117.0 7.1 30.8 90.2
         July 2,668.9 912.8 1,079.8 355.4 724.4 29.9 694.5 563.5 112.8 7.2 31.2 78.9
         Aug 2,661.7 920.2 1,063.2 338.1 725.1 29.3 695.8 568.5 109.7 7.2 31.3 68.9         Sep 2,676.8 943.5 1,053.3 328.8 724.5 28.4 696.0 572.9 107.1 7.3 31.4 81.7
         Oct 2,681.0 971.4 1,025.9 303.6 722.3 28.4 693.9 579.4 104.3 7.3 31.4 79.3
         Nov 2,691.1 992.6 1,012.7 291.5 721.2 27.9 693.3 583.1 102.7 7.3 31.7 76.9         Dec 2,700.4 987.6 1,019.2 296.5 722.7 28.5 694.2 591.9 101.6 7.7 31.7 76.3
2010          Jan 2,692.6 1,010.3 987.3 269.9 717.4 26.7 690.7 595.2 99.8 7.4 31.8 62.3
         Feb 2,699.6 1,012.3 987.6 270.7 716.9 26.3 690.6 600.4 99.3 7.4 31.8 72.7
         Mar 2,691.4 999.8 990.4 273.7 716.7 25.6 691.1 602.2 99.0 7.3 31.8 73.7
Changes *
2008 + 199.1 + 48.1 + 154.0 + 109.4 + 44.6 + 10.0 + 34.6 − 20.0 + 17.0 − 0.7 + 0.0 + 36.7
2009 + 83.6 + 203.8 − 146.4 − 175.3 + 28.9 − 0.5 + 29.4 + 57.9 − 31.7 − 0.4 + 1.4 + 17.0
2009          Apr + 19.9 + 30.2 − 9.6 − 13.9 + 4.3 + 0.3 + 4.0 + 3.3 − 3.9 + 0.2 − 0.1 + 4.6
         May − 7.6 + 2.6 − 10.9 − 12.8 + 1.9 + 0.6 + 1.3 + 3.8 − 3.1 − 0.1 + 0.6 − 1.6         June + 7.7 + 18.2 − 11.4 − 24.7 + 13.3 − 0.1 + 13.4 + 4.5 − 3.7 − 0.0 + 0.1 + 0.9
         July − 14.3 + 1.7 − 17.4 − 16.9 − 0.5 − 0.0 − 0.5 + 5.6 − 4.1 + 0.1 + 0.4 − 11.3
         Aug − 7.2 + 7.4 − 16.6 − 17.3 + 0.7 − 0.6 + 1.3 + 5.1 − 3.1 + 0.1 + 0.1 − 10.0         Sep + 15.1 + 23.3 − 9.9 − 9.3 − 0.6 − 0.9 + 0.2 + 4.3 − 2.6 + 0.1 + 0.2 + 12.8
         Oct + 4.4 + 27.8 − 27.4 − 25.3 − 2.1 − 0.0 − 2.1 + 6.5 − 2.5 + 0.0 + 0.2 − 2.4
         Nov + 9.9 + 21.3 − 13.4 − 12.3 − 1.1 − 0.6 − 0.6 + 3.7 − 1.7 + 0.0 + 0.3 − 2.3         Dec + 9.4 − 5.0 + 6.5 + 5.0 + 1.5 + 0.6 + 0.9 + 8.9 − 1.0 + 0.3 − 0.0 − 0.7
2010          Jan − 7.8 + 22.6 − 31.9 − 26.6 − 5.3 − 1.8 − 3.5 + 3.2 − 1.8 − 0.3 + 0.1 − 13.9
         Feb + 7.0 + 2.0 + 0.3 + 0.8 − 0.5 − 0.4 − 0.1 + 5.2 − 0.5 + 0.0 + 0.0 + 10.4         Mar − 8.2 − 12.5 + 2.8 + 3.1 − 0.3 − 0.7 + 0.4 + 1.8 − 0.4 − 0.0 + 0.0 + 0.9
of which:  Domestic enterprises End of year or month *
2007 961.9 264.9 672.9 178.6 494.3 5.5 488.8 3.9 20.1 8.3 21.5 22.6
2008 1,073.5 292.6 757.7 223.7 534.0 7.7 526.3 3.8 19.3 7.8 22.0 59.32009 1,105.6 336.4 743.6 187.5 556.1 9.1 547.0 5.5 20.2 7.6 21.8 76.3
2009          Apr 1,120.1 313.6 782.9 232.5 550.5 9.0 541.5 4.4 19.1 6.9 21.6 90.9
         May 1,106.5 305.7 777.2 225.7 551.5 9.2 542.2 4.5 19.2 7.0 21.5 89.2         June 1,116.0 319.8 772.3 208.2 564.1 9.1 555.0 4.7 19.3 7.0 21.5 90.2
         July 1,100.5 313.2 763.1 199.9 563.2 9.1 554.0 4.9 19.3 7.1 21.8 78.9
         Aug 1,093.6 311.2 758.0 194.2 563.8 9.1 554.7 5.0 19.4 7.1 21.8 68.9
         Sep 1,109.2 326.3 758.1 195.5 562.6 8.5 554.1 5.1 19.6 7.2 21.9 81.7
         Oct 1,107.8 342.8 740.1 180.6 559.5 8.4 551.0 5.2 19.7 7.2 21.8 79.3
         Nov 1,106.2 346.5 734.6 176.4 558.2 8.5 549.7 5.3 19.8 7.2 22.0 76.9         Dec 1,105.6 336.4 743.6 187.5 556.1 9.1 547.0 5.5 20.2 7.6 21.8 76.3
2010          Jan 1,089.1 343.0 720.2 169.0 551.1 8.6 542.6 5.7 20.2 7.2 21.8 62.3
         Feb 1,087.3 337.2 723.9 174.3 549.6 8.5 541.2 5.9 20.3 7.3 21.8 72.7         Mar 1,083.5 329.6 727.5 178.7 548.8 8.4 540.4 6.2 20.2 7.2 21.8 73.7
Changes *
2008 + 110.4 + 27.0 + 84.4 + 45.0 + 39.3 + 2.1 + 37.2 − 0.1 − 0.8 − 0.5 + 0.4 + 36.7
2009 + 32.6 + 61.6 − 31.5 − 53.1 + 21.6 + 1.4 + 20.3 + 1.6 + 0.9 − 0.4 − 0.3 + 17.0
2009          Apr + 15.1 + 12.5 + 2.6 − 1.3 + 3.9 + 0.4 + 3.5 + 0.1 − 0.1 + 0.2 − 0.2 + 4.6
         May − 13.5 − 7.9 − 5.7 − 6.7 + 1.0 + 0.3 + 0.7 + 0.1 + 0.1 − 0.1 − 0.1 − 1.6         June + 9.4 + 14.1 − 4.9 − 17.6 + 12.6 − 0.2 + 12.8 + 0.2 + 0.1 − 0.0 − 0.0 + 0.9
         July − 15.5 − 6.5 − 9.2 − 8.3 − 0.9 + 0.1 − 1.0 + 0.2 + 0.0 + 0.1 + 0.3 − 11.3
         Aug − 6.9 − 2.0 − 5.1 − 5.7 + 0.7 − 0.0 + 0.7 + 0.1 + 0.1 + 0.1 + 0.0 − 10.0         Sep + 15.6 + 15.1 + 0.1 + 1.3 − 1.2 − 0.6 − 0.6 + 0.1 + 0.2 + 0.1 + 0.0 + 12.8
         Oct − 1.4 + 16.4 − 18.0 − 14.9 − 3.1 − 0.0 − 3.1 + 0.1 + 0.1 + 0.0 − 0.1 − 2.4
         Nov − 1.9 + 3.8 − 5.8 − 4.4 − 1.4 + 0.1 − 1.4 + 0.0 + 0.1 − + 0.1 − 2.3         Dec − 0.6 − 10.2 + 9.0 + 11.1 − 2.1 + 0.6 − 2.7 + 0.2 + 0.4 + 0.3 − 0.2 − 0.7
2010          Jan − 16.5 + 6.6 − 23.4 − 18.5 − 5.0 − 0.5 − 4.4 + 0.3 + 0.0 − 0.3 − 0.0 − 13.9
         Feb − 1.8 − 5.8 + 3.7 + 5.2 − 1.5 − 0.1 − 1.4 + 0.2 + 0.1 + 0.0 − 0.0 + 10.4         Mar − 3.8 − 7.5 + 3.6 + 4.4 − 0.8 − 0.1 − 0.7 + 0.2 − 0.0 − 0.0 + 0.0 + 0.9
liabilities arising from registered debt securities. — 2Including deposits under savings and loan contracts (see also footnote 2). — 4Including
under savings and loan contracts (see Table IV.12). — 3Excluding deposits liabilities arising from non-negotiable bearer debt securities. 
35*IV Banks

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
E U R O S Y S T E M
Monthly Report
May 2010
IV Banks
 
8 Deposits of domestic households and non-profit institutions at banks (MFIs) in Germany *
 
 
€ billion
Sight deposits Time deposits  1,2 
by creditor group by creditor group
Deposits of Domestic households Domestic households
domestichouseholdsand Domestic
non-profit Self- non-profit Self-
employed Other institu- employed Other institutions,
Period total Total Total persons Employees tions Total Total persons Employees individuals individuals
End of year or month *
 
2007 1,458.7 487.1 472.1 83.9 320.9 67.2 15.0 324.8 300.7 41.7 234.3 24.7
2008 1,543.2 507.8 491.8 85.1 336.5 70.3 16.0 390.6 367.2 50.4 281.0 35.82009 1,594.9 651.3 631.3 112.5 424.6 94.3 19.9 275.6 258.5 24.5 213.2 20.7
2009          Oct 1,573.2 628.6 608.9 110.0 408.8 90.2 19.6 285.8 267.8 26.4 219.0 22.4
         Nov 1,584.9 646.1 626.2 112.5 421.3 92.4 19.9 278.1 261.4 25.1 214.8 21.5
         Dec 1,594.9 651.3 631.3 112.5 424.6 94.3 19.9 275.6 258.5 24.5 213.2 20.7
2010          Jan 1,603.5 667.3 645.3 115.2 432.7 97.4 22.0 267.2 250.7 22.7 208.4 19.5
         Feb 1,612.3 675.1 652.9 115.0 439.0 98.9 22.2 263.7 247.3 22.4 205.8 19.2         Mar 1,607.9 670.1 648.5 112.8 437.0 98.6 21.7 263.0 246.6 21.9 205.4 19.4
Changes *
2008 + 88.7 + 21.1 + 19.5 + 1.2 + 15.2 + 3.2 + 1.5 + 69.7 + 66.6 + 9.4 + 46.1 + 11.1
2009 + 51.0 + 142.2 + 138.3 + 27.4 + 88.3 + 22.6 + 4.0 − 115.0 − 108.7 − 25.8 − 67.7 − 15.2
2009          Oct + 5.8 + 11.4 + 10.9 + 4.5 + 4.4 + 2.0 + 0.5 − 9.4 − 8.4 − 1.7 − 5.5 − 1.3
         Nov + 11.8 + 17.5 + 17.3 + 2.5 + 12.5 + 2.3 + 0.2 − 7.6 − 6.3 − 1.3 − 4.1 − 0.9         Dec + 10.0 + 5.2 + 5.1 − 0.0 + 3.3 + 1.8 + 0.1 − 2.5 − 2.9 − 0.6 − 1.6 − 0.8
2010          Jan + 8.6 + 16.0 + 13.9 + 2.7 + 8.1 + 3.1 + 2.1 − 8.5 − 7.8 − 1.8 − 4.8 − 1.2
         Feb + 8.8 + 7.8 + 7.6 − 0.2 + 6.3 + 1.5 + 0.2 − 3.5 − 3.4 − 0.4 − 2.7 − 0.4         Mar − 4.4 − 4.9 − 4.4 − 2.2 − 1.9 − 0.3 − 0.5 − 0.7 − 0.6 − 0.5 − 0.4 + 0.2
*See Table IV.2, footnote*; statistical breaks have been eliminated from the Report, are not specially marked. — 1Including subordinated liabilities and
changes. The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as liabilities arising from registered debt securities. — 2Including deposits
provisional. Subsequent revisions, which appear in the following MonthlyDEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
E U R O S Y S T E M
Monthly Report
May 2010
 
  
9 Deposits of domestic government at banks (MFIs) in Germany, by creditor group 
*
 
€ billion
Deposits
   
Federal Government and its special funds  1 State governments
Time deposits Time deposits
Savings Savings
for up deposits Memo for up deposits Memo
Domestic to and for more and bank item to and for more and bank item
government, Sight including than savings Fiduciary Sight including than savings Fiduciary
Period total Total deposits 1 year 1 year bonds  2 loans Total deposits 1 year 1 year bonds  2 loans
End of year or month *
 
2007 158.5 38.3 1.9 3.1 33.2 0.0 8.2 27.9 6.0 11.2 10.6 0.1 19.1
2008 164.7 34.8 2.3 3.7 28.9 0.0 6.6 28.2 6.9 9.9 11.3 0.1 17.32009 129.3 22.2 1.3 3.7 17.1 0.1 17.3 23.1 7.1 5.8 10.1 0.1 18.0
2009          Oct 131.0 23.2 1.2 4.8 17.2 0.1 17.5 26.6 9.7 6.4 10.3 0.1 17.0
         Nov 134.4 24.2 1.4 5.4 17.2 0.1 17.5 24.1 8.4 5.2 10.4 0.1 17.0
         Dec 129.3 22.2 1.3 3.7 17.1 0.1 17.3 23.1 7.1 5.8 10.1 0.1 18.0
2010          Jan 127.7 21.3 1.3 2.8 17.1 0.1 17.3 27.2 8.4 6.2 12.4 0.1 17.9
         Feb 130.6 20.7 1.5 2.0 17.2 0.1 17.3 29.6 9.2 7.8 12.4 0.2 17.9         Mar 127.6 20.4 1.3 2.4 16.6 0.1 17.3 30.6 8.6 9.6 12.3 0.2 17.7
Changes *
2008 + 8.5 − 3.2 + 0.3 + 0.6 − 4.2 + 0.0 − 0.0 + 0.5 + 0.9 − 1.1 + 0.7 − 0.0 − 0.6
2009 − 23.9 − 0.8 − 1.0 + 0.4 − 0.3 + 0.0 − 0.1 − 5.1 + 0.2 − 4.1 − 1.1 + 0.0 − 0.4
2009          Oct − 2.7 + 0.5 − 0.1 + 1.0 − 0.4 + 0.0 + 0.1 − 1.5 + 0.1 − 1.5 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.0
         Nov + 3.6 + 0.9 + 0.3 + 0.6 + 0.0 + 0.0 − 0.0 − 2.4 − 1.3 − 1.2 + 0.1 + 0.0 − 0.0         Dec − 5.1 − 1.9 − 0.2 − 1.7 − 0.0 − − 0.2 − 1.1 − 1.3 + 0.6 − 0.3 − 0.0 − 0.0
2010          Jan − 1.6 − 0.9 + 0.0 − 1.0 − 0.0 + 0.0 − 0.0 + 4.1 + 1.4 + 0.4 + 2.3 + 0.0 − 0.1
         Feb + 2.9 − 0.6 + 0.2 − 0.8 + 0.1 + 0.0 − 0.0 + 2.4 + 0.8 + 1.6 − 0.0 + 0.0 − 0.0         Mar − 3.0 − 0.4 − 0.2 + 0.4 − 0.6 + 0.0 − + 1.0 − 0.7 + 1.8 − 0.1 + 0.0 − 0.2
*See Table IV.2, footnote *; excluding deposits of the Treuhand agency and which are included in ”Enterprises”. Statistical breaks have been eliminat ed
its successor organisations, of the Federal Railways, east German Railways from the changes. The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded
and Federal Post Office, and, from 1995, of Deutsche Bahn AG, Deutsche as provisional. Subsequent revisions, which appear in the followingPost AG and Deutsche Telekom AG, and of publicly owned enterprises,
36*IV Banks

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
May 2010
IV Banks
 
 
 
 
 
 Savings deposits  3  Memo item
 
 by maturity
 more than 1 year  2 
Included Subordinated
of which liabilities in time
Domestic Domestic (excluding deposits:
up to and up to and Bank negotiable liabilities non-profit non-profit
institu- including including more than Domestic institu- savings Fiduciary debt arising
tions 1 year Total 2 years 2 years Total tions bonds  4 loans from repos   Period households securities)  5 
End of year or month *
 
24.1 168.4 156.4 13.5 142.8 550.1 542.4 7.7 96.8 0.5 9.0 − 2007
23.4 231.5 159.2 21.3 137.9 530.2 523.1 7.1 114.6 0.3 8.5 − 200817.2 109.0 166.6 19.4 147.2 586.5 577.5 9.0 81.5 0.1 9.8 − 2009
18.0 123.0 162.9 20.0 142.9 574.2 565.3 8.9 84.6 0.1 9.6 − 2009          Oct 
16.7 115.1 163.0 19.4 143.6 577.8 569.0 8.8 82.9 0.1 9.7 −          Nov 
17.2 109.0 166.6 19.4 147.2 586.5 577.5 9.0 81.5 0.1 9.8 −          Dec 
16.5 100.8 166.3 18.2 148.2 589.5 580.4 9.1 79.6 0.1 9.9 0.0 2010          Jan 
16.4 96.4 167.3 17.8 149.5 594.5 585.2 9.3 79.1 0.1 10.0 −          Feb 
16.3 95.1 167.9 17.2 150.6 596.0 586.5 9.5 78.7 0.1 10.1 −          Mar 
Changes *
+ 3.1 + 64.4 + 5.3 + 7.9 − 2.6 − 19.9 − 19.3 − 0.6 + 17.8 − 0.2 − 0.4 − 2008
− 6.2 −122.2 + 7.2 − 1.9 + 9.1 + 56.3 + 54.4 + 1.9 − 32.6 + 0.0 + 1.7 − 2009
− 1.0 − 10.4 + 1.0 + 0.0 + 1.0 + 6.4 + 6.2 + 0.2 − 2.6 − 0.0 + 0.3 − 2009          Oct 
− 1.3 − 7.9 + 0.3 − 0.6 + 0.9 + 3.7 + 3.7 − 0.1 − 1.7 + 0.0 + 0.2 −          Nov 
+ 0.5 − 6.1 + 3.6 + 0.0 + 3.6 + 8.7 + 8.4 + 0.2 − 1.4 − 0.0 + 0.2 −          Dec 
− 0.7 − 8.2 − 0.3 − 1.2 + 0.9 + 3.0 + 2.9 + 0.1 − 1.9 + 0.0 + 0.1 + 0.0 2010          Jan 
− 0.1 − 4.5 + 1.0 − 0.4 + 1.3 + 5.0 + 4.8 + 0.2 − 0.5 − 0.0 + 0.1 − 0.0          Feb 
− 0.1 − 1.3 + 0.6 − 0.6 + 1.1 + 1.6 + 1.3 + 0.2 − 0.3 − 0.0 + 0.0 −          Mar 
under savings and loan contracts (see Table IV.12). — 3Excluding deposits liabilities arising from non-negotiable bearer debt securities. — 5Included in
under savings and loan contracts (see also footnote 2). — 4Including time deposits. DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
May 2010
 
  
 
 
 
 
Local government and local government associations
(including municipal special-purpose associations) Social security funds
Time deposits  3 Time deposits
Savings Savings
for up deposits Memo for up deposits Memo
to and for more and bank item to and for more and bank item
Sight including than savings Fiduciary Sight including than savings Fiduciary
Total deposits 1 year 1 year bonds  2,4 loans Total deposits 1 year 1 year bonds  2 loans   Period
End of year or month *
 
37.8 12.3 19.5 3.6 2.5 0.3 54.5 7.7 38.1 8.4 0.3 0.0 2007
42.5 14.3 22.0 3.9 2.2 0.2 59.2 10.7 39.8 8.4 0.3 0.0 200838.0 20.2 10.3 4.2 3.3 0.4 46.0 13.3 23.1 8.9 0.6 0.0 2009
37.4 18.2 11.8 4.3 3.1 0.4 43.8 13.5 20.6 9.1 0.6 0.0 2009          Oct 
37.1 18.7 11.0 4.2 3.2 0.4 49.0 16.4 22.9 9.1 0.7 0.0          Nov 
38.0 20.2 10.3 4.2 3.3 0.4 46.0 13.3 23.1 8.9 0.6 0.0          Dec 
34.1 17.2 9.3 4.3 3.3 0.4 45.2 14.1 21.8 8.7 0.5 0.0 2010          Jan 
35.8 18.9 9.3 4.3 3.3 0.4 44.4 14.1 21.1 8.8 0.5 0.0          Feb 
34.4 17.9 8.7 4.4 3.4 0.4 42.3 12.5 20.6 8.6 0.4 0.0          Mar 
Changes *
+ 5.4 + 2.0 + 3.3 + 0.4 − 0.3 − 0.0 + 5.9 + 3.0 + 2.3 + 0.6 − 0.0 − 0.0 2008
− 4.4 + 5.9 −11.7 + 0.3 + 1.1 − 0.0 − 13.6 + 2.5 − 16.8 + 0.4 + 0.3 − 0.0 2009
− 0.9 + 0.1 − 1.1 + 0.0 + 0.1 − 0.0 − 0.8 − 1.1 + 0.1 + 0.1 + 0.1 − 2009          Oct 
− 0.3 + 0.5 − 0.8 − 0.1 + 0.1 − + 5.3 + 2.8 + 2.5 − 0.0 + 0.0 −          Nov 
+ 0.9 + 1.5 − 0.6 + 0.0 + 0.1 − − 3.0 − 3.0 + 0.2 − 0.2 − 0.0 −          Dec 
− 4.0 − 3.0 − 1.0 + 0.1 − 0.0 − − 0.8 + 0.8 − 1.3 − 0.1 − 0.1 − 2010          Jan 
+ 1.8 + 1.7 + 0.0 + 0.0 + 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.7 − 0.0 − 0.7 + 0.0 − 0.0 −          Feb 
− 1.4 − 1.0 − 0.6 + 0.0 + 0.1 + 0.0 − 2.2 − 1.5 − 0.4 − 0.1 − 0.1 − 0.0          Mar 
Monthly Report, are not specially marked. — 1Federal Railways Fund, liabilities arising from non-negotiable bearer debt securities. — 3Including
Indemnification Fund, Redemption Fund for Inherited Liabilities, ERP Special deposits under savings and loan contracts. — 4Excluding deposits under
Fund, German Unity Fund, Equalisation of Burdens Fund. — 2Including savings and loan contracts (see also footnote 3). 
37*IV Banks

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
E U R O S Y S T E M
Monthly Report
May 2010
IV Banks
 
10 Savings deposits and bank savings bonds of banks (MFIs) in Germany sold to non-banks (non-MFIs) *
 
 
€ billion
Savings deposits  1 Bank savings bonds,  3  sold to
of residents of non-residents domestic non-banks
at three months’ at more than three Memo
notice months’ notice item of which
Interest With
of which of which of which credited maturities
Special Special At three on of moresavings savings savings non-banks, than foreign months’
Period Total Total Total Total Total notice deposits total Total 2 years facilities  
2 facilities  2 non-banks
End of year or month *
 
2007 563.8 555.4 446.0 354.6 109.4 101.4 8.4 6.1 14.2 130.7 118.4 64.5 12.3
2008 544.1 535.2 424.8 344.0 110.4 103.2 8.9 6.3 14.9 150.8 135.4 59.6 15.4
2009 604.1 594.5 474.5 379.4 120.0 112.1 9.6 7.0 13.8 118.8 103.2 68.3 15.6
2009          Nov 595.1 585.6 464.5 371.6 121.1 113.3 9.5 6.9 0.8 119.7 104.2 66.5 15.5
         Dec 604.1 594.5 474.5 379.4 120.0 112.1 9.6 7.0 8.1 118.8 103.2 68.3 15.6
2010          Jan 607.3 597.7 479.2 382.3 118.5 110.6 9.6 7.1 0.7 117.5 101.3 70.2 16.2
         Feb 612.5 602.9 485.1 387.3 117.8 110.0 9.6 7.1 0.3 117.1 100.8 71.4 16.3         Mar 614.4 604.7 486.9 389.4 117.9 109.4 9.6 7.2 0.3 116.9 100.5 72.0 16.4
Changes *
2008 − 19.7 − 20.2 − 21.2 − 11.1 + 1.0 + 1.6 + 0.5 + 0.1 . + 20.1 + 17.0 − 4.9 + 3.2
2009 + 60.0 + 59.3 + 50.3 + 35.8 + 8.9 + 7.8 + 0.7 + 0.8 . − 30.6 − 31.6 + 9.5 + 1.0
2009          Nov + 3.8 + 3.8 + 3.0 + 1.9 + 0.9 + 0.8 − 0.0 + 0.0 . − 1.8 − 1.7 + 1.8 − 0.2
         Dec + 9.0 + 8.9 + 9.9 + 7.8 − 1.0 − 1.2 + 0.1 + 0.2 . − 0.9 − 1.0 + 1.8 + 0.1
2010          Jan + 3.2 + 3.2 + 4.7 + 3.0 − 1.6 − 1.5 + 0.0 + 0.1 . − 1.3 − 1.9 + 1.9 + 0.6
         Feb + 5.2 + 5.2 + 5.9 + 5.1 − 0.7 − 0.7 − 0.0 + 0.0 . − 0.4 − 0.5 + 1.2 + 0.1         Mar + 1.9 + 1.8 + 1.8 + 2.2 + 0.1 − 0.5 + 0.0 + 0.1 . − 0.2 − 0.4 + 0.6 + 0.2
*See Table IV.2, footnote*; statistical breaks have been eliminated from the loan contracts, which are classified as time deposits. — 2Savings deposits
changes. The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as bearing interest at a rate which exceeds the minimum or basic rate of
provisional. Subsequent revisions, which appear in the following Monthly interest. — 3Including liabilities arising from non-negotiable bearer debt
Report, are not specially marked. — 1Excluding deposits under savings and securities. 
 
  
 
11 Debt securities and money market paper outstanding of banks (MFIs) in Germany 
*
 
€ billion
Non-negotiable bearer debt securities
Negotiable bearer debt securities and money market paper and money market paper  5 
of which of which
with maturities of Subordinated
with maturities of
Certifi- more more non-
Floating Zero Foreign cates up to and more up to and more than 1 year than 1 year negotiable negotiable
rate coupon currency of including including than including including than debt debt
Period Total bonds  1 deposit 1 year 2 years 2 years Total 1 year 2 years 2 years bonds  1,2 bonds  3,4 securities securities
End of year or month *
 
2007 1,659.1 375.7 54.2 305.1 51.2 109.6 147.5 1,402.0 1.9 0.1 1.1 0.7 53.6 1.4
2008 1,640.1 395.9 50.7 314.1 64.0 162.6 153.3 1,324.2 2.3 0.2 1.3 0.8 52.5 1.6
2009 1,529.8 380.6 43.9 317.4 70.4 115.9 105.8 1,308.2 0.9 0.0 0.3 0.6 46.1 1.8
2009          Nov 1,533.6 387.2 44.3 302.0 60.2 85.1 135.3 1,313.2 1.0 0.0 0.3 0.6 47.5 1.8
         Dec 1,529.8 380.6 43.9 317.4 70.4 115.9 105.8 1,308.2 0.9 0.0 0.3 0.6 46.1 1.8
2010          Jan 1,529.2 379.3 44.2 327.2 71.9 114.0 100.5 1,314.7 0.8 0.0 0.2 0.6 45.7 1.8
         Feb 1,521.9 380.7 46.2 335.0 74.7 116.4 94.5 1,311.1 0.7 0.0 0.1 0.6 45.3 1.8         Mar 1,532.8 385.9 45.2 340.3 75.5 118.5 94.4 1,319.9 0.7 0.0 0.1 0.6 45.1 1.8
Changes *
2008 − 17.0 + 18.2 − 3.7 + 9.0 + 12.8 + 53.1 + 5.8 − 75.9 + 0.4 + 0.1 + 0.2 + 0.1 − 1.1 + 0.1
2009 − 110.1 − 15.3 − 6.8 + 4.7 + 6.4 − 46.7 − 47.8 − 15.6 − 1.4 − 0.2 − 1.0 − 0.2 − 6.4 + 0.5
2009          Nov − 14.3 − 1.8 − 3.0 − 5.0 − 1.6 − 6.3 + 0.5 − 8.4 − 0.1 − 0.0 − 0.1 − 0.0 + 0.4 − 0.0
         Dec − 3.8 − 6.6 − 0.4 + 15.4 + 10.2 + 30.8 − 29.5 − 5.1 − 0.1 − 0.0 − 0.1 − 0.0 − 1.4 + 0.0
2010          Jan − 0.6 − 1.3 + 0.3 + 9.8 + 1.5 − 1.9 − 5.3 + 6.6 − 0.1 − − 0.1 − 0.0 − 0.4 + 0.0
         Feb − 7.3 − 3.5 + 2.0 + 7.8 + 2.8 + 2.4 − 6.0 − 3.6 − 0.1 − − 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.4 − 0.0         Mar + 10.9 + 5.2 − 1.0 + 5.3 + 0.8 + 2.1 − 0.1 + 8.8 − 0.0 − − 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.2 + 0.0
*See Table IV.2, footnote*; statistical breaks have been eliminated from the rate notes and zero coupon bonds denominated in foreign currencies. —
changes. The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as 4Bonds denominated in non-euro-area currencies. — 5Non-negotiable
provisional. Subsequent revisions, which appear in the following Monthly bearer debt securities are classified among bank savings bonds (see also
Report, are not specially marked. — 1Including debt securities denominated Table IV.10, footnote 2). 
in foreign currencies. — 2Issue value when floated. — 3Including floating
38*IV Banks

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
May 2010
IV  Banks
  
12  Building  and  loan  associations (MFIs) in Germany *
  Interim statements
  
€ billion
Lending to banks (MFIs) Lending to non-banks (non-MFIs) Deposits of banks Deposits of non-
(MFIs)  5 banks (non-MFIs)
Credit Building loans Secur- Memo
bal- item ities (in-
ances cluding Bearer New
and Loans Treasury Deposits Deposits debt Capital con-
Num- loans under bills under under secur- (includ- tractsber (ex- Bank savings Interim and savings savings ities ing pub- enteredof Balance cluding debt and loan and Other Treasury and loan Sight and loan Sight and out- lished into in
End of sheet building Building secur- con- bridging building discount con- and time con- time de- stand- re- year or associ-
year/month ations total loans  
2 ities 3 tracts loans loans tracts deposits tracts posits  6 ing month  8 loans)  1 paper)  4 serves)  7 
All  building  and  loan  associations
2009 25 193.6 37.2 0.0 19.1 29.4 70.7 12.6 12.2 0.4 27.8 123.4 7.4 6.3 7.3 87.5
2010          Jan 25 194.8 38.5 0.0 19.3 29.4 70.6 12.6 12.2 0.5 28.5 123.9 7.4 6.1 7.5 6.7
         Feb 25 195.2 39.0 0.0 19.0 29.2 70.5 12.6 12.6 0.5 28.3 124.4 7.4 5.7 7.5 6.8         Mar 24 194.5 37.6 0.0 19.2 29.1 70.8 12.7 13.0 0.5 27.0 125.2 7.4 5.5 7.4 7.8
Private  building  and  Ioan  associations
  
2010          Jan 15 142.6 22.9 0.0 14.8 18.8 55.9 11.3 7.5 0.3 25.1 81.3 7.2 6.1 4.9 4.3
         Feb 15 142.6 23.2 0.0 14.4 18.7 55.9 11.1 7.7 0.3 24.8 81.7 7.2 5.7 4.9 4.3
         Mar 14 141.8 22.0 0.0 14.5 18.6 56.2 11.3 7.8 0.3 23.6 82.2 7.2 5.5 4.8 4.9
Public  building  and  Ioan  associations
  
2010          Jan 10 52.2 15.6 0.0 4.5 10.6 14.7 1.3 4.7 0.2 3.5 42.6 0.2 − 2.6 2.5
         Feb 10 52.6 15.8 0.0 4.6 10.5 14.6 1.4 4.9 0.2 3.5 42.8 0.2 − 2.6 2.5
         Mar 10 52.7 15.6 0.0 4.7 10.5 14.6 1.4 5.2 0.2 3.4 43.0 0.2 − 2.6 2.9
Trends in building and loan association business
  
€ billion
Changes in deposits Capital promised Capital disbursed Disbursement Interest and
under savings and commitments repayments
loan contracts Allocations outstanding at received on
end of period building loans  10 
Deposits under Loans under
Repay- savings and savings andments loan contracts loan contracts  
9 Newly
Interest of granted
credited interim deposits of which of which
on under Applied Applied and of
which of Memo Amounts deposits cancelled to settle- to settle- bridging
under savings of ment of ment of loans Under which item paid intosavings savings and which interim interim and alloc- Repay- Housing
and and loan loan Net and and other ated ments bonuses
loan ac- con- con- alloca- bridging bridging building con- during re-
Period tracts tracts Total Total Total loans Total loans loans Total tracts Total quarter counts  
9 tions  11 ceived  12 
All  building  and  loan  associations
2009 25.4 2.5 5.8 46.6 31.6 41.3 18.4 4.2 9.1 3.9 13.7 10.9 7.5 11.4 9.3 0.4
2010          Jan 2.3 0.0 0.4 3.1 2.2 2.7 1.2 0.3 0.6 0.3 0.8 10.9 7.5 0.9 0.0
         Feb 2.2 0.0 0.4 3.2 2.4 2.7 1.2 0.4 0.6 0.3 0.9 11.0 7.7 0.9 0.0         Mar 2.7 0.0 0.5 3.5 2.3 3.3 1.4 0.3 0.7 0.3 1.1 10.9 7.5 1.0 ... 0.1
Private  building  and  Ioan  associations
  
2010          Jan 1.4 0.0 0.2 2.1 1.5 2.0 0.9 0.3 0.4 0.2 0.7 6.8 4.0 0.6 0.0
         Feb 1.4 0.0 0.2 2.1 1.4 1.9 0.8 0.3 0.4 0.2 0.7 6.7 3.9 0.6 0.0
         Mar 1.8 0.0 0.3 2.5 1.6 2.4 1.0 0.3 0.4 0.2 0.9 6.7 3.9 0.7 ... 0.0
Public  building  and  Ioan  associations
  
2010          Jan 0.8 − 0.2 0.9 0.7 0.7 0.4 0.1 0.2 0.1 0.2 4.1 3.6 0.3 0.0
         Feb 0.8 − 0.2 1.2 1.0 0.8 0.4 0.1 0.2 0.1 0.1 4.3 3.8 0.3 0.0
         Mar 0.9 0.0 0.2 1.0 0.8 0.9 0.5 0.1 0.2 0.1 0.2 4.2 3.7 0.3 ... 0.0
*Excluding assets and liabilities and/or transactions of foreign branches. amount covered by the contracts; only contracts newly entered into, for
The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as provisional. which the contract fee has been fully paid. Increases in the sum contracted
Subsequent revisions, which appear in the following Monthly Report, are count as new contracts. — 9For disbursements of deposits under savings
not specially marked. — 1Including postal giro account balances, claims on and loan contracts arising from the allocation of contracts see “Capital
building and loan associations, claims arising from registered debt securities disbursed“. — 10Including housing bonuses credited. — 11Only allocations
and central bank credit balances. — 2Loans under savings and loan accepted by the beneficiaries; including allocations applied to settlement of
contracts and interim and bridging loans. — 3Including money market interim and bridging loans. — 12The amounts already credited to the
paper and small amounts of other securities issued by banks. — 4Including accounts of savers or borrowers are also included in “Amounts paid into
equalisation claims. — 5Including liabilities to building and loan savings and loan accounts“ and “Interest and repayments received on
associations. — 6Including small amounts of savings deposits. — 7Including building loans“. 
participation rights capital and fund for general banking risks. — 8Total
39*IV  Banks

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
E U R O S Y S T E M
Monthly Report
May 2010
IV  Banks
  
13 Assets and liabilities of the foreign branches and foreign subsidiaries of German banks (MFIs) *
  
  
€ billion
Number of Lending to banks (MFIs) Lending to non-banks (non-MFIs)
Loans Credit  balances and loans
German   
banks to German
(MFIs)   non-banks
with
foreign foreign of which
branches Money enter- Money branches  1 
and/or and/or market prises to market
foreign foreign Balance paper, and foreign paper,
subsi- subsi- sheet German Foreign secur- house- non- secur- Other
Period diaries diaries total Total Total banks banks Total Total Total holds banks ities  2 assets ities 2,3 
Foreign  branches End of year or month *
  
2007 52 218 2,042.4 813.8 743.1 238.6 504.5 70.7 1,066.8 811.4 21.6 20.7 789.8 255.3 161.8
2008 56 226 1,715.5 730.7 669.1 244.9 424.2 61.6 825.3 630.4 20.2 19.2 610.3 194.9 159.52009 51 211 1,461.6 579.2 539.1 210.1 328.9 40.2 691.5 534.7 20.7 19.7 514.0 156.7 190.9
2009          May 56 228 1,723.8 722.6 670.3 266.7 403.5 52.3 780.3 607.2 23.6 22.6 583.6 173.1 220.9
         June 55 224 1,680.2 715.4 666.5 260.9 405.7 48.8 760.5 588.8 20.9 19.9 567.9 171.6 204.4
         July 54 223 1,627.0 683.2 636.3 252.0 384.4 46.9 740.7 576.2 20.9 19.8 555.4 164.4 203.2
         Aug 54 225 1,586.8 663.4 617.1 248.1 369.0 46.3 720.8 555.7 21.5 20.5 534.2 165.1 202.6         Sep 54 224 1,546.2 627.7 582.6 230.6 352.0 45.1 724.9 559.1 20.1 19.0 539.1 165.8 193.5
         Oct 54 225 1,552.6 612.5 569.0 229.1 339.9 43.4 720.6 553.1 20.0 18.9 533.1 167.5 219.5
         Nov 53 222 1,530.0 581.5 540.0 205.6 334.4 41.5 710.1 547.5 19.9 18.9 527.6 162.6 238.4         Dec 51 211 1,461.6 579.2 539.1 210.1 328.9 40.2 691.5 534.7 20.7 19.7 514.0 156.7 190.9
2010          Jan 53 212 1,557.1 609.7 570.4 214.8 355.6 39.3 715.9 552.3 20.7 19.7 531.6 163.6 231.5
         Feb 53 213 1,539.5 604.8 565.7 211.5 354.3 39.1 709.5 547.7 19.7 18.6 528.0 161.8 225.3
Changes *
2008 + 4 + 8 −359.4 − 98.5 − 89.3 + 6.3 − 95.5 − 9.2 −256.8 −190.7 − 1.5 − 1.6 −189.3 − 66.1 − 4.1
2009 − 5 − 15 −247.9 −148.8 −127.3 − 34.7 − 92.6 − 21.5 −131.7 − 94.6 + 0.5 + 0.5 − 95.1 − 37.1 + 32.6
2009          May − − 2 − 27.3 − 17.6 − 15.2 − 9.6 − 5.6 − 2.5 − 15.0 − 10.8 − 1.1 − 1.0 − 9.8 − 4.1 + 5.3
         June − 1 − 4 − 43.6 − 6.5 − 3.0 − 5.9 + 2.9 − 3.5 − 20.6 − 19.3 − 2.7 − 2.7 − 16.6 − 1.2 − 16.5
         July − 1 − 1 − 53.9 − 32.5 − 30.6 − 8.9 − 21.7 − 2.0 − 20.1 − 12.7 − 0.1 − 0.1 − 12.7 − 7.4 − 1.2
         Aug − + 2 − 32.2 − 17.4 − 16.9 − 3.9 − 13.0 − 0.5 − 14.4 − 16.0 + 0.7 + 0.7 − 16.7 + 1.6 − 0.4
         Sep − − 1 − 24.6 − 30.5 − 29.5 − 17.5 − 12.1 − 1.0 + 14.3 + 11.6 − 1.5 − 1.5 + 13.1 + 2.7 − 8.4
         Oct − + 1 + 11.6 − 12.9 − 11.3 − 1.5 − 9.8 − 1.6 − 1.6 − 4.1 − 0.1 − 0.1 − 4.0 + 2.5 + 26.1
         Nov − 1 − 3 − 15.0 − 28.8 − 27.0 − 23.5 − 3.5 − 1.9 − 5.3 − 1.4 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 1.3 − 3.9 + 19.1         Dec − 2 − 11 − 92.6 − 10.5 − 8.9 + 4.5 − 13.4 − 1.6 − 33.5 − 24.5 + 0.8 + 0.8 − 25.2 − 9.0 − 48.6
2010          Jan + 2 + 1 + 74.7 + 23.4 + 24.5 + 4.6 + 19.9 − 1.1 + 11.6 + 7.5 + 0.0 + 0.0 + 7.4 + 4.1 + 39.7
         Feb − + 1 − 32.8 − 11.8 − 11.4 − 3.3 − 8.1 − 0.4 − 14.1 − 10.2 − 1.1 − 1.1 − 9.2 − 3.9 − 6.9
  
  
Foreign  subsidiaries End of year or month *
  
2007 39 120 590.8 267.8 202.4 104.8 97.5 65.5 263.9 176.0 37.8 36.8 138.1 87.9 59.0
2008 38 116 594.9 244.9 183.1 85.5 97.6 61.8 267.8 196.5 42.2 41.6 154.3 71.3 82.22009 36 97 474.1 205.4 157.0 87.4 69.6 48.4 217.0 154.7 38.7 38.4 115.9 62.4 51.7
2009          May 37 112 533.6 220.1 165.1 74.3 90.7 55.0 261.4 191.7 43.1 42.5 148.7 69.7 52.1
         June 37 111 530.3 218.2 163.8 75.0 88.8 54.4 260.4 190.8 42.4 41.8 148.4 69.7 51.7
         July 37 112 526.5 208.9 155.0 72.3 82.7 54.0 260.8 191.3 41.9 41.3 149.4 69.6 56.7
         Aug 37 112 523.9 211.8 158.0 71.6 86.4 53.8 257.1 189.7 41.0 40.5 148.8 67.4 55.0         Sep 36 112 531.3 214.0 163.3 73.8 89.5 50.7 251.6 186.9 40.9 40.4 146.0 64.7 65.8
         Oct 36 110 517.3 210.3 160.6 77.6 83.0 49.7 251.1 186.6 40.9 40.4 145.7 64.5 56.0
         Nov 36 108 516.5 212.8 163.7 77.5 86.2 49.1 247.0 183.5 41.0 40.5 142.5 63.4 56.7         Dec 36 97 474.1 205.4 157.0 87.4 69.6 48.4 217.0 154.7 38.7 38.4 115.9 62.4 51.7
2010          Jan 36 97 476.5 206.1 158.2 84.9 73.2 48.0 219.1 155.5 38.9 38.5 116.6 63.6 51.3
         Feb 36 96 480.5 211.7 163.8 85.4 78.4 47.9 218.9 155.7 38.6 38.2 117.1 63.2 49.9
Changes *
2008 − 1 − 4 − 0.2 − 24.2 − 19.8 − 19.3 − 0.5 − 4.4 + 1.1 + 17.5 + 4.4 + 4.8 + 13.2 − 16.4 + 22.9
2009 − 2 − 19 −120.2 − 39.8 − 26.9 + 1.9 − 28.8 − 12.9 − 50.0 − 41.1 − 3.5 − 3.3 − 37.6 − 8.9 − 30.4
2009          May − 1 − 1 − 13.5 − 7.2 − 5.6 + 0.2 − 5.8 − 1.5 − 3.4 − 1.2 − 0.4 − 0.4 − 0.7 − 2.3 − 2.9
         June − − 1 − 3.2 − 2.0 − 1.4 + 0.6 − 2.0 − 0.6 − 0.9 − 0.8 − 0.7 − 0.7 − 0.1 − 0.0 − 0.4
         July − + 1 − 3.8 − 9.3 − 8.8 − 2.7 − 6.1 − 0.5 + 0.5 + 0.5 − 0.5 − 0.5 + 1.0 − 0.1 + 5.0
         Aug − − − 1.7 + 3.4 + 3.3 − 0.7 + 4.0 + 0.1 − 3.4 − 1.3 − 0.9 − 0.8 − 0.3 − 2.2 − 1.7
         Sep − 1 − + 9.7 + 3.5 + 6.0 + 2.2 + 3.8 − 2.6 − 4.7 − 2.0 − 0.1 − 0.1 − 1.9 − 2.7 + 10.9
         Oct − − 2 − 13.3 − 3.3 − 2.5 + 3.8 − 6.3 − 0.8 − 0.2 + 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.0 + 0.0 − 0.2 − 9.8
         Nov − − 2 + 0.2 + 3.1 + 3.4 − 0.1 + 3.5 − 0.3 − 3.7 − 2.7 + 0.2 + 0.1 − 2.8 − 1.0 + 0.8         Dec − − 11 − 46.0 − 9.3 − 7.8 + 9.9 − 17.7 − 1.5 − 31.4 − 30.4 − 2.3 − 2.1 − 28.1 − 1.1 − 5.2
2010          Jan − − − 0.7 − 0.9 + 0.3 − 2.5 + 2.7 − 1.2 + 0.7 − 0.5 + 0.1 + 0.1 − 0.6 + 1.2 − 0.5
         Feb − − 1 + 2.0 + 4.4 + 5.2 + 0.5 + 4.7 − 0.7 − 1.0 − 0.6 − 0.2 − 0.3 − 0.4 − 0.4 − 1.5
*In this table “foreign“ also includes the country of domicile of the foreign ies.) The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as provision al;
branches and foreign subsidiaries. Statistical revisions have been eliminated subsequent revisions, which appear in the following Monthly Report , are
from the changes. (Breaks owing to changes in the reporting population not specially marked. — 1Several branches in a given country of domicile
have not been eliminated from the flow figures for the foreign subsidiar-
40*IV  Banks

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
May 2010
IV  Banks
  
  
  
  
  
Deposits
of banks (MFIs) of non-banks (non-MFIs)
German non-banks  4 
Money
Short-term market Medium  and long-term
paper
of which of which and debt
enter- enter- Working securities
out- capital Other prises  and prises  and
German Foreign house- house- Foreign stand- and own liabil-
Total Total banks Total Total Total holds Total holds ing  5 funds ities  6   Period banks non-banks
End of year or month * Foreign  branches
  
1,723.7 1,191.0 547.7 643.3 532.7 55.3 51.2 47.5 4.1 3.9 477.4 186.0 29.2 103.5 2007
1,446.1 1,070.4 554.3 516.1 375.7 45.0 36.5 34.6 8.5 8.0 330.7 126.6 35.6 107.2 20081,125.9 798.0 449.6 348.4 327.9 37.4 33.8 31.6 3.5 3.3 290.5 157.5 33.9 144.4 2009
1,393.7 990.9 522.3 468.6 402.8 43.9 39.3 38.5 4.5 4.0 359.0 148.5 35.9 145.6 2009          May
1,344.9 968.0 517.0 451.1 376.8 41.4 36.9 36.3 4.5 3.9 335.5 158.1 35.7 141.6          June
1,285.1 913.1 479.5 433.6 372.0 40.1 35.6 35.1 4.4 3.9 331.9 157.0 35.9 149.1          July
1,250.3 875.2 465.5 409.7 375.1 38.3 33.8 33.4 4.4 3.9 336.8 157.8 35.8 142.9          Aug 1,206.4 851.8 446.3 405.5 354.6 38.1 33.7 32.9 4.4 3.9 316.4 166.3 35.7 137.8          Sep 
1,203.4 822.4 441.1 381.3 381.1 36.9 32.5 32.2 4.4 3.9 344.2 169.4 34.7 145.1          Oct 
1,172.1 829.1 434.1 395.0 343.0 36.5 32.2 31.6 4.3 3.8 306.5 169.0 34.6 154.3          Nov 1,125.9 798.0 449.6 348.4 327.9 37.4 33.8 31.6 3.5 3.3 290.5 157.5 33.9 144.4          Dec 
1,195.5 824.5 444.2 380.3 371.1 36.3 32.9 32.3 3.5 3.2 334.7 171.2 34.2 156.3 2010          Jan 
1,178.0 801.9 431.4 370.5 376.1 38.9 35.4 34.8 3.5 3.3 337.2 168.2 34.3 159.2          Feb 
Changes *
− 304.0 −139.7 + 6.5 −146.3 −164.3 − 10.3 − 14.7 − 12.9 + 4.4 + 4.1 −153.9 − 59.4 + 6.5 − 2.4 2008
− 312.0 −267.8 −104.7 −163.1 − 44.2 − 7.6 − 2.6 − 3.0 − 5.0 − 4.7 − 36.6 + 30.9 − 1.7 + 34.9 2009
− 28.3 − 23.9 − 4.0 − 19.9 − 4.4 − 3.1 − 2.9 − 3.1 − 0.2 − 0.1 − 1.3 + 1.6 − 0.5 − 0.1 2009          May
− 48.8 − 22.4 − 5.3 − 17.1 − 26.3 − 2.5 − 2.5 − 2.2 − 0.1 − 0.0 − 23.8 + 9.6 − 0.3 − 4.1          June
− 60.1 − 55.2 − 37.5 − 17.7 − 4.9 − 1.3 − 1.2 − 1.2 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 3.6 − 1.1 + 0.3 + 7.1          July
− 29.3 − 35.1 − 14.0 − 21.2 + 5.8 − 1.8 − 1.8 − 1.7 − 0.0 − 0.0 + 7.6 + 0.8 − 0.2 − 3.5          Aug 
− 32.7 − 17.3 − 19.2 + 1.9 − 15.4 − 0.1 − 0.1 − 0.5 − 0.0 + 0.0 − 15.3 + 8.4 − 0.1 − 0.2          Sep 
+ 1.2 − 26.6 − 5.3 − 21.3 + 27.8 − 1.2 − 1.2 − 0.7 − 0.0 − 0.0 + 29.0 + 3.1 − 1.0 + 8.3          Oct 
− 25.8 + 9.4 − 7.0 + 16.4 − 35.2 − 0.4 − 0.4 − 0.6 − 0.1 − 0.0 − 34.8 − 0.4 − 0.1 + 11.2          Nov − 62.4 − 40.1 + 15.5 − 55.6 − 22.4 + 0.9 + 1.7 + 0.0 − 0.8 − 0.6 − 23.2 − 11.5 − 0.7 − 17.9          Dec 
+ 56.3 + 18.9 − 5.4 + 24.3 + 37.4 − 1.0 − 1.0 + 0.7 − 0.1 − 0.1 + 38.4 + 13.7 + 0.2 + 4.5 2010          Jan 
− 28.5 − 29.2 − 12.8 − 16.4 + 0.7 + 2.6 + 2.5 + 2.5 + 0.1 + 0.1 − 1.9 − 3.0 + 0.1 − 1.4          Feb 
  
  
End of year or month * Foreign  subsidiaries
  
437.3 270.1 118.2 151.9 167.2 37.1 30.3 29.5 6.8 6.7 130.1 69.5 28.6 55.4 2007
453.7 277.7 145.1 132.7 176.0 32.8 24.1 23.6 8.7 8.6 143.2 57.7 30.5 52.9 2008377.6 218.5 125.4 93.1 159.1 37.0 29.6 29.4 7.4 7.3 122.1 33.3 24.3 38.9 2009
402.5 242.5 121.6 121.0 160.0 33.3 24.9 24.2 8.4 8.3 126.7 55.2 28.5 47.4 2009          May
403.0 240.1 122.3 117.8 162.9 33.7 25.3 24.6 8.4 8.3 129.2 54.2 28.7 44.5          June
397.5 236.2 120.5 115.7 161.3 31.5 23.0 22.6 8.5 8.4 129.9 55.0 28.9 45.0          July
394.9 235.3 122.7 112.5 159.7 30.8 22.4 21.8 8.4 8.3 128.9 55.2 28.0 45.8          Aug 403.7 239.7 128.2 111.5 164.0 31.0 22.5 21.7 8.5 8.4 133.0 54.6 28.0 45.1          Sep 
387.8 228.3 121.7 106.6 159.5 31.7 23.2 22.3 8.5 8.4 127.8 53.7 27.9 47.9          Oct 
387.2 227.1 119.9 107.2 160.1 30.0 21.5 21.1 8.5 8.4 130.0 53.3 28.9 47.1          Nov 377.6 218.5 125.4 93.1 159.1 37.0 29.6 29.4 7.4 7.3 122.1 33.3 24.3 38.9          Dec 
378.1 220.5 121.5 99.1 157.5 34.2 26.9 26.6 7.4 7.3 123.3 33.5 24.4 40.7 2010          Jan 
382.4 219.9 121.9 98.0 162.5 35.3 27.6 27.3 7.7 7.6 127.2 33.9 24.4 39.8          Feb 
Changes *
+ 12.1 + 4.8 + 26.9 − 22.1 + 7.3 − 4.3 − 6.3 − 5.9 + 2.0 + 2.0 + 11.6 − 11.8 + 1.9 − 2.4 2008
− 76.0 − 59.1 − 19.7 − 39.5 − 16.9 + 4.2 + 5.5 + 5.8 − 1.4 − 1.4 − 21.1 − 24.3 − 6.2 − 13.6 2009
− 10.6 − 3.8 − 2.7 − 1.1 − 6.8 − 0.2 + 0.0 − 0.3 − 0.2 − 0.2 − 6.7 − 1.6 − 0.6 − 0.8 2009          May
+ 0.6 − 2.3 + 0.7 − 3.1 + 2.9 + 0.4 + 0.4 + 0.4 + 0.0 + 0.0 + 2.5 − 1.0 + 0.2 − 2.9          June
− 5.5 − 4.0 − 1.8 − 2.2 − 1.6 − 2.3 − 2.3 − 2.1 + 0.0 + 0.0 + 0.7 + 0.9 + 0.3 + 0.6          July
− 1.9 − 0.7 + 2.2 − 2.9 − 1.3 − 0.7 − 0.7 − 0.7 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.6 + 0.2 − 0.9 + 1.0          Aug 
+ 10.3 + 5.1 + 5.4 − 0.4 + 5.2 + 0.2 + 0.1 − 0.2 + 0.0 + 0.0 + 5.1 − 0.6 − 0.0 − 0.0          Sep 
− 15.3 − 11.0 − 6.4 − 4.6 − 4.3 + 0.7 + 0.7 + 0.6 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 5.0 − 0.9 − 0.1 + 3.0          Oct 
+ 0.2 − 0.9 − 1.9 + 1.0 + 1.1 − 1.7 − 1.7 − 1.2 + 0.0 + 0.0 + 2.7 − 0.4 + 1.0 − 0.5          Nov − 12.2 − 9.8 + 5.5 − 15.4 − 2.4 + 6.9 + 8.1 + 8.3 − 1.1 − 1.1 − 9.3 − 19.9 − 4.6 − 9.3          Dec 
− 1.8 + 0.9 − 4.0 + 4.9 − 2.8 − 2.7 − 2.7 − 2.7 + 0.0 + 0.0 − 0.1 + 0.1 + 0.0 + 0.9 2010          Jan 
+ 2.9 − 1.4 + 0.5 − 1.9 + 4.3 + 1.0 + 0.7 + 0.7 + 0.3 + 0.3 + 3.2 + 0.4 + 0.0 − 1.4          Feb 
are regarded as a single branch. — 2Treasury bills, Treasury discount non-negotiable debt securities. — 5Issues of negotiable and
paper and other money market paper, debt securities. — 3Including non-negotiable debt securities and money market paper. — 6Including
own debt securities. — 4Excluding subordinated liabilities and subordinated liabilities. 
41*IV  Banks

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
E U R O S Y S T E M
Monthly Report
May 2010
V  Minimum reserves
 
1  Reserve ratios
Germany Euro area
 
% of liabilities subject to reserve requirements % of reserve base  1 
Sight Time
Applicable from liabilities liabilities Applicable from Ratio Savings deposits
1995  Aug 1 2    2    1.5    1999  Jan 1 2    
 
   
1Article 3 of the Regulation of the European Central Bank on the appli-
cation of minimum reserves (excluding liabilities to which a reserve ratio of
0% applies pursuant to Article 4 (1)). 
 
  
2  Reserve maintenance in Germany up to the end of 1998
− pursuant to the Minimum Reserves Order of the Bundesbank 
 
DM million
Liabilities subject to reserve requirements Excess reserves  4 
Monthly Required % of the
average  1 Total reserves  2 Level Deficiencies Sight liabilities Time liabilities Savings deposits Actual reserves  3 required  reserves
1995          Dec 2,066,565 579,337 519,456 967,772 36,492 37,337 845 2.3 3
1996          Dec 2,201,464 655,483 474,342 1,071,639 38,671 39,522 851 2.2 41997          Dec 2,327,879 734,986 476,417 1,116,477 40,975 41,721 745 1.8 3
1998          Dec 2,576,889 865,444 564,878 1,146,567 45,805 46,432 627 1.4 4
1Pursuant to sections 5 to 7 of the Minimum Reserves Order. 2Amount balances of the credit institutions subject to reserve requirements on their
after applying the reserve ratios to the liabilities subject to reserve require- giro accounts at the Bundesbank. — 4 Actual reserves less required reserves. 
ments (section 5 (1) of the Minimum Reserves Order). — 3Average credit
 
 
3  Reserve maintenance in the euro area
− from 1999, pursuant to the ECB Regulation on the application of minimum reserves in accordance with
Article 19.1 of the Statute of the ESCB 
 
Maintenance Required reserves
period before deduction Required reserves
of lump-sum Lump-sum beginning in  1 after deduction of
Reserve base  2 allowance  3 allowance  4 Deficiencies  7 lump-sum allowance Current account  5 Excess reserves  6 
Euro area ( € billion)
 
2009          Sep 10,710.1 214.2 0.5 213.7 214.7 1.1 0.0
         Oct 10,617.5 212.4 0.5 211.8 212.8 1.0 0.0
         Nov 10,538.1 210.8 0.5 210.2 211.4 1.2 0.0
         Dec 10,530.2 210.6 0.5 210.1 211.3 1.2 0.0
2010          Jan 10,499.6 210.0 0.5 209.5 210.9 1.4 0.0
         Feb 10,568.9 211.4 0.5 210.9 211.8 1.0 0.0
         Mar  p 10,595.2 211.9 0.5 211.4 212.5 1.2 0.0
         Apr  p,8 10,587.7 211.8 0.5 211.2 212.4 1.2 ...
         May  p ... ... ... 211.3 ... ... ...
Of which:  Germany ( € million)
2009          Sep 2,566,298 51,326 188 51,138 51,456 318 0
         Oct 2,549,967 50,999 188 50,812 51,032 220 0
         Nov 2,523,110 50,462 187 50,275 50,532 257 2
         Dec 2,507,906 50,158 187 49,971 50,297 326 0
2010          Jan 2,496,117 49,922 187 49,735 50,168 433 2
         Feb 2,496,911 49,938 187 49,751 50,044 293 0
         Mar  p 2,508,645 50,173 187 49,985 50,295 310 0
         Apr  p 2,504,766 50,095 187 49,908 50,213 305 0
         May  p 2,510,392 50,208 187 50,020 ... ... ...
1From March 2004, the reserve maintenance period will start on the reserve base. — 4Article 5 (2) of the Regulation of the European Central
settlement day of the main refinancing operation immediately following Bank on the application of minimum reserves. — 5Average credit balances
the meeting of the Governing Council of the ECB for which the monthly of the credit institutions at the national central banks. — 6Average credit
discussion of the monetary policy stance is scheduled. — 2Article 3 of the balances less required reserves after deduction of the lump-sum
Regulation of the European Central Bank on the application of minimum allowance. — 7Required reserves after deduction of the lump-sum
reserves (excluding liabilities to which a reserve ratio of 0% applies, pur- allowance. — 8The total number of deficiencies was not available when
suant to Article 4 (1)). — 3Amount after applying the reserve ratios to the this report went to press. 
42*V  Minimum reserves

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
May 2010
VI Interest rates
 
1 ECB interest rates 2 Base rates
 
 
% per annum % per annum
Main refinancing Main refinancing Base rate
operations operations as per Base
Mar- Mar- Discount rate
ginal ginal Rate as per Minimum Minimum
Applicable Deposit Fixed bid lending Applicable Deposit Fixed bid lending Applicable Applicable Civil Transition
from facility rate rate facility from facility rate rate facility from Act  1 from Code  2 
1999 Jan                  1 2.00 3.00 − 4.50 2005 Dec                  6 1.25 − 2.25 3.25 1999 Jan                1 2.50 2002 Jan                1 2.57
         Jan                  4 2.75 3.00 − 3.25          May                1 1.95          July                1 2.47
         Jan                22 2.00 3.00 − 4.50 2006 Mar                  8 1.50 − 2.50 3.50
         Apr                  9 1.50 2.50 − 3.50          June                15 1.75 − 2.75 3.75 2000 Jan                1 2.68 2003 Jan                1 1.97
         Nov                  5 2.00 3.00 − 4.00          Aug                  9 2.00 − 3.00 4.00          May                1 3.42          July                1 1.22
         Oct                11 2.25 − 3.25 4.25          Sep                1 4.26
2000 Feb                  4 2.25 3.25 − 4.25          Dec                13 2.50 − 3.50 4.50 2004 Jan                1 1.14
         Mar                17 2.50 3.50 − 4.50 2001 Sep                1 3.62          July                1 1.13
         Apr                28 2.75 3.75 − 4.75 2007 Mar                14 2.75 − 3.75 4.75
         June                 9 3.25 4.25 − 5.25          June                13 3.00 − 4.00 5.00 2002 Jan                1 2.71 2005 Jan                1 1.21
         June               28 3.25 − 4.25 5.25          to          July                1 1.17
         Sep                  1 3.50 − 4.50 5.50 2008 July                  9 3.25 − 4.25 5.25          Apr                3
         Oct                  6 3.75 − 4.75 5.75          Oct                  8 2.75 − 3.75 4.75 2006 Jan                1 1.37
          Oct                  9 3.25 3.75 − 4.25          July                1 1.95
2001 May               11 3.50 − 4.50 5.50          Nov                12 2.75 3.25 − 3.75
         Aug                31 3.25 − 4.25 5.25          Dec                10 2.00 2.50 − 3.00 2007 Jan                1 2.70
         Sep                18 2.75 − 3.75 4.75          July               1 3.19
         Nov                  9 2.25 − 3.25 4.25 2009 Jan                21 1.00 2.00 − 3.00   
         Mar                11 0.50 1.50 − 2.50 2008 Jan                1 3.32
2002 Dec                  6 1.75 − 2.75 3.75          Apr                  8 0.25 1.25 − 2.25          July                1 3.19
         May               13 0.25 1.00 − 1.75   
2003 Mar                  7 1.50 − 2.50 3.50 2009 Jan                1 1.62
         June                 6 1.00 − 2.00 3.00          July               1 0.12
1Pursuant to the Discount Rate Transition Act, read in conjunction with the 2 Pursuant to section 247 of the Civil Code. 
Regulation Governing the Use of the Base Rate as a Reference Variable. —  
 
  
3 Eurosystem monetary policy operations allotted through tenders
 
 
Fixed rate tenders Variable rate tenders
Bid Allotment Minimum Weighted
amount amount Fixed rate bid rate Marginal rate  1 average rate
Date of Running for
settlement € million % per annum ... days
Main refinancing operations
2010 Apr                21 70,228 70,228 1.00 − − − 7
         Apr                28 75,624 75,624 1.00 − − − 7
         May          5 90,317 90,317 1.00 − − − 7
         May               12 99,570 99,570 1.00 − − − 7
         May               19 104,752 104,752 1.00 − − − 7
Longer-term refinancing operations
2010 Apr                14 15,730 15,730 1.00 − − − 28
         Apr                29 4,846 4,846 1.00 − − − 91
         May               12 20,480 20,480 1.00 − − − 35
         May               13 35,668 35,668 1.00 − − − 182
Source: ECB. — 1Lowest or highest interest rate at which funds were   
allotted or collected.  
 
  
4 Money market rates, by month
 
 
% per annum
Money market rates reported by Frankfurt banks  1 EURIBOR  3 
One-week One-month Six-month Nine-month Twelve- Three-month
Overnight money Three-month funds EONIA  2 funds funds funds funds funds month funds
Reporting Monthly Lowest and Monthly Lowest and
period averages highest rates averages highest rates Monthly averages
2009          Nov 0.33 0.25 − 0.75 0.67 0.57 − 0.75 0.36 0.36 0.44 0.72 0.99 1.12 1.23
         Dec 0.32 4 0.23 − 0.80 0.66 0.56 − 0.76 0.35 0.39 0.48 0.71 1.00 1.12 1.24
2010          Jan 0.28 0.23 − 0.70 0.62 0.52 − 0.71 0.34 0.36 0.44 0.68 0.98 1.11 1.23
         Feb 0.30 0.24 − 0.75 0.60 0.51 − 0.69 0.34 0.34 0.42 0.66 0.96 1.10 1.23         Mar 0.28 0.23 − 0.75 0.57 0.49 − 0.66 0.35 0.34 0.41 0.64 0.95 1.09 1.22
         Apr 0.29 0.24 − 0.75 0.58 0.49 − 0.67 0.35 0.35 0.40 0.64 0.96 1.10 1.23
1Money market rates are not fixed or quoted officially; the monthly aver- of real turnover according to the act/360 method and published via
ages computed from daily quotations are unweighted. — 2Euro OverNight Moneyline Telerate. — 3Euro Interbank Offered Rate: unweighted average
Index Average: weighted average overnight rate for interbank operations rate calculated by Moneyline Telerate since 30 December 1998 according to
calculated by the European Central Bank since 4 January 1999 on the basis the act/360 method. — 4 At end-December, 0.23% to 0.30%. 
43*VI Interest rates

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
E U R O S Y S T E M
Monthly Report
May 2010
VI Interest rates
 
5 Interest rates for outstanding amounts and new business of banks (MFIs) in the European monetary union *
(a) Outstanding amounts o
 
Effective interest rate % per annum  1 
Non-financial Loans to households Loans to
Households’ corporations’ non-financial
deposits deposits Housing loans Consumer credit and other loans corporations
with an agreed maturity of with a maturity of
over 1 year over 1 year over 1 year
End of up to over up to over up to and up to over up to and up to over up to and up to over
month 2 years 2 years 2 years 2 years 1 year 5 years 5 years 1 year 5 years 5 years 1 year 5 years 5 years
2009          July 3.07 3.03 1.97 3.53 4.31 4.31 4.36 7.82 6.79 5.70 3.72 3.59 3.81
         Aug 2.94 3.01 1.89 3.39 4.23 4.25 4.28 7.82 6.74 5.65 3.65 3.50 3.73         Sep 2.83 3.01 1.80 3.39 4.18 4.26 4.25 7.80 6.71 5.63 3.62 3.43 3.68
         Oct 2.64 2.96 1.70 3.34 4.05 4.19 4.18 7.69 6.66 5.54 3.56 3.37 3.60
         Nov 2.51 2.95 1.62 3.37 4.01 4.15 4.12 7.56 6.66 5.51 3.53 3.36 3.57         Dec 2.36 2.91 1.56 3.30 4.08 4.11 4.07 7.55 6.57 5.43 3.46 3.35 3.50
2010          Jan 2.20 2.81 1.45 3.23 3.99 4.05 4.00 7.51 6.52 5.38 3.47 3.31 3.45
         Feb 2.15 2.84 1.42 3.31 4.04 4.11 4.03 7.49 6.61 5.43 3.45 3.33 3.43         Mar 2.13 2.76 1.39 3.23 3.98 4.04 3.98 7.42 6.48 5.34 3.43 3.26 3.36
 
 
(b) New business +
 
Effective interest rate % per annum  1 
Households’ deposits Non-financial corporations’ deposits
with an agreed maturity of redeemable at notice of with an agreed maturity of
over 1 year over 1 year
Reporting up to and up to over up to over up to and up to over
period Overnight 1 year 2 years 2 years 3 months 3 months Overnight 1 year 2 years 2 years
2009          July 0.52 1.86 2.41 2.61 1.86 3.38 0.57 0.82 2.41 2.92
         Aug 0.50 1.72 2.32 2.64 1.64 3.23 0.54 0.71 2.06 2.93         Sep 0.49 1.61 2.27 2.52 1.60 3.12 0.52 0.69 2.10 2.74
         Oct 0.46 1.68 2.11 2.55 1.55 2.97 0.49 0.66 1.99 2.72
         Nov 0.46 1.67 2.23 2.56 1.52 2.76 0.48 0.70 2.11 2.92         Dec 0.45 1.67 2.31 2.40 1.53 2.45 0.47 0.77 2.00 2.53
2010          Jan 0.43 1.74 2.33 2.52 1.47 2.23 0.45 0.72 1.95 2.44
         Feb 0.42 1.75 2.24 2.36 1.45 2.11 0.44 0.73 2.11 2.39         Mar 0.42 1.89 2.38 2.24 1.45 2.05 0.44 0.79 2.73 2.26
 
 
Loans to households
Consumer credit Housing loans Other loans
with an initial rate fixation with an initial rate fixation
floating floating floating over 1 year over 1 year over 5 years over 1 year
Reporting Over- rate or up and up to over rate or up and up to and up to over and up to over rate or up
period drafts Total  2 to 1 year 5 years 5 years Total  2 to 1 year 5 years 10 years 10 years to 1 year 5 years 5 years
2009          July 9.31 8.02 7.63 6.49 8.03 4.02 3.03 4.10 4.54 4.54 3.35 4.77 4.91
         Aug 9.26 8.17 7.93 6.54 7.96 4.06 3.00 4.10 4.54 4.45 3.24 4.74 4.82
         Sep 9.26 8.00 7.69 6.45 7.91 3.92 2.81 4.05 4.48 4.45 3.13 4.66 4.74
         Oct 9.16 7.87 7.32 6.38 7.94 3.85 2.77 4.02 4.45 4.40 3.21 4.73 4.72
         Nov 9.07 7.76 7.03 6.29 7.87 3.78 2.71 3.97 4.46 4.32 3.16 4.57 4.66
         Dec 8.99 7.43 6.42 6.26 7.56 3.81 2.71 3.96 4.42 4.26 3.08 4.40 4.35
2010          Jan 8.94 7.86 6.83 6.42 8.04 3.79 2.71 3.94 4.38 4.26 3.13 4.45 4.46
         Feb 9.01 7.78 6.72 6.25 7.98 3.74 2.68 3.83 4.32 4.18 3.17 4.48 4.74         Mar 8.86 7.60 6.34 6.22 7.95 3.66 2.63 3.73 4.21 4.15 3.05 4.61 4.55
 
 
Loans to non-financial corporations
Loans up to €1 million with an initial rate fixation Loans over €1 million with an initial rate fixation
Reporting floating rate or over 1 year and floating rate or over 1 year and
period Overdrafts up to 1 year up to 5 years over 5 years up to 1 year up to 5 years over 5 years
2009          July 4.34 3.56 4.78 4.32 2.37 2.89 3.90
         Aug 4.23 3.42 4.67 4.24 2.31 2.80 3.83
         Sep 4.25 3.36 4.54 4.16 2.06 2.89 3.64
         Oct 4.18 3.33 4.49 4.18 2.14 2.73 3.64
         Nov 4.11 3.34 4.49 4.10 2.22 2.74 3.80         Dec 4.05 3.28 4.22 3.96 2.19 3.15 3.58
2010          Jan 4.05 3.25 4.20 3.99 2.01 2.88 3.65
         Feb 4.02 3.25 4.22 4.05 1.94 2.90 3.61         Mar 3.99 3.24 4.21 4.00 1.98 2.41 3.43
Source: ECB. — For footnotes *, o and 1see p 45. For footnote + see p 46. — which contains other related charges which may occur for enquiries, adminis-
2Annual percentage rate of charge as defined in Directive 2008/48/EC, tration, preparation of the documents, guarantees and credit insuran ce. 
44*VI Interest rates

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
May 2010
VI Interest rates
 
6 Interest rates and volumes for outstanding amounts and new business of German banks (MFIs) *
(a) Outstanding amounts o
 
 
Households’ deposits Non-financial corporations’ deposits
with an agreed maturity of
up to 2 years over 2 years up to 2 years over 2 years
Effective Effective Effective Effective
End of interest rate  1 Volume  2 interest rate  1 Volume  2 interest rate  1 Volume  2 interest rate  1 Volume  2 
month % pa € million % pa € million % pa € million % pa € million
2009          Mar 3.71 278,398 2.45 179,828 2.15 109,282 4.42 23,274
         Apr 3.56 261,337 2.45 180,758 1.86 110,298 4.39 23,265
         May 3.42 251,435 2.44 182,163 1.72 107,732 4.36 23,269
         June 3.32 240,427 2.44 183,008 1.52 101,792 4.25 23,871
         July 3.10 226,909 2.43 184,056 1.30 101,908 4.17 24,569
         Aug 2.91 211,060 2.43 185,213 1.20 102,191 4.03 25,351
         Sep 2.75 196,660 2.42 186,698 1.09 99,264 3.99 25,666
         Oct 2.59 182,143 2.42 188,911 1.06 93,477 3.95 25,921
         Nov 2.39 170,152 2.41 191,395 1.01 92,010 3.92 26,499         Dec 2.18 161,018 2.40 196,621 0.95 88,785 3.99 26,227
2010          Jan 1.92 148,065 2.40 199,231 0.91 87,339 3.93 25,855
         Feb 1.80 141,541 2.40 201,737 0.88 86,509 4.16 24,504         Mar 1.77 138,799 2.38 203,418 0.83 86,735 4.04 24,304
 
 
Housing loans to households  3 Consumer credit and other loans to households  4, 5 
with a maturity of
over 1 year and over 1 year and
up to 1 year  6 up to 5 years over 5 years up to 1 year  6 up to 5 years over 5 years
Effective Effective Effective Effective Effective Effective
interest interest interest interest interest interest
End of rate  1 Volume  2 rate 1 Volume  2 rate 1 Volume  2 rate 1 Volume  2 rate 1 Volume  2 rate 1 Volume  2 
month % pa % pa % pa % pa % pa % pa € million € million € million € million € million € million
2009          Mar 5.34 5,628 4.65 25,121 5.01 914,717 9.16 69,930 5.56 65,236 6.10 310,908
         Apr 5.06 5,584 4.57 25,145 4.98 915,839 8.93 68,006 5.58 66,027 6.01 313,261
         May 4.97 5,586 4.54 25,160 4.97 916,289 8.76 67,806 5.54 66,445 5.99 313,661
         June 4.86 5,605 4.49 25,260 4.95 916,103 8.98 69,625 5.49 66,936 5.98 313,433
         July 4.64 5,645 4.44 25,362 4.93 917,085 8.74 67,655 5.44 67,784 5.95 314,065
         Aug 4.56 5,590 4.41 25,463 4.92 919,804 8.67 67,279 5.41 68,040 5.94 313,043
         Sep 4.51 5,673 4.38 25,577 4.91 920,688 8.67 69,218 5.36 68,844 5.94 312,413
         Oct 4.37 5,595 4.35 25,653 4.89 922,437 8.53 67,505 5.33 69,092 5.90 312,661
         Nov 4.38 5,539 4.33 25,786 4.88 923,421 8.40 66,513 5.29 69,197 5.89 312,363         Dec 4.46 5,548 4.28 25,772 4.86 922,968 8.53 67,071 5.30 70,265 5.88 311,657
2010          Jan 4.37 5,331 4.26 25,666 4.85 920,635 8.44 65,619 5.28 69,803 5.86 310,801
         Feb 4.36 5,265 4.25 25,617 4.84 919,585 8.30 64,998 5.26 69,606 5.85 310,649         Mar 4.34 5,409 4.22 25,702 4.83 919,685 8.40 66,783 5.22 69,960 5.83 310,442
 
 
Loans to non-financial corporations with a maturity of
up to 1 year  6 over 1 year and up to 5 years over 5 years
End of Volume  2 Volume  2 Volume  2 Effective interest rate  1 Effective interest rate  1 Effective interest rate  1 
month % pa € million % pa € million % pa € million
2009          Mar 4.51 183,679 4.30 139,786 4.55 543,946
         Apr 4.18 178,062 4.02 142,202 4.40 541,091
         May 4.13 177,190 3.93 142,644 4.36 541,981
         June 4.09 174,044 3.87 142,643 4.27 539,830
         July 3.92 164,009 3.76 144,430 4.18 542,592
         Aug 3.85 162,055 3.72 144,119 4.15 543,900
         Sep 3.87 160,310 3.65 144,402 4.10 542,542
         Oct 3.83 154,789 3.61 143,106 4.06 542,895
         Nov 3.82 152,333 3.61 142,207 4.06 547,731         Dec 3.68 140,178 3.66 144,786 4.01 545,324
2010          Jan 3.66 140,783 3.61 143,161 3.98 545,782
         Feb 3.67 140,023 3.62 143,854 3.96 547,450         Mar 3.77 139,145 3.49 139,288 3.93 544,007
*The MFI interest rate statistics are based on the interest rates applied by interest rates may always be calculated either as annualised agreed intere st
MFIs and the related volumes of euro-denominated deposits and loans to rates or as narrowly defined effective rates. Both calculation methods cover
households and non-financial corporations domiciled in the euro area. The all interest payments on deposits and loans but not any other relatedhousehold sector comprises individuals (including sole proprietors) and charges which may occur for enquiries, administration, preparation of th e
non-profit institutions serving households. Non-financial corporations in- documents, guarantees and credit insurance. — 2Data based on monthly
clude all enterprises other than insurance companies, banks and other finan- balance sheet statistics. — 3Secured and unsecured loans for home
cial institutions. The interest rate statistics gathered on a harmonised basis purchase, including building and home improvements; including loan s
in the euro area from January 2003 are being collected in Germany on a granted by building and loan associations and interim credits as well assample basis. The most recent figures are in all cases to be regarded as provi- transmitted loans granted by the reporting agents in their own name andsional. Subsequent revisions appearing in the following Monthly Report are for their own account. — 4Consumer credit is defined as loans granted for
not specially marked. Further information on the MFI interest rate statistics the purpose of personal use in the consumption of goods and services. —can be found on the Bundesbank’s website (Statistics / Reporting system / 5For the purpose of these statistics, other loans are loans granted for other
Banking statistics / MFI interest rate statistics). — oThe statistics on out- purposes such as business, debt consolidation, education etc. — 6Including
standing amounts are collected at the end of the month. — 1The effective overdrafts. 
45*VI Interest rates

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
E U R O S Y S T E M
Monthly Report
May 2010
VI Interest rates
 
6 Interest rates and volumes for outstanding amounts and new business of German banks (MFIs) *  (cont’d)
(b) New business +
 
 
Households’ deposits
with an agreed maturity of redeemable at notice of  8 
over 1 year and
Overnight up to 1 year up to 2 years over 2 years up to 3 months over 3 months
Effective Effective Effective Effective Effective Effective
interest interest interest interest interest interest
Reporting rate  1 Volume  2 rate 1 Volume  7 rate 1 Volume  7 rate 1 Volume  7 rate 1 Volume  2 rate 1 Volume  2 
period % pa % pa % pa % pa % pa % pa € million € million € million € million € million € million
2009          Mar 1.38 558,216 1.46 30,369 2.97 1,746 3.15 2,911 2.08 437,140 3.91 111,178
         Apr 1.13 576,843 1.32 27,496 2.69 1,611 3.08 3,059 1.98 439,565 3.79 112,039
         May 1.03 587,516 1.34 25,817 2.17 1,663 2.88 2,893 1.85 441,968 3.67 113,497
         June 0.94 591,673 1.29 25,435 2.28 1,293 2.74 2,592 1.82 445,518 3.55 114,481
         July 0.88 599,922 1.45 28,372 2.29 2,077 2.77 2,947 1.79 450,019 3.41 115,616
         Aug 0.84 609,242 1.18 21,694 2.14 1,393 2.83 2,866 1.62 454,401 3.25 116,343
         Sep 0.82 617,597 1.01 19,325 2.02 1,584 2.61 2,779 1.61 457,521 3.14 117,556
         Oct 0.79 629,015 1.03 19,145 1.97 1,868 2.75 3,393 1.49 461,657 2.99 119,952
         Nov 0.75 646,360 1.04 17,401 1.92 1,801 2.80 3,572 1.47 464,488 2.77 120,775         Dec 0.75 651,570 0.87 19,427 1.94 1,704 2.69 3,516 1.52 474,429 2.44 119,702
2010          Jan 0.73 667,262 1.12 20,151 1.88 1,645 2.93 3,755 1.37 479,240 2.22 118,141
         Feb 0.71 675,402 1.21 17,884 1.87 1,287 2.80 2,873 1.34 485,075 2.09 117,491         Mar 0.70 670,474 1.35 18,487 1.90 1,418 2.43 2,485 1.40 486,809 2.03 117,551
 
 
Non-financial corporations’ deposits
with an agreed maturity of
Overnight up to 1 year over 1 year and up to 2 years over 2 years
Effective Effective Effective Effective
Reporting interest rate  1 Volume  2 interest rate  1 Volume  7 interest rate  1 Volume  7 interest rate  1 Volume  7 
period % pa € million % pa € million % pa € million % pa € million
2009          Mar 1.03 203,071 1.10 50,263 2.63 480 4.02 1,149
         Apr 0.81 209,654 0.89 50,849 2.57 358 3.68 538
         May 0.81 211,660 0.77 43,357 2.32 412 3.41 395
         June 0.61 217,069 0.78 42,875 1.77 279 2.11 917
         July 0.55 222,639 0.54 46,924 2.22 356 2.91 1,713
         Aug 0.53 228,457 0.46 34,238 1.75 326 3.63 792
         Sep 0.51 234,141 0.42 38,890 1.78 325 2.91 565
         Oct 0.48 244,464 0.42 40,077 1.79 229 3.20 513
         Nov 0.47 249,011 0.48 41,382 1.75 301 3.59 559         Dec 0.46 249,139 0.47 37,933 2.20 460 3.24 844
2010          Jan 0.48 245,835 0.45 36,579 1.38 256 2.57 539
         Feb 0.47 238,889 0.46 30,650 1.57 200 2.76 294         Mar 0.45 243,829 0.47 34,398 1.87 344 3.04 473
 
 
Loans to households
Consumer credit with an initial rate fixation of  4 Other loans with an initial rate fixation of  5 
floating rate or over 1 year and floating rate or over 1 year and
Total up to 1 year  10 up to 5 years over 5 years up to 1 year  10 up to 5 years over 5 years
Annual
Effective Effective Effective Effective Effective Effective percentage
rate of interest interest interest interest interest interest
Reporting charge  9 rate 1 Volume  7 rate 1 Volume  7 rate 1 Volume  7 rate 1 Volume  7 rate 1 Volume  7 rate 1 Volume  7 
period % pa % pa % pa % pa % pa % pa % pa € million € million € million € million € million € million
2009          Mar 6.95 4.74 1,171 5.06 3,180 8.19 2,765 3.01 6,416 4.82 1,467 4.90 2,192
         Apr 6.99 4.41 1,510 5.30 3,112 8.28 2,485 2.68 7,353 4.65 1,773 4.79 2,329
         May 6.94 5.10 904 5.08 2,915 8.24 2,247 2.67 5,699 4.78 1,307 4.75 2,020
         June 6.79 5.20 1,484 4.99 3,097 8.19 2,347 2.65 6,020 4.66 1,419 4.83 2,407
         July 7.02 5.52 1,242 5.15 3,184 8.25 2,607 2.49 6,809 4.73 1,468 4.84 2,800
         Aug 7.19 5.55 1,187 5.28 2,401 8.24 1,958 2.38 5,529 4.62 1,119 4.82 1,825
         Sep 6.93 5.32 1,322 5.10 2,294 8.20 2,007 2.17 6,690 4.61 1,043 4.60 2,043
         Oct 6.84 4.90 1,651 5.05 2,386 8.29 2,018 2.24 6,626 4.65 1,208 4.52 2,480
         Nov 6.47 4.55 2,065 4.96 2,242 8.05 1,733 2.08 5,102 4.47 1,225 4.39 1,859         Dec 6.06 4.04 2,385 4.83 2,027 7.57 1,789 2.40 6,198 4.41 1,495 4.25 2,902
2010          Jan 6.95 4.36 2,233 5.30 1,775 8.45 1,889 2.30 5,417 4.43 1,422 4.37 1,894
         Feb 6.91 4.32 2,127 5.31 1,759 8.37 1,834 2.23 4,795 4.62 977 4.57 1,634         Mar 6.72 4.13 2,685 5.14 2,385 8.20 2,179 2.22 7,183 4.48 1,205 4.41 2,487
For footnotes * and 1to6, see p 45*. — +In the case of deposits with an business at the end of the month has to be incorporated in the calculation
agreed maturity and all loans excluding overdrafts, new business covers all of average rates of interest. — 7Estimated. The volume of new business is
new agreements between households or non-financial corporations and the extrapolated to form the underlying total using the Horvitz-Thompson esti -
bank. The interest rates are calculated as volume-weighted average rates mator. — 8Including non-financial corporations’ deposits; including fidelity
across all new agreements concluded during the reporting month. In the and growth premia. — 9Annual percentage rate of charge as defined in Dir-
case of overnight deposits, deposits redeemable at notice and overdrafts, ective 2008/48/EC, which contains other related charges which may occur f or
new business is collected in the same way as outstanding amounts for the enquiries, administration, preparation of the documents, guarantees and
sake of simplicity. This means that all outstanding deposit and lending credit insurance. — 10 Excluding overdrafts. 
46*VI Interest rates

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
May 2010
VI Interest rates
 
6 Interest rates and volumes for outstanding amounts and new business of German banks (MFIs) *  (cont’d)
(b) New business +
 
 
Loans to households (cont’d)
Housing loans with an initial rate fixation of  3 
floating rate or over 1 year and over 5 years and
Overdrafts  11 Total up to 1 year  10 up to 5 years up to 10 years over 10 years
Annual per-
Effective Effective Effective Effective Effective centage rate
Reporting Volume  12 Volume  7 Volume  7 Volume  7 Volume  7 interest rate  1 of charge  9 interest rate  1 interest rate  1 interest rate  1 interest rate  1 
period % pa € million % pa % pa € milion % pa € million % pa € million % pa € million
2009          Mar 11.16 45,902 4.42 4.19 2,787 4.12 3,343 4.40 6,831 4.49 4,609
         Apr 10.97 43,989 4.34 3.86 3,150 4.01 3,521 4.37 7,455 4.54 4,272
         May 10.87 43,269 4.29 3.80 2,616 3.93 3,031 4.35 6,547 4.47 4,000         June 10.85 45,907 4.31 3.73 2,654 3.88 3,410 4.39 7,491 4.53 4,261
         July 10.58 44,140 4.31 3.56 3,374 3.89 3,747 4.45 8,321 4.54 4,424
         Aug 10.58 43,846 4.28 3.47 2,931 3.87 2,812 4.46 6,269 4.51 3,767
         Sep 10.61 45,022 4.22 3.38 2,256 3.81 2,587 4.37 5,904 4.45 4,060
         Oct 10.53 43,311 4.17 3.28 2,956 3.83 2,707 4.34 6,512 4.41 3,780
         Nov 10.36 41,858 4.14 3.24 2,214 3.78 2,462 4.35 5,363 4.32 3,681         Dec 10.38 43,670 4.13 3.36 2,530 3.76 2,741 4.29 5,547 4.38 3,668
2010          Jan 10.33 42,165 4.08 3.20 2,978 3.71 2,512 4.27 5,293 4.49 3,006
         Feb 10.28 41,795 4.06 3.16 2,057 3.67 2,096 4.22 4,389 4.34 3,354         Mar 10.36 43,281 3.96 3.04 2,660 3.56 2,470 4.09 5,889 4.30 4,291
 
 
Loans to non-financial corporations
Loans up to €1 million with an initial rate fixation of  13 
Overdrafts  11 floating rate or up to 1 year  10 over 1 year and up to 5 years over 5 years
Effective Effective Effective Effective
Reporting interest rate  1 Volume  12 interest rate  1 Volume  7 interest rate  1 Volume  7 interest rate  1 Volume  7 
period % pa € million % pa € million % pa € million % pa € million
2009          Mar 5.65 84,903 3.83 12,529 4.95 1,198 4.69 1,333
         Apr 5.21 82,312 3.60 11,605 4.85 1,204 4.48 1,488
         May 5.24 81,653 3.52 10,634 4.83 1,078 4.41 1,139         June 5.14 82,602 3.36 11,556 4.82 1,090 4.61 1,392
         July 5.01 76,756 3.36 11,383 4.73 1,398 4.54 1,680
         Aug 4.86 77,358 3.26 8,654 4.80 990 4.43 1,155
         Sep 5.05 76,050 3.28 11,592 4.72 986 4.35 1,283
         Oct 5.02 72,593 3.37 11,279 4.54 1,133 4.37 1,403
         Nov 4.99 72,412 3.37 8,729 4.70 965 4.22 1,252         Dec 4.84 67,483 3.36 9,502 4.23 1,426 3.98 1,719
2010          Jan 4.70 69,286 3.19 7,819 4.54 1,047 4.20 1,124
         Feb 4.82 68,416 3.43 7,546 4.63 943 4.17 940         Mar 5.03 66,491 3.41 11,441 4.70 1,073 4.16 1,337
 
 
Loans to non-financial corporations (cont’d)
Loans over €1 million with an initial rate fixation of  13 
floating rate or up to 1 year  10 over 1 year and up to 5 years over 5 years
Reporting Volume  7 Volume  7 Volume  7 Effective interest rate  1 Effective interest rate  1 Effective interest rate  1 
period % pa € million % pa € million % pa € million
2009          Mar 3.09 73,340 4.23 2,283 4.50 3,512
         Apr 2.84 67,171 4.22 2,706 4.47 3,480
         May 2.84 58,465 3.98 2,404 4.47 2,783         June 2.93 69,989 4.33 2,229 4.69 4,190
         July 2.74 70,243 3.85 3,615 4.52 4,734
         Aug 2.80 54,832 4.18 1,771 4.40 3,281
         Sep 2.26 59,657 4.23 2,479 4.12 3,334
         Oct 2.59 58,565 3.88 2,149 4.29 3,158
         Nov 2.95 51,190 3.87 1,858 4.20 3,859         Dec 2.57 67,036 3.88 3,644 4.07 5,099
2010          Jan 2.45 49,385 3.90 2,333 4.23 3,270
         Feb 2.43 37,997 4.54 1,840 4.07 3,029         Mar 2.32 50,387 3.69 1,628 3.81 6,273
For footnotes *and 1to6, see p 45*. For footnotes +and 7to10, see The volume of outstanding amounts reported is extrapolated to form the
p 46*. — 11Overdrafts are defined as debit balances on current accounts. underlying total using the Horvitz-Thompson estimator. — 13The amount
They include all bank overdrafts regardless of whether they are within or refers to the single loan transaction considered as new business.  
beyond the limits agreed between customers and the bank. — 12Estimated.
47*VI Interest rates

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
E U R O S Y S T E M
Monthly Report
May 2010
VII Capital market
 
1 Sales and purchases of debt securities and shares in Germany *
 
 
 
Debt securities
Sales Purchases
Domestic debt securities  1 Residents
Credit in- Bundes-
Sales stitutions bank
= Public Foreign including open
total Bank Corporate debt debt building marketpur- debt bonds secur- secur- and loan Non- oper- Non-
Period chases Total securities (non-MFIs) ities  
2 ities 3 Total  4 banks  6 ations  5 residents  7 associations  5 
DM million
1997 332,655 250,688 184,911 1,563 64,214 81,967 204,378 144,177 60,201 − 128,276
1998 418,841 308,201 254,367 3,143 50,691 110,640 245,802 203,342 42,460 − 173,038
€ million
1999 292,663 198,068 156,399 2,184 39,485 94,595 155,766 74,728 81,038 − 136,898
2000 226,393 157,994 120,154 12,605 25,234 68,399 151,568 91,447 60,121 − 74,825
2001 180,227 86,656 55,918 14,473 16,262 93,571 111,281 35,848 75,433 − 68,946
2002 175,396 124,035 47,296 14,506 62,235 51,361 60,476 13,536 46,940 − 114,9202003 184,679 134,455 31,404 30,262 72,788 50,224 105,557 35,748 69,809 − 79,1222004 233,890 133,711 64,231 10,778 58,703 100,179 108,119 121,841 − 13,723 − 125,772
2005 252,658 110,542 39,898 2,682 67,965 142,116 94,718 61,740 32,978 − 157,940
2006 242,006 102,379 40,995 8,943 52,446 139,627 125,423 68,893 56,530 − 116,5832007 217,859 90,270 42,034 20,123 28,111 127,589 − 28,853 96,476 − 125,329 − 246,7122008 72,358 66,139 − 45,712 86,527 25,322 6,219 21,032 68,049 − 47,017 − 51,3262009 70,433 − 538 − 114,902 22,709 91,655 70,971 96,606 12,973 83,633 − − 26,173
2010          Jan 12,253 − 581 − 17,133 4,582 11,970 12,834 12,532 2,131 10,401 − − 279
         Feb 12,646 16,982 − 7,526 4,684 19,824 − 4,336 2,945 − 7,949 10,894 − 9,701         Mar 10,066 3,740 − 2,448 5,961 227 6,326 10,373 7,919 2,454 − − 307
 
  
Shares
Sales Purchases
Sales Residents
=total Domestic Foreign Credit insti- Non-purchases shares  
8 shares  9 Total  10 tutions  5,11 Non-banks  6 residents  12 
Period
DM million
1997 119,522 22,239 97,280 96,844 8,547 88,297 22,678
1998 249,504 48,796 200,708 149,151 20,252 128,899 100,353
€ million
1999 150,013 36,010 114,003 103,136 18,637 84,499 46,877
2000 140,461 22,733 117,729 164,654 23,293 141,361 − 24,194
2001 82,665 17,575 65,091 − 2,252 − 14,714 12,462 84,918
2002 39,338 9,232 30,106 18,398 − 23,236 41,634 20,9412003 11,896 16,838 − 4,946 − 15,121 7,056 − 22,177 27,0162004 − 3,317 10,157 − 13,474 7,432 5,045 2,387 − 10,748
2005 32,364 13,766 18,597 1,036 10,208 − 9,172 31,329
2006 26,276 9,061 17,214 7,528 11,323 − 3,795 18,7482007 − 3,722 10,053 − 13,773 − 48,183 − 6,702 − 41,481 44,4612008 − 20,326 11,326 − 31,651 10,417 − 23,079 33,496 − 30,7422009 36,217 23,962 12,254 24,015 − 8,335 32,350 12,201
2010          Jan 552 1,393 − 841 4,154 3,457 697 − 3,602
         Feb − 338 96 − 434 − 2,308 − 4,785 2,477 1,970         Mar 7,065 5,192 1,873 4,892 4,338 554 2,173
*Up to end-1999, debt securities in this table comprise bonds and money funds. — 7Net purchases or net sales (−) of domestic debt securities by
market paper issued by domestic banks; from January 2000, they comprise non-residents; transaction values. — 8Excluding shares of public limited
all debt securities. For mutual fund shares, see Table VII.6. — 1Net sales at investment companies; at issue prices. — 9Net purchases or net sales (−) of
market values plus/minus changes in issuers’ portfolios of their own debt foreign shares (including direct investment)  by  residents;  transa ction  val-
securities. — 2Including Federal Railways Fund, Federal Post Office and ues. — 10Domestic and foreign shares. — 11Up to end-1998, excluding
Treuhand agency. — 3Net purchases or net sales (−) of foreign debt syndicated shares. — 12Net purchases or net sales (−) of domestic shares
securities by residents; transaction values. — 4Domestic and foreign debt (including direct investment) by non-residents; transaction values. — The
securities. — 5Book values; statistically adjusted. — 6Residual; also figures for the most recent date are provisional; revisions are not specially
including purchases of domestic and foreign securities by domestic mutual marked. 
48*VII Capital market

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
May 2010
VII Capital market
 
2 Sales of debt securities issued by residents * 
 
 
Up to end-1998, DM nominal million value; from 1999, € million nominal value
Bank debt securities  1 Memo item
 Foreign  DM/euro
bonds issued Debt securities
Corporate by German- issued by special
Mortgage Public purpose credit Other bank bonds Public managed
Period Total Total Pfandbriefe Pfandbriefe institutions (non-MFIs) syndicates debt securities debt securities  2 
Gross sales  3 
1997 846,567 621,683 53,168 276,755 54,829 236,933 1,915 222,972 114,813
1998 1,030,827 789,035 71,371 344,609 72,140 300,920 3,392 238,400 149,542
€ million
1999 571,269 448,216 27,597 187,661 59,760 173,200 2,570 120,483 57,202
2000 659,148 500,895 34,528 143,107 94,556 228,703 8,114 150,137 31,597
2001 687,988 505,646 34,782 112,594 106,166 252,103 11,328 171,012 10,6052002 818,725 569,232 41,496 119,880 117,506 290,353 17,574 231,923 10,3132003 958,917 668,002 47,828 107,918 140,398 371,858 22,510 268,406 2,8502004 990,399 688,844 33,774 90,815 162,353 401,904 31,517 270,040 12,344
2005 988,911 692,182 28,217 103,984 160,010 399,969 24,352 272,380 600
2006 925,863 622,055 24,483 99,628 139,193 358,750 29,975 273,834 692007 1,021,533 743,616 19,211 82,720 195,722 445,963 15,043 262,872 −2008 1,337,337 961,271 51,259 70,520 382,814 456,676 95,093 280,974 −2009 1,533,616 1,058,815 40,421 37,615 331,566 649,215 76,379 398,423 −
2009          Dec 116,005 101,121 2,166 1,034 31,004 66,917 1,313 13,572 −2010          Jan 109,792 64,294 2,393 3,465 36,072 22,364 6,809 38,689 −
         Feb 94,437 53,246 1,939 4,171 31,193 15,943 6,077 35,114 −         Mar 109,558 67,153 3,671 3,161 36,175 24,146 7,182 35,223 −
of which:  Debt securities with maturities of more than four years  4 
1997 563,333 380,470 41,189 211,007 41,053 87,220 1,820 181,047 98,413
1998 694,414 496,444 59,893 288,619 54,385 93,551 2,847 195,122 139,645
€ million
1999 324,888 226,993 16,715 124,067 37,778 48,435 2,565 95,331 44,013
2000 319,330 209,187 20,724 102,664 25,753 60,049 6,727 103,418 27,008
2001 299,751 202,337 16,619 76,341 42,277 67,099 7,479 89,933 6,4802002 309,157 176,486 16,338 59,459 34,795 65,892 12,149 120,527 9,2132003 369,336 220,103 23,210 55,165 49,518 92,209 10,977 138,256 2,8502004 424,769 275,808 20,060 48,249 54,075 153,423 20,286 128,676 4,320
2005 425,523 277,686 20,862 63,851 49,842 143,129 16,360 131,479 400
2006 337,969 190,836 17,267 47,814 47,000 78,756 14,422 132,711 692007 315,418 183,660 10,183 31,331 50,563 91,586 13,100 118,659 −2008 387,516 190,698 13,186 31,393 54,834 91,289 84,410 112,407 −2009 361,999 185,575 20,235 20,490 59,809 85,043 55,240 121,185 −
2009          Dec 18,895 15,404 943 538 5,103 8,820 998 2,493 −2010          Jan 46,523 22,926 705 2,856 12,498 6,866 4,714 18,882 −
         Feb 33,266 10,728 960 2,227 3,715 3,826 4,922 17,615 −         Mar 40,201 17,875 2,422 873 7,418 7,162 5,065 17,262 −
Net sales  5 
1997 257,521 188,525 16,471 115,970 12,476 43,607 1,560 67,437 63,181
1998 327,991 264,627 22,538 162,519 18,461 61,111 3,118 60,243 84,308
€ million
1999 209,096 170,069 2,845 80,230 31,754 55,238 2,185 36,840 22,728
2000 155,615 122,774 5,937 29,999 30,089 56,751 7,320 25,522 − 16,705
2001 84,122 60,905 6,932 − 9,254 28,808 34,416 8,739 14,479 − 30,6572002 131,976 56,393 7,936 − 26,806 20,707 54,561 14,306 61,277 − 44,5462003 124,556 40,873 2,700 − 42,521 44,173 36,519 18,431 65,253 − 54,9902004 167,233 81,860 1,039 − 52,615 50,142 83,293 18,768 66,605 − 22,124
2005 141,715 65,798 − 2,151 − 34,255 37,242 64,962 10,099 65,819 − 35,963
2006 129,423 58,336 − 12,811 − 20,150 44,890 46,410 15,605 55,482 − 19,2082007 86,579 58,168 − 10,896 − 46,629 42,567 73,127 − 3,683 32,093 − 29,7502008 119,472 8,517 15,052 − 65,773 25,165 34,074 82,653 28,302 − 31,6072009 76,441 − 75,554 858 − 80,646 25,579 − 21,345 48,508 103,482 − 21,037
2009          Dec − 36,747 − 20,331 − 819 − 7,328 12,592 − 24,776 − 3,548 − 12,869 − 7952010          Jan − 5,452 − 9,236 − 785 − 9,979 5,351 − 3,824 4,759 − 975 − 10
         Feb 13,001 − 11,720 847 − 2,473 − 1,252 − 8,842 5,084 19,637 − 2,529         Mar 14,754 7,111 2,481 − 4,517 7,669 1,479 5,318 2,325 − 1,282
*For definitions, see the explanatory notes in the Statistical Supplement 2 Treuhand agency. — 3Gross sales means only initial sales of newly issued
Capital market statistics on p 21 ff. — 1Excluding registered bank debt securities. — 4Maximum maturity according to the terms of issue. — 5Gross
securities. — 2Including Federal Railways Fund, Federal Post Office and sales less redemptions. 
49*VII Capital market

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
E U R O S Y S T E M
Monthly Report
May 2010
VII Capital market
 
3 Amounts outstanding of debt securities issued by residents  * 
 
 
Up to end-1998, DM million nominal value; from 1999, € million nominal value
Bank debt securities  1 Memo item
 Foreign  DM/euro
End of year Debt securities bonds issued
or month/ issued by Corporate by German-
Maturity Mortgage Public Other bank bonds Public managed special purpose
in years Total Total (non-MFIs) syndicates credit institutions debt securities debt securities Pfandbriefe Pfandbriefe
DM million
1998 3,694,234 2,254,668 265,721 1,124,198 259,243 605,507 8,009 1,431,558 619,668
€ million
1999 2,097,926 1,322,863 134,814 655,024 163,284 369,741 6,280 768,783 339,560
2000 2,265,121 1,445,736 140,751 685,122 157,374 462,488 13,599 805,786 322,856
2001 2,349,243 1,506,640 147,684 675,868 201,721 481,366 22,339 820,264 292,1992002 2,481,220 1,563,034 155,620 649,061 222,427 535,925 36,646 881,541 247,6552003 2,605,775 1,603,906 158,321 606,541 266,602 572,442 55,076 946,793 192,6662004 2,773,007 1,685,766 159,360 553,927 316,745 655,734 73,844 1,013,397 170,543
2005 2,914,723 1,751,563 157,209 519,674 323,587 751,093 83,942 1,079,218 134,580
2006 3,044,145 1,809,899 144,397 499,525 368,476 797,502 99,545 1,134,701 115,3732007 3,130,723 1,868,066 133,501 452,896 411,041 870,629 95,863 1,166,794 85,6232008 3,250,195 1,876,583 150,302 377,091 490,641 858,550 178,515 1,195,097 54,0152009 3,326,635 1,801,029 151,160 296,445 516,221 837,203 227,024 1,298,581 32,978
2010          Jan 3,321,183 1,791,793 150,375 286,466 521,572 833,379 231,783 1,297,606 32,968
         Feb 3,334,184 1,780,073 151,222 283,994 520,320 824,537 236,868 1,317,243 30,440
         Mar 3,348,938
2 1,781,705 153,702 279,476 527,989 2 820,537 242,186 2 1,325,048 29,157
Breakdown by remaining period to maturity  3 Position at end-March 2010 
1,318,800 808,951 66,005 140,072 211,859 391,014 36,719 473,132 13,071    less than 2
724,539 429,353 49,345 76,692 131,705 171,612 33,979 261,206 5,285 2 to less than 4
521,355 286,180 20,524 31,176 65,835 168,648 37,042 198,132 4,216 4 to less than 6
232,846 88,683 11,679 18,237 32,464 26,303 16,589 127,574 2,800 6 to less than 8
164,291 58,233 4,368 8,275 34,208 11,384 6,738 99,319 306 8 to less than 10
70,744 29,908 1,757 2,352 19,054 6,746 14,946 25,890 1,763 10 to less than 15
69,517 18,148 24 1,436 11,696 4,992 2,959 48,411 651 15 to less than 20
246,846 62,249 0 1,238 21,169 39,841 93,213 91,385 1,064 20 and more
*Including debt securities temporarily held in the issuers’ portfolios. — month under review until final maturity for debt securities falling due en
1Excluding debt securities handed to the trustee for temporary safe bloc and until mean maturity of the residual amount outstanding for debt
custody. — 2Sectoral reclassification of debt securities. — 3Calculated from securities not falling due en bloc. 
50* 
 
4 Shares in circulation issued by residents  * 
  
Up to end-1998, DM million nominal value; from 1999, € million nominal value
Change in domestic public limited companies’ capital due to
Memo item
Share circulation
at market values
cash payments contribution (market capita-
and ex- merger reduction lisation) Share capital = Net increase or contribution of shares,
change of of claims and circulation at net decrease (−) mining shares, of capital level at end
issue of and other transfer change of and of period end of period during period convertible GmbH shares,
Period under review under review bonds  1 etc of assets bonus shares real assets legal form liquidation under review  2 
DM million
1998 238,156 16,578 6,086 2,566 658 8,607 − 4,055 3,905 − 1,188 1,258,042
€ million
1999 133,513 11,747 5,519 2,008 190 1,075 2,099 1,560 − 708 1,603,304
2000 147,629 14,115 3,620 3,694 618 8,089 − 1,986 1,827 − 1,745 1,353,000
2001 166,187 18,561 7,987 4,057 1,106 8,448 1,018 − 905 − 3,152 1,205,6132002 168,716 2,528 4,307 1,291 486 1,690 − 868 − 2,152 − 2,224 647,4922003 162,131 − 6,585 4,482 923 211 513 − 322 − 10,806 − 1,584 851,0012004 164,802 2,669 3,960 1,566 276 696 220 − 1,760 − 2,286 887,217
2005 163,071 − 1,733 2,470 1,040 694 268 − 1,443 − 3,060 − 1,703 1,058,532
2006 163,764 695 2,670 3,347 604 954 − 1,868 − 1,256 − 3,761 1,279,6382007 164,560 799 3,164 1,322 200 269 − 682 − 1,847 − 1,636 1,481,9302008 168,701 4,142 5,006 1,319 152 0 − 428 − 608 − 1,306 830,6222009 175,691 6,989 12,476 398 97 − − 3,741 − 1,269 − 974 927,256
2010          Jan 175,763 72 205 − 86 − 0 − 203 − 15 887,966
         Feb 175,450 − 313 66 − 0 − − 121 − 235 − 22 879,672
         Mar 175,699 249 282 49 2 − − 31 0 − 54 968,958
*Excluding shares of public limited investment companies. — 1Including ber 2007) or the Neuer Markt (stock market segment was closed down on
shares issued out of company profits. — 2Enterprises listed on the Regulated 24 March 2003) are included as well as enterprises listed on the Open Market.
Market (the introduction of which marked the end of the division of organ- Source: Bundesbank calculations based on data of the Herausgebergemein-
ised trading segments into an official and a regulated market on 1 Novem- schaft Wertpapier-Mitteilungen and the Deutsche Börse AG. 
50*VII Capital market

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
May 2010
VII Capital market
 
5 Yields and indices on German securities
 
 
               
Yields on debt securities outstanding issued by residents  1 Price indices  2,3 
Public debt securities Bank debt securities Debt securities Shares
Listed
Federal securities
With a residual With a residual
maturity of maturity of Corporate German German
more than 9 more than 9 bonds bond iBoxx CDAX shareand including and including (non- index share price index
€ Germany
Total Total Total 10 years  4 Total 10 years MFIs) (REX) price index index (DAX)
Average End-1998 End-1987 End-1987
Period % per annum daily rate = 100 = 100 = 1000
1998 4.5 4.4 4.4 4.6 4.5 4.9 5.0 118.18 100.00 343.64 5,002.39
1999 4.3 4.3 4.3 4.5 4.3 4.9 5.0 110.60 92.52 445.95 6,958.14
2000 5.4 5.3 5.2 5.3 5.6 5.8 6.2 112.48 94.11 396.59 6,433.61
2001 4.8 4.7 4.7 4.8 4.9 5.3 5.9 113.12 94.16 319.38 5,160.102002 4.7 4.6 4.6 4.8 4.7 5.1 6.0 117.56 97.80 188.46 2,892.632003 3.7 3.8 3.8 4.1 3.7 4.3 5.0 117.36 97.09 252.48 3,965.162004 3.7 3.7 3.7 4.0 3.6 4.2 4.0 120.19 99.89 268.32 4,256.08
2005 3.1 3.2 3.2 3.4 3.1 3.5 3.7 120.92 101.09 335.59 5,408.26
2006 3.8 3.7 3.7 3.8 3.8 4.0 4.2 116.78 96.69 407.16 6,596.922007 4.3 4.3 4.2 4.2 4.4 4.5 5.0 114.85 94.62 478.65 8,067.32
2008 4.2 4.0 4.0 4.0 4.5 4.7 6.3 121.68 102.06 266.33 4,810.202009 3.2 3.1 3.0 3.2 3.5 4.0 5.5 123.62 100.12 320.32 5,957.43
2010          Jan 3.0 3.0 3.0 3.3 3.1 3.8 4.4 123.86 101.31 303.33 5,608.79
         Feb 2.9 2.8 2.8 3.2 3.0 3.7 4.4 124.70 102.02 302.10 5,598.46         Mar 2.8 2.8 2.8 3.1 2.9 3.5 4.2 124.93 102.01 331.65 6,153.55
         Apr 2.8 2.7 2.7 3.1 2.8 3.5 4.3 125.47 102.86 329.26 6,135.70
1Bearer debt securities with maximum maturities according to the terms of the calculation. Monthly figures are calculated on the basis of the yields on
issue of over 4 years if their mean residual maturities exceed 3 years. Conver- all the business days in a month. The annual figures are the unweighted
tible debt securities, etc. debt securities with unscheduled redemption, zero means of the monthly figures. — 2End of year or month. — 3Source:
-coupon bonds, floating -rate notes and bonds not denominated in DM or Deutsche Börse AG. — 4Only debt securities eligible as underlying
euro are not included. Group yields for the various categories of securities instruments for futures contracts; calculated as unweighted averages.are weighted by the amounts outstanding of the debt securities included in
 
 
6 Sales and purchases of mutual fund shares in Germany
 
 
Sales Purchases
Domestic mutual funds  1  (sales receipts) Residents
Mutual funds open to the Credit institutions
general public including building
Non-banks  3 and loan associations  2 
of which
Sales Open- of which of which
= Secur- end Foreign Foreign
total Money ities- real Special- mutual mutualpur- market based estate ised Foreign fund fund Non-resi-chases Total Total funds funds funds funds funds  
4 Total Total shares Total shares dents  5 
Period
DM million
1998 187,641 169,748 38,998 5,772 27,814 4,690 130,750 17,893 190,416 43,937 961 146,479 16,507 − 2,775
€ million
1999 111,282 97,197 37,684 3,347 23,269 7,395 59,513 14,086 105,521 19,862 − 637 85,659 14,722 5,761
2000 118,021 85,160 39,712 − 2,188 36,818 − 2,824 45,448 32,861 107,019 14,454 92 92,565 32,769 11,002
2001 97,077 76,811 35,522 12,410 9,195 10,159 41,289 20,266 96,127 10,251 2,703 85,876 17,563 951
2002 66,571 59,482 25,907 3,682 7,247 14,916 33,575 7,089 67,251 2,100 3,007 65,151 4,082 − 6802003 47,754 43,943 20,079 − 924 7,408 14,166 23,864 3,811 49,547 − 2,658 734 52,205 3,077 − 1,7932004 14,435 1,453 − 3,978 − 6,160 − 1,246 3,245 5,431 12,982 10,267 8,446 3,796 1,821 9,186 4,168
2005 85,268 41,718 6,400 − 124 7,001 − 3,186 35,317 43,550 79,252 21,290 7,761 57,962 35,789 6,016
2006 47,264 19,535 − 14,257 490 − 9,362 − 8,814 33,791 27,729 39,006 14,676 5,221 24,330 22,508 8,2582007 55,695 13,436 − 7,872 − 4,839 − 12,848 6,840 21,307 42,259 50,925 − 229 4,240 51,154 38,019 4,7702008 514 − 7,911 − 14,409 − 12,171 − 11,149 799 6,498 8,425 9,154 − 16,625 − 9,252 25,779 17,677 − 8,640
2009 43,139 43,747 10,966 − 5,047 11,749 2,686 32,780 − 609 42,984 − 14,995 − 8,178 57,979 7,569 155
2010          Jan 13,133 10,008 2,704 706 − 10 1,811 7,303 3,125 12,269 1,007 574 11,262 2,551 864
         Feb 7,717 5,671 2,857 − 133 1,645 1,100 2,814 2,046 7,382 2,014 779 5,368 1,267 335         Mar 8,131 5,280 1,460 − 480 846 428 3,820 2,851 7,574 − 2,648 505 10,222 2,346 557
1Including public limited investment companies. — 2Book values. — fund shares by non-residents; transaction values. — The figures for the most
3Residual. — 4Net purchases or net sales (−) of foreign fund shares by recent date are provisional; revisions are not specially marked. 
residents; transaction values. — 5Net purchases or net sales (−) of domestic
51*VII Capital market

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
E U R O S Y S T E M
Monthly Report
May 2010
VIII  Financial accounts
  
1  Acquisition of financial assets and financing of private non-financial sectors
  
  
  € billion
2008 2009 
Item 2007 2008 2009 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4
Households 1 
  I  Acquisition of financial assets
Currency and deposits 85.9 121.0 49.9 6.4 14.6 12.9 87.1 9.4 15.2 5.5 19.8
Money market paper − 0.3 − 0.1 − 0.8 − 0.1 − 0.1 0.0 0.1 − 0.2 − 0.1 − 0.2 − 0.2
Bonds − 53.3 1.8 − 4.6 19.4 1.3 6.6 − 25.5 9.8 0.3 1.7 − 16.4
Shares − 16.5 − 45.5 − 1.0 − 1.0 − 2.5 − 9.0 − 33.0 − 2.0 − 1.0 1.0 1.0
Other equity 2.9 3.0 3.0 0.8 0.7 0.8 0.8 0.7 0.8 0.8 0.8Mutual funds shares 24.3 9.3 29.2 13.4 7.6 1.7 − 13.4 9.3 5.4 7.6 6.8
Claims on insurance
corporations  
2 71.9 31.7 69.0 7.0 8.3 7.3 9.1 23.8 14.5 12.9 17.7
Short-term claims 1.1 0.4 3.4 0.4 − 0.2 0.1 0.1 0.8 0.9 0.8 0.9
Longer-term claims 70.8 31.2 65.6 6.6 8.5 7.2 9.0 23.0 13.6 12.1 16.9
Claims from company
pension commitments 4.3 7.3 7.7 1.8 1.8 1.8 1.9 1.9 2.0 1.9 1.9
Other claims  3 − 4.1 − 2.8 − 5.5 − 0.7 − 0.7 − 0.7 − 0.7 − 1.3 − 1.4 − 1.4 − 1.4
Total 115.1 125.7 146.9 47.0 30.9 21.5 26.3 51.6 35.6 29.8 30.0
  II Financing
Loans − 20.7 − 16.0 − 4.4 − 9.9 0.8 − 1.2 − 5.7 − 7.6 2.4 4.6 − 3.9
Short-term loans − 1.2 1.2 − 4.3 − 0.7 − 0.0 0.6 1.4 − 0.4 − 0.1 − 1.3 − 2.5
Longer-term loans − 19.5 − 17.2 − 0.1 − 9.1 0.9 − 1.8 − 7.1 − 7.1 2.6 5.8 − 1.4
Other liabilities − 0.4 0.4 1.2 0.1 0.1 − 0.1 0.4 0.3 0.2 − 0.2 0.9
Total − 21.1 − 15.5 − 3.2 − 9.8 0.9 − 1.3 − 5.3 − 7.2 2.7 4.4 − 3.0
Corporations
I  Acquisition of financial assets
Currency and deposits 71.2 22.8 47.7 8.6 − 15.5 33.5 − 3.7 13.2 − 1.4 14.5 21.4
Money market paper − 11.6 − 4.1 8.6 13.7 − 24.7 − 13.4 20.3 2.0 − 0.6 − 3.3 10.6
Bonds −104.0 7.6 − 4.7 − 55.3 0.5 9.7 52.7 − 1.0 − 15.5 − 17.0 28.8
Financial derivatives 44.9 14.3 − 10.3 10.3 8.3 0.1 − 4.4 − 11.4 − 2.0 3.0 0.2
Shares 39.5 100.2 73.7 13.0 48.3 15.2 23.7 13.2 39.9 29.5 − 8.9
Other equity 17.4 18.5 19.0 12.3 17.7 − 8.5 − 3.0 11.2 6.4 3.7 − 2.3
Mutual funds shares − 2.9 − 8.2 − 41.4 − 3.8 − 2.8 5.6 − 7.2 − 3.0 − 10.1 − 15.5 − 12.8
Loans 9.7 32.1 12.4 6.2 12.3 9.7 3.9 3.3 − 1.4 − 2.0 12.5
Short-term loans 5.0 23.7 − 1.3 − 0.3 12.7 6.5 4.8 1.0 − 3.0 − 3.1 3.9
Longer-term loans 4.6 8.4 13.7 6.5 − 0.4 3.2 − 0.9 2.3 1.6 1.2 8.6
Claims on insurancecorporations  
2 1.0 0.4 0.4 0.1 0.1 0.1 0.1 0.1 0.1 0.1 0.1
Short-term claims 1.0 0.4 0.4 0.1 0.1 0.1 0.1 0.1 0.1 0.1 0.1
Longer-term claims . . . . . . . . . . .
Other claims 104.0 − 51.8 − 67.9 23.6 − 11.8 − 29.3 − 34.4 − 44.8 − 18.8 − 25.1 20.8
Total 169.1 131.8 37.4 28.8 32.4 22.6 48.0 − 17.3 − 3.5 − 12.2 70.5
  II Financing
Money market paper 18.6 3.6 − 26.7 9.5 − 6.5 0.4 0.2 − 13.5 − 8.3 − 2.3 − 2.7
Bonds − 11.4 6.0 19.6 − 2.5 1.6 1.5 5.4 3.5 6.5 5.8 3.8
Financial derivatives . . . . . . . . . . .
Shares 6.8 3.6 5.5 0.9 1.4 0.7 0.5 1.9 0.3 2.3 1.0
Other equity 34.9 14.9 8.1 6.2 5.7 0.2 2.8 3.7 0.7 1.1 2.6
Loans 51.5 73.9 − 19.3 − 3.4 20.8 24.7 31.9 18.1 − 6.7 − 24.7 − 6.0
Short-term loans 16.4 18.7 − 36.8 − 5.9 14.9 1.2 8.5 3.6 − 14.1 − 18.0 − 8.2
Longer-term loans 35.1 55.3 17.5 2.5 5.9 23.4 23.4 14.5 7.5 − 6.7 2.2
Claims from companypension commitments 1.3 2.9 2.9 0.7 0.7 0.7 0.7 0.7 0.7 0.7 0.7
Other liabilities 13.3 − 0.7 9.6 9.2 − 0.8 5.4 − 14.5 15.3 − 6.4 0.8 − 0.1
Total 114.9 104.2 − 0.3 20.7 23.1 33.5 26.9 29.8 − 13.1 − 16.3 − 0.7
1Including non-profit institutions serving households. — 2Including private supplementary pension funds. — 3Including accumulated interest-bearing
pension funds, burial funds, occupational pension schemes and surplus shares with insurance corporations. 
52*VIII  Financial accounts

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
May 2010
VIII  Financial accounts
  
2  Financial assets and liabilities of private non-financial sectors
  
  
  End-of-year level, end-of-quarter level; € billion
2008 2009 
Item 2007 2008 2009 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4
Households 1 
  I  Financial assets
Currency and deposits 1,620.8 1,737.5 1,788.1 1,627.2 1,642.0 1,650.6 1,737.5 1,746.8 1,762.9 1,768.4 1,788.1
Money market paper 1.7 1.6 0.8 1.6 1.5 1.5 1.6 1.4 1.3 1.1 0.8
Bonds 343.7 324.6 362.8 367.4 351.6 329.0 324.6 315.0 321.5 368.4 362.8
Shares 368.5 169.4 181.3 319.4 302.0 259.8 169.4 142.6 155.1 161.3 181.3
Other equity 187.8 177.5 183.8 186.6 189.3 194.4 177.5 178.3 179.8 179.7 183.8Mutual funds shares 549.4 503.6 555.3 539.6 543.4 530.8 503.6 502.6 526.0 542.9 555.3
Claims on insurance
corporations  
2 1,190.4 1,216.9 1,295.3 1,195.7 1,203.5 1,209.8 1,216.9 1,234.6 1,255.0 1,275.8 1,295.3
Short-term claims 80.8 81.3 84.7 81.2 81.0 81.1 81.3 82.1 83.0 83.8 84.7
Longer-term claims 1,109.6 1,135.7 1,210.6 1,114.5 1,122.5 1,128.6 1,135.7 1,152.5 1,172.0 1,192.0 1,210.6
Claims from company
pension commitments 255.1 262.4 270.1 256.9 258.7 260.5 262.4 264.3 266.3 268.2 270.1
Other claims  3 42.6 39.8 34.2 41.9 41.2 40.5 39.8 38.4 37.0 35.6 34.2
Total 4,559.8 4,433.4 4,671.7 4,536.3 4,533.2 4,476.8 4,433.4 4,424.1 4,505.0 4,601.4 4,671.7
  II Liabilities
Loans 1,536.7 1,520.8 1,520.7 1,525.5 1,526.4 1,525.1 1,520.8 1,513.4 1,518.2 1,522.8 1,520.7
Short-term loans 78.9 80.0 75.7 78.1 78.1 78.7 80.0 79.6 79.5 78.2 75.7
Longer-term loans 1,457.9 1,440.8 1,444.9 1,447.4 1,448.3 1,446.5 1,440.8 1,433.8 1,438.7 1,444.6 1,444.9
Other liabilities 9.1 10.2 11.4 10.5 10.2 10.6 10.2 11.4 11.5 11.2 11.4
Total 1,545.8 1,531.0 1,532.0 1,536.0 1,536.6 1,535.7 1,531.0 1,524.8 1,529.7 1,534.0 1,532.0
Corporations
I  Financial assets
Currency and deposits 477.0 507.3 560.7 474.6 470.0 502.5 507.3 517.4 517.5 539.9 560.7
Money market paper 27.1 10.9 18.8 30.7 7.9 0.9 10.9 9.6 12.7 15.5 18.8
Bonds 92.9 102.5 106.8 38.2 39.2 49.8 102.5 104.4 79.5 66.5 106.8
Financial derivatives . . . . . . . . . . .
Shares 1,024.3 644.2 800.4 924.3 933.5 861.4 644.2 575.1 668.3 718.3 800.4
Other equity 297.2 293.7 318.4 306.5 327.4 326.4 293.7 305.0 312.7 314.9 318.4Mutual funds shares 109.5 67.9 61.6 81.0 81.0 85.3 67.9 63.0 58.0 83.4 61.6
Loans 152.2 184.1 200.7 159.7 172.3 179.4 184.1 187.5 186.4 188.2 200.7
Short-term loans 103.0 126.3 123.7 103.3 115.9 119.8 126.3 126.2 124.2 120.3 123.7
Longer-term loans 49.2 57.8 77.0 56.4 56.5 59.6 57.8 61.3 62.2 67.9 77.0
Claims on insurance
corporations  
2 43.8 44.2 44.6 43.9 44.0 44.1 44.2 44.3 44.4 44.5 44.6
Short-term claims 43.8 44.2 44.6 43.9 44.0 44.1 44.2 44.3 44.4 44.5 44.6
Longer-term claims . . . . . . . . . . .
Other claims 500.2 576.9 525.9 520.2 536.7 569.4 576.9 588.9 513.0 521.8 525.9
Total 2,724.1 2,431.8 2,637.9 2,578.9 2,611.9 2,619.2 2,431.8 2,395.3 2,392.4 2,493.0 2,637.9
  II Liabilities
Money market paper 36.5 40.2 13.5 46.0 39.6 44.9 40.2 26.7 18.4 16.1 13.5
Bonds 82.2 96.8 123.4 82.3 78.9 81.6 96.8 102.5 106.1 116.7 123.4Financial derivatives . . . . . . . . . . .
Shares 1,564.3 963.5 1,081.3 1,322.0 1,266.1 1,154.1 963.5 814.4 948.4 1,043.3 1,081.3
Other equity 670.4 685.3 693.4 676.6 682.3 682.5 685.3 688.9 689.7 690.8 693.4
Loans 1,392.9 1,470.0 1,450.6 1,389.2 1,414.9 1,437.2 1,470.0 1,488.1 1,479.4 1,454.6 1,450.6
Short-term loans 380.3 390.7 356.4 368.4 383.8 381.5 390.7 392.2 378.1 361.8 356.4
Longer-term loans 1,012.6 1,079.2 1,094.2 1,020.8 1,031.2 1,055.7 1,079.2 1,095.9 1,101.4 1,092.9 1,094.2
Claims from companypension commitments 215.5 218.4 221.3 216.2 216.9 217.7 218.4 219.1 219.8 220.6 221.3
Other liabilities 446.8 490.8 475.9 454.6 465.5 474.4 490.8 552.8 470.1 482.5 475.9
Total 4,408.4 3,964.8 4,059.4 4,187.0 4,164.2 4,092.4 3,964.8 3,892.4 3,931.9 4,024.6 4,059.4
1Including non-profit institutions serving households. — 2Including private supplementary pension funds. — 3Including accumulated interest-bearing
pension funds, burial funds, occupational pension schemes and surplus shares with insurance corporations. 
53*VIII  Financial accounts

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
E U R O S Y S T E M
Monthly Report
May 2010
IX Public finances in Germany
 
1 General government: deficit and debt level as defined in the Maastricht Treaty
 
 
 
Social Social
General Central State Local security General Central State Local security
government government government government funds government government government government funds
Period € billion as a percentage of GDP
Deficit / surplus 1
2003 − 87.2 − 39.6 − 32.7 − 7.1 − 7.7 − 4.0 − 1.8 − 1.5 − 0.3 − 0.4
2004 − 83.5 − 52.0 − 27.9 − 2.4 − 1.2 − 3.8 − 2.4 − 1.3 − 0.1 − 0.1
2005 − 74.0 − 47.4 − 22.5 − 0.2 − 3.9 − 3.3 − 2.1 − 1.0 − 0.0 − 0.2
2006 p − 37.8 − 34.5 − 11.3 + 3.0 + 5.0 − 1.6 − 1.5 − 0.5 + 0.1 + 0.2
2007 p + 4.9 − 18.9 + 4.6 + 8.3 + 10.9 + 0.2 − 0.8 + 0.2 + 0.3 + 0.4
2008 p + 1.0 − 14.2 + 1.2 + 5.8 + 8.2 + 0.0 − 0.6 + 0.0 + 0.2 + 0.3
2009 pe − 79.4 − 39.7 − 20.2 − 7.5 − 12.1 − 3.3 − 1.6 − 0.8 − 0.3 − 0.5
2008          H1  p + 7.3 − 7.0 + 3.6 + 5.7 + 4.9 + 0.6 − 0.6 + 0.3 + 0.5 + 0.4
         H2  p − 6.3 − 7.2 − 2.5 + 0.1 + 3.3 − 0.5 − 0.6 − 0.2 + 0.0 + 0.3
2009          H1  pe − 20.7 − 10.4 − 7.2 − 0.1 − 3.1 − 1.8 − 0.9 − 0.6 − 0.0 − 0.3
         H2  pe − 58.6 − 29.2 − 13.0 − 7.4 − 9.0 − 4.7 − 2.4 − 1.1 − 0.6 − 0.7
Debt level 2 End of year or quarter
2003 1,383.5 847.9 435.3 111.5 5.3 63.9 39.2 20.1 5.2 0.2
2004 1,453.8 889.5 459.8 116.3 4.2 65.8 40.2 20.8 5.3 0.2
2005 1,524.4 935.3 482.3 120.0 2.7 68.0 41.7 21.5 5.4 0.1
2006 1,571.7 970.7 492.1 122.4 1.7 67.6 41.7 21.2 5.3 0.12007 1,578.8 977.9 494.0 120.2 1.6 65.0 40.3 20.3 4.9 0.12008 1,646.2 1,006.8 533.3 118.8 1.5 66.0 40.3 21.4 4.8 0.12009
pe 1,762.2 1,077.1 575.2 122.6 1.3 73.2 44.7 23.9 5.1 0.1
2008          Q1 1,598.5 989.0 504.3 118.3 1.6 65.3 40.4 20.6 4.8 0.1
         Q2 1,634.3 997.0 531.4 118.7 1.6 66.0 40.2 21.5 4.8 0.1
         Q3 1,628.4 995.1 528.1 117.6 2.0 65.3 39.9 21.2 4.7 0.1
         Q4 1,646.2 1,006.8 533.3 118.8 1.5 66.0 40.3 21.4 4.8 0.1
2009          Q1  pe 1,677.5 1,028.2 542.0 119.6 1.6 68.0 41.7 22.0 4.9 0.1
         Q2  pe 1,742.9 1,073.6 561.5 120.3 1.4 71.7 44.2 23.1 5.0 0.1
         Q3  pe 1,750.8 1,077.0 564.8 121.1 1.5 72.6 44.7 23.4 5.0 0.1
         Q4  pe 1,762.2 1,077.1 575.2 122.6 1.3 73.2 44.7 23.9 5.1 0.1
Source: Federal Statistical Office and Bundesbank calculations. — 1Unlike rate agreements. The half-year figures correspond to the deficit / surplus
the fiscal balance as shown in the national accounts, the deficit as defined according to the national accounts. — 2Quarterly GDP ratios are based on
in the Maastricht Treaty includes interest flows from swaps and forward the national output of the four preceding quarters. 
 
 
2 General government: revenue, expenditure and fiscal deficit / surplus as shown in the national accounts *
  
 
Revenue Expenditure
of which of which
Compen- Gross Memo item
Social con- Social sation of capital Deficit / Total tax
Period Total Taxes tributions Other Total benefits employees Interest formation Other surplus burden  1 
€ billion
2003 961.9 481.8 396.3 83.9 1,049.2 594.2 169.2 64.3 33.9 187.6 − 87.3 889.3
2004 957.7 481.3 396.5 79.9 1,041.2 592.0 169.6 62.4 31.7 185.5 − 83.5 888.0
2005 976.1 493.2 396.5 86.4 1,050.3 597.0 168.9 62.6 30.3 191.5 − 74.2 900.5
2006 p 1,016.4 530.6 400.0 85.8 1,054.5 598.4 167.9 65.5 32.4 190.3 − 38.1 941.9
2007 p 1,065.3 576.3 399.8 89.2 1,060.7 596.8 168.4 67.3 34.3 193.9 + 4.7 988.2
2008 p 1,091.8 592.6 408.1 91.1 1,090.8 607.4 172.1 67.1 37.4 206.8 + 1.0 1,013.6
2009 pe 1,066.0 562.9 411.1 92.0 1,145.3 640.8 177.0 63.5 40.1 223.9 − 79.3 984.3
as a percentage of GDP
2003 44.5 22.3 18.3 3.9 48.5 27.5 7.8 3.0 1.6 8.7 − 4.0 41.1
2004 43.3 21.8 17.9 3.6 47.1 26.8 7.7 2.8 1.4 8.4 − 3.8 40.2
2005 43.5 22.0 17.7 3.9 46.8 26.6 7.5 2.8 1.4 8.5 − 3.3 40.2
2006 p 43.7 22.8 17.2 3.7 45.4 25.7 7.2 2.8 1.4 8.2 − 1.6 40.5
2007 p 43.9 23.7 16.5 3.7 43.7 24.6 6.9 2.8 1.4 8.0 + 0.2 40.7
2008 p 43.7 23.7 16.4 3.7 43.7 24.3 6.9 2.7 1.5 8.3 + 0.0 40.6
2009 pe 44.3 23.4 17.1 3.8 47.6 26.6 7.4 2.6 1.7 9.3 − 3.3 40.9
Percentage growth rates
2003 + 1.0 + 0.9 + 1.4 − 0.5 + 1.8 + 2.5 + 0.3 + 2.6 − 6.1 + 2.2 . + 1.1
2004 − 0.4 − 0.1 + 0.1 − 4.8 − 0.8 − 0.4 + 0.2 − 3.0 − 6.4 − 1.1 . − 0.1
2005 + 1.9 + 2.5 + 0.0 + 8.1 + 0.9 + 0.8 − 0.4 + 0.4 − 4.4 + 3.2 . + 1.4
2006 p + 4.1 + 7.6 + 0.9 − 0.7 + 0.4 + 0.2 − 0.6 + 4.6 + 7.0 − 0.6 . + 4.6
2007 p + 4.8 + 8.6 − 0.0 + 4.0 + 0.6 − 0.3 + 0.3 + 2.7 + 6.0 + 1.9 . + 4.9
2008 p + 2.5 + 2.8 + 2.1 + 2.2 + 2.8 + 1.8 + 2.2 − 0.3 + 9.1 + 6.6 . + 2.6
2009 pe − 2.4 − 5.0 + 0.7 + 0.9 + 5.0 + 5.5 + 2.8 − 5.3 + 7.0 + 8.3 . − 2.9
Source: Federal Statistical Office. — *Figures in accordance with ESA 1995. data (without affecting the fiscal deficit / surplus). This information can still
In the Monthly Reports up to December 2006, customs duties, the EU share be found on the Bundesbank’s website. — 1Taxes and social contributions
in VAT revenue and EU subsidies were included in the national accounts’ plus customs duties and the EU share in VAT revenue. 
54*IX Public finances in Germany

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
May 2010
IX Public finances in Germany
 
3 General government: budgetary development (as per government’s financial statistics)
 
 
€ billion
Central, state and local government  1 Social security funds  2 General government, total
Revenue Expenditure
of which of which 3 
Finan- Person- Fixed Finan-
cial nel asset cialtransac- expend- Current forma- transac- Deficit / Rev- Expend- Deficit / Rev- Expend- Deficit /
Period Total  
4 Taxes tions  5 Total  4 iture grants Interest tion tions  5 surplus enue  6 iture surplus enue iture surplus
2002 p 554.7 441.7 20.5 610.4 173.3 226.8 66.1 38.7 11.3 − 55.8 457.7 466.0 − 8.3 927.7 991.8 − 64.1
2003 pe 547.0 442.2 21.5 614.2 174.0 235.0 65.6 36.3 10.0 − 67.2 467.6 474.4 − 6.8 925.2 999.1 − 73.9
2004 pe 545.9 442.8 24.1 610.4 173.4 236.9 64.8 34.3 9.6 − 64.5 469.7 468.6 + 1.1 926.8 990.2 − 63.4
2005 pe 568.9 452.1 31.3 620.6 172.1 245.3 64.0 33.0 14.3 − 51.7 467.8 471.3 − 3.4 947.4 1,002.5 − 55.1
2006 pe 590.9 488.4 18.8 626.2 169.7 252.1 64.4 33.7 11.6 − 35.3 486.3 466.6 + 19.7 988.2 1,003.8 − 15.6
2007 pe 644.8 538.2 17.7 644.2 182.2 250.0 66.2 34.6 9.5 + 0.6 475.3 466.4 + 8.9 1,025.6 1,016.1 + 9.6
2008 pe 668.9 561.2 13.4 677.4 187.3 259.9 67.3 36.4 18.6 − 8.5 485.7 478.9 + 6.9 1,058.8 1,060.4 − 1.6
2007          Q1 p 149.4 122.3 2.8 164.5 42.7 64.9 25.5 5.3 3.4 − 15.1 112.2 115.6 − 3.4 238.4 256.9 − 18.5
         Q2 p 158.5 136.9 3.0 144.5 43.9 58.4 10.0 6.7 2.5 + 14.0 119.0 116.3 + 2.7 253.8 237.0 + 16.7
         Q3 p 155.4 131.6 3.6 160.5 44.2 59.8 21.3 8.6 1.6 − 5.1 116.2 115.6 + 0.6 248.2 252.8 − 4.6
         Q4 p 179.6 147.6 7.9 172.9 49.7 65.1 9.1 12.7 1.9 + 6.7 126.9 117.8 + 9.1 283.0 267.2 + 15.7
2008          Q1 p 160.0 130.8 3.0 164.5 43.7 65.5 24.7 5.3 2.0 − 4.5 114.1 119.4 − 5.3 250.4 260.2 − 9.8
         Q2 p 166.1 143.5 2.1 151.5 44.9 61.4 11.1 7.2 1.7 + 14.6 120.6 120.1 + 0.5 263.0 247.9 + 15.1
         Q3 p 159.7 137.2 1.3 167.1 45.9 62.6 21.2 9.0 1.5 − 7.4 118.6 118.9 − 0.3 254.5 262.2 − 7.7
         Q4 p 180.9 149.4 6.7 192.4 51.2 68.7 10.0 13.6 13.3 − 11.5 130.4 121.7 + 8.7 287.4 290.2 − 2.8
2009          Q1 p 157.0 128.9 1.8 175.7 45.9 67.4 22.8 5.0 10.0 − 18.7 117.9 122.3 − 4.4 251.2 274.4 − 23.1
         Q2 p 154.4 130.4 3.3 169.2 47.2 60.4 10.7 7.4 16.9 − 14.8 120.5 125.5 − 5.0 251.4 271.2 − 19.8
         Q3 p 148.8 124.4 2.1 174.9 47.6 65.0 19.8 10.5 4.5 − 26.0 120.1 127.6 − 7.5 245.1 278.7 − 33.5
Source: Bundesbank calculations based on the data from the Federal Stat- are estimated. — 3The development of the types of expenditure recorded
istical Office. — 1Including subsidiary budgets but excluding the Post Office here is influenced in part by statistical changeovers. — 4Including discrep-
pension funds. Unlike the annual figures based on the annual calculations ancies in clearing transactions between central, state and local govern-of the Federal Statistical Office, the quarterly figures do not include muni- ment. — 5On the revenue side, this contains proceeds booked as disposals
cipal special purpose associations and various special accounts. — 2The of equity interests and as loan repayments. On the expenditure side, this con-
annual figures do not tally with the sum of the quarterly figures, as the tains the acquisition of equity interests and loans granted. — 6Including Fed-
latter are all provisional. The quarterly figures for some insurance sectors eral Government liquidity assistance to the Federal Labour Of fice. 
4 Central, state and local government: budgetary development (as per government’s financial statistics)
 
 
€ billion
Central government State government  2,3 Local government  3 
Period Revenue  1 Expenditure Deficit / surplus Revenue Expenditure Deficit / surplus Revenue Expenditure Deficit / surplus
2002 240.8 273.5 − 32.7 228.8 258.0 − 29.2 147.0 150.0 − 3.0
2003 239.6 278.8 − 39.2 229.2 259.7 − 30.5 142.1 149.9 − 7.8
2004 233.9 273.6 − 39.7 233.5 257.1 − 23.6 147.0 150.1 − 3.1
2005 250.0 281.5 − 31.5 237.4 259.6 − 22.2 151.3 153.2 − 1.9
2006 254.6 282.8 − 28.2 249.8 260.1 − 10.3 161.1 157.4 + 3.72007
pe 277.4 292.1 − 14.7 275.9 267.5 + 8.4 171.3 162.4 + 8.9
2008 pe 292.0 303.8 − 11.8 279.3 278.0 + 1.3 176.9 169.0 + 7.9
2009 pe 282.6 317.1 − 34.5 269.9 295.0 − 25.1 171.7 178.6 − 6.9
2007          Q1 p 61.1 74.6 − 13.6 63.5 66.5 − 3.0 35.4 37.6 − 2.1
         Q2 p 69.7 64.4 + 5.3 67.6 61.9 + 5.7 40.4 37.3 + 3.1
         Q3 p 68.3 76.8 − 8.5 66.2 64.1 + 2.1 42.5 39.7 + 2.8
         Q4 p 78.3 76.3 + 2.0 77.7 74.0 + 3.7 51.0 46.1 + 4.9
2008          Q1 p 64.1 75.6 − 11.5 67.7 67.7 − 0.1 37.3 37.4 − 0.1
         Q2 p 73.0 68.3 + 4.7 70.7 64.2 + 6.5 42.7 39.7 + 3.0
         Q3 p 71.2 82.7 − 11.4 67.3 66.3 + 1.0 43.8 41.1 + 2.7
         Q4 p 83.7 77.3 + 6.4 72.6 78.7 − 6.0 51.0 49.0 + 2.0
2009          Q1 p 65.8 76.8 − 11.0 65.3 75.9 − 10.6 36.3 39.3 − 3.0
         Q2 p 71.3 68.6 + 2.7 66.1 67.9 − 1.8 40.7 41.9 − 1.2
         Q3 p 68.6 84.5 − 15.9 63.1 69.4 − 6.3 42.5 45.1 − 2.6
         Q4 p 77.0 87.2 − 10.2 74.4 80.7 − 6.3 50.6 51.0 − 0.4
Source: Bundesbank calculations based on the data from the Federal Stat- local authority level of the city-states Berlin, Bremen and Hamburg. —
istical Office. — 1Any amounts of the Bundesbank’s profit distribution 3Unlike the annual figure based on the annual calculations of the Federal
exceeding the reference value that were used to repay parts of the debt of Statistical Office, the quarterly figures do not include various special ac-central government’s special funds are not included here. — 2Including the counts and municipal special purpose associations. 
55*IX Public finances in Germany

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
E U R O S Y S T E M
Monthly Report
May 2010
IX Public finances in Germany
 
5 Central, state and local government: tax revenue
 
 
€ million
Central and state government and European Union Memo item
Supplementary
central govern-
Balance of ment grants, state
Central State Local untransferred government’s share
Period Total Total government  1 government European Union  2 government  3 tax shares  4 of energy tax
2003 442,238 390,438 214,002 155,510 20,926 51,673 + 127 22,067
2004 442,838 386,459 208,920 157,898 19,640 56,237 + 142 21,967
2005 452,078 392,313 211,779 158,823 21,711 59,750 + 16 21,634
2006 488,444 421,151 225,634 173,374 22,142 67,316 − 22 21,7422007 538,243 465,554 251,747 191,558 22,249 72,551 + 138 21,6432008 561,182 484,182 260,690 200,411 23,081 77,190 − 190 21,5102009 ... 455,615 252,842 182,273 20,501 ... ... 20,275
2008          Q1 131,507 111,845 56,179 47,660 8,006 14,148 + 5,513 5,272
         Q2 143,006 122,931 66,952 51,585 4,394 19,614 + 461 5,324         Q3 137,454 117,861 65,380 48,667 3,814 19,715 − 122 5,503         Q4 149,216 131,545 72,178 52,500 6,867 23,712 − 6,042 5,411
2009          Q1 128,787 109,674 55,941 46,212 7,521 13,289 + 5,824 5,154
         Q2 130,491 113,442 65,247 46,653 1,541 17,397 − 347 5,140
         Q3 124,437 108,572 62,354 42,335 3,883 15,865 − 1 5,048         Q4 ... 123,928 69,299 47,073 7,556 ... ... 4,933
2010          Q1 ... 104,370 54,316 41,777 8,278 ... ... 4,885
2009          Mar . 38,154 20,468 15,784 1,903 . . 1,718
2010          Mar . 36,592 21,096 14,308 1,188 . . 1,628
Source: Federal Ministry of Finance, Federal Statistical Office and Bundes- cruing to the EU from central government tax revenue. — 3Including local
bank calculations. — 1Before deducting supplementary central government government taxes in the city-states Berlin, Bremen and Hamburg. — 4Differ-
grants, shares in energy tax revenue and compensation for the transfer of ence between local government’s share in the joint taxes received by the
motor vehicle tax to central government, which are remitted to state govern- state government cash offices in the period in question (see Table IX. 6) a nd
ment. — 2Custom duties and shares in VAT and gross national income ac- the amounts passed on to local government in the same period. 
 
 
6 Central and state government and European Union: tax revenue, by type
 
 
€ million
Joint taxes
Memo
Income taxes  2 Turnover taxes  5 item
Local
Local govern-
Invest- business Central State ment
Assessed ment Turnover tax govern- govern- EU share in
Wage income Corpora- income Turnover tax on trans- ment ment customs joint
Period Total  1 Total tax  3 tax tion tax tax  4 Total tax imports fers  6 taxes  7 taxes  7 duties taxes
2003 414,846 162,567 133,090 4,568 8,275 16,633 136,996 103,162 33,834 7,085 86,609 18,713 2,877 24,409
2004 409,517 159,104 123,896 5,394 13,123 16,691 137,366 104,715 32,651 5,661 84,554 19,774 3,059 23,058
2005 415,355 161,960 118,919 9,766 16,333 16,943 139,713 108,440 31,273 6,218 83,508 20,579 3,378 23,042
2006 446,139 182,614 122,612 17,567 22,898 19,537 146,688 111,318 35,370 7,013 84,215 21,729 3,880 24,9882007 493,817 204,698 131,774 25,027 22,929 24,969 169,636 127,522 42,114 6,975 85,690 22,836 3,983 28,2632008 515,498 220,483 141,895 32,685 15,868 30,035 175,989 130,789 45,200 6,784 86,302 21,937 4,002 31,316
2009 484,880 193,684 135,165 26,430 7,173 24,916 176,991 141,907 35,084 4,908 89,318 16,375 3,604 29,265
2008          Q1 118,847 49,649 32,793 3,668 4,727 8,462 44,294 33,488 10,806 297 17,515 6,114 980 7,002
         Q2 130,829 60,000 34,700 10,398 4,821 10,080 41,890 30,645 11,244 1,636 20,700 5,676 927 7,898         Q3 125,510 52,135 34,063 8,878 4,086 5,109 44,338 32,705 11,633 1,690 20,888 5,442 1,017 7,648         Q4 140,312 58,699 40,339 9,741 2,235 6,384 45,468 33,951 11,517 3,161 27,200 4,705 1,080 8,767
2009          Q1 116,731 50,001 33,975 2,971 4,399 8,657 43,087 34,234 8,853 − 36 17,361 5,351 966 7,057
         Q2 120,543 48,503 30,481 9,141 342 8,539 43,424 35,176 8,248 1,499 21,085 5,186 846 7,102         Q3 115,567 43,486 32,150 6,732 592 4,011 44,365 35,717 8,649 1,346 22,427 3,023 920 6,994         Q4 132,040 51,695 38,559 7,586 1,841 3,708 46,114 36,780 9,334 2,099 28,445 2,815 872 8,112
2010          Q1 111,163 45,127 30,255 6,155 1,951 6,766 42,891 34,054 8,837 215 19,001 2,814 1,115 6,793
2009          Mar 40,612 19,502 10,319 3,848 4,343 992 12,216 9,444 2,772 27 6,823 1,730 315 2,4582010          Mar 39,125 18,935 9,169 5,836 2,839 1,090 11,138 8,225 2,913 11 7,726 1,003 312 2,533
Source: Federal Ministry of Finance and Bundesbank calculations. — 1This sion plans. — 4Final withholding tax on interest income and capital gains,
total, unlike that in Table IX. 5, does not include the receipts from the equal- non-assessed taxes on earnings. — 5The allocation of revenue to central,
isation of burdens levies, local business tax (less local business tax transfers state and local government, which is adjusted at more regular interv als, is
to central and state government), real property taxes and other local govern- regulated in section 1 of the Revenue Adjustment Act. Respective percen t-
ment taxes, or the balance of untransferred tax shares. — 2Respective age share of central, state and local government in revenue for 2009:
percentage share of central, state and local government in revenue: wage 53.9:44.1:2. The EU share is deducted from central government’s share. —
tax and assessed income tax 42.5:42.5:15, corporation tax and non-assessed 6Respective percentage share of central and state government for 2009:
taxes on earnings 50:50:-, withholding tax on interest income 44:44:12. — 21.3:78.7. — 7 For the breakdown, see Table IX. 7. 
3After deducting child benefit and subsidies for supplementary private pen-
56*IX Public finances in Germany

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
May 2010
IX Public finances in Germany
  
7 Central, state and local government: individual taxes   
  
€ million
Central government taxes  1 State government taxes  1 Local government taxes
Tax on of which
the acqui-
Soli- Motor Motor sition of Inher- Local Real
Period Energy Tobacco darity Insurance vehicle Electri- Spirits vehicle land and itance business property
tax tax surcharge tax tax  2 city tax tax Other tax  2 buildings tax Other  3 Total tax taxes
2003 43,188 14,094 10,280 8,870 . 6,531 2,204 1,442 7,336 4,800 3,373 3,205 34,477 24,139 9,658
2004 41,782 13,630 10,108 8,751 . 6,597 2,195 1,492 7,740 4,646 4,284 3,105 38,982 28,373 9,939
2005 40,101 14,273 10,315 8,750 . 6,462 2,142 1,465 8,674 4,791 4,097 3,018 42,941 32,129 10,247
2006 39,916 14,387 11,277 8,775 . 6,273 2,160 1,428 8,937 6,125 3,763 2,904 49,319 38,370 10,3992007 38,955 14,254 12,349 10,331 . 6,355 1,959 1,488 8,898 6,952 4,203 2,783 51,401 40,116 10,713
2008 39,248 13,574 13,146 10,478 . 6,261 2,126 1,470 8,842 5,728 4,771 2,596 52,468 41,037 10,807
2009 39,822 13,366 11,927 10,548 3,803 6,278 2,101 1,473 4,398 4,857 4,550 2,571 ... ... ...
2008          Q1 4,668 2,547 3,192 4,540 . 1,547 626 394 2,590 1,676 1,087 761 12,956 10,330 2,444
         Q2 9,570 3,267 3,502 1,950 . 1,594 479 338 2,290 1,461 1,301 624 13,813 10,850 2,815
         Q3 9,807 3,649 3,059 2,078 . 1,464 488 343 2,050 1,398 1,361 632 13,634 10,281 3,184         Q4 15,203 4,111 3,392 1,911 . 1,655 533 396 1,912 1,193 1,022 579 12,065 9,577 2,364
2009          Q1 4,777 2,365 3,191 4,502 . 1,560 594 372 2,284 1,165 1,144 758 12,021 9,370 2,452
         Q2 10,059 3,560 3,057 1,999 . 1,569 478 363 2,114 1,131 1,334 608 11,447 8,433 2,860         Q3 9,883 3,499 2,638 2,096 1,907 1,582 488 335 0 1,297 1,123 604 10,216 6,800 3,233         Q4 15,103 3,942 3,040 1,952 1,897 1,567 542 402 − 1,264 950 601 ... ... ...
2010          Q1 4,446 2,462 2,856 4,496 2,345 1,498 526 372 − 1,229 918 667 ... ... ...
2009          Mar 2,982 1,046 1,382 645 . 538 139 91 738 399 393 200 . . .2010          Mar 2,779 1,266 1,263 744 810 641 130 93 − 453 359 192 . . .
Source: Federal Ministry of Finance, Federal Statistical Office and Bundes- ment. Postings to state government shown thereafter relate to the booki ng
bank calculations. — 1For the sum total, see Table IX. 6. — 2As of of cash flows. — 3 Notably betting, lottery and beer tax.   
1 July 2009, motor vehicle tax revenue is attributable to central govern-
 
 
8 German pension insurance scheme: budgetary development and assets *
  
€ million
Revenue  1 Expenditure  1 Assets  4 
of which of which
Equity
Payments interests, Memo
from Pen- mort- item
central sioners’ gages Adminis-
Contri- govern- Pension health Deficit / and other Real trative
Period Total butions  2 ment Total payments insurance  3 surplus Total Deposits  5 Securities loans  6 estate assets
2003 229,371 156,510 71,447 231,362 196,038 15,178 − 1,991 7,641 5,017 816 1,682 126 4,862
2004 7 231,684 156,535 71,680 233,011 198,587 14,258 − 1,327 5,158 4,980 19 41 118 4,834
2005 229,428 156,264 71,917 233,357 199,873 13,437 − 3,929 1,976 1,794 16 42 123 4,8882006 241,231 168,083 71,773 233,668 200,459 13,053 + 7,563 10,047 9,777 115 46 109 4,9122007 236,642 162,225 72,928 235,459 201,642 13,665 + 1,183 12,196 11,270 765 46 115 4,8192008 242,770 167,611 73,381 238,995 204,071 14,051 + 3,775 16,531 16,313 36 56 126 4,6452009
p 244,140 169,178 73,842 244,201 208,751 14,422 − 61 16,812 16,608 23 61 120 4,582
2008          Q1 57,611 39,028 18,241 58,952 50,795 3,473 − 1,341 10,730 9,459 1,095 46 130 4,792
         Q2 60,574 41,958 18,241 59,346 50,714 3,482 + 1,228 11,923 10,267 1,466 61 128 4,704
         Q3 59,525 40,769 18,215 60,124 51,418 3,539 − 599 11,727 10,421 1,128 50 127 4,690         Q4 64,495 45,851 18,231 60,100 51,301 3,548 + 4,395 16,531 16,313 36 56 126 4,645
2009          Q1 58,681 39,891 18,500 60,105 51,554 3,633 − 1,424 14,902 14,699 15 56 132 4,618
         Q2 60,812 42,140 18,384 60,263 51,410 3,626 + 549 15,280 15,082 15 59 124 4,593         Q3 59,783 41,142 18,364 61,841 52,869 3,580 − 2,058 13,647 13,428 40 60 119 4,585         Q4
p 64,864 46,005 18,594 61,993 52,917 3,583 + 2,871 16,812 16,608 23 61 120 4,582
2010          Q1 p 59,761 40,601 18,917 61,861 53,059 3,582 − 2,100 14,922 14,717 20 64 120 4,490
Source: Federal Ministry of Labour and Social Affairs and German pension and proceeds. — 2Including contributions for recipients of government
insurance scheme. — *Excluding the German pension insurance scheme for cash benefits. — 3Including long-term care insurance for pensioners until
the mining, railway and maritime industries. — 1The annual figures do not 2004 Q1. — 4Largely corresponds to the sustainability reserves. End of year
tally with the sum of the quarterly figures, as the latter are all provisional. In- or quarter. — 5Including cash. — 6Excluding loans to other social security
cluding financial compensation payments. Excluding investment spending funds. — 7 Revenue includes proceeds from the disposal of equity interests. 
57*IX Public finances in Germany

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
E U R O S Y S T E M
Monthly Report
May 2010
IX Public finances in Germany
 
9 Federal Employment Agency: budgetary development
 
 
€ million
Revenue Expenditure
Grant or
of which of which working
capital
of which of which loansfrom
Unemploy- Measures central
Contri- ment sup- Western Eastern Job promo- Western Eastern financed Deficit / govern-
Period Total  
1 butions Levies  2 Total  3 port 4,5 Germany Germany tion  5,6 Germany Germany by levies  7 surplus ment
2003 50,635 47,337 2,081 56,850 29,735 21,528 8,207 19,155 10,564 8,591 1,948 − 6,215 6,215
2004 50,314 47,211 1,674 54,490 29,746 21,821 7,925 16,843 9,831 7,011 1,641 − 4,176 4,175
2005 52,692 46,989 1,436 53,089 27,654 20,332 7,322 11,590 7,421 4,169 1,450 − 397 397
2006 55,384 51,176 1,123 44,162 23,249 17,348 5,901 9,259 6,185 3,074 1,089 + 11,221 0
2007 42,838 32,264 971 36,196 17,356 13,075 4,282 8,370 5,748 2,623 949 + 6,643 −2008 38,289 26,452 974 39,407 14,283 10,652 3,631 8,712 6,222 2,490 920 − 1,118 −2009 34,254 22,046 1,000 48,057 20,866 16,534 4,332 11,595 8,794 2,801 1,946 − 13,803 −
2007          Q1 9,932 7,738 78 10,044 5,321 3,971 1,350 2,032 1,370 662 408 − 113 −
         Q2 10,837 7,910 303 9,383 4,598 3,440 1,157 2,089 1,423 666 259 + 1,454 −         Q3 10,366 7,765 232 8,357 3,910 2,979 931 1,985 1,363 622 160 + 2,010 −         Q4 11,703 8,851 357 8,412 3,528 2,684 843 2,264 1,591 674 122 + 3,292 −
2008          Q1 8,714 5,955 83 11,295 4,299 3,183 1,116 2,088 1,473 615 327 − 2,581 −
         Q2 9,690 6,931 211 10,367 3,739 2,761 978 2,182 1,556 626 255 − 677 −         Q3 9,330 6,317 272 8,648 3,245 2,442 804 2,053 1,462 592 149 + 683 −         Q4 10,555 7,248 409 9,098 3,001 2,267 733 2,389 1,731 657 189 + 1,458 −
2009          Q1 6,283 5,248 192 10,396 4,723 3,556 1,167 2,318 1,688 630 480 − 4,113 −
         Q2 6,490 5,421 261 12,391 5,563 4,376 1,187 2,893 2,193 700 491 − 5,901 −         Q3 6,853 5,316 250 12,480 5,465 4,439 1,026 3,026 2,325 701 630 − 5,626 −         Q4 14,627 6,061 296 12,790 5,115 4,163 951 3,358 2,588 770 345 + 1,837 −
2010          Q1 10,020 5,196 714 11,681 6,475 5,112 1,362 2,957 2,263 694 208 − 1,661 −
Source: Federal Employment Agency. — 1Excluding central government schemes. 6Vocational training, measures to encourage job take-up, rehabili-
liquidity assistance. — 2Levies to promote winter construction and to pay in- tation, job creation measures, subsidies granted to Personnel Service Agen-
solvency compensation to employees. — 3From 2005, including a compen- cies, compensation top-up payments and business start-up grants. —
satory amount or a reintegration payment to central government. — 4Un- 7Promotion of winter construction and insolvency compensation for em-
employment benefit and short-time working benefit. — 5Including contri- ployees. 
butions to the statutory health, pension and long-term care insurance
 
 
10 Statutory health insurance scheme: budgetary development
 
 
€ million
Revenue  1 Expenditure  1 
of which of which
Central Thera- Adminis-
govern- peutical trative
Contri- ment Hospital Pharma- Medical Dental treatment Sickness expend- Deficit /
Period Total butions  2 funds  3 Total treatment ceuticals treatment treatment  4 and aids benefits iture  5 surplus
2003 141,654 138,383 . 145,095 46,800 24,218 24,301 11,819 9,409 6,973 8,206 − 3,441
2004 144,279 140,120 1,000 140,260 47,594 21,811 22,955 11,263 8,281 6,367 8,196 + 4,020
2005 145,742 140,250 2,500 144,071 48,959 25,358 23,096 9,928 8,284 5,868 8,303 + 1,671
2006 149,929 142,183 4,200 148,297 50,327 25,835 23,896 10,364 8,303 5,708 8,319 + 1,6322007 156,058 149,964 2,500 154,314 50,850 27,791 24,788 10,687 8,692 6,017 8,472 + 1,7442008 162,763 156,130 2,500 161,334 52,623 29,145 25,889 10,926 9,095 6,583 8,680 + 1,4292009
p 169,430 158,607 7,200 170,825 56,105 30,742 27,782 11,242 9,532 7,241 8,989 − 1,396
2007          Q1 36,437 35,693 − 37,147 12,948 6,687 6,123 2,670 1,918 1,525 1,879 − 710
         Q2 39,316 37,306 1,250 38,299 12,893 6,862 6,163 2,697 2,160 1,510 1,930 + 1,017
         Q3 37,939 37,138 − 38,068 12,750 6,897 6,062 2,552 2,199 1,451 1,987 − 129         Q4 41,987 39,829 1,250 40,384 12,363 7,313 6,481 2,797 2,378 1,527 2,618 + 1,602
2008          Q1 37,937 37,136 − 39,010 13,410 7,084 6,409 2,711 2,011 1,643 1,898 − 1,073
         Q2 40,361 38,491 1,250 40,232 13,387 7,339 6,434 2,728 2,292 1,644 2,021 + 129         Q3 39,185 38,338 − 39,733 13,012 7,215 6,415 2,660 2,271 1,602 2,045 − 548         Q4 44,387 41,838 1,250 42,165 12,913 7,588 6,812 2,894 2,461 1,672 2,704 + 2,222
2009          Q1 42,502 39,324 2,575 41,432 14,154 7,463 6,969 2,797 2,095 1,822 1,977 + 1,069
         Q2 42,540 40,464 1,377 42,400 14,092 7,652 6,810 2,857 2,392 1,779 2,083 + 140         Q3 42,752 38,827 3,002 42,548 13,967 7,574 6,981 2,684 2,437 1,746 2,324 + 204         Q4 41,635 39,992 246 44,445 13,892 8,052 7,021 2,904 2,607 1,895 2,604 − 2,809
Source: Federal Ministry of Health. — 1The final annual figures do not tally employment. — 3Federal grant and liquidity assistance. — 4Including den-
with the sum of the quarterly figures, as the latter are all provisional. Ex- tures. — 5Net, ie after deducting reimbursements for expenses for levying
cluding revenue and expenditure as part of the risk structure compensation contributions incurred by other social insurance funds. Including admin is-
scheme. — 2Including contributions from subsidised low-paid part-time trative expenditure on disease management programmes. 
58*IX Public finances in Germany

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
May 2010
IX Public finances in Germany
 
11 Statutory long-term care insurance scheme: budgetary development
 
 
€ million
Revenue  1 Expenditure  1 
of which
Contributions to
of which Non-cash In-patient Nursing pension insur- Administrative Deficit /
Period Total Contributions  2 Total care benefits care benefit ance scheme  3 expenditure surplus
2003 16,844 16,665 17,468 2,361 8,183 4,090 951 853 − 624
2004 16,817 16,654 17,605 2,365 8,349 4,049 925 851 − 788
2005 17,526 17,385 17,891 2,409 8,516 4,050 890 875 − 366
2006 17,749 17,611 18,064 2,437 8,671 4,017 862 886 − 3152007 18,036 17,858 18,385 2,475 8,831 4,050 861 896 − 350
2008 19,785 19,608 19,163 2,605 9,054 4,225 868 941 + 6222009
p 21,314 21,189 20,327 2,754 9,288 4,467 877 996 + 987
2007          Q1 4,301 4,265 4,591 624 2,191 1,014 212 238 − 290
         Q2 4,469 4,432 4,528 595 2,192 993 213 231 − 59
         Q3 4,440 4,403 4,617 623 2,226 1,012 216 213 − 177         Q4 4,813 4,761 4,608 626 2,218 1,015 217 209 + 204
2008          Q1 4,421 4,381 4,681 641 2,229 1,022 210 255 − 261
         Q2 4,597 4,563 4,703 634 2,251 1,025 221 230 − 106         Q3 5,167 5,133 4,872 665 2,280 1,089 218 234 + 295         Q4 5,583 5,535 4,884 662 2,293 1,103 219 220 + 698
2009          Q1 5,110 5,082 4,970 676 2,284 1,104 215 274 + 139
         Q2 5,275 5,253 4,977 662 2,308 1,100 217 248 + 298         Q3 5,279 5,239 5,157 706 2,338 1,115 219 246 + 122         Q4 5,650 5,614 5,223 710 2,358 1,148 225 228 + 427
Source: Federal Ministry of Health. — 1The final annual figures do not tally 2Since 2005 including special contributions for childless persons (0.25% of
with the sum of the quarterly figures, as the latter are all provisional. — income subject to insurance contributions). — 3 For non-professional carers. 
 
 
12 Central government: borrowing in 13 Central, state and local government: debt by
the market creditor *
 
€ million € million
Total new borrowing  1 of which of which Banking system Domestic non-banks
Change Change
in money in money Social
market market End of year Bundes- Credit security Foreign
Period Gross  2 Net loans deposits or quarter Total bank institutions funds Other  1 creditors  pe 
2003 + 227,483 + 42,270 + 1,236 + 7,218 2003 1,358,137 4,440 530,700 341 301,956 520,700
2004 + 227,441 + 44,410 + 1,844 + 802 2004 1,430,582 4,440 544,200 430 306,912 574,600
2005 + 224,922 + 35,479 + 4,511 + 6,041 2005 1,489,029 4,440 518,500 488 312,201 653,400
2006 + 221,873 + 32,656 + 3,258 + 6,308 2006 1,533,697 4,440 496,900 480 329,177 702,7002007 + 214,995 + 6,996 + 1,086 − 4,900 2007 1,540,381 4,440 457,000 476 312,265 766,200
2008 + 233,356 + 26,208 + 6,888 + 9,036 2008 1,564,590 4,440 435,700 510 323,240 800,7002009 + 312,729 + 66,821 − 8,184 + 106 2009
p 1,657,242 4,440 442,100 516 331,486 878,700
2007          Q1 + 68,285 + 4,600 + 12,649 − 11,200 2007          Q1 1,538,621 4,440 513,900 480 320,701 699,100
         Q2 + 54,415 + 22,020 + 5,792 + 27,209          Q2 1,556,684 4,440 504,600 480 319,864 727,300
         Q3 + 51,413 − 20,291 − 4,783 − 27,450          Q3 1,535,253 4,440 489,000 480 307,833 733,500         Q4 + 40,882 + 667 − 12,571 + 6,541          Q4 1,540,381 4,440 457,000 476 312,265 766,200
2008          Q1 + 69,510 + 10,443 + 12,306 − 705 2008          Q1 1,541,759 4,440 467,300 475 305,344 764,200
         Q2 + 52,618 + 7,478 + 4,872 + 10,289          Q2 1,554,151 4,440 462,200 506 291,906 795,100
         Q3 + 53,933 − 2,231 − 10,736 − 12,088          Q3 1,547,336 4,440 431,900 506 298,490 812,000         Q4 + 57,296 + 10,519 + 447 + 11,541          Q4 1,564,590 4,440 435,700 510 323,240 800,700
2009          Q1 + 66,560 + 20,334 − 2,256 − 7,856 2009          Q1 1,594,621 4,440 426,500 514 324,567 838,600
         Q2 + 96,270 + 46,283 − 2,791 + 26,434          Q2 1,646,307 4,440 430,400 520 327,047 883,900
         Q3 + 82,451 + 1,343 + 1,268 − 15,901          Q3 1,651,955 4,440 439,600 520 322,995 884,400         Q4 + 67,448 − 1,139 − 4,406 − 2,572          Q4
p 1,657,242 4,440 442,100 516 331,486 878,700
Source:  Federal  Republic  of  Germany  -  Finance Source: Bundesbank calculations based on data from the Federal Statistical 
Agency. — 1 Including the Financial  Market  Stabil- Office. — * Excluding direct intergovernmental borrowing. — 1 Calculated 
isation Fund (SoFFin) and the Investment and Repay- as a residual. ment Fund. — 2 After deducting repurchases. 
59*IX Public finances in Germany

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
E U R O S Y S T E M
Monthly Report
May 2010
IX Public finances in Germany
 
14 Central, state and local government: debt by category *
 
 
€ million
Loans from non-banks Old debt
Direct
Treasury Five-year lending
discount Federal Federal Federal by credit Social Equal-
End of year paper Treasury notes savings bonds institu- security isationor quarter Total (Bubills)  
1 notes  2,3 (Bobls)  2 notes (Bunds)  2 Day-bond tions  4 funds Other  4 claims  5 Other  5,6 
Central, state and local government
2004 1,430,582 35,722 279,796 168,958 10,817 495,547 . 379,984 430 53,672 5,572 84
2005 1,489,029 36,945 310,044 174,423 11,055 521,801 . 366,978 488 62,765 4,443 882006 1,533,697 37,834 320,288 179,940 10,199 552,028 . 356,514 480 71,889 4,443 822007 1,540,381 39,510 329,108 177,394 10,287 574,512 . 329,588 476 74,988 4,443 76
2008          Q3 1,547,336 42,816 332,792 177,594 9,415 579,969 701 326,582 506 72,445 4,443 74
         Q4 1,564,590 44,870 337,261 172,037 9,649 584,144 3,174 325,648 510 82,781 4,443 73
2009          Q1 1,594,621 70,315 341,169 177,859 9,436 586,340 3,413 320,494 514 80,564 4,443 74
         Q2 1,646,307 99,170 353,904 174,146 9,490 600,012 3,185 310,665 520 90,699 4,443 73
         Q3 1,651,955 110,126 346,833 181,326 9,450 587,608 2,746 315,889 520 92,945 4,443 72         Q4
p 1,657,242 106,220 361,475 174,219 9,471 594,999 2,495 304,304 516 99,031 4,442 71
Central government 7,8,9,10,11
2004 812,123 34,440 95,638 159,272 10,817 460,380 . 34,835 333 10,751 5,572 83
2005 886,254 36,098 108,899 174,371 11,055 510,866 . 29,318 408 10,710 4,443 872006 918,911 37,798 103,624 179,889 10,199 541,404 . 30,030 408 11,036 4,443 822007 939,988 37,385 102,083 177,394 10,287 574,156 . 22,829 408 10,928 4,443 75
2008          Q3 955,678 40,316 105,361 177,594 9,415 579,713 701 26,980 438 10,644 4,443 74
         Q4 966,197 40,795 105,684 172,037 9,649 583,930 3,174 35,291 448 10,674 4,443 72
2009          Q1 986,530 64,653 104,571 177,859 9,436 586,225 3,413 24,804 448 10,605 4,443 74
         Q2 1,032,813 95,758 113,060 174,146 9,490 599,898 3,185 21,634 448 10,680 4,443 72
         Q3 1,034,156 107,415 107,171 181,326 9,450 587,493 2,746 22,877 448 10,718 4,443 71         Q4 1,033,017 104,409 113,637 174,219 9,471 594,780 2,495 18,347 448 10,700 4,442 70
State government
2004 448,672 1,282 179,620 .... 228,644 3 39,122 . 1
2005 471,375 847 201,146 .... 221,163 3 48,216 . 1
2006 481,850 36 216,665 .... 209,270 2 55,876 . 1
2007 484,373 2,125 227,025 .... 194,956 2 60,264 . 1
2008          Q3 478,495 2,500 227,430 .... 190,560 3 58,001 . 1
         Q4 483,875 4,075 231,577 .... 179,978 3 68,241 . 1
2009          Q1 492,771 5,661 236,599 .... 184,415 6 66,090 . 1
         Q2 497,725 3,411 240,844 .... 177,307 12 76,149 . 1
         Q3 501,092 2,711 239,661 .... 180,349 12 78,358 . 1
         Q4 p 505,965 1,811 247,838 .... 171,846 8 84,461 . 1
Local government 12
2004 112,538 . − . . 812 . 108,231 86 3,410 . .
2005 116,033 . − . . 466 . 111,889 77 3,601 . .2006 118,380 . − . . 256 . 113,265 70 4,789 . .2007 115,920 . − . . 256 . 111,803 66 3,796 . .
2008          Q3 113,163 . − . . 256 . 109,042 65 3,800 . .
         Q4 114,518 . − . . 214 . 110,379 60 3,866 . .
2009          Q1 115,320 . − . . 114 . 111,276 60 3,870 . .
         Q2 115,769 . − . . 114 . 111,725 60 3,870 . .
         Q3 116,707 . − . . 114 . 112,663 60 3,870 . .         Q4
p 118,260 . − . . 219 . 114,111 60 3,870 . .
Special funds 7,8,9,13
2004 57,250 − 4,538 9,685 . 34,355 . 8,274 8 389 . .
2005 15,367 . − 51 . 10,469 . 4,609 − 238 . .2006 14,556 . − 51 . 10,368 . 3,950 − 188 . .2007 100 . − − . 100 . − − − . .
2008          Q3 − . − − . − . − − − . .
         Q4 − . − − . − . − − − . .
2009          Q1 − . − − . − . − − − . .
         Q2 − . − − . − . − − − . .
         Q3 − . − − . − . − − − . .         Q4 − . − − . − . − − − . .
Source: Bundesbank calculations based on data from the Federal Statistical trast to the capital market statistics, the debt incurred through the joi nt issu-
Office. — *Excluding direct intergovernmental borrowing. — 1Including ance of Federal securities is recorded here under central government and its
Treasury financing paper. — 2Excluding issuers’ holdings of their own secur- special funds in accordance with the agreed allocation ratios. — 8On 1
ities. — 3Treasury notes issued by state government include long-term January 2005 central government assumed joint responsibility for the debts
notes. — 4Mainly loans against borrowers’ notes and cash advances. In- of the German Unity Fund. From that date on, the aforementioned special
cluding loans raised abroad. Other loans from non-banks, including loans fund is recorded under central government. — 9On 1 July 2007 central
from public supplementary pension funds and liabilities arising from the in- government assumed joint responsibility for the debts of the ERP Specia l
vestment assistance levy. — 5Excluding offsets against outstanding Fund. From that date on, the aforementioned special fund is recorded
claims. — 6Old debt mainly denominated in foreign currency, in accordance under central government. — 10From December 2008, including debt of
with the London Debts Agreement, old liabilities arising from housing con- the Financial Market Stabilisation Fund (SoFFin). — 11From March 2009, in-
struction and liabilities arising from housing construction by the former cluding debt of the Investment and Repayment Fund. — 12Including debt
GDR’s armed forces and from housing construction in connection with the of municipal special purpose associations. Data other than year-end figures
return of the troops of the former USSR stationed in eastern Germany to have been estimated. — 13ERP Special Fund (up to the end of June 2007),
their home country; excluding debt securities in own portfolios. — 7In con- German Unity Fund (up to the end of 2004) and Indemnification Fund. 
60*IX Public finances in Germany

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
May 2010
X Economic conditions in Germany
  
1 Origin and use of domestic product, distribution of national income
  
  
  
  2008   2009   2010
  2007   2008   2009   2007   2008   2009   Q3   Q4   Q1   Q2   Q3   Q4   Q1
Item Index 2000=100 Annual percentage change
At  constant  prices,  chained
  I Origin of domestic product
Production sector
(excluding construction) 114.0 114.2 94.7 1.8 0.2 − 17.1 0.6 − 8.5 − 20.3 − 23.2 − 16.4 − 7.5 6.8
Construction 79.2 81.9 80.7 0.8 3.5 − 1.5 3.2 0.7 − 5.9 − 2.9 0.9 1.7 − 3.7
Wholesale/retail trade, hotel andrestaurant services, transportand storage  
1 112.5 114.3 107.7 2.9 1.5 − 5.8 1.6 − 1.5 − 6.6 − 7.5 − 5.7 − 3.3 − 0.2
Financing, renting and business
services  2 115.6 117.5 115.6 4.8 1.6 − 1.6 1.4 0.2 − 1.3 − 2.2 − 2.0 − 0.9 0.9
Public and private services  3 106.6 108.6 110.1 2.1 1.9 1.4 2.1 2.0 0.7 1.1 1.4 2.2 2.3
Gross value added 110.5 112.0 105.8 2.9 1.4 − 5.5 1.5 − 2.0 − 6.9 − 7.9 − 5.3 − 2.0 2.2
Gross domestic product  4 108.9 110.3 104.8 2.5 1.3 − 4.9 1.4 − 1.7 − 6.4 − 7.0 − 4.7 − 1.5 1.7
 II Use of domestic product
Private consumption  5 102.6 102.9 102.9 − 0.3 0.4 − 0.1 0.4 − 0.6 − 0.3 0.4 − 0.5 − 0.0 − 1.2
Government consumption 104.8 107.0 110.6 1.7 2.1 3.4 2.2 2.3 3.4 3.4 4.0 2.7 2.4
Machinery and equipment 123.2 127.3 101.1 11.0 3.3 − 20.5 5.8 − 3.0 − 20.1 − 23.4 − 20.8 − 17.9 0.8
Premises 86.2 88.4 87.4 0.0 2.6 − 1.1 2.7 0.3 − 5.7 − 3.0 1.2 2.5 − 3.1
Other investment  6 135.9 143.2 150.3 6.5 5.3 4.9 5.6 4.7 4.4 4.5 5.3 5.5 6.0
Changes in inventories  7  8 . . . 0.0 0.4 − 0.9 0.3 1.7 0.0 − 1.2 − 0.8 − 1.5 0.5
Domestic use 101.1 102.9 100.7 1.0 1.7 − 2.1 1.8 1.7 − 1.6 − 2.7 − 1.8 − 2.4 0.1Net exports  
8 . . . 1.5 − 0.3 − 2.9 − 0.4 − 3.3 − 5.0 − 4.4 − 3.1 0.8 1.6
Exports 164.0 168.7 144.3 7.5 2.9 − 14.5 4.2 − 5.7 − 16.9 − 20.1 − 15.5 − 4.8 7.5
Imports 141.1 147.1 133.1 4.8 4.3 − 9.5 5.8 1.2 − 8.0 − 12.9 − 10.1 − 7.1 4.2
Gross domestic product  4 108.9 110.3 104.8 2.5 1.3 − 4.9 1.4 − 1.7 − 6.4 − 7.0 − 4.7 − 1.5 1.7
At  current  prices  (€ billion)
III Use of domestic product
Private consumption  5 1,375.4 1,409.7 1,410.8 1.4 2.5 0.1 3.0 0.8 − 0.3 0.5 − 0.7 0.7 0.7
Government consumption 435.6 451.8 473.5 2.2 3.7 4.8 3.8 3.6 5.3 4.7 5.9 3.5 3.6Machinery and equipment 196.5 201.8 158.2 10.2 2.7 − 21.6 5.3 − 3.5 − 21.1 − 24.4 − 21.9 − 19.1 − 0.5
Premises 231.5 245.0 244.4 6.3 5.8 − 0.2 6.4 3.4 − 3.5 − 2.1 1.1 3.0 − 2.8
Other investment  
6 27.5 27.9 27.3 3.4 1.6 − 2.2 1.6 0.7 − 2.5 − 2.3 − 2.3 − 1.7 0.8
Changes in inventories  7 − 10.0 3.9 − 18.2 . . . . . . . . . .
Domestic use 2,256.5 2,340.1 2,296.0 2.9 3.7 − 1.9 4.3 3.0 − 1.1 − 2.5 − 1.7 − 2.1 1.5Net exports 171.7 155.7 113.1 . . . . . . . . . .
Exports 1,139.5 1,179.4 979.3 8.0 3.5 − 17.0 5.3 − 5.5 − 19.0 − 23.1 − 18.5 − 6.5 8.9Imports 967.8 1,023.7 866.2 4.9 5.8 − 15.4 9.4 − 0.1 − 13.0 − 19.1 − 17.6 − 11.5 5.3
Gross domestic product  
4 2,428.2 2,495.8 2,409.1 4.4 2.8 − 3.5 2.8 0.2 − 5.0 − 5.8 − 2.9 − 0.3 3.2
IV Prices (2000 = 100)
Private consumption 110.5 112.8 113.0 1.8 2.1 0.2 2.6 1.3 0.0 0.1 − 0.2 0.7 1.9Gross domestic product 108.1 109.8 111.4 1.9 1.5 1.5 1.4 2.0 1.6 1.3 1.9 1.2 1.4Terms of trade 100.2 99.4 103.2 0.4 − 0.8 3.8 − 2.2 1.6 3.1 3.6 5.2 3.1 0.2
V Distribution of national income
Compensation of employees 1,180.9 1,225.1 1,223.3 2.8 3.7 − 0.1 4.1 3.5 1.1 − 0.0 − 0.6 − 0.9 0.9Entrepreneurial and propertyincome 659.4 661.0 583.2 4.8 0.2 − 11.8 − 0.2 − 9.8 − 19.5 − 20.0 − 7.5 1.5 15.2
National income 1,840.3 1,886.0 1,806.6 3.5 2.5 − 4.2 2.5 − 0.9 − 6.8 − 7.1 − 3.1 − 0.2 5.6
Memo item: Gross national
income 2,477.7 2,537.0 2,444.0 4.4 2.4 − 3.7 2.7 − 0.4 − 5.3 − 5.7 − 3.2 − 0.5 3.1
Source: Federal Statistical Office; figures computed in May 2010. — 1Includ- ucts). — 5Including non-profit institutions serving households. — 6Intangi-
ing communication services. — 2Financial intermediation, real estate activi- ble fixed asset formation (inter alia, computer software and entertainment,
ties, renting and business services. — 3Including care-at-home services. — literary or artistic originals) and cultivated assets. — 7Including net increase
4Gross value added plus taxes on products (netted with subsidies on prod- in valuables. — 8 Contribution of growth to GDP. 
61*X Economic conditions in Germany

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
E U R O S Y S T E M
Monthly Report
May 2010
 X Economic conditions in Germany
 
2 Output in the production sector  * 
 
 
Adjusted for working-day variations  o 
of which
Industry
of which:   by main industrial grouping of which:   by economic sector
Manu-
Manu- facture of
facture of computers,
Motor basic metals electronic
and vehicles, and optical
Production Inter- Non- fabricated products Machinery trailers
sector, Construc- mediate Capital Durable durable metal and and semi- and electrical
total tion Energy Total goods goods goods goods products equipment equipment trailers
2005=100  
  
% of total  1 100.00 5.56 8.76 85.69 33.96 35.37 2.78 13.58 12.15 10.82 12.48 12.34
Period
2005 99.7 99.5 100.1 99.6 99.7 99.6 99.7 99.6 99.6 99.8 99.5 99.6
2006 105.4 105.8 101.0 105.8 107.1 106.0 107.3 101.7 107.3 112.9 107.5 102.62007 111.6 108.9 98.2 113.1 114.6 114.9 108.4 105.8 114.0 124.4 119.4 109.72008 111.5 108.3 95.6 113.4 114.2 116.8 104.0 104.4 114.4 128.8 124.5 104.52009 93.8 108.2 90.1 93.2 93.2 90.8 87.6 100.7 87.4 100.8 92.3 82.0
2008          July 113.2 122.7 89.0 115.0 119.2 116.7 95.0 104.3 118.5 131.2 126.5 104.9
         Aug 106.0 117.5 85.7 107.3 113.9 103.8 90.0 103.5 112.8 125.9 113.7 84.2         Sep 117.6 125.2 89.6 120.0 119.2 125.8 115.7 107.7 119.9 135.9 129.4 113.9
         Oct 115.7 123.2 98.0 117.1 117.4 119.2 113.3 111.6 117.6 133.0 125.9 104.4
         Nov 112.1 116.9 97.5 113.3 108.8 119.6 111.8 108.7 109.4 133.5 126.5 100.9         Dec 95.5 84.9 99.8 95.7 82.6 107.6 84.7 99.6 80.1 109.7 136.3 61.6
2009          Jan 86.8 58.9 105.0 86.7 87.3 81.3 85.3 99.8 83.0 96.2 87.4 67.5
         Feb 85.7 67.5 92.2 86.3 86.6 82.8 85.1 95.0 82.0 96.4 90.2 65.9         Mar 96.4 104.3 91.7 96.3 93.5 97.1 92.8 102.1 87.1 103.9 104.1 84.5
         Apr 88.5 117.6 82.2 87.3 87.1 83.3 83.6 98.7 80.8 91.3 87.0 70.3
         May 91.4 117.7 80.9 90.8 90.5 88.9 83.3 98.0 83.7 93.7 89.3 83.5         June 96.0 123.8 85.2 95.3 94.6 95.7 83.9 98.4 88.4 98.6 95.2 91.1
         July 94.0 126.2 85.8 92.7 95.4 88.5 80.1 99.7 87.6 99.1 86.1 83.6
         Aug 88.4 122.0 81.8 86.9 92.6 78.0 74.4 98.2 84.8 96.2 78.7 65.1         Sep 102.8 129.1 84.5 102.9 101.9 103.0 99.4 105.7 95.8 109.1 102.5 103.2
         Oct 101.5 126.1 93.6 100.7 103.1 96.4 98.4 106.5 96.7 111.9 90.2 97.8
         Nov 103.2 121.2 95.7 102.8 103.0 100.7 102.6 107.7 99.2 113.8 93.5 99.8         Dec 90.4 83.9 103.0 89.6 82.7 93.6 82.7 98.1 79.3 99.6 103.4 71.3
2010          Jan  
x 88.9 49.4 110.4 89.2 94.3 81.1 88.7 97.4 87.2 98.8 77.5 82.3
         Feb  x 90.4 55.4 99.8 91.8 94.9 88.2 91.4 93.8 89.9 102.4 82.3 91.7
         Mar  x p 104.7 107.0 98.0 105.3 107.9 103.7 98.8 104.4 103.6 114.1 100.6 108.4
 
Annual percentage change  
  
2005 + 3.0 − 5.4 + 0.4 + 3.8 + 3.0 + 5.0 + 0.1 + 3.9 + 1.4 + 8.8 + 5.1 + 4.1
2006 + 5.7 + 6.3 + 0.9 + 6.2 + 7.4 + 6.4 + 7.6 + 2.1 + 7.7 + 13.1 + 8.0 + 3.02007 + 5.9 + 2.9 − 2.8 + 6.9 + 7.0 + 8.4 + 1.0 + 4.0 + 6.2 + 10.2 + 11.1 + 6.9
2008 − 0.1 − 0.6 − 2.6 + 0.3 − 0.3 + 1.7 − 4.1 − 1.3 + 0.4 + 3.5 + 4.3 − 4.7
2009 − 15.9 − 0.1 − 5.8 − 17.8 − 18.4 − 22.3 − 15.8 − 3.5 − 23.6 − 21.7 − 25.9 − 21.5
 
2008          July − 0.1 − 2.9 − 2.7 + 0.3 + 1.3 + 0.3 − 6.1 − 1.0 + 1.8 + 4.1 + 3.6 − 6.6
         Aug + 1.4 + 0.7 − 5.8 + 2.1 + 2.7 + 3.7 − 2.9 − 2.5 + 3.3 + 6.3 + 5.6 + 0.7         Sep − 1.5 − 1.4 − 4.4 − 1.2 − 1.8 + 0.5 − 5.8 − 3.9 − 0.5 − 0.4 − 0.2 − 6.6
         Oct − 3.7 − 2.4 − 5.0 − 3.6 − 3.7 − 3.9 − 6.6 − 1.8 − 3.2 − 2.7 − 1.0 − 12.4
         Nov − 7.2 − 1.1 − 9.6 − 7.4 − 9.4 − 6.9 − 7.5 − 3.5 − 10.0 − 5.1 − 2.5 − 17.3         Dec − 11.4 − 4.0 − 9.0 − 12.0 − 18.9 − 9.6 − 14.9 − 2.0 − 20.6 − 11.5 − 0.5 − 31.6
2009          Jan − 18.4 − 24.9 + 0.2 − 20.0 − 22.3 − 24.2 − 16.3 − 2.9 − 25.8 − 21.6 − 19.4 − 35.3
         Feb − 21.7 − 20.6 − 5.8 − 23.0 − 24.1 − 28.1 − 20.7 − 5.2 − 28.4 − 23.4 − 22.0 − 43.5         Mar − 20.3 + 4.0 − 12.8 − 22.3 − 25.7 − 24.3 − 21.0 − 6.4 − 31.6 − 26.1 − 22.1 − 32.2
         Apr − 22.5 + 6.4 − 17.6 − 24.7 − 26.8 − 30.1 − 21.9 − 2.8 − 32.6 − 28.4 − 29.8 − 39.7
         May − 17.7 + 2.9 − 12.8 − 19.4 − 22.8 − 22.2 − 14.1 − 2.6 − 28.9 − 25.8 − 25.2 − 21.6         June − 17.5 + 2.7 − 2.2 − 19.8 − 21.4 − 23.3 − 21.1 − 4.1 − 28.0 − 26.3 − 29.1 − 20.6
         July − 17.0 + 2.9 − 3.6 − 19.4 − 20.0 − 24.2 − 15.7 − 4.4 − 26.1 − 24.5 − 31.9 − 20.3
         Aug − 16.6 + 3.8 − 4.6 − 19.0 − 18.7 − 24.9 − 17.3 − 5.1 − 24.8 − 23.6 − 30.8 − 22.7         Sep − 12.6 + 3.1 − 5.7 − 14.3 − 14.5 − 18.1 − 14.1 − 1.9 − 20.1 − 19.7 − 20.8 − 9.4
         Oct − 12.3 + 2.4 − 4.5 − 14.0 − 12.2 − 19.1 − 13.2 − 4.6 − 17.8 − 15.9 − 28.4 − 6.3
         Nov − 7.9 + 3.7 − 1.8 − 9.3 − 5.3 − 15.8 − 8.2 − 0.9 − 9.3 − 14.8 − 26.1 − 1.1         Dec − 5.3 − 1.2 + 3.2 − 6.4 + 0.1 − 13.0 − 2.4 − 1.5 − 1.0 − 9.2 − 24.1 + 15.7
2010          Jan  
x + 2.4 − 16.1 + 5.1 + 2.9 + 8.0 − 0.2 + 4.0 − 2.4 + 5.1 + 2.7 − 11.3 + 21.9
         Feb  x + 5.5 − 17.9 + 8.2 + 6.4 + 9.6 + 6.5 + 7.4 − 1.3 + 9.6 + 6.2 − 8.8 + 39.2
         Mar  x p + 8.6 + 2.6 + 6.9 + 9.3 + 15.4 + 6.8 + 6.5 + 2.3 + 18.9 + 9.8 − 3.4 + 28.3
Source of the unadjusted figures: Federal Statistical Office. — *For explan- duction sector in the base year 2005. — xProvisional; adjusted in advance by
atory notes, see Statistical Supplement "Seasonally adjusted business the Federal Statistical Office, by way of estimates, to the results of the
statistics", Tables II.10 to II.12. — oUsing the Census X-12-ARIMA method, Quarterly Production Survey. 
version 0.2.8. — 1Share of gross value added at factor cost of the pro-
62* X Economic conditions in Germany

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
May 2010
 X Economic conditions in Germany
 
3 Orders received by industry *
 
 
Adjusted for working-day variations  o 
of which
of which
Industry Intermediate goods Capital goods Consumer goods Durable goods Non-durable goods
Annual Annual Annual Annual Annual Annual
percent- percent- percent- percent- percent- percent-age age age age age age
Period 2005=100 change 2005=100 change 2005=100 change 2005=100 change 2005=100 change 2005=100 change
total  
  
2005 99.7 + 6.5 99.7 + 5.6 99.7 + 7.3 99.8 + 5.6 99.7 − 1.5 99.8 + 8.1
2006 110.7 + 11.0 113.9 + 14.2 109.4 + 9.7 105.3 + 5.5 108.4 + 8.7 104.3 + 4.52007 123.1 + 11.2 125.2 + 9.9 123.2 + 12.6 111.9 + 6.3 110.3 + 1.8 112.5 + 7.92008 115.5 − 6.2 121.2 − 3.2 112.9 − 8.4 108.1 − 3.4 103.5 − 6.2 109.7 − 2.52009 87.5 − 24.2 89.3 − 26.3 85.2 − 24.5 94.8 − 12.3 88.5 − 14.5 96.9 − 11.7
 
2009          Mar 89.1 − 34.2 86.5 − 37.9 89.5 − 34.0 98.2 − 16.4 88.5 − 24.0 101.4 − 13.8
         Apr 79.8 − 35.5 82.2 − 36.1 77.1 − 37.7 87.5 − 15.2 80.5 − 24.3 89.8 − 12.0
         May 83.0 − 31.6 84.1 − 35.0 81.4 − 31.6 89.1 − 12.3 82.9 − 18.5 91.2 − 10.3         June 89.7 − 26.4 91.7 − 29.5 88.2 − 25.8 90.8 − 13.2 87.7 − 18.1 91.9 − 11.4
         July 90.2 − 23.8 91.7 − 28.5 88.2 − 21.8 97.7 − 12.1 85.7 − 12.4 101.8 − 11.9
         Aug 83.9 − 24.3 87.7 − 25.7 80.1 − 24.4 92.9 − 16.2 76.0 − 20.7 98.6 − 15.1         Sep 95.3 − 16.3 97.6 − 20.0 92.9 − 14.6 101.8 − 9.2 110.6 − 3.7 98.7 − 11.2
         Oct 92.0 − 12.6 98.1 − 14.6 86.9 − 11.8 99.2 − 9.2 101.0 − 8.7 98.6 − 9.4
         Nov 96.8 − 1.5 101.0 − 1.5 93.6 − 1.0 99.7 − 6.4 99.4 − 4.1 99.7 − 7.2         Dec 89.5 + 4.8 87.3 + 4.8 91.4 + 6.3 87.0 − 4.0 86.9 + 5.7 87.0 − 6.9
2010          Jan 97.5 + 20.1 104.8 + 22.9 92.5 + 20.9 98.9 + 3.2 93.5 + 11.4 100.8 + 1.0
         Feb 98.5 + 24.5 103.8 + 32.7 94.6 + 22.7 100.9 + 3.2 94.1 + 19.4 103.2 − 1.1         Mar  
p 113.2 + 27.0 119.2 + 37.8 110.0 + 22.9 107.6 + 9.6 107.1 + 21.0 107.8 + 6.3
from the domestic market  
  
2005 99.7 + 3.4 99.7 + 4.0 99.6 + 2.8 99.7 + 4.2 99.7 − 3.2 99.7 + 6.72006 109.0 + 9.3 113.3 + 13.6 106.4 + 6.8 103.4 + 3.7 111.0 + 11.3 100.9 + 1.22007 118.7 + 8.9 124.7 + 10.1 115.8 + 8.8 107.0 + 3.5 109.6 − 1.3 106.1 + 5.22008 113.1 − 4.7 121.8 − 2.3 107.5 − 7.2 103.9 − 2.9 107.1 − 2.3 102.9 − 3.02009 88.0 − 22.2 89.9 − 26.2 86.5 − 19.5 87.4 − 15.9 89.9 − 16.1 86.6 − 15.8
 
2009          Mar 90.1 − 31.0 85.8 − 38.6 93.7 − 25.5 90.7 − 20.0 88.8 − 25.6 91.3 − 18.0
         Apr 81.4 − 32.6 82.0 − 36.7 81.1 − 31.0 80.3 − 18.8 80.1 − 27.2 80.4 − 15.6
         May 84.2 − 27.7 83.3 − 35.5 85.4 − 21.9 81.6 − 15.8 83.3 − 18.8 81.0 − 14.8         June 87.6 − 26.8 90.9 − 30.8 85.9 − 24.3 82.0 − 18.3 85.7 − 20.6 80.8 − 17.5
         July 94.2 − 19.6 92.7 − 28.9 96.6 − 10.7 87.8 − 16.5 84.9 − 17.0 88.8 − 16.2
         Aug 86.8 − 22.5 89.6 − 26.9 84.1 − 19.0 88.8 − 17.7 81.9 − 14.2 91.0 − 18.8         Sep 93.1 − 18.9 97.6 − 20.8 88.3 − 18.7 98.4 − 10.5 121.9 + 1.1 90.7 − 14.8
         Oct 92.7 − 13.1 101.2 − 11.8 85.8 − 14.2 90.7 − 14.0 103.7 − 9.5 86.4 − 15.8
         Nov 95.1 − 1.9 103.9 + 2.6 88.6 − 3.9 89.6 − 12.8 97.4 − 12.3 87.0 − 13.0         Dec 84.5 + 2.1 87.5 + 7.9 82.8 − 0.6 79.4 − 9.4 82.6 − 3.6 78.3 − 11.2
2010          Jan 96.3 + 12.1 105.0 + 21.5 90.3 + 6.5 88.8 − 1.4 86.8 − 1.6 89.5 − 1.3
         Feb 94.7 + 17.5 103.3 + 32.6 88.3 + 8.5 89.5 + 0.3 86.0 + 7.5 90.6 − 1.7         Mar  
p 109.7 + 21.8 119.8 + 39.6 103.7 + 10.7 95.9 + 5.7 99.7 + 12.3 94.7 + 3.7
from abroad  
  
2005 99.7 + 9.6 99.8 + 7.8 99.7 + 10.9 99.8 + 7.2 99.6 + 0.3 99.8 + 9.82006 112.2 + 12.5 114.6 + 14.8 111.5 + 11.8 107.5 + 7.7 105.7 + 6.1 108.1 + 8.32007 126.8 + 13.0 125.7 + 9.7 128.5 + 15.2 117.3 + 9.1 111.0 + 5.0 119.5 + 10.52008 117.6 − 7.3 120.6 − 4.1 116.7 − 9.2 112.6 − 4.0 99.9 − 10.0 117.1 − 2.02009 87.0 − 26.0 88.6 − 26.5 84.3 − 27.8 102.8 − 8.7 87.1 − 12.8 108.3 − 7.5
 
2009          Mar 88.2 − 37.0 87.2 − 37.1 86.5 − 39.4 106.2 − 12.8 88.1 − 22.4 112.6 − 9.7
         Apr 78.4 − 38.0 82.5 − 35.3 74.3 − 42.0 95.2 − 11.7 81.0 − 21.0 100.2 − 8.7
         May 82.0 − 34.7 85.0 − 34.3 78.6 − 37.5 97.2 − 8.9 82.5 − 18.1 102.4 − 6.0         June 91.5 − 26.0 92.6 − 28.0 89.8 − 26.9 100.3 − 8.1 89.7 − 15.5 104.1 − 5.5
         July 86.7 − 27.3 90.6 − 28.0 82.2 − 29.1 108.4 − 7.7 86.6 − 7.2 116.1 − 8.0
         Aug 81.3 − 26.0 85.5 − 24.3 77.2 − 28.3 97.3 − 14.8 70.0 − 27.2 107.0 − 11.4         Sep 97.3 − 14.0 97.5 − 19.2 96.1 − 11.8 105.4 − 7.9 99.2 − 9.0 107.6 − 7.6
         Oct 91.4 − 12.2 94.5 − 17.8 87.6 − 10.1 108.4 − 4.2 98.2 − 7.8 112.0 − 3.1
         Nov 98.3 − 1.3 97.6 − 6.1 97.2 + 1.1 110.6 + 0.1 101.4 + 5.4 113.8 − 1.6         Dec 93.9 + 7.1 87.0 + 1.5 97.4 + 10.8 95.3 + 1.6 91.3 + 16.0 96.7 − 2.4
2010          Jan 98.6 + 27.7 104.5 + 24.3 94.1 + 33.1 109.8 + 7.6 100.2 + 26.0 113.2 + 3.0
         Feb 101.8 + 30.8 104.4 + 33.0 99.0 + 33.8 113.3 + 5.8 102.3 + 31.8 117.2 − 0.3         Mar  
p 116.2 + 31.7 118.5 + 35.9 114.4 + 32.3 120.2 + 13.2 114.6 + 30.1 122.3 + 8.6
Source of the unadjusted figures: Federal Statistical Office. — *For explana- statistics", Tables II.14 to II.16. — oUsing the Census X-12-ARIMA method,
tory notes, see Statistical Supplement "Seasonally adjusted business version 0.2.8. 
63* X Economic conditions in Germany

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
E U R O S Y S T E M
Monthly Report
May 2010
 X Economic conditions  in Germany
 
4 Orders received by construction *   
 
 
Adjusted for working-day variations  o 
Breakdown by type of construction Breakdown by client  1 
 Building    
Housing Industrial Public sector Civil Public
Total Total construction construction construction engineering Industry sector
Annual Annual Annual Annual Annual Annual Annual Annual
percent- percent- percent- percent- percent- percent- percent- percent-age age age age age age age age
Period change change change change change change change change
2005 = 100 2005 = 100 2005 = 100 2005 = 100 2005 = 100 2005 = 100 2005 = 100 2005 = 100
2006 105.1 + 5.2 106.6 + 6.7 104.3 + 4.4 109.6 + 9.7 101.7 + 1.7 103.5 + 3.7 109.0 + 9.1 101.6 + 1.7
2007 113.9 + 8.4 112.5 + 5.5 98.5 − 5.6 123.2 + 12.4 108.5 + 6.7 115.4 + 11.5 120.7 + 10.7 113.7 + 11.92008 113.4 − 0.4 114.7 + 2.0 94.4 − 4.2 127.9 + 3.8 116.7 + 7.6 112.0 − 2.9 123.3 + 2.2 111.4 − 2.0
2009 107.4 − 5.3 100.7 − 12.2 94.2 − 0.2 100.7 − 21.3 115.5 − 1.0 114.4 + 2.1 104.9 − 14.9 115.5 + 3.7
 
2009          Feb 76.9 − 13.3 74.9 − 20.3 70.0 − 13.3 74.5 − 28.2 87.3 − 4.4 79.0 − 4.9 78.1 − 21.7 78.7 − 2.7
         Mar 113.3 − 12.0 109.1 − 15.8 95.6 − 10.1 114.4 − 16.1 121.7 − 24.0 117.8 − 7.8 111.5 − 13.7 122.8 − 10.8
         Apr 113.5 − 5.6 101.7 − 21.0 105.2 + 13.9 98.1 − 37.2 105.5 − 11.2 125.9 + 13.2 101.8 − 25.2 128.9 + 11.2
         May 115.8 − 2.7 106.6 − 5.8 96.4 − 0.7 105.9 − 14.6 132.1 + 16.2 125.5 + 0.5 111.2 − 9.8 128.7 + 3.9         June 130.0 − 4.2 110.4 − 19.7 108.3 − 2.2 104.7 − 34.1 134.5 + 6.2 150.3 + 12.3 119.2 − 17.8 150.0 + 9.7
         July 123.7 − 7.1 109.9 − 8.4 107.8 + 3.8 106.3 − 17.1 126.4 − 1.6 138.2 − 5.9 112.0 − 13.9 142.3 − 4.2
         Aug 118.4 + 2.1 110.4 − 2.6 97.3 + 4.0 116.2 − 8.0 120.8 + 5.8 126.7 + 6.6 117.3 − 6.5 128.5 + 10.7         Sep 123.2 − 6.1 115.8 − 14.9 109.9 − 3.1 110.8 − 26.2 146.0 + 4.4 130.8 + 3.7 116.0 − 17.1 136.0 + 4.7
         Oct 109.2
+ 0.0 104.1 − 5.2 103.0 + 9.7 101.7 − 12.6 114.5 − 7.7 114.5 + 5.3 109.5 − 9.4 111.4 + 6.9
         Nov 90.6 − 1.9 93.1 − 2.8 89.6 + 1.1 92.8 − 11.7 102.3 + 26.6 88.0 − 1.0 96.7 − 8.4 84.9 + 5.2
         Dec 99.0 + 5.8 99.2 − 0.5 89.1 + 12.1 97.3 − 7.7 128.2 + 1.3 98.8 + 13.3 101.8 − 5.7 100.3 + 17.9
2010          Jan 71.2 − 5.2 69.7 − 4.3 56.0 − 2.8 75.2 − 11.6 82.4 + 24.7 72.7 − 6.1 79.0 − 5.4 69.8 − 5.7
         Feb 90.9 + 18.2 87.4 + 16.7 76.2 + 8.9 88.1 + 18.3 110.2 + 26.2 94.5 + 19.6 90.6 + 16.0 97.4 + 23.8
Source of the unadjusted figures: Federal Statistical Office. — *Values exclu- X-12-ARIMA method, version 0.2.8. — 1Excluding housing construction
sive of value-added tax; for explanatory notes, see Statistical Supplement orders. 
"Seasonally adjusted business statistics", Tables II.21. — oUsing the Census
 
 
5. Retail trade turnover, sales of motor vehicles *
  
Adjusted for calendar variations  o 
Retail trade
of which:  by enterprises’ main product range  1 
Construction Retail sale of
and flooring pharmaceutical Wholesale
Textiles, Information materials and medical and retail trade
clothing and household goods, cosmetic and repair of
Food, beverages, foodwear and communications appliances and toilet motor vehicles
Total tobacco  2 leather goods equipment furniture articles and motorcycles
At current At prices in
prices year 2005 At current prices
Annual Annual Annual Annual Annual Annual Annual Annual
percent- percent- percent- percent- percent- percent- percent- percent-age age age age age age age agechange change change change change change change change
Period % % % % % % % %
2005 = 100 2005 = 100 2005 = 100 2005 = 100 2005 = 100 2005 = 100 2005 = 100 2005 = 100
2006 3 101.0 + 1.1 100.3 + 0.4 100.1 + 0.1 102.4 + 2.4 102.3 + 2.3 103.4 + 3.5 102.1 + 2.2 106.8 + 7.3
2007 3 99.4 − 1.6 99.0 − 1.3 99.5 − 0.6 103.6 + 1.2 110.1 + 7.6 98.5 − 4.7 104.2 + 2.1 100.7 − 5.7
2008 101.5 + 2.1 98.9 − 0.1 100.7 + 1.2 104.7 + 1.1 116.3 + 5.6 99.7 + 1.2 107.1 + 2.8 95.8 − 4.9
2009 4 99.0 − 2.5 97.1 − 1.8 99.4 − 1.3 104.3 − 0.4 117.1 + 0.7 98.6 − 1.1 109.9 + 2.6 96.9 + 1.1
 
2009          Mar  4 100.6 − 1.5 98.8 − 0.6 101.3 − 1.7 101.4 + 4.2 112.4 − 4.3 104.3 − 2.9 110.1 + 3.6 117.5 + 7.5
         Apr 101.2 + 0.4 98.4 + 0.5 102.4 + 0.5 113.4 + 6.6 94.4 − 9.7 106.4 + 3.4 110.0 + 3.1 109.7 + 4.8
         May 99.1 − 2.6 96.4 − 1.8 103.1 + 1.3 103.2 − 8.3 94.5 − 4.7 100.0 − 1.7 106.7 + 3.7 104.8 + 2.3         June 94.4 − 3.0 91.9 − 2.3 97.0 − 1.2 95.7 + 0.3 102.3 − 3.3 94.8 − 0.9 106.0 + 2.0 105.5 + 4.2
         July 97.8 − 2.1 96.2 − 0.5 98.1 − 1.6 103.4 + 2.8 106.3 + 1.5 98.8 + 1.1 111.4 + 2.9 100.2 + 2.2
         Aug 95.3 − 4.3 93.4 − 3.2 99.6 − 0.2 93.3 − 5.7 105.8 + 0.2 95.4 − 1.3 106.2 + 3.3 89.9 + 1.9         Sep 96.4 − 4.6 94.5 − 3.3 95.1 − 2.6 111.0 − 4.7 109.5 + 1.0 98.0 − 0.9 107.0 + 1.2 94.1 + 0.2
         Oct 103.3 − 2.1 101.1 − 1.3 99.3 − 3.4 127.8 + 7.5 124.3 + 4.0 105.3 + 0.8 112.1 + 2.1 98.2 + 0.2
         Nov 102.7 − 2.9 101.2 − 2.6 99.1 − 3.1 104.8 − 4.1 137.6 + 5.4 106.9 − 0.1 116.5 + 5.1 91.3 − 1.9         Dec 119.1 − 0.9 117.4 − 1.4 116.9 + 0.3 131.3 + 1.6 192.3 + 6.1 106.5 − 0.7 127.2 + 2.4 80.4 − 3.1
2010          Jan 90.0 − 1.3 88.4 − 1.8 92.2 + 1.1 86.8 − 0.3 121.9 − 1.5 82.8 − 0.4 105.6 + 0.2 70.9 − 6.2
         Feb 87.5 + 0.3 85.4 − 0.1 90.1 + 0.7 78.2 − 0.6 104.6 + 2.4 84.5 + 1.4 103.4 + 3.3 75.7 − 20.6         Mar 100.3 − 0.3 97.2 − 1.6 100.1 − 1.2 106.7 + 5.2 112.9 + 0.4 107.3 + 2.9 111.6 + 1.4 99.0 − 15.7
Source of the unadjustded figures: Federal Statistical Office. — *Excluding in January 2006 and January 2007; statistical breaks in reporting population
value-added tax;  For explanatory notes, see Statistical Supplement "Sea- eliminated by chain-linking. — 4From January 2009 figures are provisional
sonally adjusted business statistics", Tables II.24. — oUsing the Census in some cases revised, and particularly uncertain in recent months owing to
X-12-ARIMA method, version 0.2.8. — 1In stores. — 2Including stalls and estimates for missing reports. 
markets. — 3Expansion of the reporting population to include new entities;
64* X Economic conditions in Germany

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
May 2010
 X Economic conditions  in Germany
 
6 Labour market * 
 
 
 
Persons in
Employment  1 Employees  1 employment  2 Persons Unemployment  7 
employed
Mining under Persons
and employ- under-
manu- ment pro- going  vo-
factur- Short- motion cational
ing Con- time schemes further
Annual change Annual sector  3 6,7 Annual Vacan- workers  5 struction  4 training  7 
percent- change, Unemploy- cies,  7 
Thou- Thou- Thou- age Thou- thou- ment rate thou-
Period sands in % sands sands change Thousands sands sands 7,8  in % sands
Germany  
  
2007 39,724 + 1.7 + 650 35,288 + 1.7 5,158 714 68 43 149 3,777 − 711 9.0 9 621
2008 40,277 + 1.4 + 553 35,845 + 1.6 5,276 706 102 40 171 3,268 − 509 7.8 5692009
r 40,267 r + 0.0 r −1 0 r 35,854 r + 0.0 5,134 705 1,143 16 216 3,423 + 155 8.2 486
2009          Apr 40,132 + 0.2 + 82 5,159 705 1,518 20 215 3,585 + 171 8.6 495         May 40,215 + 0.0 + 17 35,769 + 0.2 5,132 708 1,534 17 229
10 3,458 10 + 175 10 11  8.2 490
         June 40,255 − 0.1 − 39 5,114 715 1,433 15 228 3,410 + 250 8.1 484
         July 40,223 − 0.2 − 70 5,094 716 1,236 13 213 3,462 + 252 8.2 484
         Aug r 40,273 r − 0.2 r −7 5 r 35,916 r − 0.2 5,090 723 1,050 11 201 3,472 + 276 8.3 486
         Sep r 40,540 r − 0.3 r − 116 5,099 726 1,074 9 218 3,346 + 266 8.0 486
         Oct r 40,661 r − 0.4 r − 181 5,074 717 1,084 7 231 3,229 + 232 7.7 479
         Nov r 40,627 r − 0.4 r − 169 r 36,171 r − 0.4 5,059 714 976 6 234 3,215 + 227 7.6 465
         Dec r 40,430 r − 0.3 r − 125 5,035 701 890 5 226 3,276 + 173 7.8 461
2010          Jan r 39,805 r − 0.3 r − 119 4,971 673 ... 4 207 3,617 + 129 8.6 457
         Feb r 39,804 r − 0.3 r − 127 35,451 − 0.3 4,971 667 ... 12 412 207 3,643 + 91 8.7 480
         Mar 13 39,908 13 − 0.2 13 − 86 4,968 ... ... 12 412 212 3,568 − 18 8.5 503
         Apr ... ... ... ... ... ... 12 312 217 3,406 − 178 8.1 517
Western Germany    o  
  
2007 . . . . . 4,560 529 52 9 103 2,486 − 521 7.5 9 489
2008 . . . . . 4,651 527 80 7 118 2,145 − 341 6.4 455
2009 . . . . . 4,517 . 980 4 150 2,320 + 176 6.9 375
2009          Apr . . . . . 4,540 . 1,318 5 151 2,400 + 184 7.2 378
         May . . . . . 4,515 . 1,332 4 162 10 2,334 10 + 194 10 11  6.9 371
         June . . . . . 4,498 . 1,244 4 161 2,319 + 245 6.9 370
         July . . . . . 4,480 . 1,070 4 151 2,368 + 248 7.0 372
         Aug . . . . . 4,478 . 893 3 141 2,389 + 281 7.1 374
         Sep . . . . . 4,485 . 926 3 151 2,307 + 265 6.9 376
         Oct . . . . . 4,462 . 935 2 157 2,229 + 239 6.6 372
         Nov . . . . . 4,448 . 845 2 158 2,216 + 230 6.6 362
         Dec . . . . . 4,427 . 757 2 151 2,248 + 189 6.7 362
2010          Jan . . . . . 4,370 . ... 1 137 2,470 + 163 7.4 353
         Feb . . . . . 4,367 . ... 12 112 138 2,482 + 134 7.4 370
         Mar . . . . . 4,363 . ... 12 112 142 2,428 + 49 7.2 389
         Apr . . . . . ... . ... 12 112 147 2,329 − 70 6.9 402
Eastern Germany    +  
  
2007 . . . . . 597 185 16 33 46 1,291 − 190 15.1 9 133
2008 . . . . . 625 179 21 33 53 1,123 − 167 13.1 113
2009 . . . . . 617 . 152 13 66 1,103 − 20 13.0 110
2009          Apr . . . . . 620 . 184 16 64 1,185 − 13 13.9 117
         May . . . . . 617 . 186 13 67 10 1,124 10 −1 9 10 11  13.3 119
         June . . . . . 616 . 175 11 66 1,091 + 5 12.9 113
         July . . . . . 614 . 155 9 61 1,094 + 4 12.9 112
         Aug . . . . . 612 . 148 8 60 1,082 − 5 12.8 112
         Sep . . . . . 614 . 140 7 68 1,040 + 1 12.3 109
         Oct . . . . . 612 . 141 5 73 1,000 − 7 11.8 107
         Nov . . . . . 611 . 126 4 76 1,000 − 3 11.8 103
         Dec . . . . . 608 . 128 3 75 1,027 − 16 12.1 99
2010          Jan . . . . . 601 . ... 2 70 1,148 − 34 13.5 104
         Feb . . . . . 603 . ... 12 212 69 1,162 − 42 13.7 111
         Mar . . . . . 604 . ... 12 212 69 1,140 − 67 13.5 115
         Apr . . . . . ... . ... 12 212 69 1,077 − 108 12.7 115
Sources: Federal Statistical Office; Federal Employment Agency. — *Annual volved in structural adjustment measures (SAM). — 7Mid-month level. —
and quarterly figures: averages; annual figures: calculated by the Bundes- 8Relative to the total civilian labour force. — 9From January 2007, vacan-
bank; deviations from the official figures are due to rounding. — oExclud- cies for seasonal workers are included only if they are based on non-specific
ing West Berlin. — +Including West Berlin. — 1Workplace concept; aver- employer requirements. — 10From May 2009, unemployed excluding
ages. — 2Including active proprietors; monthly figures: end of month. — persons formally on the books of private employment agencies. — 11From
3Enterprises with at least 50 employees. — 4The figures refer to enter- May 2009, calculated on the basis of new labour force figures. — 12Annual-
prises from Nace Rev.2 items 41.2, 42, 43.1 and 43.9. — 5Number within a ised data from the Federal Employment Agency based on information re-
given month; from January 2009, results for Germany contain data from ceived so far. — 13Initial preliminary estimate by the Federal Statistical
operational reports, which cannot be assigned to a region. — 6Employees in- Office. 
volved in job creation schemes; up to December 2008 including employees in-
65* X Economic conditions in Germany

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
E U R O S Y S T E M
Monthly Report
May 2010
 X Economic conditions  in Germany
 
7 Prices
 
 
 
Consumer price index HWWI
Indices of Index of World Market
of which foreign trade prices Prices  of Raw Materials  5 
Other Index of
durable producer
and non- prices ofdurable industrial Index ofconsumer Services Con- products producergoods excluding prices of sold on the struction
excluding house House price domestic Other raw agricultural
Total Food Energy  
1 rents  3 rents  3 index  2 market  4 Exports Imports Energy  6 products  4 materials  7 energy  1,2 
Period 2005 = 100 2000 = 100 2005 = 100 2000 = 100
Index level  
  
2005 8 100.0 100.0 100.0 100.0 100.0 100.0 100.0 8 100.0 98.8 100.0 100.0 139.5 105.4
2006 9 101.6 101.9 100.3 108.5 101.0 101.1 102.4 9 105.4 107.1 101.8 104.4 163.9 131.5
2007 10 11  103.9 105.9 101.7 112.8 103.9 102.2 109.3 106.8 118.2 103.0 105.1 166.6 143.7
2008 106.6 112.7 102.5 123.6 105.8 103.5 113.0 112.7 121.2 104.8 109.9 217.1 150.3
2009 107.0 111.2 103.9 116.9 107.4 104.6 114.4 108.0 102.6 102.5 100.5 144.5 124.3
 
2008          June 107.0 113.1 102.3 129.3 105.3 103.5 113.3 126.4 105.5 113.6 278.3 162.8
         July 107.6 113.4 101.8 131.0 107.1 103.6 115.5 127.0 106.0 114.3 279.8 160.6
         Aug 107.3 112.9 102.2 127.1 107.0 103.7 114.0 114.9 124.1 105.9 113.6 254.8 156.4         Sep 107.2 112.6 102.9 127.9 105.9 103.8 115.2 119.8 105.8 112.7 232.7 150.8
         Oct 107.0 112.8 103.2 124.9 105.6 103.9 115.2 115.1 105.1 109.1 180.2 133.3
         Nov 106.5 112.0 103.1 119.9 105.6 104.0 114.0 113.3 110.7 104.3 106.0 142.7 126.9         Dec 106.8 112.7 103.0 114.8 108.3 104.0 112.4 107.7 103.1 102.2 107.3 114.6
2009          Jan 106.3 113.3 102.7 117.4 106.0 104.1 111.1 105.7 102.9 101.5 112.8 114.9
         Feb 106.9 113.3 103.4 117.4 107.1 104.3 114.4 110.5 106.5 102.9 101.3 112.1 116.2         Mar 106.8 112.8 103.7 116.0 106.7 104.4 109.7 104.4 102.5 100.7 118.8 113.8
         Apr 106.8 112.3 103.9 116.2 106.8 104.5 108.2 103.3 102.4 99.9 125.8 120.1
         May 106.7 111.7 103.7 116.8 106.7 104.5 114.2 108.2 102.9 102.3 99.9 139.6 123.2         June 107.1 112.1 103.9 119.1 106.9 104.6 108.1 103.7 102.4 100.3 160.7 125.8
         July 107.1 110.7 103.3 116.0 108.8 104.7 106.5 103.3 102.2 99.4 150.1 123.9
         Aug 107.3 109.5 103.8 118.2 108.7 104.8 114.4 107.0 102.1 102.5 100.7 163.2 131.3
         Sep 106.9 109.2 104.4 116.4 107.3 104.8 106.5 100.6 102.4 99.8 152.0 126.4
         Oct 107.0 109.0 104.7 116.2 107.3 104.9 106.5 100.4 102.4 100.3 161.7 127.9
         Nov 106.9 109.5 104.2 116.9 106.9 105.0 114.4 106.6 103.4 102.5 100.7 168.6 130.6         Dec 107.8 110.4 104.5 115.9 109.5 105.1 106.5 104.6 102.7 101.2 166.6 138.0
2010          Jan 107.1 111.7 103.7 118.5 106.9 105.2 107.3 104.6 103.3 102.9 178.4 143.6
         Feb 107.5 112.0 104.1 117.5 107.7 105.3 114.5 107.3 105.7 103.7 103.9 179.5 144.5         Mar 108.0 113.1 104.5 120.6 107.9 105.5 108.0
p 105.3 104.5 105.7 191.7 151.0
         Apr 107.9 114.0 104.5 122.2 106.7 105.6 108.9 ... ... ... 206.9 172.1
Annual percentage change  
  
2005 8 + 1.5 − 0.2 + 0.5 + 9.8 + 0.7 + 0.9 + 1.1 8 + 4.4 − 0.9 + 0.9 + 3.4 + 37.6 + 9.4
2006 9 + 1.6 + 1.9 + 0.3 + 8.5 + 1.0 + 1.1 + 2.4 9 + 5.4 + 8.4 + 1.8 + 4.4 + 17.5 + 24.8
2007 10 11  + 2.3 + 3.9 + 1.4 + 4.0 + 2.9 + 1.1 + 6.7 + 1.3 + 10.4 + 1.2 + 0.7 + 1.6 + 9.3
2008 + 2.6 + 6.4 + 0.8 + 9.6 + 1.8 + 1.3 + 3.4 + 5.5 + 2.5 + 1.7 + 4.6 + 30.3 + 4.6
2009 + 0.4 − 1.3 + 1.4 − 5.4 + 1.5 + 1.1 + 1.2 − 4.2 − 15.3 − 2.2 − 8.6 − 33.4 − 17.3
 
2008          June + 3.3 + 7.6 + 0.9 + 14.6 + 1.7 + 1.3 + 6.2 + 11.7 + 2.2 + 7.9 + 69.4 + 9.6
         July + 3.3 + 8.0 + 0.6 + 15.1 + 1.8 + 1.3 + 8.2 + 7.8 + 2.6 + 8.3 + 62.0 + 9.8
         Aug + 3.1 + 7.4 + 1.1 + 13.0 + 1.7 + 1.2 + 4.0 + 7.7 + 1.9 + 2.6 + 8.3 + 52.8 + 10.5
         Sep + 2.9 + 6.4 + 1.1 + 12.2 + 1.5 + 1.3 + 7.9 − 5.4 + 2.5 + 7.0 + 31.2 + 5.5
         Oct + 2.4 + 4.3 + 1.0 + 9.8 + 1.5 + 1.3 + 7.3 − 10.9 + 1.8 + 2.8 − 3.4 − 7.4
         Nov + 1.4 + 2.1 + 0.7 + 1.4 + 1.7 + 1.3 + 3.4 + 4.7 − 15.0 + 1.1 − 0.7 − 29.4 − 7.7         Dec + 1.1 + 2.1 + 0.8 − 0.9 + 1.8 + 1.2 + 4.0 − 17.7
+ 0.0 − 4.1 − 46.2 − 17.1
2009          Jan + 0.9 + 1.1 + 0.8 − 0.8 + 1.6 + 1.1 + 2.0 − 19.3 − 0.9 − 5.6 − 43.9 − 25.0
         Feb + 1.0 + 1.2 + 1.1 − 1.2 + 1.7 + 1.2 + 2.6 + 0.9 − 19.1 − 1.2 − 6.7 − 46.8 − 28.8
         Mar + 0.5 + 0.2 + 1.2 − 4.5 + 0.9 + 1.2 − 0.5 − 20.6 − 1.7 − 7.5 − 45.1 − 29.1
         Apr + 0.7 − 0.6 + 1.3 − 5.2 + 2.5 + 1.2 − 2.7 − 18.5 − 2.0 − 9.0 − 44.1 − 23.8
         May + 0.0 − 1.2 + 1.3 − 8.0 + 1.6 + 1.1 + 1.5 − 3.6 − 18.0 − 2.7 − 10.9 − 46.1 − 22.8
         June + 0.1 − 0.9 + 1.6 − 7.9 + 1.5 + 1.1 − 4.6 − 18.0 − 2.9 − 11.7 − 42.3 − 22.7
         July − 0.5 − 2.4 + 1.5 − 11.5 + 1.6 + 1.1 − 7.8 − 18.7 − 3.6 − 13.0 − 46.4 − 22.9
         Aug + 0.0 − 3.0 + 1.6 − 7.0 + 1.6 + 1.1 + 0.4 − 6.9 − 17.7 − 3.2 − 11.4 − 35.9 − 16.0
         Sep − 0.3 − 3.0 + 1.5 − 9.0 + 1.3 + 1.0 − 7.6 − 16.0 − 3.2 − 11.4 − 34.7 − 16.2
         Oct + 0.0 − 3.4 + 1.5 − 7.0 + 1.6 + 1.0 − 7.6 − 12.8 − 2.6 − 8.1 − 10.3 − 4.1
         Nov + 0.4 − 2.2 + 1.1 − 2.5 + 1.2 + 1.0 + 0.4 − 5.9 − 6.6 − 1.7 − 5.0 + 18.1 + 2.9
         Dec + 0.9 − 2.0 + 1.5 + 1.0 + 1.1 + 1.1 − 5.2 − 2.9 − 0.4 − 1.0 + 55.3 + 20.4
2010          Jan + 0.8 − 1.4 + 1.0 + 0.9 + 0.8 + 1.1 − 3.4 − 1.0 + 0.4 + 1.4 + 58.2 + 25.0
         Feb + 0.6 − 1.1 + 0.7 + 0.1 + 0.6 + 1.0 + 0.1 − 2.9 − 0.8 + 0.8 + 2.6 + 60.1 + 24.4
         Mar + 1.1 + 0.3 + 0.8 + 4.0 + 1.1 + 1.1 − 1.5 p + 0.9 + 2.0 + 5.0 + 61.4 + 32.7
         Apr + 1.0 + 1.5 + 0.6 + 5.2 − 0.1 + 1.1 + 0.6 ... ... ... + 64.5 + 43.3
Source: Federal Statistical Office; HWWI Index of World Market Prices. — September 2005, increase in tobacco tax. — 9From October 2006, increase
1Electricity, gas and other fuels. — 2Bundesbank calculation based on data in the prices of tobacco products. — 10From January 2007, increase in the
provided by the Federal Statistical Office. — 3Net rents. — 4Excluding standard rate of VAT and in insurance tax from 16% to 19%. —
value-added tax. — 5For the euro area, in euro. — 6Coal and crude oil. — 11 Introduction of university tuition fees in some federal states. 
7Food, beverages and tobacco as well as industrial raw materials. — 8From
66* X Economic conditions in Germany

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
May 2010
X Economic conditions in Germany
  
8 Households’ income *
  
  
  
Gross wages and Net wages and Monetary social Saving
salaries  1 salaries  2 Mass income  4 Saving  6 ratio  7 benefits received  3 Disposable income  5 
Annual Annual Annual Annual Annual Annual
percent- percent- percent- percent- percent- percent-
age age age age age age
Period change change change change change change % € billion € billion € billion € billion € billion € billion
2002 908.2 0.7 591.9 0.3 367.7 3.9 959.6 1.7 1,402.8 1.0 139.3 6.4 9.9
2003 908.3 0.0 589.0 − 0.5 378.3 2.9 967.2 0.8 1,431.8 2.1 147.2 5.6 10.32004 914.6 0.7 603.3 2.4 378.2 − 0.0 981.5 1.5 1,454.5 1.6 151.4 2.9 10.4
2005 912.1 − 0.3 602.4 − 0.2 378.6 0.1 981.0 − 0.1 1,481.0 1.8 155.6 2.7 10.5
2006 926.2 1.6 604.7 0.4 378.1 − 0.1 982.8 0.2 1,516.2 2.4 160.0 2.8 10.52007 957.8 3.4 623.0 3.0 372.8 − 1.4 995.9 1.3 1,541.1 1.6 165.7 3.6 10.82008 995.8 4.0 642.7 3.2 374.4 0.4 1,017.1 2.1 1,588.2 3.1 178.5 7.7 11.22009 992.2 − 0.4 638.9 − 0.6 403.4 7.7 1,042.3 2.5 1,591.2 0.2 180.4 1.0 11.3
2008          Q4 275.6 3.5 176.3 2.4 93.2 0.8 269.5 1.8 402.2 1.3 40.5 6.9 10.1
2009          Q1 232.8 0.8 149.1 − 0.4 98.8 4.4 247.9 1.5 396.4 0.0 59.3 1.5 15.0
         Q2 239.8 − 0.4 151.0 − 0.7 101.6 9.0 252.5 2.9 395.9 0.5 42.0 − 0.1 10.6         Q3 246.4 − 0.8 163.4 − 0.8 102.4 9.8 265.8 3.0 393.9 − 0.4 38.3 2.2 9.7         Q4 273.2 − 0.9 175.5 − 0.5 100.6 7.9 276.1 2.4 404.9 0.7 40.8 0.6 10.1
2010          Q1 234.8 0.9 153.6 3.0 103.1 4.4 256.8 3.6 400.4 1.0 60.9 2.8 15.2
Source: Federal Statistical Office; figures computed in May 2010. — *House- plus monetary social benefits received. — 5Mass income plus operating
holds including non-profit institutions serving households. — 1Residence surplus, mixed income, property income (net), other current transfers
concept. — 2After deducting the wage tax payable on gross wages and received, income of non-profit institutions serving households, less taxes (ex-
salaries and employees’ contributions to the social security funds. — 3Social cluding wage tax and consumption-related taxes) and other current trans-
security benefits in cash from the social security funds, central, state and fers paid. Including the increase in claims on company pension funds. — 6In-
local government and foreign countries, pension payments (net), private cluding the increase in claims on company pension funds. — 7Saving as a
funded social benefits, less social contributions on social benefits, percentage of disposable income. 
consumption-related taxes and public charges. — 4Net wages and salaries
  
  
  
9 Pay rates (overall economy)
    
  
Index of negotiated wages 1 
on a monthly basis
Memo item:
Total excluding Wages and salaries
on an hourly basis Total one-off payments Basic pay rates  2 per employee  3 
Annual Annual Annual Annual Annual
Period percentage percentage percentage percentage percentage
2000 = 100 change 2000 = 100 change 2000 = 100 change 2000 = 100 change 2000 = 100 change
2002 104.7 2.6 104.5 2.6 104.5 2.2 104.4 2.2 103.2 1.3
2003 106.7 2.0 106.6 2.0 106.7 2.1 106.9 2.4 104.5 1.3
2004 107.9 1.1 108.0 1.3 108.1 1.3 108.6 1.6 105.1 0.6
2005 108.9 0.9 109.1 1.1 109.1 0.9 109.8 1.0 105.4 0.3
2006 109.9 1.0 110.5 1.2 110.0 0.8 110.7 0.9 106.4 0.92007 111.2 1.2 111.9 1.3 111.6 1.5 112.3 1.5 108.1 1.62008 114.3 2.8 115.1 2.8 114.9 3.0 115.9 3.2 110.5 2.32009 116.9 2.3 117.8 2.3 117.9 2.6 119.0 2.7 110.2 − 0.3
2008          Q4 129.0 3.6 129.9 3.6 129.2 2.9 116.7 3.2 120.7 2.1
2009          Q1 108.3 3.1 109.1 3.1 108.9 2.7 117.9 2.8 104.0 0.1
         Q2 109.0 2.8 109.8 2.8 110.0 2.8 118.9 2.8 106.7 − 0.6         Q3 119.6 2.1 120.5 2.1 120.5 2.6 119.4 2.6 109.5 − 0.4         Q4 130.9 1.5 131.8 1.5 132.0 2.2 119.8 2.6 120.5 − 0.2
2010          Q1 110.2 1.8 111.0 1.8 111.2 2.2 120.5 2.2 105.3 1.3
2009          Sep 110.4 3.2 111.2 3.2 110.5 2.6 119.6 2.6 . .
         Oct 109.5 2.7 110.4 2.7 110.6 2.7 119.8 2.7 . .
         Nov 171.0 2.0 172.3 2.0 172.6 1.8 119.8 2.6 . .         Dec 112.0 − 0.5 112.8 − 0.5 112.9 2.2 119.9 2.6 . .
2010          Jan 110.0 1.0 110.8 1.1 111.2 2.5 120.4 2.5 . .
         Feb 110.2 2.4 111.1 2.4 111.2 2.2 120.4 2.2 . .         Mar 110.4 2.0 111.2 2.0 111.4 1.8 120.6 1.8 . .
1Current data are normally revised on account of additional reports. — (13
thmonthly salary payment) and retirement provisions). — 3Source:
2Excluding one-off payments and covenants (capital formation benefits, Federal Statistical Office; figures computed in May 2010. 
special payments, such as annual bonuses, holiday pay, Christmas bonuses
67*X Economic conditions in Germany

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
E U R O S Y S T E M
Monthly Report
May 2010
XI External sector
 
1 Major items of the balance of payments of the euro area *
 
 
€ million
2009 2010
Item 2007 2008 2009 Q2 Q3 Q4 Dec Jan Feb
Current account + 13,493 − 153,805 − 55,800 − 21,954 − 3,579 + 6,967 + 9,498 − 14,743 − 5,161A
1 Goods
Exports (fob) 1,518,025 1,580,431 1,290,061 312,468 322,518 347,605 114,022 100,156 111,702
Imports (fob) 1,470,068 1,599,530 1,250,520 298,500 308,722 328,214 108,149 107,514 106,377
Balance + 47,958 − 19,096 + 39,540 + 13,967 + 13,797 + 19,391 + 5,873 − 7,358 + 5,325
2 Services
Receipts 494,918 517,570 471,050 114,790 124,034 121,839 44,220 35,073 34,265Expenditure 445,275 476,182 439,659 107,914 111,867 111,260 39,342 34,252 32,614
Balance + 49,639 + 41,388 + 31,393 + 6,876 + 12,167 + 10,579 + 4,878 + 821 + 1,651
3 Income + 2,931 − 76,560 − 37,997 − 25,516 − 6,707 − 2,815 − 512 − 1,137 + 1,181
4 Current transfers
Transfers from non-residents 91,023 88,467 92,798 21,012 14,329 31,657 16,294 10,350 9,507
Transfers to non-residents 178,055 188,001 181,532 38,292 37,165 51,845 17,035 17,419 22,825
Balance − 87,034 − 99,536 − 88,732 − 17,280 − 22,835 − 20,188 − 741 − 7,069 − 13,317
Capital account + 5,015 + 9,765 + 7,993 + 2,151 + 1,419 + 2,968 + 1,381 + 1,712 + 897B
Financial account (net capital exports: − − 10,669 + 163,207 + 45,375 + 10,881 − 12,621 − 3,774 − 8,063 + 14,488 + 7,160C)
1 Direct investment − 73,696 − 198,689 − 95,743 + 348 − 23,713 − 7,776 + 2,661 − 3,107 + 175
By resident units abroad − 476,544 − 323,796 − 314,371 − 87,186 − 61,954 − 62,794 − 15,266 − 5,751 − 14,158By non-resident units in the euro area + 402,850 + 125,111 + 218,629 + 87,535 + 38,242 + 55,018 + 17,927 + 2,644 + 14,333
2 Portfolio investment + 151,493 + 344,074 + 317,897 + 70,803 + 78,154 + 63,099 + 61,052 − 718 + 10,700
By resident units abroad − 438,456 + 10,201 − 74,160 − 61,192 − 45,568 − 37,969 + 6,383 − 30,869 − 8,440
Equity − 64,685 + 103,949 − 46,571 − 9,496 − 39,551 − 35,795 − 8,907 + 2,908 − 3,586Bonds and notes − 290,454 − 96,736 − 29,346 − 32,134 − 27,392 − 25,097 − 580 − 14,485 − 5,258Money market instruments − 83,318 + 2,986 + 1,756 − 19,563 + 21,375 + 22,923 + 15,870 − 19,292 + 404
By non-resident units in the euro area + 589,949 + 333,873 + 392,059 + 131,996 + 123,724 + 101,068 + 54,669 + 30,151 + 19,140
Equity + 167,969 − 107,113 + 139,838 + 48,265 + 89,453 + 50,366 + 57,184 + 18,254 + 4,885
Bonds and notes + 362,509 + 236,328 + 134,163 + 37,386 − 19,242 + 42,437 + 6,829 + 2,056 + 10,600Money market instruments + 59,468 + 204,657 + 118,056 + 46,344 + 53,512 + 8,264 − 9,344 + 9,841 + 3,655
3 Financial derivatives − 63,743 − 62,476 + 39,906 + 22,879 − 4,528 + 5,779 + 4,104 + 5,100 − 989
4 Other investment − 19,637 + 83,677 − 221,160 − 81,742 − 62,863 − 64,789 − 75,046 + 11,742 + 922
Eurosystem + 67,582 + 290,011 − 229,338 − 96,302 − 36,784 − 22,254 − 11,251 − 2,376 + 4,579
General government + 6,835 + 16,413 − 16,388 + 1,175 + 720 − 10,493 − 14,134 + 4,042 + 5,306MFIs (excluding the Eurosystem) + 78,364 − 130,518 + 60,144 + 8,422 + 4,109 − 76,719 − 68,911 + 2,810 + 23,616
Long-term − 112,471 − 227,007 − 27,863 − 32,792 + 7,576 + 16,430 + 13,150 + 10,946 − 16,429Short-term + 190,835 + 96,490 + 88,006 + 41,216 − 3,467 − 93,151 − 82,062 − 8,135 + 40,045
Other sectors − 172,415 − 92,229 − 35,576 + 4,964 − 30,909 + 44,677 + 19,250 + 7,265 − 32,579
5 Reserve assets (Increase: −) − 5,087 − 3,381 + 4,473 − 1,407 + 328 − 88 − 834 + 1,470 − 3,648
Errors and omissions − 7,839 − 19,169 + 2,431 + 8,922 + 14,781 − 6,160 − 2,815 − 1,457 − 2,896D
* Source: European Central Bank.  
  
68*XI External sector

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
May 2010
XI External sector
 
2 Major items of the balance of payments of the Federal Republic of Germany
(balances)
 
 
Current account Financial account Capital trans-
fers and
of which acquisition/
disposal of Change in
Supple- non- reserve assets
Balance mentary produced at trans- Errorson current Foreign trade Current action and non-financial
Period account trade  
1 items  2 Services  3 Income transfers assets Total  4 value  5 Omissions
DM million
1996 − 21,086 + 98,538 − 4,941 − 64,743 + 1,052 − 50,991 − 3,283 + 24,290 + 1,882 + 79
1997 − 17,336 + 116,467 − 7,875 − 68,692 − 4,740 − 52,496 + 52 + 6,671 + 6,640 + 10,6131998 − 28,696 + 126,970 − 8,917 − 75,053 − 18,635 − 53,061 + 1,289 + 25,683 − 7,128 + 1,724
1999 − 49,241 + 127,542 − 15,947 − 90,036 − 22,325 − 48,475 − 301 − 20,332 + 24,517 + 69,874
2000 − 68,913 + 115,645 − 17,742 − 95,848 − 16,302 − 54,666 + 13,345 + 66,863 + 11,429 − 11,2942001 + 830 + 186,771 − 14,512 − 97,521 − 21,382 − 52,526 − 756 − 23,068 + 11,797 + 22,994
€ million
1999 − 25,177 + 65,211 − 8,153 − 46,035 − 11,415 − 24,785 − 154 − 10,396 + 12,535 + 35,726
2000 − 35,235 + 59,128 − 9,071 − 49,006 − 8,335 − 27,950 + 6,823 + 34,187 + 5,844 − 5,7752001 + 424 + 95,495 − 7,420 − 49,862 − 10,932 − 26,856 − 387 − 11,794 + 6,032 + 11,757
2002 + 42,973 + 132,788 − 8,552 − 35,728 − 18,019 − 27,517 − 212 − 38,448 + 2,065 − 4,313
2003 + 40,917 + 129,921 − 11,148 − 34,506 − 15,067 − 28,283 + 311 − 61,758 + 445 + 20,529
2004 + 102,833 + 156,096 − 16,470 − 29,375 + 20,431 − 27,849 + 435 − 122,984 + 1,470 + 19,717
2005 + 114,630 + 158,179 − 14,057 − 25,677 + 24,896 − 28,712 − 1,369 − 129,635 + 2,182 + 16,3742006 + 150,106 + 159,048 − 12,888 − 13,740 + 44,893 − 27,206 − 258 − 174,133 + 2,934 + 24,2852007 + 185,137 + 195,348 − 9,907 − 11,603 + 43,506 − 32,206 + 110 − 219,502 − 953 + 34,2542008 + 166,963 + 178,297 − 12,618 − 7,031 + 42,617 − 34,303 − 209 − 198,730 − 2,008 + 31,976
2009 + 119,225 + 136,081 − 9,226 − 9,437 + 33,797 − 31,991 − 186 − 137,777 + 3,200 + 18,739
2007          Q2 + 40,990 + 48,183 − 2,343 − 1,448 + 1,743 − 5,145 + 358 − 73,559 − 1,359 + 32,210
         Q3 + 41,438 + 50,181 − 2,718 − 9,013 + 12,382 − 9,393 + 299 − 24,575 − 347 − 17,162         Q4 + 55,775 + 48,745 − 2,182 + 502 + 15,175 − 6,466 − 687 − 73,457 + 653 + 18,369
2008          Q1 + 48,581 + 50,934 − 3,561 + 77 + 13,387 − 12,255 + 502 − 64,083 − 1,165 + 15,000
         Q2 + 43,797 + 53,167 − 2,818 − 2,425 + 1,470 − 5,597 + 245 − 61,132 − 889 + 17,090         Q3 + 35,091 + 40,225 − 2,873 − 6,331 + 13,301 − 9,231 − 299 − 18,169 + 1,630 − 16,623         Q4 + 39,494 + 33,972 − 3,365 + 1,649 + 14,458 − 7,219 − 658 − 55,346 − 1,584 + 16,509
2009          Q1 + 22,555 + 27,506 − 2,711 − 1,274 + 11,949 − 12,916 + 25 + 4,139 + 321 − 26,719
         Q2 + 23,403 + 31,686 − 2,048 − 2,620 − 93 − 3,522 + 290 − 45,176 + 41 + 21,483         Q3 + 25,788 + 32,816 − 2,291 − 7,293 + 10,714 − 8,159 − 42 − 15,578 + 2,269 − 10,168         Q4 + 47,479 + 44,073 − 2,176 + 1,751 + 11,226 − 7,395 − 459 − 81,162 + 569 + 34,143
2010          Q1  
p + 31,684 + 37,844 − 2,445 − 1,516 + 11,189 − 13,388 + 292 − 9,132 − 651 − 22,844
2007          Oct + 17,183 + 18,851 − 824 − 2,169 + 4,859 − 3,533 − 13 − 34,810 + 309 + 17,639
         Nov + 20,112 + 19,423 − 759 + 327 + 4,752 − 3,631 − 224 − 27,378 + 339 + 7,491         Dec + 18,480 + 10,472 − 599 + 2,344 + 5,564 + 699 − 450 − 11,269 + 5 − 6,761
2008          Jan + 14,847 + 17,063 − 1,081 − 672 + 3,458 − 3,920 + 438 − 4,667 − 311 − 10,618
         Feb + 16,196 + 17,103 − 1,528 + 817 + 4,920 − 5,117 + 214 − 29,183 − 349 + 12,773         Mar + 17,538 + 16,768 − 952 − 68 + 5,010 − 3,219 − 150 − 30,233 − 504 + 12,845
         Apr + 15,765 + 19,035 − 918 + 44 − 287 − 2,109 − 140 − 11,569 − 1,089 − 4,056
         May + 8,741 + 14,371 − 1,040 − 1,827 − 2,228 − 535 + 406 − 26,656 + 913 + 17,509         June + 19,291 + 19,761 − 860 − 642 + 3,985 − 2,953 − 21 − 22,907 − 713 + 3,637
         July + 11,269 + 14,139 − 919 − 3,006 + 4,066 − 3,011 − 127 + 1,300 + 1,225 − 12,442
         Aug + 8,075 + 10,813 − 1,082 − 2,647 + 4,356 − 3,365 − 50 − 7,407 − 82 − 618         Sep + 15,747 + 15,273 − 873 − 677 + 4,878 − 2,854 − 122 − 12,062 + 487 − 3,563
         Oct + 14,379 + 16,666 − 1,008 − 1,836 + 4,696 − 4,139 − 201 − 22,465 − 3,373 + 8,286
         Nov + 9,800 + 9,967 − 1,737 + 578 + 4,833 − 3,841 − 85 − 10,041 − 269 + 326         Dec + 15,315 + 7,339 − 621 + 2,907 + 4,930 + 761 − 371 − 22,841 + 2,058 + 7,897
2009          Jan + 3,185 + 7,083 − 955 − 2,121 + 3,348 − 4,170 − 52 + 22,428 + 2,245 − 25,561
         Feb + 7,073 + 8,873 − 901 + 239 + 4,008 − 5,147 − 86 − 435 − 271 − 6,552         Mar + 12,297 + 11,550 − 855 + 608 + 4,593 − 3,599 + 163 − 17,854 − 1,652 + 5,394
         Apr + 6,039 + 9,657 − 538 + 329 − 553 − 2,856 + 314 − 8,857 − 590 + 2,504
         May + 4,630 + 9,688 − 781 − 172 − 3,221 − 883 + 99 − 7,034 + 342 + 2,305         June + 12,734 + 12,341 − 728 − 2,777 + 3,681 + 217 − 123 − 29,286 + 288 + 16,675
         July + 10,632 + 14,309 − 991 − 3,674 + 3,536 − 2,548 − 56 + 1,178 − 92 − 11,753
         Aug + 5,166 + 8,069 − 731 − 2,759 + 3,556 − 2,969 − 10 − 6,902 + 743 + 1,745         Sep + 9,990 + 10,438 − 569 − 860 + 3,622 − 2,642 + 24 − 9,854 + 1,618 − 160
         Oct + 10,981 + 13,447 − 247 − 1,167 + 3,846 − 4,898 − 235 − 23,637 − 651 + 12,892
         Nov + 16,643 + 17,191 − 1,197 + 688 + 3,805 − 3,844 + 89 − 23,727 + 1,522 + 6,995         Dec + 19,856 + 13,435 − 733 + 2,230 + 3,576 + 1,348 − 313 − 33,798 − 302 + 14,255
2010          Jan + 4,398 + 8,014 − 882 − 1,885 + 3,504 − 4,353 + 82 + 21,599 − 55 − 26,079
         Feb + 9,261 + 12,654 − 316 − 407 + 3,657 − 6,328 + 432 − 14,925 − 782 + 5,232         Mar  
p + 18,026 + 17,176 − 1,247 + 775 + 4,028 − 2,706 − 222 − 15,807 + 187 − 1,997
1Special trade according to the official foreign trade statistics: imports cif, the account of residents and deduction of goods returned. — 3Excluding
exports fob. From January 2007 onwards, excluding supplies of goods the expenditure on freight and insurance included in the cif import
for/after repair/maintenance, which, up to December 2006, were deducted figure. — 4Financial account balance including change in reserve assets.
via supplementary trade items. — 2Inter alia warehouse transactions for Capital exports: − . — 5 Increase: − . 
69*XI External sector

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
E U R O S Y S T E M
Monthly Report
May 2010
XI External sector
 
3 Foreign trade (special trade) of the Federal Republic of Germany,
by country and group of countries *
 
 € million
 2009  2010
Country / group of countries  2007  2008  2009 Oct Nov Dec Jan Feb Mar  p 
All countries  1 Exports 965,236 984,140 803,476 74,131 73,355 69,228 63,823 70,028 85,615
Imports 769,887 805,842 667,395 60,684 56,164 55,793 55,809 57,373 68,439Balance + 195,348 + 178,297 + 136,081 + 13,447 + 17,191 + 13,435 + 8,014 + 12,654 + 17,176
I Exports 726,518 733,092 593,030 54,095 52,420 49,076 47,017 50,287 ...European countries
Imports 541,650 567,062 475,403 43,316 38,831 39,141 38,248 41,111 ...
Balance + 184,867 + 166,031 + 117,627 + 10,780 + 13,589 + 9,935 + 8,769 + 9,176 ...
Exports 623,837 622,637 508,395 46,342 43,890 41,902 40,735 43,088 ... 1 EU member states (27)
Imports 449,691 460,887 392,637 36,149 32,163 32,381 31,453 34,214 ...
Balance + 174,147 + 161,750 + 115,758 + 10,193 + 11,727 + 9,521 + 9,282 + 8,874 ...
Euro-area (16) Exports 421,570 419,597 347,943 31,522 30,096 28,773 27,899 29,590 ...countries Imports 307,188 315,052 268,205 24,515 21,783 21,979 21,425 23,252 ...
Balance + 114,383 + 104,545 + 79,738 + 7,007 + 8,314 + 6,794 + 6,474 + 6,338 ...
of which
Austria Exports 52,813 54,689 48,235 4,312 4,205 3,745 3,702 3,877 ...
Imports 32,091 33,180 29,084 2,702 2,539 2,347 2,257 2,440 ...Balance + 20,722 + 21,509 + 19,151 + 1,610 + 1,667 + 1,398 + 1,445 + 1,437 ...
Belgium and Exports 55,397 55,230 46,808 4,211 4,023 3,939 3,738 4,109 ...
Luxembourg Imports 39,455 39,959 32,092 2,916 2,696 2,607 2,490 2,617 ...
Balance + 15,942 + 15,271 + 14,717 + 1,295 + 1,327 + 1,332 + 1,248 + 1,492 ...
France Exports 91,665 93,718 81,941 7,543 7,067 6,875 6,781 7,056 ...
Imports 62,873 63,369 54,559 5,197 3,847 4,175 4,629 4,728 ...Balance + 28,792 + 30,349 + 27,382 + 2,346 + 3,220 + 2,700 + 2,153 + 2,328 ...
Italy Exports 64,499 62,015 51,050 4,633 4,633 4,190 4,093 4,348 ...
Imports 44,694 46,842 39,684 3,525 3,275 3,102 2,848 3,219 ...Balance + 19,805 + 15,173 + 11,367 + 1,108 + 1,358 + 1,088 + 1,245 + 1,128 ...
Netherlands Exports 62,948 65,799 54,142 4,628 4,311 4,496 4,313 4,629 ...
Imports 61,951 67,971 58,044 5,139 4,761 5,253 4,816 5,297 ...Balance + 997 − 2,172 − 3,902 − 510 − 450 − 757 − 503 − 668 ...
Spain Exports 47,631 42,676 31,296 3,011 2,846 2,647 2,610 2,706 ...
Imports 20,687 20,701 19,257 1,727 1,564 1,462 1,592 1,858 ...Balance + 26,944 + 21,975 + 12,040 + 1,284 + 1,282 + 1,185 + 1,018 + 848 ...
Other EU member Exports 202,267 203,040 160,451 14,820 13,794 13,129 12,836 13,498 ...states Imports 142,503 145,836 124,432 11,634 10,380 10,402 10,028 10,963 ...
Balance + 59,764 + 57,204 + 36,020 + 3,185 + 3,413 + 2,727 + 2,808 + 2,536 ...
of which
United Exports 69,760 64,175 53,156 4,798 4,441 4,430 4,447 4,611 ...Kingdom Imports 41,966 41,646 33,174 3,045 2,492 2,756 2,679 2,916 ...
Balance + 27,794 + 22,529 + 19,982 + 1,753 + 1,948 + 1,674 + 1,768 + 1,695 ...
Exports 102,680 110,455 84,636 7,753 8,530 7,174 6,282 7,199 ... 2 Other European
Imports 91,960 106,174 82,766 7,166 6,668 6,760 6,795 6,897 ... countries
Balance + 10,721 + 4,281 + 1,869 + 587 + 1,862 + 414 − 513 + 302 ...
of which
Switzerland Exports 36,373 39,027 35,324 3,243 3,666 2,899 2,865 3,126 ...
Imports 29,822 31,299 28,071 2,414 2,407 2,071 2,280 2,244 ...
Balance + 6,551 + 7,728 + 7,252 + 828 + 1,259 + 829 + 585 + 882 ...
II Exports 237,139 249,199 213,841 19,911 20,806 20,068 16,797 19,724 ...Non-European
Imports 227,569 238,050 197,924 17,314 17,276 16,601 17,560 16,260 ... countries
Balance + 9,570 + 11,150 + 15,917 + 2,598 + 3,530 + 3,467 − 763 + 3,464 ...
Exports 17,575 19,636 17,200 1,705 1,568 1,616 1,286 1,518 ... 1 Africa
Imports 16,457 20,661 14,211 1,038 1,399 1,261 1,246 1,080 ...
Balance + 1,118 − 1,024 + 2,990 + 667 + 169 + 355 + 41 + 438 ...
Exports 100,769 101,866 77,903 7,382 7,830 6,450 5,804 6,811 ... 2 America
Imports 71,276 73,884 60,909 5,024 5,013 4,913 5,221 4,544 ...
Balance + 29,493 + 27,982 + 16,993 + 2,358 + 2,816 + 1,537 + 583 + 2,266 ...
of which
Exports 73,327 71,428 53,835 4,865 5,393 4,339 3,839 4,459 ... United States
Imports 45,993 46,464 39,915 3,178 3,311 3,285 3,352 2,870 ...Balance + 27,334 + 24,965 + 13,920 + 1,687 + 2,083 + 1,054 + 487 + 1,588 ...
Exports 111,691 120,102 111,653 10,203 10,606 11,385 9,142 10,679 ... 3 Asia
Imports 136,411 140,585 120,096 11,034 10,652 10,234 10,932 10,436 ...
Balance − 24,721 − 20,483 − 8,443 − 831 − 46 + 1,151 − 1,790 + 242 ...
of which
Middle East Exports 23,709 27,498 23,334 1,941 2,158 2,696 1,714 2,033 ...
Imports 6,444 7,943 5,492 407 480 639 448 458 ...Balance + 17,265 + 19,555 + 17,841 + 1,534 + 1,679 + 2,057 + 1,266 + 1,576 ...
Japan Exports 13,022 12,732 10,787 944 1,034 965 1,005 977 ...
Imports 24,381 23,130 18,116 1,605 1,587 1,492 1,556 1,424 ...Balance − 11,359 − 10,398 − 7,329 − 661 − 554 − 527 − 551 − 447 ...
Exports 29,902 34,065 36,460 3,449 3,539 3,410 3,121 4,010 ... People‘s Republic
Imports 56,417 60,825 55,447 5,282 5,229 4,794 5,011 4,817 ... of China  
2 
Balance − 26,515 − 26,760 − 18,988 − 1,834 − 1,690 − 1,384 − 1,890 − 807 ...
Exports 32,284 32,572 28,309 2,755 2,725 2,773 2,395 2,623 ... Emerging markets
Imports 35,357 33,152 27,756 2,609 2,395 2,311 2,817 2,435 ... in South-East Asia  3 
Balance − 3,073 − 580 + 553 + 146 + 330 + 462 − 423 + 188 ...
Exports 7,104 7,595 7,085 622 802 617 564 717 ... 4 Oceania and
Imports 3,425 2,920 2,707 218 212 192 162 199 ... polar regions
Balance + 3,679 + 4,674 + 4,378 + 404 + 590 + 425 + 403 + 517 ...
 
*Source: Federal Statistical Office. Exports (fob) by country of destination, region. Excluding repair and maintenance operations from January 200 7 on-
imports (cif) by country of origin. Individual countries and groups of wards. — 2Excluding Hong Kong. — 3Brunei Darussalam, Hong Kong, Indo-
countries according to the current position. — 1Including fuel and other nesia, Malaysia, Philippines, Republic of Korea, Singapore, Taiwan and
supplies for ships and aircraft and other data not classifiable by Thailand. 
70*XI External sector

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
May 2010
XI External sector
 
4 Services and income of the Federal Republic of Germany
(balances)
 
€ million
Services
Other services
of which
 
Patents Compen- Services  of Construction
Trans- Financial and sation of Investment Government self-employed and  assembly
Period Total Travel  1 services licences Total income portation  2 services  3 persons  4 work,  repairs employees  5 
2005 − 25,677 − 36,317 + 6,379 + 1,622 − 1,203 + 3,688 + 153 − 1,638 + 3,086 − 1,285 + 26,182
2006 − 13,740 − 32,771 + 5,723 + 2,232 − 1,895 + 3,736 + 9,235 − 1,790 + 3,980 − 773 + 45,666
2007 − 11,603 − 34,324 + 6,770 + 2,886 − 2,192 + 3,309 + 11,947 − 1,977 + 3,089 + 342 + 43,163
2008 − 7,031 − 34,644 + 8,312 + 4,067 − 1,715 + 2,351 + 14,598 − 1,583 + 3,059 + 523 + 42,0942009 − 9,437 − 33,073 + 6,877 + 3,941 − 357 + 2,315 + 10,861 − 1,164 + 2,165 − 344 + 34,142
2008          Q3 − 6,331 − 14,729 + 2,261 + 887 − 605 + 648 + 5,208 − 322 + 943 − 372 + 13,674
         Q4 + 1,649 − 5,221 + 2,197 + 1,600 − 183 + 542 + 2,713 − 501 + 748 + 189 + 14,269
2009          Q1 − 1,274 − 5,431 + 2,260 + 921 − 994 + 615 + 1,355 − 342 + 311 + 677 + 11,273
         Q2 − 2,620 − 8,667 + 1,855 + 697 − 343 + 644 + 3,193 − 254 + 467 + 269 − 362         Q3 − 7,293 − 13,362 + 1,325 + 732 + 103 + 577 + 3,332 − 276 + 585 − 720 + 11,435         Q4 + 1,751 − 5,613 + 1,437 + 1,591 + 877 + 478 + 2,981 − 291 + 802 − 570 + 11,796
2010          Q1 − 1,516 − 5,465 + 1,433 + 905 − 13 + 586 + 1,038 − 261 + 414 + 812 + 10,377
2009          May − 172 − 2,790 + 643 + 253 + 27 + 209 + 1,487 − 76 − 83 + 87 − 3,308
         June − 2,777 − 3,914 + 482 + 48 − 153 + 211 + 548 − 87 + 366 + 86 + 3,595
         July − 3,674 − 5,015 + 525 + 267 − 117 + 164 + 502 − 108 + 304 − 247 + 3,783
         Aug − 2,759 − 4,825 + 416 + 254 + 249 + 210 + 937 − 95 + 136 − 237 + 3,793
         Sep − 860 − 3,522 + 385 + 211 − 30 + 203 + 1,893 − 73 + 145 − 236 + 3,858
         Oct − 1,167 − 3,617 + 466 + 373 − 80 + 154 + 1,537 − 67 + 374 − 224 + 4,069
         Nov + 688 − 1,235 + 517 + 314 + 368 + 183 + 541 − 102 + 153 − 215 + 4,020
         Dec + 2,230 − 760 + 454 + 904 + 588 + 141 + 903 − 121 + 275 − 132 + 3,707
2010          Jan − 1,885 − 1,872 + 361 + 303 − 560 + 154 − 271 − 81 + 136 + 250 + 3,255
         Feb − 407 − 1,597 + 475 + 289 + 397 + 213 − 184 − 70 + 111 + 270 + 3,387
         Mar + 775 − 1,997 + 597 + 314 + 150 + 219 + 1,493 − 110 + 166 + 292 + 3,736
1From January 2001, figures subject to significant uncertainty. — 2Ex- vices supplied. — 4Engineering and other technical services, research and
cluding the expenditure on freight included in the cif import figure. — development, commercial services, etc. — 5 Wages and salaries. 
3Including the receipts from foreign military agencies for goods and ser-
5 Current transfers of the Federal Republic of Germany 6 Capital transfers
(balances) (balances)
€ million € million
Public  1 Private  1 
International
organisations  2 
 
of which Other Other
European current Workers’ current
Period Total Total Total Communities Total remittances transfers Total  4 Public  1 Private  1 transfers  3 
2005 − 28,712 − 17,588 − 16,264 − 14,687 − 1,324 − 11,124 − 2,926 − 8,198 − 1,369 − 3,419 + 2,050
2006 − 27,206 − 14,496 − 14,902 − 13,348 + 406 − 12,710 − 2,927 − 9,783 − 258 − 1,947 + 1,689
2007 − 32,206 − 16,752 − 18,659 − 16,876 + 1,908 − 15,454 − 2,997 − 12,458 + 110 − 2,034 + 2,145
2008 − 34,303 − 17,907 − 19,611 − 17,536 + 1,704 − 16,395 − 3,079 − 13,316 − 209 − 1,857 + 1,6482009 − 31,991 − 17,750 − 17,921 − 15,581 + 171 − 14,241 − 2,995 − 11,247 − 186 − 1,645 + 1,459
2008          Q3 − 9,231 − 5,054 − 4,415 − 3,998 − 639 − 4,176 − 770 − 3,407 − 299 − 367 + 69
         Q4 − 7,219 − 3,034 − 2,045 − 1,582 − 989 − 4,185 − 770 − 3,415 − 658 − 792 + 134
2009          Q1 − 12,916 − 9,286 − 8,689 − 7,827 − 597 − 3,629 − 749 − 2,881 + 25 − 407 + 432
         Q2 − 3,522 + 351 − 2,109 − 1,630 + 2,460 − 3,873 − 749 − 3,124 + 290 − 303 + 592         Q3 − 8,159 − 5,019 − 4,288 − 3,766 − 731 − 3,140 − 749 − 2,392 − 42 − 360 + 318         Q4 − 7,395 − 3,796 − 2,834 − 2,358 − 962 − 3,599 − 749 − 2,850 − 459 − 576 + 117
2010          Q1 − 13,388 − 9,945 − 8,957 − 8,265 − 988 − 3,443 − 759 − 2,684 + 292 − 378 + 670
2009          May − 883 + 234 − 1,357 − 1,265 + 1,591 − 1,117 − 250 − 868 + 99 − 90 + 190
         June + 217 + 1,143 + 1,320 + 1,555 − 178 − 925 − 250 − 676 − 123 − 108 − 16
         July − 2,548 − 1,322 − 1,110 − 871 − 213 − 1,226 − 250 − 976 − 56 − 117 + 61
         Aug − 2,969 − 2,040 − 1,716 − 1,538 − 324 − 930 − 250 − 680 − 10 − 100 + 91
         Sep − 2,642 − 1,657 − 1,462 − 1,356 − 194 − 985 − 250 − 735 + 24 − 142 + 166
         Oct − 4,898 − 3,974 − 3,557 − 3,350 − 418 − 924 − 250 − 674 − 235 − 148 − 88
         Nov − 3,844 − 2,517 − 2,077 − 1,991 − 441 − 1,327 − 250 − 1,077 + 89 − 198 + 287
         Dec + 1,348 + 2,696 + 2,799 + 2,982 − 103 − 1,348 − 250 − 1,098 − 313 − 230 − 83
2010          Jan − 4,353 − 3,179 − 2,952 − 2,716 − 227 − 1,175 − 253 − 922 + 82 − 112 + 193
         Feb − 6,328 − 5,137 − 4,696 − 4,358 − 442 − 1,191 − 253 − 938 + 432 − 108 + 540
         Mar − 2,706 − 1,629 − 1,309 − 1,191 − 319 − 1,078 − 253 − 825 − 222 − 158 − 64
1The classification of “public” and “private” transfers depends on the (excluding capital transfers). — 3Payments to developing countries, pension
sector to which the participating domestic body belongs. — 2Current contri- payments, tax revenue and refunds, etc. — 4Where identifiable; in
butions to the budgets of international organisations and to the EU budget particular, debt forgiveness. 
71*XI External sector

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
E U R O S Y S T E M
Monthly Report
May 2010
XI External sector
 
7 Financial account of the Federal Republic of Germany
 
 
€ million
2009 2010
Item 2007 2008 2009 Q2 Q3 Q4 Q1 Jan Feb Mar
I Net German investment abroad
(Increase/capital exports: −) − 687,629 − 233,154 + 4,951 − 68,117 + 40,831 − 27,348 − 68,069 − 1,824 − 25,892 − 40,354
1 Direct investment  1 − 118,723 − 91,882 − 45,138 − 16,116 − 17,247 + 1,855 − 32,011 − 7,911 − 10,426 − 13,674
Equity capital − 43,692 − 61,067 − 47,617 − 13,561 − 14,892 + 2,563 − 14,105 − 4,467 − 7,539 − 2,099
Reinvested earnings  2 − 30,853 − 11,852 − 14,431 − 1,103 − 5,584 − 4,649 − 5,303 − 645 − 2,778 − 1,880
Other capital transactions
of German direct investors − 44,178 − 18,964 + 16,910 − 1,452 + 3,228 + 3,941 − 12,604 − 2,799 − 109 − 9,695
2 Portfolio investment − 148,706 + 24,956 − 72,571 − 27,121 − 18,369 − 17,979 − 19,264 − 13,148 + 4,261 − 10,378
Shares 3 + 21,141 + 39,598 − 2,208 − 1,442 − 253 − 771 + 3,581 + 2,811 + 1,971 − 1,202
Mutual fund shares  4 − 42,259 − 8,425 + 608 − 1,030 − 865 + 2,995 − 8,022 − 3,125 − 2,046 − 2,851
Bonds and notes  5 − 101,167 − 23,905 − 83,507 − 27,448 − 19,949 − 21,596 − 18,123 − 7,671 − 537 − 9,915
Money market instruments − 26,422 + 17,688 + 12,536 + 2,799 + 2,698 + 1,393 + 3,300 − 5,163 + 4,873 + 3,589
3 Financial derivatives  6 − 85,170 − 25,449 + 20,415 + 4,142 − 5,902 − 377 − 4,107 − 577 + 296 − 3,826
4 Other investment − 334,077 − 138,770 + 99,044 − 29,063 + 80,081 − 11,416 − 12,036 + 19,866 − 19,241 − 12,662
MFIs  7,8 − 226,871 − 71,875 + 176,593 + 1,522 + 71,065 − 772 + 23,637 + 4,258 + 10,979 + 8,400
Long-term − 98,835 − 142,257 + 25,819 − 16,002 + 18,219 + 23,670 + 11,600 + 6,719 + 2,004 + 2,877Short-term − 128,036 + 70,382 + 150,774 + 17,523 + 52,846 − 24,442 + 12,037 − 2,462 + 8,975 + 5,524
Enterprises and households − 49,908 − 25,105 − 18,287 + 4,468 + 2,839 − 10,297 − 4,817 + 11,162 − 9,855 − 6,124
Long-term − 47,586 − 22,745 − 16,747 + 2,279 − 11,394 − 5,611 − 8,296 − 3,612 − 5,184 + 499
Short-term  
7 − 2,321 − 2,360 − 1,540 + 2,188 + 14,232 − 4,686 + 3,479 + 14,774 − 4,671 − 6,623
General government + 8,426 + 2,809 + 2,005 − 15,680 + 14,159 − 1,446 − 1,675 + 4,271 − 943 − 5,002
Long-term + 309 − 325 − 652 − 391 − 43 + 130 − 517 − 423 − 69 − 25Short-term  
7 + 8,117 + 3,135 + 2,657 − 15,289 + 14,203 − 1,577 − 1,158 + 4,694 − 874 − 4,978
Bundesbank − 65,724 − 44,600 − 61,267 − 19,372 − 7,982 + 1,099 − 29,181 + 176 − 19,422 − 9,936
5 Change in reserve assets at
transaction values (Increase:-) − 953 − 2,008 + 3,200 + 41 + 2,269 + 569 − 651 − 55 − 782 + 187
II Net foreign investment in Germany
(Increase/capital imports: +) + 468,128 + 34,423 − 142,728 + 22,940 − 56,409 − 53,814 + 58,937 + 23,423 + 10,967 + 24,547
1 Direct investment  1 + 55,925 + 16,681 + 25,631 + 9,372 + 5,725 + 6,794 + 6,847 + 250 + 1,082 + 5,515
Equity capital + 39,980 + 17,536 + 8,020 − 357 + 1,353 + 2,402 + 570 − 268 − 698 + 1,537
Reinvested earnings  2 + 5,487 − 1,802 + 2,322 + 380 + 481 − 5 + 3,846 + 1,379 + 1,163 + 1,305
Other capital transactions
of foreign direct investors + 10,458 + 947 + 15,290 + 9,349 + 3,891 + 4,397 + 2,431 − 860 + 617 + 2,674
2 Portfolio investment + 291,455 + 10,068 − 18,227 + 28,656 − 5,296 − 18,788 + 11,626 − 2,769 + 11,978 + 2,418
Shares  3 + 39,971 − 32,619 + 7,791 + 1,122 + 11,807 − 700 + 756 − 3,355 + 1,943 + 2,167
Mutual fund shares + 4,771 − 8,639 + 155 − 2 − 612 + 475 + 1,756 + 864 + 335 + 557Bonds and notes  
5 + 199,219 + 13,894 − 75,383 − 1,261 − 27,423 − 14,156 + 14,551 + 5,122 + 7,491 + 1,938
Money market instruments + 47,493 + 37,432 + 49,210 + 28,798 + 10,933 − 4,407 − 5,436 − 5,401 + 2,210 − 2,245
3 Other investment + 120,748 + 7,674 − 150,132 − 15,088 − 56,839 − 41,821 + 40,464 + 25,942 − 2,093 + 16,614
MFIs  7,8 + 73,212 − 58,201 − 115,410 − 11,652 − 45,741 − 36,894 + 51,662 + 44,695 − 6,809 + 13,775
Long-term − 14,201 + 11,871 − 24,386 − 3,821 − 4,564 − 12,456 − 1,603 − 637 − 356 − 611Short-term + 87,413 − 70,073 − 91,024 − 7,832 − 41,176 − 24,438 + 53,265 + 45,332 − 6,453 + 14,386
Enterprises and households + 39,667 + 45,177 − 7,706 − 2,274 − 10,360 + 8,489 − 12,971 − 20,393 + 848 + 6,574
Long-term + 20,003 + 24,555 + 168 + 2,733 − 1,046 − 1,836 + 435 + 980 − 500 − 45
Short-term  
7 + 19,664 + 20,623 − 7,874 − 5,006 − 9,314 + 10,324 − 13,406 − 21,373 + 1,348 + 6,620
General government − 3,480 + 6,347 − 5,235 − 3,779 + 711 − 13,904 + 1,496 + 713 + 4,364 − 3,580
Long-term − 3,204 − 1,048 − 1,959 − 931 − 180 − 355 − 521 + 6 − 220 − 306Short-term  
7 − 276 + 7,396 − 3,276 − 2,848 + 891 − 13,549 + 2,016 + 707 + 4,584 − 3,274
Bundesbank + 11,349 + 14,351 − 21,782 + 2,617 − 1,449 + 489 + 277 + 928 − 496 − 155
III Financial account balance  9 
(Net capital exports: −) − 219,502 − 198,730 − 137,777 − 45,176 − 15,578 − 81,162 − 9,132 + 21,599 − 14,925 − 15,807
1From 1996, new definition for direct investment. — 2Estimated. — action values shown here are mostly derived from changes in stocks. Purely
3Including participation rights. — 4From 1991, including retained statistical changes have been eliminated as far as possible. — 8Excluding
earnings. — 5From 1975, excluding accrued interest. — 6Options, whether the Deutsche Bundesbank. — 9Financial account balance including change
evidenced by securities or not, and financial futures contracts. — 7The trans- in reserve assets. 
72*XI External sector

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
May 2010
XI External sector
 
8 External position of the Bundesbank *
 
 
DM million
Reserve assets and other claims on non-residents Liabilities vis-à-vis non-residents
Reserve assets
Reserve
positionin theInter- Liabilitiesnational arising Net Liabilities
Monetary arising from externalFund and Claims Loans and from liquidity position
Foreign special on the external Treasury (col 1 other claims
End of year currency drawing ECB  
2 on non- trans- discount less
or month Total Total Gold rights (net) Total paper col 8) balances  1 residents  3 actions  4 
1234567891 0 1 1
1996 120,985 119,544 13,688 72,364 11,445 22,048 1,441 15,604 15,604 − 105,381
1997 127,849 126,884 13,688 76,673 13,874 22,649 966 16,931 16,931 − 110,9181998 135,085 134,005 17,109 100,363 16,533 − 1,079 15,978 15,978 − 119,107
*Valuation of the gold holdings and the claims on non-residents in Monetary Cooperation Fund (EMCF)). — 3Including loans to the World
accordance with section 26 (2) of the Bundesbank Act and the provisions of Bank. — 4Including liquidity paper sold to non-residents by the
the Commercial Code, especially section 253. In the course of the year, Bundesbank; excluding the liquidity Treasury discount paper sold to
valuation at the preceding year’s balance sheet rates. — 1Mainly US dollar non-residents between March 1993 and March 1995, as shown in column 10. 
assets. — 2European Central Bank (up to 1993, claims on the European
  
 
9 External position of the Bundesbank in the euro area o
€ million
Reserve assets and other claims on non-residents
Reserve assets
Reserveposition
Other in the Inter-national claims onMonetary Other residentsFund and claims on Claims in other Net external
Gold special Foreign non-euro- within the euro-area position Liabilities
End of year and gold drawing currency area Eurosystem member vis-à-vis non- (col 1 lessor month Total Total rights reserves (net)  
2 states col 9) receivables residents  1,3 residents  3,4 
1234567891 0
1999          Jan  5 95,316 93,940 29,312 8,461 56,167 140 1,225 11 8,169 87,146
1999 141,958 93,039 32,287 8,332 52,420 9,162 39,746 11 6,179 135,779
2000 100,762 93,815 32,676 7,762 53,377 313 6,620 14 6,592 94,1702001 76,147 93,215 35,005 8,721 49,489 312 − 17,385 5 8,752 67,3962002 103,948 85,002 36,208 8,272 40,522 312 18,466 167 9,005 94,9422003 95,394 76,680 36,533 7,609 32,538 312 17,945 456 10,443 84,951
2004 93,110 71,335 35,495 6,548 29,292 312 20,796 667 7,935 85,175
2005 130,268 86,181 47,924 4,549 33,708 350 42,830 906 6,285 123,9832006 104,389 84,765 53,114 3,011 28,640 350 18,344 931 4,819 99,5702007 179,492 92,545 62,433 2,418 27,694 350 84,064 2,534 16,005 163,4882008 230,775 99,185 68,194 3,285 27,705 350 128,668 2,573 30,169 200,607
2009 323,286 125,541 83,939 15,969 25,634 350 189,936 7,460 9,126 314,160
2008          Dec 230,775 99,185 68,194 3,285 27,705 350 128,668 2,573 30,169 200,607
2009          Jan 258,620 109,963 78,633 3,462 27,869 350 145,706 2,601 21,988 236,631
         Feb 275,770 113,507 81,893 3,455 28,159 350 159,318 2,594 16,983 258,786
         Mar 274,458 107,809 75,726 3,463 28,620 350 163,681 2,618 7,527 266,931
         Apr 272,318 105,577 73,476 3,482 28,619 350 163,774 2,618 8,538 263,781
         May 261,878 107,375 75,646 4,599 27,130 350 151,664 2,490 9,175 252,703         June 290,738 104,691 72,955 4,493 27,243 350 183,052 2,645 10,121 280,617
         July 282,460 104,931 72,586 4,694 27,651 350 173,956 3,222 7,900 274,560
         Aug 291,882 115,309 72,998 15,186 27,124 350 171,719 4,506 8,972 282,910
         Sep 314,396 116,785 74,913 16,268 25,604 350 191,035 6,227 8,641 305,756
         Oct 292,775 119,584 77,320 16,501 25,763 350 166,341 6,500 9,038 283,737
         Nov 306,623 126,129 85,449 15,723 24,957 350 172,779 7,366 9,274 297,349         Dec 323,286 125,541 83,939 15,969 25,634 350 189,936 7,460 9,126 314,160
2010          Jan 326,161 127,966 84,917 16,350 26,699 350 189,759 8,086 10,066 316,095
         Feb 352,969 134,669 89,796 17,327 27,546 50 209,481 8,770 9,573 343,396
         Mar 364,072 134,826 90,158 17,176 27,491 50 219,417 9,780 9,421 354,651
         Apr 377,729 142,021 96,677 17,290 28,054 50 225,677 9,982 11,833 365,897
oClaims and liabilities vis-à-vis all countries within and outside the euro November 2000, including the TARGET positions which were previously
area. Up to December 2000, the levels at the end of each quarter are shown, shown (in columns 6 and 9) as bilateral assets and liabilities vis-à-vis natio nal
owing to revaluations, at market prices; within each quarter, however, the central banks outside the Eurosystem. — 3See footnote 2. — 4Excluding
levels are computed on the basis of cumulative transaction values. From allocations of special drawing rights (SDR) by the International Monetary
January 2001, all end-of-month levels are valued at market prices. — Fund (IMF) for an amount of SDR 12,059 million. — 5Euro opening balance
1Including loans to the World Bank. — 2Including the balances in the sheet of the Bundesbank as at 1 January 1999. 
Bundesbank’s cross-border payments within the Eurosystem. From
73*XI External sector

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
E U R O S Y S T E M
Monthly Report
May 2010
XI External sector
 
10 Assets and liabilities of enterprises in Germany (other than banks)
vis-à-vis non-residents *
 
€ million
Claims on non-residents Liabilities vis-à-vis non-residents
Claims on foreign non-banks Liabilities  vis-à-vis foreign non-banks
from trade credits from trade credits
Balances Loans
with from Credit Advance from from Credit Advance
End of year foreign financial terms payments foreign financial terms payments
or month Total banks Total Total granted effected Total banks Total Total used received operations operations
All countries
 
2006 450,228 117,723 332,505 190,300 142,205 134,057 8,148 624,790 95,019 529,771 408,907 120,864 79,900 40,964
2007 509,178 162,654 346,524 196,178 150,346 139,842 10,504 650,966 111,543 539,423 404,904 134,519 82,979 51,540
2008 553,465 173,255 380,210 227,055 153,155 140,520 12,635 706,304 147,242 559,062 422,811 136,251 79,980 56,271
2009 594,771 209,729 385,042 241,907 143,135 130,605 12,530 751,625 159,667 591,958 454,738 137,220 80,759 56,461
2009          Oct 590,748 208,618 382,130 236,413 145,717 132,995 12,722 726,700 147,955 578,745 442,165 136,580 78,438 58,142
         Nov 596,457 209,907 386,550 236,828 149,722 137,175 12,547 728,414 149,664 578,750 440,476 138,274 80,756 57,518         Dec 594,771 209,729 385,042 241,907 143,135 130,605 12,530 751,625 159,667 591,958 454,738 137,220 80,759 56,461
2010          Jan 585,567 205,776 379,791 245,189 134,602 122,038 12,564 724,937 145,359 579,578 452,051 127,527 70,475 57,052
         Feb 597,683 214,474 383,209 245,660 137,549 124,929 12,620 730,116 143,824 586,292 456,578 129,714 72,228 57,486         Mar 619,382 216,334 403,048 255,243 147,805 135,035 12,770 749,068 146,788 602,280 465,631 136,649 78,751 57,898
Industrial countries 1
 
2006 396,649 115,269 281,380 174,784 106,596 100,541 6,055 570,675 93,560 477,115 389,770 87,345 66,210 21,135
2007 452,354 160,666 291,688 180,564 111,124 103,104 8,020 590,245 110,291 479,954 384,024 95,930 69,347 26,583
2008 489,430 171,387 318,043 207,807 110,236 101,002 9,234 642,252 145,045 497,207 400,620 96,587 68,148 28,439
2009 532,976 208,571 324,405 221,958 102,447 93,566 8,881 682,254 157,343 524,911 428,795 96,116 68,912 27,204
2009          Oct 528,658 207,403 321,255 216,213 105,042 95,751 9,291 661,178 145,898 515,280 418,847 96,433 67,635 28,798
         Nov 533,581 208,776 324,805 216,345 108,460 99,365 9,095 662,669 147,619 515,050 417,044 98,006 69,441 28,565         Dec 532,976 208,571 324,405 221,958 102,447 93,566 8,881 682,254 157,343 524,911 428,795 96,116 68,912 27,204
2010          Jan 523,677 204,714 318,963 224,505 94,458 85,434 9,024 655,442 143,042 512,400 426,086 86,314 58,787 27,527
         Feb 534,112 213,467 320,645 224,500 96,145 87,103 9,042 660,115 141,525 518,590 430,529 88,061 60,308 27,753         Mar 553,812 215,282 338,530 234,208 104,322 95,449 8,873 677,692 144,474 533,218 438,979 94,239 66,410 27,829
EU member states 1
 
2006 308,720 108,982 199,738 121,929 77,809 72,902 4,907 479,025 86,343 392,682 332,871 59,811 45,202 14,609
2007 364,105 154,644 209,461 127,080 82,381 75,942 6,439 489,234 105,022 384,212 318,769 65,443 46,262 19,181
2008 398,833 164,762 234,071 151,391 82,680 75,192 7,488 534,951 137,208 397,743 330,098 67,645 46,188 21,457
2009 443,431 200,400 243,031 165,986 77,045 70,051 6,994 576,596 141,633 434,963 364,980 69,983 48,977 21,006
2009          Oct 438,523 199,468 239,055 159,369 79,686 72,382 7,304 564,747 136,659 428,088 358,519 69,569 47,516 22,053
         Nov 442,355 200,413 241,942 159,922 82,020 74,895 7,125 565,224 138,113 427,111 356,186 70,925 48,945 21,980         Dec 443,431 200,400 243,031 165,986 77,045 70,051 6,994 576,596 141,633 434,963 364,980 69,983 48,977 21,006
2010          Jan 433,328 196,101 237,227 167,033 70,194 62,993 7,201 559,494 136,135 423,359 361,898 61,461 40,126 21,335
         Feb 443,957 205,203 238,754 168,084 70,670 63,493 7,177 562,567 134,856 427,711 365,109 62,602 41,244 21,358         Mar 455,584 205,972 249,612 172,789 76,823 69,831 6,992 573,886 134,321 439,565 372,210 67,355 45,985 21,370
of which:  Euro-area member states 2
 
2006 207,868 77,056 130,812 79,901 50,911 47,614 3,297 369,648 38,878 330,770 292,178 38,592 28,340 10,252
2007 251,718 118,112 133,606 79,745 53,861 49,537 4,324 367,318 56,632 310,686 269,095 41,591 28,964 12,627
2008 281,518 130,226 151,292 96,968 54,324 49,408 4,916 413,821 81,703 332,118 288,693 43,425 29,768 13,657
2009 321,991 159,740 162,251 114,378 47,873 43,179 4,694 463,064 91,792 371,272 329,280 41,992 28,397 13,595
2009          Oct 307,498 154,897 152,601 103,037 49,564 44,644 4,920 451,697 86,386 365,311 323,068 42,243 28,126 14,117
         Nov 313,980 158,134 155,846 104,921 50,925 46,144 4,781 450,934 88,176 362,758 320,309 42,449 28,393 14,056         Dec 321,991 159,740 162,251 114,378 47,873 43,179 4,694 463,064 91,792 371,272 329,280 41,992 28,397 13,595
2010          Jan 317,132 156,956 160,176 112,898 47,278 42,399 4,879 455,285 88,596 366,689 326,104 40,585 26,443 14,142
         Feb 324,621 163,628 160,993 113,084 47,909 43,074 4,835 457,580 88,218 369,362 327,489 41,873 27,939 13,934         Mar 328,902 160,720 168,182 116,317 51,865 47,044 4,821 462,990 84,275 378,715 334,050 44,665 30,961 13,704
Emerging economies and developing countries 3
 
2006 53,579 2,454 51,125 15,516 35,609 33,516 2,093 54,115 1,459 52,656 19,137 33,519 13,690 19,829
2007 56,824 1,988 54,836 15,614 39,222 36,738 2,484 60,721 1,252 59,469 20,880 38,589 13,632 24,957
2008 64,035 1,868 62,167 19,248 42,919 39,518 3,401 64,052 2,197 61,855 22,191 39,664 11,832 27,832
2009 61,795 1,158 60,637 19,949 40,688 37,039 3,649 69,371 2,324 67,047 25,943 41,104 11,847 29,257
2009          Oct 62,090 1,215 60,875 20,200 40,675 37,244 3,431 65,522 2,057 63,465 23,318 40,147 10,803 29,344
         Nov 62,876 1,131 61,745 20,483 41,262 37,810 3,452 65,745 2,045 63,700 23,432 40,268 11,315 28,953         Dec 61,795 1,158 60,637 19,949 40,688 37,039 3,649 69,371 2,324 67,047 25,943 41,104 11,847 29,257
2010          Jan 61,890 1,062 60,828 20,684 40,144 36,604 3,540 69,495 2,317 67,178 25,965 41,213 11,688 29,525
         Feb 63,571 1,007 62,564 21,160 41,404 37,826 3,578 70,001 2,299 67,702 26,049 41,653 11,920 29,733         Mar 65,570 1,052 64,518 21,035 43,483 39,586 3,897 71,376 2,314 69,062 26,652 42,410 12,341 30,069
* Up to and including November 2009 the assets and liabilities vis-à-vis shown in Table XI.7. — 1From January 2007, including Bulgaria and
non-residents of households in Germany. The assets and liabilities vis-à-vis Romania. — 2From January 2007, including Slovenia; from January 2008,
non-residents of banks (MFIs) in Germany are shown in Table 4 of Section IV, including Cyprus and Malta; from January 2009, including Slovakia. — 3All
“Banks”. Statistical increases and decreases have not been eliminated; to countries that are not regarded as industrial countries. 
this extent, the changes in totals are not comparable with the figures
74*XI External sector

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
May 2010
XI External sector
 
11 ECB euro reference exchange rates of selected currencies *
 
 
EUR 1 = currency units ...
Yearly Australia Canada China Denmark Japan Norway Sweden Switzerland United States United Kingdom
or monthly       
average AUD CAD CNY  1 DKK JPY NOK SEK CHF GBP USD
1999 1.6523 1.5840 . 7.4355 121.32 8.3104 8.8075 1.6003 0.65874 1.0658
2000 1.5889 1.3706 2 7.6168 7.4538 99.47 8.1129 8.4452 1.5579 0.60948 0.9236
2001 1.7319 1.3864 7.4131 7.4521 108.68 8.0484 9.2551 1.5105 0.62187 0.8956
2002 1.7376 1.4838 7.8265 7.4305 118.06 7.5086 9.1611 1.4670 0.62883 0.9456
2003 1.7379 1.5817 9.3626 7.4307 130.97 8.0033 9.1242 1.5212 0.69199 1.1312
2004 1.6905 1.6167 10.2967 7.4399 134.44 8.3697 9.1243 1.5438 0.67866 1.2439
2005 1.6320 1.5087 10.1955 7.4518 136.85 8.0092 9.2822 1.5483 0.68380 1.2441
2006 1.6668 1.4237 10.0096 7.4591 146.02 8.0472 9.2544 1.5729 0.68173 1.25562007 1.6348 1.4678 10.4178 7.4506 161.25 8.0165 9.2501 1.6427 0.68434 1.37052008 1.7416 1.5594 10.2236 7.4560 152.45 8.2237 9.6152 1.5874 0.79628 1.47082009 1.7727 1.5850 9.5277 7.4462 130.34 8.7278 10.6191 1.5100 0.89094 1.3948
2008          July 1.6386 1.5974 10.7809 7.4599 168.45 8.0487 9.4566 1.6193 0.79308 1.5770
         Aug 1.6961 1.5765 10.2609 7.4595 163.63 7.9723 9.3984 1.6212 0.79279 1.4975         Sep 1.7543 1.5201 9.8252 7.4583 153.20 8.1566 9.5637 1.5942 0.79924 1.4370
         Oct 1.9345 1.5646 9.1071 7.4545 133.52 8.5928 9.8506 1.5194 0.78668 1.3322
         Nov 1.9381 1.5509 8.6950 7.4485 123.28 8.8094 10.1275 1.5162 0.83063 1.2732
         Dec 2.0105 1.6600 9.2205 7.4503 122.51 9.4228 10.7538 1.5393 0.90448 1.3449
2009          Jan 1.9633 1.6233 9.0496 7.4519 119.73 9.2164 10.7264 1.4935 0.91819 1.3239
         Feb 1.9723 1.5940 8.7406 7.4514 118.30 8.7838 10.9069 1.4904 0.88691 1.2785         Mar 1.9594 1.6470 8.9210 7.4509 127.65 8.8388 11.1767 1.5083 0.91966 1.3050
         Apr 1.8504 1.6188 9.0110 7.4491 130.25 8.7867 10.8796 1.5147 0.89756 1.3190
         May 1.7831 1.5712 9.3157 7.4468 131.85 8.7943 10.5820 1.5118 0.88445 1.3650         June 1.7463 1.5761 9.5786 7.4457 135.39 8.9388 10.8713 1.5148 0.85670 1.4016
         July 1.7504 1.5824 9.6246 7.4458 133.09 8.9494 10.8262 1.5202 0.86092 1.4088
         Aug 1.7081 1.5522 9.7485 7.4440 135.31 8.6602 10.2210 1.5236 0.86265 1.4268         Sep 1.6903 1.5752 9.9431 7.4428 133.14 8.5964 10.1976 1.5148 0.89135 1.4562
         Oct 1.6341 1.5619 10.1152 7.4438 133.91 8.3596 10.3102 1.5138 0.91557 1.4816
         Nov 1.6223 1.5805 10.1827 7.4415 132.97 8.4143 10.3331 1.5105 0.89892 1.4914         Dec 1.6185 1.5397 9.9777 7.4419 131.21 8.4066 10.4085 1.5021 0.89972 1.4614
2010          Jan 1.5624 1.4879 9.7436 7.4424 130.34 8.1817 10.1939 1.4765 0.88305 1.4272
         Feb 1.5434 1.4454 9.3462 7.4440 123.46 8.0971 9.9505 1.4671 0.87604 1.3686         Mar 1.4882 1.3889 9.2623 7.4416 123.03 8.0369 9.7277 1.4482 0.90160 1.3569
         Apr 1.4463 1.3467 9.1505 7.4428 125.33 7.9323 9.6617 1.4337 0.87456 1.3406
*Averages: Bundesbank calculations based on the daily euro reference 1Up to March 2005, ECB indicative rates. — 2Average from 13 January to
exchange rates published by the ECB; for additional euro reference 29 December 2000. 
exchange rates, see Statistical Supplement 5, Exchange rate statistics. —
12 Irrevocable euro conversion rates in Stage III of European Economic and Monetary Union
As of Country Currency ISO currency code Euro 1 = currency units ...
1999  January 1 Austria Austrian schilling ATS 13.7603
Belgium Belgian franc BEF 40.3399
Finland Finnish markka FIM 5.94573France French franc FRF 6.55957Germany Deutsche Mark DEM 1.95583Ireland Irish pound IEP 0.787564Italy Italian lira ITL 1,936.27
Luxembourg Luxembourg franc LUF 40.3399
Netherlands Dutch guilder NLG 2.20371Portugal Portuguese escudo PTE 200.482Spain Spanish peseta ESP 166.386
2001  January 1 Greece Greek drachma GRD 340.7502007  January 1 Slovenia Slovenian tolar SIT 239.6402008  January 1 Cyprus Cyprus pound CYP 0.585274
Malta Maltese lira MTL 0.429300
2009  January 1 Slovakia Slovak koruna SKK 30.1260
75*XI External sector

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
E U R O S Y S T E M
Monthly Report
May 2010
XI  External  sector
 
13  Effective exchange rates of the Euro and indicators of the German economy’s price competitiveness *
 
 
1999 Q1 = 100
Effective exchange rate of the Euro Indicators of the German economy’s price competitiveness
EER-21  1 EER-41  2 Based on the deflators of total sales  3 Based on consumer price indices
23 selected industrial countries  4 In real terms
In real terms based on
In real based on unit In real
23 terms the deflators labour terms Non-
based on of gross costs of based on Euro- euro- selected
36 36 56 consumer domestic national consumer area area industrial
Zeit Nominal price indices product  3 economy  3 Nominal price indices Total countries countries countries  5 6 countries  4 countries  5 countries  7 
1999 96.1 96.0 95.8 96.5 96.5 95.8 97.7 99.5 95.5 97.6 98.1 97.9 97.6
2000 86.8 86.5 85.8 85.6 87.9 85.8 91.5 97.1 85.0 90.9 92.7 91.7 90.8
2001 87.3 87.0 86.3 84.5 90.2 86.9 91.2 95.9 85.7 90.3 92.9 91.3 90.72002 89.7 90.1 89.2 87.4 94.7 90.5 92.0 95.1 88.3 90.9 93.6 92.0 91.92003 100.3 101.3 100.0 97.8 106.6 101.4 95.5 94.1 97.4 94.8 97.3 96.6 96.92004 104.2 105.1 102.8 101.8 111.2 105.0 95.9 93.0 99.9 95.2 98.8 98.2 98.6
2005 102.7 103.7 101.0 99.6 109.2 102.5 94.7 91.5 98.9 93.3 98.8 97.4 97.2
2006 102.6 103.7 100.3 98.9 109.3 101.8 93.7 90.0 98.7 92.1 99.0 97.1 96.72007 106.3 106.8 102.7 101.0 113.0 104.2 95.1 89.3 103.1 93.1 101.7 99.1 98.62008 110.5 110.1 105.7 104.7 118.0 107.0 95.7 87.9 106.7 93.3 103.5 100.1 99.52009 111.7 110.6
p 106.9 p 106.6 120.6 p 107.8 95.2 88.1 105.1 p 93.6 102.8 100.0 99.7
2006          Aug 103.6 104.7 100.7 99.7 110.6 103.1 93.7 89.7 99.1 92.2 99.1 97.4 97.2
         Sep 103.4 104.3 110.4 102.7 99.0 97.2 96.9
         Oct 102.8 103.8 109.7 102.0 99.2 97.2 96.8
         Nov 103.4 104.3 100.5 98.8 110.4 102.4 93.9 89.6 99.7 92.2 99.7 97.6 97.2         Dec 104.4 105.0 111.5 103.2 100.2 98.0 97.7
2007          Jan 103.8 104.5 110.6 102.5 100.3 98.0 97.5
         Feb 104.3 104.9 101.3 99.2 111.0 102.7 94.7 89.9 101.1 92.8 100.5 98.3 97.8         Mar 105.0 105.5 111.9 103.4 100.7 98.4 97.9
         Apr 105.9 106.6 112.7 104.2 101.3 98.9 98.4
         May 106.0 106.6 102.5 100.6 112.5 103.9 95.2 89.6 102.9 93.3 101.5 99.0 98.4         June 105.6 106.1 112.0 103.4 101.3 98.8 98.1
         July 106.2 106.7 112.6 103.9 101.8 99.2 98.5
         Aug 105.8 106.1 102.5 100.5 112.6 103.7 94.9 89.0 103.0 92.9 101.3 98.7 98.2         Sep 106.8 107.1 113.5 104.5 102.1 99.4 98.9
         Oct 107.9 108.1 114.4 105.1 102.5 99.7 99.1
         Nov 109.4 109.6 104.3 103.4 116.2 106.6 95.6 88.5 105.5 93.5 103.6 100.8 100.3         Dec 109.5 109.4 116.0 106.2 103.5 100.5 99.9
2008          Jan 110.1 109.9 116.6 106.6 103.5 100.5 99.9
         Feb 109.8 109.3 105.8 104.6 116.5 106.0 96.2 88.4 107.2 94.0 103.5 100.3 99.6         Mar 112.6 112.3 119.9 109.3 104.5 101.4 101.1
         Apr 113.7 113.2 121.2 110.1 104.9 101.6 101.2
         May 113.2 112.9 108.2 107.5 120.5 109.5 97.3 88.1 110.4 94.7 104.8 101.4 100.9         June 113.0 112.7 120.4 109.4 104.8 101.2 100.7
         July 113.2 112.7 120.6 109.4 105.2 101.3 100.8
         Aug 110.9 110.3 106.2 104.9 117.8 106.6 96.1 87.5 108.2 93.3 104.0 100.1 99.3         Sep 109.3 108.5 116.4 105.2 102.9 99.2 98.5
         Oct 105.8 105.2 113.8 102.7 100.5 97.3 96.8
         Nov 105.0 104.5 102.5 101.7 113.0 102.0 93.1 87.5 100.8 91.3 100.3 97.1 96.6         Dec 110.2 109.7 118.7 107.1 102.4 99.5 99.3
2009          Jan 109.8 109.2 118.6 106.8 102.2 99.4 99.2
         Feb 108.7 108.0 105.2
p 105.1 117.7 105.9 93.9 87.9 102.2 92.7 101.2 99.0 98.8
         Mar 111.1 110.3 120.4 108.0 102.3 99.9 99.7
         Apr 110.3 109.5 119.1 106.8 102.2 99.5 99.1
         May 110.8 109.9 106.5 p 106.4 119.5 107.1 95.1 88.2 104.7 93.7 102.5 99.6 99.2
         June 112.0 111.1 120.7 108.3 102.9 100.2 99.8
         July 111.6 110.5 120.5 107.7 102.8 99.9 99.5
         Aug 111.7 110.6 107.4 p 106.6 120.6 107.8 95.7 88.2 106.1 p 94.0 103.0 100.1 99.7
         Sep 112.9 111.6 122.0 108.7 103.3 100.3 100.0
         Oct 114.3 112.8 123.0 p 109.5 103.9 101.0 100.5
         Nov 114.0 112.5 p 108.6 p 108.1 122.9 p 109.2 96.0 88.0 107.3 p 94.2 103.8 100.9 100.4
         Dec 113.0 111.3 121.7 p 107.9 103.5 100.5 99.9
2010          Jan 110.8 108.9 119.1 p 105.3 102.4 99.2 98.4
         Feb 108.0 106.0 ... ... 116.2 p 102.5 ... ... ... ... 101.1 97.8 96.9
         Mar 107.4 105.7 115.2 p 101.8 101.2 97.6 96.5
         Apr 106.1 p 104.4 113.5 p 100.2 100.7 97.0 95.6
*The effective exchange rate corresponds to the weighted external value of Kingdom and United States. Where price and wage indices were not avai-
the currency concerned. The method of calculating the indicators of the lable, estimates were used. — 2ECB calculations. This group includes not
German economy’s price competitiveness is consistent with the procedure only the countries belonging to the EER-21 group (see footnote 1) but also
used by the ECB to compute the effective exchange rates of the euro except Algeria, Argentina, Brazil, Chile, Croatia, Iceland, India, Indonesia, Isr ael,
for the used trade weights (see Monthly Report, November 2001, pp  51-65, Malaysia, Mexico, Morocco, New Zealand, Philippines, Russian Federation ,
May 2007, pp  32-37 and May 2008, p  40). For details of the methodology South Africa, Taiwan, Thailand, Turkey and Venezuela. — 3Annual and
see ECB, Monthly Bulletin, January 2010, pp S93 − S94 as well as the ECB’s quarterly averages. — 4Euro-area countries (from 2001 including Greece,
Occasional Paper No  2, which can be downloaded from the ECB’s website from 2007 including Slovenia, from 2008 including Cyprus and Malta, from(www.ecb.int). A decline in the figures implies an increase in competitive- 2009 including Slovakia) as well as the non-euro-area countries (Canada ,
ness. — 1ECB calculations are based on the weighted averages of the Denmark, Japan, Norway, Sweden, Switzerland, United Kingdom and
changes in the bilateral exchange rates of the euro against the currencies of United States). — 5Euro-area countries and countries belonging to the
the following countries: Australia, Bulgaria, Canada, China, Czech Republic, EER-21 group. — 6Owing to missing data for the deflator of total sales,
Denmark, Estonia, Hong Kong, Hungary, Japan, Latvia, Lithuania, Norway, China is not included in this calculation. — 7Euro-area countries and
Poland, Romania, Singapore, South Korea, Sweden, Switzerland, United countries belonging to the EER-41 group (see footnote 2). 
76*XI  External sector

Overview of
publications
by the Deutsche
BundesbankThis overview provides information
about selected recent economic and
statistical publications by the Deutsche
Bundesbank. Unless otherwise indi-
cated, these publications are available
in both English and German, in printed
form and on the Bundesbank’s web-
site.
The publications are available free of
charge from the Communication Div-
ision. For a small fee to cover costs, a
file which is updated monthly and
contains approximately 40,000 time
series published by the Bundesbank
can be obtained on magnetic tape cas-
sette or CD-ROM from the Division
Statistical data processing, math-
ematical methods. Orders should be
sent, in writing, to one of the ad-
dresses listed on the reverse of the title
page. Selected time series can also be
downloaded from the internet.
Annual Report
Financial Stability Review
Monthly Report
For information on the articles published between
1990 and 2009 see the index attached to the Janu-
ary 2010 Monthly Report.
77*DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
May 2010

Monthly Report articles
June 2009
– Outlook for the German economy – macroeco-
nomic projections for 2009 and 2010
– Growth effects of permanently high energy
prices: recent evidence for Germany
– The development and determinants of euro
currency in circulation in Germany
July 2009
– Corporate earnings and share prices
– Demographic change and the long-term
sustainability of public finances in Germany
– Recent developments in German and European
retail payments
August 2009
– The current economic situation in Germany
September 2009
– Developments in lending to the German pri-
vate sector during the global financial crisis
– The performance of German credit institutions
in 2008
– Amendments to the new EU Capital Require-
ments Directive and the Minimum Require-
ments for Risk Management
October 2009
– The development of government investment
– Firm-level and aggregate output volatility
November 2009
– The current economic situation in GermanyDecember 2009
– Outlook for the German economy – macroeco-
nomic projections for 2010 and 2011
– Financial integration and risk sharing in the
euro area – longer-term trends and impact of
the financial crisis
– International cooperation in the area of
ongoing banking supervision
January 2010
– German enterprises’ profitability and financing
in 2008
– Price-level targeting as a monetary policy strat-
egy
February 2010
– The current economic situation in Germany
March 2010
– German balance of payments in 2009
– The use of cash and other payment instru-
ments – a behavioural study using micro data
– The Treaty of Lisbon
– Financing and representation in the Inter-
national Monetary Fund
April 2010
– Government debt and interest payment
burden in Germany
– Emerging markets in the financial crisis: the
effect of cross-border bank loans
May 2010
– The current economic situation in Germany
78*DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
EUROSYSTEM
Monthly Report
May 2010

Statistical Supplements to the
Monthly Report1
1 Banking statistics (monthly)
2 Capital market statistics (monthly)
3 Balance of payments statistics (monthly)
4 Seasonally adjusted business statistics (monthly)
5 Exchange rate statistics (quarterly)
Special Publications
Makro-/C246konometrisches Mehr-L/C228nder-Modell,
November 19962
Europ/C228ische Organisationen und Gremien im Be-
reich von W/C228hrung und Wirtschaft, May 19972
Die Zahlungsbilanz der ehemaligen DDR 1975 bis
1989, August 19992
The market for German Federal securities,
May 2000
Macro-Econometric Multi-Country Model: MEMMOD,
June 2000
Bundesbank Act, September 2002
Weltweite Organisationen und Gremien im Bereich
von W/C228hrung und Wirtschaft, March 20032
Die Europ/C228ische Union: Grundlagen und Politik-
bereiche außerhalb der Wirtschafts- und W/C228h-
rungsunion, April 20052
Die Deutsche Bundesbank – Aufgabenfelder,
rechtlicher Rahmen, Geschichte, April 20062
European economic and monetary union,
April 2008
Special Statistical Publications*o
1 Banking statistics guidelines and customer clas-
sification, January 200932 Bankenstatistik Kundensystematik Firmenver-
zeichnisse, March 20102, 4
3 Aufbau der bankstatistischen Tabellen,
July 20082, 4
4 Financial accounts for Germany 1991 to 2008,
June 20094
5 Extrapolated results from financial statements
of German enterprises 1994 to 2003, March
20064
6 Ratios from financial statements of German
enterprises 2004 to 2005, February 20084
7 Notes on the coding list for the balance of pay-
ments statistics, March 20094
8 The balance of payments statistics of the Fed-
eral Republic of Germany, 2nd edition,
February 1991o
9 Securities deposits,
August 2005
10 Foreign direct investment stock statistics,
April 20091, 4
11 Balance of payments by region,
August 2009
12 Technologische Dienstleistungen in der Zah-
lungsbilanz, June 20082
79*DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
May 2010
1Only the headings and explanatory notes to the data
contained in the German originals are available in English.
2Available in German only.
3Solely available on the website, updated at half-yearly
intervals. Only the sections “Preliminary remarks“,
“Monthly balance sheet statistics”, “Borrowers’ statis-
tics“, “External positions report” and “Customer classifi-
cation” are available in English.
4Available on the website only.*Unless stated otherwise, these publications are avail-
able on the Bundesbank’s website in German and Eng-
lish.
oNot available on the website.

80*DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
EUROSYSTEM
Monthly Report
May 2010
Discussion Papers*
Series 1
Economic Studies
35/2009
Analyse der /C220bertragung US-amerikanischer
Schocks auf Deutschland auf Basis eines FAVAR
36/2009
Choosing and using payment instruments: evi-
dence from German microdata
01/2010
Optimal monetary policy in a small open economy
with financial frictions
02/2010
Price, wage and employment response to shocks:
evidence from the WDN survey
03/2010
Exports versus FDI revisited: Does finance matter?
04/2010
Heterogeneity in money holdings across euro area
countries: the role of housing
05/2010
Loan supply in Germany during the financial crisis
06/2010
Empirical simultaneous confidence regions for
path-forecasts
07/2010
Monetary policy, housing booms and financial
(im)balances
08/2010
On the nonlinear influence of Reserve Bank of
Australia Interventions on exchange ratesSeries 2
Banking and Financial Studies
13/2009
Systematic risk of CDOs and CDO arbitrage
14/2009
The dependency of the banks’ assets and liabilities:
evidence from Germany
15/2009
What macroeconomic shocks affect the German
banking system? Analysis in an integrated micro-
macro model
01/2010
Deriving the term structure of banking crisis risk
with a compound option approach: the case of
Kazakhstan
02/2010
Recovery determinants of distressed banks: Regu-
lators, market discipline, or the environment?
03/2010
Purchase and redemption decisions of mutual fund
investors and the role of fund families
Banking legislation
1 Bundesbank Act and Statute of the European
System of Central Banks and of the European
Central Bank, June 1998
2 Gesetz /C252ber das Kreditwesen, February 20092
2a Solvabilit/C228ts- und Liquidit/C228tsverordnung, Feb-
ruary 20082
*Discussion Papers which appeared from 2000 onwards
are available on the website.
For footnotes, see p 79*.

