MONTHLY REPORT
FEBRUARY MARCH APRIL MAY JUNE
2010
Vol 62
No 2

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
EUROSYSTEM
Monthly Report
February 2010
Deutsche Bundesbank
Wilhelm-Epstein-Strasse 14
60431 Frankfurt am Main
Germany
Postal address
Postfach 10 06 02
60006 Frankfurt am Main
Germany
Tel +49 69 9566 -0
Fax +49 69 9566 3077
Telex 41227 within Germany
414431 from abroad
http://www.bundesbank.de
Reproduction permitted only if source is stated.
ISSN 0418 -8292 (print edition)
ISSN 1862 -1325 (online edition)
The German original of this Monthly Report
went to press at 4.30 pm on 16 February 2010.Annual and weekly publishing schedules for
selected statistics of the Deutsche Bundes-
bank can be downloaded from our website.
The statistical data are also published on the
website.
The Monthly Report is published by the
Deutsche Bundesbank, Frankfurt am Main,
by virtue of section 18 of the Bundesbank
Act. It is available to interested parties free of
charge.
This is a translation of the original German-
language version, which is the sole authorita-
tive text.

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
February 2010
ContentsThe current economic situation
in Germany 5
Overview 6
Global and European setting 12
Saving and unemployment during the
global financial and economic crisis 17
Monetary policy and banking business 23
Money market management
and liquidity needs 24
Second special survey on German
banks’ lending to domestic
enterprises 36
Financial markets 37
Volatility in the German stock market 42
Economic conditions in Germany 47
House prices in Germany in 2009 58
Public finances 63
The structural development of public
finances – results of the disaggregated
framework for 2009 66
Federal budget for 2010 and scope
for borrowing up to 2016 72
Statistical Section 1*
Key economic data for the euro area 5*
Overall monetary survey in the euro area 8*
Consolidated financial statement
of the Eurosystem 16*
Banks 20*
Minimum reserves 42*
Interest rates 43*

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
EUROSYSTEM
Monthly Report
February 2010
Capital market 48*
Financial accounts 52*
Public finances in Germany 54*
Economic conditions in Germany 61*
External sector 68*
Overview of publications by the
Deutsche Bundesbank 77*
Abbreviations and symbols
eEstimated
pProvisional
pePartly estimated
rRevised
...Data available at a later date
.Data unknown, not to be published or
not meaningful
0Less than 0.5 but more than nil
–Nil
Discrepancies in the totals are due to round-
ing.

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
February 2010
5The current economic
situation in Germany

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
EUROSYSTEM
Monthly Report
February 2010
6OverviewEconomic recovery encountering
temporary strains
The global economy remained on a recovery
path as 2009 drew to a close. Although the
pace of global industrial output growth mod-
erated slightly compared with the third quar-
ter, the volume of world trade continued to
expand briskly. The south and east Asian
emerging market economies, in particular,
continued to generate considerable momen-
tum. The region’s resultant rising demand for
oil and other commodities was one of the
factors that sharply drove up prices in the
international markets last year. The OPEC
countries and several Latin American states
were the principal beneficiaries of this.
Among the industrialised countries, the
United States was the frontrunner in the
fourth quarter, recording a perceptible accel-
eration in economic growth. By contrast,
the euro area’s recovery was muted, mainly
because of waning stimuli from fiscal pro-
grammes and stockbuilding.
Despite temporary strains, the available lead-
ing indicators show that the dynamic upward
thrust of the global economy continued into
the new year. The scenario of a broad-based
global upturn therefore remains intact.
In view of this benign overall environment
and given continuing abundant liquidity and
low interest rates, the situation on the inter-
national capital markets eased further on the
whole as the new year began. Phases of un-
certainty were comparatively short-lived. This
initially pushed up stock market prices and
pushed down corporate bond yields. In theGlobal
economy
Financial
market setting

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
February 2010
7euro area, too, wholesale funding conditions
for enterprises improved perceptibly. Thespreads of BBB-rated, euro-denominated cor-porate bonds over government bonds nar-rowed to levels last seen at the beginning of2008. Declining interest rate spreads sinceearly 2009 were accompanied by lively issu-ance activity on Europe’s corporate bondmarkets.
Since mid-January, however, the positive eco-
nomic signals have increasingly been cloudedby political developments in the perception ofmarket participants. Thus plans to tightenbanking regulation and potentially force fi-nancial institutions to shoulder a greater partof the cost of the financial crisis triggeredstock market losses worldwide, particularlyamong financial stocks. Moreover, the publicdiscourse on the sustainability of Greece’ssovereign debt has seen spreads on Greekdebt securities widen considerably vis-/C224-visGerman Bunds. This has also affected theeuro, which has fallen widely in the foreignexchange markets, particularly since the be-ginning of 2010.
Monetary growth slowed again in the report-
ing quarter as lending to the private sectorwas virtually stagnant; monetary develop-ments consequently present no medium-terminflation risks at present. Not least owing tothe likelihood that economic recovery will begradual, consumer prices are currently ex-pected to remain compatible with price sta-bility over the horizon relevant for monetarypolicy, and market participants’ medium tolong-term inflation expectations likewise re-main well anchored in the euro area.In consideration of this constellation, the
Governing Council of the ECB left its keyinterest rates unchanged between October2009 and January 2010. Throughout thefourth quarter of 2009, the main refinancingoperations were again conducted as fixed-rate tenders with full allotment at an interestrate of 1%.
The liquidity situation within the European
banking sector can still be described as excep-tionally good. This is borne out by the factthat demand for the third 12-month tenderin December was significantly lower than forthe first transaction of this type in June 2009.Moreover, the number of banks taking part inthis operation was smaller than in the twoprevious ones.
As developments on the money and capital
market continued to normalise, the Govern-ing Council of the ECB was able to initiate agradual phasing-out of the extraordinary li-quidity measures at the turn of the year. Thelast supplementary three-month longer-termrefinancing operation and the last twelve-month longer-term refinancing operation,which will be fixed at the average minimumbid rate of the MROs over the life of this op-eration, were conducted in December 2009.In January 2010, the Eurosystem’s counter-parties were offered liquidity-providing oper-ations in US dollars and Swiss francs for thelast time. In addition, the Governing Councilof the ECB decided to conduct its last six-month longer-term refinancing operation atthe end of March 2010. Euro-area moneymarket rates barely reacted to the announce-ment that the non-standard monetary policy
Monetary
policy

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
EUROSYSTEM
Monthly Report
February 2010
8measures would gradually be phased out.
The Governing Council will take decisions on
the continued implementation of the gradual
exit measures at the beginning of March.
For the first time since the fourth quarter of
2008, bank lending in the euro area recorded
an increase, albeit a small one, in the volume
of loans to domestic private non-banks. How-
ever, this was the outcome of fairly heteroge-
neous developments in the individual sectors.
Lending to households expanded most, with
the positive developments seen in the last
two quarters firming further. This was again
attributable to loans for house purchase,
which make up the lion’s share of household
borrowing. Growth in loans to households in
the final quarter of 2009 contrasted with a
strong cyclical decline in lending to non-
financial corporations. However, the fact that
short-term lending contracted sharply where-
as long-term loans continued to expand ap-
preciably indicates that cyclical factors were
paramount in determining credit dynamics.
The economic recovery in Germany faltered
in the autumn months of 2009, partly as a re-
sult of temporary factors. The phasing-out of
the car scrappage environmental premium, in
particular, considerably dented macroeco-
nomic momentum. According to a flash esti-
mate by the Federal Statistical Office, real
gross domestic product stagnated quarter on
quarter. This compares with a gain of 0.7% in
aggregate output in the third quarter of
2009. While domestic activity was sluggish,
export business again expanded robustly dur-
ing the reporting period. The fact that the
slowdown in growth can to some extent beexplained by temporary factors, whereas ex-
port business, which is traditionally a main-
stay of the German economy, continues to
expand at a rapid pace indicates that the eco-
nomic recovery basically remains intact.
Nominal exports of goods rose by 5.1% in
seasonally adjusted terms in the fourth
quarter compared with the previous three
months, in which growth of 5.4% had al-
ready been recorded. Having picked up spec-
tacularly between May and September, deliv-
eries to the European Union moderated to-
wards the end of the period under review.
Interestingly, the volatile growth pattern not
only affected deliveries to euro-area partner
countries but was also fairly similar for deliv-
eries to both old and new EU member states
that are not members of the euro area. In nu-
merous countries, the strongly expansionary
effects emanating from the stockbuilding
cycle appear to have combined with the im-
pact of the fiscal stabilisation measures to cre-
ate an appreciable economic stimulus in the
third quarter, which spread across the entire
European Union via production interlinkages
and thus temporarily gave a major boost to
German exports to the countries in this re-
gion. Seasonally adjusted imports of goods
and services fell significantly in the period
under review, after having outpaced exports
in the third quarter of 2009. Given the on-
going revival in exports and recently weaker
import activity, external trade made a consid-
erable positive contribution to GDP growth
on balance in the fourth quarter of 2009.
Enterprises’ willingness to invest in machinery
and equipment and in industrial and com-German
economy

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
February 2010
9mercial property appears to have remained
muted at the end of the year. According tothe available indicators, investment volumesdid not match the third-quarter levels. Givencontinuing considerable underutilisation ofproduction capacity, it is, however, notablethat the fall-off in investment following themarked correction at the beginning of 2009has remained within narrow bounds. This ap-plies both to investment in industrial andcommercial construction and to investment innew machinery and equipment and can,moreover, be read as an indication that theinternal funds available to enterprises have,to date, covered planned real investment.This suggests that the slow growth in loans tonon-financial corporations in Germany doesnot reflect a credit crunch.
Private consumption was again extremely
sluggish in the fourth quarter of 2009, havingalready fallen by 0.9% in the third quarter inseasonally and calendar-adjusted terms. As inthe third quarter, this weakening of demandwas mainly due to passenger car sales, deliv-eries of which remained elevated but dippedappreciably compared with the precedingthree months as the boosting effect of theenvironmental premium wore off. By con-trast, retail sales were unchanged on thequarter.
The resilience of the German labour market is
one of the most remarkable features of thecurrent recession. The adjustment to theslump in production in the final quarter of2008 and first quarter of 2009 differs fromthat seen in past economic downturns in im-portant respects. Job losses in the generallyvolatile manufacturing industry have, to date,
been very moderate. By contrast, the numberof hours worked has responded much moresharply than in previous recessions. Anotherunusual feature of the current overall eco-nomic situation is the rise in labour marketparticipation (disregarding trend factors). Al-though jobs will probably continue to be cutin manufacturing in the coming period, thereis no indication of a sharp increase in lay-offs.In fact, leading indicators for the labour mar-ket point upward and are, in some cases,even approaching neutral territory.
In the upstream stages of the production and
distribution chain, the drop in prices that had,a year earlier, first affected commodities andintermediate goods and later spread to fin-ished products abated, at least temporarily,in the fourth quarter of 2009 as the globaleconomy picked up steam. While the disinfla-tionary process that has been in evidencesince mid-2008, and which ran through thevarious stages of the production chain, initial-ly continued with respect to final products,there have been signs of a trend reversal inimport prices at the current end. This is alsolikely to have a lagged effect on domesticproducer and consumer prices. To date, theslightly accelerated but still moderate pace ofconsumer price inflation has, however, mainlybeen the result of higher energy prices. Allother product categories experienced little orno inflation.
The German economy is on a recovery path,
the underlying momentum of which doesnot, according to the available indicators, ap-pear at risk but which is currently still subject

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
EUROSYSTEM
Monthly Report
February 2010
10to negative influences. In the short term, the
comparatively cold and snowy winter wea-
ther has considerably dampened construction
activity, in particular, since the turn of the
year and is also likely to have adversely affect-
ed the transport sector and other outdoor in-
dustries. Yet despite the fairly volatile quarter-
ly pattern, neither the underlying dynamics of
economic growth nor the demand profile in-
dicates that the expansionary cyclical forces
in Germany have abated, especially given the,
to date, very robust recovery of the global
economy.
The economic slump and the expansionary
fiscal policy response have had a profound
impact on public budgets. Following two
years of a virtually balanced government
budget, a high deficit was recorded in 2009.
According to provisional data released by the
Federal Statistical Office, the deficit ratio
amounted to 3.2% and thus exceeded the
EU reference value. Cyclical factors account-
ed for not quite half of the dramatic de-
terioration vis-/C224-vis the previous year. In this
context the negative cyclical impact was sig-
nificantly mitigated by the fact that the
macroeconomic profile was favourable for
public finances. The deficit ratio is likely to
continue to rise substantially in 2010 and
could reach as much as 5%. Based on current
analysis, the cyclical component of the deficit
is likely to increase slightly again even though
GDP is expected to expand perceptibly, as the
overall growth profile will – unlike in 2009 –
probably be fairly unfavourable for public fi-
nances. The increase in the deficit will none-
theless be primarily structural in nature, asfurther spending measures and tax cuts take
their toll.
The German government presented a revised
draft budget for 2010 in mid-December
2009. Although expectations regarding the
macroeconomic environment have improved
significantly compared with the first draft
budget of June 2009, forecast net new bor-
rowing was revised down by barely 31/C252billion
to just short of 386 billion. However, the
structural deficit, ie the deficit adjusted for
cyclical effects and financial transactions
which constitutes the starting point for the
gradual reduction of the constitutional bor-
rowing limit to 0.35% of GDP by 2016 envis-
aged under the new “debt brake” rules, was
racheted up substantially compared with the
June 2009 draft budget. This can be ex-
plained in part by the reclassification of loans
to the social security funds as grants. It should
be recalled that the new budget rules are in-
tended to reverse the persistent trend towards
ballooning debt ratios and prevent further
delays in the structural consolidation of public
finances, which is widely acknowledged to be
necessary. The transitional arrangements seek
to ensure a relatively constant structural im-
provement starting in 2011. This would be
jeopardised, however, if the necessary con-
solidation were postponed until the next le-
gislative period or if the budgetary situation
were even to deteriorate further as a result of
additional fiscal measures, potentially endan-
gering the success of the new rules. Against
this backdrop, when setting the central gov-
ernment budget for 2011 and the medium-
term financial plan, the reference deficit in
2010 should not only be based on a realisticPublic finances

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
February 2010
11assessment of current budgetary develop-
ments. By the same token, temporary charges(such as the one-off conversion of the loan tothe Federal Employment Agency into a grant)should not be misused in order to artificiallyincrease the scope for borrowing during thetransitional period, thus postponing thenecessary consolidation.
In December 2009 the Ecofin Council ad-
judged Germany to have an excessive deficitand called on the German government tobring the deficit ratio back below the 3%ceiling by 2013 at the latest. It demanded noconsolidation for 2010, instead recommend-ing that the fiscal measures be implementedas planned. Germany is to reduce its struc-tural deficit by an average of 0.5% of GDP ayear starting from 2011, with consolidationto be accelerated should economic andbudgetary developments be better than ex-pected. Not least in the light of the macro-economic outlook, these recommendationsare not very challenging and ultimately con-stitute minimalist requirements as measuredby the intention of the Stability and GrowthPact.
1The updated stability programme that
the German government presented on 9 Feb-ruary just complies with these requirements,although the necessary measures were not
specified and greater efforts would havebeen desirable in view of the high deficitsand the fact that the debt ratio will continueto rise in 2013.
Germany has prominent responsibility for en-
suring that the fiscal rules in the euro area arerigorously complied with. These fiscal rules inparticular and the EU’s fiscal policy in generalare currently being put to their severest testsince monetary union was launched. Compli-ance with the national consolidation require-ments agreed on by the EU bodies is there-fore imperative. It was thus heartening to seethat on 11 February the European Council de-manded that Greece take additional meas-ures and on 16 February the Ecofin Councilimposed extensive conditions under theexcessive deficit procedure. The EuropeanCouncil has highlighted all countries’ respon-sibility for ensuring euro-area stability. It isnow up to national policymakers to meettheir obligations in order to safeguard the in-stitutional foundations of monetary union.
1See also Deutsche Bundesbank, Monthly Report, No-
vember 2009, pp 63 to 66.

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
EUROSYSTEM
Monthly Report
February 2010
12Global and
European settingWorld economic activity
The cyclical recovery of the world economy,
which had begun in the second quarter of
2009, continued in the last quarter of the year.
Numerous economic stimulus programmes,
expansionary monetary policy, ongoing calm-
ing of the financial markets and the inventory
cycle all combined to keep providing key
stimuli. All the same, global industrial output
in October-November was up by a more
moderate 2%, after seasonal adjustment,
from the previous quarter, in which – boosted
in part by the increased demand for cars due
to government stimulus measures – it had
grown by 3%. The volume of global trade, by
contrast, maintained its very buoyant growth
in that two-month period.
The south and east Asian emerging market
economies, particularly China and India, re-
mained on their steep expansionary path and
also managed to increase their total econom-
ic output considerably on average for all of
2009. The rise in demand from this region for
crude oil and other commodities, in particu-
lar, caused their prices in the international
markets to rise sharply over the course of the
past year. This benefited, in particular, the
OPEC nations and some Latin American econ-
omies which have now largely returned to
sound growth. Of the industrial countries, the
United States was clearly at the forefront of
economic developments in the fourth quar-
ter, as the pace of growth increased percep-
tibly. By contrast, the euro-area recovery has
made hardly any meaningful progress owing,
above all, to the subsiding effects of the fiscal
stimulus packages and to inventory adjust-Global
economy still
on path to
recovery ...
... yet great
differences
with respect
to dynamics
remain
between
countries and
between
groups of
countries

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
February 2010
13ments. The Japanese economy, however,
emerged from a growth hiatus in the thirdquarter with renewed vigour. Total real grossdomestic product (GDP) of the industrialcountries as a group, at +
3/C254% (after seasonal
adjustment) according to initial estimatesbased on provisional information for somemajor economies and the euro area, grew sig-nificantly faster than in the previous quarter.On average for all of 2009, however, growthwas still down by 3
1/C252%.
The global economy appears to have re-
mained on its growth track following the turnof 2009-10, with the global Purchasing Man-agers’ Index for the manufacturing sector upagain noticeably in January. The OECD com-posite leading indicator also continued its risetowards the end of the previous year, signal-ling good future prospects for the south andeast Asian and Latin American emerging mar-ket economies as well as for the industrialcountries. Of the industrial countries, the USeconomic climate, in particular, has improvedvisibly of late.
At the end of January, the International Mon-
etary Fund (IMF) revised its forecast of globalgrowth for this year upwards, from 3.1% inits autumn forecast to a current level of3.9%, to take account of sharp correctionsfor both the advanced economies (to 2.1%)and the developing and emerging economies(to 6.0%). Of the latter group, the growthrates were revised upwards by 2.1 percentagepoints for Russia to 3.6%, by one point forChina to 10.0% and for India by 1.3 points to7.7%. Real global trade is expected to growby +5.8% as compared with +2.5% in earlyOverall economic output
in industrial countries *
* The United States, Japan, the United King-
dom and the euro area.
Deutsche Bundesbank2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 20092.01.001.0
––+
–2.0–1.00+1.0+2.0
3.02.01.001.02.0
–––++
–3.0–2.0–1.00+1.0
3.02.01.001.0
–––+Seasonally adjusted,
quarter-on-quarter percentage change
Industrial countries
United States
Japan
United Kingdom
Euro areaCyclical signs
still clearly
positive in early
2010
IMF forecast
revised
upwards

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
EUROSYSTEM
Monthly Report
February 2010
14October. For 2011, now included in the pub-
lished forecast for the first time, the IMF now
expects global GDP to grow by 4.3% and
world trade to expand by 6.3%. This interim
forecast for 2010 and 2011 rests on the as-
sumption that average crude oil prices (based
on a basket of the three most important
blends of oil) will be at US$76 and US$82 a
barrel respectively.
The price of a barrel of Brent crude oil con-
tinued to rise sharply in the first half of Octo-
ber before then mostly holding steady within
a relatively narrow band of US$75 to US$80
up until the end of the year. There was ultim-
ately no major price volatility throughout the
entire second half of 2009, which was also
due to the near-absence of disruptions to
production in the Gulf of Mexico owing tothe very mild hurricane season. On average
for the quarter, though, the price of crude oil
still rose by nearly one-tenth on the quarter
and by nearly one-third on the year. In early
January the price of crude oil very briefly
broke the US$80 mark before returning to
US$723/C254or3531/C252per barrel by mid-February.
In order to minimise speculation, in January
the US Commodity Futures Trading Commis-
sion introduced upper position limits, though
the effects of these limits cannot yet be reli-
ably assessed. Non-oil commodity prices con-
tinued to rise sharply from October to mid-
January before going back down noticeably.
In the first half of February non-oil commod-
ities were trading 293/C254% higher on the year
in US dollar terms. Higher prices for industrial
raw materials, which rose by +42% year-on-
year, played a greater role here than increases
in the prices of food, beverages and tobacco
(+8%).
Rising prices for energy and food had a per-
ceptible impact on consumer price trends in
the industrial countries in the fourth quarter.
Headline inflation was up by 0.6% (after sea-
sonal adjustment) on the quarter. Year-on-
year inflation, having been negative up until
October, reversed itself and returned to posi-
tive territory in November owing, above all,
to a base effect in the above-mentioned com-
ponents. In December, headline inflation
stood at 1.6%, or 1.9% excluding Japan.
Core inflation (excluding energy and food),
by contrast, has stood at around 11/C254% since
the middle of 2009.World market prices for 
crude oil and industrial raw 
materials as well as food, 
beverages and tobacco
Sources:  Thomson  Reuters  and  HWWI.  — 
 = 12 February or 15 February 2010 (crude 
oil).
Deutsche Bundesbank2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010100125150175200250300400500US dollar basis, 2000 = 100, log scale
Crude oil 
(Brent)
Industrial raw materialsFood, beverages 
and tobacco
Commodities
more expensive
since beginning
of Q4Year-on-year
consumer price
inflation once
again positive

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
February 2010
15Selected emerging market economies
Of the emerging market economies (EMEs), it
was those in south and east Asia which, inthe fourth quarter, remained at the forefrontof the cyclical recovery, even though the ex-ceptionally strong momentum of the periodspanning the second and third quarters of2009 has subsided somewhat in many places.In China, however, real year-on-year GDPgrowth accelerated from 9% in the thirdquarter to 10
3/C254% in the fourth. Although the
expansion of year-on-year growth was due inpart to a base effect, the pace of overallgrowth remained high even in the final quar-ter of the year. Positive stimuli were gener-ated by the extant fiscal policy stimuli, stronggrowth of household consumption and a dis-tinct recovery in export demand. For 2009 asa whole, Chinese economic output rose by8
3/C254%. According to an official estimate, gross
investment, which was expanded massivelyby the government economic stimulus pro-gramme, contributed no less than eight per-centage points. Consumer price inflation inthe past few months rose sharply again, par-ticularly due to a base effect and a weather-related increase in food prices, and stood at1.5% in January. On average for 2009, theconsumer price index fell by 0.7%, owingmainly to lower energy prices. Since growthprospects have remained favourable, atten-tion has been increasingly given to inflation-ary risks. Against this background, China’scentral bank tightened the reins of monetarypolicy somewhat at the beginning of theyear. In addition, the authorities have an-nounced a significant cutback in creditgrowth in 2010. In India, where real GDP (atmarket prices) grew by 6
3/C254% on the year in
the third quarter, recovery continued apace inthe fourth quarter. The sharp consumer priceinflation, caused particularly by crop failures,persisted throughout the reporting period.Average inflation for the year totalled 10.9%,the highest rate since 1998.
In the Latin American countries, too, the cyc-
lical upswing continued up until the end ofConsumer prices in the 
industrial countries
Sources: national statistics and Eurostat. — 
1 Excluding  energy  and  food;  euro  area: 
HICP  excluding  energy  and  unprocessed food.
Deutsche Bundesbank2008 2009 201020246
–+++
–20+2+4+6
2024
–++
–20+2+4Industrial countries, total
Of which
USA
Euro area
JapanJanHeadline
Core 1Quarterly, year-on-year percentage changeStrong growth
in south and
east Asian
emerging
market
economies

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
EUROSYSTEM
Monthly Report
February 2010
16the year. This was true especially of the
Brazilian economy, where, according to the
available indicators, household consumption,
which is still being stimulated by government
incentives, continued to expand sharply in
the fourth quarter. In addition, increased in-
vestment activity and rising demand from
overseas, not least from Asia, are likely to
have boosted growth. In Mexico, it appears
likely that real GDP rose significantly in the
last quarter of 2009, according to the avail-
able information. However, the extremely
strong pace of the previous quarter, during
which the economy rebounded following a
decrease in influenza A (H1N1) and the coun-
try’s car industry benefited from the US “cash
for clunkers” scheme, could not be main-
tained. In many Latin American countries,
consumer price inflation picked up at the be-
ginning of 2010 for the first time in a long
time. In January, inflation stood at 4.6% in
Brazil and 4.5% in Mexico.
Real GDP in Russia contracted by 8% on aver-
age for 2009 according to an initial estimate
from the Federal State Statistics Service. This
implies that macroeconomic output grew sig-
nificantly in the fourth quarter after seasonal
adjustment, to which fiscal stimuli probably
made a major contribution. Given the mas-
sive collapse in 2009 as a whole, the rise in
the unemployment rate by two percentage
points from the previous year’s average to
8.4% was still within reasonable bounds. The
cyclical recovery is generally expected to con-
tinue in the current year as well. Consumer
price inflation has abated in Russia through-
out the reporting period, posting a rate of8.1% in January compared with 13.4% a
year earlier.
USA
In the final quarter of 2009, the US economy
accelerated considerably. After the elimin-
ation of seasonal variations, total economic
output according to the initial estimate rose
by 11/C252% from the preceding quarter, in
which it had risen by1/C252%. At -21/C252%, how-
ever, the overall 2009 result was still percep-
tibly in negative territory. According to cur-
rent indicators, the US economy got off to a
positive start in the new year, and its outlook
is more favourable than it has been for quite
some time. The recovery of household final
demand is likely to initially remain based on
monetary and fiscal policy support measures.
A considerable slowdown in inventory deple-
tion was the primary reason why total eco-
nomic output picked up speed towards the
end of 2009. However, domestic household
final demand likewise rose once again. Real
household consumption even managed to
surpass by1/C252% its elevated level of the third
quarter, when car sales had been given a
strong boost by the temporary government
environmental premium granted in July and
August. After dipping sharply in September,
car sales rebounded strongly over the course
of the fourth quarter. In addition, households
rapidly increased their spending on other
goods and services. This may have had several
causes: not only did household wealth re-
cover, but real disposable incomes also saw
solid growth and the saving ratio held steady
at 41/C252%. That the saving ratio remainedLatin America
on solid growth
path
Positive tenden-
cies in RussiaEconomic
activity picking
up steam
Expansion of
household
consumption
from elevated
level ...

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
February 2010
17Deuts che Bun desbankSavin g an d unemployment durin g the global ﬁ nan cial an d economi c crisis
The impa ct of the global re cession on the la bour 
markets in in dustrial countries has varie d quite con-
sidera bly. Be ginnin g with the thir d quarter of 2007, 
when the ﬁ  rst major sho ckwave emanate d from the 
international ﬁ  nan cial markets, unemployment in the 
USA dou bled to 9. 6% in the thir d quarter of 2009.1 In 
Spain, the num ber of unemploye d persons rose in this 
perio d by more than ten per centa ge points to 18.7%. 
By contrast, Germany even mana ged to post a sli ght 
decline in unemployment. What is noteworthy is that, 
in a pattern trans cending national borders, there was 
no close conne ction between jo b losses an d total 
output losses.2
Conversely, there seems to be a very close symmetri c 
link between the in crease in the level of un deremploy-
ment an d the growth pattern of the househol d savin g 
ratio. In countries su ch as Germany, Fran ce or Japan, 
where the impa ct on la bour markets has thus far been 
relatively limite d, househol ds in crease d their savin g 
only mo destly. By contrast, in the U SA, the UK an d par-
ticularly in Spain, a relatively sharp in crease in savin g 
and unemployment was o bserve d.
This link su ggests that, a cross the worl d, enterprises 
and househol ds alike have assesse d their e conomi c 
outlook quite disparately. For instan ce, in export-ori-
ente d economies like Germany an d Japan the down-
turn mi ght have been interprete d ﬁ rst an d foremost 
as a temporary decline in forei gn deman d, whi ch 
househol ds woul d not interpret as a threat of major 
adjustment in employment (re dun dancies) an d whi ch 
therefore did not result in a sharp fall in consumer 
spen ding. This ar gument is base d on the theory of 
savin g, whi ch conten ds that househol ds generally keep 
their spen ding constant if they suspe ct that the perio d 
of e conomi c slow down will be relatively short, whereas 
any anti cipation of a protra cted pro cess of stru ctural 
adjustment involvin g heavy jo b losses tri ggers an in cre-
ase in pre cautionary savin g. This appears to have been 
very mu ch the case in Spain.
Naturally, there were numerous other fa ctors whi ch 
inﬂ uen ced househol ds’ spen ding in the course of 2008 
and 2009. In parti cular, the extensive government pro-
grammes to stimulate pur chases of dura ble goo ds, su ch 
as the environmental premium in Germany, are likely to have at least intermittently depresse d the savin g ratio, 
taken in isolation. On the other han d, it appears that 
wealth losses in the wake of the international ﬁ  nan cial 
crisis have discerni bly dampene d private consumption 
in some countries in favour of stron ger savin g. Between 
the thir d quarter of 2007 an d the ﬁ  rst quarter of 2009 
– the low point in the ﬁ  nan cial markets – mainly U S an d 
UK househol ds saw their net ﬁ  nan cial wealth dwin dle. 
The prime reason for this was that – unlike German an d 
Japanese househol ds – they ha d investe d most of their 
ﬁ nan cial assets in shares, whi ch re corded parti cularly 
lar ge losses. This was compoun ded by ﬁ nan cial losses 
on real estate ownership. As a conse quen ce, fewer 
options were availa ble for takin g up collateralise d 
loans for consumption purposes, whi ch ha d playe d a 
role in re ducing the savin g ratio in the years pre ceding 
the crisis, espe cially in the U SA. In Spain, the home 
value to in come ratio has by no means decline d more 
sharply than in the U SA an d therefore does not exp-
lain the relatively stron g in crease in the savin g ratio. 
Nonetheless, the per ception of major turmoil in the 
real estate markets, couple d with si gns of a lon g an d 
arduous stru ctural a djustment pro cess, pre dominantly 
in the constru ction se ctor, an d the a dverse effe cts of 
this in the la bour market are likely to have ha d a si gni-
ﬁ cant inﬂ  uen ce on Spanish househol ds’ savin g.
1 Althou gh, for the U SA, more up-to- date information is 
availa ble, for various other countries consi dere d here data 
are availa ble only up to 2009 Q3. — 2 See Deuts che Bun-
desbank, La bour markets in the global re cession, Monthly Report, Novem ber 2009, pp 20–21. — 3 Sour ces: Eurostat, 
BIS, OE CD, national data an d Bun desbank calculations. — 
4 2009 Q2 compare d with 2007 Q3.02468 1 00246810
USASeasonally adjusted figures, 2009 Q3 compared with 2007 Q3
UKChange in unemployment 
rate (percentage points)
DE
Change in saving rate (percentage points)FRCA
JP 4ES
EEASaving and unemployment rates in 
selected industrial countries 3

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
EUROSYSTEM
Monthly Report
February 2010
18unchanged is probably associated with the
stabilisation in the labour market (see box
on page 17). Although unemployment in the
fourth quarter, at 10.0%, was higher than at
any time since the second quarter of 1983,
the shedding of jobs came to a near-standstill
at the turn of 2009-10. By contrast, price
trends did not provide any further relief to
consumers. Higher energy prices, in particu-
lar, caused the consumer price index to rise
by 0.9% in the fourth quarter from the pre-
ceding three-month period. A base effect as
a result of the sharp drop in energy prices in
the fourth quarter of 2008 was the primary
reason why headline inflation underwent a
turnaround from -1.3% to +2.7% between
September and December. The annual infla-
tion rate excluding food and energy rose by
0.3 percentage point to +1.8%.
Improved profitability and a rise in capacity
utilisation – albeit from a low level – enticed
firms to step up their spending on machinery
and equipment and on software. However,
commercial construction investment continued
its nosedive, which is attributable to its lag-
ging the cycle and to the steep downturn
in the relevant real-estate-market segment.
Investment in residential construction con-
tinued to recover, albeit at a much slower
pace than a quarter earlier. Given the real
effective depreciation of the US dollar over
the preceding months, exports were able to
fully constitute part of the revival in world
trade. As the growth of exports (41/C252%) out-
stripped that of imports (21/C252%), on balance
foreign trade generated a slight increase in
GDP in the final quarter of the year.Japan
After a hiatus in the third quarter, the recov-
ery of the Japanese economy became reinvig-
orated in the last quarter of 2009, during
which real growth, at 1% on the quarter after
seasonal adjustment, was nearly as strong as
in the second quarter, when the cyclical re-
covery had begun. Average GDP growth for
the year as a whole was -5%. However,
throughout the reporting period the Japanese
economy remained dependent on strong ex-
ternal stimuli and on fiscal policy. Although
household consumption in the fourth quarter
did once again post a significant gain on the
preceding three-month period (+3/C254%), this is
likely to be due largely to government incen-
tives, especially for purchasing consumer dur-
ables. The persistent difficulties in the labour
market situation, in particular, have dented
households’ propensity to consume, even
though unemployment remained quite low
by international standards, ending the year
at 5.1%. Whereas investment for residential
construction continued to contract in the
fourth quarter, commercial investment stabil-
ised, most likely because the favourable trend
in overseas business continued. Real exports
continued to recover at a brisk pace, growing
by 5% compared with the third quarter of
the year. In the light of muted domestic de-
mand, imports rose by only 11/C254%. This calcu-
lates to foreign trade making up nearly one-
half of total GDP growth in the final quarter.
The negative year-on-year growth in the con-
sumer price index narrowed, primarily owing
to a base effect in the energy component, by
one-half percentage point to 1.7% between
September and December. Excluding the... yet other
demand
components
likewise
pointing
upwardsReinvigoration
of recovery
path

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
February 2010
19comparatively volatile prices for food and
energy, the Japanese basket of consumer
goods was 1.2% cheaper at the end of 2009
than a year earlier.
United Kingdom
In the United Kingdom, the economic con-
traction that had begun in the second quarter
of 2008 ended in the fourth quarter; how-
ever, no meaningful cyclical recovery has oc-
curred yet. Real GDP in the fourth quarter
was only minimally higher than the relatively
low level of the preceding period and con-
tracted by 43/C254% on the year. This disappoint-
ing fourth-quarter result rested on a virtual
stagnation of real gross value added in both
the services sector and the manufacturing
sector (excluding construction). With regard
to manufacturing it should be noted that, fol-
lowing the completion of maintenance and
repairs, the production of oil and gas picked
up perceptibly again after seasonal adjust-
ment and manufacturing output was pointed
upwards for the first time since early 2008,
whereas output in the utilities sector con-
tracted considerably. Activity in the construc-
tion sector, which in the previous quarter had
been boosted to a large extent by numerous
public building projects, did not grow any fur-
ther. In October, the standardised unemploy-
ment rate, at 7.8%, held steady at the level
of the third-quarter months. Consumer price
inflation, which had also been relatively high
owing to the depreciation of the pound ster-
ling in 2009, jumped toward the turn of the
year. In January 2010, the 2.5-percentage-
point increase in value-added tax caused in-
flation to climb to 3.5%.New EU member states
The economic picture for the new EU mem-
ber states remains quite heterogeneous. Es-
tonia and Lithuania, which – like Latvia –
were forced to cope with a particularly sharp
correction of their unsustainable growth
paths once their external sources of finance
had dried up, saw their economies resume
economic growth in the fourth quarter. Pol-
and, which had hardly any past imbalances to
deal with, will probably have continued its
recovery, which had already begun in the
second quarter, thanks to robust domestic
demand. In Bulgaria, Hungary, Latvia and Ro-
mania, however, the slump does not appear
to have abated even in the fourth quarter.
The increase in the standardised unemploy-
ment rate for this group of countries as a
whole by 0.3% over the course of the fourth
quarter to 9.2% at the end of the year, how-
ever, is much weaker in a quarter-on-quarter
comparison. Over the same period, consumer
price inflation, as measured by the Harmon-
ised Index of Consumer Prices (HICP), rose by
0.1 percentage point to 3.2%.
Macroeconomic trends in the euro area
The euro-area recovery made little progress in
the last quarter of 2009. Real GDP was only
marginally up, after seasonal adjustment,
from the third quarter, in which it had grown
by1/C252%. On account of the sharp decline in
output in the first quarter, total economic
output fell by 4% on average for the year.
The main reasons for the stalled recovery in
the euro area – broken down by country –Economic
slump is overEconomic
picture remains
mixed
Upward trend
stalled

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
EUROSYSTEM
Monthly Report
February 2010
20were faltering growth in Germany and a
slight decline in Italy’s GDP . By contrast, the
French economy grew markedly more strong-
ly because, among other things, the gradual
reduction in the environmental premium for
new cars that had begun in January 2010
continued to buoy car sales even into the
fourth quarter.1In Spain, the cyclical tailspin
that had continued since the third quarter of
2008 has come to a near-standstill. For thecurrent quarter, recovery in the euro area is
likely to remain sluggish amidst subsiding
stimuli from the government economic
stimulus packages. The muted outlook is also
manifesting itself in a January revision of the
IMF’s forecast: now growth in 2010 is predict-
ed to be only 1.0%, thereby lagging far be-
hind that of the industrial countries as a
group and especially that of the United
States.
On the supply side, the weaker GDP growth
in the fourth quarter of 2009 is largely attrib-
utable to a more subdued pace of industrial
output growth, which amounted to a mere
1/C254% after seasonal adjustment compared
with +2% in the third quarter. Capacity util-
isation in the manufacturing sector, however,
rose just as sharply in the October-January
period as in the three months previously.
Whereas the manufacturers of capital goods
and intermediate goods saw distinct growth
compared with the third-quarter months
(+11/C254% and +11/C252% respectively), output of
consumer goods (-1/C254%) and energy (-1%)
continued to decline. In 2009 as a whole,
industrial output fell by 15%. Growth of
demand for industrial goods likewise weak-
ened in the October-November two-month
period, up to which information is available.
Excluding the manufacture of other transport
equipment, which is often characterised by
large orders, new orders rose by a seasonally
adjusted 13/C254% from the third quarter, inSelected indicators of 
industrial activity
in the euro area
Deutsche Bundesbank2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010859095100105110115
67707376798285
80859095100105110115120125130130Seasonally adjusted, quarterly
Lin scale
Capacity utilisation
Log scale
New orders received
by manufacturers 
working on
orders
2005 = 100Log scale
Industrial output
2005 = 100
1994 - 2009
average%
0
Of which
Excluding 
heavy 
transport
equipmentTotal
Oct-
Nov
1For orders up to 30 June 2010 with an invoice date not
later than 30 September 2010, only one premium (prime
/C224 la casse) of 3700 (previously 31,000) is paid. This pre-
mium will go down to 3500 for orders up to 31 Decem-
ber 2010 with an invoice date not later than 31 March
2011.Industrial
activity
expanding less
dynamically
of late

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
February 2010
21which they had grown by 71/C252%. Sentiment in
the industrial sector continued to brightenat the beginning of the year, even thoughsurvey results remained visibly below theirlong-term averages. One factor was thatorder books and inventory stocks were nolonger assessed as unfavourably as before,while another was that the indicator for pro-duction expectations continued the steep as-cent which had begun in the second quarter.
One of the key demand-based pillars of over-
all euro-area growth in the fourth quarterwas exports, which in nominal terms andafter adjustment for seasonal variation roseby not less than 4% in October-Novembercompared with the third quarter. Importsgrew somewhat more weakly, at 3
1/C252%,
which meant that for the last quarter of theyear foreign trade with non-euro-area coun-
tries made a perceptible positive contributionto growth. Household consumption is likelyto have provided next to no stimulus, how-ever. New car registrations in the fourth quar-ter were up only slightly on the period(+1
1/C254%); relatively strong growth in some
countries, especially in France and Portugal,contrasted with sharp declines in, for in-stance, Germany. However, a more damagingimpact was caused by the fact that seasonallyadjusted real retail sales only treaded water inthe fourth quarter after falling in the secondand third. Nevertheless, consumer confidencehas continued to improve since the beginningof the fourth quarter. The renewed declinein construction output in October-Novembermust be seen particularly against the back-ground of the low demand for new produc-Unemployment * in the euro area
* Standardised unemployment rates as defined by the ILO. — 1 Figure for 2009 Q3.
Deutsche Bundesbank02468101214161820Seasonally adjusted
2008 Q4
2009 Q4
NLEuro-area average 2008 Q4Euro-area average 2009 Q4
AT LU CY SI MT DE BE IT FI 1
GR FR PT IE SK ES%
Only weak
growth stimuli
from domestic
household
demand

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
EUROSYSTEM
Monthly Report
February 2010
22tion capacities and the housing glut in some
member states. Firms’ demand for new ma-
chinery and equipment – based on the output
of capital goods excluding cars – is likely to
have risen slightly.
No improvement in the labour market situ-
ation is in sight. Employment in the euro area
fell in the third quarter of 2009 once again
by1/C252% after seasonal adjustment from the
second quarter and was thus down 2% on
the year. Since firms had short-time work ar-
rangements which were, in many cases, quite
favourable owing to government subsidies,
and because of the options for more flexible
working hours negotiated in wage contracts
in many countries, the number of hours
worked fell considerably more strongly – by
63/C254% on the year. Implementing this method
of adapting the volume of labour to output
cutbacks, however, has in most cases not
been cost-neutral. Rather, labour costs sky-
rocketed, going up in the third quarter by
3.2% on the year. They rose particularly
strongly in Greece, at 11.2%. The trend de-
cline in employment will have probably kept
up in the fourth quarter as well. At all events,
one sign of this happening is that the number
of unemployed persons rose by around
450,000 on the period. The standardised
unemployment rate rose by 0.3 percentage
point to 9.9%, compared with 8.0% a year
earlier and 7.2% in March 2008.In the fourth quarter, consumer prices in the
euro area rose by a modest 0.2% after sea-
sonal adjustment, much as in the two preced-
ing quarters. Specifically, the prices for energy
and services picked up somewhat, whereas
those for industrial goods and food virtually
held steady. The downward trend in the
prices of unprocessed food ground to a halt.
Year-on-year HICP inflation reversed itself
from -0.4% in the third quarter to +0.4% in
the fourth. Along with the low rate of infla-
tion at the current end, another contributory
factor was the sharp drop in energy prices in
the fourth quarter of 2008, which has now
had the effect of increasing the year-on-year
rate. Although energy prices in the final quar-
ter of 2009 remained below the level at the
end of 2008, their negative year-on-year
growth has narrowed since the third quarter
of 2009 by 8.7 percentage points to -3.2%.
Excluding energy and food, which are very
volatile, annual inflation in the fourth quarter
stood at a mere +1.1%, compared with
+1.3% in the third quarter and as much as
+1.6% in the first quarter of 2009. This also
reflects the impact of the cyclical slowdown.
In January, euro-area consumer prices are
likely to have risen slightly after seasonal ad-
justment. Annual total HICP inflation, accord-
ing to the Eurostat flash estimate, stood at
+1.0% following +0.9% a month earlier. The
gap between headline and core inflation is
therefore likely to have closed.Labour market
still reeling
from the
recessionGap between
headline and
core inflation
probably closed

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
February 2010
23Monetary policy and
banking businessInterest rate policy and the money
market
As expected, economic activity in the euro
area slowed in the fourth quarter of 2009.
Against this backdrop and given the prospect
of a gradual economic recovery, Eurosystem
projections indicate that consumer prices will
remain within the range of stability over the
time horizon relevant to monetary policy,
although uncertainty regarding the outlook
remains high due to the fallout from the
financial crisis. Likewise, market participants’
medium to long-term inflation expectations
remain well anchored in the euro area.
Monetary growth slowed in the reporting
quarter, not least in view of the fact that lend-
ing to the private sector was virtually stag-
nant. Monetary developments consequently
present no medium-term inflation risks at
present. Based on these framework condi-
tions, the Governing Council of the ECB left
the Eurosystem’s key policy rates on hold
between October 2009 and January 2010.
Throughout the fourth quarter of 2009, the
main refinancing operations were again con-
ducted as fixed-rate tenders with full allot-
ment at an interest rate of 1%. Commercial
banks still have to pay 1.75% to use the mar-
ginal refinancing facility, while credit balances
under the deposit facility are remunerated at
0.25%.
On 17 December 2009, the ECB conducted
its third and last supplementary Eurosystem
refinancing operation with a maturity of one
year. The tender was conducted on an interest-
indexed basis. Banks participating in this
transaction are not charged a pre-definedMain refinan-
cing rate
remains at 1%
Last one-year
tender interest-
indexed

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
EUROSYSTEM
Monthly Report
February 2010
24Deutsche BundesbankMoney market management and liquidity needs
During the three reserve maintenance periods from
14 October 2009 to 19 January 2010, euro-area credit
institutions’ need for central bank liquidity deter-
mined by autonomous liquidity factors remained prac-
tically unchanged; it decreased slightly by 51.8 billion
in net terms. Although the demand for liquidity from
banknotes in circulation increased markedly by 528.0
billion – primarily owing to the usual seasonal increase
around Christmas – the developments in the remaining
autonomous factors during the period under review
resulted in a slight reduction in the need for central
bank liquidity in net terms. First, there was a decrease
of519.2 billion in general government deposits with
the Eurosystem over the three periods and, second, if
the net foreign reserves and the other factors are
taken together, a move which eliminates liquidity-
neutral valuation effects, there was a decrease in the
liquidity needs of 510.6 billion. The decline in the de-
mand for liquidity arising from autonomous factors
was strengthened by the decline in the minimum re-
serve requirement of 53.6 billion net.
As was the case in previous months, the period under
review was defined by the generous supply of liquid-
ity by the Eurosystem which had the aim of support-
ing the functioning of the money market and satisfy-
ing credit institutions’ demand for central bank li-
quidity, even above the regular demand. Liquidity-
providing open-market operations continued to be
carried out as fixed-rate tenders with full allotment
meaning that liquidity provision was determined by
the demand from credit institutions. Primarily as a re-
sult of the additional liquidity provided by the 12-
month tenders, the last of which was carried out on
17 December 2009 with a volume of 597 billion, in the
three periods under review, the emphasis shifted fur-
ther from main refinancing operations to longer-term
refinancing operations. In net terms, the volume of
the main refinancing operations decreased by around
519 billion, while the volume of the longer-term oper-
ations increased by just under 532 billion. Additional-
ly, the Eurosystem continued to pursue its purchase
programme for covered bonds and was able to in-crease its holdings by 513 billion to 531 billion during
the period under review. At the same time, owing to
the increase in liquidity provision, recourse to the de-
posit facility increased by around 537 billion net,
while the marginal lending facility remained largely
unused.
EONIA was recorded at around 0.35% throughout al-
most the entire period and thus was primarily orient-
ed to the deposit facility rate of 0.25%. Only on the
final day of each reserve period when the Eurosystem
withdrew liquidity through liquidity-absorbing quick
tenders did the EONIA fixings increase noticeably, to a
maximum rate of 0.69%.
On 3 December 2009, the ECB Governing Council de-
cided on initial steps to facilitate a move away from
its liquidity policy characterised by non-standard
measures. For instance, the Governing Council agreed
to discontinue the supplementary 3-month tenders
and the 12-month operations as of the beginning of
2010 and to allot just one final 6-month tender in
2010, at the end of March. Parallel to this, market par-
ticipants were guaranteed that, until the beginning
of April 2010, all main and longer-term refinancing
operations would continue to be carried out as fixed-
rate tenders with full allotment.
During the October-November 2009 reserve mainten-
ance period, the outstanding refinancing volume de-
creased steadily, mainly due to declining demand
from credit institutions in the weekly main refinan-
cing operations, the volume of which decreased from
562 billion to 546 billion. Almost entirely unaffected
by this, however, was the fact that significantly more
liquidity remained available than was necessary to
meet the regular liquidity needs arising from auto-
nomous factors and the reserve requirement. The ex-
cess liquidity (on the basis of the benchmark amount)
was around 5135 billion on average over the period.
EONIA turnover was 538.7 billion on average over the
period, representing a slight increase on the previous
period ( 535.9 billion).

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
February 2010
25In the November-December 2009 reserve period, the
outstanding refinancing volume was around 5650 bil-
lion on most days. The excess liquidity stood at around5109 billion on average, somewhat lower than in the
previous period, and recourse to the deposit facilitydeclined further ( 566 billion on average compared
with 586 billion and 5110 billion in the previous
periods). EONIA remained close to the deposit rate. Atthe same time, EONIA turnover, at 538.1 billion on
average over the period, changed very little comparedwith the preceding period.
The December 2009-January 2010 reserve period,
which lasted a total of 43 days, was determined bythe allotment of the third and final 12-month tender.In its meeting on 3 December 2009, the ECB Govern-ing Council agreed that the interest rate of this tenderwould correspond to the average minimum bid rateof the main refinancing operations carried out duringthe maturity of this tender. Under these changed con-ditions – both of the previous 12-month tenders wereallotted at a fixed rate of 1.00% – 224 credit institu-tions participated in this tender in mid-December inthe Eurosystem; they bid and received 597 billion, in
line with market expectations. Even though the bidvolume was higher than the 575 billion allotment vol-
ume of the second 12-month tender at the end ofSeptember, the number of bidders decreased by morethan half in comparison. As a result of this additionalinflow of just under 5100 billion, the excess liquidity
went up again ( 5228 billion on average over the
period), causing a sharp increase in average recourseto the deposit facility to 5147 billion. Owing to the
even more comfortable liquidity conditions, turnoverin the (short-term) money market decreased as creditinstitutions were even less dependent on trade in thesecondary market. Hence, unsecured EONIA turnoverfell to 529.1 billion on average over the period ( 59 bil-
lion less than in the preceding period). Additionally,turnover on Eurex Repo’s Euro GC Pooling for securedovernight money decreased to 57.1 billion per day on
average, after being recorded at 510.0 billion and
511.0 billion respectively in the two precedingperiods. This meant that the Eurosystem again played
a more prominent role as an intermediary in themoney market.
In the subsequent January-February 2010 reserve
period, Eurosystem counterparties were offeredliquidity-providing operations in US dollar and Swissfrancs for the last time; the ECB had announcedin January that these operations, which were limiteduntil the end of January 2010, would not be ex-tended.Factors determining bank liquidity1
5billion; changes in the daily averages of the reserve
maintenance periods vis-/C224-vis the previous period
2009 2010
Item14 Oct
to10 Nov11 Nov
to7 Dec8 Dec
to19 Jan
I Provision (+) or absorption (–) of
central bank balances due to changesin autonomous factors
1 Banknotes in circulation
(increase: –) – 1.9 – 4.5 – 21.6
2 General government deposits with
the Eurosystem (increase: –) – 9.7 – 1.4 + 30.3
3 Net foreign reserves
2– 8.4 – 5.4 + 5.4
4 Other factors2+ 5.8 + 11.3 + 1.9
Total – 14.2 + 0.0 + 16.0
II Monetary policy operations of the
Eurosystem
1 Open market operations
(a) Main refinancing operations – 26.8 + 3.5 + 4.7(b) Longer-term refinancing
operations + 9.2 – 32.7 + 55.0
(c) Other operations + 6.7 + 6.6 + 5.6
2 Standing facilities
(a) Marginal lending facility – 0.0 + 0.4 – 0.3(b) Deposit facility (increase: –) + 23.1 + 20.8 – 81.3
Total + 12.2 – 1.4 – 16.3
III Change in credit institutions’ current
accounts (I + II) – 1.9 – 1.4 – 0.2
IV Change in the minimum reserve
requirement (increase: –) + 1.8 + 1.6 + 0.2
1For longer-term trends and the Deutsche Bundesbank’s contribu-
tion, see pages 14* and 15* of the Statistical Section of this MonthlyReport. — 2Including end-of-quarter valuation adjustments with no
impact on liquidity.

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
EUROSYSTEM
Monthly Report
February 2010
26interest rate for the provision of central bank
liquidity; instead, upon maturity of the trans-
action, they are charged the average main re-
financing or minimum bid rate over the term.
Although banks took advantage of this last
opportunity to gain a one-year loan and, at a
volume of 396.9 billion in December, bor-
rowed more liquidity from the Eurosystem
than during the second 12-month tender at
the end of September ( 375.2 billion), theallotment volume in the third one-year oper-
ation was significantly down on the first
transaction of this kind in June 2009 ( 3442.2
billion) owing to the extremely favourable
liquidity situation in the European banking
sector. At the same time, the number of
banks participating in the tender fell again.
Only 224 credit institutions participated in the
December tender compared with 1,121 in
the first and 589 in the second 12-month
operations.
In light of the recent drop in demand, the
Eurosystem and the US Federal Reserve
agreed to discontinue 84-day foreign cur-
rency operations in US dollars after 6 October
2009. The Eurosystem stopped conducting
one-week US-dollar swap operations and
refinancing operations for Swiss francs from
1 February 2010. Furthermore, supplemen-
tary three-month tenders were discontinued
at the end of 2009. The Governing Council
announced that it will conduct its last special
tender with a maturity of six months at the
end of March 2010. In addition, the Govern-
ing Council announced that it will decide at
the start of March 2010 whether to continue
gradually phasing out the supplementary
non-standard liquidity measures adopted in
response to the financial crisis.
Euro-area money market rates barely reacted
to the announcement that non-standard
monetary policy measures are to be gradually
phased out. As in the third quarter of 2009,
the overnight interest rate (EONIA) was
fluctuating slightly around the 0.35% mark
between October and January, which was
around 0.1 percentage point above the inter-Money market interest rates
in the euro area
1 Monthly averages. — 2 Only on 8 October 
2008 2.75%. — 3 Three-month Euribor less 
three-month Eurepo. —  Average from 1 
to 15 February 2010.
Deutsche Bundesbank2006 2007 2008 2009 201000.51.01.52.02.53.03.54.04.55.05.56.06.5
050100150200Marginal lending rate
Three-month Euribor1
EONIA1
Minimum bid rate or fixed
interest rate for main
refinancing operations
Difference between
uncollateralised and
collateralised three-month
interbank lending
rates 1, 32
Basis
points%
Deposit rate
Gradual
phasing-out of
supplementary
monetary policy
measures
announced
Overnight
interest rate
just above
interest rate on
deposit facility

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
February 2010
27est rate on the Eurosystem deposit facility.
Any significant increases in the overnight rateoccurred almost exclusively on the last daysof each of the maintenance periods, whenthe Eurosystem absorbed surplus liquiditythrough fine-tuning operations.
A predominantly sideways trend was also ob-
served in longer-term money market interestrates in the final quarter of 2009, especially atthe long end of the money market curve.
Conversely, towards the end of the year, inparticular, shorter-term unsecured interbankinterest rates with maturities of up to sixmonths fell slightly and are, at present, con-sistently being quoted below the Eurosys-tem’s main refinancing rate. The uncollatera-lised three-month rate (3M Euribor) currentlystands at 0.66% and its collateralised coun-terpart (3M Eurepo) at 0.35%. The risk pre-Open market operations of the Eurosystem*
Value
dateType of trans-
action 1Maturityin daysActual
allotmentin5billionDeviation
from thebenchmark
2
in5billionMarginal
rate/fixedrate%Allotment
ratio%Weighted
rate%Cover
ratio
3Numberof bidders
14.10.09 MRO (FRT) 7 61.6 105.6 1.00 100.00 – 1.00 218
14.10.09 S-LTRO (FRT) 28 7.7 – 1.00 100.00 – 1.00 1921.10.09 MRO (FRT) 7 49.8 142.8 1.00 100.00 – 1.00 22428.10.09 MRO (FRT) 7 48.7 138.7 1.00 100.00 – 1.00 18829.10.09 LTRO (FRT) 91 3.3 – 1.00 100.00 – 1.00 2504.11.09 MRO (FRT) 7 46.2 141.2 1.00 100.00 – 1.00 17010.11.09 FTO (–) 1 – 191.4 – 0.80 100.00 0.76 1.00 16511.11.09 MRO (FRT) 7 51.3 68.8 1.00 100.00 – 1.00 16011.11.09 S-LTRO (FRT) 27 2.5 – 1.00 100.00 – 1.00 1212.11.09 S-LTRO (FRT) 91 10.8 – 1.00 100.00 – 1.00 912.11.09 S-LTRO (FRT) 182 0.8 – 1.00 100.00 – 1.00 2118.11.09 MRO (FRT) 7 52.6 99.6 1.00 100.00 – 1.00 17725.11.09 MRO (FRT) 7 59.1 114.1 1.00 100.00 – 1.00 16826.11.09 LTRO (FRT) 91 2.1 – 1.00 100.00 – 1.00 1902.12.09 MRO (FRT) 6 58.1 138.1 1.00 100.00 – 1.00 13707.12.09 FTO (–) 1 – 129.7 – 0.80 100.00 0.76 1.00 14708.12.09 MRO (FRT) 8 55.8 58.3 1.00 100.00 – 1.00 11108.12.09 S-LTRO (FRT) 43 2.7 – 1.00 100.00 – 1.00 810.12.09 S-LTRO (FRT) 91 2.9 – 1.00 100.00 – 1.00 910.12.09 S-LTRO (FRT) 182 1.7 – 1.00 100.00 – 1.00 2116.12.09 MRO (FRT) 7 52.9 109.4 1.00 100.00 – 1.00 12517.12.09 S-LTRO (FRT) 371 96.9 – ...
4 100.00 – 1.00 224
17.12.09 LTRO (FRT) 105 2.6 – 1.00 100.00 – 1.00 2123.12.09 MRO (FRT) 7 58.6 253.1 1.00 100.00 – 1.00 10930.12.09 MRO (FRT) 7 78.6 288.6 1.00 100.00 – 1.00 13206.01.10 MRO (FRT) 7 54.0 292.5 1.00 100.00 – 1.00 10013.01.10 MRO (FRT) 7 60.1 277.1 1.00 100.00 – 1.00 10219.01.10 FTO (–) 1 – 258.9 – 0.80 100.00 0.75 1.00 188
*For more information on the Eurosystem’s operations
from 8 July 2009 to 13 October 2009, see DeutscheBundesbank, Monthly Report, November 2009, p 28. —1MRO: main refinancing operation, LTRO: longer-term
refinancing operation, S-LTRO: supplementary longer-term refinancing operation, FTO: fine-tuning operation(+: liquidity providing operation, –: liquidity absorbing
operation). FRT: fixed-rate tender. — 2Excluding
(S-)LTROs allotted in the same week. — 3Ratio of total
bids to the allotment amount. — 4The interest rate is the
average minimum bid rate of the MROs over the life ofthis operation.
Deutsche Bundesbank
Sideways trend
in longer-term
money market
interest rates

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
EUROSYSTEM
Monthly Report
February 2010
28mium on the euro money market, which is
determined on the basis of their yield spread,
is currently 0.3 percentage point and thus
only marginally below the level at the end of
the previous quarter. The announcement of
the gradual phasing-out of non-standard
monetary policy measures in December did
not lead to any discernible rise in this risk
premium either.
Monetary developments in the euro area
Monetary expansion in the euro area con-
tinued to slow in the reporting quarter. In sea-
sonally adjusted and annualised terms, the
growth rate of the broad monetary aggregate
M3 was more than -1% in the fourth quarter
of 2009 and was thus well down on the al-
ready weak rate of 0% recorded in the third
quarter. The three-month average of the an-
nual rates of growth of M3 over the period
from October to December also fell to -0.1%
on the back of growth of 2.4% in the preced-
ing quarter. It thus fell into negative territory
for the first time since the launch of monetary
union.
The interest rate environment, characterised
by assets with a maturity of up to two years
having a comparatively small interest rate
advantage over overnight deposits and by a
steep yield curve for maturities of over two
years, had a major impact on monetary
growth in the reporting quarter, too. How-
ever, the shifts from short-term time deposits
(with an agreed maturity of up to two years)
remunerated at close to market rates to the
most liquid components of M3, as witnessedin the three preceding quarters, steadily
diminished throughout the reporting quarter.
At a seasonally adjusted and annualised
three-month rate of 8% in the fourth quarter,
the rise in overnight deposits remained well
below the very high rate of 161/C252% in the pre-
vious quarter. At the same time, growth in
currency in circulation slowed in annualised
terms from just under 71/C252% to just short of
4%. Overall, the still buoyant growth of the
narrow monetary aggregate M1 decelerated
to just over 7% between October and De-
cember on the back of 15% between July
and September.
At the same time, the decline in holdings of
other short-term deposits in the reporting
quarter was almost just as equally marked as
in the past three quarters, at a seasonally ad-
justed and annualised three-month rate of
just over 91/C252%. This was due mainly to per-
sistently strong outflows of short-term time
deposits. Households, in particular, contrib-
uted to the 25% seasonally adjusted and
annualised decline in these deposits, com-
pared with -27% in the previous quarter. The
uptake of shorter-term savings deposits
(redeemable at notice of up to three months)
did not come close to compensating for this
development; in the period under review, it
was down somewhat on the preceding three
quarters.
There were also net outflows of marketable
financial instruments. After shrinking by more
than 15% in the previous quarter, the decline
slowed to just under 21/C252% in annualised
terms between October and December 2009.
Repo transactions, which are highly volatileFurther
deceleration
of monetary
expansion
Demand for
highly liquid
M3 compon-
ents still
buoyantNet reduction
in short-term
deposits other
than overnight
deposits ...
... and
marketable
instruments

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
February 2010
29and originate largely from securitised inter-
bank operations, were the only sub-compon-ent to show a sharply positive trend in the re-porting quarter. There were significant out-flows of money market fund shares/units inthe last quarter of 2009. These account forthe largest share of marketable instrumentsand had experienced positive growth be-tween July and September. By contrast, inDecember, special factors played a role in theconsiderable slowing of the decline in short-term debt securities of monetary financial in-stitutions held by non-banks (with a maturityof up to two years) compared with the previ-ous four quarters.
The slowdown in the underlying pace of
monetary growth and the latterly weak lend-ing to the private sector continued in the re-porting quarter. Nonetheless, credit providedby banks in the euro area experienced an in-crease, albeit slight, in loans for the first timesince the final quarter of 2008. Starting fromthe high level of the previous quarter, the ac-quisition of securitised assets was negativeoverall from October to December. Loans todomestic private non-banks, which had stoodat an annualised and seasonally adjustedthree-month rate of -1% in the third quarter,rose by just short of 1% in the period underreview. The three-month lending rate to thedomestic private sector, adjusted for credit in-stitutions’ securitisation activities and loansales, also amounted to just under 1%. Theparallel development of the adjusted and un-adjusted three-month rates can be attributedto the fact that banks conducted only a smallnumber of securitisation transactions in thefourth quarter of 2009, which meant thatComponents and 
counterparts of the money stock in the euro area
1 12-month  flows. —  2 Taken  in  isolation, 
an  increase  curbs  M3  growth. —  3 Not 
seasonally  adjusted. —  4 Increase:  –,  de-
crease: +.
Deutsche Bundesbank2001 02 03 04 05 06 07 08 200950510152025
–+++++
–10–50+5+10+15+20+25+30
90060030003006009001,200
–––++++Seasonally adjusted, quarterly
... components of the money stock
... counterparts
of which
Net external asset position 3
External
assets 1Net externalasset position
External
liabilities
 1 4Growth rate 1 of M3 and
the contributions to growth in ...
Remaining balancesheet items
 2Net externalasset position
Longer-term financialliabilities to othernon-MFIs
 2Credit to theprivate sector
 M2 – M1
M3 – M2M1
€ bn%%
M3
M3 Weak lending
to the private
sector

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
EUROSYSTEM
Monthly Report
February 2010
30there was no statistical underreporting of
banks’ actual lending.
The slight rise in loans to domestic private
non-banks was the outcome of fairly hetero-
geneous sectoral developments. Lending to
households expanded most, with the positive
developments of the past two quarters con-
solidating further. This was again attributable
to loans for house purchase, which make up
the lion’s share of households’ borrowing.
Other credit to households also rose sharply,
while consumer credit virtually stagnated in
the reporting quarter following slight growth
in the previous quarter.
In the fourth quarter of 2009, inflows of
loans to households were accompanied by
strong outflows of loans to non-financial cor-
porations, which are to be seen in connection
with the slowdown in economic activity. This
was primarily caused by the persistently sharp
drop in short-term loans with a maturity of
up to one year. Nevertheless, the develop-
ment of medium-term loans (with a maturity
of over one and up to five years) was also
identifiably negative again in the reporting
quarter. By contrast, there was a further clear
increase in long-term loans (with a maturity
of over five years).
There was a discernible increase in loans to
other financial intermediaries between Octo-
ber and December, while these loans had a
significant negative effect on credit growth in
the third quarter. The volatility of these move-
ments should be viewed in connection with
reverse repo transactions. With these transac-
tions, banks issue securitised credit to a finan-cial service provider in the other financial
intermediaries sector. The financial service
provider then lends the liquidity raised to
other banks against collateral. By nature,
these transactions ultimately constitute indir-
ect interbank operations. This type of lending
is therefore not per se accompanied by lend-
ing to the private non-banking sector.
Starting from a high level in the previous
three months, the fourth quarter of 2009
saw a slight drop in the level of funds made
available by banks in the euro area through
securities acquisitions. There was only a small
rise in holdings of securities from public sec-
tor issuers; their annualised and seasonally
adjusted growth rate fell from 151/C252% in the
previous quarter to almost 11/C252% in the period
under review. Holdings of securities issued by
the private sector in the euro area had been
rising sharply since 2007, but, for the first
time since then, fell at a corresponding rate
of 7% between October and December
2009, compared with an increase of more
than 61/C252% in the preceding quarter.
In the fourth quarter of 2009, the net exter-
nal assets of the euro-area MFI sector rose by
345.4 billion in seasonally adjusted terms
and, thus, taken in isolation, had an expan-
sionary effect on monetary growth. As in the
two preceding quarters, the decline in do-
mestic MFIs’ liabilities to residents outside the
euro area in connection with the restructur-
ing of MFI balance sheets was more pro-
nounced than the corresponding reduction in
assets.Perceptible
growth in
loans to
households, ...
... but further
decline in loans
to non-financial
corporations
Discernible
increase in
loans to other
financial inter-
mediariesSlight drop
in securities
acquisitions
by banks
Perceptible rise
in net external
assets

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
February 2010
31By contrast, monetary growth tended to be
slowed by a weaker, but nonetheless percep-
tible, formation of MFI longer-term financial
liabilities. Monetary capital in the euro area
rose by 4% in seasonally adjusted and annu-
alised terms in the fourth quarter of 2009,
compared with just over 7% in the previous
quarter. While banks topped up their capital
and reserves noticeably in the reporting
period, there was a decline on the quarter in
the remaining components. Although the
steep yield curve gave rise to a further uptake
of longer-term time deposits, particularly by
households, their growth was, however, sim-
ultaneously dampened by other financial
intermediaries’ low securitisation activity via
banks’ special-purpose financing vehicles.
Consequently, the increase in long-term time
deposits was significantly lower between
October and December than in the previous
four quarters. Domestic non-banks reduced
their holdings of long-term savings deposits
slightly in the reporting quarter. Credit institu-
tions in the euro area also borrowed less from
non-banks in the form of bank debt securities
with longer maturities on the back of high is-
suance in the third quarter.
Overall, the underlying monetary dynamics
– in other words, monetary growth which is
ultimately relevant to inflation – slowed again
in the reporting quarter. There was even a
slight drop in M3 between October and
December. Inflation projections based on
monetary data, taken as a whole, therefore
continue to indicate that there will be no pro-
nounced risk to price stability in the euro area
for the next three years. Nevertheless, the dis-
persion of these projections increased againslightly in comparison with the previous quar-
ter. This highlights the fact that there is still a
high degree of uncertainty associated with
such an outlook.
Deposit and lending business of German
banks with domestic customers
In the third quarter of 2009, domestic invest-
ors reduced their deposits held by German
banks for the first time in four years, and this
trend accelerated in the fourth quarter.
Deposits shrank at a seasonally adjusted and
annualised three-month rate of -1% between
October and December, compared with -1/C252%
in the third quarter. This decline was once
again driven mainly by the drop in short-term
time deposits (with an agreed maturity of up
to two years) remunerated at close to market
rates. At just under -45%, their seasonally ad-
justed and annualised three-month rate was
almost as sharply negative as in the preceding
quarter. Households, in particular, reduced
these balances extremely sharply for the
fourth time in succession. Simultaneously,
there was another sharp expansion in hold-
ings of overnight deposits. At a seasonally ad-
justed and annualised three-month rate of
141/C252%, they were down on the previous
quarter (221/C252%), although their growth rate
was still well above the long-term average.
Strong growth was recorded among non-
financial corporations and households, in par-
ticular. The latter also built up a very large vol-
ume of short-term savings deposits (redeem-
able at notice of up to three months), which
meant that the pace of growth of this type of
deposit remained at a high level. In seasonallyNoticeable rise
in longer-term
investment at
banks
No pronounced
risk to price
stability from
a monetary
perspectiveSignificant
reduction in
domestic
investors’
balances at
German banks

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
EUROSYSTEM
Monthly Report
February 2010
32adjusted and annualised terms, short-term
savings deposits increased by more than 11%
between October and December, compared
with over 16% in the third quarter.
With regard to long-term deposit types, the
strong decline in savings deposits (redeem-
able at notice of over three months) in
December was the main contributor to the
reduction in the total volume of domestic
deposits in the reporting quarter. In seasonally
adjusted and annualised terms, long-term
savings deposits shrank by 31/C252% in the fourth
quarter. In the same period, there was, by
contrast, a clear rise in the quantitatively
more significant long-term time deposits
(with an agreed maturity of over two years).
Even so, the corresponding three-month rate
fell slightly from 3% to 2% as a result of anunusually strong reduction in these balances
by insurance corporations and pension funds.
Conversely, households continued to top up
their long-term time deposits on an extremely
large scale with a view to benefiting from the
comparatively high yields on these instru-
ments.
Granting of credit by domestic credit institu-
tions to the private sector decreased by a
seasonally adjusted and annualised three-
month rate of just under 31/C252% between July
and September. Growth was back in positive
territory in the fourth quarter, however, with
the counterbalancing development in the net
credit supply to the individual sectors, which
had began in the previous quarter, becoming
more pronounced. While more credit was
issued to financial corporations, there was a
further decline in credit to non-financial
corporations. Loans decreased on balance.
Growth in total credit to the private sector in
the fourth quarter was therefore solely attrib-
utable to a perceptible rise in securitised lend-
ing. Securitised lending rose by a seasonally
adjusted and annualised 5%, after having
decreased by 81/C252% in the previous quarter.
The reduction in loans to the private sector in
the reporting quarter was, overall, less pro-
nounced than in the prececing three-month
period. The annualised and seasonally adjust-
ed three-month rate went up from -21/C252%t o
1/C252%. The decline in lending to the private sec-
tor in the fourth quarter of 2009 was due
solely to the further reduction in the supply of
credit to non-financial corporations. Follow-
ing marked net redemptions of credit issued
by German banks to domestic non-financialLending and deposits of monetary
financial institutions (MFIs)
in Germany*
5billion
2009 2008
ItemOct to
DecOct to
Dec
Deposits of domestic non-MFIs 1
Overnight 44.9 51.0
With agreed maturities
of up to 2 years – 41.5 23.2
of over 2 years 3.3 28.6
Redeemable at notice
of up to 3 months 17.1 5.6
of over 3 months 2.3 10.4
Lending
to domestic enterprises and
households
Loans – 19.2 – 3.0
Securities 4.7 28.1
to domestic general government
Loans – 2.3 – 0.9
Securities 5.5 0.4
*As well as banks (including building and loan associ-
ations, but excluding the Bundesbank), monetary finan-
cial institutions (MFIs) here also include money market
funds; see also Table IV.1 in the Statistical Section of the
Monthly Report. — 1Enterprises, households and gen-
eral government excluding central government.
Deutsche Bundesbank
Keen interest in
long-term time
depositsWeak credit
provision by
German banks
Further decline
in unsecuritised
lending to
non-financial
corporations

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
February 2010
33corporations in the second and third quarters
of 2009, there was a further 6% seasonallyadjusted and annualised reduction in theirvolume in the fourth quarter. With regard tomaturities, there was a continuation of thetrend observed in previous quarters. The re-duction in short-term loans that had takenplace in the preceding three quarters gainedmomentum significantly in the reportingquarter, while there was considerable growthin medium-term and long-term loans with amaturity of more than one year.
Unlike lending to non-financial corporations,
lending to households continued to recoverin the fourth quarter. Total loans to house-holds again increased significantly in season-ally adjusted terms between October and De-cember. Even so, the annualised three-monthrate stood at just
1/C252%, compared with not
quite 1% between July and September. Thisgrowth was wholly due to loans for housepurchase, which more than offset the declinein other credit and gave rise to a positivethree-month rate for the third time in succes-sion.
Although the volume of credit issued to gen-
eral government increased sharply in Octoberdue to the simultaneous rise in loans and se-curitised credit, credit growth in the fourthquarter was down overall on the two previ-ous quarters. This was because of the consid-erable reduction in loans at the end of thequarter. However, for the first time in fiveyears, the overall volume of loans to generalgovernment increased for three consecutivequarters. In seasonally adjusted and annual-ised terms, it increased by 2
1/C252%. Loans fell ata seasonally adjusted and annualised three-
month rate of just under 6% over the fourthquarter as a whole, while securitised creditgrew by more than 22
1/C252%.
In the closing quarter of 2009, banks parti-
cipating in the Bank Lending Survey (BLS)barely changed their credit standards, thusconfirming the impression gained in the pre-vious quarter that a turning point had beenreached in the credit cycle. In the area ofloans to enterprises, industry-specific or firm-specific factors, in particular, again gave riseto more restrictive tendencies. As in the pre-ceding quarters, lending to large enterpriseswas also affected by higher costs related tobanks’ capital position. This was countered,on the whole, by institutions’ positive liquiditysituation, however. Trends in margins becameLoans of German banks
to domestic enterprisesand households
1 End  of  month;  adjusted  for  statistical 
changes.
Deutsche Bundesbank2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 20092,2502,2802,3102,3402,3702,4002,4302,460
01234Seasonally adjusted
%
Lin scale
Year-on-year changeLog scale
Loans 1€ bn
Clear increase
in loans to
households
Less dynamic
growth of
credit to
general
governmentCredit
standards
barely change

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
EUROSYSTEM
Monthly Report
February 2010
34Banking conditions in Germany
1 According to harmonised MFI interest rate statistics. — 2 According to the Bank Lending Survey, difference 
between the numbers of respondents reporting “tightened considerably” and “tightened somewhat” and the 
numbers of respondents reporting “eased somewhat” and “eased considerably” as a percentage of the re-
sponses given. — 3 Expectations for 2010 Q1. — 4 Reduced scale.
Deutsche Bundesbank02 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 20103.54.04.55.05.56.06.57.07.58.08.59.09.510.0
–300+30
–300+30
–60–300+30+60
–60–300+30
2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 102.02.53.03.54.04.55.05.56.06.57.0
603003060
––++
9060300306090
–––+++Credit to non-financial corporations Credit to households
% pa
%% pa
%
%%
%Changes in credit standards 2
Average loansRiskier loans
Average loansAverage loansRiskier loans
Riskier loansLoans to enterprises... with an initial rate fixation of
    over 1 year and up to 5 years... with an initial rate fixation of
    over 5 yearsConsumer credit ...
Consumer creditConsumer credit
Loans for house purchaseLoans for house purchaseLoans for house purchase
with an initial rate fixation of
over 5 years and up to 10 years
Loans to enterprises... with an initial rate fixation
    of over 5 years ...Loans to enterprises ...
... with an initial rate fixation
    of up to 1 year ...
... over €1 million... over €1 million
... up to €1 million... up to €1 millionBank interest rates (new business) 1
Changes in loan margins 2, 43
333.54.04.55.05.5
%

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
February 2010
35calmer, with margins for average risks in cor-
porate credit business being widened onlyslightly and adjustments for poorer credit rat-ings also declining significantly.
Credit supply conditions were therefore very
largely in line with those in the euro area as awhole. By contrast, certain differences wereonce again evident with regard to reportedfunding needs. These increased in Germany,mainly as a result of debt rescheduling andcaution on the part of other banks, whilehaving decreased somewhat on balance inthe euro area as a whole. For lending tohouseholds, as with loans to enterprises, itwas chiefly institutions’ perception of riskthat led to a tightening of standards. For thefirst time since the third quarter of 2008,however, margins for average loans for housepurchase narrowed again slightly. By contrast,riskier housing loans and lending to house-holds for consumption purposes in bothcredit rating categories were again affectedby expanded margins. At the same time,households’ funding requirements remainedunchanged on balance.
In the fourth quarter of 2009, the BLS was ex-
panded to include a number of additionalquestions on the effects of the financial crisison wholesale funding, capital costs and thelending of the participating banks as well as,for the first time, two questions on credit sup-ply policy in 2010. The responses once againsuggest that government aid measures hadlittle influence on the funding of the surveyedGerman banks. Furthermore, the surveyees
identified little change in access to wholesalefunding via the money and capital markets. Inthe fourth quarter, too, half of the banksnoted higher capital costs in the wake of thefinancial crisis, which was reflected partly intheir lending. For 2010, the surveyed banksexpect somewhat tighter standards, especial-ly for credit to large enterprises and forhousehold consumption purposes. Accordingto the respondent institutions, this is attribut-able, above all, to the continuing deterior-ation of the perception of risk.
According to reports for the interest rate stat-
istics, bank lending rates, much like capitalmarket rates, eased slightly on a broad frontor remained very largely unchanged in thefourth quarter. At the end of the periodunder review, the reporting institutions werecharging interest of 2.6% for large short-term loans to enterprises and 3.3% for smallshort-term loans to enterprises, and werecharging 4.1% and 3.9%, respectively, forlong-term loans to enterprises.
1While bank
lending rates for loans to households forhouse purchase remained virtually unchangedin the fourth quarter of 2009 and stood at4.4% for long-term loans, interest rates forconsumer credit fell again broadly at the endof the year in line with the seasonal patternof recent years.
1It should be noted that the recorded interest rate
changes in December 2009 were also due to special fac-
tors.Little change in
bank lending
rates overall

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
EUROSYSTEM
Monthly Report
February 2010
36Deuts che Bun desbankSecon d spe cial survey on German banks’ len ding to domesti c enterprises
At the turn of 2009-10, the Bun desbank repeate d 
the spe cial survey whi ch it ﬁ  rst con ducted amon g 
sele cted German banks an d bankin g asso ciations 
in July 2009.1 The aim of this survey was to sup-
plement the existin g information on len ding 
with the banks’ assessments of their expe cted 
len ding behaviour in the comin g 12 months. In 
this conne ction, the parti cipatin g institutions 
were also aske d to fore cast the development of 
their capital position.
Like the ﬁ  rst survey in the summer of 2009, the 
secon d survey provi ded little in dication of an 
imminent, broa d-base d credit crun ch in len ding 
business with domesti c enterprises. The banks’ 
responses therefore do not bear out con cerns 
that the German e conomy mi ght be fa cing a 
shorta ge of credit as the upturn gets un der way.
Overall, the survey parti cipants take an optimisti c 
view of their new len ding in 2010, parti cularly 
to small an d me dium-size d enterprises. Even so, 
they do not anti cipate that the total len ding 
volume will in crease si gniﬁ cantly over the next 
12 months as lar ge write- downs are expe cted to 
have a dampenin g impa ct. On balan ce, the small 
banks surveye d expresse d a somewhat more 
positive view of developments in their len ding 
volume than the lar ge institutions.
In the ﬁ  rst survey, the parti cipants still expe cted 
the poor outlook re garding general domesti c 
activity as well as in dustry or ﬁ  rm-spe ciﬁ c fa ctors 
to have a dampenin g impa ct on their len ding at 
least until the en d of 2010. By contrast, in the 
latest survey they state d that these an d other 
supply-si de fa ctors will pro bably no lon ger affe ct 
len ding developments this year. They cite d higher 
deman d from enterprises as the only major fa c-
tor drivin g len ding in the comin g 12 months; in 
their view, this in crease in deman d is likely to be 
reﬂ ected in a risin g utilisation rate on existin g 
credit lines an d a lar ger overall volume of loan 
appli cations. Banks inten d to respon d to this by 
increasin g their credit lines while keepin g the 
reje ction ratio constant.While the banks takin g part in the earlier survey 
had, on balan ce, expe cted their tier 1 capital ratio 
to decline in 2010, the institutions parti cipatin g 
in the current spe cial survey anti cipate no major 
chan ge over the next 12 months. They state that 
the nee d for write- downs, poorer borrower 
creditworthiness, an d chan ges to the ratin gs of 
stru cture d se curities will have a ne gative impa ct 
on the tier 1 capital ratio. To counter this, some 
banks are plannin g to improve their tier 1 capital 
ratio by re ducing their balan ce sheet, althou gh 
they claim that this will not affe ct their len ding 
behaviour.
1 See the detaile d report on our we bsite www. bundesbank.
de/volkswirts chaft/vo_veroeffentli chun gen.en.php. — 2 For this 
question, the possi ble responses ran ge from “1 = will decrease 
consi dera bly/will contri bute consi dera bly to a decrease of the tier 
1 capital ratio ” to “5 = will in crease consi dera bly /will contri bute 
consi dera bly to an in crease of the tier 1 capital ratio ”. When this ran ge is broken down into ﬁ  ve intervals of e qual wi dth, there 
is an area of un certainty between 2. 6 an d 3.4 (sha ded in grey), 
whi ch is interprete d as “will remain basically un chan ged/will 
have basically no impa ct on the tier 1 capital ratio ”. — 3 At least 
90% of the banks surveye d gave the response “not appli cable” 
or “not state d” to this question. Forecast of the tier 1 capital ratio
for 2010, and key determinants 2
1135 1.8 2.6 3.4 4.2Planned balance sheet
reductionsChanges in
revaluation reservesBad Bank ActNew private equity
raisedNew capital raised by
government bodiesRating changes for 
structured securitiesDebtor 
creditworthinessWrite-downs on
loan portfolioTier 1 capital ratio
Will contribute
to a decrease
in the tier 1
capital ratioWill
increase
Will contribute
to an increase
in the tier 1
capital ratioWill
decreaseAll banks
Small banksLarge banks
333
33
33

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
February 2010
37Financial marketsFinancial market trends
Given the ongoing recovery in the global
economy paired with continuing abundant li-
quidity and low interest rates, the situation
on the international capital markets eased
further on the whole as the new year began.
Phases of uncertainty were comparatively
short-lived. This initially pushed up stock mar-
ket prices further and brought down corpor-
ate bond yields. Since mid-January, however,
the positive economic signals have increasing-
ly been clouded by political developments in
the perception of market participants. Thus
plans to tighten banking regulation and po-
tentially force financial institutions to shoul-
der part of the cost of the financial crisis
triggered stock market losses worldwide, par-
ticularly among financial stocks. Moreover,
the public discourse on the sustainability of
Greece’s sovereign debt given the uncertainty
about the success of the consolidation meas-
ures introduced has seen spreads on Greek
debt securities widen considerably vis-/C224-vis
German Bunds. This has also affected the
euro, which has fallen widely in the foreign
exchange markets, particularly since the be-
ginning of 2010.
Exchange rates
The financial markets gradually calmed
down, causing exchange rate uncertainty on
the currency markets to decrease perceptibly.
This seems to have led to a gradual unwind-
ing of “safe haven” positions in the dollar
area, which was, in the fourth quarter of
2009, initially also reflected in a noticeableFinancial
market setting
Euro exchange
rate develop-
ments against
the US dollar, ...

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
EUROSYSTEM
Monthly Report
February 2010
38appreciation of the euro against the US dollar.
After reaching a high for the year of US$1.51
in early December, however, the euro relin-
quished some of its gains when positive sig-
nals from the US labour market contributed
to the rise in economic optimism. The single
currency subsequently traded in a narrow
range around US$1.44 before experiencing
renewed pressure in mid-January 2010. In
particular, the precarious budget situation in
Greece was perceived as a burden on the
euro. Moreover, surprisingly upbeat GDP data
for the United States gave the dollar a further
boost. As this report went to press, the euro
was trading at just over US$1.36, or roughly
51/C252% lower than at the beginning of 2010
and some 2% below the average for 2009.In the two months after the euro-yen ex-
change rate reached a new high for the year
of more than ¥138 in the second half of Oc-
tober 2009, it fluctuated with no clear trend
within a range of ¥129 to ¥135. After the
severe recession, Japan’s economy too picked
up again, stimulated by the revival in global
economic activity. Yet the deflationary ten-
dencies in Japan persisted despite govern-
ment spending programmes and an expan-
sionary monetary policy. In addition, carry
trade considerations seemingly still played a
part in the valuation of the yen. One indica-
tion of this is that the Japanese currency
made broad-based gains when foreign ex-
change market uncertainty grew again some-
what at the beginning of January 2010. Nor
did the new Japanese finance minister’s
stated preference for a weaker yen curb this
trend for very long. As this report went to
press, the euro stood at slightly less than
¥123 or roughly 8% below its level at the
start of the year.
In the fourth quarter of 2009, the euro for
the most part traded close to £0.90. The
pound sterling came under some pressure in
early November when the Bank of England
published in its inflation report a generally
pessimistic economic assessment. However,
the euro subsequently relinquished its gains
against the pound due to increasingly positive
UK economic news. Surprisingly benign la-
bour market data announced in mid-January
signalled a faster economic recovery than
hitherto expected. Thereupon, the Bank of
England indicated that its stimulus measures
would no longer include securities purchases.
At the end of the reporting period the euroAppreciation / depreciation of 
the euro against selected 
currencies
1 Nominal  effective  exchange  rate  of  the 
euro as measured against the currencies of 
21 countries.
Deutsche Bundesbank– 8– 8 – 6 – 4 – 2 0 + 231 December 2009 until 16 February 2010
%Swiss franc
Czech koruna
EER-21 1
Pound sterling
Zloty (Poland)
Norwegian krone
Australian
dollar
Renminbi
yuan (China)
US dollar
Canadian
dollar
Won (Repub-
lic of Korea)
YenDanish krone... against the
yen ...
... and against
the pound
sterling

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
February 2010
39was, at approximately £0.87, 2% below its
level at the beginning of 2010.
The European Central Bank adjusted its
weighting scheme for calculating the effect-
ive exchange rates of the euro.1Based on the
new weights, the euro’s average rate against
the 21 major currencies in the exchange rate
index has therefore fallen by just under 4%
since the beginning of 2010. As this report
went to press, the single currency was 41/C252%
above its level at the launch of monetary
union. In real terms, ie taking account of the
inflation differentials between the euro area
and its major trading partners, the euro’s
effective exchange rate was therefore well
above its longer-term average. This indicates
an unfavourable price competitiveness of
euro-area suppliers. It should be noted in this
context that the real appreciation of the euro
following the switch to the current weighting
scheme is significantly less than before. Ger-
many is in a more favourable situation. In
view of the moderate price and cost develop-
ments seen for many years now, the price
competitiveness of the German economy is
currently roughly 51/C252% above its long-term
average.
Securities markets and portfolio
transactions
The GDP-weighted yield on euro-area gov-
ernment bonds outstanding fluctuated only
slightly from the end of September onwards,
rising finally to 33/C254% at the time of going to
press. As usual, there was a close linkage
with the US market. Driven by upbeat eco-nomic data and the foreseeable severe strain
that the high fiscal deficits will have on the
bond market, the average yield on ten-year
US government bonds showed a marked in-
crease in the fourth quarter, but fell again
somewhat after the start of 2010. On bal-
ance, it rose by just under1/C252percentage
point also to 33/C254%. Uncertainty about future
price developments, measured in terms of
the implied volatility of options on bond
futures, declined substantially in the period
under review and, as this report went to
press, was back at levels last recorded at the
start of 2008 on both sides of the Atlantic.
Japanese government bond yields fluctuated
within a narrow range around 11/C254%.Bond yields in the euro area
Sources: Thomson Reuters and Bundesbank 
calculations. —  1 GDP-weighted  yield  of 
bonds of euro-area member states excluding 
Germany. —  2 Standard  deviation  of  inter-
est  rate  spreads  of  euro-area  government 
bonds versus Germany.
Deutsche Bundesbank2007 2008 2009 20103.03.54.04.55.05.5
020406080100Weekly averages
Dispersion of yield spreads
to Germany 2
(scale enlarged)Yield on ten-year
government bonds outstanding
GDP weightedUnweightedGermanyEuro area excluding
Germany 1%
Basis 
points
1See: European Central Bank, International trade devel-
opments and revision of the effective exchange rates of
the euro, ECB Monthly Bulletin, January 2010, pp 55-58).Effective euro
exchange rate
International
bond markets

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
EUROSYSTEM
Monthly Report
February 2010
40Market participants followed the widening
interest-rate differentials in the euro area par-
ticularly closely. From the end of the third
quarter, the GDP-weighted yield advantage
of the other euro-area government bonds
over the corresponding Federal bonds
(Bunds) edged up to3/C254percentage point.
However, the average view masks the consid-
erable widening of the premium that invest-
ors demanded for holding Greek bonds,
which was around 330 basis points at the
time of going to press, or 200 basis points
more than at end-September. This increase
was driven by considerable uncertainty about
the condition of Greek public finances and
scepticism about the prospects of the success
of the consolidation measures that are cur-
rently under way. Spreads for Portuguese and
Spanish government bonds, too, were signifi-cantly higher – having risen3/C254and1/C254percent-
age point respectively – than at the end of
the third quarter. At the time of going to
press, the GDP-weighted yield dispersion of
euro-area government bonds was again just
below the level of the first quarter of 2009,
when financial crisis-induced uncertainty was
at its peak.
The current situation in the bond markets is
characterised by an unusually steep yield
curve. Based on German Bunds, the spread
between ten and two-year yields is, at 242
basis points, still very high by historical stand-
ards. It even rose slightly from the end of the
third quarter as a result, primarily, of falling
yields on bonds with two-year maturities. The
steep yield curve is currently boosting finan-
cial institutions’ interest income from matur-
ity transformation. Given the comparatively
low long-term yield level, however, the risk of
falling bond market prices cannot be ruled
out.
Wholesale funding conditions for enterprises
in the euro area continued to improve appre-
ciably compared with the third quarter of
2009. In line with developments in the US
market, the spread of BBB-rated, euro-
denominated corporate bonds over govern-
ment bonds narrowed by more than 40 basis
points to 21/C254percentage points, thus return-
ing to levels last recorded at the beginning of
2008. Declining interest rate spreads since
early 2009 were accompanied by lively issu-
ance activity on Europe’s corporate bond
markets. During the reporting period, CDS
premiums were largely unchanged for debt
securities issued by non-financial corpor-Financing conditions on the 
European capital market
Sources:  Bloomberg,  Merrill  Lynch  and 
Thomson  Reuters.  —  1 Yield  spread  of 
seven  to  ten-year  euro-denominated  BBB-
rated  corporate  bonds  over  euro-area 
government  bonds  of  similar  maturity. — 
2 Credit default risk premiums for 125 Euro-
pean companies with an investment-grade 
rating.
Deutsche Bundesbank2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010012345678
012Weekly averages
Per- 
centage 
pointsPer- 
centage 
points
iTraxx Europe 125 2Interest rate spread 
of BBB bonds 1
European
government
bonds in the
spotlightGerman yield
curve remains
steep
Further
improvement
in financing
conditions for
enterprises

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
February 2010
41ations, whereas they rose for European finan-
cials, especially from mid-January.
In the German bond market, gross sales of
debt securities issued by residents totalled3373 billion in the fourth quarter of 2009.
Thus, issuance was down both on the thirdquarter of 2009 and on the correspondingfigure for the fourth quarter of 2008. With anincrease in redemptions, and taking changesin issuers’ holdings of their own bonds intoaccount, domestic borrowers paid back atotal of 319 billion to investors. On the other
hand, foreign borrowers sold debt securitiesin Germany for 321 billion net, which on bal-
ance was accounted for almost exclusively byeuro-denominated paper. All in all, the capitalinflow from the sale of domestic and foreigndebt securities in Germany during the report-ing period was therefore only 32 billion.
In the final quarter of 2009, the public sector
raised 36 billion in the capital market. The
main reason for this was that the Federalstates increased their capital market debt by37 billion. Conversely, central government
reduced its borrowing slightly in the fourthquarter, by 31 billion, after new issues and
redemptions had balanced each other out inthe previous three-month period. From Octo-ber to December, the Federal governmentissued two-year Federal Treasury notes(Sch/C228tze) totalling 36
1/C252billion net and 30-
year bonds worth 321/C252billion net. By con-
trast, it redeemed five-year Federal notes(Bobls) amounting to 36
1/C252billion, Federal
Treasury discount paper (Bubills) with matur-ities of up to 12 months for 33 billion and a
small quantity of Federal Treasury financingpaper, ten-year Federal bonds (Bunds) as well
as German government Day Bonds (bothworth 3
1/C252billion).
As wholesale funding conditions continued
to ease, domestic non-banks issued debtsecurities (excluding money market paper) inGermany amounting to 35 billion net in the
reporting quarter, compared with 38 billion in
the previous three-month period. By contrast,enterprises continued to redeem commercialpaper in the fourth quarter ( 32 billion).
In the reporting period, credit institutions re-
duced their capital market debt by the sameamount as in the third quarter ( 328
1/C252billion).
These net redemptions were the result, aboveall, of other bank debt securities, which werepaid back in the amount of 320
1/C252billion.Investment activity in the German
securities markets
5billion
2008 2009
Item Q4 Q3 Q4Debt securities
Residents 7.7 6.9 5.6
Credit institutions 10.5 – 5.4 – 19.1of which
Foreign debt securities – 46.9 – 9.9 – 9.0
Non-banks – 2.9 12.4 24.6of which
Domestic debt securities – 3.0 – 14.6 – 5.2
Non-residents – 38.2 – 12.3 – 3.8
Shares
Residents – 16.3 – 12.7 7.6
Credit institutions – 12.3 – 8.0 7.1of which
Domestic shares – 7.8 – 7.6 4.8
Non-banks – 4.0 – 4.7 0.4of which
Domestic shares 8.7 – 5.8 – 1.2
Non-residents 2.4 18.1 – 1.2
Mutual fund shares
Investment in specialised funds 0.3 12.3 19.3
Investment in funds open to thegeneral public – 11.3 0.9 3.2of which: Share-based funds 0.5 1.3 1.6
Deutsche BundesbankLow net sales
in the bond
market
Borrowing
by German
government
Issues
by non-banks
Net
redemptions
by credit
institutions

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
EUROSYSTEM
Monthly Report
February 2010
42Deuts che Bun desbankVolatility in the German sto ck market
Volatility in the German blue- chip share pri ce in dex 
(DAX), whi ch rea ched a re cord hi gh in the autumn of 
2008, fell back si gniﬁ cantly durin g the su bsequent 
perio d of pri ce re covery an d was close to its ﬁ  ve-year 
avera ge as this report went to press. This box puts the 
developments sin ce the hei ght of the ﬁ  nan cial crisis into 
their histori cal context an d analyses them with a view to 
identifyin g possi ble in dicators of the risk of a brupt pri ce 
movements in future.
A decomposition of the total realise d volatility of a typ-
ical German sto ck1 into a ﬁ  rm-spe ciﬁ c component an d 
a market or systemati c component shows that the cor-
relation of the pri ce ﬂ uctuations for the in dividual DAX 
companies rose in O ctober 2008, thus lea ding to a dispro-
portionately lar ge in crease in realise d non- diversiﬁ  able 
market volatility. This reﬂ  ects the fa ct that the o bserve d 
pri ce ﬂ uctuations were tri ggere d less by news affe ctin g 
individual ﬁ rms than by the emer gence of new informa-
tion relevant to the market as a whole. This un dermines 
the a bility of investors to guar d against the effe cts of 
unwel come pri ce ﬂ uctuations by diversifyin g their equity 
portfolios. Experien ce has shown that this pattern is typ-
ical in times of crisis; in the case of the DAX, it can be observe d in parti cular when pri ces fall. This in crease d 
correlation amon g the in dividual in dex mem bers often 
continues for an exten ded perio d followin g a drop in 
pri ces. It was 40 % at last report – despite a mo derate 
decline – an d was thus still sli ghtly a bove its ﬁ  ve-year 
avera ge (38 %).
Owin g to the – relate d – persisten ce of volatility, the 
extent of future pri ce ﬂ uctuations is not deta ched from 
previous values. A day of hi gh volatility is very likely to 
be followe d by another day of stron g ﬂ uctuations ( clus-
terin g). A calmin g of the sto ck markets – ie a phase of 
smaller ﬂ  uctuations – is thus less likely at that point than 
at times when the persisten ce of volatility is alrea dy low. 
Transitions between perio ds of low an d high ﬂ uctuation 
can be analyse d in a re gime swit chin g mo del.2 In 2008 
– as durin g the Asian an d Russian crises an d the burst-
ing of the dotcom bubble – the sto ck market tempor-
arily swit ched to a hi gh volatility re gime (see a djacent 
chart). The pro bability of bein g in a hi gh volatility DAX 
regime has re cently fallen a gain si gniﬁ cantly; however, 
it is still a bove the ﬁ  ve-year avera ge of 30 %, meanin g 
that a sustaine d mo deration in the sto ck market is not 
yet assure d.
Another startin g point for estimatin g future sto ck pri ce 
movements are the impli cit volatilities of DAX options, 
whi ch can be use d to o btain information on the pri ce 
ﬂ uctuations expe cted by market players. As shown by 
the VDAX-NEW (maturity: 30 days) an d the VDAX-NEW 
subindices with resi dual maturities of one to two years, 
whi ch are likewise calculate d by Deuts che Börse, the 
ﬁ nan cial crisis has le d to a sharp in crease in expe cted vola-
tility a cross all time horizons sin ce early 2008 (see chart 
on p 43). There was a parti cularly steep rise in short-term 
un certainty, whi ch rea ched hi ghs of over 80 % per year 
in O ctober 2008.
The term stru cture of volatility expe ctations can be 
examine d in more detail usin g a prin cipal component 
analysis, in whi ch all ei ght VDAX-NEW su bindices are 
1 See J Stapf an d T Werner (2003), How wa cky is the DAX? The chan-
ging stru cture of German sto ck market volatility, Deuts che Bun desbank 
Resear ch Centre, Dis cussion Paper, Series 1, No 18/2003. — 2  See, for 
example, J D Hamilton (1994), Time series analysis, Prin ceton University Press, Prin ceton, New Jersey, chapter 22. — 3 The VDAX-NEW itself is 
not in cluded in the analysis as it is calculate d usin g linear interpolation 
of two su bindices. The su bindices are linke d to the followin g maturi-
ties: 1 month, 2 months, 3 months, 6 months, 9 months, 12 months, 18 Smoothed regime probabilities for a high 
volatility of the DAX
1988 90 95 00 05 20100102030405060708090100%Daily data

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
February 2010
43included.3 Taken to gether, the ﬁ  rst two prin cipal com-
ponents explain more than 98 % of the total varian ce. 
The ﬁ  rst prin cipal component, whi ch contri butes 91 % to 
the total varian ce, can be interprete d as a fa ctor reﬂ  ect-
ing the overall level of volatility expe ctations measure d 
across the various maturities. This fa ctor can therefore 
be re garded as an in dicator of market players’ general 
un certainty – irrespe ctive of maturities – con cernin g 
future sto ck pri ce developments. By contrast, the se con d 
prin cipal component, whi ch explains aroun d 7% of the 
total varian ce, can be described as a discriminatin g fa c-
tor.4 An in crease in this fa ctor is a ccompanie d by growth 
in expe cted short-term volatility but a decline in lon g-
term un certainty. Thus, all other thin gs bein g equal, a 
high value for this prin cipal component su ggests that 
market players expe ct tur bulen ce in the short term but 
actually anti cipate a calmin g of the sto ck markets in the 
lon ger term.
The upsur ge in the ﬁ  rst prin cipal component beginnin g 
in late Septem ber 2008 reﬂ  ects the fa ct that the general 
un certainty amon g market players that affe cted all matu-
rities followin g the Lehman Brothers bankrupt cy on 15 
Septem ber 2008 in crease d clearly an d peake d at the en d 
of Novem ber 2008 (see a djacent chart). In the ﬁ  rst half 
of 2009, general un certainty re ceded again si gniﬁ cantly. 
The government res cue pa ckages intro duced across the 
globe for in dividual ﬁ nan cial institutions an d other gov-
ernment support measures for the ﬁ  nan cial se ctor pro b-
ably playe d a role in this respe ct. The continue d decline 
from the en d of last year reﬂ  ects the renewe d growth in 
conﬁ dence amon g sto ck market players.
From the en d of Novem ber 2008, the se con d main prin-
cipal component fell to below-avera ge (ne gative) values, 
thus si gnallin g a shift in pri ce un certainty from short-term 
to lon ger-term maturities. This is likely to reﬂ  ect the view 
emer ging at the time that, while it woul d be possi ble to 
miti gate the imme diate turmoil in the ﬁ  nan cial system 
throu gh politi cal measures, the interplay between the 
stri cken ﬁ  nan cial se ctor an d the real e conomy woul d have a ne gative impa ct on the lon ger-term sto ck mar-
ket outlook. The su bsequent si deways movement in the 
secon d prin cipal component lastin g throu gh to the cur-
rent en d is attri buta ble to the still elevate d lon g-term 
un certainty, whi ch has remaine d above expe cted short-
term volatility throu ghout the past few months. It was 
not until the en d of the reportin g perio d that talk of a 
“crisis tax” for ﬁ  nan cial enterprises an d tou gher re gula-
tion for the ﬁ  nan cial se ctor in crease d investors’ fo cus on 
the more imme diate future an d led to a sli ght rise in the 
pri ce ﬂ uctuations expe cted in the short term.
months an d 24 months, ie over time the un derlyin g options swit ch to 
the su bindex with the correspon ding maturity. — 4 While the loa ding 
coefﬁ cients of the ﬁ  rst prin cipal component all have similar (positive) values, the loa ding coefﬁ cients of the se con d prin cipal component 
have different si gns an d ten d to be smaller the lon ger the maturity.Implied volatilities of the DAX
2008 2009 201020304050607080
–4–20+2+4+6+8+10%
VDAX-NEW
(maturity of 30 days)
First principal component
Second principal
componentDaily data
VDAX-NEW
(maturity of 23-24 months)VDAX-NEW
(maturity of 5-6 months)

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
EUROSYSTEM
Monthly Report
February 2010
44Moreover, as in the previous quarters, public
Pfandbriefe were redeemed (worth 314 bil-
lion net), as were small amounts of mortgage
Pfandbriefe ( 31/C252billion) – despite further pur-
chases by the Eurosystem under the purchase
programme for covered bonds.2Specialised
credit institutions, meanwhile, sold their own
instruments in the amount of 361/C252billion.
In the fourth quarter of 2009, as in the quar-
ter before, debt securities were purchased
exclusively by domestic non-banks, which
added a total of 3241/C252billion worth of debt
instruments to their portfolios. By contrast,
domestic credit institutions and foreign in-
vestors disposed of interest-bearing securities
worth, in net terms, 319 billion and 34 billion
respectively.All in all, developments on the stock markets
were mixed in the reporting period. Whereas
the European Dow Jones Stoxx index and the
German CDAX were down 6% and 3%,
respectively, on end-September 2009, the
US S&P 500 index posted gains (13/C254%). The
upward trend on the stock markets, which
began in the second quarter of 2009, was
temporarily interrupted at the end of Novem-
ber following announcements that bonds is-
sued by quasi-government entities in Dubai
would be restructured. Given the small de-
gree of interconnectedness of the euro area
and the United States with the debtors in-
volved, the resultant decline in stock prices
worldwide reflected uncertainty about the
sustainability of the stock market recovery
rather than concerns about the immediate
impact of a debtor’s default. The markets
made a relatively fast recovery and in some
cases were already posting new highs for the
year at the end of 2009. This positive trend
persisted at the beginning of January before
further pronounced share price losses were
triggered, primarily, by debate surrounding
tougher regulation and the possibility of
financial institutions being made to shoulder
some of the cost of the financial crisis. This
led to a slump in share prices that hit financial
stocks particularly hard.
The risk premium demanded by investors for
holding stocks – which can be determined
using a dividend discount model – has fallen
again slightly since September, and so is still
at the level seen prior to the insolvency of
investment bank Lehman Brothers. AlthoughEuropean and
US e quity markets
Source: Thomson Reuters.
Deutsche Bundesbank2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 20106080100120140160180
0102030405060End-of-month levels
Lin scale
VolatilitiesLog scale
Price indices
(end- January 2005 = 100)
%
Dow Jones
Euro Stoxx (VStoxx)Dow Jones
Euro Stoxx
S&P 500 (VIX)S&P 500
2As this report went to press, Eurosystem purchases of
covered bonds since July 2009 totalled 336 billion.Purchase of
debt securitiesMixed develop-
ments on the
international
stock markets
Uncertainty
remains high

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
February 2010
45this suggests a stabilisation of market expect-
ations, it should not be interpreted as mean-ing that the financial and economic crisis hasbeen fully overcome. The stock markets con-tinue to benefit from high global liquidity andthe support measures taken by governmentsand central banks. It remains to be seen howsustainable the upswing is. Accordingly, onboth sides of the Atlantic, uncertainty aboutfuture stock price developments as gaugedby the implied volatility of options on futureswas still above its long-term averages as thisreport went to press, despite a further decline(see the box on pages 46-47).
On the German equity market, new shares –
mostly listed equities – totalling 32
1/C252billion
were issued in the fourth quarter. Thus, thepositive stock market developments evidentlyhad no effect on issuing activity, which fellshort of that in previous quarters. In addition,foreign shares were sold in Germany for 34
billion. Domestic and foreign equities werepurchased by domestic credit institutions ( 37
billion) and, to a small extent, by domesticnon-banks ( 3
1/C252billion). By contrast, foreign
investors sold shares worth 31 billion.
Domestic investment companies recorded
inflows of 3221/C252billion during the reporting
quarter. After the unusually high figure post-ed in the previous three-month period, in-flows to specialised funds reserved for institu-tional investors increased again ( 319
1/C252bil-
lion). Funds open to the general public re-ceived smaller inflows ( 33 billion), notably
equity-based funds ( 31
1/C252billion) and mixed
securities-based funds ( 31 billion). Bond-
based funds and mixed funds also attractedMajor items of the balance of
payments
5billion
2008 2009
Item Q4 Q3 Q4
I Current account 1, 2 + 38.2 + 25.3 + 49.5
Foreign trade 1, 3 + 34.0 + 32.8 + 44.1
Services 1 – 0.4 – 9.6 + 1.4
Income 1 + 14.8 + 13.6 + 14.3
Current transfers 1 – 6.8 – 8.7 – 7.8
II Capital transfers 1, 4 – 0.6 – 0.2 + 0.2
III Financial account 1
(Net capital exports: –) – 52.2 – 13.0 – 72.3
1 Direct investment – 18.2 – 8.4 + 4.7
German investment
abroad – 22.5 – 17.5 + 4.7
Foreign investment in
Germany + 4.3 + 9.1 – 0.0
2 Portfolio investment + 36.4 – 16.9 – 24.3
German investment
abroad + 74.4 – 18.1 – 21.0
Shares + 14.0 – 0.1 – 0.6
Mutual fund shares + 13.6 – 0.9 + 0.5
Debt securities + 46.8 – 17.1 – 20.9
Bonds and notes 5 + 20.7 – 19.7 – 21.5
of which
Euro-denominated
bonds and notes + 13.6 – 20.3 – 19.6
Money market
instruments + 26.1 + 2.6 + 0.6
Foreign investment
in Germany – 38.0 + 1.2 – 3.3
Shares + 2.9 + 14.1 – 0.8
Mutual fund shares – 2.7 – 0.6 + 1.3
Debt securities – 38.2 – 12.3 – 3.8
Bonds and notes 5 – 45.3 – 26.3 – 8.7
of which
Public bonds and
notes – 7.4 – 8.4 + 3.5
Money market
instruments + 7.1 + 14.0 + 4.9
3 Financial derivatives 6 + 10.2 – 5.8 – 0.8
4 Other investment 7 – 79.0 + 15.9 – 52.4
Monetary financial
institutions 8 – 87.5 + 25.3 – 37.7
of which: short-term – 73.1 + 11.7 – 48.9
Enterprises and
households + 29.3 – 14.8 – 1.1
of which: short-term + 22.8 – 0.5 + 6.7
General government – 8.9 + 14.9 – 15.2
of which: short-term – 9.2 + 15.1 – 15.1
Bundesbank – 12.0 – 9.4 + 1.6
5 Change in reserve assets at
transaction values
(increase: –) 9 – 1.6 + 2.3 + 0.6
IV Errors and omissions + 14.7 – 12.1 + 22.7
1Balance. — 2Including supplementary trade items. — 3Special
trade according to the official foreign trade statistics (source:
Federal Statistical Office). — 4Including the acquisition/disposal
of non-produced non-financial assets. — 5Original maturity of
more than one year. — 6Securitised and non-securitised options
as well as financial futures contracts. — 7Includes financial and
trade credits, bank deposits and other assets. — 8Excluding the
Bundesbank. — 9Excluding allocation of SDRs and excluding
changes due to value adjustments.
Deutsche BundesbankStock market
funding and
stock purchases
Sales and
purchases of
mutual fund
shares

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
EUROSYSTEM
Monthly Report
February 2010
46small net inflows. Meanwhile, investors – still
faced with exceptionally low money market
rates – withdrew capital from money market
funds ( 31 billion) as they had done in the pre-
vious quarter. Foreign mutual fund units were
returned in Germany for 31/C252billion. On bal-
ance, mutual fund shares were bought mainly
by German non-banks ( 3251/C252billion) – pre-
dominantly, as was mentioned above, by in-
stitutional investors. At the same time, Ger-
man credit institutions returned mutual fund
shares to the tune of 341/C252billion, exclusively
in the form of foreign certificates. Non-
residents purchased German mutual fund
shares worth 311/C252billion.
Direct investment
Unlike in portfolio investments, which record-
ed net capital exports amounting to 3241/C252billion in the fourth quarter of 2009, in direct
investment cross-border transactions resulted
in net capital imports of 341/C252billion. German
enterprises withdrew funds from their foreign
branches totalling 341/C252billion, primarily
through intra-group loans ( 351/C252billion). For
the first time since the first quarter of 2004,
moreover, German enterprises reduced their
equity capital abroad, by 321/C252billion. The
capital reduction at a banking subsidiary in
Luxembourg was a major factor.
Foreign firms’ investment in their branches in
Germany was broadly neutral in the months
October to December 2009, with a slight in-
crease in equity capital roughly offsetting
capital outflows through reinvestment of
earnings.
German direct
investment
abroadForeign direct
investment in
Germany

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
February 2010
47Economic conditions
in GermanyMacroeconomic situation
The cyclical upturn faltered in the fourth
quarter of 2009, partly because of temporary
factors. Above all, the fact that the environ-
mental premium had been discontinued had
a significant impact on developments in the
economy as a whole. Added to this were in-
clement weather conditions towards the end
of the year as well as extended plant shut-
downs in parts of industry. Domestic activity
had a dampening effect, whereas exports
showed buoyant growth again. According to
the flash estimate by the Federal Statistical
Office, quarter-on-quarter real gross domestic
product (GDP) in the reporting period stag-
nated in seasonally and calendar-adjusted
terms; the comparable figure for the third
quarter was +0.7%. Overall capacity utilisa-
tion was still at a low level, and economic
output in the final quarter of 2009, at 5.6%
after seasonal and calendar adjustment, was
quite clearly down on its cyclical peak in the
first quarter of 2008. The fact that export
activity, which is a mainstay of the German
economy, continues to expand at a rapid
pace suggests that the trend recovery is still
intact.
As was the case in the third quarter, overall
output in the reporting period was given a
strong boost by export demand for German
products. Nominal exports of goods rose by a
seasonally adjusted 5.1% compared with the
third quarter, which had already recorded
growth of 5.4%. Having picked up impres-
sively between May and September, exports
to other countries of the European Union
slowed towards the end of the period underTemporary
standstill in the
economic
recovery
process
Strong boost
from export
demand

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
EUROSYSTEM
Monthly Report
February 2010
48review. On an average of October and No-
vember – more recent data broken down by
region are unavailable at present – the value
of goods exported to other EU countries was
more than 3% down on the quarter; com-
pared with the cyclical low in the second
quarter of 2009, there was still an increase of
41/C254%, however.
What is striking is that this erratic growth pat-
tern not only affected exports to euro-area
partner countries but was also noticeable in
the case of exports to EU member states that
are not members of the euro area. The
strongly expansionary effects of the inventory
cycle along with the effects of the fiscal sta-
bilisation measures in a number of countries
appear to have provided a strong economic
stimulus in the third quarter. Owing to thefact that production is closely integrated, this
had an effect on the European Union as a
whole, thus giving a temporary major boost
to German exports to this region. By compari-
son, exports to China and Japan were still on
the up towards the end of the year, although
they were not as buoyant as before. Positive
aspects, in particular, were flourishing busi-
ness with South-East Asian emerging econ-
omies and a marked turnaround in external
trade with the United States and the OPEC
countries towards the end of the period
under review.
Seasonally adjusted imports of goods and ser-
vices fell significantly in the reporting period,
after having outpaced exports in the third
quarter of 2009. In comparison with the third
quarter, when enterprises imported raw ma-
terials and intermediate goods on a large
scale, this represented a return to a more or
less normal level. Furthermore, large quan-
tities of energy were exported to Germany in
the third quarter of 2009. Since very little
heating oil was bought by households, how-
ever, there was a significantly lower import
demand in the reporting period. Added to
this was the fact that imports of capital and
consumer goods fell perceptibly owing to
weaker domestic demand. The car scrappage
scheme, in particular, was now having a
dampening impact when viewed over the
four quarters of the year. Given the continu-
ing pick-up in exports and slower import ac-
tivity at the end of the period under review,
external trade made a considerable positive
contribution to overall economic growth on
balance in the fourth quarter of 2009.Overall output
1 Price-adjusted.
Deutsche Bundesbank2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009100102104106108110112
–8–6–4–20+2+42000 = 100, seasonally adjusted
Log scale
GDP 1
Year-on-year change%
Lin scale
Marked
reduction in
imports

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
February 2010
49Enterprises’ willingness to invest in machinery
and equipment and in industrial and com-mercial property is likely to have remainedmuted at the end of the year. According tothe available indicators, the volume of invest-ment did not match its third-quarter level. Inview of the continuing considerable under-utilisation of production capacity, it is, how-ever, striking from a cyclical perspective thatthe fall-off in investment following themarked correction at the beginning of 2009has remained within narrow bounds. Thisapplies, in particular, to investment in newmachinery and equipment and may also betaken as an indication that the internal fundsavailable to enterprises have so far been suffi-cient to conduct planned real investment.
In the period under review, less public con-
struction work may have been performed inseasonally adjusted terms than in the thirdquarter. This is suggested by the fact that theplacing of new orders for public infrastructurehad been faltering since mid-2009 despitethe additional resources made available inthe Federal government’s fiscal stimuluspackages. Such inactivity chiefly affectedroad construction. It is likely that public non-residential building construction was tendingto increase in the second half of 2009. Privatehousing construction also showed a furtherslight rise in the fourth quarter of 2009. Thisis consistent with the fact that there was amarked increase in the volume of new offi-cially approved construction projects com-pared with the low in the first quarter of2009.Foreign trade by region and category
of goods
Percentage change
2009 Q3Average of
Oct-Nov 2009
compared with2009 Q2 2009 Q3
seasonally adjusted
ItemEx-
portsIm-
portsEx-
portsIm-
ports
Total 5.4 5.4 3.9 – 2.2
Countries or group of
countries
Euro-area countries 6.6 2.0 – 2.5 – 3.6Other EU-countries 9.6 4.8 – 4.4 – 2.2of which
New memberstates
1 6.9 2.5 – 2.2 – 0.3
United States ofAmerica – 13.4 – 4.0 19.5 5.3Russian Federation 2.6 21.3 9.2 9.2Japan 5.0 6.4 1.6 1.8South-East Asiancountries
2 9.7 16.1 10.3 – 11.8
China 7.6 7.7 5.4 – 4.2OPEC countries – 13.1 6.8 9.9 – 7.6
Categories of goods
Main categories
Intermediate goods 7.4 8.0 2.9 5.0Capital goods 3.5 0.8 5.0 – 3.6Consumer goods 2.6 4.5 – 0.4 – 6.0Energy 8.7 11.3 0.0 – 6.3
Selected categories
Pharmaceutical andchemical products 3.3 6.7 2.2 0.6Machinery andequipment 0.0 2.1 2.8 – 0.9Motor vehicles,trailers and semi-trailers 10.9 0.6 14.7 – 2.9Computer, electronicand optical productsas well as electricalequipment 7.4 5.8 3.7 5.4Basic metals andfabricated metalproducts 6.5 7.4 4.3 4.5
1Excluding Cyprus, Malta, Slovakia and Slovenia, which
now belong to the euro area. — 2Brunei Daressalam,
Hong Kong, Indonesia, Malaysia, Philippines, Singa-pore, South Korea, Taiwan, Thailand.
Deutsche BundesbankLittle change
in corporate
investment
Declining public
construction,
but housing
construction
still pointing
upwards

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
EUROSYSTEM
Monthly Report
February 2010
50There was a perceptible slowdown in private
consumption in the fourth quarter of 2009
after it had already fallen by a seasonally and
calendar-adjusted 0.9% in the third quarter.
As in the previous quarter, this was due main-
ly to passenger car sales; owing to the wan-
ing impact of the environmental premium,
deliveries were still at a high level but well
down on the exceptionally high level at the
beginning of the third quarter. By contrast,retail sales matched their prior-quarter level
after seasonal adjustment. Consumption is
thus proving to be quite robust still in terms
of its underlying trend, even though the up-
turn in the first half of 2009 was chiefly the
result of the selective incentive to buy pro-
vided by the granting of the government en-
vironmental premium and, therefore, only of
brief duration. The situation was helped by
the fact that households reduced their saving
for a while and cut back their spending on
other consumer goods only to a limited ex-
tent. Measured in terms of non-food retail
sales, expenditure on household electrical ap-
pliances as well as on information and com-
munication technology (ICT) equipment was
reduced substantially following the introduc-
tion of the car scrappage scheme before it
picked up again in the second half of the
year. However, sales of furniture, just like re-
tail business in textiles, clothing and shoes,
were not visibly impaired by crowding out ef-
fects.
Sectoral trends
Industry is continuing to work its way out of
the slump into which it fell as a result of the
severe recession in the fourth quarter of 2008
and the first quarter of 2009. At a seasonally
adjusted 1.0%, growth in output in the final
quarter of 2009 was, however, clearly weaker
than in the preceding three-month period
(+3.6%). The slowdown affected both cyclic-
ally sensitive main industrial groupings. While
production of intermediate goods was still
obviously expanding between October and
December 2009 (+2.0%), output of capitalRetail and motor vehicle sales
1 By  enterprises’  main  product  range;  in-
cluding  mail  order  and  internet  trade. — 
o Increase in the standard rate of VAT.
Deutsche Bundesbank95100105110115120125130135
250300400500600700Seasonally adjusted, quarterly, log scale
8590951001051101151201252008 Q4 = 100
Retail sales of non-food
products 1
Textiles, clothing, shoes,
leather goods
FurnitureHousehold electrical appliances
Reduced scale, memo item:
New car registrations
by households
(in thousands)Motor vehicle salesICT equipmentTotal
oDuration of the
environmental
premium
2006 2007 2008 2009
Consumption
activity now
affected nega-
tively by car
scrappage
schemeSlowdown
in industrial
recovery

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
February 2010
51goods was stagnating. In contrast to electrical
engineering, the recovery process in themechanical engineering sector had failed tomake any headway even by the end of theyear. Here, as in the automotive sector, theextended plant shutdowns over the Christ-mas holiday period are likely to have affectedoutput. There was a seasonally adjusted1.3% increase in consumer goods output inthe fourth quarter of 2009 following a nomore than minor rise in the previous three-month period. In the period under review, in-dustrial output – after adjustment for calen-dar variations – was more than one-tenthdown on its already depressed prior-year leveland almost one-fifth below its most recentcyclical peak in the first quarter of 2008.
The cyclical upturn is reflected in rising cap-
acity utilisation in manufacturing. Accordingto the Ifo Institute survey, at 75
1/C254% of normal
full capacity in January 2010, utilisation wasalready more than 4 percentage points higherthan its all-time low in April of last year. Thisoffset only one-third of the shortfall with re-gard to normal capacity utilisation, however.At the beginning of the year, manufacturersof intermediate goods reported only a mar-ginally higher seasonally adjusted level ofcapacity utilisation than producers of capitalgoods. Since production capacity in inter-mediate goods is better utilised on a longer-term average than in the basic materialsindustry, however, it can justifiably be con-cluded that the recovery process is alreadymore advanced in the intermediate goodssector.Construction output fell by a seasonally ad-
justed 1.8% in the final quarter of 2009, fol-lowing a slight quarter-on-quarter decline inthe period from July to September. The pooroverall result in the period under review wasdue in part to the fact that weather-relatedlosses of construction output occurred asearly as December, with dampening effectsstemming mostly from civil engineering. Thiswas probably connected to the fact that pub-lic sector orders had dried up following thebuoyant start to last year. Roughly two-thirdsof the strong growth in the energy sector inthe third quarter had been lost by the end ofthe year.
The diverging trends that were already appar-
ent in the business activity of the individualtrade sectors in the third quarter continued toManufacturing capacity 
utilisation
Source: Ifo Institute.
Deutsche Bundesbank2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010636669727578818487909396As a percentage of normal full capacity,
seasonally adjusted
Sectoral
averages1994-2008Capital goodsIntermediate goods
0
Further increase
in industrial
capacity
utilisationConstruction
output and
energy
production
clearly weaker

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
EUROSYSTEM
Monthly Report
February 2010
52shape developments up to the end of 2009.
In real terms, the wholesale sector recorded a
further seasonally adjusted growth in sales,
for example, even though it was smaller than
in the previous quarter. Retail sales were
tending to be somewhat better, but sales of
motor vehicles fell off at an accelerated pace.
Following an improvement in the second and
third quarters, the performance of hotels and
restaurants is likely to have been markedlypoorer in the last three months of 2009. Ac-
cording to the statistics on motorway tolls,
the domestic activity of transport and logistics
enterprises was perceptibly less favourable
towards the end of last year following the
upturn in the period from April to September.
Given flatter growth in cross-border transac-
tions in goods recently, this is unlikely to have
been offset entirely by their foreign business.
According to the available indicators, activity
in the rest of the business-related services
sector is likely to have picked up somewhat
further.
Employment and unemployment
By and large, the final three months of 2009
saw a continuation of the underlying trends
already apparent in the labour market in the
preceding quarters. Despite the persistent
major underutilisation of overall production
capacity, for example, there was no more
than a slight quarter-on-quarter decline in the
number of persons in work in Germany in
seasonally adjusted terms. Manufacturing
employment subject to social security contri-
butions did show a further fall but staffing
levels were increased again noticeably in the
health and social work as well as education
sectors. In addition, there was a further in-
crease in the number of persons in low-paid
employment as a main or secondary occupa-
tion.
In line with the development in employment,
the rise in unemployment was very limited
in the fourth quarter. The official unem-
ployment figure showed a slight quarter-on-Output in industry
and in construction
Deutsche Bundesbank2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 20099095100105110115120
–25–20–15–10–50+5+10
95100105110115120
–15–10–50+5+10+15+20+25+302005 = 100, seasonally adjusted, quarterly
Log scale
Industry
Lin scale
Year-on-year change
Log scale
Construction
Lin Scale
Year-on-year
change%%
Trends continu-
ing to diverge
in trade, but
largely positive
in the rest of
the services
sectorOnly moderate
decline in em-
ployment again
at the end of
2009
... and only a
slight rise in
unemployment

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
February 2010
53quarter decline in seasonally adjusted terms,
in fact. It was only unemployment in thebroader sense – which includes, for example,persons on the books of private employmentagencies – that showed a slight increase. Offi-cial unemployment showed an increase of211,000 on the year to a seasonally adjusted3.42 million. In the broader definition, therewas an increase of 437,000. After seasonaladjustment, there was a year-on-year rise inthe official unemployment rate from 7.6% to8.1%. In January 2010, unemployment roseby 6,000 on the month to 3.43 million. Theunemployment rate went up to 8.2%.
The response of the labour market to the
slump in output during the two quartersaround the turn of 2008-09 differs in threekey aspects from earlier economic down-turns. First, employment in manufacturing,which tends to be severely affected by cyclicalfluctuations, was cut back far less than mighthave been expected from the loss of output.Based on the headcount in the first quarter of2008, only 239,000 jobs had been lost inmanufacturing in seasonally adjusted termsby the third quarter of 2009 (more recentconsistent national accounts data are unavail-able at present). This corresponds to a declineof 3.1%, while the fall in industrial outputover the same period was roughly one-fifthafter seasonal and calendar adjustment.
1The
employment effects are to seen as extremelysubdued even including the job losses ofroughly 160,000 in the case of temporaryemployment agencies and assuming thattemporary work (assigned to the services sec-tor for statistical purposes) was used primarilyby industry in the past upswing. With regardto the economy as a whole, the employment
level was, in fact, maintained despite thesharp drop in real GDP in the reference periodsince many new jobs were created, above all,in wholly or partly publicly financed services.
A second thing that is striking about the
labour market’s response to the current slow-down is that working hours – principally inmanufacturing – have been cut back consid-erably more sharply than in earlier cycles. Ac-cording to the figures as of November 2009,average working hours in the economy asa whole were reduced by a seasonally andcalendar-adjusted 4.4% between early 2008and the third quarter of 2009. Claims toshort-time working benefits and reductions inregular working hours each account forroughly one-quarter of this figure, with one-fifth being explained by forgoing overtime,around 15% by the use of working time ac-counts, and more than 15% by an increase inpart-time work.
2Not least given experience
of the medium-term impact of recession-induced redundancies in earlier economicslowdowns, there is currently a noticeableinterest on the part of enterprises and em-ployees to maintain jobs that are profitableunder normal cyclical conditions and to safe-guard firm-specific human capital linked tothe employees. The conditions necessary forthis have been created over the past fewyears by pay agreements which grant consid-erable flexibility at company level in terms of
1Compared with the cyclical peak in employment, the
decline amounted to 270,000 or 3.5%.
2The initial provisional IAB annual figures on the total
number of hours worked for 2009 appear to imply an-
other weighting of the individual components. Although
this modifies the overall picture somewhat, it does not
fundamentally call it into question.Special charac-
teristics of the
labour market
in the current
cycle with
regard to
employment, ...... working
hours ...

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
EUROSYSTEM
Monthly Report
February 2010
54working hours and remuneration. Surveys by
the Institute for Employment Research (IAB)
and the Institute of Economic and Social
Research (WSI) show that much use has been
made of the scope this provides. Govern-
ment-subsidised short-time working has
helped to counter the sharp cyclical decline in
the amount of work so far, largely by means
of a reduction in the number of hours
worked, although it has been only one of sev-
eral factors.
A third point is that an increase in the labour
market participation rate – disregarding posi-
tive trend factors – is rather untypical of eco-
nomic slowdowns. The number of persons
active in the labour market as a percentage
of the working-age population showed a
comparatively sharp increase, especially in the
first half of 2009. The newly created em-
ployment opportunities in publicly financed
services are mostly part-time jobs. A consider-
able number of these are likely to have been
taken up by women who were previously
neither unemployed nor in employment. By
contrast, job losses in industry and in tempor-
ary work frequently resulted in unemploy-
ment.
Although jobs will probably continue to be
cut in manufacturing in the near future, there
are no identifiable signs of increased pressure
in terms of lay-offs. In fact, leading indicators
for the labour market are pointing upwards
and are, in some cases, even approaching
neutral territory. The Ifo employment barom-
eter for trade and industry has shown a fur-
ther improvement, and has now clearly gone
up from the low reached in the second quar-Labour market
1 Not seasonally adjusted. — 2 Introduction 
of seasonal short-time working benefits at 
the end of 2006. — 3 From May 2009, un-
employed  excluding  persons  newly  re-
gistered  on  the  books  of  private  employ-
ment agencies.
Deutsche Bundesbank2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 201038.539.039.540.040.5
05001,0001,500
3.03.54.04.55.0
1,00050005001,000
––++
681012Seasonally adjusted, quarterly
Million
Million
0Thou-
sandThou-
sand
Thou-
sand
%Employed
2Short-time workers 1
Unemployed 3Year-on-year change
Year-on-year change
Unemployment rate 3Jan
Jan
Jan–5000+500+1,000
Advance notification 
of short-time work 1
Jan... and labour
market
participation
Labour market
outlook

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
February 2010
55ter of 2009. At the Federal Employment
Agency, there continues to be an increase in
both the level and number of new vacancies
for non-government-assisted jobs, albeit
starting from a depressed level and at no
more than a subdued pace. This trend is also
revealed by the quarterly IAB Job Vacancy
Survey for the final quarter of 2009. Further-
more, greater use is being made of temporary
employment in industry again and this sector
even recorded a slight seasonally adjusted rise
in the number of employees subject to social
security contributions during the second half
of 2009. Although January 2010 saw some
increase again in the influx of jobseekers who
were not (yet) unemployed, it was still clearly
smaller than at the turn of 2008-09.
Wages and prices
The Deutsche Bundesbank’s pay rate statistics
show that the year-on-year increase in nego-
tiated rates of pay in the fourth quarter of
2009, at 1.5% on average, was significantly
lower than in the third quarter (2.1%). This
was due, for one thing, to diminishing rises in
negotiated rates of pay. For another, a part
was played by special factors in the public
sector (such as spreading the special payment
in the case of Federal civil servants over a
period of several months and the discontinu-
ation of the performance bonus in the
Federal states) as well as by a base effect in
the metal-working and electrical engineering
industries owing to earlier lump-sum pay-
ments. Excluding collectively agreed one-off
and special payments, earnings were 2.2%
up on the year in the fourth quarter of 2009,compared with +2.6% in the preceding
three-month period.
For 2009, this gives an average increase in
negotiated rates of pay of 2.3%, compared
with 2.8% in 2008.3According to initial cal-
culations by the Federal Statistical Office,
actual earnings were down 0.4% on the year
in 2009. On a monthly basis, the wage drift
was thus clearly negative at -2.7 percentage
points. This was due chiefly to the consider-
able discrepancy between hours actually
worked and negotiated working hours. By
contrast, the cutting of non-core components
and the deferment of collectively agreed pay-
ments have been of comparatively little sig-
nificance so far. The wage drift, calculated on
an hourly basis, was in positive territory, how-
ever, at 0.6 percentage point.
The beginning of the year saw the introduc-
tion of a new generally binding minimum
wage for the waste disposal sector including
street cleaning and winter road maintenance.
This means that there are, at present, min-
imum wages in 11 sectors, six of which have
the status of a sector-specific minimum wage
level. This takes account of the fact that the
Federal Administrative Court ( Bundesverwal-
tungsgericht ) has ruled it unlawful to declare
as generally binding the minimum wage for
letter carriers, procedural errors being de-
3The growth rate for basic pay including lump-sum and
one-off payments amounts to 2.4%, while the negoti-
ated pay index of the WSI, which excludes civil servants,
shows a marginally higher annual increase of 2.6%. If
only basic rates of pay are considered, Bundesbank calcu-
lations produce an increase of 2.7%. The Federal Statis-
tical Office, which also excludes civil servants from its fig-
ures, reports a similarly high increase of 2.8% in collect-
ively agreed basic rates of pay.Noticeably
smaller rise in
negotiated pay
rates in 2009
Q4Annual result
for 2009
Sector-specific
minimum
wages

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
EUROSYSTEM
Monthly Report
February 2010
56cisive in the repeal. In addition, the generally
binding minimum wage levels for the roofing
and industrial cleaning trades, which have
run out, will be renewed in the near future.
With the world economy picking up, the
fourth quarter of 2009 saw at least a tempor-
ary standstill in the negative price trend at the
upstream stages of the production chain that,
one year earlier, had first affected commod-
ities and intermediate goods and later spread
to finished products. Import and export prices
were 1.8% and 0.6% up on the quarter
respectively in seasonally adjusted terms.
Domestic industrial producer prices rose by
0.2%. Prices were therefore still well below
the peaks recorded in the third quarter of
2008, which is quite consistent with the con-
tinuing global output gap. The terms of tradedeteriorated for the first time since the third
quarter of 2008 owing to the disproportion-
ate increase in import prices in the wake of
higher oil prices. For consumers, the marked
increase in energy prices more than offset the
easing of price pressure in the case of other
goods and services. Overall, consumer prices
rose by a seasonally adjusted 0.3% on the
quarter, which was a somewhat sharper in-
crease than in the preceding quarters but still
quite moderate. The year-on-year figure for
the national consumer price index (CPI)
turned positive again at +0.4% after having
been -0.3% in the third quarter (HICP:
+0.4%, subsequent to -0.5%). Base effects
played a considerable part in this, mainly on
account of movements in crude oil prices in
the second half of 2008. The generally
favourable price climate is likely to persist in
the next few months.
The disinflationary process in final goods run-
ning successively through the various stages
of the production chain since mid-2008 con-
tinued initially in the forth quarter. Neverthe-
less, in the case of imports a reversal of trend
was becoming apparent at the current end.
This is also likely to have a lagged impact on
domestic producer and consumer prices. At
the upstream stages of the supply chain,
there was a continuation of the increase in
the cost of energy and intermediate goods
that had begun in the previous quarter in the
wake of the recovery in the world economy.
The increase in the price of imports – where
price movements generally have a greater
amplitude – was much more pronounced
than in the domestic prices of German indus-
trial products, however. Domestic construc-Negotiated rates of pay
1 Excluding additional benefits and lump-
sum payments.
Deutsche Bundesbank2002 03 04 05 06 07 08 200900.51.01.52.02.53.03.5Year-on-year change, on monthly basis
Negotiated rates of pay total
Basic pay 1%
Price climate
remains
favourablePrices of final
goods still
falling, prices
of intermediate
goods
beginning to
rise again

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
February 2010
57tion prices were unchanged on the quarter
and were still 0.4% up on the year.
The somewhat faster, but still moderate pace
of consumer price inflation resulted largelyfrom higher energy prices. Prices in all otherproduct categories went up only slightly inseasonally adjusted terms or not at all. The in-creased cost of energy was due chiefly tohigher international crude oil prices, whichwere tracked by the prices of heating oil andfuel. Gas, which usually reacts with a time lag,became cheaper again as a delayed conse-quence of falling crude oil prices in 2008.Food prices ended their downward trendbegun in the final quarter of 2008. Althoughthere was a marked fall in the prices of meatand vegetables, consumers had to pay moreagain for dairy products for the first time sincethe second quarter of 2008. Overall, therewas a slight rise in the cost of other durableand non-durable goods, with relatively un-favourable price developments in the case ofsemi-durable goods contrasting with price re-ductions for durables. In the case of clothingand shoes, there was a marked decline in theindex in November owing to a clearance saleby one mail-order company. In contrast toearlier years, however, prices were only mar-ginally lower in December than they had beenin October. Prices of services and housingrents continued their moderate upward trendand were no more than roughly 1% higherthan in the same period of 2008. Accordingto various indicators, house prices in Germanylast year showed only a subdued rise, too (fordetails, see the box on pages 58-59).Despite higher energy prices, the cost of liv-
ing fell in January by a seasonally adjusted0.1%. The annual rate of change in the na-tional consumer price index fell from 0.9% inDecember to 0.8% (HICP unchanged at0.8%). This was due mainly to strongereffects of sales, partly because some priceswere reduced later rather than in December.Improved statistical recording of goods show-ing pronounced seasonal price movementsImport, producer and
consumer prices
1 Not  seasonally  adjusted,  quarterly. — 
2 National consumer price index.
Deutsche Bundesbank2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 201095100105110115
95100105 105110115
95100105 105110115
95100105110
10123
–+++2005 = 100, seasonally adjusted
Lin scale
Year-on-year change 1Consumer prices 2Construction
prices 1Producer prices
of industrialproductsImport pricesLog scale
%
JanConsumer
prices affected
by higher cost
of oil
Inflation rate
stabilised in
January at a
low level

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
EUROSYSTEM
Monthly Report
February 2010
58Deuts che Bun desbankHouse pri ces in 2009 in Germany 
In keepin g with the current ma croe conomi c environ-
ment an d the me dium-term outlook, the stea dy 
mo derate upwar d tren d in house pri ces continue d in 
Germany in 2009. A ccording to the in dices for resi dential 
property pri ces calculate d by the Bun desbank base d on 
Bulwien Gesa A G data,1 the pri ces of newly constru cted 
semi- deta ched houses an d owner-o ccupie d apartments 
rose somewhat in Germany in 2009, whilst pri ces for 
existin g properties ease d sli ghtly. The pri ces of new 
owner-o ccupie d apartments rose somewhat more 
stron gly than those of new semi- deta ched houses, while 
the fall in pri ces for existin g properties of both types was 
virtually i denti cal. In western Germany pri ces of existin g 
properties remaine d essentially sta ble, while in eastern 
Germany they fell marke dly, espe cially for semi- deta ched 
houses. In both re gions, the pri ces of new owner-o ccu-
pie d apartments rose somewhat more sharply than those 
of newly constru cted semi- deta ched houses.
A very similar pi cture is reveale d by the he doni c house 
pri ce in dices whi ch have been pu blishe d re gularly by 
Hypoport A G sin ce autumn 2008. A ccording to these 
indices, the pri ces of newly constru cted properties rose 
slightly on an annual avera ge for 2009, whilst pri ces for 
existin g houses fell quite sharply. 
The pri ce in dices for owner-o ccupie d housin g pro duced 
by the Asso ciation of German Pfan dbrief Banks ( Verband 
deutscher Pfandbriefbanken , vdp) chan ged only sli ghtly 
in 2009 followin g a small in crease in 2008. Owner-o ccu-
pie d apartments became noti ceably more expensive, 
whilst the pri ces of one-family an d two-family houses 
fell. 
According to all the in dicators, the reportin g perio d 
correspon ds to the pi cture of a stea dy pri ce develop-
ment in the German housin g market that has prevaile d 
for several years now. Pronoun ced an d quite persistent 
ﬂ uctuations, whi ch have been o bserve d in the U SA an d 
in some European countries over the past years, have not occurre d in Germany. Base d on the fa ct that there have 
been no major tensions in the German housin g markets, 
the ﬂ  at pri ce tren d is consistent with the development 
of major fun damentals. Demo graphi c developments, for 
example, are ten ding to exert dampenin g effe cts, an d 
increases in real in come are also assesse d to be limite d 
over the lon g term. In a ddition, the real e conomi c 
reper cussions of the e conomi c crisis are unlikely to have 
stron gly impaire d the deman d for resi dential property, 
as its impa ct on the la bour market has been mo derate 
so far. Finally, it can be assume d that the low interest 
rate level, com bine d with har dly any ti ghtenin g of credit 
stan dards for mort gage loans has been a positive inﬂ  u-
ence in itself. In the case of newly constru cted housin g, 
sharply in crease d constru ction costs over the past years 
coul d also have ha d an impa ct on pri ces.
In Germany, the past few years have seen a marke d 
increase in the availa ble ran ge of pri ce in dices for 
resi dential property that meet spe ciﬁ c minimum 
requirements. Private se ctor provi ders pre dominate in 
this context, while the ofﬁ  cial statisti cs have not yet pro-
gresse d beyon d provisional ﬁ  gures as part of an EU pilot 
proje ct.2 The availa ble in dex series show quite different 
tren ds in some cases, however. This may well be due to 
the fa ct that none of the in dices so far fulﬁ  l the criterion 
of bein g  completely representative. The deviations are 
possi bly also due to differen ces in the metho dolo gy use d 
for colle ctin g data, an d the wei ghtin g. Furthermore, the 
pro cedures use d to make the mi cro data compara ble 
differ from ea ch other.
Bulwien Gesa A G data are lar gely base d on expert assess-
ments, whi ch are surveye d for the purpose of determin-
ing the value of typi cal properties in the cate gories of 
new an d existin g owner-o ccupie d apartments an d semi-
deta ched houses.3 Usin g data colle cted for 100 west 
German cities an d 25 east German cities, an in dex series 
is calculate d for ea ch type of property with the num ber 
of inha bitants in 2005 a ctin g as wei ghtin g fa ctors. The 
1 See Deuts che Bun desbank, Pri ce in dicators for the housin g market, 
Monthly Report, Septem ber 2003, pp 45-58. — 2 See J De chent, Häu-
serpreise – Er gebnisse für 2007 un d erste Resultate für Transferkosten, 
Wirts chaft un d Statistik 10/2008 (availa ble in German only). — 3 The 
pri ce information comprises data collate d from estate a gents, surveyor 
committees, an d building an d loan asso ciations, offer pri ces in sales 
advertisements in printe d an d online me dia, test pur chases an d surveys 
conducted by Bulwien Gesa A G themselves. A ccording to Bulwien Gesa 
AG, a typi cal property is an owner-owne d apartment/semi- deta ched house in a me dium to good location with aroun d 70m² or aroun d 100 
m² of livin g spa ce respe ctively. — 4 According to Hypoport A G ﬁ gures, 
the platform pro cesses an avera ge of almost 8,000 mort gage loan 
agreements per month. Apart from the fa ct that this ﬁ  gure pro bably 
also in cludes mort gage reﬁ  nan cing, this correspon ds to one-tenth of 
all real estate transa ctions in Germany. — 5 Newly constru cted housin g: 
HPX-he doni c-newhome; resale housin g: HPX-he doni c-existin ghome; 
owner-o ccupie d apartments: HPX-he doni c-apartment. See H-J Dü bel 
and S Iden, He donis cher Immo bilienpreisin dex für Deuts chlan d, Isolie-

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
February 2010
59overall pri ce in dex for newly constru cted housin g is 
determine d usin g the in dividual in dicators for owner-
owne d apartments an d semi- deta ched houses base d on 
the relationship between the estimate d cost of the com-
plete d building per property type (in a ccordance with 
the constru ction statisti cs). The wei ghtin g scheme use d 
for resale data is the per centa ge share of ea ch type of 
property in livin g spa ce in the overall property port folio. 
The in dex levels for the reportin g year are availa ble in 
January of the followin g year. For new properties, the 
time series of histori cal calculation results go back to 
1975 for western Germany; the in dicator series go back 
to 1995 for Germany as a whole.
Hypoport A G primarily uses data on mort gage loan 
brokerin g via an internet platform.4 Usin g he doni c 
regressions, quality-a djuste d indices are calculate d from 
these data for new an d existin g one an d two-family 
houses, as well as for owner-o ccupie d apartments.5 The 
index series are generally pu blishe d monthly in the form 
of three-month avera ges, an d cover the perio d sin ce 
Au gust 2005. 
vdp pu blishes quarterly house pri ce in dices for one an d 
two-family houses an d owner-o ccupie d apartments. 
There is no break down for new an d existin g properties, 
and results go back to 2003. The un derlyin g mi cro data 
stem from a v dp data base, in whi ch new mort gage len d-
ing is capture d from the business se ctor of currently 17 
parti cipatin g vdp mem ber institutions. This data base is 
likely to mo del the re gional distri bution of property pur-
chases in Germany quite well.6 Usin g he doni c metho ds 
for quality a djustment, re gional an d national in dica-
tors for owner-o ccupie d houses an d apartments are 
calculate d, whi ch are then collate d in an overall in dex 
for owner-o ccupie d housin g. The wei ghtin g is base d on 
the relative fre quen cy of owner-o ccupie d houses/apart-
ments in private ownership in 2003.7
run g qualitativer Hauspreismerkmale durch he donis che Re gressionsa-
nalyse aus Daten der Europa ce-Plattform (Hypoport A G) un d Ma chbar-
keit eines he donis chen Hauspreisin dexes für Deuts chlan d (availa ble in 
German only), Berlin 2008. The owner-o ccupie d apartment cate gory 
may contain both new an d existin g properties. — 6 According to v dp, 
17 ﬁ nan cial institutions provi de data re cords totallin g some 500,000 
units with an annual num ber of rou ghly 30,000 cases. These also 
include estimate d market values, however. — 7 F Eilers un d T Hofer, Die 
statistis che Erfassun g der Immo bilienpreisentwi cklun g in Deuts chlan d, Professionelles Immo bilien-Bankin g, Fakten un d Daten 2007/2008, 
Berlin 2007 (availa ble in German only) an d T Hofer, v dp-Transakti-
ons daten bank un d -Immo bilienpreisin dex: Stan d, Er gebnisse un d 
Perspektiven, Professionelles Immo bilien-Bankin g, Fakten un d Daten 
2008/2009, Berlin 2008 (availa ble in German only). — 8 Bun desbank 
calculations base d on data provi ded by Bulwien Gesa A G. — 9 Semi-
deta ched houses an d owner-o ccupie d apartments. — 10 Re calculate d 
from the ori ginal base: Au gust 2005 = 100.2005 2006 2007 2008 2009889092949698100102104106108Selected house prices
1995 96 97 98 99 00 01 02 03 04 05 06 07 08 200998100102104106108110112114Log scale
Q1 2003 = 100, quarterly
Association of German Pfandbrief banks Q3 2005 = 100, seasonally adjusted, quarterly
Hypoport AG 10
Owner-occupied residential 
property
Owner-
occupied houses
Owner-occupied apartmentsNew and existing owner- 
occupied apartments
Existing 
apartmentsNewly constructed
apartmentsResale 9
New construction 9
2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009981001021041061081102005 = 100, annual data
Deutsche Bundesbank 8

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
EUROSYSTEM
Monthly Report
February 2010
60was also a contributory factor, however. The
lowering of the rate of value added tax for
overnight accommodation had no marked
effect on consumer prices. There was a clear
rise in the prices of seasonal food owing to
the exceptional weather conditions.
Orders received and outlook
The German economy is on a path of recov-
ery. According to the available indicators, its
underlying momentum does not appear to be
at risk, although it is still subject to negative
influences at the beginning of 2010. In the
short term, the fact that it has been colder
and that there has been more snow than
usual this winter has, in particular, consider-
ably dampened construction activity since the
turn of the year and is also likely to have ad-
versely affected the transport sector and
other outdoor industries. Furthermore, the
stimuli generated by fiscal policy measures
introduced in Germany and elsewhere in
response to the crisis are now waning, while
the endogenous forces of growth still lack the
strength and breadth to compensate for
them in terms of overall demand at present.
German enterprises’ business with the Asian
emerging economies is still expanding strong-
ly and activity in other major export markets,
such as central and eastern Europe, the USA
and the OPEC countries, has picked up no-
ticeably of late. Nevertheless, a broad-based
export-led recovery also requires more dy-
namic growth in trade with euro-area partner
countries in the future.The pick-up in demand for industrial products
perceptibly lost momentum at the end of
2009. In the final three months of last year,
the seasonally adjusted intake of industrial
orders rose by no more than 0.7% on the
quarter, compared with a sharp rise in the
second and third quarters following a sharp
downturn. The loss of momentum is due to
the lack of new impulses domestically and
from the rest of the euro area, whereas the
flow of orders from non-euro-area countries
continued to increase sharply at 5.1%. Nei-
ther intermediate goods nor the capital
goods segment were able to maintain the
sharp expansion of orders seen in the third
quarter, which was probably also due in part
to the ending of the boom in the automotive
industry and its supplier subsectors. Even so,
the underlying trend in both intermediate
and capital goods remained positive; the
moderate decline in orders of capital goods
shown in the figures was chiefly due to the
fact that orders in manufacturing of other
transport equipment had now returned to
normal following the exceptionally large
order placed in July. There was a marked in-
crease in orders of consumer goods. In calen-
dar-adjusted terms, the overall volume of in-
dustrial orders in the fourth quarter of 2009
was only slightly below its prior-year level,
which had itself been heavily affected by the
crisis.
According to the Ifo Institute, there was a
further improvement in the business climate
in manufacturing at the turn of 2009-10,
although this referred only to the component
which reflects the current business situation,
while business expectations for the next sixRecovery under
increased
pressure in the
short termIndustrial orders
lacking
momentum
of late
Further
improvement in
manufacturing
sentiment

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
February 2010
61months were stagnating, albeit at a high
level. The outlook for exports continued to berated very optimistically. In January 2010, thematching Ifo indicator recorded a figure lastachieved in the first quarter of 2008 beforethe start of the slowdown in industrial activ-ity.
Construction investment has been very weak
in the winter quarter so far owing to large-scale disruptions to production caused by ex-tremely low temperatures and heavy snow-falls. Capacity utilisation in the constructionsector in January, at a seasonally adjusted63%, was around 4
1/C252percentage points
lower than in December 2009. The weather-related losses could be made up again fromthe second quarter onwards, however.
A number of fiscal policy measures will have a
positive impact on households’ disposable in-come in 2010. Together with the measures toafford relief contained in the fiscal stimuluspackages at the turn of 2008-09, whichcome into effect only this year, the scope forexpenditure will be expanded by roughly 320
billion compared with last year as a result ofthe extended tax deductibility of contri-butions to the health and long-term care in-surance schemes, which entered into forceon 1 January 2010, as well as the increase inchild benefit and the higher basic income taxallowance. On the other hand, some statu-tory health insurance institutions have an-nounced they will charge their members add-itional contributions. This effect is likely to becomparatively limited in the current year,however. According to the surveys of theconsumer research institution, GesellschaftDemand for industrial goods 
and construction work
Deutsche Bundesbank2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 20098090100110120130
01020
++
–40–30–20–100
100110120130
758090100
100110120
8090100
90100110120
–20–100+10+20Volume, 2005 = 100,
seasonally adjusted, quarterly
DomesticForeignLog scaleLog scale
Total industrial
orders
Lin scale
Year-on-year change
Total construction orders%
Lin scale
Year-on-year change%
%Oct-
Nov
Oct-
NovConstruction
investment
severely
affected by
weather at start
of the year
Private
consumption
supported by
further fiscal
relief

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
EUROSYSTEM
Monthly Report
February 2010
62f/C252r Konsumforschung (GfK), consumer senti-
ment is still intact despite losses in the past
few months. This is true especially with
regard to the persistently favourable assess-
ments of income expectations and of the
general propensity to purchase, although
individual willingness to realise consumption
plans suffered a setback at the end of the
period under review.
Although the underlying trends in industrial
investment and private consumption are flat,
they are currently supporting the export-led
recovery process owing to their cyclical resili-
ence – leaving aside the dampening effects
on private consumption owing to the discon-tinuation of the car scrappage scheme. This
may be due to there still being a prevailing ex-
pectation among enterprises and households
that the global economic recovery, will, with
a time lag, also help the German economy to
gain greater intrinsic momentum. With this in
mind, enterprises are maintaining their exist-
ing production capacities despite major
underutilisation and, as far as possible, avoid-
ing staffing adjustments. The sharp cutback
in production is thus having a very subdued
impact on the labour market. Consequently,
knock-on effects on consumption in the form
of greater job insecurity have largely failed to
materialise so far.Corporate
investment,
and private
consumption,
too, quite
robust

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
February 2010
63Public finances* General government budget
Following two years of a virtually balanced
government budget, 2009 saw the return to
a high deficit. According to provisional data
from the Federal Statistical Office, the deficit
ratio amounted to 3.2% and thus exceeded
the European reference value. Cyclical factors
accounted for not quite half of the dramatic
deterioration vis-/C224-vis the previous year. In
this context, the negative cyclical impact was
still significantly mitigated by the fact that the
macroeconomic profile was favourable for
public finances. Gross wages and salaries as
well as private consumption, both of which
are of particular importance for government
revenue, experienced a far more stable devel-
opment than gross domestic product (GDP)
and growth in unemployment also remained
limited. The plunge in revenue from profit-
related taxes from exceptionally high levels
(see box on pages 66 and 67) contributed to
the sharp rise in the deficit after adjustment
for direct cyclical and temporary effects. Even
more significant, however, were the deficit-
increasing measures, with cuts in tax and so-
cial contribution rates and higher spending in
connection with the fiscal stimulus packages
accounting for the largest share, whereas
support measures for the financial sector were
*The “General government budget” section starts with
an analysis based on data contained in the national ac-
counts and on the Maastricht ratios. Subsequent report-
ing on budgets of the various levels of government and
social security schemes is based on the budgetary figures
as defined in the government’ s (budgetary) financial stat-
istics.General
government
deficit for 2009
slightly above
3% mark

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
EUROSYSTEM
Monthly Report
February 2010
64reflected in the national accounts deficit to a
limited extent only.1
Government revenue fell by just over 2% in
2009. The economic slowdown coupled with
plummeting profit-related taxes2and exten-
sive tax cuts contributed to the 41/C252% decline
in tax revenue. Changes to income tax rates
and to the tax depreciation rules contained in
the fiscal stimulus packages as well as theadditional tax relief measures for enterprises
adopted in summer 2009 are especially im-
portant in this context. By contrast, revenue
from social contributions increased slightly as
the lower contribution rate to the Federal Em-
ployment Agency was virtually offset by high-
er average annual rates to the health insur-
ance fund as well as to the public long-term
care insurance scheme, and cyclically induced
shortfalls were alleviated by contributions
paid on behalf of the unemployed by the Fed-
eral Employment Agency and central govern-
ment. The general government revenue ratio
rose perceptibly to 44.4% as revenue de-
creased less sharply than nominal GDP be-
cause the development of the economic
structure was favourable for public finances.
At 5%, government spending in 2009 grew
at a pace not seen since the early 1990s.
Measures such as the car scrappage scheme,
expansion of public investment, increases inGeneral government
fiscal ratios *
* As  defined  in  the  national  accounts. — 
1 Taxes  and  social  contributions  plus  cus-
toms duties and the EU share in VAT rev-
enue.
Deutsche Bundesbank2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 200940414243444546474849
01234As a percentage of GDP
Expenditure ratio
Revenue ratio
Taxes and social
security ratio 1
Deficit ratio
1Support measures for HRE in particular were recorded
as increasing the deficit if participating interests were not
acquired at prevailing market rates. According to SoFFin’s
annual accounts, interest expenditure was offset by sub-
stantially higher income predominantly from fees for
guarantees issued. In total, capital injections to credit in-
stitutions recorded as not affecting the deficit amounted
to just over 1% of GDP . From the extensive guarantees of
7% of GDP , there have so far been no deficit-increasing
calls on guarantees.
2Entrepreneurial and property income, which, for the
sake of simplicity, is normally used as a macroeconomic
reference variable for revenue from profit-related taxes,
provides only a rough approximation of the actual tax as-
sessment base. Thus only an approximate distinction can
be drawn between cyclically induced and other (struc-
tural) developments. Pursuant to the standard cyclical ad-
justment procedure used in the European System of Cen-
tral Banks, a considerable portion of the expected decline
in revenue from this type of tax in 2009 can be attributed
to neither the development of the macroeconomic refer-
ence variable (and is thus not cyclically induced) nor legis-
lative changes. For a seminal contribution, see Deutsche
Bundesbank, Development of tax revenue in Germany
and current tax policy issues, Monthly Report, October
2008, pp 33-57.Revenue down
considerablyExpenditure
significantly
increased due
to government
measures and
cyclical impact

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
February 2010
65child benefit and additional expenditure on
healthcare alone are likely to have accountedfor approximately one half of this increase.Moreover, labour-market-related expenditurealso rose significantly, primarily due to eco-nomic circumstances. The expenditure ratiowas up by almost four percentage points to47.6% due to the sharp decline in GDP .
The deficit ratio is likely to continue to rise
substantially in 2010 and could reach asmuch as 5%. Based on current analysis, thecyclical component of the deficit is again like-ly to increase slightly even though GDP is ex-pected to expand perceptibly, as the overallgrowth profile will probably be fairly un-favourable for public finances. The rise in thedeficit will nonetheless be primarily structuralin nature. Extensive deficit-increasing meas-ures are once again taking their toll. On therevenue side, these include the extended taxdeductibility of contributions to the healthand long-term care insurance schemes andvarious measures adopted to support theeconomy (notably, the renewed adjustmentto income tax rates, tax relief measures forcorporate taxation, new tax allowances forturnover tax as well as the lower contributionrate to the health insurance fund on an an-nual average). On balance, spending will riseowing to measures such as a further increasein child benefit and growing investment.Moreover, healthcare expenditure, in particu-lar, is likely to continue to soar.
In December 2009, the Ecofin Council ad-
judged Germany to have an excessive deficitand called on the German government tobring the deficit ratio back below the 3%ceiling by 2013 at the latest. In order to
achieve this, Germany is to reduce its struc-tural deficit by an average of 0.5% of GDP ayear starting from 2011, with consolidationto be accelerated should economic andbudgetary developments be better than ex-pected. The Council demanded no consolida-tion for 2010, instead recommending fiscalmeasures be implemented as planned. Inlight of the macroeconomic outlook, theserecommendations are not very challengingand, at best, constitute minimalist require-ments as measured by the intention of theStability and Growth Pact.
3
The updated stability programme that theGerman government presented on 9 Febru-ary just complies with these requirements.The programme is based on a 1.4% increasein real GDP for 2010 whereas a somewhatoptimistic figure of +2% per annum has beenestimated for the period from 2011 to 2013.The deficit ratio is expected to rise to 5
1/C252%i n
2010, in particular due to a further expansionin discretionary budgetary burdens.
4From
2011, the ratio is to be reduced by not quiteone percentage point a year with the aim ofjust undershooting the 3% ceiling in 2013.Budgetary burdens arising from further taxcuts envisaged in the coalition agreementhave not been factored into these projec-tions. From 2011, the structural deficit is tobe cut by an annual average of just over
1/C252%
of GDP . Given the high deficits and the factthat the debt ratio will still continue to rise in
3See also Deutsche Bundesbank, Monthly Report,
November 2009, pp 63-66.
4Unlike in the ESCB procedure, the EU procedure does
not report an increase in cyclically induced budgetary
burdens for 2010.Deficit to
continue to rise
substantially in
2010
Ecofin Council
recommenda-
tions to correct
excessive deficit
not very
challengingConsolidation
planned in
stability
programme just
meets require-
ments

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
EUROSYSTEM
Monthly Report
February 2010
66Deutsche BundesbankThe structural development of public finances – results of the disaggregated framework for 2009
The general government budgetary position in Germany
deteriorated sharply in 2009. According to provisional
data from the Federal Statistical Office, the general gov-
ernment deficit (as defined in the national accounts)
amounted to 3.2% of GDP, after the budget had been
balanced in 2008. Using the disaggregated framework
for analysing public finances,1it is possible, firstly, to esti-
mate the role played by cyclical and specific temporary
effects and, secondly, to identify other changes, referred
to here as structural changes, in the revenue and expend-
iture ratios and their major determinants. The main re-
sults of this analysis for 2009 are presented below.2
Just less than half of the very sharp deterioration in the
unadjusted deficit ratio can be attributed to direct cyclic-
al influences. Applying the standard adjustment proced-
ure used within the European System of Central Banks,
there was a negative impact from the change in the cyc-
lical component of 1.3 percentage points (pp), which
would have been significantly higher had it not been for
the fact that the profile of macroeconomic development
was extremely favourable for public finances. Clearly
identifiable specific temporary effects reduced the in-
crease in the deficit by 0.2 pp as the tax refunds which
resulted from the Federal Constitutional Court’s ruling
reinstating the commuting allowance were already re-
corded in the national accounts in 2008 and thus reduced
revenue in that year instead of in 2009. In addition, last
year Germany received a one-off repayment from the EU
budget for the years 2007 and 2008 owing to the imple-
mentation of the Own Resources Decision of 2007.3The
(structural) fiscal balance adjusted for these cyclical and
specific temporary effects consequently deteriorated
sharply by 2.1 pp in relation to trend-GDP.
While the unadjusted revenue ratio increased by 0.7 pp,
the structural revenue decreased markedly by 1.1 pp of
nominal trend-GDP. The more favourable development
in the unadjusted ratio reflected the fact that those
macroeconomic reference variables that are of particular
importance for government revenue, such as gross wages
and salaries and private consumption, were hurt far less
by the economic downturn than was overall GDP. This
revenue-boosting change in the pattern of economic ac-tivity is not reflected in the structural revenue ratio as it
is geared to longer-term trends in the macroeconomic
reference variables. The negative structural decoupling
of the macroeconomic reference variables from the de-
velopment of GDP thus continued to slightly depress the
revenue ratio (-0.2 pp). While the trend for entrepreneur-
ial and investment income remained above trend-GDP,
this was more than offset by the comparatively low
trend-growth of gross wages and salaries and private
consumption. Legislative changes caused a noticeable
reduction in the structural revenue ratio (-0.4 pp). This
was caused by the further lowering of the contribution
rate of the Federal Employment Agency from 3.3% to
2.8%, cuts in taxes and social contribution rates agreed
as part of the stimulus packages and the tax relief meas-
ures for enterprises adopted in summer 2009. The higher
average annual contribution rates to the statutory health
and long-term care insurance schemes had a lesser im-
pact in comparison. By contrast, the structural ratio was
increased slightly by the positive fiscal drag (+0.1 pp)
owing to income tax progression accompanied by slightly
positive trend-growth in per capita wages.
The decline experienced in the structural revenue ratio in
2009 can only be partially explained by the three factors
mentioned above (fiscal drag, the structural decoupling
of the macroeconomic reference variables from GDP and
legislative changes). The part remaining unexplained in
the standardised procedure (residual) came to a total of
-0.6 pp. This is largely attributable to the fall in revenue
from profit-related taxes, which was faster than can be
explained by the development of entrepreneurial and
investment income (which serves as the macroeconomic
reference variable for these taxes in the disaggregated
framework) and legislative changes. This is connected
with the fact that the fall in corporate earnings was more
quickly reflected in revenue (in particular via the rapid ad-
justment of advance payments of assessed taxes and lower
investment income tax payments on dividends) than as-
sumed according to the average relationships upon which
the disaggregated approach is based. Overall, much of
the extraordinary surge in revenue from profit-related
taxes over the past years to a distinctly above-average
level now seems to have been cancelled out.
1For a more detailed description, including of the standardised
method of determining the cyclical component, see Deutsche Bun-
desbank, A disaggregated framework for analysing public finances:
Germany’s fiscal track record between 2000 and 2005, Monthly Re-
port, March 2006, pages 61-76. — 2The results are subject to subse-
quent amendment owing to revisions to the preliminary national ac-
count figures or revised estimates of the macroeconomic outlook. —
3Expenditure associated with the support measures for financial in-stitutions (0.2 pp) is not included in the specific temporary effects
here and, moreover, also occurred on a similar scale in 2008, meaning
that the year-on-year change was minimal. — 4Adjusted for cyclical
influences and specific temporary effects. In accordance with EDP def-
inition, ie including swaps and forward rate agreements in interest
rate expenditure and the fiscal balance, or in accordance with ESA 95
(2009). — 5Year-on-year change of the ratio to nominal GDP in per-
centage points. — 6Assessed income tax, corporation tax, local busi-

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
February 2010
67While the unadjusted expenditure ratio increased dra-
matically by 3.9 pp in 2009, the ratio of structural ex-
penditure to the more stable nominal trend-GDP in-
creased by just 1.0 pp. General government profited
from a renewed decline in the interest expenditure ratio
which was attributable to the very favourable (re)finan-
cing conditions. Conversely, the structural ratio of other
expenditure (primary expenditure) increased somewhat
more sharply (+1.2 pp). It was chiefly driven by higher
spending on social benefits (primarily healthcare expend-
iture, child benefit and the car scrappage incentive,
which was booked under other current transfers to
households). But public intermediate consumption, sub-
sidies and investments, which were expanded as part ofthe economic stimulus measures, also played a significant
role.
Overall, it is apparent that half of the very sharp deterior-
ation in the fiscal balance in relation to GDP, amounting
to 3.2 pp in net terms, is attributable to the effects of the
automatic stabilisers, temporary effects and the normal-
isation of profit-related taxes. The significant additional
deterioration on both the revenue and expenditure sides
is largely the result of discretionary fiscal policy measures
(in particular the two economic stimulus packages).
ness tax, investment income tax. — 7Payments attributable to the
general government sector, eg social contributions for public sectoremployees (estimated). — 8Other current transfers receivable, sales
and total capital revenue. — 9Including other current transfers to
households. — 10Other current transfers payable to corporations
and the rest of the world, other net acquisitions of non-financialassets and capital transfers. — 11Spending by the statutory pension
insurance scheme, on civil servant pensions and payments by the postoffice pension fund. — 12Spending by the statutory health insurance
scheme and assistance towards civil servants’ healthcare costs. —13Spending by the Federal Employment Agency (excluding the com-
pensatory amount (up to 2007)/reintegration payment (from 2008)paid to the Federal Government and expenditure on unemploymentassistance (up to 2004) or unemployment benefit II (from 2005) andon labour market reintegration measures.Structural development4as percentage of trend-GDP
Year-on-year change in percentage points
Item 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009Total
2003-2009
Unadjusted fiscal balance5– 0.4 0.3 0.5 1.7 1.8 – 0.2 – 3.2 0.5
Cyclical component5– 0.4 – 0.1 – 0.2 0.8 0.5 0.5 – 1.3 – 0.3
Temporary effects50.0 0.0 0.1 – 0.1 0.0 – 0.2 0.2 0.1
Fiscal balance 0.1 0.3 0.6 1.0 1.3 – 0.5 – 2.1 0.7
Interest payable 0.0 – 0.1 0.0 0.1 0.0 – 0.1 – 0.2 – 0.4
Owing to change in average interest ratepe– 0.1 – 0.3 – 0.1 0.0 0.0 – 0.1 – 0.3 – 0.8
Owing to change in debt levelpe0.1 0.1 0.1 0.1 0.0 0.0 0.1 0.4
Primary balance 0.1 0.1 0.5 1.1 1.3 – 0.6 – 2.3 0.4
Revenue – 0.3 – 1.1 0.1 0.8 0.7 0.1 – 1.1 – 0.8
Taxes and social contributions – 0.2 – 0.8 – 0.1 0.7 0.7 0.1 – 1.0 – 0.5
Fiscal drag 0.1 0.1 0.0 0.0 0.1 0.1 0.1 0.5
Decoupling of base from GDP – 0.3 – 0.2 – 0.1 – 0.1 – 0.2 0.1 – 0.2 – 0.8
Legislative changes 0.4 – 0.5 – 0.2 0.1 0.7 – 0.5 – 0.4 – 0.4
Residual – 0.4 – 0.2 0.2 0.6 0.1 0.4 – 0.6 0.3
of which: profit-related taxes6– 0.1 0.1 0.2 0.5 0.3 0.4 – 0.5 0.9
Memo item: included in expenditure70.0 – 0.1 – 0.2 – 0.1 – 0.1 0.0 0.1 – 0.3
Non-tax revenue8– 0.1 – 0.3 0.1 0.1 0.0 0.0 – 0.1 – 0.3
Primary expenditure – 0.4 – 1.3 – 0.4 – 0.3 – 0.6 0.6 1.2 – 1.1
Social payments9– 0.1 – 0.8 – 0.3 0.0 – 0.3 0.2 0.7 – 0.6
Subsidies – 0.1 – 0.1 – 0.1 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.2 – 0.2
Compensation of employees – 0.2 – 0.1 – 0.2 – 0.2 – 0.2 0.0 0.1 – 0.7
Intermediate consumption 0.0 0.0 0.1 0.1 0.0 0.1 0.2 0.4
Gross fixed capital formation – 0.1 – 0.1 – 0.1 0.1 0.0 0.1 0.1 – 0.1
Other expenditure100.1 – 0.1 0.1 – 0.2 – 0.1 0.2 0.0 0.0
Memo item
Pension expenditure110.0 – 0.2 – 0.2 – 0.1 – 0.3 – 0.1 0.0 – 0.8
Healthcare expenditure12– 0.1 – 0.4 0.1 0.1 0.1 0.2 0.3 0.2
Labour-market expenditure13– 0.1 – 0.2 0.0 0.0 – 0.1 0.1 0.2 – 0.1

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
EUROSYSTEM
Monthly Report
February 2010
682013, greater efforts would have been desir-
able. Furthermore, contrary to the basic func-
tion of the stability programmes as a com-
ponent of the EU budgetary surveillance pro-
cedure, the funding of this improvement is
still pending as concrete measures for cutting
the deficit will not be set out before central
government’s draft budget for 2011 and
medium-term financial plan up to 2014.
Budgetary development of central, state
and local government
Tax revenue
In 2009, tax revenue5recorded a marked fall
of 6% (see chart on page 69 and table on
page 70), however, it was thus around 31 bil-lion higher than forecast in the latest official
tax estimate from November 2009. This de-
cline in revenue is mainly attributable to the
economic downturn, fiscal policy measures6
as well as tax refunds following the Federal
Constitutional Court’s ruling reinstating the
standard travel allowance for commuters,
which are recorded in the cash receipts for
2009. Revenue from income-related taxes fell
very sharply (-12%). Wage tax receipts de-
clined by just over 41/C252%. This is partly due toKey data of the Federal Government’s updated stability programme
As a percentage
Item 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013
Real GDP growth
Stability programme January 2010 1.3 – 5.0 1.4 2 2 2
Stability programme January 2009 1.3 – 21/C254 11/C254 11/C254 11/C254 –
General government fiscal balance (as % of GDP)
Stability programme January 2010 0.0 – 3.2 – 51/C252 –41/C252 –31/C252 –3
Stability programme January 2009 – 0.1 – 3 – 4 – 3 – 21/C252 –
Structural fiscal balance (as % of GDP)
Stability programme January 2010 – 1 – 11/C252 –41/C252 –4 –3 –21/C252
Stability programme January 2009 – 1 – 2 – 3 – 2 – 2 –
Debt ratio
Stability programme January 2010 65.9 721/C252 761/C252 791/C252 81 82
Stability programme January 2009 651/C252 681/C252 701/C252 711/C252 721/C252 –
Source: Federal Ministry of Finance.
Deutsche Bundesbank
5Including EU shares in German tax revenue but exclud-
ing receipts from local government taxes, which are not
yet known for the last quarter recorded.
6These notably include lowering the income tax rates,
easing depreciation facilities, extending actual taxation in
the case of turnover tax, more lenient counterfinancing
measures from the 2008 business tax reform, reinstating
the previous, more generous standard travel allowance
for commuters as well as the child bonus and the increase
in child benefit which are recorded as reducing revenue
in the cash receipts.Steep decline in
tax revenue in
2009Large income
tax shortfalls

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
February 2010
69the fact that gross wages and salaries de-
creased overall and progression had an add-itional revenue-reducing effect owing tolower per capita wages. Moreover, tax rateswere lowered and the payments deductedfrom cash receipts were raised (one-off childbonus, increase in child benefit and subsidiesfor supplementary private pension plans).Massive short-falls were recorded for profit-related taxes (-25
1/C252%). Receipts from corpor-
ation tax plummeted mainly owing to loweradvance payments for current profits and, onbalance, higher repayments for 2008. The ef-fects of considerable shortfalls as a result oftax refunds following the Federal Constitu-tional Court’s ruling reinstating the standardtravel allowance for commuters, and of taxcuts were felt in assessed income tax. By con-trast, smaller deductions for grants to home-buyers, which are being phased out, boostedrevenue. Lower profit distributions resulted inlarge decreases in revenue from investmentincome tax. Given the relatively stable devel-opment of consumption, however, revenuefrom consumption-related taxes rose slightlyby just under
1/C252%.
On the basis of the November tax estimate, a
further decline in revenue (including localgovernment taxes) of 3
1/C252% is expected in
2010 if shortfalls of 36 billion (1% of 2009
tax revenue) due to tax relief measuresagreed in December 2009 are additionallyfactored in (especially the increase in childbenefit and in child tax allowance, preferen-tial turnover tax treatment for the hotel tradeas well as relief measures for corporate andinheritance tax). Measures that had been pre-viously adopted – in particular the extendedtax allowances for insurance contributions
and the fiscal stimulus packages – resulted inconsiderable net shortfalls. Added to this isthe fact that receipts from profit-related taxesare likely to continue to fall as the slump incorporate earnings associated with the eco-nomic downturn partly takes some time tofeed through to revenue. Furthermore, themacroeconomic reference variables for wagetax and consumption-related taxes are alsoexpected to develop poorly. All in all, how-ever, forecasting uncertainty is currently veryhigh, primarily owing to the unsettled eco-nomic outlook, estimation problems withregard to extremely volatile revenue fromprofit-related taxes
7and the fact that theTax revenue *
* Including  EU  shares  in  German  tax  rev-
enue, but excluding receipts from local gov-ernment taxes.
Deutsche Bundesbank2007 2008 200986420246810121416
––––++++++++Year-on-year change, quarterly
%
7See also Deutsche Bundesbank, Development of tax rev-
enue in Germany and current tax policy issues, Monthly
Report, October 2008, pp 33-57.Revenue from
consumption-
related taxes
stable
Further marked
decline in
revenue
expected in
2010

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
EUROSYSTEM
Monthly Report
February 2010
70financial impact of extensive legislative
changes is, at times, difficult to quantify.
Central government budget
The central government budget recorded a
deficit of 3341/C252billion in 2009. Net borrow-
ing was thus 315 billion below the level envis-
aged in the second supplementary budget
from July 2009. The main factors behind the
better-than-anticipated results were the al-
most 34 billion improvement in tax receipts,
partly driven by smaller transfers to the EU
budget, and much lower spending ( 311 bil-
lion in total). The loan to the health insurance
fund, forecast to be 34 billion, was not taken
up and, owing to the low level of interest
rates and the issue of debt instruments with
considerable premiums, interest expenditurewas lower than estimated. Calls on guaran-
tees and benefits for the long-term un-
employed were also below budget.
Nevertheless, the deficit was up sharply on
the year by 323 billion. After adjustment for
the transfer of motor vehicle tax to central
government, tax revenue was down by just
over 312 billion; however, on balance, more
than half of this drop was attributable to new
tax relief measures. Proceeds from asset real-
isations fell by 34 billion, although, this was
largely offset by the one-off use of the Bun-
desbank’s entire profits to finance the
budget. Growth in expenditure was recorded
in particular for grants to the statutory health
insurance scheme and investment. But other
operating expenditure, benefits for the long-
term unemployed and personnel expenditureTax revenue
Year as a whole Q4
2008 2009Estimate
for 2009
as a
whole
1, 2, 3 2008 2009
Year-on-year
changeYear-on-
year per-
centageYear-on-year
change
Type of tax 5billion 5billion as % change 5billion 5billion as %
Tax revenue, total 2 515.5 484.9 – 30.6 – 5.9 – 6.1 140.3 132.0 – 8.3 – 5.9
of which
Wage tax 141.9 135.2 – 6.7 – 4.7 – 5.2 40.3 38.6 – 1.8 – 4.4
Profit-related taxes 4 78.6 58.5 – 20.1 – 25.5 – 25.0 18.4 13.1 – 5.2 – 28.5
Assessed income tax 32.7 26.4 – 6.3 – 19.1 – 17.9 9.7 7.6 – 2.2 – 22.1
Corporation tax 15.9 7.2 – 8.7 – 54.8 – 59.9 2.2 1.8 – 0.4 – 17.6
Investment income
tax 5 30.0 24.9 – 5.1 – 17.0 – 14.4 6.4 3.7 – 2.7 – 41.9
Turnover taxes 6 176.0 177.0 + 1.0 + 0.6 + 0.4 45.5 46.1 + 0.6 + 1.4
Energy tax 39.2 39.8 + 0.6 + 1.5 + 0.0 15.2 15.1 – 0.1 – 0.7
Tobacco tax 13.6 13.4 – 0.2 – 1.5 + 0.0 4.1 3.9 – 0.2 – 4.1
1According to official tax estimate of November 2009. —
2Including EU shares in German tax revenue, but exclud-
ing receipts from local government taxes. — 3Including
(estimated) local government taxes, tax revenue was
546.8 billion below the November 2008 estimate, which
was used as a basis for the original 2009 Federal budget
from the end of 2008. According to government esti-mates, 518.8 billion of this shortfall is attributable to
additional legislative changes. — 4Employee refunds,
grants paid to home owners and investors deducted from
revenue. — 5Withholding tax on interest income and
capital gains, non-assessed taxes on earnings. — 6Turn-
over tax and import turnover tax.
Deutsche Bundesbank
2009 central
government
budget with
much smaller
deficit than
planned, ...... however, up
sharply on
2008 and
borrowing limit
overshot

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
February 2010
71also rose markedly. By contrast, interest ex-
penditure recorded a decline of 32 billion. On
balance, net borrowing exceeded investmentexpenditure by 37 billion. When drawing up
the supplementary budgets, the oversteppingof the constitutional borrowing limit was jus-tified by invoking the exemption clause that itserves to avert a disruption of the macroeco-nomic equilibrium.
The new government presented a revised
draft budget for 2010 in mid-December2009. Although the macroeconomic environ-ment has improved significantly comparedwith expectations in June, forecast net newborrowing was revised down by barely 3
1/C252
billion to just short of 386 billion. While lower
estimates of expenditure to offset the FederalEmployment Agency’s deficit, less funds ear-marked for benefits for the long-term un-employed and interest payments, as well asadditional tax revenue forecast in the latestofficial tax estimate will amount to total reliefof310 billion, this will be virtually offset by
the goal of strengthening cyclical growthforces primarily by means of the Act to Accel-erate Growth ( Wachstumsbeschleunigungs-
gesetz ), an additional one-off grant to the
health insurance fund as well as additionalspending on education and promoting agri-culture. The fact that the macroeconomicoutlook has brightened perceptibly in themeantime indicates that there is no real needfor additional stimuli and that the associatedgrowth effects are likely to remain limited. Allin all, from today’s perspective, the deficit in2010 is nevertheless likely to be substantiallylower than forecast. For instance, in the Fed-eral Government’s Annual Economic Reportfrom January, labour market development is
expected to be much more favourable, whichshould give rise to cost savings, notably forexpenditure to offset the Federal EmploymentAgency’s deficit but also for benefits for thelong-term unemployed. Furthermore, inter-est, not least with a discount of 32 billion, ap-
pears to be estimated extremely cautiously,especially as the latest topping up of 30-yearFederal bonds alone yielded a premium of al-most 3
1/C252billion.
The (structural) deficit for 2010, ie adjusted
for cyclical effects and financial transactions,constitutes the starting point for the gradualreduction of the constitutional borrowinglimit to 0.35% of GDP by 2016. The 2010budget is therefore of particular importance(see box on pages 72 and 73). As a rule, theCentral government fiscal 
deficit / surplus
Deutsche BundesbankQ1 Q2 Q3 Q415105051015
–––+++
–35–30–25–20–15–10–5€ bn Cumulative from start of year
20092009
20082008
20072007Quarterly results€ bn
Despite im-
provement in
macroeconomic
environment,
2010 draft
budget
contains
exceptionally
high deficit
Strictly apply
new borrowing
limit

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
EUROSYSTEM
Monthly Report
February 2010
72Deuts che Bun desbankFederal budget for 2010 an d scope for borrowin g up to 201 6 
In 2009, followin g approval from both houses of parlia-
ment (Bun desta g an d Bun desrat), a new constitutional 
debt rule for central an d state government was inserte d 
into the German Basi c Law ( Grundgesetz ). From 201 6 
onwar ds, central government’s “stru ctural” net borrow-
ing (ie total borrowin g adjuste d for cyclical effe cts an d 
ﬁ nan cial transa ctions) may generally not ex ceed 0.35 % 
of GDP. Durin g the transitional perio d from 2011 to 2015, 
the limit for stru ctural new borrowin g will decrease to 
this ﬁ  gure in e qual steps, startin g from the level in the 
base year 2010.1
Structural deﬁ  cit sharply revised in draft Federal budget 
for 20 10
Hen ce the hi gher the debt ratio at the start of the 
man datory re duction path, the greater the overall s cope 
for borrowin g durin g the transitional perio d (see chart below). The key si gniﬁ can ce of this startin g value can 
be seen by comparin g the draft budget for 2010 from 
mi d-2009 with the revise d draft budget for 2010 from 
De cem ber 2009. The revise d draft budget, presente d 
by the new German government in De cem ber, put the 
stru ctural budget deﬁ cit at € 68½ billion (2.8 % of GDP). 
This ﬁ  gure was arrive d at by deductin g €1 6½ billion 
for cyclical effe cts an d €1 billion for net a cquisitions 
of ﬁ nan cial assets from the total deﬁ cit of €8 6 billion. 
In mi d-2009, by contrast, a similar-size d overall deﬁ cit 
estimate was re duced by €2 6 billion for the cyclical 
component an d €21 billion for ﬁ  nan cial asset a cquisi-
tions, resultin g in an estimate d stru ctural deﬁ cit of €39½ 
billion (1. 6% of GDP). At almost € 60 billion alto gether 
or aroun d €10 billion per year, the deviation from the 
future constitutional borrowin g limit of 0.35 % of GDP, 
whi ch is to be re duced throu gh consoli dation, is almost 
twi ce as lar ge un der the current draft budget as it was 
in the initial calculation.  However, this also means that, 
parti cularly durin g the ﬁ  rst few years of the transitional 
perio d, the maximum annual stru ctural deﬁ cit coul d be 
set si gniﬁ cantly hi gher an d still comply with the rule.
Just over €5 billion of the revisions vis-à-vis the mi d-2009 
draft budget can be attri bute d to measures a dopte d 
un der the A ct to A ccelerate Growth ( Wachstumsbe-
schleunigungsgesetz ) an d a dditional spen ding on 
education, lon g-term unemployment an d agriculture.  
Furthermore, the size of the estimate d ne gative cyclical 
inﬂ uen ce was consi dera bly re duced. Another major revi-
sion con cerne d the conversion of a loan to the Fe deral 
Employment A gen cy into a grant (totallin g €1 6 billion).  
In the mi d-2009 draft budget, this loan to the Fe deral 
Employment A gen cy was cate gorise d as an a cquisition 
of ﬁ nan cial assets an d conse quently deducted from the 
total deﬁ cit when calculatin g the stru ctural deﬁ cit.2 
In a ddition, an extra €4 billion of central government 
fun ds is now to be transferre d to the health insuran ce 
fun d, pushin g total transfers up to €20 billion. Pursuant 
to the draft So cial Se curity Sta bilisation A ct (Sozialver-
sicherungs-Stabilisierungsgesetz ), these payments are 
1 Se ction 9 (2) of the A ct Implementin g Arti cle 115 of the German Basi c 
Law, base d on Arti cle 143 d of the same law. For more information on 
the new rules, see Deuts che Bun desbank, The reform of the borrow-
ing limits for central an d state government, Monthly Report, May 2009, pp 78-79. — 2 Un der the new budgetary rule – in line with European 
provisions – ﬁ  nan cial transa ctions, a bove all loans, are not assi gned to 
the stru ctural deﬁ cit component. — 3 Amountin g to ﬁ  ve-sixths of the 
one-off stru ctural burden in 2011, decreasin g further in e qual sta ges in Scope for borrowing up to 2016 based on 
central government structural deficit
for 2010
2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 201600.51.01.52.02.53.0Revised draft budget from end of 2009
Draft budget from mid-2009Structural deficit as a percentage of GDP

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
February 2010
73inten ded to offset cyclically in duced revenue shortfalls 
an d crisis-in duced additional expen diture on the part of 
the Fe deral Employment A gen cy whi ch it cannot cover 
with its own fun ds.
Success of new rule depends on strict application The un derlyin g o bjective of the new debt rule is to 
reverse the upwar d tren d in the debt ratio, whi ch has 
been evi dent for many years, an d to counter the per-
petually o bserve d ten den cy to put off the consoli dation 
of pu blic ﬁ nan ces, thou
gh generally a cknowle dged as 
bein g ne cessary, to some unspe ciﬁ ed future date. In 
order to enhan ce the credibility of the new rule, it is 
crucial that from the very start it is implemente d in line 
with the inten ded objective an d, in parti cular, that no 
attempts are ma de to circumvent the rule‘s provisions 
an d hen ce its un derlyin g objective. In this respe ct, the 
decision to reje ct the i dea of transferrin g the debt to 
off- budget entities before the rule came into for ce, as 
was discusse d last autumn, is consistent with the un der-
lyin g objective. Another pro blemati c option woul d be to 
base the man datory path to re duce borrowin g durin g 
the transitional perio d on a pessimisti c budget estimate 
for 2010 (see comments on pa ges 74 an d 75) an d to not 
adjust it in the li ght of more favoura ble expe ctations or 
actual ﬁ  gures. This woul d create unjustiﬁ  able a dditional 
scope for borrowin g. Measures whi ch have only a one-off 
impa ct on the 2010 budget but are viewe d as stru ctural 
un der the new debt rule (su ch as the components of the 
one-off grant to the Fe deral Employment A gen cy whi ch 
are not classe d as cyclical) will also in crease the s cope for 
borrowin g durin g the transitional perio d.3 In a ccordan ce 
with the spirit of the transitional arran gements, none of 
these options shoul d be exploite d when drawin g up the 
Federal budget for 2011 or the me dium-term ﬁ  nan cial 
plan.
There is therefore a nee d to resist the temptation to 
artiﬁ cially inﬂ  ate the borrowin g limit in or der to for-
mally create s cope for temporary unfun ded tax cuts or expen diture in creases in the short term or to defer a 
sizea ble part of the re quire d consoli dation to the next 
legislative perio d. While the size of the overall stru c-
tural a djustment to be a chieve d by 201 6 woul d remain 
un chan ged, the intro duction of further deﬁ cit-in creasin g 
measures woul d enlar ge the a djustment re quirement 
an d the postponement of consoli dation woul d ne ces-
sitate mana ging the ne cessary a djustment – as well as 
the a dditional interest burden – within a mu ch shorter 
perio d of time. Both s cenarios woul d seriously en dan ger 
the new debt rule’s lon g-term prospe cts of su ccess as 
minimal complian ce with the limit without allowin g 
for unforeseen budgetary burdens woul d entail the risk 
of havin g to take extensive an d timely consoli dation 
measures in future downturns, thus desta bilisin g overall 
economi c development.4
The new debt rule, whi ch was a dopte d durin g the last 
legislative perio d with a broa d politi cal consensus, is of 
key si gniﬁ can ce both in a national an d international 
context. Its stri ct appli cation coul d reverse the current 
tren d of ever in creasin g debt ratios an d thus provi de a 
better basis for a ddressin g the loomin g demo graphi c 
burdens in Germany. Furthermore, credible budgetary 
rules, espe cially when the ﬁ  nan cial situation is tense, are 
an important safe guar d for gainin g an d maintainin g the 
conﬁ den ce of the general pu blic an d the capital markets 
in sustaina ble pu blic ﬁ nan ces an d thus fa cilitate, in par-
ticular, a sta bility-oriente d monetary poli cy in the euro 
area. The new German budgetary rule was expressly wel-
come d by international or ganisations. Other countries, 
some of whi ch have even hi gher deﬁ cits, seem willin g 
to intro duce similar national rules, not least in or der to 
limit the dan ger of in currin g soverei gn risk premiums on 
the capital markets. Central government‘s pen ding ﬁ scal 
poli cy decisions therefore take on crucial si gniﬁ can ce 
both in view of the intention un derlyin g the new consti-
tutional rule an d in li ght of international developments. 
Ensurin g the su ccess of the new debt rule will be one of 
the foremost tasks of ﬁ  scal poli cy.
the years up to 2015. — 4 See also Deuts che Bun desbank, The reform 
of the borrowin g limits for central an d state government, Monthly 
Report, May 2009, pp 78-79 an d J Kremer an d D Ste gares cu (2009), Neue Schul denre geln: Si cherheitsa bstan d für eine steti ge Finanzpolitik, in 
Wirts chafts dienst, Vol 89/9, pp 630 ff.

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
EUROSYSTEM
Monthly Report
February 2010
74scope for borrowing up to 2015 is greater,
the larger the reference deficit in the base
year 2010. Inflating the reference deficit with
a view to gaining a greater scope for borrow-
ing during the transitional period would clear-
ly undermine the intention of the legislation.
Should a sizeable part of the required consoli-
dation be deferred to the next legislative
period or even enlarged as a result of add-
itional measures, the success of the new debt
rules would ultimately be endangered. The
very purpose of these rules is to prevent the
structural consolidation of public finances,
which is generally acknowledged as being ne-
cessary, being put off to some unspecified fu-
ture date and to reverse the upward trend in
the debt ratio, which has been evident for
many years. Against this backdrop, when
drawing up the central government budget
for 2011 and the medium-term financial
plan, the reference deficit in 2010 should be
based on a realistic assessment of current
budgetary developments and temporary
charges (such as the one-off conversion of
the loan to the Federal Employment Agency
into a grant) should not be misused in order
to artificially increase the future scope for
borrowing.
At just over 320 billion, the deficit of central
government’s off-budget entities more than
tripled in 2009. This was chiefly attributable
to the Special Fund for Financial Market Sta-
bilisation (SoFFin), which was set up in the
fourth quarter of 2008. Although no funds
were paid out for guarantees or purchasing
impaired securities, further outflows of funds,
in particular, to top up banks’ capital, led to a
deficit of just under 317 billion. The Invest-ment and Repayment Fund, set up to manage
spending relating to the second economic
stimulus package, reported a deficit of 36 bil-
lion largely resulting from the car scrappage
scheme. Of the 310 billion for investment
grants to state government, only just under
311/C252billion had an impact, not the intended
minimum of 35 billion. By contrast, the Post
Office Pension Fund again recorded a surplus
of just over 31/C252billion in 2009. The newly cre-
ated special fund to build up reserves for final
payments of inflation-indexed Federal Gov-
ernment debt instruments is likely to have re-
corded an even larger surplus of 311/C252billion.
This should provide for the increase in repay-
ment amounts due to past inflation.
State government8
After a surplus of just over 31/C252billion in 2008,
state government recorded a high deficit of
3251/C252billion for 2009 as a whole. Excluding
the additional burden from the second stage
of the capital injection into the Landesbank
BayernLB of 37 billion, which was allocated
to the 2008 budgetary accounts but did not
affect cash receipts until 2009, the deficit
amounted to 3181/C252billion.9The forecast
state government deficit was thus still under-
shot by 34 billion. Owing to the fall in tax
revenue, receipts declined by 51/C252%. By con-
trast, at just over 21/C252%, expenditure – adjust-
ed for both stages of the aforementioned re-
capitalisation – increased relatively sharply.
8The development of local government finances in the
third quarter of 2009 was outlined in the short articles in
the Bundesbank Monthly Report of January 2010. These
are the most recent data available.
9Furthermore, Hamburg, Schleswig-Holstein and Baden-
W/C252rttemberg injected a total of 35 billion of capital into
their Landesbanken in 2009, however, off budget.On balance,
off-budget
entities
recorded
sizeable deficit
for 2009Deficit already
high for 2009
as a whole ...

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
February 2010
75Not least the impact of the distinct rise in the
compensation of employees and pension pay-
ments in the wake of the spring 2009 pay
agreement was felt here. Budgetary burdens
arising from co-financing the investment pro-
gramme initiated by central government as
part of the second economic stimulus pack-
age appear, to date, to have had only a minor
role to play.
According to the official tax estimate from
November excluding shortfalls owing to the
Act to Accelerate Growth, tax revenue is ex-
pected to again decline markedly in 2010.
Pursuant to budget plans available to date,
the tax-revenue-sharing schemes with local
government are likely to offer limited relief
only. On the expenditure side, no sizeable re-
lief has been budgeted for on balance, not
least owing to growing personnel expend-
iture, meaning that the fiscal deficit is again
likely to rise substantially. In order to come
close to a structurally balanced budget by
2020, as stipulated in the German Basic Law’s
new debt rule, extensive consolidation meas-
ures are required for the most part. The fact
that the old borrowing limit enshrined in the
state government constitutions, which is still
in place, is forecast to be overshot, in some
cases, for a number of years, ultimately indi-
cates that structural deficits are likely to be
exceptionally high and will require decisive,
swift countermeasures. However, even those
state governments that have already imposed
stricter borrowing limits in their budgetary
regulations and that are plugging current def-
icits with reserves or by taking out temporary
loans, have to take into account the new
financial outlook sooner or later.Social security funds10
Statutory pension insurance scheme
The statutory pension insurance scheme re-
corded a virtually balanced result for 2009,
compared with a surplus of 333/C254billion one
year previously. Total revenue rose by just
under 1%. Employees’ compulsory contribu-
tions went up by1/C254%, even though gross
wages and salaries fell slightly on balance.
However, contributions relating to periods of
not working as part of short-time working
schemes are also recorded under this item. In
addition, the statutory pension insurance
scheme’s funds were stabilised in particular
by contributions for recipients of unemploy-
ment benefit I. Transfers from the central gov-
ernment budget increased by just under
11/C252%.
Spending by the statutory pension insurance
scheme went up by 21/C252% in 2009. The sharp
mid-year pension increase (+2.41% in west-
ern Germany and +3.38% in eastern Ger-
many, compared with +1.1% in both in mid-
2008) made a decisive contribution to this.
Pension expenditure rose by just over 2%,
which was broadly in line with the average
annual increase. At 21/C252%, the rise in spend-
ing on health insurance contributions to be
paid by the pension insurance scheme was
only slightly higher than the increase in pen-
sion expenditure, despite the fact that the
contribution rate to the statutory health in-
10The financial development of the statutory health and
public long-term care insurance schemes in the third
quarter of 2009 was analysed in the short articles of the
Monthly Report of December 2009. These are the most
recent data available.... and
expected to
climb even
further in 2010Despite marked
deterioration
on 2009,
balanced result
Accelerated
growth in
expenditure
due to high
mid-2009
pension
increase

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
EUROSYSTEM
Monthly Report
February 2010
76surance scheme was higher on an annual
average. This is probably because many pen-
sioners are members of health insurance insti-
tutions that charged above-average contribu-
tion rates up to the end of 2008 meaning
that the increase was then lower for them.
Expenditure on rehabilitation measures, in
particular, rose at a sharper rate (+9%).
In the final quarter of 2009, the Federal Gov-
ernment expected the statutory pension in-
surance scheme to record a deficit of 333/C254bil-
lion in 2010. As the underlying macroeco-
nomic assumptions in the Old-age Provision
Report11seem rather pessimistic from today’s
standpoint, the financing of the statutory
pension insurance scheme may develop more
favourably. However, a deficit is still likely.
This is due in part to the fact that followingthe extension of the safeguard clause, pen-
sions will not be cut in mid-2010 despite a
probable fall in average earnings in 2009. To
finance the resulting higher (relative) pension
level, the contribution rate does not need to
be raised initially as there are still reserves
that can be drawn on. As pension cuts
waived in the past owing to the safeguard
clause are also to be clawed back in the com-
ing years by halving the pension increases
due at those times, no more than minor rises
are to be expected for the foreseeable future
if current legislation is applied.
Federal Employment Agency
The Federal Employment Agency recorded a
deficit of almost 314 billion in 2009, com-
pared with an operating surplus of 311/C252bil-
lion a year earlier (ie excluding the one-off
payment of 32.5 billion to the pension fund
set up in 200812). This financial deterioration
primarily reflects the automatic stabilisation
effect of the Federal Employment Agency.
However, the labour market was compara-
tively robust during the economic crisis. Rev-
enue declined by a total of 101/C252% on the
year. The main factor behind this was the
lowering of the contribution rate from 3.3%
to 2.8% at the beginning of 2009. Had the
contribution rate remained the same, revenueFinances of the
German statutory
pension insurance scheme
Deutsche Bundesbank2007 2008 20095658606264
–20+2+4Quarterly
€ bn€ bn
Lin scale
Surplus (+) or deficit (–)ExpenditureLog scale
Revenue
11In the 2009 Old-age Provision Report (Bundestags-
Drucksache 17/52 of 20 November 2009), the Federal
Government expected gross wages and salaries per em-
ployee to rise by 0.7% and the number of employees to
decline by 2.0% in 2010. In its Annual Economic Report,
it now expects per capita earnings to increase by 0.9%
and employment to decline by 1.1%.
12By contrast, the pension fund posted a small surplus
of just under 31/C252billion in 2009. Building up reserves by
means of ongoing transfers from the Federal Employ-
ment Agency continued to outweigh spending, especially
on civil servant pensions.2010 deficit
also attribut-
able to
extended
pension
guaranteeHigh deficit in
2009
Decline in
revenue mainly
brought about
by lowering
contribution
rate

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
February 2010
77would have only fallen slightly by just under
1/C252%.
Again adjusted for the one-off transfers to
the pension fund in 2008, expenditure by theFederal Employment Agency rose by 30%, or311 billion. At almost 317
1/C252billion, close to
331/C252billion more was spent on unemploy-
ment benefit I. Payments for short-time work-ing benefits increased from just under 3
1/C252bil-
lion to just over 331/C252billion, and expenditure
on active labour market policy measures (in-cluding refunds of social contributions forshort-time work made to employers, whichare recorded here) was up by almost 33 bil-
lion. Insolvency benefit payments rose tomore than two-and-a-half times their prioryear amount owing to the crisis, and a rev-enue gap of approximately 31 billion, which
is to be plugged in 2010, arose from the in-solvency benefit contributions, which wereset in advance for the first time.
13
The Federal Employment Agency’s reserveswere depleted to just under 33 billion by the
end of 2009. The Federal Employment Agen-cy’s 2010 budget plan envisages a deficit ofalmost 318 billion. However, this is based on
macroeconomic projections from October2009, which, in particular, foresaw an in-crease in the number of unemployed personsto 4.1 million. In its Annual Economic Report,the Federal Government is currently expect-ing a much smaller increase to 3.7 million.This should mean that the Federal Employ-ment Agency’s deficit, while still at a highlevel, is markedly lower in 2010.This year, on a one-off basis, central govern-
ment’s payments to the Federal EmploymentAgency to offset the deficit are to take theform of a non-repayable grant rather than aloan. This ultimately constitutes tax financingof insurance benefits. As the current contri-bution rate of 2.8% (3.0% from 2011), to-Finances of the
Federal Employment Agency
1 Excluding central government liquidity as-
sistance. — 2 Including transfers to the civil 
servants ’ pension fund set up in 2008.
Deutsche Bundesbank2007 2008 20096810121416
1.82.43.03.64.24.85.46.06.6
6420246
–––+++Quarterly
€ bn€ bnLog scale
Expenditure, 
total 2Revenue 1
Expenditure on ...
... vocational training... unemployment
    benefit and short-time    working benefits
Lin scale
Surplus (+) or deficit (–)€ bn
13For this purpose, the contribution rate for insolvency
benefit payments was raised from 0.1% to 0.41% of the
respective gross wages and salaries.Growth in
expenditure
due to crisis
2010 deficit
likely to be
lower than
forecast
Contribution
rate not
sufficient to
structurally
cover
expenditure

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
EUROSYSTEM
Monthly Report
February 2010
78gether with other revenue, is not sufficient to
structurally cover the Federal Employment
Agency’s expenditure, benefits either have to
be cut permanently or the contribution rate
has to be raised. Otherwise, the Federal Em-ployment Agency will remain dependent on
extensive central government funds to bal-
ance its budget even in normal economic
times.

Statistical
Section
1*DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
February 2010

ContentsI Key economic data for the euro area
1 Monetary developments and interest
rates 5*
2 External transactions and positions 5*
3 General economic indicators 6*
II Overall monetary survey in the
euro area
1 The money stock and its counterparts 8*
2 Consolidated balance sheet of mon-
etary financial institutions (MFIs) 10*
3 Banking system’s liquidity position 14*
III Consolidated financial statement
of the Eurosystem
1 Assets 16*2 Liabilities 18*
IV Banks
1 Assets and liabilities of monetary
financial institutions (excluding theBundesbank) in Germany 20*
2 Principal assets and liabilities of banks
(MFIs) in Germany, by category ofbanks 24*
3 Assets and liabilities of banks (MFIs)
in Germany vis-/C224-vis residents 26*
4 Assets and liabilities of banks (MFIs)
in Germany vis-/C224-vis non-residents 28*
2*DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
EUROSYSTEM
Monthly Report
February 2010

5 Lending by banks (MFIs) in Germany
to domestic non-banks (non-MFIs) 30*
6 Lending by banks (MFIs) in Germany
to domestic enterprises and house-
holds, housing loans, sectors of
economic activity 32*
7 Deposits of domestic non-banks
(non-MFIs) at banks (MFIs)
in Germany 34*
8 Deposits of domestic households
and non-profit institutions atbanks (MFIs) in Germany 36*
9 Deposits of domestic government
at banks (MFIs) in Germany, bycreditor group 36*
10 Savings deposits and bank savings
bonds of banks (MFIs) in Germanysold to non-banks (non-MFIs) 38*
11 Debt securities and money market
paper outstanding of banks (MFIs)in Germany 38*
12 Building and loan associations (MFIs)
in Germany 39*
13 Assets and liabilities of the foreign
branches and foreign subsidiaries ofGerman banks (MFIs) 40*
V Minimum reserves
1 Reserve ratios 42*2 Reserve maintenance in Germany up
to the end of 1998 42*
3 Reserve maintenance in the euro
area 42*VI Interest rates
1 ECB interest rates 43*
2 Base rates 43*3 Eurosystem monetary policy oper-
ations allotted through tenders 43*
4 Money market rates, by month 43*
5 Interest rates for outstanding
amounts and new business ofbanks (MFIs) in the Europeanmonetary union 44*
6 Interest rates and volumes for out-
standing amounts and new business
of German banks (MFIs) 45*
VII Capital market
1 Sales and purchases of debt securities
and shares in Germany 48*
2 Sales of debt securities issued by
residents 49*
3 Amounts outstanding of debt
securities issued by residents 50*
4 Shares in circulation issued by
residents 50*
5 Yields and indices on German
securities 51*
6 Sales and purchases of mutual
fund shares in Germany 51*
VIII Financial accounts
1 Acquisition of financial assets and
financing of private non-financialsectors 52*
2 Financial assets and liabilities of private
non-financial sectors 53*
3*DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
February 2010

IX Public finances in Germany
1 General government: deficit and debt
level as defined in the Maastricht Treaty 54*
2 General government: revenue,
expenditure and fiscal deficit/surplus
as shown in the national accounts 54*
3 General government: budgetary
development (as per government’sfinancial statistics) 55*
4 Central, state and local government:
budgetary development (as per
government’s financial statistics) 55*
5 Central, state and local government:
tax revenue 56*
6 Central and state government and
European Union: tax revenue, by type 56*
7 Central, state and local government:
individual taxes 57*
8 German pension insurance scheme:
budgetary development and assets 57*
9 Federal Employment Agency:
budgetary development 58*
10 Statutory health insurance scheme:
budgetary development 58*
11 Statutory long-term care insurance
scheme: budgetary development 59*
12 Central government: borrowing in
the market 59*
13 Central, state and local government:
debt by creditor 59*
14 Central, state and local government:
debt by category 60*
X Economic conditions in Germany
1 Origin and use of domestic product,
distribution of national income 61*
2 Output in the production sector 62*3 Orders received by industry 63*
4 Orders received by construction 64*5 Retail trade turnover 64*
6 Labour market 65*
7 Prices 66*8 Households’ income 67*9 Pay rates and actual earnings 67*
XI External sector
1 Major items of the balance of
payments of the euro area 68*
2 Major items of the balance of
payments of the Federal Republicof Germany 69*
3 Foreign trade (special trade) of the
Federal Republic of Germany, bycountry and group of countries 70*
4 Services and income of the
Federal Republic of Germany 71*
5 Current transfers of the Federal
Republic of Germany 71*
6 Capital transfers 71*7 Financial account of the Federal
Republic of Germany 72*
8 External position of the Bundesbank 73*9 External position of the Bundesbank
in the euro area 73*
10 Assets and liabilities of enterprises
in Germany (other than banks)vis-/C224-vis non-residents 74*
11 ECB euro reference exchange rates
of selected currencies 75*
12 Irrevocable euro conversion rates in
Stage III of European Economic and Mon-
etary Union 75*
13 Effective exchange rates of the euro
and indicators of the Germaneconomy’s price competitiveness 76*
4*DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
EUROSYSTEM
Monthly Report
February 2010

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
February 2010
 I Key economic data for the euro area  
 
1 Monetary developments and interest rates
 
 
 
 
 Money stock in various definitions  1,2 Determinants of the money stock  1 Interest rates
 M 3  3 
MFI lending to Yield on Euro-
 3-month enterprises Monetary pean govern-
MFI lending, and capital 3-month ment bonds moving  average
M1 M2 (centred) total households formation  4 Eonia  5,7 Euribor  6,7 outstanding  8 
Period Annual percentage change % per annum as a monthly average
2008          Apr 2.5 10.5 10.5 10.3 10.4 12.7 7.1 3.99 4.78 4.3
         May 2.4 10.3 10.2 10.1 10.0 12.6 7.2 4.01 4.86 4.4
         June 1.6 9.7 9.7 9.7 9.7 11.9 6.4 4.01 4.94 4.8
         July 0.3 9.2 9.2 9.3 9.7 11.7 6.0 4.19 4.96 4.7
         Aug 0.2 8.9 8.9 8.9 9.9 11.6 6.3 4.30 4.97 4.5
         Sep 1.2 9.0 8.7 8.8 9.2 10.8 6.2 4.27 5.02 4.4
         Oct 3.6 9.3 8.7 8.4 8.0 9.5 4.5 3.82 5.11 4.3
         Nov 2.2 8.7 7.7 8.0 8.0 9.1 5.1 3.15 4.24 4.1
         Dec 3.3 8.3 7.6 7.1 7.0 7.8 4.3 2.49 3.29 3.7
2009          Jan 5.2 7.6 6.0 6.5 6.7 7.1 4.9 1.81 2.46 3.9
         Feb 6.2 7.0 5.9 5.7 6.5 6.4 5.7 1.26 1.94 4.0
         Mar 6.1 6.3 5.2 5.3 5.7 5.2 5.3 1.06 1.64 3.9
         Apr 8.3 5.9 4.9 4.7 4.8 4.2 5.2 0.84 1.42 3.9
         May 8.2 5.2 3.9 4.1 4.4 3.6 5.7 0.78 1.28 4.0
         June 9.5 5.0 3.7 3.5 4.6 3.4 6.1 0.70 1.23 4.2
         July 12.1 4.6 2.9 3.0 3.7 2.3 6.0 0.36 0.97 4.0
         Aug 13.4 4.5 2.4 2.4 3.2 1.6 6.3 0.35 0.86 3.8
         Sep 12.8 3.6 1.8 1.5 3.4 1.4 6.5 0.36 0.77 3.8
         Oct 11.8 2.4 0.3 0.6 3.2 0.9 7.3 0.36 0.74 3.7
         Nov 12.5 1.8 − 0.3 − 0.1 2.7 0.7 7.2 0.36 0.72 3.7
         Dec 12.3 1.6 − 0.2 ... 2.4 0.7 6.7 0.35 0.71 3.7
2010          Jan ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 0.34 0.68 3.8
1 Source: ECB. — 2 Seasonally adjusted. — 3 Excluding money market fund euro-area non-MFIs. — 5 Euro OverNight Index Average. — 6 Euro
shares/units, money market paper and debt securities with a maturity of up Interbank Offered Rate. — 7 See also footnotes to Table VI.4, p 43*. —
to two years held by non-euro-area residents. — 4 Longer-term liabilities to 8  GDP-weighted yield on ten-year government bonds. 
 
 
2 External transactions and positions  * 
 
 
 
Selected items of the euro-area balance of payments Euro exchange rates  1 
Current account Capital account Effective exchange rate  3 
of which Direct Securities Other Reserve
Balance Trade balance Balance investment investment assets Dollar rate Nominal Real  4 transactions  2 
Period € million Euro/US-$ Q1 1999 = 100
2008          Apr − 10,983 + 4,924 + 9,088 − 24,158 − 22,124 + 58,628 − 3,257 1.5751 113.7 113.2
         May − 27,790 − 2,245 + 24,806 − 5,355 − 13,269 + 40,701 + 2,729 1.5557 113.2 112.9
         June − 4,061 + 2,207 + 55 − 15,329 + 38,264 − 23,407 + 527 1.5553 113.0 112.7
         July − 8,270 − 150 + 23,718 + 9,597 + 7,053 + 9,336 − 2,268 1.5770 113.2 112.7
         Aug − 15,394 − 7,759 + 10,773 − 11,607 + 11,563 + 8,526 + 2,290 1.4975 110.9 110.3
         Sep − 10,986 − 2,495 + 23,852 − 21,606 + 87,834 − 43,996 + 1,620 1.4370 109.3 108.5
         Oct − 9,122 + 3,159 + 12,793 − 4,811 + 101,749 − 76,161 − 7,985 1.3322 105.8 105.2
         Nov − 17,412 − 4,797 + 12,656 − 53,471 + 39,872 + 26,663 − 408 1.2732 105.0 104.5
         Dec − 5,675 − 249 + 16,091 − 2,839 − 2,278 + 13,356 + 7,853 1.3449 110.2 109.7
2009          Jan − 24,040 − 10,635 + 31,818 − 22,826 − 3,068 + 52,389 + 5,323 1.3239 109.8 109.2
         Feb − 5,371 − 88 + 11,196 − 11,737 + 65,998 − 44,267 + 1,202 1.2785 108.7 108.0
         Mar − 8,588 + 2,986 + 12,746 − 24,259 + 61,644 − 23,789 − 849 1.3050 111.1 110.3
         Apr − 10,779 + 4,087 + 12,435 + 6,643 + 8,497 − 2,855 + 149 1.3190 110.3 109.5
         May − 13,738 + 2,159 + 13,009 + 10,873 + 47,101 − 42,794 − 2,171 1.3650 110.8 109.9
         June + 2,852 + 6,864 − 11,521 − 21,809 + 46,030 − 35,334 − 408 1.4016 112.0 111.1
         July + 9,134 + 13,602 − 13,024 + 895 − 16,463 + 6,243 − 3,698 1.4088 111.6 110.5
         Aug − 5,954 − 1,786 − 5,966 + 4,753 + 17,194 − 28,677 + 763 1.4268 111.7 110.6
         Sep − 5,863 + 1,435 + 32,977 − 29,899 + 78,474 − 18,868 + 3,270 1.4562 112.9 111.6
         Oct − 3,919 + 6,199 + 4,450 − 1,956 + 18,007 − 10,973 − 629 1.4816 114.3 112.9
         Nov + 101 + 6,763 − 638 − 345 − 15,584 + 14,944 + 347 1.4914 114.0 112.5
         Dec ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 1.4614 113.0 111.3
2010          Jan ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 1.4272 110.8 109.1
*  Source: ECB. — 1  See also Tables XI.12 and 13, pp 75−76. — 2  Including
financial derivatives. — 3  Vis-à-vis the currencies of The-EER-21 group. —
4  Based on consumer prices. 
5* I Key economic data for the euro area 

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
E U R O S Y S T E M
Monthly Report
February 2010
I. Key economic data for the euro area 
 
3  General economic indicators
 
 
                   
 
Period Euro area Belgium Germany Finland France Greece Ireland Italy
 
Real gross domestic product 1,2
 
2007 2.8 2.9 2.5 4.2 2.3 4.5 6.0 1.6
2008 0.6 1.0 1.3 1.0 0.4 2.0 − 3.0 − 1.0
2009 ... ... − 5.0 ... ... ... ... ...
2008          Q3 0.4 1.2 1.4 1.8 0.4 2.0 − 1.0 − 0.9
         Q4 − 1.8 − 0.9 − 1.7 − 2.6 − 1.8 0.7 − 8.0 − 2.9
2009          Q1 − 5.0 − 4.0 − 6.4 − 7.5 − 3.3 − 0.5 − 9.1 − 6.5
         Q2 − 4.8 − 4.4 − 7.0 − 9.2 − 3.3 − 1.2 − 7.9 − 6.2
         Q3 − 4.0 − 2.9 − 4.7 − 9.1 − 2.0 − 1.7 − 7.4 − 4.3
         Q4 − 2.1 ... − 1.7 ... ... ... ... ...
 
Industrial production 1,3
 
2007 3.7 2.9 6.0 4.8 1.2 2.3 5.0 2.1
2008 − 1.7 − 0.6 0.0 1.1 − 2.5 − 4.2 − 1.5 − 3.3
2009 e − 15.0 ... 9p − 17.0 − 21.2 − 12.1 p − 9.3 p − 2.6 − 17.6
2008          Q3 − 1.4 1.4 0.0 2.1 − 2.1 − 3.1 − 0.1 − 4.1
         Q4 − 8.9 − 7.8 − 7.6 − 6.8 − 8.9 − 7.5 − 7.1 − 10.3
2009          Q1 − 18.4 − 16.5 − 20.5 − 21.9 − 15.8 − 8.1 − 2.6 − 21.3
         Q2 − 18.6 − 17.5 − 20.6 − 24.0 − 15.7 − 11.3 − 1.1 − 22.1
         Q3 − 14.5 − 13.8 − 16.5 − 22.3 − 10.9 − 9.9 − 2.8 − 17.1
         Q4 e − 7.8 ... 10p − 10.0 − 16.3 − 5.4 p − 7.8 p − 3.9 − 8.6
 
Capacity utilisation in industry 4
 
2007 84.3 83.2 87.5 87.3 86.6 76.9 76.6 78.2
2008 83.0 82.9 86.5 84.4 85.8 76.4 ... 75.9
2009 71.4 72.3 72.8 67.7 73.0 70.7 ... 66.7
2008          Q4 81.5 82.4 84.8 81.9 84.1 75.4 ... 75.2
2009          Q1 74.6 75.4 76.2 72.0 76.0 73.4 ... 70.4
         Q2 70.2 70.4 71.8 66.5 71.2 70.3 ... 66.2
         Q3 69.6 71.5 71.1 65.3 70.8 68.3 ... 64.6
         Q4 71.0 72.0 72.1 67.0 74.1 70.6 ... 65.6
2010          Q1 72.4 73.7 73.9 74.6 74.7 69.0 ... 66.7
 
Unemployment rate 5
 
2007 7.5 7.5 8.4 6.9 8.4 8.3 4.6 6.1
2008 7.5 7.0 7.3 6.4 7.8 7.7 6.0 6.7
2009 9.4 7.9 7.5 8.2 9.4 ... 11.8 ...
2009          July 9.5 7.9 7.6 8.5 9.5 9.7 12.0 7.7
         Aug 9.6 8.0 7.6 8.6 9.6 9.7 12.1 7.7
         Sep 9.8 8.0 7.6 8.7 9.7 9.7 12.5 8.0
         Oct 9.9 8.1 7.5 8.8 9.9 ... 12.6 8.2
         Nov 9.9 8.1 7.5 8.9 10.0 ... 13.0 8.3
         Dec 10.0 8.2 7.5 8.8 10.0 ... 13.3 8.5
 
Harmonised Index of Consumer Prices 1
 
2007 6 2.1 1.8 2.3 1.6 1.6 3.0 2.9 2.0
2008 7 3.3 4.5 2.8 3.9 3.2 4.2 3.1 3.5
2009 8p 0.3 0.0 0.2 1.6 0.1 1.3 − 1.7 0.8
2009          Aug − 0.2 − 0.7 − 0.1 1.3 − 0.2 1.0 − 2.4 0.1
         Sep − 0.3 − 1.0 − 0.5 1.1 − 0.4 0.7 − 3.0 0.4
         Oct − 0.1 − 0.9 − 0.1 0.6 − 0.2 1.2 − 2.8 0.3
         Nov 0.5 0.0 0.3 1.3 0.5 2.1 − 2.8 0.8
         Dec p 0.9 0.3 0.8 1.8 1.0 2.6 − 2.6 1.1
2010          Jan e 1.0 ... 0.8 ... ... ... − 2.4 ...
 
General government financial balance 9
 
2006 − 1.3 0.3 − 1.6 4.0 − 2.3 − 2.9 3.0 − 3.3
2007 − 0.6 − 0.2 0.2 5.2 − 2.7 − 3.7 0.3 − 1.5
2008 − 2.0 − 1.2 0.0 4.5 − 3.4 − 7.7 − 7.2 − 2.7
 
General government debt 9
 
2006 68.2 88.1 67.6 39.3 63.7 97.1 25.0 106.5
2007 65.9 84.2 65.0 35.2 63.8 95.6 25.1 103.5
2008 69.3 89.8 65.9 34.1 67.4 99.2 44.1 105.8
Sources: National data, European Commission, Eurostat, European Central for working-day variations. — 4  Manufacturing, in %; seasonally adjusted;
Bank. Latest data are partly based on press reports and are provisional. — data are collected in January, April, July and October. — 5  Standardised, as
1  Annual percentage change. — 2  GDP of the euro area calculated from a percentage of the civilian labour force; seasonally adjusted. — 6  Including
seasonally adjusted data. — 3  Manufacturing, mining and energy; adjusted
6*I. Key economic data for the euro area 

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
February 2010
I.  Key economic data for the euro area 
 
3  General economic indicators
 
 
                   
 
Luxembourg Malta Netherlands Austria Portugal Slovakia Slovenia Spain Cyprus Period
 
Real gross domestic product 1,2
 
6.5 4.0 3.6 3.5 1.9 10.6 6.8 3.6 5.1 2007
0.0 2.1 2.0 2.0 0.0 6.2 3.5 0.9 3.6 2008
... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 2009
− 0.7 2.5 1.9 2.3 0.5 6.8 3.6 0.9 3.3 2008          Q3
− 4.7 0.8 − 0.7 − 0.3 − 1.8 1.6 − 0.8 − 0.9 2.4          Q4
− 6.3 − 1.7 − 4.5 − 4.9 − 4.5 − 5.7 − 8.2 − 3.9 0.7 2009          Q1
− 7.3 − 3.3 − 5.5 − 5.1 − 4.1 − 5.5 − 9.2 − 5.1 − 1.5          Q2
− 2.5 − 2.1 − 3.7 − 3.2 − 2.5 − 4.9 − 8.3 − 3.4 − 2.5          Q3
... ... − 2.2 − 1.5 ... − 2.7 ... ... − 2.7          Q4
 
Industrial production1,3
 
− 0.6 − 2.3 5.9 0.1 15.0 7.2 2.0 4.6 2007
− 5.3 − 1.5 1.2 − 4.1 3.2 2.1 − 7.3 4.2 2008
... − − 7.8 ... − 8.6 ... − 17.4 − 15.8 ... 2009
2.1 − 0.5 1.2 − 2.3 5.5 2.6 − 6.3 4.3 2008          Q3
− 17.9 − − 6.4 − 4.5 − 6.8 − 11.4 − 8.1 − 16.6 − 0.5          Q4
− 24.7 − − 9.9 − 12.5 − 12.5 − 22.0 − 19.3 − 22.6 − 8.9 2009          Q1
− 21.3 − − 12.6 − 16.6 − 9.7 − 21.2 − 23.4 − 18.6 − 11.1          Q2
− 17.3 − − 7.0 − 13.1 − 7.4 − 11.2 − 18.4 − 14.6 − 8.8          Q3
... − − 1.9 ... − 4.3 ... − 7.5 − 5.6 ...          Q4
 
Capacity utilisation in industry 4
 
87.3 80.8 83.6 85.2 81.8 73.6 85.9 81.0 70.0 2007
85.1 79.0 83.4 83.0 79.8 72.0 84.1 79.2 72.0 2008
69.2 69.7 75.9 74.8 72.6 53.7 71.1 70.0 66.3 2009
83.9 75.9 82.9 81.9 79.0 68.9 82.6 76.4 70.1 2008          Q4
72.6 69.0 77.5 77.2 76.4 53.3 75.2 73.5 69.5 2009          Q1
65.2 65.9 74.6 73.2 70.6 50.9 69.1 69.8 66.7          Q2
67.4 71.0 75.5 73.5 71.5 51.9 69.3 67.9 64.8          Q3
71.6 73.0 76.0 75.2 72.0 58.8 70.7 68.8 64.3          Q4
77.5 77.3 77.3 75.8 75.1 58.1 73.0 68.9 61.7 2010          Q1
 
Unemployment rate 5
 
4.2 6.4 3.2 4.4 8.1 11.1 4.9 8.3 4.0 2007
4.9 5.9 2.8 3.8 7.7 9.5 4.4 11.4 3.6 2008
5.7 7.0 3.5 5.0 9.6 11.9 6.0 18.1 5.3 2009
5.9 7.3 3.5 5.1 9.8 12.1 6.3 18.4 5.4 2009          July
5.9 7.1 3.7 5.2 9.9 12.6 6.4 18.7 5.6          Aug 
5.9 7.1 3.7 5.5 10.0 13.0 6.5 19.0 5.9          Sep 
6.0 6.9 3.9 5.6 10.2 13.3 6.8 19.2 6.0          Oct 
6.1 7.0 3.9 5.5 10.3 13.5 6.8 19.4 6.1          Nov 
6.2 7.2 4.0 5.4 10.4 13.6 6.8 19.5 6.1          Dec 
 
Harmonised Index of Consumer Prices 1
 
2.7 0.7 1.6 2.2 2.4 1.9 3.8 2.8 2.2 2007
4.1 4.7 2.2 3.2 2.7 3.9 5.5 4.1 4.4 2008
0.0 1.8 1.0 p 0.4 − 0.9 0.9 0.9 − 0.3 0.2 2009
− 0.2 1.0 − 0.1 0.2 − 1.2 0.5 0.1 − 0.8 − 0.9 2009          Aug 
− 0.4 0.8 0.0 0.0 − 1.8 0.0 0.0 − 1.0 − 1.2          Sep 
− 0.2 − 0.5 0.4 0.1 − 1.6 − 0.1 0.2 − 0.6 − 1.0          Oct 
1.7 − 0.1 0.7 0.6 − 0.8 0.0 1.8 0.4 1.0          Nov 
2.5 − 0.4 0.7 p 1.1 − 0.1 0.0 2.1 0.9 1.6          Dec 
... ... p 0.4 ... 0.1 ... ... ... ... 2010          Jan 
 
General government financial balance 9
 
1.3 − 2.6 0.5 − 1.6 − 3.9 − 3.5 − 1.3 2.0 − 1.2 2006
3.7 − 2.2 0.2 − 0.6 − 2.6 − 1.9 0.0 1.9 3.4 2007
2.5 − 4.7 0.7 − 0.4 − 2.7 − 2.3 − 1.8 − 4.1 0.9 2008
 
General government debt 9
 
6.6 63.6 47.4 62.2 64.7 30.5 26.7 39.6 64.6 2006
6.6 62.0 45.5 59.5 63.6 29.3 23.3 36.1 58.3 2007
13.5 63.8 58.2 62.6 66.3 27.7 22.5 39.7 48.4 2008
Slovenia from 2007 onwards. — 7  Including Malta and Cyprus from 2008 states: European Commission (Maastricht Treaty definition). —
onwards. — 8  Including Slovakia from 2009 onwards. — 9  As a percentage 10  Provisional; adjusted in advance by the Federal Statistical Office by way
of GDP; euro-area aggregate: European Central Bank (ESA 1995), member of estimates to the results of the Quarterly Production Survey. 
7*I.  Key economic data for the euro area 

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
E U R O S Y S T E M
Monthly Report
February 2010
II Overall monetary survey in the euro area 
 
1 The money stock and its counterparts *
  
(a) Euro area 
  
€ billion
I Lending to non-banks (non-MFIs) II Net claims on III Monetary capital formation at monetary
in the euro area non-euro-area residents financial institutions (MFIs) in the euro area
Enterprises General
and households government Debt
Deposits securities
Liabil- with an Deposits with
Claims ities to agreed at agreed maturities
on non- non-euro- maturity notice of of over Capital
of which of which euro-area area of over over 2 years and
Period Total Total Total Total residents residents Total 2 years 3 months (net)  2 Securities Securities reserves  3 
2008          May 95.8 93.9 26.6 1.8 9.4 − 75.4 − 24.6 50.8 27.5 22.8 − 1.7 15.7 − 9.3
         June 61.3 52.7 − 16.3 8.6 − 3.6 2.0 − 140.1 − 142.1 43.5 16.2 − 0.9 17.6 10.6
         July 102.8 98.9 41.3 3.8 2.8 − 6.9 25.2 32.0 33.1 3.0 − 0.7 16.0 15.0
         Aug 24.1 30.9 34.4 − 6.9 − 0.1 − 2.1 15.5 17.5 15.8 3.0 − 1.3 − 0.5 14.6
         Sep 40.0 67.8 − 19.5 − 27.8 − 38.0 27.6 12.5 − 15.1 8.3 − 13.4 − 1.3 − 10.8 33.9
         Oct 17.8 25.3 8.4 − 7.6 − 7.1 79.0 − 48.2 − 127.1 − 40.8 − 0.7 2.6 − 66.3 23.6
         Nov 117.0 78.6 60.0 38.4 40.7 5.5 − 85.9 − 91.4 40.6 26.0 3.4 − 9.0 20.2
         Dec 3.4 − 8.9 62.4 12.3 18.9 − 21.5 − 185.7 − 164.2 58.8 43.0 3.7 11.5 0.7
2009          Jan 102.2 32.2 6.7 70.0 56.0 − 87.0 − 37.4 49.7 53.5 31.7 2.1 6.8 12.9
         Feb 25.2 − 8.5 13.8 33.6 37.0 48.6 − 106.2 − 154.8 42.3 13.2 − 0.3 23.8 5.6
         Mar 54.6 14.3 12.2 40.3 49.0 − 22.8 − 130.5 − 107.7 18.9 22.9 0.4 1.8 − 6.2
         Apr 76.7 44.2 48.3 32.4 21.2 38.5 41.2 2.7 16.2 15.0 0.1 − 5.3 6.3
         May 36.7 23.4 9.5 13.3 20.7 23.7 − 52.5 − 76.2 57.9 23.7 1.3 23.9 9.1
         June 105.4 34.7 3.1 70.6 47.5 42.4 − 51.8 − 94.2 75.4 20.7 0.8 13.5 40.3
         July − 33.3 − 40.2 − 10.0 6.9 6.2 11.5 − 39.2 − 50.7 26.5 13.7 1.1 9.4 2.3
         Aug − 54.4 − 62.8 − 1.0 8.3 3.5 26.4 − 22.9 − 49.2 39.2 6.9 0.7 18.6 13.1
         Sep 70.1 50.1 5.2 20.0 29.4 − 6.2 − 29.3 − 23.1 20.4 14.1 1.0 − 6.9 12.3
         Oct − 7.4 − 38.9 − 0.9 31.5 11.9 12.4 13.2 0.8 6.3 1.7 2.2 − 0.6 2.9
         Nov 40.8 44.6 13.8 − 3.8 1.1 − 5.9 4.2 10.1 34.9 9.7 0.6 10.0 14.6
         Dec − 36.9 3.5 − 2.3 − 40.4 − 35.0 72.8 − 52.4 − 125.2 30.7 20.8 − 1.1 − 16.1 27.1
  
  
(b) German contribution
 
I Lending to non-banks (non-MFIs) II Net claims on III Monetary capital formation at monetary
in the euro area non-euro-area residents financial institutions (MFIs) in the euro area
Enterprises General
and households government Debt
Deposits securities
Liabil- with an Deposits with
Claims ities to agreed at agreed maturities
on non- non-euro- maturity notice of of over Capital
of which of which euro-area area of over over 2 years and
Period Total Total Total Total residents residents Total 2 years 3 months (net)  2 Securities Securities reserves  3 
2008          May − 12.8 − 7.1 − 14.3 − 5.8 − 0.6 5.8 − 6.7 − 12.5 − 12.3 0.1 − 1.4 − 4.3 − 6.8
         June − 16.9 − 4.1 − 24.2 − 12.8 − 11.8 − 1.1 − 32.5 − 31.4 3.6 − 0.3 − 0.8 0.7 4.0
         July 10.1 13.9 2.7 − 3.8 − 3.8 0.1 − 6.8 − 6.9 5.7 − 0.4 − 0.5 − 0.2 6.9
         Aug 25.7 30.3 25.8 − 4.6 − 4.2 − 10.2 − 5.1 5.1 − 1.5 − 1.0 − 1.1 − 1.7 2.3
         Sep 1.3 18.6 2.2 − 17.3 − 14.8 34.7 71.4 36.7 − 7.4 − 3.0 − 1.1 − 6.3 2.9
         Oct − 9.9 − 12.8 − 10.7 3.0 1.2 23.2 − 2.8 − 26.0 − 14.2 − 3.1 3.0 − 16.8 2.8
         Nov 7.4 12.0 1.2 − 4.6 − 2.5 − 38.2 − 76.5 − 38.3 − 5.6 0.8 3.7 − 9.9 − 0.3
         Dec 13.7 15.4 30.8 − 1.7 − 0.8 − 6.5 − 31.1 − 24.7 27.3 29.8 3.8 − 18.0 11.7
2009          Jan 36.2 29.7 7.1 6.5 6.9 − 58.9 − 53.5 5.4 1.0 3.7 0.0 − 0.6 − 2.2
         Feb − 9.0 − 6.6 6.7 − 2.4 − 0.3 − 1.7 − 24.7 − 23.0 − 13.6 6.8 − 0.0 − 9.7 − 10.7
         Mar 9.2 13.7 − 3.6 − 4.6 − 0.1 − 31.3 − 35.7 − 4.3 − 3.1 2.6 0.8 − 6.8 0.4
         Apr 20.1 13.4 12.0 6.7 4.9 19.7 40.7 21.0 − 8.3 3.9 0.2 − 5.9 − 6.5
         May − 3.2 − 4.1 − 8.5 1.0 5.1 28.5 − 4.9 − 33.4 3.2 2.6 1.5 2.7 − 3.6
         June 15.8 16.1 5.0 − 0.3 1.6 − 27.4 − 23.6 3.8 30.2 13.6 1.0 − 3.0 18.6
         July − 8.5 − 23.3 − 3.6 14.8 1.9 − 25.3 − 31.6 − 6.3 − 7.1 0.9 1.2 − 9.0 − 0.2
         Aug − 27.5 − 18.8 − 6.4 − 8.7 − 3.2 2.0 − 13.2 − 15.2 1.5 1.9 0.8 1.8 − 2.9
         Sep 22.3 18.7 0.5 3.6 6.5 − 6.7 − 28.0 − 21.3 − 12.0 2.9 1.2 − 17.1 0.9
         Oct − 0.1 − 19.2 − 5.1 19.1 7.3 9.2 − 0.9 − 10.1 − 0.5 − 0.9 2.4 − 1.3 − 0.7
         Nov − 0.4 6.6 2.4 − 7.0 1.3 − 0.6 − 1.3 − 0.8 − 1.0 2.3 0.9 − 10.1 6.0
         Dec − 37.5 − 30.1 − 9.7 − 7.4 − 1.4 16.8 − 8.9 − 25.7 − 12.5 0.7 − 1.1 − 12.7 0.6
*The data in this table are based on the consolidated balance sheet of deduction of inter-MFI participations. — 4Including the counterparts of
monetary financial institutions (MFIs) (Table II.2); statistical breaks have monetary liabilities of central governments. — 5Including the monetary
been eliminated from the flow figures (see also the “Notes on the figures“ liabilities of central governments (Post Office, Treasury). — 6In Germany,
in the “Explanatory notes“ in the Statistical Supplement to the Monthly only savings deposits. — 7Paper held by residents outside the euro area has
Report 1, p 30). — 1Source: ECB. — 2Excluding MFIs’ portfolios. — 3After been eliminated. — 8Less German MFIs’ holdings of paper issued by
8*II Overall monetary survey in the euro area 

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
February 2010
II Overall monetary survey in the euro area
 
 
 
(a) Euro area 
 
V Other factors VI Money stock M3 (balance I plus II less III less IV less V)
Money stock M2 Debt secur-
of which ities with
Intra- Money stock M1 maturities
Eurosystem Deposits of up to
liability/ with an Deposits Money 2 years
IV De- claim agreed at agreed market (incl money
posits of related to Currency maturity notice of Repo fund market    
banknote in circu- Overnight of up to up to 3 transac- shares paper)    central  gov-
ernments Total  4 issue Total Total Total lation deposits  5 2 years  5 tions (net)  2,7  Period (net)  2,7,8 months  5,6 
− 24.0 − 69.0 − 85.8 61.3 28.8 4.3 24.4 36.1 − 3.6 4.5 4.7 15.4 2008          May
37.3 − 41.2 − 23.5 49.5 48.2 6.4 41.8 4.7 − 3.4 − 3.0 − 23.2 0.3          June
− 30.4 64.3 − 28.9 11.0 − 77.7 6.7 − 84.4 98.5 − 9.8 2.9 8.8 6.2          July
5.9 − 15.5 − 15.7 − 0.9 − 52.6 − 2.7 − 49.9 54.2 − 2.5 9.8 14.6 − 7.7          Aug 
4.5 − 2.7 − 57.5 72.0 83.5 1.1 82.4 − 1.5 − 10.1 2.4 − 27.6 10.8          Sep 
65.1 − 28.6 − 101.1 104.3 56.4 41.7 14.7 52.4 − 4.6 5.0 − 1.3 − 7.0          Oct 
69.9 − 32.2 − 44.3 49.6 25.5 4.8 20.7 19.7 4.4 − 12.6 10.1 − 2.8          Nov 
− 66.5 − 80.8 − 70.5 103.7 74.7 19.2 55.5 − 15.1 44.2 − 6.3 − 19.2 − 7.7          Dec 
62.5 − 19.1 − − 81.7 − 64.6 22.1 − 11.9 34.0 − 131.7 45.1 − 6.4 34.8 − 45.6 2009          Jan 
14.0 2.4 − 15.1 − 6.7 4.5 3.6 0.9 − 34.3 23.0 3.4 20.2 − 1.7          Feb 
12.7 − 0.3 − 0.4 10.7 33.5 4.0 29.5 − 43.2 20.5 11.2 0.9 − 22.4          Mar 
− 14.0 31.4 − 81.6 68.9 82.6 9.3 73.3 − 36.4 22.8 − 0.3 2.3 10.7          Apr 
− 5.9 14.0 − − 5.7 4.3 26.9 2.8 24.1 − 38.7 16.1 − 1.9 0.6 − 8.7          May
20.4 51.1 − 0.8 28.6 91.0 3.0 88.0 − 74.1 11.7 11.1 − 22.9 − 16.0          June
− 54.1 41.7 − − 36.0 − 15.7 − 0.6 10.5 − 11.1 − 34.0 18.9 − 27.3 16.0 − 9.0          July
− 12.3 − 14.9 − − 40.1 − 15.7 7.3 − 4.3 11.6 − 39.9 16.9 − 9.2 1.1 − 16.4          Aug 
20.7 16.8 − 6.0 10.2 62.4 − 0.5 62.9 − 59.6 7.4 24.5 − 19.5 − 9.3          Sep 
22.3 − 11.1 − − 12.5 28.4 55.6 4.8 50.8 − 43.7 16.5 − 25.8 − 4.8 − 10.4          Oct 
− 13.6 38.5 − − 25.0 − 6.7 38.4 4.7 33.7 − 49.6 4.5 5.5 − 15.0 − 8.8          Nov 
− 57.0 − 39.5 − 101.7 95.5 82.1 19.9 62.2 − 23.7 37.1 15.3 − 22.6 13.4          Dec 
 
 
 (b) German contribution 
 
V Other factors VI Money stock M3 (balance I plus II less III less IV less V)  10 
of which Components of the money stock
Intra- Debt securities
Eurosystem Deposits with
liability/ with an Deposits Money maturities
IV De- claim agreed at agreed market of up to 2 years
posits of related to Currency maturity notice of Repo fund (incl money    
banknote in circu- Overnight of up to up to 3 transac- shares market    central  gov-
ernments Total issue  9,11 lation Total deposits 2 years months  6 tions (net)  7,8 paper)(net)  7  Period
2.2 − 7.5 2.1 0.4 10.6 2.8 17.4 − 2.1 0.2 − 0.6 − 7.1 2008          May
− 0.3 − 27.2 0.9 2.2 5.8 8.4 − 4.3 − 2.1 7.9 − 0.1 − 3.9          June
− 2.2 5.1 0.2 2.0 1.6 − 22.4 35.6 − 5.1 − 5.8 − 0.1 − 0.7          July
0.1 2.1 2.4 − 1.0 14.9 1.4 14.1 − 3.2 5.0 − 0.3 − 2.1          Aug 
0.7 24.9 2.1 0.5 17.9 16.3 − 0.8 − 3.3 7.8 − 0.4 − 1.7          Sep 
− 1.4 − 8.6 7.5 10.6 37.5 28.2 13.9 − 1.4 − 1.2 − 3.9 1.8          Oct 
0.2 − 59.5 1.3 1.3 34.2 9.2 9.9 − 1.1 2.8 − 0.8 14.1          Nov 
− 0.0 − 17.3 1.1 5.6 − 2.7 1.5 − 2.2 8.1 − 9.9 − 0.8 0.6          Dec 
0.6 − 31.0 17.5 − 18.2 6.7 57.9 − 47.7 3.8 6.3 − 0.3 − 13.2 2009          Jan 
8.1 − 14.2 1.5 0.7 8.9 17.2 − 23.0 5.3 6.6 0.8 1.9          Feb 
3.2 0.2 − 0.3 1.3 − 22.5 − 1.8 − 19.4 2.8 13.7 − 0.6 − 17.2          Mar 
14.4 7.2 1.3 1.6 26.5 32.1 − 20.8 3.1 4.9 − 0.1 7.3          Apr 
12.0 20.1 0.4 0.1 − 9.9 4.1 − 15.0 2.4 − 1.7 − 0.3 0.6          May
− 9.2 − 15.5 − 0.3 1.5 − 17.1 20.1 − 33.9 3.7 2.5 − 0.2 − 9.2          June
− 5.8 3.7 − 0.1 3.3 − 24.6 2.2 − 19.0 4.6 − 11.0 − 1.1 − 0.2          July
1.7 − 18.5 1.6 − 1.4 − 10.2 12.8 − 18.0 4.5 − 10.6 − 0.1 1.1          Aug 
− 2.3 20.1 1.6 0.1 9.6 20.5 − 26.1 3.1 11.9 0.1 0.0          Sep 
1.4 11.2 1.5 0.8 − 3.1 27.8 − 30.7 4.2 − 0.4 − 0.1 − 3.9          Oct 
− 7.8 1.9 0.3 1.5 5.9 24.0 − 16.8 3.0 − 2.3 − 0.2 − 1.7          Nov 
− 8.9 2.8 0.0 4.3 − 2.1 − 16.4 4.0 10.0 − 0.9 − 0.6 1.9          Dec 
euro-area MFIs. — 9Including national banknotes still in circulation. — M2 or M3. — 11The difference between the volume of euro banknotes
10The German contributions to the Eurosystem’s monetary aggregates actually issued by the Bundesbank and the amount disclosed in accordance
should on no account be interpreted as national monetary aggregates and with the accounting regime chosen by the Eurosystem (see also footnote 2
are therefore not comparable with the erstwhile German money stocks M1, on banknote circulation in Table III.2). 
9*II Overall monetary survey in the euro area

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
E U R O S Y S T E M
Monthly Report
February 2010
II Overall monetary survey in the euro area
 
2 Consolidated balance sheet of monetary financial institutions (MFIs) *
 
 
 
Assets
Lending to non-banks (non-MFIs) in the euro area
Enterprises and households General government
Claims
Total Shares and on non-
End of assets or Debt other Debt euro-area Other
year/month liabilities Total Total Loans securities  2 equities Total Loans securities  3 residents assets
 Euro area ( € billion) 1
 
2007          Nov 22,421.5 14,295.3 11,897.4 10,082.4 944.3 870.8 2,397.9 961.6 1,436.3 5,414.1 2,712.1
         Dec 22,376.1 14,436.8 12,042.3 10,144.9 1,015.2 882.2 2,394.5 972.3 1,422.2 5,274.2 2,665.2
2008          Jan 22,880.1 14,637.9 12,205.4 10,286.4 1,027.8 891.2 2,432.5 978.8 1,453.7 5,523.8 2,718.5
         Feb 23,020.2 14,692.0 12,267.0 10,342.7 1,053.9 870.5 2,425.0 969.0 1,456.0 5,562.2 2,765.9
         Mar 23,059.7 14,826.9 12,396.6 10,443.2 1,084.6 868.9 2,430.2 975.7 1,454.6 5,392.0 2,840.8
         Apr 23,252.9 15,014.7 12,564.5 10,517.8 1,122.3 924.4 2,450.2 988.0 1,462.1 5,487.5 2,750.8
         May 23,454.0 15,103.7 12,656.5 10,583.2 1,156.3 917.0 2,447.2 980.4 1,466.8 5,469.4 2,880.9
         June 23,401.1 15,142.7 12,693.0 10,646.6 1,187.7 858.7 2,449.7 992.5 1,457.2 5,302.1 2,956.3
         July 23,399.0 15,245.1 12,787.3 10,701.5 1,208.8 877.1 2,457.8 993.5 1,464.3 5,346.9 2,807.1
         Aug 23,620.1 15,287.7 12,832.5 10,709.0 1,245.3 878.1 2,455.2 987.0 1,468.2 5,501.7 2,830.6
         Sep 23,885.7 15,327.5 12,897.3 10,804.8 1,218.2 874.3 2,430.2 997.3 1,432.8 5,600.2 2,958.0
         Oct 24,570.2 15,382.7 12,954.8 10,860.9 1,258.9 835.0 2,427.9 997.6 1,430.2 5,774.3 3,413.2
         Nov 24,727.3 15,489.2 13,015.0 10,870.3 1,321.2 823.5 2,474.2 995.2 1,479.0 5,659.7 3,578.4
         Dec 24,108.0 15,506.6 12,967.3 10,772.0 1,409.1 786.1 2,539.3 986.6 1,552.7 5,231.0 3,370.3
2009          Jan 24,489.9 15,686.5 13,061.3 10,860.1 1,412.0 789.2 2,625.2 1,002.1 1,623.1 5,385.7 3,417.7
         Feb 24,432.4 15,706.1 13,046.7 10,836.8 1,433.0 776.9 2,659.4 998.7 1,660.7 5,301.5 3,424.8
         Mar 24,152.9 15,734.4 13,034.7 10,815.3 1,449.4 770.0 2,699.7 989.7 1,710.1 5,035.9 3,382.5
         Apr 24,235.3 15,815.5 13,083.1 10,812.2 1,475.4 795.5 2,732.4 1,000.8 1,731.6 5,098.0 3,321.8
         May 23,915.7 15,825.1 13,087.0 10,809.8 1,484.4 792.9 2,738.1 993.1 1,744.9 4,965.5 3,125.1
         June 24,080.1 15,925.6 13,116.1 10,836.5 1,498.9 780.7 2,809.4 1,016.2 1,793.2 4,911.9 3,242.6
         July 24,028.6 15,894.9 13,074.4 10,799.8 1,496.9 777.7 2,820.5 1,016.9 1,803.7 4,873.9 3,259.8
         Aug 23,946.1 15,842.4 13,013.0 10,735.1 1,496.0 781.8 2,829.4 1,021.7 1,807.7 4,861.8 3,242.0
         Sep 23,898.3 15,915.1 13,062.4 10,769.1 1,495.9 797.4 2,852.7 1,012.2 1,840.5 4,784.6 3,198.6
         Oct 23,849.4 15,899.4 13,016.3 10,723.4 1,493.8 799.1 2,883.1 1,031.8 1,851.3 4,793.1 3,156.9
         Nov 24,002.3 15,936.6 13,057.5 10,751.6 1,494.4 811.6 2,879.0 1,025.2 1,853.8 4,798.8 3,266.9
         Dec 23,802.1 15,899.9 13,063.8 10,756.2 1,496.4 811.2 2,836.1 1,020.0 1,816.1 4,811.4 3,090.8
 German contribution ( € billion) 
2007          Nov 5,155.4 3,486.8 2,839.6 2,401.8 151.5 286.3 647.1 392.7 254.4 1,434.8 233.8
         Dec 5,159.0 3,491.7 2,850.6 2,413.7 148.7 288.2 641.1 391.2 249.9 1,432.7 234.6
2008          Jan 5,167.5 3,535.3 2,894.6 2,438.5 145.8 310.3 640.7 387.4 253.3 1,407.0 225.2
         Feb 5,186.3 3,525.7 2,879.9 2,442.3 144.4 293.3 645.8 383.9 261.9 1,427.6 233.0
         Mar 5,222.7 3,565.8 2,919.8 2,456.6 163.7 299.5 646.0 381.6 264.4 1,422.9 234.1
         Apr 5,300.6 3,614.0 2,958.7 2,466.4 161.4 330.8 655.4 386.3 269.0 1,441.3 245.3
         May 5,283.0 3,600.6 2,951.1 2,473.1 162.5 315.5 649.5 381.1 268.4 1,436.0 246.5
         June 5,230.1 3,581.4 2,944.7 2,491.9 162.8 290.0 636.6 380.1 256.6 1,399.5 249.2
         July 5,239.5 3,592.2 2,959.4 2,503.6 162.1 293.7 632.9 380.0 252.9 1,394.5 252.8
         Aug 5,284.5 3,623.9 2,995.2 2,511.9 187.2 296.1 628.8 379.8 249.0 1,410.0 250.6
         Sep 5,383.1 3,627.7 3,016.0 2,530.7 188.4 296.9 611.7 377.3 234.4 1,501.9 253.5
         Oct 5,457.7 3,632.1 3,016.4 2,540.2 186.7 289.5 615.7 379.4 236.3 1,554.5 271.1
         Nov 5,385.6 3,637.4 3,026.4 2,549.0 191.6 285.8 611.1 377.3 233.8 1,463.2 285.0
         Dec 5,310.8 3,642.6 3,035.0 2,529.4 224.5 281.1 607.6 374.9 232.8 1,379.1 289.1
2009          Jan 5,343.8 3,682.0 3,065.9 2,557.6 219.9 288.4 616.1 374.8 241.3 1,367.2 294.6
         Feb 5,315.0 3,672.2 3,058.5 2,544.1 235.8 278.6 613.8 372.8 241.0 1,348.2 294.6
         Mar 5,282.0 3,674.0 3,065.2 2,555.9 235.1 274.3 608.8 368.1 240.7 1,278.5 329.5
         Apr 5,330.0 3,694.6 3,079.0 2,557.4 234.9 286.8 615.6 369.8 245.8 1,319.6 315.8
         May 5,261.9 3,684.9 3,068.7 2,556.8 234.0 277.8 616.2 365.5 250.8 1,292.8 284.3
         June 5,220.8 3,698.7 3,082.9 2,566.5 246.0 270.4 615.8 363.7 252.1 1,270.5 251.6
         July 5,173.5 3,689.5 3,059.0 2,545.9 245.8 267.3 630.6 376.6 254.0 1,238.5 245.5
         Aug 5,149.9 3,660.3 3,038.5 2,532.0 242.9 263.6 621.8 371.0 250.7 1,223.4 266.3
         Sep 5,131.7 3,679.7 3,054.4 2,548.0 242.8 263.6 625.2 368.1 257.1 1,186.5 265.5
         Oct 5,128.8 3,677.6 3,033.3 2,532.0 240.4 260.9 644.2 379.8 264.4 1,184.0 267.3
         Nov 5,131.5 3,675.6 3,041.1 2,537.6 240.3 263.2 634.6 368.9 265.7 1,184.3 271.6
         Dec 5,084.9 3,642.8 3,015.2 2,520.5 235.5 259.1 627.6 363.0 264.6 1,188.8 253.2
*Monetary financial institutions (MFIs) comprise banks (including building and other money market paper issued by general government. — 4Euro
and loan associations), money market funds, and the European Central currency in circulation (see also footnote 8 on p 12*). Excluding MFIs‘ cash in
Bank and national central banks (the Eurosystem). — 1Source: ECB. — hand (in euro). The German contribution includes the volume of euro bank-
2Including money market paper of enterprises. — 3Including Treasury bills notes put into circulation by the Bundesbank in accordance with
10*II Overall monetary survey in the euro area

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
February 2010
II Overall monetary survey in the euro area
 
 
 
 
 
Liabilities
Deposits of non-banks (non-MFIs) in the euro area
Enterprises and households
With agreed At agreed
maturities of notice of  6 
over
Currency 1 year and
in of which up to up to over up to over  End of
Total in euro  5 Total Overnight 1 year 2 years 2 years 3 months 3 months year/month circulation  4 
Euro area ( € billion) 1
 
618.7 8,678.5 8,155.5 8,219.5 3,004.6 1,633.7 193.2 1,794.9 1,479.9 113.3 2007          Nov 
638.6 8,814.4 8,344.4 8,406.7 3,048.6 1,689.7 198.1 1,855.5 1,500.9 113.9          Dec 
623.2 8,871.7 8,368.6 8,451.0 3,024.6 1,744.1 204.6 1,854.5 1,508.0 115.2 2008          Jan 
628.8 8,906.7 8,389.3 8,461.9 2,973.7 1,814.1 205.0 1,849.1 1,505.7 114.4          Feb 
632.9 8,997.0 8,475.7 8,547.8 3,024.7 1,834.5 203.1 1,861.5 1,511.7 112.3          Mar 
641.4 9,077.2 8,555.9 8,627.0 3,002.6 1,922.9 208.1 1,871.1 1,511.3 111.0          Apr 
645.8 9,134.1 8,631.1 8,696.7 3,027.1 1,949.3 208.6 1,894.1 1,508.1 109.6          May
652.1 9,224.9 8,681.5 8,743.5 3,063.1 1,941.1 215.5 1,910.0 1,505.1 108.9          June
658.8 9,207.3 8,687.5 8,760.7 2,986.3 2,031.6 225.1 1,913.3 1,496.2 108.3          July
656.1 9,230.3 8,695.3 8,776.7 2,942.3 2,081.1 233.3 1,918.5 1,494.4 107.2          Aug 
657.2 9,302.0 8,759.5 8,840.7 3,025.4 2,081.6 236.5 1,906.6 1,484.6 106.1          Sep 
698.9 9,467.0 8,856.6 8,941.8 3,049.8 2,151.7 237.6 1,911.0 1,482.7 109.0          Oct 
703.7 9,601.2 8,935.7 8,997.5 3,060.0 2,164.4 239.4 1,933.7 1,487.3 112.6          Nov 
722.9 9,637.2 9,075.4 9,113.9 3,105.8 2,151.9 235.6 1,972.7 1,531.4 116.5          Dec 
712.3 9,761.5 9,115.3 9,171.1 3,184.2 2,040.4 241.3 2,011.1 1,576.9 117.3 2009          Jan 
716.0 9,780.6 9,127.3 9,173.9 3,185.1 1,996.9 250.2 2,024.7 1,599.9 117.2          Feb 
719.9 9,810.0 9,155.3 9,193.9 3,203.3 1,955.1 251.8 2,045.9 1,620.0 117.8          Mar 
729.2 9,874.4 9,235.9 9,272.9 3,254.9 1,938.7 253.4 2,063.4 1,643.9 118.8          Apr 
732.0 9,879.9 9,251.8 9,285.0 3,275.9 1,893.7 252.0 2,085.3 1,657.9 120.2          May
735.0 9,947.4 9,291.9 9,328.7 3,354.1 1,835.5 241.6 2,106.6 1,669.7 121.3          June
745.5 9,880.6 9,278.3 9,320.1 3,341.8 1,794.1 254.0 2,119.6 1,688.2 122.4          July
741.2 9,850.9 9,274.9 9,313.9 3,350.6 1,752.5 257.2 2,125.5 1,704.9 123.2          Aug 
740.6 9,887.6 9,295.2 9,330.0 3,406.9 1,694.4 254.0 2,138.0 1,712.2 124.4          Sep 
745.5 9,935.5 9,316.2 9,359.1 3,460.6 1,648.3 256.0 2,138.8 1,728.5 126.9          Oct 
750.1 9,917.2 9,318.4 9,351.6 3,485.2 1,598.6 259.1 2,147.6 1,733.3 127.7          Nov 
770.0 9,959.6 9,414.1 9,469.3 3,560.6 1,580.4 259.7 2,170.9 1,770.7 126.9          Dec 
 German contribution ( € billion) 
167.3 2,592.5 2,509.1 2,430.6 779.5 340.4 39.4 722.4 440.4 108.5 2007          Nov 
172.0 2,634.0 2,554.6 2,473.5 763.6 384.6 42.7 726.2 446.8 109.5          Dec 
167.9 2,628.9 2,548.6 2,476.2 769.4 383.1 45.0 727.3 442.1 109.4 2008          Jan 
169.4 2,638.9 2,559.5 2,487.6 764.9 402.2 45.8 726.2 440.0 108.5          Feb 
170.8 2,645.3 2,564.1 2,492.0 773.5 402.6 45.5 725.5 438.4 106.5          Mar 
173.6 2,650.1 2,574.0 2,498.9 760.6 425.8 46.0 725.6 435.7 105.1          Apr 
174.0 2,671.0 2,591.1 2,508.4 763.8 435.1 46.3 725.8 433.7 103.7          May
176.2 2,671.2 2,589.5 2,502.9 770.0 425.7 47.4 725.3 431.6 102.9          June
178.2 2,676.3 2,596.5 2,512.2 750.5 458.7 49.2 724.8 426.5 102.5          July
177.2 2,688.5 2,608.0 2,522.6 751.6 472.1 50.3 724.0 423.4 101.3          Aug 
177.7 2,698.7 2,618.7 2,532.2 768.0 471.5 51.5 720.9 420.1 100.3          Sep 
188.3 2,742.6 2,664.9 2,580.8 798.6 489.4 52.8 718.1 418.8 103.2          Oct 
189.6 2,760.1 2,685.4 2,592.5 804.1 492.9 54.6 716.3 417.6 106.9          Nov 
195.2 2,799.3 2,728.0 2,632.6 800.8 493.7 54.4 747.3 425.7 110.7          Dec 
177.0 2,819.7 2,748.0 2,657.0 859.6 452.3 53.7 751.4 429.4 110.7 2009          Jan 
177.7 2,834.1 2,754.4 2,660.1 872.0 432.0 52.8 758.1 434.7 110.6          Feb 
179.0 2,821.3 2,740.2 2,650.6 870.1 418.5 52.7 760.7 437.3 111.3          Mar 
180.6 2,854.6 2,759.1 2,667.2 880.6 418.0 52.0 764.7 439.8 112.1          Apr 
180.7 2,860.9 2,753.2 2,661.0 884.4 401.8 51.8 767.2 442.2 113.6          May
182.2 2,856.1 2,755.9 2,666.6 902.2 372.6 50.8 780.8 445.7 114.6          June
185.6 2,840.1 2,747.1 2,663.6 907.2 358.8 50.2 781.5 450.2 115.7          July
184.2 2,832.1 2,748.8 2,667.0 919.1 344.4 49.1 783.3 454.6 116.5          Aug 
184.3 2,830.8 2,750.2 2,671.8 937.9 324.4 47.9 786.2 457.7 117.7          Sep 
185.0 2,821.5 2,739.4 2,663.7 966.4 295.8 47.6 772.0 461.8 120.1          Oct 
186.5 2,839.6 2,767.0 2,687.1 987.8 280.1 46.6 787.0 464.7 120.9          Nov 
190.8 2,828.7 2,763.7 2,688.8 975.4 284.0 46.9 788.0 474.6 119.8          Dec 
the accounting regime chosen by the Eurosystem (see footnote 3 on item “Intra-Eurosystem liability/claim related to banknote issue“ (see “Other
banknote circulation in Table III.2). The volume of currency actually put into liability items“). — 5Excluding central governments’ deposits. — 6In
circulation by the Bundesbank can be calculated by adding to this total the Germany, only saving deposits. 
11*II Overall monetary survey in the euro area

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
E U R O S Y S T E M
Monthly Report
February 2010
II Overall monetary survey in the euro area
 
2 Consolidated balance sheet of monetary financial institutions (MFIs) (cont’d) *
 
 
 
Liabilities (cont’d)
Deposits of non-banks (non-MFIs) in the euro area (cont’d)  
 
General government Repo transactions Debt securities
with non-banks
Other general government in the euro area
With agreed At agreed
maturities of notice of  2 
Money
over of which market of which
Central 1 year and Enterprises fund denom-
End of govern- up to up to over up to over and shares inated
year/month ments Total Overnight 1 year 2 years 2 years 3 months 3 months Total households (net)  3 Total in euro
 Euro area ( € billion) 1
 
2007          Nov 199.7 259.4 129.8 93.8 4.0 23.0 1.8 6.9 301.8 297.0 696.7 2,841.6 2,196.7
         Dec 150.8 256.9 125.2 94.8 4.4 24.1 1.7 6.7 282.9 278.7 660.4 2,849.1 2,212.0
2008          Jan 168.8 251.8 123.0 90.3 3.9 24.2 1.8 8.7 307.3 303.5 737.2 2,837.2 2,199.3
         Feb 189.0 255.8 122.1 95.0 4.1 24.6 1.7 8.3 314.3 309.9 749.6 2,803.2 2,178.4
         Mar 199.9 249.2 118.5 91.5 5.1 24.4 1.7 8.1 314.0 309.9 742.5 2,809.3 2,200.4
         Apr 197.5 252.7 119.0 94.4 5.2 24.6 1.7 7.9 328.9 322.8 751.3 2,812.4 2,197.1
         May 173.9 263.5 120.8 103.6 5.3 24.5 1.6 7.6 333.3 327.3 755.8 2,844.7 2,226.8
         June 211.2 270.1 124.0 106.9 5.8 24.4 1.6 7.4 330.3 324.5 733.0 2,856.5 2,241.8
         July 180.8 265.7 118.8 107.9 5.8 24.4 1.6 7.2 333.1 329.0 743.2 2,878.2 2,260.8
         Aug 186.7 266.8 117.5 110.3 5.9 24.4 1.6 7.1 343.1 338.3 757.9 2,888.8 2,261.3
         Sep 191.2 270.1 121.1 110.1 5.9 24.6 1.5 6.8 345.6 341.0 731.1 2,906.9 2,267.9
         Oct 256.3 268.9 122.9 107.4 5.8 24.8 1.5 6.6 351.0 347.4 729.8 2,890.9 2,209.9
         Nov 326.2 277.6 129.3 110.2 5.7 24.5 1.5 6.4 336.6 333.4 739.7 2,871.2 2,207.9
         Dec 259.8 263.5 124.4 101.7 4.9 24.7 1.6 6.1 330.1 327.4 726.1 2,828.6 2,224.4
2009          Jan 325.3 265.1 125.9 99.4 5.0 24.6 2.0 8.2 324.0 321.4 759.9 2,824.6 2,194.6
         Feb 339.3 267.4 130.3 97.0 5.3 24.6 2.3 8.0 327.4 324.6 779.9 2,849.0 2,215.6
         Mar 351.9 264.2 134.9 89.3 4.6 24.9 2.6 7.9 338.5 335.5 780.8 2,801.4 2,200.0
         Apr 337.6 263.8 139.9 83.8 4.8 24.9 2.8 7.7 338.2 335.4 781.8 2,811.9 2,196.0
         May 331.7 263.2 138.1 84.7 4.9 25.0 3.0 7.5 336.2 333.4 771.6 2,808.0 2,215.2
         June 352.5 266.3 146.0 80.3 4.6 25.0 3.1 7.3 347.3 344.5 741.7 2,805.9 2,203.1
         July 298.4 262.1 146.0 74.9 4.9 25.5 3.5 7.2 320.0 317.6 758.0 2,807.1 2,206.2
         Aug 274.6 262.3 148.3 72.3 5.1 25.7 3.8 7.1 310.8 308.8 759.3 2,803.2 2,199.9
         Sep 295.3 262.3 154.7 65.9 5.2 25.7 3.9 6.8 335.2 333.0 740.5 2,775.5 2,191.2
         Oct 317.7 258.8 151.7 65.1 5.2 26.0 4.2 6.6 309.4 307.2 734.9 2,761.9 2,180.1
         Nov 304.1 261.5 158.1 61.8 5.0 26.1 4.1 6.4 314.9 312.7 721.8 2,757.3 2,176.8
         Dec 247.1 243.2 143.6 58.7 4.8 25.8 4.0 6.2 330.3 327.6 650.6 2,769.5 2,182.3
 German contribution ( € billion) 
2007          Nov 46.7 115.2 25.4 65.9 3.1 19.3 1.0 0.4 39.7 39.7 21.4 881.2 655.5
         Dec 40.1 120.3 26.1 69.1 3.5 20.3 1.0 0.4 26.6 26.6 21.1 866.9 646.7
2008          Jan 40.0 112.7 23.4 64.5 3.0 20.4 0.9 0.4 42.1 42.1 21.0 873.7 652.8
         Feb 38.7 112.6 23.5 63.9 3.2 20.6 0.9 0.4 45.9 45.9 21.5 862.3 642.2
         Mar 40.8 112.4 23.1 63.2 4.2 20.7 0.9 0.4 46.7 46.7 20.0 854.3 648.3
         Apr 37.5 113.7 22.8 64.5 4.2 20.9 0.9 0.4 55.7 55.7 18.4 859.7 644.1
         May 39.7 122.9 24.3 72.2 4.3 20.8 0.9 0.4 56.0 56.0 17.8 848.4 630.4
         June 39.4 128.8 26.3 75.5 4.8 21.0 0.9 0.4 63.9 63.9 17.7 842.9 626.2
         July 37.3 126.9 23.4 76.7 4.5 21.1 0.8 0.3 58.1 58.1 17.7 842.4 619.3
         Aug 37.3 128.6 24.6 77.1 4.6 21.1 0.8 0.3 63.1 63.1 17.3 846.5 619.4
         Sep 38.0 128.4 25.0 76.4 4.6 21.3 0.8 0.3 70.9 70.9 16.9 845.5 607.4
         Oct 36.6 125.1 25.0 73.2 4.5 21.3 0.8 0.3 69.8 69.8 13.0 853.5 600.2
         Nov 36.7 130.8 28.7 75.7 4.4 21.0 0.8 0.3 71.0 71.0 12.3 854.6 607.1
         Dec 36.7 129.9 32.0 72.0 3.6 21.2 0.8 0.3 61.1 61.1 11.5 819.1 596.4
2009          Jan 37.3 125.4 32.2 67.2 3.6 21.1 1.0 0.4 67.4 67.4 11.1 822.0 575.4
         Feb 45.4 128.6 37.1 65.0 3.9 21.1 1.0 0.4 74.0 74.0 12.0 814.7 563.9
         Mar 48.6 122.2 36.3 59.5 3.4 21.4 1.1 0.5 87.7 87.7 11.4 779.4 542.7
         Apr 62.7 124.6 41.4 56.8 3.5 21.3 1.2 0.5 92.6 92.6 11.2 782.5 531.5
         May 74.7 125.1 41.0 57.6 3.5 21.3 1.2 0.5 90.9 90.9 10.9 776.7 538.0
         June 65.8 123.7 43.0 54.3 3.2 21.3 1.3 0.6 93.4 93.4 10.7 764.5 521.5
         July 60.0 116.5 40.3 49.4 3.3 21.5 1.4 0.6 82.4 82.4 9.6 754.9 510.6
         Aug 50.2 114.9 41.1 46.6 3.4 21.5 1.6 0.6 71.7 71.7 9.5 755.1 507.7
         Sep 47.9 111.2 42.4 41.7 3.4 21.5 1.6 0.7 83.7 83.7 9.6 734.0 498.1
         Oct 49.3 108.5 41.6 39.5 3.4 21.7 1.6 0.7 83.3 83.3 9.5 727.1 492.8
         Nov 41.6 110.9 44.1 39.3 3.3 21.7 1.7 0.7 81.0 81.0 9.3 713.6 483.0
         Dec 32.7 107.3 40.7 39.5 3.2 21.4 1.8 0.7 80.1 80.1 8.7 709.1 476.4
*Monetary financial institutions (MFIs) comprise banks (including building 5Excluding liabilities arising from securities issued. — 6After deduction of
and loan associations), money market funds, and the European Central inter-MFI participations. — 7The German contributions to the Eurosystem’s
Bank and national central banks (the Eurosystem). — 1Source: ECB. — 2In monetary aggregates should on no account be interpreted as national
Germany, only savings deposits. — 3Excluding holdings of MFIs; for the monetary aggregates and are therefore not comparable with the erstwhile
German contribution, excluding German MFIs’ portfolios of securities issued German money stocks M1, M2 or M3. — 8including DM banknotes still in
by MFIs in the euro area. — 4In Germany, bank debt securities with circulation (see also footnote 4 on p 10*). — 9For the German contribution,
maturities of up to one year are classed as money market paper. — the difference between the volume of euro banknotes actually issued
12*II Overall monetary survey in the euro area

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
February 2010
II Overall monetary survey in the euro area
 
 
 
 
 
 Memo item
 Other liability items Monetary aggregates  7 
 (From 2002, German contribution
issued (net)  3 excludes currency in circulation)
With maturities of
of which Monetary
Intra- liabilities
Eurosystem- of central
liability/ govern-
over Liabilities Excess claim Monetary ments
1 year and to non- Capital of related to capital (Post
up to up to over euro-area and inter-MFI banknote forma- Office, End of
1 year  4 2 years 2 years residents  5 reserves  6 liabilities Total  8 issue  9 M1 10 M2 11 M3 12 tion 13 year/month Treasury)  14 
Euro area ( € billion) 1
 
217.2 90.9 2,533.6 4,731.3 1,462.3 − 19.8 3,110.1 − 3,835.9 7,281.8 8,587.4 5,934.0 122.3 2007          Nov 
217.0 96.3 2,535.8 4,652.5 1,492.7 − 48.2 3,033.6 − 3,901.1 7,429.9 8,685.4 6,028.7 127.8          Dec 
195.8 97.8 2,543.5 4,923.3 1,520.1 − 36.7 3,096.6 − 3,851.1 7,442.4 8,779.7 6,066.2 118.9 2008          Jan 
173.2 98.9 2,531.1 4,983.3 1,519.8 − 29.9 3,144.2 − 3,800.4 7,464.3 8,799.5 6,047.2 114.2          Feb 
165.7 111.7 2,531.9 4,896.2 1,506.7 − 18.7 3,179.6 − 3,852.0 7,537.6 8,870.7 6,044.8 113.8          Mar 
155.7 112.8 2,543.9 5,079.2 1,500.1 − 31.5 3,093.7 − 3,836.8 7,618.1 8,965.9 6,058.4 111.5          Apr 
159.6 125.5 2,559.6 5,134.8 1,488.0 − 40.1 3,157.3 − 3,867.3 7,681.2 9,054.3 6,083.4 110.9          May
151.9 130.3 2,574.3 4,962.7 1,494.4 − 57.2 3,204.0 − 3,914.3 7,727.1 9,071.2 6,119.4 112.0          June
149.1 137.7 2,591.4 5,005.3 1,517.5 − 55.3 3,110.4 − 3,838.3 7,743.1 9,104.9 6,162.1 111.0          July
140.5 137.4 2,610.9 5,119.4 1,528.7 − 46.8 3,142.4 − 3,789.7 7,752.3 9,129.9 6,196.8 109.9          Aug 
146.9 140.3 2,619.7 5,179.1 1,563.8 − 60.8 3,260.4 − 3,876.4 7,832.7 9,195.3 6,227.6 108.8          Sep 
140.4 136.4 2,614.1 5,291.3 1,570.2 − 68.0 3,638.8 − 3,944.0 7,964.6 9,321.2 6,235.6 106.3          Oct 
136.8 137.9 2,596.5 5,166.7 1,609.1 − 68.3 3,767.0 − 3,969.0 8,011.1 9,361.5 6,282.8 109.5          Nov 
138.5 129.1 2,561.0 4,780.5 1,613.3 − 110.7 3,579.6 − 4,035.3 8,095.4 9,418.4 6,294.4 115.1          Dec 
93.7 123.6 2,607.3 5,000.3 1,658.5 − 140.8 3,589.2 − 4,095.8 8,094.0 9,394.7 6,427.0 106.6 2009          Jan 
88.7 126.8 2,633.6 4,862.5 1,670.1 − 117.1 3,563.6 − 4,102.1 8,086.5 9,408.8 6,478.2 103.6          Feb 
66.2 128.8 2,606.4 4,645.9 1,645.2 − 100.1 3,511.1 − 4,131.0 8,087.0 9,400.6 6,448.0 105.5          Mar 
65.8 140.2 2,605.9 4,674.1 1,646.8 − 114.4 3,493.0 − 4,197.7 8,155.7 9,481.1 6,467.3 104.4          Apr 
53.7 145.3 2,608.9 4,516.7 1,657.0 − 118.9 3,332.8 − 4,220.9 8,149.6 9,455.9 6,503.9 107.4          May
38.9 143.7 2,623.3 4,439.5 1,690.0 − 135.1 3,508.2 − 4,311.7 8,178.6 9,449.5 6,573.3 108.7          June
28.3 146.0 2,632.8 4,385.8 1,698.6 − 124.9 3,557.7 − 4,311.1 8,162.6 9,414.4 6,606.2 109.7          July
13.2 144.8 2,645.2 4,311.1 1,717.2 − 105.0 3,557.2 − 4,317.7 8,145.4 9,373.0 6,644.0 109.6          Aug 
6.9 141.8 2,626.8 4,238.7 1,738.7 − 83.9 3,524.9 − 4,379.3 8,146.6 9,370.8 6,660.5 108.7          Sep 
− 1.8 141.1 2,622.6 4,229.8 1,746.2 − 109.9 3,495.9 − 4,434.5 8,173.6 9,356.9 6,667.1 108.6          Oct 
− 6.6 135.8 2,628.1 4,215.9 1,780.8 − 72.0 3,616.0 − 4,472.2 8,165.6 9,330.8 6,716.8 110.2          Nov 
19.1 121.8 2,628.6 4,210.5 1,798.2 − 73.1 3,386.2 − 4,557.2 8,266.8 9,387.8 6,756.6 114.1          Dec 
 German contribution ( € billion) 
27.4 48.4 805.5 777.4 363.0 − 200.2 680.4 98.6 804.9 1,695.2 1,832.1 2,019.1 − 2007          Nov 
27.0 45.1 794.8 754.6 368.0 − 194.9 682.8 99.5 789.7 1,737.4 1,857.2 2,019.3 −          Dec 
30.2 46.9 796.6 779.2 374.4 − 220.0 668.2 100.2 792.9 1,731.4 1,871.6 2,028.4 − 2008          Jan 
27.2 48.2 787.0 794.7 377.0 − 228.9 674.8 102.4 788.4 1,744.4 1,887.1 2,019.8 −          Feb 
25.0 48.8 780.6 813.3 379.8 − 212.8 676.2 103.7 796.6 1,751.3 1,891.8 2,013.5 −          Mar 
24.7 52.5 782.5 837.1 375.4 − 187.9 692.0 104.1 783.4 1,760.6 1,911.9 2,009.9 −          Apr 
19.6 51.6 777.3 824.7 369.6 − 197.6 693.0 106.3 788.1 1,780.6 1,925.6 1,997.6 −          May
13.3 53.9 775.8 789.2 375.0 − 228.6 698.8 107.2 796.3 1,782.2 1,931.0 2,000.4 −          June
12.2 54.3 775.9 783.7 381.7 − 223.0 702.7 107.4 773.9 1,790.4 1,932.6 2,006.2 −          July
13.7 50.9 782.0 803.1 382.3 − 241.0 724.7 109.8 776.2 1,804.4 1,949.4 2,011.0 −          Aug 
13.5 49.5 782.5 850.4 391.3 − 238.3 747.6 111.8 793.1 1,817.9 1,968.8 2,016.5 −          Sep 
19.2 45.6 788.7 862.4 388.3 − 248.6 776.8 119.3 823.6 1,863.0 2,010.7 2,019.9 −          Oct 
33.2 45.7 775.7 815.4 395.6 − 309.6 786.2 120.6 832.8 1,878.8 2,040.9 2,015.9 −          Nov 
41.9 37.5 739.8 762.8 406.3 − 334.6 785.4 121.8 832.8 1,883.0 2,034.9 2,025.6 −          Dec 
32.7 33.5 755.8 791.6 414.8 − 353.2 770.3 139.2 891.8 1,898.9 2,043.7 2,054.1 − 2009          Jan 
34.5 33.5 746.8 770.8 407.4 − 376.1 778.2 140.7 909.1 1,898.4 2,052.3 2,044.4 −          Feb 
19.3 31.4 728.8 751.2 400.0 − 382.6 813.6 140.4 906.4 1,878.9 2,028.6 2,022.7 −          Mar 
24.5 33.4 724.5 774.4 390.7 − 373.8 797.8 141.8 922.0 1,893.1 2,054.9 2,013.9 −          Apr 
25.8 32.5 718.4 727.4 389.3 − 361.3 767.1 142.2 925.5 1,883.5 2,043.6 2,010.3 −          May
22.0 26.6 715.9 731.4 407.9 − 390.7 747.5 141.9 945.2 1,873.0 2,025.8 2,041.0 −          June
23.3 25.1 706.4 724.8 408.0 − 397.8 751.5 141.8 947.5 1,860.8 2,001.2 2,033.8 −          July
24.7 24.9 705.6 718.3 408.3 − 407.6 762.6 143.4 960.2 1,859.9 1,990.7 2,035.8 −          Aug 
26.3 23.2 684.5 690.3 409.6 − 396.2 769.8 144.9 980.3 1,856.9 1,999.7 2,020.1 −          Sep 
23.7 21.9 681.5 678.5 411.0 − 388.6 786.4 146.5 1,008.0 1,857.8 1,996.2 2,007.0 −          Oct 
21.5 22.4 669.7 674.6 424.7 − 384.9 773.7 146.8 1,031.9 1,867.7 2,001.8 2,024.8 −          Nov 
38.1 7.8 663.2 658.2 423.6 − 390.1 766.6 146.8 1,016.1 1,866.0 2,000.7 2,016.8 −          Dec 
by the Bundesbank and the amount disclosed in accordance with the (excluding central governments’ deposits) and (for the euro area) central
accounting regime chosen by the Eurosystem (see also footnote 3 on governments’ monetary liabilities with such maturities. — 12M2 plus repo
banknote circulation in Table III.2). — 10Overnight deposits (excluding transactions, money market fund shares, money market paper and debt
central governments’ deposits), and (for the euro area) currency in securities up to 2 years. — 13Deposits with agreed maturities of over 2
circulation, central governments’ overnight monetary liabilities, which are years and at agreed notice of over 3 months, debt securities with matur ities
not included in the consolidated balance sheet. — 11M1 plus deposits with of over 2 years, capital and reserves. — 14 Non-existent in Germany. 
agreed maturities of up to 2 years and at agreed notice of up to 3 months
13*II Overall monetary survey in the euro area

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
E U R O S Y S T E M
Monthly Report
February 2010
II  Overall monetary survey in the euro area
  
 3  Banking system’s liquidity position  * 
Stocks
  
€ billion; period averages of daily positions
Liquidity-providing factors Liquidity-absorbing factors
Monetary policy operations of the Eurosystem
Credit
institutions‘
current
account
Net assets Longer- Other Other balances
Reserve in gold Main term Marginal liquidity- liquidity- Banknotes Central Other (including
maintenance and foreign refinancing refinancing lending providing Deposit absorbing in government factors minimum Base
period currency operations operations facility facility deposits (net)  6 reserves)  7 money  8 operations  3 operations  4 circulation  5 
ending in  1 
Eurosystem  2  
  
2007          July 323.0 295.4 150.0 0.2 0.1 0.3 − 631.3 53.9 − 106.4 189.6 821.2
         Aug 316.7 301.7 150.0 0.1 − 0.4 − 639.7 52.3 − 115.8 192.0 832.1
         Sep 317.3 268.7 171.7 0.2 10.7 0.4 1.7 639.2 52.3 − 117.8 192.7 832.4
         Oct 321.9 194.3 262.3 0.3 − 1.6 0.9 637.3 63.7 − 118.0 193.4 832.3
         Nov 327.6 180.2 265.0 0.1 − 0.6 5.1 640.1 55.9 − 123.3 194.4 835.1
         Dec 327.5 173.0 278.6 0.3 − 0.4 2.2 644.6 61.9 − 126.6 196.8 841.9
2008          Jan 343.8 255.7 268.8 0.3 − 1.1 68.4 668.2 46.4 − 116.4 200.9 870.2
         Feb 353.6 173.8 268.5 0.2 − 0.4 0.6 651.7 51.7 − 110.7 202.4 854.5
         Mar 343.3 181.3 268.5 0.1 0.3 0.3 − 653.2 59.7 − 125.0 205.3 858.7
         Apr 349.4 181.5 278.6 0.1 2.6 0.6 0.4 662.1 66.4 − 124.8 207.5 870.3
         May 364.5 174.4 295.0 0.1 − 0.3 0.8 667.6 68.8 − 112.2 208.6 876.6
         June 375.0 172.8 287.9 0.3 − 0.2 0.5 671.4 67.3 − 111.5 208.1 879.7
         July 376.4 185.4 275.4 0.1 − 0.4 0.5 677.2 64.9 − 118.3 212.7 890.3
         Aug 374.5 166.3 299.3 0.1 − 0.3 0.6 686.1 61.3 − 123.0 214.8 901.2
         Sep 376.6 163.5 300.0 0.1 − 0.6 0.7 685.0 61.1 − 121.2 214.0 899.5
         Oct 417.3 174.1 334.3 7.5 5.9 19.9 45.5 684.3 55.2 − 82.6 216.8 921.0
         Nov 549.0 301.6 452.5 12.7 4.2 213.7 2.3 722.1 85.0 78.2 218.6 1 154.4
         Dec 580.5 337.3 457.2 2.7 − 200.9 4.9 731.1 107.8 114.3 218.7 1 150.7
2009          Jan 581.3 219.2 613.6 2.9 − 238.5 3.3 753.1 99.9 100.6 221.5 1 213.1
         Feb 547.4 224.9 551.4 2.1 − 175.4 6.1 740.2 102.7 79.3 222.1 1 137.7
         Mar 512.7 224.3 472.4 1.6 − 95.5 4.0 741.5 110.1 41.4 218.6 1 055.5
         Apr 508.0 230.5 443.1 1.1 − 57.8 3.7 747.3 139.0 13.3 221.6 1 026.6
         May 512.4 239.7 426.9 0.7 − 42.7 3.1 757.5 141.9 13.7 220.8 1 021.0
         June 487.9 238.8 400.6 0.7 − 22.3 2.1 759.8 141.7 − 15.8 217.9 1 000.0
         July 457.1 221.4 504.9 1.3 − 119.7 9.9 763.1 137.9 − 65.1 219.2 1 102.0
         Aug 433.6 94.1 694.0 0.3 2.8 185.1 22.1 770.8 133.9 − 103.9 216.9 1 172.8
         Sep 427.6 74.8 645.4 0.3 8.4 136.7 18.5 769.1 125.7 − 110.4 216.9 1 122.7
         Oct 421.4 79.1 616.9 0.3 14.3 109.6 12.9 768.8 139.0 − 113.1 214.7 1 093.1
         Nov 413.0 52.3 626.1 0.3 20.1 86.5 12.0 770.7 148.7 − 118.9 212.8 1 070.0
         Dec 407.6 55.8 593.4 0.7 24.6 65.7 9.9 775.2 150.1 − 130.2 211.4 1 052.3
2010          Jan 413.0 60.6 648.4 0.4 28.4 147.0 8.1 796.8 119.8 − 132.1 211.2 1 155.0
Deutsche Bundesbank
2007          July 82.7 125.1 108.8 0.1 0.0 0.1 − 171.8 0.1 99.7 45.0 216.8
         Aug 81.1 135.4 104.9 0.1 − 0.0 − 173.9 0.1 102.6 44.9 218.8
         Sep 81.1 125.0 114.2 0.2 4.1 0.3 0.6 174.1 0.1 104.4 45.2 219.6
         Oct 82.4 93.2 142.9 0.2 − 0.9 0.2 173.5 0.1 98.8 45.2 219.6
         Nov 84.6 78.3 139.0 0.0 − 0.4 1.5 174.1 0.0 80.0 45.9 220.5
         Dec 84.6 73.2 133.6 0.3 − 0.3 0.7 175.2 0.1 68.7 46.7 222.1
2008          Jan 91.5 102.1 134.6 0.1 − 0.6 26.4 180.6 0.1 73.7 46.9 228.1
         Feb 96.0 60.8 130.6 0.0 − 0.2 0.1 176.2 0.0 63.3 47.7 224.1
         Mar 90.8 59.8 122.5 0.0 0.1 0.2 − 177.5 0.1 46.9 48.6 226.3
         Apr 92.9 76.7 109.9 0.0 1.5 0.5 − 179.7 0.0 52.4 48.6 228.7
         May 99.6 75.7 112.7 0.0 − 0.2 0.2 181.0 0.0 57.9 48.6 229.8
         June 104.4 73.5 112.8 0.1 − 0.1 0.1 182.7 0.1 58.9 49.1 231.8
         July 102.8 79.4 107.2 0.0 − 0.1 0.1 183.6 0.1 55.9 49.5 233.2
         Aug 99.6 70.8 111.9 0.0 − 0.1 0.0 185.5 0.0 46.5 50.1 235.7
         Sep 100.6 76.7 105.2 0.1 − 0.2 0.1 185.7 0.1 46.2 50.2 236.2
         Oct 114.4 74.8 118.6 0.9 3.6 10.1 8.6 186.2 0.2 55.9 51.2 247.5
         Nov 138.6 103.6 163.2 2.7 2.0 88.8 1.1 198.9 0.3 68.7 52.3 339.9
         Dec 146.9 105.1 158.5 2.0 − 84.2 1.1 197.9 0.2 77.2 52.0 334.0
2009          Jan 141.2 72.4 198.1 2.4 − 91.5 1.2 195.8 4.1 68.5 52.8 340.2
         Feb 132.9 79.4 178.5 1.3 − 77.9 2.2 185.0 2.5 71.4 53.2 316.1
         Mar 135.3 72.9 147.8 1.2 − 51.9 1.7 185.3 9.6 55.7 52.9 290.1
         Apr 142.9 74.7 122.8 0.7 − 38.9 1.6 186.3 14.6 46.2 53.4 278.7
         May 150.7 87.5 111.9 0.1 − 24.1 1.3 189.1 26.2 56.3 53.3 266.5
         June 145.7 95.0 103.4 0.7 − 15.4 0.6 189.3 32.3 54.3 52.8 257.4
         July 138.0 81.0 141.5 0.6 − 49.4 4.5 190.2 23.5 40.4 53.2 292.8
         Aug 128.6 47.6 189.1 0.1 0.8 70.1 4.9 192.0 23.5 23.6 52.2 314.2
         Sep 126.0 40.6 178.0 0.1 2.9 51.8 4.3 192.3 23.6 23.4 52.2 296.4
         Oct 124.2 37.3 175.9 0.2 4.9 49.4 3.0 192.5 23.7 22.4 51.5 293.3
         Nov 120.7 34.6 178.8 0.2 6.2 34.2 4.3 192.5 23.6 34.8 51.0 277.7
         Dec 116.3 33.7 171.1 0.6 7.2 25.7 2.7 193.3 18.8 37.8 50.5 269.5
2010          Jan 112.1 42.8 168.9 0.1 7.9 44.8 2.3 198.4 10.7 25.3 50.3 293.5
Discrepancies may arise from rounding. — *The banking system’s liquidity purchase programme. — 4From Aug. 2009, includes liquidity absorbed as a
position is defined as the current account holdings in euro of euro-area result of the Eurosystem’s foreign exchange swap operations. — 5From
credit institutions with the Eurosystem. Amounts are derived from the conso- 2002, euro banknotes and other banknotes which have been issued by the
lidated financial statement of the Eurosystem and the financial statement national central banks of the Eurosystem and which are still in circulatio n. In
of the Bundesbank. — 1Figures are daily averages for the reserve mainte- accordance with the accounting procedure chosen by the Eurosystem for
nance period ending in the month indicated. — 2Source: ECB. — 3From the issue of euro banknotes, 8% of the total value of the euro banknotes in
Aug. 2009, includes liquidity provided under Eurosystem’s covered bond circulation are allocated on a monthly basis to the ECB. The counterpart of
14*II  Overall monetary survey in the euro area

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
February 2010
II  Overall monetary survey in the euro area
  
  
Flows
  
Liquidity-providing factors Liquidity-absorbing factors
Monetary policy operations of the Eurosystem
Credit
institutions‘
current
account
Net assets Longer- Other Other balances
in gold Main term Marginal liquidity- liquidity- Banknotes Central Other (including Reserve
and foreign refinancing refinancing lending providing Deposit absorbing in government factors minimum Base maintenance
currency operations operations facility facility deposits (net)  6 reserves)  7 money  8 period operations  3 operations  4 circulation  5 
ending in  1 
Eurosystem  2  
  
− 3.4 + 10.5 + 0.0 − 0.1 + 0.1 + 0.1 − 0.2 + 6.1 + 4.8 − 7.0 + 3.4 + 9.5 2007          July
− 6.3 + 6.3 + 0.0 − 0.1 − 0.1 + 0.1 − + 8.4 − 1.6 − 9.4 + 2.4 + 10.9          Aug 
+ 0.6 − 33.0 + 21.7 + 0.0 + 10.7 + 0.0 + 1.7 − 0.5 − 0.0 − 2.0 + 0.7 + 0.3          Sep 
+ 4.6 − 74.4 + 90.6 + 0.1 − 10.7 + 1.2 − 0.8 − 1.9 + 11.4 − 0.2 + 0.7 − 0.1          Oct 
+ 5.7 − 14.1 + 2.7 − 0.2 − − 1.0 + 4.2 + 2.8 − 7.8 − 5.3 + 1.0 + 2.8          Nov 
− 0.1 − 7.2 + 13.6 + 0.2 − − 0.2 − 2.9 + 4.5 + 6.0 − 3.3 + 2.4 + 6.8          Dec 
+ 16.3 + 82.7 − 9.8 − 0.0 − + 0.7 + 66.2 + 23.6 − 15.5 + 10.2 + 4.1 + 28.3 2008          Jan 
+ 9.8 − 81.9 − 0.3 − 0.1 − − 0.7 − 67.8 − 16.5 + 5.3 + 5.7 + 1.5 − 15.7          Feb 
− 10.3 + 7.5 − 0.0 − 0.1 + 0.3 − 0.1 − 0.6 + 1.5 + 8.0 − 14.3 + 2.9 + 4.2          Mar 
+ 6.1 + 0.2 + 10.1 + 0.0 + 2.3 + 0.3 + 0.4 + 8.9 + 6.7 + 0.2 + 2.2 + 11.6          Apr 
+ 15.1 − 7.1 + 16.4 − 0.0 − 2.6 − 0.3 + 0.4 + 5.5 + 2.4 + 12.6 + 1.1 + 6.3          May
+ 10.5 − 1.6 − 7.1 + 0.2 − − 0.1 − 0.3 + 3.8 − 1.5 + 0.7 − 0.5 + 3.1          June
+ 1.4 + 12.6 − 12.5 − 0.2 − + 0.2 + 0.0 + 5.8 − 2.4 − 6.8 + 4.6 + 10.6          July
− 1.9 − 19.1 + 23.9 − 0.0 − − 0.1 + 0.1 + 8.9 − 3.6 − 4.7 + 2.1 + 10.9          Aug 
+ 2.1 − 2.8 + 0.7 + 0.0 − + 0.3 + 0.1 − 1.1 − 0.2 + 1.8 − 0.8 − 1.7          Sep 
+ 40.7 + 10.6 + 34.3 + 7.4 + 5.9 + 19.3 + 44.8 − 0.7 − 5.9 + 38.6 + 2.8 + 21.5          Oct 
+ 131.7 + 127.5 + 118.2 + 5.2 − 1.7 +193.8 − 43.2 + 37.8 + 29.8 +160.8 + 1.8 + 233.4          Nov 
+ 31.5 + 35.7 + 4.7 − 10.0 − 4.2 − 12.8 + 2.6 + 9.0 + 22.8 + 36.1 + 0.1 − 3.7          Dec 
+ 0.8 − 118.1 + 156.4 + 0.2 − + 37.6 − 1.6 + 22.0 − 7.9 − 13.7 + 2.8 + 62.4 2009          Jan 
− 33.9 + 5.7 − 62.2 − 0.8 − − 63.1 + 2.8 − 12.9 + 2.8 − 21.3 + 0.6 − 75.4          Feb 
− 34.7 − 0.6 − 79.0 − 0.5 − − 79.9 − 2.1 + 1.3 + 7.4 − 37.9 − 3.5 − 82.2          Mar 
− 4.7 + 6.2 − 29.3 − 0.5 − − 37.7 − 0.3 + 5.8 + 28.9 − 28.1 + 3.0 − 28.9          Apr 
+ 4.4 + 9.2 − 16.2 − 0.4 − − 15.1 − 0.6 + 10.2 + 2.9 + 0.4 − 0.8 − 5.6          May
− 24.5 − 0.9 − 26.3 − 0.0 − − 20.4 − 1.0 + 2.3 − 0.2 − 29.5 − 2.9 − 21.0          June
− 30.8 − 17.4 + 104.3 + 0.6 − + 97.4 + 7.8 + 3.3 − 3.8 − 49.3 + 1.3 + 102.0          July
− 23.5 − 127.3 + 189.1 − 1.0 + 2.8 + 65.4 + 12.2 + 7.7 − 4.0 − 38.8 − 2.3 + 70.8          Aug 
− 6.0 − 19.3 − 48.6 − 0.0 + 5.6 − 48.4 − 3.6 − 1.7 − 8.2 − 6.5 − 0.0 − 50.1          Sep 
− 6.2 + 4.3 − 28.5 + 0.0 + 5.9 − 27.1 − 5.6 − 0.3 + 13.3 − 2.7 − 2.2 − 29.6          Oct 
− 8.4 − 26.8 + 9.2 − 0.0 + 5.8 − 23.1 − 0.9 + 1.9 + 9.7 − 5.8 − 1.9 − 23.1          Nov 
− 5.4 + 3.5 − 32.7 + 0.4 + 4.5 − 20.8 − 2.1 + 4.5 + 1.4 − 11.3 − 1.4 − 17.7          Dec 
+ 5.4 + 4.8 + 55.0 − 0.3 + 3.8 + 81.3 − 1.8 + 21.6 − 30.3 − 1.9 − 0.2 + 102.7 2010          Jan 
Deutsche Bundesbank
− 0.8 + 1.1 + 0.0 − 0.1 + 0.0 + 0.0 − 0.0 + 1.1 + 0.0 − 1.7 + 0.9 + 2.0 2007          July
− 1.6 + 10.3 − 3.9 + 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.0 − + 2.1 − 0.0 + 2.9 − 0.1 + 2.0          Aug 
+ 0.1 − 10.4 + 9.3 + 0.1 + 4.1 + 0.2 + 0.6 + 0.2 − 0.0 + 1.9 + 0.3 + 0.7          Sep 
+ 1.3 − 31.9 + 28.7 + 0.1 − 4.1 + 0.6 − 0.4 − 0.6 − 0.0 − 5.6 − 0.0 + 0.1          Oct 
+ 2.2 − 14.9 − 3.8 − 0.2 − − 0.5 + 1.2 + 0.6 − 0.0 − 18.8 + 0.7 + 0.9          Nov 
− 0.0 − 5.2 − 5.5 + 0.2 − − 0.1 − 0.8 + 1.0 + 0.0 − 11.3 + 0.8 + 1.6          Dec 
+ 6.9 + 28.9 + 1.0 − 0.1 − + 0.4 + 25.6 + 5.4 + 0.0 + 5.1 + 0.2 + 6.0 2008          Jan 
+ 4.5 − 41.3 − 4.0 − 0.1 − − 0.4 − 26.3 − 4.4 − 0.0 − 10.5 + 0.8 − 4.0          Feb 
− 5.2 − 1.0 − 8.1 + 0.0 + 0.1 − 0.0 − 0.1 + 1.3 + 0.0 − 16.3 + 0.9 + 2.2          Mar 
+ 2.1 + 16.9 − 12.5 + 0.0 + 1.4 + 0.3 − + 2.2 − 0.0 + 5.4 − 0.0 + 2.4          Apr 
+ 6.7 − 1.1 + 2.7 − 0.0 − 1.5 − 0.3 + 0.2 + 1.3 − 0.0 + 5.5 + 0.0 + 1.1          May
+ 4.8 − 2.1 + 0.1 + 0.1 − − 0.2 − 0.1 + 1.7 + 0.0 + 1.0 + 0.5 + 2.0          June
− 1.7 + 5.9 − 5.6 − 0.1 − + 0.1 − 0.0 + 0.9 + 0.0 − 2.9 + 0.4 + 1.4          July
− 3.2 − 8.6 + 4.7 − 0.0 − − 0.1 − 0.0 + 2.0 − 0.1 − 9.4 + 0.6 + 2.5          Aug 
+ 1.0 + 5.9 − 6.7 + 0.1 − + 0.1 + 0.1 + 0.2 + 0.0 − 0.3 + 0.1 + 0.4          Sep 
+ 13.8 − 1.9 + 13.5 + 0.8 + 3.6 + 10.0 + 8.5 + 0.5 + 0.1 + 9.7 + 0.9 + 11.4          Oct 
+ 24.2 + 28.8 + 44.6 + 1.9 − 1.6 + 78.6 − 7.5 + 12.7 + 0.1 + 12.8 + 1.1 + 92.4          Nov 
+ 8.3 + 1.5 − 4.6 − 0.8 − 2.0 − 4.6 + 0.0 − 1.0 − 0.2 + 8.5 − 0.3 − 5.9          Dec 
− 5.7 − 32.7 + 39.5 + 0.4 − + 7.3 + 0.1 − 2.1 + 4.0 − 8.7 + 0.9 + 6.1 2009          Jan 
− 8.3 + 7.0 − 19.5 − 1.0 − − 13.6 + 0.9 − 10.8 − 1.7 + 2.9 + 0.3 − 24.0          Feb 
+ 2.3 − 6.4 − 30.7 − 0.2 − − 26.1 − 0.4 + 0.3 + 7.2 − 15.7 − 0.2 − 26.0          Mar 
+ 7.6 + 1.8 − 25.1 − 0.5 − − 12.9 − 0.1 + 1.0 + 5.0 − 9.5 + 0.5 − 11.4          Apr 
+ 7.8 + 12.8 − 10.9 − 0.6 − − 14.8 − 0.3 + 2.7 + 11.6 + 10.1 − 0.2 − 12.2          May
− 5.0 + 7.5 − 8.5 + 0.5 − − 8.7 − 0.6 + 0.2 + 6.2 − 2.0 − 0.5 − 9.1          June
− 7.7 − 13.9 + 38.1 − 0.0 − + 34.1 + 3.8 + 0.9 − 8.9 − 13.9 + 0.4 + 35.4          July
− 9.3 − 33.5 + 47.6 − 0.5 + 0.8 + 20.6 + 0.4 + 1.8 + 0.0 − 16.8 − 1.0 + 21.5          Aug 
− 2.6 − 7.0 − 11.1 + 0.0 + 2.1 − 18.2 − 0.6 + 0.3 + 0.1 − 0.2 + 0.1 − 17.9          Sep 
− 1.8 − 3.3 − 2.1 + 0.0 + 2.0 − 2.5 − 1.2 + 0.2 + 0.1 − 1.0 − 0.8 − 3.1          Oct 
− 3.5 − 2.7 + 3.0 − 0.0 + 1.3 − 15.2 + 1.2 + 0.1 − 0.1 + 12.5 − 0.4 − 15.6          Nov 
− 4.4 − 0.9 − 7.7 + 0.4 + 1.0 − 8.5 − 1.6 + 0.7 − 4.8 + 3.0 − 0.5 − 8.2          Dec 
− 4.2 + 9.1 − 2.2 − 0.5 + 0.7 + 19.1 − 0.4 + 5.1 − 8.1 − 12.6 − 0.2 + 24.0 2010          Jan 
this adjustment is shown under “Other factors”. The remaining 92% of the factors”. From 2003 euro banknotes only. — 6Remaining items in the
value of the euro banknotes in circulation is allocated, likewise on a consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem and the financial
monthly basis, to the NCBs, with each NCB showing in its balance sheet the statement of the Bundesbank. — 7Equal to the difference between the
percentage of the euro banknotes in circulation that corresponds to its sum of liquidity-providing factors and the sum of liquidity-absorbing
paid-up share in the ECB’s capital. The difference between the value of the factors. — 8Calculated as the sum of the “deposit facility”, “banknotes in
euro banknotes allocated to an NCB and the value of the euro banknotes circulation” and “credit institutions’ current account holdings”. 
which that NCB has put into circulation is likewise shown under “Other
15*II  Overall monetary survey in the euro area

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
E U R O S Y S T E M
Monthly Report
February 2010
III Consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem
 
1 Assets *
 
 
€ billion
Claims on non-euro area Claims on non-euro area residents denominated
in foreign currency residents denominated in euro
Balances with
Claims on banks, security
On investments, euro area Balances Claims
reporting external loans residents with banks, arising from
date/ Gold and other denominated security the credit
End of Total and gold Receivables external in foreign investments facility under
month  1 assets receivables Total from the IMF assets currency Total and loans ERM II
 Eurosystem 2
 
2009 June                 5 1,747.8 240.8 156.6 17.0 139.6 99.6 18.8 18.8 −
                              12 1,726.6 240.7 162.3 17.0 145.3 90.9 18.4 18.4 −
                              19 1,719.7 240.7 161.7 17.0 144.7 74.5 17.5 17.5 −
                              26 1,997.3 240.6 159.7 17.2 142.5 75.1 17.8 17.8 −
         July                 3 3 1,911.6 3 232.1 3 158.9 16.8 3 142.0 3 66.5 18.3 18.3 −
                              10 1,888.9 232.1 160.4 16.8 143.6 69.0 19.5 19.5 −
                              17 1,875.7 232.1 159.6 16.8 142.8 62.9 20.6 20.6 −
                              24 1,867.8 232.1 159.6 16.8 142.8 62.6 19.9 19.9 −
                              31 1,854.1 232.1 159.6 17.1 142.5 61.2 18.7 18.7 −
         Aug                  7 1,835.9 232.1 158.0 17.0 141.0 60.8 17.5 17.5 −
                              14 1,801.8 232.1 158.4 17.1 141.3 61.3 17.9 17.9 −
                              21 1,798.4 232.1 158.4 17.1 141.3 56.9 17.2 17.2 −
                              28 1,821.4 232.1 197.2 57.9 139.3 59.3 17.4 17.4 −
         Sep                  4 1,819.5 232.1 196.3 58.0 138.2 58.9 17.0 17.0 −
                              11 1,802.5 232.0 198.1 63.3 134.8 58.2 16.3 16.3 −
                              18 1,793.0 232.0 196.7 63.3 133.4 59.1 15.6 15.6 −
                              25 1,790.2 231.9 196.3 63.6 132.7 58.1 15.0 15.0 −
2009 Oct                  2 3 1,844.6 3 238.2 3 194.4 3 62.9 3 131.5 3 52.3 15.1 15.1 −
                                9 1,802.7 238.2 193.7 62.9 130.8 48.9 15.4 15.4 −
                              16 1,801.4 238.2 194.3 62.9 131.5 47.7 15.0 15.0 −
                              23 1,786.1 238.2 195.0 63.1 131.9 44.1 15.3 15.3 −
                              30 1,779.0 238.2 194.7 63.2 131.5 43.0 16.4 16.4 −
         Nov                  6 1,773.7 238.1 193.0 61.8 131.2 42.6 16.5 16.5 −
                              13 1,759.6 238.2 194.0 62.2 131.8 41.9 16.7 16.7 −
                              20 1,761.5 238.1 193.8 62.2 131.6 41.2 17.1 17.1 −
                              27 1,759.2 238.1 192.2 62.1 130.1 39.7 17.4 17.4 −
         Dec                  4 1,759.4 238.1 192.7 62.2 130.4 36.0 15.7 15.7 −
                              11 1,744.5 238.1 191.9 62.2 129.7 34.9 15.2 15.2 −
                              18 1,842.4 238.1 192.1 62.3 129.8 33.3 15.7 15.7 −
                              25 1,852.5 238.1 191.9 61.4 130.6 31.7 15.7 15.7 −
2010 Jan                  1 3 1,904.9 3 266.9 3 195.5 62.8 3 132.7 3 32.2 15.2 15.2 −
                                8 1,879.6 266.9 196.1 62.8 133.3 31.4 16.2 16.2 −
                              15 1,870.6 266.9 196.4 62.8 133.6 28.2 17.3 17.3 −
                              22 1,870.3 266.9 195.1 62.8 132.3 27.8 17.4 17.4 −
                              29 1,877.7 266.9 193.8 62.8 130.9 28.3 18.1 18.1 −
         Feb                  5 1,874.5 266.9 194.5 62.8 131.7 29.0 17.8 17.8 −
 Deutsche Bundesbank
2008          Mar 3 453.4 3 65.1 3 30.0 2.3 3 27.6 4.5 0.3 0.3 −
         Apr 439.6 65.1 31.1 2.3 28.7 8.1 0.3 0.3 −
         May 439.2 65.1 30.2 2.5 27.6 14.5 0.3 0.3 −
         June 447.2 64.9 3 30.3 2.5 3 27.8 12.2 0.3 0.3 −
         July 435.9 64.9 29.1 2.5 26.6 9.4 0.3 0.3 −
         Aug 449.0 64.9 29.1 2.5 26.7 10.1 0.3 0.3 −
         Sep 3 519.7 3 68.8 3 31.1 2.6 3 28.5 3 39.1 0.3 0.3 −
         Oct 591.6 68.8 34.5 2.6 31.9 50.5 0.3 0.3 −
         Nov 577.1 68.8 34.8 3.3 31.5 61.1 0.3 0.3 −
         Dec 3 612.9 3 68.2 3 31.0 3.3 3 27.7 63.3 0.3 0.3 −
2009          Jan 560.5 68.2 28.7 3.3 25.5 46.7 0.3 0.3 −
         Feb 547.5 68.2 29.0 3.3 25.7 45.3 0.3 0.3 −
         Mar 3 539.7 3 75.7 3 32.1 3.5 3 28.6 3 50.7 0.3 0.3 −
         Apr 540.5 75.7 32.7 3.5 29.2 42.0 0.3 0.3 −
         May 555.9 75.7 32.3 4.7 27.6 37.5 0.3 0.3 −
         June 3 628.3 3 73.0 31.7 4.5 27.2 3 30.8 0.3 0.3 −
         July 572.3 73.0 31.8 4.7 27.1 25.3 0.3 0.3 −
         Aug 571.2 73.0 41.6 15.1 26.5 24.0 0.3 0.3 −
         Sep 3 577.7 3 74.9 3 41.9 16.3 3 25.6 3 21.6 0.3 0.3 −
         Oct 557.2 74.9 42.5 16.6 25.9 16.9 0.3 0.3 −
         Nov 551.7 74.9 41.0 15.9 25.1 13.0 0.3 0.3 −
         Dec 3 588.2 3 83.9 41.6 16.0 25.6 4.4 0.3 0.3 −
2010          Jan 571.8 83.9 41.7 16.0 25.7 − 0.3 0.3 −
 
*The consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem comprises the statements of the national central banks of the euro area member states
financial statement of the European Central Bank (ECB) and the financial (NCBs). The balance sheet items for foreign currency, securities, gold
16*III Consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
February 2010
III Consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem
 
 
 
 
 
Lending to euro area credit institutions related to monetary policy operations Securities of euro area residents
denominated in euro in euro
 Other
 claims on
 euro area
Longer- Fine-  credit Securities General    On
Main re- term re- tuning Structural Credits institutions held for government    reporting
financing financing reverse reverse Marginal related denomi- monetary debt deno-    date/
opera- opera- opera- opera- lending to margin nated in policy Other minated in Other    End of
Total tions tions tions tions facility calls euro Total purposes securities euro assets    month  1 
Eurosystem 2
 
632.9 227.6 403.6 − − 1.7 0.0 24.1 298.2 − 298.2 36.8 240.2 2009 June                  5
611.0 302.1 308.7 − − 0.2 − 23.9 300.6 − 300.6 36.8 242.0                               12
618.9 309.6 308.7 − − 0.5 0.0 24.0 301.0 − 301.0 36.8 244.7                               19
896.8 167.9 728.6 − − 0.3 0.0 24.5 301.6 − 301.6 36.8 244.4                               26
834.6 105.9 728.6 − − 0.1 0.1 23.1 302.2 − 302.2 32.3 3 239.7          July                  3
808.0 106.4 701.5 − − 0.1 0.0 23.0 301.7 0.1 301.7 36.2 239.0                               10
801.9 100.3 701.5 − − 0.1 0.0 22.8 301.2 1.1 300.1 36.2 238.4                               17
789.8 88.3 701.5 − − 0.1 0.0 24.0 305.6 2.9 302.7 36.2 237.8                               24
775.7 94.8 680.8 − − 0.2 0.0 24.3 306.6 4.2 302.4 36.2 239.5                               31
761.6 80.8 680.7 − − 0.1 0.0 24.0 308.8 5.6 303.3 36.2 236.7          Aug                  7
727.5 73.6 653.6 − − 0.2 0.0 22.6 311.5 7.0 304.5 36.2 234.2                               14
729.8 76.1 653.6 − − 0.1 0.0 23.0 312.6 7.9 304.6 36.2 232.2                               21
712.1 77.5 634.4 − − 0.1 0.0 22.1 313.1 8.8 304.3 36.2 231.8                               28
706.7 72.1 634.4 − − 0.1 0.1 23.3 315.4 10.2 305.2 36.2 233.6          Sep                  4
689.3 93.3 595.9 − − 0.1 0.0 24.0 316.6 11.1 305.5 36.2 231.7                               11
683.8 87.8 595.9 − − 0.1 0.0 24.7 317.5 12.8 304.7 36.2 227.4                               18
681.0 85.0 595.9 − − 0.1 0.0 26.4 319.1 14.2 304.8 36.2 226.2                               25
734.3 66.8 667.4 − − 0.1 0.0 24.7 3 320.8 15.6 3 305.2 36.2 3 228.6 2009 Oct                  2
694.6 62.6 631.9 − − 0.1 0.0 24.0 322.9 17.4 305.5 36.2 228.9                                 9
691.4 62.3 629.0 − − 0.1 0.0 22.2 324.2 18.3 305.9 36.2 232.3                               16
679.6 50.5 629.0 − − 0.1 0.0 21.1 325.4 19.7 305.7 36.2 231.2                               23
672.3 49.4 622.7 − − 0.1 0.1 19.9 323.5 20.6 302.9 36.2 234.8                               30
669.9 46.9 622.7 − − 0.1 0.1 20.2 324.1 21.6 302.5 36.2 233.2          Nov                  6
649.9 52.0 595.4 − − 2.5 0.0 21.8 325.8 22.7 303.0 36.2 235.2                               13
649.5 53.3 595.4 − − 0.8 0.1 22.1 326.1 24.2 301.9 36.2 237.5                               20
649.0 59.7 589.1 − − 0.1 0.0 20.6 327.9 25.3 302.6 36.2 238.1                               27
648.1 58.8 589.1 − − 0.1 0.0 22.6 328.2 26.2 302.0 36.2 241.9          Dec                  4
629.3 56.5 572.6 − − 0.2 0.0 24.4 328.9 26.7 302.3 36.2 245.5                               11
722.9 53.6 669.3 − − 0.0 0.0 24.8 329.2 27.7 301.5 36.2 250.0                               18
728.6 59.2 669.3 − − 0.0 0.0 25.8 329.5 28.5 301.0 36.2 254.9                               25
749.9 79.3 669.3 − − 1.3 0.0 26.3 3 328.7 28.8 3 299.9 36.2 3 254.2 2010 Jan                  1
724.0 54.7 669.3 − − 0.0 0.0 26.9 329.6 29.1 300.5 36.2 252.2                                 8
719.9 60.7 659.1 − − 0.0 0.0 27.3 327.2 29.9 297.3 36.2 251.3                               15
720.9 58.6 662.2 − − 0.1 0.0 28.5 328.8 32.1 296.8 36.2 248.7                               22
726.3 64.0 662.2 − − 0.1 0.0 26.7 331.2 33.5 297.7 36.2 250.2                               29
718.7 56.4 662.2 − − 0.1 0.0 26.9 332.6 34.8 297.8 36.1 251.9          Feb                  5
 Deutsche Bundesbank
213.1 98.4 103.5 11.2 − 0.0 − 20. 6−−− 4 . 4 3 115.4 2008          Mar 
192.5 80.1 112.4 − − 0.0 − 19. 9−−− 4 . 4 118.1          Apr 
184.5 71.2 113.2 − − 0.1 − 19. 9−−− 4 . 4 120.2          May
192.4 86.5 105.9 − − 0.0 − 18. 4−−− 4 . 4 124.3          June
184.5 75.5 109.0 − − 0.0 − 20. 3−−− 4 . 4 122.9          July
180.4 76.6 103.8 − − 0.0 − 22. 9−−− 4 . 4 136.8          Aug 
223.5 69.2 153.5 − − 0.8 − 25. 2−−− 4 . 4 3 127.2          Sep 
297.1 107.2 186.4 − − 3.5 − 38. 5−−− 4 . 4 97.4          Oct 
263.3 101.4 159.7 − − 2.2 − 23. 5−−− 4 . 4 120.9          Nov 
277.7 75.3 201.6 − − 0.8 − 22. 0−−− 4 . 4 3 146.0          Dec 
245.4 74.4 169.2 − − 1.8 − 3. 9−−− 4 . 4 162.9 2009          Jan 
219.4 75.4 143.4 − − 0.6 − 4. 4−−− 4 . 4 176.4          Feb 
186.7 71.6 114.6 − − 0.6 − 5. 0−−− 4 . 4 3 184.6          Mar 
194.6 83.6 110.6 − − 0.4 − 6. 0−−− 4 . 4 184.8          Apr 
225.0 121.5 103.4 − − 0.2 − 5.9 2.1 − 2.1 4.4 172.6          May
273.5 71.6 201.6 − − 0.3 − 6.5 4.4 − 4.4 4.4 3 203.8          June
231.8 48.8 182.9 − − 0.1 − 4.5 6.5 1.2 5.3 4.4 194.6          July
220.9 45.9 175.0 − − 0.1 − 6.0 8.5 3.2 5.3 4.4 192.4          Aug 
205.6 33.0 168.8 − − 3.8 − 6.8 10.6 5.3 5.3 4.4 211.6          Sep 
212.9 35.1 177.7 − − 0.1 − 6.8 11.6 6.4 5.3 4.4 186.8          Oct 
206.0 35.3 170.6 − − 0.0 − 6.9 12.9 7.6 5.3 4.4 192.3          Nov 
223.6 53.6 170.0 − − 0.0 − 7.1 13.2 7.9 5.3 4.4 209.6          Dec 
210.3 41.7 168.5 − − 0.0 − 7.7 14.1 8.8 5.3 4.4 209.4 2010          Jan 
 
and financial instruments are valued at market rates at the end of the quar- for the Bundesbank: end-of month financial statement. — 2Source: ECB. —
ter.— 1For the Eurosystem: financial statements for specific weekly dates; 3 Changes are due mainly to revalutions at the end of the quarter. 
17*III Consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
E U R O S Y S T E M
Monthly Report
February 2010
III Consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem
 
2 Liabilities *
 
 
€ billion
Liabilities to euro area credit institutions related to Liabilities to
monetary policy operations denominated in euro other euro area residents
denominated in euro
 
Other
Current liabilities
accounts to euro-
On (covering Fine- area credit
reporting the tuning Deposits institutions Debt
date/ Banknotes minimum Fixed- reverse deno- certifi- General related to
End of Total in circu- reserve Deposit term opera- margin minated cates govern- Other
month  1 liabilities lation  2 Total system) facility deposits tions calls in euro issued Total ment liabilities
 Eurosystem 4
 
2009 June                 5 1,747.8 763.5 235.8 206.9 28.8 − − 0.0 0.2 − 145.0 136.7 8.3
                              12 1,726.6 762.8 224.9 213.5 11.3 − − 0.1 0.2 − 152.9 144.9 8.0
                              19 1,719.7 760.8 226.3 213.5 12.7 − − 0.0 0.2 − 159.8 150.3 9.5
                              26 1,997.3 762.1 504.5 268.2 236.2 − − 0.0 0.2 − 161.3 153.4 7.9
         July                 3 5 1,911.6 768.7 484.3 168.3 316.0 − − 0.0 0.3 − 116.8 109.1 7.8
                              10 1,888.9 770.3 427.4 271.8 155.5 − − 0.0 0.3 − 132.6 124.7 7.9
                              17 1,875.7 770.4 419.4 229.5 189.9 − − 0.0 0.3 − 142.8 132.4 10.3
                              24 1,867.8 768.4 389.8 194.5 195.3 − − 0.0 0.3 − 167.2 157.2 10.1
                              31 1,854.1 772.8 394.8 186.1 208.7 − − 0.0 0.3 − 151.7 141.6 10.1
         Aug                  7 1,835.9 775.0 404.1 182.1 222.0 − − 0.0 0.2 − 124.6 114.5 10.2
                              14 1,801.8 772.8 375.0 264.2 110.8 − − 0.0 0.2 − 123.4 113.3 10.0
                              21 1,798.4 768.3 381.3 221.1 160.2 − − 0.0 0.2 − 125.2 114.5 10.7
                              28 1,821.4 767.2 345.5 202.9 142.6 − − 0.0 0.2 − 145.3 134.6 10.7
         Sep                  4 1,819.5 770.0 339.7 199.6 140.1 − − 0.0 0.2 − 145.3 134.6 10.7
                              11 1,802.5 769.2 331.9 243.0 88.8 − − 0.0 0.2 − 138.4 127.7 10.7
                              18 1,793.0 767.5 325.2 236.2 89.0 − − 0.0 0.2 − 145.7 134.4 11.4
                              25 1,790.2 766.1 306.5 189.8 116.8 − − 0.0 0.2 − 160.7 145.0 15.7
2009 Oct                  2 5 1,844.6 770.9 368.9 218.3 150.6 − − 0.0 0.2 − 151.8 140.8 10.9
                                9 1,802.7 772.3 321.3 176.5 144.8 − − 0.0 0.2 − 152.3 138.4 13.9
                              16 1,801.4 770.9 322.0 254.0 68.0 − − 0.0 0.3 − 158.3 144.4 13.9
                              23 1,786.1 768.7 300.3 219.6 80.7 − − 0.0 0.4 − 167.4 153.1 14.2
                              30 1,779.0 771.6 277.3 189.5 87.8 − − 0.0 0.4 − 182.3 173.9 8.3
         Nov                  6 1,773.7 773.8 309.8 180.9 128.9 − − 0.0 0.5 − 146.0 137.5 8.4
                              13 1,759.6 773.2 286.5 232.2 54.3 − − 0.0 0.4 − 155.5 147.3 8.2
                              20 1,761.5 771.6 275.9 229.8 46.1 − − 0.0 0.4 − 163.6 155.4 8.2
                              27 1,759.2 774.4 273.4 205.1 68.3 − − 0.0 0.2 − 166.6 158.4 8.2
         Dec                  4 1,759.4 785.2 282.7 159.4 123.4 − − 0.0 0.4 − 150.9 142.2 8.7
                              11 1,744.5 789.4 274.7 242.6 32.1 − − 0.0 0.3 − 139.8 131.1 8.7
                              18 1,842.4 797.5 389.3 252.8 136.5 − − 0.0 0.3 − 113.3 104.6 8.7
                              25 1,852.5 807.2 368.7 204.6 164.1 − − 0.0 0.3 − 133.8 125.7 8.1
2010 Jan                  1 5 1,904.9 806.5 395.6 233.5 162.1 − − 0.0 0.3 − 129.7 120.5 9.3
                                8 1,879.6 796.4 387.8 160.7 227.1 − − 0.0 0.5 − 123.4 114.9 8.4
                              15 1,870.6 787.9 394.5 162.4 232.1 − − 0.0 0.5 − 119.1 110.5 8.6
                              22 1,870.3 783.4 387.3 244.2 143.1 − − − 0.3 − 133.0 124.4 8.6
                              29 1,877.7 783.5 384.8 219.5 165.3 − − 0.0 0.4 − 143.6 135.2 8.3
         Feb                  5 1,874.5 785.2 398.6 169.3 229.4 − − − 0.5 − 121.6 113.4 8.3
 Deutsche Bundesbank
2008          Mar 5 453.4 179.0 70.1 69.3 0.8 − − − − − 0.6 0.1 0.5
         Apr 439.6 181.4 53.4 53.3 0.1 − − − − − 0.7 0.0 0.7
         May 439.2 182.0 50.5 50.4 0.0 − − − − − 0.5 0.0 0.4
         June 447.2 183.8 56.0 55.1 0.9 − − − − − 0.5 0.0 0.4
         July 435.9 186.0 41.2 40.9 0.4 − − − − − 0.4 0.0 0.4
         Aug 449.0 185.1 50.6 50.5 0.1 − − − − − 0.4 0.0 0.3
         Sep 5 519.7 185.3 111.5 65.8 45.7 − − − − − 0.7 0.1 0.6
         Oct 591.6 197.1 146.4 48.4 98.0 − − − − − 7.9 0.2 7.7
         Nov 577.1 198.1 138.3 52.5 85.7 − − − − − 2.9 0.1 2.8
         Dec 5 612.9 206.6 166.9 100.7 66.3 − − − − − 1.1 0.2 0.9
2009          Jan 560.5 184.7 127.2 49.3 77.8 − − − − − 2.6 2.2 0.5
         Feb 547.5 185.2 106.6 54.2 52.4 − − − − − 12.5 11.9 0.6
         Mar 5 539.7 186.5 100.0 53.1 46.9 − − − − − 15.7 15.4 0.3
         Apr 540.5 189.5 80.0 48.3 31.7 − − − − − 30.8 30.2 0.6
         May 555.9 190.0 87.2 71.1 16.1 − − − − − 36.8 36.2 0.5
         June 5 628.3 190.6 176.7 75.1 101.5 − − − − − 23.7 23.4 0.4
         July 572.3 192.9 120.7 44.5 76.2 − − − − − 23.9 23.5 0.4
         Aug 571.2 191.6 107.4 46.2 61.2 − − − − − 24.0 23.5 0.4
         Sep 5 577.7 191.5 109.7 76.1 33.6 − − − − − 24.0 23.6 0.4
         Oct 557.2 192.6 86.5 50.7 35.9 − − − − − 24.0 23.6 0.4
         Nov 551.7 193.7 87.0 59.0 28.0 − − − − − 16.0 15.6 0.4
         Dec 5 588.2 201.3 112.2 76.7 35.5 − − − − − 10.4 10.0 0.4
2010          Jan 571.8 195.6 106.3 60.9 45.4 − − − − − 4.1 3.7 0.4
 
*The consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem comprises the the Bundesbank: end-of-month financial statements. — 2According to the
financial statement of the European Central Bank (ECB) and the financial accounting regime chosen by the Eurosystem on the issue of euro bank-
statements of the national central banks of the euro area member states notes, a share of 8% of the total value of the euro banknotes in circulation
(NCBs). The balance sheet items for foreign currency, securities, gold and is allocated to the ECB on a monthly basis. The counterpart of this
financial instruments are valued at market rates at the end of the quar- adjustment is disclosed as an “Intra-Eurosystem liability related to euro
ter. — 1For Eurosystem: financial statements for specific weekly dates; for
18*III Consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
February 2010
III Consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem
 
 
 
 
 
Liabilities to non-euro area
residents denominated in
foreign currency
Intra-  
Eurosystem  
Liabilities Liabilities Liabilities Counterpart liability     On
to non-euro to euro area Deposits, arising of special related to     reporting
area residents residents balances from the drawing euro  Capital    date/
denominated in foreign and other rights allocated Other banknote Revaluation and    End of credit facility
in euro currency Total liabilities under ERM II by the IMF issue  2 accounts reserves    month  1 liabilities  3 
Eurosystem 4
 
152.2 5.1 8.5 8.5 − 5.6 156.0 − 203.0 73.0 2009 June                  5
131.8 3.2 11.2 11.2 − 5.6 158.1 − 203.0 73.0                               12
118.7 3.5 10.2 10.2 − 5.6 158.8 − 203.0 73.0                               19
117.9 5.4 7.3 7.3 − 5.6 157.2 − 203.0 73.0                               26
107.8 5.3 8.5 8.5 − 5.4 5 153.7 − 5 187.8 73.0          July                  3
123.2 4.8 10.3 10.3 − 5.4 153.8 − 187.8 73.0                               10
109.5 3.7 11.9 11.9 − 5.4 151.6 − 187.8 73.0                               17
107.0 4.4 12.4 12.4 − 5.4 152.1 − 187.8 73.0                               24
98.3 3.2 14.0 14.0 − 5.4 152.8 − 187.8 73.0                               31
98.3 3.1 12.2 12.2 − 5.4 152.0 − 187.8 73.0          Aug                  7
98.8 3.6 12.0 12.0 − 5.4 149.7 − 187.8 73.0                               14
91.3 3.0 12.8 12.8 − 5.4 150.0 − 187.8 73.0                               21
93.4 3.4 12.2 12.2 − 46.3 147.1 − 187.8 73.0                               28
94.1 1.8 12.7 12.7 − 46.3 148.7 − 187.8 73.0          Sep                  4
89.3 2.1 12.1 12.1 − 51.5 147.0 − 187.8 73.0                               11
83.4 3.2 11.0 11.0 − 51.5 144.6 − 187.8 73.0                               18
85.7 3.0 10.7 10.7 − 51.5 145.0 − 187.8 73.0                               25
76.3 3.9 8.8 8.8 − 5 50.9 5 147.6 − 5 192.3 73.0 2009 Oct                  2
78.9 4.6 8.1 8.1 − 50.9 149.0 − 192.3 73.0                                 9
70.9 4.0 9.3 9.3 − 50.9 149.7 − 192.3 73.0                               16
69.7 2.5 11.0 11.0 − 50.9 150.1 − 192.3 73.0                               23
65.8 4.5 8.1 8.1 − 50.9 152.8 − 192.3 73.0                               30
61.8 3.3 9.5 9.5 − 50.9 152.9 − 192.3 73.0          Nov                  6
58.2 4.2 8.9 8.9 − 50.9 156.5 − 192.3 73.0                               13
62.1 3.6 9.7 9.7 − 50.9 158.5 − 192.3 73.0                               20
57.0 3.2 9.0 9.0 − 50.9 159.2 − 192.3 73.0                               27
49.6 3.2 10.0 10.0 − 50.9 161.2 − 192.3 73.0          Dec                  4
48.9 3.6 9.0 9.0 − 50.9 162.8 − 192.3 73.0                               11
47.4 3.3 9.3 9.3 − 50.9 165.8 − 192.3 73.0                               18
46.5 3.7 9.6 9.6 − 50.9 166.6 − 192.3 73.0                               25
46.8 4.0 9.6 9.6 − 51.2 167.8 − 5 220.2 73.0 2010 Jan                  1
46.3 4.7 9.6 9.6 − 51.2 166.5 − 220.2 73.0                                 8
43.4 5.0 9.2 9.2 − 51.2 165.5 − 220.2 74.0                               15
41.0 5.0 8.4 8.4 − 51.2 166.5 − 220.2 74.0                               22
40.2 2.7 9.4 9.4 − 51.2 167.5 − 220.2 74.0                               29
40.0 2.9 10.4 10.4 − 51.2 169.7 − 220.2 74.0          Feb                  5
 Deutsche Bundesbank
21.7 0.0 3.3 3.3 − 1.3 10.7 103.7 5 58.1 5.0 2008          Mar 
21.2 0.0 4.3 4.3 − 1.3 10.2 104.1 58.1 5.0          Apr 
21.2 0.0 3.2 3.2 − 1.3 11.3 106.3 58.1 5.0          May
19.6 0.0 3.9 3.9 − 1.3 12.5 107.2 5 57.4 5.0          June
22.1 0.0 3.0 3.0 − 1.3 12.2 107.4 57.4 5.0          July
24.0 0.0 2.4 2.4 − 1.3 13.1 109.8 57.4 5.0          Aug 
24.7 0.0 2.1 2.1 − 1.3 5 15.1 111.8 5 62.2 5.0          Sep 
21.7 11.9 3.8 3.8 − 1.3 14.8 119.3 62.2 5.0          Oct 
16.1 13.5 3.0 3.0 − 1.3 15.9 120.6 62.2 5.0          Nov 
9.2 18.4 2.5 2.5 − 1.3 16.9 121.8 5 63.1 5.0          Dec 
6.9 13.4 0.1 0.1 − 1.3 17.0 139.2 63.1 5.0 2009          Jan 
7.5 7.6 0.2 0.2 − 1.3 17.7 140.7 63.1 5.0          Feb 
7 . 5 0 . 0−−− 1 . 4 5 11.6 140.4 5 71.5 5.0          Mar 
8.3 0.0 0.2 0.2 − 1.4 12.1 141.8 71.5 5.0          Apr 
8.7 0.1 0.5 0.5 − 1.4 12.6 142.2 71.5 5.0          May
9.3 0.0 0.8 0.8 − 1.3 5 12.4 141.9 5 66.6 5.0          June
6.7 0.0 1.2 1.2 − 1.3 12.2 141.8 66.6 5.0          July
8.1 0.0 0.9 0.9 − 11.9 12.4 143.4 66.6 5.0          Aug 
8.6 0.0 0.1 0.1 − 13.0 5 13.2 144.9 5 67.6 5.0          Sep 
8.5 0.0 0.5 0.5 − 13.0 12.9 146.5 67.6 5.0          Oct 
9.3 0.0 0.0 0.0 − 13.0 13.2 146.8 67.6 5.0          Nov 
9 . 1 0 . 0−−− 13.1 13.5 146.8 5 76.8 5.0          Dec 
9.8 0.0 0.2 0.2 − 13.1 13.2 147.6 76.8 5.0 2010          Jan 
 
banknote issue“. The remaining 92 % of the value of the euro banknote in the aforementioned accounting regime and the value of euro banknotes
circulation is also allocated to the NCBs on a monthly basis, and each NCB put into circulation is also disclosed as an “Intra-Eurosystem claim/ liabil ity
shows in its balance sheet the share of the euro banknotes issued which related to banknote issue“. — 3For the Deutsche Bundesbank: including
corresponds to its paid-up share in the ECB’s capital. The difference DM banknotes still in circulation. — 4Source: ECB. — 5Changes are due
between the value of the euro banknotes allocated to the NCB according to mainly to revaluations at the end of the quarter. 
19*III Consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
E U R O S Y S T E M
Monthly Report
February 2010
IV Banks
 
1 Assets and liabilities of monetary financial institutions (excluding the Bundesbank) in Germany *
  Assets
 
 
Lending to banks (MFIs) in the euro area Lending to non-banks (non-MFIs) in the
to banks in the home country to banks in other member states to non-banks in the home country
Enterprises and house-
holds
Secur- Secur-
Balance ities ities
sheet Cash issued issued
Period total in hand Total Total Loans by banks Total Loans by banks Total Total Total Loans
 End of year or month
 
2000 6,083.9 16.1 1,977.4 1,724.2 1,108.9 615.3 253.2 184.5 68.6 3,249.9 3,062.6 2,445.7 2,186.6
2001 6,303.1 14.6 2,069.7 1,775.5 1,140.6 634.9 294.2 219.8 74.4 3,317.1 3,084.9 2,497.1 2,235.7
2002 6,394.2 17.9 2,118.0 1,769.1 1,164.3 604.9 348.9 271.7 77.2 3,340.2 3,092.2 2,505.8 2,240.8
2003 6,432.0 17.3 2,111.5 1,732.0 1,116.8 615.3 379.5 287.7 91.8 3,333.2 3,083.1 2,497.4 2,241.2
2004 6,617.4 15.1 2,174.3 1,750.2 1,122.9 627.3 424.2 306.3 117.9 3,358.7 3,083.4 2,479.7 2,223.8
2005 6,859.4 15.3 2,276.0 1,762.5 1,148.4 614.1 513.5 356.3 157.2 3,407.6 3,085.2 2,504.6 2,226.3
2006 7,154.4 16.4 2,314.4 1,718.6 1,138.6 580.0 595.8 376.8 219.0 3,462.1 3,085.5 2,536.1 2,241.9
2007 7,592.4 17.8 2,523.4 1,847.9 1,290.4 557.5 675.4 421.6 253.8 3,487.3 3,061.8 2,556.0 2,288.8
2008 7,892.7 17.8 2,681.8 1,990.2 1,404.3 585.8 691.6 452.9 238.8 3,638.2 3,163.0 2,686.9 2,357.3
2008          Mar 7,641.7 14.2 2,516.2 1,818.8 1,262.4 556.4 697.4 442.9 254.5 3,561.3 3,095.9 2,593.5 2,316.4
         Apr 7,725.9 13.9 2,520.4 1,824.8 1,264.1 560.7 695.6 445.9 249.7 3,609.6 3,145.8 2,632.0 2,323.2
         May 7,729.1 14.1 2,540.8 1,844.9 1,274.1 570.9 695.8 436.6 259.3 3,596.2 3,130.8 2,620.8 2,326.7
         June 7,688.7 13.8 2,556.9 1,855.1 1,281.7 573.3 701.8 436.9 265.0 3,576.9 3,098.7 2,604.6 2,333.7
         July 7,675.4 14.2 2,532.5 1,833.9 1,263.1 570.8 698.6 430.6 268.1 3,587.8 3,110.1 2,616.3 2,341.6
         Aug 7,744.7 14.2 2,556.0 1,860.3 1,284.2 576.2 695.7 427.4 268.3 3,619.5 3,137.0 2,645.3 2,344.2
         Sep 7,896.2 13.7 2,614.7 1,918.3 1,351.8 566.6 696.3 431.1 265.2 3,623.3 3,134.6 2,657.2 2,354.8
         Oct 8,030.2 15.4 2,670.4 1,962.1 1,399.6 562.5 708.3 453.2 255.1 3,627.7 3,135.2 2,653.3 2,357.7
         Nov 7,985.4 15.1 2,705.1 1,995.0 1,408.3 586.8 710.1 462.5 247.6 3,633.0 3,134.5 2,657.2 2,362.4
         Dec 7,892.7 17.8 2,681.8 1,990.2 1,404.3 585.8 691.6 452.9 238.8 3,638.2 3,163.0 2,686.9 2,357.3
2009          Jan 7,906.4 14.0 2,676.9 1,975.0 1,382.5 592.5 701.9 465.2 236.7 3,677.6 3,189.7 2,706.2 2,375.7
         Feb 7,846.4 13.9 2,649.2 1,950.8 1,357.1 593.7 698.4 466.0 232.4 3,667.8 3,183.1 2,702.3 2,368.3
         Mar 7,777.1 13.9 2,611.1 1,923.6 1,312.9 610.7 687.4 458.5 228.9 3,669.6 3,193.6 2,716.4 2,383.4
         Apr 7,802.2 15.3 2,584.9 1,902.2 1,295.0 607.1 682.7 454.9 227.8 3,690.1 3,216.1 2,730.5 2,385.5
         May 7,685.1 15.8 2,537.1 1,869.2 1,263.7 605.5 667.9 444.2 223.7 3,680.5 3,198.6 2,714.9 2,384.7
         June 7,710.6 15.0 2,601.5 1,943.5 1,333.1 610.4 658.0 436.9 221.2 3,694.3 3,211.7 2,725.6 2,388.3
         July 7,619.1 14.0 2,558.6 1,890.7 1,277.0 613.7 667.8 448.3 219.5 3,685.1 3,205.7 2,706.7 2,372.4
         Aug 7,590.2 14.0 2,563.6 1,886.5 1,270.3 616.2 677.2 458.7 218.4 3,655.8 3,183.7 2,691.4 2,361.6
         Sep 7,519.5 13.9 2,512.5 1,862.6 1,253.1 609.6 649.9 432.3 217.6 3,675.2 3,199.8 2,705.4 2,375.4
         Oct 7,498.4 14.2 2,496.7 1,824.6 1,219.2 605.4 672.2 456.2 216.0 3,673.1 3,202.2 2,692.0 2,365.5
         Nov 7,493.5 13.8 2,496.0 1,826.7 1,224.7 602.0 669.4 448.7 220.6 3,671.2 3,201.7 2,700.0 2,372.5
         Dec 7,436.1 17.2 2,480.5 1,813.2 1,218.4 594.8 667.3 449.5 217.8 3,638.4 3,187.9 2,692.9 2,357.5
 Changes 1
2001 244.9 − 1.4 91.0 50.7 30.3 20.5 40.3 34.5 5.8 55.1 23.9 50.4 48.1
2002 165.7 3.3 63.6 6.5 23.7 − 17.1 57.1 51.9 5.2 34.1 15.7 16.5 10.4
2003 83.5 − 0.6 − 20.2 − 49.0 − 47.5 − 1.5 28.8 15.7 13.1 29.6 23.0 22.2 26.4
2004 207.5 − 2.1 68.9 22.5 9.5 13.1 46.3 15.8 30.5 44.1 17.5 − 0.4 − 1.2
2005 197.2 0.1 101.8 13.2 25.7 − 12.5 88.6 50.5 38.1 59.7 14.2 37.2 15.5
2006 349.0 1.1 76.2 − 2.4 25.2 − 27.6 78.6 17.3 61.3 56.0 1.5 32.5 13.3
2007 509.7 1.5 210.1 132.5 153.3 − 20.8 77.6 41.6 36.0 54.1 − 1.0 38.6 53.1
2008 322.2 − 0.1 187.8 167.0 130.1 36.9 20.8 35.1 − 14.4 140.5 102.8 131.1 65.7
2008          Apr 81.6 − 0.3 5.4 8.0 2.8 5.2 − 2.6 2.2 − 4.8 49.9 50.6 39.1 7.3
         May 5.2 0.2 22.9 20.5 10.2 10.2 2.5 − 7.1 9.6 − 12.8 − 14.3 − 10.6 4.0
         June − 25.4 − 0.4 23.5 14.5 7.6 6.8 9.0 3.3 5.8 − 16.9 − 30.6 − 14.8 7.8
         July − 1.1 0.4 − 8.5 − 5.4 − 5.2 − 0.2 − 3.1 − 6.3 3.2 10.1 11.4 11.7 7.8
         Aug 52.5 − 0.0 29.2 32.1 27.0 5.1 − 2.9 − 3.2 0.2 25.7 24.2 26.4 0.4
         Sep 132.4 − 0.5 58.4 57.9 67.6 − 9.7 0.5 3.7 − 3.2 1.3 − 3.5 10.7 9.2
         Oct 59.4 1.7 54.7 43.3 47.9 − 4.6 11.5 22.1 − 10.6 − 9.9 − 6.9 − 11.0 − 4.6
         Nov − 10.3 − 0.4 44.8 42.6 18.3 24.3 2.2 9.6 − 7.4 7.4 0.9 5.6 6.4
         Dec − 39.8 2.7 − 20.0 − 2.8 − 2.4 − 0.4 − 17.2 − 9.6 − 7.6 13.7 30.6 30.4 − 4.8
2009          Jan − 33.5 − 3.8 − 5.1 − 15.4 − 21.8 6.4 10.3 12.1 − 1.8 36.2 27.8 20.9 16.5
         Feb − 74.5 − 0.1 − 27.1 − 24.2 − 25.4 1.2 − 2.9 0.8 − 3.7 − 9.0 − 5.1 − 2.5 − 6.7
         Mar − 57.8 0.1 − 37.4 − 26.9 − 44.1 17.2 − 10.5 − 7.3 − 3.2 9.2 13.9 17.4 18.4
         Apr 20.6 1.4 − 26.7 − 21.5 − 17.9 − 3.6 − 5.2 − 3.7 − 1.6 20.1 22.4 13.9 2.2
         May − 79.4 0.5 − 38.0 − 23.4 − 27.9 4.6 − 14.6 − 10.5 − 4.1 − 3.2 − 13.7 − 11.9 2.1
         June 27.3 − 0.8 64.3 74.4 69.4 4.9 − 10.1 − 7.2 − 2.9 15.9 14.9 12.4 4.9
         July − 93.3 − 1.1 − 42.9 − 52.7 − 56.1 3.3 9.8 11.4 − 1.6 − 8.5 − 5.2 − 18.1 − 15.1
         Aug − 9.6 0.0 6.0 − 3.5 − 6.0 2.5 9.5 10.6 − 1.1 − 27.5 − 20.9 − 14.3 − 9.8
         Sep − 57.5 − 0.0 − 49.6 − 23.0 − 16.5 − 6.5 − 26.6 − 25.9 − 0.7 22.3 17.5 15.4 15.0
         Oct − 16.3 0.3 − 15.2 − 37.5 − 33.4 − 4.2 22.4 24.1 − 1.7 − 0.1 3.5 − 12.4 − 8.6
         Nov 2.4 − 0.4 0.4 3.0 6.1 − 3.1 − 2.6 − 7.2 4.6 − 0.4 0.2 6.1 5.1
         Dec − 57.4 3.4 − 14.9 − 13.0 − 6.3 − 6.7 − 1.9 1.0 − 2.9 − 33.4 − 15.1 − 8.2 − 15.8
*This table serves to supplement the “Overall monetary survey“ in section the figures reported by banks (including building and loan associations) −
II. Unlike the other tables in section IV, this table includes − in addition to data from money market funds. — 1Statistical breaks have been eliminated
20*IV Banks

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
February 2010
IV Banks
 
 
 
 
 
euro area Claims on
non-euro-area
to non-banks in other member states residents
 General Enterprises and General
 government households government
Secur- Secur- of which Secur- of which Other
ities Total Loans ities  2 Total Total Loans Total Loans ities Total Loans assets   Period
End of year or month
 
259.1 616.9 478.5 138.4 187.3 83.8 44.2 103.5 20.0 83.5 622.4 481.7 218.1 2000
261.3 587.8 468.7 119.1 232.3 111.3 53.7 121.0 26.2 94.8 727.3 572.0 174.3 2001
265.0 586.4 448.5 137.9 248.0 125.0 63.6 123.0 25.5 97.5 738.1 589.2 179.9 2002
256.2 585.6 439.6 146.1 250.2 133.5 62.7 116.6 25.9 90.7 806.4 645.6 163.6 2003
255.9 603.8 423.0 180.8 275.3 140.6 61.9 134.7 25.7 109.0 897.8 730.4 171.4 2004
278.2 580.7 408.7 171.9 322.4 169.1 65.0 153.3 30.7 122.6 993.8 796.8 166.7 2005
294.1 549.5 390.2 159.2 376.6 228.1 85.2 148.5 26.1 122.4 1,172.7 936.2 188.8 2006
267.3 505.8 360.7 145.0 425.5 294.6 124.9 130.9 26.0 104.9 1,339.5 1,026.9 224.4 2007
329.6 476.1 342.8 133.4 475.1 348.1 172.1 127.0 27.6 99.4 1,279.2 1,008.6 275.7 2008
277.1 502.5 350.9 151.5 465.4 326.3 140.3 139.1 26.2 112.9 1,327.0 1,035.8 223.0 2008          Mar 
308.7 513.8 355.9 158.0 463.8 326.7 143.2 137.1 26.0 111.1 1,347.9 1,061.0 234.1          Apr 
294.2 509.9 350.7 159.3 465.4 330.3 146.5 135.1 26.0 109.1 1,342.9 1,054.7 235.2          May
270.9 494.1 349.4 144.7 478.3 340.1 158.3 138.1 26.2 111.9 1,303.5 1,013.6 237.6          June
274.7 493.8 349.6 144.2 477.7 343.1 161.9 134.6 26.0 108.7 1,299.8 1,011.4 241.2          July
301.1 491.7 349.0 142.8 482.4 349.9 167.7 132.6 26.4 106.2 1,316.1 1,027.0 239.0          Aug 
302.4 477.5 344.8 132.7 488.7 358.9 175.9 129.8 28.0 101.8 1,401.2 1,106.2 243.3          Sep 
295.6 481.9 346.7 135.2 492.5 363.1 182.5 129.3 28.3 101.1 1,455.9 1,166.6 260.8          Oct 
294.8 477.2 344.2 133.0 498.5 369.2 186.6 129.4 28.6 100.8 1,357.6 1,078.6 274.7          Nov 
329.6 476.1 342.8 133.4 475.1 348.1 172.1 127.0 27.6 99.4 1,279.2 1,008.6 275.7          Dec 
330.5 483.5 344.3 139.2 487.9 359.7 182.0 128.3 26.1 102.1 1,256.5 991.4 281.4 2009          Jan 
334.1 480.8 342.4 138.3 484.7 356.1 175.8 128.5 25.9 102.7 1,233.9 974.1 281.6          Feb 
333.0 477.1 338.1 139.0 476.0 348.8 172.5 127.2 25.5 101.7 1,169.9 916.9 312.7          Mar 
345.0 485.6 340.5 145.1 474.1 348.6 171.9 125.5 24.8 100.7 1,213.3 961.0 298.7          Apr 
330.1 483.7 336.6 147.0 481.9 353.8 172.1 128.1 24.4 103.7 1,184.7 933.9 267.1          May
337.3 486.1 336.5 149.7 482.5 357.3 178.2 125.2 22.7 102.5 1,165.0 912.3 234.8          June
334.3 499.0 348.5 150.5 479.4 352.3 173.5 127.1 23.6 103.5 1,132.8 882.1 228.8          July
329.8 492.4 342.9 149.5 472.1 347.1 170.4 124.9 23.7 101.2 1,107.4 856.8 249.5          Aug 
330.0 494.3 340.0 154.3 475.4 349.0 172.6 126.4 23.6 102.8 1,069.0 822.5 248.8          Sep 
326.5 510.2 351.7 158.5 470.9 341.3 166.5 129.6 23.7 105.9 1,063.7 822.7 250.7          Oct 
327.5 501.7 340.9 160.8 469.5 341.0 165.1 128.4 23.5 105.0 1,057.5 818.6 255.0          Nov 
335.4 495.0 335.1 160.0 450.5 322.3 163.0 128.2 23.5 104.7 1,062.6 821.1 237.4          Dec 
Changes 1
2.4 − 26.5 − 9.8 − 16.7 31.3 24.3 7.7 7.0 2.2 4.8 110.1 86.6 − 9.9 2001
6.2 − 0.8 − 20.2 19.4 18.3 15.9 12.0 2.4 − 0.6 3.0 65.7 64.1 − 0.4 2002
− 4.3 0.8 − 8.7 9.6 6.6 13.4 2.7 − 6.8 − 0.8 − 6.0 116.2 98.5 − 41.5 2003
0.9 17.8 − 17.0 34.9 26.6 8.2 3.1 18.4 0.0 18.4 111.4 100.5 − 14.7 2004
21.7 − 23.0 − 14.3 − 8.6 45.5 27.4 2.1 18.2 4.6 13.5 57.7 31.6 − 22.2 2005
19.3 − 31.0 − 18.6 − 12.4 54.5 59.6 20.9 − 5.1 − 1.3 − 3.8 205.9 165.7 9.8 2006
− 14.6 − 39.6 − 29.3 − 10.3 55.1 73.7 41.5 − 18.6 0.0 − 18.6 222.9 136.8 21.1 2007
65.4 − 28.3 − 16.8 − 11.5 37.7 42.3 40.4 − 4.6 1.6 − 6.1 − 35.6 − 3.7 29.7 2008
31.8 11.5 4.7 6.8 − 0.7 1.3 3.8 − 2.1 − 0.2 − 1.8 16.5 20.9 10.2 2008          Apr 
− 14.6 − 3.8 − 5.2 1.4 1.5 3.5 3.2 − 2.0 0.0 − 2.0 − 5.6 − 6.8 0.4          May
− 22.6 − 15.8 − 1.3 − 14.6 13.7 10.7 12.3 3.0 0.2 2.8 − 33.2 − 34.6 1.6          June
3.9 − 0.4 0.2 − 0.6 − 1.2 2.2 3.4 − 3.5 − 0.3 − 3.2 − 6.0 − 4.1 2.8          July
26.0 − 2.2 − 0.6 − 1.6 1.5 3.9 4.0 − 2.3 0.3 − 2.6 − 4.4 − 3.1 1.9          Aug 
1.6 − 14.2 − 4.1 − 10.1 4.8 7.8 7.2 − 3.1 1.6 − 4.7 71.0 66.2 2.1          Sep 
− 6.4 4.0 1.8 2.3 − 2.9 − 1.9 2.5 − 1.1 − 0.0 − 1.0 − 3.0 7.4 15.8          Oct 
− 0.8 − 4.7 − 2.5 − 2.2 6.5 6.4 4.4 0.1 0.4 − 0.2 − 75.4 − 65.3 13.2          Nov 
35.2 0.2 − 0.2 0.3 − 16.9 − 15.0 − 10.7 − 1.8 − 0.7 − 1.1 − 33.1 − 29.2 − 3.1          Dec 
4.4 7.0 1.3 5.6 8.3 8.8 6.1 − 0.5 − 1.7 1.2 − 51.7 − 47.8 − 9.1 2009          Jan 
4.2 − 2.7 − 1.8 − 0.9 − 3.9 − 4.1 − 6.7 0.3 − 0.3 0.5 − 24.6 − 20.6 − 13.7          Feb 
− 1.0 − 3.5 − 4.2 0.7 − 4.7 − 3.6 − 1.1 − 1.1 − 0.2 − 0.9 − 38.9 − 35.7 9.3          Mar 
11.7 8.5 2.4 6.1 − 2.3 − 0.6 − 0.8 − 1.7 − 0.5 − 1.2 40.3 41.5 − 14.5          Apr 
− 14.0 − 1.8 − 3.8 2.0 10.5 7.8 2.4 2.8 − 0.5 3.2 − 6.2 − 6.7 − 32.6          May
7.5 2.5 − 0.2 2.6 1.0 3.7 6.3 − 2.7 − 1.7 − 1.1 − 17.0 − 19.5 − 35.0          June
− 3.0 12.9 12.0 0.9 − 3.3 − 5.2 − 4.6 1.9 0.9 1.0 − 31.7 − 29.5 − 9.1          July
− 4.4 − 6.7 − 5.6 − 1.0 − 6.6 − 4.5 − 2.6 − 2.1 0.1 − 2.2 − 9.5 − 9.7 21.5          Aug 
0.5 2.0 − 2.8 4.9 4.8 3.2 3.2 1.6 − 0.0 1.6 − 28.4 − 25.3 − 1.8          Sep 
− 3.8 15.9 11.7 4.2 − 3.6 − 6.8 − 5.5 3.2 0.0 3.1 − 1.8 3.2 0.5          Oct 
1.0 − 5.9 − 8.2 2.3 − 0.5 0.5 − 0.9 − 1.1 − 0.1 − 0.9 − 0.9 0.8 3.6          Nov 
7.6 − 6.9 − 5.9 − 1.0 − 18.3 − 18.1 − 1.5 − 0.3 0.0 − 0.3 6.4 3.3 − 18.9          Dec 
from the flow figures (see also footnote * in Table II.1). — 2Including debt
securities arising from the exchange of equalisation claims.
21*IV Banks

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
E U R O S Y S T E M
Monthly Report
February 2010
IV Banks
 
1 Assets and liabilities of monetary financial institutions (excluding the Bundesbank) in Germany *
  Liabilities
 
Deposits of banks (MFIs) Deposits of non-banks (non-MFIs) in the euro area
in the euro area
Deposits of non-banks in the home country Deposits of non-banks
With agreed At agreed
of banks maturities notice
Balance in the in other of which of which
sheet home member Over- up to up to Over-
Period total Total country states Total Total night Total 2 years Total 3 months Total night
 End of year or month
 
2000 6,083.9 1,379.4 1,188.9 190.5 2,051.4 1,873.6 441.4 858.8 274.3 573.5 450.5 107.9 6.9
2001 6,303.1 1,418.0 1,202.1 215.9 2,134.0 1,979.7 525.0 880.2 290.6 574.5 461.9 105.2 7.6
2002 6,394.2 1,478.7 1,236.2 242.4 2,170.0 2,034.9 574.8 884.9 279.3 575.3 472.9 87.4 8.1
2003 6,432.0 1,471.0 1,229.4 241.6 2,214.6 2,086.9 622.1 874.5 248.0 590.3 500.8 81.8 9.3
2004 6,617.4 1,528.4 1,270.8 257.6 2,264.2 2,148.5 646.2 898.9 239.9 603.5 515.5 71.9 8.8
2005 6,859.4 1,569.6 1,300.8 268.8 2,329.1 2,225.4 715.8 906.2 233.4 603.4 519.1 62.2 9.6
2006 7,154.4 1,637.7 1,348.6 289.0 2,449.2 2,341.6 745.8 1,009.3 310.1 586.5 487.4 62.0 13.9
2007 7,592.4 1,778.6 1,479.0 299.6 2,633.6 2,518.3 769.6 1,193.3 477.9 555.4 446.0 75.1 19.6
2008 7,892.7 1,827.7 1,583.0 244.7 2,798.2 2,687.3 809.5 1,342.7 598.7 535.2 424.8 74.2 22.4
2008          Mar 7,641.7 1,759.3 1,432.8 326.5 2,644.7 2,524.5 769.7 1,211.0 492.4 543.8 437.5 79.3 26.3
         Apr 7,725.9 1,790.8 1,439.8 351.1 2,649.4 2,535.5 758.9 1,236.8 517.2 539.8 434.8 76.4 23.7
         May 7,729.1 1,785.2 1,443.6 341.6 2,670.6 2,550.5 761.5 1,252.7 533.4 536.3 432.8 80.4 26.1
         June 7,688.7 1,764.2 1,448.9 315.3 2,670.8 2,551.5 768.8 1,249.3 530.1 533.4 430.7 79.8 27.1
         July 7,675.4 1,749.7 1,439.1 310.6 2,675.9 2,557.0 746.2 1,283.0 563.6 527.9 425.6 81.7 27.3
         Aug 7,744.7 1,753.3 1,446.9 306.3 2,688.1 2,569.2 748.7 1,296.8 577.6 523.6 422.5 81.6 27.1
         Sep 7,896.2 1,832.7 1,529.1 303.5 2,698.0 2,573.6 758.0 1,296.4 578.4 519.2 419.2 86.4 34.4
         Oct 8,030.2 1,913.9 1,642.3 271.6 2,734.7 2,620.5 786.9 1,312.8 598.0 520.8 417.8 77.6 28.8
         Nov 7,985.4 1,862.4 1,595.7 266.7 2,757.2 2,645.5 804.3 1,317.8 603.6 523.4 416.7 75.0 25.6
         Dec 7,892.7 1,827.7 1,583.0 244.7 2,798.2 2,687.3 809.5 1,342.7 598.7 535.2 424.8 74.2 22.4
2009          Jan 7,906.4 1,794.4 1,533.3 261.1 2,817.1 2,701.2 857.7 1,304.6 557.0 539.0 428.6 80.7 33.6
         Feb 7,846.4 1,760.2 1,509.8 250.4 2,821.6 2,714.6 882.6 1,287.7 534.4 544.3 433.9 73.4 25.7
         Mar 7,777.1 1,693.9 1,456.2 237.6 2,805.6 2,699.1 879.3 1,272.1 515.8 547.8 436.6 73.2 26.8
         Apr 7,802.2 1,701.3 1,458.7 242.6 2,823.8 2,716.8 895.8 1,269.8 509.3 551.1 439.1 74.4 25.4
         May 7,685.1 1,678.3 1,445.4 232.9 2,824.1 2,711.3 898.8 1,257.5 494.8 555.0 441.5 74.2 26.0
         June 7,710.6 1,695.3 1,469.0 226.3 2,832.4 2,716.6 918.7 1,238.2 461.7 559.7 445.1 73.2 26.0
         July 7,619.1 1,641.3 1,417.8 223.4 2,816.2 2,706.5 922.3 1,218.7 442.0 565.5 449.7 73.2 24.7
         Aug 7,590.2 1,635.5 1,414.6 220.8 2,808.1 2,707.6 933.8 1,203.1 424.4 570.8 454.3 73.7 25.8
         Sep 7,519.5 1,603.4 1,381.3 222.1 2,806.8 2,706.2 953.3 1,177.9 398.2 575.1 457.4 76.2 26.5
         Oct 7,498.4 1,602.0 1,373.6 228.4 2,797.5 2,696.7 981.3 1,133.7 367.5 581.7 461.5 74.9 26.2
         Nov 7,493.5 1,599.1 1,375.7 223.4 2,823.6 2,724.5 1,005.5 1,133.4 353.0 585.6 464.5 73.0 25.9
         Dec 7,436.1 1,589.7 1,355.6 234.0 2,818.4 2,731.7 997.9 1,139.3 356.6 594.4 474.4 63.9 17.7
 Changes 1
2001 244.9 32.4 8.4 24.0 80.6 105.2 83.0 21.2 16.2 1.1 11.4 − 4.0 0.4
2002 165.7 70.2 37.2 33.1 53.0 57.0 50.3 5.9 − 11.0 0.8 11.0 − 2.6 0.6
2003 83.5 3.8 − 3.3 7.1 44.7 50.3 48.8 − 13.6 − 31.6 15.1 28.0 − 3.8 1.4
2004 207.5 62.3 42.9 19.5 53.5 64.9 26.3 25.5 − 8.3 13.1 14.7 − 9.3 − 0.4
2005 197.2 32.8 26.9 5.9 65.0 75.5 69.4 7.3 − 6.9 − 1.2 2.9 − 8.0 0.5
2006 349.0 105.5 81.5 24.0 123.0 118.6 30.4 105.0 77.1 − 16.8 − 31.7 0.5 4.4
2007 509.7 148.4 134.8 13.6 185.2 177.3 24.5 183.9 167.8 − 31.1 − 41.4 13.7 5.6
2008 322.2 66.4 121.8 − 55.3 162.4 173.2 38.8 154.6 123.5 − 20.2 − 21.2 − 7.5 − 0.1
2008          Apr 81.6 32.6 7.9 24.8 4.7 10.6 − 11.1 25.8 24.7 − 4.1 − 2.7 − 2.6 − 2.3
         May 5.2 − 1.2 4.0 − 5.2 19.2 15.0 2.6 15.9 16.3 − 3.5 − 2.1 2.1 0.5
         June − 25.4 − 18.0 5.9 − 23.9 0.6 1.3 7.4 − 3.3 − 3.2 − 2.9 − 2.1 − 0.4 1.0
         July − 1.1 − 1.7 3.0 − 4.7 5.1 5.4 − 22.7 33.6 33.5 − 5.6 − 5.1 1.9 0.3
         Aug 52.5 5.4 11.4 − 6.0 10.3 11.2 1.9 13.6 13.7 − 4.3 − 3.1 − 0.9 − 0.4
         Sep 132.4 76.2 80.5 − 4.2 8.4 3.7 8.8 − 0.7 0.6 − 4.4 − 3.3 4.0 7.2
         Oct 59.4 67.6 103.9 − 36.3 32.0 44.4 27.1 15.7 18.9 1.5 − 1.4 − 11.0 − 6.2
         Nov − 10.3 − 36.2 − 29.9 − 6.3 27.7 29.9 17.5 9.8 7.8 2.6 − 1.1 − 2.3 − 3.3
         Dec − 39.8 − 26.1 − 4.6 − 21.5 42.7 44.4 6.4 26.2 − 3.5 11.8 8.1 − 1.6 − 3.0
2009          Jan − 33.5 − 42.8 − 57.3 14.5 16.7 12.4 47.1 − 38.5 − 42.1 3.8 3.8 5.8 11.2
         Feb − 74.5 − 35.2 − 24.4 − 10.8 4.6 13.2 24.8 − 16.9 − 22.7 5.3 5.3 − 7.1 − 7.8
         Mar − 57.8 − 60.9 − 49.1 − 11.8 − 15.1 − 14.8 − 2.6 − 15.8 − 18.5 3.5 2.8 0.1 1.2
         Apr 20.6 6.5 1.7 4.8 17.9 17.2 33.2 − 19.3 − 23.6 3.3 3.1 1.1 − 1.4
         May − 79.4 − 14.7 − 5.8 − 8.9 1.7 − 4.5 3.5 − 11.9 − 14.1 3.9 2.4 0.3 0.7
         June 27.3 17.2 23.7 − 6.5 8.3 5.3 19.9 − 19.3 − 33.1 4.7 3.6 − 0.8 0.3
         July − 93.3 − 54.0 − 51.1 − 2.9 − 16.1 − 10.1 3.5 − 19.4 − 19.7 5.8 4.6 0.0 − 1.3
         Aug − 9.6 − 5.1 − 2.6 − 2.4 3.6 1.3 11.7 − 15.6 − 17.6 5.3 4.5 0.6 1.1
         Sep − 57.5 − 31.3 − 33.0 1.7 − 0.7 − 1.0 19.8 − 25.1 − 26.1 4.3 3.1 2.8 0.8
         Oct − 16.3 − 1.0 − 7.3 6.3 4.3 3.8 28.1 − 31.0 − 30.6 6.6 4.2 − 1.0 − 0.3
         Nov 2.4 − 2.0 2.8 − 4.9 13.5 15.1 24.4 − 13.1 − 14.4 3.8 3.0 − 1.8 − 0.3
         Dec − 57.4 − 9.4 − 20.1 10.7 − 5.2 7.2 − 7.6 5.9 3.5 8.9 9.9 − 9.1 − 8.2
*This table serves to supplement the “Overall monetary survey“ in section data from money market funds. — 1Statistical breaks have been eliminated
II. Unlike the other tables in section IV, this table includes − in addition to from the flow figures (see also footnote * in Table II.1). —
the figures reported by banks (including building and loan associations) −
22*IV Banks

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
February 2010
IV Banks
 
 
 
 
 
 Debt securities
issued  3 
in other member states  2 Deposits of
central governments
With agreed At agreed Liabilities
maturities notice arising
of which from Money of which Liabilities
domestic market with to non- repos with
of which of which central non-banks fund euro- Capital maturities
up to up to govern- in the shares of up to area and Other
Total 2 years Total 3 months Total ments euro area issued  3 Total reserves   Period 2 years  3 residents Liabilities
End of year or month
 
96.3 6.7 4.7 3.3 69.9 67.6 0.4 19.3 1,417.1 113.3 599.8 298.1 318.4 2000
92.4 9.0 5.2 3.8 49.1 46.9 4.9 33.2 1,445.4 129.3 647.6 319.2 300.8 2001
74.6 9.9 4.7 3.6 47.7 45.6 3.3 36.7 1,468.2 71.6 599.2 343.0 309.8 2002
68.6 11.4 3.9 3.1 45.9 44.2 14.1 36.7 1,486.9 131.3 567.8 340.2 300.8 2003
59.8 9.8 3.3 2.7 43.8 41.4 14.8 31.5 1,554.8 116.9 577.1 329.3 317.2 2004
50.2 9.8 2.4 2.0 41.6 38.8 19.5 31.7 1,611.9 113.8 626.2 346.8 324.5 2005
45.9 9.3 2.3 1.9 45.5 41.9 17.1 32.0 1,636.7 136.4 638.5 389.6 353.7 2006
53.2 22.0 2.3 1.8 40.1 38.3 26.6 28.6 1,637.6 182.3 661.0 428.2 398.2 2007
49.5 24.9 2.4 1.8 36.6 34.8 61.1 16.4 1,609.9 233.3 666.3 461.7 451.5 2008
50.7 23.0 2.3 1.8 40.8 37.6 46.7 27.2 1,622.3 188.1 703.1 447.5 390.9 2008          Mar 
50.4 23.5 2.3 1.8 37.5 35.3 55.7 25.4 1,628.2 195.8 729.3 442.8 404.2          Apr 
52.0 24.6 2.3 1.8 39.7 36.7 56.0 24.6 1,629.9 201.4 716.8 444.5 401.5          May
50.5 23.4 2.3 1.8 39.4 37.8 63.9 23.8 1,641.4 217.1 679.2 442.6 402.9          June
52.0 25.5 2.3 1.7 37.2 35.2 58.1 23.5 1,644.8 222.2 674.8 443.6 405.0          July
52.3 26.4 2.3 1.7 37.3 36.3 63.1 23.2 1,655.8 224.7 687.9 448.7 424.6          Aug 
49.7 25.5 2.3 1.7 38.0 37.5 70.9 22.4 1,642.2 219.9 741.6 445.3 443.0          Sep 
46.5 21.8 2.3 1.7 36.6 35.5 69.8 18.6 1,637.0 214.5 747.9 453.9 454.4          Oct 
47.1 23.9 2.3 1.7 36.7 34.4 71.0 17.5 1,655.9 242.5 713.2 448.2 460.1          Nov 
49.5 24.9 2.4 1.8 36.6 34.8 61.1 16.4 1,609.9 233.3 666.3 461.7 451.5          Dec 
44.6 19.7 2.4 1.8 35.2 33.0 67.4 15.9 1,614.6 215.8 697.5 462.3 437.1 2009          Jan 
45.2 19.3 2.5 1.8 33.6 32.7 74.0 15.4 1,604.9 211.4 686.7 441.5 442.1          Feb 
44.0 18.2 2.5 1.8 33.2 32.0 87.7 14.8 1,580.2 201.3 664.6 447.9 482.5          Mar 
46.5 21.0 2.5 1.9 32.6 32.0 92.6 14.4 1,579.0 203.6 697.7 430.2 463.3          Apr 
45.7 19.9 2.5 1.9 38.5 36.5 90.9 14.1 1,574.2 196.6 646.6 425.4 431.7          May
44.7 19.1 2.5 1.9 42.6 40.6 93.4 13.6 1,571.0 185.5 652.1 441.8 411.0          June
46.0 19.7 2.5 1.9 36.6 34.6 82.4 12.4 1,565.9 181.1 647.3 441.5 412.0          July
45.3 19.2 2.5 1.9 26.8 25.0 71.7 12.2 1,570.3 177.8 626.3 443.6 422.6          Aug 
47.1 19.2 2.5 1.9 24.4 22.7 83.7 12.4 1,543.3 171.9 599.7 442.8 427.3          Sep 
46.2 18.8 2.5 1.9 25.9 23.2 83.3 12.3 1,530.6 161.7 591.4 439.4 442.0          Oct 
44.6 16.3 2.5 1.9 26.1 24.2 81.0 12.0 1,518.8 158.0 589.4 440.6 429.1          Nov 
43.7 17.0 2.5 2.0 22.8 22.2 80.1 11.4 1,506.3 152.0 559.9 454.8 415.5          Dec 
Changes 1
− 4.6 1.6 0.2 0.4 − 20.5 − 20.4 4.6 13.3 59.5 18.6 34.8 20.9 − 1.1 2001
− 2.6 1.1 − 0.5 − 0.3 − 1.4 − 1.3 − 1.6 4.1 18.8 14.8 − 2.1 25.6 − 2.7 2002
− 4.4 2.0 − 0.8 − 0.4 − 1.8 − 1.4 10.7 0.1 49.8 − 2.2 4.6 − 3.9 − 26.3 2003
− 8.3 − 1.4 − 0.6 − 0.4 − 2.1 − 2.8 0.8 − 5.2 72.9 − 14.8 21.5 − 10.5 12.2 2004
− 7.7 − 0.4 − 0.9 − 0.7 − 2.5 − 3.0 4.7 0.2 39.3 − 9.4 22.4 14.4 18.5 2005
− 3.9 − 0.2 − 0.1 − 0.2 3.9 3.1 − 3.2 0.3 34.3 21.7 32.1 27.9 29.2 2006
8.1 13.0 0.0 − 0.1 − 5.8 − 4.3 8.1 − 3.4 20.4 48.7 49.1 42.9 59.1 2007
− 7.5 0.7 0.1 − 0.0 − 3.3 − 3.2 36.1 − 12.3 − 32.4 50.7 1.7 39.2 61.1 2008
− 0.3 0.5 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 3.3 − 2.3 9.0 − 1.8 5.5 7.7 23.5 − 3.9 12.0 2008          Apr 
1.6 1.1 − 0.0 − 0.0 2.2 1.4 0.2 − 0.8 1.6 4.5 − 12.8 1.8 − 2.9          May
− 1.3 − 1.1 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.3 1.1 7.9 − 0.8 14.0 15.8 − 34.1 4.1 0.9          June
1.6 2.1 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 2.2 − 2.6 − 5.8 − 0.3 4.5 5.7 − 5.8 1.5 1.4          July
− 0.4 0.4 − 0.0 − 0.0 0.1 1.1 5.0 − 0.3 2.9 2.3 0.6 3.3 25.1          Aug 
− 3.1 − 1.4 − 0.0 − 0.0 0.7 1.3 7.8 − 0.8 − 20.8 − 5.0 44.7 − 4.9 21.6          Sep 
− 4.9 − 5.0 0.1 0.0 − 1.4 − 2.0 − 1.2 − 3.8 − 29.2 − 5.5 − 26.6 3.8 16.8          Oct 
0.9 2.1 0.0 0.0 0.1 − 1.1 2.8 − 1.1 21.6 28.1 − 26.6 − 4.3 5.7          Nov 
1.3 1.3 0.1 0.0 − 0.1 0.4 − 9.9 − 1.1 − 26.9 − 9.0 − 23.1 17.3 − 12.8          Dec 
− 5.5 − 5.7 0.0 0.0 − 1.5 − 1.8 6.3 − 0.5 − 12.5 − 17.7 11.9 − 3.2 − 9.5 2009          Jan 
0.7 − 0.3 0.0 0.0 − 1.6 − 0.3 6.6 − 0.5 − 9.5 − 4.7 − 13.0 − 20.8 − 6.5          Feb 
− 1.1 − 0.9 0.0 0.0 − 0.3 − 0.6 13.7 − 0.6 − 13.0 − 9.9 − 9.5 8.9 18.7          Mar 
2.4 2.7 0.0 0.0 − 0.3 0.4 4.9 − 0.4 − 3.3 2.3 31.4 − 18.2 − 18.2          Apr 
− 0.5 − 0.9 0.0 0.0 5.9 4.4 − 1.7 − 0.3 4.5 − 6.9 − 39.6 3.1 − 32.3          May
− 1.0 − 0.8 − 0.0 0.0 3.8 4.1 2.5 − 0.5 − 3.4 − 11.1 6.2 16.4 − 19.4          June
1.3 0.6 0.0 0.0 − 6.0 − 6.0 − 11.0 − 1.2 − 4.9 − 4.4 − 4.6 − 0.2 − 1.5          July
− 0.5 − 0.4 0.0 0.0 1.7 1.9 − 10.6 − 0.3 6.2 − 3.3 − 18.2 2.5 12.4          Aug 
2.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 − 2.5 − 2.3 11.9 0.2 − 22.7 − 5.9 − 21.3 0.2 6.1          Sep 
− 0.7 − 0.1 0.0 0.0 1.5 0.5 − 0.4 − 0.1 − 11.0 − 10.2 − 7.1 − 3.1 2.1          Oct 
− 1.5 − 2.4 − 0.0 0.0 0.2 0.9 − 2.3 − 0.2 − 10.2 − 3.7 0.8 1.5 1.3          Nov 
− 0.9 0.7 0.0 0.0 − 3.3 − 1.9 − 0.9 − 0.6 − 11.1 − 4.6 − 29.5 12.9 − 13.6          Dec 
2Excluding deposits of central governments. — 3In Germany, debt paper; up to the January 2002 Monthly Report they were published
securities with maturities of up to one year are classed as money market together with money market fund shares. 
23*IV Banks

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
E U R O S Y S T E M
Monthly Report
February 2010
IV Banks
 
2 Principal assets and liabilities of banks (MFIs) in Germany, by category of banks *
 
 
€ billion
  Lending to banks (MFIs)  Lending to non-banks (non-MFIs)
 
 of which of which
 
Loans
 Cash in
 hand and
 credit
Number of balances for
reporting Balance with Balances up to and for Partici- Securities Securities
End of institu- sheet central and issued by including more than issued by pating Other
month tions total banks Total loans banks Total 1 year 1 year Bills non-banks interests assets
All categories of banks
 
2009          July 1,965 7,681.0 69.4 3,122.4 2,236.4 852.9 3,991.8 518.3 2,711.9 1.0 741.6 157.2 340.1
         Aug 1,962 7,663.2 75.1 3,113.4 2,224.8 857.4 3,945.6 492.2 2,703.0 1.0 731.4 157.7 371.4
         Sep 1,951 7,591.8 102.0 3,012.1 2,130.9 854.1 3,950.5 500.9 2,695.9 1.0 734.7 157.1 370.0
         Oct 1,945 7,570.4 75.4 3,018.5 2,143.8 851.1 3,953.2 502.4 2,694.2 1.0 737.1 152.9 370.4
         Nov 1,937 7,565.4 87.6 3,003.7 2,130.7 850.4 3,945.9 492.6 2,693.1 0.9 740.7 153.8 374.3
         Dec 1,939 7,509.8 96.2 2,988.9 2,124.1 826.9 3,915.8 459.1 2,702.0 1.0 739.8 151.4 357.5
Commercial banks 5
2009          Nov 276 2,253.0 43.0 897.2 757.6 136.2 1,088.0 253.8 619.2 0.4 205.2 72.9 151.9
         Dec 278 2,191.9 47.9 889.1 752.5 116.8 1,055.1 220.5 622.4 0.5 207.0 74.7 125.1
   Big banks 6
2009          Nov 5 1,338.4 30.0 564.2 478.7 82.9 556.6 154.3 270.9 0.3 123.1 66.1 121.4
         Dec 4 1,292.4 34.8 562.5 479.7 63.6 529.0 129.8 270.2 0.4 124.8 66.8 99.4
   Regional banks and other commercial banks
2009          Nov 169 727.2 11.0 225.0 172.5 51.6 461.2 73.9 306.0 0.1 80.1 6.5 23.5
         Dec 170 717.3 11.5 220.6 168.4 51.6 456.1 68.8 306.8 0.1 79.8 7.6 21.4
   Branches of foreign banks
2009          Nov 102 187.4 2.0 108.0 106.3 1.6 70.2 25.6 42.2 0.0 2.0 0.3 7.0
         Dec 104 182.2 1.5 106.1 104.4 1.6 70.1 22.0 45.4 0.0 2.4 0.3 4.2
Landesbanken
2009          Nov 10 1,467.2 9.2 674.7 495.0 167.7 683.4 95.4 439.9 0.1 139.2 27.3 72.8
         Dec 10 1,457.9 6.9 678.0 499.7 165.5 676.1 89.7 441.8 0.1 135.8 22.9 74.0
Savings banks
2009          Nov 431 1,064.3 19.8 267.4 97.6 167.6 740.6 62.7 579.6 0.3 97.8 18.7 17.8
         Dec 431 1,073.3 23.3 270.2 100.1 168.7 741.8 61.5 580.9 0.2 99.0 18.7 19.3
 
Regional institutions of credit cooperatives  
 
2009          Nov 2 257.9 0.6 162.2 117.4 44.4 67.0 19.0 19.6 0.0 28.3 14.8 13.4
         Dec 2 248.5 0.1 159.0 114.5 43.9 62.0 16.4 19.9 0.0 25.6 14.8 12.6
Credit cooperatives
2009          Nov 1,157 691.1 13.5 200.5 78.4 119.4 446.5 34.1 354.7 0.1 57.5 11.3 19.3
         Dec 1,157 690.0 14.9 195.5 75.6 118.7 448.2 33.6 355.9 0.1 58.5 11.5 19.8
Mortgage banks
2009          Nov 18 764.8 0.6 264.4 164.0 99.4 482.9 9.9 356.2 − 116.8 1.3 15.6
         Dec 18 771.5 1.2 266.4 166.4 98.9 483.8 10.2 355.9 − 117.7 1.3 18.8
Building and loan associations
2009          Nov 25 193.1 0.1 55.9 36.8 19.2 124.7 1.5 110.9 . 12.3 0.3 12.1
         Dec 25 193.6 0.1 56.3 37.2 19.1 124.8 1.5 111.2 . 12.2 0.3 12.1
Special purpose banks
2009          Nov 18 874.1 0.9 481.5 384.0 96.6 312.9 16.2 213.0 − 83.6 7.2 71.5
         Dec 18 883.1 1.7 474.3 378.1 95.4 324.0 25.7 214.1 − 84.1 7.2 75.9
Memo item: Foreign banks 7
2009          Nov 148 819.2 23.0 321.6 261.1 60.3 433.3 80.2 271.7 0.1 79.2 6.2 35.1
         Dec 148 798.3 11.8 322.1 261.9 57.7 429.6 70.7 274.8 0.2 81.7 6.2 28.7
  of which:  Banks majority-owned by foreign banks 8
2009          Nov 46 631.8 21.1 213.6 154.8 58.7 363.2 54.5 229.5 0.1 77.2 5.9 28.0
         Dec 44 616.1 10.2 216.0 157.4 56.0 359.5 48.7 229.4 0.2 79.3 5.9 24.4
*For the period up to December 1998, section IV (except for Table IV.1) MFIs) and of the Bundesbank are not included. For the definitions of the
shows the assets and liabilities of banks (excluding building and loan respective items, see the footnotes to Table IV.3. — 1For building and loan
associations) in Germany; from January 1999, the assets and liabilities of associations: Including deposits under savings and loan contracts (see T able
monetary financial institutions (MFIs) in Germany. The assets and liabilities IV.12). — 2Included in time deposits. — 3Excluding deposits under savings
of foreign branches, of money market funds (which are also classified as and loan contracts (see also footnote 2). — 4Including subordinated
24*IV Banks

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
February 2010
IV Banks
 
 
 
 
 
Deposits of banks (MFIs) Deposits of non-banks (non-MFIs) Capital
 including  
of which of which published
reserves,
Time deposits  1 Savings deposits  3 partici-
pation
Memo rights
item Bearer capital,
for for of which debt Liabilities funds for
up to and more arising At three Bank general securities
Sight Time Sight including than from savings out- banking Other   End of months’
Total deposits deposits Total deposits 1 year 1 year  1 repos  2 Total notice bonds risks   month standing  4 liabilities
All categories of banks
 
2,116.7 347.1 1,769.6 3,070.6 1,066.7 475.4 824.4 134.1 574.8 456.5 129.2 1,633.5 373.3 487.0 2009          July
2,096.2 340.9 1,755.3 3,045.4 1,062.9 463.2 813.2 119.8 580.2 461.1 125.9 1,639.4 373.8 508.4          Aug 
2,046.0 348.8 1,697.2 3,047.5 1,081.8 442.9 813.8 126.1 584.6 464.2 124.4 1,611.6 373.7 512.9          Sep 
2,030.1 352.6 1,677.5 3,057.0 1,117.8 415.3 810.9 135.9 591.3 468.4 121.6 1,595.0 374.3 514.0          Oct 
2,026.6 386.4 1,640.1 3,066.5 1,130.8 410.9 810.0 134.4 595.1 471.4 119.7 1,581.1 377.6 513.7          Nov 
2,007.7 342.5 1,665.2 3,046.0 1,107.5 405.9 809.7 116.3 604.1 481.5 118.8 1,575.9 378.8 501.3          Dec 
Commercial banks 5
714.5 244.5 469.9 1,020.9 510.3 185.5 172.7 65.9 128.8 100.4 23.6 212.9 122.7 182.1 2009          Nov 
705.0 226.8 478.1 988.0 496.4 168.1 172.1 48.9 127.8 103.0 23.8 208.4 122.7 167.8          Dec 
Big banks 6
432.4 166.5 265.9 552.1 249.6 113.5 104.0 60.7 75.8 70.6 9.2 173.9 78.2 101.7 2009          Nov 
432.5 165.6 266.9 520.6 237.1 93.5 103.5 43.2 76.9 72.3 9.5 170.5 77.5 91.4          Dec 
Regional banks and other commercial banks
155.9 46.0 109.9 420.4 236.4 60.1 56.9 5.2 52.9 29.8 14.1 38.9 38.2 73.8 2009          Nov 
150.1 34.5 115.6 420.9 237.2 62.3 56.5 5.7 50.8 30.6 14.1 37.9 39.0 69.4          Dec 
Branches of foreign banks
126.2 32.0 94.1 48.4 24.3 12.0 11.9 − 0.0 0.0 0.2 0.0 6.2 6.6 2009          Nov 
122.4 26.7 95.7 46.5 22.0 12.2 12.1 − 0.0 0.0 0.2 0.0 6.2 7.1          Dec 
Landesbanken
449.2 68.3 380.9 402.9 87.5 99.8 200.1 61.3 13.8 12.3 1.7 458.8 72.8 83.5 2009          Nov 
445.5 54.1 391.4 407.0 79.9 114.4 197.2 65.3 13.9 12.2 1.6 446.1 73.8 85.6          Dec 
Savings banks
197.5 15.3 182.2 722.8 308.1 47.7 15.2 − 281.9 218.9 70.0 31.7 57.6 54.7 2009          Nov 
201.4 15.9 185.5 730.6 310.8 47.5 15.7 − 287.3 223.1 69.2 30.8 57.6 53.0          Dec 
 
Regional institutions of credit cooperatives
 
131.7 32.4 99.3 36.5 11.4 7.1 15.8 4.3 − − 2.3 60.9 11.7 17.1 2009          Nov 
129.1 29.9 99.2 33.0 7.6 7.8 15.4 1.2 − − 2.3 58.2 11.7 16.5          Dec 
Credit cooperatives
110.0 3.9 106.1 479.2 203.1 56.5 28.7 − 169.9 139.2 21.0 30.3 39.7 32.0 2009          Nov 
106.7 3.7 103.0 482.5 203.2 55.2 29.0 − 174.4 142.5 20.8 29.6 39.7 31.4          Dec 
Mortgage banks
220.7 5.5 215.3 186.3 4.2 6.2 175.4 0.0 0.4 0.4 0.0 318.0 20.3 19.5 2009          Nov 
226.5 4.7 221.8 186.2 4.4 6.6 174.8 0.0 0.4 0.4 0.0 314.2 20.3 24.3          Dec 
Building and loan associations
28.8 3.1 25.7 127.5 0.4 1.9 124.1 − 0.3 0.3 0.8 6.8 7.3 22.7 2009          Nov 
28.2 2.5 25.7 130.7 0.6 1.8 127.2 − 0.3 0.3 0.8 6.3 7.3 21.1          Dec 
Special purpose banks
174.2 13.5 160.8 90.3 5.7 6.2 78.1 2.9 − − 0.4 461.8 45.6 102.1 2009          Nov 
165.4 4.9 160.5 87.9 4.7 4.5 78.3 0.8 − − 0.4 482.3 45.8 101.8          Dec 
Memo item:   Foreign banks 7
276.9 92.0 184.9 363.4 179.0 71.5 84.3 13.7 20.8 20.6 7.7 76.2 42.7 60.1 2009          Nov 
266.6 76.0 190.6 359.2 175.8 70.4 84.4 10.2 21.0 20.8 7.5 74.7 43.1 54.7          Dec 
of which:   Banks majority-owned by foreign banks 8
150.7 59.9 90.8 315.0 154.7 59.5 72.4 13.7 20.8 20.5 7.5 76.1 36.5 53.5 2009          Nov 
144.2 49.3 94.9 312.7 153.8 58.2 72.4 10.2 21.0 20.7 7.3 74.7 36.9 47.7          Dec 
negotiable bearer debt securities; excluding non-negotiable bearer debt of the banks majority-owned by foreign banks and included in other
securities. — 5Commercial banks comprise the sub-groups ”Big banks”, categories of banks and the category ”Branches (with dependent legal
”Regional banks and other commercial banks” and ”Branches of foreign status) of foreign banks”. — 8Separate presentation of the banks
banks”. — 6Deutsche Bank AG, Dresdner Bank AG, Commerzbank AG , majority-owned by foreign banks included in other banking categories. 
Bayerische Hypo- und Vereinsbank AG and Deutsche Postbank AG. — 7Sum
25*IV Banks

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
E U R O S Y S T E M
Monthly Report
February 2010
IV Banks
 
3 Assets and liabilities of banks (MFIs) in Germany vis-à-vis residents *
 
€ billion
Lending to domestic banks (MFIs)  2,3 Lending to domestic non-banks (non-MFIs)  3,6 
Treasury
Cash in Negotiable bills and
hand Credit money negotiable
balances market Memo money mar- (euro-area Securities
banknotes with the Credit paper item ket paper issued Securities
and Bundes- balances issued by issued by Fiduciary issued by by non-
Period coins)  1 bank Total and loans Bills  4 banks banks loans  5 Total Loans Bills  4 non-banks banks  7 
End of year or month *
 
2000 15.6 50.8 1,639.6 1,056.1 0.0 26.8 556.6 3.6 3,003.7 2,657.3 6.5 2.3 304.7
2001 14.2 56.3 1,676.0 1,078.9 0.0 5.6 591.5 2.8 3,014.1 2,699.4 4.8 4.4 301.5
2002 17.5 45.6 1,691.3 1,112.3 0.0 7.8 571.2 2.7 2,997.2 2,685.0 4.1 3.3 301.9
2003 17.0 46.7 1,643.9 1,064.0 0.0 8.8 571.0 2.3 2,995.6 2,677.0 3.7 3.4 309.6
2004 14.9 41.2 1,676.3 1,075.8 0.0 7.4 592.9 2.1 3,001.3 2,644.0 2.7 2.6 351.0
2005 15.1 47.9 1,684.5 1,096.8 0.0 6.7 580.9 2.1 2,995.1 2,632.7 2.4 2.4 357.6
2006 16.0 49.4 1,637.8 1,086.3 − 9.3 542.2 1.9 3,000.7 2,630.3 1.9 2.0 366.5
2007 17.5 64.6 1,751.8 1,222.5 0.0 25.3 504.0 2.3 2,975.7 2,647.9 1.6 1.5 324.7
2008 17.4 102.6 1,861.7 1,298.1 0.0 55.7 507.8 2.0 3,071.1 2,698.9 1.2 3.1 367.9
2009 16.9 78.9 1,711.5 1,138.0 − 31.6 541.9 2.2 3,100.1 2,691.8 0.8 4.0 403.5
2008          July 13.6 41.2 1,766.2 1,218.9 − 37.5 509.8 1.9 3,018.8 2,690.2 1.1 2.8 324.8
         Aug 13.7 48.2 1,785.7 1,232.3 − 38.9 514.6 1.9 3,045.3 2,692.1 1.1 2.9 349.3
         Sep 13.4 68.5 1,823.5 1,279.2 0.0 38.0 506.3 1.9 3,044.8 2,698.6 1.0 2.5 342.7
         Oct 14.6 51.4 1,884.6 1,343.9 0.0 39.3 501.4 1.9 3,045.1 2,703.4 1.0 2.3 338.4
         Nov 14.4 54.7 1,914.5 1,349.3 0.0 57.6 507.6 1.9 3,044.6 2,705.5 1.1 2.0 336.1
         Dec 17.4 102.6 1,861.7 1,298.1 0.0 55.7 507.8 2.0 3,071.1 2,698.9 1.2 3.1 367.9
2009          Jan 13.5 51.8 1,893.6 1,327.3 0.0 54.5 511.8 1.9 3,097.3 2,718.9 1.1 3.1 374.3
         Feb 13.4 54.4 1,865.5 1,299.3 0.0 52.2 514.0 1.9 3,091.2 2,709.8 0.9 3.2 377.2
         Mar 13.5 54.1 1,835.7 1,255.7 0.0 35.9 544.2 1.7 3,101.4 2,720.6 0.9 3.7 376.2
         Apr 14.9 48.5 1,819.9 1,243.3 0.0 32.5 544.1 1.7 3,124.3 2,725.1 0.9 5.4 392.9
         May 15.4 73.3 1,771.0 1,187.2 0.0 29.3 554.6 1.6 3,106.5 2,720.5 0.9 5.8 379.3
         June 14.6 78.1 1,840.0 1,251.2 0.0 26.3 562.4 1.6 3,121.8 2,724.0 0.8 3.7 393.3
         July 13.5 55.4 1,811.6 1,219.6 0.0 24.6 567.4 1.7 3,116.5 2,720.1 0.8 5.3 390.3
         Aug 13.6 61.2 1,801.7 1,207.4 0.0 22.9 571.3 1.7 3,094.1 2,703.8 0.7 4.8 384.8
         Sep 13.5 88.1 1,751.1 1,163.2 0.0 19.0 568.9 1.8 3,110.3 2,714.8 0.7 7.0 387.9
         Oct 13.8 61.2 1,739.8 1,156.2 0.0 15.8 567.8 1.8 3,116.9 2,716.5 0.7 5.3 394.4
         Nov 13.5 73.8 1,729.6 1,149.1 0.0 13.6 566.9 1.9 3,117.3 2,712.8 0.7 5.4 398.4
         Dec 16.9 78.9 1,711.5 1,138.0 − 31.6 541.9 2.2 3,100.1 2,691.8 0.8 4.0 403.5
Changes *
2001 − 1.4 + 5.5 + 34.6 + 20.1 − 0.0 − 21.3 + 35.8 − 0.9 + 11.9 + 40.8 − 1.6 + 1.6 + 0.3
2002 + 3.3 − 10.7 + 15.0 + 33.1 + 0.0 + 2.3 − 20.3 − 0.2 − 19.2 − 18.0 − 0.8 − 1.1 + 1.7
2003 − 0.5 + 1.1 − 47.2 − 48.2 + 0.0 + 1.0 + 0.1 − 0.3 + 0.1 − 8.0 − 0.4 + 0.3 + 9.3
2004 − 2.1 − 5.5 + 35.9 + 15.1 + 0.0 − 1.4 + 22.1 − 0.2 + 3.3 − 35.0 − 1.0 + 1.1 + 39.2
2005 + 0.2 + 6.7 + 8.4 + 21.0 − 0.0 − 0.8 − 11.9 − 0.0 − 6.7 − 11.8 − 0.3 − 0.2 + 6.6
2006 + 0.9 + 1.5 − 3.6 + 24.5 − 0.0 + 2.6 − 30.6 − 0.2 − 12.4 − 20.3 − 0.5 − 0.4 + 8.8
2007 + 1.5 + 15.2 + 114.8 + 137.6 + 0.0 + 17.0 − 39.8 + 0.4 − 15.9 + 12.1 − 0.3 − 0.5 − 27.2
2008 − 0.1 + 39.4 + 125.9 + 90.1 + 0.0 + 30.6 + 5.2 − 0.8 + 92.0 + 47.3 − 0.4 + 1.8 + 43.3
2009 − 0.5 − 23.6 − 147.2 − 157.3 − 0.0 − 24.1 + 34.3 + 0.2 + 25.7 − 11.2 − 0.4 + 1.4 + 35.9
2008          July + 0.3 − 13.6 + 7.6 + 8.1 − 0.0 + 0.6 − 1.1 − 0.0 + 6.8 + 7.7 − 0.0 − 0.8 − 0.0
         Aug + 0.1 + 7.1 + 25.4 + 19.3 − + 1.3 + 4.8 − 0.0 + 26.6 + 2.1 + 0.0 + 0.1 + 24.5
         Sep − 0.3 + 20.2 + 37.8 + 46.9 + 0.0 − 0.8 − 8.3 + 0.0 − 0.5 + 6.5 − 0.1 − 0.4 − 6.5
         Oct + 1.3 − 17.1 + 61.1 + 64.7 − 0.0 + 1.3 − 4.9 − 0.0 + 0.4 + 4.8 + 0.0 − 0.2 − 4.3
         Nov − 0.2 + 4.8 + 38.0 + 13.6 − + 18.3 + 6.1 + 0.1 − 0.5 + 2.2 + 0.0 − 0.3 − 2.4
         Dec + 3.0 + 47.8 − 51.3 − 49.7 − − 1.8 + 0.3 + 0.0 + 23.2 − 9.7 + 0.1 + 1.1 + 31.7
2009          Jan − 3.9 − 50.8 + 31.9 + 29.2 + 0.0 − 1.3 + 4.0 − 0.1 + 26.2 + 20.0 − 0.1 − 0.1 + 6.4
         Feb − 0.1 + 2.6 − 28.1 − 28.0 − 0.0 − 2.3 + 2.2 + 0.0 − 6.1 − 9.1 − 0.1 + 0.2 + 2.9
         Mar + 0.0 − 0.3 − 29.8 − 43.6 − − 16.3 + 30.1 − 0.2 + 9.2 + 9.8 − 0.0 + 0.4 − 1.0
         Apr + 1.5 − 5.5 − 15.9 − 12.4 − − 3.3 − 0.1 − 0.0 + 22.8 + 4.5 + 0.0 + 1.7 + 16.7
         May + 0.5 + 24.7 − 45.4 − 52.6 − − 3.2 + 10.5 − 0.1 − 16.9 − 4.6 − 0.1 + 0.5 − 12.8
         June − 0.9 + 4.8 + 69.0 + 64.0 + 0.0 − 3.0 + 7.9 − 0.0 + 15.8 + 3.5 − 0.1 − 1.6 + 14.0
         July − 1.1 − 22.6 − 28.4 − 31.6 − − 1.8 + 5.0 + 0.1 − 5.4 − 3.9 − 0.0 + 1.5 − 3.1
         Aug + 0.1 + 5.7 − 9.9 − 12.2 − 0.0 − 1.6 + 3.9 − 0.0 − 22.4 − 16.4 − 0.0 − 0.5 − 5.5
         Sep − 0.1 + 26.9 − 51.3 − 44.9 − 0.0 − 3.9 − 2.5 + 0.2 + 15.9 + 10.7 − 0.0 + 2.2 + 3.1
         Oct + 0.3 − 26.9 − 11.3 − 7.0 + 0.0 − 3.2 − 1.1 − 0.0 + 6.4 + 1.8 + 0.0 − 1.7 + 6.3
         Nov − 0.3 + 12.6 − 10.2 − 7.1 + 0.0 − 2.3 − 0.9 + 0.0 + 0.4 − 3.7 − 0.0 + 0.1 + 4.0
         Dec + 3.4 + 5.1 − 17.9 − 11.1 − 0.0 + 18.1 − 24.8 + 0.3 − 20.2 − 23.8 + 0.1 − 1.4 + 4.9
*See Table IV.2, footnote*; statistical breaks have been eliminated from the rediscounted bills and bills sent for collection from the banks’ portfol ios
changes. The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as prior to maturity). — 5From 1999, no longer included in loans or deposits
provisional. Subsequent revisions which appear in the following Monthly (see also footnote 3). — 6Up to December 1998, including loans to domestic
Report, are not specially marked. — 1Up to December 1998, domestic building and loan associations. — 7Excluding debt securities arising from
banknotes and coins. — 2Up to December 1998, excluding loans to the exchange of equalisation claims (see also footnote 8). — 8Including
domestic building and loan associations. — 3Up to December 1998, debt securities arising from the exchange of equalisation claims. —
including fiduciary loans (see also footnote 5). — 4Up to December 1998, 9Including liabilities arising from registered debt securities, registered
bill-based lending (bill holdings plus endorsement liabilities arising from money market paper and non-negotiable bearer debt securities;
26*IV Banks

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
February 2010
IV Banks
 
 
 
 
 Deposits of domestic banks (MFIs)  3,9,10  Deposits of domestic non-banks (non-MFIs)  3,15 
Partici-
pating
interests
in
Memo domestic Memo Memo
item banks Sight Time Redis- item Sight Time Savings Bank item Equalisa-
tion Fiduciary and deposits deposits counted Fiduciary de- deposits de- savings Fiduciary
claims  8 loans  5 Total 11,12  12,13  bills 14 loans  5 Total 13,16  bonds  18 loans  5   Period enterprises posits  11 posits  17 
End of year or month *
 
33.1 58.5 82.7 1,189.2 113.4 1,075.3 0.4 30.1 1,945.8 443.4 819.9 573.5 109.0 42.1 2000
4.0 57.0 95.9 1,204.9 123.1 1,081.6 0.3 27.2 2,034.0 526.4 827.0 574.5 106.0 43.3 2001
3.0 54.8 119.0 1,244.0 127.6 1,116.2 0.2 25.6 2,085.9 575.6 830.6 575.3 104.4 42.1 2002
2.0 56.8 109.2 1,229.6 116.8 1,112.6 0.2 27.8 2,140.3 624.0 825.7 590.3 100.3 40.5 2003
1.0 61.8 99.6 1,271.2 119.7 1,151.4 0.1 30.3 2,200.0 646.9 851.2 603.5 98.4 43.7 2004
− 56.6 108.5 1,300.0 120.5 1,179.4 0.1 26.5 2,276.6 717.0 864.4 603.4 91.9 42.4 2005
− 53.0 106.3 1,348.2 125.4 1,222.7 0.0 22.3 2,394.6 747.7 962.8 586.5 97.5 37.8 2006
− 51.1 109.4 1,478.6 122.1 1,356.5 0.0 20.0 2,579.1 779.9 1,125.4 555.4 118.4 36.4 2007
− 47.2 111.2 1,582.5 138.5 1,444.0 0.0 41.6 2,781.4 834.6 1,276.1 535.2 135.4 32.3 2008
− 43.9 106.1 1,355.1 128.9 1,226.2 0.0 35.7 2,829.7 1,029.5 1,102.6 594.5 103.2 43.4 2009
− 49.7 110.5 1,438.6 122.5 1,316.1 0.0 41.9 2,644.7 768.2 1,221.5 527.9 127.1 32.5 2008          July
− 49.3 110.2 1,446.4 124.6 1,321.8 0.0 42.3 2,660.4 771.9 1,236.7 523.6 128.1 32.5          Aug 
− 48.4 108.2 1,528.8 151.4 1,377.4 0.0 42.0 2,676.0 784.7 1,242.4 519.3 129.6 32.3          Sep 
− 48.1 108.8 1,641.8 162.0 1,479.7 0.0 43.2 2,719.2 812.8 1,252.5 520.8 133.1 32.3          Oct 
− 47.8 108.4 1,595.2 155.9 1,439.3 0.0 43.2 2,748.8 832.8 1,257.9 523.4 134.7 32.2          Nov 
− 47.2 111.2 1,582.5 138.5 1,444.0 0.0 41.6 2,781.4 834.6 1,276.1 535.2 135.4 32.3          Dec 
− 46.9 115.6 1,532.6 155.0 1,377.6 0.0 41.9 2,799.9 884.4 1,242.7 539.0 133.8 31.9 2009          Jan 
− 46.5 116.4 1,509.5 159.0 1,350.4 0.0 42.0 2,820.0 912.1 1,231.8 544.3 131.9 31.8          Feb 
− 46.4 119.5 1,455.9 138.3 1,317.7 0.0 40.6 2,817.3 914.0 1,226.4 547.8 129.1 30.9          Mar 
− 45.5 119.1 1,458.0 153.2 1,304.8 0.0 39.6 2,839.6 932.2 1,231.1 551.1 125.2 31.1          Apr 
− 44.7 110.6 1,444.8 121.6 1,323.1 0.0 38.3 2,837.0 935.4 1,224.4 555.1 122.1 31.2          May
− 44.2 108.4 1,467.8 117.4 1,350.4 0.0 37.6 2,847.3 956.0 1,213.1 559.7 118.5 31.1          June
− 43.8 107.5 1,417.1 119.2 1,297.9 0.0 37.2 2,819.9 954.4 1,185.6 565.5 114.4 31.2          July
− 43.5 108.0 1,413.9 125.7 1,288.2 0.0 36.9 2,801.5 962.4 1,157.0 570.8 111.2 42.0          Aug 
− 43.2 107.7 1,380.6 129.9 1,250.7 0.0 36.3 2,810.6 987.2 1,139.6 575.1 108.6 42.2          Sep 
− 42.9 103.7 1,372.8 126.2 1,246.7 0.0 35.8 2,812.0 1,014.0 1,110.4 581.8 105.9 42.2          Oct 
− 42.8 102.7 1,375.3 150.5 1,224.8 0.0 35.5 2,825.5 1,037.6 1,098.1 585.6 104.2 42.2          Nov 
− 43.9 106.1 1,355.1 128.9 1,226.2 0.0 35.7 2,829.7 1,029.5 1,102.6 594.5 103.2 43.4          Dec 
Changes *
− 29.1 − 1.5 + 13.3 + 9.6 + 7.4 + 2.3 − 0.2 − 2.9 + 88.5 + 82.3 + 8.1 + 1.1 − 2.9 + 1.0 2001
− 1.0 − 2.1 + 24.2 + 37.9 + 1.7 + 36.3 − 0.1 − 1.5 + 51.7 + 48.4 + 4.1 + 0.8 − 1.6 − 1.1 2002
− 1.0 + 2.1 − 9.8 − 5.6 − 9.5 + 3.9 + 0.0 + 2.4 + 54.0 + 48.4 − 4.8 + 15.1 − 4.8 − 1.2 2003
− 1.1 + 3.0 − 9.6 + 41.3 + 2.9 + 38.5 − 0.1 + 2.4 + 62.0 + 24.4 + 25.9 + 13.1 − 1.5 + 1.2 2004
− 1.0 − 4.9 + 8.9 + 28.9 + 0.8 + 28.0 + 0.0 − 3.5 + 76.6 + 70.7 + 12.4 − 1.2 − 5.4 − 1.2 2005
− − 3.7 − 2.2 + 79.0 + 8.6 + 70.5 − 0.1 − 4.5 + 118.0 + 30.0 + 97.7 − 16.8 + 7.2 − 4.1 2006
− − 2.3 + 3.1 + 132.0 − 3.3 + 135.3 − 0.0 − 2.3 + 181.1 + 31.6 + 160.5 − 31.1 + 20.1 − 2.0 2007
− − 5.4 + 7.8 + 124.3 + 23.0 + 101.3 − 0.0 − 3.6 + 207.6 + 54.3 + 156.6 − 20.2 + 17.0 − 1.3 2008
− − 4.2 + 0.7 − 225.4 − 9.7 − 215.7 − 0.0 − 5.7 + 59.7 + 211.3 − 179.3 + 59.3 − 31.6 − 0.9 2009
− + 0.5 + 4.4 + 3.0 − 9.7 + 12.7 − 0.0 + 0.3 − 1.7 − 24.9 + 27.1 − 5.6 + 1.7 − 0.5 2008          July
− − 0.4 − 0.3 + 13.7 + 2.2 + 11.6 − + 0.4 + 15.7 + 3.8 + 15.2 − 4.3 + 1.0 + 0.0          Aug 
− − 1.0 − 2.0 + 82.3 + 26.8 + 55.5 − − 0.3 + 15.5 + 12.8 + 5.7 − 4.4 + 1.4 − 0.2          Sep 
− − 0.3 + 0.5 + 113.0 + 11.1 + 101.9 − 0.0 + 1.2 + 43.2 + 28.1 + 10.1 + 1.5 + 3.5 − 0.1          Oct 
− − 0.3 − 0.3 − 30.7 − 3.3 − 27.4 + 0.0 + 0.0 + 34.3 + 20.0 + 10.1 + 2.6 + 1.7 − 0.0          Nov 
− − 0.6 + 2.8 − 12.7 − 17.4 + 4.7 − 0.0 − 1.6 + 33.5 + 1.8 + 19.2 + 11.8 + 0.6 + 0.1          Dec 
− − 0.3 + 4.4 − 49.9 + 16.5 − 66.4 − 0.0 + 0.3 + 18.5 + 49.7 − 33.5 + 3.8 − 1.5 − 0.4 2009          Jan 
− − 0.3 + 0.7 − 23.1 + 4.0 − 27.1 − + 0.1 + 20.2 + 27.7 − 10.9 + 5.3 − 2.0 − 0.1          Feb 
− − 0.6 + 3.2 − 53.6 − 20.7 − 32.8 − 0.0 − 1.4 − 3.0 + 1.9 − 6.1 + 3.5 − 2.4 − 0.9          Mar 
− − 0.9 − 0.4 + 1.8 + 14.9 − 13.2 + 0.0 − 1.0 + 22.3 + 34.9 − 12.0 + 3.3 − 3.9 + 0.2          Apr 
− − 0.2 − 2.6 − 9.8 − 31.6 + 21.8 − 0.0 − 1.1 − 2.6 + 3.0 − 6.5 + 3.9 − 3.1 − 0.0          May
− − 0.4 − 2.2 + 23.0 − 4.3 + 27.3 − 0.0 − 0.7 + 10.3 + 20.6 − 11.3 + 4.7 − 3.7 − 0.1          June
− − 0.4 − 0.8 − 50.6 + 1.9 − 52.5 − − 0.4 − 27.4 − 1.7 − 27.4 + 5.8 − 4.1 + 0.1          July
− − 0.3 + 0.5 − 3.3 + 6.4 − 9.7 − 0.0 − 0.3 − 7.0 + 8.0 − 17.2 + 5.3 − 3.1 + 0.0          Aug 
− − 0.3 − 0.3 − 34.3 + 4.3 − 38.5 − 0.0 − 0.6 + 9.1 + 24.7 − 17.4 + 4.3 − 2.6 + 0.2          Sep 
− − 0.3 − 4.1 − 7.8 − 3.8 − 4.1 + 0.0 − 0.5 + 1.7 + 26.8 − 29.3 + 6.6 − 2.5 + 0.1          Oct 
− − 0.1 − 0.9 + 2.5 + 24.4 − 21.9 − 0.0 − 0.3 + 13.5 + 23.6 − 12.3 + 3.8 − 1.7 + 0.0          Nov 
− + 0.0 + 3.3 − 20.2 − 21.7 + 1.5 + 0.0 + 0.2 + 4.3 − 8.1 + 4.5 + 8.9 − 1.0 + 0.1          Dec 
including subordinated liabilities. — 10Up to December 1998, excluding endorsement liabilities arising from rediscounted bills. — 15Up to
liabilities to domestic building and loan associations and money market December 1998, including liabilities to domestic building and loan
funds. — 11Up to December 1998, including time deposits with terms of associations and money market funds. — 16Since the inclusion of building
less than one month. — 12Including liabilities arising from monetary policy and loan associations in January 1999, including deposits under savings and
operations with the Bundesbank. — 13Up to December 1998, excluding loan contracts (see Table IV.12). — 17Excluding deposits under savings and
time deposits with terms of less than one month. — 14Own acceptances loan contracts (see also footnote 16). — 18Including liabilities arising from
and promissory notes outstanding and, up to December 1998, including non-negotiable bearer debt securities. 
27*IV Banks

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
E U R O S Y S T E M
Monthly Report
February 2010
IV Banks
 
4 Assets and liabilities of banks (MFIs) in Germany vis-à-vis non-residents *
 
€ billion
Lending to foreign banks (MFIs)  2 Lending to foreign non-banks (non-MFIs)  2 
Treasury
Cash in bills and
hand Loans and bills  3 negotiable Credit balances and loans, bills  3 Negotiable
(non- money money
euro-area Medium market Memo Medium market
banknotes and paper item and paper Securities Securities
and Short- long- issued by issued by Fiduciary Short- long- issued by issued by
Period coins)  1 Total Total term term banks banks loans  4 Total Total term term non-banks non-banks
End of year or month *
 
2000 0.4 507.7 441.4 325.4 116.0 1.3 65.0 3.6 475.8 286.8 71.1 215.7 6.5 182.5
2001 0.4 596.1 521.7 383.7 138.0 0.8 73.6 3.5 570.3 347.2 99.7 247.5 5.2 217.9
2002 0.3 690.6 615.3 468.0 147.2 0.9 74.4 2.7 558.8 332.6 92.6 240.0 9.3 216.9
2003 0.3 769.6 675.8 515.7 160.1 1.5 92.3 1.6 576.3 344.8 110.9 233.9 6.0 225.4
2004 0.2 889.4 760.2 606.5 153.7 2.8 126.3 1.5 629.5 362.5 136.6 225.9 10.9 256.1
2005 0.2 1,038.8 860.0 648.5 211.5 5.8 173.0 1.5 712.0 387.9 132.8 255.1 9.3 314.8
2006 0.4 1,266.9 1,003.2 744.5 258.7 13.3 250.4 0.8 777.0 421.0 156.0 264.9 7.2 348.9
2007 0.3 1,433.5 1,105.9 803.6 302.4 13.4 314.2 0.5 908.3 492.9 197.5 295.4 27.5 387.9
2008 0.3 1,446.6 1,131.6 767.2 364.3 15.6 299.5 1.9 908.4 528.9 151.4 377.5 12.9 366.6
2009 0.3 1,277.4 986.1 643.5 342.6 6.2 285.1 2.9 815.7 469.6 116.9 352.7 9.8 336.3
2008          July 0.6 1,445.9 1,096.0 766.6 329.5 32.2 317.7 1.9 929.5 533.3 196.0 337.3 18.2 378.0
         Aug 0.5 1,444.6 1,093.5 754.7 338.8 32.5 318.6 2.0 949.7 554.6 203.1 351.5 17.3 377.8
         Sep 0.4 1,521.0 1,171.1 814.7 356.4 32.1 317.8 2.0 967.1 569.7 203.4 366.3 18.5 378.9
         Oct 0.8 1,571.1 1,232.6 859.9 372.7 27.3 311.3 2.0 990.1 597.4 208.6 388.8 17.0 375.6
         Nov 0.7 1,509.6 1,181.4 807.5 373.9 21.5 306.7 2.0 961.6 574.4 183.8 390.5 12.8 374.4
         Dec 0.3 1,446.6 1,131.6 767.2 364.3 15.6 299.5 1.9 908.4 528.9 151.4 377.5 12.9 366.6
2009          Jan 0.4 1,433.6 1,122.7 743.9 378.8 14.8 296.1 1.9 915.4 541.1 153.8 387.3 12.2 362.1
         Feb 0.4 1,416.2 1,111.4 733.1 378.3 12.2 292.6 1.9 905.6 529.5 141.1 388.4 11.3 364.7
         Mar 0.5 1,357.7 1,058.2 686.2 372.0 10.0 289.5 1.9 880.9 514.4 135.4 379.1 9.8 356.6
         Apr 0.4 1,378.9 1,081.8 713.6 368.2 9.2 287.9 1.9 896.0 530.1 147.2 382.9 11.6 354.3
         May 0.4 1,355.9 1,057.7 691.4 366.3 6.7 291.4 2.0 884.5 516.3 143.5 372.8 12.3 355.9
         June 0.5 1,332.8 1,036.7 653.2 383.5 8.2 287.8 2.0 879.9 513.5 142.6 370.9 11.6 354.7
         July 0.4 1,310.8 1,016.8 639.5 377.3 8.6 285.5 2.0 875.4 510.3 136.8 373.5 13.8 351.3
         Aug 0.3 1,311.7 1,017.4 647.4 370.0 8.3 286.1 3.1 851.5 491.7 130.6 361.1 13.1 346.6
         Sep 0.4 1,261.1 967.7 608.1 359.6 8.1 285.2 3.0 840.2 482.3 125.6 356.7 11.1 346.8
         Oct 0.4 1,278.7 987.6 637.1 350.5 7.8 283.3 3.0 836.3 480.4 127.2 353.3 13.1 342.7
         Nov 0.3 1,274.1 981.6 637.6 344.1 9.0 283.5 3.0 828.7 473.2 124.5 348.8 13.2 342.3
         Dec 0.3 1,277.4 986.1 643.5 342.6 6.2 285.1 2.9 815.7 469.6 116.9 352.7 9.8 336.3
Changes *
2001 + 0.0 + 83.7 + 75.6 + 54.4 + 21.2 − 0.5 + 8.5 − 0.2 + 88.3 + 53.4 + 27.0 + 26.4 − 1.5 + 36.3
2002 − 0.1 + 120.3 + 118.0 + 99.4 + 18.6 + 0.1 + 2.2 − 0.9 + 21.2 + 12.7 − 0.4 + 13.2 + 4.6 + 3.9
2003 − 0.1 + 103.8 + 84.6 + 65.2 + 19.3 + 0.6 + 18.7 − 0.4 + 46.3 + 35.1 + 24.0 + 11.0 − 2.7 + 13.9
2004 − 0.1 + 128.3 + 89.4 + 95.3 − 5.9 + 1.3 + 37.6 − 0.1 + 65.8 + 29.5 + 31.7 − 2.2 + 5.1 + 31.1
2005 + 0.0 + 127.3 + 78.9 + 26.3 + 52.6 + 2.9 + 45.4 − 0.0 + 59.4 + 7.3 − 9.4 + 16.7 − 1.8 + 54.0
2006 + 0.1 + 238.3 + 153.5 + 109.7 + 43.8 + 7.5 + 77.2 − 0.7 + 81.4 + 51.6 + 25.9 + 25.8 − 1.8 + 31.5
2007 − 0.0 + 190.3 + 123.7 + 72.9 + 50.8 + 7.5 + 59.1 − 0.4 + 167.7 + 94.3 + 50.1 + 44.2 + 20.1 + 53.3
2008 + 0.0 + 8.5 + 20.2 − 43.0 + 63.2 + 2.1 − 13.7 − 0.0 + 4.3 + 45.1 − 31.9 + 77.0 − 14.5 − 26.3
2009 − 0.0 − 170.0 − 141.3 − 122.5 − 18.8 −10.3 − 18.4 − 0.2 − 72.8 − 43.8 − 31.7 − 12.1 − 3.3 − 25.7
2008          July + 0.2 − 9.2 − 13.5 − 25.2 + 11.7 + 3.9 + 0.4 − 0.0 − 1.4 + 5.7 + 1.4 + 4.3 − 1.1 − 6.0
         Aug − 0.1 − 15.5 − 16.4 − 20.7 + 4.3 + 0.2 + 0.7 + 0.1 + 7.0 + 11.5 + 4.7 + 6.9 − 1.1 − 3.4
         Sep − 0.1 + 65.8 + 67.5 + 53.7 + 13.7 − 0.4 − 1.3 + 0.0 + 9.2 + 8.9 − 1.5 + 10.3 + 1.1 − 0.7
         Oct + 0.4 + 9.5 + 21.6 + 19.2 + 2.5 − 5.0 − 7.2 + 0.0 − 10.3 + 3.6 − 1.1 + 4.7 − 2.0 − 11.8
         Nov − 0.2 − 53.9 − 43.8 − 46.5 + 2.8 − 5.7 − 4.4 − 0.0 − 12.5 − 7.4 − 10.3 + 2.9 − 4.2 − 0.9
         Dec − 0.3 − 31.8 − 19.9 − 22.1 + 2.2 − 5.9 − 6.0 − 0.1 − 27.1 − 25.2 − 27.6 + 2.4 + 0.2 − 2.0
2009          Jan + 0.1 − 39.9 − 34.8 − 39.1 + 4.2 − 0.8 − 4.2 + 0.1 − 15.8 − 5.3 − 1.5 − 3.9 − 0.7 − 9.7
         Feb − 0.0 − 19.3 − 13.5 − 12.0 − 1.5 − 3.1 − 2.7 + 0.0 − 12.8 − 13.6 − 13.3 − 0.4 − 0.9 + 1.8
         Mar + 0.1 − 42.4 − 37.7 − 38.1 + 0.4 − 2.2 − 2.5 − 0.0 − 9.8 − 3.7 − 3.2 − 0.5 − 1.5 − 4.7
         Apr − 0.1 + 18.4 + 21.3 + 26.0 − 4.7 − 0.8 − 2.1 − 0.0 + 13.0 + 14.5 + 11.6 + 2.9 + 1.5 − 3.0
         May − 0.0 − 14.1 − 10.9 − 14.3 + 3.5 − 2.5 − 0.7 − 0.1 + 6.3 − 2.9 − 1.1 − 1.8 + 0.8 + 8.4
         June + 0.1 − 23.9 − 21.2 − 38.2 + 17.0 + 1.0 − 3.7 − 0.0 − 4.3 − 2.5 − 0.2 − 2.3 − 0.7 − 1.0
         July − 0.0 − 21.8 − 19.9 − 13.7 − 6.1 + 0.3 − 2.3 + 0.0 − 5.0 − 3.4 − 5.8 + 2.4 + 2.2 − 3.8
         Aug − 0.1 + 4.9 + 4.7 + 9.7 − 5.0 − 0.3 + 0.5 + 0.0 − 10.9 − 6.4 − 5.0 − 1.4 − 0.7 − 3.7
         Sep + 0.1 − 43.7 − 43.5 − 35.9 − 7.6 − 0.1 − 0.1 − 0.1 − 5.5 − 4.6 − 3.9 − 0.8 − 2.0 + 1.1
         Oct − 0.0 + 19.4 + 21.7 + 30.1 − 8.4 − 0.4 − 2.0 − 0.0 − 1.2 − 0.1 + 1.9 − 1.9 + 2.1 − 3.2
         Nov − 0.0 − 1.3 − 2.8 + 2.2 − 5.1 + 1.2 + 0.3 − 0.0 − 4.3 − 4.6 − 2.1 − 2.5 + 0.0 + 0.2
         Dec + 0.0 − 6.4 − 4.8 + 0.8 − 5.6 − 2.8 + 1.1 − 0.1 − 22.6 − 11.2 − 9.2 − 2.0 − 3.4 − 8.1
*See Table IV.2, footnote*; statistical breaks have been eliminated from the banknotes and coins. — 2Up to December 1998, including fiduciary loans
changes. The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as (see also footnote 4). — 3Up to December 1998, bill-based lending (bill
provisional. Subsequent revisions, which appear in the following Monthly holdings plus endorsement liabilities arising from rediscounted bills a nd bills
Report, are not specially marked. — 1Up to December 1998, foreign sent for collection from the banks’ portfolios prior to maturity). —
28*IV Banks

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
February 2010
IV Banks
 
 
 
 
 Deposits of foreign banks (MFIs)  2 Deposits of foreign non-banks (non-MFIs)  2 
 Partici- Time deposits (including
pating Time deposits (including bank savings deposits and bank
interests savings bonds) savings bonds)
in foreign
Memo banks Medium Memo Medium Memo
item and and item and item
Fiduciary enter- Sight Short- long- Fiduciary Sight Short- long- Fiduciary
loans  4 prises  5 Total Total  7 term  7 term loans  4 Total Total  7 term  7 term loans  4   Period deposits  6 deposits  6 
End of year or month *
 
13.9 47.4 586.0 113.7 472.2 382.9 89.3 1.7 314.9 35.4 279.5 62.5 217.0 5.6 2000
13.8 47.6 622.7 91.9 530.8 434.5 96.3 1.4 350.6 34.0 316.6 97.6 219.0 5.3 2001
15.6 44.8 614.2 101.6 512.7 410.4 102.3 1.1 319.2 33.5 285.7 87.0 198.7 4.5 2002
11.6 41.4 590.7 95.1 495.6 387.7 107.9 0.4 307.3 32.2 275.1 102.4 172.7 3.6 2003
9.8 39.3 603.3 87.0 516.2 403.2 113.0 0.5 311.2 36.6 274.7 123.4 151.2 0.8 2004
10.6 37.2 651.7 102.9 548.8 420.4 128.4 0.6 316.4 62.0 254.4 119.4 135.0 1.2 2005
5.8 50.4 689.7 168.1 521.6 397.3 124.3 0.4 310.1 82.1 228.0 111.5 116.5 1.5 2006
5.7 48.3 738.9 164.7 574.1 461.2 113.0 0.2 303.1 76.0 227.1 122.3 104.8 3.1 2007
25.5 45.1 703.3 218.1 485.1 362.3 122.9 0.3 286.1 92.2 193.9 95.1 98.8 2.5 2008
32.1 45.4 652.6 213.6 439.0 307.4 131.6 0.2 216.3 78.1 138.2 73.7 64.5 1.9 2009
23.7 49.8 746.6 198.8 547.7 439.8 107.9 0.3 328.7 100.7 228.0 130.9 97.2 2.6 2008          July
24.4 49.9 748.0 171.6 576.5 465.4 111.1 0.3 337.6 103.8 233.8 136.4 97.4 2.6          Aug 
24.7 48.6 815.2 258.3 556.9 436.1 120.8 0.3 323.3 101.1 222.2 125.6 96.6 2.5          Sep 
26.3 49.2 780.1 243.5 536.6 415.1 121.5 0.3 325.3 103.6 221.7 117.9 103.8 2.7          Oct 
26.5 49.0 752.0 254.4 497.6 369.7 127.9 0.3 307.8 103.7 204.1 101.4 102.7 2.6          Nov 
25.5 45.1 703.3 218.1 485.1 362.3 122.9 0.3 286.1 92.2 193.9 95.1 98.8 2.5          Dec 
25.9 50.9 737.2 253.1 484.1 359.6 124.6 0.3 306.8 123.8 183.0 82.4 100.7 2.6 2009          Jan 
26.1 49.4 733.1 251.7 481.4 356.7 124.6 0.3 279.9 100.5 179.4 78.5 100.9 2.5          Feb 
24.1 49.5 705.4 266.8 438.7 315.7 122.9 0.3 273.0 103.7 169.3 71.3 98.0 2.5          Mar 
24.2 50.0 729.0 228.6 500.4 378.6 121.8 0.3 288.8 100.4 188.4 91.5 96.9 2.4          Apr 
23.8 49.7 718.8 214.4 504.4 353.6 150.8 0.3 239.2 102.5 136.7 72.1 64.7 2.3          May
23.3 49.7 720.6 247.2 473.4 321.9 151.5 0.3 237.5 102.5 135.0 70.9 64.1 2.1          June
23.2 49.7 699.5 227.9 471.7 321.9 149.8 0.3 250.7 112.3 138.3 73.2 65.1 2.0          July
32.9 49.6 682.3 215.3 467.1 321.8 145.2 0.3 243.9 100.5 143.4 79.7 63.7 2.0          Aug 
32.5 49.3 665.4 218.9 446.5 304.7 141.9 0.2 237.0 94.7 142.3 76.1 66.2 2.0          Sep 
32.3 49.2 657.2 226.4 430.9 291.5 139.4 0.2 245.0 103.8 141.1 75.5 65.7 1.9          Oct 
32.1 51.1 651.3 235.9 415.4 281.6 133.7 0.2 241.0 93.2 147.8 82.1 65.7 1.9          Nov 
32.1 45.4 652.6 213.6 439.0 307.4 131.6 0.2 216.3 78.1 138.2 73.7 64.5 1.9          Dec 
Changes *
− 0.5 − 0.5 + 23.5 − 23.6 + 47.0 + 42.4 + 4.6 − 0.4 + 30.8 − 1.8 + 32.6 + 33.3 − 0.7 − 0.6 2001
+ 1.7 + 1.6 + 22.7 + 14.6 + 8.1 − 1.3 + 9.4 − 0.3 + 4.6 + 0.8 + 3.8 − 4.6 + 8.4 − 0.9 2002
− 0.7 − 1.9 + 5.7 − 2.0 + 7.7 − 2.4 + 10.0 − 0.0 + 4.5 + 0.4 + 4.1 + 20.6 − 16.5 + 1.9 2003
+ 0.7 − 1.5 + 19.8 − 6.1 + 25.9 + 21.1 + 4.8 + 0.1 + 13.0 + 5.4 + 7.6 + 22.8 − 15.2 − 0.3 2004
+ 0.8 − 3.5 + 28.6 + 12.6 + 16.0 + 4.9 + 11.1 + 0.1 − 4.9 + 23.9 − 28.8 − 7.7 − 21.1 + 0.4 2005
− 5.1 + 13.8 + 56.2 + 68.3 − 12.1 − 13.7 + 1.6 − 0.2 − 0.8 + 21.2 − 22.0 − 5.1 − 17.0 − 0.2 2006
− 0.1 − 0.8 + 67.3 + 1.5 + 65.8 + 74.0 − 8.3 − 0.1 + 4.6 − 5.5 + 10.2 + 16.6 − 6.4 + 1.6 2007
+ 0.7 − 3.1 − 50.1 + 52.2 − 102.3 − 120.7 + 18.5 + 0.1 − 12.4 + 16.1 − 28.5 − 19.4 − 9.1 − 0.6 2008
− 3.2 + 0.1 − 81.4 − 2.1 − 79.3 − 57.5 − 21.7 − 0.2 − 33.5 − 13.3 − 20.1 − 17.0 − 3.1 − 0.6 2009
− 0.7 − 0.1 − 23.6 − 32.2 + 8.5 + 7.6 + 1.0 + 0.0 + 14.4 − 0.6 + 15.0 + 16.6 − 1.6 − 0.0 2008          July
+ 0.7 − 0.4 − 11.1 − 29.7 + 18.6 + 16.2 + 2.4 + 0.0 + 6.4 + 2.1 + 4.2 + 5.4 − 1.1 − 0.0          Aug 
+ 0.4 − 1.7 + 59.5 + 85.7 − 26.2 − 35.3 + 9.1 − 0.0 − 17.7 − 3.1 − 14.6 − 12.7 − 1.9 − 0.1          Sep 
+ 1.6 − 0.8 − 61.4 − 22.2 − 39.2 − 40.1 + 0.9 + 0.0 − 13.0 + 0.1 − 13.2 − 13.3 + 0.1 + 0.1          Oct 
+ 0.2 + 0.1 − 26.4 + 11.0 − 37.3 − 44.0 + 6.6 − 0.0 − 10.4 + 2.9 − 13.3 − 13.5 + 0.2 − 0.1          Nov 
− 1.0 − 2.6 − 38.1 − 31.8 − 6.3 − 4.2 − 2.1 − 0.0 − 7.6 − 9.8 + 2.2 + 3.4 − 1.2 − 0.1          Dec 
+ 0.3 + 4.6 + 18.3 + 32.1 − 13.8 − 12.9 − 0.9 − 0.0 + 14.2 + 30.4 − 16.3 − 14.8 − 1.4 + 0.1 2009          Jan 
+ 0.3 − 1.6 − 5.9 − 1.8 − 4.0 − 3.8 − 0.2 − 0.0 − 27.4 − 23.4 − 4.0 − 3.9 − 0.1 − 0.1          Feb 
− 1.6 + 0.8 − 17.5 + 17.9 − 35.4 − 35.3 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 3.1 + 4.0 − 7.1 − 6.0 − 1.1 − 0.1          Mar 
+ 0.0 + 0.3 + 22.5 − 37.8 + 60.3 + 60.8 − 0.5 − + 14.8 − 3.3 + 18.1 + 19.8 − 1.6 − 0.1          Apr 
− 0.9 + 0.1 − 36.3 − 11.5 − 24.9 − 23.8 − 1.0 − 0.0 − 10.5 + 3.1 − 13.6 − 14.3 + 0.7 − 0.1          May
− 0.5 − 0.1 + 1.9 + 32.8 − 30.9 − 30.7 − 0.2 − 0.0 − 1.9 + 0.1 − 2.0 − 1.3 − 0.6 − 0.1          June
− 0.1 − − 21.0 − 19.4 − 1.7 + 0.0 − 1.7 − 0.0 + 13.2 + 9.8 + 3.4 + 2.3 + 1.1 − 0.1          July
+ 0.0 + 0.1 − 15.1 − 12.8 − 2.3 + 1.6 − 4.0 − 0.0 − 5.6 − 11.7 + 6.1 + 6.9 − 0.7 + 0.0          Aug 
− 0.4 + 0.0 − 12.2 + 4.7 − 16.9 − 14.6 − 2.3 − 0.1 − 5.6 − 5.5 − 0.1 − 2.9 + 2.9 − 0.1          Sep 
− 0.2 − 0.1 − 6.9 + 7.9 − 14.8 − 12.5 − 2.3 − + 8.2 + 9.3 − 1.1 − 0.4 − 0.7 − 0.1          Oct 
− 0.2 + 2.0 − 3.6 + 10.2 − 13.9 − 8.8 − 5.1 − − 3.3 − 10.4 + 7.1 + 6.9 + 0.2 − 0.0          Nov 
− 0.0 − 6.1 − 5.4 − 24.4 + 19.0 + 22.5 − 3.5 − 0.0 − 26.4 − 15.6 − 10.8 − 9.1 − 1.7 − 0.0          Dec 
4From 1999, no longer included in loans and deposits (see also footnote terms of less than one month. — 7Up to December 1998, excluding time
2). — 5Up to December 1998, including working capital supplied to deposits with terms of less than one month. 
branches abroad. — 6Up to December 1998, including time deposits with
29*IV Banks

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
E U R O S Y S T E M
Monthly Report
February 2010
IV Banks
 
5 Lending by banks (MFIs) in Germany to domestic non-banks (non-MFIs) *
 
€ billion
Lending to domestic Short-term lending Medium and long-term
non-banks, total  1,2 
      to general government to enter- to enterprises and households  1 
 
including excluding Negoti-
negotiable money able
market paper, Loans money
Period securities, and market Treasury
equalisation claims Total Total paper Total Loans bills Total Total bills 3,4 
End of year or month *
 
2000 3,003.7 2,663.7 371.2 348.2 347.7 0.5 22.9 21.2 1.7 2,632.5 2,038.6
2001 3,014.1 2,704.2 387.9 356.7 355.2 1.5 31.2 28.2 2.9 2,626.2 2,070.2
2002 2,997.2 2,689.1 365.4 331.9 331.0 1.0 33.5 31.1 2.4 2,631.8 2,079.7
2003 2,995.6 2,680.6 355.2 315.0 313.4 1.6 40.2 38.4 1.8 2,640.4 2,096.1
2004 3,001.3 2,646.7 320.9 283.8 283.0 0.8 37.1 35.3 1.8 2,680.4 2,114.2
2005 2,995.1 2,635.1 309.7 273.5 272.9 0.6 36.2 34.4 1.8 2,685.4 2,141.3
2006 3,000.7 2,632.2 303.1 269.8 269.3 0.6 33.3 31.9 1.4 2,697.6 2,181.8
2007 2,975.7 2,649.5 331.2 301.8 301.5 0.3 29.4 28.2 1.2 2,644.6 2,168.3
2008 3,071.1 2,700.1 373.0 337.5 335.3 2.2 35.5 34.5 1.0 2,698.1 2,257.8
2009 3,100.1 2,692.5 347.3 306.3 306.2 0.1 41.0 37.1 3.9 2,752.8 2,299.7
2008          July 3,018.8 2,691.2 374.4 340.5 339.9 0.6 34.0 31.8 2.1 2,644.3 2,184.7
         Aug 3,045.3 2,693.2 369.9 335.0 334.3 0.7 34.9 32.8 2.1 2,675.4 2,218.7
         Sep 3,044.8 2,699.6 378.5 345.9 345.0 0.9 32.6 31.1 1.6 2,666.2 2,221.6
         Oct 3,045.1 2,704.4 374.5 337.9 337.5 0.4 36.7 34.8 1.9 2,670.6 2,225.5
         Nov 3,044.6 2,706.6 375.8 341.3 340.9 0.4 34.5 32.9 1.6 2,668.8 2,226.4
         Dec 3,071.1 2,700.1 373.0 337.5 335.3 2.2 35.5 34.5 1.0 2,698.1 2,257.8
2009          Jan 3,097.3 2,719.9 395.2 353.9 353.2 0.7 41.4 39.0 2.4 2,702.0 2,260.4
         Feb 3,091.2 2,710.7 386.9 344.0 343.6 0.5 42.8 40.1 2.8 2,704.3 2,266.9
         Mar 3,101.4 2,721.5 410.5 368.3 367.9 0.4 42.2 39.0 3.3 2,690.9 2,256.7
         Apr 3,124.3 2,726.0 408.5 362.5 362.1 0.4 46.0 41.0 5.0 2,715.8 2,276.8
         May 3,106.5 2,721.4 401.9 360.4 359.5 0.9 41.4 36.5 5.0 2,704.6 2,263.1
         June 3,121.8 2,724.8 401.8 362.3 362.0 0.3 39.5 36.0 3.4 2,720.0 2,274.1
         July 3,116.5 2,720.9 387.8 336.5 336.1 0.3 51.3 46.4 4.9 2,728.7 2,281.7
         Aug 3,094.1 2,704.5 367.4 321.9 321.7 0.3 45.5 40.9 4.6 2,726.7 2,280.6
         Sep 3,110.3 2,715.5 383.3 337.5 337.2 0.3 45.8 39.1 6.7 2,727.1 2,279.4
         Oct 3,116.9 2,717.2 381.6 326.3 325.9 0.4 55.3 50.4 4.9 2,735.3 2,281.4
         Nov 3,117.3 2,713.4 374.5 327.2 327.0 0.2 47.4 42.1 5.2 2,742.7 2,289.4
         Dec 3,100.1 2,692.5 347.3 306.3 306.2 0.1 41.0 37.1 3.9 2,752.8 2,299.7
Changes *
2001 + 11.9 + 39.2 + 15.3 + 7.0 + 5.9 + 1.0 + 8.4 + 7.8 + 0.6 − 3.4 + 32.0
2002 − 19.2 − 18.8 − 23.4 − 25.7 − 25.2 − 0.5 + 2.3 + 2.9 − 0.6 + 4.3 + 7.6
2003 + 0.1 − 8.4 − 10.0 − 16.7 − 17.5 + 0.9 + 6.7 + 7.3 − 0.6 + 10.1 + 16.0
2004 + 3.3 − 36.0 − 31.7 − 30.5 − 29.7 − 0.8 − 1.2 − 3.2 + 1.9 + 35.0 + 15.6
2005 − 6.7 − 12.1 − 11.5 − 10.6 − 10.4 − 0.2 − 0.9 − 0.9 + 0.0 + 4.8 + 26.8
2006 − 12.4 − 20.8 − 7.1 − 4.5 − 4.4 − 0.0 − 2.7 − 2.3 − 0.4 − 5.2 + 23.6
2007 − 15.9 + 11.8 + 27.6 + 31.5 + 31.7 − 0.2 − 3.9 − 3.7 − 0.3 − 43.5 − 7.1
2008 + 92.0 + 46.9 + 43.1 + 36.8 + 34.9 + 1.8 + 6.3 + 6.3 − 0.0 + 48.9 + 83.4
2009 + 25.7 − 11.6 − 26.1 − 31.5 − 30.0 − 1.5 + 5.5 + 2.5 + 2.9 + 51.8 + 36.6
2008          July + 6.8 + 7.7 + 3.4 + 1.6 + 2.0 − 0.4 + 1.8 + 2.2 − 0.4 + 3.4 + 5.6
         Aug + 26.6 + 2.1 − 4.6 − 5.5 − 5.6 + 0.1 + 0.9 + 0.9 − 0.0 + 31.2 + 34.1
         Sep − 0.5 + 6.4 + 8.7 + 10.9 + 10.7 + 0.1 − 2.2 − 1.7 − 0.5 − 9.2 + 2.8
         Oct + 0.4 + 4.8 − 3.1 − 7.1 − 6.6 − 0.5 + 4.0 + 3.7 + 0.3 + 3.4 + 3.0
         Nov − 0.5 + 2.2 + 1.3 + 3.4 + 3.5 − 0.0 − 2.1 − 1.9 − 0.2 − 1.7 + 0.9
         Dec + 23.2 − 9.6 − 2.8 − 3.8 − 5.6 + 1.8 + 1.0 + 1.6 − 0.6 + 26.0 + 26.9
2009          Jan + 26.2 + 19.8 + 21.0 + 15.1 + 16.7 − 1.5 + 5.8 + 4.4 + 1.4 + 5.2 + 3.9
         Feb − 6.1 − 9.2 − 8.3 − 9.8 − 9.6 − 0.2 + 1.5 + 1.1 + 0.4 + 2.3 + 6.5
         Mar + 9.2 + 9.7 + 23.6 + 24.2 + 24.3 − 0.1 − 0.6 − 1.1 + 0.5 − 14.4 − 11.3
         Apr + 22.8 + 4.5 − 2.0 − 5.8 − 5.7 − 0.0 + 3.7 + 2.0 + 1.7 + 24.9 + 20.2
         May − 16.9 − 4.6 − 6.6 − 2.1 − 2.6 + 0.5 − 4.5 − 4.5 − 0.0 − 10.4 − 12.9
         June + 15.8 + 3.4 + 0.7 + 2.7 + 2.8 − 0.1 − 1.9 − 0.4 − 1.5 + 15.1 + 10.7
         July − 5.4 − 3.9 − 14.1 − 25.9 − 25.9 + 0.0 + 11.8 + 10.3 + 1.5 + 8.6 + 7.5
         Aug − 22.4 − 16.4 − 20.4 − 14.5 − 14.4 − 0.1 − 5.8 − 5.5 − 0.4 − 2.0 − 1.1
         Sep + 15.9 + 10.7 + 15.9 + 15.5 + 15.5 + 0.1 + 0.3 − 1.8 + 2.1 + 0.1 − 1.5
         Oct + 6.4 + 1.8 − 1.6 − 11.1 − 11.2 + 0.0 + 9.5 + 11.2 − 1.7 + 8.0 + 1.7
         Nov + 0.4 − 3.7 − 7.0 + 0.9 + 1.1 − 0.2 − 7.9 − 8.2 + 0.3 + 7.4 + 5.4
         Dec − 20.2 − 23.7 − 27.3 − 20.9 − 20.8 − 0.0 − 6.4 − 5.0 − 1.4 + 7.1 + 7.5
*See Table IV.2, footnote*; statistical breaks have been eliminated from the including fiduciary loans (see also footnote 9). — 3Up to December 1998,
changes. The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as bill-based lending (bill holdings plus endorsement liabilities arising from
provisional. Subsequent revisions, which appear in the following Monthly rediscounted bills and bills sent for collection from the banks’ portfoli os
Report, are not specially marked. — 1Up to December 1998, including loans prior to maturity). — 4From 1999, including small amounts of medium-term
to domestic building and loan associations. — 2Up to December 1998, series of bills. — 5From 1999, breakdown of securities by medium
30*IV Banks

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
February 2010
IV Banks
 
 
 
 
lending  2,5 
prises and households  1,2 to general government  2 
Loans Loans
Memo Memo
item Equal- item
Medium- Long- Fiduciary Medium- Long- Secur- isation Fiduciary
Total term  6 term  7 loans  8 Total Total term  6 term  7 loans  8   Period Securities  5 ities 5,9 claims  10 
End of year or month *
 
1,838.9 192.8 1,646.0 199.7 50.1 593.9 455.9 30.4 425.5 104.9 33.1 8.4 2000
1,880.5 191.1 1,689.4 189.7 48.9 556.0 440.3 25.6 414.6 111.8 4.0 8.0 2001
1,909.8 193.5 1,716.3 169.9 47.3 552.1 417.1 27.4 389.7 132.0 3.0 7.5 2002
1,927.7 195.0 1,732.8 168.3 49.9 544.3 401.0 34.6 366.4 141.3 2.0 7.0 2003
1,940.8 194.3 1,746.5 173.5 55.3 566.1 387.7 32.9 354.8 177.5 1.0 6.5 2004
1,953.4 194.7 1,758.8 187.9 52.1 544.1 374.4 32.9 341.4 169.7 − 4.5 2005
1,972.7 194.5 1,778.1 209.1 48.2 515.8 358.4 31.7 326.6 157.4 − 4.8 2006
1,987.3 207.7 1,779.6 181.1 46.5 476.2 332.5 31.9 300.6 143.7 − 4.7 2007
2,022.0 222.0 1,800.0 235.8 42.8 440.3 308.2 29.7 278.5 132.1 − 4.5 2008
2,051.3 242.7 1,808.6 248.4 39.6 453.1 298.0 32.2 265.8 155.1 − 4.3 2009
2,001.8 213.3 1,788.4 182.9 45.2 459.7 317.8 32.1 285.7 141.9 − 4.5 2008          July
2,009.9 215.6 1,794.3 208.8 44.9 456.7 316.2 31.7 284.6 140.5 − 4.4          Aug 
2,009.8 215.4 1,794.4 211.9 44.0 444.6 313.7 31.0 282.8 130.9 − 4.4          Sep 
2,020.3 218.1 1,802.1 205.3 43.6 445.0 311.9 29.8 282.1 133.2 − 4.5          Oct 
2,021.5 218.7 1,802.8 204.9 43.3 442.4 311.3 29.9 281.4 131.2 − 4.5          Nov 
2,022.0 222.0 1,800.0 235.8 42.8 440.3 308.2 29.7 278.5 132.1 − 4.5          Dec 
2,022.5 222.9 1,799.5 238.0 42.5 441.6 305.3 29.7 275.6 136.3 − 4.4 2009          Jan 
2,024.7 225.8 1,799.0 242.2 42.2 437.4 302.4 29.2 273.2 135.0 − 4.4          Feb 
2,015.5 224.4 1,791.1 241.1 42.0 434.3 299.2 28.8 270.4 135.1 − 4.4          Mar 
2,023.4 229.0 1,794.4 253.5 41.1 439.0 299.5 29.2 270.3 139.4 − 4.4          Apr 
2,025.2 230.2 1,795.0 237.9 40.3 441.5 300.2 30.4 269.8 141.4 − 4.4          May
2,026.3 233.0 1,793.3 247.8 39.9 445.9 300.4 30.8 269.6 145.5 − 4.3          June
2,036.3 236.7 1,799.5 245.5 39.5 447.0 302.1 31.8 270.3 144.9 − 4.3          July
2,039.9 237.1 1,802.9 240.7 39.2 446.1 302.0 31.9 270.1 144.1 − 4.3          Aug 
2,038.3 237.2 1,801.0 241.1 38.9 447.7 300.9 32.5 268.4 146.8 − 4.3          Sep 
2,039.6 236.9 1,802.7 241.8 38.7 453.9 301.3 32.5 268.8 152.6 − 4.2          Oct 
2,045.5 236.9 1,808.6 243.9 38.5 453.4 298.8 32.6 266.2 154.6 − 4.3          Nov 
2,051.3 242.7 1,808.6 248.4 39.6 453.1 298.0 32.2 265.8 155.1 − 4.3          Dec 
Changes *
+ 41.9 − 2.8 + 44.7 − 9.8 − 1.2 − 35.4 − 16.5 − 5.5 − 10.9 + 10.1 − 29.1 − 0.4 2001
+ 26.6 − 2.1 + 28.7 − 19.0 − 1.6 − 3.4 − 23.1 + 1.0 − 24.1 + 20.7 − 1.0 − 0.5 2002
+ 17.9 + 0.2 + 17.8 − 1.9 + 2.6 − 5.9 − 16.1 + 4.9 − 21.0 + 11.2 − 1.0 − 0.5 2003
+ 10.7 + 0.2 + 10.5 + 4.9 + 3.6 + 19.4 − 13.8 − 0.9 − 12.9 + 34.3 − 1.1 − 0.6 2004
+ 12.5 + 1.7 + 10.8 + 14.3 − 3.0 − 22.1 − 13.4 + 0.9 − 14.2 − 7.7 − 1.0 − 2.0 2005
+ 2.3 + 0.2 + 2.2 + 21.2 − 3.9 − 28.8 − 16.4 − 1.4 − 15.0 − 12.4 − + 0.3 2006
+ 9.6 + 10.1 − 0.6 − 16.7 − 2.2 − 36.3 − 25.8 + 0.1 − 26.0 − 10.5 − − 0.1 2007
+ 28.8 + 12.0 + 16.8 + 54.7 − 5.3 − 34.5 − 23.2 − 2.3 − 20.8 − 11.4 − − 0.1 2008
+ 23.5 + 17.3 + 6.3 + 13.1 − 3.9 + 15.2 − 7.6 + 2.5 − 10.2 + 22.8 − − 0.2 2009
+ 5.5 − 0.2 + 5.7 + 0.1 + 0.5 − 2.2 − 2.0 − 0.4 − 1.7 − 0.1 − − 0.0 2008          July
+ 8.3 + 2.4 + 5.8 + 25.9 − 0.3 − 2.9 − 1.5 − 0.4 − 1.1 − 1.4 − − 0.0          Aug 
− 0.3 − 0.2 − 0.1 + 3.1 − 0.9 − 12.0 − 2.4 − 0.7 − 1.6 − 9.6 − − 0.1          Sep 
+ 9.6 + 1.8 + 7.8 − 6.6 − 0.4 + 0.5 − 1.8 − 1.2 − 0.7 + 2.3 − + 0.1          Oct 
+ 1.2 + 0.6 + 0.7 − 0.4 − 0.3 − 2.6 − 0.6 + 0.2 − 0.8 − 2.0 − + 0.0          Nov 
− 3.8 + 2.3 − 6.1 + 30.7 − 0.5 − 0.9 − 1.9 − 0.2 − 1.7 + 1.0 − − 0.0          Dec 
+ 1.7 + 2.2 − 0.5 + 2.2 − 0.3 + 1.3 − 2.9 − 0.1 − 2.9 + 4.2 − − 0.0 2009          Jan 
+ 2.3 + 2.8 − 0.6 + 4.2 − 0.3 − 4.2 − 2.9 − 0.4 − 2.5 − 1.3 − − 0.0          Feb 
− 10.2 − 3.1 − 7.2 − 1.1 − 0.5 − 3.1 − 3.2 − 0.4 − 2.9 + 0.1 − − 0.0          Mar 
+ 7.8 + 4.6 + 3.2 + 12.3 − 0.9 + 4.7 + 0.4 + 0.4 − 0.1 + 4.3 − + 0.0          Apr 
+ 1.8 + 1.2 + 0.7 − 14.8 − 0.1 + 2.6 + 0.6 + 1.2 − 0.5 + 1.9 − − 0.0          May
+ 0.8 + 2.6 − 1.8 + 9.9 − 0.4 + 4.4 + 0.3 + 0.5 − 0.2 + 4.1 − − 0.0          June
+ 10.0 + 3.8 + 6.2 − 2.4 − 0.4 + 1.1 + 1.7 + 1.0 + 0.7 − 0.6 − − 0.0          July
+ 3.7 + 0.3 + 3.4 − 4.8 − 0.3 − 0.9 − 0.2 + 0.1 − 0.2 − 0.7 − − 0.0          Aug 
− 2.0 + 0.2 − 2.1 + 0.5 − 0.3 + 1.6 − 1.1 + 0.6 − 1.7 + 2.6 − − 0.0          Sep 
+ 1.3 − 0.3 + 1.6 + 0.4 − 0.2 + 6.3 + 0.5 + 0.1 + 0.4 + 5.8 − − 0.0          Oct 
+ 3.3 + 0.0 + 3.3 + 2.1 − 0.2 + 2.0 + 0.1 + 0.0 + 0.0 + 2.0 − + 0.0          Nov 
+ 3.0 + 3.0 + 0.0 + 4.5 + 0.1 − 0.4 − 0.8 − 0.4 − 0.4 + 0.4 − − 0.0          Dec 
and long-term lending no longer possible. — 6Up to December 1998, 1999, of more than five years. — 8From 1999, no longer included in lending
maturity or period of notice of more than one year to less than four years; (see also footnote 2). — 9Excluding debt securities arising from the
from 1999, more than one year up to and including five years. — 7Up to exchange of equalisation claims (see also footnote 10). — 10Including debt
December 1998, maturity or period of notice of four years and more; from securities arising from the exchange of equalisation claims. 
31*IV Banks

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
E U R O S Y S T E M
Monthly Report
February 2010
IV Banks
 
6 Lending by banks (MFIs) in Germany to domestic enterprises and households, housing loans,
sectors of economic activity *x
 
€ billion
Lending to domestic enterprises and households (excluding holdings of negotiable money market paper and excluding securities po rtfolios)  1 
of which  
 
Housing loans Lending to enterprises and self-employed persons
 
Whole-
sale and Electricity,
gas and retail Financial
Mortgage water trade; Agri- Transport- intermedi-
loans supply; repair of culture, ation and ation
secured refuse motor forestry, storage; (excluding
by disposal, vehicles fishing post and MFIs) and
Mortgage residen- Other of which mining and and telecom- insurance
loans, tial real housing Housing Manufac- and Construc- motor- aqua- munica- com-
Period Total total Total estate loans Total loans turing quarrying tion cycles culture tions panies
Lending, total End of year or quarter *
 
2007 2,289.0 1,166.7 1,101.3 914.4 186.8 1,259.7 306.2 145.4 41.3 47.0 135.7 33.2 65.4 101.4
2008          Dec 2,357.5 1,157.4 1,093.4 907.1 186.3 1,332.6 302.8 157.4 56.1 52.1 138.9 34.6 74.0 127.6
2009          Mar 2,383.5 1,150.8 1,087.5 901.5 186.0 1,363.1 301.2 160.9 61.7 62.8 131.0 34.0 74.5 161.5
         June 2,388.5 1,149.7 1,087.4 899.6 187.7 1,365.5 300.9 160.4 62.7 63.4 128.8 34.8 74.7 173.3
         Sep 2,375.6 1,149.2 1,092.1 900.2 191.9 1,346.7 300.7 155.4 63.1 62.7 126.2 36.0 73.6 165.7
         Dec 2,357.6 1,155.1 1,094.7 905.0 189.7 1,327.1 301.4 145.8 68.5 63.2 122.1 36.4 74.7 165.2
 Short-term lending
2007 301.7 − 8.6 − 8.6 261.6 4.6 46.2 4.4 8.5 52.0 3.1 7.2 52.1
2008          Dec 335.5 − 8.4 − 8.4 294.8 4.5 51.4 5.4 10.4 54.7 3.1 7.4 70.9
2009          Mar 368.0 − 8.7 − 8.7 328.1 4.8 54.6 6.5 15.2 48.9 3.4 7.6 106.1
         June 362.2 − 8.8 − 8.8 322.3 4.8 51.5 6.2 15.8 46.8 3.7 7.8 109.2
         Sep 337.3 − 8.8 − 8.8 296.9 4.8 46.4 5.4 15.1 44.0 3.9 7.3 98.4
         Dec 306.3 − 8.4 − 8.4 266.9 4.5 36.3 6.0 14.2 39.7 3.0 7.1 90.7
 Medium-term lending
2007 207.7 − 32.2 − 32.2 141.5 10.4 22.3 2.2 5.6 13.1 2.9 12.5 17.4
2008          Dec 222.0 − 30.3 − 30.3 159.1 10.9 27.1 2.7 6.6 13.8 3.1 14.5 18.0
2009          Mar 224.4 − 31.4 − 31.4 160.0 11.3 29.0 3.4 8.2 13.2 2.9 14.5 16.9
         June 233.0 − 31.6 − 31.6 167.1 11.5 31.6 3.6 8.8 13.2 3.0 14.6 21.0
         Sep 237.2 − 32.0 − 32.0 169.6 11.6 32.2 4.0 8.8 13.4 3.3 14.1 21.7
         Dec 242.7 − 32.4 − 32.4 173.9 11.8 32.6 4.8 9.0 13.9 3.7 13.6 25.5
 Long-term lending
2007 1,779.6 1,166.7 1,060.5 914.4 146.0 856.5 291.2 76.9 34.7 33.0 70.6 27.2 45.7 31.9
2008          Dec 1,800.0 1,157.4 1,054.6 907.1 147.5 878.7 287.5 78.9 48.0 35.2 70.4 28.4 52.1 38.6
2009          Mar 1,791.1 1,150.8 1,047.3 901.5 145.8 875.1 285.1 77.2 51.8 39.4 68.9 27.7 52.4 38.5
         June 1,793.3 1,149.7 1,047.0 899.6 147.4 876.2 284.5 77.3 52.9 38.8 68.8 28.0 52.2 43.0
         Sep 1,801.0 1,149.2 1,051.3 900.2 151.1 880.2 284.3 76.8 53.8 38.9 68.8 28.8 52.2 45.6
         Dec 1,808.6 1,155.1 1,053.9 905.0 148.9 886.4 285.1 76.9 57.7 40.0 68.5 29.8 54.0 49.0
 
Lending, total Change during quarter *
 
2008          Q4 − 1.7 − 3.2 − 3.5 − 3.5 + 0.0 + 0.5 − 1.4 + 0.1 + 4.2 + 0.7 + 4.4 − 0.5 + 2.5 − 12.8
2009          Q1 + 25.0 − 5.4 − 5.9 − 4.4 − 1.6 + 29.5 − 1.6 + 4.4 + 2.6 + 2.0 − 7.5 − 0.2 + 0.6 + 33.8
         Q2 + 4.9 − 0.5 + 0.7 − 0.5 + 1.2 + 3.8 + 0.4 − 0.5 + 1.1 + 0.4 − 2.2 + 0.7 − 0.4 + 10.1
         Q3 − 13.2 − 0.7 + 3.3 + 0.3 + 3.0 − 19.2 − 0.2 − 4.3 + 0.3 − 0.7 − 2.7 + 1.3 − 1.1 − 7.6
         Q4 − 23.3 + 3.3 + 2.6 + 2.3 + 0.3 − 23.9 + 0.7 − 9.7 + 3.8 + 0.2 − 4.3 + 0.4 + 1.1 − 7.7
 Short-term lending
2008          Q4 − 8.7 − − 0.2 − − 0.2 − 9.5 − 0.2 − 1.9 + 0.4 − 0.1 + 4.5 − 0.7 + 0.6 − 14.6
2009          Q1 + 31.3 − + 0.3 − + 0.3 + 32.1 + 0.3 + 2.9 + 1.1 + 1.7 − 5.8 + 0.3 + 0.2 + 33.9
         Q2 − 5.6 − + 0.0 − + 0.0 − 5.6 + 0.0 − 3.1 − 0.3 + 0.3 − 1.9 + 0.3 + 0.2 + 2.6
         Q3 − 24.9 − + 0.0 − + 0.0 − 25.3 − 0.1 − 4.4 − 0.9 − 0.7 − 2.9 + 0.1 − 0.5 − 10.9
         Q4 − 30.9 − − 0.3 − − 0.3 − 29.9 − 0.3 − 10.1 + 0.6 − 0.9 − 4.2 − 0.9 − 0.2 − 10.6
 Medium-term lending
2008          Q4 + 4.6 − − 0.5 − − 0.5 + 5.5 + 0.2 + 2.0 + 0.9 + 0.2 − 0.0 − 0.0 + 0.6 + 0.5
2009          Q1 + 1.9 − − 0.4 − − 0.4 + 1.7 + 0.1 + 2.1 + 0.6 + 0.4 − 0.7 − 0.2 + 0.1 + 0.0
         Q2 + 8.4 − + 0.2 − + 0.2 + 6.9 + 0.2 + 2.5 + 0.2 + 0.6 − 0.1 + 0.1 + 0.2 + 3.0
         Q3 + 4.3 − + 0.4 − + 0.4 + 2.5 + 0.1 + 0.6 + 0.4 − 0.0 + 0.2 + 0.3 − 0.5 + 0.7
         Q4 + 2.7 − + 0.3 − + 0.3 + 2.4 + 0.2 + 0.2 + 0.9 − 0.1 + 0.3 + 0.3 − 0.5 + 2.4
 Long-term lending
2008          Q4 + 2.4 − 3.2 − 2.8 − 3.5 + 0.7 + 4.6 − 1.3 + 0.0 + 2.9 + 0.5 − 0.1 + 0.3 + 1.4 + 1.2
2009          Q1 − 8.2 − 5.4 − 5.9 − 4.4 − 1.5 − 4.2 − 2.1 − 0.6 + 0.9 − 0.1 − 1.0 − 0.4 + 0.3 − 0.1
         Q2 + 2.1 − 0.5 + 0.4 − 0.5 + 0.9 + 2.4 + 0.2 + 0.1 + 1.2 − 0.6 − 0.2 + 0.3 − 0.7 + 4.5
         Q3 + 7.4 − 0.7 + 2.8 + 0.3 + 2.6 + 3.7 − 0.3 − 0.5 + 0.8 + 0.0 − 0.0 + 0.8 − 0.0 + 2.6
         Q4 + 4.9 + 3.3 + 2.6 + 2.3 + 0.3 + 3.6 + 0.8 + 0.1 + 2.3 + 1.1 − 0.3 + 1.0 + 1.8 + 0.4
*Excluding lending by foreign branches. Breakdown of lending by building appear in the following Monthly Report, are not specially marked. —
and loan associations by areas and sectors estimated. Statistical alterations 1Excluding fiduciary loans. — 2Including sole proprietors. — 3Excluding
have been eliminated from the changes. The figures for the latest date are mortgage loans and housing loans, even in the form of instalment credit.
always to be regarded as provisional; subsequent alterations, which will x As of December 2008, the data are collected according to the
32*IV Banks

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
February 2010
IV Banks
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Lending to
 Lending to employees and other individuals non-profit institutions
Memo items Other lending Services sector (including the professions)
of which of which
Debit
balances
on wage,
Other Lending salary
real to self- Lending and of which
Housing Holding estate employed to craft Housing pension Housing Instalment
Total companies Total loans Total loans  3 accounts Total loans   Period enterprises activities persons  2 enterprises
End of year or quarter * Lending, total 
 
690.3 165.0 46.2 197.5 386.6 58.2 1,015.2 791.6 223.7 129.3 17.2 14.0 3.5 2007
691.9 169.4 51.7 190.2 381.4 58.2 1,011.4 787.3 224.0 132.1 17.1 13.5 3.3 2008          Dec 
676.8 183.9 51.9 168.0 378.3 58.2 1,007.2 783.0 224.2 134.7 16.2 13.2 3.2 2009          Mar 
667.5 181.2 50.7 171.3 380.3 55.7 1,010.3 783.4 226.8 137.2 16.1 12.7 3.1          June
663.9 180.9 50.0 172.3 379.7 55.1 1,015.9 788.1 227.8 140.3 16.2 13.0 3.3          Sep 
651.2 181.2 46.5 170.5 378.9 54.3 1,017.5 790.0 227.5 142.0 15.8 13.0 3.3          Dec 
Short-term lending
88.0 13.0 13.0 23.3 35.7 9.4 39.2 4.0 35.2 2.5 17.2 0.8 0.0 2007
91.4 13.4 17.0 19.3 35.4 9.4 39.7 3.9 35.8 2.8 17.1 1.0 0.0 2008          Dec 
85.7 12.9 16.6 16.2 35.8 10.0 39.1 3.9 35.2 3.0 16.2 0.8 0.0 2009          Mar 
81.0 12.0 15.5 16.4 35.5 9.8 39.2 3.9 35.3 3.1 16.1 0.7 0.0          June
76.5 11.5 15.1 15.8 34.6 9.2 39.7 4.0 35.7 3.0 16.2 0.7 0.0          Sep 
69.9 11.1 12.1 14.6 33.3 8.3 38.7 4.0 34.7 3.0 15.8 0.7 0.0          Dec 
Medium-term lending
65.7 7.4 7.5 17.7 27.4 3.7 65.4 21.7 43.6 35.8 − 0.7 0.0 2007
73.3 8.2 9.2 21.3 26.7 4.0 62.3 19.5 42.8 35.1 − 0.6 0.0 2008          Dec 
71.9 8.3 9.8 20.0 26.5 4.1 63.9 20.1 43.8 36.7 − 0.5 0.0 2009          Mar 
71.3 7.9 10.3 20.8 26.8 4.1 65.4 20.1 45.2 38.1 − 0.5 0.0          June
72.1 8.3 10.5 21.9 27.2 4.0 67.0 20.4 46.6 39.6 − 0.6 0.0          Sep 
70.8 8.5 11.0 21.7 27.6 4.0 68.2 20.5 47.7 40.9 − 0.6 0.0          Dec 
Long-term lending
536.6 144.7 25.7 156.5 323.5 45.1 910.6 765.8 144.8 90.9 − 12.5 3.4 2007
527.2 147.8 25.6 149.7 319.3 44.8 909.4 763.9 145.4 94.2 − 11.9 3.2 2008          Dec 
519.1 162.7 25.6 131.8 316.0 44.1 904.3 759.0 145.2 95.0 − 11.8 3.2 2009          Mar 
515.2 161.3 24.8 134.2 318.1 41.9 905.7 759.4 146.3 96.0 − 11.4 3.0          June
515.3 161.1 24.4 134.6 317.9 41.9 909.2 763.7 145.5 97.7 − 11.7 3.3          Sep 
510.4 161.6 23.5 134.1 318.0 42.0 910.6 765.5 145.0 98.0 − 11.7 3.3          Dec 
 
Change during quarter * Lending, total 
 
+ 2.0 + 0.5 + 2.4 − 2.5 − 1.1 − 0.5 − 2.3 − 2.1 − 0.2 + 0.2 − 0.8 + 0.0 − 0.0 2008          Q4
− 6.1 − 0.3 + 0.3 − 2.3 − 3.2 − 0.0 − 4.3 − 4.3 + 0.0 + 2.4 − 0.9 − 0.3 − 0.0 2009          Q1
− 5.5 − 2.2 − 1.3 + 3.6 + 1.1 − 0.9 + 1.6 + 0.4 + 1.2 + 2.2 − 0.1 − 0.5 − 0.2          Q2
− 4.5 − 0.3 − 1.5 + 0.9 − 0.6 − 0.6 + 5.7 + 3.2 + 2.4 + 3.1 + 0.1 + 0.3 + 0.2          Q3
− 7.6 + 0.5 − 2.9 + 0.3 − 1.0 − 0.8 + 0.6 + 1.9 − 1.3 + 0.7 − 0.4 − 0.0 + 0.0          Q4
Short-term lending
+ 2.3 + 0.0 + 2.3 − 2.4 + 0.4 − 0.5 + 0.5 + 0.1 + 0.5 + 0.3 − 0.8 + 0.3 − 0.0 2008          Q4
− 2.3 − 0.5 − 0.4 − 0.5 + 0.4 + 0.6 − 0.6 − 0.0 − 0.6 + 0.2 − 0.9 − 0.2 + 0.0 2009          Q1
− 3.7 − 0.6 − 1.0 + 0.2 − 0.3 − 0.2 + 0.1 − 0.0 + 0.1 + 0.1 − 0.1 − 0.1 − 0.0          Q2
− 5.2 − 0.5 − 1.2 − 0.5 − 0.8 − 0.6 + 0.5 + 0.1 + 0.4 − 0.1 + 0.1 − 0.0 − 0.0          Q3
− 3.7 − 0.3 − 2.4 − 0.4 − 1.3 − 0.9 − 1.0 − 0.1 − 1.0 + 0.0 − 0.4 + 0.0 − 0.0          Q4
Medium-term lending
+ 1.3 − 0.3 + 0.2 + 0.8 − 0.2 + 0.1 − 0.9 − 0.6 − 0.2 − 0.1 − − 0.0 − 0.0 2008          Q4
− 0.6 − 0.2 + 0.6 + 0.0 − 0.5 + 0.0 + 0.3 − 0.6 + 0.9 + 1.6 − − 0.1 + 0.0 2009          Q1
+ 0.4 − 0.4 + 0.6 + 0.8 + 0.3 + 0.0 + 1.5 + 0.0 + 1.5 + 1.6 − − 0.0 − 0.0          Q2
+ 0.8 + 0.4 + 0.1 + 1.1 + 0.4 − 0.0 + 1.7 + 0.3 + 1.4 + 1.5 − + 0.1 + 0.0          Q3
− 1.1 + 0.2 + 0.2 + 0.2 + 0.2 − 0.1 + 0.3 + 0.1 + 0.1 + 0.3 − − 0.0 + 0.0          Q4
Long-term lending
− 1.7 + 0.8 − 0.1 − 0.9 − 1.3 − − 1.9 − 1.5 − 0.4 + 0.0 − − 0.3 − 0.0 2008          Q4
− 3.2 + 0.3 + 0.1 − 1.9 − 3.0 − 0.7 − 3.9 − 3.7 − 0.2 + 0.6 − − 0.1 − 0.1 2009          Q1
− 2.2 − 1.2 − 0.8 + 2.6 + 1.1 − 0.7 + 0.1 + 0.4 − 0.3 + 0.5 − − 0.4 − 0.2          Q2
− 0.0 − 0.2 − 0.4 + 0.4 − 0.2 − 0.0 + 3.5 + 2.9 + 0.6 + 1.6 − + 0.3 + 0.2          Q3
− 2.9 + 0.6 − 0.7 + 0.5 + 0.1 + 0.1 + 1.4 + 1.9 − 0.5 + 0.3 − − 0.0 + 0.0          Q4
Federal Statistical Office’s "Classification of Economic Activities", Edition breaks could only be statistically adjusted in part, the data from 2 008 Q4
2008 (WZ 2008). The changeover from the "old" to the "new" classification onwards are not fully comparable with those from preceding quarte rs. 
resulted in many changes within the individual sectors. As the resulting
33*IV Banks

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
E U R O S Y S T E M
Monthly Report
February 2010
IV Banks
 
7 Deposits of domestic non-banks (non-MFIs) at banks (MFIs) in Germany *
 
 
€ billion
Time deposits  1,2   Memo item
  
 for more than 1 year  2 Included Subordinated
 liabilities in time
for up for up (excluding deposits:
to and to and for more Bank negotiable liabilities
Deposits, Sight including including than Savings savings Fiduciary debt arising
Period total deposits Total 1 year Total 2 years 2 years bonds  4 loans securities) from repos deposits  3 
Domestic non-banks, total End of year or month *
 
2007 2,579.1 779.9 1,125.4 418.9 706.5 22.8 683.7 555.4 118.4 36.4 35.0 22.6
2008 2,781.4 834.6 1,276.1 530.6 745.6 32.6 713.0 535.2 135.4 32.3 34.4 59.3
2009 2,829.7 1,029.5 1,102.6 339.5 763.1 32.1 731.0 594.5 103.2 43.4 35.6 76.8
2009          Jan 2,799.9 884.4 1,242.7 493.9 748.8 32.7 716.1 539.0 133.8 31.9 34.2 65.7
         Feb 2,820.0 912.1 1,231.8 477.0 754.8 32.7 722.1 544.3 131.9 31.8 34.1 73.0
         Mar 2,817.3 914.0 1,226.4 469.1 757.3 32.4 724.9 547.8 129.1 30.9 34.1 86.4
         Apr 2,839.6 932.2 1,231.1 469.7 761.4 32.9 728.4 551.1 125.2 31.1 34.0 91.9
         May 2,837.0 935.4 1,224.4 461.0 763.4 33.7 729.7 555.1 122.1 31.2 34.6 91.4
         June 2,847.3 956.0 1,213.1 436.9 776.2 33.4 742.8 559.7 118.5 31.1 34.7 93.6
         July 2,819.9 954.4 1,185.6 409.5 776.1 33.7 742.4 565.5 114.4 31.2 35.1 81.1
         Aug 2,801.5 962.4 1,157.0 390.8 766.2 33.1 733.1 570.8 111.2 42.0 35.2 72.7
         Sep 2,810.6 987.2 1,139.6 374.1 765.5 32.4 733.2 575.1 108.6 42.2 35.4 83.5
         Oct 2,812.0 1,014.0 1,110.4 347.2 763.2 32.3 730.9 581.8 105.9 42.2 35.3 82.0
         Nov 2,825.5 1,037.6 1,098.1 336.0 762.1 31.7 730.4 585.6 104.2 42.2 35.6 80.2
         Dec 2,829.7 1,029.5 1,102.6 339.5 763.1 32.1 731.0 594.5 103.2 43.4 35.6 76.8
Changes *
2008 + 207.6 + 54.3 + 156.6 + 114.5 + 42.1 + 10.0 + 32.0 − 20.2 + 17.0 − 1.3 − 0.6 + 36.7
2009 + 59.7 + 211.3 − 179.3 − 207.5 + 28.2 − 0.5 + 28.7 + 59.3 − 31.6 − 0.9 + 1.4 + 17.5
2009          Jan + 18.5 + 49.7 − 33.5 − 36.7 + 3.2 + 0.1 + 3.1 + 3.8 − 1.5 − 0.4 − 0.2 + 6.4
         Feb + 20.2 + 27.7 − 10.9 − 16.9 + 6.0 + 0.0 + 6.0 + 5.3 − 2.0 − 0.1 − 0.1 + 7.4
         Mar − 3.0 + 1.9 − 6.1 − 7.9 + 1.8 − 0.3 + 2.1 + 3.5 − 2.4 − 0.9 − 0.0 + 13.4
         Apr + 22.3 + 34.9 − 12.0 − 16.1 + 4.1 + 0.5 + 3.6 + 3.3 − 3.9 + 0.2 − 0.1 + 5.5
         May − 2.6 + 3.0 − 6.5 − 8.5 + 2.0 + 0.7 + 1.3 + 3.9 − 3.1 − 0.0 + 0.6 − 0.5
         June + 10.3 + 20.6 − 11.3 − 24.1 + 12.8 − 0.3 + 13.1 + 4.7 − 3.7 − 0.1 + 0.1 + 2.2
         July − 27.4 − 1.7 − 27.4 − 27.3 − 0.1 + 0.3 − 0.4 + 5.8 − 4.1 + 0.1 + 0.4 − 12.6
         Aug − 7.0 + 8.0 − 17.2 − 18.7 + 1.5 − 0.6 + 2.1 + 5.3 − 3.1 + 0.0 + 0.1 − 8.4
         Sep + 9.1 + 24.7 − 17.4 − 16.7 − 0.7 − 0.8 + 0.1 + 4.3 − 2.6 + 0.2 + 0.2 + 10.8
         Oct + 1.7 + 26.8 − 29.3 − 26.9 − 2.3 − 0.0 − 2.3 + 6.6 − 2.5 + 0.1 + 0.2 − 1.5
         Nov + 13.5 + 23.6 − 12.3 − 11.1 − 1.1 − 0.7 − 0.5 + 3.8 − 1.7 + 0.0 + 0.3 − 1.8
         Dec + 4.3 − 8.1 + 4.5 + 3.5 + 1.0 + 0.4 + 0.6 + 8.9 − 1.0 + 0.1 + 0.0 − 3.4
Domestic government End of year or month *
2007 158.5 28.0 127.7 71.9 55.8 3.7 52.1 1.4 1.5 27.6 4.5 −
2008 164.7 34.2 127.8 75.4 52.5 3.6 48.8 1.2 1.5 24.2 3.9 −
2009 129.3 41.8 83.4 43.0 40.4 3.6 36.8 2.6 1.5 35.7 3.9 0.5
2009          Jan 158.4 33.3 122.3 69.8 52.5 3.7 48.8 1.3 1.4 24.1 3.9 −
         Feb 161.1 38.0 120.2 67.4 52.8 3.9 48.9 1.5 1.5 24.0 3.9 0.2
         Mar 154.1 37.2 113.7 61.9 51.9 3.4 48.5 1.7 1.5 24.1 3.9 0.1
         Apr 156.6 42.0 111.3 59.7 51.6 3.6 48.0 1.7 1.5 24.1 3.9 1.1
         May 161.5 42.5 115.7 63.9 51.8 3.8 48.0 1.8 1.5 24.1 3.9 2.2
         June 164.1 44.9 115.8 64.5 51.3 3.6 47.7 1.9 1.5 24.0 3.9 3.5
         July 151.0 41.6 105.8 54.1 51.7 3.9 47.9 2.1 1.5 24.1 3.9 2.2
         Aug 139.8 42.2 93.8 52.7 41.1 3.9 37.3 2.2 1.5 34.7 3.9 3.8
         Sep 133.7 43.6 86.3 45.2 41.1 3.9 37.1 2.3 1.5 34.9 3.9 1.8
         Oct 131.0 42.6 84.5 43.6 40.9 3.9 37.0 2.4 1.6 34.9 3.9 2.7
         Nov 134.4 44.9 85.4 44.6 40.9 3.8 37.1 2.5 1.5 34.9 3.9 3.3
         Dec 129.3 41.8 83.4 43.0 40.4 3.6 36.8 2.6 1.5 35.7 3.9 0.5
Changes *
2008 + 8.5 + 6.2 + 2.5 + 5.1 − 2.6 + 0.0 − 2.6 − 0.3 − 0.0 − 0.6 − 0.6 + 0.0
2009 − 23.9 + 7.5 − 32.8 − 32.2 − 0.7 − 0.0 − 0.7 + 1.4 + 0.1 − 0.5 + 0.0 + 0.5
2009          Jan − 6.3 − 0.9 − 5.5 − 5.6 + 0.0 + 0.0 − 0.0 + 0.1 − 0.0 − 0.1 + 0.0 −
         Feb + 2.8 + 4.7 − 2.1 − 2.4 + 0.3 + 0.2 + 0.1 + 0.1 + 0.0 − 0.1 − 0.0 + 0.2
         Mar − 7.0 − 0.8 − 6.5 − 5.5 − 1.0 − 0.5 − 0.4 + 0.2 + 0.0 − 0.1 + 0.0 − 0.1
         Apr + 2.4 + 4.7 − 2.4 − 2.2 − 0.2 + 0.2 − 0.4 + 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.0 + 0.0 + 0.9
         May + 4.9 + 0.5 + 4.4 + 4.2 + 0.1 + 0.2 − 0.0 + 0.1 + 0.0 + 0.0 + 0.0 + 1.2
         June + 2.6 + 2.4 + 0.1 + 0.6 − 0.5 − 0.2 − 0.3 + 0.1 − 0.0 − 0.1 − 0.0 + 1.3
         July − 13.1 − 3.4 − 10.0 − 10.4 + 0.5 + 0.3 + 0.1 + 0.2 + 0.0 + 0.0 + 0.0 − 1.3
         Aug + 0.2 + 0.6 − 0.6 − 1.4 + 0.8 − 0.0 + 0.8 + 0.2 − 0.0 − 0.1 + 0.0 + 1.6
         Sep − 6.0 + 1.4 − 7.5 − 7.5 − 0.1 + 0.1 − 0.1 + 0.0 + 0.0 + 0.1 − 0.0 − 2.0
         Oct − 2.7 − 1.0 − 1.8 − 1.6 − 0.2 − 0.0 − 0.2 + 0.1 + 0.0 + 0.1 − + 0.9
         Nov + 3.6 + 2.3 + 1.1 + 1.2 − 0.0 − 0.1 + 0.1 + 0.2 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.0 + 0.5
         Dec − 5.1 − 3.1 − 2.0 − 1.5 − 0.5 − 0.2 − 0.3 + 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.2 + 0.0 − 2.7
*See Table IV.2, footnote *; statistical breaks have been eliminated from provisional. Subsequent revisions, which appear in the following Monthly
the changes. The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as Report, are not specially marked. — 1Including subordinated liabilities and
34*IV Banks

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
February 2010
IV Banks
 
7 Deposits of domestic non-banks (non-MFIs) at banks (MFIs) in Germany * (cont’d)
 
 
€ billion
Time deposits  1,2   Memo item
  
 for more than 1 year  2 Included Subordinated
 liabilities in time
for up for up (excluding deposits:
to and to and for more Bank negotiable liabilities
Deposits, Sight including including than Savings savings Fiduciary debt arising
Period total deposits Total 1 year Total 2 years 2 years bonds  4 loans securities) from repos deposits  3 
Domestic enterprises and households End of year or month *
 
2007 2,420.6 752.0 997.7 347.0 650.7 19.0 631.7 554.0 116.9 8.8 30.5 22.6
2008 2,616.7 800.5 1,148.3 455.2 693.1 29.0 664.1 534.0 133.9 8.1 30.5 59.3
2009 2,700.4 987.6 1,019.2 296.5 722.7 28.5 694.2 591.9 101.6 7.7 31.7 76.3
2009          Jan 2,641.5 851.1 1,120.4 424.0 696.3 29.0 667.3 537.7 132.4 7.8 30.3 65.7
         Feb 2,658.9 874.1 1,111.6 409.6 702.0 28.8 673.2 542.8 130.4 7.8 30.2 72.8
         Mar 2,663.2 876.8 1,112.7 407.2 705.4 29.0 676.4 546.2 127.6 6.8 30.2 86.3
         Apr 2,683.0 890.1 1,119.7 410.0 709.7 29.3 680.4 549.4 123.7 7.0 30.1 90.9
         May 2,675.4 892.9 1,108.7 397.1 711.6 29.9 681.7 553.3 120.6 7.1 30.7 89.2
         June 2,683.2 911.1 1,097.3 372.4 724.9 29.9 695.1 557.8 117.0 7.1 30.8 90.2
         July 2,668.9 912.8 1,079.8 355.4 724.4 29.9 694.5 563.5 112.8 7.2 31.2 78.9
         Aug 2,661.7 920.2 1,063.2 338.1 725.1 29.3 695.8 568.5 109.7 7.2 31.3 68.9
         Sep 2,676.8 943.5 1,053.3 328.8 724.5 28.4 696.0 572.9 107.1 7.3 31.4 81.7
         Oct 2,681.0 971.4 1,025.9 303.6 722.3 28.4 693.9 579.4 104.3 7.3 31.4 79.3
         Nov 2,691.1 992.6 1,012.7 291.5 721.2 27.9 693.3 583.1 102.7 7.3 31.7 76.9
         Dec 2,700.4 987.6 1,019.2 296.5 722.7 28.5 694.2 591.9 101.6 7.7 31.7 76.3
Changes *
2008 + 199.1 + 48.1 + 154.0 + 109.4 + 44.6 + 10.0 + 34.6 − 20.0 + 17.0 − 0.7 + 0.0 + 36.7
2009 + 83.6 + 203.8 − 146.5 − 175.3 + 28.9 − 0.5 + 29.4 + 57.9 − 31.7 − 0.4 + 1.4 + 17.0
2009          Jan + 24.8 + 50.6 − 27.9 − 31.1 + 3.2 + 0.1 + 3.1 + 3.6 − 1.5 − 0.3 − 0.2 + 6.4
         Feb + 17.4 + 23.0 − 8.8 − 14.4 + 5.7 − 0.2 + 5.9 + 5.2 − 2.0 − 0.0 − 0.1 + 7.2
         Mar + 4.0 + 2.7 + 0.4 − 2.4 + 2.7 + 0.2 + 2.5 + 3.3 − 2.5 − 0.8 − 0.0 + 13.4
         Apr + 19.9 + 30.2 − 9.6 − 13.9 + 4.3 + 0.3 + 4.0 + 3.3 − 3.9 + 0.2 − 0.1 + 4.6
         May − 7.6 + 2.6 − 10.9 − 12.8 + 1.9 + 0.6 + 1.3 + 3.8 − 3.1 − 0.1 + 0.6 − 1.6
         June + 7.7 + 18.2 − 11.4 − 24.7 + 13.3 − 0.1 + 13.4 + 4.5 − 3.7 − 0.0 + 0.1 + 0.9
         July − 14.3 + 1.7 − 17.4 − 16.9 − 0.5 − 0.0 − 0.5 + 5.6 − 4.1 + 0.1 + 0.4 − 11.3
         Aug − 7.2 + 7.4 − 16.6 − 17.3 + 0.7 − 0.6 + 1.3 + 5.1 − 3.1 + 0.1 + 0.1 − 10.0
         Sep + 15.1 + 23.3 − 9.9 − 9.3 − 0.6 − 0.9 + 0.2 + 4.3 − 2.6 + 0.1 + 0.2 + 12.8
         Oct + 4.4 + 27.8 − 27.4 − 25.3 − 2.1 − 0.0 − 2.1 + 6.5 − 2.5 + 0.0 + 0.2 − 2.4
         Nov + 9.9 + 21.3 − 13.4 − 12.3 − 1.1 − 0.6 − 0.6 + 3.7 − 1.7 + 0.0 + 0.3 − 2.3
         Dec + 9.4 − 5.0 + 6.5 + 5.0 + 1.5 + 0.6 + 0.9 + 8.9 − 1.0 + 0.3 − 0.0 − 0.7
of which:  Domestic enterprises End of year or month *
2007 961.9 264.9 672.9 178.6 494.3 5.5 488.8 3.9 20.1 8.3 21.5 22.6
2008 1,073.5 292.6 757.7 223.7 534.0 7.7 526.3 3.8 19.3 7.8 22.0 59.3
2009 1,105.6 336.4 743.6 187.5 556.1 9.1 547.0 5.5 20.2 7.6 21.8 76.3
2009          Jan 1,091.9 321.5 747.2 208.8 538.4 8.2 530.1 3.9 19.3 7.5 21.8 65.7
         Feb 1,098.3 323.5 751.5 207.1 544.3 8.4 536.0 4.1 19.3 7.5 21.8 72.8
         Mar 1,106.1 318.9 763.7 217.1 546.6 8.6 538.0 4.3 19.2 6.7 21.7 86.3
         Apr 1,120.1 313.6 782.9 232.5 550.5 9.0 541.5 4.4 19.1 6.9 21.6 90.9
         May 1,106.5 305.7 777.2 225.7 551.5 9.2 542.2 4.5 19.2 7.0 21.5 89.2
         June 1,116.0 319.8 772.3 208.2 564.1 9.1 555.0 4.7 19.3 7.0 21.5 90.2
         July 1,100.5 313.2 763.1 199.9 563.2 9.1 554.0 4.9 19.3 7.1 21.8 78.9
         Aug 1,093.6 311.2 758.0 194.2 563.8 9.1 554.7 5.0 19.4 7.1 21.8 68.9
         Sep 1,109.2 326.3 758.1 195.5 562.6 8.5 554.1 5.1 19.6 7.2 21.9 81.7
         Oct 1,107.8 342.8 740.1 180.6 559.5 8.4 551.0 5.2 19.7 7.2 21.8 79.3
         Nov 1,106.2 346.5 734.6 176.4 558.2 8.5 549.7 5.3 19.8 7.2 22.0 76.9
         Dec 1,105.6 336.4 743.6 187.5 556.1 9.1 547.0 5.5 20.2 7.6 21.8 76.3
Changes *
2008 + 110.4 + 27.0 + 84.4 + 45.0 + 39.3 + 2.1 + 37.2 − 0.1 − 0.8 − 0.5 + 0.4 + 36.7
2009 + 32.6 + 61.6 − 31.5 − 53.1 + 21.6 + 1.4 + 20.3 + 1.6 + 0.9 − 0.4 − 0.3 + 17.0
2009          Jan + 18.4 + 28.8 − 10.5 − 14.9 + 4.4 + 0.6 + 3.8 + 0.1 + 0.0 − 0.3 − 0.1 + 6.4
         Feb + 6.5 + 2.0 + 4.3 − 1.7 + 6.0 + 0.2 + 5.8 + 0.2 − 0.1 − 0.0 − 0.1 + 7.2
         Mar + 7.4 − 4.5 + 11.9 + 9.9 + 1.9 + 0.2 + 1.7 + 0.2 − 0.0 − 0.8 − 0.0 + 13.4
         Apr + 15.1 + 12.5 + 2.6 − 1.3 + 3.9 + 0.4 + 3.5 + 0.1 − 0.1 + 0.2 − 0.2 + 4.6
         May − 13.5 − 7.9 − 5.7 − 6.7 + 1.0 + 0.3 + 0.7 + 0.1 + 0.1 − 0.1 − 0.1 − 1.6
         June + 9.4 + 14.1 − 4.9 − 17.6 + 12.6 − 0.2 + 12.8 + 0.2 + 0.1 − 0.0 − 0.0 + 0.9
         July − 15.5 − 6.5 − 9.2 − 8.3 − 0.9 + 0.1 − 1.0 + 0.2 + 0.0 + 0.1 + 0.3 − 11.3
         Aug − 6.9 − 2.0 − 5.1 − 5.7 + 0.7 − 0.0 + 0.7 + 0.1 + 0.1 + 0.1 + 0.0 − 10.0
         Sep + 15.6 + 15.1 + 0.1 + 1.3 − 1.2 − 0.6 − 0.6 + 0.1 + 0.2 + 0.1 + 0.0 + 12.8
         Oct − 1.4 + 16.4 − 18.0 − 14.9 − 3.1 − 0.0 − 3.1 + 0.1 + 0.1 + 0.0 − 0.1 − 2.4
         Nov − 1.9 + 3.8 − 5.8 − 4.4 − 1.4 + 0.1 − 1.4 + 0.0 + 0.1 − + 0.1 − 2.3
         Dec − 0.6 − 10.2 + 9.0 + 11.1 − 2.1 + 0.6 − 2.7 + 0.2 + 0.4 + 0.3 − 0.2 − 0.7
liabilities arising from registered debt securities. — 2Including deposits under savings and loan contracts (see also footnote 2). — 4Including
under savings and loan contracts (see Table IV.12). — 3Excluding deposits liabilities arising from non-negotiable bearer debt securities. 
35*IV Banks

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
E U R O S Y S T E M
Monthly Report
February 2010
IV Banks
 
8 Deposits of domestic households and non-profit institutions at banks (MFIs) in Germany *
 
 
€ billion
Sight deposits Time deposits  1,2 
by creditor group by creditor group
Deposits of Domestic households Domestic households
domestic
households
and Domestic
non-profit Self- non-profit Self-
employed Other institu- employed Other institutions,
Period total Total Total persons Employees tions Total Total persons Employees individuals individuals
End of year or month *
 
2007 1,458.7 487.1 472.1 83.9 320.9 67.2 15.0 324.8 300.7 41.7 234.3 24.7
2008 1,543.2 507.8 491.8 85.1 336.5 70.3 16.0 390.6 367.2 50.4 281.0 35.8
2009 1,594.9 651.3 631.3 112.5 424.6 94.3 19.9 275.6 258.5 24.5 213.2 20.7
2009          July 1,568.5 599.6 580.3 103.2 391.3 85.8 19.3 316.8 296.7 31.6 238.3 26.9
         Aug 1,568.2 609.0 589.9 105.7 397.8 86.4 19.2 305.2 285.5 29.6 230.7 25.2
         Sep 1,567.7 617.2 598.0 105.5 404.4 88.1 19.2 295.2 276.3 28.1 224.5 23.7
         Oct 1,573.2 628.6 608.9 110.0 408.8 90.2 19.6 285.8 267.8 26.4 219.0 22.4
         Nov 1,584.9 646.1 626.2 112.5 421.3 92.4 19.9 278.1 261.4 25.1 214.8 21.5
         Dec 1,594.9 651.3 631.3 112.5 424.6 94.3 19.9 275.6 258.5 24.5 213.2 20.7
Changes *
2008 + 88.7 + 21.1 + 19.5 + 1.2 + 15.2 + 3.2 + 1.5 + 69.7 + 66.6 + 9.4 + 46.1 + 11.1
2009 + 51.0 + 142.2 + 138.3 + 27.4 + 88.3 + 22.6 + 4.0 − 115.0 − 108.7 − 25.8 − 67.7 − 15.2
2009          July + 1.2 + 8.2 + 7.7 + 4.3 + 2.1 + 1.3 + 0.5 − 8.2 − 7.9 − 0.7 − 6.2 − 1.0
         Aug − 0.3 + 9.4 + 9.6 + 2.5 + 6.5 + 0.5 − 0.1 − 11.5 − 11.2 − 1.9 − 7.6 − 1.7
         Sep − 0.5 + 8.2 + 8.2 − 0.2 + 6.6 + 1.8 + 0.0 − 10.0 − 9.2 − 1.5 − 6.2 − 1.4
         Oct + 5.8 + 11.4 + 10.9 + 4.5 + 4.4 + 2.0 + 0.5 − 9.4 − 8.4 − 1.7 − 5.5 − 1.3
         Nov + 11.8 + 17.5 + 17.3 + 2.5 + 12.5 + 2.3 + 0.2 − 7.6 − 6.3 − 1.3 − 4.1 − 0.9
         Dec + 10.0 + 5.2 + 5.1 − 0.0 + 3.3 + 1.8 + 0.1 − 2.5 − 2.9 − 0.6 − 1.6 − 0.8
*See Table IV.2, footnote*; statistical breaks have been eliminated from the Report, are not specially marked. — 1Including subordinated liabilities and
changes. The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as liabilities arising from registered debt securities. — 2Including deposits
provisional. Subsequent revisions, which appear in the following MonthlyDEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
E U R O S Y S T E M
Monthly Report
February 2010
 
 
 
9 Deposits of domestic government at banks (MFIs) in Germany, by creditor group *
 
€ billion
Deposits
   
Federal Government and its special funds  1 State governments
Time deposits Time deposits
Savings Savings
for up deposits Memo for up deposits Memo
Domestic to and for more and bank item to and for more and bank item
government, Sight including than savings Fiduciary Sight including than savings Fiduciary
Period total Total deposits 1 year 1 year bonds  2 loans Total deposits 1 year 1 year bonds  2 loans
End of year or month *
 
2007 158.5 38.3 1.9 3.1 33.2 0.0 8.2 27.9 6.0 11.2 10.6 0.1 19.1
2008 164.7 34.8 2.3 3.7 28.9 0.0 6.6 28.2 6.9 9.9 11.3 0.1 17.3
2009 129.3 22.2 1.3 3.7 17.1 0.1 17.3 23.1 7.1 5.8 10.1 0.1 18.0
2009          July 151.0 34.6 1.4 4.9 28.2 0.0 6.6 26.6 8.8 7.2 10.4 0.2 17.0
         Aug 139.8 25.0 1.3 6.3 17.4 0.0 17.3 26.0 7.0 8.4 10.4 0.2 17.0
         Sep 133.7 22.7 1.3 3.9 17.5 0.0 17.4 28.0 9.6 7.9 10.3 0.2 17.0
         Oct 131.0 23.2 1.2 4.8 17.2 0.1 17.5 26.6 9.7 6.4 10.3 0.1 17.0
         Nov 134.4 24.2 1.4 5.4 17.2 0.1 17.5 24.1 8.4 5.2 10.4 0.1 17.0
         Dec 129.3 22.2 1.3 3.7 17.1 0.1 17.3 23.1 7.1 5.8 10.1 0.1 18.0
Changes *
2008 + 8.5 − 3.2 + 0.3 + 0.6 − 4.2 + 0.0 − 0.0 + 0.5 + 0.9 − 1.1 + 0.7 − 0.0 − 0.6
2009 − 23.9 − 0.8 − 1.0 + 0.4 − 0.3 + 0.0 − 0.1 − 5.1 + 0.2 − 4.1 − 1.1 + 0.0 − 0.4
2009          July − 13.1 − 6.0 − 0.6 − 5.5 + 0.2 + 0.0 − 0.0 − 4.2 − 1.7 − 2.6 + 0.1 + 0.0 + 0.0
         Aug + 0.2 + 1.9 − 0.1 + 1.3 + 0.6 + 0.0 − 0.1 − 0.6 − 1.8 + 1.2 − 0.0 + 0.0 − 0.0
         Sep − 6.0 − 2.3 + 0.0 − 2.4 + 0.1 + 0.0 + 0.2 + 2.0 + 2.6 − 0.5 − 0.1 + 0.0 − 0.0
         Oct − 2.7 + 0.5 − 0.1 + 1.0 − 0.4 + 0.0 + 0.1 − 1.5 + 0.1 − 1.5 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.0
         Nov + 3.6 + 0.9 + 0.3 + 0.6 + 0.0 + 0.0 − 0.0 − 2.4 − 1.3 − 1.2 + 0.1 + 0.0 − 0.0
         Dec − 5.1 − 1.9 − 0.2 − 1.7 − 0.0 − − 0.2 − 1.1 − 1.3 + 0.6 − 0.3 − 0.0 − 0.0
*See Table IV.2, footnote *; excluding deposits of the Treuhand agency and which are included in ”Enterprises”. Statistical breaks have been eliminat ed
its successor organisations, of the Federal Railways, east German Railways from the changes. The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded
and Federal Post Office, and, from 1995, of Deutsche Bahn AG, Deutsche as provisional. Subsequent revisions, which appear in the following
Post AG and Deutsche Telekom AG, and of publicly owned enterprises,
36*IV Banks

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
February 2010
IV Banks
 
 
 
 
 
 Savings deposits  3  Memo item
 
 by maturity
 more than 1 year  2 
Included Subordinated
of which liabilities in time
Domestic Domestic (excluding deposits:
up to and up to and Bank negotiable liabilities non-profit non-profit
institu- including including more than Domestic institu- savings Fiduciary debt arising
tions 1 year Total 2 years 2 years Total tions bonds  4 loans from repos   Period households securities)  5 
End of year or month *
 
24.1 168.4 156.4 13.5 142.8 550.1 542.4 7.7 96.8 0.5 9.0 − 2007
23.4 231.5 159.2 21.3 137.9 530.2 523.1 7.1 114.6 0.3 8.5 − 2008
17.2 109.0 166.6 19.4 147.2 586.5 577.5 9.0 81.5 0.1 9.8 − 2009
20.0 155.5 161.2 20.7 140.5 558.6 550.2 8.4 93.5 0.1 9.4 − 2009          July
19.7 143.9 161.3 20.2 141.1 563.6 555.0 8.5 90.3 0.1 9.4 −          Aug 
18.9 133.3 161.9 20.0 141.9 567.7 559.0 8.7 87.5 0.1 9.6 −          Sep 
18.0 123.0 162.9 20.0 142.9 574.2 565.3 8.9 84.6 0.1 9.6 −          Oct 
16.7 115.1 163.0 19.4 143.6 577.8 569.0 8.8 82.9 0.1 9.7 −          Nov 
17.2 109.0 166.6 19.4 147.2 586.5 577.5 9.0 81.5 0.1 9.8 −          Dec 
Changes *
+ 3.1 + 64.4 + 5.3 + 7.9 − 2.6 − 19.9 − 19.3 − 0.6 + 17.8 − 0.2 − 0.4 − 2008
− 6.2 −122.2 + 7.2 − 1.9 + 9.1 + 56.3 + 54.4 + 1.9 − 32.6 + 0.0 + 1.7 − 2009
− 0.4 − 8.6 + 0.4 − 0.1 + 0.5 + 5.4 + 5.2 + 0.2 − 4.2 − + 0.1 − 2009          July
− 0.3 − 11.6 + 0.1 − 0.5 + 0.6 + 5.0 + 4.9 + 0.1 − 3.2 + 0.0 + 0.1 −          Aug 
− 0.8 − 10.6 + 0.6 − 0.2 + 0.8 + 4.2 + 4.0 + 0.2 − 2.8 + 0.0 + 0.1 −          Sep 
− 1.0 − 10.4 + 1.0 + 0.0 + 1.0 + 6.4 + 6.2 + 0.2 − 2.6 − 0.0 + 0.3 −          Oct 
− 1.3 − 7.9 + 0.3 − 0.6 + 0.9 + 3.7 + 3.7 − 0.1 − 1.7 + 0.0 + 0.2 −          Nov 
+ 0.5 − 6.1 + 3.6 + 0.0 + 3.6 + 8.7 + 8.4 + 0.2 − 1.4 − 0.0 + 0.2 −          Dec 
under savings and loan contracts (see Table IV.12). — 3Excluding deposits liabilities arising from non-negotiable bearer debt securities. — 5Included in
under savings and loan contracts (see also footnote 2). — 4Including time deposits. DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
February 2010
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Local government and local government associations
(including municipal special-purpose associations) Social security funds
Time deposits  3 Time deposits
Savings Savings
for up deposits Memo for up deposits Memo
to and for more and bank item to and for more and bank item
Sight including than savings Fiduciary Sight including than savings Fiduciary
Total deposits 1 year 1 year bonds  2,4 loans Total deposits 1 year 1 year bonds  2 loans   Period
End of year or month *
 
37.8 12.3 19.5 3.6 2.5 0.3 54.5 7.7 38.1 8.4 0.3 0.0 2007
42.5 14.3 22.0 3.9 2.2 0.2 59.2 10.7 39.8 8.4 0.3 0.0 2008
38.0 20.2 10.3 4.2 3.3 0.4 46.0 13.3 23.2 8.9 0.6 0.0 2009
39.6 17.7 14.9 4.2 2.9 0.4 50.1 13.6 27.0 8.9 0.5 0.0 2009          July
41.9 19.6 15.0 4.3 3.0 0.4 46.8 14.3 22.9 9.0 0.5 0.0          Aug 
38.4 18.1 12.9 4.3 3.0 0.4 44.6 14.6 20.5 8.9 0.6 0.0          Sep 
37.4 18.2 11.8 4.3 3.1 0.4 43.8 13.5 20.6 9.1 0.6 0.0          Oct 
37.1 18.7 11.0 4.2 3.2 0.4 49.0 16.4 22.9 9.1 0.7 0.0          Nov 
38.0 20.2 10.3 4.2 3.3 0.4 46.0 13.3 23.2 8.9 0.6 0.0          Dec 
Changes *
+ 5.4 + 2.0 + 3.3 + 0.4 − 0.3 − 0.0 + 5.9 + 3.0 + 2.3 + 0.6 − 0.0 − 0.0 2008
− 4.4 + 5.9 −11.7 + 0.3 + 1.1 − 0.0 − 13.6 + 2.5 − 16.8 + 0.4 + 0.3 − 0.0 2009
− 0.7 − 0.2 − 0.9 + 0.2 + 0.1 − − 2.2 − 0.9 − 1.5 + 0.1 + 0.0 − 2009          July
+ 2.2 + 1.8 + 0.2 + 0.1 + 0.1 − − 3.3 + 0.7 − 4.1 + 0.1 + 0.0 −          Aug 
− 3.5 − 1.4 − 2.1 + 0.0 + 0.0 − 0.0 − 2.2 + 0.3 − 2.4 − 0.1 + 0.0 −          Sep 
− 0.9 + 0.1 − 1.1 + 0.0 + 0.1 − 0.0 − 0.8 − 1.1 + 0.1 + 0.1 + 0.1 −          Oct 
− 0.3 + 0.5 − 0.8 − 0.1 + 0.1 − + 5.3 + 2.8 + 2.5 − 0.0 + 0.0 −          Nov 
+ 0.9 + 1.5 − 0.6 + 0.0 + 0.1 − − 3.0 − 3.1 + 0.3 − 0.2 − 0.0 −          Dec 
Monthly Report, are not specially marked. — 1Federal Railways Fund, liabilities arising from non-negotiable bearer debt securities. — 3Including
Indemnification Fund, Redemption Fund for Inherited Liabilities, ERP Special deposits under savings and loan contracts. — 4Excluding deposits under
Fund, German Unity Fund, Equalisation of Burdens Fund. — 2Including savings and loan contracts (see also footnote 3). 
37*IV Banks

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
E U R O S Y S T E M
Monthly Report
February 2010
IV Banks
 
10 Savings deposits and bank savings bonds of banks (MFIs) in Germany sold to non-banks (non-MFIs) *
 
 
€ billion
Savings deposits  1 Bank savings bonds,  3  sold to
of residents of non-residents domestic non-banks
at three months’ at more than three Memo
notice months’ notice item of which
Interest With
of which of which of which credited maturities
Special Special At three on of more
savings savings savings non-banks, than foreign months’
Period Total Total Total Total Total notice deposits total Total 2 years facilities  2 facilities  2 non-banks
End of year or month *
 
2007 563.8 555.4 446.0 354.6 109.4 101.4 8.4 6.1 14.2 130.7 118.4 64.5 12.3
2008 544.1 535.2 424.8 344.0 110.4 103.2 8.9 6.3 14.9 150.8 135.4 59.6 15.4
2009 604.1 594.5 474.5 379.3 120.0 112.1 9.6 7.0 13.8 118.8 103.2 68.3 15.6
2009          Aug 580.2 570.8 454.3 365.2 116.5 109.1 9.4 6.8 0.5 125.9 111.2 62.5 14.7
         Sep 584.6 575.1 457.4 367.0 117.7 110.3 9.5 6.8 0.5 124.4 108.6 63.3 15.8
         Oct 591.3 581.8 461.6 369.6 120.2 112.5 9.5 6.9 0.7 121.6 105.9 64.7 15.7
         Nov 595.1 585.6 464.5 371.6 121.1 113.3 9.5 6.9 0.8 119.7 104.2 66.5 15.5
         Dec 604.1 594.5 474.5 379.3 120.0 112.1 9.6 7.0 8.1 118.8 103.2 68.3 15.6
Changes *
2008 − 19.7 − 20.2 − 21.2 − 11.1 + 1.0 + 1.6 + 0.5 + 0.1 . + 20.1 + 17.0 − 4.9 + 3.2
2009 + 60.0 + 59.3 + 50.3 + 35.8 + 8.9 + 7.8 + 0.7 + 0.8 . − 30.6 − 31.6 + 9.5 + 1.0
2009          Aug + 5.4 + 5.3 + 4.5 + 3.4 + 0.8 + 0.7 + 0.1 + 0.1 . − 3.3 − 3.1 + 0.6 − 0.1
         Sep + 4.4 + 4.3 + 3.1 + 1.7 + 1.2 + 1.2 + 0.0 + 0.0 . − 1.5 − 2.6 + 0.9 + 1.1
         Oct + 6.7 + 6.6 + 4.2 + 2.7 + 2.4 + 2.2 + 0.1 + 0.0 . − 2.6 − 2.5 + 1.6 − 0.1
         Nov + 3.8 + 3.8 + 3.0 + 1.9 + 0.9 + 0.8 − 0.0 + 0.0 . − 1.8 − 1.7 + 1.8 − 0.2
         Dec + 9.0 + 8.9 + 9.9 + 7.7 − 1.0 − 1.2 + 0.1 + 0.2 . − 0.9 − 1.0 + 1.8 + 0.1
*See Table IV.2, footnote*; statistical breaks have been eliminated from the loan contracts, which are classified as time deposits. — 2Savings deposits
changes. The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as bearing interest at a rate which exceeds the minimum or basic rate of
provisional. Subsequent revisions, which appear in the following Monthly interest. — 3Including liabilities arising from non-negotiable bearer debt
Report, are not specially marked. — 1Excluding deposits under savings and securities. 
 
 
 
 
11 Debt securities and money market paper outstanding of banks (MFIs) in Germany *
 
€ billion
Non-negotiable bearer debt securities
Negotiable bearer debt securities and money market paper and money market paper  5 
of which of which
with maturities of Subordinated
with maturities of
Certifi- more more non-
Floating Zero Foreign cates up to and more up to and more than 1 year than 1 year negotiable negotiable
rate coupon currency of including including than including including than debt debt
Period Total bonds  1 deposit 1 year 2 years 2 years Total 1 year 2 years 2 years bonds  1,2 bonds  3,4 securities securities
End of year or month *
 
2007 1,659.1 375.7 54.2 305.1 51.2 109.6 147.5 1,402.0 1.9 0.1 1.1 0.7 53.6 1.4
2008 1,640.1 395.9 50.7 314.1 64.0 162.6 153.3 1,324.2 2.3 0.2 1.3 0.8 52.5 1.6
2009 1,529.8 380.6 43.9 317.4 70.4 115.9 105.8 1,308.2 0.9 0.0 0.3 0.6 46.1 1.8
2009          Aug 1,591.9 398.7 49.1 326.2 65.3 103.4 143.7 1,344.8 1.3 0.1 0.6 0.7 47.5 2.1
         Sep 1,564.5 391.6 48.2 312.8 64.5 100.2 140.1 1,324.2 1.2 0.0 0.5 0.7 47.2 2.0
         Oct 1,547.9 388.9 47.3 307.0 61.8 91.4 134.8 1,321.7 1.1 0.0 0.4 0.7 47.1 1.8
         Nov 1,533.6 387.2 44.3 302.0 60.2 85.1 135.3 1,313.2 1.0 0.0 0.3 0.6 47.5 1.8
         Dec 1,529.8 380.6 43.9 317.4 70.4 115.9 105.8 1,308.2 0.9 0.0 0.3 0.6 46.1 1.8
Changes *
2008 − 17.0 + 18.2 − 3.7 + 9.0 + 12.8 + 53.1 + 5.8 − 75.9 + 0.4 + 0.1 + 0.2 + 0.1 − 1.1 + 0.1
2009 − 110.1 − 15.3 − 6.8 + 4.7 + 6.4 − 46.7 − 47.8 − 15.6 − 1.4 − 0.2 − 1.0 − 0.2 − 6.4 + 0.5
2009          Aug + 6.2 + 2.4 − 0.1 + 4.2 + 4.9 + 2.1 − 3.9 + 8.0 − 0.1 − 0.0 − 0.1 − 0.0 − 0.3 − 0.0
         Sep − 27.4 − 7.1 − 0.9 − 13.5 − 0.8 − 3.2 − 3.5 − 20.7 − 0.1 − 0.0 − 0.1 − 0.0 − 0.4 − 0.0
         Oct − 16.6 − 2.7 − 0.9 − 5.7 − 2.7 − 8.7 − 5.3 − 2.5 − 0.1 − 0.0 − 0.1 − 0.0 − 0.0 + 0.0
         Nov − 14.3 − 1.8 − 3.0 − 5.0 − 1.6 − 6.3 + 0.5 − 8.4 − 0.1 − 0.0 − 0.1 − 0.0 + 0.4 − 0.0
         Dec − 3.8 − 6.6 − 0.4 + 15.4 + 10.2 + 30.8 − 29.5 − 5.1 − 0.1 − 0.0 − 0.1 − 0.0 − 1.4 + 0.0
*See Table IV.2, footnote*; statistical breaks have been eliminated from the rate notes and zero coupon bonds denominated in foreign currencies. —
changes. The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as 4Bonds denominated in non-euro-area currencies. — 5Non-negotiable
provisional. Subsequent revisions, which appear in the following Monthly bearer debt securities are classified among bank savings bonds (see also
Report, are not specially marked. — 1Including debt securities denominated Table IV.10, footnote 2). 
in foreign currencies. — 2Issue value when floated. — 3Including floating
38*IV Banks

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
February 2010
IV  Banks
  
12  Building  and  loan  associations (MFIs) in Germany *
  Interim statements
  
€ billion
Lending to banks (MFIs) Lending to non-banks (non-MFIs) Deposits of banks Deposits of non-
(MFIs)  5 banks (non-MFIs)
Credit Building loans Secur- Memo
bal- item ities (in-
ances cluding Bearer New
and Loans Treasury Deposits Deposits debt Capital con-
Num- loans under bills under under secur- (includ- tracts
ber (ex- Bank savings Interim and savings savings ities ing pub- entered
of Balance cluding debt and loan and Other Treasury and loan Sight and loan Sight and out- lished into in
End of sheet building Building secur- con- bridging building discount con- and time con- time de- stand- re- year or associ-
year/month ations total loans  2 ities 3 tracts loans loans tracts deposits tracts posits  6 ing month  8 loans)  1 paper)  4 serves)  7 
All  building  and  loan  associations
2008 25 188.4 39.8 0.1 13.4 29.4 68.9 11.9 11.0 0.2 25.2 120.0 6.5 7.5 7.3 97.6
2009          Oct 25 192.9 36.9 0.0 19.2 29.7 70.1 12.4 12.1 0.3 28.9 119.9 7.1 6.8 7.3 7.2
         Nov 25 193.1 36.8 0.0 19.2 29.6 70.3 12.5 12.3 0.3 28.5 120.4 7.1 6.8 7.3 7.5
         Dec 25 193.6 37.2 0.0 19.1 29.4 70.7 12.6 12.2 0.4 27.8 123.4 7.4 6.3 7.3 9.4
Private  building  and  Ioan  associations
  
2009          Oct 15 141.5 22.1 0.0 14.8 18.9 55.4 11.2 7.4 0.2 25.1 78.7 6.9 6.8 4.7 4.5
         Nov 15 141.6 21.9 0.0 14.7 18.9 55.5 11.3 7.5 0.2 24.8 79.1 6.9 6.8 4.7 4.7
         Dec 15 141.7 21.8 0.0 14.7 18.8 56.0 11.3 7.5 0.2 24.3 81.0 7.2 6.3 4.7 5.8
Public  building  and  Ioan  associations
  
2009          Oct 10 51.4 14.8 0.0 4.4 10.7 14.7 1.3 4.7 0.1 3.8 41.2 0.2 − 2.6 2.7
         Nov 10 51.5 14.9 0.0 4.4 10.7 14.7 1.3 4.8 0.1 3.7 41.3 0.2 − 2.6 2.8
         Dec 10 51.9 15.4 0.0 4.4 10.6 14.7 1.3 4.6 0.2 3.5 42.4 0.2 − 2.6 3.6
Trends in building and loan association business
  
€ billion
Changes in deposits Capital promised Capital disbursed Disbursement Interest and
under savings and commitments repayments
loan contracts Allocations outstanding at received on
end of period building loans  10 
Deposits under Loans under
Repay- savings and savings and
ments loan contracts loan contracts  9 Newly
Interest of granted
credited interim deposits of which of which
on under Applied Applied and of
which of Memo Amounts deposits cancelled to settle- to settle- bridging
under savings of ment of ment of loans Under which item paid into
savings savings and which interim interim and alloc- Repay- Housing
and and loan loan Net and and other ated ments bonuses
loan ac- con- con- alloca- bridging bridging building con- during re-
Period tracts tracts Total Total Total loans Total loans loans Total tracts Total quarter counts  9 tions  11 ceived  12 
All  building  and  loan  associations
2008 24.2 2.7 6.6 50.7 38.2 48.1 24.3 4.2 9.9 3.9 14.0 10.1 7.6 10.2 8.4 0.5
2009          Oct 2.0 0.0 0.4 3.7 2.4 3.5 1.4 0.4 0.9 0.3 1.2 11.1 7.7 1.0 0.0
         Nov 2.2 0.0 0.4 3.5 2.2 3.0 1.3 0.3 0.6 0.3 1.1 11.2 7.7 0.9 0.0
         Dec 2.6 2.2 0.4 3.3 2.2 3.2 1.3 0.3 0.7 0.3 1.3 10.9 7.5 1.1 . 0.0
Private  building  and  Ioan  associations
  
2009          Oct 1.3 0.0 0.3 2.7 1.7 2.6 1.0 0.3 0.6 0.3 1.0 6.9 4.0 0.7 0.0
         Nov 1.4 0.0 0.2 2.4 1.4 2.2 0.8 0.2 0.4 0.2 0.9 7.0 4.0 0.6 0.0
         Dec 1.7 1.4 0.2 2.4 1.4 2.4 0.9 0.2 0.4 0.2 1.1 6.9 3.9 0.7 . 0.0
Public  building  and  Ioan  associations
  
2009          Oct 0.7 0.0 0.2 1.0 0.8 0.8 0.4 0.1 0.2 0.1 0.2 4.2 3.6 0.3 0.0
         Nov 0.8 0.0 0.2 1.0 0.8 0.8 0.4 0.1 0.2 0.1 0.2 4.2 3.7 0.3 0.0
         Dec 0.9 0.8 0.2 1.0 0.8 0.9 0.4 0.1 0.2 0.1 0.2 4.1 3.6 0.3 . 0.0
*Excluding assets and liabilities and/or transactions of foreign branches. amount covered by the contracts; only contracts newly entered into, for
The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as provisional. which the contract fee has been fully paid. Increases in the sum contracted
Subsequent revisions, which appear in the following Monthly Report, are count as new contracts. — 9For disbursements of deposits under savings
not specially marked. — 1Including postal giro account balances, claims on and loan contracts arising from the allocation of contracts see “Capital
building and loan associations, claims arising from registered debt securities disbursed“. — 10Including housing bonuses credited. — 11Only allocations
and central bank credit balances. — 2Loans under savings and loan accepted by the beneficiaries; including allocations applied to settlement of
contracts and interim and bridging loans. — 3Including money market interim and bridging loans. — 12The amounts already credited to the
paper and small amounts of other securities issued by banks. — 4Including accounts of savers or borrowers are also included in “Amounts paid into
equalisation claims. — 5Including liabilities to building and loan savings and loan accounts“ and “Interest and repayments received on
associations. — 6Including small amounts of savings deposits. — 7Including building loans“. 
participation rights capital and fund for general banking risks. — 8Total
39*IV  Banks

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
E U R O S Y S T E M
Monthly Report
February 2010
IV  Banks
  
13 Assets and liabilities of the foreign branches and foreign subsidiaries of German banks (MFIs) *
  
  
€ billion
Number of Lending to banks (MFIs) Lending to non-banks (non-MFIs)
Loans Credit  balances and loans
German   
banks to German
(MFIs)   non-banks
with
foreign foreign of which
branches Money enter- Money branches  1 
and/or and/or market prises to market
foreign foreign Balance paper, and foreign paper,
subsi- subsi- sheet German Foreign secur- house- non- secur- Other
Period diaries diaries total Total Total banks banks Total Total Total holds banks ities  2 assets ities 2,3 
Foreign  branches End of year or month *
  
2006 53 213 1,743.7 711.6 635.5 194.1 441.4 76.1 897.7 671.8 18.5 17.9 653.3 226.0 134.3
2007 52 218 2,042.4 813.8 743.1 238.6 504.5 70.7 1,066.8 811.4 21.6 20.7 789.8 255.3 161.8
2008 56 226 1,715.5 730.7 669.1 244.9 424.2 61.6 825.3 630.4 20.2 19.2 610.3 194.9 159.5
2009          Feb 56 231 1,797.0 725.5 668.8 252.6 416.2 56.8 855.8 659.1 25.1 24.0 634.0 196.7 215.7
         Mar 56 230 1,718.0 715.1 659.8 257.7 402.0 55.3 801.5 614.9 21.5 20.4 593.5 186.6 201.4
         Apr 56 230 1,786.9 753.9 698.6 276.3 422.3 55.3 815.6 633.6 24.7 23.7 608.9 182.1 217.4
         May 56 228 1,723.8 722.6 670.3 266.7 403.5 52.3 780.3 607.2 23.6 22.6 583.6 173.1 220.9
         June 55 224 1,680.2 715.4 666.5 260.9 405.7 48.8 760.5 588.8 20.9 19.9 567.9 171.6 204.4
         July 54 223 1,627.0 683.2 636.3 252.0 384.4 46.9 740.7 576.2 20.9 19.8 555.4 164.4 203.2
         Aug 54 225 1,586.8 663.4 617.1 248.1 369.0 46.3 720.8 555.7 21.5 20.5 534.2 165.1 202.6
         Sep 54 224 1,546.2 627.7 582.6 230.6 352.0 45.1 724.9 559.1 20.1 19.0 539.1 165.8 193.5
         Oct 54 225 1,552.6 612.5 569.0 229.1 339.9 43.4 720.6 553.1 20.0 18.9 533.1 167.5 219.5
         Nov 53 222 1,530.0 581.5 540.0 205.6 334.4 41.5 710.1 547.5 19.9 18.9 527.6 162.6 238.4
Changes *
2007 − 1 + 5 +406.5 +132.8 +136.4 + 44.5 + 91.9 − 3.6 +240.6 +196.1 + 3.1 + 2.9 +192.9 + 44.5 + 33.1
2008 + 4 + 8 −359.4 − 98.5 − 89.3 + 6.3 − 95.5 − 9.2 −256.8 −190.7 − 1.5 − 1.6 −189.3 − 66.1 − 4.1
2009          Feb − − − 25.7 − 35.9 − 34.4 − 5.0 − 29.4 − 1.5 − 28.3 − 22.9 + 2.2 + 2.2 − 25.1 − 5.4 + 38.6
         Mar − − 1 − 37.2 + 4.0 + 4.8 + 5.2 − 0.3 − 0.8 − 28.0 − 24.1 − 3.6 − 3.6 − 20.5 − 3.9 − 13.2
         Apr − − + 61.7 + 37.0 + 37.2 + 18.6 + 18.6 − 0.2 + 8.9 + 14.5 + 3.2 + 3.2 + 11.3 − 5.6 + 15.7
         May − − 2 − 27.3 − 17.6 − 15.2 − 9.6 − 5.6 − 2.5 − 15.0 − 10.8 − 1.1 − 1.0 − 9.8 − 4.1 + 5.3
         June − 1 − 4 − 43.6 − 6.5 − 3.0 − 5.9 + 2.9 − 3.5 − 20.6 − 19.3 − 2.7 − 2.7 − 16.6 − 1.2 − 16.5
         July − 1 − 1 − 53.9 − 32.5 − 30.6 − 8.9 − 21.7 − 2.0 − 20.1 − 12.7 − 0.1 − 0.1 − 12.7 − 7.4 − 1.2
         Aug − + 2 − 32.2 − 17.4 − 16.9 − 3.9 − 13.0 − 0.5 − 14.4 − 16.0 + 0.7 + 0.7 − 16.7 + 1.6 − 0.4
         Sep − − 1 − 24.6 − 30.5 − 29.5 − 17.5 − 12.1 − 1.0 + 14.3 + 11.6 − 1.5 − 1.5 + 13.1 + 2.7 − 8.4
         Oct − + 1 + 11.6 − 12.9 − 11.3 − 1.5 − 9.8 − 1.6 − 1.6 − 4.1 − 0.1 − 0.1 − 4.0 + 2.5 + 26.1
         Nov − 1 − 3 − 15.0 − 28.8 − 27.0 − 23.5 − 3.5 − 1.9 − 5.3 − 1.4 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 1.3 − 3.9 + 19.1
  
  
Foreign  subsidiaries End of year or month *
  
2006 40 142 761.2 341.9 262.8 124.1 138.7 79.1 347.3 218.7 38.0 36.4 180.7 128.6 72.1
2007 39 120 590.8 267.8 202.4 104.8 97.5 65.5 263.9 176.0 37.8 36.8 138.1 87.9 59.0
2008 38 116 594.9 244.9 183.1 85.5 97.6 61.8 267.8 196.5 42.2 41.6 154.3 71.3 82.2
2009          Feb 38 115 573.5 241.0 180.0 77.2 102.9 60.9 270.4 199.4 43.5 43.0 155.9 71.0 62.1
         Mar 38 113 560.7 227.1 168.1 75.8 92.3 59.0 264.4 194.3 43.1 42.6 151.2 70.1 69.2
         Apr 38 113 552.1 229.9 172.0 74.2 97.8 57.9 266.9 195.0 43.5 42.9 151.5 71.9 55.2
         May 37 112 533.6 220.1 165.1 74.3 90.7 55.0 261.4 191.7 43.1 42.5 148.7 69.7 52.1
         June 37 111 530.3 218.2 163.8 75.0 88.8 54.4 260.4 190.8 42.4 41.8 148.4 69.7 51.7
         July 37 112 526.5 208.9 155.0 72.3 82.7 54.0 260.8 191.3 41.9 41.3 149.4 69.6 56.7
         Aug 37 112 523.9 211.8 158.0 71.6 86.4 53.8 257.1 189.7 41.0 40.5 148.8 67.4 55.0
         Sep 36 112 531.3 214.0 163.3 73.8 89.5 50.7 251.6 186.9 40.9 40.4 146.0 64.7 65.8
         Oct 36 110 517.3 210.3 160.6 77.6 83.0 49.7 251.1 186.6 40.9 40.4 145.7 64.5 56.0
         Nov 36 108 516.5 212.8 163.7 77.5 86.2 49.1 247.0 183.5 41.0 40.5 142.5 63.4 56.7
Changes *
2007 − 1 − 22 −155.7 − 64.1 − 55.8 − 19.3 − 36.5 − 8.3 − 79.1 − 38.8 − 0.2 + 0.4 − 38.6 − 40.4 − 12.5
2008 − 1 − 4 − 0.2 − 24.2 − 19.8 − 19.3 − 0.5 − 4.4 + 1.1 + 17.5 + 4.4 + 4.8 + 13.2 − 16.4 + 22.9
2009          Feb − − − 8.2 − 3.9 − 4.5 − 1.5 − 3.0 + 0.6 − 2.3 − 0.6 + 0.0 + 0.1 − 0.6 − 1.7 − 2.0
         Mar − − 2 − 6.3 − 10.3 − 10.0 − 1.3 − 8.6 − 0.4 − 3.3 − 2.4 − 0.4 − 0.4 − 2.0 − 0.9 + 7.4
         Apr − − − 9.8 + 2.1 + 3.4 − 1.6 + 5.1 − 1.4 + 2.1 + 0.3 + 0.4 + 0.3 − 0.1 + 1.9 − 14.1
         May − 1 − 1 − 13.5 − 7.2 − 5.6 + 0.2 − 5.8 − 1.5 − 3.4 − 1.2 − 0.4 − 0.4 − 0.7 − 2.3 − 2.9
         June − − 1 − 3.2 − 2.0 − 1.4 + 0.6 − 2.0 − 0.6 − 0.9 − 0.8 − 0.7 − 0.7 − 0.1 − 0.0 − 0.4
         July − + 1 − 3.8 − 9.3 − 8.8 − 2.7 − 6.1 − 0.5 + 0.5 + 0.5 − 0.5 − 0.5 + 1.0 − 0.1 + 5.0
         Aug − − − 1.7 + 3.4 + 3.3 − 0.7 + 4.0 + 0.1 − 3.4 − 1.3 − 0.9 − 0.8 − 0.3 − 2.2 − 1.7
         Sep − 1 − + 9.7 + 3.5 + 6.0 + 2.2 + 3.8 − 2.6 − 4.7 − 2.0 − 0.1 − 0.1 − 1.9 − 2.7 + 10.9
         Oct − − 2 − 13.3 − 3.3 − 2.5 + 3.8 − 6.3 − 0.8 − 0.2 + 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.0 + 0.0 − 0.2 − 9.8
         Nov − − 2 + 0.2 + 3.1 + 3.4 − 0.1 + 3.5 − 0.3 − 3.7 − 2.7 + 0.2 + 0.1 − 2.8 − 1.0 + 0.8
*In this table “foreign“ also includes the country of domicile of the foreign ies.) The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as provision al;
branches and foreign subsidiaries. Statistical revisions have been eliminated subsequent revisions, which appear in the following Monthly Report , are
from the changes. (Breaks owing to changes in the reporting population not specially marked. — 1Several branches in a given country of domicile
have not been eliminated from the flow figures for the foreign subsidiar-
40*IV  Banks

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
February 2010
IV  Banks
  
  
  
  
  
Deposits
of banks (MFIs) of non-banks (non-MFIs)
German non-banks  4 
Money
Short-term market Medium  and long-term
paper
of which of which and debt
enter- enter- Working securities
out- capital Other prises  and prises  and
German Foreign house- house- Foreign stand- and own liabil-
Total Total banks Total Total Total holds Total holds ing  5 funds ities  6   Period banks non-banks
End of year or month * Foreign  branches
  
1,442.7 984.9 398.5 586.4 457.8 53.8 49.3 46.2 4.6 4.1 403.9 181.5 27.8 91.7 2006
1,723.7 1,191.0 547.7 643.3 532.7 55.3 51.2 47.5 4.1 3.9 477.4 186.0 29.2 103.5 2007
1,446.1 1,070.4 554.3 516.1 375.7 45.0 36.5 34.6 8.5 8.0 330.7 126.6 35.6 107.2 2008
1,474.1 1,032.8 530.2 502.6 441.2 48.6 43.2 41.8 5.3 4.7 392.7 138.2 36.2 148.5 2009          Feb 
1,393.5 987.3 515.3 472.0 406.2 51.7 46.8 44.2 4.9 4.3 354.5 141.0 36.2 147.4          Mar 
1,449.1 1,031.9 526.2 505.7 417.2 47.0 42.2 41.5 4.7 4.1 370.3 146.9 36.5 154.3          Apr 
1,393.7 990.9 522.3 468.6 402.8 43.9 39.3 38.5 4.5 4.0 359.0 148.5 35.9 145.6          May
1,344.9 968.0 517.0 451.1 376.8 41.4 36.9 36.3 4.5 3.9 335.5 158.1 35.7 141.6          June
1,285.1 913.1 479.5 433.6 372.0 40.1 35.6 35.1 4.4 3.9 331.9 157.0 35.9 149.1          July
1,250.3 875.2 465.5 409.7 375.1 38.3 33.8 33.4 4.4 3.9 336.8 157.8 35.8 142.9          Aug 
1,206.4 851.8 446.3 405.5 354.6 38.1 33.7 32.9 4.4 3.9 316.4 166.3 35.7 137.8          Sep 
1,203.4 822.4 441.1 381.3 381.1 36.9 32.5 32.2 4.4 3.9 344.2 169.4 34.7 145.1          Oct 
1,172.1 829.1 434.1 395.0 343.0 36.5 32.2 31.6 4.3 3.8 306.5 169.0 34.6 154.3          Nov 
Changes *
+ 359.0 +243.9 +149.2 + 94.7 +115.1 + 1.5 + 2.0 + 1.3 − 0.5 − 0.2 +113.6 + 4.5 + 1.3 + 41.7 2007
− 304.0 −139.7 + 6.5 −146.3 −164.3 − 10.3 − 14.7 − 12.9 + 4.4 + 4.1 −153.9 − 59.4 + 6.5 − 2.4 2008
− 70.3 − 68.8 − 4.5 − 64.3 − 1.4 − 1.1 + 2.7 + 3.9 − 3.8 − 3.8 − 0.3 + 2.2 + 0.0 + 42.4 2009          Feb 
− 49.9 − 28.2 − 14.9 − 13.3 − 21.7 + 3.2 + 3.6 + 2.3 − 0.4 − 0.4 − 24.9 + 2.8 − 0.1 + 10.0          Mar 
+ 51.2 + 42.4 + 10.9 + 31.5 + 8.7 − 4.8 − 4.6 − 2.6 − 0.2 − 0.2 + 13.5 + 6.0 + 0.3 + 4.2          Apr 
− 28.3 − 23.9 − 4.0 − 19.9 − 4.4 − 3.1 − 2.9 − 3.1 − 0.2 − 0.1 − 1.3 + 1.6 − 0.5 − 0.1          May
− 48.8 − 22.4 − 5.3 − 17.1 − 26.3 − 2.5 − 2.5 − 2.2 − 0.1 − 0.0 − 23.8 + 9.6 − 0.3 − 4.1          June
− 60.1 − 55.2 − 37.5 − 17.7 − 4.9 − 1.3 − 1.2 − 1.2 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 3.6 − 1.1 + 0.3 + 7.1          July
− 29.3 − 35.1 − 14.0 − 21.2 + 5.8 − 1.8 − 1.8 − 1.7 − 0.0 − 0.0 + 7.6 + 0.8 − 0.2 − 3.5          Aug 
− 32.7 − 17.3 − 19.2 + 1.9 − 15.4 − 0.1 − 0.1 − 0.5 − 0.0 + 0.0 − 15.3 + 8.4 − 0.1 − 0.2          Sep 
+ 1.2 − 26.6 − 5.3 − 21.3 + 27.8 − 1.2 − 1.2 − 0.7 − 0.0 − 0.0 + 29.0 + 3.1 − 1.0 + 8.3          Oct 
− 25.8 + 9.4 − 7.0 + 16.4 − 35.2 − 0.4 − 0.4 − 0.6 − 0.1 − 0.0 − 34.8 − 0.4 − 0.1 + 11.2          Nov 
  
  
End of year or month * Foreign  subsidiaries
  
557.3 329.4 121.5 207.9 227.9 40.8 33.0 31.6 7.8 7.7 187.1 87.9 40.0 76.0 2006
437.3 270.1 118.2 151.9 167.2 37.1 30.3 29.5 6.8 6.7 130.1 69.5 28.6 55.4 2007
453.7 277.7 145.1 132.7 176.0 32.8 24.1 23.6 8.7 8.6 143.2 57.7 30.5 52.9 2008
430.5 259.6 131.0 128.6 170.9 33.5 24.9 24.4 8.6 8.6 137.4 58.7 31.1 53.1 2009          Feb 
423.2 259.3 129.8 129.4 164.0 33.6 25.1 24.7 8.6 8.5 130.3 57.2 29.8 50.5          Mar 
416.5 247.9 124.2 123.6 168.6 33.5 24.9 24.5 8.6 8.5 135.2 56.8 29.0 49.8          Apr 
402.5 242.5 121.6 121.0 160.0 33.3 24.9 24.2 8.4 8.3 126.7 55.2 28.5 47.4          May
403.0 240.1 122.3 117.8 162.9 33.7 25.3 24.6 8.4 8.3 129.2 54.2 28.7 44.5          June
397.5 236.2 120.5 115.7 161.3 31.5 23.0 22.6 8.5 8.4 129.9 55.0 28.9 45.0          July
394.9 235.3 122.7 112.5 159.7 30.8 22.4 21.8 8.4 8.3 128.9 55.2 28.0 45.8          Aug 
403.7 239.7 128.2 111.5 164.0 31.0 22.5 21.7 8.5 8.4 133.0 54.6 28.0 45.1          Sep 
387.8 228.3 121.7 106.6 159.5 31.7 23.2 22.3 8.5 8.4 127.8 53.7 27.9 47.9          Oct 
387.2 227.1 119.9 107.2 160.1 30.0 21.5 21.1 8.5 8.4 130.0 53.3 28.9 47.1          Nov 
Changes *
− 109.3 − 53.9 − 3.4 − 50.5 − 55.4 − 3.7 − 2.6 − 2.1 − 1.1 − 1.0 − 51.7 − 18.3 − 11.4 − 16.7 2007
+ 12.1 + 4.8 + 26.9 − 22.1 + 7.3 − 4.3 − 6.3 − 5.9 + 2.0 + 2.0 + 11.6 − 11.8 + 1.9 − 2.4 2008
− 6.1 − 1.5 + 2.6 − 4.1 − 4.6 + 0.0 + 0.1 + 0.4 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 4.7 + 0.2 + 0.0 − 2.4 2009          Feb 
− 2.9 + 1.7 − 1.1 + 2.9 − 4.7 + 0.1 + 0.2 + 0.2 − 0.1 − 0.1 − 4.8 − 1.5 − 1.3 − 0.6          Mar 
− 7.5 − 11.8 − 5.6 − 6.2 + 4.3 − 0.1 − 0.2 − 0.2 + 0.0 + 0.0 + 4.4 − 0.4 − 0.8 − 1.1          Apr 
− 10.6 − 3.8 − 2.7 − 1.1 − 6.8 − 0.2 + 0.0 − 0.3 − 0.2 − 0.2 − 6.7 − 1.6 − 0.6 − 0.8          May
+ 0.6 − 2.3 + 0.7 − 3.1 + 2.9 + 0.4 + 0.4 + 0.4 + 0.0 + 0.0 + 2.5 − 1.0 + 0.2 − 2.9          June
− 5.5 − 4.0 − 1.8 − 2.2 − 1.6 − 2.3 − 2.3 − 2.1 + 0.0 + 0.0 + 0.7 + 0.9 + 0.3 + 0.6          July
− 1.9 − 0.7 + 2.2 − 2.9 − 1.3 − 0.7 − 0.7 − 0.7 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.6 + 0.2 − 0.9 + 1.0          Aug 
+ 10.3 + 5.1 + 5.4 − 0.4 + 5.2 + 0.2 + 0.1 − 0.2 + 0.0 + 0.0 + 5.1 − 0.6 − 0.0 − 0.0          Sep 
− 15.3 − 11.0 − 6.4 − 4.6 − 4.3 + 0.7 + 0.7 + 0.6 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 5.0 − 0.9 − 0.1 + 3.0          Oct 
+ 0.2 − 0.9 − 1.9 + 1.0 + 1.1 − 1.7 − 1.7 − 1.2 + 0.0 + 0.0 + 2.7 − 0.4 + 1.0 − 0.5          Nov 
are regarded as a single branch. — 2Treasury bills, Treasury discount non-negotiable debt securities. — 5Issues of negotiable and
paper and other money market paper, debt securities. — 3Including non-negotiable debt securities and money market paper. — 6Including
own debt securities. — 4Excluding subordinated liabilities and subordinated liabilities. 
41*IV  Banks

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
E U R O S Y S T E M
Monthly Report
February 2010
V  Minimum reserves
 
1  Reserve ratios
Germany Euro area
 
% of liabilities subject to reserve requirements % of reserve base  1 
Sight Time
Applicable from liabilities liabilities Applicable from Ratio Savings deposits
1995  Aug 1 2    2    1.5    1999  Jan 1 2    
 
 
 
 
1Article 3 of the Regulation of the European Central Bank on the appli-
cation of minimum reserves (excluding liabilities to which a reserve ratio of
0% applies pursuant to Article 4 (1)). 
 
 
 
2  Reserve maintenance in Germany up to the end of 1998
− pursuant to the Minimum Reserves Order of the Bundesbank 
 
DM million
Liabilities subject to reserve requirements Excess reserves  4 
Monthly Required % of the
average  1 Total reserves  2 Level Deficiencies Sight liabilities Time liabilities Savings deposits Actual reserves  3 required  reserves
1995          Dec 2,066,565 579,337 519,456 967,772 36,492 37,337 845 2.3 3
1996          Dec 2,201,464 655,483 474,342 1,071,639 38,671 39,522 851 2.2 4
1997          Dec 2,327,879 734,986 476,417 1,116,477 40,975 41,721 745 1.8 3
1998          Dec 2,576,889 865,444 564,878 1,146,567 45,805 46,432 627 1.4 4
1Pursuant to sections 5 to 7 of the Minimum Reserves Order. 2Amount balances of the credit institutions subject to reserve requirements on their
after applying the reserve ratios to the liabilities subject to reserve require- giro accounts at the Bundesbank. — 4 Actual reserves less required reserves. 
ments (section 5 (1) of the Minimum Reserves Order). — 3Average credit
 
 
3  Reserve maintenance in the euro area
− from 1999, pursuant to the ECB Regulation on the application of minimum reserves in accordance with
Article 19.1 of the Statute of the ESCB 
 
Maintenance Required reserves
period before deduction Required reserves
of lump-sum Lump-sum beginning in  1 after deduction of
Reserve base  2 allowance  3 allowance  4 Deficiencies  7 lump-sum allowance Current account  5 Excess reserves  6 
Euro area ( € billion)
 
2009          June 10,931.5 218.6 0.5 218.1 219.2 1.1 0.0
         July 10,826.6 216.5 0.5 216.0 216.9 0.9 0.0
         Aug 10,822.7 216.5 0.5 215.9 216.9 1.0 0.0
         Sep 10,710.1 214.2 0.5 213.7 214.7 1.1 0.0
         Oct 10,617.5 212.4 0.5 211.8 212.8 1.0 0.0
         Nov 10,538.1 210.8 0.5 210.2 211.4 1.2 0.0
         Dec 10,530.2 210.6 0.5 210.1 211.3 1.2 0.0
2010          Jan  p,8 10,499.8 210.0 0.5 209.5 210.9 1.4 ...
         Feb  p ... ... ... 210.9 ... ... ...
Of which:  Germany ( € million)
2009          June 2,653,695 53,074 191 52,883 53,161 278 0
         July 2,607,617 52,152 190 51,962 52,185 223 1
         Aug 2,608,650 52,173 189 51,984 52,236 252 7
         Sep 2,566,298 51,326 188 51,138 51,456 318 0
         Oct 2,549,967 50,999 188 50,812 51,032 220 0
         Nov 2,523,110 50,462 187 50,275 50,532 257 2
         Dec 2,507,906 50,158 187 49,971 50,297 326 0
2010          Jan  p 2,496,117 49,922 187 49,735 50,168 433 2
         Feb  p 2,496,911 49,938 187 49,751 ... ... ...
1From March 2004, the reserve maintenance period will start on the reserve base. — 4Article 5 (2) of the Regulation of the European Central
settlement day of the main refinancing operation immediately following Bank on the application of minimum reserves. — 5Average credit balances
the meeting of the Governing Council of the ECB for which the monthly of the credit institutions at the national central banks. — 6Average credit
discussion of the monetary policy stance is scheduled. — 2Article 3 of the balances less required reserves after deduction of the lump-sum
Regulation of the European Central Bank on the application of minimum allowance. — 7Required reserves after deduction of the lump-sum
reserves (excluding liabilities to which a reserve ratio of 0% applies, pur- allowance. — 8The total number of deficiencies was not available when
suant to Article 4 (1)). — 3Amount after applying the reserve ratios to the this report went to press. 
42*V  Minimum reserves

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
February 2010
VI Interest rates
 
1 ECB interest rates 2 Base rates
 
 
% per annum % per annum
Main refinancing Main refinancing Base rate
operations operations as per Base
Mar- Mar- Discount rate
ginal ginal Rate as per Minimum Minimum
Applicable Deposit Fixed bid lending Applicable Deposit Fixed bid lending Applicable Applicable Civil Transition
from facility rate rate facility from facility rate rate facility from Act  1 from Code  2 
1999 Jan                  1 2.00 3.00 − 4.50 2005 Dec                  6 1.25 − 2.25 3.25 1999 Jan                1 2.50 2002 Jan                1 2.57
         Jan                  4 2.75 3.00 − 3.25          May                1 1.95          July                1 2.47
         Jan                22 2.00 3.00 − 4.50 2006 Mar                  8 1.50 − 2.50 3.50
         Apr                  9 1.50 2.50 − 3.50          June                15 1.75 − 2.75 3.75 2000 Jan                1 2.68 2003 Jan                1 1.97
         Nov                  5 2.00 3.00 − 4.00          Aug                  9 2.00 − 3.00 4.00          May                1 3.42          July                1 1.22
         Oct                11 2.25 − 3.25 4.25          Sep                1 4.26
2000 Feb                  4 2.25 3.25 − 4.25          Dec                13 2.50 − 3.50 4.50 2004 Jan                1 1.14
         Mar                17 2.50 3.50 − 4.50 2001 Sep                1 3.62          July                1 1.13
         Apr                28 2.75 3.75 − 4.75 2007 Mar                14 2.75 − 3.75 4.75
         June                 9 3.25 4.25 − 5.25          June                13 3.00 − 4.00 5.00 2002 Jan                1 2.71 2005 Jan                1 1.21
         June               28 3.25 − 4.25 5.25          to          July                1 1.17
         Sep                  1 3.50 − 4.50 5.50 2008 July                  9 3.25 − 4.25 5.25          Apr                3
         Oct                  6 3.75 − 4.75 5.75          Oct                  8 2.75 − 3.75 4.75 2006 Jan                1 1.37
          Oct                  9 3.25 3.75 − 4.25          July                1 1.95
2001 May               11 3.50 − 4.50 5.50          Nov                12 2.75 3.25 − 3.75
         Aug                31 3.25 − 4.25 5.25          Dec                10 2.00 2.50 − 3.00 2007 Jan                1 2.70
         Sep                18 2.75 − 3.75 4.75          July               1 3.19
         Nov                  9 2.25 − 3.25 4.25 2009 Jan                21 1.00 2.00 − 3.00   
         Mar                11 0.50 1.50 − 2.50 2008 Jan                1 3.32
2002 Dec                  6 1.75 − 2.75 3.75          Apr                  8 0.25 1.25 − 2.25          July                1 3.19
         May               13 0.25 1.00 − 1.75   
2003 Mar                  7 1.50 − 2.50 3.50 2009 Jan                1 1.62
         June                 6 1.00 − 2.00 3.00          July               1 0.12
1Pursuant to the Discount Rate Transition Act, read in conjunction with the 2 Pursuant to section 247 of the Civil Code. 
Regulation Governing the Use of the Base Rate as a Reference Variable. —  
 
 
 
3 Eurosystem monetary policy operations allotted through tenders
 
 
Fixed rate tenders Variable rate tenders
Bid Allotment Minimum Weighted
amount amount Fixed rate bid rate Marginal rate  1 average rate
Date of Running for
settlement € million % per annum ... days
Main refinancing operations
2010 Jan                13 60,077 60,077 1.00 − − − 7
         Jan                20 58,020 58,020 1.00 − − − 7
         Jan                27 63,435 63,435 1.00 − − − 7
         Feb          3 55,824 55,824 1.00 − − − 7
         Feb                10 76,083 76,083 1.00 − − − 7
Longer-term refinancing operations
2010 Jan                20 5,739 5,739 1.00 − − − 21
         Jan                28 3,268 3,268 1.00 − − − 91
         Feb                10 2,757 2,757 1.00 − − − 28
Source: ECB. — 1Lowest or highest interest rate at which funds were   
allotted or collected.  
 
 
 
4 Money market rates, by month
 
 
% per annum
Money market rates reported by Frankfurt banks  1 EURIBOR  3 
One-week One-month Six-month Nine-month Twelve- Three-month
Overnight money Three-month funds EONIA  2 funds funds funds funds funds month funds
Reporting Monthly Lowest and Monthly Lowest and
period averages highest rates averages highest rates Monthly averages
2009          Aug 0.28 0.20 − 0.50 0.81 0.69 − 0.95 0.35 0.35 0.51 0.86 1.12 1.24 1.33
         Sep 0.30 0.23 − 0.55 0.72 0.61 − 0.85 0.36 0.34 0.46 0.77 1.04 1.16 1.26
         Oct 0.30 0.23 − 0.60 0.68 0.59 − 0.77 0.36 0.35 0.43 0.74 1.02 1.14 1.24
         Nov 0.33 0.25 − 0.75 0.67 0.57 − 0.75 0.36 0.36 0.44 0.72 0.99 1.12 1.23
         Dec 0.32 4 0.23 − 0.80 0.66 0.56 − 0.76 0.35 0.39 0.48 0.71 1.00 1.12 1.24
2010          Jan 0.28 0.23 − 0.70 0.62 0.52 − 0.71 0.34 0.36 0.44 0.68 0.98 1.11 1.23
1Money market rates are not fixed or quoted officially; the monthly aver- of real turnover according to the act/360 method and published via
ages computed from daily quotations are unweighted. — 2Euro OverNight Moneyline Telerate. — 3Euro Interbank Offered Rate: unweighted average
Index Average: weighted average overnight rate for interbank operations rate calculated by Moneyline Telerate since 30 December 1998 according to
calculated by the European Central Bank since 4 January 1999 on the basis the act/360 method. — 4 At end-December, 0.23% to 0.30%. 
43*VI Interest rates

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
E U R O S Y S T E M
Monthly Report
February 2010
VI Interest rates
 
5 Interest rates for outstanding amounts and new business of banks (MFIs) in the European monetary union *
(a) Outstanding amounts o
 
Effective interest rate % per annum  1 
Non-financial Loans to households Loans to
Households’ corporations’ non-financial
deposits deposits Housing loans Consumer credit and other loans corporations
with an agreed maturity of with a maturity of
over 1 year over 1 year over 1 year
End of up to over up to over up to and up to over up to and up to over up to and up to over
month 2 years 2 years 2 years 2 years 1 year 5 years 5 years 1 year 5 years 5 years 1 year 5 years 5 years
2009          Apr 3.54 3.11 2.50 3.84 4.70 4.49 4.65 8.19 7.00 5.92 4.10 3.97 4.25
         May 3.38 3.04 2.35 3.70 4.59 4.45 4.56 8.09 6.92 5.84 4.00 3.84 4.12
         June 3.25 3.07 2.19 3.65 4.50 4.40 4.46 7.97 6.91 5.79 3.91 3.72 4.00
         July 3.07 3.03 1.97 3.53 4.31 4.31 4.36 7.82 6.79 5.70 3.72 3.59 3.81
         Aug 2.94 3.01 1.89 3.39 4.23 4.25 4.28 7.81 6.74 5.65 3.65 3.50 3.73
         Sep 2.83 3.01 1.80 3.39 4.18 4.26 4.25 7.80 6.72 5.64 3.62 3.43 3.68
         Oct 2.64 2.96 1.70 3.34 4.05 4.19 4.18 7.69 6.66 5.54 3.56 3.37 3.60
         Nov 2.51 2.95 1.62 3.37 4.01 4.15 4.12 7.56 6.66 5.51 3.53 3.36 3.57
         Dec 2.36 2.90 1.56 3.31 4.08 4.10 4.06 7.54 6.58 5.43 3.46 3.35 3.49
 
 
(b) New business +
 
Effective interest rate % per annum  1 
Households’ deposits Non-financial corporations’ deposits
with an agreed maturity of redeemable at notice of with an agreed maturity of
over 1 year over 1 year
Reporting up to and up to over up to over up to and up to over
period Overnight 1 year 2 years 2 years 3 months 3 months Overnight 1 year 2 years 2 years
2009          Apr 0.66 2.01 2.69 2.87 2.22 3.75 0.77 1.15 2.64 3.06
         May 0.61 1.89 2.39 2.71 1.99 3.62 0.73 1.08 2.38 3.11
         June 0.56 1.86 2.38 2.57 1.95 3.52 0.63 1.04 2.17 2.58
         July 0.52 1.86 2.41 2.61 1.86 3.38 0.57 0.82 2.41 2.93
         Aug 0.50 1.72 2.32 2.64 1.64 3.23 0.55 0.71 2.06 2.93
         Sep 0.49 1.61 2.27 2.52 1.60 3.12 0.52 0.69 2.10 2.74
         Oct 0.46 1.68 2.11 2.55 1.55 2.97 0.49 0.66 1.99 2.72
         Nov 0.46 1.67 2.23 2.56 1.52 2.76 0.48 0.70 2.11 2.92
         Dec 0.45 1.67 2.32 2.48 1.53 2.45 0.47 0.77 1.99 2.49
 
 
Loans to households
Consumer credit Housing loans Other loans
with an initial rate fixation with an initial rate fixation
floating floating floating over 1 year over 1 year over 5 years over 1 year
Reporting Over- rate or up and up to over rate or up and up to and up to over and up to over rate or up
period drafts Total  2 to 1 year 5 years 5 years Total  2 to 1 year 5 years 10 years 10 years to 1 year 5 years 5 years
2009          Apr 9.71 8.05 7.43 6.50 8.27 4.22 3.38 4.21 4.55 4.68 3.54 4.69 4.90
         May 9.62 8.08 7.87 6.44 8.17 4.12 3.22 4.15 4.50 4.58 3.60 4.71 4.90
         June 9.55 7.83 7.30 6.36 8.03 4.07 3.12 4.12 4.51 4.58 3.54 4.76 4.95
         July 9.31 8.02 7.67 6.49 8.04 4.02 3.03 4.09 4.54 4.54 3.35 4.77 4.91
         Aug 9.26 8.17 7.96 6.54 7.96 4.06 3.00 4.10 4.54 4.45 3.21 4.74 4.82
         Sep 9.26 8.00 7.69 6.45 7.91 3.92 2.81 4.05 4.48 4.45 3.13 4.66 4.74
         Oct 9.16 7.87 7.32 6.38 7.94 3.85 2.77 4.02 4.45 4.40 3.21 4.73 4.72
         Nov 9.07 7.76 7.03 6.29 7.87 3.78 2.71 3.97 4.46 4.32 3.16 4.57 4.66
         Dec 9.00 7.41 6.42 6.25 7.49 3.80 2.71 3.96 4.42 4.26 3.08 4.40 4.33
 
 
Loans to non-financial corporations
Loans up to €1 million with an initial rate fixation Loans over €1 million with an initial rate fixation
Reporting floating rate or over 1 year and floating rate or over 1 year and
period Overdrafts up to 1 year up to 5 years over 5 years up to 1 year up to 5 years over 5 years
2009          Apr 4.72 3.82 5.00 4.60 2.54 3.34 4.01
         May 4.64 3.73 5.00 4.52 2.48 3.21 3.98
         June 4.55 3.64 4.85 4.49 2.57 3.08 3.71
         July 4.34 3.56 4.78 4.32 2.37 2.89 3.90
         Aug 4.24 3.42 4.67 4.24 2.31 2.80 3.83
         Sep 4.25 3.36 4.54 4.16 2.06 2.89 3.64
         Oct 4.18 3.33 4.49 4.18 2.14 2.73 3.64
         Nov 4.11 3.34 4.49 4.10 2.22 2.74 3.80
         Dec 4.06 3.27 4.23 3.95 2.18 3.13 3.58
Source: ECB. — For footnotes *, o and 1see p 45. For footnote + see p 46. — which contains other related charges which may occur for enquiries, adminis-
2Annual percentage rate of charge as defined in Directive 2008/48/EC, tration, preparation of the documents, guarantees and credit insuran ce. 
44*VI Interest rates

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
February 2010
VI Interest rates
 
6 Interest rates and volumes for outstanding amounts and new business of German banks (MFIs) *
(a) Outstanding amounts o
 
 
Households’ deposits Non-financial corporations’ deposits
with an agreed maturity of
up to 2 years over 2 years up to 2 years over 2 years
Effective Effective Effective Effective
End of interest rate  1 Volume  2 interest rate  1 Volume  2 interest rate  1 Volume  2 interest rate  1 Volume  2 
month % pa € million % pa € million % pa € million % pa € million
2008          Dec 4.26 326,679 2.45 179,319 3.63 118,097 4.45 22,976
2009          Jan 3.98 307,958 2.46 179,112 2.95 116,231 4.43 23,192
         Feb 3.82 292,932 2.45 179,096 2.57 113,302 4.43 23,084
         Mar 3.71 278,398 2.45 179,828 2.15 109,282 4.42 23,274
         Apr 3.56 261,337 2.45 180,758 1.86 110,298 4.39 23,265
         May 3.42 251,435 2.44 182,163 1.72 107,732 4.36 23,269
         June 3.32 240,427 2.44 183,008 1.52 101,792 4.25 23,871
         July 3.10 226,909 2.43 184,056 1.30 101,908 4.17 24,569
         Aug 2.91 211,060 2.43 185,213 1.20 102,191 4.03 25,351
         Sep 2.75 196,660 2.42 186,698 1.09 99,264 3.99 25,666
         Oct 2.59 182,143 2.42 188,911 1.06 93,477 3.95 25,921
         Nov 2.39 170,152 2.41 191,395 1.01 92,010 3.92 26,499
         Dec 2.18 161,023 2.40 196,621 0.95 88,785 3.99 26,227
 
 
Housing loans to households  3 Consumer credit and other loans to households  4, 5 
with a maturity of
over 1 year and over 1 year and
up to 1 year  6 up to 5 years over 5 years up to 1 year  6 up to 5 years over 5 years
Effective Effective Effective Effective Effective Effective
interest interest interest interest interest interest
End of rate  1 Volume  2 rate 1 Volume  2 rate 1 Volume  2 rate 1 Volume  2 rate 1 Volume  2 rate 1 Volume  2 
month % pa % pa % pa % pa % pa % pa € million € million € million € million € million € million
2008          Dec 6.13 5,528 4.84 24,239 5.06 921,188 10.15 70,489 5.77 64,751 6.22 312,381
2009          Jan 5.81 5,418 4.77 23,857 5.03 918,498 9.60 68,437 5.66 64,234 6.16 311,940
         Feb 5.54 5,385 4.73 23,698 5.02 917,848 9.21 68,721 5.63 64,058 6.14 312,266
         Mar 5.34 5,628 4.65 25,121 5.01 914,717 9.16 69,930 5.56 65,236 6.10 310,908
         Apr 5.06 5,584 4.57 25,145 4.98 915,839 8.93 68,006 5.58 66,027 6.01 313,261
         May 4.97 5,586 4.54 25,160 4.97 916,289 8.76 67,806 5.54 66,445 5.99 313,661
         June 4.86 5,605 4.49 25,260 4.95 916,103 8.98 69,625 5.49 66,936 5.98 313,433
         July 4.64 5,645 4.44 25,362 4.93 917,085 8.74 67,655 5.44 67,784 5.95 314,065
         Aug 4.56 5,590 4.41 25,463 4.92 919,804 8.67 67,279 5.41 68,040 5.94 313,043
         Sep 4.51 5,673 4.38 25,577 4.91 920,688 8.67 69,218 5.36 68,844 5.94 312,413
         Oct 4.37 5,595 4.35 25,653 4.89 922,437 8.53 67,505 5.33 69,092 5.90 312,661
         Nov 4.38 5,539 4.33 25,786 4.88 923,421 8.40 66,513 5.29 69,197 5.89 312,363
         Dec 4.46 5,548 4.28 25,770 4.86 922,971 8.53 67,071 5.30 70,267 5.88 311,653
 
 
Loans to non-financial corporations with a maturity of
up to 1 year  6 over 1 year and up to 5 years over 5 years
End of Volume  2 Volume  2 Volume  2 Effective interest rate  1 Effective interest rate  1 Effective interest rate  1 
month % pa € million % pa € million % pa € million
2008          Dec 5.52 188,252 5.30 138,069 5.04 544,529
2009          Jan 4.94 185,671 4.81 140,169 4.82 545,349
         Feb 4.69 182,528 4.55 140,944 4.70 545,925
         Mar 4.51 183,679 4.30 139,786 4.55 543,946
         Apr 4.18 178,062 4.02 142,202 4.40 541,091
         May 4.13 177,190 3.93 142,644 4.36 541,981
         June 4.09 174,044 3.87 142,643 4.27 539,830
         July 3.92 164,009 3.76 144,430 4.18 542,592
         Aug 3.85 162,055 3.72 144,119 4.15 543,900
         Sep 3.87 160,310 3.65 144,402 4.10 542,542
         Oct 3.83 154,789 3.61 143,106 4.06 542,895
         Nov 3.82 152,333 3.61 142,207 4.06 547,731
         Dec 3.68 140,179 3.66 144,800 4.01 545,394
*The MFI interest rate statistics are based on the interest rates applied by interest rates may always be calculated either as annualised agreed intere st
MFIs and the related volumes of euro-denominated deposits and loans to rates or as narrowly defined effective rates. Both calculation methods cover
households and non-financial corporations domiciled in the euro area. The all interest payments on deposits and loans but not any other related
household sector comprises individuals (including sole proprietors) and charges which may occur for enquiries, administration, preparation of th e
non-profit institutions serving households. Non-financial corporations in- documents, guarantees and credit insurance. — 2Data based on monthly
clude all enterprises other than insurance companies, banks and other finan- balance sheet statistics. — 3Secured and unsecured loans for home
cial institutions. The interest rate statistics gathered on a harmonised basis purchase, including building and home improvements; including loan s
in the euro area from January 2003 are being collected in Germany on a granted by building and loan associations and interim credits as well as
sample basis. The most recent figures are in all cases to be regarded as provi- transmitted loans granted by the reporting agents in their own name and
sional. Subsequent revisions appearing in the following Monthly Report are for their own account. — 4Consumer credit is defined as loans granted for
not specially marked. Further information on the MFI interest rate statistics the purpose of personal use in the consumption of goods and services. —
can be found on the Bundesbank’s website (Statistics / Reporting system / 5For the purpose of these statistics, other loans are loans granted for other
Banking statistics / MFI interest rate statistics). — oThe statistics on out- purposes such as business, debt consolidation, education etc. — 6Including
standing amounts are collected at the end of the month. — 1The effective overdrafts. 
45*VI Interest rates

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
E U R O S Y S T E M
Monthly Report
February 2010
VI Interest rates
 
6 Interest rates and volumes for outstanding amounts and new business of German banks (MFIs) *  (cont’d)
(b) New business +
 
 
Households’ deposits
with an agreed maturity of redeemable at notice of  8 
over 1 year and
Overnight up to 1 year up to 2 years over 2 years up to 3 months over 3 months
Effective Effective Effective Effective Effective Effective
interest interest interest interest interest interest
Reporting rate  1 Volume  2 rate 1 Volume  7 rate 1 Volume  7 rate 1 Volume  7 rate 1 Volume  2 rate 1 Volume  2 
period % pa % pa % pa % pa % pa % pa € million € million € million € million € million € million
2008          Dec 1.85 508,140 3.21 52,012 4.44 2,583 3.75 2,291 2.42 425,527 4.19 110,599
2009          Jan 1.77 529,633 2.67 48,906 4.08 3,415 3.81 2,143 2.33 429,238 4.11 110,567
         Feb 1.55 550,800 1.94 29,935 3.37 2,015 3.40 1,968 2.24 434,504 4.02 110,493
         Mar 1.38 558,216 1.46 30,369 2.97 1,746 3.15 2,911 2.08 437,140 3.91 111,178
         Apr 1.13 576,843 1.32 27,496 2.69 1,611 3.08 3,059 1.98 439,565 3.79 112,039
         May 1.03 587,516 1.34 25,817 2.17 1,663 2.88 2,893 1.85 441,968 3.67 113,497
         June 0.94 591,673 1.29 25,435 2.28 1,293 2.74 2,592 1.82 445,518 3.55 114,481
         July 0.88 599,922 1.45 28,372 2.29 2,077 2.77 2,947 1.79 450,019 3.41 115,616
         Aug 0.84 609,242 1.18 21,694 2.14 1,393 2.83 2,866 1.62 454,401 3.25 116,343
         Sep 0.82 617,597 1.01 19,325 2.02 1,584 2.61 2,779 1.61 457,521 3.14 117,556
         Oct 0.79 629,015 1.03 19,145 1.97 1,868 2.75 3,393 1.49 461,657 2.99 119,952
         Nov 0.75 646,360 1.04 17,401 1.92 1,801 2.80 3,572 1.47 464,488 2.77 120,775
         Dec 0.75 651,564 0.87 19,427 1.94 1,704 2.69 3,516 1.52 474,429 2.44 119,702
 
 
Non-financial corporations’ deposits
with an agreed maturity of
Overnight up to 1 year over 1 year and up to 2 years over 2 years
Effective Effective Effective Effective
Reporting interest rate  1 Volume  2 interest rate  1 Volume  7 interest rate  1 Volume  7 interest rate  1 Volume  7 
period % pa € million % pa € million % pa € million % pa € million
2008          Dec 1.66 194,621 2.60 65,240 4.02 480 4.24 470
2009          Jan 1.31 202,948 1.91 69,444 3.45 843 4.34 463
         Feb 1.16 197,847 1.39 43,602 2.93 367 3.83 421
         Mar 1.03 203,071 1.10 50,263 2.63 480 4.02 1,149
         Apr 0.81 209,654 0.89 50,849 2.57 358 3.68 538
         May 0.81 211,660 0.77 43,357 2.32 412 3.41 395
         June 0.61 217,069 0.78 42,875 1.77 279 2.11 917
         July 0.55 222,639 0.54 46,924 2.22 356 2.91 1,713
         Aug 0.53 228,457 0.46 34,238 1.75 326 3.63 792
         Sep 0.51 234,141 0.42 38,890 1.78 325 2.91 565
         Oct 0.48 244,464 0.42 40,077 1.79 229 3.20 513
         Nov 0.47 249,011 0.48 41,382 1.75 301 3.59 559
         Dec 0.46 249,124 0.47 37,933 2.20 460 3.24 844
 
 
Loans to households
Consumer credit with an initial rate fixation of  4 Other loans with an initial rate fixation of  5 
floating rate or over 1 year and floating rate or over 1 year and
Total up to 1 year  10 up to 5 years over 5 years up to 1 year  10 up to 5 years over 5 years
Annual
Effective Effective Effective Effective Effective Effective percentage
rate of interest interest interest interest interest interest
Reporting charge  9 rate 1 Volume  7 rate 1 Volume  7 rate 1 Volume  7 rate 1 Volume  7 rate 1 Volume  7 rate 1 Volume  7 
period % pa % pa % pa % pa % pa % pa % pa € million € million € million € million € million € million
2008          Dec 7.02 4.76 1,217 5.47 2,086 8.19 1,947 4.39 7,051 5.51 1,360 5.15 1,966
2009          Jan 7.47 5.10 1,202 5.48 2,204 8.74 2,101 3.73 7,060 5.24 1,475 5.19 2,145
         Feb 7.18 5.12 878 5.17 2,649 8.46 2,173 3.15 5,204 5.08 1,155 4.99 1,538
         Mar 6.95 4.74 1,171 5.06 3,180 8.19 2,765 3.01 6,416 4.82 1,467 4.90 2,192
         Apr 6.99 4.41 1,510 5.30 3,112 8.28 2,485 2.68 7,353 4.65 1,773 4.79 2,329
         May 6.94 5.10 904 5.08 2,915 8.24 2,247 2.67 5,699 4.78 1,307 4.75 2,020
         June 6.79 5.20 1,484 4.99 3,097 8.19 2,347 2.65 6,020 4.66 1,419 4.83 2,407
         July 7.02 5.52 1,242 5.15 3,184 8.25 2,607 2.49 6,809 4.73 1,468 4.84 2,800
         Aug 7.19 5.55 1,187 5.28 2,401 8.24 1,958 2.38 5,529 4.62 1,119 4.82 1,825
         Sep 6.93 5.32 1,322 5.10 2,294 8.20 2,007 2.17 6,690 4.61 1,043 4.60 2,043
         Oct 6.84 4.90 1,651 5.05 2,386 8.29 2,018 2.24 6,626 4.65 1,208 4.52 2,480
         Nov 6.47 4.55 2,065 4.96 2,242 8.05 1,733 2.08 5,102 4.47 1,225 4.39 1,859
         Dec 6.06 4.04 2,385 4.83 2,027 7.57 1,789 2.40 6,198 4.41 1,495 4.25 2,902
For footnotes * and 1to6, see p 45*. — +In the case of deposits with an business at the end of the month has to be incorporated in the calculation
agreed maturity and all loans excluding overdrafts, new business covers all of average rates of interest. — 7Estimated. The volume of new business is
new agreements between households or non-financial corporations and the extrapolated to form the underlying total using the Horvitz-Thompson esti -
bank. The interest rates are calculated as volume-weighted average rates mator. — 8Including non-financial corporations’ deposits; including fidelity
across all new agreements concluded during the reporting month. In the and growth premia. — 9Annual percentage rate of charge as defined in Dir-
case of overnight deposits, deposits redeemable at notice and overdrafts, ective 2008/48/EC, which contains other related charges which may occur f or
new business is collected in the same way as outstanding amounts for the enquiries, administration, preparation of the documents, guarantees and
sake of simplicity. This means that all outstanding deposit and lending credit insurance. — 10 Excluding overdrafts. 
46*VI Interest rates

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
February 2010
VI Interest rates
 
6 Interest rates and volumes for outstanding amounts and new business of German banks (MFIs) *  (cont’d)
(b) New business +
 
 
Loans to households (cont’d)
Housing loans with an initial rate fixation of  3 
floating rate or over 1 year and over 5 years and
Overdrafts  11 Total up to 1 year  10 up to 5 years up to 10 years over 10 years
Annual per-
Effective Effective Effective Effective Effective centage rate
Reporting Volume  12 Volume  7 Volume  7 Volume  7 Volume  7 interest rate  1 of charge  9 interest rate  1 interest rate  1 interest rate  1 interest rate  1 
period % pa € million % pa % pa € milion % pa € million % pa € million % pa € million
2008          Dec 11.82 47,477 4.96 5.38 2,476 4.84 2,918 4.83 5,566 4.73 4,200
2009          Jan 11.42 45,056 4.83 4.97 3,251 4.58 3,343 4.73 6,197 4.77 3,970
         Feb 11.19 44,553 4.58 4.38 2,370 4.33 2,749 4.58 5,336 4.60 3,395
         Mar 11.16 45,902 4.42 4.19 2,787 4.12 3,343 4.40 6,831 4.49 4,609
         Apr 10.97 43,989 4.34 3.86 3,150 4.01 3,521 4.37 7,455 4.54 4,272
         May 10.87 43,269 4.29 3.80 2,616 3.93 3,031 4.35 6,547 4.47 4,000
         June 10.85 45,907 4.31 3.73 2,654 3.88 3,410 4.39 7,491 4.53 4,261
         July 10.58 44,140 4.31 3.56 3,374 3.89 3,747 4.45 8,321 4.54 4,424
         Aug 10.58 43,846 4.28 3.47 2,931 3.87 2,812 4.46 6,269 4.51 3,767
         Sep 10.61 45,022 4.22 3.38 2,256 3.81 2,587 4.37 5,904 4.45 4,060
         Oct 10.53 43,311 4.17 3.28 2,956 3.83 2,707 4.34 6,512 4.41 3,780
         Nov 10.36 41,858 4.14 3.24 2,214 3.78 2,462 4.35 5,363 4.32 3,681
         Dec 10.38 43,670 4.13 3.36 2,535 3.76 2,741 4.29 5,547 4.38 3,668
 
 
Loans to non-financial corporations
Loans up to €1 million with an initial rate fixation of  13 
Overdrafts  11 floating rate or up to 1 year  10 over 1 year and up to 5 years over 5 years
Effective Effective Effective Effective
Reporting interest rate  1 Volume  12 interest rate  1 Volume  7 interest rate  1 Volume  7 interest rate  1 Volume  7 
period % pa € million % pa € million % pa € million % pa € million
2008          Dec 6.35 84,891 5.25 10,536 5.61 1,438 5.08 1,828
2009          Jan 5.77 83,490 4.55 9,429 5.31 1,151 5.07 1,351
         Feb 5.63 84,220 4.15 9,245 5.12 1,036 4.84 1,105
         Mar 5.65 84,903 3.83 12,529 4.95 1,198 4.69 1,333
         Apr 5.21 82,312 3.60 11,605 4.85 1,204 4.48 1,488
         May 5.24 81,653 3.52 10,634 4.83 1,078 4.41 1,139
         June 5.14 82,602 3.36 11,556 4.82 1,090 4.61 1,392
         July 5.01 76,756 3.36 11,383 4.73 1,398 4.54 1,680
         Aug 4.86 77,358 3.26 8,654 4.80 990 4.43 1,155
         Sep 5.05 76,050 3.28 11,592 4.72 986 4.35 1,283
         Oct 5.02 72,593 3.37 11,279 4.54 1,133 4.37 1,403
         Nov 4.99 72,412 3.37 8,729 4.70 965 4.22 1,252
         Dec 4.84 67,500 3.29 9,655 4.29 1,455 3.95 1,753
 
 
Loans to non-financial corporations (cont’d)
Loans over €1 million with an initial rate fixation of  13 
floating rate or up to 1 year  10 over 1 year and up to 5 years over 5 years
Reporting Volume  7 Volume  7 Volume  7 Effective interest rate  1 Effective interest rate  1 Effective interest rate  1 
period % pa € million % pa € million % pa € million
2008          Dec 4.35 80,446 4.82 4,972 4.92 6,563
2009          Jan 3.63 78,532 5.00 3,051 4.69 3,788
         Feb 3.26 63,830 4.79 1,959 4.53 3,225
         Mar 3.09 73,340 4.23 2,283 4.50 3,512
         Apr 2.84 67,171 4.22 2,706 4.47 3,480
         May 2.84 58,465 3.98 2,404 4.47 2,783
         June 2.93 69,989 4.33 2,229 4.69 4,190
         July 2.74 70,243 3.85 3,615 4.52 4,734
         Aug 2.80 54,832 4.18 1,771 4.40 3,281
         Sep 2.26 59,657 4.23 2,479 4.12 3,334
         Oct 2.59 58,565 3.88 2,149 4.29 3,158
         Nov 2.95 51,190 3.87 1,858 4.20 3,859
         Dec 2.58 66,894 3.86 3,615 4.08 5,066
For footnotes *and 1to6, see p 45*. For footnotes +and 7to10, see The volume of outstanding amounts reported is extrapolated to form the
p 46*. — 11Overdrafts are defined as debit balances on current accounts. underlying total using the Horvitz-Thompson estimator. — 13The amount
They include all bank overdrafts regardless of whether they are within or refers to the single loan transaction considered as new business.  
beyond the limits agreed between customers and the bank. — 12Estimated.
47*VI Interest rates

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
E U R O S Y S T E M
Monthly Report
February 2010
VII Capital market
 
1 Sales and purchases of debt securities and shares in Germany *
 
 
 
Debt securities
Sales Purchases
Domestic debt securities  1 Residents
Credit in- Bundes-
Sales stitutions bank
= Public Foreign including open
total Bank Corporate debt debt building market
pur- debt bonds secur- secur- and loan Non- oper- Non-
Period chases Total securities (non-MFIs) ities  2 ities 3 Total  4 banks  6 ations  5 residents  7 associations  5 
DM million
1997 332,655 250,688 184,911 1,563 64,214 81,967 204,378 144,177 60,201 − 128,276
1998 418,841 308,201 254,367 3,143 50,691 110,640 245,802 203,342 42,460 − 173,038
€ million
1999 292,663 198,068 156,399 2,184 39,485 94,595 155,766 74,728 81,038 − 136,898
2000 226,393 157,994 120,154 12,605 25,234 68,399 151,568 91,447 60,121 − 74,825
2001 180,227 86,656 55,918 14,473 16,262 93,571 111,281 35,848 75,433 − 68,946
2002 175,396 124,035 47,296 14,506 62,235 51,361 60,476 13,536 46,940 − 114,920
2003 184,679 134,455 31,404 30,262 72,788 50,224 105,557 35,748 69,809 − 79,122
2004 233,890 133,711 64,231 10,778 58,703 100,179 108,119 121,841 − 13,723 − 125,772
2005 252,658 110,542 39,898 2,682 67,965 142,116 94,718 61,740 32,978 − 157,940
2006 243,496 102,379 40,995 8,943 52,446 141,117 125,425 68,893 56,532 − 118,071
2007 217,249 90,270 42,034 20,123 28,111 126,979 − 37,503 96,476 − 133,979 − 254,752
2008 68,838 66,139 − 45,712 86,527 25,322 2,699 − 2,263 68,049 − 70,312 − 71,101
2009 70,663 − 538 − 114,902 22,709 91,655 71,201 46,627 12,980 33,647 − 24,036
2009          Oct 542 − 6,708 − 13,259 2,818 3,733 7,250 29 − 4,509 4,538 − 513
         Nov 23,214 11,973 − 12,741 1,328 23,386 11,241 15,709 354 15,355 − 7,505
         Dec − 21,999 − 24,359 − 2,318 − 1,166 − 20,875 2,360 − 10,176 − 14,922 4,746 − − 11,823
 
 
 
Shares
Sales Purchases
Sales Residents
=
total Domestic Foreign Credit insti- Non-
purchases shares  8 shares  9 Total  10 tutions  5,11 Non-banks  6 residents  12 
Period
DM million
1997 119,522 22,239 97,280 96,844 8,547 88,297 22,678
1998 249,504 48,796 200,708 149,151 20,252 128,899 100,353
€ million
1999 150,013 36,010 114,003 103,136 18,637 84,499 46,877
2000 140,461 22,733 117,729 164,654 23,293 141,361 − 24,194
2001 82,665 17,575 65,091 − 2,252 − 14,714 12,462 84,918
2002 39,338 9,232 30,106 18,398 − 23,236 41,634 20,941
2003 11,896 16,838 − 4,946 − 15,121 7,056 − 22,177 27,016
2004 − 3,317 10,157 − 13,474 7,432 5,045 2,387 − 10,748
2005 32,364 13,766 18,597 1,036 10,208 − 9,172 31,329
2006 24,077 9,061 15,018 4,757 11,323 − 6,566 19,322
2007 − 1,426 10,053 − 11,478 − 46,867 − 6,702 − 40,165 45,440
2008 − 20,864 11,326 − 32,190 27,739 − 23,079 50,818 − 48,604
2009 35,379 23,962 11,417 23,688 − 8,335 32,023 11,691
2009          Oct − 931 883 − 1,814 − 3,092 1,389 − 4,481 2,161
         Nov 2,541 584 1,957 4,632 1,057 3,575 − 2,091
         Dec 4,799 1,050 3,749 6,019 4,671 1,348 − 1,220
*Up to end-1999, debt securities in this table comprise bonds and money funds. — 7Net purchases or net sales (−) of domestic debt securities by
market paper issued by domestic banks; from January 2000, they comprise non-residents; transaction values. — 8Excluding shares of public limited
all debt securities. For mutual fund shares, see Table VII.6. — 1Net sales at investment companies; at issue prices. — 9Net purchases or net sales (−) of
market values plus/minus changes in issuers’ portfolios of their own debt foreign shares (including direct investment)  by  residents;  transa ction  val-
securities. — 2Including Federal Railways Fund, Federal Post Office and ues. — 10Domestic and foreign shares. — 11Up to end-1998, excluding
Treuhand agency. — 3Net purchases or net sales (−) of foreign debt syndicated shares. — 12Net purchases or net sales (−) of domestic shares
securities by residents; transaction values. — 4Domestic and foreign debt (including direct investment) by non-residents; transaction values. — The
securities. — 5Book values; statistically adjusted. — 6Residual; also figures for the most recent date are provisional; revisions are not specially
including purchases of domestic and foreign securities by domestic mutual marked. 
48*VII Capital market

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
February 2010
VII Capital market
 
2 Sales of debt securities issued by residents * 
 
 
Up to end-1998, DM nominal million value; from 1999, € million nominal value
Bank debt securities  1 Memo item
 Foreign  DM/euro
bonds issued Debt securities
Corporate by German- issued by special
Mortgage Public purpose credit Other bank bonds Public managed
Period Total Total Pfandbriefe Pfandbriefe institutions (non-MFIs) syndicates debt securities debt securities  2 
Gross sales  3 
1997 846,567 621,683 53,168 276,755 54,829 236,933 1,915 222,972 114,813
1998 1,030,827 789,035 71,371 344,609 72,140 300,920 3,392 238,400 149,542
€ million
1999 571,269 448,216 27,597 187,661 59,760 173,200 2,570 120,483 57,202
2000 659,148 500,895 34,528 143,107 94,556 228,703 8,114 150,137 31,597
2001 687,988 505,646 34,782 112,594 106,166 252,103 11,328 171,012 10,605
2002 818,725 569,232 41,496 119,880 117,506 290,353 17,574 231,923 10,313
2003 958,917 668,002 47,828 107,918 140,398 371,858 22,510 268,406 2,850
2004 990,399 688,844 33,774 90,815 162,353 401,904 31,517 270,040 12,344
2005 988,911 692,182 28,217 103,984 160,010 399,969 24,352 272,380 600
2006 925,863 622,055 24,483 99,628 139,193 358,750 29,975 273,834 69
2007 1,021,533 743,616 19,211 82,720 195,722 445,963 15,043 262,872 −
2008 1,337,337 961,271 51,259 70,520 382,814 456,676 95,093 280,974 −
2009 1,533,616 1,058,815 40,421 37,615 331,566 649,215 76,379 398,423 −
2009          Sep 115,962 74,322 3,395 3,054 27,960 39,913 6,430 35,210 −
         Oct 98,802 54,300 2,690 2,813 24,965 23,832 7,322 37,180 −
         Nov 140,784 97,897 2,504 1,394 18,327 75,673 5,470 37,417 −
         Dec 116,005 101,121 2,166 1,034 31,004 66,917 1,313 13,572 −
of which:  Debt securities with maturities of more than four years  4 
1997 563,333 380,470 41,189 211,007 41,053 87,220 1,820 181,047 98,413
1998 694,414 496,444 59,893 288,619 54,385 93,551 2,847 195,122 139,645
€ million
1999 324,888 226,993 16,715 124,067 37,778 48,435 2,565 95,331 44,013
2000 319,330 209,187 20,724 102,664 25,753 60,049 6,727 103,418 27,008
2001 299,751 202,337 16,619 76,341 42,277 67,099 7,479 89,933 6,480
2002 309,157 176,486 16,338 59,459 34,795 65,892 12,149 120,527 9,213
2003 369,336 220,103 23,210 55,165 49,518 92,209 10,977 138,256 2,850
2004 424,769 275,808 20,060 48,249 54,075 153,423 20,286 128,676 4,320
2005 425,523 277,686 20,862 63,851 49,842 143,129 16,360 131,479 400
2006 337,969 190,836 17,267 47,814 47,000 78,756 14,422 132,711 69
2007 315,418 183,660 10,183 31,331 50,563 91,586 13,100 118,659 −
2008 387,516 190,698 13,186 31,393 54,834 91,289 84,410 112,407 −
2009 361,999 185,575 20,235 20,490 59,809 85,043 55,240 121,185 −
2009          Sep 27,033 10,736 2,201 2,360 1,691 4,484 4,885 11,412 −
         Oct 35,404 15,831 1,715 1,840 5,699 6,577 6,675 12,898 −
         Nov 26,337 10,471 649 675 1,932 7,215 3,532 12,333 −
         Dec 18,895 15,404 943 538 5,103 8,820 998 2,493 −
Net sales  5 
1997 257,521 188,525 16,471 115,970 12,476 43,607 1,560 67,437 63,181
1998 327,991 264,627 22,538 162,519 18,461 61,111 3,118 60,243 84,308
€ million
1999 209,096 170,069 2,845 80,230 31,754 55,238 2,185 36,840 22,728
2000 155,615 122,774 5,937 29,999 30,089 56,751 7,320 25,522 − 16,705
2001 84,122 60,905 6,932 − 9,254 28,808 34,416 8,739 14,479 − 30,657
2002 131,976 56,393 7,936 − 26,806 20,707 54,561 14,306 61,277 − 44,546
2003 124,556 40,873 2,700 − 42,521 44,173 36,519 18,431 65,253 − 54,990
2004 167,233 81,860 1,039 − 52,615 50,142 83,293 18,768 66,605 − 22,124
2005 141,715 65,798 − 2,151 − 34,255 37,242 64,962 10,099 65,819 − 35,963
2006 129,423 58,336 − 12,811 − 20,150 44,890 46,410 15,605 55,482 − 19,208
2007 86,579 58,168 − 10,896 − 46,629 42,567 73,127 − 3,683 32,093 − 29,750
2008 119,472 8,517 15,052 − 65,773 25,165 34,074 82,653 28,302 − 31,607
2009 76,441 − 75,554 858 − 80,646 25,579 − 21,345 48,508 103,482 − 21,037
2009          Sep 11,032 − 1,398 585 − 12,543 − 7,432 17,992 4,515 7,915 − 758
         Oct − 26,288 − 33,292 − 303 − 4,951 − 2,547 − 25,491 4,186 2,817 − 3,261
         Nov 16,675 − 10,659 − 1,595 − 3,930 − 1,713 − 3,422 4,488 22,846 − 500
         Dec − 36,747 − 20,331 − 819 − 7,328 12,592 − 24,776 − 3,548 − 12,869 − 795
*For definitions, see the explanatory notes in the Statistical Supplement 2 Treuhand agency. — 3Gross sales means only initial sales of newly issued
Capital market statistics on p 21 ff. — 1Excluding registered bank debt securities. — 4Maximum maturity according to the terms of issue. — 5Gross
securities. — 2Including Federal Railways Fund, Federal Post Office and sales less redemptions. 
49*VII Capital market

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
E U R O S Y S T E M
Monthly Report
February 2010
VII Capital market
 
3 Amounts outstanding of debt securities issued by residents  * 
 
 
Up to end-1998, DM million nominal value; from 1999, € million nominal value
Bank debt securities  1 Memo item
 Foreign  DM/euro
End of year Debt securities bonds issued
or month/ issued by Corporate by German-
Maturity Mortgage Public Other bank bonds Public managed special purpose
in years Total Total Pfandbriefe (non-MFIs) syndicates credit institutions debt securities debt securities Pfandbriefe
DM million
1998 3,694,234 2,254,668 265,721 1,124,198 259,243 605,507 8,009 1,431,558 619,668
€ million
1999 2,097,926 1,322,863 134,814 655,024 163,284 369,741 6,280 768,783 339,560
2000 2,265,121 1,445,736 140,751 685,122 157,374 462,488 13,599 805,786 322,856
2001 2,349,243 1,506,640 147,684 675,868 201,721 481,366 22,339 820,264 292,199
2002 2,481,220 1,563,034 155,620 649,061 222,427 535,925 36,646 881,541 247,655
2003 2,605,775 1,603,906 158,321 606,541 266,602 572,442 55,076 946,793 192,666
2004 2,773,007 1,685,766 159,360 553,927 316,745 655,734 73,844 1,013,397 170,543
2005 2,914,723 1,751,563 157,209 519,674 323,587 751,093 83,942 1,079,218 134,580
2006 3,044,145 1,809,899 144,397 499,525 368,476 797,502 99,545 1,134,701 115,373
2007 3,130,723 1,868,066 133,501 452,896 411,041 870,629 95,863 1,166,794 85,623
2008 3,250,195 1,876,583 150,302 377,091 490,641 858,550 178,515 1,195,097 54,015
2009 3,326,635 1,801,029 151,160 296,445 516,221 837,203 227,024 1,298,581 32,978
2009          Oct 3,346,707 1,832,019 153,574 307,703 505,342 865,401 226,084 1,288,604 34,273
         Nov 3,363,382 1,821,360 151,979 303,773 503,629 861,979 230,572 1,311,450 33,773
         Dec 3,326,635 1,801,029 151,160 296,445 516,221 837,203 227,024 1,298,581 32,978
Breakdown by remaining period to maturity  2 Position at end-December 2009 
1,311,778 814,685 63,196 153,021 213,329 385,138 25,170 471,923 16,882    less than 2
732,395 440,232 51,216 78,186 128,003 182,828 38,639 253,524 5,027 2 to less than 4
469,710 251,717 20,561 33,504 59,561 138,088 39,197 178,796 4,293 4 to less than 6
266,001 129,750 10,744 16,659 35,612 66,732 10,829 125,422 2,991 6 to less than 8
163,929 53,059 4,658 9,878 25,857 12,666 6,921 103,949 278 8 to less than 10
72,255 29,888 765 2,493 20,107 6,523 14,430 27,936 1,769 10 to less than 15
60,537 18,237 19 1,464 12,138 4,617 2,959 39,342 673 15 to less than 20
250,030 63,465 − 1,242 21,612 40,610 88,878 97,688 1,064 20 and more
*Including debt securities temporarily held in the issuers’ portfolios. — debt securities falling due en bloc and until mean maturity of the residual
1Excluding debt securities handed to the trustee for temporary safe amount outstanding for debt securities not falling due en bloc. 
custody. — 2Calculated from month under review until final maturity for
50* 
 
4 Shares in circulation issued by residents  * 
 
 
Up to end-1998, DM million nominal value; from 1999, € million nominal value
Change in domestic public limited companies’ capital due to
Memo item
Share circulation
at market values
cash payments contribution (market capita-
and ex- merger reduction lisation) Share capital = Net increase or contribution of shares,
change of of claims and circulation at net decrease (−) mining shares, of capital level at end
issue of and other transfer change of and of period end of period during period convertible GmbH shares,
Period under review under review bonds  1 etc of assets bonus shares real assets legal form liquidation under review  2 
DM million
1998 238,156 16,578 6,086 2,566 658 8,607 − 4,055 3,905 − 1,188 1,258,042
€ million
1999 133,513 11,747 5,519 2,008 190 1,075 2,099 1,560 − 708 1,603,304
2000 147,629 14,115 3,620 3,694 618 8,089 − 1,986 1,827 − 1,745 1,353,000
2001 166,187 18,561 7,987 4,057 1,106 8,448 1,018 − 905 − 3,152 1,205,613
2002 168,716 2,528 4,307 1,291 486 1,690 − 868 − 2,152 − 2,224 647,492
2003 162,131 − 6,585 4,482 923 211 513 − 322 − 10,806 − 1,584 851,001
2004 164,802 2,669 3,960 1,566 276 696 220 − 1,760 − 2,286 887,217
2005 163,071 − 1,733 2,470 1,040 694 268 − 1,443 − 3,060 − 1,703 1,058,532
2006 163,764 695 2,670 3,347 604 954 − 1,868 − 1,256 − 3,761 1,279,638
2007 164,560 799 3,164 1,322 200 269 − 682 − 1,847 − 1,636 1,481,930
2008 168,701 4,142 5,006 1,319 152 0 − 428 − 608 − 1,306 830,622
2009 175,691 6,989 12,476 398 97 − − 3,741 − 1,269 − 974 927,256
2009          Oct 175,391 − 406 131 29 4 − − 39 − 503 − 29 878,206
         Nov 175,788 397 465 − 33 − − 63 − 14 − 26 885,394
         Dec 175,691 − 97 292 3 5 − − 3 − 220 − 174 927,256
*Excluding shares of public limited investment companies. — 1Including ber 2007) or the Neuer Markt (stock market segment was closed down on
shares issued out of company profits. — 2Enterprises listed on the Regulated 24 March 2003) are included as well as enterprises listed on the Open Market.
Market (the introduction of which marked the end of the division of organ- Source: Bundesbank calculations based on data of the Herausgebergemein-
ised trading segments into an official and a regulated market on 1 Novem- schaft Wertpapier-Mitteilungen and the Deutsche Börse AG. 
50*VII Capital market

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
February 2010
VII Capital market
 
5 Yields and indices on German securities
 
 
               
Yields on debt securities outstanding issued by residents  1 Price indices  2,3 
Public debt securities Bank debt securities Debt securities Shares
Listed Memo item
Federal securities Foreign
DM/euro
bonds With a residual With a residual
maturity of maturity of Corporate issued by German German
more than 9 more than 9 bonds German- bond iBoxx CDAX share
and including and including (non- managed index index € Germany share price
Total Total Total 10 years  4 Total 10 years MFIs) (REX) price index index (DAX) syndicates  1,5 
Average End-1998 End-1987 End-1987
Period % per annum daily rate = 100 = 100 = 1000
1998 4.5 4.4 4.4 4.6 4.5 4.9 5.0 5.3 118.18 100.00 343.64 5,002.39
1999 4.3 4.3 4.3 4.5 4.3 4.9 5.0 5.4 110.60 92.52 445.95 6,958.14
2000 5.4 5.3 5.2 5.3 5.6 5.8 6.2 6.3 112.48 94.11 396.59 6,433.61
2001 4.8 4.7 4.7 4.8 4.9 5.3 5.9 6.2 113.12 94.16 319.38 5,160.10
2002 4.7 4.6 4.6 4.8 4.7 5.1 6.0 5.6 117.56 97.80 188.46 2,892.63
2003 3.7 3.8 3.8 4.1 3.7 4.3 5.0 4.5 117.36 97.09 252.48 3,965.16
2004 3.7 3.7 3.7 4.0 3.6 4.2 4.0 4.0 120.19 99.89 268.32 4,256.08
2005 3.1 3.2 3.2 3.4 3.1 3.5 3.7 3.2 120.92 101.09 335.59 5,408.26
2006 3.8 3.7 3.7 3.8 3.8 4.0 4.2 4.0 116.78 96.69 407.16 6,596.92
2007 4.3 4.3 4.2 4.2 4.4 4.5 5.0 4.6 114.85 94.62 478.65 8,067.32
2008 4.2 4.0 4.0 4.0 4.5 4.7 6.3 4.9 121.68 102.06 266.33 4,810.20
2009 3.2 3.1 3.0 3.2 3.5 4.0 5.5 4.0 123.62 100.12 320.32 5,957.43
2009          Oct 3.1 3.0 3.0 3.2 3.2 3.7 4.7 3.7 123.20 100.68 292.17 5,414.96
         Nov 3.1 3.0 3.0 3.2 3.2 3.7 4.4 3.6 124.43 101.39 303.22 5,625.95
         Dec 3.0 2.9 2.9 3.1 3.0 3.7 4.8 3.6 123.62 100.12 320.32 5,957.43
2010          Jan 3.0 3.0 3.0 3.3 3.1 3.8 4.4 3.7 123.86 101.31 303.33 5,608.79
1Bearer debt securities with maximum maturities according to the terms of the calculation. Monthly figures are calculated on the basis of the yields on
issue of over 4 years if their mean residual maturities exceed 3 years. Conver- all the business days in a month. The annual figures are the unweighted
tible debt securities, etc. debt securities with unscheduled redemption, zero means of the monthly figures. — 2End of year or month. — 3Source:
-coupon bonds, floating -rate notes and bonds not denominated in DM or Deutsche Börse AG. — 4Only debt securities eligible as underlying
euro are not included. Group yields for the various categories of securities instruments for futures contracts; calculated as unweighted averages. —5If
are weighted by the amounts outstanding of the debt securities included in quoted on German stock exchanges. 
 
 
6 Sales and purchases of mutual fund shares in Germany
 
 
Sales Purchases
Domestic mutual funds  1  (sales receipts) Residents
Mutual funds open to the Credit institutions
general public including building
Non-banks  3 and loan associations  2 
of which
Sales Open- of which of which
= Secur- end Foreign Foreign
total Money ities- real Special- mutual mutual
pur- market based estate ised Foreign fund fund Non-resi-
chases Total Total funds funds funds funds funds  4 Total Total shares Total shares dents  5 
Period
DM million
1998 187,641 169,748 38,998 5,772 27,814 4,690 130,750 17,893 190,416 43,937 961 146,479 16,507 − 2,775
€ million
1999 111,282 97,197 37,684 3,347 23,269 7,395 59,513 14,086 105,521 19,862 − 637 85,659 14,722 5,761
2000 118,021 85,160 39,712 − 2,188 36,818 − 2,824 45,448 32,861 107,019 14,454 92 92,565 32,769 11,002
2001 97,077 76,811 35,522 12,410 9,195 10,159 41,289 20,266 96,127 10,251 2,703 85,876 17,563 951
2002 66,571 59,482 25,907 3,682 7,247 14,916 33,575 7,089 67,251 2,100 3,007 65,151 4,082 − 680
2003 47,754 43,943 20,079 − 924 7,408 14,166 23,864 3,811 49,547 − 2,658 734 52,205 3,077 − 1,793
2004 14,435 1,453 − 3,978 − 6,160 − 1,246 3,245 5,431 12,982 10,267 8,446 3,796 1,821 9,186 4,168
2005 85,268 41,718 6,400 − 124 7,001 − 3,186 35,317 43,550 79,252 21,290 7,761 57,962 35,789 6,016
2006 43,172 19,535 − 14,257 490 − 9,362 − 8,814 33,791 23,637 35,094 14,676 5,221 20,418 18,416 8,078
2007 55,022 13,436 − 7,872 − 4,839 − 12,848 6,840 21,307 41,586 51,083 − 229 4,240 51,312 37,346 3,939
2008 697 − 7,911 − 14,409 − 12,171 − 11,149 799 6,498 8,608 6,517 − 16,625 − 9,252 23,142 17,860 − 5,820
2009 45,431 43,747 10,966 − 5,047 11,749 2,686 32,780 1,683 44,573 − 14,995 − 8,178 59,568 9,861 858
2009          Oct 8,745 6,581 − 150 − 190 735 − 936 6,731 2,164 9,274 5 276 9,269 1,888 − 529
         Nov 5,876 4,585 2,331 − 244 1,797 84 2,254 1,291 4,852 1,415 508 3,437 783 1,024
         Dec 7,470 11,384 1,020 − 609 787 672 10,364 − 3,914 6,712 − 6,131 − 8,830 12,843 4,916 758
1Including public limited investment companies. — 2Book values. — fund shares by non-residents; transaction values (up to end-1988 recorded
3Residual. — 4Net purchases or net sales (−) of foreign fund shares by under shares). — The figures for the most recent date are provisional;
residents; transaction values. — 5Net purchases or net sales (−) of domestic revisions are not specially marked. 
51*VII Capital market

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
E U R O S Y S T E M
Monthly Report
February 2010
VIII  Financial accounts
  
1  Acquisition of financial assets and financing of private non-financial sectors
  
  
  € billion
2007 2008 2009 
Item 2006 2007 2008 Q4 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 Q1 Q2 Q3
Households 1 
  I  Acquisition of financial assets
Currency and deposits 42.5 85.9 121.0 38.4 6.4 14.6 12.9 87.1 9.4 15.2 5.5
Money market paper 1.0 − 0.3 − 0.1 − 0.1 − 0.1 − 0.1 0.0 0.1 − 0.2 − 0.1 − 0.2
Bonds 24.9 − 53.9 − 4.0 − 32.0 14.3 0.7 3.3 − 22.3 21.3 5.1 4.9
Shares − 5.0 − 16.5 − 45.5 − 12.0 − 1.0 − 2.5 − 9.0 − 33.0 − 2.0 − 1.0 1.0
Other equity 2.9 2.9 3.0 0.7 0.8 0.7 0.8 0.8 0.7 0.8 0.8
Mutual funds shares − 6.5 24.8 5.6 8.1 13.2 7.5 1.9 − 17.0 9.1 5.5 7.6
Claims on insurance
corporations  2 66.1 71.9 41.1 20.8 12.3 8.9 10.5 9.4 11.8 9.0 8.6
Short-term claims 2.1 1.1 0.3 0.4 0.4 − 0.2 0.1 0.1 0.1 0.1 0.1
Longer-term claims 64.0 70.8 40.8 20.4 11.9 9.2 10.4 9.4 11.7 8.9 8.6
Claims from company
pension commitments 10.3 4.3 7.3 1.1 1.8 1.8 1.8 1.9 1.9 2.0 2.0
Other claims  3 − 4.9 − 4.1 − 2.8 − 1.1 − 0.6 − 0.7 − 0.7 − 0.7 − 0.2 − 0.7 − 0.6
Total 131.3 115.1 125.7 23.8 47.0 30.9 21.5 26.3 51.9 35.7 29.4
  II Financing
Loans − 5.1 − 20.7 − 15.5 − 5.4 − 9.9 0.8 − 1.2 − 5.3 − 7.5 2.5 4.6
Short-term loans − 5.4 − 1.2 1.2 1.0 − 0.7 − 0.0 0.6 1.4 − 0.4 − 0.1 − 1.3
Longer-term loans 0.3 − 19.5 − 16.7 − 6.4 − 9.1 0.9 − 1.8 − 6.7 − 7.1 2.6 5.8
Other liabilities − 0.4 − 0.4 0.0 − 0.8 0.1 0.1 − 0.1 − 0.0 0.2 0.2 − 0.2
Total − 5.5 − 21.1 − 15.5 − 6.2 − 9.8 0.9 − 1.3 − 5.3 − 7.3 2.7 4.4
Corporations
I  Acquisition of financial assets
Currency and deposits 28.3 72.0 20.8 30.1 6.1 − 15.3 33.7 − 3.7 13.8 1.0 22.1
Money market paper 8.9 − 20.3 − 14.3 − 10.4 11.7 − 28.4 − 13.4 15.7 − 6.4 − 3.4 − 6.3
Bonds − 7.9 −105.0 − 2.5 − 35.7 − 52.5 − 0.5 10.0 40.5 − 32.3 − 34.2 − 21.1
Financial derivatives 1.4 45.2 14.4 16.7 10.5 8.3 0.0 − 4.4 − 1.6 − 0.3 3.0
Shares 11.2 56.4 128.8 21.0 16.5 69.1 15.9 27.3 18.3 43.0 26.2
Other equity 55.6 16.4 22.8 − 4.6 11.8 18.6 − 9.5 1.9 12.2 6.5 4.7
Mutual funds shares − 8.1 − 3.3 − 7.8 1.9 − 3.9 − 2.5 5.9 − 7.3 − 3.3 − 10.1 − 15.6
Loans 24.1 9.3 29.8 − 19.3 5.6 10.1 6.9 7.3 − 3.6 − 1.0 − 4.7
Short-term loans 18.4 4.7 25.1 − 13.5 0.2 12.9 5.8 6.2 − 3.8 − 1.8 − 5.2
Longer-term loans 5.8 4.6 4.7 − 5.8 5.4 − 2.9 1.1 1.1 0.2 0.8 0.6
Claims on insurance
corporations  2 1.4 1.0 0.4 0.5 0.1 0.1 0.1 0.1 0.1 0.1 0.1
Short-term claims 1.4 1.0 0.4 0.5 0.1 0.1 0.1 0.1 0.1 0.1 0.1
Longer-term claims . . . . . . . . . . .
Other claims 52.7 106.6 − 54.2 62.5 19.3 − 11.9 − 31.8 − 29.8 − 25.0 − 13.7 − 17.3
Total 167.6 178.5 138.3 62.7 25.2 47.6 17.8 47.7 − 27.9 − 11.9 − 8.9
  II Financing
Money market paper 0.8 18.6 3.6 8.4 9.5 − 6.5 0.4 0.2 − 13.5 − 8.3 − 2.3
Bonds 12.9 − 11.4 6.0 − 3.2 − 2.5 1.6 1.5 5.4 3.5 6.5 5.8
Financial derivatives . . . . . . . . . . .
Shares 5.7 6.8 3.6 1.6 0.9 1.4 0.7 0.5 1.9 0.3 2.3
Other equity 33.0 26.7 13.6 8.9 6.6 3.0 1.0 2.9 3.2 1.0 1.3
Loans 72.0 49.0 69.7 15.5 − 4.3 19.6 23.2 31.2 11.5 − 15.8 − 19.5
Short-term loans 30.7 15.9 16.8 − 1.3 − 5.7 14.9 0.2 7.5 − 0.1 − 12.3 − 18.2
Longer-term loans 41.3 33.1 52.9 16.8 1.4 4.8 23.0 23.7 11.6 − 3.5 − 1.3
Claims from company
pension commitments 8.2 1.3 2.9 0.3 0.7 0.7 0.7 0.7 0.7 0.7 0.7
Other liabilities − 5.4 13.7 1.4 2.9 9.7 − 0.2 5.9 − 14.1 14.2 − 5.5 2.7
Total 127.2 104.7 100.8 34.3 20.6 19.8 33.5 26.8 21.6 − 21.0 − 9.0
1Including non-profit institutions serving households. — 2Including private supplementary pension funds. — 3Including accumulated interest-bearing
pension funds, burial funds, occupational pension schemes and surplus shares with insurance corporations. 
52*VIII  Financial accounts

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
February 2010
VIII  Financial accounts
  
2  Financial assets and liabilities of private non-financial sectors
  
  
  End-of-year level, end-of-quarter level; € billion
2007 2008 2009 
Item 2006 2007 2008 Q4 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 Q1 Q2 Q3
Households 1 
  I  Financial assets
Currency and deposits 1,534.8 1,620.8 1,737.5 1,620.8 1,627.2 1,642.0 1,650.6 1,737.5 1,746.8 1,762.9 1,768.4
Money market paper 2.0 1.7 1.6 1.7 1.6 1.5 1.5 1.6 1.4 1.3 1.1
Bonds 373.5 352.9 341.0 352.9 373.2 358.1 335.3 341.0 347.6 348.3 384.4
Shares 350.6 364.0 163.0 364.0 314.9 293.1 251.8 163.0 138.3 149.7 154.5
Other equity 204.9 183.7 176.2 183.7 184.1 186.7 193.7 176.2 186.6 188.2 188.2
Mutual funds shares 515.3 545.6 497.2 545.6 535.7 539.9 527.9 497.2 495.9 519.4 577.3
Claims on insurance
corporations  2 1,118.9 1,190.3 1,231.3 1,190.3 1,202.6 1,211.4 1,221.9 1,231.3 1,243.1 1,252.3 1,261.0
Short-term claims 79.7 80.8 81.1 80.8 81.2 81.0 81.1 81.1 81.2 81.4 81.4
Longer-term claims 1,039.2 1,109.5 1,150.2 1,109.5 1,121.3 1,130.4 1,140.8 1,150.2 1,161.9 1,170.9 1,179.6
Claims from company
pension commitments 250.8 255.1 262.4 255.1 256.9 258.7 260.5 262.4 264.3 266.3 268.2
Other claims  3 46.7 42.6 39.8 42.6 41.9 41.2 40.5 39.8 39.6 39.0 38.3
Total 4,397.5 4,556.8 4,450.1 4,556.8 4,538.2 4,532.7 4,483.8 4,450.1 4,463.7 4,527.3 4,641.4
  II Liabilities
Loans 1,557.0 1,536.7 1,521.2 1,536.7 1,525.5 1,526.4 1,525.1 1,521.2 1,513.9 1,518.7 1,523.3
Short-term loans 80.2 78.9 80.0 78.9 78.1 78.1 78.7 80.0 79.6 79.5 78.2
Longer-term loans 1,476.8 1,457.9 1,441.2 1,457.9 1,447.4 1,448.3 1,446.5 1,441.2 1,434.3 1,439.2 1,445.1
Other liabilities 9.6 8.8 9.4 8.8 10.2 9.9 10.3 9.4 10.5 10.6 10.5
Total 1,566.6 1,545.5 1,530.6 1,545.5 1,535.7 1,536.2 1,535.4 1,530.6 1,524.4 1,529.2 1,533.8
Corporations
I  Financial assets
Currency and deposits 411.3 477.0 507.4 477.0 474.7 470.0 502.6 507.4 517.5 517.6 540.0
Money market paper 35.3 27.1 10.9 27.1 30.1 7.7 0.7 10.9 1.6 1.3 1.6
Bonds 136.1 84.5 83.9 84.5 32.5 32.7 43.8 83.9 52.0 18.5 15.5
Financial derivatives . . . . . . . . . . .
Shares 905.8 1,028.7 653.6 1,028.7 928.5 942.5 869.8 653.6 590.6 686.9 733.4
Other equity 317.1 294.4 299.7 294.4 305.8 327.5 328.8 299.7 328.4 336.4 339.7
Mutual funds shares 106.5 109.5 67.9 109.5 81.0 81.0 85.3 67.9 63.0 58.0 45.7
Loans 132.6 152.0 182.8 152.0 159.3 171.6 178.4 182.8 185.8 184.7 186.2
Short-term loans 88.2 103.0 125.3 103.0 103.0 115.3 119.0 125.3 125.1 122.9 118.9
Longer-term loans 44.3 49.1 57.5 49.1 56.2 56.3 59.4 57.5 60.7 61.8 67.3
Claims on insurance
corporations  2 42.8 43.8 44.2 43.8 43.9 44.0 44.1 44.2 44.3 44.4 44.4
Short-term claims 42.8 43.8 44.2 43.8 43.9 44.0 44.1 44.2 44.3 44.4 44.4
Longer-term claims . . . . . . . . . . .
Other claims 447.9 500.4 583.3 500.4 521.4 538.3 571.5 583.3 595.6 519.2 541.0
Total 2,535.4 2,717.5 2,433.7 2,717.5 2,577.2 2,615.2 2,625.1 2,433.7 2,378.8 2,366.9 2,447.6
  II Liabilities
Money market paper 17.9 36.5 40.2 36.5 46.0 39.6 44.9 40.2 26.7 18.4 16.1
Bonds 91.1 82.2 96.8 82.2 82.3 78.9 81.6 96.8 102.5 106.1 116.7
Financial derivatives . . . . . . . . . . .
Shares 1,336.7 1,564.3 963.5 1,564.3 1,322.0 1,266.1 1,154.1 963.5 814.4 948.4 1,043.3
Other equity 636.9 663.6 677.2 663.6 670.1 673.2 674.2 677.2 680.3 681.3 682.7
Loans 1,333.4 1,394.6 1,474.2 1,394.6 1,390.9 1,416.6 1,442.1 1,474.2 1,494.0 1,476.5 1,459.0
Short-term loans 354.9 380.3 390.7 380.3 368.3 383.7 381.5 390.7 390.8 376.3 359.4
Longer-term loans 978.5 1,014.3 1,083.5 1,014.3 1,022.6 1,032.8 1,060.6 1,083.5 1,103.1 1,100.3 1,099.6
Claims from company
pension commitments 214.2 215.5 218.4 215.5 216.2 216.9 217.7 218.4 219.1 219.8 220.6
Other liabilities 395.7 443.5 489.2 443.5 451.2 462.2 471.1 489.2 549.6 468.2 482.2
Total 4,025.9 4,400.0 3,959.4 4,400.0 4,178.7 4,153.4 4,085.7 3,959.4 3,886.6 3,918.8 4,020.6
1Including non-profit institutions serving households. — 2Including private supplementary pension funds. — 3Including accumulated interest-bearing
pension funds, burial funds, occupational pension schemes and surplus shares with insurance corporations. 
53*VIII  Financial accounts

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
E U R O S Y S T E M
Monthly Report
February 2010
IX Public finances in Germany
 
1 General government: deficit and debt level as defined in the Maastricht Treaty
 
 
 
Social Social
General Central State Local security General Central State Local security
government government government government funds government government government government funds
Period € billion as a percentage of GDP
Deficit / surplus 1
2003 − 87.2 − 39.6 − 32.7 − 7.1 − 7.7 − 4.0 − 1.8 − 1.5 − 0.3 − 0.4
2004 − 83.5 − 52.0 − 27.9 − 2.4 − 1.2 − 3.8 − 2.4 − 1.3 − 0.1 − 0.1
2005 − 74.0 − 47.4 − 22.5 − 0.2 − 3.9 − 3.3 − 2.1 − 1.0 − 0.0 − 0.2
2006 p − 37.8 − 34.5 − 11.3 + 3.0 + 5.0 − 1.6 − 1.5 − 0.5 + 0.1 + 0.2
2007 p + 4.9 − 18.9 + 4.6 + 8.3 + 10.9 + 0.2 − 0.8 + 0.2 + 0.3 + 0.4
2008 p + 1.1 − 14.1 + 1.2 + 5.8 + 8.2 + 0.0 − 0.6 + 0.0 + 0.2 + 0.3
2007          H1  p + 4.6 − 10.4 + 3.8 + 3.9 + 7.2 + 0.4 − 0.9 + 0.3 + 0.3 + 0.6
         H2  p + 0.1 − 8.7 + 0.8 + 4.4 + 3.6 + 0.0 − 0.7 + 0.1 + 0.4 + 0.3
2008          H1  p + 7.3 − 7.0 + 3.6 + 5.7 + 4.9 + 0.6 − 0.6 + 0.3 + 0.5 + 0.4
         H2  p − 6.3 − 7.2 − 2.5 + 0.1 + 3.3 − 0.5 − 0.6 − 0.2 + 0.0 + 0.3
2009          H1  pe − 19.4 − 10.3 − 6.3 − 0.7 − 2.1 − 1.7 − 0.9 − 0.5 − 0.1 − 0.2
Debt level 2 End of year or quarter
2003 1,383.5 847.9 435.3 111.5 5.3 63.9 39.2 20.1 5.2 0.2
2004 1,453.6 889.5 459.7 116.3 4.2 65.7 40.2 20.8 5.3 0.2
2005 1,524.0 935.3 481.9 120.0 2.7 68.0 41.7 21.5 5.3 0.1
2006 1,571.0 970.7 491.5 122.4 1.7 67.6 41.7 21.1 5.3 0.1
2007 1,577.7 977.9 492.9 120.2 1.6 65.0 40.3 20.3 4.9 0.1
2008 pe 1,644.5 1,006.7 531.8 118.7 1.5 65.9 40.3 21.3 4.8 0.1
2008          Q1  pe 1,597.1 988.8 503.1 118.3 1.6 65.2 40.4 20.5 4.8 0.1
         Q2  pe 1,632.8 996.8 530.1 118.7 1.6 65.9 40.2 21.4 4.8 0.1
         Q3  pe 1,626.8 995.0 526.7 117.6 2.0 65.2 39.9 21.1 4.7 0.1
         Q4  pe 1,644.5 1,006.7 531.8 118.7 1.5 65.9 40.3 21.3 4.8 0.1
2009          Q1  pe 1,675.8 1,028.0 540.6 119.5 1.6 68.0 41.7 21.9 4.8 0.1
         Q2  pe 1,726.4 1,073.3 545.4 120.2 1.4 71.1 44.2 22.4 4.9 0.1
         Q3  pe 1,734.2 1,076.7 548.7 121.0 1.5 71.9 44.7 22.8 5.0 0.1
Source: Federal Statistical Office and Bundesbank calculations. — 1Unlike the 2009 annual figures, no revised figures were released for the first half
the fiscal balance as shown in the national accounts, the deficit as defined of the year. Therefore, the 2009 half-year figures are not directly compar -
in the Maastricht Treaty includes interest flows from swaps and forward able with the annual figures. — 2Quarterly GDP ratios are based on the na-
rate agreements. The half-year figures correspond to the deficit / surplus tional output of the four preceding quarters. 
according to the national accounts. In connection with the publication of
 
 
2 General government: revenue, expenditure and fiscal deficit / surplus as shown in the national accounts *
 
 
 
Revenue Expenditure
of which of which
Compen- Gross Memo item
Social con- Social sation of capital Deficit / Total tax
Period Total Taxes tributions Other Total benefits employees Interest formation Other surplus burden  1 
€ billion
2003 961.9 481.8 396.3 83.9 1,049.2 594.2 169.2 64.3 33.9 187.6 − 87.3 889.3
2004 957.7 481.3 396.5 79.9 1,041.2 592.0 169.6 62.4 31.7 185.5 − 83.5 888.0
2005 976.1 493.2 396.5 86.4 1,050.3 597.0 168.9 62.6 30.3 191.5 − 74.2 900.5
2006 p 1,016.4 530.6 400.0 85.8 1,054.5 598.4 167.9 65.5 32.4 190.3 − 38.1 941.9
2007 p 1,065.3 576.3 399.8 89.2 1,060.7 596.8 168.4 67.3 34.3 193.9 + 4.7 988.2
2008 p 1,091.8 592.6 408.1 91.1 1,090.8 607.4 172.1 67.1 37.4 206.8 + 1.0 1,013.6
2009 pe 1,067.7 565.8 411.0 90.9 1,144.9 640.8 177.0 63.8 40.2 223.1 − 77.2 987.2
as a percentage of GDP
2003 44.5 22.3 18.3 3.9 48.5 27.5 7.8 3.0 1.6 8.7 − 4.0 41.1
2004 43.3 21.8 17.9 3.6 47.1 26.8 7.7 2.8 1.4 8.4 − 3.8 40.2
2005 43.5 22.0 17.7 3.9 46.8 26.6 7.5 2.8 1.4 8.5 − 3.3 40.2
2006 p 43.7 22.8 17.2 3.7 45.4 25.7 7.2 2.8 1.4 8.2 − 1.6 40.5
2007 p 43.9 23.7 16.5 3.7 43.7 24.6 6.9 2.8 1.4 8.0 + 0.2 40.7
2008 p 43.7 23.7 16.4 3.7 43.7 24.3 6.9 2.7 1.5 8.3 + 0.0 40.6
2009 pe 44.4 23.5 17.1 3.8 47.6 26.7 7.4 2.7 1.7 9.3 − 3.2 41.1
Percentage growth rates
2003 + 1.0 + 0.9 + 1.4 − 0.5 + 1.8 + 2.5 + 0.3 + 2.6 − 6.1 + 2.2 . + 1.1
2004 − 0.4 − 0.1 + 0.1 − 4.8 − 0.8 − 0.4 + 0.2 − 3.0 − 6.4 − 1.1 . − 0.1
2005 + 1.9 + 2.5 + 0.0 + 8.1 + 0.9 + 0.8 − 0.4 + 0.4 − 4.4 + 3.2 . + 1.4
2006 p + 4.1 + 7.6 + 0.9 − 0.7 + 0.4 + 0.2 − 0.6 + 4.6 + 7.0 − 0.6 . + 4.6
2007 p + 4.8 + 8.6 − 0.0 + 4.0 + 0.6 − 0.3 + 0.3 + 2.7 + 6.0 + 1.9 . + 4.9
2008 p + 2.5 + 2.8 + 2.1 + 2.2 + 2.8 + 1.8 + 2.2 − 0.3 + 9.1 + 6.6 . + 2.6
2009 pe − 2.2 − 4.5 + 0.7 − 0.3 + 5.0 + 5.5 + 2.8 − 4.9 + 7.5 + 7.9 . − 2.6
Source: Federal Statistical Office. — *Figures in accordance with ESA 1995. data (without affecting the fiscal deficit / surplus). This information can still
In the Monthly Reports up to December 2006, customs duties, the EU share be found on the Bundesbank’s website. — 1Taxes and social contributions
in VAT revenue and EU subsidies were included in the national accounts’ plus customs duties and the EU share in VAT revenue. 
54*IX Public finances in Germany

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
February 2010
IX Public finances in Germany
 
3 General government: budgetary development (as per government’s financial statistics)
 
 
€ billion
Central, state and local government  1 Social security funds  2 General government, total
Revenue Expenditure
of which of which 3 
Finan- Person- Fixed Finan-
cial nel asset cial
transac- expend- Current forma- transac- Deficit / Rev- Expend- Deficit / Rev- Expend- Deficit /
Period Total  4 Taxes tions  5 Total  4 iture grants Interest tion tions  5 surplus enue  6 iture surplus enue iture surplus
2002 p 554.7 441.7 20.5 610.4 173.3 226.8 66.1 38.7 11.3 − 55.8 457.7 466.0 − 8.3 927.7 991.8 − 64.1
2003 pe 547.0 442.2 21.5 614.2 174.0 235.0 65.6 36.3 10.0 − 67.2 467.6 474.4 − 6.8 925.2 999.1 − 73.9
2004 pe 545.9 442.8 24.1 610.4 173.4 236.9 64.8 34.3 9.6 − 64.5 469.7 468.6 + 1.1 926.8 990.2 − 63.4
2005 pe 568.9 452.1 31.3 620.6 172.1 245.3 64.0 33.0 14.3 − 51.7 467.8 471.3 − 3.4 947.4 1,002.5 − 55.1
2006 pe 590.9 488.4 18.8 626.2 169.7 252.1 64.4 33.7 11.6 − 35.3 486.3 466.6 + 19.7 988.2 1,003.8 − 15.6
2007 pe 644.8 538.2 17.7 644.2 182.2 250.0 66.2 34.6 9.5 + 0.6 475.3 466.4 + 8.9 1,025.6 1,016.1 + 9.5
2008 pe 668.5 561.2 13.0 677.6 187.3 259.9 67.3 36.3 18.6 − 9.1 485.2 478.1 + 7.1 1,057.9 1,059.9 − 2.0
2007          Q1 p 149.4 122.3 2.8 164.5 42.7 64.9 25.5 5.3 3.4 − 15.1 112.2 115.6 − 3.4 238.4 256.9 − 18.5
         Q2 p 158.5 136.9 3.0 144.5 43.9 58.4 10.0 6.7 2.5 + 14.0 119.0 116.3 + 2.7 253.8 237.0 + 16.7
         Q3 p 155.4 131.6 3.6 160.5 44.2 59.8 21.3 8.6 1.6 − 5.1 116.2 115.6 + 0.6 248.2 252.8 − 4.6
         Q4 p 179.6 147.6 7.9 172.9 49.7 65.1 9.1 12.7 1.9 + 6.7 126.9 117.8 + 9.1 283.0 267.2 + 15.7
2008          Q1 p 160.0 130.8 3.0 164.5 43.7 65.5 24.7 5.3 2.0 − 4.5 114.1 119.4 − 5.3 250.4 260.2 − 9.8
         Q2 p 166.1 143.5 2.1 151.5 44.9 61.4 11.1 7.2 1.7 + 14.6 120.6 120.1 + 0.5 263.0 247.9 + 15.1
         Q3 p 159.7 137.2 1.3 167.1 45.9 62.6 21.2 9.0 1.5 − 7.4 118.6 118.9 − 0.3 254.5 262.2 − 7.7
         Q4 p 180.5 149.3 6.4 192.4 51.2 68.7 10.0 13.5 13.3 − 11.9 130.4 121.7 + 8.7 287.0 290.2 − 3.3
2009          Q1 p 157.0 128.9 1.8 175.7 45.9 67.4 22.8 5.0 10.0 − 18.7 117.9 122.3 − 4.4 251.2 274.4 − 23.1
         Q2 p 154.4 130.4 3.3 169.2 47.2 60.4 10.7 7.4 16.9 − 14.8 120.5 125.5 − 5.0 251.4 271.2 − 19.8
Source: Bundesbank calculations based on the data from the Federal Stat- are estimated. — 3The development of the types of expenditure recorded
istical Office. — 1Including subsidiary budgets but excluding the Post Office here is influenced in part by statistical changeovers. — 4Including discrep-
pension funds. Unlike the annual figures based on the annual calculations ancies in clearing transactions between central, state and local govern-
of the Federal Statistical Office, the quarterly figures do not include muni- ment. — 5On the revenue side, this contains proceeds booked as disposals
cipal special purpose associations and various special accounts. — 2The of equity interests and as loan repayments. On the expenditure side, this con-
annual figures do not tally with the sum of the quarterly figures, as the tains the acquisition of equity interests and loans granted. — 6Including Fed-
latter are all provisional. The quarterly figures for some insurance sectors eral Government liquidity assistance to the Federal Labour Of fice. 
4 Central, state and local government: budgetary development (as per government’s financial statistics)
 
 
€ billion
Central government State government  2,3 Local government  3 
Period Revenue  1 Expenditure Deficit / surplus Revenue Expenditure Deficit / surplus Revenue Expenditure Deficit / surplus
2002 240.8 273.5 − 32.7 228.8 258.0 − 29.2 147.0 150.0 − 3.0
2003 239.6 278.8 − 39.2 229.2 259.7 − 30.5 142.1 149.9 − 7.8
2004 233.9 273.6 − 39.7 233.5 257.1 − 23.6 147.0 150.1 − 3.1
2005 250.0 281.5 − 31.5 237.4 259.6 − 22.2 151.3 153.2 − 1.9
2006 pe 254.6 282.8 − 28.2 249.8 260.1 − 10.3 161.1 157.4 + 3.7
2007 pe 277.4 292.1 − 14.7 275.9 267.5 + 8.4 171.3 162.4 + 8.9
2008 pe 292.0 303.8 − 11.8 278.8 278.0 + 0.8 176.9 169.0 + 7.9
2007          Q1 p 61.1 74.6 − 13.6 63.5 66.5 − 3.0 35.4 37.6 − 2.1
         Q2 p 69.7 64.4 + 5.3 67.6 61.9 + 5.7 40.4 37.3 + 3.1
         Q3 p 68.3 76.8 − 8.5 66.2 64.1 + 2.1 42.5 39.7 + 2.8
         Q4 p 78.3 76.3 + 2.0 77.7 74.0 + 3.7 51.0 46.1 + 4.9
2008          Q1 p 64.1 75.6 − 11.5 67.7 67.7 − 0.1 37.3 37.4 − 0.1
         Q2 p 73.0 68.3 + 4.7 70.7 64.2 + 6.5 42.7 39.7 + 3.0
         Q3 p 71.2 82.7 − 11.4 67.3 66.3 + 1.0 43.8 41.1 + 2.7
         Q4 p 83.7 77.3 + 6.4 72.1 78.6 − 6.5 51.0 49.0 + 2.0
2009          Q1 p 65.8 76.8 − 11.0 65.3 75.9 − 10.6 36.3 39.3 − 3.0
         Q2 p 71.3 68.6 + 2.7 66.1 67.9 − 1.8 40.7 41.9 − 1.2
Source: Bundesbank calculations based on the data from the Federal Stat- city-states Berlin, Bremen and Hamburg. — 3Unlike the annual figure based
istical Office. — 1The Bundesbank’s profit is included only up to the max- on the annual calculations of the Federal Statistical Office, the quarterly
imum amount of €3.5 billion that is to be assigned to the core budget. Rev- figures do not include various special accounts and municipal special pur-
enue over and above this amount accrues directly to the Redemption Fund pose associations. 
for Inherited Liabilities. — 2Including the local authority level of the
55*IX Public finances in Germany

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
E U R O S Y S T E M
Monthly Report
February 2010
IX Public finances in Germany
 
5 Central, state and local government: tax revenue
 
 
€ million
Central and state government and European Union Memo item
Supplementary
central govern-
Balance of ment grants, state
Central State Local untransferred government’s share
Period Total Total government  1 government European Union  2 government  3 tax shares  4 of energy tax
2003 442,238 390,438 214,002 155,510 20,926 51,673 + 127 22,067
2004 442,838 386,459 208,920 157,898 19,640 56,237 + 142 21,967
2005 452,078 392,313 211,779 158,823 21,711 59,750 + 16 21,634
2006 488,444 421,151 225,634 173,374 22,142 67,316 − 22 21,742
2007 538,243 465,554 251,747 191,558 22,249 72,551 + 138 21,643
2008 561,182 484,182 260,690 200,411 23,081 77,190 − 190 21,510
2009 ... 455,615 252,842 182,273 20,501 ... ... 20,275
2008          Q1 131,507 111,845 56,179 47,660 8,006 14,148 + 5,513 5,272
         Q2 143,006 122,931 66,952 51,585 4,394 19,614 + 461 5,324
         Q3 137,454 117,861 65,380 48,667 3,814 19,715 − 122 5,503
         Q4 149,216 131,545 72,178 52,500 6,867 23,712 − 6,042 5,411
2009          Q1 p 128,787 109,674 55,941 46,212 7,521 13,289 + 5,824 5,154
         Q2 p 130,491 113,442 65,247 46,653 1,541 17,397 − 347 5,140
         Q3 ... 108,572 62,354 42,335 3,883 ... ... 5,048
         Q4 ... 123,928 69,299 47,073 7,556 ... ... 4,933
2008          Dec . 64,424 36,257 25,690 2,477 . . 1,804
2009          Dec . 60,424 35,080 23,081 2,263 . . 1,644
Source: Federal Ministry of Finance, Federal Statistical Office and Bundes- cruing to the EU from central government tax revenue. — 3Including local
bank calculations. — 1Before deducting supplementary central government government taxes in the city-states Berlin, Bremen and Hamburg. — 4Differ-
grants, shares in energy tax revenue and compensation for the transfer of ence between local government’s share in the joint taxes received by the
motor vehicle tax to central government, which are remitted to state govern- state government cash offices in the period in question (see Table IX. 6) a nd
ment. — 2Custom duties and shares in VAT and gross national income ac- the amounts passed on to local government in the same period. 
 
 
6 Central and state government and European Union: tax revenue, by type
 
 
€ million
Joint taxes
Memo
Income taxes  2 Turnover taxes  5 item
Local
Local govern-
Invest- business Central State ment
Assessed ment Turnover tax govern- govern- EU share in
Wage income Corpora- income Turnover tax on trans- ment ment customs joint
Period Total  1 Total tax  3 tax tion tax tax  4 Total tax imports fers  6 taxes  7 taxes  7 duties taxes
2003 414,846 162,567 133,090 4,568 8,275 16,633 136,996 103,162 33,834 7,085 86,609 18,713 2,877 24,409
2004 409,517 159,104 123,896 5,394 13,123 16,691 137,366 104,715 32,651 5,661 84,554 19,774 3,059 23,058
2005 415,355 161,960 118,919 9,766 16,333 16,943 139,713 108,440 31,273 6,218 83,508 20,579 3,378 23,042
2006 446,139 182,614 122,612 17,567 22,898 19,537 146,688 111,318 35,370 7,013 84,215 21,729 3,880 24,988
2007 493,817 204,698 131,774 25,027 22,929 24,969 169,636 127,522 42,114 6,975 85,690 22,836 3,983 28,263
2008 515,498 220,483 141,895 32,685 15,868 30,035 175,989 130,789 45,200 6,784 86,302 21,937 4,002 31,316
2009 484,880 193,684 135,165 26,430 7,173 24,916 176,991 141,907 35,084 4,908 89,318 16,375 3,604 29,265
2008          Q1 118,847 49,649 32,793 3,668 4,727 8,462 44,294 33,488 10,806 297 17,515 6,114 980 7,002
         Q2 130,829 60,000 34,700 10,398 4,821 10,080 41,890 30,645 11,244 1,636 20,700 5,676 927 7,898
         Q3 125,510 52,135 34,063 8,878 4,086 5,109 44,338 32,705 11,633 1,690 20,888 5,442 1,017 7,648
         Q4 140,312 58,699 40,339 9,741 2,235 6,384 45,468 33,951 11,517 3,161 27,200 4,705 1,080 8,767
2009          Q1 116,731 50,001 33,975 2,971 4,399 8,657 43,087 34,234 8,853 − 36 17,361 5,351 966 7,057
         Q2 120,543 48,503 30,481 9,141 342 8,539 43,424 35,176 8,248 1,499 21,085 5,186 846 7,102
         Q3 115,567 43,486 32,150 6,732 592 4,011 44,365 35,717 8,649 1,346 22,427 3,023 920 6,994
         Q4 132,040 51,695 38,559 7,586 1,841 3,708 46,114 36,780 9,334 2,099 28,445 2,815 872 8,112
2008          Dec 69,157 36,755 18,854 9,932 4,598 3,371 15,095 11,628 3,467 1,526 13,848 1,604 329 4,733
2009          Dec 64,884 32,937 18,181 8,849 4,126 1,781 15,644 12,480 3,164 1,026 14,046 958 273 4,460
Source: Federal Ministry of Finance and Bundesbank calculations. — 1This sion plans. — 4Final withholding tax on interest income and capital gains,
total, unlike that in Table IX. 5, does not include the receipts from the equal- non-assessed taxes on earnings. — 5The allocation of revenue to central,
isation of burdens levies, local business tax (less local business tax transfers state and local government, which is adjusted at more regular interv als, is
to central and state government), real property taxes and other local govern- regulated in section 1 of the Revenue Adjustment Act. Respective percen t-
ment taxes, or the balance of untransferred tax shares. — 2Respective age share of central, state and local government in revenue for 2009:
percentage share of central, state and local government in revenue: wage 53.9:44.1:2. The EU share is deducted from central government’s share. —
tax and assessed income tax 42.5:42.5:15, corporation tax and non-assessed 6Respective percentage share of central and state government for 2009:
taxes on earnings 50:50:-, withholding tax on interest income 44:44:12. — 21.3:78.7. — 7 For the breakdown, see Table IX. 7. 
3After deducting child benefit and subsidies for supplementary private pen-
56*IX Public finances in Germany

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
February 2010
IX Public finances in Germany
  
7 Central, state and local government: individual taxes   
  
€ million
Central government taxes  1 State government taxes  1 Local government taxes
Tax on of which
the acqui-
Soli- Motor Motor sition of Inher- Local Real
Period Energy Tobacco darity Insurance vehicle Electri- Spirits vehicle land and itance business property
tax tax surcharge tax tax  2 city tax tax Other tax  2 buildings tax Other  3 Total tax taxes
2003 43,188 14,094 10,280 8,870 . 6,531 2,204 1,442 7,336 4,800 3,373 3,205 34,477 24,139 9,658
2004 41,782 13,630 10,108 8,751 . 6,597 2,195 1,492 7,740 4,646 4,284 3,105 38,982 28,373 9,939
2005 40,101 14,273 10,315 8,750 . 6,462 2,142 1,465 8,674 4,791 4,097 3,018 42,941 32,129 10,247
2006 39,916 14,387 11,277 8,775 . 6,273 2,160 1,428 8,937 6,125 3,763 2,904 49,319 38,370 10,399
2007 38,955 14,254 12,349 10,331 . 6,355 1,959 1,488 8,898 6,952 4,203 2,783 51,401 40,116 10,713
2008 39,248 13,574 13,146 10,478 . 6,261 2,126 1,470 8,842 5,728 4,771 2,596 52,468 41,037 10,807
2009 39,822 13,366 11,927 10,548 3,803 6,278 2,101 1,473 4,398 4,857 4,550 2,571 ... ... ...
2008          Q1 4,668 2,547 3,192 4,540 . 1,547 626 394 2,590 1,676 1,087 761 12,956 10,330 2,444
         Q2 9,570 3,267 3,502 1,950 . 1,594 479 338 2,290 1,461 1,301 624 13,813 10,850 2,815
         Q3 9,807 3,649 3,059 2,078 . 1,464 488 343 2,050 1,398 1,361 632 13,634 10,281 3,184
         Q4 15,203 4,111 3,392 1,911 . 1,655 533 396 1,912 1,193 1,022 579 12,065 9,577 2,364
2009          Q1 p 4,777 2,365 3,191 4,502 . 1,560 594 372 2,284 1,165 1,144 758 12,021 9,370 2,452
         Q2 p 10,059 3,560 3,057 1,999 . 1,569 478 363 2,114 1,131 1,334 608 11,447 8,433 2,860
         Q3 9,883 3,499 2,638 2,096 1,907 1,582 488 335 0 1,297 1,123 604 ... ... ...
         Q4 15,103 3,942 3,040 1,952 1,897 1,567 542 402 − 1,264 950 601 ... ... ...
2008          Dec 8,494 1,682 2,034 755 . 552 192 140 664 395 373 172 . . .
2009          Dec 8,242 1,641 1,824 783 670 520 209 157 − 417 358 183 . . .
Source: Federal Ministry of Finance, Federal Statistical Office and Bundes- ment. Postings to state government shown thereafter relate to the booki ng
bank calculations. — 1For the sum total, see Table IX. 6. — 2As of of cash flows. — 3 Notably betting, lottery and beer tax.   
1 July 2009, motor vehicle tax revenue is attributable to central govern-
 
 
8 German pension insurance scheme: budgetary development and assets *
 
 
€ million
Revenue  1 Expenditure  1 Assets  4 
of which of which
Equity
Payments interests, Memo
from Pen- mort- item
central sioners’ gages Adminis-
Contri- govern- Pension health Deficit / and other Real trative
Period Total butions  2 ment Total payments insurance  3 surplus Total Deposits  5 Securities loans  6 estate assets
2003 229,371 156,510 71,447 231,362 196,038 15,178 − 1,991 7,641 5,017 816 1,682 126 4,862
2004 7 231,684 156,535 71,680 233,011 198,587 14,258 − 1,327 5,158 4,980 19 41 118 4,834
2005 229,428 156,264 71,917 233,357 199,873 13,437 − 3,929 1,976 1,794 16 42 123 4,888
2006 241,231 168,083 71,773 233,668 200,459 13,053 + 7,563 10,047 9,777 115 46 109 4,912
2007 236,642 162,225 72,928 235,459 201,642 13,665 + 1,183 12,196 11,270 765 46 115 4,819
2008 242,770 167,611 73,381 238,995 204,071 14,051 + 3,775 16,531 16,313 36 56 126 4,645
2009 p 244,140 169,178 73,842 244,201 208,751 14,422 − 61 16,812 16,608 23 61 120 4,582
2007          Q1 56,177 37,771 18,118 58,275 50,369 3,279 − 2,098 7,955 7,585 215 46 108 4,889
         Q2 59,068 40,501 18,180 58,595 50,282 3,432 + 473 8,890 8,573 165 48 103 4,881
         Q3 57,996 39,494 18,115 59,054 50,633 3,470 − 1,058 8,025 7,598 265 45 117 4,868
         Q4 62,926 44,452 18,136 59,159 50,638 3,475 + 3,767 12,196 11,270 765 46 115 4,819
2008          Q1 57,611 39,028 18,241 58,952 50,795 3,473 − 1,341 10,730 9,459 1,095 46 130 4,792
         Q2 60,574 41,958 18,241 59,346 50,714 3,482 + 1,228 11,923 10,267 1,466 61 128 4,704
         Q3 59,525 40,769 18,215 60,124 51,418 3,539 − 599 11,727 10,421 1,128 50 127 4,690
         Q4 64,495 45,851 18,231 60,100 51,301 3,548 + 4,395 16,531 16,313 36 56 126 4,645
2009          Q1 58,681 39,891 18,500 60,105 51,554 3,633 − 1,424 14,902 14,699 15 56 132 4,618
         Q2 60,812 42,140 18,384 60,263 51,410 3,626 + 549 15,280 15,082 15 59 124 4,593
         Q3 59,783 41,142 18,364 61,841 52,869 3,580 − 2,058 13,647 13,428 40 60 119 4,585
         Q4 p 64,864 46,005 18,594 61,993 52,917 3,583 + 2,871 16,812 16,608 23 61 120 4,582
Source: Federal Ministry of Labour and Social Affairs and German pension and proceeds. — 2Including contributions for recipients of government
insurance scheme. — *Excluding the German pension insurance scheme for cash benefits. — 3Including long-term care insurance for pensioners until
the mining, railway and maritime industries. — 1The annual figures do not 2004 Q1. — 4Largely corresponds to the sustainability reserves. End of year
tally with the sum of the quarterly figures, as the latter are all provisional. In- or quarter. — 5Including cash. — 6Excluding loans to other social security
cluding financial compensation payments. Excluding investment spending funds. — 7 Revenue includes proceeds from the disposal of equity interests. 
57*IX Public finances in Germany

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
E U R O S Y S T E M
Monthly Report
February 2010
IX Public finances in Germany
 
9 Federal Employment Agency: budgetary development
 
 
€ million
Revenue Expenditure
Grant or
of which of which working
capital
of which of which loans
from
Unemploy- Measures central
Contri- ment sup- Western Eastern Job promo- Western Eastern financed Deficit / govern-
Period Total  1 butions Levies  2 Total  3 port 4,5 Germany Germany tion  5,6 Germany Germany by levies  7 surplus ment
2003 50,635 47,337 2,081 56,850 29,735 21,528 8,207 19,155 10,564 8,591 1,948 − 6,215 6,215
2004 50,314 47,211 1,674 54,490 29,746 21,821 7,925 16,843 9,831 7,011 1,641 − 4,176 4,175
2005 52,692 46,989 1,436 53,089 27,654 20,332 7,322 11,590 7,421 4,169 1,450 − 397 397
2006 55,384 51,176 1,123 44,162 23,249 17,348 5,901 9,259 6,185 3,074 1,089 + 11,221 0
2007 42,838 32,264 971 36,196 17,356 13,075 4,282 8,370 5,748 2,623 949 + 6,643 −
2008 38,289 26,452 974 39,407 14,283 10,652 3,631 8,712 6,222 2,490 920 − 1,118 −
2009 34,254 22,046 1,000 48,057 20,866 16,534 4,332 11,595 8,794 2,801 1,946 − 13,803 −
2007          Q1 9,932 7,738 78 10,044 5,321 3,971 1,350 2,032 1,370 662 408 − 113 −
         Q2 10,837 7,910 303 9,383 4,598 3,440 1,157 2,089 1,423 666 259 + 1,454 −
         Q3 10,366 7,765 232 8,357 3,910 2,979 931 1,985 1,363 622 160 + 2,010 −
         Q4 11,703 8,851 357 8,412 3,528 2,684 843 2,264 1,591 674 122 + 3,292 −
2008          Q1 8,714 5,955 83 11,295 4,299 3,183 1,116 2,088 1,473 615 327 − 2,581 −
         Q2 9,690 6,931 211 10,367 3,739 2,761 978 2,182 1,556 626 255 − 677 −
         Q3 9,330 6,317 272 8,648 3,245 2,442 804 2,053 1,462 592 149 + 683 −
         Q4 10,555 7,248 409 9,098 3,001 2,267 733 2,389 1,731 657 189 + 1,458 −
2009          Q1 6,283 5,248 192 10,396 4,723 3,556 1,167 2,318 1,688 630 480 − 4,113 −
         Q2 6,490 5,421 261 12,391 5,563 4,376 1,187 2,893 2,193 700 491 − 5,901 −
         Q3 6,853 5,316 250 12,480 5,465 4,439 1,026 3,026 2,325 701 630 − 5,626 −
         Q4 14,627 6,061 296 12,790 5,115 4,163 951 3,358 2,588 770 345 + 1,837 −
Source: Federal Employment Agency. — 1Excluding central government schemes. 6Vocational training, measures to encourage job take-up, rehabili-
liquidity assistance. — 2Levies to promote winter construction and to pay in- tation, job creation measures, subsidies granted to Personnel Service Agen-
solvency compensation to employees. — 3From 2005, including a compen- cies, compensation top-up payments and business start-up grants. —
satory amount or a reintegration payment to central government. — 4Un- 7Promotion of winter construction and insolvency compensation for em-
employment benefit and short-time working benefit. — 5Including contri- ployees. 
butions to the statutory health, pension and long-term care insurance
 
 
10 Statutory health insurance scheme: budgetary development
 
 
€ million
Revenue  1 Expenditure  1 
of which of which
Central Thera- Adminis-
govern- peutical trative
Contri- ment Hospital Pharma- Medical Dental treatment Sickness expend- Deficit /
Period Total butions  2 funds  3 Total treatment ceuticals treatment treatment  4 and aids benefits iture  5 surplus
2003 141,654 138,383 . 145,095 46,800 24,218 24,301 11,819 9,409 6,973 8,206 − 3,441
2004 144,279 140,120 1,000 140,260 47,594 21,811 22,955 11,263 8,281 6,367 8,196 + 4,020
2005 145,742 140,250 2,500 144,071 48,959 25,358 23,096 9,928 8,284 5,868 8,303 + 1,671
2006 149,929 142,183 4,200 148,297 50,327 25,835 23,896 10,364 8,303 5,708 8,319 + 1,632
2007 156,058 149,964 2,500 154,314 50,850 27,791 24,788 10,687 8,692 6,017 8,472 + 1,744
2008 162,763 156,130 2,500 161,334 52,623 29,145 25,889 10,926 9,095 6,583 8,680 + 1,429
2007          Q1 36,437 35,693 − 37,147 12,948 6,687 6,123 2,670 1,918 1,525 1,879 − 710
         Q2 39,316 37,306 1,250 38,299 12,893 6,862 6,163 2,697 2,160 1,510 1,930 + 1,017
         Q3 37,939 37,138 − 38,068 12,750 6,897 6,062 2,552 2,199 1,451 1,987 − 129
         Q4 41,987 39,829 1,250 40,384 12,363 7,313 6,481 2,797 2,378 1,527 2,618 + 1,602
2008          Q1 37,937 37,136 − 39,010 13,410 7,084 6,409 2,711 2,011 1,643 1,898 − 1,073
         Q2 40,361 38,491 1,250 40,232 13,387 7,339 6,434 2,728 2,292 1,644 2,021 + 129
         Q3 39,185 38,338 − 39,733 13,012 7,215 6,415 2,660 2,271 1,602 2,045 − 548
         Q4 44,387 41,838 1,250 42,165 12,913 7,588 6,812 2,894 2,461 1,672 2,704 + 2,222
2009          Q1 42,502 39,324 3,833 41,432 14,154 7,463 6,969 2,797 2,095 1,822 1,977 + 1,069
         Q2 42,540 40,464 1,239 42,400 14,092 7,652 6,810 2,857 2,392 1,779 2,083 + 140
         Q3 42,752 38,827 3,435 42,548 13,967 7,574 6,981 2,684 2,437 1,746 2,324 + 204
Source: Federal Ministry of Health. — 1The final annual figures do not tally employment. — 3Federal grant and liquidity assistance. — 4Including den-
with the sum of the quarterly figures, as the latter are all provisional. Ex- tures. — 5Net, ie after deducting reimbursements for expenses for levying
cluding revenue and expenditure as part of the risk structure compensation contributions incurred by other social insurance funds. Including admin is-
scheme. — 2Including contributions from subsidised low-paid part-time trative expenditure on disease management programmes. 
58*IX Public finances in Germany

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
February 2010
IX Public finances in Germany
 
11 Statutory long-term care insurance scheme: budgetary development
 
 
€ million
Revenue  1 Expenditure  1 
of which
Contributions to
of which Non-cash In-patient Nursing pension insur- Administrative Deficit /
Period Total Contributions  2 Total care benefits care benefit ance scheme  3 expenditure surplus
2003 16,844 16,665 17,468 2,361 8,183 4,090 951 853 − 624
2004 16,817 16,654 17,605 2,365 8,349 4,049 925 851 − 788
2005 17,526 17,385 17,891 2,409 8,516 4,050 890 875 − 366
2006 17,749 17,611 18,064 2,437 8,671 4,017 862 886 − 315
2007 18,036 17,858 18,385 2,475 8,831 4,050 861 896 − 350
2008 19,785 19,608 19,163 2,605 9,054 4,225 868 941 + 622
2007          Q1 4,301 4,265 4,591 624 2,191 1,014 212 238 − 290
         Q2 4,469 4,432 4,528 595 2,192 993 213 231 − 59
         Q3 4,440 4,403 4,617 623 2,226 1,012 216 213 − 177
         Q4 4,813 4,761 4,608 626 2,218 1,015 217 209 + 204
2008          Q1 4,421 4,381 4,681 641 2,229 1,022 210 255 − 261
         Q2 4,597 4,563 4,703 634 2,251 1,025 221 230 − 106
         Q3 5,167 5,133 4,872 665 2,280 1,089 218 234 + 295
         Q4 5,583 5,535 4,884 662 2,293 1,103 219 220 + 698
2009          Q1 5,110 5,082 4,970 676 2,284 1,104 215 274 + 139
         Q2 5,275 5,253 4,977 662 2,308 1,100 217 248 + 298
         Q3 5,279 5,239 5,157 706 2,338 1,115 219 246 + 122
Source: Federal Ministry of Health. — 1The final annual figures do not tally 2Since 2005 including special contributions for childless persons (0.25% of
with the sum of the quarterly figures, as the latter are all provisional. — income subject to insurance contributions). — 3 For non-professional carers. 
 
 
12 Central government: borrowing in 13 Central, state and local government: debt by
the market creditor *
 
€ million € million
Total new borrowing  1 of which of which Banking system Domestic non-banks
Change Change
in money in money Social
market market End of year Bundes- Credit security Foreign
Period Gross  2 Net loans deposits or quarter Total bank institutions funds Other  1 creditors  pe 
2002 + 178,203 + 24,327 + 2,221 + 22 2002 1,277,667 4,440 536,900 137 238,390 497,800
2003 + 227,483 + 42,270 + 1,236 + 7,218 2003 1,358,137 4,440 530,700 341 301,956 520,700
2004 + 227,441 + 44,410 + 1,844 + 802 2004 1,430,582 4,440 544,200 430 306,912 574,600
2005 + 224,922 + 35,479 + 4,511 + 6,041 2005 1,489,029 4,440 518,500 488 312,201 653,400
2006 + 221,873 + 32,656 + 3,258 + 6,308 2006 1,533,697 4,440 496,900 480 329,177 702,700
2007 + 214,995 + 6,996 + 1,086 − 4,900 2007 1,540,381 4,440 457,000 476 312,265 766,200
2008 + 233,356 + 26,208 + 6,888 + 9,036 2008 1,564,590 4,440 435,700 510 323,240 800,700
2007          Q1 + 68,285 + 4,600 + 12,649 − 11,200 2007          Q1 1,538,621 4,440 513,900 480 320,701 699,100
         Q2 + 54,415 + 22,020 + 5,792 + 27,209          Q2 1,556,684 4,440 504,600 480 319,864 727,300
         Q3 + 51,413 − 20,291 − 4,783 − 27,450          Q3 1,535,253 4,440 489,000 480 307,833 733,500
         Q4 + 40,882 + 667 − 12,571 + 6,541          Q4 1,540,381 4,440 457,000 476 312,265 766,200
2008          Q1 + 69,510 + 10,443 + 12,306 − 705 2008          Q1 1,541,759 4,440 467,300 475 305,344 764,200
         Q2 + 52,618 + 7,478 + 4,872 + 10,289          Q2 1,554,151 4,440 462,200 506 291,906 795,100
         Q3 + 53,933 − 2,231 − 10,736 − 12,088          Q3 1,547,336 4,440 431,900 506 298,490 812,000
         Q4 + 57,296 + 10,519 + 447 + 11,541          Q4 1,564,590 4,440 435,700 510 323,240 800,700
2009          Q1 + 66,560 + 20,334 − 2,256 − 7,856 2009          Q1 p 1,594,621 4,440 426,500 514 322,167 841,000
         Q2 + 96,270 + 46,283 − 2,791 + 26,434          Q2 p 1,646,307 4,440 430,400 520 325,647 885,300
Source:  Federal  Republic  of  Germany  -  Finance Source: Bundesbank calculations based on data from the Federal Statistical 
Agency. — 1 Including the Financial  Market  Stabil- Office. — * Excluding direct intergovernmental borrowing. — 1 Calculated 
isation Fund (SoFFin) and the Investment and Repay- as a residual. 
ment Fund. — 2 After deducting repurchases. 
59*IX Public finances in Germany

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
E U R O S Y S T E M
Monthly Report
February 2010
IX Public finances in Germany
 
14 Central, state and local government: debt by category *
 
 
€ million
Loans from non-banks Old debt
Direct
Treasury Five-year lending
discount Federal Federal Federal by credit Social Equal-
End of year paper Treasury notes savings bonds institu- security isation
or quarter Total (Bubills)  1 notes  2,3 (Bobls)  2 notes (Bunds)  2 Day-bond tions  4 funds Other  4 claims  5 Other  5,6 
Central, state and local government
2003 1,358,137 36,022 246,414 153,611 12,810 471,115 . 396,832 341 34,163 6,711 119
2004 1,430,582 35,722 279,796 168,958 10,817 495,547 . 379,984 430 53,672 5,572 84
2005 1,489,029 36,945 310,044 174,423 11,055 521,801 . 366,978 488 62,765 4,443 88
2006 1,533,697 37,834 320,288 179,940 10,199 552,028 . 356,514 480 71,889 4,443 82
2007 1,540,381 39,510 329,108 177,394 10,287 574,512 . 329,588 476 74,988 4,443 76
2008          Q2 1,554,151 39,655 328,980 168,938 9,816 586,050 . 343,931 506 71,761 4,443 72
         Q3 1,547,336 42,816 332,792 177,594 9,415 579,969 701 326,582 506 72,445 4,443 74
         Q4 1,564,590 44,870 337,261 172,037 9,649 584,144 3,174 325,648 510 82,781 4,443 73
2009          Q1 p 1,594,621 70,315 341,169 177,859 9,436 586,340 3,413 320,494 514 80,564 4,443 74
         Q2 p 1,646,307 99,170 353,904 174,146 9,490 600,012 3,185 310,665 520 90,699 4,443 73
Central government 7,8,9,10,11
2003 767,713 35,235 87,538 143,425 12,810 436,181 . 38,146 223 7,326 6,711 118
2004 812,123 34,440 95,638 159,272 10,817 460,380 . 34,835 333 10,751 5,572 83
2005 886,254 36,098 108,899 174,371 11,055 510,866 . 29,318 408 10,710 4,443 87
2006 918,911 37,798 103,624 179,889 10,199 541,404 . 30,030 408 11,036 4,443 82
2007 939,988 37,385 102,083 177,394 10,287 574,156 . 22,829 408 10,928 4,443 75
2008          Q2 957,909 37,136 101,932 168,938 9,816 585,794 . 38,496 438 10,845 4,443 71
         Q3 955,678 40,316 105,361 177,594 9,415 579,713 701 26,980 438 10,644 4,443 74
         Q4 966,197 40,795 105,684 172,037 9,649 583,930 3,174 35,291 448 10,674 4,443 72
2009          Q1 986,530 64,653 104,571 177,859 9,436 586,225 3,413 24,804 448 10,605 4,443 74
         Q2 1,032,813 95,758 113,060 174,146 9,490 599,898 3,185 21,634 448 10,680 4,443 72
         Q3 1,034,156 107,415 107,171 181,326 9,450 587,493 2,746 22,877 448 10,718 4,443 71
State government
2003 423,737 787 154,189 .... 244,902 4 23,854 . 1
2004 448,672 1,282 179,620 .... 228,644 3 39,122 . 1
2005 471,375 847 201,146 .... 221,163 3 48,216 . 1
2006 481,850 36 216,665 .... 209,270 2 55,876 . 1
2007 484,373 2,125 227,025 .... 194,956 2 60,264 . 1
2008          Q2 481,875 2,519 227,048 .... 195,189 3 57,116 . 1
         Q3 478,495 2,500 227,430 .... 190,560 3 58,001 . 1
         Q4 483,875 4,075 231,577 .... 179,978 3 68,241 . 1
2009          Q1 p 492,771 5,661 236,599 .... 184,415 6 66,090 . 1
         Q2 p 497,725 3,411 240,844 .... 177,307 12 76,149 . 1
         Q3 p 501,092 2,711 239,661 .... 180,349 12 78,358 . 1
Local government 12
2003 107,857 . 77 . . 734 . 104,469 106 2,471 . .
2004 112,538 . − . . 812 . 108,231 86 3,410 . .
2005 116,033 . − . . 466 . 111,889 77 3,601 . .
2006 118,380 . − . . 256 . 113,265 70 4,789 . .
2007 115,920 . − . . 256 . 111,803 66 3,796 . .
2008          Q2 114,367 . − . . 256 . 110,246 65 3,800 . .
         Q3 113,163 . − . . 256 . 109,042 65 3,800 . .
         Q4 114,518 . − . . 214 . 110,379 60 3,866 . .
2009          Q1 p 115,320 . − . . 114 . 111,276 60 3,870 . .
         Q2 p 115,769 . − . . 114 . 111,725 60 3,870 . .
Special funds 7,8,9,13
2003 58,830 − 4,610 10,185 . 34,201 . 9,315 8 512 . .
2004 57,250 − 4,538 9,685 . 34,355 . 8,274 8 389 . .
2005 15,367 . − 51 . 10,469 . 4,609 − 238 . .
2006 14,556 . − 51 . 10,368 . 3,950 − 188 . .
2007 100 . − − . 100 . − − − . .
2008          Q2 − . − − . − . − − − . .
         Q3 − . − − . − . − − − . .
         Q4 − . − − . − . − − − . .
2009          Q1 − . − − . − . − − − . .
         Q2 − . − − . − . − − − . .
         Q3 − . − − . − . − − − . .
Source: Bundesbank calculations based on data from the Federal Statistical trast to the capital market statistics, the debt incurred through the joi nt issu-
Office. — *Excluding direct intergovernmental borrowing. — 1Including ance of Federal securities is recorded here under central government and its
Treasury financing paper. — 2Excluding issuers’ holdings of their own secur- special funds in accordance with the agreed allocation ratios. — 8On 1
ities. — 3Treasury notes issued by state government include long-term January 2005 central government assumed joint responsibility for the debts
notes. — 4Mainly loans against borrowers’ notes and cash advances. In- of the German Unity Fund. From that date on, the aforementioned special
cluding loans raised abroad. Other loans from non-banks, including loans fund is recorded under central government. — 9On 1 July 2007 central
from public supplementary pension funds and liabilities arising from the in- government assumed joint responsibility for the debts of the ERP Specia l
vestment assistance levy. — 5Excluding offsets against outstanding Fund. From that date on, the aforementioned special fund is recorded
claims. — 6Old debt mainly denominated in foreign currency, in accordance under central government. — 10From December 2008, including debt of
with the London Debts Agreement, old liabilities arising from housing con- the Financial Market Stabilisation Fund (SoFFin). — 11From March 2009, in-
struction and liabilities arising from housing construction by the former cluding debt of the Investment and Repayment Fund. — 12Including debt
GDR’s armed forces and from housing construction in connection with the of municipal special purpose associations. Data other than year-end figures
return of the troops of the former USSR stationed in eastern Germany to have been estimated. — 13ERP Special Fund (up to the end of June 2007),
their home country; excluding debt securities in own portfolios. — 7In con- German Unity Fund (up to the end of 2004) and Indemnification Fund. 
60*IX Public finances in Germany

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
February 2010
X Economic conditions in Germany
  
1 Origin and use of domestic product, distribution of national income
  
  
  
  2008   2009
  2007   2008   2009   2007   2008   2009   Q1   Q2   Q3   Q4   Q1   Q2   Q3
Item Index 2000=100 Annual percentage change
At  constant  prices,  chained
  I Origin of domestic product
Production sector
(excluding construction) 114.0 114.2 94.9 1.8 0.2 − 16.9 2.7 6.4 0.6 − 8.5 − 20.4 − 23.3 − 16.5
Construction 79.2 81.9 81.3 0.8 3.5 − 0.7 3.0 6.8 3.2 0.7 − 5.8 − 2.8 1.9
Wholesale/retail trade, hotel and
restaurant services, transport
and storage  1 112.5 114.3 108.5 2.9 1.5 − 5.1 2.5 3.6 1.6 − 1.5 − 5.9 − 6.7 − 5.1
Financing, renting and business
services  2 115.6 117.5 115.5 4.8 1.6 − 1.6 2.3 2.4 1.4 0.2 − 1.3 − 1.9 − 1.7
Public and private services  3 106.6 108.6 109.7 2.1 1.9 1.0 1.5 2.0 2.1 2.0 0.5 0.6 0.8
Gross value added 110.5 112.0 105.9 2.9 1.4 − 5.5 2.3 3.7 1.5 − 2.0 − 6.9 − 7.9 − 5.3
Gross domestic product  4 108.9 110.3 104.8 2.5 1.3 − 5.0 2.1 3.4 1.4 − 1.7 − 6.4 − 7.0 − 4.7
 II Use of domestic product
Private consumption  5 102.6 102.9 103.3 − 0.3 0.4 0.4 0.8 0.9 0.4 − 0.6 0.1 0.7 0.2
Government consumption 104.8 107.0 109.9 1.7 2.1 2.7 1.2 2.4 2.2 2.3 2.8 2.6 2.4
Machinery and equipment 123.2 127.3 101.8 11.0 3.3 − 20.0 4.5 7.2 5.8 − 3.0 − 20.1 − 23.4 − 20.8
Premises 86.2 88.4 87.7 0.0 2.6 − 0.7 1.5 5.8 2.7 0.3 − 5.6 − 3.0 2.0
Other investment  6 135.9 143.2 150.3 6.5 5.3 5.0 6.5 4.7 5.6 4.7 6.9 6.7 7.0
Changes in inventories  7  8 . . . 0.0 0.4 − 0.8 − 0.2 0.0 0.3 1.7 0.2 − 1.1 − 0.9
Domestic use 101.1 102.9 101.0 1.0 1.7 − 1.8 1.1 2.3 1.8 1.7 − 1.3 − 2.7 − 1.7
Net exports  8 . . . 1.5 − 0.3 − 3.4 1.0 1.3 − 0.4 − 3.3 − 5.2 − 4.5 − 3.2
Exports 164.0 168.7 143.9 7.5 2.9 − 14.7 6.0 7.6 4.2 − 5.7 − 17.2 − 20.2 − 15.4
Imports 141.1 147.1 134.1 4.8 4.3 − 8.9 4.5 5.7 5.8 1.2 − 7.6 − 13.0 − 9.9
Gross domestic product  4 108.9 110.3 104.8 2.5 1.3 − 5.0 2.1 3.4 1.4 − 1.7 − 6.4 − 7.0 − 4.7
At  current  prices  (€ billion)
III Use of domestic product
Private consumption  5 1,375.4 1,409.7 1,416.4 1.4 2.5 0.5 3.0 3.3 3.0 0.8 0.2 0.7 − 0.0
Government consumption 435.6 451.8 472.1 2.2 3.7 4.5 2.9 4.6 3.8 3.6 5.0 4.4 4.7
Machinery and equipment 196.5 201.8 159.3 10.2 2.7 − 21.1 3.7 6.3 5.3 − 3.5 − 21.1 − 24.4 − 21.9
Premises 231.5 245.0 245.4 6.3 5.8 0.2 4.3 8.9 6.4 3.4 − 3.4 − 2.0 2.2
Other investment  6 27.5 27.9 27.3 3.4 1.6 − 2.2 2.0 2.1 1.6 0.7 − 2.0 − 1.8 − 1.3
Changes in inventories  7 − 10.0 3.9 − 15.2 . . . . . . . . . .
Domestic use 2,256.5 2,340.1 2,305.2 2.9 3.7 − 1.5 3.0 4.5 4.3 3.0 − 0.8 − 2.4 − 1.5
Net exports 171.7 155.7 99.2 . . . . . . . . . .
Exports 1,139.5 1,179.4 975.0 8.0 3.5 − 17.3 6.5 8.2 5.3 − 5.5 − 19.2 − 23.1 − 18.3
Imports 967.8 1,023.7 875.8 4.9 5.8 − 14.4 6.1 8.0 9.4 − 0.1 − 12.4 − 18.8 − 16.8
Gross domestic product  4 2,428.2 2,495.8 2,404.4 4.4 2.8 − 3.7 3.4 4.8 2.8 0.2 − 5.0 − 5.8 − 2.9
IV Prices (2000 = 100)
Private consumption 110.5 112.8 112.9 1.8 2.1 0.1 2.2 2.4 2.6 1.3 0.0 0.1 − 0.2
Gross domestic product 108.1 109.8 111.3 1.9 1.5 1.4 1.3 1.4 1.4 2.0 1.6 1.3 1.9
Terms of trade 100.2 99.4 102.6 0.4 − 0.8 3.3 − 1.1 − 1.6 − 2.2 1.6 3.0 3.3 4.7
V Distribution of national income
Compensation of employees 1,180.9 1,225.1 1,223.1 2.8 3.7 − 0.2 3.7 3.7 4.1 3.5 1.1 − 0.1 − 0.6
Entrepreneurial and property
income 659.4 661.0 588.1 4.8 0.2 − 11.0 3.6 7.8 − 0.2 − 9.8 − 18.7 − 18.7 − 7.1
National income 1,840.3 1,886.0 1,811.2 3.5 2.5 − 4.0 3.7 5.1 2.5 − 0.9 − 6.5 − 6.7 − 3.0
Memo item: Gross national
income 2,477.7 2,537.0 2,447.1 4.4 2.4 − 3.5 3.1 4.4 2.7 − 0.4 − 5.1 − 5.3 − 2.9
Source: Federal Statistical Office; figures computed in November 2009. ucts). — 5Including non-profit institutions serving households. — 6Intangi-
Initial annual results for 2009: figures computed in January 2010. — 1Includ- ble fixed asset formation (inter alia, computer software and entertainment,
ing communication services. — 2Financial intermediation, real estate activi- literary or artistic originals) and cultivated assets. — 7Including net increase
ties, renting and business services. — 3Including care-at-home services. — in valuables. — 8 Contribution of growth to GDP. 
4Gross value added plus taxes on products (netted with subsidies on prod-
61*X Economic conditions in Germany

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
E U R O S Y S T E M
Monthly Report
February 2010
 X Economic conditions in Germany
 
2 Output in the production sector  * 
 
 
Adjusted for working-day variations  o 
of which
Industry
of which:   by main industrial grouping of which:   by economic sector
Manu-
Manu- facture of
facture of computers,
Motor basic metals electronic
and vehicles, and optical
Production Inter- Non- fabricated products Machinery trailers
sector, Construc- mediate Capital Durable durable metal and and semi- and electrical
total tion Energy Total goods goods goods goods products equipment equipment trailers
2005=100  
  
% of total  1 100.00 5.56 8.76 85.69 33.96 35.37 2.78 13.58 12.15 10.82 12.48 12.34
Period
2005 99.7 99.5 100.1 99.6 99.7 99.6 99.7 99.6 99.6 99.8 99.5 99.6
2006 105.4 105.8 101.0 105.8 107.1 106.0 107.3 101.7 107.3 112.9 107.5 102.6
2007 111.6 108.9 98.2 113.1 114.6 114.9 108.4 105.8 114.0 124.4 119.4 109.7
2008 111.5 108.3 95.6 113.4 114.2 116.8 104.0 104.4 114.4 128.8 124.5 104.5
2009  x p 93.6 108.2 89.4 93.1 93.2 90.5 87.9 100.7 87.4 100.7 92.0 81.6
2008          Apr 114.2 110.5 99.7 115.9 119.0 119.2 107.1 101.5 119.9 127.6 124.0 116.6
         May 111.1 114.4 92.8 112.7 117.2 114.2 97.0 100.6 117.7 126.2 119.4 106.5
         June 116.3 120.5 87.1 118.9 120.3 124.8 106.3 102.6 122.7 133.8 134.2 114.8
         July 113.2 122.7 89.0 115.0 119.2 116.7 95.0 104.3 118.5 131.2 126.5 104.9
         Aug 106.0 117.5 85.7 107.3 113.9 103.8 90.0 103.5 112.8 125.9 113.7 84.2
         Sep 117.6 125.2 89.6 120.0 119.2 125.8 115.7 107.7 119.9 135.9 129.4 113.9
         Oct 115.7 123.2 98.0 117.1 117.4 119.2 113.3 111.6 117.6 133.0 125.9 104.4
         Nov 112.1 116.9 97.5 113.3 108.8 119.6 111.8 108.7 109.4 133.5 126.5 100.9
         Dec 95.5 84.9 99.8 95.7 82.6 107.6 84.7 99.6 80.1 109.7 136.3 61.6
2009          Jan 86.8 58.9 105.0 86.7 87.3 81.3 85.3 99.8 83.0 96.2 87.4 67.5
         Feb 85.8 67.5 92.3 86.3 86.6 82.8 85.1 95.0 82.0 96.4 90.2 65.9
         Mar 96.4 104.3 91.7 96.3 93.5 97.1 92.8 102.1 87.1 103.9 104.1 84.5
         Apr 88.5 117.6 82.2 87.3 87.1 83.3 83.6 98.7 80.8 91.3 87.0 70.3
         May 91.4 117.7 80.9 90.8 90.5 88.9 83.3 98.0 83.7 93.7 89.3 83.5
         June 96.0 123.8 85.2 95.3 94.6 95.7 83.9 98.4 88.4 98.6 95.2 91.1
         July 94.0 126.2 85.7 92.7 95.4 88.5 80.1 99.7 87.6 99.1 86.1 83.6
         Aug 88.4 122.0 81.8 86.9 92.6 78.0 74.4 98.2 84.8 96.2 78.7 65.1
         Sep 102.8 129.1 84.5 102.9 101.9 103.0 99.4 105.7 95.8 109.1 102.5 103.2
         Oct  x 101.5 126.1 92.0 100.8 103.2 96.3 99.3 106.6 96.8 112.1 90.4 97.7
         Nov  x 103.1 121.2 94.0 102.8 103.1 100.6 103.6 107.8 99.3 114.0 93.7 99.7
         Dec  x p 88.7 83.4 97.4 88.1 82.5 90.1 84.1 97.8 79.0 98.3 99.4 67.5
 
Annual percentage change  
  
2005 + 3.0 − 5.4 + 0.4 + 3.8 + 3.0 + 5.0 + 0.1 + 3.9 + 1.4 + 8.8 + 5.1 + 4.1
2006 + 5.7 + 6.3 + 0.9 + 6.2 + 7.4 + 6.4 + 7.6 + 2.1 + 7.7 + 13.1 + 8.0 + 3.0
2007 + 5.9 + 2.9 − 2.8 + 6.9 + 7.0 + 8.4 + 1.0 + 4.0 + 6.2 + 10.2 + 11.1 + 6.9
2008 − 0.1 − 0.6 − 2.6 + 0.3 − 0.3 + 1.7 − 4.1 − 1.3 + 0.4 + 3.5 + 4.3 − 4.7
2009  x p − 16.1 − 0.1 − 6.5 − 17.9 − 18.4 − 22.5 − 15.5 − 3.5 − 23.6 − 21.8 − 26.1 − 21.9
 
2008          Apr + 5.2 − 2.0 + 6.5 + 5.6 + 5.3 + 9.3 + 3.6 − 3.1 + 7.0 + 9.9 + 10.7 + 6.6
         May + 1.5 − 0.9 − 0.3 + 1.6 + 2.6 + 3.2 − 5.5 − 4.1 + 4.2 + 8.2 + 3.7 − 2.7
         June + 2.1 − 0.2 − 4.8 + 2.8 + 2.2 + 4.2 + 0.2 + 0.3 + 4.6 + 7.1 + 9.3 − 2.1
         July − 0.1 − 2.9 − 2.7 + 0.3 + 1.3 + 0.3 − 6.1 − 1.0 + 1.8 + 4.1 + 3.6 − 6.6
         Aug + 1.4 + 0.7 − 5.8 + 2.1 + 2.7 + 3.7 − 2.9 − 2.5 + 3.3 + 6.3 + 5.6 + 0.7
         Sep − 1.5 − 1.4 − 4.4 − 1.2 − 1.8 + 0.5 − 5.8 − 3.9 − 0.5 − 0.4 − 0.2 − 6.6
         Oct − 3.7 − 2.4 − 5.0 − 3.6 − 3.7 − 3.9 − 6.6 − 1.8 − 3.2 − 2.7 − 1.0 − 12.4
         Nov − 7.2 − 1.1 − 9.6 − 7.4 − 9.4 − 6.9 − 7.5 − 3.5 − 10.0 − 5.1 − 2.5 − 17.3
         Dec − 11.4 − 4.0 − 9.0 − 12.0 − 18.9 − 9.6 − 14.9 − 2.0 − 20.6 − 11.5 − 0.5 − 31.6
2009          Jan − 18.4 − 24.9 + 0.2 − 20.0 − 22.3 − 24.2 − 16.3 − 2.9 − 25.8 − 21.6 − 19.4 − 35.3
         Feb − 21.6 − 20.6 − 5.6 − 23.0 − 24.1 − 28.1 − 20.7 − 5.2 − 28.4 − 23.4 − 22.0 − 43.5
         Mar − 20.3 + 4.0 − 12.8 − 22.3 − 25.7 − 24.3 − 21.0 − 6.4 − 31.6 − 26.1 − 22.1 − 32.2
         Apr − 22.5 + 6.4 − 17.6 − 24.7 − 26.8 − 30.1 − 21.9 − 2.8 − 32.6 − 28.4 − 29.8 − 39.7
         May − 17.7 + 2.9 − 12.8 − 19.4 − 22.8 − 22.2 − 14.1 − 2.6 − 28.9 − 25.8 − 25.2 − 21.6
         June − 17.5 + 2.7 − 2.2 − 19.8 − 21.4 − 23.3 − 21.1 − 4.1 − 28.0 − 26.3 − 29.1 − 20.6
         July − 17.0 + 2.9 − 3.7 − 19.4 − 20.0 − 24.2 − 15.7 − 4.4 − 26.1 − 24.5 − 31.9 − 20.3
         Aug − 16.6 + 3.8 − 4.6 − 19.0 − 18.7 − 24.9 − 17.3 − 5.1 − 24.8 − 23.6 − 30.8 − 22.7
         Sep − 12.6 + 3.1 − 5.7 − 14.3 − 14.5 − 18.1 − 14.1 − 1.9 − 20.1 − 19.7 − 20.8 − 9.4
         Oct  x − 12.3 + 2.4 − 6.1 − 13.9 − 12.1 − 19.2 − 12.4 − 4.5 − 17.7 − 15.7 − 28.2 − 6.4
         Nov  x − 8.0 + 3.7 − 3.6 − 9.3 − 5.2 − 15.9 − 7.3 − 0.8 − 9.2 − 14.6 − 25.9 − 1.2
         Dec  x p − 7.1 − 1.8 − 2.4 − 7.9 − 0.1 − 16.3 − 0.7 − 1.8 − 1.4 − 10.4 − 27.1 + 9.6
Source of the unadjusted figures: Federal Statistical Office. — *For explan- duction sector in the base year 2005. — xProvisional; adjusted in advance by
atory notes, see Statistical Supplement "Seasonally adjusted business the Federal Statistical Office, by way of estimates, to the results of the
statistics", Tables II.10 to II.12. — oUsing the Census X-12-ARIMA method, Quarterly Production Survey. 
version 0.2.8. — 1Share of gross value added at factor cost of the pro-
62* X Economic conditions in Germany

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
February 2010
 X Economic conditions in Germany
 
3 Orders received by industry *
 
 
Adjusted for working-day variations  o 
of which
of which
Industry Intermediate goods Capital goods Consumer goods Durable goods Non-durable goods
Annual Annual Annual Annual Annual Annual
percent- percent- percent- percent- percent- percent-
age age age age age age
Period 2005=100 change 2005=100 change 2005=100 change 2005=100 change 2005=100 change 2005=100 change
total  
  
2005 99.7 + 6.5 99.7 + 5.6 99.7 + 7.3 99.8 + 5.6 99.7 − 1.5 99.8 + 8.1
2006 110.7 + 11.0 113.9 + 14.2 109.4 + 9.7 105.3 + 5.5 108.4 + 8.7 104.3 + 4.5
2007 123.0 + 11.1 125.2 + 9.9 123.2 + 12.6 111.9 + 6.3 110.3 + 1.8 112.5 + 7.9
2008 115.5 − 6.1 121.2 − 3.2 112.9 − 8.4 108.1 − 3.4 103.5 − 6.2 109.7 − 2.5
2009  p 87.3 − 24.4 89.3 − 26.3 85.0 − 24.7 94.7 − 12.4 88.1 − 14.9 96.9 − 11.7
 
2008          Dec 85.4 − 31.0 83.3 − 29.4 86.0 − 34.5 90.6 − 7.4 82.2 − 12.3 93.4 − 5.8
2009          Jan 81.1 − 35.2 86.0 − 34.5 75.7 − 38.6 95.9 − 13.6 83.0 − 20.5 100.3 − 11.4
         Feb 79.2 − 37.3 78.3 − 38.3 77.3 − 39.2 96.6 − 19.0 78.3 − 22.9 102.8 − 17.9
         Mar 89.0 − 34.4 86.5 − 37.9 89.3 − 34.2 98.1 − 16.4 88.2 − 24.2 101.5 − 13.7
         Apr 79.9 − 35.5 82.4 − 35.9 77.1 − 37.7 87.8 − 15.0 80.6 − 24.3 90.3 − 11.6
         May 83.1 − 31.5 84.2 − 34.9 81.4 − 31.6 89.1 − 12.3 82.9 − 18.5 91.2 − 10.3
         June 89.5 − 26.5 91.6 − 29.5 87.9 − 26.1 90.8 − 13.2 87.6 − 18.3 91.8 − 11.5
         July 89.7 − 24.2 91.7 − 28.5 87.3 − 22.6 96.6 − 13.1 84.6 − 13.6 100.7 − 12.9
         Aug 84.2 − 24.1 87.7 − 25.7 80.6 − 24.0 92.7 − 16.4 77.0 − 19.5 98.0 − 15.5
         Sep 94.9 − 16.7 96.7 − 20.7 92.6 − 14.9 101.6 − 9.4 108.4 − 5.7 99.3 − 10.7
         Oct 92.2 − 12.4 98.0 − 14.6 87.4 − 11.3 99.3 − 9.1 100.8 − 8.9 98.8 − 9.2
         Nov 96.4 − 2.0 100.7 − 1.9 93.2 − 1.4 99.0 − 7.0 97.5 − 5.9 99.6 − 7.3
         Dec  p 88.9 + 4.1 87.2 + 4.7 90.2 + 4.9 88.6 − 2.2 88.0 + 7.1 88.7 − 5.0
from the domestic market  
  
2005 99.7 + 3.4 99.7 + 4.0 99.6 + 2.8 99.7 + 4.2 99.7 − 3.2 99.7 + 6.7
2006 109.0 + 9.3 113.3 + 13.6 106.4 + 6.8 103.4 + 3.7 111.0 + 11.3 100.9 + 1.2
2007 118.7 + 8.9 124.7 + 10.1 115.8 + 8.8 107.0 + 3.5 109.6 − 1.3 106.1 + 5.2
2008 113.1 − 4.7 121.8 − 2.3 107.5 − 7.2 103.9 − 2.9 107.1 − 2.3 102.9 − 3.0
2009  p 87.8 − 22.4 89.9 − 26.2 86.2 − 19.8 87.3 − 16.0 89.4 − 16.5 86.6 − 15.8
 
2008          Dec 82.8 − 27.7 81.1 − 30.6 83.3 − 28.6 87.6 − 5.4 85.7 − 9.1 88.2 − 4.1
2009          Jan 85.3 − 28.6 87.1 − 32.9 82.9 − 26.6 89.7 − 15.8 86.3 − 21.7 90.8 − 13.8
         Feb 80.6 − 32.8 77.8 − 39.3 81.5 − 28.8 89.2 − 20.6 80.6 − 23.6 92.0 − 19.7
         Mar 89.8 − 31.2 85.9 − 38.6 92.9 − 26.2 91.1 − 19.6 88.8 − 25.4 91.9 − 17.5
         Apr 81.6 − 32.5 82.4 − 36.4 81.1 − 31.0 80.9 − 18.3 79.6 − 27.9 81.3 − 14.7
         May 84.1 − 27.8 83.2 − 35.7 85.2 − 22.0 81.8 − 15.6 83.9 − 18.2 81.1 − 14.7
         June 87.4 − 27.0 91.0 − 30.7 85.3 − 24.8 82.3 − 18.0 86.6 − 19.9 80.9 − 17.4
         July 94.1 − 19.7 92.8 − 28.8 96.3 − 11.0 87.6 − 16.7 84.8 − 17.2 88.5 − 16.5
         Aug 87.0 − 22.3 89.4 − 27.0 84.7 − 18.4 88.8 − 17.7 82.8 − 13.0 90.7 − 19.0
         Sep 92.4 − 19.5 97.1 − 21.2 87.6 − 19.3 97.4 − 11.4 117.7 − 2.5 90.8 − 14.7
         Oct 92.4 − 13.4 101.0 − 12.0 85.5 − 14.5 90.6 − 14.1 103.6 − 9.6 86.4 − 15.8
         Nov 94.8 − 2.2 103.7 + 2.4 88.5 − 4.0 88.6 − 13.7 94.0 − 15.2 86.9 − 13.1
         Dec  p 84.6 + 2.2 87.6 + 8.0 83.0 − 0.4 79.8 − 8.9 84.0 − 2.0 78.4 − 11.1
from abroad  
  
2005 99.7 + 9.6 99.7 + 7.7 99.7 + 10.9 99.8 + 7.2 99.6 + 0.3 99.8 + 9.8
2006 112.2 + 12.5 114.6 + 14.9 111.5 + 11.8 107.5 + 7.7 105.7 + 6.1 108.1 + 8.3
2007 126.8 + 13.0 125.7 + 9.7 128.5 + 15.2 117.3 + 9.1 111.0 + 5.0 119.5 + 10.5
2008 117.6 − 7.3 120.6 − 4.1 116.7 − 9.2 112.6 − 4.0 99.9 − 10.0 117.1 − 2.0
2009  p 86.9 − 26.1 88.5 − 26.6 84.2 − 27.8 102.6 − 8.9 86.7 − 13.2 108.2 − 7.6
 
2008          Dec 87.7 − 33.4 85.7 − 28.2 87.9 − 37.8 93.8 − 9.4 78.7 − 15.5 99.1 − 7.6
2009          Jan 77.5 − 40.4 84.7 − 36.3 70.7 − 45.8 102.6 − 11.4 79.7 − 19.1 110.7 − 9.2
         Feb 77.9 − 40.9 78.8 − 37.3 74.4 − 45.3 104.5 − 17.5 75.9 − 22.3 114.7 − 16.2
         Mar 88.3 − 36.9 87.2 − 37.2 86.8 − 39.2 105.6 − 13.2 87.5 − 23.0 112.0 − 10.0
         Apr 78.4 − 38.0 82.5 − 35.2 74.3 − 42.0 95.3 − 11.7 81.6 − 20.4 100.2 − 8.7
         May 82.2 − 34.6 85.4 − 34.1 78.8 − 37.4 96.9 − 9.2 81.9 − 18.7 102.3 − 6.1
         June 91.4 − 26.1 92.3 − 28.2 89.8 − 26.9 99.9 − 8.4 88.6 − 16.6 103.9 − 5.7
         July 85.8 − 28.1 90.4 − 28.1 81.0 − 30.2 106.4 − 9.5 84.4 − 9.5 114.2 − 9.5
         Aug 81.7 − 25.7 85.8 − 24.1 77.7 − 27.8 96.9 − 15.1 71.1 − 26.0 106.0 − 12.0
         Sep 97.0 − 14.2 96.3 − 20.1 96.2 − 11.7 106.2 − 7.3 99.1 − 9.1 108.7 − 6.7
         Oct 92.0 − 11.6 94.5 − 17.8 88.7 − 8.9 108.6 − 4.1 97.9 − 8.1 112.5 − 2.8
         Nov 97.8 − 1.9 97.2 − 6.6 96.5 + 0.4 110.3 − 0.1 101.0 + 5.0 113.6 − 1.6
         Dec  p 92.7 + 5.7 86.8 + 1.3 95.3 + 8.4 98.0 + 4.5 92.0 + 16.9 100.0 + 0.9
Source of the unadjusted figures: Federal Statistical Office. — *For explana- statistics", Tables II.14 to II.16. — oUsing the Census X-12-ARIMA method,
tory notes, see Statistical Supplement "Seasonally adjusted business version 0.2.8. 
63* X Economic conditions in Germany

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
E U R O S Y S T E M
Monthly Report
February 2010
 X Economic conditions  in Germany
 
4 Orders received by construction *   
 
 
Adjusted for working-day variations  o 
Breakdown by type of construction Breakdown by client  1 
 Building    
Housing Industrial Public sector Civil Public
Total Total construction construction construction engineering Industry sector
Annual Annual Annual Annual Annual Annual Annual Annual
percent- percent- percent- percent- percent- percent- percent- percent-
age age age age age age age age
Period change change change change change change change change 2005 = 100 2005 = 100 2005 = 100 2005 = 100 2005 = 100 2005 = 100 2005 = 100 2005 = 100
2005 99.9 − 0.8 99.9 − 2.3 99.9 − 7.2 99.9 + 2.3 99.9 − 5.2 99.8 + 0.7 99.8 + 2.1 99.9 − 0.9
2006 105.1 + 5.2 106.6 + 6.7 104.3 + 4.4 109.6 + 9.7 101.7 + 1.8 103.5 + 3.7 109.0 + 9.2 101.5 + 1.6
2007 114.0 + 8.5 112.6 + 5.6 98.5 − 5.6 123.2 + 12.4 108.5 + 6.7 115.4 + 11.5 120.7 + 10.7 113.7 + 12.0
2008 113.4 − 0.5 114.8 + 2.0 94.4 − 4.2 127.9 + 3.8 116.7 + 7.6 112.0 − 2.9 123.3 + 2.2 111.4 − 2.0
 
2008          Nov 92.3 − 11.8 95.5 + 3.7 88.5 + 10.5 104.7 + 3.2 80.9 − 7.8 88.9 − 24.5 105.4 − 6.1 80.8 − 24.8
         Dec 93.6 − 7.8 99.7 − 5.2 79.5 − 12.3 105.4 − 7.0 126.5 + 14.1 87.2 − 10.7 108.0 − 2.5 85.1 − 12.0
2009          Jan 75.0 − 19.2 72.7 − 26.7 57.6 − 20.8 84.9 − 31.5 66.1 − 13.0 77.4 − 10.1 83.4 − 28.3 74.0 − 4.6
         Feb 76.9 − 13.4 74.8 − 20.6 70.0 − 13.4 74.4 − 28.5 87.3 − 4.4 79.0 − 4.9 78.0 − 22.0 78.7 − 2.7
         Mar 113.4 − 11.6 109.2 − 15.3 95.7 − 9.7 114.6 − 15.0 121.7 − 24.2 117.8 − 7.8 111.6 − 13.0 122.8 − 10.9
         Apr 113.6 − 5.7 101.7 − 21.4 105.3 + 13.6 98.2 − 37.7 105.5 − 11.0 125.9 + 13.2 101.8 − 25.6 128.9 + 11.3
         May 115.8 − 2.6 106.4 − 5.9 96.3 − 0.8 105.6 − 14.7 132.2 + 16.2 125.5 + 0.5 111.0 − 9.9 128.7 + 3.9
         June 130.0 − 4.3 110.4 − 19.8 108.3 − 2.3 104.7 − 34.2 134.5 + 6.3 150.3 + 12.3 119.2 − 18.0 150.0 + 9.7
         July 123.8 − 7.1 110.1 − 8.4 107.9 + 3.8 106.7 − 17.1 126.3 − 1.6 138.2 − 5.9 112.3 − 13.9 142.2 − 4.2
         Aug 118.2 + 2.0 110.1 − 2.6 97.1 + 3.9 115.7 − 8.0 120.9 + 5.7 126.7 + 6.6 117.0 − 6.5 128.5 + 10.7
         Sep 123.2 − 6.1 115.9 − 14.9 109.9 − 3.2 111.0 − 26.2 145.9 + 4.4 130.8 + 3.7 116.1 − 17.1 136.0 + 4.7
         Oct 109.2 − 0.1 104.2 − 5.3 103.1 + 9.7 101.9 − 12.6 114.4 − 7.7 114.5 + 5.3 109.6 − 9.4 111.4 + 6.9
         Nov 90.6 − 1.8 93.2 − 2.4 89.7 + 1.4 92.8 − 11.4 102.3 + 26.5 88.0 − 1.0 96.7 − 8.3 84.9 + 5.1
Source of the unadjusted figures: Federal Statistical Office. — *Values exclu- X-12-ARIMA method, version 0.2.8. — 1Excluding housing construction
sive of value-added tax; for explanatory notes, see Statistical Supplement orders. 
"Seasonally adjusted business statistics", Tables II.21. — oUsing the Census
 
 
5. Retail trade turnover, sales of motor vehicles *
 
 
Adjusted for calendar variations  o 
Retail trade
of which:  by enterprises’ main product range  1 
Construction Retail sale of
and flooring pharmaceutical Wholesale
Textiles, Information materials and medical and retail trade
clothing and household goods, cosmetic and repair of
Food, beverages, foodwear and communications appliances and toilet motor vehicles
Total tobacco  2 leather goods equipment furniture articles and motorcycles
At current At prices in
prices year 2005 At current prices
Annual Annual Annual Annual Annual Annual Annual Annual
percent- percent- percent- percent- percent- percent- percent- percent-
age age age age age age age age
change change change change change change change change
Period % % % % % % % % 2005 = 100 2005 = 100 2005 = 100 2005 = 100 2005 = 100 2005 = 100 2005 = 100 2005 = 100
2005 99.9 + 1.8 99.9 + 1.2 100.0 + 3.0 100.0 + 2.0 100.0 + 7.8 99.9 − 1.9 99.9 + 4.6 99.5 + 1.6
2006 3 101.0 + 1.1 100.3 + 0.4 100.1 + 0.1 102.4 + 2.4 102.3 + 2.3 103.4 + 3.5 102.1 + 2.2 106.8 + 7.3
2007 3 99.4 − 1.6 99.0 − 1.3 99.5 − 0.6 103.6 + 1.2 110.1 + 7.6 98.5 − 4.7 104.2 + 2.1 100.6 − 5.8
2008 101.5 + 2.1 98.9 − 0.1 100.7 + 1.2 104.7 + 1.1 116.3 + 5.6 99.7 + 1.2 107.1 + 2.8 95.8 − 4.8
2009 4 99.6 − 1.9 97.6 − 1.3 99.4 − 1.3 104.5 − 0.2 112.5 − 3.3 100.9 + 1.2 110.3 + 3.0 97.4 + 1.7
 
2008          Dec 120.2 + 3.1 119.1 + 3.3 116.6 + 3.8 129.2 + 1.8 181.2 + 1.5 107.3 + 2.0 124.2 + 7.3 83.1 − 13.4
2009          Jan  4 91.8 − 1.9 90.6 − 1.5 91.3 − 2.1 87.5 − 1.7 119.4 − 0.3 85.3 − 2.6 105.8 + 1.4 76.4 − 11.8
         Feb 87.7 − 3.0 85.9 − 2.8 89.6 − 2.3 78.9 − 4.4 98.2 − 0.8 85.2 − 3.6 100.6 + 0.9 95.8 + 4.5
         Mar 101.3 − 0.8 99.4 + 0.0 101.5 − 1.6 101.7 + 4.5 108.1 − 8.0 106.9 − 0.5 110.6 + 4.0 118.0 + 8.0
         Apr 101.9 + 1.1 99.0 + 1.1 102.6 + 0.7 113.8 + 7.0 91.0 − 12.9 108.3 + 5.2 110.5 + 3.6 110.5 + 5.6
         May 99.6 − 2.1 97.0 − 1.2 103.2 + 1.4 103.5 − 8.0 90.6 − 8.7 101.9 + 0.2 107.3 + 4.3 105.7 + 3.1
         June 95.0 − 2.4 92.5 − 1.7 97.1 − 1.1 95.9 + 0.5 98.4 − 7.0 97.0 + 1.4 106.6 + 2.6 106.2 + 4.9
         July 98.5 − 1.4 96.9 + 0.2 98.3 − 1.4 103.6 + 3.0 101.6 − 3.0 101.3 + 3.7 112.1 + 3.5 100.5 + 2.7
         Aug 95.9 − 3.7 94.0 − 2.6 99.7 − 0.1 93.6 − 5.4 101.2 − 4.2 97.7 + 1.0 106.8 + 3.9 90.4 + 2.6
         Sep 97.1 − 3.9 95.2 − 2.6 95.2 − 2.5 111.2 − 4.5 105.4 − 2.8 100.5 + 1.6 107.6 + 1.9 94.6 + 0.6
         Oct 104.1 − 1.3 101.9 − 0.5 99.5 − 3.2 127.8 + 7.5 119.2 − 0.3 108.3 + 3.5 112.6 + 2.6 98.4 + 0.4
         Nov 103.5 − 2.2 102.0 − 1.8 99.3 − 2.9 105.2 − 3.8 133.3 + 2.1 109.5 + 2.4 117.1 + 5.7 91.8 − 1.4
         Dec 118.7 − 1.2 116.9 − 1.8 115.6 − 0.9 130.9 + 1.3 183.1 + 1.0 109.3 + 1.9 126.0 + 1.4 80.6 − 3.0
Source of the unadjustded figures: Federal Statistical Office. — *Excluding in January 2006 and January 2007; statistical breaks in reporting population
value-added tax;  For explanatory notes, see Statistical Supplement "Sea- eliminated by chain-linking. — 4From January 2009 figures are provisional
sonally adjusted business statistics", Tables II.24. — oUsing the Census in some cases revised, and particularly uncertain in recent months owing to
X-12-ARIMA method, version 0.2.8. — 1In stores. — 2Including stalls and estimates for missing reports. 
markets. — 3Expansion of the reporting population to include new entities;
64* X Economic conditions in Germany

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
February 2010
 X Economic conditions  in Germany
 
6 Labour market * 
 
 
 
Persons in
Employment  1 Employees  1 employment  2 Persons Unemployment  7 
employed
Mining under Persons
and employ- under-
manu- ment pro- going  vo-
factur- Short- motion cational
ing Con- time schemes further
Annual change Annual sector  3 6,7 Annual Vacan- workers  5 struction  4 training  7 
percent- change, Unemploy- cies,  7 
Thou- Thou- Thou- age Thou- thou- ment rate thou-
Period sands in % sands sands change Thousands sands sands 7,8  in % sands
Germany  
  
2007 39,724 + 1.7 + 650 35,288 + 1.7 5,301 714 68 43 149 3,777 − 711 9.0 9 621
2008 40,277 + 1.4 + 553 35,845 + 1.6 10 . 706 102 40 171 3,268 − 509 7.8 569
2009 40,265 + 0.0 − 12 35,852 + 0.0 5,137 ... ... 11 1611 216 3,423 + 155 8.2 486
2009          Jan 39,924 + 0.6 + 233 5,229 671 574 36 190 3,489 − 171 8.3 485
         Feb 39,931 + 0.5 + 204 35,560 + 0.6 5,219 666 1,082 31 197 3,552 − 66 8.5 506
         Mar 39,994 + 0.3 + 125 5,196 694 1,259 25 207 3,586 + 78 8.6 507
         Apr 40,132 + 0.2 + 82 5,165 705 1,518 20 215 3,585 + 171 8.6 495
         May r 40,215 r + 0.0 r +1 7 r 35,769 r + 0.2 5,137 708 1,534 17 229 12 3,458 12 + 175 12 13  8.2 490
         June r 40,255 r − 0.1 r − 39 5,115 715 1,433 15 228 3,410 + 250 8.1 484
         July r 40,223 r − 0.2 r − 70 5,096 716 1,236 13 213 3,462 + 252 8.2 484
         Aug r 40,255 r − 0.2 r −9 3 r 35,904 r − 0.2 5,092 723 1,050 11 201 3,472 + 276 8.3 486
         Sep r 40,518 r − 0.3 r − 138 5,100 726 1,074 9 218 3,346 + 266 8.0 486
         Oct r 40,676 r − 0.4 r − 166 5,076 717 ... 7 231 3,229 + 232 7.7 479
         Nov r 40,638 r − 0.4 r − 158 36,173 − 0.4 5,061 714 ... 11 611 234 3,215 + 227 7.6 465
         Dec 14 40,416 14 − 0.3 14 − 139 5,035 ... ... 11 511 227 3,276 + 173 7.8 461
2010          Jan ... ... ... ... ... ... 11 411 209 3,617 + 129 8.6 457
Western Germany    o  
  
2007 . . . . . 4,684 529 52 9 103 2,486 − 521 7.5 9 489
2008 . . . . . 10 . 527 80 7 118 2,145 − 341 6.4 455
2009 . . . . . 4,519 . ... 11 411 150 2,320 + 176 6.9 375
2009          Jan . . . . . 4,604 . 462 6 132 2,306 − 76 6.9 382
         Feb . . . . . 4,594 . 910 6 138 2,348 + 1 7.0 394
         Mar . . . . . 4,571 . 1,064 5 145 2,379 + 108 7.1 390
         Apr . . . . . 4,543 . 1,318 5 151 2,400 + 184 7.2 378
         May . . . . . 4,519 . 1,332 4 162 12 2,334 12 + 194 12 13  6.9 371
         June . . . . . 4,499 . 1,244 4 161 2,319 + 245 6.9 370
         July . . . . . 4,483 . 1,070 4 151 2,368 + 248 7.0 372
         Aug . . . . . 4,480 . 893 3 141 2,389 + 281 7.1 374
         Sep . . . . . 4,486 . 926 3 151 2,307 + 265 6.9 376
         Oct . . . . . 4,463 . ... 2 157 2,229 + 239 6.6 372
         Nov . . . . . 4,449 . ... 11 211 158 2,216 + 230 6.6 362
         Dec . . . . . 4,427 . ... 11 211 152 2,248 + 189 6.7 362
2010          Jan . . . . . ... . ... 11 111 139 2,470 + 163 7.4 353
Eastern Germany    +  
  
2007 . . . . . 617 185 16 33 46 1,291 − 190 15.1 9 133
2008 . . . . . 10 . 179 21 33 53 1,123 − 167 13.1 113
2009 . . . . . 618 . ... 11 1311 66 1,103 − 20 13.0 110
2009          Jan . . . . . 625 . 105 30 59 1,182 − 94 13.9 103
         Feb . . . . . 626 . 158 25 59 1,204 − 66 14.1 112
         Mar . . . . . 624 . 177 20 61 1,207 − 29 14.2 116
         Apr . . . . . 622 . 184 16 64 1,185 − 13 13.9 117
         May . . . . . 618 . 186 13 67 12 1,124 12 −1 9 12 13  13.3 119
         June . . . . . 616 . 175 11 66 1,091 + 5 12.9 113
         July . . . . . 613 . 155 9 61 1,094 + 4 12.9 112
         Aug . . . . . 612 . 148 8 60 1,082 − 5 12.8 112
         Sep . . . . . 614 . 140 7 68 1,040 + 1 12.3 109
         Oct . . . . . 613 . ... 11 511 73 1,000 − 7 11.8 107
         Nov . . . . . 611 . ... 11 411 76 1,000 − 3 11.8 103
         Dec . . . . . 608 . ... 11 311 75 1,027 − 16 12.1 99
2010          Jan . . . . . ... . ... 2 70 1,148 − 34 13.5 104
Sources: Federal Statistical Office; Federal Employment Agency. — *Annual volved in structural adjustment measures (SAM). — 7Mid-month level. —
and quarterly figures: averages; annual figures: calculated by the Bundes- 8Relative to the total civilian labour force. — 9From January 2007, vacan-
bank; deviations from the official figures are due to rounding. — oExclud- cies for seasonal workers are included only if they are based on non-specific
ing West Berlin. — +Including West Berlin. — 1Workplace concept; aver- employer requirements. — 10From January 2008, based on Nace Rev.2 de-
ages. — 2Including active proprietors; monthly figures: end of month. — finitions, previously based on Nace Rev.1. — 11Annualised data from the
3Enterprises with at least 50 employees. — 4The figures refer to enter- Federal Employment Agency based on information received so far. —
prises from Nace Rev.2 items 41.2, 42, 43.1 and 43.9. — 5Number within a 12From May 2009, unemployed excluding persons formally on the books of
given month; from January 2009, results for Germany contain data from private employment agencies. — 13From May 2009, calculated on the basis
operational reports, which cannot be assigned to a region. — 6Employees in- of new labour force figures. — 14Initial preliminary estimate by the Federal
volved in job creation schemes; up to December 2008 including employees in- Statistical Office. 
65* X Economic conditions in Germany

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
E U R O S Y S T E M
Monthly Report
February 2010
 X Economic conditions  in Germany
 
7 Prices
 
 
 
Consumer price index HWWI
Indices of Index of World Market
of which foreign trade prices Prices  of Raw Materials  5 
Other Index of
durable producer
and non- prices of
durable industrial Index of
consumer Services Con- products producer
goods excluding prices of sold on the struction
excluding house House price domestic Other raw agricultural
Total Food Energy  1 rents  3 rents  3 index  2 market  4 Exports Imports Energy  6 products  4 materials  7 energy  1,2 
Period 2005 = 100 2000 = 100 2005 = 100 2000 = 100
Index level  
  
2005 8 100.0 100.0 100.0 100.0 100.0 100.0 100.0 8 100.0 98.8 100.0 100.0 139.5 105.4
2006 9 101.6 101.9 100.3 108.5 101.0 101.1 102.4 9 105.4 107.1 101.8 104.4 163.9 131.5
2007 10 11  103.9 105.9 101.7 112.8 103.9 102.2 109.3 106.8 118.2 103.0 105.1 166.6 143.7
2008 106.6 112.7 102.5 123.6 105.8 103.5 113.0 112.7 121.2 104.8 109.9 217.1 150.3
2009 107.0 111.2 103.9 116.9 107.4 104.6 114.4 108.0 p 102.6 102.5 100.5 144.5 124.3
 
2008          Mar 106.3 112.6 102.5 121.5 105.7 103.2 110.2 131.5 104.3 108.9 216.5 160.5
         Apr 106.1 113.0 102.6 122.6 104.2 103.3 111.2 126.8 104.5 109.8 225.1 157.7
         May 106.7 113.0 102.4 126.9 105.0 103.4 112.5 112.2 125.5 105.1 112.1 258.8 159.6
         June 107.0 113.1 102.3 129.3 105.3 103.5 113.3 126.4 105.5 113.6 278.3 162.8
         July 107.6 113.4 101.8 131.0 107.1 103.6 115.5 127.0 106.0 114.3 279.8 160.6
         Aug 107.3 112.9 102.2 127.1 107.0 103.7 114.0 114.9 124.1 105.9 113.6 254.8 156.4
         Sep 107.2 112.6 102.9 127.9 105.9 103.8 115.2 119.8 105.8 112.7 232.7 150.8
         Oct 107.0 112.8 103.2 124.9 105.6 103.9 115.2 115.1 105.1 109.1 180.2 133.3
         Nov 106.5 112.0 103.1 119.9 105.6 104.0 114.0 113.3 110.7 104.3 106.0 142.7 126.9
         Dec 106.8 112.7 103.0 114.8 108.3 104.0 112.4 107.7 103.1 102.2 107.3 114.6
2009          Jan 106.3 113.3 102.7 117.4 106.0 104.1 111.1 105.7 102.9 101.5 112.8 114.9
         Feb 106.9 113.3 103.4 117.4 107.1 104.3 114.4 110.5 106.5 102.9 101.3 112.1 116.2
         Mar 106.8 112.8 103.7 116.0 106.7 104.4 109.7 104.4 102.5 100.7 118.8 113.8
         Apr 106.8 112.3 103.9 116.2 106.8 104.5 108.2 103.3 102.4 99.9 125.8 120.1
         May 106.7 111.7 103.7 116.8 106.7 104.5 114.2 108.2 102.9 102.3 99.9 139.6 123.2
         June 107.1 112.1 103.9 119.1 106.9 104.6 108.1 103.7 102.4 100.3 160.7 125.8
         July 107.1 110.7 103.3 116.0 108.8 104.7 106.5 103.3 102.2 99.4 150.1 123.9
         Aug 107.3 109.5 103.8 118.2 108.7 104.8 114.4 107.0 102.1 102.5 100.7 163.2 131.3
         Sep 106.9 109.2 104.4 116.4 107.3 104.8 106.5 100.6 102.4 99.8 152.0 126.4
         Oct 107.0 109.0 104.7 116.2 107.3 104.9 106.5 100.4 102.4 100.3 161.7 127.9
         Nov 106.9 109.5 104.2 116.9 106.9 105.0 114.4 106.6 103.4 102.5 100.7 168.6 130.6
         Dec 107.8 110.4 104.5 115.9 109.5 105.1 106.5 p 104.3 102.7 101.2 166.6 138.0
2010          Jan 107.1 111.7 103.7 118.5 106.9 105.2 ... ... ... ... 178.4 143.6
Annual percentage change  
  
2005 8 + 1.5 − 0.2 + 0.5 + 9.8 + 0.7 + 0.9 + 1.1 8 + 4.4 − 0.9 + 0.9 + 3.4 + 37.6 + 9.4
2006 9 + 1.6 + 1.9 + 0.3 + 8.5 + 1.0 + 1.1 + 2.4 9 + 5.4 + 8.4 + 1.8 + 4.4 + 17.5 + 24.8
2007 10 11  + 2.3 + 3.9 + 1.4 + 4.0 + 2.9 + 1.1 + 6.7 + 1.3 + 10.4 + 1.2 + 0.7 + 1.6 + 9.3
2008 + 2.6 + 6.4 + 0.8 + 9.6 + 1.8 + 1.3 + 3.4 + 5.5 + 2.5 + 1.7 + 4.6 + 30.3 + 4.6
2009 + 0.4 − 1.3 + 1.4 − 5.4 + 1.5 + 1.1 + 1.2 − 4.2 p − 15.3 − 2.2 − 8.6 − 33.4 − 17.3
 
2008          Mar + 3.1 + 8.6 + 0.8 + 9.8 + 2.8 + 1.4 + 3.9 + 16.7 + 1.6 + 4.6 + 46.6 + 10.3
         Apr + 2.4 + 7.3 + 0.9 + 9.6 + 0.7 + 1.4 + 4.7 + 13.3 + 1.5 + 4.8 + 45.3 + 5.8
         May + 3.0 + 7.9 + 0.8 + 12.8 + 1.4 + 1.4 + 3.1 + 5.3 + 11.5 + 1.9 + 6.9 + 67.3 + 6.0
         June + 3.3 + 7.6 + 0.9 + 14.6 + 1.7 + 1.3 + 6.2 + 11.7 + 2.2 + 7.9 + 69.4 + 9.6
         July + 3.3 + 8.0 + 0.6 + 15.1 + 1.8 + 1.3 + 8.2 + 7.8 + 2.6 + 8.3 + 62.0 + 9.8
         Aug + 3.1 + 7.4 + 1.1 + 13.0 + 1.7 + 1.2 + 4.0 + 7.7 + 1.9 + 2.6 + 8.3 + 52.8 + 10.5
         Sep + 2.9 + 6.4 + 1.1 + 12.2 + 1.5 + 1.3 + 7.9 − 5.4 + 2.5 + 7.0 + 31.2 + 5.5
         Oct + 2.4 + 4.3 + 1.0 + 9.8 + 1.5 + 1.3 + 7.3 − 10.9 + 1.8 + 2.8 − 3.4 − 7.4
         Nov + 1.4 + 2.1 + 0.7 + 1.4 + 1.7 + 1.3 + 3.4 + 4.7 − 15.0 + 1.1 − 0.7 − 29.4 − 7.7
         Dec + 1.1 + 2.1 + 0.8 − 0.9 + 1.8 + 1.2 + 4.0 − 17.7 + 0.0 − 4.1 − 46.2 − 17.1
2009          Jan + 0.9 + 1.1 + 0.8 − 0.8 + 1.6 + 1.1 + 2.0 − 19.3 − 0.9 − 5.6 − 43.9 − 25.0
         Feb + 1.0 + 1.2 + 1.1 − 1.2 + 1.7 + 1.2 + 2.6 + 0.9 − 19.1 − 1.2 − 6.7 − 46.8 − 28.8
         Mar + 0.5 + 0.2 + 1.2 − 4.5 + 0.9 + 1.2 − 0.5 − 20.6 − 1.7 − 7.5 − 45.1 − 29.1
         Apr + 0.7 − 0.6 + 1.3 − 5.2 + 2.5 + 1.2 − 2.7 − 18.5 − 2.0 − 9.0 − 44.1 − 23.8
         May + 0.0 − 1.2 + 1.3 − 8.0 + 1.6 + 1.1 + 1.5 − 3.6 − 18.0 − 2.7 − 10.9 − 46.1 − 22.8
         June + 0.1 − 0.9 + 1.6 − 7.9 + 1.5 + 1.1 − 4.6 − 18.0 − 2.9 − 11.7 − 42.3 − 22.7
         July − 0.5 − 2.4 + 1.5 − 11.5 + 1.6 + 1.1 − 7.8 − 18.7 − 3.6 − 13.0 − 46.4 − 22.9
         Aug + 0.0 − 3.0 + 1.6 − 7.0 + 1.6 + 1.1 + 0.4 − 6.9 − 17.7 − 3.2 − 11.4 − 35.9 − 16.0
         Sep − 0.3 − 3.0 + 1.5 − 9.0 + 1.3 + 1.0 − 7.6 − 16.0 − 3.2 − 11.4 − 34.7 − 16.2
         Oct + 0.0 − 3.4 + 1.5 − 7.0 + 1.6 + 1.0 − 7.6 − 12.8 − 2.6 − 8.1 − 10.3 − 4.1
         Nov + 0.4 − 2.2 + 1.1 − 2.5 + 1.2 + 1.0 + 0.4 − 5.9 − 6.6 − 1.7 − 5.0 + 18.1 + 2.9
         Dec + 0.9 − 2.0 + 1.5 + 1.0 + 1.1 + 1.1 − 5.2 p − 3.2 − 0.4 − 1.0 + 55.3 + 20.4
2010          Jan + 0.8 − 1.4 + 1.0 + 0.9 + 0.8 + 1.1 ... ... ... ... + 58.2 + 25.0
Source: Federal Statistical Office; HWWI Index of World Market Prices. — September 2005, increase in tobacco tax. — 9From October 2006, increase
1Electricity, gas and other fuels. — 2Bundesbank calculation based on data in the prices of tobacco products. — 10From January 2007, increase in the
provided by the Federal Statistical Office. — 3Net rents. — 4Excluding standard rate of VAT and in insurance tax from 16% to 19%. —
value-added tax. — 5For the euro area, in euro. — 6Coal and crude oil. — 11 Introduction of university tuition fees in some federal states. 
7Food, beverages and tobacco as well as industrial raw materials. — 8From
66* X Economic conditions in Germany

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
February 2010
X Economic conditions in Germany
  
8 Households’ income *
  
  
  
Gross wages and Net wages and Monetary social Saving
salaries  1 salaries  2 Mass income  4 Saving  6 ratio  7 benefits received  3 Disposable income  5 
Annual Annual Annual Annual Annual Annual
percent- percent- percent- percent- percent- percent-
age age age age age age
Period change change change change change change % € billion € billion € billion € billion € billion € billion
2001 902.0 2.1 590.0 3.6 353.8 4.1 943.9 3.8 1,389.5 3.9 130.9 6.2 9.4
2002 908.2 0.7 591.9 0.3 367.7 3.9 959.6 1.7 1,402.8 1.0 139.3 6.4 9.9
2003 908.3 0.0 589.0 − 0.5 378.3 2.9 967.2 0.8 1,431.8 2.1 147.2 5.6 10.3
2004 914.6 0.7 603.3 2.4 378.2 − 0.0 981.5 1.5 1,454.5 1.6 151.4 2.9 10.4
2005 912.1 − 0.3 602.4 − 0.2 378.6 0.1 981.0 − 0.1 1,481.0 1.8 155.6 2.7 10.5
2006 926.2 1.6 604.7 0.4 378.1 − 0.1 982.8 0.2 1,516.2 2.4 160.0 2.8 10.5
2007 957.8 3.4 623.0 3.0 372.8 − 1.4 995.9 1.3 1,541.1 1.6 165.7 3.6 10.8
2008 995.8 4.0 642.7 3.2 374.4 0.4 1,017.1 2.1 1,588.2 3.1 178.5 7.7 11.2
2008          Q2 240.8 4.0 152.1 3.1 93.2 0.2 245.3 2.0 394.1 3.9 42.1 9.1 10.7
         Q3 248.3 4.4 164.7 3.9 93.3 0.2 258.0 2.5 395.6 3.5 37.5 8.5 9.5
         Q4 275.6 3.5 176.3 2.4 93.2 0.8 269.5 1.8 402.2 1.3 40.5 6.9 10.1
2009          Q1 232.6 0.7 148.6 − 0.7 98.7 4.3 247.3 1.2 398.3 0.5 59.8 2.3 15.0
         Q2 239.6 − 0.5 150.5 − 1.0 101.2 8.5 251.7 2.6 396.7 0.7 42.0 − 0.0 10.6
         Q3 246.4 − 0.8 163.4 − 0.8 102.1 9.4 265.5 2.9 396.4 0.2 38.4 2.2 9.7
Source: Federal Statistical Office; figures computed in November 2009. — plus monetary social benefits received. — 5Mass income plus operating
*Households including non-profit institutions serving households. — 1Resi- surplus, mixed income, property income (net), other current transfers
dence concept. — 2After deducting the wage tax payable on gross wages received, income of non-profit institutions serving households, less taxes (ex-
and salaries and employees’ contributions to the social security funds. — cluding wage tax and consumption-related taxes) and other current trans-
3Social security benefits in cash from the social security funds, central, state fers paid. Including the increase in claims on company pension funds. —6In-
and local government and foreign countries, pension payments (net), cluding the increase in claims on company pension funds. — 7Saving as a
private funded social benefits, less social contributions on social benefits, percentage of disposable income. 
consumption-related taxes and public charges. — 4Net wages and salaries
  
  
  
9 Pay rates (overall economy)
  
  
  
Index of negotiated wages 1 
on a monthly basis
Memo item:
Total excluding Wages and salaries
on an hourly basis Total one-off payments Basic pay rates  2 per employee  3 
Annual Annual Annual Annual Annual
Period percentage percentage percentage percentage percentage
2000 = 100 change 2000 = 100 change 2000 = 100 change 2000 = 100 change 2000 = 100 change
2002 104.6 2.6 104.5 2.6 104.5 2.2 104.4 2.2 103.2 1.3
2003 106.7 2.0 106.6 2.0 106.7 2.1 106.9 2.4 104.5 1.3
2004 107.9 1.1 108.0 1.3 108.1 1.3 108.6 1.6 105.1 0.6
2005 108.9 0.9 109.1 1.1 109.1 0.9 109.8 1.0 105.4 0.3
2006 109.9 1.0 110.5 1.2 110.0 0.8 110.7 0.9 106.4 0.9
2007 111.2 1.2 111.9 1.3 111.6 1.5 112.3 1.5 108.1 1.6
2008 114.3 2.8 115.1 2.8 114.9 3.0 115.9 3.2 110.5 2.3
2009 116.9 2.3 117.8 2.3 117.8 2.5 119.0 2.7 . .
2008          Q3 117.1 3.0 117.9 3.0 117.4 2.9 116.4 3.2 110.0 2.7
         Q4 129.0 3.6 129.9 3.7 129.2 2.9 116.7 3.1 120.7 2.1
2009          Q1 108.2 3.1 109.0 3.1 108.9 2.7 117.9 2.8 103.9 0.0
         Q2 109.0 2.7 109.8 2.8 110.0 2.7 118.9 2.8 106.5 − 0.7
         Q3 119.6 2.1 120.4 2.1 120.4 2.6 119.4 2.6 109.5 − 0.4
         Q4 130.9 1.5 131.9 1.5 132.1 2.2 119.8 2.6 . .
2009          June 109.1 2.7 109.9 2.7 110.0 2.6 119.1 2.6 . .
         July 139.3 2.2 140.3 2.2 140.7 2.6 119.3 2.5 . .
         Aug 109.1 0.9 109.9 0.9 110.2 2.5 119.4 2.6 . .
         Sep 110.3 3.2 111.1 3.2 110.4 2.6 119.6 2.6 . .
         Oct 109.5 2.7 110.3 2.7 110.5 2.6 119.7 2.7 . .
         Nov 171.2 2.1 172.5 2.1 172.8 1.9 119.8 2.6 . .
         Dec 112.0 − 0.6 112.8 − 0.6 112.9 2.2 119.9 2.6 . .
1Current data are normally revised on account of additional reports. — (13 thmonthly salary payment) and retirement provisions). — 3Source:
2Excluding one-off payments and covenants (capital formation benefits, Federal Statistical Office; figures computed in November 2009. 
special payments, such as annual bonuses, holiday pay, Christmas bonuses
67*X Economic conditions in Germany

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
E U R O S Y S T E M
Monthly Report
February 2010
XI External sector
 
1 Major items of the balance of payments of the euro area *
 
 
€ million
2009
Item 2006 2007 2008 Q1 Q2 Q3 Sep Oct Nov
Current account − 10,206 + 10,650 − 143,270 − 37,999 − 21,665 − 2,683 − 5,863 − 3,919 + 101A
1 Goods
Exports (fob) 1,396,356 1,516,507 1,581,023 307,821 312,066 322,905 111,384 117,582 115,524
Imports (fob) 1,385,655 1,470,519 1,592,387 315,559 298,956 309,653 109,948 111,383 108,761
Balance + 10,697 + 45,986 − 11,365 − 7,737 + 13,110 + 13,251 + 1,435 + 6,199 + 6,763
2 Services
Receipts 441,215 491,762 509,886 108,759 113,247 123,965 40,621 40,198 36,480
Expenditure 399,622 443,460 469,248 108,302 105,977 111,199 36,845 36,215 34,643
Balance + 41,592 + 48,304 + 40,637 + 458 + 7,270 + 12,767 + 3,776 + 3,983 + 1,837
3 Income + 17,271 + 2,775 − 74,431 − 2,329 − 25,121 − 5,780 − 3,399 + 535 − 1,281
4 Current transfers
Transfers from non-residents 91,590 91,291 88,832 25,717 21,105 14,632 5,093 3,986 7,685
Transfers to non-residents 171,361 177,705 186,942 54,106 38,027 37,553 12,769 18,621 14,902
Balance − 79,771 − 86,415 − 98,112 − 28,391 − 16,923 − 22,922 − 7,676 − 14,635 − 7,217
Capital account + 9,137 + 5,037 + 10,001 + 1,384 + 2,210 + 1,497 − 6 + 293 + 1,180B
Financial account (net capital exports: − − 9,107 − 1,239 + 163,925 + 55,760 + 13,923 + 13,987 + 32,977 + 4,450 − 638C)
1 Direct investment − 160,216 − 72,894 − 189,046 − 58,822 − 4,293 − 24,251 − 29,899 − 1,956 − 345
By resident units abroad − 417,577 − 481,212 − 326,522 − 100,117 − 97,480 − 59,239 − 30,175 − 27,943 − 9,670
By non-resident units in the euro area + 257,364 + 408,320 + 137,472 + 41,295 + 93,187 + 34,989 + 277 + 25,987 + 9,326
2 Portfolio investment + 188,706 + 151,259 + 350,520 + 129,870 + 82,779 + 83,362 + 79,839 + 17,087 − 14,908
By resident units abroad − 519,829 − 436,689 + 8,981 + 71,182 − 62,248 − 41,986 + 24,787 − 15,704 − 11,024
Equity − 156,090 − 64,203 + 101,796 + 38,147 − 9,291 − 36,721 − 8,140 − 7,998 − 9,079
Bonds and notes − 300,513 − 291,518 − 95,350 + 56,070 − 32,898 − 27,448 + 22,684 − 4,224 − 19,874
Money market instruments − 63,224 − 80,967 + 2,534 − 23,035 − 20,061 + 22,183 + 10,243 − 3,482 + 17,929
By non-resident units in the euro area + 708,533 + 587,950 + 341,541 + 58,688 + 145,026 + 125,349 + 55,052 + 32,791 − 3,885
Equity + 246,612 + 157,934 − 124,839 − 51,284 + 47,833 + 78,649 − 18,131 − 26,128 − 427
Bonds and notes + 481,318 + 367,109 + 250,034 + 90,389 + 44,641 − 12,875 + 44,544 + 36,973 + 9,694
Money market instruments − 19,397 + 62,907 + 216,347 + 19,581 + 52,551 + 59,575 + 28,639 + 21,946 − 13,151
3 Financial derivatives − 610 − 64,577 − 65,723 − 5,296 + 18,849 − 4,157 − 1,365 + 920 − 676
4 Other investment − 35,697 − 9,943 + 72,106 − 15,667 − 80,983 − 41,302 − 18,868 − 10,973 + 14,944
Eurosystem + 29,166 + 69,367 + 290,013 − 73,999 − 96,302 − 36,840 − 18,433 − 10,182 − 1,510
General government + 8,888 + 6,647 + 16,113 − 10,174 + 1,434 + 6,455 + 3,101 + 6,205 − 2,767
MFIs (excluding the Eurosystem) − 38,425 + 78,482 − 130,817 + 123,705 + 8,892 + 4,403 + 17,783 + 921 − 403
Long-term − 55,584 − 112,467 − 226,748 − 19,558 − 32,450 + 5,593 + 14,957 + 12,151 − 11,952
Short-term + 17,156 + 190,945 + 95,933 + 143,262 + 41,341 − 1,192 + 2,826 − 11,230 + 11,549
Other sectors − 35,327 − 164,438 − 103,210 − 55,199 + 4,993 − 15,320 − 21,320 − 7,918 + 19,623
5 Reserve assets (Increase: −) − 1,290 − 5,087 − 3,934 + 5,676 − 2,430 + 335 + 3,270 − 629 + 347
Errors and omissions + 10,179 − 14,448 − 30,659 − 19,145 + 5,533 − 12,802 − 27,108 − 825 − 644D
* Source: European Central Bank.  
  
68*XI External sector

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
February 2010
XI External sector
 
2 Major items of the balance of payments of the Federal Republic of Germany
(balances)
 
 
Current account Financial account Capital trans-
fers and
of which acquisition/
disposal of Change in
Supple- non- reserve assets
Balance mentary produced at trans- Errors
on current Foreign trade Current action and non-financial
Period account trade  1 items  2 Services  3 Income transfers assets Total  4 value  5 Omissions
DM million
1996 − 21,086 + 98,538 − 4,941 − 64,743 + 1,052 − 50,991 − 3,283 + 24,290 + 1,882 + 79
1997 − 17,336 + 116,467 − 7,875 − 68,692 − 4,740 − 52,496 + 52 + 6,671 + 6,640 + 10,613
1998 − 28,696 + 126,970 − 8,917 − 75,053 − 18,635 − 53,061 + 1,289 + 25,683 − 7,128 + 1,724
1999 − 49,241 + 127,542 − 15,947 − 90,036 − 22,325 − 48,475 − 301 − 20,332 + 24,517 + 69,874
2000 − 68,913 + 115,645 − 17,742 − 95,848 − 16,302 − 54,666 + 13,345 + 66,863 + 11,429 − 11,294
2001 + 830 + 186,771 − 14,512 − 97,521 − 21,382 − 52,526 − 756 − 23,068 + 11,797 + 22,994
€ million
1999 − 25,177 + 65,211 − 8,153 − 46,035 − 11,415 − 24,785 − 154 − 10,396 + 12,535 + 35,726
2000 − 35,235 + 59,128 − 9,071 − 49,006 − 8,335 − 27,950 + 6,823 + 34,187 + 5,844 − 5,775
2001 + 424 + 95,495 − 7,420 − 49,862 − 10,932 − 26,856 − 387 − 11,794 + 6,032 + 11,757
2002 + 42,973 + 132,788 − 8,552 − 35,728 − 18,019 − 27,517 − 212 − 38,448 + 2,065 − 4,313
2003 + 40,931 + 129,921 − 11,142 − 34,497 − 15,067 − 28,283 + 311 − 61,758 + 445 + 20,515
2004 + 102,889 + 156,096 − 16,447 − 29,341 + 20,431 − 27,849 + 435 − 122,984 + 1,470 + 19,660
2005 + 114,650 + 158,179 − 14,036 − 25,677 + 24,896 − 28,712 − 1,369 − 129,635 + 2,182 + 16,354
2006 + 150,913 + 159,048 − 13,106 − 13,985 + 46,105 − 27,148 − 252 − 174,977 + 2,934 + 24,316
2007 + 191,267 + 195,348 − 9,818 − 13,312 + 50,643 − 31,594 + 134 − 237,280 − 953 + 45,879
2008 + 165,171 + 178,297 − 12,102 − 12,682 + 44,746 − 33,088 − 90 − 205,398 − 2,008 + 40,316
2009  p + 119,394 + 136,141 − 11,342 − 15,755 + 43,318 − 32,968 + 339 − 130,866 + 3,200 + 11,132
2007          Q1 + 47,739 + 48,239 − 2,677 − 1,918 + 15,171 − 11,076 + 145 − 49,877 + 100 + 1,993
         Q2 + 42,110 + 48,183 − 2,276 − 1,739 + 2,957 − 5,015 + 364 − 82,845 − 1,359 + 40,371
         Q3 + 43,409 + 50,181 − 2,668 − 9,499 + 14,524 − 9,128 + 306 − 26,896 − 347 − 16,819
         Q4 + 58,009 + 48,745 − 2,198 − 156 + 17,992 − 6,374 − 681 − 77,662 + 653 + 20,335
2008          Q1 + 49,475 + 50,934 − 3,274 − 877 + 14,848 − 12,156 + 518 − 60,618 − 1,165 + 10,625
         Q2 + 42,388 + 53,167 − 2,739 − 3,656 + 762 − 5,146 + 324 − 79,466 − 889 + 36,755
         Q3 + 35,074 + 40,225 − 2,670 − 7,778 + 14,324 − 9,027 − 289 − 13,065 + 1,630 − 21,719
         Q4 + 38,235 + 33,972 − 3,419 − 370 + 14,812 − 6,759 − 643 − 52,248 − 1,584 + 14,656
2009          Q1 + 20,805 + 27,506 − 3,168 − 3,752 + 13,412 − 13,193 + 34 + 2,954 + 321 − 23,793
         Q2 + 23,846 + 31,686 − 2,718 − 3,770 + 1,963 − 3,315 + 305 − 48,524 + 41 + 24,373
         Q3 + 25,286 + 32,817 − 2,884 − 9,594 + 13,598 − 8,650 − 151 − 13,015 + 2,269 − 12,120
         Q4  p + 49,458 + 44,132 − 2,572 + 1,362 + 14,346 − 7,810 + 151 − 72,281 + 569 + 22,672
2007          July + 15,120 + 17,780 − 951 − 3,119 + 4,412 − 3,003 + 373 − 2,283 + 121 − 13,210
         Aug + 10,338 + 14,183 − 813 − 4,681 + 4,669 − 3,020 − 54 − 1,911 − 21 − 8,373
         Sep + 17,951 + 18,218 − 905 − 1,699 + 5,442 − 3,105 − 14 − 22,702 − 447 + 4,764
         Oct + 17,766 + 18,851 − 814 − 2,283 + 5,511 − 3,499 − 13 − 31,405 + 309 + 13,652
         Nov + 21,035 + 19,423 − 809 + 184 + 5,828 − 3,591 − 224 − 26,429 + 339 + 5,618
         Dec + 19,207 + 10,472 − 574 + 1,943 + 6,652 + 715 − 444 − 19,828 + 5 + 1,064
2008          Jan + 15,391 + 17,063 − 972 − 899 + 4,048 − 3,848 + 447 − 2,085 − 311 − 13,753
         Feb + 16,535 + 17,103 − 1,395 + 487 + 5,412 − 5,072 + 217 − 26,980 − 349 + 10,228
         Mar + 17,549 + 16,768 − 906 − 465 + 5,388 − 3,235 − 146 − 31,553 − 504 + 14,150
         Apr + 15,260 + 19,035 − 869 − 327 − 631 − 1,947 − 64 − 16,002 − 1,089 + 806
         May + 7,943 + 14,371 − 1,072 − 2,259 − 2,777 − 321 + 407 − 36,999 + 913 + 28,648
         June + 19,185 + 19,761 − 798 − 1,070 + 4,170 − 2,878 − 19 − 26,466 − 713 + 7,300
         July + 11,436 + 14,139 − 908 − 3,340 + 4,500 − 2,955 − 123 + 3,118 + 1,225 − 14,431
         Aug + 8,169 + 10,813 − 1,043 − 2,927 + 4,584 − 3,258 − 47 − 3,021 − 82 − 5,101
         Sep + 15,469 + 15,273 − 719 − 1,512 + 5,241 − 2,814 − 120 − 13,162 + 487 − 2,187
         Oct + 14,948 + 16,666 − 972 − 2,146 + 5,208 − 3,808 − 199 − 16,613 − 3,373 + 1,865
         Nov + 9,428 + 9,967 − 1,706 − 53 + 4,993 − 3,772 − 84 − 5,037 − 269 − 4,307
         Dec + 13,859 + 7,339 − 741 + 1,829 + 4,611 + 821 − 360 − 30,598 + 2,058 + 17,099
2009          Jan + 2,403 + 7,083 − 1,145 − 2,718 + 3,470 − 4,287 − 48 + 19,505 + 2,245 − 21,860
         Feb + 7,127 + 8,873 − 1,101 − 309 + 4,934 − 5,269 − 83 + 2,594 − 271 − 9,637
         Mar + 11,275 + 11,550 − 921 − 725 + 5,008 − 3,637 + 164 − 19,145 − 1,652 + 7,705
         Apr + 5,700 + 9,657 − 691 − 695 − 290 − 2,281 + 317 − 14,761 − 590 + 8,744
         May + 4,394 + 9,688 − 1,224 − 682 − 2,416 − 973 + 99 − 7,901 + 342 + 3,408
         June + 13,752 + 12,341 − 803 − 2,394 + 4,669 − 61 − 112 − 25,861 + 288 + 12,221
         July + 11,616 + 14,309 − 1,245 − 3,246 + 4,474 − 2,676 − 171 − 1,137 − 92 − 10,307
         Aug + 4,372 + 8,069 − 849 − 4,299 + 4,506 − 3,055 − 7 − 4,809 + 743 + 443
         Sep + 9,297 + 10,439 − 791 − 2,049 + 4,617 − 2,918 + 27 − 7,069 + 1,618 − 2,256
         Oct + 11,061 + 13,449 − 821 − 1,333 + 4,982 − 5,216 − 234 − 13,914 − 651 + 3,087
         Nov + 17,842 + 17,192 − 930 + 496 + 4,955 − 3,870 + 93 − 22,135 + 1,522 + 4,200
         Dec  p + 20,555 + 13,492 − 821 + 2,199 + 4,409 + 1,276 + 292 − 36,232 − 302 + 15,385
1Special trade according to the official foreign trade statistics: imports cif, the account of residents and deduction of goods returned. — 3Excluding
exports fob. From January 2007 onwards, excluding supplies of goods the expenditure on freight and insurance included in the cif import
for/after repair/maintenance, which, up to December 2006, were deducted figure. — 4Financial account balance including change in reserve assets.
via supplementary trade items. — 2Inter alia warehouse transactions for Capital exports: − . — 5 Increase: − . 
69*XI External sector

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
E U R O S Y S T E M
Monthly Report
February 2010
XI External sector
 
3 Foreign trade (special trade) of the Federal Republic of Germany,
by country and group of countries *
 
 € million
 2009
Country / group of countries  2006  2007  2008 Jan / Nov Aug Sep Oct Nov Dec  p 
All countries  1 Exports 893,042 965,236 984,140 734,250 59,253 69,896 74,132 73,355 68,993
Imports 733,994 769,887 805,842 611,601 51,184 59,457 60,684 56,163 55,501
Balance + 159,048 + 195,348 + 178,297 + 122,649 + 8,069 + 10,439 + 13,449 + 17,192 + 13,492
I Exports 657,325 726,518 733,092 543,954 43,792 52,890 54,095 52,420 ...European countries
Imports 512,568 541,650 567,062 436,262 36,117 41,435 43,316 38,831 ...
Balance + 144,757 + 184,867 + 166,031 + 107,692 + 7,675 + 11,455 + 10,780 + 13,589 ...
Exports 564,864 623,837 622,637 466,493 37,556 45,877 46,342 43,890 ... 1 EU member states (27)
Imports 423,731 449,691 460,887 360,256 29,882 33,823 36,149 32,163 ...
Balance + 141,133 + 174,147 + 161,750 + 106,237 + 7,674 + 12,054 + 10,193 + 11,727 ...
Euro-area (16) Exports 385,273 421,570 419,597 319,170 24,967 30,981 31,522 30,096 ...
countries Imports 293,126 307,188 315,052 246,226 20,127 22,739 24,515 21,783 ...
Balance + 92,147 + 114,383 + 104,545 + 72,944 + 4,840 + 8,242 + 7,007 + 8,314 ...
of which
Austria Exports 49,512 52,813 54,689 44,490 3,707 4,444 4,312 4,205 ...
Imports 30,301 32,091 33,180 26,737 2,060 2,606 2,702 2,539 ...
Balance + 19,211 + 20,722 + 21,509 + 17,753 + 1,647 + 1,837 + 1,610 + 1,667 ...
Belgium and Exports 51,141 55,397 55,230 42,870 3,543 4,227 4,211 4,023 ...
Luxembourg Imports 36,263 39,455 39,959 29,485 2,522 2,842 2,916 2,696 ...
Balance + 14,878 + 15,942 + 15,271 + 13,385 + 1,020 + 1,385 + 1,295 + 1,327 ...
France Exports 85,006 91,665 93,718 75,066 5,915 7,164 7,543 7,067 ...
Imports 62,102 62,873 63,369 50,385 4,137 4,620 5,197 3,847 ...
Balance + 22,904 + 28,792 + 30,349 + 24,682 + 1,777 + 2,544 + 2,346 + 3,220 ...
Italy Exports 59,348 64,499 62,015 46,860 2,956 4,592 4,633 4,633 ...
Imports 41,470 44,694 46,842 36,582 2,743 3,248 3,525 3,275 ...
Balance + 17,878 + 19,805 + 15,173 + 10,279 + 213 + 1,343 + 1,108 + 1,358 ...
Netherlands Exports 56,531 62,948 65,799 49,646 4,156 4,535 4,628 4,311 ...
Imports 60,750 61,951 67,971 52,791 4,702 4,727 5,139 4,761 ...
Balance − 4,219 + 997 − 2,172 − 3,145 − 546 − 192 − 510 − 450 ...
Spain Exports 41,775 47,631 42,676 28,650 2,101 2,928 3,011 2,846 ...
Imports 19,832 20,687 20,701 17,795 1,241 1,658 1,727 1,564 ...
Balance + 21,943 + 26,944 + 21,975 + 10,855 + 860 + 1,270 + 1,284 + 1,282 ...
Other EU member Exports 179,591 202,267 203,040 147,323 12,589 14,896 14,820 13,794 ...
states Imports 130,605 142,503 145,836 114,030 9,755 11,084 11,634 10,380 ...
Balance + 48,986 + 59,764 + 57,204 + 33,293 + 2,834 + 3,812 + 3,185 + 3,413 ...
of which
United Exports 64,726 69,760 64,175 48,726 4,156 5,062 4,798 4,441 ...
Kingdom Imports 40,832 41,966 41,646 30,418 2,570 2,967 3,045 2,492 ...
Balance + 23,895 + 27,794 + 22,529 + 18,308 + 1,586 + 2,095 + 1,753 + 1,948 ...
Exports 92,461 102,680 110,455 77,461 6,236 7,013 7,753 8,530 ... 2 Other European
Imports 88,837 91,960 106,174 76,006 6,235 7,612 7,166 6,668 ... countries
Balance + 3,625 + 10,721 + 4,281 + 1,455 + 1 − 599 + 587 + 1,862 ...
of which
Switzerland Exports 34,782 36,373 39,027 32,424 2,490 2,886 3,243 3,666 ...
Imports 25,227 29,822 31,299 26,001 2,042 2,414 2,414 2,407 ...
Balance + 9,556 + 6,551 + 7,728 + 6,424 + 449 + 472 + 828 + 1,259 ...
II Exports 234,139 237,139 249,199 193,773 15,886 16,930 19,911 20,806 ...Non-European
Imports 220,745 227,569 238,050 181,323 15,783 17,964 17,314 17,276 ... countries
Balance + 13,393 + 9,570 + 11,150 + 12,450 + 103 − 1,033 + 2,598 + 3,530 ...
Exports 16,617 17,575 19,636 15,584 1,246 1,303 1,705 1,568 ... 1 Africa
Imports 16,734 16,457 20,661 12,949 1,218 1,289 1,038 1,399 ...
Balance − 117 + 1,118 − 1,024 + 2,635 + 28 + 15 + 667 + 169 ...
Exports 104,154 100,769 101,866 71,452 5,409 5,746 7,382 7,830 ... 2 America
Imports 72,163 71,276 73,884 55,996 4,616 4,855 5,024 5,013 ...
Balance + 31,991 + 29,493 + 27,982 + 15,456 + 793 + 891 + 2,358 + 2,816 ...
of which
Exports 77,991 73,327 71,428 49,496 3,391 4,019 4,865 5,393 ... United States
Imports 49,197 45,993 46,464 36,630 2,867 3,072 3,178 3,311 ...
Balance + 28,795 + 27,334 + 24,965 + 12,865 + 524 + 948 + 1,687 + 2,083 ...
Exports 106,991 111,691 120,102 100,268 8,677 9,281 10,203 10,606 ... 3 Asia
Imports 128,942 136,411 140,585 109,862 9,747 11,587 11,034 10,652 ...
Balance − 21,951 − 24,721 − 20,483 − 9,594 − 1,070 − 2,306 − 831 − 46 ...
of which
Middle East Exports 22,978 23,709 27,498 20,638 1,581 1,650 1,941 2,158 ...
Imports 6,295 6,444 7,943 4,853 540 585 407 480 ...
Balance + 16,682 + 17,265 + 19,555 + 15,785 + 1,042 + 1,065 + 1,534 + 1,679 ...
Japan Exports 13,886 13,022 12,732 9,822 797 941 944 1,034 ...
Imports 24,016 24,381 23,130 16,624 1,319 1,623 1,605 1,587 ...
Balance − 10,130 − 11,359 − 10,398 − 6,802 − 522 − 682 − 661 − 554 ...
Exports 27,478 29,902 34,065 33,049 3,064 3,275 3,449 3,539 ... People‘s Republic
Imports 49,958 56,417 60,825 50,653 4,457 5,309 5,282 5,229 ... of China  2 
Balance − 22,479 − 26,515 − 26,760 − 17,604 − 1,392 − 2,034 − 1,834 − 1,690 ...
Exports 31,619 32,284 32,572 25,536 2,190 2,434 2,755 2,725 ... Emerging markets
Imports 36,113 35,357 33,152 25,444 2,271 2,825 2,609 2,395 ... in South-East Asia  3 
Balance − 4,494 − 3,073 − 580 + 91 − 82 − 392 + 146 + 330 ...
Exports 6,377 7,104 7,595 6,468 554 601 622 802 ... 4 Oceania and
Imports 2,906 3,425 2,920 2,515 202 234 218 212 ... polar regions
Balance + 3,471 + 3,679 + 4,674 + 3,953 + 352 + 367 + 404 + 590 ...
 
*Source: Federal Statistical Office. Exports (fob) by country of destination, region. Excluding repair and maintenance operations from January 200 7 on-
imports (cif) by country of origin. Individual countries and groups of wards. — 2Excluding Hong Kong. — 3Brunei Darussalam, Hong Kong, Indo-
countries according to the current position. — 1Including fuel and other nesia, Malaysia, Philippines, Republic of Korea, Singapore, Taiwan and
supplies for ships and aircraft and other data not classifiable by Thailand. 
70*XI External sector

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
February 2010
XI External sector
 
4 Services and income of the Federal Republic of Germany
(balances)
 
€ million
Services
Other services
of which
 
Patents Compen- Services  of Construction
Trans- Financial and sation of Investment Government self-employed and  assembly
Period Total Travel  1 services licences Total income portation  2 services  3 persons  4 work,  repairs employees  5 
2005 − 25,677 − 36,317 + 6,356 + 1,622 − 1,203 + 3,688 + 177 − 1,638 + 3,086 − 1,285 + 26,182
2006 − 13,985 − 32,771 + 5,690 + 2,185 − 1,861 + 3,736 + 9,037 − 1,795 + 3,885 − 685 + 46,790
2007 − 13,312 − 34,324 + 6,730 + 2,854 − 2,167 + 3,310 + 10,285 − 1,966 + 2,875 + 449 + 50,194
2008 − 12,682 − 34,646 + 7,802 + 3,916 − 2,129 + 2,338 + 10,036 − 1,585 + 2,277 + 654 + 44,092
2009 − 15,755 − 35,413 + 5,922 + 3,919 − 613 + 2,400 + 8,030 − 1,167 + 1,934 + 488 + 42,830
2008          Q2 − 3,656 − 8,686 + 1,849 + 656 − 359 + 595 + 2,288 − 338 + 576 + 132 + 630
         Q3 − 7,778 − 14,722 + 2,205 + 804 − 795 + 645 + 4,084 − 319 + 807 − 331 + 14,655
         Q4 − 370 − 5,228 + 2,114 + 1,572 − 271 + 539 + 904 − 503 + 357 + 199 + 14,613
2009          Q1 − 3,752 − 5,926 + 2,020 + 837 − 1,167 + 625 − 141 − 361 + 255 + 599 + 12,813
         Q2 − 3,770 − 8,741 + 1,751 + 819 − 379 + 618 + 2,161 − 262 + 392 + 145 + 1,818
         Q3 − 9,594 − 15,141 + 1,036 + 723 + 32 + 611 + 3,145 − 271 + 525 − 384 + 13,981
         Q4 + 1,362 − 5,605 + 1,115 + 1,541 + 901 + 546 + 2,865 − 273 + 762 + 128 + 14,218
2009          Feb − 309 − 1,768 + 778 + 284 + 143 + 168 + 85 − 109 + 149 + 203 + 4,730
         Mar − 725 − 2,662 + 667 + 359 + 25 + 311 + 574 − 116 + 91 + 228 + 4,781
         Apr − 695 − 2,309 + 713 + 361 − 218 + 215 + 543 − 94 + 167 + 55 − 345
         May − 682 − 2,848 + 580 + 234 + 0 + 200 + 1,151 − 78 − 94 + 45 − 2,461
         June − 2,394 − 3,584 + 458 + 224 − 161 + 202 + 467 − 90 + 320 + 45 + 4,624
         July − 3,246 − 4,578 + 506 + 251 − 140 + 175 + 541 − 101 + 298 − 135 + 4,609
         Aug − 4,299 − 5,917 + 240 + 257 + 239 + 221 + 661 − 96 + 96 − 125 + 4,631
         Sep − 2,049 − 4,645 + 290 + 214 − 67 + 215 + 1,944 − 74 + 131 − 124 + 4,741
         Oct − 1,333 − 3,610 + 315 + 382 − 82 + 175 + 1,488 − 66 + 364 + 18 + 4,964
         Nov + 496 − 1,235 + 339 + 325 + 369 + 206 + 493 − 100 + 148 + 25 + 4,930
         Dec + 2,199 − 760 + 461 + 834 + 615 + 165 + 884 − 107 + 249 + 85 + 4,324
1From January 2001, figures subject to significant uncertainty. — 2Ex- vices supplied. — 4Engineering and other technical services, research and
cluding the expenditure on freight included in the cif import figure. — development, commercial services, etc. — 5 Wages and salaries. 
3Including the receipts from foreign military agencies for goods and ser-
5 Current transfers of the Federal Republic of Germany 6 Capital transfers
(balances) (balances)
€ million € million
Public  1 Private  1 
International
organisations  2 
 
of which Other Other
European current Workers’ current
Period Total Total Total Communities Total remittances transfers Total  4 Public  1 Private  1 transfers  3 
2005 − 28,712 − 17,588 − 16,264 − 14,687 − 1,324 − 11,124 − 2,926 − 8,198 − 1,369 − 3,419 + 2,050
2006 − 27,148 − 14,512 − 14,900 − 13,356 + 388 − 12,637 − 2,927 − 9,710 − 252 − 1,947 + 1,695
2007 − 31,594 − 16,264 − 18,662 − 16,890 + 2,398 − 15,329 − 3,005 − 12,324 + 134 − 2,036 + 2,170
2008 − 33,088 − 16,805 − 19,545 − 17,556 + 2,739 − 16,283 − 3,122 − 13,161 − 90 − 1,784 + 1,694
2009 − 32,968 − 17,684 − 17,599 − 15,437 − 85 − 15,284 − 3,022 − 12,261 + 339 − 1,624 + 1,963
2008          Q2 − 5,146 − 774 − 4,836 − 4,310 + 4,061 − 4,371 − 781 − 3,591 + 324 − 361 + 685
         Q3 − 9,027 − 4,843 − 4,416 − 3,998 − 427 − 4,185 − 781 − 3,404 − 289 − 368 + 79
         Q4 − 6,759 − 2,709 − 1,987 − 1,598 − 721 − 4,051 − 781 − 3,270 − 643 − 785 + 142
2009          Q1 − 13,193 − 9,041 − 8,553 − 7,844 − 488 − 4,151 − 762 − 3,390 + 34 − 400 + 434
         Q2 − 3,315 + 510 − 2,100 − 1,645 + 2,611 − 3,825 − 753 − 3,072 + 305 − 300 + 605
         Q3 − 8,650 − 5,036 − 4,119 − 3,598 − 917 − 3,614 − 753 − 2,861 − 151 − 353 + 202
         Q4 − 7,810 − 4,117 − 2,826 − 2,350 − 1,291 − 3,693 − 753 − 2,939 + 151 − 571 + 722
2009          Feb − 5,269 − 4,075 − 3,737 − 3,553 − 338 − 1,194 − 255 − 939 − 83 − 121 + 38
         Mar − 3,637 − 2,284 − 2,165 − 1,961 − 119 − 1,353 − 251 − 1,101 + 164 − 159 + 323
         Apr − 2,281 − 950 − 2,053 − 1,920 + 1,103 − 1,331 − 251 − 1,080 + 317 − 102 + 419
         May − 973 + 331 − 1,354 − 1,266 + 1,685 − 1,304 − 251 − 1,053 + 99 − 90 + 190
         June − 61 + 1,129 + 1,307 + 1,541 − 178 − 1,190 − 251 − 939 − 112 − 108 − 4
         July − 2,676 − 1,395 − 1,111 − 872 − 285 − 1,281 − 251 − 1,030 − 171 − 115 − 56
         Aug − 3,055 − 1,928 − 1,546 − 1,369 − 382 − 1,128 − 251 − 877 − 7 − 98 + 91
         Sep − 2,918 − 1,713 − 1,463 − 1,356 − 250 − 1,206 − 251 − 954 + 27 − 140 + 167
         Oct − 5,216 − 4,084 − 3,557 − 3,350 − 527 − 1,132 − 251 − 881 − 234 − 145 − 88
         Nov − 3,870 − 2,628 − 2,077 − 1,991 − 551 − 1,243 − 251 − 992 + 93 − 194 + 287
         Dec + 1,276 + 2,595 + 2,808 + 2,991 − 213 − 1,318 − 251 − 1,067 + 292 − 231 + 523
1The classification of “public” and “private” transfers depends on the (excluding capital transfers). — 3Payments to developing countries, pension
sector to which the participating domestic body belongs. — 2Current contri- payments, tax revenue and refunds, etc. — 4Where identifiable; in
butions to the budgets of international organisations and to the EU budget particular, debt forgiveness. 
71*XI External sector

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
E U R O S Y S T E M
Monthly Report
February 2010
XI External sector
 
7 Financial account of the Federal Republic of Germany
 
 
€ million
2009
Item 2007 2008 2009 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 Oct Nov Dec
I Net German investment abroad
(Increase/capital exports: −) − 695,904 − 241,260 − 22,857 + 46,047 − 75,293 + 34,002 − 27,613 − 20,583 − 22,423 + 15,393
1 Direct investment  1 − 131,177 − 106,813 − 39,709 − 9,387 − 17,466 − 17,538 + 4,682 − 4,869 − 1,969 + 11,520
Equity capital − 49,448 − 60,334 − 44,451 − 18,737 − 13,439 − 14,763 + 2,488 − 737 − 402 + 3,626
Reinvested earnings  2 − 36,741 − 27,648 − 18,160 − 6,738 − 2,845 − 5,446 − 3,130 − 1,817 − 1,539 + 226
Other capital transactions
of German direct investors − 44,988 − 18,831 + 22,901 + 16,088 − 1,182 + 2,671 + 5,325 − 2,315 − 28 + 7,668
2 Portfolio investment − 145,507 + 27,871 − 74,450 − 7,073 − 28,272 − 18,101 − 21,005 − 7,049 − 12,940 − 1,016
Shares 3 + 23,056 + 39,177 − 1,565 + 571 − 1,410 − 114 − 613 + 2,365 − 408 − 2,571
Mutual fund shares  4 − 41,586 − 8,606 − 1,683 − 136 − 1,147 − 860 + 460 − 2,164 − 1,291 + 3,914
Bonds and notes  5 − 105,260 − 20,195 − 82,732 − 13,433 − 28,150 − 19,687 − 21,463 − 4,118 − 10,585 − 6,760
Money market instruments − 21,718 + 17,496 + 11,531 + 5,925 + 2,435 + 2,559 + 612 − 3,132 − 657 + 4,400
3 Financial derivatives  6 − 85,939 − 25,559 − 2,997 + 2,912 + 709 − 5,839 − 778 − 454 − 2,127 + 1,803
4 Other investment − 332,327 − 134,751 + 91,099 + 59,274 − 30,305 + 73,211 − 11,081 − 7,561 − 6,909 + 3,389
MFIs  7,8 − 224,876 − 73,931 + 176,624 + 104,777 + 1,597 + 71,039 − 789 − 22,351 + 7,156 + 14,405
Long-term − 96,840 − 144,313 + 25,849 − 70 − 15,926 + 18,193 + 23,653 + 9,804 + 7,261 + 6,588
Short-term − 128,036 + 70,382 + 150,774 + 104,847 + 17,523 + 52,846 − 24,442 − 32,154 − 105 + 7,817
Enterprises and households − 50,152 − 19,021 − 26,296 − 15,463 + 3,149 − 4,019 − 9,964 − 9,536 − 3,380 + 2,952
Long-term − 46,973 − 18,697 − 13,995 − 1,029 + 3,323 − 10,837 − 5,452 − 5,442 − 5,086 + 5,076
Short-term  7 − 3,179 − 324 − 12,302 − 14,433 − 174 + 6,819 − 4,512 − 4,094 + 1,706 − 2,124
General government + 8,425 + 2,801 + 2,040 + 4,972 − 15,679 + 14,173 − 1,426 − 368 − 4,247 + 3,188
Long-term + 309 − 334 − 617 − 348 − 389 − 30 + 150 − 33 − 19 + 203
Short-term  7 + 8,117 + 3,135 + 2,657 + 5,320 − 15,289 + 14,203 − 1,577 − 334 − 4,228 + 2,986
Bundesbank − 65,724 − 44,600 − 61,267 − 35,012 − 19,372 − 7,982 + 1,099 + 24,694 − 6,438 − 17,156
5 Change in reserve assets at
transaction values (Increase:-) − 953 − 2,008 + 3,200 + 321 + 41 + 2,269 + 569 − 651 + 1,522 − 302
II Net foreign investment in Germany
(Increase/capital imports: +) + 458,624 + 35,862 − 108,009 − 43,092 + 26,769 − 47,017 − 44,668 + 6,670 + 287 − 51,625
1 Direct investment  1 + 41,211 + 14,526 + 19,578 + 1,430 + 9,058 + 9,095 − 5 + 1,434 + 1,696 − 3,135
Equity capital + 32,101 + 12,406 + 7,908 + 3,730 − 451 + 3,820 + 809 + 67 − 141 + 883
Reinvested earnings  2 − 305 + 4,336 + 3,240 + 2,578 + 693 + 964 − 996 + 164 + 547 − 1,707
Other capital transactions
of foreign direct investors + 9,415 − 2,217 + 8,430 − 4,878 + 8,816 + 4,311 + 182 + 1,203 + 1,290 − 2,311
2 Portfolio investment + 297,880 + 15,997 + 29,429 − 3,300 + 34,878 + 1,182 − 3,331 + 2,148 + 6,808 − 12,288
Shares  3 + 39,189 − 49,282 + 4,535 − 8,210 − 595 + 14,120 − 779 + 2,164 − 1,720 − 1,223
Mutual fund shares + 3,939 − 5,822 + 858 + 292 − 46 − 641 + 1,253 − 529 + 1,024 + 758
Bonds and notes  5 + 203,298 + 23,258 − 48,893 − 17,650 + 3,740 − 26,272 − 8,711 − 7,479 + 7,211 − 8,443
Money market instruments + 51,454 + 47,843 + 72,929 + 22,268 + 31,779 + 13,975 + 4,907 + 7,992 + 294 − 3,380
3 Other investment + 119,533 + 5,340 − 157,016 − 41,223 − 17,167 − 57,294 − 41,332 + 3,087 − 8,217 − 36,202
MFIs  7,8 + 73,218 − 58,481 − 115,399 − 21,117 − 11,648 − 45,741 − 36,894 + 1,808 − 6,676 − 32,026
Long-term − 14,195 + 11,592 − 24,376 − 3,539 − 3,816 − 4,565 − 12,456 − 2,521 − 4,861 − 5,074
Short-term + 87,413 − 70,073 − 91,024 − 17,578 − 7,832 − 41,176 − 24,438 + 4,329 − 1,815 − 26,952
Enterprises and households + 38,001 + 43,262 − 14,709 − 8,406 − 4,316 − 10,815 + 8,828 − 1,734 + 556 + 10,006
Long-term + 18,493 + 23,339 − 8,531 − 3,005 + 316 − 3,453 − 2,389 − 2,659 + 894 − 624
Short-term  7 + 19,508 + 19,924 − 6,177 − 5,401 − 4,632 − 7,362 + 11,217 + 926 − 338 + 10,630
General government − 3,034 + 6,207 − 5,126 + 11,738 − 3,820 + 711 − 13,754 + 2,616 − 2,336 − 14,034
Long-term − 2,759 − 1,189 − 1,850 − 492 − 972 − 180 − 205 − 65 − 148 + 8
Short-term  7 − 276 + 7,396 − 3,276 + 12,230 − 2,848 + 891 − 13,549 + 2,681 − 2,188 − 14,042
Bundesbank + 11,349 + 14,351 − 21,782 − 23,439 + 2,617 − 1,449 + 489 + 397 + 240 − 148
III Financial account balance  9 
(Net capital exports: −) − 237,280 − 205,398 − 130,866 + 2,954 − 48,524 − 13,015 − 72,281 − 13,914 − 22,135 − 36,232
1From 1996, new definition for direct investment. — 2Estimated. — action values shown here are mostly derived from changes in stocks. Purely
3Including participation rights. — 4From 1991, including retained statistical changes have been eliminated as far as possible. — 8Excluding
earnings. — 5From 1975, excluding accrued interest. — 6Options, whether the Deutsche Bundesbank. — 9Financial account balance including change
evidenced by securities or not, and financial futures contracts. — 7The trans- in reserve assets. 
72*XI External sector

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
February 2010
XI External sector
 
8 External position of the Bundesbank *
 
 
DM million
Reserve assets and other claims on non-residents Liabilities vis-à-vis non-residents
Reserve assets
Reserve
position
in the
Inter- Liabilities
national arising Net Liabilities
Monetary arising from external
Fund and Claims Loans and from liquidity position
Foreign special on the external Treasury (col 1 other claims
End of year currency drawing ECB  2 on non- trans- discount less
or month Total Total Gold rights (net) Total paper col 8) balances  1 residents  3 actions  4 
1234567891 0 1 1
1996 120,985 119,544 13,688 72,364 11,445 22,048 1,441 15,604 15,604 − 105,381
1997 127,849 126,884 13,688 76,673 13,874 22,649 966 16,931 16,931 − 110,918
1998 135,085 134,005 17,109 100,363 16,533 − 1,079 15,978 15,978 − 119,107
*Valuation of the gold holdings and the claims on non-residents in Monetary Cooperation Fund (EMCF)). — 3Including loans to the World
accordance with section 26 (2) of the Bundesbank Act and the provisions of Bank. — 4Including liquidity paper sold to non-residents by the
the Commercial Code, especially section 253. In the course of the year, Bundesbank; excluding the liquidity Treasury discount paper sold to
valuation at the preceding year’s balance sheet rates. — 1Mainly US dollar non-residents between March 1993 and March 1995, as shown in column 10. 
assets. — 2European Central Bank (up to 1993, claims on the European
 
 
 
9 External position of the Bundesbank in the euro area o
€ million
Reserve assets and other claims on non-residents
Reserve assets
Reserve
position
Other in the Inter-
national claims on
Monetary Other residents
Fund and claims on Claims in other Net external
Gold special Foreign non-euro- within the euro-area position Liabilities
End of year and gold drawing currency area Eurosystem member vis-à-vis non- (col 1 less
or month Total Total rights reserves (net)  2 states col 9) receivables residents  1,3 residents  3 
1234567891 0
1999          Jan  4 95,316 93,940 29,312 8,461 56,167 140 1,225 11 8,169 87,146
1999 141,958 93,039 32,287 8,332 52,420 9,162 39,746 11 6,179 135,779
2000 100,762 93,815 32,676 7,762 53,377 313 6,620 14 6,592 94,170
2001 76,147 93,215 35,005 8,721 49,489 312 − 17,385 5 8,752 67,396
2002 103,948 85,002 36,208 8,272 40,522 312 18,466 167 9,005 94,942
2003 95,394 76,680 36,533 7,609 32,538 312 17,945 456 10,443 84,951
2004 93,110 71,335 35,495 6,548 29,292 312 20,796 667 7,935 85,175
2005 130,268 86,181 47,924 4,549 33,708 350 42,830 906 6,285 123,983
2006 104,389 84,765 53,114 3,011 28,640 350 18,344 931 4,819 99,570
2007 179,492 92,545 62,433 2,418 27,694 350 84,064 2,534 16,005 163,488
2008 230,775 99,185 68,194 3,285 27,705 350 128,668 2,573 30,169 200,607
2009 323,286 125,541 83,939 15,626 25,977 350 189,936 7,460 9,126 314,160
2008          Aug 217,137 93,048 62,296 2,539 28,213 350 121,103 2,636 26,641 190,496
         Sep 215,889 99,936 68,808 2,623 28,504 350 112,975 2,628 26,756 189,133
         Oct 183,398 97,415 62,655 2,773 31,987 350 83,214 2,419 38,598 144,801
         Nov 213,908 104,612 70,131 3,476 31,005 350 106,395 2,551 33,778 180,130
         Dec 230,775 99,185 68,194 3,285 27,705 350 128,668 2,573 30,169 200,607
2009          Jan 258,620 109,963 78,633 3,462 27,869 350 145,706 2,601 21,988 236,631
         Feb 275,770 113,507 81,893 3,455 28,159 350 159,318 2,594 16,983 258,786
         Mar 274,458 107,809 75,726 3,463 28,620 350 163,681 2,618 7,527 266,931
         Apr 272,318 105,577 73,476 3,482 28,619 350 163,774 2,618 8,538 263,781
         May 261,878 107,375 75,646 4,599 27,130 350 151,664 2,490 9,175 252,703
         June 290,738 104,691 72,955 4,493 27,243 350 183,052 2,645 10,121 280,617
         July 282,460 104,931 72,586 4,694 27,651 350 173,956 3,222 7,900 274,560
         Aug 291,882 115,309 72,998 15,186 27,124 350 171,719 4,506 8,972 282,910
         Sep 314,396 116,785 74,913 16,268 25,604 350 191,035 6,227 8,641 305,756
         Oct 292,775 119,584 77,320 16,163 26,101 350 166,341 6,500 9,038 283,737
         Nov 306,623 126,129 85,449 15,385 25,295 350 172,779 7,366 9,274 297,349
         Dec 323,286 125,541 83,939 15,626 25,977 350 189,936 7,460 9,126 314,160
2010          Jan 326,161 127,966 84,917 15,974 27,076 350 189,759 8,086 10,066 316,095
oClaims and liabilities vis-à-vis all countries within and outside the euro Bundesbank’s cross-border payments within the Eurosystem. From
area. Up to December 2000, the levels at the end of each quarter are shown, November 2000, including the TARGET positions which were previously
owing to revaluations, at market prices; within each quarter, however, the shown (in columns 6 and 9) as bilateral assets and liabilities vis-à-vis na tional
levels are computed on the basis of cumulative transaction values. From central banks outside the Eurosystem. — 3See footnote 2. — 4Euro
January 2001, all end-of-month levels are valued at market prices. — opening balance sheet of the Bundesbank as at 1 January 1999. 
1Including loans to the World Bank. — 2Including the balances in the
73*XI External sector

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
E U R O S Y S T E M
Monthly Report
February 2010
XI External sector
 
10 Assets and liabilities of enterprises in Germany (other than banks)
vis-à-vis non-residents *
 
€ million
Claims on non-residents Liabilities vis-à-vis non-residents
Claims on foreign non-banks Liabilities  vis-à-vis foreign non-banks
from trade credits from trade credits
Balances Loans
with from Credit Advance from from Credit Advance
End of year foreign financial terms payments foreign financial terms payments
or month Total banks Total Total granted effected Total banks Total Total used received operations operations
All countries
 
2006 450,228 117,723 332,505 190,300 142,205 134,057 8,148 624,790 95,019 529,771 408,907 120,864 79,900 40,964
2007 509,178 162,654 346,524 196,178 150,346 139,842 10,504 651,736 111,543 540,193 405,674 134,519 82,979 51,540
2008  r 553,465 173,255 380,210 227,055 153,155 140,520 12,635 710,504 147,242 563,262 427,011 136,251 79,980 56,271
2009 594,771 209,729 385,042 241,907 143,135 130,605 12,530 751,925 159,667 592,258 455,038 137,220 80,759 56,461
2009          July 568,103 193,205 374,898 230,395 144,503 131,664 12,839 722,354 145,322 577,032 440,607 136,425 77,377 59,048
         Aug 568,689 197,749 370,940 231,817 139,123 126,358 12,765 723,037 151,162 571,875 440,942 130,933 71,347 59,586
         Sep  r 576,697 202,206 374,491 231,347 143,144 130,654 12,490 727,336 149,300 578,036 442,955 135,081 77,293 57,788
         Oct  r 590,748 208,618 382,130 236,413 145,717 132,995 12,722 731,200 147,955 583,245 446,665 136,580 78,438 58,142
         Nov 596,457 209,907 386,550 236,828 149,722 137,175 12,547 733,362 149,664 583,698 445,424 138,274 80,756 57,518
         Dec 594,771 209,729 385,042 241,907 143,135 130,605 12,530 751,925 159,667 592,258 455,038 137,220 80,759 56,461
Industrial countries 1
 
2006 396,649 115,269 281,380 174,784 106,596 100,541 6,055 570,675 93,560 477,115 389,770 87,345 66,210 21,135
2007 452,354 160,666 291,688 180,564 111,124 103,104 8,020 591,015 110,291 480,724 384,794 95,930 69,347 26,583
2008  r 489,430 171,387 318,043 207,807 110,236 101,002 9,234 646,452 145,045 501,407 404,820 96,587 68,148 28,439
2009 532,976 208,571 324,405 221,958 102,447 93,566 8,881 686,654 157,343 529,311 433,195 96,116 68,912 27,204
2009          July 507,191 191,886 315,305 210,182 105,123 95,822 9,301 657,355 143,297 514,058 418,291 95,767 67,069 28,698
         Aug 507,537 196,499 311,038 211,545 99,493 90,270 9,223 657,353 149,032 508,321 418,560 89,761 60,660 29,101
         Sep  r 514,735 200,712 314,023 211,252 102,771 93,787 8,984 661,651 147,224 514,427 419,460 94,967 66,281 28,686
         Oct  r 528,658 207,403 321,255 216,213 105,042 95,751 9,291 665,678 145,898 519,780 423,347 96,433 67,635 28,798
         Nov 533,581 208,776 324,805 216,345 108,460 99,365 9,095 667,617 147,619 519,998 421,992 98,006 69,441 28,565
         Dec 532,976 208,571 324,405 221,958 102,447 93,566 8,881 686,654 157,343 529,311 433,195 96,116 68,912 27,204
EU member states 1
 
2006 308,720 108,982 199,738 121,929 77,809 72,902 4,907 479,025 86,343 392,682 332,871 59,811 45,202 14,609
2007 364,105 154,644 209,461 127,080 82,381 75,942 6,439 490,004 105,022 384,982 319,539 65,443 46,262 19,181
2008  r 398,833 164,762 234,071 151,391 82,680 75,192 7,488 539,151 137,208 401,943 334,298 67,645 46,188 21,457
2009 443,431 200,400 243,031 165,986 77,045 70,051 6,994 580,996 141,633 439,363 369,380 69,983 48,977 21,006
2009          July 419,114 184,256 234,858 155,428 79,430 72,081 7,349 563,452 134,972 428,480 358,485 69,995 48,185 21,810
         Aug 419,337 188,520 230,817 155,834 74,983 67,685 7,298 561,802 140,511 421,291 357,127 64,164 42,062 22,102
         Sep  r 425,145 193,193 231,952 154,724 77,228 70,165 7,063 565,222 138,343 426,879 358,099 68,780 47,042 21,738
         Oct  r 438,523 199,468 239,055 159,369 79,686 72,382 7,304 569,247 136,659 432,588 363,019 69,569 47,516 22,053
         Nov 442,355 200,413 241,942 159,922 82,020 74,895 7,125 570,172 138,113 432,059 361,134 70,925 48,945 21,980
         Dec 443,431 200,400 243,031 165,986 77,045 70,051 6,994 580,996 141,633 439,363 369,380 69,983 48,977 21,006
of which:  Euro-area member states 2
 
2006 207,868 77,056 130,812 79,901 50,911 47,614 3,297 369,648 38,878 330,770 292,178 38,592 28,340 10,252
2007 251,718 118,112 133,606 79,745 53,861 49,537 4,324 368,088 56,632 311,456 269,865 41,591 28,964 12,627
2008  r 281,518 130,226 151,292 96,968 54,324 49,408 4,916 418,021 81,703 336,318 292,893 43,425 29,768 13,657
2009 321,991 159,740 162,251 114,378 47,873 43,179 4,694 467,464 91,792 375,672 333,680 41,992 28,397 13,595
2009          July 290,436 141,595 148,841 100,625 48,216 43,310 4,906 449,952 83,904 366,048 323,774 42,274 28,662 13,612
         Aug 292,911 145,397 147,514 100,749 46,765 41,840 4,925 450,366 88,594 361,772 321,996 39,776 25,819 13,957
         Sep  r 297,985 150,022 147,963 99,968 47,995 43,262 4,733 454,406 88,348 366,058 323,526 42,532 28,830 13,702
         Oct  r 307,498 154,897 152,601 103,037 49,564 44,644 4,920 456,197 86,386 369,811 327,568 42,243 28,126 14,117
         Nov 313,980 158,134 155,846 104,921 50,925 46,144 4,781 455,882 88,176 367,706 325,257 42,449 28,393 14,056
         Dec 321,991 159,740 162,251 114,378 47,873 43,179 4,694 467,464 91,792 375,672 333,680 41,992 28,397 13,595
Emerging economies and developing countries 3
 
2006 53,579 2,454 51,125 15,516 35,609 33,516 2,093 54,115 1,459 52,656 19,137 33,519 13,690 19,829
2007 56,824 1,988 54,836 15,614 39,222 36,738 2,484 60,721 1,252 59,469 20,880 38,589 13,632 24,957
2008 64,035 1,868 62,167 19,248 42,919 39,518 3,401 64,052 2,197 61,855 22,191 39,664 11,832 27,832
2009 61,795 1,158 60,637 19,949 40,688 37,039 3,649 65,271 2,324 62,947 21,843 41,104 11,847 29,257
2009          July 60,912 1,319 59,593 20,213 39,380 35,842 3,538 64,999 2,025 62,974 22,316 40,658 10,308 30,350
         Aug 61,152 1,250 59,902 20,272 39,630 36,088 3,542 65,684 2,130 63,554 22,382 41,172 10,687 30,485
         Sep 61,962 1,494 60,468 20,095 40,373 36,867 3,506 65,685 2,076 63,609 23,495 40,114 11,012 29,102
         Oct 62,090 1,215 60,875 20,200 40,675 37,244 3,431 65,522 2,057 63,465 23,318 40,147 10,803 29,344
         Nov 62,876 1,131 61,745 20,483 41,262 37,810 3,452 65,745 2,045 63,700 23,432 40,268 11,315 28,953
         Dec 61,795 1,158 60,637 19,949 40,688 37,039 3,649 65,271 2,324 62,947 21,843 41,104 11,847 29,257
* Up to and including November 2009 the assets and liabilities vis-à-vis shown in Table XI.7. — 1From January 2007, including Bulgaria and
non-residents of households in Germany. The assets and liabilities vis-à-vis Romania. — 2From January 2007, including Slovenia; from January 2008,
non-residents of banks (MFIs) in Germany are shown in Table 4 of Section IV, including Cyprus and Malta; from January 2009, including Slovakia. — 3All
“Banks”. Statistical increases and decreases have not been eliminated; to countries that are not regarded as industrial countries. 
this extent, the changes in totals are not comparable with the figures
74*XI External sector

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
February 2010
XI External sector
 
11 ECB euro reference exchange rates of selected currencies *
 
 
EUR 1 = currency units ...
Yearly Australia Canada China Denmark Japan Norway Sweden Switzerland United States United Kingdom
or monthly       
average AUD CAD CNY  1 DKK JPY NOK SEK CHF GBP USD
1999 1.6523 1.5840 . 7.4355 121.32 8.3104 8.8075 1.6003 0.65874 1.0658
2000 1.5889 1.3706 2 7.6168 7.4538 99.47 8.1129 8.4452 1.5579 0.60948 0.9236
2001 1.7319 1.3864 7.4131 7.4521 108.68 8.0484 9.2551 1.5105 0.62187 0.8956
2002 1.7376 1.4838 7.8265 7.4305 118.06 7.5086 9.1611 1.4670 0.62883 0.9456
2003 1.7379 1.5817 9.3626 7.4307 130.97 8.0033 9.1242 1.5212 0.69199 1.1312
2004 1.6905 1.6167 10.2967 7.4399 134.44 8.3697 9.1243 1.5438 0.67866 1.2439
2005 1.6320 1.5087 10.1955 7.4518 136.85 8.0092 9.2822 1.5483 0.68380 1.2441
2006 1.6668 1.4237 10.0096 7.4591 146.02 8.0472 9.2544 1.5729 0.68173 1.2556
2007 1.6348 1.4678 10.4178 7.4506 161.25 8.0165 9.2501 1.6427 0.68434 1.3705
2008 1.7416 1.5594 10.2236 7.4560 152.45 8.2237 9.6152 1.5874 0.79628 1.4708
2009 1.7727 1.5850 9.5277 7.4462 130.34 8.7278 10.6191 1.5100 0.89094 1.3948
2008          Apr 1.6933 1.5965 11.0237 7.4603 161.56 7.9629 9.3699 1.5964 0.79487 1.5751
         May 1.6382 1.5530 10.8462 7.4609 162.31 7.8648 9.3106 1.6247 0.79209 1.5557
         June 1.6343 1.5803 10.7287 7.4586 166.26 7.9915 9.3739 1.6139 0.79152 1.5553
         July 1.6386 1.5974 10.7809 7.4599 168.45 8.0487 9.4566 1.6193 0.79308 1.5770
         Aug 1.6961 1.5765 10.2609 7.4595 163.63 7.9723 9.3984 1.6212 0.79279 1.4975
         Sep 1.7543 1.5201 9.8252 7.4583 153.20 8.1566 9.5637 1.5942 0.79924 1.4370
         Oct 1.9345 1.5646 9.1071 7.4545 133.52 8.5928 9.8506 1.5194 0.78668 1.3322
         Nov 1.9381 1.5509 8.6950 7.4485 123.28 8.8094 10.1275 1.5162 0.83063 1.2732
         Dec 2.0105 1.6600 9.2205 7.4503 122.51 9.4228 10.7538 1.5393 0.90448 1.3449
2009          Jan 1.9633 1.6233 9.0496 7.4519 119.73 9.2164 10.7264 1.4935 0.91819 1.3239
         Feb 1.9723 1.5940 8.7406 7.4514 118.30 8.7838 10.9069 1.4904 0.88691 1.2785
         Mar 1.9594 1.6470 8.9210 7.4509 127.65 8.8388 11.1767 1.5083 0.91966 1.3050
         Apr 1.8504 1.6188 9.0110 7.4491 130.25 8.7867 10.8796 1.5147 0.89756 1.3190
         May 1.7831 1.5712 9.3157 7.4468 131.85 8.7943 10.5820 1.5118 0.88445 1.3650
         June 1.7463 1.5761 9.5786 7.4457 135.39 8.9388 10.8713 1.5148 0.85670 1.4016
         July 1.7504 1.5824 9.6246 7.4458 133.09 8.9494 10.8262 1.5202 0.86092 1.4088
         Aug 1.7081 1.5522 9.7485 7.4440 135.31 8.6602 10.2210 1.5236 0.86265 1.4268
         Sep 1.6903 1.5752 9.9431 7.4428 133.14 8.5964 10.1976 1.5148 0.89135 1.4562
         Oct 1.6341 1.5619 10.1152 7.4438 133.91 8.3596 10.3102 1.5138 0.91557 1.4816
         Nov 1.6223 1.5805 10.1827 7.4415 132.97 8.4143 10.3331 1.5105 0.89892 1.4914
         Dec 1.6185 1.5397 9.9777 7.4419 131.21 8.4066 10.4085 1.5021 0.89972 1.4614
2010          Jan 1.5624 1.4879 9.7436 7.4424 130.34 8.1817 10.1939 1.4765 0.88305 1.4272
*Averages: Bundesbank calculations based on the daily euro reference 1Up to March 2005, ECB indicative rates. — 2Average from 13 January to
exchange rates published by the ECB; for additional euro reference 29 December 2000. 
exchange rates, see Statistical Supplement 5, Exchange rate statistics. —
12 Irrevocable euro conversion rates in Stage III of European Economic and Monetary Union
As of Country Currency ISO currency code Euro 1 = currency units ...
1999  January 1 Austria Austrian schilling ATS 13.7603
Belgium Belgian franc BEF 40.3399
Finland Finnish markka FIM 5.94573
France French franc FRF 6.55957
Germany Deutsche Mark DEM 1.95583
Ireland Irish pound IEP 0.787564
Italy Italian lira ITL 1,936.27
Luxembourg Luxembourg franc LUF 40.3399
Netherlands Dutch guilder NLG 2.20371
Portugal Portuguese escudo PTE 200.482
Spain Spanish peseta ESP 166.386
2001  January 1 Greece Greek drachma GRD 340.750
2007  January 1 Slovenia Slovenian tolar SIT 239.640
2008  January 1 Cyprus Cyprus pound CYP 0.585274
Malta Maltese lira MTL 0.429300
2009  January 1 Slovakia Slovak koruna SKK 30.1260
75*XI External sector

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
E U R O S Y S T E M
Monthly Report
February 2010
XI  External  sector
 
13  Effective exchange rates of the Euro and indicators of the German economy’s price competitiveness *
 
 
1999 Q1 = 100
Effective exchange rate of the Euro Indicators of the German economy’s price competitiveness
EER-21  1 EER-41  2 Based on the deflators of total sales  3 Based on consumer price indices
23 selected industrial countries  4 In real terms
In real terms based on
In real based on unit In real
23 terms the deflators labour terms Non-
based on of gross costs of based on Euro- euro- selected
36 36 56 consumer domestic national consumer area area industrial
Zeit Nominal price indices product  3 economy  3 Nominal price indices Total countries countries countries  5 6 countries  4 countries  5 countries  7 
1999 96.1 96.0 95.8 96.5 96.5 95.8 97.7 99.5 95.6 97.6 98.1 98.0 97.6
2000 86.8 86.5 85.8 85.5 87.9 85.8 91.6 97.2 85.1 91.0 92.8 91.8 90.8
2001 87.3 87.0 86.3 84.4 90.2 86.9 91.4 96.0 85.9 90.5 92.9 91.3 90.8
2002 89.7 90.1 89.2 87.3 94.7 90.5 92.1 95.2 88.5 91.1 93.6 92.0 91.9
2003 100.3 101.2 100.0 97.7 106.6 101.4 95.6 94.2 97.5 94.9 97.3 96.6 96.9
2004 104.2 105.1 102.8 101.7 111.2 105.0 96.1 93.1 100.1 95.3 98.8 98.2 98.6
2005 102.7 103.7 101.0 99.3 109.2 102.5 94.9 91.7 99.2 93.5 98.9 97.4 97.3
2006 102.6 103.7 100.3 98.5 109.3 101.9 94.0 90.2 99.1 92.4 99.1 97.2 96.8
2007 106.3 106.8 102.7 100.6 113.0 104.2 95.4 89.5 103.6 93.5 101.7 99.2 98.7
2008 110.5 p 110.1 105.7 104.3 118.0 p 107.1 96.0 88.1 107.2 p 93.7 103.5 100.1 99.6
2009 111.7 p 110.6 ... ... 120.6 p 107.9 ... ... ... ... 102.8 100.0 99.7
2006          May 103.1 104.2 100.9 99.0 109.9 102.6 94.2 90.4 99.3 92.7 99.1 97.4 97.1
         June 103.3 104.4 110.5 103.2 99.2 97.6 97.4
         July 103.6 104.8 110.6 103.4 99.3 97.7 97.5
         Aug 103.6 104.7 100.7 99.3 110.6 103.2 94.0 89.9 99.5 92.5 99.2 97.4 97.2
         Sep 103.4 104.4 110.4 102.8 99.0 97.3 97.0
         Oct 102.8 103.8 109.7 102.0 99.2 97.2 96.9
         Nov 103.4 104.2 100.5 98.4 110.4 102.5 94.2 89.8 100.1 92.4 99.7 97.6 97.3
         Dec 104.4 105.0 111.5 103.3 100.2 98.0 97.7
2007          Jan 103.8 104.5 110.6 102.5 100.3 98.1 97.6
         Feb 104.3 104.9 101.3 98.9 111.0 102.7 95.0 90.1 101.5 93.1 100.5 98.3 97.8
         Mar 105.0 105.5 111.9 103.4 100.7 98.4 98.0
         Apr 105.9 106.7 112.7 104.3 101.4 99.0 98.5
         May 106.0 106.6 102.5 100.3 112.5 104.0 95.6 89.9 103.4 93.6 101.6 99.1 98.5
         June 105.6 106.2 112.0 103.5 101.3 98.8 98.2
         July 106.2 106.8 112.6 104.0 101.9 99.2 98.6
         Aug 105.8 106.2 102.6 100.2 112.6 103.7 95.3 89.2 103.6 93.3 101.4 98.8 98.3
         Sep 106.8 107.2 113.5 104.5 102.1 99.4 99.0
         Oct 107.9 108.1 114.4 105.1 102.6 99.8 99.2
         Nov 109.4 109.6 104.3 102.9 116.2 106.7 95.9 88.7 106.0 93.8 103.6 100.8 100.3
         Dec 109.5 109.4 116.0 106.2 103.5 100.5 99.9
2008          Jan 110.1 109.9 116.6 106.7 103.5 100.5 99.9
         Feb 109.8 109.2 105.8 104.3 116.5 106.1 96.6 88.7 107.7 94.3 103.5 100.2 99.6
         Mar 112.6 112.3 119.9 109.4 104.7 101.6 101.3
         Apr 113.7 113.2 121.2 110.2 105.0 101.6 101.3
         May 113.2 112.9 108.2 107.1 120.5 109.6 97.6 88.3 110.9 95.0 104.9 101.5 101.0
         June 113.0 112.7 120.4 109.5 104.8 101.2 100.7
         July 113.2 p 112.7 120.6 p 109.5 105.3 101.3 100.8
         Aug 110.9 p 110.3 106.3 104.6 117.8 p 106.7 96.5 87.8 108.9 p 93.8 104.0 100.1 99.3
         Sep 109.3 p 108.5 116.4 p 105.3 103.0 99.3 98.6
         Oct 105.8 p 105.2 113.8 p 102.8 100.5 97.3 96.9
         Nov 105.0 p 104.5 102.4 101.3 113.0 p 102.0 93.4 87.7 101.2 p 91.5 100.4 97.1 96.7
         Dec 110.2 p 109.7 118.7 p 107.2 102.5 99.5 99.4
2009          Jan 109.8 p 109.2 118.6 p 106.9 102.1 99.4 99.2
         Feb 108.7 p 108.0 104.9 p 105.2 117.7 p 106.0 94.2 88.2 102.5 p 93.0 101.1 98.9 98.7
         Mar 111.1 p 110.3 120.4 p 108.1 102.4 99.9 99.8
         Apr 110.3 p 109.5 119.1 p 106.9 102.3 99.6 99.2
         May 110.8 p 109.9 106.3 p 106.5 119.5 p 107.2 p 95.5 p 88.6 105.1 p 94.0 102.5 99.7 99.3
         June 112.0 p 111.1 120.7 p 108.3 102.9 100.2 99.9
         July 111.6 p 110.5 120.5 p 107.8 102.8 99.9 99.5
         Aug 111.7 p 110.6 p 107.4 p 106.6 120.6 p 107.9 p 96.2 p 88.7 106.7 p 94.4 103.0 100.1 99.7
         Sep 112.9 p 111.6 122.0 p 108.8 103.3 100.4 100.0
         Oct 114.3 p 112.9 123.0 p 109.5 104.0 101.0 100.6
         Nov 114.0 p 112.5 ... ... 122.9 p 109.3 ... ... ... ... 103.8 100.9 100.5
         Dec 113.0 p 111.3 121.7 p 108.0 103.6 100.6 100.0
2010          Jan 110.8 p 109.1 119.1 p 105.6 102.7 99.6 98.8
*The effective exchange rate corresponds to the weighted external value of Kingdom and United States. Where price and wage indices were not avai-
the currency concerned. The method of calculating the indicators of the lable, estimates were used. — 2ECB calculations. This group includes not
German economy’s price competitiveness is consistent with the procedure only the countries belonging to the EER-21 group (see footnote 1) but also
used by the ECB to compute the effective exchange rates of the euro except Algeria, Argentina, Brazil, Chile, Croatia, Iceland, India, Indonesia, Isr ael,
for the used trade weights (see Monthly Report, November 2001, pp  51-65, Malaysia, Mexico, Morocco, New Zealand, Philippines, Russian Federation ,
May 2007, pp  32-37 and May 2008, p  40). For details of the methodology South Africa, Taiwan, Thailand, Turkey and Venezuela. — 3Annual and
see ECB, Monthly Bulletin, January 2010, pp S93 − S94 as well as the ECB’s quarterly averages. — 4Euro-area countries (from 2001 including Greece,
Occasional Paper No  2, which can be downloaded from the ECB’s website from 2007 including Slovenia, from 2008 including Cyprus and Malta, from
(www.ecb.int). A decline in the figures implies an increase in competitive- 2009 including Slovakia) as well as the non-euro-area countries (Canada ,
ness. — 1ECB calculations are based on the weighted averages of the Denmark, Japan, Norway, Sweden, Switzerland, United Kingdom and
changes in the bilateral exchange rates of the euro against the currencies of United States). — 5Euro-area countries and countries belonging to the
the following countries: Australia, Bulgaria, Canada, China, Czech Republic, EER-21 group. — 6Owing to missing data for the deflator of total sales,
Denmark, Estonia, Hong Kong, Hungary, Japan, Latvia, Lithuania, Norway, China is not included in this calculation. — 7Euro-area countries and
Poland, Romania, Singapore, South Korea, Sweden, Switzerland, United countries belonging to the EER-41 group (see footnote 2). 
76*XI  External sector

Overview of
publications
by the Deutsche
BundesbankThis overview provides information
about selected recent economic and
statistical publications by the Deutsche
Bundesbank. Unless otherwise indi-
cated, these publications are available
in both English and German, in printed
form and on the Bundesbank’s web-
site.
The publications are available free of
charge from the Communication Div-
ision. For a small fee to cover costs, a
file which is updated monthly and
contains approximately 40,000 time
series published by the Bundesbank
can be obtained on magnetic tape cas-
sette or CD-ROM from the Division
Statistical data processing, math-
ematical methods. Orders should be
sent, in writing, to one of the ad-
dresses listed on the reverse of the title
page. Selected time series can also be
downloaded from the internet.
Annual Report
Financial Stability Review
Monthly Report
For information on the articles published between
1990 and 2009 see the index attached to the Janu-
ary 2010 Monthly Report.
77*DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
February 2010

Monthly Report articles
March 2009
– German balance of payments in 2008
– Price convergence in the euro area
– Cashless payments in Germany and the role of
the Deutsche Bundesbank
April 2009
– Wage setting in Germany – new empirical find-
ings
– Short-term forecasting methods as instruments
of business cycle analysis
May 2009
– The current economic situation in Germany
June 2009
– Outlook for the German economy – macroeco-
nomic projections for 2009 and 2010
– Growth effects of permanently high energy
prices: recent evidence for Germany
– The development and determinants of euro
currency in circulation in Germany
July 2009
– Corporate earnings and share prices
– Demographic change and the long-term
sustainability of public finances in Germany
– Recent developments in German and European
retail payments
August 2009
– The current economic situation in GermanySeptember 2009
– Developments in lending to the German pri-
vate sector during the global financial crisis
– The performance of German credit institutions
in 2008
– Amendments to the new EU Capital Require-
ments Directive and the Minimum Require-
ments for Risk Management
October 2009
– The development of government investment
– Firm-level and aggregate output volatility
November 2009
– The current economic situation in Germany
December 2009
– Outlook for the German economy – macroeco-
nomic projections for 2010 and 2011
– Financial integration and risk sharing in the
euro area – longer-term trends and impact of
the financial crisis
– International cooperation in the area of
ongoing banking supervision
January 2010
– German enterprises’ profitability and financing
in 2008
– Price-level targeting as a monetary policy strat-
egy
February 2010
– The current economic situation in Germany
78*DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
EUROSYSTEM
Monthly Report
February 2010

Statistical Supplements to the
Monthly Report1
1 Banking statistics (monthly)
2 Capital market statistics (monthly)
3 Balance of payments statistics (monthly)
4 Seasonally adjusted business statistics (monthly)
5 Exchange rate statistics (quarterly)
Special Publications
Makro-/C246konometrisches Mehr-L/C228nder-Modell,
November 19962
Europ/C228ische Organisationen und Gremien im Be-
reich von W/C228hrung und Wirtschaft, May 19972
Die Zahlungsbilanz der ehemaligen DDR 1975 bis
1989, August 19992
The market for German Federal securities,
May 2000
Macro-Econometric Multi-Country Model: MEMMOD,
June 2000
Bundesbank Act, September 2002
Weltweite Organisationen und Gremien im Bereich
von W/C228hrung und Wirtschaft, March 20032
Die Europ/C228ische Union: Grundlagen und Politik-
bereiche außerhalb der Wirtschafts- und W/C228h-
rungsunion, April 20052
Die Deutsche Bundesbank – Aufgabenfelder,
rechtlicher Rahmen, Geschichte, April 20062
European economic and monetary union,
April 2008
Special Statistical Publications*o
1 Banking statistics guidelines and customer clas-
sification, January 200932 Bankenstatistik Kundensystematik Firmenver-
zeichnisse, December 20092, 4
3 Aufbau der bankstatistischen Tabellen,
July 20082, 4
4 Financial accounts for Germany 1991 to 2008,
June 20094
5 Extrapolated results from financial statements
of German enterprises 1994 to 2003, March
20064
6 Ratios from financial statements of German
enterprises 2004 to 2005, February 20084
7 Erl/C228uterungen zum Leistungsverzeichnis f/C252r die
Zahlungsbilanz, March 20092
8 Balance of payments statistics of the Fed-
eral Republic of Germany, 2nd edition,
February 1991o
9 Securities deposits,
August 2005
10 Foreign direct investment stock statistics,
April 20091, 4
11 Balance of payments by region,
August 2009
12 Technologische Dienstleistungen in der Zah-
lungsbilanz, June 20082
79*DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
February 2010
1Only the headings and explanatory notes to the data
contained in the German originals are available in English.
2Available in German only.
3Solely available on the website, updated at half-yearly
intervals. Only the sections “Preliminary remarks“,
“Monthly balance sheet statistics”, “Borrowers’ statis-
tics“, “External positions report” and “Customer classifi-
cation” are available in English.
4Available on the website only.*Unless stated otherwise, these publications are avail-
able on the Bundesbank’s website in German and Eng-
lish.
oNot available on the website.

80*DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
EUROSYSTEM
Monthly Report
February 2010
Discussion Papers*
Series 1
Economic Studies
28/2009
Efficient estimation of forecast uncertainty based
on recent forecast errors
29/2009
Financial constraints and the margins of FDI
30/2009
Unemployment insurance and the business cycle:
Prolong benefit entitlements in bad times?
31/2009
A solution to the problem of too many instruments
in dynamic panel data GMM
32/2009
Are oil price forecasters finally right? Regressive ex-
pectations toward more fundamental valus of the
oil price
33/2009
Bank capital regulation, the lending channel and
business cycles
34/2009
Deciding to peg the exchange rate in developing
countries: the role of private-sector debt
35/2009
Analyse der /C220bertragung US-amerikanischer
Schocks auf Deutschland auf Basis eines FAVAR
36/2009
Choosing and using payment instruments: evi-
dence from German microdata
01/2010
Optimal monetary policy in a small open economy
with financial frictionsSeries 2
Banking and Financial Studies
10/2009
The dark and the bright side of liquidity risks:
evidence from open-end real estate funds in
Germany
11/2009
Determinants for using visible reserves in German
banks – an empirical study
12/2009
Margins of international banking: Is there a prod-
uctivity pecking order in banking, too?
13/2009
Systematic risk of CDOs and CDO arbitrage
14/2009
The dependency of the banks’ assets and liabilities:
evidence from Germany
15/2009
What macroeconomic shocks affect the German
banking system? Analysis in an integrated micro-
macro model
Banking legislation
1 Bundesbank Act and Statute of the European
System of Central Banks and of the European
Central Bank, June 1998
2 Gesetz /C252ber das Kreditwesen, February 20092
2a Solvabilit/C228ts- und Liquidit/C228tsverordnung, Feb-
ruary 20082
*Discussion Papers which appeared from 2000 onwards
are available on the website.
For footnotes, see p 79*.

