MONTHLY REPORT
NOVEMBER DECEMBER JANUARY FEBRUARY MARCH
2010
Vol 62
No 1 1

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
EUROSYSTEM
Monthly Report
November 2010
Deutsche Bundesbank
Wilhelm-Epstein-Strasse 14
60431 Frankfurt am Main
Germany
Postal address
Postfach 10 06 02
60006 Frankfurt am Main
Germany
Tel +49 69 9566 -0
Fax +49 69 9566 3077
Telex 41227 within Germany
414431 from abroad
http://www.bundesbank.de
Reproduction permitted only if source is stated.
ISSN 0418 -8292 (print edition)
ISSN 1862 -1325 (online edition)
The German original of this Monthly Report
went to press at 4.30 pm on 16 November
2010.Annual and weekly publishing schedules for
selected statistics of the Deutsche Bundes-
bank can be downloaded from our website.
The statistical data are also published on the
website.
The Monthly Report is published by the
Deutsche Bundesbank, Frankfurt am Main,
by virtue of section 18 of the Bundesbank
Act. It is available to interested parties free of
charge.
This is a translation of the original German-
language version, which is the sole authorita-
tive text.

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2010
ContentsThe current economic situation
in Germany 5
Overview 6
Global and European setting 12
Are structural dislocations preventing
a more rapid recovery of the US labour
market? 18
Monetary policy and banking business 24
Money market management
and liquidity needs 26
Financial markets 37
Recalculated weights for indicators
of the German economy’s price
competitiveness 42
Economic conditions in Germany 49
Public finances 61
Statistical Section 1*
Key economic data for the euro area 5*
Overall monetary survey in the euro area 8*
Consolidated financial statement
of the Eurosystem 16*
Banks 20*
Minimum reserves 42*
Interest rates 43*
Capital market 48*
Financial accounts 52*
Public finances in Germany 54*
Economic conditions in Germany 61*
External sector 68*

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
EUROSYSTEM
Monthly Report
November 2010
Overview of publications by the
Deutsche Bundesbank 77*
Abbreviations and symbols
eEstimated
pProvisional
pePartly estimated
rRevised
...Data available at a later date
.Data unknown, not to be published or
not meaningful
0Less than 0.5 but more than nil
–Nil
Discrepancies in the totals are due to round-
ing.

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2010
5The current economic
situation in Germany

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
EUROSYSTEM
Monthly Report
November 2010
6OverviewGerman growth more broadly based
Global economic development remained on
an expansionary path moving into the second
half of the year. As anticipated, the slow-
down from the previously very dynamic pace
of global growth, which was already a feature
in the second quarter, continued. However,
various indicators at the current end suggest
that the rate of expansion is likely to speed
up again somewhat towards year-end.
The lower momentum in the summer months
was mainly due to more moderate growth in
the industrial countries. In the third quarter,
in particular, the cyclical dynamics in the euro
area slackened compared to the very buoyant
second quarter. Growth was again generated
chiefly by the German economy, which is cur-
rently driving economic expansion in the euro
area and is having a stabilising effect there.
On balance, the peripheral countries again
made a negative contribution to the overall
outcome. Moreover, the strained public fi-
nances in several of these euro-area countries
has recently again been intensely spotlighted
by market players. Without urgently needed
measures to regain investor confidence, the
economic outlook in the countries concerned
will remain clouded for the foreseeable fu-
ture. In the second half of the year to date,
the economic recovery in the United States
remained on the moderate path upon which
it had embarked in the second quarter. In the
emerging market economies of south and
east Asia as well as Latin America, exports
often provided weaker impetus, while do-
mestic demand continued to expand apace.
Quarter-on-quarter aggregate growth in thisGlobal
economy

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2010
7group of countries is likely to have been fairly
strong again, so that economic policymakerscontinued to focus on preventing their econ-omies from overheating.
The different pace of economic growth in the
industrial and emerging market economiesalso left its mark on financial market trendsduring the summer months. Given the brightoverall global outlook, confidence on thefinancial markets rebounded. This was re-flected particularly in price movements on theinternational stock markets. Favourable quar-terly results and improved earnings prospectsfor enterprises pushed up stock prices in themain. Funding conditions for European firmson the bond markets also improved percep-tibly over the reporting period. However, theemerging regional disparities in cyclical recov-ery also caused tensions on the foreignexchange markets. In this environment, theeuro continued to trend upwards againstother major currencies. Moreover, in recentweeks, financial market fears regarding thesustainability of public finances in the periph-eral countries of the currency union haveescalated massively.
Despite Germany’s very buoyant economic
development, domestic capital market yieldsremained virtually unchanged on balanceafter mid-year, amid fairly high volatility and,at one point, an all-time low for Bunds. Thereare probably two main reasons why the posi-tive economic stimuli were not reflected morein reported yields. First, Germany was unableto escape the dampening effects of increasedscepticism regarding growth in other majorindustrial economies. Second, investors con-tinued to differentiate very strongly between
issuers given stark differences in the fiscalpositions in the euro-area countries. Whilesafe-haven effects temporarily drove Bundinterest rates down to a record low close to2%, bond prices in some euro-area partnercountries came under a lot of pressure.
Given the ongoing economic recovery ex-
pected in the euro area, firmly anchored long-er-term inflation expectations and still weakunderlying monetary dynamics, the Govern-ing Council of the ECB identified no increasedrisks to price stability over the time horizonrelevant to monetary policy. It therefore againleft the Eurosystem’s key policy rates un-changed in the third quarter of 2010.
Conditions on the euro-area money market
also improved perceptibly over the summermonths. The maturing of several large longer-term transactions since mid-year reduced themarket’s refinancing volume by more than3535 billion. As banks only partly offset this
withdrawal of liquidity, excess liquidity in thebanking system contracted significantly. Thistended to lift money market interest rates. Inview of the additional funding needs at year-end and the worsening of the sovereign debtproblems in several euro-area member states,the Governing Council of the ECB again de-cided that the now index-linked full allotmentprocedure would be retained also for thethree-month longer-term refinancing oper-ations that do not expire until after the year-end.
The underlying monetary dynamics – in other
words, those components of monetary
Financial
markets
Monetary
policy

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
EUROSYSTEM
Monthly Report
November 2010
8growth that are relevant to inflation – re-
mained muted in the reporting quarter. The
monetary aggregate M3 grew perceptibly be-
tween July and September for the second
quarter in a row, with bank lending to the pri-
vate sector the principal factor in this for the
first time since the end of 2008. However,
growth in loans and securitised lending in the
euro area remained moderate overall in the
third quarter of 2010. In line with this, aggre-
gate inflation projections based on monetary
data continue to indicate that there is no pro-
nounced risk to price stability in the euro area
over the time horizon relevant to monetary
policy.
The German economy continued its upturn
over the summer months. According to the
flash estimate produced by the Federal Statis-
tical Office, real gross domestic product
(GDP) rose by 0.7% in the third quarter of
2010 after adjustment for seasonal and
calendar effects. This reflects the anticipated
normalisation after the second quarter, which
was inflated by backlog and catch-up effects.
The recovery of the German economy was
again buoyed by the robust global economy.
Nonetheless, there is no overlooking the fact
that domestic economic growth forces are
now gaining in strength. The sharp expansion
in investment in machinery and equipment
and the further appreciable increase in private
consumption are clear evidence of this. The
renewed rise in production has also lifted
capacity utilisation in manufacturing.
In the third quarter of 2010, German export-
ers benefited from the continued global eco-
nomic recovery. The fact that exports of inter-mediate, capital and consumer goods ex-
perienced similar levels of growth suggests
that German manufacturers across the board
participated in the recovery of the global
economy.
The investment environment remained buoy-
ant over the summer months. Purchases of
machinery and equipment by enterprises are
likely to have risen sharply again over the
summer. The volume of investment in cap-
acity extensions was probably larger than was
to be expected given that capacity is, in part,
still underutilised. Construction investment in
the third quarter could have largely main-
tained the level of the second quarter, which
was boosted by catch-up effects. Historically
low mortgage rates appear to be prompting
numerous households to hurry to realise their
dream of home ownership.
Against this backdrop, the as yet muted
growth of credit to non-financial corporations
in Germany is probably mainly due to their
improved internal funding sources in the
wake of the economic recovery. The latest re-
sults of the Bank Lending Survey likewise indi-
cate that banks are not hampering the upturn
in Germany. They show that credit standards
for enterprises were eased somewhat in the
third quarter of 2010 for the first time since
the onset of the financial crisis.
The recovery of the German labour market
continued into the second half of 2010. Em-
ployment picked up further in the third quar-
ter, and unemployment clearly declined
again. In a welcome development, numerous
additional jobs subject to social security con-German
economy

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2010
9tributions were created, while the number of
workers with a main occupation in low-paidpart-time jobs not subject to social contribu-tions fell further. Moreover, the total head-count engaged in short-time work continuedto come down rapidly with the sharp recoveryin industrial activity. However, the number ofnewly registered short-time workers is stillhigher than in the years immediately preced-ing the financial and economic crisis, whichshows that not all industrial enterprises feltthe effects of the economic upturn. Leadingindicators suggest that the positive labourmarket trend will continue. Thus seasonallyadjusted vacancies rose further up until Octo-ber 2010, and the number of firms intendingto hire new staff in the next 12 months hasrisen sharply according to a survey conductedby the German Chamber of Industry andCommerce (DIHK) in autumn 2010.
The robust upswing has appreciably lifted
corporate profitability. The trade unions areconsequently stepping up their calls foremployees to be given a fair share in thegrowing economic rewards, a view which isincreasingly finding support among thegeneral public as elsewhere. More and moreemployers, too, are now willing to retrospect-ively compensate staff for their frequentlysignificant income shortfalls during the crisis.The rise in negotiated wages in the thirdquarter of 2010 was still pegged to wageagreements concluded during the crisis whenno or only very moderate increases in sched-uled rates of pay had been agreed. The actualrise in wages is likely to have been muchhigher, however, given the normalisation inworking hours.During the summer of 2010, factory-gate
prices rose much more moderately thanks tothe euro’s appreciation and lower crude oilprices. These factors also dampened con-sumer price inflation in the third quarter of2010.
The buoyant momentum of the German
economy appears to be firmly based atpresent and is unlikely to be dented much bythe gradual phasing-out of the fiscal stimuli.The economy should benefit from furtherexternal stimuli over the next few months.This is indicated, not least, by enterprises’very optimistic export expectations. More-over, growth is likely to become even morebroadly based going forward; overall eco-nomic expansion will also be buoyed by risingdomestic demand on the back of the positivestate of the labour market and the veryfavourable financing conditions. Further-more, capacity utilisation is back at its normallevel at ever more enterprises, which makesinvestment in additional plant and equipmentmore pressing. Historically low mortgagerates are also boosting private housingconstruction. Nonetheless, the overall pace ofeconomic growth will fall well short of thedynamic surge seen in the spring, which waspartly driven by extraordinary factors.
However, the continued recovery remains
conditional on expectations of global eco-nomic development in general and exports inparticular being fulfilled, as they are under-pinning the positive labour market develop-ments. This expectation is additionally subjectto the proviso that the sovereign debt crisis inthe euro area causes no other marked down-

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
EUROSYSTEM
Monthly Report
November 2010
10side risks to the real economy via the financial
markets and banks.
The positive macroeconomic performance so
far this year has also prevented Germany’s
public finances from deteriorating to the
extent that was initially expected. As things
currently stand, the deficit ratio is likely to
increase to roughly 31/C252%, after 3% last year.
Given that fiscal policy remains clearly expan-
sionary, the structural deficit will rise more
sharply. And the debt ratio, too, will climb
way above its already high 2009 level, driven
mainly by the risk assets that were assumed
when bad banks were set up for WestLB and
HRE.
Next year, the general government deficit is
likely to drop below the 3% threshold as the
economic recovery is expected to continue,
stimulus measures will be phased out and
cost-cutting measures will have been imple-
mented. Better-than-expected economic and
budgetary developments mean that there is
now a chance, in a favourable macroeconom-
ic setting, of achieving the intended balanced
budget more quickly. That would also limit
the considerable increase in government
indebtedness that is already in the pipeline.
To this end, a strict austerity course should be
pursued at all levels – in line with the under-
lying intent of the national and EU budgetary
rules – and no concessions should be made in
terms of the planned consolidation path. It
remains to be seen whether policymakers
avoid repeating the error they made in the
past of postponing the necessary consolida-
tion when times are good.With regard to the German government’s
new debt brake, the fact that it will apparent-
ly not be rigorously implemented even in the
first year is a bad sign. When it was adopted
in the spring of 2009, it was agreed, given
considerable uncertainty about the likely
course of macroeconomic development, that
there should be a transitional period up until
2016 during which the structural deficit
recorded in the base-year 2010 would be
reduced in equal steps. As the crisis-related
strains are now obviously having a much
smaller impact on the central government
budget than was initially feared, the base
value – and thus the scope for new borrow-
ing up until 2015 – should be reduced ac-
cordingly. In the summer the German govern-
ment rightly updated its adjustment path, but
now evidently intends not to lower the base
value further in line with the latest data. This
gives policymakers greater scope for new
borrowing over the next few years which, if
fully used, would – as so often in the past – in
good times put off the necessary consolida-
tion until later years. The clearly documented
legislative intent of the new debt brake,
which is currently being regarded as a model
for ensuring sustainable public finances in
other euro-area countries, too, would thus be
undermined on the occasion of its very first
application, thereby hurting confidence in the
long-term effectiveness of the reform.
The key importance of sustainable public
finances is graphically illustrated by the
present situation in several euro-area coun-
tries. During the crisis, the European fiscal
framework and its implementation ultimately
did not suffice to ensure sound public fi-Public finances

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2010
11nances in all member states. In the light of
this experience, the European institutionalarrangements for crisis prevention and crisismanagement must therefore likewise be im-proved.
The changes to the Stability and Growth Pact
that the European Council initiated at theend of October may result in progress vis-/C224-vis the status quo . However, it is already be-
coming evident that the adjustments will fallshort of the more ambitious ideas proposedinter alia by the European Commission. Thus
implementation of the rules by the EcofinCouncil will remain decisive. In addition tothe changes to the fiscal framework, greatermacroeconomic oversight is to ensure thatserious problems are identified and combatedat an early stage. However, any temptation toindulge in macroeconomic fine-tuning shouldbe resisted, and the rules should mainly seekto limit serious distortions and imbalances
– for instance regarding unsustainable currentaccount deficits or severe losses of competi-tiveness.
The European Council has also laid the foun-
dations for setting up a crisis resolution mech-anism. In particular, the reaffirmation of acentral principle of the existing union, namelythat neither the Union nor the member statesare liable for the debt of another memberstate, is to be welcomed. A transparent andpredictable procedure which also notablyguarantees a comprehensive and credibleconsolidation and reform programme could,in conjunction with improved financialmarket regulation, largely limit the risk ofa systemic crisis. In this context privatecreditors, too, have an essential responsibilityfor restoring sustainable public finances inover-indebted countries.

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
EUROSYSTEM
Monthly Report
November 2010
12Global and
European settingWorld economic activity
Global growth, which in spring had already
started a visible slowdown following a period
of very vigorous activity, continued to slacken
in the second half of the year. This was due
mainly to a perceptible tailing-off of expan-
sion in the industrial countries after the torrid
pace of growth in some major emerging
market economies (EMEs) had already sub-
sided a bit in the second quarter. The primary
factor behind the weaker upswing among
the industrial countries was that aggregate
output growth in the euro area was down by
around one-half on the period – which partly
represents a return to normal following a very
strong second quarter. The UK economy was
unable to fully sustain its high growth rate
from the same period, either. After the mid-
point of the year, the United States remained
on the moderate path of economic recovery
upon which it had embarked in the second
quarter. The faster growth of the Japanese
economy is most likely attributable, in parti-
cular, to temporary factors. In the summer
months, according to initial estimates based
on provisional data for the United States,
Japan, the United Kingdom and the euro
area, real gross domestic product (GDP) for
the industrial countries grew by a seasonally
adjusted1/C252% on the period, compared with
+3/C254% for each of the three preceding
quarters. Total output was up by 23/C254% on the
year.
In the emerging market economies (EMEs) of
south and east Asia, the stimuli from exports,
which in many places were weak, were offset
in the summer months by persistently vibrantGlobal
economy on
flatter growth
path
Danger of
overheating in
some EMEs

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2010
13growth in domestic demand; as a result,
quarter-on-quarter aggregate growth is likelyto have once again been quite strong. In LatinAmerica, the previously rapid pace of growthhas slowed down. On the whole, economicpolicymakers in those countries remainedfocused on preventing their economies fromoverheating. Brazil raised its key lending ratesonce again in July. China raised its rates inmid-October for the first time since 2007.India’s monetary authorities raised their reporate in several steps, beginning in March, by atotal of 1.50 percentage points to 6.25%. Asharp contrast to these countries is presentedby developments in the Russian economy,which was hampered by a variety of specialfactors.
In the July-August period, global industrial
output was up by a mere
1/C252% from the
second quarter, in which it had grown by2%. However, the pace of expansion seemsto be resurging somewhat towards the endof the year. The global Purchasing Managers’Indices for manufacturing (and services) wereup perceptibly in October after falling notice-ably in the five preceding months. Althoughthe expectation component of the ifo WorldEconomic Climate indicator was down signifi-cantly in the third quarter from a high level, itstill remained higher than in the boom year of2007.
In the October edition of its World Economic
Outlook (WEO), the International MonetaryFund (IMF) once again raised its forecast ofglobal growth for 2010 slightly (+0.2 percent-age point) to 4.8%. At the beginning of Julyalready, it had perceptibly revised its forecastOverall economic output
in industrial countries *
* The United States, Japan, the United King-
dom and the euro area.
Deutsche Bundesbank2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 20102.01.001.0
––+
–2.0–1.00+1.0+2.0
4.03.02.01.001.02.0
––––++
–3.0–2.0–1.00+1.0
3.02.01.001.0
–––+Seasonally adjusted,
quarter-on-quarter percentage change
Industrial countries
United States
Japan
United Kingdom
Euro areaSigns of growth
picking up
slightly in
autumn 2010
Renewed
upward revision
of IMF forecast
for 2010

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
EUROSYSTEM
Monthly Report
November 2010
14upward, primarily owing to the unexpectedly
good start to 2010. The projection for 2011,
however, was reduced slightly in the autumn
to 4.2% owing to the slackening pace of
growth in the second half of the current year.
The IMF expects growth over the course of
2011 to be about as brisk as this year. In a
regional view, the renewed upward revision
for 2010 is attributable mainly to a more
favourable assessment of economic activity in
the developing and emerging economies,
which are now projected to see growth of
7.1%, compared with 2.7% in the advanced
economies. According to the IMF, however,
next year’s growth rates in both groups of
countries will probably be down by around
one-half percentage point. The projections
were raised particularly sharply for Germany,
up to 3.3% (2010) and 2.0% (2011), whichwas also the main reason for the more
positive assessment of the euro-area outlook.
The forecast for real world trade growth was
raised by 2.4 percentage points to 11.4% for
2010 and by 0.7 percentage point to 7.0%
for 2011. As before, the IMF still considers
that the risks with regard to the latest growth
projection outweigh the chances of a better
result. The primary factor cited by the IMF is
the danger emanating from the sharp rise in
government debt in the industrial countries.
The price of Brent crude oil continued to fluc-
tuate in the summer months within a corridor
of between US$70 and just over US$80 per
barrel. Owing also, in all likelihood, to the
perceptible depreciation of the US dollar, the
price of Brent rose distinctly in October on
the month (+7%) yet failed to sustainably
breach the upper barrier of the aforemen-
tioned price range. By mid-November, how-
ever, prices had climbed to US$87 ( 3631/C252).
The year-on-year price increase, denominated
in US dollars, ran to 133/C254% at last report.
Forward quotations were not quite able to
keep pace with the rising spot price in Octo-
ber, signalling somewhat smaller price in-
creases for the future. The prices of other
commodities went up quite sharply over the
summer. Owing, above all, to cereals crop
failures in eastern Europe, world market
prices for food, beverages and tobacco rose
by 161/C252% between July and October. Indus-
trial raw materials prices, too, trended visibly
upwards (+73/C254%) in the light of robust global
economic developments. Overall, in October
the HWWI non-energy commodity price index,
in US dollar terms, surpassed its July 2008
peak for the first time since then.World market prices for 
crude oil and industrial raw 
materials as well as food, 
beverages and tobacco
Sources:  Thomson  Reuters  and  HWWI.  — 
 = 12 November 2010.
Deutsche Bundesbank2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010100125150175200250300400500US dollar basis, 2000 = 100, log scale
Crude oil 
(Brent)
Industrial raw 
materials
Food, beverages 
and tobaccoMarked rise in
commodity
prices ...

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2010
15Amidst higher crude oil prices, consumers in
the US dollar area, in particular – but not somuch households in countries whose curren-cies appreciated against the dollar – werecharged higher energy prices in October. Inthe June-September period, however, theConsumer Price Index for the industrialcountries rose by merely 0.3% overall afterseasonal adjustment. Its year-on-year riseopened up from +1.1% to +1.3%. Excludingenergy and food, inflation, at 0.8% at theend of the third quarter, was nearly as low asthree months earlier. For the industrialcountries as a group, there is currently nodiscernible danger of either inflation ordeflation.
Selected emerging market economiesThe south and east Asian emerging market
economies (EMEs) maintained their powerfulgrowth momentum in the summer. In China,year-on-year growth of real GDP was downin the third quarter from 10
1/C254%t o91/C252%.
However, quarter on quarter, aggregateeconomic growth is likely to have increased.According to the monthly indicators, domes-tic final demand was unable to fully maintainits growth rate on the year. Nominal retailsales continued to rise strongly, whereasgrowth in overall fixed investment camedown somewhat from a high level. In thelight of the slackening of growth in the in-dustrial countries, exports lost a more signifi-cant amount of steam. Consumer price infla-tion in China has picked up considerably inrecent months, from 2.9% in June to 4.4%in October, mainly on account of weather-related increases in food prices. India’s econ-omy, which in the spring saw real GDP grow
by 10% on the year, has remained on itsgrowth track in the past few months, al-though industrial output growth slowed upfrom 15
3/C254% in the second quarter to 11% in
the third. Consumer price inflation, despitedeclining once again after mid-year, remainedhigh in September at 9.8%. One factor wasthat food prices continued their clear upwardtrend even though the monsoon season wasprecipitation-rich.
The uptick in economic activity in some large
Latin American countries is likely to havedecelerated in the summer months. More-over, the expansionary forces appear to haveshifted, particularly in Brazil. Owing, in par-ticular, to ebbing contributions from foreigndemand, third-quarter industrial output was,after seasonal adjustment, down somewhaton the period. By contrast, retail sales grewby a very strong 3
1/C252% in real terms. This
was attributable to exceptionally favourabledevelopments in the labour market and ahigh level of consumer confidence. Aftertreading water in the summer months, infla-tion rose perceptibly, to 5.2% in October. InMexico, too, economic activity subsided fromits level in the spring, which had witnessedreal GDP growth (after seasonal adjustment)of no less than 3
1/C254%. Manufacturing, which
in the meantime has recovered a large per-centage of its crisis-related losses, saw outputexpand in the summer by only
1/C252%, com-
pared with +13/C254% a quarter earlier. It is
noteworthy that Mexican exporters derivedsub-par benefits from the high volume of USimport activity in the 2010 Q2-Q3 period.Inflation in Mexico has trended slightly up-... but only
moderate
increase in
consumer
prices
South and east
Asian EMEs still
with strong
momentumSlower growth
in Latin
America

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
EUROSYSTEM
Monthly Report
November 2010
16wards in the past few months and stood at
4.0% in October.
In the third quarter of the year, the Russian
economy came under considerable strain as a
result of an exceptionally hot summer and a
wave of large forest and bog fires. Severe
farm output losses, particularly in cereals,
were one result. Another upshot was that
business in some parts of the country was, at
times, hampered significantly by the fire-
related smog. This caused year-on-year real
GDP growth to diminish from 51/C254% in spring
to 23/C254% in summer, according to the initial
official estimate. Given the continuing favour-
able underlying conditions, including the
rather high price of oil, however, the final
quarter of 2010 could see a return to strong-
er growth in economic output. The crop fail-
ures have driven up food prices considerably
in Russia; this has also led to a noticeable rise
in overall consumer price inflation, which
stood at 7.5% in October
USA
In the July-September period, the US
economy remained on the moderate growth
path onto which it had embarked in the
second quarter. Real GDP growth of an annu-
alised rate of 41/C252% in the 2009 Q4-2010 Q1
period was followed by a slowdown in the
Q2-Q3 period to 2%. However, the slow-
down masks a persistently high momentum
of real domestic demand, which grew by an
annualised rate of 41/C252% over the Q2-Q3
stretch, thereby even outdoing its growth
over the preceding six-month period despite
a considerable reduction in support from theinventory cycle. The reduction in GDP growth
is therefore due not to domestic demand but
to foreign trade. Whereas real imports of
goods and services skyrocketed, export
growth dwindled. However, the US economy
has thus generated key stimuli for a continu-
ation of the global recovery process.
If – staying purely within the summer half-
year – one compares the third quarter with
the second, real GDP rose once again by1/C252%
after seasonal adjustment. However, growth
of domestic final demand, at1/C252%, was down
slightly from its earlier pace (+1%). This was
primarily because households’ gross fixed
capital formation failed to maintain its spring
pace, especially because households cut back
their residential construction investment
sharply (-81/C254%). This setback, however, has
to be placed in the context of the expiry of
tax incentives for house purchases, which
had previously given the private housing
market a temporary boost. Of late, a variety
of indicators have been pointing to a stabil-
isation of the situation in the housing market.
Investment in commercial construction went
up slightly in the summer quarter for the first
time in two years. Inventory investment
likewise generated positive stimuli. Foreign
trade once again depressed GDP growth
sharply, though not by as much as in the
spring.
Household consumption was up by a season-
ally adjusted1/C252% on the quarter, a slow pace
compared with previous periods of recovery.
This was due mainly to the rather muted
growth of household income owing to the
sluggish recovery in the US job market. TheRussian
economy under
considerable
strain owing to
exceptional
heat and fires
GDP growth in
Q2-Q3 period
weaker but
domestic
demand with
greater
momentumHouseholds’
gross fixed
capital
formation
trod water in
summer ...
... household
consumption
increased
moderately

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2010
17sluggishness of this recovery has recently
been attributed by various commentators tostructural rigidities in the US economy. Acloser look reveals, however, that muteddemand for labour among firms is by far themore important factor (see box on pages18-19). The sharp reduction in public-sectorjobs had a particularly damaging impact. In asituation of tight budgets, especially affectingmunicipalities, the public sector shed morethan 140,000 jobs during the summermonths. In addition, 334,000 temporary jobscreated for the census expired. By contrast,non-farm employment in the private sectorincreased by 367,000 over the summer,which comes to an average of 122,000 jobsper month. In the light of these counter-vailing factors, the seasonally adjusted un-employment rate, at 9.6% in the third quar-ter, virtually held firm at the level of the pre-ceding two periods. October was the firstmonth since May in which a considerablenumber (151,000) of new non-farm jobswere created in net terms;
1however, the
unemployment rate, which is calculated in aseparate survey of households, remainedunchanged. Consumers’ purchasing powerwas boosted in the summer quarter by con-sumer price developments. Owing to pro-nounced base effects in energy and foodprices, the rate of inflation, at 1.2%, wasone-third lower than before. Excludingenergy and food prices, the rate of priceincrease held steady at 0.9%.
JapanThe Japanese economy remained on its
mainly steep, albeit somewhat uneven, pathto recovery. Aggregate output, according to
the initial estimate, was up in the thirdquarter by a seasonally adjusted 1% from thespring quarter, in which it had picked up by
1/C252%. Growth of 41/C252% on the year was
achieved. It is worth noting that, althoughthe figure was 6% higher than its nadir in thewinter of 2009, it was still 3% below its cyc-lical peak in the first quarter of 2008. Thegood third-quarter result was supported byJapanese domestic demand. Foreign trade,by contrast, provided no net input. House-hold consumption, in particular, saw stronggrowth. This reflected, in some cases, front-loading effects as a result of the financialUS GDP, domestic demand 
and foreign trade
Source:  Bureau  of  Economic  Analysis. — 
1 Goods  and  services.  —  o Recession  as 
dated by the NBER (2008 Q1 to 2009 Q2).
Deutsche Bundesbank2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010949698100
80859095100105110Quarterly, seasonally adjusted,
2007 Q4 = 100, log scale
Real GDPReal domestic demand
Scale reduced
Real imports 1
Real exports1
o
1If the sharp upward corrections for August and Sep-
tember are taken into account, employment grew by a
total of 0.9 million since the beginning of the year, or an
average of 87,000 persons per month.Japanese
economy still
on path to
recovery

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
EUROSYSTEM
Monthly Report
November 2010
18Deuts che Bun desbankAre stru ctural dislo cations preventin g a more rapi d re covery of the U S labour market?
The re covery of the U S labour market has faile d to pi ck up 
steam thus far an d is thus likely to have been a drag on the 
upturn in househol d consumption an d, ultimately, also on 
aggregate output growth in comparison with earlier perio ds 
of expansion.1 At 9. 6%, the U S unemployment rate was only 
½ per centa ge point below its peak one year previously. The 
slu ggish re covery of the la bour market is fre quently attri b-
ute d to an in crease in stru ctural unemployment, whi ch – so 
the reasonin g goes – came a bout, in terms of both re gion 
and industry, mainly as a result of pro blems in the real estate 
market.
Proponents of this theory point, in parti cular, to a clear rise 
in va cancies in re cent quarters whi ch they claim has not 
been mat ched by a decline in unemployment. They believe 
this in dicates that businesses are havin g difﬁ culty ﬁ  nding 
suita ble candidates from the pool of unemploye d workers 
and expe ct a mismat ch of this nature between la bour sup-
ply an d deman d to be demonstrate d by an outwar d shift in 
the  Beveri dge curve, whi ch depi cts the e quili brium between 
vacancies an d unemployment in the la bour market. By 
contrast, cyclical ﬂ uctuations woul d be illustrate d by a move-
ment alon g a given Beveri dge curve.
One empiri cal pro blem in this re gard is that the Bureau of 
Labor Statisti cs’ (BL S) time series for the num ber of va cancies, on whi ch su ch ar gumentation is usually base d, only dates 
back to the en d of 2000.2 It is therefore virtually impossi ble 
to paint a typi cal pi cture of cyclical developments. Barni chon 
and Fi gura (2010) have constru cted a composite in dicator 
for the num ber of va cancies, whi ch can be use d to compare 
employment a cross cycles.3 This shows that, in in cipient 
phases of re covery, the Beveri dge curve is by no means sta ble 
but re gularly moves counter- clockwise. This is due to the 
time-la g between a dvertisin g a va cancy an d ﬁ llin g it, whi ch 
means that the num ber of va cancies at the start of a re covery 
phase initially rises faster than unemployment can fall before 
the momentum a djusts a ccordingly.4
The inﬂ  ection o bserve d in the Beveri dge curve, in an d of 
itself, does not ne cessarily in dicate an unusually hi gh level of 
stru ctural fri ction in the U S labour market at present. How-
ever, the surroun ding dataset does not appear to conﬁ rm the 
mismat ch hypothesis of late. The num ber of va cancies is still 
low; in relation to the sum of payroll employment an d va can-
cies, it amounte d to 2.2% in Septem ber, still short of the low 
from the previous cycle. Nor are businesses complainin g 
about a shorta ge of qualiﬁ ed appli cants. In a re gular sur-
vey of small businesses con ducted, 28% of respon dents in 
October 2010 in dicate d that few or no qualiﬁ ed appli cants 
were replyin g to va cancy a dvertisements, compare d with 
46% in O ctober 2007. Firms citin g employee qualiﬁ cations as 
the sin gle most important pro blem at present even fell to a 
histori c low of 3%.5
A rise in unemployment cause d primarily by a djustment 
pro blems in the real estate market shoul d also lea d to a 
wider dispersion of relevant la bour market varia bles bro-
ken down either by re gion or in dustry. However, this has 
not been o bserve d. The (wei ghte d) stan dard deviation of 
unemployment rates a cross all 50 states (an d the Distri ct of 
Colum bia) may have gone up sharply in the re cent re cession, 
yet it shoul d not be for gotten that the level of unemploy-
ment also soare d. Thus, the coefﬁ cient of variation – the 
ratio of the stan dard deviation to the national unemploy-
ment rate – does not show an ex ceptional rise for the most 
recent re cession. A ccording to this measure of dispersion, 
regional shifts are only gradual an d occur primarily in phases 
of expansion.6 In past years, the dispersion was on an upwar d 
tren d, al beit startin g from a very low level.
1 See Deuts che Bun desbank, The current e conomi c upturn in the 
Unite d States in comparison with earlier phases of re covery, Monthly 
Report, Au gust 2010, pp 18-19. — 2 Job Openin gs an d La bor Turnover 
Survey ( JOLT S). — 3 This analysis uses Barni chon an d Figura’s compos-
ite help-wante d in dex for the perio d from 1995 to 200 6. Fi gures for 
the current en d have been determine d usin g an estimate base d on JOLT S data. The Conferen ce Boar d’s help-wante d advertisin g in dex 
has been use d for the perio d prior to 1995. The resultin g in dex was 
then converte d into the num ber of va cancies usin g JOLT S data an d 
set a gainst the sum of (non-farm) payroll employment an d va cancies 
to calculate a ratio. See R Barni chon an d A Fi gura (2010), Buil ding a 
Composite Help-Wante d In dex, forth comin g in E conomi cs Letters. — Beveridge curves for selected periods
33456789 1 0 1 12.02.53.03.54.04.5
2001 Q1
2008 Q12005 Q4
2010 Q31976 Q41974 Q1
1983 Q41981 Q1As a percentage, seasonally adjusted, quarterly
Unemployment rateVacancy rate 3

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2010
19In the case of a pronoun ced stru ctural chan ge a cross 
industries, one woul d expe ct jo b cuts durin g the re cession 
to be con centrate d on a small num ber of in dustries an d 
for these cuts to then continue at a similar pa ce durin g a 
perio d of overall e conomi c re covery. This situation arose at 
the beginnin g of the millennium followin g the en d of the 
New E conomy boom when the manufa cturin g se ctor an d 
some servi ce o ccupations were for ced to un dergo a painful 
pro cess of a djustment. Manufa cturin g alone contri bute d 
¾ per centa ge point to the total fall in employment of 1¼% 
durin g the 2001 re cession. In the ﬁ  rst 1 6 months of the su b-
sequent overall e conomi c re covery, a perio d that has been 
use d for purposes of comparison with the current situation, 
1.1 million jo bs were lost, whi ch is just as many as durin g the 
downturn. In the information in dustry, almost twi ce as many 
jobs were cut.
By comparison, the sharp drop in overall employment durin g 
the last re cession (5¼%) was not just mu ch more severe but 
also affe cted an extremely lar ge num ber of in dustries. In 
addition to constru ction an d manufa cturin g, jo bs were axe d 
in lar ge num bers in many private se ctor servi ce o ccupations. 
Moreover – unlike the situation at the beginnin g of the mil-
lennium – there is a major differen ce in the ﬁ  gures re corded 
in the various in dustries prior to an d after the cyclical low. On 
balan ce, constru ction continue d to she d jo bs between June 
2009 an d October 2010; however, this came to a halt at the 
end of the perio d un der review. Sharp cuts durin g the re ces-
sion may mean that the ne cessary a djustments in this in dustry 
have alrea dy been ma de. The situation in ﬁ  nan cial servi ces, 
where employment ha d prove d to be relatively ro bust, also 
appears to have sta bilise d over the past few months. In other 
sectors, parti cularly manufa cturin g, there has been a tren d 
towar ds adding jobs sin ce the beginnin g of the year. Overall, 
private se ctor (non-farm) employment in O ctober 2010 was 
¼% hi gher than in June 2009 when the re cession en ded. In 
the previous cycle, similar growth was not re corded until May 
2004 – 30 months after the en d of the e conomi c downturn. 
Nota bly, however, the government se ctor – unlike in earlier 
phases of re covery – is currently exertin g a ne gative impa ct 
on the la bour market upswin g, in parti cular owin g to the 
tense ﬁ  nan cial situation of lo cal governments.
All in all, there is mu ch to su ggest that the deman d for 
labour has ha d a major impa ct on employment growth over the past few years.7 Extensive jo b cuts durin g the re cession 
were ex ceptionally broa dly base d, in terms of both re gion 
and in dustry, an d – unlike the previous “jo bless” re covery – 
employment levels sta bilise d rather promptly in many areas 
on ce a ggregate deman d ha d begun to re cover. Moreover, 
the con cern that unemployment – whi ch, initially, was to a 
lar ge extent cyclically in duced – mi ght evolve into stru cturally 
entren ched un deremployment does not ne cessarily follow 
from the latest developments on the la bour market, either.
4 See B Hansen (1970), Ex cess Deman d, Unemployment, Va cancies, an d 
Wa ges, Quarterly Journal of E conomi cs, Vol 84, No 1, pp 1-23, as well as 
O J Blan char d an d P Diamon d (1989), The Beveri dge Curve, Brookin gs 
Papers on E conomi c Activity, Vol 1989, No 1, pp 1- 60. — 5 See National 
Federation of In depen dent Business (NFIB), Small Business E conomi c 
Tren ds, Novem ber 2010. — 6 A temporary jump in autumn 2005 is due to the devastation, mainly in the state of Louisiana, cause d by hurri-
canes Katrina an d Rita. — 7 See R Barni chon an d A Fi gura (2010), What 
Drives Movements in the Unemployment Rate? A De composition of 
the Beveri dge Curve, Boar d of Governors of the Fe deral Reserve Sys-
tem, Finan ce an d Economi cs Dis cussion Series, No 48.Labour market indicators for the 
significance of structural change by region and industry
0.20.3
–6–5–4–3–2–10+1+2Seasonally adjusted, quarterly
1976 80 85 90 95 00 05 2010Coefficient of variation of
unemployment rates in US states
Recession
ConstructionMining and
logging
Manufacturing
Information
Financial activities
Professional and
business servicesEducation and
health services
Government
Other private servicesSeasonally adjustedPer-
centagepoints
... current cycle ... previous cycleContributions to change in
employment by industry in the ...
Recession
(June 2009
compared
with
Dec 2007)Recovery
(Oct 2010
compared
with
June 2009)Recovery
(Mar 2003
compared
with
Nov 2001)Recession
(Nov 2001
compared
with
Mar 2001)

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
EUROSYSTEM
Monthly Report
November 2010
20incentives to purchase fuel-efficient cars that
ended in September, which means that the
coming quarters are likely to witness a
countermovement of sorts. The improved
situation in the labour market is also likely
to have provided a perceptible boost to
economic activity. The unemployment rate
fell from 5.3% in June to 5.0% in September.
Private residential investment continued
its roller-coaster ride. Households sharply
stepped up their spending on construction in
the summer after having curbed it significant-
ly a quarter earlier. Commercial investment
remained on a steep upward path. Inventory
movements, moreover, made a slightly posi-
tive contribution to growth, whereas public-
sector demand continued to contract.
Consumer prices continued to fall in the
summer months. Year-on-year consumer
price inflation narrowed only slightly from
-0.7% in June to -0.6% in September. Ex-
cluding energy and food, the rate remained
unchanged in September at -1.5%.
United Kingdom
The UK economy, which had already seen real
GDP grow by a seasonally adjusted 11/C254%i n
the spring, continued its cyclical upturn in the
third quarter, growing at a rate of3/C254%. This
represents an increase of 23/C254% from the
sharply depressed level of a year earlier.
However, this was still nearly 4% below its
cyclical peak in 2008. One key reason for the
growth of activity being somewhat slower
than in the spring was – seen from the output
side – that growth in the manufacturing
industry was down by nearly one-half, to justover1/C252%. Another was that, in the light of
the expiring weather-related catch-up effects,
growth in the construction sector likewise
slowed down noticeably in the summer; how-
ever, at +4%, it remained strong. Gross value
added in the services sector maintained its
vigour (+1/C252%). However, the cyclical upturn
does not appear to have had a lasting impact
on the labour market just yet. Although the
standardised unemployment rate, which in
the United Kingdom is published with a con-
siderable delay, was, at 7.7% in July, some-
what lower than its peak at the beginning of
the year, the number of applicants for un-
employment benefits went back up slightly
in the summer months. Consumer price in-
flation had increased slightly further as this
report went to press; in October, headline
inflation stood at 3.2% and core inflation
was reported at 2.7%.
New EU member states
Economic output in the new EU member
states (EU-8), having already gone up by a
seasonally adjusted 1% on the period in the
second quarter, is likely to have experienced a
further significant rise in the summer. One
indication of this is that the industrial output
of the entire group of countries once again
rose strongly, by 31/C254%. Admittedly, the indus-
trial production of most of these countries
still fell well short of pre-crisis levels; in
Bulgaria it was off by as much as 173/C254%. The
labour market continued to ease slightly, in a
trend that had begun in most countries in the
spring. The aggregate unemployment rate for
this entire area fell from 9.7% to 9.5% in the
third quarter. Consumer price inflation aver-Strong cyclical
recovery of
UK economy
continued in
summerAggregate
economic
growth once
again quite
high

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2010
21aged 3.4% in the July-October period, which
was perceptibly higher than in the second
quarter. A VAT increase in Romania at mid-
year was one of the key factors in this devel-
opment.
Macroeconomic trends in the euro area
Following strong growth in spring 2010, the
euro area maintained its upswing in the
summer months at a much more moderate
pace. The seasonally adjusted period-on-
period growth of real GDP dropped by virtual-
ly one-half to just under1/C252% according to
Eurostat’s flash estimate. This slowdown, for
one thing, represents a return to normality:
the very good spring result was overstated by
special factors, such as weather-related catch-
up effects in construction. Another factor was
the relative paucity of stimuli from world trade
after the midpoint of the year; in terms of real
cross-border goods transactions, it rose after
seasonal adjustment by only 11/C254%i nJ u l y -
August from the spring quarter. In addition,
the expansionary effects of government eco-
nomic stimulus packages have probably either
dwindled or expired altogether. Aggregate
output in the euro area in the third quarter
was still 31/C254% below its cyclical peak in early
2008, which, according to the latest IMF fore-
cast, is not likely to be reattained until some-
time in 2012 at the earliest.
GDP growth in the euro area was strongly
supported by Germany in the third quarter as
well. Seasonally adjusted growth in France
(+1/C252%) and Italy (+1/C254%) was once again
below that of Germany (+3/C254%), yet thegap was no longer quite as large as in the
spring. Momentum remained sluggish in the
peripheral countries. Economic output in
Portugal rose in the summer in lockstep with
the euro area as a whole; however, in Spain,
it stagnated following sluggish growth in the
first two quarters. Aggregate output in
Greece dropped by 1% from the already
depressed level of a period earlier. (No third-
quarter GDP results for Ireland are available
yet.) Structural adjustment processes, such as
in construction or the financial sector, and
increased efforts by governments to con-
solidate public budgets, the primary aim of
which is to regain lost financial market con-
fidence as quickly as possible, are the main
reasons for the underperformance of the
peripheral countries. On the whole, however,
the heterogeneity within the euro area withHeterogeneity of euro-area 
growth
Source:  Eurostat  and  Bundesbank  calcula-
tions. — 1 Standard deviation of the season-
ally adjusted quarterly growth rates of GDP 
for  the  euro-area  member  states;  average 
values for the periods given.
Deutsche Bundesbank2009 Q2
to
2010 Q32008 Q4
to
2009 Q1Unweighted
standard deviation 1
2008 Q1
to
2008 Q300.20.40.60.81.01.21.41.6
1999
to
2007Weighted
standard deviation 1Per-
centage
points
Growth
continued in
summer
months but at
visibly more
moderate pace
Cyclical divide
in the euro area

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
EUROSYSTEM
Monthly Report
November 2010
22regard to growth since the beginning of the
upswing in spring 2009 – measured in terms
of both the weighted and unweighted stand-
ard deviation – corresponds roughly to the
1999-2007 average. The hierarchy, though,
has changed considerably. The growth rates
of some formerly fast-growing peripheral
countries have now fallen below the euro-
area average, while Germany has assumed
the function of economic locomotive.Industrial activity contributed much less to
aggregate euro-area growth in the summer
quarter. After adjustment for seasonal and
calendar variations, output was up by3/C254%
from the second quarter, in which it had
climbed by 21/C254%. Whereas the production of
capital goods surged (+21/C252%), manufacturers
of intermediate goods reported only slight
growth (+1/C252%). Consumer goods output
remained unchanged, and energy production
was down by1/C252%. This slower industrial
growth is consistent with the fact that the
rise in capacity utilisation in the July-October
period was much lower than in the preceding
three-month periods since the beginning of
the economic recovery. The gap compared
with its long-term average was still very wide
at last report; it was relatively narrow in
Germany but mostly very pronounced in the
peripheral countries. Euro-area industrial
activity is likely to keep pointing upwards in
the last quarter of the year as well. New
orders received by industry were up in July-
August by 33/C254% from their second-quarter
levels; this increase amounts to 4% excluding
other transport equipment, in which large
orders are more frequent. Sentiment in the
industrial sector has improved recently too.
Whereas household consumption in the
peripheral countries was hampered by the
continued economic slump and tax increases
as part of the necessary measures to consoli-
date public budgets, the rest of the euro area
saw consumption increase. In the euro area
as a whole, real retail spending was1/C252%
higher than in the second quarter. Car sales,
which had slumped by a total of 15% in the
first two quarters following the expiry of theTotalSelected indicators of 
industrial activity
in the euro area
Deutsche Bundesbank2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010Lin scale
Capacity utilisation859095100105110115120
67707376798285
80859095100105110115120125130Log scale
Industrial output
2005 = 100
1994 - 2009
average
Log scale
New orders received by order-based 
manufacturing industry
2005 = 100%Seasonally adjusted, quarterly
0
of which
Excluding 
other 
transport
equipmentJuly/
AugContinued
upward trend
in industrial
activity
Growth not
yet broadly
supported by
demand

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2010
23car scrappage schemes, stabilised at around
the same level as in the spring. The picture ismixed for investment. Whereas the sharpincrease in the production of capital goodsindicates continuing brisk growth in invest-ment in machinery and equipment, construc-tion output in July-August was 2% lowerthan in the second quarter, which wascharacterised by catch-up effects. Exports ofgoods to non-euro-area countries once againformed a key pillar of the economy; the July-August average in real terms surpassed a dis-tinctly elevated spring level by 1
1/C252%. Real im-
ports of goods, at 11/C254%, did not pick up
quite as sharply.
The situation in the euro-area labour market
has stabilised, at best, but not improved. Onaverage over the summer months, thenumber of unemployed, at 15.9 million,stood virtually still at the previous quarter’slevel, and unemployment held steady at10.0% after seasonal adjustment. However,this obscures major differences among thevarious countries. While unemployment wason the decline in Germany, Italy, Austria,Portugal and Finland, it was on the rise aboveall in Spain and Ireland but also in Belgium.Euro-area employment in the second quarter– more recent figures are not available – waslevel with its figure for autumn 2009. Aver-age unit wage costs in the euro area fellslightly (-
1/C254%) after remaining unchanged in
the first quarter.
Consumer price inflation in the euro area
eased up somewhat in the summer quarter.At a seasonally adjusted 0.4% on the period,
it was muted on the whole, despite the rise inVAT rates in various member states (Finland,Ireland, Portugal and Spain). This was mainlybecause, due to the appreciating euro andthe continued decline in quarterly averages ofcrude oil prices, energy prices did not rise anyfurther. Food prices, however, continued theirascent. The prices of other goods (excludingenergy and food) rose once again after sea-sonal adjustment, especially services. Theaforementioned increases in indirect taxesmay have been a contributory factor in thisdevelopment. Year-on-year headline HICP in-flation was up from +1.4% in June to +1.9%in October.Euro-area consumer prices
Year-on-year percentage change
2010
Item Q1 Q2 Q3HICP, total 1.1 1.5 1.7
of which
Energy 4.8 8.1 7.3Unprocessed food – 0.8 0.7 2.3Processed food 0.6 0.8 0.9Industrial goods 0.1 0.3 0.5Services 1.5 1.2 1.4
Deutsche Bundesbank
Labour market
situation
remains
difficult
Moderate rise
in consumer
prices

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
EUROSYSTEM
Monthly Report
November 2010
24Monetary policy and
banking businessInterest rate policy and the money market
The cyclical recovery in the euro area con-
tinued in the third quarter of 2010. As
expected, the rate of expansion was down
compared with the extremely dynamic
growth seen in the previous quarter. None-
theless, the upswing remains uninterrupted.
Economic activity in the euro area benefited
from ongoing positive developments at the
global level along with the exceptionally
robust dynamics underpinning the German
economy. For the next few months, the
Governing Council of the ECB expects this
recovery to continue. Against this backdrop,
and taking into account the solidly anchored
longer-term inflation expectations as well as
the still weak, though recently accelerating,
underlying pace of monetary expansion, the
Council sees no increased risks to price stabil-
ity over the time horizon relevant to monetary
policy. For this reason, the Council again
chose to leave the Eurosystem’s key policy
rates unchanged in the third quarter of 2010.
The interest rate at which the Eurosystem
supplies its counterparties with central bank
liquidity as part of main refinancing oper-
ations (MROs), which were once again
conducted as fixed-rate tenders with full
allotment between July and September, thus
remains at 1%; the interest rate on the mar-
ginal lending facility is 1.75%. Funds held
under the deposit facility are remunerated at
0.25%.
In order not to jeopardise the nascent
recovery on the euro money market by exit-
ing the non-standard monetary policy meas-
ures too quickly, the ECB Governing CouncilKey Eurosystem
rates
unchanged
Full allotment
for MROs to be
continued until
the beginning
of 2011

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2010
25announced in September that it would con-
tinue to conduct all MROs as well as re-financing operations with a maturity of onemaintenance period as fixed-rate tenderprocedures with full allotment at the mainrefinancing rate for as long as needed, and atleast until 18 January 2011. At the sametime, the Council resolved to continue withfull allotment for three-month longer-termrefinancing operations (LTROs) beyond theturn of the year, but to conduct the fourth-
quarter tenders on an interest-indexed basis.The decision not to return to variable-ratetenders for the duration of 2010 was based,first, on past experience which has shownthat banks’ end-of-year liquidity needs arehard to predict and, second, the consider-ation that the exit from non-standard mon-etary policy measures would in any eventcarry on automatically in the fourth quarterOpen market operations of the Eurosystem*
Value
dateType of trans-
action 1Maturityin daysActual
allotmentin5billionDeviation
from thebenchmark
2
in5billionMarginal
rate/fixedrate%Allotment
ratio%Weighted
rate%Cover
ratio
3Numberof bidders
14.07.10 FTO (–) 7 – 60.0 – 0.65 71.46 0.56 1.64 85
14.07.10 MRO (FRT) 7 195.7 61.2 1.00 100.00 – 1.00 14714.07.10 S-LTRO (FRT) 28 49.4 – 1.00 100.00 – 1.00 3421.07.10 MRO (FRT) 7 201.3 153.3 1.00 100.00 – 1.00 16321.07.10 FTO (–) 7 – 60.0 – 0.64 8.84 0.56 1.62 8828.07.10 FTO (–) 7 – 60.5 – 0.60 24.04 0.55 1.46 8628.07.10 MRO (FRT) 7 190.0 186.0 1.00 100.00 – 1.00 15129.07.10 LTRO (FRT) 91 23.2 – 1.00 100.00 – 1.00 7004.08.10 FTO (–) 7 – 60.5 – 0.50 86.22 0.45 1.91 9304.08.10 MRO (FRT) 7 154.8 190.3 1.00 100.00 – 1.00 12510.08.10 FTO (–) 1 – 201.8 – 0.80 100.00 0.77 1.00 17111.08.10 MRO (FRT) 7 153.7 59.7 1.00 100.00 – 1.00 11111.08.10 S-LTRO (FRT) 28 39.1 – 1.00 100.00 – 1.00 3611.08.10 FTO (–) 7 – 60.5 – 0.47 28.94 0.43 2.04 9418.08.10 MRO (FRT) 7 155.2 148.2 1.00 100.00 – 1.00 10918.08.10 FTO (–) 7 – 60.5 – 0.40 70.45 0.39 2.13 8925.08.10 MRO (FRT) 7 150.3 139.3 1.00 100.00 – 1.00 11225.08.10 FTO (–) 7 – 60.5 – 0.37 45.53 0.35 1.79 8226.08.10 LTRO (FRT) 91 19.1 – 1.00 100.00 – 1.00 4901.09.10 MRO (FRT) 7 153.1 139.1 1.00 100.00 – 1.00 11101.09.10 FTO (–) 7 – 61.0 – 0.35 18.62 0.33 1.92 7107.09.10 FTO (–) 1 – 175.4 – 0.80 100.00 0.77 1.00 16808.09.10 MRO (FRT) 7 153.7 50.2 1.00 100.00 – 1.00 11108.09.10 S-LTRO (FRT) 35 37.9 – 1.00 100.00 – 1.00 2708.09.10 FTO (–) 7 – 61.0 – 0.39 1.65 0.33 1.71 6415.09.10 MRO (FRT) 7 151.6 159.1 1.00 100.00 – 1.00 10515.09.10 FTO (–) 7 – 61.0 – 0.37 23.02 0.34 1.62 6022.09.10 MRO (FRT) 7 153.8 188.8 1.00 100.00 – 1.00 10922.09.10 FTO (–) 7 – 61.5 – 0.36 44.21 0.34 1.47 5929.09.10 MRO (FRT) 7 166.4 33.4 1.00 100.00 – 1.00 12929.09.10 FTO (–) 7 – 61.5 – 0.75 22.14 0.38 1.47 4430.09.10 LTRO (FRT) 84 104.0 – 1.00 100.00 – 1.00 18230.09.10 FTO (+) 6 29.4 – 1.00 100.00 – 1.00 5006.10.10 MRO (FRT) 7 197.0 115.5 1.00 100.00 – 1.00 14806.10.10 FTO (–) 7 – 63.5 – 0.50 83.83 0.42 1.80 7712.10.10 FTO (–) 1 – 109.0 – 0.80 100.00 0.76 1.02 143
*For more information on the Eurosystem’s operations
from 14 April 2010 to 13 July 2010, see DeutscheBundesbank, Monthly Report, August 2010, p 28. —1MRO: main refinancing operation, LTRO: longer-term
refinancing operation, S-LTRO: supplementary longer-term refinancing operation, FTO: fine-tuning operation
(+: liquidity providing operation, –: liquidity absorbingoperation), FRT: fixed-rate tender. — 2Excluding
(S-)LTROs allotted in the same week. — 3Ratio of total
bids to the allotment amount.
Deutsche Bundesbank

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
EUROSYSTEM
Monthly Report
November 2010
26Deutsche BundesbankMoney market management and liquidity needs
During the three reserve maintenance periods be-
tween 14 July and 12 October 2010, euro-area credit
institutions’ need for central bank liquidity as deter-
mined by autonomous liquidity factors fell signifi-
cantly by 542.7 billion in net terms. Seasonal factors
meant that banknote circulation increased consider-
ably in the reserve period from July to August and
reached a new peak of 5823 billion on 6 August
2010. During the period under review as a whole,
however, banknotes only absorbed liquidity of 51.1
billion due to weaker demand for banknotes in sub-
sequent periods. General government deposits with
the Eurosystem decreased considerably by 530.1 bil-
lion and thereby had a liquidity-providing effect. Al-
though deposits have thus contracted from the high
volume seen during the financial crisis, they still re-
main above pre-crisis levels. If net foreign reserves
and other factors are taken together, a move which
eliminates liquidity-neutral valuation effects, banks’
liquidity needs likewise fell by 513.7 billion over the
three periods. The liquidity needs arising from the
minimum reserve requirement declined by 51.1 bil-
lion over the three reserve maintenance periods and
were met by credit institutions without any prob-
lems.
Eurosystem liquidity management continues to focus
above all on supporting the money market by means
of a generous supply of liquidity. Refinancing oper-
ations were still conducted as fixed-rate tenders
with full allotment (see table on page 25).
With the second one-year tender expiring, liquidity
above the benchmark dropped significantly, which
led to a revival of the interbank market with increas-
ing money market rates and turnover.
The purchases made as part of the Securities Markets
Programme, which was launched in May 2010, took
place on a low level during the period under review.
With the introduced weekly liquidity-absorbing
fine-tuning operations, the liquidity effect of theprogramme was still neutralised smoothly. Demand
for the US dollar liquidity-providing operations, like-
wise agreed upon in May, was extremely low.
At the beginning of the reserve period from July to
August, the reduced liquidity supply due to the first
one-year tender expiring at the start of July caused
the EONIA to rise to 0.56%. As a result of the re-
duced liquidity, EONIA turnover increased from a
daily average of 534 billion in the previous period to
558 billion. As is often the case when there is liquid-
ity in abundance, more credit institutions met their
reserve requirements at the beginning of the period,
resulting in decreasing demand for liquidity over the
period and the EONIA falling back to a lower level.
The last day of the reserve period was the exception
when the Eurosystem carried out a 5262 billion
liquidity-absorbing fine-tuning operation and the
EONIA was fixed at 0.77%. With overnight rates
lower, turnover also fell. However, at 547 billion on
average, turnover was significantly higher than in
the previous periods and bore testimony to a rise in
activity on the unsecured overnight money market.
Reduced excess liquidity was also reflected in the re-
course made to the deposit facility, which was a lot
lower this period, with an average of 597 billion,
than in the previous period ( 5230 billion).
In the August-September reserve period, the EONIA
fluctuated within a range of 0.36% to 0.48%. At an
average of 0.43%, it was 4 basis points lower than in
the previous period and was more in line with the
deposit facility rate of 0.25% despite reduced liquid-
ity. As seen in the previous periods, the end of the
month was not marked by a pronounced rise in over-
night rates. Only at the end of the reserve period on
7 September 2010 did the combined effect of more
restricted interbank trading, which is always ob-
served on the last day of the period, and the
liquidity-absorbing quick tender with a volume of
5236 billion result in the EONIA climbing to 0.70%.
Average turnover was not quite at the previous peri-

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2010
27od’s level but – at 544 billion – was still significantly
higher than before the expiry of the first one-year
tender. Compared with the previous period, use of
the deposit facility, at an average of 584 billion per
day, fell again.
The most important event of the maintenance
period from September to October was the second
one-year tender expiring. Parallel to this, one six-
month and one three-month tender expired with
the result that refinancing operations with a total
volume of 5225 billion matured on 30 September. In
order to make the transition as smooth as possible,
the Eurosystem offered an additional six-day quick
tender on top of the regular three-month operation
to bridge the period until the next main refinancing
operation. The combined demand for these two
tenders stood at 5133 billion, markedly reducing
the total volume of outstanding refinancing oper-
ations – by 580 billion to 5512 billion. With market
participants expecting higher prolongation, the
lower volume was seen as a signal that the interbank
market had recovered further. The decline in liquid-
ity was also reflected in higher overnight rates. On
30 September, the EONIA climbed by 47 basis points
to 0.88%. One decisive reason for this sharp rise is
likely to have been the end of the quarter, when
banks regularly considerably scale back lending.
Overnight rates fell only slowly in the subsequent
days, however. Owing to the Eurosystem’s usual
liquidity-absorbing fine-tuning operation worth
5172 billion on the last day of the maintenance
period, they rose to 0.76%. The EONIA thereby ex-
ceeded the levels of previous periods by an average
of 0.48 percentage point. Compared to the previous
period, turnover increased, too, and attained an
average value of 547 billion (previous period: 544
billion). Furthermore, the drop in excess liquidity
dampened the usual increase in the deposit facility
towards the end of the reserve period, causing the
average daily use of the deposit facility to fall to 569
billion.In the subsequent reserve period from October to
November, the EONIA initially continued to rise al-
beit with lower excess liquidity. Turnover also re-
mained at a high level. Secured overnight money
trading also saw a rise in interest rates and in turn-
over. All this is evidence that the interbank market is
progressively improving, even though the Eurosys-
tem’s intermediary function continues to be pro-
nounced and necessary for some banks.Factors determining bank liquidity1
5billion; changes in the daily averages of the reserve
maintenance periods vis-/C224-vis the previous period
2010
Item14 July
to
10 Aug11 Aug
to
7 Sep8 Sep
to
12 Oct
I Provision (+) or absorption (–) of
central bank balances due to changes
in autonomous factors
1 Banknotes in circulation
(increase: –) – 6.3 + 3.3 + 1.9
2 General government deposits with
the Eurosystem (increase: –) + 31.3 + 8.4 – 9.6
3 Net foreign reserves2+ 42.5 – 0.2 – 11.9
4 Other factors2– 44.7 + 3.2 + 24.8
Total + 22.8 + 14.7 + 5.2
II Monetary policy operations of the
Eurosystem
1 Open market operations
(a) Main refinancing operations + 17.9 – 32.3 + 11.4
(b) Longer-term refinancing
operations – 141.0 + 2.8 – 42.4
(c) Other operations – 31.9 + 1.0 + 8.6
2 Standing facilities
(a) Marginal lending facility – 0.2 + 0.5 + 0.1
(b) Deposit facility (increase: –) + 133.7 + 13.0 + 14.9
Total – 21.5 – 15.0 – 7.4
III Change in credit institutions’ current
accounts (I + II) + 1.3 – 0.4 – 2.2
IV Change in the minimum reserve
requirement (increase: –) – 1.3 + 0.5 + 1.9
1For longer-term trends and the Deutsche Bundesbank’s contribu-
tion, see pages 14* and 15* of the Statistical Section of this Monthly
Report. — 2Including end-of-quarter valuation adjustments with no
impact on liquidity.

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
EUROSYSTEM
Monthly Report
November 2010
28upon maturity of the third and final one-year
tender as well as of the final six-month LTRO.
Finally, to ensure the continued supply of
liquidity to the banking system, the Council
announced additional fine-tuning operations
(FTOs) for when these two transactions ma-
ture, namely on 11 November and 23 Decem-
ber 2010.When the first two one-year tenders and the
penultimate six-month tender matured in the
second and third quarters of 2010, the
volume of refinancing operations, taken in
isolation, was already down by over 3535 bil-
lion. Banks offset this withdrawal of liquidity
only partially by increasing their bidding
volumes in other regular operations, which,
in aggregate terms, markedly lowered excess
liquidity in the banking system. This led to a
trend rise in money market interest rates,
which was also attributable to growing opti-
mism among money market participants,
especially in the third quarter of 2010, after a
run of surprisingly upbeat macroeconomic
data. Of late, there has been a discernible
decline in euro-area banks’ frontloading of re-
serves as a means of fulfilling their minimum
reserve requirements. Instead, they further re-
duced excess liquidity in the banking system,
especially at the beginning of the tenth main-
tenance period in October. As a result, amid
strong fluctuations, the overnight money
market rate EONIA likewise rose perceptibly,
and, subject to similarly high volatility, the
underlying turnover stabilised at an elevated
level compared with during the crisis. The
EONIA currently stands at around 0.8% and
is thus well above the level recorded for the
first half of 2010.
The longer-term money market rates mim-
icked the overnight money market rate and
also increased significantly at the end of
October. The unsecured three-month rate
(3M Euribor) climbed to 1.05% at last count
and is thus almost 0.3 percentage point
above its level at the end of the second quar-
ter. During the same period, its collateralisedMoney market interest rates
in the euro area
1 Monthly averages. — 2 Only on 8 October 
2008 2.75%. — 3 Three-month Euribor less 
three-month Eurepo. —  Average from 1 
to 15 November 2010.
Deutsche Bundesbank2007 2008 2009 201000.51.01.52.02.53.03.54.04.55.05.56.06.57.0
050100150200Marginal lending rate
Three-month Euribor1
EONIA1
Minimum bid rate or fixed
interest rate for main
refinancing operations
Difference between 
uncollateralised and collateralised 
three-month interbank lending 
rates 1, 32
Basis
points%
Deposit rateFrontloading
reduced,
excess liquidity
lowered,
money market
rates up
Longer-term
money market
rates showing
slight upwards
trend at last
count

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2010
29counterpart (3M Eurepo) rose by around 0.3
percentage point to roughly 0.75% as this re-
port went to press. The spread between both
interest rates, which can be interpreted as a
risk premium, stood at around 0.25 percent-
age point at the end of October, not far off its
lowest level since the financial market turmoil
began in August 2007. Since then it has risen
slightly again to currently around 0.3 percent-
age point.
Monetary developments in the euro area
In the third quarter of 2010, monetary expan-
sion in the euro area remained muted in
overall terms, but continued to accelerate. In
seasonally adjusted and annualised terms, the
three-month growth rate of the broad mon-
etary aggregate M3 amounted to just over
31/C252% in the July to September period and
was therefore again perceptibly up on the
preceding quarter, when growth was 3%.
The annual growth rate of M3 thus moved
into positive territory in seasonally adjusted
terms, with the average figure going up from
0.0% between April and June to 0.8% for
the months July to September 2010. In this
context, however, it should be borne in mind
that, as in the previous quarter, the current
momentum is largely the result of trans-
actions of banks with other financial inter-
mediaries, which have proved very volatile in
the wake of the financial market tensions of
the last two years and often reflect indirect
interbank transactions.
Between July and September, growth of the
seasonally adjusted and annualised three-month rate for the narrow monetary aggre-
gate M1, which had started at the end of
2009, continued to decelerate. First, growth
in currency in circulation declined slightly in
the third quarter. Second, and more signifi-
cantly in terms of volume, it was once again
the case that fewer overnight deposits were
made than in the previous quarter, particular-
ly on the part of households. By contrast,
during the same period, the positive growth
experienced by other short-term deposits ac-
celerated, with the corresponding seasonally
adjusted and annualised three-month rate
turning positive again in the third quarter of
2010 for the first time since the end of 2008.
This was principally due to a renewed in-
crease in inflows to short-term savings de-
posits (redeemable at notice of up to three
months). In addition, over the same three-
month period, short-term time deposits (with
an agreed maturity of up to two years) were
bolstered, after recording extensive net out-
flows in the preceding one-and-a-half years
as funds were shifted into other types of
assets. Recent developments are likely to
have been further aided by the fact that the
interest rates available on short-term time
deposits continued to go up compared with
sight deposits in the reporting quarter.
Conversely, in the third quarter of 2010,
developments in marketable instruments held
by non-banks had a moderately dampening
effect on M3 growth. Following still per-
ceptible M3 growth in the second quarter,
the fall in the seasonally adjusted and annual-
ised three-month rate seen in the reporting
quarter was again closer to the pattern of the
previous few quarters. This was mostly due toMonetary
expansion still
muted in 2010
Q3Slower growth
in overnight
deposits,
greater
momentum
in other short-
term deposits
Marketable
financial
instruments
see small
outflows

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
EUROSYSTEM
Monthly Report
November 2010
30renewed outflows from money market funds,
which account for the largest volume share
of marketable instruments. However, this
decline is now considerably less marked due
to the gradually increasing, albeit still low,
short-term money market rates, which are
traditionally used to determine the interest
paid on money market funds. Repo trans-
actions and short-term debt securities of
monetary financial institutions held by non-
banks virtually stagnated in the reporting
quarter.
For the first time since the end of 2008, credit
by euro-area banks to the domestic private
sector was again the driving force behind
monetary expansion in the euro area during
the reporting quarter. Having returned to
positive territory in the second quarter of
2010 at 1% growth after three successive
quarters of negative readings, the annualised
and seasonally adjusted three-month rate
picked up pace again in the third quarter to
stand at just over 31/C252%. This expansion was
fairly evenly split between standard loans and
securitised lending. With respect to bank
loans, the three-month rate fell moderately
on the quarter from 21/C252% to 2%, in season-
ally adjusted and annualised terms; during
the same period, the annualised three-month
rate, adjusted for credit institutions’ securiti-
sation activities and loan sales, rose from
21/C252% to 3%.
For the first time in two years, the rise in
loans to domestic private non-banks was
once again borne by all three sectors, with
loans to households increasing the most. For
the sixth successive quarter, expansion in thiscategory was driven by loans for house pur-
chase, which make up the lion’s share of
household borrowing, although their in-
creases have become slightly less pronounced
in the past few months. Between July and
September, loans to non-financial corpor-
ations likewise posted a modest net increase,
with a seasonally adjusted and annualised
three-month rate of just over 11/C252% following
a marginal decline of just under -1/C252% in the
preceding three-month period. During the
reporting quarter, net lending to non-financial
corporations was more or less evenly split be-
tween long-term loans (with a maturity of
over five years) and short-term loans (with a
maturity of up to one year), which thus went
up perceptibly again for the first time in
almost two years. Conversely, medium-term
loans to enterprises stagnated. Overall, it is
broadly consistent with the pattern that is
familiar from earlier periods of economic
recovery, that unsecuritised lending to non-
financial corporations recovers more slowly
from a slump in economic activity than lend-
ing to households.
As in the previous quarter, loans to the private
sector in the euro area in the July to Septem-
ber period were strengthened by loans to
other financial intermediaries. However,
some of these loans are, by nature, indirect
interbank transactions which in the past two
years have been characterised by a high de-
gree of volatility and, in the traditional sense,
have no impact on lending to the private
non-banking sector.
As in the traditional lending business, there
was a marked increase in securities claims byLoans to the
private sector
drive monetary
expansion
Increased
lending to
households,
non-financial
corporations ...... and financial
corporations

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2010
31euro-area banks on domestic private non-
banks in the reporting quarter. The corres-ponding annualised and seasonally adjustedthree-month rate went up by 12% betweenJuly and September, following a second-quarter decrease of 8%. In the same period,euro-area banks raised their net holdings of,in particular, fixed-income securities and alsoperceptibly upped their holdings of sharesand other equity issued by the private sector.Overall, euro-area banks also clearly increasedtheir net holdings of securities issued by thepublic sector, at a seasonally adjusted andannualised three-month rate of 7
1/C252%.
In the third quarter, the net external asset pos-
ition of the euro-area MFI sector fell by 318.7
billion on the quarter in seasonally adjustedterms and thus, taken in isolation, had a mod-erately restrictive effect on monetary growth.There were substantial outflows of funds tonon-euro-area countries in the reporting quar-ter, predominantly from Germany and Spain.At the same time, the MFI sector in Finland,the Netherlands and Luxembourg, in particu-lar, recorded net inflows of funds from coun-tries outside the euro area. These data are,however, not seasonally adjusted.
Following a period of stagnation between
April and June, monetary capital formationreturned to the positive growth path it hadfollowed in preceding quarters which, per se ,
tended to slow the pace of monetary growth.All in all, banks’ longer-term financial liabil-ities vis-/C224-vis non-banks rose by just under4
1/C252% in seasonally adjusted and annualised
terms in the third quarter of 2010. This devel-opment was driven, first, by a noticeable in-Components and 
counterparts of the money stock in the euro area
1 12-month  flows. —  2 Taken  in  isolation, 
an  increase  curbs  M3  growth. —  3 Not 
seasonally  adjusted. —  4 Increase:  –,  de-
crease: +.
Deutsche Bundesbank2002 03 04 05 06 07 08 09 201050510152025
–+++++
–10–50+5+10+15+20+25+30
90060030003006009001,200
–––++++Seasonally adjusted, quarterly
... components of the money stock
... counterparts
of which
Net external asset position 3
External
assets 1Net externalasset position
External
liabilities
 1, 4Growth rate 1 of M3 and
the contributions to growth in ...
Remaining balancesheet items
 2Net externalasset position
Longer-term financial
liabilities to othernon-MFIs 2Credit to the
private sector M2 – M1
M3 – M2M1
€ bn%%
M3
M3Discernible
increase in
purchases of
private sector
securities
Moderate
decline in the
net external
asset position
Buoyant
monetary
capital
formation

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
EUROSYSTEM
Monthly Report
November 2010
32crease in non-banks’ holdings of bank debt
securities with longer maturities. Second, the
private sector built up its holdings of long-
term time deposits, although their attractive-
ness to households as well as insurers and
pension funds had waned on the back of a
further narrowing of the interest rate spread
between short and long-term deposits in the
euro area during the reporting quarter. The
other components had practically no impact
on monetary capital in the same period.
While banks had raised their capital and
reserves considerably in the second quarter of
2010, these stagnated between July and
September. As in the previous quarter, house-
holds especially reduced their holdings of
long-term savings deposits by a substantial
margin.
Overall, the underlying monetary dynamics – in
other words, monetary growth which is ulti-
mately relevant to inflation – remained muted
in the reporting quarter. Although the monet-
ary aggregate M3 increased appreciably
between July and September for the second
quarter in a row, this growth was in turn
largely attributable to transactions with other
financial intermediaries. Given that some of
these take the form of collateralised transac-
tions which are settled via trading platforms,
the aforementioned growth is also related to
the tensions that are still evident in several
segments of the financial market. At the
same time, bank lending to the private sector
in the euro area continued to expand moder-
ately overall in the third quarter of 2010. In
line with this, aggregate inflation projections
based on monetary data (albeit surrounded
by particularly great uncertainty due to thecrisis) continue to indicate that there is no
pronounced risk to price stability in the euro
area over the time horizon relevant to monet-
ary policy.
German banks’ deposit and lending
business with domestic customers
Between July and September 2010, domestic
investors continued to make appreciable de-
posits with German banks. As in the previous
quarter, however, this was solely attributable
to the way in which short-term bank balances
developed; in net terms, long-term balances
contracted perceptibly. Overall, at just under
3%, the third-quarter seasonally adjusted
and annualised three-month rate for all de-
posits was slightly down on the quarter.
Overnight deposits continued to have a
favourable influence on this growth rate,
although their seasonally adjusted growth
rate weakened substantially, not least owing
to noticeably reduced interest on the part of
households. Demand for short-term time
deposits, which had dropped sharply over the
past few quarters, stagnated in the reporting
quarter. On the heels of a somewhat more
subdued second quarter, the uptake of short-
term savings deposits (redeemable at notice
of up to three months) accelerated again in
the third quarter of 2010 and thus reverted
to the positive growth pattern seen in preced-
ing quarters.
During the third quarter, long-term deposits
were sharply reduced in seasonally adjusted
terms, on balance, though to a lesser extentNo pronounced
risk to price
stability from
a monetary
perspectiveRise in domestic
investors’ bank
balances ...
... due to
inflows to
short-term
segment

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2010
33than in the second quarter. This was solely
due to households’ large-scale withdrawalfrom long-term savings deposits, which canprobably be explained by the ongoing relativedeterioration of the interest rates available onsuch deposits. By contrast, during the sameperiod, there was a modest increase in thequantitatively more significant long-term timedeposits. As in the rest of the euro area, therewas a further pronounced decline in house-holds’ demand for such funds; insurers andpension funds continued to reduce suchdeposits.
In the July to September period, seasonally
adjusted lending by domestic credit insti-tutions to the domestic private sector con-tracted sharply, after expanding robustly justone quarter earlier. The seasonally adjustedand annualised three-month rate of changefor total credit decreased from 4% in thesecond quarter to just under -4% in the re-porting quarter. On balance, in the third quar-ter of 2010 there was a marked reduction insecuritised lending to the private sector,which fell by a seasonally adjusted and annu-alised 11%, after having increased by 7% inthe previous quarter. Furthermore, loans tothe domestic private sector, which are moresignificant in terms of volume, declined. Inthe third quarter, the corresponding annual-ised and seasonally adjusted three-monthrate stood at just under -3%, compared with3
1/C252% in the previous quarter. It must be
noted, however, that since the winter of2009 this development has largely been de-termined by the dynamics of lending to finan-cial corporations and has proved highly vola-tile owing to the financial market turmoil.Net inflows in loans to the domestic private
sector were recorded solely for loans tohouseholds in the third quarter of 2010. Inannualised terms, the corresponding three-month rate stood at just over
1/C252% in the third
quarter, down from just under 1% in theprevious quarter. While lending for housepurchase rose perceptibly in the reportingquarter owing to the low interest rates avail-able on such loans, the simultaneously ob-served sizeable reduction in consumer lend-ing was offset by an equally large increase inother lending.
German banks reduced their net lending
to non-financial corporations in the report-ing quarter. The corresponding annualisedand seasonally adjusted three-month rateamounted to just over -1
1/C252% in the thirdLending and deposits of monetary
financial institutions (MFIs) inGermany
*
5billion, seasonally adjusted
2010
Item Q2 Q3Deposits of domestic non-MFIs
1
Overnight 48.9 11.2
With agreed maturities
of up to 2 years – 28.3 0.9of over 2 years – 3.3 1.1
Redeemable at notice
of up to 3 months 7.3 11.8of over 3 months – 3.1 – 5.8
Lending
to domestic enterprises andhouseholds
Loans 20.7 – 16.7of which: to households
2 2.7 2.4
to non-financialcorporations
3 1.4 – 3.3
Securities 5.5 – 9.5
to domestic general government
Loans 13.2 – 3.4Securities 22.5 6.8
*As well as banks (including building and loan associations,
but excluding the Bundesbank), monetary financial institu-tions (MFIs) here also include money market funds. — 1Enter-
prises, households and general government excluding centralgovernment — 2And non-profit institutions. — 3Including
non-financial quasi-corporations.
Deutsche BundesbankBy contrast,
marked
reduction in
long-term
deposit types
Reduced credit
provision by
German banks
to the private
sector
By contrast,
discernible
increase in
loans to
households
Lending to
non-financial
corporations
sees outflows

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
EUROSYSTEM
Monthly Report
November 2010
34quarter of 2010, compared with just over
1/C252% in the previous quarter. However, this
quarterly analysis masks the fact that on
several occasions positive and negative net
inflows alternated from one month to an-
other in 2010, when viewed as a whole. The
downward trend in credit momentum in
Germany in 2009 therefore seems to be
broken, but no turnaround with growing
volumes is on the horizon yet. As far as the
maturity structure is concerned, short and
medium-term lending to non-financial
corporations continued to decline during the
reporting quarter. Moreover, the growth of
long-term lending slackened after having
gathered momentum in the first half of the
year. All in all, however, if trends in loans to
domestic non-financial corporations are com-
pared with developments in the real economyin the third quarter of 2010 there is again no
indication of a credit crunch in Germany. The
as yet muted credit growth of non-financial
corporations in Germany appears to be partly
due to the improved internal financing op-
tions that have resulted from the economic
recovery.
In contrast to the credit extended to the pri-
vate sector, German banks’ net lending to
German general government between July
and September rose for the sixth time in a
row, although on a very much reduced scale
compared with the two preceding quarters.
In seasonally adjusted and annualised terms,
credit provision to the public sector increased
by 21/C252%, which applied solely to securitised
lending; standard loans to the public sector
contracted significantly in the reporting quar-
ter.
The results of the latest Bank Lending Survey
(BLS) indicate only marginally changed credit
supply conditions in Germany during the
third quarter of 2010. For instance, credit
standards applying to loans to enterprises
were eased somewhat for the first time since
the onset of the financial crisis. According to
the banks surveyed, this was due, in particu-
lar, to the improvement in the outlook for
general economic activity as well as the posi-
tive liquidity situation of these institutions. By
contrast, large enterprises proved unable to
benefit from this initial easing. As regards
margins, enterprises with average credit
ratings saw no additional adjustments while
the margins on riskier loans were widened
somewhat again. At the same time, partici-
pating bank managers spoke of significantlyLoans of German banks
to domestic enterprises
and households *
* End  of  month;  adjusted  for  statistical 
changes.
Deutsche Bundesbank2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 201098100102104106108
–20+2+4Seasonally adjusted
%Lin scale
Year-on-year changeLog scale
Loans
2005 = 100
Further increase
in credit to
general
government
Credit
standards for
loans to enter-
prises were
eased
somewhat
again for the
first time ...

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2010
35Banking conditions in Germany
1 According to harmonised MFI interest rate statistics. — 2 According to the Bank Lending Survey, difference 
between the numbers of respondents reporting “tightened considerably” and “tightened somewhat”and the numbers of respondents reporting “eased somewhat” and “eased considerably” as a percentage of the re-sponses given. — 3 Expectations for  2010 Q4. — 4 Reduced scale.
Deutsche Bundesbank02 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 20103.54.04.55.05.56.06.57.07.58.08.59.09.510.0
–300+30
–300+30
–60–300+30+60
2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010–60–300+302.02.53.03.54.04.55.05.56.06.57.0
603003060
––++
9060300306090
–––+++Credit to non-financial corporations Credit to households
% pa
%%% pa
%%
%
%Change in credit standards 2
Average loans Riskier loans
Average loansAverage loansRiskier loans
Riskier loansLoans to enterprises... with an initial rate fixation of 
    over 1 year and up to 5 years... with an initial rate fixation of 
    over 5 yearsConsumer credit ...
Consumer creditConsumer credit
Loans for house purchaseLoans for house purchaseLoans for house purchase
with an initial rate fixation of over 5 years and up to 10 years
Loans to enterprises... with an initial rate fixation
    of over 5 years ...Loans to enterprises ...
... with an initial rate fixation    of up to 1 year ...
... over €1 million... over €1 million
... up to €1 million... up to €1 millionBank interest rates (new business) 1
Change in loan margins 2, 43333.03.54.04.55.05.5

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
EUROSYSTEM
Monthly Report
November 2010
36heightened demand in this line of business,
which they mainly attributed to the sharp
increase in financing needs for inventories
and working capital. The banks expect little
change to credit standards in the fourth
quarter.
Credit standards applying to private loans for
house purchase remained virtually unchanged
in the third quarter of 2010, whereas the
standards for consumer credit were again
tightened somewhat on account of house-
holds’ lower creditworthiness. Above and be-
yond this, the surveyed bank managers stated
that they had, in most cases, slightly tight-
ened the margins for retail clients in both of
the risk categories under review. Mirroring
developments in commercial banking, the
respondent bank managers observed a per-
ceptible pick-up in demand for loans for
house purchase while net demand for funds
for consumption purposes was unchanged.
Unlike in Germany, credit standards for loans
to enterprises were once again tightened
somewhat in the third quarter across the euro
area as a whole and, for the first time since
the financial crisis began, remained basically
unchanged only in the retail banking sector.
The margin policy was likewise a little more
restrictive than in the German sample and
developments in demand throughout the
currency area were also markedly weaker on
balance.The survey round for the third quarter of
2010 again contained additional questions
on the impact of the financial crisis on whole-
sale funding, capital and lending of the par-
ticipating banks. According to information
supplied by German institutions, their access
to wholesale funding on the money and cap-
ital markets was, in broad terms, somewhat
better than in the previous quarter when, still
suffering from the sovereign debt crisis, they
had spoken of a certain deterioration in their
access to market financing. At the same time,
just over one-third of the German bank man-
agers surveyed said capital costs were higher
in the wake of the financial crisis. This also
resulted in some lending constraints at no less
than one-fifth of the institutions.
In the main, bank lending rates on new loans
are likely to have supported domestic lending
to the private sector. The reporting institu-
tions recorded largely unchanged or declining
lending rates again in the third quarter of
2010. Thus, interest rates on long-term loans
for house purchase fell to 3.6%, which was
in line with the interest rate for small long-
term loans to non-financial corporations; at a
rate of 3.7%, large loans were priced at a
virtually identical level. For the most part, the
rates for short-term loans to enterprises
remained at the fairly low level recorded in
the previous quarter and, depending on the
size of the loan, stood at 3.6% and 2.4%
respectively at last count.... though not
for loans to
households ...
... or in the
euro area as a
wholeBanks’ access
to wholesale
funding
somewhat
improved again
Little change or
decline in bank
lending rates

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2010
37Financial marketsFinancial market trends
In the financial markets, market players’
attention was increasingly drawn to the
heightened tension surrounding public fi-
nances in a number of peripheral euro-area
countries, as well as to the different eco-
nomic outlooks in the major currency areas.
While many market players were mostly
sceptical about the continuing business cycle
in the United States and Japan, a number of
emerging markets continued to grow strong-
ly, propping up confidence in the financial
markets but equally causing pressure on the
foreign exchange markets. Germany is cur-
rently leading the way in terms of euro-area
economic growth, which is having a stabilis-
ing effect on the single-currency area as a
whole. Yet despite these favourable condi-
tions for Germany, the yield level in the do-
mestic capital market has, on balance, been
virtually unchanged since mid-year, albeit
with some rather sharp fluctuations and, at
one point, an all-time low for Bunds. This was
probably mainly attributable to the dampen-
ing effects of international interest rate link-
age over an extended period, from which
Germany, which is so strongly integrated in
the international financial markets, could not
escape. The positive economic framework
data and the partial shift of funds away from
safe Bunds into more risky investments only
served to atone for this effect. On the inter-
national equity markets, favourable quarterly
results and improved corporate earnings out-
looks for the most part helped prices to rise,
and in the foreign exchange markets, the
euro continued to trend up vis-/C224-vis otherFinancial
market setting

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
EUROSYSTEM
Monthly Report
November 2010
38major currencies against a backdrop of per-
sistent disquietude.
Financial market fears regarding the sustain-
ability of public finances in the peripheral
countries of the European currency union
have escalated dramatically in recent weeks,
the upshot being that Irish and Portuguese
government bonds temporarily hit new
highs, and yields on Greek bonds also rose
significantly again. The principal factors
behind these increases were poorer fiscal
indicators from debtor countries and an
increased level of risk aversion among
investors.
Exchange rates
Positive economic data, particularly from
Germany, have been a mainstay of the euro
against the US dollar since the middle of the
year, although its influence on exchange rate
developments has been masked at times by
international investors’ shifts in risk appetite.
This support initially took the euro to levels of
around US$1.32 in August, putting it signifi-
cantly above the multi-year low of US$1.19
reached in June of this year. Since then, the
euro has fallen back due to the increased
uncertainty shown by market participants,
who appear to be finding safe investments,
particularly in the dollar zone, more attractive
again. This depreciation also expressed the
concerns surrounding the budget situation in
several peripheral euro-area countries, as well
as European banking sector vulnerability,
particularly in Ireland.In contrast to the euro area’s ongoing eco-
nomic robustness, negative reports on the US
economy from mid-September indicated
slower US GDP growth and provoked a dis-
cussion on the foreign exchange market
about further monetary policy easing on the
part of the Federal Reserve. A number of
trouble-free bond offerings by euro-area
countries, launched in some cases with high
yield spreads, however, pushed the sovereign
debt crisis in Europe out of the spotlight
somewhat. As a result, the euro-dollar ex-
change rate returned to a stable upward
trend, which compensated for a large share
of the price losses accumulated during the
first half of 2010. At the beginning of
November, the Federal Reserve decided, as
expected, to purchase US Treasuries worth
US$600 billion, further depressing the US
dollar across the world. At the time of going
to print, the euro-dollar rate was US$1.36,
around 51/C252% down on the start of the year.
Unlike the euro’s appreciation against the US
dollar, the euro-yen rate during the reporting
period stayed mainly within a narrow band of
110 to 115 yen. The only exception came in
early August, when the euro temporarily
depreciated against the yen as international
investors – their perception of risk rising –
may have reduced the scale of carry trades
and unwound short positions in yen. During
the course of this development, the yen
appreciated considerably across the board
and reached multi-year highs against the
euro and the US dollar. On 15 September
2010, there was a massive intervention in the
foreign exchange market by the Bank of
Japan – its first for more than six years –Euro exchange
rate develop-
ments against
the US dollar, ...
... against
the yen ...

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2010
39much to the detriment of the yen. This
prompted a complete recovery of the euro-yen rate’s losses outlined above and rapidappreciation by 4%. As this report went topress, the rate stood at 113 yen, which isstill around 15% down on the start of theyear.
Following minor fluctuations in August
around the 0.82 pound sterling mark, theeuro-pound rate experienced marked appre-ciation over the following two months. Thedriving force behind this was seen to be thechallenging budget situation in the UnitedKingdom. Market participants feared that theconsolidation measures announced by theBritish government would harm the country’seconomic recovery on a sustained basis.These worries pushed up the euro and virtual-ly eliminated the losses it accrued during thefirst half of the year. A surprisingly sharpincrease in third quarter UK growth calmedinvestors’ fears, however, and the euro fellback to around 0.85 pound sterling.
The euro fared weakly against the Swiss franc
at the start of the reporting period, reachingan all-time low in early September. The euro-franc rate recovered from these losses there-after, however, and of late was trading againat around 1.34 Swiss francs. These changeswere reflected in the euro’s average valuevis-/C224-vis the 21 major currencies, with theexchange rate index rising roughly 1
1/C252%
since the end of June. At last count, theeuro’s effective exchange rate was 6
1/C252%
below its level at the beginning of the yearand roughly 1
1/C252% higher than at the launch
of monetary union. In real terms, too, ie tak-ing account of the simultaneous inflation dif-
ferentials between the euro area and itsmajor trading partners, the euro has risen oflate, which indicates a decline in pricecompetitiveness.
In view of the moderate price and cost devel-
opments in Germany over the past years,however, the price competitiveness of theGerman economy should continue to berated favourably. As the box on pages 42-43show, the growing significance of Germantrade links with central and east Europeancountries over the past years has helpedbroad indicators show a noticeable increasein the German economy’s price competitive-ness.Yen exchange rates during 
the course of the Bank of Japan’s foreign exchange market operations
Deutsche Bundesbank106108110112114116
80828486
122124126128130Log scale
yen/euro
Nominal effective yen exchange rate
against 21 currencies
1999 Q1 = 100yen/US dollar1$ = ... ¥1€ = ... ¥
2010Sep Oct NovIntervention day
... and against
the pound
sterling
Effective euro
exchange rates

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
EUROSYSTEM
Monthly Report
November 2010
40Securities markets and portfolio
transactions
While participants in the European bond
markets continued to focus their attention
mainly on the fiscal position of EMU member
states in the summer and autumn months,
factors that served to drive down interest
rates predominated in the major non-European
industrial countries for long periods. In the
United States, for example, a number of
weaker-than-expected economic figures indi-
cated a slowdown in the economy. Concur-
rently, there were at times increasing signs of
the recovery losing momentum in Japan. The
result was a temporary fall in ten-year US
Treasury yields to under 21/C252%, while in Japan,
investors were for a time demanding no more
than 0.85% per year for investing in ten-year
bonds. The central banks of both countries
decided to reinitiate their quantative easing
policies in the autumn months; nevertheless,
a moderate countermovement began in the
bond markets at the beginning of November
which was fuelled by rising inflation expect-
ations, particularly in the United States, and
better economic indicators of late. Ultimately,
ten-year government bond yields for the
United States and Japan were, at just under
3% and slightly above 1% respectively in
mid-November, at roughly their mid-June
levels.
Although international influences contributed
to yield developments in the euro area, they
did not define them. For instance, the GDP-
weighted yield on ten-year euro-area govern-
ment bonds was slightly above its June level
of late at just over 33/C254%. This average figuredisguises the massive shifts in yield levels in
the individual EMU countries. In keeping with
fundamentals and their assessments of risk,
investors continued to make very strong
differentiations between issuers. While Bund
yields temporarily fell near to a record low of
close to 2% – though besides safe-haven
effects, the international interest rate trend
may have contributed to this – bond prices in
some euro-area partner countries came under
heavy pressure. Irish sovereign debt lost a
great deal of value when it became evident
that bank support was costing the govern-
ment more than feared and rating agencies
downgraded Ireland’s sovereign rating. In-
vestors were also concerned about the fiscal
situation in Portugal, where bond yields were
at their highest level since the launch of
monetary union. The prices of Greek govern-
ment debt spiked in September, but subse-
quently eased perceptibly when the budget
deficit for 2009 had to be revised upwards
again and it was announced that tax
revenues could fall short of the restructuring
conditions in the financial support package.
Recently, the prices of government bonds in
peripheral countries were probably bolstered
by a joint declaration by the larger EU coun-
tries to involve private creditors in a future
sustainable crisis resolution mechanism.
The period since the end of August has also
seen an overall rise in euro-area bond yields,
thanks in no small part to the surprisingly
sharp increase in growth – fuelled predomin-
antly by Germany – which met with a very
positive response from the financial markets.
Against this backdrop, some investors reacted
by accepting somewhat more risk and mov-International
bond markets
Yield
movements in
the euro area

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2010
41ing funds from safe and liquid investments,
which in this case were predominantly Ger-man Bunds, into equities. At any rate, Ger-man Bund yields initially rose by almost 20basis points, more than the average of theother euro-area sovereign bonds with thesame maturity. By the end of the reportingperiod, amidst worries concerning the debtcrisis, bond yields widened again, however,and led to ten-year Bunds being traded atslightly above 2
1/C252% and therefore 40 basis
points higher than at the end of August. Thismeans that the current yield level more or lessmatches that seen in the middle of the year.
The yield curve, which is calculated based on
interest rates for Federal debt securities, hasflattened quite markedly since the middle ofthe year. The difference between ten-yearand two-year yields has narrowed by 55 basispoints to 175 basis points, which is still con-siderably above the five-year average of justover 110 basis points. An element of thisdevelopment may be attributed to the factthat market participants expect a quickernormalisation of interest rate conditions onthe money market than they did at the endof June.
Funding conditions for European enterprises
on the bond markets improved perceptiblyover the reporting period. First, marketparticipants had a more optimistic assessmentof credit risk in light of the positive economicindicators, and second, a decline in the liquid-ity premium demanded by investors mayhave helped improve financing conditions.The calming on the credit markets is in keep-ing with the fall in price uncertainty observedon the stock markets. As this article went to
press, the spreads on BBB-rated corporatebonds denominated in euro against Federalgovernment bonds – as measured by theiBoxx bond indices – were, at 270 basispoints, 50 basis points lower than at the endof June. Yields on BBB-rated corporate bondsfell by just under one half of a percentagepoint. The situation on the markets for cor-porate credit default swaps (CDS) was alsoeasing. As measured by the credit derivativesindex iTraxx Europe, which is composed ofcredit default swaps referencing investmentgrade credits, CDS premiums were, at theend of the reporting period, 25 basis pointslower than at the end of June at just under105 basis points.Bond yields in Germany
and the United States
Deutsche Bundesbank2007 2008 2009 20102.02.53.03.54.04.55.05.5
–1.0–0.50+0.5+1.0Weekly averages
%
Per-
centage pointsUS yield spread against
the German bond marketYield on ten-year 
government bonds
United States
Germany
Flattened
yield curve
Financing
conditions for
enterprises

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
EUROSYSTEM
Monthly Report
November 2010
42Deuts che Bun desbankRe calculate d wei ghts for in dicators of the German e conomy ’s pri ce competitiveness
The Bun desbank re gularly calculates an d pu blishes in di-
cators of the German e conomy ’s pri ce competitiveness, 
whi ch reﬂ  ect pri ce an d cost developments in Germany in 
comparison with a wei ghte d avera ge of Germany ’s tra d-
ing partners. These in dicators comply with the con cept 
of real effe ctive ex chan ge rates, as calculate d by the 
European Central Bank for the euro, for example. The 
individual tra ding partners are in cluded in the in dicators 
with tra de wei ghts, whi ch are a djuste d to the chan ging 
tra de ﬂ ows over time. The re gular a djustments aim to 
take a ccount of the current developments in forei gn 
tra de. The same applies to the latest re calculation. 
Previously the tra de wei ghts for all ran ges of in dicators 
up to 1998 were base d on data from the years 1995 to 
1997, an d from 1999 onwar ds on data from the years 
1999 to 2001.1 For all ran ges of in dicators up to 1997 the 
new wei ghts are base d on data from the years 1995 to 
1997, from 1998 to 2000 an d from 2001 to 2003 on the 
tra de data of the correspon ding perio d, an d from 2004 
onwar ds on data from the years 2004 to 2006 (see ta ble 
on pa ge 43).
The Bun desbank calculates an d pu blishes the in dicators 
of the German e conomy ’s pri ce competitiveness a gainst three groups of tra ding partners: ﬁ  rst the narrow group 
of 19 or 23 countries, whi ch is re gularly exten ded by new 
euro-area countries an d whi ch in a ddition to the euro-
area countries in cludes ei ght in dustrial nations; se con d 
the me dium-size d group (36 countries) whi ch in cludes 
an a dditional 13 countries − in cluding China an d ei ght 
central an d eastern European EU countries − an d thir d 
the broa d group (56 countries), whi ch comprises 20 fur-
ther important tra ding partners. The ta ble on pa ge 43 
displays the re calculate d tra de wei ghts for the me dium-
size d an d broa d group of countries. The wei ghts for the 
narrow (an d the me dium-size d) group of countries can 
be determine d by simply res calin g the wei ghts calculate d 
for the broa d group.3
Over the past decade, the si gniﬁ can ce of China an d the 
central an d eastern European countries for Germany‘s 
forei gn tra de has stea dily in crease d, whilst the share of 
advan ced economies su ch as the Unite d States, Japan, 
the Unite d Kin gdom an d Fran ce has gradually fallen. 
In contrast to the in dicator base d on the narrow group 
of countries, the broa der in dicators take a ccount of the 
growin g signiﬁ can ce of the German tra ding conne ctions 
to central an d eastern European as well as east Asian 
countries. As shown in the ta ble on pa ge 43, this devel-
opment is also reﬂ  ected in the hi gher wei ghts whi ch 
these e conomies have re ceive d over time.
As a result of the re calculation of the wei ghts, the in dica-
tors for the broa der group of countries show a somewhat  
stron ger improvement in the pri ce competitiveness of 
the German e conomy in re cent years than previously 
(see a djacent chart). The re calculate d in dicator of pri ce 
competitiveness a gainst 56 countries (36 countries) for 
the perio d De cem ber 1998 to Au gust 2010 shows an 
improvement of 10 % (8 %), whilst if applyin g the ol d 
wei ghts there woul d have been a sli ghtly lower rise of 
8% (7 %). This effe ct is due to the fa ct that pri ce devel-
opments in the now more heavily wei ghte d countries 
have pro ceeded more unfavoura bly on the whole than 
the avera ge for the partner countries. However, the 
up datin g of the wei ghts does not have any si gniﬁ cant 
inﬂ uen ce on the pro gression of the narrow in dicator.
1 A list of the wei ghts use d so far can be foun d in Deuts che Bun des-
bank, Monthly Report, May 2008, p 40. — 2 Inverte d scale: risin g curve 
(decline in values) denotes an in crease in competitiveness. — 3 The metho d use d in calculatin g the wei ghts for the broa d group of coun-
tries is described in: L Bul dorini, S Makry dakis an d C Thimann (2001), 
The effe ctive ex chan ge rates of the euro, ECB O ccasional Paper No 2. Price competitiveness
of the German economy
1993 95 00 05 201085
90
95
100
105
110
1151999 Q1 = 100, monthly, log scale 2
Old weightsNew weightsIndicator based on deflators of
consumer price indices against 5 6 trading partners

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2010
43The res calin g is a chieve d by a dding the wei ghts of the countries whi ch 
do not belon g to this group of countries un der review proportionately 
to the wei ghts of the remainin g countries. Therefore the wei ght of a country in the broa d group of countries is set in relation to the 
total wei ght of the group of countries un der review in the broa d 
group. — 4 Basis 1995 to 1997. — 5 Basis 2004 to 2006.Weighting sc heme forindicators o fprice compet itiveness
In thousandths
Price competitiveness of the German economy against a ...
... medium-sized group of countries (36 trading
partners) ... broad group of countries (56 trading partners)
Group of countries/country Up to 199741998-2000 2001-2003 From 20045Up to 199741998-2000 2001-2003 From 20045
Narrow group of countries 865.3 855.8 821.1 786.5 778.5 773.7 742.5 707.6
Belgium 60.4 53.6 57.7 62.7 54.3 48.4 52.2 56.5Finland 11.9 12.4 12.2 12.1 10.7 11.2 11.0 10.9France 127.5 116.2 107.8 100.7 114.7 105.0 97.4 90.6
Greece 5.1 5.0 4.8 4.9 4.6 4.5 4.3 4.4
Ireland 11.0 17.9 17.8 14.0 9.9 16.2 16.1 12.6Italy 96.3 89.8 84.2 81.5 86.6 81.1 76.2 73.3Luxembourg 4.0 3.5 4.1 4.6 3.6 3.2 3.7 4.1
Malta 0.6 0.5 0.5 0.4 0.5 0.5 0.5 0.4
Netherlands 71.2 71.9 70.1 74.9 64.1 65.0 63.4 67.4Austria 48.4 47.7 45.5 46.6 43.6 43.1 41.2 41.9Portugal 11.8 11.7 10.7 8.7 10.6 10.6 9.7 7.8
Slovenia 5.7 4.9 5.0 5.1 5.1 4.4 4.5 4.6
Spain 39.1 41.5 42.3 44.1 35.2 37.5 38.3 39.7Cyprus 0.4 0.3 0.4 0.5 0.3 0.3 0.3 0.5Denmark 17.1 15.4 15.8 14.9 15.4 13.9 14.2 13.4
Sweden 25.0 23.3 21.1 22.6 22.5 21.1 19.1 20.4
United Kingdom 91.4 90.9 85.8 78.9 82.2 82.2 77.6 71.0Norway 7.9 6.8 6.5 6.0 7.1 6.2 5.8 5.4Switzerland 46.2 42.2 41.3 39.0 41.6 38.1 37.3 35.1
Slovakia 6.2 7.0 10.0 11.5 5.6 6.4 9.1 10.3
Japan 66.9 60.9 49.9 44.1 60.2 55.1 45.1 39.6Canada 9.1 9.7 9.9 8.4 8.2 8.8 9.0 7.5United States of America 102.1 122.7 117.7 100.3 91.9 110.9 106.5 90.2
Countries additionally included in
medium-sized group 134.7 144.2 178.9 213.5 121.2 130.1 161.8 192.0
Bulgaria 1.4 1.3 1.8 2.4 1.3 1.2 1.6 2.2Estonia 0.6 0.7 1.0 1.1 0.5 0.6 0.9 1.0
Latvia 0.6 0.7 1.0 0.9 0.5 0.6 0.9 0.8
Lithuania 1.1 1.2 1.7 1.8 1.0 1.0 1.5 1.6Poland 20.4 23.2 27.7 30.1 18.4 21.0 25.1 27.0Romania 4.3 4.6 5.9 7.9 3.9 4.2 5.4 7.1
Czech Republic 18.9 21.0 28.8 28.6 17.0 18.9 26.0 25.8
Hungary 12.3 16.6 21.0 21.6 11.0 15.0 19.0 19.4China 28.5 34.8 49.7 72.6 25.6 31.4 44.9 65.3Hong Kong SAR 13.5 11.2 11.1 11.5 12.1 10.1 10.1 10.3
Republic of Korea 18.0 15.3 15.9 21.1 16.2 13.8 14.4 19.0
Singapore 10.5 9.4 9.1 9.6 9.5 8.5 8.2 8.6Australia 4.6 4.2 4.2 4.3 4.2 3.8 3.8 3.9
Countries additionally included in
broad group .... 100.3 96.2 95.7 100.4
Iceland .... 0 . 3 0 . 5 0 . 5 0 . 6
Israel .... 4 . 5 4 . 5 4 . 1 3 . 2
Croatia .... 2 . 5 2 . 1 2 . 1 2 . 2
Russia . . . 12.0 10.4 12.2 16.0
Turkey .... 13.2 13.6 13.4 15.3
Algeria .... 0 . 4 0 . 3 0 . 4 0 . 5
Morocco .... 1 . 4 1 . 4 1 . 4 1 . 3
South Africa .... 5 . 8 5 . 3 6 . 1 6 . 5
Argentina .... 1 . 9 1 . 8 1 . 2 1 . 2
Brazil .... 8 . 3 7 . 3 6 . 3 7 . 0
Chile .... 1 . 3 1 . 2 1 . 2 1 . 9
Mexico .... 4 . 7 7 . 3 7 . 8 7 . 6
Venezuela .... 0 . 7 0 . 6 0 . 7 0 . 6
India .... 7 . 3 6 . 1 6 . 7 8 . 4
Indonesia .... 5 . 3 4 . 2 4 . 0 3 . 4
Malaysia .... 7 . 3 6 . 7 6 . 6 6 . 2
Philippines .... 2 . 6 3 . 2 3 . 5 2 . 9
Taiwan .... 13.5 13.8 11.4 9.7
Thailand .... 6 . 6 5 . 3 5 . 4 5 . 2
New Zealand .... 0 . 7 0 . 6 0 . 7 0 . 7
Total 1,000.0 1,000.0 1,000.0 1,000.0 1,000.0 1,000.0 1,000.0 1,000.0

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
EUROSYSTEM
Monthly Report
November 2010
44The positive economic environment is also
reflected in lower external financing needs
on the part of market participants. Issuing
activity in the German bond market was
relatively subdued in the third quarter. In
total, domestic debt securities amounting to
just33241/C252billion were issued, which repre-
sents the lowest issue volume for three years.
Taking the redemptions and changes in issuers’
holdings into account, domestic issuers re-duced their capital market borrowing by
3231/C252billion. By contrast, foreign issuers
placed debt securities worth 318 billion, con-
sisting primarily of euro-denominated secur-
ities ( 3131/C252billion), on the German market.
On balance, 35 billion was redeemed on the
domestic bond market.
The public sector raised its bond market debt
by3141/C252billion in the third quarter. Thus, it
tapped the capital market to a much lower
degree than in the first two quarters of the
year (quarterly average: 327 billion). The
Federal government accounted for 311 billion
of this borrowing, a somewhat smaller
amount than was initially planned for in its
issuance preview of December 2009. This
reflects the cyclically driven improvement in
the development of the public sector budget-
ary situation. The debt instruments of choice
were five-year Federal notes (Bobls), which
the Federal government sold for 3101/C252billion.
In addition, it issued two-year Federal
Treasury notes (Sch/C228tze) worth 321/C252billion,
30-year Federal bonds ( 33 billion) and, to a
small extent, Federal Treasury discount paper
(Bubils) worth 31/C252billion. On the other hand,
it redeemed ten-year bonds ( 341/C252billion)
and recorded outflows in Federal Treasury
financing paper and day bonds used by
private investors. The Federal states expanded
their capital market debt by 331/C252billion.
Domestic enterprises reduced their capital
market borrowing slightly by a total of 311/C252
billion during the reporting period. They
issued debt securities ( 31 billion net), but
redeemed short-term commercial paper
worth 32 billion. The decline in tapping theYield spreads
in the euro area
Sources: Thomson Reuters and Bundesbank 
calculations. — 1 Standard deviation of yield 
spreads  of  euro-area  government  bonds 
against German Federal bonds (Bunds).
Deutsche Bundesbank2009 201001002003004005006007008009001,000
0100200300Daily data
Spread of ten-year 
government bonds 
against Bunds
Dispersion of yield spreads
against German Federal bonds 1
GDP weightedUnweightedGreeceBasis
points
Basis
pointsIreland
PortugalItaly
Spain
Net redemp-
tions in the
bond marketPublic sector
borrowing low
Net redemp-
tions by non-
banks and ...

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2010
45capital market indicates a comparatively
good corporate liquidity position.
Credit institutions reduced their bond market
debt by 3361/C252billion net, continuing the
trend that has prevailed since the outbreak ofthe financial crisis. They mainly redeemedother bank debt securities that allow flexiblestructuring ( 318 billion), an instrument that
on balance has barely been used since mid-2007, as well as public Pfandbriefe ( 322 bil-
lion). The mortgage Pfandbrief business onlypicked up again towards the end of thequarter. Calculated for the quarter however,paper such as this continued to be withdrawn(32 billion).
1By contrast, specialised credit in-
stitutions, which include the public promo-tional banks, issued bonds worth 35 billion
(net).
Domestic investors disposed of large volumes
of debt securities across sectors ( 343
1/C252bil-
lion). Domestic paper bore the sole brunt ofthis withdrawal on balance, with credit insti-tutions and non-banks selling a combinedtotal of 372
1/C252billion worth of these securities
from their portfolios – an unusually high vol-ume. While financial institutions shifted somefunds from bank debt securities into Federalgovernment securities, on the whole, non-banks withdrew from the German bond mar-ket in the reporting period. Differences be-tween the sectors also became apparent inforeign issuers’ exposure to debt securities.While the financial sector used the market todispose of its debt securities, non-banks usedit to increase their holdings. By contrast, for-eign investors were very active in the thirdquarter, investing 338
1/C252billion in the Germanmarket, primarily in Federal government
paper.
The international equity markets initially
swung between hope and fear in the summermonths. The positive stemmed from the EU’seconomic recovery, especially the strong eco-nomic growth in Germany in the secondquarter, and from emerging markets, whileuncertainty arose mainly from concernssurrounding the further development of theUS economy. Furthermore, a certain amountof pressure was exerted on stock pricesbecause some market participants, given thetense public finance situation of the euro-area peripheral countries, feared the tempor-ary negative impacts the urgently requiredInvestment activity in the German
securities markets
5billion
2009 2010
Item Q3 Q2 Q3Debt securities
Residents 11.2 – 10.0 – 43.7
Credit institutions – 5.4 – 44.4 – 31.9of which
Foreign debt securities – 9.9 – 40.3 – 10.9
Non-banks 16.7 34.3 – 11.7of which
Domestic debt securities – 10.4 – 2.7 – 40.8
Non-residents – 16.5 3.9 38.5
Shares
Residents – 7.4 12.4 – 2.7
Credit institutions – 8.0 – 1.4 – 3.1of which
Domestic shares – 7.6 – 4.4 – 1.4
Non-banks 0.6 13.8 0.4of which
Domestic shares – 0.7 6.5 0.6
Non-residents 13.0 – 1.3 2.0
Mutual fund shares
Investment in specialised funds 12.3 14.0 20.2
Investment in funds open tothe general public 0.9 0.6 3.0of which: Share-based funds 1.3 – 1.3 0.3
Deutsche Bundesbank
1The Eurosystem’s covered bonds purchase programme
expired at the end of June 2010.... credit
institutions
Purchase of
debt securities
After sideways
movement,
international
equity
markets ...

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
EUROSYSTEM
Monthly Report
November 2010
46consolidation measures may bring. Against
this background, equity prices on both sides
of the Atlantic moved mainly sideways, with
relatively high fluctuations, until the end of
August.
Buoyed by friendly economic signals that
were reflected in positive quarterly results
and improved corporate profit expectations
in the euro area and the United States, theperiod since September has been character-
ised by significant rises in stock market prices.
Moreover, investors’ expectations of further
quantative easing in the United States were
reinforced, and were actually fulfilled in
November, additionally driving up prices. This
wave of increasing confidence may have led
investors to withdraw funds they had placed
in safe havens and invest more heavily in the
stock markets. Unlike with bonds, uncertainty
regarding the price trend reduced for equities
during the remainder of the reporting period.
For instance, one measure of fluctuation (the
implicit volatility of options) for future share
price developments fell further and was
below its five-year average worldwide as this
report went to press. German and European
equities, measured against the broad-based
CDAX and Euro Stoxx indices, therefore re-
corded price gains of 13% and 11% respect-
ively, while US shares (S&P 500) were up
16%.
The excess return investors demand for an
investment in European shares (Euro Stoxx) as
compared to a secure investment, which can
be calculated using a dividend discount
model, remained virtually unchanged at
around 71/C254%, and is therefore still clearly
above the five-year average (around 51/C254%).
This indicates that risk aversion among invest-
ors active in the overall market is still at a
comparatively high level despite the consider-
able gains. The implied risk premium of an ex-
posure to European banking stocks rose to
just under 61/C254% at the end of the period
under review, which is somewhat below its
five-year average.3050100200300
0510152025
2007 2008 2009 2010102030405060Equity market
Sources: Thomson Reuters and Bundesbank 
calculations. —  1 Measure  of  the  risk  pre-
mium  demanded  by  investors.  Calculated 
from  three-stage  dividend  discount  model 
using three to five-year IBES expectations of 
profit  growth  and  long-term  GDP  growth 
expectations  (concensus  forecast). —  2 Ex-
pected  future  volatility,  calculated  from 
prices of options on the Euro Stoxx. Month-
ly averages.
Deutsche BundesbankEuro Stoxx banks
Lin scale
Equity risk premiums 1
Euro StoxxEuro Stoxx
Euro Stoxx banks%31 January 2005 = 100, log scale
Stock price indicesEnd-of-month levels
%
Implied volat-
ility of the 
Euro Stoxx 2
... see strong
price gainsEquity risk
premiums

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2010
47Issuing activity in the domestic stock market
remained subdued in the third quarter, not-withstanding the positive economic pro-spects. Domestic enterprises issued 31 billion
in new shares, compared with 3
1/C252billion in
the months April to June. By contrast, theoutstanding amount of foreign equities in theGerman market decreased by 32 billion.
Equities were mainly purchased by foreigninvestors ( 32 billion), which were almost
entirely portfolio investments. Resident non-banks purchased shares for 3
1/C252billion, and
only invested in domestic shares. Credit insti-tutions, for their part, reduced their domesticand foreign equity holdings evenly (- 31
1/C252bil-
lion in each case).
In the reporting period, domestic mutual
funds recorded a net inflow of 323 billion
compared with 3141/C252billion in the previous
quarter. The fresh money benefited mainlyspecialised funds reserved for institutionalinvestors ( 320 billion). Among funds open to
the general public, mixed securities-basedfunds ( 31
1/C252billion), mixed funds, bond-based
funds, share-based funds and open-end realestate funds ( 3
1/C252billion each) attracted
inflows. Sales of foreign mutual fund units inGermany totalled 35
1/C252billion.
Mutual fund shares were bought almost
exclusively by domestic non-banks, whichplaced 329
1/C252billion worth of such shares in
their portfolios, the majority being domesticfund shares ( 324
1/C252billion). Credit institutions
reduced their exposure to mutual fund sharesby3
1/C252billion, but on balance only sold do-
mestic fund shares (- 31 billion). Non-residentMajor items of the balance of
payments
5billion
2009 2010
Item Q3 Q2 Q3
I Current account 1, 2 + 28.6 + 25.9 + 28.1
Foreign trade 1, 3 + 36,1r + 37.1 + 39.3
Services 1 – 7.8 – 2.9 – 7.3
Income 1 + 10.7 + 0.9 + 10.0
Current transfers 1 – 8.2 – 6.4 – 10.6
II Capital transfers 1, 4 – 0.0 – 0.4 + 0.1
III Financial account 1
(Net capital exports: –) – 14.5 – 20.9 – 16.0
1 Direct investment – 10.5 – 26.4 + 11.3
German investment
abroad – 17.2 – 31.5 + 3.5
Foreign investment in
Germany + 6.8 + 5.1 + 7.7
2 Portfolio investment – 23.7 – 0.4 + 18.6
German investment
abroad – 18.4 – 3.6 – 21.3
Shares – 0.3 – 3.7 + 2.4
Mutual fund shares – 0.9 – 3.2 – 5.5
Debt securities – 17.3 + 3.3 – 18.2
Bonds and notes 5 – 19.9 – 0.1 – 16.9
of which
Euro-denominated
bonds and notes – 20.6 + 0.5 – 11.7
Money market
instruments + 2.7 + 3.4 – 1.4
Foreign investment
in Germany – 5.3 + 3.2 + 39.9
Shares + 11.8 – 1.5 + 1.9
Mutual fund shares – 0.6 + 0.7 – 0.5
Debt securities – 16.5 + 3.9 + 38.5
Bonds and notes 5 – 27.4 + 19.8 + 25.3
of which
Public bonds and
notes – 8.3 + 22.9 + 25.1
Money market
instruments + 10.9 – 15.9 + 13.1
3 Financial derivatives 6 – 5.9 – 6.3 – 6.6
4 Other investment 7 + 23.2 + 13.1 – 39.5
Monetary financial
institutions 8 + 25.3 + 49.9 + 42.4
of which: short-term + 11.7 + 41.0 + 15.5
Enterprises and
households – 7.5 – 4.1 – 14.0
of which: short-term + 4.9 + 5.2 – 1.5
General government + 14.9 + 7.6 – 7.2
of which: short-term + 15.1 + 7.3 + 3.2
Bundesbank – 9.4 – 40.2 – 60.7
5 Change in reserve assets at
transaction values
(increase: –) 9 + 2.3 – 0.8 + 0.3
IV Errors and omissions – 14.0 – 4.6 – 12.2
1Balance. — 2Including supplementary trade items. — 3Special
trade according to the official foreign trade statistics (source:
Federal Statistical Office). — 4Including the acquisition/disposal
of non-produced non-financial assets. — 5Original maturity of
more than one year. — 6Securitised and non-securitised options
as well as financial futures contracts. — 7Includes financial and
trade credits, bank deposits and other assets. — 8Excluding the
Bundesbank. — 9Excluding allocation of SDRs and excluding
changes due to value adjustments.
Deutsche BundesbankStock market
funding and
stock purchases
Sales and
purchases of
mutual fund
shares

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
EUROSYSTEM
Monthly Report
November 2010
48investors reduced their holdings of domestic
fund units by 31/C252billion.
Direct investment
Like portfolio investment ( 3181/C252billion),
direct investment also recorded net capital
inflows in the third quarter of 2010 ( 3111/C252
billion). By contrast, the second quarter of the
year saw net capital outflows of 3261/C252billion.
This turnaround was principally attributable
to the downturn in cross-border investment
by German enterprises, which removed 331/C252
billion from their foreign subsidiaries on bal-
ance exclusively in the form of intra-group
credit transactions ( 316 billion). In the pre-ceding quarter, domestic enterprises had
increased their direct investment abroad by
3311/C252billion. The main participants in this
deduction of capital were domestic holding
companies and enterprises from the tele-
communications sector. The countries most
strongly affected were the Netherlands and
the United Kingdom.
Direct investment by foreign enterprises in
Germany amounted to 371/C252billion for the
July to September period, after 35 billion in
the previous quarter. Non-resident propri-
etors, primarily from the European Economic
Area, supplied their German-based subsidiar-
ies with new equity capital ( 331/C252billion) and
reinvested profits ( 34 billion).German direct
investment
abroad
Foreign direct
investment in
Germany

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2010
49Economic conditions
in GermanyMacroeconomic situation
The upturn in the German economy con-
tinued over the summer months. According
to a flash estimate by the Federal Statistical
Office, real gross domestic product (GDP) in
the third quarter of 2010 rose by a seasonally
and calendar-adjusted 0.7% on the quarter.
A normalisation has therefore set in following
the second quarter, which was characterised
by catch-up and backlog effects. Owing to a
revision of retail sales figures and including
new information that has since become avail-
able for the finishing trades, growth of 0.6%
and 2.3% respectively (previously 0.5% and
2.2%) is now shown for the first two quarters
of the year. During the reporting period, over-
all economic activity was still down 1.8% on
the cyclical peak of the first quarter of 2008;
at its highest level, the shortfall had stood at
6.6%. The recovery of the German economy
continued to be buoyed by robust global eco-
nomic activity. Nonetheless, there is no over-
looking the fact that domestic forces are now
gaining in strength. The sharp expansion of
investment in machinery and equipment and
the further appreciable increase in private
consumption are clear evidence of this.
In the third quarter of 2010, German export-
ers benefited from the ongoing global eco-
nomic recovery, even though its momentum
slackened somewhat during the summer
months. In real terms, exports of goods went
up by a seasonally adjusted 31/C252% on the
quarter, and export profits consequently
reached similar levels in both euro-area and
non-euro-area countries. However, this was
also due to a slower pace of sales growth inNormalisation
of the pace of
economic
recovery
Impulses from
the global
economy less
pronounced

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
EUROSYSTEM
Monthly Report
November 2010
50the emerging market economies, in particu-
lar, which has so far proven to be a major
driving force behind the external catching-up
process. In the first two months of the third
quarter – more recent data are not yet avail-
able – exports to China, which had been
growing very quickly in the first quarter, did
not fully maintain the high level of the previ-
ous three-month period. Growth in exports
to the USA were also markedly lower than in
the first half of 2010. By contrast, the cyclical
upturn in a number of euro-area partner
countries seems to have steadied, which, in
turn, has supported exports of goods to the
region. The fact that exports of intermediate,
capital and consumer goods experienced
similar growth rates suggests that German
manufacturers were participating in the
global economic recovery on a broad basis.Real imports of goods grew by a seasonally
adjusted 21/C254% in the third quarter. German
customers’ demand was again focused on
motor vehicles and (other) capital goods. Im-
ports of consumer goods also continued to
rise sharply, however, owing to the pick-up in
private consumption. Given the anticipated
normalisation of the pace of economic recov-
ery, imports of immediate goods did not go
up quite as sharply in the period under review
as on an average of the previous four quar-
ters. In terms of their regional profile, it is
striking that, in the first two months of the
third quarter, the seasonally adjusted value of
imports from the USA rose considerably on
the quarter, while there was a slackening of
the buoyant momentum of imports from Asia
compared with the first half of 2010. The
same is also true (albeit to a lesser degree) of
imports from euro-area countries.
Purchases of machinery and equipment by
enterprises are likely to have risen sharply
again in the third quarter. Given the favour-
able outlook for growth, investment in ma-
chinery and plant would appear appropriate.
Non-deferrable replacement purchases were
not the only factor in this context. The vol-
ume of investment in capacity extensions was
probably also larger than would be expected
in view of the fact that capacity is, in part, still
underutilised. One reason for this could be
the discontinuation at the end of the year of
the more generous tax depreciation rules for
moveable fixed assets, which were intro-
duced as part of the fiscal stimulus package
in November 2008. Furthermore, the avail-
able funds of enterprises increased sharply in
the wake of the buoyant economic recovery.Overall output
Deutsche Bundesbank2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010102104106108110112114
–6–4–20+2+42000 = 100, price and seasonally adjusted
Log scale
GDP
Year-on-year change%
Lin scaleImports also
less buoyant
Perceptible
increase in
purchases of
machinery and
equipment

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2010
51Added to this is the fact that external finan-
cing conditions are favourable at present.
Construction investment in the third quarter
could have largely maintained the level of thesecond quarter, which was boosted by catch-up effects. Further progress was made inworking off the backlog of commercial andpublic sector construction orders that hadbeen built up in the winter, most of whichwere in connection with the modernisationof public infrastructure under the govern-ment economic stimulus programmes. Fur-thermore, there has been a marked rise indemand for new housing since the secondquarter. Historically low mortgage rates areevidently prompting numerous householdsto achieve their desire for home ownershipquickly. Nevertheless, the planning and ap-proval stage takes a certain amount of time.As a result, construction activity probably wasnot yet benefiting substantially in the thirdquarter from the new stimuli to housing con-struction.
In the third quarter of 2010, households fur-
ther increased their consumption expenditurein real terms after adjustment for seasonaland calendar variations. The fact that morenew cars were being purchased again was ofparticular importance in this context. Theslump in demand following the period of asharp rise in car sales owing to the environ-mental premium now seems to have beenlargely overcome. This was helped by the factthat the income situation of households im-proved perceptibly following the scaling-backof the crisis measures in enterprises, whichhad been associated with significant losses ofincome in some cases. The retail trade sector
also benefited from this. Furthermore, house-holds began stocking up heavily on heatingoil as early as the third quarter; they were ob-viously anticipating further price rises beforethe start of the heating period.Underlying trends
in foreign trade
1 Adjusted for the price indices for foreign 
trade.
Deutsche Bundesbank2007 2008 2009 201090100110120130
100110120Seasonally adjusted, quarterly
to non-euro-area countries
to euro-area
countries2005 = 100, log scale
Exports of goods  (price-adjusted)1
Total
pe90100110120130
Lin scale
Foreign trade balance
0204060€ bn90100110120
Imports of goods in total
(price-adjusted)1Construction
activity at high
Q2 level
Further pick-up
in private
consumption

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
EUROSYSTEM
Monthly Report
November 2010
52Sectoral trends
The pace of growth in industrial output
moved on to a somewhat flatter path in the
fourth quarter. Industrial output grew by a
seasonally adjusted 1.8% after expanding
by as much as 5.6% in the second quarter.
This was due to quite diverse developments
in the individual sectors. There was very
strong growth in the output of capital goods(+2.5% excluding vehicles), a sector in which
the economic recovery set in comparatively
late. This was attributable primarily to manu-
facturers of machinery and electrical equip-
ment, who again managed to increase their
output significantly by 4.9% and 4.1% re-
spectively. The automotive industry, which
benefited especially from the sharp rise in
foreign demand and, most recently, from
replacement orders for car fleets, increased
its output by 1.5% on the second quarter.
The large orders received by manufacturers of
other transport equipment in the previous
quarter had exerted only a marginal impact
on output at this point in time. Manufactur-
ers of intermediate goods, who have made
the greatest headway in the catching-up
process so far, increased their output again
(+1.6%). The rise in output in the consumer
goods industry, at 1.6%, was twice as strong
as in the previous quarter.
The further rise in production has also lifted
capacity utilisation in manufacturing again.
On the whole, it was up 1 percentage point
on the second quarter level. According to the
survey results of the Ifo Institute, there was
a higher than average rise in the capacity
utilisation of capital goods manufacturers
(+2 percentage points); capacity utilisation
was therefore just 21/C254percentage points
below the longer-term average. There was
also a further increase in capacity utilisation
in the intermediate and consumer goods sec-
tors, where it has already been above the
respective longer-term sectoral average, either
entirely or in part, since the third quarter
(+1/C252percentage point and +3/C254percentage
point respectively).Output in industry
and in construction
Deutsche Bundesbank2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 20109095100105110115120
–25–20–15–10–50+5+10+15
95100105110115120
–15–10–50+5+10+15+20+25+302005 = 100, seasonally adjusted, quarterly
Log scale
Industry
Lin scale
Year-on-year change
Log scale
Construction
Lin scale
Year-on-year
change%%
Further rise in
industrial
outputRise in industrial
capacity
utilisation

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2010
53Energy producers reduced their output slight-
ly on the quarter. The construction sector
benefited from the fact that further headway
was made in working off the construction
orders placed in connection with the govern-
ment economic stimulus packages. Seasonal-
ly adjusted construction output was therefore
able to maintain its high level of the second
quarter, which was still characterised by
catch-up effects following the harsh winter.
Output in civil engineering did not quite
match its second-quarter level, however,
since significantly fewer public sector orders
were being received as early as the spring.
This effect also had an impact on the building
industry, although this was offset by an in-
crease in the flow of housing construction
orders. No current data are available at
present for the finishing trades, which record-
ed extremely sharp growth in the first two
quarters of the year.
There was a further pick-up in business activ-
ity in the tertiary sector. However, the slow-
down in the pace of exports and in indus-
trial activity made itself felt in the case of
business-related service providers; according
to the available corporate surveys, their busi-
ness did not expand as sharply as in the previ-
ous quarter. There was even a slight decline
in sales in the wholesale sector, which had
been growing rapidly up to that point in the
wake of the economic recovery. By contrast,
the consumption-related service sectors were
tending to expand their activities. Retail sales
in the third quarter were slightly up on the
preceding three-month period. There was
even a marked rise in motor vehicle sales as
the decline in sales to commercial customerswas more than offset by the increase in
sales to households. Furthermore, turnover of
hotels and restaurants rose perceptibly in the
first two months of the third quarter in sea-
sonally and price-adjusted terms.
Employment and unemployment
The recovery of the labour market continued
into the second half of 2010. Employment
showed a further rise in the third quarter, and
unemployment showed a distinct decline
again. Moreover, enterprises are reporting an
increasing number of vacancies, which means
that a continued upward movement in em-
ployment subject to social security contribu-
tions is to be expected in the coming months.
Furthermore, recent survey data suggest thatManufacturing capacity 
utilisation
Source: Ifo Institute.
Deutsche Bundesbank2006 2007 2008 2009 2010Sectoral
averages
1993-2008Capital goods
636669727578818487909396Intermediate goods
0As a percentage of normal full capacity,
seasonally adjustedSlight decline in
energy output,
construction
activity at a
high level
Stronger
pick-up in
consumption
than in
industry-related
services
Further im-
provement in
labour market
situation

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
EUROSYSTEM
Monthly Report
November 2010
54the need to recruit new staff will remain high
even longer.
According to estimates by the Federal Statis-
tical Office, employment in Germany in the
third quarter of 2010 rose by 110,000, or
0.3%, on the quarter after adjustment for
seasonal variations. This increase was there-
fore only slightly down on the sharp 0.4%
growth recorded in the second quarter. As in
2009, the commuter flows increased signifi-
cantly with the start of the main harvest
period. Domestic employment grew some-
what less strongly during the third quarter,
which is generally characterised by holiday
effects.
In a welcome development, numerous add-
itional jobs subject to social security contribu-
tions were created, while the number of per-
sons working in low-paid part-time employ-
ment as their main source of income showed
a further fall. Taking the average of the first
two months of the third quarter, the season-
ally adjusted number of persons in employ-
ment subject to social security contributions
rose by 121,000, or 0.4%, on the quarter.
Although the expansion was again broadly
based, there are, however, signs of a shift in
focus. In the manufacturing sector, the sub-
dued growth in employment continued un-
abated. The same applies to the transport
and logistics sectors, although at a somewhat
faster underlying pace. Around mid-2010,
there were signs of a flattening of the percep-
tible upswing seen in the construction sector
and in business-related services (including
temporary employment) in the second quar-
ter. Added to this was the fact that the em-Advance notification 
of short-time work 1Million
July-
Aug
MillionOct
0Thou-
sand
OctThou-
sand
Oct%Employed
Short-time workers1
Unemployed 2
Year-on-year change
Unemployment rate 2–5000+500+1,000Labour market
1 Only short-time work for economic reas-
ons  pursuant  to  section  170  of  the  Third 
Book of the Social Security Code ( Sozialge-
setzbuch  (SGBIII));  not  seasonally  ad-
justed. — 2 From May 2009, unemployed ex-
cluding  persons  newly  registered  on  the 
books of private employment agencies.
Deutsche Bundesbank2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 201038.539.039.540.040.5
05001,0001,500
3.03.54.04.55.0
1,00050005001,000
––++
681012Seasonally adjusted, quarterly
Thou-
sand
Year-on-year change
OctPick-up in
employment ...
...owing to an
increase in
employment
subject to
social security
contributions

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2010
55ployment trend in the services sectors, where
considerable numbers of new staff had beenrecruited during the crisis, was no longerlooking quite so positive. Whereas furtherjobs subject to social security contributionswere being created in the health and socialwork sector, there have been no further sea-sonally adjusted increases in the educationsector or in public administration for a num-ber of months.
The total headcount engaged in short-time
work continued to fall rapidly along with thesharp recovery in industrial activity. Accordingto estimates by the Federal EmploymentAgency, the number of persons engaged inshort-time work for economic reasons stoodat just 173,000 in August 2010. This wasdown 12% on the peak recorded in May2009. The decline was, however, sloweddown by the fact that new registrations forshort-time work have been stagnating at justunder 30,000 per month since the secondquarter. The number of newly registeredshort-time workers was therefore more thantwice as high as the average for 2007, for ex-ample, and went back up to 40,000 in Octo-ber 2010. This shows that not yet all indus-trial enterprises were feeling the effects ofthe economic upturn.
There was a further perceptible decline in
unemployment in the third quarter of 2010.In line with trends in domestic employment,the decline in the reporting period, at a sea-sonally adjusted 69,000, was only half aslarge as in the previous quarter (-127,000),however. This was due primarily to the factthat fewer unemployed persons receivingunemployment benefits under the statutory
insurance scheme are likely to have foundemployment again between July and Septem-ber, whereas the decline in the number ofnon-working recipients of unemploymentbenefit II was hardly smaller than the averageof the previous quarter. The weakening of thecyclical effect during the summer monthsmay also have been due to the holidayperiod. The obvious thing to do at this timewas to moderate the pace of recruitment fol-lowing the sizeable increases in staffing levelsin the second quarter as well as in view of theanticipated normalisation of the economicrecovery process. There were 290,000 fewerpersons registered as unemployed in the thirdquarter of 2010 than in the previous year. Theofficial unemployment rate declined by 0.7percentage point on the year to a seasonallyadjusted 7.6%. In October, the seasonallyadjusted number of unemployed persons re-mained practically unchanged on the month;the corresponding unemployment rate re-mained steady at the September level (7.5%).
Leading indicators suggest that the positive
developments in the labour market are con-tinuing. The number of seasonally adjustedvacancies showed a further increase up toOctober 2010, with additional unfilled pos-itions subject to social security contributionsbeing reported, in particular, in the manufac-turing, trade, transport, business-related ser-vices and the healthcare sectors. The fact thatpersonnel planning in the industrial sector iscurrently geared towards expansion is alsorevealed by the Ifo employment barometerhaving reached an all-time high recently andthe fact that the number of firms intending
Short-time
working still
declining
Decline in
unemployment
in Q3 no longer
quite as steepLeading
indicators
extremely
positive

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
EUROSYSTEM
Monthly Report
November 2010
56to hire new staff in the next 12 months has
risen sharply according to the autumn 2010
survey by the German Chamber of Industry
and Commerce (DIHK).
Wages and prices
Corporate profitability has recovered appre-
ciably in the wake of the robust upswing. The
trade unions are therefore stepping up their
calls for the workforce to be given an appro-
priate share of the upswing and are finding
widespread support for this view not just
among the general public. Employers, too,
are now becoming more willing to provide
employees with some degree of compensa-
tion for the, in some cases, significant earlier
losses of income during the crisis. For ex-ample, a number of enterprises in the metal-
working and electrical engineering industries
have announced that they will bring forward
by two months the 2.7% increase in sched-
uled rates of pay that was agreed for April
2011; this was envisaged in the current wage
agreement from February 2010 in the event
of a positive development in the economy. In
the steel industry, wage bargainers concluded
a new agreement consisting of a one-off
payment of 3150 for September 2010 and a
3.6% rise in scheduled rates of pay from Oc-
tober 2010. Furthermore, temporary workers
employed in the steel industry are to receive
the same wages as the regular workforce.
By contrast, the rise in negotiated wages in
the third quarter of 2010 was still shaped by
wage agreements concluded during the crisis
when no or only very moderate increases in
scheduled rates of pay were agreed. The Bun-
desbank’s pay rate statistics show that the
year-on-year increase in negotiated pay rates,
at 1.0%, was even weaker than in the previ-
ous quarter (2.1%). The year-on-year in-
crease in the basic negotiated rates of pay,
which do not include one-off payments or
fringe benefits, went up by 1.4% on the year.
The comparable negotiated wage index of
the Federal Statistical Office shows a similar
increase with a year-on-year change of 1.3%
in July. The effective increase in wages is likely
to have been much higher given the normal-
isation in working hours.
During the summer of 2010, the rise in prices
at the upstream stages of the economy less-
ened noticeably thanks to the euro’s appreci-
ation and lower crude oil prices. This is par-Negotiated rates of pay
1 Excluding additional benefits and lump-
sum payments.
Deutsche Bundesbank2003 04 05 06 07 08 09 201000.51.01.52.02.53.03.5Year-on-year change, on monthly basis
Negotiated rates of pay total
Basic pay 1%
Q1-Q3
Cyclical
strengthening
of wage
growth
foreseeableRise in
negotiated
wages in Q3
but still very
moderate
Price rises more
moderate at
upstream
stages of the
economy

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2010
57ticularly evident in the case of imports, the
prices of which rose by just 0.5% on thequarter in seasonally adjusted terms after in-creasing by 3.2% in the second quarter. Inthe case of exports, this moderation was lesspronounced (1.8% to 0.7%) owing to thelesser significance of crude oil products. Con-sequently, there was no further deteriorationin the terms of trade. Domestic industrial pro-ducer prices rose by 0.9%, compared with+1.3% in the previous period. If the especiallyvolatile component of energy is excluded, theseasonally adjusted rise in the price of importsgoes down to 1.0%, and 0.8% in the case ofdomestic sales. Despite the appreciation ofthe euro, the prices of intermediate goodswent up again significantly in terms of bothimports and domestic sales; this is likely tohave been due mainly to buoyant global in-dustrial activity, which is also reflected inhigher commodity prices. Owing to rising de-mand in the third quarter, German manufac-turers of capital goods were able to increasetheir domestic prices, too, on a considerablescale again for the first time since the begin-ning of 2009; they were able to raise their ex-port sale prices as early as the beginning ofthis year. The food industry increased its salesprices significantly in some cases owing to arise in input prices and improved sales oppor-tunities. The prices of imported consumergoods continued to rise, albeit at a decliningrate. Construction prices rose by a further0.5% on the quarter owing to the favourableeconomic situation in this sector, and were up1.2% on their prior-year level. According tovdp, prices of owner-occupied housing rose1.4% on the year, compared with +0.7% inthe second quarter. This was due to a pick-upin demand owing to favourable financing
conditions. On the whole, there is an emer-ging picture of a moderate upward trend inprices in the economy as a whole, which isclearly being influenced by the cyclical recov-ery.
At the consumer level, too, the appreciation
of the euro along with lower crude oil pricesdampened the rise in prices in the third quar-Import, producer and
consumer prices
1 Not  seasonally  adjusted,  quarterly. — 
2 National consumer price index.
Deutsche Bundesbank2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 201095100105110115
95100105 105110115
100105 105110115
100105110
10123
–+++2005 = 100, seasonally adjusted
Lin scale
Year-on-year change 1Consumer prices 2Construction
prices 1Producer prices
of industrialproductsImport pricesLog scale
%
Oct
Moderate rise
in consumer
prices

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
EUROSYSTEM
Monthly Report
November 2010
58ter of 2010. Consumer prices went up by just
0.2% on the quarter after adjustment for
seasonal variations. This was due to opposing
movements in the principal components.
Owing to lower prices for petrol and heating
oil, energy was somewhat cheaper than in
the second quarter. By contrast, food prod-
ucts became more expensive again since agri-
cultural production was hampered by adverse
weather conditions in the summer months,
too. There was little change in the prices of
other goods. However, the prices of services
were rising more sharply again for the first
time since the end of 2009, which was in line
with the economic recovery, but also the re-
sult of special factors. Housing rents con-
tinued their moderate rise. The year-on-year
figure for consumer prices in both the nation-
al consumer price index (CPI) and the Har-
monised Index of Consumer Prices (HICP)
went up by 0.2 percentage point to 1.2%.
The rise in the cost of living in October was
somewhat more pronounced than in the pre-
vious months. The fact that the further appre-
ciation of the euro did not quite keep pace
with the sharp rise in crude oil prices probably
played a part in this. The annual CPI and HICP
rates both stood at 1.3%.
Orders received and outlook
The upturn in the German economy appears
to be quite firm at present. This is indicated,
not least, by enterprises’ very optimistic ex-
port expectations. Economic activity is likely
not just to be supported by further external
stimuli over the next few months, but will
also benefit from rising domestic demand.Demand for industrial goods 
and construction work
Deutsche Bundesbank8090100110120130
–40–30–20–1000+10+20+30
100110120130
758090100
90100110120
–20–100+10+20
2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010100110120
8090100Volume, 2005 = 100,
seasonally adjusted, quarterly
DomesticForeignLog scaleTotal industrial 
ordersLog scale
Lin scale
Year-on-year change
Total construction orders
Lin scale
Year-on-year change%
%July-
Aug
July-
AugFirm economic
activity on a
broad footing

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2010
59Nonetheless, the pace of overall economic
growth will fall well short of the dynamicsurge in the spring, which was driven byspecial factors. On the other hand, the basisfor growth is likely to broaden. The positivedevelopments in the labour market, as wellas the outlook for growth in earnings, isgiving rise to favourable income prospectsfor households, which will benefit privateconsumption in particular. The currently verypositive financing conditions are giving a con-siderable push to housing construction. Cap-acity utilisation is back at its normal level atever more enterprises, which is making in-vestment in additional equipment more ur-gent. The German economy should thereforecope with the gradual phasing out of thefiscal stimuli without experiencing any majorloss in the underlying pace of economicgrowth. This is, however, conditional on ex-pectations of global economic developments,in general, and exports, in particular, beingfulfilled as these form the basis of the positivelabour market situation, favourable incomeprospects and expansionary investment plans.
The inflow of orders slowed down in most
major industrial sectors in the third quarter of2010 compared with the strong growth re-corded in the first half of the year. In season-ally adjusted terms, the quarter-on-quarterincrease in new orders went up by no morethan 1.7% in total. Demand stimuli camesolely from abroad (+3.4%), whereas domes-tic orders declined slightly (-0.4%). Ordersfrom the euro area were very positive, whichwas also due to exceptionally strong growthin the manufacture of other transport equip-ment. Leaving this sector aside, orders fromnon-euro-area countries, which have so far
proven to be an engine of growth, were stillincreasing more strongly than orders from theeuro area. On the whole, demand from for-eign customers during the reporting periodcontinued to be focused on both intermedi-ate goods and capital goods. By contrast,there was a perceptible decline in domesticcustomers’ demand for inputs and intermedi-ary products. Instead, they stepped up theirIndicators of corporate sector 
investment
1 Ratio of gross fixed capital formation to 
corporate gross value added (data for 1991 at  current  prices,  extrapolated  using  the relevant change factors based on the previ-ous  year’s  prices). —  2 Source:  German 
Chamber of Industy and Commerce (DIHK), autumn survey.
Deutsche Bundesbank1999 00 01 02 03 04 05 06 07 08 09 20101819202122
10152025303540455055606570Investment ratio 1
Rationalisation
Product 
innovation
Capacity expansionReplacement%
Investment motives 2H1%
Orders received
dominated
by foreign
demand again,
but somewhat
calmer

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
EUROSYSTEM
Monthly Report
November 2010
60orders of equipment, mainly machinery, but
also electrical equipment and motor vehicles.
Investment activity is likely to pick up towards
the end of the year, not least owing to antici-
patory effects in connection with the discon-
tinuation of the improved tax depreciation
rules for moveable fixed assets. However,
enterprises’ fixed asset formation will not be
influenced solely by this temporary special
factor. According to the Ifo surveys, industrial
enterprises’ business expectations for the next
six months are at an unchanging high level.
Furthermore, the latest survey by the German
Chamber of Industry and Commerce (DIHK),
which covers a broader range of enterprises,
is reporting a further marked improvement in
business expectations. It is, first and foremost,
those enterprises whose production capaci-
ties are already operating at normal capacity
again that are increasingly thinking of stock-
ing up on input factors. This is also suggested
by the fact that the DIHK indicators of invest-
ment intentions and employment plans
moved virtually in parallel into expansionary
territory.
Public sector construction orders are likely to
have passed their peak now that the financial
resources made available in the economic
stimulus packages are being disbursed. The
construction sector will, however, benefit
from a pick-up in housing construction in thecoming months. Taking the average of July
and August, around one-fifth more new
housing projects were approved in seasonally
adjusted terms than on an average of the pre-
vious one and a half years. This was not just
the case for single-family and two-family
houses; the number of projected new apart-
ments soared at the end of the period under
review following extremely subdued demand
in this segment over a number of years.
Given the exceptionally low interest rates and
the lack of lucrative investment opportunities
elsewhere, it would appear that investors,
too, are once again taking a greater interest
in the German housing market.
In view of the marked economic recov-
ery, consumers are thoroughly optimistic at
present. According to the surveys of the con-
sumer research institution, Gesellschaft f/C252r
Konsumforschung (GfK), consumer sentiment
and the propensity to purchase are holding
up at a high level. Given increasing employ-
ment as well as the reversal of the cuts in
working hours and of the short-time working
arrangements that were undertaken during
the crisis, households’ income is rising per-
ceptibly. The prospect of larger wage in-
creases is additionally improving income pro-
spects. The foundation is therefore in place
for a further marked rise in private consump-
tion.Rise in
enterprises’
propensity to
invest
Pick-up in
housing
constructionOptimistic
consumers

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2010
61Public finances* General government budget
This year, the deterioration in German public
finances will not be as sharp as initially pre-
dicted owing, in particular, to the unexpect-
edly strong economic upturn. Nonetheless,
both the structural deficit and the debt ratio
are rising significantly. The deficit ratio is likely
to increase to around 31/C252%, after reaching
3% last year. While the fiscal policy stance is
expansionary, not least because of additional
stabilisation measures, this development is
being bolstered by the positive cyclical influ-
ence1and one-off effects, most notably the
proceeds from the auction of mobile phone
frequencies. The debt ratio, which soared to
73.4% in 2009, will continue its steep rise,
mainly as a result of the risk assets that were
assumed when bad banks were set up for
WestLB and HRE.
The government revenue ratio will decline
significantly in 2010. The sizeable tax cuts are
the main factor behind revenue shortfalls. By
contrast, in the case of social security contri-
butions, the financial effects of the various
measures are largely balancing each other
out. In addition, the growth structure is de-
pressing the revenue ratio, as – unlike in
2009 – key macroeconomic reference vari-
*The analysis in the “General government budget” sec-
tion is based on data contained in the national accounts
and on the Maastricht ratios. The subsequent reporting on
the budgets of the various levels of government and social
security schemes is based on the budgetary figures as
defined in the government’ s (budgetary) financial statistics.
1The cyclical component of the improvement in the fis-
cal balance is significantly smaller than GDP growth
would suggest, as key macroeconomic reference vari-
ables for revenue are showing a weaker development
than GDP . See also Deutsche Bundesbank, Germany in
the financial and economic crisis, Fiscal policy, Monthly
Report, October 2010, pp 71-85.In 2010, small
rise in deficit
but consider-
able structural
deterioration
Falling revenue
ratio...

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
EUROSYSTEM
Monthly Report
November 2010
62ables for general government revenue are
likely to see a weaker development than
gross domestic product (GDP).
The expenditure ratio, too, is likely to fall
markedly after soaring in 2009. These fluctu-
ations in the ratio largely reflect economic de-
velopments. The GDP in the denominator of
the expenditure ratio is a particularly signifi-
cant factor in this respect. After cyclical ad-
justment, there is actually a further slight in-
crease in the expenditure ratio. Above all, the
rise in healthcare costs is disproportionately
large, as in the preceding years. Two addition-
al factors are the rising outlays resulting from
the economic stimulus packages and the fur-
ther increase in child benefit. By contrast, the
expiry of the car scrappage scheme and the
child bonus, and the proceeds received in
May from the auction of mobile phone
frequencies all had an alleviating effect.2
As things stand, the general government def-
icit is likely to fall below the 3% threshold in
2011. Although certain one-off effects will
expire (auction of mobile phone frequencies,
higher insolvency benefit contributions), the
economic trend is likely to further reduce the
deficit. Furthermore, the previously expan-
sionary fiscal policy stance will be reversed. A
number of economic stimulus measures are
gradually being phased out, and government
investment is also likely to fall. In addition,
the general contribution rates to the statutory
health insurance scheme3and the Federal
Employment Agency will be raised. Moreover,
austerity measures will have an impact on the
central government budget. All in all, the rev-
enue ratio could remain almost constant,while, given the emerging expenditure trend,
which is muted in comparison with the ag-
gregate growth outlook, the expenditure
ratio will probably fall significantly.
In retrospect, it is clear that the financial and
economic crisis has had a key impact on the
development of public finances both in 2009
and in 2010.4In 2009, the deficit ratio rose
sharply owing mainly to the automatic stabil-
isers and the additional fiscal policy support
measures. This year, it is increasing again, as
the fiscal policy stance is still expansionary
– alongside a favourable economic trend.
Furthermore, the debt ratio has soared from
its pre-crisis level, which was already overly
high, and additional budgetary risks in the
form of extensive guarantees have been
taken on in the wake of the financial and
sovereign debt crisis. Better-than-expected
economic and budgetary developments
mean that there is now a chance of bringing
the deficit back below the 3% threshold
more rapidly and achieving the aim of a bal-
anced budget more quickly. This would also
limit the increase in government indebted-
ness, which remains substantial despite the
more favourable trend. To this end, a strict
austerity course should be pursued at all
levels in line with the underlying intent of the
national and EU budgetary rules. No conces-
2In the government’s national accounts, the purchase
and sale of non-financial assets are netted out and re-
corded on the expenditure side. The auction proceeds
thus reduce expenditure (as was the case with the pro-
ceeds from the sales of UMTS mobile telephone licences
in 2000), whereas in the government’s (budgetary) finan-
cial statistics they increase revenue.
3Owing to reforms, the additional revenue generated
by further increasing the general contribution rate from
14.9% to 15.5% will probably only be partly offset by
higher expenditure in 2011.
4See Deutsche Bundesbank (2010), op cit, pp 71-85....and
expenditure
ratio
Improvement
in 2011 due
to economic
developments
and consolida-
tion strategyVery favourable
conditions for
fiscal policy exit

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2010
63sions should be made in terms of the planned
consolidation path. Unlike so often in thepast, the necessary budgetary consolidationcould thus be implemented under favourableconditions. It remains to be seen whetherpolicymakers will comply with the objectivesof the new budgetary rules and resist thetemptation to postpone the necessary con-solidation when times are good.
The public finance situation is particularly dra-
matic in certain euro-area member states. Inorder to restore confidence in the sustainabil-ity of public debt, it is crucial that the euro-area countries strictly comply with the min-imum requirements for budgetary consolida-tion at EU level and, in addition, take everyopportunity to reduce their deficits morerapidly. Furthermore, the European institu-tional arrangements for crisis prevention andcrisis management must likewise be im-proved. In the run-up to the crisis, the Euro-pean fiscal framework and its implementa-tion ultimately did not suffice to ensuresound public finances in all member states.
The changes to the Stability and Growth Pact
set in motion by the European Council at theend of October may result in progress vis-/C224-vis the status quo . However, these changes
are yet to be fleshed out. The key factor hereis to strengthen fiscal discipline as extensivelyas possible. However, it is already becomingevident that the adjustments will fall short ofthe more ambitious ideas proposed by theEuropean Commission, among others. Thereappears to have been no majority for a largerdegree of automatism and no details have yetbeen specified for a greater obligation tocomply with the debt criterion. The way in
which the Ecofin Council implements therules will thus remain crucial in future. Inaddition to the changes to the fiscal policyframework, it is planned that more intensivemacroeconomic oversight will ensure thatserious problems are identified and combatedat an early stage. However, it is advisable toguard against attempts at macroeconomicfine-tuning. Such requirements should, aboveall, help to avoid serious problems and imbal-ances, such as those relating to unsustainablecurrent account deficits.
The European Council has also laid the foun-
dations for setting up a crisis resolution mech-anism. In particular, the reaffirmation of theprinciple that neither the union nor the mem-ber states are liable for the debt of othermember states is to be welcomed. This, alongwith the principle of autonomous responsibil-ity for national fiscal policy, is a cornerstoneof the existing union. Private creditors shouldnot be absolved of their responsibility andthere should be no one-way transfer of risksto the union. A crisis resolution mechanismthat can, in very exceptional cases where thestability of the currency union is at risk, pro-vide government aid based on strict condi-tionality and a very limited timeframe mustnot distort incentives for fiscal policymakersand investors. A transparent and predictableprocedure which also notably guarantees acomprehensive and credible consolidationand reform programme could, in conjunctionwith improved financial market regulation,narrowly limit the risk of a systemic crisis.Relatively extensive sanctions in cases wherethe stability of the currency union is jeopard-
Improve EU
rules for crisis
prevention and
management
by...
...tightening
the Stability
and Growth
Pact......more
intensive
macroeconomic
oversight...
...and a crisis
resolution
mechanism
with the
participation
of private
creditors

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
EUROSYSTEM
Monthly Report
November 2010
64ised should also be a key element of this new
fiscal framework.
Budgetary development of central, state
and local government
Tax revenue
In the third quarter of 2010, tax revenue5was
up by 1% on the year (see chart above and
table on page 65). The shortfalls caused by
extensive tax breaks6were thus more than
offset by the positive underlying trend.
Receipts from income-related taxes fell by a
total of 11/C252%. This decline was mainly attrib-
utable to shortfalls in revenue from wage tax
as a result of the relief measures and the in-
crease in child benefit. By contrast, profit-related taxes posted a considerable overall
rise (+9%). The positive underlying trend in
assessed income tax was strengthened by a
fall in deduction amounts (refunds to employ-
ees and grants to investors and homebuyers).
Corporation tax revenue increased strongly
from the level recorded one year previously,
which was very low as a result, in particular,
of high refunds. In contrast to the assessed
taxes, investment income tax (primarily on
dividends, interest income and capital gains)
saw a steep net decline in revenue. Receipts
from consumption-related taxes rose by 2%.
According to the latest official tax estimate,
tax receipts for 2010 as a whole are expected
to rise by just under1/C252% (including local gov-
ernment taxes) on the year.7Although, on
balance, changes in tax legislation are causing
substantial shortfalls (amounting to around
4% of revenue, or 320 billion), these are
roughly offset by growth resulting from the
economic recovery. In addition, the burdening
effect resulting from the tax refunds made in
2009 in connection with the earlier unconsti-
tutional restrictions on the standard travelTax revenue *
* Including  EU  shares  in  German  tax  rev-
enue, excluding receipts from local govern-
ment taxes.
Deutsche Bundesbank864202468
––––++++
2008 2009 2010Year-on-year change, quarterly
%
5Including EU shares in German tax revenue but exclud-
ing receipts from local government taxes, which are not
yet known for the last quarter recorded.
6These include, above all, the extended income tax al-
lowances for insurance contributions, the second stage
of the reduction in income tax rates, preferential turnover
tax treatment for the hotel trade, corporate taxation re-
lief measures and the increase in child benefit. Unlike in
the national accounts, in the government’s financial stat-
istics child benefit payments are not recorded on the ex-
penditure side, but are deducted from wage tax receipts.
7The estimate is based on central government’s current
macroeconomic projection, which foresees real GDP
growth of 3.4% and nominal GDP growth of 4.1% for
2010 (May 2010: 1.4% and +1.8% respectively). In
2011, real growth is expected to be +1.8% and nominal
growth +3.0% (May 2010: +1.6% and +2.4% respect-
ively). From 2012 onward, nominal annual growth is pre-
dicted to be +2.8% (May 2010: +2.9%).Slight rise in tax
revenue in Q3Small revenue
rise expected
for 2010 as a
whole

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2010
65allowance for commuters has now come to
an end. A clear rise in receipts from profit-re-lated taxes is expected for 2010 following lastyear’s sharp decline from the high level re-corded in 2008. The tax ratio as defined inthe government’s financial statistics will fallby just under 1 percentage point to 21.1%,essentially as a result of the changes in taxlegislation.
A steeper rise in revenue of just over 2% is
expected for 2011. Although the economictrend will weaken perceptibly, and a negativespecial factor was included in these calcula-tions,
8the revenue shortfalls resulting from
the legislative changes that were taken intoaccount in the estimate will be much smalleron balance than in 2010. In 2012,
9tax rev-
enue is projected to climb by just under 5%.Given a similar overall impact from the eco-
nomic trend to that in 2011, the above-mentioned special factor will largely havecome to an end, and legislative changes willhave a positive net influence. Following a fur-ther marginal decline in 2011, the tax ratiowould thus rise again to 21.3% in 2012.Tax revenue
Q1 to Q3 Q3Estimate
for2010
1, 2
2009 2010 2009 2010
Year-on-year
changeYear-on-year
changeYear-on-
year per-centage
Type of tax 5billion 5billion as % 5billion 5billion as % change
Tax revenue,
total
2 352.8 351.7 – 1.1 – 0.3 115.6 116.7 + 1.1 + 1.0 – 0.0
of which
Wage tax 96.6 91.1 – 5.5 – 5.7 32.2 30.4 – 1.7 – 5.3 – 5.4Profit-related taxes
3 45.4 48.5 + 3.1 + 6.8 11.3 12.4 + 1.0 + 9.1 + 6.5
Assessed income tax 18.8 23.2 + 4.3 + 22.9 6.7 7.3 + 0.6 + 8.7 + 17.7Corporation tax 5.3 7.4 + 2.0 + 38.2 0.6 1.6 + 1.0 . + 41.6Investment incometax
4 21.2 17.9 – 3.3 – 15.4 4.0 3.5 – 0.6 – 13.8 – 15.6
Turnover taxes 5 130.9 132.2 + 1.4 + 1.0 44.4 45.0 + 0.6 + 1.4 + 1.4
Energy tax 24.7 24.2 – 0.5 – 2.0 9.9 10.2 + 0.3 + 2.9 – 0.8Tobacco tax 9.4 9.4 – 0.0 – 0.3 3.5 3.6 + 0.1 + 3.1 – 0.5
1According to official tax estimate of November 2010. —
2Including EU shares in German tax revenue, excluding
receipts from local government taxes. — 3Employee re-
funds, grants paid to homebuyers and investors deductedfrom revenue. — 4Withholding tax on interest income
and capital gains, non-assessed taxes on earnings. —5Turnover tax and import turnover tax.
Deutsche Bundesbank
8The Federal Government is expecting a ruling this year
in the Meilicke case regarding the treatment of corpor-
ation tax paid abroad in the taxation of dividends under
the tax imputation procedure that was abolished in
2001. Temporary burdens arising from tax refunds are
therefore included in the official tax estimate (a total of
35 billion, of which just over 331/C252billion in 2011 and the
remainder in 2012).
9In a change from previous practice, the forecast for the
year after next was also updated. From 2011, an estimate
will be made in November for the medium-term planning
period of the following year (eg forecast for 2011 to
2016 in November 2011), as the data will, in future, be
needed at an earlier stage owing to a change in the pro-
cedure for drawing up the central government budget.Strong growth
again in 2011......and further
acceleration
in 2012

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
EUROSYSTEM
Monthly Report
November 2010
66As the official tax estimates are based on the
legislative status quo , a number of measures
that are to be adopted before the year is out
(nuclear fuel tax, air traffic tax, reduction of
energy and electricity tax concessions for the
production sector, amendments to regula-
tions on the tax allowance for an office at
home) have not yet been included in the cal-
culations. From 2011 onward, these meas-
ures are expected to lead to additional re-
ceipts totalling around1/C252% of revenue.
Compared with the previous official estimate
in May, revenue expectations have been
raised considerably. Adjusted for the legisla-
tive changes that have since been made,
which are small in number, additional revenue
is predicted to rise from 3151/C252billion this year
to3231/C252billion in 2012. This changed assess-
ment is due crucially to the significantly more
favourable macroeconomic fundamentals.
Central government
Central government posted a deficit of 3161/C252
billion in the third quarter of 2010. The year-
on-year deterioration came to just over 31/C252
billion and was thus much smaller than in the
preceding quarters. Revenue fell by 31/C252%
(-321/C252billion). Owing to higher transfers to
the EU budget, there was a decline of 2%
(-311/C252billion) in tax receipts. There were fur-
ther burdens amounting to almost 311/C252bil-
lion owing to the fact that – as in the previous
quarters – the Federal Employment Agency
had not yet made its reintegration payment.
There was also a fall in expenditure (-2%, or
-311/C252billion). This was mainly attributable to
the sharp decrease of 341/C252billion in interestexpenditure, although this was largely due to
the outpayment for the coupon date at the
beginning of July being brought forward.
However, central government also continued
to benefit from the exceptionally favourable
financing conditions. By contrast, payments
to the social security funds rose significant-
ly.10
The 2010 central government budget envis-
ages net borrowing of 380 billion. The Fed-
eral Ministry of Finance already presented a
revised assessment in June with an improve-
ment of 315 billion in the result. At the end
of the third quarter, the deficit stood at 343
billion. Last year, a deficit of 310 billion was
recorded in the final quarter, but this year’s
fourth-quarter figure should be much lower.
The reintegration payment of almost 351/C252bil-
lion from the Federal Employment Agency
will not be made until around the end of the
year. At the same time, central government’s
fourth-quarter payments to the Federal Em-
ployment Agency are likely to be lower than
they were a year earlier. Furthermore, a sig-
nificant fall in interest expenditure is expect-
ed. All in all, the latest tax estimate predicts a
year-on-year improvement of 311/C252billion,
which should compensate for further add-
itional burdens in connection with the health
insurance fund. For 2010 as a whole, there is
thus likely to be a deficit of around 350 bil-
lion, which is just over 315 billion lower than
in the June estimate. After adjustment for the
10Of the 321/C252billion increase, 311/C252billion was account-
ed for by the health insurance fund alone owing to the
one-off grant in 2010 and higher regular transfers. The
Federal Employment Agency and the statutory pension
insurance scheme each received additional funds of 31/C252
billion.No account
yet taken
of planned
legislative
changes
Revenue clearly
above previous
forecast
Only slight rise
in deficit in Q3Deficit for year
as a whole
considerably
lower than
projected

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2010
67cyclical component and financial transactions,
this results in a structural deficit of under 345
billion from today’s perspective, which is thusaround 310 billion lower than was expected
in June.
Following the Budget Committee’s adjust-
ment meeting, net borrowing of 348
1/C252billion
is envisaged for the 2011 central governmentbudget. This is 39 billion lower than in the
cabinet decision in July.
11This is mainly attrib-
utable to tax revenue, which is now expectedto be 37
1/C252billion higher according to the No-
vember tax estimate. In addition, labour mar-ket costs, in particular, are estimated to besomewhat lower. Excluding the cyclical com-ponent and financial transactions, the struc-tural deficit is projected to be just over 340
billion. Overall, the budget thus seems to bebased on conservative calculations. If, at thesame time, the measures from the austeritypackages achieve the desired easing effect, abetter outcome can be expected, in particu-lar, for tax transfers to the EU budget, interestexpenditure and labour market costs.
With regard to the new debt brake, the fact
that it will apparently not be rigorously imple-mented even in the first year is a bad sign.When it was adopted in the spring of 2009, itwas agreed, given considerable uncertaintyabout the likely course of macroeconomicdevelopments, that there should be a transi-tional period up until 2016 during which thestructural deficit recorded in the base-year2010 would be reduced in equal steps. As thecrisis-related strains are now obviously havinga much smaller impact on the central govern-ment budget than was initially feared, thebase value – and thus the scope for new bor-
rowing up until 2015 – should be reduced ac-cordingly. In the summer, the German gov-ernment rightly updated its adjustment path,but now evidently intends not to lower thebase value further in line with the latest data.This gives policymakers greater discretion fornew borrowing over the next few yearswhich, if fully used, would – as so often in thepast – put off the consolidation necessarywhen times are good until later years. Thedebt level might then be just over 325 billion
higher by 2016 – with knock-on effects onthe interest burden for future budgets. Theclearly documented legislative intent of thenew debt brake, which is currently regardedas a model for ensuring sustainable publicCentral government fiscal 
deficit / surplus
2009
Deutsche Bundesbank2008
Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4252015105051015
–––––+++
–45–40–35–30–25–20–15–10–5€ bnCumulative from start of year201020092008Quarterly results
2010€ bn
11See Deutsche Bundesbank, Public finances, Monthly
Report, August 2010, pp 61-72.Further
improvement
expected for
2011
Implementation
of debt brake
warrants
criticism

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
EUROSYSTEM
Monthly Report
November 2010
68finances in other euro-area countries, too,
would thus be violated on the very first occa-
sion it was applied, thereby undermining
confidence in the long-term effectiveness of
the reform.
As in the previous year, central government’s
off-budget entities recorded a total deficit of
just over 31 billion in the third quarter of
2010. There were net outflows of just over
311/C252billion from the Investment and Repay-
ment Fund. Above all, there were large pay-
ments ( 31 billion) for state and local govern-
ment investment activities. Since the spring
of 2009, however, there have been outflows
of only 331/C252billion, or just over one-third of
the total volume of 310 billion. The legally
binding aim of calling at least half of the
funds by the end of 2009 was thus very clear-
ly undershot. Again, this shows the difficulty
of using government investment in a targeted
manner to swiftly stabilise macroeconomic
developments. The Financial Market Stabilisa-
tion Fund, from which assistance measures
can only be requested until the end of the
year, posted a surplus of 31/C252billion, above all
as a result of proceeds from the provision of
guarantees. The other off-budget entities
once again recorded an almost balanced
overall result. The deficit of all of the off-
budget entities taken together is likely to
have increased again by the end of the year
and may be in the order of 310 billion for
2010, compared with 322 billion in 2009.
State government12
In the third quarter, too, the state govern-
ment budget situation was somewhat betterthan it had been a year earlier. The deficit fell
from just over 36 billion in the same quarter
of 2009 to 351/C252billion. Revenue rose by
31/C252%(32 billion). Payments from the Invest-
ment and Repayment Fund alone, which ini-
tially go to the federal states, increased by 31
billion. In the wake of the economic recovery,
tax revenue also climbed by 3%. At the same
time, expenditure saw a rise of 2% (just
under 311/C252billion). Staff costs increased fur-
ther, not least as a result of wage adjust-
ments, and growth was likewise recorded in
fixed asset formation and, to a lesser extent,
other operating expenditure. By contrast, there
was a further sharp decline in interest ex-
penditure and in general grants to local gov-
ernment, which are generally linked – with a
time lag – to the level of tax revenue.
The deficit in the state government budgets
is likely to be markedly below the previous
year’s figure ( 325 billion). However, excluding
the recapitalisation of BayernLB ( 37 billion),
which was reflected in the cash position in
2009, the deficit will be at roughly the same
high level as in 2009 despite the additional
revenue now forecast. There is no prospect of
a major decline in 2011, either. The expected
increase in revenue is likely to be eclipsed by
significant growth in expenditure. Staff costs,
other operating expenditure and general
grants to local government are on the rise.
Furthermore, particularly after a ruling by the
Constitutional Court for the Federal State of
12The development of local government finances in the
second quarter was analysed in greater detail in the short
articles in the Bundesbank’ s October Monthly Report.
These are the most recent data available.Off-budget
entities record
deficit againImprovement
continued in
Q3
High deficit
expected for
2010 as a
whole and no
major decline
in 2011

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2010
69North Rhine-Westphalia,13it is to be expected
that state government will have to bear a
greater share of the costs of the expansion in
child day care facilities.
On the basis of the stability reports presented
by central government and the federal states,
the Stability Council stated at its second
meeting in mid-October that there are signs
of imminent budgetary hardship in four of
the five states which are to receive consolida-
tion assistance (Berlin, Bremen, Saarland,
Schleswig-Holstein).14An evaluation commit-
tee is to examine the budgets of these federal
states in more detail by May 2011; on this
basis, the Stability Council will decide
whether the states are considered to be in
budgetary hardship and, where appropriate,
agree on a programme of restructuring. In
order to prevent the necessary consolidation
from being postponed, the agreed consolida-
tion assistance is essentially tied to a gradual
reduction in the initial structural deficit, for
which the calculation method and data time-
frame have not yet been agreed. Great ef-
forts will be needed from the federal states
concerned. However, in view of the present
favourable economic outlook, it is strongly
advisable for other federal states with high
deficits to swiftly consolidate their budgets,
too, even though the transitional period will
last until the end of 2019. A secure legal
framework could be created to achieve this
by promptly enshrining the debt brake in the
constitutions of the federal states and by
passing implementation acts that also stipu-
late binding rules for the transitional period.
This has already been put into practice by
Schleswig-Holstein, and the parliament of thestate of Hesse, for example, is now working
on a draft to amend its constitution. The
amendment borrows heavily from the Ger-
man constitution (Basic Law) but is not yet
tied to implementation provisions. In add-
ition, there are no clear regulations for the
transitional period.15
Social security funds16
Statutory pension insurance scheme
The deficit recorded by the statutory pension
insurance scheme came to just under 31 bil-
lion in the third quarter, after being more
than twice as high a year earlier. Whereas rev-
enue increased by 21/C252%, expenditure grew
by only1/C252%. Employees’ compulsory contri-
butions climbed by as much as just under 3%
on the year.17On the expenditure side, fol-
lowing the waiver of the pension adjustment
scheduled for mid-2010, the pension pay-
ments were only slightly above the level re-
corded in the same quarter of 2009 (+1/C252%).
13Although this ruling is only binding for North-Rhine
Westphalia, it is likely to be relevant for numerous other
federal states owing to the principle of connexity en-
shrined in most state government constitutions.
14See the press release and the documents provided at
http://www.stabilitaetsrat.de/DE/Home/home_node.html
(in German only).
15See also the Bundesbank’ s statement on the consult-
ation in the state parliament of Hesse at http://www.
hessischer-landtag.de (in German only).
16The financial development of the statutory health and
public long-term care insurance schemes in the second
quarter of 2010 was discussed in the short articles of the
Monthly Report of September 2010. These are the most
recent data available.
17As the figure for compulsory contributions also in-
cludes the contributions made for short-time workers,
which are now down significantly on the year, the inflow
of contributions related to actual pay developments actu-
ally rose even more steeply.Threat of
budgetary
hardship in
Berlin, Bremen,
Saarland and
Schleswig-
Holstein,...
...but rapid and
stringent
implementation
of debt brake
needed in other
federal states,
tooPositive
contribution
trend, weaker
expenditure
growth

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
EUROSYSTEM
Monthly Report
November 2010
70Without the extension of the safeguard
clause, the pension payment amounts in
western Germany would have been cut by
around1/C252%, as per capita earnings there
declined in 2009. Over the past few years,
the safeguard clause has prevented pension
cuts amounting to 3.8% in western Germany
and 1.8% in eastern Germany. For the statu-
tory pension insurance scheme, this has re-
sulted in additional expenditure of around 38
billion per year, which is equivalent to around
0.8 percentage point of the contribution rate.
In the coming years, the calculated pension
increases are to be halved until the pension
cuts that were waived have been offset in
order to comply with the long-term contribu-
tion rate targets.18The favourable revenue trend and moderate
expenditure trend can be expected to continue
throughout the rest of the year. It can there-
fore be assumed that a surplus will be record-
ed for the year as a whole despite the cumu-
lated deficit of just over 321/C252billion for the
period up to the end of September. Nonethe-
less, the financial situation looks less favour-
able for the coming year, as pension contribu-
tions on behalf of recipients of unemployment
benefit II and reimbursements from central
government for burdens resulting from the
reunification of Germany, jointly totalling just
over 32 billion, will be cut as part of the con-
solidation of the central government budget.
In the longer term, however, this will be offset
by reduced outpayments from the statutory
pension insurance scheme. This will, inciden-
tally, prevent pension payments to those who
are not in need of assistance from being in-
creased in future.
Federal Employment Agency
The Federal Employment Agency posted a
deficit of 33/C254billion in the third quarter of
2010, compared with a deficit of 351/C252billion
one year earlier. However, the result for the
third quarter of 2010 was distorted by the
fact that no transfers had yet been made to
central government to meet the reintegration
payment.19In addition, the grant from central
government was up by almost 31/C252billion on
the year in the third quarter. Excluding theseFinances of the
German statutory
pension insurance scheme
Deutsche Bundesbank2008 2009 20105860626466
–20+2+4Quarterly
€ bn€ bn
Lin scale
Surplus (+) or deficit (–)ExpenditureLog scale
Revenue
18The contribution rate to the statutory pension insur-
ance scheme must be no higher than 20% in the years
up to 2020 and a maximum of 22% in the years up to
2030.
19The reintegration payment is set at 351/C254billion for the
fiscal year and, in 2010, will be paid in one instalment at
the end of the year rather than on a quarterly basis.Safeguard
clause causes
substantial
additional
expenditureFinancial
deterioration
due to central
government’s
austerity
package
Clear financial
improvement
even after
adjustment for
special factors

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2010
71special factors, the deficit fell by 33 billion,
and the increase in revenue, at 13%, wasvery sharp. The strong growth in the inflowof contributions (4%) was not the main fac-tor in this development. The additional re-ceipts from insolvency benefit contributionsfollowing the significant increase in the con-tribution rate for 2010 had a greater influ-ence.
20Excluding the reintegration payment,
the Federal Employment Agency’s outlayswere down by 21% on the year. Spending onunemployment benefit I, short-time workingbenefits and active labour market policymeasures (including refunds of social securitycontributions for short-time working made toemployers, which fall into this category andhave been declining sharply) was, in eachcase, just over 3
1/C252billion lower in the third
quarter. Contrary to expectations, moreover,insolvency benefit payments remained farbelow the level recorded a year earlier.
The deficit of the Federal Employment
Agency for the first nine months of 2010came to just under 32
1/C252billion. In operational
business, only a slight deficit is to be expectedat the end of the year. However, transfersamounting to almost 35
1/C252billion to meet the
reintegration payment are due before theyear is out. All in all, a sizeable deficit can beexpected for 2010 as a whole, although itcould be smaller than the figure recently esti-mated by the Federal Employment Agency it-self (310 billion). 33 billion of this sum can be
offset by releasing reserves. The remainderwill be covered by a one-off central govern-ment grant. From 2011 onward, the FederalEmployment Agency will only receive loans toeliminate its deficit, which must be repaid in
better times.
At the beginning of 2011, the contribution
rate will be raised from 2.8% to 3.0%. How-Finances of the
Federal Employment Agency
1 Excluding central government liquidity as-
sistance. — 2 Including transfers to the civil 
servants’ pension fund set up in 2008.
Deutsche Bundesbank2008 2009 20106810121416
1.82.43.03.64.24.85.46.06.6
642024
–––++Quarterly
€ bn€ bnLog scale
Expenditure, 
total 2
Revenue 1
Expenditure on ...
... vocational training... unemployment benefit and
    short-time working    benefits
Lin scale
Surplus (+) or deficit (–)€ bn
20The rate for insolvency benefit contributions was
raised from 0.1% to 0.41% for 2010, with the aim of
compensating for the fact that expenditure on insolvency
benefit payments substantially exceeded contribution re-
ceipts in 2009 and covering the outlays expected for
2010.Grant required
for 2010
considerably
lower than
expected
Contribution
rate of 3% only
sufficient if
lasting savings
are made

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
EUROSYSTEM
Monthly Report
November 2010
72ever, the total revenue that can be achieved
in this way and the regular central govern-
ment grant will only be sufficient across the
economic cycle if spending, such as on active
labour market policy, is significantly and last-ingly reduced. Otherwise, the Federal Em-
ployment Agency will not be able to use sur-
pluses in better times to fully repay future
central government loans.

Statistical
Section
1*DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2010

ContentsI Key economic data for the euro area
1 Monetary developments and interest
rates 5*
2 External transactions and positions 5*
3 General economic indicators 6*
II Overall monetary survey in the
euro area
1 The money stock and its counterparts 8*
2 Consolidated balance sheet of mon-
etary financial institutions (MFIs) 10*
3 Banking system’s liquidity position 14*
III Consolidated financial statement
of the Eurosystem
1 Assets 16*2 Liabilities 18*
IV Banks
1 Assets and liabilities of monetary
financial institutions (excluding theBundesbank) in Germany 20*
2 Principal assets and liabilities of banks
(MFIs) in Germany, by category ofbanks 24*
3 Assets and liabilities of banks (MFIs)
in Germany vis-/C224-vis residents 26*
4 Assets and liabilities of banks (MFIs)
in Germany vis-/C224-vis non-residents 28*
2*DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
EUROSYSTEM
Monthly Report
November 2010

5 Lending by banks (MFIs) in Germany
to domestic non-banks (non-MFIs) 30*
6 Lending by banks (MFIs) in Germany
to domestic enterprises and house-
holds, housing loans, sectors of
economic activity 32*
7 Deposits of domestic non-banks
(non-MFIs) at banks (MFIs)
in Germany 34*
8 Deposits of domestic households
and non-profit institutions atbanks (MFIs) in Germany 36*
9 Deposits of domestic government
at banks (MFIs) in Germany, bycreditor group 36*
10 Savings deposits and bank savings
bonds of banks (MFIs) in Germanysold to non-banks (non-MFIs) 38*
11 Debt securities and money market
paper outstanding of banks (MFIs)in Germany 38*
12 Building and loan associations (MFIs)
in Germany 39*
13 Assets and liabilities of the foreign
branches and foreign subsidiaries ofGerman banks (MFIs) 40*
V Minimum reserves
1 Reserve ratios 42*2 Reserve maintenance in Germany up
to the end of 1998 42*
3 Reserve maintenance in the euro
area 42*VI Interest rates
1 ECB interest rates 43*
2 Base rates 43*3 Eurosystem monetary policy oper-
ations allotted through tenders 43*
4 Money market rates, by month 43*
5 Interest rates for outstanding
amounts and new business ofbanks (MFIs) in the Europeanmonetary union 44*
6 Interest rates and volumes for out-
standing amounts and new business
of German banks (MFIs) 45*
VII Capital market
1 Sales and purchases of debt securities
and shares in Germany 48*
2 Sales of debt securities issued by
residents 49*
3 Amounts outstanding of debt
securities issued by residents 50*
4 Shares in circulation issued by
residents 50*
5 Yields and indices on German
securities 51*
6 Sales and purchases of mutual
fund shares in Germany 51*
VIII Financial accounts
1 Acquisition of financial assets and
financing of private non-financialsectors 52*
2 Financial assets and liabilities of private
non-financial sectors 53*
3*DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2010

IX Public finances in Germany
1 General government: deficit and debt
level as defined in the Maastricht Treaty 54*
2 General government: revenue,
expenditure and fiscal deficit/surplus
as shown in the national accounts 54*
3 General government: budgetary
development (as per government’sfinancial statistics) 55*
4 Central, state and local government:
budgetary development (as per
government’s financial statistics) 55*
5 Central, state and local government:
tax revenue 56*
6 Central and state government and
European Union: tax revenue, by type 56*
7 Central, state and local government:
individual taxes 57*
8 German pension insurance scheme:
budgetary development and assets 57*
9 Federal Employment Agency:
budgetary development 58*
10 Statutory health insurance scheme:
budgetary development 58*
11 Statutory long-term care insurance
scheme: budgetary development 59*
12 Central government: borrowing in
the market 59*
13 Central, state and local government:
debt by creditor 59*
14 Central, state and local government:
debt by category 60*
X Economic conditions in Germany
1 Origin and use of domestic product,
distribution of national income 61*
2 Output in the production sector 62*3 Orders received by industry 63*
4 Orders received by construction 64*5 Retail trade turnover 64*6 Labour market 65*7 Prices 66*8 Households’ income 67*9 Pay rates and actual earnings 67*
XI External sector
1 Major items of the balance of
payments of the euro area 68*
2 Major items of the balance of
payments of the Federal Republic
of Germany 69*
3 Foreign trade (special trade) of the
Federal Republic of Germany, bycountry and group of countries 70*
4 Services and income of the
Federal Republic of Germany 71*
5 Current transfers of the Federal
Republic of Germany 71*
6 Capital transfers 71*7 Financial account of the Federal
Republic of Germany 72*
8 External position of the Bundesbank 73*9 External position of the Bundesbank
in the European Monetary Union 73*
10 Assets and liabilities of enterprises
in Germany (other than banks)vis-/C224-vis non-residents 74*
11 ECB euro reference exchange rates
of selected currencies 75*
12 Euro member countries and
irrevocable euro conversion ratesin the third stage of EuropeanEconomic and Monetary Union 75*
13 Effective exchange rates of the euro
and indicators of the Germaneconomy’s price competitiveness 76*
4*DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
EUROSYSTEM
Monthly Report
November 2010

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2010
 I Key economic data for the euro area  
 
1 Monetary developments and interest rates
 
 
 
 
 Money stock in various definitions  1,2 Determinants of the money stock  1 Interest rates
 M 3  3 
MFI lending to Yield on Euro-
 3-month enterprises Monetary pean govern-
MFI lending, and capital 3-month ment bonds moving  average
M1 M2 (centred) total households formation  4 Eonia  5,7 Euribor  6,7 outstanding  8 
Period Annual percentage change % per annum as a monthly average
2009          Jan 5.1 7.5 6.0 6.5 6.9 7.1 4.7 1.81 2.46 3.9
         Feb 6.2 7.0 5.8 5.7 6.6 6.4 5.6 1.26 1.94 4.0         Mar 6.1 6.3 5.2 5.3 5.8 5.2 5.2 1.06 1.64 3.9
         Apr 8.4 6.0 4.9 4.6 5.0 4.2 5.0 0.84 1.42 3.9
         May 8.1 5.2 3.9 4.1 4.5 3.6 5.5 0.78 1.28 4.0         June 9.5 5.0 3.6 3.5 4.7 3.4 6.0 0.70 1.23 4.2
         July 12.0 4.6 2.9 3.0 3.8 2.3 5.9 0.36 0.97 4.0
         Aug 13.4 4.5 2.4 2.4 3.3 1.6 6.2 0.35 0.86 3.8         Sep 12.8 3.6 1.8 1.5 3.5 1.4 6.4 0.36 0.77 3.8
         Oct 11.8 2.3 0.3 0.6 3.3 0.9 7.2 0.36 0.74 3.7
         Nov 12.5 1.8 − 0.2 − 0.1 2.8 0.7 7.0 0.36 0.72 3.7         Dec 12.4 1.6 − 0.3 − 0.2 2.6 0.7 6.7 0.35 0.71 3.7
2010          Jan 11.5 1.8 0.0 − 0.2 1.8 0.2 6.5 0.34 0.68 3.8
         Feb 11.0 1.6 − 0.4 − 0.2 1.8 0.2 5.7 0.34 0.66 3.8         Mar 10.8 1.6 − 0.1 − 0.3 1.8 0.2 5.9 0.35 0.64 3.7
         Apr 10.7 1.3 − 0.2 − 0.1 1.8 0.4 6.0 0.35 0.64 3.7
         May 10.3 1.5 − 0.1 0.0 1.7 0.1 5.1 0.34 0.69 3.6         June 9.1 1.4 0.2 0.1 1.5 0.0 3.9 0.35 0.73 3.6
         July 8.2 1.5 0.2 0.5 1.8 0.5 3.8 0.48 0.85 3.6
         Aug 7.7 2.0 1.1 0.8 2.2 1.0 3.4 0.43 0.90 3.3         Sep 5.9 1.9 1.0 ... 2.1 1.0 3.1 0.45 0.88 3.4
         Oct ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 0.70 1.00 3.3
1 Source: ECB. — 2 Seasonally adjusted. — 3 Excluding money market fund euro-area non-MFIs. — 5 Euro OverNight Index Average. — 6 Euro
shares
/units, money market paper and debt securities with a maturity of up Interbank Offered Rate. — 7 See also footnotes to Table VI.4, p 43*. —
to two years held by non-euro-area residents. — 4 Longer-term liabilities to 8  GDP-weighted yield on ten-year government bonds. 
 
 
2 External transactions and positions  * 
  
 
Selected items of the euro-area balance of payments Euro exchange rates  1 
Current account Capital account Effective exchange rate  3 
of which Direct Securities Other Reserve
Balance Trade balance Balance investment investment assets Dollar rate Nominal Real  4 transactions  2 
Period € million Euro/US-$ Q1 1999 = 100
2009          Jan − 22,577 − 10,711 + 20,738 − 22,850 − 36,333 + 74,723 + 5,198 1.3239 109.8 109.2
         Feb − 2,538 − 15 + 10,137 − 6,673 + 67,963 − 52,446 + 1,294 1.2785 108.7 108.0
         Mar − 6,603 + 2,924 + 9,793 − 33,021 + 62,193 − 18,521 − 859 1.3050 111.1 110.3
         Apr − 9,318 + 3,899 + 6,586 − 2,374 + 5,589 + 2,174 + 1,197 1.3190 110.3 109.5
         May − 13,259 + 2,596 + 11,442 + 14,718 + 43,923 − 44,997 − 2,202 1.3650 110.8 110.0         June − 6,802 + 6,900 + 6,492 − 10,177 + 74,370 − 57,291 − 410 1.4016 112.0 111.1
         July + 9,400 + 14,061 − 17,895 + 10,244 − 18,099 − 6,327 − 3,713 1.4088 111.6 110.5
         Aug − 5,729 − 1,854 − 7,957 − 1,896 + 20,532 − 27,349 + 757 1.4268 111.7 110.6         Sep − 4,070 + 1,658 + 3,702 − 34,027 + 56,840 − 22,400 + 3,289 1.4562 112.9 111.6
         Oct + 531 + 8,416 + 4,354 + 7,322 + 8,392 − 10,706 − 654 1.4816 114.3 112.8
         Nov − 623 + 5,316 + 5,983 − 4,830 − 18 + 9,339 + 1,492 1.4914 114.0 112.5         Dec + 11,821 + 6,176 − 22,335 + 9,107 + 30,939 − 61,550 − 831 1.4614 113.0 111.2
2010          Jan − 13,630 − 7,630 + 22,175 − 5,019 + 30,861 − 5,197 + 1,529 1.4272 110.8 108.9
         Feb − 7,214 + 4,309 − 452 − 3,259 − 6,340 + 12,774 − 3,626 1.3686 108.0 106.1         Mar − 971 + 5,992 + 383 − 32,033 − 3,979 + 38,937 − 2,541 1.3569 107.4 105.7
         Apr − 6,422 + 1,139 + 16,505 − 14,460 + 46,037 − 15,003 − 69 1.3406 106.1 104.5
         May − 17,337 − 1,187 + 24,888 − 12,131 + 62,633 − 25,535 − 79 1.2565 102.8 101.4         June + 632 + 3,938 + 5,084 − 10,973 − 495 + 15,432 + 1,119 1.2209 100.7 99.4
         July + 3,396 + 7,556 + 4,819 − 560 − 15,983 + 24,465 − 3,103 1.2770 102.5 101.1
         Aug − 10,505 − 3,800 + 10,267 − 11,003 + 14,166 + 8,662 − 1,557 1.2894 102.1 100.6         Sep ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 1.3067 102.5 100.9
         Oct ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 1.3898 106.1 104.3
*  Source: ECB. — 1  See also Tables XI.12 and 13, pp 75−76. — 2  Including
financial derivatives. — 3  Vis-à-vis the currencies of The-EER-21 group. —
4  Based on consumer prices. 
5* I Key economic data for the euro area 

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
E U R O S Y S T E M
Monthly Report
November 2010
I. Key economic data for the euro area 
 
3  General economic indicators
 
 
                   
 
Period Euro area Belgium Germany Finland France Greece Ireland Italy
 
Real gross domestic product 1,2
 
2007 2.8 2.9 2.7 5.3 2.4 4.5 5.6 1.5
2008 0.5 1.0 1.0 0.9 0.2 2.0 − 3.5 − 1.3
2009 − 4.1 − 2.7 − 4.7 − 8.0 − 2.6 − 2.0 − 7.6 − 5.0
2009          Q2 − 4.9 − 4.0 − 6.8 − 9.7 − 3.8 − 1.9 − 7.8 − 6.5
         Q3 − 4.0 − 2.5 − 4.4 − 8.1 − 2.5 − 2.4 − 7.4 − 4.0         Q4 − 2.0 − 0.2 − 1.3 − 5.2 − 0.6 − 2.5 − 5.8 − 2.7
2010          Q1 0.8 1.5 2.2 0.0 1.2 − 2.3 − 0.8 1.0
         Q2 1.9 2.6 4.3 3.7 2.1 − 3.8 − 1.8 1.8         Q3 1.9 ... 3.9 4.3 ... ... ... ...
 
Industrial production 1,3
 
2007 3.7 2.9 6.0 4.7 1.3 2.3 5.2 1.8
2008 − 1.8 − 0.6 0.0 1.0 − 2.8 − 4.2 − 2.2 − 3.5
2009 − 14.9 − 14.0 − 16.4 − 18.1 − 12.5 − 9.2 − 4.5 − 18.3
2009          Q2 − 18.6 − 17.5 − 20.2 − 21.6 − 16.0 − 11.3 − 0.7 − 23.2
         Q3 − 14.4 − 13.8 − 16.0 − 19.2 − 11.6 − 9.9 − 7.8 − 17.1         Q4 − 7.4 − 7.4 − 8.8 − 12.4 − 5.7 − 7.2 − 8.7 − 9.4
2010          Q1 4.7 2.5 7.1 − 1.0 5.5 − 7.2 2.7 3.5
         Q2 9.1 9.1 12.9 6.5 7.4 − 6.4 3.6 7.9         Q3
e 6.8 ... 4p 10.3 6.1 4.9 p − 6.2 p 11.5 5.8
 
Capacity utilisation in industry 5,6
 
2008 83.0 82.9 86.5 84.4 85.8 76.4 ... 75.9
2009 71.4 72.3 72.8 67.7 73.0 70.7 ... 66.7
2010 75.7 77.1 79.8 77.0 76.5 68.1 ... 69.0
2009          Q3 69.6 71.5 71.1 65.3 70.8 68.3 ... 64.6
         Q4 71.0 72.0 72.1 67.0 74.1 70.6 ... 65.6
2010          Q1 72.3 73.7 73.9 74.6 74.6 69.0 ... 66.7
         Q2 75.5 76.9 79.8 74.6 76.4 69.7 ... 68.6         Q3 77.2 79.0 82.1 79.5 77.8 66.6 ... 69.6         Q4 77.6 78.9 83.2 79.2 77.0 67.1 ... 70.9
 
Standardised unemployment rate 7
 
2007 7.5 7.5 8.4 6.9 8.4 8.3 4.6 6.1
2008 7.5 7.0 7.3 6.4 7.8 7.7 6.3 6.7
2009 9.4 7.9 7.5 8.2 9.5 9.5 11.9 7.8
2010          Apr 10.0 8.5 7.0 8.6 9.8 12.2 13.2 8.5
         May 10.0 8.5 6.9 8.5 9.9 12.2 13.6 8.5         June 10.0 8.6 6.9 8.5 9.9 12.2 13.7 8.3
         July 10.0 8.7 6.8 8.4 9.9 ... 13.8 8.3
         Aug 10.0 8.7 6.8 8.3 10.0 ... 13.9 8.1         Sep 10.1 8.7 6.7 8.3 10.0 ... 14.1 8.3
 
Harmonised Index of Consumer Prices 1
 
2007 8 2.1 1.8 2.3 1.6 1.6 3.0 2.9 2.0
2008 9 3.3 4.5 2.8 3.9 3.2 4.2 3.1 3.5
2009 10 0.3 0.0 0.2 1.6 0.1 1.3 − 1.7 0.8
2010          May 1.6 2.5 1.2 1.4 1.9 5.3 − 1.9 1.6
         June 1.4 2.7 0.8 1.3 1.7 5.2 − 2.0 1.5
         July 1.7 2.4 1.2 1.3 1.9 5.5 − 1.2 1.8
         Aug 1.6 2.4 1.0 1.3 1.6 5.6 − 1.2 1.8         Sep 
p 1.8 2.9 1.3 1.4 1.8 5.7 − 1.0 1.6
         Oct e 1.9 3.1 1.3 2.3 1.8 5.2 − 0.8 ...
 
General government financial balance 11
 
2007 − 0.7 − 0.3 0.3 5.2 − 2.7 − 6.4 0.0 − 1.5
2008 − 2.0 − 1.3 0.1 4.2 − 3.3 − 9.4 − 7.3 − 2.7
2009 − 6.3 − 6.0 − 3.0 − 2.5 − 7.5 − 15.4 − 14.4 − 5.3
 
General government debt 11
 
2007 66.1 84.2 64.9 35.2 63.8 105.0 25.0 103.6
2008 69.8 89.6 66.3 34.1 67.5 110.3 44.3 106.3
2009 79.2 96.2 73.4 43.8 78.1 126.8 65.5 116.0
Sources: National data, European Commission, Eurostat, European Central for working-day variations. — 4  Provisional; adjusted in advance by the
Bank. Latest data are partly based on press reports and are provisional. — Federal Statistical Office by way of estimates to the results of the Quarterl y
1  Annual percentage change. — 2  GDP of the euro area calculated from Production Survey. — 5  Manufacturing, in %; seasonally adjusted; data are
seasonally adjusted data. — 3  Manufacturing, mining and energy; adjusted collected in January, April, July and October. — 6  From the second quarter
6*I. Key economic data for the euro area 

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2010
I.  Key economic data for the euro area 
 
3  General economic indicators
 
 
                   
 
Luxembourg Malta Netherlands Austria Portugal Slovakia Slovenia Spain Cyprus Period
 
Real gross domestic product 1,2
 
6.6 3.7 3.9 3.7 2.4 10.5 6.9 3.6 5.1 2007
1.4 2.6 1.9 2.2 0.0 5.8 3.7 0.9 3.6 2008
− 3.7 − 2.1 − 3.9 − 3.9 − 2.6 − 4.8 − 8.1 − 3.7 − 1.7 2009
− 8.1 − 3.9 − 5.3 − 5.7 − 3.0 − 5.4 − 9.4 − 4.5 − 1.8 2009          Q2
− 3.1 − 2.5 − 3.7 − 3.6 − 2.4 − 5.0 − 8.8 − 4.0 − 2.7          Q3
2.1 0.3 − 2.2 − 0.9 − 0.9 − 3.6 − 5.7 − 2.6 − 2.9          Q4
2.8 4.2 0.6 0.1 1.7 4.7 − 1.1 − 0.9 − 1.2 2010          Q1
5.3 3.9 2.2 2.4 1.6 4.2 2.2 0.2 0.4          Q2
... ... 1.8 2.4 ... 3.7 ... ... 1.7          Q3
 
Industrial production1,3
 
− 0.6 − 2.3 5.9 0.1 16.9 7.4 2.0 4.5 2007
− 5.3 − 1.4 1.2 − 4.1 3.2 1.7 − 7.3 4.0 2008
− 15.8 − − 7.6 − 11.3 − 8.6 − 13.7 − 17.6 − 15.8 − 8.6 2009
− 21.3 − − 12.5 − 16.1 − 9.9 − 20.6 − 24.0 − 18.6 − 9.6 2009          Q2
− 16.4 − − 6.9 − 12.4 − 7.4 − 12.6 − 18.9 − 14.6 − 8.7          Q3
2.8 − − 1.4 − 4.9 − 4.5 1.3 − 8.4 − 5.6 − 8.7          Q4
15.6 − 7.1 0.2 3.7 19.7 − 0.6 0.3 − 2.4 2010          Q1
14.6 − 10.5 8.7 2.7 24.5 10.3 2.9 − 2.3          Q2
p 6.5 − 4.2 ... − 0.3 15.4 8.2 − 0.1 ...          Q3
 
Capacity utilisation in industry 5,6
 
85.1 79.0 83.4 83.0 79.8 72.0 84.1 79.2 72.0 2008
69.2 69.7 75.9 74.8 72.6 53.7 71.1 70.0 66.3 2009
79.0 77.2 78.2 80.3 75.1 57.5 76.1 71.2 62.5 2010
67.4 71.0 75.5 73.5 71.5 51.9 69.3 67.9 64.8 2009          Q3
71.6 73.0 76.0 75.2 72.0 58.8 70.7 68.8 64.3          Q4
77.5 77.3 77.3 75.8 75.1 58.1 73.0 68.9 61.7 2010          Q1
79.3 75.7 78.8 79.4 75.7 55.4 75.3 70.9 63.1          Q2
80.2 78.7 78.4 82.6 75.0 59.7 77.6 72.7 61.4          Q379.0 76.9 78.2 83.4 74.7 56.7 78.3 72.4 63.6          Q4
 
Standardised unemployment rate 7
 
4.2 6.4 3.6 4.4 8.1 11.1 4.9 8.3 4.0 2007
4.9 5.9 3.1 3.8 7.7 9.5 4.4 11.3 3.6 2008
5.1 7.0 3.7 4.8 9.6 12.0 5.9 18.0 5.3 2009
4.9 7.0 4.5 4.6 10.9 14.5 7.2 19.8 6.9 2010          Apr 
4.9 6.7 4.5 4.6 11.0 14.4 7.3 20.0 7.0          May
4.9 6.5 4.5 4.5 11.0 14.4 7.3 20.2 7.1          June
5.0 6.4 4.6 4.3 10.8 14.5 7.2 20.4 7.1          July
5.0 6.2 4.5 4.3 10.6 14.6 7.3 20.6 7.1          Aug 5.0 6.2 4.4 4.5 10.6 14.7 7.3 20.8 7.1          Sep 
 
Harmonised Index of Consumer Prices 1
 
2.7 0.7 1.6 2.2 2.4 1.9 3.8 2.8 2.2 2007
4.1 4.7 2.2 3.2 2.7 3.9 5.5 4.1 4.4 2008
0.0 1.8 1.0 0.4 − 0.9 0.9 0.9 − 0.2 0.2 2009
3.1 1.8 0.4 1.7 1.1 0.7 2.4 1.8 1.8 2010          May
2.3 1.8 0.2 1.8 1.1 0.7 2.1 1.5 2.1          June
2.9 2.5 1.3 1.7 1.9 1.0 2.3 1.9 2.7          July
2.5 3.0 1.2 1.6 2.0 1.1 2.4 1.8 3.4          Aug 2.6 2.4
p 1.4 p 1.8 2.0 1.1 2.1 2.1 3.6          Sep 
2.9 2.2 p 1.4 ... 2.3 1.0 2.1 2.3 3.2          Oct 
 
General government financial balance 11
 
3.7 − 2.3 0.2 − 0.4 − 2.8 − 1.8 0.0 1.9 3.4 2007
3.0 − 4.8 0.6 − 0.5 − 2.9 − 2.1 − 1.8 − 4.2 0.9 2008
− 0.7 − 3.8 − 5.4 − 3.5 − 9.3 − 7.9 − 5.8 − 11.1 − 6.0 2009
 
General government debt 11
 
6.7 61.7 45.3 59.3 62.7 29.6 23.4 36.1 58.3 2007
13.6 63.1 58.2 62.5 65.3 27.8 22.5 39.8 48.3 2008
14.5 68.6 60.8 67.5 76.1 35.4 35.4 53.2 58.0 2009
of 2010 onward Nace Rev. 2: not comparable with earlier data. — 7  As a onwards. — 10  Including Slovakia from 2009 onwards. — 11  As a percen-
percentage of the civilian labour force; seasonally adjusted. — 8  Including tage of GDP; euro-area aggregate: European Central Bank (ESA 1995),
Slovenia from 2007 onwards. — 9  Including Malta and Cyprus from 2008 member states: European Commission (Maastricht Treaty definition). 
7*I.  Key economic data for the euro area 

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
E U R O S Y S T E M
Monthly Report
November 2010
II Overall monetary survey in the euro area 
 
1 The money stock and its counterparts *
  
(a) Euro area 
  
€ billion
I Lending to non-banks (non-MFIs) II Net claims on III Monetary capital formation at monetary
in the euro area non-euro-area residents financial institutions (MFIs) in the euro area
Enterprises General
and households government Debt
Deposits securities
Liabil- with an Deposits with
Claims ities to agreed at agreed maturitieson non- non-euro- maturity notice of of over Capital
of which of which euro-area area of over over 2 years and
Period Total Total Total Total residents residents Total 2 years 3 months (net)  
2 Securities Securities reserves  3 
2009          Feb 28.5 − 8.7 13.6 37.2 40.5 52.1 − 101.9 − 154.0 43.8 13.2 − 0.3 24.1 6.9
         Mar 50.5 14.8 12.7 35.7 44.4 − 26.9 − 129.3 − 102.4 19.4 22.9 0.4 2.2 − 6.1
         Apr 84.9 42.2 46.0 42.6 31.3 39.9 39.6 − 0.3 15.7 15.0 0.1 − 5.4 6.0
         May 33.8 22.2 8.5 11.6 19.7 19.8 − 51.9 − 71.7 57.5 23.7 1.3 23.5 9.0         June 110.6 38.0 6.7 72.6 49.6 45.7 − 49.1 − 94.7 76.4 20.8 0.8 14.5 40.3
         July − 34.2 − 40.0 − 9.4 5.8 5.1 9.3 − 40.0 − 49.2 28.5 12.2 1.1 14.1 1.1
         Aug − 52.7 − 62.0 − 0.8 9.3 4.9 26.3 − 22.8 − 49.1 37.2 6.7 0.7 16.9 12.9         Sep 72.5 50.7 5.7 21.8 31.2 − 13.9 − 35.0 − 21.1 22.5 16.3 1.0 − 8.4 13.6
         Oct − 5.9 − 39.6 − 1.4 33.7 14.0 10.1 12.2 2.2 5.1 1.7 2.2 − 0.7 1.9
         Nov 42.5 44.9 13.8 − 2.4 2.4 − 7.1 4.8 11.9 29.1 9.5 0.6 4.6 14.3
         Dec − 35.7 − 2.7 3.5 − 33.0 − 28.4 48.9 − 51.2 − 100.1 41.9 19.8 − 1.1 − 13.3 36.4
2010          Jan − 11.2 − 31.2 − 1.5 20.0 8.6 5.1 61.4 56.3 34.1 11.1 1.0 30.7 − 8.7
         Feb 20.8 − 6.1 − 9.4 26.9 31.9 − 15.1 14.2 29.3 − 1.9 6.3 − 0.7 − 6.6 − 1.0         Mar 63.7 6.1 − 20.7 57.6 33.5 − 16.2 − 24.7 − 8.5 35.9 2.6 − 0.1 23.2 10.3
         Apr 87.6 72.9 42.6 14.6 11.5 − 24.7 71.5 96.3 20.8 16.2 − 2.0 6.2 0.3
         May 15.6 − 19.0 − 41.7 34.6 20.2 26.7 30.7 4.0 1.3 − 4.3 − 0.7 − 7.9 14.2         June 69.9 27.2 − 17.2 42.7 24.2 − 12.0 − 157.3 − 145.3 2.4 − 7.5 − 1.3 − 19.9 31.1
         July 23.3 29.1 19.7 − 5.9 5.1 − 32.1 − 42.8 − 10.6 24.2 3.3 − 1.2 8.7 13.4
         Aug 3.8 3.9 17.1 − 0.1 − 7.3 6.4 94.8 88.3 12.0 8.2 − 0.3 − 3.3 7.4         Sep 55.3 39.0 − 6.4 16.3 11.2 7.7 − 48.4 − 56.1 4.1 1.6 − 1.4 17.9 − 14.0
  
  
(b) German contribution
 
I Lending to non-banks (non-MFIs) II Net claims on III Monetary capital formation at monetary
in the euro area non-euro-area residents financial institutions (MFIs) in the euro area
Enterprises Generaland households government Debt
Deposits securities
Liabil- with an Deposits with
Claims ities to agreed at agreed maturitieson non- non-euro- maturity notice of of over Capital
of which of which euro-area area of over over 2 years and
Period Total Total Total Total residents residents Total 2 years 3 months (net)  
2 Securities Securities reserves  3 
2009          Feb − 9.1 − 6.6 6.7 − 2.4 − 0.3 − 1.9 − 24.9 − 23.0 − 13.7 6.8 − 0.0 − 9.8 − 10.7
         Mar 9.2 13.7 − 3.6 − 4.6 − 0.1 − 30.8 − 35.1 − 4.4 − 3.0 2.6 0.8 − 6.8 0.4
         Apr 20.1 13.4 12.0 6.7 4.9 19.7 40.7 21.0 − 8.3 3.9 0.2 − 5.9 − 6.5
         May − 3.3 − 4.2 − 8.5 1.0 5.1 28.0 − 5.7 − 33.7 2.9 2.6 1.5 2.4 − 3.6         June 15.8 16.1 5.0 − 0.3 1.6 − 22.9 − 19.2 3.8 34.5 13.6 1.0 − 3.0 23.0
         July − 8.5 − 23.3 − 3.6 14.8 1.9 − 25.3 − 31.6 − 6.3 − 7.1 0.9 1.2 − 9.0 − 0.2
         Aug − 27.5 − 18.8 − 6.4 − 8.7 − 3.2 1.9 − 13.3 − 15.2 1.5 1.9 0.8 1.8 − 2.9         Sep 22.3 18.7 0.5 3.6 6.5 − 6.7 − 28.0 − 21.3 − 12.0 2.9 1.2 − 17.1 0.9
         Oct − 0.1 − 19.2 − 5.1 19.1 7.3 9.2 − 0.9 − 10.1 − 0.5 − 0.9 2.4 − 1.3 − 0.7
         Nov − 0.4 6.6 2.4 − 7.0 1.3 − 0.4 − 1.2 − 0.8 − 0.9 2.2 0.9 − 10.0 6.0
         Dec − 37.4 − 30.0 − 9.7 − 7.4 − 1.4 10.6 − 9.3 − 20.0 − 12.5 0.7 − 1.1 − 12.8 0.6
2010          Jan 16.6 5.4 8.1 11.1 8.1 − 15.1 6.8 21.9 − 6.2 2.4 − 1.6 − 0.3 − 6.7
         Feb − 12.8 − 15.3 − 11.1 2.5 5.7 − 22.1 − 18.4 3.8 − 6.8 0.5 − 0.7 − 6.3 − 0.4         Mar − 2.5 − 8.8 − 5.2 6.2 7.0 − 14.0 2.8 16.8 2.9 1.1 0.1 2.7 − 0.9
         Apr 54.7 50.6 24.7 4.1 2.3 − 13.0 40.5 53.5 − 3.7 0.1 − 1.9 − 0.6 − 1.4
         May − 36.4 − 54.5 − 52.2 18.1 7.8 − 35.4 13.5 48.9 − 17.1 − 5.3 − 1.8 1.7 − 11.6         June 15.1 − 10.3 − 9.7 25.3 20.4 − 17.8 − 62.2 − 44.4 − 4.9 0.7 − 1.3 − 3.4 − 0.9
         July − 2.9 − 1.5 − 4.5 − 1.4 2.9 − 30.9 − 38.4 − 7.5 − 6.4 − 0.2 − 2.2 − 12.1 8.1
         Aug 8.7 7.2 1.8 1.6 1.6 7.2 12.0 4.8 − 3.5 2.4 − 1.8 − 2.5 − 1.7         Sep − 15.7 − 23.4 − 4.6 7.7 3.9 − 1.8 − 22.8 − 21.0 0.4 − 1.0 − 2.3 3.0 0.7
*The data in this table are based on the consolidated balance sheet of deduction of inter-MFI participations. — 4Including the counterparts of
monetary financial institutions (MFIs) (Table II.2); statistical breaks have monetary liabilities of central governments. — 5Including the monetary
been eliminated from the flow figures (see also the “Notes on the figures“ liabilities of central governments (Post Office, Treasury). — 6In Germany,
in the “Explanatory notes“ in the Statistical Supplement to the Monthly only savings deposits. — 7Paper held by residents outside the euro area has
Report 1, p 30). — 1Source: ECB. — 2Excluding MFIs’ portfolios. — 3After been eliminated. — 8Less German MFIs’ holdings of paper issued by
8*II Overall monetary survey in the euro area 

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2010
II Overall monetary survey in the euro area
 
 
 
(a) Euro area 
 
V Other factors VI Money stock M3 (balance I plus II less III less IV less V)
Money stock M2 Debt secur-
of which ities with
Intra- Money stock M1 maturities
Eurosystem Deposits of up toliability/ with an Deposits Money 2 years
IV De- claim agreed at agreed market (incl money
posits of related to Currency maturity notice of Repo fund market    
banknote in circu- Overnight of up to up to 3 transac-
shares paper)    central  gov-
ernments Total  4 issue Total Total Total lation deposits  5 2 years  5 tions (net)  2,7  Period (net)  2,7,8 months  5,6 
13.9 7.9 − 14.8 − 7.3 3.9 3.6 0.3 − 34.3 23.0 3.4 20.2 − 1.5 2009          Feb 
12.7 − 9.1 − 0.6 10.4 33.5 4.0 29.5 − 43.6 20.5 11.2 0.8 − 21.9          Mar 
− 14.0 39.0 − 84.0 71.1 82.7 9.3 73.4 − 36.1 24.6 − 0.3 2.3 10.9          Apr 
− 5.8 9.5 − − 7.6 2.5 26.9 2.8 24.1 − 38.7 14.3 − 1.9 0.6 − 8.8          May
20.4 57.6 − 1.9 28.7 91.0 3.0 88.0 − 74.0 11.7 11.1 − 22.6 − 15.3          June
− 54.0 37.9 − − 37.4 − 15.8 − 0.6 10.5 − 11.1 − 34.1 18.9 − 25.9 16.0 − 11.6          July− 12.3 − 11.8 − − 39.5 − 15.5 7.4 − 4.3 11.7 − 39.9 16.9 − 10.5 1.2 − 14.6          Aug 
20.8 8.7 − 6.6 9.7 62.6 − 0.5 63.1 − 59.6 6.7 24.5 − 19.5 − 8.0          Sep 
22.3 − 9.1 − − 14.2 26.2 55.6 4.8 50.8 − 44.1 14.7 − 25.8 − 4.8 − 9.8          Oct 
− 13.6 40.1 − − 20.1 − 7.0 38.5 4.7 33.9 − 49.3 3.8 5.5 − 15.0 − 3.6          Nov 
− 57.3 − 54.4 − 83.0 96.9 84.3 19.9 64.4 − 23.9 36.6 12.5 − 26.3 − 0.2          Dec 
30.7 − 9.2 − − 61.6 − 46.7 − 4.2 − 12.8 8.5 − 71.5 29.1 − 19.9 4.7 0.4 2010          Jan 
− 3.9 40.1 − − 28.5 − 28.9 − 16.6 2.4 − 19.0 − 21.4 9.1 15.3 − 8.2 − 6.7          Feb − 6.0 9.9 − 7.7 − 3.3 4.1 9.1 − 4.9 − 16.2 8.8 18.4 − 16.6 9.1          Mar 
− 20.0 − 17.9 − 80.0 55.6 81.5 4.0 77.5 − 35.4 9.4 21.0 1.8 1.7          Apr 
36.8 − 2.9 − 7.2 14.6 27.3 6.4 20.9 − 11.0 − 1.7 4.1 − 4.0 − 7.5          May
20.5 6.0 − 29.0 24.0 39.5 6.5 32.9 − 17.6 2.1 39.0 − 26.6 − 7.4          June
− 22.6 4.1 − − 14.5 14.8 − 10.4 8.4 − 18.8 16.4 8.8 − 22.2 − 8.9 1.7          July− 20.2 2.4 − 16.0 − 1.7 − 33.0 − 6.0 − 27.0 18.5 12.8 2.7 15.3 − 0.3          Aug 
3.4 39.2 − 16.4 16.4 − 2.8 − 1.2 − 1.6 14.1 5.1 21.5 − 20.5 − 1.2          Sep 
 
 
 (b) German contribution 
 
V Other factors VI Money stock M3 (balance I plus II less III less IV less V)  10 
of which Components of the money stock
Intra- Debt securities
Eurosystem Deposits with
liability/ with an Deposits Money maturities
IV De- claim agreed at agreed market of up to 2 years
posits of related to Currency maturity notice of Repo fund (incl money    
banknote in circu- Overnight of up to up to 3 transac- shares market    central  gov-
ernments Total issue  9,11 lation Total deposits 2 years months  6 tions (net)  7,8 paper)(net)  7  Period
8.1 − 14.1 1.5 0.7 8.8 17.2 − 23.1 5.3 6.6 0.8 1.9 2009          Feb 
3.2 0.7 − 0.3 1.3 − 22.5 − 1.8 − 19.4 2.8 13.7 − 0.6 − 17.2          Mar 
14.4 7.2 1.3 1.6 26.5 32.1 − 20.8 3.1 4.9 − 0.1 7.3          Apr 
12.0 19.8 0.4 0.1 − 10.0 4.1 − 15.0 2.4 − 1.7 − 0.3 0.5          May
− 9.2 − 15.3 − 0.3 1.5 − 17.1 20.0 − 33.9 3.7 2.5 − 0.2 − 9.2          June
− 5.8 3.7 − 0.1 3.3 − 24.6 2.3 − 19.0 4.6 − 11.0 − 1.1 − 0.2          July
1.7 − 18.5 1.6 − 1.4 − 10.2 12.8 − 18.0 4.5 − 10.6 − 0.1 1.1          Aug 
− 2.3 20.1 1.6 0.1 9.6 20.5 − 26.1 3.1 11.9 0.1 0.0          Sep 
1.4 11.1 1.5 0.8 − 3.1 27.9 − 30.7 4.2 − 0.4 − 0.1 − 3.9          Oct 
− 7.8 2.0 0.3 1.5 5.9 24.0 − 16.8 3.0 − 2.3 − 0.2 − 1.7          Nov 
− 8.9 2.5 0.0 4.3 − 7.8 − 16.6 3.7 10.0 − 0.5 − 0.6 − 3.8          Dec 
− 6.1 16.4 0.7 − 2.9 − 2.7 29.3 − 27.6 4.7 − 12.3 0.7 2.5 2010          Jan 
− 3.8 − 30.9 2.1 0.6 6.6 0.3 − 11.6 5.9 10.7 − 0.2 1.5          Feb 
− 1.6 − 3.3 0.5 2.9 − 14.6 − 14.7 − 0.0 1.8 1.0 − 0.5 − 2.1          Mar 
0.2 4.5 0.9 0.6 40.8 40.5 − 21.9 2.0 20.8 − 0.2 − 0.4          Apr 1.6 − 65.6 0.6 1.2 9.3 11.8 − 5.3 2.0 0.7 0.4 − 0.3          May
− 1.0 6.5 − 0.8 2.3 − 3.4 1.7 − 0.3 0.7 1.2 − 0.7 − 6.0          June
1.5 − 23.0 0.3 1.7 − 5.9 − 0.2 − 3.0 3.7 − 10.4 0.5 3.5          July7.5 − 14.5 2.0 − 1.3 26.5 4.7 1.5 1.7 11.7 − 0.3 7.2          Aug 
− 8.5 − 11.0 2.6 − 0.3 1.7 0.7 3.6 2.6 − 8.0 − 0.2 2.9          Sep 
euro-area MFIs. — 9Including national banknotes still in circulation. — M2 or M3. — 11The difference between the volume of euro banknotes
10The German contributions to the Eurosystem’s monetary aggregates actually issued by the Bundesbank and the amount disclosed in accordance
should on no account be interpreted as national monetary aggregates and with the accounting regime chosen by the Eurosystem (see also footnote 2
are therefore not comparable with the erstwhile German money stocks M1, on banknote circulation in Table III.2). 
9*II Overall monetary survey in the euro area

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
E U R O S Y S T E M
Monthly Report
November 2010
II Overall monetary survey in the euro area
 
2 Consolidated balance sheet of monetary financial institutions (MFIs) *
 
 
 
Assets
Lending to non-banks (non-MFIs) in the euro area
Enterprises and households General government
Claims
Total Shares and on non-
End of assets or Debt other Debt euro-area Other
year/month liabilities Total Total Loans securities  2 equities Total Loans securities  3 residents assets
 Euro area ( € billion) 1
 
2008          Aug 23,622.4 15,351.3 12,836.5 10,711.8 1,245.7 878.9 2,514.8 988.8 1,526.0 5,499.9 2,771.2
         Sep 23,888.3 15,392.0 12,901.2 10,807.6 1,218.7 874.9 2,490.8 999.0 1,491.8 5,600.7 2,895.6
         Oct 24,572.8 15,447.0 12,958.7 10,863.8 1,259.4 835.5 2,488.3 999.4 1,488.9 5,783.6 3,342.2
         Nov 24,730.5 15,553.8 13,018.8 10,873.0 1,321.7 824.1 2,535.0 997.0 1,538.0 5,672.9 3,503.7         Dec 24,121.4 15,523.8 12,970.0 10,775.5 1,409.8 784.8 2,553.7 988.9 1,564.9 5,231.4 3,366.2
2009          Jan 24,487.4 15,704.6 13,064.5 10,863.2 1,413.6 787.8 2,640.1 1,004.4 1,635.7 5,389.0 3,393.9
         Feb 24,431.4 15,727.7 13,049.3 10,839.8 1,434.3 775.3 2,678.4 1,001.0 1,677.4 5,303.7 3,400.0         Mar 24,157.6 15,752.4 13,037.4 10,818.3 1,451.1 768.0 2,715.0 991.9 1,723.1 5,034.0 3,371.2
         Apr 24,239.7 15,845.1 13,086.8 10,815.4 1,476.5 794.9 2,758.3 1,003.0 1,755.3 5,094.3 3,300.3
         May 23,919.0 15,852.1 13,090.2 10,812.7 1,484.6 792.8 2,761.9 994.7 1,767.2 4,961.8 3,105.1         June 24,085.4 15,956.3 13,122.0 10,839.1 1,500.0 782.9 2,834.4 1,017.6 1,816.7 4,910.2 3,218.9
         July 24,038.3 15,924.6 13,081.0 10,802.0 1,499.7 779.3 2,843.6 1,018.3 1,825.3 4,871.7 3,242.0
         Aug 23,953.8 15,873.5 13,019.7 10,737.8 1,499.6 782.3 2,853.8 1,022.7 1,831.1 4,860.9 3,219.5         Sep 23,906.8 15,948.6 13,069.0 10,771.9 1,499.5 797.6 2,879.6 1,013.2 1,866.4 4,779.2 3,179.1
         Oct 23,852.6 15,934.5 13,022.5 10,726.0 1,497.4 799.1 2,912.1 1,032.8 1,879.3 4,786.5 3,131.6
         Nov 24,007.9 15,973.2 13,064.7 10,755.3 1,497.9 811.5 2,908.5 1,025.3 1,883.2 4,796.0 3,238.7         Dec 23,861.4 15,972.9 13,100.5 10,784.0 1,504.6 811.9 2,872.5 1,020.9 1,851.5 4,808.4 3,080.0
2010          Jan 24,089.2 15,983.6 13,091.0 10,773.7 1,501.5 815.8 2,892.6 1,032.5 1,860.1 4,940.8 3,164.9
         Feb 24,259.8 16,008.9 13,084.4 10,777.0 1,505.9 801.5 2,924.4 1,027.7 1,896.7 5,011.5 3,239.4         Mar 24,308.8 16,067.0 13,085.8 10,800.7 1,491.6 793.5 2,981.2 1,051.9 1,929.3 4,997.5 3,244.4
         Apr 24,631.5 16,140.9 13,147.1 10,822.5 1,499.3 825.3 2,993.8 1,055.3 1,938.5 5,121.4 3,369.1
         May 25,234.4 16,174.5 13,144.1 10,864.7 1,478.6 800.7 3,030.4 1,070.2 1,960.2 5,347.5 3,712.5         June 25,240.9 16,353.8 13,281.6 10,984.9 1,514.2 782.5 3,072.2 1,086.8 1,985.4 5,243.9 3,643.2
         July 24,936.6 16,365.3 13,295.0 10,970.6 1,539.8 784.6 3,070.3 1,075.5 1,994.8 5,049.9 3,521.3
         Aug 25,588.5 16,387.0 13,308.8 10,968.6 1,544.4 795.8 3,078.2 1,083.0 1,995.1 5,238.2 3,963.3         Sep 25,171.3 16,407.8 13,316.2 10,982.1 1,536.4 797.8 3,091.6 1,087.5 2,004.1 5,033.6 3,729.9
 German contribution ( € billion) 
2008          Aug 5,284.5 3,623.9 2,995.2 2,511.9 187.2 296.1 628.8 379.8 249.0 1,410.0 250.6
         Sep 5,383.1 3,627.7 3,016.0 2,530.7 188.4 296.9 611.7 377.3 234.4 1,501.9 253.5
         Oct 5,457.7 3,632.1 3,016.4 2,540.2 186.7 289.5 615.7 379.4 236.3 1,554.5 271.1
         Nov 5,385.6 3,637.4 3,026.4 2,549.0 191.6 285.8 611.1 377.3 233.8 1,463.2 285.0         Dec 5,310.8 3,642.6 3,035.0 2,529.4 224.5 281.1 607.6 374.9 232.8 1,379.1 289.1
2009          Jan 5,343.8 3,682.0 3,065.9 2,557.6 219.9 288.4 616.1 374.8 241.3 1,367.2 294.6
         Feb 5,315.0 3,672.2 3,058.5 2,544.1 235.8 278.6 613.8 372.8 241.0 1,348.2 294.6         Mar 5,282.0 3,674.0 3,065.2 2,555.9 235.1 274.3 608.8 368.1 240.7 1,278.5 329.5
         Apr 5,330.0 3,694.6 3,079.0 2,557.4 234.9 286.8 615.6 369.8 245.8 1,319.6 315.8
         May 5,261.9 3,684.9 3,068.7 2,556.8 234.0 277.8 616.2 365.5 250.8 1,292.8 284.3         June 5,220.8 3,698.7 3,082.9 2,566.5 246.0 270.4 615.8 363.7 252.1 1,270.5 251.6
         July 5,173.5 3,689.5 3,059.0 2,545.9 245.8 267.3 630.6 376.6 254.0 1,238.5 245.5
         Aug 5,149.9 3,660.3 3,038.5 2,532.0 242.9 263.6 621.8 371.0 250.7 1,223.4 266.3
         Sep 5,131.7 3,679.7 3,054.4 2,548.0 242.8 263.6 625.2 368.1 257.1 1,186.5 265.5
         Oct 5,128.8 3,677.6 3,033.3 2,532.0 240.4 260.9 644.2 379.8 264.4 1,184.0 267.3
         Nov 5,131.5 3,675.6 3,041.1 2,537.6 240.3 263.2 634.6 368.9 265.7 1,184.3 271.6         Dec 5,084.8 3,642.7 3,015.1 2,520.4 235.5 259.1 627.6 363.0 264.6 1,188.8 253.3
2010          Jan 5,123.4 3,660.2 3,021.3 2,516.0 239.8 265.5 638.8 366.1 272.7 1,211.6 251.5
         Feb 5,099.1 3,649.6 3,008.2 2,513.7 237.7 256.8 641.4 362.9 278.5 1,208.0 241.5         Mar 5,105.8 3,638.3 2,993.1 2,509.7 233.9 249.6 645.2 362.2 283.0 1,209.3 258.2
         Apr 5,210.6 3,693.3 3,044.0 2,535.9 231.3 276.8 649.3 364.1 285.2 1,262.7 254.6
         May 5,259.6 3,664.4 2,996.6 2,539.6 209.1 247.9 667.8 374.7 293.1 1,324.9 270.3         June 5,236.5 3,680.2 2,988.1 2,540.8 205.5 241.8 692.1 377.7 314.4 1,272.2 284.0
         July 5,144.1 3,670.8 2,980.4 2,537.8 200.7 242.0 690.4 373.1 317.3 1,195.0 278.3
         Aug 5,201.0 3,683.3 2,991.4 2,546.6 199.6 245.1 691.9 373.2 318.7 1,228.9 288.8
         Sep 5,106.7 3,659.3 2,960.2 2,520.3 198.8 241.1 699.1 376.7 322.3 1,172.2 275.2
*Monetary financial institutions (MFIs) comprise banks (including building and other money market paper issued by general government. — 4Euro
and loan associations), money market funds, and the European Central currency in circulation (see also footnote 8 on p 12*). Excluding MFIs‘ cash in
Bank and national central banks (the Eurosystem). — 1Source: ECB. — hand (in euro). The German contribution includes the volume of euro bank-
2Including money market paper of enterprises. — 3Including Treasury bills notes put into circulation by the Bundesbank in accordance with
10*II Overall monetary survey in the euro area

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2010
II Overall monetary survey in the euro area
 
 
 
 
 
Liabilities
Deposits of non-banks (non-MFIs) in the euro area
Enterprises and households
With agreed At agreed
maturities of notice of  6 
over
Currency 1 year and
in of which up to up to over up to over  End of
Total in euro  5 Total Overnight 1 year 2 years 2 years 3 months 3 months year/month circulation  4 
Euro area ( € billion) 1
 
656.0 9,238.3 8,703.6 8,785.0 2,943.0 2,087.3 233.7 1,919.4 1,494.4 107.2 2008          Aug 
657.1 9,310.1 8,767.9 8,849.1 3,026.1 2,087.9 237.0 1,907.4 1,484.6 106.1          Sep 
698.8 9,475.1 8,865.3 8,950.4 3,050.5 2,158.4 238.1 1,911.8 1,482.7 109.0          Oct 
703.6 9,609.7 8,944.6 9,006.3 3,060.8 2,171.3 239.9 1,934.4 1,487.3 112.6          Nov 722.7 9,645.6 9,084.1 9,122.6 3,106.4 2,158.8 236.1 1,973.5 1,531.4 116.5          Dec 
712.2 9,770.0 9,124.1 9,179.9 3,184.7 2,047.6 241.7 2,011.7 1,576.9 117.3 2009          Jan 
715.8 9,788.5 9,135.6 9,182.2 3,185.0 2,004.1 250.6 2,025.4 1,599.9 117.2          Feb 
719.8 9,817.5 9,163.2 9,201.8 3,203.3 1,962.0 252.2 2,046.6 1,620.0 117.8          Mar 
729.1 9,882.3 9,244.2 9,281.2 3,254.9 1,945.8 253.8 2,064.0 1,643.9 118.8          Apr 
731.9 9,887.9 9,260.1 9,293.3 3,275.9 1,900.8 252.5 2,085.9 1,657.9 120.2          May734.9 9,955.5 9,300.4 9,337.1 3,354.1 1,842.7 242.1 2,107.2 1,669.7 121.3          June
745.3 9,887.2 9,285.1 9,326.9 3,341.9 1,801.2 254.5 2,118.7 1,688.2 122.4          July
741.0 9,857.4 9,281.6 9,320.7 3,350.7 1,759.6 257.8 2,124.5 1,704.9 123.2          Aug 740.5 9,895.9 9,303.8 9,338.4 3,407.1 1,701.4 254.6 2,139.3 1,711.5 124.4          Sep 
745.3 9,941.5 9,322.4 9,365.2 3,460.8 1,654.9 256.7 2,140.0 1,726.0 126.9          Oct 
750.0 9,922.5 9,324.0 9,357.1 3,485.6 1,605.4 259.9 2,148.6 1,730.0 127.7          Nov 769.9 9,985.3 9,440.5 9,495.2 3,559.9 1,590.9 262.2 2,188.3 1,767.0 126.9          Dec 
757.1 10,011.6 9,432.0 9,487.3 3,579.5 1,521.0 265.1 2,199.3 1,796.9 125.4 2010          Jan 
759.5 9,994.9 9,424.1 9,472.0 3,559.8 1,502.0 269.0 2,210.3 1,805.9 124.9          Feb 
768.6 9,981.5 9,413.5 9,467.1 3,560.6 1,485.2 268.3 2,213.1 1,814.8 125.1          Mar 
772.6 10,029.7 9,477.7 9,536.4 3,638.5 1,449.9 270.3 2,231.2 1,824.4 122.1          Apr 
779.0 10,087.7 9,479.1 9,550.2 3,660.4 1,442.0 270.3 2,234.0 1,823.1 120.4          May785.4 10,217.9 9,594.4 9,651.7 3,696.0 1,432.0 269.0 2,320.4 1,815.0 119.4          June
793.9 10,186.1 9,602.0 9,661.9 3,685.4 1,444.6 270.2 2,320.8 1,823.7 117.2          July
787.9 10,186.3 9,610.2 9,678.5 3,662.2 1,459.8 272.3 2,331.6 1,836.7 116.0          Aug 786.7 10,189.8 9,626.5 9,673.3 3,654.8 1,470.0 264.0 2,329.3 1,841.4 113.9          Sep 
 German contribution ( € billion) 
177.2 2,688.5 2,608.0 2,522.6 751.6 472.1 50.3 724.0 423.4 101.3 2008          Aug 
177.7 2,698.7 2,618.7 2,532.2 768.0 471.5 51.5 720.9 420.1 100.3          Sep 
188.3 2,742.6 2,664.9 2,580.8 798.6 489.4 52.8 718.1 418.8 103.2          Oct 
189.6 2,760.1 2,685.4 2,592.5 804.1 492.9 54.6 716.3 417.6 106.9          Nov 195.2 2,799.3 2,728.0 2,632.6 800.8 493.7 54.4 747.3 425.7 110.7          Dec 
177.0 2,819.7 2,748.0 2,657.0 859.6 452.3 53.7 751.4 429.4 110.7 2009          Jan 
177.7 2,834.1 2,754.4 2,660.1 872.0 432.0 52.8 758.1 434.7 110.6          Feb 
179.0 2,821.3 2,740.2 2,650.6 870.1 418.5 52.7 760.7 437.3 111.3          Mar 
180.6 2,854.6 2,759.1 2,667.2 880.6 418.0 52.0 764.7 439.8 112.1          Apr 
180.7 2,860.9 2,753.2 2,661.0 884.4 401.8 51.8 767.2 442.2 113.6          May182.2 2,856.1 2,755.9 2,666.6 902.2 372.6 50.8 780.8 445.7 114.6          June
185.6 2,840.1 2,747.1 2,663.6 907.2 358.8 50.2 781.5 450.2 115.7          July
184.2 2,832.1 2,748.8 2,667.0 919.1 344.4 49.1 783.3 454.6 116.5          Aug 
184.3 2,830.8 2,750.2 2,671.8 937.9 324.4 47.9 786.2 457.7 117.7          Sep 
185.0 2,834.4 2,752.2 2,676.5 966.4 295.8 47.6 784.8 461.8 120.1          Oct 
186.5 2,839.6 2,767.0 2,687.1 987.8 280.1 46.6 787.0 464.7 120.9          Nov 190.8 2,828.4 2,763.3 2,688.5 975.3 283.8 46.9 788.0 474.6 119.8          Dec 
187.9 2,830.4 2,772.0 2,696.8 1,005.5 261.0 44.4 788.2 479.4 118.3 2010          Jan 
188.5 2,829.6 2,776.4 2,695.8 1,003.1 253.7 43.7 792.4 485.3 117.6          Feb 
191.4 2,816.4 2,765.5 2,687.3 992.2 254.0 42.8 793.5 487.1 117.7          Mar 
192.1 2,836.8 2,782.6 2,710.0 1,035.2 234.4 42.0 793.6 489.0 115.8          Apr 
193.2 2,841.8 2,783.5 2,706.9 1,043.4 229.2 40.8 788.5 490.9 114.0          May195.5 2,842.8 2,787.0 2,702.1 1,041.7 229.2 39.0 787.9 491.6 112.7          June
197.2 2,841.1 2,785.3 2,706.3 1,047.6 227.6 37.8 787.4 495.2 110.6          July
195.8 2,857.9 2,794.5 2,710.2 1,050.3 226.9 37.5 789.7 496.9 108.8          Aug 
195.5 2,851.2 2,797.5 2,708.8 1,049.6 226.9 37.5 788.8 499.4 106.6          Sep 
the accounting regime chosen by the Eurosystem (see footnote 3 on item “Intra-Eurosystem liability/claim related to banknote issue“ (see “Other
banknote circulation in Table III.2). The volume of currency actually put into liability items“). — 5Excluding central governments’ deposits. — 6In
circulation by the Bundesbank can be calculated by adding to this total the Germany, only saving deposits. 
11*II Overall monetary survey in the euro area

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
E U R O S Y S T E M
Monthly Report
November 2010
II Overall monetary survey in the euro area
 
2 Consolidated balance sheet of monetary financial institutions (MFIs) (cont’d) *
 
 
 
Liabilities (cont’d)
Deposits of non-banks (non-MFIs) in the euro area (cont’d)  
 
General government Repo transactions Debt securitieswith non-banks
Other general government in the euro area
With agreed At agreedmaturities of notice of  
2 
Money
over of which market of which
Central 1 year and Enterprises fund denom-
End of govern- up to up to over up to over and shares inatedyear/month ments Total Overnight 1 year 2 years 2 years 3 months 3 months Total households (net)  
3 Total in euro
 Euro area ( € billion) 1
 
2008          Aug 186.6 266.8 117.5 110.3 5.9 24.4 1.6 7.1 343.1 338.3 758.2 2,881.9 2,256.1
         Sep 191.1 270.0 121.1 110.1 5.9 24.6 1.5 6.8 345.6 340.9 731.4 2,899.9 2,262.6
         Oct 256.0 268.8 122.9 107.3 5.8 24.8 1.5 6.6 351.0 347.4 730.1 2,883.6 2,204.6
         Nov 325.8 277.5 129.3 110.1 5.7 24.5 1.5 6.4 336.6 333.4 740.0 2,863.9 2,202.5         Dec 259.6 263.4 124.4 101.6 4.9 24.7 1.6 6.1 330.1 327.4 726.3 2,823.3 2,221.0
2009          Jan 325.1 265.0 125.9 99.4 5.0 24.6 2.0 8.2 324.0 321.4 760.2 2,816.8 2,188.7
         Feb 339.0 267.3 130.2 97.0 5.2 24.6 2.3 8.0 327.4 324.6 780.3 2,840.9 2,209.3         Mar 351.7 264.1 134.9 89.2 4.6 24.9 2.6 7.9 338.5 335.5 781.1 2,794.1 2,194.4
         Apr 337.4 263.8 139.9 83.8 4.8 24.9 2.8 7.7 338.2 335.4 782.1 2,804.8 2,190.6
         May 331.5 263.1 138.1 84.7 4.9 24.9 3.0 7.5 336.2 333.4 771.9 2,800.4 2,209.3         June 352.3 266.2 146.0 80.3 4.6 25.0 3.1 7.3 347.3 344.5 742.3 2,799.2 2,198.1
         July 298.2 262.0 146.0 74.9 4.9 25.5 3.5 7.2 321.3 318.9 758.5 2,802.4 2,203.3
         Aug 274.5 262.2 148.2 72.3 5.1 25.7 3.8 7.1 310.8 308.8 759.9 2,798.6 2,197.2         Sep 295.2 262.2 154.7 65.9 5.2 25.7 3.9 6.8 335.2 333.0 741.1 2,769.7 2,187.1
         Oct 317.5 258.7 151.6 65.1 5.2 26.0 4.2 6.6 309.4 307.2 735.5 2,756.7 2,176.5
         Nov 304.0 261.5 158.1 61.8 5.0 26.1 4.1 6.4 314.8 312.7 722.3 2,751.7 2,173.0         Dec 246.7 243.5 143.9 58.8 4.8 25.8 4.0 6.2 327.5 324.8 647.5 2,753.5 2,168.2
2010          Jan 277.3 247.0 144.4 56.8 4.8 28.2 4.3 8.6 307.6 306.1 652.2 2,800.3 2,184.6
         Feb 273.4 249.5 146.5 56.8 4.7 28.3 4.7 8.4 323.0 321.4 644.0 2,794.9 2,163.3         Mar 267.4 247.0 142.2 58.8 4.6 28.5 4.9 8.1 341.4 339.6 628.3 2,829.0 2,192.6
         Apr 247.5 245.8 141.0 58.6 4.5 28.6 5.1 7.9 362.4 360.4 634.2 2,844.2 2,194.4
         May 284.2 253.3 145.6 61.6 4.4 28.4 5.4 7.8 366.8 364.8 630.3 2,869.3 2,181.2         June 304.8 261.3 149.8 64.6 3.9 30.0 5.5 7.6 405.9 404.4 603.6 2,848.3 2,162.9
         July 282.2 242.0 131.7 63.0 3.6 30.5 5.7 7.5 383.6 382.2 594.8 2,831.3 2,165.8
         Aug 262.1 245.7 131.4 67.0 3.3 30.7 5.9 7.4 386.4 385.0 610.1 2,843.1 2,156.6         Sep 265.5 251.0 131.9 72.2 3.4 30.1 6.5 7.0 407.6 406.1 589.7 2,824.7 2,167.3
 German contribution ( € billion) 
2008          Aug 37.3 128.6 24.6 77.1 4.6 21.1 0.8 0.3 63.1 63.1 17.3 846.5 619.4         Sep 38.0 128.4 25.0 76.4 4.6 21.3 0.8 0.3 70.9 70.9 16.9 845.5 607.4
         Oct 36.6 125.1 25.0 73.2 4.5 21.3 0.8 0.3 69.8 69.8 13.0 853.5 600.2
         Nov 36.7 130.8 28.7 75.7 4.4 21.0 0.8 0.3 71.0 71.0 12.3 854.6 607.1         Dec 36.7 129.9 32.0 72.0 3.6 21.2 0.8 0.3 61.1 61.1 11.5 819.1 596.4
2009          Jan 37.3 125.4 32.2 67.2 3.6 21.1 1.0 0.4 67.4 67.4 11.1 822.0 575.4
         Feb 45.4 128.6 37.1 65.0 3.9 21.1 1.0 0.4 74.0 74.0 12.0 814.7 563.9         Mar 48.6 122.2 36.3 59.5 3.4 21.4 1.1 0.5 87.7 87.7 11.4 779.4 542.7
         Apr 62.7 124.6 41.4 56.8 3.5 21.3 1.2 0.5 92.6 92.6 11.2 782.5 531.5
         May 74.7 125.1 41.0 57.6 3.5 21.3 1.2 0.5 90.9 90.9 10.9 776.7 538.0         June 65.8 123.7 43.0 54.3 3.2 21.3 1.3 0.6 93.4 93.4 10.7 764.5 521.5
         July 60.0 116.5 40.3 49.4 3.3 21.5 1.4 0.6 82.4 82.4 9.6 754.9 510.6
         Aug 50.2 114.9 41.1 46.6 3.4 21.5 1.6 0.6 71.7 71.7 9.5 755.1 507.7         Sep 47.9 111.2 42.4 41.7 3.4 21.5 1.6 0.7 83.7 83.7 9.6 734.0 498.1
         Oct 49.3 108.5 41.6 39.5 3.4 21.7 1.6 0.7 83.3 83.3 9.5 727.1 492.8
         Nov 41.6 110.9 44.1 39.3 3.3 21.7 1.7 0.7 81.0 81.0 9.3 713.6 483.0         Dec 32.7 107.3 40.7 39.5 3.2 21.4 1.8 0.7 80.5 80.5 8.7 703.3 470.7
2010          Jan 26.6 107.0 40.3 37.4 3.1 23.7 1.7 0.7 68.2 68.2 9.4 712.0 466.2
         Feb 22.7 111.1 43.4 38.4 3.1 23.7 1.7 0.7 78.9 78.9 9.2 711.0 456.3         Mar 21.2 107.9 39.6 39.1 3.0 23.7 1.8 0.7 79.8 79.8 8.6 714.4 458.2
         Apr 21.4 105.4 37.4 38.8 2.9 23.8 1.8 0.7 100.7 100.7 8.4 715.8 451.0
         May 23.0 112.0 42.2 40.6 2.8 23.7 2.0 0.7 101.4 101.4 8.8 733.9 451.9         June 21.9 118.8 45.4 43.2 2.4 25.0 2.0 0.7 102.7 102.7 8.1 729.6 450.9
         July 23.5 111.3 38.4 42.9 2.1 25.1 2.0 0.7 92.2 92.2 8.6 709.2 437.0
         Aug 30.9 116.8 41.0 45.7 2.0 25.4 2.1 0.7 104.0 104.0 8.3 720.7 436.1         Sep 22.4 120.0 41.1 48.9 2.1 25.1 2.2 0.6 95.9 95.9 8.1 710.8 437.1
*Monetary financial institutions (MFIs) comprise banks (including building 5Excluding liabilities arising from securities issued. — 6After deduction of
and loan associations), money market funds, and the European Central inter-MFI participations. — 7The German contributions to the Eurosystem’s
Bank and national central banks (the Eurosystem). — 1Source: ECB. — 2In monetary aggregates should on no account be interpreted as national
Germany, only savings deposits. — 3Excluding holdings of MFIs; for the monetary aggregates and are therefore not comparable with the erstwhile
German contribution, excluding German MFIs’ portfolios of securities issued German money stocks M1, M2 or M3. — 8including DM banknotes still in
by MFIs in the euro area. — 4In Germany, bank debt securities with circulation (see also footnote 4 on p 10*). — 9For the German contribution,
maturities of up to one year are classed as money market paper. — the difference between the volume of euro banknotes actually issued
12*II Overall monetary survey in the euro area

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2010
II Overall monetary survey in the euro area
 
 
 
 
 
 Memo item
 Other liability items Monetary aggregates  7 
 (From 2002, German contribution
issued (net)  3 excludes currency in circulation)
With maturities of
of which Monetary
Intra- liabilities
Eurosystem- of centralliability/ govern-
over Liabilities Excess claim Monetary ments1 year and to non- Capital of related to capital (Post
up to up to over euro-area and inter-MFI banknote forma- Office, End of1 year  
4 2 years 2 years residents  5 reserves  6 liabilities Total  8 issue  9 M1 10 M2 11 M3 12 tion 13 year/month Treasury)  14 
Euro area ( € billion) 1
 
140.2 137.1 2,604.7 5,115.6 1,529.2 − 41.0 3,141.2 − 3,790.3 7,759.5 9,136.4 6,192.0 109.9 2008          Aug 
146.6 140.0 2,613.3 5,173.6 1,564.3 − 35.6 3,242.0 − 3,877.0 7,839.9 9,201.9 6,222.5 108.8          Sep 
140.0 136.2 2,607.5 5,288.0 1,570.8 − 13.7 3,589.2 − 3,944.5 7,972.1 9,328.1 6,230.4 106.3          Oct 
136.4 137.7 2,589.8 5,162.7 1,609.6 − 39.8 3,744.2 − 3,969.7 8,019.0 9,368.8 6,277.4 109.5          Nov 138.0 128.8 2,556.5 4,779.8 1,615.1 − 82.3 3,560.8 − 4,035.7 8,103.1 9,425.2 6,292.3 115.1          Dec 
93.3 123.4 2,600.1 4,996.5 1,652.3 − 102.3 3,557.8 − 4,096.2 8,101.9 9,402.0 6,414.3 106.6 2009          Jan 
88.3 126.5 2,626.1 4,860.5 1,666.1 − 100.7 3,552.6 − 4,101.9 8,093.8 9,415.5 6,467.4 103.6          Feb 65.9 128.5 2,599.8 4,643.6 1,643.7 − 91.2 3,510.3 − 4,130.8 8,094.0 9,407.1 6,440.6 105.5          Mar 
65.5 139.9 2,599.4 4,670.6 1,646.3 − 89.6 3,475.9 − 4,197.6 8,165.0 9,489.7 6,461.0 106.2          Apr 
53.5 144.7 2,602.2 4,513.2 1,656.8 − 110.3 3,331.0 − 4,220.8 8,157.1 9,462.4 6,497.5 107.4          May38.6 143.2 2,617.4 4,436.0 1,689.8 − 71.3 3,451.9 − 4,311.6 8,186.1 9,456.6 6,567.8 108.7          June
25.3 145.5 2,631.6 4,383.7 1,698.1 − 66.7 3,508.4 − 4,311.0 8,170.1 9,420.1 6,603.6 109.7          July
12.1 144.3 2,642.3 4,307.7 1,716.8 − 76.7 3,538.1 − 4,317.6 8,153.0 9,379.3 6,639.7 109.6          Aug 
7.0 141.1 2,621.6 4,234.4 1,740.1 − 73.0 3,523.0 − 4,379.3 8,153.6 9,377.5 6,657.9 108.7          Sep 
− 1.6 140.3 2,618.0 4,226.4 1,747.0 − 99.2 3,490.2 − 4,434.6 8,178.4 9,361.4 6,664.4 108.6          Oct − 2.4 136.5 2,617.5 4,212.6 1,780.6 − 63.3 3,616.7 − 4,472.3 8,170.0 9,340.4 6,706.9 110.2          Nov 
3.6 129.2 2,620.6 4,237.3 1,802.3 − 30.7 3,368.8 − 4,559.6 8,278.5 9,385.1 6,770.2 117.2          Dec 
2.5 129.3 2,668.5 4,357.7 1,798.3 − 31.0 3,435.4 − 4,557.4 8,237.6 9,329.2 6,828.4 107.8 2010          Jan 
1.1 124.2 2,669.7 4,421.0 1,814.4 − 14.2 3,522.3 − 4,542.6 8,216.8 9,309.0 6,856.0 107.8          Feb 
11.7 122.4 2,694.8 4,423.1 1,831.9 − 51.1 3,556.2 − 4,546.8 8,214.0 9,317.9 6,901.5 106.1          Mar 
16.0 119.9 2,708.4 4,548.5 1,840.8 − 69.2 3,668.1 − 4,629.3 8,272.8 9,405.1 6,939.0 107.8          Apr 
22.2 106.8 2,740.3 4,702.8 1,877.6 − 51.1 3,972.1 − 4,663.8 8,301.2 9,427.0 7,008.5 109.4          May21.4 101.0 2,725.9 4,603.3 1,956.5 − 4.6 3,824.6 − 4,711.4 8,331.4 9,463.1 7,159.8 110.4          June
27.5 99.1 2,704.8 4,486.7 1,943.7 − 21.8 3,738.3 − 4,695.7 8,336.5 9,441.1 7,124.5 114.8          July
26.9 99.4 2,716.7 4,631.0 1,980.3 1.5 4,162.0 − 4,665.6 8,340.1 9,462.7 7,182.7 113.7          Aug 31.3 96.0 2,697.4 4,434.6 1,955.7 9.7 3,972.7 − 4,655.9 8,342.6 9,467.2 7,133.4 111.9          Sep 
 German contribution ( € billion) 
13.7 50.9 782.0 803.1 382.3 − 241.0 724.7 109.8 776.2 1,804.4 1,949.4 2,011.0 − 2008          Aug 
13.5 49.5 782.5 850.4 391.3 − 238.3 747.6 111.8 793.1 1,817.9 1,968.8 2,016.5 −          Sep 
19.2 45.6 788.7 862.4 388.3 − 248.6 776.8 119.3 823.6 1,863.0 2,010.7 2,019.9 −          Oct 
33.2 45.7 775.7 815.4 395.6 − 309.6 786.2 120.6 832.8 1,878.8 2,040.9 2,015.9 −          Nov 41.9 37.5 739.8 762.8 406.3 − 334.6 785.4 121.8 832.8 1,883.0 2,034.9 2,025.6 −          Dec 
32.7 33.5 755.8 791.6 414.8 − 353.2 770.3 139.2 891.8 1,898.9 2,043.7 2,054.1 − 2009          Jan 
34.5 33.5 746.8 770.8 407.4 − 376.1 778.2 140.7 909.1 1,898.4 2,052.3 2,044.4 −          Feb 
19.3 31.4 728.8 751.2 400.0 − 382.6 813.6 140.4 906.4 1,878.9 2,028.6 2,022.7 −          Mar 
24.5 33.4 724.5 774.4 390.7 − 373.8 797.8 141.8 922.0 1,893.1 2,054.9 2,013.9 −          Apr 
25.8 32.5 718.4 727.4 389.3 − 361.3 767.1 142.2 925.5 1,883.5 2,043.6 2,010.3 −          May22.0 26.6 715.9 731.4 407.9 − 390.7 747.5 141.9 945.2 1,873.0 2,025.8 2,041.0 −          June
23.3 25.1 706.4 724.8 408.0 − 397.8 751.5 141.8 947.5 1,860.8 2,001.2 2,033.8 −          July
24.7 24.9 705.6 718.3 408.3 − 407.6 762.6 143.4 960.2 1,859.9 1,990.7 2,035.8 −          Aug 26.3 23.2 684.5 690.3 409.6 − 396.2 769.8 144.9 980.3 1,856.9 1,999.7 2,020.1 −          Sep 
23.7 21.9 681.5 678.5 411.0 − 388.6 773.6 146.5 1,008.0 1,857.8 1,996.2 2,019.8 −          Oct 
21.5 22.4 669.7 674.6 424.7 − 384.9 773.7 146.8 1,031.9 1,867.7 2,001.8 2,024.8 −          Nov 23.1 17.0 663.2 663.8 423.6 − 390.1 766.7 146.8 1,015.9 1,865.7 1,994.9 2,016.8 −          Dec 
25.4 17.2 669.3 693.8 419.4 − 364.7 755.0 147.6 1,045.8 1,872.9 1,993.1 2,019.7 − 2010          Jan 
27.4 16.7 666.9 703.0 424.6 − 394.6 737.4 149.6 1,046.5 1,872.4 2,004.6 2,026.0 −          Feb 
27.3 15.3 671.8 721.0 424.3 − 419.9 761.1 150.2 1,031.8 1,859.6 1,990.6 2,031.8 −          Mar 
27.5 14.7 673.7 777.7 429.9 − 411.7 753.1 151.1 1,072.5 1,881.6 2,032.7 2,037.4 −          Apr 
26.7 15.3 692.0 847.8 431.1 − 469.8 764.6 151.7 1,085.6 1,891.9 2,044.0 2,050.0 −          May23.5 13.1 693.0 807.3 431.2 − 475.4 790.2 150.9 1,087.1 1,894.5 2,041.9 2,050.6 −          June
25.4 14.7 669.1 784.5 426.1 − 483.3 765.7 151.2 1,086.0 1,893.7 2,034.6 2,019.1 −          July
33.6 13.9 673.3 797.3 433.5 − 496.8 776.1 153.2 1,091.3 1,902.4 2,062.0 2,031.3 −          Aug 35.2 14.8 660.9 757.5 430.4 − 517.5 770.2 155.8 1,090.8 1,907.7 2,061.6 2,012.4 −          Sep 
by the Bundesbank and the amount disclosed in accordance with the (excluding central governments’ deposits) and (for the euro area) central
accounting regime chosen by the Eurosystem (see also footnote 3 on governments’ monetary liabilities with such maturities. — 12M2 plus repo
banknote circulation in Table III.2). — 10Overnight deposits (excluding transactions, money market fund shares, money market paper and debt
central governments’ deposits), and (for the euro area) currency in securities up to 2 years. — 13Deposits with agreed maturities of over 2
circulation, central governments’ overnight monetary liabilities, which are years and at agreed notice of over 3 months, debt securities with matur ities
not included in the consolidated balance sheet. — 11M1 plus deposits with of over 2 years, capital and reserves. — 14 Non-existent in Germany. 
agreed maturities of up to 2 years and at agreed notice of up to 3 months
13*II Overall monetary survey in the euro area

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
E U R O S Y S T E M
Monthly Report
November 2010
II  Overall monetary survey in the euro area
  
 3  Banking system’s liquidity position  * 
Stocks
  
€ billion; period averages of daily positions
Liquidity-providing factors Liquidity-absorbing factors
Monetary policy operations of the Eurosystem
Credit
institutions‘
currentaccount
Net assets Longer- Other Other balances
Reserve in gold Main term Marginal liquidity- liquidity- Banknotes Central Other (including
maintenance and foreign refinancing refinancing lending providing Deposit absorbing in government factors minimum Baseperiod currency operations operations facility facility deposits (net)  
6 reserves)  7 money  8 operations  3 operations  4 circulation  5 
ending in  1 
Eurosystem  2  
  
2008          Apr 349.4 181.5 278.6 0.1 2.6 0.6 0.4 662.1 66.4 − 124.8 207.5 870.3
         May 364.5 174.4 295.0 0.1 − 0.3 0.8 667.6 68.8 − 112.2 208.6 876.6         June 375.0 172.8 287.9 0.3 − 0.2 0.5 671.4 67.3 − 111.5 208.1 879.7
         July 376.4 185.4 275.4 0.1 − 0.4 0.5 677.2 64.9 − 118.3 212.7 890.3
         Aug 374.5 166.3 299.3 0.1 − 0.3 0.6 686.1 61.3 − 123.0 214.8 901.2
         Sep 376.6 163.5 300.0 0.1 − 0.6 0.7 685.0 61.1 − 121.2 214.0 899.5
         Oct 417.3 174.1 334.3 7.5 5.9 19.9 45.5 684.3 55.2 − 82.6 216.8 921.0
         Nov 549.0 301.6 452.5 12.7 4.2 213.7 2.3 722.1 85.0 78.2 218.6 1 154.4
         Dec 580.5 337.3 457.2 2.7 − 200.9 4.9 731.1 107.8 114.3 218.7 1 150.7
2009          Jan 581.3 219.2 613.6 2.9 − 238.5 3.3 753.1 99.9 100.6 221.5 1 213.1
         Feb 547.4 224.9 551.4 2.1 − 175.4 6.1 740.2 102.7 79.3 222.1 1 137.7
         Mar 512.7 224.3 472.4 1.6 − 95.5 4.0 741.5 110.1 41.4 218.6 1 055.5
         Apr 508.0 230.5 443.1 1.1 − 57.8 3.7 747.3 139.0 13.3 221.6 1 026.6
         May 512.4 239.7 426.9 0.7 − 42.7 3.1 757.5 141.9 13.7 220.8 1 021.0
         June 487.9 238.8 400.6 0.7 − 22.3 2.1 759.8 141.7 − 15.8 217.9 1 000.0
         July 457.1 221.4 504.9 1.3 − 119.7 9.9 763.1 137.9 − 65.1 219.2 1 102.0
         Aug 433.6 94.1 694.0 0.3 2.8 185.1 22.1 770.8 133.9 − 103.9 216.9 1 172.8         Sep 427.6 74.8 645.4 0.3 8.4 136.7 18.5 769.1 125.7 − 110.4 216.9 1 122.7
         Oct 421.4 79.1 616.9 0.3 14.3 109.6 12.9 768.8 139.0 − 113.1 214.7 1 093.1
         Nov 413.0 52.3 626.1 0.3 20.1 86.5 12.0 770.7 148.7 − 118.9 212.8 1 070.0
         Dec 407.6 55.8 593.4 0.7 24.6 65.7 9.9 775.2 150.1 − 130.2 211.4 1 052.3
2010          Jan 413.0 60.6 648.4 0.4 28.4 147.0 8.1 796.8 119.8 − 132.1 211.2 1 155.0
         Feb 425.6 59.7 662.2 0.2 33.5 168.3 13.3 783.6 122.6 − 117.5 210.9 1 162.8
         Mar 426.9 80.5 641.1 0.9 38.0 186.4 10.5 784.6 113.2 − 119.3 211.8 1 182.9
         Apr 439.8 77.7 650.5 0.4 43.6 200.7 8.4 792.9 113.6 − 116.1 212.5 1 206.1
         May 457.0 76.7 666.4 0.9 49.4 218.2 11.4 796.6 112.1 − 100.3 212.4 1 227.2
         June 462.4 110.0 706.7 0.3 86.9 288.8 34.1 806.2 123.1 − 98.4 212.5 1 307.5
         July 500.9 167.5 573.2 0.3 140.2 230.4 54.4 813.0 126.5 − 56.5 214.4 1 257.8
         Aug 543.4 185.4 432.2 0.1 121.4 96.7 67.5 819.3 95.2 − 11.8 215.7 1 131.7
         Sep 543.2 153.1 435.0 0.6 121.8 83.7 66.9 816.0 86.8 − 15.0 215.3 1 115.0
         Oct 531.3 164.5 392.6 0.7 128.3 68.8 64.8 814.1 96.4 − 39.8 213.1 1 096.1
Deutsche Bundesbank
2008          Apr 92.9 76.7 109.9 0.0 1.5 0.5 − 179.7 0.0 52.4 48.6 228.7
         May 99.6 75.7 112.7 0.0 − 0.2 0.2 181.0 0.0 57.9 48.6 229.8
         June 104.4 73.5 112.8 0.1 − 0.1 0.1 182.7 0.1 58.9 49.1 231.8
         July 102.8 79.4 107.2 0.0 − 0.1 0.1 183.6 0.1 55.9 49.5 233.2
         Aug 99.6 70.8 111.9 0.0 − 0.1 0.0 185.5 0.0 46.5 50.1 235.7
         Sep 100.6 76.7 105.2 0.1 − 0.2 0.1 185.7 0.1 46.2 50.2 236.2
         Oct 114.4 74.8 118.6 0.9 3.6 10.1 8.6 186.2 0.2 55.9 51.2 247.5
         Nov 138.6 103.6 163.2 2.7 2.0 88.8 1.1 198.9 0.3 68.7 52.3 339.9
         Dec 146.9 105.1 158.5 2.0 − 84.2 1.1 197.9 0.2 77.2 52.0 334.0
2009          Jan 141.2 72.4 198.1 2.4 − 91.5 1.2 195.8 4.1 68.5 52.8 340.2
         Feb 132.9 79.4 178.5 1.3 − 77.9 2.2 185.0 2.5 71.4 53.2 316.1
         Mar 135.3 72.9 147.8 1.2 − 51.9 1.7 185.3 9.6 55.7 52.9 290.1
         Apr 142.9 74.7 122.8 0.7 − 38.9 1.6 186.3 14.6 46.2 53.4 278.7
         May 150.7 87.5 111.9 0.1 − 24.1 1.3 189.1 26.2 56.3 53.3 266.5         June 145.7 95.0 103.4 0.7 − 15.4 0.6 189.3 32.3 54.3 52.8 257.4
         July 138.0 81.0 141.5 0.6 − 49.4 4.5 190.2 23.5 40.4 53.2 292.8
         Aug 128.6 47.6 189.1 0.1 0.8 70.1 4.9 192.0 23.5 23.6 52.2 314.2
         Sep 126.0 40.6 178.0 0.1 2.9 51.8 4.3 192.3 23.6 23.4 52.2 296.4
         Oct 124.2 37.3 175.9 0.2 4.9 49.4 3.0 192.5 23.7 22.4 51.5 293.3
         Nov 120.7 34.6 178.8 0.2 6.2 34.2 4.3 192.5 23.6 34.8 51.0 277.7
         Dec 116.3 33.7 171.1 0.6 7.2 25.7 2.7 193.3 18.8 37.8 50.5 269.5
2010          Jan 112.1 42.8 168.9 0.1 7.9 44.8 2.3 198.4 10.7 25.3 50.3 293.5
         Feb 112.3 42.2 168.6 0.1 8.9 50.3 5.2 195.6 5.4 25.4 50.2 296.1
         Mar 112.6 51.8 157.9 0.8 10.0 67.8 5.0 196.5 2.1 11.8 50.0 314.3
         Apr 116.2 40.9 164.9 0.2 11.5 69.8 3.4 198.0 0.3 11.9 50.3 318.2
         May 121.1 40.5 164.7 0.1 12.8 74.9 4.2 199.0 0.7 10.2 50.2 324.1
         June 122.2 43.0 166.4 0.0 22.1 113.1 17.1 201.5 0.8 − 29.2 50.5 365.0
         July 133.9 55.2 112.8 0.1 32.7 81.0 22.3 202.5 0.4 − 22.7 51.2 334.7
         Aug 145.8 61.7 52.8 0.1 28.4 32.7 20.7 204.2 0.5 − 21.6 52.3 289.2         Sep 145.5 52.6 50.3 0.2 28.4 24.8 26.5 204.2 0.5 − 30.9 52.0 280.9
         Oct 142.2 54.4 40.5 0.1 29.3 27.0 32.4 204.0 0.5 − 48.3 51.0 281.9
Discrepancies may arise from rounding. — *The banking system’s liquidity programme and the Eurosystem’s securities markets programme. — 4From
position is defined as the current account holdings in euro of euro-area Aug. 2009, includes liquidity absorbed as a result of the Eurosystem’s
credit institutions with the Eurosystem. Amounts are derived from the conso- foreign exchange swap operations. — 5From 2002, euro banknotes and oth-
lidated financial statement of the Eurosystem and the financial statement er banknotes which have been issued by the national central banks of theof the Bundesbank. — 1Figures are daily averages for the reserve mainte- Eurosystem and which are still in circulation. In accordance with the ac-
nance period ending in the month indicated. — 2Source: ECB. — 3Includes counting procedure chosen by the Eurosystem for the issue of euro bank-
liquidity provided under the Eurosystem’s covered bond purchase notes, 8% of the total value of the euro banknotes in circulation are alloca-
14*II  Overall monetary survey in the euro area

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2010
II  Overall monetary survey in the euro area
  
  
Flows
  
Liquidity-providing factors Liquidity-absorbing factors
Monetary policy operations of the Eurosystem
Credit
institutions‘
currentaccount
Net assets Longer- Other Other balances
in gold Main term Marginal liquidity- liquidity- Banknotes Central Other (including Reserve
and foreign refinancing refinancing lending providing Deposit absorbing in government factors minimum Base maintenancecurrency operations operations facility facility deposits (net)  
6 reserves)  7 money  8 period operations  3 operations  4 circulation  5 
ending in  1 
Eurosystem  2  
  
+ 6.1 + 0.2 + 10.1 + 0.0 + 2.3 + 0.3 + 0.4 + 8.9 + 6.7 + 0.2 + 2.2 + 11.6 2008          Apr 
+ 15.1 − 7.1 + 16.4 − 0.0 − 2.6 − 0.3 + 0.4 + 5.5 + 2.4 + 12.6 + 1.1 + 6.3          May
+ 10.5 − 1.6 − 7.1 + 0.2 − − 0.1 − 0.3 + 3.8 − 1.5 + 0.7 − 0.5 + 3.1          June
+ 1.4 + 12.6 − 12.5 − 0.2 − + 0.2 + 0.0 + 5.8 − 2.4 − 6.8 + 4.6 + 10.6          July
− 1.9 − 19.1 + 23.9 − 0.0 − − 0.1 + 0.1 + 8.9 − 3.6 − 4.7 + 2.1 + 10.9          Aug 
+ 2.1 − 2.8 + 0.7 + 0.0 − + 0.3 + 0.1 − 1.1 − 0.2 + 1.8 − 0.8 − 1.7          Sep 
+ 40.7 + 10.6 + 34.3 + 7.4 + 5.9 + 19.3 + 44.8 − 0.7 − 5.9 + 38.6 + 2.8 + 21.5          Oct 
+ 131.7 + 127.5 + 118.2 + 5.2 − 1.7 +193.8 − 43.2 + 37.8 + 29.8 +160.8 + 1.8 + 233.4          Nov 
+ 31.5 + 35.7 + 4.7 − 10.0 − 4.2 − 12.8 + 2.6 + 9.0 + 22.8 + 36.1 + 0.1 − 3.7          Dec 
+ 0.8 − 118.1 + 156.4 + 0.2 − + 37.6 − 1.6 + 22.0 − 7.9 − 13.7 + 2.8 + 62.4 2009          Jan 
− 33.9 + 5.7 − 62.2 − 0.8 − − 63.1 + 2.8 − 12.9 + 2.8 − 21.3 + 0.6 − 75.4          Feb 
− 34.7 − 0.6 − 79.0 − 0.5 − − 79.9 − 2.1 + 1.3 + 7.4 − 37.9 − 3.5 − 82.2          Mar 
− 4.7 + 6.2 − 29.3 − 0.5 − − 37.7 − 0.3 + 5.8 + 28.9 − 28.1 + 3.0 − 28.9          Apr 
+ 4.4 + 9.2 − 16.2 − 0.4 − − 15.1 − 0.6 + 10.2 + 2.9 + 0.4 − 0.8 − 5.6          May
− 24.5 − 0.9 − 26.3 − 0.0 − − 20.4 − 1.0 + 2.3 − 0.2 − 29.5 − 2.9 − 21.0          June
− 30.8 − 17.4 + 104.3 + 0.6 − + 97.4 + 7.8 + 3.3 − 3.8 − 49.3 + 1.3 + 102.0          July
− 23.5 − 127.3 + 189.1 − 1.0 + 2.8 + 65.4 + 12.2 + 7.7 − 4.0 − 38.8 − 2.3 + 70.8          Aug − 6.0 − 19.3 − 48.6 − 0.0 + 5.6 − 48.4 − 3.6 − 1.7 − 8.2 − 6.5 − 0.0 − 50.1          Sep 
− 6.2 + 4.3 − 28.5 + 0.0 + 5.9 − 27.1 − 5.6 − 0.3 + 13.3 − 2.7 − 2.2 − 29.6          Oct 
− 8.4 − 26.8 + 9.2 − 0.0 + 5.8 − 23.1 − 0.9 + 1.9 + 9.7 − 5.8 − 1.9 − 23.1          Nov 
− 5.4 + 3.5 − 32.7 + 0.4 + 4.5 − 20.8 − 2.1 + 4.5 + 1.4 − 11.3 − 1.4 − 17.7          Dec 
+ 5.4 + 4.8 + 55.0 − 0.3 + 3.8 + 81.3 − 1.8 + 21.6 − 30.3 − 1.9 − 0.2 + 102.7 2010          Jan 
+ 12.6 − 0.9 + 13.8 − 0.2 + 5.1 + 21.3 + 5.2 − 13.2 + 2.8 + 14.6 − 0.3 + 7.8          Feb 
+ 1.3 + 20.8 − 21.1 + 0.7 + 4.5 + 18.1 − 2.8 + 1.0 − 9.4 − 1.8 + 0.9 + 20.1          Mar 
+ 12.9 − 2.8 + 9.4 − 0.5 + 5.6 + 14.3 − 2.1 + 8.3 + 0.4 + 3.2 + 0.7 + 23.2          Apr 
+ 17.2 − 1.0 + 15.9 + 0.5 + 5.8 + 17.5 + 3.0 + 3.7 − 1.5 + 15.8 − 0.1 + 21.1          May
+ 5.4 + 33.3 + 40.3 − 0.6 + 37.5 + 70.6 + 22.7 + 9.6 + 11.0 + 1.9 + 0.1 + 80.3          June
+ 38.5 + 57.5 − 133.5 − 0.0 + 53.3 − 58.4 + 20.3 + 6.8 + 3.4 + 41.9 + 1.9 − 49.7          July
+ 42.5 + 17.9 − 141.0 − 0.2 − 18.8 −133.7 + 13.1 + 6.3 − 31.3 + 44.7 + 1.3 − 126.1          Aug 
− 0.2 − 32.3 + 2.8 + 0.5 + 0.4 − 13.0 − 0.6 − 3.3 − 8.4 − 3.2 − 0.4 − 16.7          Sep 
− 11.9 + 11.4 − 42.4 + 0.1 + 6.5 − 14.9 − 2.1 − 1.9 + 9.6 − 24.8 − 2.2 − 18.9          Oct 
Deutsche Bundesbank
+ 2.1 + 16.9 − 12.5 + 0.0 + 1.4 + 0.3 − + 2.2 − 0.0 + 5.4 − 0.0 + 2.4 2008          Apr 
+ 6.7 − 1.1 + 2.7 − 0.0 − 1.5 − 0.3 + 0.2 + 1.3 − 0.0 + 5.5 + 0.0 + 1.1          May
+ 4.8 − 2.1 + 0.1 + 0.1 − − 0.2 − 0.1 + 1.7 + 0.0 + 1.0 + 0.5 + 2.0          June
− 1.7 + 5.9 − 5.6 − 0.1 − + 0.1 − 0.0 + 0.9 + 0.0 − 2.9 + 0.4 + 1.4          July
− 3.2 − 8.6 + 4.7 − 0.0 − − 0.1 − 0.0 + 2.0 − 0.1 − 9.4 + 0.6 + 2.5          Aug 
+ 1.0 + 5.9 − 6.7 + 0.1 − + 0.1 + 0.1 + 0.2 + 0.0 − 0.3 + 0.1 + 0.4          Sep 
+ 13.8 − 1.9 + 13.5 + 0.8 + 3.6 + 10.0 + 8.5 + 0.5 + 0.1 + 9.7 + 0.9 + 11.4          Oct 
+ 24.2 + 28.8 + 44.6 + 1.9 − 1.6 + 78.6 − 7.5 + 12.7 + 0.1 + 12.8 + 1.1 + 92.4          Nov 
+ 8.3 + 1.5 − 4.6 − 0.8 − 2.0 − 4.6 + 0.0 − 1.0 − 0.2 + 8.5 − 0.3 − 5.9          Dec 
− 5.7 − 32.7 + 39.5 + 0.4 − + 7.3 + 0.1 − 2.1 + 4.0 − 8.7 + 0.9 + 6.1 2009          Jan 
− 8.3 + 7.0 − 19.5 − 1.0 − − 13.6 + 0.9 − 10.8 − 1.7 + 2.9 + 0.3 − 24.0          Feb 
+ 2.3 − 6.4 − 30.7 − 0.2 − − 26.1 − 0.4 + 0.3 + 7.2 − 15.7 − 0.2 − 26.0          Mar 
+ 7.6 + 1.8 − 25.1 − 0.5 − − 12.9 − 0.1 + 1.0 + 5.0 − 9.5 + 0.5 − 11.4          Apr 
+ 7.8 + 12.8 − 10.9 − 0.6 − − 14.8 − 0.3 + 2.7 + 11.6 + 10.1 − 0.2 − 12.2          May− 5.0 + 7.5 − 8.5 + 0.5 − − 8.7 − 0.6 + 0.2 + 6.2 − 2.0 − 0.5 − 9.1          June
− 7.7 − 13.9 + 38.1 − 0.0 − + 34.1 + 3.8 + 0.9 − 8.9 − 13.9 + 0.4 + 35.4          July
− 9.3 − 33.5 + 47.6 − 0.5 + 0.8 + 20.6 + 0.4 + 1.8 + 0.0 − 16.8 − 1.0 + 21.5          Aug 
− 2.6 − 7.0 − 11.1 + 0.0 + 2.1 − 18.2 − 0.6 + 0.3 + 0.1 − 0.2 + 0.1 − 17.9          Sep 
− 1.8 − 3.3 − 2.1 + 0.0 + 2.0 − 2.5 − 1.2 + 0.2 + 0.1 − 1.0 − 0.8 − 3.1          Oct 
− 3.5 − 2.7 + 3.0 − 0.0 + 1.3 − 15.2 + 1.2 + 0.1 − 0.1 + 12.5 − 0.4 − 15.6          Nov 
− 4.4 − 0.9 − 7.7 + 0.4 + 1.0 − 8.5 − 1.6 + 0.7 − 4.8 + 3.0 − 0.5 − 8.2          Dec 
− 4.2 + 9.1 − 2.2 − 0.5 + 0.7 + 19.1 − 0.4 + 5.1 − 8.1 − 12.6 − 0.2 + 24.0 2010          Jan 
+ 0.2 − 0.6 − 0.3 + 0.0 + 1.0 + 5.5 + 3.0 − 2.8 − 5.2 + 0.1 − 0.1 + 2.6          Feb 
+ 0.3 + 9.6 − 10.6 + 0.7 + 1.1 + 17.4 − 0.3 + 0.9 − 3.3 − 13.6 − 0.1 + 18.2          Mar 
+ 3.6 − 10.8 + 7.0 − 0.7 + 1.5 + 2.0 − 1.6 + 1.6 − 1.8 + 0.1 + 0.3 + 3.9          Apr 
+ 4.9 − 0.4 − 0.2 − 0.1 + 1.3 + 5.0 + 0.8 + 1.0 + 0.5 − 1.7 − 0.1 + 5.9          May
+ 1.1 + 2.5 + 1.7 − 0.0 + 9.3 + 38.2 + 12.9 + 2.5 + 0.1 − 39.4 + 0.3 + 40.9          June
+ 11.7 + 12.2 − 53.6 + 0.0 + 10.7 − 32.1 + 5.1 + 1.0 − 0.4 + 6.5 + 0.8 − 30.3          July
+ 11.9 + 6.6 − 60.0 + 0.0 − 4.3 − 48.3 − 1.5 + 1.7 + 0.1 + 1.1 + 1.0 − 45.6          Aug − 0.3 − 9.1 − 2.5 + 0.1 + 0.0 − 7.9 + 5.8 + 0.0 − 0.1 − 9.3 − 0.3 − 8.3          Sep 
− 3.3 + 1.8 − 9.8 − 0.1 + 0.9 + 2.2 + 5.9 − 0.2 − 0.0 − 17.4 − 1.0 + 1.0          Oct 
ted on a monthly basis to the ECB. The counterpart of this adjustment is has put into circulation is likewise shown under “Other factors”. From 2003
shown under “Other factors”. The remaining 92% of the value of the euro euro banknotes only. — 6Remaining items in the consolidated financial
banknotes in circulation is allocated, likewise on a monthly basis, to the statement of the Eurosystem and the financial statement of theNCBs, with each NCB showing in its balance sheet the percentage of the Bundesbank. — 7Equal to the difference between the sum of liquidity-pro-
euro banknotes in circulation that corresponds to its paid-up share in the viding factors and the sum of liquidity-absorbing factors. — 8Calculated as
ECB’s capital. The difference between the value of the euro banknotes the sum of the “deposit facility”, “banknotes in circulation” and “creditallocated to an NCB and the value of the euro banknotes which that NCB institutions’ current account holdings”. 
15*II  Overall monetary survey in the euro area

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
E U R O S Y S T E M
Monthly Report
November 2010
III Consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem
 
1 Assets *
 
 
€ billion
Claims on non-euro area Claims on non-euro area residents denominated
in foreign currency residents denominated in euro
Balances with
Claims on banks, security
On investments, euro area Balances Claims
reporting external loans residents with banks, arising from
date/ Gold and other denominated security the credit
End of Total and gold Receivables external in foreign investments facility undermonth  
1 assets receivables Total from the IMF assets currency Total and loans ERM II
 Eurosystem 2
 
2010 Mar                  5 1,890.3 266.9 197.5 64.4 133.1 27.8 16.1 16.1 −
                              12 1,886.7 266.9 197.2 64.3 132.9 28.3 15.7 15.7 −
                              19 1,889.7 266.9 198.0 64.2 133.8 28.4 16.1 16.1 −
                              26 1,894.9 266.9 198.6 64.4 134.2 28.5 15.7 15.7 −
         Apr                  1 3 1,942.5 3 286.7 3 210.6 3 66.5 3 144.1 3 29.3 17.6 17.6 −
                                9 1,936.7 286.7 209.4 66.7 142.7 28.5 17.2 17.2 −
                              16 1,940.0 286.7 209.9 66.6 143.3 28.4 16.8 16.8 −
                              23 1,943.3 286.7 209.3 66.6 142.7 28.0 17.3 17.3 −
                              30 1,956.8 286.7 211.7 66.5 145.2 27.2 17.5 17.5 −
         May                 7 1,983.2 286.7 209.6 66.5 143.1 28.8 16.8 16.8 −
                              14 2,062.9 286.7 215.0 69.7 145.3 35.2 16.4 16.4 −
                              21 2,070.0 286.7 211.7 69.6 142.1 29.8 19.3 19.3 −
                              28 2,088.5 286.7 212.3 69.5 142.8 33.7 18.1 18.1 −
         June                 4 2,098.5 286.7 213.0 69.4 143.6 28.7 17.8 17.8 −
                              11 2,107.1 286.7 213.7 69.4 144.3 28.6 17.0 17.0 −
                              18 2,124.7 286.7 213.7 69.4 144.4 27.9 16.5 16.5 −
                              25 2,154.2 286.7 213.0 69.3 143.6 28.3 16.3 16.3 −
2010 July                 2 3 2,049.8 3 352.1 3 232.6 3 74.1 3 158.6 3 31.3 16.9 16.9 −
                                9 2,004.7 352.1 234.2 74.0 160.2 30.8 17.5 17.5 −
                              16 1,987.0 352.1 234.1 74.0 160.1 30.5 19.7 19.7 −
                              23 1,993.6 352.0 235.6 74.0 161.6 29.8 18.1 18.1 −
                              30 2,001.7 352.0 236.3 74.1 162.2 29.5 17.9 17.9 −
         Aug                  6 1,964.9 352.0 236.1 74.1 162.0 30.4 17.6 17.6 −
                              13 1,953.1 352.0 234.4 74.0 160.4 30.5 17.0 17.0 −
                              20 1,956.1 352.0 234.0 73.9 160.1 30.0 18.4 18.4 −
                              27 1,957.9 352.0 235.4 73.8 161.6 29.4 18.4 18.4 −
         Sep                  3 1,963.2 352.0 237.7 73.7 163.9 28.0 17.0 17.0 −
                              10 1,973.3 352.0 236.7 73.5 163.3 28.2 17.8 17.8 −
                              17 1,970.5 351.9 236.5 74.0 162.5 28.2 17.5 17.5 −
                              24 1,971.4 351.9 236.3 73.9 162.4 27.7 17.3 17.3 −
         Oct                  1 3 1,865.9 3 334.4 3 219.6 3 70.1 3 149.5 3 24.9 17.6 17.6 −
                                8 1,868.0 334.4 219.9 70.0 149.9 24.3 18.3 18.3 −
                              15 1,876.9 334.4 219.9 70.0 149.9 24.2 17.2 17.2 −
                              22 1,878.0 334.4 219.8 70.0 149.8 23.8 17.9 17.9 −
                              29 1,895.7 334.4 220.8 69.9 151.0 23.7 17.8 17.8 −
         Nov                  5 1,886.4 334.4 220.3 69.8 150.4 23.7 19.0 19.0 −
 Deutsche Bundesbank
2008          Dec 3 612.9 3 68.2 3 31.0 3.3 3 27.7 63.3 0.3 0.3 −
2009          Jan 560.5 68.2 28.7 3.3 25.5 46.7 0.3 0.3 −
         Feb 547.5 68.2 29.0 3.3 25.7 45.3 0.3 0.3 −         Mar 
3 539.7 3 75.7 3 32.1 3.5 3 28.6 3 50.7 0.3 0.3 −
         Apr 540.5 75.7 32.7 3.5 29.2 42.0 0.3 0.3 −         May 555.9 75.7 32.3 4.7 27.6 37.5 0.3 0.3 −         June
3 628.3 3 73.0 31.7 4.5 27.2 3 30.8 0.3 0.3 −
         July 572.3 73.0 31.8 4.7 27.1 25.3 0.3 0.3 −         Aug 571.2 73.0 41.6 15.1 26.5 24.0 0.3 0.3 −         Sep 
3 577.7 3 74.9 3 41.9 16.3 3 25.6 3 21.6 0.3 0.3 −
         Oct 557.2 74.9 42.5 16.6 25.9 16.9 0.3 0.3 −         Nov 551.7 74.9 41.0 15.9 25.1 13.0 0.3 0.3 −         Dec 
3 588.2 3 83.9 41.6 16.0 25.6 4.4 0.3 0.3 −
2010          Jan 571.8 83.9 41.7 16.0 25.7 − 0.3 0.3 −         Feb 591.6 83.9 42.4 16.7 25.7 −−−−
         Mar 
3 608.6 3 90.2 3 44.7 3 17.2 3 27.5 −−−−
         Apr 615.5 90.2 44.8 17.2 27.6 −−−−
         May 673.4 90.2 45.5 17.9 27.6 0.1 − − −         June
3 713.7 3 110.7 3 49.9 3 19.0 3 30.9 0.2 − − −
         July 625.3 110.6 49.9 19.1 30.8 0.2 − − −         Aug 624.7 110.6 49.8 19.0 30.7 0.0 − − −         Sep 
3 623.2 3 105.1 3 45.7 3 18.2 3 27.5 −−−−
         Oct 619.1 105.1 45.5 18.1 27.4 −−−−
 
*The consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem comprises the statements of the national central banks of the euro area member states
financial statement of the European Central Bank (ECB) and the financial (NCBs). The balance sheet items for foreign currency, securities, gold
16*III Consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2010
III Consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem
 
 
 
 
 
Lending to euro area credit institutions related to monetary policy operations Securities of euro area residents
denominated in euro in euro
 Other
 claims on euro area
Longer- Fine-  credit Securities General    On
Main re- term re- tuning Structural Credits institutions held for government    reportingfinancing financing reverse reverse Marginal related denomi- monetary debt deno-    date/opera- opera- opera- opera- lending to margin nated in policy Other minated in Other    End of
Total tions tions tions tions facility calls euro Total purposes securities euro assets    month  
1 
Eurosystem 2
 
724.9 80.5 644.4 − − 0.1 0.0 26.4 336.7 39.6 297.1 36.1 257.9 2010 Mar                  5
722.8 78.4 644.3 − − 0.1 0.0 27.2 338.9 41.5 297.3 36.1 253.5                               12
723.4 79.0 644.3 − − 0.1 0.0 25.4 340.3 42.4 297.8 36.1 255.0                               19
725.4 81.1 644.3 − − 0.0 0.0 27.2 342.9 43.5 299.4 36.1 253.6                               26
740.0 78.3 661.7 − − 0.1 0.0 26.7 345.2 44.4 300.8 36.1 3 250.4          Apr                  1
730.9 71.5 659.3 − − 0.0 0.0 29.0 348.5 46.1 302.4 36.1 250.4                                 9
736.3 70.6 665.7 − − 0.0 0.0 31.7 351.0 47.2 303.8 36.1 243.1                               16
735.9 70.2 665.7 − − 0.0 0.0 32.7 352.1 48.5 303.6 36.1 245.0                               23
743.6 75.6 667.2 − − 0.8 0.0 32.7 354.7 50.2 304.5 35.6 247.0                               30
760.0 90.3 667.2 − − 2.4 0.0 33.9 360.2 51.6 308.5 35.6 251.7          May                  7
806.7 99.6 706.9 − − 0.2 0.0 36.7 377.3 68.7 308.6 35.6 253.4                               14
811.7 104.8 706.9 − − 0.0 0.0 39.9 387.1 79.8 307.3 35.6 248.2                               21
815.1 106.0 708.8 − − 0.3 0.0 40.4 398.2 90.0 308.2 35.6 248.3                               28
826.6 117.7 708.8 − − 0.0 0.0 37.6 400.7 96.2 304.5 35.6 251.9          June                  4
829.5 122.0 707.1 − − 0.4 0.0 40.5 406.5 103.7 302.7 35.6 249.1                               11
844.9 126.7 718.2 − − 0.0 0.0 39.4 410.4 109.6 300.8 35.6 249.8                               18
870.4 151.5 718.2 − − 0.6 0.0 42.2 414.4 115.1 299.4 35.6 247.4                               25
680.6 162.9 405.9 111.2 − 0.5 0.0 43.8 3 416.7 120.1 3 296.7 35.1 3 240.7 2010 July                  2
635.0 229.1 405.9 − − 0.0 0.0 43.0 418.0 120.9 297.1 35.0 239.0                                 9
619.4 195.7 423.7 − − 0.0 0.0 42.6 417.1 121.2 295.9 35.0 236.5                               16
625.2 201.3 423.7 − − 0.0 0.2 44.4 418.5 121.4 297.1 35.0 235.0                               23
632.5 190.0 442.0 − − 0.4 0.1 42.9 417.8 121.5 296.3 35.0 237.7                               30
597.1 154.8 442.0 − − 0.1 0.1 41.2 418.7 121.5 297.3 35.0 236.9          Aug                  6
585.8 153.7 431.8 − − 0.3 0.1 39.5 419.7 121.5 298.3 35.0 239.1                               13
587.4 155.2 431.8 − − 0.3 0.1 37.5 420.3 121.8 298.5 35.0 241.4                               20
590.5 150.3 438.7 − − 1.4 0.1 34.2 421.6 121.9 299.7 35.0 241.5                               27
591.8 153.1 438.7 − − 0.0 0.1 32.3 423.9 122.1 301.7 35.0 245.5          Sep                  3
592.2 153.7 437.5 − − 1.0 0.1 30.7 426.3 122.4 303.9 35.0 254.3                               10
589.1 151.6 437.5 − − − 0.1 30.0 428.3 122.7 305.7 35.0 253.9                               17
592.5 153.8 437.5 − − 1.2 0.1 27.6 429.3 122.8 306.5 35.0 253.7                               24
514.1 166.4 316.7 29.4 − 1.6 0.0 26.3 431.3 124.3 307.0 35.0 3 262.6          Oct                  1
514.2 197.0 316.7 − − 0.4 0.0 29.1 433.3 124.3 309.0 35.0 259.4                                 8
518.5 186.0 331.1 − − 1.4 0.0 29.9 434.9 124.3 310.5 35.0 263.0                               15
516.1 184.0 331.1 − − 0.9 0.0 30.7 435.6 124.3 311.3 35.0 264.7                               22
534.1 183.4 350.4 − − 0.3 0.0 30.2 437.3 124.3 313.0 35.0 262.3                               29
528.9 178.4 350.4 − − 0.1 0.0 28.4 438.7 125.0 313.6 35.0 258.1          Nov                  5
 Deutsche Bundesbank
277.7 75.3 201.6 − − 0.8 − 22. 0−−− 4 . 4 3 146.0 2008          Dec 
245.4 74.4 169.2 − − 1.8 − 3. 9−−− 4 . 4 162.9 2009          Jan 
219.4 75.4 143.4 − − 0.6 − 4. 4−−− 4 . 4 176.4          Feb 
186.7 71.6 114.6 − − 0.6 − 5. 0−−− 4 . 4 3 184.6          Mar 
194.6 83.6 110.6 − − 0.4 − 6. 0−−− 4 . 4 184.8          Apr 
225.0 121.5 103.4 − − 0.2 − 5.9 2.1 − 2.1 4.4 172.6          May
273.5 71.6 201.6 − − 0.3 − 6.5 4.4 − 4.4 4.4 3 203.8          June
231.8 48.8 182.9 − − 0.1 − 4.5 6.5 1.2 5.3 4.4 194.6          July220.9 45.9 175.0 − − 0.1 − 6.0 8.5 3.2 5.3 4.4 192.4          Aug 205.6 33.0 168.8 − − 3.8 − 6.8 10.6 5.3 5.3 4.4 211.6          Sep 
212.9 35.1 177.7 − − 0.1 − 6.8 11.6 6.4 5.3 4.4 186.8          Oct 
206.0 35.3 170.6 − − 0.0 − 6.9 12.9 7.6 5.3 4.4 192.3          Nov 223.6 53.6 170.0 − − 0.0 − 7.1 13.2 7.9 5.3 4.4 209.6          Dec 
210.3 41.7 168.5 − − 0.0 − 7.7 14.1 8.8 5.3 4.4 209.4 2010          Jan 
209.1 51.6 157.3 − − 0.1 − 7.2 15.6 10.3 5.3 4.4 228.9          Feb 
206.1 40.9 164.7 − − 0.6 − 7.3 17.0 11.8 5.3 4.4 239.0          Mar 
206.1 41.6 164.5 − − 0.0 − 7.8 18.1 12.9 5.3 4.4 244.2          Apr 
210.2 43.3 166.8 − − 0.1 − 8.4 28.4 23.1 5.3 4.4 286.3          May225.6 58.6 167.0 − − 0.0 − 8.8 33.4 28.1 5.3 4.4 280.8          June
115.0 61.7 53.3 − − 0.0 − 9.3 33.7 28.4 5.3 4.4 302.3          July
103.8 52.9 50.3 − − 0.6 − 8.7 33.7 28.4 5.3 4.4 313.8          Aug 
85.3 56.4 24.0 4.1 − 0.8 − 8.9 33.9 28.6 5.3 4.4
3 339.9          Sep 
103.0 69.1 33.8 − − 0.2 − 10.6 34.0 28.7 5.3 4.4 316.5          Oct 
 
and financial instruments are valued at market rates at the end of the quar- for the Bundesbank: end-of month financial statement. — 2Source: ECB. —
ter.— 1For the Eurosystem: financial statements for specific weekly dates; 3 Changes are due mainly to revalutions at the end of the quarter. 
17*III Consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
E U R O S Y S T E M
Monthly Report
November 2010
III Consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem
 
2 Liabilities *
 
 
€ billion
Liabilities to euro area credit institutions related to Liabilities to
monetary policy operations denominated in euro other euro area residents
denominated in euro
 
Other
Current liabilities
accounts to euro-
On (covering Fine- area creditreporting the tuning Deposits institutions Debtdate/ Banknotes minimum Fixed- reverse deno- certifi- General related to
End of Total in circu- reserve Deposit term opera- margin minated cates govern- Othermonth  
1 liabilities lation  2 Total system) facility deposits tions calls in euro issued Total ment liabilities
 Eurosystem 4
 
2010 Mar                  5 1,890.3 788.4 423.7 164.0 259.8 − − 0.0 0.4 − 109.5 101.3 8.2
                              12 1,886.7 788.1 423.0 262.6 160.3 − − 0.0 2.4 − 112.9 104.9 8.1
                              19 1,889.7 787.7 418.2 223.1 195.1 − − 0.0 0.6 − 121.6 113.5 8.1
                              26 1,894.9 791.3 413.8 199.9 213.9 − − 0.0 0.8 − 128.2 120.2 8.0
         Apr                  1 5 1,942.5 801.7 421.8 179.2 242.7 − − 0.0 0.7 − 126.3 118.2 8.2
                                9 1,936.7 797.5 427.2 177.9 249.3 − − 0.0 0.6 − 120.4 112.4 8.1
                              16 1,940.0 794.5 430.9 259.7 171.1 − − 0.0 0.5 − 125.6 117.5 8.1
                              23 1,943.3 792.8 421.5 204.1 217.4 − − − 0.7 − 137.8 129.9 7.9
                              30 1,956.8 798.1 449.1 197.5 251.6 − − − 0.5 − 113.1 104.9 8.1
         May                 7 1,983.2 802.6 454.2 172.2 282.0 − − 0.0 0.6 − 107.9 98.6 9.3
                              14 2,062.9 805.0 527.4 301.8 225.6 − − 0.0 0.6 − 117.2 109.2 8.1
                              21 2,070.0 804.6 516.2 246.2 253.5 16.5 − 0.0 0.4 − 126.5 118.3 8.2
                              28 2,088.5 804.7 526.3 183.7 316.2 26.5 − 0.0 0.5 − 145.7 137.7 8.0
         June                 4 2,098.5 809.4 557.3 171.3 350.9 35.0 − 0.0 0.6 − 125.4 117.2 8.2
                              11 2,107.1 809.7 562.6 137.8 384.3 40.5 − 0.0 0.7 − 130.6 122.5 8.1
                              18 2,124.7 808.9 574.9 295.7 232.0 47.0 − 0.2 1.0 − 139.6 131.0 8.5
                              25 2,154.2 809.8 580.6 245.1 284.4 51.0 − 0.1 1.0 − 163.5 155.4 8.1
2010 July                 2 5 2,049.8 816.5 424.0 160.4 231.7 31.9 − 0.1 0.8 − 123.8 115.7 8.1
                                9 2,004.7 818.8 391.4 126.8 205.5 59.0 − 0.1 0.6 − 108.9 100.8 8.1
                              16 1,987.0 819.0 384.4 265.9 58.6 60.0 − 0.0 0.6 − 100.0 91.9 8.1
                              23 1,993.6 817.5 366.6 245.3 61.3 60.0 − 0.0 1.4 − 124.8 116.9 7.9
                              30 2,001.7 820.6 377.3 195.8 120.9 60.5 − 0.1 1.8 − 118.1 110.8 7.3
         Aug                  6 1,964.9 822.6 376.1 154.2 161.3 60.5 − 0.1 0.8 − 83.1 76.0 7.1
                              13 1,953.1 819.9 371.7 255.5 55.6 60.5 − 0.1 1.2 − 80.1 73.1 7.0
                              20 1,956.1 815.7 372.4 237.6 74.2 60.5 − 0.2 2.0 − 85.8 79.0 6.9
                              27 1,957.9 813.4 355.2 191.9 102.7 60.5 − 0.1 1.6 − 108.0 101.1 6.8
         Sep                  3 1,963.2 816.8 359.8 176.3 122.4 61.0 − 0.1 1.5 − 103.8 97.0 6.8
                              10 1,973.3 816.0 371.5 261.4 49.1 61.0 − 0.1 1.7 − 99.8 92.9 6.8
                              17 1,970.5 814.2 375.0 252.3 61.6 61.0 − 0.1 1.6 − 96.5 89.4 7.1
                              24 1,971.4 812.0 366.7 221.0 84.1 61.5 − 0.1 1.5 − 111.5 104.6 6.9
         Oct                  1 5 1,865.9 814.8 301.3 190.3 49.5 61.5 − 0.1 1.3 − 104.9 98.1 6.8
                                8 1,868.0 815.9 309.7 151.7 94.4 63.5 − 0.1 1.2 − 99.2 93.2 5.9
                              15 1,876.9 814.0 328.0 228.7 35.8 63.5 − 0.1 0.7 − 92.2 86.0 6.2
                              22 1,878.0 811.2 319.7 230.5 25.7 63.5 − 0.1 0.6 − 101.5 95.2 6.3
                              29 1,895.7 815.0 319.1 205.2 50.3 63.5 − 0.0 1.4 − 116.2 109.8 6.4
         Nov                  5 1,886.4 816.3 335.3 190.0 81.7 63.5 − 0.0 3.0 − 87.1 80.9 6.2
 Deutsche Bundesbank
2008          Dec 5 612.9 206.6 166.9 100.7 66.3 − − − − − 1.1 0.2 0.9
2009          Jan 560.5 184.7 127.2 49.3 77.8 − − − − − 2.6 2.2 0.5
         Feb 547.5 185.2 106.6 54.2 52.4 − − − − − 12.5 11.9 0.6
         Mar 5 539.7 186.5 100.0 53.1 46.9 − − − − − 15.7 15.4 0.3
         Apr 540.5 189.5 80.0 48.3 31.7 − − − − − 30.8 30.2 0.6
         May 555.9 190.0 87.2 71.1 16.1 − − − − − 36.8 36.2 0.5
         June 5 628.3 190.6 176.7 75.1 101.5 − − − − − 23.7 23.4 0.4
         July 572.3 192.9 120.7 44.5 76.2 − − − − − 23.9 23.5 0.4
         Aug 571.2 191.6 107.4 46.2 61.2 − − − − − 24.0 23.5 0.4
         Sep 5 577.7 191.5 109.7 76.1 33.6 − − − − − 24.0 23.6 0.4
         Oct 557.2 192.6 86.5 50.7 35.9 − − − − − 24.0 23.6 0.4
         Nov 551.7 193.7 87.0 59.0 28.0 − − − − − 16.0 15.6 0.4
         Dec 5 588.2 201.3 112.2 76.7 35.5 − − − − − 10.4 10.0 0.4
2010          Jan 571.8 195.6 106.3 60.9 45.4 − − − − − 4.1 3.7 0.4
         Feb 591.6 195.8 127.6 55.2 72.3 − − − − − 0.7 0.3 0.4
         Mar 5 608.6 199.0 135.7 82.3 53.4 − − − − − 0.6 0.2 0.4
         Apr 615.5 199.2 139.1 58.6 80.5 − − − − − 0.7 0.2 0.5
         May 673.4 201.0 193.0 52.8 123.9 16.2 − − − − 0.9 0.3 0.6
         June 5 713.7 202.7 208.8 108.6 82.9 17.3 − − − − 0.6 0.1 0.4
         July 625.3 204.8 115.9 61.8 34.7 19.4 − − − − 1.0 0.5 0.5
         Aug 624.7 203.2 115.3 62.4 29.8 23.1 − − − − 1.0 0.6 0.4
         Sep 5 623.2 203.0 121.3 64.9 28.2 28.2 − − − − 1.0 0.6 0.4
         Oct 619.1 203.5 114.4 62.1 20.8 31.4 − − − − 0.9 0.2 0.7
 
*The consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem comprises the the Bundesbank: end-of-month financial statements. — 2According to the
financial statement of the European Central Bank (ECB) and the financial accounting regime chosen by the Eurosystem on the issue of euro bank-
statements of the national central banks of the euro area member states notes, a share of 8% of the total value of the euro banknotes in circulation(NCBs). The balance sheet items for foreign currency, securities, gold and is allocated to the ECB on a monthly basis. The counterpart of this
financial instruments are valued at market rates at the end of the quar- adjustment is disclosed as an “Intra-Eurosystem liability related to euro
ter. — 1For Eurosystem: financial statements for specific weekly dates; for
18*III Consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2010
III Consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem
 
 
 
 
 
Liabilities to non-euro area
residents denominated in
foreign currency
Intra-  Eurosystem  
Liabilities Liabilities Liabilities Counterpart liability     Onto non-euro to euro area Deposits, arising of special related to     reportingarea residents residents balances from the drawing euro  Capital    date/denominated in foreign and other rights allocated Other banknote Revaluation and    End of credit facility
in euro currency Total liabilities under ERM II by the IMF issue  
2 accounts reserves    month  1 liabilities  3 
Eurosystem 4
 
39.8 1.8 11.4 11.4 − 51.2 168.8 − 220.2 75.0 2010 Mar                  5
38.8 1.3 12.1 12.1 − 51.2 161.6 − 220.2 75.0                               12
37.9 1.6 12.6 12.6 − 51.2 163.1 − 220.2 75.0                               19
37.6 1.6 12.9 12.9 − 51.2 160.6 − 220.2 76.4                               26
37.2 1.4 5 14.5 5 14.5 − 5 53.0 5 160.2 − 5 249.2 76.4          Apr                  1
36.5 0.9 13.0 13.0 − 53.0 161.6 − 249.2 76.7                                 9
36.4 1.1 13.4 13.4 − 53.0 158.8 − 249.2 76.7                               16
36.2 1.0 13.0 13.0 − 53.0 161.4 − 249.2 76.7                               23
40.1 1.1 14.5 14.5 − 53.0 161.4 − 249.2 76.7                               30
56.7 2.8 12.7 12.7 − 53.0 167.0 − 249.2 76.7          May                  7
45.6 3.4 13.4 13.4 − 53.0 171.4 − 249.2 76.7                               14
59.2 2.4 12.6 12.6 − 53.0 169.2 − 249.2 76.7                               21
48.5 2.1 13.1 13.1 − 53.0 167.9 − 249.2 77.3                               28
40.6 2.2 13.3 13.3 − 53.0 170.2 − 249.2 77.3          June                  4
41.1 1.1 15.4 15.4 − 53.0 165.6 − 249.2 77.9                               11
41.8 1.1 14.7 14.7 − 53.0 162.6 − 249.2 77.9                               18
41.4 1.0 14.6 14.6 − 53.0 162.2 − 249.2 77.9                               25
41.9 0.9 5 15.5 5 15.5 − 5 56.7 5 162.6 − 5 328.8 78.2 2010 July                  2
42.2 0.9 16.3 16.3 − 56.7 161.8 − 328.8 78.2                                 9
42.8 0.9 15.7 15.7 − 56.7 159.8 − 328.8 78.2                               16
42.2 0.9 16.6 16.6 − 56.7 159.8 − 328.8 78.2                               23
42.2 1.3 16.1 16.1 − 56.7 160.5 − 328.8 78.2                               30
41.4 1.0 17.0 17.0 − 56.7 159.2 − 328.8 78.2          Aug                  6
40.6 1.0 15.9 15.9 − 56.7 159.0 − 328.8 78.2                               13
41.0 1.1 15.1 15.1 − 56.7 159.4 − 328.8 78.2                               20
39.2 1.0 16.0 16.0 − 56.7 159.8 − 328.8 78.2                               27
38.9 1.0 16.9 16.9 − 56.7 161.0 − 328.8 78.2          Sep                  3
39.7 1.0 16.1 16.1 − 56.7 163.8 − 328.8 78.2                               10
40.1 1.0 15.4 15.4 − 56.7 163.0 − 328.8 78.2                               17
40.4 2.1 13.8 13.8 − 56.7 159.6 − 328.8 78.2                               24
41.9 1.1 5 13.1 5 13.1 − 5 53.7 5 158.8 − 5 296.7 78.2          Oct                  1
42.6 1.6 12.4 12.4 − 53.7 156.9 − 296.7 78.2                                 8
42.4 0.9 12.8 12.8 − 53.7 157.3 − 296.7 78.2                               15
41.5 2.1 10.9 10.9 − 53.7 161.8 − 296.7 78.2                               22
42.0 0.9 12.9 12.9 − 53.7 159.6 − 296.7 78.2                               29
41.9 1.4 11.7 11.7 − 53.7 161.1 − 296.7 78.2          Nov                  5
 Deutsche Bundesbank
9.2 18.4 2.5 2.5 − 1.3 16.9 121.8 5 63.1 5.0 2008          Dec 
6.9 13.4 0.1 0.1 − 1.3 17.0 139.2 63.1 5.0 2009          Jan 
7.5 7.6 0.2 0.2 − 1.3 17.7 140.7 63.1 5.0          Feb 
7 . 5 0 . 0−−− 1 . 4 5 11.6 140.4 5 71.5 5.0          Mar 
8.3 0.0 0.2 0.2 − 1.4 12.1 141.8 71.5 5.0          Apr 
8.7 0.1 0.5 0.5 − 1.4 12.6 142.2 71.5 5.0          May
9.3 0.0 0.8 0.8 − 1.3 5 12.4 141.9 5 66.6 5.0          June
6.7 0.0 1.2 1.2 − 1.3 12.2 141.8 66.6 5.0          July
8.1 0.0 0.9 0.9 − 11.9 12.4 143.4 66.6 5.0          Aug 
8.6 0.0 0.1 0.1 − 13.0 5 13.2 144.9 5 67.6 5.0          Sep 
8.5 0.0 0.5 0.5 − 13.0 12.9 146.5 67.6 5.0          Oct 
9.3 0.0 0.0 0.0 − 13.0 13.2 146.8 67.6 5.0          Nov 
9 . 1 0 . 0−−− 13.1 13.5 146.8 5 76.8 5.0          Dec 
9.8 0.0 0.2 0.2 − 13.1 13.2 147.6 76.8 5.0 2010          Jan 
9.3 0.0 0.3 0.3 − 13.1 13.4 149.6 76.8 5.0          Feb 9.3 0.0 0.1 0.1 − 13.6 10.3 150.2
5 84.8 5.0          Mar 
11.5 0.0 0.3 0.3 − 13.6 10.2 151.1 84.8 5.0          Apr 
12.8 0.0 0.2 0.2 − 13.6 10.4 151.7 84.8 5.0          May
11.0 0.0 0.2 0.2 − 5 14.5 5 11.3 150.9 5 108.8 5.0          June
11.2 0.0 0.3 0.3 − 14.5 12.5 151.2 108.8 5.0          July
10.5 0.0 0.5 0.5 − 14.5 12.8 153.2 108.8 5.0          Aug 
10.8 0.0 0.1 0.1 − 5 13.7 5 12.4 155.8 5 99.9 5.0          Sep 
12.6 0.0 0.1 0.1 − 13.7 12.3 156.7 99.9 5.0          Oct 
 
banknote issue“. The remaining 92 % of the value of the euro banknote in the aforementioned accounting regime and the value of euro banknotes
circulation is also allocated to the NCBs on a monthly basis, and each NCB put into circulation is also disclosed as an “Intra-Eurosystem claim/ liabil ity
shows in its balance sheet the share of the euro banknotes issued which related to banknote issue“. — 3For the Deutsche Bundesbank: including
corresponds to its paid-up share in the ECB’s capital. The difference DM banknotes still in circulation. — 4Source: ECB. — 5Changes are due
between the value of the euro banknotes allocated to the NCB according to mainly to revaluations at the end of the quarter. 
19*III Consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
E U R O S Y S T E M
Monthly Report
November 2010
IV Banks
 
1 Assets and liabilities of monetary financial institutions (excluding the Bundesbank) in Germany *
  Assets
 
 
Lending to banks (MFIs) in the euro area Lending to non-banks (non-MFIs) in the
to banks in the home country to banks in other member states to non-banks in the home country
Enterprises and house-
holds
Secur- Secur-
Balance ities ities
sheet Cash issued issued
Period total in hand Total Total Loans by banks Total Loans by banks Total Total Total Loans
 End of year or month
 
2001 6,303.1 14.6 2,069.7 1,775.5 1,140.6 634.9 294.2 219.8 74.4 3,317.1 3,084.9 2,497.1 2,235.7
2002 6,394.2 17.9 2,118.0 1,769.1 1,164.3 604.9 348.9 271.7 77.2 3,340.2 3,092.2 2,505.8 2,240.8
2003 6,432.0 17.3 2,111.5 1,732.0 1,116.8 615.3 379.5 287.7 91.8 3,333.2 3,083.1 2,497.4 2,241.2
2004 6,617.4 15.1 2,174.3 1,750.2 1,122.9 627.3 424.2 306.3 117.9 3,358.7 3,083.4 2,479.7 2,223.8
2005 6,859.4 15.3 2,276.0 1,762.5 1,148.4 614.1 513.5 356.3 157.2 3,407.6 3,085.2 2,504.6 2,226.3
2006 7,154.4 16.4 2,314.4 1,718.6 1,138.6 580.0 595.8 376.8 219.0 3,462.1 3,085.5 2,536.1 2,241.92007 7,592.4 17.8 2,523.4 1,847.9 1,290.4 557.5 675.4 421.6 253.8 3,487.3 3,061.8 2,556.0 2,288.82008 7,892.7 17.8 2,681.8 1,990.2 1,404.3 585.8 691.6 452.9 238.8 3,638.2 3,163.0 2,686.9 2,357.32009 7,436.1 17.2 2,480.5 1,813.2 1,218.4 594.8 667.3 449.5 217.8 3,638.3 3,187.9 2,692.9 2,357.5
2008          Dec 7,892.7 17.8 2,681.8 1,990.2 1,404.3 585.8 691.6 452.9 238.8 3,638.2 3,163.0 2,686.9 2,357.32009          Jan 7,906.4 14.0 2,676.9 1,975.0 1,382.5 592.5 701.9 465.2 236.7 3,677.6 3,189.7 2,706.2 2,375.7
         Feb 7,846.4 13.9 2,649.2 1,950.8 1,357.1 593.7 698.4 466.0 232.4 3,667.8 3,183.1 2,702.3 2,368.3         Mar 7,777.1 13.9 2,611.1 1,923.6 1,312.9 610.7 687.4 458.5 228.9 3,669.6 3,193.6 2,716.4 2,383.4
         Apr 7,802.2 15.3 2,584.9 1,902.2 1,295.0 607.1 682.7 454.9 227.8 3,690.1 3,216.1 2,730.5 2,385.5
         May 7,685.1 15.8 2,537.1 1,869.2 1,263.7 605.5 667.9 444.2 223.7 3,680.5 3,198.6 2,714.9 2,384.7         June 7,710.6 15.0 2,601.5 1,943.5 1,333.1 610.4 658.0 436.9 221.2 3,694.3 3,211.7 2,725.6 2,388.3
         July 7,619.1 14.0 2,558.6 1,890.7 1,277.0 613.7 667.8 448.3 219.5 3,685.1 3,205.7 2,706.7 2,372.4
         Aug 7,590.2 14.0 2,563.6 1,886.5 1,270.3 616.2 677.2 458.7 218.4 3,655.8 3,183.7 2,691.4 2,361.6         Sep 7,519.5 13.9 2,512.5 1,862.6 1,253.1 609.6 649.9 432.3 217.6 3,675.2 3,199.8 2,705.4 2,375.4
         Oct 7,498.4 14.2 2,496.7 1,824.6 1,219.2 605.4 672.2 456.2 216.0 3,673.1 3,202.2 2,692.0 2,365.5
         Nov 7,493.5 13.8 2,496.0 1,826.7 1,224.7 602.0 669.4 448.7 220.6 3,671.2 3,201.7 2,700.0 2,372.5         Dec 7,436.1 17.2 2,480.5 1,813.2 1,218.4 594.8 667.3 449.5 217.8 3,638.3 3,187.9 2,692.9 2,357.5
2010          Jan 7,452.7 14.3 2,465.1 1,806.6 1,220.4 586.2 658.5 440.7 217.8 3,655.8 3,198.2 2,695.9 2,354.2
         Feb 7,449.5 14.2 2,491.6 1,830.8 1,250.2 580.5 660.8 444.5 216.3 3,645.2 3,184.7 2,682.5 2,350.8         Mar 7,454.6 14.4 2,489.7 1,832.0 1,250.3 581.7 657.7 440.2 217.5 3,633.9 3,180.8 2,673.6 2,347.0
         Apr 7,570.0 14.0 2,507.1 1,843.7 1,263.9 579.8 663.5 448.2 215.3 3,688.9 3,222.8 2,711.0 2,360.2
         May 7,681.0 14.7 2,593.2 1,897.6 1,326.4 571.2 695.6 480.6 215.0 3,650.9 3,211.1 2,688.9 2,364.6         June 7,641.3 14.2 2,583.7 1,899.5 1,341.3 558.2 684.2 464.9 219.3 3,664.0 3,228.2 2,685.0 2,368.0
         July 7,438.3 14.7 2,457.9 1,777.3 1,234.5 542.8 680.6 473.5 207.1 3,654.1 3,219.4 2,680.5 2,364.5
         Aug 7,517.6 14.5 2,489.7 1,792.7 1,252.0 540.6 697.1 488.6 208.4 3,667.0 3,229.6 2,688.4 2,373.2         Sep 7,386.5 14.8 2,447.4 1,780.4 1,245.4 535.0 667.1 460.9 206.1 3,642.5 3,208.9 2,665.8 2,353.8
 Changes 1
2002 165.7 3.3 63.6 6.5 23.7 − 17.1 57.1 51.9 5.2 34.1 15.7 16.5 10.4
2003 90.7 − 0.6 − 12.2 − 44.1 − 42.6 − 1.5 31.9 18.8 13.1 30.0 23.6 22.8 26.42004 209.7 − 2.1 71.6 24.0 10.9 13.1 47.6 17.1 30.5 44.0 17.4 − 0.4 − 1.3
2005 191.4 0.1 96.5 10.3 22.8 − 12.5 86.2 48.1 38.0 59.7 14.1 37.1 15.5
2006 353.9 1.1 81.2 0.5 28.0 − 27.6 80.8 19.5 61.3 55.9 1.5 32.5 13.2
2007 515.3 1.5 215.6 135.5 156.2 − 20.8 80.1 44.1 36.0 54.1 − 1.0 38.6 53.2
2008 314.0 − 0.1 184.4 164.2 127.3 36.9 20.2 34.6 − 14.4 140.2 102.5 130.8 65.42009 −454.8 − 0.5 −189.5 −166.4 −182.1 15.8 − 23.2 − 2.5 − 20.7 17.3 38.2 16.9 6.5
2009          Jan − 43.6 − 3.8 − 14.8 − 23.0 − 29.4 6.4 8.2 10.0 − 1.8 36.2 27.8 20.8 16.5
         Feb − 76.0 − 0.1 − 28.3 − 25.2 − 26.4 1.2 − 3.1 0.6 − 3.7 − 9.1 − 5.2 − 2.5 − 6.7         Mar − 51.3 0.1 − 31.5 − 22.4 − 39.6 17.2 − 9.1 − 5.9 − 3.2 9.2 13.9 17.4 18.4
         Apr 19.9 1.4 − 27.3 − 21.9 − 18.3 − 3.6 − 5.4 − 3.9 − 1.6 20.1 22.4 13.9 2.2
         May − 75.1 0.5 − 32.8 − 19.4 − 24.0 4.6 − 13.4 − 9.3 − 4.1 − 3.3 − 13.7 − 11.9 2.1         June 25.3 − 0.8 64.3 74.4 69.5 4.9 − 10.1 − 7.2 − 2.9 15.8 14.8 12.4 4.8
         July − 93.3 − 1.1 − 42.9 − 52.7 − 56.1 3.3 9.8 11.4 − 1.6 − 8.5 − 5.2 − 18.1 − 15.1
         Aug − 9.7 0.0 6.0 − 3.5 − 6.0 2.5 9.5 10.6 − 1.1 − 27.5 − 20.9 − 14.3 − 9.8         Sep − 57.5 − 0.0 − 49.6 − 23.0 − 16.5 − 6.5 − 26.6 − 25.9 − 0.7 22.3 17.5 15.4 15.0
         Oct − 16.3 0.3 − 15.2 − 37.5 − 33.4 − 4.2 22.4 24.1 − 1.7 − 0.1 3.5 − 12.4 − 8.6
         Nov 2.5 − 0.4 0.4 2.9 6.1 − 3.1 − 2.6 − 7.2 4.6 − 0.4 0.2 6.1 5.1         Dec − 79.7 3.4 − 17.7 − 14.9 − 8.0 − 6.9 − 2.8 0.2 − 3.1 − 37.4 − 16.8 − 9.9 − 17.4
2010          Jan − 8.8 − 2.9 − 17.4 − 8.1 0.8 − 8.9 − 9.3 − 9.4 0.1 16.6 11.3 3.9 − 1.7
         Feb − 7.0 − 0.2 25.8 24.0 29.6 − 5.6 1.8 3.4 − 1.7 − 12.8 − 14.6 − 14.4 − 4.4         Mar 4.9 0.3 0.5 2.6 − 0.3 2.9 − 2.1 − 4.4 2.3 − 2.5 1.2 − 4.5 − 3.2
         Apr 107.9 − 0.5 16.4 11.0 13.1 − 2.1 5.4 7.7 − 2.3 54.7 42.4 37.9 13.2
         May 63.7 0.7 80.7 50.4 59.5 − 9.1 30.4 30.9 − 0.6 − 45.7 − 15.4 − 25.6 1.1         June − 50.5 − 0.6 − 11.2 0.7 13.8 − 13.1 − 11.9 − 16.1 4.2 11.1 15.6 − 5.3 2.0
         July −166.0 0.6 −118.1 −116.0 −101.0 − 15.0 − 2.1 9.9 − 11.9 − 3.2 − 4.5 − 0.5 0.4
         Aug 60.5 − 0.3 29.1 13.5 15.9 − 2.4 15.6 14.4 1.1 8.7 7.3 5.3 6.2         Sep −131.1 0.4 − 42.1 − 12.3 − 6.7 − 5.7 − 29.8 − 27.5 − 2.3 − 24.0 − 20.2 − 22.2 − 18.9
*This table serves to supplement the “Overall monetary survey“ in section the figures reported by banks (including building and loan associations) −
II. Unlike the other tables in section IV, this table includes − in addition to data from money market funds. — 1Statistical breaks have been eliminated
20*IV Banks

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2010
IV Banks
 
 
 
 
 
euro area Claims on
non-euro-area
to non-banks in other member states residents
 General Enterprises and General
 government households government
Secur- Secur- of which Secur- of which Other
ities Total Loans ities  2 Total Total Loans Total Loans ities Total Loans assets   Period
End of year or month
 
261.3 587.8 468.7 119.1 232.3 111.3 53.7 121.0 26.2 94.8 727.3 572.0 174.3 2001
265.0 586.4 448.5 137.9 248.0 125.0 63.6 123.0 25.5 97.5 738.1 589.2 179.9 2002256.2 585.6 439.6 146.1 250.2 133.5 62.7 116.6 25.9 90.7 806.4 645.6 163.6 2003255.9 603.8 423.0 180.8 275.3 140.6 61.9 134.7 25.7 109.0 897.8 730.4 171.4 2004
278.2 580.7 408.7 171.9 322.4 169.1 65.0 153.3 30.7 122.6 993.8 796.8 166.7 2005
294.1 549.5 390.2 159.2 376.6 228.1 85.2 148.5 26.1 122.4 1,172.7 936.2 188.8 2006267.3 505.8 360.7 145.0 425.5 294.6 124.9 130.9 26.0 104.9 1,339.5 1,026.9 224.4 2007329.6 476.1 342.8 133.4 475.1 348.1 172.1 127.0 27.6 99.4 1,279.2 1,008.6 275.7 2008335.4 495.0 335.1 160.0 450.4 322.2 162.9 128.2 23.5 104.7 1,062.6 821.1 237.5 2009
329.6 476.1 342.8 133.4 475.1 348.1 172.1 127.0 27.6 99.4 1,279.2 1,008.6 275.7 2008          Dec 
330.5 483.5 344.3 139.2 487.9 359.7 182.0 128.3 26.1 102.1 1,256.5 991.4 281.4 2009          Jan 
334.1 480.8 342.4 138.3 484.7 356.1 175.8 128.5 25.9 102.7 1,233.9 974.1 281.6          Feb 
333.0 477.1 338.1 139.0 476.0 348.8 172.5 127.2 25.5 101.7 1,169.9 916.9 312.7          Mar 
345.0 485.6 340.5 145.1 474.1 348.6 171.9 125.5 24.8 100.7 1,213.3 961.0 298.7          Apr 
330.1 483.7 336.6 147.0 481.9 353.8 172.1 128.1 24.4 103.7 1,184.7 933.9 267.1          May337.3 486.1 336.5 149.7 482.5 357.3 178.2 125.2 22.7 102.5 1,165.0 912.3 234.8          June
334.3 499.0 348.5 150.5 479.4 352.3 173.5 127.1 23.6 103.5 1,132.8 882.1 228.8          July
329.8 492.4 342.9 149.5 472.1 347.1 170.4 124.9 23.7 101.2 1,107.4 856.8 249.5          Aug 330.0 494.3 340.0 154.3 475.4 349.0 172.6 126.4 23.6 102.8 1,069.0 822.5 248.8          Sep 
326.5 510.2 351.7 158.5 470.9 341.3 166.5 129.6 23.7 105.9 1,063.7 822.7 250.7          Oct 
327.5 501.7 340.9 160.8 469.5 341.0 165.1 128.4 23.5 105.0 1,057.5 818.6 255.0          Nov 335.4 495.0 335.1 160.0 450.4 322.2 162.9 128.2 23.5 104.7 1,062.6 821.1 237.5          Dec 
341.7 502.3 338.0 164.4 457.5 325.5 161.9 132.1 23.7 108.3 1,081.5 838.8 236.0 2010          Jan 
331.7 502.2 334.8 167.4 460.5 325.7 162.9 134.8 23.7 111.1 1,072.7 832.8 225.9          Feb 
326.6 507.3 335.5 171.8 453.1 319.6 162.7 133.5 22.3 111.2 1,073.9 833.9 242.6          Mar 
350.8 511.8 337.7 174.1 466.1 332.9 175.7 133.1 22.0 111.2 1,120.2 879.4 239.8          Apr 
324.3 522.2 343.8 178.4 439.8 307.7 175.0 132.1 26.4 105.7 1,167.0 923.7 255.2          May317.0 543.2 349.1 194.1 435.8 303.1 172.8 132.7 24.2 108.5 1,111.1 865.0 268.4          June
316.0 538.9 344.7 194.2 434.7 299.9 173.2 134.8 23.9 110.9 1,048.9 810.6 262.7          July
315.2 541.2 344.9 196.3 437.4 303.0 173.4 134.4 23.8 110.5 1,073.1 834.1 273.3          Aug 312.0 543.1 346.6 196.5 433.6 294.4 166.4 139.2 25.7 113.5 1,020.8 787.3 260.9          Sep 
Changes 1
6.2 − 0.8 − 20.2 19.4 18.3 15.9 12.0 2.4 − 0.6 3.0 65.7 64.1 − 0.4 2002
− 3.6 0.8 − 8.7 9.6 6.4 13.1 2.6 − 6.8 − 0.8 − 6.0 115.4 97.7 − 42.0 2003
0.9 17.8 − 17.0 34.9 26.6 8.2 3.1 18.4 0.0 18.4 111.0 100.2 − 14.7 2004
21.7 − 23.0 − 14.3 − 8.6 45.5 27.4 2.2 18.2 4.6 13.5 57.2 31.3 − 22.2 2005
19.3 − 31.0 − 18.6 − 12.4 54.5 59.6 20.9 − 5.2 − 1.3 − 3.8 205.8 165.7 9.8 2006
− 14.6 − 39.6 − 29.3 − 10.3 55.1 73.7 41.5 − 18.6 0.0 − 18.6 223.0 136.7 21.1 2007
65.4 − 28.3 − 16.9 − 11.5 37.7 42.2 40.3 − 4.5 1.6 − 6.1 − 40.1 − 7.5 29.7 2008
10.5 21.3 − 5.1 26.4 − 20.9 − 21.0 − 7.1 0.0 − 3.9 3.9 −182.2 −162.2 − 99.8 2009
4.4 7.0 1.3 5.6 8.3 8.8 6.1 − 0.5 − 1.7 1.2 − 52.0 − 48.0 − 9.1 2009          Jan 
4.2 − 2.7 − 1.8 − 0.9 − 3.9 − 4.2 − 6.7 0.3 − 0.3 0.5 − 24.8 − 20.7 − 13.7          Feb 
− 1.0 − 3.5 − 4.2 0.7 − 4.7 − 3.6 − 1.1 − 1.1 − 0.2 − 0.9 − 38.3 − 35.2 9.3          Mar 
11.7 8.5 2.4 6.1 − 2.3 − 0.6 − 0.8 − 1.7 − 0.5 − 1.2 40.2 41.5 − 14.5          Apr 
− 14.0 − 1.8 − 3.8 2.0 10.5 7.7 2.2 2.7 − 0.3 3.1 − 7.0 − 7.5 − 32.6          May
7.5 2.5 − 0.2 2.6 1.0 3.7 6.3 − 2.7 − 1.7 − 1.1 − 19.1 − 21.2 − 35.0          June
− 3.0 12.9 12.0 0.9 − 3.3 − 5.2 − 4.6 1.9 0.9 1.0 − 31.6 − 29.5 − 9.1          July
− 4.4 − 6.7 − 5.6 − 1.0 − 6.6 − 4.5 − 2.6 − 2.1 0.1 − 2.2 − 9.6 − 9.8 21.5          Aug 
0.5 2.0 − 2.8 4.9 4.8 3.2 3.2 1.6 − 0.0 1.6 − 28.4 − 25.3 − 1.8          Sep 
− 3.8 15.9 11.7 4.2 − 3.6 − 6.8 − 5.5 3.2 0.0 3.1 − 1.8 3.2 0.5          Oct 
1.0 − 5.9 − 8.2 2.3 − 0.5 0.5 − 0.9 − 1.1 − 0.1 − 0.9 − 0.7 0.9 3.6          Nov 7.5 − 6.9 − 5.9 − 1.0 − 20.6 − 20.1 − 2.9 − 0.4 − 0.1 − 0.4 − 9.0 − 10.7 − 18.9          Dec 
5.6 7.3 2.8 4.5 5.3 1.5 − 1.0 3.8 0.2 3.6 6.1 6.3 − 11.2 2010          Jan 
− 10.0 − 0.2 − 3.2 3.0 1.8 − 0.9 0.3 2.7 − 0.0 2.7 − 17.1 − 13.7 − 2.7          Feb 
− 1.3 5.7 0.7 5.0 − 3.7 − 4.2 − 0.4 0.5 − 1.4 2.0 3.1 − 1.2 3.7          Mar 
24.7 4.5 2.2 2.3 12.3 12.7 12.7 − 0.4 − 0.4 0.0 40.7 40.7 − 3.4          Apr 
− 26.7 10.2 6.0 4.2 − 30.2 − 28.9 − 3.3 − 1.4 4.4 − 5.7 13.9 15.0 13.9          May− 7.3 20.9 5.2 15.7 − 4.4 − 4.9 − 2.5 0.5 − 0.3 0.8 − 62.1 − 64.3 12.3          June
− 0.9 − 4.0 − 4.1 0.1 1.3 − 1.0 2.5 2.3 − 0.2 2.5 − 39.1 − 33.5 − 6.1          July
− 1.0 2.1 0.0 2.0 1.4 1.9 − 0.8 − 0.5 − 0.1 − 0.4 12.3 13.0 10.6          Aug − 3.3 1.9 1.7 0.3 − 3.8 − 8.6 − 7.0 4.8 1.9 3.0 − 52.4 − 46.7 − 12.9          Sep 
from the flow figures (see also footnote * in Table II.1). — 2Including debt
securities arising from the exchange of equalisation claims.
21*IV Banks

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
E U R O S Y S T E M
Monthly Report
November 2010
IV Banks
 
1 Assets and liabilities of monetary financial institutions (excluding the Bundesbank) in Germany *
  Liabilities
 
Deposits of banks (MFIs) Deposits of non-banks (non-MFIs) in the euro area
in the euro area
Deposits of non-banks in the home country Deposits of non-banks
With agreed At agreed
of banks maturities notice
Balance in the in other of which of which
sheet home member Over- up to up to Over-
Period total Total country states Total Total night Total 2 years Total 3 months Total night
 End of year or month
 
2001 6,303.1 1,418.0 1,202.1 215.9 2,134.0 1,979.7 525.0 880.2 290.6 574.5 461.9 105.2 7.6
2002 6,394.2 1,478.7 1,236.2 242.4 2,170.0 2,034.9 574.8 884.9 279.3 575.3 472.9 87.4 8.1
2003 6,432.0 1,471.0 1,229.4 241.6 2,214.6 2,086.9 622.1 874.5 248.0 590.3 500.8 81.8 9.3
2004 6,617.4 1,528.4 1,270.8 257.6 2,264.2 2,148.5 646.2 898.9 239.9 603.5 515.5 71.9 8.8
2005 6,859.4 1,569.6 1,300.8 268.8 2,329.1 2,225.4 715.8 906.2 233.4 603.4 519.1 62.2 9.6
2006 7,154.4 1,637.7 1,348.6 289.0 2,449.2 2,341.6 745.8 1,009.3 310.1 586.5 487.4 62.0 13.92007 7,592.4 1,778.6 1,479.0 299.6 2,633.6 2,518.3 769.6 1,193.3 477.9 555.4 446.0 75.1 19.6
2008 7,892.7 1,827.7 1,583.0 244.7 2,798.2 2,687.3 809.5 1,342.7 598.7 535.2 424.8 74.2 22.4
2009 7,436.1 1,589.7 1,355.6 234.0 2,818.0 2,731.3 997.8 1,139.1 356.4 594.4 474.4 63.9 17.7
2008          Dec 7,892.7 1,827.7 1,583.0 244.7 2,798.2 2,687.3 809.5 1,342.7 598.7 535.2 424.8 74.2 22.42009          Jan 7,906.4 1,794.4 1,533.3 261.1 2,817.1 2,701.2 857.7 1,304.6 557.0 539.0 428.6 80.7 33.6
         Feb 7,846.4 1,760.2 1,509.8 250.4 2,821.6 2,714.6 882.6 1,287.7 534.4 544.3 433.9 73.4 25.7         Mar 7,777.1 1,693.9 1,456.2 237.6 2,805.6 2,699.1 879.3 1,272.1 515.8 547.8 436.6 73.2 26.8
         Apr 7,802.2 1,701.3 1,458.7 242.6 2,823.8 2,716.8 895.8 1,269.8 509.3 551.1 439.1 74.4 25.4
         May 7,685.1 1,678.3 1,445.4 232.9 2,824.1 2,711.3 898.8 1,257.5 494.8 555.0 441.5 74.2 26.0         June 7,710.6 1,695.3 1,469.0 226.3 2,832.4 2,716.6 918.7 1,238.2 461.7 559.7 445.1 73.2 26.0
         July 7,619.1 1,641.3 1,417.8 223.4 2,816.2 2,706.5 922.3 1,218.7 442.0 565.5 449.7 73.2 24.7
         Aug 7,590.2 1,635.5 1,414.6 220.8 2,808.1 2,707.6 933.8 1,203.1 424.4 570.8 454.3 73.7 25.8         Sep 7,519.5 1,603.4 1,381.3 222.1 2,806.8 2,706.2 953.3 1,177.9 398.2 575.1 457.4 76.2 26.5
         Oct 7,498.4 1,602.0 1,373.6 228.4 2,797.5 2,696.7 981.3 1,133.7 367.5 581.7 461.5 74.9 26.2
         Nov 7,493.5 1,599.1 1,375.7 223.4 2,823.6 2,724.5 1,005.5 1,133.4 353.0 585.6 464.5 73.0 25.9         Dec 7,436.1 1,589.7 1,355.6 234.0 2,818.0 2,731.3 997.8 1,139.1 356.4 594.4 474.4 63.9 17.7
2010          Jan 7,452.7 1,596.8 1,348.9 247.9 2,826.3 2,736.7 1,025.2 1,113.9 330.5 597.6 479.2 66.6 20.1
         Feb 7,449.5 1,597.3 1,361.7 235.6 2,828.9 2,736.7 1,025.5 1,108.4 323.8 602.9 485.1 69.6 20.4         Mar 7,454.6 1,566.6 1,328.7 237.9 2,815.8 2,725.0 1,009.4 1,110.9 325.3 604.7 486.8 69.7 21.9
         Apr 7,570.0 1,599.7 1,340.9 258.7 2,836.1 2,737.0 1,044.7 1,087.5 301.4 604.8 488.8 77.9 27.3
         May 7,681.0 1,629.3 1,356.0 273.3 2,840.9 2,749.1 1,063.1 1,081.1 299.5 605.0 490.8 69.1 21.9
         June 7,641.3 1,616.8 1,365.8 251.0 2,842.3 2,750.9 1,064.3 1,082.1 299.7 604.4 491.5 69.5 22.3
         July 7,438.3 1,515.4 1,244.1 271.3 2,840.1 2,745.2 1,061.3 1,078.1 297.4 605.9 495.1 71.8 24.2
         Aug 7,517.6 1,534.6 1,253.2 281.4 2,856.9 2,756.0 1,068.3 1,081.9 298.3 605.8 496.8 70.4 22.5         Sep 7,386.5 1,482.7 1,218.5 264.1 2,850.2 2,758.6 1,069.4 1,083.1 300.6 606.1 499.4 69.7 20.9
 Changes 1
2002 165.7 70.2 37.2 33.1 53.0 57.0 50.3 5.9 − 11.0 0.8 11.0 − 2.6 0.6
2003 90.7 3.8 − 3.3 7.1 44.7 50.3 48.8 − 13.6 − 31.6 15.1 28.0 − 3.8 1.42004 209.7 62.3 42.8 19.6 53.5 64.9 26.3 25.5 − 8.3 13.1 14.7 − 9.3 − 0.4
2005 191.4 32.8 26.9 5.8 65.0 75.5 69.4 7.3 − 6.9 − 1.2 2.9 − 8.0 0.5
2006 353.9 105.6 81.5 24.1 122.9 118.6 30.4 105.0 77.1 − 16.8 − 31.7 0.5 4.42007 515.3 148.3 134.8 13.5 185.1 177.3 24.6 183.9 167.8 − 31.1 − 41.4 13.6 5.62008 314.0 65.8 121.5 − 55.8 162.4 173.1 38.8 154.6 123.5 − 20.2 − 21.2 − 7.4 − 0.12009 −454.8 −235.3 −224.5 − 10.8 31.9 43.9 205.0 −220.4 −259.3 59.3 50.3 − 9.6 − 4.1
2009          Jan − 43.6 − 42.8 − 57.3 14.5 16.7 12.4 47.1 − 38.5 − 42.1 3.8 3.8 5.8 11.2
         Feb − 76.0 − 35.3 − 24.5 − 10.8 4.4 13.2 24.8 − 16.9 − 22.7 5.3 5.3 − 7.2 − 7.8         Mar − 51.3 − 60.9 − 49.1 − 11.8 − 15.1 − 14.9 − 2.6 − 15.8 − 18.5 3.5 2.8 0.1 1.2
         Apr 19.9 6.5 1.7 4.8 17.9 17.2 33.2 − 19.3 − 23.6 3.3 3.1 1.1 − 1.4
         May − 75.1 − 14.8 − 5.9 − 8.8 1.6 − 4.6 3.5 − 11.9 − 14.1 3.9 2.4 0.2 0.7         June 25.3 17.1 23.7 − 6.5 8.2 5.3 19.9 − 19.3 − 33.1 4.7 3.6 − 0.8 0.3
         July − 93.3 − 54.0 − 51.1 − 2.9 − 16.1 − 10.1 3.5 − 19.4 − 19.7 5.8 4.6 0.0 − 1.3
         Aug − 9.7 − 5.1 − 2.6 − 2.4 3.6 1.3 11.6 − 15.6 − 17.6 5.3 4.5 0.6 1.1         Sep − 57.5 − 31.3 − 33.0 1.7 − 0.7 − 1.0 19.8 − 25.1 − 26.1 4.3 3.1 2.8 0.8
         Oct − 16.3 − 1.0 − 7.3 6.3 4.3 3.8 28.1 − 31.0 − 30.6 6.6 4.2 − 1.0 − 0.3
         Nov 2.5 − 2.1 2.8 − 4.9 13.5 15.1 24.4 − 13.1 − 14.4 3.8 3.0 − 1.8 − 0.3         Dec − 79.7 − 11.8 − 21.8 10.0 − 6.5 6.1 − 8.3 5.5 3.2 8.9 9.9 − 9.3 − 8.3
2010          Jan − 8.8 5.3 − 7.9 13.2 7.3 4.8 26.9 − 25.3 − 26.0 3.2 4.7 2.4 2.3
         Feb − 7.0 3.6 12.0 − 8.4 − 6.0 − 0.4 − 0.1 − 5.6 − 6.8 5.2 5.9 − 5.2 0.3         Mar 4.9 − 15.7 − 17.8 2.1 − 13.3 − 11.8 − 16.1 2.4 1.5 1.8 1.8 0.1 1.4
         Apr 107.9 33.5 12.9 20.6 18.9 10.6 35.1 − 24.5 − 25.0 0.1 2.0 8.2 5.4
         May 63.7 25.0 11.9 13.0 2.9 10.7 17.3 − 6.8 − 2.1 0.2 2.0 − 9.4 − 5.6         June − 50.5 − 14.0 8.7 − 22.7 0.8 1.5 1.6 0.5 − 0.3 − 0.6 0.6 0.2 0.3
         July −166.0 − 94.4 −116.0 21.6 − 0.8 − 4.6 − 2.2 − 3.8 − 2.2 1.5 3.6 2.6 2.0
         Aug 60.5 16.8 7.6 9.2 16.0 10.2 6.6 3.7 0.8 − 0.1 1.7 − 1.6 − 1.8
         Sep −131.1 − 51.9 − 34.7 − 17.2 − 6.7 2.6 1.1 1.2 2.3 0.3 2.6 − 0.7 − 1.6
*This table serves to supplement the “Overall monetary survey“ in section data from money market funds. — 1Statistical breaks have been eliminated
II. Unlike the other tables in section IV, this table includes − in addition to from the flow figures (see also footnote * in Table II.1). —
the figures reported by banks (including building and loan associations) −
22*IV Banks

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2010
IV Banks
 
 
 
 
 
 Debt securities
issued  3 
in other member states  2 Deposits of
central governments
With agreed At agreed Liabilities
maturities notice arising
of which from Money of which Liabilities
domestic market with to non- repos with
of which of which central non-banks fund euro- Capital maturities
up to up to govern- in the shares of up to area and Other
Total 2 years Total 3 months Total ments euro area issued  3 Total reserves   Period 2 years  3 residents Liabilities
End of year or month
 
92.4 9.0 5.2 3.8 49.1 46.9 4.9 33.2 1,445.4 129.3 647.6 319.2 300.8 2001
74.6 9.9 4.7 3.6 47.7 45.6 3.3 36.7 1,468.2 71.6 599.2 343.0 309.8 2002
68.6 11.4 3.9 3.1 45.9 44.2 14.1 36.7 1,486.9 131.3 567.8 340.2 300.8 2003
59.8 9.8 3.3 2.7 43.8 41.4 14.8 31.5 1,554.8 116.9 577.1 329.3 317.2 2004
50.2 9.8 2.4 2.0 41.6 38.8 19.5 31.7 1,611.9 113.8 626.2 346.8 324.5 2005
45.9 9.3 2.3 1.9 45.5 41.9 17.1 32.0 1,636.7 136.4 638.5 389.6 353.7 200653.2 22.0 2.3 1.8 40.1 38.3 26.6 28.6 1,637.6 182.3 661.0 428.2 398.2 2007
49.5 24.9 2.4 1.8 36.6 34.8 61.1 16.4 1,609.9 233.3 666.3 461.7 451.5 2008
43.7 17.0 2.5 2.0 22.8 22.2 80.5 11.4 1,500.5 146.3 565.6 454.8 415.6 2009
49.5 24.9 2.4 1.8 36.6 34.8 61.1 16.4 1,609.9 233.3 666.3 461.7 451.5 2008          Dec 
44.6 19.7 2.4 1.8 35.2 33.0 67.4 15.9 1,614.6 215.8 697.5 462.3 437.1 2009          Jan 
45.2 19.3 2.5 1.8 33.6 32.7 74.0 15.4 1,604.9 211.4 686.7 441.5 442.1          Feb 
44.0 18.2 2.5 1.8 33.2 32.0 87.7 14.8 1,580.2 201.3 664.6 447.9 482.5          Mar 
46.5 21.0 2.5 1.9 32.6 32.0 92.6 14.4 1,579.0 203.6 697.7 430.2 463.3          Apr 
45.7 19.9 2.5 1.9 38.5 36.5 90.9 14.1 1,574.2 196.6 646.6 425.4 431.7          May44.7 19.1 2.5 1.9 42.6 40.6 93.4 13.6 1,571.0 185.5 652.1 441.8 411.0          June
46.0 19.7 2.5 1.9 36.6 34.6 82.4 12.4 1,565.9 181.1 647.3 441.5 412.0          July
45.3 19.2 2.5 1.9 26.8 25.0 71.7 12.2 1,570.3 177.8 626.3 443.6 422.6          Aug 47.1 19.2 2.5 1.9 24.4 22.7 83.7 12.4 1,543.3 171.9 599.7 442.8 427.3          Sep 
46.2 18.8 2.5 1.9 25.9 23.2 83.3 12.3 1,530.6 161.7 591.4 439.4 442.0          Oct 
44.6 16.3 2.5 1.9 26.1 24.2 81.0 12.0 1,518.8 158.0 589.4 440.6 429.1          Nov 43.7 17.0 2.5 2.0 22.8 22.2 80.5 11.4 1,500.5 146.3 565.6 454.8 415.6          Dec 
44.0 15.5 2.5 2.0 23.0 21.3 68.2 12.2 1,503.2 142.7 598.0 441.8 406.3 2010          Jan 
46.6 15.1 2.5 2.0 22.6 20.7 78.9 12.0 1,496.5 140.1 608.5 441.6 385.9          Feb 
45.2 13.6 2.6 2.0 21.1 20.4 79.8 11.6 1,503.2 138.0 622.6 445.8 409.3          Mar 
48.0 16.8 2.6 2.0 21.2 19.8 100.7 11.3 1,501.9 132.1 672.6 448.0 399.8          Apr 
44.5 13.9 2.6 2.1 22.7 20.6 101.4 11.3 1,503.4 127.7 738.4 447.0 409.4          May
44.6 14.1 2.7 2.1 21.9 20.8 102.7 11.0 1,487.2 111.3 705.4 443.4 432.6          June
44.9 13.1 2.7 2.1 23.0 19.6 92.2 10.7 1,448.5 106.8 686.7 439.9 404.9          July
45.3 13.9 2.7 2.1 30.4 20.4 104.0 10.3 1,457.6 111.1 701.7 438.1 414.3          Aug 46.2 14.8 2.7 2.1 21.9 20.7 95.9 10.2 1,440.3 108.5 667.1 433.7 406.6          Sep 
Changes 1
− 2.6 1.1 − 0.5 − 0.3 − 1.4 − 1.3 − 1.6 4.1 18.8 14.8 − 2.1 25.6 − 2.7 2002
− 4.4 2.0 − 0.8 − 0.4 − 1.8 − 1.4 10.7 − 0.5 49.6 − 2.2 4.9 − 3.3 − 19.4 2003− 8.3 − 1.4 − 0.6 − 0.4 − 2.1 − 2.8 0.8 − 5.2 73.2 − 14.8 21.7 − 10.5 14.0 2004
− 7.7 − 0.4 − 0.9 − 0.7 − 2.5 − 3.0 4.7 0.2 39.1 − 9.5 22.0 14.4 13.3 2005
− 3.9 − 0.3 − 0.1 − 0.2 3.9 3.1 − 3.3 0.3 34.4 21.7 32.4 27.9 33.7 2006
8.0 13.0 0.0 − 0.1 − 5.8 − 4.3 8.1 − 3.4 20.3 48.7 48.8 42.9 65.1 2007
− 7.4 0.7 0.1 − 0.0 − 3.3 − 3.2 36.1 − 12.2 − 33.8 50.4 − 0.0 39.2 56.6 2008− 5.6 − 7.6 0.1 0.2 − 2.4 − 0.8 19.4 − 5.0 −105.0 − 87.3 − 95.5 − 0.1 − 65.1 2009
− 5.5 − 5.7 0.0 0.0 − 1.5 − 1.8 6.3 − 0.5 − 12.5 − 17.7 11.9 − 3.2 − 19.6 2009          Jan 
0.6 − 0.4 0.0 0.0 − 1.6 − 0.3 6.6 − 0.5 − 9.7 − 4.7 − 13.1 − 20.8 − 7.5          Feb 
− 1.1 − 0.9 0.0 0.0 − 0.3 − 0.6 13.7 − 0.6 − 12.9 − 9.9 − 9.5 8.9 25.1          Mar 
2.4 2.7 0.0 0.0 − 0.3 0.4 4.9 − 0.4 − 3.4 2.3 31.4 − 18.2 − 18.9          Apr 
− 0.5 − 0.9 0.0 0.0 5.9 4.4 − 1.7 − 0.3 4.2 − 6.9 − 39.9 3.1 − 27.3          May
− 1.1 − 0.8 − 0.0 0.0 3.8 4.1 2.5 − 0.4 − 3.5 − 11.1 5.4 16.3 − 20.4          June
1.3 0.6 0.0 0.0 − 6.0 − 6.0 − 11.0 − 1.2 − 4.8 − 4.4 − 4.6 − 0.2 − 1.4          July
− 0.5 − 0.4 0.0 0.0 1.7 1.9 − 10.6 − 0.3 6.1 − 3.3 − 18.2 2.5 12.4          Aug 
2.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 − 2.5 − 2.3 11.9 0.2 − 22.7 − 5.9 − 21.3 0.2 6.1          Sep 
− 0.7 − 0.1 0.0 0.0 1.5 0.5 − 0.4 − 0.1 − 11.0 − 10.2 − 7.1 − 3.1 2.1          Oct 
− 1.5 − 2.4 − 0.0 0.0 0.2 0.9 − 2.3 − 0.2 − 10.1 − 3.7 0.8 1.5 1.4          Nov − 1.1 0.6 0.0 0.0 − 3.3 − 1.9 − 0.5 − 0.6 − 24.6 − 11.8 − 31.4 12.8 − 17.1          Dec 
0.1 − 1.6 0.0 0.0 0.2 − 0.9 − 12.3 0.8 − 6.2 − 5.3 26.3 − 13.0 − 17.0 2010          Jan 
− 5.5 − 4.8 0.0 0.0 − 0.4 − 0.6 10.7 − 0.1 − 10.9 − 2.7 6.4 − 1.2 − 9.4          Feb − 1.4 − 1.5 0.0 0.0 − 1.5 − 0.4 1.0 − 0.4 6.0 − 2.0 13.0 4.0 10.3          Mar 
2.7 3.1 0.0 0.0 0.1 − 0.5 20.8 − 0.3 − 4.0 − 6.0 47.5 1.6 − 10.1          Apr 
− 3.9 − 3.2 0.0 0.0 1.5 0.8 0.7 − 0.0 − 16.2 − 4.5 49.5 − 5.3 7.1          May− 0.1 0.0 0.0 0.0 − 0.9 0.2 1.2 − 0.3 − 20.7 − 16.4 − 35.6 − 4.7 22.7          June
0.6 − 0.8 0.0 0.0 1.1 − 1.2 − 10.4 − 0.2 − 26.2 − 4.4 − 6.6 − 0.9 − 26.4          July0.2 0.6 0.0 0.0 7.4 0.7 11.7 − 0.4 1.4 4.2 8.9 − 3.3 9.4          Aug 
0.9 0.9 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 8.6 0.3 − 8.1 − 0.2 − 20.4 − 5.7 − 34.7 − 1.4 − 7.7          Sep 
2Excluding deposits of central governments. — 3In Germany, debt paper; up to the January 2002 Monthly Report they were published
securities with maturities of up to one year are classed as money market together with money market fund shares. 
23*IV Banks

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
E U R O S Y S T E M
Monthly Report
November 2010
IV Banks
 
2 Principal assets and liabilities of banks (MFIs) in Germany, by category of banks *
 
 
€ billion
  Lending to banks (MFIs)  Lending to non-banks (non-MFIs)
 
 of which of which 
Loans
 Cash in hand and credit
Number of balances forreporting Balance with Balances up to and for Partici- Securities Securities
End of institu- sheet central and issued by including more than issued by pating Othermonth tions total banks Total loans banks Total 1 year 1 year Bills non-banks interests assets
All categories of banks
 
2010          Apr 1,937 7,643.7 80.4 3,061.8 2,214.9 815.8 3,993.1 499.4 2,702.9 0.9 776.5 148.5 359.8
         May 1,937 7,755.8 72.3 3,174.3 2,340.9 800.3 3,984.5 514.5 2,724.2 0.9 731.8 147.7 377.0
         June 1,937 7,715.7 130.3 3,062.1 2,243.1 786.4 3,980.3 501.8 2,720.8 0.8 737.4 153.5 389.6
         July 1,935 7,511.5 81.6 2,948.6 2,154.3 764.3 3,953.4 486.0 2,714.5 0.8 729.8 146.0 382.0
         Aug 1,928 7,591.6 81.3 2,997.9 2,203.6 763.4 3,972.1 492.2 2,724.6 0.8 734.4 147.1 393.1         Sep 1,921 7,461.9 90.9 2,917.4 2,133.0 757.3 3,925.6 463.3 2,711.0 0.8 728.7 146.5 381.4
Commercial banks 5
2010          Aug 278 2,284.1 37.1 945.3 818.4 107.6 1,078.8 245.4 624.6 0.4 195.3 73.7 149.1
         Sep 277 2,205.6 46.3 897.4 774.9 105.7 1,041.7 212.0 620.9 0.4 193.8 73.4 146.9
   Big banks 6
2010          Aug 4 1,354.3 23.7 594.3 518.2 57.0 549.4 158.6 265.0 0.3 113.8 67.0 120.0         Sep 4 1,284.7 31.7 551.5 479.3 55.6 515.3 126.8 261.4 0.2 113.5 66.7 119.5
   Regional banks and other commercial banks
2010          Aug 169 730.4 11.6 228.1 178.9 49.0 459.2 63.5 315.7 0.1 78.9 6.5 25.0         Sep 168 722.9 13.2 223.6 174.8 48.6 456.6 61.3 316.0 0.1 78.1 6.4 23.1
   Branches of foreign banks
2010          Aug 105 199.3 1.9 122.9 121.3 1.5 70.2 23.2 43.9 0.0 2.7 0.3 4.1         Sep 105 198.0 1.4 122.3 120.9 1.4 69.8 23.9 43.5 0.0 2.2 0.3 4.2
Landesbanken
2010          Aug 10 1,393.4 6.2 622.2 475.3 139.4 674.0 100.9 437.2 0.1 129.9 20.5 70.5         Sep 10 1,379.1 8.7 608.0 462.3 139.5 668.6 102.3 429.4 0.1 130.7 20.5 73.3
Savings banks
2010          Aug 430 1,066.1 21.5 251.5 86.2 164.0 758.9 60.0 594.1 0.2 104.4 17.3 17.0         Sep 430 1,062.8 18.9 247.8 83.1 163.2 761.9 61.5 595.2 0.2 104.9 17.3 16.9
 
Regional institutions of credit cooperatives  
 
2010          Aug 2 260.9 0.4 165.5 125.6 38.9 60.2 13.6 19.7 0.0 26.3 14.8 20.0
         Sep 2 259.8 0.7 164.9 126.1 38.1 59.9 15.6 19.3 0.0 24.6 14.8 19.5
Credit cooperatives
2010          Aug 1,148 695.7 14.1 187.5 68.8 118.2 463.6 32.5 367.4 0.1 63.7 11.6 18.8
         Sep 1,142 692.3 13.2 182.8 64.7 117.8 465.9 33.5 368.5 0.1 63.8 11.6 18.9
Mortgage banks
2010          Aug 18 764.5 0.5 273.2 186.3 86.5 471.1 10.2 345.9 − 115.0 1.4 18.4         Sep 18 752.5 0.5 266.5 180.5 85.7 464.0 10.1 342.1 − 111.8 1.4 20.0
Building and loan associations
2010          Aug 24 198.1 0.1 57.2 38.2 18.9 128.1 1.7 111.9 . 14.6 0.5 12.2         Sep 24 200.5 0.1 59.4 40.6 18.7 128.4 1.7 112.4 . 14.3 0.4 12.3
Special purpose banks
2010          Aug 18 928.6 1.4 495.5 404.9 89.8 337.4 28.0 223.8 − 85.3 7.3 87.0         Sep 18 909.3 2.5 490.6 400.9 88.8 335.3 26.7 223.3 − 84.8 7.3 73.7
Memo item: Foreign banks 7
2010          Aug 147 837.3 8.9 356.1 299.7 53.3 429.4 74.3 268.7 0.2 83.8 5.4 37.6         Sep 146 822.2 10.8 351.5 296.0 52.6 423.5 70.5 267.2 0.1 82.8 5.4 31.1
  of which:  Banks majority-owned by foreign banks 8
2010          Aug 42 638.0 7.1 233.2 178.4 51.7 359.1 51.0 224.8 0.2 81.1 5.1 33.5         Sep 41 624.2 9.3 229.2 175.2 51.2 353.7 46.6 223.7 0.1 80.6 5.1 26.9
*For the period up to December 1998, section IV (except for Table IV.1) MFIs) and of the Bundesbank are not included. For the definitions of the
shows the assets and liabilities of banks (excluding building and loan respective items, see the footnotes to Table IV.3. — 1For building and loan
associations) in Germany; from January 1999, the assets and liabilities of associations: Including deposits under savings and loan contracts (see T able
monetary financial institutions (MFIs) in Germany. The assets and liabilities IV.12). — 2Included in time deposits. — 3Excluding deposits under savings
of foreign branches, of money market funds (which are also classified as and loan contracts (see also footnote 2). — 4Including subordinated
24*IV Banks

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2010
IV Banks
 
 
 
 
 
Deposits of banks (MFIs) Deposits of non-banks (non-MFIs) Capital
 including  
of which of which published
reserves,
Time deposits  1 Savings deposits  3 partici-
pation
Memo rights
item Bearer capital,
for for of which debt Liabilities funds for
up to and more arising At three Bank general securities
Sight Time Sight including than from savings out- banking Other   End of months’
Total deposits deposits Total deposits 1 year 1 year  1 repos  2 Total notice bonds risks   month standing  4 liabilities
All categories of banks
 
2,090.6 411.1 1,679.4 3,118.4 1,181.7 400.3 805.5 173.3 614.5 496.1 116.4 1,580.9 368.4 485.4 2010          Apr 
2,171.3 450.6 1,720.7 3,138.7 1,205.6 402.9 799.0 188.5 614.7 498.1 116.6 1,584.8 365.0 495.9          May
2,145.2 472.0 1,673.2 3,121.8 1,200.8 393.3 797.2 174.0 614.2 498.8 116.4 1,562.9 367.2 518.5          June
2,022.4 446.5 1,575.9 3,111.9 1,197.1 389.3 794.5 167.9 615.7 502.5 115.3 1,520.1 367.6 489.5          July
2,056.2 463.0 1,593.2 3,140.9 1,209.4 404.3 796.5 182.3 615.6 504.3 115.2 1,527.4 367.8 499.2          Aug 1,974.2 432.2 1,542.0 3,121.7 1,187.6 409.3 794.4 171.7 615.9 506.9 114.6 1,505.4 367.9 492.7          Sep 
Commercial banks 5
764.9 311.4 453.5 1,038.3 552.7 162.1 172.9 85.9 121.9 101.9 28.7 206.9 118.1 155.9 2010          Aug 
713.5 277.4 436.1 1,014.5 531.8 158.9 173.1 71.1 121.9 102.2 28.7 204.4 118.1 155.2          Sep 
Big banks 6
471.8 213.3 258.5 552.8 280.6 89.7 96.0 81.8 76.4 72.9 10.1 169.7 70.6 89.5 2010          Aug 
426.4 182.3 244.1 528.5 257.0 89.1 95.9 66.4 76.7 73.2 9.8 168.8 70.6 90.5          Sep 
Regional banks and other commercial banks
161.2 60.6 100.6 432.3 243.7 61.9 63.4 4.1 45.4 28.9 17.9 37.2 40.3 59.3 2010          Aug 
156.6 60.1 96.5 433.0 246.4 59.5 63.5 4.7 45.2 28.9 18.3 35.6 40.2 57.5          Sep 
Branches of foreign banks
131.9 37.5 94.4 53.2 28.4 10.5 13.6 − 0.0 0.0 0.7 0.0 7.2 7.1 2010          Aug 
130.6 35.0 95.6 53.0 28.3 10.3 13.7 − 0.0 0.0 0.7 0.0 7.2 7.2          Sep 
Landesbanken
419.4 61.8 357.6 409.5 88.9 122.0 183.2 83.4 13.9 11.2 1.5 406.2 65.7 92.6 2010          Aug 
411.6 64.6 347.0 414.1 88.5 128.7 181.5 83.3 14.0 11.3 1.5 401.1 65.6 86.6          Sep 
Savings banks
185.3 20.3 165.0 740.5 326.1 41.2 15.1 − 295.4 236.9 62.8 25.9 59.7 54.7 2010          Aug 
184.0 22.9 161.1 737.2 323.7 40.8 15.1 − 295.4 238.2 62.2 25.5 59.8 56.3          Sep 
 
Regional institutions of credit cooperatives
 
136.7 32.0 104.7 35.2 8.9 9.9 14.1 5.5 − − 2.3 55.7 11.8 21.6 2010          Aug 
137.0 32.5 104.5 34.3 9.1 9.2 13.8 5.7 − − 2.3 54.8 11.8 21.9          Sep 
Credit cooperatives
98.8 4.2 94.6 498.0 219.5 47.1 28.6 − 183.7 153.6 19.0 24.6 41.2 33.1 2010          Aug 
95.7 5.9 89.9 496.7 218.9 46.5 28.6 − 183.9 154.6 19.0 24.2 41.2 34.4          Sep 
Mortgage banks
255.3 9.2 246.1 190.5 5.1 14.1 170.9 4.8 0.4 0.4 − 274.0 18.8 25.9 2010          Aug 
245.5 9.1 236.5 192.9 5.5 15.9 171.1 7.1 0.4 0.4 − 270.7 18.9 24.5          Sep 
Building and loan associations
27.6 1.7 25.9 134.1 0.4 1.2 131.2 − 0.3 0.3 0.9 6.1 7.4 22.9 2010          Aug 
30.1 4.4 25.7 134.6 0.5 1.2 131.7 − 0.3 0.3 0.9 5.4 7.5 22.9          Sep 
Special purpose banks
168.2 22.4 145.8 94.9 7.8 6.7 80.4 2.6 − − − 528.0 45.1 92.5 2010          Aug 
156.7 15.6 141.2 97.3 9.7 8.1 79.5 4.6 − − − 519.2 45.1 91.0          Sep 
Memo item:   Foreign banks 7
296.7 112.9 183.7 382.8 196.3 66.3 89.1 21.1 20.4 20.1 10.7 68.1 43.1 46.6 2010          Aug 
282.5 102.7 179.8 385.0 199.2 65.2 89.1 25.0 20.4 20.1 11.1 65.5 43.1 46.1          Sep 
of which:   Banks majority-owned by foreign banks 8
164.8 75.4 89.4 329.6 167.9 55.8 75.6 21.1 20.3 20.1 10.0 68.1 35.9 39.5 2010          Aug 
151.9 67.7 84.2 332.0 171.0 54.9 75.4 25.0 20.4 20.1 10.4 65.5 35.9 38.9          Sep 
negotiable bearer debt securities; excluding non-negotiable bearer debt Vereinsbank AG) and Deutsche Postbank AG. — 7Sum of the banks
securities. — 5Commercial banks comprise the sub-groups ”Big banks”, majority-owned by foreign banks and included in other categories of banks
”Regional banks and other commercial banks” and ”Branches of foreign and the category ”Branches (with dependent legal status) of foreign
banks”. — 6Deutsche Bank AG, Dresdner Bank AG (up to Nov. 2009), banks”. — 8Separate presentation of the banks majority-owned by foreign
Commerzbank AG, UniCredit Bank AG (formerly Bayerische Hypo- und banks included in other banking categories. 
25*IV Banks

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
E U R O S Y S T E M
Monthly Report
November 2010
IV Banks
 
3 Assets and liabilities of banks (MFIs) in Germany vis-à-vis residents *
 
€ billion
Lending to domestic banks (MFIs)  2,3 Lending to domestic non-banks (non-MFIs)  3,6 
Treasury
Cash in Negotiable bills and
hand Credit money negotiable
balances market Memo money mar- (euro-area Securities
banknotes with the Credit paper item ket paper issued Securities
and Bundes- balances issued by issued by Fiduciary issued by by non-
Period coins)  1 bank Total and loans Bills  4 banks banks loans  5 Total Loans Bills  4 non-banks banks  7 
End of year or month *
 
2000 15.6 50.8 1,639.6 1,056.1 0.0 26.8 556.6 3.6 3,003.7 2,657.3 6.5 2.3 304.7
2001 14.2 56.3 1,676.0 1,078.9 0.0 5.6 591.5 2.8 3,014.1 2,699.4 4.8 4.4 301.52002 17.5 45.6 1,691.3 1,112.3 0.0 7.8 571.2 2.7 2,997.2 2,685.0 4.1 3.3 301.92003 17.0 46.7 1,643.9 1,064.0 0.0 8.8 571.0 2.3 2,995.6 2,677.0 3.7 3.4 309.62004 14.9 41.2 1,676.3 1,075.8 0.0 7.4 592.9 2.1 3,001.3 2,644.0 2.7 2.6 351.0
2005 15.1 47.9 1,684.5 1,096.8 0.0 6.7 580.9 2.1 2,995.1 2,632.7 2.4 2.4 357.6
2006 16.0 49.4 1,637.8 1,086.3 − 9.3 542.2 1.9 3,000.7 2,630.3 1.9 2.0 366.5
2007 17.5 64.6 1,751.8 1,222.5 0.0 25.3 504.0 2.3 2,975.7 2,647.9 1.6 1.5 324.72008 17.4 102.6 1,861.7 1,298.1 0.0 55.7 507.8 2.0 3,071.1 2,698.9 1.2 3.1 367.92009 16.9 78.9 1,711.5 1,138.0 − 31.6 541.9 2.2 3,100.1 2,691.8 0.8 4.0 403.5
2009          Apr 14.9 48.5 1,819.9 1,243.3 0.0 32.5 544.1 1.7 3,124.3 2,725.1 0.9 5.4 392.9
         May 15.4 73.3 1,771.0 1,187.2 0.0 29.3 554.6 1.6 3,106.5 2,720.5 0.9 5.8 379.3
         June 14.6 78.1 1,840.0 1,251.2 0.0 26.3 562.4 1.6 3,121.8 2,724.0 0.8 3.7 393.3
         July 13.5 55.4 1,811.6 1,219.6 0.0 24.6 567.4 1.7 3,116.5 2,720.1 0.8 5.3 390.3
         Aug 13.6 61.2 1,801.7 1,207.4 0.0 22.9 571.3 1.7 3,094.1 2,703.8 0.7 4.8 384.8         Sep 13.5 88.1 1,751.1 1,163.2 0.0 19.0 568.9 1.8 3,110.3 2,714.8 0.7 7.0 387.9
         Oct 13.8 61.2 1,739.8 1,156.2 0.0 15.8 567.8 1.8 3,116.9 2,716.5 0.7 5.3 394.4
         Nov 13.5 73.8 1,729.6 1,149.1 0.0 13.6 566.9 1.9 3,117.3 2,712.8 0.7 5.4 398.4         Dec 16.9 78.9 1,711.5 1,138.0 − 31.6 541.9 2.2 3,100.1 2,691.8 0.8 4.0 403.5
2010          Jan 13.9 60.9 1,723.0 1,157.7 0.0 29.8 535.5 2.0 3,111.5 2,691.3 0.8 4.0 415.3
         Feb 13.6 59.2 1,748.8 1,188.8 0.0 28.2 531.8 2.0 3,103.1 2,684.8 0.7 3.2 414.4         Mar 13.9 89.5 1,720.0 1,158.7 − 27.2 534.1 1.9 3,098.8 2,681.7 0.8 3.1 413.3
         Apr 13.6 66.4 1,754.8 1,195.3 − 26.5 533.0 1.9 3,140.8 2,697.2 0.7 2.0 440.9
         May 14.2 57.5 1,817.8 1,267.0 − 26.5 524.3 1.9 3,130.1 2,707.8 0.6 2.5 419.2         June 13.7 116.1 1,761.1 1,223.2 0.0 26.5 511.3 1.9 3,147.5 2,716.5 0.6 7.9 422.5
         July 14.3 66.8 1,688.7 1,165.6 − 26.4 496.7 1.8 3,139.7 2,708.6 0.6 9.9 420.6
         Aug 13.9 66.8 1,704.5 1,183.5 − 27.1 493.9 1.8 3,150.2 2,717.5 0.6 9.2 423.0         Sep 14.2 76.0 1,683.1 1,167.6 − 24.5 491.1 1.9 3,129.6 2,699.9 0.6 8.9 420.3
Changes *
2001 − 1.4 + 5.5 + 34.6 + 20.1 − 0.0 − 21.3 + 35.8 − 0.9 + 11.9 + 40.8 − 1.6 + 1.6 + 0.3
2002 + 3.3 − 10.7 + 15.0 + 33.1 + 0.0 + 2.3 − 20.3 − 0.2 − 19.2 − 18.0 − 0.8 − 1.1 + 1.72003 − 0.5 + 1.1 − 47.2 − 48.2 + 0.0 + 1.0 + 0.1 − 0.3 + 0.1 − 8.0 − 0.4 + 0.3 + 9.32004 − 2.1 − 5.5 + 35.9 + 15.1 + 0.0 − 1.4 + 22.1 − 0.2 + 3.3 − 35.0 − 1.0 + 1.1 + 39.2
2005 + 0.2 + 6.7 + 8.4 + 21.0 − 0.0 − 0.8 − 11.9 − 0.0 − 6.7 − 11.8 − 0.3 − 0.2 + 6.6
2006 + 0.9 + 1.5 − 3.6 + 24.5 − 0.0 + 2.6 − 30.6 − 0.2 − 12.4 − 20.3 − 0.5 − 0.4 + 8.82007 + 1.5 + 15.2 + 114.8 + 137.6 + 0.0 + 17.0 − 39.8 + 0.4 − 15.9 + 12.1 − 0.3 − 0.5 − 27.22008 − 0.1 + 39.4 + 125.9 + 90.1
+ 0.0 + 30.6 + 5.2 − 0.8 + 92.0 + 47.3 − 0.4 + 1.8 + 43.3
2009 − 0.5 − 23.6 − 147.2 − 157.3 − 0.0 − 24.1 + 34.3 + 0.2 + 25.7 − 11.2 − 0.4 + 1.4 + 35.9
2009          Apr + 1.5 − 5.5 − 15.9 − 12.4 − − 3.3 − 0.1 − 0.0 + 22.8 + 4.5 + 0.0 + 1.7 + 16.7
         May + 0.5 + 24.7 − 45.4 − 52.6 − − 3.2 + 10.5 − 0.1 − 16.9 − 4.6 − 0.1 + 0.5 − 12.8         June − 0.9 + 4.8 + 69.0 + 64.0 + 0.0 − 3.0 + 7.9 − 0.0 + 15.8 + 3.5 − 0.1 − 1.6 + 14.0
         July − 1.1 − 22.6 − 28.4 − 31.6 − − 1.8 + 5.0 + 0.1 − 5.4 − 3.9 − 0.0 + 1.5 − 3.1
         Aug + 0.1 + 5.7 − 9.9 − 12.2 − 0.0 − 1.6 + 3.9 − 0.0 − 22.4 − 16.4 − 0.0 − 0.5 − 5.5         Sep − 0.1 + 26.9 − 51.3 − 44.9 − 0.0 − 3.9 − 2.5 + 0.2 + 15.9 + 10.7 − 0.0 + 2.2 + 3.1
         Oct + 0.3 − 26.9 − 11.3 − 7.0 + 0.0 − 3.2 − 1.1 − 0.0 + 6.4 + 1.8 + 0.0 − 1.7 + 6.3
         Nov − 0.3 + 12.6 − 10.2 − 7.1 + 0.0 − 2.3 − 0.9 + 0.0 + 0.4 − 3.7 − 0.0 + 0.1 + 4.0
         Dec + 3.4 + 5.1 − 17.9 − 11.1 − 0.0 + 18.1 − 24.8 + 0.3 − 20.2 − 23.8 + 0.1 − 1.4 + 4.9
2010          Jan − 3.0 − 18.1 + 11.5 + 19.7 + 0.0 − 1.8 − 6.4 − 0.2 + 11.2 − 0.6 + 0.0 + 0.0 + 11.8
         Feb − 0.4 − 1.7 + 26.3 + 31.7 − 0.0 − 1.6 − 3.7 − 0.0 − 8.9 − 7.0 − 0.1 − 0.9 − 1.0
         Mar + 0.4 + 30.3 − 27.0 − 30.1 − 0.0 − 0.5 + 3.6 − 0.0 + 0.2 − 3.2 + 0.0 − 0.1 + 3.4
         Apr − 0.4 − 23.1 + 34.8 + 36.5 − − 0.7 − 1.1 − 0.0 + 42.1 + 15.5 − 0.1 − 1.1 + 27.7
         May + 0.7 − 8.9 + 63.0 + 71.7 − − 0.0 − 8.7 − 0.0 − 10.7 + 10.5 − 0.0 + 0.5 − 21.8         June − 0.5 + 58.6 − 56.7 − 43.7 + 0.0 − 0.4 − 12.6 + 0.0 + 17.4 + 8.7 − 0.0 + 5.4 + 3.3
         July + 0.5 − 49.3 − 69.2 − 54.4 − 0.0 − 0.1 − 14.7 − 0.1 − 7.8 − 7.8 + 0.1 + 1.6 − 1.7
         Aug − 0.3 − 0.0 + 15.8 + 17.9 − + 0.7 − 2.8 − + 10.5 + 8.8 − 0.0 − 0.7 + 2.4         Sep + 0.3 + 9.2 − 21.4 − 15.9 − − 2.7 − 2.8 + 0.0 − 20.6 − 17.6 − 0.1 − 0.2 − 2.7
*See Table IV.2, footnote*; statistical breaks have been eliminated from the rediscounted bills and bills sent for collection from the banks’ portfol ios
changes. The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as prior to maturity). — 5From 1999, no longer included in loans or deposits
provisional. Subsequent revisions which appear in the following Monthly (see also footnote 3). — 6Up to December 1998, including loans to domestic
Report, are not specially marked. — 1Up to December 1998, domestic building and loan associations. — 7Excluding debt securities arising from
banknotes and coins. — 2Up to December 1998, excluding loans to the exchange of equalisation claims (see also footnote 8). — 8Including
domestic building and loan associations. — 3Up to December 1998, debt securities arising from the exchange of equalisation claims. —
including fiduciary loans (see also footnote 5). — 4Up to December 1998, 9Including liabilities arising from registered debt securities, registered
bill-based lending (bill holdings plus endorsement liabilities arising from money market paper and non-negotiable bearer debt securities;
26*IV Banks

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2010
IV Banks
 
 
 
 
 Deposits of domestic banks (MFIs)  3,9,10  Deposits of domestic non-banks (non-MFIs)  3,15 
Partici-
pating
interests
in
Memo domestic Memo Memo
item banks Sight Time Redis- item Sight Time Savings Bank item Equalisa-tion Fiduciary and deposits deposits counted Fiduciary de- deposits de- savings Fiduciary
claims  
8 loans  5 Total 11,12  12,13  bills 14 loans  5 Total 13,16  bonds  18 loans  5   Period enterprises posits  11 posits  17 
End of year or month *
 
33.1 58.5 82.7 1,189.2 113.4 1,075.3 0.4 30.1 1,945.8 443.4 819.9 573.5 109.0 42.1 2000
4.0 57.0 95.9 1,204.9 123.1 1,081.6 0.3 27.2 2,034.0 526.4 827.0 574.5 106.0 43.3 2001
3.0 54.8 119.0 1,244.0 127.6 1,116.2 0.2 25.6 2,085.9 575.6 830.6 575.3 104.4 42.1 20022.0 56.8 109.2 1,229.6 116.8 1,112.6 0.2 27.8 2,140.3 624.0 825.7 590.3 100.3 40.5 20031.0 61.8 99.6 1,271.2 119.7 1,151.4 0.1 30.3 2,200.0 646.9 851.2 603.5 98.4 43.7 2004
− 56.6 108.5 1,300.0 120.5 1,179.4 0.1 26.5 2,276.6 717.0 864.4 603.4 91.9 42.4 2005− 53.0 106.3 1,348.2 125.4 1,222.7 0.0 22.3 2,394.6 747.7 962.8 586.5 97.5 37.8 2006
− 51.1 109.4 1,478.6 122.1 1,356.5 0.0 20.0 2,579.1 779.9 1,125.4 555.4 118.4 36.4 2007− 47.2 111.2 1,582.5 138.5 1,444.0 0.0 41.6 2,781.4 834.6 1,276.1 535.2 135.4 32.3 2008− 43.9 106.1 1,355.1 128.9 1,226.2 0.0 35.7 2,829.7 1,029.5 1,102.6 594.5 103.2 43.4 2009
− 45.5 119.1 1,458.0 153.2 1,304.8 0.0 39.6 2,839.6 932.2 1,231.1 551.1 125.2 31.1 2009          Apr 
− 44.7 110.6 1,444.8 121.6 1,323.1 0.0 38.3 2,837.0 935.4 1,224.4 555.1 122.1 31.2          May
− 44.2 108.4 1,467.8 117.4 1,350.4 0.0 37.6 2,847.3 956.0 1,213.1 559.7 118.5 31.1          June
− 43.8 107.5 1,417.1 119.2 1,297.9 0.0 37.2 2,819.9 954.4 1,185.6 565.5 114.4 31.2          July
− 43.5 108.0 1,413.9 125.7 1,288.2 0.0 36.9 2,801.5 962.4 1,157.0 570.8 111.2 42.0          Aug − 43.2 107.7 1,380.6 129.9 1,250.7 0.0 36.3 2,810.6 987.2 1,139.6 575.1 108.6 42.2          Sep 
− 42.9 103.7 1,372.8 126.2 1,246.7 0.0 35.8 2,812.0 1,014.0 1,110.4 581.8 105.9 42.2          Oct 
− 42.8 102.7 1,375.3 150.5 1,224.8 0.0 35.5 2,825.5 1,037.6 1,098.1 585.6 104.2 42.2          Nov − 43.9 106.1 1,355.1 128.9 1,226.2 0.0 35.7 2,829.7 1,029.5 1,102.6 594.5 103.2 43.4          Dec 
− 43.4 104.3 1,348.2 142.4 1,205.8 0.0 35.7 2,820.3 1,051.3 1,070.0 597.7 101.3 43.0 2010          Jan 
− 43.3 98.9 1,360.7 150.4 1,210.3 0.0 36.0 2,830.1 1,055.9 1,070.5 602.9 100.8 43.0          Feb 
− 42.9 98.7 1,327.9 129.4 1,198.5 0.0 36.1 2,819.0 1,040.0 1,073.7 604.7 100.5 42.8          Mar 
− 42.8 98.6 1,340.4 140.3 1,200.1 0.0 36.1 2,852.0 1,070.3 1,077.0 604.8 99.9 42.7          Apr 
− 42.8 97.8 1,355.5 139.6 1,215.9 0.0 37.1 2,867.5 1,089.6 1,073.1 605.1 99.7 42.7          May− 42.5 97.6 1,365.2 140.1 1,225.0 0.0 36.8 2,867.5 1,090.5 1,073.1 604.4 99.5 42.4          June
− 42.3 96.1 1,243.3 134.7 1,108.6 0.0 35.6 2,851.1 1,084.9 1,061.3 605.9 98.9 42.2          July
− 42.3 95.6 1,252.5 138.9 1,113.7 0.0 35.9 2,873.4 1,094.7 1,074.2 605.9 98.7 42.2          Aug − 42.1 95.3 1,217.8 138.7 1,079.1 0.0 35.1 2,867.2 1,083.3 1,079.4 606.1 98.4 42.1          Sep 
Changes *
− 29.1 − 1.5 + 13.3 + 9.6 + 7.4 + 2.3 − 0.2 − 2.9 + 88.5 + 82.3 + 8.1 + 1.1 − 2.9 + 1.0 2001
− 1.0 − 2.1 + 24.2 + 37.9 + 1.7 + 36.3 − 0.1 − 1.5 + 51.7 + 48.4 + 4.1 + 0.8 − 1.6 − 1.1 2002− 1.0 + 2.1 − 9.8 − 5.6 − 9.5 + 3.9 + 0.0 + 2.4 + 54.0 + 48.4 − 4.8 + 15.1 − 4.8 − 1.2 2003− 1.1 + 3.0 − 9.6 + 41.3 + 2.9 + 38.5 − 0.1 + 2.4 + 62.0 + 24.4 + 25.9 + 13.1 − 1.5 + 1.2 2004
− 1.0 − 4.9 + 8.9 + 28.9 + 0.8 + 28.0 + 0.0 − 3.5 + 76.6 + 70.7 + 12.4 − 1.2 − 5.4 − 1.2 2005
− − 3.7 − 2.2 + 79.0 + 8.6 + 70.5 − 0.1 − 4.5 + 118.0 + 30.0 + 97.7 − 16.8 + 7.2 − 4.1 2006
− − 2.3 + 3.1 + 132.0 − 3.3 + 135.3 − 0.0 − 2.3 + 181.1 + 31.6 + 160.5 − 31.1 + 20.1 − 2.0 2007− − 5.4 + 7.8 + 124.3 + 23.0 + 101.3 − 0.0 − 3.6 + 207.6 + 54.3 + 156.6 − 20.2 + 17.0 − 1.3 2008
− − 4.2 + 0.7 − 225.4 − 9.7 − 215.7 − 0.0 − 5.7 + 59.7 + 211.4 − 179.3 + 59.3 − 31.6 − 0.9 2009
− − 0.9 − 0.4 + 1.8 + 14.9 − 13.2 + 0.0 − 1.0 + 22.3 + 34.9 − 12.0 + 3.3 − 3.9 + 0.2 2009          Apr 
− − 0.2 − 2.6 − 9.8 − 31.6 + 21.8 − 0.0 − 1.1 − 2.6 + 3.0 − 6.5 + 3.9 − 3.1 − 0.0          May
− − 0.4 − 2.2 + 23.0 − 4.3 + 27.3 − 0.0 − 0.7 + 10.3 + 20.6 − 11.3 + 4.7 − 3.7 − 0.1          June
− − 0.4 − 0.8 − 50.6 + 1.9 − 52.5 − − 0.4 − 27.4 − 1.7 − 27.4 + 5.8 − 4.1 + 0.1          July
− − 0.3 + 0.5 − 3.3 + 6.4 − 9.7 − 0.0 − 0.3 − 7.0 + 8.0 − 17.2 + 5.3 − 3.1 + 0.0          Aug 
− − 0.3 − 0.3 − 34.3 + 4.3 − 38.5 − 0.0 − 0.6 + 9.1 + 24.7 − 17.4 + 4.3 − 2.6 + 0.2          Sep 
− − 0.3 − 4.1 − 7.8 − 3.8 − 4.1 + 0.0 − 0.5 + 1.7 + 26.8 − 29.3 + 6.6 − 2.5 + 0.1          Oct 
− − 0.1 − 0.9 + 2.5 + 24.4 − 21.9 − 0.0 − 0.3 + 13.5 + 23.6 − 12.3 + 3.8 − 1.7 + 0.0          Nov − + 0.0 + 3.3 − 20.2 − 21.7 + 1.5 + 0.0 + 0.2 + 4.3 − 8.1 + 4.5 + 8.9 − 1.0 + 0.1          Dec 
− − 0.5 − 1.7 − 6.9 + 13.6 − 20.4 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 9.5 + 21.9 − 32.6 + 3.2 − 1.9 − 0.5 2010          Jan 
− − 0.1 − 5.4 + 12.4 + 7.9 + 4.5 + 0.0 + 0.3 + 9.9 + 4.6 + 0.5 + 5.2 − 0.5 − 0.0          Feb 
− − 0.4 − 0.2 − 17.2 − 5.4 − 11.8 − 0.0 + 0.0 − 11.2 − 15.9 + 3.2 + 1.8 − 0.4 − 0.2          Mar 
− − 0.1 − 0.1 + 13.6 + 10.9 + 2.7 − 0.0 + 0.0 + 32.0 + 30.3 + 2.2 + 0.1 − 0.6 − 0.0          Apr 
− − 0.0 − 0.9 + 15.1 − 0.7 + 15.8 − 0.0 + 1.0 + 15.4 + 19.3 − 3.9 + 0.2 − 0.2 − 0.0          May− − 0.3 − 0.2 + 9.7 + 0.5 + 9.1 + 0.0 − 0.3 + 0.0 + 1.4 − 0.5 − 0.6 − 0.3 − 0.3          June
− − 0.1 − 1.4 − 118.6 − 5.1 − 113.5 + 0.0 − 1.2 − 16.4 − 5.6 − 11.8 + 1.5 − 0.5 − 0.2          July
− − 0.1 − 0.5 + 9.2 + 4.1 + 5.1 − 0.0 + 0.3 + 17.6 + 9.8 + 8.2 − 0.1 − 0.3 − 0.0          Aug 
− − 0.2 − 0.3 − 34.7 − 0.1 − 34.6 − 0.0 − 0.8 − 6.2 − 11.4 + 5.2 + 0.3 − 0.3 − 0.1          Sep 
including subordinated liabilities. — 10Up to December 1998, excluding endorsement liabilities arising from rediscounted bills. — 15Up to
liabilities to domestic building and loan associations and money market December 1998, including liabilities to domestic building and loan
funds. — 11Up to December 1998, including time deposits with terms of associations and money market funds. — 16Since the inclusion of building
less than one month. — 12Including liabilities arising from monetary policy and loan associations in January 1999, including deposits under savings and
operations with the Bundesbank. — 13Up to December 1998, excluding loan contracts (see Table IV.12). — 17Excluding deposits under savings and
time deposits with terms of less than one month. — 14Own acceptances loan contracts (see also footnote 16). — 18Including liabilities arising from
and promissory notes outstanding and, up to December 1998, including non-negotiable bearer debt securities. 
27*IV Banks

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
E U R O S Y S T E M
Monthly Report
November 2010
IV Banks
 
4 Assets and liabilities of banks (MFIs) in Germany vis-à-vis non-residents *
 
€ billion
Lending to foreign banks (MFIs)  2 Lending to foreign non-banks (non-MFIs)  2 
Treasury
Cash in bills and
hand Loans and bills  3 negotiable Credit balances and loans, bills  3 Negotiable
(non- money money
euro-area Medium market Memo Medium market
banknotes and paper item and paper Securities Securities
and Short- long- issued by issued by Fiduciary Short- long- issued by issued by
Period coins)  1 Total Total term term banks banks loans  4 Total Total term term non-banks non-banks
End of year or month *
 
2000 0.4 507.7 441.4 325.4 116.0 1.3 65.0 3.6 475.8 286.8 71.1 215.7 6.5 182.5
2001 0.4 596.1 521.7 383.7 138.0 0.8 73.6 3.5 570.3 347.2 99.7 247.5 5.2 217.92002 0.3 690.6 615.3 468.0 147.2 0.9 74.4 2.7 558.8 332.6 92.6 240.0 9.3 216.92003 0.3 769.6 675.8 515.7 160.1 1.5 92.3 1.6 576.3 344.8 110.9 233.9 6.0 225.42004 0.2 889.4 760.2 606.5 153.7 2.8 126.3 1.5 629.5 362.5 136.6 225.9 10.9 256.1
2005 0.2 1,038.8 860.0 648.5 211.5 5.8 173.0 1.5 712.0 387.9 132.8 255.1 9.3 314.8
2006 0.4 1,266.9 1,003.2 744.5 258.7 13.3 250.4 0.8 777.0 421.0 156.0 264.9 7.2 348.9
2007 0.3 1,433.5 1,105.9 803.6 302.4 13.4 314.2 0.5 908.3 492.9 197.5 295.4 27.5 387.92008 0.3 1,446.6 1,131.6 767.2 364.3 15.6 299.5 1.9 908.4 528.9 151.4 377.5 12.9 366.62009 0.3 1,277.4 986.1 643.5 342.6 6.2 285.0 2.9 815.7 469.6 116.9 352.7 9.8 336.3
2009          Apr 0.4 1,378.9 1,081.8 713.6 368.2 9.2 287.9 1.9 896.0 530.1 147.2 382.9 11.6 354.3
         May 0.4 1,355.9 1,057.7 691.4 366.3 6.7 291.4 2.0 884.5 516.3 143.5 372.8 12.3 355.9         June 0.5 1,332.8 1,036.7 653.2 383.5 8.2 287.8 2.0 879.9 513.5 142.6 370.9 11.6 354.7
         July 0.4 1,310.8 1,016.8 639.5 377.3 8.6 285.5 2.0 875.4 510.3 136.8 373.5 13.8 351.3
         Aug 0.3 1,311.7 1,017.4 647.4 370.0 8.3 286.1 3.1 851.5 491.7 130.6 361.1 13.1 346.6         Sep 0.4 1,261.1 967.7 608.1 359.6 8.1 285.2 3.0 840.2 482.3 125.6 356.7 11.1 346.8
         Oct 0.4 1,278.7 987.6 637.1 350.5 7.8 283.3 3.0 836.3 480.4 127.2 353.3 13.1 342.7
         Nov 0.3 1,274.1 981.6 637.6 344.1 9.0 283.5 3.0 828.7 473.2 124.5 348.8 13.2 342.3
         Dec 0.3 1,277.4 986.1 643.5 342.6 6.2 285.0 2.9 815.7 469.6 116.9 352.7 9.8 336.3
2010          Jan 0.4 1,278.4 986.8 647.2 339.6 5.3 286.2 2.9 829.2 477.1 121.1 356.0 12.1 340.1
         Feb 0.6 1,269.6 980.1 640.5 339.5 4.5 285.0 2.9 835.3 483.0 122.5 360.5 10.5 341.8
         Mar 0.5 1,272.2 980.1 640.2 339.8 4.8 287.3 3.0 822.5 478.7 119.5 359.2 11.1 332.7
         Apr 0.4 1,307.0 1,019.7 681.4 338.3 4.6 282.8 3.0 852.3 505.3 143.7 361.7 11.4 335.6
         May 0.5 1,356.5 1,073.9 725.7 348.3 6.6 276.0 3.0 854.4 531.2 156.2 375.0 10.6 312.7
         June 0.4 1,301.0 1,019.9 678.6 341.2 6.1 275.0 3.0 832.8 506.4 134.6 371.8 11.5 314.9
         July 0.4 1,259.9 988.7 678.4 310.3 3.5 267.6 2.9 813.6 492.1 130.7 361.4 12.3 309.2
         Aug 0.5 1,293.4 1,020.2 708.5 311.7 3.8 269.5 2.8 821.9 499.5 135.0 364.5 11.0 311.5         Sep 0.6 1,234.3 965.4 666.0 299.4 2.6 266.3 2.7 796.0 474.6 119.2 355.4 12.9 308.4
Changes *
2001 + 0.0 + 83.7 + 75.6 + 54.4 + 21.2 − 0.5 + 8.5 − 0.2 + 88.3 + 53.4 + 27.0 + 26.4 − 1.5 + 36.3
2002 − 0.1 + 120.3 + 118.0 + 99.4 + 18.6 + 0.1 + 2.2 − 0.9 + 21.2 + 12.7 − 0.4 + 13.2 + 4.6 + 3.92003 − 0.1 + 103.8 + 84.6 + 65.2 + 19.3 + 0.6 + 18.7 − 0.4 + 46.3 + 35.1 + 24.0 + 11.0 − 2.7 + 13.92004 − 0.1 + 128.3 + 89.4 + 95.3 − 5.9 + 1.3 + 37.6 − 0.1 + 65.8 + 29.5 + 31.7 − 2.2 + 5.1 + 31.1
2005 + 0.0 + 127.3 + 78.9 + 26.3 + 52.6 + 2.9 + 45.4 − 0.0 + 59.4 + 7.3 − 9.4 + 16.7 − 1.8 + 54.0
2006 + 0.1 + 238.3 + 153.5 + 109.7 + 43.8 + 7.5 + 77.2 − 0.7 + 81.4 + 51.6 + 25.9 + 25.8 − 1.8 + 31.52007 − 0.0 + 190.3 + 123.7 + 72.9 + 50.8 + 7.5 + 59.1 − 0.4 + 167.7 + 94.3 + 50.1 + 44.2 + 20.1 + 53.3
2008 + 0.0 + 8.5 + 20.2 − 43.0 + 63.2 + 2.1 − 13.7 − 0.0 + 4.3 + 45.1 − 31.9 + 77.0 − 14.5 − 26.3
2009 − 0.0 − 170.0 − 141.3 − 122.5 − 18.8 −10.3 − 18.4 − 0.2 − 72.8 − 43.8 − 31.7 − 12.1 − 3.3 − 25.7
2009          Apr − 0.1 + 18.4 + 21.3 + 26.0 − 4.7 − 0.8 − 2.1 − 0.0 + 13.0 + 14.5 + 11.6 + 2.9 + 1.5 − 3.0
         May − 0.0 − 14.1 − 10.9 − 14.3 + 3.5 − 2.5 − 0.7 − 0.1 + 6.3 − 2.9 − 1.1 − 1.8 + 0.8 + 8.4         June + 0.1 − 23.9 − 21.2 − 38.2 + 17.0 + 1.0 − 3.7 − 0.0 − 4.3 − 2.5 − 0.2 − 2.3 − 0.7 − 1.0
         July − 0.0 − 21.8 − 19.9 − 13.7 − 6.1 + 0.3 − 2.3 + 0.0 − 5.0 − 3.4 − 5.8 + 2.4 + 2.2 − 3.8
         Aug − 0.1 + 4.9 + 4.7 + 9.7 − 5.0 − 0.3 + 0.5 + 0.0 − 10.9 − 6.4 − 5.0 − 1.4 − 0.7 − 3.7
         Sep + 0.1 − 43.7 − 43.5 − 35.9 − 7.6 − 0.1 − 0.1 − 0.1 − 5.5 − 4.6 − 3.9 − 0.8 − 2.0 + 1.1
         Oct − 0.0 + 19.4 + 21.7 + 30.1 − 8.4 − 0.4 − 2.0 − 0.0 − 1.2 − 0.1 + 1.9 − 1.9 + 2.1 − 3.2
         Nov − 0.0 − 1.3 − 2.8 + 2.2 − 5.1 + 1.2 + 0.3 − 0.0 − 4.3 − 4.6 − 2.1 − 2.5 + 0.0 + 0.2
         Dec + 0.0 − 6.4 − 4.8 + 0.8 − 5.6 − 2.8 + 1.1 − 0.1 − 22.6 − 11.2 − 9.2 − 2.0 − 3.4 − 8.1
2010          Jan + 0.1 − 7.4 − 7.5 − 1.0 − 6.5 − 0.9 + 1.0 + 0.0 + 5.4 + 2.5 + 2.8 − 0.3 + 2.3 + 0.5
         Feb + 0.2 − 14.1 − 11.8 − 9.2 − 2.6 − 0.9 − 1.5 − 0.0 − 0.0 + 1.2 + 0.6 + 0.6 − 1.6 + 0.4
         Mar − 0.1 + 2.5 − 1.5 − 1.1 − 0.4 + 0.3 + 3.7 + 0.1 − 6.7 − 5.8 − 3.3 − 2.5 + 0.7 − 1.6
         Apr − 0.1 + 34.9 + 36.3 + 39.4 − 3.1 − 0.3 − 1.1 − 0.0 + 23.0 + 24.0 + 23.5 + 0.5 + 0.3 − 1.3
         May + 0.1 + 30.6 + 35.8 + 34.5 + 1.2 + 2.0 − 7.1 + 0.0 − 18.3 + 10.2 + 8.8 + 1.4 − 0.8 − 27.7
         June − 0.1 − 60.0 − 58.1 − 49.0 − 9.2 − 1.1 − 0.7 − 0.0 − 24.8 − 27.2 − 24.5 − 2.7 + 0.9 + 1.6
         July + 0.0 − 26.9 − 17.5 + 6.9 − 24.5 − 2.5 − 6.8 − 0.1 − 5.0 − 2.6 − 1.0 − 1.6 + 0.9 − 3.3
         Aug + 0.1 + 25.8 + 24.1 + 26.3 − 2.2 + 0.2 + 1.5 − 0.2 + 1.2 + 1.6 + 0.7 + 0.9 − 1.4 + 1.0         Sep + 0.1 − 40.8 − 37.6 − 33.1 − 4.5 − 1.0 − 2.2 − 0.0 − 9.1 − 10.7 − 12.5 + 1.8 + 2.0 − 0.4
*See Table IV.2, footnote*; statistical breaks have been eliminated from the banknotes and coins. — 2Up to December 1998, including fiduciary loans
changes. The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as (see also footnote 4). — 3Up to December 1998, bill-based lending (bill
provisional. Subsequent revisions, which appear in the following Monthly holdings plus endorsement liabilities arising from rediscounted bills a nd bills
Report, are not specially marked. — 1Up to December 1998, foreign sent for collection from the banks’ portfolios prior to maturity). —
28*IV Banks

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2010
IV Banks
 
 
 
 
 Deposits of foreign banks (MFIs)  2 Deposits of foreign non-banks (non-MFIs)  2 
 Partici- Time deposits (including
pating Time deposits (including bank savings deposits and bank
interests savings bonds) savings bonds)in foreign
Memo banks Medium Memo Medium Memo
item and and item and item
Fiduciary enter- Sight Short- long- Fiduciary Sight Short- long- Fiduciaryloans  
4 prises  5 Total Total  7 term  7 term loans  4 Total Total  7 term  7 term loans  4   Period deposits  6 deposits  6 
End of year or month *
 
13.9 47.4 586.0 113.7 472.2 382.9 89.3 1.7 314.9 35.4 279.5 62.5 217.0 5.6 2000
13.8 47.6 622.7 91.9 530.8 434.5 96.3 1.4 350.6 34.0 316.6 97.6 219.0 5.3 200115.6 44.8 614.2 101.6 512.7 410.4 102.3 1.1 319.2 33.5 285.7 87.0 198.7 4.5 200211.6 41.4 590.7 95.1 495.6 387.7 107.9 0.4 307.3 32.2 275.1 102.4 172.7 3.6 2003
9.8 39.3 603.3 87.0 516.2 403.2 113.0 0.5 311.2 36.6 274.7 123.4 151.2 0.8 2004
10.6 37.2 651.7 102.9 548.8 420.4 128.4 0.6 316.4 62.0 254.4 119.4 135.0 1.2 2005
5.8 50.4 689.7 168.1 521.6 397.3 124.3 0.4 310.1 82.1 228.0 111.5 116.5 1.5 20065.7 48.3 738.9 164.7 574.1 461.2 113.0 0.2 303.1 76.0 227.1 122.3 104.8 3.1 2007
25.5 45.1 703.3 218.1 485.1 362.3 122.9 0.3 286.1 92.2 193.9 95.1 98.8 2.5 200832.1 45.4 652.6 213.6 439.0 307.4 131.6 0.2 216.3 78.1 138.2 73.7 64.5 1.9 2009
24.2 50.0 729.0 228.6 500.4 378.6 121.8 0.3 288.8 100.4 188.4 91.5 96.9 2.4 2009          Apr 
23.8 49.7 718.8 214.4 504.4 353.6 150.8 0.3 239.2 102.5 136.7 72.1 64.7 2.3          May
23.3 49.7 720.6 247.2 473.4 321.9 151.5 0.3 237.5 102.5 135.0 70.9 64.1 2.1          June
23.2 49.7 699.5 227.9 471.7 321.9 149.8 0.3 250.7 112.3 138.3 73.2 65.1 2.0          July
32.9 49.6 682.3 215.3 467.1 321.8 145.2 0.3 243.9 100.5 143.4 79.7 63.7 2.0          Aug 32.5 49.3 665.4 218.9 446.5 304.7 141.9 0.2 237.0 94.7 142.3 76.1 66.2 2.0          Sep 
32.3 49.2 657.2 226.4 430.9 291.5 139.4 0.2 245.0 103.8 141.1 75.5 65.7 1.9          Oct 
32.1 51.1 651.3 235.9 415.4 281.6 133.7 0.2 241.0 93.2 147.8 82.1 65.7 1.9          Nov 
32.1 45.4 652.6 213.6 439.0 307.4 131.6 0.2 216.3 78.1 138.2 73.7 64.5 1.9          Dec 
32.4 48.0 683.5 253.9 429.6 299.0 130.6 0.2 237.2 96.1 141.0 74.7 66.4 1.9 2010          Jan 
32.8 47.7 678.1 253.6 424.5 293.3 131.2 0.2 244.5 92.6 152.0 82.3 69.7 1.9          Feb 
32.8 49.2 701.7 278.4 423.3 289.7 133.6 0.1 236.2 92.4 143.8 76.8 67.0 1.8          Mar 
32.9 49.9 750.2 270.8 479.3 345.4 134.0 0.1 266.4 111.4 155.0 88.8 66.2 1.8          Apr 
33.9 49.9 815.8 311.0 504.8 367.4 137.4 0.1 271.2 116.0 155.2 88.7 66.5 1.7          May
33.6 55.9 780.1 331.9 448.2 310.4 137.8 0.1 254.3 110.3 144.1 77.7 66.4 1.7          June
32.4 49.9 779.1 311.8 467.3 336.6 130.7 0.1 260.8 112.2 148.6 82.4 66.2 1.7          July
32.9 51.5 803.7 324.2 479.5 347.2 132.3 0.1 267.5 114.7 152.8 87.3 65.6 1.8          Aug 32.2 51.2 756.4 293.5 462.9 330.4 132.5 0.1 254.5 104.3 150.1 85.6 64.6 1.7          Sep 
Changes *
− 0.5 − 0.5 + 23.5 − 23.6 + 47.0 + 42.4 + 4.6 − 0.4 + 30.8 − 1.8 + 32.6 + 33.3 − 0.7 − 0.6 2001
+ 1.7 + 1.6 + 22.7 + 14.6 + 8.1 − 1.3 + 9.4 − 0.3 + 4.6 + 0.8 + 3.8 − 4.6 + 8.4 − 0.9 2002− 0.7 − 1.9 + 5.7 − 2.0 + 7.7 − 2.4 + 10.0 − 0.0 + 4.5 + 0.4 + 4.1 + 20.6 − 16.5 + 1.9 2003+ 0.7 − 1.5 + 19.8 − 6.1 + 25.9 + 21.1 + 4.8 + 0.1 + 13.0 + 5.4 + 7.6 + 22.8 − 15.2 − 0.3 2004
+ 0.8 − 3.5 + 28.6 + 12.6 + 16.0 + 4.9 + 11.1 + 0.1 − 4.9 + 23.9 − 28.8 − 7.7 − 21.1 + 0.4 2005
− 5.1 + 13.8 + 56.2 + 68.3 − 12.1 − 13.7 + 1.6 − 0.2 − 0.8 + 21.2 − 22.0 − 5.1 − 17.0 − 0.2 2006− 0.1 − 0.8 + 67.3 + 1.5 + 65.8 + 74.0 − 8.3 − 0.1 + 4.6 − 5.5 + 10.2 + 16.6 − 6.4 + 1.6 2007
+ 0.7 − 3.1 − 50.1 + 52.2 − 102.3 − 120.7 + 18.5 + 0.1 − 12.4 + 16.1 − 28.5 − 19.4 − 9.1 − 0.6 2008
− 3.2 + 0.1 − 81.4 − 2.1 − 79.3 − 57.5 − 21.7 − 0.2 − 33.5 − 13.3 − 20.1 − 17.0 − 3.1 − 0.6 2009
+ 0.0 + 0.3 + 22.5 − 37.8 + 60.3 + 60.8 − 0.5 − + 14.8 − 3.3 + 18.1 + 19.8 − 1.6 − 0.1 2009          Apr 
− 0.9 + 0.1 − 36.3 − 11.5 − 24.9 − 23.8 − 1.0 − 0.0 − 10.5 + 3.1 − 13.6 − 14.3 + 0.7 − 0.1          May
− 0.5 − 0.1 + 1.9 + 32.8 − 30.9 − 30.7 − 0.2 − 0.0 − 1.9 + 0.1 − 2.0 − 1.3 − 0.6 − 0.1          June
− 0.1 − − 21.0 − 19.4 − 1.7 + 0.0 − 1.7 − 0.0 + 13.2 + 9.8 + 3.4 + 2.3 + 1.1 − 0.1          July
+ 0.0 + 0.1 − 15.1 − 12.8 − 2.3 + 1.6 − 4.0 − 0.0 − 5.6 − 11.7 + 6.1 + 6.9 − 0.7 + 0.0          Aug 
− 0.4 + 0.0 − 12.2 + 4.7 − 16.9 − 14.6 − 2.3 − 0.1 − 5.6 − 5.5 − 0.1 − 2.9 + 2.9 − 0.1          Sep 
− 0.2 − 0.1 − 6.9 + 7.9 − 14.8 − 12.5 − 2.3 − + 8.2 + 9.3 − 1.1 − 0.4 − 0.7 − 0.1          Oct 
− 0.2 + 2.0 − 3.6 + 10.2 − 13.9 − 8.8 − 5.1 − − 3.3 − 10.4 + 7.1 + 6.9 + 0.2 − 0.0          Nov 
− 0.0 − 6.1 − 5.4 − 24.4 + 19.0 + 22.5 − 3.5 − 0.0 − 26.4 − 15.6 − 10.8 − 9.1 − 1.7 − 0.0          Dec 
+ 0.3 + 2.2 + 25.6 + 39.0 − 13.3 − 11.3 − 2.0 − 0.0 + 19.4 + 17.7 + 1.7 + 0.4 + 1.3 + 0.1 2010          Jan 
+ 0.4 − 0.5 − 5.0 − 1.5 − 3.5 − 3.6 + 0.1 − 0.0 − 1.4 − 3.9 + 2.5 + 3.0 − 0.5 − 0.0          Feb 
+ 0.0 + 1.4 + 22.4 + 24.4 − 2.0 − 4.2 + 2.2 − 0.0 − 8.6 − 0.2 − 8.4 − 5.6 − 2.8 − 0.1          Mar 
+ 0.1 + 0.5 + 46.4 − 8.3 + 54.6 + 54.8 − 0.1 − + 29.5 + 18.8 + 10.7 + 11.7 − 1.0 − 0.0          Apr 
+ 1.0 − 1.0 + 52.5 + 36.3 + 16.2 + 15.1 + 1.1 − 0.0 + 0.2 + 2.8 − 2.6 − 1.9 − 0.8 − 0.0          May
− 0.3 + 5.7 − 37.8 + 20.5 − 58.3 − 58.1 − 0.1 − 0.0 − 17.8 − 6.0 − 11.8 − 11.4 − 0.4 − 0.0          June
− 1.1 − 5.8 + 9.2 − 16.6 + 25.7 + 31.1 − 5.4 − 0.0 + 9.9 + 3.3 + 6.6 + 6.0 + 0.6 + 0.0          July
+ 0.5 + 1.5 + 19.4 + 10.6 + 8.7 + 8.0 + 0.7 − 0.0 + 4.9 + 1.9 + 3.0 + 4.1 − 1.1 + 0.0          Aug − 0.8 − 0.1 − 34.1 − 26.2 − 7.9 − 10.3 + 2.4 − 0.0 − 9.1 − 9.0 − 0.1 − 0.1 − 0.0 − 0.1          Sep 
4From 1999, no longer included in loans and deposits (see also footnote terms of less than one month. — 7Up to December 1998, excluding time
2). — 5Up to December 1998, including working capital supplied to deposits with terms of less than one month. 
branches abroad. — 6Up to December 1998, including time deposits with
29*IV Banks

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
E U R O S Y S T E M
Monthly Report
November 2010
IV Banks
 
5 Lending by banks (MFIs) in Germany to domestic non-banks (non-MFIs) *
 
€ billion
Lending to domestic Short-term lending Medium and long-term
non-banks, total  1,2 
      to general government to enter- to enterprises and households  1 
 
including excluding Negoti-
negotiable money able
market paper, Loans money
Period securities, and market Treasury
equalisation claims Total Total paper Total Loans bills Total Total bills 3,4 
End of year or month *
 
2000 3,003.7 2,663.7 371.2 348.2 347.7 0.5 22.9 21.2 1.7 2,632.5 2,038.6
2001 3,014.1 2,704.2 387.9 356.7 355.2 1.5 31.2 28.2 2.9 2,626.2 2,070.22002 2,997.2 2,689.1 365.4 331.9 331.0 1.0 33.5 31.1 2.4 2,631.8 2,079.72003 2,995.6 2,680.6 355.2 315.0 313.4 1.6 40.2 38.4 1.8 2,640.4 2,096.12004 3,001.3 2,646.7 320.9 283.8 283.0 0.8 37.1 35.3 1.8 2,680.4 2,114.2
2005 2,995.1 2,635.1 309.7 273.5 272.9 0.6 36.2 34.4 1.8 2,685.4 2,141.3
2006 3,000.7 2,632.2 303.1 269.8 269.3 0.6 33.3 31.9 1.4 2,697.6 2,181.82007 2,975.7 2,649.5 331.2 301.8 301.5 0.3 29.4 28.2 1.2 2,644.6 2,168.32008 3,071.1 2,700.1 373.0 337.5 335.3 2.2 35.5 34.5 1.0 2,698.1 2,257.82009 3,100.1 2,692.6 347.3 306.3 306.2 0.1 41.0 37.1 3.9 2,752.8 2,299.7
2009          Apr 3,124.3 2,726.0 408.5 362.5 362.1 0.4 46.0 41.0 5.0 2,715.8 2,276.8
         May 3,106.5 2,721.4 401.9 360.4 359.5 0.9 41.4 36.5 5.0 2,704.6 2,263.1
         June 3,121.8 2,724.8 401.8 362.3 362.0 0.3 39.5 36.0 3.4 2,720.0 2,274.1
         July 3,116.5 2,720.9 387.8 336.5 336.1 0.3 51.3 46.4 4.9 2,728.7 2,281.7
         Aug 3,094.1 2,704.5 367.4 321.9 321.7 0.3 45.5 40.9 4.6 2,726.7 2,280.6         Sep 3,110.3 2,715.5 383.3 337.5 337.2 0.3 45.8 39.1 6.7 2,727.1 2,279.4
         Oct 3,116.9 2,717.2 381.6 326.3 325.9 0.4 55.3 50.4 4.9 2,735.3 2,281.4
         Nov 3,117.3 2,713.4 374.5 327.2 327.0 0.2 47.4 42.1 5.2 2,742.7 2,289.4         Dec 3,100.1 2,692.6 347.3 306.3 306.2 0.1 41.0 37.1 3.9 2,752.8 2,299.7
2010          Jan 3,111.5 2,692.1 349.7 305.0 304.8 0.2 44.7 40.9 3.8 2,761.8 2,305.2
         Feb 3,103.1 2,685.6 343.5 299.8 299.6 0.2 43.7 40.8 2.9 2,759.6 2,302.2         Mar 3,098.8 2,682.4 348.9 302.9 302.6 0.3 46.1 43.2 2.8 2,749.9 2,290.3
         Apr 3,140.8 2,697.9 358.7 311.7 311.5 0.3 46.9 45.2 1.7 2,782.2 2,318.9
         May 3,130.1 2,708.4 361.7 310.6 310.3 0.2 51.1 48.8 2.3 2,768.4 2,298.8         June 3,147.5 2,717.1 376.0 313.2 312.9 0.3 62.8 55.2 7.7 2,771.5 2,292.6
         July 3,139.7 2,709.3 366.0 305.7 305.4 0.3 60.4 50.8 9.6 2,773.7 2,296.5
         Aug 3,150.2 2,718.1 367.2 309.8 309.6 0.2 57.3 48.4 9.0 2,783.1 2,300.7         Sep 3,129.6 2,700.4 353.8 296.0 295.8 0.2 57.8 49.0 8.8 2,775.9 2,292.2
Changes *
2001 + 11.9 + 39.2 + 15.3 + 7.0 + 5.9 + 1.0 + 8.4 + 7.8 + 0.6 − 3.4 + 32.02002 − 19.2 − 18.8 − 23.4 − 25.7 − 25.2 − 0.5 + 2.3 + 2.9 − 0.6 + 4.3 + 7.62003 + 0.1 − 8.4 − 10.0 − 16.7 − 17.5 + 0.9 + 6.7 + 7.3 − 0.6 + 10.1 + 16.02004 + 3.3 − 36.0 − 31.7 − 30.5 − 29.7 − 0.8 − 1.2 − 3.2 + 1.9 + 35.0 + 15.6
2005 − 6.7 − 12.1 − 11.5 − 10.6 − 10.4 − 0.2 − 0.9 − 0.9 + 0.0 + 4.8 + 26.8
2006 − 12.4 − 20.8 − 7.1 − 4.5 − 4.4 − 0.0 − 2.7 − 2.3 − 0.4 − 5.2 + 23.62007 − 15.9 + 11.8 + 27.6 + 31.5 + 31.7 − 0.2 − 3.9 − 3.7 − 0.3 − 43.5 − 7.12008 + 92.0 + 46.9 + 43.1 + 36.8 + 34.9 + 1.8 + 6.3 + 6.3 − 0.0 + 48.9 + 83.42009 + 25.7 − 11.6 − 26.1 − 31.5 − 30.0 − 1.5 + 5.5 + 2.5 + 2.9 + 51.8 + 36.6
2009          Apr + 22.8 + 4.5 − 2.0 − 5.8 − 5.7 − 0.0 + 3.7 + 2.0 + 1.7 + 24.9 + 20.2
         May − 16.9 − 4.6 − 6.6 − 2.1 − 2.6 + 0.5 − 4.5 − 4.5 − 0.0 − 10.4 − 12.9         June + 15.8 + 3.4 + 0.7 + 2.7 + 2.8 − 0.1 − 1.9 − 0.4 − 1.5 + 15.1 + 10.7
         July − 5.4 − 3.9 − 14.1 − 25.9 − 25.9 + 0.0 + 11.8 + 10.3 + 1.5 + 8.6 + 7.5
         Aug − 22.4 − 16.4 − 20.4 − 14.5 − 14.4 − 0.1 − 5.8 − 5.5 − 0.4 − 2.0 − 1.1
         Sep + 15.9 + 10.7 + 15.9 + 15.5 + 15.5 + 0.1 + 0.3 − 1.8 + 2.1 + 0.1 − 1.5
         Oct + 6.4 + 1.8 − 1.6 − 11.1 − 11.2 + 0.0 + 9.5 + 11.2 − 1.7 + 8.0 + 1.7
         Nov + 0.4 − 3.7 − 7.0 + 0.9 + 1.1 − 0.2 − 7.9 − 8.2 + 0.3 + 7.4 + 5.4         Dec − 20.2 − 23.7 − 27.2 − 20.8 − 20.8 − 0.0 − 6.4 − 5.0 − 1.4 + 7.1 + 7.5
2010          Jan + 11.2 − 0.6 + 2.3 − 1.5 − 1.6 + 0.1 + 3.8 + 3.8 − 0.1 + 9.0 + 5.5
         Feb − 8.9 − 7.1 − 6.2 − 5.1 − 5.2 + 0.0 − 1.0 − 0.1 − 0.9 − 2.8 − 3.5         Mar + 0.2 − 3.1 + 5.4 + 3.0 + 3.0 + 0.0 + 2.4 + 2.5 − 0.1 − 5.2 − 8.1
         Apr + 42.1 + 15.5 + 9.7 + 8.9 + 8.9 − 0.0 + 0.9 + 2.0 − 1.1 + 32.3 + 28.6
         May − 10.7 + 10.5 + 3.0 − 1.2 − 1.1 − 0.0 + 4.2 + 3.6 + 0.6 − 13.7 − 20.0         June + 17.4 + 8.7 + 12.3 + 0.7 + 0.7 + 0.0 + 11.7 + 6.3 + 5.4 + 5.1 − 4.4
         July − 7.8 − 7.8 − 10.3 − 7.5 − 7.5 + 0.0 − 2.8 − 4.4 + 1.6 + 2.4 + 3.9
         Aug + 10.5 + 8.8 + 0.6 + 3.6 + 3.7 − 0.1 − 3.0 − 2.4 − 0.6 + 9.9 + 4.8         Sep − 20.6 − 17.7 − 13.4 − 13.8 − 13.8 − 0.0 + 0.4 + 0.6 − 0.2 − 7.2 − 8.6
*See Table IV.2, footnote*; statistical breaks have been eliminated from the including fiduciary loans (see also footnote 9). — 3Up to December 1998,
changes. The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as bill-based lending (bill holdings plus endorsement liabilities arising from
provisional. Subsequent revisions, which appear in the following Monthly rediscounted bills and bills sent for collection from the banks’ portfoli os
Report, are not specially marked. — 1Up to December 1998, including loans prior to maturity). — 4From 1999, including small amounts of medium-term
to domestic building and loan associations. — 2Up to December 1998, series of bills. — 5From 1999, breakdown of securities by medium
30*IV Banks

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2010
IV Banks
 
 
 
 
lending  2,5 
prises and households  1,2 to general government  2 
Loans Loans
Memo Memo
item Equal- item
Medium- Long- Fiduciary Medium- Long- Secur- isation Fiduciary
Total term  6 term  7 loans  8 Total Total term  6 term  7 loans  8   Period Securities  5 ities 5,9 claims  10 
End of year or month *
 
1,838.9 192.8 1,646.0 199.7 50.1 593.9 455.9 30.4 425.5 104.9 33.1 8.4 2000
1,880.5 191.1 1,689.4 189.7 48.9 556.0 440.3 25.6 414.6 111.8 4.0 8.0 2001
1,909.8 193.5 1,716.3 169.9 47.3 552.1 417.1 27.4 389.7 132.0 3.0 7.5 2002
1,927.7 195.0 1,732.8 168.3 49.9 544.3 401.0 34.6 366.4 141.3 2.0 7.0 20031,940.8 194.3 1,746.5 173.5 55.3 566.1 387.7 32.9 354.8 177.5 1.0 6.5 2004
1,953.4 194.7 1,758.8 187.9 52.1 544.1 374.4 32.9 341.4 169.7 − 4.5 2005
1,972.7 194.5 1,778.1 209.1 48.2 515.8 358.4 31.7 326.6 157.4 − 4.8 20061,987.3 207.7 1,779.6 181.1 46.5 476.2 332.5 31.9 300.6 143.7 − 4.7 20072,022.0 222.0 1,800.0 235.8 42.8 440.3 308.2 29.7 278.5 132.1 − 4.5 20082,051.3 242.7 1,808.6 248.4 39.6 453.1 298.0 32.2 265.8 155.1 − 4.3 2009
2,023.4 229.0 1,794.4 253.5 41.1 439.0 299.5 29.2 270.3 139.4 − 4.4 2009          Apr 
2,025.2 230.2 1,795.0 237.9 40.3 441.5 300.2 30.4 269.8 141.4 − 4.4          May
2,026.3 233.0 1,793.3 247.8 39.9 445.9 300.4 30.8 269.6 145.5 − 4.3          June
2,036.3 236.7 1,799.5 245.5 39.5 447.0 302.1 31.8 270.3 144.9 − 4.3          July
2,039.9 237.1 1,802.9 240.7 39.2 446.1 302.0 31.9 270.1 144.1 − 4.3          Aug 2,038.3 237.2 1,801.0 241.1 38.9 447.7 300.9 32.5 268.4 146.8 − 4.3          Sep 
2,039.6 236.9 1,802.7 241.8 38.7 453.9 301.3 32.5 268.8 152.6 − 4.2          Oct 
2,045.5 236.9 1,808.6 243.9 38.5 453.4 298.8 32.6 266.2 154.6 − 4.3          Nov 2,051.3 242.7 1,808.6 248.4 39.6 453.1 298.0 32.2 265.8 155.1 − 4.3          Dec 
2,049.4 241.4 1,808.0 255.8 39.2 456.6 297.0 31.5 265.5 159.5 − 4.2 2010          Jan 
2,051.2 241.9 1,809.4 251.0 39.1 457.3 294.0 30.8 263.2 163.4 − 4.2          Feb 
2,044.4 237.5 1,806.9 245.9 38.7 459.6 292.2 30.5 261.8 167.4 − 4.1          Mar 
2,048.7 237.7 1,811.0 270.1 38.7 463.3 292.5 30.9 261.6 170.8 − 4.1          Apr 
2,054.3 237.6 1,816.7 244.6 38.6 469.6 295.0 31.4 263.6 174.6 − 4.1          May
2,055.1 237.2 1,817.9 237.5 38.4 479.0 293.9 31.3 262.6 185.0 − 4.1          June
2,059.1 237.2 1,821.9 237.3 38.3 477.2 294.0 31.9 262.1 183.3 − 4.1          July
2,063.6 236.7 1,826.9 237.2 38.3 482.3 296.5 33.9 262.6 185.8 − 4.0          Aug 2,058.0 236.2 1,821.8 234.2 38.1 483.7 297.6 34.0 263.6 186.1 − 4.0          Sep 
Changes *
+ 41.9 − 2.8 + 44.7 − 9.8 − 1.2 − 35.4 − 16.5 − 5.5 − 10.9 + 10.1 − 29.1 − 0.4 2001+ 26.6 − 2.1 + 28.7 − 19.0 − 1.6 − 3.4 − 23.1 + 1.0 − 24.1 + 20.7 − 1.0 − 0.5 2002+ 17.9 + 0.2 + 17.8 − 1.9 + 2.6 − 5.9 − 16.1 + 4.9 − 21.0 + 11.2 − 1.0 − 0.5 2003+ 10.7 + 0.2 + 10.5 + 4.9 + 3.6 + 19.4 − 13.8 − 0.9 − 12.9 + 34.3 − 1.1 − 0.6 2004
+ 12.5 + 1.7 + 10.8 + 14.3 − 3.0 − 22.1 − 13.4 + 0.9 − 14.2 − 7.7 − 1.0 − 2.0 2005
+ 2.3 + 0.2 + 2.2 + 21.2 − 3.9 − 28.8 − 16.4 − 1.4 − 15.0 − 12.4 − + 0.3 2006+ 9.6 + 10.1 − 0.6 − 16.7 − 2.2 − 36.3 − 25.8 + 0.1 − 26.0 − 10.5 − − 0.1 2007+ 28.8 + 12.0 + 16.8 + 54.7 − 5.3 − 34.5 − 23.2 − 2.3 − 20.8 − 11.4 − − 0.1 2008+ 23.5 + 17.3 + 6.3 + 13.1 − 3.9 + 15.2 − 7.6 + 2.5 − 10.2 + 22.8 − − 0.2 2009
+ 7.8 + 4.6 + 3.2 + 12.3 − 0.9 + 4.7 + 0.4 + 0.4 − 0.1 + 4.3 − + 0.0 2009          Apr 
+ 1.8 + 1.2 + 0.7 − 14.8 − 0.1 + 2.6 + 0.6 + 1.2 − 0.5 + 1.9 − − 0.0          May
+ 0.8 + 2.6 − 1.8 + 9.9 − 0.4 + 4.4 + 0.3 + 0.5 − 0.2 + 4.1 − − 0.0          June
+ 10.0 + 3.8 + 6.2 − 2.4 − 0.4 + 1.1 + 1.7 + 1.0 + 0.7 − 0.6 − − 0.0          July
+ 3.7 + 0.3 + 3.4 − 4.8 − 0.3 − 0.9 − 0.2 + 0.1 − 0.2 − 0.7 − − 0.0          Aug 
− 2.0 + 0.2 − 2.1 + 0.5 − 0.3 + 1.6 − 1.1 + 0.6 − 1.7 + 2.6 − − 0.0          Sep 
+ 1.3 − 0.3 + 1.6 + 0.4 − 0.2 + 6.3 + 0.5 + 0.1 + 0.4 + 5.8 − − 0.0          Oct 
+ 3.3 + 0.0 + 3.3 + 2.1 − 0.2 + 2.0 + 0.1 + 0.0 + 0.0 + 2.0 − + 0.0          Nov + 3.0 + 3.0 + 0.0 + 4.5 + 0.1 − 0.4 − 0.8 − 0.4 − 0.4 + 0.4 − − 0.0          Dec 
− 1.9 − 1.3 − 0.6 + 7.4 − 0.4 + 3.4 − 0.9 − 0.7 − 0.3 + 4.4 − − 0.1 2010          Jan 
+ 1.3 − 0.1 + 1.4 − 4.8 − 0.1 + 0.8 − 3.1 − 0.7 − 2.4 + 3.8 − − 0.0          Feb 
− 6.8 − 4.4 − 2.5 − 1.2 − 0.4 + 2.8 − 1.8 − 0.4 − 1.4 + 4.6 − − 0.0          Mar 
+ 4.4 + 0.2 + 4.2 + 24.2 − 0.1 + 3.7 + 0.3 + 0.5 − 0.2 + 3.5 − − 0.0          Apr 
+ 5.5 − 0.1 + 5.6 − 25.6 − 0.0 + 6.3 + 2.5 + 0.4 + 2.0 + 3.8 − − 0.0          May+ 2.7 + 0.6 + 2.1 − 7.1 − 0.3 + 9.4 − 1.0 − 0.4 − 0.6 + 10.4 − − 0.0          June
+ 4.1 + 0.0 + 4.1 − 0.2 − 0.1 − 1.4 + 0.0 + 0.6 − 0.6 − 1.5 − − 0.0          July
+ 5.0 − 0.3 + 5.3 − 0.2 − 0.0 + 5.1 + 2.5 + 2.0 + 0.5 + 2.5 − − 0.0          Aug − 5.6 − 0.5 − 5.1 − 3.0 − 0.2 + 1.4 + 1.1 + 0.0 + 1.0 + 0.3 − − 0.0          Sep 
and long-term lending no longer possible. — 6Up to December 1998, 1999, of more than five years. — 8From 1999, no longer included in lending
maturity or period of notice of more than one year to less than four years; (see also footnote 2). — 9Excluding debt securities arising from the
from 1999, more than one year up to and including five years. — 7Up to exchange of equalisation claims (see also footnote 10). — 10Including debt
December 1998, maturity or period of notice of four years and more; from securities arising from the exchange of equalisation claims. 
31*IV Banks

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
E U R O S Y S T E M
Monthly Report
November 2010
IV Banks
 
6 Lending by banks (MFIs) in Germany to domestic enterprises and households, housing loans,
sectors of economic activity *x
 
€ billion
Lending to domestic enterprises and households (excluding holdings of negotiable money market paper and excluding securities po rtfolios)  1 
of which  
 
Housing loans Lending to enterprises and self-employed persons
 
Whole-
sale and Electricity,gas and retail Financial
Mortgage water trade; Agri- Transport- intermedi-
loans supply; repair of culture, ation and ationsecured refuse motor forestry, storage; (excludingby disposal, vehicles fishing post and MFIs) and
Mortgage residen- Other of which mining and and telecom- insurance
loans, tial real housing Housing Manufac- and Construc- motor- aqua- munica- com-
Period Total total Total estate loans Total loans turing quarrying tion cycles culture tions panies
Lending, total End of year or quarter *
 
2008 2,357.5 1,157.4 1,093.4 907.1 186.3 1,332.6 302.8 157.4 56.1 52.1 138.9 34.6 74.0 127.6
2009          Sep 2,375.6 1,149.2 1,092.1 900.2 191.9 1,346.7 300.7 155.4 63.1 62.7 126.2 36.0 73.6 165.7
         Dec 2,357.6 1,155.1 1,094.7 905.0 189.7 1,327.1 301.4 145.8 68.5 63.2 122.1 36.4 74.7 165.2
2010          Mar 2,347.1 1,151.5 1,090.4 902.0 188.5 1,320.8 299.6 143.9 69.5 63.7 122.2 37.6 77.2 162.7
         June 2,368.1 1,157.6 1,091.0 901.8 189.2 1,339.2 299.0 143.5 72.3 64.2 120.6 39.6 81.5 171.8
         Sep 2,353.9 1,151.9 1,096.6 905.8 190.8 1,320.0 300.2 138.1 73.0 63.4 120.1 40.5 78.1 160.6
 Short-term lending
2008 335.5 − 8.4 − 8.4 294.8 4.5 51.4 5.4 10.4 54.7 3.1 7.4 70.9
2009          Sep 337.3 − 8.8 − 8.8 296.9 4.8 46.4 5.4 15.1 44.0 3.9 7.3 98.4
         Dec 306.3 − 8.4 − 8.4 266.9 4.5 36.3 6.0 14.2 39.7 3.0 7.1 90.7
2010          Mar 302.7 − 8.1 − 8.1 264.2 4.3 36.6 6.1 15.1 39.7 3.5 7.7 87.3
         June 313.0 − 7.4 − 7.4 272.6 3.8 36.4 6.4 14.9 38.8 3.9 7.9 95.6
         Sep 295.9 − 8.1 − 8.1 255.2 4.0 34.8 5.2 14.6 39.0 3.7 7.3 85.4
 Medium-term lending
2008 222.0 − 30.3 − 30.3 159.1 10.9 27.1 2.7 6.6 13.8 3.1 14.5 18.0
2009          Sep 237.2 − 32.0 − 32.0 169.6 11.6 32.2 4.0 8.8 13.4 3.3 14.1 21.7
         Dec 242.7 − 32.4 − 32.4 173.9 11.8 32.6 4.8 9.0 13.9 3.7 13.6 25.5
2010          Mar 237.5 − 32.2 − 32.2 168.9 11.6 30.4 5.1 8.9 14.6 3.7 13.2 26.1
         June 237.2 − 32.4 − 32.4 169.3 11.8 30.3 5.2 9.3 13.6 3.8 13.5 26.9         Sep 236.2 − 33.0 − 33.0 167.8 11.9 28.2 5.0 9.3 13.3 4.1 13.1 27.7
 Long-term lending
2008 1,800.0 1,157.4 1,054.6 907.1 147.5 878.7 287.5 78.9 48.0 35.2 70.4 28.4 52.1 38.6
2009          Sep 1,801.0 1,149.2 1,051.3 900.2 151.1 880.2 284.3 76.8 53.8 38.9 68.8 28.8 52.2 45.6
         Dec 1,808.6 1,155.1 1,053.9 905.0 148.9 886.4 285.1 76.9 57.7 40.0 68.5 29.8 54.0 49.0
2010          Mar 1,806.9 1,151.5 1,050.1 902.0 148.1 887.7 283.6 77.0 58.3 39.8 67.9 30.3 56.3 49.3
         June 1,817.9 1,157.6 1,051.1 901.8 149.3 897.2 283.4 76.8 60.7 40.0 68.2 32.0 60.2 49.2         Sep 1,821.8 1,151.9 1,055.6 905.8 149.8 897.0 284.3 75.1 62.8 39.5 67.7 32.7 57.7 47.6
 
Lending, total Change during quarter *
 
2009          Q3 − 13.2 − 0.7 + 3.3 + 0.3 + 3.0 − 19.2 − 0.2 − 4.3 + 0.3 − 0.7 − 2.7 + 1.3 − 1.1 − 7.6
         Q4 − 23.3 + 3.3 + 2.6 + 2.3 + 0.3 − 23.9 + 0.7 − 9.7 + 3.8 + 0.2 − 4.3 + 0.4 + 1.1 − 7.7
2010          Q1 − 11.2 − 3.4 − 4.7 − 3.0 − 1.7 − 6.3 − 1.4 − 1.9 + 1.0 + 0.5 + 0.1 + 0.5 + 2.5 − 4.5
         Q2 + 21.0 + 2.7 + 0.5 + 0.7 − 0.1 + 18.2 − 0.6 − 0.4 + 2.7 + 0.4 − 1.6 + 2.1 + 4.4 + 8.7         Q3 − 14.1 + 2.3 + 5.1 + 3.5 + 1.5 − 19.1 + 1.1 − 4.2 + 0.7 − 0.8 − 0.5 + 0.9 − 3.4 − 11.2
 Short-term lending
2009          Q3 − 24.9 − + 0.0 − + 0.0 − 25.3 − 0.1 − 4.4 − 0.9 − 0.7 − 2.9 + 0.1 − 0.5 − 10.9         Q4 − 30.9 − − 0.3 − − 0.3 − 29.9 − 0.3 − 10.1 + 0.6 − 0.9 − 4.2 − 0.9 − 0.2 − 10.6
2010          Q1 − 3.8 − − 0.3 − − 0.3 − 2.9 − 0.2 + 0.3 + 0.1 + 0.8 − 0.0 + 0.4 + 0.6 − 3.5
         Q2 + 8.4 − − 0.7 − − 0.7 + 7.9 − 0.6 − 0.2 + 0.3 − 0.2 − 0.9 + 0.3 + 0.2 + 8.1         Q3 − 17.7 − + 0.2 − + 0.2 − 17.8 + 0.1 − 1.7 − 1.2 − 0.4 + 0.2 − 0.2 − 0.6 − 10.4
 Medium-term lending
2009          Q3 + 4.3 − + 0.4 − + 0.4 + 2.5 + 0.1 + 0.6 + 0.4 − 0.0 + 0.2 + 0.3 − 0.5 + 0.7         Q4 + 2.7 − + 0.3 − + 0.3 + 2.4 + 0.2 + 0.2 + 0.9 − 0.1 + 0.3 + 0.3 − 0.5 + 2.4
2010          Q1 − 5.8 − − 0.2 − − 0.2 − 5.6 − 0.2 − 2.3 + 0.3 − 0.1 + 0.6 − 0.1 − 0.3 − 1.6
         Q2 + 0.7 − + 0.5 − + 0.5 − 0.1 + 0.2 − 0.0 − 0.1 + 0.3 − 1.0 + 0.1 − 0.1 + 0.7         Q3 − 0.8 − + 0.5 − + 0.5 − 1.4 + 0.1 − 0.9 − 0.2 + 0.1 − 0.3 + 0.3 − 0.4 + 0.9
 Long-term lending
2009          Q3 + 7.4 − 0.7 + 2.8 + 0.3 + 2.6 + 3.7 − 0.3 − 0.5 + 0.8 + 0.0 − 0.0 + 0.8 − 0.0 + 2.6         Q4 + 4.9 + 3.3 + 2.6 + 2.3 + 0.3 + 3.6 + 0.8 + 0.1 + 2.3 + 1.1 − 0.3 + 1.0 + 1.8 + 0.4
2010          Q1 − 1.7 − 3.4 − 4.2 − 3.0 − 1.2 + 2.1 − 1.1 + 0.1 + 0.6 − 0.2 − 0.5 + 0.3 + 2.3 + 0.6
         Q2 + 11.9 + 2.7 + 0.7 + 0.7 + 0.0 + 10.4 − 0.2 − 0.2 + 2.4 + 0.2 + 0.2 + 1.6 + 4.3 − 0.1         Q3 + 4.4 + 2.3 + 4.3 + 3.5 + 0.8 + 0.0 + 1.0 − 1.7 + 2.1 − 0.5 − 0.4 + 0.8 − 2.5 − 1.6
*Excluding lending by foreign branches. Breakdown of lending by building appear in the following Monthly Report, are not specially marked. —
and loan associations by areas and sectors estimated. Statistical alterations 1Excluding fiduciary loans. — 2Including sole proprietors. — 3Excluding
have been eliminated from the changes. The figures for the latest date are mortgage loans and housing loans, even in the form of instalment credit.
always to be regarded as provisional; subsequent alterations, which will x As of December 2008, the data are collected according to the
32*IV Banks

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2010
IV Banks
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Lending to
 Lending to employees and other individuals non-profit institutions
Memo items Other lending Services sector (including the professions)
of which of which
Debitbalanceson wage,
Other Lending salary
real to self- Lending and of which
Housing Holding estate employed to craft Housing pension Housing Instalment
Total companies Total loans Total loans  
3 accounts Total loans   Period enterprises activities persons  2 enterprises
End of year or quarter * Lending, total 
 
691.9 169.4 51.7 190.2 381.4 58.2 1,011.4 787.3 224.0 132.1 17.1 13.5 3.3 2008
663.9 180.9 50.0 172.3 379.7 55.1 1,015.9 788.1 227.8 140.3 16.2 13.0 3.3 2009          Sep 
651.2 181.2 46.5 170.5 378.9 54.3 1,017.5 790.0 227.5 142.0 15.8 13.0 3.3          Dec 
643.9 179.5 44.9 171.7 378.1 54.4 1,013.4 787.5 225.8 141.8 15.0 13.0 3.3 2010          Mar 
645.7 177.3 44.1 175.0 381.1 55.0 1,016.0 788.7 227.4 143.8 14.2 12.9 3.4          June
646.2 176.8 46.8 176.4 381.2 54.4 1,020.8 792.9 228.0 154.0 14.7 13.1 3.5          Sep 
Short-term lending
91.4 13.4 17.0 19.3 35.4 9.4 39.7 3.9 35.8 2.8 17.1 1.0 0.0 2008
76.5 11.5 15.1 15.8 34.6 9.2 39.7 4.0 35.7 3.0 16.2 0.7 0.0 2009          Sep 
69.9 11.1 12.1 14.6 33.3 8.3 38.7 4.0 34.7 3.0 15.8 0.7 0.0          Dec 
68.2 10.6 11.7 14.8 33.8 8.9 37.8 3.8 34.0 3.0 15.0 0.7 0.0 2010          Mar 
68.7 10.5 11.7 14.5 34.1 8.8 39.6 3.7 35.9 2.8 14.2 0.8 0.0          June
65.3 9.9 11.6 14.3 33.1 8.5 40.0 4.0 36.0 2.6 14.7 0.7 0.0          Sep 
Medium-term lending
73.3 8.2 9.2 21.3 26.7 4.0 62.3 19.5 42.8 35.1 − 0.6 0.0 2008
72.1 8.3 10.5 21.9 27.2 4.0 67.0 20.4 46.6 39.6 − 0.6 0.0 2009          Sep 
70.8 8.5 11.0 21.7 27.6 4.0 68.2 20.5 47.7 40.9 − 0.6 0.0          Dec 
66.9 8.4 9.5 21.7 27.4 3.9 68.1 20.5 47.6 40.9 − 0.6 0.0 2010          Mar 
66.8 8.5 8.8 21.8 27.8 3.8 67.4 20.6 46.8 41.5 − 0.5 0.0          June
67.1 8.7 9.8 21.3 28.0 3.7 67.9 21.0 46.9 41.7 − 0.5 0.0          Sep 
Long-term lending
527.2 147.8 25.6 149.7 319.3 44.8 909.4 763.9 145.4 94.2 − 11.9 3.2 2008
515.3 161.1 24.4 134.6 317.9 41.9 909.2 763.7 145.5 97.7 − 11.7 3.3 2009          Sep 
510.4 161.6 23.5 134.1 318.0 42.0 910.6 765.5 145.0 98.0 − 11.7 3.3          Dec 
508.8 160.5 23.7 135.1 316.9 41.6 907.5 763.2 144.3 97.9 − 11.7 3.3 2010          Mar 
510.2 158.3 23.6 138.7 319.1 42.3 909.1 764.4 144.7 99.5 − 11.6 3.3          June
513.8 158.1 25.4 140.8 320.0 42.2 913.0 767.8 145.1 109.6 − 11.9 3.5          Sep 
 
Change during quarter * Lending, total 
 
− 4.5 − 0.3 − 1.5 + 0.9 − 0.6 − 0.6 + 5.7 + 3.2 + 2.4 + 3.1 + 0.1 + 0.3 + 0.2 2009          Q3
− 7.6 + 0.5 − 2.9 + 0.3 − 1.0 − 0.8 + 0.6 + 1.9 − 1.3 + 0.7 − 0.4 − 0.0 + 0.0          Q4
− 4.6 − 1.8 − 1.6 + 0.9 − 0.8 + 0.2 − 4.9 − 3.3 − 1.6 − 0.2 − 0.8 − 0.0 + 0.0 2010          Q1
+ 2.1 − 2.0 − 0.9 + 3.2 + 2.7 − 0.1 + 2.9 + 1.1 + 1.7 + 1.9 − 0.7 − 0.1 + 0.0          Q2
− 0.7 + 0.4 + 1.3 + 0.3 + 0.2 − 0.6 + 4.8 + 3.8 + 1.0 + 0.5 + 0.4 + 0.2 + 0.1          Q3
Short-term lending
− 5.2 − 0.5 − 1.2 − 0.5 − 0.8 − 0.6 + 0.5 + 0.1 + 0.4 − 0.1 + 0.1 − 0.0 − 0.0 2009          Q3
− 3.7 − 0.3 − 2.4 − 0.4 − 1.3 − 0.9 − 1.0 − 0.1 − 1.0 + 0.0 − 0.4 + 0.0 − 0.0          Q4
− 1.5 − 0.5 − 0.4 + 0.2 + 0.5 + 0.7 − 0.9 − 0.1 − 0.8 − 0.0 − 0.8 − + 0.0 2010          Q1
+ 0.2 − 0.1 + 0.0 − 0.3 + 0.1 − 0.1 + 0.5 − 0.1 + 0.6 − 0.2 − 0.7 + 0.0 − 0.0          Q2
− 3.6 − 0.5 − 0.3 − 0.3 − 1.2 − 0.3 + 0.2 + 0.1 + 0.0 − 0.1 + 0.4 − 0.0 + 0.0          Q3
Medium-term lending
+ 0.8 + 0.4 + 0.1 + 1.1 + 0.4 − 0.0 + 1.7 + 0.3 + 1.4 + 1.5 − + 0.1 + 0.0 2009          Q3
− 1.1 + 0.2 + 0.2 + 0.2 + 0.2 − 0.1 + 0.3 + 0.1 + 0.1 + 0.3 − − 0.0 + 0.0          Q4
− 2.1 − 0.1 − 1.5 − 0.0 − 0.2 − 0.1 − 0.2 − 0.0 − 0.1 + 0.0 − − 0.0 − 0.0 2010          Q1
+ 0.0 − 0.1 − 0.5 − 0.1 + 0.4 − 0.1 + 0.9 + 0.4 + 0.5 + 0.6 − − 0.1 + 0.0          Q2
− 0.9 + 0.3 − 0.2 − 0.6 + 0.2 − 0.1 + 0.5 + 0.4 + 0.1 − 0.0 − + 0.0 + 0.0          Q3
Long-term lending
− 0.0 − 0.2 − 0.4 + 0.4 − 0.2 − 0.0 + 3.5 + 2.9 + 0.6 + 1.6 − + 0.3 + 0.2 2009          Q3
− 2.9 + 0.6 − 0.7 + 0.5 + 0.1 + 0.1 + 1.4 + 1.9 − 0.5 + 0.3 − − 0.0 + 0.0          Q4
− 1.0 − 1.2 + 0.2 + 0.7 − 1.1 − 0.4 − 3.9 − 3.1 − 0.7 − 0.1 − + 0.0 + 0.0 2010          Q1
+ 1.9 − 1.8 − 0.4 + 3.7 + 2.3 + 0.1 + 1.6 + 0.9 + 0.6 + 1.5 − − 0.0 + 0.0          Q2
+ 3.8 + 0.7 + 1.8 + 1.2 + 1.1 − 0.2 + 4.1 + 3.2 + 0.9 + 0.7 − + 0.2 + 0.1          Q3
Federal Statistical Office’s "Classification of Economic Activities", Edition breaks could only be statistically adjusted in part, the data from 2 008 Q4
2008 (WZ 2008). The changeover from the "old" to the "new" classification onwards are not fully comparable with those from preceding quarte rs. 
resulted in many changes within the individual sectors. As the resulting
33*IV Banks

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
E U R O S Y S T E M
Monthly Report
November 2010
IV Banks
 
7 Deposits of domestic non-banks (non-MFIs) at banks (MFIs) in Germany *
 
 
€ billion
Time deposits  1,2   Memo item
  
 for more than 1 year  2 Included Subordinated
 liabilities in time
for up for up (excluding deposits:
to and to and for more Bank negotiable liabilities
Deposits, Sight including including than Savings savings Fiduciary debt arising
Period total deposits Total 1 year Total 2 years 2 years bonds  4 loans securities) from repos deposits  3 
Domestic non-banks, total End of year or month *
 
2007 2,579.1 779.9 1,125.4 418.9 706.5 22.8 683.7 555.4 118.4 36.4 35.0 22.6
2008 2,781.4 834.6 1,276.1 530.6 745.6 32.6 713.0 535.2 135.4 32.3 34.4 59.3
2009 2,829.7 1,029.5 1,102.6 339.5 763.1 32.1 731.0 594.5 103.2 43.4 35.6 76.8
2009          Oct 2,812.0 1,014.0 1,110.4 347.2 763.2 32.3 730.9 581.8 105.9 42.2 35.3 82.0
         Nov 2,825.5 1,037.6 1,098.1 336.0 762.1 31.7 730.4 585.6 104.2 42.2 35.6 80.2         Dec 2,829.7 1,029.5 1,102.6 339.5 763.1 32.1 731.0 594.5 103.2 43.4 35.6 76.8
2010          Jan 2,820.3 1,051.3 1,070.0 309.9 760.1 30.3 729.8 597.7 101.3 43.0 38.1 63.5
         Feb 2,830.1 1,055.9 1,070.5 310.8 759.7 29.9 729.8 602.9 100.8 43.0 38.1 73.3         Mar 2,819.0 1,040.0 1,073.7 315.1 758.6 29.1 729.6 604.7 100.5 42.8 38.1 74.5
         Apr 2,852.0 1,070.3 1,077.0 319.0 758.1 28.6 729.5 604.8 99.9 42.7 38.1 95.3
         May 2,867.5 1,089.6 1,073.1 321.6 751.5 27.3 724.2 605.1 99.7 42.7 38.0 97.8         June 2,867.5 1,090.5 1,073.1 323.1 750.0 25.8 724.2 604.4 99.5 42.4 37.8 96.1
         July 2,851.1 1,084.9 1,061.3 314.4 746.9 24.7 722.2 605.9 98.9 42.2 37.8 86.4
         Aug 2,873.4 1,094.7 1,074.2 324.6 749.6 24.3 725.2 605.9 98.7 42.2 37.6 97.5
         Sep 2,867.2 1,083.3 1,079.4 331.4 748.0 24.2 723.9 606.1 98.4 42.1 37.6 89.1
Changes *
2008 + 207.6 + 54.3 + 156.6 + 114.5 + 42.1 + 10.0 + 32.0 − 20.2 + 17.0 − 1.3 − 0.6 + 36.7
2009 + 59.7 + 211.4 − 179.3 − 207.5 + 28.2 − 0.5 + 28.7 + 59.3 − 31.6 − 0.9 + 1.4 + 17.5
2009          Oct + 1.7 + 26.8 − 29.3 − 26.9 − 2.3 − 0.0 − 2.3 + 6.6 − 2.5 + 0.1 + 0.2 − 1.5
         Nov + 13.5 + 23.6 − 12.3 − 11.1 − 1.1 − 0.7 − 0.5 + 3.8 − 1.7 + 0.0 + 0.3 − 1.8         Dec + 4.3 − 8.1 + 4.5 + 3.5 + 1.0 + 0.4 + 0.6 + 8.9 − 1.0 + 0.1 + 0.0 − 3.4
2010          Jan − 9.5 + 21.9 − 32.6 − 29.6 − 3.0 − 1.8 − 1.2 + 3.2 − 1.9 − 0.5 + 2.5 − 13.3
         Feb + 9.9 + 4.6 + 0.5 + 0.9 − 0.4 − 0.4 + 0.0 + 5.2 − 0.5 − 0.0 + 0.0 + 9.8         Mar − 11.2 − 15.9 + 3.2 + 4.3 − 1.0 − 0.8 − 0.2 + 1.8 − 0.4 − 0.2 − 0.0 + 1.3
         Apr + 32.0 + 30.3 + 2.2 + 2.8 − 0.6 − 0.5 − 0.1 + 0.1 − 0.6 − 0.0 − 0.1 + 20.8
         May + 15.4 + 19.3 − 3.9 + 2.7 − 6.6 − 1.2 − 5.3 + 0.2 − 0.2 − 0.0 − 0.1 + 2.5         June + 0.0 + 1.4 − 0.5 + 1.1 − 1.6 − 1.6 + 0.0 − 0.6 − 0.3 − 0.3 − 0.2 − 1.7
         July − 16.4 − 5.6 − 11.8 − 8.7 − 3.1 − 1.1 − 2.0 + 1.5 − 0.5 − 0.2 + 0.0 − 9.7
         Aug + 17.6 + 9.8 + 8.2 + 10.2 − 2.0 − 0.4 − 1.6 − 0.1 − 0.3 − 0.0 − 0.2 + 11.1         Sep − 6.2 − 11.4 + 5.2 + 6.7 − 1.5 − 0.2 − 1.3 + 0.3 − 0.3 − 0.1 − 0.0 − 8.5
Domestic government End of year or month *
2007 158.5 28.0 127.7 71.9 55.8 3.7 52.1 1.4 1.5 27.6 4.5 −
2008 164.7 34.2 127.8 75.4 52.5 3.6 48.8 1.2 1.5 24.2 3.9 −2009 129.3 41.8 83.4 43.0 40.4 3.6 36.8 2.6 1.5 35.7 3.9 0.5
2009          Oct 131.0 42.6 84.5 43.6 40.9 3.9 37.0 2.4 1.6 34.9 3.9 2.7
         Nov 134.4 44.9 85.4 44.6 40.9 3.8 37.1 2.5 1.5 34.9 3.9 3.3         Dec 129.3 41.8 83.4 43.0 40.4 3.6 36.8 2.6 1.5 35.7 3.9 0.5
2010          Jan 127.7 41.1 82.6 40.0 42.6 3.6 39.1 2.5 1.5 35.6 6.3 1.2
         Feb 130.6 43.7 82.9 40.1 42.7 3.6 39.2 2.5 1.5 35.6 6.3 0.5
         Mar 127.6 40.3 83.3 41.3 42.0 3.4 38.5 2.5 1.5 35.4 6.3 0.9
         Apr 124.4 39.2 81.2 39.6 41.6 3.3 38.3 2.6 1.5 35.4 6.3 −
         May 131.9 43.8 83.9 42.6 41.3 3.1 38.3 2.8 1.5 35.4 6.2 −         June 139.0 47.1 87.5 45.4 42.1 2.5 39.6 2.8 1.6 35.3 6.2 0.2
         July 130.5 40.5 85.7 43.9 41.8 2.1 39.7 2.8 1.6 35.2 6.2 0.1
         Aug 137.0 43.0 89.6 47.5 42.0 2.0 40.0 2.8 1.6 35.1 6.2 0.4         Sep 140.6 43.4 93.0 51.6 41.3 1.9 39.4 2.8 1.5 35.1 6.2 1.4
Changes *
2008 + 8.5 + 6.2 + 2.5 + 5.1 − 2.6 + 0.0 − 2.6 − 0.3 − 0.0 − 0.6 − 0.6 + 0.0
2009 − 23.9 + 7.5 − 32.9 − 32.2 − 0.7 − 0.0 − 0.7 + 1.4 + 0.1 − 0.5 + 0.0 + 0.5
2009          Oct − 2.7 − 1.0 − 1.8 − 1.6 − 0.2 − 0.0 − 0.2 + 0.1 + 0.0 + 0.1 − + 0.9
         Nov + 3.6 + 2.3 + 1.1 + 1.2 − 0.0 − 0.1 + 0.1 + 0.2 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.0 + 0.5         Dec − 5.1 − 3.1 − 2.1 − 1.6 − 0.5 − 0.2 − 0.3 + 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.2 + 0.0 − 2.7
2010          Jan − 1.6 − 0.8 − 0.7 − 3.0 + 2.3 − 0.1 + 2.3 − 0.1 − 0.0 − 0.1 + 2.4 + 0.6
         Feb + 2.9 + 2.6 + 0.3 + 0.1 + 0.1 + 0.0 + 0.1 + 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.6         Mar − 3.0 − 3.4 + 0.4 + 1.2 − 0.8 − 0.2 − 0.6 + 0.0 + 0.0 − 0.2 − 0.0 + 0.3
         Apr − 3.2 − 1.1 − 2.1 − 1.7 − 0.4 − 0.2 − 0.3 + 0.0 + 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.9
         May + 7.3 + 4.4 + 2.7 + 3.0 − 0.2 − 0.2 − 0.0 + 0.2 − − 0.0 − 0.0 −         June + 7.1 + 3.3 + 3.6 + 2.8 + 0.8 − 0.5 + 1.3 + 0.0 + 0.1 − 0.1 − 0.0 + 0.2
         July − 8.5 − 6.6 − 1.8 − 1.5 − 0.3 − 0.4 + 0.1 + 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.1 − − 0.1
         Aug + 6.5 + 2.6 + 3.9 + 3.6 + 0.3 − 0.1 + 0.4 + 0.0 + 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.0 + 0.3         Sep + 3.6 + 0.3 + 3.4 + 4.1 − 0.7 − 0.1 − 0.6 + 0.0 − 0.1 − 0.1 − + 1.0
*See Table IV.2, footnote *; statistical breaks have been eliminated from provisional. Subsequent revisions, which appear in the following Monthly
the changes. The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as Report, are not specially marked. — 1Including subordinated liabilities and
34*IV Banks

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2010
IV Banks
 
7 Deposits of domestic non-banks (non-MFIs) at banks (MFIs) in Germany * (cont’d)
 
 
€ billion
Time deposits  1,2   Memo item
  
 for more than 1 year  2 Included Subordinated
 liabilities in time
for up for up (excluding deposits:
to and to and for more Bank negotiable liabilities
Deposits, Sight including including than Savings savings Fiduciary debt arising
Period total deposits Total 1 year Total 2 years 2 years bonds  4 loans securities) from repos deposits  3 
Domestic enterprises and households End of year or month *
 
2007 2,420.6 752.0 997.7 347.0 650.7 19.0 631.7 554.0 116.9 8.8 30.5 22.6
2008 2,616.7 800.5 1,148.3 455.2 693.1 29.0 664.1 534.0 133.9 8.1 30.5 59.3
2009 2,700.4 987.6 1,019.2 296.5 722.7 28.5 694.2 591.9 101.6 7.7 31.7 76.3
2009          Oct 2,681.0 971.4 1,025.9 303.6 722.3 28.4 693.9 579.4 104.3 7.3 31.4 79.3
         Nov 2,691.1 992.6 1,012.7 291.5 721.2 27.9 693.3 583.1 102.7 7.3 31.7 76.9         Dec 2,700.4 987.6 1,019.2 296.5 722.7 28.5 694.2 591.9 101.6 7.7 31.7 76.3
2010          Jan 2,692.6 1,010.3 987.3 269.9 717.4 26.7 690.7 595.2 99.8 7.4 31.8 62.3
         Feb 2,699.6 1,012.3 987.6 270.7 716.9 26.3 690.6 600.4 99.3 7.4 31.8 72.7         Mar 2,691.4 999.8 990.4 273.7 716.7 25.6 691.1 602.2 99.0 7.3 31.8 73.7
         Apr 2,727.6 1,031.1 995.9 279.4 716.5 25.3 691.2 602.3 98.3 7.3 31.8 95.3
         May 2,735.5 1,045.8 989.2 279.0 710.2 24.3 685.9 602.3 98.2 7.3 31.7 97.8         June 2,728.5 1,043.4 985.6 277.7 707.9 23.3 684.6 601.7 97.8 7.1 31.6 95.9
         July 2,720.6 1,044.5 975.7 270.5 705.1 22.6 682.5 603.1 97.4 7.1 31.6 86.3
         Aug 2,736.4 1,051.7 984.6 277.1 707.5 22.3 685.2 603.0 97.1 7.1 31.4 97.1
         Sep 2,726.5 1,039.9 986.4 279.7 706.7 22.2 684.5 603.3 96.9 7.0 31.4 87.7
Changes *
2008 + 199.1 + 48.1 + 154.0 + 109.4 + 44.6 + 10.0 + 34.6 − 20.0 + 17.0 − 0.7 + 0.0 + 36.7
2009 + 83.6 + 203.8 − 146.4 − 175.3 + 28.9 − 0.5 + 29.4 + 57.9 − 31.7 − 0.4 + 1.4 + 17.0
2009          Oct + 4.4 + 27.8 − 27.4 − 25.3 − 2.1 − 0.0 − 2.1 + 6.5 − 2.5 + 0.0 + 0.2 − 2.4
         Nov + 9.9 + 21.3 − 13.4 − 12.3 − 1.1 − 0.6 − 0.6 + 3.7 − 1.7 + 0.0 + 0.3 − 2.3         Dec + 9.4 − 5.0 + 6.5 + 5.0 + 1.5 + 0.6 + 0.9 + 8.9 − 1.0 + 0.3 − 0.0 − 0.7
2010          Jan − 7.8 + 22.6 − 31.9 − 26.6 − 5.3 − 1.8 − 3.5 + 3.2 − 1.8 − 0.3 + 0.1 − 13.9
         Feb + 7.0 + 2.0 + 0.3 + 0.8 − 0.5 − 0.4 − 0.1 + 5.2 − 0.5 + 0.0 + 0.0 + 10.4         Mar − 8.2 − 12.5 + 2.8 + 3.1 − 0.3 − 0.7 + 0.4 + 1.8 − 0.4 − 0.0 + 0.0 + 0.9
         Apr + 35.1 + 31.3 + 4.3 + 4.5 − 0.2 − 0.3 + 0.2 + 0.1 − 0.6 − 0.0 − 0.1 + 21.6
         May + 8.1 + 14.9 − 6.6 − 0.3 − 6.3 − 1.0 − 5.3 + 0.0 − 0.2 + 0.0 − 0.1 + 2.5         June − 7.0 − 1.9 − 4.1 − 1.8 − 2.4 − 1.1 − 1.3 − 0.6 − 0.3 − 0.2 − 0.2 − 1.9
         July − 7.9 + 1.1 − 9.9 − 7.2 − 2.8 − 0.6 − 2.1 + 1.5 − 0.5 − 0.0 + 0.0 − 9.6
         Aug + 11.1 + 7.2 + 4.3 + 6.6 − 2.3 − 0.3 − 2.0 − 0.1 − 0.3 + 0.0 − 0.2 + 10.8         Sep − 9.9 − 11.8 + 1.8 + 2.6 − 0.8 − 0.1 − 0.7 + 0.2 − 0.2 − 0.1 − 0.0 − 9.4
of which:  Domestic enterprises End of year or month *
2007 961.9 264.9 672.9 178.6 494.3 5.5 488.8 3.9 20.1 8.3 21.5 22.6
2008 1,073.5 292.6 757.7 223.7 534.0 7.7 526.3 3.8 19.3 7.8 22.0 59.32009 1,105.6 336.4 743.6 187.5 556.1 9.1 547.0 5.5 20.2 7.6 21.8 76.3
2009          Oct 1,107.8 342.8 740.1 180.6 559.5 8.4 551.0 5.2 19.7 7.2 21.8 79.3
         Nov 1,106.2 346.5 734.6 176.4 558.2 8.5 549.7 5.3 19.8 7.2 22.0 76.9         Dec 1,105.6 336.4 743.6 187.5 556.1 9.1 547.0 5.5 20.2 7.6 21.8 76.3
2010          Jan 1,089.1 343.0 720.2 169.0 551.1 8.6 542.6 5.7 20.2 7.2 21.8 62.3
         Feb 1,087.3 337.2 723.9 174.3 549.6 8.5 541.2 5.9 20.3 7.3 21.8 72.7
         Mar 1,083.5 329.6 727.5 178.7 548.8 8.4 540.4 6.2 20.2 7.2 21.8 73.7
         Apr 1,110.4 349.3 734.6 186.4 548.2 8.4 539.8 6.2 20.2 7.2 21.7 95.3
         May 1,115.0 357.5 731.0 188.7 542.3 8.2 534.1 6.3 20.2 7.2 21.7 97.8         June 1,105.6 351.6 727.4 187.5 539.9 7.6 532.3 6.4 20.1 7.0 21.8 95.9
         July 1,092.2 346.8 718.4 181.3 537.2 7.5 529.7 6.5 20.5 7.0 21.8 86.3
         Aug 1,110.5 356.3 727.2 187.9 539.3 7.5 531.8 6.5 20.5 7.0 21.5 97.1         Sep 1,101.8 343.1 731.8 194.0 537.9 7.4 530.4 6.5 20.4 6.9 21.6 87.7
Changes *
2008 + 110.4 + 27.0 + 84.4 + 45.0 + 39.3 + 2.1 + 37.2 − 0.1 − 0.8 − 0.5 + 0.4 + 36.7
2009 + 32.6 + 61.6 − 31.5 − 53.1 + 21.6 + 1.4 + 20.3 + 1.6 + 0.9 − 0.4 − 0.3 + 17.0
2009          Oct − 1.4 + 16.4 − 18.0 − 14.9 − 3.1 − 0.0 − 3.1 + 0.1 + 0.1 + 0.0 − 0.1 − 2.4
         Nov − 1.9 + 3.8 − 5.8 − 4.4 − 1.4 + 0.1 − 1.4 + 0.0 + 0.1 − + 0.1 − 2.3         Dec − 0.6 − 10.2 + 9.0 + 11.1 − 2.1 + 0.6 − 2.7 + 0.2 + 0.4 + 0.3 − 0.2 − 0.7
2010          Jan − 16.5 + 6.6 − 23.4 − 18.5 − 5.0 − 0.5 − 4.4 + 0.3 + 0.0 − 0.3 − 0.0 − 13.9
         Feb − 1.8 − 5.8 + 3.7 + 5.2 − 1.5 − 0.1 − 1.4 + 0.2 + 0.1 + 0.0 − 0.0 + 10.4         Mar − 3.8 − 7.5 + 3.6 + 4.4 − 0.8 − 0.1 − 0.7 + 0.2 − 0.0 − 0.0 + 0.0 + 0.9
         Apr + 25.8 + 19.7 + 6.0 + 6.6 − 0.6 + 0.0 − 0.6 + 0.1 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.1 + 21.6
         May + 4.8 + 8.4 − 3.6 + 2.3 − 6.0 − 0.2 − 5.7 + 0.1 − 0.0 + 0.0 − 0.0 + 2.5         June − 9.4 − 5.4 − 4.0 − 1.6 − 2.4 − 0.7 − 1.8 + 0.1 − 0.0 − 0.2 + 0.1 − 1.9
         July − 13.4 − 4.8 − 9.0 − 6.2 − 2.8 − 0.1 − 2.6 + 0.0 + 0.3 − 0.1 − 0.0 − 9.6
         Aug + 13.6 + 9.5 + 4.1 + 6.6 − 2.5 + 0.0 − 2.6 + 0.1 − 0.0 + 0.0 − 0.2 + 10.8         Sep − 8.7 − 13.2 + 4.6 + 6.1 − 1.4 − 0.1 − 1.4 − 0.0 − 0.1 − 0.1 + 0.1 − 9.4
liabilities arising from registered debt securities. — 2Including deposits under savings and loan contracts (see also footnote 2). — 4Including
under savings and loan contracts (see Table IV.12). — 3Excluding deposits liabilities arising from non-negotiable bearer debt securities. 
35*IV Banks

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
E U R O S Y S T E M
Monthly Report
November 2010
IV Banks
 
8 Deposits of domestic households and non-profit institutions at banks (MFIs) in Germany *
 
 
€ billion
Sight deposits Time deposits  1,2 
by creditor group by creditor group
Deposits of Domestic households Domestic households
domestichouseholdsand Domestic
non-profit Self- non-profit Self-
employed Other institu- employed Other institutions,
Period total Total Total persons Employees tions Total Total persons Employees individuals individuals
End of year or month *
 
2007 1,458.7 487.1 472.1 83.9 320.9 67.2 15.0 324.8 300.7 41.7 234.3 24.7
2008 1,543.2 507.8 491.8 85.1 336.5 70.3 16.0 390.6 367.2 50.4 281.0 35.8
2009 1,594.9 651.3 631.3 112.5 424.6 94.3 19.9 275.6 258.5 24.5 213.2 20.7
2010          Apr 1,617.2 681.8 659.8 116.8 442.3 100.8 22.0 261.2 245.0 21.7 204.1 19.1
         May 1,620.5 688.3 665.2 118.0 446.1 101.1 23.1 258.2 242.2 21.0 202.5 18.7         June 1,622.9 691.8 668.0 116.9 456.1 95.0 23.8 258.2 241.9 21.7 201.9 18.3
         July 1,628.4 697.6 674.6 120.3 458.9 95.3 23.1 257.2 240.9 21.8 201.1 18.0
         Aug 1,625.9 695.4 672.6 120.8 457.4 94.4 22.7 257.4 240.8 22.2 200.9 17.7         Sep 1,624.7 696.8 674.1 118.6 460.8 94.7 22.7 254.6 238.2 21.7 199.7 16.8
Changes *
2008 + 88.7 + 21.1 + 19.5 + 1.2 + 15.2 + 3.2 + 1.5 + 69.7 + 66.6 + 9.4 + 46.1 + 11.1
2009 + 51.0 + 142.2 + 138.3 + 27.4 + 88.3 + 22.6 + 4.0 − 115.0 − 108.7 − 25.8 − 67.7 − 15.2
2010          Apr + 9.3 + 11.6 + 11.4 + 4.0 + 5.2 + 2.2 + 0.3 − 1.7 − 1.7 − 0.2 − 1.2 − 0.2
         May + 3.4 + 6.5 + 5.4 + 1.3 + 3.8 + 0.3 + 1.1 − 3.0 − 2.8 − 0.7 − 1.6 − 0.5         June + 2.4 + 3.5 + 2.8 − 1.1 + 4.3 − 0.4 + 0.7 − 0.1 − 0.3 + 0.7 − 0.6 − 0.4
         July + 5.5 + 5.9 + 6.6 + 3.4 + 2.9 + 0.4 − 0.8 − 0.9 − 1.0 + 0.1 − 0.8 − 0.3
         Aug − 2.5 − 2.3 − 1.9 + 0.5 − 1.7 − 0.8 − 0.3 + 0.2 − 0.1 + 0.4 − 0.3 − 0.3         Sep − 1.2 + 1.4 + 1.5 − 2.2 + 3.0 + 0.6 − 0.0 − 2.8 − 2.6 − 0.5 − 1.3 − 0.7
*See Table IV.2, footnote*; statistical breaks have been eliminated from the Report, are not specially marked. — 1Including subordinated liabilities and
changes. The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as liabilities arising from registered debt securities. — 2Including deposits
provisional. Subsequent revisions, which appear in the following MonthlyDEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
E U R O S Y S T E M
Monthly Report
November 2010
 
  
9 Deposits of domestic government at banks (MFIs) in Germany, by creditor group 
*
 
€ billion
Deposits
   
Federal Government and its special funds  1 State governments
Time deposits Time deposits
Savings Savings
for up deposits Memo for up deposits Memo
Domestic to and for more and bank item to and for more and bank item
government, Sight including than savings Fiduciary Sight including than savings Fiduciary
Period total Total deposits 1 year 1 year bonds  2 loans Total deposits 1 year 1 year bonds  2 loans
End of year or month *
 
2007 158.5 38.3 1.9 3.1 33.2 0.0 8.2 27.9 6.0 11.2 10.6 0.1 19.1
2008 164.7 34.8 2.3 3.7 28.9 0.0 6.6 28.2 6.9 9.9 11.3 0.1 17.3
2009 129.3 22.2 1.3 3.7 17.1 0.1 17.3 23.1 7.1 5.8 10.1 0.1 18.0
2010          Apr 124.4 19.8 1.9 1.6 16.3 0.1 17.3 28.0 6.7 8.8 12.3 0.2 17.7
         May 131.9 20.6 2.1 2.2 16.2 0.1 17.3 27.8 6.7 8.6 12.4 0.2 17.6         June 139.0 20.8 2.3 2.4 16.1 0.1 17.3 36.1 11.8 10.6 13.5 0.3 17.6
         July 130.5 19.6 2.2 1.5 15.9 0.1 17.2 30.7 7.2 9.9 13.3 0.3 17.5
         Aug 137.0 20.4 2.2 2.0 16.0 0.1 17.2 33.9 8.5 11.7 13.3 0.3 17.5         Sep 140.6 20.7 2.2 2.9 15.5 0.1 17.2 39.7 10.4 16.0 13.2 0.2 17.4
Changes *
2008 + 8.5 − 3.2 + 0.3 + 0.6 − 4.2 + 0.0 − 0.0 + 0.5 + 0.9 − 1.1 + 0.7 − 0.0 − 0.6
2009 − 23.9 − 0.8 − 1.0 + 0.4 − 0.3 + 0.0 − 0.1 − 5.1 + 0.2 − 4.1 − 1.1 + 0.0 − 0.4
2010          Apr − 3.2 − 0.5 + 0.6 − 0.8 − 0.4 − − 0.0 − 2.6 − 1.8 − 0.8 + 0.0 + 0.0 − 0.0
         May + 7.3 + 0.8 + 0.2 + 0.6 − 0.1 − + 0.0 − 0.2 + 0.0 − 0.2 + 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.1         June + 7.1 + 0.2 + 0.1 + 0.2 − 0.1 + 0.0 − 0.0 + 8.3 + 5.0 + 2.0 + 1.1 + 0.1 − 0.1
         July − 8.5 − 1.2 − 0.1 − 0.9 − 0.2 − 0.0 − 0.1 − 5.3 − 4.5 − 0.7 − 0.2 + 0.0 − 0.0
         Aug + 6.5 + 0.7 + 0.0 + 0.6 + 0.2 − + 0.0 + 3.1 + 1.3 + 1.8 + 0.0 + 0.0 − 0.1         Sep + 3.6 + 0.3 + 0.0 + 0.9 − 0.6 + 0.0 − 0.0 + 5.8 + 1.8 + 4.2 − 0.1 − 0.1 − 0.1
*See Table IV.2, footnote *; excluding deposits of the Treuhand agency and which are included in ”Enterprises”. Statistical breaks have been eliminat ed
its successor organisations, of the Federal Railways, east German Railways from the changes. The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded
and Federal Post Office, and, from 1995, of Deutsche Bahn AG, Deutsche as provisional. Subsequent revisions, which appear in the followingPost AG and Deutsche Telekom AG, and of publicly owned enterprises,
36*IV Banks

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2010
IV Banks
 
 
 
 
 
 Savings deposits  3  Memo item
 
 by maturity
 more than 1 year  2 
Included Subordinated
of which liabilities in time
Domestic Domestic (excluding deposits:
up to and up to and Bank negotiable liabilities non-profit non-profit
institu- including including more than Domestic institu- savings Fiduciary debt arising
tions 1 year Total 2 years 2 years Total tions bonds  4 loans from repos   Period households securities)  5 
End of year or month *
 
24.1 168.4 156.4 13.5 142.8 550.1 542.4 7.7 96.8 0.5 9.0 − 2007
23.4 231.5 159.2 21.3 137.9 530.2 523.1 7.1 114.6 0.3 8.5 − 2008
17.2 109.0 166.6 19.4 147.2 586.5 577.5 9.0 81.5 0.1 9.8 − 2009
16.3 93.0 168.3 16.9 151.4 596.0 586.4 9.6 78.2 0.1 10.1 − 2010          Apr 
16.0 90.3 167.9 16.0 151.8 596.0 586.2 9.8 78.0 0.1 10.0 −          May
16.3 90.2 168.0 15.6 152.3 595.3 585.3 9.9 77.7 0.1 9.8 −          June
16.3 89.2 168.0 15.2 152.8 596.7 586.7 10.0 76.9 0.1 9.8 −          July
16.6 89.2 168.2 14.8 153.4 596.5 586.5 10.1 76.6 0.1 9.8 −          Aug 16.4 85.8 168.8 14.8 154.0 596.8 586.7 10.1 76.6 0.1 9.8 −          Sep 
Changes *
+ 3.1 + 64.4 + 5.3 + 7.9 − 2.6 − 19.9 − 19.3 − 0.6 + 17.8 − 0.2 − 0.4 − 2008
− 6.2 − 122.2 + 7.2 − 1.9 + 9.1 + 56.3 + 54.4 + 1.9 − 32.6 + 0.0 + 1.7 − 2009
− 0.0 − 2.1 + 0.4 − 0.4 + 0.8 − 0.0 − 0.1 + 0.1 − 0.6 − 0.0 + 0.0 − 2010          Apr 
− 0.3 − 2.6 − 0.4 − 0.8 + 0.5 − 0.0 − 0.2 + 0.2 − 0.1 − 0.0 − 0.0 −          May
+ 0.3 − 0.1 + 0.1 − 0.4 + 0.5 − 0.7 − 0.9 + 0.1 − 0.3 − 0.0 − 0.2 −          June
+ 0.1 − 1.0 + 0.0 − 0.5 + 0.5 + 1.4 + 1.3 + 0.1 − 0.8 + 0.0 + 0.0 −          July
+ 0.3 − 0.0 + 0.2 − 0.3 + 0.5 − 0.2 − 0.2 + 0.1 − 0.2 + 0.0 + 0.0 −          Aug − 0.2 − 3.4 + 0.6 − 0.0 + 0.7 + 0.3 + 0.2 + 0.1 − 0.1 − 0.0 − 0.1 −          Sep 
under savings and loan contracts (see Table IV.12). — 3Excluding deposits liabilities arising from non-negotiable bearer debt securities. — 5Included in
under savings and loan contracts (see also footnote 2). — 4Including time deposits. DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2010
 
  
 
 
 
 
Local government and local government associations
(including municipal special-purpose associations) Social security funds
Time deposits  3 Time deposits
Savings Savings
for up deposits Memo for up deposits Memo
to and for more and bank item to and for more and bank item
Sight including than savings Fiduciary Sight including than savings Fiduciary
Total deposits 1 year 1 year bonds  2,4 loans Total deposits 1 year 1 year bonds  2 loans   Period
End of year or month *
 
37.8 12.3 19.5 3.6 2.5 0.3 54.5 7.7 38.1 8.4 0.3 0.0 2007
42.5 14.3 22.0 3.9 2.2 0.2 59.2 10.7 39.8 8.4 0.3 0.0 2008
38.0 20.2 10.3 4.2 3.3 0.4 46.0 13.3 23.1 8.9 0.6 0.0 2009
34.4 17.9 8.7 4.3 3.4 0.4 42.2 12.6 20.5 8.6 0.5 0.0 2010          Apr 
37.3 19.9 9.6 4.4 3.5 0.4 46.2 15.0 22.2 8.4 0.5 0.0          May
35.2 18.2 9.1 4.5 3.5 0.4 46.9 14.9 23.3 8.1 0.6 0.0          June
34.6 17.5 9.2 4.5 3.4 0.4 45.5 13.5 23.3 8.1 0.6 0.0          July
37.6 19.4 10.2 4.5 3.5 0.4 45.2 12.9 23.6 8.2 0.6 0.0          Aug 35.7 17.9 9.9 4.5 3.5 0.4 44.5 12.9 22.9 8.2 0.6 0.0          Sep 
Changes *
+ 5.4 + 2.0 + 3.3 + 0.4 − 0.3 − 0.0 + 5.9 + 3.0 + 2.3 + 0.6 − 0.0 − 0.0 2008
− 4.4 + 5.9 − 11.7 + 0.3 + 1.1 − 0.0 − 13.6 + 2.5 − 16.8 + 0.4 + 0.3 − 0.0 2009
− 0.0 + 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.0 + 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.0 + 0.1 − 0.1 − 0.0 + 0.0 − 2010          Apr 
+ 3.0 + 1.9 + 0.9 + 0.1 + 0.1 − 0.0 + 3.8 + 2.2 + 1.7 − 0.3 + 0.1 −          May
− 2.1 − 1.7 − 0.5 + 0.1 − 0.0 − + 0.7 − 0.1 + 1.1 − 0.3 + 0.0 −          June
− 0.6 − 0.6 + 0.1 + 0.0 − 0.1 − − 1.4 − 1.4 − 0.0 + 0.0 + 0.0 −          July
+ 3.0 + 1.9 + 1.0 + 0.0 + 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.3 − 0.6 + 0.3 + 0.1 − 0.0 −          Aug − 1.9 − 1.6 − 0.3 − 0.1 + 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.6 + 0.1 − 0.7 + 0.0 + 0.0 −          Sep 
Monthly Report, are not specially marked. — 1Federal Railways Fund, liabilities arising from non-negotiable bearer debt securities. — 3Including
Indemnification Fund, Redemption Fund for Inherited Liabilities, ERP Special deposits under savings and loan contracts. — 4Excluding deposits under
Fund, German Unity Fund, Equalisation of Burdens Fund. — 2Including savings and loan contracts (see also footnote 3). 
37*IV Banks

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
E U R O S Y S T E M
Monthly Report
November 2010
IV Banks
 
10 Savings deposits and bank savings bonds of banks (MFIs) in Germany sold to non-banks (non-MFIs) *
 
 
€ billion
Savings deposits  1 Bank savings bonds,  3  sold to
of residents of non-residents domestic non-banks
at three months’ at more than three Memo
notice months’ notice item of which
Interest With
of which of which of which credited maturities
Special Special At three on of moresavings savings savings non-banks, than foreign months’
Period Total Total Total Total Total notice deposits total Total 2 years facilities  
2 facilities  2 non-banks
End of year or month *
 
2007 563.8 555.4 446.0 354.6 109.4 101.4 8.4 6.1 14.2 130.7 118.4 64.5 12.3
2008 544.1 535.2 424.8 344.0 110.4 103.2 8.9 6.3 14.9 150.8 135.4 59.6 15.4
2009 604.1 594.5 474.5 379.4 120.0 112.1 9.6 7.0 13.8 118.8 103.2 68.3 15.6
2010          May 614.7 605.1 490.9 392.6 114.2 105.3 9.6 7.2 0.3 116.6 99.7 73.1 16.9
         June 614.2 604.4 491.5 392.8 112.9 104.1 9.7 7.3 0.3 116.4 99.5 74.0 16.9
         July 615.7 605.9 495.2 396.2 110.8 101.8 9.7 7.4 0.4 115.3 98.9 74.4 16.4
         Aug 615.6 605.9 496.9 398.1 109.0 100.0 9.8 7.4 0.3 115.2 98.7 74.3 16.5
         Sep 615.9 606.1 499.5 400.0 106.6 97.6 9.7 7.4 0.3 114.6 98.4 74.1 16.2
Changes *
2008 − 19.7 − 20.2 − 21.2 − 11.1 + 1.0 + 1.6 + 0.5 + 0.1 . + 20.1 + 17.0 − 4.9 + 3.2
2009 + 60.0 + 59.3 + 50.3 + 35.8 + 8.9 + 7.8 + 0.7 + 0.8 . − 30.6 − 31.6 + 9.5 + 1.0
2010          May + 0.2 + 0.2 + 2.0 + 1.7 − 1.8 − 2.1 − 0.0 + 0.0 . + 0.2 − 0.2 + 0.7 + 0.4
         June − 0.6 − 0.6 + 0.7 + 0.2 − 1.3 − 1.2 + 0.1 + 0.1 . − 0.2 − 0.3 + 0.9 + 0.1
         July + 1.5 + 1.5 + 3.6 + 3.4 − 2.2 − 2.2 + 0.0 + 0.1 . − 1.1 − 0.5 + 0.4 − 0.5
         Aug − 0.0 − 0.1 + 1.7 + 1.9 − 1.8 − 1.9 + 0.0 + 0.1 . − 0.2 − 0.3 − 0.0 + 0.1         Sep + 0.2 + 0.3 + 2.6 + 1.9 − 2.4 − 2.4 − 0.0 + 0.0 . − 0.6 − 0.3 − 0.2 − 0.4
*See Table IV.2, footnote*; statistical breaks have been eliminated from the loan contracts, which are classified as time deposits. — 2Savings deposits
changes. The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as bearing interest at a rate which exceeds the minimum or basic rate of
provisional. Subsequent revisions, which appear in the following Monthly interest. — 3Including liabilities arising from non-negotiable bearer debt
Report, are not specially marked. — 1Excluding deposits under savings and securities. 
 
  
 
11 Debt securities and money market paper outstanding of banks (MFIs) in Germany 
*
 
€ billion
Non-negotiable bearer debt securities
Negotiable bearer debt securities and money market paper and money market paper  5 
of which of which
with maturities of Subordinated
with maturities of
Certifi- more more non-
Floating Zero Foreign cates up to and more up to and more than 1 year than 1 year negotiable negotiable
rate coupon currency of including including than including including than debt debt
Period Total bonds  1 deposit 1 year 2 years 2 years Total 1 year 2 years 2 years bonds  1,2 bonds  3,4 securities securities
End of year or month *
 
2007 1,659.1 375.7 54.2 305.1 51.2 109.6 147.5 1,402.0 1.9 0.1 1.1 0.7 53.6 1.4
2008 1,640.1 395.9 50.7 314.1 64.0 162.6 153.3 1,324.2 2.3 0.2 1.3 0.8 52.5 1.6
2009 1,529.8 380.6 43.9 317.4 70.4 115.9 105.8 1,308.2 0.9 0.0 0.3 0.6 46.1 1.8
2010          May 1,540.0 388.5 40.9 375.3 79.6 123.9 85.3 1,330.8 0.7 0.0 0.1 0.6 44.9 1.9
         June 1,517.0 394.5 39.1 370.3 73.2 116.6 70.8 1,329.6 0.6 0.0 0.1 0.6 45.9 1.6
         July 1,475.3 388.0 37.7 359.6 70.7 113.6 65.0 1,296.8 0.6 0.0 0.1 0.5 44.8 1.6
         Aug 1,482.4 391.6 38.4 368.1 74.5 120.0 61.0 1,301.4 0.6 0.0 0.0 0.5 45.0 1.6
         Sep 1,460.9 382.8 38.2 351.2 69.1 114.2 59.5 1,287.2 0.5 0.0 0.0 0.5 44.5 1.5
Changes *
2008 − 17.0 + 18.2 − 3.7 + 9.0 + 12.8 + 53.1 + 5.8 − 75.9 + 0.4 + 0.1 + 0.2 + 0.1 − 1.1 + 0.1
2009 − 110.1 − 15.3 − 6.8 + 4.7 + 6.4 − 46.7 − 47.8 − 15.6 − 1.4 − 0.2 − 1.0 − 0.2 − 6.4 + 0.5
2010          May + 3.9 − 1.3 + 1.0 + 21.5 − 0.9 + 1.2 − 3.1 + 5.9 − 0.0 − − 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.0 + 0.0
         June − 23.0 + 6.0 − 1.8 − 5.0 − 6.4 − 7.3 − 14.5 − 1.2 − 0.0 − − 0.0 − 0.0 + 1.0 − 0.2
         July − 41.6 − 6.5 − 0.5 − 10.7 − 2.5 − 3.0 − 5.8 − 32.8 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 1.1 − 0.0
         Aug + 7.1 + 3.8 + 0.7 + 8.5 + 3.8 + 6.4 − 4.0 + 4.7 − 0.0 − − 0.0 − 0.0 + 0.2 + 0.0         Sep − 21.5 − 8.8 − 0.2 − 16.9 − 5.4 − 5.8 − 1.5 − 14.2 − 0.0 − − 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.5 − 0.1
*See Table IV.2, footnote*; statistical breaks have been eliminated from the rate notes and zero coupon bonds denominated in foreign currencies. —
changes. The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as 4Bonds denominated in non-euro-area currencies. — 5Non-negotiable
provisional. Subsequent revisions, which appear in the following Monthly bearer debt securities are classified among bank savings bonds (see also
Report, are not specially marked. — 1Including debt securities denominated Table IV.10, footnote 2). 
in foreign currencies. — 2Issue value when floated. — 3Including floating
38*IV Banks

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2010
IV  Banks
  
12  Building  and  loan  associations (MFIs) in Germany *
  Interim statements
  
€ billion
Lending to banks (MFIs) Lending to non-banks (non-MFIs) Deposits of banks Deposits of non-
(MFIs)  5 banks (non-MFIs)
Credit Building loans Secur- Memo
bal- item ities (in-
ances cluding Bearer New
and Loans Treasury Deposits Deposits debt Capital con-
Num- loans under bills under under secur- (includ- tractsber (ex- Bank savings Interim and savings savings ities ing pub- enteredof Balance cluding debt and loan and Other Treasury and loan Sight and loan Sight and out- lished into in
End of sheet building Building secur- con- bridging building discount con- and time con- time de- stand- re- year or associ-
year/month ations total loans  
2 ities 3 tracts loans loans tracts deposits tracts posits  6 ing month  8 loans)  1 paper)  4 serves)  7 
All  building  and  loan  associations
2009 25 193.6 37.2 0.0 19.1 29.4 70.7 12.6 12.2 0.4 27.8 123.4 7.4 6.3 7.3 87.5
2010          July 24 196.4 37.5 0.0 19.0 28.9 71.0 13.4 13.9 0.6 26.5 126.5 7.3 5.4 7.4 7.7
         Aug 24 198.1 38.2 0.0 19.1 28.8 71.1 13.7 14.6 0.6 27.1 126.9 7.2 6.1 7.4 7.5
         Sep 24 200.5 40.7 0.0 18.8 28.6 71.5 14.0 14.3 0.6 29.5 127.4 7.2 5.4 7.5 7.5
Private  building  and  Ioan  associations
  
2010          July 14 143.0 21.6 0.0 14.0 18.6 56.6 12.0 8.4 0.4 23.0 83.0 7.1 5.4 4.8 4.8
         Aug 14 144.7 22.5 0.0 14.0 18.5 56.7 12.3 8.9 0.4 23.8 83.3 7.0 6.1 4.8 4.7
         Sep 14 146.9 24.9 0.0 13.6 18.4 57.0 12.6 8.6 0.4 26.3 83.7 7.0 5.4 4.8 4.7
Public  building  and  Ioan  associations
  
2010          July 10 53.4 15.8 0.0 5.0 10.4 14.4 1.4 5.6 0.2 3.5 43.5 0.2 − 2.7 2.9
         Aug 10 53.4 15.7 0.0 5.0 10.3 14.5 1.4 5.7 0.2 3.3 43.6 0.2 − 2.7 2.8
         Sep 10 53.6 15.8 0.0 5.2 10.2 14.5 1.4 5.7 0.2 3.3 43.7 0.2 − 2.7 2.9
Trends in building and loan association business
  
€ billion
Changes in deposits Capital promised Capital disbursed Disbursement Interest and
under savings and commitments repayments
loan contracts Allocations outstanding at received on
end of period building loans  10 
Deposits under Loans under
Repay- savings and savings andments loan contracts loan contracts  
9 Newly
Interest of granted
credited interim deposits of which of which
on under Applied Applied and of
which of Memo Amounts deposits cancelled to settle- to settle- bridging
under savings of ment of ment of loans Under which item paid intosavings savings and which interim interim and alloc- Repay- Housing
and and loan loan Net and and other ated ments bonuses
loan ac- con- con- alloca- bridging bridging building con- during re-
Period tracts tracts Total Total Total loans Total loans loans Total tracts Total quarter counts  
9 tions  11 ceived  12 
All  building  and  loan  associations
2009 25.4 2.5 5.8 46.6 31.6 41.3 18.4 4.2 9.1 3.9 13.7 10.9 7.5 11.4 9.3 0.4
2010          July 2.2 0.0 0.5 3.9 2.7 3.5 1.6 0.4 0.7 0.4 1.2 11.4 7.8 1.0 0.0
         Aug 2.2 0.0 0.4 3.6 2.3 3.1 1.4 0.3 0.6 0.3 1.1 11.4 7.7 0.9 0.0
         Sep 2.3 0.0 0.4 3.5 2.3 3.1 1.3 0.3 0.6 0.3 1.2 11.4 7.7 1.0 ... 0.0
Private  building  and  Ioan  associations
  
2010          July 1.4 0.0 0.3 2.6 1.7 2.4 1.0 0.3 0.4 0.2 1.0 7.0 4.0 0.7 0.0
         Aug 1.4 0.0 0.2 2.4 1.5 2.2 0.9 0.3 0.4 0.2 0.9 7.0 3.9 0.6 0.0
         Sep 1.5 0.0 0.2 2.4 1.5 2.3 0.9 0.3 0.4 0.2 1.0 6.9 3.9 0.7 ... 0.0
Public  building  and  Ioan  associations
  
2010          July 0.8 0.0 0.2 1.3 1.0 1.0 0.5 0.1 0.3 0.1 0.2 4.5 3.8 0.3 0.0
         Aug 0.8 0.0 0.2 1.1 0.9 0.9 0.5 0.1 0.2 0.1 0.2 4.5 3.8 0.3 0.0
         Sep 0.8 0.0 0.2 1.1 0.8 0.9 0.4 0.1 0.2 0.1 0.2 4.5 3.8 0.3 ... 0.0
*Excluding assets and liabilities and/or transactions of foreign branches. amount covered by the contracts; only contracts newly entered into, for
The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as provisional. which the contract fee has been fully paid. Increases in the sum contracted
Subsequent revisions, which appear in the following Monthly Report, are count as new contracts. — 9For disbursements of deposits under savings
not specially marked. — 1Including postal giro account balances, claims on and loan contracts arising from the allocation of contracts see “Capital
building and loan associations, claims arising from registered debt securities disbursed“. — 10Including housing bonuses credited. — 11Only allocations
and central bank credit balances. — 2Loans under savings and loan accepted by the beneficiaries; including allocations applied to settlement of
contracts and interim and bridging loans. — 3Including money market interim and bridging loans. — 12The amounts already credited to the
paper and small amounts of other securities issued by banks. — 4Including accounts of savers or borrowers are also included in “Amounts paid into
equalisation claims. — 5Including liabilities to building and loan savings and loan accounts“ and “Interest and repayments received on
associations. — 6Including small amounts of savings deposits. — 7Including building loans“. 
participation rights capital and fund for general banking risks. — 8Total
39*IV  Banks

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
E U R O S Y S T E M
Monthly Report
November 2010
IV  Banks
  
13 Assets and liabilities of the foreign branches and foreign subsidiaries of German banks (MFIs) *
  
  
€ billion
Number of Lending to banks (MFIs) Lending to non-banks (non-MFIs)
Loans Credit  balances and loans
German   
banks to German
(MFIs)   non-banks
with
foreign foreign of which
branches Money enter- Money branches  1 
and/or and/or market prises to market
foreign foreign Balance paper, and foreign paper,
subsi- subsi- sheet German Foreign secur- house- non- secur- Other
Period diaries diaries total Total Total banks banks Total Total Total holds banks ities  2 assets ities 2,3 
Foreign  branches End of year or month *
  
2007 52 218 2,042.4 813.8 743.1 238.6 504.5 70.7 1,066.8 811.4 21.6 20.7 789.8 255.3 161.8
2008 56 226 1,715.5 730.7 669.1 244.9 424.2 61.6 825.3 630.4 20.2 19.2 610.3 194.9 159.5
2009 51 211 1,461.6 579.2 539.1 210.1 328.9 40.2 691.5 534.7 20.7 19.7 514.0 156.7 190.9
2009          Nov 53 222 1,530.0 581.5 540.0 205.6 334.4 41.5 710.1 547.5 19.9 18.9 527.6 162.6 238.4
         Dec 51 211 1,461.6 579.2 539.1 210.1 328.9 40.2 691.5 534.7 20.7 19.7 514.0 156.7 190.9
2010          Jan 53 212 1,557.1 609.7 570.4 214.8 355.6 39.3 715.9 552.3 20.7 19.7 531.6 163.6 231.5
         Feb 53 213 1,539.5 604.8 565.7 211.5 354.3 39.1 709.5 547.7 19.7 18.6 528.0 161.8 225.3
         Mar 53 212 1,523.3 614.4 578.4 219.0 359.4 36.0 726.5 559.0 18.9 17.9 540.0 167.5 182.4
         Apr 55 214 1,641.2 648.4 613.8 239.2 374.6 34.6 804.7 620.3 19.9 18.9 600.4 184.4 188.2
         May 55 215 1,695.9 691.9 659.0 233.3 425.7 32.9 807.2 622.2 37.4 20.4 584.8 185.0 196.8         June 55 215 1,674.3 679.4 647.8 226.8 421.0 31.6 777.5 598.0 22.5 20.0 575.5 179.5 217.4
         July 56 216 1,584.2 633.6 603.0 230.7 372.3 30.6 742.3 564.5 23.4 20.7 541.1 177.8 208.3
         Aug 56 217 1,596.6 663.4 633.2 235.7 397.4 30.2 736.2 570.9 22.7 20.0 548.1 165.4 197.0
Changes *
2008 + 4 + 8 −359.4 − 98.5 − 89.3 + 6.3 − 95.5 − 9.2 −256.8 −190.7 − 1.5 − 1.6 −189.3 − 66.1 − 4.1
2009 − 5 − 15 −247.9 −148.8 −127.3 − 34.7 − 92.6 − 21.5 −131.7 − 94.6 + 0.5 + 0.5 − 95.1 − 37.1 + 32.6
2009          Dec − 2 − 11 − 92.6 − 10.5 − 8.9 + 4.5 − 13.4 − 1.6 − 33.5 − 24.5 + 0.8 + 0.8 − 25.2 − 9.0 − 48.6
2010          Jan + 2 + 1 + 74.7 + 23.4 + 24.5 + 4.6 + 19.9 − 1.1 + 11.6 + 7.5 + 0.0 + 0.0 + 7.4 + 4.1 + 39.7
         Feb − + 1 − 32.8 − 11.8 − 11.4 − 3.3 − 8.1 − 0.4 − 14.1 − 10.2 − 1.1 − 1.1 − 9.2 − 3.9 − 6.9         Mar − − 1 − 19.3 + 8.3 + 11.4 + 7.5 + 3.9 − 3.1 + 15.0 + 9.6 − 0.7 − 0.7 + 10.3 + 5.4 − 42.6
         Apr + 2 + 2 +108.8 + 30.9 + 32.5 + 20.2 + 12.3 − 1.6 + 72.4 + 56.5 + 1.0 + 0.9 + 55.6 + 15.9 + 5.5
         May − + 1 − 5.5 + 21.3 + 23.5 − 5.9 + 29.4 − 2.2 − 32.8 − 26.2 + 17.5 + 1.5 − 43.7 − 6.6 + 6.1         June − − − 34.2 − 12.6 − 11.2 − 6.5 − 4.7 − 1.4 − 38.5 − 31.5 − 14.9 − 0.4 − 16.6 − 7.0 + 16.9
         July + 1 + 1 − 49.0 − 28.3 − 27.6 + 3.8 − 31.4 − 0.7 − 12.7 − 15.7 + 1.0 + 0.6 − 16.7 + 3.0 − 8.0
         Aug − + 1 − 7.1 + 21.7 + 22.3 + 5.1 + 17.2 − 0.6 − 16.8 − 1.9 − 0.7 − 0.7 − 1.2 − 14.9 − 12.1
  
  
Foreign  subsidiaries End of year or month *
  
2007 39 120 590.8 267.8 202.4 104.8 97.5 65.5 263.9 176.0 37.8 36.8 138.1 87.9 59.0
2008 38 116 594.9 244.9 183.1 85.5 97.6 61.8 267.8 196.5 42.2 41.6 154.3 71.3 82.2
2009 36 97 474.1 205.4 157.0 87.4 69.6 48.4 217.0 154.7 38.7 38.4 115.9 62.4 51.7
2009          Nov 36 108 516.5 212.8 163.7 77.5 86.2 49.1 247.0 183.5 41.0 40.5 142.5 63.4 56.7
         Dec 36 97 474.1 205.4 157.0 87.4 69.6 48.4 217.0 154.7 38.7 38.4 115.9 62.4 51.7
2010          Jan 36 97 476.5 206.1 158.2 84.9 73.2 48.0 219.1 155.5 38.9 38.5 116.6 63.6 51.3
         Feb 36 96 480.5 211.7 163.8 85.4 78.4 47.9 218.9 155.7 38.6 38.2 117.1 63.2 49.9
         Mar 36 96 476.9 209.7 162.0 87.2 74.8 47.7 217.7 154.7 37.8 37.4 116.9 63.0 49.6
         Apr 36 99 514.1 211.1 163.2 86.2 77.0 48.0 230.4 165.9 38.1 37.7 127.8 64.6 72.5
         May 37 98 521.0 224.0 176.7 98.9 77.9 47.3 222.2 166.3 38.3 38.0 128.0 55.9 74.7         June 37 99 494.4 215.4 167.6 95.8 71.9 47.8 224.7 168.6 38.7 38.4 129.9 56.1 54.3
         July 38 99 495.0 212.9 168.2 88.6 79.6 44.7 227.0 173.1 39.8 39.4 133.3 53.9 55.1
         Aug 38 99 495.8 218.4 172.6 86.8 85.9 45.8 224.4 171.7 39.4 39.0 132.2 52.7 53.0
Changes *
2008 − 1 − 4 − 0.2 − 24.2 − 19.8 − 19.3 − 0.5 − 4.4 + 1.1 + 17.5 + 4.4 + 4.8 + 13.2 − 16.4 + 22.9
2009 − 2 − 19 −120.2 − 39.8 − 26.9 + 1.9 − 28.8 − 12.9 − 50.0 − 41.1 − 3.5 − 3.3 − 37.6 − 8.9 − 30.4
2009          Dec − − 11 − 46.0 − 9.3 − 7.8 + 9.9 − 17.7 − 1.5 − 31.4 − 30.4 − 2.3 − 2.1 − 28.1 − 1.1 − 5.2
2010          Jan − − − 0.7 − 0.9 + 0.3 − 2.5 + 2.7 − 1.2 + 0.7 − 0.5 + 0.1 + 0.1 − 0.6 + 1.2 − 0.5
         Feb − − 1 + 2.0 + 4.4 + 5.2 + 0.5 + 4.7 − 0.7 − 1.0 − 0.6 − 0.2 − 0.3 − 0.4 − 0.4 − 1.5         Mar − − − 4.4 − 2.4 − 2.1 + 1.8 − 3.9 − 0.3 − 1.6 − 1.4 − 0.8 − 0.8 − 0.6 − 0.2 − 0.4
         Apr − + 3 + 35.9 + 0.7 + 0.8 − 1.0 + 1.8 − 0.0 + 12.3 + 10.8 + 0.3 + 0.3 + 10.5 + 1.6 + 22.9
         May + 1 − 1 − 0.7 + 8.6 + 11.1 + 12.7 − 1.6 − 2.5 − 11.2 − 2.6 + 0.2 + 0.2 − 2.8 − 8.6 + 1.9         June − + 1 − 28.8 − 9.6 − 9.8 − 3.1 − 6.7 + 0.2 + 1.3 + 1.1 + 0.4 + 0.4 + 0.7 + 0.2 − 20.5
         July + 1 − + 5.9 + 0.1 + 1.9 − 7.1 + 9.1 − 1.8 + 4.7 + 6.8 + 1.0 + 1.0 + 5.8 − 2.2 + 1.1
         Aug − − − 2.4 + 4.1 + 3.6 − 1.9 + 5.5 + 0.4 − 4.2 − 3.0 − 0.3 − 0.4 − 2.7 − 1.2 − 2.2
*In this table “foreign“ also includes the country of domicile of the foreign ies.) The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as provision al;
branches and foreign subsidiaries. Statistical revisions have been eliminated subsequent revisions, which appear in the following Monthly Report , are
from the changes. (Breaks owing to changes in the reporting population not specially marked. — 1Several branches in a given country of domicile
have not been eliminated from the flow figures for the foreign subsidiar-
40*IV  Banks

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2010
IV  Banks
  
  
  
  
  
Deposits
of banks (MFIs) of non-banks (non-MFIs)
German non-banks  4 
Money
Short-term market Medium  and long-term
paper
of which of which and debt
enter- enter- Working securities
out- capital Other prises  and prises  and
German Foreign house- house- Foreign stand- and own liabil-
Total Total banks Total Total Total holds Total holds ing  5 funds ities  6   Period banks non-banks
End of year or month * Foreign  branches
  
1,723.7 1,191.0 547.7 643.3 532.7 55.3 51.2 47.5 4.1 3.9 477.4 186.0 29.2 103.5 2007
1,446.1 1,070.4 554.3 516.1 375.7 45.0 36.5 34.6 8.5 8.0 330.7 126.6 35.6 107.2 20081,125.9 798.0 449.6 348.4 327.9 37.4 33.8 31.6 3.5 3.3 290.5 157.5 33.9 144.4 2009
1,172.1 829.1 434.1 395.0 343.0 36.5 32.2 31.6 4.3 3.8 306.5 169.0 34.6 154.3 2009          Nov 
1,125.9 798.0 449.6 348.4 327.9 37.4 33.8 31.6 3.5 3.3 290.5 157.5 33.9 144.4          Dec 
1,195.5 824.5 444.2 380.3 371.1 36.3 32.9 32.3 3.5 3.2 334.7 171.2 34.2 156.3 2010          Jan 
1,178.0 801.9 431.4 370.5 376.1 38.9 35.4 34.8 3.5 3.3 337.2 168.2 34.3 159.2          Feb 
1,168.0 802.6 437.8 364.8 365.4 41.6 38.2 37.6 3.5 3.2 323.8 171.0 34.1 150.2          Mar 
1,284.0 860.7 440.4 420.3 423.2 41.2 37.8 37.7 3.4 3.1 382.1 173.6 34.2 149.5          Apr 
1,328.6 877.4 446.3 431.1 451.2 38.9 35.4 33.5 3.5 3.2 412.3 178.0 35.2 154.0          May1,298.9 867.0 425.3 441.7 431.9 39.7 36.1 33.7 3.6 3.3 392.2 181.1 35.2 159.1          June
1,211.4 801.7 404.5 397.2 409.7 41.9 38.1 37.3 3.7 3.4 367.9 185.3 34.7 152.8          July
1,229.0 829.5 407.0 422.6 399.4 42.9 39.0 36.8 3.8 3.5 356.6 178.6 34.9 154.1          Aug 
Changes *
− 304.0 −139.7 + 6.5 −146.3 −164.3 − 10.3 − 14.7 − 12.9 + 4.4 + 4.1 −153.9 − 59.4 + 6.5 − 2.4 2008
− 312.0 −267.8 −104.7 −163.1 − 44.2 − 7.6 − 2.6 − 3.0 − 5.0 − 4.7 − 36.6 + 30.9 − 1.7 + 34.9 2009
− 62.4 − 40.1 + 15.5 − 55.6 − 22.4 + 0.9 + 1.7 + 0.0 − 0.8 − 0.6 − 23.2 − 11.5 − 0.7 − 17.9 2009          Dec 
+ 56.3 + 18.9 − 5.4 + 24.3 + 37.4 − 1.0 − 1.0 + 0.7 − 0.1 − 0.1 + 38.4 + 13.7 + 0.2 + 4.5 2010          Jan 
− 28.5 − 29.2 − 12.8 − 16.4 + 0.7 + 2.6 + 2.5 + 2.5 + 0.1 + 0.1 − 1.9 − 3.0 + 0.1 − 1.4          Feb 
− 11.9 − 0.0 + 6.5 − 6.5 − 11.9 + 2.7 + 2.8 + 2.7 − 0.1 − 0.1 − 14.6 + 2.8 − 0.2 − 10.1          Mar 
+ 110.2 + 55.3 + 2.6 + 52.7 + 54.9 − 0.4 − 0.3 + 0.1 − 0.1 − 0.1 + 55.3 + 2.6 + 0.1 − 4.1          Apr 
+ 2.2 − 6.6 + 5.9 − 12.5 + 8.8 − 2.2 − 2.4 − 4.2 + 0.2 + 0.2 + 11.0 + 4.4 + 1.1 − 13.1          May− 33.6 − 9.6 − 20.4 + 10.9 − 24.0 + 0.8 + 0.7 + 0.3 + 0.0 + 0.0 − 24.8 + 3.1 + 0.0 − 3.7          June
− 57.3 − 48.4 − 20.8 − 27.6 − 8.9 + 2.1 + 2.0 + 3.6 + 0.1 + 0.2 − 11.1 + 4.2 − 0.6 + 4.7          July
+ 3.7 + 20.0 + 2.5 + 17.5 − 16.3 + 1.0 + 0.9 − 0.4 + 0.1 + 0.1 − 17.3 − 6.7 + 0.3 − 4.4          Aug 
  
  
End of year or month * Foreign  subsidiaries
  
437.3 270.1 118.2 151.9 167.2 37.1 30.3 29.5 6.8 6.7 130.1 69.5 28.6 55.4 2007
453.7 277.7 145.1 132.7 176.0 32.8 24.1 23.6 8.7 8.6 143.2 57.7 30.5 52.9 2008
377.6 218.5 125.4 93.1 159.1 37.0 29.6 29.4 7.4 7.3 122.1 33.3 24.3 38.9 2009
387.2 227.1 119.9 107.2 160.1 30.0 21.5 21.1 8.5 8.4 130.0 53.3 28.9 47.1 2009          Nov 
377.6 218.5 125.4 93.1 159.1 37.0 29.6 29.4 7.4 7.3 122.1 33.3 24.3 38.9          Dec 
378.1 220.5 121.5 99.1 157.5 34.2 26.9 26.6 7.4 7.3 123.3 33.5 24.4 40.7 2010          Jan 
382.4 219.9 121.9 98.0 162.5 35.3 27.6 27.3 7.7 7.6 127.2 33.9 24.4 39.8          Feb 
377.9 216.7 119.7 96.9 161.2 35.3 27.9 27.3 7.3 7.3 126.0 34.4 24.8 39.8          Mar 
409.4 242.0 137.1 104.9 167.4 34.6 27.3 26.7 7.3 7.2 132.9 33.3 27.6 43.8          Apr 
414.7 239.0 139.8 99.2 175.7 31.5 24.2 23.5 7.3 7.2 144.1 31.0 27.4 47.8          May386.2 219.2 127.1 92.1 167.0 30.3 23.0 22.6 7.3 7.2 136.8 31.1 27.9 49.1          June
387.1 218.3 127.5 90.9 168.8 31.1 23.7 23.7 7.3 7.2 137.7 30.7 32.7 44.5          July
387.5 219.2 128.4 90.8 168.3 31.7 24.3 24.1 7.4 7.3 136.7 31.2 32.9 44.2          Aug 
Changes *
+ 12.1 + 4.8 + 26.9 − 22.1 + 7.3 − 4.3 − 6.3 − 5.9 + 2.0 + 2.0 + 11.6 − 11.8 + 1.9 − 2.4 2008
− 76.0 − 59.1 − 19.7 − 39.5 − 16.9 + 4.2 + 5.5 + 5.8 − 1.4 − 1.4 − 21.1 − 24.3 − 6.2 − 13.6 2009
− 12.2 − 9.8 + 5.5 − 15.4 − 2.4 + 6.9 + 8.1 + 8.3 − 1.1 − 1.1 − 9.3 − 19.9 − 4.6 − 9.3 2009          Dec 
− 1.8 + 0.9 − 4.0 + 4.9 − 2.8 − 2.7 − 2.7 − 2.7 + 0.0 + 0.0 − 0.1 + 0.1 + 0.0 + 0.9 2010          Jan 
+ 2.9 − 1.4 + 0.5 − 1.9 + 4.3 + 1.0 + 0.7 + 0.7 + 0.3 + 0.3 + 3.2 + 0.4 + 0.0 − 1.4          Feb 
− 5.1 − 3.5 − 2.2 − 1.3 − 1.6 − 0.0 + 0.4 − 0.0 − 0.4 − 0.4 − 1.6 + 0.5 + 0.4 − 0.2          Mar 
+ 30.6 + 24.9 + 17.4 + 7.6 + 5.7 − 0.7 − 0.7 − 0.6 − 0.0 − 0.0 + 6.4 − 1.1 + 2.8 + 3.7          Apr 
− 0.4 − 5.7 + 2.7 − 8.4 + 5.3 − 3.1 − 3.0 − 3.2 − 0.0 − 0.0 + 8.3 − 2.3 − 0.1 + 2.1          May− 29.8 − 20.5 − 12.8 − 7.7 − 9.3 − 1.2 − 1.2 − 0.9 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 8.1 + 0.0 + 0.5 + 0.5          June
+ 4.8 + 0.8 + 0.4 + 0.5 + 4.0 + 0.8 + 0.7 + 1.1 + 0.1 + 0.1 + 3.2 − 0.3 + 4.7 − 3.3          July
− 1.9 − 0.3 + 0.9 − 1.2 − 1.6 + 0.6 + 0.5 + 0.4 + 0.1 + 0.1 − 2.2 + 0.5 + 0.2 − 1.1          Aug 
are regarded as a single branch. — 2Treasury bills, Treasury discount non-negotiable debt securities. — 5Issues of negotiable and
paper and other money market paper, debt securities. — 3Including non-negotiable debt securities and money market paper. — 6Including
own debt securities. — 4Excluding subordinated liabilities and subordinated liabilities. 
41*IV  Banks

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
E U R O S Y S T E M
Monthly Report
November 2010
V  Minimum reserves
 
1  Reserve ratios
Germany Euro area
 
% of liabilities subject to reserve requirements % of reserve base  1 
Sight Time
Applicable from liabilities liabilities Applicable from Ratio Savings deposits
1995  Aug 1 2    2    1.5    1999  Jan 1 2    
 
   
1Article 3 of the Regulation of the European Central Bank on the appli-
cation of minimum reserves (excluding liabilities to which a reserve ratio of
0% applies pursuant to Article 4 (1)). 
 
  
2  Reserve maintenance in Germany up to the end of 1998
− pursuant to the Minimum Reserves Order of the Bundesbank 
 
DM million
Liabilities subject to reserve requirements Excess reserves  4 
Monthly Required % of the
average  1 Total reserves  2 Level Deficiencies Sight liabilities Time liabilities Savings deposits Actual reserves  3 required  reserves
1995          Dec 2,066,565 579,337 519,456 967,772 36,492 37,337 845 2.3 3
1996          Dec 2,201,464 655,483 474,342 1,071,639 38,671 39,522 851 2.2 41997          Dec 2,327,879 734,986 476,417 1,116,477 40,975 41,721 745 1.8 3
1998          Dec 2,576,889 865,444 564,878 1,146,567 45,805 46,432 627 1.4 4
1Pursuant to sections 5 to 7 of the Minimum Reserves Order. 2Amount balances of the credit institutions subject to reserve requirements on their
after applying the reserve ratios to the liabilities subject to reserve require- giro accounts at the Bundesbank. — 4 Actual reserves less required reserves. 
ments (section 5 (1) of the Minimum Reserves Order). — 3Average credit
 
 
3  Reserve maintenance in the euro area
− from 1999, pursuant to the ECB Regulation on the application of minimum reserves in accordance with
Article 19.1 of the Statute of the ESCB 
 
Maintenance Required reserves
period before deduction Required reserves
of lump-sum Lump-sum beginning in  1 after deduction of
Reserve base  2 allowance  3 allowance  4 Deficiencies  7 lump-sum allowance Current account  5 Excess reserves  6 
Euro area ( € billion)
 
2010          Mar 10,595.2 211.9 0.5 211.4 212.5 1.2 0.0
         Apr 10,587.4 211.7 0.5 211.2 212.4 1.2 0.0
         May 10,590.1 211.8 0.5 211.3 212.5 1.3 0.0
         June 10,676.4 213.5 0.5 213.0 214.4 1.4 0.0
         July 10,739.9 214.8 0.5 214.3 215.7 1.4 0.0
         Aug 10,716.7 214.3 0.5 213.8 215.3 1.5 0.0
         Sep  p 10,621.6 212.4 0.5 211.9 213.1 1.2 0.0
         Oct  p,8 10,726.1 214.5 0.5 214.0 215.2 1.2 ...
         Nov  p ... ... ... 211.8 ... ... ...
Of which:  Germany ( € million)
2010          Mar 2,508,645 50,173 187 49,985 50,295 310 0
         Apr 2,504,766 50,095 187 49,908 50,213 305 0
         May 2,510,392 50,208 187 50,020 50,473 453 0
         June 2,553,393 51,068 188 50,880 51,229 349 1
         July 2,602,742 52,055 187 51,868 52,276 408 0
         Aug 2,587,031 51,741 187 51,554 51,963 409 0
         Sep  p 2,543,184 50,864 186 50,678 50,965 287 0
         Oct  p 2,565,552 51,311 186 51,125 51,499 374 1
         Nov  p 2,541,821 50,836 186 50,651 ... ... ...
1From March 2004, the reserve maintenance period will start on the reserve base. — 4Article 5 (2) of the Regulation of the European Central
settlement day of the main refinancing operation immediately following Bank on the application of minimum reserves. — 5Average credit balances
the meeting of the Governing Council of the ECB for which the monthly of the credit institutions at the national central banks. — 6Average credit
discussion of the monetary policy stance is scheduled. — 2Article 3 of the balances less required reserves after deduction of the lump-sum
Regulation of the European Central Bank on the application of minimum allowance. — 7Required reserves after deduction of the lump-sum
reserves (excluding liabilities to which a reserve ratio of 0% applies, pur- allowance. — 8The total number of deficiencies was not available when
suant to Article 4 (1)). — 3Amount after applying the reserve ratios to the this report went to press. 
42*V  Minimum reserves

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2010
VI Interest rates
 
1 ECB interest rates 2 Base rates
 
 
% per annum % per annum
Main refinancing Main refinancing
operations operations Base Base
Mar- Mar- rate rate
ginal ginal as per as per Minimum Minimum
Applicable Deposit Fixed bid lending Applicable Deposit Fixed bid lending Applicable Civil Applicable Civil
from facility rate rate facility from facility rate rate facility from Code  1 from Code  1 
2002 Dec                  6 1.75 − 2.75 3.75 2008 July                  9 3.25 − 4.25 5.25 2002 Jan                1 2.57 2007 Jan                1 2.70
         Oct                  8 2.75 − 3.75 4.75          July                1 2.47          July                1 3.19
2003 Mar                  7 1.50 − 2.50 3.50          Oct                  9 3.25 3.75 − 4.25
         June                 6 1.00 − 2.00 3.00          Nov                12 2.75 3.25 − 3.75 2003 Jan                1 1.97 2008 Jan                1 3.32
         Dec                10 2.00 2.50 − 3.00          July                1 1.22          July                1 3.19
2005 Dec                  6 1.25 − 2.25 3.25
2009 Jan                21 1.00 2.00 − 3.00 2004 Jan                1 1.14 2009 Jan                1 1.62
2006 Mar                  8 1.50 − 2.50 3.50          Mar                11 0.50 1.50 − 2.50          July                1 1.13          July                1  2 0.12
         June               15 1.75 − 2.75 3.75          Apr                  8 0.25 1.25 − 2.25
         Aug                  9 2.00 − 3.00 4.00          May                13 0.25 1.00 − 1.75 2005 Jan                1 1.21
         Oct                11 2.25 − 3.25 4.25          July                1 1.17
         Dec                13 2.50 − 3.50 4.50
2006 Jan                1 1.37
2007 Mar                14 2.75 − 3.75 4.75          July                1 1.95
         June               13 3.00 − 4.00 5.00
1Pursuant to section 247 of the Civil Code. — 2Since 1 July 2009  
unchanged. 
 
  
3 Eurosystem monetary policy operations allotted through tenders
 
 
Fixed rate tenders Variable rate tenders
Bid Allotment Minimum Weighted
amount amount Fixed rate bid rate Marginal rate  1 average rate
Date of Running for
settlement € million % per annum ... days
Main refinancing operations
2010 Sep                15 151,574 151,574 1.00 − − − 7
         Sep                22 153,771 153,771 1.00 − − − 7
         Sep                29 166,361 166,361 1.00 − − − 7
         Oct                  6 197,049 197,049 1.00 − − − 7
         Oct                13 185,984 185,984 1.00 − − − 7
         Oct                20 184,030 184,030 1.00 − − − 7
         Oct                27 183,439 183,439 1.00 − − − 7
         Nov                  3 178,350 178,350 1.00 − − − 7
         Nov                10 175,035 175,035 1.00 − − − 7
Longer-term refinancing operations
2010 Aug                26 19,083 19,083 1.00 − − − 91
         Sep                  8 37,903 37,903 1.00 − − − 35
         Sep                30 104,009 104,009 1.00 − − − 84
         Oct                13 52,236 52,236 1.00 − − − 28
         Oct                28 42,475 42,475 2 . . .−−− 9 1
         Nov                10 63,618 63,618 1.00 − − − 28
Source: ECB. — 1Lowest or highest interest rate at which funds were will be fixed at the average minimum bid rate of the main refinancing
allotted or collected. — 2Interest payment on the maturity date; the rate operations over the life of this operation. 
 
  
4 Money market rates, by month
 
 
% per annum
Money market rates reported by Frankfurt banks  1 EURIBOR  3 
One-week One-month Six-month Nine-month Twelve- Three-month
Overnight money Three-month funds EONIA  2 funds funds funds funds funds month funds
Reporting Monthly Lowest and Monthly Lowest and
period averages highest rates averages highest rates Monthly averages
2010          Apr 0.29 0.24 − 0.75 0.58 0.49 − 0.67 0.35 0.35 0.40 0.64 0.96 1.10 1.23
         May 0.29 0.24 − 0.65 0.61 0.51 − 0.71 0.34 0.36 0.42 0.69 0.98 1.12 1.25
         June 0.30 0.25 − 0.70 0.65 0.55 − 0.77 0.35 0.38 0.45 0.73 1.01 1.15 1.28
         July 0.46 0.25 − 0.85 0.79 0.62 − 0.92 0.48 0.53 0.58 0.85 1.10 1.25 1.37
         Aug 0.36 0.25 − 0.80 0.83 0.73 − 0.95 0.43 0.54 0.64 0.90 1.15 1.29 1.42         Sep 0.40 0.25 − 1.15 0.83 0.73 − 0.94 0.45 0.51 0.62 0.88 1.14 1.29 1.42
         Oct 0.66 0.27 − 0.92 0.93 0.76 − 1.06 0.70 0.74 0.78 1.00 1.22 1.36 1.50
1Money market rates are not fixed or quoted officially; the monthly aver- of real turnover according to the act/360 method and published via
ages computed from daily quotations are unweighted. — 2Euro OverNight Moneyline Telerate. — 3Euro Interbank Offered Rate: unweighted average
Index Average: weighted average overnight rate for interbank operations rate calculated by Moneyline Telerate since 30 December 1998 according to
calculated by the European Central Bank since 4 January 1999 on the basis the act/360 method. 
43*VI Interest rates

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
E U R O S Y S T E M
Monthly Report
November 2010
VI Interest rates
 
5 Interest rates for outstanding amounts and new business of banks (MFIs) in the European monetary union *
(a) Outstanding amounts o
 
Effective interest rate % per annum  1 
Non-financial Loans to households Loans to
Households’ corporations’ non-financial
deposits deposits Housing loans Consumer credit and other loans corporations
with an agreed maturity of with a maturity of
over 1 year over 1 year over 1 year
End of up to over up to over up to and up to over up to and up to over up to and up to over
month 2 years 2 years 2 years 2 years 1 year 5 years 5 years 1 year 5 years 5 years 1 year 5 years 5 years
2010          Jan 2.19 2.80 1.45 3.23 3.99 4.05 3.99 7.51 6.52 5.37 3.47 3.31 3.45
         Feb 2.14 2.84 1.42 3.31 4.03 4.11 4.03 7.49 6.61 5.43 3.45 3.33 3.43         Mar 2.12 2.74 1.38 3.26 3.98 4.04 3.98 7.43 6.51 5.35 3.43 3.26 3.37
         Apr 2.12 2.74 1.37 3.24 3.89 4.01 3.92 7.38 6.50 5.29 3.42 3.21 3.33
         May 2.12 2.71 1.42 3.22 3.87 3.97 3.89 7.40 6.45 5.29 3.40 3.20 3.31
         June 2.13 2.72 1.46 3.12 3.79 3.96 3.84 7.62 6.48 5.20 3.28 3.21 3.30
         July 2.15 2.72 1.54 3.16 3.74 3.93 3.82 7.69 6.50 5.19 3.34 3.25 3.33
         Aug 2.17 2.72 1.56 3.12 3.80 3.89 3.81 7.74 6.46 5.19 3.38 3.28 3.34         Sep 2.20 2.74 1.61 3.07 3.83 3.88 3.83 7.81 6.45 5.22 3.38 3.28 3.36
 
 
(b) New business +
 
Effective interest rate % per annum  1 
Households’ deposits Non-financial corporations’ deposits
with an agreed maturity of redeemable at notice of with an agreed maturity of
over 1 year over 1 year
Reporting up to and up to over up to over up to and up to over
period Overnight 1 year 2 years 2 years 3 months 3 months Overnight 1 year 2 years 2 years
2010          Jan 0.43 1.74 2.33 2.52 1.47 2.23 0.45 0.72 1.95 2.46
         Feb 0.42 1.75 2.24 2.36 1.45 2.11 0.44 0.73 2.11 2.39         Mar 0.42 1.90 2.38 2.24 1.45 2.05 0.44 0.79 2.73 2.34
         Apr 0.41 2.02 2.64 2.14 1.42 2.01 0.43 0.78 2.78 2.30
         May 0.40 2.04 2.73 2.24 1.40 1.98 0.43 0.77 2.78 2.26         June 0.43 2.16 2.25 2.47 1.41 1.96 0.43 0.89 1.85 2.29
         July 0.43 2.31 2.59 2.36 1.39 1.93 0.45 1.05 2.11 2.23
         Aug 0.43 2.21 2.54 2.35 1.50 1.91 0.45 1.00 2.01 2.22         Sep 0.43 2.25 2.76 2.28 1.55 1.85 0.46 1.11 2.15 2.80
 
 
Loans to households
Consumer credit Housing loans Other loans
with an initial rate fixation with an initial rate fixation
floating floating floating over 1 year over 1 year over 5 years over 1 year
Reporting Over- rate or up and up to over rate or up and up to and up to over and up to over rate or up
period drafts  2 Total  3 to 1 year 5 years 5 years Total  3 to 1 year 5 years 10 years 10 years to 1 year 5 years 5 years
2010          Jan 8.94 7.86 6.83 6.42 8.04 3.79 2.71 3.94 4.38 4.26 3.12 4.45 4.46
         Feb 9.01 7.78 6.72 6.25 7.98 3.74 2.68 3.83 4.32 4.18 3.16 4.48 4.74
         Mar 8.82 7.59 6.35 6.21 7.94 3.66 2.63 3.72 4.21 4.15 3.05 4.61 4.55
         Apr 8.77 7.66 6.77 6.12 7.92 3.68 2.62 3.71 4.18 4.12 3.06 4.32 4.53
         May 8.77 7.62 6.69 6.14 7.84 3.58 2.58 3.64 4.14 4.02 3.09 4.45 4.50         June 8.83 7.11 5.18 6.13 7.73 3.54 2.56 3.59 4.06 3.90 3.00 4.22 4.27
         July 8.79 7.32 5.49 6.22 7.77 3.64 2.66 3.60 3.94 3.84 3.15 4.27 4.27
         Aug 8.72 7.35 5.38 6.25 7.85 3.74 2.80 3.63 3.95 3.80 3.34 4.52 4.14         Sep 8.75 7.25 5.56 6.16 7.85 3.62 2.75 3.57 3.84 3.74 3.31 4.53 4.38
 
 
Loans to non-financial corporations
Loans up to €1 million with an initial rate fixation Loans over €1 million with an initial rate fixation
Reporting floating rate or over 1 year and floating rate or over 1 year and
period Overdrafts  2 up to 1 year up to 5 years over 5 years up to 1 year up to 5 years over 5 years
2010          Jan 4.05 3.25 4.20 3.99 2.02 2.88 3.65
         Feb 4.03 3.25 4.22 4.05 1.94 2.90 3.61
         Mar 3.98 3.24 4.21 4.00 1.99 2.54 3.44
         Apr 3.98 3.19 4.17 3.90 2.00 2.73 3.45
         May 3.97 3.25 4.12 3.86 1.96 2.83 3.41         June 3.77 3.25 4.11 3.80 2.17 2.87 3.37
         July 3.72 3.30 4.27 3.95 2.26 2.86 3.19
         Aug 3.76 3.38 4.19 3.84 2.28 2.92 3.65         Sep 3.81 3.35 4.13 3.77 2.26 2.72 3.52
Source: ECB. — For footnotes *, o, 1see p 45*. For footnote + see p 46*. — other related charges which may occur for enquiries, administration,
2From June 2010 including revolving loans, convenience and extended preparation of the documents, guarantees and credit insurance. 
credit card debt. — 3Annual percentage rate of charge, which contains
44*VI Interest rates

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2010
VI Interest rates
 
6 Interest rates and volumes for outstanding amounts and new business of German banks (MFIs) *
(a) Outstanding amounts o
 
 
Households’ deposits Non-financial corporations’ deposits
with an agreed maturity of
up to 2 years over 2 years up to 2 years over 2 years
Effective Effective Effective Effective
End of interest rate  1 Volume  2 interest rate  1 Volume  2 interest rate  1 Volume  2 interest rate  1 Volume  2 
month % pa € million % pa € million % pa € million % pa € million
2009          Sep 2.75 196,660 2.42 186,698 1.09 99,264 3.99 25,666
         Oct 2.59 182,143 2.42 188,911 1.06 93,477 3.95 25,921
         Nov 2.39 170,152 2.41 191,395 1.01 92,010 3.92 26,499
         Dec 2.18 161,018 2.40 196,621 0.95 88,785 3.99 26,227
2010          Jan 1.92 148,065 2.40 199,231 0.91 87,339 3.93 25,855
         Feb 1.80 141,541 2.40 201,737 0.88 86,509 4.16 24,504
         Mar 1.77 138,799 2.38 203,418 0.83 86,535 4.04 24,304
         Apr 1.74 135,398 2.37 204,546 0.83 87,161 4.05 24,331
         May 1.70 130,925 2.37 205,790 0.83 85,444 4.06 24,284         June 1.70 129,294 2.47 207,028 0.85 83,947 3.92 22,642
         July 1.65 126,987 2.46 207,585 0.89 86,081 3.90 22,755
         Aug 1.62 126,748 2.46 208,128 0.91 88,667 3.90 22,595         Sep 1.59 123,624 2.45 208,721 0.92 90,427 3.90 22,520
 
 
Housing loans to households  3 Consumer credit and other loans to households  4, 5 
with a maturity of
over 1 year and over 1 year and
up to 1 year  6 up to 5 years over 5 years up to 1 year  6 up to 5 years over 5 years
Effective Effective Effective Effective Effective Effective
interest interest interest interest interest interest
End of rate  1 Volume  2 rate 1 Volume  2 rate 1 Volume  2 rate 1 Volume  2 rate 1 Volume  2 rate 1 Volume  2 
month % pa % pa % pa % pa % pa % pa € million € million € million € million € million € million
2009          Sep 4.51 5,673 4.38 25,577 4.91 920,688 8.67 69,218 5.36 68,844 5.94 312,413
         Oct 4.37 5,595 4.35 25,653 4.89 922,437 8.53 67,505 5.33 69,092 5.90 312,661
         Nov 4.38 5,539 4.33 25,786 4.88 923,421 8.40 66,513 5.29 69,197 5.89 312,363
         Dec 4.46 5,548 4.28 25,772 4.86 922,968 8.53 67,071 5.30 70,265 5.88 311,657
2010          Jan 4.37 5,331 4.26 25,666 4.85 920,635 8.44 65,619 5.28 69,803 5.86 310,801
         Feb 4.36 5,265 4.25 25,617 4.84 919,585 8.30 64,998 5.26 69,606 5.85 310,649
         Mar 4.34 5,409 4.22 25,698 4.83 919,684 8.40 66,783 5.22 69,966 5.83 310,443
         Apr 4.19 5,308 4.20 25,751 4.81 920,311 8.31 65,798 5.21 69,811 5.82 311,285
         May 4.16 5,432 4.17 25,886 4.80 920,455 8.34 65,888 5.18 69,992 5.79 311,983         June 4.07 5,042 4.17 25,736 4.74 920,866 8.37 69,258 6.00 69,419 5.79 312,492
         July 3.92 5,045 4.14 25,877 4.73 922,884 8.24 66,947 5.97 69,924 5.78 313,416
         Aug 4.05 5,504 4.10 26,087 4.72 923,541 8.28 66,989 5.95 69,869 5.77 313,830         Sep 4.18 5,507 4.07 26,302 4.70 925,252 8.41 68,117 5.93 69,688 5.76 313,484
 
 
Loans to non-financial corporations with a maturity of
up to 1 year  6 over 1 year and up to 5 years over 5 years
End of Volume  2 Volume  2 Volume  2 Effective interest rate  1 Effective interest rate  1 Effective interest rate  1 
month % pa € million % pa € million % pa € million
2009          Sep 3.87 160,310 3.65 144,402 4.10 542,542
         Oct 3.83 154,789 3.61 143,106 4.06 542,895
         Nov 3.82 152,333 3.61 142,207 4.06 547,731
         Dec 3.68 140,178 3.66 144,786 4.01 545,324
2010          Jan 3.66 140,783 3.61 143,161 3.98 545,782
         Feb 3.67 140,023 3.62 143,854 3.96 547,450
         Mar 3.77 139,354 3.49 139,466 3.93 544,224
         Apr 3.77 135,797 3.45 138,677 3.92 546,900
         May 3.76 136,914 3.44 137,604 3.91 547,945         June 3.71 137,411 3.52 136,207 3.85 549,949
         July 3.71 132,479 3.57 134,907 3.86 552,591
         Aug 3.74 130,788 3.60 133,990 3.86 553,853         Sep 3.83 132,961 3.58 134,315 3.87 551,310
*The MFI interest rate statistics are based on the interest rates applied by interest rates are calculated either as annualised agreed interest rates o ra s
MFIs and the related volumes of euro-denominated deposits and loans to narrowly defined effective rates. Both calculation methods cover all interes t
households and non-financial corporations domiciled in the euro area. The payments on deposits and loans but not any other related charges which
household sector comprises individuals (including sole proprietors) and may occur for enquiries, administration, preparation of the documents,non-profit institutions serving households. Non-financial corporations in- guarantees and credit insurance. — 2Data based on monthly balance sheet
clude all enterprises other than insurance companies, banks and other finan- statistics. — 3Secured and unsecured loans for home purchase, including
cial institutions. The interest rate statistics gathered on a harmonised basis building and home improvements; including loans granted by building and
in the euro area from January 2003 are being collected in Germany on a loan associations and interim credits as well as transmitted loans granted bysample basis. The most recent figures are in all cases to be regarded as provi- the reporting agents in their own name and for their own account. —sional. Subsequent revisions appearing in the following Monthly Report are 4Consumer credit is defined as loans granted for the purpose of personal
not specially marked. Further information on the MFI interest rate statistics use in the consumption of goods and services. — 5For the purpose of these
can be found on the Bundesbank’s website (Statistics / Reporting system / statistics, other loans are loans granted for other purposes such as busines s,
Banking statistics / MFI interest rate statistics). — oThe statistics on out- debt consolidation, education etc. — 6Including overdrafts (see also
standing amounts are collected at the end of the month. — 1The effective footnotes 11 to 13 p 47*). 
45*VI Interest rates

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
E U R O S Y S T E M
Monthly Report
November 2010
VI Interest rates
 
6 Interest rates and volumes for outstanding amounts and new business of German banks (MFIs) *  (cont’d)
(b) New business +
 
 
Households’ deposits
with an agreed maturity of redeemable at notice of  8 
Overnight up to 1 year over 2 years up to 3 months over 3 months over 1 year and up to 2 years
Effective Effective Effective Effective Effective Effective
interest interest interest interest interest interest
Reporting rate  1 Volume  2 rate 1 Volume  7 rate 1 Volume  7 rate 1 Volume  7 rate 1 Volume  2 rate 1 Volume  2 
period % pa % pa % pa % pa % pa % pa € million € million € million € million € million € million
2009          Sep 0.82 617,597 1.01 19,325 2.02 1,584 2.61 2,779 1.61 457,521 3.14 117,556
         Oct 0.79 629,015 1.03 19,145 1.97 1,868 2.75 3,393 1.49 461,657 2.99 119,952
         Nov 0.75 646,360 1.04 17,401 1.92 1,801 2.80 3,572 1.47 464,488 2.77 120,775
         Dec 0.75 651,570 0.87 19,427 1.94 1,704 2.69 3,516 1.52 474,429 2.44 119,702
2010          Jan 0.73 667,262 1.12 20,151 1.88 1,645 2.93 3,755 1.37 479,240 2.22 118,141
         Feb 0.71 675,402 1.21 17,884 1.87 1,287 2.80 2,873 1.34 485,075 2.09 117,491
         Mar 0.70 670,474 1.35 18,487 1.90 1,418 2.43 2,485 1.40 486,809 2.03 117,551
         Apr 0.69 681,563 1.07 15,049 1.83 935 2.36 1,946 1.31 488,783 1.98 115,665
         May 0.69 688,068 0.96 13,756 1.78 701 3.16 2,319 1.31 490,706 1.95 113,839         June 0.76 691,840 0.94 12,881 1.46 545 3.18 2,388 1.36 491,359 1.95 112,572
         July 0.73 698,095 1.10 14,993 2.21 1,171 2.22 1,514 1.32 495,008 1.91 110,429
         Aug 0.74 695,737 1.03 13,926 2.35 1,245 2.13 1,253 1.32 496,668 1.90 108,681         Sep 0.74 697,418 1.04 13,930 2.26 1,354 2.12 1,469 1.40 499,160 1.83 106,425
 
 
Non-financial corporations’ deposits
with an agreed maturity of
Overnight up to 1 year over 1 year and up to 2 years over 2 years
Effective Effective Effective Effective
Reporting interest rate  1 Volume  2 interest rate  1 Volume  7 interest rate  1 Volume  7 interest rate  1 Volume  7 
period % pa € million % pa € million % pa € million % pa € million
2009          Sep 0.51 234,141 0.42 38,890 1.78 325 2.91 565
         Oct 0.48 244,464 0.42 40,077 1.79 229 3.20 513
         Nov 0.47 249,011 0.48 41,382 1.75 301 3.59 559
         Dec 0.46 249,139 0.47 37,933 2.20 460 3.24 844
2010          Jan 0.48 245,835 0.45 36,579 1.38 256 2.57 539
         Feb 0.47 238,889 0.46 30,650 1.57 200 2.76 294
         Mar 0.45 243,829 0.47 34,452 1.87 344 3.04 473
         Apr 0.45 248,053 0.44 34,914 1.79 334 3.29 281
         May 0.44 249,328 0.43 32,850 1.79 185 2.89 193         June 0.43 247,746 0.51 29,165 1.76 331 2.29 172
         July 0.44 246,466 0.60 38,656 1.68 479 2.56 183
         Aug 0.44 250,809 0.59 32,128 1.59 353 2.32 243         Sep 0.45 250,734 0.59 35,617 1.72 475 2.81 139
 
 
Loans to households
Consumer credit with an initial rate fixation of  4 Other loans with an initial rate fixation of  5 
floating rate or over 1 year and floating rate or over 1 year and
Total up to 1 year  10 up to 5 years over 5 years up to 1 year  10 up to 5 years over 5 years
Annual
Effective Effective Effective Effective Effective Effective percentage
rate of interest interest interest interest interest interest
Reporting charge  9 rate 1 Volume  7 rate 1 Volume  7 rate 1 Volume  7 rate 1 Volume  7 rate 1 Volume  7 rate 1 Volume  7 
period % pa % pa % pa % pa % pa % pa % pa € million € million € million € million € million € million
2009          Sep 6.93 5.32 1,322 5.10 2,294 8.20 2,007 2.17 6,690 4.61 1,043 4.60 2,043
         Oct 6.84 4.90 1,651 5.05 2,386 8.29 2,018 2.24 6,626 4.65 1,208 4.52 2,480
         Nov 6.47 4.55 2,065 4.96 2,242 8.05 1,733 2.08 5,102 4.47 1,225 4.39 1,859
         Dec 6.06 4.04 2,385 4.83 2,027 7.57 1,789 2.40 6,198 4.41 1,495 4.25 2,902
2010          Jan 6.95 4.36 2,233 5.30 1,775 8.45 1,889 2.30 5,417 4.43 1,422 4.37 1,894
         Feb 6.91 4.32 2,127 5.31 1,759 8.37 1,834 2.23 4,795 4.62 977 4.57 1,634
         Mar 6.72 4.13 2,685 5.14 2,385 8.20 2,179 2.22 7,183 4.48 1,205 4.41 2,487
         Apr 6.74 4.27 2,297 5.14 2,247 8.24 1,979 2.26 6,504 4.12 1,307 4.42 2,110
         May 6.61 4.31 2,041 5.04 2,074 8.09 1,719 2.17 5,191 4.26 1,082 4.32 2,021         June 6.83 3.39 1,033 5.50 2,324 8.28 2,175 2.21 5,620 4.10 1,930 4.05 2,456
         July 7.10 3.50 776 5.63 2,285 8.46 2,223 2.37 4,890 4.18 1,706 4.01 2,741
         Aug 7.18 3.47 734 5.76 2,079 8.46 2,036 2.39 4,238 4.47 857 3.92 2,206         Sep 7.09 3.43 731 5.67 2,142 8.43 2,083 2.40 4,588 4.15 1,061 3.88 2,581
For footnotes * and 1to6, see p 45*. — +In the case of deposits with an business at the end of the month has to be incorporated in the calculation
agreed maturity and all loans excluding revolving loans and overdrafts, of average rates of interest. — 7Estimated. The volume of new business is
credit card debt, new business covers all new agreements between extrapolated to form the underlying total using the Horvitz-Thompson esti-
households or non-financial corporations and the bank. The interest rates mator. — 8Including non-financial corporations’ deposits; including fidelity
are calculated as volume-weighted average rates across all new agreements and growth premia. — 9Annual percentage rate of charge, which contains
concluded during the reporting month. In the case of overnight deposits, other related charges which may occur for enquiries, administration, prepa r-
deposits redeemable at notice, revolving loans and overdrafts, credit card ation of the documents, guarantees and credit insurance. — 10Excluding
debt, new business is collected in the same way as outstanding amounts for overdrafts. the sake of simplicity. This means that all outstanding deposit and lending
46*VI Interest rates

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2010
VI Interest rates
 
6 Interest rates and volumes for outstanding amounts and new business of German banks (MFIs) *  (cont’d)
(b) New business +
 
 
Loans to households (cont’d)
Housing loans with an initial rate fixation of  3 
Total over 1 year and up to 5 years over 10 years floating rate or up to 1 year  10 over 5 years and up to 10 years
Effective Effective Effective Effective Annual percentage
Reporting Volume  7 Volume  7 Volume  7 Volume  7 rate of charge  9 interest rate  1 interest rate  1 interest rate  1 interest rate  1 
period % pa % pa € milion % pa € million % pa € million % pa € million
2009          Sep 4.22 3.38 2,256 3.81 2,587 4.37 5,904 4.45 4,060
         Oct 4.17 3.28 2,956 3.83 2,707 4.34 6,512 4.41 3,780
         Nov 4.14 3.24 2,214 3.78 2,462 4.35 5,363 4.32 3,681         Dec 4.13 3.36 2,530 3.76 2,741 4.29 5,547 4.38 3,668
2010          Jan 4.08 3.20 2,978 3.71 2,512 4.27 5,293 4.49 3,006
         Feb 4.06 3.16 2,057 3.67 2,096 4.22 4,389 4.34 3,354         Mar 3.96 3.04 2,660 3.56 2,470 4.09 5,889 4.30 4,291
         Apr 3.97 3.08 2,723 3.56 2,485 4.07 5,485 4.36 4,104
         May 3.89 3.16 2,233 3.42 2,271 4.01 5,238 4.10 4,104         June 3.78 3.19 2,215 3.36 2,323 3.89 5,494 3.90 4,865
         July 3.68 3.11 3,092 3.35 2,842 3.79 6,801 3.76 5,357
         Aug 3.73 3.27 2,125 3.31 2,330 3.80 5,931 3.83 4,769         Sep 3.62 3.28 2,039 3.25 2,339 3.65 6,341 3.64 5,589
 
 
Loans to households (cont’d) Loans to non-financial corporations
Revolving loans  11 Revolving loans  11 Revolving loans  11  and overdrafts  12 Revolving loans  11  and overdrafts  12 
and overdrafts  12 credit card debt  13 and overdrafts  12 credit card debt  13 
Effective Effective Effective Effective
Reporting interest rate  1 Volume  14 interest rate  1 Volume  14 interest rate  1 Volume  14 interest rate  1 Volume  14 
period % pa € million % pa € million % pa € million % pa € million
2009          Sep 10.61 45,022 10.61 45,022 5.05 76,050 5.05 76,050
         Oct 10.53 43,311 10.53 43,311 5.02 72,593 5.02 72,593
         Nov 10.36 41,858 10.36 41,858 4.99 72,412 4.99 72,412         Dec 10.38 43,670 10.38 43,670 4.84 67,483 4.84 67,483
2010          Jan 10.33 42,165 10.33 42,165 4.70 69,286 4.70 69,286
         Feb 10.28 41,795 10.28 41,795 4.82 68,416 4.82 68,416         Mar 10.36 43,281 10.36 43,281 5.03 66,593 5.03 66,593
         Apr 10.34 41,655 10.34 41,655 5.06 64,035 5.06 64,035
         May 10.38 41,645 10.38 41,645 5.09 63,191 5.09 63,191         June 10.20 39,362 10.22 44,263 4.75 70,537 4.74 70,717
         July 10.09 40,207 10.03 45,246 4.72 66,073 4.72 66,293
         Aug 10.10 40,545 10.07 45,747 4.75 64,337 4.74 64,516         Sep 10.18 41,644 10.15 46,795 4.83 65,969 4.82 66,162
 
 
Loans to non-financial corporations (cont’d)
Loans up to €1 million with an initial rate fixation of  15 Loans over €1 million with an initial rate fixation of  15 
floating rate or over 1 year and floating rate or over 1 year and
up to 1 year  10 up to 5 years over 5 years up to 1 year  10 up to 5 years over 5 years
Effective Effective Effective Effective Effective Effectiveinterest interest interest interest interest interest
Reporting rate  
1 Volume  7 rate 1 Volume  7 rate 1 Volume  7 rate 1 Volume  7 rate 1 Volume  7 rate 1 Volume  7 
period % pa % pa % pa % pa % pa % pa € million € million € million € million € million € million
2009          Sep 3.28 11,592 4.72 986 4.35 1,283 2.26 59,657 4.23 2,479 4.12 3,334
         Oct 3.37 11,279 4.54 1,133 4.37 1,403 2.59 58,565 3.88 2,149 4.29 3,158
         Nov 3.37 8,729 4.70 965 4.22 1,252 2.95 51,190 3.87 1,858 4.20 3,859         Dec 3.36 9,502 4.23 1,426 3.98 1,719 2.57 67,036 3.88 3,644 4.07 5,099
2010          Jan 3.19 7,819 4.54 1,047 4.20 1,124 2.45 49,385 3.90 2,333 4.23 3,270
         Feb 3.43 7,546 4.63 943 4.17 940 2.43 37,997 4.54 1,840 4.07 3,029         Mar 3.41 11,490 4.70 1,076 4.16 1,337 2.32 50,429 3.69 1,629 3.81 6,274
         Apr 3.28 9,965 4.52 1,147 4.08 1,180 2.35 50,433 3.92 1,730 4.06 3,542
         May 3.45 10,055 4.52 897 3.94 1,304 2.45 42,240 3.59 1,102 3.74 3,990         June 3.54 7,438 4.70 962 3.82 1,458 2.36 49,112 3.29 1,939 3.62 4,607
         July 3.36 7,401 4.56 1,065 3.78 1,507 2.46 47,412 2.97 2,312 3.24 4,474
         Aug 3.54 5,932 4.61 820 3.70 1,318 2.62 37,588 3.39 1,400 3.66 3,808         Sep 3.60 7,545 4.67 874 3.63 1,453 2.37 43,712 3.39 1,725 3.67 4,467
For footnotes *and 1to6, see p 45*. For footnotes +and 7to10, see whether they are within or beyond the limits agreed between customers
p 46*. — 11From June 2010 including revolving loans which have all the and the bank. — 13From June 2010 including convenience and extended
following features: (a) the borrower may use or withdraw the funds to a credit card debt. — 14From January 2003 up to May 2010 estimated. The
pre-approved credit limit without giving prior notice to the lender; (b) the volume of outstanding amounts reported was extrapolated to form the
amount of available credit can increase and decrease as funds are borrowed underlying total using the Horvitz-Thompson estimator. From June 2010 theand repaid; (c) the loan may be used repeatedly; (d) there is no obligation data are based on monthly balance sheet statistics. — 15The amount refers
of regular repayment of funds. — 12Overdrafts are defined as debit to the single loan transaction considered as new business. 
balances on current accounts. They include all bank overdrafts regardless of
47*VI Interest rates

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
E U R O S Y S T E M
Monthly Report
November 2010
VII Capital market
 
1 Sales and purchases of debt securities and shares in Germany *
 
 
 
Debt securities
Sales Purchases
Domestic debt securities  1 Residents
Credit in- Bundes-
Sales stitutions bank
= Public Foreign including open
total Bank Corporate debt debt building marketpur- debt bonds secur- secur- and loan Non- oper- Non-
Period chases Total securities (non-MFIs) ities  
2 ities 3 Total  4 banks  6 ations  5 residents  7 associations  5 
DM million
1997 332,655 250,688 184,911 1,563 64,214 81,967 204,378 144,177 60,201 − 128,276
1998 418,841 308,201 254,367 3,143 50,691 110,640 245,802 203,342 42,460 − 173,038
€ million
1999 292,663 198,068 156,399 2,184 39,485 94,595 155,766 74,728 81,038 − 136,898
2000 226,393 157,994 120,154 12,605 25,234 68,399 151,568 91,447 60,121 − 74,825
2001 180,227 86,656 55,918 14,473 16,262 93,571 111,281 35,848 75,433 − 68,946
2002 175,396 124,035 47,296 14,506 62,235 51,361 60,476 13,536 46,940 − 114,9202003 184,679 134,455 31,404 30,262 72,788 50,224 105,557 35,748 69,809 − 79,1222004 233,890 133,711 64,231 10,778 58,703 100,179 108,119 121,841 − 13,723 − 125,772
2005 252,658 110,542 39,898 2,682 67,965 142,116 94,718 61,740 32,978 − 157,940
2006 242,006 102,379 40,995 8,943 52,446 139,627 125,423 68,893 56,530 − 116,5832007 217,859 90,270 42,034 20,123 28,111 127,589 − 28,853 96,476 − 125,329 − 246,7122008 72,358 66,139 − 45,712 86,527 25,322 6,219 21,032 68,049 − 47,017 − 51,3262009 70,433 − 538 − 114,902 22,709 91,655 70,971 96,606 12,973 83,633 − − 26,173
2010          July − 29,675 − 33,570 − 31,224 − 1,169 − 1,176 3,895 − 26,070 − 23,894 − 2,176 − − 3,605
         Aug 16,821 14,267 2,574 − 732 12,425 2,554 − 1,980 − 1,922 − 58 − 18,801         Sep 7,655 − 4,122 − 7,947 642 3,182 11,777 − 15,623 − 6,129 − 9,494 − 23,278
 
  
Shares
Sales Purchases
Sales Residents
=total Domestic Foreign Credit insti- Non-purchases shares  
8 shares  9 Total  10 tutions  5,11 Non-banks  6 residents  12 
Period
DM million
1997 119,522 22,239 97,280 96,844 8,547 88,297 22,678
1998 249,504 48,796 200,708 149,151 20,252 128,899 100,353
€ million
1999 150,013 36,010 114,003 103,136 18,637 84,499 46,877
2000 140,461 22,733 117,729 164,654 23,293 141,361 − 24,194
2001 82,665 17,575 65,091 − 2,252 − 14,714 12,462 84,918
2002 39,338 9,232 30,106 18,398 − 23,236 41,634 20,9412003 11,896 16,838 − 4,946 − 15,121 7,056 − 22,177 27,0162004 − 3,317 10,157 − 13,474 7,432 5,045 2,387 − 10,748
2005 32,364 13,766 18,597 1,036 10,208 − 9,172 31,329
2006 26,276 9,061 17,214 7,528 11,323 − 3,795 18,7482007 − 3,722 10,053 − 13,773 − 48,183 − 6,702 − 41,481 44,4612008 − 20,326 11,326 − 31,651 10,417 − 23,079 33,496 − 30,7422009 36,217 23,962 12,254 24,015 − 8,335 32,350 12,201
2010          July − 1,593 269 − 1,862 − 2,581 − 2,697 116 988
         Aug 247 70 177 922 2,493 − 1,571 − 675         Sep 630 776 − 146 − 1,057 − 2,933 1,876 1,687
*Up to end-1999, debt securities in this table comprise bonds and money funds. — 7Net purchases or net sales (−) of domestic debt securities by
market paper issued by domestic banks; from January 2000, they comprise non-residents; transaction values. — 8Excluding shares of public limited
all debt securities. For mutual fund shares, see Table VII.6. — 1Net sales at investment companies; at issue prices. — 9Net purchases or net sales (−) of
market values plus/minus changes in issuers’ portfolios of their own debt foreign shares (including direct investment)  by  residents;  transa ction  val-
securities. — 2Including Federal Railways Fund, Federal Post Office and ues. — 10Domestic and foreign shares. — 11Up to end-1998, excluding
Treuhand agency. — 3Net purchases or net sales (−) of foreign debt syndicated shares. — 12Net purchases or net sales (−) of domestic shares
securities by residents; transaction values. — 4Domestic and foreign debt (including direct investment) by non-residents; transaction values. — The
securities. — 5Book values; statistically adjusted. — 6Residual; also figures for the most recent date are provisional; revisions are not specially
including purchases of domestic and foreign securities by domestic mutual marked. 
48*VII Capital market

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2010
VII Capital market
 
2 Sales of debt securities issued by residents * 
 
 
Up to end-1998, DM nominal million value; from 1999, € million nominal value
Bank debt securities  1 Memo item
 Foreign  DM/euro
bonds issued Debt securities
Corporate by German- issued by special
Mortgage Public purpose credit Other bank bonds Public managed
Period Total Total Pfandbriefe Pfandbriefe institutions (non-MFIs) syndicates debt securities debt securities  2 
Gross sales  3 
1997 846,567 621,683 53,168 276,755 54,829 236,933 1,915 222,972 114,813
1998 1,030,827 789,035 71,371 344,609 72,140 300,920 3,392 238,400 149,542
€ million
1999 571,269 448,216 27,597 187,661 59,760 173,200 2,570 120,483 57,202
2000 659,148 500,895 34,528 143,107 94,556 228,703 8,114 150,137 31,597
2001 687,988 505,646 34,782 112,594 106,166 252,103 11,328 171,012 10,6052002 818,725 569,232 41,496 119,880 117,506 290,353 17,574 231,923 10,3132003 958,917 668,002 47,828 107,918 140,398 371,858 22,510 268,406 2,8502004 990,399 688,844 33,774 90,815 162,353 401,904 31,517 270,040 12,344
2005 988,911 692,182 28,217 103,984 160,010 399,969 24,352 272,380 600
2006 925,863 622,055 24,483 99,628 139,193 358,750 29,975 273,834 692007 1,021,533 743,616 19,211 82,720 195,722 445,963 15,043 262,872 −2008 1,337,337 961,271 51,259 70,520 382,814 456,676 95,093 280,974 −2009 1,533,616 1,058,815 40,421 37,615 331,566 649,215 76,379 398,423 −
2010          June 166,968 115,898 7,875 4,374 24,861 78,788 3,220 47,850 −         July 98,592 58,918 5,572 4,567 28,617 20,162 3,135 36,540 −
         Aug 94,113 60,973 1,507 837 32,142 26,487 4,091 29,050 −         Sep 115,673 75,061 3,102 2,346 28,386 41,226 4,146 36,466 −
of which:  Debt securities with maturities of more than four years  4 
1997 563,333 380,470 41,189 211,007 41,053 87,220 1,820 181,047 98,413
1998 694,414 496,444 59,893 288,619 54,385 93,551 2,847 195,122 139,645
€ million
1999 324,888 226,993 16,715 124,067 37,778 48,435 2,565 95,331 44,013
2000 319,330 209,187 20,724 102,664 25,753 60,049 6,727 103,418 27,008
2001 299,751 202,337 16,619 76,341 42,277 67,099 7,479 89,933 6,4802002 309,157 176,486 16,338 59,459 34,795 65,892 12,149 120,527 9,2132003 369,336 220,103 23,210 55,165 49,518 92,209 10,977 138,256 2,8502004 424,769 275,808 20,060 48,249 54,075 153,423 20,286 128,676 4,320
2005 425,523 277,686 20,862 63,851 49,842 143,129 16,360 131,479 400
2006 337,969 190,836 17,267 47,814 47,000 78,756 14,422 132,711 692007 315,418 183,660 10,183 31,331 50,563 91,586 13,100 118,659 −2008 387,516 190,698 13,186 31,393 54,834 91,289 84,410 112,407 −2009 361,999 185,575 20,235 20,490 59,809 85,043 55,240 121,185 −
2010          June 30,526 14,178 3,595 1,295 3,428 5,859 2,148 14,200 −         July 30,610 13,172 939 3,095 4,208 4,931 2,021 15,417 −
         Aug 22,989 12,585 1,104 289 6,687 4,506 883 9,522 −         Sep 35,280 18,094 1,205 783 11,296 4,811 3,147 14,038 −
Net sales  5 
1997 257,521 188,525 16,471 115,970 12,476 43,607 1,560 67,437 63,181
1998 327,991 264,627 22,538 162,519 18,461 61,111 3,118 60,243 84,308
€ million
1999 209,096 170,069 2,845 80,230 31,754 55,238 2,185 36,840 22,728
2000 155,615 122,774 5,937 29,999 30,089 56,751 7,320 25,522 − 16,705
2001 84,122 60,905 6,932 − 9,254 28,808 34,416 8,739 14,479 − 30,6572002 131,976 56,393 7,936 − 26,806 20,707 54,561 14,306 61,277 − 44,5462003 124,556 40,873 2,700 − 42,521 44,173 36,519 18,431 65,253 − 54,9902004 167,233 81,860 1,039 − 52,615 50,142 83,293 18,768 66,605 − 22,124
2005 141,715 65,798 − 2,151 − 34,255 37,242 64,962 10,099 65,819 − 35,963
2006 129,423 58,336 − 12,811 − 20,150 44,890 46,410 15,605 55,482 − 19,2082007 86,579 58,168 − 10,896 − 46,629 42,567 73,127 − 3,683 32,093 − 29,7502008 119,472 8,517 15,052 − 65,773 25,165 34,074 82,653 28,302 − 31,6072009 76,441 − 75,554 858 − 80,646 25,579 − 21,345 48,508 103,482 − 21,037
2010          June − 18,047 − 23,496 3,447 − 8,610 − 2,831 − 15,503 − 1,172 6,621 − 779         July − 28,806 − 27,506 − 2,394 − 11,718 1,266 − 14,660 − 1,376 77 − 905
         Aug 13,148 − 3,053 − 526 − 3,980 − 1,994 3,447 2,044 14,156 − 650         Sep 15,011 9,918 1,468 − 4,721 6,290 6,880 276 4,817 − 511
*For definitions, see the explanatory notes in the Statistical Supplement 2 Treuhand agency. — 3Gross sales means only initial sales of newly issued
Capital market statistics on p 21 ff. — 1Excluding registered bank debt securities. — 4Maximum maturity according to the terms of issue. — 5Gross
securities. — 2Including Federal Railways Fund, Federal Post Office and sales less redemptions. 
49*VII Capital market

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
E U R O S Y S T E M
Monthly Report
November 2010
VII Capital market
 
3 Amounts outstanding of debt securities issued by residents  * 
 
 
Up to end-1998, DM million nominal value; from 1999, € million nominal value
Bank debt securities  1 Memo item
 Foreign  DM/euro
End of year Debt securities bonds issued
or month/ issued by Corporate by German-
Maturity Mortgage Public Other bank bonds Public managed special purpose
in years Total Total (non-MFIs) syndicates credit institutions debt securities debt securities Pfandbriefe Pfandbriefe
DM million
1998 3,694,234 2,254,668 265,721 1,124,198 259,243 605,507 8,009 1,431,558 619,668
€ million
1999 2,097,926 1,322,863 134,814 655,024 163,284 369,741 6,280 768,783 339,560
2000 2,265,121 1,445,736 140,751 685,122 157,374 462,488 13,599 805,786 322,856
2001 2,349,243 1,506,640 147,684 675,868 201,721 481,366 22,339 820,264 292,1992002 2,481,220 1,563,034 155,620 649,061 222,427 535,925 36,646 881,541 247,6552003 2,605,775 1,603,906 158,321 606,541 266,602 572,442 55,076 946,793 192,6662004 2,773,007 1,685,766 159,360 553,927 316,745 655,734 73,844 1,013,397 170,543
2005 2,914,723 1,751,563 157,209 519,674 323,587 751,093 83,942 1,079,218 134,580
2006 3,044,145 1,809,899 144,397 499,525 368,476 797,502 99,545 1,134,701 115,3732007 3,130,723 1,868,066 133,501 452,896 411,041 870,629 95,863 1,166,794 85,6232008 3,250,195 1,876,583 150,302 377,091 490,641 858,550 178,515 1,195,097 54,0152009 3,326,635 1,801,029 151,160 296,445 516,221 837,203 227,024 1,298,581 32,978
2010          July 3,323,367 1,725,681 149,935 253,234 541,606 780,906 241,759 1,355,928 23,759
         Aug 3,336,515 1,722,628 149,410 249,254 539,612 784,353 243,803 1,370,084 23,109
         Sep 3,351,526 1,732,546 150,878 244,533 545,902 791,233 244,080 1,374,901 22,598
Breakdown by remaining period to maturity  2 Position at end-September 2010 
1,291,959 776,520 59,234 109,558 214,690 393,038 36,979 478,460 6,733    less than 2
742,850 425,653 51,188 76,642 137,932 159,891 39,659 277,539 7,564 2 to less than 4
539,992 277,801 28,631 29,616 66,047 153,508 33,492 228,700 2,742 4 to less than 6
215,630 95,155 7,001 19,155 43,162 25,837 14,667 105,806 1,876 6 to less than 8
167,398 47,434 4,033 5,031 26,947 11,420 9,242 110,722 204 8 to less than 10
71,379 32,493 771 2,896 23,053 5,773 12,058 26,827 1,782 10 to less than 15
66,686 14,924 19 683 8,974 5,248 3,299 48,463 632 15 to less than 20
255,632 62,564 0 953 25,095 36,516 94,684 98,383 1,064 20 and more
*Including debt securities temporarily held in the issuers’ portfolios. — debt securities falling due en bloc and until mean maturity of the residual
1Excluding debt securities handed to the trustee for temporary safe amount outstanding for debt securities not falling due en bloc. 
custody. — 2Calculated from month under review until final maturity for
50* 
 
4 Shares in circulation issued by residents  * 
  
Up to end-1998, DM million nominal value; from 1999, € million nominal value
Change in domestic public limited companies’ capital due to
Memo item
Share circulation
at market values
cash payments contribution (market capita-
and ex- merger reduction lisation) Share capital = Net increase or contribution of shares,
change of of claims and circulation at net decrease (−) mining shares, of capital level at end
issue of and other transfer change of and of period end of period during period convertible GmbH shares,
Period under review under review bonds  1 etc of assets bonus shares real assets legal form liquidation under review  2 
DM million
1998 238,156 16,578 6,086 2,566 658 8,607 − 4,055 3,905 − 1,188 1,258,042
€ million
1999 133,513 11,747 5,519 2,008 190 1,075 2,099 1,560 − 708 1,603,304
2000 147,629 14,115 3,620 3,694 618 8,089 − 1,986 1,827 − 1,745 1,353,000
2001 166,187 18,561 7,987 4,057 1,106 8,448 1,018 − 905 − 3,152 1,205,6132002 168,716 2,528 4,307 1,291 486 1,690 − 868 − 2,152 − 2,224 647,4922003 162,131 − 6,585 4,482 923 211 513 − 322 − 10,806 − 1,584 851,0012004 164,802 2,669 3,960 1,566 276 696 220 − 1,760 − 2,286 887,217
2005 163,071 − 1,733 2,470 1,040 694 268 − 1,443 − 3,060 − 1,703 1,058,532
2006 163,764 695 2,670 3,347 604 954 − 1,868 − 1,256 − 3,761 1,279,6382007 164,560 799 3,164 1,322 200 269 − 682 − 1,847 − 1,636 1,481,9302008 168,701 4,142 5,006 1,319 152 0 − 428 − 608 − 1,306 830,6222009 175,691 6,989 12,476 398 97 − − 3,741 − 1,269 − 974 927,256
2010          July 174,619 − 137 46 46 30 10 − 1 − 11 − 258 944,596
         Aug 174,381 − 238 47 9 2 − − 4 − 121 − 171 913,265
         Sep 174,615 234 653 55 2 − − 108 − 180 − 188 970,048
*Excluding shares of public limited investment companies. — 1Including ber 2007) or the Neuer Markt (stock market segment was closed down on
shares issued out of company profits. — 2Enterprises listed on the Regulated 24 March 2003) are included as well as enterprises listed on the Open Market.
Market (the introduction of which marked the end of the division of organ- Source: Bundesbank calculations based on data of the Herausgebergemein-
ised trading segments into an official and a regulated market on 1 Novem- schaft Wertpapier-Mitteilungen and the Deutsche Börse AG. 
50*VII Capital market

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2010
VII Capital market
 
5 Yields and indices on German securities
 
 
               
Yields on debt securities outstanding issued by residents  1 Price indices  2,3 
Public debt securities Bank debt securities Debt securities Shares
Listed
Federal securities
With a residual With a residual
maturity of maturity of Corporate German German
more than 9 more than 9 bonds bond iBoxx CDAX shareand including and including (non- index share price index
€ Germany
Total Total Total 10 years  4 Total 10 years MFIs) (REX) price index index (DAX)
Average End-1998 End-1987 End-1987
Period % per annum daily rate = 100 = 100 = 1000
1998 4.5 4.4 4.4 4.6 4.5 4.9 5.0 118.18 100.00 343.64 5,002.39
1999 4.3 4.3 4.3 4.5 4.3 4.9 5.0 110.60 92.52 445.95 6,958.14
2000 5.4 5.3 5.2 5.3 5.6 5.8 6.2 112.48 94.11 396.59 6,433.61
2001 4.8 4.7 4.7 4.8 4.9 5.3 5.9 113.12 94.16 319.38 5,160.102002 4.7 4.6 4.6 4.8 4.7 5.1 6.0 117.56 97.80 188.46 2,892.632003 3.7 3.8 3.8 4.1 3.7 4.3 5.0 117.36 97.09 252.48 3,965.162004 3.7 3.7 3.7 4.0 3.6 4.2 4.0 120.19 99.89 268.32 4,256.08
2005 3.1 3.2 3.2 3.4 3.1 3.5 3.7 120.92 101.09 335.59 5,408.26
2006 3.8 3.7 3.7 3.8 3.8 4.0 4.2 116.78 96.69 407.16 6,596.922007 4.3 4.3 4.2 4.2 4.4 4.5 5.0 114.85 94.62 478.65 8,067.32
2008 4.2 4.0 4.0 4.0 4.5 4.7 6.3 121.68 102.06 266.33 4,810.202009 3.2 3.1 3.0 3.2 3.5 4.0 5.5 123.62 100.12 320.32 5,957.43
2010          July 2.4 2.3 2.3 2.6 2.5 3.1 4.0 125.75 104.43 322.99 6,147.97
         Aug 2.2 2.1 2.1 2.4 2.3 3.0 3.8 129.20 108.24 312.12 5,925.22         Sep 2.1 2.0 2.0 2.3 2.3 3.0 3.7 128.37 106.61 329.00 6,229.02
         Oct 2.2 2.1 2.1 2.4 2.4 3.0 3.5 126.80 105.12 348.85 6,601.37
1Bearer debt securities with maximum maturities according to the terms of the calculation. Monthly figures are calculated on the basis of the yields on
issue of over 4 years if their mean residual maturities exceed 3 years. Conver- all the business days in a month. The annual figures are the unweighted
tible debt securities, etc. debt securities with unscheduled redemption, zero means of the monthly figures. — 2End of year or month. — 3Source:
-coupon bonds, floating -rate notes and bonds not denominated in DM or Deutsche Börse AG. — 4Only debt securities eligible as underlying
euro are not included. Group yields for the various categories of securities instruments for futures contracts; calculated as unweighted averages.are weighted by the amounts outstanding of the debt securities included in
 
 
6 Sales and purchases of mutual fund shares in Germany
 
 
Sales Purchases
Domestic mutual funds  1  (sales receipts) Residents
Mutual funds open to the Credit institutions
general public including building
Non-banks  3 and loan associations  2 
of which
Sales Open- of which of which
= Secur- end Foreign Foreign
total Money ities- real Special- mutual mutualpur- market based estate ised Foreign fund fund Non-resi-chases Total Total funds funds funds funds funds  
4 Total Total shares Total shares dents  5 
Period
DM million
1998 187,641 169,748 38,998 5,772 27,814 4,690 130,750 17,893 190,416 43,937 961 146,479 16,507 − 2,775
€ million
1999 111,282 97,197 37,684 3,347 23,269 7,395 59,513 14,086 105,521 19,862 − 637 85,659 14,722 5,761
2000 118,021 85,160 39,712 − 2,188 36,818 − 2,824 45,448 32,861 107,019 14,454 92 92,565 32,769 11,002
2001 97,077 76,811 35,522 12,410 9,195 10,159 41,289 20,266 96,127 10,251 2,703 85,876 17,563 951
2002 66,571 59,482 25,907 3,682 7,247 14,916 33,575 7,089 67,251 2,100 3,007 65,151 4,082 − 6802003 47,754 43,943 20,079 − 924 7,408 14,166 23,864 3,811 49,547 − 2,658 734 52,205 3,077 − 1,7932004 14,435 1,453 − 3,978 − 6,160 − 1,246 3,245 5,431 12,982 10,267 8,446 3,796 1,821 9,186 4,168
2005 85,268 41,718 6,400 − 124 7,001 − 3,186 35,317 43,550 79,252 21,290 7,761 57,962 35,789 6,016
2006 47,264 19,535 − 14,257 490 − 9,362 − 8,814 33,791 27,729 39,006 14,676 5,221 24,330 22,508 8,2582007 55,695 13,436 − 7,872 − 4,839 − 12,848 6,840 21,307 42,259 50,925 − 229 4,240 51,154 38,019 4,7702008 514 − 7,911 − 14,409 − 12,171 − 11,149 799 6,498 8,425 9,154 − 16,625 − 9,252 25,779 17,677 − 8,640
2009 43,139 43,747 10,966 − 5,047 11,749 2,686 32,780 − 609 42,984 − 14,995 − 8,178 57,979 7,569 155
2010          July 7,614 6,789 1,724 − 55 1,146 599 5,066 825 8,327 − 5 − 382 8,332 1,207 − 713
         Aug 12,363 9,511 1,111 94 371 − 106 8,400 2,852 13,021 386 1,334 12,635 1,518 − 658         Sep 8,733 6,908 167 − 76 699 − 190 6,741 1,825 7,853 − 1,093 − 564 8,946 2,389 880
1Including public limited investment companies. — 2Book values. — fund shares by non-residents; transaction values. — The figures for the most
3Residual. — 4Net purchases or net sales (−) of foreign fund shares by recent date are provisional; revisions are not specially marked. 
residents; transaction values. — 5Net purchases or net sales (−) of domestic
51*VII Capital market

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
E U R O S Y S T E M
Monthly Report
November 2010
VIII  Financial accounts
  
1  Acquisition of financial assets and financing of private non-financial sectors
  
  
  € billion
2008 2009 2010 
Item 2007 2008 2009 Q3 Q4 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 Q1 Q2
Households 1 
  I  Acquisition of financial assets
Currency and deposits 85.9 121.0 49.9 12.9 87.1 9.4 15.2 5.5 19.8 16.5 21.3
Bonds  2 − 53.9 − 0.9 − 6.6 6.6 − 25.5 9.0 − 0.0 1.2 − 16.8 1.8 0.9
Shares − 16.5 − 45.5 − 1.0 − 9.0 − 33.0 − 2.0 − 1.0 1.0 1.0 1.0 1.0
Other equity 2.9 3.0 3.0 0.8 0.8 0.7 0.8 0.8 0.8 0.7 0.7Mutual funds shares 24.6 8.9 29.2 1.4 − 13.3 9.5 5.3 7.5 6.8 6.1 − 3.4
Claims on insurance
corporations  
3 71.9 31.7 69.0 7.3 9.1 23.8 14.5 12.9 17.7 23.9 14.6
Short-term claims 1.1 0.4 3.4 0.1 0.1 0.8 0.9 0.8 0.9 0.9 0.9Longer-term claims 70.8 31.2 65.6 7.2 9.0 23.0 13.6 12.1 16.9 23.0 13.7
Claims from company
pension commitments 4.3 7.3 9.9 1.8 1.9 2.4 2.5 2.4 2.5 2.5 2.5
Other claims  
4 − 4.1 − 2.8 − 5.5 − 0.7 − 0.7 − 1.3 − 1.4 − 1.4 − 1.4 − 1.3 − 1.4
Total 115.1 122.7 147.8 21.2 26.3 51.6 35.8 29.9 30.4 51.2 36.3
  II Financing
Loans − 20.7 − 16.0 − 4.4 − 1.2 − 5.7 − 7.6 2.5 4.5 − 3.8 − 7.1 5.7
Short-term loans − 1.2 1.2 − 4.3 0.6 1.4 − 0.4 − 0.1 − 1.3 − 2.5 − 0.3 1.0
Longer-term loans − 19.5 − 17.2 − 0.1 − 1.8 − 7.1 − 7.2 2.7 5.7 − 1.3 − 6.7 4.7
Other liabilities − 0.4 0.4 1.2 − 0.1 0.4 0.3 0.2 − 0.2 0.9 − 0.7 0.0
Total − 21.1 − 15.5 − 3.2 − 1.3 − 5.3 − 7.3 2.7 4.2 − 2.9 − 7.8 5.8
Corporations
I  Acquisition of financial assets
Currency and deposits 71.2 22.8 43.0 33.5 − 3.7 13.2 − 1.4 14.5 16.7 − 0.7 − 7.0
Bonds  2 −117.7 8.3 0.4 − 4.0 72.3 0.2 − 16.6 − 21.6 38.3 14.2 39.1
Financial derivatives 44.9 14.4 − 9.9 0.1 − 4.3 − 11.3 − 1.9 3.1 0.3 2.1 3.2Shares 39.4 99.8 73.6 15.1 23.6 13.1 39.9 29.4 − 8.9 6.8 − 13.8
Other equity 17.7 18.2 17.7 − 8.6 − 3.1 11.4 6.6 2.9 − 3.2 27.9 7.0
Mutual funds shares − 3.2 − 7.8 − 41.3 5.9 − 7.3 − 3.2 − 10.0 − 15.5 − 12.8 − 1.3 3.9
Loans 12.4 0.4 10.9 − 3.3 − 5.6 8.1 − 2.6 3.9 1.5 9.8 7.0
Short-term loans 6.6 − 1.6 − 0.4 − 4.0 − 4.6 6.6 − 2.3 − 1.3 − 3.4 7.3 4.2
Longer-term loans 5.8 2.0 11.3 0.7 − 1.0 1.6 − 0.4 5.2 5.0 2.5 2.8
Claims on insurance
corporations  
3 1.0 0.4 0.4 0.1 0.1 0.1 0.1 0.1 0.1 0.1 0.1
Short-term claims 1.0 0.4 0.4 0.1 0.1 0.1 0.1 0.1 0.1 0.1 0.1
Longer-term claims . . . . . . . . . . .
Other claims 117.5 − 53.3 − 54.1 − 31.2 − 33.9 − 42.3 − 16.1 − 21.6 25.9 − 52.8 − 34.0
Total 183.0 103.3 40.7 7.6 38.0 − 10.6 − 2.0 − 4.7 58.0 6.2 5.5
  II Financing
Bonds  2 7.2 9.6 − 7.1 1.9 5.6 − 9.9 − 1.8 3.5 1.2 8.7 − 0.5
Financial derivatives . . . . . . . . . . .
Shares 6.8 3.6 5.5 0.7 0.5 1.9 0.3 2.3 1.0 6.1 0.1
Other equity 34.9 14.9 8.1 0.2 2.8 3.7 0.7 1.1 2.6 1.5 0.0
Loans 57.8 33.1 − 15.5 12.3 3.6 14.1 − 5.8 − 12.6 − 11.3 12.9 − 6.9
Short-term loans 26.2 11.1 − 43.5 − 4.1 − 2.2 2.3 − 14.6 − 14.2 − 16.9 17.0 5.3
Longer-term loans 31.6 22.0 27.9 16.4 5.8 11.8 8.8 1.6 5.7 − 4.0 − 12.2
Claims from company
pension commitments 1.3 2.9 4.8 0.7 0.7 1.2 1.2 1.2 1.2 1.2 1.2
Other liabilities 11.0 1.0 4.5 5.5 − 15.3 11.2 − 4.5 − 1.4 − 0.8 − 5.6 − 7.7
Total 118.9 65.1 0.2 21.2 − 2.1 22.2 − 9.9 − 5.9 − 6.2 24.8 − 13.8
1Including non-profit institutions serving households. — 2Including money 4Including accumulated interest-bearing surplus shares with insurance
market paper. — 3Including private pension funds, burial funds, corporations. 
occupational pension schemes and supplementary pension funds. —
52*VIII  Financial accounts

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2010
VIII  Financial accounts
  
2  Financial assets and liabilities of private non-financial sectors
  
  
  End-of-year level, end-of-quarter level; € billion
2008 2009 2010 
Item 2007 2008 2009 Q3 Q4 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 Q1 Q2
Households 1 
  I  Financial assets
Currency and deposits 1,620.8 1,737.5 1,788.1 1,650.6 1,737.5 1,746.8 1,762.9 1,768.4 1,788.1 1,804.6 1,825.9
Bonds  2 349.7 337.6 361.8 337.1 337.6 319.6 319.7 362.7 361.8 379.4 364.8
Shares 366.6 176.0 192.3 252.5 176.0 151.7 164.3 173.5 192.3 203.5 197.9
Other equity 198.3 170.4 166.1 184.5 170.4 158.7 161.2 162.5 166.1 170.1 181.1Mutual funds shares 549.4 503.6 555.3 530.8 503.6 502.8 526.0 542.9 555.3 567.7 555.5
Claims on insurance
corporations  
3 1,190.4 1,216.9 1,295.3 1,209.8 1,216.9 1,234.6 1,255.0 1,275.8 1,295.3 1,319.2 1,333.8
Short-term claims 80.8 81.3 84.7 81.1 81.3 82.1 83.0 83.8 84.7 85.5 86.4
Longer-term claims 1,109.6 1,135.7 1,210.6 1,128.6 1,135.7 1,152.5 1,172.0 1,192.0 1,210.6 1,233.7 1,247.5
Claims from company
pension commitments 255.1 262.4 272.3 260.5 262.4 264.9 267.4 269.8 272.3 274.8 277.4
Other claims  4 42.6 39.8 34.2 40.5 39.8 38.4 37.0 35.6 34.2 32.9 31.5
Total 4,572.8 4,444.3 4,665.5 4,466.2 4,444.3 4,417.6 4,493.6 4,591.1 4,665.5 4,752.3 4,768.0
  II Liabilities
Loans 1,536.7 1,520.8 1,520.7 1,525.1 1,520.8 1,513.3 1,518.2 1,522.7 1,520.7 1,514.4 1,520.1
Short-term loans 78.9 80.0 75.7 78.7 80.0 79.6 79.5 78.2 75.7 75.4 78.0
Longer-term loans 1,457.9 1,440.8 1,444.9 1,446.5 1,440.8 1,433.7 1,438.7 1,444.4 1,444.9 1,439.0 1,442.1
Other liabilities 8.7 10.0 10.5 10.4 10.0 10.9 10.9 10.4 10.5 11.0 10.5
Total 1,545.5 1,530.8 1,531.2 1,535.6 1,530.8 1,524.2 1,529.1 1,533.1 1,531.2 1,525.4 1,530.6
Corporations
I  Financial assets
Currency and deposits 477.0 507.3 560.7 502.5 507.3 517.4 517.5 539.9 560.7 558.2 550.5
Bonds  2 123.1 131.5 139.7 65.0 131.5 127.9 117.3 107.1 139.7 156.5 196.2
Financial derivatives . . . . . . . . . . .
Shares 1,015.2 658.3 827.8 835.5 658.3 597.1 690.2 749.3 827.8 872.0 839.1
Other equity 316.2 283.6 289.7 311.7 283.6 274.3 284.0 287.7 289.7 323.3 349.8
Mutual funds shares 109.5 67.9 64.3 85.3 67.9 62.9 58.0 85.9 64.3 68.0 73.9
Loans 115.0 115.3 126.3 120.9 115.3 123.5 120.8 124.8 126.3 136.1 143.0
Short-term loans 82.2 80.6 80.2 85.2 80.6 87.2 84.9 83.6 80.2 87.5 91.6
Longer-term loans 32.7 34.7 46.1 35.8 34.7 36.3 35.9 41.1 46.1 48.6 51.4
Claims on insurance
corporations  3 43.8 44.2 44.6 44.1 44.2 44.3 44.4 44.5 44.6 44.7 44.8
Short-term claims 43.8 44.2 44.6 44.1 44.2 44.3 44.4 44.5 44.6 44.7 44.8
Longer-term claims . . . . . . . . . . .
Other claims 496.9 573.4 522.2 566.1 573.4 585.7 510.0 518.3 522.2 510.2 542.6
Total 2,696.6 2,381.5 2,575.2 2,531.1 2,381.5 2,333.1 2,342.2 2,457.4 2,575.2 2,668.8 2,740.0
  II Liabilities
Bonds  2 118.7 137.0 136.9 126.6 137.0 129.2 124.5 132.8 136.9 146.9 154.1
Financial derivatives . . . . . . . . . . .
Shares 1,564.3 963.5 1,081.3 1,154.1 963.5 814.4 948.4 1,043.3 1,081.3 1,118.8 1,089.5
Other equity 670.4 685.3 693.4 682.5 685.3 688.9 689.7 690.8 693.4 694.9 694.9
Loans 1,123.7 1,162.4 1,132.6 1,155.3 1,162.4 1,175.9 1,166.7 1,144.1 1,132.6 1,136.6 1,129.4
Short-term loans 302.3 309.7 266.1 310.1 309.7 310.4 295.5 280.8 266.1 278.0 284.1
Longer-term loans 821.4 852.6 866.4 845.2 852.6 865.5 871.2 863.3 866.4 858.6 845.2
Claims from companypension commitments 215.5 218.4 223.2 217.7 218.4 219.6 220.8 222.0 223.2 224.4 225.6
Other liabilities 442.9 489.0 469.9 473.5 489.0 547.3 466.6 477.1 469.9 466.5 473.4
Total 4,135.4 3,655.5 3,737.3 3,809.6 3,655.5 3,575.3 3,616.7 3,710.1 3,737.3 3,788.0 3,766.8
1Including non-profit institutions serving households. — 2Including money 4Including accumulated interest-bearing surplus shares with insurance
market paper. — 3Including private pension funds, burial funds, corporations. 
occupational pension schemes and supplementary pension funds. —
53*VIII  Financial accounts

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
E U R O S Y S T E M
Monthly Report
November 2010
IX Public finances in Germany
 
1 General government: deficit and debt level as defined in the Maastricht Treaty
 
 
 
Social Social
General Central State Local security General Central State Local security
government government government government funds government government government government funds
Period € billion as a percentage of GDP
Deficit / surplus 1
2004 − 83.5 − 52.0 − 27.9 − 2.4 − 1.2 − 3.8 − 2.4 − 1.3 − 0.1 − 0.1
2005 − 74.0 − 47.4 − 22.5 − 0.2 − 3.9 − 3.3 − 2.1 − 1.0 − 0.0 − 0.2
2006 − 36.8 − 34.2 − 10.5 + 2.9 + 5.1 − 1.6 − 1.5 − 0.5 + 0.1 + 0.2
2007 p + 6.6 − 18.2 + 4.1 + 9.8 + 10.9 + 0.3 − 0.7 + 0.2 + 0.4 + 0.4
2008 p + 2.8 − 15.6 + 1.8 + 7.8 + 8.8 + 0.1 − 0.6 + 0.1 + 0.3 + 0.4
2009 p − 72.9 − 39.4 − 16.2 − 4.0 − 13.3 − 3.0 − 1.6 − 0.7 − 0.2 − 0.6
2008          H1  p + 8.5 − 7.1 + 4.2 + 6.3 + 5.1 + 0.7 − 0.6 + 0.3 + 0.5 + 0.4
         H2  p − 5.6 − 8.4 − 2.4 + 1.5 + 3.7 − 0.5 − 0.7 − 0.2 + 0.1 + 0.3
2009          H1  p − 18.7 − 9.6 − 5.2 + 0.2 − 4.0 − 1.6 − 0.8 − 0.4 + 0.0 − 0.3
         H2  p − 54.0 − 29.5 − 11.0 − 4.1 − 9.4 − 4.4 − 2.4 − 0.9 − 0.3 − 0.8
2010          H1  pe − 42.8 − 29.1 − 11.2 − 6.6 + 4.1 − 3.5 − 2.4 − 0.9 − 0.5 + 0.3
Debt level 2 End of year or quarter
2004 1,453.8 889.5 459.8 116.3 4.2 65.8 40.2 20.8 5.3 0.2
2005 1,524.4 935.3 482.3 120.0 2.7 68.0 41.7 21.5 5.4 0.1
2006 1,571.6 970.7 492.1 122.4 1.7 67.6 41.7 21.2 5.3 0.1
2007 1,578.7 978.0 494.0 120.2 1.6 64.9 40.2 20.3 4.9 0.12008 1,643.8 1,007.6 531.0 118.8 1.5 66.3 40.6 21.4 4.8 0.12009
pe 1,760.5 1,075.7 573.4 123.8 1.3 73.4 44.9 23.9 5.2 0.1
2008          Q1 1,596.1 989.0 502.0 118.3 1.6 65.1 40.4 20.5 4.8 0.1
         Q2 1,631.9 997.0 529.2 118.7 1.6 65.9 40.3 21.4 4.8 0.1
         Q3 1,626.0 995.1 525.8 117.7 2.0 65.4 40.0 21.1 4.7 0.1         Q4 1,643.8 1,007.6 531.0 118.8 1.5 66.3 40.6 21.4 4.8 0.1
2009          Q1  
pe 1,674.8 1,028.3 539.6 119.4 1.6 68.4 42.0 22.0 4.9 0.1
         Q2  pe 1,740.5 1,074.4 559.2 120.4 1.4 72.1 44.5 23.2 5.0 0.1
         Q3  pe 1,748.5 1,077.1 562.6 121.2 1.5 72.9 44.9 23.5 5.1 0.1
         Q4  pe 1,760.5 1,075.7 573.4 123.8 1.3 73.4 44.9 23.9 5.2 0.1
2010          Q1  pe 1,780.5 1,088.5 579.6 124.5 1.3 73.7 45.1 24.0 5.2 0.1
         Q2  pe 1,822.4 1,099.1 608.8 126.6 1.3 74.6 45.0 24.9 5.2 0.1
Source: Federal Statistical Office and Bundesbank calculations. — 1Unlike rate agreements. The half-year figures correspond to the deficit / surplus
the fiscal balance as shown in the national accounts, the deficit as defined according to the national accounts. — 2Quarterly GDP ratios are based on
in the Maastricht Treaty includes interest flows from swaps and forward the national output of the four preceding quarters. 
 
 
2 General government: revenue, expenditure and fiscal deficit / surplus as shown in the national accounts *
  
 
Revenue Expenditure
of which of which
Compen- Gross Memo item
Social con- Social sation of capital Deficit / Total tax
Period Total Taxes tributions Other Total benefits employees Interest formation Other surplus burden  1 
€ billion
2004 957.7 481.3 396.5 79.9 1,041.2 592.0 169.6 62.4 31.7 185.5 − 83.5 888.0
2005 976.1 493.2 396.5 86.4 1,050.3 597.0 168.9 62.6 30.3 191.5 − 74.2 900.5
2006 1,017.1 530.6 400.1 86.3 1,054.2 598.4 168.3 65.6 32.4 189.6 − 37.1 942.0
2007 p 1,065.8 576.4 400.2 89.2 1,059.4 597.3 168.3 67.3 34.4 192.1 + 6.3 988.6
2008 p 1,088.5 590.1 407.8 90.5 1,085.6 606.8 170.7 66.7 36.8 204.7 + 2.8 1,010.8
2009 p 1,066.0 564.5 409.9 91.7 1,138.7 640.1 177.6 62.2 39.3 219.5 − 72.7 984.6
as a percentage of GDP
2004 43.3 21.8 17.9 3.6 47.1 26.8 7.7 2.8 1.4 8.4 − 3.8 40.2
2005 43.5 22.0 17.7 3.9 46.8 26.6 7.5 2.8 1.4 8.5 − 3.3 40.2
2006 43.7 22.8 17.2 3.7 45.3 25.7 7.2 2.8 1.4 8.1 − 1.6 40.5
2007 p 43.8 23.7 16.5 3.7 43.6 24.6 6.9 2.8 1.4 7.9 + 0.3 40.6
2008 p 43.9 23.8 16.4 3.6 43.8 24.5 6.9 2.7 1.5 8.3 + 0.1 40.7
2009 p 44.5 23.5 17.1 3.8 47.5 26.7 7.4 2.6 1.6 9.2 − 3.0 41.1
Percentage growth rates
2004 − 0.4 − 0.1 + 0.1 − 4.8 − 0.8 − 0.4 + 0.2 − 3.0 − 6.4 − 1.1 . − 0.1
2005 + 1.9 + 2.5 + 0.0 + 8.1 + 0.9 + 0.8 − 0.4 + 0.4 − 4.4 + 3.2 . + 1.4
2006 + 4.2 + 7.6 + 0.9 − 0.1 + 0.4 + 0.2 − 0.4 + 4.7 + 7.0 − 1.0 . + 4.6
2007 p + 4.8 + 8.6 + 0.0 + 3.3 + 0.5 − 0.2 + 0.0 + 2.7 + 6.0 + 1.3 . + 4.9
2008 p + 2.1 + 2.4 + 1.9 + 1.5 + 2.5 + 1.6 + 1.4 − 1.0 + 7.1 + 6.6 . + 2.2
2009 p − 2.1 − 4.3 + 0.5 + 1.2 + 4.9 + 5.5 + 4.1 − 6.7 + 7.0 + 7.2 . − 2.6
Source: Federal Statistical Office. — *Figures in accordance with ESA 1995. data (without affecting the fiscal deficit / surplus). This information can still
In the Monthly Reports up to December 2006, customs duties, the EU share be found on the Bundesbank’s website. — 1Taxes and social contributions
in VAT revenue and EU subsidies were included in the national accounts’ plus customs duties and the EU share in VAT revenue. 
54*IX Public finances in Germany

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2010
IX Public finances in Germany
 
3 General government: budgetary development (as per government’s financial statistics)
 
 
€ billion
Central, state and local government  1 Social security funds  2 General government, total
Revenue Expenditure
of which of which 3 
Finan- Person- Fixed Finan-
cial nel asset cialtransac- expend- Current forma- transac- Deficit / Rev- Expend- Deficit / Rev- Expend- Deficit /
Period Total  
4 Taxes tions  5 Total  4 iture grants Interest tion tions  5 surplus enue  6 iture surplus enue iture surplus
2003 pe 547.0 442.2 21.5 614.2 174.0 235.0 65.6 36.3 10.0 − 67.2 467.6 474.4 − 6.8 925.2 999.1 − 73.9
2004 pe 545.9 442.8 24.1 610.4 173.4 236.9 64.8 34.3 9.6 − 64.5 469.7 468.6 + 1.1 926.8 990.2 − 63.4
2005 pe 568.9 452.1 31.3 620.6 172.1 245.3 64.0 33.0 14.3 − 51.7 467.8 471.3 − 3.4 947.4 1,002.5 − 55.1
2006 pe 590.9 488.4 18.8 626.2 169.7 252.1 64.4 33.7 11.6 − 35.3 486.3 466.6 + 19.7 988.2 1,003.8 − 15.6
2007 pe 644.8 538.2 17.7 644.2 182.2 250.0 66.2 34.6 9.5 + 0.6 475.3 466.4 + 8.9 1,025.6 1,016.1 + 9.6
2008 pe 668.9 561.2 13.4 677.4 187.3 259.9 67.3 36.4 18.6 − 8.5 485.7 478.9 + 6.9 1,058.8 1,060.4 − 1.7
2009 pe 634.3 524.0 9.1 722.8 195.2 271.1 64.0 39.3 38.0 − 88.5 491.6 506.0 − 14.4 1,024.2 1,127.1 −102.9
2008          Q1 p 160.0 130.8 3.0 164.5 43.7 65.5 24.7 5.3 2.0 − 4.5 114.1 119.4 − 5.3 250.4 260.2 − 9.8
         Q2 p 166.1 143.5 2.1 151.5 44.9 61.4 11.1 7.2 1.7 + 14.6 120.6 120.1 + 0.5 263.0 247.9 + 15.1
         Q3 p 159.7 137.2 1.3 167.1 45.9 62.6 21.2 9.0 1.5 − 7.4 118.6 118.9 − 0.3 254.5 262.2 − 7.7
         Q4 p 180.9 149.4 6.7 192.4 51.2 68.7 10.0 13.6 13.3 − 11.5 130.4 121.7 + 8.7 287.4 290.2 − 2.8
2009          Q1 p 157.0 128.9 1.8 175.7 45.9 67.4 22.8 5.0 10.0 − 18.7 117.9 122.3 − 4.4 251.2 274.4 − 23.1
         Q2 p 154.4 130.4 3.3 169.2 47.2 60.4 10.7 7.4 16.9 − 14.8 120.5 125.5 − 5.0 251.4 271.2 − 19.8
         Q3 p 148.8 124.4 2.1 174.9 47.6 65.0 19.8 10.5 4.5 − 26.0 120.1 127.6 − 7.5 245.2 278.7 − 33.5
         Q4 p 172.2 140.6 1.8 201.3 52.8 76.6 10.5 15.2 6.4 − 29.1 132.3 130.1 + 2.2 273.4 300.3 − 26.9
Source: Bundesbank calculations based on the data from the Federal Stat- are estimated. — 3The development of the types of expenditure recorded
istical Office. — 1Including subsidiary budgets but excluding the Post Office here is influenced in part by statistical changeovers. — 4Including discrep-
pension funds. Unlike the annual figures based on the annual calculations ancies in clearing transactions between central, state and local govern-of the Federal Statistical Office, the quarterly figures do not include muni- ment. — 5On the revenue side, this contains proceeds booked as disposals
cipal special purpose associations and various special accounts. — 2The of equity interests and as loan repayments. On the expenditure side, this con-
annual figures do not tally with the sum of the quarterly figures, as the tains the acquisition of equity interests and loans granted. — 6Including Fed-
latter are all provisional. The quarterly figures for some insurance sectors eral Government liquidity assistance to the Federal Labour Of fice. 
4 Central, state and local government: budgetary development (as per government’s financial statistics)
 
 
€ billion
Central government State government  2,3 Local government  3 
Period Revenue  1 Expenditure Deficit / surplus Revenue Expenditure Deficit / surplus Revenue Expenditure Deficit / surplus
2003 239.6 278.8 − 39.2 229.2 259.7 − 30.5 142.1 149.9 − 7.8
2004 233.9 273.6 − 39.7 233.5 257.1 − 23.6 147.0 150.1 − 3.1
2005 250.0 281.5 − 31.5 237.4 259.6 − 22.2 151.3 153.2 − 1.9
2006 254.6 282.8 − 28.2 249.8 260.1 − 10.3 161.1 157.4 + 3.7
2007 pe 277.4 292.1 − 14.7 275.9 267.5 + 8.4 171.3 162.4 + 8.9
2008 pe 292.0 303.8 − 11.8 279.3 278.0 + 1.3 176.9 169.0 + 7.9
2009 pe 282.6 317.1 − 34.5 269.9 295.0 − 25.1 171.7 178.6 − 6.9
2008          Q1 p 64.1 75.6 − 11.5 67.7 67.7 − 0.1 37.3 37.4 − 0.1
         Q2 p 73.0 68.3 + 4.7 70.7 64.2 + 6.5 42.7 39.7 + 3.0
         Q3 p 71.2 82.7 − 11.4 67.3 66.3 + 1.0 43.8 41.1 + 2.7
         Q4 p 83.7 77.3 + 6.4 72.6 78.7 − 6.0 51.0 49.0 + 2.0
2009          Q1 p 65.8 76.8 − 11.0 65.3 75.9 − 10.6 35.8 39.0 − 3.1
         Q2 p 71.3 68.6 + 2.7 66.1 67.9 − 1.8 41.1 42.2 − 1.1
         Q3 p 68.6 84.5 − 15.9 63.1 69.4 − 6.3 42.5 45.1 − 2.6
         Q4 p 77.0 87.2 − 10.2 74.4 80.7 − 6.3 50.6 51.0 − 0.4
2010          Q1 p 61.1 82.6 − 21.5 65.0 73.5 − 8.5 34.6 41.2 − 6.6
         Q2 p 75.6 80.6 − 5.0 68.3 69.1 − 0.8 42.2 43.5 − 1.3
Source: Bundesbank calculations based on the data from the Federal Stat- local authority level of the city-states Berlin, Bremen and Hamburg. —
istical Office. — 1Any amounts of the Bundesbank’s profit distribution 3Unlike the annual figure based on the annual calculations of the Federal
exceeding the reference value that were used to repay parts of the debt of Statistical Office, the quarterly figures do not include various special ac-
central government’s special funds are not included here. — 2Including the counts and municipal special purpose associations. 
55*IX Public finances in Germany

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
E U R O S Y S T E M
Monthly Report
November 2010
IX Public finances in Germany
 
5 Central, state and local government: tax revenue
 
 
€ million
Central and state government and European Union Memo item
Supplementary
central govern-
Balance of ment grants, state
Central State Local untransferred government’s share
Period Total Total government  1 government European Union  2 government  3 tax shares  4 of energy tax
2003 442,238 390,438 214,002 155,510 20,926 51,673 + 127 22,067
2004 442,838 386,459 208,920 157,898 19,640 56,237 + 142 21,967
2005 452,078 392,313 211,779 158,823 21,711 59,750 + 16 21,634
2006 488,444 421,151 225,634 173,374 22,142 67,316 − 22 21,7422007 538,243 465,554 251,747 191,558 22,249 72,551 + 138 21,6432008 561,182 484,182 260,690 200,411 23,081 77,190 − 190 21,5102009 524,000 455,615 252,842 182,273 20,501 68,419 − 34 20,275
2008          Q1 131,507 111,845 56,179 47,660 8,006 14,148 + 5,513 5,272
         Q2 143,006 122,931 66,952 51,585 4,394 19,614 + 461 5,324         Q3 137,454 117,861 65,380 48,667 3,814 19,715 − 122 5,503         Q4 149,216 131,545 72,178 52,500 6,867 23,712 − 6,042 5,411
2009          Q1 128,787 109,674 55,941 46,212 7,521 13,289 + 5,824 5,154
         Q2 130,491 113,442 65,247 46,653 1,541 17,397 − 347 5,140         Q3 124,437 108,572 62,354 42,335 3,883 15,865 − 1 5,048         Q4 140,285 123,928 69,299 47,073 7,556 21,868 − 5,511 4,933
2010          Q1 121,321 104,370 54,316 41,777 8,278 11,299 + 5,652 4,885
         Q2 134,843 116,767 66,331 46,516 3,919 18,270 − 194 4,879         Q3 ... 109,956 61,146 43,102 5,709 ... ... 5,081
2009          Sep . 42,125 24,068 16,715 1,342 . . 1,6832010          Sep . 42,402 23,348 16,932 2,122 . . 1,694
Source: Federal Ministry of Finance, Federal Statistical Office and Bundes- cruing to the EU from central government tax revenue. — 3Including local
bank calculations. — 1Before deducting supplementary central government government taxes in the city-states Berlin, Bremen and Hamburg. — 4Differ-
grants, shares in energy tax revenue and compensation for the transfer of ence between local government’s share in the joint taxes received by the
motor vehicle tax to central government, which are remitted to state govern- state government cash offices in the period in question (see Table IX. 6) a nd
ment. — 2Custom duties and shares in VAT and gross national income ac- the amounts passed on to local government in the same period. 
 
 
6 Central and state government and European Union: tax revenue, by type
 
 
€ million
Joint taxes
Memo
Income taxes  2 Turnover taxes  5 item
Local
Local govern-
Invest- business Central State ment
Assessed ment Turnover tax govern- govern- EU share in
Wage income Corpora- income Turnover tax on trans- ment ment customs joint
Period Total  1 Total tax  3 tax tion tax tax  4 Total tax imports fers  6 taxes  7 taxes  7 duties taxes
2003 414,846 162,567 133,090 4,568 8,275 16,633 136,996 103,162 33,834 7,085 86,609 18,713 2,877 24,409
2004 409,517 159,104 123,896 5,394 13,123 16,691 137,366 104,715 32,651 5,661 84,554 19,774 3,059 23,058
2005 415,355 161,960 118,919 9,766 16,333 16,943 139,713 108,440 31,273 6,218 83,508 20,579 3,378 23,042
2006 446,139 182,614 122,612 17,567 22,898 19,537 146,688 111,318 35,370 7,013 84,215 21,729 3,880 24,9882007 493,817 204,698 131,774 25,027 22,929 24,969 169,636 127,522 42,114 6,975 85,690 22,836 3,983 28,2632008 515,498 220,483 141,895 32,685 15,868 30,035 175,989 130,789 45,200 6,784 86,302 21,937 4,002 31,3162009 484,880 193,684 135,165 26,430 7,173 24,916 176,991 141,907 35,084 4,908 89,318 16,375 3,604 29,265
2008          Q1 118,847 49,649 32,793 3,668 4,727 8,462 44,294 33,488 10,806 297 17,515 6,114 980 7,002
         Q2 130,829 60,000 34,700 10,398 4,821 10,080 41,890 30,645 11,244 1,636 20,700 5,676 927 7,898         Q3 125,510 52,135 34,063 8,878 4,086 5,109 44,338 32,705 11,633 1,690 20,888 5,442 1,017 7,648         Q4 140,312 58,699 40,339 9,741 2,235 6,384 45,468 33,951 11,517 3,161 27,200 4,705 1,080 8,767
2009          Q1 116,731 50,001 33,975 2,971 4,399 8,657 43,087 34,234 8,853 − 36 17,361 5,351 966 7,057
         Q2 120,543 48,503 30,481 9,141 342 8,539 43,424 35,176 8,248 1,499 21,085 5,186 846 7,102         Q3 115,567 43,486 32,150 6,732 592 4,011 44,365 35,717 8,649 1,346 22,427 3,023 920 6,994         Q4 132,040 51,695 38,559 7,586 1,841 3,708 46,114 36,780 9,334 2,099 28,445 2,815 872 8,112
2010          Q1 111,163 45,127 30,255 6,155 1,951 6,766 42,891 34,054 8,837 215 19,001 2,814 1,115 6,793
         Q2 123,859 51,667 30,447 9,681 3,830 7,710 44,343 33,779 10,564 1,311 22,682 2,914 943 7,092         Q3 116,691 42,813 30,445 7,320 1,588 3,460 44,997 33,258 11,740 1,574 22,922 3,242 1,143 6,734
2009          Sep 45,186 21,103 10,067 7,861 2,249 926 15,025 12,189 2,836 1 7,834 918 305 3,0612010          Sep 45,421 21,072 9,487 8,373 2,392 820 14,851 10,932 3,918 18 7,975 1,096 409 3,019
Source: Federal Ministry of Finance and Bundesbank calculations. — 1This sion plans. — 4Final withholding tax on interest income and capital gains,
total, unlike that in Table IX. 5, does not include the receipts from the equal- non-assessed taxes on earnings. — 5The allocation of revenue to central,
isation of burdens levies, local business tax (less local business tax transfers state and local government, which is adjusted at more regular interv als, is
to central and state government), real property taxes and other local govern- regulated in section 1 of the Revenue Adjustment Act. Respective percen t-
ment taxes, or the balance of untransferred tax shares. — 2Respective age share of central, state and local government in revenue for 2009:
percentage share of central, state and local government in revenue: wage 53.9:44.1:2. The EU share is deducted from central government’s share. —
tax and assessed income tax 42.5:42.5:15, corporation tax and non-assessed 6Respective percentage share of central and state government for 2009:
taxes on earnings 50:50:-, withholding tax on interest income 44:44:12. — 21.3:78.7. — 7 For the breakdown, see Table IX. 7. 
3After deducting child benefit and subsidies for supplementary private pen-
56*IX Public finances in Germany

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2010
IX Public finances in Germany
  
7 Central, state and local government: individual taxes   
  
€ million
Central government taxes  1 State government taxes  1 Local government taxes
Tax on of which
the acqui-
Soli- Motor Motor sition of Inher- Local Real
Period Energy Tobacco darity Insurance vehicle Electri- Spirits vehicle land and itance business property
tax tax surcharge tax tax  2 city tax tax Other tax  2 buildings tax Other  3 Total tax taxes
2003 43,188 14,094 10,280 8,870 . 6,531 2,204 1,442 7,336 4,800 3,373 3,205 34,477 24,139 9,658
2004 41,782 13,630 10,108 8,751 . 6,597 2,195 1,492 7,740 4,646 4,284 3,105 38,982 28,373 9,939
2005 40,101 14,273 10,315 8,750 . 6,462 2,142 1,465 8,674 4,791 4,097 3,018 42,941 32,129 10,247
2006 39,916 14,387 11,277 8,775 . 6,273 2,160 1,428 8,937 6,125 3,763 2,904 49,319 38,370 10,3992007 38,955 14,254 12,349 10,331 . 6,355 1,959 1,488 8,898 6,952 4,203 2,783 51,401 40,116 10,713
2008 39,248 13,574 13,146 10,478 . 6,261 2,126 1,470 8,842 5,728 4,771 2,596 52,468 41,037 10,8072009 39,822 13,366 11,927 10,548 3,803 6,278 2,101 1,473 4,398 4,857 4,550 2,571 44,028 32,421 10,936
2008          Q1 4,668 2,547 3,192 4,540 . 1,547 626 394 2,590 1,676 1,087 761 12,956 10,330 2,444
         Q2 9,570 3,267 3,502 1,950 . 1,594 479 338 2,290 1,461 1,301 624 13,813 10,850 2,815         Q3 9,807 3,649 3,059 2,078 . 1,464 488 343 2,050 1,398 1,361 632 13,634 10,281 3,184         Q4 15,203 4,111 3,392 1,911 . 1,655 533 396 1,912 1,193 1,022 579 12,065 9,577 2,364
2009          Q1 4,777 2,365 3,191 4,502 . 1,560 594 372 2,284 1,165 1,144 758 12,021 9,370 2,452
         Q2 10,059 3,560 3,057 1,999 . 1,569 478 363 2,114 1,131 1,334 608 11,447 8,433 2,860         Q3 9,883 3,499 2,638 2,096 1,907 1,582 488 335 0 1,297 1,123 604 10,216 6,800 3,233         Q4 15,103 3,942 3,040 1,952 1,897 1,567 542 402 − 1,264 950 601 10,344 7,818 2,391
2010          Q1 4,446 2,462 2,856 4,496 2,345 1,498 526 372 − 1,229 918 667 10,374 7,641 2,518
         Q2 9,596 3,327 3,100 2,060 2,235 1,570 437 357 − 1,207 1,115 591 12,295 9,201 2,915         Q3 10,172 3,608 2,615 2,110 2,012 1,563 489 354 − 1,430 1,216 597 ... ... ...
2009          Sep 3,523 1,072 1,244 509 667 536 170 113 − 23 435 300 207 . . .2010          Sep 3,507 1,175 1,272 540 642 557 165 119 − 503 383 210 . . .
Source: Federal Ministry of Finance, Federal Statistical Office and Bundes- ment. Postings to state government shown thereafter relate to the booki ng
bank calculations. — 1For the sum total, see Table IX. 6. — 2As of of cash flows. — 3 Notably betting, lottery and beer tax.   
1 July 2009, motor vehicle tax revenue is attributable to central govern-
 
 
8 German pension insurance scheme: budgetary development and assets *
  
€ million
Revenue  1,2 Expenditure  1,2 Assets  1,5 
of which of which
Equity
Payments interests, Memo
from Pen- mort- item
central sioners’ gages Adminis-
Contri- govern- Pension health Deficit / and other Real trative
Period Total butions  3 ment Total payments insurance  4 surplus Total Deposits  6 Securities loans  7 estate assets
2003 229,371 156,510 71,447 231,362 196,038 15,178 − 1,991 7,641 5,017 816 1,682 126 4,862
2004 8 231,684 156,535 71,680 233,011 198,587 14,258 − 1,327 5,158 4,980 19 41 118 4,834
2005 229,428 156,264 71,917 233,357 199,873 13,437 − 3,929 1,976 1,794 16 42 123 4,8882006 241,231 168,083 71,773 233,668 200,459 13,053 + 7,563 10,047 9,777 115 46 109 4,9122007 236,642 162,225 72,928 235,459 201,642 13,665 + 1,183 12,196 11,270 765 46 115 4,8192008 242,770 167,611 73,381 238,995 204,071 14,051 + 3,775 16,531 16,313 36 56 126 4,6452009 244,689 169,183 74,313 244,478 208,475 14,431 + 211 16,821 16,614 23 64 120 4,525
2008          Q1 57,611 39,028 18,241 58,952 50,795 3,473 − 1,341 10,730 9,459 1,095 46 130 4,792
         Q2 60,574 41,958 18,241 59,346 50,714 3,482 + 1,228 11,923 10,267 1,466 61 128 4,704         Q3 59,525 40,769 18,215 60,124 51,418 3,539 − 599 11,727 10,421 1,128 50 127 4,690         Q4 64,495 45,851 18,231 60,100 51,301 3,548 + 4,395 16,912 16,399 336 50 126 4,677
2009          Q1 58,681 39,891 18,500 60,105 51,554 3,633 − 1,424 14,902 14,699 15 56 132 4,618
         Q2 60,812 42,140 18,384 60,263 51,410 3,626 + 549 15,280 15,082 15 59 124 4,593         Q3 59,783 41,142 18,364 61,841 52,869 3,580 − 2,058 13,647 13,428 40 60 119 4,585         Q4 64,864 46,005 18,594 61,993 52,917 3,583 + 2,871 16,812 16,608 23 61 120 4,582
2010          Q1 59,761 40,601 18,917 61,861 53,059 3,582 − 2,100 14,922 14,717 20 64 120 4,490
         Q2 62,249 43,054 18,923 61,999 53,006 3,585 + 250 15,254 15,053 20 69 112 4,478         Q3 61,237 42,048 18,912 62,091 53,102 3,589 − 854 14,853 14,656 20 68 109 4,474
Source: Federal Ministry of Labour and Social Affairs and German pension ing and proceeds. — 3Including contributions for recipients of government
insurance scheme. — *Excluding the German pension insurance scheme for cash benefits. — 4Including long-term care insurance for pensioners until
the mining, railway and maritime industries. — 1The final annual figures 2004 Q1. — 5Largely corresponds to the sustainability reserves. End of year
do not tally with the quarterly figures, as the latter are all provisional. — or quarter. — 6Including cash. — 7Excluding loans to other social security
2Including financial compensation payments. Excluding investment spend- funds. — 8 Revenue includes proceeds from the disposal of equity interests. 
57*IX Public finances in Germany

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
E U R O S Y S T E M
Monthly Report
November 2010
IX Public finances in Germany
 
9 Federal Employment Agency: budgetary development
 
 
€ million
Revenue Expenditure
Grant or
of which of which working
capital
of which of which loansfrom
Unemploy- Measures central
Contri- ment sup- Western Eastern Job promo- Western Eastern financed Deficit / govern-
Period Total  
1 butions Levies  2 Total  3 port 4,5 Germany Germany tion  5,6 Germany Germany by levies  7 surplus ment
2003 50,635 47,337 2,081 56,850 29,735 21,528 8,207 19,155 10,564 8,591 1,948 − 6,215 6,215
2004 50,314 47,211 1,674 54,490 29,746 21,821 7,925 16,843 9,831 7,011 1,641 − 4,176 4,175
2005 52,692 46,989 1,436 53,089 27,654 20,332 7,322 11,590 7,421 4,169 1,450 − 397 397
2006 55,384 51,176 1,123 44,162 23,249 17,348 5,901 9,259 6,185 3,074 1,089 + 11,221 02007 42,838 32,264 971 36,196 17,356 13,075 4,282 8,370 5,748 2,623 949 + 6,643 −2008 38,289 26,452 974 39,407 14,283 10,652 3,631 8,712 6,222 2,490 920 − 1,118 −2009 34,254 22,046 1,000 48,057 20,866 16,534 4,332 11,595 8,794 2,801 1,946 − 13,803 −
2008          Q1 8,714 5,955 83 11,295 4,299 3,183 1,116 2,088 1,473 615 327 − 2,581 −
         Q2 9,690 6,931 211 10,367 3,739 2,761 978 2,182 1,556 626 255 − 677 −         Q3 9,330 6,317 272 8,648 3,245 2,442 804 2,053 1,462 592 149 + 683 −         Q4 10,555 7,248 409 9,098 3,001 2,267 733 2,389 1,731 657 189 + 1,458 −
2009          Q1 6,283 5,248 192 10,396 4,723 3,556 1,167 2,318 1,688 630 480 − 4,113 −
         Q2 6,490 5,421 261 12,391 5,563 4,376 1,187 2,893 2,193 700 491 − 5,901 −         Q3 6,853 5,316 250 12,480 5,465 4,439 1,026 3,026 2,325 701 630 − 5,626 −         Q4 14,627 6,061 296 12,790 5,115 4,163 951 3,358 2,588 770 345 + 1,837 −
2010          Q1 10,020 5,196 714 11,681 6,475 5,112 1,362 2,957 2,263 694 208 − 1,661 −
         Q2 10,649 5,601 784 10,501 5,264 4,148 1,116 2,872 2,204 668 184 + 148 −         Q3 8,109 5,527 808 8,887 4,082 3,353 729 2,431 1,863 567 193 − 778 −
Source: Federal Employment Agency. — 1Excluding central government schemes. 6Vocational training, measures to encourage job take-up, rehabili-
liquidity assistance. — 2Levies to promote winter construction and to pay in- tation, job creation measures, subsidies granted to Personnel Service Agen-
solvency compensation to employees. — 3From 2005, including a compen- cies, compensation top-up payments and business start-up grants. —
satory amount or a reintegration payment to central government. — 4Un- 7Promotion of winter construction and insolvency compensation for em-
employment benefit and short-time working benefit. — 5Including contri- ployees. 
butions to the statutory health, pension and long-term care insurance
 
 
10 Statutory health insurance scheme: budgetary development
 
 
€ million
Revenue  1 Expenditure  1 
of which of which
Central Thera- Adminis-
govern- peutical trative
Contri- ment Hospital Pharma- Medical Dental treatment Sickness expend- Deficit /
Period Total butions  2 funds  3 Total treatment ceuticals treatment treatment  4 and aids benefits iture  5 surplus
2003 141,654 138,383 . 145,095 46,800 24,218 24,301 11,819 9,409 6,973 8,206 − 3,441
2004 144,279 140,120 1,000 140,260 47,594 21,811 22,955 11,263 8,281 6,367 8,196 + 4,020
2005 145,742 140,250 2,500 144,071 48,959 25,358 23,096 9,928 8,284 5,868 8,303 + 1,671
2006 149,929 142,183 4,200 148,297 50,327 25,835 23,896 10,364 8,303 5,708 8,319 + 1,6322007 156,058 149,964 2,500 154,314 50,850 27,791 24,788 10,687 8,692 6,017 8,472 + 1,7442008 162,516 155,883 2,500 161,334 52,623 29,145 25,887 10,926 9,095 6,583 8,680 + 1,1822009 169,758 158,594 7,200 170,823 55,977 30,696 27,635 11,219 9,578 7,258 8,947 − 1,065
2008          Q1 37,937 37,136 − 39,010 13,410 7,084 6,409 2,711 2,011 1,643 1,898 − 1,073
         Q2 40,361 38,491 1,250 40,232 13,387 7,339 6,434 2,728 2,292 1,644 2,021 + 129         Q3 39,185 38,338 − 39,733 13,012 7,215 6,415 2,660 2,271 1,602 2,045 − 548         Q4 44,387 41,838 1,250 42,165 12,913 7,588 6,812 2,894 2,461 1,672 2,704 + 2,222
2009          Q1 42,502 39,324 2,575 41,432 14,154 7,463 6,969 2,797 2,095 1,822 1,977 + 1,069
         Q2 42,540 40,464 1,377 42,400 14,092 7,652 6,810 2,857 2,392 1,779 2,083 + 140         Q3 42,752 38,827 3,002 42,548 13,967 7,574 6,981 2,684 2,437 1,746 2,324 + 204         Q4 41,635 39,992 246 44,445 13,892 8,052 7,021 2,904 2,607 1,895 2,604 − 2,809
2010          Q1
6 43,093 38,542 3,878 43,274 14,769 7,555 6,933 2,871 2,363 1,996 2,130 − 182
         Q2 44,440 39,826 3,889 43,999 14,384 7,876 6,815 2,882 2,664 1,955 2,261 + 441
Source: Federal Ministry of Health. — 1The final annual figures do not tally tures. — 5Net, ie after deducting reimbursements for expenses for levying
with the sum of the quarterly figures, as the latter are all provisional. Ex- contributions incurred by other social insurance funds. Including admin is-
cluding revenue and expenditure as part of the risk structure compensation trative expenditure on disease management programmes. — 6Data on indi-
scheme. — 2Including contributions from subsidised low-paid part-time vidual expenditure categories for 2010 only partly comparable with
employment. — 3Federal grant and liquidity assistance. — 4Including den- prior-year figures owing to a change in the statistical definition. 
58*IX Public finances in Germany

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2010
IX Public finances in Germany
 
11 Statutory long-term care insurance scheme: budgetary development
 
 
€ million
Revenue  1 Expenditure  1 
of which
Contributions to
of which Non-cash In-patient Nursing pension insur- Administrative Deficit /
Period Total Contributions  2 Total care benefits care benefit ance scheme  3 expenditure surplus
2003 16,844 16,665 17,468 2,361 8,183 4,090 951 853 − 624
2004 16,817 16,654 17,605 2,365 8,349 4,049 925 851 − 788
2005 17,526 17,385 17,891 2,409 8,516 4,050 890 875 − 366
2006 17,749 17,611 18,064 2,437 8,671 4,017 862 886 − 3152007 18,036 17,858 18,385 2,475 8,831 4,050 861 896 − 3502008 19,785 19,608 19,163 2,605 9,054 4,225 868 941 + 6222009 21,300 21,137 20,314 2,742 9,274 4,443 878 984 + 986
2008          Q1 4,421 4,381 4,681 641 2,229 1,022 210 255 − 261
         Q2 4,597 4,563 4,703 634 2,251 1,025 221 230 − 106
         Q3 5,167 5,133 4,872 665 2,280 1,089 218 234 + 295         Q4 5,583 5,535 4,884 662 2,293 1,103 219 220 + 698
2009          Q1 5,110 5,082 4,970 676 2,284 1,104 215 274 + 139
         Q2 5,275 5,253 4,977 662 2,308 1,100 217 248 + 298         Q3 5,279 5,239 5,157 706 2,338 1,115 219 246 + 122         Q4 5,650 5,614 5,223 710 2,358 1,148 225 228 + 427
2010          Q1 5,241 5,175 5,298 722 2,362 1,151 217 264 − 56
         Q2 5,398 5,369 5,302 707 2,378 1,167 219 258 + 95
Source: Federal Ministry of Health. — 1The final annual figures do not tally 2Since 2005 including special contributions for childless persons (0.25% of
with the sum of the quarterly figures, as the latter are all provisional. — income subject to insurance contributions). — 3 For non-professional carers. 
 
 
12 Central government: borrowing in 13 Central, state and local government: debt by
the market creditor *
 
€ million € million
Total new borrowing  1 of which of which Banking system Domestic non-banks
Change Change
in money in money Social
market market End of year Bundes- Credit security Foreign
Period Gross  2 Net loans deposits or quarter Total bank institutions funds Other  1 creditors  pe 
2003 + 227,483 + 42,270 + 1,236 + 7,218 2003 1,358,137 4,440 530,700 341 301,956 520,700
2004 + 227,441 + 44,410 + 1,844 + 802 2004 1,430,582 4,440 544,100 430 307,012 574,600
2005 + 224,922 + 35,479 + 4,511 + 6,041 2005 1,489,029 4,440 518,400 488 312,201 653,500
2006 + 221,873 + 32,656 + 3,258 + 6,308 2006 1,533,697 4,440 496,800 480 329,177 702,8002007 + 214,995 + 6,996 + 1,086 − 4,900 2007 1,540,381 4,440 456,900 476 316,665 761,9002008 + 233,356 + 26,208 + 6,888 + 9,036 2008 1,564,590 4,440 435,600 510 320,740 803,3002009 + 312,729 + 66,821 − 8,184 + 106 2009 1,657,842 4,440 438,700 507 332,795 881,400
2008          Q1 + 69,510 + 10,443 + 12,306 − 705 2008          Q1 1,541,759 4,440 467,200 475 305,244 764,400
         Q2 + 52,618 + 7,478 + 4,872 + 10,289          Q2 1,554,151 4,440 462,100 506 292,406 794,700
         Q3 + 53,933 − 2,231 − 10,736 − 12,088          Q3 1,547,336 4,440 431,800 506 295,190 815,400         Q4 + 57,296 + 10,519 + 447 + 11,541          Q4 1,564,590 4,440 435,600 510 320,740 803,300
2009          Q1 + 66,560 + 20,334 − 2,256 − 7,856 2009          Q1 1,594,403 4,440 426,200 514 321,949 841,300
         Q2 + 96,270 + 46,283 − 2,791 + 26,434          Q2 1,646,307 4,440 430,300 520 324,547 886,500
         Q3 + 82,451 + 1,343 + 1,268 − 15,901          Q3 1,651,955 4,440 439,500 520 320,395 887,100         Q4 + 67,448 − 1,139 − 4,406 − 2,572          Q4 1,657,842 4,440 438,700 507 332,795 881,400
2010          Q1 + 74,369 + 12,637 − 5,322 − 1,520 2010          Q1
p 1,678,191 4,440 450,100 508 338,743 884,400
         Q2 + 83,082 + 3,666 − 4,143 + 1,950          Q2 p 1,687,957 4,440 469,600 468 319,849 893,600
Source:  Federal  Republic  of  Germany  -  Finance Source: Bundesbank calculations based on data from the Federal Statistical 
Agency. — 1 Including the Financial  Market  Stabil- Office. — * Excluding direct intergovernmental borrowing. — 1 Calculated 
isation Fund (SoFFin) and the Investment and Repay- as a residual. ment Fund. — 2 After deducting repurchases. 
59*IX Public finances in Germany

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
E U R O S Y S T E M
Monthly Report
November 2010
IX Public finances in Germany
 
14 Central, state and local government: debt by category *
 
 
€ million
Loans from non-banks Old debt
Direct
Treasury Five-year lending
discount Federal Federal Federal by credit Social Equal-
End of year paper Treasury notes savings bonds institu- security isationor quarter Total (Bubills)  
1 notes  2,3 (Bobls)  2 notes (Bunds)  2 Day-bond tions  4 funds Other  4 claims  5 Other  5,6 
Central, state and local government
2004 1,430,582 35,722 279,796 168,958 10,817 495,547 . 379,984 430 53,672 5,572 84
2005 1,489,029 36,945 310,044 174,423 11,055 521,801 . 366,978 488 62,765 4,443 882006 1,533,697 37,834 320,288 179,940 10,199 552,028 . 356,514 480 71,889 4,443 82
2007 1,540,381 39,510 329,108 177,394 10,287 574,512 . 329,588 476 74,988 4,443 76
2008 1,564,590 44,620 337,511 172,037 9,649 584,144 3,174 325,648 510 82,781 4,443 73
2009          Q2 1,646,307 98,920 354,154 174,146 9,490 600,012 3,185 310,665 520 90,699 4,443 73
         Q3 1,651,955 109,876 347,083 181,326 9,450 587,608 2,746 315,889 520 92,945 4,443 72         Q4 1,657,842 105,970 361,727 174,219 9,471 594,999 2,495 300,927 507 103,014 4,442 71
2010          Q1
p 1,678,191 93,830 374,088 191,722 9,441 602,650 2,286 297,819 508 101,331 4,442 73
         Q2 p 1,687,957 82,661 378,912 192,682 9,438 617,987 2,123 296,325 468 102,843 4,440 78
Central government 7,8,9,10,11
2004 812,123 34,440 95,638 159,272 10,817 460,380 . 34,835 333 10,751 5,572 83
2005 886,254 36,098 108,899 174,371 11,055 510,866 . 29,318 408 10,710 4,443 872006 918,911 37,798 103,624 179,889 10,199 541,404 . 30,030 408 11,036 4,443 82
2007 939,988 37,385 102,083 177,394 10,287 574,156 . 22,829 408 10,928 4,443 75
2008 966,197 40,795 105,684 172,037 9,649 583,930 3,174 35,291 448 10,674 4,443 72
2009          Q2 1,032,813 95,758 113,060 174,146 9,490 599,898 3,185 21,634 448 10,680 4,443 72
         Q3 1,034,156 107,415 107,171 181,326 9,450 587,493 2,746 22,877 448 10,718 4,443 71         Q4 1,033,017 104,409 113,637 174,219 9,471 594,780 2,495 18,347 448 10,700 4,442 70
2010          Q1 1,045,654 93,630 117,695 191,722 9,441 602,345 2,286 13,303 448 10,270 4,442 73
         Q2 1,049,321 82,511 120,801 192,682 9,438 617,682 2,123 8,859 408 10,300 4,440 77
State government
2004 448,672 1,282 179,620 .... 228,644 3 39,122 . 1
2005 471,375 847 201,146 .... 221,163 3 48,216 . 1
2006 481,850 36 216,665 .... 209,270 2 55,876 . 1
2007 484,373 2,125 227,025 .... 194,956 2 60,264 . 1
2008 483,875 3,825 231,827 .... 179,978 3 68,241 . 1
2009          Q2 497,725 3,161 241,094 .... 177,307 12 76,149 . 1
         Q3 501,092 2,461 239,911 .... 180,349 12 78,358 . 1
         Q4 505,359 1,561 248,091 .... 167,310 8 88,389 . 1
2010          Q1 p 511,619 200 256,393 .... 167,878 10 87,137 . 1
         Q2 p 515,471 150 258,111 .... 168,581 10 88,618 . 1
Local government 12
2004 112,538 . − . . 812 . 108,231 86 3,410 . .
2005 116,033 . − . . 466 . 111,889 77 3,601 . .2006 118,380 . − . . 256 . 113,265 70 4,789 . .
2007 115,920 . − . . 256 . 111,803 66 3,796 . .
2008 114,518 . − . . 214 . 110,379 60 3,866 . .
2009          Q2 115,769 . − . . 114 . 111,725 60 3,870 . .
         Q3 116,707 . − . . 114 . 112,663 60 3,870 . .         Q4 119,466 . − . . 219 . 115,270 52 3,925 . .
2010          Q1
p 120,918 . − . . 305 . 116,638 50 3,925 . .
         Q2 p 123,165 . − . . 305 . 118,885 50 3,925 . .
Special funds 7,8,9,13
2004 57,250 − 4,538 9,685 . 34,355 . 8,274 8 389 . .
2005 15,367 . − 51 . 10,469 . 4,609 − 238 . .2006 14,556 . − 51 . 10,368 . 3,950 − 188 . .
2007 100 . − − . 100 . − − − . .
2008 − . − − . − . − − − . .
2009          Q2 − . − − . − . − − − . .
         Q3 − . − − . − . − − − . .         Q4 − . − − . − . − − − . .
2010          Q1 − . − − . − . − − − . .
         Q2 − . − − . − . − − − . .
Source: Bundesbank calculations based on data from the Federal Statistical trast to the capital market statistics, the debt incurred through the joi nt issu-
Office. — *Excluding direct intergovernmental borrowing. — 1Including ance of Federal securities is recorded here under central government and its
Treasury financing paper. — 2Excluding issuers’ holdings of their own secur- special funds in accordance with the agreed allocation ratios. — 8On 1
ities. — 3Treasury notes issued by state government include long-term January 2005 central government assumed joint responsibility for the debts
notes. — 4Mainly loans against borrowers’ notes and cash advances. In- of the German Unity Fund. From that date on, the aforementioned special
cluding loans raised abroad. Other loans from non-banks, including loans fund is recorded under central government. — 9On 1 July 2007 central
from public supplementary pension funds and liabilities arising from the in- government assumed joint responsibility for the debts of the ERP Specia l
vestment assistance levy. — 5Excluding offsets against outstanding Fund. From that date on, the aforementioned special fund is recorded
claims. — 6Old debt mainly denominated in foreign currency, in accordance under central government. — 10From December 2008, including debt of
with the London Debts Agreement, old liabilities arising from housing con- the Financial Market Stabilisation Fund (SoFFin). — 11From March 2009, in-
struction and liabilities arising from housing construction by the former cluding debt of the Investment and Repayment Fund. — 12Including debt
GDR’s armed forces and from housing construction in connection with the of municipal special purpose associations. Data other than year-end figures
return of the troops of the former USSR stationed in eastern Germany to have been estimated. — 13ERP Special Fund (up to the end of June 2007),
their home country; excluding debt securities in own portfolios. — 7In con- German Unity Fund (up to the end of 2004) and Indemnification Fund. 
60*IX Public finances in Germany

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2010
X Economic conditions in Germany
  
1 Origin and use of domestic product, distribution of national income
  
  
  
  2008   2009   2010
  2007   2008   2009   2007   2008   2009   Q4   Q1   Q2   Q3   Q4   Q1   Q2
Item Index 2000=100 Annual percentage change
At  constant  prices,  chained
  I Origin of domestic product
Production sector
(excluding construction) 116.7 112.7 93.9 3.8 − 3.4 − 16.7 − 12.2 − 20.3 − 22.9 − 15.9 − 6.9 7.0 13.2
Construction 78.7 77.9 76.5 − 0.1 − 1.0 − 1.8 − 3.1 − 5.5 − 3.3 0.7 0.5 − 0.9 4.4
Wholesale/retail trade, hotel andrestaurant services, transportand storage  
1 113.9 118.9 111.8 3.4 4.4 − 6.0 1.4 − 6.8 − 7.5 − 5.8 − 3.7 0.5 2.3
Financing, renting and business
services  2 115.1 118.2 116.8 4.5 2.7 − 1.2 1.4 − 1.2 − 1.7 − 1.3 − 0.5 1.0 1.5
Public and private services  3 106.0 108.5 110.4 1.1 2.4 1.7 2.7 1.1 1.5 1.9 2.5 2.7 1.9
Gross value added 111.1 112.3 106.4 3.1 1.1 − 5.3 − 2.2 − 6.8 − 7.6 − 4.9 − 1.9 2.6 4.4
Gross domestic product  4 109.3 110.4 105.2 2.7 1.0 − 4.7 − 1.9 − 6.3 − 6.8 − 4.4 − 1.3 2.1 4.1
 II Use of domestic product
Private consumption  5 102.8 103.5 103.3 − 0.2 0.7 − 0.2 0.0 − 0.2 0.3 − 0.6 − 0.3 − 0.7 − 0.7
Government consumption 104.7 107.2 110.2 1.6 2.3 2.9 2.2 3.3 2.7 3.3 2.1 3.2 3.1
Machinery and equipment 122.8 127.2 98.4 10.7 3.5 − 22.6 − 3.0 − 20.6 − 25.7 − 23.4 − 20.5 1.3 9.5
Premises 86.0 87.0 85.7 − 0.5 1.2 − 1.5 − 1.2 − 6.1 − 3.4 0.9 2.1 − 1.0 5.2
Other investment  6 136.2 145.0 153.2 6.8 6.5 5.6 5.7 5.7 5.0 5.8 6.1 6.2 6.7
Changes in inventories  7  8 . . . 0.1 − 0.2 − 0.3 0.4 0.0 − 0.7 0.1 − 0.5 0.1 1.4
Domestic use 101.5 102.7 100.8 1.2 1.2 − 1.9 0.5 − 1.6 − 2.6 − 1.4 − 2.0 0.3 2.9Net exports  
8 . . . 1.5 − 0.1 − 2.9 − 2.4 − 4.9 − 4.4 − 3.1 0.6 1.8 1.4
Exports 164.4 168.6 144.5 7.6 2.5 − 14.3 − 5.7 − 16.7 − 19.9 − 15.3 − 4.7 8.3 19.1
Imports 141.4 146.0 132.3 5.0 3.3 − 9.4 − 1.0 − 8.0 − 13.0 − 9.9 − 6.7 4.4 17.8
Gross domestic product  4 109.3 110.4 105.2 2.7 1.0 − 4.7 − 1.9 − 6.3 − 6.8 − 4.4 − 1.3 2.1 4.1
At  current  prices  (€ billion)
III Use of domestic product
Private consumption  5 1,378.9 1,413.2 1,411.1 1.6 2.5 − 0.2 1.1 − 0.3 0.3 − 0.9 0.2 1.2 1.2
Government consumption 434.9 449.6 472.1 2.2 3.4 5.0 2.8 5.5 4.9 6.1 3.6 4.2 3.7Machinery and equipment 196.0 201.6 154.7 9.9 2.9 − 23.3 − 3.6 − 21.2 − 26.3 − 24.1 − 21.3 0.1 8.1
Premises 231.0 241.5 240.1 5.7 4.5 − 0.6 2.1 − 3.8 − 2.4 0.8 2.7 − 0.9 6.5
Other investment  
6 27.6 28.3 27.9 3.7 2.8 − 1.4 1.5 − 0.5 − 1.7 − 2.0 − 1.4 0.6 1.3
Changes in inventories  7 − 8.8 − 12.4 − 27.3 . . . . . . . . . .
Domestic use 2,259.6 2,321.8 2,278.6 3.0 2.8 − 1.9 1.4 − 1.5 − 2.6 − 1.6 − 1.8 1.6 4.4Net exports 172.8 159.5 118.5 . . . . . . . . . .
Exports 1,141.2 1,177.9 978.8 8.1 3.2 − 16.9 − 5.4 − 18.9 − 23.1 − 18.5 − 6.5 8.8 22.4Imports 968.4 1,018.4 860.3 5.0 5.2 − 15.5 − 0.8 − 13.2 − 19.5 − 17.6 − 11.5 5.5 23.7
Gross domestic product  
4 2,432.4 2,481.2 2,397.1 4.6 2.0 − 3.4 − 1.0 − 5.2 − 5.7 − 2.8 0.0 3.1 4.9
IV Prices (2000 = 100)
Private consumption 110.5 112.4 112.5 1.8 1.7 0.1 1.1 − 0.1 0.0 − 0.3 0.6 1.9 2.0Gross domestic product 107.9 109.0 110.5 1.8 1.0 1.4 1.0 1.3 1.2 1.7 1.3 0.9 0.7Terms of trade 100.3 99.1 103.1 0.5 − 1.2 4.0 0.1 3.3 3.8 5.3 3.4 − 0.5 − 2.1
V Distribution of national income
Compensation of employees 1,181.0 1,223.3 1,225.9 2.7 3.6 0.2 3.4 1.4 0.4 − 0.2 − 0.6 1.3 2.5Entrepreneurial and propertyincome 656.9 647.7 566.0 4.3 − 1.4 − 12.6 − 12.7 − 21.1 − 21.6 − 7.4 1.9 17.3 21.9
National income 1,837.8 1,871.0 1,791.8 3.3 1.8 − 4.2 − 1.9 − 7.2 − 7.3 − 2.8 0.2 6.5 8.3
Memo item: Gross national
income 2,475.2 2,520.9 2,430.9 4.2 1.8 − 3.6 − 1.2 − 5.4 − 5.7 − 3.0 − 0.3 3.2 4.9
Source: Federal Statistical Office; figures computed in August 2010. — 1In- products). — 5Including non-profit institutions serving households. — 6In-
cluding communication services. — 2Financial intermediation, real estate tangible fixed asset formation (inter alia, computer software and entertain-
activities, renting and business services. — 3Including care-at-home servi- ment, literary or artistic originals) and cultivated assets. — 7Including net in-
ces. — 4Gross value added plus taxes on products (netted with subsidies on crease in valuables. — 8 Contribution of growth to GDP. 
61*X Economic conditions in Germany

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
E U R O S Y S T E M
Monthly Report
November 2010
 X Economic conditions in Germany
 
2 Output in the production sector  * 
 
 
Adjusted for working-day variations  o 
of which
Industry
of which:   by main industrial grouping of which:   by economic sector
Manu-
Manu- facture of
facture of computers,
Motor basic metals electronic
and vehicles, and optical
Production Inter- Non- fabricated products Machinery trailers
sector, Construc- mediate Capital Durable durable metal and and semi- and electrical
total tion Energy Total goods goods goods goods products equipment equipment trailers
2005=100  
  
% of total  1 100.00 5.56 8.76 85.69 33.96 35.37 2.78 13.58 12.15 10.82 12.48 12.34
Period
2005 99.7 99.5 100.1 99.7 99.7 99.6 99.7 99.6 99.7 99.8 99.5 99.7
2006 105.4 105.8 101.0 105.8 107.1 106.0 107.3 101.7 107.3 112.9 107.5 102.62007 111.6 108.9 98.2 113.1 114.6 114.9 108.4 105.8 114.0 124.4 119.4 109.72008 111.5 108.3 95.6 113.4 114.2 116.8 104.0 104.4 114.4 128.8 124.5 104.52009 94.3 108.2 90.7 93.7 93.3 92.0 87.6 100.6 87.5 100.8 92.2 82.0
2009          Jan 86.8 58.8 105.4 86.7 86.8 82.0 84.8 98.8 82.3 95.7 86.2 68.0
         Feb 86.4 67.5 93.2 86.9 86.7 84.0 85.1 95.4 82.3 96.6 90.4 65.4         Mar 97.3 104.3 92.6 97.3 93.8 99.1 93.2 102.3 87.4 104.3 105.0 84.4
         Apr 89.0 117.6 82.4 87.8 87.1 84.6 83.6 98.9 81.0 91.3 86.9 70.2
         May 91.8 117.7 80.9 91.3 90.6 90.2 83.2 97.8 84.0 93.7 89.1 83.6         June 96.4 123.9 84.2 95.9 94.7 97.0 83.9 98.3 88.6 98.6 95.2 91.2
         July 94.6 126.2 86.1 93.4 95.6 89.9 80.1 99.7 87.8 99.2 86.0 83.7
         Aug 88.9 122.1 84.4 87.2 92.3 79.1 74.0 98.0 84.6 95.9 78.5 65.1         Sep 103.3 129.1 85.9 103.4 102.0 104.2 99.4 105.8 96.0 109.2 102.5 103.1
         Oct 102.0 126.0 93.5 101.3 103.5 97.5 98.5 106.6 97.1 111.8 89.9 97.8
         Nov 103.7 121.2 95.7 103.4 103.4 101.8 102.7 107.8 99.3 113.9 93.0 99.8         Dec 91.1 84.0 103.6 90.3 83.2 94.8 82.8 97.9 79.5 99.7 103.4 71.4
2010          Jan 89.8 49.3 110.4 90.3 95.3 82.7 89.0 97.7 88.3 99.7 77.6 82.5
         Feb 91.6 55.4 99.8 93.1 96.0 89.9 91.8 94.2 91.0 103.3 83.2 91.8         Mar 106.3 105.1 98.1 107.2 109.3 106.5 99.7 105.6 105.4 115.7 103.4 108.2
         Apr 101.2 123.2 90.1 100.9 106.1 97.5 91.0 98.9 100.3 110.1 93.1 99.6
         May 103.4 122.8 91.4 103.4 108.9 100.5 92.3 99.5 102.6 113.2 95.7 104.6         June 106.6 127.6 83.5 107.6 110.8 108.1 96.6 100.6 105.9 120.1 104.7 108.9
         July  
x 104.9 132.5 86.2 105.0 110.9 101.1 90.2 103.4 104.1 120.1 99.4 97.3
         Aug  x 98.4 124.5 82.7 98.4 106.1 90.8 84.7 101.9 98.1 115.9 94.7 78.1
         Sep  x p 111.5 134.3 86.2 112.6 113.8 114.0 106.2 107.4 107.4 128.1 109.9 119.0
 
Annual percentage change  
  
2005 + 3.0 − 5.4 + 0.4 + 3.9 + 3.0 + 5.0 + 0.1 + 3.9 + 1.5 + 8.8 + 5.1 + 4.2
2006 + 5.7 + 6.3 + 0.9 + 6.1 + 7.4 + 6.4 + 7.6 + 2.1 + 7.6 + 13.1 + 8.0 + 2.92007 + 5.9 + 2.9 − 2.8 + 6.9 + 7.0 + 8.4 + 1.0 + 4.0 + 6.2 + 10.2 + 11.1 + 6.92008 − 0.1 − 0.6 − 2.6 + 0.3 − 0.3 + 1.7 − 4.1 − 1.3 + 0.4 + 3.5 + 4.3 − 4.72009 − 15.4 − 0.1 − 5.1 − 17.4 − 18.3 − 21.2 − 15.8 − 3.6 − 23.5 − 21.7 − 25.9 − 21.5
 
2009          Jan − 18.4 − 25.0 + 0.6 − 20.0 − 22.7 − 23.6 − 16.8 − 3.8 − 26.4 − 22.0 − 20.5 − 34.9         Feb − 21.0 − 20.7 − 4.8 − 22.4 − 24.0 − 27.0 − 20.8 − 4.8 − 28.2 − 23.2 − 21.8 − 43.9         Mar − 19.6 + 4.1 − 12.0 − 21.5 − 25.4 − 22.8 − 20.5 − 6.2 − 31.3 − 25.8 − 21.4 − 32.4
         Apr − 22.1 + 6.4 − 17.4 − 24.2 − 26.8 − 29.0 − 22.1 − 2.6 − 32.5 − 28.4 − 29.9 − 39.7
         May − 17.4 + 2.8 − 12.8 − 19.0 − 22.7 − 21.1 − 14.2 − 2.9 − 28.6 − 25.8 − 25.4 − 21.5
         June − 17.1 + 2.8 − 3.3 − 19.3 − 21.3 − 22.3 − 21.1 − 4.2 − 27.9 − 26.3 − 29.1 − 20.6
         July − 16.4 + 2.9 − 3.3 − 18.8 − 19.8 − 23.0 − 15.8 − 4.4 − 25.9 − 24.4 − 32.0 − 20.2
         Aug − 16.1 + 3.8 − 1.5 − 18.7 − 19.0 − 23.8 − 17.7 − 5.3 − 24.9 − 23.8 − 31.0 − 22.8
         Sep − 12.2 + 3.1 − 4.1 − 13.8 − 14.4 − 17.2 − 14.1 − 1.8 − 19.9 − 19.6 − 20.8 − 9.5
         Oct − 11.8 + 2.3 − 4.6 − 13.5 − 11.9 − 18.2 − 13.1 − 4.5 − 17.4 − 15.9 − 28.6 − 6.2
         Nov − 7.5 + 3.7 − 1.8 − 8.7 − 4.9 − 15.0 − 8.1 − 0.8 − 9.2 − 14.7 − 26.5 − 1.2         Dec − 4.6 − 1.1 + 3.8 − 5.6 + 0.7 − 11.9 − 2.1 − 1.7 − 0.6 − 9.1 − 24.1 + 15.9
2010          Jan + 3.5 − 16.2 + 4.7 + 4.2 + 9.8 + 0.9 + 5.0 − 1.1 + 7.3 + 4.2 − 10.0 + 21.3
         Feb + 6.0 − 17.9 + 7.1 + 7.1 + 10.7 + 7.0 + 7.9 − 1.3 + 10.6 + 6.9 − 8.0 + 40.4         Mar + 9.2 + 0.8 + 5.9 + 10.2 + 16.5 + 7.5 + 7.0 + 3.2 + 20.6 + 10.9 − 1.5 + 28.2
         Apr + 13.7 + 4.8 + 9.3 + 14.9 + 21.8 + 15.2 + 8.9
+ 0.0 + 23.8 + 20.6 + 7.1 + 41.9
         May + 12.6 + 4.3 + 13.0 + 13.3 + 20.2 + 11.4 + 10.9 + 1.7 + 22.1 + 20.8 + 7.4 + 25.1
         June + 10.6 + 3.0 − 0.8 + 12.2 + 17.0 + 11.4 + 15.1 + 2.3 + 19.5 + 21.8 + 10.0 + 19.4
         July  x + 10.9 + 5.0 + 0.1 + 12.4 + 16.0 + 12.5 + 12.6 + 3.7 + 18.6 + 21.1 + 15.6 + 16.2
         Aug  x + 10.7 + 2.0 − 2.0 + 12.8 + 15.0 + 14.8 + 14.5 + 4.0 + 16.0 + 20.9 + 20.6 + 20.0
         Sep  x p + 7.9 + 4.0 + 0.3 + 8.9 + 11.6 + 9.4 + 6.8 + 1.5 + 11.9 + 17.3 + 7.2 + 15.4
Source of the unadjusted figures: Federal Statistical Office. — *For explan- duction sector in the base year 2005. — xProvisional; adjusted in advance by
atory notes, see Statistical Supplement "Seasonally adjusted business the Federal Statistical Office, by way of estimates, to the results of the
statistics", Tables II.10 to II.12. — oUsing the Census X-12-ARIMA method, Quarterly Production Survey. 
version 0.2.8. — 1Share of gross value added at factor cost of the pro-
62* X Economic conditions in Germany

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2010
 X Economic conditions in Germany
 
3 Orders received by industry *
 
 
Adjusted for working-day variations  o 
of which
of which
Industry Intermediate goods Capital goods Consumer goods Durable goods Non-durable goods
Annual Annual Annual Annual Annual Annual
percent- percent- percent- percent- percent- percent-age age age age age age
Period 2005=100 change 2005=100 change 2005=100 change 2005=100 change 2005=100 change 2005=100 change
total  
  
2005 99.7 + 6.5 99.7 + 5.6 99.7 + 7.3 99.7 + 5.5 99.7 − 1.5 99.8 + 8.1
2006 110.7 + 11.0 113.9 + 14.2 109.4 + 9.7 105.3 + 5.6 108.4 + 8.7 104.3 + 4.52007 123.1 + 11.2 125.2 + 9.9 123.2 + 12.6 111.9 + 6.3 110.3 + 1.8 112.5 + 7.9
2008 115.5 − 6.2 121.2 − 3.2 112.9 − 8.4 108.1 − 3.4 103.5 − 6.2 109.7 − 2.5
2009 87.5 − 24.2 89.3 − 26.3 85.2 − 24.5 94.8 − 12.3 88.5 − 14.5 96.9 − 11.7
 
2009          Sep 95.2 − 16.4 97.6 − 20.0 92.8 − 14.7 101.7 − 9.3 110.6 − 3.7 98.7 − 11.2
         Oct 92.0 − 12.6 98.1 − 14.5 86.9 − 11.8 99.2 − 9.2 100.9 − 8.8 98.5 − 9.4
         Nov 96.8 − 1.6 101.0 − 1.6 93.6 − 1.0 99.7 − 6.4 99.4 − 4.1 99.7 − 7.3
         Dec 89.5 + 4.8 87.2 + 4.7 91.4 + 6.3 87.0 − 4.0 86.9 + 5.7 87.0 − 6.9
2010          Jan 97.5 + 19.9 104.8 + 22.9 92.6 + 20.9 99.0 + 3.3 93.5 + 11.4 100.9 + 1.0
         Feb 98.5 + 24.5 103.8 + 32.7 94.6 + 22.7 100.9 + 3.1 94.1 + 19.4 103.3 − 1.0         Mar 113.2 + 27.2 119.3 + 37.9 110.0 + 22.9 107.6 + 9.7 107.3 + 21.2 107.7 + 6.2
         Apr 106.1 + 33.0 115.7 + 40.8 101.6 + 31.8 94.3 + 7.9 99.5 + 23.6 92.6 + 3.1
         May 106.7 + 28.6 114.4 + 36.0 103.0 + 26.5 97.6 + 9.4 104.4 + 25.9 95.4 + 4.5         June 115.5 + 28.8 118.6 + 29.3 115.7 + 31.2 100.4 + 10.5 106.7 + 21.7 98.2 + 6.9
         July 110.7 + 22.7 119.2 + 30.0 105.7 + 20.0 106.3 + 8.9 104.2 + 21.6 107.1 + 5.3
         Aug 104.7 + 24.8 109.4 + 24.7 102.4 + 27.8 100.1 + 7.6 90.2 + 18.7 103.5 + 4.8         Sep  
p 112.6 + 18.3 116.4 + 19.3 111.4 + 20.0 103.4 + 1.7 112.5 + 1.7 100.2 + 1.5
from the domestic market  
  
2005 99.7 + 3.4 99.7 + 4.0 99.6 + 2.8 99.7 + 4.2 99.7 − 3.2 99.7 + 6.7
2006 109.0 + 9.3 113.3 + 13.6 106.4 + 6.8 103.3 + 3.6 111.0 + 11.3 100.9 + 1.22007 118.7 + 8.9 124.7 + 10.1 115.8 + 8.8 106.9 + 3.5 109.6 − 1.3 106.1 + 5.2
2008 113.1 − 4.7 121.8 − 2.3 107.5 − 7.2 103.9 − 2.8 107.1 − 2.3 102.9 − 3.0
2009 88.0 − 22.2 89.9 − 26.2 86.5 − 19.5 87.4 − 15.9 89.9 − 16.1 86.6 − 15.8
 
2009          Sep 93.1 − 18.9 97.6 − 20.8 88.3 − 18.7 98.4 − 10.5 121.9 + 1.1 90.7 − 14.8
         Oct 92.7 − 13.1 101.2 − 11.8 85.8 − 14.3 90.7 − 14.0 103.7 − 9.5 86.4 − 15.7
         Nov 95.1 − 1.9 103.9 + 2.6 88.6 − 3.9 89.6 − 12.8 97.4 − 12.3 87.0 − 13.0
         Dec 84.5 + 2.1 87.5 + 7.9 82.8 − 0.6 79.4 − 9.4 82.6 − 3.6 78.3 − 11.2
2010          Jan 96.2 + 12.0 105.0 + 21.5 90.2 + 6.4 88.8 − 1.4 86.8 − 1.6 89.5 − 1.3
         Feb 94.7 + 17.5 103.3 + 32.6 88.3 + 8.5 89.5 + 0.3 86.0 + 7.5 90.6 − 1.7         Mar 110.0 + 22.1 120.1 + 40.0 104.1 + 11.1 95.9 + 5.7 99.8 + 12.4 94.6 + 3.6
         Apr 104.2 + 28.0 118.9 + 45.0 95.7 + 18.0 82.7 + 3.0 87.7 + 9.5 81.1 + 0.9
         May 103.2 + 22.7 116.2 + 39.5 95.5 + 12.0 84.9 + 4.0 94.5 + 13.4 81.8 + 1.0         June 107.6 + 22.8 120.7 + 32.8 100.5 + 17.0 85.6 + 4.4 90.7 + 5.8 83.9 + 3.8
         July 107.4 + 14.0 122.5 + 32.1 97.3 + 0.7 92.4 + 5.2 91.0 + 7.2 92.9 + 4.6
         Aug 100.2 + 15.4 112.6 + 25.7 91.5 + 8.8 90.2 + 1.6 87.0 + 6.2 91.2 + 0.1         Sep  
p 108.2 + 16.2 117.6 + 20.5 102.5 + 16.1 96.1 − 2.3 111.3 − 8.7 91.1 + 0.4
from abroad  
  
2005 99.7 + 9.6 99.7 + 7.7 99.7 + 10.9 99.8 + 7.2 99.6 + 0.3 99.8 + 9.8
2006 112.2 + 12.5 114.6 + 14.9 111.5 + 11.8 107.5 + 7.7 105.7 + 6.1 108.1 + 8.32007 126.8 + 13.0 125.7 + 9.7 128.5 + 15.2 117.3 + 9.1 111.0 + 5.0 119.6 + 10.6
2008 117.6 − 7.3 120.6 − 4.1 116.6 − 9.3 112.6 − 4.0 99.9 − 10.0 117.1 − 2.1
2009 87.0 − 26.0 88.6 − 26.5 84.3 − 27.7 102.8 − 8.7 87.1 − 12.8 108.4 − 7.4
 
2009          Sep 97.1 − 14.1 97.5 − 19.2 96.0 − 11.8 105.3 − 8.0 99.2 − 9.0 107.5 − 7.6
         Oct 91.3 − 12.3 94.5 − 17.8 87.6 − 10.0 108.3 − 4.2 98.1 − 7.9 111.9 − 3.1
         Nov 98.3 − 1.4 97.6 − 6.2 97.2 + 1.0 110.6 + 0.0 101.4 + 5.4 113.8 − 1.7
         Dec 93.9 + 7.1 86.9 + 1.4 97.4 + 10.8 95.2 + 1.5 91.3 + 16.0 96.6 − 2.6
2010          Jan 98.7 + 27.7 104.6 + 24.4 94.3 + 33.2 110.1 + 7.9 100.3 + 26.2 113.5 + 3.2
         Feb 101.8 + 30.8 104.4 + 33.0 99.0 + 33.8 113.3 + 5.7 102.3 + 31.8 117.3 − 0.3
         Mar 116.0 + 31.7 118.4 + 35.8 114.2 + 32.0 120.2 + 13.3 114.8 + 30.3 122.1 + 8.4
         Apr 107.8 + 37.5 112.0 + 35.8 105.8 + 42.4 106.8 + 12.3 111.5 + 37.7 105.2 + 5.0
         May 109.7 + 33.6 112.3 + 32.0 108.2 + 37.5 111.4 + 14.5 114.4 + 38.7 110.4 + 7.6         June 122.4 + 33.8 116.2 + 25.5 126.4 + 40.6 116.3 + 15.8 122.9 + 37.0 113.9 + 9.3
         July 113.5 + 30.9 115.5 + 27.5 111.7 + 36.1 121.4 + 12.2 117.6 + 35.8 122.8 + 6.0
         Aug 108.7 + 33.5 105.8 + 23.6 110.0 + 42.3 110.8 + 13.6 93.4 + 33.2 117.0 + 9.1         Sep  
p 116.4 + 19.9 115.1 + 18.1 117.7 + 22.6 111.3 + 5.7 113.8 + 14.7 110.3 + 2.6
Source of the unadjusted figures: Federal Statistical Office. — *For explana- statistics", Tables II.14 to II.16. — oUsing the Census X-12-ARIMA method,
tory notes, see Statistical Supplement "Seasonally adjusted business version 0.2.8. 
63* X Economic conditions in Germany

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
E U R O S Y S T E M
Monthly Report
November 2010
 X Economic conditions  in Germany
 
4 Orders received by construction *   
 
 
Adjusted for working-day variations  o 
Breakdown by type of construction Breakdown by client  1 
 Building    
Housing Industrial Public sector Civil Public
Total Total construction construction construction engineering Industry sector
Annual Annual Annual Annual Annual Annual Annual Annual
percent- percent- percent- percent- percent- percent- percent- percent-age age age age age age age age
Period change change change change change change change change
2005 = 100 2005 = 100 2005 = 100 2005 = 100 2005 = 100 2005 = 100 2005 = 100 2005 = 100
2006 105.1 + 5.2 106.6 + 6.7 104.3 + 4.4 109.6 + 9.7 101.7 + 1.7 103.5 + 3.7 109.0 + 9.1 101.6 + 1.7
2007 113.9 + 8.4 112.5 + 5.5 98.5 − 5.6 123.2 + 12.4 108.5 + 6.7 115.4 + 11.5 120.7 + 10.7 113.7 + 11.92008 113.4 − 0.4 114.7 + 2.0 94.4 − 4.2 127.9 + 3.8 116.7 + 7.6 112.0 − 2.9 123.3 + 2.2 111.4 − 2.0
2009 107.4 − 5.3 100.7 − 12.2 94.1 − 0.3 100.7 − 21.3 115.5 − 1.0 114.4 + 2.1 104.9 − 14.9 115.5 + 3.7
 
2009          Aug 118.4 + 2.1 110.4 − 2.6 97.3 + 3.8 116.2 − 8.0 120.8 + 5.8 126.7 + 6.6 117.3 − 6.5 128.5 + 10.7
         Sep 123.2 − 6.1 115.8 − 14.9 109.8 − 3.2 110.8 − 26.2 146.0 + 4.4 130.8 + 3.7 116.0 − 17.1 136.0 + 4.7
         Oct 109.2 + 0.0 104.1 − 5.2 103.0 + 9.7 101.7 − 12.6 114.5 − 7.7 114.5 + 5.3 109.5 − 9.4 111.4 + 6.9
         Nov 90.6 − 1.9 93.1 − 2.8 89.6 + 1.0 92.8 − 11.7 102.3 + 26.6 88.0 − 1.0 96.7 − 8.4 84.9 + 5.2
         Dec 99.0 + 5.8 99.2 − 0.5 89.1 + 12.1 97.3 − 7.7 128.2 + 1.3 98.8 + 13.3 101.8 − 5.7 100.3 + 17.9
2010          Jan 71.2 − 5.2 69.7 − 4.3 56.0 − 2.8 75.2 − 11.6 82.4 + 24.7 72.7 − 6.1 79.0 − 5.4 69.8 − 5.7
         Feb 90.9 + 18.2 87.4 + 16.7 76.2 + 8.9 88.1 + 18.3 110.2 + 26.2 94.5 + 19.6 90.6 + 16.0 97.4 + 23.8
         Mar 126.8 + 11.9 121.6 + 11.5 114.5 + 19.8 122.7 + 7.3 134.2 + 10.3 132.2 + 12.2 130.0 + 16.6 128.8 + 4.9
         Apr 114.1 + 0.5 111.4 + 9.5 113.2 + 7.6 103.8 + 5.8 132.6 + 25.7 117.0 − 7.1 107.7 + 5.8 121.0 − 6.1
         May 116.0 + 0.1 108.3 + 1.6 108.7 + 12.6 103.3 − 2.5 124.3 − 5.9 124.0 − 1.2 112.2 + 0.9 122.9 − 4.5
         June 128.1 − 1.5 125.0 + 13.2 110.4 + 1.9 127.0 + 21.3 151.2 + 12.4 131.4 − 12.6 134.5 + 12.8 129.3 − 13.8
         July 123.3 − 0.3 117.8 + 7.3 113.8 + 5.7 116.2 + 9.3 132.1 + 4.5 129.0 − 6.7 123.4 + 10.2 127.2 − 10.6
         Aug 117.7 − 0.6 119.8 + 8.5 112.7 + 15.8 124.7 + 7.3 119.8 − 0.8 115.4 − 8.9 120.3 + 2.6 117.1 − 8.9
Source of the unadjusted figures: Federal Statistical Office. — *Values exclu- X-12-ARIMA method, version 0.2.8. — 1Excluding housing construction
sive of value-added tax; for explanatory notes, see Statistical Supplement orders. 
"Seasonally adjusted business statistics", Tables II.21. — oUsing the Census
 
 
5. Retail trade turnover, sales of motor vehicles *
  
Adjusted for calendar variations  o 
Retail trade
of which:  by enterprises’ main product range  1 
Construction Retail sale of
and flooring pharmaceutical Wholesale
Textiles, Information materials and medical and retail trade
clothing and household goods, cosmetic and repair of
Food, beverages, foodwear and communications appliances and toilet motor vehicles
Total tobacco  2 leather goods equipment furniture articles and motorcycles
At current At prices in
prices year 2005 At current prices
Annual Annual Annual Annual Annual Annual Annual Annual
percent- percent- percent- percent- percent- percent- percent- percent-age age age age age age age agechange change change change change change change change
Period % % % % % % % %
2005 = 100 2005 = 100 2005 = 100 2005 = 100 2005 = 100 2005 = 100 2005 = 100 2005 = 100
2005 99.9 + 1.8 99.9 + 1.2 99.9 + 2.9 100.0 + 2.0 100.0 + 7.8 99.9 − 1.9 99.9 + 4.6 99.5 + 1.5
2006 3 100.9 + 1.0 100.3 + 0.4 100.1 + 0.2 102.4 + 2.4 102.3 + 2.3 103.4 + 3.5 102.1 + 2.2 106.8 + 7.3
2007 3 99.4 − 1.5 99.0 − 1.3 99.5 − 0.6 103.6 + 1.2 110.1 + 7.6 98.5 − 4.7 104.2 + 2.1 100.7 − 5.7
2008 101.5 + 2.1 98.9 − 0.1 100.8 + 1.3 104.7 + 1.1 116.3 + 5.6 99.7 + 1.2 107.1 + 2.8 95.8 − 4.92009
4 98.7 − 2.8 96.8 − 2.1 99.0 − 1.8 104.2 − 0.5 117.0 + 0.6 98.0 − 1.7 110.1 + 2.8 96.9 + 1.1
 
2009          Sep  4 96.2 − 4.8 94.3 − 3.5 94.1 − 3.5 111.4 − 4.2 109.8 + 1.3 98.2 − 0.7 107.7 + 1.9 95.5 + 1.7
         Oct 102.9 − 2.5 100.6 − 1.8 98.5 − 4.2 127.5 + 7.5 121.3 + 1.5 103.6 − 0.9 113.1 + 3.0 99.4 + 1.4
         Nov 102.8 − 2.9 101.2 − 2.7 98.4 − 3.8 106.4 − 2.9 135.1 + 3.4 106.0 − 0.9 118.4 + 6.9 91.4 − 1.8         Dec 119.0 − 1.0 117.1 − 1.7 117.0 + 0.3 132.9 + 2.9 181.1 − 0.1 105.6 − 1.6 128.8 + 3.7 82.3 − 0.8
2010          Jan 90.2 − 0.9 88.7 − 1.4 93.1 + 1.4 86.5 − 0.7 122.6 − 3.4 81.8 − 2.3 106.1 + 2.2 71.2 − 4.0
         Feb 87.7 + 1.5 85.7 + 1.1 90.0 + 1.1 78.4 + 2.0 106.2 + 1.8 83.6 + 1.3 105.2 + 5.3 74.9 − 20.0         Mar 102.0 + 1.8 98.6 + 0.2 102.6 + 1.7 107.6 + 6.0 111.9 − 0.1 105.8 + 2.3 116.6 + 6.1 99.5 − 14.2
         Apr 100.8 − 0.1 96.9 − 1.3 99.3 − 3.1 110.1 − 2.2 101.7 + 3.2 104.6 − 0.9 112.7 + 2.9 97.8 − 9.8
         May 101.9 + 3.2 98.2 + 2.3 102.1 − 0.6 104.3 + 1.6 109.8 + 13.7 105.2 + 5.2 113.4 + 6.7 94.2 − 10.0         June 97.6 + 3.7 94.4 + 3.1 97.8 + 1.3 102.7 + 7.8 109.1 + 6.9 98.6 + 4.0 111.6 + 5.5 98.7 − 7.1
         July 101.6 + 4.1 98.5 + 2.5 101.9 + 4.0 106.0 + 3.4 112.3 + 2.1 99.7 + 2.5 117.3 + 5.3 96.8 − 4.0
         Aug 98.8 + 4.0 95.9 + 2.9 97.6 − 1.5 102.5 + 10.1 115.3 + 8.2 100.1 + 5.6 113.4 + 6.8 86.7 − 3.6         Sep 98.3 + 2.2 95.2 + 1.0 92.1 − 2.1 118.0 + 5.9 113.1 + 3.0 98.5 + 0.3 111.8 + 3.8 94.2 − 1.4
Source of the unadjustded figures: Federal Statistical Office. — *Excluding eliminated by chain-linking. — 4In January 2009 new reporting sample inclu-
value-added tax;  For explanatory notes, see Statistical Supplement "Sea- ding new entities; statistical breaks in the reporting sample eliminate db y
sonally adjusted business statistics", Tables II.24. — oUsing the Census chain-linking. Figures from January 2009 are provisional in some cases re-
X-12-ARIMA method, version 0.2.8. — 1In stores. — 2Including stalls and vised, and particularly uncertain in recent months owing to estimates for
markets. — 3Expansion of the reporting population to include new entities; missing reports. 
in January 2006 and January 2007; statistical breaks in reporting population
64* X Economic conditions in Germany

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2010
 X Economic conditions  in Germany
 
6 Labour market * 
 
 
 
Persons in
Employment  1 Employees  1 employment  2 Persons Unemployment  7 
employed
Mining under Persons
and employ- under-
manu- ment pro- going  vo-
factur- Short- motion cational
ing Con- time schemes further
Annual change Annual sector  3 6,7 Annual Vacan- workers  5 struction  4 training  7 
percent- change, Unemploy- cies,  7,9 
Thou- Thou- Thou- age Thou- thou- ment rate thou-
Period sands in % sands sands change Thousands sands sands 7,8  in % sands
Germany  
  
2007 39,724 + 1.7 + 650 35,288 + 1.7 5,158 714 68 43 149 3,777 − 711 9.0 423
2008 40,277 + 1.4 + 553 35,843 + 1.6 5,276 706 102 40 171 3,268 − 509 7.8 3892009 40,271
+ 0.0 − 6 35,862 + 0.1 5,134 705 1,144 16 216 10 3,423 10 + 155 10 8.2 301
2009          Oct 40,685 − 0.4 − 158 5,074 717 1,109 7 231 3,229 + 232 7.7 298
         Nov 40,663 − 0.3 − 136 36,178 − 0.4 5,059 714 982 6 234 3,215 + 227 7.6 291
         Dec 40,490 − 0.2 − 68 5,035 701 929 5 226 3,276 + 173 7.8 281
2010          Jan r 39,826 r − 0.2 r − 94 4,971 673 1,057 4 207 3,617 + 129 8.6 271
         Feb r 39,807 r − 0.3 r − 109 r 35,457 r − 0.3 4,971 667 1,031 4 206 3,643 + 91 8.7 298
         Mar r 39,970 r − 0.0 r − 6 4,968 11 680 874 4 211 3,568 − 18 8.5 320
         Apr r 40,218 r + 0.3 r + 104 4,965 11 694 631 3 215 3,406 − 178 8.1 335
         May r 40,387 r + 0.5 r + 187 r 35,932 r + 0.4 4,965 11 699 ... 3 212 3,242 − 217 12 7.7 355
         June r 40,487 r + 0.6 r + 243 4,976 11 703 ... 3 208 3,153 − 257 7.5 370
         July r 40,484 r + 0.7 r + 270 4,994 11 705 ... 3 189 3,192 − 271 7.6 391
         Aug r 40,577 r + 0.8 r + 305 36,221 + 0.8 5,023 11 712 ... 13 213 183 3,188 − 283 7.6 396
         Sep 14 40,902 14 + 0.9 14 + 348 5,045 ... ... 13 213 198 3,031 − 315 7.2 398
         Oct ... ... ... ... ... ... 13 213 212 2,945 − 283 7.0 401
Western Germany    o  
  
2007 . . . . . 4,560 529 52 9 103 2,486 − 521 7.5 359
2008 . . . . . 4,651 527 80 7 118 2,145 − 341 6.4 3332009 . . . . . 4,517 . 988 4 150
10 2,320 10 + 176 10 6.9 250
2009          Oct . . . . . 4,462 . 966 2 157 2,229 + 239 6.6 248
         Nov . . . . . 4,448 . 855 2 158 2,216 + 230 6.6 242
         Dec . . . . . 4,427 . 791 2 151 2,248 + 189 6.7 234
2010          Jan . . . . . 4,370 . 878 1 137 2,470 + 163 7.4 225
         Feb . . . . . 4,367 . 845 1 138 2,482 + 134 7.4 246         Mar . . . . . 4,363 . 713 1 142 2,428 + 49 7.2 262
         Apr . . . . . 4,359 . 529 1 145 2,329 − 70 6.9 275
         May . . . . . 4,358 . ... 1 145 2,224 − 110
12 6.6 294
         June . . . . . 4,366 . ... 1 142 2,176 − 143 6.5 308
         July . . . . . 4,382 . ... 1 130 2,209 − 159 6.6 327
         Aug . . . . . 4,406 . ... 13 113 126 2,219 − 171 6.6 333
         Sep . . . . . 4,423 . ... 13 113 137 2,104 − 203 6.2 334
         Oct . . . . . ... . ... 13 113 148 2,043 − 185 6.1 337
Eastern Germany    +  
  
2007 . . . . . 597 185 16 33 46 1,291 − 190 15.1 63
2008 . . . . . 625 179 21 33 53 1,123 − 167 13.1 552009 . . . . . 617 . 151 13 66
10 1,103 10 −2 0 10 13.0 50
2009          Oct . . . . . 612 . 140 5 73 1,000 − 7 11.8 50
         Nov . . . . . 611 . 124 4 76 1,000 − 3 11.8 49
         Dec . . . . . 608 . 135 3 75 1,027 − 16 12.1 47
2010          Jan . . . . . 601 . 177 2 70 1,148 − 34 13.5 47
         Feb . . . . . 603 . 183 2 68 1,162 − 42 13.7 52         Mar . . . . . 604 . 160 2 69 1,140 − 67 13.5 58
         Apr . . . . . 606 . 101 2 69 1,077 − 108 12.7 60
         May . . . . . 608 . ... 2 67 1,017 − 107
12 12.1 62
         June . . . . . 610 . ... 2 65 978 − 114 11.6 62
         July . . . . . 612 . ... 2 59 983 − 111 11.6 64
         Aug . . . . . 617 . ... 13 113 57 969 − 113 11.5 63
         Sep . . . . . 622 . ... 13 113 61 928 − 112 11.0 63
         Oct . . . . . ... . ... 13 113 64 902 − 98 10.7 63
Sources: Federal Statistical Office; Federal Employment Agency. — *Annual justment measures (SAM). — 7Mid-month level. — 8Relative to the total
and quarterly figures: averages; annual figures: calculated by the Bundes- civilian labour force. — 9Reported vacancies excluding subsidised positions
bank; deviations from the official figures are due to rounding. — oExclud- and excluding seasonal jobs. — 10From May 2009, unemployed excluding
ing West Berlin. — +Including West Berlin. — 1Workplace concept; aver- persons formally on the books of private employment agencies. — 11Pro-
ages. — 2Including active proprietors; monthly figures: end of month. — visional up to adjustment to the figures of the annual overall survey. —
3Enterprises with at least 50 employees. — 4The figures refer to enter- 12From May 2010, calculated on the basis of new labour force figures. —
prises from Nace Rev.2 items 41.2, 42, 43.1 and 43.9. — 5Number within a 13Annualised data from the Federal Employment Agency based on informa-
given month; from January 2009, results for Germany contain data which tion received so far. — 14Initial preliminary estimate by the Federal Statis-
cannot be assigned to a region. — 6Employees involved in job creation tical Office. 
schemes; up to December 2008 including employees involved in structural ad-
65* X Economic conditions in Germany

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
E U R O S Y S T E M
Monthly Report
November 2010
 X Economic conditions  in Germany
 
7 Prices
 
 
 
Consumer price index HWWI
Indices of Index of World Market
of which foreign trade prices Prices  of Raw Materials  5 
Other Index of
durable producer
and non- prices ofdurable industrial Index ofconsumer Services Con- products producergoods excluding prices of sold on the struction
excluding house House price domestic Other raw agricultural
Total Food Energy  
1 rents  3 rents  3 index  2 market  4 Exports Imports Energy  6 products  4 materials  7 energy  1,2 
Period 2005 = 100 2000 = 100 2005 = 100 2000 = 100
Index level  
  
2005 8 100.0 100.0 100.0 100.0 100.0 100.0 100.0 8 100.0 98.8 100.0 100.0 139.5 105.4
2006 9 101.6 101.9 100.3 108.5 101.0 101.1 102.4 9 105.4 107.1 101.8 104.4 163.9 131.5
2007 10 11  103.9 105.9 101.7 112.8 103.9 102.2 109.3 106.8 118.2 103.0 105.1 166.6 143.7
2008 106.6 112.7 102.5 123.6 105.8 103.5 113.0 112.7 121.2 104.8 109.9 217.1 150.3
2009 107.0 111.2 103.9 116.9 107.4 104.6 114.4 108.0 102.6 102.5 100.5 144.5 124.3
 
2008          Dec 106.8 112.7 103.0 114.8 108.3 104.0 112.4 107.7 103.1 102.2 107.3 114.6
2009          Jan 106.3 113.3 102.7 117.4 106.0 104.1 111.1 105.7 102.9 101.5 112.8 114.9
         Feb 106.9 113.3 103.4 117.4 107.1 104.3 114.4 110.5 106.5 102.9 101.3 112.1 116.2
         Mar 106.8 112.8 103.7 116.0 106.7 104.4 109.7 104.4 102.5 100.7 118.8 113.8
         Apr 106.8 112.3 103.9 116.2 106.8 104.5 108.2 103.4 102.4 99.9 125.8 120.1
         May 106.7 111.7 103.7 116.8 106.7 104.5 114.2 108.2 102.7 102.3 99.9 139.6 123.2         June 107.1 112.1 103.9 119.1 106.9 104.6 108.1 103.7 102.4 100.3 160.7 125.8
         July 107.1 110.7 103.3 116.0 108.8 104.7 106.5 103.3 102.2 99.4 150.1 123.9
         Aug 107.3 109.5 103.8 118.2 108.7 104.8 114.4 107.0 102.1 102.5 100.7 163.2 131.3         Sep 106.9 109.2 104.4 116.4 107.3 104.8 106.5 100.6 102.4 99.8 152.0 126.4
         Oct 107.0 109.0 104.7 116.2 107.3 104.9 106.5 100.4 102.4 100.3 161.7 127.9
         Nov 106.9 109.5 104.2 116.9 106.9 105.0 114.4 106.6 103.4 102.5 100.7 168.6 130.6         Dec 107.8 110.4 104.5 115.9 109.5 105.1 106.5 104.6 102.7 101.2 166.6 138.0
2010          Jan 107.1 111.7 103.7 118.5 106.9 105.2 107.3 104.6 103.3 102.9 178.4 143.6
         Feb 107.5 112.0 104.1 117.5 107.7 105.3 114.5 107.3 105.7 103.7 103.9 179.5 144.5
         Mar 108.0 113.1 104.5 120.6 107.9 105.5 108.0 105.5 104.5 105.7 191.7 151.0
         Apr 107.9 114.0 104.5 122.2 106.7 105.6 108.9 106.3 105.5 107.8 206.9 172.1
         May 108.0 113.2 104.4 122.5 107.2 105.7 115.2 109.2 108.5 106.0 108.4 199.7 175.7         June 108.1 113.4 104.2 122.4 107.5 105.8 109.9 110.8 106.4 109.4 203.4 179.3
         July 108.4 113.6 103.6 121.4 109.2 105.9 110.4
p 112.4 106.4 109.2 194.0 182.5
         Aug 108.4 112.6 104.0 121.2 109.4 106.0 115.8 110.4 p 117.3 106.8 109.4 194.2 187.3
         Sep 108.3 112.5 104.7 121.7 108.0 106.0 110.7 ... 107.1 109.7 192.3 189.9
         Oct 108.4 112.2 105.1 122.1 107.9 106.1 ... ... ... ... 193.6 182.5
Annual percentage change  
  
2005 8 + 1.5 − 0.2 + 0.5 + 9.8 + 0.7 + 0.9 + 1.1 8 + 4.4 − 0.9 + 0.9 + 3.4 + 37.6 + 9.4
2006 9 + 1.6 + 1.9 + 0.3 + 8.5 + 1.0 + 1.1 + 2.4 9 + 5.4 + 8.4 + 1.8 + 4.4 + 17.5 + 24.8
2007 10 11  + 2.3 + 3.9 + 1.4 + 4.0 + 2.9 + 1.1 + 6.7 + 1.3 + 10.4 + 1.2 + 0.7 + 1.6 + 9.3
2008 + 2.6 + 6.4 + 0.8 + 9.6 + 1.8 + 1.3 + 3.4 + 5.5 + 2.5 + 1.7 + 4.6 + 30.3 + 4.6
2009 + 0.4 − 1.3 + 1.4 − 5.4 + 1.5 + 1.1 + 1.2 − 4.2 − 15.3 − 2.2 − 8.6 − 33.4 − 17.3
 
2008          Dec + 1.1 + 2.1 + 0.8 − 0.9 + 1.8 + 1.2 + 4.0 − 17.7 + 0.0 − 4.1 − 46.2 − 17.1
2009          Jan + 0.9 + 1.1 + 0.8 − 0.8 + 1.6 + 1.1 + 2.0 − 19.3 − 0.9 − 5.6 − 43.9 − 25.0
         Feb + 1.0 + 1.2 + 1.1 − 1.2 + 1.7 + 1.2 + 2.6 + 0.9 − 19.1 − 1.2 − 6.7 − 46.8 − 28.8
         Mar + 0.5 + 0.2 + 1.2 − 4.5 + 0.9 + 1.2 − 0.5 − 20.6 − 1.7 − 7.5 − 45.1 − 29.1
         Apr + 0.7 − 0.6 + 1.3 − 5.2 + 2.5 + 1.2 − 2.7 − 18.5 − 2.0 − 9.0 − 44.1 − 23.8
         May + 0.0 − 1.2 + 1.3 − 8.0 + 1.6 + 1.1 + 1.5 − 3.6 − 18.2 − 2.7 − 10.9 − 46.1 − 22.8
         June + 0.1 − 0.9 + 1.6 − 7.9 + 1.5 + 1.1 − 4.6 − 18.0 − 2.9 − 11.7 − 42.3 − 22.7
         July − 0.5 − 2.4 + 1.5 − 11.5 + 1.6 + 1.1 − 7.8 − 18.7 − 3.6 − 13.0 − 46.4 − 22.9
         Aug + 0.0 − 3.0 + 1.6 − 7.0 + 1.6 + 1.1 + 0.4 − 6.9 − 17.7 − 3.2 − 11.4 − 35.9 − 16.0
         Sep − 0.3 − 3.0 + 1.5 − 9.0 + 1.3 + 1.0 − 7.6 − 16.0 − 3.2 − 11.4 − 34.7 − 16.2
         Oct + 0.0 − 3.4 + 1.5 − 7.0 + 1.6 + 1.0 − 7.6 − 12.8 − 2.6 − 8.1 − 10.3 − 4.1
         Nov + 0.4 − 2.2 + 1.1 − 2.5 + 1.2 + 1.0 + 0.4 − 5.9 − 6.6 − 1.7 − 5.0 + 18.1 + 2.9
         Dec + 0.9 − 2.0 + 1.5 + 1.0 + 1.1 + 1.1 − 5.2 − 2.9 − 0.4 − 1.0 + 55.3 + 20.4
2010          Jan + 0.8 − 1.4 + 1.0 + 0.9 + 0.8 + 1.1 − 3.4 − 1.0 + 0.4 + 1.4 + 58.2 + 25.0
         Feb + 0.6 − 1.1 + 0.7 + 0.1 + 0.6 + 1.0 + 0.1 − 2.9 − 0.8 + 0.8 + 2.6 + 60.1 + 24.4         Mar + 1.1 + 0.3 + 0.8 + 4.0 + 1.1 + 1.1 − 1.5 + 1.1 + 2.0 + 5.0 + 61.4 + 32.7
         Apr + 1.0 + 1.5 + 0.6 + 5.2 − 0.1 + 1.1 + 0.6 + 2.8 + 3.0 + 7.9 + 64.5 + 43.3
         May + 1.2 + 1.3 + 0.7 + 4.9 + 0.5 + 1.1 + 0.9 + 0.9 + 5.6 + 3.6 + 8.5 + 43.1 + 42.6         June + 0.9 + 1.2 + 0.3 + 2.8 + 0.6 + 1.1 + 1.7 + 6.8 + 3.9 + 9.1 + 26.6 + 42.5
         July + 1.2 + 2.6 + 0.3 + 4.7 + 0.4 + 1.1 + 3.7
p + 8.8 + 4.1 + 9.9 + 29.2 + 47.3
         Aug + 1.0 + 2.8 + 0.2 + 2.5 + 0.6 + 1.1 + 1.2 + 3.2 p + 14.9 + 4.2 + 8.6 + 19.0 + 42.7
         Sep + 1.3 + 3.0 + 0.3 + 4.6 + 0.7 + 1.1 + 3.9 ... + 4.6 + 9.9 + 26.5 + 50.2
         Oct + 1.3 + 2.9 + 0.4 + 5.1 + 0.6 + 1.1 ... ... ... ... + 19.7 + 42.7
Source: Federal Statistical Office; HWWI Index of World Market Prices. — September 2005, increase in tobacco tax. — 9From October 2006, increase
1Electricity, gas and other fuels. — 2Bundesbank calculation based on data in the prices of tobacco products. — 10From January 2007, increase in the
provided by the Federal Statistical Office. — 3Net rents. — 4Excluding standard rate of value-added tax and in insurance tax from 16% to 19%. —
value-added tax. — 5For the euro area, in euro. — 6Coal and crude oil. — 11 Introduction of university tuition fees in some federal states. 
7Food, beverages and tobacco as well as industrial raw materials. — 8From
66* X Economic conditions in Germany

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2010
X Economic conditions in Germany
  
8 Households’ income *
  
  
  
Gross wages and Net wages and Monetary social Saving
salaries  1 salaries  2 Mass income  4 Saving  6 ratio  7 benefits received  3 Disposable income  5 
Annual Annual Annual Annual Annual Annual
percent- percent- percent- percent- percent- percent-
age age age age age age
Period change change change change change change % € billion € billion € billion € billion € billion € billion
2002 908.2 0.7 591.9 0.3 367.7 3.9 959.6 1.7 1,402.8 1.0 139.3 6.4 9.9
2003 908.3 0.0 589.0 − 0.5 378.3 2.9 967.2 0.8 1,431.8 2.1 147.2 5.6 10.32004 914.6 0.7 603.3 2.4 378.2 − 0.0 981.5 1.5 1,454.5 1.6 151.4 2.9 10.4
2005 912.1 − 0.3 602.4 − 0.2 378.6 0.1 981.0 − 0.1 1,481.0 1.8 155.6 2.7 10.5
2006 926.6 1.6 605.0 0.4 378.1 − 0.1 983.1 0.2 1,518.7 2.5 160.9 3.4 10.62007 957.6 3.3 622.8 2.9 373.3 − 1.3 996.1 1.3 1,545.8 1.8 166.8 3.7 10.82008 994.5 3.9 641.3 3.0 374.4 0.3 1,015.7 2.0 1,600.7 3.6 187.5 12.4 11.72009 992.4 − 0.2 639.2 − 0.3 403.3 7.7 1,042.5 2.6 1,587.8 − 0.8 176.8 − 5.7 11.1
2009          Q1 232.6 0.8 148.9 − 0.3 98.8 4.6 247.8 1.6 396.0 − 0.7 58.5 − 2.5 14.8
         Q2 240.0 − 0.2 151.1 − 0.4 101.5 8.8 252.6 3.1 395.3 − 0.5 41.7 − 7.2 10.6
         Q3 246.5 − 0.6 163.5 − 0.6 102.3 9.7 265.7 3.1 393.3 − 1.4 37.6 − 6.7 9.6         Q4 273.3 − 0.7 175.7 − 0.1 100.7 7.9 276.4 2.7 403.3 − 0.6 38.9 − 7.8 9.6
2010          Q1 235.5 1.2 153.5 3.1 103.5 4.7 257.0 3.7 403.3 1.8 61.8 5.5 15.3
         Q2 246.1 2.5 157.0 3.9 102.7 1.2 259.7 2.8 401.5 1.6 43.6 4.5 10.9
Source: Federal Statistical Office; figures computed in August 2010. — plus monetary social benefits received. — 5Mass income plus operating
*Households including non-profit institutions serving households. — 1Resi- surplus, mixed income, property income (net), other current transfers
dence concept. — 2After deducting the wage tax payable on gross wages received, income of non-profit institutions serving households, less taxes (ex-
and salaries and employees’ contributions to the social security funds. — cluding wage tax and consumption-related taxes) and other current trans-
3Social security benefits in cash from the social security funds, central, state fers paid. Including the increase in claims on company pension funds. —6In-
and local government and foreign countries, pension payments (net), cluding the increase in claims on company pension funds. — 7Saving as a
private funded social benefits, less social contributions on social benefits, percentage of disposable income. consumption-related taxes and public charges. — 4Net wages and salaries
  
  
  
9 Pay rates (overall economy)
    
  
Index of negotiated wages 1 
on a monthly basis
Memo item:
Total excluding Wages and salaries
on an hourly basis Total one-off payments Basic pay rates  2 per employee  3 
Annual Annual Annual Annual Annual
Period percentage percentage percentage percentage percentage
2000 = 100 change 2000 = 100 change 2000 = 100 change 2000 = 100 change 2000 = 100 change
2002 104.7 2.6 104.5 2.6 104.5 2.2 104.4 2.2 103.2 1.3
2003 106.7 2.0 106.6 2.0 106.8 2.1 106.9 2.4 104.5 1.3
2004 107.9 1.2 108.0 1.3 108.1 1.3 108.6 1.6 105.1 0.6
2005 108.9 0.9 109.1 1.1 109.1 0.9 109.8 1.0 105.4 0.3
2006 109.9 1.0 110.5 1.2 110.0 0.8 110.7 0.9 106.4 0.92007 111.2 1.2 111.9 1.3 111.6 1.5 112.3 1.5 108.0 1.52008 114.3 2.8 115.1 2.8 114.9 3.0 115.9 3.2 110.4 2.22009 116.9 2.3 117.8 2.3 117.9 2.5 119.0 2.7 110.2 − 0.2
2009          Q2 109.0 2.7 109.8 2.8 110.0 2.8 118.9 2.8 106.7 − 0.4
         Q3 119.6 2.1 120.5 2.1 120.5 2.6 119.4 2.6 109.5 − 0.3         Q4 130.8 1.4 131.8 1.4 132.0 2.2 119.8 2.6 120.5 − 0.1
2010          Q1 110.2 1.8 111.0 1.8 111.2 2.2 120.5 2.2 105.7 1.7
         Q2 111.3 2.1 112.2 2.1 111.8 1.6 120.9 1.7 109.3 2.5         Q3 120.8 1.0 121.7 1.0 122.0 1.2 121.1 1.4 . .
2010          Mar 110.4 2.0 111.2 2.0 111.4 1.8 120.6 1.8 . .
         Apr 110.8 2.3 111.6 2.3 111.5 1.9 120.8 1.9 . .
         May 111.8 2.0 112.6 2.1 112.0 1.3 120.9 1.6 . .         June 111.4 2.1 112.2 2.1 111.9 1.7 121.0 1.6 . .
         July 140.7 0.9 141.8 1.0 142.3 1.0 121.1 1.5 . .
         Aug 110.8 1.6 111.7 1.6 111.8 1.4 121.1 1.4 . .         Sep 110.8 0.4 111.6 0.4 111.9 1.4 121.3 1.4 . .
1Current data are normally revised on account of additional reports. — (13
thmonthly salary payment) and retirement provisions). — 3Source:
2Excluding one-off payments and covenants (capital formation benefits, Federal Statistical Office; figures computed in August 2010. 
special payments, such as annual bonuses, holiday pay, Christmas bonuses
67*X Economic conditions in Germany

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
E U R O S Y S T E M
Monthly Report
November 2010
XI External sector
 
1 Major items of the balance of payments of the euro area *
 
 
€ million
2009  r 2010
Item 2007  r 2008  r 2009  r Q4 Q1  r Q2 r June  r July r Aug
Current account + 10,652 − 133,916 − 49,767 + 11,729 − 21,815 − 23,127 + 632 + 3,396 − 10,505A
1 Goods
Exports (fob) 1,518,753 1,580,926 1,291,296 348,592 348,609 386,366 139,970 139,965 122,282
Imports (fob) 1,473,198 1,599,208 1,251,929 328,683 345,938 382,475 136,032 132,409 126,083
Balance + 45,552 − 18,282 + 39,366 + 19,908 + 2,671 + 3,890 + 3,938 + 7,556 − 3,800
2 Services
Receipts 494,191 513,000 468,983 120,819 110,993 127,205 46,271 45,696 43,740Expenditure 447,244 470,942 436,806 111,705 107,287 115,337 41,221 41,719 41,263
Balance + 46,947 + 42,060 + 32,173 + 9,113 + 3,706 + 11,868 + 5,050 + 3,977 + 2,477
3 Income + 6,324 − 58,269 − 28,716 + 2,345 + 7,145 − 18,053 − 1,886 − 676 + 176
4 Current transfers
Transfers from non-residents 90,875 88,646 92,990 31,961 21,268 17,445 5,392 4,820 4,728
Transfers to non-residents 179,048 188,074 185,581 51,599 56,604 38,278 11,862 12,281 14,086
Balance − 88,172 − 99,427 − 92,593 − 19,638 − 35,336 − 20,833 − 6,470 − 7,461 − 9,357
Capital account + 4,600 + 9,751 + 6,085 + 1,002 + 2,514 + 1,855 + 449 + 1,554 + 277B
Financial account (net capital exports: − − 2,629 + 116,837 + 31,040 − 11,998 + 22,106 + 46,477 + 5,084 + 4,819 + 10,267C)
1 Direct investment − 90,131 − 240,302 − 74,457 + 11,599 − 40,311 − 37,564 − 10,973 − 560 − 11,003
By resident units abroad − 511,515 − 333,674 − 288,267 − 48,176 − 38,807 − 60,226 − 14,472 − 8,418 − 15,977By non-resident units in the euro area + 421,384 + 93,370 + 213,810 + 59,775 − 1,505 + 22,663 + 3,500 + 7,858 + 4,975
2 Portfolio investment + 127,128 + 303,810 + 264,793 + 30,705 + 16,647 + 101,697 − 7,020 − 16,953 + 10,250
By resident units abroad − 438,923 + 14,953 − 78,639 − 32,933 − 60,970 + 16,285 + 5,950 − 21,310 − 21,756
Equity − 62,459 + 106,487 − 45,514 − 34,849 − 36,368 + 7,866 − 3,038 + 1,731 + 87Bonds and notes − 293,182 − 81,244 − 24,721 − 18,723 − 46,474 + 2,548 − 13 + 2,734 − 14,201Money market instruments − 83,284 − 10,291 − 8,403 + 20,639 + 21,872 + 5,870 + 9,001 − 25,775 − 7,641
By non-resident units in the euro area + 566,050 + 288,857 + 343,436 + 63,639 + 77,616 + 85,412 − 12,970 + 4,357 + 32,005
Equity + 164,399 − 101,134 + 82,663 + 31,450 + 321 + 3,763 + 22,465 + 4,935 + 21,581Bonds and notes + 341,107 + 209,240 + 141,813 + 13,942 + 70,417 + 90,434 − 743 − 37,249 − 8,330Money market instruments + 60,543 + 180,749 + 118,957 + 18,246 + 6,877 − 8,783 − 34,692 + 36,671 + 18,755
3 Financial derivatives − 66,886 − 74,985 + 51,498 + 8,608 + 3,895 + 6,478 + 6,525 + 970 + 3,916
4 Other investment + 32,349 + 131,673 − 215,351 − 62,917 + 46,514 − 25,106 + 15,432 + 24,465 + 8,662
Eurosystem + 68,425 + 291,557 − 232,180 − 18,565 + 1,777 + 3,064 − 11,501 − 3,147 − 1,349
General government + 6,872 + 15,187 + 536 − 11,449 + 11,424 + 3,112 − 135 − 5,247 + 172MFIs (excluding the Eurosystem) + 83,172 − 132,754 + 68,151 − 74,380 + 48,335 − 15,222 − 515 + 18,234 + 1,342
Long-term − 112,471 − 226,316 − 21,299 + 16,479 + 5,445 − 3,209 + 2,267 + 30,603 + 4,511Short-term + 195,644 + 93,565 + 89,450 − 90,859 + 42,890 − 12,015 − 2,783 − 12,368 − 3,169
Other sectors − 126,120 − 42,320 − 51,860 + 41,476 − 15,021 − 16,062 + 27,582 + 14,626 + 8,497
5 Reserve assets (Increase: −) − 5,088 − 3,358 + 4,558 + 7 − 4,638 + 971 + 1,119 − 3,103 − 1,557
Errors and omissions − 12,623 + 7,327 + 12,643 − 734 − 2,805 − 25,205 − 6,165 − 9,769 − 39D
* Source: European Central Bank.  
  
68*XI External sector

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2010
XI External sector
 
2 Major items of the balance of payments of the Federal Republic of Germany
(balances)
 
 
Current account Financial account Capital trans-
fers and
of which acquisition/
disposal of Change in
Supple- non- reserve assets
Balance mentary produced at trans- Errorson current Foreign trade Current action and non-financial
Period account trade  
1 items  2 Services  3 Income transfers assets Total  4 value  5 Omissions
DM million
1996 − 21,086 + 98,538 − 4,941 − 64,743 + 1,052 − 50,991 − 3,283 + 24,290 + 1,882 + 79
1997 − 17,336 + 116,467 − 7,875 − 68,692 − 4,740 − 52,496 + 52 + 6,671 + 6,640 + 10,6131998 − 28,696 + 126,970 − 8,917 − 75,053 − 18,635 − 53,061 + 1,289 + 25,683 − 7,128 + 1,724
1999 − 49,241 + 127,542 − 15,947 − 90,036 − 22,325 − 48,475 − 301 − 20,332 + 24,517 + 69,874
2000 − 68,913 + 115,645 − 17,742 − 95,848 − 16,302 − 54,666 + 13,345 + 66,863 + 11,429 − 11,2942001 + 830 + 186,771 − 14,512 − 97,521 − 21,382 − 52,526 − 756 − 23,068 + 11,797 + 22,994
€ million
1999 − 25,177 + 65,211 − 8,153 − 46,035 − 11,415 − 24,785 − 154 − 10,396 + 12,535 + 35,7262000 − 35,235 + 59,128 − 9,071 − 49,006 − 8,335 − 27,950 + 6,823 + 34,187 + 5,844 − 5,7752001 + 424 + 95,495 − 7,420 − 49,862 − 10,932 − 26,856 − 387 − 11,794 + 6,032 + 11,7572002 + 42,973 + 132,788 − 8,552 − 35,728 − 18,019 − 27,517 − 212 − 38,448 + 2,065 − 4,3132003 + 40,917 + 129,921 − 11,148 − 34,506 − 15,067 − 28,283 + 311 − 61,758 + 445 + 20,529
2004 + 102,833 + 156,096 − 16,470 − 29,375 + 20,431 − 27,849 + 435 − 122,984 + 1,470 + 19,717
2005 + 114,630 + 158,179 − 14,057 − 25,677 + 24,896 − 28,712 − 1,369 − 129,635 + 2,182 + 16,3742006 + 150,106 + 159,048 − 12,888 − 13,740 + 44,893 − 27,206 − 258 − 175,474 + 2,934 + 25,6252007 + 185,137 + 195,348 − 9,907 − 11,603 + 43,506 − 32,206 + 110 − 219,502 − 953 + 34,2542008 + 166,963 + 178,297 − 12,618 − 7,031 + 42,617 − 34,303 − 209 − 197,330 − 2,008 + 30,576
2009  
r + 119,874 + 138,692 − 9,225 − 9,662 + 33,797 − 33,727 − 186 − 129,649 + 3,200 + 9,961
2007          Q4 + 55,775 + 48,745 − 2,182 + 502 + 15,175 − 6,466 − 687 − 73,457 + 653 + 18,369
2008          Q1 + 48,581 + 50,934 − 3,561 + 77 + 13,387 − 12,255 + 502 − 64,083 − 1,165 + 15,000
         Q2 + 43,797 + 53,167 − 2,818 − 2,425 + 1,470 − 5,597 + 245 − 61,132 − 889 + 17,090
         Q3 + 35,091 + 40,225 − 2,873 − 6,331 + 13,301 − 9,231 − 299 − 18,169 + 1,630 − 16,623         Q4 + 39,494 + 33,972 − 3,365 + 1,649 + 14,458 − 7,219 − 658 − 53,946 − 1,584 + 15,109
2009          Q1  
r + 23,462 + 27,575 − 2,711 − 1,253 + 11,949 − 12,099 + 25 + 5,419 + 321 − 28,907
         Q2  r + 23,642 + 34,119 − 2,048 − 2,261 − 93 − 6,075 + 290 − 45,176 + 41 + 21,245
         Q3  r + 28,603 + 36,090 − 2,291 − 7,752 + 10,714 − 8,159 − 42 − 14,521 + 2,269 − 14,040
         Q4  r + 44,167 + 40,908 − 2,176 + 1,604 + 11,226 − 7,395 − 459 − 75,371 + 569 + 31,663
2010          Q1 + 31,726 + 37,592 − 2,458 − 1,467 + 11,475 − 13,416 + 293 − 15,402 − 651 − 16,617
         Q2 + 25,874 + 37,098 − 2,884 − 2,892 + 906 − 6,353 − 434 − 20,865 − 801 − 4,576
         Q3  p + 28,057 + 39,342 − 3,399 − 7,306 + 10,000 − 10,580 + 64 − 15,963 + 344 − 12,158
2008          Apr + 15,765 + 19,035 − 918 + 44 − 287 − 2,109 − 140 − 11,569 − 1,089 − 4,056
         May + 8,741 + 14,371 − 1,040 − 1,827 − 2,228 − 535 + 406 − 26,656 + 913 + 17,509
         June + 19,291 + 19,761 − 860 − 642 + 3,985 − 2,953 − 21 − 22,907 − 713 + 3,637
         July + 11,269 + 14,139 − 919 − 3,006 + 4,066 − 3,011 − 127 + 1,300 + 1,225 − 12,442
         Aug + 8,075 + 10,813 − 1,082 − 2,647 + 4,356 − 3,365 − 50 − 7,407 − 82 − 618         Sep + 15,747 + 15,273 − 873 − 677 + 4,878 − 2,854 − 122 − 12,062 + 487 − 3,563
         Oct + 14,379 + 16,666 − 1,008 − 1,836 + 4,696 − 4,139 − 201 − 22,465 − 3,373 + 8,286
         Nov + 9,800 + 9,967 − 1,737 + 578 + 4,833 − 3,841 − 85 − 10,041 − 269 + 326         Dec + 15,315 + 7,339 − 621 + 2,907 + 4,930 + 761 − 371 − 21,441 + 2,058 + 6,497
2009          Jan  
r + 3,671 + 7,405 − 955 − 2,121 + 3,348 − 4,007 − 52 + 22,528 + 2,245 − 26,147
         Feb  r + 7,469 + 8,770 − 901 + 248 + 4,008 − 4,657 − 86 + 745 − 271 − 8,128
         Mar  r + 12,322 + 11,400 − 855 + 620 + 4,593 − 3,435 + 163 − 17,854 − 1,652 + 5,369
         Apr  r + 6,762 + 10,065 − 538 + 480 − 553 − 2,692 + 314 − 8,857 − 590 + 1,781
         May  r + 5,497 + 10,327 − 781 − 56 − 3,221 − 772 + 99 − 7,034 + 342 + 1,438
         June  r + 11,384 + 13,727 − 728 − 2,686 + 3,681 − 2,611 − 123 − 29,286 + 288 + 18,026
         July  r + 11,901 + 15,591 − 991 − 3,687 + 3,536 − 2,548 − 56 + 1,278 − 92 − 13,123
         Aug  r + 6,052 + 8,999 − 731 − 2,803 + 3,556 − 2,969 − 10 − 6,216 + 743 + 173
         Sep  r + 10,650 + 11,500 − 569 − 1,262 + 3,622 − 2,642 + 24 − 9,584 + 1,618 − 1,090
         Oct  r + 9,744 + 12,465 − 247 − 1,422 + 3,846 − 4,898 − 235 − 22,217 − 651 + 12,709
         Nov  r + 15,218 + 15,961 − 1,197 + 493 + 3,805 − 3,844 + 89 − 22,585 + 1,522 + 7,278
         Dec  r + 19,205 + 12,482 − 733 + 2,532 + 3,576 + 1,348 − 313 − 30,569 − 302 + 11,676
2010          Jan + 4,398 + 8,014 − 882 − 1,885 + 3,504 − 4,353 + 82 + 19,651 − 55 − 24,131
         Feb + 9,261 + 12,654 − 316 − 407 + 3,657 − 6,328 + 432 − 14,925 − 782 + 5,232
         Mar + 18,067 + 16,923 − 1,260 + 825 + 4,314 − 2,735 − 220 − 20,128 + 187 + 2,281
         Apr + 11,309 + 13,099 − 855 + 275 + 825 − 2,034 − 197 − 9,585 − 116 − 1,527
         May + 1,831 + 9,775 − 1,277 − 1,685 − 3,464 − 1,519 − 50 − 10,773 − 671 + 8,992         June + 12,735 + 14,224 − 753 − 1,481 + 3,546 − 2,800 − 187 − 507 − 14 − 12,041
         July + 9,097 + 13,498 − 1,277 − 2,996 + 3,505 − 3,633 + 424 + 6,305 + 20 − 15,826
         Aug + 4,989 + 9,046 − 971 − 3,102 + 3,474 − 3,459 − 108 − 11,347 + 119 + 6,466         Sep  
p + 13,971 + 16,798 − 1,152 − 1,209 + 3,021 − 3,488 − 251 − 10,922 + 205 − 2,798
1Special trade according to the official foreign trade statistics: imports cif, the account of residents and deduction of goods returned. — 3Excluding
exports fob. From January 2007 onwards, excluding supplies of goods the expenditure on freight and insurance included in the cif import
for/after repair/maintenance, which, up to December 2006, were deducted figure. — 4Financial account balance including change in reserve assets.
via supplementary trade items. — 2Inter alia warehouse transactions for Capital exports: − . — 5 Increase: − . 
69*XI External sector

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
E U R O S Y S T E M
Monthly Report
November 2010
XI External sector
 
3 Foreign trade (special trade) of the Federal Republic of Germany,
by country and group of countries *
 
 € million
 2010
Country / group of countries  2007  2008  2009 r Jan / Aug May Jun Jul Aug Sep  p 
All countries  1 Exports 965,236 984,140 803,309 616,325 77,441 86,383 82,936 75,114 86,885
Imports 769,887 805,842 664,617 519,090 67,665 72,159 69,437 66,068 70,087Balance + 195,348 + 178,297 + 138,692 + 97,234 + 9,775 + 14,224 + 13,498 + 9,046 + 16,798
I Exports 726,518 733,092 593,030 437,949 55,027 61,683 57,519 52,525 ...European countries
Imports 541,650 567,062 475,403 357,066 47,131 49,424 47,602 43,523 ...Balance + 184,867 + 166,031 + 117,627 + 80,883 + 7,896 + 12,259 + 9,918 + 9,002 ...
Exports 623,837 622,637 508,395 372,200 47,058 52,530 48,567 43,821 ... 1 EU member states (27)
Imports 449,691 460,887 392,637 293,279 38,428 40,632 39,294 35,775 ...
Balance + 174,147 + 161,750 + 115,758 + 78,920 + 8,630 + 11,898 + 9,273 + 8,046 ...
Euro-area (16) Exports 421,570 419,597 347,943 253,111 32,127 35,721 33,085 28,728 ...
countries Imports 307,188 315,052 268,205 198,951 26,010 27,585 27,054 23,629 ...
Balance + 114,383 + 104,545 + 79,738 + 54,161 + 6,117 + 8,135 + 6,031 + 5,099 ...
of which
Austria Exports 52,813 54,689 48,235 34,428 4,490 4,595 4,526 4,342 ...
Imports 32,091 33,180 29,084 21,908 2,918 3,065 2,992 2,726 ...Balance + 20,722 + 21,509 + 19,151 + 12,520 + 1,572 + 1,530 + 1,535 + 1,616 ...
Belgium and Exports 55,397 55,230 46,808 34,576 4,389 4,692 4,242 4,247 ...Luxembourg Imports 39,455 39,959 32,092 23,620 3,116 3,348 3,156 3,022 ...
Balance + 15,942 + 15,271 + 14,717 + 10,956 + 1,273 + 1,345 + 1,086 + 1,225 ...
France Exports 91,665 93,718 81,941 58,927 7,292 8,536 7,723 6,166 ...
Imports 62,873 63,369 54,559 40,513 4,947 5,812 6,090 4,525 ...Balance + 28,792 + 30,349 + 27,382 + 18,413 + 2,346 + 2,723 + 1,633 + 1,641 ...
Italy Exports 64,499 62,015 51,050 36,986 4,766 5,340 5,163 3,634 ...
Imports 44,694 46,842 39,684 28,236 3,990 3,789 3,975 3,193 ...Balance + 19,805 + 15,173 + 11,367 + 8,750 + 775 + 1,551 + 1,188 + 441 ...
Netherlands Exports 62,948 65,799 54,142 40,488 5,171 5,706 5,146 5,092 ...
Imports 61,951 67,971 58,044 44,247 5,749 6,023 5,411 5,590 ...Balance + 997 − 2,172 − 3,902 − 3,759 − 579 − 317 − 265 − 498 ...
Spain Exports 47,631 42,676 31,296 22,657 2,850 3,097 2,966 2,278 ...
Imports 20,687 20,701 19,257 14,784 1,964 2,061 2,017 1,449 ...
Balance + 26,944 + 21,975 + 12,040 + 7,873 + 887 + 1,036 + 949 + 830 ...
Other EU member Exports 202,267 203,040 160,451 119,088 14,931 16,810 15,483 15,092 ...states Imports 142,503 145,836 124,432 94,329 12,418 13,047 12,241 12,146 ...
Balance + 59,764 + 57,204 + 36,020 + 24,760 + 2,513 + 3,763 + 3,242 + 2,946 ...
of which
United Exports 69,760 64,175 53,156 38,623 4,490 5,217 5,195 4,800 ...Kingdom Imports 41,966 41,646 33,174 24,434 3,144 3,242 3,199 3,220 ...
Balance + 27,794 + 22,529 + 19,982 + 14,189 + 1,345 + 1,975 + 1,996 + 1,580 ...
Exports 102,680 110,455 84,636 65,749 7,969 9,153 8,952 8,704 ... 2 Other European
Imports 91,960 106,174 82,766 63,786 8,703 8,792 8,307 7,748 ... countries
Balance + 10,721 + 4,281 + 1,869 + 1,962 − 733 + 361 + 645 + 956 ...
of which
Switzerland Exports 36,373 39,027 35,324 26,852 3,186 3,615 3,450 3,354 ...
Imports 29,822 31,299 28,071 21,384 3,023 3,106 2,831 2,395 ...
Balance + 6,551 + 7,728 + 7,252 + 5,467 + 163 + 510 + 619 + 960 ...
II Exports 237,139 249,199 213,841 178,210 22,394 24,675 25,382 22,559 ...Non-European
Imports 227,569 238,050 197,924 162,004 20,533 22,727 21,834 22,543 ... countries
Balance + 9,570 + 11,150 + 15,917 + 16,206 + 1,860 + 1,948 + 3,549 + 16 ...
Exports 17,575 19,636 17,200 13,374 1,627 1,848 1,905 1,714 ... 1 Africa
Imports 16,457 20,661 14,211 11,144 1,414 1,582 1,353 1,423 ...
Balance + 1,118 − 1,024 + 2,990 + 2,230 + 213 + 266 + 553 + 291 ...
Exports 100,769 101,866 77,903 64,499 8,171 9,046 9,325 8,032 ... 2 America
Imports 71,276 73,884 60,909 45,887 5,589 6,500 6,491 6,124 ...
Balance + 29,493 + 27,982 + 16,993 + 18,612 + 2,582 + 2,547 + 2,834 + 1,908 ...
of which
Exports 73,327 71,428 53,835 41,912 5,183 5,881 5,976 5,085 ... United States
Imports 45,993 46,464 39,915 29,146 3,519 4,198 4,050 3,879 ...Balance + 27,334 + 24,965 + 13,920 + 12,765 + 1,665 + 1,682 + 1,927 + 1,206 ...
Exports 111,691 120,102 111,653 94,440 11,888 13,055 13,284 11,992 ... 3 Asia
Imports 136,411 140,585 120,096 103,042 13,243 14,344 13,694 14,745 ...
Balance − 24,721 − 20,483 − 8,443 − 8,602 − 1,355 − 1,289 − 410 − 2,753 ...
of which
Middle East Exports 23,709 27,498 23,334 17,736 2,206 2,535 2,581 2,330 ...
Imports 6,444 7,943 5,492 4,293 594 545 751 702 ...Balance + 17,265 + 19,555 + 17,841 + 13,444 + 1,612 + 1,990 + 1,830 + 1,628 ...
Japan Exports 13,022 12,732 10,787 8,475 1,001 1,114 1,205 1,010 ...
Imports 24,381 23,130 18,116 14,221 1,735 1,991 1,846 1,826 ...Balance − 11,359 − 10,398 − 7,329 − 5,746 − 735 − 877 − 641 − 816 ...
Exports 29,902 34,065 36,460 34,210 4,396 4,701 4,755 4,209 ... People‘s Republic
Imports 56,417 60,825 55,447 47,948 6,158 6,793 6,292 7,060 ... of China  
2 
Balance − 26,515 − 26,760 − 18,988 − 13,738 − 1,762 − 2,092 − 1,538 − 2,851 ...
Exports 32,284 32,572 28,309 24,537 3,084 3,396 3,500 3,135 ... Emerging markets
Imports 35,357 33,152 27,756 25,469 3,318 3,588 3,375 3,434 ... in South-East Asia  3 
Balance − 3,073 − 580 + 553 − 932 − 234 − 192 + 125 − 299 ...
Exports 7,104 7,595 7,085 5,896 708 726 868 822 ... 4 Oceania and
Imports 3,425 2,920 2,707 1,930 288 302 296 252 ... polar regions
Balance + 3,679 + 4,674 + 4,378 + 3,966 + 420 + 425 + 572 + 570 ...
 
*Source: Federal Statistical Office. Exports (fob) by country of destination, region. Excluding repair and maintenance operations from January 200 7 on-
imports (cif) by country of origin. Individual countries and groups of wards. — 2Excluding Hong Kong. — 3Brunei Darussalam, Hong Kong, Indo-
countries according to the current position. — 1Including fuel and other nesia, Malaysia, Philippines, Republic of Korea, Singapore, Taiwan and
supplies for ships and aircraft and other data not classifiable by Thailand. 
70*XI External sector

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2010
XI External sector
 
4 Services and income of the Federal Republic of Germany
(balances)
 
€ million
Services
Other services
of which
 
Patents Compen- Services  of Construction
Trans- Financial and sation of Investment Government self-employed and  assembly
Period Total Travel  1 services licences Total income portation  2 services  3 persons  4 work,  repairs employees  5 
2005 − 25,677 − 36,317 + 6,379 + 1,622 − 1,203 + 3,688 + 153 − 1,638 + 3,086 − 1,285 + 26,182
2006 − 13,740 − 32,771 + 5,723 + 2,232 − 1,895 + 3,736 + 9,235 − 1,790 + 3,980 − 773 + 45,666
2007 − 11,603 − 34,324 + 6,770 + 2,886 − 2,192 + 3,309 + 11,947 − 1,977 + 3,089 + 342 + 43,1632008 − 7,031 − 34,644 + 8,312 + 4,067 − 1,715 + 2,351 + 14,598 − 1,583 + 3,059 + 523 + 42,0942009 − 9,662 − 33,299 + 6,877 + 3,941 − 357 + 2,315 + 10,861 − 1,164 + 2,165 − 344 + 34,142
2009          Q1 − 1,253 − 5,410 + 2,260 + 921 − 994 + 615 + 1,355 − 342 + 311 + 677 + 11,273
         Q2 − 2,261 − 8,308 + 1,855 + 697 − 343 + 644 + 3,193 − 254 + 467 + 269 − 362         Q3 − 7,752 − 13,821 + 1,325 + 732 + 103 + 577 + 3,332 − 276 + 585 − 720 + 11,435         Q4 + 1,604 − 5,760 + 1,437 + 1,591 + 877 + 478 + 2,981 − 291 + 802 − 570 + 11,796
2010          Q1 − 1,467 − 5,465 + 1,399 + 905 + 1 + 585 + 1,109 − 237 + 457 + 812 + 10,663
         Q2 − 2,892 − 8,269 + 1,992 + 683 + 220 + 600 + 1,882 − 265 + 600 + 366 + 540         Q3 − 7,306 − 13,864 + 1,947 + 1,108 − 208 + 601 + 3,109 − 335 + 606 − 609 + 10,610
2009          Nov + 493 − 1,430 + 517 + 314 + 368 + 183 + 541 − 102 + 153 − 215 + 4,020
         Dec + 2,532 − 457 + 454 + 904 + 588 + 141 + 903 − 121 + 275 − 132 + 3,707
2010          Jan − 1,885 − 1,872 + 361 + 303 − 560 + 154 − 271 − 81 + 136 + 250 + 3,255
         Feb − 407 − 1,597 + 475 + 289 + 397 + 213 − 184 − 70 + 111 + 270 + 3,387         Mar + 825 − 1,997 + 563 + 314 + 164 + 218 + 1,563 − 86 + 209 + 292 + 4,022
         Apr + 275 − 1,999 + 660 + 414 + 381 + 182 + 636 − 79 + 176 + 112 + 712
         May − 1,685 − 2,946 + 637 + 117 + 44 + 231 + 233 − 80 + 57 + 134 − 3,598         June − 1,481 − 3,325 + 696 + 152 − 205 + 187 + 1,013 − 106 + 367 + 120 + 3,426
         July − 2,996 − 4,717 + 698 + 287 − 446 + 174 + 1,008 − 156 + 234 − 203 + 3,708
         Aug − 3,102 − 5,211 + 705 + 446 + 163 + 202 + 593 − 73 + 142 − 206 + 3,680         Sep − 1,209 − 3,936 + 544 + 375 + 75 + 225 + 1,508 − 106 + 230 − 201 + 3,222
1From January 2001, figures subject to significant uncertainty. — 2Ex- vices supplied. — 4Engineering and other technical services, research and
cluding the expenditure on freight included in the cif import figure. — development, commercial services, etc. — 5 Wages and salaries. 
3Including the receipts from foreign military agencies for goods and ser-
5 Current transfers of the Federal Republic of Germany 6 Capital transfers
(balances) (balances)
€ million € million
Public  1 Private  1 
International
organisations  2 
 
of which Other Other
European current Workers’ current
Period Total Total Total Communities Total remittances transfers Total  4 Public  1 Private  1 transfers  3 
2005 − 28,712 − 17,588 − 16,264 − 14,687 − 1,324 − 11,124 − 2,926 − 8,198 − 1,369 − 3,419 + 2,050
2006 − 27,206 − 14,496 − 14,902 − 13,348 + 406 − 12,710 − 2,927 − 9,783 − 258 − 1,947 + 1,689
2007 − 32,206 − 16,752 − 18,659 − 16,876 + 1,908 − 15,454 − 2,997 − 12,458 + 110 − 2,034 + 2,1452008 − 34,303 − 17,907 − 19,611 − 17,536 + 1,704 − 16,395 − 3,079 − 13,316 − 209 − 1,857 + 1,6482009 − 33,727 − 19,486 − 19,657 − 17,317 + 171 − 14,241 − 2,995 − 11,247 − 186 − 1,645 + 1,459
2009          Q1 − 12,099 − 8,469 − 7,873 − 7,010 − 597 − 3,629 − 749 − 2,881 + 25 − 407 + 432
         Q2 − 6,075 − 2,202 − 4,662 − 4,183 + 2,460 − 3,873 − 749 − 3,124 + 290 − 303 + 592         Q3 − 8,159 − 5,019 − 4,288 − 3,766 − 731 − 3,140 − 749 − 2,392 − 42 − 360 + 318         Q4 − 7,395 − 3,796 − 2,834 − 2,358 − 962 − 3,599 − 749 − 2,850 − 459 − 576 + 117
2010          Q1 − 13,416 − 9,954 − 8,959 − 8,268 − 994 − 3,463 − 759 − 2,704 + 293 − 376 + 669
         Q2 − 6,353 − 2,270 − 4,168 − 3,763 + 1,898 − 4,083 − 759 − 3,324 − 434 − 395 − 39         Q3 − 10,580 − 7,108 − 6,383 − 5,664 − 725 − 3,472 − 759 − 2,713 + 64 − 417 + 482
2009          Nov − 3,844 − 2,517 − 2,077 − 1,991 − 441 − 1,327 − 250 − 1,077 + 89 − 198 + 287
         Dec + 1,348 + 2,696 + 2,799 + 2,982 − 103 − 1,348 − 250 − 1,098 − 313 − 230 − 83
2010          Jan − 4,353 − 3,179 − 2,952 − 2,716 − 227 − 1,175 − 253 − 922 + 82 − 112 + 193
         Feb − 6,328 − 5,137 − 4,696 − 4,358 − 442 − 1,191 − 253 − 938 + 432 − 108 + 540         Mar − 2,735 − 1,638 − 1,312 − 1,194 − 326 − 1,097 − 253 − 844 − 220 − 156 − 64
         Apr − 2,034 − 711 − 1,349 − 1,166 + 638 − 1,324 − 253 − 1,071 − 197 − 115 − 82
         May − 1,519 − 284 − 1,642 − 1,589 + 1,358 − 1,234 − 253 − 982 − 50 − 124 + 74         June − 2,800 − 1,275 − 1,177 − 1,007 − 98 − 1,525 − 253 − 1,272 − 187 − 156 − 30
         July − 3,633 − 2,387 − 2,092 − 1,931 − 295 − 1,247 − 253 − 994 + 424 − 144 + 568
         Aug − 3,459 − 2,349 − 2,013 − 1,673 − 336 − 1,110 − 253 − 857 − 108 − 126 + 18         Sep − 3,488 − 2,372 − 2,278 − 2,060 − 95 − 1,116 − 253 − 863 − 251 − 147 − 104
1The classification of “public” and “private” transfers depends on the (excluding capital transfers). — 3Payments to developing countries, pension
sector to which the participating domestic body belongs. — 2Current contri- payments, tax revenue and refunds, etc. — 4Where identifiable; in
butions to the budgets of international organisations and to the EU budget particular, debt forgiveness. 
71*XI External sector

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
E U R O S Y S T E M
Monthly Report
November 2010
XI External sector
 
7 Financial account of the Federal Republic of Germany
 
 
€ million
2009 2010
Item 2007 2008 2009 Q4 Q1 Q2 Q3 July Aug Sep
I Net German investment abroad
(Increase/capital exports: −) − 687,629 − 233,154 + 10,792 − 22,687 − 73,008 − 114,523 − 78,532 − 27,508 − 50,254 − 770
1 Direct investment  1 − 118,723 − 91,882 − 43,958 + 1,855 − 34,144 − 31,506 + 3,530 + 839 + 2,937 − 245
Equity capital − 43,692 − 61,067 − 47,617 + 2,563 − 16,335 − 10,645 − 5,129 − 3,352 − 2,655 + 878
Reinvested earnings  2 − 30,853 − 11,852 − 14,431 − 4,649 − 5,303 − 2,248 − 7,572 − 2,585 − 2,862 − 2,125
Other capital transactionsof German direct investors − 44,178 − 18,964 + 18,090 + 3,941 − 12,507 − 18,613 + 16,231 + 6,776 + 8,453 + 1,001
2 Portfolio investment − 148,706 + 24,956 − 72,571 − 17,979 − 22,086 − 3,620 − 21,294 − 1,470 − 5,625 − 14,199
Shares
3 + 21,141 + 39,598 − 2,208 − 771 + 3,584 − 3,704 + 2,434 + 3,250 − 219 − 597
Mutual fund shares  4 − 42,259 − 8,425 + 608 + 2,995 − 7,786 − 3,195 − 5,502 − 825 − 2,852 − 1,825
Bonds and notes  5 − 101,167 − 23,905 − 83,507 − 21,596 − 18,862 − 89 − 16,852 − 2,727 − 3,442 − 10,683
Money market instruments − 26,422 + 17,688 + 12,536 + 1,393 + 978 + 3,368 − 1,374 − 1,168 + 888 − 1,094
3 Financial derivatives  6 − 85,170 − 25,449 + 20,415 − 377 − 4,081 − 6,337 − 6,641 − 781 − 2,206 − 3,655
4 Other investment − 334,077 − 138,770 + 103,706 − 6,755 − 12,047 − 72,259 − 54,471 − 26,117 − 45,479 + 17,124
MFIs  7,8 − 226,871 − 71,875 + 176,593 − 772 + 23,638 − 23,037 + 41,681 + 19,756 − 25,659 + 47,585
Long-term − 98,835 − 142,257 + 25,819 + 23,670 + 11,601 + 10,161 + 29,331 + 25,810 + 1,220 + 2,302Short-term − 128,036 + 70,382 + 150,774 − 24,442 + 12,037 − 33,198 + 12,350 − 6,054 − 26,879 + 45,283
Enterprises and households − 49,908 − 25,105 − 13,625 − 5,636 − 4,828 − 13,529 − 24,168 − 15,139 − 6,971 − 2,058
Long-term − 47,586 − 22,745 − 16,747 − 5,611 − 8,307 − 6,562 − 11,602 − 5,808 − 6,250 + 457Short-term  
7 − 2,321 − 2,360 + 3,122 − 24 + 3,479 − 6,966 − 12,566 − 9,331 − 720 − 2,515
General government + 8,426 + 2,809 + 2,005 − 1,446 − 1,677 + 6,306 − 11,421 − 8,926 − 1,474 − 1,020
Long-term + 309 − 325 − 652 + 130 − 519 + 108 − 10,448 − 10,400 − 22 − 26
Short-term  7 + 8,117 + 3,135 + 2,657 − 1,577 − 1,158 + 6,199 − 973 + 1,474 − 1,452 − 995
Bundesbank − 65,724 − 44,600 − 61,267 + 1,099 − 29,181 − 42,000 − 60,563 − 21,807 − 11,375 − 27,382
5 Change in reserve assets at
transaction values (Increase: −) − 953 − 2,008 + 3,200 + 569 − 651 − 801 + 344 + 20 + 119 + 205
II Net foreign investment in Germany
(Increase/capital imports: +) + 468,128 + 35,823 − 140,442 − 52,684 + 57,607 + 93,658 + 62,569 + 33,814 + 38,907 − 10,152
1 Direct investment  1 + 55,925 + 18,081 + 27,917 + 7,924 + 6,631 + 5,089 + 7,737 + 2,575 + 150 + 5,011
Equity capital + 39,980 + 17,536 + 8,976 + 2,402 − 253 + 782 + 3,710 + 3,543 + 123 + 44
Reinvested earnings  2 + 5,487 − 1,802 + 2,322 − 5 + 3,844 − 1,213 + 4,045 + 1,025 + 1,398 + 1,623
Other capital transactionsof foreign direct investors + 10,458 + 2,347 + 16,620 + 5,527 + 3,041 + 5,519 − 19 − 1,993 − 1,370 + 3,344
2 Portfolio investment + 291,455 + 10,068 − 18,227 − 18,788 + 10,647 + 3,178 + 39,857 − 3,498 + 17,467 + 25,888
Shares  
3 + 39,971 − 32,619 + 7,791 − 700 + 838 − 1,477 + 1,873 + 820 − 676 + 1,730
Mutual fund shares + 4,771 − 8,639 + 155 + 475 + 1,732 + 736 − 491 − 713 − 658 + 880Bonds and notes  
5 + 199,219 + 13,894 − 75,383 − 14,156 + 13,382 + 19,769 + 25,337 − 7,288 + 14,129 + 18,496
Money market instruments + 47,493 + 37,432 + 49,210 − 4,407 − 5,304 − 15,851 + 13,137 + 3,683 + 4,672 + 4,782
3 Other investment + 120,748 + 7,674 − 150,132 − 41,821 + 40,328 + 85,392 + 14,975 + 34,736 + 21,290 − 41,051
MFIs  7,8 + 73,212 − 58,201 − 115,410 − 36,894 + 51,662 + 72,897 + 745 + 19,269 + 24,267 − 42,791
Long-term − 14,201 + 11,871 − 24,386 − 12,456 − 1,603 − 1,317 − 2,417 − 4,655 − 152 + 2,390Short-term + 87,413 − 70,073 − 91,024 − 24,438 + 53,265 + 74,214 + 3,162 + 23,924 + 24,419 − 45,181
Enterprises and households + 39,667 + 45,177 − 7,706 + 8,489 − 13,106 + 9,459 + 10,198 + 9,580 − 1,858 + 2,477
Long-term + 20,003 + 24,555 + 168 − 1,836 + 280 − 2,661 − 900 + 3,009 − 2,388 − 1,521Short-term  
7 + 19,664 + 20,623 − 7,874 + 10,324 − 13,387 + 12,121 + 11,098 + 6,571 + 530 + 3,998
General government − 3,480 + 6,347 − 5,235 − 13,904 + 1,496 + 1,252 + 4,202 + 5,530 − 470 − 858
Long-term − 3,204 − 1,048 − 1,959 − 355 − 521 + 103 + 73 + 69 − 8 + 12Short-term  
7 − 276 + 7,396 − 3,276 − 13,549 + 2,016 + 1,149 + 4,129 + 5,461 − 462 − 870
Bundesbank + 11,349 + 14,351 − 21,782 + 489 + 277 + 1,784 − 170 + 358 − 649 + 121
III Financial account balance  9 
(Net capital exports: −) − 219,502 − 197,330 − 129,649 − 75,371 − 15,402 − 20,865 − 15,963 + 6,305 − 11,347 − 10,922
1From 1996, new definition for direct investment. — 2Estimated. — action values shown here are mostly derived from changes in stocks. Purely
3Including participation rights. — 4From 1991, including retained statistical changes have been eliminated as far as possible. — 8Excluding
earnings. — 5From 1975, excluding accrued interest. — 6Options, whether the Deutsche Bundesbank. — 9Financial account balance including change
evidenced by securities or not, and financial futures contracts. — 7The trans- in reserve assets. 
72*XI External sector

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2010
XI External sector
 
8 External position of the Bundesbank *
 
 
DM million
Reserve assets and other claims on non-residents Liabilities vis-à-vis non-residents
Reserve assets
Reserve
positionin theInter- Liabilitiesnational arising Net Liabilities
Monetary arising from externalFund and Claims Loans and from liquidity position
Foreign special on the external Treasury (col 1 other claims
End of year currency drawing ECB  
2 on non- trans- discount less
or month Total Total Gold rights (net) Total paper col 8) balances  1 residents  3 actions  4 
1234567891 0 1 1
1996 120,985 119,544 13,688 72,364 11,445 22,048 1,441 15,604 15,604 − 105,381
1997 127,849 126,884 13,688 76,673 13,874 22,649 966 16,931 16,931 − 110,918
1998 135,085 134,005 17,109 100,363 16,533 − 1,079 15,978 15,978 − 119,107
*Valuation of the gold holdings and the claims on non-residents in Monetary Cooperation Fund (EMCF)). — 3Including loans to the World
accordance with section 26 (2) of the Bundesbank Act and the provisions of Bank. — 4Including liquidity paper sold to non-residents by the
the Commercial Code, especially section 253. In the course of the year, Bundesbank; excluding the liquidity Treasury discount paper sold to
valuation at the preceding year’s balance sheet rates. — 1Mainly US dollar non-residents between March 1993 and March 1995, as shown in column 10. 
assets. — 2European Central Bank (up to 1993, claims on the European
  
 
9 External position of the Bundesbank in the euro area o
€ million
Reserve assets and other claims on non-residents
Reserve assets
Reserveposition
Other in the Inter-national claims on NetMonetary Other residents externalFund and claims on Claims in other position
Gold special Foreign non-euro- within the euro-area (col 1 Liabilities
End of year and gold drawing currency area Eurosystem member less vis-à-vis non-
or month Total Total rights reserves (net)  
2 states col 9) receivables residents  1,3 residents  3,4 
1234567891 0
1999          Jan  5 95,316 93,940 29,312 8,461 56,167 140 1,225 11 8,169 87,146
1999 141,958 93,039 32,287 8,332 52,420 9,162 39,746 11 6,179 135,779
2000 100,762 93,815 32,676 7,762 53,377 313 6,620 14 6,592 94,1702001 76,147 93,215 35,005 8,721 49,489 312 − 17,385 5 8,752 67,396
2002 103,948 85,002 36,208 8,272 40,522 312 18,466 167 9,005 94,9422003 95,394 76,680 36,533 7,609 32,538 312 17,945 456 10,443 84,951
2004 93,110 71,335 35,495 6,548 29,292 312 20,796 667 7,935 85,175
2005 130,268 86,181 47,924 4,549 33,708 350 42,830 906 6,285 123,9832006 104,389 84,765 53,114 3,011 28,640 350 18,344 931 4,819 99,5702007 179,492 92,545 62,433 2,418 27,694 350 84,064 2,534 16,005 163,4882008 230,775 99,185 68,194 3,285 27,705 350 128,668 2,573 30,169 200,607
2009 323,286 125,541 83,939 15,969 25,634 350 189,936 7,460 9,126 314,160
2009          July 282,460 104,931 72,586 4,694 27,651 350 173,956 3,222 7,900 274,560
         Aug 291,882 115,309 72,998 15,186 27,124 350 171,719 4,506 8,972 282,910         Sep 314,396 116,785 74,913 16,268 25,604 350 191,035 6,227 8,641 305,756
         Oct 292,775 119,584 77,320 16,501 25,763 350 166,341 6,500 9,038 283,737
         Nov 306,623 126,129 85,449 15,723 24,957 350 172,779 7,366 9,274 297,349         Dec 323,286 125,541 83,939 15,969 25,634 350 189,936 7,460 9,126 314,160
2010          Jan 326,161 127,966 84,917 16,350 26,699 350 189,759 8,086 10,066 316,095
         Feb 352,969 134,669 89,796 17,327 27,546 50 209,481 8,770 9,573 343,396         Mar 364,072 134,826 90,158 17,176 27,491 50 219,417 9,780 9,421 354,651
         Apr 377,729 142,021 96,677 17,290 28,054 50 225,677 9,982 11,833 365,897
         May 444,480 157,385 108,045 18,854 30,486 50 267,464 19,580 13,024 431,455         June 444,756 160,629 110,727 19,039 30,863 50 261,416 22,662 11,220 433,536
         July 452,125 145,637 98,074 18,507 29,056 50 283,223 23,216 11,557 440,569
         Aug 473,073 155,245 106,417 18,798 30,030 50 294,597 23,181 10,910 462,163         Sep 496,333 150,758 105,059 18,188 27,511 50 321,979 23,547 10,995 485,338
         Oct 472,762 150,481 105,507 17,972 27,002 50 298,661 23,569 12,729 460,032
oClaims and liabilities vis-à-vis all countries within and outside the euro November 2000, including the TARGET positions which were previously
area. Up to December 2000, the levels at the end of each quarter are shown, shown (in columns 6 and 9) as bilateral assets and liabilities vis-à-vis natio nal
owing to revaluations, at market prices; within each quarter, however, the central banks outside the Eurosystem. — 3See footnote 2. — 4Excluding
levels are computed on the basis of cumulative transaction values. From allocations of special drawing rights (SDR) by the International Monetary
January 2001, all end-of-month levels are valued at market prices. — Fund (IMF) for an amount of SDR 12,059 million. — 5Euro opening balance
1Including loans to the World Bank. — 2Including the balances in the sheet of the Bundesbank as at 1 January 1999. 
Bundesbank’s cross-border payments within the Eurosystem. From
73*XI External sector

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
E U R O S Y S T E M
Monthly Report
November 2010
XI External sector
 
10 Assets and liabilities of enterprises in Germany (other than banks)
vis-à-vis non-residents *
 
€ million
Claims on non-residents Liabilities vis-à-vis non-residents
Claims on foreign non-banks Liabilities  vis-à-vis foreign non-banks
from trade credits from trade credits
Balances Loans
with from Credit Advance from from Credit Advance
End of year foreign financial terms payments foreign financial terms payments
or month Total banks Total Total granted effected Total banks Total Total used received operations operations
All countries
 
2006 450,228 117,723 332,505 190,300 142,205 134,057 8,148 624,790 95,019 529,771 408,907 120,864 79,900 40,964
2007 509,178 162,654 346,524 196,178 150,346 139,842 10,504 650,966 111,543 539,423 404,904 134,519 82,979 51,540
2008 553,465 173,255 380,210 227,055 153,155 140,520 12,635 707,704 147,242 560,462 424,211 136,251 79,980 56,271
2009 593,591 209,729 383,862 240,727 143,135 130,605 12,530 754,355 159,667 594,688 457,468 137,220 80,759 56,461
2010          Apr 629,628 230,422 399,206 252,797 146,409 133,565 12,844 743,754 146,968 596,786 462,186 134,600 75,994 58,606
         May 639,878 227,856 412,022 262,050 149,972 136,999 12,973 759,508 151,096 608,412 470,547 137,865 79,522 58,343         June 647,735 223,126 424,609 269,377 155,232 142,332 12,900 760,309 154,287 606,022 463,737 142,285 83,707 58,578
         July 658,907 235,157 423,750 271,494 152,256 139,343 12,913 768,475 162,807 605,668 465,492 140,176 81,203 58,973
         Aug 664,596 242,139 422,457 273,551 148,906 135,959 12,947 774,005 160,937 613,068 476,192 136,876 77,825 59,051         Sep 672,434 244,650 427,784 271,792 155,992 143,109 12,883 787,250 160,457 626,793 483,082 143,711 85,380 58,331
Industrial countries 1
 
2006 396,649 115,269 281,380 174,784 106,596 100,541 6,055 570,675 93,560 477,115 389,770 87,345 66,210 21,135
2007 452,354 160,666 291,688 180,564 111,124 103,104 8,020 590,245 110,291 479,954 384,024 95,930 69,347 26,583
2008 489,430 171,387 318,043 207,807 110,236 101,002 9,234 643,652 145,045 498,607 402,020 96,587 68,148 28,439
2009 531,796 208,571 323,225 220,778 102,447 93,566 8,881 684,984 157,343 527,641 431,525 96,116 68,912 27,204
2010          Apr 562,101 229,397 332,704 231,182 101,522 92,600 8,922 672,075 144,684 527,391 435,750 91,641 63,617 28,024
         May 570,078 226,767 343,311 239,469 103,842 94,791 9,051 682,625 148,798 533,827 440,453 93,374 65,577 27,797         June 575,873 221,970 353,903 246,115 107,788 98,795 8,993 681,611 151,886 529,725 432,224 97,501 69,743 27,758
         July 586,781 233,966 352,815 247,714 105,101 96,095 9,006 689,706 160,382 529,324 434,062 95,262 67,481 27,781
         Aug 593,422 240,922 352,500 250,330 102,170 93,149 9,021 694,597 158,474 536,123 443,918 92,205 64,136 28,069         Sep 601,955 243,577 358,378 249,752 108,626 99,464 9,162 707,632 158,032 549,600 450,494 99,106 70,953 28,153
EU member states 1
 
2006 308,720 108,982 199,738 121,929 77,809 72,902 4,907 479,025 86,343 392,682 332,871 59,811 45,202 14,609
2007 364,105 154,644 209,461 127,080 82,381 75,942 6,439 489,234 105,022 384,212 318,769 65,443 46,262 19,181
2008 398,833 164,762 234,071 151,391 82,680 75,192 7,488 536,351 137,208 399,143 331,498 67,645 46,188 21,457
2009 443,431 200,400 243,031 165,986 77,045 70,051 6,994 579,596 141,633 437,963 367,980 69,983 48,977 21,006
2010          Apr 466,591 219,833 246,758 172,354 74,404 67,387 7,017 574,971 136,362 438,609 372,949 65,660 44,149 21,511
         May 470,610 217,185 253,425 176,747 76,678 69,597 7,081 583,792 140,748 443,044 376,505 66,539 45,294 21,245         June 470,795 211,242 259,553 180,372 79,181 72,146 7,035 582,443 143,344 439,099 369,428 69,671 48,589 21,082
         July 483,132 224,015 259,117 182,157 76,960 69,961 6,999 590,107 151,701 438,406 370,957 67,449 46,390 21,059
         Aug 490,857 231,119 259,738 185,505 74,233 67,214 7,019 594,001 150,859 443,142 378,415 64,727 43,375 21,352         Sep 497,799 233,913 263,886 184,416 79,470 72,345 7,125 607,004 150,568 456,436 386,287 70,149 48,554 21,595
of which:  Euro-area member states 2
 
2006 207,868 77,056 130,812 79,901 50,911 47,614 3,297 369,648 38,878 330,770 292,178 38,592 28,340 10,252
2007 251,718 118,112 133,606 79,745 53,861 49,537 4,324 367,318 56,632 310,686 269,095 41,591 28,964 12,627
2008 281,518 130,226 151,292 96,968 54,324 49,408 4,916 415,221 81,703 333,518 290,093 43,425 29,768 13,657
2009 321,991 159,740 162,251 114,378 47,873 43,179 4,694 466,064 91,792 374,272 332,280 41,992 28,397 13,595
2010          Apr 337,073 170,838 166,235 115,723 50,512 45,680 4,832 463,120 85,560 377,560 333,948 43,612 29,927 13,685
         May 340,376 170,047 170,329 118,490 51,839 47,022 4,817 468,812 88,158 380,654 336,094 44,560 31,022 13,538         June 342,718 168,550 174,168 120,566 53,602 48,803 4,799 466,854 91,152 375,702 329,293 46,409 32,808 13,601
         July 352,723 171,850 180,873 128,757 52,116 47,393 4,723 471,125 95,685 375,440 329,925 45,515 31,882 13,633
         Aug 359,434 178,267 181,167 131,143 50,024 45,343 4,681 477,825 97,036 380,789 336,938 43,851 30,067 13,784         Sep 359,033 177,769 181,264 128,550 52,714 47,955 4,759 486,168 96,833 389,335 342,797 46,538 32,586 13,952
Emerging economies and developing countries 3
 
2006 53,579 2,454 51,125 15,516 35,609 33,516 2,093 54,115 1,459 52,656 19,137 33,519 13,690 19,829
2007 56,824 1,988 54,836 15,614 39,222 36,738 2,484 60,721 1,252 59,469 20,880 38,589 13,632 24,957
2008 64,035 1,868 62,167 19,248 42,919 39,518 3,401 64,052 2,197 61,855 22,191 39,664 11,832 27,832
2009 61,795 1,158 60,637 19,949 40,688 37,039 3,649 69,371 2,324 67,047 25,943 41,104 11,847 29,257
2010          Apr 67,527 1,025 66,502 21,615 44,887 40,965 3,922 71,679 2,284 69,395 26,436 42,959 12,377 30,582
         May 69,800 1,089 68,711 22,581 46,130 42,208 3,922 76,883 2,298 74,585 30,094 44,491 13,945 30,546         June 71,862 1,156 70,706 23,262 47,444 43,537 3,907 78,698 2,401 76,297 31,513 44,784 13,964 30,820
         July 72,126 1,191 70,935 23,780 47,155 43,248 3,907 78,769 2,425 76,344 31,430 44,914 13,722 31,192
         Aug 71,174 1,217 69,957 23,221 46,736 42,810 3,926 79,408 2,463 76,945 32,274 44,671 13,689 30,982         Sep 70,479 1,073 69,406 22,040 47,366 43,645 3,721 79,618 2,425 77,193 32,588 44,605 14,427 30,178
* Up to and including November 2009 the assets and liabilities vis-à-vis shown in Table XI.7. — 1From January 2007, including Bulgaria and
non-residents of households in Germany. The assets and liabilities vis-à-vis Romania. — 2From January 2007, including Slovenia; from January 2008,
non-residents of banks (MFIs) in Germany are shown in Table 4 of Section IV, including Cyprus and Malta; from January 2009, including Slovakia. — 3All
“Banks”. Statistical increases and decreases have not been eliminated; to countries that are not regarded as industrial countries. 
this extent, the changes in totals are not comparable with the figures
74*XI External sector

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2010
XI External sector
 
11 ECB euro reference exchange rates of selected currencies *
 
 
EUR 1 = currency units ...
Yearly Australia Canada China Denmark Japan Norway Sweden Switzerland United States United Kingdom
or monthly       
average AUD CAD CNY  1 DKK JPY NOK SEK CHF GBP USD
1999 1.6523 1.5840 . 7.4355 121.32 8.3104 8.8075 1.6003 0.65874 1.0658
2000 1.5889 1.3706 2 7.6168 7.4538 99.47 8.1129 8.4452 1.5579 0.60948 0.9236
2001 1.7319 1.3864 7.4131 7.4521 108.68 8.0484 9.2551 1.5105 0.62187 0.8956
2002 1.7376 1.4838 7.8265 7.4305 118.06 7.5086 9.1611 1.4670 0.62883 0.9456
2003 1.7379 1.5817 9.3626 7.4307 130.97 8.0033 9.1242 1.5212 0.69199 1.1312
2004 1.6905 1.6167 10.2967 7.4399 134.44 8.3697 9.1243 1.5438 0.67866 1.2439
2005 1.6320 1.5087 10.1955 7.4518 136.85 8.0092 9.2822 1.5483 0.68380 1.2441
2006 1.6668 1.4237 10.0096 7.4591 146.02 8.0472 9.2544 1.5729 0.68173 1.25562007 1.6348 1.4678 10.4178 7.4506 161.25 8.0165 9.2501 1.6427 0.68434 1.3705
2008 1.7416 1.5594 10.2236 7.4560 152.45 8.2237 9.6152 1.5874 0.79628 1.4708
2009 1.7727 1.5850 9.5277 7.4462 130.34 8.7278 10.6191 1.5100 0.89094 1.3948
2009          Mar 1.9594 1.6470 8.9210 7.4509 127.65 8.8388 11.1767 1.5083 0.91966 1.3050
         Apr 1.8504 1.6188 9.0110 7.4491 130.25 8.7867 10.8796 1.5147 0.89756 1.3190
         May 1.7831 1.5712 9.3157 7.4468 131.85 8.7943 10.5820 1.5118 0.88445 1.3650         June 1.7463 1.5761 9.5786 7.4457 135.39 8.9388 10.8713 1.5148 0.85670 1.4016
         July 1.7504 1.5824 9.6246 7.4458 133.09 8.9494 10.8262 1.5202 0.86092 1.4088
         Aug 1.7081 1.5522 9.7485 7.4440 135.31 8.6602 10.2210 1.5236 0.86265 1.4268         Sep 1.6903 1.5752 9.9431 7.4428 133.14 8.5964 10.1976 1.5148 0.89135 1.4562
         Oct 1.6341 1.5619 10.1152 7.4438 133.91 8.3596 10.3102 1.5138 0.91557 1.4816
         Nov 1.6223 1.5805 10.1827 7.4415 132.97 8.4143 10.3331 1.5105 0.89892 1.4914         Dec 1.6185 1.5397 9.9777 7.4419 131.21 8.4066 10.4085 1.5021 0.89972 1.4614
2010          Jan 1.5624 1.4879 9.7436 7.4424 130.34 8.1817 10.1939 1.4765 0.88305 1.4272
         Feb 1.5434 1.4454 9.3462 7.4440 123.46 8.0971 9.9505 1.4671 0.87604 1.3686         Mar 1.4882 1.3889 9.2623 7.4416 123.03 8.0369 9.7277 1.4482 0.90160 1.3569
         Apr 1.4463 1.3467 9.1505 7.4428 125.33 7.9323 9.6617 1.4337 0.87456 1.3406
         May 1.4436 1.3060 8.5794 7.4413 115.83 7.8907 9.6641 1.4181 0.85714 1.2565         June 1.4315 1.2674 8.3245 7.4409 110.99 7.9062 9.5723 1.3767 0.82771 1.2209
         July 1.4586 1.3322 8.6538 7.4522 111.73 8.0201 9.4954 1.3460 0.83566 1.2770
         Aug 1.4337 1.3411 8.7520 7.4495 110.04 7.9325 9.4216 1.3413 0.82363 1.2894         Sep 1.3943 1.3515 8.8104 7.4476 110.26 7.9156 9.2241 1.3089 0.83987 1.3067
         Oct 1.4164 1.4152 9.2665 7.4567 113.67 8.1110 9.2794 1.3452 0.87638 1.3898
*Averages: Bundesbank calculations based on the daily euro reference to March 2005, ECB indicative rates. — 2Average from 13 January to
exchange rates published by the ECB; for additional euro reference 29 December 2000. 
exchange rates, see Statistical Supplement 5 Exchange rate statistics. — 1Up
12 Euro member countries and irrevocable euro conversion rates in the third stage
of European Economic and Monetary Union
From Country Currency ISO currency code EUR 1 = currency units ...
1999  January 1 Austria Austrian schilling ATS 13.7603
Belgium Belgian franc BEF 40.3399
Finland Finnish markka FIM 5.94573France French franc FRF 6.55957
Germany Deutsche Mark DEM 1.95583Ireland Irish pound IEP 0.787564Italy Italian lira ITL 1,936.27Luxembourg Luxembourg franc LUF 40.3399Netherlands Dutch guilder NLG 2.20371Portugal Portuguese escudo PTE 200.482Spain Spanish peseta ESP 166.386
2001  January 1 Greece Greek drachma GRD 340.7502007  January 1 Slovenia Slovenian tolar SIT 239.6402008  January 1 Cyprus Cyprus pound CYP 0.585274
Malta Maltese lira MTL 0.429300
2009  January 1 Slovakia Slovak koruna SKK 30.12602011  January 1 Estonia Estonian kroon EEK 15.6466
75*XI External sector

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
E U R O S Y S T E M
Monthly Report
November 2010
XI  External  sector
 
13  Effective exchange rates of the Euro and indicators of the German economy’s price competitiveness *
 
 
1999 Q1 = 100
Effective exchange rate of the Euro Indicators of the German economy’s price competitiveness
EER-21  1 EER-41  2 Based on the deflators of total sales  3 Based on consumer price indices
23 selected industrial countries  4 In real terms
In real terms based on
In real based on unit In real
23 terms the deflators labour terms Non-
based on of gross costs of based on Euro- euro- selected
36 36 56 consumer domestic national consumer area area industrial
Period Nominal price indices product  3 economy  3 Nominal price indices Total countries countries countries  5 6 countries  4 countries  5 countries  7 
1999 96.1 96.0 95.9 96.4 96.5 95.8 97.7 99.5 95.6 97.6 98.2 98.0 97.7
2000 86.8 86.5 85.9 85.4 87.9 85.8 91.6 97.1 85.1 91.0 92.8 91.9 90.9
2001 87.3 87.0 86.4 84.3 90.2 86.9 91.2 95.9 85.6 90.3 92.9 91.4 90.82002 89.7 90.1 89.3 87.4 94.7 90.5 91.8 95.1 88.1 90.7 93.5 91.9 91.72003 100.3 101.3 100.1 97.8 106.6 101.3 95.1 94.1 96.9 94.4 97.0 96.5 96.72004 104.2 105.1 102.9 101.8 111.2 105.0 95.4 93.0 99.3 94.5 98.4 98.0 98.3
2005 102.7 103.7 101.1 99.6 109.2 102.5 94.1 91.4 98.3 92.4 98.5 96.9 96.6
2006 102.6 103.7 100.5 98.8 109.3 101.9 92.9 89.8 97.8 90.9 98.6 96.5 95.82007 106.3 106.8 102.9 100.6 113.0 104.3 93.9 89.0 101.7 91.4 100.9 98.0 97.22008 110.5 110.1 105.5 104.3 118.0 107.2 94.1 87.4 104.9 91.1 102.5 98.5 97.72009 111.7 110.6 106.4 106.4 120.6 108.0 93.7 87.5 103.8
p 91.8 102.0 98.6 98.0
2007          Feb 104.3 105.0 101.5 99.0 111.0 102.8 93.6 89.6 99.8 91.3 99.9 97.3 96.6
         Mar 105.0 105.5 111.9 103.5 100.0 97.4 96.7
         Apr 105.9 106.7 112.7 104.4 100.6 97.9 97.2
         May 106.0 106.6 102.6 100.3 112.5 104.1 94.0 89.3 101.5 91.6 100.7 97.9 97.0         June 105.6 106.1 112.0 103.5 100.5 97.6 96.7
         July 106.2 106.7 112.6 104.1 101.0 98.0 97.0
         Aug 105.8 106.1 102.7 100.2 112.6 103.8 93.7 88.8 101.6 91.2 100.6 97.5 96.7         Sep 106.8 107.1 113.5 104.6 101.3 98.2 97.4
         Oct 107.9 108.1 114.4 105.2 101.7 98.5 97.5
         Nov 109.4 109.6 104.8 103.0 116.2 106.7 94.3 88.2 104.0 91.6 102.6 99.5 98.6         Dec 109.5 109.4 116.0 106.3 102.4 99.1 98.1
2008          Jan 110.1 110.0 116.6 106.8 102.5 99.1 98.1
         Feb 109.8 109.3 106.1 104.3 116.5 106.2 94.7 88.0 105.5 91.9 102.6 98.8 97.8         Mar 112.6 112.3 119.9 109.4 103.4 99.9 99.3
         Apr 113.7 113.3 121.2 110.3 103.7 99.9 99.3
         May 113.2 112.9 108.0 107.0 120.5 109.7 95.3 87.5 108.2 92.2 103.7 99.8 99.0         June 113.0 112.7 120.4 109.5 103.6 99.4 98.6
         July 113.2 112.7 120.6 109.5 104.0 99.4 98.7
         Aug 110.9 110.3 105.6 104.7 117.8 106.8 94.3 87.0 106.2 90.9 102.8 98.2 97.2         Sep 109.3 108.5 116.4 105.3 102.0 97.5 96.6
         Oct 105.8 105.1 113.8 102.8 99.9 95.8 95.1
         Nov 105.0 104.4 102.1 101.1 113.0 102.1 92.0 87.0 99.9 89.6 99.9 95.7 95.0         Dec 110.2 109.7 118.7 107.3 101.8 98.1 97.6
2009          Jan 109.8 109.2 118.6 107.0 101.6 98.1 97.6
         Feb 108.7 108.0 104.8 104.5 117.7 106.1 92.6 87.2 101.2 91.0 100.8 97.8 97.4         Mar 111.1 110.3 120.4 108.2 101.7 98.4 98.1
         Apr 110.3 109.5 119.1 107.0 101.6 98.1 97.5
         May 110.8 110.0 106.1 105.6 119.5 107.3 93.6 87.6 103.4 91.8 101.7 98.2 97.5         June 112.0 111.1 120.7 108.4 102.1 98.8 98.2
         July 111.6 110.5 120.5 107.8 102.1 98.5 97.9
         Aug 111.7 110.6 106.7 106.3 120.6 108.0 94.0 87.6 104.6
p 91.9 102.1 98.6 98.0
         Sep 112.9 111.6 122.0 108.9 102.4 98.9 98.3
         Oct 114.3 112.8 123.0 109.6 103.0 99.5 98.7
         Nov 114.0 112.5 108.0 109.0 122.9 109.3 94.6 87.6 106.1 p 92.3 102.8 99.4 98.6
         Dec 113.0 111.2 121.7 108.0 102.6 99.0 98.2
2010          Jan 110.8 108.9 119.1 105.5 101.6 97.7 96.6
         Feb 108.0 106.1 p 102.8 p 103.5 116.2 102.7 p 92.8 p 87.4 101.4 p 90.4 100.5 96.3 95.1
         Mar 107.4 105.7 115.2 102.0 100.5 96.0 94.6
         Apr 106.1 104.5 113.5 100.5 99.8 95.2 93.6
         May 102.8 101.4 p 97.7 p 97.9 109.9 p 97.4 p 90.9 p 87.4 96.5 p 88.4 98.4 93.8 92.0
         June 100.7 99.4 107.7 p 95.5 97.2 92.7 90.9
         July 102.5 p 101.1 109.9 p 97.5 97.9 93.6 91.9
         Aug 102.1 p 100.6 ... ... 109.5 p 97.0 ... ... ... ... 97.6 93.3 91.6
         Sep 102.5 p 100.9 110.0 p 97.2 97.8 93.4 91.7
         Oct 106.1 p 104.3 113.8 p 100.4 99.4 94.9 93.4
*The effective exchange rate corresponds to the weighted external value of States. Where price and wage indices were not available, estimates were
the currency concerned. The method of calculating the indicators of the used. — 2ECB calculations. This group includes not only the countries
German economy’s price competitiveness is consistent with the procedure belonging to the EER-21 group (see footnote 1) but also Algeria, Argentina,
used by the ECB to compute the effective exchange rates of the euro (see Brazil, Chile, Croatia, Iceland, India, Indonesia, Israel, Malaysia, Mexico,Monthly Report, November 2001, pp  50-53, May 2007, pp  31-35 and May Morocco, New Zealand, Philippines, Russian Federation, South Africa,2008, p  40). For details of the methodology see ECB, Monthly Bulletin, Taiwan, Thailand, Turkey and Venezuela. — 3Annual and quarterly
January 2010, pp S93 − S94 as well as the ECB’s Occasional Paper No  2, averages. — 4Euro-area countries (from 2001 including Greece, from 2007
which can be downloaded from the ECB’s website (www.ecb.int). A decline including Slovenia, from 2008 including Cyprus and Malta, from 2009in the figures implies an increase in competitiveness. — 1ECB calculations including Slovakia) as well as the non-euro-area countries (Canada,
are based on the weighted averages of the changes in the bilateral Denmark, Japan, Norway, Sweden, Switzerland, United Kingdom andexchange rates of the euro against the currencies of the following countries: United States). — 5Euro-area countries and countries belonging to the
Australia, Bulgaria, Canada, China, Czech Republic, Denmark, Estonia, Hong EER-21 group. — 6Owing to missing data for the deflator of total sales,
Kong, Hungary, Japan, Latvia, Lithuania, Norway, Poland, Romania, China is not included in this calculation. — 7Euro-area countries and
Singapore, South Korea, Sweden, Switzerland, United Kingdom and United countries belonging to the EER-41 group (see footnote 2). 
76*XI  External sector

Overview of
publications
by the Deutsche
BundesbankThis overview provides information
about selected recent economic and
statistical publications by the Deutsche
Bundesbank. Unless otherwise indi-
cated, these publications are available
in both English and German, in printed
form and on the Bundesbank’s web-
site.
The publications are available free of
charge from the Communication Div-
ision. For a small fee to cover costs, a
file which is updated monthly and
contains approximately 40,000 time
series published by the Bundesbank
can be obtained on magnetic tape cas-
sette or CD-ROM from the Division
Statistical data processing, math-
ematical methods. Orders should be
sent, in writing, to one of the ad-
dresses listed on the reverse of the title
page. Selected time series can also be
downloaded from the internet.
Annual Report
Financial Stability Review
Monthly Report
For information on the articles published between
1990 and 2009 see the index attached to the Janu-
ary 2010 Monthly Report.
77*DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2010

Monthly Report articles
December 2009
– Outlook for the German economy – macroeco-
nomic projections for 2010 and 2011
– Financial integration and risk sharing in the
euro area – longer-term trends and impact of
the financial crisis
– International cooperation in the area of
ongoing banking supervision
January 2010
– German enterprises’ profitability and financing
in 2008
– Price-level targeting as a monetary policy strat-
egy
February 2010
– The current economic situation in Germany
March 2010
– German balance of payments in 2009
– The use of cash and other payment instru-
ments – a behavioural study using micro data
– The Treaty of Lisbon
– Financing and representation in the Inter-
national Monetary Fund
April 2010
– Government debt and interest payment
burden in Germany
– Emerging markets in the financial crisis: the
effect of cross-border bank loans
May 2010
– The current economic situation in GermanyJune 2010
– Outlook for the German economy – macroeco-
nomic projections for 2010 and 2011
– Uncertainty of macroeconomic forecasts
– Extended investment cycle with stable prices:
supply and demand in the German housing
market from a longer-term perspective
– The whole and its parts: problems with the
aggregation of seasonally adjusted data
July 2010
– On the problems of macroeconomic imbal-
ances in the euro area
– Nominal and real exchange rate movements
during the financial crisis
– Deutsche Bundesbank Spring Conference
2010 – International risk sharing and global
imbalances
August 2010
– The current economic situation in Germany
September 2010
– The performance of German credit institutions
in 2009
– The Act Modernising Accounting Law from a
banking supervision perspective
– Supervisory disclosure under Pillar 3 of BaselII
October 2010
– Germany in the financial and economic crisis
November 2010
– The current economic situation in Germany
78*DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
EUROSYSTEM
Monthly Report
November 2010

Statistical Supplements to the
Monthly Report
1 Banking statistics1, 2
2 Capital market statistics1, 2
3 Balance of payments statistics1, 2
4 Seasonally adjusted business statistics1, 2
5 Exchange rate statistics2
Special Publications
Makro-/C246konometrisches Mehr-L/C228nder-Modell,
November 19963
Europ/C228ische Organisationen und Gremien im Be-
reich von W/C228hrung und Wirtschaft, May 19973
Die Zahlungsbilanz der ehemaligen DDR 1975 bis
1989, August 19993
The market for German Federal securities,
May 2000
Macro-Econometric Multi-Country Model: MEMMOD,
June 2000
Bundesbank Act, September 2002
Weltweite Organisationen und Gremien im Bereich
von W/C228hrung und Wirtschaft, March 20033
Die Europ/C228ische Union: Grundlagen und Politik-
bereiche außerhalb der Wirtschafts- und W/C228h-
rungsunion, April 20053
Die Deutsche Bundesbank – Aufgabenfelder,
rechtlicher Rahmen, Geschichte, April 20063
European economic and monetary union,
April 2008
Special Statistical Publications*o
1 Banking statistics guidelines and customer clas-
sification, July 200822 Bankenstatistik Kundensystematik Firmenver-
zeichnisse, September 20102, 3
3 Aufbau der bankstatistischen Tabellen,
July 20082, 3
4 Financial accounts for Germany 1991 to 2009,
June 20102
5 Extrapolated results from financial statements
of German enterprises 1994 to 2003, March
20062
6 Verh/C228ltniszahlen aus Jahresabschl/C252ssen deut-
scher Unternehmen von 2006 bis 2007, May
20102, 3
7 Notes on the coding list for the balance of pay-
ments statistics, March 20092
8 The balance of payments statistics of the Fed-
eral Republic of Germany, 2nd edition,
February 1991o
9 Securities deposits,
August 2005
10 Foreign direct investment stock statistics,
April 20101, 2
11 Balance of payments by region,
August 20102
12 Technologische Dienstleistungen in der Zah-
lungsbilanz, June 20083
79*DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2010
1Only the headings and explanatory notes to the data
contained in the German originals are available in English.
2Available on the website only.
3Available in German only.*Unless stated otherwise, these publications are avail-
able on the Bundesbank’s website in German and Eng-
lish.
oNot available on the website.

80*DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
EUROSYSTEM
Monthly Report
November 2010
Discussion Papers*
Series 1
Economic Studies
13/2010
Extraordinary measures in extraordinary times –
public measures in support of the financial sector
in the EU and the United States
14/2010
The discontinuous integration of Western Europe’s
heterogeneous market for corporate control from
1995 to 2007
15/2010
Bubbles and incentives: a post-mortem of the
Neuer Markt in Germany
16/2010
Rapid demographic change and the allocation of
public education resources: evidence from East
Germany
17/2010
The determinants of cross-border bank flows to
emerging markets – new empirical evidence on
the spread of financial crisis
18/2010
Government expenditures and unemployment: a
DSGE perspective
19/2010
NAIRU estimates for Germany: new evidence on
the inflation-unemployment trade-off
21/2010
How useful is the carry-over effect for short-term
economic forecasting?
22/2010
Deep habits and the macroeconomic effects of
government debtSeries 2
Banking and Financial Studies
04/2010
What drives portfolio investments of German
banks in emerging capital markets?
05/2010
Bank liquidity creation and risk taking during dis-
tress
06/2010
Performance and regulatory effects of non-compli-
ant loans in German synthetic mortgage-backed
securities transactions
07/2010
Bank’s exposure to interest rate risk, their earnings
from term transformation, and the dynamics of
the term structure
08/2010
Completeness, interconnectedness and distribu-
tion of interbank exposures – a parameterized
analysis of the stability of financial networks
09/2010
Do banks benefit from internationalization? Re-
visiting the market power-risk nexus
Banking legislation
1 Bundesbank Act and Statute of the European
System of Central Banks and of the European
Central Bank, June 1998
2 Gesetz /C252ber das Kreditwesen, February 20093
2a Solvabilit/C228ts- und Liquidit/C228tsverordnung, Feb-
ruary 20083
*Discussion Papers which appeared from 2000 onwards
are available on the website.
For footnotes, see p 79*.

