MONTHLY REPORT
AUGUST 	 SEPTEMBER	 OCTOBER	 NOVEMBER	 DECEMBER
2011
Vol	63	
No	8

Deutsche 	Bundesbank 	
Wilhelm-Epstein-Strasse 	14	
60431 	Frankfurt 	am	Main 	
Germany
Postal 	address 	
Postfach 	10	06	02	
60006 	Frankfurt 	am	Main 	
Germany
Tel	 +49 	69	9566-0
Fax	 +49 	69	9566 	3077
Telex	 41227 	within 	Germany 	
	 414431 	from 	abroad
http://www.bundesbank.de
Reproduction 	permitted 	only	if	source 	is	stated.
ISSN	0418-8292 	(print 	edition) 	
ISSN	1862-1325 	(online 	edition)
The	German 	original 	of	this	Monthly Report 	
went 	to	press 	at	11	am	on	19	August 	2011.Annual 	and	weekly 	publishing 	schedules 	for	
selected 	statistics 	of	the	Deutsche 	Bundes -
bank 	can	be	downloaded 	from 	our	website. 	
The	statistical 	data	are	also	published 	on	the	
website.
The	Monthly Report 	is	published 	by	the	
	Deutsche 	Bundesbank, 	Frankfurt 	am	Main, 		
by	virtue 	of	section 	18	of	the	Bundesbank 		
Act.	It	is	available 	to	interested 	parties 	free	of	
charge.
This	is	a	translation 	of	the	original 	German -
language 	version, 	which 	is	the	sole	authorita -
tive	text.
DEUTSCHE  
BUNDESBANK
E U R O S Y S T E M
Monthly Report  
August 2011

ContentsThe current economic situation  
in Germany 	 5
Overview 	 6
Global 	and	European 	setting 	 12
Is the global Purchasing Managers’  
Index pointing to a further slowdown  
in industrial activity?  14
The latest revision of the US national 
 accounts  18
Monetary 	policy 	and	banking 	business 	25
Money market management and  
liquidity needs  28
Financial 	markets 	 37
Economic 	conditions 	in	Germany 	 47
Public 	finances 	 59
Decisions taken by the heads of state  
or government of the euro area and  
the institutions of the European Union  
on 21 July 2011  62
Proposal for an effective private sector 
 involvement for bond issues from  
mid-2013 onwards  68
Sustainable contribution rate  
for the Federal Employment Agency  76
Statistical Section 	 1*
Key	economic 	data	for	the	euro	area	 5*
Overall 	monetary 	survey 	in	the	euro	area	8*
Consolidated 	financial 	statement 	
of	the	Eurosystem 	 16*
Banks 	 20*DEUTSCHE  
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report  
August 2011

Minimum 	reserves 	 42*
Interest 	rates 	 43*
Capital 	market 	 48*
Financial 	accounts 	 52*
Public 	finances 	in	Germany 	 54*
Economic 	conditions 	in	Germany 	 61*
External 	sector 	 68*
Overview of publications by the  
Deutsche Bundesbank 	 77*
Abbreviations and symbols
e	 Estimated
p	 Provisional
pe	 Partly 	estimated
r	 Revised
…	 Data 	available 	at	a	later	date
.	 Data 	unknown, 	not	to	be	published 	or
not	meaningful
0	 Less 	than	0.5	but	more 	than	nil
–	 Nil
Discrepancies 	in	the	totals 	are	due	to	rounding.
DEUTSCHE  
BUNDESBANK
E U R O S Y S T E M
Monthly Report  
August 2011

The current economic 
situation in GermanyDEUTSCHE  
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report  
August 2011
5

OverviewGerman economy slowed in second 
 quarter as expected, but underlying 
trend remains positive
The	global 	economy 	was	characterised 	by	
muted 	growth 	in	the	second 	quarter. 	However, 	
much 	of	this	was	due	to	temporary 	factors 	that	
obscured 	the	basically 	ongoing 	positive 	under -
lying 	trend. 	Moreover, 	the	influence 	of	these 	
short-term 	negative 	factors 	waned 	consider -
ably	towards 	the	end	of	the	reporting 	period. 	
The	disruptions 	to	Japanese 	production, 	and	
carmakers 	in	particular, 	following 	the	natural 	
disaster 	of	mid-March 	have 	now	largely 	been 	
eliminated. 	The	considerable 	erosion 	of	pur-
chasing 	power 	as	a	result 	of	rising 	energy 	and	
food 	prices 	in	the	latter 	part	of	2010 	and	early 	
part	of	2011 	also	weighed 	considerably 	on	the	
global 	economy. 	Both 	effects 	were 	also	a	key	
feature 	in	the	dulled 	economic 	momentum 	in	
the	United 	States.
In	addition 	to	these 	temporary 	constraints 	on	
the	global 	upturn, 	longer-term 	factors 	also	
played 	a	role,	however. 	These 	include 	appreci -
able	interest 	rate	hikes 	and	other 	central 	bank 	
measures 	to	reduce 	the	expansionary 	bias	of	
monetary 	policy 	that	the	emerging 	market 	
economies 	used	to	avert 	the	danger 	of	second-
round 	inflation 	effects. 	In	several 	advanced 	
economies, 	the	necessary 	consolidation 	efforts 	
are	having 	a	dampening 	effect.
Overall, 	there 	is	still	much 	evidence 	suggesting 	
that	the	global 	economic 	upswing 	remains 	
intact 	and	that	worldwide 	growth 	will	remain 	
robust 	next	year.	Nonetheless, 	there 	are	doubt -
less	risks, 	not	least	in	connection 	with	a	loss	of	Global 
economy
DEUTSCHE  
BUNDESBANK
E U R O S Y S T E M
Monthly Report  
August 2011
6

confidence 	in	the	long-term 	sustainability 	of	
public	finances	in	several	countries.
Financial 	market 	players 	have 	been 	monitoring	
not	only	the	slowdown 	of	the	global 	economy	
but	also,	increasingly, 	the	large 	sovereign 	debt	
burden 	facing 	some 	developed 	countries. 	In	
Europe, 	the	markets 	were 	only	temporarily	
calmed	 by	the	news	 that	 Greek	 solvency	 is	to	
be	assured	 by	another	 rescue	 package	 agreed	
by	the	heads	 of	state	 or	government	 in	mid-
July.	At	the	beginning 	of	August, 	the	situation	
on	the	financial	 markets	 deteriorated	 further.	
Against 	the	backdrop 	of	a	fierce 	parliamentary	
debate	 on	whether	 to	raise	 the	statutory	 debt	
ceiling, 	the	United 	States 	suffered 	its	–	first	
ever	–	credit 	downgrade 	by	a	rating 	agency. 	In	
the	euro	area, 	meanwhile, 	Spanish 	bond 	yields	
rose	 perceptibly,	 as	did	yields	 on	bonds	 issued	
by	heavily	 indebted	 Italy.	 In	this	environment,	
share 	prices 	around 	the	world 	tumbled, 	and	
yields	 on	the	government	 bonds	 of	the	major	
industrial 	nations 	weakened 	noticeably 	as	a	
result	of	safe	haven	inflows.
Market 	participants’ 	uncertainty 	regarding 	eco-
nomic	 developments	 on	both	 sides	 of	the	At-
lantic	 caused	 the	euro-dollar	 exchange	 rate	to	
fluctuate 	sharply, 	and	both 	currencies 	depreci -
ated	against 	the	yen	and,	in	particular, 	the	
Swiss	franc.
With	 the	sovereign	 debt	 crisis	 worsening	 and	
uncertainty	 rife	on	the	financial	 markets,	 the	
Eurosystem’s	 monetary	 policymakers	 face	 the	
challenge,	 in	keeping	 with	 their	 mandate,	 of	
meeting 	banks’ 	increased 	demand 	for	liquidity	
while 	simultaneously 	addressing 	the	threats	
posed	 to	price	 stability	 in	an	appropriate	 and	timely	 manner.	 Once	 again,	 the	clear	 segrega -
tion	of	liquidity-providing 	measures, 	on	the	
one	hand,	 and	the	monetary	 policy	 stance	 as	
expressed 	in	interest 	rate	decisions, 	on	the	
other,	has	proved	the	right	course	of	action.
During	 the	second	 quarter,	 inflation	 as	meas -
ured	by	the	Harmonised 	Index 	of	Consumer	
Prices	 (HICP)	 remained	 well	above	 2%,	 mainly	
on	account	 of	energy	 and	commodity	 prices.	
In	order 	to	combat 	the	resultant 	medium-term	
upside	 risks	 to	price	 stability	 and	anchor	 infla-
tion	expectations 	at	a	level	consistent 	with	
price 	stability, 	the	Governing 	Council 	of	the	
ECB	decided 	in	July	that, 	following 	the	interest	
rate	increase 	in	April, 	its	accommodative 	mon-
etary	policy	required	further	tightening.
At	the	start	of	the	second 	quarter 	of	2011,	
banks 	initially 	continued 	to	reduce 	their	surplus	
liquidity, 	a	course 	they	had	been 	pursuing 	since	
the	beginning 	of	the	year.	However, 	the	grow -
ing	uncertainty 	on	the	financial 	markets 	halted	
this	temporary 	normalisation 	of	the	money	
market 	in	mid-June. 	Since 	then, 	banks’ 	rapidly	
increasing 	borrowing 	from 	the	Eurosystem 	has	
caused	 excess	 liquidity	 in	the	banking	 system	
to	reach 	a	level	last	observed 	in	the	fourth	
quarter 	of	2010. 	Moreover, 	banks 	resorted	
more 	and	more 	to	frontloading 	their	minimum	
reserve 	requirement, 	which 	meant 	that	money	
market 	rates 	increasingly 	tended 	to	fall	over	
the	course 	of	each 	maintenance 	period 	in	a	
pattern	 that	 is	typical	 of	situations	 character -
ised	by	abundant	excess	liquidity.
Faced 	with	renewed 	tensions 	in	some 	euro-
area	 financial	 markets,	 the	Governing	 Council	
decided	 in	early	 August	 to	continue	 conduct -Financial 
markets
Monetary 
policyDEUTSCHE  
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report  
August 2011
7

ing	all	refinancing 	operations 	as	fixed-rate 	
tenders 	with	full	allotment 	for	as	long	as	
needed, 	and	at	least	until	the	end	of	2011, 	and	
to	conduct 	a	one-off 	supplementary 	longer-
term 	refinancing 	operation 	at	the	beginning 	
of	August 	to	provide 	liquidity 	for	approxi -
mately 	six	months. 	With 	the	sovereign 	debt	
crisis 	spreading 	to	other 	euro-area 	member 	
states, 	the	Governing 	Council 	also	reactivated 	
its	Securities 	Markets 	Programme 	(SMP). 	This	
would, 	it	argued, 	help	restore 	better 	monetary 	
policy 	transmission.
The	increase 	in	the	M3	money 	aggregate 	that	
has	been 	apparent 	since 	the	spring 	of	2010 	
continued 	in	the	second 	quarter 	of	2011, 	al-
though 	the	pace 	of	growth 	remained 	moder -
ate.	As	regards 	the	counterparts 	of	M3,	loans 	
to	the	domestic 	private 	sector 	expanded 	fur-
ther,	albeit 	slightly 	less	rapidly 	than	in	the	pre-
vious 	quarter. 	Broken 	down 	by	sector, 	growth 	
was	due	in	equal 	measure 	to	an	increase 	in	
loans 	to	non-financial 	corporations 	and	to	
households.
The	German 	economy 	continued 	its	upswing 	
in	the	second 	quarter 	of	2011 	at	a	muted 	pace, 	
as	anticipated. 	According 	to	an	initial 	estimate 	
by	the	Federal 	Statistical 	Office, 	real	gross 	do-
mestic 	product 	(GDP) 	in	the	second 	quarter, 	
after 	seasonal 	and	calendar 	adjustment, 	ex-
panded 	by	0.1 % 	on	the	first	quarter, 	which 	had	
recorded 	very	strong 	growth 	of	1.3%. 	This	
slower 	growth 	rate	is	in	line	with	the	Bundes -
bank’s 	June	forecast. 	The	volatile 	pattern 	in	the	
first	half	of	the	year	can	be	attributed 	in	part	
to	the	weather-related 	output 	losses 	at	the	end	
of	last	year.	The	resultant 	catching-up 	effects, 	
which 	were 	fairly 	pronounced 	in	some 	areas 	of	the	economy, 	had	boosted 	output 	above 	all	
in	the	first	few	months 	of	this	year.
The	weak 	growth 	in	the	second 	quarter 	is	
therefore 	not	in	itself 	proof 	that	the	German 	
economy’s 	dynamics 	have 	become 	less	stable 	
as	a	result 	of	the	foreseeable 	weakening 	of	
foreign 	demand 	and	heightened 	uncertainty.
German 	enterprises 	further 	expanded 	foreign 	
sales 	in	the	second 	quarter. 	In	real	terms, 	the	
second-quarter 	increase 	was	only	marginally 	
smaller 	than	that	of	the	previous 	period; 	im-
ports 	of	goods 	even 	rose	more 	strongly 	in	the	
second 	quarter 	in	real	terms 	than	in	the	first.	
Germany’s 	euro-area 	partner 	countries 	were 	
once 	again 	beneficiaries 	of	the	German 	econ -
omy’s 	strong 	import 	demand. 	The	country’s 	
function 	as	a	pacemaker 	for	the	entire 	euro	
area	therefore 	remains 	intact 	at	the	current 	
end.
Within 	Germany, 	corporate 	investment 	geared 	
to	expansion 	was	a	main 	driver 	of	economic 	
activity. 	Replacing 	and	adding 	to	machinery 	
and	other 	equipment 	were 	the	main 	priorities. 	
Although 	business 	expectations 	were 	not	quite 	
as	optimistic 	towards 	the	end	of	the	reporting 	
period, 	many 	industries 	continued 	to	extend 	
their 	production 	facilities 	in	the	light	of	the	
current 	high	level	of	capacity 	utilisation 	of	tan-
gible 	fixed 	assets. 	This	is	likely 	to	have 	been 	
fuelled 	by	the	still	positive 	investment 	environ -
ment, 	which 	is	characterised, 	amongst 	other 	
things, 	by	favourable 	earnings 	developments 	
as	well	as	advantageous 	external 	funding 	con-
ditions.Germany
DEUTSCHE  
BUNDESBANK
E U R O S Y S T E M
Monthly Report  
August 2011
8

In	recent	 months,	 consumer	 demand	 is	likely	
to	have	 been	 dented	 by	the	strained	 price	 cli-
mate 	despite 	the	favourable 	economic 	and	
labour 	market 	situation 	in	Germany. 	For	in-
stance,	 fuel	prices	 –	which	 are	a	sensitive	 and	
closely 	monitored 	barometer 	–	were 	high	at	
the	beginning 	of	the	second 	quarter, 	which	
could 	have	weighed 	on	households’ 	propensity	
to	consume.
The	labour 	market 	revival 	continued 	in	the	sec-
ond	quarter 	of	2011. 	A	key	feature 	of	the	posi-
tive	employment	 trend	 was	once	 again	 an	in-
crease	 in	jobs	 subject	 to	social	 security	 contri -
butions.	 Unemployment	 fell	noticeably	 again	
in	the	second	 quarter.	 The	official	 jobless	 stat-
istics	 probably	 understate	 the	positive	 impact	
of	cyclical 	factors, 	as	active 	labour 	market	
measures 	have 	concurrently 	been 	reduced.	
Thus, 	overall 	underemployment 	fell	twice 	as	
much	 year	 on	year	 as	the	official	 measure	 of	
unemployment. 	Leading 	indicators 	suggest	
that	the	favourable 	labour 	market 	develop -
ment	 will	continue	 for	the	time	 being,	 albeit	
probably	at	a	slightly	more	moderate	pace.
The	higher 	collective 	wage 	agreements 	in	2011	
compared	 with	 2010	 on	the	back	 of	the	very	
buoyant	 labour	 market	 situation	 are	gradually	
affecting 	the	overall 	level	of	negotiated 	wages.	
Moreover, 	effective 	wages 	are	likely 	to	have	
outpaced	 negotiated	 wages	 as	hours	 worked	
increased	 further,	 as	was	 also	 the	case	 in	the	
preceding	quarters.
Nevertheless, 	prices 	at	the	various 	stages 	of	
the	economy 	either 	fell	during 	the	second	
quarter	 or	their	 increase	 levelled	 off.	This	was	
mainly 	caused 	by	falling 	crude 	oil	prices. 	Lower	prices 	for	refined 	petroleum 	products 	also	
dampened 	consumer 	price 	inflation 	during 	the	
second	 quarter.	 On	average,	 consumer	 prices	
nonetheless	 rose	 over	 the	spring	 months.	 The	
rate	of	price 	increase 	for	components 	deter -
mined 	by	domestic 	costs 	is	likely 	to	pick	up	
again	 slowly	 in	the	near	 future.	 However,	 the	
burden	 on	the	consumer	 should	 be	limited,	 as	
long	 as	crude	 oil	prices	 do	not	rebound	 per-
ceptibly.
Consumer 	sentiment 	remains 	strong. 	Provided	
uncertainty	 remains	 limited,	 there	 is	a	chance	
that	 the	very	 positive	 labour	 market	 outlook	
and	realised 	or	foreseeable 	wage 	increases 	will	
continue 	to	dominate 	the	consumer 	climate 	in	
Germany.
As	things	 currently	 stand,	 the	German	 econ -
omy	 looks	 set	to	maintain	 its	positive	 underly -
ing	economic	 trend	 in	the	second	 half	of	the	
year,	albeit 	at	a	slightly 	slower 	pace. 	The	previ -
ously 	extraordinarily 	optimistic 	business 	expec -
tations	 have	 been	 lowered	 considerably,	 and	
incoming 	orders 	–	excluding 	large 	orders 	–	
have 	also	lost	momentum. 	Moreover, 	there 	are	
a	number	 of	global	 risk	factors	 such	 as	uncer -
tainty	 as	to	what	 lies	ahead	 for	the	US	econ -
omy	and	a	potential 	cyclical 	slowing 	in	the	
emerging 	markets. 	In	addition, 	increasingly 	jit-
tery	global	 financial	 markets	 and	the	ongoing	
sovereign 	debt 	problems 	could 	erode 	confi -
dence.	 Whereas	 the	external	 setting	 has	be-
come	 less	favourable,	 the	domestic	 economy	
is	still	very	 robust,	 largely	 as	a	result	 of	enter -
prises’ 	marked 	willingness 	to	invest, 	sharply	
higher	 demand	 in	housing	 construction	 in	re-
cent	months 	and	the	favourable 	labour 	market	
outlook.	 In	addition,	 if	actual	 growth	 largely	DEUTSCHE  
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report  
August 2011
9

matches 	its	potential 	path	–	as	looks 	likely 	at	
the	moment 	–	this	should 	help	counteract 	the	
risk	of	increasing 	tensions 	and	supply 	short -
ages 	within 	the	domestic 	economy. 	Overall 	
therefore, 	real	GDP	growth 	in	the	magnitude 	
of	3%	may	still	be	expected 	for	the	full	year.
Following 	a	sharp 	deterioration 	in	German 	
public 	finances 	over	the	past	two	years, 	a	
marked 	decline 	in	the	deficit 	ratio	is	expected 	
in	2011, 	provided 	the	financial 	crisis 	and	the	
sovereign 	debt	crisis 	do	not	cause 	any	major 	
new	strains. 	The	German 	government’s 	most 	
recent 	deficit 	forecast 	of	1½% 	appears 	realistic. 	
The	buoyant 	macroeconomic 	development 	is	
considerably 	facilitating 	the	task	of	deficit 	re-
duction. 	All	other 	things 	being 	equal, 	the	
lower 	deficit, 	coupled 	with	relatively 	high	
nominal 	GDP	growth, 	should 	bring 	the	debt	
ratio	down 	considerably 	from 	its	record 	2010 	
level.
From 	a	current 	perspective 	the	deficit 	is	ex-
pected 	to	contract 	further 	in	2012, 	albeit 	at	a	
slower 	pace. 	Lower 	deficits 	than	in	previous 	
years 	should 	not,	however, 	be	allowed 	to	mask 	
the	fact	that	fiscal 	consolidation 	is	far	from 	
complete. 	Even 	in	the	economic 	upturn 	the	
deficit 	will	still	be	substantial. 	Moreover, 	the	
debt	ratio	is	very	high, 	and	demographic 	trends 	
will	soon 	place 	an	additional 	strain 	on	public 	
coffers. 	Therefore, 	the	medium-term 	objective 	
of	a	close-to-balance 	structural 	budget 	ought 	
to	be	achieved 	rapidly 	and,	given 	a	favourable 	
overall 	economic 	setting, 	a	surplus 	should 	also	
be	recorded. 	Conversely, 	cuts	in	tax	and	social 	
contribution 	rates 	are	not	appropriate 	at	this	
juncture 	unless 	they	are	fully	funded 	by	coun -
terfinancing 	measures. 	They 	would 	delay 	the	consolidation 	of	central 	and	state 	government 	
budgets 	required 	under 	the	national 	debt 	
brake, 	and	the	opportunity 	for	consolidation 	
provided 	by	the	currently 	favourable 	conditions 	
might 	be	missed. 	In	view	of	the	European 	de-
bate	on	the	introduction 	of	national 	debt 	
brakes, 	it	is	particularly 	important 	that	the	Ger-
man	rules 	be	strictly 	implemented 	at	central 	
and	state 	government 	level. 	Lax	interpretation 	
should 	be	avoided, 	and	no	attempt 	should 	be	
made 	to	circumvent 	the	rules.
The	sovereign 	debt	crisis 	in	several 	euro-area 	
states 	underscores 	the	supreme 	importance 	of	
sound 	public 	finances 	for	a	stability-oriented 	
monetary 	union. 	On	21 July 	2011, 	the	heads 	
of	state 	or	government 	of	the	euro	area	and	
the	institutions 	of	the	European 	Union 	took	
further 	steps 	towards 	containing 	the	crisis. 	
They 	resolved 	to	appreciably 	extend 	the	set	of	
instruments 	available 	to	the	European 	Financial 	
Stability 	Facility 	(EFSF) 	and	the	European 	Stabil -
ity	Mechanism 	(ESM). 	They 	are	to	be	able	to	
intervene 	on	a	precautionary 	basis, 	allowed 	to	
recapitalise 	financial 	institutions 	through 	loans, 	
including 	to	non-programme 	countries, 	and	
have 	the	option 	of	buying 	government 	bonds 	
in	secondary 	markets. 	Yet	the	aid	is	still	to	be	
activated 	only	as	a	measure 	of	last	resort 	to	
avert 	an	immediate 	risk	to	the	stability 	of	the	
euro	area	as	a	whole, 	and	financial 	assistance 	
must 	be	subject 	to	strict 	conditionality. 	Further -
more, 	assistance 	for	Greece 	has	been 	ex-
panded 	significantly 	by	announcing 	an	add-
itional 	€109 	billion 	aid	programme, 	which 	is	
to	run	until	the	end	of	2014. 	Private 	creditors 	
are	to	be	involved 	in	financing 	the	measures, 	
although 	their	exposure 	will,	at	the	same 	time, 	
be	partly 	underwritten 	by	the	countries 	pro-Public finances
DEUTSCHE  
BUNDESBANK
E U R O S Y S T E M
Monthly Report  
August 2011
10

viding 	the	assistance. 	The	maturity 	of	future	
EFSF	 aid	loans	 to	Greece,	 Portugal	 and	Ireland	
was	extended	 to	15	to	30	years;	 and	the	EFSF	
will	largely 	refrain 	from 	adding 	an	interest 	rate	
premium	to	its	cost	of	funding.
The	recent	 resolutions	 transfer	 sizeable	 addi-
tional 	risks	to	the	countries 	providing 	assist -
ance	 and	their	 taxpayers,	 and	go	a	long	 way	
towards 	communitising 	risks	caused 	by	un-
sound	 public	 finances	 and	misguided	 macro-
economic 	policies 	in	individual 	euro-area 	coun -
tries. 	This	weakens 	the	foundations 	of	monet -
ary	union,	 which	 is	based	 on	the	principles	 of	
national	 fiscal	 responsibility	 and	the	disciplin -
ing	effect	 of	capital	 markets,	 without	 notice -
ably	 increasing	 the	influence	 and	control	 over	
individual	 national	 fiscal	 policies	 as	a	quid pro 
quo.	Overall,	 there	 is	a	risk	that	 the	originally	
agreed 	institutional 	framework 	of	monetary	
union	 will	increasingly	 become	 eroded.	 While	
fiscal	 policy	 will	continue	 to	be	determined	 by	
democratically 	elected 	parliaments 	at	national	level,	 the	resultant 	risks	 and	burdens	 will	in-
creasingly 	be	borne 	by	the	Community 	in	gen-
eral	and	the	financially 	sound 	countries 	in	
particular, 	without 	this	being 	offset 	by	any	con-
crete 	powers 	to	intervene 	in	the	sovereignty 	of	
national 	fiscal 	policies. 	No	comprehensive	
change 	in	the	European 	treaties 	is	currently	
envisaged 	that	would 	democratically 	empower	
a	central	 entity	 to	exert	 some	 control	 over	 na-
tional	 budgetary	 policies.	 This	 means	 there	 is	
a	danger 	that	the	euro-area 	countries’ 	propen -
sity	to	incur 	debt	may	increase 	even 	further,	
and	the	pressure 	on	the	euro 	area’s 	single	
monetary	 policy	 to	adopt	 an	accommodating	
stance 	may	grow. 	Unless 	and	until	a	funda -
mental	 change	 of	regime	 occurs	 involving	 an	
extensive 	surrender 	of	national 	fiscal 	sover -
eignty, 	it	is	imperative 	that	the	no	bail-out 	rule	
that	is	still	enshrined 	in	the	treaties 	and	the	
associated	 disciplining	 function	 of	the	capital	
markets 	be	strengthened, 	and	not	fatally	
weakened.DEUTSCHE  
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report  
August 2011
11

Global and  
European settingWorld economic activity
In	the	second 	quarter 	of	the	year,	global 	growth 	
dynamics 	diminished 	noticeably. 	However, 	this	
was	due	in	part	to	temporary 	factors 	which 	
are	clearly 	visible 	in	the	quarterly 	figures 	but	
have 	since 	lost	influence. 	Although 	the	disrup -
tions 	to	Japanese 	production, 	and	carmakers 	
in	particular, 	following 	the	natural 	disaster 	of	
mid-March 	have 	now	largely 	been 	eliminated, 	
efforts 	to	return 	to	normal 	in	some 	Japanese 	
car	plants 	located 	abroad 	will	probably 	also	
continue 	throughout 	summer. 	The	consider -
able	erosion 	of	purchasing 	power 	as	a	result 	of	
rising 	energy 	and	food 	prices 	in	the	latter 	part	
of	2010 	and	early 	part	of	2011 	also	weighed 	
noticeably 	on	the	global 	economy. 	Both 	effects 	
were 	also	a	key	factor 	in	the	reduced 	economic 	
momentum 	in	the	United 	States.
After 	adjustment 	for	general 	price 	movements, 	
the	price 	per	barrel 	of	Brent 	crude 	oil	reached 	
a	level	last	seen	in	2008 	Q2-Q3 	and	in	autumn 	
1979. 	Subsequently, 	commodity 	markets 	eased 	
slightly; 	prices 	then	fell	considerably 	in	the	first	
half	of	August, 	making 	a	decline 	in	consumer 	
price 	inflation 	likely 	for	the	second 	half	of	the	
year. 	The	renewed 	turmoil 	in	the	financial 	
markets 	caused 	prices 	to	slide	in	the	past	few	
weeks. 	Market 	participants 	have 	been 	held	in	
suspense 	by	the	increased 	uncertainty 	about 	
the	future 	outlook 	for	the	economy 	and	about 	
the	state 	of	public 	budgets 	in	some 	advanced 	
economies.
In	addition 	to	these 	temporary 	constraints 	on	
the	global 	upturn, 	longer-term 	braking 	effects 	
also	played 	a	role,	however. 	These 	include 	the	
perceptible 	interest 	rate	hikes 	and	other 	restric -Global 
economy much 
less dynamic in 
spring
DEUTSCHE  
BUNDESBANK
E U R O S Y S T E M
Monthly Report  
August 2011
12

tive	measures 	taken 	by	central 	banks 	which	
had	become 	necessary, 	above 	all,	in	the	emerg -
ing	market	 economies	 in	order	 to	counter	 the	
danger 	of	second-round 	effects 	with	regard 	to	
price 	developments. 	In	some 	advanced 	econo -
mies, 	ongoing 	consolidation 	efforts 	continued	
to	dampen	 the	pace	 of	recovery.	 The	renewed	
decline 	in	the	global 	Purchasing 	Managers’	
Index 	for	the	manufacturing 	industry 	in	July	
indicates 	that	at	least 	industrial 	activity 	was	
able	to	maintain 	its	slower 	pace 	at	the	start	
of	the	summer	months	(see	box	on	page 14).
Seasonally 	adjusted 	global 	industrial 	output	
fell	in	April	 and	May	 compared	 with	 the	first	
quarter 	of	2011, 	and	international 	goods 	trade	
likewise 	trended 	downwards 	slightly 	(-¼%).	
Weak 	industrial 	activity 	was	broadly 	based	
across	 regions,	 with	 production	 in	the	emerg -
ing	market 	economies 	stagnating 	yet	declining	
by	¾%	 in	the	advanced	 economies.	 However,	
this	was	attributable 	to	the	considerable 	slump	
in	Japanese	 output.	 Excluding	 this	slump,	 in-
dustrial	 output	 of	the	advanced	 economies	 in	
the	April-May	 period	 was	even	 up	somewhat	
compared	 with	 the	first	quarter.	 Similarly,	 ag-
gregate 	economic 	growth 	in	the	United 	States	
and	the	United 	Kingdom 	proceeded 	at	a	tepid	
pace 	in	the	second 	quarter, 	while 	euro-area	
momentum 	slowed 	perceptibly 	after	the	strong	
surge 	in	the	winter 	months. 	At	the	same 	time,	
the	contraction 	of	the	Japanese 	economy 	sub-
sided 	distinctly. 	On	the	whole, 	according 	to	
initial 	estimates 	based 	on	interim 	figures 	for	
the	United	 States,	 Japan,	 the	United	 Kingdom	
and	the	euro	area, 	real	gross 	domestic 	product	
(GDP) 	in	the	industrial 	nations 	rose	once 	again	
by	¼%	after	seasonal	adjustment.Given	 unexpectedly	 weak	 growth,	 in	June	 the	
IMF	reduced	 its	growth	 forecast	 for	the	global	
economy	 published	 in	the	April	 edition	 of	the	
World	 Economic	 Outlook	 slightly	 to	a	rate	 of	
4.3%. 	However, 	it	maintained 	its	projection	
for	2012 	unchanged 	at	4.5%. 	The	revisions	
for	the	current	 year	 are	focused	 on	the	indus -
trial	countries. 	The	downward 	revisions 	for	
growth 	in	Japan, 	the	United 	States 	and	the	
United 	Kingdom 	contrasted 	with	a	percepti -
ble	increase	 in	the	forecast	 for	the	euro	 area,	
which	 primarily	 reflects	 Germany	 and	France’s	
brisk	 growth	 in	the	winter	 months.	 The	fore-
cast	for	developing 	and	emerging 	countries	
was	 increased	 slightly	 to	6.6%	 for	2011	 and	
reduced	 a	bit	to	6.4%	 for	2012.	 The	relatively	
strong	 upward	 revision	 in	real	world	 trade	 by	
0.8	percentage	 point	 to	8.2%	 in	the	current	
year	 is	noteworthy.	 This	is	founded	 on	a	more	
favourable	 outlook	 for	foreign	 trade	 in	devel -
oping 	and	emerging 	countries. 	On	balance,	
the	IMF	sees	the	mid-year 	risks	to	the	fore-
casts	 as	being	 more	 on	the	downside	 than	 in	
early 	spring, 	owing 	to	the	worsening 	of	the	
euro-area	 debt	 crisis	 and	the	rise	of	concerns	
regarding	 the	future	 economic	 outlook	 in	the	
United	States.
After	 rallying	 noticeably	 in	the	2010	 Q4-2011	
Q1	period, 	the	price 	for	a	barrel 	of	Brent	
crude	 peaked	 in	April	 at	slightly	 over	 US$126,	
its	highest	 level	 since	 July	2008.	 After	 taking	
some 	distinct 	hits	in	May, 	it	stabilised 	at	an	
average	 level	 of	US$114	 in	June.	 However,	 on	
average	 over	 the	spring	 months,	 the	price	 of	
Brent	 crude	 was	 still	up	by	11 %	 on	the	quar-
ter	and	47% 	on	the	year. 	One	of	the	main	
reasons	 for	the	slight	 easing	 in	the	crude	 oil	
market	 was	that	 the	political	 unrest	 in	the	oil-Virtual stand-
still in industrial countries’ aggregate outputJune IMF forecast for 2011 revised downwards slightly
Calming in 
commodity markets following sharp price risesDEUTSCHE  
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report  
August 2011
13

Deutsche BundesbankIs the global Purchasing Managers’ Index 
pointing to a further slowdown in industrial activity?
July’s decline in the global Purchasing Managers’ 
Index (PMI) for the manufacturing sector to just 
above the expansion threshold of 50 has been 
taken by many as a signal that output growth 
in this sector is grinding to a halt. Of course, 
such an interpretation of this indicator would 
only be valid if it were closely aligned with 
manufacturing output growth. According to the 
survey design, the PMI should actually reflect the 
monthly change in activity and thus, on account 
of its relatively rapid publication, give a timely 
indication of where the economy is heading. 
However, global industrial output growth, on 
which data are published on a monthly basis 
by the Centraal Planbureau is rather volatile. 
Consequently, the PMI tends to mainly show 
the underlying trend of output growth. The 
correlation is therefore closer if the increase in 
production is considered over a longer period, 
thus reducing the volatility in the reference 
series.1 This, however, diminishes the informative 
value of this indicator with regard to industrial 
production growth at the current end, since it 
largely reflects changes in output that occurred 
in previous months.
In order to be able to directly compare the PMI 
with industrial output growth that has been 
smoothed in this way, they both still need to 
be adjusted for differences in their averages 
and volatilities.2 Up to 2007, the time series that 
have been standardised in this way are actually 
largely identical. During the recession that fol -
lowed, however, the PMI did not fall as much as 
the change in output, and by the same token, it 
has not yet risen as much during the subsequent 
recovery. This could be due to the survey design, 
as the focus is only on the direction, and not the 
size, of the change in activity. Furthermore, the 
picture is no different in qualitative terms if, 
instead of the overall index, the output or new 
orders component is compared with production 
growth.
In addition, the PMI does not appear to fully 
reflect the latest cyclical fluctuations in the glo -bal industrial sector. Its slide towards stagnation 
point in July is therefore to be viewed against the 
fact that already during April and May, average 
global industrial output was even down slightly 
from the first quarter. Of course, the main driv -
ing force behind this decline was the direct and 
indirect effects of the slump in activity in Japan. 
For example, production suspensions at Japanese 
car plants also had an impact on the foreign 
branches of the companies concerned, owing to 
bottlenecks in the supply of intermediate goods. 
As a result, industrial output also suffered in the 
United States and United Kingdom, as well as 
other countries where Japanese car firms oper -
ate production plants. The return to normal in 
the automobile industry is likely to give fresh 
impetus to global production growth in the 
summer months. It is unclear, however, whether 
the deterioration in the PMI over the past few 
months is not just simply an indication of these 
temporary burdens, but rather a weakening 
underlying trend in the manufacturing sector 
(excluding vehicle construction).
1 Measured as the percentage change between the aver -
age of the last three months and that of the previous 
three-month period. — 2 In order to highlight any potential change in the correlation over time, the averages and stan -
dard deviations over the period from 1998 to 2007 were used 
for the standardisation.Global Purchasing Managers’ Index 
for the manufacturing sector and 
the change in global industrial 
output
1998 990001020304050607080910201110864202
–––––+Seasonally adjusted and standardised, 2 monthly
Industrial output 1Purchasing Managers’
Index
DEUTSCHE  
BUNDESBANK
E U R O S Y S T E M
Monthly Report  
August 2011
14

producing 	countries 	of	North 	Africa 	and	the	
Middle 	East	did	not	expand 	any	further 	or	even	
subsided.	 Another	 was	 that	 growing	 signs	 of	
a	global	 economic	 slowdown,	 the	continued	
tightening 	of	monetary 	policy 	in	key	emerging	
market	 economies	 and	the	general	 rise	in	un-
certainty 	on	the	financial 	markets 	put	pressure	
on	prices.	 The	announcement	 of	the	coordin -
ated	 release	 of	strategic	 crude	 oil	reserves	 by	
the	International	 Energy	 Agency	 caused	 only	
a	temporary 	sharp 	drop 	in	the	spot	price. 	In	
the	first	half	of	August, 	however, 	the	escal -
ating	 turbulence	 in	the	financial	 markets	 led	
to	a	considerable	 decline	 in	crude	 oil	prices	 to	
US$109 	by	mid-month. 	The	prices 	of	other	
commodities, 	after 	already 	sagging 	slightly	
from	 a	high	 level	 in	response	 to	economic	 ac-
tivity	 cooling	 off	in	the	past	 few	months,	 fell	
noticeably	 in	the	past	 few	weeks.	 Global	 mar-
ket	prices	 for	food,	 beverages	 and	tobacco	 in	
the	first	half	of	August	 were	 5%	lower	 than	
in	the	spring	 quarter.	 Industrial	 raw	materials	
were	2½%	cheaper.
The	sharp 	increase 	in	energy 	commodity 	prices	
pushed 	consumer 	prices 	in	the	industrial 	coun -
tries	upwards 	anew 	in	spring. 	Year-on-year	
headline 	inflation 	increased 	from 	+2.1 % 	in	the	
first	 quarter	 to	+2.9%.	 However, 	inflation	 in	
the	second 	quarter 	of	the	year,	compared 	with	
the	previous 	three-month 	period 	and	adjusted	
for	seasonal 	influences, 	dropped 	by	nearly	
one-half	 to	½%.	 The	considerable	 decline	 in	
pressure 	from 	energy 	and	food 	contrasted	
with	rising 	core	inflation 	which, 	at	just	over	
½%,	 showed	 the	strongest	 quarterly	 increase	
since 	summer 	2008. 	Annual 	inflation 	under	
this	definition 	remained 	moderate 	at	1.7%	
year-on-year. 	Its	strong 	increase 	in	the	past	few	months	 shows	 clearly,	 however,	 that	 the	
underutilisation 	of	aggregate 	capacity 	that	still	
afflicts	 some	 industrial	 countries	 leaves	 open	
room	 for	upside	 risks	 to	price	 developments.	
The	IMF	once	 again	 revised	 its	2011	 inflation	
forecast 	for	the	advanced 	economies 	upwards	
in	June,	 from	 2.2%	 to	2.6%,	 while	 holding	 its	
forecast	 for	the	other	 countries	 unchanged	 at	
6.9%. 	With 	regard 	to	2012, 	both 	groups 	of	
countries 	are	still	expected 	to	see	declining	
inflation,	however.
Selected emerging market economies
Year-on-year 	real	GDP	growth 	in	China 	fell	
from	 9¾%	 in	the	first	quarter	 to	9½%	 in	the	
second.	 The	fact	that	 the	pace	 of	growth	 de-
clined 	to	such 	a	slight 	extent 	is	remarkable	
given 	the	strains 	the	Chinese 	economy 	was	ex-Consumer price 
inflation up once again in the industrial countries
Chinese growth still strong despite unfavourable special effects1973 75 80 85 90 95 00 05 2011Price of Brent crude oil
Sources: Global Insight, International Mon-
etary  Fund  and  Bundesbank  calcula-tions. — 1 Deflated with the US CPI exclud-
ing  energy  (seasonally  adjusted,  reference 
year: 2010).
Deutsche Bundesbank020406080100120140
NominalUS recessions (NBER)
Real 1US$ per barrel, quarterly averagesDEUTSCHE  
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report  
August 2011
15

posed 	to	during 	the	reporting 	quarter. 	Power 	
supply 	ran	low	in	some 	provinces, 	while 	car	
manufacturing 	is	likely 	to	have 	taken 	a	hit	due	
to	a	lack	of	intermediate 	goods 	from 	Japan. 	
In	addition, 	the	minimum 	reserve 	rates 	for	
banks 	were 	raised 	three 	times, 	and	in	July	the	
People’s 	Bank 	of	China 	raised 	its	policy 	rate	
for	the	fifth	time	in	succession. 	However, 	con-
sumer 	price 	inflation 	once 	again 	accelerated 	
significantly, 	from 	5.4% 	in	March 	to	6.5% 	in	
July.	This	was	due	primarily 	to	a	more 	rapid 	
increase 	in	the	price 	of	food, 	which 	accounts 	
for	one-third 	of	the	goods 	basket. 	However, 	
inflation 	has	also	continued 	to	accelerate 	in	the	
non-food 	sector; 	at	2.9% 	as	this	report 	went 	
to	press, 	it	has	reached 	a	level	which 	is	excep -
tionally 	high	by	Chinese 	standards.
India’s 	economy, 	which 	increased 	its	output 	by	
7¾% 	on	the	year	in	the	first	quarter, 	is	likely 	
to	have 	slowed 	down 	in	the	past	few	months. 	
One	sign	is	that	growth 	of	industrial 	output 	
has	weakened 	perceptibly. 	This	moderation 	
was	due	primarily 	to	slower 	domestic 	demand 	
growth, 	whereas 	India’s 	export 	activity 	con-
tinued 	to	run	full	steam 	ahead. 	The	strong 	
inflationary 	pressure 	to	which 	India 	has	been 	
subjected 	since 	2008 	continued 	throughout 	
the	reporting 	period. 	In	the	second 	quarter, 	
the	consumer 	price 	index 	rose	8.9% 	year-on-
year,	down 	only	minimally 	from 	the	beginning 	
of	the	year.
The	macroeconomic 	upswing 	in	Brazil 	contin -
ued	at	a	fast	pace 	in	the	spring 	months. 	Ac-
cording 	to	the	available 	indicators, 	growth 	was	
supported 	mainly 	by	services. 	By	contrast, 	the	
Brazilian 	industrial 	sector 	was	hit	hard	by	the	
strong 	appreciation 	of	the	currency; 	in	July,	India’s 
economy 
growing at 
slower pace
Brazilian 
i ndustrial sector 
hit by strong 
appreciationConsumer prices in the
industrial countries
Sources:  national  statistics,  Eurostat  and 
Bundesbank  calculations. —  1 USA,  EU-27, 
Japan, Canada, Norway and Switzerland. — 
2 Excluding energy and food; euro area and 
United  Kingdom:  HICP  excluding  energy 
and unprocessed food; Japan: including al-
coholic beverages.
Deutsche Bundesbank2008 2009 2010 201120246
–+++
–20+2+4+6
2024
–++
0+2+4+6
202
–+Quarterly, year-on-year percentage change
Industrial countries, total 1
Headline inflation
Core inflation 2
of which
USA
Euro area
United Kingdom
Japan
DEUTSCHE  
BUNDESBANK
E U R O S Y S T E M
Monthly Report  
August 2011
16

the	real	reached	 its	highest	 value	 against	 the	
US	dollar	 since	 early	 1999.	 In	addition,	 strong	
wage 	increases 	have	been 	eroding 	Brazil’s 	price	
competitiveness 	for	quite 	a	while. 	Whereas 	the	
country’s 	real	goods 	exports 	virtually 	stagnated	
in	the	past	few	years, 	imports 	have 	nearly 	dou-
bled	from 	their	2006 	level. 	However, 	as	the	
terms 	of	trade 	have	improved 	considerably 	ow-
ing	to	sharply 	rising 	commodity 	prices, 	Brazil 	is	
continuing	 to	run	a	clear	 trade	 surplus.	 Con-
sumer 	price 	inflation 	has	accelerated 	slightly	
once	 again	 in	the	past	 few	months,	 reaching	
6.9%	 in	July.	 This	 was	 still	above	 the	central	
bank’s	tolerance	limit	of	6.5%.
The	Russian 	economy’s 	pace 	of	growth 	slowed	
down 	in	the	second 	quarter. 	According 	to	a	
provisional	 estimate	 by	Russia’s	 Federal	 State	
Statistics	 Service,	 year-on-year	 growth	 of	real	
GDP	 fell	from	 4%	in	the	first	quarter	 to	3½%.	
However,	 the	seasonally	 adjusted	 quarter-on-
quarter	 growth	 of	economic	 output	 –	in	the	
absence 	of	current 	official 	data	–	is	likely 	to	
have 	been 	weak 	at	best. 	This	GDP	result 	stands	
in	a	certain	 contrast	 to	the	picture	 painted	 by	
the	monthly	 indicators	 of	economic	 activity	 in	
Russia,	 which	 showed	 seasonally	 adjusted	 in-
dustrial	 output	 picking	 up	in	the	second	 quar-
ter	by	1½%	 from	 its	average	 over	 the	winter	
months. 	Real	retail 	sales, 	too,	rose	distinctly 	as	
a	result	 of	wage	 increases	 and	 a	persistently	
favourable	 employment	 situation.	 Consumer	
price 	inflation 	was	9.0% 	in	July.	Whereas	
food 	price 	inflation 	continued 	to	decelerate,	
inflation	 accelerated	 slightly	 once	 again	 for	all	
other	goods.United States
Economic 	activity 	in	the	United 	States 	re-
mained 	subdued 	in	the	second 	quarter 	of	
2011.	 According	 to	the	extensive	 revisions	 to	
the	national	 accounts,	 the	initially	 rapid	 pace	
of	cyclical 	growth 	diminished 	in	the	second	
half	of	2010,	 reaching	 a	near-standstill	 in	win-
ter	2011 	(see	box	on	pp 18-19). 	Seasonally 	ad-
justed	 quarter-on-quarter	 growth	 of	real	GDP	
in	spring,	 at	¼%,	 was	 only	 somewhat	 higher	
than	in	the	preceding	three-month	period.
This	disappointing 	result 	was	due	mainly 	to	
households’ 	reluctance 	to	purchase, 	though	
this	is	probably	 largely	 the	result	 of	temporary	
factors. 	Real	consumer 	spending 	stagnated	
at	the	previous	 quarter’s	 level.	 Although	 this	
includes 	a	sharp 	drop 	in	car	sales 	owing 	to	
problems 	Japanese 	car	manufacturers 	had	
been 	facing 	with	regard 	to	production 	and	
deliveries,	 the	more	 likely	 culprit,	 in	the	light	
of	a	general	 sluggishness	 in	consumption	 ac-
tivity, 	is	that	continued 	nominal 	increases 	in	
households’ 	disposable 	income 	were 	eroded	
by	inflation. 	The	basket 	of	goods 	on	which	
the	consumer 	price 	index 	is	based 	increased	
in	price,	 after	 eliminating	 seasonal	 influences,	
by	1 %	compared 	to	the	first	quarter 	of	the	
year;	 the	corresponding	 year-on-year	 increase	
even	 accelerated	 from	 +2.1 %	 to	+3.4%.	 Core	
inflation 	(which 	excludes 	energy 	and	food),	
at	+1.5%,	 was	 double	 its	level	 of	half	a	year	
earlier. 	In	addition, 	households 	were 	prob -
ably	 no	longer	 willing	 to	compensate	 for	the	
inflation-related 	tightening 	of	their 	income	
scope 	by	curtailing 	their	saving. 	At	just	over	
5%,	 their	 saving 	ratio	 was	even 	slightly	 higher	
than 	in	the	winter 	months. 	In	this	context,	Recovery in 
Russia less buoyantSluggish GDP growth in spring
Losses in 
purchasing power straining household  consumptionDEUTSCHE  
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report  
August 2011
17

Deutsche BundesbankThe latest revision of the US national accounts
The latest revision of the US national accounts entailed a 
significant downward revision to real GDP growth in the 
first quarter of 2011. Taking this together with the advance 
estimate for the second quarter, a picture now emerges of an 
economy whose output increased only marginally in the first 
half of this year. In order to deduce the implications this may 
have for both the analysis of economic driving forces and the 
future outlook, this box takes a closer look at the statistical 
revisions.
Every year in the summer, the Bureau of Economic Analysis 
(BEA) revises the national accounts estimates for the last three 
years and the first quarter of the current year, in particular to 
take into account newly available data. Previously, corrections 
to earlier periods were carried out only as part of the BEA’s 
comprehensive revisions which took place every five years. In 
the meantime, however, the BEA has adopted a more flex -
ible approach.1 It has now carried out a “flexible” revision 
in which the corrections to some expenditure components of 
GDP cover the period from 2003 onwards. That said, only a 
few changes have been made to the period prior to 2008.
Upon closer inspection of the latest revision, two results in 
particular stand out: the lower level of real GDP at the current 
end and the modified quarterly profile of its growth rates. 
Specifically, economic output in the first quarter of 2011 was 
revised downwards from its previous level by a total of 1½%. 
This now means that, in spring 2011 too, it remained below 
its pre-crisis level to which, according to previous estimates, it 
had already returned in autumn 2010.
Based on the business cycle dates published by the National 
Bureau of Economic Research (NBER), the main contributor 
to this downward revision over time was the unexpected 
severity of the recession (-1 percentage point), with approxi -
mately only ¼ percentage point being deducted each for the 
period prior to the downturn and the current recovery phase. 
In terms of the expenditure breakdown of GDP, around 
half of the downward revision was attributable to private 
consumption, in particular real spending on services, which 
was adjusted to reflect the results of more recent statistical 
surveys. The other half of the reduction stemmed more or less 
equally from lower investment in equipment and software on 
the part of enterprises, a drop in government spending and 
higher imports.In terms of the temporal perspective and the breakdown of 
expenditure components together, the sharper-than-expected 
decline in private consumption during the recession contrib-
uted almost ¾ percentage point to the downward revision of 
GDP and its weaker growth prior to the recession a further 
¼ percentage point. By contrast, the rise in real household 
spending during the current upturn has even been somewhat 
stronger than previously estimated. For example, a year ago it 
was still assumed that private consumption had contributed, 
on average, only one percentage point (in annualised terms) 
to GDP growth over the first four quarters of the recovery. In 
the meantime, its contribution has been revised upwards to 
1½ percentage points, the upshot being that the pattern of 
private consumption during that period now resembles that 
of the two preceding recoveries.2 The revision notwithstand-
ing, real consumer spending has still exceeded its pre-crisis 
level since autumn 2010.
As was the case with private consumption, the latest national 
accounts data show that enterprises’ investment in equipment 
and software slumped much further during the latest recession 
than had been previously estimated. By contrast, government 
spending growth was not weaker until during the recovery. 
The cyclical pattern in changes in inventories was even more 
pronounced than previously published. The temporal pattern 
of quarterly growth rates of real GDP was also revised con -
siderably. Ignoring the direction of the change, the average 
annualised growth rate over the 13-quarter period from the 
first quarter of 2008 to the first quarter of 2011 was corrected 
by almost one percentage point. In terms of the expenditure 
components, primarily movements in inventories and imports 
leap to the eye, with their contributions to the annualised 
growth rate being adjusted by an average of ¾ and one 
percentage point respectively. Of course, if the direction of 
the changes is factored in, the revisions to these components 
largely cancel each other out over time. In the case of imports, 
the change stemmed from a modification of the seasonal 
adjustment method specifically for oil imports. As a result, the 
national accounts data now far better reflect the seasonally 
adjusted real imports of goods data that are published by the 
BEA and the US Census Bureau on a monthly basis.
Consequently, the pattern of real GDP growth over time has 
become much smoother. In particular, the data no longer 
include the marked deceleration in aggregate growth 
reported for spring 2010, which was due primarily to an 
increase in imports, but nevertheless fuelled last year’s debate 
1 See Bureau of Economic Analysis, Improving BEA’s Accounts Through 
Flexible Annual Revisions, Survey of Current Business, June 2008, 
pp 29-32. — 2 See Deutsche Bundesbank, The current economic upturn in the United States in comparison with earlier phases of recovery, 
Monthly Report, August 2010, pp 18-19. — 3 See Deutsche Bundes -
bank, Global and European setting, Monthly Report, November 2010, 
DEUTSCHE  
BUNDESBANK
E U R O S Y S T E M
Monthly Report  
August 2011
18

over the possibility of another recession.3 That said, the 
annualised GDP growth rate for the first quarter of 2011 was 
revised downwards by no less than 1½ percentage points. This 
revision, however, was almost exclusively attributable to the 
adjusted contributions from inventory changes (-1 percent -
age point) and imports (-½ percentage point) and is therefore 
simply likely to be the reversal of revisions made in previous 
quarters.4 According to the latest national accounts data, the 
episode of virtual stagnation at the beginning of the year 
was the result of a sharp decline in government spending, which was due to one-off effects stemming from military 
expenditure and to a large extent sapped growth in private domestic final demand. The more moderate pace of growth 
of the latter is to be viewed against the backdrop of its robust expansion at the end of 2010. Furthermore, the sharp hike in 
oil prices may have already curbed consumption at the begin -
ning of 2011.
These factors are likely to soften the contrast between the 
sluggish overall economic momentum and the strong employ -
ment growth in the private sector at the beginning of this year. Furthermore, it seems plausible that employers briefly 
swallowed lower productivity from their staff on the back of 
temporary supply-side shocks such as the oil price hikes and subsequent delivery problems in the automobile industry. The sharper decline in real GDP during the latest recession is now more in line with the slump in employment at the time.
5
Overall, the latest revision has not affected the basic eco -
nomic picture. Now that the bolstering effect of the inventory cycle has waned, the upturn continues to be driven mainly by private consumption and enterprises’ investment in equipment and software. As things stand at the moment, the 
weakness in consumption growth in the first quarter is likely 
to be largely temporary. The pick-up in motor vehicle sales in July from the depressed level a month earlier and the recent return to more favourable labour market developments are an indication that these strains will disappear. Against this background, it appears unlikely that the US economy will 
edge back into recession in the near future. However, given 
that the construction industry has yet to generate discernible positive stimuli and that government demand will have a dampening impact in the future, too, owing to the need for consolidation, the underlying momentum of economic activ -
ity over the next few quarters may lag behind that recorded in similar expansion periods.
pp 16-17. — 4 Accordingly, the contribution from imports to the down -
ward revision to GDP growth in the first quarter of 2011 is also simply 
likely to be the result of changes in the seasonal pattern. — 5 See Deut-sche Bundesbank, The US labour market in the current cycle, Monthly Report, April 2011, pp 35-51.Main results of the latest revision to the 
national accounts data
2007 2008 2009 2010 2011100101102103104105106107
–0.9–0.6–0.30+0.3+0.6
2008 2009 2010 2011963036
–––++2005 = 100, chain index, seasonally adjusted, log scale
Real GDP
After revisionBefore revisionNBER recession
Contributions of expenditure components
to the revision of GDP in the first quarter of 2011
according to previous cyclical phasesPer-
cent-
age
points
OtherGovern-
ment
spending ImportsChanges
in inven-
toriesPrivate
invest-
ment in
equipment
and
softwarePrivate con-
sumptionRecovery RecessionBefore
the recession
–40–200+20+40Quarter-on-quarter change, seasonally adjusted, annualised
Real goods imports
(Scale reduced)Real GDPAfter revision Before revision
Monthly indicator
%%DEUTSCHE  
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report  
August 2011
19

rising 	uncertainty 	about 	the	development 	of	
public 	finances 	could 	have 	made 	households 	
more 	cautious. 	Moreover, 	the	slackening 	of	
economic 	activity 	also	impacted 	on	the	labour 	
market. 	Employment 	growth 	made 	little	head -
way	in	May	and	June	and	only	picked 	up	steam 	
in	July.	At	9.1 % 	on	average 	over	the	April 	to	
July	period, 	the	unemployment 	rate	was	one-
quarter 	percentage 	point 	higher 	than	in	the	
first	quarter 	of	the	year.
As	is	to	be	expected 	in	an	economy 	that	is	
being 	forced 	to	shoulder 	temporary 	burdens, 	
firms 	continued 	to	perceptibly 	increase 	their	
investment 	in	equipment 	and	software 	in	the	
second 	quarter, 	despite 	households’ 	reluctance 	
to	consume. 	Budgetary 	consolidation 	at	the	
federal, 	state 	and	local 	government 	level, 	
which 	is	now	looming 	and	has	already 	made 	itself 	felt	in	a	renewed 	decline 	in	government 	
spending 	in	the	spring 	months, 	will	involve 	
short-term 	growth 	losses 	yet	is	indispensable 	
over	the	medium 	and	long	term 	in	order 	to	
ensure 	the	macroeconomic 	upturn.
Japan
In	spring, 	seasonally 	adjusted 	real	GDP	in	
Japan, 	according 	to	an	initial 	estimate, 	fell	
from 	the	previous 	quarter 	for	the	third 	con-
secutive 	quarter 	(-¼%). 	On	the	expenditure 	
side,	the	only	factor 	pushing 	towards 	macro -
economic 	contraction 	was	foreign 	trade, 	
whereas 	domestic 	final	demand 	once 	again 	ex-
panded 	perceptibly 	and	inventory 	movements 	
provided 	positive 	stimuli. 	The	time	structure 	of	
key	monthly 	indicators 	of	economic 	activity 	
makes 	it	clear, 	moreover, 	that	the	quarter-on-
quarter 	reduction 	in	activity 	was	still	an	out-
come 	of	the	severe 	slump 	in	March 	and	April. 	
In	the	following 	months, 	Japan’s 	economy 	al-
ready 	returned 	to	a	path	of	steep 	growth. 	In	
June, 	industrial 	production 	went 	up	to	nearly 	
95% 	of	February’s 	output 	level	after 	having 	
fallen 	to	85% 	in	March. 	Delivery 	bottlenecks 	
had	brought, 	in	particular, 	the	manufacture 	of	
motor 	vehicles 	to	a	temporary 	halt.	Automo -
tive	manufacturing 	output 	was	increased 	from 	
41 %	of	February’s 	levels 	in	April 	to	over	81 %	
in	June. 	Demand 	indicators, 	too,	including 	the	
number 	of	new	registrations 	of	cars	as	well	
as	goods 	export 	volumes, 	are	clearly 	pointing 	
upwards. 	Outside 	the	disaster 	area, 	unemploy -
ment 	in	June, 	at	4.6%, 	was	just	as	high	as	in	
February. 	In	May	and	June 	the	price 	of	the	
basket 	of	goods 	on	which 	the	consumer 	price 	
index 	is	based, 	excluding 	energy 	and	food, 	in-Robust 
 commercial 
investment 
but falling 
 government 
expenditureRenewed GDP 
contraction 
but recovery 
already under 
waySelected economic indicators 
for Japan
Sources: Global Insight and Ministry of Eco-
nomy, Trade and Industry.
Deutsche BundesbankO N D J F M A M J
2010 2011404550556065707580859095100105110115February 2011 = 100, seasonally
adjusted, log scale
Total industrial 
output
Manufacture
of carsReal exports
of goods
DEUTSCHE  
BUNDESBANK
E U R O S Y S T E M
Monthly Report  
August 2011
20

creased 	slightly 	year-on-year 	(+0.1 %) 	for	the	
first	time	since	2008.
United Kingdom
In	the	spring, 	UK	economic 	recovery 	remained	
flat.	 UK	output,	 according	 to	a	first	estimate,	
grew 	by	only	¼%	on	the	quarter 	after 	sea-
sonal	 adjustment	 and	was	 thus	 barely	 above	
its	summer 	2010 	level. 	However, 	it	is	necessary	
to	take	 into	 consideration	 several	 special	 fac-
tors	which	 probably,	 on	balance,	 considerably	
depressed	 aggregate	 output	 in	the	past	 quar-
ter	and	the	elimination	 of	which	 will	probably	
cause	 GDP	 to	rise	accordingly	 in	the	coming	
quarters.1	An	ad hoc 	holiday	 to	celebrate	 the	
royal 	wedding 	is	likely 	to	have 	had	the	greatest	
dampening 	impact.2	However, 	it	could 	have	
had	a	positive 	effect 	on	real	gross 	value 	added	
in	hotels	 and	catering.	 On	the	whole,	 output	
in	the	services	 sector	 was	still	up	by	½%	 from	
the	winter	 months.	 On	the	other	 hand,	 value	
added	 in	manufacturing	 (excluding	 construc -
tion)	contracted 	by	1½%. 	This	was	due	mainly	
to	a	slump	 in	oil	and	gas	production	 following	
maintenance	 work,	 a	sharp	 slowdown	 in	en-
ergy	production 	in	April	owing 	to	exceptionally	
warm	 weather	 and	disruptions	 in	the	produc -
tion	of	motor 	vehicles 	caused 	by	Japanese	
firms’	 problems	 with	 deliveries.	 Construction	
output	 recovered	 only	 slightly	 from	 its	severe	
contraction 	in	the	2010 	Q4-2011 	Q1	period	
(+½). 	The	muted 	pace 	of	aggregate 	growth	
is	also	making	 itself	 felt	in	the	labour	 market,	
where	 the	situation	 has	not	improved	 any	fur-
ther.	The	number 	of	applications 	for	unem -
ployment 	benefits 	was	somewhat 	higher 	on	
average 	for	the	second 	quarter 	than 	in	the	
preceding 	three-month 	period. 	Year-on-year	consumer 	price 	inflation 	receded 	again 	in	June	
after 	surging 	at	the	beginning 	of	the	spring	
period.	 According	 to	the	Harmonised	 Index	 of	
Consumer 	Prices 	(HICP), 	average 	inflation 	over	
the	quarter	 still	rose	 from	 4.2%	 in	the	winter	
period	to	4.4%.
New EU member states
In	the	new	 EU	countries	 (EU	7),3	the	pace	 of	
economic 	activity 	largely 	diminished 	in	the	
second	 quarter	 of	2011.	 In	the	Czech	 Repub -
lic,	seasonally 	adjusted 	real	GDP	was	up	by	
¼%	 from	 the	previous	 period,	 in	which	 it	had	
grown 	by	1 %.	Hungary’s 	economic 	output	
remained 	unchanged 	following 	growth 	of	
¼%.	 On	the	other	 hand,	 in	Poland,	 for	which	
no	data	on	GDP	are	available 	yet,	economic	
output	 is	likely	 to	have	 once	 again	 picked	 up	
distinctly.	 One	 sign	 is	that	 second-quarter	 in-
dustrial 	output 	grew 	by	2%	on	the	quarter.	
In	most	 other	 countries	 in	the	region,	 indus -
trial	activity	 was	less	brisk	 than	 in	the	previous	
period.	 Consumer	 price	 inflation	 in	the	EU	7	
overall 	has	receded 	in	the	past	few	months,	
reaching	 3.7%	 in	July.	 It	ranged	 from	 1.9%	 in	
the	Czech	Republic	to	4.9%	in	Rumania.Aggregate 
growth curbed by special factors
Recovery less buoyant
1	According	 to	an	estimate	 by	the	UK	Office	 for	National	
Statistics,	 which	 can	only	 serve	 as	a	rough	 guideline,	 the	
special 	factors 	could 	have 	reduced 	real	GDP	by	½%	in	the	
second	quarter.
2	Although	 the	seasonal	 adjustment	 procedures	 used	 by	
the	Office	 for	National	 Statistics	 also	 includes	 the	elimi -
nation 	of	calendar 	effects, 	it	only	eliminates 	those 	that	
recur	regularly.
3	This	group	 comprises	 the	non-euro-area	 countries	 that	
joined	the	European	Union	in	2004	and	2007.DEUTSCHE  
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report  
August 2011
21

Macroeconomic trends in the euro area
Euro-area 	growth 	diminished 	noticeably 	in	
the	second 	quarter. 	Seasonally 	adjusted 	real	
GDP	rose	by	only	¼%	from 	a	period 	earlier, 	in	
which 	it	had	grown 	by	as	much 	as	¾%. 	It	was	
up	by	1¾% 	on	the	year.	The	reduced 	pace 	of	
aggregate 	growth 	was	due,	for	one	thing, 	to	
an	overstatement 	of	the	underlying 	economic 	
trend 	by	the	buoyant 	growth 	at	the	begin -ning	of	the	year,	which 	had	been 	affected 	by	
catching-up 	effects 	following 	weather-related 	
cutbacks 	in	production 	in	the	final	quarter 	of	
2010. 	Another 	factor 	was	that	euro-area 	con-
sumers’ 	pocketbooks 	were 	hit	by	accelerating 	
inflation 	caused 	by	the	sharp 	rise	in	crude 	oil	
prices. 	Moreover, 	demand 	for	exports 	from 	
non-euro-area 	countries 	also	decelerated.4
The	elimination 	of	the	catching-up 	effects 	
which, 	in	the	winter 	quarter, 	had	particularly 	
affected 	the	more 	northerly 	euro-area 	member 	
states 	also	led	to	a	visible 	reduction 	in	euro-
area	growth 	differentials 	in	the	spring. 	Of	
the	12	euro-area 	countries 	that	have 	already 	
released 	data	on	GDP	growth 	in	the	second 	
quarter, 	Estonia 	(+1¾%) 	and	Finland 	(+1¼%) 	
recorded 	the	best	results 	after 	seasonal 	adjust -
ment, 	followed 	by	Austria 	and	Slovakia, 	which 	
posted 	growth 	of	1 %.	Of	the	large 	euro-area 	
member 	states, 	only	Italy,	at	+¼%, 	performed 	
somewhat 	better 	than	in	the	two	preceding 	
periods. 	However, 	following 	strong 	growth 	in	
the	winter 	months, 	real	GDP	in	Germany 	and	
France 	held	more 	or	less	steady 	at	its	previous 	
levels. 	Of	those 	peripheral 	countries 	for	which 	
data	are	available 	thus	far,	Spain’s 	second-
quarter 	growth 	once 	again 	came 	in	at	¼%, 	
whereas 	Portugal’s 	output, 	after 	falling 	consid -
erably 	in	the	2010 	Q4-2011 	Q1	period, 	main -
tained 	its	level	of	a	quarter 	earlier. 	No	season -
ally	adjusted 	second-quarter 	data	have 	been 	
reported 	yet	for	Ireland 	and	Greece. 	Overall, 	Distinct 
slowdown in 
growth rate 
following brisk 
beginning to 
the yearVisible 
reduction in 
euro-area 
growth differ -
entials in springReal GDP in the euro area
and selected member states
Deutsche Bundesbank2008 2009 2010 2011949698100Euro areaLatest GDP peak before the crisis
(2008 Q1)=100, seasonally adjusted
92949698100
9698100
92949698100
949698100FranceGermany
Italy
Spain
4	The	events 	in	Japan 	and	the	associated 	disruptions 	to	the	
supply 	chains 	did	not	cause 	any	major 	production 	delays 	
in	the	euro	area	since 	only	a	few	Japanese 	manufactur -
ers	of	cars	and	electronic 	appliances, 	which 	are	generally 	
heavily 	dependent 	on	intra-group 	deliveries, 	have 	plants 	
and	factories 	located 	in	the	euro	area.
DEUTSCHE  
BUNDESBANK
E U R O S Y S T E M
Monthly Report  
August 2011
22

real	euro-area 	GDP	stood 	at	2%	below 	its	pre-
crisis	level	as	this	report	went	to	press.
The	main 	supply-side 	reasons 	for	the	slower	
pace 	of	aggregate 	economic 	growth 	in	the	
euro	area	are	flatter 	industrial 	activity 	and	a	no-
ticeable	 slowdown	 in	the	construction	 sector.	
Output 	in	manufacturing 	(excluding 	construc -
tion)	 grew	 in	the	second	 quarter	 by	a	season -
ally	adjusted	 ¼%,	 which	 was	well	 off	its	pace	
of	a	quarter 	earlier. 	Fittingly, 	capacity 	utilisa -
tion,	 which	 in	April	 had	pretty	 much	 returned	
to	its	multi-year	 average,	 fell	off	somewhat	 in	
July.	 The	slower	 growth	 of	industrial	 output	 is	
masking 	highly 	uneven 	trends 	in	the	various	
sectors.	 While	 the	production	 of	energy	 and	
consumer	 durables	 declined	 by	4%	and	¼%	
respectively 	over	the	reporting 	period, 	inter-
mediate	 goods	 production	 stagnated	 follow -
ing	very	high	growth 	rates 	at	the	beginning	
of	the	year.	 The	manufacture	 of	non-durables	
and	capital	 goods,	 however,	 rose	 by	1 %	each.	
Construction 	output 	in	the	spring 	was	only	
¼%	 higher	 than	 in	the	first	quarter,	 in	which	
it	had	grown 	by	1½% 	owing 	to	favourable	
weather	conditions.
The	indicators	 are	not	consistent	 with	 regard	
to	developments 	in	industrial 	activity 	following	
the	middle	 of	the	year.	 The	Purchasing	 Man-
agers’ 	Index 	for	the	manufacturing 	sector 	was	
down 	in	July	for	the	third 	consecutive 	time	
and	stood 	only	marginally 	above 	the	expan -
sion	threshold. 	The	industrial 	confidence 	in-
dicator, 	too,	was	perceptibly 	pointed 	down -
wards	 and	 declined	 significantly	 in	July	once	
more,	 yet	remained	 above	 its	multi-year	 aver-
age	throughout	 the	reporting	 period.	 The	as-
sessment	 of	new	 orders,	 in	particular,	 was	no	longer 	as	fa-vourable 	as	in	the	winter 	months.	
This	 stands	 in	a	contrast	 of	sorts	 to	the	con-
siderable 	increase 	in	new	orders 	received 	by	
order-based	 industry;	 the	April-May	 average,	
after 	seasonal 	adjustment, 	was	2¼% 	higher	
than	in	the	first	quarter. 	Even 	excluding 	the	
manufacture 	of	other 	transport 	equipment, 	in	
which	 large	 orders	 often	 have	 a	marked	 im-
pact, 	new	orders 	were 	still	up	perceptibly 	(+¾).Slower pace 
of growth in industrial and construction sector
Uneven 
economic signals for second half of yearSeasonally adjusted, quarterlySelected indicators of
euro-area industrial activity
Lin scale
Capacity utilisation
April-
May
Deutsche Bundesbank2005 = 100, log scale
New orders received
by order-based industry
2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 20112005 = 100, log scale
Industrial output
859095100105110115120
Average
1990 to 2010
0
of which
Excluding the 
manufacture of other transport equipment67707376798285%
Total
80859095100105110115120125130DEUTSCHE  
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report  
August 2011
23

The	spring 	slowdown 	of	economic 	growth 	was	
broadly 	based 	across 	the	demand 	side.	In	the	
second 	quarter 	of	the	year,	the	seasonally 	ad-
justed 	quarter-on-quarter 	rise	in	goods 	exports 	
in	terms 	of	value, 	at	½%, 	was	no	longer 	as	
buoyant. 	Imports 	slowed 	down 	even 	further, 	
remaining 	unchanged 	from 	the	level	of	the	
first	quarter, 	in	which 	they	had	accelerated 	
by	6½%. 	Gross 	fixed 	capital 	formation 	is	also	
likely 	to	have 	grown 	more 	moderately 	than	in	
the	winter 	quarter. 	The	primary 	indicator 	of	this	
being 	the	case	is	that	construction 	output, 	as	
mentioned 	earlier, 	exhibited 	much 	more 	muted 	
growth, 	whereas 	the	index 	for	the	production 	
of	capital 	goods, 	which 	is	a	rough 	indicator 	of	
investment 	in	new	equipment, 	maintained 	its	
growth 	rate	of	the	winter 	period. 	Consump -
tion	by	households, 	who	had	been 	hit	in	their	
pocketbooks 	by	the	considerable 	rise	in	en-
ergy	prices, 	has	probably 	provided 	no	further 	
boost 	to	growth 	whatsoever. 	Real	retail 	sales 	
in	spring 	were 	down 	both 	quarter-on-quarter 	
and	year-on-year. 	In	addition, 	the	number 	of	
new	car	registrations 	in	the	euro	area	was	4%	
below 	the	level	of	the	winter 	months 	after	sea-
sonal 	adjustment 	and	down 	1¾% 	on	the	year.
Over 	the	course 	of	the	spring 	quarter, 	the	
labour 	market 	recovery, 	which 	was	proceed -
ing	at	a	snail’s 	pace 	to	begin 	with, 	once 	again 	
started 	to	stall.	The	seasonally 	adjusted 	number 	
of	unemployed 	persons 	in	June	was	hardly 	any	
lower 	than	in	March. 	However, 	on	a	quarterly 	
average, 	it	still	fell	by	57,000 	after 	a	decline 	of	
189,000 	a	period 	earlier. 	Unemployment 	was	
reduced 	by	349,000 	on	the	year, 	with	Ger-
many 	being 	the	main 	pillar 	of	this	improve -
ment; 	the	overall 	figure 	for	the	other 	euro-area	countries, 	by	contrast, 	remained 	virtually 	
unchanged. 	Second-quarter 	unemployment, 	at	
a	seasonally 	adjusted 	9.9%, 	was	only	margin -
ally	lower 	than	a	quarter 	earlier. 	The	number 	
of	employed 	persons 	in	the	first	quarter 	(the	
latest 	period 	for	which 	data	are	available) 	
remained 	at	the	level	of	autumn 	2010 	after 	
seasonal 	adjustment 	and	was	also	just	mini-
mally 	higher 	than	a	year	earlier, 	thereby 	also	
encapsulating 	the	overall 	unsatisfactory 	labour 	
market 	trend 	in	the	euro	area.
Consumer 	price 	inflation 	in	the	euro 	area	
has	flattened 	over	the	course 	of	the	past	few	
months. 	This	reflects, 	in	particular, 	the	ups	and	
downs 	of	the	crude 	oil	markets. 	Consumer 	
prices, 	following 	a	seasonally 	adjusted 	surge 	in	
April 	caused 	by	a	further 	sharp 	rise	in	crude 	oil	
prices, 	remained 	unchanged 	in	the	following 	
two	months 	as	crude 	oil	prices 	were 	trending 	
downwards. 	Year-on-year 	HICP 	inflation, 	how-
ever,	still	rose	from 	2.5% 	in	the	winter 	quarter 	
to	2.8% 	in	the	second 	quarter 	of	2011. 	Spe-
cifically, 	price 	movements 	in	spring 	were 	also	
influenced 	by	the	preceding 	sharp 	increase 	in	
prices 	in	the	international 	food 	markets. 	Prices 	
of	services 	were 	probably 	somewhat 	higher 	
following 	the	economic 	recovery, 	whereas 	
the	prices 	of	industrial 	goods 	barely 	budged. 	
Euro-area 	consumer 	prices 	are	unlikely 	to	have 	
changed 	a	great 	deal	in	July,	whereas 	year-
on-year 	HICP 	inflation 	fell	from 	2.7% 	in	June	
to	2.5% 	in	July.	However, 	this	decline 	is	at-
tributable 	to	a	change 	in	the	statistical 	treat -
ment 	of	seasonal 	goods. 	For	the	near	future, 	
annual 	HICP 	inflation 	of	well	over	2%	can	still	
be	expected.Weaker growth 
of domestic 
and foreign 
demand
Labour market 
recovery stalledInflation still 
clearly above 
2%
DEUTSCHE  
BUNDESBANK
E U R O S Y S T E M
Monthly Report  
August 2011
24

Monetary policy  
and banking businessMonetary policy and money market 
 developments
Following 	a	sharp 	increase 	in	economic 	out-
put	in	the	euro	area	during 	the	first	quarter, 	
growth 	levelled 	off	to	a	much 	flatter 	path	in	
the	second 	quarter 	of	the	year	as	expected. 	
This	recovery 	was	spurred 	on	by	the	ongoing 	
expansionary 	monetary 	policy. 	However, 	in	the	
months 	under 	review, 	HICP 	inflation 	remained 	
well	above 	2%,	mainly 	on	account 	of	energy 	
and	commodity 	prices. 	In	order 	to	counter 	the	
resultant 	medium-term 	upside 	risks	to	price 	
stability 	and	anchor 	inflation 	expectations 	at	
a	level	consistent 	with	price 	stability, 	the	Gov-
erning 	Council 	of	the	ECB	decided 	in	July	that, 	
following 	the	interest 	rate	increase 	in	April, 	
its	accommodative 	monetary 	policy 	required 	
further 	tightening. 	Taking 	care	to	maintain 	the	
current 	corridor 	breadth 	of	150	basis 	points, 	
it	raised 	the	key	ECB	interest 	rates 	by	25	basis 	
points. 	With 	effect 	from 	13 July 	2011, 	the	main 	
refinancing 	rate	has	stood 	at	1½%, 	with	the	
interest 	rate	for	recourse 	to	the	marginal 	lend-
ing	facility 	and	the	interest 	rate	on	the	deposit 	
facility 	set	at	2¼% 	and	¾%	respectively.
At	the	start	of	the	second 	quarter 	of	2011, 	
banks 	initially 	continued 	to	reduce 	their	surplus 	
liquidity, 	a	course 	they	had	been 	pursuing 	since 	
the	beginning 	of	the	year.	Temporary 	fluctu -
ations 	in	liquidity 	conditions 	led	to	increased 	
volatility 	in	the	overnight 	market 	interest 	rates, 	
as	in	the	previous 	quarter. 	At	the	mid-quarter 	
stage 	the	money 	market 	rates 	stabilised 	slightly 	
below 	the	key	interest 	rate	for	a	time. 	How -
ever,	the	growing 	uncertainty 	on	the	financial 	
markets 	put	an	end	to	this	temporary 	nor-
malisation 	of	the	money 	market 	in	mid-June. 	ECB Governing 
Council raises 
key interest 
rates again  
by 25 bp 
Overnight 
interest rate 
under pressure 
from rising 
excess liquidityDEUTSCHE  
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report  
August 2011
25

Since 	then, 	banks’ 	rapidly 	increasing 	borrow -
ing	from 	the	Eurosystem 	has	caused 	excess 	
liquidity 	in	the	banking 	system 	to	reach 	a	level	
last	observed 	in	the	fourth 	quarter 	of	2010. 	
Moreover, 	banks 	resorted 	more 	and	more 	to	
fulfilling 	their	minimum 	reserve 	requirements 	
early 	in	the	maintenance 	period 	(frontload -
ing),	which 	meant 	that	money 	market 	rates 	
increasingly 	tended 	to	fall	over	the	course 	of	
each 	maintenance 	period 	in	a	pattern 	that	is	typical 	of	situations 	characterised 	by	abundant 	
excess 	liquidity.
With 	the	sovereign 	debt 	crisis 	worsening 	
and	uncertainty 	rife	on	the	financial 	markets, 	
since 	the	end	of	the	second 	quarter 	the	Eu-
rosystem’s 	monetary 	policymakers 	have 	been 	
faced 	with	the	challenge 	of	meeting 	banks’ 	
increased 	demand 	for	liquidity 	while 	simultan -
eously 	addressing 	the	threats 	posed 	to	price 	
stability 	in	an	appropriate 	and	timely 	manner. 	
Once 	again, 	the	clear 	segregation 	of	liquidity-
providing 	measures, 	on	the	one	hand, 	and	the	
monetary 	policy 	stance 	as	expressed 	in	interest 	
rate	decisions, 	on	the	other, 	has	proved 	the	
right 	course 	of	action. 	Accordingly, 	the	rise	
in	the	key	interest 	rate	which 	occurred 	in	July	
was	correctly 	anticipated 	by	the	markets 	and	
duly	reflected 	in	higher 	longer-term 	unsecured 	
money 	market 	rates. 	The	upward 	shift	was,	
however, 	greatly 	weakened 	compared 	with	the	
previous 	quarter, 	in	particular 	for	longer 	ma-
turities. 	By	contrast, 	since 	the	recent 	worsen -
ing	of	the	sovereign 	debt	crisis 	in	July	2011, 	
the	secured 	money 	market 	rates 	(Eurepo), 	
and	in	particular 	those 	for	longer 	maturities, 	
have 	dropped 	significantly 	with	the	result 	that	
depo-repo-spreads 	have	almost 	doubled 	in	size	
compared 	with	the	first-quarter 	averages. 	Irre-
spective 	of	the	underlying 	maturity, 	these 	risk	
premiums 	are	thus	currently 	well	above 	their	
average 	recorded 	level	over	the	last	2½	years.
Faced 	with	renewed 	tensions 	in	some 	euro-
area	financial 	markets, 	the	Governing 	Council 	
decided 	in	early	August 	to	continue 	conducting 	
all	refinancing 	operations 	as	fixed-rate 	tenders 	
with	full	allotment 	for	as	long	as	needed, 	but	
at	least	until	the	end	of	2011, 	and	to	conduct 	Longer-term 
money market 
rates halt 
upward trend
Continued 
use of full 
allotment 
alongside 
a renewed 
expansion 
of longer-
term liquidity 
provisionMoney market interest rates
in the euro area
1 Monthly averages. — 2 Only on 8 October 
2008 2.75%. — 3 Three-month Euribor less 
three-month Eurepo. —  Average from 1 
to 17 August 2011.
Deutsche Bundesbank2008 2009 2010 201100.51.01.52.02.53.03.54.04.55.05.56.06.57.0
050100150200Difference between unsecured 
and secured three-month 
interbank lending rates 1, 32
Basis
points%
Marginal lending rate
Three-month Euribor1
EONIA1
Minimum bid rate or fixed
interest rate for main
refinancing operations
Deposit rate
DEUTSCHE  
BUNDESBANK
E U R O S Y S T E M
Monthly Report  
August 2011
26

a	one-off 	supplementary 	longer-term 	refinan -
cing	operation 	at	the	beginning 	of	August 	to	
provide 	liquidity 	for	approximately 	six	months. 	
With 	the	sovereign 	debt 	crisis 	spreading 	to	
other 	euro-area 	member 	states, 	the	Governing 	
Council 	also	reactivated 	its	Securities 	Markets 	
Programme 	(SMP), 	which 	had	been 	adopted 	in	
May	2010. 	This	would, 	it	argued, 	help	restore 	
better 	monetary 	policy 	transmission.1Monetary developments in the euro area
The	increase 	in	the	M3	monetary 	aggregate 	
that	has	been 	apparent 	since 	the	spring 	of	
2010 	continued 	in	the	second 	quarter 	of	2011. 	
However, 	at	a	seasonally-adjusted 	and	annual -
ised	three-month 	rate	of	2½%, 	the	quarter-on-
quarter 	increase 	remained 	moderate. 	Parallel 	Continued 
moderate 
monetary 
expansionOpen market operations of the Eurosystem*
 
Value 
dateType of
trans action 1Maturity
in daysActual
allotment
in € billionDeviation
from the
benchmark
in € billion 2Marginal
rate/fi  xed
rate
%Allotment
ratio
%Weighted
rate
%Cover
ratio 3Number
of bidders
13.04.11 MRO (FRT) 7 94.1 – 56.4 1.25 100.00 – 1.00 161
13.04.11 S-LTRO (FRT) 28 83.7 – 1.25 100.00 – 1.00 40
13.04.11 FTO (–) 7 –  77.0 – 1.12 88.00 1.05 1.33 71
20.04.11 MRO (FRT) 7 97.4 23.4 1.25 100.00 – 1.00 181
20.04.11 FTO (–) 7 –  76.0 – 1.21 91.14 1.12 1.17 68
27.04.11 MRO (FRT) 7 117.9 – 34.1 1.25 100.00 – 1.00 241
27.04.11 FTO (–) 7 –  71.4 – 1.25 100.00 1.17 1.00 49
28.04.11 LTRO (FRT) 91 63.4 –4 1.29 100.00 – 1.00 177
04.05.11 MRO (FRT) 7 127.5 53.5 1.25 100.00 – 1.00 326
04.05.11 FTO (–) 7 –  62.2 – 1.25 100.00 1.16 1.00 58
10.05.11 FTO (–) 1 – 143.1 – 1.05 100.00 1.01 1.01 152
11.05.11 MRO (FRT) 7 124.8 – 31.7 1.25 100.00 – 1.00 247
11.05.11 S-LTRO (FRT) 35 80.7 – 1.25 100.00 – 1.00 60
11.05.11 FTO (–) 7 –  76.0 – 1.15 69.16 1.09 1.00 72
18.05.11 MRO (FRT) 7 119.4 63.9 1.25 100.00 – 1.00 235
18.05.11 FTO (–) 7 –  76.0 – 1.16 23.17 1.08 1.13 74
25.05.11 MRO (FRT) 7 116.1 30.1 1.25 100.00 – 1.00 241
25.05.11 FTO (–) 7 –  75.0 – 1.25 38.14 1.14 1.09 62
26.05.11 LTRO (FRT) 98 48.1 –4 … 100.00 – 1.00 182
01.06.11 MRO (FRT) 7 110.8 57.8 1.25 100.00 – 1.00 174
01.06.11 FTO (–) 7 –  75.0 – 0.89 41.39 0.81 1.38 69
08.06.11 MRO (FRT) 7 102.4 28.9 1.25 100.00 – 1.00 145
08.06.11 FTO (–) 7 –  75.0 – 1.03 39.80 0.90 1.25 71
14.06.11 FTO (–) 1 –  29.6 – 1.05 100.00 1.04 1.19 77
15.06.11 MRO (FRT) 7 135.6 – 40.4 1.25 100.00 – 1.00 235
15.06.11 S-LTRO (FRT) 28 69.4 – 1.25 100.00 – 1.00 60
15.06.11 FTO (–) 7 –  75.0 – 1.25 91.82 1.20 1.00 61
22.06.11 MRO (FRT) 7 186.9 84.4 1.25 100.00 – 1.00 353
22.06.11 FTO (–) 7 –  74.0 – 1.24 1.73 1.15 1.13 56
29.06.11 MRO (FRT) 7 141.5 – 10.5 1.25 100.00 – 1.00 232
29.06.11 FTO (–) 7 –  74.0 – 1.25 88.75 1.17 1.01 57
30.06.11 LTRO (FRT) 91 132.2 –4 … 100.00 – 1.00 265
06.07.11 MRO (FRT) 7 120.0 84.5 1.25 100.00 – 1.00 185
06.07.11 FTO (–) 7 –  74.0 – 0.90 92.08 0.75 1.30 68
12.07.11 FTO (–) 1 –  74.8 – 1.05 100.00 1.03 1.01 119
* For more information on the Eurosystem’s operations 
from 19 January 2011 to 12 April 2011, see Deutsche Bun-
desbank, Monthly Report, May 2011, p 29. — 1 MRO: 
main refi  nancing operation, LTRO: longer-term refi  nanc-
ing operation, S-LTRO: supplementary longer- term refi  -
nancing operation, FTO: fi  ne-tuning operation (+: liquid-ity providing operation, –: liquidity absorbing operation), 
FRT: fi  xed-rate tender. — 2 Calculation accor ding to publi-
cation after MRO allotment. — 3 Ratio of total bids to the 
allotment amount. — 4 The interest rate corresponds to 
the average minimum bid rate of the MROs conducted 
over the life of this operation.
Deutsche Bundesbank
1	Statement 	issued 	by	the	ECB’s 	President 	on	7 August 	
2011.DEUTSCHE  
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report  
August 2011
27

Money market management and liquidity needs
Deutsche BundesbankDuring the three reserve maintenance periods from 
13  April to 12  July 2011, euro-area credit institutions’ 
need for central bank liquidity determined by autono-
mous liquidity factors rose by €16.6 billion in net terms. 
This increase was due to the higher demand for bank 
notes, which rose by a total of €21.8 billion in the period 
under review. At the same time, general government de-
posits with the Eurosystem were virtually unchanged on 
balance. They rose by a mere €0.3 billion. The remaining 
autonomous factors showed a contrary development. If 
the net foreign reserves and the other factors are taken 
together, a move which eliminates liquidity-neutral valu-
ation effects, there was a decline of €5.5 billion in the 
resulting liquidity needs in the period under review. The 
need for central bank liquidity stemming from the mini-
mum reserve requirements decreased by a total of €1.6 
billion over the three maintenance periods; the credit in-
stitutions were able to fulfi  l the minimum reserve re-
quirements without any diffi  culty.
The Eurosystem continued the policy it has practiced for 
some time of generous liquidity provision during the pe-
riod under review; it fully met the demand of credit insti-
tutions for central bank liquidity – beyond the regular li-
quidity needs (benchmark amount). Liquidity- providing 
open-market operations continued to be carried out as 
fi  xed-rate tenders with full allotment of the submitted 
bids (see table on page 27); the size of the liquidity pro-
vided through the tender operations was determined ex-
clusively by the demand from credit institutions in the 
Eurosystem.
At its meeting on 7 April 2011, the Governing Council of 
the ECB decided to raise the key interest rate of 1.00%, in 
place since May 2009, by 25 basis points to 1.25%. The 
new main refi  nancing rate and the increased rates for the 
deposit and marginal lending facility (also up by 25 basis 
points to 0.50% and 2.00% respectively) applied for the 
fi  rst time in the April-May 2011 maintenance period.
The demand for liquidity in the open market operations 
increased in the period under review, which however was 
only partly due to the higher liquidity needs related to 
the autonomous factors. This increased demand was ac-
companied by a marked shift in the maturity structure. In 
net terms, the volume of longer-term refi  nancing opera-
tions decreased by approximately €24 billion during the 
three reserve maintenance periods, while at the same 
time the volume of main refi  nancing operations in-
creased by around €49 billion in comparison. The demand 
for central bank liquidity over and above the increased 
liquidity need was reﬂ  ected in a higher average recourse 
to the deposit facility in the Eurosystem. In the period 
under review it rose by just under €7 billion net. By con-trast, in most instances, the marginal lending facility was 
used only sparingly, with average recourse in the three 
reserve periods of just around €350 million, €50 million 
and €220 million respectively. In addition to these devel-
opments, the overnight rates were very volatile during 
the period in question, partly as a result of prevailing 
 liquidity conditions, but also due to special factors such as 
public holidays or the end of the half-year.
No purchases were made as part of the Securities Market 
Programme (SMP) in the period under review. The Euro-
system holdings declined by around €2.7 billion to a total 
of €74.2 billion during this period on account of matured 
securities. Weekly liquidity-absorbing fi  ne-tuning opera-
tions, in place since the launch of the programme, contin-
ued to be carried out, in order to neutralise the 
 liquidity-providing effect resulting from the SMP pur-
chases. This aim was accomplished in the course of most 
of the SMP liquidity absorbing tenders. Only the April-
May reserve period saw some underbidding; in both cases 
this was in particular due to the somewhat scarce liquid-
ity supply and special effects over the Easter holidays. 
Moreover, on the last day of each of the reserve periods, 
the Eurosystem continued to carry out a liquidity- 
absorbing fi  ne-tuning operation in order to withdraw 
excess central bank liquidity no longer needed to meet 
reserve requirements.
The April-May 2011 reserve period was characterised by 
mainly scarce liquidity conditions, which in some in-
stances led to relatively high overnight rates. Particularly 
in the second and third week of the reserve period, which 
also included the Easter holidays, the decidedly small 
 liquidity surplus, ie central bank liquidity exceeding the 
benchmark amount, made itself felt, resulting in EONIA 
fi  xings above the main refi  nancing rate of 1.25%. EONIA 
reached a peak of 1.43% during this period on the Thurs-
day before Easter. The total outstanding tender volume 
(excluding liquidity-absorbing fi  ne-tuning operations) 
rose from €418 billion at the beginning of the reserve pe-
riod to €444 billion in the last week; it was, however, ini-
tially accompanied by a likewise increasing liquidity need 
due to autonomous factors. It was only the more com-
fortable liquidity conditions in the last days of the reserve 
period which led to a marked decline in overnight rates 
combined with increasing recourse to the deposit facility. 
Daily use of the deposit facility averaged €23 billion over 
the period, unchanged from the previous period. The 
predominantly scarce liquidity supply led to an EONIA av-
erage of 1.12% in this period, ie 13 basis points below the 
main refi  nancing rate. In the previous period this gap was 
still 33 basis points. With these higher overnight rates the 
underlying EONIA turnovers, which averaged €39.1 bil-
lion, remained close to the relatively high level of the 
DEUTSCHE  
BUNDESBANK
E U R O S Y S T E M
Monthly Report  
August 2011
28

previous period (€39.4 billion). With regard to secured 
overnight money trading on GC Pooling of Eurex Repo the rates followed a similar path to EONIA. On a volume-weighted average, the overnight rate stood at 1.13% and 
was thus also noticeably closer to the main refi  nancing 
rate than it had been in the previous period (-12 basis 
points as compared to -37 basis points in the March-April period). At an average of €9.9 billion, the corresponding turnovers were down somewhat on the previous period 
(€11.5 billion).
The May-June reserve period initially followed the typical 
pattern. Pronounced frontloading by the credit institu-tions in the Eurosystem, ie the holding of a relatively high level of reserves to meet their minimum reserve require-ments sooner, in the environment of suffi  cient excess  liquidity, initially led to overnight rates hovering close to, though still below, the main refi  nancing rate. As the re-serve period went on, the increasingly favourable liquid-ity conditions and the aforementioned reserve fulfi  lment behaviour of the credit institutions brought about a fall in EONIA fi  xings (down to 0.85%). The Whitsun holiday at the end of the reserve period curtailed this develop-ment, however. Fortifi  ed by a rather small demand of €102 billion vis-à-vis the benchmark, the last main refi  -nancing operation of the period saw a signifi  cant rise in overnight rates; EONIA was fi  xed at 1.55% on the Friday before Whitsun, ie 30 basis points above the key interest rate. EONIA was recorded at 1.08% on average over the period, though with considerably lower turnovers. These fell to an average of €29.4 billion during the period and were thus almost €10 billion lower than the previous pe-riod, indicating aggravated tensions and a further inten-sifi  ed segmentation of the interbank market. In contrast, the secured overnight turnover on GC Pooling rose to €11.5 billion, although the overnight rates were very volatile here too, with the reference rate up to 1.63%. The weighted overnight rate at GC Pooling averaged 1.08%.
The June-July reserve period began with overnight rates 
above the main refi  nancing rate of 1.25%. This was at-tributable to the relatively strong frontloading of credit institutions with somewhat scarce liquidity. In response to these conditions, the banks raised their bids in the sec-ond main refi  nancing operation of the reserve period sig-nifi  cantly by €51 billion to €187 billion. The additional li-quidity available triggered a rapid decline in the over-night rates. The liquidity situation remained very com-fortable throughout the reserve period causing EONIA to fall yet further to stand at 0.59%, close to the deposit facility rate. Apart from the usual rise at the end of the reserve period, the half-year end proved an exception, with EONIA jumping to 1.72%. In total it averaged 0.98% Factors determining bank liquidity 1
€ billion; changes in the daily averages of the reserve
maintenance periods vis-à-vis the previous period
Item2011
13 Apr 
to10 May11 May to14 June15 June to12 July
I Provision (+) or absorption (–) of
central bank balances due to changes
in autonomous factors1 Banknotes in circulation
(increase: –) –  9.5 – 2.7 –  9.6
2 Government deposits with the
Eurosystem (increase: –) + 11.8 – 1.3 – 10.8
3 Net foreign assets 
2 – 18.2 + 0.9 +  6.8
4 Other factors 2 + 16.4 – 3.7 +  3.3
Total +  0.5 – 6.8 – 10.3
II Monetary policy operations of the
Eurosystem1 Open market operations
(a) Main refi  nancing operations + 11.9 + 5.5 + 31.3
(b) Longer-term refi  nancing 
 operations – 14.9 – 2.6 –  6.3
(c) Other operations +  1.7 – 0.5 –  2.0
2 Standing facilities
(a) Marginal lending facility –  0.4 – 0.4 +  0.2
(b) Deposit facility (increase: –) +  0.2 + 4.4 – 11.1
Total –  1.5 + 6.4 + 12.1
III Change in credit institutions’  current 
accounts (I + II) –  1.0 – 0.5 +  1.9
IV Change in the minimum reserve
requirement (increase: –) +  1.1 + 1.3 –  0.8
1 For longer-term trends and the Deutsche Bundesbank’s contribu-tion, see pages 14* and 15* of the Statistical Section of this Monthly Report. — 2 Including end-of-quarter valuation adjustments with no 
impact on liquidity.
over the period and was accompanied by a further drop 
in turnovers (€26 billion on average). Secured overnight rates at GC Pooling experienced a similar development; on average, the reference rate for secured overnight money stood at 0.91% and the underlying turnovers av-eraged €11.6 billion. The liquidity situation of the credit institutions was more comfortable overall in comparison 
to the previous period. This was also reﬂ  ected in a higher 
recourse to the deposit facility which averaged €30 bil-
lion over the period (compared with just €18 billion in the 
previous period).
In the subsequent July-August reserve period the main 
refi  nancing rate of 1.50% was used for the fi  rst time, fol-lowing the ECB Governing Council’s decision in its meet-
ing on 7 July 2011 to raise the key interest rate once again 
by 25 basis points.DEUTSCHE  
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report  
August 2011
29

to	the	inflow 	of	funds 	from 	abroad, 	the	ex-
panded 	granting 	of	loans 	to	the	private 	sector 	
that	was	already 	discernible 	in	the	previous 	
quarter 	continued 	apace. 	The	renewed 	drop 	
in	loans 	to	general 	government, 	along 	with	
the	ongoing 	clear 	increase 	in	monetary 	cap-
ital	formation, 	served 	to	slow	down 	monetary 	
growth. 	The	combined 	effect 	of	these 	develop -
ments 	was	to	bring 	about 	a	certain 	levelling-off 	
in	the	annual 	growth 	rate	of	M3	at	2%.
Among 	the	components 	of	M3,	only	the	highly 	
liquid 	sub-aggregate 	M1	experienced 	a	de-
cline. 	While 	the	demand 	for	cash	during 	the	
reporting 	period 	was	up	significantly 	on	the	
quarter, 	this	growth 	was	nonetheless 	domin -
ated	by	developments 	in	sight 	deposits 	which 	
took	a	downward 	turn	for	the	first	time	since 	
the	second 	quarter 	of	2008. 	To	a	great 	ex-tent, 	the	declining 	attractiveness 	of	overnight 	
deposits 	is	likely 	attributable 	to	the	widening 	
differential 	between 	the	virtually 	unchanged 	
rate	of	interest 	applying 	to	this	kind	of	deposit 	
and	the	rate	for	time	deposits 	which 	went 	up	
again 	during 	the	reporting 	quarter. 	Overall, 	at	
just	under 	-½%, 	the	seasonally-adjusted 	and	
annualised 	three-month 	rate	for	M1	fell	to	its	
lowest 	level	since 	the	second 	quarter 	of	2008. 	
In	seasonally 	adjusted 	and	annualised 	terms, 	
the	growth 	rate	of	short-term 	deposits 	rose	
considerably 	by	3½%. 	Even 	so,	this	was	less	
buoyant 	than	one	quarter 	earlier.
By	contrast, 	in	seasonally 	adjusted 	and	annu -
alised 	terms, 	the	three-month 	growth 	rate	for	
marketable 	instruments 	amounted 	to	11 %, 	
and	was	thus	higher 	than	at	any	time	since 	
the	end	of	2007. 	This	was	in	part	due	to	the	
fact	that	banks 	returned 	to	settling 	more 	trans -
actions 	through 	central 	counterparties 	which 	
in	turn	led	to	a	sharp 	increase 	in	the	number 	
of	repo	transactions. 	Another 	causal 	factor 	was	
the	strong 	inflows 	for	short-term 	bank 	debt	se-
curities, 	also	in	connection 	with	the	measures 	
adopted 	by	individual 	euro-area 	countries 	to	
stabilise 	their	banking 	systems.
As	regards 	the	counterparts 	of	M3,	loans 	to	
the	domestic 	private 	sector 	during 	the	report -
ing	quarter 	expanded 	at	a	seasonally 	adjusted 	
and	annualised 	three-month 	rate	of	just	over	
2%.	The	pace	of	growth 	was	somewhat 	slower 	
than	in	the	previous 	quarter 	which 	recorded 	an	
increase 	of	just	over	2½%. 	As	in	the	preceding 	
quarter, 	this	increase 	was	mainly 	attributable 	to	
developments 	in	lending 	to	the	non-financial 	
private 	sector. 	Broken 	down 	by	sector, 	growth 	
was	due	in	equal 	measure 	to	an	increase 	in	Declining 
demand  
for highly  
liquid M3  
componentsSizeable 
inflows  
to marketable 
instruments
Moderate 
increase in 
lending to 
the domestic 
private sectorMonetary developments in the euro
area *
Changes in € billion, seasonally adjusted
Monetary aggregate in a balance 
sheet context2011
Q1 Q2
Monetary aggregate M3 
(=1+2-3-4-5) 40.8 58.3
Components:
  Currency in circulation and 
overnight deposits (M1) 14.4 –  4.8
  Other short-term deposits
(M2-M1) 40.4 32.8
  Marketable instruments (M3-M2) – 14.0 30.3
Counterparts
 1.  Total credit to non-MFIs in
the euro area 20.3 3.7
    Credit to general govern-
ment – 48.5 – 30.5
    Credit to private-sector 
 non-MFIs in the euro area 68.8 34.1
 2.  Net external assets 158.4 45.9
 3. Central government deposits – 20.5 19.9
 4.  Longer-term fi  nancial 
liabilities to other non-MFIs 
in the euro area 80.9 75.8
 5.  Other counterparts of M3 
( residual) – 77.5 104.4
* Changes for statistical reasons are eliminated.
Deutsche Bundesbank
DEUTSCHE  
BUNDESBANK
E U R O S Y S T E M
Monthly Report  
August 2011
30

loans 	to	non-financial 	corporations 	and	to	
households. 	At	2%,	the	seasonally 	adjusted	
and	annualised 	increase 	in	loans 	to	households	
was	well	below	 the	level	 recorded	 for	the	pre-
vious 	quarter, 	which 	stood 	at	just	under 	4½%.	
This	was	largely	driven	 by	the	marked	 decline	
in	loans	 for	house	 purchase,	 which	 constitute	
the	majority 	component 	of	household 	borrow -
ing.	Lending 	to	non-financial 	corporations 	like-
wise	 expanded	 at	a	somewhat	 slower	 pace	 in	
the	reporting	 quarter.	 As	in	the	previous	 quar-
ter,	lending 	in	this	sector 	was	focused 	on	short	
and	long-term	maturities	while	medium-term	
loans	 (with	 a	maturity	 of	over	 one	and	up	to	
five	years)	 again	 shrank,	 this	time	 by	a	signifi -
cant	margin. 	Conversely, 	the	extent 	of	loans 	to	
financial 	corporations 	between 	April 	and	June	
2011	remained	virtually	unchanged.
In	the	quarter	 under	 review,	 the	significant	 in-
flows	 of	loans	 to	the	domestic	 private	 sector	
were	 once	 again	 accompanied	 by	a	consider -
able	 drop	 in	lending	 to	general	 government,	
with	 the	effect	 that,	 overall,	 loans	 to	domes -
tic	non-banks	 barely	 registered	 any	growth.	 In	
contrast	 to	the	situation	 in	the	previous	 quar-
ter,	the	decline	 in	lending	 to	the	public	 sector	
in	the	April 	to	June	period 	was	solely 	the	result	
of	a	reduction	 in	unsecuritised	 lending	 in	this	
segment.	 At	the	same	 time,	 there	 was	 a	dis-
cernible	 increase	 in	the	central	 governments’	
deposits	 (which	 are	not	part	 of	the	monetary	
aggregate	 M3),	 which	 broadly	 dampened	 the	
M3	growth 	seen	in	the	second 	quarter 	of	2011.
As	was	the	case	one	quarter 	previously, 	the	net	
external 	assets 	of	the	euro-area 	MFI	sector 	rose	
considerably, 	which, 	taken 	in	isolation, 	had	an	
expansionary 	effect 	on	monetary 	growth. 	This	Drop in loans 
to general  governmentComponents and
counterparts of the money stock in the euro area
1 In  percent,  12-month  flows. —  2 In  per-
centage points. —  3 Taken in isolation, an 
increase curbs M3 growth.
Deutsche Bundesbank2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 201150510152025
–+++++
–10–50+5+10+15+20+25+30
505101520
–++++Seasonally adjusted, quarterly
... components of the money stock
... counterparts
Sectoral growth contributions2of which
Loans to the private sectorGrowth rate1 of M3 and the
contributions of growth2 of the ...
Remaining balance 
sheet itemsNet external
asset position
Longer-term financial 
liabilities to other non-MFIs3
Growth rate1 
Financial 
corporations
Non-financial 
corporationsHouseholdsCredit to the
private sector M2 – M1
M3 – M2 M1M3
M3DEUTSCHE  
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report  
August 2011
31

arose 	from 	a	discernible 	increase 	in	external 	
assets 	combined 	with	an	almost 	unchanged 	
level	of	external 	liabilities. 	However, 	this	posi-
tive	effect, 	was	again 	restrained 	by	significant 	
monetary 	capital 	formation 	which 	was	primar -
ily	driven 	by	strong 	capital 	formation 	and	ac-
cumulation 	of	reserves 	along 	with	a	sharp 	in-
crease 	in	long-term 	bank 	debt	securities 	(with 	
a	maturity 	of	over	two	years).
The	pick-up 	in	the	pace 	of	underlying 	monet -
ary	expansion 	that	was	observed 	in	the	past	
few	quarters 	lost	steam 	in	the	second 	quarter. 	
Nevertheless, 	on	the	whole, 	the	inflation 	risk	
indicators 	derived 	from 	monetary 	data	con-
tinue 	to	point 	to	upside 	risks	to	price 	stability 	
over	the	monetary 	policy 	horizon. 	However, 	
the	high	degree 	of	uncertainty 	associated 	with	these 	indicators 	at	present 	should 	not	be	over-
looked 	here.
German banks’ deposit and lending 
 business with domestic customers
At	a	seasonally 	adjusted 	and	annualised 	
growth 	rate	of	3½% 	compared 	with	just	over	
3%	in	the	previous 	quarter, 	the	moderate 	ac-
cumulation 	of	deposits 	with	German 	banks 	
continued 	in	the	second 	quarter 	of	2011. 	This	
increase 	mainly 	related 	to	short-term 	depos -
its,	in	particular 	time	deposits 	with	an	agreed 	
maturity 	of	up	to	two	years, 	which 	saw	strong 	
inflows. 	By	contrast, 	short-term 	savings 	de-
posits 	were 	reduced 	slightly. 	This	development 	
is,	not	least, 	probably 	attributable 	to	the	fact	
that	the	interest 	rate	advantage 	of	short-term 	
time	deposits 	over	other 	forms 	of	investment 	
of	similar 	maturities 	widened 	once 	more 	dur-
ing	the	second 	quarter.
By	contrast, 	domestic 	customers’ 	longer-term 	
deposits 	with	German 	credit 	institutions 	shrank 	
somewhat 	on	balance, 	as	was	also	the	case	one	
quarter 	earlier. 	However, 	the	second-quarter 	
reduction 	in	time	deposits 	with	an	agreed ma 	 -
turity 	of	over	two	years 	was	much 	smaller 	in	
size	than	that	seen	in	the	first	quarter. 	As	in	the		
preceding 	three 	quarters, 	the	outflows 	from 	
this	deposit 	category 	were 	mainly 	the	product 	
of	portfolio 	investment 	decisions 	by	financial 	
corporations, 	with	households 	again 	exhibit -
ing	a	strong 	demand 	for	this	investment 	form. 	
Longer-term 	savings 	deposits 	also	experienced 	
some 	growth, 	albeit 	of	a	modest 	kind. 	This	may	
well	be	attributable 	to	the	fact	that, 	during 	the	
reporting 	quarter, 	banks 	further 	enhanced 	the	Marked 
increase in 
net external 
position along 
with signifi-
cant monetary 
capital 
formation
Continued 
slight upside 
risks to price 
stability from  
a monetary 
perspectiveRenewed 
strong inflows 
for short-term 
time deposits
Slowdown in 
reduction of 
longer-term 
deposit typesLending and deposits of monetary
fi  nancial institutions (MFIs)
in Germany *
Changes in € billion, seasonally adjusted
Item2011
Q1 Q2
Deposits of domestic non-MFIs 1
 Overnight 4.7 7.6
 With agreed maturities
  of up to 2 years 18.2 19.3
  of over 2 years –  4.0 –  2.2
 Redeemable at notice
  of up to 3 months 3.6 –  1.3
  of over 3 months –  0.4 0.4
Lending
  to domestic enterprises and 
 households
  Loans 1.9 14.1
  of which  to households 2 3.0 2.7
    to non-fi  nancial 
 corporations 3 10.9 –  1.7
  Securities –  0.1 –  5.1
 to domestic general government
  Loans – 17.2 – 23.8
  Securities –  7.3 –  2.1
* As well as banks (including building and loan associations, 
but excluding the Bundesbank), monetary fi  nancial institu-
tions (MFIs) here also include money market funds. End-of-
quarter data, adjusted for statistical changes.— 1 Enterprises, 
households and general government excluding central 
 government. — 2 Including non-profi  t institutions serving 
households.— 3 Including non-fi  nancial quasi-corporations.
Deutsche BundesbankDEUTSCHE  
BUNDESBANK
E U R O S Y S T E M
Monthly Report  
August 2011
32

attractiveness	 of	the	rates	 of	interest	 on	this	
type	 of	bank	 deposits	 while,	 in	the	same	 time	
period, 	capital 	market 	yields 	fell	by	a	consider -
able	margin	owing	to	safe-haven	effects.
During	 the	reporting	 period,	 German	 banks’	
lending	 to	non-banks	 decreased	 again	 to	re-
cord	a	seasonally 	adjusted 	and	annualised	
three-month	 rate	 of	-2%.	 As	in	the	previous	
quarter, 	this	development 	was	largely 	driven 	by	
the	decline	 in	lending	 to	general	 government	
while 	lending 	to	the	domestic 	private 	sector	
developed	 positively.	 This	said,	 the	increase	 in	
the	latter 	compared 	with	the	figure 	recorded 	at	
the	end	of	the	previous 	quarter 	was	very	much	
the	result	 of	lending	 to	financial	 corporations,	
mostly	 in	the	form	 of	interbank	 transactions	
which 	were 	settled 	through 	a	central 	coun -
terparty 	and	therefore 	did	not	entail 	any	in-
creased 	provision 	of	credit 	to	the	non-financial	
private	sector.
By	contrast, 	unlike 	in	the	euro	area	as	a	whole,	
the	period 	under 	review 	saw	a	halt	to	German	
banks’ 	expanded 	lending 	to	domestic 	non-
financial 	corporations, 	which 	had	occurred	
on	a	very	 large	 scale	 in	the	winter	 months.	 If	
loans	 to	enterprises	 are	broken	 down	 by	ma-
turity, 	the	slight 	decline 	compared 	with	the	
previous	 quarter’s	 final	 result	 is	shown	 to	be	
the	product 	of	a	sharp 	drop	in	lending 	over	the	
medium-term 	horizon. 	Although 	curbed 	lend-
ing	in	this	segment 	was	evident 	throughout	
the	euro	 area,	 short-term	 lending	 at	this	level	
rose	much 	more 	sharply. 	This	contrasts 	with	
Germany 	where 	this	type	of	lending, 	which	
had	 expanded	 by	a	significant	 margin	 in	the	
previous 	quarter, 	grew 	only	fractionally. 	The	
aggregate	 picture,	 however,	 masks	 extremely	mixed 	developments 	in	the	course 	of	the	quar-
ter	and	between 	bank 	groups. 	For	instance,	
the	decline	 in	question	 is	largely	 attributable	
to	a	marked	 curb	 in	lending	 on	the	part	of	the	
Landesbanken	 in	April,	 which	 had	the	effect	
of	obscuring	 the	increased	 growth	 in	lending	
by	savings	 banks	 during	 the	quarter.	 Overall,	
at	just	over	½%, 	the	annual 	growth 	rate	of	
loans 	to	non-financial 	corporations 	was	some -
what 	down 	on	the	quarter 	but	it	still	remained	
positive.
While	 unsecuritised	 loans	 to	households	 con-
tinued 	along 	the	path 	of	expansion 	which	
commenced	 in	early	 2009,	 the	seasonally	 ad-
justed	 and	 annualised	 quarter-on-quarter	 in-
crease	 in	growth	 came	 in	at	just	over	 ½%	 and	
was	thus	 somewhat	 below	 the	results	 for	the	
two	preceding 	quarters. 	The	noticeable 	decline	Further decline 
in banks’ lending to domestic non-banks
Medium-term 
lending to non-financial corporations main focus of reductions
Loans for house purchase rise again.Loans of German banks to 
selected domestic sectors
1 Year-on-year rate of change.
Deutsche Bundesbank2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 201121012345
––+++++Financial
corporations
Non-financial
corporations
HouseholdsGrowth contributions
in percentage pointsSeasonally adjusted, quarterly
Growth rate 1 in %DEUTSCHE  
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report  
August 2011
33

Banking conditions in Germany
1 According to harmonised MFI interest rate statistics. — 2 According to the Bank Lending Survey, difference 
between the numbers of respondents reporting “tightened considerably” and “tightened somewhat”and the 
numbers of respondents reporting “eased somewhat” and “eased considerably” as a percentage of the re-
sponses given. — 3 Expectations for  2011 Q3.
Deutsche Bundesbank02 03 04 05 06 07 08 09 10 20113.54.04.55.05.56.06.57.07.58.08.59.09.510.0
–300+30
–300+30
–60–300+30+60
2002 03 04 05 06 07 08 09 10 11–60–300+302.02.53.03.54.04.55.05.56.06.57.0
603003060
––++
9060300306090
–––+++Credit to non-financial corporations Credit to households
% pa
%%% pa
%%
%
%Change in credit standards 2
Average loansRiskier loans
Average loansAverage loansRiskier loans
Riskier loans
Consumer creditLoans to enterprisesConsumer credit... with an initial rate fixation of 
    over 1 year and up to 5 years
Loans for house purchase... with an initial rate fixation of 
    over 5 yearsLoans to enterprises ...
... with an initial rate fixation
    of up to 1 year ...
Loans for house purchase... over €1 millionLoans for house purchase
with an initial rate fixation of 
over 5 years and up to 10 years
3... over €1 million
Loans to enterprisesConsumer credit ...
... with an initial rate fixation
    of over 5 years ...
... up to €1 million
Change in loan margins 2... up to €1 million
3
3Bank interest rates (new business) 1
3.03.54.04.55.05.5DEUTSCHE  
BUNDESBANK
E U R O S Y S T E M
Monthly Report  
August 2011
34

in	consumer 	credit 	growth 	was	more 	than	off-
set	by	a	renewed 	increase 	in	lending 	for	house	
purchase. 	The	interest 	rates 	on	loans 	for	house	
purchase 	no	longer 	stood 	at	the	decidedly 	low	
level	seen	in	2010, 	nevertheless 	they	remained	
favourable	in	a	long-term	comparison.
According	 to	the	results	 of	the	latest	 round	 of	
the	Bank 	Lending 	Survey 	(BLS), 	participating	
German	 banks	 did	not	make	 further	 changes	
to	their	 lending	 policies	 in	the	second	 quarter	
of	2011 	after 	reporting 	perceptible 	easing 	a	
quarter	 earlier.	 For	instance,	 credit	 standards	
and	conditions	 for	lending	 to	both	 enterprises	
and	households 	remained 	broadly 	constant.	
The	margins 	on	loans 	to	borrowers 	of	aver-
age	quality	 were	 narrowed	 again	 somewhat,	
though 	to	a	lesser 	extent 	than 	one	quarter	
previously. 	At	the	same 	time, 	they	widened	
for	riskier	 borrowers,	 in	particular	 on	private	
real	estate 	loans. 	The	participating 	institu -
tions 	assume 	that	credit 	standards 	for	small	
and	medium-sized 	enterprises 	and	for	loans	
to	households 	for	house 	purchase 	will	ease	
somewhat	 in	the	third	 quarter,	 whereas	 they	
do	not	expect	 any	adjustment	 with	 respect	 to	
other	surveyed	types	of	lending.
Parallel	 to	this,	 the	surveyed	 banks	 observed	
a	clear 	increase 	in	demand 	for	loans 	to	the	
private	 sector.	 As	in	the	previous	 quarter,	 with	
regard	 to	enterprises	 this	increase	 was	mainly	
driven	 by	the	financing	 needs	 for	fixed	 assets	
and,	on	a	smaller 	scale, 	for	inventories 	and	
working 	capital. 	In	the	case	of	households, 	the	
improvement	 in	consumer	 confidence	 played	
a	crucial	role.Compared 	with	the	results 	for	Germany, 	lend-
ing	conditions	 in	the	euro	 area	 as	a	whole	 in	
the	second 	quarter 	of	2011 	again 	became	
more 	restrictive. 	The	European 	banks 	cited 	not	
only	 cyclical	 but,	 given	 the	ongoing	 sovereign	
debt	 crisis,	 also	–	and	primarily	 –	bank-related	
factors	as	reasons	for	this	development.
The	second-quarter	 BLS	once	 again	 contained	
a	supplementary 	question 	on	the	impact 	of	the	
financial 	and	sovereign 	debt	crisis 	on	banks’	
refinancing	 conditions	 and,	 for	the	first	time,	
another	 two	questions	 about	 banks’	 planned	
and	actual 	adjustments 	in	line	with 	the	
“Basel	 III”	requirements.	 The	German	 institu -
tions	 stated	 that,	 in	broad	 terms,	 their	 access	
to	wholesale 	funding 	saw	little	change 	whereas	
the	overall 	sample 	of	euro-area 	banks 	reported	
a	certain 	deterioration 	compared 	with	the	pre-
ceding	quarter.
In	response	 to	questions	 concerning	 Basel	 III,	
both 	German 	and	European 	banks 	declared	
that	 they	 had	strengthened	 their	 equity	 pos-
ition	in	the	first	half	of	the	year, 	mainly 	by	
retaining 	profits. 	Moreover, 	the	decrease 	in	
risk-weighted	 assets	 as	part	 of	the	realisation	
of	changes	 planned	 by	the	BCBS	 was	 also	 of	
key	importance	 to	the	euro	 area	 as	a	whole.	
Overall, 	the	surveyed 	institutions 	expressed	
their	 intention	 to	respond	 to	the	stricter	 regu-
lations	 in	a	similar	 fashion	 in	the	second	 half	
of	the	year	and	in	2012.
As	in	the	previous 	quarter, 	the	reporting 	in-
stitutions	 in	Germany	 recorded	 an	increase	 in	
lending 	rates 	in	the	second 	quarter 	of	2011.	
Unlike 	in	the	first	quarter, 	this	development	
was	most 	pronounced 	for	shorter-term 	rate	fix-Lending policies 
in Germany 
unchanged
Further marked 
increase in demandEuro-area credit 
standards continued to tighten, however
Access to 
wholesale 
funding broadly 
unchanged
Response 
to Basel III: 
topping up of equity by retaining profits
Bank loans 
more expensive in overall termsDEUTSCHE  
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report  
August 2011
35

ation 	periods. 	However, 	longer-term 	loans 	for	
house 	purchase 	also	became 	more 	expensive 	
compared 	with	the	previous 	quarter, 	albeit 	to	a	
somewhat 	smaller 	degree.2	Long-term 	lending 	
to	non-financial 	enterprises 	was	likewise 	more 	
costly, 	amounting 	to	4.2% 	for	large-scale 	loans 	
and	4.3% 	for	those 	of	a	smaller 	volume. 	All	in	all,	movements 	in	bank 	lending 	rates 	were 	in	
line	with	the	interest 	rates 	paid	on	the	money 	
and	capital 	markets.
2	Longer-term 	loans 	for	house 	purchase 	encompass 	new	
lending 	with	an	initial 	rate	fixation 	period 	of	over	five	
years 	up	to	ten	years.DEUTSCHE  
BUNDESBANK
E U R O S Y S T E M
Monthly Report  
August 2011
36

Financial marketsFinancial market setting
In	the	summer 	of	2011, 	financial 	market 	play-
ers	have	increasingly 	been 	monitoring 	the	large 	
sovereign 	debt	burden 	facing 	developed 	coun -
tries. 	The	consolidation 	pressure 	on	govern -
ment 	budgets 	was	also	highlighted 	in	the	do-
mestic 	policy 	disputes 	in	those 	countries, 	which 	
stirred 	up	fears 	among 	investors. 	Furthermore, 	
global 	driving 	forces 	in	the	second 	quarter 	
weakened 	noticeably 	and	global 	economic 	
prospects 	also	diminished 	somewhat. 	The	loss	
of	purchasing 	power 	owing 	to	increased 	oil	
prices 	and	higher 	inflation 	rates 	likewise 	had	
a	dampening 	effect. 	Turning 	to	Europe, 	the	
markets 	enjoyed 	only	a	brief	respite 	after 	the	
heads 	of	state 	and	government 	decided 	in	
mid-July 	to	grant 	Greece 	another 	rescue 	pack -
age,	staving 	off	a	default. 	At	the	beginning 	of	
August, 	the	situation 	on	the	financial 	markets 	
deteriorated 	further. 	Against 	the	backdrop 	of	
a	fierce 	parliamentary 	debate 	on	whether 	to	
raise 	the	statutory 	debt 	ceiling, 	the	United 	
States 	suffered 	its	–	first	ever	–	credit 	down -
grade 	by	a	rating 	agency. 	In	the	euro	area, 	
meanwhile, 	Spanish 	bond 	yields 	rose	percep -
tibly,	as	did	yields 	on	bonds 	issued 	by	heavily 	
indebted 	Italy.	In	this	environment, 	share 	prices 	
around 	the	world 	tumbled, 	and	yields 	on	the	
government 	bonds 	of	the	major 	industrial 	na-
tions 	weakened 	noticeably 	as	a	result 	of	safe	
haven 	inflows. 	Market 	participants’ 	uncertainty 	
regarding 	economic 	developments 	on	both 	
sides 	of	the	Atlantic 	caused 	noticeable 	fluctu -
ations 	of	the	euro-dollar 	exchange 	rate,	and	
both 	currencies 	depreciated 	against 	the	yen	
and,	in	particular, 	the	Swiss 	franc.Financial 
market trendsDEUTSCHE  
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report  
August 2011
37

Exchange rates
In	the	foreign 	exchange 	market, 	the	spotlight 	
was	on	the	euro-dollar 	rate,	which 	was	caught 	
between 	opposing 	influencing 	factors 	from 	
Europe 	and	the	USA. 	Thus 	there 	were 	phases 	
when 	the	euro	depreciated 	noticeably, 	with	
the	debt	problems 	of	the	euro-area 	peripheral 	
countries 	determining 	the	euro’s 	exchange 	rate	
performance. 	These 	contrasted 	with	phases 	of	
a	stronger 	euro	when 	the	focus 	was	on	US	
economic 	figures 	that	were 	below 	expecta -
tions 	and,	for	a	time, 	on	disputes 	over	the	US	
debt	ceiling.
The	euro 	initially 	appreciated 	by	nearly 	5%	
from 	the	end	of	March 	to	the	beginning 	of	
May	2011, 	and	at	US$1.49 	it	reached 	its	high-
est	level	since 	December 	2009. 	This	was	due	
to	economic 	reports 	which 	tended 	to	be	more 	
favourable 	for	the	euro	area	than	the	USA, 	and	
the	resulting 	positive 	yield	spread 	for	the	euro	
area. 	After 	the	indication 	of	a	further 	key	inter-
est	rate	increase 	in	the	euro	area	in	June, 	which 	
was	expected 	by	some 	market 	participants, 	
failed 	to	materialise 	at	the	start	of	May, 	the	
euro	devalued 	noticeably, 	however. 	In	addition, 	
a	renewed 	credit 	downgrade 	of	Greek 	govern -
ment 	bonds 	and	rumours 	of	an	imminent 	re-
structuring 	of	Greek 	debt	put	pressure 	on	the	
euro. 	Only 	at	the	start	of	June, 	when 	signs 	
grew 	that	the	next	tranche 	of	the	agreed 	aid	
programme 	would 	be	disbursed 	to	Greece, 	
and	disappointing 	US	economic 	figures 	were 	
published 	at	the	same 	time, 	did	the	focus 	
swing 	back 	again 	towards 	the	USA	–	in	con-
junction 	with	a	marked 	appreciation 	of	the	
euro.The	euro	has	depreciated 	again 	since 	then, 	
however. 	This	was	connected 	with	the	re-
newed 	escalation 	of	the	debt	crisis 	in	various 	
euro-area 	countries. 	Examples 	of	this	were 	
concerns 	that	the	Greek 	parliament 	would 	not	
approve 	the	austerity 	package, 	the	credit 	
downgrade 	of	Portugal 	and,	finally, 	the	rise	in	
risk	premiums 	on	Italian 	and	Spanish 	govern -
ment 	bonds. 	However, 	the	parliamentary 	de-
bate	on	whether 	to	raise	the	US	debt	ceiling 	
served 	to	prevent 	a	larger 	depreciation 	of	the	
euro. 	At	US$1.44 	as	this	report 	went 	to	press, 	
the	euro	is	about 	1 %	stronger 	than	at	the	end	
of	the	first	quarter 	of	2011.
The	yen	profited 	from 	investors’ 	uncertainty 	
over	developments 	in	the	euro	area	and	the	
USA, 	which 	has	led	to	a	depreciation 	of	the	
euro	against 	the	Japanese 	currency 	by	around 	
6½% 	since 	the	end	of	March. 	The	yen	was	also	
bolstered 	by	signs 	of	a	rapid 	recovery 	of	the	
Japanese 	economy 	from 	the	slump 	after 	the	
natural 	and	nuclear 	power 	plant 	disaster. 	In-
dustrial 	output 	in	Japan 	rose	again 	clearly, 	as	
did	retail 	sales 	and	real	exports 	of	goods. 	The	
Japanese 	central 	bank 	reacted 	to	the	appre -
ciation 	of	the	national 	currency 	with	foreign 	
exchange 	market 	interventions 	at	the	begin -
ning	of	August, 	which 	were 	successful 	in	the	
short 	term 	but	could 	not	prevent 	a	further 	ap-
preciation 	of	the	yen	thereafter. 	As	this	report 	
went 	to	press, 	the	euro	was	trading 	at	¥110.
The	euro	barely 	changed 	on	balance 	against 	
pound 	sterling 	during 	the	reporting 	period. 	
Reports 	regarding 	the	UK’s	stalling 	economy 	
led	to	a	temporary 	appreciation 	of	the	euro	
during 	the	course 	of	June. 	Despite 	the	inflation 	
rate	being 	above 	the	Bank 	of	England’s 	target, 	Euro-dollar rate 
virtually 
unchanged on 
balance
Depreciation 
against the yen
Little change  
in euro against 
pound sterling 
on balanceDEUTSCHE  
BUNDESBANK
E U R O S Y S T E M
Monthly Report  
August 2011
38

the	likelihood 	of	a	key	interest 	rate	increase 	
fell,	in	the	opinion 	of	market 	participants. 	
Since 	the	beginning 	of	July,	the	euro	has	been 	
dogged 	by	the	debt 	crisis 	in	the	euro 	area	
again, 	however. 	At	the	end	of	the	period 	under 	
review, 	€1	was	worth 	£0.87, 	down 	around 	
1½% 	compared 	with	the	end	of	March.
The	euro	registered 	marked 	losses 	against 	the	
Swiss 	franc. 	Compared 	with	the	end	of	the	first	
quarter, 	the	euro 	of	late	stood 	at	CHF1.14 	
– down 	12½% 	–	shortly 	after 	it	had	reached 	
its	lowest 	historical 	value 	of	CHF1.05. 	The	
Swiss 	currency 	profited 	as	a	safe	haven 	from 	
great 	investor 	uncertainty 	over	developments 	
in	the	euro	area	and	the	USA, 	as	well	as	from 	
the	sound 	state 	of	the	Swiss 	economy. 	The	
euro	recovered 	somewhat 	of	late	again 	after 	
a	loosening 	of	Swiss 	monetary 	policy 	as	well	
as	reports 	of	a	possible 	pegging 	of	the	Swiss 	
franc 	to	the	euro.
The	euro 	lost	about 	1 %	in	value 	compared 	
with	the	beginning 	of	the	second 	quarter 	vis-
à-vis	the	currencies 	of	the	20	most 	important 	
trading 	partners. 	However, 	it	was	still	2%	
above 	its	level	at	the	launch 	of	monetary 	un-
ion.	Thus, 	the	price 	competitiveness 	of	euro-
area	suppliers 	vis-à-vis 	important 	trade 	part-
ners	is	still	relatively 	unfavourable.
Securities markets and portfolio 
 transactions
Yields 	on	US,	Japanese 	and	German 	govern -
ment 	bonds 	decreased 	steadily 	during 	the	
spring 	and	summer, 	and	by	mid-August 	were 	
trading 	close 	to	their	historical 	lows. 	Thus, 	the	Noticeable 
exchange rate 
losses for euro 
against Swiss 
franc
Effective euro 
exchange rate
International 
bond markets 
affected by 
safe haven 
flowsExchange rate of the euro
1 Exchange  rate  at  the  start  of  monetary 
union on 4 January 1999. — 2 As calculated 
by  the  ECB  against  the  currencies  of  20 
countries.
Deutsche BundesbankA M J J A S O N D J F M A M J J A S
2010 20111.201.301.401.50
105110120130140
0.700.750.800.850.900.95
100105110115120Daily data; log scale
US$
¥
£against the ...
... US dollar
US$1.1789 1
... yen
¥133.73 1
... Swiss franc... pound sterling
CHF1.6168 1£0.7111 1
Nominal effective exchange rate 2
1999Q1 = 100
103.11 11.001.101.201.301.401.501.601.70DEUTSCHE  
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report  
August 2011
39

yield	on	ten-year 	German 	government 	bonds 	
(Bunds) 	has	fallen 	by	more 	than 	120	basis 	
points 	to	2.1 % 	since 	the	end	of	March 	2011, 	
while 	US	Treasuries 	with	the	same 	maturity 	
also	dropped 	to	2.1 % 	virtually 	in	lockstep. 	The	
corresponding 	yield	on	Japanese 	government 	
bonds 	fell	from 	a	lower 	level	by	20	points 	to	
just	over	1 %.	In	an	environment 	of	high	un-
certainty 	–	as	gauged 	by	the	implied 	volatility 	
of	options 	on	interest 	rate	futures, 	which 	was	above 	the	five-year 	average 	–	investors’ 	search 	
for	safe	and	liquid 	investments 	was	reflected 	
in	declining 	yields. 	They 	also	expressed 	the	
more 	unfavourable 	global 	economic 	outlook. 	
The	indicators 	pointed 	to	a	slowdown 	in	the	
upward 	growth 	tendency 	in	the	USA	and	then	
also	for	the	euro	area. 	The	markets 	were 	af-
fected 	of	late	by	the	credit 	downgrade 	of	the	
USA, 	which 	triggered 	a	paradoxical 	response 	
from 	yields. 	Although 	the	revaluation 	nega -
tively 	affected 	investors’ 	propensity 	to	invest 	
in	US	Treasuries, 	given 	the	fragile 	market 	situ-
ation 	the	increased 	uncertainty 	offset 	a	pos-
sible	substitution 	effect 	and	ultimately 	led	to	
an	intensified 	demand 	for	US	Treasuries, 	which 	
were 	still	regarded 	as	a	safe	haven. 	Due	to	
Japan’s 	rapid 	recovery 	following 	the	devastat -
ing	earthquake, 	Japanese 	government 	bonds 	
recorded 	more 	stable 	prices 	than 	sovereign 	
bonds 	on	both 	sides 	of	the	Atlantic.
Throughout 	the	review 	period, 	euro-area 	yield	
spreads 	were 	dominated 	by	market 	partici -
pants’ 	uncertainty 	regarding 	the	solvency 	of	
highly 	indebted 	countries. 	Initial 	concerns 	cen-
tred	on	a	possible 	credit 	event 	involving 	Greek 	
bonds. 	The	markets 	were 	also	put	under 	pres-
sure	by	the	facts 	that	this	jeopardised 	an	IMF	
credit 	tranche 	that	is	tied	to	strict 	conditional -
ity,	that	Greece 	was	not	meeting 	the	objectives 	
of	its	consolidation 	efforts 	and	that	the	Greek 	
parliament 	only	adopted 	an	urgently 	required 	
austerity 	package, 	which 	had	been 	agreed 	
upon 	with	the	European 	Commission, 	ECB	and	
the	IMF,	at	the	last	possible 	moment. 	In	addi-
tion,	during 	the	course 	of	the	quarter, 	the	po-
litical 	dispute 	about 	whether 	the	public 	sector 	
should 	completely 	cover 	the	risks	entered 	into	
by	the	private 	sector 	with	its	exposure 	to	Yield spreads  
in the EMU  
at record levelYield spreads
in the euro area
Sources: Thomson Reuters and Bundesbank 
calculations. — 1 Standard deviation of yield 
spreads  of  euro-area  government  bonds 
against German Federal bonds (Bunds).
Deutsche Bundesbank01002003004005006007008009001,0001,1001,2001,3001,4001,5001,600
2009 2010 20110100200300400500Daily data
Spread of ten-year 
government bonds 
against Bunds
Dispersion of
yield spreads against
German Federal bonds 1
GDP weightedUnweightedBasis
points
Greece
Basis
pointsIreland
ItalyPortugal
SpainDEUTSCHE  
BUNDESBANK
E U R O S Y S T E M
Monthly Report  
August 2011
40

Greece 	came 	to	the	fore. 	At	the	European	
Union	 summit	 on	21 July	 2011,	 a	new	 rescue	
programme 	for	Greece 	was	finally 	resolved,	
and	a	plan	 for	a	maturity	 extension	 on	capital	
market-financed 	public 	debt, 	with	private 	sec-
tor	involvement, 	was	presented. 	Sovereign	
yields	 of	highly	 indebted	 euro-area	 countries	
fell	only	 briefly	 in	response,	 however.	 When,	
in	rapid 	succession, 	the	rating 	agencies	
lowered 	their 	credit 	ratings 	for	the	already	
crisis-stricken 	countries 	as	well	as	for	Spain 	and	
Italy,	 the	yield	 spreads	 on	euro-area	 countries’	
long-term	 government	 bonds	 rose	 to	new	 re-
cord	highs 	against 	Bunds 	in	August. 	Market	
participants’ 	main 	concern 	was	whether 	Italy’s	
fiscal 	policy 	would 	drive 	the	budgetary 	consoli -
dation	 forward	 decisively	 enough.	 In	light	 of	
the	Eurosystem’s	 secondary	 market	 purchases	
and	additional 	consolidation 	efforts 	in	Italy,	the	
spread 	narrowed 	again, 	however; 	as	this	report	
went 	to	press, 	it	stood 	at	over	240	basis 	points	
and	thus	still	130	basis 	points 	above 	its	level	at	
the	end	of	March	2011.
The	German 	yield 	curve 	has	shifted 	down -
wards 	markedly 	since 	March, 	with	interest	
rates 	in	the	short-term 	capital 	market 	segment	
falling 	less	strongly 	than	long-term 	yields. 	This	
reflects 	the	key	interest 	rate	increases 	in	the	
euro	 area,	 which	 led	to	rising	 money	 market	
rates 	and	had	a	knock-on 	effect 	on	short-term	
maturities	 on	the	capital	 market.	 However,	 in	
market	 participants’	 view,	 the	time	 for	further	
monetary 	policy 	steps 	had	been 	put	back 	com-
pared	 with	 the	end	of	March.	 The	implied	 for-
ward 	break-even 	inflation 	rate	between 	five	
and	ten	years	 has	increased	 appreciably	 since	
mid-June. 	For	all	the	uncertainty 	involved 	in	
interpreting 	financial 	market 	data	given 	the	Yield curve 
shifted downwardsRatings of Greece, Ireland, 
Italy, Portugal and Spain *
* Long-term foreign currency rating. In this 
chart, a negative or positive outlook corres-ponds to one-third of a notch.
Deutsche Bundesbank2008 2009 2010 2011Moody’s
Standard & Poor’sCaa2Caa1B3B2B1Ba3Ba2Ba1Baa3Baa2Baa1A3A2A1Aa3Aa2Aa1
CCCCCC +B –BB +BB –BBBB +BBB –BBBAAA
BBB +A –AA +AA –AAAA +Aaa
Spain IrelandItalyIreland
GreeceGreece
ItalyPortugalPortugalSpainDEUTSCHE  
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report  
August 2011
41

high	volume 	of	safe	haven 	flows, 	it	cannot 	be	
ruled 	out	that	market 	participants 	envisage 	
greater 	inflation 	risks	in	the	long	term. 	At	the	
very	least, 	the	observed 	trend 	of	this	indicator 	
for	longer-term 	inflation 	expectations 	has	con-
tinued 	upwards 	since 	autumn 	2010.
Yields 	on	BBB-rated 	European 	corporate 	bonds 	
initially 	fell	in	the	reporting 	period 	and	only	
rose	again 	slightly 	as	the	debt	crisis 	intensified 	
in	August.1	As	interest 	on	Bunds 	fell	sharply 	at	
the	same 	time, 	the	gap	to	this	benchmark 	
widened 	to	380	basis 	points, 	which 	was	clearly 	
above 	the	five-year 	average. 	This,	and	the	in-
creases 	in	credit 	default 	derivative 	indices 	
(iTraxx) 	show 	that	market 	participants 	evaluate 	the	credit 	risks	of	enterprises 	somewhat 	more 	
critically 	than	they	did	at	the	beginning 	of	the	
second 	quarter. 	Besides 	–	as	with	government 	
bonds 	–	the	yield 	dispersion 	between 	the	
countries 	increased, 	with	banks 	in	some 	pe-
ripheral 	countries 	registering 	a	particularly 	
strong 	rise	in	debt	financing 	costs. 	In	absolute 	
terms, 	bonds 	issued 	by	enterprises 	to	borrow 	
on	the	capital 	market 	yielded 	just	over	5.9% 	
of	late,	and	thus	slightly 	below 	the	average 	of	
the	last	five	years. 	All	in	all,	enterprises’ 	financ -
ing	conditions 	on	the	capital 	market 	cannot 	
therefore 	be	considered 	as	unfavourable.
Issuance 	activity 	on	the	German 	bond 	market 	
in	the	months 	April 	to	June	was,	at	€349 	bil-
lion,	below 	the	volume 	recorded 	in	the	previ -
ous	quarter 	(€371½ 	billion). 	However, 	after 	
deducting 	redemptions, 	which 	also	decreased, 	
and	taking 	account 	of	changes 	in	issuers’ 	hold-
ings	of	their	own	bonds, 	the	volume 	of	out-
standing 	domestic 	bonds 	rose	by	€2	billion 	on	
balance. 	Foreign 	debtors 	sold	debt	securities 	
totalling 	only	€4	billion 	on	the	German 	market. 	
Compared 	with	the	two-digit 	billion 	amounts 	
which 	were 	seen 	before 	the	crisis, 	this	is	a	
comparatively 	small 	amount. 	Before 	the	out-
break 	of	the	debt	crisis, 	even 	weaker 	partner 	
countries 	–	from 	a	fiscal 	policy 	perspective 	–	
could 	regularly 	place 	large 	amounts 	in	Ger-
many. 	The	smaller 	sales 	volume 	shows 	that	
some 	euro-area 	countries 	have 	lost	the	ability 	
to	procure 	capital 	market 	funds 	from 	private 	
investors. 	A	total	of	€6	billion 	flowed 	into	the	
German 	bond 	market 	on	balance.
The	public 	sector 	increased 	its	capital 	market 	
debt	by	€35½ 	billion 	in	the	second 	quarter. 	Of	
this	amount, 	central 	government 	(including 	Financing 
 conditions for 
enterprises not 
unfavourableHigh issuance 
in the bond 
market
High level of 
public sector 
borrowingYield curve on the German 
bond market *
* Interest rates for (hypothetical) zero-cou-
pon bonds (Svensson model), based on lis-
ted Federal securities.
Deutsche Bundesbank0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 100.51.01.52.02.53.03.5
Residual maturity in years%
18 August 20117 July 201130 March 2011
1	Yields 	on	BBB-rated 	corporate 	bonds 	in	the	iBoxx 	bond 	
index 	are	used 	as	a	basis. 	This	index 	covers 	bonds 	issued 	
by	banks 	and	non-banks.DEUTSCHE  
BUNDESBANK
E U R O S Y S T E M
Monthly Report  
August 2011
42

FMS	Wertmanagement) 	accounted 	for	€22	bil-
lion.	The	German 	Federal 	government 	itself	
borrowed 	just	under 	€9½	billion. 	It	was	striking	
that	 it	continued	 with	 its	issues	 to	extend	 the	
maturity	 of	its	debt	 and	 in	doing	 so	secured	
the	favourable	 interest	 rate	level	 for	longer.	 It	
primarily 	issued 	ten-year 	Bunds 	(€13	billion),	
and,	to	a	smaller 	extent, 	two-year 	Federal	
Treasury	 notes	 (Schätze)	 and	30-year	 Federal	
bonds	 (€2	billion	 each).	 Conversely,	 the	Ger-
man	 Federal	 government	 redeemed	 five-year	
Federal	 notes	 (Bobls)	 and	Federal	 Treasury	 dis-
count 	paper 	(Bubils) 	totalling 	€4	billion 	and	
€3½	billion 	respectively. 	The	Federal 	states 	bor-
rowed	€13½	billion	from	the	capital	market.
Non-bank 	domestic 	enterprises 	issued 	debt	se-
curities	 during	 the	reporting	 period	 worth	 €3	
billion, 	which 	on	balance 	were 	solely 	bonds	
with	a	maturity	of	more	than	one	year.
By	comparison, 	domestic 	credit 	institutions 	re-
duced 	their 	capital 	market 	debt 	–	following	
the	trend	 of	the	past	 years	 –	by	€36½	 billion	
net	(previous 	quarter: 	+€4½ 	billion). 	Above 	all,	
flexibly	 structured	 other	 bank	 debt	 securities	
(€31½ 	billion) 	and	public 	Pfandbriefe 	(€10½	
billion) 	were 	redeemed. 	By	contrast, 	specialised	
credit 	institutions, 	which 	also	include 	public	
promotional	 banks,	 issued	 bonds	 worth	 €5½	
billion	net.
The	sole	purchasers 	of	German 	debt	securities	
in	spring	 2011	 were	 foreign	 investors,	 increas -
ing	their	 portfolios	 of	domestic	 fixed-income	
securities 	by	€60	billion. 	Throughout 	the	entire	
quarter,	 they	 mainly	 invested	 in	paper	 issued	
by	the	public 	sector. 	The	figures 	once 	again	
reflect 	global 	financial 	market 	participants’	trust	 in	the	soundness	 of	the	German	 Federal	
government	 as	a	debtor	 in	times	 of	crisis.	 This	
meant 	that	on	several 	occasions 	the	euro-area	
debt	problem 	triggered 	sharp 	inflows 	into	Fed-
eral	securities. 	By	contrast, 	residents 	sold	
bonds	 on	the	German	 bond	 market	 (€54	 bil-
lion), 	the	majority 	of	which 	was	interest-
bearing 	paper 	from 	domestic 	non-banks	
(€36½ 	billion). 	Domestic 	credit 	institutions 	sold	
debt	 securities	 worth	 €17½	 billion,	 (primarily	
German 	paper). 	Demand 	for	euro-denominated	
government 	bonds 	from 	highly 	indebted 	euro-
area	countries	was	virtually	zero.
The	sovereign 	debt 	crisis 	in	Europe 	and	the	
discussions 	surrounding 	the	debt	ceiling 	in	the	
USA	 led	to	greater	 uncertainty	 and	significant	
price	 losses	 on	the	stock	 markets	 during	 the	
summer. 	The	agreement 	on	a	new	rescue 	pack-Bank issuance 
activity low
Net redemp-
tions by credit institutions
Purchases of 
debt securities by foreign investorsHeavy losses on international stock marketsInvestment activity in the German 
 securities markets
€ billion
Item2010 2011
Q2 Q1 Q2
Debt securities
Residents –  4.2 16.0 – 54.0
Credit institutions – 44.5 – 11.4 – 17.5
of which
Foreign debt securities – 40.3 0.5 –  2.6
Non-banks 40.3 27.4 – 36.5
of which
Domestic debt securities 0.4 5.4 – 43.1
Non-residents 1.0 50.3 60.1
Shares
Residents 13.4 7.4 15.9
Credit institutions –  1.6 5.8 –  0.3
of which
Domestic shares –  4.6 7.6 –  5.1
Non-banks 15.0 1.7 16.2
of which
Domestic shares 6.8 2.4 10.5
Non-residents –  1.5 –  8.7 12.4
Mutual fund sharesInvestment in specialised funds 14.0 14.2 4.2
Investment in funds open to 
the general public 0.6 0.6 0.5
of which Share-based funds –  1.4 0.2 1.4
Deutsche BundesbankDEUTSCHE  
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report  
August 2011
43

age	for	Greece 	and	the	publication 	of	the	bank 	
stress 	tests	results 	by	the	European 	Banking 	
Authority 	did	lead	to	temporary 	market 	rallies. 	
With 	the	altogether 	rather 	disappointing 	eco-
nomic 	reports, 	first	from 	the	USA	then	later	
also	from 	the	euro	area, 	as	well	as	the	con-
cerns 	surrounding 	the	budgetary 	situation 	in	
large 	countries, 	stock 	market 	prices 	fell	in	
some 	cases 	by	over	20% 	within 	a	few	days, 	however, 	and	reached 	the	levels 	last	seen	dur-
ing	the	recession 	in	2009.
Listed 	US	enterprises 	were 	also	affected 	by	
share 	price 	losses, 	although 	the	prospect 	of	a	
continued 	low-interest-rate 	policy 	is	producing 	
negative 	expected 	real	interest 	rates 	there. 	In	
Europe, 	equities 	performed 	very	divergently. 	
While 	equities 	from 	peripheral 	countries 	in	par-
ticular 	had	already 	registered 	clear 	declines 	in	
prices 	in	the	period 	from 	April 	to	the	end	of	
July,	the	core	countries’ 	indices 	initially 	stabil -
ised	around 	the	level	seen	at	the	end	of	March. 	
Concerns 	about 	the	stability 	of	public 	finances 	
and	less	favourable 	economic 	data	also	af-
fected 	stock 	prices 	of	late.	On	balance, 	the	
overall 	European 	Euro	Stoxx 	index 	has	fallen 	
by	23½% 	since 	the	end	of	March, 	with	CDAX 	
losses 	only	marginally 	smaller. 	In	view	of	these 	
high	share 	price 	decreases, 	the	fact	that	profit 	
growth 	expectations 	deteriorated 	only	slightly 	
was	somewhat 	overshadowed. 	When 	consid -
ered	as	a	whole, 	the	P/E	ratio 	of	European 	
shares 	is,	at	8.9,	clearly 	below 	its	long-term 	
average. 	Japanese 	shares 	lost	8½% 	in	value 	
based 	on	the	Nikkei 	225	index 	despite 	Japan’s 	
brisker 	than	expected 	recovery 	from 	the	earth -
quake.
The	risk	compensation 	investors 	demand 	for	
an	investment 	in	European 	shares 	(Euro 	Stoxx) 	
as	compared 	to	a	safer 	investment, 	which 	can	
be	calculated 	using 	a	dividend 	discount 	model, 	
rose	by	just	less	than	½	percentage 	point 	to	
around 	7¾%, 	mirroring 	the	fallen 	P/E	ratio. 	It	
therefore 	remains 	considerably 	above 	the	five-
year	average 	(around 	5½%). 	The	implied 	risk	
premium 	for	exposure 	to	European 	banking 	
stocks 	rose	markedly 	of	late	to	10½%. 	This	was	Equity risk 
premium quite 
high20305075100150
0510152025
10203040506070
2007 2008 2009 2010 2011Equity market
Sources: Thomson Reuters and Bundesbank 
calculations. — 1 End-of-month levels; meas-
ure of the risk premium demanded by in-
vestors.  Calculated  from  three-stage  di-
vidend discount model using three to five-
year IBES expectations of profit growth and 
long-term  GDP  growth  expectations  (con-
census forecast). — 2 Expected future volat-
ility,  calculated  from  prices  of  options  on 
the Euro Stoxx. 
Deutsche BundesbankEuro Stoxx 
banks
Lin scale
Equity risk premiums 1
Euro StoxxEuro Stoxx
Euro Stoxx 
banks%31 December 2006 = 100, log scale
Stock price indicesWeekly averages
% Implied volatility of the Euro Stoxx 2
DEUTSCHE  
BUNDESBANK
E U R O S Y S T E M
Monthly Report  
August 2011
44

because 	their 	prices 	were 	down 	even 	more	
sharply	 than	 earnings	 expectations	 for	banks.	
The	equity 	risk	premium 	for	bank 	equities 	is	
therefore	 at	a	level	 last	seen	 during	 the	bank -
ing	crisis	at	the	beginning	of	2009.
The	–	on	the	whole 	–	harsh 	stock 	exchange	
climate 	did	not	negatively 	affect 	issuance 	activ-
ity	in	Germany.	 In	the	second	 quarter	 of	2011,	
domestic	 enterprises	 issued	 new	 shares	 worth	
€18	billion,	 compared	 with	 €1½	 billion	 in	the	
months 	January 	to	March.	 Capital 	increases 	in	
particular	 played	 a	major	 role	in	this.	 The	larg-
est	new	issue 	was	brought 	by	a	real	estate	
enterprise 	that	sees	good 	investment 	possi -
bilities	 in	Germany.	 The	outstanding	 amount	
of	foreign 	shares 	in	Germany 	rose	by	€10½	
billion.	 Equities	 were	 acquired	 particularly	 by	
resident 	non-banks 	(€16	billion), 	which 	pre-
dominantly 	invested 	in	domestic 	shares 	(€10½	
billion). 	Credit 	institutions 	sold	domestic 	shares	
(-€5	billion) 	in	favour 	of	foreign 	shares 	(+€5	
billion). 	Non-resident 	investors 	expanded 	their	
exposure 	to	the	German 	stock 	market 	by	€12½	
billion,	 the	vast	majority	 of	which	 was	portfo -
lio	investment.
Domestic	 investment	 companies	 recorded	 in-
flows 	of	€4½	billion 	in	the	months 	April 	to	
June,	 after	 €15	billion	 in	the	previous	 quarter.	
Almost 	all	of	the	fresh 	funds 	benefited 	special -
ised	 funds	 reserved	 for	institutional	 investors	
(€4	billion).	 Of	the	mutual	 funds	 open	 to	the	
general 	public, 	equity-based 	funds 	attracted	
inflows 	of	€1½	billion 	and	open-end 	real	estate	
funds 	€½	billion. 	By	contrast, 	bond-based	
funds	 and	money	 market	 funds	 suffered	 out-
flows	 of	€1	billion	 and	€½	billion	 respectively.	Stock market 
funding and stock purchases not affected
Sales and 
purchases  of mutual  fund shares decliningMajor items of the balance of 
 payments
€ billion
Item2010 2011
Q2 Q1 Q2
 I Current account 1, 2 + 28.5 + 35.3 + 27.6 
Foreign trade 1, 3 + 37.4 r + 40.8 + 38.3
Services 1 –  2.6 –  0.2 –  2.3 
Income 1 +  3.1 + 13.3 +  0.7 
Current transfers 1 –  6.6 – 14.1 –  5.6 
 II Capital transfers 1, 4 –  0.4 +  0.9 –  0.3 
 III Financial account 1
(Net capital exports: –) – 31.7 – 53.8 – 22.4 
1 Direct investment – 24.2 – 24.5 +  4.5 
German investment 
abroad – 33.7 – 26.4 +  1.7 
Foreign investment in  Germany +  9.5 +  1.8 +  2.9 
2 Portfolio investment –  9.1 + 27.1 + 58.8 
German investment abroad –  6.3 – 20.7 – 13.8 
Shares –  3.7 +  4.8 –  8.4 
Mutual fund shares –  3.1 –  2.9 –  1.4 
Debt securities +  0.4 – 22.6 –  4.0 
Bonds and notes 
5 –  2.8 – 20.0 +  3.7 
of which
Euro-denominated 
bonds and notes –  2.4 – 18.7 +  6.4 
Money market 
 instruments +  3.2 –  2.6 –  7.7 
Foreign investment 
in Germany –  2.8 + 47.8 + 72.5 
Shares –  3.8 –  4.9 + 11.6 
Mutual fund shares +  0.1 +  2.4 +  0.9 
Debt securities +  1.0 + 50.3 + 60.1 
Bonds and notes 5 + 20.9 + 32.4 + 38.3 
of which 
Public bonds and notes + 22.4 + 24.1 + 31.3 
Money market  instruments – 19.9 + 17.9 + 21.7 
3 Financial derivatives 
6 –  6.3 – 11.5 –  5.5 
4 Other investment 7 +  8.7 – 43.5 – 79.8 
Monetary fi  nancial  institutions 
8 + 49.9 –  4.8 – 52.4 
of which short-term + 41.0 –  6.3 – 47.6 
Enterprises and  households +  3.0 – 30.6 –  3.1 
of which short-term + 13.1 – 15.3 +  2.8 
General government –  3.9 –  9.3 –  8.1 
of which short-term +  6.9 – 11.4 –  8.6 
Bundesbank – 40.2 +  1.3 – 16.2 
5 Change in reserve assets 
at transaction values (increase: –) 
9 –  0.8 –  1.4 –  0.4 
 IV Errors and omissions +  3.6 + 17.5 –  4.9 
1 Balance. — 2 Including supplementary trade items. — 3 Special 
trade according to the offi  cial foreign trade statistics (source: Federal Statistical Offi  ce). — 4 Including the acquisition/disposal 
of non-produced non-fi  nancial assets. — 5 Original maturity of 
more than one year. — 6 Securitised and non-securitised options 
as well as fi  nancial futures contracts. — 7 Includes fi  nancial and 
trade credits, bank deposits and other assets. — 8 Excluding the 
Bundesbank. — 9 Excluding allocation of SDRs and excluding 
changes due to value adjustments.
Deutsche BundesbankDEUTSCHE  
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report  
August 2011
45

Sales 	of	foreign 	mutual 	fund 	units 	in	Germany 	
totalled 	€1½	billion.
As	in	the	first	quarter, 	mutual 	fund 	shares 	were 	
mainly 	bought 	by	domestic 	non-banks, 	which 	
added 	€7½ 	billion 	worth 	of	fund 	shares 	to	
their	portfolios. 	This	predominantly 	involved 	
shares 	in	domestic 	mutual 	funds 	(€7	billion). 	
Non-resident 	investors 	increased 	their	holdings 	
of	domestic 	fund 	units 	by	€1	billion. 	By	con-
trast, 	domestic 	credit 	institutions 	sold	mutual 	
fund 	shares 	worth 	€2½	billion, 	selling 	only	do-
mestic 	shares 	(€3	billion) 	on	balance.
Direct investment
As	in	cross-border 	portfolio 	transactions, 	which 	
registered 	high	net	inflows 	in	the	second 	quar-
ter	of	2011 	(€59 	billion), 	Germany 	also	re-
corded 	inflows 	in	direct 	investment 	during 	the	
reporting 	period 	(€4½ 	billion). 	In	the	previous 	
three 	months, 	net	capital 	exports 	totalled 	
€24½ 	billion. 	The	main 	reason 	for	the	turna -
round 	was	that	domestic 	enterprises 	withdrew 	funds 	from 	abroad 	(€1½ 	billion), 	while 	in	the	
previous 	quarter 	they	had	distributed 	capital 	
to	their 	foreign 	subsidiaries 	to	the	tune 	of	
€26½ 	billion. 	This	was	mainly 	in	the	form 	of	
intra-group 	loans, 	which 	on	balance 	provided 	
funds 	to	the	resident 	parent 	enterprises 	during 	
the	second 	quarter 	of	the	year	(€15½ 	billion). 	
Furthermore, 	reinvested 	earnings 	decreased 	to	
€6½	billion. 	By	contrast, 	the	supply 	of	addi-
tional 	equity 	capital 	was,	at	€7½	billion, 	slightly 	
above 	the	previous 	quarter’s 	level. 	The	geo-
graphical 	focus 	of	German 	direct 	investment 	
during 	the	reporting 	period 	was	on	emerging 	
market 	and	developing 	countries 	(€3½ 	billion), 	
while 	on	balance 	funds 	were 	withdrawn 	from 	
industrialised 	countries 	(€5½ 	billion).
Transactions 	by	foreign 	proprietors 	with	their	
German 	affiliates 	also	led	to	net	capital 	inflows 	
(€3	billion) 	between 	April	and	June	2011. 	These 	
were 	generally 	conducted 	via	inter-group 	
loans. 	Manufacturing 	enterprises 	in	particular 	
profited 	from 	this	inflow. 	The	funds 	predomi -
nantly 	came 	from 	affiliated 	enterprises 	in	Lux-
embourg, 	the	Netherlands 	and	Switzerland.Net inflows  
in direct 
 investmentDEUTSCHE  
BUNDESBANK
E U R O S Y S T E M
Monthly Report  
August 2011
46

Economic conditions 
in GermanyMacroeconomic situation
The	German 	economy 	continued 	its	upswing 	
in	the	second 	quarter 	of	2011 	at	a	muted 	pace, 	
as	anticipated. 	According 	to	an	initial 	estimate 	
by	the	Federal 	Statistical 	Office, 	real	gross 	do-
mestic 	product 	(GDP) 	in	the	second 	quarter, 	
after 	seasonal 	and	calendar 	adjustment, 	ex-
panded 	by	0.1 % 	on	the	first	quarter, 	which 	had	
recorded 	very	strong 	growth 	of	1.3%. 	The	
volatile 	pattern 	over	the	first	half	of	the	year	
can	be	attributed 	in	part	to	the	weather-related 	
output 	losses 	at	the	end	of	last	year.	The	result -
ant	catch-up 	effects, 	which 	were 	fairly 	pro-
nounced 	in	some 	areas 	of	the	economy, 	had	
boosted 	output 	above 	all	in	the	first	few	
months 	of	this	year. 	The	return 	to	a	normal 	
cyclical 	growth 	path	during 	the	course 	of	the	
second 	quarter 	was	accompanied 	by	a	low	
quarter-on-quarter 	rate	of	expansion 	in	the	
reporting 	period 	which 	understates 	the	under -
lying 	growth 	momentum.
Furthermore, 	special 	factors 	have 	recently 	held	
domestic 	growth 	dynamics 	below 	the	underly -
ing	trend. 	For	example, 	fixed 	capital 	formation 	
picked 	up	noticeably 	only	in	the	case	of	move -
able	goods, 	whereas 	construction 	investment 	
fell	back 	to	a	more 	normal 	level. 	Moreover, 	the	
fact	that	energy 	prices 	reached 	new	record 	
highs 	at	the	beginning 	of	the	second 	quarter 	
may	have 	prompted 	consumers 	to	curb	their	
spending 	somewhat. 	The	muted 	growth 	in	the	
second 	quarter 	is	therefore 	not	in	itself 	proof 	
that	the	German 	economy’s 	dynamics 	have 	
perceptibly 	slackened 	as	a	result 	of	the	foresee -
able	weakening 	of	foreign 	demand 	and	the	
sharply 	rising 	uncertainty 	of	late	as	a	result 	of	
heightened 	tension 	on	the	financial 	markets 	GDP growth in 
Q2 understates 
underlying 
pace of 
economic 
growth
Domestic 
dynamics 
dampened by 
special factorsDEUTSCHE  
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report  
August 2011
47

in	connection 	with	the	sovereign 	debt	problem 	
in	the	euro	area	and	the	USA. 	There 	are,	how-
ever,	significant 	risks	in	this	respect 	going 	for-
ward.
German 	enterprises 	further 	boosted 	their	for-
eign	sales	in	the	second 	quarter. 	The	seasonally 	
adjusted 	value 	of	exported 	goods 	went 	up	by	
2¼% 	during 	the	reporting 	period, 	following 	a	
4%	increase 	in	the	first	quarter. 	In	real	terms, 	
the	second-quarter 	increase 	was	only	margin -
ally	smaller 	than	that	of	the	previous 	period. 	
According 	to	the	data	available 	for	April 	and	
May, 	sales 	to	euro-area 	customers 	increased 	
only	marginally, 	whereas 	goods 	exports 	to	
non-euro-area 	buyers 	rose	significantly. 	There 	
was	strong 	growth 	in	exports 	to	South 	and	
East	Asian 	countries 	and	to	Russia. 	By	contrast, 	
turnover 	with	central 	and	east	European 	coun -tries, 	the	other 	EU	member 	states 	and	the	USA	
registered 	a	noticeable 	loss	of	momentum. 	
Deliveries 	to	China 	fell	sharply 	after 	recording 	
very	strong 	growth 	on	the	whole 	since 	the	be-
ginning 	of	2009. 	Exports 	to	Japan 	also	de-
clined, 	although 	this	is	to	be	seen	in	connec -
tion	with	the	output 	losses 	related 	to	the	re-
cent	natural 	disaster 	there. 	Exports 	of	interme -
diate 	goods 	failed 	to	pick	up	further 	in	the	
second 	quarter 	owing 	to	the	global 	growth 	
dip.	By	contrast, 	German-produced 	capital 	
goods 	were 	still	very	much 	in	demand 	across 	
the	globe. 	Exports 	of	machinery, 	in	particular, 	
expanded 	strongly. 	Motor 	vehicle 	exports 	like-
wise	climbed 	appreciably.
Corporate 	investment 	geared 	to	expansion 	
was	a	major 	driver 	of	economic 	activity 	in	Ger-
many. 	Firms’ 	spending 	on	moveable 	fixed 	as-
sets	is	likely 	to	have 	risen 	substantially 	again 	in	
the	second 	quarter. 	Replacing 	and	adding 	to	
machinery 	and	other 	equipment 	were 	the	main 	
priorities, 	whereas 	purchases 	of	vehicle 	fleets 	
played 	a	subordinate 	role.	Although 	business 	
expectations 	were 	not	quite 	as	optimistic 	to-
wards 	the	end	of	the	reporting 	period, 	many 	
industries 	continued 	to	extend 	their	production 	
facilities 	in	the	light	of	the	current 	high	level	
of	capacity 	utilisation 	of	tangible 	fixed 	assets. 	
This	is	likely 	to	have 	been 	fuelled 	by	the	still	
positive 	investment 	environment, 	which 	is	
characterised, 	amongst 	other 	things, 	by	the	
favourable 	earnings 	situation 	as	well	as	advan -
tageous 	external 	funding 	conditions.
Seasonally 	adjusted 	construction 	investment 	
in	the	second 	quarter 	was	unable 	to	match 	the	
high	level	recorded 	at	the	beginning 	of	the	
year, 	which 	was	characterised 	by	weather-Continuing 
export growthHigher invest-
ment in 
machinery and 
equipment
Slight decline  
in construction 
investmentOverall output
Deutsche Bundesbank2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011102104106108110112
–6–4–20+2+42005 = 100, price and seasonally adjusted
Log scale
GDP
Year-on-year
change%Lin scaleDEUTSCHE  
BUNDESBANK
E U R O S Y S T E M
Monthly Report  
August 2011
48

related 	catch-up 	effects. 	But	given 	the	marked	
underlying 	upward 	trend 	in	construction 	activ-
ity,	the	decline	 is	not	likely	 to	have	 been	 sub-
stantial.	 This	was	due	not	only	 to	the	very	 fa-
vourable 	situation 	in	housing 	construction 	but	
also	 to	the	fact	that	 construction	 firms	 addi-
tionally 	benefited 	from 	the	large 	number 	of	
building 	projects 	of	commercial 	customers 	and	
the	public	sector.
In	recent	 months,	 consumer	 demand	 is	likely	
to	have	 been	 dented	 by	the	strained	 price	 cli-
mate 	despite 	the	favourable 	economic 	and	
labour 	market 	situation 	in	Germany. 	For	in-
stance,	 fuel	prices	 –	which	 are	usually	 a	sensi -
tive	and	closely	 monitored	 barometer	 –	were	
high	 at	the	beginning	 of	the	second	 quarter,	
which 	could 	have 	weighed 	on	households’	
propensity 	to	consume. 	The	decline 	in	the	
number 	of	new	cars	registered 	by	households,	
for	example,	 points	 to	more	 modest	 expendi -
ture	on	automobile 	purchases 	in	the	second	
quarter. 	Seasonally 	adjusted 	expenditure 	on	
heating	 oil	was	 also	 much	 lower	 than	 in	the	
first	quarter. 	By	contrast, 	retail 	purchases 	–	
bearing 	in	mind 	the	current 	uncertainties 	in	
terms	 of	statistical	 data	 recording	 –	largely	 re-
mained	at	the	level	of	the	first	quarter.
At	3½%, 	the	seasonally 	adjusted 	value 	of	
goods	 imports	 expanded	 much	 more	 sharply	
in	the	second	 quarter	 than	 that	 of	goods	 ex-
ports.	 In	real	terms,	 the	rise	in	imports	 almost	
matched 	the	nominal 	increase. 	Apart 	from 	the	
sharp	 increase	 in	expenditure	 on	foreign	 fuel,	
which	 was	partly	 due	to	price-related	 factors,	
a	greater 	number 	of	computers, 	electronic 	and	
optical 	products 	as	well	as	electrical 	equip -
ment,	 which	 were	 largely	 attributable	 to	the	capital 	goods 	sector, 	were 	imported 	as	a	result	
of	the	higher	 investment	 undertaken	 by	Ger-
man	enterprises. 	Furthermore, 	starting 	from	
an	already 	significantly 	elevated 	level	in	the	
first	quarter,	 noticeably	 more	 machines	 were	
purchased	 from	 foreign	 manufacturers.	 There	
was	also	a	rise	in	imports	 of	consumer	 goods.	
Germany’s 	euro-area 	partner 	countries, 	in	par-
ticular, 	were 	once 	again 	beneficiaries 	of	the	
German 	economy’s 	strong 	import 	demand.	Private 
 consumption 
dented  by strained price climate
Marked import 
growthUnderlying trends
in foreign trade
1 Adjusted for the price indices for foreign 
trade.
Deutsche Bundesbank951001101201302005 = 100, log scale
Exports of goods  (price-adjusted)1
100110120130Seasonally adjusted, quarterly
To euro-area countriesTo non-euro-area countriesApr-
MayTotal
Apr-May
€ bn
2007 2008 2009 2010 2011100110120130140
Lin scale
Foreign trade balance90100110120
Imports of goods in total
(price-adjusted)1
0204060DEUTSCHE  
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report  
August 2011
49

The	country’s 	function 	as	a	pacemaker 	for	the	
entire 	euro	area	therefore 	remains 	intact 	at	the	
current 	end.
Sectoral trends
Industrial 	output 	in	the	second 	quarter 	rose	by	
a	seasonally 	adjusted 	2%	on	the	quarter 	and	
therefore 	expanded 	equally 	as	strongly 	as	in	the	early 	part	of	the	year. 	Output 	of	capital 	
goods 	expanded 	at	a	slightly 	higher 	rate.	This	
was	driven 	by	a	significant 	increase 	in	the	pro-
duction 	not	only	of	motor 	vehicles 	but	also	of	
other 	transport 	equipment, 	demand 	for	which 	
was	boosted 	perceptibly 	by	large-volume 	or-
ders	in	recent 	months. 	The	production 	of	in-
termediate 	goods 	also	picked 	up	further 	(+2%) 	
after 	already 	recording 	strong 	growth 	in	the	
first	quarter. 	The	largest 	growth 	rate	among 	
the	intermediate 	goods 	sectors 	was	recorded 	
in	the	manufacture 	of	machinery 	and	equip -
ment, 	whereas 	the	chemicals 	industry 	in-
creased 	its	output 	only	slightly. 	The	manufac -
ture	of	consumer 	goods 	recorded 	only	modest 	
growth 	(+1¼%), 	as	in	the	first	quarter.
The	further 	rise	in	output 	was	accompanied 	by	
continuing 	expansion 	of	overall 	capacity 	utilisa -
tion	in	industry. 	According 	to	the	Ifo	surveys, 	
capacity 	utilisation 	went 	up	slightly 	in	July	
compared 	with	April 	and	is	now	2	percentage 	
points 	above 	its	long-term 	average. 	This	
masked 	divergent 	developments 	in	the	indi-
vidual 	sectors, 	however. 	Capacity 	utilisation 	in	
the	capital 	goods 	sector 	increased 	further. 	The	
report 	by	intermediate 	goods 	producers 	in	July	
of	a	slight 	fall	in	their	capacity 	utilisation 	might 	
indicate 	weaker 	output 	in	this	industrial 	sector 	
at	the	beginning 	of	the	third 	quarter. 	This	is	
also	suggested, 	for	example, 	by	the	fact	that	
the	manufacture 	of	crude 	steel 	was	around 	
one-tenth 	lower 	in	July	than	the	corresponding 	
peak 	figure 	in	May.
Construction 	output 	in	the	second 	quarter 	was	
down 	1¼% 	on	the	perceptibly 	higher 	level	of	
the	first	quarter, 	which 	had	been 	boosted 	by	
catch-up 	effects, 	but	was	still	clearly 	up	on	the	Further rise  
in industrial 
outputFurther 
expansion in 
manufacturing 
capacity 
 utilisation
Moderate fall 
in constructionLog scale
Industry
Lin scale
Year-on-year
change
Log scale
Construction
Lin scale
Year-on-year
change%%Output in industry and in 
construction
Deutsche Bundesbank2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 20119095100105110115120
–20–15–10–50+5+10+15
95100105110115120125
–10–50+5+10+15+20+25+30+352005 = 100, seasonally adjusted, quarterlyDEUTSCHE  
BUNDESBANK
E U R O S Y S T E M
Monthly Report  
August 2011
50

level	of	the	preceding 	quarters. 	Output 	in	civil	
engineering 	declined 	a	little	more 	sharply 	than	
building 	construction 	in	the	reporting 	period. 	
The	fact	that	the	utilisation 	of	construction 	
machinery 	is	still	at	an	exceptionally 	high	level	
is	a	strong 	indication 	that	construction 	activity 	
is	still	buoyant. 	Economic 	activity 	in	the	second 	
quarter 	is	also	likely 	to	have 	been 	supported 	
by	the	finishing 	trades, 	which 	had	already 	re-
corded 	sharp 	growth 	in	the	first	quarter.
According 	to	initial 	official 	statistics, 	seasonally 	
adjusted 	energy 	output 	fell	sharply 	in	the	re-
porting 	period 	(-7¾%). 	It	is	likely 	that	this	was	
connected 	with	the	shutdown 	of	a	number 	of	
German 	nuclear 	power 	plants 	following 	the	
nuclear 	disaster 	in	Japan.
Developments 	in	the	services 	sector 	appear 	to	
have 	been 	rather 	lacklustre 	on	the	whole. 	On	
the	one	hand, 	surveys 	by	Ifo	and	ZEW	(Centre 	
for	European 	Economic 	Research) 	suggest 	that	
the	expansionary 	impulses 	from 	industry 	are	
continuing 	to	have 	a	knock-on 	effect 	on	a	
number 	of	business-related 	service 	sectors. 	On	
the	other 	hand, 	the	monthly 	statistics 	on	mo-
torway 	tolls	indicate 	that	the	mileage 	of	Ger-
man	hauliers 	and	logistics 	enterprises 	increased 	
only	marginally. 	In	the	trade 	sector 	most 	firms 	
sustained 	drops 	in	real	revenue. 	This	applies 	in	
particular 	to	wholesale 	and	motor 	vehicle 	trad-
ers.	By	contrast, 	the	business 	situation 	in	the	
consumption-related 	service 	sectors 	appeared 	
to	be	somewhat 	more 	stable. 	This	can	also	be	
seen	in	the	hotel 	and	restaurant 	sector, 	where 	
sales 	held	up	well	in	the	second 	quarter.Employment and labour market
The	labour 	market 	recovery 	continued 	in	the	
second 	quarter 	of	2011. 	According 	to	Federal 	
Statistical 	Office 	estimates, 	the	seasonally 	ad-
justed 	number 	of	persons 	in	work 	in	Germany 	
between 	April 	and	June	rose	by	150,000 	on	
the	quarter, 	which 	is	equivalent 	to	an	increase 	
of	0.4%. 	The	mainstay 	of	the	positive 	develop -
ment 	in	employment 	was	again 	an	increase 	in	
jobs	subject 	to	social 	security 	contributions. 	In	
April 	and	May, 	186,000 	or	0.7% 	more 	such	
jobs	were 	recorded 	than	on	an	average 	of	the	
first	quarter 	after 	adjustment 	for	seasonal 	
variations. 	According 	to	initial 	estimates, 	there 	
was	a	slight 	increase 	in	the	number 	of	persons 	
working 	exclusively 	in	low-paid 	part-time 	jobs. 	
The	number 	of	self-employed 	persons 	re-
mained 	largely 	unchanged.
The	growth 	in	employment 	subject 	to	social 	
security 	contributions 	is	proceeding 	at	a	rela-
tively 	similar 	pace 	in	the	individual 	sectors. 	
Thus 	there 	was	a	¾%	rise	in	April 	and	May	on	
the	previous 	quarter 	in	the	seasonally 	adjusted 	
number 	of	positions 	filled 	in	the	manufactur -
ing	sector 	as	well	as	in	the	health 	and	social 	
work 	sector, 	the	construction 	sector 	and	the	
transport 	sector. 	The	increase 	in	the	trade 	sec-
tor,	at	just	over	½%, 	fell	slightly 	short 	of	this	
figure, 	whereas 	the	increase 	in	the	case	of	
business-related 	services 	(excluding 	third-party 	
hiring) 	was	slightly 	above 	average 	at	1 %.	Ac-
cording 	to	initial 	estimates 	by	the	Federal 	Em-
ployment 	Agency, 	the	strong 	growth 	in	third-
party 	hiring 	observed 	over	the	past	two	years, 	
which 	accounted 	for	a	large 	share 	of	the	over-
all	growth 	in	employment 	up	until	the	first	Smaller energy 
output
Little impetus 
from service 
providersContinued 
growth in 
employment …
… broadly 
based across 
sectorsDEUTSCHE  
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report  
August 2011
51

quarter 	of	2011, 	was	much 	more 	moderate 	in	
April 	and	May.
According 	to	calculations 	by	the	Federal 	Em-
ployment 	Agency, 	the	number 	of	payroll 	em-
ployees 	who	are	nationals 	of	a	central 	or	east-
ern	European 	EU	member 	state 	which 	have 	
now	been 	granted 	full	labour 	mobility 	(EU-8) 	
rose	sharply 	in	May.1	However, 	the	net	immi -
gration 	of	citizens 	from 	this	region 	recorded 	
by	the	German 	authorities 	for	this	same 	period 	
was	much 	lower,2	which 	suggests 	that	it	was	
initially 	those 	nationals 	of	the	EU-8 	countries 	
already 	living 	in	Germany 	who	made 	use	of	
the	new	employment 	opportunities. 	This	snap -
shot	from 	the	first	month 	of	the	new	regula -
tion	becoming 	effective 	gives 	no	grounds 	for	
implying 	that	the	German 	labour 	market 	could 	
be	flooded 	by	a	massive 	influx 	of	workers 	from 	
these 	countries 	in	the	near	future. 	Nor,	how-
ever,	does 	it	negate 	the	proposition 	that	the	
granting 	of	full	labour 	mobility 	to	the	east	Eu-
ropean 	EU	states 	could 	well	result 	in	noticeable 	
migration 	effects.3
There 	was	a	further 	perceptible 	decline 	in	un-
employment 	in	the	second 	quarter. 	The	regis -Marked impact 
of full labour 
mobility on 
employment, 
but little 
change in 
immigration  
so far
Lower 
 unemploymentLabour market
2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011
1 From  May  2009,  unemployed  excluding 
persons  newly  registered  on  the  books  of 
private employment agencies.
Deutsche Bundesbank38.539.039.540.040.541.0
26.026.527.027.528.028.5–5000+500+1,000
2.53.03.54.04.55.0
–1,000–5000+500Seasonally adjusted, quarterly
Million
Million
MillionThou-
sand
Thou-
sand
Thou-
sand Year-on-year changeOfficially unemployed 1UnemployedTotalEmployed
Unsubsidised vacancies
(scale enlarged)Occupied positionsJobs subject to social security
contributionsYear-on-year change
JulyJulyJulyApr-
May
200300400500
1	According 	to	a	press 	release 	issued 	by	the	Federal 	Em-
ployment 	Agency 	on	27	July	2011, 	the	number 	of	persons 	
from 	the	EU-8 	countries 	subject 	to	full	social 	security 	con-
tributions 	and	those 	working 	exclusively 	in	low-paid 	part-
time	jobs	went 	up	by	33,000 	or	15% 	between 	April 	and	
May	2011, 	which 	is	much 	higher 	than	usual 	for	the	time	
of	year.
2	According 	to	an	evaluation 	of	the	central 	register 	for	
foreigners, 	the	migration 	surplus 	resulting 	from 	the	EU-8 	
amounted 	to	8,000 	persons 	in	May	2011. 	In	the	past	dec-
ade,	the	corresponding 	monthly 	average 	of	net	additions 	
from 	these 	countries 	was	calculated 	at	around 	2,500.
3	See	also	Deutsche 	Bundesbank, 	Outlook 	for	the	German 	
economy 	–	macroeconomic 	projections 	for	2011 	and	2012, 	
Monthly 	Report, 	June	2011, 	pp	13-26, 	and	Deutsche 	Bun-
desbank, 	The	possible 	growth 	effects 	of	increased 	immi -
gration 	from 	the	new	EU	member 	states, 	Monthly 	Report, 	
May	2011, 	pp	58-59.DEUTSCHE  
BUNDESBANK
E U R O S Y S T E M
Monthly Report  
August 2011
52

tered 	unemployment 	figure 	for	the	second	
quarter	 of	2011,	 at	a	seasonally	 adjusted	 2.98	
million,	 was	around	 89,000	 lower	 than	 in	the	
first	quarter. 	The	unemployment 	rate	fell	by	
0.2	percentage 	point 	to	7.1 %. 	Only 	around	
three-fifths	 of	the	decline	 in	the	second	 quar-
ter	was	attributable 	to	job-seekers 	claiming	
insurance	 benefits	 as	opposed	 to	social	 ben-
efits. 	The	national 	statistics 	probably 	under -
state	 the	positive	 cyclical	 impact,	 as	active	 la-
bour 	market 	measures 	have 	concurrently 	been	
reduced. 	Thus, 	overall 	underemployment, 	at	
572,000	 persons,	 fell	twice	 as	strongly	 as	reg-
istered 	unemployment 	year	on	year	(-284,000).	
The	decline 	in	government 	sponsored 	work	
experience 	programmes 	(one-euro 	workfare	
jobs)	 continued	 at	a	rapid	 pace	 in	the	second	
quarter. 	There 	were 	consequently 	just	under	
180,000 	such 	jobs, 	which 	corresponds 	to	a	
decline	 of	around	 one-third	 on	the	year.	 Reg-
istered 	unemployment 	declined 	further 	to	2.96	
million	 in	July	2011.	 The	unemployment	 rate	
decreased	further	to	7.0%.
There 	was	no	change 	between 	April 	and	July	
in	the	seasonally 	adjusted 	number 	of	un-
employed 	workers 	claiming 	insurance 	benefits,	
who	tend 	to	have 	been 	unemployed 	for	a	
shorter 	period. 	In	the	current 	economic 	envir -
onment, 	there 	is	unlikely 	to	be	much 	potential	
in	the	foreseeable 	future 	for	a	further 	reduction	
in	worker 	unemployment, 	which 	stood 	at	
around 	880,000 	persons 	in	the	second 	quarter	
of	2011 	in	seasonally 	adjusted 	terms 	(see	also	
the	box	“Sustainable 	contribution 	rate	for	the	
Federal 	Employment 	Agency” 	on	pages 76-77).	
At	the	same 	time, 	a	seasonally 	adjusted 	total	
of	2.1	million 	longer-term 	job	seekers 	were	
	receiving 	the	basic 	welfare 	allowance. 	The	on-going 	upswing 	had	an	impact 	in	this	category	
of	unemployment 	in	the	form 	of	an	improved	
net	outflow 	to	employment 	and	a	decline 	in	
the	number 	of	unemployed 	workers 	receiving	
the	basic 	welfare 	allowance 	after 	their	entitle -
ment 	to	insurance 	benefits 	had	expired; 	its	
	impact 	was	dampened 	by	the	curtailing 	of	la-
bour 	market 	policy 	measures, 	however.
The	available	 leading	 indicators	 suggest	 that	
the	favourable 	labour 	market 	development 	will	
continue 	for	the	time	being, 	although 	probably	
at	a	slightly	 more	 moderate	 pace.	 The	Ifo	em-
ployment	 barometer,	 which	 provides	 informa -
tion	about 	planned 	staffing 	levels 	in	trade 	and	
industry	 over	 the	next	 three	 months,	 declined	
slightly	 from	 its	peak	 in	March	 2011	 but	still	
largely	 remained	 in	expansionary	 territory.	 Ac-
cording	 to	the	survey	 conducted	 by	the	Ger-
man	 Chamber	 of	Commerce	 DIHK	 at	the	be-
ginning	 of	the	summer,	 those	 enterprises	 in-
tending	 to	expand	 their	 staffing	 levels	 within	
the	next	12	months 	by	far	outnumbered 	those	
with	plans	to	reduce	headcount.
At	457,000, 	the	number 	of	vacancies 	regis -
tered 	with	the	Federal 	Employment 	Agency	
was	up	by	around	 26,000	 on	the	first	quarter	
in	seasonally 	adjusted 	terms. 	As	in	the	past	few	
quarters, 	the	increase 	was	accounted 	for	solely	
by	positions 	subject 	to	social 	security 	contribu -
tions.	 Half	 of	this	increase	 was	attributable	 to	
the	sector	 for	other	 business-related	 services,	
which 	also	includes 	job	vacancies 	posted 	by	
temporary	 work	 agencies.	 At	the	same	 time,	
the	number 	of	vacancies 	in	manufacturing,	
construction,	 retail	 trade,	 transport	 as	well	 as	
in	technical	 and	 scientific	 activities	 increased	
considerably,	 just	like	in	the	early	 part	 of	the	Hard to further 
reduce insured unemploymentLabour market outlook remains bright
Greater 
number of vacanciesDEUTSCHE  
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report  
August 2011
53

year. 	The	number 	of	vacancies 	in	the	health 	
and	social 	sector 	also	remained 	at	a	high	level. 	
The	Federal 	Employment 	Agency’s 	BA-X 	job	
index 	reached 	a	new	record 	level	in	the	second 	
quarter, 	although 	it	declined 	again 	somewhat 	
in	July	owing 	to	a	reduction 	in	the	influx 	of	
new	job	offers. 	According 	to	the	IAB	Job	Va-
cancy 	Survey, 	there 	were 	around 	975,000 	va-
cancies 	available 	in	the	second 	quarter 	of	2011, 	
which 	corresponds 	to	an	increase 	of	24% 	on	
the	year.
Wages and prices
In	the	second 	quarter 	of	2011, 	collective 	wage 	
agreements 	were 	reached 	primarily 	in	the	serv-
ices	sectors 	–	notably 	with	the	trade 	sector 	and	
the	insurance 	industry 	–	as	well	as	with	two	smaller 	industrial 	sectors. 	The	negotiated 	pay	
rises	were 	lower 	than 	the	negotiated 	wage 	
increases 	in	the	larger 	and	more 	cyclical 	man-
ufacturing 	industries 	which 	were 	concluded 	in	
the	first	quarter 	of	this	year.	The	rather 	wide 	
diversification 	of	agreed 	wage 	increases 	in	this	
year’s 	pay	round 	is	a	clear 	indication 	that	
sector-specific 	factors 	are	still	of	primary 	im-
portance 	in	the	wage 	bargaining 	process. 	
Workers 	in	the	economically 	less	favoured 	sec-
tors	have 	generally 	also	been 	granted 	a	clear 	
increase 	in	scheduled 	rates 	of	pay.	By	stagger -
ing	the	pay	increases 	and	agreeing 	a	longer 	
term, 	however, 	the	cost	burden 	on	firms 	re-
mains 	within 	reasonable 	bounds.
The	fact	that	the	collective 	wage 	agreements 	
reached 	so	far	in	2011 	are	higher 	than	those 	
concluded 	last	year	is	gradually 	affecting 	the	
overall 	level	of	negotiated 	wages. 	According 	
to	Bundesbank 	statistics, 	the	year-on-year 	rise	
in	the	level	of	negotiated 	basic 	pay	rates 	in	the	
second 	quarter 	of	2011, 	at	1.6%, 	was	notice -
ably	larger 	than	in	the	first	quarter 	(+1.1 %).4 
However, 	given 	that	the	volume 	of	one-off 	
payments 	in	the	second 	quarter 	of	2010 	was	
particularly 	high, 	the	overall 	increase, 	including 	
these 	payments 	and	all	other 	fringe 	benefits, 	
in	the	reporting 	period 	amounted 	to	just	1.3% 	
year	on	year,	compared 	with	an	overall 	increase 	
of	1.7% 	in	the	first	quarter. 	As	in	the	preceding 	
quarters, 	actual 	earnings 	are	likely 	to	have 	
risen 	more 	sharply 	than	negotiated 	wages 	in	
the	second 	quarter 	as	well, 	as	actual 	working 	
hours 	are	higher.
Diversity of 
negotiated 
rates in this 
year’s pay 
roundGrowth in 
negotiated 
rates of pay still 
moderateNegotiated rates of pay
1 Excluding  additional  benefits  and  lump-
sum payments.
Deutsche Bundesbank2004 05 06 07 08 09 10 201100.51.01.52.02.53.03.5Year-on-year change, on monthly basis
Negotiated rates of pay, total
Basic pay 1%
H1
4	The	Federal 	Statistical 	Office, 	whose 	index 	excludes 	civil	
servants, 	reports 	an	increase 	of	1.5% 	for	the	negotiated 	
rates 	of	basic 	pay,	compared 	with	0.9% 	at	the	beginning 	
of	the	year.DEUTSCHE  
BUNDESBANK
E U R O S Y S T E M
Monthly Report  
August 2011
54

Prices 	at	the	various 	stages 	of	the	economy	
either	 fell	during	 the	second	 quarter	 or	their	
increase	 levelled	 off.	This	is	mainly	 a	reflection	
of	falling	 crude	 oil	prices.	 Added	 to	this	were	
the	effects 	of	the	euro’s 	appreciation, 	espe -
cially 	in	the	case	of	imports. 	In	June, 	for	exam -
ple,	seasonally	 adjusted	 import	 prices	 for	en-
ergy	were 	around 	7%	lower 	than	in	March.	
On	a	quarterly 	average, 	however, 	they	were	
practically	 just	as	high	 as	in	the	first	quarter.	
Excluding	 energy,	 importers	 had	to	pay	0.5%	
less	than	in	the	previous 	quarter, 	owing 	prima -
rily	to	the	appreciation	 of	the	euro.	 The	price	
reductions	 in	the	case	 of	intermediate	 goods	
also	stemmed 	partly 	from 	lower 	prices 	for	a	
number 	of	industrial 	commodities. 	The	in-
crease 	in	the	cost	of	motor 	vehicles, 	trailers	
and	semi-trailers 	was	more 	than	offset 	by	price	
reductions	 in	the	case	 of	other	 capital	 goods.	
Food	 prices	 were	 once	 again	 responsible	 for	a	
rise	in	the	prices 	of	consumer 	goods, 	although	
these	 rises	 were	 considerably	 weaker	 than	 in	
the	first	quarter.	 Overall,	 imports	 were	 0.4%	
cheaper	 than	 in	the	first	quarter,	 but	were	 still	
8.0%	dearer	on	the	year.
In	the	context	 of	domestic	 industrial	 sales,	 en-
ergy	prices 	fell	only	moderately 	during 	the	
course 	of	the	quarter 	owing 	to	their	smaller	
share	 of	oil	and	on	average	 were	 higher	 than	
at	the	beginning 	of	the	year.	Unlike 	in	the	case	
of	imports, 	prices 	excluding 	energy 	rose	further	
by	a	seasonally 	adjusted 	0.7%. 	This	is	also	
likely	 to	have	 been	 due	in	part	 to	the	buoyant	
industrial	 activity,	 which	 expanded	 the	scope	
for	raising 	prices 	across 	all	categories 	of	goods.	
Price 	rises	in	the	case	of	consumer 	goods 	were	
particularly	 pronounced	 as	the	food	 and	drink	
industry 	was	again 	able	to	impose 	considerable	Lower import 
prices owing to crude oil and appreciation …
… but further 
rise in industrial sales prices, …100105110
Export pricesImport, export, producer and 
consumer prices
1 Producer price index for industrial prod-
ucts in domestic sales.  — 2 Not seasonally 
adjusted, quarterly. — 3 National consumer 
price index.
Deutsche Bundesbank2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011100105110115120
102105110115120
100105110 110115120
100105110115
10123
–+++2005 = 100, seasonally adjusted
Lin scale
Year-on-year change 2Consumer prices 3Construction
prices 2Producer prices 1Import pricesLog scale
%
JulyDEUTSCHE  
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report  
August 2011
55

price 	increases. 	On	the	whole, 	prices 	went 	up	
by	1.2% 	on	the	quarter, 	and	by	6.0% 	on	the	
year.	Price	developments 	for	foreign 	sales	show 	
a	similar 	pattern. 	The	previous-quarter 	level	
was	exceeded 	by	0.4% 	and	the	prior-year 	level	
by	3.8%. 	This,	together 	with	declining 	import 	
prices, 	improved 	the	terms 	of	trade 	again 	
somewhat.
Construction 	prices, 	too,	rose	noticeably 	on	
the	quarter 	(0.9%) 	on	the	back 	of	buoyant 	
construction 	activity. 	The	year-on-year 	rise	
amounted 	to	2.9%. 	Real	estate 	prices 	likewise 	
continued 	their	ascent. 	According 	to	calcula -
tions 	by	the	Association 	of	German 	Pfandbrief 	
Banks 	(Verband deutscher Pfandbriefbanken ),	
the	prices 	of	owner-occupied 	housing 	rose	by	
0.4% 	on	the	first	quarter 	of	2011 	and	by	2.3% 	
on	the	year.
Lower 	prices 	for	refined 	petroleum 	products 	
dampened 	consumer 	price 	inflation 	during 	the	
second 	quarter. 	On	a	quarterly 	average, 	how-
ever,	consumers 	paid	somewhat 	more 	for	en-
ergy	on	the	whole 	than 	in	the	first	quarter 	
after 	adjustment 	for	seasonal 	variations. 	The	
increase 	in	prices 	paid	out	to	the	food 	industry 	
was	swiftly 	passed 	on	to	consumers 	and	there -
fore	more 	than	offset 	the	decline 	in	fruit	and	
vegetable 	prices, 	which 	is	likely 	to	have 	been 	
connected 	in	part	with	the	EHEC 	epidemic. 	
Furthermore, 	other 	goods 	and	services, 	includ -
ing	rents, 	continued 	to	become 	gradually 	
dearer 	in	line	with	the	ongoing 	economic 	up-
turn. 	Seasonally 	adjusted 	consumer 	prices 	
went 	up	by	0.6% 	on	the	whole 	on	an	average 	
of	the	second 	quarter. 	The	year-on-year 	rise	
expanded 	from 	2.1 % 	to	2.3%. 	Excluding 	en-ergy, 	the	corresponding 	growth 	rate	rose	from 	
1.1 % 	to	1.5%.
Consumer 	prices 	accelerated 	somewhat 	in	July	
owing 	to	the	temporary 	rise	in	crude 	oil	prices. 	
The	year-on-year 	increase 	in	the	national 	con-
sumer 	price 	index 	(CPI)	went 	up	from 	2.3% 	
to	2.4%, 	and	the	Harmonised 	Index 	of	Con-
sumer 	Prices 	(HICP) 	from 	2.4% 	to	2.6%. 	The	
rate	of	price 	increases 	for	components 	deter -
mined 	by	domestic 	costs 	is	likely 	to	pick	up	
again 	slowly 	in	the	near	future. 	Price 	increases 	
for	gas	have 	also	been 	announced. 	However, 	
the	burden 	on	the	consumer 	is	likely 	to	be	
limited 	provided 	that	crude 	oil	prices 	do	not	
increase 	sharply 	again.
Orders received and outlook
As	things 	currently 	stand, 	the	German 	econ -
omy	looks 	set	to	maintain 	a	positive, 	albeit 	
slightly 	slower 	underlying 	trend 	in	the	second 	
half	of	the	year.	This	is	also	suggested 	by	the	
fact	that	the	previously 	extremely 	optimistic 	
business 	expectations 	have 	been 	lowered 	con-
siderably 	and	incoming 	orders, 	too,	have 	lost	
momentum 	(excluding 	large 	orders). 	Added 	to	
this	are	a	number 	of	global 	risk	factors 	such	as	
uncertainty 	regarding 	further 	developments 	in	
the	US	economy 	and	potential 	cyclical 	weaken -
ing	in	the	emerging 	markets. 	Moreover, 	in-
creasingly 	jittery 	global 	financial 	markets 	and	
the	ongoing 	government 	debt	problems 	could 	
have 	a	negative 	impact 	on	confidence. 	
Whereas 	the	external 	environment 	has	become 	
less	favourable, 	the	domestic 	economy 	is	still	
very	robust, 	largely 	as	a	result 	of	enterprises’ 	
marked 	willingness 	to	invest, 	sharply 	higher 	… construction 
and real estate 
prices …
… as well as 
consumer 
pricesInflation 
 accelerated  
in July
Economic 
growth 
continues at a 
moderate paceDEUTSCHE  
BUNDESBANK
E U R O S Y S T E M
Monthly Report  
August 2011
56

demand 	in	housing 	construction 	in	recent	
months 	and	the	favourable 	labour 	market 	out-
look.	 In	addition,	 if	growth	 remains	 on	its	po-
tential	 output	 path,	 as	looks	 likely	 at	the	mo-
ment,	 this	should	 help	 counteract	 the	risk	of	
increasing 	tensions 	and	supply 	shortages	
within	the	domestic	economy.
The	overall	 order	 situation	 in	the	second	 quar-
ter	saw	a	continuation 	of	the	steep 	upward	
path. 	Growth 	in	orders, 	at	a	seasonally 	ad-
justed	 3¼%,	 appears	 to	have	 even	 exceeded	
the	already 	sharp 	increase 	recorded 	in	the	first	
quarter 	(+2¼%). 	The	main 	reason 	for	the	sharp	
increase, 	however, 	was	the	exceptional 	number	
of	large	 orders	 received	 from	 both	 Germany	
and	abroad. 	Excluding 	the	manufacture 	of	
other 	transport 	equipment, 	which 	accounts 	for	
the	majority 	of	these 	large-scale 	orders, 	the	
volume 	of	new	orders 	would 	have 	merely 	held	
up	at	around 	the	first-quarter 	level. 	An	increase	
of	just	under	 ¾%	 in	domestic	 orders	 was	off-
set	by	a	decline	 of	a	similar	 amount	 in	foreign	
orders.	 Producers 	of	capital 	goods 	–	excluding	
manufacturers 	of	other 	transport 	equipment 	–	
recorded 	their	first	slight 	decline 	in	orders 	since	
the	beginning	 of	the	economic	 recovery.	 Only	
a	modest 	¼%	increase 	was	recorded 	in	the	
intermediate 	goods 	sector 	following 	strong	
growth	 at	the	beginning	 of	the	year.	 By	con-
trast, 	consumer 	goods 	producers 	recorded 	a	
comparatively 	marked 	increase 	in	orders	
(+1¾%).
Nonetheless, 	the	flat	trend 	in	new	contracts 	in	
the	second	 quarter	 should	 not	be	overstated.	
Large 	orders 	have 	an	impact 	on	production	
over	 a	prolonged	 period	 of	time	 and	can	–	es-
pecially 	if	they	occur 	in	multiple 	batches 	as	was	Strong inflow 
of orders  characterised 
by large orders
Further 
expansion in orders on handDemand for industrial goods 
and construction work
Deutsche Bundesbank2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 20118090100110120130
–40–30–20–100 0+10+20+30
100110120130
758090100
100110120
8090100
Apr-
May
Apr-
May90100110120
–20–100+10+20Volume, 2005 = 100,
seasonally adjusted, quarterly
DomesticForeignLog scaleTotal industrial 
ordersLog scale
Lin scale
Year-on-year change
Total construction 
orders
Lin scale
Year-on-year change%
%DEUTSCHE  
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report  
August 2011
57

recently 	the	case	–	lead	to	a	steady 	rise	in	eco-
nomic 	output. 	The	assessments 	made 	by	the	
manufacturing 	sector 	in	terms 	of	the	stock 	of	
orders 	are	still	exceptionally 	optimistic. 	The	
backlog 	of	incomplete 	orders 	in	July	expanded 	
further 	to	over	three 	production 	months.
According 	to	the	Ifo	business 	surveys, 	the	busi-
ness	expectations 	of	manufacturing 	enterprises 	
have 	been 	lowered 	significantly 	in	recent 	
months. 	This	downscaling 	of	expectations 	was	
accompanied 	by	waning 	optimism 	with	regard 	
to	the	outlook 	for	exports. 	In	terms 	of	level, 	
however, 	the	sentiment 	indicators 	are	still	
clearly 	in	expansionary 	territory. 	This	is	consist -
ent	with	the	fact	that	enterprises 	are	stepping 	
up	their	plans 	for	investment 	in	capacity 	exten -
sions 	and	for	some 	time	now	have 	been 	re-
porting 	a	perceptible 	shortage 	of	skilled 	work -
ers,	raw	materials 	and	intermediate 	inputs.
The	construction 	sector 	is	likely 	to	prove 	a	
stimulus 	for	economic 	activity 	in	the	second 	
half	of	the	year.	This	is	suggested 	not	only	by	
the	further 	improvement 	of	the	assessment 	of	
the	current 	economic 	situation 	and	the	outlook 	
in	this	sector, 	but	also	by	the	large 	inflow 	of	
new	orders. 	The	volume 	of	new	orders 	in	hous -
ing	construction, 	in	particular, 	expanded 	fur-
ther	in	April 	and	May	–	more 	recent 	data	are	
not	yet	available 	–	after 	already 	recording 	strong 	growth 	in	the	first	quarter. 	The	favour -
able	financing 	conditions, 	the	positive 	labour 	
market 	outlook 	and,	in	some 	cases, 	doubts 	
about 	the	soundness 	of	alternative 	forms 	of	
investment 	are	still	making 	themselves 	felt	in	
this	sector. 	Although 	demand 	from 	commercial 	
customers 	in	April 	and	May	did	not	reach 	the	
high	level	of	the	first	quarter, 	it	markedly 	ex-
ceeded 	the	volume 	of	the	preceding 	quarters. 	
The	public 	sector 	also	placed 	more 	construc -
tion	orders 	of	late	after 	it	had	previously 	scaled 	
back 	its	demand 	significantly, 	probably 	due	
partly 	to	the	exhaustion 	of	the	financial 	re-
sources 	available 	under 	the	economic 	stimulus 	
packages.
Consumer 	sentiment 	is	still	at	a	high	level. 	
However, 	economic 	and	income 	expectations 	
have 	been 	scaled 	back 	slightly, 	which 	was	also	
reflected 	in	a	somewhat 	lower 	general 	propen -
sity	to	purchase. 	The	current 	relatively 	high	
inflation 	rate	and	the	possible 	negative 	confi -
dence 	effects 	in	connection 	with	the	consider -
able	increase 	in	risks	recently 	may	also	have 	
had	a	negative 	impact 	on	consumer 	sentiment. 	
Provided 	uncertainty 	remains 	limited, 	there 	is	
still	a	chance 	that	the	very	positive 	labour 	mar-
ket	outlook 	and	realised 	or	imminent 	wage 	
increases 	will	continue 	to	prop 	up	consumer 	
confidence 	in	Germany.Optimistic 
expectations  
in industry 
downscaled
Further stimuli 
for the con-
struction sectorPrivate 
 consumption 
setting less sureDEUTSCHE  
BUNDESBANK
E U R O S Y S T E M
Monthly Report  
August 2011
58

Public finances* General government budget
Following 	a	sharp 	deterioration 	in	German 	
public 	finances 	over	the	past	two	years, 	a	
marked 	decline 	in	the	deficit 	ratio	is	expected 	
in	2011.1	The	Federal 	Government’s 	recent 	es-
timate 	of	1½% 	appears 	realistic, 	provided 	the	
financial 	crisis 	and	the	sovereign 	debt	crisis 	do	
not	cause 	any	major 	new	strains. 	The	buoyant 	
macroeconomic 	development 	is	considerably 	
facilitating 	the	task	of	deficit 	reduction. 	Given 	
that	production 	capacity 	utilisation 	has	re-
turned 	to	more 	or	less	normal 	levels, 	the	defi-
cit	ratio 	(after 	adjustment 	for	cyclical 	influ-
ences) 	will	probably 	also	be	around 	1½%. 	All	
other 	things 	being 	equal, 	the	lower 	deficit, 	
coupled 	with	relatively 	high	nominal 	growth 	
in	the	gross 	domestic 	product 	(GDP), 	should 	
per se 	bring 	the	debt	ratio	down 	considerably 	
from 	its	record 	2010 	level	of	83.2%.2	However, 	
there 	is	uncertainty 	in	particular 	in	connection 	
with	aid	programmes 	for	euro-area 	countries 	
and	support 	measures 	for	German 	financial 	
institutions.
The	government 	revenue 	ratio	is	likely 	to	in-
crease 	somewhat 	in	2011. 	Following 	sizeable 	
cuts	in	tax	and	social 	contribution 	rates 	be-
tween 	2008 	and	2010, 	legislative 	changes 	are	
expected 	to	result 	in	additional 	revenue 	on	bal-Decline  
in deficit  
in 2011 …
… especially 
due to falling 
expenditure 
ratio
*	The	analysis 	in	the	“General 	government 	budget” 	sec-
tion	is	based 	on	data	contained 	in	the	national 	accounts 	
and	on	the	Maastricht 	ratios. 	The	subsequent 	reporting 	
on	the	budgets 	of	the	various 	levels 	of	government 	and	
social 	security 	schemes 	is	based 	on	the	budgetary 	figures 	
as	defined 	in	the	government’s 	financial 	statistics 	(which 	
are	generally 	in	line	with	the	budgetary 	accounts).
1	In	spring, 	a	deficit 	ratio	of	3.3% 	was	announced 	for	
2010. 	This	figure 	is	expected 	to	be	revised 	upwards 	some -
what 	in	September.
2	This	figure 	includes 	debt 	in	connection 	with	support 	
measures 	for	financial 	institutions 	of	13½% 	of	GDP	since 	
2008. 	This	is	largely 	offset 	by	financial 	assets, 	which 	are,	
however, 	prone 	to	risk.DEUTSCHE  
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report  
August 2011
59

ance	in	2011. 	By	contrast, 	the	expenditure 	ratio	
is	likely 	to	fall	significantly. 	This	is	predomin -
antly 	attributable 	to	favourable 	economic 	de-
velopments, 	which 	are	chiefly 	reflected 	in	the	
increase 	in	GDP	in	the	denominator. 	Further -
more, 	according 	to	the	latest 	information, 	cap-
ital	transfers 	to	support 	financial 	institutions 	
could 	be	dropped 	for	the	most 	part.
From 	the	current 	perspective, 	the	deficit 	is	ex-
pected 	to	contract 	further 	in	2012, 	albeit 	at	a	
slower 	pace. 	Although 	the	Federal 	Govern -
ment 	has	now	watered 	down 	its	consolidation 	
plans 	from 	the	summer 	of	2010, 	inter alia 	by	
virtue 	of	the	new	energy 	strategy, 	in	the	ab-
sence 	of	additional 	deficit-increasing 	measures, 	
the	expenditure 	ratio	is	nevertheless 	likely 	to	
fall,	while 	the	revenue 	ratio	could 	remain 	virtu-
ally	unchanged. 	Economic 	developments 	will	
probably 	play	only	a	minor 	role	in	this	context. 	
Of	greater 	importance 	is	the	fact	that	the	cur-
rent	regulations 	mute 	pension 	growth 	and	
labour 	market 	expenditure 	is	expected 	to	de-
cline	once 	again 	in	structural 	terms. 	Further -
more, 	the	temporary 	economic 	stimuli 	(above 	
all	the	investment 	programmes, 	which 	have 	an	
especially 	large 	time	lag)	will	continue 	to	be	
phased 	out.
The	relatively 	favourable 	developments 	and	
lower 	deficits 	than 	in	previous 	years 	should 	
not,	however, 	be	allowed 	to	mask 	the	fact	that	
fiscal 	consolidation 	is	far	from 	complete. 	Even 	
in	the	economic 	upturn 	the	deficit 	will	still	be	
substantial. 	Moreover, 	the	debt 	ratio 	is	very	
high, 	and	demographic 	trends 	will	soon 	place 	
an	additional 	strain 	on	public 	coffers. 	The	sov-
ereign 	debt	crisis 	has	made 	it	abundantly 	clear 	
that	political 	leeway 	requires 	sound 	public 	fi-nances. 	Therefore, 	the	medium-term 	objective 	
of	a	close-to-balance 	structural 	budget 	ought 	
to	be	achieved 	rapidly 	and,	given 	a	favourable 	
overall 	economic 	setting, 	a	surplus 	should 	also	
be	recorded. 	Cuts	in	tax	and	social 	contribution 	
rates 	are	not	appropriate 	at	this	juncture 	unless 	
they	are	fully	funded 	by	counterfinancing 	
measures. 	They 	would 	delay 	the	consolidation 	
of	central 	and	state 	government 	budgets 	re-
quired 	under 	the	national 	debt	brake, 	and	the	
opportunity 	for	consolidation 	provided 	by	the	
currently 	favourable 	conditions 	might 	be	
missed. 	It	is	imperative 	that	Germany 	quickly 	
reduces 	its	deficit, 	not	least	in	light	of	the	re-
quirements 	of	the	Stability 	and	Growth 	Pact	
and	the	objective 	of	better 	safeguarding 	the	
euro	area	in	the	future 	by	means 	of	stricter 	
budgetary 	rules.3
Budgetary development of central, state 
and local government
Tax revenue
Tax	revenue4	was	up	by	8%	on	the	year	in	the	
second 	quarter 	(see	the	chart 	and	table 	on	
pages 	61	and	66).	The	pace 	of	growth 	was	
thus	somewhat 	weaker 	than	in	the	first	quar-
ter,	but	was	nevertheless 	still	strong. 	Revenue 	
from 	income-related 	taxes 	rose	by	11½%. 	The	Decline in 
deficit could 
continue in 
2012, but to a 
lesser extent
Rapidly achieve 
balanced 
budget in good 
timesSharp rise  
in tax revenue 
in Q2
3	The	preventive 	arm	of	the	Pact	stipulates 	that, 	once 	the	
3%	limit	is	undershot, 	the	structural 	deficit 	ratio	should 	
generally 	be	reduced 	by	½	percentage 	point, 	and	at	an	
accelerated 	pace 	in	“good 	times”, 	until	the	medium-term 	
budgetary 	objective 	is	achieved. 	It	is	therefore 	linked 	to	
improvements 	in	the	structural 	deficit 	and	not	(as,	for	
example, 	in	the	stability 	programme) 	to	the	planned 	def-
icit	level.
4	Including 	EU	shares 	in	German 	tax	revenue 	but	exclud -
ing	receipts 	from 	local	government 	taxes, 	which 	are	not	
yet	known 	for	the	quarter 	under 	review.DEUTSCHE  
BUNDESBANK
E U R O S Y S T E M
Monthly Report  
August 2011
60

increase	 in	wage	 tax	receipts,	 which	 –	before	
deducting	 child	 benefit	 and	subsidies	 for	sup-
plementary	 private	 pension	 plans	 –	was,	 how-
ever, 	somewhat 	lower 	than 	recorded 	in	the	
cash	 flows,	 is	likely	 to	mainly	 reflect	 the	posi-
tive	pay	and	employment 	trends. 	Revenue	
from	 profit-related	 taxes	 went	 up	by	10½%,	
chiefly	 as	a	result	 of	the	sharp	 growth	 in	non-
assessed	 taxes	 on	earnings	 (especially	 invest -
ment 	income 	tax	on	dividends). 	Revenue 	from	
consumption-related 	taxes 	also	rose	(by	just	
under	 4½%).	 Growth	 in	turnover	 tax	receipts	
was	largely 	in	line	with	the	macroeconomic	
reference	 variables.	 The	reduction	 in	the	elec-
tricity 	and	energy 	tax	concessions 	as	well	as	
the	new	air	traffic 	tax,	in	particular, 	also	re-
sulted	in	additional	revenue.
According 	to	the	official 	tax	estimate 	from	
May,	 tax	receipts	 for	2011	 as	a	whole	 are	ex-
pected 	to	rise	by	4½% 	(including 	local	govern -
ment 	taxes). 	This	growth 	above 	all	reflects	
underlying 	macroeconomic 	developments. 	Fur-
thermore,	 profit-related	 taxes	 are	likely	 to	ex-
perience	 a	rebound	 from	 2010’s	 muted	 level	
and	legislative	 changes	 to	result	 in	additional	
revenue	 on	balance	 (in	particular,	 nuclear	 fuel	
tax,	air	traffic 	tax,	tobacco 	tax	and	a	reduction	
in	the	electricity	 and	energy	 tax	concessions).	
Since	 economic	 growth	 is	currently	 expected	
to	be	higher,5	and	 tax	refunds	 in	connection	
with	the	ruling 	on	the	Meilicke 	case6	to	be	
lower, 	revenue 	is	now	forecast 	to	rise	much	
more	 sharply,	 although	 growth	 will	probably	
weaken	during	the	course	of	the	year.
“Cold	 progression”,	 ie	the	rise	in	income	 tax	
revenue 	due	to	a	combination 	of	inflation 	and	
the	progressive	 rate	 of	tax,	also	 produces	 ad-ditional	 revenue.	 However,	 usually	 little	 atten -
tion	is	paid	to	the	fact	that, 	on	the	other 	hand,	
inflation 	reduces 	the	real	consumption 	tax	bur-
den	as	special 	excise 	duties 	(eg	energy 	tax)	are	
generally	 linked	 to	quantity.	 Taking	 these	 op-
posing	 effects	 into	 account,	 if	tax	conditions	
remain	 unchanged,	 additional	 tax	revenue	 re-
sulting 	from 	cold	progression 	is	likely 	to	
amount	 to	an	extra	 €1½	 billion	 each	 year	 be-
tween 	2011 	and	2013. 	If	the	impact 	on	income	Marked growth 
also expected for year as a wholeCold progres-sion only com-pensated for via counter -
financingTax revenue *
* Including  EU  shares  in  German  tax  rev-
enue, excluding receipts from local govern-
ment taxes.
Deutsche Bundesbank86420246810
––––+++++
2009 2010 2011Year-on-year change, quarterly
%
5	The	estimate	 was	 based	 on	the	Federal	 Government’s	
macroeconomic	 forecast	 from	 April	 that	 predicted	 an	in-
crease	 in	real	GDP	 of	2.6%	 for	2011.	 At	the	current	 end,	
growth	is	expected	to	be	around	3%.
6	The	case	concerns 	the	recognition 	of	corporation 	tax	
paid	abroad 	in	the	taxation 	of	dividends 	under 	the	tax	
imputation 	procedure 	that	was	abolished 	in	2001. 	The	
Federal	 Government	 has	estimated	 the	associated	 short -
falls	at	just	over	 €3½	 billion	 for	2011	 and	just	under	 €1½	
billion	 for	2012.	 However,	 not	least	 following	 the	ruling	
of	the	European 	Court 	of	Justice 	(of	30 June 	2011; 	file	
number	 C-262/09)	 a	delay	 and	 lower	 repayments	 seem	
plausible.DEUTSCHE  
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report  
August 2011
61

Decisions taken by the heads of state or government of the euro area and the institutions 
of the European Union on 21 July 2011
Deutsche BundesbankThe founding principle of the euro area was to 
leave the responsibility for fi  scal policy in the 
hands of each individual member state. How-
ever, at the same time, the need to safeguard 
joint monetary policy and other member states 
from the potentially unsound fi  scal policies of 
individual countries was recognised. If fi  scal pol-
icy were to be too expansionary on the whole, 
monetary policy would be forced to pursue a 
more restrictive path to maintain price stability. 
With regard to the sustainability of fi  scal policy, 
if sovereign debt is high, there are greater incen-
tives to exert pressure on the Eurosystem to ease 
monetary policy or to monetise sovereign debt 
in order to reduce the real burden of a high debt 
level by means of low interest rates or high inﬂ  a-
tion. Monetary policy should be protected fi  rst 
and foremost by the disciplining function of the 
fi  nancial markets and by regulations for national 
fi  scal policies enshrined at European level. As an 
incentive to establish sound budgetary policy, it 
was codifi  ed in the Maastricht Treaty that nei-
ther the Community nor the member states may 
be liable for or assume the debt of another 
member state. The consequences of unsound fi  s-
cal policy, for example in the form of rising fi  -
nancing costs due to risk premiums on interest 
rates, were meant to be concentrated on the 
member state in question and not shared be-
tween other countries in the currency union as 
would be the case with joint liability or a trans-
fer union. Furthermore, the Treaty and the sup-plementary Stability and Growth Pact set out 
regulations on national fi  scal policy and, in par-
ticular, ceilings for the government defi  cit and 
debt ratios.
The fact that the current sovereign debt crisis 
was able to take hold in a number of euro-area 
countries despite these regulations is due to a 
number of reasons, the importance of which can 
differ greatly for each country affected. One key 
reason is that in many cases the fi  scal regulations 
were not appropriately implemented, neither in 
the run-up to the fi  nancial crisis nor in the ensu-
ing sharp economic downturn. In the case of 
Greece, this was aggravated by the fact that the 
statistics were severely lacking and, for many 
years, the public fi  nance situation was presented 
in a considerably more favourable light than was 
actually the case. Furthermore, the underlying 
structural problems in a number of economies 
and their potential effects on fi  nancial markets 
and public fi  nances were underestimated. In ad-
dition, fi  nancial investors’ assessment of govern-
ment budgets was evidently too optimistic and 
after a decade with only very low risk premiums 
on euro-area government bonds, the risk of ris-
ing interest rates appears to no longer have 
served as a suffi  cient deterrent.
Given the intensifi  cation of the sovereign debt 
crisis, at fi  rst Greece and then – as part of newly 
established rescue funds at euro-area and EU 
1 See Deutsche Bundesbank, The assumption of guarantees in con-
nection with a European Stabilisation Mechanism, Monthly Report, 
May 2010, pp 12-13; and Deutsche Bundesbank, Fiscal developments 
in the euro area, Monthly Report, May 2011, pp 22-23. — 2 In particu-
lar, the use of reverse majority under the Stability and Growth Pact and individual points regarding the procedure for macroeconomic 
imbalances are still contentious issues. — 3 For more information on 
the main features of the changes already agreed in March, see Deut-
sche Bundesbank, European Council decisions on the prevention and 
resolution of future sovereign debt crises, Monthly Report, April 
DEUTSCHE  
BUNDESBANK
E U R O S Y S T E M
Monthly Report  
August 2011
62

level – Ireland and Portugal were granted fi  nan-
cial assistance with the participation of the IMF. This fi  nancial assistance was tied to compliance with fi  scal and economic policy conditions. While interest rates were fi  xed at well below market level, they were still noticeably higher than fi  -nancing costs for member states with very high credit ratings.
1 From an economic perspective, 
given the threat for the stability of European monetary union, the assistance funds set up to ensure short-term stabilisation and the aid pro-grammes with their strict fi  scal and economic policy conditionality were by and large justifi  a-ble, even if the future incentives for sound pub-lic fi  nances were weakened.
To at least partially compensate for this, changes 
to the framework of monetary union were drawn up in parallel with the aim of being able to better prevent future sovereign debt crises. However, no changes were made to the funda-mental framework of monetary union. On the contrary, the no bail-out principle, member states’ national responsibility for their own fi  scal policy as well as investors’ individual responsibil-ity for their investment decisions remain constit-uent components of monetary union. Regarding prevention, planned measures mainly include modifi  cations to the Stability and Growth Pact, the introduction of a procedure for macroeco-nomic imbalances and the “Euro Plus Pact” (EPP).
2 Although the proposed enhancement of prevention is a welcome development in prin-ciple, the approach appears to be too cautious, particularly with regard to the Stability and Growth Pact. In addition, the establishment of a European Stability Mechanism (ESM) was re-solved to improve the handling of future sover-eign debt crises – should they occur despite bet-ter prevention measures being in place – even after the European Financial Stability Facility (EFSF) has been wound up in mid-2013.
3
At the beginning of July, uncertainty heightened 
on the fi  nancial markets and, inter alia, interest rates for the government bonds of some larger euro-area countries (including Italy and Spain
4) 
rose. Against this background, decisions taken by the heads of state or government of the euro area and the institutions of the European Union on 21 July 2011 have after only a short interval (and even before the ratifi  cation process has be-gun in the countries in question) once again changed key areas of the proposed reforms. Moreover, assistance for Greece has been ex-panded signifi  cantly by announcing an addi-tional €109 billion aid programme, which is to run until the end of 2014. A voluntary contribu-
tion by the private sector has also been proposed to plug Greece’s fi  nancing gap. Furthermore, the 
maturity of future EFSF aid loans to Greece, Por-
tugal and Ireland was extended to 15 to 30 years, 
and, in particular, the EFSF will largely refrain from adding an interest rate premium to its cost 
2011, pp 53-58. — 4 In 1997, the year relevant for joining monetary 
union, government interest expenditure in Italy still amounted to 
9.3% of gross domestic product (GDP) but dropped sharply to 4.5% by 
2010 (Spain 1997: 4.7% and 2010: 1.9% of GDP). Although the ob-served increase in yields – had it persisted for a longer period of time – would have caused a gradual rise in additional expenditure, in the short term on no account would it have given rise to unsustainable 
fi  scal burdens that would have necessitated immediate rescue meas-
ures. These countries should instead rapidly take credible measures to 
rebuild market confi  dence. For Spain, for example, even in the case of DEUTSCHE  
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report  
August 2011
63

Decisions taken by the heads of state or government of the euro area and the institutions 
of the European Union on 21 July 2011 (cont’d)
Deutsche Bundesbankof funding for current programme countries. 
Lastly, it was resolved to appreciably extend the 
set of instruments available to the EFSF and the 
ESM without specifying any concrete details. 
They are to be able to intervene on a precaution-
ary basis, allowed to provide loans also to gov-
ernments of non-programme countries for re-
capitalising fi  nancial institutions, and have the 
option of buying government bonds in second-
ary markets.5 However, the previously planned 
extension of Article 136 of the Treaty on the 
Functioning of the European Union to legally 
protect the ESM is not to be changed meaning 
that, in principle, the ESM is to be activated only 
as a measure of last resort to avert an immediate 
risk to the stability of the euro area as a whole, 
and fi  nancial assistance must be subject to strict 
conditionality.
The latest resolutions are another big step to-
wards joint liability and weakening the disciplin-
ing function of capital markets, without notice-
ably increasing the inﬂ  uence and control over 
individual national fi  scal policies as a quid pro 
quo. A fundamental drawback is that the new 
credit conditions considerably reduce the incen-
tives for countries with an aid programme to 
make fi  scal and economic reforms to enable as 
rapid a return as possible to sounder public fi  -
nances and the capital market. If these condi-
tions are also adopted for future aid programmes 
(or even for the ESM), this would perpetuate this problem of weakened incentives and encourage 
countries to apply for an aid programme. Sec-
ondary market purchases are an additional disin-
centive for appropriate fi  scal policy.6 While states 
with an unsound budgetary policy could count 
on receiving assistance, countries with sound fi  -
nances would be increasingly called on to pro-
vide fi  nancing. This raises the question as to 
how, for example, an improved sanction mecha-
nism in the Stability and Growth Pact is to pre-
vent unsound national fi  scal policies if, assuming 
the rules continue to be breached, protection 
from the capital market is ultimately granted at 
extremely benefi  cial conditions that are even 
much more favourable than those for some 
countries providing assistance. If the bonds of 
countries without aid programmes are pur-
chased on the secondary market, it is not clear 
how countries can be strictly bound to consolida-
tion and reform conditions and how this can be 
brought into line with the requirement of grant-
ing aid only as a measure of last resort to avert a 
risk to the stability of the euro area as a whole. 
These prerequisites likewise have to apply to any 
preventive programme. In any case, important 
basic principles, such as subsidiarity, national fi  s-
cal responsibility and the no bail-out rule – and 
thus also the disciplining function of the capital 
markets – will again be considerably weakened.
Greece has been granted an additional aid pro-
gramme that is to secure funding for the govern-
a temporary sharp rise in interest rates, the interest expenditure ratio 
is likely to remain below the euro-area average in 2012 and, in Italy, 
this ratio is likely to be far lower than at the time it joined monetary 
union. — 5 Any future interventions on the secondary market by the EFSF and the ESM differ from bond purchases by the Eurosystem inter 
alia in that they are to be resolved – if necessary, following authorisa-
tion by parliament – unanimously by governments, under the no bail-
DEUTSCHE  
BUNDESBANK
E U R O S Y S T E M
Monthly Report  
August 2011
64

ment during an adjustment period, which is now 
signifi  cantly longer. One key condition here should continue to be that the fi  scal and eco-nomic policy adjustment measures originally agreed are actually implemented in full. To en-sure that the conditionality for aid remains cred-ible, an appropriate response to missed targets is not for the requirements of the aid programme to be watered down but for the programme country in question to rectify the matter. It must continue to be stressed that aid is granted only if the programme is implemented (conditionality). This also means that any interest cost savings as a result of more favourable credit conditions than envisaged in the original plan should be used for additional defi  cit reduction and not as compensation for any missed expenditure or rev-enue targets. The involvement of private credit-ors envisaged for Greece is voluntary and, over-all, not without advantage for them (see also the comments on pages 68-71). The pledge by heads of state or government to provide Greek banks with suffi  cient collateral for funding and, if ne-cessary, mobilise funds for recapitalisation is wel-come. Supporting fi  nancial institutions that are no longer solvent – in adherence with European competition law – is without a doubt a task for fi  scal policymakers. Also in this case, it is import-ant to heed the separation of monetary from fi  s-cal policy in line with the provisions stipulated in the Treaty. Monetary policymakers have no au-thorisation to redistribute such risks or burdens among the taxpayers of various euro-area coun-tries.
Overall, there is a risk that the resolutions of 
21  July will increasingly erode the originally agreed institutional framework of monetary union. While fi  scal policy will continue to be de-termined by democratically elected parliaments at national level, the resultant risks and burdens will increasingly be borne by the Community in general and fi  nancially strong countries in par-ticular, without this being offset by any much further reaching powers of intervention. There is currently nothing on the political agenda that would establish a joint European fi  scal policy or a political union that would democratically em-
power a central entity to exert some control over 
national budgetary policies. This means there is a danger that the euro-area countries’ propen-sity to incur debt may increase even further, and the pressure on the euro-area’s single monetary policy to adopt an accommodating stance may grow. Unless and until a fundamental change of regime occurs involving an extensive surrender of national fi  scal sovereignty, it is imperative that the no bail-out rule still enshrined in the treaties and the associated disciplining function of capital markets for national fi  scal policies are not fatally weakened but strengthened.
out principle specifi  ed in the EU Treaty will generally be implemented 
only as a last resort to avert a risk to the fi  nancial market stability of 
the euro area as a whole and are to be made under a programmewith appropriate conditionality. — 6 See Deutsche Bundesbank, The 
debate on secondary market purchases by the future European Stabil-ity Mechanism, Monthly Report, February 2011, pp 68-69.DEUTSCHE  
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report  
August 2011
65

tax	is	viewed 	in	isolation, 	it	is	around 	twice 	as	
high. 	With 	regard 	to	the	discussion 	on	reduc -
ing	tax	rates 	to	compensate 	for	this	increase 	
in	the	tax	burden, 	in	light	of	the	still	strained 	
budgetary 	situation, 	it	is	essential 	that	any	tax	
cut	is	counterfinanced, 	so	as	to	ensure 	that	the	
original 	consolidation 	path 	is	not	watered 	
down 	further 	and	the	success 	of	the	consolida -
tion	measures 	is	not	jeopardised.
Central government budget
Central 	government 	recorded 	a	surplus 	of	€3	
billion 	in	the	second 	quarter 	of	2011 	compared 	
with	a	deficit 	of	€5	billion 	one	year	previously. 	
Revenue 	rose	by	1½% 	(€1	billion). 	Tax	receipts 	
continued 	to	increase 	sharply 	(7½%, 	or	€5	bil-
lion). 	By	contrast, 	other 	revenue 	was	affected 	
by	the	absence 	of	the	one-off 	effect 	of	€4½	billion 	from 	the	auction 	of	radio 	frequencies 	
that	had	been 	recorded 	one	year	previously. 	
Conversely, 	higher 	inflows 	from 	business 	ac-
tivities 	owing 	to	the	new	railway 	dividends 	of	
€½	billion 	were 	far	less	significant. 	At	almost 	
9%	(-€7	billion), 	expenditure 	declined 	sharply. 	
The	most 	important 	contributory 	factors 	were 	
payments 	to	the	social 	security 	funds 	(-€3	bil-
lion,	which 	on	balance 	was	almost 	entirely 	due	
to	lower 	transfers 	to	the	Federal 	Employment 	
Agency) 	and	interest 	expenditure 	(just	over	
-€2½ 	billion). 	In	the	case	of	the	latter, 	on	the	
one	hand, 	the	previous 	year’s 	figure 	was	sig-
nificantly 	overstated 	due	to	an	advanced 	out-
flow	and,	on	the	other 	hand, 	there 	was	add-
itional 	expenditure 	due	to	discounts 	when 	is-
suing 	new	securities. 	However, 	even 	without 	
these 	special 	effects, 	the	debt	service 	burden 	
is	likely 	to	have 	declined 	again 	somewhat. 	Fur-Marked 
improvement  
in fiscal balance 
in Q2Tax revenue
 
Type of taxH1 Q2Estimate
for
2011 1, 2
2010 2011 2010 2011Year-on-
year per-
centage
changeYear-on-year
changeYear-on-year
change
€ billion € billion as % € billion € billion as %
Tax revenue, 235.0 256.9 + 21.8 +  9.3 123.9 133.7 + 9.9 +  8.0 +  4.4
total 2
of which
Wage tax 60.7 66.6 +  5.9 +  9.8 30.4 34.1 + 3.7 + 12.1 +  5.1
Profi  t-related taxes 3 36.1 41.3 +  5.2 + 14.5 21.2 23.5 + 2.3 + 10.6 +  2.3
Assessed income tax 15.8 16.1 +  0.3 +  1.8 9.7 9.4 – 0.3 –  3.3 –  9.6
Corporation tax 5.8 6.7 +  0.9 + 15.9 3.8 4.2 + 0.4 + 10.1 + 11.8
Investment income 
tax 4 14.5 18.5 +  4.0 + 27.9 7.7 9.9 + 2.2 + 28.4 + 14.0
Turnover taxes 5 87.2 93.5 +  6.2 +  7.2 44.3 46.1 + 1.7 +  3.9 +  4.1
Energy tax 14.0 14.5 +  0.4 +  3.0 9.6 10.0 + 0.4 +  4.2 +  0.5
Tobacco tax 5.8 6.2 +  0.4 +  7.0 3.3 3.3 – 0.0 –  0.8 –  0.4
1 According to offi  cial tax estimate of May 2011. — 2 In-
cluding EU shares in German tax revenue, excluding re-
ceipts from local government taxes. — 3 Employee re-
funds, grants paid to homebuyers and investors deducted from revenue. — 4 Withholding tax on interest income 
and capital gains, non-assessed taxes on earnings. — 
5 Turnover tax and import turnover tax.
Deutsche Bundesbank
DEUTSCHE  
BUNDESBANK
E U R O S Y S T E M
Monthly Report  
August 2011
66

thermore, 	spending 	on	unemployment 	benefit	
II	fell	by	just	over	 €½	billion	 –	not	least	 owing	
to	central	 government	 cutting	 pension	 contri -
butions	 on	behalf	 of	recipients	 of	unemploy -
ment	 benefit	 II.	By	contrast,	 further	 relief	 as	a	
result 	of	favourable 	labour 	market 	develop -
ments 	is	likely 	to	have 	been 	masked 	by	the	
subsequent 	payment 	of	the	increased 	amounts	
owing 	to	higher 	standard 	rates 	with	retroactive	
effect	from	the	beginning	of	the	year.
Central 	government 	has	further 	lowered 	its	
estimate 	for	new	borrowing 	in	2011 	to	around	
€30	billion	 (budget	 plan:	 €48½	 billion).	 Given	
that	macroeconomic 	developments 	are	now	
forecast	 to	be	even	 more	 favourable,	 the	bur-
dens 	arising 	from 	the	Meilicke 	ruling 	are	
smaller 	than	estimated 	and	the	transfers 	to	the	
EU	budget 	are	lower, 	the	additional 	income 	of	
€8	billion	 forecast	 on	the	basis	 of	the	tax	esti-
mate	 from	 May	 is	once	 again	 likely	 to	be	sig-
nificantly 	exceeded. 	Furthermore, 	if	the	
number	 of	unemployed	 persons	 continues	 to	
fall	and	the	financing 	conditions 	for	central	
government 	are	favourable, 	expenditure 	will	
probably 	remain 	well	below 	the	estimates,	
meaning	 that	 an	even	 greater	 undershooting	
of	the	planned	deficit	appears	possible.
When 	drawing 	up	the	draft 	Federal 	budget 	for	
2012, 	the	Federal 	Government 	used 	a	top-
down	 procedure	 for	the	first	time.	 The	bench -
mark	 figures	 from	 mid-March	 set	out	budgets	
for	the	individual 	government 	departments.	
Thereafter, 	if	the	rules 	are	resolutely 	imple -
mented, 	adjustments 	may	only	be	made 	in	
response 	to	the	effects 	of	unexpectedly 	favour -
able	or	unfavourable 	macroeconomic 	develop -
ments. 	In	this	respect, 	only	the	revised 	revenue	expectations	 in	the	wake	 of	the	May	 tax	esti-
mate 	and	higher 	loan	repayments 	from 	the	
Federal 	Employment 	Agency 	would 	have 	been	
regarded	 as	positive	 and,	 by	contrast,	 the	up-
ward 	revisions 	to	interest 	costs 	would 	have	
been 	considered 	negative. 	However, 	in	con-
nection	 with	 the	new	 energy	 strategy,	 the	de-
cision 	was	also	taken 	to	permanently 	shut	
down	 older	 nuclear	 reactors	 and	bear	 the	en-
suing	 nuclear	 fuel	tax	shortfalls,	 as	well	 as	to	
transfer	 the	proceeds	 from	 CO2	emissions	 cer-
tificates, 	which 	have 	so	far	gone 	to	the	Federal	
budget, 	to	the	Energy 	and	Climate 	Fund.	
Along 	with	additional 	expenditure 	resulting	
from	 the	surplus	 of	personnel	 in	the	Federal	
Armed	 Forces	 and	the	income	 foregone	 from	
the	financial 	transaction 	tax,	the	additional	
burdens	 in	the	draft	 budget	 from	 July	amount	
to	almost 	€5	billion 	vis-à-vis 	the	benchmark	Lower-than-
expected deficit for year as a whole
Considerable 
additional burdens despite new top-down procedure for drawing up 2012 budgetCentral government fiscal 
deficit / surplus
20092011
Deutsche Bundesbank20112010
Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4252015105051015
–––––+++
–45–40–35–30–25–20–15–10–5€ bnCumulative from start of year
2010Quarterly results
2009€ bnDEUTSCHE  
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report  
August 2011
67

Proposal for an effective private sector involvement for bond issues from mid-2013 onwards
Deutsche BundesbankThe fundamental importance of sound public fi  -
nances within the euro area to ensuring an inde-
pendent and stability-oriented monetary policy 
is abundantly clear at present. Where there is a 
lack of direct, centralised powers to intervene in 
national budgets, fi  scal-policy rules as well as, in 
particular, the disciplining effect of the fi  nancial 
markets on national fi  scal policies play a key role 
(see box on pages 62-65). If investors believe that 
the servicing of government bonds may become 
jeopardised by unsound fi  scal policy, then they 
have cause to demand higher interest ex ante. 
The possibility of rising interest rates strength-
ens the fi  nancial incentives to pursue a more am-
bitious budgetary policy. They are likely to have 
a far greater effect than reprimands and recom-
mendations from European institutions. For this 
disciplining effect via the capital markets to re-
main intact, however, investors actually have to 
believe that they will bear potential losses. If, on 
the other hand, they expect government rescue 
funds, say, to relieve them of any losses, this in-
centive to pursue sound budgetary policies will 
be lost.
For this reason, the Treaty on the Functioning of 
the European Union (TFEU) bans governments 
from assuming liability for the debts of other 
states (“no bail-out” clause). In the event of the 
imminent insolvency of one state, however, a 
trade-off can occur between the liability of pri-
vate investors and the safeguarding of fi  nancial stability. This prompted the European Council to 
propose, in March 2011, a supplement to the 
TEFU whereby a stability mechanism may be es-
tablished and fi  nancial aid given under strict 
conditionality in order to ensure the stability of 
the euro area as a whole. If a country is no longer 
in a position to service its debts despite massive 
consolidation and reform efforts (or if the state 
fails to undertake the necessary efforts and vio-
lates the conditions), the creditors must, as a 
general principle, nevertheless continue to as-
sume that their claims will not be met in full.
On 21 July 2011, the European Council resolved 
that the substantial expansion of government 
assistance for Greece is to be linked to the par-
ticipation of private creditors of that country. 
This is essentially in keeping with the European 
agreements; however, the concrete framework 
conditions have ultimately made effective imple-
mentation almost impossible in this particular 
case. First, a sizeable part of Greek sovereign 
debt is already held by public creditors, above all 
because maturing debt securities have for some 
time now been passed to the countries providing 
assistance. Private creditors have thus been able 
to reduce their liability risks. Second, there was 
the danger that a moderate, yet enforced waiver 
of claims – which was also a topic of debate prior 
to the summit meeting – would have jeopard-
ised euro-area fi  nancial stability without getting 
to the root of Greece‘s problems. In the end, the 
1 Particularly in the case of bonds with long residual maturities, 
creditors probably stand to gain a fi  nancial advantage by swapping given the guarantee linked to the swap. Although the possibility of 
extending the scope of the swap to include bond maturities after DEUTSCHE  
BUNDESBANK
E U R O S Y S T E M
Monthly Report  
August 2011
68

idea of involving private creditors on a manda-
tory basis was rejected. Moreover, it was agreed that extensive government guarantees would be furnished as collateral for voluntarily swapped bonds. The form that private sector involvement will ultimately take has not yet been decided. However, it can probably be expected that the overall package will impose very strict limits on the contribution made by private creditors,
1 and, 
above all, that there will be a further transfer of risk to the countries providing assistance.
In view of the severe problems that have become 
evident with regard to implementing private sector involvement, it will be important in future to make it as effective, ie as goal-oriented, as possible. On the one hand, the potential trade-off between fi  nancial market stability and the assumption of liability by private creditors ought to be reduced by strengthening fi  nancial market stability – over and above what is planned or al-ready implemented – by suitable measures in the regulation and supervision of fi  nancial markets. Moreover, the EMU rules need to be adjusted in a way that prevents private creditors from off-loading their liability after just a short period of time at the expense of aid-providing countries‘ taxpayers the moment a euro-area member state appears to be on the verge of diffi  culties. This objective is likely to be achieved only to a very limited extent under the provisions contained in the draft European Stability Mechanism (ESM) treaty on private sector involvement and the planned collective action clauses (CACs), which 
from July 2013 onwards are to be included in the 
terms and conditions of all new euro-area gov-ernment bonds with a maturity of more than one year. The draft ESM treaty does envisage ini-tiatives by the member state receiving assistance in the event of liquidity risks, the aim being to encourage the most important private investors to hold on to their exposure; however, there are doubts as to whether such negotiations would be very successful, since private investors in par-ticular will have little interest in extended matu-rities.
A pragmatic and fairly simple approach towards 
achieving an effective private sector involve-ment would be to extend the terms of bonds is-sued by euro-area member states.
2 In this way, 
the terms of all newly issued euro-area govern-ment bonds could include not only the already planned CACs but also a standard trigger clause concerning the bond‘s maturity. Such a clause would stipulate that the regular maturity (eg fi  ve or ten years) of each bond would be auto-matically extended by three years (to a total of 
eight or thirteen years) as soon as the ESM grants 
fi  nancial assistance to the country in question. During this extended maturity, the bond would 
continue to be subject to the agreed bond terms. 
Three years could be an appropriate (fi  xed) pe-riod, because a large part of the necessary re-
2020 is evidently under discussion, it does not appear to be inevitable 
under the present circumstances, not least given Greece‘s access to capital. — 2 See AA Weber, J Ulbrich and K Wendorff, Finanzmarktsta-
bilität sichern, Investorenverantwortung stärken, Steuerzahler scho-DEUTSCHE  
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report  
August 2011
69

Proposal for an effective private sector involvement for bond issues from mid-2013 onwards (cont’d)
Deutsche Bundesbankform and consolidation efforts by the country 
concerned would have to be carried out by the 
end of that period. A trigger clause that is fi  rmly 
anchored in the bond terms would offer an array 
of important benefi  ts.
Should it become apparent only in the course of 
the fi  rst three years of the period of assistance 
that a restructuring of sovereign debt is una-
voidable, considerable risks would not have to 
be concentrated on a much smaller group of pri-
vate creditors or transferred to the taxpayers of 
the countries providing assistance. One key ad-
vantage for countries providing assistance, 
moreover, is that the need for support within the 
framework of the assistance programmes would 
be dramatically reduced; “only” the current defi  -
cits (interest payments and primary defi  cits) 
would need to be refi  nanced. These would prob-
ably make up by far the smaller part of the over-
all funding requirement – for instance, more 
than two-thirds of the loans to Greece under the 
fi  rst aid package were used to refi  nance matur-
ing bonds. The maturity extension clause could 
thus very sharply reduce the volume required by 
the assistance fund. In the event of a crisis, the 
maturity extension clause would improve the 
maturity structure of the debt of countries re-
ceiving assistance. At the same time, particularly 
if a country unexpectedly suffers fi  nancial dis-
tress through no fault of its own (and therefore 
previously had relatively favourable fi  nancing conditions), the interest payments on the ex-
tended bonds would probably be fairly low. In 
addition, these countries would have planning 
certainty with regard to interest payments for 
the duration of the extended maturity.
The inclusion of a maturity extension clause 
would do more to enhance fi  nancial market sta-
bility than an ESM programme without this ad-
ditional measure. The European Council has 
agreed to accord ESM loans preferred creditor 
status, analogous to IMF conditionality. This pre-
ferred creditor status is crucial as a means of pro-
tecting taxpayers in the countries providing as-
sistance and ought to be non-negotiable in the 
future. However, without an automatic exten-
sion of maturities, this status could on the whole 
also have some undesirable implications for fi  -
nancial stability. For instance, creditors of short-
term bonds would get off largely risk-free, 
whereas creditors of longer-dated paper might 
have to participate in any unavoidable future re-
structuring. These investors would then have to 
bear heavier losses than if there had been no as-
sistance programme: their claims would be sub-
ordinated to those of the IMF and the ESM, and 
in the event of restructuring they would have to 
take the entire haircut. The greater the share of 
preferred debt, which itself largely stems from 
the fi  nancing of maturing paper, the larger the 
haircut. This could put additional downward 
pressure on the prices of long-dated instruments. 
nen. Ein Vorschlag zur Stärkung des Europäischen Stabilitätsmecha-
nismus durch die geeignete Ausgestaltung künftiger Anleihekondi-tionen, Frankfurter Allgemeine Zeitung, 3 March 2011 (English trans-
lation available at http://www.bundesbank.de/presse/presse_aktuell.DEUTSCHE  
BUNDESBANK
E U R O S Y S T E M
Monthly Report  
August 2011
70

Secondary market purchases, which should also 
be rejected for other fundamental reasons, would exacerbate this development further.
By contrast, incorporating a maturity-extending 
trigger clause into the terms of government bonds would mean that, notwithstanding the length of the residual maturity, all private credi-tors of the bonds of the country in question would face a similar default risk. This would spread any price losses across more shoulders, making them easier to cope with. In addition, it would ensure that fi  nancial investors continue to bear responsibility for their investment deci-sion and that liability is not passed on to the tax-payer in the event of a crisis. Unlike moratoriums for which there are no ex ante provisions, the explicit inclusion of a maturity clause in bond terms would mitigate contagion effects. Thus, there would be no failure to comply (default) on the part of the debtor, since the procedure would have been laid down ex ante in the bond terms. Moreover, where a maturity extension is already provided for in the terms, the direct im-pact on credit default swap contracts and auto-matic rating downgrades should remain within limits – and hardly differ from what it would be if ESM loans were granted without an automatic extension clause. Thus, changeover problems as-sociated with amending the bond terms are also likely to be limited, since the bond terms will be fundamentally changed in any case given the fi  rm plans to include CACs.
Sovereign debtors may, as a general principle, in-
cur higher costs from investors factoring in the specifi  c risk of a maturity extension when they purchase government bonds subject to such con-ditionality. However, with the increasing likeli-hood of an application for ESM assistance being made and granted during the regular maturity, the interest rate expected when the bonds are issued would, at most, come close to the interest rates of bonds which have a maturity running three years longer from the outset. Countries with a good credit rating would probably hardly see any increase in interest rates. The interest rate spread would also remain limited for coun-tries with a poorer credit rating and a higher probability of EMS utilisation. The European Council has in any case already agreed that more 
emphasis be put on medium and long-term debt. 
However, the yield curve is usually relatively ﬂ  at in this maturity segment, meaning that a poten-tially longer maturity would carry no more than a relatively benign premium. The interest pay-ments could even be lower on the whole if the proposed bond conditionality reduces the likeli-hood of a transfer to overindebted countries, and if a more effective disciplining of the mar-kets throughout the euro area leads to a more stability-oriented fi  scal policy.
en.php). A differently structured option to extend foreign currency 
debt is proposed by WH Buiter and AC Sibert (1999), UDROP: a contri-bution to the new international fi  nancial architecture, International  Finance 2 (2), pp 227-247.DEUTSCHE  
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report  
August 2011
71

figures. 	This	has	not	been 	compensated 	for	by	
means 	of	new	consolidation 	measures. 	Rather, 	
these 	effects 	were 	accounted 	for	on	a	one-off 	
basis 	with	a	discretionary 	supplement 	(with 	
regard 	to	compliance 	with	the	debt	brake, 	this	
is	treated 	as	entirely 	structural) 	on	tax	revenue 	
(€2	billion 	compared 	with	the	May	tax	esti-
mate) 	as	well	as	higher 	forecast 	proceeds 	from 	
asset 	realisations.
Overall, 	the	2012 	draft 	budget 	passed 	by	the	
Federal 	Cabinet 	foresees 	net	borrowing 	of	
€27.2 	billion. 	Compared 	with	the	actual 	result 	
for	2011 	expected 	by	the	Federal 	Government, 	
this	amounts 	to	only	a	small 	decrease. 	The	im-
proved 	economic 	situation 	and	higher 	(net) 	
proceeds 	from 	sales 	of	financial 	assets 	even 	
produce 	an	increase 	in	the	structural 	deficit. 	
However, 	the	estimates 	appear 	to	be	rather 	
cautious. 	Although 	the	discretionary 	supple -
ment 	on	the	tax	estimate 	result 	poses 	proce -
dural 	problems 	(as	it	permits 	the	creation 	of	
budgetary 	leeway 	when 	needed 	in	the	short 	
term), 	as	things 	currently 	stand, 	it	is	justified 	
in	objective 	terms 	and	even 	higher 	additional 	
revenue 	appears 	plausible. 	On	the	expenditure 	
side,	it	is	likely 	that	above 	all	estimates 	for	in-
terest 	and	for	long-term 	unemployment 	have 	
been 	calculated 	cautiously. 	Overall, 	it	seems 	
that	a	significantly 	lower 	deficit 	can	be	
achieved.
Despite 	these 	more 	favourable 	developments, 	
the	draft 	budget 	constitutes 	a	clear 	departure 	
from 	the	volume 	of	consolidation 	agreed 	in	
June	2010, 	which 	the	impact 	of	the	very	fa-
vourable 	economic 	developments 	only	masks. 	
The	burdens 	vis-à-vis 	the	benchmark 	figures 	
plus	the	shortfalls 	owing 	to	the	planned 	2011 	Tax	Simplification 	Act	(overall 	amounting 	to	
€5½	billion), 	which 	were 	already 	included 	in	
the	calculation 	of	these 	figures, 	are	consider -
ably	delaying 	deficit 	reduction.
This	easing 	of	fiscal 	policy 	during 	the	upturn 	
is	facilitated 	by	problematic 	room 	for	manoeu -
vre	having 	been 	created 	when 	implementing 	
the	debt	brake. 	For	example, 	the	starting 	value 	
for	the	structural 	deficit 	limit, 	which 	was	set	in	
spring 	last	year	and	is	to	be	reduced 	gradually 	
by	2016, 	has	still	not	been 	adjusted 	for	the	
considerably 	more 	favourable 	actual 	result 	for	
2010. 	This	produces 	additional 	scope 	for	bor-
rowing 	in	2012 	of	up	to	approximately 	€15	
billion, 	as	the	upper 	limit	was	set	at	€40	billion 	
rather 	than	just	over	€25	billion. 	According 	to	
the	draft 	budget, 	the	structural 	deficit 	will	
amount 	to	€29½ 	billion 	(although, 	given 	the	
rather 	cautious 	budgetary 	estimates, 	the	
stricter 	limit	also	appears 	within 	reach). 	If	the	
room 	for	manoeuvre 	created 	by	not	adjusting 	
the	upper 	limit	were 	to	be	exhausted, 	the	cur-
rently 	favourable 	setting 	for	far-reaching 	budg -
etary 	consolidation 	would 	go	unused.
In	this	connection, 	a	further 	cause 	for	concern 	
is	the	fact	that	despite 	the	forecast 	good 	ca-
pacity 	utilisation 	for	2012, 	a	cyclically 	induced 	
burden 	for	the	Federal 	budget 	of	€3	billion 	is	
still	estimated 	and	the	scope 	for	new	borrow -
ing	will	be	increased 	accordingly. 	The	cyclical 	
adjustment 	procedure 	based 	on	the	modified 	
EU	approach 	therefore 	appears 	unsuitable 	for	
the	debt	brake, 	also	particularly 	given 	its	de-
sign	weakness. 	It	is	therefore 	advisable 	to	re-
vert	back 	to	the	procedure 	used 	last	year, 	
which 	is	considerably 	more 	straightforward.Mostly cautious 
estimates in 
2012 draft 
budget …
… and 
departure  
from 2010 
 consolidation 
programmeImplementation 
of debt brake 
at odds with 
intention
Problematic 
cyclical 
 adjustment 
procedure
DEUTSCHE  
BUNDESBANK
E U R O S Y S T E M
Monthly Report  
August 2011
72

By	contrast, 	in	the	case	of	financial 	transac -
tions,	 attempts	 are	being	 made	 to	produce	 a	
more	 appropriate	 economic	 definition,	 which	
would, 	for	example, 	treat	transfers 	to	multilat -
eral	development	 banks	 in	the	amount	 of	al-
most	 €1	billion	 as	transfers	 rather	 than	 as	par-
ticipating 	interests, 	under 	which 	they	have	
been	 recorded	 to	date.	 However,	 interest-free	
loans 	without 	a	fixed 	redemption 	date	that	are	
granted 	to	the	Federal 	Employment 	Agency	
are	to	continue 	to	be	classified 	as	financial	
transactions	 and	thus	 not	fall	under	 the	debt	
brake.
The	financial	 plan	 envisages	 a	further	 gradual	
reduction	 in	net	borrowing	 to	€14½	 billion	 by	
2015. 	Assuming 	normal 	capacity 	utilisation 	and	
high	burdens 	stemming 	from 	financial 	transac -
tions	 –	particularly	 from	 the	capital	 transfer	 to	the	ESM	 –	this	would	 mean	 that	 the	limit	 for	
structural 	new	borrowing 	of	0.35% 	of	GDP ,	
which	 applies	 from	 2016	 onwards,	 would	 al-
ready	 be	complied	 with	 in	2015.	 However,	 the	
plan	 entails	 substantial	 risks.	 For	example,	 the	
calculation	 includes	 income	 of	€2	billion	 per	
year	 from	 2013	 onwards	 stemming	 from	 a	fi-
nancial	 transaction	 tax	that	 has	not	yet	been	
specified. 	Furthermore, 	global 	savings 	of	€5	
billion 	are	planned 	for	both 	2014 	and	2015,	
but	they	have 	yet	to	be	finalised. 	Moreover,	
the	government 	assumes 	that	defence 	expend -
iture	 will	be	reduced	 by	just	over	 €1	billion	 by	
2015, 	despite 	rising 	pay	levels. 	In	addition,	
given 	annual 	real	GDP	growth 	of	just	over	
1½%,	 it	is	assumed	 that	 the	output	 gap	will	
not	be	closed 	until	2015. 	However, 	in	the	past,	
visible 	optimism 	with	regard 	to	the	growth	
trend	 has	often	 resulted	 in	the	financial	 plan	Inclusion  
of financial transactionsFinancial plan up to 2015 records marked structural deficit reduction, but also contains sizeable risksMedium-term fi  nancial plan and permissible net borrowing of central government 
under the debt rule
€ billion
ItemActual
2010Target2011Draft2012Financial plan
2013 2014 2015
Expenditure 
1 303.6 305.8 306.0 311.5 309.9 315.0
of which
Investment 2 26.1 26.9 26.4 25.3 25.1 24.9
Revenue 1, 3 259.6 257.4 278.9 286.6 291.2 300.3
of which
Tax revenue 1 226.2 229.2 247.4 256.4 265.8 275.7
Net borrowing 44.0 48.4 27.2 24.9 18.7 14.7
plus cyclical component 4 – 12.3 – 2.5 – 2.8 – 2.2 – 1.3 – 0.0
plus balance of fi  nancial transactions 5 0.9 – 5.0 4.8 0.6 – 4.3 – 5.2
Structural net borrowing 32.6 40.9 29.2 23.3 13.1 9.5
as a percentage of GDP 6 1.4 1.7 1.2 0.9 0.5 0.3
Memo item
Structural net borrowing 7
Upper limit according to Federal Ministry of Finance 53.2 45.6 39.8 33.1 26.0 18.2
Upper limit if actual 2010 result is reduced in equal steps 32.6 28.6 25.6 22.1 18.4 14.3
1 After deducting supplementary central government grants, shares in en-
ergy tax revenue, compensation as part of the 2009 motor vehicle tax re-form and consolidation assistance from 2011 onwards, which are all remit-
ted to state government. 2014 and 2015 including global savings of €4.8 
billion each year from the “package for the future”. — 2 Excluding loans to 
the Federal Employment Agency and participating interests in ESM. — 3 In-
cluding proceeds from coin seigniorage. — 4 For 2010, current estimate of 
the Federal Ministry of Finance. For 2011, in accordance with budget plan. For 2012 to 2015, current estimate of the Federal Ministry of Finance (date: spring forecast 2011, see Federal Ministry of Finance, Monthly Report, May 2011, p 132 (complete report available in German only)). — 5 For 2010, in 
accordance with cash statistics data. — 6 Nominal GDP in the year preced-
ing the drafting of the budget; for 2010, GDP in 2009 (date: spring forecast 2011). — 7 Central government does not record an actual result for struc-
tural net borrowing for the base year 2010. The defi  cit reduction path from 2011 onwards (upper limits), which was laid down in 2010, is based on last 
year’s forecast of the starting structural defi  cit value of 2.2% of GDP in 
2010 and stipulates a reduction of 0.3% of GDP each year.
Deutsche BundesbankDEUTSCHE  
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report  
August 2011
73

goals 	being 	abandoned 	owing 	to	compara -
tively 	weaker 	economic 	developments. 	Since 	
the	debt	brake 	is	intended 	to	prevent 	an	ac-
cumulation 	of	debt	in	the	future, 	it	is	impera -
tive	that	a	margin 	of	safety 	is	set	below 	the	
deficit 	ceiling 	so	as	to	avoid 	procyclical 	con-
solidation 	in	the	case	of	unwelcome 	surprises.
Central 	government’s 	off-budget 	entities 	re-
corded 	a	surplus 	of	€12½ 	billion 	in	the	second 	
quarter 	compared 	with	a	deficit 	of	€2½	billion 	
in	the	same 	period 	last	year.	This	was	mainly 	
due	to	the	repayment 	to	SoFFin 	of	the	capital 	
assistance 	granted 	during 	the	financial 	crisis. 	
The	Investment 	and	Repayment 	Fund 	still	has	
around 	€3	billion 	of	funds 	that	can	be	re-
quested 	for	investment 	purposes 	during 	the	
remainder 	of	the	year,	well	after 	the	end	of	the	
economic 	slump. 	For	the	year	as	a	whole, 	the	
off-budget 	entities 	could 	record 	a	surplus 	of	
around 	€5	billion, 	compared 	with	a	deficit 	of	
€7	billion 	in	2010.
State government7
The	financial 	situation 	of	state 	government 	
continued 	to	improve 	in	the	second 	quarter. 	
Following 	a	deficit 	of	€½	billion 	one	year	pre-
viously, 	the	core	budgets 	posted 	a	surplus 	of	
€1½	billion. 	The	main 	reason 	for	this	was	a	
further 	sharp 	increase 	in	revenue 	of	just	under 	
8½% 	(€5½ 	billion). 	Tax	revenue 	alone 	went 	up	
by	almost 	€4	billion 	(+8%). 	At	the	same 	time, 	
expenditure 	grew 	at	a	similarly 	strong 	pace 	
(just	under 	5½%, 	or	€3½	billion), 	which 	is	at-
tributable 	not	least	to	€1	½	billion 	higher 	cur-
rent	transfers 	to	local	government. 	In	addition, 	
personnel 	costs 	likewise 	rose	at	an	accelerated 	
pace 	owing 	to	the	recent 	pay	agreement, 	which 	also	broadly 	applies 	to	both 	public 	sec-
tor	employees 	with	civil	servant 	status 	and	
retired 	civil	servants 	(+3%).
A	decline 	in	the	deficit 	is	also	expected 	for	the	
year	as	a	whole, 	although 	growth 	in	tax	rev-
enue 	is	likely 	to	weaken 	during 	the	remainder 	
of	the	year	and	spending 	on	personnel 	and	
other 	operating 	expenditure 	as	well	as	trans -
fers	to	local	government 	will	probably 	continue 	
to	increase 	significantly. 	By	contrast, 	a	total 	
deficit 	of	just	over	€23½ 	billion 	is	still	assumed 	
in	the	budget 	plans, 	following 	an	actual 	result 	
of	€21½ 	billion 	in	2010.
The	fact	that	many 	federal 	states 	plan	to	over-
shoot 	the	regular 	borrowing 	limits 	by	invoking 	
the	exemption 	clause 	that	it	serves 	to	avert 	a	
disruption 	of	the	macroeconomic 	equilibrium, 	
despite 	the	exceptionally 	favourable 	economic 	
developments, 	is	extremely 	problematic. 	The	
notion 	that	it	is	impossible 	to	comply 	with	the	
debt	brake 	owing 	to	extreme 	budgetary 	hard-
ship, 	as	in	the	case	of	Bremen, 	is	even 	less	
comprehensible. 	It	was	only	in	spring 	2011 	that	
recipients 	of	consolidation 	aid	undertook 	to	
reduce 	their	structural 	new	borrowing 	to	zero	
by	2020. 	Given 	the	moderate 	growth 	in	tax	
revenue 	which 	can	be	assumed 	up	until	then, 	
in	order 	to	achieve 	this,	extensive 	reduction 	
opportunities 	must 	be	included 	in	the	budget 	
and	adopted 	in	any	restructuring 	programme 	
to	be	agreed. 	This	would 	make 	it	unlikely 	for	
there 	to	be	an	extreme 	situation 	of	budgetary 	
hardship 	in	which 	all	revenue 	leeway 	has	al-Central 
 government’s 
off-budget 
entities record 
high surplus
Surplus in Q2Improvement 
expected for 
year as a 
whole, …
… although 
overshooting  
of regular 
borrowing 
limits planned
7	The	development 	of	local	government 	finances 	in	the	
first	quarter 	of	2011 	was	analysed 	in	greater 	detail 	in	the	
short 	article 	in	the	Bundesbank 	Monthly 	Report 	of	July	
2011. 	These 	are	the	most 	recent 	data	available.DEUTSCHE  
BUNDESBANK
E U R O S Y S T E M
Monthly Report  
August 2011
74

ready 	been 	made 	use	of	and	all	possible 	ex-
penditure 	cuts	have 	already 	been 	imple -
mented.
To	date, 	the	implementation 	of	the	new	debt	
rules 	has	been 	hesitant. 	Alongside 	Schleswig-
Holstein, 	Rhineland-Palatinate 	and	Hesse, 	
Mecklenburg-West 	Pomerania 	has	now	also	
implemented 	the	debt	brake 	of	the	Basic 	Law	
(Grundgesetz )	in	its	state 	government 	constitu -
tion.	However, 	like	in	the	other 	three 	federal 	
states, 	it	appears 	that	the	more 	precise 	ar-
rangements 	remain 	largely 	open. 	In	the	other 	
federal 	states 	there 	are	at	most 	regulations 	in	
the	budgetary 	laws	that	can	–	as	is	evidently 	
also	currently 	planned 	in	Baden-Württemberg 	–	
be	adjusted 	as	and	when 	necessary. 	The	fact	
that	some 	federal 	states 	have 	even 	assumed 	
additional 	budgetary 	burdens, 	despite 	the	re-
duction 	in	new	borrowing 	that	is	to	be	
achieved 	by	2020, 	and	are	postponing 	neces -
sary	consolidation 	measures, 	should 	also	be	
viewed 	critically. 	Given 	this	general 	climate 	and	
the	considerable 	need 	for	consolidation 	in	
some 	federal 	states, 	tax	cuts	that	are	not	coun -
terfinanced 	would 	also	be	problematic 	from 	
the	perspective 	of	state 	government 	in	the	
coming 	years.
At	its	meeting 	in	May, 	the	Stability 	Council 	
–	the	successor 	to	the	Financial 	Planning 	Coun -
cil	of	central 	and	state 	government 	–	deter -
mined, 	as	expected, 	that	in	four	of	the	five	
federal 	states 	with	a	fundamental 	entitlement 	
to	consolidation 	aid	(Bremen, 	Saarland, 	
Schleswig-Holstein 	and	Berlin) 	there 	is	also	a	
threat 	of	budgetary 	hardship.8	Consequently, 	
these 	federal 	states 	must 	additionally 	present 	
five-year 	restructuring 	programmes 	that	con-tain	concrete 	measures 	–	at	least	for	the	sub-
sequent 	budget 	–	for	the	gradual 	reduction 	of	
net	borrowing. 	The	federal 	states 	concerned 	
and	the	Stability 	Council 	intend 	to	agree 	on	
these 	at	the	next	meeting 	in	November. 	Owing 	
to	the	inflated 	starting 	level	for	the	deficit 	re-
duction 	paths,9	particular 	attention 	should 	be	
paid	to	making 	sure	that, 	in	accordance 	with	
section 	5	of	the	Stability 	Council 	Act	(Stabili -
tätsratsgesetz ),	measures 	are	implemented 	to	
ensure 	the	calculated 	deficit 	reduction 	steps, 	
rather 	than	the	distorted 	levels, 	are	fulfilled 	in	
their	entirety, 	insofar 	as	this	cannot 	be	achieved 	
by	means 	of	purely 	structural 	relief 	from 	the	
tax	estimate. 	Otherwise, 	there 	is	a	risk	of	more 	
or	less	passing 	up	the	currently 	favourable 	
macroeconomic 	setting 	for	far-reaching 	budg -
etary 	consolidation. 	It	would 	also	seem 	advis -
able	to	set	concrete 	sanctions 	in	case	devia -
tions 	are	made 	from 	the	respective 	pro-
grammes.
Social security funds10
Statutory pension insurance scheme
The	statutory 	pension 	insurance 	scheme 	re-
corded 	a	surplus 	of	almost 	€1½	billion 	in	the	
second 	quarter, 	which 	was	just	over	€1	billion 	
higher 	than	one	year	previously. 	While 	revenue 	Sluggish 
 implementation 
of the new 
debt rules
Stability 
Council 
 determines 
imminent 
budgetary 
hardship in 
four federal 
states receiving 
consolidation 
aidHigher surplus 
in Q2
8	See	press 	release 	on	the	third 	meeting 	of	the	Stability 	
Council 	on	23 May 	2011 	at	www.stabilitaetsrat.de 	(avail -
able	in	German 	only).
9	See	Deutsche 	Bundesbank, 	German 	states 	receiving 	
consolidation 	aid	–	initial 	deficit 	reduction 	requirements 	
not	very	ambitious, 	Monthly 	Report, 	May	2011, 	pp	70-71.
10	The	financial 	development 	of	the	statutory 	health 	and	
public 	long-term 	care	insurance 	schemes 	in	the	first	quar-
ter	of	2011 	was	analysed 	in	the	short 	articles 	of	the	
Monthly 	Reports 	of	June 	and	July.	These 	are	the	most 	
recent 	data	available.DEUTSCHE  
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report  
August 2011
75

Deutsche BundesbankSustainable contribution rate for the Federal Employment Agency
The Federal Employment Agency‘s main source of fund -
ing comes from insurance contributions. Last year, such 
contributions accounted for approximately three-fifths 
of its revenue. The second largest source of revenue was 
the rule-based central government grant, which covered 
roughly €8 billion, or just over 17%, of expenditure in 
2010.1 Economic justification for regular tax grants can 
be derived from the concept of “non-insurance-related 
benefits” that are not to be financed solely by contribu -
tion payers. Although a universal definition of these 
benefits is not possible, there is much to suggest that 
they are likely to be more or less covered by current cen -
tral government funds. In addition, in 2010 the Federal 
Employment Agency recorded income from insolvency 
benefit contributions, refunds of administrative costs for 
support for the long-term unemployed, taking recourse 
to remaining reserves and from an extraordinary central 
government grant to offset losses.
The contribution rate to the Federal Employment Agency 
was raised from 4.3% to 6.5% at the start of the 1990s, 
following German reunification, where it remained until it was cut to 4.2% in 2007 and 3.3% in 2008 and 2009. 
The rate was subsequently lowered to 2.8% as part of 
the economic stimulus programme. The rate has stayed 
put at 3.0% since the beginning of 2011. In the past, the 
respective contribution rate was usually not sufficient 
for the Federal Employment Agency to be able to cover 
its expenditure with own funds. For instance, in 2010 a 
rate of 3.8% would have been required to do so.3 Up to 
2006, the annual deficit was offset by central govern -
ment grants. Since 2007, funds from central government 
to offset the deficit have been granted solely in the form 
of non-interest-bearing loans that are to be repaid in 
years when a surplus is recorded. However, this rule was 
broken in 2010 when the deficit of €5.2 billion, which 
could no longer be covered by reserves, was offset by a 
non-repayable central government grant.
With the aid of a sustainable contribution rate, it should 
be possible to balance out the Federal Employment 
Agency’s revenue and expenditure over the economic 
cycle without having to make procyclical adjustments 
to the contribution rate or take recourse to additional 
structural central government grants. In 2011, when 
production capacities can hardly be regarded as underu -
tilised, the Federal Employment Agency is expecting a 
deficit of just under €2 billion and just short of 850,000 
recipients of unemployment benefits.4 To ensure a bal -
anced budget, the contribution rate should have been 
set a quarter of a percentage point higher.
The contribution rate required in the long term hinges 
on the average number of recipients of unemployment 
benefits. If the following assumptions are made 
– the central government grant is halved as planned 
(-€4 billion)
 – expenditure on active labour policy measures is low-
ered by roughly €2 billion compared with 2010 
– the promotion of partial retirement, which currently 
amounts to just over €1 billion, comes to an end (in 
accordance with the laws applicable at that time) 
1 The central government grant was introduced in 2007 when the 
standard rate of VAT was raised from 16% to 19% and it corresponds 
to the (extrapolated) revenue from 1 percentage point of the standard 
rate of VAT.  — 2 Current estimate of deficit by the Federal Employ -ment Agency.  — 3 Had the contribution rate been 3.8% instead of 
2.8%, this would have meant additional income of just over €8  billion 
which would have covered the deficit.  — 4 The number of recipients 
of unemployment benefits is usually somewhat below the number of Fiscal balance of the
Federal Employment Agency
1991 95 00 05 10201120151050510
––––€ bn
2Actual fiscal balancePlanned fiscal balance
(including supplementary budget)DEUTSCHE  
BUNDESBANK
E U R O S Y S T E M
Monthly Report  
August 2011
76

– the reintegration payment is reduced by around €1 bil-
lion compared with 2011 to approximately €4 billion per 
year 
– there is no repetition of the crisis-related extension of 
short-time working benefits 
then a contribution rate of 3.4% would be required 
based on the forecast number of recipients of unem -
ployment benefits in 2011. Conversely, with the current contribution rate of 3.0%, benefits could be financed for only just short of 700,000 recipients, meaning that the number of recipients would have to be permanently cut on average over an economic cycle by a further 15% on 
current values.
By contrast, on an annual average, the number of 
recipients of benefits observed between 1995 and 2005 
amounted to almost 1.9 million. Admittedly a rather 
sharp decline has been observed since then, which is probably chiefly due to labour market reforms over the 
course of the past decade. Nevertheless, even if the aver -
age for the period from 2007 to 2011 were to continue, 
there would still be around one million recipients of unemployment benefits. Under the assumptions stated above, this would necessitate a contribution rate of 3.7%. If the payment of short-term working benefits were to be extended again in future downturns, an 
additional 100,000 recipients of unemployment benefits 
would have to be financed.
Overall, under the aforementioned conditions, the cur -
rent contribution rate of 3.0% can only be considered 
sufficient if the present positive labour market situation 
continues to improve and a further drop in the number 
of recipients of unemployment benefits forms the basis 
for a new long-term average. This appears unlikely (see 
also the comments on p 53). It is more realistic that a further lowering of the contribution rate to the Federal Employment Agency would – at best – be financially 
manageable only in the very short term, with a continu -
ation of positive economic developments and no reduc-
tion of the central government grant.In the long term, it is safe to assume that even with a con -
tribution rate of 3.0%, the Federal Employment Agency 
will be structurally underfinanced. Furthermore, halving 
the rule-based central government grant by 2015 means 
that under-coverage of the Federal Employment Agen -
cy’s “non-insurance-related benefits” is inevitable. In the 
future, action will have to be taken. On the one hand, changes could be made to the benefits – above all to the level and period of entitlement. Alternatively, either the 
contribution rate would have to be increased or central 
government funds would have to be raised again. How -
ever, if the contribution rate remains unchanged, it is unlikely that the Federal Employment Agency would be able to repay a central government loan. In such a sce -
nario, not booking a grant as a grant but as a repayable loan, which is not included in the calculation of central government’s deficit, would cause problems for central 
government’s debt brake.
unemployed persons in the category SGB III. The number of short-term 
unemployed persons who are not entitled to unemployment benefits (eg directly after a period of training) is usually higher than the number of recipients of unemployment benefits who are not registered as 
unemployed (eg due to illness).  — 5 After converting expenditure on 
short-time working benefits into recipients of unemployment benefits.Recipients of unemployment benefits
1995 00 05 1020110.81.01.21.41.61.82.02.2Number 
in 
millions
Average of the period from
2007 to 2011Including the effect of short-timeworking benefits
 5DEUTSCHE  
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report  
August 2011
77

rose	by	nearly 	2%,	expenditure 	largely 	stag-
nated. 	Contribution 	receipts 	rose	by	close 	
to	3%	in	total. 	At	almost 	5%,	employees’ 	com-
pulsory 	contributions 	rose	even 	more 	strongly 	
owing 	to	the	favourable 	employment 	and	pay	
trends, 	while 	contributions 	on	behalf 	of	recipi -
ents	of	unemployment 	transfers 	fell	by	42%. 	
Just	over	22% 	less	was	transferred 	on	behalf 	
of	recipients 	of	unemployment 	benefit, 	and	
since 	the	beginning 	of	2011 	pension 	contribu -
tions 	have 	no	longer 	been 	paid	on	behalf 	of	
recipients 	of	unemployment 	benefit 	II.	How -
ever,	revenue 	growth 	was	also	muted 	by	the	
fact	that	transfers 	from 	the	Federal 	budget 	
were, 	in	accordance 	with	the	rules, 	extrapo -
lated 	in	line	with	wage 	and	salary 	develop -
ments 	two	years 	previously 	(2009) 	and	there -
fore	stagnated. 	Pension 	payments 	even 	fell	
slightly 	in	the	second 	quarter, 	as	pensions 	were 	not	increased 	mid-2010, 	the	number 	of	pen-
sions 	hardly 	increased 	and,	furthermore, 	dis-
continued 	pensions 	were 	on	average 	higher 	
than	new	pensions. 	By	contrast, 	the	contribu -
tions 	that	the	pension 	insurance 	scheme 	has	
to	pay	to	the	health 	insurance 	scheme 	on	be-
half	of	pensioners 	increased 	by	just	over	4%	
owing 	to	the	rise	in	the	general 	contribution 	
rate.
It	is	now	looking 	more 	and	more 	likely 	that	the	
statutory 	pension 	insurance 	scheme 	will	record 	
a	marked 	surplus 	for	2011 	as	a	whole 	because, 	
following 	the	balanced 	result 	for	the	first	half	
of	the	year,	a	surplus 	is	expected 	in	the	second 	
half	of	the	year	particularly 	owing 	to	contribu -
tions 	paid	on	Christmas 	bonuses. 	However, 	it	
should 	also	be	taken 	into	account 	that	pen-
sions 	were 	raised 	by	0.99% 	on	1 July 	2011. 	If	
the	favourable 	economic 	developments 	con-
tinue 	in	2012, 	from 	today’s 	perspective 	it	can	
no	longer 	be	ruled 	out	that	in	November 	re-
serves 	in	excess 	of	the	intervention 	threshold 	
of	1.5	of	monthly 	expenditure 	will	be	forecast 	
for	the	end	of	2012, 	provided 	the	contribution 	
rate	remains 	unchanged. 	If	this	is	the	case, 	the	
contribution 	rate	would 	be	lowered 	on	1 Jan -
uary	2012. 	A	further 	cut	in	the	contribution 	
rate	at	the	beginning 	of	2013 	appears 	possible. 	
However, 	in	the	years 	there 	after, 	the	ratio	of	
the	number 	of	contribution 	payers 	to	pension -
ers	can	be	expected 	to	deteriorate 	for	demo -
graphic 	reasons, 	making 	continual 	contribu -
tion	rate	rises	appear 	likely, 	although 	they	will	
be	dampened 	by	the	deceleration 	in	pension 	
increases 	and	the	gradual 	rise	in	the	statutory 	
retirement 	age	to	67	years.Surplus in 2011 
and contribu-
tion rate cuts  
in the years 
thereafterFinances of the
German statutory
pension insurance scheme
Deutsche Bundesbank2009 2010 20115860626466
–20+2+4Quarterly
Lin scale
Surplus (+) or deficit (–)€ bnExpend-
iture€ bnLog scale
RevenueDEUTSCHE  
BUNDESBANK
E U R O S Y S T E M
Monthly Report  
August 2011
78

Federal Employment Agency
The	Federal 	Employment 	Agency 	recorded 	a	
surplus	 of	just	over	 €½	billion	 in	the	second	
quarter 	of	2011, 	compared 	with	a	virtually 	bal-
anced 	budget 	one	year	previously. 	As	from	
April 	to	June	of	the	previous 	year	more 	central	
government 	funds 	were 	transferred 	in	ad-
vance, 	the	financial 	improvement 	is	under -
stated 	by	€2	billion. 	Overall, 	revenue 	fell	by	
17½%. 	Yet	expenditure 	fell	even 	more 	sharply	
(-21½%). 	On	the	revenue 	side, 	on	the	one	
hand 	there 	was	a	considerable 	increase 	in	em-
ployees’ 	contributions 	(+13½%). 	The	contribu -
tion	rate	was	raised 	from 	2.8% 	to	3.0% 	at	the	
beginning	 of	the	year	 and	even	 after	 adjust -
ment	 contribution	 receipts	 increased	 by	6%.	
On	the	other	 hand,	 revenue	 from	 insolvency	
benefit	 contributions	 is	absent	 in	2011.	 Both	
effects 	more 	or	less	balance 	each 	other	 out.	
However, 	central 	government 	payments 	fell	by	
a	half	owing, 	among 	other 	things, 	to	the	
above-mentioned 	shifting 	of	the	payment	
date. 	The	renewed 	sharp 	decline 	on	the	ex-
penditure	 side	was	attributable	 to	lower	 pay-
ments	 for	unemployment	 benefits	 (-21 %),	 for	
short-time 	working 	benefits 	(-73%) 	and	for	
active	 labour	 market	 policy	 measures	 (includ -
ing	refunds	 of	social	 contributions	 for	short-
time	work, 	which 	are	recorded 	here: 	-8%). 	The	
expenditure 	of	the	Federal 	Employment	
Agency	 thus	 responded	 to	the	favourable	 la-
bour	market	developments.
The	central 	government 	loan	to	offset 	the	
deficit	 of	almost	 €5½	 billion	 estimated	 in	the	
Federal	 Employment	 Agency’s	 budget	 plan	 is	
likely 	to	be	much 	higher 	than	required. 	The	
Federal	 Employment	 Agency	 itself	 calculated	mid-2011	 that	 only	 just	under	 €2	billion	 is	still	
needed.	 If	the	favourable	 macroeconomic	 de-
velopments 	continue, 	it	would 	appear 	feasible	
for	the	central 	government 	loan	to	be	com-
pletely	 repaid	 as	early	 as	next	 year.	 Neverthe -
less,	 in	the	longer	 term,	 the	Federal	 Employ -
ment 	Agency 	is	likely 	to	be	significantly 	under -
financed 	with	a	contribution 	rate	of	3.0% 	(see	
comments	on	pages	76-77).Financial 
improvement understated by special effect
Despite lower-
than-expected deficit, Federal Employment Agency struc-turally under -
financedFinances of the
Federal Employment Agency
1 Including  transfers  to  the  civil  servants’ 
pension fund set up in 2008. — 2 Excluding 
central government liquidity assistance.
Deutsche Bundesbank2009 2010 20116810121416
2.02.53.03.54.04.55.06.07.0
642024
–––++Quarterly
€ bn€ bnLog scaleExpenditure, 
total 1
Revenue 2
Expenditure on ...€ bn
... vocational training... unemployment
    benefit and
    short-time working
    benefits
Lin scale
Surplus (+) or deficit (–)DEUTSCHE  
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report  
August 2011
79

DEUTSCHE  
BUNDESBANK
E U R O S Y S T E M
Monthly Report  
August 2011
80

Statistical  
SectionDEUTSCHE  
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report  
August 2011
1*

ContentsI  Key economic data for the euro area
	 1	 Monetary 	developments 	and	interest 	
rates 	 5*
	 2	 External 	transactions 	and	positions 	5*
	 3	 General 	economic 	indicators 	 6*
II  Overall monetary survey in the  
euro area
	 1	 The 	money 	stock 	and	its	counterparts 	8*
	 2	 Consolidated 	balance 	sheet 	of	mon -
etary 	financial 	institutions 	(MFIs) 	 10*
	 3	 Banking 	system’s 	liquidity 	position 	14*
III  Consolidated financial statement  
of the Eurosystem
	 1	 Assets 	 16*
	 2	 Liabilities 	 18*
IV  Banks
	 1	 Assets 	and	liabilities 	of	monetary 	
financial 	institutions 	(excluding 	the	
Bundesbank) 	in	Germany 	 20*
	 2	 Principal 	assets 	and	liabilities 	of	banks 	
(MFIs) 	in	Germany, 	by	category 	of	
banks 	 24*
	 3	 Assets 	and	liabilities 	of	banks 	(MFIs) 	
in	Germany 	vis-à-vis 	residents 	 26*
	 4	 Assets 	and	liabilities 	of	banks 	(MFIs) 	
in	Germany 	vis-à-vis 	non-residents 	28*
DEUTSCHE  
BUNDESBANK
E U R O S Y S T E M
Monthly Report  
August 2011
2*

	 5	 Lending 	by	banks 	(MFIs) 	in	Germany 	
to	domestic 	non-banks 	(non-MFIs) 	30*
	 6	 Lending 	by	banks 	(MFIs) 	in	Germany 	
to	domestic 	enterprises 	and	house -
holds, 	housing 	loans, 	sectors 	of	
economic 	activity 	 32*
	 7	 Deposits 	of	domestic 	non-banks 	
(non-MFIs) 	at	banks 	(MFIs) 	
in	Germany 	 34*
	 8	 Deposits 	of	domestic 	households 	
and	non-profit 	institutions 	at	
banks 	(MFIs) 	in	Germany 	 36*
	 9	 Deposits 	of	domestic 	government 	
at	banks 	(MFIs) 	in	Germany, 	by	
creditor 	group 	 36*
	 10	 Savings 	deposits 	and	bank 	savings 	
bonds 	of	banks 	(MFIs) 	in	Germany 	
sold	to	non-banks 	(non-MFIs) 	 38*
	 11	 Debt 	securities 	and	money 	market 	
paper 	outstanding 	of	banks 	(MFIs) 	
in	Germany 	 38*
	 12	 Building 	and	loan	associations 	(MFIs) 	
in	Germany 	 39*
	 13	 Assets 	and	liabilities 	of	the	foreign 	
branches 	and	foreign 	subsidiaries 	of	
German 	banks 	(MFIs) 	 40*
V  Minimum reserves
	 1	 Reserve 	ratios 	 42*
	 2	 Reserve 	maintenance 	in	Germany 	up	
to	the	end	of	1998 	 42*
	 3	 Reserve 	maintenance 	in	the	euro 	
area	 42*VI  Interest rates
	 1	 ECB 	interest 	rates 	 43*
	 2	 Base 	rates 	 43*
	 3	 Eurosystem 	monetary 	policy 	oper -
ations 	allotted 	through 	tenders 	 43*
	 4	 Money 	market 	rates, 	by	month 	 43*
	 5	 Interest 	rates 	and	volumes 	for	out-
standing 	amounts 	and	new	business 	
of	German 	banks 	(MFIs) 	 44*
VII  Capital market
	 1	 Sales 	and	purchases 	of	debt 	securities 	
and	shares 	in	Germany 	 48*
	 2	 Sales 	of	debt 	securities 	issued 	by	
residents 	 49*
	 3	 Amounts 	outstanding 	of	debt 	
securities 	issued 	by	residents 	 50*
	 4	 Shares 	in	circulation 	issued 	by	
residents 	 50*
	 5	 Yields 	and	indices 	on	German 	
securities 	 51*
	 6	 Sales 	and	purchases 	of	mutual 	
fund 	shares 	in	Germany 	 51*
VIII  Financial accounts
	 1	 Acquisition 	of	financial 	assets 	and	
financing 	of	private 	non-financial 	
sectors 	 52*
	 2	 Financial 	assets 	and	liabilities 	of	private 	
non-financial 	sectors 	 53*DEUTSCHE  
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report  
August 2011
3*

IX  Public finances in Germany
	 1	 General 	government: 	deficit 	and	debt	
level	a s 	d efined 	in	the	Maastricht 	Treaty 	54*
	 2	 General 	government: 	revenue, 	
expenditure 	and	fiscal 	deficit/surplus 	
as	shown 	in	the	national 	accounts 	54*
	 3	 General 	government: 	budgetary 	
development 	(as	per	government’s 	
financial 	statistics) 	 55*
	 4	 Central, 	state 	and	local 	government: 	
budgetary 	development 	(as	per	
government’s 	financial 	statistics) 	 55*
	 5	 Central, 	state 	and	local 	government: 	
tax	revenue 	 56*
	 6	 Central 	and	state	government 	and	
European 	U nion: 	tax	revenue, 	by	type	56*
	 7	 Central, 	state 	and	local 	government: 	
individual 	taxes 	 57*
	 8	 German 	pension 	insurance 	scheme: 	
budgetary 	development 	and	assets 	57*
	 9	 Federal 	Employment 	Agency: 	
budgetary 	development 	 58*
	 10	 Statutory 	health 	insurance 	scheme: 	
budgetary 	development 	 58*
	 11	 Statutory 	long-term 	care	insurance 	
scheme: 	budgetary 	development 	 59*
	 12	 Central 	government: 	borrowing 	in	
the	market 	 59*
	 13	 Central, 	state 	and	local 	government: 	
debt 	by	creditor 	 59*
	 14	 Central, 	state 	and	local 	government: 	
debt 	by	category 	 60*
X  Economic conditions in Germany
	 1	 Origin 	and	use	of	domestic 	product, 	
distribution 	of	national 	income 	 61*
	 2	 Output 	in	the	production 	sector 	 62*	 3	 Orders 	received 	by	industry 	 63*
	 4	 Orders 	received 	by	construction 	 64*
	 5	 Retail 	trade 	turnover 	 64*
	 6	 Labour 	market 	 65*
	 7	 Prices 	 66*
	 8	 Households’ 	income 	 67*
	 9	 Pay 	rates 	and	actual 	earnings 	 67*
XI External sector
	 1	 Major 	items 	of	the	balance 	of	
payments 	of	the	euro 	area	 68*
	 2	 Major 	items 	of	the	balance 	of	
payments 	of	the	Federal 	Republic 	
of	Germany 	 69*
	 3	 Foreign 	trade 	(special 	trade) 	of	the	
Federal 	Republic 	of	Germany, 	by	
country 	and	group 	of	countries 	 70*
	 4	 Services 	and	income 	of	the	
Federal 	Republic 	of	Germany 	 71*
	 5	 Current 	transfers 	of	the	Federal 	
Republic 	of	Germany 	 71*
	 6	 Capital 	transfers 	 71*
	 7	 Financial 	account 	of	the	Federal 	
Republic 	of	Germany 	 72*
	 8	 External 	position 	of	the	Bundesbank 	73*
	 9	 External 	position 	of	the	Bundesbank 	
in	the	European 	Monetary 	Union 	 73*
	 10	 Assets 	and	liabilities 	of	enterprises 	
in	Germany 	(other 	than 	banks) 	
vis-à-vis 	non-residents 	 74*
	 11	 ECB 	euro 	reference 	exchange 	rates 	
of	selected 	currencies 	 75*
	 12	 Euro 	member 	countries 	and	
irrevocable 	euro 	conversion 	rates 	
in	the	third 	stage 	of	European 	
Economic 	and	Monetary 	Union 	 75*
	 13	 Effective 	exchange 	rates 	of	the	euro 	
and	indicators 	of	the	German 	
economy’s 	price 	competitiveness 	 76*
DEUTSCHE  
BUNDESBANK
E U R O S Y S T E M
Monthly Report  
August 2011
4*

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2011
 I Key economic data for the euro area  
 
1 Monetary developments and interest rates
 
 
 
 
 Money stock in various definitions  1,2 Determinants of the money stock  1 Interest rates
 M 3  3 
MFI lending to Yield on Euro-
 3-month enterprises Monetary pean govern-
MFI lending, and capital 3-month ment bonds moving  average
M1 M2 (centred) total households formation  4 Eonia  5,7 Euribor  6,7 outstanding  8 
Period Annual percentage change % per annum as a monthly average
2009          Oct 11.8 2.3 0.3 0.6 3.3 0.9 7.2 0.36 0.74 3.7
         Nov 12.6 1.8 − 0.2 − 0.1 2.8 0.7 7.0 0.36 0.72 3.7
         Dec 12.2 1.5 − 0.4 − 0.2 2.5 0.7 6.7 0.35 0.71 3.7
2010          Jan 11.5 1.8 0.0 − 0.3 1.8 0.2 6.5 0.34 0.68 3.8
         Feb 10.9 1.6 − 0.4 − 0.1 1.8 0.2 5.7 0.34 0.66 3.8
         Mar 11.0 1.7 − 0.1 − 0.3 1.8 0.2 6.0 0.35 0.64 3.7
         Apr 10.5 1.3 − 0.3 − 0.1 1.8 0.4 6.1 0.35 0.64 3.7
         May 10.4 1.5 0.0 0.0 1.8 0.1 5.2 0.34 0.69 3.6
         June 9.4 1.5 0.3 0.2 1.6 0.0 4.0 0.35 0.73 3.6
         July 8.2 1.5 0.2 0.5 2.0 0.7 4.3 0.48 0.85 3.6
         Aug 7.7 2.0 1.1 0.8 2.3 1.2 3.8 0.43 0.90 3.3
         Sep 6.2 2.0 1.1 1.1 2.3 1.1 3.7 0.45 0.88 3.4
         Oct 4.9 2.1 1.1 1.4 3.2 1.2 3.7 0.70 1.00 3.3
         Nov 4.6 2.3 2.1 1.6 4.0 1.9 4.0 0.59 1.04 3.7
         Dec 4.3 2.2 1.7 1.8 3.5 1.6 3.9 0.50 1.02 4.1
2011          Jan 3.2 2.3 1.6 1.8 3.8 2.0 3.6 0.66 1.02 4.2
         Feb 2.8 2.4 2.1 2.0 3.8 2.3 4.1 0.71 1.09 4.3
         Mar 3.0 2.7 2.2 2.1 3.2 2.2 3.9 0.66 1.18 4.4
         Apr 1.6 2.4 2.0 2.2 3.2 2.2 4.0 0.97 1.32 4.5
         May 1.2 2.4 2.5 2.2 3.1 2.5 4.3 1.03 1.43 4.5
         June 1.2 2.3 2.1 ... 2.6 2.2 4.6 1.12 1.49 4.4
         July ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 1.01 1.60 4.6
1 Source: ECB. — 2 Seasonally adjusted. — 3 Excluding money market fund euro-area non-MFIs. — 5 Euro OverNight Index Average. — 6 Euro
sharesunits, money market paper and debt securities with a maturity of up Interbank Offered Rate. — 7 See also footnotes to Table VI.4, p 43*. —
to two years held by non-euro-area residents. — 4 Longer-term liabilities to 8  GDP-weighted yield on ten-year government bonds. 
 
 
2 External transactions and positions  * 
 
 
 
Selected items of the euro-area balance of payments Euro exchange rates  1 
Current account Capital account Effective exchange rate  3 
of which Direct Securities Other Reserve
Balance Trade balance Balance investment investment assets Dollar rate Nominal Real  4 transactions  2 
Period € million Euro/US-$ Q1 1999 = 100
2009          Oct + 591 + 6,481 − 2,418 + 4,667 + 10,335 − 16,765 − 654 1.4816 114.2 112.7
         Nov + 185 + 4,218 + 4,931 − 7,332 + 3,497 + 7,274 + 1,492 1.4914 114.0 112.4
         Dec + 13,154 + 5,629 − 16,699 + 9,968 + 29,409 − 55,245 − 831 1.4614 113.0 111.2
2010          Jan − 12,303 − 8,016 + 11,041 − 10,776 + 42,418 − 22,132 + 1,529 1.4272 110.8 109.0
         Feb − 5,581 + 4,067 + 2,337 − 1,721 − 10,490 + 18,174 − 3,626 1.3686 108.0 106.1
         Mar − 50 + 5,568 + 2,662 − 32,710 − 4,285 + 42,197 − 2,541 1.3569 107.4 105.8
         Apr − 4,220 + 1,439 + 5,129 − 18,428 + 37,294 − 13,655 − 81 1.3406 106.1 104.5
         May − 15,987 − 1,495 + 20,315 − 3,763 + 51,367 − 27,216 − 73 1.2565 102.8 101.4
         June + 1,650 + 3,348 − 80 − 7,645 + 6,952 − 508 + 1,121 1.2209 100.6 99.3
         July + 5,499 + 7,231 + 440 − 618 − 26,486 + 30,676 − 3,132 1.2770 102.5 101.0
         Aug − 7,096 − 3,842 + 2,282 − 26,934 + 4,997 + 25,818 − 1,599 1.2894 102.1 100.6
         Sep − 4,559 + 4,826 + 1,160 − 3,220 + 6,783 − 2,178 − 225 1.3067 102.5 100.8
         Oct + 3,060 + 6,046 + 1,343 − 9,018 + 7,460 + 3,137 − 236 1.3898 106.0 104.1
         Nov − 5,086 − 490 + 15,507 + 51,978 + 13,525 − 49,997 + 1 1.3661 104.7 102.7
         Dec + 4,234 + 852 − 15,562 + 16,267 + 14,358 − 44,869 − 1,318 1.3220 102.6 100.5
2011          Jan − 20,254 − 14,267 + 14,443 + 15,401 − 30,656 + 35,582 − 5,884 1.3360 102.4 100.3
         Feb − 10,157 − 1,150 − 981 − 35,372 + 95,372 − 61,951 + 971 1.3649 103.4 101.1
         Mar − 512 + 2,879 − 707 + 8,511 + 64,500 − 67,579 − 6,139 1.3999 105.2 103.0
         Apr − 6,481 − 3,500 + 2,023 − 27,760 + 48,445 − 24,600 + 5,938 1.4442 107.0 104.9
         May − 18,300 + 1,533 + 16,576 − 4,723 + 60,466 − 36,043 − 3,124 1.4349 106.0 103.7
         June ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 1.4388 106.1 103.9
         July ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 1.4264 105.2 103.0
*  Source: ECB. — 1  See also Tables XI.12 and 13, pp 75−76. — 2  Including
financial derivatives. — 3  Vis-à-vis the currencies of The-EER-20 group. —
4  Based on consumer prices. 
5* I Key economic data for the euro area 

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
E U R O S Y S T E M
Monthly Report
August 2011
I. Key economic data for the euro area 
 
3  General economic indicators
 
 
                   
 
Period Euro area Belgium Germany Estonia Finland France Greece Ireland Italy
 
Real gross domestic product 1,2
 
2008 0.4 1.0 1.1 − 5.1 1.0 − 0.1 1.0 − 3.0 − 1.3
2009 − 4.2 − 2.7 − 5.1 − 13.9 − 8.2 − 2.7 − 2.0 − 7.0 − 5.2
2010 1.8 2.2 3.7 3.1 3.6 1.5 − 4.5 − 0.4 1.3
2010          Q1 0.9 1.6 2.6 − 2.6 0.3 1.0 0.7 − 1.1 1.0
         Q2 2.0 2.8 4.4 3.1 5.0 1.9 − 4.0 − 0.7 1.8
         Q3 2.0 1.9 4.0 5.0 3.4 1.7 − 4.8 0.3 1.3
         Q4 2.0 2.4 3.8 6.7 5.6 1.3 − 8.8 − 0.2 1.2
2011          Q1 2.5 3.2 5.0 8.5 4.9 2.3 − 8.1 0.1 1.1
         Q2 1.7 ... 2.8 ... 3.4 1.7 − 7.0 ... 0.8
 
Industrial production 1,3
 
2008 − 1.6 3.7 0.0 − 4.8 1.0 − 2.8 − 4.2 − 2.1 − 3.5
2009 − 14.8 − 9.5 − 16.3 − 23.8 − 18.0 − 12.6 − 9.2 − 4.5 − 18.8
2010 7.5 11.9 10.8 20.1 5.4 5.3 − 6.6 7.3 6.4
2010          Q1 5.2 13.3 7.1 5.3 − 1.1 4.9 − 7.2 3.2 4.3
         Q2 9.4 15.1 12.8 17.7 6.4 6.6 − 6.4 3.9 9.0
         Q3 7.1 9.5 10.6 23.8 6.1 3.7 − 6.7 11.0 7.2
         Q4 8.1 9.9 12.7 33.8 10.1 5.6 − 6.3 12.4 5.0
2011          Q1 6.5 8.2 r 11.9 31.3 3.9 4.4 − 6.3 0.9 2.1
         Q2 e 4.1 ... 4p 7.8 26.3 5.9 2.5 p − 11.4 p 2.6 2.0
 
Capacity utilisation in industry 5
 
2008 83.4 83.2 86.9 70.7 84.7 86.2 76.4 ... 76.0
2009 71.2 72.0 72.0 58.1 67.0 73.6 70.7 ... 66.1
2010 75.9 77.9 79.7 67.1 73.5 77.2 68.1 ... 68.3
2010          Q2 76.0 78.2 79.4 66.6 73.6 78.6 69.7 ... 67.7
         Q3 77.2 79.0 81.9 68.8 74.4 77.5 66.6 ... 69.2
         Q4 78.1 79.4 83.1 71.2 74.8 78.4 67.1 ... 70.9
2011          Q1 80.2 81.2 85.6 73.5 77.0 81.8 69.5 ... 72.5
         Q2 81.6 82.6 86.8 73.4 77.4 84.5 68.8 ... 74.3
         Q3 80.9 80.1 86.7 73.0 77.9 83.9 67.5 ... 72.1
 
Standardised unemployment rate 6,7
 
2008 7.6 7.0 7.5 5.5 6.4 7.8 7.7 6.3 6.7
2009 9.6 7.9 7.8 13.8 8.3 9.5 9.5 11.9 7.8
2010 10.1 8.3 7.1 16.9 8.4 9.8 12.6 13.7 8.4
2011          Jan 10.0 7.4 6.6 8.0 9.7 15.0 14.4 8.2
         Feb 10.0 7.1 6.2 8.0 9.7 15.0 14.3 8.1
         Mar 9.9 7.1 6.2 13.8 8.0 9.7 15.0 14.1 8.1
         Apr 9.9 7.2 6.0 7.9 9.6 ... 14.0 8.0
         May 9.9 7.3 6.0 7.8 9.6 ... 14.0 8.1
         June 9.9 7.4 6.1 ... 7.8 9.7 ... 14.2 8.0
 
Harmonised Index of Consumer Prices 1
 
2008 8 3.3 4.5 2.8 10.6 3.9 3.2 4.2 3.1 3.5
2009 9 0.3 0.0 0.2 0.2 1.6 0.1 1.3 − 1.7 0.8
2010 1.6 2.3 1.2 2.7 1.7 1.7 4.7 − 1.6 1.6
2011          Feb 10 2.4 3.5 2.2 5.5 3.5 1.8 4.2 0.9 2.1
         Mar 2.7 3.5 2.3 5.1 3.5 2.2 4.3 1.2 2.8
         Apr 2.8 3.3 2.7 5.4 3.4 2.2 3.7 1.5 2.9
         May 2.7 3.1 2.4 5.5 3.4 2.2 3.1 1.2 3.0
         June 2.7 3.4 2.4 4.9 3.4 2.3 3.1 1.1 3.0
         July p 2.5 4.0 2.6 5.3 3.7 2.1 2.1 1.0 2.1
 
General government financial balance 11
 
2008 − 2.0 − 1.3 0.1 − 2.8 4.2 − 3.3 − 9.8 − 7.3 − 2.7
2009 − 6.3 − 5.9 − 3.0 − 1.7 − 2.6 − 7.5 − 15.4 − 14.3 − 5.4
2010 − 6.0 − 4.1 − 3.3 0.1 − 2.5 − 7.0 − 10.5 − 32.4 − 4.6
 
General government debt 11
 
2008 70.0 89.6 66.3 4.6 34.1 67.7 110.7 44.4 106.3
2009 79.5 96.2 73.5 7.2 43.8 78.3 127.1 65.6 116.1
2010 85.3 96.8 83.2 6.6 48.4 81.7 142.8 96.2 119.0
Sources: National data, European Commission, Eurostat, European Central for working-day variations. — 4  Provisional; adjusted in advance by the
Bank. Latest data are partly based on press reports and are provisional. — Federal Statistical Office by way of estimates to the results of the Quarterly
1  Annual percentage change. — 2  GDP of the euro area calculated from Production Survey. — 5  Manufacturing, in %; seasonally adjusted; data are
seasonally adjusted data. — 3  Manufacturing, mining and energy; adjusted collected in January, April, July and October. — 6  As a percentage of
6*I. Key economic data for the euro area 

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2011
I.  Wichtige Wirtschaftsdaten für die Europäische Währungsunion 
 
3. Allgemeine Wirtschaftsindikatoren
 
 
                   
Slowakische
Luxemburg Malta Niederlande Österreich Portugal Republik Slowenien Spanien Zypern Zeit
 
Reales Bruttoinlandsprodukt 1)2)
 
1,4 5,4 1,9 2,2 0,0 5,8 3,7 0,9 3,6 2008
− 3,6 − 3,3 − 3,9 − 3,9 − 2,5 − 4,8 − 8,1 − 3,7 − 1,7 2009
3,5 3,1 1,8 2,1 1,3 4,0 1,2 − 0,1 1,0 2010
1,0 3,7 0,5 0,2 2,0 4,7 − 1,1 − 1,4 − 0,8 2010          1.Vj.
4,9 2,9 2,1 2,4 1,6 4,2 1,9 0,2 0,6          2.Vj.
2,4 2,4 1,8 2,6 0,9 3,8 1,8 0,0 1,9          3.Vj.
5,7 3,6 2,3 3,2 0,9 3,5 2,1 0,6 2,4          4.Vj.
4,8 2,4 2,8 4,2 − 0,6 3,5 2,0 0,7 1,7 2011          1.Vj.
... ... 1,5 3,7 ... 3,3 ... ... 1,5          2.Vj.
 
Industrieproduktion 1)3)
 
− 5,2 − 1,4 1,3 − 4,1 3,3 1,7 − 7,3 4,0 2008
− 15,9 − − 7,6 − 11,3 − 8,6 − 13,8 − 17,7 − 15,8 − 8,6 2009
10,6 − 7,1 6,5 1,7 18,9 6,4 0,8 − 1,8 2010
15,8 − 7,6 0,6 3,3 19,8 − 0,7 0,3 − 2,4 2010          1.Vj.
14,8 − 10,8 8,1 2,5 24,4 10,3 2,9 − 2,2          2.Vj.
5,7 − 4,2 8,4 − 0,2 15,3 8,2 − 0,2 − 0,3          3.Vj.
6,3 − 5,9 9,0 1,0 16,6 7,8 0,4 − 2,5          4.Vj.
1,8 − 0,8 11,3 0,1 11,9 8,9 1,8 − 3,8 2011          1.Vj.
p)− 1,2 − − 1,6 ... − 1,6 p) 8,0 p) 4,7 − 1,2 ...          2.Vj.
 
Kapazitätsauslastung in der Industrie 5)
 
84,7 80,6 83,3 86,6 79,7 72,8 83,9 79,5 71,9 2008
65,4 70,1 76,0 77,4 72,6 54,0 70,9 70,0 65,2 2009
78,5 77,7 78,9 81,9 75,0 58,0 76,0 71,1 62,6 2010
79,3 76,6 78,8 82,0 75,9 57,2 75,0 70,9 62,8 2010          2.Vj.
80,3 78,7 79,6 83,2 75,0 58,9 77,9 72,6 62,5          3.Vj.
78,1 77,0 79,7 83,7 74,5 57,9 78,2 72,5 63,9          4.Vj.
82,9 80,6 80,7 84,6 73,5 68,0 79,9 73,5 63,2 2011          1.Vj.
87,3 81,1 81,1 86,3 76,4 55,4 82,2 74,7 62,9          2.Vj.
82,7 76,9 80,6 85,8 74,3 60,6 80,1 72,6 61,3          3.Vj.
 
Standardisierte Arbeitslosenquote 6)7)
 
4,9 5,9 3,1 3,8 8,5 9,5 4,4 11,3 3,6 2008
5,1 7,0 3,7 4,8 10,6 12,0 5,9 18,0 5,3 2009
4,5 6,9 4,5 4,4 12,0 14,4 7,3 20,1 6,3 2010
4,3 6,3 4,3 4,5 12,4 13,6 8,1 20,4 6,7 2011          Jan 
4,3 6,4 4,3 4,6 12,4 13,5 8,1 20,6 6,8          Feb 
4,3 6,2 4,2 4,3 12,4 13,4 8,2 20,7 7,0          Mrz
4,3 6,2 4,2 4,2 12,4 13,4 8,3 20,7 7,2          Apr 
4,4 6,2 4,2 4,2 12,4 13,3 8,3 20,8 7,4          Mai
4,5 6,2 4,1 4,0 12,2 13,4 8,4 21,0 7,6          June
 
Harmonisierter Verbraucherpreisindex 1)
 
4.1 4.7 2.2 3.2 2.7 3.9 5.5 4.1 4.4 2008
0.0 1.8 1.0 0.4 − 0.9 0.9 0.9 − 0.2 0.2 2009
2.8 2.0 0.9 1.7 1.4 0.7 2.1 2.0 2.6 2010
3.9 2.7 2.0 3.1 3.5 3.5 2.0 3.4 3.1 2011          Feb 
4.0 2.8 2.0 3.3 3.9 3.8 2.4 3.3 3.2          Mar 
4.0 2.4 2.2 3.7 4.0 3.9 2.0 3.5 3.5          Apr 
3.8 2.5 2.4 3.7 3.7 4.2 2.4 3.4 4.1          May
3.8 3.1 2.5 3.7 3.3 4.1 1.6 3.0 4.5          June
3.2 p 2.2 p 2.9 p 3.8 3.0 3.8 1.1 3.0 3.5          July
 
General government financial balance 11
 
3.0 − 4.5 0.6 − 0.9 − 3.5 − 2.1 − 1.8 − 4.2 0.9 2008
− 0.9 − 3.7 − 5.5 − 4.1 − 10.1 − 8.0 − 6.0 − 11.1 − 6.0 2009
− 1.7 − 3.6 − 5.4 − 4.6 − 9.1 − 7.9 − 5.6 − 9.2 − 5.3 2010
 
General government debt 11
 
13.6 61.5 58.2 63.8 71.6 27.8 21.9 39.8 48.3 2008
14.6 67.6 60.8 69.6 83.0 35.4 35.2 53.3 58.0 2009
18.4 68.0 62.7 72.3 93.0 41.0 38.0 60.1 60.8 2010
the civilian labour force; seasonally adjusted. — 7  Standardised unemploy- Estonia from 2011 onwards. — 11  As a percentage of GDP; euro-area
ment rate of Germany: Bundesbank calculation based on unadjusted data aggregate: European Central Bank (ESA 1995), member states: European
from the Federal Statistical Office. — 8  Including Malta and Cyprus from Commission (Maastricht Treaty definition). 
2008 onwards. — 9  Including Slovakia from 2009 onwards. — 10  Including
7*I.  Wichtige Wirtschaftsdaten für die Europäische Währungsunion 

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
E U R O S Y S T E M
Monthly Report
August 2011
II Overall monetary survey in the euro area 
 
1 The money stock and its counterparts *
  
(a) Euro area 
  
€ billion
I Lending to non-banks (non-MFIs) II Net claims on III Monetary capital formation at monetary
in the euro area non-euro-area residents financial institutions (MFIs) in the euro area
Enterprises General
and households government Debt
Deposits securities
Liabil- with an Deposits with
Claims ities to agreed at agreed maturities
on non- non-euro- maturity notice of of over Capital
of which of which euro-area area of over over 2 years and
Period Total Total Total Total residents residents Total 2 years 3 months (net)  2 Securities Securities reserves  3 
2009          Nov 42.5 44.9 13.8 − 2.4 2.4 − 7.3 4.6 11.9 29.0 9.5 0.6 4.6 14.3
         Dec − 34.8 − 2.2 3.2 − 32.6 − 28.0 49.0 − 50.9 − 99.9 42.3 20.6 − 1.1 − 14.0 36.7
2010          Jan − 10.5 − 31.1 − 1.6 20.6 9.2 5.3 61.5 56.2 35.8 11.1 1.0 31.6 − 7.9
         Feb 20.5 − 6.7 − 9.6 27.2 32.2 − 14.9 14.8 29.7 − 2.9 6.4 − 0.7 − 7.2 − 1.3
         Mar 63.9 5.7 − 20.7 58.2 33.6 − 16.9 − 25.0 − 8.1 36.0 2.6 − 0.1 23.2 10.3
         Apr 83.6 69.2 40.9 14.4 11.7 − 25.4 71.2 96.6 24.0 17.0 − 2.0 7.9 1.0
         May 22.0 − 15.9 − 41.6 37.9 23.7 27.5 30.9 3.4 1.6 − 3.1 − 1.8 − 7.9 14.4
         June 82.8 32.7 − 10.4 50.1 31.9 − 9.1 − 156.6 − 147.5 4.9 − 6.0 − 2.4 − 18.3 31.7
         July 32.3 45.3 29.1 − 13.0 − 2.1 − 33.6 − 42.6 − 9.0 49.4 28.1 − 2.2 6.1 17.3
         Aug 3.6 3.7 12.6 − 0.1 − 7.3 − 0.7 91.4 92.1 9.3 6.9 − 1.4 − 1.9 5.7
         Sep 62.8 44.6 2.3 18.2 13.1 9.1 − 44.5 − 53.6 13.1 3.6 − 2.7 15.6 − 3.5
         Oct 150.0 − 37.0 − 20.2 187.0 107.5 − 83.0 − 37.7 45.3 9.4 − 7.5 − 1.7 12.0 6.5
         Nov 160.2 143.3 51.5 16.9 − 37.8 8.3 15.4 7.1 53.0 29.4 0.2 1.8 21.6
         Dec − 113.1 − 48.0 − 28.5 − 65.2 − 69.9 50.9 − 88.8 − 139.7 34.0 19.9 − 0.5 − 2.5 17.1
2011          Jan 43.9 27.5 3.1 16.4 20.0 7.6 83.9 76.3 17.5 − 1.4 1.5 22.2 − 4.8
         Feb 19.9 23.8 − 0.4 − 3.9 10.2 19.3 31.6 12.2 33.4 − 5.4 0.5 22.7 15.6
         Mar − 28.2 − 6.4 − 25.0 − 21.8 − 11.2 102.8 − 33.7 − 136.5 25.9 9.6 0.0 14.4 1.8
         Apr 83.2 82.8 45.9 0.4 11.1 − 24.5 82.7 107.2 35.4 17.1 − 1.1 18.9 0.5
         May 6.0 19.1 − 21.6 − 13.0 10.3 8.5 81.9 73.4 24.3 1.6 − 0.5 11.3 11.9
         June 9.2 − 12.1 − 37.8 21.3 25.1 71.7 − 127.7 − 199.4 27.0 3.6 − 0.3 − 0.6 24.3
  
  
(b) German contribution
 
I Lending to non-banks (non-MFIs) II Net claims on III Monetary capital formation at monetary
in the euro area non-euro-area residents financial institutions (MFIs) in the euro area
Enterprises General
and households government Debt
Deposits securities
Liabil- with an Deposits with
Claims ities to agreed at agreed maturities
on non- non-euro- maturity notice of of over Capital
of which of which euro-area area of over over 2 years and
Period Total Total Total Total residents residents Total 2 years 3 months (net)  2 Securities Securities reserves  3 
2009          Nov − 0.4 6.6 2.4 − 7.0 1.3 − 0.4 − 1.2 − 0.8 − 0.9 2.2 0.9 − 10.0 6.0
         Dec − 37.4 − 30.0 − 9.7 − 7.4 − 1.4 10.6 − 9.3 − 19.9 − 12.5 0.7 − 1.1 − 12.8 0.6
2010          Jan 16.6 5.4 8.1 11.1 8.1 − 15.1 6.8 21.9 − 6.1 2.4 − 1.6 − 0.3 − 6.7
         Feb − 12.8 − 15.3 − 11.1 2.5 5.7 − 22.1 − 18.4 3.8 − 6.8 0.5 − 0.7 − 6.3 − 0.4
         Mar − 2.5 − 8.8 − 5.2 6.2 7.0 − 14.0 2.8 16.8 2.9 1.1 0.1 2.7 − 0.9
         Apr 54.7 50.6 24.7 4.1 2.3 − 13.0 40.5 53.5 − 3.7 0.1 − 1.9 − 0.6 − 1.4
         May − 36.4 − 54.5 − 52.2 18.1 7.8 − 35.4 13.5 48.9 − 17.0 − 5.3 − 1.8 1.7 − 11.6
         June 15.1 − 10.3 − 9.7 25.3 20.4 − 17.8 − 62.2 − 44.4 − 4.9 0.7 − 1.3 − 3.4 − 0.9
         July − 2.9 − 1.5 − 4.5 − 1.4 2.9 − 30.9 − 38.5 − 7.5 − 6.5 − 0.2 − 2.2 − 12.2 8.1
         Aug 8.7 6.9 1.6 1.8 1.8 7.2 12.0 4.8 − 3.4 2.4 − 1.8 − 2.4 − 1.7
         Sep − 16.1 − 24.0 − 5.2 7.9 4.0 − 2.2 − 23.0 − 20.9 − 0.4 − 1.0 − 2.4 2.2 0.7
         Oct 101.0 7.6 1.6 93.4 88.7 5.0 − 3.4 − 8.4 2.3 − 2.1 − 1.4 − 4.4 10.2
         Nov 40.6 33.5 5.2 7.1 − 69.0 − 5.2 6.4 11.6 4.3 − 0.2 0.5 3.1 0.8
         Dec − 72.0 − 39.6 − 4.2 − 32.4 − 22.5 18.4 − 11.7 − 30.1 − 0.5 − 0.2 − 0.0 − 0.7 0.4
2011          Jan 30.1 19.0 16.9 11.1 6.2 9.5 6.0 − 3.5 5.8 − 2.5 − 0.5 2.3 6.5
         Feb − 0.8 13.5 − 7.2 − 14.3 − 2.4 − 4.0 3.6 7.7 2.2 − 1.8 0.0 0.0 3.9
         Mar − 29.6 − 17.0 − 0.5 − 12.5 − 2.2 26.3 − 26.8 − 53.1 − 3.7 − 1.7 0.2 − 4.7 2.5
         Apr 29.0 36.8 22.4 − 7.7 3.2 18.9 50.0 31.2 2.4 − 1.3 − 0.8 3.0 1.4
         May − 26.0 − 16.3 − 24.7 − 9.7 1.3 5.4 1.3 − 4.1 − 10.2 − 0.3 − 0.1 − 3.4 − 6.4
         June − 23.1 − 13.3 − 12.3 − 9.9 − 6.4 15.9 − 41.3 − 57.2 4.7 0.2 − 0.2 1.9 2.8
*The data in this table are based on the consolidated balance sheet of deduction of inter-MFI participations. — 4Including the counterparts of
monetary financial institutions (MFIs) (Table II.2); statistical breaks have monetary liabilities of central governments. — 5Including the monetary
been eliminated from the flow figures (see also the “Notes on the figures“ liabilities of central governments (Post Office, Treasury). — 6In Germany,
in the “Explanatory notes“ in the Statistical Supplement to the Monthly only savings deposits. — 7Paper held by residents outside the euro area has
Report 1, p 30). — 1Source: ECB. — 2Excluding MFIs’ portfolios. — 3After been eliminated. — 8Less German MFIs’ holdings of paper issued by
8*II Overall monetary survey in the euro area 

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2011
II Overall monetary survey in the euro area
 
 
 
(a) Euro area 
 
V Other factors VI Money stock M3 (balance I plus II less III less IV less V)
Money stock M2 Debt secur-
of which ities with
Intra- Money stock M1 maturities
Eurosystem Deposits of up to
liability/ with an Deposits Money 2 years
IV De- claim agreed at agreed market (incl money
posits of related to Currency maturity notice of Repo fund market    
banknote in circu- Overnight of up to up to 3 transac- shares paper)    central  gov-
ernments Total  4 issue Total Total Total lation deposits  5 2 years  5 tions (net)  2,7  Period (net)  2,7,8 months  5,6 
− 13.6 39.9 − − 20.1 − 7.0 38.5 4.7 33.9 − 49.3 3.8 5.5 − 15.0 − 3.6 2009          Nov 
− 55.4 − 52.0 − 79.3 93.6 80.9 19.9 61.0 − 23.9 36.6 12.5 − 26.3 − 0.5          Dec 
28.8 − 10.0 − − 59.8 − 43.9 − 2.1 − 12.8 10.7 − 70.9 29.1 − 20.5 4.6 0.0 2010          Jan 
− 3.6 40.4 − − 28.3 − 29.4 − 17.1 2.4 − 19.5 − 21.4 9.1 15.9 − 8.2 − 6.6          Feb 
− 5.9 7.9 − 9.0 − 1.9 5.4 9.1 − 3.7 − 16.1 8.8 18.4 − 16.5 9.1          Mar 
− 19.6 − 23.0 − 76.9 53.6 80.5 4.0 76.5 − 36.1 9.1 21.0 2.0 0.5          Apr 
34.0 1.3 − 12.7 18.6 30.9 6.4 24.5 − 10.9 − 1.5 4.2 − 4.1 − 6.0          May
20.2 15.4 − 33.1 25.2 42.4 6.5 35.9 − 20.6 3.4 39.0 − 24.4 − 6.7          June
− 22.3 − 13.4 − − 15.0 14.4 − 12.1 8.4 − 20.5 16.3 10.1 − 22.1 − 8.4 1.2          July
− 20.2 − 3.8 − 17.6 3.9 − 34.9 − 6.0 − 28.9 26.0 12.7 2.7 11.7 − 0.7          Aug 
3.4 36.6 − 18.9 16.1 8.5 − 1.2 9.7 4.5 3.1 22.2 − 18.8 − 0.8          Sep 
78.1 − 8.2 − − 12.4 35.6 8.2 2.2 6.0 23.8 3.6 − 27.5 − 14.9 − 5.6          Oct 
17.1 41.9 − 56.4 − 1.2 10.5 1.2 9.3 − 15.2 3.6 48.1 12.9 − 3.5          Nov 
− 97.1 − 50.4 − 51.3 89.6 65.4 18.4 47.0 3.2 21.1 − 5.2 − 34.0 0.9          Dec 
51.9 58.9 − − 76.8 − 41.1 − 44.7 − 12.6 − 32.1 − 16.2 19.7 − 36.1 − 5.2 5.7 2011          Jan 
13.5 − 27.5 − 19.9 − 20.5 − 33.9 − 0.0 − 33.9 12.2 1.2 39.7 2.9 − 2.2          Feb 
− 29.1 51.3 − 26.5 26.7 16.9 2.5 14.4 6.8 2.9 − 15.0 − 2.1 17.0          Mar 
8.0 − 63.1 − 78.4 50.0 40.2 7.1 33.0 6.8 3.0 22.8 2.2 3.4          Apr 
− 17.0 − 20.6 − 27.8 − 7.5 − 15.1 5.0 − 20.1 6.9 0.7 38.7 − 3.9 0.6          May
51.0 − 10.8 − 13.7 30.6 54.7 9.2 45.5 − 22.2 − 1.9 − 10.8 − 19.5 13.4          June
 
 
 (b) German contribution 
 
V Other factors VI Money stock M3 (balance I plus II less III less IV less V)  10 
of which Components of the money stock
Intra- Debt securities
Eurosystem Deposits with
liability/ with an Deposits Money maturities
IV De- claim agreed at agreed market of up to 2 years
posits of related to Currency maturity notice of Repo fund (incl money    
banknote in circu- Overnight of up to up to 3 transac- shares market    central  gov-
ernments Total issue  9,11 lation Total deposits 2 years months  6 tions (net)  7,8 paper)(net)  7  Period
− 7.8 2.0 0.3 1.5 5.9 24.0 − 16.8 3.0 − 2.3 − 0.2 − 1.7 2009          Nov 
− 8.9 2.4 0.0 4.3 − 7.8 − 16.6 3.7 10.0 − 0.5 − 0.6 − 3.8          Dec 
− 6.1 16.4 0.7 − 2.9 − 2.7 29.3 − 27.6 4.7 − 12.3 0.7 2.5 2010          Jan 
− 3.8 − 30.9 2.1 0.6 6.6 0.3 − 11.6 5.9 10.7 − 0.2 1.5          Feb 
− 1.6 − 3.3 0.5 2.9 − 14.6 − 14.7 − 0.0 1.8 1.0 − 0.5 − 2.1          Mar 
0.2 4.5 0.9 0.6 40.8 40.5 − 21.9 2.0 20.8 − 0.2 − 0.4          Apr 
1.6 − 65.7 0.6 1.2 9.3 11.8 − 5.3 2.0 0.7 0.4 − 0.3          May
− 1.0 6.5 − 0.8 2.3 − 3.3 1.7 − 0.3 0.7 1.2 − 0.7 − 6.0          June
1.5 − 23.0 0.3 1.7 − 5.9 − 0.2 − 3.0 3.7 − 10.4 0.5 3.5          July
7.5 − 14.7 2.0 − 1.3 26.5 4.7 1.5 1.7 11.7 − 0.3 7.2          Aug 
− 8.5 − 11.3 2.6 − 0.4 1.9 1.0 3.6 2.6 − 8.0 − 0.2 2.9          Sep 
20.8 110.6 0.9 0.0 − 27.7 2.5 − 0.2 2.7 − 10.8 − 0.1 − 21.7          Oct 
3.3 − 18.8 − 0.1 1.1 46.7 26.4 − 5.2 2.1 23.9 0.3 − 0.8          Nov 
− 6.7 − 29.2 0.5 3.8 − 17.2 − 8.7 8.5 8.6 − 22.2 0.1 − 3.6          Dec 
5.4 32.5 0.7 − 2.8 − 4.1 14.7 − 6.2 2.7 − 12.2 0.1 − 3.1 2011          Jan 
1.9 − 17.7 1.1 − 0.2 8.8 − 15.5 5.2 2.1 18.8 − 0.1 − 1.7          Feb 
− 8.2 16.4 0.6 0.6 − 7.7 3.3 3.8 0.8 − 14.3 0.1 − 1.5          Mar 
− 4.5 26.7 0.7 1.5 23.3 7.3 10.2 − 1.3 10.4 − 0.2 − 3.1          Apr 
3.4 − 38.9 1.5 1.4 25.1 1.1 10.9 − 2.3 15.9 − 0.3 − 0.1          May
3.0 − 18.9 1.5 2.5 3.9 8.2 − 0.4 − 1.9 − 0.3 − 0.2 − 1.5          June
euro-area MFIs. — 9Including national banknotes still in circulation. — M2 or M3. — 11The difference between the volume of euro banknotes
10The German contributions to the Eurosystem’s monetary aggregates actually issued by the Bundesbank and the amount disclosed in accordance
should on no account be interpreted as national monetary aggregates and with the accounting regime chosen by the Eurosystem (see also footnote 2
are therefore not comparable with the erstwhile German money stocks M1, on banknote circulation in Table III.2). 
9*II Overall monetary survey in the euro area

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
E U R O S Y S T E M
Monthly Report
August 2011
II Overall monetary survey in the euro area
 
2 Consolidated balance sheet of monetary financial institutions (MFIs) *
 
 
 
Assets
Lending to non-banks (non-MFIs) in the euro area
Enterprises and households General government
Claims
Total Shares and on non-
End of assets or Debt other Debt euro-area Other
year/month liabilities Total Total Loans securities  2 equities Total Loans securities  3 residents assets
 Euro area ( € billion) 1
 
2009          May 23,918.1 15,851.6 13,089.6 10,812.5 1,484.4 792.8 2,762.0 994.7 1,767.3 4,960.9 3,105.7
         June 24,086.0 15,956.3 13,122.0 10,839.1 1,500.0 782.9 2,834.4 1,017.6 1,816.7 4,910.8 3,218.9
         July 24,038.9 15,924.6 13,081.0 10,802.0 1,499.7 779.3 2,843.6 1,018.3 1,825.3 4,872.3 3,242.0
         Aug 23,954.5 15,873.5 13,019.7 10,737.8 1,499.6 782.3 2,853.8 1,022.7 1,831.1 4,861.3 3,219.7
         Sep 23,907.4 15,948.6 13,069.0 10,771.9 1,499.5 797.6 2,879.6 1,013.2 1,866.4 4,779.8 3,179.1
         Oct 23,853.5 15,934.7 13,022.4 10,725.9 1,497.4 799.1 2,912.3 1,033.0 1,879.3 4,787.1 3,131.7
         Nov 24,008.8 15,973.4 13,064.7 10,755.2 1,497.9 811.5 2,908.7 1,025.5 1,883.2 4,796.4 3,239.0
         Dec 23,862.5 15,974.2 13,102.7 10,784.5 1,505.5 812.7 2,871.5 1,021.1 1,850.4 4,809.2 3,079.1
2010          Jan 24,085.0 15,985.1 13,092.5 10,774.4 1,501.6 816.5 2,892.6 1,032.8 1,859.8 4,941.8 3,158.1
         Feb 24,257.1 16,010.6 13,086.0 10,777.2 1,505.9 802.9 2,924.6 1,027.9 1,896.7 5,013.3 3,233.2
         Mar 24,305.5 16,068.3 13,087.2 10,800.5 1,492.0 794.7 2,981.1 1,052.5 1,928.6 4,998.9 3,238.3
         Apr 24,624.5 16,139.0 13,145.3 10,820.2 1,499.2 825.9 2,993.8 1,055.5 1,938.3 5,122.8 3,362.7
         May 25,230.7 16,179.5 13,145.1 10,865.1 1,478.6 801.3 3,034.4 1,070.2 1,964.2 5,349.6 3,701.7
         June 25,240.1 16,379.1 13,288.2 10,988.6 1,516.3 783.4 3,090.9 1,091.5 1,999.4 5,247.2 3,613.8
         July 24,950.6 16,395.4 13,314.0 10,981.3 1,548.1 784.7 3,081.4 1,080.3 2,001.1 5,050.3 3,504.9
         Aug 25,591.3 16,412.5 13,323.5 10,978.8 1,549.6 795.1 3,088.9 1,087.9 2,001.0 5,236.5 3,942.3
         Sep 25,178.2 16,434.0 13,332.5 10,983.1 1,552.3 797.1 3,101.5 1,092.4 2,009.2 5,034.4 3,709.8
         Oct 25,148.1 16,575.1 13,288.9 10,959.9 1,524.5 804.5 3,286.2 1,171.9 2,114.2 4,976.3 3,596.8
         Nov 25,457.0 16,731.2 13,442.7 11,069.4 1,557.1 816.3 3,288.5 1,227.5 2,061.0 5,148.2 3,577.5
         Dec 25,826.1 16,593.4 13,366.9 11,028.7 1,538.3 799.9 3,226.6 1,238.7 1,987.9 5,007.7 4,224.9
2011          Jan 25,702.5 16,653.3 13,408.7 11,066.6 1,526.9 815.2 3,244.6 1,235.1 2,009.4 5,019.1 4,030.1
         Feb 25,749.6 16,689.4 13,457.3 11,114.0 1,535.5 807.7 3,232.2 1,214.9 2,017.3 5,055.9 4,004.2
         Mar 25,327.9 16,487.5 13,400.6 11,118.6 1,502.9 779.1 3,086.9 1,205.6 1,881.3 4,947.4 3,892.9
         Apr 25,476.3 16,559.3 13,474.3 11,142.6 1,509.2 822.5 3,085.1 1,197.1 1,888.0 4,967.3 3,949.6
         May 25,808.7 16,586.4 13,509.6 11,202.6 1,506.9 800.1 3,076.8 1,174.1 1,902.8 5,131.6 4,090.7
         June 25,456.7 16,585.2 13,489.6 11,224.6 1,482.5 782.5 3,095.5 1,170.0 1,925.5 4,972.7 3,898.9
 German contribution ( € billion) 
2009          May 5,261.9 3,684.9 3,068.7 2,556.8 234.0 277.8 616.2 365.5 250.8 1,292.8 284.3
         June 5,220.8 3,698.7 3,082.9 2,566.5 246.0 270.4 615.8 363.7 252.1 1,270.5 251.6
         July 5,173.5 3,689.5 3,059.0 2,545.9 245.8 267.3 630.6 376.6 254.0 1,238.5 245.5
         Aug 5,149.9 3,660.3 3,038.5 2,532.0 242.9 263.6 621.8 371.0 250.7 1,223.4 266.3
         Sep 5,131.7 3,679.7 3,054.4 2,548.0 242.8 263.6 625.2 368.1 257.1 1,186.5 265.5
         Oct 5,128.8 3,677.6 3,033.3 2,532.0 240.4 260.9 644.2 379.8 264.4 1,184.0 267.3
         Nov 5,131.5 3,675.6 3,041.1 2,537.6 240.3 263.2 634.6 368.9 265.7 1,184.3 271.6
         Dec 5,084.8 3,642.7 3,015.1 2,520.4 235.5 259.1 627.6 363.0 264.6 1,188.8 253.3
2010          Jan 5,123.4 3,660.2 3,021.3 2,516.0 239.8 265.5 638.8 366.1 272.7 1,211.6 251.5
         Feb 5,099.1 3,649.6 3,008.2 2,513.7 237.7 256.8 641.4 362.9 278.5 1,208.0 241.5
         Mar 5,105.8 3,638.3 2,993.1 2,509.7 233.9 249.6 645.2 362.2 283.0 1,209.3 258.2
         Apr 5,210.6 3,693.3 3,044.0 2,535.9 231.3 276.8 649.3 364.1 285.2 1,262.7 254.6
         May 5,259.6 3,664.4 2,996.6 2,539.6 209.1 247.9 667.8 374.7 293.1 1,324.9 270.3
         June 5,236.5 3,680.2 2,988.1 2,540.8 205.5 241.8 692.1 377.7 314.4 1,272.2 284.0
         July 5,144.1 3,670.8 2,980.4 2,537.8 200.7 242.0 690.4 373.1 317.3 1,195.0 278.3
         Aug 5,201.0 3,683.3 2,991.4 2,546.6 199.6 245.1 691.9 373.2 318.7 1,228.9 288.8
         Sep 5,107.4 3,659.4 2,960.3 2,520.3 198.8 241.2 699.1 376.7 322.3 1,172.2 275.8
         Oct 5,191.7 3,756.9 2,964.7 2,523.0 197.8 243.9 792.2 381.2 411.0 1,162.4 272.4
         Nov 5,311.7 3,822.0 3,004.1 2,557.1 195.3 251.8 817.8 457.5 360.3 1,207.0 282.8
         Dec 6,121.8 3,742.7 2,958.5 2,518.9 192.7 246.9 784.2 447.6 336.6 1,183.6 1,195.5
2011          Jan 6,033.2 3,767.9 2,972.6 2,516.5 194.1 262.0 795.3 452.3 342.9 1,170.1 1,095.2
         Feb 5,986.9 3,764.4 2,983.4 2,535.7 193.4 254.3 781.0 440.8 340.2 1,175.3 1,047.2
         Mar 5,835.3 3,730.5 2,962.9 2,515.9 190.2 256.8 767.6 430.3 337.3 1,134.9 970.0
         Apr 5,901.3 3,753.8 2,995.6 2,526.0 189.8 279.8 758.2 419.3 339.0 1,171.1 976.3
         May 5,944.1 3,731.5 2,982.7 2,537.9 189.2 255.6 748.8 408.5 340.3 1,192.1 1,020.6
         June 5,794.5 3,706.9 2,968.4 2,536.0 187.5 244.9 738.5 405.0 333.4 1,145.1 942.6
*Monetary financial institutions (MFIs) comprise banks (including building and other money market paper issued by general government. — 4Euro
and loan associations), money market funds, and the European Central currency in circulation (see also footnote 8 on p 12*). Excluding MFIs‘ cash in
Bank and national central banks (the Eurosystem). — 1Source: ECB. — hand (in euro). The German contribution includes the volume of euro bank-
2Including money market paper of enterprises. — 3Including Treasury bills notes put into circulation by the Bundesbank in accordance with
10*II Overall monetary survey in the euro area

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2011
II Overall monetary survey in the euro area
 
 
 
 
 
Liabilities
Deposits of non-banks (non-MFIs) in the euro area
Enterprises and households
With agreed At agreed
maturities of notice of  6 
over
Currency 1 year and
in of which up to up to over up to over  End of
Total in euro  5 Total Overnight 1 year 2 years 2 years 3 months 3 months year/month circulation  4 
Euro area ( € billion) 1
 
731.9 9,886.5 9,258.7 9,291.8 3,276.2 1,900.8 252.5 2,084.2 1,657.9 120.2 2009          May
734.9 9,955.5 9,300.4 9,337.1 3,354.1 1,842.7 242.1 2,107.2 1,669.7 121.3          June
745.3 9,887.2 9,285.1 9,326.9 3,341.9 1,801.2 254.5 2,118.7 1,688.2 122.4          July
741.0 9,857.4 9,281.6 9,320.7 3,350.7 1,759.6 257.8 2,124.5 1,704.9 123.2          Aug 
740.5 9,895.9 9,303.8 9,338.4 3,407.1 1,701.4 254.6 2,139.3 1,711.5 124.4          Sep 
745.3 9,941.5 9,322.4 9,365.2 3,460.8 1,654.9 256.7 2,140.0 1,726.0 126.9          Oct 
750.0 9,922.5 9,324.0 9,357.1 3,485.6 1,605.4 259.9 2,148.6 1,730.0 127.7          Nov 
769.9 9,984.7 9,437.9 9,492.5 3,556.5 1,590.9 262.2 2,189.1 1,767.0 126.9          Dec 
757.1 10,011.8 9,430.2 9,485.4 3,576.3 1,521.6 265.1 2,200.1 1,796.9 125.4 2010          Jan 
759.5 9,994.9 9,421.7 9,469.6 3,556.1 1,502.6 269.0 2,211.1 1,805.9 124.9          Feb 
768.6 9,982.9 9,412.5 9,466.0 3,558.2 1,485.8 268.3 2,213.8 1,814.7 125.1          Mar 
772.6 10,030.1 9,475.3 9,534.0 3,635.0 1,449.8 270.3 2,232.7 1,824.1 122.1          Apr 
779.0 10,089.2 9,480.6 9,551.6 3,660.4 1,442.0 270.3 2,235.5 1,823.1 120.4          May
785.5 10,217.2 9,594.3 9,651.2 3,695.5 1,426.0 269.0 2,318.6 1,822.6 119.5          June
793.9 10,209.2 9,625.3 9,684.9 3,683.4 1,438.2 270.5 2,342.7 1,832.8 117.4          July
788.0 10,207.2 9,631.4 9,699.4 3,657.4 1,457.2 272.6 2,350.3 1,845.7 116.1          Aug 
786.8 10,206.5 9,644.5 9,689.9 3,661.4 1,458.3 263.9 2,344.0 1,848.5 113.8          Sep 
789.0 10,308.3 9,671.7 9,717.5 3,666.6 1,476.6 273.7 2,336.0 1,852.2 112.4          Oct 
790.2 10,390.5 9,719.2 9,777.1 3,670.5 1,465.7 277.9 2,393.8 1,856.3 112.9          Nov 
808.6 10,371.2 9,808.2 9,871.6 3,723.4 1,472.1 272.8 2,413.2 1,877.7 112.5          Dec 
796.3 10,407.3 9,792.5 9,849.0 3,699.8 1,451.9 276.2 2,410.6 1,898.3 112.2 2011          Jan 
796.2 10,415.9 9,789.7 9,842.4 3,667.9 1,460.9 278.9 2,422.4 1,899.3 112.9          Feb 
798.3 10,424.9 9,834.7 9,884.0 3,681.8 1,456.1 287.4 2,441.5 1,904.2 113.1          Mar 
805.4 10,484.3 9,888.6 9,937.7 3,709.7 1,458.6 286.6 2,461.4 1,909.3 112.2          Apr 
810.4 10,472.2 9,886.5 9,932.4 3,689.0 1,457.8 298.3 2,464.8 1,910.6 112.0          May
819.6 10,545.4 9,908.4 9,945.1 3,726.5 1,429.6 300.4 2,467.9 1,908.9 111.9          June
 German contribution ( € billion) 
180.7 2,860.9 2,753.2 2,661.0 884.4 401.8 51.8 767.2 442.2 113.6 2009          May
182.2 2,856.1 2,755.9 2,666.6 902.2 372.6 50.8 780.8 445.7 114.6          June
185.6 2,840.1 2,747.1 2,663.6 907.2 358.8 50.2 781.5 450.2 115.7          July
184.2 2,832.1 2,748.8 2,667.0 919.1 344.4 49.1 783.3 454.6 116.5          Aug 
184.3 2,830.8 2,750.2 2,671.8 937.9 324.4 47.9 786.2 457.7 117.7          Sep 
185.0 2,834.4 2,752.2 2,676.5 966.4 295.8 47.6 784.8 461.8 120.1          Oct 
186.5 2,839.6 2,767.0 2,687.1 987.8 280.1 46.6 787.0 464.7 120.9          Nov 
190.8 2,828.4 2,763.3 2,688.5 975.3 283.8 46.9 788.0 474.6 119.8          Dec 
187.9 2,830.4 2,772.0 2,696.8 1,005.5 261.0 44.4 788.2 479.4 118.3 2010          Jan 
188.5 2,829.6 2,776.4 2,695.8 1,003.1 253.7 43.7 792.4 485.3 117.6          Feb 
191.4 2,816.4 2,765.5 2,687.3 992.2 254.0 42.8 793.5 487.1 117.7          Mar 
192.1 2,836.8 2,782.6 2,710.0 1,035.2 234.4 42.0 793.6 489.0 115.8          Apr 
193.2 2,841.8 2,783.5 2,706.9 1,043.4 229.2 40.8 788.5 490.9 114.0          May
195.5 2,842.8 2,787.0 2,702.1 1,041.7 229.2 39.0 787.9 491.6 112.7          June
197.2 2,841.1 2,785.3 2,706.3 1,047.6 227.6 37.8 787.4 495.2 110.6          July
195.8 2,857.9 2,794.5 2,710.2 1,050.3 226.9 37.5 789.7 496.9 108.8          Aug 
195.4 2,851.5 2,797.8 2,709.0 1,049.9 226.9 37.5 788.8 499.4 106.6          Sep 
195.5 2,873.7 2,798.5 2,717.1 1,055.7 229.3 37.9 786.8 502.1 105.2          Oct 
196.6 2,925.7 2,845.2 2,764.3 1,078.2 227.8 38.2 810.2 504.1 105.7          Nov 
200.4 2,926.8 2,855.0 2,772.1 1,069.6 235.1 38.1 811.1 512.4 105.7          Dec 
197.6 2,939.7 2,862.6 2,782.4 1,084.8 230.8 38.0 808.5 515.1 105.3 2011          Jan 
197.4 2,931.4 2,853.1 2,769.4 1,066.1 236.0 38.2 806.5 517.1 105.4          Feb 
198.0 2,928.9 2,858.5 2,771.7 1,066.6 238.1 38.7 804.8 517.9 105.6          Mar 
199.5 2,937.5 2,871.5 2,786.1 1,074.5 246.3 39.5 803.5 517.6 104.8          Apr 
200.9 2,951.3 2,881.4 2,787.4 1,071.8 252.3 40.0 803.2 515.4 104.7          May
203.5 2,960.1 2,884.6 2,787.0 1,078.0 247.9 39.6 803.5 513.6 104.5          June
the accounting regime chosen by the Eurosystem (see footnote 3 on item “Intra-Eurosystem liability/claim related to banknote issue“ (see “Other
banknote circulation in Table III.2). The volume of currency actually put into liability items“). — 5Excluding central governments’ deposits. — 6In
circulation by the Bundesbank can be calculated by adding to this total the Germany, only saving deposits. 
11*II Overall monetary survey in the euro area

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
E U R O S Y S T E M
Monthly Report
August 2011
II Overall monetary survey in the euro area
 
2 Consolidated balance sheet of monetary financial institutions (MFIs) (cont’d) *
 
 
 
Liabilities (cont’d)
Deposits of non-banks (non-MFIs) in the euro area (cont’d)  
 
General government Repo transactions Debt securities
with non-banks
Other general government in the euro area
With agreed At agreed
maturities of notice of  2 
Money
over of which market of which
Central 1 year and Enterprises fund denom-
End of govern- up to up to over up to over and shares inated
year/month ments Total Overnight 1 year 2 years 2 years 3 months 3 months Total households (net)  3 Total in euro
 Euro area ( € billion) 1
 
2009          May 331.5 263.1 138.1 84.7 4.9 24.9 3.0 7.5 336.2 333.4 771.9 2,802.4 2,211.0
         June 352.3 266.2 146.0 80.3 4.6 25.0 3.1 7.3 347.3 344.5 742.3 2,799.2 2,198.1
         July 298.2 262.0 146.0 74.9 4.9 25.5 3.5 7.2 321.3 318.9 758.5 2,802.4 2,203.3
         Aug 274.5 262.2 148.2 72.3 5.1 25.7 3.8 7.1 310.8 308.8 759.9 2,798.6 2,197.2
         Sep 295.2 262.2 154.7 65.9 5.2 25.7 3.9 6.8 335.2 333.0 741.1 2,769.7 2,187.1
         Oct 317.5 258.7 151.6 65.1 5.2 26.0 4.2 6.6 309.4 307.2 735.5 2,756.8 2,176.7
         Nov 304.0 261.5 158.1 61.8 5.0 26.1 4.1 6.4 314.8 312.7 722.3 2,751.8 2,173.2
         Dec 248.6 243.5 143.9 58.8 4.8 25.9 4.0 6.2 327.5 324.8 647.5 2,752.9 2,167.6
2010          Jan 279.4 247.1 144.4 56.8 4.8 28.2 4.3 8.6 307.0 305.5 652.1 2,799.3 2,183.8
         Feb 275.7 249.5 146.5 56.8 4.7 28.4 4.7 8.4 323.0 321.4 643.9 2,793.9 2,162.4
         Mar 269.9 247.0 142.2 58.8 4.6 28.5 4.9 8.1 341.4 339.6 628.3 2,828.4 2,192.1
         Apr 250.3 245.8 141.0 58.6 4.5 28.6 5.1 7.9 362.4 360.4 634.4 2,842.2 2,192.7
         May 284.2 253.3 145.6 61.6 4.4 28.4 5.4 7.8 366.8 364.8 630.3 2,868.5 2,180.5
         June 304.5 261.4 149.9 64.7 3.9 30.0 5.5 7.6 405.9 404.4 605.7 2,855.2 2,169.6
         July 282.2 242.0 131.7 63.0 3.6 30.5 5.7 7.5 383.6 382.2 596.7 2,835.5 2,169.9
         Aug 262.1 245.7 131.4 67.0 3.3 30.8 5.9 7.4 386.4 385.1 608.1 2,848.1 2,161.5
         Sep 265.5 251.0 132.0 72.2 3.3 30.1 6.4 7.0 408.4 406.9 589.4 2,831.2 2,172.7
         Oct 343.7 247.0 133.2 66.9 3.4 30.3 6.5 6.8 385.0 383.5 574.3 2,830.8 2,173.0
         Nov 360.8 252.5 141.4 64.3 3.4 30.4 6.6 6.5 433.4 431.8 586.5 2,866.4 2,183.3
         Dec 264.2 235.4 125.1 64.0 3.4 30.1 6.5 6.3 428.1 426.1 552.4 2,858.2 2,182.5
2011          Jan 316.5 241.7 127.6 65.4 3.4 30.1 6.9 8.2 392.0 390.6 570.2 2,882.9 2,216.2
         Feb 330.0 243.5 126.4 67.8 3.4 30.6 7.4 8.0 431.6 430.0 575.6 2,899.6 2,230.8
         Mar 296.6 244.3 125.7 69.3 3.4 30.7 7.4 7.8 405.1 403.7 568.2 2,972.1 2,314.4
         Apr 304.4 242.2 123.8 69.1 3.6 30.7 7.5 7.5 427.7 426.3 570.2 2,977.5 2,321.7
         May 287.4 252.4 128.3 74.9 3.7 30.8 7.3 7.3 466.6 464.9 566.3 3,007.0 2,332.0
         June 338.3 262.0 134.7 78.2 3.8 30.8 7.3 7.1 455.7 454.1 546.6 3,017.6 2,336.5
 German contribution ( € billion) 
2009          May 74.7 125.1 41.0 57.6 3.5 21.3 1.2 0.5 90.9 90.9 10.9 776.7 538.0
         June 65.8 123.7 43.0 54.3 3.2 21.3 1.3 0.6 93.4 93.4 10.7 764.5 521.5
         July 60.0 116.5 40.3 49.4 3.3 21.5 1.4 0.6 82.4 82.4 9.6 754.9 510.6
         Aug 50.2 114.9 41.1 46.6 3.4 21.5 1.6 0.6 71.7 71.7 9.5 755.1 507.7
         Sep 47.9 111.2 42.4 41.7 3.4 21.5 1.6 0.7 83.7 83.7 9.6 734.0 498.1
         Oct 49.3 108.5 41.6 39.5 3.4 21.7 1.6 0.7 83.3 83.3 9.5 727.1 492.8
         Nov 41.6 110.9 44.1 39.3 3.3 21.7 1.7 0.7 81.0 81.0 9.3 713.6 483.0
         Dec 32.7 107.3 40.7 39.5 3.2 21.4 1.8 0.7 80.5 80.5 8.7 703.3 470.7
2010          Jan 26.6 107.0 40.3 37.4 3.1 23.7 1.7 0.7 68.2 68.2 9.4 712.0 466.2
         Feb 22.7 111.1 43.4 38.4 3.1 23.7 1.7 0.7 78.9 78.9 9.2 711.0 456.3
         Mar 21.2 107.9 39.6 39.1 3.0 23.7 1.8 0.7 79.8 79.8 8.6 714.4 458.2
         Apr 21.4 105.4 37.4 38.8 2.9 23.8 1.8 0.7 100.7 100.7 8.4 715.8 451.0
         May 23.0 112.0 42.2 40.6 2.8 23.7 2.0 0.7 101.4 101.4 8.8 733.9 451.9
         June 21.9 118.8 45.4 43.2 2.4 25.0 2.0 0.7 102.7 102.7 8.1 729.6 450.9
         July 23.5 111.3 38.4 42.9 2.1 25.1 2.0 0.7 92.2 92.2 8.6 709.2 437.0
         Aug 30.9 116.8 41.0 45.7 2.0 25.4 2.1 0.7 104.0 104.0 8.3 720.7 436.1
         Sep 22.4 120.1 41.2 48.9 2.1 25.1 2.2 0.6 95.9 95.9 8.1 710.8 437.1
         Oct 43.2 113.3 37.6 45.6 2.1 25.2 2.2 0.6 85.0 85.0 8.0 682.1 408.8
         Nov 46.5 114.9 41.9 43.0 2.1 25.2 2.2 0.6 109.0 109.0 8.3 716.8 433.9
         Dec 39.8 114.9 40.6 44.6 2.0 25.0 2.2 0.5 86.7 86.7 8.4 708.5 425.8
2011          Jan 45.2 112.1 39.6 42.7 1.9 25.0 2.3 0.5 74.5 74.5 8.4 703.2 426.8
         Feb 47.1 114.9 39.7 45.6 1.7 25.2 2.3 0.5 93.2 93.2 8.4 698.6 424.5
         Mar 38.9 118.3 42.0 46.6 1.8 25.2 2.3 0.5 78.9 78.9 8.5 686.0 426.2
         Apr 34.3 117.2 39.8 47.6 1.8 25.2 2.3 0.5 89.2 89.2 8.4 678.5 420.6
         May 37.7 126.3 44.2 52.1 1.9 25.2 2.3 0.5 105.2 105.2 8.0 681.7 417.9
         June 40.7 132.3 46.1 56.4 2.1 25.2 2.2 0.5 104.8 104.8 7.8 681.1 415.5
*Monetary financial institutions (MFIs) comprise banks (including building 5Excluding liabilities arising from securities issued. — 6After deduction of
and loan associations), money market funds, and the European Central inter-MFI participations. — 7The German contributions to the Eurosystem’s
Bank and national central banks (the Eurosystem). — 1Source: ECB. — 2In monetary aggregates should on no account be interpreted as national
Germany, only savings deposits. — 3Excluding holdings of MFIs; for the monetary aggregates and are therefore not comparable with the erstwhile
German contribution, excluding German MFIs’ portfolios of securities issued German money stocks M1, M2 or M3. — 8including DM banknotes still in
by MFIs in the euro area. — 4In Germany, bank debt securities with circulation (see also footnote 4 on p 10*). — 9For the German contribution,
maturities of up to one year are classed as money market paper. — the difference between the volume of euro banknotes actually issued
12*II Overall monetary survey in the euro area

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2011
II Overall monetary survey in the euro area
 
 
 
 
 
 Memo item
 Other liability items Monetary aggregates  7 
 (From 2002, German contribution
issued (net)  3 excludes currency in circulation)
With maturities of
of which Monetary
Intra- liabilities
Eurosystem- of central
liability/ govern-
over Liabilities Excess claim Monetary ments
1 year and to non- Capital of related to capital (Post
up to up to over euro-area and inter-MFI banknote forma- Office, End of
1 year  4 2 years 2 years residents  5 reserves  6 liabilities Total  8 issue  9 M1 10 M2 11 M3 12 tion 13 year/month Treasury)  14 
Euro area ( € billion) 1
 
53.5 144.7 2,604.1 4,513.6 1,654.3 − 102.3 3,323.8 − 4,221.1 8,157.4 9,462.8 6,495.2 107.4 2009          May
38.6 143.2 2,617.4 4,437.0 1,688.7 − 62.5 3,443.6 − 4,311.6 8,186.1 9,456.6 6,566.7 108.7          June
25.3 145.5 2,631.6 4,385.0 1,697.0 − 58.8 3,500.9 − 4,311.0 8,170.1 9,420.1 6,602.5 109.7          July
12.1 144.3 2,642.3 4,309.1 1,715.7 − 68.6 3,530.5 − 4,317.6 8,153.0 9,379.3 6,638.6 109.6          Aug 
7.0 141.1 2,621.6 4,235.7 1,739.0 − 67.2 3,517.5 − 4,379.3 8,153.6 9,377.5 6,656.8 108.7          Sep 
− 1.6 140.3 2,618.1 4,227.7 1,745.8 − 93.9 3,485.3 − 4,434.6 8,178.4 9,361.4 6,663.4 108.6          Oct 
− 2.4 136.5 2,617.7 4,213.9 1,779.5 − 58.3 3,612.2 − 4,472.3 8,170.0 9,340.4 6,706.0 110.2          Nov 
3.6 129.1 2,620.2 4,238.8 1,801.0 − 22.5 3,362.9 − 4,556.2 8,275.1 9,381.5 6,769.1 117.2          Dec 
2.5 128.9 2,668.0 4,359.1 1,798.0 − 21.4 3,421.9 − 4,554.1 8,234.9 9,325.5 6,828.4 107.8 2010          Jan 
1.1 123.8 2,669.1 4,422.9 1,814.3 − 4.6 3,509.4 − 4,538.9 8,213.6 9,305.4 6,856.1 107.8          Feb 
11.7 122.3 2,694.3 4,425.3 1,831.1 − 41.7 3,541.2 − 4,544.3 8,212.2 9,315.9 6,901.0 106.1          Mar 
15.6 118.8 2,707.7 4,551.2 1,839.9 − 61.0 3,652.8 − 4,625.9 8,269.0 9,399.9 6,939.0 107.8          Apr 
22.2 106.9 2,739.4 4,705.0 1,876.7 − 41.6 3,957.0 − 4,663.8 8,301.2 9,427.1 7,008.2 109.4          May
22.5 100.7 2,732.1 4,603.3 1,957.0 3.2 3,807.1 − 4,711.1 8,332.9 9,467.3 7,164.8 110.4          June
27.7 99.2 2,708.6 4,488.4 1,943.7 − 12.4 3,712.1 − 4,693.8 8,337.5 9,444.4 7,150.4 114.8          July
27.1 99.4 2,721.6 4,636.6 1,980.0 12.4 4,124.4 − 4,660.8 8,342.2 9,463.0 7,206.1 113.7          Aug 
32.4 96.1 2,702.8 4,440.7 1,955.7 7.8 3,951.8 − 4,662.7 8,344.7 9,470.9 7,153.4 111.9          Sep 
25.4 97.3 2,708.1 4,457.7 1,967.2 28.4 3,807.6 − 4,669.3 8,377.9 9,459.7 7,160.8 109.8          Oct 
23.1 96.5 2,746.8 4,585.2 2,001.5 24.8 3,778.5 − 4,685.0 8,387.7 9,527.1 7,291.9 111.4          Nov 
29.7 91.6 2,736.9 4,374.1 2,022.2 59.8 4,351.5 − 4,747.0 8,471.3 9,572.9 7,321.3 117.9          Dec 
33.8 93.7 2,755.4 4,388.1 2,003.7 53.4 4,208.7 − 4,705.0 8,434.8 9,524.1 7,320.3 109.0 2011          Jan 
37.6 88.3 2,773.7 4,386.0 2,033.8 64.1 4,146.8 − 4,670.4 8,415.1 9,547.7 7,381.4 106.8          Feb 
68.4 85.5 2,818.2 4,173.8 2,038.5 72.0 3,874.8 − 4,685.7 8,440.0 9,566.7 7,449.8 106.3          Mar 
70.7 87.0 2,819.8 4,215.4 2,042.6 39.0 3,914.1 − 4,719.9 8,480.9 9,636.2 7,474.3 107.4          Apr 
73.9 84.0 2,849.1 4,350.4 2,070.0 8.9 4,056.9 − 4,708.2 8,487.0 9,677.4 7,533.9 106.7          May
91.6 80.2 2,845.7 4,132.1 2,078.0 21.2 3,840.5 − 4,762.1 8,516.4 9,690.2 7,541.4 107.4          June
 German contribution ( € billion) 
25.8 32.5 718.4 727.4 389.3 − 361.3 767.1 142.2 925.5 1,883.5 2,043.6 2,010.3 − 2009          May
22.0 26.6 715.9 731.4 407.9 − 390.7 747.5 141.9 945.2 1,873.0 2,025.8 2,041.0 −          June
23.3 25.1 706.4 724.8 408.0 − 397.8 751.5 141.8 947.5 1,860.8 2,001.2 2,033.8 −          July
24.7 24.9 705.6 718.3 408.3 − 407.6 762.6 143.4 960.2 1,859.9 1,990.7 2,035.8 −          Aug 
26.3 23.2 684.5 690.3 409.6 − 396.2 769.8 144.9 980.3 1,856.9 1,999.7 2,020.1 −          Sep 
23.7 21.9 681.5 678.5 411.0 − 388.6 773.6 146.5 1,008.0 1,857.8 1,996.2 2,019.8 −          Oct 
21.5 22.4 669.7 674.6 424.7 − 384.9 773.7 146.8 1,031.9 1,867.7 2,001.8 2,024.8 −          Nov 
23.1 17.0 663.2 663.8 423.6 − 390.1 766.7 146.8 1,015.9 1,865.7 1,994.9 2,016.8 −          Dec 
25.4 17.2 669.3 693.8 419.4 − 364.7 755.0 147.6 1,045.8 1,872.9 1,993.1 2,019.7 − 2010          Jan 
27.4 16.7 666.9 703.0 424.6 − 394.6 737.4 149.6 1,046.5 1,872.4 2,004.6 2,026.0 −          Feb 
27.3 15.3 671.8 721.0 424.3 − 419.9 761.1 150.2 1,031.8 1,859.6 1,990.6 2,031.8 −          Mar 
27.5 14.7 673.7 777.7 429.9 − 411.7 753.1 151.1 1,072.5 1,881.6 2,032.7 2,037.4 −          Apr 
26.7 15.3 692.0 847.8 431.1 − 469.8 764.6 151.7 1,085.6 1,891.9 2,044.0 2,050.0 −          May
23.5 13.1 693.0 807.3 431.2 − 475.4 790.2 150.9 1,087.1 1,894.5 2,041.9 2,050.6 −          June
25.4 14.7 669.1 784.5 426.1 − 483.3 765.7 151.2 1,086.0 1,893.7 2,034.6 2,019.1 −          July
33.6 13.9 673.3 797.3 433.5 − 496.8 776.1 153.2 1,091.3 1,902.4 2,062.0 2,031.3 −          Aug 
35.2 14.8 660.8 757.5 430.4 − 517.7 770.9 155.8 1,091.1 1,908.0 2,061.9 2,012.4 −          Sep 
13.0 15.2 653.9 745.2 440.6 − 414.3 771.5 156.7 1,093.3 1,912.7 2,033.8 2,012.2 −          Oct 
28.0 18.4 670.4 772.9 451.7 − 439.4 766.9 156.6 1,120.1 1,937.4 2,101.1 2,063.8 −          Nov 
27.4 15.4 665.7 736.5 450.9 − 456.6 1,660.7 157.1 1,110.2 1,944.6 2,082.5 2,058.9 −          Dec 
24.2 15.5 663.5 727.0 447.6 − 421.8 1,554.6 157.8 1,124.4 1,955.2 2,077.8 2,050.4 − 2011          Jan 
26.1 11.8 660.6 732.7 455.8 − 446.9 1,513.6 158.9 1,105.8 1,946.8 2,086.4 2,054.0 −          Feb 
23.7 12.9 649.4 672.7 455.5 − 438.1 1,442.9 159.5 1,108.6 1,954.0 2,078.0 2,040.9 −          Mar 
19.8 13.6 645.1 694.9 457.3 − 413.4 1,448.8 160.1 1,114.2 1,969.4 2,100.4 2,036.3 −          Apr 
19.3 14.0 648.4 698.7 456.2 − 455.5 1,498.4 161.6 1,116.0 1,980.1 2,126.5 2,038.2 −          May
17.5 14.3 649.3 640.1 455.5 − 480.6 1,425.7 163.1 1,124.1 1,985.8 2,130.2 2,038.4 −          June
by the Bundesbank and the amount disclosed in accordance with the (excluding central governments’ deposits) and (for the euro area) central
accounting regime chosen by the Eurosystem (see also footnote 3 on governments’ monetary liabilities with such maturities. — 12M2 plus repo
banknote circulation in Table III.2). — 10Overnight deposits (excluding transactions, money market fund shares, money market paper and debt
central governments’ deposits), and (for the euro area) currency in securities up to 2 years. — 13Deposits with agreed maturities of over 2
circulation, central governments’ overnight monetary liabilities, which are years and at agreed notice of over 3 months, debt securities with maturities
not included in the consolidated balance sheet. — 11M1 plus deposits with of over 2 years, capital and reserves. — 14 Non-existent in Germany. 
agreed maturities of up to 2 years and at agreed notice of up to 3 months
13*II Overall monetary survey in the euro area

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
E U R O S Y S T E M
Monthly Report
August 2011
II  Overall monetary survey in the euro area
  
 3  Banking system’s liquidity position  * 
Stocks
  
€ billion; period averages of daily positions
Liquidity-providing factors Liquidity-absorbing factors
Monetary policy operations of the Eurosystem
Credit
institutions‘
current
account
Net assets Longer- Other Other balances
Reserve in gold Main term Marginal liquidity- liquidity- Banknotes Central Other (including
maintenance and foreign refinancing refinancing lending providing Deposit absorbing in government factors minimum Base
period currency operations operations facility facility deposits (net)  6 reserves)  7 money  8 operations  3 operations  4 circulation  5 
ending in  1 
Eurosystem  2  
  
2009          Jan 581.3 219.2 613.6 2.9 − 238.5 3.3 753.1 99.9 100.6 221.5 1 213.1
         Feb 547.4 224.9 551.4 2.1 − 175.4 6.1 740.2 102.7 79.3 222.1 1 137.7
         Mar 512.7 224.3 472.4 1.6 − 95.5 4.0 741.5 110.1 41.4 218.6 1 055.5
         Apr 508.0 230.5 443.1 1.1 − 57.8 3.7 747.3 139.0 13.3 221.6 1 026.6
         May 512.4 239.7 426.9 0.7 − 42.7 3.1 757.5 141.9 13.7 220.8 1 021.0
         June 487.9 238.8 400.6 0.7 − 22.3 2.1 759.8 141.7 − 15.8 217.9 1 000.0
         July 457.1 221.4 504.9 1.3 − 119.7 9.9 763.1 137.9 − 65.1 219.2 1 102.0
         Aug 433.6 94.1 694.0 0.3 2.8 185.1 22.1 770.8 133.9 − 103.9 216.9 1 172.8
         Sep 427.6 74.8 645.4 0.3 8.4 136.7 18.5 769.1 125.7 − 110.4 216.9 1 122.7
         Oct 421.4 79.1 616.9 0.3 14.3 109.6 12.9 768.8 139.0 − 113.1 214.7 1 093.1
         Nov 413.0 52.3 626.1 0.3 20.1 86.5 12.0 770.7 148.7 − 118.9 212.8 1 070.0
         Dec 407.6 55.8 593.4 0.7 24.6 65.7 9.9 775.2 150.1 − 130.2 211.4 1 052.3
2010          Jan 413.0 60.6 648.4 0.4 28.4 147.0 8.1 796.8 119.8 − 132.1 211.2 1 155.0
         Feb 425.6 59.7 662.2 0.2 33.5 168.3 13.3 783.6 122.6 − 117.5 210.9 1 162.8
         Mar 426.9 80.5 641.1 0.9 38.0 186.4 10.5 784.6 113.2 − 119.3 211.8 1 182.9
         Apr 439.8 77.7 650.5 0.4 43.6 200.7 8.4 792.9 113.6 − 116.1 212.5 1 206.1
         May 457.0 76.7 666.4 0.9 49.4 218.2 11.4 796.6 112.1 − 100.3 212.4 1 227.2
         June 462.4 110.0 706.7 0.3 86.9 288.8 34.1 806.2 123.1 − 98.4 212.5 1 307.5
         July 500.9 167.5 573.2 0.3 140.2 230.4 54.4 813.0 126.5 − 56.5 214.4 1 257.8
         Aug 543.4 185.4 432.2 0.1 121.4 96.7 67.5 819.3 95.2 − 11.8 215.7 1 131.7
         Sep 543.2 153.1 435.0 0.6 121.8 83.7 66.9 816.0 86.8 − 15.0 215.3 1 115.0
         Oct 531.3 164.5 392.6 0.7 128.3 68.8 64.8 814.1 96.4 − 39.8 213.1 1 096.1
         Nov 511.3 183.0 340.0 0.8 124.5 41.9 68.8 813.5 92.1 − 72.0 215.2 1 070.7
         Dec 511.1 179.5 336.3 1.9 130.4 44.7 70.8 815.9 94.4 − 79.1 212.5 1 073.1
2011          Jan 527.5 197.0 316.6 0.5 140.9 66.5 73.5 833.9 81.3 − 85.1 212.4 1 112.8
         Feb 549.7 185.4 318.2 0.1 137.2 39.2 81.3 822.0 101.2 − 66.7 213.6 1 074.8
         Mar 550.0 134.4 321.0 7.6 137.9 26.9 80.3 820.9 89.8 − 79.9 212.9 1 060.7
         Apr 544.1 97.3 335.4 0.8 137.6 23.0 79.5 824.4 73.1 − 95.2 210.5 1 057.9
         May 525.9 109.2 320.5 0.4 136.6 22.8 76.8 833.9 61.3 − 111.6 209.5 1 066.1
         June 526.8 114.7 317.9 0.0 135.5 18.4 76.2 836.6 62.6 − 107.9 209.0 1 064.0
         July 533.6 146.0 311.6 0.2 134.2 29.5 76.9 846.2 73.4 − 111.2 210.9 1 086.6
Deutsche Bundesbank
2009          Jan 141.2 72.4 198.1 2.4 − 91.5 1.2 195.8 4.1 68.5 52.8 340.2
         Feb 132.9 79.4 178.5 1.3 − 77.9 2.2 185.0 2.5 71.4 53.2 316.1
         Mar 135.3 72.9 147.8 1.2 − 51.9 1.7 185.3 9.6 55.7 52.9 290.1
         Apr 142.9 74.7 122.8 0.7 − 38.9 1.6 186.3 14.6 46.2 53.4 278.7
         May 150.7 87.5 111.9 0.1 − 24.1 1.3 189.1 26.2 56.3 53.3 266.5
         June 145.7 95.0 103.4 0.7 − 15.4 0.6 189.3 32.3 54.3 52.8 257.4
         July 138.0 81.0 141.5 0.6 − 49.4 4.5 190.2 23.5 40.4 53.2 292.8
         Aug 128.6 47.6 189.1 0.1 0.8 70.1 4.9 192.0 23.5 23.6 52.2 314.2
         Sep 126.0 40.6 178.0 0.1 2.9 51.8 4.3 192.3 23.6 23.4 52.2 296.4
         Oct 124.2 37.3 175.9 0.2 4.9 49.4 3.0 192.5 23.7 22.4 51.5 293.3
         Nov 120.7 34.6 178.8 0.2 6.2 34.2 4.3 192.5 23.6 34.8 51.0 277.7
         Dec 116.3 33.7 171.1 0.6 7.2 25.7 2.7 193.3 18.8 37.8 50.5 269.5
2010          Jan 112.1 42.8 168.9 0.1 7.9 44.8 2.3 198.4 10.7 25.3 50.3 293.5
         Feb 112.3 42.2 168.6 0.1 8.9 50.3 5.2 195.6 5.4 25.4 50.2 296.1
         Mar 112.6 51.8 157.9 0.8 10.0 67.8 5.0 196.5 2.1 11.8 50.0 314.3
         Apr 116.2 40.9 164.9 0.2 11.5 69.8 3.4 198.0 0.3 11.9 50.3 318.2
         May 121.1 40.5 164.7 0.1 12.8 74.9 4.2 199.0 0.7 10.2 50.2 324.1
         June 122.2 43.0 166.4 0.0 22.1 113.1 17.1 201.5 0.8 − 29.2 50.5 365.0
         July 133.9 55.2 112.8 0.1 32.7 81.0 22.3 202.5 0.4 − 22.7 51.2 334.7
         Aug 145.8 61.7 52.8 0.1 28.4 32.7 20.7 204.2 0.5 − 21.6 52.3 289.2
         Sep 145.5 52.6 50.3 0.2 28.4 24.8 26.5 204.2 0.5 − 30.9 52.0 280.9
         Oct 142.2 54.4 40.5 0.1 29.3 27.0 32.4 204.0 0.5 − 48.3 51.0 281.9
         Nov 136.7 63.7 28.9 0.0 28.8 21.2 35.7 202.9 0.4 − 53.6 51.5 275.5
         Dec 136.5 60.5 32.5 0.1 29.3 21.2 41.0 203.3 0.2 − 57.7 51.0 275.5
2011          Jan 141.9 55.2 34.1 0.1 31.2 28.2 42.0 207.7 0.3 − 66.9 51.3 287.2
         Feb 148.1 44.6 44.0 0.0 31.6 19.8 43.0 204.6 0.2 − 51.0 51.8 276.2
         Mar 148.4 31.3 44.7 0.0 31.7 14.6 48.4 204.8 0.2 − 63.7 51.8 271.2
         Apr 146.6 24.1 45.5 0.0 31.9 13.6 38.9 205.2 0.2 − 61.5 51.7 270.4
         May 142.4 17.9 47.7 0.2 31.9 10.8 38.2 207.6 0.4 − 68.2 51.4 269.8
         June 142.5 10.6 41.5 0.0 31.7 8.1 33.4 208.7 0.3 − 75.8 51.7 268.4
         July 144.3 22.8 35.8 0.0 31.4 11.1 36.4 211.1 0.3 − 77.3 52.6 274.8
Discrepancies may arise from rounding. — *The banking system’s liquidity programme and the Eurosystem’s securities markets programme. — 4From
position is defined as the current account holdings in euro of euro-area Aug. 2009, includes liquidity absorbed as a result of the Eurosystem’s
credit institutions with the Eurosystem. Amounts are derived from the conso- foreign exchange swap operations. — 5From 2002, euro banknotes and oth-
lidated financial statement of the Eurosystem and the financial statement er banknotes which have been issued by the national central banks of the
of the Bundesbank. — 1Figures are daily averages for the reserve mainte- Eurosystem and which are still in circulation. In accordance with the ac-
nance period ending in the month indicated. — 2Source: ECB. — 3Includes counting procedure chosen by the Eurosystem for the issue of euro bank-
liquidity provided under the Eurosystem’s covered bond purchase notes, 8% of the total value of the euro banknotes in circulation are alloca-
14*II  Overall monetary survey in the euro area

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2011
II  Overall monetary survey in the euro area
  
  
Flows
  
Liquidity-providing factors Liquidity-absorbing factors
Monetary policy operations of the Eurosystem
Credit
institutions‘
current
account
Net assets Longer- Other Other balances
in gold Main term Marginal liquidity- liquidity- Banknotes Central Other (including Reserve
and foreign refinancing refinancing lending providing Deposit absorbing in government factors minimum Base maintenance
currency operations operations facility facility deposits (net)  6 reserves)  7 money  8 period operations  3 operations  4 circulation  5 
ending in  1 
Eurosystem  2  
  
+ 0.8 − 118.1 + 156.4 + 0.2 − + 37.6 − 1.6 + 22.0 − 7.9 − 13.7 + 2.8 + 62.4 2009          Jan 
− 33.9 + 5.7 − 62.2 − 0.8 − − 63.1 + 2.8 − 12.9 + 2.8 − 21.3 + 0.6 − 75.4          Feb 
− 34.7 − 0.6 − 79.0 − 0.5 − − 79.9 − 2.1 + 1.3 + 7.4 − 37.9 − 3.5 − 82.2          Mar 
− 4.7 + 6.2 − 29.3 − 0.5 − − 37.7 − 0.3 + 5.8 + 28.9 − 28.1 + 3.0 − 28.9          Apr 
+ 4.4 + 9.2 − 16.2 − 0.4 − − 15.1 − 0.6 + 10.2 + 2.9 + 0.4 − 0.8 − 5.6          May
− 24.5 − 0.9 − 26.3 − 0.0 − − 20.4 − 1.0 + 2.3 − 0.2 − 29.5 − 2.9 − 21.0          June
− 30.8 − 17.4 + 104.3 + 0.6 − + 97.4 + 7.8 + 3.3 − 3.8 − 49.3 + 1.3 + 102.0          July
− 23.5 − 127.3 + 189.1 − 1.0 + 2.8 + 65.4 + 12.2 + 7.7 − 4.0 − 38.8 − 2.3 + 70.8          Aug 
− 6.0 − 19.3 − 48.6 − 0.0 + 5.6 − 48.4 − 3.6 − 1.7 − 8.2 − 6.5 − 0.0 − 50.1          Sep 
− 6.2 + 4.3 − 28.5 + 0.0 + 5.9 − 27.1 − 5.6 − 0.3 + 13.3 − 2.7 − 2.2 − 29.6          Oct 
− 8.4 − 26.8 + 9.2 − 0.0 + 5.8 − 23.1 − 0.9 + 1.9 + 9.7 − 5.8 − 1.9 − 23.1          Nov 
− 5.4 + 3.5 − 32.7 + 0.4 + 4.5 − 20.8 − 2.1 + 4.5 + 1.4 − 11.3 − 1.4 − 17.7          Dec 
+ 5.4 + 4.8 + 55.0 − 0.3 + 3.8 + 81.3 − 1.8 + 21.6 − 30.3 − 1.9 − 0.2 + 102.7 2010          Jan 
+ 12.6 − 0.9 + 13.8 − 0.2 + 5.1 + 21.3 + 5.2 − 13.2 + 2.8 + 14.6 − 0.3 + 7.8          Feb 
+ 1.3 + 20.8 − 21.1 + 0.7 + 4.5 + 18.1 − 2.8 + 1.0 − 9.4 − 1.8 + 0.9 + 20.1          Mar 
+ 12.9 − 2.8 + 9.4 − 0.5 + 5.6 + 14.3 − 2.1 + 8.3 + 0.4 + 3.2 + 0.7 + 23.2          Apr 
+ 17.2 − 1.0 + 15.9 + 0.5 + 5.8 + 17.5 + 3.0 + 3.7 − 1.5 + 15.8 − 0.1 + 21.1          May
+ 5.4 + 33.3 + 40.3 − 0.6 + 37.5 + 70.6 + 22.7 + 9.6 + 11.0 + 1.9 + 0.1 + 80.3          June
+ 38.5 + 57.5 − 133.5 − 0.0 + 53.3 − 58.4 + 20.3 + 6.8 + 3.4 + 41.9 + 1.9 − 49.7          July
+ 42.5 + 17.9 − 141.0 − 0.2 − 18.8 −133.7 + 13.1 + 6.3 − 31.3 + 44.7 + 1.3 − 126.1          Aug 
− 0.2 − 32.3 + 2.8 + 0.5 + 0.4 − 13.0 − 0.6 − 3.3 − 8.4 − 3.2 − 0.4 − 16.7          Sep 
− 11.9 + 11.4 − 42.4 + 0.1 + 6.5 − 14.9 − 2.1 − 1.9 + 9.6 − 24.8 − 2.2 − 18.9          Oct 
− 20.0 + 18.5 − 52.6 + 0.1 − 3.8 − 26.9 + 4.0 − 0.6 − 4.3 − 32.2 + 2.1 − 25.4          Nov 
− 0.2 − 3.5 − 3.7 + 1.1 + 5.9 + 2.8 + 2.0 + 2.4 + 2.3 − 7.1 − 2.7 + 2.4          Dec 
+ 16.4 + 17.5 − 19.7 − 1.4 + 10.5 + 21.8 + 2.7 + 18.0 − 13.1 − 6.0 − 0.1 + 39.7 2011          Jan 
+ 22.2 − 11.6 + 1.6 − 0.4 − 3.7 − 27.3 + 7.8 − 11.9 + 19.9 + 18.4 + 1.2 − 38.0          Feb 
+ 0.3 − 51.0 + 2.8 + 7.5 + 0.7 − 12.3 − 1.0 − 1.1 − 11.4 − 13.2 − 0.7 − 14.1          Mar 
− 5.9 − 37.1 + 14.4 − 6.8 − 0.3 − 3.9 − 0.8 + 3.5 − 16.7 − 15.3 − 2.4 − 2.8          Apr 
− 18.2 + 11.9 − 14.9 − 0.4 − 1.0 − 0.2 − 2.7 + 9.5 − 11.8 − 16.4 − 1.0 + 8.2          May
+ 0.9 + 5.5 − 2.6 − 0.4 − 1.1 − 4.4 − 0.6 + 2.7 + 1.3 + 3.7 − 0.5 − 2.1          June
+ 6.8 + 31.3 − 6.3 + 0.2 − 1.3 + 11.1 + 0.7 + 9.6 + 10.8 − 3.3 + 1.9 + 22.6          July
Deutsche Bundesbank
− 5.7 − 32.7 + 39.5 + 0.4 − + 7.3 + 0.1 − 2.1 + 4.0 − 8.7 + 0.9 + 6.1 2009          Jan 
− 8.3 + 7.0 − 19.5 − 1.0 − − 13.6 + 0.9 − 10.8 − 1.7 + 2.9 + 0.3 − 24.0          Feb 
+ 2.3 − 6.4 − 30.7 − 0.2 − − 26.1 − 0.4 + 0.3 + 7.2 − 15.7 − 0.2 − 26.0          Mar 
+ 7.6 + 1.8 − 25.1 − 0.5 − − 12.9 − 0.1 + 1.0 + 5.0 − 9.5 + 0.5 − 11.4          Apr 
+ 7.8 + 12.8 − 10.9 − 0.6 − − 14.8 − 0.3 + 2.7 + 11.6 + 10.1 − 0.2 − 12.2          May
− 5.0 + 7.5 − 8.5 + 0.5 − − 8.7 − 0.6 + 0.2 + 6.2 − 2.0 − 0.5 − 9.1          June
− 7.7 − 13.9 + 38.1 − 0.0 − + 34.1 + 3.8 + 0.9 − 8.9 − 13.9 + 0.4 + 35.4          July
− 9.3 − 33.5 + 47.6 − 0.5 + 0.8 + 20.6 + 0.4 + 1.8 + 0.0 − 16.8 − 1.0 + 21.5          Aug 
− 2.6 − 7.0 − 11.1 + 0.0 + 2.1 − 18.2 − 0.6 + 0.3 + 0.1 − 0.2 + 0.1 − 17.9          Sep 
− 1.8 − 3.3 − 2.1 + 0.0 + 2.0 − 2.5 − 1.2 + 0.2 + 0.1 − 1.0 − 0.8 − 3.1          Oct 
− 3.5 − 2.7 + 3.0 − 0.0 + 1.3 − 15.2 + 1.2 + 0.1 − 0.1 + 12.5 − 0.4 − 15.6          Nov 
− 4.4 − 0.9 − 7.7 + 0.4 + 1.0 − 8.5 − 1.6 + 0.7 − 4.8 + 3.0 − 0.5 − 8.2          Dec 
− 4.2 + 9.1 − 2.2 − 0.5 + 0.7 + 19.1 − 0.4 + 5.1 − 8.1 − 12.6 − 0.2 + 24.0 2010          Jan 
+ 0.2 − 0.6 − 0.3 + 0.0 + 1.0 + 5.5 + 3.0 − 2.8 − 5.2 + 0.1 − 0.1 + 2.6          Feb 
+ 0.3 + 9.6 − 10.6 + 0.7 + 1.1 + 17.4 − 0.3 + 0.9 − 3.3 − 13.6 − 0.1 + 18.2          Mar 
+ 3.6 − 10.8 + 7.0 − 0.7 + 1.5 + 2.0 − 1.6 + 1.6 − 1.8 + 0.1 + 0.3 + 3.9          Apr 
+ 4.9 − 0.4 − 0.2 − 0.1 + 1.3 + 5.0 + 0.8 + 1.0 + 0.5 − 1.7 − 0.1 + 5.9          May
+ 1.1 + 2.5 + 1.7 − 0.0 + 9.3 + 38.2 + 12.9 + 2.5 + 0.1 − 39.4 + 0.3 + 40.9          June
+ 11.7 + 12.2 − 53.6 + 0.0 + 10.7 − 32.1 + 5.1 + 1.0 − 0.4 + 6.5 + 0.8 − 30.3          July
+ 11.9 + 6.6 − 60.0 + 0.0 − 4.3 − 48.3 − 1.5 + 1.7 + 0.1 + 1.1 + 1.0 − 45.6          Aug 
− 0.3 − 9.1 − 2.5 + 0.1 + 0.0 − 7.9 + 5.8 + 0.0 − 0.1 − 9.3 − 0.3 − 8.3          Sep 
− 3.3 + 1.8 − 9.8 − 0.1 + 0.9 + 2.2 + 5.9 − 0.2 − 0.0 − 17.4 − 1.0 + 1.0          Oct 
− 5.6 + 9.3 − 11.6 − 0.1 − 0.5 − 5.8 + 3.3 − 1.1 − 0.1 − 5.3 + 0.5 − 6.4          Nov 
− 0.2 − 3.1 + 3.6 + 0.1 + 0.6 + 0.0 + 5.3 + 0.5 − 0.2 − 4.1 − 0.5 − 0.0          Dec 
+ 5.5 − 5.4 + 1.5 − 0.0 + 1.9 + 7.0 + 1.1 + 4.3 + 0.0 − 9.2 + 0.4 + 11.6 2011          Jan 
+ 6.2 − 10.6 + 9.9 − 0.1 + 0.3 − 8.4 + 0.9 − 3.1 − 0.0 + 15.9 + 0.5 − 11.0          Feb 
+ 0.3 − 13.3 + 0.7 − 0.0 + 0.2 − 5.2 + 5.5 + 0.3 − 0.0 − 12.7 − 0.1 − 5.0          Mar 
− 1.8 − 7.2 + 0.9 + 0.0 + 0.1 − 1.0 − 9.5 + 0.3 + 0.0 + 2.2 − 0.0 − 0.7          Apr 
− 4.2 − 6.2 + 2.2 + 0.2 + 0.0 − 2.8 − 0.7 + 2.4 + 0.1 − 6.7 − 0.3 − 0.7          May
+ 0.2 − 7.3 − 6.3 − 0.2 − 0.2 − 2.7 − 4.7 + 1.1 − 0.1 − 7.6 + 0.2 − 1.4          June
+ 1.7 + 12.2 − 5.7 + 0.0 − 0.3 + 3.0 + 3.0 + 2.4 + 0.0 − 1.5 + 0.9 + 6.4          July
ted on a monthly basis to the ECB. The counterpart of this adjustment is has put into circulation is likewise shown under “Other factors”. From 2003
shown under “Other factors”. The remaining 92% of the value of the euro euro banknotes only. — 6Remaining items in the consolidated financial
banknotes in circulation is allocated, likewise on a monthly basis, to the statement of the Eurosystem and the financial statement of the
NCBs, with each NCB showing in its balance sheet the percentage of the Bundesbank. — 7Equal to the difference between the sum of liquidity-pro-
euro banknotes in circulation that corresponds to its paid-up share in the viding factors and the sum of liquidity-absorbing factors. — 8Calculated as
ECB’s capital. The difference between the value of the euro banknotes the sum of the “deposit facility”, “banknotes in circulation” and “credit
allocated to an NCB and the value of the euro banknotes which that NCB institutions’ current account holdings”. 
15*II  Overall monetary survey in the euro area

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
E U R O S Y S T E M
Monthly Report
August 2011
III Consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem
 
1 Assets *
 
 
€ billion
Claims on non-euro area Claims on non-euro area residents denominated
in foreign currency residents denominated in euro
Balances with
Claims on banks, security
On investments, euro area Balances Claims
reporting external loans residents with banks, arising from
date/ Gold and other denominated security the credit
End of Total and gold Receivables external in foreign investments facility under
month  1 assets receivables Total from the IMF assets currency Total and loans ERM II
 Eurosystem 2
 
2010 Dec                  3 1,924.1 334.4 219.3 69.6 149.6 24.7 19.6 19.6 −
                              10 1,951.7 334.4 220.1 69.6 150.5 24.8 20.3 20.3 −
                              17 1,945.2 334.4 219.6 69.3 150.3 25.3 19.6 19.6 −
                              24 1,926.2 334.4 220.2 70.2 149.9 26.0 19.1 19.1 −
                              31 3 2,004.4 3 367.4 3 224.0 3 71.3 3 152.7 3 26.9 22.6 22.6 −
2011 Jan                  7 1,965.9 367.4 225.0 71.4 153.6 26.8 19.3 19.3 −
                              14 1,957.1 367.4 226.6 71.4 155.2 26.0 20.7 20.7 −
                              21 1,961.1 367.4 228.3 72.9 155.4 25.5 19.1 19.1 −
                              28 1,965.6 367.4 228.3 72.9 155.4 26.1 19.2 19.2 −
         Feb                  4 2,015.6 367.4 229.4 72.6 156.8 26.1 18.4 18.4 −
                              11 1,956.1 367.4 229.8 72.6 157.1 26.0 21.8 21.8 −
                              18 1,958.5 367.4 227.5 72.6 154.8 26.4 21.3 21.3 −
                              25 1,952.3 367.4 226.5 72.6 153.9 26.5 21.9 21.9 −
         Mar                  4 1,939.2 367.4 230.7 75.4 155.3 26.4 22.0 22.0 −
                              11 1,953.0 367.4 232.2 75.5 156.7 26.0 18.8 18.8 −
                              18 1,940.4 367.4 233.8 76.9 156.9 25.6 20.5 20.5 −
                              25 1,928.1 367.4 232.9 76.5 156.4 25.6 20.4 20.4 −
2011 Apr                  1 3 1,888.5 3 350.7 3 221.9 3 74.1 3 147.8 3 23.9 20.9 20.9 −
                                8 1,873.1 350.7 219.6 74.2 145.4 24.2 23.1 23.1 −
                              15 1,885.0 350.7 219.3 74.2 145.0 23.6 24.9 24.9 −
                              22 1,887.9 350.7 218.1 74.2 143.8 23.5 23.2 23.2 −
                              29 1,894.1 350.7 216.8 74.2 142.6 23.3 22.4 22.4 −
         May                  6 1,901.9 350.7 218.1 74.1 144.0 23.4 21.1 21.1 −
                              13 1,898.7 350.7 217.5 74.1 143.3 23.6 19.8 19.8 −
                              20 1,895.9 350.7 218.7 74.8 143.9 23.8 18.8 18.8 −
                              27 1,900.6 350.7 219.4 74.9 144.5 22.9 19.4 19.4 −
         June                  3 1,899.0 350.7 219.4 74.9 144.5 23.2 19.0 19.0 −
                              10 1,892.6 350.7 219.6 74.9 144.7 23.3 21.3 21.3 −
                              17 1,914.5 350.7 219.1 74.9 144.2 23.7 20.1 20.1 −
                              24 1,972.2 350.7 217.7 74.9 142.8 23.7 20.7 20.7 −
         July                  1 3 1,944.6 3 363.3 3 216.0 3 74.3 141.7 23.3 20.5 20.5 −
                                8 1,919.5 363.3 216.3 74.3 142.0 23.8 19.1 19.1 −
                              15 1,957.2 363.3 217.4 75.6 141.8 23.2 20.0 20.0 −
                              22 2,006.1 363.3 218.1 75.9 142.2 24.6 20.3 20.3 −
                              29 2,000.5 363.3 217.7 75.9 141.8 23.9 21.8 21.8 −
         Aug                  5 2,004.3 363.3 216.5 75.9 140.6 25.5 23.1 23.1 −
 Deutsche Bundesbank
2009          Sep 3 577.7 3 74.9 3 41.9 16.3 3 25.6 3 21.6 0.3 0.3 −
         Oct 557.2 74.9 42.5 16.6 25.9 16.9 0.3 0.3 −
         Nov 551.7 74.9 41.0 15.9 25.1 13.0 0.3 0.3 −
         Dec 3 588.2 3 83.9 41.6 16.0 25.6 4.4 0.3 0.3 −
2010          Jan 571.8 83.9 41.7 16.0 25.7 − 0.3 0.3 −
         Feb 591.6 83.9 42.4 16.7 25.7 −−−−
         Mar 3 608.6 3 90.2 3 44.7 3 17.2 3 27.5 −−−−
         Apr 615.5 90.2 44.8 17.2 27.6 −−−−
         May 673.4 90.2 45.5 17.9 27.6 0.1 − − −
         June 3 713.7 3 110.7 3 49.9 3 19.0 3 30.9 0.2 − − −
         July 625.3 110.6 49.9 19.1 30.8 0.2 − − −
         Aug 624.7 110.6 49.8 19.0 30.7 0.0 − − −
         Sep 3 623.2 3 105.1 3 45.7 3 18.2 3 27.5 −−−−
         Oct 619.1 105.1 45.5 18.1 27.4 −−−−
         Nov 621.0 105.1 45.4 17.9 27.5 −−−−
         Dec 3 671.2 3 115.4 46.7 18.7 28.0 −−−−
2011          Jan 628.7 115.4 46.9 18.9 27.9 −−−−
         Feb 639.5 115.4 46.9 18.9 28.0 −−−−
         Mar 3 632.2 3 110.1 3 45.6 3 19.3 3 26.3 −−−−
         Apr 610.1 110.1 46.1 19.3 26.9 −−−−
         May 611.3 110.1 46.1 19.3 26.9 −−−−
         June 3 632.3 3 114.1 45.7 19.1 26.6 −−−−
         July 629.0 114.1 46.1 19.7 26.4 −−−−
 
*The consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem comprises the statements of the national central banks of the euro area member states
financial statement of the European Central Bank (ECB) and the financial (NCBs). The balance sheet items for foreign currency, securities, gold
16*III Consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2011
III Consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem
 
 
 
 
 
Lending to euro area credit institutions related to monetary policy operations Securities of euro area residents
denominated in euro in euro
 Other
 claims on
 euro area
Longer- Fine-  credit Securities General    On
Main re- term re- tuning Structural Credits institutions held for government    reporting
financing financing reverse reverse Marginal related denomi- monetary debt deno-    date/
opera- opera- opera- opera- lending to margin nated in policy Other minated in Other    End of
Total tions tions tions tions facility calls euro Total purposes securities euro assets    month  1 
Eurosystem 2
 
525.8 179.7 345.2 − − 0.9 0.0 33.0 450.6 130.1 320.6 35.0 281.8 2010 Dec                  3
547.6 197.3 349.7 − − 0.6 0.0 33.9 454.2 132.8 321.4 35.0 281.5                               10
538.8 187.8 349.7 − − 1.3 0.0 37.5 456.4 133.4 323.0 35.0 278.7                               17
513.1 193.5 298.2 20.6 − 0.8 0.0 42.0 459.6 134.5 325.1 35.0 276.9                               24
546.7 227.9 298.2 20.6 − 0.0 0.0 45.7 3 457.4 134.8 3 322.6 35.0 3 278.7                               31
494.0 195.7 298.2 − − 0.0 0.0 46.8 458.4 134.9 323.5 35.0 293.1 2011 Jan                  7
478.4 180.1 298.2 − − 0.0 0.0 45.0 461.5 137.2 324.3 35.0 296.7                               14
477.5 176.9 300.5 − − 0.1 0.0 49.3 463.0 137.2 325.8 35.0 296.0                               21
494.8 165.6 329.2 − − − 0.1 46.9 465.1 137.2 327.9 35.0 282.8                               28
542.9 213.7 329.2 − − 0.0 0.0 48.8 466.8 137.2 329.7 34.9 280.9          Feb                  4
477.7 156.7 320.3 − − 0.7 0.0 49.3 467.7 137.2 34.9 34.9 281.5                               11
471.5 137.0 320.3 − − 14.2 0.0 51.5 469.1 137.8 331.2 34.9 288.9                               18
458.4 119.5 321.8 − − 17.1 0.0 48.5 469.8 138.2 331.6 34.9 298.4                               25
447.0 124.4 321.8 − − 0.8 0.0 47.8 471.3 138.2 333.1 34.9 291.7          Mar                  4
454.2 111.3 342.9 − − 0.0 0.0 50.6 471.9 138.2 333.7 34.9 296.8                               11
443.5 100.5 342.9 − − 0.1 0.0 48.7 470.4 138.0 332.5 34.9 295.5                               18
435.7 89.4 342.9 − − 3.4 0.0 45.5 470.7 137.3 333.3 34.9 294.9                               25
424.0 100.4 322.9 − − 0.7 0.0 42.1 3 471.0 137.6 3 333.5 34.9 3 299.1 2011 Apr                  1
407.7 84.5 322.9 − − 0.2 0.0 44.6 471.6 137.5 334.1 35.1 296.5                                 8
418.4 94.1 324.0 − − 0.2 0.0 43.5 470.4 136.6 333.8 35.1 299.2                               15
421.5 97.4 324.0 − − 0.0 0.0 44.9 471.9 136.6 335.3 35.1 299.1                               22
434.3 117.9 316.3 − − 0.0 0.1 49.6 472.1 136.5 335.5 34.5 290.5                               29
444.0 127.5 316.3 − − 0.0 0.1 52.2 471.4 136.5 334.9 34.5 286.4          May                  6
438.2 124.8 313.3 − − 0.1 0.1 50.4 472.7 136.5 336.2 34.5 291.3                               13
432.7 119.4 313.3 − − 0.0 0.0 50.5 471.5 135.3 336.2 34.5 294.7                               20
437.5 116.1 321.3 − − 0.1 0.1 47.2 472.7 135.3 337.4 34.5 296.3                               27
432.1 110.8 321.3 − − − 0.1 40.3 477.9 135.3 342.6 34.5 301.8          June                  3
423.9 102.4 321.3 − − 0.0 0.1 36.6 477.9 135.2 342.7 34.5 304.8                               10
445.9 135.6 310.3 − − 0.0 0.1 39.2 476.6 134.2 342.4 34.5 304.7                               17
497.5 186.9 310.3 − − 0.2 0.1 41.0 478.8 134.1 344.7 34.5 307.6                               24
455.2 141.5 313.2 − − 0.5 0.0 45.2 485.0 134.4 3 350.7 34.0 3 302.2          July                  1
433.2 120.0 313.2 − − 0.0 0.1 45.8 486.2 134.4 351.9 33.9 297.9                                 8
465.2 153.6 311.5 − − 0.0 0.0 52.4 485.4 134.2 351.2 33.9 296.4                               15
508.6 197.1 311.5 − − − 0.0 57.3 484.5 133.8 350.6 33.9 295.5                               22
497.4 164.2 333.1 − − 0.0 0.1 59.2 484.4 133.7 350.6 33.9 298.8                               29
505.1 172.0 333.1 − − − 0.0 50.9 469.8 133.7 336.1 33.9 316.2          Aug                  5
 Deutsche Bundesbank
205.6 33.0 168.8 − − 3.8 − 6.8 10.6 5.3 5.3 4.4 211.6 2009          Sep 
212.9 35.1 177.7 − − 0.1 − 6.8 11.6 6.4 5.3 4.4 186.8          Oct 
206.0 35.3 170.6 − − 0.0 − 6.9 12.9 7.6 5.3 4.4 192.3          Nov 
223.6 53.6 170.0 − − 0.0 − 7.1 13.2 7.9 5.3 4.4 209.6          Dec 
210.3 41.7 168.5 − − 0.0 − 7.7 14.1 8.8 5.3 4.4 209.4 2010          Jan 
209.1 51.6 157.3 − − 0.1 − 7.2 15.6 10.3 5.3 4.4 228.9          Feb 
206.1 40.9 164.7 − − 0.6 − 7.3 17.0 11.8 5.3 4.4 239.0          Mar 
206.1 41.6 164.5 − − 0.0 − 7.8 18.1 12.9 5.3 4.4 244.2          Apr 
210.2 43.3 166.8 − − 0.1 − 8.4 28.4 23.1 5.3 4.4 286.3          May
225.6 58.6 167.0 − − 0.0 − 8.8 33.4 28.1 5.3 4.4 280.8          June
115.0 61.7 53.3 − − 0.0 − 9.3 33.7 28.4 5.3 4.4 302.3          July
103.8 52.9 50.3 − − 0.6 − 8.7 33.7 28.4 5.3 4.4 313.8          Aug 
85.3 56.4 24.0 4.1 − 0.8 − 8.9 33.9 28.6 5.3 4.4 3 339.9          Sep 
103.0 69.1 33.8 − − 0.2 − 10.6 34.0 28.7 5.3 4.4 316.5          Oct 
93.0 59.1 33.8 − − 0.0 − 9.1 34.7 29.5 5.3 4.4 329.3          Nov 
103.1 68.4 33.5 1.2 − − − 9.6 36.1 30.9 5.2 4.4 355.9          Dec 
82.5 37.8 44.4 − − 0.3 − 10.0 36.8 31.6 5.2 4.4 332.7 2011          Jan 
74.9 29.8 45.1 − − 0.0 − 10.0 37.1 31.8 5.2 4.4 350.9          Feb 
71.7 25.5 46.1 − − 0.1 − 9.6 37.2 31.9 5.2 4.4 353.5          Mar 
64.8 18.7 46.1 − − 0.0 − 8.3 37.0 31.9 5.1 4.4 339.3          Apr 
52.1 10.9 41.3 − − 0.0 − 7.7 36.8 31.7 5.1 4.4 353.9          May
57.8 21.8 35.9 − − 0.2 − 6.7 36.5 31.4 5.1 4.4 366.9          June
45.8 9.8 36.0 − − 0.0 − 8.1 36.4 31.3 5.1 4.4 374.0          July
 
and financial instruments are valued at market rates at the end of the quar- for the Bundesbank: end-of month financial statement. — 2Source: ECB. —
ter.— 1For the Eurosystem: financial statements for specific weekly dates; 3 Changes are due mainly to revalutions at the end of the quarter. 
17*III Consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
E U R O S Y S T E M
Monthly Report
August 2011
III Consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem
 
2 Liabilities *
 
 
€ billion
Liabilities to euro area credit institutions related to Liabilities to
monetary policy operations denominated in euro other euro area residents
denominated in euro
 
Other
Current liabilities
accounts to euro-
On (covering Fine- area credit
reporting the tuning Deposits institutions Debt
date/ Banknotes minimum Fixed- reverse deno- certifi- General related to
End of Total in circu- reserve Deposit term opera- margin minated cates govern- Other
month  1 liabilities lation  2 Total system) facility deposits tions calls in euro issued Total ment liabilities
 Eurosystem 4
 
2010 Dec                  3 1,924.1 824.5 337.9 185.8 84.9 67.0 − 0.2 10.1 − 99.5 91.8 7.7
                              10 1,951.7 828.5 361.4 268.1 24.1 69.0 − 0.2 3.7 − 104.5 96.6 7.9
                              17 1,945.2 833.8 379.2 266.7 40.3 72.0 − 0.2 2.1 − 78.2 70.4 7.8
                              24 1,926.2 842.3 334.7 206.1 55.4 72.5 − 0.7 2.5 − 87.7 79.7 7.9
                              31 5 2,004.4 839.7 378.0 212.7 104.5 60.8 − 0.0 2.8 − 79.8 71.7 8.1
2011 Jan                  7 1,965.9 834.8 332.5 176.9 81.0 73.5 − 1.2 2.3 − 89.3 81.6 7.8
                              14 1,957.1 827.8 327.5 145.9 107.2 74.0 − 0.5 2.9 − 88.2 80.4 7.8
                              21 1,961.1 823.1 313.3 209.1 27.5 76.5 − 0.2 3.0 − 112.1 103.9 8.2
                              28 1,965.6 821.4 312.9 211.9 24.4 76.5 − 0.1 4.3 − 120.0 112.1 7.9
         Feb                  4 2,015.6 823.0 379.1 239.3 71.4 68.2 − 0.1 9.5 − 95.8 88.1 7.8
                              11 1,956.1 821.7 332.4 238.8 17.0 76.5 − 0.1 2.9 − 90.2 82.4 7.8
                              18 1,958.5 819.5 333.2 222.1 34.5 76.5 − 0.1 2.8 − 91.2 83.5 7.8
                              25 1,952.3 819.6 314.1 212.3 24.7 77.0 − 0.1 2.8 − 105.7 97.9 7.8
         Mar                  4 1,939.2 824.9 303.7 182.7 43.2 77.5 − 0.4 3.6 − 99.3 91.6 7.7
                              11 1,953.0 824.4 327.1 234.1 15.3 77.5 − 0.3 3.1 − 91.7 84.0 7.7
                              18 1,940.4 823.9 321.0 222.4 20.2 77.5 − 1.0 3.9 − 85.0 77.1 7.9
                              25 1,928.1 822.2 303.3 206.3 19.4 77.5 − 0.1 4.2 − 90.9 83.0 7.9
2011 Apr                  1 5 1,888.5 826.0 308.4 205.8 26.1 76.5 − 0.1 5.0 − 73.0 64.9 8.0
                                8 1,873.1 828.5 296.2 188.6 30.5 77.0 − 0.1 5.2 − 68.4 60.6 7.8
                              15 1,885.0 830.9 309.6 222.4 10.0 77.0 − 0.1 5.1 − 65.6 57.8 7.8
                              22 1,887.9 837.6 293.7 204.5 13.1 76.0 − 0.1 5.3 − 74.6 66.8 7.9
                              29 1,894.1 834.4 286.5 187.7 27.3 71.4 − 0.1 5.1 − 92.2 84.4 7.8
         May                  6 1,901.9 834.7 331.5 215.0 54.2 62.2 − 0.1 4.9 − 53.7 46.1 7.6
                              13 1,898.7 833.3 331.8 243.7 12.1 76.0 − 0.1 4.5 − 50.8 43.2 7.6
                              20 1,895.9 832.0 311.0 217.2 17.8 76.0 − 0.1 5.8 − 65.4 57.8 7.6
                              27 1,900.6 834.1 307.2 212.8 19.4 75.0 − 0.0 5.5 − 72.6 65.0 7.6
         June                  3 1,899.0 842.7 287.1 191.7 20.4 75.0 − 0.0 6.6 − 80.7 73.1 7.6
                              10 1,892.6 843.5 282.8 197.4 10.4 75.0 − 0.0 5.4 − 78.4 70.7 7.8
                              17 1,914.5 842.7 318.5 238.1 5.4 75.0 − 0.0 2.5 − 67.1 59.6 7.5
                              24 1,972.2 843.4 340.6 253.4 13.2 74.0 − 0.0 2.8 − 101.4 93.7 7.7
         July                  1 5 1,944.6 849.2 316.9 216.2 24.9 74.0 − 1.8 5.1 − 79.5 71.8 7.7
                                8 1,919.5 851.8 297.4 157.6 65.7 74.0 − 0.1 6.0 − 72.5 64.8 7.7
                              15 1,957.2 853.4 327.6 242.4 10.3 74.0 − 1.0 4.4 − 74.9 67.0 7.8
                              22 2,006.1 853.0 357.9 250.5 32.2 74.0 − 1.2 4.4 − 87.3 79.4 7.8
                              29 2,000.5 855.7 332.9 208.3 49.9 74.0 − 0.8 5.2 − 97.4 89.5 8.0
         Aug                  5 2,004.3 857.6 369.8 159.8 134.8 74.0 − 1.2 6.5 − 62.5 54.0 8.4
 Deutsche Bundesbank
2009          Sep 5 577.7 191.5 109.7 76.1 33.6 − − − − − 24.0 23.6 0.4
         Oct 557.2 192.6 86.5 50.7 35.9 − − − − − 24.0 23.6 0.4
         Nov 551.7 193.7 87.0 59.0 28.0 − − − − − 16.0 15.6 0.4
         Dec 5 588.2 201.3 112.2 76.7 35.5 − − − − − 10.4 10.0 0.4
2010          Jan 571.8 195.6 106.3 60.9 45.4 − − − − − 4.1 3.7 0.4
         Feb 591.6 195.8 127.6 55.2 72.3 − − − − − 0.7 0.3 0.4
         Mar 5 608.6 199.0 135.7 82.3 53.4 − − − − − 0.6 0.2 0.4
         Apr 615.5 199.2 139.1 58.6 80.5 − − − − − 0.7 0.2 0.5
         May 673.4 201.0 193.0 52.8 123.9 16.2 − − − − 0.9 0.3 0.6
         June 5 713.7 202.7 208.8 108.6 82.9 17.3 − − − − 0.6 0.1 0.4
         July 625.3 204.8 115.9 61.8 34.7 19.4 − − − − 1.0 0.5 0.5
         Aug 624.7 203.2 115.3 62.4 29.8 23.1 − − − − 1.0 0.6 0.4
         Sep 5 623.2 203.0 121.3 64.9 28.2 28.2 − − − − 1.0 0.6 0.4
         Oct 619.1 203.5 114.4 62.1 20.8 31.4 − − − − 0.9 0.2 0.7
         Nov 621.0 203.9 116.9 54.8 23.7 38.4 − − − − 0.9 0.2 0.6
         Dec 5 671.2 209.6 146.4 71.4 38.5 36.5 − − − − 0.9 0.2 0.8
2011          Jan 628.7 204.5 109.4 50.5 16.6 42.3 − − − − 2.0 0.2 1.8
         Feb 639.5 204.2 120.7 58.2 13.0 49.5 − − − − 0.6 0.2 0.5
         Mar 5 632.2 205.2 119.9 63.9 17.1 38.9 − − − − 0.6 0.2 0.5
         Apr 610.1 207.8 95.9 47.9 11.7 36.3 − − − − 0.8 0.4 0.4
         May 611.3 208.6 95.0 54.3 7.7 32.9 − − − − 0.6 0.2 0.4
         June 5 632.3 210.9 108.5 63.3 8.7 36.5 − − − − 1.1 0.2 0.9
         July 629.0 213.1 100.3 52.5 13.2 34.6 − − − − 0.6 0.2 0.4
 
*The consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem comprises the the Bundesbank: end-of-month financial statements. — 2According to the
financial statement of the European Central Bank (ECB) and the financial accounting regime chosen by the Eurosystem on the issue of euro bank-
statements of the national central banks of the euro area member states notes, a share of 8% of the total value of the euro banknotes in circulation
(NCBs). The balance sheet items for foreign currency, securities, gold and is allocated to the ECB on a monthly basis. The counterpart of this
financial instruments are valued at market rates at the end of the quar- adjustment is disclosed as an “Intra-Eurosystem liability related to euro
ter. — 1For Eurosystem: financial statements for specific weekly dates; for
18*III Consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2011
III Consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem
 
 
 
 
 
Liabilities to non-euro area
residents denominated in
foreign currency
Intra-  
Eurosystem  
Liabilities Liabilities Liabilities Counterpart liability     On
to non-euro to euro area Deposits, arising of special related to     reporting
area residents residents balances from the drawing euro  Capital    date/
denominated in foreign and other rights allocated Other banknote Revaluation and    End of credit facility
in euro currency Total liabilities under ERM II by the IMF issue  2 accounts reserves    month  1 liabilities  3 
Eurosystem 4
 
43.8 1.8 11.6 11.6 − 53.7 166.2 − 296.7 78.2 2010 Dec                  3
43.6 1.1 13.7 13.7 − 53.7 166.6 − 296.7 78.2                               10
43.2 1.3 14.0 14.0 − 53.7 164.7 − 296.7 78.2                               17
44.7 1.7 14.4 14.4 − 53.7 169.7 − 296.7 78.2                               24
47.7 2.0 14.3 14.3 − 5 54.5 5 175.9 − 5 331.5 78.1                               31
43.6 2.2 14.7 14.7 − 54.6 181.9 − 331.5 78.5 2011 Jan                  7
46.7 2.4 14.7 14.7 − 54.6 182.3 − 331.5 78.5                               14
46.1 3.1 13.8 13.8 − 54.6 181.7 − 331.5 78.7                               21
44.6 2.9 14.7 14.7 − 54.6 180.0 − 331.5 78.7                               28
43.1 2.1 16.7 16.7 − 54.6 181.5 − 331.5 78.8          Feb                  4
43.5 2.4 16.7 16.7 − 54.6 181.0 − 331.5 79.2                               11
42.4 3.1 14.4 14.4 − 54.6 186.4 − 331.5 79.2                               18
44.3 2.3 14.4 14.4 − 54.6 183.4 − 331.5 79.4                               25
43.4 2.9 14.9 14.9 − 54.6 180.6 − 331.5 79.8          Mar                  4
42.4 2.4 16.3 16.3 − 54.6 179.6 − 331.5 79.8                               11
41.8 2.0 15.8 15.8 − 54.6 181.0 − 331.5 79.9                               18
43.3 1.6 15.1 15.1 − 54.6 181.2 − 331.5 80.1                               25
42.3 1.3 5 14.5 5 14.5 − 5 52.6 5 179.1 − 5 305.9 80.5 2011 Apr                  1
41.7 1.1 14.0 14.0 − 52.6 178.0 − 305.9 81.4                                 8
41.5 1.0 12.7 12.7 − 52.6 178.8 − 305.9 81.4                               15
42.3 1.0 13.0 13.0 − 52.6 180.4 − 305.9 81.4                               22
41.2 0.9 11.8 11.8 − 52.6 182.3 − 305.9 81.2                               29
40.2 1.9 11.9 11.9 − 52.6 183.2 − 305.9 81.2          May                  6
40.7 2.4 10.9 10.9 − 52.6 184.5 − 305.9 81.2                               13
40.4 2.4 11.3 11.3 − 52.6 187.9 − 305.9 81.2                               20
41.1 1.7 11.8 11.8 − 52.6 186.9 − 305.9 81.2                               27
40.0 2.4 11.3 11.3 − 52.6 188.5 − 305.9 81.2          June                  3
38.1 1.6 11.9 11.9 − 52.6 190.8 − 305.9 81.5                               10
40.6 0.9 12.0 12.0 − 52.6 190.3 − 305.9 81.5                               17
38.0 1.5 10.1 10.1 − 52.6 194.4 − 305.9 81.5                               24
36.3 0.9 9.6 9.6 − 52.2 5 196.8 − 5 316.7 81.5          July                  1
37.1 1.9 8.5 8.5 − 52.2 194.0 − 316.7 81.5                                 8
38.9 3.2 6.9 6.9 − 52.2 197.6 − 316.7 81.5                               15
40.4 3.4 8.9 8.9 − 52.2 200.4 − 316.7 81.5                               22
40.2 1.6 10.2 10.2 − 52.2 207.1 − 316.7 81.5                               29
39.1 1.5 10.6 10.6 − 52.2 206.4 − 316.7 81.5          Aug                  5
 Deutsche Bundesbank
8.6 0.0 0.1 0.1 − 13.0 5 13.2 144.9 5 67.6 5.0 2009          Sep 
8.5 0.0 0.5 0.5 − 13.0 12.9 146.5 67.6 5.0          Oct 
9.3 0.0 0.0 0.0 − 13.0 13.2 146.8 67.6 5.0          Nov 
9.1 0 .0−−− 13.1 13.5 146.8 5 76.8 5.0          Dec 
9.8 0.0 0.2 0.2 − 13.1 13.2 147.6 76.8 5.0 2010          Jan 
9.3 0.0 0.3 0.3 − 13.1 13.4 149.6 76.8 5.0          Feb 
9.3 0.0 0.1 0.1 − 13.6 10.3 150.2 5 84.8 5.0          Mar 
11.5 0.0 0.3 0.3 − 13.6 10.2 151.1 84.8 5.0          Apr 
12.8 0.0 0.2 0.2 − 13.6 10.4 151.7 84.8 5.0          May
11.0 0.0 0.2 0.2 − 5 14.5 5 11.3 150.9 5 108.8 5.0          June
11.2 0.0 0.3 0.3 − 14.5 12.5 151.2 108.8 5.0          July
10.5 0.0 0.5 0.5 − 14.5 12.8 153.2 108.8 5.0          Aug 
10.8 0.0 0.1 0.1 − 5 13.7 5 12.4 155.8 5 99.9 5.0          Sep 
12.6 0.0 0.1 0.1 − 13.7 12.3 156.7 99.9 5.0          Oct 
11.0 0.0 0.2 0.2 − 13.7 12.8 156.6 99.9 5.0          Nov 
14.5 0.0 0.2 0.2 − 14.0 13.1 157.1 5 110.5 5.0          Dec 
12.2 0.0 0.2 0.2 − 14.0 13.1 157.8 110.5 5.0 2011          Jan 
12.0 0.0 0.1 0.1 − 14.0 13.5 158.9 110.5 5.0          Feb 
13.4 0.0 0.2 0.2 − 13.5 11.7 159.5 5 103.3 5.0          Mar 
11.7 0.0 0.3 0.3 − 13.5 11.7 160.1 103.3 5.0          Apr 
11.3 0.0 0.3 0.3 − 13.5 12.1 161.6 103.3 5.0          May
10.5 0.0 0.1 0.1 − 13.3 12.7 163.1 5 107.0 5.0          June
11.9 0.0 0.1 0.1 − 13.3 12.7 164.9 107.0 5.0          July
 
banknote issue“. The remaining 92 % of the value of the euro banknote in the aforementioned accounting regime and the value of euro banknotes
circulation is also allocated to the NCBs on a monthly basis, and each NCB put into circulation is also disclosed as an “Intra-Eurosystem claim/ liability
shows in its balance sheet the share of the euro banknotes issued which related to banknote issue“. — 3For the Deutsche Bundesbank: including
corresponds to its paid-up share in the ECB’s capital. The difference DM banknotes still in circulation. — 4Source: ECB. — 5Changes are due
between the value of the euro banknotes allocated to the NCB according to mainly to revaluations at the end of the quarter. 
19*III Consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
E U R O S Y S T E M
Monthly Report
August 2011
IV Banks
 
1 Assets and liabilities of monetary financial institutions (excluding the Bundesbank) in Germany *
  Assets
 
 
€ billion
Lending to banks (MFIs) in the euro area Lending to non-banks (non-MFIs) in the
to banks in the home country to banks in other member states to non-banks in the home country
Enterprises and house-
holds
Secur- Secur-
Balance ities ities
sheet Cash issued issued
Period total  1 in hand Total Total Loans by banks Total Loans by banks Total Total Total Loans
 End of year or month
 
2002 6,394.2 17.9 2,118.0 1,769.1 1,164.3 604.9 348.9 271.7 77.2 3,340.2 3,092.2 2,505.8 2,240.8
2003 6,432.0 17.3 2,111.5 1,732.0 1,116.8 615.3 379.5 287.7 91.8 3,333.2 3,083.1 2,497.4 2,241.2
2004 6,617.4 15.1 2,174.3 1,750.2 1,122.9 627.3 424.2 306.3 117.9 3,358.7 3,083.4 2,479.7 2,223.8
2005 6,859.4 15.3 2,276.0 1,762.5 1,148.4 614.1 513.5 356.3 157.2 3,407.6 3,085.2 2,504.6 2,226.3
2006 7,154.4 16.4 2,314.4 1,718.6 1,138.6 580.0 595.8 376.8 219.0 3,462.1 3,085.5 2,536.1 2,241.9
2007 7,592.4 17.8 2,523.4 1,847.9 1,290.4 557.5 675.4 421.6 253.8 3,487.3 3,061.8 2,556.0 2,288.8
2008 7,892.7 17.8 2,681.8 1,990.2 1,404.3 585.8 691.6 452.9 238.8 3,638.2 3,163.0 2,686.9 2,357.3
2009 7,436.1 17.2 2,480.5 1,813.2 1,218.4 594.8 667.3 449.5 217.8 3,638.3 3,187.9 2,692.9 2,357.5
2010 8,304.7 16.5 2,361.6 1,787.8 1,276.9 510.9 573.9 372.8 201.0 3,724.5 3,302.9 2,669.1 2,354.7
2009          Sep 7,519.5 13.9 2,512.5 1,862.6 1,253.1 609.6 649.9 432.3 217.6 3,675.2 3,199.8 2,705.4 2,375.4
         Oct 7,498.4 14.2 2,496.7 1,824.6 1,219.2 605.4 672.2 456.2 216.0 3,673.1 3,202.2 2,692.0 2,365.5
         Nov 7,493.5 13.8 2,496.0 1,826.7 1,224.7 602.0 669.4 448.7 220.6 3,671.2 3,201.7 2,700.0 2,372.5
         Dec 7,436.1 17.2 2,480.5 1,813.2 1,218.4 594.8 667.3 449.5 217.8 3,638.3 3,187.9 2,692.9 2,357.5
2010          Jan 7,452.7 14.3 2,465.1 1,806.6 1,220.4 586.2 658.5 440.7 217.8 3,655.8 3,198.2 2,695.9 2,354.2
         Feb 7,449.5 14.2 2,491.6 1,830.8 1,250.2 580.5 660.8 444.5 216.3 3,645.2 3,184.7 2,682.5 2,350.8
         Mar 7,454.6 14.4 2,489.7 1,832.0 1,250.3 581.7 657.7 440.2 217.5 3,633.9 3,180.8 2,673.6 2,347.0
         Apr 7,570.0 14.0 2,507.1 1,843.7 1,263.9 579.8 663.5 448.2 215.3 3,688.9 3,222.8 2,711.0 2,360.2
         May 7,681.0 14.7 2,593.2 1,897.6 1,326.4 571.2 695.6 480.6 215.0 3,650.9 3,211.1 2,688.9 2,364.6
         June 7,641.3 14.2 2,583.7 1,899.5 1,341.3 558.2 684.2 464.9 219.3 3,664.0 3,228.2 2,685.0 2,368.0
         July 7,438.3 14.7 2,457.9 1,777.3 1,234.5 542.8 680.6 473.5 207.1 3,654.1 3,219.4 2,680.5 2,364.5
         Aug 7,517.6 14.5 2,489.7 1,792.7 1,252.0 540.6 697.1 488.6 208.4 3,667.0 3,229.6 2,688.4 2,373.2
         Sep 7,387.2 14.9 2,447.4 1,780.3 1,245.4 535.0 667.0 460.9 206.1 3,642.6 3,209.0 2,665.8 2,353.9
         Oct 7,397.5 15.2 2,353.9 1,759.6 1,246.2 513.4 594.3 389.3 205.0 3,758.9 3,327.9 2,675.0 2,360.5
         Nov 7,508.4 14.8 2,376.9 1,776.3 1,259.7 516.5 600.7 397.7 203.0 3,804.8 3,368.9 2,704.7 2,389.3
         Dec 8,304.7 16.5 2,361.6 1,787.8 1,276.9 510.9 573.9 372.8 201.0 3,724.5 3,302.9 2,669.1 2,354.7
2011          Jan 8,183.8 14.1 2,322.8 1,748.8 1,239.7 509.1 573.9 374.7 199.2 3,748.8 3,322.9 2,684.7 2,356.7
         Feb 8,142.3 14.5 2,332.2 1,751.5 1,243.1 508.4 580.6 380.6 200.1 3,745.3 3,322.0 2,697.7 2,377.4
         Mar 7,955.1 14.5 2,294.6 1,735.4 1,233.8 501.6 559.2 363.4 195.8 3,711.8 3,293.5 2,680.7 2,358.7
         Apr 7,997.9 15.6 2,270.7 1,702.2 1,203.3 498.8 568.6 371.7 196.9 3,736.5 3,307.8 2,703.7 2,360.9
         May 8,045.9 15.5 2,281.5 1,702.0 1,201.3 500.7 579.5 377.0 202.5 3,714.4 3,289.2 2,694.7 2,376.5
         June 7,886.9 15.2 2,268.6 1,696.4 1,206.0 490.5 572.1 372.2 199.9 3,690.6 3,269.4 2,681.2 2,374.9
 Changes 3
2003 90.7 − 0.6 − 12.2 − 44.1 − 42.6 − 1.5 31.9 18.8 13.1 30.0 23.6 22.8 26.4
2004 209.7 − 2.1 71.6 24.0 10.9 13.1 47.6 17.1 30.5 44.0 17.4 − 0.4 − 1.3
2005 191.4 0.1 96.5 10.3 22.8 − 12.5 86.2 48.1 38.0 59.7 14.1 37.1 15.5
2006 353.9 1.1 81.2 0.5 28.0 − 27.6 80.8 19.5 61.3 55.9 1.5 32.5 13.2
2007 515.3 1.5 215.6 135.5 156.2 − 20.8 80.1 44.1 36.0 54.1 − 1.0 38.6 53.2
2008 314.0 − 0.1 184.4 164.2 127.3 36.9 20.2 34.6 − 14.4 140.2 102.5 130.8 65.4
2009 −454.8 − 0.5 −189.5 −166.4 −182.1 15.8 − 23.2 − 2.5 − 20.7 17.3 38.2 16.9 6.5
2010 −135.1 − 0.7 − 90.6 3.0 58.3 − 55.3 − 93.6 − 78.5 − 15.1 77.5 107.1 − 13.7 0.6
2009          Oct − 16.3 0.3 − 15.2 − 37.5 − 33.4 − 4.2 22.4 24.1 − 1.7 − 0.1 3.5 − 12.4 − 8.6
         Nov 2.5 − 0.4 0.4 2.9 6.1 − 3.1 − 2.6 − 7.2 4.6 − 0.4 0.2 6.1 5.1
         Dec − 79.7 3.4 − 17.7 − 14.9 − 8.0 − 6.9 − 2.8 0.2 − 3.1 − 37.4 − 16.8 − 9.9 − 17.4
2010          Jan − 8.8 − 2.9 − 17.4 − 8.1 0.8 − 8.9 − 9.3 − 9.4 0.1 16.6 11.3 3.9 − 1.7
         Feb − 7.2 − 0.2 25.8 24.0 29.6 − 5.6 1.8 3.4 − 1.7 − 12.8 − 14.7 − 14.4 − 4.5
         Mar 4.9 0.3 0.5 2.6 − 0.3 2.9 − 2.1 − 4.4 2.3 − 2.5 1.2 − 4.5 − 3.2
         Apr 107.9 − 0.5 16.4 11.0 13.1 − 2.1 5.4 7.8 − 2.3 54.7 42.4 37.9 13.2
         May 63.7 0.7 80.8 50.4 59.5 − 9.1 30.4 31.0 − 0.6 − 45.6 − 15.4 − 25.6 1.1
         June − 50.5 − 0.6 − 11.2 0.7 13.8 − 13.1 − 11.9 − 16.1 4.2 11.1 15.6 − 5.3 2.0
         July −166.1 0.6 −118.1 −116.0 −101.0 − 15.0 − 2.1 9.9 − 11.9 − 3.2 − 4.5 − 0.5 0.4
         Aug 60.6 − 0.3 29.2 13.6 15.9 − 2.4 15.6 14.5 1.1 8.7 7.3 5.2 6.2
         Sep − 88.7 0.4 − 36.3 − 8.8 − 3.6 − 5.2 − 27.5 − 26.0 − 1.5 − 16.5 − 15.2 − 17.5 − 14.3
         Oct 20.7 0.4 − 72.6 − 0.9 1.7 − 2.6 − 71.7 − 70.7 − 0.9 100.9 102.9 11.7 9.2
         Nov 80.9 − 0.5 25.6 22.0 10.8 11.2 3.5 5.8 − 2.3 39.4 36.9 25.8 25.0
         Dec −152.6 1.7 − 13.1 12.6 18.1 − 5.5 − 25.6 − 24.0 − 1.6 − 73.2 − 60.5 − 30.3 − 32.8
2011          Jan −106.0 − 2.4 − 35.7 − 37.3 − 36.0 − 1.2 1.5 2.9 − 1.4 29.3 24.2 19.4 5.7
         Feb − 39.5 0.3 10.1 3.2 3.7 − 0.5 6.9 6.1 0.9 − 1.1 0.4 14.6 22.0
         Mar −167.6 0.0 − 31.8 − 10.8 − 8.2 − 2.6 − 20.9 − 16.2 − 4.8 − 29.7 − 25.8 − 14.5 − 16.4
         Apr 63.2 1.2 − 21.0 − 31.7 − 29.2 − 2.5 10.8 9.6 1.2 29.0 17.1 25.6 5.1
         May 27.3 − 0.1 7.4 − 1.9 − 3.5 1.6 9.3 3.9 5.4 − 25.8 − 21.2 − 11.3 13.1
         June −167.6 − 0.3 − 21.4 − 14.1 4.7 − 18.8 − 7.3 − 4.8 − 2.5 − 23.0 − 19.0 − 12.8 − 0.9
*This table serves to supplement the “Overall monetary survey“ in section data from money market funds. — 1See footnote 1 in Table IV.2. —
II. Unlike the other tables in section IV, this table includes − in addition to 2Including debt securities arising from the exchange of equalisation
the figures reported by banks (including building and loan associations) −
20*IV Banks

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2011
IV Banks
 
 
 
 
 
 
euro area Claims on
non-euro-area
to non-banks in other member states residents
 General Enterprises and General
 government households government
Secur- Secur- of which Secur- of which Other
ities Total Loans ities  2 Total Total Loans Total Loans ities Total Loans assets  1   Period
End of year or month
 
265.0 586.4 448.5 137.9 248.0 125.0 63.6 123.0 25.5 97.5 738.1 589.2 179.9 2002
256.2 585.6 439.6 146.1 250.2 133.5 62.7 116.6 25.9 90.7 806.4 645.6 163.6 2003
255.9 603.8 423.0 180.8 275.3 140.6 61.9 134.7 25.7 109.0 897.8 730.4 171.4 2004
278.2 580.7 408.7 171.9 322.4 169.1 65.0 153.3 30.7 122.6 993.8 796.8 166.7 2005
294.1 549.5 390.2 159.2 376.6 228.1 85.2 148.5 26.1 122.4 1,172.7 936.2 188.8 2006
267.3 505.8 360.7 145.0 425.5 294.6 124.9 130.9 26.0 104.9 1,339.5 1,026.9 224.4 2007
329.6 476.1 342.8 133.4 475.1 348.1 172.1 127.0 27.6 99.4 1,279.2 1,008.6 275.7 2008
335.4 495.0 335.1 160.0 450.4 322.2 162.9 128.2 23.5 104.7 1,062.6 821.1 237.5 2009
314.5 633.8 418.4 215.3 421.6 289.2 164.2 132.4 24.8 107.6 1,021.0 792.7 1,181.0 2010
330.0 494.3 340.0 154.3 475.4 349.0 172.6 126.4 23.6 102.8 1,069.0 822.5 248.8 2009          Sep 
326.5 510.2 351.7 158.5 470.9 341.3 166.5 129.6 23.7 105.9 1,063.7 822.7 250.7          Oct 
327.5 501.7 340.9 160.8 469.5 341.0 165.1 128.4 23.5 105.0 1,057.5 818.6 255.0          Nov 
335.4 495.0 335.1 160.0 450.4 322.2 162.9 128.2 23.5 104.7 1,062.6 821.1 237.5          Dec 
341.7 502.3 338.0 164.4 457.5 325.5 161.9 132.1 23.7 108.3 1,081.5 838.8 236.0 2010          Jan 
331.7 502.2 334.8 167.4 460.5 325.7 162.9 134.8 23.7 111.1 1,072.7 832.8 225.9          Feb 
326.6 507.3 335.5 171.8 453.1 319.6 162.7 133.5 22.3 111.2 1,073.9 833.9 242.6          Mar 
350.8 511.8 337.7 174.1 466.1 332.9 175.7 133.1 22.0 111.2 1,120.2 879.4 239.8          Apr 
324.3 522.2 343.8 178.4 439.8 307.7 175.0 132.1 26.4 105.7 1,167.0 923.7 255.2          May
317.0 543.2 349.1 194.1 435.8 303.1 172.8 132.7 24.2 108.5 1,111.1 865.0 268.4          June
316.0 538.9 344.7 194.2 434.7 299.9 173.2 134.8 23.9 110.9 1,048.9 810.6 262.7          July
315.2 541.2 344.9 196.3 437.4 303.0 173.4 134.4 23.8 110.5 1,073.1 834.1 273.3          Aug 
312.0 543.1 346.6 196.5 433.7 294.4 166.4 139.2 25.7 113.5 1,020.8 787.3 261.6          Sep 
314.6 652.9 350.9 302.0 431.0 289.7 162.6 141.3 25.8 115.5 1,011.3 781.3 258.2          Oct 
315.4 664.2 427.3 237.0 435.9 299.5 167.8 136.4 25.8 110.6 1,043.4 810.3 268.5          Nov 
314.5 633.8 418.4 215.3 421.6 289.2 164.2 132.4 24.8 107.6 1,021.0 792.7 1,181.0          Dec 
328.0 638.2 421.7 216.5 425.9 287.9 159.8 138.0 26.2 111.8 1,017.1 786.3 1,081.0 2011          Jan 
320.2 624.3 410.1 214.2 423.3 285.7 158.2 137.6 26.3 111.3 1,017.4 790.0 1,033.0          Feb 
322.1 612.8 399.4 213.4 418.3 282.2 157.2 136.2 26.4 109.7 978.6 748.1 955.6          Mar 
342.8 604.1 388.4 215.7 428.7 291.9 165.1 136.8 26.4 110.4 1,013.2 787.6 961.8          Apr 
318.2 594.5 377.9 216.6 425.2 288.0 161.4 137.2 26.2 111.0 1,028.3 796.9 1,006.2          May
306.3 588.3 374.7 213.6 421.1 287.2 161.2 133.9 25.9 108.0 984.4 753.6 928.1          June
Changes 3
− 3.6 0.8 − 8.7 9.6 6.4 13.1 2.6 − 6.8 − 0.8 − 6.0 115.4 97.7 − 42.0 2003
0.9 17.8 − 17.0 34.9 26.6 8.2 3.1 18.4 0.0 18.4 111.0 100.2 − 14.7 2004
21.7 − 23.0 − 14.3 − 8.6 45.5 27.4 2.2 18.2 4.6 13.5 57.2 31.3 − 22.2 2005
19.3 − 31.0 − 18.6 − 12.4 54.5 59.6 20.9 − 5.2 − 1.3 − 3.8 205.8 165.7 9.8 2006
− 14.6 − 39.6 − 29.3 − 10.3 55.1 73.7 41.5 − 18.6 0.0 − 18.6 223.0 136.7 21.1 2007
65.4 − 28.3 − 16.9 − 11.5 37.7 42.2 40.3 − 4.5 1.6 − 6.1 − 40.1 − 7.5 29.7 2008
10.5 21.3 − 5.1 26.4 − 20.9 − 20.9 − 7.1 0.0 − 3.9 3.9 −182.2 −162.2 − 99.8 2009
− 14.2 120.8 83.3 37.4 − 29.6 − 36.4 0.2 6.8 3.0 3.7 − 74.9 − 61.9 − 46.4 2010
− 3.8 15.9 11.7 4.2 − 3.6 − 6.8 − 5.5 3.2 0.0 3.1 − 1.8 3.2 0.5 2009          Oct 
1.0 − 5.9 − 8.2 2.3 − 0.6 0.5 − 0.9 − 1.1 − 0.1 − 0.9 − 0.7 0.9 3.6          Nov 
7.5 − 6.9 − 5.9 − 1.0 − 20.6 − 20.1 − 2.9 − 0.4 − 0.1 − 0.4 − 9.0 − 10.7 − 18.9          Dec 
5.6 7.3 2.8 4.5 5.3 1.5 − 1.0 3.8 0.2 3.6 6.1 6.4 − 11.2 2010          Jan 
− 10.0 − 0.2 − 3.2 3.0 1.8 − 0.9 0.3 2.7 − 0.0 2.7 − 17.3 − 13.8 − 2.7          Feb 
− 1.3 5.7 0.7 5.0 − 3.7 − 4.2 − 0.4 0.5 − 1.4 2.0 3.1 − 1.2 3.7          Mar 
24.7 4.5 2.2 2.3 12.3 12.7 12.7 − 0.4 − 0.4 0.0 40.7 40.7 − 3.4          Apr 
− 26.7 10.2 6.0 4.2 − 30.2 − 28.9 − 3.3 − 1.4 4.4 − 5.7 13.9 15.0 13.9          May
− 7.3 20.9 5.2 15.7 − 4.4 − 4.9 − 2.5 0.5 − 0.3 0.8 − 62.1 − 64.3 12.3          June
− 0.9 − 4.0 − 4.1 0.1 1.3 − 1.0 2.5 2.3 − 0.2 2.5 − 39.1 − 33.6 − 6.1          July
− 1.0 2.1 0.0 2.0 1.4 1.7 − 0.8 − 0.3 − 0.1 − 0.2 12.4 13.0 10.6          Aug 
− 3.1 2.2 1.9 0.4 − 1.3 − 6.6 − 4.5 5.3 2.0 3.3 − 24.0 − 21.2 − 12.3          Sep 
2.5 91.2 4.6 86.6 − 2.0 − 4.2 − 3.3 2.1 0.1 2.0 − 3.4 − 0.5 − 4.6          Oct 
0.7 11.1 76.1 − 65.0 2.6 7.7 3.2 − 5.1 − 0.1 − 5.0 7.5 6.7 8.9          Nov 
2.5 − 30.2 − 8.8 − 21.4 − 12.7 − 9.3 − 2.6 − 3.4 − 1.0 − 2.4 − 12.7 − 9.0 − 55.5          Dec 
13.7 4.8 3.5 1.3 5.1 − 0.4 − 3.6 5.5 1.4 4.0 5.2 2.4 −102.4 2011          Jan 
− 7.4 − 14.2 − 12.0 − 2.2 − 1.5 − 1.1 − 1.3 − 0.4 0.1 − 0.5 3.0 6.1 − 51.9          Feb 
1.9 − 11.3 − 10.5 − 0.8 − 3.9 − 2.6 − 0.1 − 1.3 0.2 − 1.5 − 27.9 − 32.3 − 78.2          Mar 
20.6 − 8.5 − 10.9 2.4 11.9 11.1 9.3 0.8 0.0 0.7 48.6 52.5 5.4          Apr 
− 24.4 − 9.9 − 10.7 0.8 − 4.6 − 5.0 − 4.6 0.4 − 0.3 0.6 1.7 − 2.9 44.1          May
− 11.9 − 6.2 − 3.1 − 3.1 − 4.0 − 0.6 − 0.2 − 3.4 − 0.3 − 3.1 − 43.9 − 43.4 − 79.0          June
claims. — 3Statistical breaks have been eliminated from the flow figures
(see also footnote * in Table II.1). 
21*IV Banks

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
E U R O S Y S T E M
Monthly Report
August 2011
IV Banks
 
1 Assets and liabilities of monetary financial institutions (excluding the Bundesbank) in Germany *
  Liabilities
 
€ billion
Deposits of banks (MFIs) Deposits of non-banks (non-MFIs) in the euro area
in the euro area
Deposits of non-banks in the home country Deposits of non-banks
With agreed At agreed
of banks maturities notice
Balance in the in other of which of which
sheet home member Over- up to up to Over-
Period total  1 Total country states Total Total night Total 2 years Total 3 months Total night
 End of year or month
 
2002 6,394.2 1,478.7 1,236.2 242.4 2,170.0 2,034.9 574.8 884.9 279.3 575.3 472.9 87.4 8.1
2003 6,432.0 1,471.0 1,229.4 241.6 2,214.6 2,086.9 622.1 874.5 248.0 590.3 500.8 81.8 9.3
2004 6,617.4 1,528.4 1,270.8 257.6 2,264.2 2,148.5 646.2 898.9 239.9 603.5 515.5 71.9 8.8
2005 6,859.4 1,569.6 1,300.8 268.8 2,329.1 2,225.4 715.8 906.2 233.4 603.4 519.1 62.2 9.6
2006 7,154.4 1,637.7 1,348.6 289.0 2,449.2 2,341.6 745.8 1,009.3 310.1 586.5 487.4 62.0 13.9
2007 7,592.4 1,778.6 1,479.0 299.6 2,633.6 2,518.3 769.6 1,193.3 477.9 555.4 446.0 75.1 19.6
2008 7,892.7 1,827.7 1,583.0 244.7 2,798.2 2,687.3 809.5 1,342.7 598.7 535.2 424.8 74.2 22.4
2009 7,436.1 1,589.7 1,355.6 234.0 2,818.0 2,731.3 997.8 1,139.1 356.4 594.4 474.4 63.9 17.7
2010 8,304.7 1,495.8 1,240.1 255.7 2,925.8 2,817.6 1,090.0 1,109.4 303.7 618.2 512.5 68.4 19.3
2009          Sep 7,519.5 1,603.4 1,381.3 222.1 2,806.8 2,706.2 953.3 1,177.9 398.2 575.1 457.4 76.2 26.5
         Oct 7,498.4 1,602.0 1,373.6 228.4 2,797.5 2,696.7 981.3 1,133.7 367.5 581.7 461.5 74.9 26.2
         Nov 7,493.5 1,599.1 1,375.7 223.4 2,823.6 2,724.5 1,005.5 1,133.4 353.0 585.6 464.5 73.0 25.9
         Dec 7,436.1 1,589.7 1,355.6 234.0 2,818.0 2,731.3 997.8 1,139.1 356.4 594.4 474.4 63.9 17.7
2010          Jan 7,452.7 1,596.8 1,348.9 247.9 2,826.3 2,736.7 1,025.2 1,113.9 330.5 597.6 479.2 66.6 20.1
         Feb 7,449.5 1,597.3 1,361.7 235.6 2,828.9 2,736.7 1,025.5 1,108.4 323.8 602.9 485.1 69.6 20.4
         Mar 7,454.6 1,566.6 1,328.7 237.9 2,815.8 2,725.0 1,009.4 1,110.9 325.3 604.7 486.8 69.7 21.9
         Apr 7,570.0 1,599.7 1,340.9 258.7 2,836.1 2,737.0 1,044.7 1,087.5 301.4 604.8 488.8 77.9 27.3
         May 7,681.0 1,629.3 1,356.0 273.3 2,840.9 2,749.1 1,063.1 1,081.1 299.5 605.0 490.8 69.1 21.9
         June 7,641.3 1,616.8 1,365.8 251.0 2,842.3 2,750.9 1,064.3 1,082.1 299.7 604.4 491.5 69.5 22.3
         July 7,438.3 1,515.4 1,244.1 271.3 2,840.1 2,745.2 1,061.3 1,078.1 297.4 605.9 495.1 71.8 24.2
         Aug 7,517.6 1,534.6 1,253.2 281.4 2,856.9 2,756.0 1,068.3 1,081.9 298.3 605.8 496.8 70.4 22.5
         Sep 7,387.2 1,482.4 1,218.3 264.1 2,850.5 2,758.9 1,069.7 1,083.1 300.6 606.1 499.4 69.7 20.9
         Oct 7,397.5 1,517.9 1,247.9 270.0 2,872.8 2,759.8 1,071.3 1,081.1 300.4 607.4 502.2 69.9 21.2
         Nov 7,508.4 1,513.5 1,245.8 267.7 2,924.8 2,802.1 1,093.6 1,098.6 295.5 609.9 504.2 76.3 25.7
         Dec 8,304.7 1,495.8 1,240.1 255.7 2,925.8 2,817.6 1,090.0 1,109.4 303.7 618.2 512.5 68.4 19.3
2011          Jan 8,183.8 1,489.1 1,221.1 268.0 2,937.6 2,823.6 1,099.8 1,103.4 299.7 620.4 515.1 69.0 22.7
         Feb 8,142.3 1,472.6 1,208.0 264.6 2,930.8 2,817.3 1,083.9 1,110.9 307.2 622.5 517.2 66.5 21.4
         Mar 7,955.1 1,454.6 1,191.7 262.9 2,928.3 2,820.7 1,085.9 1,111.3 308.8 623.5 518.0 68.7 22.1
         Apr 7,997.9 1,458.9 1,183.6 275.3 2,936.7 2,830.9 1,088.0 1,120.7 319.2 622.3 517.6 71.9 25.7
         May 8,045.9 1,422.2 1,163.9 258.3 2,950.7 2,841.8 1,090.4 1,131.5 330.2 619.9 515.3 71.3 25.1
         June 7,886.9 1,401.2 1,158.5 242.6 2,959.0 2,844.9 1,096.5 1,130.7 330.2 617.7 513.4 73.4 26.6
 Changes 4
2003 90.7 3.8 − 3.3 7.1 44.7 50.3 48.8 − 13.6 − 31.6 15.1 28.0 − 3.8 1.4
2004 209.7 62.3 42.8 19.6 53.5 64.9 26.3 25.5 − 8.3 13.1 14.7 − 9.3 − 0.4
2005 191.4 32.8 26.9 5.8 65.0 75.5 69.4 7.3 − 6.9 − 1.2 2.9 − 8.0 0.5
2006 353.9 105.6 81.5 24.1 122.9 118.6 30.4 105.0 77.1 − 16.8 − 31.7 0.5 4.4
2007 515.3 148.3 134.8 13.5 185.1 177.3 24.6 183.9 167.8 − 31.1 − 41.4 13.6 5.6
2008 314.0 65.8 121.5 − 55.8 162.4 173.1 38.8 154.6 123.5 − 20.2 − 21.2 − 7.4 − 0.1
2009 −454.8 −235.3 −224.5 − 10.8 31.9 43.9 205.0 −220.4 −259.3 59.3 50.3 − 9.6 − 4.1
2010 −135.1 − 75.5 − 99.6 24.0 72.4 59.8 92.2 − 56.5 − 55.7 24.0 38.3 − 4.4 2.1
2009          Oct − 16.3 − 1.0 − 7.3 6.3 4.3 3.8 28.1 − 31.0 − 30.6 6.6 4.2 − 1.0 − 0.3
         Nov 2.5 − 2.1 2.8 − 4.9 13.5 15.1 24.4 − 13.1 − 14.4 3.8 3.0 − 1.8 − 0.3
         Dec − 79.7 − 11.8 − 21.8 10.0 − 6.5 6.1 − 8.3 5.5 3.2 8.9 9.9 − 9.3 − 8.3
2010          Jan − 8.8 5.3 − 7.9 13.2 7.4 4.8 26.9 − 25.3 − 26.0 3.2 4.7 2.4 2.3
         Feb − 7.2 3.6 12.0 − 8.3 − 5.9 − 0.4 − 0.1 − 5.6 − 6.8 5.2 5.9 − 5.1 0.3
         Mar 4.9 − 15.7 − 17.8 2.1 − 13.3 − 11.8 − 16.1 2.4 1.5 1.8 1.8 0.1 1.4
         Apr 107.9 33.5 12.9 20.6 18.9 10.6 35.1 − 24.5 − 25.0 0.1 2.0 8.2 5.4
         May 63.7 25.0 11.9 13.0 2.9 10.7 17.3 − 6.8 − 2.1 0.2 2.0 − 9.4 − 5.6
         June − 50.5 − 14.0 8.7 − 22.7 0.8 1.5 1.6 0.5 − 0.3 − 0.6 0.6 0.2 0.3
         July −166.1 − 94.4 −116.0 21.6 − 0.8 − 4.6 − 2.2 − 3.8 − 2.2 1.5 3.6 2.6 2.0
         Aug 60.6 16.9 7.6 9.2 16.0 10.2 6.6 3.7 0.8 − 0.1 1.7 − 1.6 − 1.8
         Sep − 88.7 − 47.4 − 31.8 − 15.6 − 4.6 4.3 2.5 1.5 2.5 0.3 2.6 − 0.4 − 1.5
         Oct 20.7 36.7 30.4 6.3 22.5 1.0 1.8 − 2.2 − 0.1 1.3 2.7 0.3 0.4
         Nov 80.9 − 8.9 − 4.9 − 4.0 26.9 17.6 22.1 − 7.0 − 6.0 2.6 2.0 6.1 4.4
         Dec −152.6 − 16.1 − 4.6 − 11.5 1.6 15.9 − 3.2 10.6 8.0 8.5 8.6 − 7.8 − 5.6
2011          Jan −106.0 − 4.9 − 17.9 13.0 12.4 6.5 10.2 − 5.9 − 3.9 2.2 2.7 0.7 3.5
         Feb − 39.5 − 16.2 − 13.1 − 3.0 − 6.7 − 6.1 − 12.8 4.6 4.6 2.1 2.1 − 2.5 − 1.4
         Mar −167.6 − 16.1 − 15.2 − 0.9 − 1.8 4.0 2.5 0.6 1.7 1.0 0.8 2.4 0.8
         Apr 63.2 6.6 − 6.9 13.5 9.4 10.8 3.6 9.3 10.4 − 2.1 − 1.3 3.3 3.7
         May 27.3 − 39.2 − 21.2 − 18.1 13.1 10.1 1.9 10.7 10.8 − 2.4 − 2.3 − 0.7 − 0.7
         June −167.6 − 21.1 − 5.4 − 15.7 8.3 3.2 6.1 − 0.8 − 0.0 − 2.1 − 1.9 2.1 1.5
*This table serves to supplement the “Overall monetary survey“ in section data from money market funds. — 1See footnote 1 in Table IV.2. —
II. Unlike the other tables in section IV, this table includes − in addition to 2Excluding deposits of central governments. — 3In Germany, debt
the figures reported by banks (including building and loan associations) −
22*IV Banks

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2011
IV Banks
 
 
 
 
 
 Debt securities
issued  3 
in other member states  2 Deposits of
central governments
With agreed At agreed Liabilities
maturities notice arising
of which from Money of which Liabilities
domestic market with to non- repos with
of which of which central non-banks fund euro- Capital maturities
up to up to govern- in the shares of up to area and Other
Total 2 years Total 3 months Total ments euro area issued  3 Total reserves   Period 2 years  3 residents Liabilities  1 
End of year or month
 
74.6 9.9 4.7 3.6 47.7 45.6 3.3 36.7 1,468.2 71.6 599.2 343.0 309.8 2002
68.6 11.4 3.9 3.1 45.9 44.2 14.1 36.7 1,486.9 131.3 567.8 340.2 300.8 2003
59.8 9.8 3.3 2.7 43.8 41.4 14.8 31.5 1,554.8 116.9 577.1 329.3 317.2 2004
50.2 9.8 2.4 2.0 41.6 38.8 19.5 31.7 1,611.9 113.8 626.2 346.8 324.5 2005
45.9 9.3 2.3 1.9 45.5 41.9 17.1 32.0 1,636.7 136.4 638.5 389.6 353.7 2006
53.2 22.0 2.3 1.8 40.1 38.3 26.6 28.6 1,637.6 182.3 661.0 428.2 398.2 2007
49.5 24.9 2.4 1.8 36.6 34.8 61.1 16.4 1,609.9 233.3 666.3 461.7 451.5 2008
43.7 17.0 2.5 2.0 22.8 22.2 80.5 11.4 1,500.5 146.3 565.6 454.8 415.6 2009
46.4 16.1 2.8 2.2 39.8 38.7 86.7 9.8 1,407.8 82.3 636.0 452.8 1,289.9 2010
47.1 19.2 2.5 1.9 24.4 22.7 83.7 12.4 1,543.3 171.9 599.7 442.8 427.3 2009          Sep 
46.2 18.8 2.5 1.9 25.9 23.2 83.3 12.3 1,530.6 161.7 591.4 439.4 442.0          Oct 
44.6 16.3 2.5 1.9 26.1 24.2 81.0 12.0 1,518.8 158.0 589.4 440.6 429.1          Nov 
43.7 17.0 2.5 2.0 22.8 22.2 80.5 11.4 1,500.5 146.3 565.6 454.8 415.6          Dec 
44.0 15.5 2.5 2.0 23.0 21.3 68.2 12.2 1,503.2 142.7 598.0 441.8 406.3 2010          Jan 
46.6 15.1 2.5 2.0 22.6 20.7 78.9 12.0 1,496.5 140.1 608.5 441.6 385.9          Feb 
45.2 13.6 2.6 2.0 21.1 20.4 79.8 11.6 1,503.2 138.0 622.6 445.8 409.3          Mar 
48.0 16.8 2.6 2.0 21.2 19.8 100.7 11.3 1,501.9 132.1 672.6 448.0 399.8          Apr 
44.5 13.9 2.6 2.1 22.7 20.6 101.4 11.3 1,503.4 127.7 738.4 447.0 409.4          May
44.6 14.1 2.7 2.1 21.9 20.8 102.7 11.0 1,487.2 111.3 705.4 443.4 432.6          June
44.9 13.1 2.7 2.1 23.0 19.6 92.2 10.7 1,448.5 106.8 686.7 439.9 404.9          July
45.3 13.9 2.7 2.1 30.4 20.4 104.0 10.3 1,457.6 111.1 701.7 438.1 414.3          Aug 
46.2 14.8 2.7 2.1 21.9 20.7 95.9 10.2 1,440.3 108.5 667.1 433.6 407.3          Sep 
46.0 14.6 2.7 2.1 43.1 34.1 85.0 9.8 1,407.4 87.7 657.4 440.1 407.1          Oct 
47.8 15.5 2.7 2.2 46.3 41.3 109.0 9.8 1,423.6 87.7 674.0 452.8 401.0          Nov 
46.4 16.1 2.8 2.2 39.8 38.7 86.7 9.8 1,407.8 82.3 636.0 452.8 1,289.9          Dec 
43.5 13.7 2.8 2.2 45.0 37.1 74.5 9.9 1,400.8 80.6 631.5 454.3 1,186.1 2011          Jan 
42.3 14.3 2.8 2.2 47.0 37.8 93.2 9.8 1,396.0 83.0 634.1 460.2 1,145.7          Feb 
43.8 16.3 2.9 2.3 38.9 36.2 78.9 10.0 1,373.4 78.2 575.5 460.7 1,073.7          Mar 
43.3 16.0 2.9 2.3 34.0 33.8 89.2 9.7 1,364.1 76.2 605.0 456.8 1,077.5          Apr 
43.3 16.2 2.9 2.3 37.6 34.8 105.2 9.5 1,368.4 77.2 605.4 460.7 1,123.8          May
43.9 15.8 2.9 2.3 40.6 38.3 104.8 9.4 1,358.8 72.9 556.6 450.8 1,046.4          June
Changes 4
− 4.4 2.0 − 0.8 − 0.4 − 1.8 − 1.4 10.7 − 0.5 49.6 − 2.2 4.9 − 3.3 − 19.4 2003
− 8.3 − 1.4 − 0.6 − 0.4 − 2.1 − 2.8 0.8 − 5.2 73.2 − 14.8 21.7 − 10.5 14.0 2004
− 7.7 − 0.4 − 0.9 − 0.7 − 2.5 − 3.0 4.7 0.2 39.1 − 9.5 22.0 14.4 13.3 2005
− 3.9 − 0.3 − 0.1 − 0.2 3.9 3.1 − 3.3 0.3 34.4 21.7 32.4 27.9 33.7 2006
8.0 13.0 0.0 − 0.1 − 5.8 − 4.3 8.1 − 3.4 20.3 48.7 48.8 42.9 65.1 2007
− 7.4 0.7 0.1 − 0.0 − 3.3 − 3.2 36.1 − 12.2 − 33.8 50.4 − 0.0 39.2 56.6 2008
− 5.6 − 7.6 0.1 0.2 − 2.4 − 0.8 19.4 − 5.0 −104.9 − 87.3 − 95.5 − 0.1 − 65.2 2009
− 6.8 − 5.8 0.3 0.3 17.0 16.5 6.2 − 1.6 −105.8 − 62.4 54.3 − 8.0 − 76.9 2010
− 0.7 − 0.1 0.0 0.0 1.5 0.5 − 0.4 − 0.1 − 11.0 − 10.2 − 7.1 − 3.1 2.1 2009          Oct 
− 1.5 − 2.4 − 0.0 0.0 0.2 0.9 − 2.3 − 0.2 − 10.1 − 3.7 0.8 1.5 1.4          Nov 
− 1.1 0.6 0.0 0.0 − 3.3 − 1.9 − 0.5 − 0.6 − 24.6 − 11.8 − 31.4 12.8 − 17.1          Dec 
0.1 − 1.6 0.0 0.0 0.2 − 0.9 − 12.3 0.8 − 4.4 − 3.5 26.4 − 14.7 − 17.2 2010          Jan 
− 5.5 − 4.8 0.0 0.0 − 0.4 − 0.6 10.7 − 0.1 − 11.0 − 2.7 6.2 − 1.2 − 9.5          Feb 
− 1.4 − 1.5 0.0 0.0 − 1.5 − 0.4 1.0 − 0.4 6.0 − 2.0 13.0 4.0 10.3          Mar 
2.7 3.1 0.0 0.0 0.1 − 0.5 20.8 − 0.3 − 4.0 − 6.0 47.5 1.6 − 10.1          Apr 
− 3.8 − 3.2 0.0 0.0 1.5 0.8 0.7 − 0.0 − 16.1 − 4.5 49.5 − 5.2 7.0          May
− 0.1 0.0 0.0 0.0 − 0.9 0.2 1.2 − 0.3 − 20.7 − 16.4 − 35.6 − 4.7 22.7          June
0.6 − 0.8 0.0 0.0 1.1 − 1.2 − 10.4 − 0.2 − 26.3 − 4.4 − 6.6 − 0.9 − 26.4          July
0.2 0.6 0.0 0.0 7.4 0.7 11.7 − 0.4 1.5 4.2 8.9 − 3.3 9.3          Aug 
1.2 1.1 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 8.6 0.3 − 8.0 − 0.1 − 0.8 − 2.3 − 19.4 − 1.4 − 6.9          Sep 
− 0.1 − 0.1 0.0 0.0 21.3 13.4 − 10.8 − 0.4 − 29.8 − 20.7 − 6.5 7.1 1.9          Oct 
1.6 0.8 0.0 0.0 3.2 7.1 23.9 − 0.0 10.7 1.2 3.9 9.9 14.6          Nov 
− 2.2 0.6 0.1 0.1 − 6.5 − 2.5 − 22.2 0.1 − 11.1 − 5.3 − 33.1 0.8 − 72.7          Dec 
− 2.8 − 2.3 0.0 0.0 5.2 − 1.6 − 12.2 0.0 − 1.2 − 1.6 0.2 2.9 −103.1 2011          Jan 
− 1.1 0.6 0.0 0.0 1.9 0.7 18.8 − 0.1 − 1.6 2.4 4.1 6.2 − 44.1          Feb 
1.6 2.1 0.0 0.0 − 8.1 − 1.6 − 14.3 0.2 − 12.4 − 3.7 − 53.4 2.3 − 72.1          Mar 
− 0.4 − 0.2 0.0 0.0 − 4.7 − 2.3 10.4 − 0.3 − 1.5 − 1.9 36.7 − 2.3 4.2          Apr 
− 0.0 0.1 0.0 0.0 3.6 1.0 15.9 − 0.2 − 3.3 1.0 − 5.8 2.4 44.6          May
0.6 − 0.4 0.0 0.0 3.0 3.5 − 0.3 − 0.1 − 18.3 − 5.2 − 48.8 − 9.8 − 77.5          June
securities with maturities of up to one year are classed as money market together with money market fund shares. — 4Statistical breaks have been
paper; up to the January 2002 Monthly Report they were published eliminated from the flow figures (see also footnote * in Table II.1). 
23*IV Banks

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
E U R O S Y S T E M
Monthly Report
August 2011
IV Banks
 
2 Principal assets and liabilities of banks (MFIs) in Germany, by category of banks *
 
 
€ billion
  Lending to banks (MFIs)  Lending to non-banks (non-MFIs)
 
 of which of which
 
Loans
 Cash in
 hand and
 credit
Number of balances for
reporting Balance with Balances up to and for Partici- Securities Securities
End of institu- sheet central and issued by including more than issued by pating Other
month tions total  1 banks Total loans banks Total 1 year 1 year Bills non-banks interests assets  1 
All categories of banks
 
2011          Jan 1,921 8,233.0 68.1 2,824.2 2,072.7 740.9 4,016.0 524.9 2,710.6 0.9 736.5 149.4 1,175.2
         Feb 1,921 8,191.6 76.2 2,826.1 2,073.8 740.8 4,013.6 534.4 2,712.6 0.9 723.4 148.3 1,127.6
         Mar 1,921 8,003.0 81.5 2,755.4 2,012.7 732.9 3,969.0 500.4 2,703.7 0.8 725.9 148.5 1,048.6
         Apr 1,922 8,045.9 64.8 2,781.5 2,043.0 728.6 3,996.7 513.3 2,695.1 0.8 746.8 148.4 1,054.5
         May 1,923 8,094.0 71.9 2,785.4 2,038.2 735.5 3,988.8 513.6 2,706.3 0.7 727.0 146.9 1,101.0
         June 1,923 7,933.8 81.9 2,729.4 1,995.8 722.6 3,956.3 504.0 2,699.0 0.7 715.8 144.4 1,021.8
Commercial banks 6
2011          May 285 2,931.4 28.3 942.9 830.2 110.4 1,099.4 252.1 625.0 0.3 193.7 74.4 786.3
         June 286 2,809.9 40.7 906.6 798.9 105.3 1,072.2 237.3 622.9 0.3 187.2 73.8 716.5
   Big banks 7
2011          May 4 1,977.0 14.7 584.2 520.2 62.2 553.5 163.0 253.6 0.2 109.1 67.0 757.5
         June 4 1,858.3 26.2 545.8 485.2 58.6 531.3 150.6 252.2 0.2 104.3 66.4 688.6
   Regional banks and other commercial banks
2011          May 169 745.4 11.7 227.1 179.9 46.8 475.6 66.1 327.4 0.1 81.4 6.5 24.5
         June 169 743.7 12.4 229.8 183.9 45.5 471.4 63.8 327.4 0.1 79.6 6.5 23.5
   Branches of foreign banks
2011          May 112 209.0 2.0 131.6 130.2 1.5 70.3 23.0 43.9 0.0 3.3 0.9 4.3
         June 113 207.8 2.1 131.0 129.8 1.2 69.5 22.8 43.4 0.0 3.2 0.9 4.4
Landesbanken
2011          May 10 1,381.1 4.7 528.3 387.1 135.8 658.3 100.2 413.6 0.1 136.2 19.6 170.1
         June 10 1,362.5 7.9 517.9 379.7 133.4 654.3 101.4 411.0 0.1 133.8 17.6 164.9
Savings banks
2011          May 429 1,073.0 21.6 245.0 85.7 157.9 771.6 59.3 606.5 0.2 105.6 17.3 17.4
         June 428 1,068.5 17.7 241.7 85.4 154.9 774.3 62.1 606.7 0.2 105.4 17.4 17.4
 
Regional institutions of credit cooperatives  
 
2011          May 2 264.8 1.0 157.5 120.2 37.3 60.2 13.4 19.1 0.0 26.9 14.8 31.2
         June 2 264.9 0.4 159.6 122.1 37.5 60.8 13.6 19.0 0.0 27.3 14.9 29.1
Credit cooperatives
2011          May 1,138 707.2 15.0 185.4 68.1 115.9 477.3 31.6 380.1 0.1 65.5 11.6 18.0
         June 1,138 706.1 13.6 182.8 66.6 114.9 480.1 33.3 381.2 0.1 65.5 11.6 18.1
Mortgage banks
2011          May 18 640.2 0.7 170.4 93.8 76.4 448.8 29.0 317.6 − 99.6 1.2 19.1
         June 18 630.7 0.4 169.5 93.4 76.1 440.7 26.7 314.0 − 97.8 1.2 18.8
Building and loan associations
2011          May 23 197.4 0.1 59.6 41.4 18.1 129.5 1.6 113.2 . 14.7 0.4 7.8
         June 23 197.5 0.1 59.4 41.6 17.7 129.7 1.6 113.7 . 14.4 0.4 7.9
Special purpose banks
2011          May 18 898.9 0.4 496.2 411.6 83.6 343.6 26.4 231.3 − 84.7 7.6 51.1
         June 18 893.7 1.0 492.0 408.2 82.8 344.1 28.1 230.4 − 84.5 7.6 49.1
Memo item: Foreign banks 8
2011          May 153 882.1 10.9 332.8 277.6 53.5 433.3 67.1 269.3 0.1 93.2 6.2 98.9
         June 154 884.2 12.2 337.5 284.2 51.7 432.7 71.0 268.7 0.1 89.8 6.1 95.7
  of which:  Banks majority-owned by foreign banks 9
2011          May 41 673.1 9.0 201.2 147.5 52.1 363.1 44.2 225.4 0.1 90.0 5.2 94.6
         June 41 676.4 10.2 206.5 154.4 50.5 363.1 48.2 225.3 0.1 86.5 5.2 91.3
*For the period up to December 1998, section IV (except for Table IV.1) of 25 May 2009, derivative financial instruments in the trading portfolio
shows the assets and liabilities of banks (excluding building and loan (trading portfolio derivatives) within the meaning of section 340e (3)
associations) in Germany; from January 1999, the assets and liabilities of sentence 1 of the German Commercial Code (Handelsgesetzbuch) read in
monetary financial institutions (MFIs) in Germany. The assets and liabilities conjunction with section 35 (1) No 1a of the Credit Institution Accounting
of foreign branches, of money market funds (which are also classified as Regulation (Verordnung über die Rechnungslegung der Kreditinstitute) are
MFIs) and of the Bundesbank are not included. For the definitions of the classified under "Other assets and liabilities" as of the December 2010
respective items, see the footnotes to Table IV.3. — 1Owing to the Act reporting date. Trading portfolio derivatives are listed separately in the
Modernising Accounting Law (Gesetz zur Modernisierung des Bilanzrechts) Statistical Supplement to the Monthly Report 1, Banking statistics in Tables
24*IV Banks

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2011
IV Banks
 
 
 
 
 
Deposits of banks (MFIs) Deposits of non-banks (non-MFIs) Capital
 including  
of which of which published
reserves,
Time deposits  2 Savings deposits  4 partici-
pation
Memo rights
item Bearer capital,
for for of which debt Liabilities funds for
up to and more arising At three Bank general Other securities
Sight Time Sight including than from savings out- banking liabi-   End of months’
Total deposits deposits Total deposits 1 year 1 year  2 repos  3 Total notice bonds risks lities  1   month standing  5 
All categories of banks
 
1,959.4 432.0 1,527.5 3,173.5 1,236.5 366.8 826.3 130.8 630.4 522.9 113.6 1,469.4 385.0 1,245.7 2011          Jan 
1,943.7 418.1 1,525.6 3,187.3 1,231.7 384.9 823.7 160.4 632.5 525.0 114.5 1,468.0 387.4 1,205.3          Feb 
1,887.2 380.5 1,506.7 3,150.3 1,202.4 378.5 821.2 128.6 633.5 525.8 114.6 1,442.8 390.6 1,132.1          Mar 
1,909.1 397.8 1,511.3 3,181.0 1,232.8 383.4 816.6 151.7 632.4 525.5 115.7 1,428.0 392.2 1,135.6          Apr 
1,871.7 393.2 1,478.4 3,212.1 1,235.5 412.6 816.2 168.7 630.0 523.2 117.8 1,436.0 392.4 1,181.9          May
1,811.6 373.3 1,438.3 3,210.1 1,226.1 422.3 815.1 161.3 627.8 521.2 118.9 1,417.7 391.2 1,103.2          June
Commercial banks 6
736.2 270.6 465.6 1,099.5 571.1 176.5 195.1 93.3 127.4 99.8 29.5 197.8 132.1 765.8 2011          May
690.3 244.1 446.2 1,100.1 558.4 190.0 196.1 93.6 125.6 98.1 29.9 196.1 129.8 693.6          June
Big banks 7
464.2 205.0 259.1 549.3 276.7 98.7 88.8 87.3 75.1 70.9 10.1 160.6 82.5 720.4 2011          May
422.7 183.2 239.6 548.1 261.4 114.6 87.9 89.2 74.1 69.9 10.0 159.0 80.1 648.4          June
Regional banks and other commercial banks
139.4 36.5 102.9 489.1 259.9 68.1 90.3 6.0 52.3 28.9 18.5 37.2 42.2 37.5 2011          May
139.0 35.5 103.5 488.0 259.2 66.8 91.5 4.4 51.5 28.2 18.9 37.1 42.1 37.4          June
Branches of foreign banks
132.7 29.1 103.6 61.1 34.6 9.7 15.9 − 0.0 0.0 0.9 − 7.4 7.9 2011          May
128.5 25.4 103.1 64.0 37.8 8.6 16.7 − 0.0 0.0 0.9 − 7.5 7.8          June
Landesbanken
366.7 54.1 312.6 383.8 87.1 111.4 169.8 65.8 14.2 10.9 1.3 376.4 65.8 188.4 2011          May
359.3 58.3 301.0 386.0 92.7 109.3 168.6 58.6 14.1 10.8 1.3 369.4 64.7 183.1          June
Savings banks
180.9 15.9 165.0 751.5 325.9 45.2 15.6 − 300.7 249.0 64.1 23.2 62.2 55.2 2011          May
177.9 14.2 163.7 748.5 322.8 45.2 15.5 − 300.3 248.6 64.6 22.9 63.4 55.8          June
 
Regional institutions of credit cooperatives
 
126.7 28.2 98.5 35.8 9.1 11.1 13.4 3.2 − − 2.3 58.9 13.0 30.3 2011          May
131.5 32.6 98.9 35.4 10.2 9.4 13.5 2.7 − − 2.3 56.5 13.0 28.5          June
Credit cooperatives
100.3 4.9 95.4 508.7 224.6 47.4 30.0 − 187.0 162.8 19.7 21.6 43.5 33.2 2011          May
98.8 4.8 94.1 508.2 223.5 47.8 30.1 − 187.1 163.0 19.8 21.4 44.1 33.6          June
Mortgage banks
172.8 4.6 168.1 198.6 8.6 12.6 177.1 3.2 0.3 0.3 − 224.6 19.2 25.0 2011          May
169.3 5.7 163.6 196.7 8.6 12.2 175.6 2.9 0.3 0.3 − 221.5 19.4 23.7          June
Building and loan associations
27.3 1.7 25.5 139.3 0.4 0.9 136.7 − 0.4 0.4 1.0 5.6 8.1 17.2 2011          May
26.8 1.9 24.8 139.6 0.4 0.9 137.0 − 0.4 0.4 1.0 5.6 8.3 17.3          June
Special purpose banks
160.8 13.1 147.7 94.8 8.7 7.6 78.5 3.2 − − − 528.0 48.5 66.9 2011          May
157.7 11.7 146.0 95.5 9.4 7.4 78.7 3.5 − − − 524.4 48.5 67.6          June
Memo item:   Foreign banks 8
249.8 73.6 176.3 409.7 213.4 72.3 90.1 23.7 20.0 19.8 14.0 66.6 44.4 111.6 2011          May
248.5 72.3 176.3 416.1 219.2 72.4 90.2 26.5 19.9 19.7 14.4 67.3 44.8 107.5          June
of which:   Banks majority-owned by foreign banks 9
117.2 44.4 72.7 348.6 178.8 62.6 74.2 23.7 20.0 19.8 13.1 66.6 37.0 103.7 2011          May
120.0 46.9 73.1 352.1 181.4 63.8 73.5 26.5 19.9 19.7 13.5 67.3 37.3 99.8          June
I.1 to I.3. — 2For building and loan associations: Including deposits under AG, Dresdner Bank AG (up to Nov. 2009), Commerzbank AG, UniCredit Bank
savings and loan contracts (see Table IV.12). — 3Included in time AG (formerly Bayerische Hypo- und Vereinsbank AG) and Deutsche Postbank
deposits. — 4Excluding deposits under savings and loan contracts (see also AG. — 8Sum of the banks majority-owned by foreign banks and included in
footnote 2). — 5Including subordinated negotiable bearer debt securities; other categories of banks and the category ”Branches (with dependent
excluding non-negotiable bearer debt securities. — 6Commercial banks legal status) of foreign banks”. — 9Separate presentation of the banks
comprise the sub-groups ”Big banks”, ”Regional banks and other majority-owned by foreign banks included in other banking categories. 
commercial banks” and ”Branches of foreign banks”. — 7Deutsche Bank
25*IV Banks

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
E U R O S Y S T E M
Monthly Report
August 2011
IV Banks
 
3 Assets and liabilities of banks (MFIs) in Germany vis-à-vis residents *
 
€ billion
Lending to domestic banks (MFIs)  2,3 Lending to domestic non-banks (non-MFIs)  3,6 
Treasury
Cash in Negotiable bills and
hand Credit money negotiable
balances market Memo money mar- (euro-area Securities
banknotes with the Credit paper item ket paper issued Securities
and Bundes- balances issued by issued by Fiduciary issued by by non-
Period coins)  1 bank Total and loans Bills  4 banks banks loans  5 Total Loans Bills  4 non-banks banks  7 
End of year or month *
 
2001 14.2 56.3 1,676.0 1,078.9 0.0 5.6 591.5 2.8 3,014.1 2,699.4 4.8 4.4 301.5
2002 17.5 45.6 1,691.3 1,112.3 0.0 7.8 571.2 2.7 2,997.2 2,685.0 4.1 3.3 301.9
2003 17.0 46.7 1,643.9 1,064.0 0.0 8.8 571.0 2.3 2,995.6 2,677.0 3.7 3.4 309.6
2004 14.9 41.2 1,676.3 1,075.8 0.0 7.4 592.9 2.1 3,001.3 2,644.0 2.7 2.6 351.0
2005 15.1 47.9 1,684.5 1,096.8 0.0 6.7 580.9 2.1 2,995.1 2,632.7 2.4 2.4 357.6
2006 16.0 49.4 1,637.8 1,086.3 − 9.3 542.2 1.9 3,000.7 2,630.3 1.9 2.0 366.5
2007 17.5 64.6 1,751.8 1,222.5 0.0 25.3 504.0 2.3 2,975.7 2,647.9 1.6 1.5 324.7
2008 17.4 102.6 1,861.7 1,298.1 0.0 55.7 507.8 2.0 3,071.1 2,698.9 1.2 3.1 367.9
2009 16.9 78.9 1,711.5 1,138.0 − 31.6 541.9 2.2 3,100.1 2,691.8 0.8 4.0 403.5
2010 16.0 79.6 1,686.3 1,195.4 − 7.5 483.5 1.8 3,220.9 2,770.4 0.8 27.9 421.8
2010          Jan 13.9 60.9 1,723.0 1,157.7 0.0 29.8 535.5 2.0 3,111.5 2,691.3 0.8 4.0 415.3
         Feb 13.6 59.2 1,748.8 1,188.8 0.0 28.2 531.8 2.0 3,103.1 2,684.8 0.7 3.2 414.4
         Mar 13.9 89.5 1,720.0 1,158.7 − 27.2 534.1 1.9 3,098.8 2,681.7 0.8 3.1 413.3
         Apr 13.6 66.4 1,754.8 1,195.3 − 26.5 533.0 1.9 3,140.8 2,697.2 0.7 2.0 440.9
         May 14.2 57.5 1,817.8 1,267.0 − 26.5 524.3 1.9 3,130.1 2,707.8 0.6 2.5 419.2
         June 13.7 116.1 1,761.1 1,223.2 0.0 26.5 511.4 1.9 3,147.5 2,716.5 0.6 8.1 422.4
         July 14.3 66.8 1,688.7 1,165.6 − 26.4 496.7 1.8 3,139.7 2,708.6 0.6 9.9 420.6
         Aug 13.9 66.8 1,704.5 1,183.5 − 27.1 493.9 1.8 3,150.2 2,717.5 0.6 9.2 423.0
         Sep 14.2 74.1 1,685.0 1,169.5 − 24.5 491.1 1.9 3,129.7 2,699.9 0.6 8.9 420.3
         Oct 14.7 64.4 1,674.2 1,180.2 − 6.9 487.1 1.8 3,249.0 2,710.7 0.6 28.2 509.4
         Nov 14.0 57.6 1,697.3 1,200.6 − 8.6 488.1 1.8 3,290.2 2,815.9 0.6 26.1 447.6
         Dec 16.0 79.6 1,686.3 1,195.4 − 7.5 483.5 1.8 3,220.9 2,770.4 0.8 27.9 421.8
2011          Jan 13.6 54.0 1,673.1 1,183.9 − 7.9 481.3 1.7 3,241.2 2,777.7 0.7 29.2 433.6
         Feb 13.6 61.7 1,668.2 1,179.5 − 9.4 479.3 1.7 3,240.3 2,786.9 0.7 29.4 423.4
         Mar 14.0 67.0 1,646.6 1,164.7 − 7.7 474.2 1.7 3,211.7 2,757.5 0.6 24.6 429.0
         Apr 15.1 49.1 1,630.9 1,152.3 − 5.4 473.2 1.7 3,226.5 2,748.7 0.6 25.6 451.6
         May 14.6 56.4 1,623.7 1,143.2 − 5.7 474.8 1.7 3,209.4 2,753.8 0.5 23.7 431.3
         June 14.4 66.6 1,607.6 1,137.5 − 5.2 465.0 1.7 3,191.7 2,748.9 0.5 21.6 420.7
Changes *
2002 + 3.3 − 10.7 + 15.0 + 33.1 + 0.0 + 2.3 − 20.3 − 0.2 − 19.2 − 18.0 − 0.8 − 1.1 + 1.7
2003 − 0.5 + 1.1 − 47.2 − 48.2 + 0.0 + 1.0 + 0.1 − 0.3 + 0.1 − 8.0 − 0.4 + 0.3 + 9.3
2004 − 2.1 − 5.5 + 35.9 + 15.1 + 0.0 − 1.4 + 22.1 − 0.2 + 3.3 − 35.0 − 1.0 + 1.1 + 39.2
2005 + 0.2 + 6.7 + 8.4 + 21.0 − 0.0 − 0.8 − 11.9 − 0.0 − 6.7 − 11.8 − 0.3 − 0.2 + 6.6
2006 + 0.9 + 1.5 − 3.6 + 24.5 − 0.0 + 2.6 − 30.6 − 0.2 − 12.4 − 20.3 − 0.5 − 0.4 + 8.8
2007 + 1.5 + 15.2 + 114.8 + 137.6 + 0.0 + 17.0 − 39.8 + 0.4 − 15.9 + 12.1 − 0.3 − 0.5 − 27.2
2008 − 0.1 + 39.4 + 125.9 + 90.1 + 0.0 + 30.6 + 5.2 − 0.8 + 92.0 + 47.3 − 0.4 + 1.8 + 43.3
2009 − 0.5 − 23.6 − 147.2 − 157.3 − 0.0 − 24.1 + 34.3 + 0.2 + 25.7 − 11.2 − 0.4 + 1.4 + 35.9
2010 − 0.9 + 0.6 − 19.3 + 61.5 + 0.0 − 24.0 − 56.8 − 0.3 + 130.5 + 78.7 + 0.0 + 23.8 + 28.0
2010          Jan − 3.0 − 18.1 + 11.5 + 19.7 + 0.0 − 1.8 − 6.4 − 0.2 + 11.2 − 0.6 + 0.0 + 0.0 + 11.8
         Feb − 0.4 − 1.7 + 26.3 + 31.7 − 0.0 − 1.6 − 3.7 − 0.0 − 8.9 − 7.0 − 0.1 − 0.9 − 1.0
         Mar + 0.4 + 30.3 − 27.0 − 30.1 − 0.0 − 0.5 + 3.6 − 0.0 + 0.2 − 3.2 + 0.0 − 0.1 + 3.4
         Apr − 0.4 − 23.1 + 34.8 + 36.5 − − 0.7 − 1.1 − 0.0 + 42.1 + 15.5 − 0.1 − 1.1 + 27.7
         May + 0.7 − 8.9 + 63.0 + 71.7 − − 0.0 − 8.7 − 0.0 − 10.7 + 10.5 − 0.0 + 0.5 − 21.8
         June − 0.5 + 58.6 − 56.7 − 43.7 + 0.0 − 0.4 − 12.6 + 0.0 + 17.5 + 8.7 − 0.0 + 5.5 + 3.3
         July + 0.5 − 49.3 − 69.2 − 54.4 − 0.0 − 0.1 − 14.7 − 0.1 − 7.8 − 7.8 + 0.1 + 1.6 − 1.7
         Aug − 0.3 − 0.0 + 15.8 + 17.9 − + 0.7 − 2.8 − + 10.5 + 8.8 − 0.0 − 0.7 + 2.4
         Sep + 0.3 + 7.4 − 19.5 − 14.0 − − 2.7 − 2.8 + 0.0 − 20.6 − 17.6 − 0.1 − 0.2 − 2.7
         Oct + 0.4 − 9.8 − 10.8 + 10.7 − − 17.5 − 4.0 − 0.0 + 120.1 + 11.7 + 0.1 + 19.3 + 89.1
         Nov − 0.6 − 6.8 + 23.1 + 20.4 − + 1.7 + 1.1 − 0.0 + 41.1 + 105.0 − 0.0 − 2.1 − 61.8
         Dec + 2.0 + 22.0 − 10.7 − 4.9 − − 1.1 − 4.6 + 0.0 − 64.1 − 45.4 + 0.2 + 1.8 − 20.7
2011          Jan − 2.4 − 25.6 − 13.2 − 11.4 − + 0.5 − 2.2 − 0.1 + 20.3 + 7.3 − 0.1 + 1.3 + 11.8
         Feb − 0.1 + 7.7 − 4.9 − 4.4 − + 1.5 − 2.0 − − 0.9 + 9.2 − 0.0 + 0.2 − 10.2
         Mar + 0.4 + 5.3 − 21.6 − 14.8 − − 1.7 − 5.1 + 0.0 − 28.6 − 29.4 − 0.1 − 4.7 + 5.6
         Apr + 1.1 − 17.8 − 15.7 − 12.4 − − 2.3 − 0.9 + 0.0 + 14.8 − 8.8 + 0.0 + 0.9 + 22.7
         May − 0.5 + 7.2 − 7.3 − 9.1 − + 0.3 + 1.6 − 0.0 − 17.1 + 5.1 − 0.1 − 1.9 − 20.3
         June − 0.3 + 10.3 − 16.0 − 5.7 − − 0.5 − 9.8 + 0.0 − 17.5 − 4.7 − 0.0 − 2.1 − 10.7
*See Table IV.2, footnote*; statistical breaks have been eliminated from the rediscounted bills and bills sent for collection from the banks’ portfolios
changes. The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as prior to maturity). — 5From 1999, no longer included in loans or deposits
provisional. Subsequent revisions which appear in the following Monthly (see also footnote 3). — 6Up to December 1998, including loans to domestic
Report, are not specially marked. — 1Up to December 1998, domestic building and loan associations. — 7Excluding debt securities arising from
banknotes and coins. — 2Up to December 1998, excluding loans to the exchange of equalisation claims (see also footnote 8). — 8Including
domestic building and loan associations. — 3Up to December 1998, debt securities arising from the exchange of equalisation claims. —
including fiduciary loans (see also footnote 5). — 4Up to December 1998, 9Including liabilities arising from registered debt securities, registered
bill-based lending (bill holdings plus endorsement liabilities arising from money market paper and non-negotiable bearer debt securities;
26*IV Banks

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2011
IV Banks
 
 
 
 
 Deposits of domestic banks (MFIs)  3,9,10  Deposits of domestic non-banks (non-MFIs)  3,15 
Partici-
pating
interests
in
Memo domestic Memo Memo
item banks Sight Time Redis- item Sight Time Savings Bank item Equalisa-
tion Fiduciary and deposits deposits counted Fiduciary de- deposits de- savings Fiduciary
claims  8 loans  5 Total 11,12  12,13  bills 14 loans  5 Total 13,16  bonds  18 loans  5   Period enterprises posits  11 posits  17 
End of year or month *
 
4.0 57.0 95.9 1,204.9 123.1 1,081.6 0.3 27.2 2,034.0 526.4 827.0 574.5 106.0 43.3 2001
3.0 54.8 119.0 1,244.0 127.6 1,116.2 0.2 25.6 2,085.9 575.6 830.6 575.3 104.4 42.1 2002
2.0 56.8 109.2 1,229.6 116.8 1,112.6 0.2 27.8 2,140.3 624.0 825.7 590.3 100.3 40.5 2003
1.0 61.8 99.6 1,271.2 119.7 1,151.4 0.1 30.3 2,200.0 646.9 851.2 603.5 98.4 43.7 2004
− 56.6 108.5 1,300.0 120.5 1,179.4 0.1 26.5 2,276.6 717.0 864.4 603.4 91.9 42.4 2005
− 53.0 106.3 1,348.2 125.4 1,222.7 0.0 22.3 2,394.6 747.7 962.8 586.5 97.5 37.8 2006
− 51.1 109.4 1,478.6 122.1 1,356.5 0.0 20.0 2,579.1 779.9 1,125.4 555.4 118.4 36.4 2007
− 47.2 111.2 1,582.5 138.5 1,444.0 0.0 41.6 2,781.4 834.6 1,276.1 535.2 135.4 32.3 2008
− 43.9 106.1 1,355.1 128.9 1,226.2 0.0 35.7 2,829.7 1,029.5 1,102.6 594.5 103.2 43.4 2009
− 33.7 96.8 1,237.9 135.3 1,102.6 0.0 13.8 2,936.6 1,104.4 1,117.1 618.2 96.9 37.5 2010
− 43.4 104.3 1,348.2 142.4 1,205.8 0.0 35.7 2,820.3 1,051.3 1,070.0 597.7 101.3 43.0 2010          Jan 
− 43.3 98.9 1,360.7 150.4 1,210.3 0.0 36.0 2,830.1 1,055.9 1,070.5 602.9 100.8 43.0          Feb 
− 42.9 98.7 1,327.9 129.4 1,198.5 0.0 36.1 2,819.0 1,040.0 1,073.7 604.7 100.5 42.8          Mar 
− 42.8 98.6 1,340.4 140.3 1,200.1 0.0 36.1 2,852.0 1,070.3 1,077.0 604.8 99.9 42.7          Apr 
− 42.8 97.8 1,355.5 139.6 1,215.9 0.0 37.1 2,867.5 1,089.6 1,073.1 605.1 99.7 42.7          May
− 42.5 97.6 1,365.2 140.1 1,225.0 0.0 36.8 2,867.5 1,090.5 1,073.1 604.4 99.5 42.4          June
− 42.3 96.1 1,243.3 134.7 1,108.6 0.0 35.6 2,851.1 1,084.9 1,061.3 605.9 98.9 42.2          July
− 42.3 95.6 1,252.5 138.9 1,113.7 0.0 35.9 2,873.4 1,094.7 1,074.2 605.9 98.7 42.2          Aug 
− 42.1 95.3 1,217.8 138.6 1,079.1 0.0 35.1 2,867.2 1,083.3 1,079.4 606.1 98.4 42.1          Sep 
− 42.0 95.1 1,247.7 137.0 1,110.7 0.0 34.9 2,872.3 1,091.1 1,075.1 607.4 98.6 42.0          Oct 
− 41.7 95.3 1,245.6 150.1 1,095.5 0.0 35.1 2,946.1 1,129.6 1,110.2 610.0 96.3 42.0          Nov 
− 33.7 96.8 1,237.9 135.3 1,102.6 0.0 13.8 2,936.6 1,104.4 1,117.1 618.2 96.9 37.5          Dec 
− 33.5 98.4 1,220.9 148.0 1,072.9 0.0 13.7 2,928.6 1,125.9 1,085.0 620.4 97.2 37.3 2011          Jan 
− 33.5 98.2 1,207.7 135.8 1,071.9 0.0 13.7 2,942.8 1,121.6 1,100.7 622.5 98.0 37.4          Feb 
− 33.3 98.3 1,191.5 126.6 1,064.8 0.0 13.7 2,930.5 1,112.1 1,096.6 623.5 98.3 37.2          Mar 
− 33.1 98.2 1,183.6 132.1 1,051.5 0.0 13.5 2,948.4 1,127.1 1,099.2 622.3 99.8 37.0          Apr 
− 33.0 96.7 1,164.0 119.8 1,044.1 0.0 13.6 2,976.6 1,125.7 1,129.3 619.9 101.7 37.0          May
− 33.0 94.7 1,158.5 120.1 1,038.4 0.0 13.6 2,980.6 1,123.7 1,136.4 617.8 102.7 36.7          June
Changes *
− 1.0 − 2.1 + 24.2 + 37.9 + 1.7 + 36.3 − 0.1 − 1.5 + 51.7 + 48.4 + 4.1 + 0.8 − 1.6 − 1.1 2002
− 1.0 + 2.1 − 9.8 − 5.6 − 9.5 + 3.9 + 0.0 + 2.4 + 54.0 + 48.4 − 4.8 + 15.1 − 4.8 − 1.2 2003
− 1.1 + 3.0 − 9.6 + 41.3 + 2.9 + 38.5 − 0.1 + 2.4 + 62.0 + 24.4 + 25.9 + 13.1 − 1.5 + 1.2 2004
− 1.0 − 4.9 + 8.9 + 28.9 + 0.8 + 28.0 + 0.0 − 3.5 + 76.6 + 70.7 + 12.4 − 1.2 − 5.4 − 1.2 2005
− − 3.7 − 2.2 + 79.0 + 8.6 + 70.5 − 0.1 − 4.5 + 118.0 + 30.0 + 97.7 − 16.8 + 7.2 − 4.1 2006
− − 2.3 + 3.1 + 132.0 − 3.3 + 135.3 − 0.0 − 2.3 + 181.1 + 31.6 + 160.5 − 31.1 + 20.1 − 2.0 2007
− − 5.4 + 7.8 + 124.3 + 23.0 + 101.3 − 0.0 − 3.6 + 207.6 + 54.3 + 156.6 − 20.2 + 17.0 − 1.3 2008
− − 4.2 + 0.7 − 225.4 − 9.7 − 215.7 − 0.0 − 5.7 + 59.7 + 211.4 − 179.3 + 59.3 − 31.6 − 0.9 2009
− − 2.1 − 9.2 − 96.8 + 22.3 − 119.1 − 0.0 − 0.2 + 77.4 + 76.0 − 18.9 + 24.0 − 3.7 − 1.7 2010
− − 0.5 − 1.7 − 6.9 + 13.6 − 20.4 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 9.5 + 21.9 − 32.6 + 3.2 − 1.9 − 0.5 2010          Jan 
− − 0.1 − 5.4 + 12.4 + 7.9 + 4.5 + 0.0 + 0.3 + 9.9 + 4.6 + 0.5 + 5.2 − 0.5 − 0.0          Feb 
− − 0.4 − 0.2 − 17.2 − 5.4 − 11.8 − 0.0 + 0.0 − 11.2 − 15.9 + 3.2 + 1.8 − 0.4 − 0.2          Mar 
− − 0.1 − 0.1 + 13.6 + 10.9 + 2.7 − 0.0 + 0.0 + 32.0 + 30.3 + 2.2 + 0.1 − 0.6 − 0.0          Apr 
− − 0.0 − 0.9 + 15.1 − 0.7 + 15.8 − 0.0 + 1.0 + 15.4 + 19.3 − 3.9 + 0.2 − 0.2 − 0.0          May
− − 0.3 − 0.2 + 9.7 + 0.5 + 9.1 + 0.0 − 0.3 + 0.0 + 1.4 − 0.5 − 0.6 − 0.3 − 0.3          June
− − 0.1 − 1.4 − 118.6 − 5.1 − 113.5 + 0.0 − 1.2 − 16.4 − 5.6 − 11.8 + 1.5 − 0.5 − 0.2          July
− − 0.1 − 0.5 + 9.2 + 4.1 + 5.1 − 0.0 + 0.3 + 17.6 + 9.8 + 8.2 − 0.1 − 0.3 − 0.0          Aug 
− − 0.2 − 0.3 − 34.7 − 0.2 − 34.5 − 0.0 − 0.8 − 6.2 − 11.4 + 5.2 + 0.3 − 0.2 − 0.1          Sep 
− − 0.1 − 0.2 + 29.9 − 1.7 + 31.5 + 0.0 − 0.2 + 4.9 + 7.9 − 4.5 + 1.3 + 0.2 − 0.1          Oct 
− − 0.1 + 0.2 − 2.1 + 13.1 − 15.2 − 0.0 + 0.4 + 50.3 + 39.3 + 8.2 + 2.6 + 0.3 − 0.0          Nov 
− − 0.1 + 1.6 − 7.2 − 14.8 + 7.6 + 0.0 + 0.2 − 9.4 − 25.5 + 6.9 + 8.5 + 0.6 − 0.3          Dec 
− − 0.2 + 1.6 − 17.0 + 12.7 − 29.8 − 0.0 − 0.1 − 8.1 + 21.6 − 32.1 + 2.2 + 0.3 − 0.2 2011          Jan 
− + 0.0 − 0.2 − 13.4 − 12.2 − 1.2 + 0.0 + 0.0 + 14.2 − 4.4 + 15.7 + 2.1 + 0.8 + 0.0          Feb 
− − 0.2 + 0.1 − 16.3 − 9.2 − 7.0 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 12.3 − 9.5 − 4.3 + 1.0 + 0.5 − 0.2          Mar 
− − 0.2 − 0.1 − 7.9 + 5.4 − 13.3 − 0.0 − 0.1 + 17.9 + 15.9 + 3.0 − 2.1 + 1.0 − 0.1          Apr 
− − 0.0 − 1.5 − 19.6 − 12.2 − 7.4 + 0.0 + 0.1 + 28.3 − 1.4 + 30.1 − 2.4 + 1.9 − 0.1          May
− − 0.1 − 2.0 − 5.5 + 0.3 − 5.7 + 0.0 + 0.0 + 4.0 − 2.0 + 7.0 − 2.1 + 1.0 − 0.3          June
including subordinated liabilities. — 10Up to December 1998, excluding endorsement liabilities arising from rediscounted bills. — 15Up to
liabilities to domestic building and loan associations and money market December 1998, including liabilities to domestic building and loan
funds. — 11Up to December 1998, including time deposits with terms of associations and money market funds. — 16Since the inclusion of building
less than one month. — 12Including liabilities arising from monetary policy and loan associations in January 1999, including deposits under savings and
operations with the Bundesbank. — 13Up to December 1998, excluding loan contracts (see Table IV.12). — 17Excluding deposits under savings and
time deposits with terms of less than one month. — 14Own acceptances loan contracts (see also footnote 16). — 18Including liabilities arising from
and promissory notes outstanding and, up to December 1998, including non-negotiable bearer debt securities. 
27*IV Banks

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
E U R O S Y S T E M
Monthly Report
August 2011
IV Banks
 
4 Assets and liabilities of banks (MFIs) in Germany vis-à-vis non-residents *
 
€ billion
Lending to foreign banks (MFIs)  2 Lending to foreign non-banks (non-MFIs)  2 
Treasury
Cash in bills and
hand Loans and bills  3 negotiable Credit balances and loans, bills  3 Negotiable
(non- money money
euro-area Medium market Memo Medium market
banknotes and paper item and paper Securities Securities
and Short- long- issued by issued by Fiduciary Short- long- issued by issued by
Period coins)  1 Total Total term term banks banks loans  4 Total Total term term non-banks non-banks
End of year or month *
 
2001 0.4 596.1 521.7 383.7 138.0 0.8 73.6 3.5 570.3 347.2 99.7 247.5 5.2 217.9
2002 0.3 690.6 615.3 468.0 147.2 0.9 74.4 2.7 558.8 332.6 92.6 240.0 9.3 216.9
2003 0.3 769.6 675.8 515.7 160.1 1.5 92.3 1.6 576.3 344.8 110.9 233.9 6.0 225.4
2004 0.2 889.4 760.2 606.5 153.7 2.8 126.3 1.5 629.5 362.5 136.6 225.9 10.9 256.1
2005 0.2 1,038.8 860.0 648.5 211.5 5.8 173.0 1.5 712.0 387.9 132.8 255.1 9.3 314.8
2006 0.4 1,266.9 1,003.2 744.5 258.7 13.3 250.4 0.8 777.0 421.0 156.0 264.9 7.2 348.9
2007 0.3 1,433.5 1,105.9 803.6 302.4 13.4 314.2 0.5 908.3 492.9 197.5 295.4 27.5 387.9
2008 0.3 1,446.6 1,131.6 767.2 364.3 15.6 299.5 1.9 908.4 528.9 151.4 377.5 12.9 366.6
2009 0.3 1,277.4 986.1 643.5 342.6 6.2 285.0 2.9 815.7 469.6 116.9 352.7 9.8 336.3
2010 0.5 1,154.1 892.7 607.7 285.1 2.1 259.3 1.8 773.8 461.4 112.6 348.8 10.1 302.3
2010          Jan 0.4 1,278.4 986.8 647.2 339.6 5.3 286.2 2.9 829.2 477.1 121.1 356.0 12.1 340.1
         Feb 0.6 1,269.6 980.1 640.5 339.5 4.5 285.0 2.9 835.3 483.0 122.5 360.5 10.5 341.8
         Mar 0.5 1,272.2 980.1 640.2 339.8 4.8 287.3 3.0 822.5 478.7 119.5 359.2 11.1 332.7
         Apr 0.4 1,307.0 1,019.7 681.4 338.3 4.6 282.8 3.0 852.3 505.3 143.7 361.7 11.4 335.6
         May 0.5 1,356.5 1,073.9 725.7 348.3 6.6 276.0 3.0 854.4 531.2 156.2 375.0 10.6 312.7
         June 0.4 1,301.1 1,019.9 678.6 341.2 6.1 275.1 3.0 832.7 506.4 134.6 371.8 11.5 314.9
         July 0.4 1,259.9 988.7 678.4 310.3 3.5 267.6 2.9 813.6 492.1 130.7 361.4 12.3 309.2
         Aug 0.5 1,293.4 1,020.2 708.5 311.7 3.8 269.5 2.8 821.9 499.5 135.0 364.5 11.0 311.5
         Sep 0.6 1,234.3 965.4 666.0 299.4 2.6 266.3 2.7 796.0 474.6 119.2 355.4 12.9 308.4
         Oct 0.6 1,159.1 892.5 604.4 288.1 3.1 263.4 2.7 786.3 466.0 115.9 350.1 15.3 304.9
         Nov 0.8 1,176.9 913.0 619.6 293.5 2.2 261.7 2.7 810.4 488.1 129.5 358.6 11.5 310.8
         Dec 0.5 1,154.1 892.7 607.7 285.1 2.1 259.3 1.8 773.8 461.4 112.6 348.8 10.1 302.3
2011          Jan 0.5 1,151.1 888.7 609.2 279.5 2.8 259.6 1.8 774.8 458.0 114.9 343.2 13.9 302.9
         Feb 0.9 1,157.9 894.3 612.9 281.5 2.0 261.5 1.8 773.2 460.3 118.3 342.1 12.9 300.0
         Mar 0.5 1,108.8 848.0 571.0 277.0 2.0 258.7 1.8 757.3 446.7 110.0 336.7 13.7 296.9
         Apr 0.5 1,150.6 890.7 615.6 275.1 4.5 255.3 1.8 770.2 459.8 129.8 330.1 15.2 295.1
         May 0.8 1,161.7 895.0 618.3 276.8 6.0 260.7 1.8 779.4 466.3 132.2 334.0 17.5 295.7
         June 0.9 1,121.8 858.3 581.3 277.0 5.8 257.6 1.8 764.6 454.2 122.1 332.1 15.2 295.2
Changes *
2002 − 0.1 + 120.3 + 118.0 + 99.4 + 18.6 + 0.1 + 2.2 − 0.9 + 21.2 + 12.7 − 0.4 + 13.2 + 4.6 + 3.9
2003 − 0.1 + 103.8 + 84.6 + 65.2 + 19.3 + 0.6 + 18.7 − 0.4 + 46.3 + 35.1 + 24.0 + 11.0 − 2.7 + 13.9
2004 − 0.1 + 128.3 + 89.4 + 95.3 − 5.9 + 1.3 + 37.6 − 0.1 + 65.8 + 29.5 + 31.7 − 2.2 + 5.1 + 31.1
2005 + 0.0 + 127.3 + 78.9 + 26.3 + 52.6 + 2.9 + 45.4 − 0.0 + 59.4 + 7.3 − 9.4 + 16.7 − 1.8 + 54.0
2006 + 0.1 + 238.3 + 153.5 + 109.7 + 43.8 + 7.5 + 77.2 − 0.7 + 81.4 + 51.6 + 25.9 + 25.8 − 1.8 + 31.5
2007 − 0.0 + 190.3 + 123.7 + 72.9 + 50.8 + 7.5 + 59.1 − 0.4 + 167.7 + 94.3 + 50.1 + 44.2 + 20.1 + 53.3
2008 + 0.0 + 8.5 + 20.2 − 43.0 + 63.2 + 2.1 − 13.7 − 0.0 + 4.3 + 45.1 − 31.9 + 77.0 − 14.5 − 26.3
2009 − 0.0 − 170.0 − 141.3 − 122.5 − 18.8 − 10.3 − 18.4 − 0.2 − 72.8 − 43.8 − 31.7 − 12.1 − 3.3 − 25.7
2010 + 0.1 − 141.5 − 116.2 − 47.3 − 68.9 − 4.8 − 20.4 − 0.2 − 62.0 − 24.5 − 12.6 − 11.9 + 0.4 − 38.0
2010          Jan + 0.1 − 7.4 − 7.5 − 1.0 − 6.5 − 0.9 + 1.0 + 0.0 + 5.4 + 2.5 + 2.8 − 0.3 + 2.3 + 0.5
         Feb + 0.2 − 14.1 − 11.8 − 9.2 − 2.6 − 0.9 − 1.5 − 0.0 − 0.0 + 1.2 + 0.6 + 0.6 − 1.6 + 0.4
         Mar − 0.1 + 2.5 − 1.5 − 1.1 − 0.4 + 0.3 + 3.7 + 0.1 − 6.7 − 5.8 − 3.3 − 2.5 + 0.7 − 1.6
         Apr − 0.1 + 34.9 + 36.3 + 39.4 − 3.1 − 0.3 − 1.1 − 0.0 + 23.0 + 24.0 + 23.5 + 0.5 + 0.3 − 1.3
         May + 0.1 + 30.6 + 35.8 + 34.5 + 1.2 + 2.0 − 7.1 + 0.0 − 18.3 + 10.2 + 8.8 + 1.4 − 0.8 − 27.7
         June − 0.1 − 59.9 − 58.1 − 49.0 − 9.2 − 1.1 − 0.6 − 0.0 − 24.8 − 27.2 − 24.5 − 2.7 + 0.9 + 1.5
         July + 0.0 − 26.9 − 17.5 + 6.9 − 24.5 − 2.5 − 6.8 − 0.1 − 5.0 − 2.6 − 1.0 − 1.6 + 0.9 − 3.3
         Aug + 0.1 + 25.8 + 24.1 + 26.3 − 2.2 + 0.2 + 1.5 − 0.2 + 1.2 + 1.6 + 0.7 + 0.9 − 1.4 + 1.0
         Sep + 0.1 − 40.8 − 37.6 − 33.1 − 4.5 − 1.0 − 2.2 − 0.0 − 9.1 − 10.7 − 12.5 + 1.8 + 2.0 − 0.4
         Oct − 0.1 − 71.3 − 69.1 − 59.6 − 9.5 + 0.5 − 2.7 − 0.0 − 6.0 − 5.5 − 2.6 − 2.9 + 2.4 − 2.9
         Nov + 0.2 + 2.5 + 5.9 + 7.6 − 1.7 − 1.0 − 2.4 + 0.0 + 9.9 + 10.1 + 11.0 − 0.9 − 3.8 + 3.5
         Dec − 0.3 − 17.5 − 15.1 − 9.1 − 5.9 − 0.2 − 2.2 − 0.0 − 31.4 − 22.3 − 16.2 − 6.1 − 1.4 − 7.7
2011          Jan + 0.0 + 2.9 + 1.6 + 4.5 − 2.9 + 0.7 + 0.5 + 0.0 + 6.3 + 1.0 + 3.2 − 2.2 + 3.8 + 1.5
         Feb + 0.4 + 8.2 + 7.0 + 4.4 + 2.6 − 0.8 + 2.0 − 0.0 − 0.1 + 3.5 + 3.7 − 0.2 − 1.0 − 2.6
         Mar − 0.4 − 42.7 − 39.6 − 38.3 − 1.4 + 0.0 − 3.2 − 0.0 − 9.6 − 8.5 − 7.1 − 1.4 + 0.9 − 2.0
         Apr + 0.0 + 50.1 + 50.6 + 48.9 + 1.7 + 2.5 − 3.0 − 0.0 + 20.8 + 19.7 + 21.2 − 1.5 + 1.5 − 0.4
         May + 0.4 + 2.8 − 3.7 − 1.7 − 2.0 + 1.5 + 5.0 − 0.0 + 2.0 + 0.4 + 0.9 − 0.5 + 2.3 − 0.7
         June + 0.0 − 38.4 − 35.2 − 36.2 + 0.9 − 0.2 − 3.0 + 0.0 − 13.2 − 10.8 − 9.8 − 1.0 − 2.2 − 0.2
*See Table IV.2, footnote*; statistical breaks have been eliminated from the banknotes and coins. — 2Up to December 1998, including fiduciary loans
changes. The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as (see also footnote 4). — 3Up to December 1998, bill-based lending (bill
provisional. Subsequent revisions, which appear in the following Monthly holdings plus endorsement liabilities arising from rediscounted bills and bills
Report, are not specially marked. — 1Up to December 1998, foreign sent for collection from the banks’ portfolios prior to maturity). —
28*IV Banks

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2011
IV Banks
 
 
 
 
 Deposits of foreign banks (MFIs)  2 Deposits of foreign non-banks (non-MFIs)  2 
 Partici- Time deposits (including
pating Time deposits (including bank savings deposits and bank
interests savings bonds) savings bonds)
in foreign
Memo banks Medium Memo Medium Memo
item and and item and item
Fiduciary enter- Sight Short- long- Fiduciary Sight Short- long- Fiduciary
loans  4 prises  5 Total Total  7 term  7 term loans  4 Total Total  7 term  7 term loans  4   Period deposits  6 deposits  6 
End of year or month *
 
13.8 47.6 622.7 91.9 530.8 434.5 96.3 1.4 350.6 34.0 316.6 97.6 219.0 5.3 2001
15.6 44.8 614.2 101.6 512.7 410.4 102.3 1.1 319.2 33.5 285.7 87.0 198.7 4.5 2002
11.6 41.4 590.7 95.1 495.6 387.7 107.9 0.4 307.3 32.2 275.1 102.4 172.7 3.6 2003
9.8 39.3 603.3 87.0 516.2 403.2 113.0 0.5 311.2 36.6 274.7 123.4 151.2 0.8 2004
10.6 37.2 651.7 102.9 548.8 420.4 128.4 0.6 316.4 62.0 254.4 119.4 135.0 1.2 2005
5.8 50.4 689.7 168.1 521.6 397.3 124.3 0.4 310.1 82.1 228.0 111.5 116.5 1.5 2006
5.7 48.3 738.9 164.7 574.1 461.2 113.0 0.2 303.1 76.0 227.1 122.3 104.8 3.1 2007
25.5 45.1 703.3 218.1 485.1 362.3 122.9 0.3 286.1 92.2 193.9 95.1 98.8 2.5 2008
32.1 45.4 652.6 213.6 439.0 307.4 131.6 0.2 216.3 78.1 138.2 73.7 64.5 1.9 2009
15.6 48.8 741.7 258.7 483.0 349.3 133.6 0.1 226.5 84.8 141.7 76.7 64.9 1.5 2010
32.4 48.0 683.5 253.9 429.6 299.0 130.6 0.2 237.2 96.1 141.0 74.7 66.4 1.9 2010          Jan 
32.8 47.7 678.1 253.6 424.5 293.3 131.2 0.2 244.5 92.6 152.0 82.3 69.7 1.9          Feb 
32.8 49.2 701.7 278.4 423.3 289.7 133.6 0.1 236.2 92.4 143.8 76.8 67.0 1.8          Mar 
32.9 49.9 750.2 270.8 479.3 345.4 134.0 0.1 266.4 111.4 155.0 88.8 66.2 1.8          Apr 
33.9 49.9 815.8 311.0 504.8 367.4 137.4 0.1 271.2 116.0 155.2 88.7 66.5 1.7          May
33.6 55.9 780.1 331.9 448.2 310.4 137.8 0.1 254.3 110.3 144.1 77.7 66.4 1.7          June
32.4 49.9 779.1 311.8 467.3 336.6 130.7 0.1 260.8 112.2 148.6 82.4 66.2 1.7          July
32.9 51.5 803.7 324.2 479.5 347.2 132.3 0.1 267.5 114.7 152.8 87.3 65.6 1.8          Aug 
32.2 51.2 756.4 293.5 462.9 330.4 132.5 0.1 254.5 104.3 150.1 85.6 64.6 1.7          Sep 
32.1 51.5 749.1 301.7 447.5 316.9 130.6 0.1 264.2 108.4 155.8 87.5 68.4 1.7          Oct 
32.5 52.5 758.3 314.2 444.1 311.8 132.3 0.1 271.5 114.3 157.1 86.9 70.2 1.7          Nov 
15.6 48.8 741.7 258.7 483.0 349.3 133.6 0.1 226.5 84.8 141.7 76.7 64.9 1.5          Dec 
15.6 51.0 738.6 284.0 454.6 321.6 133.0 0.1 245.0 110.5 134.5 70.3 64.2 1.5 2011          Jan 
15.6 50.0 735.9 282.3 453.7 321.0 132.7 0.1 244.5 110.1 134.3 72.2 62.1 1.5          Feb 
15.6 50.2 695.8 253.9 441.9 310.5 131.4 0.1 219.8 90.3 129.4 68.6 60.8 1.5          Mar 
15.5 50.2 725.6 265.7 459.8 329.8 130.0 0.1 232.6 105.7 126.9 68.0 58.9 1.5          Apr 
15.5 50.2 707.7 273.4 434.3 303.4 130.9 0.1 235.5 109.8 125.7 66.2 59.4 1.4          May
15.4 49.7 653.1 253.2 399.9 274.1 125.7 0.1 229.5 102.4 127.1 66.5 60.5 1.5          June
Changes *
+ 1.7 + 1.6 + 22.7 + 14.6 + 8.1 − 1.3 + 9.4 − 0.3 + 4.6 + 0.8 + 3.8 − 4.6 + 8.4 − 0.9 2002
− 0.7 − 1.9 + 5.7 − 2.0 + 7.7 − 2.4 + 10.0 − 0.0 + 4.5 + 0.4 + 4.1 + 20.6 − 16.5 + 1.9 2003
+ 0.7 − 1.5 + 19.8 − 6.1 + 25.9 + 21.1 + 4.8 + 0.1 + 13.0 + 5.4 + 7.6 + 22.8 − 15.2 − 0.3 2004
+ 0.8 − 3.5 + 28.6 + 12.6 + 16.0 + 4.9 + 11.1 + 0.1 − 4.9 + 23.9 − 28.8 − 7.7 − 21.1 + 0.4 2005
− 5.1 + 13.8 + 56.2 + 68.3 − 12.1 − 13.7 + 1.6 − 0.2 − 0.8 + 21.2 − 22.0 − 5.1 − 17.0 − 0.2 2006
− 0.1 − 0.8 + 67.3 + 1.5 + 65.8 + 74.0 − 8.3 − 0.1 + 4.6 − 5.5 + 10.2 + 16.6 − 6.4 + 1.6 2007
+ 0.7 − 3.1 − 50.1 + 52.2 − 102.3 − 120.7 + 18.5 + 0.1 − 12.4 + 16.1 − 28.5 − 19.4 − 9.1 − 0.6 2008
− 3.2 + 0.1 − 81.4 − 2.1 − 79.3 − 57.5 − 21.7 − 0.2 − 33.5 − 13.3 − 20.1 − 17.0 − 3.1 − 0.6 2009
+ 0.2 + 1.4 + 79.6 + 42.0 + 37.5 + 38.1 − 0.6 − 0.1 − 2.7 + 6.0 − 8.7 − 3.3 − 5.5 − 0.4 2010
+ 0.3 + 2.2 + 25.6 + 39.0 − 13.3 − 11.3 − 2.0 − 0.0 + 19.4 + 17.7 + 1.7 + 0.4 + 1.3 + 0.1 2010          Jan 
+ 0.4 − 0.5 − 5.0 − 1.5 − 3.5 − 3.6 + 0.1 − 0.0 − 1.4 − 3.9 + 2.5 + 3.0 − 0.5 − 0.0          Feb 
+ 0.0 + 1.4 + 22.4 + 24.4 − 2.0 − 4.2 + 2.2 − 0.0 − 8.6 − 0.2 − 8.4 − 5.6 − 2.8 − 0.1          Mar 
+ 0.1 + 0.5 + 46.4 − 8.3 + 54.6 + 54.8 − 0.1 − + 29.5 + 18.8 + 10.7 + 11.7 − 1.0 − 0.0          Apr 
+ 1.0 − 1.0 + 52.5 + 36.3 + 16.2 + 15.1 + 1.1 − 0.0 + 0.2 + 2.8 − 2.6 − 1.9 − 0.8 − 0.0          May
− 0.3 + 5.7 − 37.8 + 20.5 − 58.3 − 58.1 − 0.1 − 0.0 − 17.8 − 6.0 − 11.8 − 11.4 − 0.4 − 0.0          June
− 1.1 − 5.8 + 9.2 − 16.6 + 25.7 + 31.1 − 5.4 − 0.0 + 9.9 + 3.3 + 6.6 + 6.0 + 0.6 + 0.0          July
+ 0.5 + 1.5 + 19.4 + 10.6 + 8.7 + 8.0 + 0.7 − 0.0 + 4.9 + 1.9 + 3.0 + 4.1 − 1.1 + 0.0          Aug 
− 0.8 − 0.1 − 34.1 − 26.2 − 7.9 − 10.3 + 2.4 − 0.0 − 9.1 − 9.0 − 0.1 − 0.1 − 0.0 − 0.1          Sep 
− 0.0 + 0.3 − 4.5 + 9.1 − 13.6 − 12.1 − 1.5 − + 10.6 + 4.3 + 6.3 + 2.4 + 4.0 + 0.1          Oct 
+ 0.4 + 0.8 − 2.3 + 8.5 − 10.8 − 10.6 − 0.2 − 0.0 + 3.3 + 4.7 − 1.4 − 2.2 + 0.8 − 0.0          Nov 
− 0.2 − 3.6 − 12.3 − 53.8 + 41.6 + 39.4 + 2.1 − 0.0 − 43.6 − 28.2 − 15.3 − 9.7 − 5.6 − 0.2          Dec 
− 0.1 + 2.3 + 1.0 + 26.4 − 25.5 − 25.6 + 0.1 − 0.0 + 19.7 + 26.0 − 6.4 − 5.9 − 0.5 − 0.0 2011          Jan 
+ 0.0 − 1.0 − 1.1 − 1.2 + 0.1 + 0.3 − 0.2 − 0.0 − 0.1 − 0.2 + 0.1 + 2.0 − 1.9 + 0.0          Feb 
− 0.0 + 0.2 − 35.5 − 26.7 − 8.8 − 8.4 − 0.3 − 0.0 − 23.2 − 19.2 − 4.0 − 3.1 − 0.9 − 0.0          Mar 
− 0.0 + 0.1 + 35.9 + 14.0 + 21.8 + 23.5 − 1.7 − + 14.6 + 16.1 − 1.5 − 0.0 − 1.4 + 0.0          Apr 
+ 0.0 − 0.1 − 23.3 + 5.8 − 29.0 − 28.9 − 0.1 − 0.0 + 1.1 + 3.3 − 2.3 − 2.4 + 0.1 − 0.0          May
− 0.1 − 0.4 − 53.5 − 19.8 − 33.7 − 28.9 − 4.8 − 0.0 − 5.7 − 7.2 + 1.5 + 0.4 + 1.2 + 0.1          June
4From 1999, no longer included in loans and deposits (see also footnote terms of less than one month. — 7Up to December 1998, excluding time
2). — 5Up to December 1998, including working capital supplied to deposits with terms of less than one month. 
branches abroad. — 6Up to December 1998, including time deposits with
29*IV Banks

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
E U R O S Y S T E M
Monthly Report
August 2011
IV Banks
 
5 Lending by banks (MFIs) in Germany to domestic non-banks (non-MFIs) *
 
€ billion
Lending to domestic Short-term lending Medium and long-term
non-banks, total  1,2 
      to general government to enter- to enterprises and households  1 
 
including excluding Negoti-
negotiable money able
market paper, Loans money
Period securities, and market Treasury
equalisation claims Total Total paper Total Loans bills Total Total bills 3,4 
End of year or month *
 
2001 3,014.1 2,704.2 387.9 356.7 355.2 1.5 31.2 28.2 2.9 2,626.2 2,070.2
2002 2,997.2 2,689.1 365.4 331.9 331.0 1.0 33.5 31.1 2.4 2,631.8 2,079.7
2003 2,995.6 2,680.6 355.2 315.0 313.4 1.6 40.2 38.4 1.8 2,640.4 2,096.1
2004 3,001.3 2,646.7 320.9 283.8 283.0 0.8 37.1 35.3 1.8 2,680.4 2,114.2
2005 2,995.1 2,635.1 309.7 273.5 272.9 0.6 36.2 34.4 1.8 2,685.4 2,141.3
2006 3,000.7 2,632.2 303.1 269.8 269.3 0.6 33.3 31.9 1.4 2,697.6 2,181.8
2007 2,975.7 2,649.5 331.2 301.8 301.5 0.3 29.4 28.2 1.2 2,644.6 2,168.3
2008 3,071.1 2,700.1 373.0 337.5 335.3 2.2 35.5 34.5 1.0 2,698.1 2,257.8
2009 3,100.1 2,692.6 347.3 306.3 306.2 0.1 41.0 37.1 3.9 2,752.8 2,299.7
2010 3,220.9 2,771.3 428.0 283.0 282.8 0.2 145.0 117.2 27.7 2,793.0 2,305.6
2010          Jan 3,111.5 2,692.1 349.7 305.0 304.8 0.2 44.7 40.9 3.8 2,761.8 2,305.2
         Feb 3,103.1 2,685.6 343.5 299.8 299.6 0.2 43.7 40.8 2.9 2,759.6 2,302.2
         Mar 3,098.8 2,682.4 348.9 302.9 302.6 0.3 46.1 43.2 2.8 2,749.9 2,290.3
         Apr 3,140.8 2,697.9 358.7 311.7 311.5 0.3 46.9 45.2 1.7 2,782.2 2,318.9
         May 3,130.1 2,708.4 361.7 310.6 310.3 0.2 51.1 48.8 2.3 2,768.4 2,298.8
         June 3,147.5 2,717.1 376.1 313.2 312.9 0.3 63.0 55.2 7.8 2,771.4 2,292.6
         July 3,139.7 2,709.3 366.0 305.7 305.4 0.3 60.4 50.8 9.6 2,773.7 2,296.5
         Aug 3,150.2 2,718.1 367.2 309.8 309.6 0.2 57.3 48.4 9.0 2,783.1 2,300.7
         Sep 3,129.7 2,700.4 351.1 293.4 293.2 0.2 57.8 49.0 8.8 2,778.5 2,294.8
         Oct 3,249.0 2,711.4 378.0 297.5 297.2 0.3 80.5 52.5 28.0 2,871.0 2,300.2
         Nov 3,290.2 2,816.5 470.8 318.0 317.7 0.3 152.8 126.9 25.9 2,819.5 2,309.5
         Dec 3,220.9 2,771.3 428.0 283.0 282.8 0.2 145.0 117.2 27.7 2,793.0 2,305.6
2011          Jan 3,241.2 2,778.4 440.2 290.4 290.2 0.2 149.8 120.8 29.0 2,801.1 2,314.1
         Feb 3,240.3 2,787.6 446.4 308.5 308.2 0.3 137.9 108.8 29.1 2,794.0 2,309.0
         Mar 3,211.7 2,758.1 415.7 292.7 292.4 0.3 123.1 98.7 24.4 2,796.0 2,307.8
         Apr 3,226.5 2,749.3 409.8 295.8 295.5 0.4 114.0 88.8 25.2 2,816.7 2,328.1
         May 3,209.4 2,754.3 405.8 305.2 304.8 0.4 100.6 77.2 23.3 2,803.6 2,311.3
         June 3,191.7 2,749.4 404.1 307.1 306.6 0.5 97.0 75.9 21.1 2,787.5 2,298.0
Changes *
2002 − 19.2 − 18.8 − 23.4 − 25.7 − 25.2 − 0.5 + 2.3 + 2.9 − 0.6 + 4.3 + 7.6
2003 + 0.1 − 8.4 − 10.0 − 16.7 − 17.5 + 0.9 + 6.7 + 7.3 − 0.6 + 10.1 + 16.0
2004 + 3.3 − 36.0 − 31.7 − 30.5 − 29.7 − 0.8 − 1.2 − 3.2 + 1.9 + 35.0 + 15.6
2005 − 6.7 − 12.1 − 11.5 − 10.6 − 10.4 − 0.2 − 0.9 − 0.9 + 0.0 + 4.8 + 26.8
2006 − 12.4 − 20.8 − 7.1 − 4.5 − 4.4 − 0.0 − 2.7 − 2.3 − 0.4 − 5.2 + 23.6
2007 − 15.9 + 11.8 + 27.6 + 31.5 + 31.7 − 0.2 − 3.9 − 3.7 − 0.3 − 43.5 − 7.1
2008 + 92.0 + 46.9 + 43.1 + 36.8 + 34.9 + 1.8 + 6.3 + 6.3 − 0.0 + 48.9 + 83.4
2009 + 25.7 − 11.6 − 26.1 − 31.5 − 30.0 − 1.5 + 5.5 + 2.5 + 2.9 + 51.8 + 36.6
2010 + 130.5 + 78.7 + 80.4 − 23.4 − 23.5 + 0.1 + 103.8 + 80.1 + 23.7 + 50.1 + 14.9
2010          Jan + 11.2 − 0.6 + 2.3 − 1.5 − 1.6 + 0.1 + 3.8 + 3.8 − 0.1 + 9.0 + 5.5
         Feb − 8.9 − 7.1 − 6.2 − 5.1 − 5.2 + 0.0 − 1.0 − 0.1 − 0.9 − 2.8 − 3.5
         Mar + 0.2 − 3.1 + 5.4 + 3.0 + 3.0 + 0.0 + 2.4 + 2.5 − 0.1 − 5.2 − 8.1
         Apr + 42.1 + 15.5 + 9.7 + 8.9 + 8.9 − 0.0 + 0.9 + 2.0 − 1.1 + 32.3 + 28.6
         May − 10.7 + 10.5 + 3.0 − 1.2 − 1.1 − 0.0 + 4.2 + 3.6 + 0.6 − 13.7 − 20.0
         June + 17.5 + 8.7 + 12.5 + 0.7 + 0.7 + 0.0 + 11.8 + 6.3 + 5.5 + 5.0 − 4.3
         July − 7.8 − 7.8 − 10.3 − 7.5 − 7.5 + 0.0 − 2.8 − 4.4 + 1.6 + 2.4 + 3.9
         Aug + 10.5 + 8.8 + 0.6 + 3.6 + 3.7 − 0.1 − 3.0 − 2.4 − 0.6 + 9.9 + 4.8
         Sep − 20.6 − 17.7 − 13.4 − 13.8 − 13.8 − 0.0 + 0.4 + 0.6 − 0.2 − 7.2 − 8.6
         Oct + 120.1 + 11.7 + 26.9 + 4.1 + 4.0 + 0.1 + 22.7 + 3.5 + 19.2 + 93.3 + 6.0
         Nov + 41.1 + 105.0 + 92.7 + 20.3 + 20.3 − 0.0 + 72.3 + 74.4 − 2.1 − 51.5 + 9.3
         Dec − 64.1 − 45.2 − 42.8 − 34.9 − 34.8 − 0.1 − 7.9 − 9.7 + 1.8 − 21.3 + 1.3
2011          Jan + 20.3 + 7.2 + 12.2 + 7.3 + 7.3 + 0.0 + 4.8 + 3.5 + 1.3 + 8.1 + 8.5
         Feb − 0.9 + 9.1 + 6.2 + 18.6 + 18.6 + 0.1 − 12.4 − 12.5 + 0.1 − 7.1 − 5.1
         Mar − 28.6 − 29.5 − 30.7 − 15.9 − 15.9 + 0.0 − 14.8 − 10.1 − 4.8 + 2.1 − 1.2
         Apr + 14.8 − 8.8 − 5.9 + 3.2 + 3.1 + 0.1 − 9.1 − 9.9 + 0.8 + 20.7 + 20.3
         May − 17.1 + 5.0 − 4.1 + 9.3 + 9.3 − − 13.4 − 11.6 − 1.9 − 13.1 − 16.8
         June − 17.5 − 4.7 − 1.4 + 2.1 + 2.0 + 0.1 − 3.6 − 1.3 − 2.3 − 16.1 − 13.3
*See Table IV.2, footnote*; statistical breaks have been eliminated from the including fiduciary loans (see also footnote 9). — 3Up to December 1998,
changes. The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as bill-based lending (bill holdings plus endorsement liabilities arising from
provisional. Subsequent revisions, which appear in the following Monthly rediscounted bills and bills sent for collection from the banks’ portfolios
Report, are not specially marked. — 1Up to December 1998, including loans prior to maturity). — 4From 1999, including small amounts of medium-term
to domestic building and loan associations. — 2Up to December 1998, series of bills. — 5From 1999, breakdown of securities by medium
30*IV Banks

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2011
IV Banks
 
 
 
 
lending  2,5 
prises and households  1,2 to general government  2 
Loans Loans
Memo Memo
item Equal- item
Medium- Long- Fiduciary Medium- Long- Secur- isation Fiduciary
Total term  6 term  7 loans  8 Total Total term  6 term  7 loans  8   Period Securities  5 ities 5,9 claims  10 
End of year or month *
 
1,880.5 191.1 1,689.4 189.7 48.9 556.0 440.3 25.6 414.6 111.8 4.0 8.0 2001
1,909.8 193.5 1,716.3 169.9 47.3 552.1 417.1 27.4 389.7 132.0 3.0 7.5 2002
1,927.7 195.0 1,732.8 168.3 49.9 544.3 401.0 34.6 366.4 141.3 2.0 7.0 2003
1,940.8 194.3 1,746.5 173.5 55.3 566.1 387.7 32.9 354.8 177.5 1.0 6.5 2004
1,953.4 194.7 1,758.8 187.9 52.1 544.1 374.4 32.9 341.4 169.7 − 4.5 2005
1,972.7 194.5 1,778.1 209.1 48.2 515.8 358.4 31.7 326.6 157.4 − 4.8 2006
1,987.3 207.7 1,779.6 181.1 46.5 476.2 332.5 31.9 300.6 143.7 − 4.7 2007
2,022.0 222.0 1,800.0 235.8 42.8 440.3 308.2 29.7 278.5 132.1 − 4.5 2008
2,051.3 242.7 1,808.6 248.4 39.6 453.1 298.0 32.2 265.8 155.1 − 4.3 2009
2,070.0 238.1 1,831.8 235.7 30.7 487.3 301.2 36.1 265.1 186.1 − 3.1 2010
2,049.4 241.4 1,808.0 255.8 39.2 456.6 297.0 31.5 265.5 159.5 − 4.2 2010          Jan 
2,051.2 241.9 1,809.4 251.0 39.1 457.3 294.0 30.8 263.2 163.4 − 4.2          Feb 
2,044.4 237.5 1,806.9 245.9 38.7 459.6 292.2 30.5 261.8 167.4 − 4.1          Mar 
2,048.7 237.7 1,811.0 270.1 38.7 463.3 292.5 30.9 261.6 170.8 − 4.1          Apr 
2,054.3 237.6 1,816.7 244.6 38.6 469.6 295.0 31.4 263.6 174.6 − 4.1          May
2,055.1 237.2 1,817.9 237.5 38.4 478.8 293.9 31.3 262.6 184.9 − 4.1          June
2,059.1 237.2 1,821.9 237.3 38.3 477.2 294.0 31.9 262.1 183.3 − 4.1          July
2,063.6 236.7 1,826.9 237.2 38.3 482.3 296.5 33.9 262.6 185.8 − 4.0          Aug 
2,060.7 236.2 1,824.5 234.2 38.1 483.7 297.6 34.0 263.6 186.1 − 4.0          Sep 
2,063.2 236.9 1,826.3 237.0 38.0 570.8 298.4 34.7 263.7 272.4 − 4.0          Oct 
2,071.6 238.5 1,833.1 237.9 37.8 510.0 300.3 35.7 264.6 209.6 − 3.9          Nov 
2,070.0 238.1 1,831.8 235.7 30.7 487.3 301.2 36.1 265.1 186.1 − 3.1          Dec 
2,066.5 237.0 1,829.6 247.6 30.5 486.9 301.0 37.2 263.8 186.0 − 3.0 2011          Jan 
2,069.2 236.8 1,832.5 239.8 30.5 485.0 301.3 37.9 263.4 183.6 − 3.0          Feb 
2,066.3 238.6 1,827.6 241.5 30.3 488.2 300.7 38.2 262.5 187.5 − 3.0          Mar 
2,065.4 236.2 1,829.2 262.7 30.1 488.6 299.6 38.6 261.1 189.0 − 3.0          Apr 
2,071.7 237.7 1,833.9 239.6 30.1 492.3 300.6 38.8 261.8 191.7 − 3.0          May
2,068.2 234.6 1,833.6 229.8 30.0 489.5 298.7 39.0 259.7 190.9 − 2.9          June
Changes *
+ 26.6 − 2.1 + 28.7 − 19.0 − 1.6 − 3.4 − 23.1 + 1.0 − 24.1 + 20.7 − 1.0 − 0.5 2002
+ 17.9 + 0.2 + 17.8 − 1.9 + 2.6 − 5.9 − 16.1 + 4.9 − 21.0 + 11.2 − 1.0 − 0.5 2003
+ 10.7 + 0.2 + 10.5 + 4.9 + 3.6 + 19.4 − 13.8 − 0.9 − 12.9 + 34.3 − 1.1 − 0.6 2004
+ 12.5 + 1.7 + 10.8 + 14.3 − 3.0 − 22.1 − 13.4 + 0.9 − 14.2 − 7.7 − 1.0 − 2.0 2005
+ 2.3 + 0.2 + 2.2 + 21.2 − 3.9 − 28.8 − 16.4 − 1.4 − 15.0 − 12.4 − + 0.3 2006
+ 9.6 + 10.1 − 0.6 − 16.7 − 2.2 − 36.3 − 25.8 + 0.1 − 26.0 − 10.5 − − 0.1 2007
+ 28.8 + 12.0 + 16.8 + 54.7 − 5.3 − 34.5 − 23.2 − 2.3 − 20.8 − 11.4 − − 0.1 2008
+ 23.5 + 17.3 + 6.3 + 13.1 − 3.9 + 15.2 − 7.6 + 2.5 − 10.2 + 22.8 − − 0.2 2009
+ 18.6 − 4.0 + 22.6 − 3.8 − 1.7 + 35.2 + 3.5 + 3.5 − 0.0 + 31.7 − − 0.3 2010
− 1.9 − 1.3 − 0.6 + 7.4 − 0.4 + 3.4 − 0.9 − 0.7 − 0.3 + 4.4 − − 0.1 2010          Jan 
+ 1.3 − 0.1 + 1.4 − 4.8 − 0.1 + 0.8 − 3.1 − 0.7 − 2.4 + 3.8 − − 0.0          Feb 
− 6.8 − 4.4 − 2.5 − 1.2 − 0.4 + 2.8 − 1.8 − 0.4 − 1.4 + 4.6 − − 0.0          Mar 
+ 4.4 + 0.2 + 4.2 + 24.2 − 0.1 + 3.7 + 0.3 + 0.5 − 0.2 + 3.5 − − 0.0          Apr 
+ 5.5 − 0.1 + 5.6 − 25.6 − 0.0 + 6.3 + 2.5 + 0.4 + 2.0 + 3.8 − − 0.0          May
+ 2.7 + 0.6 + 2.1 − 7.0 − 0.3 + 9.3 − 1.0 − 0.4 − 0.6 + 10.3 − − 0.0          June
+ 4.1 + 0.0 + 4.1 − 0.2 − 0.1 − 1.4 + 0.0 + 0.6 − 0.6 − 1.5 − − 0.0          July
+ 5.0 − 0.3 + 5.3 − 0.2 − 0.0 + 5.1 + 2.5 + 2.0 + 0.5 + 2.5 − − 0.0          Aug 
− 5.6 − 0.5 − 5.1 − 3.0 − 0.2 + 1.4 + 1.1 + 0.0 + 1.0 + 0.3 − − 0.0          Sep 
+ 3.2 + 0.7 + 2.5 + 2.8 − 0.1 + 87.3 + 1.0 + 0.8 + 0.2 + 86.3 − − 0.0          Oct 
+ 8.3 + 1.6 + 6.8 + 1.0 − 0.0 − 60.8 + 1.9 + 1.0 + 1.0 − 62.8 − − 0.0          Nov 
− 1.5 − 0.3 − 1.2 + 2.8 − 0.0 − 22.6 + 0.9 + 0.4 + 0.5 − 23.5 − − 0.0          Dec 
− 3.5 − 1.2 − 2.3 + 12.0 − 0.2 − 0.4 − 0.3 + 1.1 − 1.3 − 0.2 − − 0.0 2011          Jan 
+ 2.7 − 0.2 + 2.9 − 7.8 + 0.0 − 2.0 + 0.4 + 0.7 − 0.4 − 2.3 − − 0.0          Feb 
− 2.9 + 1.2 − 4.2 + 1.7 − 0.2 + 3.2 − 0.6 + 0.3 − 0.9 + 3.8 − − 0.0          Mar 
− 0.9 − 2.4 + 1.5 + 21.2 − 0.2 + 0.4 − 1.1 + 0.3 − 1.5 + 1.5 − − 0.0          Apr 
+ 6.3 + 1.6 + 4.6 − 23.0 − 0.0 + 3.7 + 1.0 + 0.2 + 0.8 + 2.7 − + 0.0          May
− 3.4 − 3.1 − 0.3 − 9.9 − 0.1 − 2.8 − 2.0 + 0.2 − 2.1 − 0.8 − − 0.0          June
and long-term lending no longer possible. — 6Up to December 1998, 1999, of more than five years. — 8From 1999, no longer included in lending
maturity or period of notice of more than one year to less than four years; (see also footnote 2). — 9Excluding debt securities arising from the
from 1999, more than one year up to and including five years. — 7Up to exchange of equalisation claims (see also footnote 10). — 10Including debt
December 1998, maturity or period of notice of four years and more; from securities arising from the exchange of equalisation claims. 
31*IV Banks

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
E U R O S Y S T E M
Monthly Report
August 2011
IV Banks
 
6 Lending by banks (MFIs) in Germany to domestic enterprises and households, housing loans,
sectors of economic activity *
 
€ billion
Lending to domestic enterprises and households (excluding holdings of negotiable money market paper and excluding securities portfolios)  1 
of which  
 
Housing loans Lending to enterprises and self-employed persons
 
Whole-
sale and Electricity,
gas and retail Financial
Mortgage water trade; Agri- Transport- intermedi-
loans supply; repair of culture, ation and ation
secured refuse motor forestry, storage; (excluding
by disposal, vehicles fishing post and MFIs) and
Mortgage residen- Other of which mining and and telecom- insurance
loans, tial real housing Housing Manufac- and Construc- motor- aqua- munica- com-
Period Total total Total estate loans Total loans turing quarrying tion cycles culture tions panies
Lending, total End of year or quarter *
 
2009 2,357.6 1,155.1 1,094.7 905.0 189.7 1,327.1 301.4 145.8 68.5 63.2 122.1 36.4 74.7 165.2
2010          June 2,368.1 1,157.6 1,091.0 901.8 189.2 1,339.2 299.0 143.5 72.3 64.2 120.6 39.6 81.5 171.8
         Sep 2,353.9 1,151.9 1,096.6 905.8 190.8 1,320.0 300.2 138.1 73.0 63.4 120.1 40.5 78.1 160.6
         Dec 2,352.9 1,153.8 1,101.6 907.8 193.8 1,317.2 302.4 134.1 75.5 61.7 120.3 40.3 78.8 157.5
2011          Mar 2,358.7 1,150.4 1,098.9 906.8 192.1 1,325.0 300.5 138.0 76.9 61.8 121.8 40.5 77.3 161.1
         June 2,374.9 1,163.7 1,102.8 909.3 193.4 1,337.2 301.3 137.1 78.9 60.7 121.6 41.6 77.0 173.6
 Short-term lending
2009 306.3 − 8.4 − 8.4 266.9 4.5 36.3 6.0 14.2 39.7 3.0 7.1 90.7
2010          June 313.0 − 7.4 − 7.4 272.6 3.8 36.4 6.4 14.9 38.8 3.9 7.9 95.6
         Sep 293.3 − 8.1 − 8.1 252.6 4.0 34.8 5.2 14.6 39.0 3.7 7.3 82.7
         Dec 282.9 − 7.7 − 7.7 243.2 3.8 32.2 5.2 13.2 39.4 3.0 6.6 78.9
2011          Mar 292.5 − 7.7 − 7.7 253.3 3.9 36.8 5.3 13.7 41.2 3.3 7.1 81.8
         June 306.7 − 7.7 − 7.7 267.0 4.0 38.1 5.8 13.5 41.5 3.7 7.1 93.9
 Medium-term lending
2009 242.7 − 32.4 − 32.4 173.9 11.8 32.6 4.8 9.0 13.9 3.7 13.6 25.5
2010          June 237.2 − 32.4 − 32.4 169.3 11.8 30.3 5.2 9.3 13.6 3.8 13.5 26.9
         Sep 236.2 − 33.0 − 33.0 167.8 11.9 28.2 5.0 9.3 13.3 4.1 13.1 27.7
         Dec 238.1 − 32.8 − 32.8 169.1 11.4 27.5 5.2 9.2 13.4 3.9 12.9 29.0
2011          Mar 238.6 − 32.6 − 32.6 169.9 11.1 27.7 5.3 9.0 13.7 3.8 12.3 30.3
         June 234.7 − 33.2 − 33.2 165.8 11.4 26.4 5.3 8.7 13.7 3.9 11.8 30.7
 Long-term lending
2009 1,808.6 1,155.1 1,053.9 905.0 148.9 886.4 285.1 76.9 57.7 40.0 68.5 29.8 54.0 49.0
2010          June 1,817.9 1,157.6 1,051.1 901.8 149.3 897.2 283.4 76.8 60.7 40.0 68.2 32.0 60.2 49.2
         Sep 1,824.5 1,151.9 1,055.6 905.8 149.8 899.7 284.3 75.1 62.8 39.5 67.7 32.7 57.7 50.2
         Dec 1,831.8 1,153.8 1,061.1 907.8 153.4 904.9 287.1 74.5 65.1 39.3 67.6 33.4 59.3 49.6
2011          Mar 1,827.6 1,150.4 1,058.7 906.8 151.9 901.8 285.4 73.6 66.3 39.0 66.9 33.4 57.9 49.0
         June 1,833.6 1,163.7 1,061.8 909.3 152.4 904.4 285.9 72.6 67.8 38.5 66.4 34.0 58.1 48.9
 
Lending, total Change during quarter *
 
2010          Q2 + 21.0 + 2.7 + 0.5 + 0.7 − 0.1 + 18.2 − 0.6 − 0.4 + 2.7 + 0.4 − 1.6 + 2.1 + 4.4 + 8.7
         Q3 − 14.1 + 2.3 + 5.1 + 3.6 + 1.5 − 19.5 + 1.1 − 4.2 + 0.7 − 0.8 − 0.5 + 0.9 − 3.4 − 11.2
         Q4 − 0.4 + 3.6 + 4.2 + 3.6 + 0.5 − 2.8 + 0.7 − 3.9 + 2.4 − 1.7 + 0.3 − 0.3 + 0.7 − 3.1
2011          Q1 + 6.3 − 1.9 − 1.8 − 0.1 − 1.7 + 8.2 − 0.9 + 3.9 + 1.4 + 0.1 + 1.5 + 0.3 − 1.5 + 3.8
         Q2 + 16.4 + 3.3 + 4.0 + 2.2 + 1.8 + 12.2 + 1.1 − 0.9 + 2.0 − 0.9 − 0.2 + 1.0 − 0.3 + 12.5
 Short-term lending
2010          Q2 + 8.4 − − 0.7 − − 0.7 + 7.9 − 0.6 − 0.2 + 0.3 − 0.2 − 0.9 + 0.3 + 0.2 + 8.1
         Q3 − 17.7 − + 0.2 − + 0.2 − 17.8 + 0.1 − 1.7 − 1.2 − 0.4 + 0.2 − 0.2 − 0.6 − 10.4
         Q4 − 10.5 − − 0.4 − − 0.4 − 9.4 − 0.2 − 2.6 + 0.0 − 1.4 + 0.3 − 0.7 − 0.7 − 3.8
2011          Q1 + 10.0 − − 0.0 − − 0.0 + 10.6 + 0.1 + 4.6 + 0.1 + 0.6 + 1.8 + 0.3 + 0.5 + 3.6
         Q2 + 14.4 − + 0.1 − + 0.1 + 13.7 + 0.1 + 1.3 + 0.6 − 0.2 + 0.3 + 0.4 − 0.0 + 12.1
 Medium-term lending
2010          Q2 + 0.7 − + 0.5 − + 0.5 − 0.1 + 0.2 − 0.0 − 0.1 + 0.3 − 1.0 + 0.1 − 0.1 + 0.7
         Q3 − 0.8 − + 0.5 − + 0.5 − 1.7 + 0.1 − 0.9 − 0.2 + 0.1 − 0.3 + 0.3 − 0.4 + 0.9
         Q4 + 1.9 − − 0.2 − − 0.2 + 1.4 − 0.5 − 0.7 + 0.2 − 0.1 + 0.1 − 0.2 − 0.2 + 1.3
2011          Q1 − 0.1 − − 0.3 − − 0.3 + 0.1 − 0.3 + 0.2 + 0.1 − 0.2 + 0.3 − 0.1 − 0.6 + 0.7
         Q2 − 3.8 − + 0.7 − + 0.7 − 4.0 + 0.2 − 1.2 − 0.1 − 0.3 + 0.0 + 0.0 − 0.5 + 0.4
 Long-term lending
2010          Q2 + 11.9 + 2.7 + 0.7 + 0.7 + 0.0 + 10.4 − 0.2 − 0.2 + 2.4 + 0.2 + 0.2 + 1.6 + 4.3 − 0.1
         Q3 + 4.4 + 2.3 + 4.3 + 3.6 + 0.8 + 0.0 + 1.0 − 1.7 + 2.1 − 0.5 − 0.4 + 0.8 − 2.5 − 1.6
         Q4 + 8.1 + 3.6 + 4.7 + 3.6 + 1.1 + 5.3 + 1.4 − 0.7 + 2.2 − 0.2 − 0.1 + 0.6 + 1.5 − 0.6
2011          Q1 − 3.6 − 1.9 − 1.5 − 0.1 − 1.4 − 2.5 − 0.7 − 0.9 + 1.2 − 0.3 − 0.7 + 0.0 − 1.3 − 0.4
         Q2 + 5.8 + 3.3 + 3.2 + 2.2 + 1.0 + 2.6 + 0.7 − 0.9 + 1.5 − 0.4 − 0.5 + 0.6 + 0.2 − 0.1
*Excluding lending by foreign branches. Breakdown of lending by building have been eliminated from the changes. The figures for the latest date are
and loan associations by areas and sectors estimated. Statistical alterations always to be regarded as provisional; subsequent alterations, which will
32*IV Banks

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2011
IV Banks
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Lending to
 Lending to employees and other individuals non-profit institutions
Memo items Other lending Services sector (including the professions)
of which of which
Debit
balances
on wage,
Other Lending salary
real to self- Lending and of which
Housing Holding estate employed to craft Housing pension Housing Instalment
Total companies Total loans Total loans  3 accounts Total loans   Period enterprises activities persons  2 enterprises
End of year or quarter * Lending, total 
 
651.2 181.2 46.5 170.5 378.9 54.3 1,017.5 790.0 227.5 142.0 15.8 13.0 3.3 2009
645.7 177.3 44.1 175.0 381.1 55.0 1,016.0 788.7 227.4 143.8 14.2 12.9 3.4 2010          June
646.2 176.8 46.8 176.4 381.2 54.4 1,020.8 792.9 228.0 154.0 14.7 13.1 3.5          Sep 
649.0 178.5 46.8 175.8 380.4 53.5 1,022.4 795.7 226.7 155.0 13.9 13.3 3.5          Dec 
647.6 175.8 47.0 178.7 378.2 53.9 1,020.3 794.9 225.4 155.1 13.7 13.5 3.5 2011          Mar 
646.7 178.3 44.6 177.9 379.5 53.6 1,024.2 798.0 226.2 145.7 13.9 13.6 3.5          June
Short-term lending
69.9 11.1 12.1 14.6 33.3 8.3 38.7 4.0 34.7 3.0 15.8 0.7 0.0 2009
68.7 10.5 11.7 14.5 34.1 8.8 39.6 3.7 35.9 2.8 14.2 0.8 0.0 2010          June
65.3 9.9 11.6 14.3 33.1 8.5 40.0 4.0 36.0 2.6 14.7 0.7 0.0          Sep 
64.7 9.6 11.7 13.9 32.2 7.7 38.9 3.9 35.1 2.6 13.9 0.9 0.0          Dec 
64.2 9.4 12.3 13.5 31.9 8.4 38.2 3.7 34.5 2.6 13.7 0.9 0.0 2011          Mar 
63.3 9.5 11.7 13.2 32.1 8.5 38.7 3.7 35.0 2.5 13.9 1.1 0.0          June
Medium-term lending
70.8 8.5 11.0 21.7 27.6 4.0 68.2 20.5 47.7 40.9 − 0.6 0.0 2009
66.8 8.5 8.8 21.8 27.8 3.8 67.4 20.6 46.8 41.5 − 0.5 0.0 2010          June
67.1 8.7 9.8 21.3 28.0 3.7 67.9 21.0 46.9 41.7 − 0.5 0.0          Sep 
68.1 8.8 10.1 21.3 28.1 3.8 68.5 21.3 47.1 42.0 − 0.5 0.0          Dec 
67.8 8.6 10.0 22.1 28.0 3.9 68.2 21.4 46.8 41.7 − 0.5 0.0 2011          Mar 
65.3 8.4 8.3 21.6 28.2 3.7 68.3 21.8 46.5 41.5 − 0.5 0.0          June
Long-term lending
510.4 161.6 23.5 134.1 318.0 42.0 910.6 765.5 145.0 98.0 − 11.7 3.3 2009
510.2 158.3 23.6 138.7 319.1 42.3 909.1 764.4 144.7 99.5 − 11.6 3.3 2010          June
513.8 158.1 25.4 140.8 320.0 42.2 913.0 767.8 145.1 109.6 − 11.9 3.5          Sep 
516.2 160.2 25.0 140.6 320.1 42.0 915.0 770.5 144.5 110.4 − 11.9 3.5          Dec 
515.7 157.9 24.7 143.1 318.3 41.6 913.9 769.8 144.1 110.8 − 12.0 3.5 2011          Mar 
518.0 160.4 24.5 143.1 319.2 41.4 917.2 772.5 144.8 101.7 − 12.0 3.4          June
 
Change during quarter * Lending, total 
 
+ 2.1 − 2.0 − 0.9 + 3.2 + 2.7 − 0.1 + 2.9 + 1.1 + 1.7 + 1.9 − 0.7 − 0.1 + 0.0 2010          Q2
− 1.0 + 0.4 + 1.3 + 0.3 + 0.2 − 0.6 + 5.2 + 3.8 + 1.4 + 0.9 + 0.4 + 0.2 + 0.1          Q3
+ 2.9 + 1.4 + 0.2 − 0.4 − 0.8 − 0.9 + 2.1 + 3.4 − 1.3 + 0.7 − 0.8 + 0.2 + 0.0          Q4
− 1.2 + 0.1 + 0.1 + 0.0 − 2.2 + 0.4 − 2.1 − 0.8 − 1.3 + 0.1 − 0.2 + 0.2 − 0.0 2011          Q1
− 1.0 + 1.4 − 2.5 + 0.2 + 1.3 − 0.4 + 4.1 + 2.9 + 1.1 + 0.4 + 0.1 + 0.1 − 0.0          Q2
Short-term lending
+ 0.2 − 0.1 + 0.0 − 0.3 + 0.1 − 0.1 + 0.5 − 0.1 + 0.6 − 0.2 − 0.7 + 0.0 − 0.0 2010          Q2
− 3.6 − 0.5 − 0.3 − 0.3 − 1.2 − 0.3 + 0.2 + 0.1 + 0.1 − 0.1 + 0.4 − 0.0 + 0.0          Q3
− 0.6 − 0.4 + 0.1 − 0.4 − 1.0 − 0.8 − 1.2 − 0.2 − 1.0 − 0.0 − 0.8 + 0.1 − 0.0          Q4
− 0.8 − 0.1 + 0.4 − 0.6 − 0.3 + 0.7 − 0.7 − 0.1 − 0.6 − 0.0 − 0.2 + 0.1 − 0.0 2011          Q1
− 0.8 + 0.2 − 0.6 − 0.2 + 0.3 + 0.1 + 0.6 − 0.0 + 0.6 − 0.1 + 0.1 + 0.1 + 0.0          Q2
Medium-term lending
+ 0.0 − 0.1 − 0.5 − 0.1 + 0.4 − 0.1 + 0.9 + 0.4 + 0.5 + 0.6 − − 0.1 + 0.0 2010          Q2
− 1.2 + 0.3 − 0.2 − 0.6 + 0.2 − 0.1 + 0.9 + 0.4 + 0.4 + 0.3 − + 0.0 + 0.0          Q3
+ 1.0 + 0.0 + 0.3 + 0.0 + 0.1 + 0.0 + 0.6 + 0.3 + 0.3 + 0.3 − + 0.0 − 0.0          Q4
− 0.3 − 0.2 − 0.1 + 0.4 − 0.2 + 0.1 − 0.3 + 0.1 − 0.4 − 0.3 − + 0.0 − 0.0 2011          Q1
− 2.4 − 0.2 − 1.7 − 0.5 + 0.3 − 0.2 + 0.2 + 0.4 − 0.2 − 0.2 − + 0.0 − 0.0          Q2
Long-term lending
+ 1.9 − 1.8 − 0.4 + 3.7 + 2.3 + 0.1 + 1.6 + 0.9 + 0.6 + 1.5 − − 0.0 + 0.0 2010          Q2
+ 3.8 + 0.7 + 1.8 + 1.2 + 1.1 − 0.2 + 4.1 + 3.2 + 0.9 + 0.7 − + 0.2 + 0.1          Q3
+ 2.4 + 1.8 − 0.2 + 0.0 + 0.0 − 0.2 + 2.8 + 3.3 − 0.5 + 0.4 − + 0.1 + 0.0          Q4
− 0.2 + 0.3 − 0.2 + 0.1 − 1.7 − 0.3 − 1.1 − 0.7 − 0.4 + 0.3 − + 0.1 − 0.0 2011          Q1
+ 2.2 + 1.4 − 0.2 + 0.9 + 0.8 − 0.2 + 3.2 + 2.5 + 0.7 + 0.7 − − 0.0 − 0.0          Q2
appear in the following Monthly Report, are not specially marked. — mortgage loans and housing loans, even in the form of instalment credit. 
1Excluding fiduciary loans. — 2Including sole proprietors. — 3Excluding
33*IV Banks

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
E U R O S Y S T E M
Monthly Report
August 2011
IV Banks
 
7 Deposits of domestic non-banks (non-MFIs) at banks (MFIs) in Germany *
 
 
€ billion
Time deposits  1,2   Memo item
  
 for more than 1 year  2 Included Subordinated
 liabilities in time
for up for up (excluding deposits:
to and to and for more Bank negotiable liabilities
Deposits, Sight including including than Savings savings Fiduciary debt arising
Period total deposits Total 1 year Total 2 years 2 years bonds  4 loans securities) from repos deposits  3 
Domestic non-banks, total End of year or month *
 
2008 2,781.4 834.6 1,276.1 530.6 745.6 32.6 713.0 535.2 135.4 32.3 34.4 59.3
2009 2,829.7 1,029.5 1,102.6 339.5 763.1 32.1 731.0 594.5 103.2 43.4 35.6 76.8
2010 2,936.6 1,104.4 1,117.1 329.3 787.8 25.1 762.7 618.2 96.9 37.5 37.2 80.9
2010          July 2,851.1 1,084.9 1,061.3 314.4 746.9 24.7 722.2 605.9 98.9 42.2 37.8 86.4
         Aug 2,873.4 1,094.7 1,074.2 324.6 749.6 24.3 725.2 605.9 98.7 42.2 37.6 97.5
         Sep 2,867.2 1,083.3 1,079.4 331.4 748.0 24.2 723.9 606.1 98.4 42.1 37.6 89.1
         Oct 2,872.3 1,091.1 1,075.1 316.3 758.9 24.6 734.2 607.4 98.6 42.0 37.4 78.6
         Nov 2,946.1 1,129.6 1,110.2 323.6 786.6 24.7 762.0 610.0 96.3 42.0 37.4 103.7
         Dec 2,936.6 1,104.4 1,117.1 329.3 787.8 25.1 762.7 618.2 96.9 37.5 37.2 80.9
2011          Jan 2,928.6 1,125.9 1,085.0 304.4 780.6 25.0 755.6 620.4 97.2 37.3 37.0 68.0
         Feb 2,942.8 1,121.6 1,100.7 320.6 780.0 24.9 755.1 622.5 98.0 37.4 37.1 90.9
         Mar 2,930.5 1,112.1 1,096.6 317.9 778.7 25.4 753.3 623.5 98.3 37.2 36.8 75.0
         Apr 2,948.4 1,127.1 1,099.2 323.6 775.7 26.0 749.7 622.3 99.8 37.0 36.7 84.7
         May 2,976.6 1,125.7 1,129.3 354.4 775.0 26.7 748.3 619.9 101.7 37.0 36.7 102.8
         June 2,980.6 1,123.7 1,136.4 363.7 772.7 26.0 746.7 617.8 102.7 36.7 36.6 103.5
Changes *
2009 + 59.7 + 211.4 − 179.3 − 207.5 + 28.2 − 0.5 + 28.7 + 59.3 − 31.6 − 0.9 + 1.4 + 17.5
2010 + 77.4 + 76.0 − 18.9 − 12.6 − 6.3 − 7.0 + 0.7 + 24.0 − 3.7 − 1.7 + 1.6 + 4.1
2010          July − 16.4 − 5.6 − 11.8 − 8.7 − 3.1 − 1.1 − 2.1 + 1.5 − 0.5 − 0.2 + 0.0 − 9.7
         Aug + 17.6 + 9.8 + 8.2 + 10.2 − 2.0 − 0.4 − 1.6 − 0.1 − 0.3 − 0.0 − 0.2 + 11.1
         Sep − 6.2 − 11.4 + 5.2 + 6.7 − 1.5 − 0.2 − 1.3 + 0.3 − 0.2 − 0.1 − − 8.5
         Oct + 4.9 + 7.9 − 4.5 − 15.1 + 10.6 + 0.5 + 10.1 + 1.3 + 0.2 − 0.1 − 0.1 − 10.5
         Nov + 50.3 + 39.3 + 8.2 + 6.4 + 1.7 + 0.0 + 1.7 + 2.6 + 0.3 − 0.0 − 0.1 + 25.2
         Dec − 9.4 − 25.5 + 6.9 + 5.7 + 1.2 + 0.5 + 0.7 + 8.5 + 0.6 − 0.3 − 0.2 − 22.8
2011          Jan − 8.1 + 21.6 − 32.1 − 24.9 − 7.2 − 0.1 − 7.1 + 2.2 + 0.3 − 0.2 − 0.1 − 12.9
         Feb + 14.2 − 4.4 + 15.7 + 16.3 − 0.6 − 0.1 − 0.5 + 2.1 + 0.8 + 0.0 + 0.0 + 22.9
         Mar − 12.3 − 9.5 − 4.3 − 2.7 − 1.6 + 0.5 − 2.1 + 1.0 + 0.5 − 0.2 − 0.2 − 15.9
         Apr + 17.9 + 15.9 + 3.0 + 5.6 − 2.6 + 0.6 − 3.2 − 2.1 + 1.0 − 0.1 − 0.1 + 9.7
         May + 28.3 − 1.4 + 30.1 + 30.8 − 0.7 + 0.7 − 1.4 − 2.4 + 1.9 − 0.1 − 0.1 + 18.1
         June + 4.0 − 2.0 + 7.0 + 9.3 − 2.3 − 0.7 − 1.6 − 2.1 + 1.0 − 0.3 − 0.1 + 0.7
Domestic government End of year or month *
2008 164.7 34.2 127.8 75.4 52.5 3.6 48.8 1.2 1.5 24.2 3.9 −
2009 129.3 41.8 83.4 43.0 40.4 3.6 36.8 2.6 1.5 35.7 3.9 0.5
2010 153.4 46.1 103.0 47.7 55.3 2.6 52.7 2.8 1.5 34.7 6.2 0.4
2010          July 130.5 40.5 85.7 43.9 41.8 2.1 39.7 2.8 1.6 35.2 6.2 0.1
         Aug 137.0 43.0 89.6 47.5 42.0 2.0 40.0 2.8 1.6 35.1 6.2 0.4
         Sep 140.6 43.4 93.0 51.6 41.3 1.9 39.4 2.8 1.5 35.1 6.2 1.4
         Oct 147.3 41.7 101.3 47.3 54.0 2.2 51.8 2.8 1.5 35.0 6.2 0.1
         Nov 156.0 49.1 102.6 45.8 56.7 2.1 54.7 2.8 1.5 35.0 6.2 1.0
         Dec 153.4 46.1 103.0 47.7 55.3 2.6 52.7 2.8 1.5 34.7 6.2 0.4
2011          Jan 149.0 49.6 95.1 44.8 50.3 2.5 47.8 2.8 1.5 34.5 6.2 0.0
         Feb 152.7 48.7 99.6 49.4 50.2 2.3 47.9 2.9 1.5 34.5 6.2 3.2
         Mar 154.4 50.2 99.9 50.1 49.7 2.4 47.3 2.9 1.5 34.4 6.1 1.4
         Apr 150.8 46.8 99.6 51.3 48.3 2.5 45.9 2.9 1.5 34.4 6.1 0.9
         May 160.9 50.3 106.3 57.5 48.8 2.9 45.9 2.8 1.5 34.4 6.1 2.7
         June 170.4 52.0 114.1 65.8 48.3 2.6 45.7 2.7 1.6 34.1 6.1 6.1
Changes *
2009 − 23.9 + 7.5 − 32.9 − 32.2 − 0.7 − 0.0 − 0.7 + 1.4 + 0.1 − 0.5 + 0.0 + 0.5
2010 + 23.9 + 4.1 + 19.7 + 4.7 + 14.9 − 1.0 + 16.0 + 0.3 − 0.1 − 1.0 + 2.3 − 0.1
2010          July − 8.5 − 6.6 − 1.8 − 1.5 − 0.3 − 0.4 + 0.1 + 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.1 − − 0.1
         Aug + 6.5 + 2.6 + 3.9 + 3.6 + 0.3 − 0.1 + 0.4 + 0.0 + 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.0 + 0.3
         Sep + 3.6 + 0.3 + 3.4 + 4.1 − 0.7 − 0.1 − 0.6 + 0.0 − 0.1 − 0.1 − + 1.0
         Oct + 6.7 − 1.6 + 8.4 − 4.3 + 12.7 + 0.3 + 12.4 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 1.3
         Nov + 8.7 + 7.4 + 1.2 − 1.5 + 2.7 − 0.1 + 2.8 + 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.0 + 0.9
         Dec − 2.6 − 3.1 + 0.5 + 1.9 − 1.4 + 0.5 − 1.9 − 0.0 + 0.0 − 0.3 − 0.0 − 0.6
2011          Jan − 4.4 + 3.5 − 7.9 − 2.9 − 5.0 − 0.0 − 4.9 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.2 − 0.0 − 0.4
         Feb + 3.7 − 0.9 + 4.5 + 4.6 − 0.1 − 0.2 + 0.1 + 0.0 + 0.0 − 0.0 + 0.0 + 3.2
         Mar + 1.7 + 1.5 + 0.3 + 0.8 − 0.5 + 0.1 − 0.6 − 0.0 + 0.0 − 0.1 − 0.1 − 1.8
         Apr − 4.0 − 3.3 − 0.7 + 0.8 − 1.4 + 0.0 − 1.4 + 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.0 + 0.0 − 0.4
         May + 10.1 + 3.4 + 6.7 + 6.2 + 0.4 + 0.4 + 0.0 − 0.1 + 0.0 − 0.1 − + 1.7
         June + 9.5 + 1.8 + 7.8 + 8.3 − 0.5 − 0.3 − 0.2 − 0.1 + 0.1 − 0.3 − 0.0 + 3.4
*See Table IV.2, footnote *; statistical breaks have been eliminated from provisional. Subsequent revisions, which appear in the following Monthly
the changes. The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as Report, are not specially marked. — 1Including subordinated liabilities and
34*IV Banks

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2011
IV Banks
 
7 Deposits of domestic non-banks (non-MFIs) at banks (MFIs) in Germany * (cont’d)
 
 
€ billion
Time deposits  1,2   Memo item
  
 for more than 1 year  2 Included Subordinated
 liabilities in time
for up for up (excluding deposits:
to and to and for more Bank negotiable liabilities
Deposits, Sight including including than Savings savings Fiduciary debt arising
Period total deposits Total 1 year Total 2 years 2 years bonds  4 loans securities) from repos deposits  3 
Domestic enterprises and households End of year or month *
 
2008 2,616.7 800.5 1,148.3 455.2 693.1 29.0 664.1 534.0 133.9 8.1 30.5 59.3
2009 2,700.4 987.6 1,019.2 296.5 722.7 28.5 694.2 591.9 101.6 7.7 31.7 76.3
2010 2,783.2 1,058.3 1,014.1 281.6 732.5 22.5 710.0 615.4 95.4 2.9 31.0 80.5
2010          July 2,720.6 1,044.5 975.7 270.5 705.1 22.6 682.5 603.1 97.4 7.1 31.6 86.3
         Aug 2,736.4 1,051.7 984.6 277.1 707.5 22.3 685.2 603.0 97.1 7.1 31.4 97.1
         Sep 2,726.6 1,039.9 986.4 279.7 706.7 22.2 684.5 603.3 96.9 7.0 31.4 87.7
         Oct 2,725.0 1,049.4 973.8 268.9 704.9 22.5 682.4 604.6 97.2 7.0 31.2 78.5
         Nov 2,790.1 1,080.4 1,007.6 277.7 729.9 22.6 707.3 607.2 94.8 7.0 31.2 102.8
         Dec 2,783.2 1,058.3 1,014.1 281.6 732.5 22.5 710.0 615.4 95.4 2.9 31.0 80.5
2011          Jan 2,779.6 1,076.4 989.9 259.6 730.3 22.5 707.8 617.6 95.7 2.8 30.9 68.0
         Feb 2,790.1 1,072.9 1,001.1 271.3 729.8 22.6 707.2 619.7 96.5 2.9 30.9 87.7
         Mar 2,776.1 1,061.9 996.7 267.8 728.9 23.0 706.0 620.7 96.8 2.7 30.7 73.6
         Apr 2,797.5 1,080.3 999.6 272.3 727.3 23.5 703.8 619.5 98.2 2.6 30.6 83.7
         May 2,815.7 1,075.4 1,023.0 296.9 726.2 23.8 702.4 617.1 100.1 2.6 30.6 100.1
         June 2,810.2 1,071.6 1,022.3 297.9 724.4 23.4 701.0 615.1 101.1 2.6 30.5 97.4
Changes *
2009 + 83.6 + 203.8 − 146.4 − 175.3 + 28.9 − 0.5 + 29.4 + 57.9 − 31.7 − 0.4 + 1.4 + 17.0
2010 + 53.5 + 71.9 − 38.6 − 17.3 − 21.3 − 6.0 − 15.3 + 23.8 − 3.6 − 0.7 − 0.7 + 4.2
2010          July − 7.9 + 1.1 − 10.0 − 7.2 − 2.8 − 0.6 − 2.1 + 1.5 − 0.5 − 0.0 + 0.0 − 9.6
         Aug + 11.1 + 7.2 + 4.3 + 6.6 − 2.3 − 0.3 − 2.0 − 0.1 − 0.3 + 0.0 − 0.2 + 10.8
         Sep − 9.8 − 11.8 + 1.8 + 2.6 − 0.8 − 0.1 − 0.7 + 0.2 − 0.2 − 0.1 − − 9.4
         Oct − 1.8 + 9.5 − 12.9 − 10.8 − 2.1 + 0.2 − 2.3 + 1.3 + 0.2 − 0.0 − 0.1 − 9.2
         Nov + 41.7 + 31.9 + 6.9 + 7.9 − 1.0 + 0.1 − 1.1 + 2.5 + 0.3 − 0.0 − 0.1 + 24.3
         Dec − 6.9 − 22.4 + 6.4 + 3.9 + 2.6 − 0.1 + 2.7 + 8.6 + 0.6 − 0.0 − 0.2 − 22.3
2011          Jan − 3.7 + 18.1 − 24.2 − 22.0 − 2.2 − 0.1 − 2.1 + 2.2 + 0.3 − 0.0 − 0.1 − 12.5
         Feb + 10.6 − 3.5 + 11.2 + 11.7 − 0.5 + 0.1 − 0.6 + 2.1 + 0.8 + 0.0 + 0.0 + 19.8
         Mar − 14.0 − 10.9 − 4.6 − 3.4 − 1.2 + 0.4 − 1.6 + 1.0 + 0.5 − 0.1 − 0.1 − 14.1
         Apr + 21.8 + 19.2 + 3.7 + 4.9 − 1.2 + 0.6 − 1.7 − 2.1 + 1.1 − 0.1 − 0.1 + 10.1
         May + 18.2 − 4.8 + 23.5 + 24.6 − 1.1 + 0.3 − 1.4 − 2.3 + 1.9 − 0.0 − 0.1 + 16.4
         June − 5.5 − 3.8 − 0.7 + 1.0 − 1.8 − 0.4 − 1.4 − 2.0 + 1.0 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 2.7
of which:  Domestic enterprises End of year or month *
2008 1,073.5 292.6 757.7 223.7 534.0 7.7 526.3 3.8 19.3 7.8 22.0 59.3
2009 1,105.6 336.4 743.6 187.5 556.1 9.1 547.0 5.5 20.2 7.6 21.8 76.3
2010 1,124.3 344.6 755.5 196.0 559.5 7.5 552.0 6.3 17.9 2.8 21.3 80.5
2010          July 1,092.2 346.8 718.4 181.3 537.2 7.5 529.7 6.5 20.5 7.0 21.8 86.3
         Aug 1,110.5 356.3 727.2 187.9 539.3 7.5 531.8 6.5 20.5 7.0 21.5 97.1
         Sep 1,101.8 343.1 731.8 194.0 537.9 7.4 530.4 6.5 20.4 6.9 21.6 87.7
         Oct 1,092.1 346.2 719.0 183.6 535.4 7.5 527.9 6.5 20.4 6.9 21.4 78.5
         Nov 1,145.3 369.3 751.8 192.1 559.7 7.4 552.3 6.4 17.9 6.9 21.4 102.8
         Dec 1,124.3 344.6 755.5 196.0 559.5 7.5 552.0 6.3 17.9 2.8 21.3 80.5
2011          Jan 1,119.8 364.2 731.6 174.9 556.6 7.5 549.1 6.3 17.7 2.7 21.2 68.0
         Feb 1,124.8 358.7 742.0 186.9 555.1 7.4 547.6 6.4 17.8 2.8 21.2 87.7
         Mar 1,108.5 347.3 737.5 184.1 553.4 7.9 545.4 6.4 17.4 2.6 21.1 73.6
         Apr 1,121.5 359.3 738.5 186.6 551.8 8.3 543.5 6.4 17.2 2.6 21.0 83.7
         May 1,137.8 354.0 760.1 210.3 549.8 8.6 541.3 6.4 17.4 2.5 20.9 100.1
         June 1,130.0 348.4 757.7 210.2 547.5 8.2 539.3 6.3 17.5 2.5 20.8 97.4
Changes *
2009 + 32.6 + 61.6 − 31.5 − 53.1 + 21.6 + 1.4 + 20.3 + 1.6 + 0.9 − 0.4 − 0.3 + 17.0
2010 − 10.6 + 9.8 − 21.6 + 6.1 − 27.6 − 1.6 − 26.0 + 0.9 + 0.3 − 0.7 − 0.5 + 4.2
2010          July − 13.4 − 4.8 − 9.0 − 6.2 − 2.8 − 0.1 − 2.7 + 0.0 + 0.3 − 0.1 − 0.0 − 9.6
         Aug + 13.6 + 9.5 + 4.1 + 6.6 − 2.5 + 0.0 − 2.6 + 0.1 − 0.0 + 0.0 − 0.2 + 10.8
         Sep − 8.7 − 13.2 + 4.6 + 6.1 − 1.4 − 0.1 − 1.4 − 0.0 − 0.1 − 0.1 + 0.1 − 9.4
         Oct − 10.0 + 3.1 − 13.1 − 10.4 − 2.7 + 0.1 − 2.8 − 0.0 + 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.1 − 9.2
         Nov + 29.8 + 23.9 + 6.0 + 7.7 − 1.7 − 0.1 − 1.6 − 0.1 + 0.1 − 0.0 − 0.0 + 24.3
         Dec − 21.0 − 24.6 + 3.6 + 3.8 − 0.2 + 0.1 − 0.3 − 0.0 + 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.1 − 22.3
2011          Jan − 4.5 + 19.6 − 23.9 − 21.0 − 2.9 − 0.0 − 2.9 − 0.0 − 0.2 − 0.0 − 0.1 − 12.5
         Feb + 5.1 − 5.5 + 10.4 + 12.0 − 1.6 − 0.1 − 1.5 + 0.1 + 0.1 + 0.0 − 0.0 + 19.8
         Mar − 16.3 − 11.5 − 4.8 − 2.8 − 2.0 + 0.5 − 2.5 − 0.0 − 0.1 − 0.1 − 0.1 − 14.1
         Apr + 13.3 + 12.0 + 1.3 + 3.0 − 1.6 + 0.4 − 2.0 + 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.1 − 0.1 + 10.1
         May + 16.4 − 5.3 + 21.6 + 23.6 − 2.0 + 0.2 − 2.2 − 0.1 + 0.2 − 0.0 − 0.1 + 16.4
         June − 7.9 − 5.5 − 2.4 − 0.1 − 2.4 − 0.4 − 2.0 − 0.0 + 0.1 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 2.7
liabilities arising from registered debt securities. — 2Including deposits under savings and loan contracts (see also footnote 2). — 4Including
under savings and loan contracts (see Table IV.12). — 3Excluding deposits liabilities arising from non-negotiable bearer debt securities. 
35*IV Banks

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
E U R O S Y S T E M
Monthly Report
August 2011
IV Banks
 
8 Deposits of domestic households and non-profit institutions at banks (MFIs) in Germany *
 
 
€ billion
Sight deposits Time deposits  1,2 
by creditor group by creditor group
Deposits of Domestic households Domestic households
domestic
households
and Domestic
non-profit Self- non-profit Self-
employed Other institu- employed Other institutions,
Period total Total Total persons Employees tions Total Total persons Employees individuals individuals
End of year or month *
 
2008 1,543.2 507.8 491.8 85.1 336.5 70.3 16.0 390.6 367.2 50.4 281.0 35.8
2009 1,594.9 651.3 631.3 112.5 424.6 94.3 19.9 275.6 258.5 24.5 213.2 20.7
2010 1,658.9 713.7 692.4 123.8 471.2 97.4 21.3 258.6 241.4 21.2 203.7 16.4
2011          Jan 1,659.8 712.2 690.0 124.7 467.7 97.6 22.1 258.3 241.4 21.2 204.0 16.2
         Feb 1,665.3 714.1 691.8 123.6 470.2 97.9 22.4 259.1 242.3 22.0 203.9 16.4
         Mar 1,667.6 714.7 692.1 121.5 472.2 98.4 22.5 259.3 242.6 22.1 204.2 16.3
         Apr 1,676.1 721.0 698.2 125.3 474.5 98.4 22.8 261.1 244.2 22.7 204.8 16.6
         May 1,677.9 721.5 698.9 126.1 474.5 98.4 22.5 262.9 245.8 22.8 205.8 17.2
         June 1,680.2 723.2 700.0 123.6 477.9 98.5 23.2 264.6 247.5 23.1 206.9 17.5
Changes *
2009 + 51.0 + 142.2 + 138.3 + 27.4 + 88.3 + 22.6 + 4.0 − 115.0 − 108.7 − 25.8 − 67.7 − 15.2
2010 + 64.0 + 62.1 + 60.8 + 11.3 + 40.4 + 9.1 + 1.4 − 17.0 − 17.1 − 3.3 − 9.7 − 4.1
2011          Jan + 0.9 − 1.5 − 2.4 + 0.9 − 3.4 + 0.2 + 0.9 − 0.3 + 0.0 − 0.1 + 0.3 − 0.2
         Feb + 5.5 + 2.0 + 1.8 − 1.1 + 2.5 + 0.3 + 0.2 + 0.8 + 0.8 + 0.8 − 0.1 + 0.2
         Mar + 2.3 + 0.5 + 0.4 − 2.1 + 2.0 + 0.5 + 0.2 + 0.1 + 0.3 + 0.1 + 0.3 − 0.1
         Apr + 8.5 + 7.2 + 7.0 + 3.9 + 2.7 + 0.4 + 0.2 + 2.4 + 2.1 + 0.7 + 1.1 + 0.4
         May + 1.8 + 0.5 + 0.7 + 0.8 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.2 + 1.8 + 1.7 + 0.2 + 1.0 + 0.6
         June + 2.4 + 1.8 + 1.0 − 2.4 + 3.4 + 0.1 + 0.7 + 1.7 + 1.7 + 0.3 + 1.1 + 0.3
*See Table IV.2, footnote*; statistical breaks have been eliminated from the Report, are not specially marked. — 1Including subordinated liabilities and
changes. The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as liabilities arising from registered debt securities. — 2Including deposits
provisional. Subsequent revisions, which appear in the following MonthlyDEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
E U R O S Y S T E M
Monthly Report
August 2011
 
 
 
9 Deposits of domestic government at banks (MFIs) in Germany, by creditor group *
 
€ billion
Deposits
   
Federal Government and its special funds  1 State governments
Time deposits Time deposits
Savings Savings
for up deposits Memo for up deposits Memo
Domestic to and for more and bank item to and for more and bank item
government, Sight including than savings Fiduciary Sight including than savings Fiduciary
Period total Total deposits 1 year 1 year bonds  2 loans Total deposits 1 year 1 year bonds  2 loans
End of year or month *
 
2008 164.7 34.8 2.3 3.7 28.9 0.0 6.6 28.2 6.9 9.9 11.3 0.1 17.3
2009 129.3 22.2 1.3 3.7 17.1 0.1 17.3 23.1 7.1 5.8 10.1 0.1 18.0
2010 153.4 38.7 5.7 3.3 29.6 0.1 17.0 28.2 8.5 6.7 12.9 0.2 17.2
2011          Jan 149.0 37.1 10.0 2.3 24.7 0.1 17.0 28.6 8.7 6.9 12.9 0.2 17.1
         Feb 152.7 37.8 9.1 4.0 24.6 0.1 17.0 29.6 7.1 9.7 12.7 0.2 17.1
         Mar 154.4 36.2 8.3 3.8 24.1 0.1 17.0 35.1 12.2 10.2 12.6 0.2 17.1
         Apr 150.8 33.8 7.2 3.9 22.7 0.1 17.0 33.3 9.7 11.0 12.4 0.2 17.0
         May 160.9 34.8 6.1 5.6 23.0 0.1 17.0 34.8 11.6 10.5 12.5 0.2 17.0
         June 170.4 38.3 6.1 9.6 22.4 0.1 16.8 39.9 14.1 13.3 12.3 0.2 16.9
Changes *
2009 − 23.9 − 0.8 − 1.0 + 0.4 − 0.3 + 0.0 − 0.1 − 5.1 + 0.2 − 4.1 − 1.1 + 0.0 − 0.4
2010 + 23.9 + 16.5 + 4.4 − 0.4 + 12.5 + 0.0 − 0.2 + 5.2 + 1.5 + 0.9 + 2.8 + 0.0 − 0.7
2011          Jan − 4.4 − 1.6 + 4.3 − 1.0 − 5.0 − − 0.1 + 0.4 + 0.2 + 0.2 − 0.0 + 0.0 − 0.1
         Feb + 3.7 + 0.7 − 0.9 + 1.7 − 0.0 − 0.0 + 0.0 + 1.0 − 1.6 + 2.8 − 0.2 + 0.0 − 0.0
         Mar + 1.7 − 1.6 − 0.8 − 0.3 − 0.5 − 0.0 − 0.0 + 5.5 + 5.1 + 0.5 − 0.1 − − 0.0
         Apr − 4.0 − 2.3 − 1.1 + 0.3 − 1.4 + 0.0 + 0.0 − 1.8 − 2.4 + 0.8 − 0.2 − 0.0 − 0.0
         May + 10.1 + 1.0 − 1.1 + 1.7 + 0.3 + 0.0 + 0.0 + 1.5 + 1.9 − 0.5 + 0.0 + 0.0 − 0.1
         June + 9.5 + 3.5 − 0.0 + 4.0 − 0.5 − 0.0 − 0.2 + 5.1 + 2.4 + 2.8 − 0.1 + 0.0 − 0.1
*See Table IV.2, footnote *; excluding deposits of the Treuhand agency and which are included in ”Enterprises”. Statistical breaks have been eliminated
its successor organisations, of the Federal Railways, east German Railways from the changes. The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded
and Federal Post Office, and, from 1995, of Deutsche Bahn AG, Deutsche as provisional. Subsequent revisions, which appear in the following
Post AG and Deutsche Telekom AG, and of publicly owned enterprises,
36*IV Banks

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2011
IV Banks
 
 
 
 
 
 Savings deposits  3  Memo item
 
 by maturity
 more than 1 year  2 
Included Subordinated
of which liabilities in time
Domestic Domestic (excluding deposits:
up to and up to and Bank negotiable liabilities non-profit non-profit
institu- including including more than Domestic institu- savings Fiduciary debt arising
tions 1 year Total 2 years 2 years Total tions bonds  4 loans from repos   Period households securities)  5 
End of year or month *
 
23.4 231.5 159.2 21.3 137.9 530.2 523.1 7.1 114.6 0.3 8.5 − 2008
17.2 109.0 166.6 19.4 147.2 586.5 577.5 9.0 81.5 0.1 9.8 − 2009
17.3 85.7 173.0 15.0 158.0 609.1 599.2 9.9 77.5 0.1 9.7 − 2010
16.9 84.7 173.7 15.0 158.7 611.3 601.3 9.9 78.0 0.1 9.7 − 2011          Jan 
16.9 84.4 174.8 15.1 159.6 613.3 603.3 10.0 78.8 0.1 9.7 −          Feb 
16.7 83.7 175.5 15.0 160.5 614.3 604.3 10.0 79.4 0.1 9.7 −          Mar 
16.9 85.6 175.5 15.2 160.3 613.0 603.0 10.0 81.0 0.1 9.7 −          Apr 
17.1 86.6 176.3 15.3 161.1 610.8 601.0 9.8 82.8 0.1 9.7 −          May
17.2 87.7 177.0 15.2 161.7 608.8 599.2 9.6 83.6 0.1 9.7 −          June
Changes *
− 6.2 − 122.2 + 7.2 − 1.9 + 9.1 + 56.3 + 54.4 + 1.9 − 32.6 + 0.0 + 1.7 − 2009
+ 0.1 − 23.3 + 6.4 − 4.4 + 10.8 + 22.8 + 22.0 + 0.9 − 4.0 − 0.0 − 0.2 + 0.0 2010
− 0.3 − 1.0 + 0.7 − 0.0 + 0.7 + 2.2 + 2.2 + 0.0 + 0.5 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 2011          Jan 
− 0.1 − 0.3 + 1.1 + 0.2 + 0.9 + 2.0 + 2.0 + 0.0 + 0.8 − 0.0 + 0.1 −          Feb 
− 0.2 − 0.6 + 0.8 − 0.1 + 0.9 + 1.0 + 0.9 + 0.0 + 0.6 + 0.0 − 0.0 −          Mar 
+ 0.2 + 1.9 + 0.5 + 0.2 + 0.3 − 2.2 − 2.1 − 0.0 + 1.1 − 0.1 − 0.0 −          Apr 
+ 0.2 + 1.0 + 0.9 + 0.1 + 0.8 − 2.3 − 2.0 − 0.2 + 1.8 − 0.0 + 0.0 −          May
+ 0.1 + 1.1 + 0.6 − 0.0 + 0.6 − 2.0 − 1.8 − 0.2 + 0.8 + 0.0 − 0.0 −          June
under savings and loan contracts (see Table IV.12). — 3Excluding deposits liabilities arising from non-negotiable bearer debt securities. — 5Included in
under savings and loan contracts (see also footnote 2). — 4Including time deposits. DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2011
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Local government and local government associations
(including municipal special-purpose associations) Social security funds
Time deposits  3 Time deposits
Savings Savings
for up deposits Memo for up deposits Memo
to and for more and bank item to and for more and bank item
Sight including than savings Fiduciary Sight including than savings Fiduciary
Total deposits 1 year 1 year bonds  2,4 loans Total deposits 1 year 1 year bonds  2 loans   Period
End of year or month *
 
42.5 14.3 22.0 3.9 2.2 0.2 59.2 10.7 39.8 8.4 0.3 0.0 2008
38.0 20.2 10.3 4.2 3.3 0.4 46.0 13.3 23.1 8.9 0.6 0.0 2009
37.4 19.5 9.9 4.5 3.5 0.4 49.1 12.3 27.9 8.3 0.6 0.0 2010
33.6 16.3 9.3 4.5 3.5 0.4 49.7 14.6 26.3 8.3 0.6 0.0 2011          Jan 
36.0 17.7 10.1 4.6 3.5 0.4 49.3 14.8 25.6 8.3 0.6 0.0          Feb 
35.0 16.6 10.2 4.6 3.6 0.4 48.1 13.1 26.0 8.5 0.6 0.0          Mar 
35.2 16.8 10.2 4.7 3.5 0.4 48.5 13.1 26.3 8.6 0.6 0.0          Apr 
38.0 18.2 11.6 4.8 3.5 0.4 53.3 14.3 29.8 8.6 0.6 0.0          May
36.6 16.9 11.3 4.8 3.5 0.4 55.6 14.9 31.5 8.7 0.5 0.0          June
Changes *
− 4.4 + 5.9 − 11.7 + 0.3 + 1.1 − 0.0 − 13.6 + 2.5 − 16.8 + 0.4 + 0.3 − 0.0 2009
− 0.6 − 0.6 − 0.5 + 0.2 + 0.2 − 0.0 + 2.9 − 1.2 + 4.7 − 0.6 − 0.1 − 0.0 2010
− 3.8 − 3.2 − 0.6 + 0.0 − 0.0 − + 0.6 + 2.2 − 1.6 + 0.0 + 0.0 − 2011          Jan 
+ 2.4 + 1.4 + 0.8 + 0.1 + 0.1 − 0.0 − 0.4 + 0.3 − 0.7 + 0.0 − 0.0 −          Feb 
− 1.0 − 1.1 + 0.0 − + 0.0 − 0.0 − 1.2 − 1.8 + 0.4 + 0.2 − 0.0 − 0.0          Mar 
+ 0.0 + 0.2 − 0.2 + 0.0 − 0.0 + 0.0 + 0.0 + 0.0 − 0.1 + 0.1 + 0.0 −          Apr 
+ 2.8 + 1.3 + 1.4 + 0.1 − 0.0 − 0.0 + 4.7 + 1.3 + 3.5 − 0.0 − 0.0 −          May
− 1.4 − 1.2 − 0.2 + 0.0 − 0.0 − + 2.4 + 0.6 + 1.7 + 0.1 − 0.0 −          June
Monthly Report, are not specially marked. — 1Federal Railways Fund, liabilities arising from non-negotiable bearer debt securities. — 3Including
Indemnification Fund, Redemption Fund for Inherited Liabilities, ERP Special deposits under savings and loan contracts. — 4Excluding deposits under
Fund, German Unity Fund, Equalisation of Burdens Fund. — 2Including savings and loan contracts (see also footnote 3). 
37*IV Banks

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
E U R O S Y S T E M
Monthly Report
August 2011
IV Banks
 
10 Savings deposits and bank savings bonds of banks (MFIs) in Germany sold to non-banks (non-MFIs) *
 
€ billion
Savings deposits  1 Bank savings bonds,  3  sold to
of residents of non-residents domestic non-banks
at three months’ at more than three Memo
notice months’ notice item of which
Interest With
of which of which of which credited maturities
Special Special At three on of more
savings savings savings non-banks, than foreign months’
Period Total Total Total Total Total notice deposits total Total 2 years facilities  2 facilities  2 non-banks
End of year or month *
 
2008 544.1 535.2 424.8 344.0 110.4 103.2 8.9 6.3 14.9 150.8 135.4 59.6 15.4
2009 604.1 594.5 474.5 379.4 120.0 112.1 9.6 7.0 13.8 118.8 103.2 68.3 15.6
2010 628.2 618.2 512.5 412.3 105.7 96.6 9.9 7.7 10.9 113.5 96.9 72.0 16.6
2011          Feb 632.5 622.5 517.2 415.6 105.3 96.4 9.9 7.7 0.3 114.5 98.0 72.4 16.5
         Mar 633.5 623.5 518.0 417.0 105.5 96.4 10.0 7.8 0.3 114.6 98.3 72.5 16.3
         Apr 632.4 622.3 517.6 415.8 104.7 95.6 10.1 7.9 0.3 115.7 99.8 73.6 16.0
         May 630.0 619.9 515.4 413.9 104.6 95.5 10.0 7.8 0.3 117.8 101.7 74.9 16.2
         June 627.8 617.8 513.5 411.8 104.3 95.3 10.0 7.7 0.3 118.9 102.7 75.6 16.1
Changes *
2009 + 60.0 + 59.3 + 50.3 + 35.8 + 8.9 + 7.8 + 0.7 + 0.8 . − 30.6 − 31.6 + 9.5 + 1.0
2010 + 24.3 + 24.0 + 38.3 + 33.1 − 14.3 − 15.5 + 0.3 + 0.6 . − 2.7 − 3.7 + 6.3 + 1.0
2011          Feb + 2.1 + 2.1 + 2.1 + 1.6 + 0.0 − + 0.0 + 0.0 . + 0.9 + 0.8 + 0.4 + 0.0
         Mar + 1.0 + 1.0 + 0.8 + 1.4 + 0.2 + 0.1 + 0.0 + 0.0 . + 0.5 + 0.5 + 0.4 − 0.1
         Apr − 2.1 − 2.1 − 1.3 − 1.2 − 0.8 − 0.8 + 0.0 + 0.0 . + 0.8 + 1.0 + 0.7 − 0.3
         May − 2.5 − 2.4 − 2.3 − 1.9 − 0.1 − 0.1 − 0.1 − 0.1 . + 2.1 + 1.9 + 1.3 + 0.2
         June − 2.2 − 2.1 − 1.9 − 2.1 − 0.2 − 0.2 − 0.1 − 0.1 . + 1.0 + 1.0 + 0.8 − 0.0
*See Table IV.2, footnote*; statistical breaks have been eliminated from the loan contracts, which are classified as time deposits. — 2Savings deposits
changes. The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as bearing interest at a rate which exceeds the minimum or basic rate of
provisional. Subsequent revisions, which appear in the following Monthly interest. — 3Including liabilities arising from non-negotiable bearer debt
Report, are not specially marked. — 1Excluding deposits under savings and securities. 
 
 
 
11 Debt securities and money market paper outstanding of banks (MFIs) in Germany *
 
€ billion
Negotiable bearer debt securities and money market paper Non-negotiable
bearer debt
of which securities and
money market
with maturities of paper  6 Subordinated
up to more than 1 year up to
and including 1 year and including 2 years of which
with
Certifi- of which of which non- maturities
Floating Zero Foreign cates without without more of more negotiable negotiable
rate coupon currency of a nominal a nominal than than debt debt
Total bonds  1 deposit Total Total 2 years Total 2 years securities securities bonds  1,2 bonds  3,4 guarantee  5 guarantee  5 
Period
End of year or month *
 
2008 1,640.1 395.9 50.7 314.1 64.0 162.6 . 153.3 . 1,324.2 2.3 0.8 52.5 1.6
2009 1,529.8 380.6 43.9 317.4 70.4 115.9 . 105.8 . 1,308.2 0.9 0.6 46.1 1.8
2010 1,435.1 287.2 27.8 359.2 82.8 94.0 4.6 54.1 6.5 1,281.4 0.7 0.6 43.9 1.5
2011          Feb 1,424.4 287.1 25.5 349.2 81.5 91.8 5.9 54.6 7.5 1,269.1 0.7 0.6 43.6 1.5
         Mar 1,397.9 295.0 27.0 333.1 76.4 87.1 5.7 53.0 7.8 1,250.0 0.6 0.6 44.9 1.5
         Apr 1,383.0 299.1 24.5 324.8 68.5 78.4 6.0 54.9 8.3 1,242.6 0.7 0.6 45.0 1.5
         May 1,391.7 299.4 24.2 335.4 73.6 84.0 6.1 53.9 8.6 1,246.6 0.6 0.5 44.3 1.5
         June 1,373.6 293.3 23.9 329.0 61.0 71.0 5.9 53.7 8.2 1,241.6 0.6 0.5 44.1 1.5
Changes *
2009 − 110.1 − 15.3 − 6.8 + 4.7 + 6.4 − 46.7 . − 47.8 . −15.6 − 1.4 − 0.2 − 6.4 + 0.5
2010 − 94.2 − 92.8 − 9.8 + 41.9 + 12.4 − 22.8 . − 52.1 . −26.4 − 0.2 − 0.0 − 2.1 − 0.3
2011          Feb + 0.5 + 0.8 + 0.7 + 0.7 + 3.7 + 5.3 + 0.7 − 1.1 + 0.5 − 5.4 + 0.0 + 0.0 − 0.1 − 0.0
         Mar − 26.5 + 0.3 + 0.1 − 16.4 − 5.1 − 5.5 − 0.2 − 2.0 + 0.3 −19.0 − 0.1 − 0.1 + 1.3 − 0.0
         Apr − 14.9 + 4.0 − 2.4 − 8.3 − 7.9 − 8.8 + 0.3 + 1.9 + 0.5 − 7.4 + 0.0 + 0.0 + 0.1 − 0.0
         May + 8.7 + 0.3 − 0.3 + 10.6 + 5.1 + 5.7 + 0.1 − 1.1 + 0.3 + 4.0 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.7 + 0.0
         June − 18.1 + 1.3 − 0.3 − 6.3 − 12.6 − 12.7 − 0.2 + 0.2 − 0.4 − 5.0 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.2 + 0.0
*See Table IV.2, footnote*; statistical breaks have been eliminated from the foreign currencies. — 4Bonds denominated in non-euro-area currencies. —
changes. The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as 5Negotiable bearer debt securities respectively money market paper with a
provisional. Subsequent revisions, which appear in the following Monthly nominal guarantee of less than 100%. — 6Non-negotiable bearer debt
Report, are not specially marked. — 1Including debt securities securities are classified among bank savings bonds (see also Table IV.10,
denominated in foreign currencies. — 2Issue value when floated. — footnote 2). 
3Including floating rate notes and zero coupon bonds denominated in
38*IV Banks

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2011
IV  Banks
  
12  Building  and  loan  associations (MFIs) in Germany *
  Interim statements
  
€ billion
Lending to banks (MFIs) Lending to non-banks (non-MFIs) Deposits of banks Deposits of non-
(MFIs)  5 banks (non-MFIs)
Credit Building loans Secur- Memo
bal- item ities (in-
ances cluding Bearer New
and Loans Treasury Deposits Deposits debt Capital con-
Num- loans under bills under under secur- (includ- tracts
ber (ex- Bank savings Interim and savings savings ities ing pub- entered
of Balance cluding debt and loan and Other Treasury and loan Sight and loan Sight and out- lished into in
End of sheet building Building secur- con- bridging building discount con- and time con- time de- stand- re- year or associ-
year/month ations loans  2 ities 3 tracts loans loans tracts deposits tracts posits  6 ing month  8 total  13 loans)  1 paper)  4 serves)  7 
All  building  and  loan  associations
2010 24 198.9 42.8 0.0 18.9 27.8 72.0 14.3 14.4 0.6 29.7 130.9 7.3 5.5 7.5 92.7
2011          Apr 23 197.5 42.1 0.0 18.1 27.5 72.1 14.7 14.8 0.6 26.7 132.4 6.9 5.6 8.1 8.3
         May 23 197.4 41.4 0.0 18.2 27.4 72.3 15.1 14.7 0.6 26.6 132.5 6.8 5.6 8.1 9.3
         June 23 197.5 41.7 0.0 17.8 27.5 72.7 15.1 14.4 0.6 26.1 132.8 6.8 5.6 8.3 8.2
Private  building  and  Ioan  associations
  
2011          Apr 13 142.7 25.7 0.0 12.2 17.9 57.5 13.0 8.8 0.4 23.4 87.3 6.7 5.6 5.4 5.4
         May 13 142.6 25.0 0.0 12.5 17.9 57.7 13.4 8.6 0.4 23.3 87.4 6.5 5.6 5.4 5.7
         June 13 142.6 25.2 0.0 12.1 17.9 58.0 13.5 8.4 0.4 22.8 87.7 6.6 5.6 5.5 5.4
Public  building  and  Ioan  associations
  
2011          Apr 10 54.8 16.4 0.0 5.9 9.6 14.6 1.6 6.0 0.2 3.4 45.1 0.2 − 2.7 3.0
         May 10 54.8 16.4 0.0 5.7 9.6 14.7 1.6 6.1 0.2 3.3 45.1 0.2 − 2.7 3.6
         June 10 54.9 16.4 0.0 5.7 9.6 14.7 1.6 6.0 0.2 3.3 45.1 0.2 − 2.7 2.8
Trends in building and loan association business
  
€ billion
Changes in deposits Capital promised Capital disbursed Disbursement Interest and
under savings and commitments repayments
loan contracts Allocations outstanding at received on
end of period building loans  10 
Deposits under Loans under
Repay- savings and savings and
ments loan contracts loan contracts  9 Newly
Interest of granted
credited interim deposits of which of which
on under Applied Applied and of
which of Memo Amounts deposits cancelled to settle- to settle- bridging
under savings of ment of ment of loans Under which item paid into
savings savings and which interim interim and alloc- Repay- Housing
and and loan loan Net and and other ated ments bonuses
loan ac- con- con- alloca- bridging bridging building con- during re-
Period tracts tracts Total Total Total loans Total loans loans Total tracts Total quarter counts  9 tions  11 ceived  12 
All  building  and  loan  associations
2010 27.8 2.6 5.5 43.6 29.3 37.9 17.0 4.3 7.8 4.0 13.2 11.8 7.5 11.8 9.6 0.5
2011          Apr 2.2 0.0 0.5 4.6 3.2 3.7 1.7 0.5 0.9 0.5 1.1 12.7 7.7 0.8 0.1
         May 2.3 0.0 0.5 4.2 2.8 3.7 1.7 0.4 0.7 0.3 1.3 12.9 7.7 0.9 0.0
         June 2.3 0.0 0.5 4.0 2.8 3.6 1.6 0.3 0.7 0.3 1.3 12.7 7.8 0.9 ... 0.0
Private  building  and  Ioan  associations
  
2011          Apr 1.5 0.0 0.3 3.3 2.3 2.8 1.3 0.5 0.7 0.5 0.9 7.8 3.9 0.6 0.0
         May 1.5 0.0 0.3 2.9 1.8 2.7 1.2 0.3 0.5 0.2 1.0 7.9 3.9 0.6 0.0
         June 1.5 0.0 0.2 2.8 1.9 2.6 1.1 0.3 0.5 0.2 1.0 7.8 4.0 0.6 ... 0.0
Public  building  and  Ioan  associations
  
2011          Apr 0.8 0.0 0.2 1.2 0.9 0.9 0.5 0.1 0.2 0.1 0.2 4.9 3.8 0.3 0.0
         May 0.8 0.0 0.3 1.3 1.0 1.0 0.5 0.1 0.2 0.1 0.3 5.0 3.8 0.3 0.0
         June 0.7 0.0 0.2 1.2 0.9 1.0 0.5 0.1 0.2 0.1 0.3 4.9 3.8 0.3 ... 0.0
*Excluding assets and liabilities and/or transactions of foreign branches. amount covered by the contracts; only contracts newly entered into, for
The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as provisional. which the contract fee has been fully paid. Increases in the sum contracted
Subsequent revisions, which appear in the following Monthly Report, are count as new contracts. — 9For disbursements of deposits under savings
not specially marked. — 1Including postal giro account balances, claims on and loan contracts arising from the allocation of contracts see “Capital
building and loan associations, claims arising from registered debt securities disbursed“. — 10Including housing bonuses credited. — 11Only allocations
and central bank credit balances. — 2Loans under savings and loan accepted by the beneficiaries; including allocations applied to settlement of
contracts and interim and bridging loans. — 3Including money market interim and bridging loans. — 12The amounts already credited to the
paper and small amounts of other securities issued by banks. — 4Including accounts of savers or borrowers are also included in “Amounts paid into
equalisation claims. — 5Including liabilities to building and loan savings and loan accounts“ and “Interest and repayments received on
associations. — 6Including small amounts of savings deposits. — 7Including building loans“. — 13 See Table IV.2, footnote 1. 
participation rights capital and fund for general banking risks. — 8Total
39*IV  Banks

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
E U R O S Y S T E M
Monthly Report
August 2011
IV  Banks
  
13 Assets and liabilities of the foreign branches and foreign subsidiaries of German banks (MFIs) *
  
  
€ billion
Number of Lending to banks (MFIs) Lending to non-banks (non-MFIs) Other  assets  7 
Loans Credit  balances and loans
German   
banks
(MFIs)   
with
foreign foreign Derivative
branches Money Money financial branches  1 
and/or and/or market to to market instruments
foreign foreign Balance paper, German foreign paper, in the
subsi- subsi- sheet German Foreign secur- non- non- secur- trading TX1
Period diaries diaries total Total Total banks banks Total Total banks banks ities  2 Total portfolio ities 2,3 
Foreign  branches End of year or month *
  
2007 52 218 2,042.4 813.8 743.1 238.6 504.5 70.7 1,066.8 811.4 21.6 789.8 255.3 161.8 −
2008 56 226 1,715.5 730.7 669.1 244.9 424.2 61.6 825.3 630.4 20.2 610.3 194.9 159.5 −
2009 51 211 1,461.6 579.2 539.1 210.1 328.9 40.2 691.5 534.7 20.7 514.0 156.7 190.9 −
2010          Aug 56 217 1,596.6 663.4 633.2 235.7 397.4 30.2 736.2 570.9 22.7 548.1 165.4 197.0 −
         Sep 56 217 1,548.3 634.3 605.5 228.8 376.7 28.8 721.1 560.7 21.3 539.4 160.4 192.9 −
         Oct 56 217 1,582.8 640.1 612.1 225.7 386.4 28.1 706.1 547.4 21.6 525.8 158.8 236.5 −
         Nov 56 215 1,636.3 648.0 620.2 232.1 388.1 27.8 725.7 557.5 24.0 533.6 168.2 262.6 −
         Dec 55 212 2,226.3 591.4 564.8 232.0 332.8 26.6 696.7 532.5 27.5 505.0 164.2 938.2 633.9
2011          Jan 55 211 2,072.1 583.8 558.1 221.8 336.3 25.8 712.9 550.9 27.1 523.8 162.0 775.4 614.1
         Feb 55 211 2,041.4 570.4 545.7 210.6 335.1 24.8 697.6 542.8 26.6 516.2 154.8 773.4 585.7
         Mar 55 211 1,980.5 546.9 523.0 199.5 323.5 24.0 678.2 523.5 26.1 497.4 154.7 755.4 585.1
         Apr 55 211 2,057.3 567.6 544.1 213.6 330.6 23.5 673.2 518.2 25.5 492.7 155.0 816.4 642.8
         May 55 212 2,023.3 579.5 556.2 204.0 352.2 23.3 682.3 526.8 24.9 501.9 155.6 761.5 600.1
Changes *
2008 + 4 + 8 −359.4 − 98.5 − 89.3 + 6.3 − 95.5 − 9.2 −256.8 −190.7 − 1.5 −189.3 −66.1 − 4.1 −
2009 − 5 − 15 −247.9 −148.8 −127.3 − 34.7 − 92.6 − 21.5 −131.7 − 94.6 + 0.5 − 95.1 −37.1 + 32.6 −
2010          Sep − − − 1.3 − 10.3 − 9.5 − 6.9 − 2.5 − 0.8 + 11.4 + 10.4 − 1.4 + 11.8 + 0.9 − 2.4 −
         Oct − − + 42.3 + 8.5 + 9.1 − 3.1 + 12.2 − 0.6 − 10.1 − 9.5 + 0.3 − 9.8 − 0.6 + 43.9 −
         Nov − − 2 + 12.4 − 9.5 − 8.8 + 6.4 − 15.3 − 0.7 − 2.0 − 6.9 + 2.3 − 9.2 + 4.9 + 23.9 −
         Dec − 1 − 3 +606.6 − 50.2 − 49.3 − 0.1 − 49.2 − 1.0 − 19.7 − 17.8 + 3.5 − 21.3 − 2.0 +676.6 −
2011          Jan − − 1 −139.5 − 0.7 + 0.0 − 10.2 + 10.3 − 0.7 + 23.5 + 23.9 − 0.4 + 24.3 − 0.4 −162.2 − 19.8
         Feb − − − 26.8 − 11.6 − 10.6 − 11.2 + 0.6 − 1.0 − 13.3 − 6.6 − 0.5 − 6.2 − 6.7 − 1.9 − 28.4
         Mar − − − 42.2 − 16.8 − 16.1 − 11.1 − 5.0 − 0.6 − 8.9 − 11.0 − 0.5 − 10.5 + 2.1 − 16.6 − 0.6
         Apr − − + 99.6 + 30.1 + 30.4 + 14.1 + 16.3 − 0.3 + 7.4 + 4.2 − 0.6 + 4.8 + 3.2 + 62.1 + 57.7
         May − + 1 − 54.5 + 3.1 + 3.5 − 9.6 + 13.1 − 0.4 − 1.6 + 0.2 − 0.6 + 0.8 − 1.8 − 56.0 − 42.6
  
  
Foreign  subsidiaries End of year or month *
  
2007 39 120 590.8 267.8 202.4 104.8 97.5 65.5 263.9 176.0 37.8 138.1 87.9 59.0 −
2008 38 116 594.9 244.9 183.1 85.5 97.6 61.8 267.8 196.5 42.2 154.3 71.3 82.2 −
2009 36 97 474.1 205.4 157.0 87.4 69.6 48.4 217.0 154.7 38.7 115.9 62.4 51.7 −
2010          Aug 38 99 495.8 218.4 172.6 86.8 85.9 45.8 224.4 171.7 39.4 132.2 52.7 53.0 −
         Sep 37 96 489.4 214.8 170.7 88.8 81.8 44.1 220.1 168.8 38.2 130.6 51.4 54.5 −
         Oct 37 96 500.7 221.7 178.4 96.0 82.4 43.4 216.6 164.9 36.9 128.1 51.7 62.4 −
         Nov 37 95 498.2 223.0 180.4 95.6 84.8 42.6 218.4 167.2 37.8 129.4 51.1 56.8 −
         Dec 37 93 495.1 220.9 178.7 98.8 79.9 42.1 218.3 168.8 37.7 131.2 49.5 55.9 −
2011          Jan 37 94 492.5 222.7 180.6 99.6 81.0 42.0 217.6 167.2 38.1 129.1 50.4 52.3 −
         Feb 37 94 490.1 221.5 182.1 100.5 81.6 39.4 215.9 165.3 37.4 127.9 50.6 52.7 −
         Mar 37 94 484.4 219.4 180.3 100.2 80.1 39.1 214.5 164.5 36.3 128.3 49.9 50.5 −
         Apr 36 93 485.9 224.5 184.9 100.7 84.2 39.5 211.9 162.8 35.4 127.4 49.1 49.5 −
         May 36 93 495.2 225.8 186.6 99.7 86.8 39.3 214.2 165.7 35.9 129.8 48.5 55.1 −
Changes *
2008 − 1 − 4 − 0.2 − 24.2 − 19.8 − 19.3 − 0.5 − 4.4 + 1.1 + 17.5 + 4.4 + 13.2 −16.4 + 22.9 −
2009 − 2 − 19 −120.2 − 39.8 − 26.9 + 1.9 − 28.8 − 12.9 − 50.0 − 41.1 − 3.5 − 37.6 − 8.9 − 30.4 −
2010          Sep − 1 − 3 − 0.1 − 0.5 − 0.1 + 2.1 − 2.2 − 0.4 − 1.4 − 0.1 − 1.3 + 1.2 − 1.3 + 1.8 −
         Oct − − + 12.9 + 7.7 + 8.2 + 7.1 + 1.0 − 0.5 − 2.7 − 3.0 − 1.3 − 1.7 + 0.3 + 7.9 −
         Nov − − 1 − 8.9 − 2.1 − 0.2 − 0.3 + 0.1 − 1.9 − 1.0 − 0.5 + 0.9 − 1.4 − 0.5 − 5.8 −
         Dec − − 2 − 1.5 − 1.1 − 1.0 + 3.2 − 4.2 − 0.1 + 0.4 + 2.1 − 0.1 + 2.2 − 1.7 − 0.8 −
2011          Jan − + 1 − 0.2 + 2.9 + 2.6 + 0.8 + 1.8 + 0.3 + 0.5 − 0.4 + 0.4 − 0.9 + 0.9 − 3.6 −
         Feb − − − 1.9 − 0.9 + 1.7 + 0.9 + 0.7 − 2.6 − 1.5 − 1.7 − 0.7 − 1.0 + 0.2 + 0.5 −
         Mar − − − 3.3 − 0.8 − 1.0 − 0.3 − 0.7 + 0.2 − 0.3 + 0.3 − 1.2 + 1.5 − 0.7 − 2.1 −
         Apr − 1 − 1 + 4.4 + 6.7 + 5.6 + 0.5 + 5.2 + 1.1 − 1.4 − 0.6 − 0.8 + 0.2 − 0.8 − 0.9 −
         May − − + 6.1 − 0.2 + 0.6 − 1.0 + 1.6 − 0.8 + 0.7 + 1.4 + 0.5 + 0.9 − 0.6 + 5.5 −
*In this table “foreign“ also includes the country of domicile of the foreign ies.) The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as provisional;
branches and foreign subsidiaries. Statistical revisions have been eliminated subsequent revisions, which appear in the following Monthly Report, are
from the changes. (Breaks owing to changes in the reporting population not specially marked. — 1Several branches in a given country of domicile
have not been eliminated from the flow figures for the foreign subsidiar-
40*IV  Banks

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2011
IV  Banks
  
  
  
  
  
Deposits Other  liabilities  6,7 
of banks (MFIs) of non-banks (non-MFIs)
German non-banks  4 
Money
market
paper Derivative
and debt financial
Medium Working instruments securities
and out- capital in the
German Foreign Short- long- Foreign stand- and own trading
Total Total banks Total Total term term ing 5 funds Total portfolio   Period banks non-banks
End of year or month * Foreign  branches
  
1,723.7 1,191.0 547.7 643.3 532.7 55.3 51.2 4.1 477.4 186.0 29.2 103.5 − 2007
1,446.1 1,070.4 554.3 516.1 375.7 45.0 36.5 8.5 330.7 126.6 35.6 107.2 − 2008
1,125.9 798.0 449.6 348.4 327.9 37.4 33.8 3.5 290.5 157.5 33.9 144.4 − 2009
1,229.0 829.5 407.0 422.6 399.4 42.9 39.0 3.8 356.6 178.6 34.9 154.1 − 2010          Aug 
1,177.7 772.3 392.5 379.9 405.4 42.6 38.8 3.8 362.8 183.1 34.4 153.1 −          Sep 
1,208.9 804.6 390.1 414.5 404.3 45.4 39.6 5.8 358.9 186.7 34.1 153.1 −          Oct 
1,240.7 815.2 395.9 419.2 425.6 47.0 41.1 5.9 378.6 193.0 34.2 168.3 −          Nov 
1,131.3 751.9 398.2 353.7 379.4 44.9 39.2 5.7 334.5 187.1 34.7 873.3 648.7          Dec 
1,155.7 759.6 400.8 358.8 396.1 44.2 38.9 5.4 351.9 187.8 35.0 693.6 610.9 2011          Jan 
1,150.3 752.8 387.7 365.0 397.5 45.1 39.8 5.3 352.4 188.4 35.0 667.8 582.3          Feb 
1,092.3 719.1 379.7 339.4 373.2 41.2 36.0 5.3 331.9 183.0 34.5 670.8 581.5          Mar 
1,111.1 737.1 397.3 339.8 374.0 39.8 34.6 5.2 334.1 177.5 34.3 734.4 636.6          Apr 
1,134.5 761.8 394.7 367.1 372.7 40.4 35.1 5.3 332.3 172.7 36.6 679.5 594.1          May
Changes *
− 304.0 −139.7 + 6.5 −146.3 −164.3 − 10.3 − 14.7 + 4.4 −153.9 − 59.4 + 6.5 − 2.4 − 2008
− 312.0 −267.8 −104.7 −163.1 − 44.2 − 7.6 − 2.6 − 5.0 − 36.6 + 30.9 − 1.7 + 34.9 − 2009
− 17.7 − 37.9 − 14.5 − 23.4 + 20.2 − 0.3 − 0.3 − 0.0 + 20.5 + 4.6 − 0.6 + 12.4 − 2010          Sep 
+ 36.8 + 35.2 − 2.3 + 37.5 + 1.6 + 2.8 + 0.9 + 1.9 − 1.2 + 3.6 − 0.3 + 2.1 −          Oct 
+ 1.5 − 6.8 + 5.8 − 12.6 + 8.2 + 1.6 + 1.4 + 0.1 + 6.7 + 6.3 + 0.1 + 4.5 −          Nov 
− 96.5 − 56.3 + 2.2 − 58.5 − 40.2 − 2.1 − 1.9 − 0.2 − 38.1 − 5.9 + 0.5 + 708.5 −          Dec 
+ 34.6 + 13.3 + 2.7 + 10.7 + 21.3 − 0.7 − 0.4 − 0.3 + 21.9 + 0.8 + 0.3 − 175.1 − 37.7 2011          Jan 
− 2.2 − 5.0 − 13.1 + 8.1 + 2.8 + 0.9 + 1.0 − 0.1 + 1.9 + 0.5 + 0.0 − 25.2 − 28.6          Feb 
− 44.6 − 26.7 − 8.0 − 18.7 − 17.9 − 3.9 − 3.8 − 0.1 − 14.0 − 5.3 − 0.5 + 8.2 − 0.8          Mar 
+ 35.5 + 26.9 + 17.6 + 9.3 + 8.6 − 1.4 − 1.4 − 0.1 + 10.0 − 5.5 − 0.2 + 69.8 + 55.1          Apr 
+ 9.4 + 17.6 − 2.6 + 20.1 − 8.2 + 0.6 + 0.5 + 0.1 − 8.8 − 4.8 + 2.3 − 61.4 − 42.5          May
  
  
End of year or month * Foreign  subsidiaries
  
437.3 270.1 118.2 151.9 167.2 37.1 30.3 6.8 130.1 69.5 28.6 55.4 − 2007
453.7 277.7 145.1 132.7 176.0 32.8 24.1 8.7 143.2 57.7 30.5 52.9 − 2008
377.6 218.5 125.4 93.1 159.1 37.0 29.6 7.4 122.1 33.3 24.3 38.9 − 2009
387.5 219.2 128.4 90.8 168.3 31.7 24.3 7.4 136.7 31.2 32.9 44.2 − 2010          Aug 
380.6 214.8 129.3 85.5 165.8 30.6 23.3 7.3 135.2 30.3 31.6 46.8 −          Sep 
390.8 224.6 135.1 89.5 166.2 31.1 23.7 7.5 135.1 30.2 31.7 48.1 −          Oct 
387.1 221.2 137.6 83.6 165.9 30.0 22.4 7.5 136.0 29.6 31.8 49.7 −          Nov 
387.4 221.1 136.4 84.7 166.3 31.0 23.6 7.3 135.3 28.9 31.8 46.9 −          Dec 
387.2 221.2 135.5 85.7 166.0 32.5 25.0 7.4 133.5 27.7 30.2 47.5 − 2011          Jan 
386.1 218.4 131.5 86.8 167.7 31.3 23.9 7.4 136.4 26.7 30.4 47.0 −          Feb 
384.9 218.8 132.0 86.8 166.1 31.1 23.9 7.2 135.0 24.7 30.1 44.7 −          Mar 
387.2 223.7 130.6 93.1 163.4 31.1 23.8 7.3 132.3 24.1 29.8 44.8 −          Apr 
393.9 232.0 139.8 92.2 161.9 29.8 22.4 7.3 132.1 24.7 30.5 46.1 −          May
Changes *
+ 12.1 + 4.8 + 26.9 − 22.1 + 7.3 − 4.3 − 6.3 + 2.0 + 11.6 − 11.8 + 1.9 − 2.4 − 2008
− 76.0 − 59.1 − 19.7 − 39.5 − 16.9 + 4.2 + 5.5 − 1.4 − 21.1 − 24.3 − 6.2 − 13.6 − 2009
− 2.1 − 2.1 + 0.9 − 3.0 + 0.0 − 1.0 − 0.9 − 0.1 + 1.1 − 0.9 − 1.2 + 4.2 − 2010          Sep 
+ 11.3 + 10.2 + 5.8 + 4.4 + 1.1 + 0.5 + 0.3 + 0.2 + 0.6 − 0.1 + 0.0 + 1.7 −          Oct 
− 8.7 − 5.7 + 2.5 − 8.2 − 3.0 − 1.2 − 1.2 + 0.1 − 1.9 − 0.6 + 0.1 + 0.3 −          Nov 
+ 1.7 + 0.5 − 1.1 + 1.6 + 1.2 + 1.0 + 1.2 − 0.2 + 0.2 − 0.7 + 0.1 − 2.7 −          Dec 
+ 1.6 + 0.9 − 0.9 + 1.8 + 0.7 + 1.5 + 1.4 + 0.1 − 0.8 − 1.3 − 1.6 + 1.1 − 2011          Jan 
− 0.6 − 2.6 − 4.0 + 1.4 + 2.0 − 1.2 − 1.1 − 0.1 + 3.2 − 1.0 + 0.2 − 0.5 −          Feb 
+ 0.7 + 1.3 + 0.5 + 0.8 − 0.6 − 0.2 − 0.1 − 0.1 − 0.4 − 2.0 − 0.3 − 1.7 −          Mar 
+ 4.8 + 6.1 − 1.4 + 7.5 − 1.3 + 0.0 − 0.1 + 0.1 − 1.3 − 0.5 − 0.3 + 0.5 −          Apr 
+ 4.3 + 7.1 + 9.2 − 2.1 − 2.8 − 1.4 − 1.4 − 0.0 − 1.4 + 0.5 + 0.7 + 0.5 −          May
are regarded as a single branch. — 2Treasury bills, Treasury discount non-negotiable debt securities. — 5Issues of negotiable and
paper and other money market paper, debt securities. — 3Including non-negotiable debt securities and money market paper. — 6Including
own debt securities. — 4Excluding subordinated liabilities and subordinated liabilities. — 7 See also Table IV.2, footnote 1. 
41*IV  Banks

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
E U R O S Y S T E M
Monthly Report
August 2011
V  Minimum reserves
 
1  Reserve ratios
Germany Euro area
 
% of liabilities subject to reserve requirements % of reserve base  1 
Sight Time
Applicable from liabilities liabilities Applicable from Ratio Savings deposits
1995  Aug 1 2    2    1.5    1999  Jan 1 2    
 
 
 
 
1Article 3 of the Regulation of the European Central Bank on the appli-
cation of minimum reserves (excluding liabilities to which a reserve ratio of
0% applies pursuant to Article 4 (1)). 
 
 
 
2  Reserve maintenance in Germany up to the end of 1998
− pursuant to the Minimum Reserves Order of the Bundesbank 
 
DM million
Liabilities subject to reserve requirements Excess reserves  4 
Monthly Required % of the
average  1 Total reserves  2 Level Deficiencies Sight liabilities Time liabilities Savings deposits Actual reserves  3 required  reserves
1995          Dec 2,066,565 579,337 519,456 967,772 36,492 37,337 845 2.3 3
1996          Dec 2,201,464 655,483 474,342 1,071,639 38,671 39,522 851 2.2 4
1997          Dec 2,327,879 734,986 476,417 1,116,477 40,975 41,721 745 1.8 3
1998          Dec 2,576,889 865,444 564,878 1,146,567 45,805 46,432 627 1.4 4
1Pursuant to sections 5 to 7 of the Minimum Reserves Order. 2Amount balances of the credit institutions subject to reserve requirements on their
after applying the reserve ratios to the liabilities subject to reserve require- giro accounts at the Bundesbank. — 4 Actual reserves less required reserves. 
ments (section 5 (1) of the Minimum Reserves Order). — 3Average credit
 
 
3  Reserve maintenance in the euro area
− from 1999, pursuant to the ECB Regulation on the application of minimum reserves in accordance with
Article 19.1 of the Statute of the ESCB 
 
Maintenance Required reserves
period before deduction Required reserves
of lump-sum Lump-sum beginning in  1 after deduction of
Reserve base  2 allowance  3 allowance  4 Deficiencies  7 lump-sum allowance Current account  5 Excess reserves  6 
Euro area ( € billion)
 
2010          Dec  8 10,559.5 211.2 0.5 210.7 212.4 1.7 0.0
2011          Jan 10,640.0 212.8 0.5 212.3 213.6 1.3 0.0
         Feb 10,606.9 212.1 0.5 211.6 212.9 1.3 0.0
         Mar 10,491.8 209.8 0.5 209.3 210.5 1.1 0.0
         Apr 10,438.7 208.8 0.5 208.3 209.5 1.2 0.0
         May 10,372.1 207.4 0.5 206.9 209.0 2.0 0.0
         June  p 10,412.3 208.2 0.5 207.7 210.9 3.1 0.0
         July  p,9 10,464.9 209.3 0.5 208.8 211.5 2.7 ...
         Aug  p ... ... ... 207.0 ... ... ...
Of which:  Germany ( € million)
2010          Dec 2,530,997 50,620 185 50,435 51,336 901 0
2011          Jan 2,578,387 51,568 185 51,382 51,834 452 1
         Feb 2,580,325 51,606 186 51,421 51,756 335 0
         Mar 2,576,678 51,534 186 51,348 51,711 363 1
         Apr 2,563,152 51,263 186 51,077 51,437 360 0
         May 2,524,058 50,481 186 50,296 51,660 1,364 0
         June  p 2,540,817 50,816 185 50,631 52,597 1,966 0
         July  p 2,552,960 51,059 185 50,874 52,734 1,860 1
         Aug  p 2,516,922 50,338 185 50,154 ... ... ...
1From March 2004, the reserve maintenance period will start on the of the credit institutions at the national central banks. — 6Average credit
settlement day of the main refinancing operation immediately following balances less required reserves after deduction of the lump-sum
the meeting of the Governing Council of the ECB for which the monthly allowance. — 7Required reserves after deduction of the lump-sum
discussion of the monetary policy stance is scheduled. — 2Article 3 of the allowance. — 8Required reserves after deduction of the lump-sum
Regulation of the European Central Bank on the application of minimum allowance, including required reserves of Estonia ( €0.223 billion). Required
reserves (excluding liabilities to which a reserve ratio of 0% applies, pur- reserves of the euro area up to 31 December 2010 amounted to €210.5
suant to Article 4 (1)). — 3Amount after applying the reserve ratios to the billion. — 9The total number of deficiencies was not available when this
reserve base. — 4Article 5 (2) of the Regulation of the European Central report went to press. 
Bank on the application of minimum reserves. — 5Average credit balances
42*V  Minimum reserves

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2011
VI Interest rates
 
1 ECB interest rates 2 Base rates
 
 
% per annum % per annum
Main refinancing Main refinancing
operations operations Base Base
Mar- Mar- rate rate
ginal ginal as per as per Minimum Minimum
Applicable Deposit Fixed bid lending Applicable Deposit Fixed bid lending Applicable Civil Applicable Civil
from facility rate rate facility from facility rate rate facility from Code  1 from Code  1 
2002 Dec                  6 1.75 − 2.75 3.75 2008 July                  9 3.25 − 4.25 5.25 2002 Jan                1 2.57 2007 Jan                1 2.70
         Oct                  8 2.75 − 3.75 4.75          July                1 2.47          July                1 3.19
2003 Mar                  7 1.50 − 2.50 3.50          Oct                  9 3.25 3.75 − 4.25
         June                  6 1.00 − 2.00 3.00          Nov                12 2.75 3.25 − 3.75 2003 Jan                1 1.97 2008 Jan                1 3.32
         Dec                10 2.00 2.50 − 3.00          July                1 1.22          July                1 3.19
2005 Dec                  6 1.25 − 2.25 3.25
2009 Jan                21 1.00 2.00 − 3.00 2004 Jan                1 1.14 2009 Jan                1 1.62
2006 Mar                  8 1.50 − 2.50 3.50          Mar                11 0.50 1.50 − 2.50          July                1 1.13          July                1 0.12
         June                15 1.75 − 2.75 3.75          Apr                  8 0.25 1.25 − 2.25
         Aug                  9 2.00 − 3.00 4.00          May                13 0.25 1.00 − 1.75 2005 Jan                1 1.21 2011 July                1 0.37
         Oct                11 2.25 − 3.25 4.25          July                1 1.17
         Dec                13 2.50 − 3.50 4.50 2011 Apr                13 0.50 1.25 − 2.00
         July                13 0.75 1.50 − 2.25 2006 Jan                1 1.37
2007 Mar                14 2.75 − 3.75 4.75          July                1 1.95
         June                13 3.00 − 4.00 5.00
1 Pursuant to section 247 of the Civil Code.  
 
 
 
3 Eurosystem monetary policy operations allotted through tenders *
 
 
Fixed rate tenders Variable rate tenders
Bid Allotment Minimum Weighted
amount amount Fixed rate bid rate Marginal rate  1 average rate
Date of Running for
settlement € million % per annum ...days
Main refinancing operations
2011 July                13 153,597 153,597 1.50 − − − 7
         July                20 197,070 197,070 1.50 − − − 7
         July                27 164,200 164,200 1.50 − − − 7
         Aug                  3 172,021 172,021 1.50 − − − 7
         Aug                10 157,073 157,073 1.50 − − − 7
         Aug                17 147,689 147,689 1.50 − − − 7
Longer-term refinancing operations
2011 June                30 132,219 132,219 2 . . .−−− 9 1
         July                13 67,748 67,748 1.50 − − − 28
         July                28 84,977 84,977 2 . . .−−− 9 1
         Aug                10 75,751 75,751 1.50 − − − 35
         Aug                11 49,752 49,752 2 . . .−−− 2 0 3
Source: ECB. — *Enlargement of the euro area on 1 January 2011 to will be fixed at the average minimum bid rate of the main refinancing
include Estonia. — 1Lowest or highest interest rate at which funds were operations over the life of this operation. 
allotted or collected. — 2Interest payment on the maturity date; the rate
 
 
 
4 Money market rates, by month
 
 
% per annum
Money market rates reported by Frankfurt banks  1 EURIBOR  3 
One-week One-month Six-month Nine-month Twelve- Three-month
Overnight money Three-month funds EONIA  2 funds funds funds funds funds month funds
Reporting Monthly Lowest and Monthly Lowest and
period averages highest rates averages highest rates Monthly averages
2011          Jan 0.61 0.25 − 1.60 0.98 0.90 − 1.09 0.66 0.69 0.79 1.02 1.25 1.41 1.55
         Feb 0.66 0.25 − 1.25 1.05 0.97 − 1.13 0.71 0.83 0.89 1.09 1.35 1.54 1.71
         Mar 0.60 0.25 − 0.85 1.12 0.98 − 1.25 0.66 0.81 0.90 1.18 1.48 1.72 1.92
         Apr 0.94 0.43 − 1.50 1.28 1.14 − 1.40 0.97 1.07 1.13 1.32 1.62 1.86 2.09
         May 1.00 0.50 − 1.35 1.39 1.29 − 1.45 1.03 1.19 1.24 1.43 1.71 1.93 2.15
         June 1.10 0.65 − 1.92 1.44 1.30 − 1.55 1.12 1.19 1.28 1.49 1.75 1.95 2.14
         July 0.95 0.50 − 1.45 1.55 1.44 − 1.63 1.01 1.32 1.42 1.60 1.82 1.99 2.18
1Money market rates are not fixed or quoted officially; the monthly aver- of real turnover according to the act/360 method and published via
ages computed from daily quotations are unweighted. — 2Euro OverNight Moneyline Telerate. — 3Euro Interbank Offered Rate: unweighted average
Index Average: weighted average overnight rate for interbank operations rate calculated by Moneyline Telerate since 30 December 1998 according to
calculated by the European Central Bank since 4 January 1999 on the basis the act/360 method. 
43*VI Interest rates

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
E U R O S Y S T E M
Monthly Report
August 2011
VI Interest rates
 
5 Interest rates and volumes for outstanding amounts and new business of German banks (MFIs) *
(a) Outstanding amounts o
 
 
Households’ deposits Non-financial corporations’ deposits
with an agreed maturity of
up to 2 years over 2 years up to 2 years over 2 years
Effective Effective Effective Effective
End of interest rate  1 Volume  2 interest rate  1 Volume  2 interest rate  1 Volume  2 interest rate  1 Volume  2 
month % pa € million % pa € million % pa € million % pa € million
2010          June 1.70 129,292 2.47 207,028 0.85 86,238 3.92 22,642
         July 1.65 126,987 2.46 207,585 0.89 88,563 3.90 22,755
         Aug 1.62 126,748 2.46 208,128 0.91 90,953 3.90 22,595
         Sep 1.59 123,619 2.45 208,722 0.92 92,658 3.90 22,520
         Oct 1.59 123,550 2.44 209,255 0.97 95,970 3.86 22,535
         Nov 1.59 123,828 2.42 209,940 1.00 95,794 3.85 22,646
         Dec 1.57 123,875 2.41 213,208 1.02 98,840 3.83 22,637
2011          Jan 1.58 123,263 2.40 213,962 1.08 95,791 3.80 22,856
         Feb 1.58 123,712 2.40 215,243 1.10 96,346 3.80 22,983
         Mar 1.58 123,032 2.37 216,569 1.14 98,952 3.79 23,106
         Apr 1.61 125,585 2.36 217,665 1.25 100,520 3.76 23,816
         May 1.65 127,375 2.36 219,602 1.33 102,891 3.75 23,709
         June 1.68 128,443 2.36 220,838 1.41 100,866 3.74 23,964
 
 
Housing loans to households  3 Consumer credit and other loans to households  4, 5 
with a maturity of
over 1 year and over 1 year and
up to 1 year  6 up to 5 years over 5 years up to 1 year  6 up to 5 years over 5 years
Effective Effective Effective Effective Effective Effective
interest interest interest interest interest interest
End of rate  1 Volume  2 rate 1 Volume  2 rate 1 Volume  2 rate 1 Volume  2 rate 1 Volume  2 rate 1 Volume  2 
month % pa % pa % pa % pa % pa % pa € million € million € million € million € million € million
2010          June 4.07 5,042 4.17 25,736 4.74 920,866 8.36 69,258 6.00 69,419 5.79 312,492
         July 3.92 5,045 4.14 25,877 4.73 922,884 8.26 66,947 5.97 69,924 5.78 313,416
         Aug 4.05 5,504 4.10 26,087 4.72 923,541 8.27 66,989 5.95 69,869 5.77 313,830
         Sep 4.18 5,496 4.07 26,301 4.69 925,117 8.42 68,206 5.93 69,703 5.75 313,591
         Oct 4.14 5,455 4.05 26,375 4.68 926,841 8.26 66,398 5.89 69,962 5.74 313,936
         Nov 4.06 5,394 4.01 26,558 4.66 927,903 8.06 66,324 5.78 70,098 5.73 314,010
         Dec 3.99 5,369 3.97 26,563 4.64 927,171 8.14 68,321 5.73 70,042 5.70 312,604
2011          Jan 3.91 5,251 3.95 26,421 4.63 926,224 8.20 65,462 5.72 69,810 5.70 311,915
         Feb 3.82 5,036 3.92 26,475 4.62 926,667 8.20 64,486 5.70 69,108 5.69 312,164
         Mar 3.88 5,244 3.89 26,702 4.60 926,845 8.25 65,739 5.66 69,606 5.68 311,059
         Apr 3.95 5,202 3.88 26,839 4.59 927,168 8.22 63,985 5.64 69,778 5.68 312,376
         May 4.04 5,248 3.87 27,063 4.58 928,319 8.30 64,040 5.60 70,343 5.68 313,138
         June 4.13 5,203 3.86 27,214 4.58 929,354 8.46 66,552 5.56 69,358 5.68 312,069
 
 
Loans to non-financial corporations with a maturity of
up to 1 year  6 over 1 year and up to 5 years over 5 years
End of Volume  2 Volume  2 Volume  2 Effective interest rate  1 Effective interest rate  1 Effective interest rate  1 
month % pa € million % pa € million % pa € million
2010          June 3.71 137,411 3.52 136,207 3.85 549,949
         July 3.71 132,479 3.56 134,907 3.86 552,591
         Aug 3.74 130,788 3.59 133,990 3.86 553,853
         Sep 3.83 132,925 3.57 134,337 3.87 551,283
         Oct 3.88 131,772 3.63 133,816 3.85 551,206
         Nov 3.82 132,041 3.65 134,424 3.85 555,004
         Dec 3.82 128,142 3.66 133,617 3.86 555,314
2011          Jan 3.89 130,003 3.67 132,483 3.85 555,165
         Feb 3.88 133,863 3.68 133,024 3.86 557,886
         Mar 3.90 135,214 3.70 133,748 3.87 556,255
         Apr 3.96 134,351 3.75 130,873 3.90 558,075
         May 3.99 134,221 3.78 130,465 3.91 558,898
         June 4.15 137,565 3.86 127,937 3.94 560,966
*The MFI interest rate statistics are based on the interest rates applied by interest rates are calculated either as annualised agreed interest rates o ra s
MFIs and the related volumes of euro-denominated deposits and loans to narrowly defined effective rates. Both calculation methods cover all interest
households and non-financial corporations domiciled in the euro area. The payments on deposits and loans but not any other related charges which
household sector comprises individuals (including sole proprietors) and may occur for enquiries, administration, preparation of the documents,
non-profit institutions serving households. Non-financial corporations in- guarantees and credit insurance. — 2Data based on monthly balance sheet
clude all enterprises other than insurance companies, banks and other finan- statistics. — 3Secured and unsecured loans for home purchase, including
cial institutions. The interest rate statistics gathered on a harmonised basis building and home improvements; including loans granted by building and
in the euro area from January 2003 are being collected in Germany on a loan associations and interim credits as well as transmitted loans granted by
sample basis. The most recent figures are in all cases to be regarded as provi- the reporting agents in their own name and for their own account. —
sional. Subsequent revisions appearing in the following Monthly Report are 4Consumer credit is defined as loans granted for the purpose of personal
not specially marked. Further information on the MFI interest rate statistics use in the consumption of goods and services. — 5For the purpose of these
can be found on the Bundesbank’s website (Statistics / Reporting system / statistics, other loans are loans granted for other purposes such as business,
Banking statistics / MFI interest rate statistics). — oThe statistics on out- debt consolidation, education etc. — 6Including overdrafts (see also
standing amounts are collected at the end of the month. — 1The effective footnotes 13 to 15 p 47*). 
44*VI Interest rates

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2011
VI Interest rates
 
5 Interest rates and volumes for outstanding amounts and new business of German banks (MFIs) *  (cont’d)
(b) New business +
 
 
Households’ deposits
with an agreed maturity of redeemable at notice of  8 
Overnight up to 1 year over 2 years up to 3 months over 3 months over 1 year and up to 2 years
Effective Effective Effective Effective Effective Effective
interest interest interest interest interest interest
Reporting rate  1 Volume  2 rate 1 Volume  7 rate 1 Volume  7 rate 1 Volume  7 rate 1 Volume  2 rate 1 Volume  2 
period % pa % pa % pa % pa % pa % pa € million € million € million € million € million € million
2010          June 0.76 691,833 0.94 12,881 1.46 545 3.18 2,388 1.36 491,359 1.95 112,572
         July 0.73 698,095 1.10 14,993 2.21 1,171 2.22 1,514 1.32 495,008 1.91 110,429
         Aug 0.74 695,737 1.03 13,926 2.35 1,245 2.13 1,253 1.32 496,668 1.90 108,681
         Sep 0.74 697,415 1.04 13,929 2.26 1,354 2.12 1,477 1.40 499,188 1.83 106,394
         Oct 0.75 703,734 1.13 13,062 2.04 1,166 2.23 1,691 1.37 501,900 1.80 105,025
         Nov 0.74 711,278 1.16 13,413 1.80 1,342 2.16 1,756 1.36 503,907 1.81 105,590
         Dec 0.71 714,112 1.06 13,862 1.99 1,075 2.13 2,300 1.39 512,222 1.82 105,583
2011          Jan 0.72 712,891 1.29 17,554 2.14 1,570 2.49 2,259 1.34 514,833 1.83 105,207
         Feb 0.74 714,176 1.24 15,659 2.21 1,621 2.67 2,278 1.36 516,856 1.84 105,268
         Mar 0.75 714,781 1.18 13,674 2.20 1,980 2.42 2,293 1.37 517,707 1.85 105,429
         Apr 0.74 720,878 1.36 15,283 2.28 1,988 2.78 2,473 1.40 517,337 1.87 104,640
         May 0.79 721,441 1.36 15,015 2.31 1,980 2.81 3,088 1.40 515,120 1.88 104,562
         June 0.81 723,542 1.40 14,485 2.61 1,707 2.79 2,458 1.43 513,314 1.89 104,371
 
 
Non-financial corporations’ deposits
with an agreed maturity of
Overnight up to 1 year over 1 year and up to 2 years over 2 years
Effective Effective Effective Effective
Reporting interest rate  1 Volume  2 interest rate  1 Volume  7 interest rate  1 Volume  7 interest rate  1 Volume  7 
period % pa € million % pa € million % pa € million % pa € million
2010          June 0.43 245,454 0.51 29,165 1.76 331 2.29 172
         July 0.44 243,984 0.60 38,656 1.68 479 2.56 183
         Aug 0.44 248,523 0.59 32,128 1.59 353 2.32 243
         Sep 0.45 248,544 0.59 35,618 1.72 475 2.81 139
         Oct 0.50 249,029 0.75 35,976 1.69 376 2.28 248
         Nov 0.47 254,987 0.73 38,509 1.86 288 2.70 381
         Dec 0.46 258,245 0.68 51,978 2.60 452 2.81 811
2011          Jan 0.53 253,658 0.77 43,391 1.72 383 2.63 388
         Feb 0.47 242,018 0.87 31,168 1.90 706 3.02 783
         Mar 0.48 245,287 0.90 35,003 2.03 430 2.48 448
         Apr 0.58 243,324 1.12 33,097 2.09 625 2.55 845
         May 0.58 245,993 1.20 37,292 2.31 433 2.94 472
         June 0.62 243,252 1.25 36,331 2.08 434 2.63 465
 
 
Loans to households
Other loans to households with an initial rate fixation of  5 
of which  loans to sole proprietors  10 
floating rate or over 1 year and floating rate or over 1 year and
up to 1 year  9 up to 5 years over 5 years up to 1 year  9 up to 5 years over 5 years
Effective Effective Effective Effective Effective Effective
interest interest interest interest interest interest
Reporting rate  1 Volume  7 rate 1 Volume  7 rate 1 Volume  7 rate 1 Volume  7 rate 1 Volume  7 rate 1 Volume  7 
period % pa % pa % pa % pa % pa % pa € million € million € million € million € million € million
2010          June 2.21 5,611 4.10 1,925 4.05 2,456 2.27 2,717 4.46 1,554 4.07 1,362
         July 2.37 5,072 4.18 1,701 4.01 2,740 2.46 3,338 4.35 962 4.00 1,529
         Aug 2.39 4,240 4.47 857 3.92 2,206 2.43 2,517 4.64 635 3.89 1,250
         Sep 2.40 4,582 4.15 1,061 3.88 2,581 2.39 2,871 4.27 798 3.84 1,387
         Oct 2.53 4,941 4.33 1,025 4.00 2,246 2.56 3,235 4.37 763 3.98 1,249
         Nov 2.57 4,301 4.31 1,519 3.93 2,536 2.58 2,861 4.44 737 3.88 1,456
         Dec 2.58 5,582 4.15 1,326 3.98 3,534 2.67 3,302 4.29 889 3.96 1,781
2011          Jan 2.58 5,362 4.13 1,387 4.15 2,234 2.62 3,557 4.22 1,007 4.16 1,295
         Feb 2.53 4,860 4.56 1,039 4.27 2,456 2.62 2,727 4.68 676 4.28 1,411
         Mar 2.63 5,036 4.56 1,328 4.45 2,880 2.70 3,273 4.67 988 4.44 1,711
         Apr 2.81 4,744 4.56 1,175 4.61 2,360 2.86 3,116 4.66 844 4.56 1,342
         May 2.93 3,980 4.71 1,150 4.63 2,605 3.02 2,670 4.81 795 4.64 1,381
         June 3.04 4,559 4.42 1,092 4.62 2,391 3.17 3,034 4.64 654 4.62 1,377
For footnotes * and 1to6, see p 44*. — +In the case of deposits with an the sake of simplicity. This means that all outstanding deposit and lending
agreed maturity and all loans excluding revolving loans and overdrafts, business at the end of the month has to be incorporated in the calculation
credit card debt, new business covers all new agreements between house- of average rates of interest. — 7Estimated. The volume of new business is
holds or non-financial corporations and the bank. The interest rates are extrapolated to form the underlying total using the Horvitz-Thompson esti-
calculated as volume-weighted average rates across all new agreements mator. — 8Including non-financial corporations’ deposits; including fidelity
concluded during the reporting month. In the case of overnight deposits, and growth premia. — 9Excluding overdrafts. — 10Collected from June
deposits redeemable at notice, revolving loans and overdrafts, credit card 2010. 
debt, new business is collected in the same way as outstanding amounts for
45*VI Interest rates

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
E U R O S Y S T E M
Monthly Report
August 2011
VI Interest rates
 
5 Interest rates and volumes for outstanding amounts and new business of German banks (MFIs) *  (cont’d)
(b) New business +
 
 
Loans to households (cont’d)
Consumer credit with an initial rate fixation of  4 
Total floating rate or over 1 year and
Total up to 1 year  9 up to 5 years over 5 years (including charges)
Effective Effective Effective Effective Annual percentage
Reporting Volume  7 Volume  7 Volume  7 Volume  7 rate of charge  11 interest rate  1 interest rate  1 interest rate  1 interest rate  1 
period % pa % pa € million % pa € million % pa € million % pa € million
Total loans
2010          June 6.83 6.20 5,530 3.39 1,032 5.50 2,324 8.28 2,174
         July 7.10 6.51 5,283 3.50 775 5.63 2,285 8.46 2,223
         Aug 7.18 6.54 4,850 3.47 734 5.76 2,080 8.46 2,036
         Sep 7.09 6.50 4,957 3.43 731 5.67 2,142 8.43 2,084
         Oct 6.89 6.26 5,170 3.45 908 5.49 2,170 8.28 2,092
         Nov 6.75 6.21 4,945 3.45 729 5.42 2,175 8.03 2,041
         Dec 6.34 5.82 4,400 3.16 771 5.27 1,943 7.66 1,686
2011          Jan 6.99 6.26 5,179 3.36 1,042 5.51 2,029 8.43 2,108
         Feb 6.93 6.20 5,233 3.30 958 5.43 2,167 8.30 2,108
         Mar 6.99 6.37 6,134 3.52 945 5.57 2,652 8.28 2,537
         Apr 6.86 6.20 5,700 3.28 1,029 5.55 2,417 8.23 2,254
         May 7.11 6.39 6,269 3.68 1,086 5.69 2,625 8.25 2,558
         June 7.00 6.34 5,203 3.42 879 5.72 2,258 8.27 2,066
of which: collateralised loans 12
2010          June . 5.28 291 3.18 54 7.15 129 4.10 108
         July . 4.90 416 3.08 95 6.54 171 4.19 150
         Aug . 4.34 425 2.19 133 6.41 156 4.07 136
         Sep . 4.35 433 2.09 110 6.30 164 3.91 159
         Oct . 4.00 536 2.29 210 6.16 173 3.91 153
         Nov . 4.64 456 2.49 94 6.40 187 3.92 175
         Dec . 4.72 475 2.78 104 6.42 198 3.95 173
2011          Jan . 4.50 430 2.67 119 5.92 176 4.25 135
         Feb . 4.12 449 2.48 181 5.82 152 4.44 116
         Mar . 5.26 458 2.72 105 6.24 182 4.61 142
         Apr . 4.88 440 2.84 116 6.17 200 4.69 124
         May . 4.85 527 3.04 168 6.40 207 4.74 152
         June . 5.16 423 3.14 109 6.52 201 4.69 113
 
 
Loans to households (cont’d)
Housing loans with an initial rate fixation of  3 
Total floating rate or over 1 year and over 5 years and
Total up to 1 year  9 up to 5 years up to 10 years over 10 years (including charges)
Effective Effective Effective Effective Effective Annual percentage
Reporting Volume  7 Volume  7 Volume  7 Volume  7 Volume  7 rate of charge  11 interest rate  1 interest rate  1 interest rate  1 interest rate  1 interest rate  1 
period % pa % pa % pa % pa % pa % pa € million € million € million € million € million
Total loans
2010          June 3.78 3.71 14,899 3.19 2,215 3.36 2,323 3.89 5,495 3.90 4,866
         July 3.68 3.60 18,095 3.11 3,092 3.35 2,843 3.79 6,802 3.76 5,358
         Aug 3.73 3.66 15,163 3.27 2,125 3.31 2,330 3.80 5,932 3.82 4,776
         Sep 3.62 3.54 16,328 3.28 2,039 3.25 2,340 3.65 6,342 3.64 5,607
         Oct 3.61 3.49 16,995 3.21 2,797 3.34 2,407 3.58 6,464 3.59 5,327
         Nov 3.65 3.55 16,236 3.42 1,977 3.25 2,378 3.61 6,393 3.66 5,488
         Dec 3.76 3.62 17,749 3.38 2,524 3.31 2,659 3.70 7,049 3.77 5,517
2011          Jan 3.82 3.74 17,098 3.38 3,444 3.43 2,803 3.85 6,692 4.06 4,159
         Feb 3.99 3.92 14,711 3.56 2,101 3.60 2,470 4.02 5,832 4.15 4,308
         Mar 4.07 3.99 17,526 3.49 2,777 3.70 2,793 4.10 6,742 4.26 5,214
         Apr 4.18 4.09 16,705 3.51 2,760 3.73 2,601 4.18 6,626 4.50 4,718
         May 4.23 4.16 16,448 3.82 2,503 3.84 2,531 4.23 6,594 4.41 4,820
         June 4.18 4.11 13,933 3.78 2,189 3.82 2,051 4.19 5,334 4.32 4,359
of which: collateralised loans 12
2010          June . 3.65 6,586 3.25 707 3.26 1,026 3.77 2,364 3.80 2,489
         July . 3.62 8,542 3.04 1,009 3.37 1,429 3.74 3,385 3.82 2,719
         Aug . 3.59 7,930 3.07 840 3.25 1,267 3.70 3,147 3.77 2,676
         Sep . 3.46 8,500 3.10 786 3.18 1,265 3.57 3,395 3.56 3,054
         Oct . 3.47 9,197 3.02 1,241 3.40 1,389 3.51 3,540 3.63 3,027
         Nov . 3.48 8,496 3.19 844 3.15 1,280 3.52 3,452 3.66 2,920
         Dec . 3.57 8,982 3.28 1,055 3.29 1,401 3.62 3,753 3.76 2,773
2011          Jan . 3.66 8,664 3.22 1,431 3.36 1,477 3.76 3,560 3.98 2,196
         Feb . 3.86 7,820 3.43 916 3.58 1,366 3.96 3,235 4.07 2,303
         Mar . 3.92 8,747 3.34 1,077 3.64 1,439 4.02 3,544 4.17 2,680
         Apr . 4.04 8,763 3.33 1,330 3.69 1,323 4.09 3,440 4.49 2,670
         May . 4.09 8,592 3.65 1,093 3.78 1,342 4.16 3,638 4.33 2,519
         June . 4.03 7,153 3.64 994 3.73 1,055 4.11 2,874 4.25 2,230
For footnotes * and 1to6, see p 44*. For footnotes +, 7to10, see p 45*. For tains other related charges which may occur for enquiries, administration,
footnote 12, see p 47*. — 11Annual percentage rate of charge, which con- preparation of the documents, guarantees and credit insurance. 
46*VI Interest rates

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2011
VI Interest rates
 
5 Interest rates and volumes for outstanding amounts and new business of German banks (MFIs) *  (cont’d)
(b) New business +
 
 
Loans to households (cont’d) Loans to non-financial corporations
of which of which
Revolving loans  13 Revolving loans  13 
and overdrafts  14 Revolving loans  13 Extended and overdrafts  14 Revolving loans  13 
credit card debt  15 and overdrafts  14 credit card debt credit card debt  15 and overdrafts  14 
Effective Effective Effective Effective Effective
Reporting Volume  16 Volume  16 Volume  2 Volume  16 Volume  16 interest rate  1 interest rate  1 interest rate  1 interest rate  1 interest rate  1 
period % pa € million % pa € million % pa € million % pa € million % pa € million
2010          June 10.16 44,263 10.18 39,362 15.07 3,108 4.74 70,717 4.75 70,537
         July 9.98 45,246 10.02 40,207 14.88 3,158 4.72 66,293 4.72 66,073
         Aug 10.02 45,747 10.09 40,545 14.89 3,236 4.74 64,516 4.75 64,337
         Sep 10.12 46,795 10.17 41,644 14.90 3,233 4.82 66,162 4.83 65,969
         Oct 9.92 45,605 9.97 40,404 14.82 3,254 4.90 64,296 4.91 64,108
         Nov 9.82 44,999 9.92 39,670 14.84 3,241 4.86 64,101 4.87 63,904
         Dec 9.95 46,527 10.04 41,264 14.85 3,266 4.86 62,512 4.87 62,342
2011          Jan 9.99 44,746 10.11 39,415 14.94 3,263 4.91 64,520 4.92 64,347
         Feb 10.09 43,724 10.19 38,548 14.88 3,250 4.91 67,762 4.92 67,580
         Mar 10.08 44,548 10.19 39,295 14.88 3,251 4.87 68,034 4.89 67,799
         Apr 10.08 42,907 10.20 37,543 14.94 3,281 4.95 66,106 4.96 65,901
         May 10.16 43,083 10.30 37,679 14.96 3,315 4.91 65,330 4.93 65,099
         June 10.18 44,814 10.27 39,450 14.94 3,362 5.07 69,283 5.08 69,071
 
 
Loans to non-financial corporations (cont’d)
Loans up to €1 million with an initial rate fixation of  17 Loans over €1 million with an initial rate fixation of  17 
floating rate or over 1 year and floating rate or over 1 year and
up to 1 year  9 up to 5 years over 5 years up to 1 year  9 up to 5 years over 5 years
Effective Effective Effective Effective Effective Effective
interest interest interest interest interest interest
Reporting rate  1 Volume  7 rate 1 Volume  7 rate 1 Volume  7 rate 1 Volume  7 rate 1 Volume  7 rate 1 Volume  7 
period % pa % pa % pa % pa % pa % pa € million € million € million € million € million € million
Total loans
2010          June 3.52 7,084 4.45 1,318 3.82 1,458 2.37 49,115 3.29 1,939 3.62 4,607
         July 3.30 7,084 4.35 1,381 3.79 1,508 2.46 47,412 2.97 2,312 3.25 4,474
         Aug 3.51 5,640 4.35 1,113 3.72 1,313 2.62 37,588 3.39 1,401 3.66 3,808
         Sep 3.49 7,124 4.40 1,227 3.67 1,438 2.37 43,643 3.40 1,725 3.66 4,437
         Oct 3.42 7,024 4.25 1,296 3.73 1,496 2.44 45,964 3.33 1,851 3.47 4,341
         Nov 3.84 6,989 4.27 1,329 3.66 1,505 2.64 38,043 3.47 2,006 3.44 4,998
         Dec 3.77 7,119 4.24 1,472 3.81 1,798 2.78 52,023 3.26 3,889 3.56 7,562
2011          Jan 3.36 6,823 4.25 1,315 3.96 1,288 2.50 44,418 3.34 2,283 3.95 4,794
         Feb 3.59 5,971 4.51 1,247 4.08 1,211 2.69 34,963 4.05 1,522 3.98 3,950
         Mar 3.69 7,429 4.54 1,537 4.28 1,426 2.69 46,728 3.84 2,216 3.97 5,171
         Apr 3.63 6,876 4.63 1,303 4.37 1,254 2.87 45,450 3.82 2,177 4.70 5,871
         May 3.95 6,606 4.71 1,378 4.36 1,362 2.91 38,493 3.67 1,083 4.10 4,057
         June 3.93 6,808 4.64 1,264 4.33 1,143 3.06 44,897 3.62 2,839 4.23 4,181
of which: collateralised loans 12
2010          June 3.81 1,071 3.94 125 3.64 394 2.45 7,467 2.66 545 3.64 1,073
         July 3.53 1,436 3.90 203 3.57 395 2.32 9,176 2.91 918 3.21 1,236
         Aug 3.99 1,025 3.79 162 3.49 387 2.34 6,046 3.97 303 3.62 1,016
         Sep 3.75 1,258 3.99 149 3.53 465 2.37 8,203 3.23 443 3.99 1,246
         Oct 3.77 1,439 3.75 191 3.58 532 2.43 8,896 3.18 746 3.68 1,251
         Nov 4.25 1,179 3.60 190 3.47 404 2.65 6,985 3.45 592 3.32 1,543
         Dec 4.15 1,477 3.72 196 3.57 503 2.82 9,561 2.74 1,206 3.41 1,665
2011          Jan 3.59 1,605 3.70 209 3.86 386 2.51 9,039 3.38 950 4.09 1,135
         Feb 3.65 1,231 4.19 146 3.86 311 2.53 6,812 4.26 624 4.06 1,070
         Mar 3.70 1,428 4.25 194 4.11 388 2.75 9,342 3.70 743 4.09 976
         Apr 3.76 1,476 4.37 199 4.20 337 2.76 9,355 3.88 922 4.60 2,009
         May 4.11 1,312 4.53 172 4.18 363 2.95 7,064 3.73 221 4.12 946
         June 4.00 1,343 4.40 156 4.05 321 3.08 8,797 3.54 1,049 4.30 1,271
For footnotes *and1to6, see p 44*. For footnotes +and7to10, see p 45*. whether they are within or beyond the limits agreed between customers
For footnote 11, see p 46*. — 12Collected from June 2010. For the purposes and the bank. — 15From June 2010 including convenience and extended
of the interest rate statistis, a loan is considered to be secured if collateral credit card debt. Convenience credit is defined as the credit granted a ta n
(among others financial collateral, real estate collateral, debt securities) in interest rate of 0% in the period between payment transactions effectuated
at leat the same value as the loan amount has been posted, pledged or with the card during one billing cycle and the date at which the debt
assigned. — 13From June 2010 including revolving loans which have all the balances from this specific billing cycle become due. — 16From January
following features: (a) the borrower may use or withdraw the funds to a 2003 up to May 2010 estimated. The volume of outstanding amounts
pre-approved credit limit without giving prior notice to the lender; (b) the reported was extrapolated to form the underlying total using the
amount of available credit can increase and decrease as funds are borrowed Horvitz-Thompson estimator. From June 2010 the data are based on
and repaid; (c) the loan may be used repeatedly; (d) there is no obligation monthly balance sheet statistics. — 17The amount refers to the single loan
of regular repayment of funds. — 14Overdrafts are defined as debit transaction considered as new business. 
balances on current accounts. They include all bank overdrafts regardless of
47*VI Interest rates

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
E U R O S Y S T E M
Monthly Report
August 2011
VII Capital market
 
1 Sales and purchases of debt securities and shares in Germany *
 
 
 
Debt securities
Sales Purchases
Domestic debt securities  1 Residents
Credit in- Bundes-
Sales stitutions bank
= Public Foreign including open
total Bank Corporate debt debt building market
pur- debt bonds secur- secur- and loan Non- oper- Non-
Period chases Total securities ities  3 ities 4 Total  5 banks  7 ations  6 residents  8 (non-MFIs)  2 associations  6 
DM million
1998 418,841 308,201 254,367 3,143 50,691 110,640 245,802 203,342 42,460 − 173,038
€ million
1999 292,663 198,068 156,399 2,184 39,485 94,595 155,766 74,728 81,038 − 136,898
2000 226,393 157,994 120,154 12,605 25,234 68,399 151,568 91,447 60,121 − 74,825
2001 180,227 86,656 55,918 14,473 16,262 93,571 111,281 35,848 75,433 − 68,946
2002 175,396 124,035 47,296 14,506 62,235 51,361 60,476 13,536 46,940 − 114,920
2003 184,679 134,455 31,404 30,262 72,788 50,224 105,557 35,748 69,809 − 79,122
2004 233,890 133,711 64,231 10,778 58,703 100,179 108,119 121,841 − 13,723 − 125,772
2005 252,658 110,542 39,898 2,682 67,965 142,116 94,718 61,740 32,978 − 157,940
2006 242,006 102,379 40,995 8,943 52,446 139,627 125,423 68,893 56,530 − 116,583
2007 217,798 90,270 42,034 20,123 28,111 127,528 − 26,762 96,476 − 123,238 − 244,560
2008 72,574 66,139 − 45,712 86,527 25,322 6,435 2,798 68,049 − 65,251 − 69,776
2009 67,560 − 538 − 114,902 22,709 91,655 68,098 88,871 12,973 75,898 − − 21,311
2010 148,535 − 1,212 − 7,621 24,044 − 17,635 149,747 100,463 − 103,271 203,734 − 48,072
2011          Apr − 2,198 − 6,295 − 10,472 − 3,518 7,695 4,097 − 21,656 − 1,559 − 20,097 − 19,458
         May 31,995 24,797 − 1,904 3,332 23,369 7,198 − 11,522 2,140 − 13,662 − 43,517
         June − 23,781 − 16,468 − 24,220 3,159 4,593 − 7,313 − 20,867 − 18,102 − 2,765 − − 2,914
 
 
 
Shares
Sales Purchases
Sales Residents
=
total Domestic Foreign Credit insti- Non-
purchases shares  9 shares  10 Total  11 tutions  6,12 Non-banks  7 residents  13 
Period
DM million
1998 249,504 48,796 200,708 149,151 20,252 128,899 100,353
€ million
1999 150,013 36,010 114,003 103,136 18,637 84,499 46,877
2000 140,461 22,733 117,729 164,654 23,293 141,361 − 24,194
2001 82,665 17,575 65,091 − 2,252 − 14,714 12,462 84,918
2002 39,338 9,232 30,106 18,398 − 23,236 41,634 20,941
2003 11,896 16,838 − 4,946 − 15,121 7,056 − 22,177 27,016
2004 − 3,317 10,157 − 13,474 7,432 5,045 2,387 − 10,748
2005 32,364 13,766 18,597 1,036 10,208 − 9,172 31,329
2006 26,276 9,061 17,214 7,528 11,323 − 3,795 18,748
2007 − 5,009 10,053 − 15,062 − 62,308 − 6,702 − 55,606 57,299
2008 − 28,613 11,326 − 39,939 1,542 − 23,079 24,621 − 30,153
2009 37,903 23,962 13,940 32,176 − 8,335 40,511 5,725
2010 35,469 20,049 15,422 37,798 7,340 30,458 − 2,329
2011          Apr 8,002 5,559 2,443 25,279 22,596 2,683 − 17,277
         May 10,649 5,851 4,798 − 4,314 − 12,646 8,332 14,963
         June 9,692 6,427 3,265 − 5,028 − 10,241 5,213 14,720
*Up to end-1999, debt securities in this table comprise bonds and money funds. — 8Net purchases or net sales (−) of domestic debt securities by
market paper issued by domestic banks; from January 2000, they comprise non-residents; transaction values. — 9Excluding shares of public limited
all debt securities. For mutual fund shares, see Table VII.6. — 1Net sales at investment companies; at issue prices. — 10Net purchases or net sales (−) of
market values plus/minus changes in issuers’ portfolios of their own debt foreign shares (including direct investment)  by  residents;  transaction  val-
securities. — 2Including cross-border financing within groups from January ues. — 11Domestic and foreign shares. — 12Up to end-1998, excluding
2011. — 3Including Federal Railways Fund, Federal Post Office and syndicated shares. — 13Net purchases or net sales (−) of domestic shares
Treuhand agency. — 4Net purchases or net sales (−) of foreign debt (including direct investment) by non-residents; transaction values. — The
securities by residents; transaction values. — 5Domestic and foreign debt figures for the most recent date are provisional; revisions are not specially
securities. — 6Book values; statistically adjusted. — 7Residual; also marked. 
including purchases of domestic and foreign securities by domestic mutual
48*VII Capital market

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2011
VII Capital market
 
2 Sales of debt securities issued by residents * 
 
 
Up to end-1998, DM nominal million value; from 1999, € million nominal value
Bank debt securities  1 Memo item
 Foreign  DM/euro
bonds issued Debt securities
Corporate by German- issued by special
Mortgage Public purpose credit Other bank bonds Public managed
Period Total Total Pfandbriefe Pfandbriefe institutions (non-MFIs)  2 syndicates debt securities debt securities  3 
Gross sales  4 
1998 1,030,827 789,035 71,371 344,609 72,140 300,920 3,392 238,400 149,542
€ million
1999 571,269 448,216 27,597 187,661 59,760 173,200 2,570 120,483 57,202
2000 659,148 500,895 34,528 143,107 94,556 228,703 8,114 150,137 31,597
2001 687,988 505,646 34,782 112,594 106,166 252,103 11,328 171,012 10,605
2002 818,725 569,232 41,496 119,880 117,506 290,353 17,574 231,923 10,313
2003 958,917 668,002 47,828 107,918 140,398 371,858 22,510 268,406 2,850
2004 990,399 688,844 33,774 90,815 162,353 401,904 31,517 270,040 12,344
2005 988,911 692,182 28,217 103,984 160,010 399,969 24,352 272,380 600
2006 925,863 622,055 24,483 99,628 139,193 358,750 29,975 273,834 69
2007 1,021,533 743,616 19,211 82,720 195,722 445,963 15,043 262,872 −
2008 1,337,337 961,271 51,259 70,520 382,814 456,676 95,093 280,974 −
2009 1,533,616 1,058,815 40,421 37,615 331,566 649,215 76,379 398,423 −
2010 1,375,138 757,754 36,226 33,539 363,828 324,160 53,654 563,731 −
2011          Mar 101,051 43,257 4,215 1,147 20,434 17,462 8,052 49,742 −
         Apr 125,181 45,989 1,643 2,954 26,792 14,600 8,141 71,051 −
         May 109,277 61,243 3,490 3,146 38,582 16,025 7,751 40,283 −
         June 101,126 47,060 1,872 2,111 30,852 12,225 10,762 43,304 −
of which:  Debt securities with maturities of more than four years  5 
1998 694,414 496,444 59,893 288,619 54,385 93,551 2,847 195,122 139,645
€ million
1999 324,888 226,993 16,715 124,067 37,778 48,435 2,565 95,331 44,013
2000 319,330 209,187 20,724 102,664 25,753 60,049 6,727 103,418 27,008
2001 299,751 202,337 16,619 76,341 42,277 67,099 7,479 89,933 6,480
2002 309,157 176,486 16,338 59,459 34,795 65,892 12,149 120,527 9,213
2003 369,336 220,103 23,210 55,165 49,518 92,209 10,977 138,256 2,850
2004 424,769 275,808 20,060 48,249 54,075 153,423 20,286 128,676 4,320
2005 425,523 277,686 20,862 63,851 49,842 143,129 16,360 131,479 400
2006 337,969 190,836 17,267 47,814 47,000 78,756 14,422 132,711 69
2007 315,418 183,660 10,183 31,331 50,563 91,586 13,100 118,659 −
2008 387,516 190,698 13,186 31,393 54,834 91,289 84,410 112,407 −
2009 361,999 185,575 20,235 20,490 59,809 85,043 55,240 121,185 −
2010 381,687 169,174 15,469 15,139 72,796 65,769 34,649 177,863 −
2011          Mar 33,572 13,001 2,021 253 2,960 7,767 4,484 16,087 −
         Apr 38,406 13,320 599 1,109 7,752 3,859 3,970 21,116 −
         May 29,509 10,462 1,570 349 5,217 3,327 2,596 16,450 −
         June 36,018 17,689 1,258 1,343 12,017 3,071 5,662 12,667 −
Net sales  6 
1998 327,991 264,627 22,538 162,519 18,461 61,111 3,118 60,243 84,308
€ million
1999 209,096 170,069 2,845 80,230 31,754 55,238 2,185 36,840 22,728
2000 155,615 122,774 5,937 29,999 30,089 56,751 7,320 25,522 − 16,705
2001 84,122 60,905 6,932 − 9,254 28,808 34,416 8,739 14,479 − 30,657
2002 131,976 56,393 7,936 − 26,806 20,707 54,561 14,306 61,277 − 44,546
2003 124,556 40,873 2,700 − 42,521 44,173 36,519 18,431 65,253 − 54,990
2004 167,233 81,860 1,039 − 52,615 50,142 83,293 18,768 66,605 − 22,124
2005 141,715 65,798 − 2,151 − 34,255 37,242 64,962 10,099 65,819 − 35,963
2006 129,423 58,336 − 12,811 − 20,150 44,890 46,410 15,605 55,482 − 19,208
2007 86,579 58,168 − 10,896 − 46,629 42,567 73,127 − 3,683 32,093 − 29,750
2008 119,472 8,517 15,052 − 65,773 25,165 34,074 82,653 28,302 − 31,607
2009 76,441 − 75,554 858 − 80,646 25,579 − 21,345 48,508 103,482 − 21,037
2010 21,566 − 87,646 − 3,754 − 63,368 28,296 − 48,822 23,748 85,464 − 10,904
2011          Mar − 22,725 − 20,633 1,158 − 2,744 − 9,928 − 9,118 2,041 − 4,134 − 197
         Apr 21,496 − 8,280 − 707 − 6,435 3,844 − 4,982 1,539 28,238 − 127
         May 20,016 − 5,338 682 − 1,720 5,899 − 10,199 1,166 24,187 − 926
         June − 15,356 − 25,203 − 1,296 − 3,638 − 1,703 − 18,566 3,574 6,274 − 300
*For definitions, see the explanatory notes in the Statistical Supplement 2 Treuhand agency. — 4Gross sales means only initial sales of newly issued
Capital market statistics on p 21 ff. — 1Excluding registered bank debt securities. — 5Maximum maturity according to the terms of issue. — 6Gross
securities. — 2Including cross-border financing within groups from January sales less redemptions. 
2011. — 3Including Federal Railways Fund, Federal Post Office and
49*VII Capital market

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
E U R O S Y S T E M
Monthly Report
August 2011
VII Capital market
 
3 Amounts outstanding of debt securities issued by residents  * 
 
 
€ million nominal value
Bank debt securities  1 Memo item
 Foreign  DM/euro
End of year Debt securities bonds issued
or month/ issued by Corporate by German-
Maturity Mortgage Public Other bank bonds Public managed special purpose
in years Total Total (non-MFIs) syndicates credit institutions debt securities debt securities Pfandbriefe Pfandbriefe
1999 2,097,926 1,322,863 134,814 655,024 163,284 369,741 6,280 768,783 339,560
2000 2,265,121 1,445,736 140,751 685,122 157,374 462,488 13,599 805,786 322,856
2001 2,349,243 1,506,640 147,684 675,868 201,721 481,366 22,339 820,264 292,199
2002 2,481,220 1,563,034 155,620 649,061 222,427 535,925 36,646 881,541 247,655
2003 2,605,775 1,603,906 158,321 606,541 266,602 572,442 55,076 946,793 192,666
2004 2,773,007 1,685,766 159,360 553,927 316,745 655,734 73,844 1,013,397 170,543
2005 2,914,723 1,751,563 157,209 519,674 323,587 751,093 83,942 1,079,218 134,580
2006 3,044,145 1,809,899 144,397 499,525 368,476 797,502 99,545 1,134,701 115,373
2007 3,130,723 1,868,066 133,501 452,896 411,041 870,629 95,863 1,166,794 85,623
2008 3,250,195 1,876,583 150,302 377,091 490,641 858,550 178,515 1,195,097 54,015
2009 3,326,635 1,801,029 151,160 296,445 516,221 837,203 227,024 1,298,581 32,978
2010 3,348,201 2 1,570,490 147,529 232,954 544,517 2 645,491 250,774 2 1,526,937 22,074
2011          Jan 3,353,580 1,577,837 148,561 229,665 547,464 652,148 259,340 1,516,402 20,824
         Feb 3,382,171 1,594,496 151,406 224,453 559,179 659,457 266,877 1,520,798 17,714
         Mar 3,359,446 1,573,863 152,564 221,709 549,250 650,340 268,919 1,516,664 17,517
         Apr 3,380,943 1,565,583 151,857 215,274 553,094 645,358 270,457 1,544,902 17,391
         May 3,400,959 1,560,246 152,539 213,554 558,994 635,158 271,624 1,569,089 16,464
         June 3,385,603 1,535,042 151,243 209,916 557,291 616,592 275,197 1,575,363 16,164
Breakdown by remaining period to maturity  3 Position at end-June 2011 
1,307,225 623,296 69,611 103,733 209,036 240,916 58,185 625,744 4,035    less than 2
772,479 399,151 44,307 57,052 141,293 156,500 63,415 309,912 5,204 2 to less than 4
521,341 271,599 25,778 30,114 78,383 137,324 28,602 221,140 3,119 4 to less than 6
210,646 89,888 6,092 10,319 49,602 23,876 13,591 107,166 278 6 to less than 8
187,024 50,018 4,950 4,666 27,420 12,983 6,979 130,026 218 8 to less than 10
69,709 28,652 466 2,523 20,666 4,997 10,571 30,485 1,657 10 to less than 15
85,233 16,327 14 330 7,439 8,544 3,166 65,740 687 15 to less than 20
231,949 56,112 25 1,181 23,452 31,454 90,685 85,151 967 20 and more
*Including debt securities temporarily held in the issuers’ portfolios. — month under review until final maturity for debt securities falling due en
1Excluding debt securities handed to the trustee for temporary safe bloc and until mean maturity of the residual amount outstanding for debt
custody. — 2Sectoral reclassification of debt securities. — 3Calculated from securities not falling due en bloc. 
50* 
 
4 Shares in circulation issued by residents  * 
 
 
€ million nominal value
Change in domestic public limited companies’ capital due to
Memo item
Share circulation
at market values
cash payments contribution (market capita-
and ex- merger reduction lisation) Share capital = Net increase or contribution of shares,
change of of claims and circulation at net decrease (−) mining shares, of capital level at end
issue of and other transfer change of and of period end of period during period convertible GmbH shares,
Period under review under review bonds  1 etc of assets bonus shares real assets legal form liquidation under review  2 
1999 133,513 11,747 5,519 2,008 190 1,075 2,099 1,560 − 708 1,603,304
2000 147,629 14,115 3,620 3,694 618 8,089 − 1,986 1,827 − 1,745 1,353,000
2001 166,187 18,561 7,987 4,057 1,106 8,448 1,018 − 905 − 3,152 1,205,613
2002 168,716 2,528 4,307 1,291 486 1,690 − 868 − 2,152 − 2,224 647,492
2003 162,131 − 6,585 4,482 923 211 513 − 322 − 10,806 − 1,584 851,001
2004 164,802 2,669 3,960 1,566 276 696 220 − 1,760 − 2,286 887,217
2005 163,071 − 1,733 2,470 1,040 694 268 − 1,443 − 3,060 − 1,703 1,058,532
2006 163,764 695 2,670 3,347 604 954 − 1,868 − 1,256 − 3,761 1,279,638
2007 164,560 799 3,164 1,322 200 269 − 682 − 1,847 − 1,636 1,481,930
2008 168,701 4,142 5,006 1,319 152 0 − 428 − 608 − 1,306 830,622
2009 175,691 6,989 12,476 398 97 − − 3,741 − 1,269 − 974 927,256
2010 174,596 − 1,096 3,265 497 178 10 − 486 − 993 − 3,569 1,091,220
2011          Jan 175,062 466 592 − 308 − − 6 − 197 − 231 1,109,831
         Feb 174,978 − 84 92 2 1 − 0 − 156 − 24 1,129,599
         Mar 175,124 145 253 19 6 − − 73 − 16 − 44 1,108,591
         Apr 175,396 272 303 30 − − − 1 − 36 − 25 1,162,665
         May 174,520 − 876 1,413 − 3 − 0 18 − 2,310 1,133,630
         June 177,023 2,503 2,860 147 10 − − 66 9 − 457 1,137,397
*Excluding shares of public limited investment companies. — 1Including ber 2007) or the Neuer Markt (stock market segment was closed down on
shares issued out of company profits. — 2Enterprises listed on the Regulated 24 March 2003) are included as well as enterprises listed on the Open Market.
Market (the introduction of which marked the end of the division of organ- Source: Bundesbank calculations based on data of the Herausgebergemein-
ised trading segments into an official and a regulated market on 1 Novem- schaft Wertpapier-Mitteilungen and the Deutsche Börse AG. 
50*VII Capital market

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2011
VII Capital market
 
5 Yields and indices on German securities
 
 
               
Yields on debt securities outstanding issued by residents  1 Price indices  2,3 
Public debt securities Bank debt securities Debt securities Shares
Listed
Federal securities
With a residual With a residual
maturity of maturity of Corporate German German
more than 9 more than 9 bonds bond iBoxx CDAX share
and including and including (non- index share price index € Germany
Total Total Total 10 years  4 Total 10 years MFIs) (REX) price index index (DAX)
Average End-1998 End-1987 End-1987
Period % per annum daily rate = 100 = 100 = 1000
1999 4.3 4.3 4.3 4.5 4.3 4.9 5.0 110.60 92.52 445.95 6,958.14
2000 5.4 5.3 5.2 5.3 5.6 5.8 6.2 112.48 94.11 396.59 6,433.61
2001 4.8 4.7 4.7 4.8 4.9 5.3 5.9 113.12 94.16 319.38 5,160.10
2002 4.7 4.6 4.6 4.8 4.7 5.1 6.0 117.56 97.80 188.46 2,892.63
2003 3.7 3.8 3.8 4.1 3.7 4.3 5.0 117.36 97.09 252.48 3,965.16
2004 3.7 3.7 3.7 4.0 3.6 4.2 4.0 120.19 99.89 268.32 4,256.08
2005 3.1 3.2 3.2 3.4 3.1 3.5 3.7 120.92 101.09 335.59 5,408.26
2006 3.8 3.7 3.7 3.8 3.8 4.0 4.2 116.78 96.69 407.16 6,596.92
2007 4.3 4.3 4.2 4.2 4.4 4.5 5.0 114.85 94.62 478.65 8,067.32
2008 4.2 4.0 4.0 4.0 4.5 4.7 6.3 121.68 102.06 266.33 4,810.20
2009 3.2 3.1 3.0 3.2 3.5 4.0 5.5 123.62 100.12 320.32 5,957.43
2010 2.5 2.4 2.4 2.7 2.7 3.3 4.0 124.96 102.95 368.72 6,914.19
2011          Apr 3.2 3.1 3.1 3.3 3.5 4.1 4.1 121.95 100.28 394.79 7,514.46
         May 3.0 2.9 2.9 3.1 3.3 3.9 4.2 123.54 101.53 377.73 7,293.69
         June 2.8 2.7 2.7 2.9 3.1 3.7 4.2 123.67 101.08 381.23 7,376.24
         July 2.7 2.6 2.6 2.7 3.1 3.5 4.2 125.79 103.94 368.64 7,158.77
1Bearer debt securities with maximum maturities according to the terms of the calculation. Monthly figures are calculated on the basis of the yields on
issue of over 4 years if their mean residual maturities exceed 3 years. Conver- all the business days in a month. The annual figures are the unweighted
tible debt securities, etc. debt securities with unscheduled redemption, zero means of the monthly figures. — 2End of year or month. — 3Source:
-coupon bonds, floating -rate notes and bonds not denominated in DM or Deutsche Börse AG. — 4Only debt securities eligible as underlying
euro are not included. Group yields for the various categories of securities instruments for futures contracts; calculated as unweighted averages.
are weighted by the amounts outstanding of the debt securities included in
 
 
6 Sales and purchases of mutual fund shares in Germany
 
 
Sales Purchases
Domestic mutual funds  1  (sales receipts) Residents
Mutual funds open to the Credit institutions
general public including building
Non-banks  3 and loan associations  2 
of which
Sales Open- of which of which
= Secur- end Foreign Foreign
total Money ities- real Special- mutual mutual
pur- market based estate ised Foreign fund fund Non-resi-
chases Total Total funds funds funds funds funds  4 Total Total shares Total shares dents  5 
Period
DM million
1998 187,641 169,748 38,998 5,772 27,814 4,690 130,750 17,893 190,416 43,937 961 146,479 16,507 − 2,775
€ million
1999 111,282 97,197 37,684 3,347 23,269 7,395 59,513 14,086 105,521 19,862 − 637 85,659 14,722 5,761
2000 118,021 85,160 39,712 − 2,188 36,818 − 2,824 45,448 32,861 107,019 14,454 92 92,565 32,769 11,002
2001 97,077 76,811 35,522 12,410 9,195 10,159 41,289 20,266 96,127 10,251 2,703 85,876 17,563 951
2002 66,571 59,482 25,907 3,682 7,247 14,916 33,575 7,089 67,251 2,100 3,007 65,151 4,082 − 680
2003 47,754 43,943 20,079 − 924 7,408 14,166 23,864 3,811 49,547 − 2,658 734 52,205 3,077 − 1,793
2004 14,435 1,453 − 3,978 − 6,160 − 1,246 3,245 5,431 12,982 10,267 8,446 3,796 1,821 9,186 4,168
2005 85,268 41,718 6,400 − 124 7,001 − 3,186 35,317 43,550 79,252 21,290 7,761 57,962 35,789 6,016
2006 47,264 19,535 − 14,257 490 − 9,362 − 8,814 33,791 27,729 39,006 14,676 5,221 24,330 22,508 8,258
2007 55,778 13,436 − 7,872 − 4,839 − 12,848 6,840 21,307 42,342 51,309 − 229 4,240 51,538 38,102 4,469
2008 − 313 − 7,911 − 14,409 − 12,171 − 11,149 799 6,498 7,598 8,401 − 16,625 − 9,252 25,026 16,850 − 8,714
2009 41,972 43,747 10,966 − 5,047 11,749 2,686 32,780 − 1,776 36,566 − 14,995 − 8,178 51,561 6,402 5,406
2010 106,663 84,906 13,381 − 148 8,683 1,897 71,525 21,756 104,253 3,873 6,290 100,380 15,466 2,410
2011          Apr 5,789 2,450 − 208 − 296 − 70 − 69 2,658 3,339 5,862 − 139 − 387 6,001 3,726 − 73
         May − 1,395 23 1,185 − 260 1,168 267 − 1,162 − 1,418 − 3,128 − 1,696 1,321 − 1,432 − 2,739 1,733
         June 1,716 2,249 − 469 − 113 − 441 426 2,718 − 533 2,514 − 439 − 5 2,953 − 528 − 798
1Including public limited investment companies. — 2Book values. — fund shares by non-residents; transaction values. — The figures for the most
3Residual. — 4Net purchases or net sales (−) of foreign fund shares by recent date are provisional; revisions are not specially marked. 
residents; transaction values. — 5Net purchases or net sales (−) of domestic
51*VII Capital market

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
E U R O S Y S T E M
Monthly Report
August 2011
VIII  Financial accounts
  
1  Acquisition of financial assets and financing of private non-financial sectors
(non-consolidated)
  
  € billion
2009 2010 2011 
Item 2008 2009 2010 Q2 Q3 Q4 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 Q1
Households  1 
  I  Acquisition of financial assets
Currency and deposits 121.0 49.9 80.2 15.2 5.5 19.8 16.5 21.3 7.6 34.8 7.8
Debt securities  2 − 21.8 − 11.7 − 11.2 − 4.5 1.0 − 1.2 − 3.5 − 4.9 0.9 − 3.8 2.7
Shares − 45.5 − 1.0 2.2 − 1.0 1.0 1.0 1.0 1.0 − 0.6 0.8 2.0
Other equity 3.0 3.0 3.0 0.8 0.8 0.8 0.7 0.7 0.7 0.8 0.7
Mutual funds shares 8.2 22.1 9.0 5.1 6.7 1.1 5.9 − 3.4 7.5 − 1.0 − 3.5
Claims on insurance
corporations  3 31.2 60.6 63.1 13.1 11.9 15.6 22.1 13.8 11.1 16.1 23.1
short-term claims 0.4 0.5 0.4 0.1 0.1 0.2 0.1 0.1 0.1 0.1 0.1
longer-term claims 30.8 60.1 62.7 13.0 11.8 15.4 22.0 13.7 11.0 16.0 22.9
Claims from company
pension commitments 7.3 9.9 7.7 2.5 2.4 2.5 1.9 1.9 1.9 1.9 2.0
Other claims  4 20.4 14.2 − 0.2 4.8 0.8 − 10.2 9.1 7.0 0.3 − 16.5 14.8
Total 123.8 147.0 153.7 35.9 30.1 29.2 53.8 37.4 29.4 33.1 49.7
  II Financing
Loans − 14.9 − 5.1 4.5 2.5 4.5 − 4.5 − 7.2 5.7 5.5 0.6 − 4.2
short-term loans 1.2 − 4.3 − 2.3 − 0.1 − 1.3 − 2.5 − 0.3 1.0 − 0.8 − 2.1 − 0.6
longer-term loans − 16.0 − 0.9 6.8 2.6 5.7 − 2.0 − 6.9 4.7 6.3 2.7 − 3.6
Other liabilities 0.4 1.1 0.4 0.3 − 0.1 0.4 0.4 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.0 0.2
Total − 14.4 − 4.0 4.9 2.8 4.4 − 4.1 − 6.8 5.7 5.4 0.6 − 4.0
Corporations
I   Acquisition of financial assets
Currency and deposits 11.2 23.6 2.4 10.2 12.6 2.1 5.5 − 21.9 20.1 − 1.3 2.0
Debt securities  2 − 0.4 4.9 − 0.1 − 0.6 − 0.1 0.1 − 0.6 0.4 1.7 − 1.6 3.2
Financial derivatives 16.6 − 6.0 26.6 − 0.3 3.7 0.2 2.0 3.3 4.2 17.3 5.2
Shares 86.7 85.1 23.1 42.0 29.3 − 6.2 8.6 − 9.6 5.2 19.0 6.0
Other equity 15.7 21.8 39.0 7.2 6.9 − 2.8 31.9 7.0 3.2 − 3.1 2.0
Mutual funds shares − 7.8 − 41.7 5.1 − 10.1 − 15.6 − 12.8 − 1.3 4.4 0.3 1.7 1.9
Loans 50.6 87.1 85.5 15.6 19.2 24.8 26.5 28.7 17.8 12.5 21.3
short-term loans 34.4 53.8 65.3 11.3 12.7 12.8 20.2 20.0 16.9 8.2 15.4
longer-term loans 16.2 33.3 20.2 4.3 6.6 12.0 6.3 8.7 0.9 4.3 5.9
Claims on insurance
corporations  3 0.4 1.0 0.8 0.2 0.2 0.4 0.2 0.2 0.2 0.2 0.2
short-term claims 0.4 1.0 0.8 0.2 0.2 0.4 0.2 0.2 0.2 0.2 0.2
longer-term claims . . . . . . . . . . .
Other claims − 7.5 − 37.8 − 37.7 − 32.4 − 20.9 34.3 − 47.1 16.2 13.3 − 20.1 − 0.7
Total 165.7 137.9 145.1 31.8 35.4 40.1 25.6 28.9 65.9 24.7 41.2
  II Financing
Debt securities  2 9.6 − 7.1 9.6 − 1.8 3.5 1.2 8.7 − 0.5 − 3.6 5.1 7.7
Financial derivatives . . . . . . . . . . .
Shares 3.6 5.5 7.2 0.3 2.3 1.0 6.1 0.1 0.2 0.8 0.3
Other equity 19.7 7.2 9.1 − 0.7 1.6 5.1 1.7 1.6 5.2 0.6 4.0
Loans 81.6 59.1 25.6 12.1 2.2 11.6 28.6 14.1 16.2 − 33.2 − 11.9
short-term loans 47.2 10.7 44.5 − 1.0 − 0.3 − 0.7 29.8 20.8 8.5 − 14.7 − 19.0
longer-term loans 34.4 48.5 − 18.9 13.1 2.5 12.3 − 1.3 − 6.8 7.7 − 18.5 7.0
Claims from company
pension commitments 2.9 4.8 2.6 1.2 1.2 1.2 0.7 0.7 0.7 0.7 0.7
Other liabilities 25.6 41.6 37.2 7.5 8.2 1.3 2.5 6.2 5.9 22.7 14.1
Total 142.9 111.2 91.4 18.5 19.0 21.3 48.2 22.1 24.5 − 3.4 14.9
1Including non-profit institutions serving households. — 2Including money 4Including accumulated interest-bearing surplus shares with insurance
market paper. — 3Including private pension funds, burial funds, corporations. 
occupational pension schemes and supplementary pension funds. —
52*VIII  Financial accounts

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2011
VIII  Financial accounts
  
2  Financial assets and liabilities of private non-financial sectors
(non-consolidated)
  
  End-of-year level, end-of-quarter level; € billion
2009 2010 2011 
Item 2008 2009 2010 Q2 Q3 Q4 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 Q1
Households  1 
  I  Financial assets
Currency and deposits 1,737.5 1,788.1 1,868.3 1,762.9 1,768.4 1,788.1 1,804.6 1,825.9 1,833.4 1,868.3 1,876.1
Debt securities  2 267.1 265.5 254.1 258.5 266.7 265.5 264.7 259.1 259.6 254.1 254.7
Shares 181.9 191.7 233.5 166.2 175.2 191.7 204.1 198.5 205.0 233.5 247.2
Other equity 171.4 165.1 175.1 160.9 160.8 165.1 169.1 180.5 168.8 175.1 170.6
Mutual funds shares 503.4 548.7 587.4 525.6 541.6 548.7 560.9 549.3 564.8 587.4 585.1
Claims on insurance
corporations  3 1,214.8 1,282.7 1,347.7 1,247.8 1,265.7 1,282.7 1,305.2 1,318.5 1,330.2 1,347.7 1,347.9
short-term claims 81.3 81.8 82.2 81.5 81.6 81.8 81.9 82.0 82.1 82.2 82.3
longer-term claims 1,133.6 1,200.9 1,265.6 1,166.3 1,184.2 1,200.9 1,223.3 1,236.5 1,248.1 1,265.6 1,265.6
Claims from company
pension commitments 262.4 272.3 280.0 267.4 269.8 272.3 274.2 276.2 278.1 280.0 282.0
Other claims  4 39.8 38.7 38.7 39.2 38.9 38.7 38.8 38.8 38.7 38.7 38.2
Total 4,378.4 4,552.8 4,784.9 4,428.5 4,487.2 4,552.8 4,621.6 4,646.7 4,678.6 4,784.9 4,801.8
  II Liabilities
Loans 1,521.7 1,520.9 1,525.4 1,519.1 1,523.6 1,520.9 1,514.4 1,520.1 1,525.2 1,525.4 1,521.2
short-term loans 80.0 75.7 75.6 79.5 78.2 75.7 75.4 78.0 77.6 75.6 75.0
longer-term loans 1,441.7 1,445.1 1,449.8 1,439.6 1,445.4 1,445.1 1,439.0 1,442.1 1,447.7 1,449.8 1,446.1
Other liabilities 10.4 11.1 10.9 11.7 11.4 11.1 12.5 12.0 12.1 10.9 12.7
Total 1,532.1 1,531.9 1,536.3 1,530.8 1,535.0 1,531.9 1,527.0 1,532.1 1,537.3 1,536.3 1,533.8
Corporations
I   Financial assets
Currency and deposits 420.0 455.2 450.5 425.1 445.2 455.2 454.1 438.8 450.3 450.5 438.0
Debt securities  2 42.0 48.4 48.1 47.5 48.6 48.4 48.2 48.5 50.0 48.1 51.3
Financial derivatives . . . . . . . . . . .
Shares 660.6 818.8 1,028.1 689.7 747.2 818.8 868.6 841.6 875.3 1,028.1 1,099.0
Other equity 286.3 293.1 345.1 284.1 289.5 293.1 330.7 358.6 337.1 345.1 336.9
Mutual funds shares 67.9 64.3 62.8 58.0 85.9 64.3 68.0 70.9 70.9 62.8 61.4
Loans 363.0 450.1 535.6 406.1 425.3 450.1 476.6 505.3 523.1 535.6 556.9
short-term loans 240.5 294.2 359.5 268.8 281.4 294.2 314.4 334.4 351.3 359.5 375.0
longer-term loans 122.5 155.8 176.1 137.3 143.9 155.8 162.2 170.9 171.8 176.1 182.0
Claims on insurance
corporations  3 44.2 45.2 46.0 44.6 44.8 45.2 45.4 45.6 45.8 46.0 46.2
short-term claims 44.2 45.2 46.0 44.6 44.8 45.2 45.4 45.6 45.8 46.0 46.2
longer-term claims . . . . . . . . . . .
Other claims 933.1 916.1 740.6 896.5 915.2 916.1 910.6 952.5 934.7 740.6 761.2
Total 2,817.1 3,091.2 3,256.8 2,851.7 3,001.8 3,091.2 3,202.2 3,261.8 3,287.0 3,256.8 3,350.9
  II Liabilities
Debt securities  2 137.0 136.9 145.2 124.5 132.8 136.9 146.9 154.1 153.6 145.2 128.5
Financial derivatives . . . . . . . . . . .
Shares 963.5 1,081.3 1,301.8 948.4 1,043.3 1,081.3 1,118.8 1,089.5 1,159.5 1,301.8 1,322.3
Other equity 689.9 697.1 706.1 690.3 691.9 697.1 698.7 700.4 705.6 706.1 710.2
Loans 1,407.7 1,453.5 1,473.9 1,449.4 1,441.8 1,453.5 1,473.7 1,487.9 1,502.3 1,473.9 1,461.4
short-term loans 469.6 478.0 523.0 477.9 477.2 478.0 502.8 523.6 530.5 523.0 500.8
longer-term loans 938.1 975.4 950.9 971.4 964.6 975.4 970.9 964.2 971.8 950.9 960.5
Claims from company
pension commitments 218.4 223.2 225.8 220.8 222.0 223.2 223.8 224.5 225.1 225.8 226.5
Other liabilities 834.0 847.8 830.5 835.5 854.6 847.8 852.3 873.8 868.4 830.5 818.3
Total 4,250.3 4,439.7 4,683.3 4,268.8 4,386.4 4,439.7 4,514.3 4,530.2 4,614.5 4,683.3 4,667.0
1Including non-profit institutions serving households. — 2Including money 4Including accumulated interest-bearing surplus shares with insurance
market paper. — 3Including private pension funds, burial funds, corporations. 
occupational pension schemes and supplementary pension funds. —
53*VIII  Financial accounts

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
E U R O S Y S T E M
Monthly Report
August 2011
IX Public finances in Germany
 
1 General government: deficit and debt level as defined in the Maastricht Treaty
 
 
 
Social Social
General Central State Local security General Central State Local security
government government government government funds government government government government funds
Period € billion as a percentage of GDP
Deficit / surplus 1
2005 − 74.0 − 47.4 − 22.5 − 0.2 − 3.9 − 3.3 − 2.1 − 1.0 − 0.0 − 0.2
2006 − 36.8 − 34.2 − 10.5 + 2.9 + 5.1 − 1.6 − 1.5 − 0.5 + 0.1 + 0.2
2007 p + 6.6 − 18.2 + 4.1 + 9.8 + 10.9 + 0.3 − 0.7 + 0.2 + 0.4 + 0.4
2008 p + 2.8 − 15.6 + 1.8 + 7.8 + 8.8 + 0.1 − 0.6 + 0.1 + 0.3 + 0.4
2009 p − 72.9 − 39.4 − 16.2 − 4.0 − 13.3 − 3.0 − 1.6 − 0.7 − 0.2 − 0.6
2010 2, pe − 81.6 − 59.7 − 20.2 − 6.6 + 4.8 − 3.3 − 2.4 − 0.8 − 0.3 + 0.2
2009          H1  p − 18.7 − 9.6 − 5.2 + 0.2 − 4.0 − 1.6 − 0.8 − 0.4 + 0.0 − 0.3
         H2  p − 54.0 − 29.5 − 11.0 − 4.1 − 9.4 − 4.4 − 2.4 − 0.9 − 0.3 − 0.8
2010          H1  2, pe − 37.8 − 27.2 − 9.8 − 4.6 + 3.9 − 3.1 − 2.2 − 0.8 − 0.4 + 0.3
         H2  pe − 44.3 − 32.9 − 10.3 − 2.1 + 1.0 − 3.4 − 2.6 − 0.8 − 0.2 + 0.1
Debt level 3 End of year or quarter
2005 1,524.4 935.3 482.3 120.0 2.7 68.0 41.7 21.5 5.4 0.1
2006 1,571.7 970.7 492.1 122.4 1.7 67.6 41.7 21.2 5.3 0.1
2007 1,578.8 978.0 494.1 120.2 1.6 64.9 40.2 20.3 4.9 0.1
2008 1,644.1 1,007.6 531.3 118.8 1.5 66.3 40.6 21.4 4.8 0.1
2009 pe 1,760.8 1,075.7 573.6 123.8 1.3 73.5 44.9 23.9 5.2 0.1
2010 pe 2,079.6 1,342.2 621.0 130.1 1.3 83.2 53.7 24.9 5.2 0.1
2009          Q1  pe 1,675.0 1,028.3 539.8 119.4 1.6 68.4 42.0 22.0 4.9 0.1
         Q2  pe 1,740.7 1,074.4 559.4 120.4 1.4 72.1 44.5 23.2 5.0 0.1
         Q3  pe 1,748.7 1,077.0 562.8 121.2 1.5 73.0 44.9 23.5 5.1 0.1
         Q4  pe 1,760.8 1,075.7 573.6 123.8 1.3 73.5 44.9 23.9 5.2 0.1
2010          Q1  pe 1,781.4 1,088.5 580.6 124.6 1.3 73.7 45.0 24.0 5.2 0.1
         Q2  pe 1,823.4 1,099.1 609.8 126.7 1.3 74.5 44.9 24.9 5.2 0.1
         Q3  pe 1,848.1 1,116.4 616.4 128.4 1.6 74.7 45.1 24.9 5.2 0.1
         Q4  pe 2,079.6 1,342.2 621.0 130.1 1.3 83.2 53.7 24.9 5.2 0.1
2011          Q1  pe 2,088.4 1,348.3 620.6 132.4 1.7 82.5 53.2 24.5 5.2 0.1
Source: Federal Statistical Office and Bundesbank calculations. — 1Unlike according to the national accounts. — 2Including the €4.4 billion proceeds
thefiscal balance as shown in the national accounts, the deficit as defined received from the 2010 frequency auction. — 3Quarterly GDP ratios are
in the Maastricht Treaty includes interest flows from swaps and forward based on the national output of the four preceding quarters. 
rate agreements. The half-year figures correspond to the deficit / surplus
 
 
2 General government: revenue, expenditure and fiscal deficit / surplus as shown in the national accounts *
 
 
 
Revenue Expenditure
of which of which
Compen- Gross Memo item
Social con- Social sation of capital Deficit / Total tax
Period Total Taxes tributions Other Total benefits employees Interest formation Other surplus burden  1 
€ billion
2005 976.1 493.2 396.5 86.4 1,050.3 597.0 168.9 62.6 30.3 191.5 − 74.2 900.5
2006 1,017.1 530.6 400.1 86.3 1,054.2 598.4 168.3 65.6 32.4 189.6 − 37.1 942.0
2007 p 1,065.8 576.4 400.2 89.2 1,059.4 597.3 168.3 67.3 34.4 192.1 + 6.3 988.6
2008 p 1,088.5 590.1 407.8 90.5 1,085.6 606.8 170.7 66.7 36.8 204.7 + 2.8 1,010.8
2009 p 1,066.0 564.5 409.9 91.7 1,138.7 640.1 177.6 62.2 39.3 219.5 − 72.7 984.6
2010 pe 1,082.4 568.9 419.4 94.2 2 1,164.5 652.5 181.4 61.1 39.2 2 230.4 2 − 82.0 998.4
as a percentage of GDP
2005 43.5 22.0 17.7 3.9 46.8 26.6 7.5 2.8 1.4 8.5 − 3.3 40.2
2006 43.7 22.8 17.2 3.7 45.3 25.7 7.2 2.8 1.4 8.1 − 1.6 40.5
2007 p 43.8 23.7 16.5 3.7 43.6 24.6 6.9 2.8 1.4 7.9 + 0.3 40.6
2008 p 43.9 23.8 16.4 3.6 43.8 24.5 6.9 2.7 1.5 8.3 + 0.1 40.7
2009 p 44.5 23.5 17.1 3.8 47.5 26.7 7.4 2.6 1.6 9.2 − 3.0 41.1
2010 pe 43.3 22.8 16.8 3.8 2 46.6 26.1 7.3 2.4 1.6 2 9.2 2 − 3.3 40.0
Percentage growth rates
2005 + 1.9 + 2.5 + 0.0 + 8.1 + 0.9 + 0.8 − 0.4 + 0.4 − 4.4 + 3.2 . + 1.4
2006 + 4.2 + 7.6 + 0.9 − 0.1 + 0.4 + 0.2 − 0.4 + 4.7 + 7.0 − 1.0 . + 4.6
2007 p + 4.8 + 8.6 + 0.0 + 3.3 + 0.5 − 0.2 + 0.0 + 2.7 + 6.0 + 1.3 . + 4.9
2008 p + 2.1 + 2.4 + 1.9 + 1.5 + 2.5 + 1.6 + 1.4 − 1.0 + 7.1 + 6.6 . + 2.2
2009 p − 2.1 − 4.3 + 0.5 + 1.2 + 4.9 + 5.5 + 4.1 − 6.7 + 7.0 + 7.2 . − 2.6
2010 pe + 1.5 + 0.8 + 2.3 + 2.7 + 2.3 + 1.9 + 2.1 − 1.7 − 0.5 + 5.0 . + 1.4
Source: Federal Statistical Office. — *Figures in accordance with ESA 1995. be found on the Bundesbank’s website. — 1Taxes and social contributions
In the Monthly Reports up to December 2006, customs duties, the EU share plus customs duties and the EU share in VAT revenue. — 2Including the
in VAT revenue and EU subsidies were included in the national accounts’ €4.4 billion proceeds received from the 2010 frequency auction, which are
data (without affecting the fiscal deficit / surplus). This information can still deducted from other expenditure in the national accounts. 
54*IX Public finances in Germany

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2011
IX Public finances in Germany
 
3 General government: budgetary development (as per government’s financial statistics)
 
 
€ billion
Central, state and local government  1 Social security funds  2 General government, total
Revenue Expenditure
of which of which 3 
Finan- Person- Fixed Finan-
cial nel asset cial
transac- expend- Current forma- transac- Deficit / Rev- Expend- Deficit / Rev- Expend- Deficit /
Period Total  4 Taxes tions  5 Total  4 iture grants Interest tion tions  5 surplus enue  6 iture surplus enue iture surplus
2004 pe 545.9 442.8 24.1 610.4 173.4 236.9 64.8 34.3 9.6 − 64.5 469.7 468.6 + 1.1 926.8 990.2 − 63.4
2005 pe 568.9 452.1 31.3 620.6 172.1 245.3 64.0 33.0 14.3 − 51.7 467.8 471.3 − 3.4 947.4 1,002.5 − 55.1
2006 pe 590.9 488.4 18.8 626.2 169.7 252.1 64.4 33.7 11.6 − 35.3 486.3 466.6 + 19.7 988.2 1,003.8 − 15.6
2007 pe 644.8 538.2 17.7 644.2 182.2 250.0 66.2 34.6 9.5 + 0.6 475.3 466.4 + 8.9 1,025.6 1,016.1 + 9.6
2008 pe 668.9 561.2 13.4 677.4 187.3 259.9 67.3 36.4 18.6 − 8.5 485.5 478.9 + 6.6 1,058.5 1,060.4 − 1.9
2009 pe 630.4 524.0 9.2 721.3 195.2 270.4 64.0 40.5 38.0 − 90.9 492.0 505.9 − 13.9 1,020.5 1,125.3 −104.8
2010 pe 650.0 530.6 12.7 732.8 199.9 293.9 60.1 40.1 19.4 − 82.8 515.4 512.3 + 3.2 1,048.0 1,127.6 − 79.6
2009          Q1 p 156.6 128.7 1.7 175.4 45.9 67.2 22.8 5.0 10.0 − 18.9 117.9 122.3 − 4.4 250.8 274.1 − 23.3
         Q2 p 154.8 130.6 3.3 169.5 47.1 60.6 10.7 7.5 16.9 − 14.6 120.5 125.5 − 5.0 251.8 271.5 − 19.6
         Q3 p 148.8 124.4 2.1 174.9 47.6 65.0 19.8 10.5 4.5 − 26.0 120.1 127.6 − 7.5 245.2 278.7 − 33.5
         Q4 p 168.0 140.3 1.9 199.4 52.5 76.6 10.2 16.3 6.4 − 31.4 132.3 130.1 + 2.2 269.3 298.5 − 29.2
2010          Q1 p 147.9 121.6 2.6 180.4 47.6 74.8 21.2 5.5 4.9 − 32.5 123.6 127.6 − 4.0 242.2 278.7 − 36.6
         Q2 p 7 163.6 134.9 3.7 173.7 48.2 71.2 13.2 8.1 6.2 − 10.1 128.2 127.3 + 0.9 7 262.4 271.6 − 9.2
         Q3 p 153.2 127.6 3.0 177.3 48.3 69.8 16.1 10.5 3.4 − 24.0 124.7 125.6 − 1.0 251.0 276.0 − 25.0
         Q4 p 183.2 147.6 3.2 199.4 54.0 76.1 9.2 14.7 4.8 − 16.2 133.3 131.8 + 1.5 290.3 305.0 − 14.7
Source: Bundesbank calculations based on the data from the Federal Stat- 3The development of the types of expenditure recorded here is influenced
istical Office. — 1Including subsidiary budgets, from 2007 also including the in part by statistical changeovers. — 4Including discrepancies in clearing
post office pension fund; excluding the special fund ”Provision for final pay- transactions between central, state and local government. — 5On the rev-
ments for inflation-indexed Federal securities”, which was set up in 2009. enue side, this contains proceeds booked as disposals of equity interests and
Unlike the annual figures based on the annual calculations of the Federal as loan repayments. On the expenditure side, this contains the acquisition
Statistical Office, the quarterly figures do not include municipal special pur- of equity interests and loans granted. — 6Including Federal Government
pose associations and various special accounts. — 2The annual figures do liquidity assistance to the Federal Labour Office. — 7Including the €4.4
not tally with the sum of the quarterly figures, as the latter are all pro- billion proceeds received from the 2010 frequency auction. 
visional. The quarterly figures for some insurance sectors are estimated. —
4 Central, state and local government: budgetary development (as per government’s financial statistics)
 
 
€ billion
Central government State government  2,3 Local government  3 
Period Revenue  1 Expenditure Deficit / surplus Revenue Expenditure Deficit / surplus Revenue Expenditure Deficit / surplus
2004 233.9 273.6 − 39.7 233.5 257.1 − 23.6 147.0 150.1 − 3.1
2005 250.0 281.5 − 31.5 237.4 259.6 − 22.2 151.3 153.2 − 1.9
2006 254.6 282.8 − 28.2 250.3 260.1 − 9.8 161.1 157.4 + 3.7
2007 pe 277.4 292.1 − 14.7 275.9 267.5 + 8.4 171.3 162.4 + 8.9
2008 pe 292.0 303.8 − 11.8 279.3 278.0 + 1.3 176.9 169.0 + 7.9
2009 pe 282.6 317.1 − 34.5 266.2 293.7 − 27.5 172.0 178.9 − 6.9
2010 pe 288.0 332.4 − 44.4 278.5 302.0 − 23.5 176.5 183.9 − 7.4
2009          Q1 p 65.8 76.8 − 11.0 65.3 75.9 − 10.6 35.8 39.0 − 3.1
         Q2 p 71.3 68.6 + 2.7 66.1 67.9 − 1.8 41.1 42.2 − 1.1
         Q3 p 68.6 84.5 − 15.9 63.1 69.4 − 6.3 42.5 45.1 − 2.6
         Q4 p 77.0 87.2 − 10.2 70.7 79.4 − 8.7 50.6 51.0 − 0.4
2010          Q1 p 61.1 82.6 − 21.5 65.0 73.5 − 8.5 34.6 41.2 − 6.6
         Q2 p 4 75.6 80.6 − 5.0 68.3 69.1 − 0.8 42.2 43.5 − 1.3
         Q3 p 66.2 82.7 − 16.6 68.5 73.3 − 4.8 43.8 45.2 − 1.4
         Q4 p 85.2 86.5 − 1.3 75.8 85.0 − 9.2 53.8 52.3 + 1.5
2011          Q1 p 65.4 84.5 − 19.1 74.1 75.6 − 1.5 37.1 42.5 − 5.3
Source: Bundesbank calculations based on the data from the Federal Stat- 3Unlike the annual figure based on the annual calculations of the Federal
istical Office. — 1Any amounts of the Bundesbank’s profit distribution Statistical Office, the quarterly figures do not include various special ac-
exceeding the reference value that were used to repay parts of the debt of counts and municipal special purpose associations. — 4Including the
central government’s special funds are not included here. — 2Including the €4.4 billion proceeds received from the 2010 frequency auction. 
local authority level of the city-states Berlin, Bremen and Hamburg. —
55*IX Public finances in Germany

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
E U R O S Y S T E M
Monthly Report
August 2011
IX Public finances in Germany
 
5 Central, state and local government: tax revenue
 
 
€ million
Central and state government and European Union Memo item
Supplementary
central govern-
Balance of ment grants, state
Central State Local untransferred government’s share
Period Total Total government  1 government European Union  2 government  3 tax shares  4 of energy tax
2004 442,838 386,459 208,920 157,898 19,640 56,237 + 142 21,967
2005 452,078 392,313 211,779 158,823 21,711 59,750 + 16 21,634
2006 488,444 421,151 225,634 173,374 22,142 67,316 − 22 21,742
2007 538,243 465,554 251,747 191,558 22,249 72,551 + 138 21,643
2008 561,182 484,182 260,690 200,411 23,081 77,190 − 190 21,510
2009 524,000 455,615 252,842 182,273 20,501 68,419 − 34 20,275
2010 530,587 460,230 254,537 181,326 24,367 70,385 − 28 19,734
2009          Q1 128,787 109,674 55,941 46,212 7,521 13,289 + 5,824 5,154
         Q2 130,491 113,442 65,247 46,653 1,541 17,397 − 347 5,140
         Q3 124,437 108,572 62,354 42,335 3,883 15,865 − 1 5,048
         Q4 140,285 123,928 69,299 47,073 7,556 21,868 − 5,511 4,933
2010          Q1 121,321 104,370 54,316 41,777 8,278 11,299 + 5,652 4,885
         Q2 134,843 116,767 66,331 46,516 3,919 18,270 − 194 4,879
         Q3 127,311 109,956 61,146 43,102 5,709 17,564 − 209 5,081
         Q4 147,112 129,137 72,744 49,932 6,462 23,253 − 5,278 4,889
2011          Q1 135,590 115,878 60,579 46,582 8,717 13,640 + 6,071 4,741
         Q2 ... 126,086 71,530 50,289 4,266 ... ... 4,854
2010          June . 45,166 25,843 18,319 1,004 . . 1,626
2011          June . 49,712 28,083 20,195 1,434 . . 1,618
Sources: Federal Ministry of Finance, Federal Statistical Office and Bundes- cruing to the EU from central government tax revenue. — 3Including local
bank calculations. — 1Before deducting supplementary central government government taxes in the city-states Berlin, Bremen and Hamburg. — 4Differ-
grants, shares in energy tax revenue and compensation for the transfer of ence between local government’s share in the joint taxes received by the
motor vehicle tax to central government, which are remitted to state govern- state government cash offices in the period in question (see Table IX. 6) and
ment. — 2Custom duties and shares in VAT and gross national income ac- the amounts passed on to local government in the same period. 
 
 
6 Central and state government and European Union: tax revenue, by type
 
 
€ million
Joint taxes
Memo
Income taxes  2 Turnover taxes  5 item
Local
Local govern-
Invest- business Central State ment
Assessed ment Turnover tax govern- govern- EU share in
Wage income Corpora- income Turnover tax on trans- ment ment customs joint
Period Total  1 Total tax  3 tax tion tax tax  4 Total tax imports fers  6 taxes  7 taxes  7 duties taxes
2004 409,517 159,104 123,896 5,394 13,123 16,691 137,366 104,715 32,651 5,661 84,554 19,774 3,059 23,058
2005 415,355 161,960 118,919 9,766 16,333 16,943 139,713 108,440 31,273 6,218 83,508 20,579 3,378 23,042
2006 446,139 182,614 122,612 17,567 22,898 19,537 146,688 111,318 35,370 7,013 84,215 21,729 3,880 24,988
2007 493,817 204,698 131,774 25,027 22,929 24,969 169,636 127,522 42,114 6,975 85,690 22,836 3,983 28,263
2008 515,498 220,483 141,895 32,685 15,868 30,035 175,989 130,789 45,200 6,784 86,302 21,937 4,002 31,316
2009 484,880 193,684 135,165 26,430 7,173 24,916 176,991 141,907 35,084 4,908 89,318 16,375 3,604 29,265
2010 488,731 192,816 127,904 31,179 12,041 21,691 180,042 136,459 43,582 5,925 93,426 12,146 4,378 28,501
2009          Q1 116,731 50,001 33,975 2,971 4,399 8,657 43,087 34,234 8,853 − 36 17,361 5,351 966 7,057
         Q2 120,543 48,503 30,481 9,141 342 8,539 43,424 35,176 8,248 1,499 21,085 5,186 846 7,102
         Q3 115,567 43,486 32,150 6,732 592 4,011 44,365 35,717 8,649 1,346 22,427 3,023 920 6,994
         Q4 132,040 51,695 38,559 7,586 1,841 3,708 46,114 36,780 9,334 2,099 28,445 2,815 872 8,112
2010          Q1 111,163 45,127 30,255 6,155 1,951 6,766 42,891 34,054 8,837 215 19,001 2,814 1,115 6,793
         Q2 123,859 51,667 30,447 9,681 3,830 7,710 44,343 33,779 10,564 1,311 22,682 2,914 943 7,092
         Q3 116,691 42,813 30,445 7,320 1,588 3,460 44,997 33,258 11,740 1,574 22,922 3,242 1,143 6,734
         Q4 137,019 53,209 36,757 8,023 4,672 3,756 47,810 35,369 12,441 2,825 28,821 3,177 1,177 7,882
2011          Q1 123,131 50,328 32,478 6,755 2,485 8,611 47,389 35,528 11,861 366 20,515 3,408 1,124 7,253
         Q2 133,727 57,624 34,144 9,366 4,215 9,900 46,091 33,082 13,010 1,692 24,026 3,207 1,087 7,641
2010          June 48,436 24,799 10,959 8,569 3,788 1,483 14,346 10,865 3,481 5 7,997 986 303 3,270
2011          June 53,194 27,755 12,154 8,603 5,164 1,834 15,519 11,146 4,373 3 8,480 1,062 374 3,482
Source: Federal Ministry of Finance and Bundesbank calculations. — 1This child benefit and subsidies for supplementary private pension plans. —
total, unlike that in Table IX. 5, does not include the receipts from the equal- 4Final withholding tax on interest income and capital gains, non-assessed
isation of burdens levies, local business tax (less local business tax transfers taxes on earnings. — 5The allocation of revenue to central, state and local
to central and state government), real property taxes and other local govern- government, which is adjusted at more regular intervals, is regulated in
ment taxes, or the balance of untransferred tax shares. — 2Respective section 1 of the Revenue Adjustment Act. Respective percentage share of
percentage share of central, state and local government in revenue: wage central, state and local government in revenue for 2010: 53.2:44.8:2. The EU
tax and assessed income tax 42.5:42.5:15, corporation tax and non-assessed share is deducted from central government’s share. — 6Respective percent-
taxes on earnings 50:50:-, final withholding tax on interest income and capi- age share of central and state government for 2010: 21.7:78.3. — 7For the
tal gains, non-assessed taxes on earnings 44:44:12. — 3After deducting breakdown, see Table IX. 7. 
56*IX Public finances in Germany

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2011
IX Public finances in Germany
  
7 Central, state and local government: individual taxes   
  
€ million
Central government taxes  1 State government taxes  1 Local government taxes
Tax on of which
the acqui-
Soli- Motor Motor sition of Inher- Local Real
Period Energy Tobacco darity Insurance vehicle Electri- Spirits vehicle land and itance business property
tax tax surcharge tax tax  2 city tax tax Other tax  2 buildings tax Other  3 Total tax taxes
2004 41,782 13,630 10,108 8,751 . 6,597 2,195 1,492 7,740 4,646 4,284 3,105 38,982 28,373 9,939
2005 40,101 14,273 10,315 8,750 . 6,462 2,142 1,465 8,674 4,791 4,097 3,018 42,941 32,129 10,247
2006 39,916 14,387 11,277 8,775 . 6,273 2,160 1,428 8,937 6,125 3,763 2,904 49,319 38,370 10,399
2007 38,955 14,254 12,349 10,331 . 6,355 1,959 1,488 8,898 6,952 4,203 2,783 51,401 40,116 10,713
2008 39,248 13,574 13,146 10,478 . 6,261 2,126 1,470 8,842 5,728 4,771 2,596 52,468 41,037 10,807
2009 39,822 13,366 11,927 10,548 3,803 6,278 2,101 1,473 4,398 4,857 4,550 2,571 44,028 32,421 10,936
2010 39,838 13,492 11,713 10,284 8,488 6,171 1,990 1,449 − 5,290 4,404 2,452 47,780 35,712 11,315
2009          Q1 4,777 2,365 3,191 4,502 . 1,560 594 372 2,284 1,165 1,144 758 12,021 9,370 2,452
         Q2 10,059 3,560 3,057 1,999 . 1,569 478 363 2,114 1,131 1,334 608 11,447 8,433 2,860
         Q3 9,883 3,499 2,638 2,096 1,907 1,582 488 335 0 1,297 1,123 604 10,216 6,800 3,233
         Q4 15,103 3,942 3,040 1,952 1,897 1,567 542 402 − 1,264 950 601 10,344 7,818 2,391
2010          Q1 4,446 2,462 2,856 4,496 2,345 1,498 526 372 − 1,229 918 667 10,374 7,641 2,518
         Q2 9,596 3,327 3,100 2,060 2,235 1,570 437 357 − 1,207 1,115 591 12,295 9,201 2,915
         Q3 10,172 3,608 2,615 2,110 2,012 1,563 489 354 − 1,430 1,216 597 12,194 8,618 3,373
         Q4 15,625 4,096 3,142 1,619 1,895 1,540 538 366 − 1,425 1,156 597 12,918 10,252 2,508
2011          Q1 4,457 2,893 3,072 4,869 2,349 1,785 574 516 − 1,555 1,170 683 12,825 9,948 2,631
         Q2 10,002 3,300 3,450 2,017 2,215 1,960 482 599 − 1,464 1,129 614 ... ... ...
2010          June 3,357 1,114 1,394 605 714 587 116 110 − 437 352 198 . . .
2011          June 3,487 1,026 1,592 543 707 745 171 210 − 518 343 201 . . .
Sources: Federal Ministry of Finance, Federal Statistical Office and Bundes- ment. Postings to state government shown thereafter relate to the booking
bank calculations. — 1For the sum total, see Table IX. 6. — 2As of of cash flows. — 3 Notably betting, lottery and beer tax.   
1 July 2009, motor vehicle tax revenue is attributable to central govern-
 
 
8 German pension insurance scheme: budgetary development and assets *
 
 
€ million
Revenue  1,2 Expenditure  1,2 Assets  1,5 
of which of which
Equity
Payments interests, Memo
from Pen- mort- item
central sioners’ gages Adminis-
Contri- govern- Pension health Deficit / and other Real trative
Period Total butions  3 ment Total payments insurance  4 surplus Total Deposits  6 Securities loans  7 estate assets
2004 8 231,684 156,535 71,680 233,011 198,587 14,258 − 1,327 5,158 4,980 19 41 118 4,834
2005 229,428 156,264 71,917 233,357 199,873 13,437 − 3,929 1,976 1,794 16 42 123 4,888
2006 241,231 168,083 71,773 233,668 200,459 13,053 + 7,563 10,047 9,777 115 46 109 4,912
2007 236,642 162,225 72,928 235,459 201,642 13,665 + 1,183 12,196 11,270 765 46 115 4,819
2008 242,770 167,611 73,381 238,995 204,071 14,051 + 3,775 16,531 16,313 36 56 126 4,645
2009 244,689 169,183 74,313 244,478 208,475 14,431 + 211 16,821 16,614 23 64 120 4,525
2010 250,133 172,767 76,173 248,076 211,852 14,343 + 2,057 19,375 18,077 1,120 73 105 4,464
2009          Q1 58,681 39,891 18,500 60,105 51,554 3,633 − 1,424 14,902 14,699 15 56 132 4,618
         Q2 60,812 42,140 18,384 60,263 51,410 3,626 + 549 15,280 15,082 15 59 124 4,593
         Q3 59,783 41,142 18,364 61,841 52,869 3,580 − 2,058 13,647 13,428 40 60 119 4,585
         Q4 64,864 46,005 18,594 61,993 52,917 3,583 + 2,871 16,812 16,608 23 61 120 4,582
2010          Q1 59,761 40,601 18,917 61,861 53,059 3,582 − 2,100 14,922 14,717 20 64 120 4,490
         Q2 62,249 43,054 18,923 61,999 53,006 3,585 + 250 15,254 15,053 20 69 112 4,478
         Q3 61,237 42,048 18,912 62,091 53,102 3,589 − 854 14,853 14,656 20 68 109 4,474
         Q4 66,317 47,060 18,933 61,887 52,966 3,579 + 4,430 19,274 17,978 1,120 68 108 4,476
2011          Q1 60,804 41,608 18,902 62,188 53,176 3,742 − 1,384 18,063 17,069 819 74 101 4,482
         Q2 63,452 44,307 18,855 62,058 52,920 3,731 + 1,394 19,704 18,507 1,019 78 100 4,475
Sources: Federal Ministry of Labour and Social Affairs and German pension ing and proceeds. — 3Including contributions for recipients of government
insurance scheme. — *Excluding the German pension insurance scheme for cash benefits. — 4Including long-term care insurance for pensioners until
the mining, railway and maritime industries. — 1The final annual figures 2004 Q1. — 5Largely corresponds to the sustainability reserves. End of year
do not tally with the quarterly figures, as the latter are all provisional. — or quarter. — 6Including cash. — 7Excluding loans to other social security
2Including financial compensation payments. Excluding investment spend- funds. — 8 Revenue includes proceeds from the disposal of equity interests. 
57*IX Public finances in Germany

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
E U R O S Y S T E M
Monthly Report
August 2011
IX Public finances in Germany
 
9 Federal Employment Agency: budgetary development *
 
 
€ million
Revenue Expenditure
of which of which
Grant or
of which of which loans
from
Unemploy- Measures central
Contri- ment sup- Western Eastern Job promo- Western Eastern financed Deficit / govern-
Period Total  1 butions Levies  2 Total  3 port 4,5 Germany Germany tion  5,6 Germany Germany by levies  7 surplus ment
2004 50,314 47,211 1,674 54,490 29,746 21,821 7,925 16,843 9,831 7,011 1,641 − 4,176 4,175
2005 52,692 46,989 1,436 53,089 27,654 20,332 7,322 11,590 7,421 4,169 1,450 − 397 397
2006 55,384 51,176 1,123 44,162 23,249 17,348 5,901 9,259 6,185 3,074 1,089 + 11,221 0
2007 42,838 32,264 971 36,196 17,356 13,075 4,282 8,370 5,748 2,623 949 + 6,643 −
2008 38,289 26,452 974 39,407 14,283 10,652 3,631 8,712 6,222 2,490 920 − 1,118 −
2009 34,254 22,046 1,000 48,057 20,866 16,534 4,332 11,595 8,794 2,801 1,946 − 13,803 −
2010 37,070 22,614 3,222 45,213 19,456 15,629 3,827 10,791 8,287 2,504 740 − 8,143 5,200
2009          Q1 6,283 5,248 192 10,396 4,723 3,556 1,167 2,318 1,688 630 480 − 4,113 −
         Q2 6,490 5,421 261 12,391 5,563 4,376 1,187 2,893 2,193 700 491 − 5,901 −
         Q3 6,853 5,316 250 12,480 5,465 4,439 1,026 3,026 2,325 701 630 − 5,626 −
         Q4 14,627 6,061 296 12,790 5,115 4,163 951 3,358 2,588 770 345 + 1,837 −
2010          Q1 10,020 5,196 714 11,681 6,475 5,112 1,362 2,957 2,263 694 208 − 1,661 −
         Q2 10,649 5,601 784 10,501 5,264 4,148 1,116 2,872 2,204 668 184 + 148 −
         Q3 8,109 5,527 808 8,887 4,082 3,353 729 2,431 1,863 567 193 − 778 −
         Q4 8,291 6,290 916 14,144 3,635 3,016 619 2,531 1,957 575 154 − 5,853 5,200
2011          Q1 10,259 5,853 123 9,583 4,602 3,701 901 2,660 2,048 612 186 + 676 −
         Q2 8,802 6,358 60 8,246 3,710 3,007 703 2,285 1,753 532 175 + 556 −
Source: Federal Employment Agency. — *Excluding pension fund. — 1Ex- long-term care insurance schemes. 6Vocational training, measures to en-
cluding central government liquidity assistance. — 2Levies to promote courage job take-up, rehabilitation, job creation measures, subsidies
winter construction and to pay insolvency compensation to employees. — granted to Personnel Service Agencies, compensation top-up payments and
3From 2005, including a compensatory amount or a reintegration payment business start-up grants. — 7Promotion of winter construction and insolv-
to central government. — 4Unemployment benefit and short-time working ency compensation for employees. 
benefit. — 5Including contributions to the statutory health, pension and
 
 
10 Statutory health insurance scheme: budgetary development
 
 
€ million
Revenue  1 Expenditure  1 
of which of which
Central Thera- Adminis-
govern- peutical trative
Contri- ment Hospital Pharma- Medical Dental treatment Sickness expend- Deficit /
Period Total butions  2 funds  3 Total treatment ceuticals treatment treatment  4 and aids benefits iture  5 surplus
2004 144,279 140,120 1,000 140,260 47,594 21,811 22,955 11,263 8,281 6,367 8,196 + 4,020
2005 145,742 140,250 2,500 144,071 48,959 25,358 23,096 9,928 8,284 5,868 8,303 + 1,671
2006 149,929 142,183 4,200 148,297 50,327 25,835 23,896 10,364 8,303 5,708 8,319 + 1,632
2007 156,058 149,964 2,500 154,314 50,850 27,791 24,788 10,687 8,692 6,017 8,472 + 1,744
2008 162,516 155,883 2,500 161,334 52,623 29,145 25,887 10,926 9,095 6,583 8,680 + 1,182
2009 169,758 158,594 7,200 170,823 55,977 30,696 27,635 11,219 9,578 7,258 8,947 − 1,065
2010 179,878 160,792 15,700 176,036 56,697 30,147 28,432 11,419 10,609 7,797 9,553 + 3,842
2009          Q1 42,502 39,324 2,575 41,432 14,154 7,463 6,969 2,797 2,095 1,822 1,977 + 1,069
         Q2 42,540 40,464 1,377 42,400 14,092 7,652 6,810 2,857 2,392 1,779 2,083 + 140
         Q3 42,752 38,827 3,002 42,548 13,967 7,574 6,981 2,684 2,437 1,746 2,324 + 204
         Q4 41,635 39,992 246 44,445 13,892 8,052 7,021 2,904 2,607 1,895 2,604 − 2,809
2010          Q1 6 43,093 38,542 3,878 43,274 14,419 7,549 7,255 2,871 2,368 1,996 2,130 − 182
         Q2 44,440 39,826 3,889 43,999 14,037 7,870 7,128 2,882 2,669 1,955 2,261 + 441
         Q3 44,457 39,808 3,884 43,662 14,122 7,592 7,007 2,786 2,676 1,903 2,255 + 795
         Q4 47,505 42,600 4,049 44,842 14,144 7,307 7,107 2,952 2,853 1,943 2,876 + 2,663
2011          Q1 45,339 40,871 3,783 44,392 15,075 7,158 7,361 2,893 2,528 2,210 2,173 + 947
Source: Federal Ministry of Health. — 1The final annual figures do not tally tures. — 5Net, ie after deducting reimbursements for expenses for levying
with the sum of the quarterly figures, as the latter are all provisional. Ex- contributions incurred by other social insurance funds. Including adminis-
cluding revenue and expenditure as part of the risk structure compensation trative expenditure on disease management programmes. — 6Data on indi-
scheme. — 2Including contributions from subsidised low-paid part-time vidual expenditure categories for 2010 only partly comparable with
employment. — 3Federal grant and liquidity assistance. — 4Including den- prior-year figures owing to a change in the statistical definition. 
58*IX Public finances in Germany

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2011
IX Public finances in Germany
 
11 Statutory long-term care insurance scheme: budgetary development
 
 
€ million
Revenue  1 Expenditure  1 
of which
Contributions to
of which Non-cash In-patient Nursing pension insur- Administrative Deficit /
Period Total Contributions  2 Total care benefits care benefit ance scheme  3 expenditure surplus
2004 16,817 16,654 17,605 2,365 8,349 4,049 925 851 − 788
2005 17,526 17,385 17,891 2,409 8,516 4,050 890 875 − 366
2006 17,749 17,611 18,064 2,437 8,671 4,017 862 886 − 315
2007 18,036 17,858 18,385 2,475 8,831 4,050 861 896 − 350
2008 19,785 19,608 19,163 2,605 9,054 4,225 868 941 + 622
2009 21,300 21,137 20,314 2,742 9,274 4,443 878 984 + 986
2010 p 21,784 21,641 21,448 2,907 9,555 4,672 881 1,017 + 336
2008          Q1 4,421 4,381 4,681 641 2,229 1,022 210 255 − 261
         Q2 4,597 4,563 4,703 634 2,251 1,025 221 230 − 106
         Q3 5,167 5,133 4,872 665 2,280 1,089 218 234 + 295
         Q4 5,583 5,535 4,884 662 2,293 1,103 219 220 + 698
2009          Q1 5,110 5,082 4,970 676 2,284 1,104 215 274 + 139
         Q2 5,275 5,253 4,977 662 2,308 1,100 217 248 + 298
         Q3 5,279 5,239 5,157 706 2,338 1,115 219 246 + 122
         Q4 5,650 5,614 5,223 710 2,358 1,148 225 228 + 427
2010          Q1 5,241 5,175 5,298 722 2,362 1,151 217 264 − 56
         Q2 5,398 5,369 5,302 707 2,378 1,167 219 258 + 95
         Q3 5,385 5,358 5,416 735 2,398 1,160 220 266 − 31
         Q4 5,760 5,739 5,432 743 2,417 1,195 225 229 + 328
2011          Q1 5,306 5,269 5,457 750 2,408 1,165 216 277 − 150
Source: Federal Ministry of Health. — 1The final annual figures do not tally 2Since 2005 including special contributions for childless persons (0.25% of
with the sum of the quarterly figures, as the latter are all provisional. — income subject to insurance contributions). — 3 For non-professional carers. 
 
 
12 Central government: borrowing in 13 Central, state and local government: debt by
the market creditor *
 
€ million € million
Total new borrowing  1 of which of which Banking system Domestic non-banks
Change Change
in money in money Period Social
market market (End of year Bundes- Credit security Foreign
Period Gross  2 Net loans deposits or quarter) Total bank institutions funds Other  1 creditors  pe 
2004 + 227,441 + 44,410 + 1,844 + 802 2004 1,430,582 4,440 544,100 430 307,012 574,600
2005 + 224,922 + 35,479 + 4,511 + 6,041 2005 1,489,029 4,440 518,400 488 312,201 653,500
2006 + 221,873 + 32,656 + 3,258 + 6,308 2006 1,533,697 4,440 496,800 480 329,177 702,800
2007 + 214,995 + 6,996 + 1,086 − 4,900 2007 1,540,381 4,440 456,900 476 316,665 761,900
2008 + 233,356 + 26,208 + 6,888 + 9,036 2008 1,564,590 4,440 435,600 510 320,740 803,300
2009 + 312,729 + 66,821 − 8,184 + 106 2009 1,657,842 4,440 438,700 507 332,795 881,400
2010 + 302,694 + 42,397 − 5,041 + 1,607 2010 p 1,732,442 4,440 400,600 473 301,129 1,025,800
2008          Q1 + 69,510 + 10,443 + 12,306 − 705 2008          Q1 1,541,759 4,440 467,200 475 305,244 764,400
         Q2 + 52,618 + 7,478 + 4,872 + 10,289          Q2 1,554,151 4,440 462,100 506 292,406 794,700
         Q3 + 53,933 − 2,231 − 10,736 − 12,088          Q3 1,547,336 4,440 431,800 506 295,190 815,400
         Q4 + 57,296 + 10,519 + 447 + 11,541          Q4 1,564,590 4,440 435,600 510 320,740 803,300
2009          Q1 + 66,560 + 20,334 − 2,256 − 7,856 2009          Q1 1,594,403 4,440 426,200 514 321,949 841,300
         Q2 + 96,270 + 46,283 − 2,791 + 26,434          Q2 1,646,307 4,440 430,300 520 324,547 886,500
         Q3 + 82,451 + 1,343 + 1,268 − 15,901          Q3 1,651,955 4,440 439,500 520 320,395 887,100
         Q4 + 67,448 − 1,139 − 4,406 − 2,572          Q4 1,657,842 4,440 438,700 507 332,795 881,400
2010          Q1 + 74,369 + 12,637 − 5,322 − 1,520 2010          Q1 p 1,678,191 4,440 450,100 508 338,843 884,300
         Q2 + 83,082 + 3,666 − 4,143 + 1,950          Q2 p 1,687,957 4,440 469,600 468 322,049 891,400
         Q3 + 79,589 + 14,791 + 250 − 4,625          Q3 p 1,712,685 4,440 470,200 473 317,572 920,000
         Q4 + 65,655 + 11,304 + 4,174 + 5,803          Q4 p 1,732,442 4,440 400,600 473 301,129 1,025,800
2011          Q1 + 76,394 + 15,958 − 607 − 5,206 2011          Q1 pe 1,746,507 4,440 410,800 525 287,442 1,043,300
Source:  Federal  Republic  of  Germany  -  Finance Source: Bundesbank calculations based on data from the Federal Statistical 
Agency. — 1 Including the Financial  Market  Stabil- Office. — * Excluding direct intergovernmental borrowing. — 1 Calculated 
isation Fund,  the  Investment and Repayment Fund as a residual. 
and the Restructuring Fund for Credit Institutions. — 
2 After deducting repurchases. 
59*IX Public finances in Germany

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
E U R O S Y S T E M
Monthly Report
August 2011
IX Public finances in Germany
 
14 Central, state and local government: debt by category *
 
 
€ million
Loans from non-banks Old debt
Direct
Treasury Five-year lending
Period discount Federal Federal Federal by credit Social Equal-
(End of year paper Treasury notes savings bonds institu- security isation
or quarter) Total (Bubills)  1 notes  2,3 (Bobls)  2 notes (Bunds)  2 Day-bond tions  4 funds Other  4 claims  5 Other  5,6 
Central, state and local government
2005 1,489,029 36,945 310,044 174,423 11,055 521,801 . 366,978 488 62,765 4,443 88
2006 1,533,697 37,834 320,288 179,940 10,199 552,028 . 356,514 480 71,889 4,443 82
2007 1,540,381 39,510 329,108 177,394 10,287 574,512 . 329,588 476 74,988 4,443 76
2008 1,564,590 44,620 337,511 172,037 9,649 584,144 3,174 325,648 510 82,781 4,443 73
2009          Q4 1,657,842 105,970 361,727 174,219 9,471 594,999 2,495 300,927 507 103,014 4,442 71
2010          Q1 p 1,678,191 93,830 374,088 191,722 9,441 602,650 2,286 297,819 508 101,331 4,442 73
         Q2 p 1,687,957 82,661 378,912 192,682 9,438 617,987 2,123 296,325 468 102,843 4,440 78
         Q3 p 1,712,685 84,808 389,502 203,056 8,867 618,150 2,058 297,349 473 103,908 4,440 75
         Q4 p 1,732,442 87,767 392,860 195,534 8,704 628,887 1,975 303,082 473 108,719 4,440 2
2011          Q1 pe 1,746,507 84,961 393,494 211,821 8,500 629,846 1,845 301,770 525 109,303 4,440 2
Central government 7,8,9,10,11,12
2005 886,254 36,098 108,899 174,371 11,055 510,866 . 29,318 408 10,710 4,443 87
2006 918,911 37,798 103,624 179,889 10,199 541,404 . 30,030 408 11,036 4,443 82
2007 939,988 37,385 102,083 177,394 10,287 574,156 . 22,829 408 10,928 4,443 75
2008 966,197 40,795 105,684 172,037 9,649 583,930 3,174 35,291 448 10,674 4,443 72
2009          Q4 1,033,017 104,409 113,637 174,219 9,471 594,780 2,495 18,347 448 10,700 4,442 70
2010          Q1 1,045,654 93,630 117,695 191,722 9,441 602,345 2,286 13,303 448 10,270 4,442 73
         Q2 1,049,321 82,511 120,801 192,682 9,438 617,682 2,123 8,859 408 10,300 4,440 77
         Q3 1,064,111 82,908 124,948 203,056 8,867 617,845 2,058 9,084 408 10,425 4,440 74
         Q4 1,075,415 85,867 126,220 195,534 8,704 628,582 1,975 13,349 408 10,335 4,440 2
2011          Q1 1,091,373 82,607 129,208 211,821 8,500 629,541 1,845 13,056 408 9,945 4,440 2
State government
2005 471,375 847 201,146 .... 221,163 3 48,216 . 1
2006 481,850 36 216,665 .... 209,270 2 55,876 . 1
2007 484,373 2,125 227,025 .... 194,956 2 60,264 . 1
2008 483,875 3,825 231,827 .... 179,978 3 68,241 . 1
2009          Q4 505,359 1,561 248,091 .... 167,310 8 88,389 . 1
2010          Q1 p 511,619 200 256,393 .... 167,878 10 87,137 . 1
         Q2 p 515,471 150 258,111 .... 168,581 10 88,618 . 1
         Q3 p 523,883 1,900 264,554 .... 167,854 15 89,558 . 1
         Q4 p 530,916 1,900 266,640 .... 167,901 15 94,459 . 1
2011          Q1 p 526,308 2,354 264,286 .... 164,167 67 95,433 . 1
Local government 13
2005 116,033 . − . . 466 . 111,889 77 3,601 . .
2006 118,380 . − . . 256 . 113,265 70 4,789 . .
2007 115,920 . − . . 256 . 111,803 66 3,796 . .
2008 114,518 . − . . 214 . 110,379 60 3,866 . .
2009          Q4 119,466 . − . . 219 . 115,270 52 3,925 . .
2010          Q1 p 120,918 . − . . 305 . 116,638 50 3,925 . .
         Q2 p 123,165 . − . . 305 . 118,885 50 3,925 . .
         Q3 p 124,691 . − . . 305 . 120,411 50 3,925 . .
         Q4 p 126,112 . − . . 305 . 121,832 50 3,925 . .
2011          Q1 pe 128,827 . − . . 305 . 124,547 50 3,925 . .
Special funds 7,8,9,14
2005 15,367 . − 51 . 10,469 . 4,609 − 238 . .
2006 14,556 . − 51 . 10,368 . 3,950 − 188 . .
2007 100 . − − . 100 . − − − . .
2008 − . − − . − . − − − . .
2009          Q4 − . − − . − . − − − . .
2010          Q1 − . − − . − . − − − . .
         Q2 − . − − . − . − − − . .
         Q3 − . − − . − . − − − . .
         Q4 − . − − . − . − − − . .
2011          Q1 − . − − . − . − − − . .
Source: Bundesbank calculations based on data from the Federal Statistical ance of Federal securities is recorded here under central government and its
Office. — *Excluding direct intergovernmental borrowing. — 1Including special funds in accordance with the agreed allocation ratios. — 8On
Treasury financing paper. — 2Excluding issuers’ holdings of their own secur- 1 January 2005 central government assumed joint responsibility for the
ities. — 3Treasury notes issued by state government include long-term debts of the German Unity Fund. From that date on, the aforementioned
notes. — 4Mainly loans against borrowers’ notes and cash advances. In- special fund is recorded under central government. — 9On 1 July 2007 cen-
cluding loans raised abroad. Other loans from non-banks, including loans tral government assumed joint responsibility for the debts of the ERP
from public supplementary pension funds and liabilities arising from the in- Special Fund. From that date on, the aforementioned special fund is
vestment assistance levy. — 5Excluding offsets against outstanding recorded under central government. — 10From December 2008, including
claims. — 6Old debt mainly denominated in foreign currency, in accordance debt of the Financial Market Stabilisation Fund. — 11From March 2009, in-
with the London Debts Agreement, old liabilities arising from housing con- cluding debt of the Investment and Repayment Fund. — 12From January
struction and liabilities arising from housing construction by the former 2011, including debt of the Restructuring Fund for Credit Institutions. —
GDR’s armed forces and from housing construction in connection with the 13Including debt of municipal special purpose associations. Data other than
return of the troops of the former USSR stationed in eastern Germany to year-end figures have been estimated. — 14ERP Special Fund (up to the
their home country; excluding debt securities in own portfolios. — 7In con- end of June 2007), German Unity Fund (up to the end of 2004) and In-
trast to the capital market statistics, the debt incurred through the joint issu- demnification Fund. 
60*IX Public finances in Germany

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2011
X Economic conditions in Germany
  
1 Origin and use of domestic product, distribution of national income
  
  
  
  2009   2010   2011
  2008   2009   2010   2008   2009   2010   Q3   Q4   Q1   Q2   Q3   Q4   Q1
Item Index 2000=100 Annual percentage change
At  constant  prices,  chained
  I Origin of domestic product
Production sector
(excluding construction) 112.7 93.9 103.6 − 3.4 − 16.7 10.3 − 15.9 − 6.9 7.6 12.9 9.0 11.7 11.6
Construction 77.9 76.5 77.7 − 1.0 − 1.8 1.5 0.7 0.5 − 1.7 5.9 2.4 − 1.1 13.5
Wholesale/retail trade, hotel and
restaurant services, transport
and storage  1 118.9 111.8 115.5 4.4 − 6.0 3.3 − 5.8 − 3.7 0.9 3.5 4.2 4.3 5.1
Financing, renting and business
services  2 118.2 116.8 119.0 2.7 − 1.2 1.9 − 1.3 − 0.5 1.6 1.6 2.4 2.1 1.5
Public and private services  3 108.5 110.4 112.5 2.4 1.7 1.9 1.9 2.5 3.0 1.6 1.7 1.3 0.7
Gross value added 112.3 106.4 110.6 1.1 − 5.3 4.0 − 4.9 − 1.9 3.0 4.6 4.0 4.3 4.7
Gross domestic product  4 110.4 105.2 109.0 1.0 − 4.7 3.6 − 4.4 − 1.3 2.5 4.3 3.9 3.8 5.2
 II Use of domestic product
Private consumption  5 103.5 103.3 103.8 0.7 − 0.2 0.5 − 0.6 − 0.3 − 0.4 − 0.5 0.9 1.8 1.9
Government consumption 107.2 110.2 112.3 2.3 2.9 1.9 3.3 2.1 3.1 1.3 1.7 1.3 1.4
Machinery and equipment 127.2 98.4 109.1 3.5 − 22.6 10.9 − 23.4 − 20.5 1.8 9.6 12.9 17.6 18.6
Premises 87.0 85.7 88.2 1.2 − 1.5 2.8 0.9 2.1 − 1.1 6.7 4.1 0.8 12.6
Other investment  6 145.0 153.2 163.0 6.5 5.6 6.4 5.8 6.1 6.7 7.3 6.3 5.6 7.2
Changes in inventories  7  8 . . . − 0.2 − 0.3 0.6 0.1 − 0.5 0.0 1.8 0.2 0.5 0.0
Domestic use 102.7 100.8 103.2 1.2 − 1.9 2.4 − 1.4 − 2.0 0.4 3.4 2.4 3.5 3.7
Net exports  8 . . . − 0.1 − 2.9 1.3 − 3.1 0.6 2.0 1.2 1.5 0.6 1.6
Exports 168.6 144.5 165.7 2.5 − 14.3 14.7 − 15.3 − 4.7 9.0 18.7 16.1 14.9 13.5
Imports 146.0 132.3 149.5 3.3 − 9.4 13.0 − 9.9 − 6.7 4.6 18.0 13.6 16.0 11.2
Gross domestic product  4 110.4 105.2 109.0 1.0 − 4.7 3.6 − 4.4 − 1.3 2.5 4.3 3.9 3.8 5.2
At  current  prices  (€ billion)
III Use of domestic product
Private consumption  5 1,413.2 1,411.1 1,445.0 2.5 − 0.2 2.4 − 0.9 0.2 1.5 1.5 2.9 3.7 4.1
Government consumption 449.6 472.1 484.7 3.4 5.0 2.7 6.1 3.6 4.3 2.5 1.9 2.0 2.4
Machinery and equipment 201.6 154.7 170.0 2.9 − 23.3 9.9 − 24.1 − 21.3 0.6 8.6 12.1 17.1 18.1
Premises 241.5 240.1 249.8 4.5 − 0.6 4.0 0.8 2.7 − 1.0 8.1 5.7 2.2 15.5
Other investment  6 28.3 27.9 28.4 2.8 − 1.4 1.5 − 2.0 − 1.4 1.1 1.8 1.7 1.3 2.3
Changes in inventories  7 − 12.4 − 27.3 − 10.8 . . . . . . . . . .
Domestic use 2,321.8 2,278.6 2,367.1 2.8 − 1.9 3.9 − 1.6 − 1.8 1.7 5.0 3.8 4.9 5.6
Net exports 159.5 118.5 131.7 . . . . . . . . . .
Exports 1,177.9 978.8 1,152.3 3.2 − 16.9 17.7 − 18.5 − 6.5 9.5 22.1 20.5 18.8 17.9
Imports 1,018.4 860.3 1,020.6 5.2 − 15.5 18.6 − 17.6 − 11.5 5.8 24.2 20.9 23.7 19.8
Gross domestic product  4 2,481.2 2,397.1 2,498.8 2.0 − 3.4 4.2 − 2.8 0.0 3.5 5.1 4.3 4.1 5.6
IV Prices (2000 = 100)
Private consumption 112.4 112.5 114.7 1.7 0.1 1.9 − 0.3 0.6 1.9 2.0 2.0 1.8 2.2
Gross domestic product 109.0 110.5 111.2 1.0 1.4 0.6 1.7 1.3 1.0 0.8 0.4 0.3 0.4
Terms of trade 99.1 103.1 100.8 − 1.2 4.0 − 2.2 5.3 3.4 − 0.6 − 2.2 − 2.5 − 3.1 − 3.6
V  Distribution of national income
Compensation of employees 1,223.3 1,225.9 1,257.8 3.6 0.2 2.6 − 0.2 − 0.6 1.3 2.6 3.0 3.3 4.3
Entrepreneurial and property
income 647.7 566.0 645.7 − 1.4 − 12.6 14.1 − 7.4 1.9 19.7 21.5 9.3 7.6 8.7
National income 1,871.0 1,791.8 1,903.5 1.8 − 4.2 6.2 − 2.8 0.2 7.3 8.2 5.2 4.6 5.9
Memo item: Gross national
income 2,520.9 2,430.9 2,535.3 1.8 − 3.6 4.3 − 3.0 − 0.3 3.8 5.4 4.0 3.9 5.8
Source: Federal Statistical Office; figures computed in May 2011. — 1Includ- ucts). — 5Including non-profit institutions serving households. — 6Intangi-
ing communication services. — 2Financial intermediation, real estate activi- ble fixed asset formation (inter alia, computer software and entertainment,
ties, renting and business services. — 3Including care-at-home services. — literary or artistic originals) and cultivated assets. — 7Including net increase
4Gross value added plus taxes on products (netted with subsidies on prod- in valuables. — 8 Contribution of growth to GDP. 
61*X Economic conditions in Germany

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
E U R O S Y S T E M
Monthly Report
August 2011
 X Economic conditions in Germany
 
2 Output in the production sector  * 
 
 
Adjusted for working-day variations  o 
of which
Industry
of which:   by main industrial grouping of which:   by economic sector
Manu-
Manu- facture of
facture of computers,
Motor basic metals electronic
and vehicles, and optical
Production Inter- Non- fabricated products Machinery trailers
sector, Construc- mediate Capital Durable durable metal and and semi- and electrical
total tion Energy Total goods goods goods goods products equipment equipment trailers
2005=100  
  
% of total  1 100.00 5.56 8.76 85.69 33.96 35.37 2.78 13.58 12.15 10.82 12.48 12.34
Period
2006 105.4 105.8 101.0 105.8 107.1 106.0 107.3 101.7 107.3 112.8 107.5 102.6
2007 111.6 108.9 98.2 113.1 114.5 114.9 108.4 105.8 114.0 124.4 119.5 109.7
2008 111.5 108.3 95.6 113.3 114.2 116.8 104.0 104.4 114.4 128.8 124.5 104.5
2009 94.3 108.2 90.6 93.7 93.3 92.0 87.6 100.6 87.5 100.8 92.2 82.0
2010 103.9 108.4 93.6 104.6 107.2 103.7 95.7 102.4 101.7 117.5 101.5 102.3
 
2009          Nov 103.7 121.2 95.7 103.4 103.4 101.8 102.7 107.8 99.3 113.9 93.0 99.8
         Dec 91.1 83.9 103.6 90.3 83.3 94.6 82.9 98.0 79.6 99.8 103.1 71.2
2010          Jan 89.7 49.4 109.6 90.3 95.6 82.5 88.6 97.7 88.3 99.8 77.2 82.7
         Feb 91.5 55.4 98.2 93.1 96.1 89.9 91.4 94.3 91.1 103.3 82.6 92.0
         Mar 106.3 105.2 98.6 107.2 109.5 106.3 99.3 105.7 105.4 115.8 102.8 108.3
         Apr 101.2 123.2 90.6 100.9 106.1 97.5 90.8 98.9 100.3 109.8 93.2 99.6
         May 103.4 122.8 91.2 103.4 108.9 100.6 92.1 99.5 102.6 112.9 95.8 104.7
         June 106.5 127.7 81.5 107.6 110.7 108.2 96.4 100.6 105.8 119.9 104.8 108.8
         July 105.2 132.3 86.5 105.4 111.2 101.7 90.0 103.5 105.1 119.7 100.0 97.8
         Aug 98.7 124.6 82.0 98.8 106.5 91.4 84.4 101.9 99.0 115.6 95.2 78.5
         Sep 111.8 133.6 83.8 113.2 114.4 114.7 107.2 107.5 108.9 127.4 110.8 119.1
         Oct 114.7 135.2 94.4 115.5 117.7 115.6 110.0 110.7 112.7 132.2 110.2 121.0
         Nov 115.4 127.8 98.3 116.4 115.9 119.7 109.2 110.8 111.8 134.2 116.6 119.4
         Dec 101.8 64.0 108.6 103.5 93.2 116.6 88.8 98.1 89.9 118.9 129.3 95.8
2011          Jan  r 100.8 75.6 105.5 102.0 108.4 97.7 94.0 99.1 103.5 120.6 92.2 101.2
         Feb  r 105.2 86.6 95.2 107.4 110.4 108.3 99.5 99.0 106.8 126.1 101.5 117.0
         Mar  r 118.6 2 121.4 98.6 120.4 122.2 124.0 109.8 109.0 118.5 136.7 123.2 128.6
         Apr  x 110.4 2 129.6 84.3 111.9 115.7 112.3 99.2 104.2 111.9 125.2 109.7 116.8
         May  x 110.8 2 131.3 78.8 112.7 116.4 113.9 96.8 103.5 113.7 126.5 109.8 119.2
         June  x p 113.6 2 131.0 e 75.4 116.4 119.0 120.1 94.3 104.5 116.2 134.4 119.6 119.9
 
Annual percentage change  
  
2006 + 5.7 + 6.3 + 0.9 + 6.2 + 7.4 + 6.4 + 7.6 + 2.1 + 7.6 + 13.0 + 8.0 + 3.0
2007 + 5.9 + 2.9 − 2.8 + 6.9 + 6.9 + 8.4 + 1.0 + 4.0 + 6.2 + 10.3 + 11.2 + 6.9
2008 − 0.1 − 0.6 − 2.6 + 0.2 − 0.3 + 1.7 − 4.1 − 1.3 + 0.4 + 3.5 + 4.2 − 4.7
2009 − 15.4 − 0.1 − 5.2 − 17.3 − 18.3 − 21.2 − 15.8 − 3.6 − 23.5 − 21.7 − 25.9 − 21.5
2010 + 10.2 + 0.2 + 3.3 + 11.6 + 14.9 + 12.7 + 9.2 + 1.8 + 16.2 + 16.6 + 10.1 + 24.8
 
2009          Nov − 7.5 + 3.7 − 1.7 − 8.7 − 4.9 − 15.0 − 8.1 − 0.8 − 9.2 − 14.7 − 26.5 − 1.3
         Dec − 4.6 − 1.2 + 3.8 − 5.6 + 0.8 − 12.1 − 2.0 − 1.6 − 0.5 − 9.0 − 24.4 + 15.4
2010          Jan + 3.3 − 16.1 + 4.1 + 4.2 + 10.1 + 0.6 + 4.5 − 1.1 + 7.3 + 4.3 − 10.4 + 21.6
         Feb + 5.9 − 17.9 + 5.4 + 7.1 + 10.8 + 7.0 + 7.4 − 1.3 + 10.7 + 6.9 − 8.6 + 40.5
         Mar + 9.2 + 0.9 + 6.5 + 10.2 + 16.7 + 7.4 + 6.5 + 3.3 + 20.6 + 11.0 − 2.1 + 28.5
         Apr + 13.7 + 4.7 + 10.0 + 14.9 + 21.8 + 15.2 + 8.6 + 0.0 + 23.8 + 20.3 + 7.2 + 42.1
         May + 12.6 + 4.3 + 12.9 + 13.3 + 20.2 + 11.5 + 10.7 + 1.7 + 22.1 + 20.5 + 7.5 + 25.2
         June + 10.5 + 3.1 − 3.1 + 12.2 + 16.9 + 11.5 + 14.9 + 2.3 + 19.4 + 21.6 + 10.1 + 19.3
         July + 11.2 + 4.8 + 0.5 + 12.8 + 16.3 + 13.1 + 12.4 + 3.8 + 19.7 + 20.5 + 16.3 + 17.0
         Aug + 11.0 + 2.1 − 2.8 + 13.3 + 15.4 + 15.5 + 14.1 + 4.0 + 17.0 + 20.5 + 21.3 + 20.4
         Sep + 8.2 + 3.5 − 2.4 + 9.5 + 12.2 + 10.1 + 7.8 + 1.7 + 13.4 + 16.7 + 8.1 + 15.5
         Oct + 12.5 + 7.2 + 1.0 + 14.0 + 13.7 + 18.6 + 11.7 + 3.8 + 16.1 + 18.2 + 22.6 + 23.7
         Nov + 11.3 + 5.4 + 2.7 + 12.6 + 12.1 + 17.6 + 6.3 + 2.8 + 12.6 + 17.8 + 25.4 + 19.6
         Dec + 11.7 − 23.7 + 4.8 + 14.6 + 11.9 + 23.3 + 7.1 + 0.1 + 12.9 + 19.1 + 25.4 + 34.6
2011          Jan  r + 12.4 + 53.0 − 3.7 + 13.0 + 13.4 + 18.4 + 6.1 + 1.4 + 17.2 + 20.8 + 19.4 + 22.4
         Feb  r + 15.0 + 56.3 − 3.1 + 15.4 + 14.9 + 20.5 + 8.9 + 5.0 + 17.2 + 22.1 + 22.9 + 27.2
         Mar  r + 11.6 2 + 15.4 + 0.0 + 12.3 + 11.6 + 16.7 + 10.6 + 3.1 + 12.4 + 18.0 + 19.8 + 18.7
         Apr  x + 9.1 2 + 5.2 − 7.0 + 10.9 + 9.0 + 15.2 + 9.3 + 5.4 + 11.6 + 14.0 + 17.7 + 17.3
         May  x + 7.2 2 + 6.9 − 13.6 + 9.0 + 6.9 + 13.2 + 5.1 + 4.0 + 10.8 + 12.0 + 14.6 + 13.8
         June  x p + 6.7 2 + 2.6 e − 7.5 + 8.2 + 7.5 + 11.0 − 2.2 + 3.9 + 9.8 + 12.1 + 14.1 + 10.2
Source of the unadjusted figures: Federal Statistical Office. — *For explan- eral Statistical Office, by way of estimates, to the results of the annual
atory notes, see Statistical Supplement "Seasonally adjusted business overall survey in the construction sector (average + 4%). — xProvision-
statistics", Tables II.10 to II.12. — oUsing the Census X-12-ARIMA method, al; adjusted in advance by the Federal Statistical Office, by way of estimates,
version 0.2.8. — 1Share of gross value added at factor cost of the pro- to the results of the Quarterly Production Survey. — eUnadjusted figures
duction sector in the base year 2005. — 2Adjusted in advance by the Fed- estimated by the Federal Statistical Office. 
62* X Economic conditions in Germany

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2011
 X Economic conditions in Germany
 
3 Orders received by industry *
 
 
Adjusted for working-day variations  o 
of which
of which
Industry Intermediate goods Capital goods Consumer goods Durable goods Non-durable goods
Annual Annual Annual Annual Annual Annual
percent- percent- percent- percent- percent- percent-
age age age age age age
Period 2005=100 change 2005=100 change 2005=100 change 2005=100 change 2005=100 change 2005=100 change
total  
  
2006 110.7 + 11.0 114.0 + 14.3 109.4 + 9.7 105.3 + 5.5 108.4 + 8.7 104.3 + 4.5
2007 123.1 + 11.2 125.2 + 9.8 123.2 + 12.6 111.9 + 6.3 110.3 + 1.8 112.5 + 7.9
2008 115.5 − 6.2 121.2 − 3.2 112.8 − 8.4 108.1 − 3.4 103.5 − 6.2 109.7 − 2.5
2009 87.5 − 24.2 89.3 − 26.3 85.2 − 24.5 94.8 − 12.3 88.5 − 14.5 96.9 − 11.7
2010 109.0 + 24.6 114.3 + 28.0 106.8 + 25.4 99.8 + 5.3 101.4 + 14.6 99.3 + 2.5
 
2010          June 115.5 + 28.8 119.0 + 29.9 115.6 + 31.1 99.5 + 9.5 106.0 + 21.0 97.3 + 5.9
         July 110.2 + 22.2 119.1 + 29.9 105.2 + 19.5 104.4 + 7.0 101.3 + 18.2 105.4 + 3.6
         Aug 104.4 + 24.4 108.9 + 24.2 102.1 + 27.5 99.8 + 7.3 89.9 + 18.3 103.1 + 4.5
         Sep 112.9 + 18.6 117.5 + 20.4 111.3 + 19.9 103.6 + 1.9 111.7 + 1.0 100.8 + 2.1
         Oct 112.6 + 22.4 119.3 + 21.6 109.4 + 25.9 104.0 + 4.8 115.9 + 14.8 100.0 + 1.5
         Nov 120.9 + 24.9 121.8 + 20.6 123.1 + 31.5 102.1 + 2.4 110.7 + 11.4 99.3 − 0.4
         Dec 111.2 + 24.2 107.9 + 23.6 116.4 + 27.5 89.3 + 2.6 87.6 + 0.7 89.9 + 3.3
2011          Jan 118.1 + 21.1 128.5 + 22.3 113.6 + 23.1 102.4 + 3.5 105.2 + 13.6 101.5 + 0.5
         Feb 122.1 + 25.0 126.2 + 21.0 121.0 + 30.2 110.9 + 10.7 104.8 + 12.7 113.0 + 10.0
         Mar 129.4 + 14.8 139.8 + 17.7 125.4 + 14.5 110.0 + 3.1 114.3 + 6.9 108.4 + 1.6
         Apr 120.4 + 13.9 127.7 + 10.4 118.4 + 17.2 100.8 + 8.4 108.0 + 9.5 98.3 + 8.0
         May 122.7 + 15.3 128.9 + 13.1 121.9 + 18.5 99.5 + 3.5 103.4 + 0.5 98.2 + 4.7
         June  p 128.9 + 11.6 127.9 + 7.5 133.8 + 15.7 99.9 + 0.4 106.6 + 0.6 97.7 + 0.4
from the domestic market  
  
2006 109.0 + 9.3 113.3 + 13.6 106.4 + 6.8 103.4 + 3.7 111.0 + 11.3 100.9 + 1.2
2007 118.7 + 8.9 124.7 + 10.1 115.8 + 8.8 107.0 + 3.5 109.6 − 1.3 106.1 + 5.2
2008 113.1 − 4.7 121.8 − 2.3 107.5 − 7.2 103.9 − 2.9 107.1 − 2.3 102.9 − 3.0
2009 88.0 − 22.2 89.9 − 26.2 86.5 − 19.5 87.4 − 15.9 89.9 − 16.1 86.6 − 15.8
2010 104.5 + 18.8 115.9 + 28.9 97.8 + 13.1 88.6 + 1.4 93.9 + 4.4 86.9 + 0.3
 
2010          June 108.0 + 23.3 121.1 + 33.4 101.0 + 17.6 85.3 + 4.0 90.5 + 5.6 83.6 + 3.5
         July 107.3 + 13.9 122.4 + 32.0 97.3 + 0.7 91.7 + 4.4 89.7 + 5.7 92.3 + 3.9
         Aug 100.0 + 15.2 112.4 + 25.4 91.4 + 8.7 90.1 + 1.5 87.6 + 7.0 90.9 − 0.1
         Sep 108.5 + 16.5 119.1 + 22.0 102.0 + 15.5 95.2 − 3.3 109.6 − 10.1 90.5 − 0.2
         Oct 110.2 + 18.9 123.0 + 21.5 102.7 + 19.7 92.5 + 2.0 112.1 + 8.1 86.1 − 0.3
         Nov 113.5 + 19.3 125.1 + 20.4 107.6 + 21.4 91.9 + 2.6 105.3 + 8.1 87.6 + 0.7
         Dec 99.5 + 17.8 104.9 + 19.9 99.0 + 19.6 76.8 − 3.3 78.2 − 5.3 76.4 − 2.4
2011          Jan 112.4 + 17.3 128.2 + 22.2 103.4 + 15.7 88.3 − 0.8 95.7 + 10.4 85.9 − 4.2
         Feb 115.2 + 21.4 127.1 + 22.0 108.6 + 23.5 96.3 + 7.4 99.5 + 16.2 95.3 + 4.6
         Mar 123.3 + 12.6 138.8 + 16.6 115.1 + 10.7 96.4 + 1.3 107.0 + 7.0 92.9 − 0.9
         Apr 114.9 + 10.4 131.0 + 10.1 106.1 + 11.1 88.1 + 7.3 102.1 + 16.3 83.5 + 4.0
         May 126.8 + 23.2 135.2 + 16.9 126.6 + 32.4 88.4 + 5.5 101.0 + 7.3 84.3 + 4.7
         June  p 115.7 + 7.1 127.1 + 5.0 111.1 + 10.0 88.5 + 3.8 98.6 + 9.0 85.2 + 1.9
from abroad  
  
2006 112.2 + 12.5 114.6 + 14.8 111.5 + 11.8 107.5 + 7.7 105.7 + 6.0 108.1 + 8.3
2007 126.8 + 13.0 125.7 + 9.7 128.5 + 15.2 117.3 + 9.1 111.0 + 5.0 119.5 + 10.5
2008 117.6 − 7.3 120.6 − 4.1 116.6 − 9.3 112.6 − 4.0 99.9 − 10.0 117.1 − 2.0
2009 87.0 − 26.0 88.6 − 26.5 84.3 − 27.7 102.8 − 8.7 87.1 − 12.8 108.4 − 7.4
2010 112.8 + 29.7 112.5 + 27.0 113.2 + 34.3 111.9 + 8.9 109.0 + 25.1 112.9 + 4.2
 
2010          June 122.1 + 33.4 116.7 + 26.0 125.8 + 39.9 114.9 + 14.4 121.7 + 35.8 112.4 + 7.9
         July 112.7 + 30.0 115.4 + 27.4 110.7 + 35.0 118.1 + 9.1 113.1 + 30.6 119.8 + 3.4
         Aug 108.3 + 33.0 105.0 + 22.8 109.7 + 41.9 110.3 + 13.1 92.3 + 31.9 116.6 + 8.7
         Sep 116.7 + 20.2 115.6 + 18.6 117.8 + 22.7 112.6 + 6.9 113.9 + 14.8 112.2 + 4.4
         Oct 114.6 + 25.5 115.0 + 21.7 114.2 + 30.4 116.5 + 7.6 119.7 + 21.9 115.4 + 3.1
         Nov 127.4 + 29.6 118.1 + 21.0 134.0 + 37.9 113.2 + 2.4 116.1 + 14.5 112.2 − 1.4
         Dec 121.3 + 29.2 111.3 + 27.9 128.7 + 32.3 102.7 + 7.9 97.1 + 6.2 104.7 + 8.4
2011          Jan 123.1 + 24.5 128.9 + 22.4 120.8 + 28.1 117.6 + 7.4 114.7 + 16.3 118.7 + 4.7
         Feb 128.1 + 28.0 125.2 + 19.8 129.7 + 34.4 126.7 + 13.6 110.2 + 9.7 132.6 + 14.9
         Mar 134.7 + 16.7 141.0 + 18.9 132.7 + 17.1 124.6 + 4.6 121.6 + 6.8 125.6 + 3.8
         Apr 125.1 + 16.8 123.9 + 10.7 127.0 + 21.1 114.5 + 9.4 114.0 + 4.0 114.7 + 11.5
         May 119.1 + 8.9 121.8 + 8.8 118.6 + 9.7 111.5 + 2.0 105.9 − 5.3 113.5 + 4.7
         June  p 140.4 + 15.0 128.9 + 10.5 149.8 + 19.1 112.3 − 2.3 114.6 − 5.8 111.5 − 0.8
Source of the unadjusted figures: Federal Statistical Office. — *For explana- statistics", Tables II.14 to II.16. — oUsing the Census X-12-ARIMA method,
tory notes, see Statistical Supplement "Seasonally adjusted business version 0.2.8. 
63* X Economic conditions in Germany

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
E U R O S Y S T E M
Monthly Report
August 2011
 X Economic conditions  in Germany
 
4 Orders received by construction *   
 
 
Adjusted for working-day variations  o 
Breakdown by type of construction Breakdown by client  1 
 Building    
Housing Industrial Public sector Civil Public
Total Total construction construction construction engineering Industry sector
Annual Annual Annual Annual Annual Annual Annual Annual
percent- percent- percent- percent- percent- percent- percent- percent-
age age age age age age age age
Period change change change change change change change change 2005 = 100 2005 = 100 2005 = 100 2005 = 100 2005 = 100 2005 = 100 2005 = 100 2005 = 100
2007 114.0 + 8.5 112.5 + 5.5 98.5 − 5.6 123.2 + 12.4 108.5 + 6.7 115.4 + 11.5 120.7 + 10.7 113.7 + 11.9
2008 113.4 − 0.5 114.7 + 2.0 94.4 − 4.2 127.9 + 3.8 116.7 + 7.6 112.0 − 2.9 123.3 + 2.2 111.4 − 2.0
2009 107.4 − 5.3 100.7 − 12.2 94.2 − 0.2 100.7 − 21.3 115.5 − 1.0 114.4 + 2.1 104.9 − 14.9 115.6 + 3.8
2010 109.0 + 1.5 106.7 + 6.0 103.3 + 9.7 105.4 + 4.7 118.9 + 2.9 111.3 − 2.7 111.0 + 5.8 109.4 − 5.4
 
2010          May 115.9 + 0.1 108.3 + 1.7 108.8 + 12.7 103.1 − 2.5 124.3 − 5.9 123.9 − 1.3 112.0 + 0.8 122.9 − 4.5
         June 128.2 − 1.4 125.1 + 13.3 110.3 + 1.8 127.3 + 21.6 151.2 + 12.4 131.4 − 12.6 134.6 + 12.9 129.3 − 13.8
         July 123.3 − 0.4 117.8 + 7.1 113.8 + 5.7 116.2 + 9.0 132.1 + 4.5 129.0 − 6.7 123.4 + 10.0 127.2 − 10.6
         Aug 117.7 − 0.6 119.8 + 8.6 112.7 + 15.7 124.7 + 7.6 119.8 − 0.8 115.4 − 8.9 120.3 + 2.7 117.1 − 8.9
         Sep 123.2 + 0.0 118.8 + 2.6 130.1 + 18.5 106.3 − 4.1 134.9 − 7.6 127.8 − 2.3 116.0 + 0.0 127.5 − 6.3
         Oct 113.9 + 4.3 110.8 + 6.4 107.0 + 3.9 111.6 + 9.6 117.0 + 2.2 117.2 + 2.4 125.5 + 14.6 105.3 − 5.5
         Nov 92.1 + 1.7 93.8 + 0.8 96.1 + 7.3 92.8 + 0.0 92.0 − 10.1 90.3 + 2.6 97.2 + 0.5 85.3 + 0.5
         Dec 90.3 − 8.8 96.0 − 3.2 101.3 + 13.7 92.3 − 5.1 96.5 − 24.7 84.2 − 14.8 95.1 − 6.6 80.7 − 19.5
2011          Jan 76.9 + 8.2 84.4 + 21.3 77.5 + 38.1 94.0 + 25.5 68.1 − 17.5 69.1 − 5.0 94.2 + 19.5 59.3 − 15.0
         Feb 94.1 + 3.6 102.3 + 17.2 97.7 + 28.2 114.3 + 29.9 72.5 − 34.2 85.6 − 9.4 114.5 + 26.5 72.0 − 26.1
         Mar 134.3 + 5.8 133.8 + 9.8 142.6 + 24.5 130.6 + 6.0 124.3 − 7.4 134.9 + 2.0 147.3 + 13.0 117.8 − 8.6
         Apr 122.9 + 7.7 118.6 + 6.5 135.9 + 20.1 111.6 + 7.5 102.9 − 22.4 127.3 + 8.8 124.9 + 16.0 115.2 − 4.8
         May 127.7 + 10.2 135.6 + 25.2 148.5 + 36.5 127.4 + 23.6 134.1 + 7.9 119.4 − 3.6 126.0 + 12.5 120.4 − 2.0
Source of the unadjusted figures: Federal Statistical Office. — *Values exclu- X-12-ARIMA method, version 0.2.8. — 1Excluding housing construction
sive of value-added tax; for explanatory notes, see Statistical Supplement orders. 
"Seasonally adjusted business statistics", Tables II.21. — oUsing the Census
 
 
5 Retail trade turnover, sales of motor vehicles *
 
 
Adjusted for calendar variations  o 
Retail trade
of which:  by enterprises’ main product range  1 
Construction Retail sale of
and flooring pharmaceutical Wholesale
Textiles, Information materials and medical and retail trade
clothing and household goods, cosmetic and repair of
Food, beverages, foodwear and communications appliances and toilet motor vehicles
Total tobacco  2 leather goods equipment furniture articles and motorcycles
At current At prices in
prices year 2005 At current prices
Annual Annual Annual Annual Annual Annual Annual Annual
percent- percent- percent- percent- percent- percent- percent- percent-
age age age age age age age age
change change change change change change change change
Period % % % % % % % % 2005 = 100 2005 = 100 2005 = 100 2005 = 100 2005 = 100 2005 = 100 2005 = 100 2005 = 100
2007 3 99.4 − 1.6 99.0 − 1.3 99.5 − 0.6 103.7 + 1.2 110.2 + 7.7 98.6 − 4.6 104.2 + 2.1 100.7 − 5.7
2008 101.5 + 2.1 98.9 − 0.1 100.8 + 1.3 104.7 + 1.0 116.4 + 5.6 99.7 + 1.1 107.1 + 2.8 95.8 − 4.9
2009 4 98.1 − 3.3 96.2 − 2.7 98.8 − 2.0 101.5 − 3.1 117.0 + 0.5 97.1 − 2.6 110.0 + 2.7 96.8 + 1.0
2010 5 100.3 + 2.2 97.2 + 1.0 99.6 + 0.8 105.8 + 4.2 119.2 + 1.9 99.0 + 2.0 114.3 + 3.9 92.2 − 4.8
 
2010          June  5 97.5 + 4.5 94.2 + 3.7 98.0 + 1.9 99.6 + 7.1 109.7 + 7.5 98.8 + 5.3 111.5 + 5.5 100.0 − 5.8
         July 101.0 + 4.1 97.8 + 2.4 101.7 + 4.1 103.2 + 3.2 110.8 + 0.9 98.6 + 2.2 116.3 + 4.4 96.2 − 4.4
         Aug 98.0 + 3.8 95.1 + 2.7 97.0 − 1.8 100.7 + 10.9 115.1 + 7.9 98.8 + 5.2 113.0 + 6.6 87.5 − 2.3
         Sep 98.7 + 3.4 95.6 + 2.1 94.5 + 0.7 118.3 + 9.0 113.1 + 2.8 98.0 + 0.8 112.5 + 4.6 95.6 + 0.3
         Oct 104.9 + 2.4 101.5 + 1.3 100.8 + 2.6 125.0 − 0.1 119.5 − 1.8 107.3 + 4.4 117.5 + 3.9 102.8 + 3.6
         Nov 104.2 + 2.1 100.8 + 0.2 100.2 + 2.1 111.5 + 7.9 130.7 − 3.4 106.6 + 1.5 116.9 − 1.2 101.1 + 10.9
         Dec 120.4 + 1.8 116.7 + 0.2 118.4 + 1.5 129.5 + 0.5 180.9 − 0.5 104.7 − 0.2 130.6 + 1.5 88.8 + 8.2
2011          Jan 93.1 + 3.9 90.5 + 2.8 92.6 + 0.1 88.5 + 4.0 132.7 + 8.9 87.3 + 9.3 110.0 + 4.3 83.2 + 19.2
         Feb 90.4 + 4.1 86.7 + 2.2 90.9 + 2.1 82.5 + 5.4 105.9 − 0.6 88.7 + 7.1 106.2 + 1.0 90.8 + 22.5
         Mar 103.4 + 2.0 98.5 + 0.4 103.6 + 1.4 107.7 + 2.0 110.7 − 1.0 107.1 + 1.3 114.2 − 2.5 110.1 + 11.3
         Apr 103.2 + 3.0 97.7 + 1.5 103.3 + 4.4 114.3 + 4.6 100.7 − 0.4 108.4 + 5.4 112.4 + 0.0 105.1 + 8.7
         May 100.0 − 1.1 94.8 − 2.7 99.8 − 1.6 100.6 − 3.1 103.1 − 5.5 101.2 − 3.1 111.9 − 0.6 102.1 + 8.3
         June  6 100.4 + 3.0 95.5 + 1.4 103.0 + 5.1 101.9 + 2.3 104.9 − 4.4 100.1 + 1.3 113.3 + 1.6 103.9 + 3.9
Source of the unadjusted figures: Federal Statistical Office. — *Excluding cluding new entities; statistical breaks in the reporting sample eliminated by
value-added tax;  For explanatory notes, see Statistical Supplement "Sea- chain-linking. — 5Figures from January 2010 are provisional in some cases re-
sonally adjusted business statistics", Tables II.24. — oUsing the Census vised, and particularly uncertain in recent months owing to estimates for
X-12-ARIMA method, version 0.2.8. — 1In stores. — 2Including stalls and missing reports. — 6Unadjusted figures estimated by the Federal Statistical
markets. — 3Expansion of the reporting population to include new entities; Office. As the estimate of missing reports is based on data for June 2010,
in January 2006 and January 2007; statistical breaks in reporting population which had two extra selling days, a downward revision is expected. 
eliminated by chain-linking. — 4In January 2009 new reporting sample in-
64* X Economic conditions in Germany

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2011
 X Economic conditions  in Germany
 
6 Labour market * 
 
 
 
Employment  1 Employment subject to social security contributions  2 Short time workers  3 Unemployment  4 
Total of which: of which: of which:
Solely
jobs
Services exempt Recipients
excluding from of insured
Produc- temporary social unem- Unem- Temporary
tion employ- employ- contri- Cyclically ployment ploy- Vacan-
 Annual Annual sector ment ment butions  2 Total induced  5 Total benefits ment cies,  4,7 
Thou- change Thou- change rate 4,6 thou-
sands in % sands in % Thousands in % sands
2006 r 39,192 r + 0.6 26,366 + 0.5 . . . 4,819 67 54 4,487 1,663 10.8 356
2007 r 39,857 r + 1.7 26,942 + 2.2 8,533 . . 4,861 68 26 3,760 1,245 9.0 423
2008 r 40,344 r + 1.2 27,510 + 2.1 8,659 17,958 679 4,866 102 58 3,258 1,006 7.8 389
2009 r 40,362 r + 0.0 27,493 − 0.1 8,521 18,210 549 4,904 1,144 1,078 8 3,415 8 1,190 8 8.1 301
2010 r 40,553 r + 0.5 27,757 + 1.0 8,426 18,438 679 4,883 503 429 3,238 1,075 7.7 359
2008          Q2 r 40,245 r + 1.3 27,364 + 2.2 8,615 17,852 677 4,865 53 42 3,276 971 7.8 403
         Q3 r 40,506 r + 1.2 27,617 + 2.1 8,701 17,974 717 4,849 44 33 3,154 947 7.5 416
         Q4 r 40,724 r + 0.9 27,916 + 1.8 8,771 18,259 674 4,885 157 128 3,021 926 7.2 362
2009          Q1 r 40,120 r + 0.5 27,390 + 0.9 8,563 18,083 550 4,864 999 855 3,533 1,284 8.4 312
         Q2 r 40,305 r + 0.2 27,379 + 0.1 8,515 18,133 512 4,906 1,436 1,411 8 3,475 8 1,207 8 8.3 300
         Q3 r 40,418 r − 0.2 27,482 − 0.5 8,500 18,204 557 4,913 1,136 1,103 3,418 1,186 8.1 300
         Q4 r 40,606 r − 0.3 27,720 − 0.7 8,504 18,423 579 4,934 1,007 944 3,232 1,083 7.7 290
2010          Q1 r 39,993 r − 0.3 27,307 − 0.3 8,308 18,244 561 4,854 987 804 3,601 1,327 8.6 296
         Q2 r 40,460 r + 0.4 27,592 + 0.8 8,377 18,346 648 4,885 517 485 3,261 1,053 7.8 353
         Q3 r 40,740 r + 0.8 27,886 + 1.5 8,469 18,454 740 4,889 265 239 3,132 1,003 7.5 395
         Q4 r 41,019 r + 1.0 28,242 + 1.9 8,548 18,710 767 4,905 242 188 2,959 920 7.0 392
2011          Q1 r 40,564 r + 1.4 9 27,951 9 + 2.4 9 8,432 9 18,599 9 741 9 4,847 ... 9 157 3,290 1,088 7.8 411
         Q2 10 41,013 10 + 1.4 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 2,977 850 11 7.1 470
2008          Mar r 39,979 r + 1.5 27,225 + 2.3 8,570 17,789 658 4,855 156 29 3,496 1,113 8.3 392
         Apr r 40,123 r + 1.3 27,332 + 2.2 8,607 17,839 666 4,857 59 47 3,403 1,043 8.1 395
         May r 40,266 r + 1.2 27,419 + 2.1 8,628 17,883 681 4,869 51 40 3,273 963 7.8 398
         June r 40,345 r + 1.3 27,458 + 2.2 8,646 17,877 710 4,882 50 39 3,151 906 7.5 418
         July r 40,392 r + 1.3 27,440 + 2.2 8,652 17,842 722 4,872 43 31 3,201 963 7.6 422
         Aug r 40,433 r + 1.2 27,684 + 2.1 8,721 18,019 715 4,820 39 29 3,187 961 7.6 417
         Sep r 40,693 r + 1.2 27,996 + 2.1 8,810 18,243 718 4,829 50 39 3,073 917 7.3 409
         Oct r 40,825 r + 1.0 28,020 + 1.8 8,802 18,299 699 4,868 71 61 2,989 883 7.1 393
         Nov r 40,789 r + 1.0 27,914 + 1.6 8,773 18,269 663 4,913 130 120 2,980 902 7.1 367
         Dec r 40,557 r + 0.8 27,632 + 1.5 8,662 18,178 598 4,920 270 201 3,094 994 7.4 327
2009          Jan r 40,116 r + 0.7 27,379 + 1.1 8,565 18,063 561 4,848 594 452 3,480 1,263 8.3 302
         Feb r 40,103 r + 0.6 27,307 + 0.7 8,529 18,052 533 4,848 1,079 919 3,542 1,293 8.5 318
         Mar r 40,140 r + 0.4 27,337 + 0.4 8,530 18,088 513 4,872 1,325 1,194 3,576 1,296 8.5 317
         Apr r 40,262 r + 0.3 27,383 + 0.2 8,524 18,132 507 4,901 1,446 1,426 3,575 1,270 8.5 305
         May r 40,324 r + 0.1 27,395 − 0.1 8,509 18,154 508 4,914 1,469 1,443 8 3,449 8 1,192 8 8.2 299
         June r 40,330 r + 0.0 27,380 − 0.3 8,493 18,135 531 4,932 1,394 1,365 3,401 1,159 8.1 297
         July r 40,317 r − 0.2 27,314 − 0.5 8,464 18,080 551 4,935 1,248 1,215 3,454 1,210 8.2 298
         Aug r 40,357 r − 0.2 27,542 − 0.5 8,507 18,249 565 4,891 1,055 1,022 3,463 1,211 8.2 300
         Sep r 40,581 r − 0.3 27,800 − 0.7 8,564 18,430 578 4,893 1,104 1,072 3,338 1,137 7.9 302
         Oct r 40,684 r − 0.3 27,786 − 0.8 8,534 18,449 581 4,909 1,109 1,076 3,221 1,071 7.7 298
         Nov r 40,675 r − 0.3 27,731 − 0.7 8,497 18,434 589 4,961 982 947 3,208 1,069 7.6 291
         Dec r 40,460 r − 0.2 27,488 − 0.5 8,400 18,341 553 4,971 929 809 3,268 1,108 7.8 281
2010          Jan r 39,965 r − 0.4 27,249 − 0.5 8,295 18,214 550 4,840 1,057 874 3,610 1,339 8.6 271
         Feb r 39,933 r − 0.4 27,230 − 0.3 8,269 18,210 560 4,814 1,031 829 3,635 1,356 8.6 298
         Mar r 40,082 r − 0.1 27,398 + 0.2 8,318 18,277 596 4,846 874 709 3,560 1,285 8.5 320
         Apr r 40,310 r + 0.1 27,553 + 0.6 8,371 18,335 627 4,875 632 599 3,399 1,140 8.1 335
         May r 40,485 r + 0.4 27,667 + 1.0 8,395 18,382 665 4,898 499 467 3,236 1,036 7.7 355
         June r 40,585 r + 0.6 27,710 + 1.2 8,414 18,365 707 4,916 420 390 3,148 983 7.5 370
         July r 40,606 r + 0.7 27,691 + 1.4 8,419 18,320 732 4,915 313 286 3,186 1,029 7.6 391
         Aug r 40,688 r + 0.8 27,976 + 1.6 8,493 18,508 752 4,864 244 219 3,183 1,030 7.6 396
         Sep r 40,926 r + 0.9 28,269 + 1.7 8,573 18,700 766 4,859 237 214 3,026 948 7.2 398
         Oct r 41,072 r + 1.0 28,296 + 1.8 8,566 18,738 769 4,886 231 209 2,941 908 7.0 401
         Nov r 41,088 r + 1.0 28,277 + 2.0 8,562 18,723 779 4,932 215 194 2,927 903 6.9 394
         Dec r 40,897 r + 1.1 28,033 + 2.0 8,460 18,635 743 4,931 279 162 3,011 949 7.1 380
2011          Jan r 40,514 r + 1.4 27,863 + 2.3 8,399 18,540 732 4,842 322 177 3,346 1,146 7.9 375
         Feb r 40,514 r + 1.5 9 27,928 9 + 2.6 9 8,417 9 18,574 9 739 9 4,818 ... 9 155 3,313 1,107 7.9 417
         Mar r 40,664 r + 1.5 9 28,090 9 + 2.5 9 8,478 9 18,640 9 760 9 4,830 ... 9 140 3,210 1,010 7.6 442
         Apr r 40,877 r + 1.4 9 28,225 9 + 2.4 9 8,518 9 18,713 9 772 9 4,873 ... 9 112 3,078 907 7.3 461
         May r 41,033 r + 1.4 9 28,373 9 + 2.6 9 8,559 9 18,782 9 801 9 4,905 ... 9 97 2,960 839 11 7.0 470
         June 10 41,129 10 + 1.3 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 2,893 804 6.9 480
         July ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 2,939 859 7.0 492
Sources: Federal Statistical Office; Federal Employment Agency. — *Annual persons formally on the books of private employment agencies. — 9Unadjus-
and quarterly figures: averages; calculated by the Bundesbank; deviations ted data estimated by the Federal Employment Agency. The estimates for
from the official figures are due to rounding. — 1Workplace concept; aver- Germany in 2008 and 2009 deviated from the final data by a maximum of
ages. — 2Monthly figures: end of month. — 3Number within a given 0.2 % for employees subject to social contributions, by a maximum of 2.0 %
month — 4Mid-month level. — 5Until the end of 2006, short-time work ex- for persons solely in jobs exempt from social contributions and, in 2009, by a
cluding construction and agriculture; from 2007, in accordance with section maximum of 14 % for cyclically induced short-time work. — 10Initial pre-
170 of the third Book of the Social Security Code. — 6Relative to the total liminary estimate by the Federal Statistical Office. — 11From May 2011, cal-
civilian labour force. — 7Excluding government-assisted forms of employ- culated on the basis of new labour force figures. 
ment and seasonal jobs. — 8From May 2009, unemployed excluding
65* X Economic conditions in Germany

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
E U R O S Y S T E M
Monthly Report
August 2011
 X Economic conditions  in Germany
 
7 Prices
 
 
 
Consumer price index HWWI
Indices of Index of World Market
of which foreign trade prices Prices  of Raw Materials  5 
Other Index of
durable producer
and non- prices of
durable industrial Index of
consumer Services Con- products producer
goods excluding prices of sold on the struction
excluding house House price domestic agricultural Other raw
Total Food Energy  1 rents  3 rents  3 index  2 market  4 products  4 Exports Imports Energy  6 materials  7 energy  1,2 
Period 2005 = 100 2010 = 100
Index level  
  
2006 8 101.6 101.9 100.3 108.5 101.0 101.1 102.4 8 105.4 107.3 101.8 104.4 84.4 80.7
2007 9 10 103.9 105.9 101.7 112.8 103.9 102.2 109.3 106.8 119.9 103.0 105.1 86.0 87.5
2008 106.6 112.7 102.5 123.6 105.8 103.5 113.0 112.7 124.3 104.8 109.9 109.7 92.0
2009 107.0 111.2 103.9 116.9 107.4 104.6 114.4 108.0 100.6 102.5 100.5 72.8 74.5
2010 108.2 113.0 104.4 121.5 108.0 105.8 115.4 109.7 114.0 106.0 108.3 100.0 100.0
 
2009          Sep 106.9 109.2 104.4 116.4 107.3 104.8 106.5 98.2 102.4 99.8 76.1 74.9
         Oct 107.0 109.0 104.7 116.2 107.3 104.9 106.5 98.4 102.4 100.3 80.7 75.8
         Nov 106.9 109.5 104.2 116.9 106.9 105.0 114.4 106.6 101.5 102.5 100.7 84.4 77.9
         Dec 107.8 110.4 104.5 115.9 109.5 105.1 106.5 102.5 102.7 101.2 83.8 82.8
2010          Jan 107.1 111.7 103.7 118.5 106.9 105.2 107.3 103.2 103.3 102.9 89.0 85.7
         Feb 107.5 112.0 104.1 117.5 107.7 105.3 114.5 107.3 104.7 103.7 103.9 89.6 85.7
         Mar 108.0 113.1 104.5 120.6 107.9 105.5 108.0 105.2 104.5 105.7 96.5 89.5
         Apr 107.9 114.0 104.5 122.2 106.7 105.6 108.9 106.3 105.5 107.8 105.1 97.2
         May 108.0 113.2 104.4 122.5 107.2 105.7 115.2 109.2 108.2 106.0 108.4 100.6 98.9
         June 108.1 113.4 104.2 122.4 107.5 105.8 109.9 110.4 106.4 109.4 102.6 100.4
         July 108.4 113.6 103.6 121.4 109.2 105.9 110.4 111.3 106.4 109.2 98.8 101.2
         Aug 108.4 112.6 104.0 121.2 109.4 106.0 115.8 110.4 117.7 106.8 109.4 99.3 104.8
         Sep 108.3 112.5 104.7 121.7 108.0 106.0 110.7 119.3 107.1 109.7 99.0 106.6
         Oct 108.4 112.2 105.1 122.1 107.9 106.1 111.1 119.9 106.8 109.5 98.9 104.1
         Nov 108.5 113.2 105.3 122.8 107.3 106.3 116.1 111.3 122.6 107.1 110.8 104.3 108.1
         Dec 109.6 114.4 105.1 125.4 110.0 106.4 112.1 127.0 108.0 113.3 115.7 116.1
2011          Jan 109.2 114.7 104.5 128.7 107.9 106.5 113.4 r 127.9 108.9 115.0 121.1 121.4
         Feb 109.8 115.8 104.8 129.5 108.8 106.7 117.4 114.2 r 131.7 109.3 116.3 126.5 122.8
         Mar 110.3 115.6 105.4 133.3 108.7 106.8 114.7 r 131.4 109.6 117.6 135.5 117.7
         Apr 110.5 115.6 105.6 135.0 108.9 106.9 115.9 r 133.6 109.9 117.9 141.0 117.8
         May 11 110.5 116.3 105.7 134.1 108.4 107.0 118.5 115.9 r 134.5 110.0 117.2 132.5 115.7
         June 110.6 116.3 105.5 133.5 109.3 107.1 116.0 p 133.8 110.0 116.5 130.5 114.0
         July 111.0 116.0 105.0 134.3 111.0 107.2 ... ... ... ... 135.1 115.0
Annual percentage change  
  
2006 8 + 1.6 + 1.9 + 0.3 + 8.5 + 1.0 + 1.1 + 2.4 8 + 5.4 + 7.3 + 1.8 + 4.4 + 16.4 + 25.5
2007 9 10 + 2.3 + 3.9 + 1.4 + 4.0 + 2.9 + 1.1 + 6.7 + 1.3 + 11.7 + 1.2 + 0.7 + 1.9 + 8.4
2008 + 2.6 + 6.4 + 0.8 + 9.6 + 1.8 + 1.3 + 3.4 + 5.5 + 3.7 + 1.7 + 4.6 + 27.6 + 5.1
2009 + 0.4 − 1.3 + 1.4 − 5.4 + 1.5 + 1.1 + 1.2 − 4.2 − 19.1 − 2.2 − 8.6 − 33.6 − 19.0
2010 + 1.1 + 1.6 + 0.5 + 3.9 + 0.6 + 1.1 + 0.9 + 1.6 + 13.3 + 3.4 + 7.8 + 37.4 + 34.2
 
2009          Sep − 0.3 − 3.0 + 1.5 − 9.0 + 1.3 + 1.0 − 7.6 − 20.3 − 3.2 − 11.4 − 34.1 − 17.9
         Oct + 0.0 − 3.4 + 1.5 − 7.0 + 1.6 + 1.0 − 7.6 − 16.8 − 2.6 − 8.1 − 10.6 − 3.9
         Nov + 0.4 − 2.2 + 1.1 − 2.5 + 1.2 + 1.0 + 0.4 − 5.9 − 10.4 − 1.7 − 5.0 + 19.2 + 3.2
         Dec + 0.9 − 2.0 + 1.5 + 1.0 + 1.1 + 1.1 − 5.2 − 6.6 − 0.4 − 1.0 + 57.8 + 22.8
2010          Jan + 0.8 − 1.4 + 1.0 + 0.9 + 0.8 + 1.1 − 3.4 − 3.3 + 0.4 + 1.4 + 56.4 + 24.0
         Feb + 0.6 − 1.1 + 0.7 + 0.1 + 0.6 + 1.0 + 0.1 − 2.9 − 2.1 + 0.8 + 2.6 + 55.8 + 23.1
         Mar + 1.1 + 0.3 + 0.8 + 4.0 + 1.1 + 1.1 − 1.5 + 0.4 + 2.0 + 5.0 + 61.9 + 30.8
         Apr + 1.0 + 1.5 + 0.6 + 5.2 − 0.1 + 1.1 + 0.6 + 3.3 + 3.0 + 7.9 + 65.0 + 34.4
         May + 1.2 + 1.3 + 0.7 + 4.9 + 0.5 + 1.1 + 0.9 + 0.9 + 6.1 + 3.6 + 8.5 + 44.3 + 32.6
         June + 0.9 + 1.2 + 0.3 + 2.8 + 0.6 + 1.1 + 1.7 + 8.0 + 3.9 + 9.1 + 27.5 + 31.8
         July + 1.2 + 2.6 + 0.3 + 4.7 + 0.4 + 1.1 + 3.7 + 10.2 + 4.1 + 9.9 + 30.3 + 36.6
         Aug + 1.0 + 2.8 + 0.2 + 2.5 + 0.6 + 1.1 + 1.2 + 3.2 + 17.5 + 4.2 + 8.6 + 18.9 + 33.3
         Sep + 1.3 + 3.0 + 0.3 + 4.6 + 0.7 + 1.1 + 3.9 + 21.5 + 4.6 + 9.9 + 30.1 + 42.3
         Oct + 1.3 + 2.9 + 0.4 + 5.1 + 0.6 + 1.1 + 4.3 + 21.8 + 4.3 + 9.2 + 22.6 + 37.3
         Nov + 1.5 + 3.4 + 1.1 + 5.0 + 0.4 + 1.2 + 1.5 + 4.4 + 20.8 + 4.5 + 10.0 + 23.6 + 38.8
         Dec + 1.7 + 3.6 + 0.6 + 8.2 + 0.5 + 1.2 + 5.3 + 23.9 + 5.2 + 12.0 + 38.1 + 40.2
2011          Jan + 2.0 + 2.7 + 0.8 + 8.6 + 0.9 + 1.2 + 5.7 r + 23.9 + 5.4 + 11.8 + 36.1 + 41.7
         Feb + 2.1 + 3.4 + 0.7 + 10.2 + 1.0 + 1.3 + 2.5 + 6.4 r + 25.8 + 5.4 + 11.9 + 41.2 + 43.3
         Mar + 2.1 + 2.2 + 0.9 + 10.5 + 0.7 + 1.2 + 6.2 r + 24.9 + 4.9 + 11.3 + 40.4 + 31.5
         Apr + 2.4 + 1.4 + 1.1 + 10.5 + 2.1 + 1.2 + 6.4 r + 25.7 + 4.2 + 9.4 + 34.2 + 21.2
         May 11 + 2.3 + 2.7 + 1.2 + 9.5 + 1.1 + 1.2 + 2.9 + 6.1 r + 24.3 + 3.8 + 8.1 + 31.7 + 17.0
         June + 2.3 + 2.6 + 1.2 + 9.1 + 1.7 + 1.2 + 5.6 p + 21.2 + 3.4 + 6.5 + 27.2 + 13.5
         July + 2.4 + 2.1 + 1.4 + 10.6 + 1.6 + 1.2 ... ... ... ... + 36.7 + 13.6
Source: Federal Statistical Office; HWWI Index of World Market Prices. — October 2006, increase in the prices of tobacco products. — 9From January
1Electricity, gas and other fuels. — 2Bundesbank calculation based on data 2007, increase in the standard rate of value-added tax and in insurance tax
provided by the Federal Statistical Office. — 3Net rents. — 4Excluding from 16% to 19%. — 10Introduction of university tuition fees in some
value-added tax. — 5For the euro area, in euro. — 6Coal and crude oil. — federal states. — 11 From May 2011, increase in tobacco tax. 
7Food, beverages and tobacco as well as industrial raw materials. — 8From
66* X Economic conditions in Germany

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2011
X Economic conditions in Germany
  
8 Households’ income *
  
  
  
Gross wages and Net wages and Monetary social Saving
salaries  1 salaries  2 Mass income  4 Saving  6 ratio  7 benefits received  3 Disposable income  5 
Annual Annual Annual Annual Annual Annual
percent- percent- percent- percent- percent- percent-
age age age age age age
Period change change change change change change % € billion € billion € billion € billion € billion € billion
2003 908.3 0.0 589.0 − 0.5 378.3 2.9 967.2 0.8 1,431.8 2.1 147.2 5.6 10.3
2004 914.6 0.7 603.3 2.4 378.2 − 0.0 981.5 1.5 1,454.5 1.6 151.4 2.9 10.4
2005 912.1 − 0.3 602.4 − 0.2 378.6 0.1 981.0 − 0.1 1,481.0 1.8 155.6 2.7 10.5
2006 926.6 1.6 605.0 0.4 378.1 − 0.1 983.1 0.2 1,518.7 2.5 160.9 3.4 10.6
2007 957.6 3.3 622.8 2.9 373.3 − 1.3 996.1 1.3 1,545.8 1.8 166.8 3.7 10.8
2008 994.5 3.9 641.3 3.0 374.4 0.3 1,015.7 2.0 1,600.7 3.6 187.5 12.4 11.7
2009 992.4 − 0.2 639.2 − 0.3 403.3 7.7 1,042.5 2.6 1,587.8 − 0.8 176.8 − 5.7 11.1
2010 1,021.2 2.9 666.8 4.3 408.9 1.4 1,075.6 3.2 1,631.2 2.7 186.2 5.3 11.4
2009          Q4 273.3 − 0.7 175.7 − 0.1 100.7 7.9 276.4 2.7 403.3 − 0.6 38.9 − 7.8 9.6
2010          Q1 236.0 1.5 153.8 3.2 104.0 5.2 257.8 4.0 404.4 2.1 62.0 5.9 15.3
         Q2 247.6 3.1 158.6 5.0 102.4 0.9 261.0 3.3 403.3 2.0 44.5 6.6 11.0
         Q3 254.4 3.2 170.2 4.1 101.8 − 0.4 272.1 2.4 405.3 3.0 39.2 4.3 9.7
         Q4 283.2 3.6 184.1 4.8 100.6 − 0.1 284.7 3.0 418.3 3.7 40.5 4.2 9.7
2011          Q1 246.4 4.4 158.6 3.1 102.4 − 1.5 261.1 1.3 417.2 3.2 60.7 − 2.1 14.5
Source: Federal Statistical Office; figures computed in May 2011. — *House- plus monetary social benefits received. — 5Mass income plus operating
holds including non-profit institutions serving households. — 1Residence surplus, mixed income, property income (net), other current transfers
concept. — 2After deducting the wage tax payable on gross wages and received, income of non-profit institutions serving households, less taxes (ex-
salaries and employees’ contributions to the social security funds. — 3Social cluding wage tax and consumption-related taxes) and other current trans-
security benefits in cash from the social security funds, central, state and fers paid. Including the increase in claims on company pension funds. — 6In-
local government and foreign countries, pension payments (net), private cluding the increase in claims on company pension funds. — 7Saving as a
funded social benefits, less social contributions on social benefits, percentage of disposable income. 
consumption-related taxes and public charges. — 4Net wages and salaries
  
  
  
9 Pay rates (overall economy)
  
  
  
Index of negotiated wages 1 
on a monthly basis
Memo item:
Total excluding Wages and salaries
on an hourly basis Total one-off payments Basic pay rates  2 per employee  3 
Annual Annual Annual Annual Annual
Period percentage percentage percentage percentage percentage
2000 = 100 change 2000 = 100 change 2000 = 100 change 2000 = 100 change 2000 = 100 change
2003 106.7 2.0 106.6 2.0 106.8 2.1 106.9 2.4 104.5 1.3
2004 107.6 0.8 107.6 0.9 107.7 0.9 108.3 1.3 105.1 0.6
2005 108.6 0.9 108.7 1.1 108.7 0.9 109.4 1.0 105.4 0.3
2006 109.6 0.9 110.0 1.2 109.5 0.8 110.3 0.8 106.4 0.9
2007 110.9 1.2 111.4 1.3 111.1 1.4 111.9 1.4 108.0 1.5
2008 113.9 2.8 114.6 2.8 114.4 3.0 115.5 3.2 110.4 2.2
2009 116.3 2.1 116.9 2.0 117.0 2.3 118.2 2.4 110.2 − 0.2
2010 118.1 1.6 118.8 1.6 118.8 1.6 120.2 1.7 112.7 2.3
2010          Q1 109.6 1.8 110.3 1.8 110.4 2.1 119.7 2.2 105.9 1.9
         Q2 111.0 2.1 111.6 2.1 111.3 1.6 120.1 1.7 109.6 2.7
         Q3 120.2 1.1 120.9 1.1 121.1 1.3 120.4 1.5 111.9 2.2
         Q4 131.7 1.4 132.4 1.5 132.4 1.3 120.6 1.3 123.3 2.3
2011          Q1 111.5 1.7 112.1 1.7 111.8 1.2 120.9 1.1 108.8 2.8
         Q2 112.5 1.3 113.1 1.3 113.2 1.7 122.0 1.6 . .
2010          Dec 113.8 2.1 114.4 2.2 113.7 1.4 120.7 1.3 . .
2011          Jan 112.4 2.7 113.0 2.7 111.6 1.1 120.9 1.1 . .
         Feb 110.7 0.9 111.3 0.9 111.6 1.1 120.9 1.1 . .
         Mar 111.4 1.4 112.0 1.4 112.2 1.5 121.0 1.0 . .
         Apr 112.8 1.7 113.5 1.7 113.1 1.4 121.7 1.4 . .
         May 112.6 1.3 113.2 1.3 113.4 2.0 122.0 1.6 . .
         June 112.0 1.0 112.6 1.0 113.0 1.7 122.3 1.8 . .
1Current data are normally revised on account of additional reports. — (13 thmonthly salary payment) and retirement provisions). — 3Source:
2Excluding one-off payments and covenants (capital formation benefits, Federal Statistical Office; figures computed in May 2011. 
special payments, such as annual bonuses, holiday pay, Christmas bonuses
67*X Economic conditions in Germany

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
E U R O S Y S T E M
Monthly Report
August 2011
XI External sector
 
1 Major items of the balance of payments of the euro area *
 
 
€ million
2010 2011
Item 2008 2009 2010 Q3 Q4 Q1 Mar Apr May
Current account − 142,440 − 25,713 − 40,439 − 6,156 + 2,208 − 30,923 − 512 − 6,481 − 18,300 A
1 Goods
Exports (fob) 1,590,237 1,303,553 1,564,144 403,170 422,144 423,971 159,285 141,404 151,365
Imports (fob) 1,612,768 1,266,047 1,544,612 394,956 415,736 436,509 156,406 144,903 149,832
Balance − 22,530 + 37,506 + 19,534 + 8,215 + 6,408 − 12,538 + 2,879 − 3,500 + 1,533
2 Services
Receipts 514,449 473,937 516,054 138,497 135,382 123,001 42,798 40,920 44,681
Expenditure 473,340 440,170 474,925 123,881 124,965 115,998 41,095 37,929 40,286
Balance + 41,107 + 33,768 + 41,131 + 14,617 + 10,418 + 7,003 + 1,703 + 2,991 + 4,395
3 Income − 63,280 − 6,404 − 467 + 1,442 + 1,716 + 9,199 + 5,425 + 486 − 17,951
4 Current transfers
Transfers from non-residents 91,214 93,905 87,342 15,620 31,128 24,675 4,776 5,996 6,945
Transfers to non-residents 188,950 184,484 187,977 46,048 47,463 59,261 15,294 12,454 13,222
Balance − 97,739 − 90,581 − 100,637 − 30,429 − 16,335 − 34,588 − 10,518 − 6,458 − 6,277
Capital account + 9,243 + 6,565 + 6,616 + 1,015 + 1,437 + 3,047 − 115 + 65 + 515 B
Financial account (net capital exports: − + 141,476 + 9,977 + 46,574 + 3,882 + 1,288 + 12,755 − 707 + 2,023 + 16,576C)
1 Direct investment − 236,012 − 109,378 − 46,588 − 30,772 + 59,227 − 11,460 + 8,511 − 27,760 − 4,723
By resident units abroad − 328,779 − 325,268 − 140,996 − 28,148 + 18,401 − 65,898 − 24,109 − 41,322 − 8,763
By non-resident units in the euro area + 92,767 + 215,888 + 94,410 − 2,624 + 40,828 + 54,437 + 32,620 + 13,562 + 4,040
2 Portfolio investment + 283,263 + 270,688 + 135,177 − 17,058 + 33,608 + 133,258 + 68,074 + 47,769 + 57,234
By resident units abroad + 7,206 − 84,281 − 137,951 − 53,150 − 40,142 − 23,866 + 19,028 + 4,975 − 12,247
Equity + 98,025 − 46,825 − 77,046 − 10,627 − 38,751 + 3,434 + 1,514 − 13,560 − 8,529
Bonds and notes − 80,737 − 30,209 − 104,683 − 59,657 − 1,055 − 4,309 + 19,016 + 6,398 − 9,216
Money market instruments − 10,082 − 7,247 + 43,776 + 17,134 − 337 − 22,992 − 1,503 + 12,137 + 5,498
By non-resident units in the euro area + 276,057 + 354,966 + 273,128 + 36,092 + 73,750 + 157,124 + 49,046 + 42,794 + 69,481
Equity − 84,591 + 111,842 + 124,628 + 39,711 + 54,165 + 90,499 + 28,102 − 28,218 − 12,984
Bonds and notes + 177,761 + 123,263 + 145,250 − 37,394 + 44,082 + 15,947 + 12,215 + 71,366 + 51,148
Money market instruments + 182,890 + 119,862 + 3,252 + 33,776 − 24,496 + 50,677 + 8,729 − 355 + 31,317
3 Financial derivatives − 82,869 + 37,207 + 8,716 + 2,352 + 1,735 − 4,042 − 3,574 + 676 + 3,232
4 Other investment + 180,452 − 193,096 − 40,553 + 54,316 − 91,729 − 93,948 − 67,579 − 24,600 − 36,043
Eurosystem + 290,397 − 233,231 + 11,820 − 4,056 + 11,213 + 5,975 − 2,110 − 5,018 + 6,896
General government + 14,929 + 1,751 + 26,097 + 9,241 + 12,495 + 35,593 + 9,973 − 3,483 + 12,847
MFIs (excluding the Eurosystem) − 132,067 + 68,489 − 5,469 + 17,698 − 71,150 − 133,883 − 84,957 + 8,259 − 28,275
Long-term − 226,153 − 21,394 + 41,680 + 40,536 + 3,201 + 48,320 + 10,982 + 151 − 4,935
Short-term + 94,082 + 89,887 − 47,146 − 22,836 − 74,352 − 182,203 − 95,939 + 8,108 − 23,341
Other sectors + 7,198 − 30,105 − 73,001 + 31,432 − 44,287 − 1,633 + 9,515 − 24,358 − 27,510
5 Reserve assets (Increase: −) − 3,358 + 4,558 − 10,180 − 4,956 − 1,553 − 11,052 − 6,139 + 5,938 − 3,124
Errors and omissions − 8,281 + 9,170 − 12,754 + 1,257 − 4,933 + 15,121 + 1,334 + 4,393 + 1,210 D
* Source: European Central Bank.  
  
68*XI External sector

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2011
XI External sector
 
2 Major items of the balance of payments of the Federal Republic of Germany
(balances)
 
 
Current account Financial account Capital trans-
fers and
of which acquisition/
disposal of Change in
Supple- non- reserve assets
Balance mentary produced at trans- Errors
on current Foreign trade Current action and non-financial
Period account trade  1 items  2 Services  3 Income transfers assets Total  4 value  5 omissions
DM million
1997 − 17,336 + 116,467 − 7,875 − 68,692 − 4,740 − 52,496 + 52 + 6,671 + 6,640 + 10,613
1998 − 28,696 + 126,970 − 8,917 − 75,053 − 18,635 − 53,061 + 1,289 + 25,683 − 7,128 + 1,724
1999 − 25,177 + 65,211 − 8,153 − 46,035 − 11,415 − 24,785 − 154 − 10,396 + 12,535 + 35,726
2000 − 68,913 + 115,645 − 17,742 − 95,848 − 16,302 − 54,666 + 13,345 + 66,863 + 11,429 − 11,295
2001 + 830 + 186,771 − 14,512 − 97,521 − 21,382 − 52,526 − 756 − 23,068 + 11,797 + 22,994
€ million
1999 − 25,177 + 65,211 − 8,153 − 46,035 − 11,415 − 24,785 − 154 − 10,396 + 12,535 + 35,726
2000 − 35,235 + 59,128 − 9,071 − 49,006 − 8,335 − 27,950 + 6,823 + 34,187 + 5,844 − 5,775
2001 + 424 + 95,495 − 7,420 − 49,862 − 10,932 − 26,856 − 387 − 11,794 + 6,032 + 11,757
2002 + 42,973 + 132,788 − 8,552 − 35,728 − 18,019 − 27,517 − 212 − 38,448 + 2,065 − 4,313
2003 + 40,917 + 129,921 − 11,148 − 34,506 − 15,067 − 28,283 + 311 − 61,758 + 445 + 20,529
2004 + 102,833 + 156,096 − 16,470 − 29,375 + 20,431 − 27,849 + 435 − 122,984 + 1,470 + 19,717
2005 + 112,906 + 158,179 − 14,057 − 27,401 + 24,896 − 28,712 − 1,369 − 129,635 + 2,182 + 18,098
2006 + 144,999 + 159,048 − 12,888 − 17,346 + 44,893 − 28,708 − 258 − 175,474 + 2,934 + 30,732
2007 + 181,150 + 195,348 − 9,816 − 14,852 + 43,310 − 32,841 + 104 − 210,151 − 953 + 28,897
2008 + 154,833 + 178,297 − 14,058 − 11,585 + 35,565 − 33,386 − 215 − 160,196 − 2,008 + 5,577
2009 + 133,744 + 138,697 − 11,604 − 10,437 + 50,105 − 33,017 + 74 − 145,427 + 3,200 + 11,609
2010 + 141,105 + 154,473 − 11,415 − 8,349 + 44,483 − 38,086 − 637 − 131,660 − 1,613 − 8,808
2008          Q3 + 30,791 + 40,225 − 3,157 − 8,932 + 11,710 − 9,054 − 299 − 11,462 + 1,630 − 19,031
         Q4 + 37,045 + 33,972 − 3,977 + 1,529 + 12,613 − 7,092 − 661 − 43,830 − 1,584 + 7,446
2009          Q1 + 24,869 + 27,576 − 3,657 − 1,984 + 14,543 − 11,609 + 22 − 3,419 + 321 − 21,471
         Q2 + 26,201 + 34,119 − 2,666 − 2,973 + 3,742 − 6,021 + 291 − 49,965 + 41 + 23,473
         Q3 + 32,190 + 36,092 − 2,679 − 8,269 + 15,210 − 8,164 + 37 − 22,056 + 2,269 − 10,171
         Q4 + 50,485 + 40,910 − 2,603 + 2,789 + 16,610 − 7,222 − 276 − 69,987 + 569 + 19,778
2010          Q1 + 34,528 + 37,830 − 2,535 − 965 + 14,296 − 14,098 + 271 − 32,811 − 651 − 1,989
         Q2 + 28,534 + 37,408 − 2,835 − 2,596 + 3,131 − 6,573 − 443 − 31,734 − 801 + 3,643
         Q3 + 31,624 + 39,711 − 2,973 − 7,127 + 12,900 − 10,886 + 6 − 24,125 + 344 − 7,505
         Q4 + 46,418 + 39,524 − 3,072 + 2,339 + 14,156 − 6,529 − 472 − 42,989 − 506 − 2,957
2011          Q1  r + 35,335 + 40,807 − 4,402 − 217 + 13,293 − 14,146 + 912 − 53,786 − 1,393 + 17,540
         Q2  p + 27,570 + 38,306 − 3,478 − 2,326 + 675 − 5,607 − 253 − 22,397 − 438 − 4,920
2009          Jan + 4,004 + 7,404 − 1,390 − 1,910 + 3,845 − 3,946 − 57 + 16,328 + 2,245 − 20,275
         Feb + 8,308 + 8,770 − 1,046 − 92 + 4,985 − 4,309 − 85 − 2,693 − 271 − 5,529
         Mar + 12,556 + 11,401 − 1,221 + 18 + 5,712 − 3,354 + 165 − 17,054 − 1,652 + 4,333
         Apr + 7,432 + 10,066 − 774 + 147 + 709 − 2,715 + 313 − 9,810 − 590 + 2,065
         May + 6,088 + 10,327 − 1,031 − 335 − 2,171 − 703 + 101 − 8,738 + 342 + 2,549
         June + 12,680 + 13,726 − 860 − 2,785 + 5,203 − 2,603 − 123 − 31,416 + 288 + 18,858
         July + 12,894 + 15,592 − 978 − 3,813 + 4,661 − 2,568 + 24 − 3,788 − 92 − 9,130
         Aug + 7,503 + 8,999 − 959 − 2,985 + 5,433 − 2,985 − 10 − 8,514 + 743 + 1,021
         Sep + 11,792 + 11,501 − 743 − 1,471 + 5,116 − 2,611 + 23 − 9,753 + 1,618 − 2,062
         Oct + 11,383 + 12,466 − 591 − 1,195 + 5,619 − 4,916 − 249 − 23,201 − 651 + 12,067
         Nov + 16,586 + 15,962 − 1,485 + 379 + 5,525 − 3,794 + 91 − 22,777 + 1,522 + 6,100
         Dec + 22,516 + 12,482 − 526 + 3,605 + 5,466 + 1,488 − 117 − 24,010 − 302 + 1,611
2010          Jan + 5,554 + 8,094 − 1,038 − 1,499 + 4,526 − 4,528 + 64 + 13,557 − 55 − 19,175
         Feb + 10,196 + 12,745 − 286 − 17 + 4,637 − 6,882 + 430 − 17,923 − 782 + 7,296
         Mar + 18,778 + 16,991 − 1,210 + 551 + 5,133 − 2,687 − 223 − 28,445 + 187 + 9,890
         Apr + 11,993 + 13,178 − 816 + 390 + 1,479 − 2,239 − 200 − 9,518 − 116 − 2,275
         May + 3,113 + 9,905 − 1,289 − 1,166 − 2,827 − 1,510 − 53 − 8,748 − 671 + 5,688
         June + 13,429 + 14,325 − 730 − 1,820 + 4,478 − 2,824 − 190 − 13,468 − 14 + 230
         July + 10,364 + 13,623 − 1,263 − 2,721 + 4,435 − 3,710 + 420 + 19,207 + 20 − 29,992
         Aug + 5,726 + 9,175 − 955 − 3,158 + 4,229 − 3,566 − 112 − 18,532 + 119 + 12,918
         Sep + 15,534 + 16,913 − 756 − 1,249 + 4,236 − 3,610 − 302 − 24,801 + 205 + 9,569
         Oct + 13,984 + 14,298 − 644 − 826 + 4,734 − 3,577 − 221 + 2,909 + 234 − 16,672
         Nov + 13,551 + 13,065 − 1,051 + 892 + 4,699 − 4,053 − 169 − 19,376 + 81 + 5,994
         Dec + 18,883 + 12,161 − 1,376 + 2,273 + 4,723 + 1,102 − 81 − 26,523 − 820 + 7,721
2011          Jan  r + 7,040 + 10,108 − 1,356 − 1,191 + 3,543 − 4,065 + 542 − 4,351 − 182 − 3,230
         Feb + 8,702 + 11,928 − 1,088 + 350 + 4,623 − 7,111 + 528 − 20,612 − 23 + 11,382
         Mar  r + 19,593 + 18,771 − 1,958 + 624 + 5,126 − 2,971 − 158 − 28,823 − 1,188 + 9,388
         Apr  r + 8,993 + 10,822 − 1,186 − 729 + 1,805 − 1,720 − 177 − 14,569 − 563 + 5,753
         May + 6,658 + 14,788 − 904 − 449 − 5,763 − 1,015 − 65 − 12,894 + 24 + 6,300
         June  p + 11,919 + 12,696 − 1,389 − 1,148 + 4,632 − 2,872 − 12 + 5,066 + 101 − 16,974
1Special trade according to the official foreign trade statistics: imports cif, the account of residents and deduction of goods returned. — 3Excluding
exports fob. From January 2007 onwards, excluding supplies of goods the expenditure on freight and insurance included in the cif import
for/after repair/maintenance, which, up to December 2006, were deducted figure. — 4Financial account balance including change in reserve assets.
via supplementary trade items. — 2Inter alia warehouse transactions for Capital exports: − . — 5 Increase: − . 
69*XI External sector

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
E U R O S Y S T E M
Monthly Report
August 2011
XI External sector
 
3 Foreign trade (special trade) of the Federal Republic of Germany,
by country and group of countries *
 
 € million
 2011
Country / group of countries  2008  2009  2010 Jan  r Feb r Mar r Apr r May r Jun p 
All countries  1 Exports 984,140 803,312 951,899 78,646 84,067 98,180 84,253 92,164 88,311
Imports 805,842 664,615 797,426 68,538 72,139 79,409 73,431 77,376 75,615
Balance + 178,297 + 138,697 + 154,473 + 10,108 + 11,928 + 18,771 + 10,822 + 14,788 + 12,696
I Exports 733,092 585,826 682,376 56,716 60,014 70,403 60,793 65,490 ...European countries
Imports 567,062 463,721 552,976 45,616 49,807 56,228 50,942 54,086 ...
Balance + 166,031 + 122,105 + 129,400 + 11,099 + 10,207 + 14,175 + 9,851 + 11,404 ...
Exports 622,637 500,654 578,225 48,330 50,687 58,695 51,026 54,550 ... 1 EU member states (27)
Imports 460,887 380,323 455,896 36,640 40,609 45,967 41,451 43,959 ...
Balance + 161,750 + 120,331 + 122,329 + 11,690 + 10,078 + 12,728 + 9,575 + 10,591 ...
Euro-area (17) Exports 421,120 343,701 393,227 32,679 34,288 39,589 34,464 36,876 ...
countries Imports 315,410 258,729 307,730 24,543 27,439 31,003 27,956 29,749 ...
Balance + 105,710 + 84,972 + 85,497 + 8,136 + 6,849 + 8,586 + 6,509 + 7,127 ...
of which
Austria Exports 54,689 46,093 53,721 4,237 4,612 5,396 4,842 5,120 ...
Imports 33,180 27,565 34,315 2,612 2,948 3,498 3,164 3,332 ...
Balance + 21,509 + 18,528 + 19,406 + 1,625 + 1,664 + 1,898 + 1,678 + 1,788 ...
Belgium and Exports 55,230 46,262 52,165 4,279 4,535 5,079 4,355 4,777 ...
Luxembourg Imports 39,959 30,694 36,678 3,062 3,209 3,686 3,398 3,472 ...
Balance + 15,271 + 15,568 + 15,487 + 1,217 + 1,327 + 1,394 + 957 + 1,305 ...
France Exports 93,718 81,304 90,694 8,145 8,084 9,390 8,111 8,850 ...
Imports 63,369 53,338 61,751 4,593 5,579 5,989 4,878 6,064 ...
Balance + 30,349 + 27,966 + 28,943 + 3,552 + 2,505 + 3,401 + 3,232 + 2,785 ...
Italy Exports 62,015 50,620 58,477 4,820 5,099 6,158 5,140 5,455 ...
Imports 46,842 37,197 43,667 3,334 3,947 4,431 4,134 4,279 ...
Balance + 15,173 + 13,423 + 14,810 + 1,487 + 1,152 + 1,727 + 1,005 + 1,176 ...
Netherlands Exports 65,799 53,195 63,235 5,111 5,597 6,211 5,783 5,942 ...
Imports 67,971 55,583 68,767 5,924 6,450 7,178 6,946 6,996 ...
Balance − 2,172 − 2,388 − 5,532 − 813 − 853 − 967 − 1,163 − 1,054 ...
Spain Exports 42,676 31,281 34,381 2,805 2,926 3,406 2,807 3,128 ...
Imports 20,701 18,959 22,258 1,821 1,933 2,169 1,888 1,984 ...
Balance + 21,975 + 12,322 + 12,122 + 984 + 993 + 1,237 + 919 + 1,144 ...
Other EU member Exports 201,517 156,953 184,998 15,650 16,400 19,106 16,562 17,674 ...
states Imports 145,478 121,594 148,166 12,097 13,170 14,964 13,495 14,210 ...
Balance + 56,039 + 35,359 + 36,832 + 3,554 + 3,229 + 4,142 + 3,066 + 3,464 ...
of which
United Exports 64,175 53,240 59,487 5,107 5,395 6,234 5,042 5,479 ...
Kingdom Imports 41,646 32,452 38,594 3,263 3,443 4,023 3,610 3,639 ...
Balance + 22,529 + 20,787 + 20,894 + 1,844 + 1,952 + 2,210 + 1,432 + 1,840 ...
Exports 110,455 85,172 104,151 8,386 9,327 11,708 9,767 10,940 ... 2 Other European
Imports 106,174 83,398 97,080 8,976 9,198 10,261 9,491 10,127 ... countries
Balance + 4,281 + 1,774 + 7,071 − 590 + 129 + 1,447 + 276 + 813 ...
of which
Switzerland Exports 39,027 35,510 41,712 3,558 3,644 4,434 3,589 4,115 ...
Imports 31,299 28,096 32,485 2,752 2,814 3,237 2,709 3,235 ...
Balance + 7,728 + 7,414 + 9,227 + 806 + 830 + 1,197 + 881 + 880 ...
II Exports 249,199 216,466 276,825 21,865 24,018 27,685 23,424 26,472 ...Non-European
Imports 238,050 200,303 253,163 22,922 22,332 23,180 22,489 23,283 ... countries
Balance + 11,150 + 16,163 + 23,662 − 1,057 + 1,685 + 4,505 + 935 + 3,189 ...
Exports 19,636 17,412 20,033 1,595 1,639 1,801 1,620 1,741 ... 1 Africa
Imports 20,661 14,235 16,991 1,815 2,283 1,815 2,012 1,441 ...
Balance − 1,024 + 3,177 + 3,043 − 220 − 645 − 14 − 392 + 300 ...
Exports 101,866 78,727 99,924 7,788 8,749 9,780 8,386 9,417 ... 2 America
Imports 73,884 60,498 71,294 6,207 6,158 6,923 6,476 7,454 ...
Balance + 27,982 + 18,229 + 28,630 + 1,581 + 2,592 + 2,857 + 1,910 + 1,963 ...
of which
Exports 71,428 54,356 65,570 5,226 5,850 6,530 5,449 6,199 ... United States
Imports 46,464 39,283 45,063 3,861 3,967 4,249 3,914 4,527 ...
Balance + 24,965 + 15,074 + 20,507 + 1,366 + 1,883 + 2,280 + 1,535 + 1,671 ...
Exports 120,102 113,179 147,870 11,831 12,944 15,254 12,639 14,389 ... 3 Asia
Imports 140,585 122,823 161,776 14,629 13,632 14,098 13,572 14,048 ...
Balance − 20,483 − 9,644 − 13,906 − 2,798 − 688 + 1,156 − 933 + 341 ...
of which
Middle East Exports 27,498 23,598 28,126 1,920 2,171 2,398 2,048 2,241 ...
Imports 7,943 5,506 6,881 564 586 537 620 629 ...
Balance + 19,555 + 18,092 + 21,245 + 1,356 + 1,584 + 1,861 + 1,428 + 1,612 ...
Japan Exports 12,732 10,875 13,114 1,172 1,206 1,266 1,072 1,129 ...
Imports 23,130 18,946 22,065 1,977 1,754 2,225 1,950 1,900 ...
Balance − 10,398 − 8,071 − 8,951 − 805 − 547 − 959 − 878 − 772 ...
Exports 34,065 37,273 53,636 4,627 5,049 6,082 4,876 5,835 ... People‘s Republic
Imports 60,825 56,706 76,528 6,667 6,257 6,048 5,890 6,610 ... of China  2 
Balance − 26,760 − 19,434 − 22,892 − 2,040 − 1,208 + 34 − 1,014 − 776 ...
Exports 32,572 28,606 38,054 3,014 3,202 3,947 3,323 3,736 ... Emerging markets
Imports 33,152 28,338 39,025 3,719 3,388 3,432 3,129 3,297 ... in South-East Asia  3 
Balance − 580 + 268 − 971 − 706 − 186 + 515 + 194 + 438 ...
Exports 7,595 7,147 8,997 651 685 850 778 925 ... 4 Oceania and
Imports 2,920 2,747 3,102 270 259 343 429 340 ... polar regions
Balance + 4,674 + 4,401 + 5,895 + 381 + 426 + 507 + 349 + 585 ...
 
*Source: Federal Statistical Office. Exports (fob) by country of destination, the year 2010 the figures on “All countries” include revisions which have
imports (cif) by country of origin. Individual countries and groups of not yet been broken down by region. — 2Excluding Hong Kong. —
countries according to the current position. — 1Including fuel and other 3Brunei Darussalam, Hong Kong, Indonesia, Malaysia, Philippines,
supplies for ships and aircraft and other data not classifiable by region. For Republic of Korea, Singapore, Taiwan and Thailand. 
70*XI External sector

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2011
XI External sector
 
4 Services and income of the Federal Republic of Germany
(balances)
 
€ million
Services
Other services
of which
 
Patents Compen- Services  of Construction
Trans- Financial and sation of Investment Government self-employed and  assembly
Period Total Travel  1 services licences Total income portation  2 services  3 persons  4 work,  repairs employees  5 
2006 − 17,346 − 32,771 + 5,723 + 2,232 − 1,895 + 3,736 + 5,629 − 1,790 + 3,980 − 773 + 45,666
2007 − 14,852 − 34,324 + 6,756 + 2,801 − 2,016 + 3,309 + 8,622 − 1,964 + 3,197 + 252 + 43,058
2008 − 11,585 − 34,718 + 8,300 + 4,106 − 1,337 + 2,372 + 9,691 − 1,648 + 3,145 + 463 + 35,103
2009 − 10,437 − 33,341 + 6,873 + 3,848 + 804 + 2,369 + 9,011 − 1,256 + 2,563 − 126 + 50,231
2010 − 8,349 − 32,778 + 7,056 + 3,709 + 992 + 2,470 + 10,202 − 1,155 + 2,887 − 269 + 44,751
2009          Q4 + 2,789 − 5,750 + 1,478 + 1,533 + 1,504 + 494 + 3,529 − 313 + 1,012 − 509 + 17,119
2010          Q1 − 965 − 5,171 + 1,497 + 920 + 112 + 608 + 1,068 − 246 + 584 + 443 + 13,853
         Q2 − 2,596 − 8,514 + 2,038 + 663 + 438 + 595 + 2,184 − 267 + 716 + 294 + 2,837
         Q3 − 7,127 − 13,252 + 1,910 + 1,033 − 289 + 596 + 2,875 − 329 + 649 − 584 + 13,484
         Q4 + 2,339 − 5,841 + 1,611 + 1,093 + 731 + 671 + 4,075 − 313 + 938 − 423 + 14,578
2011          Q1 − 217 − 5,563 + 1,402 + 709 − 141 + 596 + 2,781 − 248 + 618 + 410 + 12,883
         Q2 − 2,326 − 8,180 + 2,165 + 800 + 346 + 675 + 1,868 − 248 + 659 + 291 + 384
2010          Aug − 3,158 − 5,280 + 702 + 450 + 179 + 201 + 591 − 72 + 148 − 197 + 4,427
         Sep − 1,249 − 3,967 + 518 + 294 − 43 + 223 + 1,727 − 104 + 260 − 192 + 4,428
         Oct − 826 − 3,176 + 496 + 239 − 75 + 213 + 1,479 − 88 + 261 − 164 + 4,898
         Nov + 892 − 1,640 + 550 + 330 + 197 + 271 + 1,184 − 101 + 375 − 185 + 4,884
         Dec + 2,273 − 1,025 + 565 + 525 + 609 + 187 + 1,412 − 124 + 302 − 74 + 4,796
2011          Jan − 1,191 − 1,994 + 411 + 391 − 198 + 187 + 13 − 87 + 150 + 131 + 3,413
         Feb + 350 − 1,486 + 489 + 64 + 244 + 194 + 845 − 64 + 264 + 130 + 4,494
         Mar + 624 − 2,083 + 502 + 253 − 187 + 215 + 1,924 − 97 + 204 + 150 + 4,977
         Apr − 729 − 1,830 + 645 + 301 + 86 + 229 − 160 − 47 + 235 + 94 + 1,711
         May − 449 − 2,576 + 783 + 291 + 313 + 234 + 506 − 117 + 196 + 102 − 5,864
         June − 1,148 − 3,774 + 737 + 208 − 53 + 212 + 1,522 − 84 + 227 + 96 + 4,537
1From January 2001, figures subject to significant uncertainty. — 2Ex- vices supplied. — 4Engineering and other technical services, research and
cluding the expenditure on freight included in the cif import figure. — development, commercial services, etc. — 5 Wages and salaries. 
3Including the receipts from foreign military agencies for goods and ser-
5 Current transfers of the Federal Republic of Germany 6 Capital transfers
(balances) (balances)
€ million € million
Public  1 Private  1 
International
organisations  2 
 
of which Other Other
European current Workers’ current
Period Total Total Total Communities Total remittances transfers Total  4 Public  1 Private  1 transfers  3 
2006 − 28,708 − 15,998 − 16,404 − 14,850 + 406 − 12,710 − 2,927 − 9,783 − 258 − 1,947 + 1,689
2007 − 32,841 − 17,393 − 19,331 − 17,548 + 1,939 − 15,448 − 2,997 − 12,451 + 104 − 2,034 + 2,138
2008 − 33,386 − 17,003 − 18,741 − 16,645 + 1,738 − 16,384 − 3,079 − 13,304 − 215 − 1,857 + 1,642
2009 − 33,017 − 18,830 − 19,044 − 16,603 + 214 − 14,187 − 2,995 − 11,192 + 74 − 1,704 + 1,778
2010 − 38,086 − 22,960 − 22,607 − 19,542 − 353 − 15,126 − 3,035 − 12,092 − 637 − 2,044 + 1,407
2009          Q4 − 7,222 − 3,744 − 2,785 − 2,216 − 959 − 3,478 − 749 − 2,729 − 276 − 633 + 357
2010          Q1 − 14,098 − 10,921 − 10,086 − 8,986 − 835 − 3,177 − 759 − 2,418 + 271 − 402 + 673
         Q2 − 6,573 − 2,298 − 4,393 − 3,771 + 2,095 − 4,275 − 759 − 3,516 − 443 − 403 − 40
         Q3 − 10,886 − 7,168 − 6,457 − 5,662 − 711 − 3,718 − 759 − 2,960 + 6 − 425 + 431
         Q4 − 6,529 − 2,573 − 1,670 − 1,123 − 903 − 3,956 − 759 − 3,197 − 472 − 815 + 343
2011          Q1 − 14,146 − 10,553 − 9,872 − 8,949 − 682 − 3,593 − 744 − 2,849 + 912 − 405 + 1,317
         Q2 − 5,607 − 1,058 − 4,859 − 4,257 + 3,801 − 4,550 − 744 − 3,806 − 253 − 425 + 171
2010          Aug − 3,566 − 2,399 − 2,066 − 1,673 − 332 − 1,167 − 253 − 914 − 112 − 129 + 17
         Sep − 3,610 − 2,368 − 2,277 − 2,061 − 91 − 1,243 − 253 − 990 − 302 − 149 − 153
         Oct − 3,577 − 2,716 − 2,335 − 2,085 − 381 − 862 − 253 − 609 − 221 − 177 − 45
         Nov − 4,053 − 2,758 − 2,271 − 2,145 − 487 − 1,296 − 253 − 1,043 − 169 − 202 + 33
         Dec + 1,102 + 2,901 + 2,935 + 3,108 − 35 − 1,799 − 253 − 1,546 − 81 − 436 + 355
2011          Jan − 4,065 − 2,943 − 2,904 − 2,415 − 39 − 1,122 − 248 − 874 + 542 − 122 + 664
         Feb − 7,111 − 5,882 − 5,439 − 5,128 − 443 − 1,229 − 248 − 981 + 528 − 108 + 636
         Mar − 2,971 − 1,729 − 1,529 − 1,406 − 200 − 1,242 − 248 − 994 − 158 − 175 + 17
         Apr − 1,720 − 590 − 1,637 − 1,272 + 1,046 − 1,130 − 248 − 882 − 177 − 128 − 49
         May − 1,015 + 1,061 − 1,666 − 1,562 + 2,727 − 2,076 − 248 − 1,828 − 65 − 141 + 76
         June − 2,872 − 1,529 − 1,556 − 1,423 + 27 − 1,344 − 248 − 1,096 − 12 − 155 + 143
1The classification of “public” and “private” transfers depends on the (excluding capital transfers). — 3Payments to developing countries, pension
sector to which the participating domestic body belongs. — 2Current contri- payments, tax revenue and refunds, etc. — 4Where identifiable; in
butions to the budgets of international organisations and to the EU budget particular, debt forgiveness. 
71*XI External sector

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
E U R O S Y S T E M
Monthly Report
August 2011
XI External sector
 
7 Financial account of the Federal Republic of Germany
 
 
€ million
2010 2011
Item 2008 2009 2010 Q3 Q4 Q1 Q2 Apr May June
I Net German investment abroad
(Increase/capital exports: −) − 200,157 − 10,911 − 390,498 − 78,073 − 95,084 − 50,553 − 65,668 − 66,279 − 50,421 + 51,033
1 Direct investment  1 − 52,663 − 56,292 − 79,172 + 9,117 − 11,270 − 26,355 + 1,690 − 3,459 − 2,078 + 7,227
Equity capital − 52,227 − 51,427 − 41,956 + 638 − 11,525 − 6,874 − 7,575 − 1,881 − 3,456 − 2,238
Reinvested earnings  2 + 17,073 − 22,735 − 23,470 − 7,992 − 5,058 − 9,236 − 6,456 − 3,144 − 1,531 − 1,781
Other capital transactions
of German direct investors − 17,508 + 17,871 − 13,745 + 16,471 + 5,312 − 10,245 + 15,720 + 1,566 + 2,909 + 11,246
2 Portfolio investment + 25,099 − 69,144 − 171,328 − 24,915 − 115,741 − 20,714 − 13,759 − 9,061 − 9,903 + 5,205
Shares 3 + 39,133 − 2,821 + 173 + 2,793 − 2,285 + 4,793 − 8,389 − 1,626 − 4,123 − 2,640
Mutual fund shares  4 − 7,600 + 1,775 − 21,753 − 7,721 − 3,190 − 2,916 − 1,388 − 3,339 + 1,418 + 533
Bonds and notes  5 − 24,151 − 81,203 − 156,134 − 17,250 − 115,902 − 19,965 + 3,688 + 3,225 − 4,365 + 4,827
Money market instruments + 17,717 + 13,105 + 6,387 − 2,738 + 5,636 − 2,626 − 7,670 − 7,322 − 2,833 + 2,486
3 Financial derivatives  6 − 30,235 + 12,368 − 17,608 − 7,898 + 267 − 11,474 − 5,528 + 2,584 − 7,614 − 498
4 Other investment − 140,350 + 98,957 − 120,777 − 54,720 + 32,166 + 9,383 − 47,633 − 55,780 − 30,850 + 38,997
MFIs  7,8 − 71,888 + 176,553 + 138,535 + 41,677 + 96,260 + 34,446 − 21,903 − 70,989 + 3,112 + 45,974
Long-term − 142,271 + 25,779 + 77,701 + 29,327 + 26,615 + 5,073 + 2,132 − 412 + 2,551 − 7
Short-term + 70,382 + 150,774 + 60,833 + 12,350 + 69,645 + 29,373 − 24,035 − 70,577 + 561 + 45,981
Enterprises and households − 26,758 − 18,390 − 50,612 − 34,893 + 4,289 − 26,714 − 7,147 − 340 − 19,197 + 12,391
Long-term − 23,572 − 22,263 − 39,834 − 13,769 − 7,214 − 9,599 + 176 − 2,574 − 8,100 + 10,850
Short-term  7 − 3,187 + 3,872 − 10,779 − 21,124 + 11,503 − 17,115 − 7,323 + 2,233 − 11,097 + 1,541
General government + 2,896 + 2,061 − 61,067 − 942 − 52,494 − 675 − 5,273 + 1,427 − 231 − 6,469
Long-term − 238 − 596 − 52,757 + 656 − 41,371 + 1,777 + 1,123 + 466 + 406 + 251
Short-term  7 + 3,135 + 2,657 − 8,309 − 1,598 − 11,122 − 2,452 − 6,395 + 961 − 637 − 6,720
Bundesbank − 44,600 − 61,267 − 147,633 − 60,563 − 15,890 + 2,325 − 13,311 + 14,122 − 14,534 − 12,899
5 Change in reserve assets at
transaction values (Increase: −) − 2,008 + 3,200 − 1,613 + 344 − 506 − 1,393 − 438 − 563 + 24 + 101
II Net foreign investment in Germany
(Increase/capital imports: +) + 39,962 − 134,516 + 258,838 + 53,947 + 52,095 − 3,234 + 43,271 + 51,710 + 37,528 − 45,967
1 Direct investment  1 + 2,879 + 27,085 + 34,833 + 7,947 + 10,267 + 1,806 + 2,856 + 1,799 − 1,481 + 2,537
Equity capital + 22,800 + 8,528 + 7,955 + 3,862 − 212 − 1,513 + 714 + 382 + 467 − 134
Reinvested earnings  2 − 21,491 + 1,389 + 5,303 + 3,130 + 343 + 3,911 − 438 + 672 − 1,187 + 77
Other capital transactions
of foreign direct investors + 1,571 + 17,168 + 21,575 + 955 + 10,137 − 592 + 2,579 + 745 − 761 + 2,595
2 Portfolio investment + 26,328 − 13,571 + 46,408 + 32,037 + 8,003 + 47,794 + 72,536 + 1,790 + 59,739 + 11,007
Shares  3 − 34,734 + 2,334 − 4,073 + 1,989 − 2,089 − 4,920 + 11,613 − 17,594 + 14,489 + 14,719
Mutual fund shares − 8,715 + 5,406 + 2,408 − 504 + 1,160 + 2,399 + 863 − 73 + 1,733 − 798
Bonds and notes  5 + 29,841 − 71,690 + 48,308 + 21,537 − 7,321 + 32,448 + 38,346 + 12,838 + 25,361 + 147
Money market instruments + 39,935 + 50,379 − 235 + 9,015 + 16,253 + 17,866 + 21,715 + 6,620 + 18,155 − 3,061
3 Other investment + 10,755 − 148,031 + 177,597 + 13,964 + 33,824 − 52,834 − 32,121 + 48,120 − 20,730 − 59,511
MFIs  7,8 − 57,268 − 114,873 + 76,198 + 745 − 49,228 − 39,262 − 30,494 + 51,150 − 22,241 − 59,403
Long-term + 12,805 − 23,849 − 5,855 − 2,417 − 640 − 3,597 − 6,903 − 3,029 − 149 − 3,724
Short-term − 70,073 − 91,024 + 82,052 + 3,162 − 48,588 − 35,666 − 23,592 + 54,179 − 22,092 − 55,679
Enterprises and households + 47,437 − 6,087 + 2,683 + 9,159 − 6,861 − 3,860 + 4,014 + 2,746 + 2,299 − 1,032
Long-term + 26,991 + 1,773 − 5,173 − 2,014 − 2,679 − 5,685 − 6,137 − 3,992 − 518 − 1,626
Short-term  7 + 20,445 − 7,860 + 7,856 + 11,174 − 4,182 + 1,825 + 10,151 + 6,739 + 2,818 + 595
General government + 6,235 − 5,290 + 93,198 + 4,230 + 86,286 − 8,670 − 2,786 − 4,233 − 342 + 1,789
Long-term − 1,161 − 2,013 − 232 + 101 + 299 + 243 − 626 − 243 − 203 − 180
Short-term  7 + 7,396 − 3,276 + 93,430 + 4,129 + 85,987 − 8,913 − 2,161 − 3,991 − 139 + 1,969
Bundesbank + 14,351 − 21,782 + 5,518 − 170 + 3,627 − 1,042 − 2,854 − 1,543 − 446 − 865
III Financial account balance  9 
(Net capital exports: −) − 160,196 − 145,427 − 131,660 − 24,125 − 42,989 − 53,786 − 22,397 − 14,569 − 12,894 + 5,066
1From 1996, new definition for direct investment. — 2Estimated. — action values shown here are mostly derived from changes in stocks. Purely
3Including participation rights. — 4From 1991, including retained statistical changes have been eliminated as far as possible. — 8Excluding
earnings. — 5From 1975, excluding accrued interest. — 6Options, whether the Deutsche Bundesbank. — 9Financial account balance including change
evidenced by securities or not, and financial futures contracts. — 7The trans- in reserve assets. 
72*XI External sector

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2011
XI External sector
 
8 External position of the Bundesbank up to end-1998 *
 
 
DM million
Reserve assets and other claims on non-residents Liabilities vis-à-vis non-residents
Reserve assets
Reserve
position
in the
Inter- Liabilities
national arising Net Liabilities
Monetary arising from external
Fund and Claims Loans and from liquidity position
Foreign special on the external Treasury (col 1 other claims
End of year currency drawing ECB  2 on non- trans- discount less
or month Total Total Gold rights (net) Total paper col 8) balances  1 residents  3 actions  4 
1234567891 0 1 1
1996 120,985 119,544 13,688 72,364 11,445 22,048 1,441 15,604 15,604 − 105,381
1997 127,849 126,884 13,688 76,673 13,874 22,649 966 16,931 16,931 − 110,918
1998 135,085 134,005 17,109 100,363 16,533 − 1,079 15,978 15,978 − 119,107
*Valuation of the gold holdings and the claims on non-residents in Monetary Cooperation Fund (EMCF)). — 3Including loans to the World
accordance with section 26 (2) of the Bundesbank Act and the provisions of Bank. — 4Including liquidity paper sold to non-residents by the
the Commercial Code, especially section 253. In the course of the year, Bundesbank; excluding the liquidity Treasury discount paper sold to
valuation at the preceding year’s balance sheet rates. — 1Mainly US dollar non-residents between March 1993 and March 1995, as shown in column 10. 
assets. — 2European Central Bank (up to 1993, claims on the European
 
 
 
9 External position of the Bundesbank in European monetary union o
€ million
Reserve assets and other claims on non-residents
Reserve assets
Reserve
position
Other in the Inter-
national claims on Net
Monetary Other residents external
Fund and claims on Claims in other position
Gold special Foreign non-euro- within the euro-area (col 1 Liabilities
End of year and gold drawing currency area Eurosystem member less vis-à-vis non-
or month Total Total rights reserves (net)  2 states col 9) receivables residents  1,3 residents  3,4 
1234567891 0
1999          Jan  5 95,316 93,940 29,312 8,461 56,167 140 1,225 11 8,169 87,146
1999 141,958 93,039 32,287 8,332 52,420 9,162 39,746 11 6,179 135,779
2000 100,762 93,815 32,676 7,762 53,377 313 6,620 14 6,592 94,170
2001 76,147 93,215 35,005 8,721 49,489 312 − 17,385 5 8,752 67,396
2002 103,948 85,002 36,208 8,272 40,522 312 18,466 167 9,005 94,942
2003 95,394 76,680 36,533 7,609 32,538 312 17,945 456 10,443 84,951
2004 93,110 71,335 35,495 6,548 29,292 312 20,796 667 7,935 85,175
2005 130,268 86,181 47,924 4,549 33,708 350 42,830 906 6,285 123,983
2006 104,389 84,765 53,114 3,011 28,640 350 18,344 931 4,819 99,570
2007 179,492 92,545 62,433 2,418 27,694 350 84,064 2,534 16,005 163,488
2008 230,775 99,185 68,194 3,285 27,705 350 128,668 2,573 30,169 200,607
2009 323,286 125,541 83,939 15,969 25,634 350 189,936 7,460 9,126 314,160
2010 524,695 162,100 115,403 18,740 27,957 50 337,869 24,676 14,620 510,075
2010          Apr 377,729 142,021 96,677 17,290 28,054 50 225,677 9,982 11,833 365,897
         May 444,480 157,385 108,045 18,854 30,486 50 267,464 19,580 13,024 431,455
         June 444,756 160,629 110,727 19,039 30,863 50 261,416 22,662 11,220 433,536
         July 452,125 145,637 98,074 18,507 29,056 50 283,223 23,216 11,557 440,569
         Aug 473,073 155,245 106,417 18,798 30,030 50 294,597 23,181 10,910 462,163
         Sep 496,333 150,758 105,059 18,188 27,511 50 321,979 23,547 10,995 485,338
         Oct 472,762 150,481 105,507 17,972 27,002 50 298,661 23,569 12,729 460,032
         Nov 497,807 162,835 115,698 18,397 28,740 50 311,444 23,479 11,281 486,526
         Dec 524,695 162,100 115,403 18,740 27,957 50 337,869 24,676 14,620 510,075
2011          Jan 492,995 152,428 106,493 18,667 27,268 50 314,944 25,574 13,719 479,276
         Feb 515,777 156,964 111,426 18,532 27,005 50 333,010 25,754 12,100 503,677
         Mar 516,360 155,718 110,136 19,253 26,329 50 335,543 25,049 13,569 502,791
         Apr 502,690 157,344 112,655 18,818 25,871 50 321,422 23,875 12,011 490,679
         May 522,887 162,854 116,831 19,202 26,821 50 335,955 24,028 11,566 511,322
         June 531,716 159,745 114,087 19,098 26,560 50 348,854 23,067 10,700 521,016
         July 549,738 170,639 123,740 19,901 26,998 50 355,977 23,072 12,077 537,661
oClaims and liabilities vis-à-vis all countries within and outside the euro November 2000, including the TARGET positions which were previously
area. Up to December 2000, the levels at the end of each quarter are shown, shown (in columns 6 and 9) as bilateral assets and liabilities vis-à-vis national
owing to revaluations, at market prices; within each quarter, however, the central banks outside the Eurosystem. — 3See footnote 2. — 4Excluding
levels are computed on the basis of cumulative transaction values. From allocations of special drawing rights (SDR) by the International Monetary
January 2001, all end-of-month levels are valued at market prices. — Fund (IMF) for an amount of SDR 12,059 million. — 5Euro opening balance
1Including loans to the World Bank. — 2Including the balances in the sheet of the Bundesbank as at 1 January 1999. 
Bundesbank’s cross-border payments within the Eurosystem. From
73*XI External sector

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
E U R O S Y S T E M
Monthly Report
August 2011
XI External sector
 
10 Assets and liabilities of enterprises in Germany (other than banks)
vis-à-vis non-residents *
 
€ million
Claims on non-residents Liabilities vis-à-vis non-residents
Claims on foreign non-banks Liabilities  vis-à-vis foreign non-banks
from trade credits from trade credits
Balances Loans
with from Credit Advance from from Credit Advance
End of year foreign financial terms payments foreign financial terms payments
or month Total banks Total Total granted effected Total banks Total Total used received operations operations
All countries
 
2007 509,178 162,654 346,524 196,178 150,346 139,842 10,504 650,966 111,543 539,423 404,904 134,519 82,979 51,540
2008 553,465 173,255 380,210 227,055 153,155 140,520 12,635 707,704 147,242 560,462 424,211 136,251 79,980 56,271
2009 593,591 209,729 383,862 240,727 143,135 130,605 12,530 754,355 159,667 594,688 457,468 137,220 80,759 56,461
2010 670,695 242,028 428,667 272,426 156,241 143,032 13,209 804,695 159,601 645,094 498,310 146,784 88,288 58,496
2011          Jan 692,921 262,346 430,575 274,046 156,529 140,978 15,551 810,133 161,551 648,582 502,425 146,157 84,387 61,770
         Feb 692,112 253,345 438,767 275,156 163,611 148,044 15,567 800,105 156,466 643,639 495,967 147,672 85,043 62,629
         Mar 698,653 244,947 453,706 286,702 167,004 151,699 15,305 805,282 151,778 653,504 502,145 151,359 88,337 63,022
         Apr 696,810 245,892 450,918 284,647 166,271 150,763 15,508 811,012 153,508 657,504 506,775 150,729 86,431 64,298
         May 718,924 258,838 460,086 291,826 168,260 152,515 15,745 819,831 155,596 664,235 513,556 150,679 85,337 65,342
         June 708,789 258,103 450,686 281,190 169,496 153,825 15,671 831,722 157,780 673,942 522,016 151,926 86,973 64,953
Industrial countries 1
 
2007 452,354 160,666 291,688 180,564 111,124 103,104 8,020 590,245 110,291 479,954 384,024 95,930 69,347 26,583
2008 489,430 171,387 318,043 207,807 110,236 101,002 9,234 643,652 145,045 498,607 402,020 96,587 68,148 28,439
2009 531,796 208,571 323,225 220,778 102,447 93,566 8,881 684,984 157,343 527,641 431,525 96,116 68,912 27,204
2010 598,167 240,915 357,252 249,497 107,755 98,428 9,327 723,154 157,032 566,122 464,105 102,017 73,987 28,030
2011          Jan 620,797 261,226 359,571 250,880 108,691 97,001 11,690 728,133 158,983 569,150 468,599 100,551 69,707 30,844
         Feb 618,218 252,260 365,958 251,747 114,211 102,555 11,656 718,901 153,899 565,002 462,532 102,470 71,262 31,208
         Mar 622,598 243,569 379,029 262,884 116,145 104,506 11,639 722,932 149,238 573,694 467,684 106,010 74,105 31,905
         Apr 619,487 244,734 374,753 260,065 114,688 102,907 11,781 728,238 151,125 577,113 472,222 104,891 72,242 32,649
         May 640,601 257,640 382,961 266,647 116,314 104,150 12,164 737,988 153,218 584,770 479,695 105,075 71,852 33,223
         June 630,725 256,817 373,908 255,877 118,031 105,863 12,168 749,820 155,366 594,454 487,851 106,603 73,664 32,939
EU member states 1
 
2007 364,105 154,644 209,461 127,080 82,381 75,942 6,439 489,234 105,022 384,212 318,769 65,443 46,262 19,181
2008 398,833 164,762 234,071 151,391 82,680 75,192 7,488 536,351 137,208 399,143 331,498 67,645 46,188 21,457
2009 443,431 200,400 243,031 165,986 77,045 70,051 6,994 579,596 141,633 437,963 367,980 69,983 48,977 21,006
2010 494,360 230,746 263,614 184,862 78,752 71,525 7,227 615,655 148,327 467,328 395,566 71,762 50,035 21,727
2011          Jan 516,901 250,221 266,680 186,587 80,093 70,465 9,628 620,724 151,016 469,708 397,705 72,003 47,397 24,606
         Feb 516,231 242,234 273,997 188,797 85,200 75,582 9,618 613,752 146,864 466,888 392,439 74,449 49,531 24,918
         Mar 517,530 232,896 284,634 198,253 86,381 76,842 9,539 616,340 141,104 475,236 398,178 77,058 51,576 25,482
         Apr 516,479 234,048 282,431 197,082 85,349 75,711 9,638 621,671 143,439 478,232 402,600 75,632 49,441 26,191
         May 536,675 246,676 289,999 203,907 86,092 76,343 9,749 629,953 145,459 484,494 408,972 75,522 48,923 26,599
         June 527,918 246,356 281,562 194,117 87,445 77,673 9,772 640,902 147,106 493,796 416,538 77,258 50,922 26,336
of which:  Euro-area member states 2
 
2007 251,718 118,112 133,606 79,745 53,861 49,537 4,324 367,318 56,632 310,686 269,095 41,591 28,964 12,627
2008 281,518 130,226 151,292 96,968 54,324 49,408 4,916 415,221 81,703 333,518 290,093 43,425 29,768 13,657
2009 321,991 159,740 162,251 114,378 47,873 43,179 4,694 466,064 91,792 374,272 332,280 41,992 28,397 13,595
2010 366,774 184,299 182,475 130,430 52,045 47,239 4,806 494,943 95,687 399,256 351,352 47,904 33,444 14,460
2011          Jan 382,619 198,108 184,511 130,629 53,882 47,870 6,012 495,203 94,767 400,436 352,951 47,485 31,853 15,632
         Feb 378,880 189,390 189,490 132,081 57,409 51,403 6,006 493,557 94,236 399,321 350,174 49,147 33,248 15,899
         Mar 384,470 183,763 200,707 142,592 58,115 52,164 5,951 494,474 90,991 403,483 352,111 51,372 35,014 16,358
         Apr 383,318 185,118 198,200 140,424 57,776 51,820 5,956 498,473 93,258 405,215 355,135 50,080 33,472 16,608
         May 401,448 195,688 205,760 147,119 58,641 52,611 6,030 508,198 96,187 412,011 361,143 50,868 33,911 16,957
         June 394,643 192,988 201,655 141,579 60,076 54,085 5,991 518,130 97,430 420,700 368,894 51,806 35,021 16,785
Emerging economies and developing countries 3
 
2007 56,824 1,988 54,836 15,614 39,222 36,738 2,484 60,721 1,252 59,469 20,880 38,589 13,632 24,957
2008 64,035 1,868 62,167 19,248 42,919 39,518 3,401 64,052 2,197 61,855 22,191 39,664 11,832 27,832
2009 61,795 1,158 60,637 19,949 40,688 37,039 3,649 69,371 2,324 67,047 25,943 41,104 11,847 29,257
2010 72,528 1,113 71,415 22,929 48,486 44,604 3,882 81,541 2,569 78,972 34,205 44,767 14,301 30,466
2011          Jan 72,124 1,120 71,004 23,166 47,838 43,977 3,861 82,000 2,568 79,432 33,826 45,606 14,680 30,926
         Feb 73,894 1,085 72,809 23,409 49,400 45,489 3,911 81,204 2,567 78,637 33,435 45,202 13,781 31,421
         Mar 76,055 1,378 74,677 23,818 50,859 47,193 3,666 82,350 2,540 79,810 34,461 45,349 14,232 31,117
         Apr 77,323 1,158 76,165 24,582 51,583 47,856 3,727 82,774 2,383 80,391 34,553 45,838 14,189 31,649
         May 78,323 1,198 77,125 25,179 51,946 48,365 3,581 81,843 2,378 79,465 33,861 45,604 13,485 32,119
         June 78,064 1,286 76,778 25,313 51,465 47,962 3,503 81,902 2,414 79,488 34,165 45,323 13,309 32,014
* Up to and including November 2009 the assets and liabilities vis-à-vis Romania. — 2From January 2007, including Slovenia; from January 2008,
non-residents of households in Germany. The assets and liabilities vis-à-vis including Cyprus and Malta; from January 2009, including Slovakia; from
non-residents of banks (MFIs) in Germany are shown in Table 4 of Section IV, January 2011 including Estonia. — 3All countries that are not regarded as
“Banks”. Statistical increases and decreases have not been eliminated; to industrial countries. Up to December 2010 including Niederländische
this extent, the changes in totals are not comparable with the figures Antillen; from January 2011 including Bonaire, St.Eustatius, Saba and
shown in Table XI.7. — 1From January 2007, including Bulgaria and Curacao and St.Martin (Dutch part). 
74*XI External sector

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2011
XI External sector
 
11 ECB euro reference exchange rates of selected currencies *
 
 
EUR 1 = currency units ...
Yearly Australia Canada China Denmark Japan Norway Sweden Switzerland United States United Kingdom
or monthly       
average AUD CAD CNY  1 DKK JPY NOK SEK CHF GBP USD
1999 1.6523 1.5840 . 7.4355 121.32 8.3104 8.8075 1.6003 0.65874 1.0658
2000 1.5889 1.3706 2 7.6168 7.4538 99.47 8.1129 8.4452 1.5579 0.60948 0.9236
2001 1.7319 1.3864 7.4131 7.4521 108.68 8.0484 9.2551 1.5105 0.62187 0.8956
2002 1.7376 1.4838 7.8265 7.4305 118.06 7.5086 9.1611 1.4670 0.62883 0.9456
2003 1.7379 1.5817 9.3626 7.4307 130.97 8.0033 9.1242 1.5212 0.69199 1.1312
2004 1.6905 1.6167 10.2967 7.4399 134.44 8.3697 9.1243 1.5438 0.67866 1.2439
2005 1.6320 1.5087 10.1955 7.4518 136.85 8.0092 9.2822 1.5483 0.68380 1.2441
2006 1.6668 1.4237 10.0096 7.4591 146.02 8.0472 9.2544 1.5729 0.68173 1.2556
2007 1.6348 1.4678 10.4178 7.4506 161.25 8.0165 9.2501 1.6427 0.68434 1.3705
2008 1.7416 1.5594 10.2236 7.4560 152.45 8.2237 9.6152 1.5874 0.79628 1.4708
2009 1.7727 1.5850 9.5277 7.4462 130.34 8.7278 10.6191 1.5100 0.89094 1.3948
2010 1.4423 1.3651 8.9712 7.4473 116.24 8.0043 9.5373 1.3803 0.85784 1.3257
2010          Feb 1.5434 1.4454 9.3462 7.4440 123.46 8.0971 9.9505 1.4671 0.87604 1.3686
         Mar 1.4882 1.3889 9.2623 7.4416 123.03 8.0369 9.7277 1.4482 0.90160 1.3569
         Apr 1.4463 1.3467 9.1505 7.4428 125.33 7.9323 9.6617 1.4337 0.87456 1.3406
         May 1.4436 1.3060 8.5794 7.4413 115.83 7.8907 9.6641 1.4181 0.85714 1.2565
         June 1.4315 1.2674 8.3245 7.4409 110.99 7.9062 9.5723 1.3767 0.82771 1.2209
         July 1.4586 1.3322 8.6538 7.4522 111.73 8.0201 9.4954 1.3460 0.83566 1.2770
         Aug 1.4337 1.3411 8.7520 7.4495 110.04 7.9325 9.4216 1.3413 0.82363 1.2894
         Sep 1.3943 1.3515 8.8104 7.4476 110.26 7.9156 9.2241 1.3089 0.83987 1.3067
         Oct 1.4164 1.4152 9.2665 7.4567 113.67 8.1110 9.2794 1.3452 0.87638 1.3898
         Nov 1.3813 1.3831 9.0895 7.4547 112.69 8.1463 9.3166 1.3442 0.85510 1.3661
         Dec 1.3304 1.3327 8.7873 7.4528 110.11 7.9020 9.0559 1.2811 0.84813 1.3220
2011          Jan 1.3417 1.3277 8.8154 7.4518 110.38 7.8199 8.9122 1.2779 0.84712 1.3360
         Feb 1.3543 1.3484 8.9842 7.4555 112.77 7.8206 8.7882 1.2974 0.84635 1.3649
         Mar 1.3854 1.3672 9.1902 7.4574 114.40 7.8295 8.8864 1.2867 0.86653 1.3999
         Apr 1.3662 1.3834 9.4274 7.4574 120.42 7.8065 8.9702 1.2977 0.88291 1.4442
         May 1.3437 1.3885 9.3198 7.4566 116.47 7.8384 8.9571 1.2537 0.87788 1.4349
         June 1.3567 1.4063 9.3161 7.4579 115.75 7.8302 9.1125 1.2092 0.88745 1.4388
         July 1.3249 1.3638 9.2121 7.4560 113.26 7.7829 9.1340 1.1766 0.88476 1.4264
*Averages: Bundesbank calculations based on the daily euro reference to March 2005, ECB indicative rates. — 2Average from 13 January to
exchange rates published by the ECB; for additional euro reference 29 December 2000. 
exchange rates, see Statistical Supplement 5 Exchange rate statistics. — 1Up
12 Euro member countries and irrevocable euro conversion rates in the third stage
of European Economic and Monetary Union
From Country Currency ISO currency code EUR 1 = currency units ...
1999  January 1 Austria Austrian schilling ATS 13.7603
Belgium Belgian franc BEF 40.3399
Finland Finnish markka FIM 5.94573
France French franc FRF 6.55957
Germany Deutsche Mark DEM 1.95583
Ireland Irish pound IEP 0.787564
Italy Italian lira ITL 1,936.27
Luxembourg Luxembourg franc LUF 40.3399
Netherlands Dutch guilder NLG 2.20371
Portugal Portuguese escudo PTE 200.482
Spain Spanish peseta ESP 166.386
2001  January 1 Greece Greek drachma GRD 340.750
2007  January 1 Slovenia Slovenian tolar SIT 239.640
2008  January 1 Cyprus Cyprus pound CYP 0.585274
Malta Maltese lira MTL 0.429300
2009  January 1 Slovakia Slovak koruna SKK 30.1260
2011  January 1 Estonia Estonian kroon EEK 15.6466
75*XI External sector

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
E U R O S Y S T E M
Monthly Report
August 2011
XI  External  sector
 
13  Effective exchange rates of the Euro and indicators of the German economy’s price competitiveness *
 
 
1999 Q1 = 100
Effective exchange rate of the Euro Indicators of the German economy’s price competitiveness
EER-20  1 EER-40  2 Based on the deflators of total sales  3 Based on consumer price indices
24 selected industrial countries  4 In real terms
In real terms based on
In real based on unit In real
24 terms the deflators labour terms Non-
based on of gross costs of based on Euro- euro- selected
36 36 56 consumer domestic national consumer area area industrial
Period Nominal price indices product  3 economy  3 Nominal price indices Total countries countries countries  5 6 countries  4 countries  5 countries  7 
1999 96.2 96.0 95.9 96.5 96.5 95.8 97.7 99.4 95.6 97.6 98.2 98.0 97.7
2000 86.9 86.5 85.9 85.6 87.9 85.8 91.5 97.1 85.1 91.0 92.8 91.9 90.9
2001 87.6 87.2 86.5 84.8 90.4 87.1 91.1 95.9 85.6 90.2 92.9 91.3 90.8
2002 90.0 90.3 89.5 87.9 94.8 90.7 91.8 95.0 88.1 90.6 93.5 91.9 91.7
2003 100.6 101.5 100.3 98.3 106.8 101.6 95.0 94.0 96.9 94.3 97.0 96.5 96.7
2004 104.4 105.3 103.0 102.1 111.4 105.2 95.3 92.9 99.3 94.4 98.4 98.0 98.2
2005 102.9 103.8 101.1 99.8 109.4 102.7 94.0 91.3 98.3 92.3 98.4 96.9 96.5
2006 102.8 103.8 100.4 98.9 109.4 102.0 92.8 89.7 97.8 90.8 98.5 96.4 95.8
2007 106.4 106.8 102.5 100.9 113.0 104.3 93.8 88.9 101.7 91.3 100.8 97.9 97.1
2008 110.4 109.9 105.0 104.3 117.9 107.1 94.0 87.3 104.9 91.0 102.4 98.4 97.6
2009 111.7 110.6 106.0 105.9 120.6 108.0 93.7 87.5 103.7 91.7 102.0 98.5 98.0
2010 104.6 103.0 98.4 98.2 112.3 99.3 91.0 87.0 97.5 p 88.6 98.9 94.5 92.9
2007          Dec 109.5 109.4 116.0 106.3 102.3 99.0 98.0
2008          Jan 110.1 109.9 116.6 106.8 102.5 99.0 98.0
         Feb 109.8 109.2 105.7 104.5 116.4 106.2 94.6 87.9 105.5 91.7 102.5 98.7 97.8
         Mar 112.5 112.2 119.8 109.4 103.4 99.9 99.2
         Apr 113.6 113.1 121.2 110.3 103.6 99.8 99.2
         May 113.1 112.7 107.5 107.1 120.4 109.6 95.2 87.4 108.1 92.0 103.6 99.7 98.9
         June 112.8 112.4 120.3 109.4 103.5 99.3 98.5
         July 113.0 112.4 120.5 109.4 103.9 99.3 98.6
         Aug 110.8 110.0 105.2 104.9 117.7 106.6 94.2 87.0 106.1 90.8 102.8 98.2 97.1
         Sep 109.1 108.3 116.3 105.2 101.9 97.4 96.5
         Oct 105.6 105.0 113.7 102.8 99.9 95.8 95.1
         Nov 104.8 104.3 101.6 100.9 112.9 102.0 92.0 87.1 99.9 89.6 99.8 95.6 94.9
         Dec 110.0 109.6 118.7 107.2 101.7 98.0 97.6
2009          Jan 109.8 109.3 118.7 107.1 101.5 98.0 97.6
         Feb 108.7 108.1 104.4 104.3 117.8 106.2 92.6 87.2 101.2 91.0 100.7 97.7 97.4
         Mar 111.2 110.3 120.5 108.3 101.7 98.4 98.1
         Apr 110.3 109.5 119.1 107.1 101.6 98.0 97.5
         May 110.9 109.9 105.7 105.3 119.6 107.3 93.5 87.5 103.3 91.6 101.7 98.1 97.5
         June 112.0 111.0 120.8 108.4 102.0 98.7 98.2
         July 111.6 110.4 120.6 107.8 102.0 98.4 97.8
         Aug 111.6 110.5 106.2 105.9 120.7 108.0 94.0 87.7 104.4 91.9 102.1 98.5 97.9
         Sep 112.9 111.4 122.0 108.8 102.4 98.8 98.3
         Oct 114.2 112.7 123.0 109.6 102.9 99.4 98.7
         Nov 114.0 112.4 107.4 108.0 122.9 109.4 94.5 87.6 106.0 92.3 102.7 99.2 98.5
         Dec 113.0 111.2 121.7 108.1 102.5 98.9 98.1
2010          Jan 110.8 109.0 119.2 105.6 101.5 97.6 96.5
         Feb 108.0 106.1 102.2 102.5 116.3 102.8 92.6 87.3 101.3 90.2 100.4 96.3 95.1
         Mar 107.4 105.8 115.2 102.2 100.4 95.9 94.5
         Apr 106.1 104.5 113.5 100.6 99.7 95.1 93.4
         May 102.8 101.4 97.2 97.0 109.9 97.5 90.7 87.0 96.5 88.2 98.3 93.6 91.8
         June 100.6 99.3 107.7 95.6 97.1 92.6 90.8
         July 102.5 101.0 109.9 97.5 97.8 93.5 91.8
         Aug 102.1 100.6 96.4 95.7 109.5 97.0 90.1 86.9 95.1 p 87.8 97.6 93.2 91.6
         Sep 102.5 100.8 110.0 97.2 97.7 93.3 91.6
         Oct 106.0 104.1 113.8 100.3 99.3 94.8 93.3
         Nov 104.7 102.7 97.8 97.6 112.5 99.0 90.7 86.7 97.1 p 88.2 98.9 94.3 92.7
         Dec 102.6 100.5 110.1 96.8 97.9 93.4 91.6
2011          Jan 102.4 100.3 110.1 96.7 97.9 93.1 p 91.4
         Feb 103.4 101.1 97.1 96.5 111.4 97.6 p 90.2 p 86.2 96.4 p 87.6 98.3 93.6 p 92.0
         Mar 105.2 p 103.0 113.2 p 99.4 98.8 94.2 p 92.7
         Apr 107.0 p 104.9 115.0 p 101.0 99.8 p 95.1 p 93.6
         May 106.0 p 103.7 ... ... 114.1 p 100.0 ... ... ... ... 99.1 p 94.4 p 92.9
         June 106.1 p 103.9 114.4 p 100.3 99.1 p 94.3 p 92.9
         July 105.2 p 103.0 113.4 p 99.4 p 98.7 p 93.9 p 92.4
*The effective exchange rate corresponds to the weighted external value of Includes countries belonging to the EER-20 group (see footnote 1) and
the currency concerned. The method of calculating the indicators of the additional Algeria, Argentina, Brazil, Chile, Croatia, Iceland, India,
German economy’s price competitiveness is consistent with the procedure Indonesia, Israel, Malaysia, Mexico, Morocco, New Zealand, Philippines,
used by the ECB to compute the effective exchange rates of the euro (see Russian Federation, South Africa, Taiwan, Thailand, Turkey and
Monthly Report, November 2001, pp  50-53, May 2007, pp  31-35, May 2008, Venezuela. — 3Annual and quarterly averages. — 4Euro-area countries
p  40 and November 2010, pp  44-45). For details of the methodology see (from 2001 including Greece, from 2007 including Slovenia, from 2008
the ECB’s Occasional Paper No  2 (www.ecb.int). A decline in the figures including Cyprus and Malta, from 2009 including Slovakia, from 2011
implies an increase in competitiveness. — 1ECB calculations are based on including Estonia) as well as Canada, Denmark, Japan, Norway, Sweden,
the weighted averages of the changes in the bilateral exchange rates of the Switzerland, United Kingdom and United States. — 5Euro-area countries
euro against the currencies of the following countries: Australia, Bulgaria, Ca- and countries belonging to the EER-20 group. — 6Owing to missing data
nada, China, Czech Republic, Denmark, Hong Kong, Hungary, Japan, Latvia, for the deflator of total sales, China is not included in this calculation. —
Lithuania, Norway, Poland, Romania, Singapore, South Korea, Sweden, 7Euro-area countries and countries belonging to the EER-40 group (see
Switzerland, United Kingdom and United States. Where price and wage footnote 2). 
indices were not available, estimates were used. — 2ECB calculations.
76*XI  External sector

Overview of  
publications  
by the Deutsche  
BundesbankThis overview provides information 
about selected recent economic and 
statistical publications by the Deutsche 
Bundesbank. Unless otherwise indi -
cated, these publications are available 
in both English and German, in printed 
form and on the Bundesbank’s web -
site.
The publications are available free of 
charge from the Communication Div -
ision. For a small fee to cover costs, a 
file which is updated monthly and 
 contains approximately 40,000 time 
series published by the Bundesbank 
can be obtained on CD-ROM from the 
Division Statistical data processing, 
mathematical methods or downloaded 
from the Bundesbank-ExtraNet site. 
Orders should be sent, in writing, to 
one of the addresses listed on the re -
verse of the title page. Selected time 
series can also be downloaded from 
the internet.
Annual Report
Financial Stability Review
Monthly Report
For information on the articles published between 
2000 and 2010 see the index attached to the Janu -
ary 2011 Monthly Report.
77*DEUTSCHE  
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report  
August 2011

Monthly Report articles
September 2010
– The performance of German credit institutions 
in 2009
– The Act Modernising Accounting Law from a 
banking supervision perspective
– Supervisory disclosur e under Pillar 3 of BaselII
October 2010
– Germany in the financial and economic crisis
November 2010
– The curr ent economic situation in Germany
December 2010
– Outlook for the German economy – macroeco -
nomic projections for 2011 and 2012
– German enterprises’ profitability and financing 
in 2009
– Development, information content and regula -
tion of the market for credit default swaps
January 2011
– The banknote cycle and banknote recycling in 
Germany
– Foreign demand for euro banknotes issued in 
Germany
– Investor behaviour in theory and practice
– Requirements regarding the cyclical adjust -
ment procedure under the new debt rule
February 2011
– The curr ent economic situation in GermanyMarch 2011
– German balance of payments in 2 010
– Approaches to the measurement and macro -
prudential treatment of systemic risk
– The implications of the financial crisis  
for monetary policy
April 2011
– Effective exchange rates from financial market 
data
– The US labour market in the curr ent cycle
– European Council decisions on the prevention 
and resolution of future sovereign debt crises
May 2011
– The curr ent economic situation in Germany
June 2011
– Outlook for the German economy – macroeco -
nomic projections for 2011 and 2012
– Sovereign yield spreads in the euro area
– Extended MFI inter est rate statistics:  
methodology and first results
– Fundamental features of the German Bank Re -
struct uring Act
July 2011
–  Developments in the exports of the four largest 
euro-area member states since the launch of 
monetary union
– Leasing financing in Germany
– Reliability and revision profile of selected Ger -
man economic indicators
– Deutsche Bundesbank Spring Conference  
2011 – fiscal and monetary policy challenges in 
the short and long run
August 2011
– The curr ent economic situation in Germany
78*DEUTSCHE  
BUNDESBANK
E U R O S Y S T E M
Monthly Report  
August 2011

Statistical Supplements to the  
Monthly Report
 1 Banking statistics 1, 2
 2 Capital market statistics 1, 2
 3 Balance of payments statistics 1, 2
 4 Seasonally adjusted business statistics 1, 2
 5 Exchange rate statistics 2
Special Publications
Makro-ökonometrisches Mehr-Länder-Modell, 
 November 1996 3
Europäische Organisationen und Gremien im Be -
reich von Währung und Wirtschaft, May 1997 3
Die Zahlungsbilanz der ehemaligen DDR 1975 bis 
1989, August 1999 3
The market for German Federal securities,  
May 2000
Macro-Econometric Multi-Country Model: MEMMOD, 
June 2000
Bundesbank Act, September 2002
Weltweite Organisationen und Gremien im Bereich 
von Währung und Wirtschaft, March 2003 3
Die Europäische Union: Grundlagen und Politik -
bereiche außerhalb der Wirtschafts-und Wäh -
rungsunion, April 2005 3
Die Deutsche Bundesbank – Aufgabenfelder, 
rechtlicher Rahmen, Geschichte, April 2006 3
European economic and monetary union,  
April 200 8
Special Statistical Publications*
 1 Banking statistics guidelines and customer clas -
sification, July 20112 2 Bankenstatistik Kundensystematik Firmenver -
zeichnisse, June 2011 2, 3
 3 Aufbau der bankstatistischen T abellen,  
June 2011 2, 3
 4 Financial accounts for Germany 1991 to 2009, 
June 2010 2
 5 Extrapolated results from financial statements 
of German enterprises 1994 to 2003, March 
2006 2
 6 Verhältniszahlen aus Jahresabschlüssen deut -
scher Unternehmen von 2007 bis 2008, March 
2011 2, 3
 7 Notes on the coding list for the balance of pay -
ments statistics, March 2009 2
 8 The balance of payments statistics of the 
 Federal Republic of Germany, 2nd edition,  
February 1991 o
 9 Securities deposits,  
August 2005
 10 Foreign direct investment stock statistics,  
April 2011 1, 2
 11 Balance of payments by r egion, July 2011  2, 3
 12 Technologische Dienstleistungen in der Zah -
lungsbilanz, June 2011 3
* Unless stated otherwise, these publications are avail -
able on the Bundesbank’s website in German and Eng -
lish.
o Not available on the website.
1 Only the headings and explanatory notes to the data 
contained in the German originals are available in English.
2 Available on the website only.
3 Available in German only.
79*DEUTSCHE  
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report  
August 2011

Discussion Papers*
Series 1  
Economic Studies
08/2011  
Seasonality in house prices
09/2011  
The third pillar in Europe: institutional factors and 
individual decisions
10/2011  
In search for yield? Survey-based evidence on bank 
risk taking
11/2011  
Fatigue in payment diaries – empirical evidence 
from Germany
12/2011  
Currency blocs in the 21st century
13/2011  
How informative are central bank assessments of 
macroeconomic risks?
14/2011  
Evaluating macroeconomic risk forecasts
15/2011  
Crises, rescues, and policy transmission through 
international banks
16/2011  
Substitution between net and gross settlement 
systems – A concern for financial stability?
17/2011  
Recent developments in quantitative models of 
sovereign default
18/2011  
Exchange rate dynamics, expectations, and monet -
ary policySeries 2  
Banking and Financial Studies
04/2011  
The price impact of leading relationships
05/2011  
Does modeling framework matter? A comparative 
study of structural and reduced-form models
06/2011  
Contagion at the interbank market with stochastic 
LGD
07/2011  
The two-sided effect of financial globalization on 
output volatility
08/2011  
Systemic risk contributions: a credit portfolio ap -
proach
09/2011  
The importance of qualitative risk assessment in 
banking supervision before and during the crisis
Banking legislation
 1 Bundesbank Act and Statute of the European 
System of Central Banks and of the European 
Central Bank, June 1998
 2 Gesetz über das Kr editwesen, February 2009 3
 2a Solvabilitäts-und Liquiditätsverordnung, Feb -
ruary 20083
* Discussion Papers which appeared from 2000 onwards 
are available on the website.   
 
For footnotes, see p 79*.
80*DEUTSCHE  
BUNDESBANK
E U R O S Y S T E M
Monthly Report  
August 2011

