MONTHLY REPORT
NOVEMBER 	 DECEMBER	 JANUARY	 FEBRUARY	 MARCH
2011
Vol	63	
No	11

Deutsche 	Bundesbank 	
Wilhelm-Epstein-Strasse 	14	
60431 	Frankfurt 	am	Main 	
Germany
Postal 	address 	
Postfach 	10	06	02	
60006 	Frankfurt 	am	Main 	
Germany
Tel	 +49 	69	9566-0
Fax	 +49 	69	9566 	3077
Telex	 41227 	within 	Germany 	
	 414431 	from 	abroad
http://www.bundesbank.de
Reproduction 	permitted 	only	if	source 	is	stated.
ISSN	0418-8292 	(print 	edition) 	
ISSN	1862-1325 	(online 	edition)
The	German 	original 	of	this	Monthly Report 	
went 	to	press 	at	11	am	on	18	November 	2011.Annual 	and	weekly 	publishing 	schedules 	for	
selected 	statistics 	of	the	Deutsche 	Bundes -
bank 	can	be	downloaded 	from 	our	website. 	
The	statistical 	data	are	also	published 	on	the	
website.
The	Monthly Report 	is	published 	by	the	
	Deutsche 	Bundesbank, 	Frankfurt 	am	Main, 		
by	virtue 	of	section 	18	of	the	Bundesbank 		
Act.	It	is	available 	to	interested 	parties 	free	of	
charge.
This	is	a	translation 	of	the	original 	German -
language 	version, 	which 	is	the	sole	authorita -
tive	text.
DEUTSCHE  
BUNDESBANK
E U R O S Y S T E M
Monthly Report  
November 2011

ContentsThe current economic situation  
in Germany 	 5
Overview 	 6
Global 	and	European 	setting 	 12
Explaining growth in US private con­
sumption during the current upturn  18
Monetary 	policy 	and	banking 	business 	25
Money market management and  
liquidity needs  28
Financial 	markets 	 37
Economic 	conditions 	in	Germany 	 48
The effect of decommissioning nuclear 
power plants on the generation and  
cross ­border trading of electricity  54
Public 	finances 	 63
Decisions of the European Council and  
the Euro Summit of 26 and 27 October 
2011  64
On the cyclical adjustment procedure 
under the German central govern ­ 
ment’s new debt rule  71
Statistical Section 	 1*
Key	economic 	data	for	the	euro	area	 5*
Overall 	monetary 	survey 	in	the	euro	area	8*
Consolidated 	financial 	statement 	
of	the	Eurosystem 	 16*
Banks 	 20*
Minimum 	reserves 	 42*
Interest 	rates 	 43*
Capital 	market 	 48*DEUTSCHE  
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report  
November 2011

Financial 	accounts 	 52*
Public 	finances 	in	Germany 	 54*
Economic 	conditions 	in	Germany 	 61*
External 	sector 	 68*
Overview of publications by the  
Deutsche Bundesbank 	 77*
Abbreviations and symbols
e	 Estimated
p	 Provisional
pe	 Partly 	estimated
r	 Revised
…	 Data 	available 	at	a	later	date
.	 Data 	unknown, 	not	to	be	published 	or
not	meaningful
0	 Less 	than	0.5	but	more 	than	nil
–	 Nil
Discrepancies 	in	the	totals 	are	due	to	rounding.
DEUTSCHE  
BUNDESBANK
E U R O S Y S T E M
Monthly Report  
November 2011

The current economic 
situation in GermanyDEUTSCHE  
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report  
November 2011
5

OverviewIn the shadow of the sovereign  
debt crisis
Global 	economic 	growth 	picked 	up	slightly 	in	
the	third 	quarter 	compared 	with	the	previous 	
three 	months, 	which 	can	mainly 	be	explained 	
by	the	evaporation 	of	temporary 	strains. 	
However, 	the	outlook 	for	the	world 	economy 	
in	the	latter 	part	of	2011 	and	early 	part	of	
2012 	has	worsened 	considerably, 	in	part	be-
cause 	of	the	renewed 	escalation 	in	the	Euro-
pean 	sovereign 	debt	crisis. 	Hard 	business 	ac-
tivity 	numbers 	have, 	to	date, 	drawn 	a	more 	
favourable 	picture. 	However, 	leading 	eco-
nomic 	indicators 	based 	on	surveys 	among 	
businesses 	and	households 	have 	for	several 	
months 	been 	pointing 	clearly 	downwards 	
and	signalling 	appreciable 	downside 	risks.
The	sovereign 	debt 	crisis 	in	the	euro 	area	
could 	weigh 	on	the	recovery 	in	Europe 	and	
could 	also	have 	negative 	consequences 	for	
trade 	partners 	in	other 	economic 	areas. 	
Against 	this	backdrop, 	it	is	particularly 	impor -
tant	that	the	affected 	euro-area 	countries 	
take	rapid 	and	decisive 	measures 	to	prevent 	a	
further 	erosion 	of	confidence 	in	the	sound -
ness	of	their 	public 	finances 	and	to	regain 	
lost	competitiveness. 	This	is	a	key	precondi -
tion	for	reducing 	the	uncertainty 	that	prevails 	
among 	consumers 	and	enterprises. 	However, 	
doubts 	about 	national 	fiscal 	and	economic 	
policymakers’ 	ability 	to	resolve 	the	problems 	
are	in	some 	cases 	obscuring 	more 	favourable 	
economic 	fundamentals 	and	settings. 	Abat -
ing	inflation, 	a	strongly 	expansionary 	mone -
tary	policy 	stance 	in	the	industrial 	countries 	
and	the	still	robustly 	growing 	demand 	in	the	
emerging 	market 	economies 	will	continue 	to	Global 
economy
DEUTSCHE  
BUNDESBANK
E U R O S Y S T E M
Monthly Report  
November 2011
6

constitute 	important 	global 	driving 	forces 	in	
the	months	 to	come.
The	heightened	 uncertainty	 about	 the	evolu -
tion	of	the	European	 sovereign	 debt	 crisis	 has	
been 	a	key	determinant 	of	events 	on	the	
finan 	cial	markets 	since 	the	middle 	of	the	
year.	 At	the	European	 level,	 the	resolutions	 of	
the	heads	 of	state	 or	government	 at	the	sum-
mit	meetings 	in	July	and	October 	failed 	to	
bring	 about	 a	long-term	 improvement	 in	the	
situation 	on	the	financial 	markets. 	Investors	
have 	widened 	their 	critical 	gaze 	to	include	
not	only	the	peripheral 	states 	that	had	al-
ready	 been	 identified	 as	endangered	 but	also	
other 	countries, 	notably 	Italy.	The	problems	
have 	therefore, 	for	the	first	time, 	reached	
large	 economies	 of	the	euro	 area.
Even	 after	 the	resolutions	 made	 at	the	Octo -
ber	summit,	 it	remains	 unclear	 what	 a	coher -
ent	institutional	 framework	 for	monetary	 un-
ion	should	 look	 like	going	 forward.	 A	funda -
mental	 decision	 must	 be	taken	 on	whether	 to	
strengthen	 the	existing	 framework,	 with	 na-
tional 	fiscal 	sovereignty 	and	the	application	
of	some	 Community	 rules	 with	 a	no-bail-out	
rule,	or	whether 	to	create 	a	fiscal 	decision-
making 	structure 	where 	a	central 	level	has	
ultimate 	powers 	to	intervene 	in	national	
budget	 sovereignty.	 The	route	 currently	 being	
taken	 of	partially	 expanding	 joint	 liability,	 and	
thus	concurrently 	reducing 	the	incentive 	for	
countries	 to	achieve	 sound	 public	 finances	 on	
their	own, 	without 	at	the	same 	time	signifi -
cantly	 strengthening	 the	right	 to	intervene	 in	
national 	budgets 	is	yielding 	an	increasingly	
incoherent 	framework 	for	monetary 	union.	
This	is	raising 	the	risk	of	unsound 	public 	fi-nances,	 and	 the	potential	 for	conflict	 with	 a	
stability-oriented 	monetary 	policy 	is	likewise	
growing 	significantly. 	The	recent 	escalation	
of	the	crisis	 demonstrates	 that	 the	pivotal	 de-
cision	 on	the	future	 framework	 for	monetary	
union	 cannot	 be	delayed	 if	a	further	 deterio -
ration	 is	to	be	avoided.
The	worsening 	of	macroeconomic 	prospects	
and	the	implications 	this	has	for	the	inflation	
outlook 	prompted 	the	ECB	Governing 	Coun -
cil	to	cut	interest 	rates 	by	25	basis 	points 	at	
the	beginning 	of	November. 	The	negative 	ef-
fects 	of	the	spreading 	sovereign 	debt 	crisis 	on	
banks’ 	funding 	situation 	caused 	a	massive 	in-
crease 	in	their	demand 	for	liquidity 	from 	the	
Eurosystem. 	The	Governing 	Council 	re-
sponded	 in	October	 by	agreeing	 on	the	re-
newed 	provision 	of	longer-term 	liquidity 	for	a	
period 	of	around 	12	months 	through 	two	
additional 	longer-term 	refinancing 	operations,	
one	in	October 	and	the	other 	in	December. 	It	
also	decided 	to	continue 	to	conduct 	all	mon-
etary 	refinancing 	operations 	on	the	basis 	of	
full	allotment 	for	as	long	as	necessary, 	and	at	
least	 until	 the	end	 of	June	 2012.	 Given	 the	
uncertainty 	on	the	money 	and	financial 	mar-
kets, 	excess 	liquidity 	in	the	banking 	system	
reached 	a	level	last	observed 	in	the	summer	
of	2010. 	In	order 	to	help	ease	the	strained	
funding 	situation 	experienced 	by	euro-area	
banks, 	the	ECB	Governing 	Council 	in	October	
also	decided 	to	relaunch 	its	covered 	bond	
purchase 	programme, 	which 	will	this	time	
have 	a	volume 	of	€40	billion 	–	one-third	
smaller 	than	the	May	2009 	programme.
The	expansion 	in	the	M3	monetary 	aggre -
gate	since 	the	spring 	of	2010 	accelerated 	in	Financial 
markets
Monetary policyDEUTSCHE  
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report  
November 2011
7

the	third 	quarter 	of	2011. 	The	quarter-on-
quarter 	increase 	was	the	highest 	since 	the	
fourth 	quarter 	of	2008. 	However, 	the	sharp 	
rise	in	monthly 	year-on-year 	growth 	rates 	in	
M3	was	largely 	due	to	heightened 	uncer -
tainty 	on	the	financial 	markets. 	Unlike 	mon-
etary 	growth, 	loans 	to	the	domestic 	private 	
sector 	have 	been 	expanding 	at	an	almost 	
constant 	pace 	since 	the	beginning 	of	the	
year, 	at	around 	2½% 	on	the	year. 	However, 	
growth 	in	loans 	to	non-financial 	corporations 	
slowed 	again 	in	the	reporting 	quarter, 	though 	
data	on	these 	loans 	for	the	entire 	euro	area	
mask 	very	heterogeneous 	developments 	in	
the	individual 	member 	states.
Such 	heterogeneity 	is	also	evident 	in	eco-
nomic 	developments. 	Several 	of	the	periph -
eral	countries 	that	had	shown 	considerable 	
overheating 	before 	the	global 	financial 	and	
economic 	crisis 	continue 	to	see	economic 	ac-
tivity 	decline 	sharply 	or	stagnate. 	By	contrast, 	
growth 	in	Germany, 	for	instance, 	remained 	
robust 	in	the	third 	quarter. 	According 	to	the	
Federal 	Statistical 	Office’s 	flash 	estimate, 	sea-
sonally 	and	calendar-adjusted 	real	gross 	do-
mestic 	product 	increased 	fairly 	sharply 	again 	
in	the	third 	quarter 	by	0.5% 	on	the	preced -
ing	three 	months 	after 	extraordinary 	effects 	
had	slightly 	slowed 	the	pace 	of	growth 	
to	0.3% 	in	the	second 	quarter. 	At	the	begin -
ning	of	the	second 	half	of	2011, 	the	underly -
ing	cyclical 	tendency 	was	therefore 	not	much 	
weaker 	than 	in	the	first	six	months. 	During 	
the	reporting 	period, 	seasonally 	and	calen -
dar-adjusted 	economic 	output 	exceeded 	the	
peak 	it	had	marked 	before 	the	onset 	of	the	
financial 	and	economic 	crisis. 	In	the	year	to	
date, 	moreover, 	the	utilisation 	of	aggregate 	capacity, 	which 	had	previously 	already 	
reached 	the	corridor 	of	normal 	utilisation, 	is	
likely 	to	have 	risen 	perceptibly.
However, 	a	look	at	developments 	in	monthly 	
production 	indicators 	shows 	that	economic 	
momentum 	has	waned 	of	late.	Furthermore, 	
the	substantial 	lowering 	of	business 	expecta -
tions 	that	has	been 	observed 	for	some 	time	is	
being 	reflected 	in	a	considerable 	deteriora -
tion	of	industrial 	new	orders. 	Disruptive 	ex-
ternalities, 	as	mirrored 	in	the	increasingly 	
bearish 	sentiment, 	are	now 	perceptibly 	
weighing 	on	real	economic 	activity 	in	Ger-
many 	and	are	likely 	to	leave 	their	mark 	over	
the	next	few	months. 	This	increases 	the	risk	
of	the	domestic 	economy 	weakening.
German 	enterprises’ 	exports 	remained 	buoy -
ant	in	the	third 	quarter 	despite 	growing 	con-
cerns 	about 	global 	economic 	momentum. 	Of	
late,	German 	enterprises’ 	foreign 	business 	
has	benefited 	from 	stimuli 	from 	the	United 	
States 	and	Japan 	and	the	country’s 	east	Euro-
pean 	neighbouring 	countries. 	Exports 	to	
China 	and	other 	south 	and	east	Asian 	emerg -
ing	market 	economies, 	by	contrast, 	stag-
nated, 	as	did	deliveries 	of	goods 	to	the	euro	
area. 	Imports 	expanded 	again 	appreciably 	in	
the	third 	quarter. 	However, 	the	rate	of	in-
crease 	is	likely 	to	have 	been 	lower 	than	in	the	
previous 	quarter.
The	dynamic 	of	business 	investment 	likewise 	
remained 	intact 	in	the	third 	quarter. 	The	cur-
rent	high	level	of	capacity 	utilisation 	of	tangi -
ble	fixed 	assets 	in	large 	parts 	of	the	economy, 	
in	conjunction 	with	the	now	considerable 	
backlog 	of	orders, 	explains 	why	enterprises 	Germany
DEUTSCHE  
BUNDESBANK
E U R O S Y S T E M
Monthly Report  
November 2011
8

have,	 so	far,	barely	 revised	 their	 intention	 to	
expand 	production 	capacity. 	Provided 	it	re-
mains 	a	temporary 	phenomenon, 	the	fact	
that	demand 	has	eased 	off	from 	its	cyclical	
high	does 	not	therefore 	contradict 	plans 	to	
expand 	production 	plant. 	Taking 	a	longer-
term	 view,	 the	business	 investment	 cycle	 has	
not	yet	achieved	 maturity.	 Housing	 construc -
tion	 again	 provided	 support	 to	the	domestic	
economy.	 Demand	 for	residential	 property	 re-
mained	 strong	 throughout	 the	third	 quarter,	
not	least	 because	 mortgage	 rates	 fell	to	new	
lows.
Private	 consumption	 recovered	 from	 its	tem-
porary	 lull	–	largely	 caused	 by	the	deteriorat -
ing	price 	climate 	in	the	spring 	months 	–	in	
the	second	 half	of	the	year.	 Retailers	 reported	
a	seasonally 	adjusted 	quarter-on-quarter 	in-
crease 	in	sales 	for	the	period 	under 	review.	
Moreover,	 households	 purchased	 significantly	
more	 motor	 vehicles	 again.	 Higher	 consumer	
spending 	was	in	part	attributable 	to	sharply	
improved	 earnings	 and	a	robust	 propensity	 to	
purchase.
An	important 	factor 	underpinning 	private	
consumption 	was	the	ongoing 	positive 	–	al-
beit	less	dynamic	 –	labour	 market	 trend.	 Em-
ployment	 continued	 to	rise	in	the	third	 quar-
ter	of	2011 	on	the	back 	of	sharply 	higher	
economic 	output. 	Most 	new	jobs	that	were	
created 	were 	again 	subject 	to	social 	security	
contributions, 	while 	the	number 	of	persons	
working 	exclusively 	in	low-paid 	part-time	
jobs	 remained	 virtually	 unchanged	 in	season -
ally	adjusted 	terms, 	and	government-
sponsored 	working 	arrangements 	(one-euro	
workfare	 jobs)	 were	 reduced	 further.	 The	fall-ing	trend 	in	unemployment 	likewise 	contin -
ued	in	the	third	 quarter	 of	2011.	 The	pace	 at	
which 	joblessness 	decreased 	decelerated	
compared	 with	 the	first	half	of	the	year,	 how-
ever. 	While 	there 	was	only	a	moderate 	de-
cline	 in	the	number	 of	longer-term	 job	seek-
ers	receiving	 welfare	 benefits,	 no	further	 sig-
nificant	 drop	 was	 recorded	 in	the	number	 of	
unemployed	 workers	 claiming	 insurance	 ben-
efits, 	which 	was	already 	at	a	very	low	level.	
According	 to	the	leading	 indicators	 available	
for	the	labour 	market, 	the	positive 	develop -
ment	 is	likely	 to	continue	 for	the	time	 being	
as	the	incentive	 to	expand	 production	 capac -
ities	is	still	the	dominant 	factor 	in	staffing	
plans 	in	trade 	and	industry. 	This	assessment	
is,	however, 	presumably 	predicated 	on	the	
assumption 	that	the	emerging 	economic	
slowdown 	is	confined 	to	the	fourth 	quarter	
of	2011	 and	early	 part	 of	2012.
Meanwhile, 	employees 	are	benefiting 	from	
the	favourable	 labour	 market	 situation	 in	the	
form	 of	sharply	 higher	 earnings.	 In	many	 in-
dustries,	 these	 are	well	 above	 the	collectively	
agreed 	wage 	increases. 	A	moderate 	drop 	in	
prices,	 or	at	least	 a	slowdown	 in	the	rate	 of	
increase,	 was	 evident	 across	 all	stages	 of	the	
economy	 in	the	third	 quarter.	 Consumer	 price	
inflation	 has	also	weakened.	 The	rate	of	price	
increase	 for	energy	 almost	 halted;	 by	contrast	
excluding 	energy 	it	continued 	virtually 	un-
checked.	 Over	 the	next	 few	months,	 year-on-
year	inflation 	rates 	are	likely 	to	fall	further,	
not	least	 given	 the	emerging	 economic	 slow-
down.
The	German	 economy	 is	likely	 to	encounter	 a	
more	 turbulent	 phase	 in	the	coming	 months.	DEUTSCHE  
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report  
November 2011
9

External 	demand, 	in	particular, 	has	fallen 	
markedly 	and	financial 	markets 	are	jittery. 	
The	industrial 	sector 	has	now	scaled 	back 	its	
export 	expectations 	to	a	level	which 	is	some -
what 	below 	the	longer-term 	average. 	By	con-
trast, 	the	construction 	sector 	and	consump -
tion-related 	sectors 	are	anticipating 	a	much 	
less	severe 	deterioration 	in	their 	business 	
prospects. 	One	positive 	factor 	is	that	enter -
prises 	have 	so	far	scarcely 	revised 	their	basic 	
expansionary 	focus 	in	terms 	of	investment 	in-
tentions 	and	recruitment 	plans. 	Moreover, 	
there 	is	no	evidence 	of	supply 	constraints 	on	
bank 	lending.
Growing 	concerns 	about 	the	economy 	are	
also	being 	clearly 	reflected 	in	household 	sen-
timent. 	This	has	done 	little	to	dent 	income 	
expectations, 	however, 	as	employees 	still	an-
ticipate 	a	perceptible 	rise	in	their	earnings 	in	
view	of	the	currently 	very	favourable 	labour 	
market 	environment. 	There 	were 	no	signs 	in	
recent 	months 	of	any	reduction 	in	consumers’ 	
pronounced 	propensity 	to	make 	major 	pur-
chases 	despite 	the	heightened 	uncertainty. 	
The	underlying 	conditions 	for	buoyant 	con-
sumer 	demand 	are	consequently 	still	in	place, 	
at	least	in	the	short 	term.
Overall, 	economic 	growth 	is	likely 	to	slow 	
next	year, 	with	the	baseline 	scenario 	of	GDP	
growth 	amounting 	to	between 	½%	and	1 %	
appearing 	realistic. 	This	is	likely 	to	entail 	a	
shift	from 	external 	to	domestic 	growth 	dy-
namics. 	No	major 	change 	for	the	labour 	mar-
ket	is	expected 	to	result 	from 	this.	However, 	
there 	are	significant 	risk	factors. 	For	instance, 	
a	pronounced 	downturn 	cannot 	be	ruled 	out	if	the	sovereign 	debt	crisis 	in	Europe 	were 	to	
intensify 	appreciably.
Despite 	the	easing 	of	cyclical 	strains, 	the	def-
icit	ratio	in	Germany 	deteriorated 	significantly 	
again 	last	year. 	This	year, 	however, 	it	is	likely 	
to	fall	substantially 	to	around 	1 %.	This	is	due	
in	no	small 	part	to	the	economic 	recovery. 	
Moreover, 	in	2011 	there 	are	likely 	to	be	very	
few	of	the	extensive 	capital 	transfers 	to	finan -
cial	institutions 	that	were 	seen	in	2010.
In	2012, 	the	deficit 	ratio 	is	likely 	to	remain 	
virtually 	unchanged 	given 	the	macroeco -
nomic 	prospects 	outlined 	above. 	The	cyclical 	
deterioration 	could 	be	small, 	not	least 	be-
cause 	the	economic 	slowdown 	is	likely 	to	
have 	mainly 	external 	causes 	and	thus	has	less	
of	an	impact 	on	cyclically 	sensitive 	domestic 	
factors 	that	have 	greater 	weight 	for	public 	
finances. 	Only 	a	slight 	structural 	improve -
ment 	is	on	the	cards, 	partly 	because 	the	orig-
inally 	announced 	fiscal 	consolidation 	path 	
has	now	been 	relaxed. 	Looking 	forward, 	the	
possibility 	of	an	escalation 	of	the	sovereign 	
debt	crisis 	and	a	stronger-than-expected 	eco-
nomic 	slowdown 	entail 	considerable 	risks.
Overall, 	German 	budgetary 	policy 	should 	fo-
cus	on	reducing 	the	deficit 	in	a	timely 	man-
ner.	However, 	the	fact	that	several 	aspects 	of	
the	original 	consolidation 	course 	have 	been 	
weakened 	–	as	happened 	recently 	with	the	
decisions 	taken 	by	the	coalition 	committee 	at	
the	beginning 	of	November 	–	suggests 	that	a	
different 	course 	has	now	been 	embarked 	
upon. 	In	particular, 	the	series 	of	upward 	revi-
sions 	of	forecast 	tax	revenue 	in	the	wake 	of	
the	economic 	upswing 	have 	encouraged 	pol-Public finances
DEUTSCHE  
BUNDESBANK
E U R O S Y S T E M
Monthly Report  
November 2011
10

icymakers 	to	delay 	eliminating 	the	structural	
budget	 imbalance.	 It	would	 be	better	 to	use	
the	windfall	 gains	 instead	 in	order	 to	reduce	
the	deficit	 faster	 and	to	achieve	 the	medium-
term	 objective	 of	a	structurally	 (close-to-)	 bal-
ance 	budget 	earlier. 	The	virtually 	unchecked	
growth 	in	the	debt 	ratio 	since 	the	1970s	
highlights 	the	continuous 	erosion 	of	fiscal	
policymakers’ 	radius 	of	action 	that	has	en-sued 	from 	their 	habitual 	tendency 	to	keep	
putting 	off	budgetary 	consolidation 	indefi -
nitely.	 The	reforms	 of	the	national	 budgetary	
rules 	and	of	the	European 	Stability 	and	
Growth 	Pact	are	intended 	precisely 	to	avoid	
making 	this	mistake 	in	the	future. 	However,	
this	will	succeed	 only	 if	the	requirements	 are	
implemented	 rigorously	 –	which	 did	not	hap-
pen	in	the	past.DEUTSCHE  
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report  
November 2011
11

Global and  
European settingWorld economic activity
In	the	summer 	quarter, 	global 	economic 	
growth 	was	somewhat 	stronger 	than	in	the	
preceding 	period, 	in	which 	output 	growth 	
had	been 	restrained. 	The	diminishing 	influ-
ence 	of	the	previously 	active 	temporary 	
strains 	was	one	of	the	reasons 	for	the	pick-up 	
in	activity. 	Energy 	and	food 	prices 	did	not	
climb 	any	further, 	and	to	a	limited 	extent 	
some 	prices 	even 	fell.	This	impacted 	to	some 	
degree 	on	consumer 	prices. 	A	phenomenon 	
which 	has	more 	of	a	short-term 	effect 	was	
the	rectification 	of	the	disruptions 	to	produc -
tion	processes 	in	Japan 	caused 	by	the	natural 	
disaster 	in	March, 	which 	had	affected, 	above 	
all,	car	manufacturing. 	Consequently, 	indus -
trial	output 	in	Japan 	and	in	countries 	with	
Japanese 	manufacturing 	plants, 	especially 	
the	United 	States, 	rose	sharply.
In	the	July-August 	period, 	seasonally 	adjusted 	
global 	industrial 	output 	was	1¼% 	higher 	
than 	in	the	second 	quarter, 	in	which 	it	had	
stagnated. 	As	this	report 	went 	to	press, 	the	
main 	drivers 	of	growth 	were 	the	industrial 	
countries, 	which 	means 	here	not	only	Japan 	
and	the	United 	States, 	which 	had	previously 	
been 	hit	hard	by	the	disaster-related 	interrup -
tions, 	but	also	the	euro	area, 	which 	was	less	
affected 	by	the	events 	in	Japan. 	By	contrast, 	
industrial 	output 	in	the	emerging 	market 	
economies 	(EMEs) 	has	barely 	budged 	since 	
mid-year. 	One	reason 	is	that, 	in	many 	re-
gions, 	a	restrictive 	economic 	policy 	has	been 	
maintained 	in	order 	to	minimise 	price 	pres-
sure	and	the	resultant 	threat 	of	second-round 	
effects. 	Of	the	major 	EMEs, 	to	date	only	Bra-
zil	and	Indonesia 	have 	loosened 	their	mone -Slight resur ­
gence of global 
growth in 
summer 
months …
… thanks to 
brisk industrial 
output
DEUTSCHE  
BUNDESBANK
E U R O S Y S T E M
Monthly Report  
November 2011
12

tary	policy	 reins.	 Trade	 volume,	 unlike	 global	
industrial 	output, 	rose	only	sluggishly 	in	the	
summer.
The	livelier 	growth 	in	the	advanced 	econo -
mies’	 industrial	 sector	 is	reflected	 in	stronger	
aggregate 	output 	growth. 	In	the	third 	quar-
ter,	according 	to	initial 	estimates 	based 	on	
provisional	 data	 for	the	United	 States,	 Japan,	
the	United 	Kingdom 	and	the	euro	area, 	real	
gross	 domestic	 product	 (GDP)	 grew	 by	a	sea-
sonally 	adjusted 	½%	and	was	thus	1¼%	
higher 	year-on-year. 	Japan 	was	in	the	lead,	
with	seasonally 	adjusted 	growth 	of	+1½%	
vis-à-vis 	the	spring 	quarter, 	followed 	by	the	
United 	States 	and	the	United 	Kingdom 	at	
+½% 	each. 	By	comparison, 	the	euro 	area	
was	only	able	to	achieve 	moderate 	growth	
(+¼%).
The	outlook 	for	the	global 	economy 	in	the	
2011	 Q4-2012	 Q1	period	 has	become	 consid -
erably 	more 	pessimistic 	following 	the	re-
newed 	escalation 	in	the	European 	sovereign	
debt	 crisis	 and	the	global	 stock	 market	 slump.	
This	is	also	reflected 	in	the	fact	that	leading	
indicators 	based 	on	surveys 	among 	busi-
nesses 	and	households 	have 	for	several	
months 	been 	pointing 	clearly 	downwards,	
signalling	 the	risk	of	a	recession.	 By	contrast,	
hard 	business 	activity 	indicators, 	to	date,	
draw 	a	more 	favourable 	picture. 	The	sover -
eign	 debt	 crisis	 in	the	euro	 area	 could	 weigh	
on	the	recovery 	in	Europe 	especially, 	but	
could	 also	have	 adverse	 implications	 for	trad-
ing	partners 	in	other 	economic 	areas. 	How -
ever, 	extreme 	turmoil 	such	as	that	following	
the	Lehman 	Brothers 	insolvency 	three 	years	
ago	is	not	likely.	 Assuming	 that	 the	sovereign	debt 	crisis 	in	Europe 	does 	not	intensify 	dra-
matically, 	there 	is	justified 	reason 	for	hope,	
given 	falling 	inflation 	and	a	very	expansion -
ary	monetary 	policy 	in	the	industrial 	nations	
as	well	 as	continued	 robust	 demand	 growth	
in	the	EMEs,	 that	 the	global	 forces	 of	growth	
will	not	run	aground	 in	the	coming	 months.	
This	 would	 also	 mitigate	 the	uncertainty	 pre-
vailing	 among	 consumers	 and	enterprises	 re-
garding	 the	economy.
Against	 the	background	 of	stock	 market	 cor-
rections,	 the	renewed	 escalation	 of	the	sover -
eign	debt	crisis 	in	the	euro	area	and	the	re-
sulting	 global	 deterioration	 in	sentiment,	 the	
IMF	revised	 downwards	 its	forecast	 for	global	
economic 	growth 	in	September 	from 	its	in-
terim 	forecast 	in	June. 	The	growth 	forecasts	
for	2011 	and	2012 	were 	reduced 	by	¼	and	Perceptible 
increase in industrial countries’ GDP
Contradictory 
signals make it difficult to assess short­term outlook
IMF forecast revised downwardsGlobal industrial output
Source:  Centraal  Planbureau.  —  1  OECD 
countries  excluding  Turkey,  Mexico,  South 
Korea, Poland, Slovakia, Czech Republic and Hungary.
Deutsche Bundesbank2007 2008 2009 2010 2011808590951001051101151201252008 Q1 = 100, seasonally adjusted, log scale
Total
of which
Advanced
economies 1
Emerging
economies
July-
AugDEUTSCHE  
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report  
November 2011
13

½	percentage 	point 	respectively 	to	4.0% 	for	
each 	of	those 	years. 	However, 	this	still	repre -
sents 	above-average 	growth 	compared 	with	
the	last	economic 	cycle. 	The	corrections 	are	
focused 	on	the	industrial 	countries, 	especially 	
the	United 	States 	and	the	euro 	area. 	The	
forecasts 	for	the	EMEs 	were 	reduced 	for	each 	
of	those 	years 	by	¼	percentage 	point 	to	6.4% 	
and	6.1 % 	respectively. 	The	revisions 	were 	
larger 	than	average 	for	the	central 	and	east	
European 	countries 	(excluding 	the	CIS)	be-
cause 	of	the	relatively 	pronounced 	depend -
ence 	of	their 	economies 	on	the	euro	area. 	
The	changes 	in	the	assessment 	of	world 	trade 	
growth 	were 	also	quite 	extensive. 	Owing 	to	
the	escalation 	of	the	euro-area 	sovereign 	
debt 	crisis, 	the	IMF’s 	latest 	World 	Economic 	
Outlook 	sees	the	downside 	risks	as	being 	
even 	more 	predominant 	than	earlier.Following 	a	bout 	of	sharp 	price 	increases 	in	
the	2010 	Q4-2011 	Q1	period, 	the	commodity 	
markets 	calmed 	perceptibly 	in	the	summer 	
months 	amidst 	more 	moderate 	global 	eco-
nomic 	activity 	and	increased 	uncertainty 	in	
the	financial 	markets. 	The	spot	price 	of	a	bar-
rel	of	Brent 	crude 	oil	was	4¼% 	cheaper 	than	
in	the	spring. 	However, 	it	was	still	more 	ex-
pensive 	year-on-year 	(45¾%). 	Oil	futures 	
were 	trading 	at	considerable 	discounts, 	indi-
cating 	that	short-term 	supplies 	are	still	low	
despite 	the	restoration 	of	oil	production 	in	
Libya. 	Prices 	for	industrial 	commodities 	and	
food 	likewise 	fell	perceptibly 	in	the	summer 	
period. 	Unlike 	crude 	oil,	however, 	their	prices 	
started 	to	fall	at	an	even 	faster 	pace 	as	late	as	
the	beginning 	of	autumn.
In	the	summer 	months, 	the	effect 	of	the	eas-
ing	in	the	commodity 	markets 	was	to	make 	a	
slight 	dent	in	consumer 	price 	inflation 	in	the	
industrial 	countries. 	However, 	the	consumer 	
price 	index 	was	still	up	by	¼%	(seasonally 	ad-
justed) 	from 	the	previous 	quarter, 	in	which 	it	
had	risen 	by	½%. 	The	basket 	of	goods 	ex-
cluding 	energy 	and	food 	was	once 	again 	up	
by	½%. 	Prices 	therefore 	afforded 	households 	
no	perceptible 	relief. 	Year-on-year 	headline 	
inflation 	accelerated 	from 	2.9% 	to	3.0%; 	
core	inflation 	(excluding 	energy 	and	food 	
prices) 	rose	by	0.2	percentage 	point 	to	1.7%.
Selected emerging market economies
The	Chinese 	economy’s 	slowdown, 	which 	
had	started 	at	year’s 	beginning, 	continued 	in	
the	summer 	months. 	Year-on-year 	real	GDP	
growth 	fell	from 	9½% 	in	the	second 	quarter 	
to	9%.	One	of	the	reasons 	for	the	decelera -Perceptible 
calming in 
commodity 
markets
Consumer 
prices still 
under upward 
pressure in the 
industrial 
countries
Chinese 
economy 
 continuing to 
gradually cool 
offWorld market prices for 
crude oil, industrial 
commodities and food, 
beverages and tobacco
Sources:  Thomson  Reuters  and  HWWI.  — 
 = Average of 1 to 11 November or 1 to 16 
November 2011 (crude oil).
Deutsche Bundesbank2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 20115060708090100120140160180US dollar basis, 2010 = 100,
monthly averages, log scale
Crude oil 
(Brent)
Industrial 
commod-
ities
Food, beverages 
and tobacco
DEUTSCHE  
BUNDESBANK
E U R O S Y S T E M
Monthly Report  
November 2011
14

tion	is	that	the	People’s 	Bank 	of	China 	has	
maintained	 its	restrictive	 monetary	 and	lend-
ing	policy. 	In	particular, 	the	central 	govern -
ment’s 	programme 	of	strongly 	expanding	
public 	residential 	construction, 	designed 	to	
meet 	rising 	demand 	for	affordable 	housing,	
has	caused 	investment 	growth 	to	weaken	
only	moderately 	up	to	now. 	Another 	reason	
is	that	 real	retail	 sales	 grew	 somewhat	 more	
slowly 	in	the	past	few	months 	than 	previ -
ously. 	The	loss	of	consumers’ 	purchasing	
power	 as	a	result	 of	the	persistently	 high	 rate	
of	inflation 	is	likely 	to	have 	played 	a	major	
role.	As	this	report 	went 	to	press, 	consumer	
price 	inflation 	decelerated 	somewhat 	owing	
to	a	slight	 easing	 in	food	 prices;	 however,	 at	
5.5%	 in	October,	 it	was	 still	well	 off	the	gov-
ernment’s 	target 	level	of	4%.	Alongside 	the	
dampened 	domestic 	dynamics, 	a	slowdown	
in	exports 	also	contributed 	to	the	recent	
moderation	 of	growth	 in	China.	 Year-on-year	
export	 growth	 –	in	US	dollar	 terms	 –	fell	from	
22%	 in	the	second	 quarter	 to	19%	 in	the	pe-
riod	 from	 July	to	October.
In	India, 	for	which 	no	current 	GDP	data	are	
available 	yet,	economic 	output 	growth 	is	
likely 	to	have 	decelerated 	perceptibly 	in	the	
third	 quarter	 from	 a	high	 level.	 One	 particular	
sign	 of	this	is	that	 manufacturing	 activity,	 af-
ter	having	 already	 slowed	 down	 considerably,	
lost	a	perceptible 	amount 	of	momentum	
again, 	with	year-on-year 	industrial 	output	
growth 	falling 	from 	+6¾% 	in	the	second	
quarter	 to	+3¼%	 in	the	third.	 Moreover,	 the	
very	 strong	 momentum	 in	some	 services	 sec-
tors	up	to	that	 point	 appears	 to	have	 recently	
also	 flagged	 considerably.	 Unlike	 the	trend	 in	
many	 other	 EMEs,	 consumer	 price	 inflation	 in	India looking at 
prospect of economic slowdownConsumer prices in the
industrial countries
Sources:  national  statistics,  Eurostat  and 
Bundesbank  calculations. —  1 USA,  EU-27, 
Japan, Canada, Norway and Switzerland. — 2 Excluding energy and food; euro area and United  Kingdom:  HICP  excluding  energy and unprocessed food; Japan: including al-coholic beverages.
Deutsche Bundesbank2008 2009 2010 201120246
–+++
–20+2+4+6
2024
–++
0+2+4+6
202
–+Quarterly, year-on-year percentage change
Industrial countries, total 1
Headline inflation
Core inflation 2
of which
USA
Euro area
United Kingdom
JapanOct
OctOctOctDEUTSCHE  
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report  
November 2011
15

India 	rose	over	the	course 	of	the	summer, 	
from 	8.6% 	in	June	to	10.1 % 	in	September. 	In	
order 	to	counter 	the	strong 	inflationary 	pres-
sure, 	the	Reserve 	Bank 	of	India 	raised 	its	key	
interest 	rate	in	September 	and	again 	in	Octo -
ber.
Brazil’s 	economic 	output 	growth 	has	proba -
bly	more 	or	less	come 	to	a	standstill 	in	the	
past	quarter 	after 	having 	grown 	by	a	consid -
erable 	¾%	in	the	spring 	quarter. 	Industrial 	
output, 	which 	has	become 	less	competitive 	
owing 	to	a	strong 	appreciation 	of	the	Brazil -
ian	real	and	high	wage 	increases, 	continued 	
to	trend 	downwards 	in	the	past	few	months. 	
In	September, 	output 	was	down 	by	a	season -
ally	adjusted 	4%	from 	its	March 	cyclical 	peak. 	
However, 	like	in	India, 	services 	seem 	to	have 	
entered 	calmer 	waters 	as	this	report 	went 	to	
press. 	The	Brazilian 	central 	bank 	lowered 	its	
key	interest 	rate	in	September 	and	October 	
by	a	total	of	100	basis 	points 	owing 	to	a	less	
favourable 	assessment 	of	the	economic 	out-
look. 	However, 	consumer 	price 	inflation 	in	
October 	stood 	at	7.0%, 	which 	was	still	above 	
the	central 	bank’s 	upper 	tolerance 	threshold 	
of	6.5%.
The	Russian 	economy, 	unlike 	those 	of	the	
other 	major 	emerging 	market 	economies, 	
saw	significant 	output 	growth 	in	the	past	
quarter. 	According 	to	an	initial 	estimate 	from 	
the	Russian 	Federal 	Statistics 	Service, 	real	
GDP	was	up	by	4¾% 	on	the	year	compared 	
with	+3½% 	in	the	second 	quarter. 	Even 	
period-on-period 	–	seasonally 	adjusted 	data	
are	not	yet	available 	–	output 	is	likely 	to	have 	
grown 	much 	more 	strongly 	than	in	the	spring 	
quarter, 	in	which 	GDP	growth 	had	been 	de-pressed 	not	least	owing 	to	inventory 	adjust -
ments. 	On	the	whole, 	the	Russian 	economy 	
has	been 	on	more 	of	a	flat	growth 	path	since 	
the	beginning 	of	the	recovery; 	as	before, 	ag-
gregate 	economic 	output 	is	still	below 	its	pre-
crisis 	levels. 	This	is	due	chiefly 	to	weak 	invest -
ment 	growth. 	The	declining 	trend 	in	con-
sumer 	price 	inflation 	since 	the	beginning 	of	
the	year	has	continued 	throughout 	the	re-
porting 	period. 	Consumer 	price 	inflation 	was	
7.2% 	in	October, 	and	thus	2.4	percentage 	
points 	lower 	than	in	January.
United States
The	US	economy 	picked 	up	the	pace 	percep -
tibly	in	the	third 	quarter. 	After 	seasonal 	ad-
justment, 	real	GDP	was	up	by	½%	from 	the	
spring 	quarter, 	in	which 	it	had	risen 	by	only	
¼%. 	This	represented 	an	exceeding 	of	the	
growth 	level	of	2007 	Q4,	the	latest 	cyclical 	
peak. 	Households 	were 	one	of	the	key	drivers 	
of	the	acceleration. 	Following 	a	quarter 	in	
which 	an	undersupply 	of	Japanese 	cars	had	
put	a	considerable 	damper 	on	real	consumer 	
spending 	(+¼%), 	the	return 	to	normal 	in	the	
summer 	months 	led	to	a	greater 	impetus 	
(+½%). 	Virtually 	just	as	many 	new	cars	were 	
sold	in	September 	as	in	April. 	However, 	la-
bour 	market 	developments 	remained 	sub-
dued. 	Although 	monthly 	employment 	
growth, 	at	130,000 	jobs, 	was	much 	stronger 	
in	the	July-September 	period 	than 	on	aver-
age	in	the	May-June 	period 	(+37,000 	jobs), 	
the	first	four	months 	of	2011 	had	seen	aver-
age	monthly 	employment 	growth 	of	179,000. 	
Whereas 	the	tentative 	employment 	growth 	
constrained 	nominal 	income 	growth, 	stub-
born 	inflation 	eroded 	consumers’ 	purchasing 	Brazilian 
economy 
treading water
Increased 
growth rate  
in RussiaEconomic 
activity 
receiving 
renewed 
stronger boost 
from house­
holds …
DEUTSCHE  
BUNDESBANK
E U R O S Y S T E M
Monthly Report  
November 2011
16

power.	 Consumer	 prices	 were	 up	in	the	sum-
mer	by	a	seasonally 	adjusted 	¾%	from 	the	
second 	quarter, 	in	which 	they	had	risen 	by	
1 %.	Year-on-year 	headline 	inflation 	thus	in-
creased	 from	 +3.4%	 to	+3.8%.	 Even	 exclud -
ing	energy	 and	food	 prices,	 the	rate	 of	infla-
tion	 rose,	 from	 1.5%	 to	1.9%.	 All	in	all,	real	
disposable 	incomes 	contracted 	slightly 	com-
pared 	with	the	spring, 	which 	meant 	that	
households’ 	increased 	consumption 	came 	at	
the	expense	 of	their	 savings.	 At	4%,	 the	sav-
ing	ratio	 was	 at	its	lowest	 level	 since	 the	end	
of	2007. 	The	role	of	real	income 	trends 	and	
specifically	 that	 of	inflation	 in	explaining	 the	
flatter 	path	of	consumption 	in	the	past	few	
years 	relative 	to	previous 	upswings 	is	also	
shown	 by	an	econometric	 study	 (see	 box	on	
pages 18	 and	19).
It	was	not	only	households 	that	provided 	a	
stronger	 boost	 in	the	summer,	 but	also	enter -
prises.	 After	 price	 adjustment,	 their	 spending	
on	equipment 	and	software 	grew 	more	
buoyantly	 than	 at	any	time	 since	 spring	 2010	
(+4%). 	In	addition, 	construction 	investment	
once	 again	 showed	 strong	 gains.	 By	contrast,	
private 	residential 	investment 	growth 	was	
muted	 at	best,	 public	 demand	 remained	 un-
changed, 	and	foreign 	trade 	had	virtually 	no	
impact 	on	GDP	growth. 	The	slowdown 	in	
stockbuilding	 continued	 to	perceptibly	 inhibit	
the	upward	 trend	 in	aggregate	 economic	 ac-
tivity. 	On	the	whole, 	real	spending 	shows	
that	 households	 and	 enterprises,	 despite	 the	
increased 	uncertainty 	expressed 	in	some	
measures	 of	sentiment,	 assume	 that	 the	up-
swing	 will	continue.Japan
Of	the	key	industrial	 countries,	 Japan	 showed	
by	far	the	strongest 	quarter-on-quarter	
growth	 in	aggregate	 economic	 activity	 in	the	
summer,	 at	a	seasonally	 adjusted	 1½%.	 If	up-
ward 	revisions 	are	taken 	into	account, 	real	
GDP	 nearly	 returned	 to	its	level	 of	a	year	 ear-
lier.	This	reflected 	a	return 	of	production 	to	
normality	 following	 the	disaster-related	 stop-
pages	 in	the	winter	 and	spring.	 With	 monthly	
indicators	 already	 showing	 much	 more	 mod-
erate	 economic	 growth	 in	Japan	 as	the	sum-
mer	progressed, 	the	sharp 	6¼% 	rise	in	real	
exports 	of	goods 	and	services 	in	the	third	
quarter,	 in	particular,	 needs	 to	be	seen	 in	the	
context	 of	the	slump	 in	the	preceding	 quarter	
(-5%).	 The	calming	 of	global	 economic	 activ-
ity	and	appreciation 	of	the	yen	are	likely 	to	
put	a	considerable	 strain	 on	the	growth	 rate	
of	Japanese	 exports	 in	the	months	 to	come.	
The	strong 	surge 	in	imports 	in	the	summer	
months 	was	driven 	by	rising 	domestic 	de-
mand.	 It	was	 especially	 private-sector	 spend -
ing	on	residential 	construction 	which 	rose	
sharply 	in	real	terms, 	while 	government 	in-
vestment 	was	scaled 	back. 	However, 	the	re-
cent	 third	 extra	 budget	 passed	 by	the	Diet	 of	
Japan 	is	expected 	to	further 	support 	the	re-
construction 	process. 	The	labour 	market	
proved 	to	be	a	stabilising 	factor. 	In	Septem -
ber,	the	national 	unemployment 	rate, 	at	
4.1 %,	 was	 even	 much	 lower	 than	 during	 the	
last	nationwide 	survey 	in	February 	(4.6%).	
Owing, 	above 	all,	to	higher 	energy 	prices,	
Japan’s 	consumer 	price 	index 	underwent 	a	
U-turn	 from	 -0.5%	 in	the	spring	 to	+0.1 %	 in	
the	third	 quarter.	 Excluding	 energy	 and	food	… and 
 enterprisesEconomic 
activity largely back to normalDEUTSCHE  
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report  
November 2011
17

Deutsche BundesbankExplaining growth in US private consumption during the current upturn
So far, the pace of economic recovery in the United States 
has been only moderate. The upswing has been rather flat 
not only in relation to the severe contraction in the latter 
part of 2008 and early part of 2009. The current expansion 
is even below average compared with the two previous 
phases of recovery in the early 1990s and 2000s, both of 
which followed considerably milder downturns.1 Sluggish 
growth of private consumption is an important reason 
for the relatively weak current upward trend of the US 
economy. In order to illustrate this, a consumption func -
tion is estimated below. A comparison of earlier cycles with 
the individual influencing factors’ contribution to growth 
calculated from this estimation enables the identification 
and classification of economic driving forces and growth-
inhibiting factors.
It is assumed in the consumption function that the change 
in consumer spending ( C ) is a function of growth in house -
holds’ disposable income ( I ). As the estimating equation is 
based on real variables, the higher rates of inflation caused 
by rising energy and food prices directly affect real dispos-
able income. Particular attention is paid to households’ 
balance sheets. Aside from net housing wealth ( HW ) and 
net financial wealth ( FW) their debt ( D) is also taken into 
account.2 For this purpose, a cause-and-effect relationship 
is assumed between the growth of private net wealth and 
consumption expenditure. In this case, the wealth effect is 
assumed to be the key driver. Rising asset prices therefore 
discourage households from saving current income as they 
can achieve a similar increase in wealth with less saving 
and vice versa.3 With this in mind, the sharp decline in the 
saving ratio of American households up to the middle of 
the past decade is often attributed to the strong increase in 
their net assets. Conversely, falling real estate prices since 
the beginning of the most recent financial and economic 
crisis are likely to have pushed the saving ratio up markedly, 
thus leading to a dent in consumption. Households’ increas -
ing efforts to reduce their debt could be having a similar 
impact. The unemployment rate ( U ) is included in the func-
tion as an additional regressor since rising unemployment 
may lead to higher precautionary saving.
On the basis of the Johansen Test, a cointegrating relation -
ship between real private consumption and real income can 
be confirmed. The error correction model below is initially 
estimated for the entire time period available, 1957 Q1 to 
spring 2011.4∆lnCt =   β1 + β2 ∆lnIt + β3 ∆lnFWt + β4 ∆lnHWt + β5 ∆2 lnDt + β6 ∆U  
+ γ(lnCt-1 – lnIt-1 ) + εt
However, structural adjustments within the US economy over 
the past 55 years are likely to have substantially altered the 
sensitivity of consumption to some of the factors considered 
in this context. Calculating the growth contributions at the 
current end and based on a regression covering the entire 
estimating period could lead to the picture being distorted. 
To gain an impression of the movement of the coefficients 
over time, rolling regressions are carried out over a period 
of 20 years. The results indicate that the importance of the 
wealth effect in the case of real estate did not manifest 
itself until the beginning of the boom in the early 1990s. 
The coefficient in the estimation over the last 20 years was 
considerably higher than with regard to the regression 
across the entire observation period. In contrast, the coeffi -
cient of net financial wealth mostly oscillated within a fairly 
narrow range, without giving an indication of a sustained 
upward or downward tendency. However, the sensitivity 
of consumption to increases in income has continually 
weakened over the past few decades. Similarly, US consum-
ers have recently appeared to be perceptibly less sensitive 
to changes in the unemployment rate than was the case 
in the 1970s and 1980s. The dynamics of the time-varying 
coefficients underline the likelihood of a regression of the 
entire estimation period potentially leading to an incorrect 
specification at the current end. For this reason, the above 
regression function has been re-estimated for the 1990 to 
2011 period; the resulting coefficients provide the basis for 
the following analysis.
The estimation results are in line with the literature.5 
Aside from real disposable income, households’ net assets 
also impact significantly on consumption growth in both 
statistical and economic terms. The considerably higher 
coefficient of the growth of housing wealth compared 
with that of financial wealth signals that households are a 
great deal more sensitive to movement in house prices than 
to fluctuations in the financial markets. A change in the 
unemployment rate impacts on consumption expenditure 
not only through the development of wage incomes, but 
also through adjustment of the saving ratio. As the debt 
dynamics appear to be insignificant, they will no longer be 
taken into account below.
1 As only the first eight quarters of recovery could be observed, the ref -
erence periods at the beginning of the 1990s and 2000s were restricted 
to this horizon, too. — 2 Net housing wealth is calculated by subtract -
ing mortgage debt from housing wealth. Net financial wealth also 
includes stocks of durable consumer goods as well as equipment and 
software. The debt variable comprises overall outstanding household 
debt, including mortgages and consumer credit. The data are taken from the Federal Reserve’s Flow of Funds. All nominal variables were 
converted into real terms with the help of the personal consumption 
expenditure deflator. — 3 An additional impact on consumption could 
stem from liquidity constraints. Hence, households which have trou -
ble obtaining credit could use the additional net equity “created” by 
higher asset prices to finance current consumption. — 4 As it is not the 
changes in the level of debt as such, but the change to the change of 
DEUTSCHE  
BUNDESBANK
E U R O S Y S T E M
Monthly Report  
November 2011
18

The model does not explain the weakness of private con -
sumption experienced in the most recent economic recovery 
compared with the expansionary phase at the beginning of 
the 1990s. The residual’s negative contribution to growth 
reflects virtually the entire growth differential. A look at 
the beginning of the new millennium leads to a different 
result: during this period, the regressors studied in this 
context did considerably more to stimulate growth, on 
balance.
A closer look at the explanatory factors reveals that the 
moderate increase in real disposable income has throttled 
consumption growth since mid-2009 in comparison with 
2002 and 2003 in particular, but also with the early 1990s. 
This, however, is probably not particularly attributable to 
the moderate increase in employment; the phases at the 
beginning of the last two decades were even referred to 
as “jobless recoveries”. Moreover, on average over the past 
few quarters, nominal wage income, too, did not grow any 
less than in previous periods. Instead, the strong inflation, 
particularly in energy and food, appears to have dampened 
the growth of real disposable income a great deal more 
than in earlier phases of recovery. This finding accentuates 
the dampening real economic effects of the latest increase 
in oil prices. In view of the high consumption intensity, 
the repercussions for the US economy were particularly 
hard-felt. For instance, the share of energy expenditure in 
private consumption rose by ¾ percentage point in the four 
quarters up to spring 2011.
By contrast, the unemployment rate made a slight positive 
contribution to the latest upswing. Unlike in the periods at 
the beginning of the 1990s and 2000s, the unemployment 
rate – starting from a relatively high level – temporarily 
trended downwards somewhat. With regard to household 
wealth, the assumption is confirmed that the fall in real 
estate prices, which has continued beyond the recession 
to the present, has stifled consumption considerably. How -
ever, since at the same time the stock market recovery has 
improved household wealth substantially, wealth effects 
generated no negative growth contributions on balance. 
Compared with 2002 and 2003, during which the real 
estate boom was strongly expansive, an important stimulus 
was nevertheless missing.
this level that determines consumption growth, the variable is incorpo -
rated in the second difference. For financial wealth, an additional term 
lagged by one period was tested, but proved to be insignificant. The 
same applies to the lagged endogenous variable. — 5 See, for instance, 
K Case, J Quigley and R Shiller (2005), Comparing Wealth Effects: The 
Stock Market versus the Housing Market, Advances in Macroeconom -ics 5 (1) and J Benjamin, P Chinloy and D Jud (2004), Real Estate Versus 
Financial Wealth in Consumption, Journal of Real Estate Finance and 
Economics, 29 (3). For a meta-analysis of the effects of housing wealth 
on consumption growth, see: CBO Background Paper (2007), Housing 
Wealth and Consumer Spending.Contributions to private consumption 
growth
0.500.51.01.52.02.53.0
–++++++
–0.6–0.4–0.20+0.2+0.4+0.6+0.8+1.0+1.2Annualised quarterly data in percentage points
2009 – 2011 2002 – 2003 1991 – 1993Regressors in detailTotal
Housing wealthFinancial wealthUnemployment
rateDisposable
incomeResidualConstant and
error correction 
termRegressorsDeterminants o f real private consumption 
growth ( ΔlnC )
Coef ﬁ cient, p-value in parentheses
Determinant1957 Q1
to 
2011 Q2 1990 Q1
to
2011 Q2 
Change in income ( ΔlnI) 0.215 0.156
(0.00) (0.01)
Change in ﬁ  nancial wealth ( ΔlnF W) 0.032 0.027
(0.02) (0.08)
Change in housing wealth ( ΔlnHW ) 0.036 0.081
(0.04) (0.00)
Second change in private debt ( Δ2lnD) 0.024 –/uni00A00.040
(0.33) (0.37)
Change in the unemployment rate ( ΔU) –/uni00A00.008 –/uni00A00.004
(0.00) (0.01)
Error correction term ( lnC (t-1)-lnI(t-1)) –/uni00A00.049 –/uni00A00.058
(0.00) (0.04)
Constant 0.001 0.001
(0.59) (0.73)
Memo item
R2 (adjusted) in % 43.9 52.4
Number of observations 218 86 DEUTSCHE  
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report  
November 2011
19

prices, 	however, 	inflation 	remained 	negative 	
(-0.4%).
United Kingdom
After 	virtually 	stagnating, 	UK	economic 	out-
put	rose	moderately 	in	the	summer 	com-
pared 	with	the	preceding 	quarter. 	However, 	
since 	special 	factors 	had	previously 	con-
strained 	real	GDP	growth, 	its	seasonally 	ad-
justed 	increase 	of	½%	from 	the	spring 	is	
probably 	more 	likely 	an	overstatement 	of	the	
underlying 	momentum 	of	economic 	activity. 	
Although 	gross 	value 	added 	in	the	manufac -
turing 	sector 	(excluding 	construction) 	once 	
again 	grew 	considerably 	following 	a	contrac -
tion	in	the	previous 	quarter, 	this	was	due	
mainly 	to	the	recovery 	of	power 	and	gas	pro-
duction 	following 	a	weather-related 	dent. 	By	
contrast, 	manufacturing 	output 	growth 	was	
once 	again 	anaemic; 	construction 	even 	saw	a	
contraction. 	However, 	the	services 	sector, 	
which 	accounts 	for	three-quarters 	of	total 	
gross 	value 	added, 	showed 	considerably 	
stronger 	growth 	(¾%) 	than 	in	the	second 	
quarter, 	in	which 	an	additional 	holiday 	had	
dampened 	the	level	of	activity. 	Although 	no	
information 	on	the	expenditure 	side	of	GDP	
is	available 	yet,	households 	are	likely 	to	have 	
remained 	in	a	tight 	spot, 	after 	already 	having 	
curbed 	their 	real	consumer 	spending 	in	the	
spring 	for	the	fourth 	consecutive 	quarter. 	For	
one	thing, 	unemployment 	climbed 	to	8.3% 	
in	August, 	its	highest 	level	since 	1995. 	The	
number 	of	applications 	for	unemployment 	
benefits 	continued 	to	rise	in	September 	and	
October, 	although 	the	pace 	decelerated. 	For	
another, 	households 	saw	their 	purchasing 	
power 	take	yet	another 	heavy 	hit.	In	the	summer, 	the	Harmonised 	Index 	of	Consumer 	
Prices 	(HICP) 	rose	nearly 	as	sharply 	period-on-
period 	as	in	the	spring 	(+1 %). 	Its	year-on-year 	
rise	further 	increased 	somewhat 	to	+4.7%, 	
and	even 	core	inflation 	(excluding 	energy 	and	
unprocessed 	food), 	at	3.5%, 	was	well	above 	
the	official 	inflation 	target 	(regarding 	head -
line	inflation) 	of	2%.
New EU member states
In	the	entire 	group 	of	new	EU	member 	states 	
(EU-7),1	economic 	output 	is	likely 	to	have 	
once 	again 	grown 	perceptibly 	in	the	summer 	
quarter 	following 	a	rise	of	½%	in	the	second 	
quarter 	after 	seasonal 	adjustment. 	Real	GDP	
was	up	by	2%	in	Romania 	and	½%	in	Hun-
gary. 	In	addition, 	the	robust 	upward 	trend 	of	
Polish 	industrial 	output 	is	indicative 	of	a	per-
ceptible 	increase 	in	aggregate 	output. 	The	
situation 	on	the	labour 	market 	has	continued 	
to	improve 	slightly 	in	most 	of	these 	countries. 	
In	the	region 	as	a	whole, 	unemployment 	fell	
from 	9.4% 	in	the	second 	quarter 	to	9.2% 	in	
the	third. 	Consumer 	price 	inflation 	averaged 	
3.5% 	in	the	July-October 	period, 	which 	was	
much 	lower 	than 	in	the	second 	quarter 	
(4.5%). 	This	was	due	in	large 	part	not	only	to	
the	easing 	of	food 	prices 	but	also	to	the	elim-
ination 	of	the	mid-2010 	rise	in	indirect 	taxes 	
in	Romania 	from 	the	year-on-year 	compari -
son.GDP growth 
overstates 
underlying 
dynamics
Upswing 
continues
1	This	group 	comprises 	the	non-euro-area 	countries 	that	
joined 	the	European 	Union 	in	2004 	and	2007.
DEUTSCHE  
BUNDESBANK
E U R O S Y S T E M
Monthly Report  
November 2011
20

Macroeconomic trends in the euro area
In	the	third 	quarter, 	the	euro	area	remained 	
on	the	flat	growth 	path	that	it	had	embarked 	
on	in	the	second 	quarter. 	Real	GDP	grew 	
once 	again 	by	¼%	after 	seasonal 	adjustment. 	
It	was	up	by	1½% 	on	the	year	but	still	1¾% 	
removed 	from 	its	pre-crisis 	level. 	The	German 	
and	French 	economies, 	which 	each 	expanded 	
by	a	seasonally 	adjusted 	½%, 	made 	the	main 	
contributions 	to	growth. 	In	Spain, 	real	GDP	
remained 	stagnant 	at	the	previous 	period’s 	
level. 	The	Netherlands, 	Portugal 	and	Cyprus 	
reported 	a	decline 	in	aggregate 	output. 	The	
contraction 	process 	seems 	to	have 	continued 	
unabated 	in	Greece. 	Although 	Greece 	has	no	
longer 	reported 	seasonally 	adjusted 	data	on	
real	GDP	since 	the	spring, 	negative 	year-on-
year	GDP	growth 	in	the	third 	quarter 	(5¼%) 	
is	likely 	to	have 	been 	smaller 	than	a	quarter 	
earlier 	owing 	merely 	to	a	base 	effect. 	No	
such 	data	are	available 	for	Italy	and	Ireland 	
yet.	Mounting 	uncertainty 	among 	consumers 	
and	investors 	caused 	by	the	renewed 	escala -
tion	of	the	sovereign 	debt	crisis 	in	the	sum-
mer	is	likely 	to	be	one	of	the	key	reasons 	for	
sluggish 	euro-area 	growth. 	In	addition, 	banks 	
appear 	to	be	less	willing 	to	grant 	loans 	in	the	
most 	afflicted 	countries.
The	deterioration 	of	the	sentiment 	indicators, 	
which 	has	already 	lasted 	for	several 	months 	
now, 	has	failed 	to	make 	itself 	felt	in	a	corre -
sponding 	distinct 	weakening 	of	real	eco-
nomic 	activity, 	thus	making 	it	more 	difficult 	
to	assess 	macroeconomic 	trends 	in	the	euro	
area	for	the	2011 	Q4-2012 	Q1	period. 	There 	
is	currently 	no	telling 	in	which 	direction 	the	
gap	between 	the	extraordinarily 	bad	survey-Moderate 
growth in the 
summer 
quarter
Growth 
outlook more 
on gloomy side 
towards year’s 
endGrowth trends
in the euro area
Sources: national statistics, Eurostat and the 
ECB.
Deutsche Bundesbank2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 201132101
–––+
–4–3–2–10+1+2+3
2101
––+
–3–2–10+1
2101
––+Euro area
Germany
France
Italy
SpainReal GDP, seasonally adjusted,
quarter-on-quarter percentage changeDEUTSCHE  
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report  
November 2011
21

based 	indicators 	and	the	less	unfavourable 	
hard	economic 	indicators 	will	close. 	All	in	all,	
there 	are	many 	indications 	that	growth 	in	the	
fourth 	quarter 	will	more 	or	less	grind 	to	a	
halt.	Further 	macroeconomic 	developments 	
are	likely 	to	depend, 	in	particular, 	on	how	the	
sovereign 	debt	crisis 	unfolds.
The	increase 	in	economic 	output 	in	the	third 	
quarter 	was	borne 	chiefly 	by	the	increased 	buoyancy 	of	activity 	in	the	production 	sector 	
compared 	to	the	spring 	quarter. 	Industrial 	
output 	was	up	by	a	seasonally 	adjusted 	1 %	
on	the	period. 	Capital 	goods 	(+2¾%) 	and	en-
ergy	production 	(+1¼%) 	were 	the	main 	driv-
ers.	The	production 	of	intermediate 	goods 	
and	consumer 	durables 	rose	by	½%	each. 	By	
contrast, 	the	output 	of	non-durables 	went 	
down 	perceptibly 	(-½%) 	in	the	period 	under 	
review. 	Although 	output 	was	brisk 	on	the	
whole 	in	the	summer 	quarter, 	capacity 	utilisa -
tion	in	manufacturing 	fell	once 	again 	in	the	
July	to	October 	period, 	thus	moving 	even 	fur-
ther	away 	from 	normal 	levels. 	Besides 	the	in-
dustrial 	sector, 	construction 	activity 	rose	no-
ticeably 	in	the	summer 	quarter, 	by	¾%	com-
pared 	to	the	second 	quarter.
With 	regard 	to	the	outlook 	for	the	euro-area 	
industrial 	sector, 	at	present 	the	leading 	indi-
cators 	–	as	is	the	case	for	other 	economic 	ar-
eas	–	are	presenting 	a	somewhat 	hazy 	pic-
ture. 	In	the	July-August 	period, 	orders 	re-
ceived 	by	manufacturing 	maintained 	their 	
high	level	of	the	spring 	months. 	Excluding 	
the	manufacture 	of	other 	transport 	equip -
ment, 	in	which 	numerous 	large 	orders 	were 	
recorded 	in	the	second 	quarter, 	orders 	were 	
still	up	by	½%. 	This	represented 	a	year-on-
year	increase 	of	6¾%. 	By	contrast, 	according 	
to	the	European 	Commission’s 	economic 	sur-
vey,	industry 	confidence 	continued 	to	deteri -
orate, 	albeit 	at	a	slower 	pace, 	falling 	in	Octo -
ber	back 	to	its	multi-year 	average. 	A	poorer 	
assessment 	of	order 	books 	and	higher 	pres-
sure	on	inventories 	are	the	main 	reasons 	for	
the	deterioration 	of	growth. 	In	addition, 	the	
Purchasing 	Managers’ 	Index 	for	manufactur -
ing	(as	well	as	for	services) 	fell	even 	further 	Industrial 
output is 
buoyant …
… yet 
uncertain 
outlookSeasonally adjusted, quarterlySelected indicators of
euro-area industrial activity
Lin scale
Capacity utilisation
July-
Aug
Deutsche Bundesbank2005 = 100, log scale
New orders received
by order-based industry
2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 20112005 = 100, log scale
Industrial output
859095100105110115120
Average
1990 to 2010
0
of which
Excluding the 
manufacture of 
other transport 
equipment67707376798285%
Total
80859095100105110115120125130
DEUTSCHE  
BUNDESBANK
E U R O S Y S T E M
Monthly Report  
November 2011
22

below 	the	expansion 	threshold 	in	October,	
thus	 signalling	 a	contraction.
From 	the	demand 	side, 	investment 	and	ex-
ports	 are	likely	 to	have	 boosted	 GDP	 growth	
in	the	third 	quarter. 	The	perceptible 	growth	
in	capital 	goods 	and	construction 	output	
mentioned 	above 	indicate 	rather 	favourable	
development 	of	investment 	expenditure. 	In	
the	July-August	 period,	 nominal	 exports	 from	
the	euro	 area	 to	non-euro-area	 countries	 rose	
by	a	seasonally	 adjusted	 1 %	from	 the	second	
quarter. 	Since 	imports 	simultaneously 	stag-
nated, 	the	euro-area 	balance 	of	trade 	im-
proved	 distinctly	 during	 the	period	 under	 re-
view.	 Foreign	 trade	 is	thus	 likely	 to	have	 once	
again	 made	 a	positive	 contribution	 to	growth.	
On	the	other 	hand, 	household 	consumption	
has	probably 	put	a	renewed 	damper 	on	ag-
gregate	 growth.	 At	all	events,	 the	number	 of	
new	 car	registrations	 was	 down	 slightly	 after	
seasonal	 adjustment,	 whereas	 real	retail	 sales	
stood	 pat	at	the	depressed	 level	 of	the	previ -
ous	period.	 This	is	consistent	 with	 a	decline	 in	
consumer	 confidence	 that	 persisted	 through -
out	the	reporting	 period,	 which	 was	 particu -
larly	 pronounced	 in	those	 member	 states	 that	
are	under	 severe	 pressure	 to	consolidate	 their	
public	 finances.
After 	mid-year, 	the	recovery 	in	the	labour	
market 	began 	to	sputter. 	Employment	
growth, 	which 	in	the	second 	quarter 	still	
managed	 to	amount	 to	¼%	 compared	 to	the	
winter 	months, 	is	likely 	to	have 	come 	to	a	
virtual	 standstill	 given	 the	renewed	 sluggish -
ness	of	economic 	growth. 	This	is	also	indi-
cated 	by	the	renewed 	rise	in	the	number 	of	
unemployed	 persons	 in	August	 and	Septem -ber	to	a	seasonally 	adjusted 	560,000 	above	
its	low	of	April 	2011. 	Since 	then, 	the	stand -
ardised 	unemployment 	rate	has	gone 	up	by	
0.3	percentage	 point	 to	10.2%.	 After	 factor -
ing	out	the	favourable 	development 	in	Ger-
many, 	the	picture 	presented 	by	the	labour	
market	 is	even	 gloomier.	 In	the	euro	 area	 ex-
cluding	 Germany,	 employment	 did	not	reach	
its	cyclical	 trough	 until	 the	beginning	 of	2011	
and	has	only	inched 	upwards 	since 	then. 	In	
addition, 	the	unemployment 	rate	in	that	
group	 of	countries,	 at	11.9%,	 was	perceptibly	
higher	 than	 in	the	euro	 area	 as	a	whole.
Year-on-year 	HICP 	inflation 	in	the	euro	area	
rose	 to	3.0%	 in	September	 2011	 and	 stayed	
at	that	 level	 in	October.	 This	 means	 that	 the	
wave 	of	inflation 	which 	followed 	the	global	
economic	 recovery	 with	 a	time-lag	 is	likely	 to	Corporate 
investment and exports boosting economic activity
Situation in 
labour market persistently difficult
Peaking  
of inflation2007 2008 2009 2010 2011979899100101102103
%
789101112Euro area 2007 Q1= 100, quarterly, log scale
Employed persons
Euro area 
excluding Germany
Monthly, lin scale
Unemployment rate
(standardised)The euro-area labour market
Seasonally adjusted
Deutsche BundesbankDEUTSCHE  
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report  
November 2011
23

have 	peaked. 	Year-on-year 	HICP 	inflation 	is	
expected 	to	recede 	distinctly 	in	the	coming 	
months. 	The	impact 	on	annual 	inflation 	of	
the	surging 	energy 	prices 	in	the	2010 	Q4-
2011 	Q1	period, 	in	particular, 	is	likely 	to	grad-
ually	wane. 	The	same 	applies 	to	the	in	some 	
cases 	rather 	sharp 	increase 	in	food 	prices. 	
The	price-driving 	effects 	of	fiscal 	measures 	
applied 	in	some 	euro-area 	countries 	to	con-
solidate 	public 	budgets 	in	deficit 	in	the	sec-
ond	half	of	2010 	and	beginning 	of	2011 	will	
likewise 	probably 	diminish.
The	extension 	of	coverage 	to	include 	sea-
sonal 	products 	beginning 	in	January 	2011 	without 	adjusting 	the	index 	series 	for	the	
past	has	increased 	the	volatility 	of	the	
monthly 	annualised 	HICP 	rates 	for	the	euro	
area, 	making 	them 	considerably 	more 	diffi-
cult	to	interpret 	at	times. 	This	is	particularly 	
true	of	non-energy 	durables 	and	non-
durables, 	in	which 	the	semi-annual 	end-of-
season 	sales 	made 	themselves 	felt	much 	
more 	strongly 	than	before. 	Because 	of	these 	
influences 	–	the	year-on-year 	rates 	in	July	and	
August 	were 	thus	condensed 	–	year-on-year 	
consumer 	price 	inflation, 	at	2.7% 	on	average 	
over	the	third 	quarter, 	was	even 	slightly 	less	
strong 	than 	in	the	second 	quarter, 	when 	it	
stood 	at	2.8%.
DEUTSCHE  
BUNDESBANK
E U R O S Y S T E M
Monthly Report  
November 2011
24

Monetary policy  
and banking businessMonetary policy and money market 
 developments
Economic 	growth 	has	weakened 	increasingly 	
in	the	euro	area	during 	the	course 	of	2011. 	
At	the	same 	time, 	the	economic 	outlook 	for	
the	final	quarter 	of	this	year	and	first	quarter 	
of	next	year	and	beyond 	has	deteriorated 	no-
ticeably 	since 	the	middle 	of	the	year. 	This	is	
partly 	due	to	the	renewed 	intensification 	of	
the	sovereign 	debt	crisis 	and	the	concomitant 	
pronounced 	uncertainty 	on	financial 	markets. 	
Overall, 	this	development 	has	led	to	a	per-
ceptible 	downward 	revision 	in	growth 	expec -
tations 	for	2012. 	Furthermore, 	it	is	expected 	
that	HICP 	inflation 	will	decline 	appreciably 	in	
the	coming 	months 	and	thus	return 	to	the	
range 	of	stability. 	The	deterioration 	in	macro -
economic 	prospects 	and	its	implications 	for	
the	inflation 	outlook 	prompted 	the	ECB	Gov-
erning 	Council‘s 	decision 	to	cut	interest 	rates 	
by	25	basis 	points 	at	the	beginning 	of	No-
vember. 	Taking 	care	to	maintain 	the	current 	
corridor 	breadth 	of	150	basis 	points, 	the	
main 	refinancing 	rate	has	stood 	at	1.25% 	
with	effect 	from 	8 November 	2011, 	with	the	
interest 	rate	for	recourse 	to	the	marginal 	
lending 	facility 	set	at	2%	and	the	interest 	rate	
on	the	deposit 	facility 	at	0.5%.
The	temporary 	calm 	on	financial 	markets 	at	
the	beginning 	of	the	year	has	been 	followed 	
by	a	significant 	deterioration 	of	financial 	
market 	conditions 	since 	the	summer. 	As	the	
crisis 	spread 	to	other 	euro-area 	countries, 	
growing 	uncertainty 	about 	banks’ 	financing 	
situation 	generated 	a	massive 	rise	in	banks’ 	
demand 	for	liquidity 	from 	the	Eurosystem. 	In	
response 	to	an	escalation 	of	this	develop -ECB Governing 
Council lowers 
key interest 
rates by 25 bp
Rise in 
overnight rate 
in spite of high 
excess liquidityDEUTSCHE  
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report  
November 2011
25

ment 	mid-September, 	on	6 October 	the	ECB	
Governing 	Council 	approved 	the	renewed 	
provision 	of	longer-term 	liquidity 	for	a	period 	
of	around 	12	months 	through 	two	additional 	
longer-term 	refinancing 	operations 	in	Octo -
ber	and	December 	2011; 	it	also	decided 	to	
continue 	to	conduct 	all	refinancing 	opera -
tions 	on	the	basis 	of	full	allotment 	for	as	long	
as	necessary, 	and	at	least	until	10 July 	2012. 	
Excess 	liquidity 	in	the	banking 	system 	conse -quently 	reached 	a	level	last	observed 	in	the	
summer 	of	2010. 	In	the	reporting 	period, 	
	EONIA 	was	affected 	by	two	opposing 	forces. 	
On	the	one	hand, 	the	abundant 	excess 	li-
quidity 	in	the	third 	quarter 	caused 	money 	
market 	rates 	to	stabilise 	significantly 	below 	
the	main 	refinancing 	rate.	On	the	other 	hand, 	
the	greater 	uncertainty 	prevailing 	since 	the	
middle 	of	September 	was	reflected 	in	the	
form 	of	a	risk	premium, 	which 	led	to	the	
spread 	between 	EONIA 	and	the	rate	on	the	
deposit 	facility 	almost 	doubling 	in	the	past	
four	months 	(to	around 	20	basis 	points 	on	
average 	throughout 	the	last	reserve 	mainte -
nance 	period). 	The	overnight 	rate	is	thus	cur-
rently 	slightly 	above 	the	weighted 	average 	
rate	of	the	liquidity-absorbing 	operations 	
conducted 	in	connection 	with	the	Securities 	
Markets 	Programme. 	The	significance 	of	
these 	operations 	for	the	Eurosystem’s 	coun -
terparties 	has	increased 	significantly, 	as	their	
volume 	has	meanwhile 	risen 	to	more 	than 	
€180 	billion, 	which 	approximately 	corre -
sponds 	to	the	average 	use	of	the	deposit 	fa-
cility	in	the	last	reserve 	maintenance 	period.
Given 	the	recent 	worsening 	of	the	sovereign 	
debt	crisis, 	markets 	had	anticipated 	an	inter-
est	rate	cut	at	the	end	of	the	year. 	Neverthe -
less,	the	interest 	rate	move 	in	November 	
came 	as	a	surprise 	for	market 	participants. 	
Longer-term 	unsecured 	money 	market 	rates 	
declined 	by	as	much 	as	9	basis 	points 	imme -
diately 	after 	the	announcement 	and	com-
pletely 	reversed 	the	increase 	of	the	past	six	
months. 	Secured 	money 	market 	rates 	like-
wise	experienced 	an	immediate 	decline 	of	up	
to	11	basis 	points, 	returning 	to	the	down -
ward 	trend 	of	the	third 	quarter. 	As	a	result, 	Longer ­term 
money market 
rates halt 
upward trendMoney market interest rates
in the euro area
1 Monthly averages. — 2 Only on 8 October 
2008 2.75%. — 3 Three-month Euribor less 
three-month Eurepo. —  Average from 1 
to 16 November 2011.
Deutsche Bundesbank2008 2009 2010 201100.51.01.52.02.53.03.54.04.55.05.56.06.57.0
050100150200Difference between unsecured 
and secured three-month 
interbank lending rates 1, 32
Basis
points%
Marginal lending rate
Three-month Euribor1
EONIA1
Minimum bid rate or fixed
interest rate for main
refinancing operations
Deposit rate
DEUTSCHE  
BUNDESBANK
E U R O S Y S T E M
Monthly Report  
November 2011
26

even 	after 	the	rate	cut,	the	depo-repo 	spreads 	
remained 	at	the	high	level	reached 	in	the	
course 	of	the	third 	quarter. 	Irrespective 	of	
their	underlying 	maturity, 	risk	premiums 	have 	
more 	than	doubled 	compared 	with	the	aver-
age	level	of	the	last	2½	years, 	as	money 	mar-
ket	rates 	for	secured 	transactions 	saw	a	dras-
tic	decline 	during 	the	third 	quarter, 	moving 	
much 	closer 	to	the	deposit 	rate.
In	order 	to	counter 	the	strained 	funding 	situ-
ation 	of	euro-area 	banks, 	at	its	first	meeting 	
in	the	month 	of	October 	2011 	the	ECB	Gov-
erning 	Council 	decided 	not	only	to	further 	
extend 	its	longer-term 	liquidity 	provision 	but	
also	to	launch 	a	second 	covered 	bond 	pur-
chase 	programme, 	which 	will	have 	a	size	of	
€40	billion, 	one-third 	smaller 	than 	the	May	
2009 	programme.
Monetary developments  
in the euro area
The	expansion 	in	the	M3	monetary 	aggre -
gate	observed 	since 	the	spring 	of	2010 	con-
tinued 	at	an	accelerated 	pace 	in	the	third 	
quarter 	of	2011. 	At	a	seasonally 	adjusted 	and	
annualised 	three-month 	rate	of	just	over	
7½%, 	the	quarter-on-quarter 	increase 	was	
the	highest 	since 	the	fourth 	quarter 	of	2008. 	
Heightened 	uncertainty 	on	the	financial 	mar-
kets	was	the	main 	reason 	for	the	sharp 	rise	in	
the	M3	monetary 	aggregate. 	The	annual 	
growth 	rate	of	M3	increased 	from 	2%	at	the	
middle 	of	the	year	to	3%	at	the	end	of	the	
reporting 	quarter 	on	account 	of	these 	influ-
ences. 	By	contrast, 	loans 	to	the	domestic 	pri-
vate	sector 	have 	grown 	at	an	almost 	constant 	pace 	since 	the	beginning 	of	the	year, 	at	
around 	2½% 	on	the	year.
Whilst 	the	expansion 	of	M3	in	the	first	half	of	
2011 	was	mainly 	driven 	by	the	growth 	of	
short-term 	time	and	savings 	deposits 	(M2-
M1),	the	rise	in	marketable 	instruments 	(M3-
M2)	and	in	the	highly 	liquid 	sub-component 	
M1	was	particularly 	marked 	over	the	summer 	
months. 	In	seasonally 	adjusted 	and	annual -
ised	terms, 	the	three-month 	rate	for	M1	was	
up	on	the	quarter 	from 	(revised) 	0.8% 	to	5%.	
This	acceleration 	was	mainly 	attributable 	to	
the	strong 	increase 	in	sight 	deposits, 	particu -
larly	in	August. 	On	top	of	this,	cash	holdings 	
again 	increased 	significantly. 	Both 	increases 	
are	likely 	to	have 	resulted 	from 	a	rebalancing 	
of	portfolios, 	in	the	course 	of	which 	market 	
participants 	shifted 	their 	funds 	temporarily 	Further non ­
standard 
measures 
announced in 
October 2011
Accelerated 
continuation  
of monetary 
expansionPronounced 
demand for 
marketable 
instruments 
and highly 
liquid compo­
nentsMonetary developments in the euro
area *
Changes in € billion, seasonally adjusted
Monetary aggregate in a balance 
sheet context2011
Q2 Q3
Monetary aggregate M3 
(=1+2-3-4-5) 54.9 181.5
Components:
  Currency in circulation and 
overnight deposits (M1) 9.1 57.4
  Other short-term deposits
(M2-M1) 31.9 36.7
  Marketable instruments (M3-M2) 13.8 87.4
Counterparts
 1.  Total credit to non-MFIs in
the euro area 16.5 114.0
    Credit to general govern-
ment – 26.7 63.8
    Credit to private-sector 
 non-MFIs in the euro area 43.2 50.3
 2.  Net external assets 46.1 64.5
 3. Central government deposits 20.5 – 29.9
 4.  Longer-term fi  nancial 
liabilities to other non-MFIs 
in the euro area 90.8 63.2
 5.  Other counterparts of M3 
( residual) 103.6 36.3
* Changes for statistical reasons are eliminated.
Deutsche BundesbankDEUTSCHE  
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report  
November 2011
27

Money market management and liquidity needs
Deutsche BundesbankDuring the three reserve maintenance periods from 
13 July to 11 October 2011, euro-area credit institutions’ 
need for central bank liquidity as determined by autono-
mous liquidity factors fell signifi  cantly by €29.4 billion in 
net terms. The volume of banknotes in circulation rose by 
€8.7 billion in the period under review and therefore 
had, in contrast to overall developments, a liquidity-ab-
sorbing effect which, however, was more than offset by 
developments in the remaining factors. For one thing, 
general government deposits with the Eurosystem went 
down by €23.4 billion, resulting in a corresponding re-
duction in the demand for central bank liquidity. For an-
other, if net foreign assets and other factors are taken 
together, a move which eliminates valuation effects with 
no impact on liquidity, there was an increase in liquidity 
needs of €14.7 billion in the period in question. The min-
imum reserve requirement dropped by a total of €1.5 bil-
lion during the three maintenance periods under review 
and further reduced the need for liquidity.
In the period under review, the Eurosystem continued to 
meet credit institutions’ demand for central bank liquid-
ity to the full amount. As liquidity-providing open- market 
operations continued to be carried out as fi  xed-rate ten-
ders with full allotment (see table on page 30), the vol-
ume of liquidity provided through the tender operations 
was determined exclusively by the demand from credit 
institutions in the Eurosystem, meaning that demand of-
ten signifi  cantly exceeded the calculated requirement 
arising from autonomous factors and the minimum re-
serve requirement. This additional liquidity made it pos-
sible for the credit institutions to meet their minimum 
reserve requirements ahead of schedule in the period un-
der review (frontloading) by holding a high level of re-
serves at the beginning of a reserve period.
In addition, given the renewed tensions in some fi  nancial 
markets in the euro area the Governing Council of the 
ECB decided at its meeting on 4 August 2011 to offer a 
further six-month tender in that same month. As with the 
three-month tenders, this was allotted at the fi  xed rate 
which is indexed to the average of the minimum bid rates 
of the main refi  nancing operations over the life of this 
operation. Moreover, at its meeting on 7 July 2011, the 
Governing Council of the ECB had already decided to 
raise its key policy rate by 25 basis points to 1.50%. The 
rates for the deposit and marginal lending facilities rose 
by the same margin to 0.75% and 2.25% respectively. The 
interest rate corridor thus remained symmetric at 75 basis 
points above and below the policy rate.
Notwithstanding the reduced need for liquidity related 
to the autonomous factors, the demand for liquidity in 
open-market operations rose perceptibly during the 
period under review, both in the case of main refi  nancing 
operations and longer-term refi  nancing operations. The 
volume of main refi  nancing operations increased over 
the three reserve periods by €47 billion while the overall volume of fi  xed-rate tenders grew by as much as €62 bil-
lion in the same period. With regard to the latter, the 
execution of the additional six-month tender had a par-
ticularly profound effect. As a result of this increase in 
demand for central bank liquidity which signifi  cantly ex-
ceeded the benchmarked amount, recourse to the de-
posit facility in the Eurosystem rose substantially and, 
comparing period averages, increased over the three re-
serve periods in net terms by €139 billion. Despite the 
overall amount of excess liquidity, the marginal lending 
facility was also used to a somewhat greater degree, es-
pecially towards the end of the observation period. Aver-
age use in the August-September reserve period stood at 
€1.5 billion, compared with €0.1 billion and €0.3 billion 
respectively in the two preceding periods. On the other 
hand, owing to the rise in excess liquidity, overnight rates 
were once again geared more closely to the deposit facil-
ity. In each of the three reserve periods under review, the 
overnight rates followed a different pattern. On the 
whole, however, they were considerably less volatile than 
in the preceding three periods, measured by the standard 
deviation of the EONIA rate.
Against the backdrop of a renewed worsening of the 
European sovereign debt crisis, the Eurosystem returned 
to purchasing bonds under the Securities Market Pro-
gramme (SMP) from mid-August onwards. As a conse-
quence, holdings of such securities expanded signifi  cantly 
during the period under review, by €89.8 billion, to reach 
a total of €164.0 billion, if matured securities are taken 
into account. The Eurosystem continued to carry out 
weekly, liquidity-absorbing fi  ne-tuning operations in 
order to neutralise the liquidity-providing effect result-
ing from the SMP purchases. Across the three reserve 
periods, the respective intended volume was easily ab-
sorbed in the course of each and every SMP liquidity ab-
sorbing tender. During the same period, the volume of 
securities purchased under the Covered Bond Purchase 
Programme (CBPP) declined by €0.9 billion to €59.2 bil-
lion as a result of maturing covered bonds and revalu-
ations. The volume of holdings thus remained close to its 
peak level of €61.1 billion which it reached at the begin-
ning of July 2010 after the planned completion of the 
programme. Moreover, throughout the period under re-
view, on the last day of each of the maintenance periods, 
the Eurosystem continued to carry out a fi  ne tuning- 
operation with an overnight maturity in order to absorb 
a large proportion of the excess central bank liquidity no 
longer needed to meet reserve requirements.
In the July-August 2011 reserve period the new main refi  -
nancing rate of 1.50% was used for the fi  rst time, as de-
cided by the ECB Governing Council in its 7 July meeting. 
This rate hike had no restrictive effect on demand in 
open market operations. Instead, the total outstanding 
tender volume (excluding liquidity-absorbing fi  ne-tuning 
operations) climbed to €505 billion by the end of the re-
serve period and was thus up a signifi  cant €72 billion 
DEUTSCHE  
BUNDESBANK
E U R O S Y S T E M
Monthly Report  
November 2011
28

from its level at around the same time one period earlier. 
As the demand for liquidity from autonomous factors 
simultaneously remained almost unchanged (€279 billion 
compared with €275 billion in the previous period), the increased demand for liquidity led to a corresponding rise in excess liquidity, ie central bank liquidity over and 
above the benchmark amount. As a result, use of the de-
posit facility rose markedly to an average of €57 billion compared with €30 billion in the previous period. The in-
crease in excess liquidity also left its mark on overnight 
money, leading to a gradual fall in rates as the period progressed. On average during the reserve period the 
EONIA stood at 1.09% and was thus 41 basis points below 
the main refi  nancing rate. In the previous period this gap was only 27 basis points. Secured overnight money trad-ing on Eurex Repo’s GC Pooling trading platform saw a 
similar development: on a volume-weighted average, the 
overnight rate was recorded at 1.02% – a clear 48 basis points below the key interest rate (previous period -34 
basis points). On average over the period, both EONIA 
turnover and secured overnight turnover on GC Pooling rose only minimally by €27.1 billion and €12.9 billion re-spectively compared with the average volumes one 
period earlier (€26.0 billion and €11.6 billion respectively) 
and thus remained at a relatively low level.
In the August-September 2011 reserve period, the overall 
increase in demand for liquidity in open market oper-ations continued apace. During this period, demand in the tender operations initially rose by a signifi  cant mar-gin before gradually declining again. This was largely at-
tributable to the additional six-month tender conducted 
in the fi  rst week for which the credit institutions in the Eurosystem put in bids totalling around €50 billion. Fur-
thermore, a decline in the demand for liquidity from au-
tonomous factors (€262 billion on average over the pe-riod) led to an additional rise in excess liquidity which the 
credit institutions in the Eurosystem utilised for pro-
nounced frontloading. Added to this, the increase in  liquidity excess triggered signifi  cantly increased recourse to the deposit facility (€122 billion on average through-
out the period) and another decline in overnight rates. 
Throughout this period, the EONIA remained fairly con-stant, averaging 0.90%; the weighted overnight rate at 
GC Pooling also declined perceptibly to 0.84% on aver-
age over the period, ﬂ  uctuating only marginally. At the same time, the average underlying turnovers barely changed (€26.9 billion for the EONIA and €14.6 billion in 
the case of GC Pooling).
The September-October 2011 reserve period was charac-
terised by a continued rise in demand for central bank li-
quidity. Primarily in the case of the main refi  nancing op-erations, the level of demand rose signifi  cantly, aver-
aging €193 billion over the period (€135 billion in the 
previous period). On balance, the outstanding tender vol-ume (excluding liquidity-absorbing fi  ne-tuning oper-
ations) rose throughout the period to €567 billion, up Factors determining bank liquidity 1
€ billion; changes in the daily averages of the reserve
maintenance periods vis-à-vis the previous period
Item2011
13 July 
to9 Aug10 Aug to13 Sep14 Sep to11 Oct
I Provision (+) or absorption (–) of
central bank balances due to changes
in autonomous factors1 Banknotes in circulation
(increase: –) –  8.0 +  1.0 –  1.7
2 Government deposits with the
Eurosystem (increase: –) +  2.0 + 19.1 +  2.3
3 Net foreign assets 
2 +  7.7 –  1.0 + 30.7
4 Other factors 2 –  6.7 –  1.5 – 14.5
Total –  5.0 + 17.6 + 16.8
II Monetary policy operations of the
Eurosystem1 Open market operations
(a) Main refi  nancing operations + 25.7 – 36.6 + 57.9
(b) Longer-term refi  nancing 
 operations +  9.9 + 68.3 – 16.2
(c) Other operations –  2.6 + 13.5 – 13.7
2 Standing facilities
(a) Marginal lending facility –  0.1 +  0.2 +  1.2
(b) Deposit facility (increase: –) – 27.2 – 65.1 – 46.9
Total +  5.7 – 19.7 – 17.7
III Change in credit institutions’  current 
accounts (I + II) +  0.6 –  2.0 –  0.8
IV Change in the minimum reserve
requirement (increase: –) –  1.1 +  1.8 +  0.8
1 For longer-term trends and the Deutsche Bundesbank’s contribu-tion, see pages 14* and 15* of the Statistical Section of this Monthly Report. — 2 Including end-of-quarter valuation adjustments with no 
impact on liquidity.
from €493 billion and €525 billion in the previous two 
periods. Since the demand for liquidity from autonomous 
factors again declined (to €244 billion on average), credit 
institutions in the Eurosystem had even more liquidity above the benchmark level at their disposal. This was re-ﬂ  ected in the use of the deposit facility which went up 
to €169 billion on average. The more comfortable liquid-
ity conditions, however, did not lead to a continued de-cline in overnight rates; the increased segmentation of 
the banking market is likely to have played a part in this. 
Instead, EONIA increased to 1.05% on average over the period, although at the end of the quarter (end-Septem-
ber) it had peaked at 1.46%. Despite the higher level of 
excess liquidity, EONIA turnover also rose to €32.6 billion. On average, secured overnight trading on GC Pooling demonstrated a similar development: a rise in weighted 
rates (to 0.96%) coupled with a simultaneous increase in 
turnover (€15.2 billion).DEUTSCHE  
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report  
November 2011
29

into	highly 	liquid 	forms 	of	investment, 	such 	
as	cash	and	overnight 	deposits. 	As	regards 	
other 	shorter-term 	bank 	deposits 	(M2-M1), 	
the	positive 	development 	seen 	in	the	previ -
ous	quarters 	continued. 	However, 	their	con-
tribution 	to	M3	growth 	in	the	summer 	
months 	was	considerably 	smaller 	than 	the	
contribution 	provided 	by	the	other 	compo -
nents.Marketable 	instruments 	enjoyed 	particularly 	
dynamic 	growth 	during 	the	period 	under 	re-
view, 	with	their	seasonally 	adjusted 	and	an-
nualised 	three-month 	rate	rising 	from 	just	
under 	5%	at	the	end	of	June 	to	just	over	
33½% 	at	the	end	of	September. 	This	devel -
opment 	was	primarily 	driven 	by	exceptional 	
growth 	in	repo	transactions, 	which 	had	al-
ready 	increased 	strongly 	in	the	previous 	quar-
ter.	The	sharp 	rise	in	secured 	interbank 	trans -Sharp rise  
in repo  
transactionsOpen market operations of the Eurosystem*
 
Value 
dateType of
trans action 1Maturity
in daysActual
allotment
in € billionDeviation
from the
benchmark
in € billion 2Marginal
rate/fi  xed
rate
%Allotment
ratio
%Weighted
rate
%Cover
ratio 3Number
of bidders
13.07.11 MRO (FRT) 7 153.6 – 24.9 1.50 100.00 – 1.00 230
13.07.11 S-LTRO (FRT) 28 67.7 – 1.50 100.00 – 1.00 57
13.07.11 FTO (–) 7 –  74.0 – 1.50 30.76 1.39 1.24 64
20.07.11 MRO (FRT) 7 197.1 102.1 1.50 100.00 – 1.00 291
20.07.11 FTO (–) 7 –  74.0 – 1.40 21.33 1.31 1.16 63
27.07.11 MRO (FRT) 7 164.2 53.2 1.50 100.00 – 1.00 193
27.07.11 FTO (–) 7 –  74.0 – 1.25 38.13 1.09 1.26 69
28.07.11 LTRO (FRT) 91 85.0 –4 1.50 100.00 – 1.00 165
03.08.11 MRO (FRT) 7 172.0 157.5 1.50 100.00 – 1.00 168
03.08.11 FTO (–) 7 –  74.0 – 0.99 49.60 0.92 1.17 68
09.08.11 FTO (–) 1 – 145.1 – 1.30 100.00 1.27 1.00 121
10.08.11 MRO (FRT) 7 157.1 8.1 1.50 100.00 – 1.00 153
10.08.11 S-LTRO (FRT) 35 75.8 – 1.50 100.00 – 1.00 39
10.08.11 FTO (–) 7 –  74.0 – 1.14 7.14 1.01 1.29 65
11.08.11 S-LTRO (FRT) 203 49.8 –4 … 100.00 – 1.00 114
17.08.11 MRO (FRT) 7 147.7 216.2 1.50 100.00 – 1.00 139
17.08.11 FTO (–) 7 –  96.0 – 1.20 8.11 0.96 1.28 78
24.08.11 MRO (FRT) 7 133.7 240.7 1.50 100.00 – 1.00 133
24.08.11 FTO (–) 7 – 110.5 – 1.15 16.15 1.03 1.20 91
31.08.11 MRO (FRT) 7 121.7 184.7 1.50 100.00 – 1.00 135
31.08.11 FTO (–) 7 115.5 – 1.14 8.45 1.02 1.32 98
01.09.11 LTRO (FRT) 91 49.4 –4 … 100.00 – 1.00 128
07.09.11 MRO (FRT) 7 115.4 205.9 1.50 100.00 – 1.00 126
07.09.11 FTO (–) 7 – 129.0 – 1.05 88.03 1.00 1.35 100
13.09.11 FTO (–) 1 – 167.0 – 1.30 100.00 1.27 1.00 130
14.09.11 MRO (FRT) 7 163.8 76.3 1.50 100.00 – 1.00 142
14.09.11 S-LTRO (FRT) 28 54.2 – 1.50 100.00 – 1.00 37
14.09.11 FTO (–) 7 – 143.0 – 1.06 42.40 1.01 1.31 104
21.09.11 MRO (FRT) 7 201.1 215.6 1.50 100.00 – 1.00 153
21.09.11 FTO (–) 7 152.5 – 1.05 20.29 0.99 1.33 109
28.09.11 MRO (FRT) 7 208.3 145.8 1.50 100.00 – 1.00 159
28.09.11 FTO (–) 7 – 156.5 – 1.15 62.14 1.05 1.30 103
29.09.11 LTRO (FRT) 84 140.6 –4 … 100.00 – 1.00 214
05.10.11 MRO (FRT) 7 198.9 275.4 1.50 100.00 – 1.00 166
05.10.11 FTO (–) 7 – 160.5 – 1.02 16.77 0.96 1.50 100
11.10.11 FTO (–) 1 – 273.8 – 1.30 100.00 1.27 1.00 153
* For more information on the Eurosystem’s operations 
from 13 April 2011 to 12 July 2011, see Deutsche Bundes-
bank, Monthly Report, August 2011, p 27. — 1 MRO: main 
refi  nancing operation, LTRO: longer-term refi  nancing op-
eration, S-LTRO: supplementary longer- term refi  nancing 
operation, FTO: fi  ne-tuning operation (+: liquidity provid-ing operation, –: liquidity absorbing operation), FRT: 
fi  xed-rate tender. — 2 Calculation accor ding to publica-
tion after MRO allotment. — 3 Ratio of total bids to the 
allotment amount. — 4 The interest rate corresponds to 
the average minimum bid rate or main refi  nancing rate of 
the MROs conducted over the life of this operation.
Deutsche Bundesbank
DEUTSCHE  
BUNDESBANK
E U R O S Y S T E M
Monthly Report  
November 2011
30

actions	 settled	 through	 central	 counterparties	
was	 the	main	 reason	 for	this	increase.	 In	this	
respect	 there	 is	also	a	direct	 link	between	 this	
development 	and	the	greater 	level	of	uncer -
tainty. 	Bank 	debt	securities 	included 	in	(M3-
M2)	 and	money	 market	 fund	 shares	 that	 are	
redeemable 	on	a	daily 	basis 	also	increased	
discernibly, 	with	the	latter 	recording 	a	posi-
tive	inflow	 for	the	first	time	 in	more	 than	 two	
years.
Among 	the	counterparts 	of	M3,	loans 	to	
non-banks 	grew 	appreciably 	again 	in	the	
third	 quarter	 after	 weaker	 growth	 in	the	first	
half	of	2011, 	with	growth 	divided 	almost	
equally 	between 	credit 	to	general 	govern -
ment 	and	credit 	to	the	private 	sector 	in	the	
euro	area. 	With 	respect 	to	credit 	to	the	do-
mestic	 private	 sector,	 in	the	reporting	 quarter	
loans 	increased 	somewhat 	more 	strongly	
than 	in	the	previous 	quarter 	at	a	seasonally	
adjusted	 and	annualised	 three-month	 rate	 of	
just	under	 2½%.	 The	contribution	 of	lending	
to	financial 	corporations 	to	the	growth 	of	
this	credit 	aggregate 	increased 	considerably	
in	the	summer	 quarter.	 These	 loans	 are	largely	
made 	up	of	the	offsetting 	positions 	to	the	
repo	 transactions	 included	 in	(M3-M2).
By	contrast,	 the	growth	 in	loans	 to	the	non-
financial 	private 	sector 	slowed 	down 	again,	
this	time	 appreciably,	 compared	 with	 the	pre-
vious 	quarter. 	The	seasonally 	adjusted 	and	
annualised 	increase 	in	loans 	to	households	
came	 in	at	just	under	 1 %	and	was	thus	 down	
on	the	quarter 	once 	again 	(previously 	2%).	
For	one	thing, 	growth 	in	lending 	for	house	
purchase, 	the	major 	component 	of	house -
hold	borrowing, 	weakened 	again. 	For	an-Moderate 
increase  
in credit  
to the domestic private sector
Increase in 
credit to non­financial private sector slows down furtherComponents and
counterparts of the money stock in the euro area
1 Year-on-year  change  in  percent. —  2 In 
percentage  points. —  3 Taken  in  isolation, 
an increase curbs M3 growth.
Deutsche Bundesbank2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 201150510152025
–+++++
–10–50+5+10+15+20+25+30
505101520
–++++Seasonally adjusted, end-of-quarter data
... components of the money stock
... counterparts
Sectoral growth contributions2of which
Loans to the private sectorGrowth rate 1 of M3 and the
contributions of growth 2 of the ...
Remaining balance 
sheet itemsNet external
asset position
Longer-term financial 
liabilities to other non-MFIs 3
Growth rate1 
Financial 
corporations
Non-financial 
corporationsHouseholdsCredit to the
private sector M2 – M1
M3 – M2 M1M3
M3DEUTSCHE  
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report  
November 2011
31

other, 	loans 	for	consumption 	saw	a	decline, 	
albeit 	smaller 	than 	in	the	previous 	quarter. 	
The	upward 	movement 	for	loans 	to	non-
financial 	corporations 	also	slowed 	again 	in	
the	reporting 	quarter. 	Lending 	to	this	sector 	
was	heavily 	focused 	on	long-term 	maturities 	
in	the	reporting 	quarter, 	whilst 	medium-term 	
loans 	virtually 	stagnated 	and	short-term 	loans 	
actually 	fell	slightly. 	It	should, 	however, 	be	
borne 	in	mind 	that	data	on	lending 	to	non-
financial 	corporations 	cover 	the	entire 	euro	
area	and	mask 	very	heterogeneous 	develop -
ments 	in	the	individual 	member 	states.
In	contrast 	to	the	previous 	quarter, 	credit 	to	
general 	government 	also	increased 	signifi -
cantly 	during 	the	July-September 	period. 	This	
growth 	was	solely 	attributable 	to	purchases 	
made 	by	the	Eurosystem 	under 	its	Securities 	Markets 	Programme, 	while 	monetary 	finan -
cial	institutions 	(excluding 	the	Eurosystem) 	re-
duced 	their 	exposure 	in	this	area. 	At	the	
same 	time, 	there 	was	a	discernible 	decrease 	
in	the	deposits 	of	central 	governments, 	which 	
are	not	part	of	the	monetary 	aggregate 	M3.	
This	had	an	overall 	positive 	impact 	on	the	in-
crease 	in	the	monetary 	aggregate 	M3	in	the	
third 	quarter 	of	2011.
Taken 	in	isolation, 	the	continuous 	growth 	of	
the	euro-area 	banking 	sector’s 	net	external 	
assets 	since 	the	beginning 	of	the	year, 	which 	
accelerated 	somewhat 	again 	in	the	reporting 	
quarter, 	also	contributed 	to	monetary 	growth. 	
This	was	caused 	by	an	appreciable 	decline 	in	
external 	liabilities 	combined 	with	almost 	un-
changed 	external 	claims. 	However, 	this	posi-
tive	effect 	was	again 	restrained 	by	significant 	
monetary 	capital 	formation, 	which 	was	pri-
marily 	driven 	by	strong 	capital 	formation 	and	
accumulation 	of	reserves, 	but	also	by	a	
marked 	increase 	in	long-term 	time	deposits 	
(with 	a	maturity 	of	over	two	years). 	The	
dampening 	impact 	of	monetary 	capital 	for-
mation 	on	monetary 	growth 	was	noticeably 	
weaker 	in	the	third 	quarter 	than	in	the	previ -
ous	period, 	however.
Inflation 	forecasts 	on	the	basis 	of	various 	
monetary 	indicators 	(monetary 	aggregates, 	
short-term 	deposits, 	loans) 	currently 	signal 	
balanced 	risks	for	price 	stability 	for	the	next	
three 	years 	on	average. 	However, 	the	uncer -
tainty 	inherent 	in	such	forecasts 	has	been 	ris-
ing	almost 	uninterruptedly 	since 	the	begin -
ning	of	the	financial 	crisis 	and	has	currently 	
reached 	a	new	record. 	This	is	mainly 	due	to	
the	fact	that	the	various 	monetary 	indicators 	Considerable 
increase  
in credit  
to general  
governmentNoticeable rise 
in net external 
position along 
with significant 
monetary 
capital 
formation
Money ­based 
forecasts with 
balanced 
inflation risksLending and deposits of monetary
fi  nancial institutions (MFIs)
in Germany *
Changes in € billion, seasonally adjusted
Item2011
Q2 Q3
Deposits of domestic non-MFIs 1
 Overnight 7.7 28.0
 With agreed maturities
  of up to 2 years 19.3 27.2
  of over 2 years –  2.2 –  2.2
 Redeemable at notice
  of up to 3 months –  1.3 –  0.7
  of over 3 months 0.4 0.2
Lending
 to domestic general government
  Loans – 23.9 – 10.2
  Securitised lending –  2.1 –  1.7
  to domestic enterprises and 
 households
  Loans 13.9 23.9
  of which  to households 2 2.6 3.1
    to non-fi  nancial 
 corporations 3 –  1.7 4.3
  Securitised lending –  5.1 –  5.2
* As well as banks (including building and loan associations, 
but excluding the Bundesbank), monetary fi  nancial institu-
tions (MFIs) here also include money market funds. End-of-
quarter data, adjusted for statistical changes.— 1 Enterprises, 
households and general government excluding central 
 government. — 2 Including non-profi  t institutions serving 
households.— 3 Non-fi  nancial and quasi-corporations.
Deutsche Bundesbank
DEUTSCHE  
BUNDESBANK
E U R O S Y S T E M
Monthly Report  
November 2011
32

are	increasingly 	sending 	out	divergent 	sig-
nals.	For	example, 	the	forecasts 	based 	on	M3	
growth 	indicate 	heightened 	inflation 	risks, 	
whereas 	those 	on	the	basis 	of	the	growth 	of	
M1	and	of	loans 	to	households 	are	well	be-
low	2%.
German banks’ deposit and lending 
 business with domestic customers
With 	a	seasonally 	adjusted 	and	annualised 	
three-month 	rate	of	7½%, 	German 	banks’ 	
deposit 	business 	has	grown 	much 	more 	
strongly 	this	quarter 	than	in	the	previous 	two	
quarters. 	The	dynamic 	growth 	of	time	depos -
its	with	a	maturity 	of	up	to	two	years 	and	of	
overnight 	deposits 	were 	decisive 	factors 	here; 	
an	increased 	use	of	both 	types 	of	deposits 	
could 	be	observed 	for	all	private 	sectors. 	In	
contrast 	to	the	euro	area	as	a	whole, 	short-
term 	time	deposits 	increased 	again 	strongly 	
in	Germany. 	Without 	this	German 	contribu -
tion,	the	holdings 	of	short-term 	time	deposits 	
in	the	euro	area	would 	have 	even 	declined 	in	
seasonally 	adjusted 	terms. 	One	major 	reason 	
for	the	increased 	accumulation 	of	short-term 	
deposits 	compared 	with	the	previous 	quarter 	
is	likely 	to	have 	been 	the	heightened 	uncer -
tainty 	on	capital 	markets, 	which 	had	already 	
led	to	portfolio 	shifts 	into	short-term 	deposits 	
in	the	second 	quarter. 	The	still	favourable 	de-
velopment 	in	terms 	of	interest 	rates 	on	these 	
deposits 	compared 	with	the	remuneration 	of	
longer-term 	investments 	may	also	have 	
played 	a	role.
As	in	previous 	quarters, 	domestic 	customers’ 	
longer-term 	deposits 	with	credit 	institutions 	in	Germany 	shrank 	further 	on	balance 	in	the	
third 	quarter. 	This	decline 	was	in	particular 	
due	to	outflows 	from 	time	deposits 	with	an	
agreed 	maturity 	of	more 	than	two	years, 	as	
holdings 	of	longer-term 	savings 	deposits 	
stagnated. 	The	continuing 	decline 	in	deposits 	
held	by	financial 	corporations 	was	a	key	fac-
tor	with	respect 	to	the	reduction 	of	longer-
term 	time	deposits. 	By	contrast, 	households 	
increased 	their	holdings 	of	longer-term 	time	
deposits, 	albeit 	less	strongly 	than	in	the	previ -
ous	quarter.
German 	banks’ 	credit 	to	domestic 	non-banks 	
increased 	again 	slightly 	in	the	third 	quarter 	of	
2011, 	growing 	at	a	seasonally 	adjusted 	and	
annualised 	three-month-rate 	of	just	under 	
1 %,	after 	two	successive 	declines 	in	the	pre-
vious 	quarters. 	This	growth 	was	driven 	by	
credit 	to	the	domestic 	private 	sector, 	while 	
credit 	to	general 	government 	remained 	on	
the	decline. 	The	main 	reason 	for	the	expan -
sion	in	credit 	to	the	private 	sector 	was	the	
strong 	increase 	in	loans, 	which 	saw	their 	
three-month 	rate	accelerate 	to	4%.	Loans 	to	
financial 	corporations 	constituted 	the	largest 	
share; 	they	rose	predominantly 	due	to	an	ex-
pansion 	of	secured 	interbank 	transactions 	
conducted 	through 	central 	counterparties 	in	
August. 	However, 	such 	loans 	do	not	entail 	
any	increased 	provision 	of	credit 	to	the	pri-
vate	non-bank 	sector.
In	addition 	to	loans 	to	financial 	corporations, 	
German 	banks 	also	increased 	their 	loans 	to	
domestic 	non-financial 	corporations 	and	
households 	appreciably 	in	the	reporting 	quar-
ter.	The	seasonally 	adjusted 	and	annualised 	
three-month 	rate	for	loans 	to	non-financial 	Strong growth 
in short ­term 
depositsReduction of 
longer ­term 
deposits 
continues
Slight increase 
in banks’ 
lending to 
domestic 
non­banks
Increased 
lending to  
non­financial 
corporationsDEUTSCHE  
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report  
November 2011
33

corporations 	increased 	at	the	end	of	the	re-
porting 	quarter 	to	just	over	2%.	The	recovery 	
in	lending 	to	this	sector, 	which 	had	set	in	dur-
ing	the	first	quarter, 	therefore 	continued, 	fol-
lowing 	a	decline 	in	the	second 	quarter. 	The	
growth 	in	loans 	to	domestic 	non-financial 	
corporations 	was	mainly 	characterised 	by	an	
increase 	in	short-term 	loans 	with	a	maturity 	
of	up	to	one	year. 	By	contrast, 	there 	was	a	
decline 	in	the	medium-term 	maturity 	seg-
ment 	–	a	decline 	which 	was, 	however, 	less	
pronounced 	in	comparison 	with	the	previous 	
quarter. 	Longer-term 	loans 	to	domestic 	non-
financial 	corporations 	only	grew 	by	a	small 	
margin. 	This	differed 	from 	the	overall 	devel -
opment 	in	the	euro	area, 	where 	expanded 	
lending 	to	non-financial 	corporations 	was	al-
most 	exclusively 	composed 	of	longer-term 	
loans. 	With 	respect 	to	Germany, 	more 	loans 	to	this	sector 	were 	extended 	by	almost 	all	the	
important 	categories 	of	banks, 	with	the	ex-
ception 	of	the	Landesbanken, 	which 	slightly 	
reduced 	their	lending 	to	non-financial 	corpo -
rations.
Loans 	from 	German 	banks 	to	households 	in	
Germany 	grew 	by	1 %	in	seasonally 	adjusted 	
and	annualised 	terms 	during 	the	reporting 	
quarter, 	representing 	a	slightly 	stronger 	rise	
than	in	the	previous 	quarter. 	The	growth 	of	
this	credit 	aggregate 	thus	remains 	in	line	with	
the	trend 	observed 	since 	the	beginning 	of	
2010. 	Cooperative 	banks 	and	savings 	banks 	
made 	the	strongest 	contribution 	to	this	ex-
pansion. 	The	increase 	in	household 	debt	with	
banks 	arose 	from 	a	marked 	expansion 	of	
credit 	for	consumption 	combined 	with	a	fur-
ther	increase 	in	lending 	for	house 	purchase, 	
which, 	however, 	saw	somewhat 	weaker 	
growth 	than	in	the	previous 	quarter.
According 	to	the	data	submitted 	by	German 	
banks 	as	part	of	the	Bank 	Lending 	Survey 	
(BLS), 	in	the	third 	quarter 	there 	were 	diver -
gent	developments 	with	regard 	to	the	lend-
ing	policy, 	which 	tended 	toward 	a	more 	re-
strictive 	stance.1	For	the	first	time	in	three 	
quarters, 	the	credit 	institutions 	applied 	
slightly 	stricter 	standards 	for	consumer 	credit 	
overall. 	By	contrast, 	credit 	standards 	re-
mained 	virtually 	unchanged 	for	corporate 	cli-
ents	and	house 	purchase 	alike. 	A	heteroge -
neous 	development 	was	also	observed 	in	
banks’ 	margin 	policy. 	On	the	one	hand, 	the	
margins 	for	loans 	to	enterprises 	were 	signifi -Increase  
in loans for 
house purchase 
and credit for 
 consumption
German banks’ 
lending policies 
show signs of 
tighteningLoans of German banks to 
selected sectors
1 Year-on-year rate of change.
Deutsche Bundesbank2004 05 06 07 08 09 10 201121012345
––+++++
Financial
corporations
Non-financial
corporations
HouseholdsGrowth contributions
in percentage pointsSeasonally adjusted, end-of-quarter data
Growth rate 1 in %
1	The	aggregate 	survey 	results 	for	Germany 	may	be	
found 	at	 www.bundesbank.de/volkswirtschaft/vo �ver- www.bundesbank.de/volkswirtschaft/vo �ver-
oeffentlichungen.en.php .
DEUTSCHE  
BUNDESBANK
E U R O S Y S T E M
Monthly Report  
November 2011
34

Banking conditions in Germany
1 According to harmonised MFI interest rate statistics. — 2 According to the Bank Lending Survey, difference 
between the numbers of respondents reporting “tightened considerably” and “tightened somewhat”and the 
numbers of respondents reporting “eased somewhat” and “eased considerably” as a percentage of the re-sponses given. — 3 Expectations for  2011 Q4.
Deutsche Bundesbank02 03 04 05 06 07 08 09 10 20113.54.04.55.05.56.06.57.07.58.08.59.09.510.0
–300+30
–300+30
–60–300+30+60
2002 03 04 05 06 07 08 09 10 11–60–300+302.02.53.03.54.04.55.05.56.06.57.0
603003060
––++
9060300306090
–––+++Credit to non-financial corporations Credit to households
% pa
%%% pa
%%
%
%Change in credit standards 2
Average loans Riskier loans
Average loansAverage loansRiskier loans
Riskier loans
Consumer creditLoans to enterprisesConsumer credit... with an initial rate fixation of 
    over 1 year and up to 5 years
Loans for house purchase... with an initial rate fixation of     over 5 yearsLoans to enterprises ...... with an initial rate fixation
    of up to 1 year ...
Loans for house purchase... over €1 millionLoans for house purchase
with an initial rate fixation of 
over 5 years and up to 10 years
3... over €1 million
Loans to enterprisesConsumer credit ...
... with an initial rate fixation
    of over 5 years ...
... up to €1 million
Change in loan margins 2... up to €1 million
3
3Bank interest rates (new business) 1
3.03.54.04.55.05.5DEUTSCHE  
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report  
November 2011
35

cantly 	expanded 	in	some 	cases. 	This	mainly 	
applied 	to	riskier 	exposures 	with	the	chief 	fo-
cus	on	loans 	to	large 	enterprises. 	On	the	
other 	hand, 	most 	of	the	surveyed 	institutions 	
reported 	broadly 	unchanged 	margins 	for	
loans 	to	households. 	According 	to	the	re-
sponses 	supplied 	by	these 	institutions, 	no	
major 	adjustments 	with	regard 	to	credit 	
standards 	are	expected 	for	the	fourth 	quarter 	
of	2011, 	with	the	exception 	of	a	planned 	
slight 	tightening 	for	long-term 	loans 	to	en-
terprises.
At	the	same 	time, 	there 	was	an	increase 	in	
the	demand 	for	credit 	from 	the	reporting 	
banks 	both 	for	corporate 	and	for	retail 	lend-
ing.	Nevertheless, 	the	credit 	institutions 	re-
ported 	a	noticeable 	deceleration 	in	demand 	
for	funds 	compared 	with	the	previous 	quar-
ter,	in	particular 	for	loans 	to	enterprises 	and	
loans 	for	consumption.
In	the	third 	quarter, 	changes 	in	credit 	supply 	
conditions 	in	the	euro	area	remained 	hetero -
geneous 	but	not	as	diverse 	as	before. 	Com -
pared 	with	the	previous 	quarters, 	between 	
July	and	September 	credit 	supply 	conditions 	
were 	tightened 	in	an	increasing 	number 	of	
euro-area 	countries. 	As	a	result, 	in	aggregate 	
terms 	there 	was	a	perceptible 	tightening 	of	
conditions 	across 	all	three 	surveyed 	lending 	
categories 	coupled 	with	a	general 	decline 	in	
demand.The	BLS	survey 	for	the	third 	quarter 	again 	
contained 	an	ad hoc 	question 	on	the	impact 	
of	the	financial 	and	sovereign 	debt	crisis 	on	
credit 	institutions’ 	refinancing 	conditions. 	Ac-
cording 	to	information 	provided 	by	the	re-
porting 	institutions, 	both 	for	the	German 	
sub-sample 	and	for	the	overall 	sample 	of	Eu-
ropean 	banks, 	access 	to	wholesale 	funding, 	
primarily 	on	money 	and	capital 	markets, 	
worsened 	significantly 	on	balance 	compared 	
with	the	preceding 	quarter.
Data 	provided 	by	the	reporting 	institutions 	
showed 	that	lending 	rates 	were 	down 	on	the	
quarter. 	This	is	especially 	true	of	loans 	with	
long	rate	fixation 	periods, 	while 	those 	with	
short 	fixation 	periods 	only	saw	small 	but	
more 	heterogeneous 	changes. 	The	interest 	
rates 	on	long-term 	loans 	for	enterprises 	fell	
sharply 	by	around 	50	basis 	points 	on	the	
quarter, 	with	the	effect 	that	the	interest 	rates 	
on	large-scale 	(small-scale) 	loans 	stood 	at	
3.7% 	(3.9%). 	In	addition, 	long-term 	loans 	to	
households 	for	the	purpose 	of	house 	pur-
chase 	also	saw	a	notable 	drop 	in	lending 	
rates 	by	around 	50	bp	to	3.8% 	on	average, 	
while 	the	interest 	rates 	on	longer-term 	con-
sumer 	credit 	remained 	broadly 	unchanged. 	
Hence, 	bank 	lending 	rates 	only	partially 	mir-
rored 	the	falling 	yields 	on	German 	bonds, 	
which 	is	in	line	with	the	historical 	pattern 	of	
a	lagged 	interest 	rate	pass-through.Reduced 
dynamics in 
credit demand 
in Germany
Less heteroge­
neity of supply 
conditions 
across euro 
areaFinancial and 
sovereign debt 
crisis has 
negative 
impact  
on banks’ 
 refinancing
Overall 
decrease in 
interest rates 
on bank loans
DEUTSCHE  
BUNDESBANK
E U R O S Y S T E M
Monthly Report  
November 2011
36

Financial marketsFinancial market developments
Since 	mid-year, 	financial 	market 	develop -
ments 	have 	been 	very	largely 	shaped 	by	
heightened 	uncertainty 	over	the	future 	
course 	of	the	sovereign 	debt	crisis 	in	several 	
euro-area 	countries. 	The	measures 	agreed 	by	
the	heads 	of	state 	or	government 	at	the	end	
of	July	2011 	to	contain 	the	crisis 	have 	ulti-
mately 	failed 	to	dispel 	market 	participants’ 	
doubts 	concerning 	the	sustainability 	of	the	
public 	finances 	of	the	peripheral 	countries. 	
Moreover, 	the	summit 	resolutions 	adopted 	at	
the	end	of	October 	–	which 	among 	other 	
things 	provide 	for	a	voluntary 	private 	sector 	
involvement 	of	50% 	in	a	Greek 	aid	plan	yet	
to	be	negotiated, 	greater 	capital 	buffers 	for	
banks 	and	extended 	powers 	for	the	EFSF	–	
brightened 	the	sentiment 	on	the	equity 	and	
bond 	markets 	only	temporarily. 	The	political 	
situation 	in	a	number 	of	euro-area 	countries 	
was	assessed 	as	still	fragile, 	notably 	in	Greece, 	
where 	there 	was	brief 	talk	of	a	referendum 	
and	where 	–	as	in	Italy	–	the	old	government 	
has	since 	resigned 	and	a	new	one	has	been 	
formed. 	The	swift 	and	resolute 	implementa -
tion	of	the	necessary 	reforms 	to	strengthen 	
economic 	growth 	and	the	consolidation 	
measures 	aimed 	at	restoring 	confidence 	in	
the	markets 	did	not	appear 	to	be	assured 	in	
all	cases. 	In	particular, 	financial 	markets 	fo-
cused 	on	the	problem 	of	high	public 	debt 	
levels 	and	weak 	growth 	prospects 	in	Italy.	
Thus, 	for	the	first	time, 	investors 	who	had	
been 	observing 	the	problems 	in	the	euro	area	
also	turned 	their	attention 	to	member 	states 	
with	a	big	economy. 	Another 	factor 	burden -
ing	the	markets 	was	that, 	compared 	with	the	
second 	quarter 	of	2011, 	the	economic 	pros-Turmoil in  
the financial 
markets amid 
insufficient 
consolidation 
progress in the 
peripheral 
countriesDEUTSCHE  
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report  
November 2011
37

pects 	were 	growing 	increasingly 	dim.	Surveys 	
revealed 	that, 	besides 	the	renewed 	escalation 	
of	the	sovereign 	debt 	crisis, 	the	long-term 	
growth 	expectations 	for	the	year	ahead 	have 	
been 	constantly 	revised 	downwards 	on	both 	
sides 	of	the	Atlantic. 	International 	organisa -
tions, 	too,	have 	lowered 	their 	growth 	fore-
casts 	(see	page 13). 	Overall, 	the	stock 	mar-
kets	of	the	major 	industrial 	countries 	have 	
seen	substantial 	price 	losses 	since 	the	end	of	
June	and	–	amid 	strong 	safe	haven 	flows 	into	
Bunds 	and	US	Treasuries 	–	spreads 	in	euro-
area	bond 	yields 	have 	widened 	further. 	On	
the	foreign 	exchange 	markets, 	the	euro	has	
depreciated 	on	balance.
Exchange rates
Since 	the	third 	quarter, 	movements 	on	the	
foreign 	exchange 	markets 	have 	to	a	large 	ex-
tent	been 	influenced 	by	developments 	in	the	
euro	area. 	This	is	especially 	true	of	the	euro-
dollar 	exchange 	rate.	In	July	and	August, 	in-
vestor 	uncertainty 	driven 	by	high	government 	
debt	levels 	on	both 	sides 	of	the	Atlantic 	kept	
the	euro 	within 	a	corridor 	of	between 	
US$1.40 	and	US$1.45. 	However, 	the	eco-
nomic 	outlook 	in	the	euro	area	gradually 	de-
teriorated, 	leading 	the	market 	to	expect 	the	
Eurosystem 	to	refrain 	from 	further 	key	inter-
est	rate	increases 	for	the	time	being. 	When, 	
after 	the	ECB	Governing 	Council 	meeting 	at	
the	beginning 	of	September, 	it	was	an-
nounced 	that	the	growth 	forecast 	by	ECB	
staff	had	been 	revised 	downwards, 	market 	
participants 	increasingly 	felt	interest 	rate	cuts	
to	be	possible 	also	in	the	euro	area.Moreover, 	there 	was	a	growing 	incidence 	of	
negative 	political 	news 	from 	the	euro	area	
during 	the	third 	quarter. 	At	the	beginning 	of	
August, 	the	Italian 	government 	cast	doubt 	
over	the	implementation 	of	the	austerity 	
measures 	that	had	already 	been 	announced. 	
Additionally, 	the	temporary 	breakdown 	of	
talks	in	Athens 	of	EU,	ECB	and	IMF	represent -
atives 	as	well	as	the	announcement 	by	Greece 	
that	it	would 	probably 	miss	the	fiscal 	deficit 	
target 	for	2011 	fuelled 	speculation 	about 	a	
possibly 	impending 	Greek 	default. 	The	grad-
ual	downward 	revision 	of	interest 	rate	expec -
tations 	in	the	euro	area	paired 	with	investors’ 	
growing 	fears 	of	the	sovereign 	debt	crisis 	es-
calating 	depressed 	the	euro	in	September. 	At	
the	beginning 	of	October, 	the	euro	dropped 	
to	US$1.32, 	its	lowest 	level	since 	January 	
2011. 	However, 	political 	measures 	were 	taken 	
in	the	course 	of	the	month 	to	contain 	the	
sovereign 	debt	crisis. 	This	led	to	a	temporary 	
appreciation 	of	the	euro	against 	the	dollar, 	
the	single 	currency 	climbing 	to	a	level	of	
US$1.42 	by	the	end	of	October.
The	euro	again 	depreciated 	early 	in	Novem -
ber	when 	the	Greek 	government 	briefly 	con-
sidered 	holding 	a	referendum 	about 	the	aid	
measures. 	The	uncertain 	political 	situation 	
further 	fuelled 	uncertainty 	over	the	develop -
ment 	of	the	sovereign 	debt 	crisis, 	with	Italy	
also	attracting 	greater 	attention 	from 	the	fi-
nancial 	markets. 	Moreover, 	further 	news 	
pointing 	to	weakening 	economic 	activity 	in	
the	euro	area	put	the	single 	currency 	under 	
additional 	pressure. 	As	this	report 	went 	to	
print, 	the	euro	stood 	at	US$1.35; 	this	is	6½% 	
down 	on	its	mid-year 	level.Euro depreci­
ates against 
US dollar since 
mid­year
DEUTSCHE  
BUNDESBANK
E U R O S Y S T E M
Monthly Report  
November 2011
38

During	 the	period	 under	 review,	 the	euro	 also	
depreciated 	against 	the	yen	on	balance, 	de-
spite	 temporarily	 regaining	 some	 lost	ground	
in	October	 given	 the	above	 developments	 in	
the	euro	area. 	Latterly 	it	stood 	at	¥104, 	or	
10½% 	below 	its	mid-year 	value. 	Among	
other	 things,	 the	yen	profited	 from	 the	mar-
kets’	 assessment	 that	 investments	 in	the	Jap-
anese 	currency 	were 	less	risky	than	in	other	
currency 	areas. 	What 	is	more, 	it	was	found	
that	Japan 	is	recovering 	more 	quickly 	from	
the	natural	 and	nuclear	 power	 plant	 disaster	
in	March 	than 	many 	had	expected. 	The	ap-
preciation	 of	the	yen,	 notably	 against	 the	US	
dollar, 	caused 	the	Japanese 	Ministry 	of	Fi-
nance	 to	resort	 to	unilateral	 foreign	 exchange	
market	 intervention	 at	the	expense	 of	the	do-
mestic 	currency 	in	early 	August 	and	at	the	
end	of	October. 	Despite 	the	yen’s 	current	
nominal 	strength 	against 	the	US	dollar 	and	
the	euro,	 the	Japanese	 currency	 is	at	present	
trading, 	in	real	terms, 	close 	to	its	long-term	
average, 	and	therefore 	by	no	means 	at	ex-
ceptionally	 high	 levels.	 Nor	was	 there	 any	ex-
cessively	 high	 nominal	 exchange	 rate	 volatil -
ity	vis-à-vis 	the	US	dollar 	or	the	euro	of	late	
that	would 	have 	made 	foreign 	exchange	
market	 interventions	 appear	 necessary.
After 	the	euro	came 	under 	pressure 	against	
the	pound	 sterling	 at	the	beginning	 of	July,	 it	
subsequently 	proved 	to	be	relatively 	stable,	
trading 	at	between 	£0.86 	and	£0.89. 	The	
British 	economic 	outlook 	deteriorated 	on	a	
scale	 similar	 to	that	 in	the	euro	 area.	 Further -
more, 	the	pound 	sterling 	was	burdened 	by	
extremely	 strong	 inflationary	 pressures	 which	
continued 	to	rise	until	the	end	of	the	third	
quarter, 	and	which 	in	combination 	with	the	Euro also down 
against the yen …
… and against 
the pound sterlingExchange rate of the euro
1 Exchange  rate  at  the  start  of  monetary 
union on 4 January 1999. — 2 As calculated 
by  the  ECB  against  the  currencies  of  20 
countries.
Deutsche BundesbankJ A S O N D J F M A M J J A S O N D
2010 20111.201.301.401.50
100110120130140
0.700.750.800.850.900.95
100105110115120Daily data; log scale
US$
¥
£against the ...
... US dollar
US$1.1789 1
... yen
¥133.73 1
... Swiss franc... pound sterling
CHF1.6168 1£0.7111 1
Nominal effective exchange rate 2
1999Q1 = 100
103.11 11.001.101.201.301.401.501.601.70DEUTSCHE  
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report  
November 2011
39

very	expansionary 	bias	of	monetary 	policy 	led	
to	high	negative 	real	interest 	rates. 	Towards 	
the	end	of	the	reporting 	period, 	the	euro	
stood 	at	£0.85, 	or	5½% 	lower 	than	at	mid-
year.
The	growing 	government 	debt	levels 	in	sev-
eral	industrial 	countries 	and	the	high	degree 	
of	uncertainty 	felt	by	investors 	led	to	sub-
stantial 	capital 	flows 	to	Switzerland 	into	the	
third 	quarter, 	resulting 	in	a	marked 	deprecia -
tion	of	the	euro	against 	the	Swiss 	franc. 	For	a	
time	the	euro 	fell	to	an	all-time 	low	of	
CHF1.05. 	After 	the	Swiss 	National 	Bank 	
countered 	this	development 	first	by	further 	
easing 	monetary 	policy, 	it	set	a	minimum 	ex-
change 	rate	of	CHF1.20 	per	euro 	in	early 	
September 	and	announced 	that	it	would 	buy	
foreign 	currency 	in	unlimited 	quantities 	to	
defend 	it.	The	Swiss 	National 	Bank 	justified 	
this	intervention 	by	arguing 	that	the	Swiss 	
currency 	was	massively 	overvalued, 	which 	
posed 	an	acute 	threat 	to	the	Swiss 	economy 	
and	harboured 	deflation 	risks. 	Since 	then, 	the	
euro	has	traded 	within 	a	band 	of	CHF1.20 	to	
CHF1.24.
Since 	the	middle 	of	the	year, 	the	euro	has	
depreciated 	by	3%	in	effective 	terms 	vis-à-vis 	
the	currencies 	of	20	major 	trading 	partners. 	It	
is	therefore 	roughly 	at	the	same 	level	as	at	
the	start	of	monetary 	union.
Securities markets and portfolio 
 transactions
Demand 	for	safe	and	liquid 	investments 	
dominated 	activity 	on	the	international 	secu-rities 	markets 	in	recent 	months,1	causing 	in-
terest 	rates 	on	the	German 	and	US	sovereign 	
bond 	markets 	to	drop 	sharply. 	Yields 	on	ten-
year	US	Treasuries 	declined 	amid 	fluctuations 	
from 	3.2% 	at	the	end	of	June 	to	2.0% 	of	
late.	As	this	report 	went 	to	print, 	German 	
Bunds 	with	the	same 	maturity 	were 	yielding 	
1.7%, 	which 	is	also	more 	than	one	percent -
age	point 	lower 	than	at	mid-year. 	During 	the	
course 	of	the	third 	quarter, 	long-term 	interest 	
rates 	on	either 	side	of	the	Atlantic 	fell,	for	a	
time, 	to	record 	lows 	of	around 	1.6% 	for	
Bunds 	and	1.7% 	in	the	US.	In	October 	there 	
was	only	a	temporary 	countermovement, 	
which 	reflected 	also	the	short-lived 	relief 	at	
the	agreement 	reached 	at	the	EU	summit. 	In	
early 	November, 	however, 	the	political 	uncer -
tainty 	in	Greece 	and	Italy	paired 	with	gloom -
ier	economic 	forecasts 	again 	depressed 	yields. 	
The	return 	on	ten-year 	Japanese 	government 	
bonds 	fell	slightly, 	by	14	basis 	points 	to	just	
shy	of	1 %,	from 	mid-year 	onwards.
Yield 	spreads 	within 	the	euro	area	widened 	
sharply 	again 	from 	the	middle 	of	the	year	on-
wards. 	Up	to	mid-November, 	the	GDP-
weighted 	yield	spread 	of	long-term 	sovereign 	
bonds 	of	the	other 	euro-area 	countries 	over	
Bunds 	of	the	same 	maturity 	rose	to	a	new	
high	of	459	basis 	points, 	despite 	substantial 	
bond 	purchases 	by	the	Eurosystem 	under 	the	
Securities 	Market 	Programme 	(SMP). 	How -
ever, 	this	average 	conceals 	considerable 	het-Minimum 
exchange rate 
of the Swiss 
franc against 
the euro
Effective euro 
exchange rateEconomic 
worries and 
safe haven 
flows affect 
international 
bond markets
Yield spreads 
within euro 
area reach 
record level
1	The	increased 	uncertainty 	among 	market 	participants 	
was	reflected, 	for	example, 	in	the	higher 	implied 	volatil -
ity	of	options 	on	Bund 	futures. 	At	the	same 	time	the	
spread 	between 	Federal 	government-guaranteed 	KfW	
bonds 	and	Bunds, 	which 	can	be	interpreted 	as	an	indica -
tor	of	investors’ 	preference 	for	liquidity, 	widened 	percep -
tibly. 	In	the	US,	too;	similar 	figures 	point 	to	a	flight 	into	
the	quality 	and	liquidity 	of	US	Treasuries.
DEUTSCHE  
BUNDESBANK
E U R O S Y S T E M
Monthly Report  
November 2011
40

erogeneity 	among 	the	individual 	countries.	
Among 	the	so-called 	programme 	countries,	
ten-year 	Greek 	bond 	yields 	reached 	a	new	
high	 (of	more	 than	 33%)2	–	in	low	turnover –	
after	 negative	 real	economic	 and	fiscal	 news	
and	in	the	light	 of	heightened	 political	 uncer -
tainty. 	However, 	Greece 	currently 	does 	not	
need 	to	raise 	funds 	on	the	market. 	In	Italy	
and	Spain,	 too,	 however,	 which	 drew	 greater	
attention	 from	 the	markets	 in	the	third	 quar-
ter,	investors’	 growing	 risk	aversion	 as	well	 as	
rating	 downgrades	 led	to	an	increase	 in	yields	
to	7.2%	 and	just	below	 6.8%	 respectively	 of	
late.	Even 	Austrian 	and	French 	sovereign	
bonds,	 yields	 on	which	 usually	 move	 in	fairly	
close 	synchrony 	with	those 	on	Bunds, 	have	
profited	 only	 to	a	limited	 extent	 from	 safe	 ha-
ven	flows 	since 	mid-year. 	The	spread 	be-
tween	 them	 and	 German	 paper	 has	likewise	
widened 	as	a	result, 	to	193	and	207	basis	
points 	respectively. 	The	yield 	level	even 	in	
these	 countries	 (3.6%	 and	3.8%	 respectively)	
is	still	comparatively 	low,	however. 	By	con-
trast, 	the	long-term 	yield 	on	Irish	sovereign	
bonds 	declined 	from 	the	third 	quarter 	on-
wards;	 as	this	report	 went	 to	print,	 it	stood	 at	
8.4%,	 compared	 with	 more	 than	 14%	 at	the	
middle	 of	July.
Since	 mid-year,	 strong	 demand	 for	Bunds	 has	
pushed 	the	German 	yield 	curve 	downwards	
largely 	in	parallel 	across 	the	entire 	maturity	
spectrum 	by	more 	than 	one	percentage	
point.	 The	interest	 rate	differential	 separating	
ten	and	two-year	 maturities	 edged	 up	slightly	
from	 155	to	158	 basis	 points.	 The	decline	 in	
interest 	rates 	at	the	short 	end	reflects 	both	
the	resolved 	interest 	rate	cut	and	expecta -
tions	 of	lower	 rates	 to	come.Yields 	on	BBB-rated 	European 	corporate	
bonds 	with	a	residual 	maturity 	of	seven 	to	
ten	years 	rose	to	6.8% 	in	the	reporting 	pe-
riod, 	which 	is	roughly 	in	line	with	the	five-
year	 average.3	This	 increase	 was	 attributable	Yield curve of 
Bunds shifted downwardsFinancing  conditions for 
enterprises slightly worseYield spreads
in the euro area
Sources: Thomson Reuters and Bundesbank 
calculations. — 1 Standard deviation of yield spreads  of  euro-area  government  bonds 
against German Federal bonds (Bunds).
Deutsche Bundesbank03006009001 2001 2001 5001 5001 8001 8002 1002 1002 4002 4002 7002 7003 0003 000
2009 2010 20110300600900Daily data
Spread of ten-year 
government bonds 
against Bunds
Dispersion of
yield spreads against
German Federal bonds1
GDP weightedUnweightedBasis
points
Basis
pointsItaly
SpainGreece
IrelandPortugal
2	Yields 	on	short-term 	Greek 	bonds 	are	even 	substan -
tially 	higher 	given 	market 	participants’ 	fear	of	massive	
losses	 under	 a	debt	 restructuring.
3	Yields	 on	BBB-rated	 corporate	 bonds	 in	the	iBoxx	 bond	
index	 serve	 as	a	basis.	 This	 index	 covers	 bonds	 issued	 by	
banks	 and	non-banks.DEUTSCHE  
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report  
November 2011
41

almost 	exclusively 	to	enterprises 	of	the	finan -
cial	sector. 	Given 	the	high	risk	of	losses 	from 	
exposures 	to	sovereign 	bonds, 	financial 	insti-
tutions 	most 	recently 	borrowed 	on	the	capi-
tal	market 	at	12.9% 	for	longer 	maturities; 	
this	is	considerably 	higher 	than 	what 	non-
financial 	enterprises 	paid	(5.1 %). 	This	discrep -
ancy	is	also	reflected 	in	the	development 	of	
the	iTraxx 	Europe 	125	Index, 	which 	tracks 	the	
credit 	risk	premiums 	of	big	European 	enter -
prises 	and	which 	also	rose	in	the	reporting 	
period 	primarily 	because 	of	financial 	enter -
prises. 	In	a	number 	of	euro-area 	peripheral 	
countries, 	notably 	in	Italy,	financing 	condi -
tions 	for	non-financial 	corporations 	have 	also	
deteriorated 	since 	mid-year, 	however. 	Never -
theless, 	there 	is	no	indication 	of	develop -
ments 	in	the	sovereign 	debt 	markets 	of	the	
euro-area 	peripheral 	states 	having 	a	stable 	systematic 	influence 	on	the	financing 	condi -
tions 	for	the	respective 	non-financial 	corpo -
rations.
In	the	third 	quarter 	of	2011, 	gross 	issue 	vol-
ume	in	the	German 	bond 	market 	amounted 	
to	€347½ 	billion, 	which 	was	just	below 	the	
level	for	the	previous 	quarter. 	After 	deduct -
ing	the	higher 	redemptions 	and	taking 	ac-
count 	of	changes 	in	issuers’ 	holdings 	of	their	
own	bonds, 	net	sales 	of	domestic 	debt	secu-
rities 	came 	to	€12½ 	billion. 	In	addition, 	for-
eign	borrowers 	placed 	debt	securities 	worth 	
€2	billion 	on	the	German 	market.4	Thus, 	
funds 	totalling 	€14½ 	billion 	were 	raised 	on	
the	German 	bond 	market 	in	the	reporting 	
period.
The	public 	sector 	raised 	€15½ 	billion 	in	the	
bond 	market 	in	the	third 	quarter, 	compared 	
with	€35½ 	billion 	one	quarter 	before. 	Here, 	
central 	government 	(including 	FMS	Wert -
management) 	issued 	mainly 	Federal 	notes 	
(€11	billion), 	and	to	a	lesser 	extent 	30-year 	
Federal 	bonds 	(€1½ 	billion). 	By	contrast, 	the	
German 	Federal 	government 	redeemed 	ten-
year	bonds 	and	Federal 	Treasury 	discount 	pa-
per	(Bubills) 	totalling 	€12	billion 	and	€5½	bil-
lion	net	respectively. 	On	balance, 	the	German 	
Länder 	tapped 	the	capital 	market 	in	the	
amount 	of	€4½	billion 	in	the	quarter 	under 	
review.
Domestic 	enterprises 	issued 	debt 	securities 	
worth 	€½	billion 	net	in	Germany 	in	the	pe-
riod	under 	review. 	On	balance, 	these 	were 	Higher net 
sales in the 
bond market
Public sector 
borrowing
On balance, 
only issues by 
non­financial 
corporationsInterest rate developments 
and change in economic 
expectations
Sources: Consensus Economics and Bundes-
bank calculations. — 1 Expectations for the 
year 2012 according to Consensus Forecast 
(October survey less June survey 2011); cal-
culated  from  expected  real  GDP  growth 
plus  expected  consumer  price  inflation. — 
2 October 2011 vs June 2011, at the time of 
the survey in each case.
Deutsche BundesbankChange of the yield on 
ten-year sovereign bonds 2Change of nominal GDP 
growth expectation 1
Japan1.41.21.00.80.60.40.20
–––––––
Germany USAPer-
centage 
points
4	A	contributory 	factor 	here	were 	securities 	purchased 	
by	the	Deutsche 	Bundesbank 	from 	foreign 	counterpar -
ties	under 	the	SMP .
DEUTSCHE  
BUNDESBANK
E U R O S Y S T E M
Monthly Report  
November 2011
42

solely 	bonds 	running 	less	than 	one	year.	
Whereas 	non-financial 	corporations, 	in	the	
light	 of	virtually	 unchanged	 yields,	 increased	
their 	market 	debt 	by	just	under 	€7	billion	
overall, 	non-monetary 	financial 	intermediar -
ies	redeemed 	bonds 	for	roughly 	the	same	
amount.
Domestic 	credit 	institutions 	reduced 	their	
capital 	market 	debt 	by	€4	billion 	net	in	the	
third	 quarter,	 compared	 with	 €36½	 billion	 in	
the	previous 	three-month 	period. 	This	takes	
into	consideration 	the	fact	that	they	scaled	
back	 holdings	 of	their	 own	 bonds	 by	€3	bil-
lion;	credit 	institutions’ 	capital 	market 	debt	
would 	have 	dropped 	even 	further 	without	
this	adjustment.	 On	balance,	 they	 redeemed	
primarily	 public	 Pfandbriefe	 (€13	 billion)	 and	
mortgage 	Pfandbriefe 	(€5½ 	billion). 	Special -
ised	credit 	institutions, 	meanwhile, 	issued	
debt	 securities	 to	the	tune	 of	€16	billion	 net.
In	the	third	 quarter,	 the	Bundesbank	 and	do-
mestic 	non-banks 	were 	the	main 	buyers 	of	
debt	 securities,	 adding	 paper	 worth	 €21½	 bil-
lion	and	€8	billion 	respectively 	to	their	port-
folios; 	primarily 	foreign 	securities 	were	
bought 	(€20½ 	billion 	in	total). 	The	Bundes -
bank	 mainly	 bought	 securities	 under	 the	SMP ,	
after 	the	Eurosystem 	had	resumed 	its	pur-
chases	 at	the	beginning	 of	August.	 Given	 the	
high	level	of	uncertainty 	in	Europe, 	foreign	
investors 	acquired 	German 	debt 	securities	
worth 	€18½ 	billion. 	They 	largely 	invested 	in	
public 	sector 	bonds, 	which 	are	usually 	in	
strong 	demand 	in	times 	of	crisis 	because 	of	
the	high	 degree	 of	security	 and	liquidity	 these	
instruments	 offer.	 By	contrast,	 German	 credit	
institutions 	disposed 	of	interest-bearing	paper	 in	the	amount	 of	€34	 billion	 net;	 they	
sold	 foreign	 debt	 instruments	 totalling	 €18½	
billion. 	As	was	mentioned 	above, 	the	Bun-
desbank	 took	 over,	 in	net	terms,	 a	portion	 of	
the	debt 	securities 	disposed 	of	by	domestic	
banks.
In	the	third	 quarter,	 too,	 price	 movements	 on	
the	international 	stock 	markets 	were 	largely	
driven 	by	the	high	level	of	investor 	uncer -Net redemp­
tions by credit institutions
Purchase of 
debt securitiesMarket valuation of the
corporate sectorin the euro area
Sources: Bloomberg and Thomson Reuters. — 
1 BBB-rated bonds with a residual maturity 
of seven to ten years.
Deutsche Bundesbank2007 2008 2009 2010 20110369121518212427
050100150200250300350Weekly averages
%
Basis
pointsYields 1
Credit default swap premiums
iTraxx
Europe
Financials iTraxx
Europe 125iTraxx Europe
Non-FinancialsiBoxx Non-FinancialsiBoxx Financials
iBoxx
CorporatesDEUTSCHE  
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report  
November 2011
43

tainty 	due	to	the	sovereign 	debt	crisis 	in	Eur-
ope.	Moreover, 	there 	was	a	renewed 	increase 	
in	recessionary 	fears 	on	both 	sides 	of	the	At-
lantic. 	This	combination 	of	factors 	led	to	con-
siderable 	share 	price 	losses, 	which 	were 	ac-
companied 	by	strong 	fluctuations. 	Stock 	
price 	indices 	fell	to	a	low	in	the	second 	half	
of	September. 	This	was	followed 	by	some 	
easing 	of	tensions 	as	a	result 	of	economic 	
data	which 	were, 	in	part, 	somewhat 	better 	
than 	anticipated 	and	the	expectation 	that	a	
solution 	to	the	European 	sovereign 	debt	crisis 	
would 	be	found 	at	the	EU	summit 	at	the	end	
of	October. 	By	contrast, 	the	reporting 	season 	
for	US	and	European 	enterprises, 	which 	was	
fairly 	favourable 	of	late,	did	not	touch 	off	any	
strong 	positive 	stimuli: 	enterprises’ 	earnings 	
prospects, 	which 	are	of	greater 	relevance 	to	equity 	valuation 	than 	earnings 	generated 	in	
the	past, 	became 	increasingly 	clouded.
After 	the	outcome 	of	the	summit 	at	the	end	
of	October 	was	announced, 	the	stock 	mar-
kets	as	a	whole, 	and	banking 	stocks 	in	sev-
eral	peripheral 	countries 	in	particular, 	regis -
tered 	pronounced 	price 	gains. 	However, 	
these 	gains 	were 	quickly 	lost	again 	when 	the	
Greek 	government 	announced 	a	referendum, 	
causing 	doubts 	among 	market 	participants 	
about 	whether 	Greece 	would 	actually 	meet 	
the	conditions 	linked 	to	the	rescue 	package, 	
and	the	EU	and	the	IMF	put	a	temporary 	halt	
on	further 	payments 	under 	the	Greek 	aid	
programme. 	As	measured 	by	the	implied 	vol-
atility 	of	equity 	options, 	share 	price 	uncer -
tainty 	rose	again 	substantially, 	particularly 	in	
Europe. 	Nevertheless, 	volatility 	in	November 	
stayed 	below 	the	levels 	recorded 	one	month 	
before.
On	balance, 	price 	losses 	on	German 	and	Eu-
ropean 	equities, 	measured 	against 	the	broad-
based 	CDAX 	and	Euro 	Stoxx 	indices, 	
amounted 	to	20½% 	and	21½% 	respectively 	
from 	the	end	of	June. 	Japanese 	shares 	
(Nikkei, 	-13½%) 	and	US	shares 	(S&P 	500, 	
-8%) 	lost	less	by	comparison. 	European 	bank 	
equities 	suffered 	even 	heavier 	losses 	than	the	
market 	as	a	whole 	(-35% 	since 	the	end	of	
June); 	this	was	true, 	above 	all,	of	the	bank 	
indexes 	in	Greece, 	Portugal 	and	Italy. 	Not	
least	of	all,	this	was	the	result 	of	banks’ 	large 	
exposure 	to	sovereign 	debt 	in	peripheral 	
countries.
The	risk	premium 	which 	investors 	demand 	
for	an	investment 	in	European 	shares 	(Euro 	Prices fall 
sharply on the 
international 
stock markets 
amid high vola­
tilityInvestment activity in the German 
 securities markets
€ billion
Item2010 2011
Q3 Q2 Q3
Debt securities
Residents – 34.0 – 51.2 –  4.2
Credit institutions – 31.9 – 17.5 – 33.9
of which
Foreign debt securities – 10.9 –  2.6 – 18.3
Other sectors –  2.0 – 33.7 29.7
of which
Domestic debt securities – 32.9 – 41.9 9.3
Non-residents 30.6 58.9 18.7
Shares
Residents –  9.2 15.8 –  8.4
Credit institutions –  3.1 –  0.3 – 12.0
of which
Domestic shares –  1.4 –  5.1 –  7.1
Other sectors –  6.1 16.1 3.6
of which
Domestic shares 0.4 10.3 12.1
Non-residents 2.1 12.6 –  4.7
Mutual fund shares
Investment in specialised funds 20.2 4.2 5.6
Investment in funds open to 
the general public 3.0 0.5 0.2
of which  Share-based funds 0.3 1.4 0.7
Deutsche Bundesbank
DEUTSCHE  
BUNDESBANK
E U R O S Y S T E M
Monthly Report  
November 2011
44

Stoxx)	 as	compared	 to	a	safe	 investment,	 and	
which	 can	be	calculated	 using	 a	dividend	 dis-
count	 model,	 at	first	rose	 considerably	 in	the	
reporting 	period 	before 	receding 	to	7½% 	in	
October; 	this	was	roughly 	in	line	with	the	
level	 at	mid-year.	 It	therefore	 remains	 consid -
erably 	above 	the	five-year 	average 	(around	
5½%). 	The	implied 	risk	premium 	for	expo -
sure	to	European 	banking 	stocks 	is	also, 	on	
balance,	 roughly	 at	its	prior-quarter	 level.	 This	
means 	that, 	compared 	to	the	market 	as	a	
whole, 	investors 	can	continue 	to	demand	
roughly	 1½	percentage	 points	 more	 as	com-
pensation	 for	investing	 in	banking	 stocks.
Issuing	 activity	 in	the	German	 equity	 market	
was	subdued 	in	the	third 	quarter. 	Domestic	
enterprises 	issued 	only	€½	billion 	worth 	of	
new	shares, 	the	majority 	of	which 	were 	un-
listed 	equities. 	In	the	same 	period, 	the	out-
standing 	volume 	of	foreign 	equities 	in	the	
German	 market	 dropped	 by	€13½	 billion.	 Eq-
uities	 were	 purchased	 only	 by	domestic	 non-
banks 	(€3½ 	billion), 	which 	bought 	only	do-
mestic 	paper 	in	net	terms. 	By	contrast, 	resi-
dent	 credit	 institutions	 sold	 shares	 worth	 €12	
billion, 	with	domestic 	paper 	again 	account -
ing	for	the	lion’s	 share.	 Foreign	 investors	 sold	
German	 equities	 to	the	tune	 of	€4½	 billion.
During	 the	reporting	 period,	 domestic	 invest -
ment 	companies 	recorded 	inflows 	of	€6	bil-
lion,	after 	raising 	funds 	totalling 	€4½	billion	
in	the	previous	 three	 months.	 Almost	 all	the	
fresh 	funds 	benefited 	specialised 	funds 	re-
served	 for	institutional	 investors	 (€5½	 billion).	
Of	the	mutual 	funds 	open 	to	the	general	
public,	 bond	 funds,	 equity	 funds	 and	money	
market 	funds 	in	particular 	sold	new	shares	totalling	 €½	billion	 in	each	 case.	 By	contrast,	
mixed 	securities-based 	funds 	and	mixed	
funds 	repurchased 	shares 	worth 	€1	billion	
and	€½	billion	 respectively.	 Foreign	 funds	 ac-
tive	in	the	German	 market	 recorded	 outflows	
totalling 	€3½	billion. 	Foreign 	investors 	were	
the	sole	 net	purchasers,	 adding	 mutual	 fund	
shares	 in	the	value	 of	€4	billion	 to	their	 port-
folios. 	On	the	other 	hand, 	domestic 	credit	
institutions	 sold	 fund	 shares	 in	the	amount	 of	Equity risk 
premium almost unchanged
Low level of 
stock market funding
Sales and 
purchases of mutual fund shares20305075100150
0510152025
10203040506070
2007 2008 2009 2010 2011Equity market
Sources: Thomson Reuters and Bundesbank 
calculations. — 1 End-of-month levels; meas-
ure of the risk premium demanded by in-
vestors.  Calculated  from  three-stage  di-
vidend discount model using three to five-year IBES expectations of profit growth and long-term  GDP  growth  expectations  (con-
census forecast). — 2 Expected future volat-
ility,  calculated  from  prices  of  options  on 
the Euro Stoxx. 
Deutsche BundesbankEuro Stoxx 
banks
Lin scale
Equity risk premiums 1
Euro StoxxEuro Stoxx
Euro Stoxx 
banks%31 December 2006 = 100, log scale
Stock price indicesWeekly averages
% Implied volatility of the Euro Stoxx 2DEUTSCHE  
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report  
November 2011
45

€1½	billion. 	Buyers 	included 	almost 	no	do-
mestic 	non-banks 	on	balance 	in	the	period 	
under 	review.
Direct investment
As	in	cross-border 	portfolio 	transactions 	(€31	
billion), 	Germany 	also	recorded 	net	inflows 	in	
direct 	investment 	between 	July	and	Septem -
ber	(€2	billion). 	This	mainly 	resulted 	from 	di-
rect	investment 	by	foreign 	enterprises 	in	Ger-
many 	(€8	billion, 	after 	€3	billion 	in	the	previ -
ous	quarter), 	which 	provided 	their 	German 	
affiliates 	with	additional 	funds, 	particularly 	
through 	intra-group 	loans 	(€4½ 	billion), 	as	
well	as	in	the	form 	of	equity 	capital 	and	rein-
vested 	earnings 	(together 	€3½	billion). 	The	
main 	investors 	were 	enterprises 	from 	Euro-
pean 	countries 	(€5½ 	billion), 	with	those 	pri-
marily 	from 	the	euro	area	and	Switzerland 	
investing 	more 	heavily 	in	Germany. 	German 	
private 	equity 	firms 	received 	a	large 	portion 	
of	funds 	(€7	billion), 	while 	€2	billion 	flowed 	
to	domestic 	credit 	institutions.
Domestic 	owners, 	too,	provided 	their	foreign 	
subsidiaries 	with	capital 	in	the	third 	quarter 	
(€5½ 	billion). 	In	particular, 	they	(re)invested 	
earnings 	previously 	generated 	abroad 	(€8½ 	
billion). 	Furthermore, 	they	increased 	their	eq-
uity	capital 	abroad. 	Conversely, 	resident 	par-
ent	enterprises 	recorded 	an	inflow 	of	funds 	
via	intra-group 	credit 	transactions 	(€5	billion) 	
which 	–	in	line	with	the	standard 	international 	
methods 	for	compiling 	the	balance 	of	pay-
ments 	–	have 	to	be	offset. 	Borrowing 	from 	
foreign 	subsidiaries 	played 	an	important 	role	
in	this	context. 	Emerging 	market 	and	devel -Inflows in 
direct 
 investmentMajor items of the balance of 
 payments
€ billion
Item2010 2011
Q3 Q2 Q3
 I Current account 1, 2 + 30.8 + 27.2 +  30.0 
Foreign trade 1, 3   r + 38.9   r + 38.3 +  39.8
Services 1 –  7.1 –  2.4 –   6.6 
Income 1 + 12.9 +  0.7 +  13.4 
Current transfers 1 – 10.9 –  5.6 –  10.3 
 II Capital transfers 1, 4 +  0.0 –  0.3 +   0.1 
 III Financial account 1
(Net capital exports: –) – 25.7 – 29.2 –  17.6 
1 Direct investment + 15.5 +  3.7 +   2.2 
German investment 
abroad +  7.5 +  0.9 –   5.6 
Foreign investment 
in  Germany +  7.9 +  2.8 +   7.8 
2 Portfolio investment +  7.1 + 55.2 +  31.2 
German investment 
abroad – 24.9 – 16.3 +  12.8 
Shares +  2.8 –  8.4 +  11.4 
Mutual fund shares –  7.7 –  2.3 +   3.6 
Debt securities – 20.0 –  5.6 –   2.2 
Bonds and notes 5 – 17.2 +  2.5 +   2.2 
of which
Euro-denominated 
bonds and notes – 12.0 +  5.6 +   3.3 
Money market 
 instruments –  2.7 –  8.1 –   4.3 
Foreign investment 
in Germany + 32.0 + 71.5 +  18.4 
Shares +  2.0 + 11.7 –   4.2 
Mutual fund shares –  0.5 +  0.9 +   3.9 
Debt securities + 30.6 + 58.9 +  18.7 
Bonds and notes 5 + 21.5 + 37.6 +   4.7 
of which  
Public bonds and 
notes + 23.6 + 30.7 +   9.0 
Money market 
 instruments +  9.0 + 21.3 +  14.0 
3 Financial derivatives 6 –  7.9 –  5.3 –   6.8 
4 Other investment 7 – 40.8 – 82.3 –  43.7 
Monetary fi  nancial 
 institutions 8 + 42.4 – 52.4 +  56.2 
of which  short-term + 15.5 – 47.6 +  66.6 
Enterprises and 
 households – 25.7 –  6.6 –   8.0 
of which  short-term –  9.9 +  0.8 –   7.3 
General government +  3.3 –  7.2 +  18.1 
of which  short-term +  2.5 –  8.6 +  15.4 
Bundesbank – 60.7 – 16.2 – 110.0 
5 Change in reserve assets 
at transaction values 
(increase: –) 9 +  0.3 –  0.4 –   0.6 
 IV Errors and omissions –  5.1 +  2.3 –  12.4 
1 Balance. — 2 Including supplementary trade items. — 3 Special 
trade according to the offi  cial foreign trade statistics (source: 
Federal Statistical Offi  ce). — 4 Including the acquisition/disposal 
of non-produced non-fi  nancial assets. — 5 Original maturity of 
more than one year. — 6 Securitised and non-securitised options 
as well as fi  nancial futures contracts. — 7 Includes fi  nancial and 
trade credits, bank deposits and other assets. — 8 Excluding the 
Bundesbank. — 9 Excluding allocation of SDRs and excluding 
changes due to value adjustments.
Deutsche Bundesbank
DEUTSCHE  
BUNDESBANK
E U R O S Y S T E M
Monthly Report  
November 2011
46

oping 	countries 	were 	the	geographical 	focus	
of	German 	direct 	investment 	abroad 	in	the	third	 quarter,	 whereas	 capital	 was	 withdrawn	
in	net	terms	 from	 the	US	in	particular.DEUTSCHE  
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report  
November 2011
47

Economic conditions 
in GermanyMacroeconomic situation
The	upturn 	in	the	German 	economy 	con-
tinued 	into	the	third 	quarter 	of	2011. 	Accord -
ing	to	the	Federal 	Statistical 	Office’s 	flash 	es-
timate, 	seasonally 	and	calendar-adjusted 	real	
gross 	domestic 	product 	(GDP) 	increased 	fairly 	
sharply 	again 	in	the	third 	quarter 	by	0.5% 	on	
the	preceding 	three-month 	period 	after 	
extraordinary 	effects 	had	slightly 	slowed 	the	
pace 	of	growth 	to	0.3% 	in	the	second 	quar-
ter.	Going 	into	the	second 	half	of	2011, 	the	
underlying 	cyclical 	tendency 	was	therefore 	
not	much 	weaker 	than	in	the	first	six	months. 	
During 	the	reporting 	period, 	seasonally 	and	
calendar-adjusted 	economic 	output 	clearly 	
exceeded 	the	peak 	it	had	marked 	prior 	to	the	
onset 	of	the	financial 	and	economic 	crisis. 	In	
the	year	to	date, 	moreover, 	the	level	of	use	of	
aggregate 	capacity, 	which 	had	previously 	al-
ready 	reached 	the	corridor 	of	normal 	utilisa -
tion,	is	likely 	to	have 	risen 	perceptibly.
However, 	a	look	at	the	pattern 	of	develop -
ment 	in	monthly 	production 	indicators 	shows 	
that	economic 	momentum 	has	waned 	of	
late.	Furthermore, 	the	substantial 	lowering 	of	
business 	expectations 	that	has	been 	observed 	
for	some 	time	is	being 	reflected 	in	a	consid -
erable 	deterioration 	of	industrial 	new	orders. 	
External 	perturbations, 	as	mirrored 	in	plum -
meting 	international 	stock 	markets 	and	sag-
ging	sentiment, 	are	now	perceptibly 	weigh -
ing	on	real	economic 	activity 	in	Germany 	and	
are	likely 	to	leave 	their 	mark 	over	the	next	
few	months. 	This	increases 	the	risk	that	do-
mestic 	economic 	dynamics 	may	weaken.Strong GDP 
growth in 2011 
Q3, …
… but 
unfavourable 
outlook
DEUTSCHE  
BUNDESBANK
E U R O S Y S T E M
Monthly Report  
November 2011
48

German 	enterprises’ 	foreign 	trade 	remained	
buoyant	 in	the	third	 quarter	 of	2011	 despite	
growing	 concerns	 about	 global	 economic	 de-
velopments. 	The	value 	of	exported 	goods	
rose	by	a	seasonally 	adjusted 	2¼% 	in	the	
summer 	months. 	Against 	the	backdrop 	of	
only	minor 	price 	rises	across 	the	range 	of	
German 	exports, 	a	real	increase 	is	likely 	to	
have 	been 	posted 	which 	was	not	smaller	
than	the	perceptible 	growth 	recorded 	in	the	
two	 preceding	 quarters.	 Of	late,	 German	 en-
terprises’	 foreign	 business	 has	benefited	 from	
stimuli	 from	 the	United	 States	 and	Japan	 and	
the	country’s 	east	European 	neighbouring	
countries. 	Exports 	to	China 	and	other 	south	
and	east	 Asian	 emerging	 market	 economies,	
by	contrast, 	stagnated, 	as	did	deliveries 	of	
goods 	to	the	euro 	area. 	Foreign 	sales 	of	
motor 	vehicles 	and	automotive 	components	
experienced 	exceptionally 	dynamic 	growth.	
Sales	 of	machinery	 and	electronic	 goods	 also	
increased. 	There 	was	once 	again 	a	percep -
tible	seasonally 	adjusted 	rise	in	intermediate	
goods	 exports	 in	July	and	August	 –	primarily	
metals	 and	metal	 products	 –	after	 only	 a	mar-
ginal	 increase	 had	 been	 recorded	 in	the	pre-
vious	 quarter.
Imports 	expanded 	again 	appreciably 	in	the	
third	 quarter.	 However,	 the	rate	of	increase	 is	
likely	 to	have	 been	 lower	 than	 in	the	previous	
three 	months. 	Purchases 	of	goods 	by	Ger-
man	 enterprises	 from	 foreign	 suppliers	 in	the	
reporting	 period	 rose	 by	a	seasonally	 adjusted	
1 %	on	the	quarter. 	Demand 	for	energy 	was	
particularly 	strong 	as	it	was	somewhat	
cheaper	 than	 in	the	second	 quarter.	 Real	 im-
ports 	of	energy 	in	July	and	August 	–	more	
recent 	data	are	not	yet	available 	–	are	esti-mated 	to	have 	risen 	by	just	over	one-tenth	
on	the	previous 	quarter 	on	average. 	In	add-
ition	to	chemical 	and	pharmaceutical 	prod -
ucts	 as	well	 as	metal	 products,	 motor	 vehicle	
imports 	also	went 	up	by	an	above-average	
amount.	 This	 is	likely	 to	be	due	to	a	sizeable	
extent 	to	the	fact	that	exports 	of	Japanese	
brands 	were 	no	longer 	being 	hampered, 	as	
they	 had	been	 in	the	second	 quarter,	 by	lost	
output	 in	connection	 with	 the	disruptions	 in	
the	global 	supply 	chain 	resulting 	from 	the	
natural	 disaster	 that	 occurred	 in	Japan.	 There	
was,	 however,	 a	slight	 decline	 in	purchases	 of	
foreign 	machinery 	from 	the	middle 	of	2011	
following	 a	marked	 rise	in	the	first	half	of	the	
year.
The	dynamic	 upswing	 in	business	 investment	
remained 	intact 	in	the	third 	quarter. 	Enter -Buoyant export 
activity
Marked rise  
in importsOverall output
Deutsche Bundesbank2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011102104106108110112
–6–4–20+2+4+62005 = 100, price and seasonally adjusted
Log scale
GDP
Year-on-year change%Lin scaleDEUTSCHE  
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report  
November 2011
49

prises 	substantially 	stepped 	up	their 	pur-
chases 	of	new	machinery 	and	electrical 	
equipment. 	Large-scale 	investments 	were 	
also	made 	in	vehicle 	fleets. 	The	current 	high	
level	of	capacity 	utilisation 	of	tangible 	fixed 	
assets 	in	large 	parts 	of	the	economy, 	in	con-
junction 	with	the	now	considerable 	backlog 	
of	orders, 	explains 	why	enterprises 	have, 	so	
far,	barely 	revised 	their 	intention 	to	expand 	
production 	capacity. 	The	order 	capacity 	index, 	for	example, 	indicates 	that	the	current 	order 	
volume 	has	been 	consistently 	above 	the	nor-
mal	level	of	industrial 	output 	for	the	past	
one-and-a-half 	years. 	Provided 	it	remains 	a	
temporary 	phenomenon, 	the	fact	that	de-
mand 	has	eased 	off	from 	its	cyclical 	high	is	
therefore 	not	inconsistent 	with	plans 	to	ex-
pand 	production 	capacity. 	Taking 	a	longer-
term 	view, 	at	any	rate, 	the	business 	invest -
ment 	cycle 	has	not	yet	reached 	maturity. 	In	
the	enterprise 	sector 	(excluding 	housing), 	for	
example, 	the	share 	of	gross 	fixed 	capital 	for-
mation 	in	value 	added 	in	the	second 	quarter 	
of	2011 	was	still	down 	perceptibly 	on	the	
price-adjusted 	level	recorded 	at	the	end	of	
the	last	upswing.
Housing 	construction 	again 	provided 	support 	
to	the	domestic 	economy. 	Demand 	for	resi-
dential 	property 	remained 	strong 	throughout 	
the	third 	quarter, 	not	least	because 	mortgage 	
rates 	fell	to	new	lows. 	Output 	in	public 	sector 	
construction 	is	not	likely 	to	have 	held	up	at	
its	elevated 	level	of	the	past	few	months 	of	
late.
Private 	consumption 	recovered 	from 	its	tem-
porary 	spring 	lull	going 	into	the	second 	half	
of	the	year. 	Retailers 	reported 	a	seasonally 	
adjusted 	quarter-on-quarter 	increase 	in	sales 	
for	the	reporting 	period. 	Moreover, 	house -
holds 	purchased 	significantly 	more 	motor 	ve-
hicles 	again. 	Higher 	consumer 	spending 	was	
attributable 	to	sharply 	improved 	earnings 	
and	a	robust 	propensity 	to	purchase. 	A	con-
tributory 	factor 	towards 	the	end	of	the	period 	
was	a	pick-up 	in	purchases 	of	heating 	oil,	
which 	had	been 	deliberately 	postponed 	in	Dynamic 
business 
 investmentFurther 
stimulus from 
housing con­
struction but 
public sector 
construction 
weaker
Recovery  
in private 
 consumptionUnderlying trends
in foreign trade
1 Adjusted for the price indices for foreign 
trade.
Deutsche Bundesbank951001101201301402005 = 100, log scale
Exports of goods  (price-adjusted)1
100110120130Seasonally adjusted, quarterly
To euro-area countriesTo non-euro-area countries
July-
AugTotal
July-
Aug
€ bn
2007 2008 2009 2010 2011100110120130140
Lin scale
Foreign trade balance90100110120
Imports of goods in total
(price-adjusted)1
0204060
DEUTSCHE  
BUNDESBANK
E U R O S Y S T E M
Monthly Report  
November 2011
50

the	late	winter 	and	early 	spring 	months 	
owing 	to	high	prices.
Sectoral trends
Industrial 	output 	developed 	dynamically 	on	
balance 	in	the	third 	quarter 	of	2011. 	In	July	
and	August 	it	clearly 	exceeded 	the	peak 	level	
recorded 	prior 	to	the	crisis. 	Following 	the	
marked 	rise	of	2¼% 	in	the	second 	quarter, 	
industrial 	output 	grew 	by	another 	2%	after 	
seasonal 	adjustment 	on	an	average 	of	the	
third 	quarter 	compared 	with	the	preceding 	
three 	months. 	The	manufacture 	of	capital 	
goods 	expanded 	very	sharply 	by	3½% 	in	the	
reporting 	period, 	compared 	with	an	increase 	
of	1¾% 	in	the	case	of	intermediate 	goods. 	
Only 	the	production 	of	consumer 	goods 	
showed 	a	slight 	decline 	(-1¼%). 	Output 	was	
bolstered 	by	the	automobile 	industry, 	in	par-
ticular, 	which 	benefited 	from 	very	positive 	
demand 	conditions 	of	late.	Added 	to	this	was	
the	fact	that	a	large 	number 	of	automobile 	
manufacturers 	shortened 	their 	usual 	plant 	
shutdowns 	this	summer 	or	even 	refrained 	
from 	shutting 	down 	completely. 	The	output 	
of	motor 	vehicles 	in	the	reporting 	period 	was	
therefore 	up	by	a	seasonally 	adjusted 	7¾% 	
on	the	quarter. 	The	severe 	cutback 	in	indus -
trial	output 	alone 	by	3%	between 	August 	
and	September 	was	due	partly 	to	this	special 	
effect, 	but	it	may	also	be	interpreted 	as	a	har-
binger 	of	a	broadly 	based 	slowdown 	in	in-
dustrial 	activity, 	which 	is	likely 	to	occur 	in	the	
coming 	months 	in	the	light	of	the	noticeably 	
weakened 	demand 	dynamics.This	view 	is	supported 	by	Ifo	Institute 	data, 	
according 	to	which 	manufacturing 	capacity 	
utilisation 	in	October, 	at	84¾% 	of	normal 	full	
capacity, 	was	rated 	significantly 	lower 	than	in	
April 	and	July	(86%). 	There 	was	an	above-
average 	decline 	in	capacity 	utilisation 	in	the	
intermediate 	goods 	sector, 	though 	it	held	up	
at	just	above 	the	long-term 	sectoral 	mean 	–	a	
position 	which 	can	also	be	observed 	in	the	
case	of	the	capital 	goods 	sector 	at	present.
Construction 	activity 	has	persisted 	at	a	high	
level	since 	the	second 	quarter. 	Overall 	con-
struction 	output 	remained 	virtually 	un-
changed 	between 	the	second 	and	the	third 	
quarter 	of	2011 	in	seasonally 	adjusted 	terms; 	
building 	construction 	expanded 	slightly, 	
whereas 	civil	engineering 	contracted 	moder -
ately. 	Energy 	production 	stabilised 	in	the	third 	
quarter 	after 	it	had	previously 	declined 	con-
siderably 	following 	the	shutdown 	of	a	num-
ber	of	nuclear 	power 	plants 	(see	the	box	on	
pages 54 	and	55	for	information 	on	the	ef-
fects 	of	permanently 	decommissioning 	older 	
nuclear 	power 	plants 	on	the	generation 	of	
domestic 	electricity 	and	cross-border 	power 	
transmission).
In	the	third 	quarter 	of	2011, 	the	wholesale 	
and	retail 	trade 	largely 	made 	good 	the	sales 	
losses 	they	suffered 	in	the	previous 	quarter 	in	
seasonally 	adjusted 	terms. 	Motor 	vehicle 	
traders 	also	posted 	growth 	in	activity. 	This, 	
however, 	was	by	no	means 	enough 	to	offset 	
the	sharp 	fall	recorded 	in	the	second 	quarter, 	
which 	was	probably 	connected 	in	part	with	
the	delivery 	problems 	of	Japanese 	cars. 	The	
transport 	and	logistics 	sector 	is	likely 	to	have 	
felt	the	forthcoming 	slowdown 	in	industrial 	High industrial 
output in July 
and August  
not matched  
in SeptemberIndustrial 
capacity utilisa­
tion noticeably 
lower at start 
of Q4
Construction 
output and 
energy produc­
tion showing 
sideways 
movement
Growth in  
sales in trade 
sectors, hardly 
any growth in 
other servicesDEUTSCHE  
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report  
November 2011
51

activity 	in	the	third 	quarter. 	For	example, 	
there 	was	no	further 	seasonally 	adjusted 	in-
crease 	in	the	mileage 	of	German-registered 	
freight 	carriers 	and	hauliers 	on	roads 	subject 	
to	toll	charges 	in	the	third 	quarter 	of	2011. 	
Nevertheless, 	according 	to	Ifo	Institute 	data, 	
service 	providers 	(excluding 	retailers) 	rated 	
their 	business 	situation 	in	the	reporting 	
period 	almost 	as	optimistically 	as	in	the	pre-
ceding 	months.Employment and labour market
Employment 	continued 	to	rise	in	the	third 	
quarter 	of	2011 	on	the	back 	of	sharply 	higher 	
economic 	output. 	The	pace 	of	growth 	decel -
erated 	compared 	with	the	first	half	of	the	
year, 	however. 	According 	to	estimates 	by	the	
Federal 	Statistical 	Office, 	employment 	in	Ger-
many 	rose	by	90,000, 	or	0.2%, 	on	the	quar-
ter	after 	adjustment 	for	seasonal 	variations. 	
Employment 	therefore 	expanded 	more 	than	
one-third 	more 	slowly 	than 	in	the	two	pre-
ceding 	quarters. 	Most 	new	jobs	that	were 	
created 	were 	again 	subject 	to	social 	security 	
contributions, 	while 	the	number 	of	persons 	
working 	exclusively 	in	low-paid 	part-time 	
jobs	remained 	virtually 	unchanged 	in	season -
ally	adjusted 	terms, 	and	government-
sponsored 	working 	arrangements 	(one-euro 	
workfare 	jobs) 	were 	reduced 	further. 	Self-
employment 	grew 	at	a	rate	similar 	to	that	of	
payroll 	employees.
Growth 	in	employment 	subject 	to	social 	se-
curity 	contributions, 	which 	was	up	by	
120,000 	persons, 	or	0.4%, 	in	July	and	Au-
gust	taken 	together 	compared 	with	the	aver-
age	of	the	second 	quarter, 	was	accounted 	for	
primarily 	by	the	manufacturing 	sector, 	the	
health 	and	social 	work 	sector, 	business-
related 	services 	(excluding 	third-party 	hiring) 	
and	the	wholesale 	and	retail 	trade. 	No	fur-
ther	growth 	in	employment 	was	posted 	in	
the	construction 	sector 	in	the	reporting 	
period 	following 	the	sizeable 	gains 	observed 	
since 	the	beginning 	of	2010. 	The	number 	of	
agency 	hirings 	has	been 	tending 	to	decline 	
for	a	number 	of	months 	now. 	This	presum -
ably	primarily 	reflects 	the	fact	that	the	Modest rise  
in employment
Further rise  
in employment 
subject to 
social security 
contributionsLog scale
Industry
Lin scale
Year-on-year
change
Log scale
Construction
Lin scale
Year-on-year
change%%Output in industry and in 
construction
Deutsche Bundesbank2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 20119095100105110115120125
–25–20–15–10–50+5+10+15
95100105110115120125
–15–10–50+5+10+15+20+25+30+352005 = 100, seasonally adjusted, quarterly
DEUTSCHE  
BUNDESBANK
E U R O S Y S T E M
Monthly Report  
November 2011
52

build-up 	of	a	flexibility 	reserve, 	which 	trig-
gered 	the	boom 	in	third-party 	hiring 	in	the	
early	 stage	 of	the	recovery,	 has	now	 come	 to	
an	end	in	a	large	 number	 of	enterprises	 and	
this	is	now	 being	 followed	 by	an	exchange	 in	
favour 	of	the	core	workforce. 	However, 	the	
anticipated 	deceleration 	in	the	pace 	of	eco-
nomic 	growth, 	among 	other 	factors, 	may	
also	have 	prompted 	firms 	to	adopt 	a	some -
what 	more 	cautious 	approach, 	especially	
with	 regard	 to	temporary	 staff.
Citizens 	from 	the	eight 	central 	and	eastern	
EU	member 	states 	(EU-8), 	who	have 	been	
permitted 	to	take	up	employment 	in	Ger-
many	 without	 restrictions	 since	 the	introduc -
tion	of	full	labour 	mobility 	within 	the	EU	in	
May	2011, 	are	also	benefiting 	from 	the	
growth 	in	employment 	subject 	to	social 	se-
curity 	contributions. 	According 	to	estimates	
by	the	Federal	 Employment	 Agency,	 the	num-
ber	of	migrants 	from 	the	EU-8 	countries 	in	
jobs	 subject	 to	social	 security	 contributions	 in	
Germany 	at	the	end	of	August 	2011 	was	
around 	47,000 	higher 	than 	the	figure 	re-
corded	 immediately	 prior	 to	the	introduction	
of	the	new	 regulation.	 This	 represents	 an	in-
crease 	of	40,000 	after 	adjustment 	for	sea-
sonal 	variations. 	The	vast	majority 	of	these	
are	likely 	to	have 	been 	persons 	who	have	
been 	living 	in	Germany 	for	some 	time	al-
ready. 	At	any	rate, 	data	from 	the	Central	
Register 	of	Foreign 	Nationals 	indicate 	that	
migration 	from 	the	EU-8 	countries 	has	been	Migration from 
EU­8 countries still mutedLabour market
2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011
1 From  May  2009,  unemployed  excluding 
persons  newly  registered  on  the  books  of 
private employment agencies.
Deutsche Bundesbank39.039.540.040.541.041.5
26.026.527.027.528.028.5–5000+500+1,000
2.53.03.54.04.55.0
–1,000–5000+500Seasonally adjusted, quarterly
Million
Million
MillionThou-
sand
Thou-
sand
Thou-
sand Year-on-year changeOfficially unemployed 1UnemployedTotalEmployed
Unsubsidised vacancies
(scale enlarged)Occupied positionsJobs subject to social security
contributionsYear-on-year change
OctOctOctJuly-
Aug
200300400500DEUTSCHE  
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report  
November 2011
53

Deutsche BundesbankThe effect of decommissioning nuclear power plants on the generation 
and cross-border trading of electricity
On 14 March 2011, three days after the nuclear reac -
tor disaster in Fukushima, Japan, the German Federal 
government announced a suspension of its nuclear 
power plant lifetime extension programme as part of 
a three-month moratorium. Following this, five block-
unit nuclear power stations with a net output of more 
than 5 gigawatts (GW) were taken off-line on 17 and 
18 March. Together with the two plants that have not 
been in operation since 2007 and the two reactor blocks 
shut down for an overhaul, at the peak in spring, nine 
of Germany’s 17 nuclear power plants with an installed 
output of just under 10 GW were not connected to the 
grid. This represents 6% of the country’s entire domestic 
electricity-generating capacity.1 The Federal government 
decided to permanently decommission the eight oldest 
nuclear power plants with effect from 6 August 2011. 
Although the moratorium had already ended seven 
weeks before the final switch-off date, none of the 
power plants concerned was started up again.
Permanently forgoing the use of around two-fifths of 
the nuclear power plants’ output leads to a reduction of 
the potential domestic electricity supply, which is deter -
mined by the generating capacity of all the domestic 
electricity producers. It is the effective supply, however, 
which is relevant to the market and this would be unaf -
fected by the nuclear power plants being switched off 
if reserve capacities could be used on an adequate scale 
and/or the average capacity utilisation of other plants 
were to be raised accordingly. For various reasons, this 
did not occur in the short term, however, resulting in a 
marked reduction in the domestic supply. What proved 
to be a likely technical obstacle was that the baseload 
capacity of nuclear power could not simply be taken up 
by other energy sources. From an economic perspective, 
it may have been relevant that departures from the 
normal degree of capacity utilisation lead to increased 
plant wear and tear, making additional maintenance 
work necessary.The main reason for maintaining additional power plant 
capacities, from an economic point of view, is to ensure 
the security of supply. Expansion investments are needed 
to substitute so that the risk of shortages increasing 
beyond the level hitherto deemed to be sustainable is 
avoided in the long term after the plants are shut down, 
although the effect of these investments will be felt only 
in the long term. Owing to complex and time-consum -
ing planning and approval procedures as well as long 
construction times, the commissioning of new plants and 
the associated expansion of the power grid generally 
require a considerable lead time.
According to the Electricity Report of the Federal Statisti -
cal Office, the production of electricity by nuclear power 
(less plants’ own consumption) slumped by a seasonally 
adjusted 35% in the second quarter of 2011.2 In terms 
of pure numbers, this almost completely “explains” the 
10% decline in electricity generation for general supply 
to 104 terawatt-hours (TWh). This is likely to overstate 
the adjustment in the level of the effective domestic 
supply, however. The monthly production results are not 
based on reports by all the electricity producers. While 
electricity from nuclear power is incorporated fully into 
the statistics, the amounts generated by smaller produc -
ers, in particular from photovoltaic plants, wind parks 
and biomass power plants, are not adequately recorded 
as there is a maximum number of power plant operators 
to be surveyed as well as a reporting threshold. Indus -
trial electricity production for self-supply is likewise not 
included in the statistics.
German electricity suppliers responded to the decline 
in domestic production mainly by stepping up imports. 
Since April 2011, the foreign trade statistics have been 
showing a deficit in cross-border trade in electricity after 
regularly recording a  surplus from 2003 onwards. The 
import and export of electricity has a distinct seasonal 
pattern. Every spring, there is a significant reduction in 
1 The Federal Association of the Energy and Water Industry (Bundes -
verband der Energie- und Wasserwirtschaft) gives the net capacity of 
all Germany’s power plants in 2010 as 166 GW. Their data are based on 
estimates, particularly in the field of renewable energy and in the case 
of industrial power plants. — 2 In May 2011, the nuclear power plants 
fed very little electricity into the grid. The monthly supply volume has since clearly recovered from this low.  — 3 Electricity plays a dominant 
role on the export side, however. In the second quarter of 2011, elec -
tricity accounted for two-fifths of the overall very small primary energy 
exports. — 4 On a monthly basis, it was only in April and May 2011 
that there were net imports of electricity in seasonally adjusted terms. 
Since June, electricity has been exported again on balance on a small 
DEUTSCHE  
BUNDESBANK
E U R O S Y S T E M
Monthly Report  
November 2011
54

(gross) electricity exports, which increase again in the 
autumn. This is mostly due to the fact that Austria and 
Switzerland import less electricity from Germany on bal-
ance during the second and third quarters of the year as 
they can generate more themselves thanks to the snow -
melt. Output to these two countries was especially low 
this year. Since April, there has also been a noticeable 
rise in electricity imports, with mainly French suppliers feeding additional electricity into the German grid. A 
similar response was also identifiable in the supply bal-
ances with Denmark and the Netherlands.
The shifts in cross-border trade in electricity have not 
had any significant impact on the German energy bal -
ance, however, which is characterised by high levels of 
oil and gas supplies from abroad. In real terms, electric -
ity accounts for no more than around 5% of Germany’s entire primary energy imports.
3 The fact that monthly 
net earnings from international trading in electricity 
have declined by some €100 million year on year since 
the nuclear power plants were switched off is hardly sig -
nificant given a monthly deficit in primary energy carrier 
trading, which has been fluctuating between €4 and €8 
billion since 2008.
According to the Electricity Report, Germany imported a 
seasonally adjusted 1¼ TWh of electricity on balance in the second quarter of 2011, compared with net exports 
of 2¾ TWh during the first quarter of the year.
4 This turn-
around in cross-border trading nevertheless accounts for merely one-third of the statistically recorded decline in domestic electricity generation of 11½ TWh during the 
same period. Considering that electricity consumption 
shows comparatively little fluctuation from one quarter 
to the next in seasonally adjusted terms,
5 a considerable 
unexplained residual persists on the supply side, which 
may be associated with the aforementioned recording 
problems.Overall, it can be said that, with the decommissioning of 
eight nuclear power plants, Germany’s domestic electric -
ity production from conventional sources has shown a perceptible decline. This has been partly offset by the 
fact that, on balance, German electricity providers have 
since supplied virtually no electricity for export. It can also be assumed that domestic electricity production has 
been increasingly shifted to plants that are not currently 
covered by the infra-annual energy reports.
6
scale. — 5 One indication of this is the supply of network operators 
to domestic end-consumers. In the second quarter of 2011, this was a 
seasonally adjusted 1½ TWh down on the quarter and somewhat up on the year. — 6 At present, experts are looking into how the informa-
tive value of energy statistics can be improved. See W Bayer (2011), Sich ständig wandelnde Energiemärkte – eine Herausforderung für die amtliche Energiestatistik, Wirtschaft und Statistik, August 2011, 
pp 753–761 . — 7 Gross output of general supply less the power plants’ 
own consumption.Indicators of electricity market
in Germany
2008 2009 2010 2011343638404244
246
3436384042Terawatt-hours, seasonally adjusted
Expor t
Output to domestic end-consumer sImpor tof which
from nuclear powerNet output 7
5791113monthly
quarterly averageDEUTSCHE  
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report  
November 2011
55

muted 	so	far.1	One	reason 	for	this	is	presum -
ably	that	demand 	for	labour 	in	the	construc -
tion	sector 	and	in	third-party 	hiring, 	which 	
have 	so	far	accounted 	for	the	largest 	shares 	
–	at	just	under 	one-fifth 	in	each 	case	–	of	the	
growth 	in	employment 	among 	persons 	ori-
ginating 	from 	one	of	the	EU-8 	countries, 	is	
not	experiencing 	any	further 	growth 	at	
present. 	Furthermore, 	the	finding 	that	the	
rise	in	the	number 	of	persons 	from 	these 	
countries 	working 	exclusively 	in	low-paid 	
part-time 	employment 	between 	April 	and	
August, 	especially 	in	the	agricultural 	and	
hotel 	and	restaurant 	sectors, 	was	greater 	
than 	last	year	is	also	an	indication 	that	this	
additional 	labour 	supply 	was	focused 	primar -
ily	on	jobs	which 	tend 	to	have 	a	low	skills 	
profile. 	Nevertheless, 	there 	is	considerable 	
demand 	for	highly 	qualified 	and	skilled 	work -
ers,	the	recruitment 	of	whom 	is	often 	a	time-
consuming 	process, 	especially 	when 	recruit -
ing	from 	abroad.
The	falling 	trend 	in	unemployment 	continued 	
in	the	third 	quarter 	of	2011. 	At	2.95	million, 	
around 	28,000 	fewer 	persons 	were 	regis -
tered 	as	unemployed 	in	the	reporting 	period 	
(seasonally 	adjusted) 	than 	in	the	second 	
quarter, 	when 	the	corresponding 	figure 	de-
clined 	by	as	much 	as	86,000. 	The	unemploy -
ment 	rate	fell	by	0.1	percentage 	point 	
to	7.0% 	in	the	period 	under 	review. 	While 	
unemployment 	among 	longer-term 	job	seek-
ers	receiving 	welfare 	benefits 	continued 	to	
fall	moderately, 	no	further 	noticeable 	drop 	
was	recorded 	in	the	number 	of	unemployed 	
workers 	claiming 	insurance 	benefits, 	which 	
was	already 	at	a	very	low	level. 	The	strong 	
cyclical 	undercurrent 	that	has	boosted 	the		labour 	market 	over	the	past	twelve 	months 	is	
demonstrated 	by	the	fact	that	underemploy -
ment 	(excluding 	short-time 	work), 	which 	also	
includes 	persons 	participating 	in	labour 	mar-
ket	policy 	measures, 	declined 	by	more 	than 	
half	a	million 	persons 	compared 	with	last	
year, 	whereas 	registered 	unemployment 	fell	
by	just	239,000. 	Registered 	unemployment 	
did	not	decline 	any	further 	in	October 	2011 	
in	seasonally 	adjusted 	terms; 	the	correspond -
ing	unemployment 	rate	remained 	at	7.0%.
According 	to	the	leading 	indicators 	available 	
for	the	labour 	market, 	the	positive 	develop -
ment 	is	likely 	to	continue 	for	the	time	being 	
as	the	incentive 	to	expand 	production 	capaci -
ties	is	still	the	dominant 	factor 	in	staffing 	
plans 	in	trade 	and	industry. 	The	Ifo	employ -
ment 	barometer 	with	a	survey 	horizon 	of	
three 	months 	has	fallen 	perceptibly 	vis-à-vis 	
the	peak 	reached 	in	the	first	quarter. 	Never -
theless, 	it	is	still	clearly 	expansionary. 	In	add-
ition, 	the	autumn 	survey 	conducted 	by	the	
German 	Chamber 	of	Commerce 	(DIHK), 	
which 	investigates 	the	hiring 	intentions 	of	
enterprises 	over	the	next	12	months, 	indi-
cates 	that	those 	enterprises 	intending 	to	re-
duce 	their 	headcount 	are	by	far	outnum -
bered 	by	those 	with	plans 	to	increase 	their 	
staffing 	levels 	or	to	leave 	them 	unchanged. 	
There 	was	a	further 	seasonally 	adjusted 	in-
crease 	in	the	third 	quarter 	in	the	number 	of	
vacancies 	registered 	with	the	Federal 	Employ -
ment 	Agency 	for	jobs	not	promoted 	by	la-Slower pace  
of decline  
in registered 
unemploymentWeaker yet still 
positive 
outlook for 
labour market
1	The	(gross) 	influx 	of	immigrants 	from 	the	EU-8 	coun -
tries	in	the	four-month 	period 	from 	May	to	August 	2011 	
was	only	about 	13,000 	higher 	than	in	the	previous 	year, 	
with	the	lion’s 	share 	of	the	increase 	being 	accounted 	for	
in	May	alone; 	see	Wanderungsmonitor 	(migration 	moni -
tor)	of	the	Federal 	Office 	for	Migration 	and	Refugees.
DEUTSCHE  
BUNDESBANK
E U R O S Y S T E M
Monthly Report  
November 2011
56

bour 	market 	policy 	measures. 	The	pace 	of	
increase 	slowed 	down 	considerably 	com-
pared 	with	the	preceding 	quarters, 	however. 	
A	similar 	picture 	is	also	revealed 	by	the	quar-
terly	IAB	Job	Vacancy 	Survey 	for	the	third 	
quarter 	of	2011. 	The	BA-X 	index 	for	job	va-
cancies, 	which 	provides 	information 	on	the	
current 	level	and	intake 	of	vacancies, 	was	
only	marginally 	higher 	than 	in	the	previous 	
quarter. 	This	is	a	reflexion 	of	the	fact	that, 	for	
the	second 	time	in	succession, 	fewer 	new	va-
cancies 	were 	reported 	in	the	quarter 	under 	
review 	than 	in	the	preceding 	period. 	There 	
was	also	a	decline 	in	the	number 	of	job	place -
ments 	in	the	third 	quarter, 	which 	resulted 	in	
vacancies 	remaining 	unfilled 	for	longer 	
periods 	and	a	lower 	turnover 	on	the	labour 	
market.
Wages and prices
Meanwhile, 	employees 	are	benefiting 	from 	
the	favourable 	labour 	market 	situation 	in	the	
form 	of	sharply 	higher 	earnings. 	In	many 	in-
dustries, 	these 	are	well	above 	the	collectively 	
agreed 	wage 	increases. 	A	number 	of	enter -
prises 	in	the	metal-working 	and	electrical 	en-
gineering 	industries, 	for	example, 	in	which, 	
from 	today’s 	perspective, 	a	comparatively 	
moderate 	wage 	increase 	had	already 	been 	
agreed 	in	2010, 	made 	generous 	voluntary 	
one-off 	payments. 	Moreover, 	a	number 	of	
chemical 	and	pharmaceutical 	companies 	
granted 	substantial 	bonus 	payments 	on	top	
of	the	sizeable 	wage 	increase 	already 	agreed 	
this	year. 	Another 	factor 	contributing 	to	the	
sharp 	rise	in	actual 	earnings 	was	that	regular 	
working 	hours 	continued 	to	converge 	to-wards 	the	normal 	level, 	thus	also	pushing 	up	
the	amount 	of	paid	overtime. 	These 	special 	
factors 	are	likely 	to	become 	much 	less	signifi -
cant	as	the	year	progresses. 	Nevertheless, 	a	
markedly 	positive 	wage 	drift, 	measured 	on	a	
monthly 	basis, 	will	be	recorded 	for	the	year	
as	a	whole.
The	moderate 	pattern 	of	increase 	in	negoti -
ated	rates 	of	pay	continued 	in	the	third 	quar-
ter.	According 	to	Bundesbank 	statistics, 	ne-
gotiated 	rates 	of	basic 	pay	went 	up	by	1.9% 	
year	on	year	in	the	third 	quarter 	of	2011, 	
compared 	with	1.6% 	in	the	second 	quarter.2	
This	is	essentially 	due	to	wage 	agreements 	
that	were 	concluded 	earlier 	as	no	further 	
wage 	settlements 	were 	finalised 	in	the	larger 	
economic 	sectors 	in	the	second 	half	of	2011. 	
Including 	all	one-off 	and	ancillary 	payments, 	
negotiated 	rates 	of	pay	in	the	reporting 	quar-
ter	went 	up	by	an	average 	of	1.9% 	on	the	
year, 	with	marked 	differences 	between 	sec-
tors.	The	wage 	increase 	in	the	very	heteroge -
neous 	services 	sector, 	for	example, 	where 	pay	
rates 	were 	raised 	by	1.7% 	on	the	year	in	the	
third 	quarter, 	was	perceptibly 	lower 	than 	in	
the	cyclically 	buoyant 	industrial 	sector 	(2.5%).
There 	are	currently 	ten	sectors 	with	generally 	
binding 	minimum 	wage 	levels 	negotiated 	up-
front 	between 	the	respective 	wage 	bargain -
ers.	It	is	difficult 	to	objectively 	measure 	the	
effects 	on	employment 	of	these 	intervention -
ist	wage 	policies. 	However, 	it	is	to	be	ex-
pected 	that	the	risk	of	negative 	effects 	in-Strong growth 
in actual 
earnings in first 
half of 2011, …… but only 
moderate rise 
in negotiated 
wages
Renewed 
debate about 
minimum wage
2	The	Federal 	Statistical 	Office, 	whose 	index 	excludes 	
government 	employees 	with	civil	servant 	status, 	reports 	
an	increase 	of	1.8% 	in	negotiated 	rates 	of	basic 	pay	in	
the	third 	quarter, 	compared 	with	1.5% 	in	the	second 	
quarter.DEUTSCHE  
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report  
November 2011
57

creases 	when 	social 	policy 	considerations 	be-
come 	a	factor 	in	the	wage 	bargaining 	process 	
for	professions 	which 	tend 	to	have 	a	low	
skills 	profile. 	This	applies 	particularly 	to	calls	
to	introduce 	a	nationwide 	minimum 	wage 	
aimed 	at	ensuring 	an	adequate 	standard 	of	
living 	for	everyone. 	A	basic 	level	of	subsist -
ence 	is	already 	guaranteed 	for	employees 	in	
Germany 	through 	the	existing 	welfare 	sys-
tem.
A	moderate 	drop 	in	prices, 	or	at	least	a	slow-
down 	in	the	rate	of	increase, 	was	evident 	
across 	all	stages 	of	the	economy 	in	the	third 	
quarter. 	Import 	prices 	continued 	to	decline 	in	
the	third 	quarter. 	Nevertheless, 	they	were 	still	
up	7%	on	the	year	owing 	to	the	sharp 	rise	in	
prices 	at	the	turn	of	2010-11. 	The	decline 	in	
crude 	oil	prices 	contributed 	to	the	favourable 	development 	of	import 	prices 	in	the	third 	
quarter, 	although 	this	tendency 	was	partly 	
counteracted 	by	the	depreciation 	of	the	euro	
(which 	was	weaker 	in	percentage 	terms). 	Ac-
cordingly, 	energy 	prices 	fell	most 	sharply, 	
whereas 	imported 	consumer 	goods 	became 	
even 	more 	expensive. 	The	prices 	of	inter-
mediate 	goods 	and	capital 	goods 	remained 	
largely 	unchanged. 	The	fall	in	import 	price 	
levels 	was	also	aided 	by	the	fact	that	the	gen-
eral	price 	upthrust 	in	the	wake 	of	the	global 	
economic 	recovery 	has	come 	to	an	end.	An	
additional 	factor 	was	that	the	looming 	eco-
nomic 	slowdown 	is	starting 	to	ease	the	pres-
sure	on	the	commodity 	markets.
Similar 	trends 	are	largely 	apparent 	in	German 	
industry’s 	sales 	prices 	both 	at	home 	and	
abroad, 	with	prices 	rising 	only	marginally 	on	
the	quarter 	in	seasonally 	adjusted 	terms. 	Do-
mestic 	sales 	prices 	went 	up	by	5½% 	on	the	
year, 	while 	foreign 	sales 	prices 	rose	by	just	
over	3%.	Despite 	the	recent 	improvement, 	
the	terms 	of	trade 	were 	still	considerably 	
more 	unfavourable 	than	in	the	third 	quarter 	
of	last	year.
The	quarter-on-quarter 	rise	in	construction 	
prices, 	at	0.7%, 	was	only	slightly 	weaker 	
than	in	the	second 	quarter 	as	a	result 	of	the	
ongoing 	buoyant 	demand, 	and	the	year-on-
year	rate	reached 	3.0%. 	According 	to	calcu -
lations 	by	the	Association 	of	German 	Pfand -
brief 	Banks 	(Verband deutscher Pfandbrief ­
banken) ,	purchase 	prices 	for	owner-occupied 	
housing 	rose	by	1.1 % 	compared 	with	the	sec-
ond	quarter 	of	2011 	and	by	2.7% 	on	the	
year.Further fall in 
import pricesSlower rise  
in industrial 
sales prices
Marked rise  
in construction 
and real estate 
pricesNegotiated rates of pay
1 Excluding  additional  benefits  and  lump-
sum payments.
Deutsche Bundesbank2004 05 06 07 08 09 10 201100.51.01.52.02.53.03.5Year-on-year change, on monthly basis
Negotiated rates of pay, total
Basic pay 1%
Q1-Q3
DEUTSCHE  
BUNDESBANK
E U R O S Y S T E M
Monthly Report  
November 2011
58

Consumer 	price 	inflation 	has	weakened. 	In	
the	summer 	months, 	consumer 	prices 	went 	
up	by	a	seasonally 	adjusted 	0.4%, 	compared 	
with	0.6% 	in	the	previous 	quarter. 	The	rate	
of	price 	increase 	for	energy 	almost 	halted, 	
but	excluding 	energy 	it	continued 	virtually 	
unabated. 	Food 	prices 	were 	adjusted 	in	line	
with	the	recent 	sharp 	rises	–	in	some 	cases 	–	
in	the	prices 	of	basic 	foodstuffs. 	The	prices 	of	
industrial 	goods 	(excluding 	energy) 	continued 	
to	rise	in	line	with	import 	prices. 	There 	was	
also	a	perceptible 	rise	in	the	prices 	of	services 	
despite 	marked 	declines 	in	the	premiums 	for	
motor 	vehicle 	insurance. 	Overall, 	consumer 	
prices 	were 	2.4% 	higher 	year	on	year. 	The	
corresponding 	figure 	as	measured 	by	the	
Harmonised 	Index 	of	Consumer 	Prices 	(HICP) 	
was	2.7%.
The	moderate 	rise	in	consumer 	prices 	con-
tinued 	in	October. 	The	year-on-year 	increase 	
in	the	national 	consumer 	price 	index 	went 	
down 	from 	2.6% 	to	2.5%; 	the	HICP 	rate	re-
mained 	unchanged 	at	2.9%. 	The	abolition 	of	
university 	tuition 	fees	in	North 	Rhine-
Westphalia 	had	an	alleviating 	impact, 	the	ef-
fect	of	which 	is	estimated 	at	0.1	percentage 	
point. 	Year-on-year 	rates 	are	likely 	to	fall	fur-
ther	over	the	next	few	months 	as	the	sharp 	
price 	rises	recorded 	in	the	fourth 	quarter 	of	
2010 	are	not	expected 	to	be	repeated.
Orders received and outlook
The	German 	economy 	is	likely 	to	encounter 	
some 	turbulence 	in	the	coming 	months. 	The	
marked 	turndown 	in	demand 	is	being 	com-
pounded 	by	nervousness 	in	the	financial 	mar-Gradual easing 
of consumer 
inflation
Downbeat 
mood …100105110
Export pricesImport, export, producer and 
consumer prices
1 Producer price index for industrial prod-
ucts in domestic sales.  — 2 Not seasonally 
adjusted, quarterly. — 3 National consumer 
price index.
Deutsche Bundesbank2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011100105110115120
102105110115120
100105110 110115120
100105110115
10123
–+++2005 = 100, seasonally adjusted
Lin scale
Year-on-year change 2Consumer prices 3Construction
prices 2Producer prices 1Import pricesLog scale
%
OctDEUTSCHE  
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report  
November 2011
59

kets	and	is	causing 	enterprises 	to	take	an	in-
creasingly 	pessimistic 	view 	of	the	future. 	In	
little	more 	than 	half	a	year, 	the	expectation 	
component 	of	the	Ifo	business 	climate 	indica -
tor	has	fallen 	from 	an	historical 	high	back 	
into	neutral 	territory. 	The	autumn 	survey 	con-
ducted 	by	the	DIHK 	is	also	pointing 	to	a	se-
vere	deterioration 	in	the	business 	outlook 	
compared 	with	the	previous 	survey 	con-
ducted 	in	the	early 	summer. 	The	usual 	offset -
ting	of	the	positive 	and	negative 	reports 	in	
this	connection 	does, 	however, 	mask 	the	fact	
that	just	over	three-fifths 	of	the	enterprises 	
surveyed 	are	not	expecting 	any	change 	in	
their	market 	opportunities. 	The	fact	that	just	
four	months 	ago	enterprises 	are	likely 	to	have 	
assessed 	their 	market 	opportunities 	very	fa-
vourably 	on	the	whole 	shows 	that	the	finding 	
based 	on	the	netting 	of	replies 	is	relative.
The	surveys 	conducted 	by	the	Ifo	and	the	
DIHK 	unanimously 	show 	that	the	cyclical 	
growth-inhibiting 	factors 	are	currently 	stem -
ming 	predominantly 	from 	external 	demand. 	
The	industrial 	sector 	has	now	scaled 	back 	its	
export 	expectations 	to	a	level	which 	is	some -
what 	below 	the	longer-term 	average. 	By	con-
trast, 	the	construction 	sector 	and	the	con-
sumption-related 	sectors 	are	anticipating 	a	
much 	less	severe 	deterioration 	in	business 	
prospects. 	Furthermore, 	there 	are,	at	best, 	
mild	indications 	that	enterprises 	have 	now	
substantially 	revised 	their	basic 	expansionary 	
focus 	in	terms 	of	investment 	intentions 	and	
recruitment 	plans. 	Nevertheless, 	the	unre -
solved 	sovereign 	debt	crisis 	in	the	euro	area	is	
a	serious 	negative 	factor. 	Substantial 	progress 	
towards 	resolving 	the	crisis 	could 	restore 	the	
confidence 	that	has	been 	lost	and	contribute 	to	reducing 	uncertainty. 	This	would 	undoubt -
edly	increase 	the	likelihood 	that	the	forth -
coming 	economic 	slowdown 	remains 	a	tem-
porary 	phenomenon.
Industrial 	new	orders 	in	the	third 	quarter 	of	
2011 	were 	down 	by	a	seasonally 	adjusted 	
3½% 	on	the	quarter, 	with	the	decline 	re-
corded 	in	September 	being 	particularly 	pro-
nounced. 	Domestic 	orders 	declined 	signifi -
cantly 	in	the	reporting 	quarter 	by	3¼%. 	The	
losses 	in	terms 	of	foreign 	orders 	were 	slightly 	
higher 	on	the	whole; 	these 	remained 	limited, 	
however, 	owing 	to	the	fact	that	the	inflow 	of	
new	orders 	from 	euro-area 	partner 	countries 	
held	up	well	(+¼%). 	By	contrast, 	demand 	for	
industrial 	goods 	from 	non-euro 	area	coun -
tries	in	the	third 	quarter 	was	much 	lower 	
than	in	the	second 	quarter 	(-6½%).
The	quarter-on-quarter 	figures 	were 	also	in-
fluenced 	significantly 	by	the	fact	that	in	the	
third 	quarter 	major 	orders 	did	not	match 	the	
level	reached 	in	the	previous 	three 	months. 	
The	impact 	of	this	was	particularly 	apparent 	
in	the	capital 	goods 	sector, 	which, 	including 	
as	it	does 	the	manufacture 	of	other 	transport 	
equipment, 	is	the	largest 	recipient 	of	major 	
orders 	in	the	industrial 	sector. 	While 	the	con-
tribution 	of	other 	transport 	equipment 	to	the	
change 	in	orders 	of	capital 	goods 	is	fairly 	
small 	overall, 	given 	its	low	share 	of	less	than	
one-tenth 	on	average, 	the	erratic 	frequency 	
at	which 	major 	orders 	are	placed 	means 	that	
they	can	have 	a	substantial 	impact 	on	the	
quarterly 	profile. 	Significantly 	fewer 	orders 	
for	other 	transport 	equipment 	were 	placed 	
by	both 	domestic 	and	foreign 	customers 	in	
the	reporting 	period 	than	between 	April 	and	… owing 
primarily  
to external 
 perturbationsSharp decline 
in industrial 
orders
Marked fall in 
capital goods 
orders due 
primarily to 
fewer big 
orders
DEUTSCHE  
BUNDESBANK
E U R O S Y S T E M
Monthly Report  
November 2011
60

June.	 This	 concealed,	 for	instance,	 the	simul -
taneous	 increase	 recorded	 in	domestic	 orders	
of	machinery	 and	 motor	 vehicles.	 Two-thirds	
of	the	marked	 decline	 in	the	demand	 for	cap-
ital	goods	 from	 non-euro-area	 markets	 is	at-
tributable	 to	this	subsegment	 of	other	 trans -
port	 equipment.	 Owing	 to	the	existence	 of	a	
major 	European 	aerospace 	group, 	orders 	of	
capital 	goods 	from 	the	euro	area	are	gener -
ally	influenced 	to	a	comparatively 	large 	ex-
tent	by	the	manufacture 	of	other 	transport	
equipment; 	these 	impulses 	were 	exception -
ally	strong	 in	the	first	half	of	2011,	 but	waned	
significantly	 after	 the	middle	 of	the	year.
New 	orders 	of	intermediate 	goods 	declined	
by	a	comparatively	 small	 amount	 in	the	third	
quarter 	after 	adjustment 	for	seasonal 	vari-
ations.	 The	fact	that	 there	 was	a	sharp	 rise	in	orders 	for	this	group 	of	goods 	from 	other	
euro-area 	countries 	helped 	to	stabilise 	the	
overall	 level	 of	orders.	 By	contrast,	 the	down -
swing	 in	the	demand	 for	inputs	 and	interme -
diate 	goods 	from 	non-euro-area 	countries,	
which 	had	already 	begun 	in	the	previous	
quarter, 	continued. 	The	corresponding 	mar-
ket	for	domestic 	orders 	also	clearly 	dipped	
during	 the	third	 quarter,	 though	 after	 having	
recorded	 sharp	 growth	 in	the	first	half	of	the	
year.	 There	 was	 slightly	 less	demand	 for	con-
sumer	 goods	 in	the	reporting	 period	 than	 in	
the	second 	quarter 	in	seasonally 	adjusted	
terms.
Construction 	demand 	remains 	favourable.	
Orders 	received 	in	the	construction 	sector,	
which 	have 	been 	subject 	to	considerable	
monthly 	volatility 	owing 	primarily 	to	the	Intermediate 
goods orders also downConstruction demand still buoyantThe significance of large orders of other transport equipment for orders in 
the capital goods sector in the year to date
Deutsche BundesbankQ1 Q2 Q3
20118642024681012
––––++++++
Q1 Q2 Q3
2011Q1 Q2 Q3
2011Q1 Q2 Q3
2011–8–6–4–20+2+4+6+8+10+12Seasonally adjusted, quarterly
Average
as of 
2009 Q2Averageas of 2009 Q2Averageas of 2009 Q2By com-parison:
Average
as of 2009 Q2Contribution of other 
transport equipment
(in percentage points)
Contribution
of capital
goods sector
excl transport equipment(in percentage points)Total orders
Quarter-on-
quarter 
change
(in %)from Germany from euro-area
countries
(excl Germany)from non-euro-areacountriesDEUTSCHE  
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report  
November 2011
61

awarding 	of	public 	infrastructure 	projects, 	
have 	held	up	at	a	high	level	since 	the	begin -
ning	of	the	year. 	The	most 	important 	demand 	
stimuli 	were 	still	being 	generated 	by	housing 	
construction. 	In	particular, 	the	construction 	
of	apartment 	blocks 	received 	strong 	impetus 	
again 	of	late.	In	the	third 	quarter 	of	2011, 	the	
seasonally 	adjusted 	number 	of	building 	per-
mits	for	flats	in	larger 	dwellings 	was	up	by	
more 	than	one-half 	on	the	base	level	of	the	
years 	2008 	and	2009. 	Following 	strong 	
growth 	in	the	first	half	of	the	year, 	not	quite 	
as	many 	permits 	were 	granted 	for	new	
	single-family 	and	two-family 	houses 	at	the	
end	of	the	period 	under 	review.
While 	growing 	concerns 	about 	the	economy 	
are	also	being 	clearly 	reflected 	in	household 	
sentiment, 	this	has	barely 	dented 	their 	in-
come 	expectations 	as	employees 	still	antici -
pate	a	perceptible 	rise	in	their 	earnings 	in	
view	of	the	currently 	very	favourable 	labour 	
market 	environment. 	Despite 	the	heightened 	
uncertainty, 	there 	were 	no	signs 	in	recent 	
months 	of	any	abatement 	of	consumers’ 	pro-
nounced 	propensity 	to	make 	major 	pur-
chases. 	The	underlying 	conditions 	for	buoy -
ant	consumer 	demand 	are	consequently 	still	
in	place, 	at	least	in	the	short 	term.Income expect­
ations and 
 propensity  
to purchase 
little dentedDemand for industrial goods 
and construction work
Deutsche Bundesbank2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 20118090100110120130
–40–30–20–100 0+10+20+30
100110120130
758090100
100110120
8090100
July-
Aug
July-
Aug90100110120
–20–100+10+20Volume, 2005 = 100,
seasonally adjusted, quarterly
DomesticForeignLog scaleTotal industrial 
ordersLog scale
Lin scale
Year-on-year change
Total construction 
orders
Lin scale
Year-on-year change%
%
DEUTSCHE  
BUNDESBANK
E U R O S Y S T E M
Monthly Report  
November 2011
62

Public finances* General government budget
Despite 	the	easing 	of	cyclical 	strains, 	the	
	deficit 	ratio 	in	Germany 	rose	significantly 	
(to	4.3%1)	again 	last	year. 	This	year, 	however, 	
it	is	likely 	to	fall	substantially 	to	around 	1 %.	
This	is	due	in	no	small 	part	to	the	ongoing 	
economic 	recovery, 	and	–	despite 	the	eco-
nomic 	slowdown 	likely 	at	the	end	of	the	
year  – 	the	cyclical 	component 	is	expected 	
even 	to	enter 	positive 	territory. 	Moreover, 	in	
2011 	the	extensive 	capital 	transfers 	to	finan -
cial	institutions 	that	were 	seen	in	2010 	(1.4% 	
of	gross 	domestic 	product 	(GDP)) 	will	prob -
ably	largely 	cease 	to	be	a	factor. 	Finally, 	con-
solidation 	measures 	and	the	phasing 	out	of	
parts 	of	the	economic 	stimulus 	programmes 	
will	also	contribute 	to	this	improvement. 	The	
forecast 	deficit, 	coupled 	with	relatively 	strong 	
nominal 	GDP	growth, 	will	help	to	bring 	the	
debt	ratio	down 	markedly. 	Overall, 	the	ratio	
could 	fall	from 	its	high	last	year	to	81.1 % 	ac-
cording 	to	government 	plans, 	although 	this	is	
subject 	to	considerable 	uncertainty, 	not	least	
due	to	the	sovereign 	debt	crisis.2
The	government 	revenue 	ratio	is	likely 	to	in-
crease 	notably 	in	2011. 	Following 	sizeable 	Significant 
improvement 
in public 
finances  
in 2011
Rising revenue 
ratio and …
*	The	analysis 	in	the	“General 	government 	budget” 	sec-
tion	is	based 	on	data	contained 	in	the	national 	accounts 	
and	on	the	Maastricht 	ratios. 	The	subsequent 	reporting 	
on	the	budgets 	of	the	various 	levels 	of	government 	and	
social 	security 	schemes 	is	based 	on	the	budgetary 	figures 	
as	defined 	in	the	government’s 	financial 	statistics 	(which 	
are	generally 	in	line	with	the	budgetary 	accounts).
1	In	spring, 	the	recorded 	deficit 	ratio	for	2010 	still	stood 	
at	3.3%. 	The	upward 	revision 	is	chiefly 	attributable 	to	
higher 	capital 	transfers 	being 	booked 	in	connection 	with	
the	founding 	of	the	FMS	Wertmanagement 	“bad 	bank” 	
as	a	result 	of	new	information 	coming 	to	light.
2	In	2010, 	the	debt	ratio	stood 	at	83.2% 	This	figure 	in-
cludes 	debt	in	connection 	with	support 	measures 	for	fi-
nancial 	institutions 	of	12½% 	of	GDP	since 	2008. 	This	
contrasts 	for	the	most 	part	with	financial 	assets, 	which 	
are,	however, 	especially 	prone 	to	risk.DEUTSCHE  
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report  
November 2011
63

Decisions of the European Council and the Euro Summit of 26 and 27 October 2011
Deutsche BundesbankOn 21 July 2011, the euro-area heads of state or govern-
ment and the EU institutions agreed on extensive meas-
ures to curtail the renewed intensifi  cation of the sover-
eign debt crisis.1 In particular, the set of tools available to 
the European Financial Stability Facility (EFSF) was ex-
tended to include precautionary credit lines, allow loans 
to recapitalise fi  nancial institutions to also be granted to 
non-programme euro-area countries, and to provide the 
option of intervening in the secondary market for gov-
ernment bonds. Furthermore, the leaders announced a 
second assistance programme for Greece and expressed 
their intention to achieve the voluntary involvement of 
private creditors in tackling Greece’s budgetary prob-
lems. Finally, the interest rates on assistance loans to 
Greece, Ireland and Portugal were cut signifi  cantly and 
their maturities were extended. The expansion of the set 
of tools available to the EFSF as well as the previously 
agreed increase in the EFSF’s effective lending capacity to 
€440 billion were ratifi  ed by the last member states in 
October.
However, the decisions did not result in a lasting stabilisa-
tion of the fi  nancial markets. Instead, despite interven-
tions by the Eurosystem, Spanish and, above all, Italian 
long-term government bond yields, for example, rapidly 
increased again. This was predominantly due to doubts 
about the fi  scal consolidation paths of some euro-area 
countries regarded as problematic, a loss of confi  dence 
within the European banking sector and a deterioration 
in the macroeconomic outlook. These factors mutually 
reinforced one another.2 In light of this, on 26 and 27 Oc-
tober the European Council and the Euro Summit once 
again took decisions aimed at alleviating the current cri-
sis.
Based on these decisions, the European fi  nancial system is 
to be strengthened by means of higher capital require-
ments and government guarantees on longer-term bank 
liabilities. At the same time, it is to be ensured that the 
credit ﬂ  ow to the real economy is not unduly restricted. 
From July 2012 onwards, large, internationally active 
fi  nan cial institutions in the EU must temporarily build up 
a higher core tier 1 capital ratio amounting to at least 9% 
after each institution has marked its holdings of EEA gov-
ernment bonds to market. Government guarantees are 
intended to facilitate access to longer-term funding. 
These measures could help increase fi  nancial institutions’ 
resilience to shocks. However, to protect the taxpayer 
and minimise distortions to competition in the fi  nancial 
sector, any government funds that may be required 
should only be granted subject to suitable conditions be-
ing imposed on the respective fi  nancial institutions, in return for corresponding rights to participate in deci-
sions, and in line with state aid rules.
It is important that, as envisaged, capital requirements 
are met as far as possible using private sources of capital, 
which may also include the conversion of debt to equity 
instruments and constraints regarding the distribution of 
dividends and the granting of bonus payments. Support 
from national governments is only justifi  ed if this cannot 
be achieved in suffi  cient measure, and the EFSF can only 
issue special-purpose loans to euro-area countries if sup-
port from national governments is likewise unavailable 
to the extent necessary. If the EFSF were to provide direct 
fi  nancial assistance to credit institutions, this would upset 
the balance between national responsibility for banking 
supervision and liability and is therefore not envisaged.
With regard to government guarantees for bank debt se-
curities, it should be ensured that the institutions have 
suffi  cient equity. The envisaged coordination at EU level 
regarding access criteria and conditions may help to min-
imise distortions to competition within Europe. The guar-
antees should be suitably recompensed and scaled back 
within a foreseeable timeframe. The EFSF support meas-
ures must not result in the necessary restructuring meas-
ures in the banking systems concerned being bypassed.
The effective lending capacity of the EFSF is once again to 
be signifi  cantly increased (on a scale of up to €1 trillion 
according to the EFSF) by means of two leverage models 
designed to mobilise additional private capital. In the 
fi  rst model, private investors buying new government 
bonds would be offered credit enhancement providing 
insurance up to a certain percentage (which has yet to be 
specifi  ed) against the risk of losses in the event of a hair-
cut. In the second model, public sector entities pay subor-
dinated capital into special purpose vehicles (SPVs). Un-
like the fi  rst model, the SPV option also allows interven-
tions in the secondary market for government bonds and 
the involvement of other public fi  nanciers, such as the 
IMF or its shareholders. In both cases, the leverage effect 
and the potential loss distribution depend on the specifi  c 
features of the models (which have yet to be decided) 
and the evolving assessment of market participants. Nei-
ther variant envisages the participation of the Eurosys-
tem in the leverage. Both the proposal for the EFSF to be 
refi  nanced via the central bank and the idea of providing 
foreign reserve assets as collateral, which has subse-
quently been discussed, would be at odds with the ban 
on the monetary fi  nancing of governments. With regard 
to the details of the leverage models, which have yet to 
be fi  nalised, the risk of loss for the EFSF, and consequently 
1 See Deutsche Bundesbank, Decisions taken by the heads of state or 
government of the euro area and the institutions of the European Union on 21 July 2011, Monthly Report, August 2011, pp 62-65. — 
2 See also pp 37-47 in this report and Deutsche Bundesbank, Financial 
DEUTSCHE  
BUNDESBANK
E U R O S Y S T E M
Monthly Report  
November 2011
64

for the taxpayers of the guaranteeing countries, would 
be limited if in both models the EFSF fi  rst grants loans to the benefi  ciary member state and the latter then, as a next step, uses these funds to provide credit enhance-ment (model 1) or hedge the subordinate tranche of the SPV’s fi  nancing (model 2). This provision is also included in the EFSF framework agreement, which envisages loans to member states only. As a general rule, complex lever-age models reduce transparency, thus making it diffi  cult 
to monitor the assistance tools. Although the leverage 
does not result in an increase in Germany’s total liability, it does bring increased risk in the form of a greater loss if guarantees are exercised.
The reorganisation of the EFSF in the wake of the deci-
sions taken in July has resulted in a marked overall in-crease in the communitisation of liability risks. The incen-tives for sound fi  scal policy are being reduced, above all in conjunction with the near-elimination of interest rate premiums on assistance loans and the expansion of sup-port options with potentially greatly diminished condi-tionality, and this is not being counterbalanced by grant-ing additional rights at a central level to intervene in na-tional budgetary policy.
The euro-area heads of state or government want private 
holders of Greek government bonds to take a voluntary 
haircut on their claims. To this end, a bond exchange is to be carried out at the beginning of 2012. With a nominal discount of 50% of the nominal value, the contribution of the private sector is to be considerably greater than initially announced in July. The euro-area countries will contribute up to €30 billion to the credit enhancement for the exchanged bonds. On this basis, it was announced that public funds of up to €100 billion until 2014 would be provided for a new adjustment programme. The new programme is to be agreed by the end of 2011 and is also 
to include a recapitalisation of Greek banks. In principle, 
the involvement of private creditors in a restructuring of sovereign debt is an important component of the regula-tory framework for monetary union. However, such a process also entails risks. In particular, it is essential to en-sure that it does not give rise to the expectation that fail-ure to meet prescribed consolidation targets will ulti-mately result in debt relief, lower consolidation require-ments and additional assistance from other countries, al-lowing the country concerned to scale back its own efforts. Otherwise, this would additionally reduce incen-tives to achieve sound public fi  nances and further erode capital market confi  dence.Furthermore, the euro-area member states were called upon to enshrine the provision of a structurally balanced budget in their constitutions, or the legal equivalent thereof, by the end of 2012 and to draw up their budget plans on the basis of independent growth forecasts. This could be a signifi  cant step forward. However, the effec-tiveness of such rules hinges on the details, which can, for example, produce loopholes.
3 Ultimately, it is crucial that 
the rules are implemented stringently and effectively and 
that there is confi  dence  that the respective countries’ po-
litical majorities also actually feel bound to the new rules.
Italy was called upon to carry out structural reforms, in-
cluding privatisation, deregulation, labour market re-forms and increasing the statutory retirement age. Close monitoring of these measures by the European Commis-sion was announced.
4
Finally, it was agreed to further develop the institutional framework of European monetary union. The Commis-sion and the Council have been given powers to examine and adopt an opinion on national draft budgets before they are passed by the respective national parliaments. The institutions at euro-area level are to be considerably expanded (including semi-annual Euro Summits chaired by a president). Furthermore, a working group has been 
commissioned to identify steps to strengthen economic 
convergence in the euro area, improve fi  scal discipline and deepen economic union. For this purpose, the possi-bility of making limited changes to the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union is to be considered, too.
Overall, it remains unclear what a coherent regulatory 
framework for monetary union will look like going for-ward. A fundamental decision must be taken on whether to strengthen the existing framework, with national fi  s-cal sovereignty and the application of some Community 
rules with a no-bail-out rule, or whether to create a fi  scal 
decision-making structure where a central level has ulti-
mate powers to intervene in national budget sovereignty. 
The route currently being taken of partially expanding joint liability, and thus concurrently reducing the incen-tive for countries to achieve sound public fi  nances on their own, without at the same time signifi  cantly strengthening the right to intervene in national budgets is yielding an increasingly inconsistent framework for monetary union. This is increasing the risk of unsound public fi  nances, and the potential for conﬂ  ict with a sta-bility-oriented monetary policy is likewise growing sig-
nifi  cantly.
Stability Review 2011. — 3 See Deutsche Bundesbank, The debt brake 
in Germany – key aspects and implementation, Monthly Report, Octo-ber 2011, pp 15-40. — 4 Shortly afterwards, it was decided that the 
IMF would also play a role in this monitoring.DEUTSCHE  
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report  
November 2011
65

cuts	in	tax	and	social 	contribution 	rates 	be-
tween 	2008 	and	2010, 	additional 	revenue 	is	
resulting 	in	particular 	from 	higher 	contribu -
tion	rates 	to	the	statutory 	health 	insurance 	
scheme 	and	to	the	Federal 	Employment 	
Agency 	as	well	as	from 	tax	hikes 	under 	cen-
tral	government’s 	consolidation 	package. 	
Moreover, 	on	the	whole 	–	as	in	previous 	up-
turns – 	tax	revenue 	(adjusted 	for	the	impact 	
of	legislative 	changes) 	is	developing 	much 	
more 	favourably 	than	its	macroeconomic 	ref-
erence 	variables.
The	expenditure 	ratio	is	likely 	to	decline 	sig-
nificantly. 	A	year-on-year 	cyclical 	improve -
ment 	is	causing 	the	ratio 	to	fall	chiefly 	via	
higher 	GDP	in	the	denominator. 	In	addition, 	
the	extensive 	capital 	transfers 	to	safeguard 	fi-
nancial 	institutions 	recorded 	last	year	will	
probably 	largely 	cease 	to	be	a	factor. 	The	par-
tial	phasing 	out	of	temporary 	macroeconomic 	
support 	measures 	from 	2009 	and	2010 	and,	
not	least, 	the	subdued 	development 	of	ex-
penditure 	as	a	result 	of	a	structural 	fall	in	un-
employment 	figures 	as	well	as	the	dampen -
ing	effect 	of	the	pension 	adjustment 	formula 	
are	also	playing 	a	part	in	the	decline.
As	things 	stand, 	the	deficit 	ratio 	is	likely 	to	
remain 	virtually 	unchanged 	in	2012. 	The	ef-
fect	of	cyclical 	developments 	could 	be	neu-
tral	on	the	whole, 	not	least	because 	the	ex-
pected 	economic 	slowdown 	is	predominantly 	
attributable 	to	external 	causes 	and	thus	has	
less	of	an	impact 	on	cyclically 	sensitive 	do-
mestic 	factors 	that	have 	greater 	weight 	for	
public 	finances. 	Only 	a	slight 	structural 	im-
provement 	is	on	the	cards, 	partly 	because 	the	
originally 	announced 	consolidation 	path	has	now	been 	relaxed. 	As	is	the	case	this	year, 	
temporary 	economic 	stimulus 	measures 	–	in	
particular 	investment 	programmes, 	which 	for	
the	most 	part	have 	an	especially 	long	time	
lag	–	will	continue 	to	be	phased 	out.	The	
muted 	development 	of	structural 	pension 	
and	labour 	market 	expenditure 	may	also	con-
tinue.
The	decline 	in	the	general 	government 	deficit 	
in	2011 	is	partly 	due	to	the	social 	security 	
funds, 	which 	are	currently 	especially 	benefit -
ing	from 	dynamic 	wage 	and	employment 	de-
velopments 	and	are	recording 	high	surpluses 	
on	balance. 	Central, 	state 	and	local	govern -
ment, 	on	the	other 	hand, 	are	still	posting 	
considerable 	structural 	deficits, 	and	the	need 	
for	consolidation 	remains 	substantial, 	not	
least 	given 	the	borrowing 	requirements 	in	
the	reformed 	budgetary 	rules.3	It	is	also	be-
coming 	apparent 	that	the	debt	ratio	will	still	
be	well	above 	the	reference 	value 	of	60% 	for	
many 	years 	to	come, 	even 	if	the	sovereign 	
debt	crisis 	does 	not	escalate 	further. 	A	rapid 	
reduction 	of	the	debt	ratio	is	warranted. 	This	
would 	additionally 	help	to	avert 	the	danger 	
of	Germany 	also	being 	affected 	by	a	loss	of	
confidence 	in	the	sustainability 	of	its	public 	
finances 	if	additional 	strains 	arise. 	The	bur-
den	of	demographic 	change 	is	soon 	likely 	to	
become 	much 	heavier, 	which, 	without 	effect -
ive	adjustments 	–	many 	of	which 	have 	yet	to	
be	set	out	in	detail 	–	would 	inflate 	the	debt	
ratio. 	For	2011 	and,	in	particular, 	for	subse -
quent 	years, 	an	escalation 	of	the	sovereign 	
debt	crisis 	and	a	stronger-than-expected 	eco-… falling 
expenditure 
ratio
Deficit ratio 
virtually 
unchanged  
in 2012Despite 
 favourable 
developments, 
consolidation 
still needed
3	See	also	Deutsche 	Bundesbank, 	The	debt	brake 	in	Ger-
many 	–	key	aspects 	and	implementation, 	Monthly 	Re-
port, 	October 	2011, 	pp	15-40.
DEUTSCHE  
BUNDESBANK
E U R O S Y S T E M
Monthly Report  
November 2011
66

nomic 	downturn 	would 	entail 	considerable 	
risks.
Against 	this	backdrop, 	structural 	deficit 	re-
duction 	should 	take	priority. 	However, 	the	
fact	that	several 	aspects 	of	the	original 	con-
solidation 	course 	have 	been 	weakened 	–	as	
happened 	recently 	with	the	decisions 	taken 	
by	the	coalition 	committee 	at	the	beginning 	
of	November 	–	suggests 	that	a	different 	
course 	has	been 	embarked 	upon. 	In	particu -
lar,	the	series 	of	upward 	revisions 	of	forecast 	
tax	revenue 	in	the	wake 	of	the	economic 	up-
swing 	have 	encouraged 	policymakers 	to	
delay 	eliminating 	the	structural 	budget 	im-
balance. 	It	would 	be	better 	to	use	the	wind -
fall	gains 	instead 	to	reduce 	the	deficit 	faster 	
and	to	achieve 	the	medium-term 	objective 	of	
a	structurally 	(close-to-) 	balance 	budget 	earl-
ier.	The	planned 	income 	tax	cuts	will	slow 	
down 	the	attainment 	of	this	objective 	if	there 	
is	no	counterfinancing 	of	these 	cuts, 	for	in-
stance 	by	abolishing 	tax	breaks 	or	reducing 	
growth 	in	expenditure.4	The	expansion 	of	the	
benefits 	provided 	under 	the	public 	long-term 	
care	insurance 	scheme 	will	initially 	be	covered 	
by	a	higher 	contribution 	rate	from 	2013 	on-
wards; 	however, 	this	paves 	the	way	for	a	
faster 	rise	in	burdens 	in	the	medium 	term.
Delaying 	consolidation 	to	actively 	stimulate 	
demand 	–	as	international 	bodies 	in	particu -
lar	are	proposing 	–	is	not	appropriate 	either 	
given 	the	limited 	economic 	slowdown 	in	Ger-
many 	indicated 	by	the	baseline 	scenario 	in	
most 	current 	macroeconomic 	forecasts. 	Here, 	
the	automatic 	stabilisers 	are	sufficient 	to	ab-
sorb	shocks. 	The	impact 	of	German 	fiscal 	pol-
icy	on	other 	countries 	via	the	demand 	chan -nel	is	very	limited 	anyway, 	as	indicated 	by	an	
IMF	study.5	It	should 	also	be	noted 	that	be-
cause 	of	its	lower 	structural 	deficit, 	the	fiscal 	
policy 	stance 	required 	in	Germany 	for	rapid 	
consolidation 	does 	not	have 	to	be	as	restrict -
ive	as	in	many 	other 	countries.
The	virtually 	unchecked 	growth 	in	the	debt 	
ratio	since 	the	1970s 	highlights 	the	continu -
ous	erosion 	of	fiscal 	policymakers’ 	radius 	of	
action 	that	has	ensued 	from 	their 	habitual 	
tendency 	to	keep 	putting 	off	budgetary 	con-
solidation 	until	later. 	The	reforms 	of	the	na-
tional 	budgetary 	rules 	and	of	the	European 	
Stability 	and	Growth 	Pact	are	intended 	pre-
cisely 	to	avoid 	making 	this	mistake 	in	the	fu-
ture. 	However, 	this	will	succeed 	only	if	the	
requirements 	are	implemented 	rigorously 	–	
which 	has	not	happened 	in	the	past.
Budgetary development of central, state 
and local government
Tax revenue
Tax	revenue6	was	up	by	7%	on	the	year	in	
the	third 	quarter 	(see	the	chart 	and	table 	on	
pages 68 	and	69).	Although 	the	year-on-year 	
rate	was	again 	somewhat 	below 	the	level	re-
corded 	in	the	previous 	quarter, 	the	pace 	of	
growth 	remained 	strong. 	Revenue 	from 	in-
come-related 	taxes 	rose	sharply 	by	just	over	Not appropri­
ate to weaken 
course given 
positive 
forecast 
revisions or …
… in order  
to stimulate 
demandBring about 
sustainable 
reversal in debt 
trend now
Sharp rise  
in tax revenue 
in Q3
4	See	for	example 	the	recommendations 	in	German 	
Council 	of	Economic 	Experts, 	Verantwortung 	für	Europa 	
wahrnehmen, 	Annual 	Report 	2011/2012, 	p	19f	(in	Ger-
man	only).
5	See	IMF,	Germany 	–	Staff 	Report 	for	the	2011 	Article 	
IV	Consultation, 	June	2011, 	p	15.
6	Including 	EU	shares 	in	German 	tax	revenue 	but	exclud -
ing	receipts 	from 	local	government 	taxes, 	which 	are	not	
yet	known 	for	the	quarter 	under 	review.DEUTSCHE  
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report  
November 2011
67

10½%. 	The	increase 	in	wage 	tax	receipts 	was	
chiefly 	attributable 	to	the	positive 	pay	and	
employment 	trends 	but	to	a	lesser 	extent 	also	
to	lower 	deductions 	(child 	benefit 	and	sub-
sidies 	for	supplementary 	private 	pension 	
plans). 	Revenue 	from 	profit-related 	taxes 	
went 	up	by	just	under 	12% 	due,	on	balance, 	
to	a	strong 	rise	in	corporation 	tax.	Receipts 	
from 	consumption-related 	taxes 	grew 	by	
3½%, 	with	turnover 	tax	revenue 	developing 	
largely 	in	line	with	its	macroeconomic 	refer-
ence 	variables. 	Overall, 	revenue 	from 	the	
new	air	traffic 	tax	and	the	nuclear 	fuel	tax	
also	contributed 	notably 	to	growth 	in	rev-
enue.7
According 	to	the	latest 	official 	tax	estimate, 	
tax	receipts 	for	2011 	as	a	whole 	are	expected 	
to	rise	by	7½% 	(including 	local	government 	taxes).8	This	growth 	reflects 	economic 	devel -
opments 	as	well	as	–	to	a	much 	lesser 	extent 	
–	fiscal 	drag9	and	legislative 	changes. 	In	the	
case	of	the	latter, 	additional 	tax	revenue 	(es-
pecially 	from 	nuclear 	fuel	tax,	air	traffic 	tax	
and	tobacco 	tax	as	well	as	from 	subsidy 	cuts	
for	electricity 	and	energy 	tax)	and	lower 	ex-
penditure 	on	homebuyers 	grants 	–	which 	are	
being 	phased 	out	–	contrast 	with	revenue 	
shortfalls 	in	other 	areas 	(in	particular, 	de-
ferred 	shortfalls 	due	to	greater 	tax	deductibil -
ity	of	insurance 	contributions). 	In	addition, 	as	
in	previous 	upturns, 	revenue 	growth 	is	much 	
stronger 	than	implied 	by	figures 	for	economic 	
developments, 	the	effects 	of	progressive 	tax-
ation 	and	legislative 	changes.
Slower 	but	still	significant 	revenue 	growth 	of	
3½% 	is	anticipated 	for	2012. 	Although 	ag-
gregate 	growth 	is	forecast 	to	weaken, 	the	
macroeconomic 	figures 	relevant 	to	tax	rev-
enue 	are	expected 	to	see	solid 	growth. 	The	
impact 	of	legislative 	changes 	is	again 	pro-
jected 	to	be	slightly 	positive 	(in	particular, 	the	
phasing 	out	of	homebuyers 	grants 	and	the	
waning 	impact 	of	depreciation 	allowances 	
under 	the	first	economic 	stimulus 	package). 	
In	the	medium 	term 	(from 	2013 	to	2016), 	an-
Strong growth 
also expected 
for year as a 
wholeClear rise 
expected in 
future, tooTax revenue *
* Including  EU  shares  in  German  tax  rev-
enue, excluding receipts from local govern-
ment taxes.
Deutsche Bundesbank86420246810
––––+++++
2009 2010 2011Year-on-year change, quarterly
%
7	Court 	orders 	have 	decreed 	that	nuclear 	fuel	tax	paid	to	
date	has	to	be	refunded 	in	some 	cases. 	A	decision 	re-
garding 	the	lawfulness 	of	this	tax	is,	however, 	still	out-
standing.
8	This	estimate 	is	based 	on	central 	government’s 	current 	
macroeconomic 	forecast. 	In	2011, 	real	GDP	growth 	is	ex-
pected 	to	be	+2.9% 	and	nominal 	growth 	+3.8% 	(May 	
2011: 	+2.6% 	and	+3.5% 	respectively). 	Growth 	for	2012 	
is	forecast 	to	be	+1.0% 	and	+2.4% 	respectively 	(May 	
2011: 	+1.8% 	and	+3.5% 	respectively). 	In	the	medium 	
term, 	nominal 	growth 	of	around 	3%	per	year	is	forecast 	
(as	was	also	the	case	in	May).
9	In	this	context, 	this	term 	comprises 	the	positive 	rev-
enue 	effect 	of	the	progressive 	structure 	of	the	income 	
tax	schedule 	as	well	as	the	nominal 	dampening 	effect 	as	
a	result 	of	the	extensive 	price 	inelasticity 	of	specific 	ex-
cise	duties.
DEUTSCHE  
BUNDESBANK
E U R O S Y S T E M
Monthly Report  
November 2011
68

nual	revenue 	growth 	is	also	expected 	to	be	
3½% 	on	average, 	with	legislative 	changes	
playing	 a	negligible	 role.	 The	tax	ratio	 (as	de-
fined	 in	the	government’s	 financial	 statistics)	
is	projected 	to	increase 	to	23.0% 	by	2016	
(2010: 	21.4%). 	Fiscal 	drag 	accounts 	for	ap-
proximately 	½	percentage 	point, 	or	€15	bil-
lion,	 of	this	rise.	 Overall,	 it	should	 be	borne	 in	
mind 	that	the	baseline 	scenario 	used 	in	the	
Federal 	Government’s 	macroeconomic 	fore-
cast	and	hence	 in	the	official	 tax	estimate	 as-
sumes 	that	no	further 	downside 	risks	as	a	
result	 of	the	sovereign	 debt	 crisis	 will	materi -
alise,	 which	 entails	 considerable	 uncertainty.
Compared 	with	May	2011, 	the	macroeco -
nomic 	assumptions 	underlying 	the	tax	esti-
mate	 are,	on	the	whole,	 more	 favourable	 for	
2011 	but	somewhat 	less	favourable 	there -after. 	Legislative 	changes 	made 	in	the	inter-
mittent	 period	 are	resulting	 in	(limited)	 short -
falls	compared 	with	the	last	forecast. 	Espe -
cially	 in	2011	 but	also	in	2012,	 there	 is,	more -
over,	 a	positive	 impact	 from	 the	fact	that	 tax	
refunds	 in	connection	 with	 a	court	 ruling	 are	
now	assumed 	to	be	much 	lower 	than 	be-
fore.10	In	total,	 expectations	 now	 exceed	 the	
May	 estimate	 by	€16	billion	 (½%	 of	GDP)	 for	
2011,	 €7½	 billion	 for	2012	 and	between	 €4½	
billion	 and	€6	billion	 for	the	period	 from	 2013	
to	2015. 	Compared 	with	the	autumn 	2010	
forecast, 	which 	forms 	the	basis 	for	the	cen-
Declining add­
itional revenue vis­à­vis earlier expectationsTax revenue
 
Type of taxQ1 to Q3 Q3Estimate
for
2011 1, 2
2010 2011 2010 2011Year-on-year per-centage
changeYear-on-yearchangeYear-on-yearchange
€ billion € billion as % € billion € billion as %
Tax revenue, 351.7 381.9 + 30.2 +  8.6 116.7 125.0 + 8.3 +  7.1 +  7.5
total 
2
of which
Wage tax 91.1 100.2 +  9.1 +  9.9 30.4 33.6 + 3.1 + 10.3 +  9.6
Profi  t-related taxes 3 48.5 55.2 +  6.7 + 13.8 12.4 13.8 + 1.5 + 11.8 + 11.2
Assessed income tax 23.2 23.2 +  0.1 +  0.3 7.3 7.1 – 0.2 –  2.8 +  0.7
Corporation tax 7.4 9.7 +  2.4 + 32.0 1.6 3.0 + 1.4 + 90.7 + 23.1
Investment income 
tax 4 17.9 22.2 +  4.3 + 23.8 3.5 3.7 + 0.2 +  6.7 + 19.8
Turnover taxes 5 132.2 140.6 +  8.4 +  6.4 45.0 47.2 + 2.2 +  4.8 +  5.7
Energy tax 24.2 24.5 +  0.3 +  1.3 10.2 10.1 – 0.1 –  1.1 +  1.0
Tobacco tax 9.4 9.6 +  0.2 +  2.3 3.6 3.4 – 0.2 –  5.3 +  2.5
1 According to offi  cial tax estimate of November 2011. — 2 Including EU shares in German tax revenue, excluding receipts from local government taxes. — 3 Employee re-
funds, homebuyers grant and investment grant deducted from revenue. — 4 Withholding tax on interest income 
and capital gains, non-assessed taxes on earnings. — 5 Turnover tax and import turnover tax.
Deutsche Bundesbank
10	The	Federal	 Government	 previously	 expected	 tax	re-
funds	 in	connection	 with	 the	Meilicke	 case	 (recognition	
of	corporation 	tax	paid	abroad 	in	the	taxation 	of	divi-
dends 	under 	the	tax	imputation 	procedure 	that	was	
abolished	 in	2001)	 of	just	over	 €3½	 billion	 for	2011	 and	
just	under	 €1½	 billion	 for	2012.	 Now	 that	 the	European	
Court 	of	Justice 	has	issued 	a	new	ruling 	on	additional	
details	 concerning	 this	case,	 total	 shortfalls	 of	€½	billion	
have	 been	 assumed	 for	2012	 and	2013	 combined.DEUTSCHE  
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report  
November 2011
69

tral	government 	budget 	and	partly 	also	for	
state 	government 	budgets 	for	2011, 	the	in-
crease 	is	much 	higher, 	totalling 	€34	billion 	for	
2011 	and	€29	billion 	for	2012 	(1½% 	and	1 %	
of	GDP	respectively).
Central government budget
Central 	government 	recorded 	a	deficit 	of	€12	
billion 	in	the	third 	quarter 	of	2011 	compared 	
with	a	deficit 	of	€16½ 	billion 	one	year	previ -
ously. 	Revenue 	rose	sharply 	by	9%	(€6	bil-
lion). 	Tax	receipts 	continued 	to	grow 	signifi -
cantly 	by	7½% 	(€4½ 	billion). 	Expenditure 	
went 	up	by	2%	(€1½ 	billion). 	On	balance, 	
this	increase 	was	predominantly 	attributable 	
to	the	fact	that	interest 	expenditure 	was	€3	
billion 	higher, 	ultimately 	because 	of	a	dis-
torted 	figure 	from 	the	previous 	year.11	As	a	
result, 	the	improvement 	in	the	fiscal 	balance 	
in	the	third 	quarter 	is	significantly 	under -
stated. 	Among 	the	other 	expenditure 	items, 	
outlays 	on	unemployment 	benefit 	II	in	par-
ticular 	fell	by	€1	billion, 	partly 	because 	of	the	
abolition 	of	pension 	insurance 	contributions 	
on	behalf 	of	benefit 	recipients, 	which 	re-
duced 	the	receipts 	of	the	statutory 	pension 	
insurance 	scheme 	accordingly. 	Transfers 	to	
the	social 	security 	funds 	were 	also	down 	(-€½ 	
billion) 	given 	lower 	needs-based 	payments 	to	
the	Federal 	Employment 	Agency.
Central 	government 	therefore 	recorded 	a	cu-
mulated 	deficit 	of	€28	billion 	at	the	end	of	
the	third 	quarter 	of	2011 	compared 	with	a	
deficit 	of	€43	billion 	one	year	previously. 	
While 	the	actual 	deficit 	in	2010 	totalled 	€44½ 	
billion, 	as	things 	stand 	it	appears 	entirely 	pos-
sible	to	keep 	net	borrowing 	for	the	year	as	a	whole 	below 	€25	billion 	(budget 	target: 	€49	
billion) 	provided 	that	tax	revenue 	continues 	
to	develop 	favourably, 	as	expected. 	Com -
pared 	with	the	budgeted 	amount, 	the	new	
official 	tax	estimate 	forecasts 	additional 	rev-
enue 	of	€17½ 	billion, 	and	expenditure 	looks 	
likely 	to	ease	by	a	total	of	almost 	€10	billion, 	
especially 	on	labour 	market-related 	costs 	(for	
loans 	to	offset 	the	Federal 	Employment 	
Agency’s 	deficit 	and	for	unemployment 	bene -
fit	II,	in	particular) 	and	interest 	costs. 	Conse -
quently, 	the	value 	for	the	structural 	deficit 	to	
be	calculated 	by	central 	government 	at	
budget 	outturn 	under 	the	debt 	brake 	will	
probably 	be	around 	€20	billion 	below 	the	
deficit 	ceiling 	used 	to	date	for	2011. 	How -
ever, 	this	undershooting 	is	largely 	due	to	the	
fact	that	the	deficit 	ceiling, 	which 	is	to	sink	
gradually 	up	to	2016, 	has	so	far	not	been 	ad-
justed 	to	the	much 	more 	favourable 	result 	for	
2010. 	As	a	result, 	budgetary 	leeway 	that	is	at	
odds 	with	the	intention 	of	the	debt	brake 	is	
still	being 	recorded.12
Following 	the	Budget 	Committee’s 	adjust -
ment 	meeting, 	the	2012 	central 	government 	
budget 	now	envisages 	net	borrowing 	of	€26	
billion, 	which 	represents 	a	marked 	rebound 	
on	the	actual 	level	that	is	emerging 	for	2011. 	
Compared 	with	the	Federal 	Cabinet 	decision 	
in	July,	new	borrowing 	has	been 	cut	by	only	
€1	billion 	despite 	tax	rate	rises	put	forward 	in	Marked 
improvement 
in fiscal 
balance in Q3
Lower ­than ­
budgeted 
deficit for year 
as a wholeAfter latest 
adjustments, 
2012 budget 
envisages 
increase  
in deficit …
11	Interest 	expenditure 	of	this	amount 	for	the	interest 	
due	date	at	the	beginning 	of	July	2010 	has	apparently 	
been 	recorded 	in	the	cash	statistics 	as	an	outflow 	in	
June.
12	For	a	more 	in-depth 	explanation 	and	critique, 	see	
Deutsche 	Bundesbank, 	The	debt	brake 	in	Germany 	–	key	
aspects 	and	implementation, 	Monthly 	Report, 	October 	
2011, 	pp	15-40.
DEUTSCHE  
BUNDESBANK
E U R O S Y S T E M
Monthly Report  
November 2011
70

On the cyclical adjustment procedure under the German central government’s new 
debt rule
 
The new debt rule for Germany’s central govern-
ment budget relates to structural net borrowing. The procedure to determine the cyclical component of the budget defi  cit therefore plays an important role. The cyclical component depends largely on the estimated output gap, which is defi  ned as the de-viation of GDP from potential output.
1 According to 
the Act implementing Article 115 of Germany’s Ba-sic Law, potential output, which cannot be ob-served, must be estimated in line with the proced-ure applied under the European Stability and Growth Pact (EU procedure).
The current design of the procedure under national 
budgetary rules entails problems with the sensitiv-ity of the estimation results, which are in clear evi-dence at the current end.
2 While Germany’s central 
government reports an output gap of -0.7% of GDP for 2011 based on the EU procedure, calculations conducted by the European Commission yield a fi  g-ure of 0% of GDP.
3 As the estimates are made using 
only slightly different expectations regarding the macroeconomic outlook, a uniform estimation pro-cedure could be expected to yield very similar re-sults. However, the fact that they differ bears testi-mony to the options that the current EU procedure allows in terms of modelling and setting parame-ters.
Under the debt brake, there is a risk that the sym-
metry of the cyclical components will be lost – pos-sibly because loopholes are exploited – and that, over time, defi  cits will therefore systematically be wrongly excused as being the result of cyclical fac-tors. That would run counter to the intention of the debt brake. Such concerns were already expressed back when the new procedure was fi  rst applied. The current range of estimation results now con-fi  rms that such a complex and opaque procedure that is diffi  cult to verify is not really suited to appli-cation under a debt rule.The alternative would be a return to the version of the EU procedure that was used in the autumn of 2010 to draw up the 2011 central government 
budget and, at the time, was obviously seen to be in 
line with legal requirements. The necessary smooth-ing of the time series was effected using only the comparatively transparent Hodrick-Prescott fi  lter.
Irrespective of the procedure selected, the calcula-
tions must be transparent and verifi  able. All infor-mation needed for control purposes must be pro-vided in full, in user-friendly form and in a timely manner. It is therefore very welcome that the cen-tral government already provides comprehensive material at an early stage. However, additional steps in this direction are necessary to ensure com-plete verifi  ability and user-friendly application.
4
Moreover, especially in connection with budgetary rules, a certain procedural stability appears very im-portant, particularly to allow for oversight by par-liament and the public. This is diffi  cult to square with discretionary modelling or frequent other methodological ad hoc interventions. Any interven-
tions that are nonetheless made should be docu-mented and explained. For more substantial changes, comparative calculations should be used to show the signifi  cance for assessment of the struc-tural budget situation. The transparency this cre-ates would ultimately be a precondition for the de-sirable continuous oversight of budgetary policy by the public.
The symmetry of the cyclical components in real 
time, on which the respective budgets are based, can, moreover, also be verifi  ed retroactively. If this reveals a signifi  cant negative cyclical component on average across one cycle, which has resulted in a trend increase in debt over time, this should be cor-rected going forward – in line with the constitu-tional intention.
1 For more on issues relating to the application of cyclical 
adjustment in the context of the German central govern-
ment’s debt rule, see Deutsche Bundesbank, Requirements 
regarding the cyclical adjustment procedure under the new debt rule, Monthly Report, January 2011, pp  55-60, and Deutsche Bundesbank, The debt brake in Germany – 
key aspects and implementation, Monthly Report, October 
2011, pp 15-40. — 2 See also German Bundestag, Budget 
Committee, committee printed paper 2946 of the 17th 
electoral term and Deutsche Bundesbank (January 2011), 
loc sit, pp 57-59. — 3 See Federal Ministry of Economics and 
Technology, www.bmwi.de/BMWi/Redaktion/PDF/G/ge samt wirtschaftliches-produktionspotenzial-herbstprojek
 tion-2011, published on 20 October 2011, and European 
Commission, www.circa.europa.eu/Public/irc/ecfi  n/outgaps/library, published on 10 November 2011. As part of the Joint Economic Forecast, the research institutions involved use the same procedure to estimate capacity overutilisa-
tion, of +1%, given similar expectations of macroeconomic 
developments, see Project Group Joint Economic Forecast, Adverse Effects on the German Economy from the Euro-pean Debt Crisis, Joint Economic Forecast Autumn 2011, 
p 6, published on 13 October 2011. — 4 Almost all of the 
necessary data are already available on the websites of the 
Federal Ministry of Finance and the Federal Ministry of 
Economics and Technology. However, the program codes 
used by the government are not yet disclosed. This relates both to the production function itself and the approaches used to smooth the unemployment rate and total factor 
productivity. Moreover, documentation and an explana-
tion of methodological changes have not yet been re-leased.
Deutsche BundesbankDEUTSCHE  
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report  
November 2011
71

the	latest 	tax	estimate 	(€2	billion)13	and	the	
estimated 	fall	of	€1½	billion 	in	interest 	ex-
penditure. 	Plans 	to	relieve 	pressure 	on	the	
budget 	on	balance 	by	effecting 	asset 	realisa -
tions 	of	€4½	billion 	and	the	fact	that	the	Fed-
eral	Government 	has	estimated 	a	more 	nega -
tive	cyclical 	effect 	(-€5½ 	billion) 	in	view 	of	
weaker 	growth 	expectations 	(for	more 	infor-
mation 	on	calculating 	cyclical 	components, 	
see	page  71) 	put	the	structural 	deficit 	at	
€25½ 	billion. 	Despite 	the	planned 	pause 	in	
consolidation, 	the	debt	brake 	ceiling 	used 	to	
date	by	the	Federal 	Government 	would 	thus	
be	undershot 	by	€14½ 	billion.
The	2012 	central 	government 	budget 	repre -
sents 	a	clear 	departure 	from 	the	consolida -
tion	measures 	decided 	in	June	2010. 	In	add-
ition	to	the	foregone 	revenue 	that	a	financial 	transaction 	tax	could 	have 	supplied, 	lower 	re-
ceipts 	from 	the	nuclear 	fuel	tax	following 	the	
closure 	of	a	number 	of	nuclear 	reactors, 	the	
transfer 	of	proceeds 	from 	the	sale	of	CO2	
emission 	permits 	to	the	Energy 	and	Climate 	
Fund, 	shortfalls 	resulting 	from 	the	2011 	Tax	
Simplification 	Act	and	a	€1	billion 	supple -
mentary 	expenditure 	item	for	surplus 	person -
nel	in	the	administration 	of	the	Federal 	
Armed 	Forces, 	it	has	now	been 	decided 	that	
cutbacks 	in	special 	payments 	for	public 	sec-
tor	employees 	with	civil	servant 	status 	and	
retired 	civil	servants 	should 	also	be	reversed 	
and	that	investment 	in	transport 	infrastruc -
ture	should 	be	increased. 	Including 	the	grad-
ual	assumption 	of	the	costs 	of	the	basic 	al-
lowance 	to	ease	the	strain 	on	local 	govern -
ment, 	the	total	departure 	from 	the	consolida -
tion	measures 	agreed 	for	2012 	already 	
amounts 	to	around 	€8	billion 	(the	total 	vol-
ume	originally 	planned 	was	€19	billion). 	This	
delay 	in	consolidation 	comes 	at	a	time	when 	
the	economic 	conditions 	continue 	to	be	ra-
ther	favourable 	(according 	to	the	baseline 	
scenario 	in	the	current 	macroeconomic 	fore-
casts) 	and	when 	the	demographic 	burdens 	
are	still	relatively 	limited. 	Policymakers 	are	
thus	putting 	off	the	essential 	task	of	adjust -
ing	fiscal 	policy 	to	the	debt 	brake’s 	increas -
ingly 	strict 	borrowing 	limits, 	running 	the	risk	
of	ultimately 	having 	to	implement 	these 	ad-
justments 	in	a	much 	tougher 	environment.
… and clear 
move away 
from agreed 
consolidation 
measuresCentral government fiscal 
deficit / surplus
20092011
Deutsche Bundesbank20112010
Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4252015105051015
–––––+++
–45–40–35–30–25–20–15–10–5€ bnCumulative from start of year
2010Quarterly results
2009€ bn
13	In	this	estimate, 	central 	government 	is	expected 	to	
receive 	an	extra 	€2½	billion 	in	revenue 	overall 	compared 	
with	the	estimate 	from 	May	2011. 	However, 	the	summer 	
draft 	budget 	already 	contained 	an	additional 	€2	billion 	
vis-à-vis 	the	May	estimate 	to	offset 	shortfalls 	as	a	result 	
of	legislative 	changes, 	which 	at	that	time	were 	only	in	
the	planning 	phase 	but	most 	of	which 	have 	now	been 	
taken 	into	account 	in	the	tax	estimate. 	The	upward 	cor-
rection 	stated 	in	the	article 	results 	from 	this	sum	plus	
additional 	planned 	tax	relief 	measures 	of	€½	billion.
DEUTSCHE  
BUNDESBANK
E U R O S Y S T E M
Monthly Report  
November 2011
72

Central 	government’s 	off-budget 	entities 	re-
corded	 a	deficit	 of	€4	billion	 in	the	third	 quar-
ter	of	2011	 compared	 with	 just	over	 €1	billion	
in	the	same	 period	 last	year.	 SoFFin	 posted	 a	
deficit	 of	€2½	 billion	 chiefly	 due	to	a	capital	
injection	 for	HRE’s	 resolution	 agency	 – which	
is	also	ascribed 	to	the	government 	sector –	
compared	 with	 a	surplus	 from	 guarantee	 fees	
of	€½	billion 	one	year	previously. 	As	in	the	
third 	quarter 	of	2010, 	there 	was	a	net	out-
flow	 of	€1½	 billion	 from	 the	Investment	 and	
Repayment	 Fund	 set	up	in	the	spring	 of	2009	
to	overcome	 the	economic	 crisis.	 Investment	
by	state	 and	local	 government	 generated	 ex-
penditure 	of	€1	billion. 	In	total, 	there 	is	still	
almost 	€2	billion 	(of	an	original 	€10	billion)	
available 	until	the	end	of	the	year	for	this	
purpose	 alone.	 For	the	year	 as	a	whole,	 cen-
tral	government’s 	off-budget 	entities 	are	ex-
pected 	to	record 	a	surplus 	of	more 	than 	€5	
billion, 	compared 	with	a	deficit 	of	€7	billion	
in	2010.	 In	addition	 to	the	high	 cash	 surplus	
that	SoFFin 	can	be	expected 	to	record 	if	no	
further 	support 	measures 	are	agreed,14	the	
transfers	 booked	 to	the	pension	 reserves,	 the	
Restructuring 	Fund’s 	income 	from 	the	new	
bank 	levy	as	well	as	inflows 	to	the	special	
fund 	“Provision 	for	final	payments 	for	infla-
tion-indexed 	Federal 	securities” 	booked 	as	
interest	 expenditure	 for	both	 central	 govern -
ment	 and	for	the	purposes	 of	the	Maastricht	
deficit 	will	make 	a	particular 	contribution 	to	
this	surplus.
State government15
State 	government 	budgets 	continued 	to	im-
prove	 in	the	third	 quarter.	 The	deficit	 of	state	
government’s	 core	 budgets	 fell	by	€2½	 billion	to	€3	billion	 compared	 with	 the	same	 period	
one	 year	 previously.	 Revenue	 rose	 sharply	 by	
7½% 	(€5	billion). 	In	addition 	to	tax	revenue	
(+6½%, 	or	€3	billion), 	receipts 	from 	other	
levels 	of	government 	recorded 	especially	
strong	 growth	 (+11½%,	 or	€2	billion),	 partly	
as	a	result	 of	the	€½	billion	 in	consolidation	
assistance 	granted 	to	the	five	federal 	states	
entitled 	to	such 	funds. 	Although 	growth 	in	
spending	 was	 slower	 than	 that	 in	revenue,	 it	
was	still	considerable	 (+3½%,	 or	€2½	 billion).	
In	addition	 to	the	sharp	 rise	in	current	 trans -
fers	to	local 	government 	(+6½%, 	or	€1	bil-
lion),	 the	development	 of	personnel	 expend -
iture	 (+3½%,	 or	€1	billion)	 following	 the	rise	
in	negotiated	 pay	rates	 in	spring	 and	the	–	in	
some	 cases	 delayed	 –	extension	 to	public	 sec-
tor	employees 	with	civil	servant 	status 	and	
retired	 civil	servants	 were	 a	key	factor.
The	latest	 tax	estimate	 forecasts	 further	 add-
itional 	revenue 	for	state 	government 	(€6½	
billion)	 for	2011	 compared	 with	 the	May	 esti-
mate, 	putting 	year-on-year 	growth 	in	rev-
enue	 at	€13½	 billion	 (6½%).	 Given	 this	situ-
ation, 	despite 	higher 	personnel 	expenditure	
and	 transfers	 to	local	 government,	 and	 con-
trary	 to	the	budget	 plans,	 the	deficit	 is	likely	
to	fall	sharply	 for	the	year	 as	a	whole	 (2010:	
€21	billion).	 Nevertheless,	 some	 federal	 states	
for	which 	the	Stability 	Council 	has	not	de-Off­budget 
entities record deficit in Q3, but surplus likely for year as a whole
Improvement 
continues in Q3Sharp deficit reduction in 2011 as a whole
14	Write-downs	 on	the	assets	 of	resolution	 agencies	 due	
to	debt	 forgiveness	 are	not	recorded	 in	the	financial	 stat-
istics.	 As	a	rule,	 they	 are	included	 in	the	Maastricht	 def-
icit	provided 	that	no	decreases 	in	value 	were 	already	
priced	 in	when	 the	assets	 were	 allocated	 to	the	govern -
ment	 sector.
15	The	development	 of	local	 government	 finances	 in	the	
second	 quarter	 of	2011	 was	 analysed	 in	greater	 detail	 in	
the	short 	articles 	in	the	Bundesbank’s 	October 	2011	
Monthly 	Report. 	These 	are	the	most 	recent 	data	avail-
able.DEUTSCHE  
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report  
November 2011
73

clared 	impending 	budgetary 	hardship 	are	still	
posting 	sizeable 	financial 	deficits. 	It	seems 	all	
the	more 	important 	to	use	the	relatively 	fa-
vourable 	macroeconomic 	conditions 	(accord -
ing	to	the	baseline 	scenario 	in	the	current 	
forecasts) 	for	consolidation 	measures. 	Defin -
ing	more 	ambitious, 	binding 	consolidation 	
paths 	for	the	period 	before 	the	new	debt	rule	
comes 	into	force 	(in	2020 	at	the	latest) 	could 	
help	this	process.16	Tax	cuts	without 	counter -
financing 	would 	inflate 	the	need 	for	consoli -
dation 	accordingly 	and	increase 	the	threat 	to	
the	constitutional 	requirement 	of	a	balanced 	
budget 	in	states 	with	high	starting 	deficits.
At	its	next	meeting 	on	1 December, 	the	Sta-
bility 	Council 	will	focus 	in	particular 	on	the	
current 	stability 	reports 	for	2011 	as	well	as	
the	five-year 	restructuring 	programmes 	to	be	agreed 	for	the	four	federal 	states 	for	which 	it	
declared 	impending 	budgetary 	hardship 	in	
May	2011 	(Berlin, 	Bremen, 	Saarland 	and	
Schleswig-Holstein ).	In	this	context, 	it	seems 	
essential 	for	the	restructuring 	programmes 	to	
lay	the	ground 	for	a	rapid 	and	sustainable 	re-
duction 	of	structural 	borrowing. 	For	this	pur-
pose, 	it	would 	be	helpful 	to	clearly 	set	out	
the	details 	of	sufficiently 	extensive 	consolida -
tion	measures 	that	will	be	effective 	over	a	
number 	of	years, 	and	to	enshrine 	in	law	a	
commitment 	to	make 	appropriate 	corrections 	
if	benchmarks 	are	missed. 	To	improve 	the	
transparency 	and	comparability 	of	the	
budgetary 	circumstances 	of	the	individual 	
governments, 	it	would 	also	be	desirable 	to	
expand 	the	regular 	reporting 	requirements 	
and	to	establish 	a	closer 	connection 	between 	
the	key	figures 	to	be	reported 	and	the	applic -
able	borrowing 	limits.17
Social security funds18
Statutory pension insurance scheme
The	statutory 	pension 	insurance 	scheme 	re-
corded 	a	deficit 	of	€½	billion 	in	the	third 	
quarter 	of	2011. 	However, 	one	year	previ -
ously 	the	deficit 	still	amounted 	to	€1	billion. 	
Contribution 	receipts 	increased 	by	a	total	of	
Fiscal 
 surveillance  
by Stability 
CouncilLower deficit 
than one year 
previouslyFinances of the
German statutory
pension insurance scheme
Deutsche Bundesbank2009 2010 20115860626466
–20+2+4Quarterly
Lin scale
Surplus (+) or deficit (–)€ bnExpenditure€ bnLog scale
Revenue
16	For	more 	details, 	see	Deutsche 	Bundesbank, 	The	debt	
brake 	in	Germany 	–	key	aspects 	and	implementation, 	
Monthly 	Report, 	October 	2011, 	pp	15-40.
17	For	more 	details 	on	the	information 	contained 	in	this	
section, 	see	Deutsche 	Bundesbank, 	The	role	of	the	Sta-
bility 	Council, 	Monthly 	Report, 	October 	2011, 	pp	20-23.
18	The	financial 	development 	of	the	statutory 	health 	
and	public 	long-term 	care	insurance 	schemes 	in	the	
second 	quarter 	of	2011 	was	analysed 	in	the	short 	articles 	
of	the	September 	Monthly 	Report. 	These 	are	the	most 	
recent 	data	available.
DEUTSCHE  
BUNDESBANK
E U R O S Y S T E M
Monthly Report  
November 2011
74

2½% 	in	the	third 	quarter. 	Employees’ 	com-
pulsory 	contributions 	rose	more 	strongly 	(by	
almost	 4%)	 owing	 to	the	favourable	 employ -
ment 	and	pay	trends. 	By	contrast, 	contribu -
tions 	for	recipients 	of	unemployment 	bene -
fits	fell	by	almost	 45%.	 This	 was	 due	 in	par-
ticular	 to	the	fact	that	 since	 the	beginning	 of	
2011 	pension 	contributions 	have 	no	longer	
been 	paid	on	behalf 	of	recipients 	of	un-
employment 	benefit 	II.	However, 	revenue	
growth 	was	also	dampened 	by	the	stagna -
tion	 on	balance	 of	transfers	 from	 the	central	
government 	budget. 	Following 	the	previous	
freeze 	in	pension 	adjustments, 	pension 	pay-
ments	 climbed	 at	a	slightly	 faster	 pace	 again	
owing 	to	the	increase 	of	almost 	1 %	in	mid-
2011. 	Nevertheless, 	the	rise	was	still	moder -
ate	as	the	number	 of	pensions	 grew	 only	 very	
marginally	 and	 the	number	 of	new	 pensions	
was	relatively 	low	on	average, 	probably 	due	
partly 	to	a	sharper 	increase 	in	pensions 	for	
persons 	with	a	reduced 	earning 	capacity,	
which 	are	lower 	on	average. 	At	almost 	5%,	
the	contributions	 that	 the	pension	 insurance	
scheme 	has	to	pay	to	the	health 	insurance	
scheme 	on	behalf 	of	pensioners 	grew 	at	a	
much 	sharper 	rate	owing 	to	the	rise	in	the	
latter	 scheme’s	 contribution	 rate.
The	statutory 	pension 	insurance 	scheme 	is	
expected	 to	record	 a	clear	 surplus	 for	2011	 as	
a	whole. 	Even 	if	economic 	activity 	slows	
somewhat, 	a	surplus 	is	again 	likely 	in	2012.	
As	the	reserves 	held	at	the	end	of	2012 	will	
probably 	exceed 	the	threshold 	of	1.5	times	
the	scheme’s	 monthly	 expenditure	 if	the	con-
tribution	 rate	remains	 unchanged,	 the	contri -
bution 	rate	has	to	be	cut.	As	the	post-war	
baby 	boomers 	increasingly 	enter 	retirement	from 	2015 	at	the	latest, 	the	financial 	situ-
ation 	of	the	statutory 	pension 	insurance	
scheme	 will	lastingly	 deteriorate	 and	the	con-
tribution	 rate	 will	be	subject	 to	constant	 up-
ward 	pressure. 	The	current 	positive 	financial	
situation 	is	thus	only	of	a	temporary 	nature	
and	offers	 no	scope	 for	a	permanent	 expan -
sion	 of	benefits.Temporary 
easing in financial situation before  demographic 
burdens riseFinances of the
Federal Employment Agency
1 Including  transfers  to  the  civil  servants’ 
pension fund set up in 2008. — 2 Excluding 
central government liquidity assistance.
Deutsche Bundesbank2009 2010 20116810121416
1.72.02.53.03.54.04.55.06.07.0
642024
–––++Quarterly
€ bn€ bnLog scaleExpenditure, 
total 1
Revenue 2
Expenditure on ...€ bn
... vocational training... unemployment
    benefit and
    short-time working
    benefits
Lin scale
Surplus (+) or deficit (–)DEUTSCHE  
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report  
November 2011
75

Federal Employment Agency
In	the	third 	quarter, 	the	Federal 	Employment 	
Agency 	recorded 	a	virtually 	balanced 	budget 	
compared 	with	a	deficit 	of	close 	to	€1	billion 	
in	the	same 	period 	last	year. 	However, 	the	
year-on-year 	comparison 	is	still	distorted 	by	
the	time	lags	affecting 	payment 	flows 	be-
tween 	central 	government 	and	the	Federal 	
Employment 	Agency. 	As	just	over	€½	billion 	
less	in	central 	government 	funds 	were 	paid	
out	in	advance 	from 	July	to	September 	2011, 	
the	actual 	financial 	improvement 	is	likely 	to	
be	greater. 	In	unadjusted 	terms, 	however, 	
revenue 	was	8%	and	expenditure 	16% 	lower 	
than 	one	year	previously. 	The	sharp 	rise	in	
employees’ 	contributions 	(+12½%) 	is	pre-
dominantly 	attributable 	to	the	contribution 	
rate	being 	raised 	from 	2.8% 	to	3.0%. 	How -
ever, 	even 	after 	adjustment 	for	this	effect, 	
contributions 	grew 	by	almost 	5%.	This	add-
itional 	revenue 	was	fully	offset 	by	shortfalls 	
resulting 	from 	the	absence 	of	insolvency 	benefit 	contributions 	in	2011. 	The	decline 	in	
total 	revenue 	in	the	third 	quarter 	is	thus	al-
most 	entirely 	due	to	lower 	advance 	payments 	
from 	central 	government. 	The	decline 	in	ex-
penditure 	is	mainly 	the	result 	of	lower 	pay-
ments 	for	unemployment 	benefits 	(-14%) 	
and	for	active 	labour 	market 	policy 	(-21 %).
For	2011 	as	a	whole, 	the	Federal 	Employment 	
Agency’s 	financial 	situation 	will	be	far	more 	
favourable 	than	the	deficit 	of	€5½	billion 	in	
the	budget 	plan. 	A	central 	government 	loan, 	
which 	is	still	likely 	to	be	required, 	will	prob -
ably	be	repaid 	for	the	most 	part	next	year	
thanks 	to	surpluses. 	However, 	the	contribu -
tion	rate	of	3.0% 	is	likely 	to	be	too	low	to	
fund 	expenditure 	over	the	economic 	cycle 	in	
the	long	run,	in	particular 	owing 	to	the	
planned 	halving 	of	the	VAT-financed 	grants 	
from 	central 	government.19Financial 
improvement 
understated 
due to special 
effect
Federal 
Employment 
Agency struc­
turally under ­
financed
19	See	Deutsche 	Bundesbank, 	Sustainable 	contribution 	
rate	for	the	Federal 	Employment 	Agency, 	Monthly 	Re-
port, 	August 	2011, 	pp	76-77.
DEUTSCHE  
BUNDESBANK
E U R O S Y S T E M
Monthly Report  
November 2011
76

Statistical  
SectionDEUTSCHE  
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report  
November 2011
1*

ContentsI  Key economic data for the euro area
	 1	 Monetary 	developments 	and	interest 	
rates 	 5*
	 2	 External 	transactions 	and	positions 	5*
	 3	 General 	economic 	indicators 	 6*
II  Overall monetary survey in the  
euro area
	 1	 The 	money 	stock 	and	its	counterparts 	8*
	 2	 Consolidated 	balance 	sheet 	of	mon -
etary 	financial 	institutions 	(MFIs) 	 10*
	 3	 Banking 	system’s 	liquidity 	position 	14*
III  Consolidated financial statement  
of the Eurosystem
	 1	 Assets 	 16*
	 2	 Liabilities 	 18*
IV  Banks
	 1	 Assets 	and	liabilities 	of	monetary 	
financial 	institutions 	(excluding 	the	
Bundesbank) 	in	Germany 	 20*
	 2	 Principal 	assets 	and	liabilities 	of	banks 	
(MFIs) 	in	Germany, 	by	category 	of	
banks 	 24*
	 3	 Assets 	and	liabilities 	of	banks 	(MFIs) 	
in	Germany 	vis-à-vis 	residents 	 26*
	 4	 Assets 	and	liabilities 	of	banks 	(MFIs) 	
in	Germany 	vis-à-vis 	non-residents 	28*
DEUTSCHE  
BUNDESBANK
E U R O S Y S T E M
Monthly Report  
November 2011
2*

	 5	 Lending 	by	banks 	(MFIs) 	in	Germany 	
to	domestic 	non-banks 	(non-MFIs) 	30*
	 6	 Lending 	by	banks 	(MFIs) 	in	Germany 	
to	domestic 	enterprises 	and	house -
holds, 	housing 	loans, 	sectors 	of	
economic 	activity 	 32*
	 7	 Deposits 	of	domestic 	non-banks 	
(non-MFIs) 	at	banks 	(MFIs) 	
in	Germany 	 34*
	 8	 Deposits 	of	domestic 	households 	
and	non-profit 	institutions 	at	
banks 	(MFIs) 	in	Germany 	 36*
	 9	 Deposits 	of	domestic 	government 	
at	banks 	(MFIs) 	in	Germany, 	by	
creditor 	group 	 36*
	 10	 Savings 	deposits 	and	bank 	savings 	
bonds 	of	banks 	(MFIs) 	in	Germany 	
sold	to	non-banks 	(non-MFIs) 	 38*
	 11	 Debt 	securities 	and	money 	market 	
paper 	outstanding 	of	banks 	(MFIs) 	
in	Germany 	 38*
	 12	 Building 	and	loan	associations 	(MFIs) 	
in	Germany 	 39*
	 13	 Assets 	and	liabilities 	of	the	foreign 	
branches 	and	foreign 	subsidiaries 	of	
German 	banks 	(MFIs) 	 40*
V  Minimum reserves
	 1	 Reserve 	ratios 	 42*
	 2	 Reserve 	maintenance 	in	Germany 	up	
to	the	end	of	1998 	 42*
	 3	 Reserve 	maintenance 	in	the	euro 	
area	 42*VI  Interest rates
	 1	 ECB 	interest 	rates 	 43*
	 2	 Base 	rates 	 43*
	 3	 Eurosystem 	monetary 	policy 	oper -
ations 	allotted 	through 	tenders 	 43*
	 4	 Money 	market 	rates, 	by	month 	 43*
	 5	 Interest 	rates 	and	volumes 	for	out-
standing 	amounts 	and	new	business 	
of	German 	banks 	(MFIs) 	 44*
VII  Capital market
	 1	 Sales 	and	purchases 	of	debt 	securities 	
and	shares 	in	Germany 	 48*
	 2	 Sales 	of	debt 	securities 	issued 	by	
residents 	 49*
	 3	 Amounts 	outstanding 	of	debt 	
securities 	issued 	by	residents 	 50*
	 4	 Shares 	in	circulation 	issued 	by	
residents 	 50*
	 5	 Yields 	and	indices 	on	German 	
securities 	 51*
	 6	 Sales 	and	purchases 	of	mutual 	
fund 	shares 	in	Germany 	 51*
VIII  Financial accounts
	 1	 Acquisition 	of	financial 	assets 	and	
financing 	of	private 	non-financial 	
sectors 	 52*
	 2	 Financial 	assets 	and	liabilities 	of	private 	
non-financial 	sectors 	 53*DEUTSCHE  
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report  
November 2011
3*

IX  Public finances in Germany
	 1	 General 	government: 	deficit 	and	debt	
level	a s 	d efined 	in	the	Maastricht 	Treaty 	54*
	 2	 General 	government: 	revenue, 	
expenditure 	and	fiscal 	deficit/surplus 	
as	shown 	in	the	national 	accounts 	54*
	 3	 General 	government: 	budgetary 	
development 	(as	per	government’s 	
financial 	statistics) 	 55*
	 4	 Central, 	state 	and	local 	government: 	
budgetary 	development 	(as	per	
government’s 	financial 	statistics) 	 55*
	 5	 Central, 	state 	and	local 	government: 	
tax	revenue 	 56*
	 6	 Central 	and	state	government 	and	
European 	U nion: 	tax	revenue, 	by	type	56*
	 7	 Central, 	state 	and	local 	government: 	
individual 	taxes 	 57*
	 8	 German 	pension 	insurance 	scheme: 	
budgetary 	development 	and	assets 	57*
	 9	 Federal 	Employment 	Agency: 	
budgetary 	development 	 58*
	 10	 Statutory 	health 	insurance 	scheme: 	
budgetary 	development 	 58*
	 11	 Statutory 	long-term 	care	insurance 	
scheme: 	budgetary 	development 	 59*
	 12	 Central 	government: 	borrowing 	in	
the	market 	 59*
	 13	 Central, 	state 	and	local 	government: 	
debt 	by	creditor 	 59*
	 14	 Central, 	state 	and	local 	government: 	
debt 	by	category 	 60*
X  Economic conditions in Germany
	 1	 Origin 	and	use	of	domestic 	product, 	
distribution 	of	national 	income 	 61*
	 2	 Output 	in	the	production 	sector 	 62*	 3	 Orders 	received 	by	industry 	 63*
	 4	 Orders 	received 	by	construction 	 64*
	 5	 Retail 	trade 	turnover 	 64*
	 6	 Labour 	market 	 65*
	 7	 Prices 	 66*
	 8	 Households’ 	income 	 67*
	 9	 Pay 	rates 	and	actual 	earnings 	 67*
XI External sector
	 1	 Major 	items 	of	the	balance 	of	
payments 	of	the	euro 	area	 68*
	 2	 Major 	items 	of	the	balance 	of	
payments 	of	the	Federal 	Republic 	
of	Germany 	 69*
	 3	 Foreign 	trade 	(special 	trade) 	of	the	
Federal 	Republic 	of	Germany, 	by	
country 	and	group 	of	countries 	 70*
	 4	 Services 	and	income 	of	the	
Federal 	Republic 	of	Germany 	 71*
	 5	 Current 	transfers 	of	the	Federal 	
Republic 	of	Germany 	 71*
	 6	 Capital 	transfers 	 71*
	 7	 Financial 	account 	of	the	Federal 	
Republic 	of	Germany 	 72*
	 8	 External 	position 	of	the	Bundesbank 	73*
	 9	 External 	position 	of	the	Bundesbank 	
in	the	European 	Monetary 	Union 	 73*
	 10	 Assets 	and	liabilities 	of	enterprises 	
in	Germany 	(other 	than 	banks) 	
vis-à-vis 	non-residents 	 74*
	 11	 ECB 	euro 	reference 	exchange 	rates 	
of	selected 	currencies 	 75*
	 12	 Euro 	member 	countries 	and	
irrevocable 	euro 	conversion 	rates 	
in	the	third 	stage 	of	European 	
Economic 	and	Monetary 	Union 	 75*
	 13	 Effective 	exchange 	rates 	of	the	euro 	
and	indicators 	of	the	German 	
economy’s 	price 	competitiveness 	 76*
DEUTSCHE  
BUNDESBANK
E U R O S Y S T E M
Monthly Report  
November 2011
4*

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2011
 I Key economic data for the euro area  
 
1 Monetary developments and interest rates
 
 
 
 
 Money stock in various definitions  1,2 Determinants of the money stock  1 Interest rates
 M 3  3 
MFI lending to Yield on Euro-
 3-month enterprises Monetary pean govern-
MFI lending, and capital 3-month ment bonds moving  average
M1 M2 (centred) total households formation  4 Eonia  5,7 Euribor  6,7 outstanding  8 
Period Annual percentage change % per annum as a monthly average
2010          Jan 11.5 1.8 0.0 − 0.3 1.8 0.2 6.3 0.34 0.68 3.7
         Feb 11.0 1.6 − 0.4 − 0.2 1.8 0.2 5.5 0.34 0.66 3.7
         Mar 10.9 1.7 − 0.1 − 0.3 1.8 0.2 5.8 0.35 0.64 3.6
         Apr 10.5 1.3 − 0.3 − 0.1 1.8 0.4 5.9 0.35 0.64 3.6
         May 10.4 1.5 0.0 0.0 1.7 0.1 5.0 0.34 0.69 3.5
         June 9.4 1.5 0.3 0.2 1.6 0.1 3.8 0.35 0.73 3.6
         July 8.3 1.6 0.3 0.6 2.0 0.7 3.8 0.48 0.85 3.5
         Aug 7.7 2.1 1.1 0.8 2.4 1.2 3.4 0.43 0.90 3.3
         Sep 6.2 2.0 1.1 1.1 2.3 1.2 3.3 0.45 0.88 3.3
         Oct 4.9 2.1 1.1 1.4 3.3 1.2 3.4 0.70 1.00 3.3
         Nov 4.6 2.3 2.1 1.6 4.0 1.9 3.7 0.59 1.04 3.7
         Dec 4.3 2.2 1.7 1.8 3.5 1.6 3.6 0.50 1.02 4.1
2011          Jan 3.2 2.3 1.6 1.8 3.8 2.1 3.3 0.66 1.02 4.2
         Feb 2.8 2.4 2.1 2.0 3.8 2.3 3.8 0.71 1.09 4.3
         Mar 2.9 2.6 2.2 2.1 3.3 2.2 3.7 0.66 1.18 4.4
         Apr 1.6 2.4 1.9 2.1 3.2 2.3 3.9 0.97 1.32 4.5
         May 1.2 2.4 2.3 2.1 3.1 2.5 4.2 1.03 1.43 4.4
         June 1.3 2.3 1.9 2.1 2.7 2.2 4.7 1.12 1.49 4.4
         July 1.0 2.2 2.1 2.3 2.5 2.0 4.7 1.01 1.60 4.6
         Aug 1.7 2.4 2.7 2.6 2.5 1.8 4.7 0.91 1.55 4.1
         Sep 2.0 2.5 3.1 ... 2.4 1.7 4.4 1.01 1.54 4.0
         Oct ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 0.96 1.58 4.3
1 Source: ECB. — 2 Seasonally adjusted. — 3 Excluding money market fund Interbank Offered Rate. — 7 See also footnotes to Table VI.4, p 43*. — 8
sharesunits, money market paper and debt securities with a maturity of up  GDP-weighted yield on ten-year government bonds. Countries
to two years held by non-euro-area residents. — 4 Longer-term liabilities to include:DE,FR,NL,BE,AT,FI,IE,PT,ES,IT,GR,SK. 
euro-area non-MFIs. — 5 Euro OverNight Index Average. — 6 Euro
 
 
2 External transactions and positions  * 
 
 
 
Selected items of the euro-area balance of payments  r) Euro exchange rates  1 
Current account Capital account Effective exchange rate  3 
of which Direct Securities Other Reserve
Balance Trade balance Balance investment investment assets Dollar rate Nominal Real  4 transactions  2 
Period € million Euro/US-$ Q1 1999 = 100
2010          Jan − 13,463 − 8,651 + 11,173 − 6,863 + 36,064 − 19,580 + 1,553 1.4272 110.8 109.0
         Feb − 5,913 + 3,526 − 101 − 2,595 − 10,256 + 16,375 − 3,625 1.3686 108.0 106.1
         Mar − 1,124 + 5,101 + 1,318 − 31,859 − 2,988 + 38,753 − 2,588 1.3569 107.4 105.8
         Apr − 4,569 + 977 + 1,084 − 18,195 + 32,534 − 13,162 − 94 1.3406 106.1 104.5
         May − 15,208 − 1,980 + 13,726 − 15,266 + 51,236 − 22,167 − 77 1.2565 102.8 101.4
         June + 1,817 + 3,044 + 562 − 2,400 + 13,188 − 11,374 + 1,148 1.2209 100.6 99.3
         July + 5,211 + 6,272 − 233 − 12,923 − 23,084 + 38,937 − 3,164 1.2770 102.5 101.0
         Aug − 7,462 − 4,602 + 667 − 30,651 + 4,623 + 28,294 − 1,600 1.2894 102.1 100.5
         Sep − 4,879 + 3,788 + 6,323 − 8,645 + 35,718 − 20,461 − 289 1.3067 102.5 100.8
         Oct + 3,892 + 5,665 + 1,998 − 8,663 + 4,959 + 5,939 − 237 1.3898 106.0 104.1
         Nov − 3,426 − 839 + 13,388 + 45,413 + 21,484 − 53,510 + 1 1.3661 104.7 102.7
         Dec + 2,963 + 639 − 5,841 + 42,731 + 1,967 − 49,222 − 1,318 1.3220 102.6 100.6
2011          Jan − 19,921 − 14,711 + 13,548 + 11,750 − 29,920 + 37,708 − 5,989 1.3360 102.4 100.3
         Feb − 9,290 − 827 + 2,180 − 27,869 + 94,422 − 65,344 + 971 1.3649 103.4 101.1
         Mar − 1,006 + 2,526 + 17 + 6,252 + 61,782 − 61,463 − 6,554 1.3999 105.2 103.1
         Apr − 4,948 − 3,717 − 1,768 − 30,353 + 21,642 + 997 + 5,946 1.4442 107.0 104.9
         May − 16,085 + 562 + 13,124 − 5,857 + 41,695 − 19,598 − 3,116 1.4349 106.0 103.8
         June + 221 + 494 + 9,202 + 7,758 + 95,647 − 95,714 + 1,511 1.4388 106.1 104.0
         July − 2,045 + 3,324 + 2,492 + 623 − 25,688 + 28,460 − 902 1.4264 105.2 102.6
         Aug − 6,317 − 3,117 + 9,798 − 291 + 34,868 − 28,027 + 3,249 1.4343 104.9 102.3
         Sep ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 1.3770 103.8 101.4
         Oct ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 1.3706 104.0 101.7
*  Source: ECB. — 1  See also Tables XI.12 and 13, pp 75−76. — 2  Including
financial derivatives. — 3  Vis-à-vis the currencies of The-EER-20 group. —
4  Based on consumer prices. 
5* I Key economic data for the euro area 

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
E U R O S Y S T E M
Monthly Report
November 2011
I. Key economic data for the euro area 
 
3  General economic indicators
 
 
                   
 
Period Euro area Belgium Germany Estonia Finland France Greece Ireland Italy
 
Real gross domestic product 1,2
 
2008 0.4 1.0 1.1 − 3.7 1.0 − 0.1 − 0.2 − 3.0 − 1.3
2009 − 4.2 − 2.8 − 5.1 − 14.3 − 8.2 − 2.7 − 3.2 − 7.0 − 5.2
2010 1.8 2.3 3.7 2.3 3.6 1.5 − 3.5 − 0.4 1.3
2010          Q2 2.1 2.9 4.4 2.5 4.9 1.9 − 0.7 − 0.7 1.8
         Q3 2.1 2.1 4.0 4.5 3.4 1.7 − 4.6 0.3 1.3
         Q4 1.9 2.2 3.8 6.0 5.6 1.3 − 8.6 − 0.2 1.2
2011          Q1 2.4 3.0 5.0 9.5 4.8 2.4 − 8.3 0.3 1.0
         Q2 1.6 2.3 3.0 8.4 2.9 1.7 − 7.4 2.3 0.8
         Q3 1.4 ... 2.5 ... 2.7 1.4 − 5.2 ... ...
 
Industrial production 1,3
 
2008 − 1.6 3.7 0.0 − 4.7 1.0 − 2.9 − 4.2 − 2.1 − 3.5
2009 − 14.8 − 9.5 − 16.4 − 23.9 − 18.0 − 12.8 − 9.2 − 4.5 − 18.8
2010 7.4 11.9 10.8 20.3 5.0 4.7 − 6.6 7.6 6.4
2010          Q2 9.3 15.1 12.8 17.7 5.9 6.2 − 6.4 3.9 9.0
         Q3 7.0 9.5 10.6 23.9 5.8 3.3 − 6.7 11.5 7.2
         Q4 8.0 9.9 12.7 33.8 9.5 5.0 − 6.3 12.8 5.0
2011          Q1 6.6 8.2 4 11.9 31.7 4.2 4.5 − 6.3 0.9 2.1
         Q2 4.1 5.3 4 8.2 26.2 2.9 2.4 − 11.6 1.5 1.9
         Q3 e 4.0 ... 4p 8.2 16.9 − 0.9 3.5 p − 5.7 p 2.0 − 0.5
 
Capacity utilisation in industry 5
 
2009 71.2 72.0 72.0 58.1 67.0 73.6 70.7 − 66.1
2010 75.9 77.9 79.7 67.1 73.5 77.2 68.1 − 68.3
2011 80.6 80.5 86.1 73.3 77.8 82.7 67.9 − 72.6
2010          Q3 77.2 79.0 81.9 68.8 74.4 77.5 66.6 − 69.2
         Q4 78.1 79.4 83.1 71.2 74.8 78.4 67.1 − 70.9
2011          Q1 80.2 81.2 85.6 73.5 77.0 81.8 69.5 − 72.5
         Q2 81.6 82.6 86.8 73.4 77.4 84.5 68.8 − 74.3
         Q3 80.8 80.1 86.7 73.0 77.9 83.0 67.5 − 72.1
         Q4 79.7 78.0 85.1 73.2 78.9 81.3 65.8 − 71.6
 
Standardised unemployment rate 6,7
 
2008 7.6 7.0 7.5 5.5 6.4 7.8 7.7 6.3 6.7
2009 9.6 7.9 7.8 13.8 8.3 9.5 9.5 11.9 7.8
2010 10.1 8.3 7.1 16.9 8.4 9.8 12.6 13.7 8.4
2011          Apr 9.9 7.0 5.8 7.9 9.7 16.0 14.2 8.1
         May 10.0 7.0 5.9 7.8 9.7 16.8 14.2 8.2
         June 10.0 7.0 6.0 12.8 7.8 9.8 17.1 14.3 8.1
         July 10.1 6.9 6.0 7.8 9.8 17.6 14.5 8.2
         Aug 10.1 6.8 5.9 7.8 9.9 ... 14.4 8.0
         Sep 10.2 6.7 5.5 ... 7.8 9.9 ... 14.2 8.3
 
Harmonised Index of Consumer Prices 1
 
2008 8 3.3 4.5 2.8 10.6 3.9 3.2 4.2 3.1 3.5
2009 9 0.3 0.0 0.2 0.2 1.6 0.1 1.3 − 1.7 0.8
2010 1.6 2.3 1.2 2.7 1.7 1.7 4.7 − 1.6 1.6
2011          May 10 2.7 3.1 2.4 5.5 3.4 2.2 3.1 1.2 3.0
         June 2.7 3.4 2.4 4.9 3.4 2.3 3.1 1.1 3.0
         July 2.5 4.0 2.6 5.3 3.7 2.1 2.1 1.0 2.1
         Aug 2.5 3.4 2.5 5.6 3.5 2.4 1.4 1.0 2.3
         Sep 3.0 3.4 2.9 5.4 3.5 2.4 2.9 1.3 3.6
         Oct p 3.0 3.4 2.9 4.7 3.2 2.5 2.9 1.5 e 3.8
 
General government financial balance 11
 
2008 − 2.1 − 1.3 − 0.1 − 2.9 4.3 − 3.3 − 9.8 − 7.3 − 2.7
2009 − 6.4 − 5.8 − 3.2 − 2.0 − 2.5 − 7.5 − 15.8 − 14.2 − 5.4
2010 − 6.2 − 4.1 − 4.3 0.2 − 2.5 − 7.1 − 10.6 − 31.3 − 4.6
 
General government debt 11
 
2008 70.1 89.3 66.7 4.5 33.9 68.2 113.0 44.3 105.8
2009 79.8 95.9 74.4 7.2 43.3 79.0 129.3 65.2 115.5
2010 85.4 96.2 83.2 6.7 48.3 82.3 144.9 94.9 118.4
Sources: National data, European Commission, Eurostat, European Central for working-day variations. — 4  Adjusted in advance by the Federal
Bank. Latest data are partly based on press reports and are provisional. — Statistical Office, by way of estimates, to the results of the annual overall
1  Annual percentage change. — 2  GDP of the euro area calculated from survey in construction sector (average + 4%). — 5  Manufacturing, in %;
seasonally adjusted data. — 3  Manufacturing, mining and energy; adjusted seasonally adjusted; data are collected in January, April, July and
6*I. Key economic data for the euro area 

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2011
I.  Key economic data for the euro area 
 
3  General economic indicators
 
 
                   
 
Luxembourg Malta Netherlands Austria Portugal Slovakia Slovenia Spain Cyprus Period
 
Real gross domestic product 1,2
 
0.8 4.4 1.8 1.4 0.0 5.8 3.6 0.9 3.6 2008
− 5.3 − 2.7 − 3.5 − 3.8 − 2.5 − 4.8 − 8.0 − 3.7 − 1.9 2009
2.7 2.7 1.7 2.3 1.4 4.0 1.4 − 0.1 1.1 2010
4.1 2.4 2.1 2.7 1.4 4.4 2.0 0.2 0.6 2010          Q2
2.4 1.7 1.8 3.6 1.1 4.0 1.7 0.0 1.9          Q3
4.1 3.0 2.3 2.6 1.1 3.7 2.4 0.6 2.4          Q4
2.9 2.3 2.8 5.2 − 0.6 3.4 2.3 1.1 1.7 2011          Q1
1.9 2.8 1.6 3.9 − 1.0 3.5 0.9 0.6 1.4          Q2
... ... 1.1 2.6 ... 2.9 ... ... ...          Q3
 
Industrial production1,3
 
− 5.2 − 1.4 1.3 − 4.1 3.3 1.7 − 7.3 4.5 2008
− 15.9 − − 7.6 − 11.3 − 8.6 − 13.8 − 17.7 − 15.8 − 9.0 2009
10.5 − 7.1 6.5 1.7 19.0 6.0 0.8 − 2.0 2010
14.7 − 10.8 8.1 2.5 24.5 9.9 2.9 − 2.1 2010          Q2
5.7 − 4.2 8.4 − 0.2 15.3 7.3 − 0.2 − 0.4          Q3
6.3 − 5.9 9.1 1.0 16.7 7.3 0.4 − 2.8          Q4
1.8 − 0.8 11.3 0.1 11.9 8.2 1.8 − 3.7 2011          Q1
− 3.8 − − 1.6 9.1 − 1.6 7.9 4.0 − 1.1 − 3.6          Q2
p 0.1 − 2.8 ... − 2.7 p 5.6 p 0.9 − 1.5 ...          Q3
 
Capacity utilisation in industry 5
 
65.4 70.1 76.0 77.4 72.6 54.0 70.9 70.0 65.2 2009
78.5 77.7 78.9 81.9 75.0 58.0 76.0 71.1 62.6 2010
83.2 78.7 80.3 85.4 74.4 61.6 80.4 73.3 61.4 2011
80.3 78.7 79.6 83.2 75.0 58.9 77.9 72.6 62.5 2010          Q3
78.1 77.0 79.7 83.7 74.5 57.9 78.2 72.5 63.9          Q4
82.9 80.6 80.7 84.6 73.5 68.0 79.9 73.5 63.2 2011          Q1
87.3 81.1 81.1 86.3 76.4 55.4 82.2 74.7 62.9          Q2
82.7 76.9 80.6 85.8 74.3 60.6 80.1 72.6 61.3          Q3
79.8 76.0 78.9 85.0 73.5 62.3 79.5 72.2 58.1          Q4
 
Standardised unemployment rate 6,7
 
4.9 6.0 3.1 3.8 8.5 9.5 4.4 11.3 3.6 2008
5.1 6.9 3.7 4.8 10.6 12.0 5.9 18.0 5.3 2009
4.6 6.9 4.5 4.4 12.0 14.4 7.3 20.1 6.3 2010
4.5 6.7 4.2 4.1 12.6 13.2 8.0 20.7 7.2 2011          Apr 
4.6 6.7 4.2 4.2 12.6 13.2 7.9 21.0 7.4          May
4.6 6.7 4.1 3.9 12.5 13.3 7.9 21.3 7.5          June
4.8 6.7 4.3 3.7 12.4 13.3 7.9 21.8 7.5          July
4.8 6.6 4.4 3.7 12.4 13.4 7.8 22.2 ...          Aug 
4.8 6.6 4.5 3.9 12.5 13.5 8.0 22.6 ...          Sep 
 
Harmonised Index of Consumer Prices 1
 
4.1 4.7 2.2 3.2 2.7 3.9 5.5 4.1 4.4 2008
0.0 1.8 1.0 0.4 − 0.9 0.9 0.9 − 0.2 0.2 2009
2.8 2.0 0.9 1.7 1.4 0.7 2.1 2.0 2.6 2010
3.8 2.5 2.4 3.7 3.7 4.2 2.4 3.4 4.1 2011          May
3.8 3.1 2.5 3.7 3.3 4.1 1.6 3.0 4.5          June
3.2 2.2 2.9 3.8 3.0 3.8 1.1 3.0 3.5          July
3.7 2.3 2.8 3.7 2.8 4.1 1.2 2.7 2.7          Aug 
3.8 2.7 3.0 3.9 3.5 4.4 2.3 3.0 2.5          Sep 
3.8 p 2.4 p 2.8 p 3.8 4.0 4.6 2.9 3.0 3.2          Oct 
 
General government financial balance 11
 
3.0 − 4.6 0.5 − 0.9 − 3.6 − 2.1 − 1.9 − 4.5 0.9 2008
− 0.9 − 3.7 − 5.6 − 4.1 − 10.1 − 8.0 − 6.1 − 11.2 − 6.1 2009
− 1.1 − 3.6 − 5.1 − 4.4 − 9.8 − 7.7 − 5.8 − 9.3 − 5.3 2010
 
General government debt 11
 
13.7 62.2 58.5 63.8 71.6 27.8 21.9 40.1 48.9 2008
14.8 67.8 60.8 69.5 83.0 35.5 35.3 53.8 58.5 2009
19.1 69.0 62.9 71.8 93.3 41.0 38.8 61.0 61.5 2010
October. — 6  As a percentage of the civilian labour force; seasonally from 2009 onwards. — 10  Including Estonia from 2011 onwards. — 11  As a
adjusted. — 7  Standardised unemployment rate of Germany: Bundesbank percentage of GDP; euro-area aggregate: European Central Bank
calculation based on unadjusted data from the Federal Statistical Office. — (ESA 1995), member states: European Commission (Maastricht Treaty
8  Including Malta and Cyprus from 2008 onwards. — 9  Including Slovakia definition). 
7*I.  Key economic data for the euro area 

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
E U R O S Y S T E M
Monthly Report
November 2011
II Overall monetary survey in the euro area 
 
1 The money stock and its counterparts *
(a) Euro area 
  
€ billion
I Lending to non-banks (non-MFIs) II Net claims on III Monetary capital formation at monetary
in the euro area non-euro-area residents financial institutions (MFIs) in the euro area
Enterprises General
and households government Debt
Deposits securities
Liabil- with an Deposits with
Claims ities to agreed at agreed maturities
on non- non-euro- maturity notice of of over Capital
of which of which euro-area area of over over 2 years and
Period Total Total Total Total residents residents Total 2 years 3 months (net)  2 Securities Securities reserves  3 
2010          Feb 20.4 − 6.7 − 9.6 27.1 32.1 − 14.9 14.8 29.7 − 2.9 6.4 − 0.7 − 7.2 − 1.3
         Mar 63.8 5.7 − 20.7 58.1 33.6 − 16.9 − 25.0 − 8.1 31.2 2.6 − 0.1 23.2 5.5
         Apr 83.3 69.2 40.9 14.1 11.4 − 25.4 71.2 96.6 24.0 17.0 − 2.0 7.9 1.0
         May 21.8 − 15.9 − 41.6 37.7 23.5 27.5 30.9 3.4 1.6 − 3.1 − 1.8 − 7.9 14.4
         June 87.4 37.2 − 10.4 50.2 31.9 − 9.1 − 156.6 − 147.5 6.4 − 6.0 − 2.4 − 18.3 33.2
         July 32.1 45.3 29.1 − 13.2 − 2.3 − 33.6 − 42.6 − 9.0 32.1 28.1 − 2.2 6.1 0.0
         Aug 3.4 3.7 12.6 − 0.2 − 7.5 − 0.7 91.4 92.1 9.3 6.9 − 1.4 − 1.9 5.7
         Sep 62.7 44.7 2.3 18.1 13.0 9.1 − 44.5 − 53.6 17.7 3.6 − 2.7 15.6 1.1
         Oct 150.0 − 37.0 − 20.2 187.0 107.5 − 83.0 − 37.7 45.3 9.4 − 7.5 − 1.7 12.0 6.5
         Nov 160.2 143.3 51.5 16.9 − 37.8 8.7 15.8 7.1 54.9 29.4 0.2 1.8 23.5
         Dec − 113.2 − 47.9 − 28.6 − 65.2 − 69.9 50.3 − 89.4 − 139.7 31.5 19.9 − 0.5 − 2.3 14.5
2011          Jan 43.9 27.5 3.1 16.4 20.0 7.8 84.1 76.3 17.5 − 1.4 1.5 22.2 − 4.8
         Feb 19.9 23.8 − 0.4 − 3.9 10.2 19.3 31.6 12.2 33.4 − 5.4 0.5 22.7 15.6
         Mar − 28.2 − 6.5 − 25.2 − 21.7 − 11.1 102.8 − 33.7 − 136.5 26.4 9.6 0.0 14.4 2.3
         Apr 83.1 82.4 45.8 0.7 11.1 − 24.4 82.7 107.1 35.4 17.0 − 1.1 18.8 0.7
         May 5.8 18.9 − 21.5 − 13.1 10.2 9.9 83.2 73.3 24.9 2.2 − 0.5 11.1 12.0
         June 22.5 − 2.4 − 30.6 24.9 28.3 70.4 − 130.3 − 200.7 41.4 4.4 − 0.3 4.7 32.5
         July − 2.0 8.0 4.0 − 10.0 − 14.1 − 6.4 − 28.5 − 22.1 36.1 − 5.5 0.0 0.0 41.5
         Aug 5.8 − 11.6 − 14.1 17.4 31.4 29.1 67.1 38.0 8.2 0.6 − 0.4 − 1.5 9.5
         Sep 47.8 23.9 − 20.4 24.0 21.3 48.5 7.1 − 41.5 0.2 12.6 − 0.7 − 11.9 0.2
  
  
(b) German contribution
 
I Lending to non-banks (non-MFIs) II Net claims on III Monetary capital formation at monetary
in the euro area non-euro-area residents financial institutions (MFIs) in the euro area
Enterprises General
and households government Debt
Deposits securities
Liabil- with an Deposits with
Claims ities to agreed at agreed maturities
on non- non-euro- maturity notice of of over Capital
of which of which euro-area area of over over 2 years and
Period Total Total Total Total residents residents Total 2 years 3 months (net)  2 Securities Securities reserves  3 
2010          Feb − 12.8 − 15.3 − 11.1 2.5 5.7 − 22.1 − 18.4 3.8 − 6.8 0.5 − 0.7 − 6.3 − 0.4
         Mar − 2.5 − 8.8 − 5.2 6.2 7.0 − 14.0 2.8 16.8 2.9 1.1 0.1 2.7 − 0.9
         Apr 54.7 50.6 24.7 4.1 2.3 − 13.0 40.5 53.5 − 3.7 0.1 − 1.9 − 0.6 − 1.4
         May − 36.4 − 54.5 − 52.2 18.1 7.8 − 35.4 13.5 48.9 − 17.0 − 5.3 − 1.8 1.7 − 11.6
         June 15.1 − 10.3 − 9.7 25.3 20.4 − 17.8 − 62.2 − 44.4 − 4.9 0.7 − 1.3 − 3.4 − 0.9
         July − 2.9 − 1.5 − 4.5 − 1.4 2.9 − 30.9 − 38.5 − 7.5 − 6.5 − 0.2 − 2.2 − 12.2 8.1
         Aug 8.7 6.9 1.6 1.8 1.8 7.2 12.0 4.8 − 3.4 2.4 − 1.8 − 2.4 − 1.7
         Sep − 16.1 − 24.0 − 5.2 7.9 4.0 − 2.2 − 23.0 − 20.9 − 0.4 − 1.0 − 2.4 2.2 0.7
         Oct 101.0 7.6 1.6 93.4 88.7 5.0 − 3.4 − 8.4 2.3 − 2.1 − 1.4 − 4.4 10.2
         Nov 40.6 33.5 5.2 7.1 − 69.0 − 5.2 6.4 11.6 4.3 − 0.2 0.5 3.1 0.8
         Dec − 72.0 − 39.6 − 4.2 − 32.4 − 22.5 18.4 − 11.7 − 30.1 − 0.5 − 0.2 − 0.0 − 0.7 0.4
2011          Jan 30.1 19.0 16.9 11.1 6.2 9.5 6.0 − 3.5 5.8 − 2.5 − 0.5 2.3 6.5
         Feb − 0.8 13.5 − 7.2 − 14.3 − 2.4 − 4.0 3.6 7.7 2.2 − 1.8 0.0 0.0 3.9
         Mar − 29.6 − 17.0 − 0.5 − 12.5 − 2.2 26.3 − 26.8 − 53.1 − 3.7 − 1.7 0.2 − 4.7 2.5
         Apr 29.0 36.8 22.4 − 7.7 3.2 18.9 50.0 31.2 2.4 − 1.3 − 0.8 3.0 1.4
         May − 26.0 − 16.3 − 24.7 − 9.7 1.3 5.5 1.4 − 4.1 − 10.3 − 0.3 − 0.1 − 3.5 − 6.4
         June − 23.3 − 13.4 − 12.4 − 10.0 − 6.4 17.2 − 41.4 − 58.5 4.8 0.2 − 0.2 2.0 2.8
         July − 0.8 − 2.0 − 4.0 1.3 − 3.9 − 9.4 − 5.0 4.4 − 5.0 − 0.3 0.0 − 6.3 1.5
         Aug 15.3 12.7 − 6.1 2.6 12.0 − 31.5 23.8 55.3 0.1 − 0.1 − 0.1 − 1.2 1.5
         Sep 12.8 9.7 − 5.5 3.1 3.6 − 39.7 − 15.0 24.6 − 7.9 − 3.8 − 0.5 − 2.2 − 1.5
*The data in this table are based on the consolidated balance sheet of deduction of inter-MFI participations. — 4Including the counterparts of
monetary financial institutions (MFIs) (Table II.2); statistical breaks have monetary liabilities of central governments. — 5Including the monetary
been eliminated from the flow figures (see also the “Notes on the figures“ liabilities of central governments (Post Office, Treasury). — 6In Germany,
in the “Explanatory notes“ in the Statistical Supplement to the Monthly only savings deposits. — 7Paper held by residents outside the euro area has
Report 1, p 30). — 1Source: ECB. — 2Excluding MFIs’ portfolios. — 3After been eliminated. — 8Less German MFIs’ holdings of paper issued by
8*II Overall monetary survey in the euro area 

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2011
II Overall monetary survey in the euro area
 
 
 
(a) Euro area 
 
V Other factors VI Money stock M3 (balance I plus II less III less IV less V)
Money stock M2 Debt secur-
of which ities with
Intra- Money stock M1 maturities
Eurosystem Deposits of up to
liability/ with an Deposits Money 2 years
IV De- claim agreed at agreed market (incl money
posits of related to Currency maturity notice of Repo fund market    
banknote in circu- Overnight of up to up to 3 transac- shares paper)    central  gov-
ernments Total  4 issue Total Total Total lation deposits  5 2 years  5 tions (net)  2,7  Period (net)  2,7,8 months  5,6 
− 3.6 40.3 − − 28.3 − 29.4 − 17.1 2.4 − 19.5 − 21.4 9.1 15.9 − 8.2 − 6.6 2010          Feb 
− 5.9 12.6 − 9.0 − 1.9 5.4 9.1 − 3.7 − 16.1 8.8 18.4 − 16.5 9.1          Mar 
− 19.8 − 23.1 − 76.9 53.6 80.5 4.0 76.5 − 36.1 9.1 21.0 2.0 0.5          Apr 
34.0 1.1 − 12.7 18.6 30.9 6.4 24.5 − 10.9 − 1.5 4.2 − 4.1 − 6.0          May
20.2 18.5 − 33.1 25.2 42.4 6.5 35.9 − 20.6 3.4 39.0 − 24.4 − 6.7          June
− 22.3 3.7 − − 15.0 14.4 − 12.1 8.4 − 20.5 16.3 10.1 − 22.1 − 8.4 1.2          July
− 20.2 − 4.0 − 17.6 3.9 − 34.9 − 6.0 − 28.9 26.0 12.7 2.7 11.7 − 0.7          Aug 
3.4 31.9 − 18.9 16.1 8.5 − 1.2 9.7 4.5 3.1 22.2 − 18.8 − 0.8          Sep 
78.1 − 8.2 − − 12.4 35.6 8.2 2.2 6.0 23.8 3.6 − 27.5 − 14.9 − 5.6          Oct 
17.1 40.6 − 56.4 − 1.2 10.5 1.2 9.3 − 15.2 3.6 48.1 12.9 − 3.5          Nov 
− 97.1 − 48.6 − 51.3 89.6 65.4 18.4 47.0 3.2 21.1 − 5.2 − 34.0 0.9          Dec 
51.9 59.0 − − 76.8 − 41.1 − 44.7 − 12.6 − 32.1 − 16.2 19.7 − 36.1 − 5.2 5.7 2011          Jan 
13.5 − 27.5 − 19.9 − 20.5 − 33.9 − 0.0 − 33.9 12.2 1.2 39.7 2.9 − 2.2          Feb 
− 29.1 50.9 − 26.5 26.7 16.9 2.5 14.4 6.8 2.9 − 15.0 − 2.1 17.0          Mar 
8.0 − 53.7 − 68.9 49.8 40.1 7.1 33.0 6.7 3.0 22.8 2.2 − 5.8          Apr 
− 17.0 − 11.6 − 19.4 − 8.4 − 15.3 5.0 − 20.2 6.2 0.7 38.7 − 3.5 − 7.3          May
51.6 − 13.9 − 13.8 30.5 54.6 9.2 45.4 − 21.9 − 2.1 − 11.4 − 18.4 13.0          June
− 22.7 − 15.5 − − 6.3 2.0 − 21.8 8.5 − 30.3 21.6 2.2 − 1.1 − 6.8 − 0.4          July
− 59.7 14.4 − 72.0 10.2 − 21.6 − 4.8 − 16.9 26.3 5.5 45.8 18.3 − 2.5          Aug 
4.2 35.9 − 56.1 28.0 19.3 7.7 11.6 13.6 − 4.8 24.8 − 7.6 10.9          Sep 
 
 
 (b) German contribution 
 
V Other factors VI Money stock M3 (balance I plus II less III less IV less V)  10 
of which Components of the money stock
Intra- Debt securities
Eurosystem Deposits with
liability/ with an Deposits Money maturities
IV De- claim agreed at agreed market of up to 2 years
posits of related to Currency maturity notice of Repo fund (incl money    
banknote in circu- Overnight of up to up to 3 transac- shares market    central  gov-
ernments Total issue  9,11 lation Total deposits 2 years months  6 tions (net)  7,8 paper)(net)  7  Period
− 3.8 − 30.9 2.1 0.6 6.6 0.3 − 11.6 5.9 10.7 − 0.2 1.5 2010          Feb 
− 1.6 − 3.3 0.5 2.9 − 14.6 − 14.7 − 0.0 1.8 1.0 − 0.5 − 2.1          Mar 
0.2 4.5 0.9 0.6 40.8 40.5 − 21.9 2.0 20.8 − 0.2 − 0.4          Apr 
1.6 − 65.7 0.6 1.2 9.3 11.8 − 5.3 2.0 0.7 0.4 − 0.3          May
− 1.0 6.5 − 0.8 2.3 − 3.3 1.7 − 0.3 0.7 1.2 − 0.7 − 6.0          June
1.5 − 23.0 0.3 1.7 − 5.9 − 0.2 − 3.0 3.7 − 10.4 0.5 3.5          July
7.5 − 14.7 2.0 − 1.3 26.5 4.7 1.5 1.7 11.7 − 0.3 7.2          Aug 
− 8.5 − 11.3 2.6 − 0.4 1.9 1.0 3.6 2.6 − 8.0 − 0.2 2.9          Sep 
20.8 110.6 0.9 0.0 − 27.7 2.5 − 0.2 2.7 − 10.8 − 0.1 − 21.7          Oct 
3.3 − 18.8 − 0.1 1.1 46.7 26.4 − 5.2 2.1 23.9 0.3 − 0.8          Nov 
− 6.7 − 29.2 0.5 3.8 − 17.2 − 8.7 8.5 8.6 − 22.2 0.1 − 3.6          Dec 
5.4 32.5 0.7 − 2.8 − 4.1 14.7 − 6.2 2.7 − 12.2 0.1 − 3.1 2011          Jan 
1.9 − 17.7 1.1 − 0.2 8.8 − 15.5 5.2 2.1 18.8 − 0.1 − 1.7          Feb 
− 8.2 16.4 0.6 0.6 − 7.7 3.3 3.8 0.8 − 14.3 0.1 − 1.5          Mar 
− 4.5 26.7 0.7 1.5 23.3 7.3 10.2 − 1.3 10.4 − 0.2 − 3.1          Apr 
3.4 − 38.8 1.5 1.4 25.1 1.1 10.9 − 2.3 15.9 − 0.3 − 0.2          May
3.0 − 19.2 1.5 2.5 5.1 8.2 − 0.4 − 1.9 − 0.3 − 0.2 − 0.2          June
− 1.2 − 1.0 1.8 2.0 − 3.0 − 4.8 13.5 − 1.2 − 13.4 − 0.1 3.0          July
− 0.1 − 46.9 2.6 − 1.0 30.7 12.3 6.6 − 1.4 10.3 0.4 2.6          Aug 
3.4 − 40.6 3.2 1.3 18.3 7.1 12.3 − 1.0 4.9 0.1 − 5.2          Sep 
euro-area MFIs. — 9Including national banknotes still in circulation. — M2 or M3. — 11The difference between the volume of euro banknotes
10The German contributions to the Eurosystem’s monetary aggregates actually issued by the Bundesbank and the amount disclosed in accordance
should on no account be interpreted as national monetary aggregates and with the accounting regime chosen by the Eurosystem (see also footnote 2
are therefore not comparable with the erstwhile German money stocks M1, on banknote circulation in Table III.2). 
9*II Overall monetary survey in the euro area

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
E U R O S Y S T E M
Monthly Report
November 2011
II Overall monetary survey in the euro area
 
2 Consolidated balance sheet of monetary financial institutions (MFIs) *
 
 
 
Assets
Lending to non-banks (non-MFIs) in the euro area
Enterprises and households General government
Claims
Total Shares and on non-
End of assets or Debt other Debt euro-area Other
year/month liabilities Total Total Loans securities  2 equities Total Loans securities  3 residents assets
 Euro area ( € billion) 1
 
2009          Aug 23,945.4 15,873.5 13,019.7 10,737.8 1,499.6 782.3 2,853.8 1,022.7 1,831.1 4,861.3 3,210.6
         Sep 23,895.7 15,948.6 13,069.0 10,771.9 1,499.5 797.6 2,879.6 1,013.2 1,866.4 4,779.8 3,167.3
         Oct 23,848.5 15,934.7 13,022.4 10,725.9 1,497.4 799.1 2,912.3 1,033.0 1,879.3 4,787.1 3,126.8
         Nov 24,007.6 15,973.4 13,064.7 10,755.2 1,497.9 811.5 2,908.7 1,025.5 1,883.2 4,796.4 3,237.8
         Dec 23,848.0 15,974.2 13,102.7 10,784.5 1,505.5 812.7 2,871.5 1,021.1 1,850.4 4,809.2 3,064.6
2010          Jan 24,070.4 15,985.1 13,092.5 10,774.4 1,501.6 816.5 2,892.6 1,032.8 1,859.8 4,941.8 3,143.5
         Feb 24,250.8 16,010.6 13,086.0 10,777.2 1,505.9 802.9 2,924.6 1,027.9 1,896.7 5,013.3 3,226.9
         Mar 24,293.0 16,068.3 13,087.2 10,800.5 1,492.0 794.7 2,981.1 1,052.5 1,928.6 4,998.9 3,225.9
         Apr 24,618.7 16,139.0 13,145.3 10,820.2 1,499.2 825.9 2,993.8 1,055.5 1,938.3 5,122.8 3,356.8
         May 25,230.9 16,179.5 13,145.1 10,865.1 1,478.6 801.3 3,034.4 1,070.2 1,964.2 5,349.6 3,701.9
         June 25,225.9 16,379.1 13,288.2 10,988.6 1,516.3 783.4 3,090.9 1,091.5 1,999.4 5,247.2 3,599.6
         July 24,924.3 16,395.4 13,314.0 10,981.3 1,548.1 784.7 3,081.4 1,080.3 2,001.1 5,050.3 3,478.6
         Aug 25,577.5 16,412.5 13,323.5 10,978.8 1,549.6 795.1 3,088.9 1,087.9 2,001.0 5,236.5 3,928.5
         Sep 25,171.8 16,434.0 13,330.7 10,981.4 1,552.3 797.1 3,103.3 1,094.1 2,009.2 5,034.4 3,703.3
         Oct 25,139.0 16,575.1 13,287.1 10,958.1 1,524.5 804.5 3,287.9 1,173.7 2,114.2 4,976.3 3,587.6
         Nov 25,450.3 16,731.2 13,441.0 11,067.7 1,557.1 816.3 3,290.3 1,229.3 2,061.0 5,148.7 3,570.4
         Dec 25,812.1 16,593.4 13,365.2 11,027.0 1,538.3 799.9 3,228.3 1,240.4 1,987.9 5,007.5 4,211.1
2011          Jan 25,684.3 16,653.2 13,407.0 11,064.9 1,526.8 815.2 3,246.3 1,236.8 2,009.4 5,019.1 4,011.9
         Feb 25,728.7 16,689.4 13,455.5 11,112.3 1,535.5 807.7 3,233.9 1,216.6 2,017.3 5,055.9 3,983.4
         Mar 25,308.7 16,487.4 13,398.7 11,117.0 1,502.7 779.0 3,088.8 1,207.3 1,881.4 4,947.4 3,873.8
         Apr 25,453.8 16,559.0 13,473.7 11,142.4 1,509.0 822.3 3,085.3 1,197.2 1,888.1 4,967.3 3,927.5
         May 25,792.1 16,585.8 13,508.8 11,202.1 1,506.7 800.0 3,077.0 1,174.2 1,902.8 5,132.9 4,073.4
         June 25,472.0 16,595.2 13,498.2 11,226.4 1,483.0 788.8 3,097.1 1,170.5 1,926.6 4,971.3 3,905.5
         July 25,843.5 16,588.4 13,511.0 11,241.1 1,487.9 782.0 3,077.4 1,175.0 1,902.4 5,025.2 4,229.9
         Aug 26,424.8 16,593.1 13,485.9 11,241.7 1,478.9 765.3 3,107.1 1,162.7 1,944.5 5,109.8 4,721.9
         Sep 27,065.9 16,640.5 13,513.9 11,293.0 1,468.4 752.5 3,126.5 1,165.4 1,961.2 5,198.0 5,227.4
 German contribution ( € billion) 
2009          Aug 5,149.9 3,660.3 3,038.5 2,532.0 242.9 263.6 621.8 371.0 250.7 1,223.4 266.3
         Sep 5,131.7 3,679.7 3,054.4 2,548.0 242.8 263.6 625.2 368.1 257.1 1,186.5 265.5
         Oct 5,128.8 3,677.6 3,033.3 2,532.0 240.4 260.9 644.2 379.8 264.4 1,184.0 267.3
         Nov 5,131.5 3,675.6 3,041.1 2,537.6 240.3 263.2 634.6 368.9 265.7 1,184.3 271.6
         Dec 5,084.8 3,642.7 3,015.1 2,520.4 235.5 259.1 627.6 363.0 264.6 1,188.8 253.3
2010          Jan 5,123.4 3,660.2 3,021.3 2,516.0 239.8 265.5 638.8 366.1 272.7 1,211.6 251.5
         Feb 5,099.1 3,649.6 3,008.2 2,513.7 237.7 256.8 641.4 362.9 278.5 1,208.0 241.5
         Mar 5,105.8 3,638.3 2,993.1 2,509.7 233.9 249.6 645.2 362.2 283.0 1,209.3 258.2
         Apr 5,210.6 3,693.3 3,044.0 2,535.9 231.3 276.8 649.3 364.1 285.2 1,262.7 254.6
         May 5,259.6 3,664.4 2,996.6 2,539.6 209.1 247.9 667.8 374.7 293.1 1,324.9 270.3
         June 5,236.5 3,680.2 2,988.1 2,540.8 205.5 241.8 692.1 377.7 314.4 1,272.2 284.0
         July 5,144.1 3,670.8 2,980.4 2,537.8 200.7 242.0 690.4 373.1 317.3 1,195.0 278.3
         Aug 5,201.0 3,683.3 2,991.4 2,546.6 199.6 245.1 691.9 373.2 318.7 1,228.9 288.8
         Sep 5,107.4 3,659.4 2,960.3 2,520.3 198.8 241.2 699.1 376.7 322.3 1,172.2 275.8
         Oct 5,191.7 3,756.9 2,964.7 2,523.0 197.8 243.9 792.2 381.2 411.0 1,162.4 272.4
         Nov 5,311.7 3,822.0 3,004.1 2,557.1 195.3 251.8 817.8 457.5 360.3 1,207.0 282.8
         Dec 6,121.8 3,742.7 2,958.5 2,518.9 192.7 246.9 784.2 447.6 336.6 1,183.6 1,195.5
2011          Jan 6,033.2 3,767.9 2,972.6 2,516.5 194.1 262.0 795.3 452.3 342.9 1,170.1 1,095.2
         Feb 5,986.9 3,764.4 2,983.4 2,535.7 193.4 254.3 781.0 440.8 340.2 1,175.3 1,047.2
         Mar 5,835.3 3,730.5 2,962.9 2,515.9 190.2 256.8 767.6 430.3 337.3 1,134.9 970.0
         Apr 5,901.3 3,753.8 2,995.6 2,526.0 189.8 279.8 758.2 419.3 339.0 1,171.1 976.3
         May 5,944.1 3,731.5 2,982.7 2,537.9 189.2 255.6 748.8 408.5 340.3 1,192.1 1,020.6
         June 5,793.3 3,706.7 2,968.3 2,536.0 187.5 244.9 738.4 404.9 333.4 1,145.1 941.6
         July 5,929.3 3,709.0 2,969.1 2,540.8 185.6 242.7 739.9 410.3 329.6 1,158.0 1,062.2
         Aug 6,140.9 3,729.5 2,988.1 2,565.9 183.4 238.8 741.4 400.7 340.8 1,190.0 1,221.3
         Sep 6,294.6 3,744.9 3,001.5 2,584.8 181.4 235.4 743.4 400.3 343.1 1,194.0 1,355.7
*Monetary financial institutions (MFIs) comprise banks (including building and other money market paper issued by general government. — 4Euro
and loan associations), money market funds, and the European Central currency in circulation (see also footnote 8 on p 12*). Excluding MFIs‘ cash in
Bank and national central banks (the Eurosystem). — 1Source: ECB. — hand (in euro). The German contribution includes the volume of euro bank-
2Including money market paper of enterprises. — 3Including Treasury bills notes put into circulation by the Bundesbank in accordance with
10*II Overall monetary survey in the euro area

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2011
II Overall monetary survey in the euro area
 
 
 
 
 
Liabilities
Deposits of non-banks (non-MFIs) in the euro area
Enterprises and households
With agreed At agreed
maturities of notice of  6 
over
Currency 1 year and
in of which up to up to over up to over  End of
Total in euro  5 Total Overnight 1 year 2 years 2 years 3 months 3 months year/month circulation  4 
Euro area ( € billion) 1
 
741.0 9,857.5 9,281.6 9,320.7 3,350.7 1,759.6 257.8 2,124.5 1,704.9 123.2 2009          Aug 
740.5 9,895.9 9,303.8 9,338.4 3,407.1 1,701.4 254.6 2,139.3 1,711.5 124.4          Sep 
745.3 9,941.6 9,322.4 9,365.2 3,460.8 1,654.9 256.7 2,140.0 1,726.0 126.9          Oct 
750.0 9,922.8 9,324.0 9,357.1 3,485.6 1,605.4 259.9 2,148.6 1,730.0 127.7          Nov 
769.9 9,985.6 9,437.9 9,492.5 3,556.5 1,590.9 262.2 2,189.1 1,767.0 126.9          Dec 
757.1 10,012.0 9,430.2 9,485.4 3,576.3 1,521.6 265.1 2,200.1 1,796.9 125.4 2010          Jan 
759.5 9,995.1 9,421.7 9,469.6 3,556.1 1,502.6 269.0 2,211.1 1,805.9 124.9          Feb 
768.6 9,983.1 9,412.5 9,466.0 3,558.2 1,485.8 268.3 2,213.8 1,814.7 125.1          Mar 
772.6 10,030.1 9,475.3 9,534.0 3,635.0 1,449.8 270.3 2,232.7 1,824.1 122.1          Apr 
779.0 10,089.2 9,480.6 9,551.6 3,660.4 1,442.0 270.3 2,235.5 1,823.1 120.4          May
785.5 10,217.2 9,594.3 9,651.2 3,695.5 1,426.0 269.0 2,318.6 1,822.6 119.5          June
793.9 10,209.2 9,625.3 9,684.9 3,683.4 1,438.2 270.5 2,342.7 1,832.8 117.4          July
788.0 10,207.2 9,631.4 9,699.4 3,657.4 1,457.2 272.6 2,350.3 1,845.7 116.1          Aug 
786.8 10,206.5 9,644.5 9,689.9 3,661.4 1,458.3 263.9 2,344.0 1,848.5 113.8          Sep 
789.0 10,308.3 9,671.7 9,717.5 3,666.6 1,476.6 273.7 2,336.0 1,852.2 112.4          Oct 
790.2 10,390.5 9,719.2 9,777.1 3,670.5 1,465.7 277.9 2,393.8 1,856.3 112.9          Nov 
808.6 10,371.2 9,808.2 9,871.6 3,723.4 1,472.2 272.6 2,413.2 1,877.7 112.5          Dec 
796.3 10,407.3 9,792.5 9,849.0 3,699.8 1,452.1 276.1 2,410.6 1,898.3 112.2 2011          Jan 
796.2 10,415.9 9,789.7 9,842.4 3,667.9 1,461.0 278.7 2,422.4 1,899.3 112.9          Feb 
798.3 10,428.5 9,838.3 9,887.6 3,681.8 1,456.3 287.2 2,445.1 1,904.2 113.1          Mar 
805.4 10,487.6 9,891.9 9,941.1 3,709.6 1,458.7 286.4 2,464.9 1,909.3 112.2          Apr 
810.4 10,475.3 9,889.6 9,935.5 3,688.9 1,457.2 298.0 2,468.9 1,910.6 111.9          May
819.7 10,549.9 9,911.8 9,949.1 3,726.4 1,429.4 300.0 2,472.7 1,908.7 111.9          June
828.2 10,523.3 9,913.3 9,956.0 3,708.8 1,444.9 306.8 2,472.3 1,911.2 112.0          July
823.4 10,482.1 9,930.6 9,969.5 3,689.9 1,460.6 312.9 2,477.6 1,916.6 111.9          Aug 
831.2 10,533.4 9,962.2 10,017.9 3,711.5 1,476.2 312.7 2,493.9 1,912.3 111.3          Sep 
 German contribution ( € billion) 
184.2 2,832.1 2,748.8 2,667.0 919.1 344.4 49.1 783.3 454.6 116.5 2009          Aug 
184.3 2,830.8 2,750.2 2,671.8 937.9 324.4 47.9 786.2 457.7 117.7          Sep 
185.0 2,834.4 2,752.2 2,676.5 966.4 295.8 47.6 784.8 461.8 120.1          Oct 
186.5 2,839.6 2,767.0 2,687.1 987.8 280.1 46.6 787.0 464.7 120.9          Nov 
190.8 2,828.4 2,763.3 2,688.5 975.3 283.8 46.9 788.0 474.6 119.8          Dec 
187.9 2,830.4 2,772.0 2,696.8 1,005.5 261.0 44.4 788.2 479.4 118.3 2010          Jan 
188.5 2,829.6 2,776.4 2,695.8 1,003.1 253.7 43.7 792.4 485.3 117.6          Feb 
191.4 2,816.4 2,765.5 2,687.3 992.2 254.0 42.8 793.5 487.1 117.7          Mar 
192.1 2,836.8 2,782.6 2,710.0 1,035.2 234.4 42.0 793.6 489.0 115.8          Apr 
193.2 2,841.8 2,783.5 2,706.9 1,043.4 229.2 40.8 788.5 490.9 114.0          May
195.5 2,842.8 2,787.0 2,702.1 1,041.7 229.2 39.0 787.9 491.6 112.7          June
197.2 2,841.1 2,785.3 2,706.3 1,047.6 227.6 37.8 787.4 495.2 110.6          July
195.8 2,857.9 2,794.5 2,710.2 1,050.3 226.9 37.5 789.7 496.9 108.8          Aug 
195.4 2,851.5 2,797.8 2,709.0 1,049.9 226.9 37.5 788.8 499.4 106.6          Sep 
195.5 2,873.7 2,798.5 2,717.1 1,055.7 229.3 37.9 786.8 502.1 105.2          Oct 
196.6 2,925.7 2,845.2 2,764.3 1,078.2 227.8 38.2 810.2 504.1 105.7          Nov 
200.4 2,926.8 2,855.0 2,772.1 1,069.6 235.1 38.1 811.1 512.4 105.7          Dec 
197.6 2,939.7 2,862.6 2,782.4 1,084.8 230.8 38.0 808.5 515.1 105.3 2011          Jan 
197.4 2,931.4 2,853.1 2,769.4 1,066.1 236.0 38.2 806.5 517.1 105.4          Feb 
198.0 2,928.9 2,858.5 2,771.7 1,066.6 238.1 38.7 804.8 517.9 105.6          Mar 
199.5 2,937.5 2,871.5 2,786.1 1,074.5 246.3 39.5 803.5 517.6 104.8          Apr 
200.9 2,951.3 2,881.4 2,787.4 1,071.8 252.3 40.0 803.2 515.4 104.7          May
203.5 2,960.1 2,884.6 2,787.0 1,078.0 247.9 39.6 803.5 513.6 104.5          June
205.5 2,966.7 2,893.1 2,798.5 1,078.4 259.7 40.1 803.3 512.4 104.5          July
204.5 2,989.1 2,916.1 2,816.9 1,090.2 260.9 41.9 808.3 511.0 104.4          Aug 
205.9 3,008.4 2,930.1 2,832.6 1,099.5 271.9 42.5 804.8 510.1 103.9          Sep 
the accounting regime chosen by the Eurosystem (see footnote 3 on item “Intra-Eurosystem liability/claim related to banknote issue“ (see “Other
banknote circulation in Table III.2). The volume of currency actually put into liability items“). — 5Excluding central governments’ deposits. — 6In
circulation by the Bundesbank can be calculated by adding to this total the Germany, only saving deposits. 
11*II Overall monetary survey in the euro area

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
E U R O S Y S T E M
Monthly Report
November 2011
II Overall monetary survey in the euro area
 
2 Consolidated balance sheet of monetary financial institutions (MFIs) (cont’d) *
 
 
 
Liabilities (cont’d)
Deposits of non-banks (non-MFIs) in the euro area (cont’d)  
 
General government Repo transactions Debt securities
with non-banks
Other general government in the euro area
With agreed At agreed
maturities of notice of  2 
Money
over of which market of which
Central 1 year and Enterprises fund denom-
End of govern- up to up to over up to over and shares inated
year/month ments Total Overnight 1 year 2 years 2 years 3 months 3 months Total households (net)  3 Total in euro
 Euro area ( € billion) 1
 
2009          Aug 274.6 262.2 148.2 72.3 5.1 25.7 3.8 7.1 310.8 308.8 759.9 2,798.6 2,197.2
         Sep 295.3 262.2 154.7 65.9 5.2 25.7 3.9 6.8 335.2 333.0 741.1 2,769.7 2,187.1
         Oct 317.6 258.7 151.6 65.1 5.2 26.0 4.2 6.6 309.4 307.2 735.5 2,756.8 2,176.7
         Nov 304.2 261.5 158.1 61.8 5.0 26.1 4.1 6.4 314.8 312.7 722.3 2,751.8 2,173.2
         Dec 249.6 243.5 143.9 58.8 4.8 25.9 4.0 6.2 327.5 324.8 647.5 2,752.9 2,167.6
2010          Jan 279.6 247.1 144.4 56.8 4.8 28.2 4.3 8.6 307.0 305.5 652.1 2,799.3 2,183.8
         Feb 275.9 249.5 146.5 56.8 4.7 28.4 4.7 8.4 323.0 321.4 643.9 2,793.9 2,162.4
         Mar 270.1 247.0 142.2 58.8 4.6 28.5 4.9 8.1 341.4 339.6 628.3 2,828.4 2,192.1
         Apr 250.3 245.8 141.0 58.6 4.5 28.6 5.1 7.9 362.4 360.4 634.4 2,842.2 2,192.7
         May 284.2 253.3 145.6 61.6 4.4 28.4 5.4 7.8 366.8 364.8 630.3 2,868.5 2,180.5
         June 304.5 261.4 149.9 64.7 3.9 30.0 5.5 7.6 405.9 404.4 605.7 2,855.2 2,169.6
         July 282.2 242.0 131.7 63.0 3.6 30.5 5.7 7.5 383.6 382.2 596.7 2,835.5 2,169.9
         Aug 262.1 245.7 131.4 67.0 3.3 30.8 5.9 7.4 386.4 385.1 608.1 2,848.1 2,161.5
         Sep 265.5 251.0 132.0 72.2 3.3 30.1 6.4 7.0 408.4 406.9 589.4 2,831.2 2,172.7
         Oct 343.7 247.0 133.2 66.9 3.4 30.3 6.5 6.8 385.0 383.5 574.3 2,830.8 2,173.0
         Nov 360.8 252.5 141.4 64.3 3.4 30.4 6.6 6.5 433.4 431.8 586.5 2,866.4 2,183.3
         Dec 264.2 235.4 125.1 64.0 3.4 30.1 6.5 6.3 428.1 426.1 552.4 2,858.3 2,182.6
2011          Jan 316.5 241.7 127.6 65.4 3.4 30.1 6.9 8.2 392.0 390.6 570.2 2,883.0 2,216.3
         Feb 330.0 243.5 126.4 67.8 3.4 30.6 7.4 8.0 431.6 430.0 575.6 2,899.7 2,230.9
         Mar 296.6 244.3 125.7 69.3 3.4 30.7 7.4 7.8 405.1 403.7 568.2 2,972.3 2,314.6
         Apr 304.4 242.2 123.8 69.1 3.6 30.7 7.5 7.5 427.7 426.3 570.2 2,977.8 2,321.9
         May 287.4 252.3 128.3 75.0 3.7 30.8 7.3 7.3 466.5 464.8 566.7 3,007.4 2,332.5
         June 339.0 261.8 134.6 78.2 3.8 30.8 7.3 7.1 455.0 453.4 548.1 3,022.6 2,340.3
         July 316.2 251.1 123.3 78.2 4.6 30.8 7.2 7.0 449.3 447.8 538.9 3,040.8 2,340.4
         Aug 256.6 256.0 124.8 82.4 4.6 30.2 7.3 6.8 494.9 492.8 557.1 3,028.4 2,330.1
         Sep 260.8 254.7 121.9 84.3 4.7 30.0 7.1 6.6 517.6 515.2 549.1 3,055.0 2,338.7
 German contribution ( € billion) 
2009          Aug 50.2 114.9 41.1 46.6 3.4 21.5 1.6 0.6 71.7 71.7 9.5 755.1 507.7
         Sep 47.9 111.2 42.4 41.7 3.4 21.5 1.6 0.7 83.7 83.7 9.6 734.0 498.1
         Oct 49.3 108.5 41.6 39.5 3.4 21.7 1.6 0.7 83.3 83.3 9.5 727.1 492.8
         Nov 41.6 110.9 44.1 39.3 3.3 21.7 1.7 0.7 81.0 81.0 9.3 713.6 483.0
         Dec 32.7 107.3 40.7 39.5 3.2 21.4 1.8 0.7 80.5 80.5 8.7 703.3 470.7
2010          Jan 26.6 107.0 40.3 37.4 3.1 23.7 1.7 0.7 68.2 68.2 9.4 712.0 466.2
         Feb 22.7 111.1 43.4 38.4 3.1 23.7 1.7 0.7 78.9 78.9 9.2 711.0 456.3
         Mar 21.2 107.9 39.6 39.1 3.0 23.7 1.8 0.7 79.8 79.8 8.6 714.4 458.2
         Apr 21.4 105.4 37.4 38.8 2.9 23.8 1.8 0.7 100.7 100.7 8.4 715.8 451.0
         May 23.0 112.0 42.2 40.6 2.8 23.7 2.0 0.7 101.4 101.4 8.8 733.9 451.9
         June 21.9 118.8 45.4 43.2 2.4 25.0 2.0 0.7 102.7 102.7 8.1 729.6 450.9
         July 23.5 111.3 38.4 42.9 2.1 25.1 2.0 0.7 92.2 92.2 8.6 709.2 437.0
         Aug 30.9 116.8 41.0 45.7 2.0 25.4 2.1 0.7 104.0 104.0 8.3 720.7 436.1
         Sep 22.4 120.1 41.2 48.9 2.1 25.1 2.2 0.6 95.9 95.9 8.1 710.8 437.1
         Oct 43.2 113.3 37.6 45.6 2.1 25.2 2.2 0.6 85.0 85.0 8.0 682.1 408.8
         Nov 46.5 114.9 41.9 43.0 2.1 25.2 2.2 0.6 109.0 109.0 8.3 716.8 433.9
         Dec 39.8 114.9 40.6 44.6 2.0 25.0 2.2 0.5 86.7 86.7 8.4 708.5 425.8
2011          Jan 45.2 112.1 39.6 42.7 1.9 25.0 2.3 0.5 74.5 74.5 8.4 703.2 426.8
         Feb 47.1 114.9 39.7 45.6 1.7 25.2 2.3 0.5 93.2 93.2 8.4 698.6 424.5
         Mar 38.9 118.3 42.0 46.6 1.8 25.2 2.3 0.5 78.9 78.9 8.5 686.0 426.2
         Apr 34.3 117.2 39.8 47.6 1.8 25.2 2.3 0.5 89.2 89.2 8.4 678.5 420.6
         May 37.7 126.3 44.2 52.1 1.9 25.2 2.3 0.5 105.2 105.2 8.0 681.7 417.9
         June 40.7 132.3 46.1 56.4 2.1 25.2 2.2 0.5 104.8 104.8 7.8 682.3 415.4
         July 39.5 128.7 41.3 57.0 2.8 25.1 2.1 0.5 91.8 91.8 5.3 684.4 410.9
         Aug 39.4 132.8 41.6 61.1 2.8 24.8 2.1 0.4 101.9 101.9 5.7 682.6 412.4
         Sep 42.9 132.9 41.1 61.8 3.0 24.7 2.0 0.4 107.0 107.0 5.8 687.0 406.8
*Monetary financial institutions (MFIs) comprise banks (including building 5Excluding liabilities arising from securities issued. — 6After deduction of
and loan associations), money market funds, and the European Central inter-MFI participations. — 7The German contributions to the Eurosystem’s
Bank and national central banks (the Eurosystem). — 1Source: ECB. — 2In monetary aggregates should on no account be interpreted as national
Germany, only savings deposits. — 3Excluding holdings of MFIs; for the monetary aggregates and are therefore not comparable with the erstwhile
German contribution, excluding German MFIs’ portfolios of securities issued German money stocks M1, M2 or M3. — 8including DM banknotes still in
by MFIs in the euro area. — 4In Germany, bank debt securities with circulation (see also footnote 4 on p 10*). — 9For the German contribution,
maturities of up to one year are classed as money market paper. — the difference between the volume of euro banknotes actually issued
12*II Overall monetary survey in the euro area

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2011
II Overall monetary survey in the euro area
 
 
 
 
 
 Memo item
 Other liability items Monetary aggregates  7 
 (From 2002, German contribution
issued (net)  3 excludes currency in circulation)
With maturities of
of which Monetary
Intra- liabilities
Eurosystem- of central
liability/ govern-
over Liabilities Excess claim Monetary ments
1 year and to non- Capital of related to capital (Post
up to up to over euro-area and inter-MFI banknote forma- Office, End of
1 year  4 2 years 2 years residents  5 reserves  6 liabilities Total  8 issue  9 M1 10 M2 11 M3 12 tion 13 year/month Treasury)  14 
Euro area ( € billion) 1
 
12.1 144.3 2,642.3 4,309.1 1,715.7 − 74.9 3,527.6 − 4,317.6 8,153.0 9,379.3 6,638.5 109.6 2009          Aug 
7.0 141.1 2,621.6 4,235.7 1,739.0 − 74.9 3,513.4 − 4,379.3 8,153.6 9,377.5 6,656.8 108.7          Sep 
− 1.6 140.3 2,618.1 4,227.7 1,747.2 − 96.6 3,481.8 − 4,434.6 8,178.4 9,361.4 6,664.8 108.6          Oct 
− 2.4 136.5 2,617.7 4,213.9 1,787.5 − 65.8 3,610.1 − 4,472.3 8,170.0 9,340.4 6,714.0 110.2          Nov 
3.6 129.1 2,620.2 4,238.8 1,801.0 − 33.9 3,358.9 − 4,556.2 8,275.1 9,381.5 6,769.1 117.2          Dec 
2.5 128.9 2,668.0 4,359.1 1,798.5 − 34.8 3,420.0 − 4,554.1 8,234.9 9,325.5 6,828.9 107.8 2010          Jan 
1.1 123.8 2,669.1 4,422.9 1,819.0 − 15.9 3,509.4 − 4,538.9 8,213.6 9,305.4 6,860.9 107.8          Feb 
11.7 122.3 2,694.3 4,425.3 1,831.1 − 53.8 3,540.6 − 4,544.3 8,212.2 9,315.9 6,901.0 106.1          Mar 
15.6 118.8 2,707.7 4,551.2 1,845.1 − 72.6 3,653.3 − 4,625.9 8,269.0 9,399.9 6,944.2 107.8          Apr 
22.2 106.9 2,739.4 4,705.0 1,890.5 − 56.5 3,958.3 − 4,663.8 8,301.2 9,427.1 7,022.0 109.4          May
22.5 100.7 2,732.1 4,603.3 1,974.3 − 10.9 3,789.7 − 4,711.1 8,332.9 9,467.3 7,182.1 110.4          June
27.7 99.2 2,708.6 4,488.4 1,934.9 − 26.6 3,708.7 − 4,693.8 8,337.5 9,444.4 7,141.6 114.8          July
27.1 99.4 2,721.6 4,636.6 1,977.8 3.1 4,122.2 − 4,660.8 8,342.2 9,463.0 7,203.9 113.7          Aug 
32.4 96.1 2,702.8 4,440.7 1,955.7 2.6 3,950.5 − 4,662.7 8,344.7 9,470.9 7,153.4 111.9          Sep 
25.4 97.3 2,708.1 4,457.7 1,967.3 17.5 3,809.2 − 4,669.3 8,377.9 9,459.7 7,160.9 109.8          Oct 
23.1 96.5 2,746.8 4,585.2 2,004.2 18.5 3,775.5 − 4,685.0 8,387.7 9,527.1 7,294.6 111.4          Nov 
29.7 91.6 2,737.0 4,374.1 2,022.2 46.0 4,351.1 − 4,747.0 8,471.3 9,572.9 7,321.4 117.9          Dec 
33.8 93.7 2,755.5 4,388.1 2,003.0 36.1 4,208.4 − 4,705.0 8,434.8 9,524.1 7,319.7 109.0 2011          Jan 
37.6 88.3 2,773.9 4,386.0 2,033.4 43.5 4,146.7 − 4,670.4 8,415.1 9,547.7 7,381.2 106.8          Feb 
68.4 85.5 2,818.4 4,173.8 2,038.3 53.0 3,871.1 − 4,685.7 8,440.0 9,566.7 7,453.4 106.3          Mar 
70.9 86.9 2,819.9 4,215.5 2,042.6 16.4 3,910.6 − 4,719.8 8,480.7 9,636.2 7,477.9 107.4          Apr 
74.3 84.0 2,849.1 4,350.2 2,070.4 − 6.2 4,051.4 − 4,708.0 8,486.0 9,677.1 7,538.5 106.7          May
92.2 79.6 2,850.8 4,131.0 2,085.1 2.2 3,858.5 − 4,761.9 8,515.4 9,690.0 7,558.4 107.4          June
92.0 82.3 2,866.4 4,144.4 2,150.4 − 5.4 4,173.7 − 4,742.6 8,521.4 9,683.6 7,639.0 108.3          July
95.1 77.1 2,856.2 4,157.3 2,204.7 2.0 4,675.0 − 4,719.5 8,530.0 9,754.0 7,687.3 107.4          Aug 
104.9 77.9 2,872.3 4,211.8 2,183.7 − 3.0 5,187.1 − 4,745.3 8,568.5 9,817.8 7,697.8 106.6          Sep 
 German contribution ( € billion) 
24.7 24.9 705.6 718.3 408.3 − 407.6 762.6 143.4 960.2 1,859.9 1,990.7 2,035.8 − 2009          Aug 
26.3 23.2 684.5 690.3 409.6 − 396.2 769.8 144.9 980.3 1,856.9 1,999.7 2,020.1 −          Sep 
23.7 21.9 681.5 678.5 411.0 − 388.6 773.6 146.5 1,008.0 1,857.8 1,996.2 2,019.8 −          Oct 
21.5 22.4 669.7 674.6 424.7 − 384.9 773.7 146.8 1,031.9 1,867.7 2,001.8 2,024.8 −          Nov 
23.1 17.0 663.2 663.8 423.6 − 390.1 766.7 146.8 1,015.9 1,865.7 1,994.9 2,016.8 −          Dec 
25.4 17.2 669.3 693.8 419.4 − 364.7 755.0 147.6 1,045.8 1,872.9 1,993.1 2,019.7 − 2010          Jan 
27.4 16.7 666.9 703.0 424.6 − 394.6 737.4 149.6 1,046.5 1,872.4 2,004.6 2,026.0 −          Feb 
27.3 15.3 671.8 721.0 424.3 − 419.9 761.1 150.2 1,031.8 1,859.6 1,990.6 2,031.8 −          Mar 
27.5 14.7 673.7 777.7 429.9 − 411.7 753.1 151.1 1,072.5 1,881.6 2,032.7 2,037.4 −          Apr 
26.7 15.3 692.0 847.8 431.1 − 469.8 764.6 151.7 1,085.6 1,891.9 2,044.0 2,050.0 −          May
23.5 13.1 693.0 807.3 431.2 − 475.4 790.2 150.9 1,087.1 1,894.5 2,041.9 2,050.6 −          June
25.4 14.7 669.1 784.5 426.1 − 483.3 765.7 151.2 1,086.0 1,893.7 2,034.6 2,019.1 −          July
33.6 13.9 673.3 797.3 433.5 − 496.8 776.1 153.2 1,091.3 1,902.4 2,062.0 2,031.3 −          Aug 
35.2 14.8 660.8 757.5 430.4 − 517.7 770.9 155.8 1,091.1 1,908.0 2,061.9 2,012.4 −          Sep 
13.0 15.2 653.9 745.2 440.6 − 414.3 771.5 156.7 1,093.3 1,912.7 2,033.8 2,012.2 −          Oct 
28.0 18.4 670.4 772.9 451.7 − 439.4 766.9 156.6 1,120.1 1,937.4 2,101.1 2,063.8 −          Nov 
27.4 15.4 665.7 736.5 450.9 − 456.6 1,660.7 157.1 1,110.2 1,944.6 2,082.5 2,058.9 −          Dec 
24.2 15.5 663.5 727.0 447.6 − 421.8 1,554.6 157.8 1,124.4 1,955.2 2,077.8 2,050.4 − 2011          Jan 
26.1 11.8 660.6 732.7 455.8 − 446.9 1,513.6 158.9 1,105.8 1,946.8 2,086.4 2,054.0 −          Feb 
23.7 12.9 649.4 672.7 455.5 − 438.1 1,442.9 159.5 1,108.6 1,954.0 2,078.0 2,040.9 −          Mar 
19.8 13.6 645.1 694.9 457.3 − 413.4 1,448.8 160.1 1,114.2 1,969.4 2,100.4 2,036.3 −          Apr 
19.3 14.0 648.4 698.7 456.2 − 455.5 1,498.4 161.6 1,116.0 1,980.1 2,126.5 2,038.2 −          May
18.7 14.3 649.2 638.7 455.5 − 480.5 1,424.7 163.1 1,124.1 1,985.8 2,131.5 2,038.3 −          June
22.2 14.0 648.2 647.7 467.3 − 484.9 1,550.9 164.9 1,119.7 1,993.8 2,127.1 2,048.9 −          July
25.2 13.6 643.8 699.8 483.8 − 542.9 1,720.9 167.5 1,131.9 2,011.7 2,158.1 2,065.6 −          Aug 
21.8 11.9 653.3 738.8 476.2 − 600.1 1,871.4 170.7 1,140.5 2,031.7 2,178.3 2,063.3 −          Sep 
by the Bundesbank and the amount disclosed in accordance with the (excluding central governments’ deposits) and (for the euro area) central
accounting regime chosen by the Eurosystem (see also footnote 3 on governments’ monetary liabilities with such maturities. — 12M2 plus repo
banknote circulation in Table III.2). — 10Overnight deposits (excluding transactions, money market fund shares, money market paper and debt
central governments’ deposits), and (for the euro area) currency in securities up to 2 years. — 13Deposits with agreed maturities of over 2
circulation, central governments’ overnight monetary liabilities, which are years and at agreed notice of over 3 months, debt securities with maturities
not included in the consolidated balance sheet. — 11M1 plus deposits with of over 2 years, capital and reserves. — 14 Non-existent in Germany. 
agreed maturities of up to 2 years and at agreed notice of up to 3 months
13*II Overall monetary survey in the euro area

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
E U R O S Y S T E M
Monthly Report
November 2011
II  Overall monetary survey in the euro area
  
 3  Banking system’s liquidity position  * 
Stocks
  
€ billion; period averages of daily positions
Liquidity-providing factors Liquidity-absorbing factors
Monetary policy operations of the Eurosystem
Credit
institutions‘
current
account
Net assets Longer- Other Other balances
Reserve in gold Main term Marginal liquidity- liquidity- Banknotes Central Other (including
maintenance and foreign refinancing refinancing lending providing Deposit absorbing in government factors minimum Base
period currency operations operations facility facility deposits (net)  6 reserves)  7 money  8 operations  3 operations  4 circulation  5 
ending in  1 
Eurosystem  2  
  
2009          Apr 508.0 230.5 443.1 1.1 − 57.8 3.7 747.3 139.0 13.3 221.6 1 026.6
         May 512.4 239.7 426.9 0.7 − 42.7 3.1 757.5 141.9 13.7 220.8 1 021.0
         June 487.9 238.8 400.6 0.7 − 22.3 2.1 759.8 141.7 − 15.8 217.9 1 000.0
         July 457.1 221.4 504.9 1.3 − 119.7 9.9 763.1 137.9 − 65.1 219.2 1 102.0
         Aug 433.6 94.1 694.0 0.3 2.8 185.1 22.1 770.8 133.9 − 103.9 216.9 1 172.8
         Sep 427.6 74.8 645.4 0.3 8.4 136.7 18.5 769.1 125.7 − 110.4 216.9 1 122.7
         Oct 421.4 79.1 616.9 0.3 14.3 109.6 12.9 768.8 139.0 − 113.1 214.7 1 093.1
         Nov 413.0 52.3 626.1 0.3 20.1 86.5 12.0 770.7 148.7 − 118.9 212.8 1 070.0
         Dec 407.6 55.8 593.4 0.7 24.6 65.7 9.9 775.2 150.1 − 130.2 211.4 1 052.3
2010          Jan 413.0 60.6 648.4 0.4 28.4 147.0 8.1 796.8 119.8 − 132.1 211.2 1 155.0
         Feb 425.6 59.7 662.2 0.2 33.5 168.3 13.3 783.6 122.6 − 117.5 210.9 1 162.8
         Mar 426.9 80.5 641.1 0.9 38.0 186.4 10.5 784.6 113.2 − 119.3 211.8 1 182.9
         Apr 439.8 77.7 650.5 0.4 43.6 200.7 8.4 792.9 113.6 − 116.1 212.5 1 206.1
         May 457.0 76.7 666.4 0.9 49.4 218.2 11.4 796.6 112.1 − 100.3 212.4 1 227.2
         June 462.4 110.0 706.7 0.3 86.9 288.8 34.1 806.2 123.1 − 98.4 212.5 1 307.5
         July 500.9 167.5 573.2 0.3 140.2 230.4 54.4 813.0 126.5 − 56.5 214.4 1 257.8
         Aug 543.4 185.4 432.2 0.1 121.4 96.7 67.5 819.3 95.2 − 11.8 215.7 1 131.7
         Sep 543.2 153.1 435.0 0.6 121.8 83.7 66.9 816.0 86.8 − 15.0 215.3 1 115.0
         Oct 531.3 164.5 392.6 0.7 128.3 68.8 64.8 814.1 96.4 − 39.8 213.1 1 096.1
         Nov 511.3 183.0 340.0 0.8 124.5 41.9 68.8 813.5 92.1 − 72.0 215.2 1 070.7
         Dec 511.1 179.5 336.3 1.9 130.4 44.7 70.8 815.9 94.4 − 79.1 212.5 1 073.1
2011          Jan 527.5 197.0 316.6 0.5 140.9 66.5 73.5 833.9 81.3 − 85.1 212.4 1 112.8
         Feb 549.7 185.4 318.2 0.1 137.2 39.2 81.3 822.0 101.2 − 66.7 213.6 1 074.8
         Mar 550.0 134.4 321.0 7.6 137.9 26.9 80.3 820.9 89.8 − 79.9 212.9 1 060.7
         Apr 544.1 97.3 335.4 0.8 137.6 23.0 79.5 824.4 73.1 − 95.2 210.5 1 057.9
         May 525.9 109.2 320.5 0.4 136.6 22.8 76.8 833.9 61.3 − 111.6 209.5 1 066.1
         June 526.8 114.7 317.9 0.0 135.5 18.4 76.2 836.6 62.6 − 107.9 209.0 1 064.0
         July 533.6 146.0 311.6 0.2 134.2 29.5 76.9 846.2 73.4 − 111.2 210.9 1 086.6
         Aug 541.3 171.7 321.5 0.1 133.9 56.7 79.2 854.2 71.4 − 104.5 211.5 1 122.4
         Sep 540.3 135.1 389.8 0.3 178.0 121.8 109.8 853.2 52.3 − 103.0 209.5 1 184.5
         Oct 571.0 193.0 373.6 1.5 217.4 168.7 162.9 854.9 50.0 − 88.5 208.7 1 232.2
Deutsche Bundesbank
2009          Apr 142.9 74.7 122.8 0.7 − 38.9 1.6 186.3 14.6 46.2 53.4 278.7
         May 150.7 87.5 111.9 0.1 − 24.1 1.3 189.1 26.2 56.3 53.3 266.5
         June 145.7 95.0 103.4 0.7 − 15.4 0.6 189.3 32.3 54.3 52.8 257.4
         July 138.0 81.0 141.5 0.6 − 49.4 4.5 190.2 23.5 40.4 53.2 292.8
         Aug 128.6 47.6 189.1 0.1 0.8 70.1 4.9 192.0 23.5 23.6 52.2 314.2
         Sep 126.0 40.6 178.0 0.1 2.9 51.8 4.3 192.3 23.6 23.4 52.2 296.4
         Oct 124.2 37.3 175.9 0.2 4.9 49.4 3.0 192.5 23.7 22.4 51.5 293.3
         Nov 120.7 34.6 178.8 0.2 6.2 34.2 4.3 192.5 23.6 34.8 51.0 277.7
         Dec 116.3 33.7 171.1 0.6 7.2 25.7 2.7 193.3 18.8 37.8 50.5 269.5
2010          Jan 112.1 42.8 168.9 0.1 7.9 44.8 2.3 198.4 10.7 25.3 50.3 293.5
         Feb 112.3 42.2 168.6 0.1 8.9 50.3 5.2 195.6 5.4 25.4 50.2 296.1
         Mar 112.6 51.8 157.9 0.8 10.0 67.8 5.0 196.5 2.1 11.8 50.0 314.3
         Apr 116.2 40.9 164.9 0.2 11.5 69.8 3.4 198.0 0.3 11.9 50.3 318.2
         May 121.1 40.5 164.7 0.1 12.8 74.9 4.2 199.0 0.7 10.2 50.2 324.1
         June 122.2 43.0 166.4 0.0 22.1 113.1 17.1 201.5 0.8 − 29.2 50.5 365.0
         July 133.9 55.2 112.8 0.1 32.7 81.0 22.3 202.5 0.4 − 22.7 51.2 334.7
         Aug 145.8 61.7 52.8 0.1 28.4 32.7 20.7 204.2 0.5 − 21.6 52.3 289.2
         Sep 145.5 52.6 50.3 0.2 28.4 24.8 26.5 204.2 0.5 − 30.9 52.0 280.9
         Oct 142.2 54.4 40.5 0.1 29.3 27.0 32.4 204.0 0.5 − 48.3 51.0 281.9
         Nov 136.7 63.7 28.9 0.0 28.8 21.2 35.7 202.9 0.4 − 53.6 51.5 275.5
         Dec 136.5 60.5 32.5 0.1 29.3 21.2 41.0 203.3 0.2 − 57.7 51.0 275.5
2011          Jan 141.9 55.2 34.1 0.1 31.2 28.2 42.0 207.7 0.3 − 66.9 51.3 287.2
         Feb 148.1 44.6 44.0 0.0 31.6 19.8 43.0 204.6 0.2 − 51.0 51.8 276.2
         Mar 148.4 31.3 44.7 0.0 31.7 14.6 48.4 204.8 0.2 − 63.7 51.8 271.2
         Apr 146.6 24.1 45.5 0.0 31.9 13.6 38.9 205.2 0.2 − 61.5 51.7 270.4
         May 142.4 17.9 47.7 0.2 31.9 10.8 38.2 207.6 0.4 − 68.2 51.4 269.8
         June 142.5 10.6 41.5 0.0 31.7 8.1 33.4 208.7 0.3 − 75.8 51.7 268.4
         July 144.3 22.8 35.8 0.0 31.4 11.1 36.4 211.1 0.3 − 77.3 52.6 274.8
         Aug 146.7 13.6 36.5 0.0 31.3 15.4 35.2 213.0 0.2 − 88.4 52.7 281.1
         Sep 146.7 6.6 33.6 0.0 42.3 27.8 60.2 213.4 0.3 − 124.3 51.8 293.0
         Oct 155.5 10.7 20.8 0.0 52.3 41.5 86.8 213.5 0.3 − 155.0 52.2 307.2
Discrepancies may arise from rounding. — *The banking system’s liquidity programme and the Eurosystem’s securities markets programme. — 4From
position is defined as the current account holdings in euro of euro-area Aug. 2009, includes liquidity absorbed as a result of the Eurosystem’s
credit institutions with the Eurosystem. Amounts are derived from the conso- foreign exchange swap operations. — 5From 2002, euro banknotes and oth-
lidated financial statement of the Eurosystem and the financial statement er banknotes which have been issued by the national central banks of the
of the Bundesbank. — 1Figures are daily averages for the reserve mainte- Eurosystem and which are still in circulation. In accordance with the ac-
nance period ending in the month indicated. — 2Source: ECB. — 3Includes counting procedure chosen by the Eurosystem for the issue of euro bank-
liquidity provided under the Eurosystem’s covered bond purchase notes, 8% of the total value of the euro banknotes in circulation are alloca-
14*II  Overall monetary survey in the euro area

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2011
II  Overall monetary survey in the euro area
  
  
Flows
  
Liquidity-providing factors Liquidity-absorbing factors
Monetary policy operations of the Eurosystem
Credit
institutions‘
current
account
Net assets Longer- Other Other balances
in gold Main term Marginal liquidity- liquidity- Banknotes Central Other (including Reserve
and foreign refinancing refinancing lending providing Deposit absorbing in government factors minimum Base maintenance
currency operations operations facility facility deposits (net)  6 reserves)  7 money  8 period operations  3 operations  4 circulation  5 
ending in  1 
Eurosystem  2  
  
− 4.7 + 6.2 − 29.3 − 0.5 − − 37.7 − 0.3 + 5.8 + 28.9 − 28.1 + 3.0 − 28.9 2009          Apr 
+ 4.4 + 9.2 − 16.2 − 0.4 − − 15.1 − 0.6 + 10.2 + 2.9 + 0.4 − 0.8 − 5.6          May
− 24.5 − 0.9 − 26.3 − 0.0 − − 20.4 − 1.0 + 2.3 − 0.2 − 29.5 − 2.9 − 21.0          June
− 30.8 − 17.4 + 104.3 + 0.6 − + 97.4 + 7.8 + 3.3 − 3.8 − 49.3 + 1.3 + 102.0          July
− 23.5 − 127.3 + 189.1 − 1.0 + 2.8 + 65.4 + 12.2 + 7.7 − 4.0 − 38.8 − 2.3 + 70.8          Aug 
− 6.0 − 19.3 − 48.6 − 0.0 + 5.6 − 48.4 − 3.6 − 1.7 − 8.2 − 6.5 − 0.0 − 50.1          Sep 
− 6.2 + 4.3 − 28.5 + 0.0 + 5.9 − 27.1 − 5.6 − 0.3 + 13.3 − 2.7 − 2.2 − 29.6          Oct 
− 8.4 − 26.8 + 9.2 − 0.0 + 5.8 − 23.1 − 0.9 + 1.9 + 9.7 − 5.8 − 1.9 − 23.1          Nov 
− 5.4 + 3.5 − 32.7 + 0.4 + 4.5 − 20.8 − 2.1 + 4.5 + 1.4 − 11.3 − 1.4 − 17.7          Dec 
+ 5.4 + 4.8 + 55.0 − 0.3 + 3.8 + 81.3 − 1.8 + 21.6 − 30.3 − 1.9 − 0.2 + 102.7 2010          Jan 
+ 12.6 − 0.9 + 13.8 − 0.2 + 5.1 + 21.3 + 5.2 − 13.2 + 2.8 + 14.6 − 0.3 + 7.8          Feb 
+ 1.3 + 20.8 − 21.1 + 0.7 + 4.5 + 18.1 − 2.8 + 1.0 − 9.4 − 1.8 + 0.9 + 20.1          Mar 
+ 12.9 − 2.8 + 9.4 − 0.5 + 5.6 + 14.3 − 2.1 + 8.3 + 0.4 + 3.2 + 0.7 + 23.2          Apr 
+ 17.2 − 1.0 + 15.9 + 0.5 + 5.8 + 17.5 + 3.0 + 3.7 − 1.5 + 15.8 − 0.1 + 21.1          May
+ 5.4 + 33.3 + 40.3 − 0.6 + 37.5 + 70.6 + 22.7 + 9.6 + 11.0 + 1.9 + 0.1 + 80.3          June
+ 38.5 + 57.5 − 133.5 − 0.0 + 53.3 − 58.4 + 20.3 + 6.8 + 3.4 + 41.9 + 1.9 − 49.7          July
+ 42.5 + 17.9 − 141.0 − 0.2 − 18.8 −133.7 + 13.1 + 6.3 − 31.3 + 44.7 + 1.3 − 126.1          Aug 
− 0.2 − 32.3 + 2.8 + 0.5 + 0.4 − 13.0 − 0.6 − 3.3 − 8.4 − 3.2 − 0.4 − 16.7          Sep 
− 11.9 + 11.4 − 42.4 + 0.1 + 6.5 − 14.9 − 2.1 − 1.9 + 9.6 − 24.8 − 2.2 − 18.9          Oct 
− 20.0 + 18.5 − 52.6 + 0.1 − 3.8 − 26.9 + 4.0 − 0.6 − 4.3 − 32.2 + 2.1 − 25.4          Nov 
− 0.2 − 3.5 − 3.7 + 1.1 + 5.9 + 2.8 + 2.0 + 2.4 + 2.3 − 7.1 − 2.7 + 2.4          Dec 
+ 16.4 + 17.5 − 19.7 − 1.4 + 10.5 + 21.8 + 2.7 + 18.0 − 13.1 − 6.0 − 0.1 + 39.7 2011          Jan 
+ 22.2 − 11.6 + 1.6 − 0.4 − 3.7 − 27.3 + 7.8 − 11.9 + 19.9 + 18.4 + 1.2 − 38.0          Feb 
+ 0.3 − 51.0 + 2.8 + 7.5 + 0.7 − 12.3 − 1.0 − 1.1 − 11.4 − 13.2 − 0.7 − 14.1          Mar 
− 5.9 − 37.1 + 14.4 − 6.8 − 0.3 − 3.9 − 0.8 + 3.5 − 16.7 − 15.3 − 2.4 − 2.8          Apr 
− 18.2 + 11.9 − 14.9 − 0.4 − 1.0 − 0.2 − 2.7 + 9.5 − 11.8 − 16.4 − 1.0 + 8.2          May
+ 0.9 + 5.5 − 2.6 − 0.4 − 1.1 − 4.4 − 0.6 + 2.7 + 1.3 + 3.7 − 0.5 − 2.1          June
+ 6.8 + 31.3 − 6.3 + 0.2 − 1.3 + 11.1 + 0.7 + 9.6 + 10.8 − 3.3 + 1.9 + 22.6          July
+ 7.7 + 25.7 + 9.9 − 0.1 − 0.3 + 27.2 + 2.3 + 8.0 − 2.0 + 6.7 + 0.6 + 35.8          Aug 
− 1.0 − 36.6 + 68.3 + 0.2 + 44.1 + 65.1 + 30.6 − 1.0 − 19.1 + 1.5 − 2.0 + 62.1          Sep 
+ 30.7 + 57.9 − 16.2 + 1.2 + 39.4 + 46.9 + 53.1 + 1.7 − 2.3 + 14.5 − 0.8 + 47.7          Oct 
Deutsche Bundesbank
+ 7.6 + 1.8 − 25.1 − 0.5 − − 12.9 − 0.1 + 1.0 + 5.0 − 9.5 + 0.5 − 11.4 2009          Apr 
+ 7.8 + 12.8 − 10.9 − 0.6 − − 14.8 − 0.3 + 2.7 + 11.6 + 10.1 − 0.2 − 12.2          May
− 5.0 + 7.5 − 8.5 + 0.5 − − 8.7 − 0.6 + 0.2 + 6.2 − 2.0 − 0.5 − 9.1          June
− 7.7 − 13.9 + 38.1 − 0.0 − + 34.1 + 3.8 + 0.9 − 8.9 − 13.9 + 0.4 + 35.4          July
− 9.3 − 33.5 + 47.6 − 0.5 + 0.8 + 20.6 + 0.4 + 1.8 + 0.0 − 16.8 − 1.0 + 21.5          Aug 
− 2.6 − 7.0 − 11.1 + 0.0 + 2.1 − 18.2 − 0.6 + 0.3 + 0.1 − 0.2 + 0.1 − 17.9          Sep 
− 1.8 − 3.3 − 2.1 + 0.0 + 2.0 − 2.5 − 1.2 + 0.2 + 0.1 − 1.0 − 0.8 − 3.1          Oct 
− 3.5 − 2.7 + 3.0 − 0.0 + 1.3 − 15.2 + 1.2 + 0.1 − 0.1 + 12.5 − 0.4 − 15.6          Nov 
− 4.4 − 0.9 − 7.7 + 0.4 + 1.0 − 8.5 − 1.6 + 0.7 − 4.8 + 3.0 − 0.5 − 8.2          Dec 
− 4.2 + 9.1 − 2.2 − 0.5 + 0.7 + 19.1 − 0.4 + 5.1 − 8.1 − 12.6 − 0.2 + 24.0 2010          Jan 
+ 0.2 − 0.6 − 0.3 + 0.0 + 1.0 + 5.5 + 3.0 − 2.8 − 5.2 + 0.1 − 0.1 + 2.6          Feb 
+ 0.3 + 9.6 − 10.6 + 0.7 + 1.1 + 17.4 − 0.3 + 0.9 − 3.3 − 13.6 − 0.1 + 18.2          Mar 
+ 3.6 − 10.8 + 7.0 − 0.7 + 1.5 + 2.0 − 1.6 + 1.6 − 1.8 + 0.1 + 0.3 + 3.9          Apr 
+ 4.9 − 0.4 − 0.2 − 0.1 + 1.3 + 5.0 + 0.8 + 1.0 + 0.5 − 1.7 − 0.1 + 5.9          May
+ 1.1 + 2.5 + 1.7 − 0.0 + 9.3 + 38.2 + 12.9 + 2.5 + 0.1 − 39.4 + 0.3 + 40.9          June
+ 11.7 + 12.2 − 53.6 + 0.0 + 10.7 − 32.1 + 5.1 + 1.0 − 0.4 + 6.5 + 0.8 − 30.3          July
+ 11.9 + 6.6 − 60.0 + 0.0 − 4.3 − 48.3 − 1.5 + 1.7 + 0.1 + 1.1 + 1.0 − 45.6          Aug 
− 0.3 − 9.1 − 2.5 + 0.1 + 0.0 − 7.9 + 5.8 + 0.0 − 0.1 − 9.3 − 0.3 − 8.3          Sep 
− 3.3 + 1.8 − 9.8 − 0.1 + 0.9 + 2.2 + 5.9 − 0.2 − 0.0 − 17.4 − 1.0 + 1.0          Oct 
− 5.6 + 9.3 − 11.6 − 0.1 − 0.5 − 5.8 + 3.3 − 1.1 − 0.1 − 5.3 + 0.5 − 6.4          Nov 
− 0.2 − 3.1 + 3.6 + 0.1 + 0.6 + 0.0 + 5.3 + 0.5 − 0.2 − 4.1 − 0.5 − 0.0          Dec 
+ 5.5 − 5.4 + 1.5 − 0.0 + 1.9 + 7.0 + 1.1 + 4.3 + 0.0 − 9.2 + 0.4 + 11.6 2011          Jan 
+ 6.2 − 10.6 + 9.9 − 0.1 + 0.3 − 8.4 + 0.9 − 3.1 − 0.0 + 15.9 + 0.5 − 11.0          Feb 
+ 0.3 − 13.3 + 0.7 − 0.0 + 0.2 − 5.2 + 5.5 + 0.3 − 0.0 − 12.7 − 0.1 − 5.0          Mar 
− 1.8 − 7.2 + 0.9 + 0.0 + 0.1 − 1.0 − 9.5 + 0.3 + 0.0 + 2.2 − 0.0 − 0.7          Apr 
− 4.2 − 6.2 + 2.2 + 0.2 + 0.0 − 2.8 − 0.7 + 2.4 + 0.1 − 6.7 − 0.3 − 0.7          May
+ 0.2 − 7.3 − 6.3 − 0.2 − 0.2 − 2.7 − 4.7 + 1.1 − 0.1 − 7.6 + 0.2 − 1.4          June
+ 1.7 + 12.2 − 5.7 + 0.0 − 0.3 + 3.0 + 3.0 + 2.4 + 0.0 − 1.5 + 0.9 + 6.4          July
+ 2.4 − 9.2 + 0.7 − 0.0 − 0.0 + 4.3 − 1.2 + 1.9 − 0.1 − 11.1 + 0.1 + 6.3          Aug 
+ 0.0 − 6.9 − 2.9 + 0.0 + 11.0 + 12.4 + 25.0 + 0.4 + 0.1 − 35.9 − 0.9 + 12.0          Sep 
+ 8.8 + 4.1 − 12.8 + 0.0 + 9.9 + 13.7 + 26.6 + 0.1 − 0.0 − 30.7 + 0.3 + 14.2          Oct 
ted on a monthly basis to the ECB. The counterpart of this adjustment is has put into circulation is likewise shown under “Other factors”. From 2003
shown under “Other factors”. The remaining 92% of the value of the euro euro banknotes only. — 6Remaining items in the consolidated financial
banknotes in circulation is allocated, likewise on a monthly basis, to the statement of the Eurosystem and the financial statement of the
NCBs, with each NCB showing in its balance sheet the percentage of the Bundesbank. — 7Equal to the difference between the sum of liquidity-pro-
euro banknotes in circulation that corresponds to its paid-up share in the viding factors and the sum of liquidity-absorbing factors. — 8Calculated as
ECB’s capital. The difference between the value of the euro banknotes the sum of the “deposit facility”, “banknotes in circulation” and “credit
allocated to an NCB and the value of the euro banknotes which that NCB institutions’ current account holdings”. 
15*II  Overall monetary survey in the euro area

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
E U R O S Y S T E M
Monthly Report
November 2011
III Consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem
 
1 Assets *
 
 
€ billion
Claims on non-euro area Claims on non-euro area residents denominated
in foreign currency residents denominated in euro
Balances with
Claims on banks, security
On investments, euro area Balances Claims
reporting external loans residents with banks, arising from
date/ Gold and other denominated security the credit
End of Total and gold Receivables external in foreign investments facility under
month  1 assets receivables Total from the IMF assets currency Total and loans ERM II
 Eurosystem 2
 
2011 Mar                  4 1,939.2 367.4 230.7 75.4 155.3 26.4 22.0 22.0 −
                              11 1,953.0 367.4 232.2 75.5 156.7 26.0 18.8 18.8 −
                              18 1,940.4 367.4 233.8 76.9 156.9 25.6 20.5 20.5 −
                              25 1,928.1 367.4 232.9 76.5 156.4 25.6 20.4 20.4 −
         Apr                  1 3 1,888.5 3 350.7 3 221.9 3 74.1 3 147.8 3 23.9 20.9 20.9 −
                                8 1,873.1 350.7 219.6 74.2 145.4 24.2 23.1 23.1 −
                              15 1,885.0 350.7 219.3 74.2 145.0 23.6 24.9 24.9 −
                              22 1,887.9 350.7 218.1 74.2 143.8 23.5 23.2 23.2 −
                              29 1,894.1 350.7 216.8 74.2 142.6 23.3 22.4 22.4 −
         May                  6 1,901.9 350.7 218.1 74.1 144.0 23.4 21.1 21.1 −
                              13 1,898.7 350.7 217.5 74.1 143.3 23.6 19.8 19.8 −
                              20 1,895.9 350.7 218.7 74.8 143.9 23.8 18.8 18.8 −
                              27 1,900.6 350.7 219.4 74.9 144.5 22.9 19.4 19.4 −
         June                  3 1,899.0 350.7 219.4 74.9 144.5 23.2 19.0 19.0 −
                              10 1,892.6 350.7 219.6 74.9 144.7 23.3 21.3 21.3 −
                              17 1,914.5 350.7 219.1 74.9 144.2 23.7 20.1 20.1 −
                              24 1,972.2 350.7 217.7 74.9 142.8 23.7 20.7 20.7 −
2011 July                  1 3 1,944.6 3 363.3 3 216.0 3 74.3 141.7 23.3 20.5 20.5 −
                                8 1,919.5 363.3 216.3 74.3 142.0 23.8 19.1 19.1 −
                              15 1,957.2 363.3 217.4 75.6 141.8 23.2 20.0 20.0 −
                              22 2,006.1 363.3 218.1 75.9 142.2 24.6 20.3 20.3 −
                              29 2,000.5 363.3 217.7 75.9 141.8 23.9 21.8 21.8 −
         Aug                  5 2,004.3 363.3 216.5 75.9 140.6 25.5 23.1 23.1 −
                              12 2,073.0 363.3 215.9 75.9 140.0 26.8 20.5 20.5 −
                              19 2,076.6 363.3 215.9 76.0 139.9 27.3 20.2 20.2 −
                              26 2,071.6 363.2 214.9 76.0 139.0 27.9 18.8 18.8 −
         Sep                  2 2,073.1 363.2 214.3 76.0 138.3 28.4 18.9 18.9 −
                                9 2,086.4 363.2 214.3 76.6 137.7 29.1 19.8 19.8 −
                              16 2,134.7 363.2 213.9 77.2 136.7 29.8 20.8 20.8 −
                              23 2,180.1 363.2 213.0 77.1 135.9 31.6 20.6 20.6 −
                              30 3 2,288.6 3 420.0 3 226.5 3 80.4 3 146.1 3 35.3 19.7 19.7 −
         Oct                  7 2,295.7 419.8 226.8 80.4 146.4 34.6 20.4 20.4 −
                              14 2,310.9 419.8 227.1 80.4 146.7 32.2 19.8 19.8 −
                              21 2,313.2 419.8 226.9 80.4 146.5 32.5 21.6 21.6 −
                              28 2,333.4 419.8 228.5 80.4 148.1 32.7 26.7 26.7 −
         Nov                  4 2,328.6 419.8 229.8 80.3 149.5 31.8 27.3 27.3 −
 Deutsche Bundesbank
2009          Dec 3 588.2 3 83.9 41.6 16.0 25.6 4.4 0.3 0.3 −
2010          Jan 571.8 83.9 41.7 16.0 25.7 − 0.3 0.3 −
         Feb 591.6 83.9 42.4 16.7 25.7 −−−−
         Mar 3 608.6 3 90.2 3 44.7 3 17.2 3 27.5 −−−−
         Apr 615.5 90.2 44.8 17.2 27.6 −−−−
         May 673.4 90.2 45.5 17.9 27.6 0.1 − − −
         June 3 713.7 3 110.7 3 49.9 3 19.0 3 30.9 0.2 − − −
         July 625.3 110.6 49.9 19.1 30.8 0.2 − − −
         Aug 624.7 110.6 49.8 19.0 30.7 0.0 − − −
         Sep 3 623.2 3 105.1 3 45.7 3 18.2 3 27.5 −−−−
         Oct 619.1 105.1 45.5 18.1 27.4 −−−−
         Nov 621.0 105.1 45.4 17.9 27.5 −−−−
         Dec 3 671.2 3 115.4 46.7 18.7 28.0 −−−−
2011          Jan 628.7 115.4 46.9 18.9 27.9 −−−−
         Feb 639.5 115.4 46.9 18.9 28.0 −−−−
         Mar 3 632.2 3 110.1 3 45.6 3 19.3 3 26.3 −−−−
         Apr 610.1 110.1 46.1 19.3 26.9 −−−−
         May 611.3 110.1 46.1 19.3 26.9 −−−−
         June 3 632.3 3 114.1 45.7 19.1 26.6 −−−−
         July 629.0 114.1 46.1 19.7 26.4 −−−−
         Aug 679.1 114.1 46.0 19.7 26.3 −−−−
         Sep 3 764.6 3 131.9 3 49.5 3 20.9 3 28.7 −−−−
         Oct 772.8 131.7 49.5 20.9 28.6 0.5 − − −
 
*The consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem comprises the statements of the national central banks of the euro area member states
financial statement of the European Central Bank (ECB) and the financial (NCBs). The balance sheet items for foreign currency, securities, gold
16*III Consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2011
III Consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem
 
 
 
 
 
Lending to euro area credit institutions related to monetary policy operations Securities of euro area residents
denominated in euro in euro
 Other
 claims on
 euro area
Longer- Fine-  credit Securities General    On
Main re- term re- tuning Structural Credits institutions held for government    reporting
financing financing reverse reverse Marginal related denomi- monetary debt deno-    date/
opera- opera- opera- opera- lending to margin nated in policy Other minated in Other    End of
Total tions tions tions tions facility calls euro Total purposes securities euro assets    month  1 
Eurosystem 2
 
447.0 124.4 321.8 − − 0.8 0.0 47.8 471.3 138.2 333.1 34.9 291.7 2011 Mar                  4
454.2 111.3 342.9 − − 0.0 0.0 50.6 471.9 138.2 333.7 34.9 296.8                               11
443.5 100.5 342.9 − − 0.1 0.0 48.7 470.4 138.0 332.5 34.9 295.5                               18
435.7 89.4 342.9 − − 3.4 0.0 45.5 470.7 137.3 333.3 34.9 294.9                               25
424.0 100.4 322.9 − − 0.7 0.0 42.1 3 471.0 137.6 3 333.5 34.9 3 299.1          Apr                  1
407.7 84.5 322.9 − − 0.2 0.0 44.6 471.6 137.5 334.1 35.1 296.5                                 8
418.4 94.1 324.0 − − 0.2 0.0 43.5 470.4 136.6 333.8 35.1 299.2                               15
421.5 97.4 324.0 − − 0.0 0.0 44.9 471.9 136.6 335.3 35.1 299.1                               22
434.3 117.9 316.3 − − 0.0 0.1 49.6 472.1 136.5 335.5 34.5 290.5                               29
444.0 127.5 316.3 − − 0.0 0.1 52.2 471.4 136.5 334.9 34.5 286.4          May                  6
438.2 124.8 313.3 − − 0.1 0.1 50.4 472.7 136.5 336.2 34.5 291.3                               13
432.7 119.4 313.3 − − 0.0 0.0 50.5 471.5 135.3 336.2 34.5 294.7                               20
437.5 116.1 321.3 − − 0.1 0.1 47.2 472.7 135.3 337.4 34.5 296.3                               27
432.1 110.8 321.3 − − − 0.1 40.3 477.9 135.3 342.6 34.5 301.8          June                  3
423.9 102.4 321.3 − − 0.0 0.1 36.6 477.9 135.2 342.7 34.5 304.8                               10
445.9 135.6 310.3 − − 0.0 0.1 39.2 476.6 134.2 342.4 34.5 304.7                               17
497.5 186.9 310.3 − − 0.2 0.1 41.0 478.8 134.1 344.7 34.5 307.6                               24
455.2 141.5 313.2 − − 0.5 0.0 45.2 485.0 134.4 3 350.7 34.0 3 302.2 2011 July                  1
433.2 120.0 313.2 − − 0.0 0.1 45.8 486.2 134.4 351.9 33.9 297.9                                 8
465.2 153.6 311.5 − − 0.0 0.0 52.4 485.4 134.2 351.2 33.9 296.4                               15
508.6 197.1 311.5 − − − 0.0 57.3 484.5 133.8 350.6 33.9 295.5                               22
497.4 164.2 333.1 − − 0.0 0.1 59.2 484.4 133.7 350.6 33.9 298.8                               29
505.1 172.0 333.1 − − − 0.0 50.9 469.8 133.7 336.1 33.9 316.2          Aug                  5
548.1 157.1 390.8 − − 0.0 0.1 52.5 491.9 155.7 336.2 33.9 320.1                               12
538.7 147.7 390.8 − − 0.1 0.1 49.1 504.7 170.0 334.7 33.9 323.6                               19
524.6 133.7 390.8 − − − 0.1 49.8 510.3 175.3 335.0 33.9 328.1                               26
513.8 121.7 392.1 − − 0.0 0.0 50.1 523.0 188.6 334.5 33.9 327.5          Sep                  2
507.5 115.4 392.1 − − 0.0 0.0 48.0 539.2 202.4 336.8 33.9 331.2                                 9
534.6 163.8 369.6 − − 1.2 0.0 52.2 547.1 212.0 335.1 33.9 339.0                               16
571.3 201.1 369.6 − − 0.5 0.0 50.2 552.1 215.9 336.2 33.9 344.1                               23
588.8 208.3 378.9 − − 1.4 0.1 52.3 3 556.7 219.9 3 336.7 34.0 3 355.3                               30
580.7 198.9 378.9 − − 2.8 0.0 68.3 560.7 222.3 338.5 34.0 350.3          Oct                  7
586.6 204.9 379.5 − − 2.2 0.0 78.2 562.4 224.5 337.9 34.0 350.7                               14
585.2 201.2 379.5 − − 4.6 0.0 79.7 567.2 228.7 338.5 34.0 346.2                               21
596.4 197.4 396.0 − − 2.9 0.2 85.0 571.3 232.7 338.6 34.0 338.9                               28
580.0 182.8 396.0 − − 1.2 0.0 85.5 578.4 242.2 336.2 34.0 342.0          Nov                  4
 Deutsche Bundesbank
223.6 53.6 170.0 − − 0.0 − 7.1 13.2 7.9 5.3 4.4 209.6 2009          Dec 
210.3 41.7 168.5 − − 0.0 − 7.7 14.1 8.8 5.3 4.4 209.4 2010          Jan 
209.1 51.6 157.3 − − 0.1 − 7.2 15.6 10.3 5.3 4.4 228.9          Feb 
206.1 40.9 164.7 − − 0.6 − 7.3 17.0 11.8 5.3 4.4 239.0          Mar 
206.1 41.6 164.5 − − 0.0 − 7.8 18.1 12.9 5.3 4.4 244.2          Apr 
210.2 43.3 166.8 − − 0.1 − 8.4 28.4 23.1 5.3 4.4 286.3          May
225.6 58.6 167.0 − − 0.0 − 8.8 33.4 28.1 5.3 4.4 280.8          June
115.0 61.7 53.3 − − 0.0 − 9.3 33.7 28.4 5.3 4.4 302.3          July
103.8 52.9 50.3 − − 0.6 − 8.7 33.7 28.4 5.3 4.4 313.8          Aug 
85.3 56.4 24.0 4.1 − 0.8 − 8.9 33.9 28.6 5.3 4.4 3 339.9          Sep 
103.0 69.1 33.8 − − 0.2 − 10.6 34.0 28.7 5.3 4.4 316.5          Oct 
93.0 59.1 33.8 − − 0.0 − 9.1 34.7 29.5 5.3 4.4 329.3          Nov 
103.1 68.4 33.5 1.2 − − − 9.6 36.1 30.9 5.2 4.4 355.9          Dec 
82.5 37.8 44.4 − − 0.3 − 10.0 36.8 31.6 5.2 4.4 332.7 2011          Jan 
74.9 29.8 45.1 − − 0.0 − 10.0 37.1 31.8 5.2 4.4 350.9          Feb 
71.7 25.5 46.1 − − 0.1 − 9.6 37.2 31.9 5.2 4.4 353.5          Mar 
64.8 18.7 46.1 − − 0.0 − 8.3 37.0 31.9 5.1 4.4 339.3          Apr 
52.1 10.9 41.3 − − 0.0 − 7.7 36.8 31.7 5.1 4.4 353.9          May
57.8 21.8 35.9 − − 0.2 − 6.7 36.5 31.4 5.1 4.4 366.9          June
45.8 9.8 36.0 − − 0.0 − 8.1 36.4 31.3 5.1 4.4 374.0          July
37.6 3.5 34.0 − − 0.0 − 7.8 48.4 43.5 4.9 4.4 420.9          Aug 
31.1 12.6 18.4 − − 0.0 − 9.7 57.8 52.9 4.9 4.4 480.2          Sep 
21.3 3.5 17.7 − − 0.1 − 8.5 60.8 55.9 4.9 4.4 496.1          Oct 
 
and financial instruments are valued at market rates at the end of the quar- for the Bundesbank: end-of month financial statement. — 2Source: ECB. —
ter.— 1For the Eurosystem: financial statements for specific weekly dates; 3 Changes are due mainly to revalutions at the end of the quarter. 
17*III Consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
E U R O S Y S T E M
Monthly Report
November 2011
III Consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem
 
2 Liabilities *
 
 
€ billion
Liabilities to euro area credit institutions related to Liabilities to
monetary policy operations denominated in euro other euro area residents
denominated in euro
 
Other
Current liabilities
accounts to euro-
On (covering Fine- area credit
reporting the tuning Deposits institutions Debt
date/ Banknotes minimum Fixed- reverse deno- certifi- General related to
End of Total in circu- reserve Deposit term opera- margin minated cates govern- Other
month  1 liabilities lation  2 Total system) facility deposits tions calls in euro issued Total ment liabilities
 Eurosystem 4
 
2011 Mar                  4 1,939.2 824.9 303.7 182.7 43.2 77.5 − 0.4 3.6 − 99.3 91.6 7.7
                              11 1,953.0 824.4 327.1 234.1 15.3 77.5 − 0.3 3.1 − 91.7 84.0 7.7
                              18 1,940.4 823.9 321.0 222.4 20.2 77.5 − 1.0 3.9 − 85.0 77.1 7.9
                              25 1,928.1 822.2 303.3 206.3 19.4 77.5 − 0.1 4.2 − 90.9 83.0 7.9
         Apr                  1 5 1,888.5 826.0 308.4 205.8 26.1 76.5 − 0.1 5.0 − 73.0 64.9 8.0
                                8 1,873.1 828.5 296.2 188.6 30.5 77.0 − 0.1 5.2 − 68.4 60.6 7.8
                              15 1,885.0 830.9 309.6 222.4 10.0 77.0 − 0.1 5.1 − 65.6 57.8 7.8
                              22 1,887.9 837.6 293.7 204.5 13.1 76.0 − 0.1 5.3 − 74.6 66.8 7.9
                              29 1,894.1 834.4 286.5 187.7 27.3 71.4 − 0.1 5.1 − 92.2 84.4 7.8
         May                  6 1,901.9 834.7 331.5 215.0 54.2 62.2 − 0.1 4.9 − 53.7 46.1 7.6
                              13 1,898.7 833.3 331.8 243.7 12.1 76.0 − 0.1 4.5 − 50.8 43.2 7.6
                              20 1,895.9 832.0 311.0 217.2 17.8 76.0 − 0.1 5.8 − 65.4 57.8 7.6
                              27 1,900.6 834.1 307.2 212.8 19.4 75.0 − 0.0 5.5 − 72.6 65.0 7.6
         June                  3 1,899.0 842.7 287.1 191.7 20.4 75.0 − 0.0 6.6 − 80.7 73.1 7.6
                              10 1,892.6 843.5 282.8 197.4 10.4 75.0 − 0.0 5.4 − 78.4 70.7 7.8
                              17 1,914.5 842.7 318.5 238.1 5.4 75.0 − 0.0 2.5 − 67.1 59.6 7.5
                              24 1,972.2 843.4 340.6 253.4 13.2 74.0 − 0.0 2.8 − 101.4 93.7 7.7
2011 July                  1 5 1,944.6 849.2 316.9 216.2 24.9 74.0 − 1.8 5.1 − 79.5 71.8 7.7
                                8 1,919.5 851.8 297.4 157.6 65.7 74.0 − 0.1 6.0 − 72.5 64.8 7.7
                              15 1,957.2 853.4 327.6 242.4 10.3 74.0 − 1.0 4.4 − 74.9 67.0 7.8
                              22 2,006.1 853.0 357.9 250.5 32.2 74.0 − 1.2 4.4 − 87.3 79.4 7.8
                              29 2,000.5 855.7 332.9 208.3 49.9 74.0 − 0.8 5.2 − 97.4 89.5 8.0
         Aug                  5 2,004.3 857.6 369.8 159.8 134.8 74.0 − 1.2 6.5 − 62.5 54.0 8.4
                              12 2,073.0 858.2 441.5 286.8 80.2 74.0 − 0.5 3.9 − 62.0 53.5 8.6
                              19 2,076.6 854.6 447.3 244.8 105.9 96.0 − 0.5 2.2 − 60.3 51.7 8.7
                              26 2,071.6 850.2 431.7 197.0 121.2 110.5 − 3.0 4.7 − 70.9 62.5 8.4
         Sep                  2 2,073.1 853.0 447.0 179.7 151.1 115.5 − 0.6 4.2 − 53.3 44.9 8.5
                                9 2,086.4 853.2 455.3 139.3 181.8 129.0 − 5.2 3.6 − 54.3 45.6 8.7
                              16 2,134.7 852.7 506.2 241.5 111.5 143.0 − 10.2 3.7 − 49.0 40.3 8.7
                              23 2,180.1 852.5 530.0 223.5 150.7 152.5 − 3.4 4.6 − 64.4 56.4 8.0
                              30 5 2,288.6 857.4 563.0 204.9 199.6 156.5 − 2.0 3.3 − 59.7 51.6 8.1
         Oct                  7 2,295.7 859.6 571.5 154.1 255.6 160.5 − 1.3 2.0 − 62.4 54.3 8.1
                              14 2,310.9 859.5 598.0 298.6 136.2 163.0 − 0.2 3.5 − 53.3 45.2 8.1
                              21 2,313.2 858.3 580.3 213.1 202.1 165.0 − 0.2 3.7 − 77.2 69.2 8.0
                              28 2,333.4 863.1 596.6 178.7 248.1 169.5 − 0.3 3.5 − 75.1 66.8 8.3
         Nov                  4 2,328.6 867.1 601.0 135.3 288.4 173.5 − 3.8 4.1 − 58.7 51.0 7.7
 Deutsche Bundesbank
2009          Dec 5 588.2 201.3 112.2 76.7 35.5 − − − − − 10.4 10.0 0.4
2010          Jan 571.8 195.6 106.3 60.9 45.4 − − − − − 4.1 3.7 0.4
         Feb 591.6 195.8 127.6 55.2 72.3 − − − − − 0.7 0.3 0.4
         Mar 5 608.6 199.0 135.7 82.3 53.4 − − − − − 0.6 0.2 0.4
         Apr 615.5 199.2 139.1 58.6 80.5 − − − − − 0.7 0.2 0.5
         May 673.4 201.0 193.0 52.8 123.9 16.2 − − − − 0.9 0.3 0.6
         June 5 713.7 202.7 208.8 108.6 82.9 17.3 − − − − 0.6 0.1 0.4
         July 625.3 204.8 115.9 61.8 34.7 19.4 − − − − 1.0 0.5 0.5
         Aug 624.7 203.2 115.3 62.4 29.8 23.1 − − − − 1.0 0.6 0.4
         Sep 5 623.2 203.0 121.3 64.9 28.2 28.2 − − − − 1.0 0.6 0.4
         Oct 619.1 203.5 114.4 62.1 20.8 31.4 − − − − 0.9 0.2 0.7
         Nov 621.0 203.9 116.9 54.8 23.7 38.4 − − − − 0.9 0.2 0.6
         Dec 5 671.2 209.6 146.4 71.4 38.5 36.5 − − − − 0.9 0.2 0.8
2011          Jan 628.7 204.5 109.4 50.5 16.6 42.3 − − − − 2.0 0.2 1.8
         Feb 639.5 204.2 120.7 58.2 13.0 49.5 − − − − 0.6 0.2 0.5
         Mar 5 632.2 205.2 119.9 63.9 17.1 38.9 − − − − 0.6 0.2 0.5
         Apr 610.1 207.8 95.9 47.9 11.7 36.3 − − − − 0.8 0.4 0.4
         May 611.3 208.6 95.0 54.3 7.7 32.9 − − − − 0.6 0.2 0.4
         June 5 632.3 210.9 108.5 63.3 8.7 36.5 − − − − 1.1 0.2 0.9
         July 629.0 213.1 100.3 52.5 13.2 34.6 − − − − 0.6 0.2 0.4
         Aug 679.1 211.6 145.5 60.5 16.0 68.9 − − − − 0.7 0.2 0.4
         Sep 5 764.6 213.5 205.5 69.8 56.8 78.8 − − − − 0.9 0.3 0.6
         Oct 772.8 215.2 212.1 59.9 58.4 93.9 − − − − 1.1 0.4 0.7
 
*The consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem comprises the the Bundesbank: end-of-month financial statements. — 2According to the
financial statement of the European Central Bank (ECB) and the financial accounting regime chosen by the Eurosystem on the issue of euro bank-
statements of the national central banks of the euro area member states notes, a share of 8% of the total value of the euro banknotes in circulation
(NCBs). The balance sheet items for foreign currency, securities, gold and is allocated to the ECB on a monthly basis. The counterpart of this
financial instruments are valued at market rates at the end of the quar- adjustment is disclosed as an “Intra-Eurosystem liability related to euro
ter. — 1For Eurosystem: financial statements for specific weekly dates; for
18*III Consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2011
III Consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem
 
 
 
 
 
Liabilities to non-euro area
residents denominated in
foreign currency
Intra-  
Eurosystem  
Liabilities Liabilities Liabilities Counterpart liability     On
to non-euro to euro area Deposits, arising of special related to     reporting
area residents residents balances from the drawing euro  Capital    date/
denominated in foreign and other rights allocated Other banknote Revaluation and    End of credit facility
in euro currency Total liabilities under ERM II by the IMF issue  2 accounts reserves    month  1 liabilities  3 
Eurosystem 4
 
43.4 2.9 14.9 14.9 − 54.6 180.6 − 331.5 79.8 2011 Mar                  4
42.4 2.4 16.3 16.3 − 54.6 179.6 − 331.5 79.8                               11
41.8 2.0 15.8 15.8 − 54.6 181.0 − 331.5 79.9                               18
43.3 1.6 15.1 15.1 − 54.6 181.2 − 331.5 80.1                               25
42.3 1.3 5 14.5 5 14.5 − 5 52.6 5 179.1 − 5 305.9 80.5          Apr                  1
41.7 1.1 14.0 14.0 − 52.6 178.0 − 305.9 81.4                                 8
41.5 1.0 12.7 12.7 − 52.6 178.8 − 305.9 81.4                               15
42.3 1.0 13.0 13.0 − 52.6 180.4 − 305.9 81.4                               22
41.2 0.9 11.8 11.8 − 52.6 182.3 − 305.9 81.2                               29
40.2 1.9 11.9 11.9 − 52.6 183.2 − 305.9 81.2          May                  6
40.7 2.4 10.9 10.9 − 52.6 184.5 − 305.9 81.2                               13
40.4 2.4 11.3 11.3 − 52.6 187.9 − 305.9 81.2                               20
41.1 1.7 11.8 11.8 − 52.6 186.9 − 305.9 81.2                               27
40.0 2.4 11.3 11.3 − 52.6 188.5 − 305.9 81.2          June                  3
38.1 1.6 11.9 11.9 − 52.6 190.8 − 305.9 81.5                               10
40.6 0.9 12.0 12.0 − 52.6 190.3 − 305.9 81.5                               17
38.0 1.5 10.1 10.1 − 52.6 194.4 − 305.9 81.5                               24
36.3 0.9 9.6 9.6 − 52.2 5 196.8 − 5 316.7 81.5 2011 July                  1
37.1 1.9 8.5 8.5 − 52.2 194.0 − 316.7 81.5                                 8
38.9 3.2 6.9 6.9 − 52.2 197.6 − 316.7 81.5                               15
40.4 3.4 8.9 8.9 − 52.2 200.4 − 316.7 81.5                               22
40.2 1.6 10.2 10.2 − 52.2 207.1 − 316.7 81.5                               29
39.1 1.5 10.6 10.6 − 52.2 206.4 − 316.7 81.5          Aug                  5
40.0 1.6 11.5 11.5 − 52.2 204.1 − 316.7 81.5                               12
44.9 1.6 11.9 11.9 − 52.2 203.6 − 316.7 81.5                               19
44.6 2.1 11.8 11.8 − 52.2 205.4 − 316.7 81.5                               26
43.7 2.7 11.2 11.2 − 52.2 207.7 − 316.7 81.5          Sep                  2
47.0 2.4 11.9 11.9 − 52.2 208.3 − 316.7 81.5                                 9
52.1 2.1 11.5 11.5 − 52.2 207.1 − 316.7 81.5                               16
56.3 2.3 12.2 12.2 − 52.2 207.4 − 316.7 81.5                               23
50.0 2.5 5 13.8 5 13.8 − 5 54.5 5 219.6 − 5 383.3 81.5                               30
48.3 3.7 12.3 12.3 − 54.5 216.8 − 383.3 81.5          Oct                  7
48.3 2.5 10.4 10.4 − 54.5 216.0 − 383.3 81.5                               14
48.2 1.9 11.0 11.0 − 54.5 213.2 − 383.3 81.5                               21
49.6 2.8 11.4 11.4 − 54.5 212.1 − 383.3 81.5                               28
49.4 2.7 11.5 11.5 − 54.5 214.9 − 383.3 81.5          Nov                  4
 Deutsche Bundesbank
9.1 0 .0−−− 13.1 13.5 146.8 5 76.8 5.0 2009          Dec 
9.8 0.0 0.2 0.2 − 13.1 13.2 147.6 76.8 5.0 2010          Jan 
9.3 0.0 0.3 0.3 − 13.1 13.4 149.6 76.8 5.0          Feb 
9.3 0.0 0.1 0.1 − 13.6 10.3 150.2 5 84.8 5.0          Mar 
11.5 0.0 0.3 0.3 − 13.6 10.2 151.1 84.8 5.0          Apr 
12.8 0.0 0.2 0.2 − 13.6 10.4 151.7 84.8 5.0          May
11.0 0.0 0.2 0.2 − 5 14.5 5 11.3 150.9 5 108.8 5.0          June
11.2 0.0 0.3 0.3 − 14.5 12.5 151.2 108.8 5.0          July
10.5 0.0 0.5 0.5 − 14.5 12.8 153.2 108.8 5.0          Aug 
10.8 0.0 0.1 0.1 − 5 13.7 5 12.4 155.8 5 99.9 5.0          Sep 
12.6 0.0 0.1 0.1 − 13.7 12.3 156.7 99.9 5.0          Oct 
11.0 0.0 0.2 0.2 − 13.7 12.8 156.6 99.9 5.0          Nov 
14.5 0.0 0.2 0.2 − 14.0 13.1 157.1 5 110.5 5.0          Dec 
12.2 0.0 0.2 0.2 − 14.0 13.1 157.8 110.5 5.0 2011          Jan 
12.0 0.0 0.1 0.1 − 14.0 13.5 158.9 110.5 5.0          Feb 
13.4 0.0 0.2 0.2 − 13.5 11.7 159.5 5 103.3 5.0          Mar 
11.7 0.0 0.3 0.3 − 13.5 11.7 160.1 103.3 5.0          Apr 
11.3 0.0 0.3 0.3 − 13.5 12.1 161.6 103.3 5.0          May
10.5 0.0 0.1 0.1 − 13.3 12.7 163.1 5 107.0 5.0          June
11.9 0.0 0.1 0.1 − 13.3 12.7 164.9 107.0 5.0          July
15.3 0.0 0.1 0.1 − 13.3 13.2 167.5 107.0 5.0          Aug 
13.6 0.0 0.2 0.2 − 5 13.9 14.3 170.7 5 127.1 5.0          Sep 
12.9 0.0 0.2 0.2 − 13.9 14.4 170.7 127.1 5.0          Oct 
 
banknote issue“. The remaining 92 % of the value of the euro banknote in the aforementioned accounting regime and the value of euro banknotes
circulation is also allocated to the NCBs on a monthly basis, and each NCB put into circulation is also disclosed as an “Intra-Eurosystem claim/ liability
shows in its balance sheet the share of the euro banknotes issued which related to banknote issue“. — 3For the Deutsche Bundesbank: including
corresponds to its paid-up share in the ECB’s capital. The difference DM banknotes still in circulation. — 4Source: ECB. — 5Changes are due
between the value of the euro banknotes allocated to the NCB according to mainly to revaluations at the end of the quarter. 
19*III Consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
E U R O S Y S T E M
Monthly Report
November 2011
IV Banks
 
1 Assets and liabilities of monetary financial institutions (excluding the Bundesbank) in Germany *
  Assets
 
 
€ billion
Lending to banks (MFIs) in the euro area Lending to non-banks (non-MFIs) in the
to banks in the home country to banks in other member states to non-banks in the home country
Enterprises and house-
holds
Secur- Secur-
Balance ities ities
sheet Cash issued issued
Period total  1 in hand Total Total Loans by banks Total Loans by banks Total Total Total Loans
 End of year or month
 
2002 6,394.2 17.9 2,118.0 1,769.1 1,164.3 604.9 348.9 271.7 77.2 3,340.2 3,092.2 2,505.8 2,240.8
2003 6,432.0 17.3 2,111.5 1,732.0 1,116.8 615.3 379.5 287.7 91.8 3,333.2 3,083.1 2,497.4 2,241.2
2004 6,617.4 15.1 2,174.3 1,750.2 1,122.9 627.3 424.2 306.3 117.9 3,358.7 3,083.4 2,479.7 2,223.8
2005 6,859.4 15.3 2,276.0 1,762.5 1,148.4 614.1 513.5 356.3 157.2 3,407.6 3,085.2 2,504.6 2,226.3
2006 7,154.4 16.4 2,314.4 1,718.6 1,138.6 580.0 595.8 376.8 219.0 3,462.1 3,085.5 2,536.1 2,241.9
2007 7,592.4 17.8 2,523.4 1,847.9 1,290.4 557.5 675.4 421.6 253.8 3,487.3 3,061.8 2,556.0 2,288.8
2008 7,892.7 17.8 2,681.8 1,990.2 1,404.3 585.8 691.6 452.9 238.8 3,638.2 3,163.0 2,686.9 2,357.3
2009 7,436.1 17.2 2,480.5 1,813.2 1,218.4 594.8 667.3 449.5 217.8 3,638.3 3,187.9 2,692.9 2,357.5
2010 8,304.7 16.5 2,361.6 1,787.8 1,276.9 510.9 573.9 372.8 201.0 3,724.5 3,302.9 2,669.1 2,354.7
2009          Dec 7,436.1 17.2 2,480.5 1,813.2 1,218.4 594.8 667.3 449.5 217.8 3,638.3 3,187.9 2,692.9 2,357.5
2010          Jan 7,452.7 14.3 2,465.1 1,806.6 1,220.4 586.2 658.5 440.7 217.8 3,655.8 3,198.2 2,695.9 2,354.2
         Feb 7,449.5 14.2 2,491.6 1,830.8 1,250.2 580.5 660.8 444.5 216.3 3,645.2 3,184.7 2,682.5 2,350.8
         Mar 7,454.6 14.4 2,489.7 1,832.0 1,250.3 581.7 657.7 440.2 217.5 3,633.9 3,180.8 2,673.6 2,347.0
         Apr 7,570.0 14.0 2,507.1 1,843.7 1,263.9 579.8 663.5 448.2 215.3 3,688.9 3,222.8 2,711.0 2,360.2
         May 7,681.0 14.7 2,593.2 1,897.6 1,326.4 571.2 695.6 480.6 215.0 3,650.9 3,211.1 2,688.9 2,364.6
         June 7,641.3 14.2 2,583.7 1,899.5 1,341.3 558.2 684.2 464.9 219.3 3,664.0 3,228.2 2,685.0 2,368.0
         July 7,438.3 14.7 2,457.9 1,777.3 1,234.5 542.8 680.6 473.5 207.1 3,654.1 3,219.4 2,680.5 2,364.5
         Aug 7,517.6 14.5 2,489.7 1,792.7 1,252.0 540.6 697.1 488.6 208.4 3,667.0 3,229.6 2,688.4 2,373.2
         Sep 7,387.2 14.9 2,447.4 1,780.3 1,245.4 535.0 667.0 460.9 206.1 3,642.6 3,209.0 2,665.8 2,353.9
         Oct 7,397.5 15.2 2,353.9 1,759.6 1,246.2 513.4 594.3 389.3 205.0 3,758.9 3,327.9 2,675.0 2,360.5
         Nov 7,508.4 14.8 2,376.9 1,776.3 1,259.7 516.5 600.7 397.7 203.0 3,804.8 3,368.9 2,704.7 2,389.3
         Dec 8,304.7 16.5 2,361.6 1,787.8 1,276.9 510.9 573.9 372.8 201.0 3,724.5 3,302.9 2,669.1 2,354.7
2011          Jan 8,183.8 14.1 2,322.8 1,748.8 1,239.7 509.1 573.9 374.7 199.2 3,748.8 3,322.9 2,684.7 2,356.7
         Feb 8,142.3 14.5 2,332.2 1,751.5 1,243.1 508.4 580.6 380.6 200.1 3,745.3 3,322.0 2,697.7 2,377.4
         Mar 7,955.1 14.5 2,294.6 1,735.4 1,233.8 501.6 559.2 363.4 195.8 3,711.8 3,293.5 2,680.7 2,358.7
         Apr 7,997.9 15.6 2,270.7 1,702.2 1,203.3 498.8 568.6 371.7 196.9 3,736.5 3,307.8 2,703.7 2,360.9
         May 8,045.9 15.5 2,281.5 1,702.0 1,201.3 500.7 579.5 377.0 202.5 3,714.4 3,289.2 2,694.7 2,376.5
         June 7,885.8 15.2 2,268.6 1,696.4 1,206.0 490.5 572.2 372.2 200.0 3,690.4 3,269.3 2,681.2 2,374.9
         July 8,001.0 15.2 2,258.5 1,688.2 1,202.0 486.2 570.2 372.7 197.6 3,692.8 3,270.6 2,685.7 2,379.2
         Aug 8,263.5 14.7 2,337.8 1,750.1 1,265.2 484.9 587.7 390.3 197.4 3,699.5 3,279.0 2,706.1 2,403.3
         Sep 8,489.4 15.4 2,412.6 1,831.2 1,349.3 481.9 581.4 385.6 195.7 3,708.6 3,285.3 2,713.5 2,413.6
 Changes 3
2003 90.7 − 0.6 − 12.2 − 44.1 − 42.6 − 1.5 31.9 18.8 13.1 30.0 23.6 22.8 26.4
2004 209.7 − 2.1 71.6 24.0 10.9 13.1 47.6 17.1 30.5 44.0 17.4 − 0.4 − 1.3
2005 191.4 0.1 96.5 10.3 22.8 − 12.5 86.2 48.1 38.0 59.7 14.1 37.1 15.5
2006 353.9 1.1 81.2 0.5 28.0 − 27.6 80.8 19.5 61.3 55.9 1.5 32.5 13.2
2007 515.3 1.5 215.6 135.5 156.2 − 20.8 80.1 44.1 36.0 54.1 − 1.0 38.6 53.2
2008 314.0 − 0.1 184.4 164.2 127.3 36.9 20.2 34.6 − 14.4 140.2 102.5 130.8 65.4
2009 −454.8 − 0.5 −189.5 −166.4 −182.1 15.8 − 23.2 − 2.5 − 20.7 17.3 38.2 16.9 6.5
2010 −135.1 − 0.7 − 90.6 3.0 58.3 − 55.3 − 93.6 − 78.5 − 15.1 77.5 107.1 − 13.7 0.6
2010          Jan − 8.8 − 2.9 − 17.4 − 8.1 0.8 − 8.9 − 9.3 − 9.4 0.1 16.6 11.3 3.9 − 1.7
         Feb − 7.2 − 0.2 25.8 24.0 29.6 − 5.6 1.8 3.4 − 1.7 − 12.8 − 14.7 − 14.4 − 4.5
         Mar 4.9 0.3 0.5 2.6 − 0.3 2.9 − 2.1 − 4.4 2.3 − 2.5 1.2 − 4.5 − 3.2
         Apr 107.9 − 0.5 16.4 11.0 13.1 − 2.1 5.4 7.8 − 2.3 54.7 42.4 37.9 13.2
         May 63.7 0.7 80.8 50.4 59.5 − 9.1 30.4 31.0 − 0.6 − 45.6 − 15.4 − 25.6 1.1
         June − 50.5 − 0.6 − 11.2 0.7 13.8 − 13.1 − 11.9 − 16.1 4.2 11.1 15.6 − 5.3 2.0
         July −166.1 0.6 −118.1 −116.0 −101.0 − 15.0 − 2.1 9.9 − 11.9 − 3.2 − 4.5 − 0.5 0.4
         Aug 60.6 − 0.3 29.2 13.6 15.9 − 2.4 15.6 14.5 1.1 8.7 7.3 5.2 6.2
         Sep − 88.7 0.4 − 36.3 − 8.8 − 3.6 − 5.2 − 27.5 − 26.0 − 1.5 − 16.5 − 15.2 − 17.5 − 14.3
         Oct 20.7 0.4 − 72.6 − 0.9 1.7 − 2.6 − 71.7 − 70.7 − 0.9 100.9 102.9 11.7 9.2
         Nov 80.9 − 0.5 25.6 22.0 10.8 11.2 3.5 5.8 − 2.3 39.4 36.9 25.8 25.0
         Dec −152.6 1.7 − 13.1 12.6 18.1 − 5.5 − 25.6 − 24.0 − 1.6 − 73.2 − 60.5 − 30.3 − 32.8
2011          Jan −106.0 − 2.4 − 35.7 − 37.3 − 36.0 − 1.2 1.5 2.9 − 1.4 29.3 24.2 19.4 5.7
         Feb − 39.5 0.3 10.1 3.2 3.7 − 0.5 6.9 6.1 0.9 − 1.1 0.4 14.6 22.0
         Mar −167.6 0.0 − 31.8 − 10.8 − 8.2 − 2.6 − 20.9 − 16.2 − 4.8 − 29.7 − 25.8 − 14.5 − 16.4
         Apr 63.2 1.2 − 21.0 − 31.7 − 29.2 − 2.5 10.8 9.6 1.2 29.0 17.1 25.6 5.1
         May 27.4 − 0.1 7.4 − 1.9 − 3.5 1.6 9.3 3.9 5.4 − 25.8 − 21.2 − 11.3 13.1
         June −165.7 − 0.2 − 21.0 − 14.0 4.8 − 18.7 − 7.1 − 4.6 − 2.4 − 23.0 − 19.3 − 12.9 − 1.0
         July 104.8 − 0.0 − 10.6 − 7.9 − 3.8 − 4.1 − 2.6 − 0.4 − 2.3 − 0.7 − 1.3 2.2 2.0
         Aug 263.0 − 0.5 80.7 69.9 71.0 − 1.1 10.8 10.9 − 0.0 1.0 1.9 14.1 17.8
         Sep 225.9 0.7 74.6 81.1 84.1 − 3.0 − 6.5 − 4.7 − 1.8 9.6 6.5 7.8 10.7
*This table serves to supplement the “Overall monetary survey“ in section data from money market funds. — 1See footnote 1 in Table IV.2. —
II. Unlike the other tables in section IV, this table includes − in addition to 2Including debt securities arising from the exchange of equalisation
the figures reported by banks (including building and loan associations) −
20*IV Banks

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2011
IV Banks
 
 
 
 
 
 
euro area Claims on
non-euro-area
to non-banks in other member states residents
 General Enterprises and General
 government households government
Secur- Secur- of which Secur- of which Other
ities Total Loans ities  2 Total Total Loans Total Loans ities Total Loans assets  1   Period
End of year or month
 
265.0 586.4 448.5 137.9 248.0 125.0 63.6 123.0 25.5 97.5 738.1 589.2 179.9 2002
256.2 585.6 439.6 146.1 250.2 133.5 62.7 116.6 25.9 90.7 806.4 645.6 163.6 2003
255.9 603.8 423.0 180.8 275.3 140.6 61.9 134.7 25.7 109.0 897.8 730.4 171.4 2004
278.2 580.7 408.7 171.9 322.4 169.1 65.0 153.3 30.7 122.6 993.8 796.8 166.7 2005
294.1 549.5 390.2 159.2 376.6 228.1 85.2 148.5 26.1 122.4 1,172.7 936.2 188.8 2006
267.3 505.8 360.7 145.0 425.5 294.6 124.9 130.9 26.0 104.9 1,339.5 1,026.9 224.4 2007
329.6 476.1 342.8 133.4 475.1 348.1 172.1 127.0 27.6 99.4 1,279.2 1,008.6 275.7 2008
335.4 495.0 335.1 160.0 450.4 322.2 162.9 128.2 23.5 104.7 1,062.6 821.1 237.5 2009
314.5 633.8 418.4 215.3 421.6 289.2 164.2 132.4 24.8 107.6 1,021.0 792.7 1,181.0 2010
335.4 495.0 335.1 160.0 450.4 322.2 162.9 128.2 23.5 104.7 1,062.6 821.1 237.5 2009          Dec 
341.7 502.3 338.0 164.4 457.5 325.5 161.9 132.1 23.7 108.3 1,081.5 838.8 236.0 2010          Jan 
331.7 502.2 334.8 167.4 460.5 325.7 162.9 134.8 23.7 111.1 1,072.7 832.8 225.9          Feb 
326.6 507.3 335.5 171.8 453.1 319.6 162.7 133.5 22.3 111.2 1,073.9 833.9 242.6          Mar 
350.8 511.8 337.7 174.1 466.1 332.9 175.7 133.1 22.0 111.2 1,120.2 879.4 239.8          Apr 
324.3 522.2 343.8 178.4 439.8 307.7 175.0 132.1 26.4 105.7 1,167.0 923.7 255.2          May
317.0 543.2 349.1 194.1 435.8 303.1 172.8 132.7 24.2 108.5 1,111.1 865.0 268.4          June
316.0 538.9 344.7 194.2 434.7 299.9 173.2 134.8 23.9 110.9 1,048.9 810.6 262.7          July
315.2 541.2 344.9 196.3 437.4 303.0 173.4 134.4 23.8 110.5 1,073.1 834.1 273.3          Aug 
312.0 543.1 346.6 196.5 433.7 294.4 166.4 139.2 25.7 113.5 1,020.8 787.3 261.6          Sep 
314.6 652.9 350.9 302.0 431.0 289.7 162.6 141.3 25.8 115.5 1,011.3 781.3 258.2          Oct 
315.4 664.2 427.3 237.0 435.9 299.5 167.8 136.4 25.8 110.6 1,043.4 810.3 268.5          Nov 
314.5 633.8 418.4 215.3 421.6 289.2 164.2 132.4 24.8 107.6 1,021.0 792.7 1,181.0          Dec 
328.0 638.2 421.7 216.5 425.9 287.9 159.8 138.0 26.2 111.8 1,017.1 786.3 1,081.0 2011          Jan 
320.2 624.3 410.1 214.2 423.3 285.7 158.2 137.6 26.3 111.3 1,017.4 790.0 1,033.0          Feb 
322.1 612.8 399.4 213.4 418.3 282.2 157.2 136.2 26.4 109.7 978.6 748.1 955.6          Mar 
342.8 604.1 388.4 215.7 428.7 291.9 165.1 136.8 26.4 110.4 1,013.2 787.6 961.8          Apr 
318.2 594.5 377.9 216.6 425.2 288.0 161.4 137.2 26.2 111.0 1,028.3 796.9 1,006.2          May
306.3 588.2 374.6 213.6 421.1 287.2 161.2 133.9 25.9 108.0 984.4 753.6 927.1          June
306.5 584.9 374.5 210.4 422.3 283.5 161.6 138.8 31.3 107.5 986.6 757.8 1,047.9          July
302.8 572.9 365.2 207.7 420.5 281.9 162.6 138.5 31.0 107.5 1,004.6 779.9 1,206.8          Aug 
299.9 571.8 365.2 206.6 423.3 288.0 171.2 135.3 30.7 104.6 1,011.7 786.7 1,341.1          Sep 
Changes 3
− 3.6 0.8 − 8.7 9.6 6.4 13.1 2.6 − 6.8 − 0.8 − 6.0 115.4 97.7 − 42.0 2003
0.9 17.8 − 17.0 34.9 26.6 8.2 3.1 18.4 0.0 18.4 111.0 100.2 − 14.7 2004
21.7 − 23.0 − 14.3 − 8.6 45.5 27.4 2.2 18.2 4.6 13.5 57.2 31.3 − 22.2 2005
19.3 − 31.0 − 18.6 − 12.4 54.5 59.6 20.9 − 5.2 − 1.3 − 3.8 205.8 165.7 9.8 2006
− 14.6 − 39.6 − 29.3 − 10.3 55.1 73.7 41.5 − 18.6 0.0 − 18.6 223.0 136.7 21.1 2007
65.4 − 28.3 − 16.9 − 11.5 37.7 42.2 40.3 − 4.5 1.6 − 6.1 − 40.1 − 7.5 29.7 2008
10.5 21.3 − 5.1 26.4 − 20.9 − 20.9 − 7.1 0.0 − 3.9 3.9 −182.2 −162.2 − 99.8 2009
− 14.2 120.8 83.3 37.4 − 29.6 − 36.4 0.2 6.8 3.0 3.7 − 74.9 − 61.9 − 46.4 2010
5.6 7.3 2.8 4.5 5.3 1.5 − 1.0 3.8 0.2 3.6 6.1 6.4 − 11.2 2010          Jan 
− 10.0 − 0.2 − 3.2 3.0 1.8 − 0.9 0.3 2.7 − 0.0 2.7 − 17.3 − 13.8 − 2.7          Feb 
− 1.3 5.7 0.7 5.0 − 3.7 − 4.2 − 0.4 0.5 − 1.4 2.0 3.1 − 1.2 3.7          Mar 
24.7 4.5 2.2 2.3 12.3 12.7 12.7 − 0.4 − 0.4 0.0 40.7 40.7 − 3.4          Apr 
− 26.7 10.2 6.0 4.2 − 30.2 − 28.9 − 3.3 − 1.4 4.4 − 5.7 13.9 15.0 13.9          May
− 7.3 20.9 5.2 15.7 − 4.4 − 4.9 − 2.5 0.5 − 0.3 0.8 − 62.1 − 64.3 12.3          June
− 0.9 − 4.0 − 4.1 0.1 1.3 − 1.0 2.5 2.3 − 0.2 2.5 − 39.1 − 33.6 − 6.1          July
− 1.0 2.1 0.0 2.0 1.4 1.7 − 0.8 − 0.3 − 0.1 − 0.2 12.4 13.0 10.6          Aug 
− 3.1 2.2 1.9 0.4 − 1.3 − 6.6 − 4.5 5.3 2.0 3.3 − 24.0 − 21.2 − 12.3          Sep 
2.5 91.2 4.6 86.6 − 2.0 − 4.2 − 3.3 2.1 0.1 2.0 − 3.4 − 0.5 − 4.6          Oct 
0.7 11.1 76.1 − 65.0 2.6 7.7 3.2 − 5.1 − 0.1 − 5.0 7.5 6.7 8.9          Nov 
2.5 − 30.2 − 8.8 − 21.4 − 12.7 − 9.3 − 2.6 − 3.4 − 1.0 − 2.4 − 12.7 − 9.0 − 55.5          Dec 
13.7 4.8 3.5 1.3 5.1 − 0.4 − 3.6 5.5 1.4 4.0 5.2 2.4 −102.4 2011          Jan 
− 7.4 − 14.2 − 12.0 − 2.2 − 1.5 − 1.1 − 1.3 − 0.4 0.1 − 0.5 3.0 6.1 − 51.9          Feb 
1.9 − 11.3 − 10.5 − 0.8 − 3.9 − 2.6 − 0.1 − 1.3 0.2 − 1.5 − 27.9 − 32.3 − 78.2          Mar 
20.6 − 8.5 − 10.9 2.4 11.9 11.1 9.3 0.8 0.0 0.7 48.6 52.5 5.4          Apr 
− 24.4 − 9.9 − 10.7 0.8 − 4.6 − 5.0 − 4.6 0.4 − 0.3 0.6 1.7 − 2.8 44.1          May
− 11.9 − 6.3 − 3.2 − 3.1 − 3.8 − 0.4 0.0 − 3.3 − 0.3 − 3.0 − 41.4 − 41.2 − 80.0          June
0.2 − 3.5 − 0.2 − 3.3 0.6 − 4.2 − 0.0 4.9 5.4 − 0.6 − 5.0 − 2.6 121.1          July
− 3.7 − 12.2 − 9.3 − 2.9 − 0.9 − 1.3 1.1 0.5 − 0.1 0.5 23.7 26.9 158.0          Aug 
− 2.9 − 1.3 − 0.1 − 1.2 3.1 6.3 8.7 − 3.2 − 0.2 − 3.0 7.8 7.0 133.1          Sep 
claims. — 3Statistical breaks have been eliminated from the flow figures
(see also footnote * in Table II.1). 
21*IV Banks

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
E U R O S Y S T E M
Monthly Report
November 2011
IV Banks
 
1 Assets and liabilities of monetary financial institutions (excluding the Bundesbank) in Germany *
  Liabilities
 
 
€ billion
Deposits of banks (MFIs) Deposits of non-banks (non-MFIs) in the euro area
in the euro area
Deposits of non-banks in the home country Deposits of non-banks
With agreed At agreed
of banks maturities notice
Balance in the in other of which of which
sheet home member Over- up to up to Over-
Period total  1 Total country states Total Total night Total 2 years Total 3 months Total night
 End of year or month
 
2002 6,394.2 1,478.7 1,236.2 242.4 2,170.0 2,034.9 574.8 884.9 279.3 575.3 472.9 87.4 8.1
2003 6,432.0 1,471.0 1,229.4 241.6 2,214.6 2,086.9 622.1 874.5 248.0 590.3 500.8 81.8 9.3
2004 6,617.4 1,528.4 1,270.8 257.6 2,264.2 2,148.5 646.2 898.9 239.9 603.5 515.5 71.9 8.8
2005 6,859.4 1,569.6 1,300.8 268.8 2,329.1 2,225.4 715.8 906.2 233.4 603.4 519.1 62.2 9.6
2006 7,154.4 1,637.7 1,348.6 289.0 2,449.2 2,341.6 745.8 1,009.3 310.1 586.5 487.4 62.0 13.9
2007 7,592.4 1,778.6 1,479.0 299.6 2,633.6 2,518.3 769.6 1,193.3 477.9 555.4 446.0 75.1 19.6
2008 7,892.7 1,827.7 1,583.0 244.7 2,798.2 2,687.3 809.5 1,342.7 598.7 535.2 424.8 74.2 22.4
2009 7,436.1 1,589.7 1,355.6 234.0 2,818.0 2,731.3 997.8 1,139.1 356.4 594.4 474.4 63.9 17.7
2010 8,304.7 1,495.8 1,240.1 255.7 2,925.8 2,817.6 1,090.0 1,109.4 303.7 618.2 512.5 68.4 19.3
2009          Dec 7,436.1 1,589.7 1,355.6 234.0 2,818.0 2,731.3 997.8 1,139.1 356.4 594.4 474.4 63.9 17.7
2010          Jan 7,452.7 1,596.8 1,348.9 247.9 2,826.3 2,736.7 1,025.2 1,113.9 330.5 597.6 479.2 66.6 20.1
         Feb 7,449.5 1,597.3 1,361.7 235.6 2,828.9 2,736.7 1,025.5 1,108.4 323.8 602.9 485.1 69.6 20.4
         Mar 7,454.6 1,566.6 1,328.7 237.9 2,815.8 2,725.0 1,009.4 1,110.9 325.3 604.7 486.8 69.7 21.9
         Apr 7,570.0 1,599.7 1,340.9 258.7 2,836.1 2,737.0 1,044.7 1,087.5 301.4 604.8 488.8 77.9 27.3
         May 7,681.0 1,629.3 1,356.0 273.3 2,840.9 2,749.1 1,063.1 1,081.1 299.5 605.0 490.8 69.1 21.9
         June 7,641.3 1,616.8 1,365.8 251.0 2,842.3 2,750.9 1,064.3 1,082.1 299.7 604.4 491.5 69.5 22.3
         July 7,438.3 1,515.4 1,244.1 271.3 2,840.1 2,745.2 1,061.3 1,078.1 297.4 605.9 495.1 71.8 24.2
         Aug 7,517.6 1,534.6 1,253.2 281.4 2,856.9 2,756.0 1,068.3 1,081.9 298.3 605.8 496.8 70.4 22.5
         Sep 7,387.2 1,482.4 1,218.3 264.1 2,850.5 2,758.9 1,069.7 1,083.1 300.6 606.1 499.4 69.7 20.9
         Oct 7,397.5 1,517.9 1,247.9 270.0 2,872.8 2,759.8 1,071.3 1,081.1 300.4 607.4 502.2 69.9 21.2
         Nov 7,508.4 1,513.5 1,245.8 267.7 2,924.8 2,802.1 1,093.6 1,098.6 295.5 609.9 504.2 76.3 25.7
         Dec 8,304.7 1,495.8 1,240.1 255.7 2,925.8 2,817.6 1,090.0 1,109.4 303.7 618.2 512.5 68.4 19.3
2011          Jan 8,183.8 1,489.1 1,221.1 268.0 2,937.6 2,823.6 1,099.8 1,103.4 299.7 620.4 515.1 69.0 22.7
         Feb 8,142.3 1,472.6 1,208.0 264.6 2,930.8 2,817.3 1,083.9 1,110.9 307.2 622.5 517.2 66.5 21.4
         Mar 7,955.1 1,454.6 1,191.7 262.9 2,928.3 2,820.7 1,085.9 1,111.3 308.8 623.5 518.0 68.7 22.1
         Apr 7,997.9 1,458.9 1,183.6 275.3 2,936.7 2,830.9 1,088.0 1,120.7 319.2 622.3 517.6 71.9 25.7
         May 8,045.9 1,422.2 1,163.9 258.3 2,950.7 2,841.8 1,090.4 1,131.5 330.2 619.9 515.3 71.3 25.1
         June 7,885.8 1,401.2 1,158.5 242.6 2,959.0 2,844.9 1,096.5 1,130.7 330.2 617.7 513.4 73.4 26.6
         July 8,001.0 1,398.0 1,154.4 243.6 2,966.1 2,853.8 1,094.1 1,143.1 342.8 616.5 512.2 72.9 25.0
         Aug 8,263.5 1,413.8 1,163.7 250.1 2,988.4 2,873.6 1,105.9 1,152.7 351.5 615.0 510.8 75.6 25.5
         Sep 8,489.4 1,430.6 1,176.1 254.6 3,007.4 2,884.0 1,111.5 1,159.1 361.4 613.4 509.7 80.7 28.3
 Changes 4
2003 90.7 3.8 − 3.3 7.1 44.7 50.3 48.8 − 13.6 − 31.6 15.1 28.0 − 3.8 1.4
2004 209.7 62.3 42.8 19.6 53.5 64.9 26.3 25.5 − 8.3 13.1 14.7 − 9.3 − 0.4
2005 191.4 32.8 26.9 5.8 65.0 75.5 69.4 7.3 − 6.9 − 1.2 2.9 − 8.0 0.5
2006 353.9 105.6 81.5 24.1 122.9 118.6 30.4 105.0 77.1 − 16.8 − 31.7 0.5 4.4
2007 515.3 148.3 134.8 13.5 185.1 177.3 24.6 183.9 167.8 − 31.1 − 41.4 13.6 5.6
2008 314.0 65.8 121.5 − 55.8 162.4 173.1 38.8 154.6 123.5 − 20.2 − 21.2 − 7.4 − 0.1
2009 −454.8 −235.3 −224.5 − 10.8 31.9 43.9 205.0 −220.4 −259.3 59.3 50.3 − 9.6 − 4.1
2010 −135.1 − 75.5 − 99.6 24.0 72.4 59.8 92.2 − 56.5 − 55.7 24.0 38.3 − 4.4 2.1
2010          Jan − 8.8 5.3 − 7.9 13.2 7.4 4.8 26.9 − 25.3 − 26.0 3.2 4.7 2.4 2.3
         Feb − 7.2 3.6 12.0 − 8.3 − 5.9 − 0.4 − 0.1 − 5.6 − 6.8 5.2 5.9 − 5.1 0.3
         Mar 4.9 − 15.7 − 17.8 2.1 − 13.3 − 11.8 − 16.1 2.4 1.5 1.8 1.8 0.1 1.4
         Apr 107.9 33.5 12.9 20.6 18.9 10.6 35.1 − 24.5 − 25.0 0.1 2.0 8.2 5.4
         May 63.7 25.0 11.9 13.0 2.9 10.7 17.3 − 6.8 − 2.1 0.2 2.0 − 9.4 − 5.6
         June − 50.5 − 14.0 8.7 − 22.7 0.8 1.5 1.6 0.5 − 0.3 − 0.6 0.6 0.2 0.3
         July −166.1 − 94.4 −116.0 21.6 − 0.8 − 4.6 − 2.2 − 3.8 − 2.2 1.5 3.6 2.6 2.0
         Aug 60.6 16.9 7.6 9.2 16.0 10.2 6.6 3.7 0.8 − 0.1 1.7 − 1.6 − 1.8
         Sep − 88.7 − 47.4 − 31.8 − 15.6 − 4.6 4.3 2.5 1.5 2.5 0.3 2.6 − 0.4 − 1.5
         Oct 20.7 36.7 30.4 6.3 22.5 1.0 1.8 − 2.2 − 0.1 1.3 2.7 0.3 0.4
         Nov 80.9 − 8.9 − 4.9 − 4.0 26.9 17.6 22.1 − 7.0 − 6.0 2.6 2.0 6.1 4.4
         Dec −152.6 − 16.1 − 4.6 − 11.5 1.6 15.9 − 3.2 10.6 8.0 8.5 8.6 − 7.8 − 5.6
2011          Jan −106.0 − 4.9 − 17.9 13.0 12.4 6.5 10.2 − 5.9 − 3.9 2.2 2.7 0.7 3.5
         Feb − 39.5 − 16.2 − 13.1 − 3.0 − 6.7 − 6.1 − 12.8 4.6 4.6 2.1 2.1 − 2.5 − 1.4
         Mar −167.6 − 16.1 − 15.2 − 0.9 − 1.8 4.0 2.5 0.6 1.7 1.0 0.8 2.4 0.8
         Apr 63.2 6.6 − 6.9 13.5 9.4 10.8 3.6 9.3 10.4 − 2.1 − 1.3 3.3 3.7
         May 27.4 − 39.2 − 21.2 − 18.1 13.1 10.1 1.9 10.7 10.8 − 2.4 − 2.3 − 0.7 − 0.7
         June −165.7 − 20.9 − 5.3 − 15.6 8.5 3.3 6.2 − 0.7 − 0.0 − 2.1 − 1.9 2.1 1.5
         July 104.8 − 4.5 − 5.0 0.4 6.5 8.3 − 2.7 12.3 12.5 − 1.2 − 1.2 − 0.6 − 1.6
         Aug 263.0 16.8 12.6 4.2 17.1 19.9 11.8 9.6 8.8 − 1.6 − 1.4 − 2.7 0.4
         Sep 225.9 16.9 12.4 4.5 19.0 10.5 5.4 6.7 10.1 − 1.5 − 1.0 5.1 2.8
*This table serves to supplement the “Overall monetary survey“ in section data from money market funds. — 1See footnote 1 in Table IV.2. —
II. Unlike the other tables in section IV, this table includes − in addition to 2Excluding deposits of central governments. — 3In Germany, debt
the figures reported by banks (including building and loan associations) −
22*IV Banks

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2011
IV Banks
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Debt securities
issued  3 
in other member states  2 Deposits of
central governments
With agreed At agreed Liabilities
maturities notice arising
of which from Money of which Liabilities
domestic market with to non- repos with
of which of which central non-banks fund euro- Capital maturities
up to up to govern- in the shares of up to area and Other
Total 2 years Total 3 months Total ments euro area issued  3 Total reserves   Period 2 years  3 residents Liabilities  1 
End of year or month
 
74.6 9.9 4.7 3.6 47.7 45.6 3.3 36.7 1,468.2 71.6 599.2 343.0 309.8 2002
68.6 11.4 3.9 3.1 45.9 44.2 14.1 36.7 1,486.9 131.3 567.8 340.2 300.8 2003
59.8 9.8 3.3 2.7 43.8 41.4 14.8 31.5 1,554.8 116.9 577.1 329.3 317.2 2004
50.2 9.8 2.4 2.0 41.6 38.8 19.5 31.7 1,611.9 113.8 626.2 346.8 324.5 2005
45.9 9.3 2.3 1.9 45.5 41.9 17.1 32.0 1,636.7 136.4 638.5 389.6 353.7 2006
53.2 22.0 2.3 1.8 40.1 38.3 26.6 28.6 1,637.6 182.3 661.0 428.2 398.2 2007
49.5 24.9 2.4 1.8 36.6 34.8 61.1 16.4 1,609.9 233.3 666.3 461.7 451.5 2008
43.7 17.0 2.5 2.0 22.8 22.2 80.5 11.4 1,500.5 146.3 565.6 454.8 415.6 2009
46.4 16.1 2.8 2.2 39.8 38.7 86.7 9.8 1,407.8 82.3 636.0 452.8 1,289.9 2010
43.7 17.0 2.5 2.0 22.8 22.2 80.5 11.4 1,500.5 146.3 565.6 454.8 415.6 2009          Dec 
44.0 15.5 2.5 2.0 23.0 21.3 68.2 12.2 1,503.2 142.7 598.0 441.8 406.3 2010          Jan 
46.6 15.1 2.5 2.0 22.6 20.7 78.9 12.0 1,496.5 140.1 608.5 441.6 385.9          Feb 
45.2 13.6 2.6 2.0 21.1 20.4 79.8 11.6 1,503.2 138.0 622.6 445.8 409.3          Mar 
48.0 16.8 2.6 2.0 21.2 19.8 100.7 11.3 1,501.9 132.1 672.6 448.0 399.8          Apr 
44.5 13.9 2.6 2.1 22.7 20.6 101.4 11.3 1,503.4 127.7 738.4 447.0 409.4          May
44.6 14.1 2.7 2.1 21.9 20.8 102.7 11.0 1,487.2 111.3 705.4 443.4 432.6          June
44.9 13.1 2.7 2.1 23.0 19.6 92.2 10.7 1,448.5 106.8 686.7 439.9 404.9          July
45.3 13.9 2.7 2.1 30.4 20.4 104.0 10.3 1,457.6 111.1 701.7 438.1 414.3          Aug 
46.2 14.8 2.7 2.1 21.9 20.7 95.9 10.2 1,440.3 108.5 667.1 433.6 407.3          Sep 
46.0 14.6 2.7 2.1 43.1 34.1 85.0 9.8 1,407.4 87.7 657.4 440.1 407.1          Oct 
47.8 15.5 2.7 2.2 46.3 41.3 109.0 9.8 1,423.6 87.7 674.0 452.8 401.0          Nov 
46.4 16.1 2.8 2.2 39.8 38.7 86.7 9.8 1,407.8 82.3 636.0 452.8 1,289.9          Dec 
43.5 13.7 2.8 2.2 45.0 37.1 74.5 9.9 1,400.8 80.6 631.5 454.3 1,186.1 2011          Jan 
42.3 14.3 2.8 2.2 47.0 37.8 93.2 9.8 1,396.0 83.0 634.1 460.2 1,145.7          Feb 
43.8 16.3 2.9 2.3 38.9 36.2 78.9 10.0 1,373.4 78.2 575.5 460.7 1,073.7          Mar 
43.3 16.0 2.9 2.3 34.0 33.8 89.2 9.7 1,364.1 76.2 605.0 456.8 1,077.5          Apr 
43.3 16.2 2.9 2.3 37.6 34.8 105.2 9.5 1,368.4 77.2 605.4 460.7 1,123.8          May
43.9 15.8 2.9 2.3 40.6 38.3 104.8 9.4 1,360.1 74.2 556.5 449.5 1,045.4          June
44.9 16.9 3.0 2.3 39.4 35.6 91.8 6.8 1,357.0 77.3 560.3 453.2 1,167.9          July
47.1 15.2 3.0 2.3 39.3 36.8 101.9 7.2 1,352.8 79.4 604.9 458.7 1,335.7          Aug 
49.4 17.7 3.0 2.3 42.7 40.8 107.0 7.2 1,352.5 76.2 644.6 459.3 1,480.7          Sep 
Changes 4
− 4.4 2.0 − 0.8 − 0.4 − 1.8 − 1.4 10.7 − 0.5 49.6 − 2.2 4.9 − 3.3 − 19.4 2003
− 8.3 − 1.4 − 0.6 − 0.4 − 2.1 − 2.8 0.8 − 5.2 73.2 − 14.8 21.7 − 10.5 14.0 2004
− 7.7 − 0.4 − 0.9 − 0.7 − 2.5 − 3.0 4.7 0.2 39.1 − 9.5 22.0 14.4 13.3 2005
− 3.9 − 0.3 − 0.1 − 0.2 3.9 3.1 − 3.3 0.3 34.4 21.7 32.4 27.9 33.7 2006
8.0 13.0 0.0 − 0.1 − 5.8 − 4.3 8.1 − 3.4 20.3 48.7 48.8 42.9 65.1 2007
− 7.4 0.7 0.1 − 0.0 − 3.3 − 3.2 36.1 − 12.2 − 33.8 50.4 − 0.0 39.2 56.6 2008
− 5.6 − 7.6 0.1 0.2 − 2.4 − 0.8 19.4 − 5.0 −104.9 − 87.3 − 95.5 − 0.1 − 65.2 2009
− 6.8 − 5.8 0.3 0.3 17.0 16.5 6.2 − 1.6 −105.8 − 62.4 54.3 − 8.0 − 76.9 2010
0.1 − 1.6 0.0 0.0 0.2 − 0.9 − 12.3 0.8 − 4.4 − 3.5 26.4 − 14.7 − 17.2 2010          Jan 
− 5.5 − 4.8 0.0 0.0 − 0.4 − 0.6 10.7 − 0.1 − 11.0 − 2.7 6.2 − 1.2 − 9.5          Feb 
− 1.4 − 1.5 0.0 0.0 − 1.5 − 0.4 1.0 − 0.4 6.0 − 2.0 13.0 4.0 10.3          Mar 
2.7 3.1 0.0 0.0 0.1 − 0.5 20.8 − 0.3 − 4.0 − 6.0 47.5 1.6 − 10.1          Apr 
− 3.8 − 3.2 0.0 0.0 1.5 0.8 0.7 − 0.0 − 16.1 − 4.5 49.5 − 5.2 7.0          May
− 0.1 0.0 0.0 0.0 − 0.9 0.2 1.2 − 0.3 − 20.7 − 16.4 − 35.6 − 4.7 22.7          June
0.6 − 0.8 0.0 0.0 1.1 − 1.2 − 10.4 − 0.2 − 26.3 − 4.4 − 6.6 − 0.9 − 26.4          July
0.2 0.6 0.0 0.0 7.4 0.7 11.7 − 0.4 1.5 4.2 8.9 − 3.3 9.3          Aug 
1.2 1.1 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 8.6 0.3 − 8.0 − 0.1 − 0.8 − 2.3 − 19.4 − 1.4 − 6.9          Sep 
− 0.1 − 0.1 0.0 0.0 21.3 13.4 − 10.8 − 0.4 − 29.8 − 20.7 − 6.5 7.1 1.9          Oct 
1.6 0.8 0.0 0.0 3.2 7.1 23.9 − 0.0 10.7 1.2 3.9 9.9 14.6          Nov 
− 2.2 0.6 0.1 0.1 − 6.5 − 2.5 − 22.2 0.1 − 11.1 − 5.3 − 33.1 0.8 − 72.7          Dec 
− 2.8 − 2.3 0.0 0.0 5.2 − 1.6 − 12.2 0.0 − 1.2 − 1.6 0.2 2.9 −103.1 2011          Jan 
− 1.1 0.6 0.0 0.0 1.9 0.7 18.8 − 0.1 − 1.6 2.4 4.1 6.2 − 44.1          Feb 
1.6 2.1 0.0 0.0 − 8.1 − 1.6 − 14.3 0.2 − 12.4 − 3.7 − 53.4 2.3 − 72.1          Mar 
− 0.4 − 0.2 0.0 0.0 − 4.7 − 2.3 10.4 − 0.3 − 1.5 − 1.9 36.7 − 2.3 4.2          Apr 
− 0.0 0.1 0.0 0.0 3.6 1.0 15.9 − 0.2 − 3.4 0.9 − 5.8 2.4 44.7          May
0.6 − 0.4 0.0 0.0 3.0 3.5 − 0.3 − 0.1 − 15.4 − 3.7 − 47.8 − 11.0 − 78.6          June
0.9 1.0 0.0 0.0 − 1.2 − 2.7 − 13.4 − 0.1 − 8.6 3.0 0.6 2.7 121.6          July
− 3.1 − 2.2 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.1 1.1 10.3 0.4 − 1.0 2.2 47.1 5.4 167.0          Aug 
2.3 2.5 0.0 0.0 3.4 4.0 5.1 0.1 2.1 − 0.8 39.7 − 1.9 144.9          Sep 
securities with maturities of up to one year are classed as money market together with money market fund shares. — 4Statistical breaks have been
paper; up to the January 2002 Monthly Report they were published eliminated from the flow figures (see also footnote * in Table II.1). 
23*IV Banks

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
E U R O S Y S T E M
Monthly Report
November 2011
IV Banks
 
2 Principal assets and liabilities of banks (MFIs) in Germany, by category of banks *
 
 
€ billion
  Lending to banks (MFIs)  Lending to non-banks (non-MFIs)
 
 of which of which
 
Loans
 Cash in
 hand and
 credit
Number of balances for
reporting Balance with Balances up to and for Partici- Securities Securities
End of institu- sheet central and issued by including more than issued by pating Other
month tions total  1 banks Total loans banks Total 1 year 1 year Bills non-banks interests assets  1 
All categories of banks
 
2011          Apr 1,922 8,045.9 64.8 2,781.5 2,043.0 728.6 3,996.7 513.3 2,695.1 0.8 746.8 148.4 1,054.5
         May 1,923 8,094.0 71.9 2,785.4 2,038.2 735.5 3,988.8 513.6 2,706.3 0.7 727.0 146.9 1,101.0
         June 1,923 7,933.6 81.9 2,729.3 1,995.7 722.6 3,956.3 504.0 2,699.0 0.7 715.8 144.4 1,021.8
         July 1,922 8,051.5 72.7 2,730.0 2,004.4 713.9 3,962.5 502.5 2,713.4 0.7 710.1 143.7 1,142.5
         Aug 1,920 8,313.8 79.1 2,819.5 2,096.1 712.7 3,969.7 512.9 2,723.0 0.7 696.6 143.8 1,301.7
         Sep 1,915 8,538.9 94.3 2,890.3 2,171.8 706.6 3,974.7 518.4 2,731.9 0.7 691.6 143.8 1,435.8
Commercial banks 6
2011          Aug 288 3,133.7 31.5 974.3 868.7 103.4 1,093.5 253.2 634.5 0.3 176.2 73.1 961.4
         Sep 288 3,282.2 44.7 1,016.0 911.6 102.2 1,086.6 249.5 637.5 0.4 173.6 73.0 1,061.9
   Big banks 7
2011          Aug 4 2,138.1 15.8 581.4 522.4 57.4 542.8 165.6 252.2 0.2 96.0 65.5 932.6
         Sep 4 2,232.3 30.3 577.0 518.9 56.5 526.8 157.8 252.4 0.3 91.4 65.4 1,032.8
   Regional banks and other commercial banks
2011          Aug 171 770.1 13.4 241.2 195.7 44.9 484.3 67.5 339.5 0.1 76.9 6.7 24.4
         Sep 171 816.5 12.2 279.2 233.8 44.7 493.7 71.4 342.1 0.1 79.5 6.7 24.7
   Branches of foreign banks
2011          Aug 113 225.5 2.2 151.7 150.6 1.1 66.4 20.1 42.9 0.0 3.3 0.9 4.4
         Sep 113 233.4 2.1 159.8 158.9 1.0 66.1 20.3 42.9 0.0 2.7 0.9 4.4
Landesbanken
2011          Aug 10 1,385.1 9.8 514.9 379.3 131.6 652.2 107.0 410.9 0.1 128.3 17.6 190.5
         Sep 10 1,440.5 12.7 535.0 399.7 130.8 662.7 116.1 414.0 0.1 127.1 17.6 212.5
Savings banks
2011          Aug 428 1,078.2 20.6 246.8 92.1 153.4 775.7 58.8 611.8 0.1 104.9 17.4 17.7
         Sep 428 1,079.2 20.1 245.2 91.8 151.5 778.1 60.5 612.9 0.1 104.5 17.4 18.3
 
Regional institutions of credit cooperatives  
 
2011          Aug 2 277.0 0.7 162.8 126.1 36.6 61.7 14.5 19.5 0.0 26.7 14.9 37.0
         Sep 2 285.3 0.9 169.2 131.9 37.3 60.9 14.1 20.0 0.0 26.3 14.9 39.3
Credit cooperatives
2011          Aug 1,133 713.0 14.6 185.8 70.4 114.2 483.0 31.8 385.4 0.1 65.6 11.6 18.0
         Sep 1,128 713.3 14.2 183.8 68.6 113.4 485.7 33.0 386.5 0.1 66.0 11.6 18.0
Mortgage banks
2011          Aug 18 616.7 0.7 173.0 98.4 74.2 423.3 17.8 309.5 − 96.0 1.2 18.6
         Sep 18 615.7 0.3 175.2 101.3 73.5 420.0 16.0 308.6 − 95.4 1.2 18.8
Building and loan associations
2011          Aug 23 196.6 0.1 58.2 40.8 17.4 130.2 1.6 114.3 . 14.3 0.4 7.8
         Sep 23 197.3 0.1 59.3 42.0 17.3 129.7 1.6 114.6 . 13.5 0.4 7.8
Special purpose banks
2011          Aug 18 913.5 1.2 503.7 420.3 82.0 350.1 28.1 236.9 − 84.7 7.6 50.8
         Sep 18 925.4 1.1 506.6 424.8 80.6 351.0 27.6 237.7 − 85.1 7.6 59.1
Memo item: Foreign banks 8
2011          Aug 152 925.0 13.1 367.3 313.4 52.2 425.9 67.2 269.3 0.1 86.1 6.1 112.6
         Sep 153 980.7 11.9 409.8 355.7 52.5 431.8 74.2 270.3 0.1 84.4 6.1 121.1
  of which:  Banks majority-owned by foreign banks 9
2011          Aug 39 699.5 10.9 215.6 162.8 51.1 359.5 47.1 226.4 0.1 82.9 5.3 108.2
         Sep 40 747.3 9.7 249.9 196.8 51.5 365.7 53.9 227.4 0.1 81.7 5.2 116.7
*For the period up to December 1998, section IV (except for Table IV.1) of 25 May 2009, derivative financial instruments in the trading portfolio
shows the assets and liabilities of banks (excluding building and loan (trading portfolio derivatives) within the meaning of section 340e (3)
associations) in Germany; from January 1999, the assets and liabilities of sentence 1 of the German Commercial Code (Handelsgesetzbuch) read in
monetary financial institutions (MFIs) in Germany. The assets and liabilities conjunction with section 35 (1) No 1a of the Credit Institution Accounting
of foreign branches, of money market funds (which are also classified as Regulation (Verordnung über die Rechnungslegung der Kreditinstitute) are
MFIs) and of the Bundesbank are not included. For the definitions of the classified under "Other assets and liabilities" as of the December 2010
respective items, see the footnotes to Table IV.3. — 1Owing to the Act reporting date. Trading portfolio derivatives are listed separately in the
Modernising Accounting Law (Gesetz zur Modernisierung des Bilanzrechts) Statistical Supplement to the Monthly Report 1, Banking statistics in Tables
24*IV Banks

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2011
IV Banks
 
 
 
 
 
Deposits of banks (MFIs) Deposits of non-banks (non-MFIs) Capital
 including  
of which of which published
reserves,
Time deposits  2 Savings deposits  4 partici-
pation
Memo rights
item Bearer capital,
for for of which debt Liabilities funds for
up to and more arising At three Bank general Other securities
Sight Time Sight including than from savings out- banking liabi-   End of months’
Total deposits deposits Total deposits 1 year 1 year  2 repos  3 Total notice bonds risks lities  1   month standing  5 
All categories of banks
 
1,909.1 397.8 1,511.3 3,181.0 1,232.8 383.4 816.6 151.7 632.4 525.5 115.7 1,428.0 392.2 1,135.6 2011          Apr 
1,871.7 393.2 1,478.4 3,212.1 1,235.5 412.6 816.2 168.7 630.0 523.2 117.8 1,436.0 392.4 1,181.9          May
1,811.6 373.3 1,438.3 3,210.1 1,226.1 422.3 815.1 161.3 627.8 521.2 118.8 1,417.7 391.2 1,103.1          June
1,810.5 370.7 1,439.8 3,206.0 1,233.4 410.7 815.7 146.8 626.5 519.9 119.7 1,418.0 391.4 1,225.6          July
1,868.7 379.8 1,488.9 3,240.5 1,241.1 432.8 821.4 160.9 624.9 518.4 120.4 1,418.2 392.7 1,393.7          Aug 
1,921.5 437.8 1,483.7 3,268.3 1,261.9 443.2 819.2 162.9 623.3 517.4 120.7 1,418.3 392.9 1,537.9          Sep 
Commercial banks 6
748.4 253.2 495.2 1,108.3 561.9 187.7 203.0 87.4 124.9 97.2 30.8 194.8 130.7 951.4 2011          Aug 
781.3 290.1 491.1 1,124.1 572.7 192.8 202.9 87.2 124.5 96.6 31.2 190.2 130.8 1,055.9          Sep 
Big banks 7
458.1 177.8 280.2 539.3 260.7 107.8 87.0 81.6 73.6 69.4 10.1 158.3 80.0 902.4 2011          Aug 
451.7 192.6 259.2 542.3 260.3 112.2 86.0 81.8 73.2 69.0 10.5 153.0 80.0 1,005.4          Sep 
Regional banks and other commercial banks
144.3 41.8 102.5 504.9 262.2 72.0 99.7 5.8 51.2 27.8 19.7 36.5 43.4 41.0 2011          Aug 
176.1 67.9 108.2 517.3 273.2 72.6 100.5 5.3 51.2 27.6 19.8 37.2 43.4 42.5          Sep 
Branches of foreign banks
146.0 33.5 112.5 64.2 39.0 7.9 16.3 − 0.0 0.0 1.0 − 7.3 8.0 2011          Aug 
153.4 29.6 123.8 64.5 39.2 7.9 16.5 − 0.0 0.0 0.9 0.1 7.4 8.1          Sep 
Landesbanken
359.5 52.4 307.0 386.7 93.8 110.0 167.5 57.7 14.1 10.8 1.3 367.4 64.5 206.9 2011          Aug 
370.7 64.7 306.0 401.0 105.0 114.0 166.7 60.3 14.0 10.7 1.4 367.8 64.6 236.5          Sep 
Savings banks
178.3 17.1 161.2 755.9 328.1 48.1 15.6 1.0 299.0 247.5 65.0 22.6 63.9 57.5 2011          Aug 
179.0 19.7 159.3 754.5 327.3 48.4 15.6 0.8 298.4 247.4 64.9 22.2 63.9 59.7          Sep 
 
Regional institutions of credit cooperatives
 
134.1 28.4 105.7 37.7 9.5 12.5 13.5 4.3 − − 2.3 55.7 13.0 36.5 2011          Aug 
137.5 29.3 108.2 41.1 11.7 13.7 13.5 7.2 − − 2.3 53.8 13.0 39.8          Sep 
Credit cooperatives
100.7 5.9 94.8 512.8 227.2 49.2 30.2 − 186.2 162.2 20.0 21.2 44.4 33.9 2011          Aug 
100.5 6.9 93.5 512.1 226.2 49.9 30.1 − 185.9 162.0 20.0 20.8 44.5 35.4          Sep 
Mortgage banks
160.2 6.6 153.6 200.4 11.3 13.5 175.4 3.9 0.3 0.3 − 213.3 19.3 23.5 2011          Aug 
165.6 8.4 157.2 199.7 11.7 13.5 174.2 3.3 0.3 0.3 − 206.4 19.3 24.6          Sep 
Building and loan associations
25.3 1.8 23.5 139.8 0.4 0.9 137.2 − 0.4 0.3 1.0 5.6 8.3 17.6 2011          Aug 
25.2 1.5 23.7 140.2 0.4 0.9 137.6 − 0.4 0.3 1.0 5.6 8.3 18.0          Sep 
Special purpose banks
162.2 14.4 147.9 98.8 8.9 10.8 79.1 6.6 − − − 537.6 48.6 66.4 2011          Aug 
161.8 17.2 144.6 95.5 6.8 10.1 78.6 4.0 − − − 551.5 48.6 68.0          Sep 
Memo item:   Foreign banks 8
267.0 80.8 186.3 421.1 216.3 79.7 90.3 27.0 19.6 19.4 15.2 66.7 44.8 125.4 2011          Aug 
309.9 109.1 200.7 428.4 223.5 79.4 90.8 30.2 19.4 19.3 15.3 63.4 44.9 134.1          Sep 
of which:   Banks majority-owned by foreign banks 9
121.0 47.2 73.8 356.9 177.3 71.8 74.0 27.0 19.5 19.3 14.2 66.7 37.5 117.4 2011          Aug 
156.5 79.6 76.9 363.9 184.3 71.5 74.3 30.2 19.4 19.2 14.3 63.3 37.5 126.1          Sep 
I.1 to I.3. — 2For building and loan associations: Including deposits under AG, Dresdner Bank AG (up to Nov. 2009), Commerzbank AG, UniCredit Bank
savings and loan contracts (see Table IV.12). — 3Included in time AG (formerly Bayerische Hypo- und Vereinsbank AG) and Deutsche Postbank
deposits. — 4Excluding deposits under savings and loan contracts (see also AG. — 8Sum of the banks majority-owned by foreign banks and included in
footnote 2). — 5Including subordinated negotiable bearer debt securities; other categories of banks and the category ”Branches (with dependent
excluding non-negotiable bearer debt securities. — 6Commercial banks legal status) of foreign banks”. — 9Separate presentation of the banks
comprise the sub-groups ”Big banks”, ”Regional banks and other majority-owned by foreign banks included in other banking categories. 
commercial banks” and ”Branches of foreign banks”. — 7Deutsche Bank
25*IV Banks

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
E U R O S Y S T E M
Monthly Report
November 2011
IV Banks
 
3 Assets and liabilities of banks (MFIs) in Germany vis-à-vis residents *
 
 
€ billion
Lending to domestic banks (MFIs)  2,3 Lending to domestic non-banks (non-MFIs)  3,6 
Treasury
Cash in Negotiable bills and
hand Credit money negotiable
balances market Memo money mar- (euro-area Securities
banknotes with the Credit paper item ket paper issued Securities
and Bundes- balances issued by issued by Fiduciary issued by by non-
Period coins)  1 bank Total and loans Bills  4 banks banks loans  5 Total Loans Bills  4 non-banks banks  7 
End of year or month *
 
2001 14.2 56.3 1,676.0 1,078.9 0.0 5.6 591.5 2.8 3,014.1 2,699.4 4.8 4.4 301.5
2002 17.5 45.6 1,691.3 1,112.3 0.0 7.8 571.2 2.7 2,997.2 2,685.0 4.1 3.3 301.9
2003 17.0 46.7 1,643.9 1,064.0 0.0 8.8 571.0 2.3 2,995.6 2,677.0 3.7 3.4 309.6
2004 14.9 41.2 1,676.3 1,075.8 0.0 7.4 592.9 2.1 3,001.3 2,644.0 2.7 2.6 351.0
2005 15.1 47.9 1,684.5 1,096.8 0.0 6.7 580.9 2.1 2,995.1 2,632.7 2.4 2.4 357.6
2006 16.0 49.4 1,637.8 1,086.3 − 9.3 542.2 1.9 3,000.7 2,630.3 1.9 2.0 366.5
2007 17.5 64.6 1,751.8 1,222.5 0.0 25.3 504.0 2.3 2,975.7 2,647.9 1.6 1.5 324.7
2008 17.4 102.6 1,861.7 1,298.1 0.0 55.7 507.8 2.0 3,071.1 2,698.9 1.2 3.1 367.9
2009 16.9 78.9 1,711.5 1,138.0 − 31.6 541.9 2.2 3,100.1 2,691.8 0.8 4.0 403.5
2010 16.0 79.6 1,686.3 1,195.4 − 7.5 483.5 1.8 3,220.9 2,770.4 0.8 27.9 421.8
2010          Apr 13.6 66.4 1,754.8 1,195.3 − 26.5 533.0 1.9 3,140.8 2,697.2 0.7 2.0 440.9
         May 14.2 57.5 1,817.8 1,267.0 − 26.5 524.3 1.9 3,130.1 2,707.8 0.6 2.5 419.2
         June 13.7 116.1 1,761.1 1,223.2 0.0 26.5 511.4 1.9 3,147.5 2,716.5 0.6 8.1 422.4
         July 14.3 66.8 1,688.7 1,165.6 − 26.4 496.7 1.8 3,139.7 2,708.6 0.6 9.9 420.6
         Aug 13.9 66.8 1,704.5 1,183.5 − 27.1 493.9 1.8 3,150.2 2,717.5 0.6 9.2 423.0
         Sep 14.2 74.1 1,685.0 1,169.5 − 24.5 491.1 1.9 3,129.7 2,699.9 0.6 8.9 420.3
         Oct 14.7 64.4 1,674.2 1,180.2 − 6.9 487.1 1.8 3,249.0 2,710.7 0.6 28.2 509.4
         Nov 14.0 57.6 1,697.3 1,200.6 − 8.6 488.1 1.8 3,290.2 2,815.9 0.6 26.1 447.6
         Dec 16.0 79.6 1,686.3 1,195.4 − 7.5 483.5 1.8 3,220.9 2,770.4 0.8 27.9 421.8
2011          Jan 13.6 54.0 1,673.1 1,183.9 − 7.9 481.3 1.7 3,241.2 2,777.7 0.7 29.2 433.6
         Feb 13.6 61.7 1,668.2 1,179.5 − 9.4 479.3 1.7 3,240.3 2,786.9 0.7 29.4 423.4
         Mar 14.0 67.0 1,646.6 1,164.7 − 7.7 474.2 1.7 3,211.7 2,757.5 0.6 24.6 429.0
         Apr 15.1 49.1 1,630.9 1,152.3 − 5.4 473.2 1.7 3,226.5 2,748.7 0.6 25.6 451.6
         May 14.6 56.4 1,623.7 1,143.2 − 5.7 474.8 1.7 3,209.4 2,753.8 0.5 23.7 431.3
         June 14.4 66.6 1,607.5 1,137.4 − 5.2 465.0 1.7 3,191.7 2,748.9 0.5 21.6 420.7
         July 14.5 57.5 1,610.1 1,144.0 − 5.1 460.9 1.6 3,193.1 2,753.1 0.5 18.7 420.7
         Aug 14.0 64.1 1,665.1 1,200.6 − 5.3 459.2 1.7 3,201.3 2,768.0 0.5 16.7 416.2
         Sep 14.7 78.8 1,731.5 1,270.1 − 6.0 455.4 1.7 3,207.5 2,778.2 0.6 14.5 414.2
Changes *
2002 + 3.3 − 10.7 + 15.0 + 33.1 + 0.0 + 2.3 − 20.3 − 0.2 − 19.2 − 18.0 − 0.8 − 1.1 + 1.7
2003 − 0.5 + 1.1 − 47.2 − 48.2 + 0.0 + 1.0 + 0.1 − 0.3 + 0.1 − 8.0 − 0.4 + 0.3 + 9.3
2004 − 2.1 − 5.5 + 35.9 + 15.1 + 0.0 − 1.4 + 22.1 − 0.2 + 3.3 − 35.0 − 1.0 + 1.1 + 39.2
2005 + 0.2 + 6.7 + 8.4 + 21.0 − 0.0 − 0.8 − 11.9 − 0.0 − 6.7 − 11.8 − 0.3 − 0.2 + 6.6
2006 + 0.9 + 1.5 − 3.6 + 24.5 − 0.0 + 2.6 − 30.6 − 0.2 − 12.4 − 20.3 − 0.5 − 0.4 + 8.8
2007 + 1.5 + 15.2 + 114.8 + 137.6 + 0.0 + 17.0 − 39.8 + 0.4 − 15.9 + 12.1 − 0.3 − 0.5 − 27.2
2008 − 0.1 + 39.4 + 125.9 + 90.1 + 0.0 + 30.6 + 5.2 − 0.8 + 92.0 + 47.3 − 0.4 + 1.8 + 43.3
2009 − 0.5 − 23.6 − 147.2 − 157.3 − 0.0 − 24.1 + 34.3 + 0.2 + 25.7 − 11.2 − 0.4 + 1.4 + 35.9
2010 − 0.9 + 0.6 − 19.3 + 61.5 + 0.0 − 24.0 − 56.8 − 0.3 + 130.5 + 78.7 + 0.0 + 23.8 + 28.0
2010          Apr − 0.4 − 23.1 + 34.8 + 36.5 − − 0.7 − 1.1 − 0.0 + 42.1 + 15.5 − 0.1 − 1.1 + 27.7
         May + 0.7 − 8.9 + 63.0 + 71.7 − − 0.0 − 8.7 − 0.0 − 10.7 + 10.5 − 0.0 + 0.5 − 21.8
         June − 0.5 + 58.6 − 56.7 − 43.7 + 0.0 − 0.4 − 12.6 + 0.0 + 17.5 + 8.7 − 0.0 + 5.5 + 3.3
         July + 0.5 − 49.3 − 69.2 − 54.4 − 0.0 − 0.1 − 14.7 − 0.1 − 7.8 − 7.8 + 0.1 + 1.6 − 1.7
         Aug − 0.3 − 0.0 + 15.8 + 17.9 − + 0.7 − 2.8 − + 10.5 + 8.8 − 0.0 − 0.7 + 2.4
         Sep + 0.3 + 7.4 − 19.5 − 14.0 − − 2.7 − 2.8 + 0.0 − 20.6 − 17.6 − 0.1 − 0.2 − 2.7
         Oct + 0.4 − 9.8 − 10.8 + 10.7 − − 17.5 − 4.0 − 0.0 + 120.1 + 11.7 + 0.1 + 19.3 + 89.1
         Nov − 0.6 − 6.8 + 23.1 + 20.4 − + 1.7 + 1.1 − 0.0 + 41.1 + 105.0 − 0.0 − 2.1 − 61.8
         Dec + 2.0 + 22.0 − 10.7 − 4.9 − − 1.1 − 4.6 + 0.0 − 64.1 − 45.4 + 0.2 + 1.8 − 20.7
2011          Jan − 2.4 − 25.6 − 13.2 − 11.4 − + 0.5 − 2.2 − 0.1 + 20.3 + 7.3 − 0.1 + 1.3 + 11.8
         Feb − 0.1 + 7.7 − 4.9 − 4.4 − + 1.5 − 2.0 − − 0.9 + 9.2 − 0.0 + 0.2 − 10.2
         Mar + 0.4 + 5.3 − 21.6 − 14.8 − − 1.7 − 5.1 + 0.0 − 28.6 − 29.4 − 0.1 − 4.7 + 5.6
         Apr + 1.1 − 17.8 − 15.7 − 12.4 − − 2.3 − 0.9 + 0.0 + 14.8 − 8.8 + 0.0 + 0.9 + 22.7
         May − 0.5 + 7.2 − 7.3 − 9.1 − + 0.3 + 1.6 − 0.0 − 17.1 + 5.1 − 0.1 − 1.9 − 20.3
         June − 0.3 + 10.3 − 16.2 − 5.8 − − 0.5 − 9.8 + 0.0 − 17.5 − 4.7 − 0.0 − 2.1 − 10.7
         July + 0.2 − 9.1 + 2.6 + 6.6 − − 0.0 − 4.0 − 0.0 + 1.4 + 4.2 + 0.0 − 2.8 + 0.0
         Aug − 0.5 + 6.6 + 62.3 + 63.8 − + 0.2 − 1.7 + 0.0 + 0.7 + 7.3 − 0.0 − 2.1 − 4.6
         Sep + 0.6 + 14.7 + 66.3 + 69.5 − + 0.7 − 3.8 − 0.0 + 6.2 + 10.2 + 0.1 − 2.2 − 1.9
*See Table IV.2, footnote*; statistical breaks have been eliminated from the rediscounted bills and bills sent for collection from the banks’ portfolios
changes. The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as prior to maturity). — 5From 1999, no longer included in loans or deposits
provisional. Subsequent revisions which appear in the following Monthly (see also footnote 3). — 6Up to December 1998, including loans to domestic
Report, are not specially marked. — 1Up to December 1998, domestic building and loan associations. — 7Excluding debt securities arising from
banknotes and coins. — 2Up to December 1998, excluding loans to the exchange of equalisation claims (see also footnote 8). — 8Including
domestic building and loan associations. — 3Up to December 1998, debt securities arising from the exchange of equalisation claims. —
including fiduciary loans (see also footnote 5). — 4Up to December 1998, 9Including liabilities arising from registered debt securities, registered
bill-based lending (bill holdings plus endorsement liabilities arising from money market paper and non-negotiable bearer debt securities;
26*IV Banks

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2011
IV Banks
 
 
 
 
 
 Deposits of domestic banks (MFIs)  3,9,10  Deposits of domestic non-banks (non-MFIs)  3,15 
Partici-
pating
interests
in
Memo domestic Memo Memo
item banks Sight Time Redis- item Sight Time Savings Bank item Equalisa-
tion Fiduciary and deposits deposits counted Fiduciary de- deposits de- savings Fiduciary
claims  8 loans  5 Total 11,12  12,13  bills 14 loans  5 Total 13,16  bonds  18 loans  5   Period enterprises posits  11 posits  17 
End of year or month *
 
4.0 57.0 95.9 1,204.9 123.1 1,081.6 0.3 27.2 2,034.0 526.4 827.0 574.5 106.0 43.3 2001
3.0 54.8 119.0 1,244.0 127.6 1,116.2 0.2 25.6 2,085.9 575.6 830.6 575.3 104.4 42.1 2002
2.0 56.8 109.2 1,229.6 116.8 1,112.6 0.2 27.8 2,140.3 624.0 825.7 590.3 100.3 40.5 2003
1.0 61.8 99.6 1,271.2 119.7 1,151.4 0.1 30.3 2,200.0 646.9 851.2 603.5 98.4 43.7 2004
− 56.6 108.5 1,300.0 120.5 1,179.4 0.1 26.5 2,276.6 717.0 864.4 603.4 91.9 42.4 2005
− 53.0 106.3 1,348.2 125.4 1,222.7 0.0 22.3 2,394.6 747.7 962.8 586.5 97.5 37.8 2006
− 51.1 109.4 1,478.6 122.1 1,356.5 0.0 20.0 2,579.1 779.9 1,125.4 555.4 118.4 36.4 2007
− 47.2 111.2 1,582.5 138.5 1,444.0 0.0 41.6 2,781.4 834.6 1,276.1 535.2 135.4 32.3 2008
− 43.9 106.1 1,355.1 128.9 1,226.2 0.0 35.7 2,829.7 1,029.5 1,102.6 594.5 103.2 43.4 2009
− 33.7 96.8 1,237.9 135.3 1,102.6 0.0 13.8 2,936.6 1,104.4 1,117.1 618.2 96.9 37.5 2010
− 42.8 98.6 1,340.4 140.3 1,200.1 0.0 36.1 2,852.0 1,070.3 1,077.0 604.8 99.9 42.7 2010          Apr 
− 42.8 97.8 1,355.5 139.6 1,215.9 0.0 37.1 2,867.5 1,089.6 1,073.1 605.1 99.7 42.7          May
− 42.5 97.6 1,365.2 140.1 1,225.0 0.0 36.8 2,867.5 1,090.5 1,073.1 604.4 99.5 42.4          June
− 42.3 96.1 1,243.3 134.7 1,108.6 0.0 35.6 2,851.1 1,084.9 1,061.3 605.9 98.9 42.2          July
− 42.3 95.6 1,252.5 138.9 1,113.7 0.0 35.9 2,873.4 1,094.7 1,074.2 605.9 98.7 42.2          Aug 
− 42.1 95.3 1,217.8 138.6 1,079.1 0.0 35.1 2,867.2 1,083.3 1,079.4 606.1 98.4 42.1          Sep 
− 42.0 95.1 1,247.7 137.0 1,110.7 0.0 34.9 2,872.3 1,091.1 1,075.1 607.4 98.6 42.0          Oct 
− 41.7 95.3 1,245.6 150.1 1,095.5 0.0 35.1 2,946.1 1,129.6 1,110.2 610.0 96.3 42.0          Nov 
− 33.7 96.8 1,237.9 135.3 1,102.6 0.0 13.8 2,936.6 1,104.4 1,117.1 618.2 96.9 37.5          Dec 
− 33.5 98.4 1,220.9 148.0 1,072.9 0.0 13.7 2,928.6 1,125.9 1,085.0 620.4 97.2 37.3 2011          Jan 
− 33.5 98.2 1,207.7 135.8 1,071.9 0.0 13.7 2,942.8 1,121.6 1,100.7 622.5 98.0 37.4          Feb 
− 33.3 98.3 1,191.5 126.6 1,064.8 0.0 13.7 2,930.5 1,112.1 1,096.6 623.5 98.3 37.2          Mar 
− 33.1 98.2 1,183.6 132.1 1,051.5 0.0 13.5 2,948.4 1,127.1 1,099.2 622.3 99.8 37.0          Apr 
− 33.0 96.7 1,164.0 119.8 1,044.1 0.0 13.6 2,976.6 1,125.7 1,129.3 619.9 101.7 37.0          May
− 33.0 94.7 1,158.5 120.1 1,038.4 0.0 13.6 2,980.6 1,123.7 1,136.4 617.8 102.7 36.7          June
− 32.7 94.8 1,154.4 122.4 1,031.9 0.0 13.3 2,976.5 1,130.6 1,125.8 616.6 103.5 36.6          July
− 32.7 94.9 1,163.0 123.3 1,039.7 0.0 13.5 3,007.6 1,139.2 1,149.1 615.0 104.2 36.7          Aug 
− 32.7 94.9 1,175.7 133.0 1,042.6 0.0 13.5 3,026.3 1,151.3 1,157.3 613.5 104.3 36.7          Sep 
Changes *
− 1.0 − 2.1 + 24.2 + 37.9 + 1.7 + 36.3 − 0.1 − 1.5 + 51.7 + 48.4 + 4.1 + 0.8 − 1.6 − 1.1 2002
− 1.0 + 2.1 − 9.8 − 5.6 − 9.5 + 3.9 + 0.0 + 2.4 + 54.0 + 48.4 − 4.8 + 15.1 − 4.8 − 1.2 2003
− 1.1 + 3.0 − 9.6 + 41.3 + 2.9 + 38.5 − 0.1 + 2.4 + 62.0 + 24.4 + 25.9 + 13.1 − 1.5 + 1.2 2004
− 1.0 − 4.9 + 8.9 + 28.9 + 0.8 + 28.0 + 0.0 − 3.5 + 76.6 + 70.7 + 12.4 − 1.2 − 5.4 − 1.2 2005
− − 3.7 − 2.2 + 79.0 + 8.6 + 70.5 − 0.1 − 4.5 + 118.0 + 30.0 + 97.7 − 16.8 + 7.2 − 4.1 2006
− − 2.3 + 3.1 + 132.0 − 3.3 + 135.3 − 0.0 − 2.3 + 181.1 + 31.6 + 160.5 − 31.1 + 20.1 − 2.0 2007
− − 5.4 + 7.8 + 124.3 + 23.0 + 101.3 − 0.0 − 3.6 + 207.6 + 54.3 + 156.6 − 20.2 + 17.0 − 1.3 2008
− − 4.2 + 0.7 − 225.4 − 9.7 − 215.7 − 0.0 − 5.7 + 59.7 + 211.4 − 179.3 + 59.3 − 31.6 − 0.9 2009
− − 2.1 − 9.2 − 96.8 + 22.3 − 119.1 − 0.0 − 0.2 + 77.4 + 76.0 − 18.9 + 24.0 − 3.7 − 1.7 2010
− − 0.1 − 0.1 + 13.6 + 10.9 + 2.7 − 0.0 + 0.0 + 32.0 + 30.3 + 2.2 + 0.1 − 0.6 − 0.0 2010          Apr 
− − 0.0 − 0.9 + 15.1 − 0.7 + 15.8 − 0.0 + 1.0 + 15.4 + 19.3 − 3.9 + 0.2 − 0.2 − 0.0          May
− − 0.3 − 0.2 + 9.7 + 0.5 + 9.1 + 0.0 − 0.3 + 0.0 + 1.4 − 0.5 − 0.6 − 0.3 − 0.3          June
− − 0.1 − 1.4 − 118.6 − 5.1 − 113.5 + 0.0 − 1.2 − 16.4 − 5.6 − 11.8 + 1.5 − 0.5 − 0.2          July
− − 0.1 − 0.5 + 9.2 + 4.1 + 5.1 − 0.0 + 0.3 + 17.6 + 9.8 + 8.2 − 0.1 − 0.3 − 0.0          Aug 
− − 0.2 − 0.3 − 34.7 − 0.2 − 34.5 − 0.0 − 0.8 − 6.2 − 11.4 + 5.2 + 0.3 − 0.2 − 0.1          Sep 
− − 0.1 − 0.2 + 29.9 − 1.7 + 31.5 + 0.0 − 0.2 + 4.9 + 7.9 − 4.5 + 1.3 + 0.2 − 0.1          Oct 
− − 0.1 + 0.2 − 2.1 + 13.1 − 15.2 − 0.0 + 0.4 + 50.3 + 39.3 + 8.2 + 2.6 + 0.3 − 0.0          Nov 
− − 0.1 + 1.6 − 7.2 − 14.8 + 7.6 + 0.0 + 0.2 − 9.4 − 25.5 + 6.9 + 8.5 + 0.6 − 0.3          Dec 
− − 0.2 + 1.6 − 17.0 + 12.7 − 29.8 − 0.0 − 0.1 − 8.1 + 21.6 − 32.1 + 2.2 + 0.3 − 0.2 2011          Jan 
− + 0.0 − 0.2 − 13.4 − 12.2 − 1.2 + 0.0 + 0.0 + 14.2 − 4.4 + 15.7 + 2.1 + 0.8 + 0.0          Feb 
− − 0.2 + 0.1 − 16.3 − 9.2 − 7.0 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 12.3 − 9.5 − 4.3 + 1.0 + 0.5 − 0.2          Mar 
− − 0.2 − 0.1 − 7.9 + 5.4 − 13.3 − 0.0 − 0.1 + 17.9 + 15.9 + 3.0 − 2.1 + 1.0 − 0.1          Apr 
− − 0.0 − 1.5 − 19.6 − 12.2 − 7.4 + 0.0 + 0.1 + 28.3 − 1.4 + 30.1 − 2.4 + 1.9 − 0.1          May
− − 0.1 − 2.0 − 5.5 + 0.3 − 5.7 + 0.0 + 0.0 + 4.0 − 2.0 + 7.0 − 2.1 + 1.0 − 0.3          June
− − 0.3 + 0.1 − 3.8 + 2.6 − 6.4 + 0.0 − 0.3 − 4.4 + 6.6 − 10.6 − 1.2 + 0.8 − 0.1          July
− + 0.0 + 0.2 + 11.4 + 1.1 + 10.3 − + 0.1 + 31.0 + 8.5 + 23.4 − 1.6 + 0.7 + 0.1          Aug 
− − − 0.0 + 12.6 + 9.7 + 2.9 − 0.0 + 0.1 + 18.7 + 11.8 + 8.4 − 1.5 + 0.0 − 0.1          Sep 
including subordinated liabilities. — 10Up to December 1998, excluding endorsement liabilities arising from rediscounted bills. — 15Up to
liabilities to domestic building and loan associations and money market December 1998, including liabilities to domestic building and loan
funds. — 11Up to December 1998, including time deposits with terms of associations and money market funds. — 16Since the inclusion of building
less than one month. — 12Including liabilities arising from monetary policy and loan associations in January 1999, including deposits under savings and
operations with the Bundesbank. — 13Up to December 1998, excluding loan contracts (see Table IV.12). — 17Excluding deposits under savings and
time deposits with terms of less than one month. — 14Own acceptances loan contracts (see also footnote 16). — 18Including liabilities arising from
and promissory notes outstanding and, up to December 1998, including non-negotiable bearer debt securities. 
27*IV Banks

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
E U R O S Y S T E M
Monthly Report
November 2011
IV Banks
 
4 Assets and liabilities of banks (MFIs) in Germany vis-à-vis non-residents *
 
 
€ billion
Lending to foreign banks (MFIs)  2 Lending to foreign non-banks (non-MFIs)  2 
Treasury
Cash in bills and
hand Loans and bills  3 negotiable Credit balances and loans, bills  3 Negotiable
(non- money money
euro-area Medium market Memo Medium market
banknotes and paper item and paper Securities Securities
and Short- long- issued by issued by Fiduciary Short- long- issued by issued by
Period coins)  1 Total Total term term banks banks loans  4 Total Total term term non-banks non-banks
End of year or month *
 
2001 0.4 596.1 521.7 383.7 138.0 0.8 73.6 3.5 570.3 347.2 99.7 247.5 5.2 217.9
2002 0.3 690.6 615.3 468.0 147.2 0.9 74.4 2.7 558.8 332.6 92.6 240.0 9.3 216.9
2003 0.3 769.6 675.8 515.7 160.1 1.5 92.3 1.6 576.3 344.8 110.9 233.9 6.0 225.4
2004 0.2 889.4 760.2 606.5 153.7 2.8 126.3 1.5 629.5 362.5 136.6 225.9 10.9 256.1
2005 0.2 1,038.8 860.0 648.5 211.5 5.8 173.0 1.5 712.0 387.9 132.8 255.1 9.3 314.8
2006 0.4 1,266.9 1,003.2 744.5 258.7 13.3 250.4 0.8 777.0 421.0 156.0 264.9 7.2 348.9
2007 0.3 1,433.5 1,105.9 803.6 302.4 13.4 314.2 0.5 908.3 492.9 197.5 295.4 27.5 387.9
2008 0.3 1,446.6 1,131.6 767.2 364.3 15.6 299.5 1.9 908.4 528.9 151.4 377.5 12.9 366.6
2009 0.3 1,277.4 986.1 643.5 342.6 6.2 285.0 2.9 815.7 469.6 116.9 352.7 9.8 336.3
2010 0.5 1,154.1 892.7 607.7 285.1 2.1 259.3 1.8 773.8 461.4 112.6 348.8 10.1 302.3
2010          Apr 0.4 1,307.0 1,019.7 681.4 338.3 4.6 282.8 3.0 852.3 505.3 143.7 361.7 11.4 335.6
         May 0.5 1,356.5 1,073.9 725.7 348.3 6.6 276.0 3.0 854.4 531.2 156.2 375.0 10.6 312.7
         June 0.4 1,301.1 1,019.9 678.6 341.2 6.1 275.1 3.0 832.7 506.4 134.6 371.8 11.5 314.9
         July 0.4 1,259.9 988.7 678.4 310.3 3.5 267.6 2.9 813.6 492.1 130.7 361.4 12.3 309.2
         Aug 0.5 1,293.4 1,020.2 708.5 311.7 3.8 269.5 2.8 821.9 499.5 135.0 364.5 11.0 311.5
         Sep 0.6 1,234.3 965.4 666.0 299.4 2.6 266.3 2.7 796.0 474.6 119.2 355.4 12.9 308.4
         Oct 0.6 1,159.1 892.5 604.4 288.1 3.1 263.4 2.7 786.3 466.0 115.9 350.1 15.3 304.9
         Nov 0.8 1,176.9 913.0 619.6 293.5 2.2 261.7 2.7 810.4 488.1 129.5 358.6 11.5 310.8
         Dec 0.5 1,154.1 892.7 607.7 285.1 2.1 259.3 1.8 773.8 461.4 112.6 348.8 10.1 302.3
2011          Jan 0.5 1,151.1 888.7 609.2 279.5 2.8 259.6 1.8 774.8 458.0 114.9 343.2 13.9 302.9
         Feb 0.9 1,157.9 894.3 612.9 281.5 2.0 261.5 1.8 773.2 460.3 118.3 342.1 12.9 300.0
         Mar 0.5 1,108.8 848.0 571.0 277.0 2.0 258.7 1.8 757.3 446.7 110.0 336.7 13.7 296.9
         Apr 0.5 1,150.6 890.7 615.6 275.1 4.5 255.3 1.8 770.2 459.8 129.8 330.1 15.2 295.1
         May 0.8 1,161.7 895.0 618.3 276.8 6.0 260.7 1.8 779.4 466.3 132.2 334.0 17.5 295.7
         June 0.9 1,121.8 858.3 581.3 277.0 5.8 257.6 1.8 764.6 454.2 122.1 332.1 15.2 295.1
         July 0.7 1,119.9 860.5 578.8 281.7 6.5 252.9 1.8 769.4 463.0 122.5 340.5 17.1 289.4
         Aug 0.7 1,154.4 895.5 608.5 287.0 5.4 253.5 1.8 768.4 468.0 130.3 337.7 19.9 280.4
         Sep 0.8 1,158.8 901.8 608.3 293.5 5.8 251.1 1.8 767.2 472.3 127.5 344.8 17.5 277.4
Changes *
2002 − 0.1 + 120.3 + 118.0 + 99.4 + 18.6 + 0.1 + 2.2 − 0.9 + 21.2 + 12.7 − 0.4 + 13.2 + 4.6 + 3.9
2003 − 0.1 + 103.8 + 84.6 + 65.2 + 19.3 + 0.6 + 18.7 − 0.4 + 46.3 + 35.1 + 24.0 + 11.0 − 2.7 + 13.9
2004 − 0.1 + 128.3 + 89.4 + 95.3 − 5.9 + 1.3 + 37.6 − 0.1 + 65.8 + 29.5 + 31.7 − 2.2 + 5.1 + 31.1
2005 + 0.0 + 127.3 + 78.9 + 26.3 + 52.6 + 2.9 + 45.4 − 0.0 + 59.4 + 7.3 − 9.4 + 16.7 − 1.8 + 54.0
2006 + 0.1 + 238.3 + 153.5 + 109.7 + 43.8 + 7.5 + 77.2 − 0.7 + 81.4 + 51.6 + 25.9 + 25.8 − 1.8 + 31.5
2007 − 0.0 + 190.3 + 123.7 + 72.9 + 50.8 + 7.5 + 59.1 − 0.4 + 167.7 + 94.3 + 50.1 + 44.2 + 20.1 + 53.3
2008 + 0.0 + 8.5 + 20.2 − 43.0 + 63.2 + 2.1 − 13.7 − 0.0 + 4.3 + 45.1 − 31.9 + 77.0 − 14.5 − 26.3
2009 − 0.0 − 170.0 − 141.3 − 122.5 − 18.8 − 10.3 − 18.4 − 0.2 − 72.8 − 43.8 − 31.7 − 12.1 − 3.3 − 25.7
2010 + 0.1 − 141.5 − 116.2 − 47.3 − 68.9 − 4.8 − 20.4 − 0.2 − 62.0 − 24.5 − 12.6 − 11.9 + 0.4 − 38.0
2010          Apr − 0.1 + 34.9 + 36.3 + 39.4 − 3.1 − 0.3 − 1.1 − 0.0 + 23.0 + 24.0 + 23.5 + 0.5 + 0.3 − 1.3
         May + 0.1 + 30.6 + 35.8 + 34.5 + 1.2 + 2.0 − 7.1 + 0.0 − 18.3 + 10.2 + 8.8 + 1.4 − 0.8 − 27.7
         June − 0.1 − 59.9 − 58.1 − 49.0 − 9.2 − 1.1 − 0.6 − 0.0 − 24.8 − 27.2 − 24.5 − 2.7 + 0.9 + 1.5
         July + 0.0 − 26.9 − 17.5 + 6.9 − 24.5 − 2.5 − 6.8 − 0.1 − 5.0 − 2.6 − 1.0 − 1.6 + 0.9 − 3.3
         Aug + 0.1 + 25.8 + 24.1 + 26.3 − 2.2 + 0.2 + 1.5 − 0.2 + 1.2 + 1.6 + 0.7 + 0.9 − 1.4 + 1.0
         Sep + 0.1 − 40.8 − 37.6 − 33.1 − 4.5 − 1.0 − 2.2 − 0.0 − 9.1 − 10.7 − 12.5 + 1.8 + 2.0 − 0.4
         Oct − 0.1 − 71.3 − 69.1 − 59.6 − 9.5 + 0.5 − 2.7 − 0.0 − 6.0 − 5.5 − 2.6 − 2.9 + 2.4 − 2.9
         Nov + 0.2 + 2.5 + 5.9 + 7.6 − 1.7 − 1.0 − 2.4 + 0.0 + 9.9 + 10.1 + 11.0 − 0.9 − 3.8 + 3.5
         Dec − 0.3 − 17.5 − 15.1 − 9.1 − 5.9 − 0.2 − 2.2 − 0.0 − 31.4 − 22.3 − 16.2 − 6.1 − 1.4 − 7.7
2011          Jan + 0.0 + 2.9 + 1.6 + 4.5 − 2.9 + 0.7 + 0.5 + 0.0 + 6.3 + 1.0 + 3.2 − 2.2 + 3.8 + 1.5
         Feb + 0.4 + 8.2 + 7.0 + 4.4 + 2.6 − 0.8 + 2.0 − 0.0 − 0.1 + 3.5 + 3.7 − 0.2 − 1.0 − 2.6
         Mar − 0.4 − 42.7 − 39.6 − 38.3 − 1.4 + 0.0 − 3.2 − 0.0 − 9.6 − 8.5 − 7.1 − 1.4 + 0.9 − 2.0
         Apr + 0.0 + 50.1 + 50.6 + 48.9 + 1.7 + 2.5 − 3.0 − 0.0 + 20.8 + 19.7 + 21.2 − 1.5 + 1.5 − 0.4
         May + 0.4 + 2.8 − 3.7 − 1.7 − 2.0 + 1.5 + 5.0 − 0.0 + 2.0 + 0.4 + 0.9 − 0.5 + 2.3 − 0.7
         June + 0.0 − 38.4 − 35.2 − 36.2 + 0.9 − 0.2 − 3.0 + 0.0 − 13.2 − 10.8 − 9.8 − 1.0 − 2.2 − 0.2
         July − 0.1 − 7.3 − 3.0 − 5.1 + 2.1 + 0.7 − 5.0 + 0.0 + 0.4 + 5.3 − 0.4 + 5.6 + 1.9 − 6.8
         Aug − 0.1 + 30.7 + 31.1 + 28.5 + 2.7 − 1.1 + 0.7 + 0.0 + 1.8 + 7.4 + 8.2 − 0.8 + 2.8 − 8.4
         Sep + 0.1 − 9.8 − 7.3 − 8.0 + 0.7 + 0.5 − 3.0 − − 13.3 − 5.7 − 5.1 − 0.6 − 2.5 − 5.2
*See Table IV.2, footnote*; statistical breaks have been eliminated from the banknotes and coins. — 2Up to December 1998, including fiduciary loans
changes. The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as (see also footnote 4). — 3Up to December 1998, bill-based lending (bill
provisional. Subsequent revisions, which appear in the following Monthly holdings plus endorsement liabilities arising from rediscounted bills and bills
Report, are not specially marked. — 1Up to December 1998, foreign sent for collection from the banks’ portfolios prior to maturity). —
28*IV Banks

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2011
IV Banks
 
 
 
 
 
 Deposits of foreign banks (MFIs)  2 Deposits of foreign non-banks (non-MFIs)  2 
 Partici- Time deposits (including
pating Time deposits (including bank savings deposits and bank
interests savings bonds) savings bonds)
in foreign
Memo banks Medium Memo Medium Memo
item and and item and item
Fiduciary enter- Sight Short- long- Fiduciary Sight Short- long- Fiduciary
loans  4 prises  5 Total Total  7 term  7 term loans  4 Total Total  7 term  7 term loans  4   Period deposits  6 deposits  6 
End of year or month *
 
13.8 47.6 622.7 91.9 530.8 434.5 96.3 1.4 350.6 34.0 316.6 97.6 219.0 5.3 2001
15.6 44.8 614.2 101.6 512.7 410.4 102.3 1.1 319.2 33.5 285.7 87.0 198.7 4.5 2002
11.6 41.4 590.7 95.1 495.6 387.7 107.9 0.4 307.3 32.2 275.1 102.4 172.7 3.6 2003
9.8 39.3 603.3 87.0 516.2 403.2 113.0 0.5 311.2 36.6 274.7 123.4 151.2 0.8 2004
10.6 37.2 651.7 102.9 548.8 420.4 128.4 0.6 316.4 62.0 254.4 119.4 135.0 1.2 2005
5.8 50.4 689.7 168.1 521.6 397.3 124.3 0.4 310.1 82.1 228.0 111.5 116.5 1.5 2006
5.7 48.3 738.9 164.7 574.1 461.2 113.0 0.2 303.1 76.0 227.1 122.3 104.8 3.1 2007
25.5 45.1 703.3 218.1 485.1 362.3 122.9 0.3 286.1 92.2 193.9 95.1 98.8 2.5 2008
32.1 45.4 652.6 213.6 439.0 307.4 131.6 0.2 216.3 78.1 138.2 73.7 64.5 1.9 2009
15.6 48.8 741.7 258.7 483.0 349.3 133.6 0.1 226.5 84.8 141.7 76.7 64.9 1.5 2010
32.9 49.9 750.2 270.8 479.3 345.4 134.0 0.1 266.4 111.4 155.0 88.8 66.2 1.8 2010          Apr 
33.9 49.9 815.8 311.0 504.8 367.4 137.4 0.1 271.2 116.0 155.2 88.7 66.5 1.7          May
33.6 55.9 780.1 331.9 448.2 310.4 137.8 0.1 254.3 110.3 144.1 77.7 66.4 1.7          June
32.4 49.9 779.1 311.8 467.3 336.6 130.7 0.1 260.8 112.2 148.6 82.4 66.2 1.7          July
32.9 51.5 803.7 324.2 479.5 347.2 132.3 0.1 267.5 114.7 152.8 87.3 65.6 1.8          Aug 
32.2 51.2 756.4 293.5 462.9 330.4 132.5 0.1 254.5 104.3 150.1 85.6 64.6 1.7          Sep 
32.1 51.5 749.1 301.7 447.5 316.9 130.6 0.1 264.2 108.4 155.8 87.5 68.4 1.7          Oct 
32.5 52.5 758.3 314.2 444.1 311.8 132.3 0.1 271.5 114.3 157.1 86.9 70.2 1.7          Nov 
15.6 48.8 741.7 258.7 483.0 349.3 133.6 0.1 226.5 84.8 141.7 76.7 64.9 1.5          Dec 
15.6 51.0 738.6 284.0 454.6 321.6 133.0 0.1 245.0 110.5 134.5 70.3 64.2 1.5 2011          Jan 
15.6 50.0 735.9 282.3 453.7 321.0 132.7 0.1 244.5 110.1 134.3 72.2 62.1 1.5          Feb 
15.6 50.2 695.8 253.9 441.9 310.5 131.4 0.1 219.8 90.3 129.4 68.6 60.8 1.5          Mar 
15.5 50.2 725.6 265.7 459.8 329.8 130.0 0.1 232.6 105.7 126.9 68.0 58.9 1.5          Apr 
15.5 50.2 707.7 273.4 434.3 303.4 130.9 0.1 235.5 109.8 125.7 66.2 59.4 1.4          May
15.4 49.7 653.1 253.2 399.9 274.1 125.7 0.1 229.5 102.4 127.0 66.5 60.5 1.5          June
15.3 49.0 656.1 248.3 407.8 279.8 128.0 0.1 229.5 102.8 126.7 66.2 60.5 1.5          July
15.4 48.8 705.7 256.5 449.2 321.1 128.1 0.1 232.9 101.9 131.0 66.0 65.0 1.4          Aug 
15.5 48.9 745.9 304.7 441.1 312.8 128.4 0.1 242.0 110.6 131.4 65.9 65.5 1.4          Sep 
Changes *
+ 1.7 + 1.6 + 22.7 + 14.6 + 8.1 − 1.3 + 9.4 − 0.3 + 4.6 + 0.8 + 3.8 − 4.6 + 8.4 − 0.9 2002
− 0.7 − 1.9 + 5.7 − 2.0 + 7.7 − 2.4 + 10.0 − 0.0 + 4.5 + 0.4 + 4.1 + 20.6 − 16.5 + 1.9 2003
+ 0.7 − 1.5 + 19.8 − 6.1 + 25.9 + 21.1 + 4.8 + 0.1 + 13.0 + 5.4 + 7.6 + 22.8 − 15.2 − 0.3 2004
+ 0.8 − 3.5 + 28.6 + 12.6 + 16.0 + 4.9 + 11.1 + 0.1 − 4.9 + 23.9 − 28.8 − 7.7 − 21.1 + 0.4 2005
− 5.1 + 13.8 + 56.2 + 68.3 − 12.1 − 13.7 + 1.6 − 0.2 − 0.8 + 21.2 − 22.0 − 5.1 − 17.0 − 0.2 2006
− 0.1 − 0.8 + 67.3 + 1.5 + 65.8 + 74.0 − 8.3 − 0.1 + 4.6 − 5.5 + 10.2 + 16.6 − 6.4 + 1.6 2007
+ 0.7 − 3.1 − 50.1 + 52.2 − 102.3 − 120.7 + 18.5 + 0.1 − 12.4 + 16.1 − 28.5 − 19.4 − 9.1 − 0.6 2008
− 3.2 + 0.1 − 81.4 − 2.1 − 79.3 − 57.5 − 21.7 − 0.2 − 33.5 − 13.3 − 20.1 − 17.0 − 3.1 − 0.6 2009
+ 0.2 + 1.4 + 79.6 + 42.0 + 37.5 + 38.1 − 0.6 − 0.1 − 2.7 + 6.0 − 8.7 − 3.3 − 5.5 − 0.4 2010
+ 0.1 + 0.5 + 46.4 − 8.3 + 54.6 + 54.8 − 0.1 − + 29.5 + 18.8 + 10.7 + 11.7 − 1.0 − 0.0 2010          Apr 
+ 1.0 − 1.0 + 52.5 + 36.3 + 16.2 + 15.1 + 1.1 − 0.0 + 0.2 + 2.8 − 2.6 − 1.9 − 0.8 − 0.0          May
− 0.3 + 5.7 − 37.8 + 20.5 − 58.3 − 58.1 − 0.1 − 0.0 − 17.8 − 6.0 − 11.8 − 11.4 − 0.4 − 0.0          June
− 1.1 − 5.8 + 9.2 − 16.6 + 25.7 + 31.1 − 5.4 − 0.0 + 9.9 + 3.3 + 6.6 + 6.0 + 0.6 + 0.0          July
+ 0.5 + 1.5 + 19.4 + 10.6 + 8.7 + 8.0 + 0.7 − 0.0 + 4.9 + 1.9 + 3.0 + 4.1 − 1.1 + 0.0          Aug 
− 0.8 − 0.1 − 34.1 − 26.2 − 7.9 − 10.3 + 2.4 − 0.0 − 9.1 − 9.0 − 0.1 − 0.1 − 0.0 − 0.1          Sep 
− 0.0 + 0.3 − 4.5 + 9.1 − 13.6 − 12.1 − 1.5 − + 10.6 + 4.3 + 6.3 + 2.4 + 4.0 + 0.1          Oct 
+ 0.4 + 0.8 − 2.3 + 8.5 − 10.8 − 10.6 − 0.2 − 0.0 + 3.3 + 4.7 − 1.4 − 2.2 + 0.8 − 0.0          Nov 
− 0.2 − 3.6 − 12.3 − 53.8 + 41.6 + 39.4 + 2.1 − 0.0 − 43.6 − 28.2 − 15.3 − 9.7 − 5.6 − 0.2          Dec 
− 0.1 + 2.3 + 1.0 + 26.4 − 25.5 − 25.6 + 0.1 − 0.0 + 19.7 + 26.0 − 6.4 − 5.9 − 0.5 − 0.0 2011          Jan 
+ 0.0 − 1.0 − 1.1 − 1.2 + 0.1 + 0.3 − 0.2 − 0.0 − 0.1 − 0.2 + 0.1 + 2.0 − 1.9 + 0.0          Feb 
− 0.0 + 0.2 − 35.5 − 26.7 − 8.8 − 8.4 − 0.3 − 0.0 − 23.2 − 19.2 − 4.0 − 3.1 − 0.9 − 0.0          Mar 
− 0.0 + 0.1 + 35.9 + 14.0 + 21.8 + 23.5 − 1.7 − + 14.6 + 16.1 − 1.5 − 0.0 − 1.4 + 0.0          Apr 
+ 0.0 − 0.1 − 23.3 + 5.8 − 29.0 − 28.9 − 0.1 − 0.0 + 1.1 + 3.3 − 2.3 − 2.4 + 0.1 − 0.0          May
− 0.1 − 0.4 − 53.5 − 19.8 − 33.7 − 28.9 − 4.8 − 0.0 − 5.7 − 7.2 + 1.5 + 0.4 + 1.2 + 0.1          June
− 0.1 − 0.8 − 0.1 − 5.9 + 5.9 + 4.3 + 1.6 + 0.0 − 0.9 + 0.0 − 0.9 − 0.7 − 0.3 − 0.1          July
+ 0.1 − 0.1 + 49.0 + 8.7 + 40.3 + 39.8 + 0.6 − 0.0 − 1.4 − 0.7 − 0.7 − 0.0 − 0.7 − 0.1          Aug 
+ 0.1 − 0.1 + 30.9 + 45.0 − 14.0 − 12.4 − 1.6 − 0.0 + 6.2 + 7.5 − 1.3 − 1.0 − 0.3 + 0.0          Sep 
4From 1999, no longer included in loans and deposits (see also footnote terms of less than one month. — 7Up to December 1998, excluding time
2). — 5Up to December 1998, including working capital supplied to deposits with terms of less than one month. 
branches abroad. — 6Up to December 1998, including time deposits with
29*IV Banks

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
E U R O S Y S T E M
Monthly Report
November 2011
IV Banks
 
5 Lending by banks (MFIs) in Germany to domestic non-banks (non-MFIs) *
 
 
€ billion
Lending to domestic Short-term lending Medium and long-term
non-banks, total  1,2 
      to general government to enter- to enterprises and households  1 
 
including excluding Negoti-
negotiable money able
market paper, Loans money
Period securities, and market Treasury
equalisation claims Total Total paper Total Loans bills Total Total bills 3,4 
End of year or month *
 
2001 3,014.1 2,704.2 387.9 356.7 355.2 1.5 31.2 28.2 2.9 2,626.2 2,070.2
2002 2,997.2 2,689.1 365.4 331.9 331.0 1.0 33.5 31.1 2.4 2,631.8 2,079.7
2003 2,995.6 2,680.6 355.2 315.0 313.4 1.6 40.2 38.4 1.8 2,640.4 2,096.1
2004 3,001.3 2,646.7 320.9 283.8 283.0 0.8 37.1 35.3 1.8 2,680.4 2,114.2
2005 2,995.1 2,635.1 309.7 273.5 272.9 0.6 36.2 34.4 1.8 2,685.4 2,141.3
2006 3,000.7 2,632.2 303.1 269.8 269.3 0.6 33.3 31.9 1.4 2,697.6 2,181.8
2007 2,975.7 2,649.5 331.2 301.8 301.5 0.3 29.4 28.2 1.2 2,644.6 2,168.3
2008 3,071.1 2,700.1 373.0 337.5 335.3 2.2 35.5 34.5 1.0 2,698.1 2,257.8
2009 3,100.1 2,692.6 347.3 306.3 306.2 0.1 41.0 37.1 3.9 2,752.8 2,299.7
2010 3,220.9 2,771.3 428.0 283.0 282.8 0.2 145.0 117.2 27.7 2,793.0 2,305.6
2010          Apr 3,140.8 2,697.9 358.7 311.7 311.5 0.3 46.9 45.2 1.7 2,782.2 2,318.9
         May 3,130.1 2,708.4 361.7 310.6 310.3 0.2 51.1 48.8 2.3 2,768.4 2,298.8
         June 3,147.5 2,717.1 376.1 313.2 312.9 0.3 63.0 55.2 7.8 2,771.4 2,292.6
         July 3,139.7 2,709.3 366.0 305.7 305.4 0.3 60.4 50.8 9.6 2,773.7 2,296.5
         Aug 3,150.2 2,718.1 367.2 309.8 309.6 0.2 57.3 48.4 9.0 2,783.1 2,300.7
         Sep 3,129.7 2,700.4 351.1 293.4 293.2 0.2 57.8 49.0 8.8 2,778.5 2,294.8
         Oct 3,249.0 2,711.4 378.0 297.5 297.2 0.3 80.5 52.5 28.0 2,871.0 2,300.2
         Nov 3,290.2 2,816.5 470.8 318.0 317.7 0.3 152.8 126.9 25.9 2,819.5 2,309.5
         Dec 3,220.9 2,771.3 428.0 283.0 282.8 0.2 145.0 117.2 27.7 2,793.0 2,305.6
2011          Jan 3,241.2 2,778.4 440.2 290.4 290.2 0.2 149.8 120.8 29.0 2,801.1 2,314.1
         Feb 3,240.3 2,787.6 446.4 308.5 308.2 0.3 137.9 108.8 29.1 2,794.0 2,309.0
         Mar 3,211.7 2,758.1 415.7 292.7 292.4 0.3 123.1 98.7 24.4 2,796.0 2,307.8
         Apr 3,226.5 2,749.3 409.8 295.8 295.5 0.4 114.0 88.8 25.2 2,816.7 2,328.1
         May 3,209.4 2,754.3 405.8 305.2 304.8 0.4 100.6 77.2 23.3 2,803.6 2,311.3
         June 3,191.7 2,749.4 404.1 307.1 306.6 0.5 97.0 75.9 21.1 2,787.6 2,298.0
         July 3,193.1 2,753.6 399.4 305.8 305.4 0.4 93.6 75.3 18.4 2,793.7 2,303.9
         Aug 3,201.3 2,768.5 399.9 318.2 317.8 0.5 81.7 65.5 16.2 2,801.4 2,311.9
         Sep 3,207.5 2,778.8 406.2 326.3 325.8 0.5 79.9 65.9 14.0 2,801.3 2,311.2
Changes *
2002 − 19.2 − 18.8 − 23.4 − 25.7 − 25.2 − 0.5 + 2.3 + 2.9 − 0.6 + 4.3 + 7.6
2003 + 0.1 − 8.4 − 10.0 − 16.7 − 17.5 + 0.9 + 6.7 + 7.3 − 0.6 + 10.1 + 16.0
2004 + 3.3 − 36.0 − 31.7 − 30.5 − 29.7 − 0.8 − 1.2 − 3.2 + 1.9 + 35.0 + 15.6
2005 − 6.7 − 12.1 − 11.5 − 10.6 − 10.4 − 0.2 − 0.9 − 0.9 + 0.0 + 4.8 + 26.8
2006 − 12.4 − 20.8 − 7.1 − 4.5 − 4.4 − 0.0 − 2.7 − 2.3 − 0.4 − 5.2 + 23.6
2007 − 15.9 + 11.8 + 27.6 + 31.5 + 31.7 − 0.2 − 3.9 − 3.7 − 0.3 − 43.5 − 7.1
2008 + 92.0 + 46.9 + 43.1 + 36.8 + 34.9 + 1.8 + 6.3 + 6.3 − 0.0 + 48.9 + 83.4
2009 + 25.7 − 11.6 − 26.1 − 31.5 − 30.0 − 1.5 + 5.5 + 2.5 + 2.9 + 51.8 + 36.6
2010 + 130.5 + 78.7 + 80.4 − 23.4 − 23.5 + 0.1 + 103.8 + 80.1 + 23.7 + 50.1 + 14.9
2010          Apr + 42.1 + 15.5 + 9.7 + 8.9 + 8.9 − 0.0 + 0.9 + 2.0 − 1.1 + 32.3 + 28.6
         May − 10.7 + 10.5 + 3.0 − 1.2 − 1.1 − 0.0 + 4.2 + 3.6 + 0.6 − 13.7 − 20.0
         June + 17.5 + 8.7 + 12.5 + 0.7 + 0.7 + 0.0 + 11.8 + 6.3 + 5.5 + 5.0 − 4.3
         July − 7.8 − 7.8 − 10.3 − 7.5 − 7.5 + 0.0 − 2.8 − 4.4 + 1.6 + 2.4 + 3.9
         Aug + 10.5 + 8.8 + 0.6 + 3.6 + 3.7 − 0.1 − 3.0 − 2.4 − 0.6 + 9.9 + 4.8
         Sep − 20.6 − 17.7 − 13.4 − 13.8 − 13.8 − 0.0 + 0.4 + 0.6 − 0.2 − 7.2 − 8.6
         Oct + 120.1 + 11.7 + 26.9 + 4.1 + 4.0 + 0.1 + 22.7 + 3.5 + 19.2 + 93.3 + 6.0
         Nov + 41.1 + 105.0 + 92.7 + 20.3 + 20.3 − 0.0 + 72.3 + 74.4 − 2.1 − 51.5 + 9.3
         Dec − 64.1 − 45.2 − 42.8 − 34.9 − 34.8 − 0.1 − 7.9 − 9.7 + 1.8 − 21.3 + 1.3
2011          Jan + 20.3 + 7.2 + 12.2 + 7.3 + 7.3 + 0.0 + 4.8 + 3.5 + 1.3 + 8.1 + 8.5
         Feb − 0.9 + 9.1 + 6.2 + 18.6 + 18.6 + 0.1 − 12.4 − 12.5 + 0.1 − 7.1 − 5.1
         Mar − 28.6 − 29.5 − 30.7 − 15.9 − 15.9 + 0.0 − 14.8 − 10.1 − 4.8 + 2.1 − 1.2
         Apr + 14.8 − 8.8 − 5.9 + 3.2 + 3.1 + 0.1 − 9.1 − 9.9 + 0.8 + 20.7 + 20.3
         May − 17.1 + 5.0 − 4.1 + 9.3 + 9.3 − − 13.4 − 11.6 − 1.9 − 13.1 − 16.8
         June − 17.5 − 4.7 − 1.4 + 2.1 + 2.0 + 0.1 − 3.6 − 1.3 − 2.3 − 16.1 − 13.3
         July + 1.4 + 4.2 − 4.7 − 1.3 − 1.2 − 0.1 − 3.4 − 0.6 − 2.7 + 6.1 + 5.9
         Aug + 0.7 + 7.3 + 0.3 + 12.4 + 12.3 + 0.1 − 12.0 − 9.8 − 2.2 + 0.3 + 0.5
         Sep + 6.2 + 10.3 + 6.3 + 8.0 + 8.0 + 0.0 − 1.7 + 0.5 − 2.2 − 0.1 − 0.7
*See Table IV.2, footnote*; statistical breaks have been eliminated from the including fiduciary loans (see also footnote 9). — 3Up to December 1998,
changes. The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as bill-based lending (bill holdings plus endorsement liabilities arising from
provisional. Subsequent revisions, which appear in the following Monthly rediscounted bills and bills sent for collection from the banks’ portfolios
Report, are not specially marked. — 1Up to December 1998, including loans prior to maturity). — 4From 1999, including small amounts of medium-term
to domestic building and loan associations. — 2Up to December 1998, series of bills. — 5From 1999, breakdown of securities by medium
30*IV Banks

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2011
IV Banks
 
 
 
 
 
lending  2,5 
prises and households  1,2 to general government  2 
Loans Loans
Memo Memo
item Equal- item
Medium- Long- Fiduciary Medium- Long- Secur- isation Fiduciary
Total term  6 term  7 loans  8 Total Total term  6 term  7 loans  8   Period Securities  5 ities 5,9 claims  10 
End of year or month *
 
1,880.5 191.1 1,689.4 189.7 48.9 556.0 440.3 25.6 414.6 111.8 4.0 8.0 2001
1,909.8 193.5 1,716.3 169.9 47.3 552.1 417.1 27.4 389.7 132.0 3.0 7.5 2002
1,927.7 195.0 1,732.8 168.3 49.9 544.3 401.0 34.6 366.4 141.3 2.0 7.0 2003
1,940.8 194.3 1,746.5 173.5 55.3 566.1 387.7 32.9 354.8 177.5 1.0 6.5 2004
1,953.4 194.7 1,758.8 187.9 52.1 544.1 374.4 32.9 341.4 169.7 − 4.5 2005
1,972.7 194.5 1,778.1 209.1 48.2 515.8 358.4 31.7 326.6 157.4 − 4.8 2006
1,987.3 207.7 1,779.6 181.1 46.5 476.2 332.5 31.9 300.6 143.7 − 4.7 2007
2,022.0 222.0 1,800.0 235.8 42.8 440.3 308.2 29.7 278.5 132.1 − 4.5 2008
2,051.3 242.7 1,808.6 248.4 39.6 453.1 298.0 32.2 265.8 155.1 − 4.3 2009
2,070.0 238.1 1,831.8 235.7 30.7 487.3 301.2 36.1 265.1 186.1 − 3.1 2010
2,048.7 237.7 1,811.0 270.1 38.7 463.3 292.5 30.9 261.6 170.8 − 4.1 2010          Apr 
2,054.3 237.6 1,816.7 244.6 38.6 469.6 295.0 31.4 263.6 174.6 − 4.1          May
2,055.1 237.2 1,817.9 237.5 38.4 478.8 293.9 31.3 262.6 184.9 − 4.1          June
2,059.1 237.2 1,821.9 237.3 38.3 477.2 294.0 31.9 262.1 183.3 − 4.1          July
2,063.6 236.7 1,826.9 237.2 38.3 482.3 296.5 33.9 262.6 185.8 − 4.0          Aug 
2,060.7 236.2 1,824.5 234.2 38.1 483.7 297.6 34.0 263.6 186.1 − 4.0          Sep 
2,063.2 236.9 1,826.3 237.0 38.0 570.8 298.4 34.7 263.7 272.4 − 4.0          Oct 
2,071.6 238.5 1,833.1 237.9 37.8 510.0 300.3 35.7 264.6 209.6 − 3.9          Nov 
2,070.0 238.1 1,831.8 235.7 30.7 487.3 301.2 36.1 265.1 186.1 − 3.1          Dec 
2,066.5 237.0 1,829.6 247.6 30.5 486.9 301.0 37.2 263.8 186.0 − 3.0 2011          Jan 
2,069.2 236.8 1,832.5 239.8 30.5 485.0 301.3 37.9 263.4 183.6 − 3.0          Feb 
2,066.3 238.6 1,827.6 241.5 30.3 488.2 300.7 38.2 262.5 187.5 − 3.0          Mar 
2,065.4 236.2 1,829.2 262.7 30.1 488.6 299.6 38.6 261.1 189.0 − 3.0          Apr 
2,071.7 237.7 1,833.9 239.6 30.1 492.3 300.6 38.8 261.8 191.7 − 3.0          May
2,068.2 234.6 1,833.6 229.8 30.0 489.5 298.7 39.0 259.7 190.9 − 2.9          June
2,073.7 235.8 1,838.0 230.2 29.7 489.7 299.2 39.7 259.5 190.5 − 2.9          July
2,085.5 244.8 1,840.8 226.4 29.8 489.5 299.7 40.0 259.8 189.8 − 2.9          Aug 
2,087.9 245.2 1,842.7 223.3 29.8 490.1 299.2 39.8 259.4 190.9 − 2.9          Sep 
Changes *
+ 26.6 − 2.1 + 28.7 − 19.0 − 1.6 − 3.4 − 23.1 + 1.0 − 24.1 + 20.7 − 1.0 − 0.5 2002
+ 17.9 + 0.2 + 17.8 − 1.9 + 2.6 − 5.9 − 16.1 + 4.9 − 21.0 + 11.2 − 1.0 − 0.5 2003
+ 10.7 + 0.2 + 10.5 + 4.9 + 3.6 + 19.4 − 13.8 − 0.9 − 12.9 + 34.3 − 1.1 − 0.6 2004
+ 12.5 + 1.7 + 10.8 + 14.3 − 3.0 − 22.1 − 13.4 + 0.9 − 14.2 − 7.7 − 1.0 − 2.0 2005
+ 2.3 + 0.2 + 2.2 + 21.2 − 3.9 − 28.8 − 16.4 − 1.4 − 15.0 − 12.4 − + 0.3 2006
+ 9.6 + 10.1 − 0.6 − 16.7 − 2.2 − 36.3 − 25.8 + 0.1 − 26.0 − 10.5 − − 0.1 2007
+ 28.8 + 12.0 + 16.8 + 54.7 − 5.3 − 34.5 − 23.2 − 2.3 − 20.8 − 11.4 − − 0.1 2008
+ 23.5 + 17.3 + 6.3 + 13.1 − 3.9 + 15.2 − 7.6 + 2.5 − 10.2 + 22.8 − − 0.2 2009
+ 18.6 − 4.0 + 22.6 − 3.8 − 1.7 + 35.2 + 3.5 + 3.5 − 0.0 + 31.7 − − 0.3 2010
+ 4.4 + 0.2 + 4.2 + 24.2 − 0.1 + 3.7 + 0.3 + 0.5 − 0.2 + 3.5 − − 0.0 2010          Apr 
+ 5.5 − 0.1 + 5.6 − 25.6 − 0.0 + 6.3 + 2.5 + 0.4 + 2.0 + 3.8 − − 0.0          May
+ 2.7 + 0.6 + 2.1 − 7.0 − 0.3 + 9.3 − 1.0 − 0.4 − 0.6 + 10.3 − − 0.0          June
+ 4.1 + 0.0 + 4.1 − 0.2 − 0.1 − 1.4 + 0.0 + 0.6 − 0.6 − 1.5 − − 0.0          July
+ 5.0 − 0.3 + 5.3 − 0.2 − 0.0 + 5.1 + 2.5 + 2.0 + 0.5 + 2.5 − − 0.0          Aug 
− 5.6 − 0.5 − 5.1 − 3.0 − 0.2 + 1.4 + 1.1 + 0.0 + 1.0 + 0.3 − − 0.0          Sep 
+ 3.2 + 0.7 + 2.5 + 2.8 − 0.1 + 87.3 + 1.0 + 0.8 + 0.2 + 86.3 − − 0.0          Oct 
+ 8.3 + 1.6 + 6.8 + 1.0 − 0.0 − 60.8 + 1.9 + 1.0 + 1.0 − 62.8 − − 0.0          Nov 
− 1.5 − 0.3 − 1.2 + 2.8 − 0.0 − 22.6 + 0.9 + 0.4 + 0.5 − 23.5 − − 0.0          Dec 
− 3.5 − 1.2 − 2.3 + 12.0 − 0.2 − 0.4 − 0.3 + 1.1 − 1.3 − 0.2 − − 0.0 2011          Jan 
+ 2.7 − 0.2 + 2.9 − 7.8 + 0.0 − 2.0 + 0.4 + 0.7 − 0.4 − 2.3 − − 0.0          Feb 
− 2.9 + 1.2 − 4.2 + 1.7 − 0.2 + 3.2 − 0.6 + 0.3 − 0.9 + 3.8 − − 0.0          Mar 
− 0.9 − 2.4 + 1.5 + 21.2 − 0.2 + 0.4 − 1.1 + 0.3 − 1.5 + 1.5 − − 0.0          Apr 
+ 6.3 + 1.6 + 4.6 − 23.0 − 0.0 + 3.7 + 1.0 + 0.2 + 0.8 + 2.7 − + 0.0          May
− 3.4 − 3.1 − 0.3 − 9.8 − 0.1 − 2.8 − 2.0 + 0.2 − 2.1 − 0.8 − − 0.0          June
+ 5.5 + 1.1 + 4.4 + 0.4 − 0.3 + 0.2 + 0.5 + 0.7 − 0.2 − 0.4 − − 0.0          July
+ 4.3 + 1.6 + 2.8 − 3.8 + 0.1 − 0.2 + 0.5 + 0.2 + 0.3 − 0.7 − − 0.0          Aug 
+ 2.3 + 0.4 + 1.9 − 3.0 + 0.0 + 0.6 − 0.5 − 0.2 − 0.3 + 1.1 − − 0.0          Sep 
and long-term lending no longer possible. — 6Up to December 1998, 1999, of more than five years. — 8From 1999, no longer included in lending
maturity or period of notice of more than one year to less than four years; (see also footnote 2). — 9Excluding debt securities arising from the
from 1999, more than one year up to and including five years. — 7Up to exchange of equalisation claims (see also footnote 10). — 10Including debt
December 1998, maturity or period of notice of four years and more; from securities arising from the exchange of equalisation claims. 
31*IV Banks

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
E U R O S Y S T E M
Monthly Report
November 2011
IV Banks
 
6 Lending by banks (MFIs) in Germany to domestic enterprises and households, housing loans,
sectors of economic activity *
 
€ billion
Lending to domestic enterprises and households (excluding holdings of negotiable money market paper and excluding securities portfolios)  1 
of which  
 
Housing loans Lending to enterprises and self-employed persons
 
Whole-
sale and Electricity,
gas and retail Financial
Mortgage water trade; Agri- Transport- intermedi-
loans supply; repair of culture, ation and ation
secured refuse motor forestry, storage; (excluding
by disposal, vehicles fishing post and MFIs) and
Mortgage residen- Other of which mining and and telecom- insurance
loans, tial real housing Housing Manufac- and Construc- motor- aqua- munica- com-
Period Total total Total estate loans Total loans turing quarrying tion cycles culture tions panies
Lending, total End of year or quarter *
 
2009 2,357.6 1,155.1 1,094.7 905.0 189.7 1,327.1 301.4 145.8 68.5 63.2 122.1 36.4 74.7 165.2
2010          Sep 2,353.9 1,151.9 1,096.6 905.8 190.8 1,320.0 300.2 138.1 73.0 63.4 120.1 40.5 78.1 160.6
         Dec 2,352.9 1,153.8 1,101.6 907.8 193.8 1,317.2 302.4 134.1 75.5 61.7 120.3 40.3 78.8 157.5
2011          Mar 2,358.7 1,150.4 1,098.9 906.8 192.1 1,325.0 300.5 138.0 76.9 61.8 121.8 40.5 77.3 161.1
         June 2,374.9 1,163.7 1,102.8 909.3 193.4 1,337.2 301.3 137.1 78.9 60.7 121.6 41.6 77.0 173.6
         Sep 2,413.7 1,166.2 1,108.3 911.8 196.5 1,367.2 302.1 134.7 81.3 60.9 125.6 42.6 79.2 196.6
 Short-term lending
2009 306.3 − 8.4 − 8.4 266.9 4.5 36.3 6.0 14.2 39.7 3.0 7.1 90.7
2010          Sep 293.3 − 8.1 − 8.1 252.6 4.0 34.8 5.2 14.6 39.0 3.7 7.3 82.7
         Dec 282.9 − 7.7 − 7.7 243.2 3.8 32.2 5.2 13.2 39.4 3.0 6.6 78.9
2011          Mar 292.5 − 7.7 − 7.7 253.3 3.9 36.8 5.3 13.7 41.2 3.3 7.1 81.8
         June 306.7 − 7.7 − 7.7 267.0 4.0 38.1 5.8 13.5 41.5 3.7 7.1 93.9
         Sep 325.8 − 7.9 − 7.9 286.0 4.1 36.6 6.3 13.2 43.8 3.8 7.0 112.8
 Medium-term lending
2009 242.7 − 32.4 − 32.4 173.9 11.8 32.6 4.8 9.0 13.9 3.7 13.6 25.5
2010          Sep 236.2 − 33.0 − 33.0 167.8 11.9 28.2 5.0 9.3 13.3 4.1 13.1 27.7
         Dec 238.1 − 32.8 − 32.8 169.1 11.4 27.5 5.2 9.2 13.4 3.9 12.9 29.0
2011          Mar 238.6 − 32.6 − 32.6 169.9 11.1 27.7 5.3 9.0 13.7 3.8 12.3 30.3
         June 234.7 − 33.2 − 33.2 165.8 11.4 26.4 5.3 8.7 13.7 3.9 11.8 30.7
         Sep 245.2 − 33.5 − 33.5 173.4 11.1 26.6 5.6 9.2 15.2 4.1 11.9 34.1
 Long-term lending
2009 1,808.6 1,155.1 1,053.9 905.0 148.9 886.4 285.1 76.9 57.7 40.0 68.5 29.8 54.0 49.0
2010          Sep 1,824.5 1,151.9 1,055.6 905.8 149.8 899.7 284.3 75.1 62.8 39.5 67.7 32.7 57.7 50.2
         Dec 1,831.8 1,153.8 1,061.1 907.8 153.4 904.9 287.1 74.5 65.1 39.3 67.6 33.4 59.3 49.6
2011          Mar 1,827.6 1,150.4 1,058.7 906.8 151.9 901.8 285.4 73.6 66.3 39.0 66.9 33.4 57.9 49.0
         June 1,833.6 1,163.7 1,061.8 909.3 152.4 904.4 285.9 72.6 67.8 38.5 66.4 34.0 58.1 48.9
         Sep 1,842.7 1,166.2 1,066.9 911.8 155.1 907.9 286.9 71.5 69.4 38.5 66.6 34.7 60.3 49.7
 
Lending, total Change during quarter *
 
2010          Q3 − 14.1 + 2.3 + 5.1 + 3.6 + 1.5 − 19.5 + 1.1 − 4.2 + 0.7 − 0.8 − 0.5 + 0.9 − 3.4 − 11.2
         Q4 − 0.4 + 3.6 + 4.2 + 3.6 + 0.5 − 2.8 + 0.7 − 3.9 + 2.4 − 1.7 + 0.3 − 0.3 + 0.7 − 3.1
2011          Q1 + 6.3 − 1.9 − 1.8 − 0.1 − 1.7 + 8.2 − 0.9 + 3.9 + 1.4 + 0.1 + 1.5 + 0.3 − 1.5 + 3.8
         Q2 + 16.4 + 3.3 + 4.0 + 2.2 + 1.8 + 12.2 + 1.1 − 0.9 + 2.0 − 0.9 − 0.2 + 1.0 − 0.3 + 12.5
         Q3 + 31.2 + 4.0 + 5.4 + 2.9 + 2.5 + 24.5 + 0.7 − 3.0 + 2.3 − 0.2 + 2.8 + 0.9 + 2.0 + 21.0
 Short-term lending
2010          Q3 − 17.7 − + 0.2 − + 0.2 − 17.8 + 0.1 − 1.7 − 1.2 − 0.4 + 0.2 − 0.2 − 0.6 − 10.4
         Q4 − 10.5 − − 0.4 − − 0.4 − 9.4 − 0.2 − 2.6 + 0.0 − 1.4 + 0.3 − 0.7 − 0.7 − 3.8
2011          Q1 + 10.0 − − 0.0 − − 0.0 + 10.6 + 0.1 + 4.6 + 0.1 + 0.6 + 1.8 + 0.3 + 0.5 + 3.6
         Q2 + 14.4 − + 0.1 − + 0.1 + 13.7 + 0.1 + 1.3 + 0.6 − 0.2 + 0.3 + 0.4 − 0.0 + 12.1
         Q3 + 19.1 − + 0.2 − + 0.2 + 18.9 + 0.1 − 1.3 + 0.5 − 0.3 + 2.3 + 0.1 − 0.1 + 18.7
 Medium-term lending
2010          Q3 − 0.8 − + 0.5 − + 0.5 − 1.7 + 0.1 − 0.9 − 0.2 + 0.1 − 0.3 + 0.3 − 0.4 + 0.9
         Q4 + 1.9 − − 0.2 − − 0.2 + 1.4 − 0.5 − 0.7 + 0.2 − 0.1 + 0.1 − 0.2 − 0.2 + 1.3
2011          Q1 − 0.1 − − 0.3 − − 0.3 + 0.1 − 0.3 + 0.2 + 0.1 − 0.2 + 0.3 − 0.1 − 0.6 + 0.7
         Q2 − 3.8 − + 0.7 − + 0.7 − 4.0 + 0.2 − 1.2 − 0.1 − 0.3 + 0.0 + 0.0 − 0.5 + 0.4
         Q3 + 3.1 − + 0.3 − + 0.3 + 2.1 − 0.2 − 0.6 + 0.3 + 0.1 + 0.4 + 0.2 − 0.0 + 1.7
 Long-term lending
2010          Q3 + 4.4 + 2.3 + 4.3 + 3.6 + 0.8 + 0.0 + 1.0 − 1.7 + 2.1 − 0.5 − 0.4 + 0.8 − 2.5 − 1.6
         Q4 + 8.1 + 3.6 + 4.7 + 3.6 + 1.1 + 5.3 + 1.4 − 0.7 + 2.2 − 0.2 − 0.1 + 0.6 + 1.5 − 0.6
2011          Q1 − 3.6 − 1.9 − 1.5 − 0.1 − 1.4 − 2.5 − 0.7 − 0.9 + 1.2 − 0.3 − 0.7 + 0.0 − 1.3 − 0.4
         Q2 + 5.8 + 3.3 + 3.2 + 2.2 + 1.0 + 2.6 + 0.7 − 0.9 + 1.5 − 0.4 − 0.5 + 0.6 + 0.2 − 0.1
         Q3 + 9.1 + 4.0 + 4.9 + 2.9 + 2.0 + 3.5 + 0.8 − 1.1 + 1.6 + 0.0 + 0.2 + 0.7 + 2.2 + 0.5
*Excluding lending by foreign branches. Breakdown of lending by building have been eliminated from the changes. The figures for the latest date are
and loan associations by areas and sectors estimated. Statistical alterations always to be regarded as provisional; subsequent alterations, which will
32*IV Banks

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2011
IV Banks
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Lending to
 Lending to employees and other individuals non-profit institutions
Memo items Other lending Services sector (including the professions)
of which of which
Debit
balances
on wage,
Other Lending salary
real to self- Lending and of which
Housing Holding estate employed to craft Housing pension Housing Instalment
Total companies Total loans Total loans  3 accounts Total loans   Period enterprises activities persons  2 enterprises
End of year or quarter * Lending, total 
 
651.2 181.2 46.5 170.5 378.9 54.3 1,017.5 790.0 227.5 142.0 15.8 13.0 3.3 2009
646.2 176.8 46.8 176.4 381.2 54.4 1,020.8 792.9 228.0 154.0 14.7 13.1 3.5 2010          Sep 
649.0 178.5 46.8 175.8 380.4 53.5 1,022.4 795.7 226.7 155.0 13.9 13.3 3.5          Dec 
647.6 175.8 47.0 178.7 378.2 53.9 1,020.3 794.9 225.4 155.1 13.7 13.5 3.5 2011          Mar 
646.7 178.3 44.6 177.9 379.5 53.6 1,024.2 798.0 226.2 145.7 13.9 13.6 3.5          June
646.4 177.9 44.5 178.3 381.8 52.8 1,033.1 802.7 230.3 149.0 14.0 13.4 3.5          Sep 
Short-term lending
69.9 11.1 12.1 14.6 33.3 8.3 38.7 4.0 34.7 3.0 15.8 0.7 0.0 2009
65.3 9.9 11.6 14.3 33.1 8.5 40.0 4.0 36.0 2.6 14.7 0.7 0.0 2010          Sep 
64.7 9.6 11.7 13.9 32.2 7.7 38.9 3.9 35.1 2.6 13.9 0.9 0.0          Dec 
64.2 9.4 12.3 13.5 31.9 8.4 38.2 3.7 34.5 2.6 13.7 0.9 0.0 2011          Mar 
63.3 9.5 11.7 13.2 32.1 8.5 38.7 3.7 35.0 2.5 13.9 1.1 0.0          June
62.4 9.5 11.6 13.4 31.1 8.0 38.9 3.8 35.1 2.6 14.0 1.0 0.0          Sep 
Medium-term lending
70.8 8.5 11.0 21.7 27.6 4.0 68.2 20.5 47.7 40.9 − 0.6 0.0 2009
67.1 8.7 9.8 21.3 28.0 3.7 67.9 21.0 46.9 41.7 − 0.5 0.0 2010          Sep 
68.1 8.8 10.1 21.3 28.1 3.8 68.5 21.3 47.1 42.0 − 0.5 0.0          Dec 
67.8 8.6 10.0 22.1 28.0 3.9 68.2 21.4 46.8 41.7 − 0.5 0.0 2011          Mar 
65.3 8.4 8.3 21.6 28.2 3.7 68.3 21.8 46.5 41.5 − 0.5 0.0          June
66.7 8.2 8.5 21.2 30.8 3.6 71.3 22.4 48.9 43.7 − 0.5 0.0          Sep 
Long-term lending
510.4 161.6 23.5 134.1 318.0 42.0 910.6 765.5 145.0 98.0 − 11.7 3.3 2009
513.8 158.1 25.4 140.8 320.0 42.2 913.0 767.8 145.1 109.6 − 11.9 3.5 2010          Sep 
516.2 160.2 25.0 140.6 320.1 42.0 915.0 770.5 144.5 110.4 − 11.9 3.5          Dec 
515.7 157.9 24.7 143.1 318.3 41.6 913.9 769.8 144.1 110.8 − 12.0 3.5 2011          Mar 
518.0 160.4 24.5 143.1 319.2 41.4 917.2 772.5 144.8 101.7 − 12.0 3.4          June
517.3 160.3 24.4 143.8 319.8 41.2 922.9 776.6 146.3 102.7 − 11.9 3.4          Sep 
 
Change during quarter * Lending, total 
 
− 1.0 + 0.4 + 1.3 + 0.3 + 0.2 − 0.6 + 5.2 + 3.8 + 1.4 + 0.9 + 0.4 + 0.2 + 0.1 2010          Q3
+ 2.9 + 1.4 + 0.2 − 0.4 − 0.8 − 0.9 + 2.1 + 3.4 − 1.3 + 0.7 − 0.8 + 0.2 + 0.0          Q4
− 1.2 + 0.1 + 0.1 + 0.0 − 2.2 + 0.4 − 2.1 − 0.8 − 1.3 + 0.1 − 0.2 + 0.2 − 0.0 2011          Q1
− 1.0 + 1.4 − 2.5 + 0.2 + 1.3 − 0.4 + 4.1 + 2.9 + 1.1 + 0.4 + 0.1 + 0.1 − 0.0          Q2
− 1.3 − 0.5 − 0.2 + 0.3 − 0.1 − 0.8 + 6.8 + 4.7 + 2.1 + 1.3 + 0.2 − 0.1 − 0.0          Q3
Short-term lending
− 3.6 − 0.5 − 0.3 − 0.3 − 1.2 − 0.3 + 0.2 + 0.1 + 0.1 − 0.1 + 0.4 − 0.0 + 0.0 2010          Q3
− 0.6 − 0.4 + 0.1 − 0.4 − 1.0 − 0.8 − 1.2 − 0.2 − 1.0 − 0.0 − 0.8 + 0.1 − 0.0          Q4
− 0.8 − 0.1 + 0.4 − 0.6 − 0.3 + 0.7 − 0.7 − 0.1 − 0.6 − 0.0 − 0.2 + 0.1 − 0.0 2011          Q1
− 0.8 + 0.2 − 0.6 − 0.2 + 0.3 + 0.1 + 0.6 − 0.0 + 0.6 − 0.1 + 0.1 + 0.1 + 0.0          Q2
− 0.9 − 0.1 − 0.2 + 0.1 − 1.0 − 0.4 + 0.2 + 0.1 + 0.1 + 0.1 + 0.2 − 0.1 − 0.0          Q3
Medium-term lending
− 1.2 + 0.3 − 0.2 − 0.6 + 0.2 − 0.1 + 0.9 + 0.4 + 0.4 + 0.3 − + 0.0 + 0.0 2010          Q3
+ 1.0 + 0.0 + 0.3 + 0.0 + 0.1 + 0.0 + 0.6 + 0.3 + 0.3 + 0.3 − + 0.0 − 0.0          Q4
− 0.3 − 0.2 − 0.1 + 0.4 − 0.2 + 0.1 − 0.3 + 0.1 − 0.4 − 0.3 − + 0.0 − 0.0 2011          Q1
− 2.4 − 0.2 − 1.7 − 0.5 + 0.3 − 0.2 + 0.2 + 0.4 − 0.2 − 0.2 − + 0.0 − 0.0          Q2
+ 0.1 − 0.3 + 0.1 − 0.6 + 0.3 − 0.1 + 1.0 + 0.6 + 0.4 + 0.2 − + 0.0 − 0.0          Q3
Long-term lending
+ 3.8 + 0.7 + 1.8 + 1.2 + 1.1 − 0.2 + 4.1 + 3.2 + 0.9 + 0.7 − + 0.2 + 0.1 2010          Q3
+ 2.4 + 1.8 − 0.2 + 0.0 + 0.0 − 0.2 + 2.8 + 3.3 − 0.5 + 0.4 − + 0.1 + 0.0          Q4
− 0.2 + 0.3 − 0.2 + 0.1 − 1.7 − 0.3 − 1.1 − 0.7 − 0.4 + 0.3 − + 0.1 − 0.0 2011          Q1
+ 2.2 + 1.4 − 0.2 + 0.9 + 0.8 − 0.2 + 3.2 + 2.5 + 0.7 + 0.7 − − 0.0 − 0.0          Q2
− 0.5 − 0.1 − 0.2 + 0.7 + 0.6 − 0.3 + 5.6 + 4.1 + 1.6 + 1.0 − − 0.1 − 0.0          Q3
appear in the following Monthly Report, are not specially marked. — mortgage loans and housing loans, even in the form of instalment credit. 
1Excluding fiduciary loans. — 2Including sole proprietors. — 3Excluding
33*IV Banks

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
E U R O S Y S T E M
Monthly Report
November 2011
IV Banks
 
7 Deposits of domestic non-banks (non-MFIs) at banks (MFIs) in Germany *
 
 
€ billion
Time deposits  1,2   Memo item
  
 for more than 1 year  2 Included Subordinated
 liabilities in time
for up for up (excluding deposits:
to and to and for more Bank negotiable liabilities
Deposits, Sight including including than Savings savings Fiduciary debt arising
Period total deposits Total 1 year Total 2 years 2 years bonds  4 loans securities) from repos deposits  3 
Domestic non-banks, total End of year or month *
 
2008 2,781.4 834.6 1,276.1 530.6 745.6 32.6 713.0 535.2 135.4 32.3 34.4 59.3
2009 2,829.7 1,029.5 1,102.6 339.5 763.1 32.1 731.0 594.5 103.2 43.4 35.6 76.8
2010 2,936.6 1,104.4 1,117.1 329.3 787.8 25.1 762.7 618.2 96.9 37.5 37.2 80.9
2010          Oct 2,872.3 1,091.1 1,075.1 316.3 758.9 24.6 734.2 607.4 98.6 42.0 37.4 78.6
         Nov 2,946.1 1,129.6 1,110.2 323.6 786.6 24.7 762.0 610.0 96.3 42.0 37.4 103.7
         Dec 2,936.6 1,104.4 1,117.1 329.3 787.8 25.1 762.7 618.2 96.9 37.5 37.2 80.9
2011          Jan 2,928.6 1,125.9 1,085.0 304.4 780.6 25.0 755.6 620.4 97.2 37.3 37.0 68.0
         Feb 2,942.8 1,121.6 1,100.7 320.6 780.0 24.9 755.1 622.5 98.0 37.4 37.1 90.9
         Mar 2,930.5 1,112.1 1,096.6 317.9 778.7 25.4 753.3 623.5 98.3 37.2 36.8 75.0
         Apr 2,948.4 1,127.1 1,099.2 323.6 775.7 26.0 749.7 622.3 99.8 37.0 36.7 84.7
         May 2,976.6 1,125.7 1,129.3 354.4 775.0 26.7 748.3 619.9 101.7 37.0 36.7 102.8
         June 2,980.6 1,123.7 1,136.4 363.7 772.7 26.0 746.7 617.8 102.7 36.7 36.6 103.5
         July 2,976.5 1,130.6 1,125.8 352.4 773.4 27.2 746.2 616.6 103.5 36.6 36.6 87.4
         Aug 3,007.6 1,139.2 1,149.1 374.6 774.5 28.4 746.1 615.0 104.2 36.7 36.4 99.4
         Sep 3,026.3 1,151.3 1,157.3 385.1 772.2 29.2 743.0 613.5 104.3 36.7 36.2 106.0
Changes *
2009 + 59.7 + 211.4 − 179.3 − 207.5 + 28.2 − 0.5 + 28.7 + 59.3 − 31.6 − 0.9 + 1.4 + 17.5
2010 + 77.4 + 76.0 − 18.9 − 12.6 − 6.3 − 7.0 + 0.7 + 24.0 − 3.7 − 1.7 + 1.6 + 4.1
2010          Oct + 4.9 + 7.9 − 4.5 − 15.1 + 10.6 + 0.5 + 10.1 + 1.3 + 0.2 − 0.1 − 0.1 − 10.5
         Nov + 50.3 + 39.3 + 8.2 + 6.4 + 1.7 + 0.0 + 1.7 + 2.6 + 0.3 − 0.0 − 0.1 + 25.2
         Dec − 9.4 − 25.5 + 6.9 + 5.7 + 1.2 + 0.5 + 0.7 + 8.5 + 0.6 − 0.3 − 0.2 − 22.8
2011          Jan − 8.1 + 21.6 − 32.1 − 24.9 − 7.2 − 0.1 − 7.1 + 2.2 + 0.3 − 0.2 − 0.1 − 12.9
         Feb + 14.2 − 4.4 + 15.7 + 16.3 − 0.6 − 0.1 − 0.5 + 2.1 + 0.8 + 0.0 + 0.0 + 22.9
         Mar − 12.3 − 9.5 − 4.3 − 2.7 − 1.6 + 0.5 − 2.1 + 1.0 + 0.5 − 0.2 − 0.2 − 15.9
         Apr + 17.9 + 15.9 + 3.0 + 5.6 − 2.6 + 0.6 − 3.2 − 2.1 + 1.0 − 0.1 − 0.1 + 9.7
         May + 28.3 − 1.4 + 30.1 + 30.8 − 0.7 + 0.7 − 1.4 − 2.4 + 1.9 − 0.1 − 0.1 + 18.1
         June + 4.0 − 2.0 + 7.0 + 9.3 − 2.3 − 0.7 − 1.6 − 2.1 + 1.0 − 0.3 − 0.1 + 0.7
         July − 4.4 + 6.6 − 10.6 − 11.3 + 0.7 + 1.2 − 0.6 − 1.2 + 0.8 − 0.1 − 0.0 − 16.4
         Aug + 31.0 + 8.5 + 23.4 + 22.2 + 1.1 + 1.2 − 0.0 − 1.6 + 0.7 + 0.1 − 0.2 + 12.1
         Sep + 18.7 + 11.8 + 8.4 + 10.7 − 2.3 + 0.8 − 3.1 − 1.5 + 0.0 − 0.1 − 0.2 + 6.6
Domestic government End of year or month *
2008 164.7 34.2 127.8 75.4 52.5 3.6 48.8 1.2 1.5 24.2 3.9 −
2009 129.3 41.8 83.4 43.0 40.4 3.6 36.8 2.6 1.5 35.7 3.9 0.5
2010 153.4 46.1 103.0 47.7 55.3 2.6 52.7 2.8 1.5 34.7 6.2 0.4
2010          Oct 147.3 41.7 101.3 47.3 54.0 2.2 51.8 2.8 1.5 35.0 6.2 0.1
         Nov 156.0 49.1 102.6 45.8 56.7 2.1 54.7 2.8 1.5 35.0 6.2 1.0
         Dec 153.4 46.1 103.0 47.7 55.3 2.6 52.7 2.8 1.5 34.7 6.2 0.4
2011          Jan 149.0 49.6 95.1 44.8 50.3 2.5 47.8 2.8 1.5 34.5 6.2 0.0
         Feb 152.7 48.7 99.6 49.4 50.2 2.3 47.9 2.9 1.5 34.5 6.2 3.2
         Mar 154.4 50.2 99.9 50.1 49.7 2.4 47.3 2.9 1.5 34.4 6.1 1.4
         Apr 150.8 46.8 99.6 51.3 48.3 2.5 45.9 2.9 1.5 34.4 6.1 0.9
         May 160.9 50.3 106.3 57.5 48.8 2.9 45.9 2.8 1.5 34.4 6.1 2.7
         June 170.4 52.0 114.1 65.8 48.3 2.6 45.7 2.7 1.6 34.1 6.1 6.1
         July 164.1 49.5 110.5 61.6 48.9 3.3 45.7 2.6 1.6 34.0 6.0 0.2
         Aug 169.4 50.4 114.9 66.6 48.3 3.3 45.0 2.6 1.5 34.1 6.0 2.1
         Sep 173.5 52.4 117.1 68.4 48.6 3.4 45.2 2.5 1.5 34.1 6.0 4.4
Changes *
2009 − 23.9 + 7.5 − 32.9 − 32.2 − 0.7 − 0.0 − 0.7 + 1.4 + 0.1 − 0.5 + 0.0 + 0.5
2010 + 23.9 + 4.1 + 19.7 + 4.7 + 14.9 − 1.0 + 16.0 + 0.3 − 0.1 − 1.0 + 2.3 − 0.1
2010          Oct + 6.7 − 1.6 + 8.4 − 4.3 + 12.7 + 0.3 + 12.4 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 1.3
         Nov + 8.7 + 7.4 + 1.2 − 1.5 + 2.7 − 0.1 + 2.8 + 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.0 + 0.9
         Dec − 2.6 − 3.1 + 0.5 + 1.9 − 1.4 + 0.5 − 1.9 − 0.0 + 0.0 − 0.3 − 0.0 − 0.6
2011          Jan − 4.4 + 3.5 − 7.9 − 2.9 − 5.0 − 0.0 − 4.9 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.2 − 0.0 − 0.4
         Feb + 3.7 − 0.9 + 4.5 + 4.6 − 0.1 − 0.2 + 0.1 + 0.0 + 0.0 − 0.0 + 0.0 + 3.2
         Mar + 1.7 + 1.5 + 0.3 + 0.8 − 0.5 + 0.1 − 0.6 − 0.0 + 0.0 − 0.1 − 0.1 − 1.8
         Apr − 4.0 − 3.3 − 0.7 + 0.8 − 1.4 + 0.0 − 1.4 + 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.0 + 0.0 − 0.4
         May + 10.1 + 3.4 + 6.7 + 6.2 + 0.4 + 0.4 + 0.0 − 0.1 + 0.0 − 0.1 − + 1.7
         June + 9.5 + 1.8 + 7.8 + 8.3 − 0.5 − 0.3 − 0.2 − 0.1 + 0.1 − 0.3 − 0.0 + 3.4
         July − 6.3 − 2.6 − 3.6 − 4.2 + 0.7 + 0.7 − 0.0 − 0.1 + 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 5.9
         Aug + 5.3 + 1.0 + 4.4 + 5.0 − 0.7 + 0.0 − 0.7 − 0.0 − 0.1 + 0.1 − 0.1 + 1.9
         Sep + 4.1 + 1.9 + 2.2 + 1.9 + 0.4 + 0.1 + 0.2 − 0.1 − 0.1 − 0.0 + 0.0 + 2.4
*See Table IV.2, footnote *; statistical breaks have been eliminated from provisional. Subsequent revisions, which appear in the following Monthly
the changes. The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as Report, are not specially marked. — 1Including subordinated liabilities and
34*IV Banks

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2011
IV Banks
 
7 Deposits of domestic non-banks (non-MFIs) at banks (MFIs) in Germany * (cont’d)
 
 
€ billion
Time deposits  1,2   Memo item
  
 for more than 1 year  2 Included Subordinated
 liabilities in time
for up for up (excluding deposits:
to and to and for more Bank negotiable liabilities
Deposits, Sight including including than Savings savings Fiduciary debt arising
Period total deposits Total 1 year Total 2 years 2 years bonds  4 loans securities) from repos deposits  3 
Domestic enterprises and households End of year or month *
 
2008 2,616.7 800.5 1,148.3 455.2 693.1 29.0 664.1 534.0 133.9 8.1 30.5 59.3
2009 2,700.4 987.6 1,019.2 296.5 722.7 28.5 694.2 591.9 101.6 7.7 31.7 76.3
2010 2,783.2 1,058.3 1,014.1 281.6 732.5 22.5 710.0 615.4 95.4 2.9 31.0 80.5
2010          Oct 2,725.0 1,049.4 973.8 268.9 704.9 22.5 682.4 604.6 97.2 7.0 31.2 78.5
         Nov 2,790.1 1,080.4 1,007.6 277.7 729.9 22.6 707.3 607.2 94.8 7.0 31.2 102.8
         Dec 2,783.2 1,058.3 1,014.1 281.6 732.5 22.5 710.0 615.4 95.4 2.9 31.0 80.5
2011          Jan 2,779.6 1,076.4 989.9 259.6 730.3 22.5 707.8 617.6 95.7 2.8 30.9 68.0
         Feb 2,790.1 1,072.9 1,001.1 271.3 729.8 22.6 707.2 619.7 96.5 2.9 30.9 87.7
         Mar 2,776.1 1,061.9 996.7 267.8 728.9 23.0 706.0 620.7 96.8 2.7 30.7 73.6
         Apr 2,797.5 1,080.3 999.6 272.3 727.3 23.5 703.8 619.5 98.2 2.6 30.6 83.7
         May 2,815.7 1,075.4 1,023.0 296.9 726.2 23.8 702.4 617.1 100.1 2.6 30.6 100.1
         June 2,810.2 1,071.6 1,022.3 297.9 724.4 23.4 701.0 615.1 101.1 2.6 30.5 97.4
         July 2,812.3 1,081.1 1,015.3 290.8 724.5 24.0 700.5 614.0 101.9 2.6 30.6 87.1
         Aug 2,838.2 1,088.7 1,034.3 308.0 726.2 25.1 701.2 612.5 102.7 2.6 30.4 97.3
         Sep 2,852.8 1,098.8 1,040.2 316.6 723.6 25.8 697.8 611.0 102.8 2.6 30.2 101.5
Changes *
2009 + 83.6 + 203.8 − 146.4 − 175.3 + 28.9 − 0.5 + 29.4 + 57.9 − 31.7 − 0.4 + 1.4 + 17.0
2010 + 53.5 + 71.9 − 38.6 − 17.3 − 21.3 − 6.0 − 15.3 + 23.8 − 3.6 − 0.7 − 0.7 + 4.2
2010          Oct − 1.8 + 9.5 − 12.9 − 10.8 − 2.1 + 0.2 − 2.3 + 1.3 + 0.2 − 0.0 − 0.1 − 9.2
         Nov + 41.7 + 31.9 + 6.9 + 7.9 − 1.0 + 0.1 − 1.1 + 2.5 + 0.3 − 0.0 − 0.1 + 24.3
         Dec − 6.9 − 22.4 + 6.4 + 3.9 + 2.6 − 0.1 + 2.7 + 8.6 + 0.6 − 0.0 − 0.2 − 22.3
2011          Jan − 3.7 + 18.1 − 24.2 − 22.0 − 2.2 − 0.1 − 2.1 + 2.2 + 0.3 − 0.0 − 0.1 − 12.5
         Feb + 10.6 − 3.5 + 11.2 + 11.7 − 0.5 + 0.1 − 0.6 + 2.1 + 0.8 + 0.0 + 0.0 + 19.8
         Mar − 14.0 − 10.9 − 4.6 − 3.4 − 1.2 + 0.4 − 1.6 + 1.0 + 0.5 − 0.1 − 0.1 − 14.1
         Apr + 21.8 + 19.2 + 3.7 + 4.9 − 1.2 + 0.6 − 1.7 − 2.1 + 1.1 − 0.1 − 0.1 + 10.1
         May + 18.2 − 4.8 + 23.5 + 24.6 − 1.1 + 0.3 − 1.4 − 2.3 + 1.9 − 0.0 − 0.1 + 16.4
         June − 5.5 − 3.8 − 0.7 + 1.0 − 1.8 − 0.4 − 1.4 − 2.0 + 1.0 − 0.0 − 0.1 − 2.7
         July + 1.8 + 9.2 − 7.0 − 7.0 + 0.0 + 0.6 − 0.5 − 1.1 + 0.8 − 0.0 + 0.0 − 10.6
         Aug + 25.7 + 7.5 + 19.0 + 17.2 + 1.8 + 1.1 + 0.7 − 1.5 + 0.8 − 0.0 − 0.2 + 10.3
         Sep + 14.7 + 9.9 + 6.2 + 8.8 − 2.6 + 0.7 − 3.3 − 1.5 + 0.1 − 0.0 − 0.2 + 4.2
of which:  Domestic enterprises End of year or month *
2008 1,073.5 292.6 757.7 223.7 534.0 7.7 526.3 3.8 19.3 7.8 22.0 59.3
2009 1,105.6 336.4 743.6 187.5 556.1 9.1 547.0 5.5 20.2 7.6 21.8 76.3
2010 1,124.3 344.6 755.5 196.0 559.5 7.5 552.0 6.3 17.9 2.8 21.3 80.5
2010          Oct 1,092.1 346.2 719.0 183.6 535.4 7.5 527.9 6.5 20.4 6.9 21.4 78.5
         Nov 1,145.3 369.3 751.8 192.1 559.7 7.4 552.3 6.4 17.9 6.9 21.4 102.8
         Dec 1,124.3 344.6 755.5 196.0 559.5 7.5 552.0 6.3 17.9 2.8 21.3 80.5
2011          Jan 1,119.8 364.2 731.6 174.9 556.6 7.5 549.1 6.3 17.7 2.7 21.2 68.0
         Feb 1,124.8 358.7 742.0 186.9 555.1 7.4 547.6 6.4 17.8 2.8 21.2 87.7
         Mar 1,108.5 347.3 737.5 184.1 553.4 7.9 545.4 6.4 17.4 2.6 21.1 73.6
         Apr 1,121.5 359.3 738.5 186.6 551.8 8.3 543.5 6.4 17.2 2.6 21.0 83.7
         May 1,137.8 354.0 760.1 210.3 549.8 8.6 541.3 6.4 17.4 2.5 20.9 100.1
         June 1,130.0 348.4 757.7 210.2 547.5 8.2 539.3 6.3 17.5 2.5 20.8 97.4
         July 1,123.6 351.9 747.8 200.9 546.9 8.3 538.6 6.3 17.5 2.5 20.9 87.1
         Aug 1,150.5 360.9 765.8 217.5 548.3 9.2 539.1 6.3 17.6 2.5 20.7 97.3
         Sep 1,163.0 370.1 769.2 224.4 544.8 9.6 535.2 6.3 17.5 2.5 20.6 101.5
Changes *
2009 + 32.6 + 61.6 − 31.5 − 53.1 + 21.6 + 1.4 + 20.3 + 1.6 + 0.9 − 0.4 − 0.3 + 17.0
2010 − 10.6 + 9.8 − 21.6 + 6.1 − 27.6 − 1.6 − 26.0 + 0.9 + 0.3 − 0.7 − 0.5 + 4.2
2010          Oct − 10.0 + 3.1 − 13.1 − 10.4 − 2.7 + 0.1 − 2.8 − 0.0 + 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.1 − 9.2
         Nov + 29.8 + 23.9 + 6.0 + 7.7 − 1.7 − 0.1 − 1.6 − 0.1 + 0.1 − 0.0 − 0.0 + 24.3
         Dec − 21.0 − 24.6 + 3.6 + 3.8 − 0.2 + 0.1 − 0.3 − 0.0 + 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.1 − 22.3
2011          Jan − 4.5 + 19.6 − 23.9 − 21.0 − 2.9 − 0.0 − 2.9 − 0.0 − 0.2 − 0.0 − 0.1 − 12.5
         Feb + 5.1 − 5.5 + 10.4 + 12.0 − 1.6 − 0.1 − 1.5 + 0.1 + 0.1 + 0.0 − 0.0 + 19.8
         Mar − 16.3 − 11.5 − 4.8 − 2.8 − 2.0 + 0.5 − 2.5 − 0.0 − 0.1 − 0.1 − 0.1 − 14.1
         Apr + 13.3 + 12.0 + 1.3 + 3.0 − 1.6 + 0.4 − 2.0 + 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.1 − 0.1 + 10.1
         May + 16.4 − 5.3 + 21.6 + 23.6 − 2.0 + 0.2 − 2.2 − 0.1 + 0.2 − 0.0 − 0.1 + 16.4
         June − 7.9 − 5.5 − 2.4 − 0.1 − 2.4 − 0.4 − 2.0 − 0.0 + 0.1 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 2.7
         July − 6.7 + 3.2 − 9.9 − 9.3 − 0.5 + 0.2 − 0.7 − 0.0 + 0.0 − 0.0 + 0.0 − 10.6
         Aug + 26.8 + 8.8 + 17.9 + 16.6 + 1.4 + 0.9 + 0.5 + 0.0 + 0.1 − 0.0 − 0.1 + 10.3
         Sep + 12.5 + 9.0 + 3.7 + 7.1 − 3.4 + 0.4 − 3.9 − 0.0 − 0.1 − 0.0 − 0.2 + 4.2
liabilities arising from registered debt securities. — 2Including deposits under savings and loan contracts (see also footnote 2). — 4Including
under savings and loan contracts (see Table IV.12). — 3Excluding deposits liabilities arising from non-negotiable bearer debt securities. 
35*IV Banks

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
E U R O S Y S T E M
Monthly Report
November 2011
IV Banks
 
8 Deposits of domestic households and non-profit institutions at banks (MFIs) in Germany *
 
 
€ billion
Sight deposits Time deposits  1,2 
by creditor group by creditor group
Deposits of Domestic households Domestic households
domestic
households
and Domestic
non-profit Self- non-profit Self-
employed Other institu- employed Other institutions,
Period total Total Total persons Employees tions Total Total persons Employees individuals individuals
End of year or month *
 
2008 1,543.2 507.8 491.8 85.1 336.5 70.3 16.0 390.6 367.2 50.4 281.0 35.8
2009 1,594.9 651.3 631.3 112.5 424.6 94.3 19.9 275.6 258.5 24.5 213.2 20.7
2010 1,658.9 713.7 692.4 123.8 471.2 97.4 21.3 258.6 241.4 21.2 203.7 16.4
2011          Apr 1,676.1 721.0 698.2 125.3 474.5 98.4 22.8 261.1 244.2 22.7 204.8 16.6
         May 1,677.9 721.5 698.9 126.1 474.5 98.4 22.5 262.9 245.8 22.8 205.8 17.2
         June 1,680.2 723.2 700.0 123.6 477.9 98.5 23.2 264.6 247.5 23.1 206.9 17.5
         July 1,688.8 729.2 706.5 126.7 480.9 98.9 22.7 267.5 250.0 24.0 208.3 17.7
         Aug 1,687.7 727.9 706.1 129.2 478.0 99.0 21.8 268.5 250.7 23.3 209.6 17.9
         Sep 1,689.9 728.8 707.9 127.7 480.1 100.1 20.9 271.0 251.1 22.7 210.5 17.9
Changes *
2009 + 51.0 + 142.2 + 138.3 + 27.4 + 88.3 + 22.6 + 4.0 − 115.0 − 108.7 − 25.8 − 67.7 − 15.2
2010 + 64.0 + 62.1 + 60.8 + 11.3 + 40.4 + 9.1 + 1.4 − 17.0 − 17.1 − 3.3 − 9.7 − 4.1
2011          Apr + 8.5 + 7.2 + 7.0 + 3.9 + 2.7 + 0.4 + 0.2 + 2.4 + 2.1 + 0.7 + 1.1 + 0.4
         May + 1.8 + 0.5 + 0.7 + 0.8 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.2 + 1.8 + 1.7 + 0.2 + 1.0 + 0.6
         June + 2.3 + 1.8 + 1.0 − 2.4 + 3.4 + 0.1 + 0.7 + 1.7 + 1.7 + 0.3 + 1.1 + 0.3
         July + 8.5 + 6.0 + 6.6 + 3.1 + 3.1 + 0.4 − 0.6 + 2.8 + 2.5 + 0.9 + 1.4 + 0.2
         Aug − 1.1 − 1.3 − 0.5 + 2.4 − 3.0 + 0.1 − 0.9 + 1.1 + 0.8 − 0.7 + 1.3 + 0.2
         Sep + 2.2 + 0.9 + 1.8 − 1.5 + 2.1 + 1.1 − 0.9 + 2.5 + 0.4 − 0.6 + 0.9 − 0.0
*See Table IV.2, footnote*; statistical breaks have been eliminated from the Report, are not specially marked. — 1Including subordinated liabilities and
changes. The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as liabilities arising from registered debt securities. — 2Including deposits
provisional. Subsequent revisions, which appear in the following MonthlyDEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
E U R O S Y S T E M
Monthly Report
November 2011
 
 
 
9 Deposits of domestic government at banks (MFIs) in Germany, by creditor group *
 
€ billion
Deposits
   
Federal Government and its special funds  1 State governments
Time deposits Time deposits
Savings Savings
for up deposits Memo for up deposits Memo
Domestic to and for more and bank item to and for more and bank item
government, Sight including than savings Fiduciary Sight including than savings Fiduciary
Period total Total deposits 1 year 1 year bonds  2 loans Total deposits 1 year 1 year bonds  2 loans
End of year or month *
 
2008 164.7 34.8 2.3 3.7 28.9 0.0 6.6 28.2 6.9 9.9 11.3 0.1 17.3
2009 129.3 22.2 1.3 3.7 17.1 0.1 17.3 23.1 7.1 5.8 10.1 0.1 18.0
2010 153.4 38.7 5.7 3.3 29.6 0.1 17.0 28.2 8.5 6.7 12.9 0.2 17.2
2011          Apr 150.8 33.8 7.2 3.9 22.7 0.1 17.0 33.3 9.7 11.0 12.4 0.2 17.0
         May 160.9 34.8 6.1 5.6 23.0 0.1 17.0 34.8 11.6 10.5 12.5 0.2 17.0
         June 170.4 38.3 6.1 9.6 22.4 0.1 16.8 39.9 14.1 13.3 12.3 0.2 16.9
         July 164.1 35.6 8.3 4.8 22.4 0.1 16.8 37.6 11.6 13.1 12.7 0.2 16.9
         Aug 169.4 36.8 8.9 5.8 22.0 0.1 16.9 37.6 9.0 15.8 12.7 0.2 16.9
         Sep 173.5 40.8 11.5 6.9 22.3 0.1 16.9 40.1 12.3 15.0 12.6 0.2 16.8
Changes *
2009 − 23.9 − 0.8 − 1.0 + 0.4 − 0.3 + 0.0 − 0.1 − 5.1 + 0.2 − 4.1 − 1.1 + 0.0 − 0.4
2010 + 23.9 + 16.5 + 4.4 − 0.4 + 12.5 + 0.0 − 0.2 + 5.2 + 1.5 + 0.9 + 2.8 + 0.0 − 0.7
2011          Apr − 4.0 − 2.3 − 1.1 + 0.3 − 1.4 + 0.0 + 0.0 − 1.8 − 2.4 + 0.8 − 0.2 − 0.0 − 0.0
         May + 10.1 + 1.0 − 1.1 + 1.7 + 0.3 + 0.0 + 0.0 + 1.5 + 1.9 − 0.5 + 0.0 + 0.0 − 0.1
         June + 9.5 + 3.5 − 0.0 + 4.0 − 0.5 − 0.0 − 0.2 + 5.1 + 2.4 + 2.8 − 0.1 + 0.0 − 0.1
         July − 6.3 − 2.7 + 2.1 − 4.8 − 0.0 + 0.0 − 0.0 − 2.3 − 2.5 − 0.2 + 0.4 + 0.0 − 0.0
         Aug + 5.3 + 1.1 + 0.6 + 0.9 − 0.4 − + 0.1 + 0.1 − 2.6 + 2.6 + 0.0 + 0.0 − 0.0
         Sep + 4.1 + 4.0 + 2.6 + 1.1 + 0.3 − + 0.0 + 2.4 + 3.3 − 0.7 − 0.2 − 0.0 − 0.0
*See Table IV.2, footnote *; excluding deposits of the Treuhand agency and which are included in ”Enterprises”. Statistical breaks have been eliminated
its successor organisations, of the Federal Railways, east German Railways from the changes. The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded
and Federal Post Office, and, from 1995, of Deutsche Bahn AG, Deutsche as provisional. Subsequent revisions, which appear in the following
Post AG and Deutsche Telekom AG, and of publicly owned enterprises,
36*IV Banks

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2011
IV Banks
 
 
 
 
 
 Savings deposits  3  Memo item
 
 by maturity
 more than 1 year  2 
Included Subordinated
of which liabilities in time
Domestic Domestic (excluding deposits:
up to and up to and Bank negotiable liabilities non-profit non-profit
institu- including including more than Domestic institu- savings Fiduciary debt arising
tions 1 year Total 2 years 2 years Total tions bonds  4 loans from repos   Period households securities)  5 
End of year or month *
 
23.4 231.5 159.2 21.3 137.9 530.2 523.1 7.1 114.6 0.3 8.5 − 2008
17.2 109.0 166.6 19.4 147.2 586.5 577.5 9.0 81.5 0.1 9.8 − 2009
17.3 85.7 173.0 15.0 158.0 609.1 599.2 9.9 77.5 0.1 9.7 − 2010
16.9 85.6 175.5 15.2 160.3 613.0 603.0 10.0 81.0 0.1 9.7 − 2011          Apr 
17.1 86.6 176.3 15.3 161.1 610.8 601.0 9.8 82.8 0.1 9.7 −          May
17.2 87.7 177.0 15.2 161.7 608.8 599.2 9.6 83.6 0.1 9.7 −          June
17.5 89.9 177.5 15.6 161.9 607.7 598.1 9.6 84.4 0.1 9.7 −          July
17.8 90.6 178.0 15.9 162.1 606.2 596.7 9.5 85.1 0.1 9.6 −          Aug 
19.9 92.3 178.8 16.2 162.6 604.7 595.3 9.4 85.3 0.1 9.6 −          Sep 
Changes *
− 6.2 − 122.2 + 7.2 − 1.9 + 9.1 + 56.3 + 54.4 + 1.9 − 32.6 + 0.0 + 1.7 − 2009
+ 0.1 − 23.3 + 6.4 − 4.4 + 10.8 + 22.8 + 22.0 + 0.9 − 4.0 − 0.0 − 0.2 + 0.0 2010
+ 0.2 + 1.9 + 0.5 + 0.2 + 0.3 − 2.2 − 2.1 − 0.0 + 1.1 − 0.1 − 0.0 − 2011          Apr 
+ 0.2 + 1.0 + 0.9 + 0.1 + 0.8 − 2.3 − 2.0 − 0.2 + 1.8 − 0.0 + 0.0 −          May
+ 0.1 + 1.1 + 0.6 − 0.0 + 0.6 − 2.0 − 1.8 − 0.2 + 0.8 + 0.0 − 0.0 −          June
+ 0.4 + 2.3 + 0.6 + 0.4 + 0.2 − 1.1 − 1.0 − 0.0 + 0.8 − 0.0 − 0.0 −          July
+ 0.3 + 0.6 + 0.4 + 0.2 + 0.2 − 1.5 − 1.5 − 0.0 + 0.7 − 0.0 − 0.0 −          Aug 
+ 2.2 + 1.7 + 0.8 + 0.3 + 0.5 − 1.4 − 1.4 − 0.1 + 0.2 − 0.0 − −          Sep 
under savings and loan contracts (see Table IV.12). — 3Excluding deposits liabilities arising from non-negotiable bearer debt securities. — 5Included in
under savings and loan contracts (see also footnote 2). — 4Including time deposits. DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2011
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Local government and local government associations
(including municipal special-purpose associations) Social security funds
Time deposits  3 Time deposits
Savings Savings
for up deposits Memo for up deposits Memo
to and for more and bank item to and for more and bank item
Sight including than savings Fiduciary Sight including than savings Fiduciary
Total deposits 1 year 1 year bonds  2,4 loans Total deposits 1 year 1 year bonds  2 loans   Period
End of year or month *
 
42.5 14.3 22.0 3.9 2.2 0.2 59.2 10.7 39.8 8.4 0.3 0.0 2008
38.0 20.2 10.3 4.2 3.3 0.4 46.0 13.3 23.1 8.9 0.6 0.0 2009
37.4 19.5 9.9 4.5 3.5 0.4 49.1 12.3 27.9 8.3 0.6 0.0 2010
35.2 16.8 10.2 4.7 3.5 0.4 48.5 13.1 26.3 8.6 0.6 0.0 2011          Apr 
38.0 18.2 11.6 4.8 3.5 0.4 53.3 14.3 29.8 8.6 0.6 0.0          May
36.6 16.9 11.3 4.8 3.5 0.4 55.6 14.9 31.5 8.7 0.5 0.0          June
36.1 16.3 11.4 5.0 3.4 0.4 54.8 13.3 32.2 8.8 0.6 0.0          July
39.9 18.5 13.0 5.0 3.3 0.4 55.1 14.0 32.1 8.5 0.5 0.0          Aug 
37.7 16.6 12.7 5.1 3.2 0.4 54.9 12.0 33.8 8.6 0.5 0.0          Sep 
Changes *
− 4.4 + 5.9 − 11.7 + 0.3 + 1.1 − 0.0 − 13.6 + 2.5 − 16.8 + 0.4 + 0.3 − 0.0 2009
− 0.6 − 0.6 − 0.5 + 0.2 + 0.2 − 0.0 + 2.9 − 1.2 + 4.7 − 0.6 − 0.1 − 0.0 2010
+ 0.0 + 0.2 − 0.2 + 0.0 − 0.0 + 0.0 + 0.0 + 0.0 − 0.1 + 0.1 + 0.0 − 2011          Apr 
+ 2.8 + 1.3 + 1.4 + 0.1 − 0.0 − 0.0 + 4.7 + 1.3 + 3.5 − 0.0 − 0.0 −          May
− 1.4 − 1.2 − 0.2 + 0.0 − 0.0 − + 2.4 + 0.6 + 1.7 + 0.1 − 0.0 −          June
− 0.4 − 0.6 + 0.1 + 0.2 − 0.1 − − 0.8 − 1.6 + 0.6 + 0.1 + 0.0 −          July
+ 3.7 + 2.2 + 1.5 + 0.0 − 0.1 − + 0.3 + 0.7 − 0.1 − 0.3 − 0.0 −          Aug 
− 2.2 − 2.0 − 0.2 + 0.1 − 0.1 − 0.0 − 0.2 − 2.0 + 1.7 + 0.1 − 0.1 −          Sep 
Monthly Report, are not specially marked. — 1Federal Railways Fund, liabilities arising from non-negotiable bearer debt securities. — 3Including
Indemnification Fund, Redemption Fund for Inherited Liabilities, ERP Special deposits under savings and loan contracts. — 4Excluding deposits under
Fund, German Unity Fund, Equalisation of Burdens Fund. — 2Including savings and loan contracts (see also footnote 3). 
37*IV Banks

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
E U R O S Y S T E M
Monthly Report
November 2011
IV Banks
 
10 Savings deposits and bank savings bonds of banks (MFIs) in Germany sold to non-banks (non-MFIs) *
 
 
€ billion
Savings deposits  1 Bank savings bonds,  3  sold to
of residents of non-residents domestic non-banks
at three months’ at more than three Memo
notice months’ notice item of which
Interest With
of which of which of which credited maturities
Special Special At three on of more
savings savings savings non-banks, than foreign months’
Period Total Total Total Total Total notice deposits total Total 2 years facilities  2 facilities  2 non-banks
End of year or month *
 
2008 544.1 535.2 424.8 344.0 110.4 103.2 8.9 6.3 14.9 150.8 135.4 59.6 15.4
2009 604.1 594.5 474.5 379.4 120.0 112.1 9.6 7.0 13.8 118.8 103.2 68.3 15.6
2010 628.2 618.2 512.5 412.3 105.7 96.6 9.9 7.7 10.9 113.5 96.9 72.0 16.6
2011          May 630.0 619.9 515.4 413.9 104.6 95.5 10.0 7.8 0.3 117.8 101.7 74.9 16.2
         June 627.8 617.8 513.5 411.8 104.3 95.3 10.0 7.7 0.3 118.8 102.7 75.6 16.1
         July 626.5 616.6 512.2 410.9 104.3 95.3 9.9 7.6 0.4 119.7 103.5 76.0 16.2
         Aug 624.9 615.0 510.8 409.8 104.2 95.2 9.9 7.6 0.4 120.4 104.2 76.5 16.1
         Sep 623.3 613.5 509.8 409.3 103.7 94.5 9.8 7.6 0.3 120.7 104.3 76.4 16.5
Changes *
2009 + 60.0 + 59.3 + 50.3 + 35.8 + 8.9 + 7.8 + 0.7 + 0.8 . − 30.6 − 31.6 + 9.5 + 1.0
2010 + 24.3 + 24.0 + 38.3 + 33.1 − 14.3 − 15.5 + 0.3 + 0.6 . − 2.7 − 3.7 + 6.3 + 1.0
2011          May − 2.5 − 2.4 − 2.3 − 1.9 − 0.1 − 0.1 − 0.1 − 0.1 . + 2.1 + 1.9 + 1.3 + 0.2
         June − 2.2 − 2.1 − 1.9 − 2.1 − 0.2 − 0.2 − 0.1 − 0.1 . + 1.0 + 1.0 + 0.8 − 0.0
         July − 1.3 − 1.2 − 1.2 − 1.1 + 0.0 + 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.1 . + 0.8 + 0.8 + 0.4 + 0.0
         Aug − 1.6 − 1.6 − 1.4 − 1.0 − 0.2 − 0.2 − 0.0 − 0.1 . + 0.7 + 0.7 + 0.4 − 0.0
         Sep − 1.6 − 1.5 − 1.0 − 0.5 − 0.5 − 0.6 − 0.0 − 0.0 . + 0.4 + 0.0 − 0.0 + 0.3
*See Table IV.2, footnote*; statistical breaks have been eliminated from the loan contracts, which are classified as time deposits. — 2Savings deposits
changes. The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as bearing interest at a rate which exceeds the minimum or basic rate of
provisional. Subsequent revisions, which appear in the following Monthly interest. — 3Including liabilities arising from non-negotiable bearer debt
Report, are not specially marked. — 1Excluding deposits under savings and securities. 
 
 
 
11 Debt securities and money market paper outstanding of banks (MFIs) in Germany *
 
€ billion
Negotiable bearer debt securities and money market paper Non-negotiable
bearer debt
of which securities and
money market
with maturities of paper  6 Subordinated
up to more than 1 year up to
and including 1 year and including 2 years of which
with
Certifi- of which of which non- maturities
Floating Zero Foreign cates without without more of more negotiable negotiable
rate coupon currency of a nominal a nominal than than debt debt
Total bonds  1 deposit Total Total 2 years Total 2 years securities securities bonds  1,2 bonds  3,4 guarantee  5 guarantee  5 
Period
End of year or month *
 
2008 1,640.1 395.9 50.7 314.1 64.0 162.6 . 153.3 . 1,324.2 2.3 0.8 52.5 1.6
2009 1,529.8 380.6 43.9 317.4 70.4 115.9 . 105.8 . 1,308.2 0.9 0.6 46.1 1.8
2010 1,435.1 287.2 27.8 359.2 82.8 94.0 4.6 54.1 6.5 1,281.4 0.7 0.6 43.9 1.5
2011          May 1,391.7 299.4 24.2 335.4 73.6 84.0 6.1 53.9 8.6 1,246.6 0.6 0.5 44.3 1.5
         June 1,373.6 293.3 23.9 329.0 61.0 71.0 5.9 53.7 8.2 1,241.6 0.6 0.5 44.1 1.5
         July 1,373.8 294.6 24.2 338.7 68.7 78.1 5.7 51.9 8.4 1,235.3 0.5 0.5 44.2 1.5
         Aug 1,374.4 294.9 24.8 340.1 76.7 86.6 4.3 49.8 6.0 1,229.5 0.5 0.4 43.8 1.5
         Sep 1,374.6 297.4 24.9 351.9 73.5 85.3 3.6 48.9 5.2 1,232.5 0.5 0.4 43.7 1.5
Changes *
2009 − 110.1 − 15.3 − 6.8 + 4.7 + 6.4 − 46.7 . − 47.8 . − 15.6 − 1.4 − 0.2 − 6.4 + 0.5
2010 − 94.2 − 92.8 − 9.8 + 41.9 + 12.4 − 22.8 . − 52.1 . − 26.4 − 0.2 − 0.0 − 2.1 − 0.3
2011          May + 8.7 + 0.3 − 0.3 + 10.6 + 5.1 + 5.7 + 0.1 − 1.1 + 0.3 + 4.0 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.7 + 0.0
         June − 18.1 + 1.3 − 0.3 − 6.3 − 12.6 − 12.7 − 0.2 + 0.2 − 0.4 − 5.0 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.2 + 0.0
         July + 0.7 + 1.3 + 0.2 + 9.6 + 7.7 + 7.1 − 0.2 − 1.8 + 0.2 − 5.8 − 0.0 − 0.0 + 0.1 + 0.0
         Aug + 0.6 + 0.3 + 0.7 + 1.4 + 8.0 + 8.5 − 1.4 − 2.1 − 2.3 − 5.8 − 0.0 − 0.1 − 0.4 − 0.0
         Sep + 0.2 + 2.5 + 0.1 + 11.8 − 3.3 − 1.6 − 0.7 − 0.5 − 0.9 + 3.0 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.1 + 0.0
*See Table IV.2, footnote*; statistical breaks have been eliminated from the foreign currencies. — 4Bonds denominated in non-euro-area currencies. —
changes. The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as 5Negotiable bearer debt securities respectively money market paper with a
provisional. Subsequent revisions, which appear in the following Monthly nominal guarantee of less than 100%. — 6Non-negotiable bearer debt
Report, are not specially marked. — 1Including debt securities securities are classified among bank savings bonds (see also Table IV.10,
denominated in foreign currencies. — 2Issue value when floated. — footnote 2). 
3Including floating rate notes and zero coupon bonds denominated in
38*IV Banks

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2011
IV  Banks
  
12  Building  and  loan  associations (MFIs) in Germany *
  Interim statements
  
€ billion
Lending to banks (MFIs) Lending to non-banks (non-MFIs) Deposits of banks Deposits of non-
(MFIs)  5 banks (non-MFIs)
Credit Building loans Secur- Memo
bal- item ities (in-
ances cluding Bearer New
and Loans Treasury Deposits Deposits debt Capital con-
Num- loans under bills under under secur- (includ- tracts
ber (ex- Bank savings Interim and savings savings ities ing pub- entered
of Balance cluding debt and loan and Other Treasury and loan Sight and loan Sight and out- lished into in
End of sheet building Building secur- con- bridging building discount con- and time con- time de- stand- re- year or associ-
year/month ations loans  2 ities 3 tracts loans loans tracts deposits tracts posits  6 ing month  8 total  13 loans)  1 paper)  4 serves)  7 
All  building  and  loan  associations
2010 24 198.9 42.8 0.0 18.9 27.8 72.0 14.3 14.4 0.6 29.7 130.9 7.3 5.5 7.5 92.7
2011          July 23 197.0 41.8 0.0 17.4 27.6 72.9 15.0 14.2 0.6 25.5 132.9 6.8 5.6 8.3 8.2
         Aug 23 196.6 40.8 0.0 17.4 27.6 73.0 15.3 14.3 0.7 24.7 133.1 6.7 5.6 8.3 8.2
         Sep 23 197.3 42.1 0.0 17.3 27.5 73.4 15.3 13.5 0.7 24.6 133.5 6.7 5.6 8.3 7.9
Private  building  and  Ioan  associations
  
2011          July 13 142.1 25.3 0.0 11.6 17.9 58.2 13.4 8.2 0.4 22.3 87.7 6.6 5.6 5.6 5.3
         Aug 13 141.6 24.1 0.0 11.8 17.9 58.2 13.7 8.3 0.4 21.5 87.9 6.5 5.6 5.6 5.3
         Sep 13 142.2 25.3 0.0 11.7 17.9 58.6 13.7 7.6 0.4 21.5 88.2 6.5 5.6 5.6 5.1
Public  building  and  Ioan  associations
  
2011          July 10 54.9 16.5 0.0 5.7 9.6 14.7 1.6 6.0 0.2 3.2 45.1 0.2 − 2.7 2.9
         Aug 10 55.0 16.7 0.0 5.7 9.6 14.8 1.6 5.9 0.3 3.2 45.2 0.2 − 2.7 2.9
         Sep 10 55.1 16.7 0.0 5.6 9.6 14.9 1.6 5.9 0.3 3.1 45.3 0.2 − 2.7 2.7
Trends in building and loan association business
  
€ billion
Changes in deposits Capital promised Capital disbursed Disbursement Interest and
under savings and commitments repayments
loan contracts Allocations outstanding at received on
end of period building loans  10 
Deposits under Loans under
Repay- savings and savings and
ments loan contracts loan contracts  9 Newly
Interest of granted
credited interim deposits of which of which
on under Applied Applied and of
which of Memo Amounts deposits cancelled to settle- to settle- bridging
under savings of ment of ment of loans Under which item paid into
savings savings and which interim interim and alloc- Repay- Housing
and and loan loan Net and and other ated ments bonuses
loan ac- con- con- alloca- bridging bridging building con- during re-
Period tracts tracts Total Total Total loans Total loans loans Total tracts Total quarter counts  9 tions  11 ceived  12 
All  building  and  loan  associations
2010 27.8 2.6 5.5 43.6 29.3 37.9 17.0 4.3 7.8 4.0 13.2 11.8 7.5 11.8 9.6 0.5
2011          July 2.1 0.0 0.5 4.0 2.8 3.6 1.6 0.4 0.8 0.4 1.3 12.7 7.8 0.9 0.0
         Aug 2.2 0.0 0.5 3.9 2.6 3.5 1.5 0.4 0.7 0.4 1.3 12.6 7.7 0.8 0.0
         Sep 2.3 0.0 0.5 3.6 2.4 3.4 1.4 0.3 0.7 0.3 1.3 12.4 7.7 0.9 ... 0.0
Private  building  and  Ioan  associations
  
2011          July 1.4 0.0 0.3 2.8 1.8 2.5 1.1 0.3 0.5 0.3 1.0 7.8 4.0 0.6 0.0
         Aug 1.5 0.0 0.3 2.7 1.7 2.5 1.0 0.3 0.5 0.3 1.0 7.7 3.9 0.6 0.0
         Sep 1.5 0.0 0.3 2.5 1.6 2.4 1.0 0.3 0.5 0.2 1.0 7.6 3.9 0.7 ... 0.0
Public  building  and  Ioan  associations
  
2011          July 0.7 0.0 0.2 1.2 1.0 1.1 0.5 0.1 0.3 0.1 0.3 4.9 3.8 0.3 0.0
         Aug 0.8 0.0 0.2 1.2 0.9 1.0 0.5 0.1 0.2 0.1 0.3 4.9 3.8 0.3 0.0
         Sep 0.7 0.0 0.2 1.1 0.8 0.9 0.4 0.1 0.2 0.1 0.3 4.8 3.8 0.3 ... 0.0
*Excluding assets and liabilities and/or transactions of foreign branches. amount covered by the contracts; only contracts newly entered into, for
The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as provisional. which the contract fee has been fully paid. Increases in the sum contracted
Subsequent revisions, which appear in the following Monthly Report, are count as new contracts. — 9For disbursements of deposits under savings
not specially marked. — 1Including postal giro account balances, claims on and loan contracts arising from the allocation of contracts see “Capital
building and loan associations, claims arising from registered debt securities disbursed“. — 10Including housing bonuses credited. — 11Only allocations
and central bank credit balances. — 2Loans under savings and loan accepted by the beneficiaries; including allocations applied to settlement of
contracts and interim and bridging loans. — 3Including money market interim and bridging loans. — 12The amounts already credited to the
paper and small amounts of other securities issued by banks. — 4Including accounts of savers or borrowers are also included in “Amounts paid into
equalisation claims. — 5Including liabilities to building and loan savings and loan accounts“ and “Interest and repayments received on
associations. — 6Including small amounts of savings deposits. — 7Including building loans“. — 13 See Table IV.2, footnote 1. 
participation rights capital and fund for general banking risks. — 8Total
39*IV  Banks

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
E U R O S Y S T E M
Monthly Report
November 2011
IV  Banks
  
13 Assets and liabilities of the foreign branches and foreign subsidiaries of German banks (MFIs) *
  
  
€ billion
Number of Lending to banks (MFIs) Lending to non-banks (non-MFIs) Other  assets  7 
Loans Credit  balances and loans
German   
banks
(MFIs)   
with
foreign foreign Derivative
branches Money Money financial branches  1 
and/or and/or market to to market instruments
foreign foreign Balance paper, German foreign paper, in the
subsi- subsi- sheet German Foreign secur- non- non- secur- trading TX1
Period diaries diaries total Total Total banks banks Total Total banks banks ities  2 Total portfolio ities 2,3 
Foreign  branches End of year or month *
  
2007 52 218 2,042.4 813.8 743.1 238.6 504.5 70.7 1,066.8 811.4 21.6 789.8 255.3 161.8 −
2008 56 226 1,715.5 730.7 669.1 244.9 424.2 61.6 825.3 630.4 20.2 610.3 194.9 159.5 −
2009 51 211 1,461.6 579.2 539.1 210.1 328.9 40.2 691.5 534.7 20.7 514.0 156.7 190.9 −
2010          Nov 56 215 1,636.3 648.0 620.2 232.1 388.1 27.8 725.7 557.5 24.0 533.6 168.2 262.6 −
         Dec 55 212 2,226.3 591.4 564.8 232.0 332.8 26.6 696.7 532.5 27.5 505.0 164.2 938.2 633.9
2011          Jan 55 211 2,072.1 583.8 558.1 221.8 336.3 25.8 712.9 550.9 27.1 523.8 162.0 775.4 614.1
         Feb 55 211 2,041.4 570.4 545.7 210.6 335.1 24.8 697.6 542.8 26.6 516.2 154.8 773.4 585.7
         Mar 55 211 1,980.5 546.9 523.0 199.5 323.5 24.0 678.2 523.5 26.1 497.4 154.7 755.4 585.1
         Apr 55 211 2,057.3 567.6 544.1 213.6 330.6 23.5 673.2 518.2 25.5 492.7 155.0 816.4 642.8
         May 55 212 2,023.3 579.5 556.2 204.0 352.2 23.3 682.3 526.8 24.9 501.9 155.6 761.5 600.1
         June 55 211 1,962.2 533.9 511.8 179.1 332.7 22.1 664.5 509.9 24.5 485.3 154.6 763.8 600.8
         July 55 211 2,028.0 526.1 503.4 182.4 321.0 22.7 676.6 523.5 25.0 498.5 153.1 825.3 651.9
         Aug 55 213 2,181.7 562.0 539.9 193.1 346.8 22.1 680.7 527.2 24.6 502.7 153.4 939.1 772.8
Changes *
2008 + 4 + 8 −359.4 − 98.5 − 89.3 + 6.3 − 95.5 − 9.2 −256.8 −190.7 − 1.5 −189.3 −66.1 − 4.1 −
2009 − 5 − 15 −247.9 −148.8 −127.3 − 34.7 − 92.6 − 21.5 −131.7 − 94.6 + 0.5 − 95.1 −37.1 + 32.6 −
2010          Dec − 1 − 3 +606.6 − 50.2 − 49.3 − 0.1 − 49.2 − 1.0 − 19.7 − 17.8 + 3.5 − 21.3 − 2.0 +676.6 −
2011          Jan − − 1 −139.5 − 0.7 + 0.0 − 10.2 + 10.3 − 0.7 + 23.5 + 23.9 − 0.4 + 24.3 − 0.4 −162.2 − 19.8
         Feb − − − 26.8 − 11.6 − 10.6 − 11.2 + 0.6 − 1.0 − 13.3 − 6.6 − 0.5 − 6.2 − 6.7 − 1.9 − 28.4
         Mar − − − 42.2 − 16.8 − 16.1 − 11.1 − 5.0 − 0.6 − 8.9 − 11.0 − 0.5 − 10.5 + 2.1 − 16.6 − 0.6
         Apr − − + 99.6 + 30.1 + 30.4 + 14.1 + 16.3 − 0.3 + 7.4 + 4.2 − 0.6 + 4.8 + 3.2 + 62.1 + 57.7
         May − + 1 − 54.5 + 3.1 + 3.5 − 9.6 + 13.1 − 0.4 − 1.6 + 0.2 − 0.6 + 0.8 − 1.8 − 56.0 − 42.6
         June − − 1 − 55.9 − 44.1 − 42.9 − 24.9 − 18.1 − 1.2 − 14.4 − 14.1 − 0.4 − 13.7 − 0.4 + 2.6 + 0.7
         July − − + 52.3 − 13.3 − 13.8 + 3.3 − 17.1 + 0.5 + 5.0 + 8.0 + 0.4 + 7.6 − 3.0 + 60.6 + 51.1
         Aug − + 2 +161.4 + 38.4 + 38.9 + 10.7 + 28.2 − 0.5 + 8.7 + 7.4 − 0.4 + 7.8 + 1.3 +114.4 + 120.9
  
  
Foreign  subsidiaries End of year or month *
  
2007 39 120 590.8 267.8 202.4 104.8 97.5 65.5 263.9 176.0 37.8 138.1 87.9 59.0 −
2008 38 116 594.9 244.9 183.1 85.5 97.6 61.8 267.8 196.5 42.2 154.3 71.3 82.2 −
2009 36 97 474.1 205.4 157.0 87.4 69.6 48.4 217.0 154.7 38.7 115.9 62.4 51.7 −
2010          Nov 37 95 498.2 223.0 180.4 95.6 84.8 42.6 218.4 167.2 37.8 129.4 51.1 56.8 −
         Dec 37 93 495.1 220.9 178.7 98.8 79.9 42.1 218.3 168.8 37.7 131.2 49.5 55.9 −
2011          Jan 37 94 492.5 222.7 180.6 99.6 81.0 42.0 217.6 167.2 38.1 129.1 50.4 52.3 −
         Feb 37 94 490.1 221.5 182.1 100.5 81.6 39.4 215.9 165.3 37.4 127.9 50.6 52.7 −
         Mar 37 94 484.4 219.4 180.3 100.2 80.1 39.1 214.5 164.5 36.3 128.3 49.9 50.5 −
         Apr 36 93 485.9 224.5 184.9 100.7 84.2 39.5 211.9 162.8 35.4 127.4 49.1 49.5 −
         May 36 93 495.2 225.8 186.6 99.7 86.8 39.3 214.2 165.7 35.9 129.8 48.5 55.1 −
         June 36 93 481.8 216.0 177.0 99.1 77.9 39.0 213.1 165.1 36.5 128.6 47.9 52.8 −
         July 35 91 480.7 211.3 172.8 100.2 72.7 38.5 215.9 167.3 36.6 130.7 48.6 53.5 −
         Aug 35 89 478.6 220.9 182.5 103.0 79.5 38.4 207.9 160.4 36.4 124.0 47.5 49.7 −
Changes *
2008 − 1 − 4 − 0.2 − 24.2 − 19.8 − 19.3 − 0.5 − 4.4 + 1.1 + 17.5 + 4.4 + 13.2 −16.4 + 22.9 −
2009 − 2 − 19 −120.2 − 39.8 − 26.9 + 1.9 − 28.8 − 12.9 − 50.0 − 41.1 − 3.5 − 37.6 − 8.9 − 30.4 −
2010          Dec − − 2 − 1.5 − 1.1 − 1.0 + 3.2 − 4.2 − 0.1 + 0.4 + 2.1 − 0.1 + 2.2 − 1.7 − 0.8 −
2011          Jan − + 1 − 0.2 + 2.9 + 2.6 + 0.8 + 1.8 + 0.3 + 0.5 − 0.4 + 0.4 − 0.9 + 0.9 − 3.6 −
         Feb − − − 1.9 − 0.9 + 1.7 + 0.9 + 0.7 − 2.6 − 1.5 − 1.7 − 0.7 − 1.0 + 0.2 + 0.5 −
         Mar − − − 3.3 − 0.8 − 1.0 − 0.3 − 0.7 + 0.2 − 0.3 + 0.3 − 1.2 + 1.5 − 0.7 − 2.1 −
         Apr − 1 − 1 + 4.4 + 6.7 + 5.6 + 0.5 + 5.2 + 1.1 − 1.4 − 0.6 − 0.8 + 0.2 − 0.8 − 0.9 −
         May − − + 6.1 − 0.2 + 0.6 − 1.0 + 1.6 − 0.8 + 0.7 + 1.4 + 0.5 + 0.9 − 0.6 + 5.5 −
         June − − − 13.0 − 9.6 − 9.3 − 0.6 − 8.7 − 0.2 − 1.1 − 0.6 + 0.6 − 1.1 − 0.6 − 2.3 −
         July − 1 − 2 − 3.5 − 5.6 − 4.8 + 1.1 − 5.9 − 0.8 + 1.5 + 0.8 + 0.1 + 0.7 + 0.6 + 0.7 −
         Aug − − 2 − 0.8 + 10.2 + 10.1 + 2.9 + 7.2 + 0.1 − 7.3 − 6.2 − 0.2 − 6.0 − 1.1 − 3.7 −
*In this table “foreign“ also includes the country of domicile of the foreign ies.) The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as provisional;
branches and foreign subsidiaries. Statistical revisions have been eliminated subsequent revisions, which appear in the following Monthly Report, are
from the changes. (Breaks owing to changes in the reporting population not specially marked. — 1Several branches in a given country of domicile
have not been eliminated from the flow figures for the foreign subsidiar-
40*IV  Banks

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2011
IV  Banks
  
  
  
  
  
Deposits Other  liabilities  6,7 
of banks (MFIs) of non-banks (non-MFIs)
German non-banks  4 
Money
market
paper Derivative
and debt financial
Medium Working instruments securities
and out- capital in the
German Foreign Short- long- Foreign stand- and own trading
Total Total banks Total Total term term ing 5 funds Total portfolio   Period banks non-banks
End of year or month * Foreign  branches
  
1,723.7 1,191.0 547.7 643.3 532.7 55.3 51.2 4.1 477.4 186.0 29.2 103.5 − 2007
1,446.1 1,070.4 554.3 516.1 375.7 45.0 36.5 8.5 330.7 126.6 35.6 107.2 − 2008
1,125.9 798.0 449.6 348.4 327.9 37.4 33.8 3.5 290.5 157.5 33.9 144.4 − 2009
1,240.7 815.2 395.9 419.2 425.6 47.0 41.1 5.9 378.6 193.0 34.2 168.3 − 2010          Nov 
1,131.3 751.9 398.2 353.7 379.4 44.9 39.2 5.7 334.5 187.1 34.7 873.3 648.7          Dec 
1,155.7 759.6 400.8 358.8 396.1 44.2 38.9 5.4 351.9 187.8 35.0 693.6 610.9 2011          Jan 
1,150.3 752.8 387.7 365.0 397.5 45.1 39.8 5.3 352.4 188.4 35.0 667.8 582.3          Feb 
1,092.3 719.1 379.7 339.4 373.2 41.2 36.0 5.3 331.9 183.0 34.5 670.8 581.5          Mar 
1,111.1 737.1 397.3 339.8 374.0 39.8 34.6 5.2 334.1 177.5 34.3 734.4 636.6          Apr 
1,134.5 761.8 394.7 367.1 372.7 40.4 35.1 5.3 332.3 172.7 36.6 679.5 594.1          May
1,090.2 715.1 384.0 331.0 375.2 40.2 35.0 5.2 334.9 163.3 36.9 671.8 594.0          June
1,099.1 724.7 386.4 338.2 374.5 38.7 33.4 5.2 335.8 162.7 37.1 729.1 653.2          July
1,148.4 780.4 404.2 376.2 368.0 39.0 33.8 5.2 328.9 153.9 37.2 842.3 766.3          Aug 
Changes *
− 304.0 −139.7 + 6.5 −146.3 −164.3 − 10.3 − 14.7 + 4.4 −153.9 − 59.4 + 6.5 − 2.4 − 2008
− 312.0 −267.8 −104.7 −163.1 − 44.2 − 7.6 − 2.6 − 5.0 − 36.6 + 30.9 − 1.7 + 34.9 − 2009
− 96.5 − 56.3 + 2.2 − 58.5 − 40.2 − 2.1 − 1.9 − 0.2 − 38.1 − 5.9 + 0.5 + 708.5 − 2010          Dec 
+ 34.6 + 13.3 + 2.7 + 10.7 + 21.3 − 0.7 − 0.4 − 0.3 + 21.9 + 0.8 + 0.3 − 175.1 − 37.7 2011          Jan 
− 2.2 − 5.0 − 13.1 + 8.1 + 2.8 + 0.9 + 1.0 − 0.1 + 1.9 + 0.5 + 0.0 − 25.2 − 28.6          Feb 
− 44.6 − 26.7 − 8.0 − 18.7 − 17.9 − 3.9 − 3.8 − 0.1 − 14.0 − 5.3 − 0.5 + 8.2 − 0.8          Mar 
+ 35.5 + 26.9 + 17.6 + 9.3 + 8.6 − 1.4 − 1.4 − 0.1 + 10.0 − 5.5 − 0.2 + 69.8 + 55.1          Apr 
+ 9.4 + 17.6 − 2.6 + 20.1 − 8.2 + 0.6 + 0.5 + 0.1 − 8.8 − 4.8 + 2.3 − 61.4 − 42.5          May
− 41.1 − 45.4 − 10.7 − 34.7 + 4.3 − 0.2 − 0.1 − 0.1 + 4.5 − 9.4 + 0.3 − 5.6 − 0.1          June
− 0.0 + 5.0 + 2.4 + 2.6 − 5.0 − 1.5 − 1.5 − 0.0 − 3.4 − 0.6 + 0.2 + 52.7 + 59.2          July
+ 54.7 + 58.4 + 17.7 + 40.6 − 3.6 + 0.4 + 0.4 − 0.0 − 4.0 − 8.8 + 0.1 + 115.4 + 113.1          Aug 
  
  
End of year or month * Foreign  subsidiaries
  
437.3 270.1 118.2 151.9 167.2 37.1 30.3 6.8 130.1 69.5 28.6 55.4 − 2007
453.7 277.7 145.1 132.7 176.0 32.8 24.1 8.7 143.2 57.7 30.5 52.9 − 2008
377.6 218.5 125.4 93.1 159.1 37.0 29.6 7.4 122.1 33.3 24.3 38.9 − 2009
387.1 221.2 137.6 83.6 165.9 30.0 22.4 7.5 136.0 29.6 31.8 49.7 − 2010          Nov 
387.4 221.1 136.4 84.7 166.3 31.0 23.6 7.3 135.3 28.9 31.8 46.9 −          Dec 
387.2 221.2 135.5 85.7 166.0 32.5 25.0 7.4 133.5 27.7 30.2 47.5 − 2011          Jan 
386.1 218.4 131.5 86.8 167.7 31.3 23.9 7.4 136.4 26.7 30.4 47.0 −          Feb 
384.9 218.8 132.0 86.8 166.1 31.1 23.9 7.2 135.0 24.7 30.1 44.7 −          Mar 
387.2 223.7 130.6 93.1 163.4 31.1 23.8 7.3 132.3 24.1 29.8 44.8 −          Apr 
393.9 232.0 139.8 92.2 161.9 29.8 22.4 7.3 132.1 24.7 30.5 46.1 −          May
384.4 222.0 134.2 87.8 162.5 30.2 22.9 7.3 132.2 24.6 30.5 42.3 −          June
379.0 220.6 133.7 86.9 158.5 30.8 23.4 7.4 127.7 25.5 30.6 45.6 −          July
377.4 218.3 131.1 87.2 159.1 30.6 23.7 7.0 128.5 25.6 30.4 45.2 −          Aug 
Changes *
+ 12.1 + 4.8 + 26.9 − 22.1 + 7.3 − 4.3 − 6.3 + 2.0 + 11.6 − 11.8 + 1.9 − 2.4 − 2008
− 76.0 − 59.1 − 19.7 − 39.5 − 16.9 + 4.2 + 5.5 − 1.4 − 21.1 − 24.3 − 6.2 − 13.6 − 2009
+ 1.7 + 0.5 − 1.1 + 1.6 + 1.2 + 1.0 + 1.2 − 0.2 + 0.2 − 0.7 + 0.1 − 2.7 − 2010          Dec 
+ 1.6 + 0.9 − 0.9 + 1.8 + 0.7 + 1.5 + 1.4 + 0.1 − 0.8 − 1.3 − 1.6 + 1.1 − 2011          Jan 
− 0.6 − 2.6 − 4.0 + 1.4 + 2.0 − 1.2 − 1.1 − 0.1 + 3.2 − 1.0 + 0.2 − 0.5 −          Feb 
+ 0.7 + 1.3 + 0.5 + 0.8 − 0.6 − 0.2 − 0.1 − 0.1 − 0.4 − 2.0 − 0.3 − 1.7 −          Mar 
+ 4.8 + 6.1 − 1.4 + 7.5 − 1.3 + 0.0 − 0.1 + 0.1 − 1.3 − 0.5 − 0.3 + 0.5 −          Apr 
+ 4.3 + 7.1 + 9.2 − 2.1 − 2.8 − 1.4 − 1.4 − 0.0 − 1.4 + 0.5 + 0.7 + 0.5 −          May
− 9.1 − 9.9 − 5.7 − 4.2 + 0.8 + 0.5 + 0.5 − 0.0 + 0.3 − 0.1 − 0.0 − 3.8 −          June
− 6.9 − 2.2 − 0.4 − 1.8 − 4.7 + 0.5 + 0.5 + 0.1 − 5.3 + 0.8 + 0.1 + 2.5 −          July
− 0.7 − 1.8 − 2.6 + 0.8 + 1.1 − 0.1 + 0.3 − 0.4 + 1.2 + 0.1 − 0.3 + 0.1 −          Aug 
are regarded as a single branch. — 2Treasury bills, Treasury discount non-negotiable debt securities. — 5Issues of negotiable and
paper and other money market paper, debt securities. — 3Including non-negotiable debt securities and money market paper. — 6Including
own debt securities. — 4Excluding subordinated liabilities and subordinated liabilities. — 7 See also Table IV.2, footnote 1. 
41*IV  Banks

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
E U R O S Y S T E M
Monthly Report
November 2011
V  Minimum reserves
 
1  Reserve ratios
Germany Euro area
 
% of liabilities subject to reserve requirements % of reserve base  1 
Sight Time
Applicable from liabilities liabilities Applicable from Ratio Savings deposits
1995  Aug 1 2    2    1.5    1999  Jan 1 2    
 
 
 
 
1Article 3 of the Regulation of the European Central Bank on the appli-
cation of minimum reserves (excluding liabilities to which a reserve ratio of
0% applies pursuant to Article 4 (1)). 
 
 
 
2  Reserve maintenance in Germany up to the end of 1998
− pursuant to the Minimum Reserves Order of the Bundesbank 
 
DM million
Liabilities subject to reserve requirements Excess reserves  4 
Monthly Required % of the
average  1 Total reserves  2 Level Deficiencies Sight liabilities Time liabilities Savings deposits Actual reserves  3 required  reserves
1995          Dec 2,066,565 579,337 519,456 967,772 36,492 37,337 845 2.3 3
1996          Dec 2,201,464 655,483 474,342 1,071,639 38,671 39,522 851 2.2 4
1997          Dec 2,327,879 734,986 476,417 1,116,477 40,975 41,721 745 1.8 3
1998          Dec 2,576,889 865,444 564,878 1,146,567 45,805 46,432 627 1.4 4
1Pursuant to sections 5 to 7 of the Minimum Reserves Order. 2Amount balances of the credit institutions subject to reserve requirements on their
after applying the reserve ratios to the liabilities subject to reserve require- giro accounts at the Bundesbank. — 4 Actual reserves less required reserves. 
ments (section 5 (1) of the Minimum Reserves Order). — 3Average credit
 
 
3  Reserve maintenance in the euro area
− from 1999, pursuant to the ECB Regulation on the application of minimum reserves in accordance with
Article 19.1 of the Statute of the ESCB 
 
Maintenance Required reserves
period before deduction Required reserves
of lump-sum Lump-sum beginning in  1 after deduction of
Reserve base  2 allowance  3 allowance  4 Deficiencies  7 lump-sum allowance Current account  5 Excess reserves  6 
Euro area ( € billion)
 
2011          Mar 10,491.8 209.8 0.5 209.3 210.5 1.1 0.0
         Apr 10,438.7 208.8 0.5 208.3 209.5 1.2 0.0
         May 10,372.1 207.4 0.5 206.9 209.0 2.0 0.0
         June 10,412.3 208.2 0.5 207.7 210.9 3.1 0.0
         July 10,464.9 209.3 0.5 208.8 211.5 2.7 0.0
         Aug 10,374.3 207.5 0.5 207.0 209.5 2.5 0.0
         Sep  p 10,330.1 206.6 0.5 206.1 208.7 2.6 0.0
         Oct  p,8 10,334.1 206.7 0.5 206.2 208.9 2.8 ...
         Nov  p ... ... ... 207.7 ... ... ...
Of which:  Germany ( € million)
2011          Mar 2,576,678 51,534 186 51,348 51,711 363 1
         Apr 2,563,152 51,263 186 51,077 51,437 360 0
         May 2,524,058 50,481 186 50,296 51,660 1,364 0
         June 2,540,817 50,816 185 50,631 52,597 1,966 0
         July 2,552,960 51,059 185 50,874 52,734 1,860 1
         Aug 2,516,922 50,338 185 50,154 51,818 1,664 3
         Sep  p 2,532,338 50,647 184 50,463 52,154 1,691 0
         Oct  p 2,588,110 51,762 184 51,579 53,005 1,426 0
         Nov  p 2,664,713 53,294 184 53,111 ... ... ...
1From March 2004, the reserve maintenance period will start on the reserve base. — 4Article 5 (2) of the Regulation of the European Central
settlement day of the main refinancing operation immediately following Bank on the application of minimum reserves. — 5Average credit balances
the meeting of the Governing Council of the ECB for which the monthly of the credit institutions at the national central banks. — 6Average credit
discussion of the monetary policy stance is scheduled. — 2Article 3 of the balances less required reserves after deduction of the lump-sum
Regulation of the European Central Bank on the application of minimum allowance. — 7Required reserves after deduction of the lump-sum
reserves (excluding liabilities to which a reserve ratio of 0% applies, pur- allowance. — 8The total number of deficiencies was not available when
suant to Article 4 (1)). — 3Amount after applying the reserve ratios to the this report went to press. 
42*V  Minimum reserves

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2011
VI Interest rates
 
1 ECB interest rates 2 Base rates
 
 
% per annum % per annum
Main refinancing Main refinancing
operations operations Base Base
Mar- Mar- rate rate
ginal ginal as per as per Minimum Minimum
Applicable Deposit Fixed bid lending Applicable Deposit Fixed bid lending Applicable Civil Applicable Civil
from facility rate rate facility from facility rate rate facility from Code  1 from Code  1 
2002 Dec                  6 1.75 − 2.75 3.75 2008 July                  9 3.25 − 4.25 5.25 2002 Jan                1 2.57 2007 Jan                1 2.70
         Oct                  8 2.75 − 3.75 4.75          July                1 2.47          July                1 3.19
2003 Mar                  7 1.50 − 2.50 3.50          Oct                  9 3.25 3.75 − 4.25
         June                  6 1.00 − 2.00 3.00          Nov                12 2.75 3.25 − 3.75 2003 Jan                1 1.97 2008 Jan                1 3.32
         Dec                10 2.00 2.50 − 3.00          July                1 1.22          July                1 3.19
2005 Dec                  6 1.25 − 2.25 3.25
2009 Jan                21 1.00 2.00 − 3.00 2004 Jan                1 1.14 2009 Jan                1 1.62
2006 Mar                  8 1.50 − 2.50 3.50          Mar                11 0.50 1.50 − 2.50          July                1 1.13          July                1 0.12
         June                15 1.75 − 2.75 3.75          Apr                  8 0.25 1.25 − 2.25
         Aug                  9 2.00 − 3.00 4.00          May                13 0.25 1.00 − 1.75 2005 Jan                1 1.21 2011 July                1 0.37
         Oct                11 2.25 − 3.25 4.25          July                1 1.17
         Dec                13 2.50 − 3.50 4.50 2011 Apr                13 0.50 1.25 − 2.00
         July                13 0.75 1.50 − 2.25 2006 Jan                1 1.37
2007 Mar                14 2.75 − 3.75 4.75          Nov                  9 0.50 1.25 − 2.00          July                1 1.95
         June                13 3.00 − 4.00 5.00
1 Pursuant to section 247 of the Civil Code.  
 
 
 
3 Eurosystem monetary policy operations allotted through tenders *
 
 
Fixed rate tenders Variable rate tenders
Bid Allotment Minimum Weighted
amount amount Fixed rate bid rate Marginal rate  1 average rate
Date of Running for
settlement € million % per annum ...days
Main refinancing operations
2011 Oct                12 204,939 204,939 1.50 − − − 7
         Oct                19 201,182 201,182 1.50 − − − 7
         Oct                26 197,438 197,438 1.50 − − − 6
         Nov                  1 182,773 182,773 1.50 − − − 8
         Nov                  9 194,765 194,765 1.25 − − − 7
         Nov                16 230,265 230,265 1.25 − − − 7
Longer-term refinancing operations
2011 Sep                29 140,628 140,628 2 . . .−−− 8 4
         Oct                12 59,062 59,062 1.50 − − − 28
         Oct                27 44,564 44,564 2 . . .−−− 9 1
         Oct                27 56,934 56,934 2 . . .−−− 3 7 1
         Nov                  9 55,547 55,547 1.25 − − − 35
Source: ECB. — *Enlargement of the euro area on 1 January 2011 to will be fixed at the average minimum bid rate of the main refinancing
include Estonia. — 1Lowest or highest interest rate at which funds were operations over the life of this operation. 
allotted or collected. — 2Interest payment on the maturity date; the rate
 
 
 
4 Money market rates, by month
 
 
% per annum
Money market rates reported by Frankfurt banks  1 EURIBOR  3 
One-week One-month Six-month Nine-month Twelve- Three-month
Overnight money Three-month funds EONIA  2 funds funds funds funds funds month funds
Reporting Monthly Lowest and Monthly Lowest and
period averages highest rates averages highest rates Monthly averages
2011          Apr 0.94 0.43 − 1.50 1.28 1.14 − 1.40 0.97 1.07 1.13 1.32 1.62 1.86 2.09
         May 1.00 0.50 − 1.35 1.39 1.29 − 1.45 1.03 1.19 1.24 1.43 1.71 1.93 2.15
         June 1.10 0.65 − 1.92 1.44 1.30 − 1.55 1.12 1.19 1.28 1.49 1.75 1.95 2.14
         July 0.95 0.50 − 1.45 1.55 1.44 − 1.63 1.01 1.32 1.42 1.60 1.82 1.99 2.18
         Aug 0.83 0.75 − 1.25 1.52 1.42 − 1.62 0.91 1.17 1.37 1.55 1.75 1.92 2.10
         Sep 0.93 0.75 − 1.70 1.49 1.42 − 1.57 1.01 1.13 1.35 1.54 1.74 1.90 2.07
         Oct 0.87 0.75 − 1.30 1.52 1.43 − 1.59 0.96 1.17 1.36 1.58 1.78 1.94 2.11
1Money market rates are not fixed or quoted officially; the monthly aver- of real turnover according to the act/360 method and published via
ages computed from daily quotations are unweighted. — 2Euro OverNight Reuters. — 3Euro Interbank Offered Rate: unweighted average rate
Index Average: weighted average overnight rate for interbank operations calculated by Reuters since 30 December 1998 according to the act/360
calculated by the European Central Bank since 4 January 1999 on the basis method. 
43*VI Interest rates

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
E U R O S Y S T E M
Monthly Report
November 2011
VI Interest rates
 
5 Interest rates and volumes for outstanding amounts and new business of German banks (MFIs) *
(a) Outstanding amounts o
 
 
Households’ deposits Non-financial corporations’ deposits
with an agreed maturity of
up to 2 years over 2 years up to 2 years over 2 years
Effective Effective Effective Effective
End of interest rate  1 Volume  2 interest rate  1 Volume  2 interest rate  1 Volume  2 interest rate  1 Volume  2 
month % pa € million % pa € million % pa € million % pa € million
2010          Sep 1.59 123,619 2.45 208,722 0.92 92,658 3.90 22,520
         Oct 1.59 123,550 2.44 209,255 0.97 95,970 3.86 22,535
         Nov 1.59 123,828 2.42 209,940 1.00 95,794 3.85 22,646
         Dec 1.57 123,875 2.41 213,208 1.02 98,840 3.83 22,637
2011          Jan 1.58 123,263 2.40 213,962 1.08 95,791 3.80 22,856
         Feb 1.58 123,712 2.40 215,243 1.10 96,346 3.80 22,983
         Mar 1.58 123,032 2.37 216,569 1.14 98,952 3.79 23,106
         Apr 1.61 125,585 2.36 217,665 1.25 100,520 3.76 23,816
         May 1.65 127,375 2.36 219,602 1.33 102,891 3.75 23,709
         June 1.68 128,443 2.36 220,838 1.41 100,866 3.74 23,964
         July 1.73 131,401 2.35 221,490 1.50 103,337 3.72 24,136
         Aug 1.78 132,093 2.35 222,091 1.52 107,467 3.71 24,181
         Sep 1.81 134,117 2.34 222,719 1.52 113,117 3.68 24,053
 
 
Housing loans to households  3 Consumer credit and other loans to households  4, 5 
with a maturity of
over 1 year and over 1 year and
up to 1 year  6 up to 5 years over 5 years up to 1 year  6 up to 5 years over 5 years
Effective Effective Effective Effective Effective Effective
interest interest interest interest interest interest
End of rate  1 Volume  2 rate 1 Volume  2 rate 1 Volume  2 rate 1 Volume  2 rate 1 Volume  2 rate 1 Volume  2 
month % pa % pa % pa % pa % pa % pa € million € million € million € million € million € million
2010          Sep 4.18 5,496 4.07 26,301 4.69 925,117 8.42 68,206 5.93 69,703 5.75 313,591
         Oct 4.14 5,455 4.05 26,375 4.68 926,841 8.26 66,398 5.89 69,962 5.74 313,936
         Nov 4.06 5,394 4.01 26,558 4.66 927,903 8.06 66,324 5.78 70,098 5.73 314,010
         Dec 3.99 5,369 3.97 26,563 4.64 927,171 8.14 68,321 5.73 70,042 5.70 312,604
2011          Jan 3.91 5,251 3.95 26,421 4.63 926,224 8.20 65,462 5.72 69,810 5.70 311,915
         Feb 3.82 5,036 3.92 26,475 4.62 926,667 8.20 64,486 5.70 69,108 5.69 312,164
         Mar 3.88 5,244 3.89 26,702 4.60 926,845 8.25 65,739 5.66 69,606 5.68 311,059
         Apr 3.95 5,202 3.88 26,839 4.59 927,168 8.22 63,985 5.64 69,778 5.68 312,376
         May 4.04 5,248 3.87 27,063 4.58 928,319 8.30 64,040 5.60 70,343 5.68 313,138
         June 4.13 5,203 3.86 27,213 4.58 929,355 8.46 66,552 5.56 69,359 5.68 312,069
         July 4.17 5,292 3.87 27,349 4.57 930,437 8.45 63,944 5.55 69,328 5.69 312,900
         Aug 4.20 5,315 3.86 27,537 4.56 931,968 8.52 63,858 5.67 74,147 5.68 313,504
         Sep 4.23 5,283 3.85 27,817 4.55 934,054 8.56 65,654 5.66 74,384 5.68 313,747
 
 
Loans to non-financial corporations with a maturity of
up to 1 year  6 over 1 year and up to 5 years over 5 years
End of Volume  2 Volume  2 Volume  2 Effective interest rate  1 Effective interest rate  1 Effective interest rate  1 
month % pa € million % pa € million % pa € million
2010          Sep 3.83 132,925 3.57 134,337 3.87 551,283
         Oct 3.88 131,772 3.63 133,816 3.85 551,206
         Nov 3.82 132,041 3.65 134,424 3.85 555,004
         Dec 3.82 128,142 3.66 133,617 3.86 555,314
2011          Jan 3.89 130,003 3.67 132,483 3.85 555,165
         Feb 3.88 133,863 3.68 133,024 3.86 557,886
         Mar 3.90 135,214 3.70 133,748 3.87 556,255
         Apr 3.96 134,351 3.75 130,873 3.90 558,075
         May 3.99 134,221 3.78 130,465 3.91 558,898
         June 4.15 137,565 3.86 127,937 3.94 560,966
         July 4.09 137,256 3.95 127,958 3.98 561,830
         Aug 4.12 135,305 4.04 129,991 3.98 562,983
         Sep 4.16 139,119 4.03 129,919 3.98 561,294
*The MFI interest rate statistics are based on the interest rates applied by interest rates are calculated either as annualised agreed interest rates o ra s
MFIs and the related volumes of euro-denominated deposits and loans to narrowly defined effective rates. Both calculation methods cover all interest
households and non-financial corporations domiciled in the euro area. The payments on deposits and loans but not any other related charges which
household sector comprises individuals (including sole proprietors) and may occur for enquiries, administration, preparation of the documents,
non-profit institutions serving households. Non-financial corporations in- guarantees and credit insurance. — 2Data based on monthly balance sheet
clude all enterprises other than insurance companies, banks and other finan- statistics. — 3Secured and unsecured loans for home purchase, including
cial institutions. The interest rate statistics gathered on a harmonised basis building and home improvements; including loans granted by building and
in the euro area from January 2003 are being collected in Germany on a loan associations and interim credits as well as transmitted loans granted by
sample basis. The most recent figures are in all cases to be regarded as provi- the reporting agents in their own name and for their own account. —
sional. Subsequent revisions appearing in the following Monthly Report are 4Consumer credit is defined as loans granted for the purpose of personal
not specially marked. Further information on the MFI interest rate statistics use in the consumption of goods and services. — 5For the purpose of these
can be found on the Bundesbank’s website (Statistics / Reporting system / statistics, other loans are loans granted for other purposes such as business,
Banking statistics / MFI interest rate statistics). — oThe statistics on out- debt consolidation, education etc. — 6Including overdrafts (see also
standing amounts are collected at the end of the month. — 1The effective footnotes 13 to 15 p 47*). 
44*VI Interest rates

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2011
VI Interest rates
 
5 Interest rates and volumes for outstanding amounts and new business of German banks (MFIs) *  (cont’d)
(b) New business +
 
 
Households’ deposits
with an agreed maturity of redeemable at notice of  8 
Overnight up to 1 year over 2 years up to 3 months over 3 months over 1 year and up to 2 years
Effective Effective Effective Effective Effective Effective
interest interest interest interest interest interest
Reporting rate  1 Volume  2 rate 1 Volume  7 rate 1 Volume  7 rate 1 Volume  7 rate 1 Volume  2 rate 1 Volume  2 
period % pa % pa % pa % pa % pa % pa € million € million € million € million € million € million
2010          Sep 0.74 697,415 1.04 13,929 2.26 1,354 2.12 1,477 1.40 499,188 1.83 106,394
         Oct 0.75 703,734 1.13 13,062 2.04 1,166 2.23 1,691 1.37 501,900 1.80 105,025
         Nov 0.74 711,278 1.16 13,413 1.80 1,342 2.16 1,756 1.36 503,907 1.81 105,590
         Dec 0.71 714,112 1.06 13,862 1.99 1,075 2.13 2,300 1.39 512,222 1.82 105,583
2011          Jan 0.72 712,891 1.29 17,554 2.14 1,570 2.49 2,259 1.34 514,833 1.83 105,207
         Feb 0.74 714,176 1.24 15,659 2.21 1,621 2.67 2,278 1.36 516,856 1.84 105,268
         Mar 0.75 714,781 1.18 13,674 2.20 1,980 2.42 2,293 1.37 517,707 1.85 105,429
         Apr 0.74 720,878 1.36 15,283 2.28 1,988 2.78 2,473 1.40 517,337 1.87 104,640
         May 0.79 721,441 1.36 15,015 2.31 1,980 2.81 3,088 1.40 515,120 1.88 104,562
         June 0.81 723,542 1.40 14,485 2.61 1,707 2.79 2,458 1.43 513,314 1.89 104,371
         July 0.87 729,146 1.55 17,846 2.53 2,140 2.80 2,398 1.42 512,173 1.90 104,420
         Aug 0.90 728,134 1.53 17,115 2.50 1,828 2.80 1,953 1.43 510,749 1.91 104,307
         Sep 0.91 729,240 1.53 18,506 2.46 1,244 2.70 1,530 1.47 509,809 1.92 103,814
 
 
Non-financial corporations’ deposits
with an agreed maturity of
Overnight up to 1 year over 1 year and up to 2 years over 2 years
Effective Effective Effective Effective
Reporting interest rate  1 Volume  2 interest rate  1 Volume  7 interest rate  1 Volume  7 interest rate  1 Volume  7 
period % pa € million % pa € million % pa € million % pa € million
2010          Sep 0.45 248,544 0.59 35,618 1.72 475 2.81 139
         Oct 0.50 249,029 0.75 35,976 1.69 376 2.28 248
         Nov 0.47 254,987 0.73 38,509 1.86 288 2.70 381
         Dec 0.46 258,245 0.68 51,978 2.60 452 2.81 811
2011          Jan 0.53 253,658 0.77 43,391 1.72 383 2.63 388
         Feb 0.47 242,018 0.87 31,168 1.90 706 3.02 783
         Mar 0.48 245,287 0.90 35,003 2.03 430 2.48 448
         Apr 0.58 243,324 1.12 33,097 2.09 625 2.55 845
         May 0.58 245,993 1.20 37,292 2.31 433 2.94 472
         June 0.62 243,252 1.25 36,331 2.08 434 2.63 465
         July 0.63 243,727 1.29 39,877 2.22 774 2.77 574
         Aug 0.63 246,151 1.23 38,033 2.53 428 2.55 515
         Sep 0.66 249,350 1.24 34,917 2.09 411 2.11 415
 
 
Loans to households
Other loans to households with an initial rate fixation of  5 
of which  loans to sole proprietors  10 
floating rate or over 1 year and floating rate or over 1 year and
up to 1 year  9 up to 5 years over 5 years up to 1 year  9 up to 5 years over 5 years
Effective Effective Effective Effective Effective Effective
interest interest interest interest interest interest
Reporting rate  1 Volume  7 rate 1 Volume  7 rate 1 Volume  7 rate 1 Volume  7 rate 1 Volume  7 rate 1 Volume  7 
period % pa % pa % pa % pa % pa % pa € million € million € million € million € million € million
2010          Sep 2.40 4,582 4.15 1,061 3.88 2,581 2.39 2,871 4.27 798 3.84 1,387
         Oct 2.53 4,941 4.33 1,025 4.00 2,246 2.56 3,235 4.37 763 3.98 1,249
         Nov 2.57 4,301 4.31 1,519 3.93 2,536 2.58 2,861 4.44 737 3.88 1,456
         Dec 2.58 5,582 4.15 1,326 3.98 3,534 2.67 3,302 4.29 889 3.96 1,781
2011          Jan 2.58 5,362 4.13 1,387 4.15 2,234 2.62 3,557 4.22 1,007 4.16 1,295
         Feb 2.53 4,860 4.56 1,039 4.27 2,456 2.62 2,727 4.68 676 4.28 1,411
         Mar 2.63 5,036 4.56 1,328 4.45 2,880 2.70 3,273 4.67 988 4.44 1,711
         Apr 2.81 4,744 4.56 1,175 4.61 2,360 2.86 3,116 4.66 844 4.56 1,342
         May 2.93 3,980 4.71 1,150 4.63 2,605 3.02 2,670 4.81 795 4.64 1,381
         June 3.04 4,559 4.42 1,092 4.62 2,391 3.17 3,034 4.64 654 4.62 1,377
         July 3.13 5,314 4.68 1,599 4.54 2,613 3.24 3,393 4.76 740 4.57 1,486
         Aug 3.14 4,211 4.81 1,087 4.36 2,051 3.22 2,473 4.98 830 4.34 1,152
         Sep 3.05 4,304 4.69 1,122 4.09 2,576 3.17 2,650 4.80 854 4.07 1,556
For footnotes * and 1to6, see p 44*. — +In the case of deposits with an the sake of simplicity. This means that all outstanding deposit and lending
agreed maturity and all loans excluding revolving loans and overdrafts, business at the end of the month has to be incorporated in the calculation
credit card debt, new business covers all new agreements between house- of average rates of interest. — 7Estimated. The volume of new business is
holds or non-financial corporations and the bank. The interest rates are extrapolated to form the underlying total using the Horvitz-Thompson esti-
calculated as volume-weighted average rates across all new agreements mator. — 8Including non-financial corporations’ deposits; including fidelity
concluded during the reporting month. In the case of overnight deposits, and growth premia. — 9Excluding overdrafts. — 10Collected from June
deposits redeemable at notice, revolving loans and overdrafts, credit card 2010. 
debt, new business is collected in the same way as outstanding amounts for
45*VI Interest rates

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
E U R O S Y S T E M
Monthly Report
November 2011
VI Interest rates
 
5 Interest rates and volumes for outstanding amounts and new business of German banks (MFIs) *  (cont’d)
(b) New business +
 
 
Loans to households (cont’d)
Consumer credit with an initial rate fixation of  4 
Total floating rate or over 1 year and
Total up to 1 year  9 up to 5 years over 5 years (including charges)
Effective Effective Effective Effective Annual percentage
Reporting Volume  7 Volume  7 Volume  7 Volume  7 rate of charge  11 interest rate  1 interest rate  1 interest rate  1 interest rate  1 
period % pa % pa € million % pa € million % pa € million % pa € million
Total loans
2010          Sep 7.09 6.50 4,957 3.43 731 5.67 2,142 8.43 2,084
         Oct 6.89 6.26 5,170 3.45 908 5.49 2,170 8.28 2,092
         Nov 6.75 6.21 4,945 3.45 729 5.42 2,175 8.03 2,041
         Dec 6.34 5.82 4,400 3.16 771 5.27 1,943 7.66 1,686
2011          Jan 6.99 6.26 5,179 3.36 1,042 5.51 2,029 8.43 2,108
         Feb 6.93 6.20 5,233 3.30 958 5.43 2,167 8.30 2,108
         Mar 6.99 6.37 6,134 3.52 945 5.57 2,652 8.28 2,537
         Apr 6.86 6.20 5,700 3.28 1,029 5.55 2,417 8.23 2,254
         May 7.11 6.39 6,269 3.68 1,086 5.69 2,625 8.25 2,558
         June 7.00 6.34 5,203 3.42 879 5.72 2,258 8.27 2,066
         July 7.07 6.30 5,699 3.47 1,164 5.75 2,307 8.35 2,228
         Aug 7.09 6.35 5,764 3.56 1,039 5.74 2,364 8.19 2,361
         Sep 7.09 6.42 5,364 3.60 867 5.69 2,243 8.24 2,254
of which: collateralised loans 12
2010          Sep . 4.35 433 2.09 110 6.30 164 3.91 159
         Oct . 4.00 536 2.29 210 6.16 173 3.91 153
         Nov . 4.64 456 2.49 94 6.40 187 3.92 175
         Dec . 4.72 475 2.78 104 6.42 198 3.95 173
2011          Jan . 4.50 430 2.67 119 5.92 176 4.25 135
         Feb . 4.12 449 2.48 181 5.82 152 4.44 116
         Mar . 5.26 458 2.72 105 6.24 182 4.61 142
         Apr . 4.88 440 2.84 116 6.17 200 4.69 124
         May . 4.85 527 3.04 168 6.40 207 4.74 152
         June . 5.16 423 3.14 109 6.52 201 4.69 113
         July . 5.01 466 3.24 130 6.26 215 4.69 121
         Aug . 4.81 461 2.98 119 5.99 207 4.60 135
         Sep . 4.55 430 2.81 124 5.81 191 4.35 115
 
 
Loans to households (cont’d)
Housing loans with an initial rate fixation of  3 
Total floating rate or over 1 year and over 5 years and
Total up to 1 year  9 up to 5 years up to 10 years over 10 years (including charges)
Effective Effective Effective Effective Effective Annual percentage
Reporting Volume  7 Volume  7 Volume  7 Volume  7 Volume  7 rate of charge  11 interest rate  1 interest rate  1 interest rate  1 interest rate  1 interest rate  1 
period % pa % pa % pa % pa % pa % pa € million € million € million € million € million
Total loans
2010          Sep 3.62 3.54 16,328 3.28 2,039 3.25 2,340 3.65 6,342 3.64 5,607
         Oct 3.61 3.49 16,995 3.21 2,797 3.34 2,407 3.58 6,464 3.59 5,327
         Nov 3.65 3.55 16,236 3.42 1,977 3.25 2,378 3.61 6,393 3.66 5,488
         Dec 3.76 3.62 17,749 3.38 2,524 3.31 2,659 3.70 7,049 3.77 5,517
2011          Jan 3.82 3.74 17,098 3.38 3,444 3.43 2,803 3.85 6,692 4.06 4,159
         Feb 3.99 3.92 14,711 3.56 2,101 3.60 2,470 4.02 5,832 4.15 4,308
         Mar 4.07 3.99 17,526 3.49 2,777 3.70 2,793 4.10 6,742 4.26 5,214
         Apr 4.18 4.09 16,705 3.51 2,760 3.73 2,601 4.18 6,626 4.50 4,718
         May 4.23 4.16 16,448 3.82 2,503 3.84 2,531 4.23 6,594 4.41 4,820
         June 4.18 4.11 13,933 3.78 2,189 3.82 2,051 4.19 5,334 4.32 4,359
         July 4.12 4.02 15,868 3.68 3,131 3.82 2,395 4.13 6,067 4.25 4,275
         Aug 4.06 3.98 15,599 3.89 2,277 3.69 2,348 4.01 6,041 4.13 4,933
         Sep 3.85 3.75 15,338 3.77 2,119 3.52 2,146 3.80 5,951 3.80 5,122
of which: collateralised loans 12
2010          Sep . 3.46 8,500 3.10 786 3.18 1,265 3.57 3,395 3.56 3,054
         Oct . 3.47 9,197 3.02 1,241 3.40 1,389 3.51 3,540 3.63 3,027
         Nov . 3.48 8,496 3.19 844 3.15 1,280 3.52 3,452 3.66 2,920
         Dec . 3.57 8,982 3.28 1,055 3.29 1,401 3.62 3,753 3.76 2,773
2011          Jan . 3.66 8,664 3.22 1,431 3.36 1,477 3.76 3,560 3.98 2,196
         Feb . 3.86 7,820 3.43 916 3.58 1,366 3.96 3,235 4.07 2,303
         Mar . 3.92 8,747 3.34 1,077 3.64 1,439 4.02 3,544 4.17 2,680
         Apr . 4.04 8,763 3.33 1,330 3.69 1,323 4.09 3,440 4.49 2,670
         May . 4.09 8,592 3.65 1,093 3.78 1,342 4.16 3,638 4.33 2,519
         June . 4.03 7,153 3.64 994 3.73 1,055 4.11 2,874 4.25 2,230
         July . 3.94 8,563 3.53 1,652 3.77 1,280 4.05 3,296 4.18 2,335
         Aug . 3.91 8,077 3.72 1,009 3.60 1,236 3.93 3,239 4.12 2,593
         Sep . 3.68 7,509 3.63 900 3.40 1,116 3.73 3,015 3.77 2,478
For footnotes * and 1to6, see p 44*. For footnotes +, 7to10, see p 45*. For tains other related charges which may occur for enquiries, administration,
footnote 12, see p 47*. — 11Annual percentage rate of charge, which con- preparation of the documents, guarantees and credit insurance. 
46*VI Interest rates

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2011
VI Interest rates
 
5 Interest rates and volumes for outstanding amounts and new business of German banks (MFIs) *  (cont’d)
(b) New business +
 
 
Loans to households (cont’d) Loans to non-financial corporations
of which of which
Revolving loans  13 Revolving loans  13 
and overdrafts  14 Revolving loans  13 Extended and overdrafts  14 Revolving loans  13 
credit card debt  15 and overdrafts  14 credit card debt credit card debt  15 and overdrafts  14 
Effective Effective Effective Effective Effective
Reporting Volume  16 Volume  16 Volume  2 Volume  16 Volume  16 interest rate  1 interest rate  1 interest rate  1 interest rate  1 interest rate  1 
period % pa € million % pa € million % pa € million % pa € million % pa € million
2010          Sep 10.12 46,795 10.17 41,644 14.90 3,233 4.82 66,162 4.83 65,969
         Oct 9.92 45,605 9.97 40,404 14.82 3,254 4.90 64,296 4.91 64,108
         Nov 9.82 44,999 9.92 39,670 14.84 3,241 4.86 64,101 4.87 63,904
         Dec 9.95 46,527 10.04 41,264 14.85 3,266 4.86 62,512 4.87 62,342
2011          Jan 9.99 44,746 10.11 39,415 14.94 3,263 4.91 64,520 4.92 64,347
         Feb 10.09 43,724 10.19 38,548 14.88 3,250 4.91 67,762 4.92 67,580
         Mar 10.08 44,548 10.19 39,295 14.88 3,251 4.87 68,034 4.89 67,799
         Apr 10.08 42,907 10.20 37,543 14.94 3,281 4.95 66,106 4.96 65,901
         May 10.16 43,083 10.30 37,679 14.96 3,315 4.91 65,330 4.93 65,099
         June 10.18 44,814 10.27 39,450 14.94 3,362 5.07 69,283 5.08 69,071
         July 10.23 42,851 10.30 37,415 15.04 3,425 4.91 67,586 4.93 67,417
         Aug 10.30 43,085 10.36 37,638 15.11 3,455 4.96 66,000 4.97 65,817
         Sep 10.30 45,279 10.37 39,701 15.17 3,506 5.09 71,074 5.10 70,863
 
 
Loans to non-financial corporations (cont’d)
Loans up to €1 million with an initial rate fixation of  17 Loans over €1 million with an initial rate fixation of  17 
floating rate or over 1 year and floating rate or over 1 year and
up to 1 year  9 up to 5 years over 5 years up to 1 year  9 up to 5 years over 5 years
Effective Effective Effective Effective Effective Effective
interest interest interest interest interest interest
Reporting rate  1 Volume  7 rate 1 Volume  7 rate 1 Volume  7 rate 1 Volume  7 rate 1 Volume  7 rate 1 Volume  7 
period % pa % pa % pa % pa % pa % pa € million € million € million € million € million € million
Total loans
2010          Sep 3.49 7,124 4.40 1,227 3.67 1,438 2.37 43,643 3.40 1,725 3.66 4,437
         Oct 3.42 7,024 4.25 1,296 3.73 1,496 2.44 45,964 3.33 1,851 3.47 4,341
         Nov 3.84 6,989 4.27 1,329 3.66 1,505 2.64 38,043 3.47 2,006 3.44 4,998
         Dec 3.77 7,119 4.24 1,472 3.81 1,798 2.78 52,023 3.26 3,889 3.56 7,562
2011          Jan 3.36 6,823 4.25 1,315 3.96 1,288 2.50 44,418 3.34 2,283 3.95 4,794
         Feb 3.59 5,971 4.51 1,247 4.08 1,211 2.69 34,963 4.05 1,522 3.98 3,950
         Mar 3.69 7,429 4.54 1,537 4.28 1,426 2.69 46,728 3.84 2,216 3.97 5,171
         Apr 3.63 6,876 4.63 1,303 4.37 1,254 2.87 45,450 3.82 2,177 4.70 5,871
         May 3.95 6,606 4.71 1,378 4.36 1,362 2.91 38,493 3.67 1,083 4.10 4,057
         June 3.93 6,808 4.64 1,264 4.33 1,143 3.06 44,897 3.62 2,839 4.23 4,181
         July 3.87 7,200 4.70 1,380 4.33 1,382 3.02 47,966 3.79 2,894 4.18 5,167
         Aug 3.97 6,317 4.75 1,470 4.10 1,181 3.01 36,905 3.92 1,639 3.99 4,143
         Sep 3.99 7,008 4.60 1,459 3.87 1,244 2.96 45,287 3.60 3,111 3.69 4,992
of which: collateralised loans 12
2010          Sep 3.75 1,258 3.99 149 3.53 465 2.37 8,203 3.23 443 3.99 1,246
         Oct 3.77 1,439 3.75 191 3.58 532 2.43 8,896 3.18 746 3.68 1,251
         Nov 4.25 1,179 3.60 190 3.47 404 2.65 6,985 3.45 592 3.32 1,543
         Dec 4.15 1,477 3.72 196 3.57 503 2.82 9,561 2.74 1,206 3.41 1,665
2011          Jan 3.59 1,605 3.70 209 3.86 386 2.51 9,039 3.38 950 4.09 1,135
         Feb 3.65 1,231 4.19 146 3.86 311 2.53 6,812 4.26 624 4.06 1,070
         Mar 3.70 1,428 4.25 194 4.11 388 2.75 9,342 3.70 743 4.09 976
         Apr 3.76 1,476 4.37 199 4.20 337 2.76 9,355 3.88 922 4.60 2,009
         May 4.11 1,312 4.53 172 4.18 363 2.95 7,064 3.73 221 4.12 946
         June 4.00 1,343 4.40 156 4.05 321 3.08 8,797 3.54 1,049 4.30 1,271
         July 4.04 1,536 4.41 190 4.04 428 3.13 10,905 3.52 999 4.36 1,227
         Aug 4.17 1,230 4.38 147 3.96 289 3.06 6,690 4.06 531 3.88 917
         Sep 4.06 1,351 4.09 139 3.61 333 3.16 9,251 3.62 1,071 3.71 1,056
For footnotes *and1to6, see p 44*. For footnotes +and7to10, see p 45*. whether they are within or beyond the limits agreed between customers
For footnote 11, see p 46*. — 12Collected from June 2010. For the purposes and the bank. — 15From June 2010 including convenience and extended
of the interest rate statistis, a loan is considered to be secured if collateral credit card debt. Convenience credit is defined as the credit granted a ta n
(among others financial collateral, real estate collateral, debt securities) in interest rate of 0% in the period between payment transactions effectuated
at leat the same value as the loan amount has been posted, pledged or with the card during one billing cycle and the date at which the debt
assigned. — 13From June 2010 including revolving loans which have all the balances from this specific billing cycle become due. — 16From January
following features: (a) the borrower may use or withdraw the funds to a 2003 up to May 2010 estimated. The volume of outstanding amounts
pre-approved credit limit without giving prior notice to the lender; (b) the reported was extrapolated to form the underlying total using the
amount of available credit can increase and decrease as funds are borrowed Horvitz-Thompson estimator. From June 2010 the data are based on
and repaid; (c) the loan may be used repeatedly; (d) there is no obligation monthly balance sheet statistics. — 17The amount refers to the single loan
of regular repayment of funds. — 14Overdrafts are defined as debit transaction considered as new business. 
balances on current accounts. They include all bank overdrafts regardless of
47*VI Interest rates

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
E U R O S Y S T E M
Monthly Report
November 2011
VII Capital market
 
1 Sales and purchases of debt securities and shares in Germany *
 
 
 
Debt securities
Sales Purchases
Domestic debt securities  1 Residents
Credit in- Bundes-
Sales stitutions bank
= Public Foreign including open
total Bank Corporate debt debt building market
pur- debt bonds secur- secur- and loan Other oper- Non-
Period chases Total securities ities  3 ities 4 Total  5 sectors  7 ations  6 residents  8 (non-MFIs)  2 associations  6 
DM million
1998 418,841 308,201 254,367 3,143 50,691 110,640 245,802 203,342 42,460 − 173,038
€ million
1999 292,663 198,068 156,399 2,184 39,485 94,595 155,766 74,728 81,038 − 136,898
2000 226,393 157,994 120,154 12,605 25,234 68,399 151,568 91,447 60,121 − 74,825
2001 180,227 86,656 55,918 14,473 16,262 93,571 111,281 35,848 75,433 − 68,946
2002 175,396 124,035 47,296 14,506 62,235 51,361 60,476 13,536 46,940 − 114,920
2003 184,679 134,455 31,404 30,262 72,788 50,224 105,557 35,748 69,809 − 79,122
2004 233,890 133,711 64,231 10,778 58,703 100,179 108,119 121,841 − 13,723 − 125,772
2005 252,658 110,542 39,898 2,682 67,965 142,116 94,718 61,740 32,978 − 157,940
2006 242,006 102,379 40,995 8,943 52,446 139,627 125,423 68,893 56,530 − 116,583
2007 217,798 90,270 42,034 20,123 28,111 127,528 − 26,762 96,476 − 123,238 − 244,560
2008 72,574 66,139 − 45,712 86,527 25,322 6,435 2,798 68,049 − 65,251 − 69,776
2009 67,560 − 538 − 114,902 22,709 91,655 68,098 88,871 12,973 75,898 − − 21,311
2010 148,535 − 1,212 − 7,621 24,044 − 17,635 149,747 100,463 − 103,271 203,734 − 48,072
2011          July − 15,843 − 13,921 − 8,597 2,528 − 7,852 − 1,922 − 8,204 − 12,490 4,286 − − 7,639
         Aug 41,731 38,421 16,683 903 20,835 3,310 5,698 − 9,417 15,115 − 36,033
         Sep − 11,398 − 12,170 − 11,839 − 2,901 2,570 772 − 1,665 − 11,962 10,297 − − 9,733
 
 
 
Shares
Sales Purchases
Sales Residents
=
total Domestic Foreign Credit insti- Non-
purchases shares  9 shares  10 Total  11 tutions  6,12 Other sectors  7 residents  13 
Period
DM million
1998 249,504 48,796 200,708 149,151 20,252 128,899 100,353
€ million
1999 150,013 36,010 114,003 103,136 18,637 84,499 46,877
2000 140,461 22,733 117,729 164,654 23,293 141,361 − 24,194
2001 82,665 17,575 65,091 − 2,252 − 14,714 12,462 84,918
2002 39,338 9,232 30,106 18,398 − 23,236 41,634 20,941
2003 11,896 16,838 − 4,946 − 15,121 7,056 − 22,177 27,016
2004 − 3,317 10,157 − 13,474 7,432 5,045 2,387 − 10,748
2005 32,364 13,766 18,597 1,036 10,208 − 9,172 31,329
2006 26,276 9,061 17,214 7,528 11,323 − 3,795 18,748
2007 − 5,009 10,053 − 15,062 − 62,308 − 6,702 − 55,606 57,299
2008 − 28,613 11,326 − 39,939 1,542 − 23,079 24,621 − 30,153
2009 37,903 23,962 13,940 32,176 − 8,335 40,511 5,725
2010 35,469 20,049 15,422 37,798 7,340 30,458 − 2,329
2011          July − 5,947 137 − 6,084 − 5,789 − 2,396 − 3,393 − 158
         Aug − 2,896 203 − 3,099 − 143 − 5,224 5,081 − 2,753
         Sep − 4,210 91 − 4,301 − 2,463 − 4,409 1,946 − 1,747
*Up to end-1999, debt securities in this table comprise bonds and money funds. — 8Net purchases or net sales (−) of domestic debt securities by
market paper issued by domestic banks; from January 2000, they comprise non-residents; transaction values. — 9Excluding shares of public limited
all debt securities. For mutual fund shares, see Table VII.6. — 1Net sales at investment companies; at issue prices. — 10Net purchases or net sales (−) of
market values plus/minus changes in issuers’ portfolios of their own debt foreign shares (including direct investment)  by  residents;  transaction  val-
securities. — 2Including cross-border financing within groups from January ues. — 11Domestic and foreign shares. — 12Up to end-1998, excluding
2011. — 3Including Federal Railways Fund, Federal Post Office and syndicated shares. — 13Net purchases or net sales (−) of domestic shares
Treuhand agency. — 4Net purchases or net sales (−) of foreign debt (including direct investment) by non-residents; transaction values. — The
securities by residents; transaction values. — 5Domestic and foreign debt figures for the most recent date are provisional; revisions are not specially
securities. — 6Book values; statistically adjusted. — 7Residual; also marked. 
including purchases of domestic and foreign securities by domestic mutual
48*VII Capital market

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2011
VII Capital market
 
2 Sales of debt securities issued by residents * 
 
 
Up to end-1998, DM nominal million value; from 1999, € million nominal value
Bank debt securities  1 Memo item
 Foreign  DM/euro
bonds issued Debt securities
Corporate by German- issued by special
Mortgage Public purpose credit Other bank bonds Public managed
Period Total Total Pfandbriefe Pfandbriefe institutions (non-MFIs)  2 syndicates debt securities debt securities  3 
Gross sales  4 
1998 1,030,827 789,035 71,371 344,609 72,140 300,920 3,392 238,400 149,542
€ million
1999 571,269 448,216 27,597 187,661 59,760 173,200 2,570 120,483 57,202
2000 659,148 500,895 34,528 143,107 94,556 228,703 8,114 150,137 31,597
2001 687,988 505,646 34,782 112,594 106,166 252,103 11,328 171,012 10,605
2002 818,725 569,232 41,496 119,880 117,506 290,353 17,574 231,923 10,313
2003 958,917 668,002 47,828 107,918 140,398 371,858 22,510 268,406 2,850
2004 990,399 688,844 33,774 90,815 162,353 401,904 31,517 270,040 12,344
2005 988,911 692,182 28,217 103,984 160,010 399,969 24,352 272,380 600
2006 925,863 622,055 24,483 99,628 139,193 358,750 29,975 273,834 69
2007 1,021,533 743,616 19,211 82,720 195,722 445,963 15,043 262,872 −
2008 1,337,337 961,271 51,259 70,520 382,814 456,676 95,093 280,974 −
2009 1,533,616 1,058,815 40,421 37,615 331,566 649,215 76,379 398,423 −
2010 1,375,138 757,754 36,226 33,539 363,828 324,160 53,654 563,731 −
2011          June 101,126 47,060 1,872 2,111 30,852 12,225 10,762 43,304 −
         July 101,359 41,497 1,040 559 25,022 14,875 8,459 51,403 −
         Aug 124,006 67,984 774 1,187 45,089 20,934 3,615 52,407 −
         Sep 101,062 52,907 2,522 836 34,485 15,065 3,124 45,031 −
of which:  Debt securities with maturities of more than four years  5 
1998 694,414 496,444 59,893 288,619 54,385 93,551 2,847 195,122 139,645
€ million
1999 324,888 226,993 16,715 124,067 37,778 48,435 2,565 95,331 44,013
2000 319,330 209,187 20,724 102,664 25,753 60,049 6,727 103,418 27,008
2001 299,751 202,337 16,619 76,341 42,277 67,099 7,479 89,933 6,480
2002 309,157 176,486 16,338 59,459 34,795 65,892 12,149 120,527 9,213
2003 369,336 220,103 23,210 55,165 49,518 92,209 10,977 138,256 2,850
2004 424,769 275,808 20,060 48,249 54,075 153,423 20,286 128,676 4,320
2005 425,523 277,686 20,862 63,851 49,842 143,129 16,360 131,479 400
2006 337,969 190,836 17,267 47,814 47,000 78,756 14,422 132,711 69
2007 315,418 183,660 10,183 31,331 50,563 91,586 13,100 118,659 −
2008 387,516 190,698 13,186 31,393 54,834 91,289 84,410 112,407 −
2009 361,999 185,575 20,235 20,490 59,809 85,043 55,240 121,185 −
2010 381,687 169,174 15,469 15,139 72,796 65,769 34,649 177,863 −
2011          June 36,018 17,689 1,258 1,343 12,017 3,071 5,662 12,667 −
         July 28,753 9,215 658 319 4,574 3,664 4,898 14,640 −
         Aug 27,396 11,663 428 82 7,542 3,612 1,647 14,086 −
         Sep 29,195 13,259 189 160 9,464 3,446 741 15,195 −
Net sales  6 
1998 327,991 264,627 22,538 162,519 18,461 61,111 3,118 60,243 84,308
€ million
1999 209,096 170,069 2,845 80,230 31,754 55,238 2,185 36,840 22,728
2000 155,615 122,774 5,937 29,999 30,089 56,751 7,320 25,522 − 16,705
2001 84,122 60,905 6,932 − 9,254 28,808 34,416 8,739 14,479 − 30,657
2002 131,976 56,393 7,936 − 26,806 20,707 54,561 14,306 61,277 − 44,546
2003 124,556 40,873 2,700 − 42,521 44,173 36,519 18,431 65,253 − 54,990
2004 167,233 81,860 1,039 − 52,615 50,142 83,293 18,768 66,605 − 22,124
2005 141,715 65,798 − 2,151 − 34,255 37,242 64,962 10,099 65,819 − 35,963
2006 129,423 58,336 − 12,811 − 20,150 44,890 46,410 15,605 55,482 − 19,208
2007 86,579 58,168 − 10,896 − 46,629 42,567 73,127 − 3,683 32,093 − 29,750
2008 119,472 8,517 15,052 − 65,773 25,165 34,074 82,653 28,302 − 31,607
2009 76,441 − 75,554 858 − 80,646 25,579 − 21,345 48,508 103,482 − 21,037
2010 21,566 − 87,646 − 3,754 − 63,368 28,296 − 48,822 23,748 85,464 − 10,904
2011          June − 15,356 − 25,203 − 1,296 − 3,638 − 1,703 − 18,566 3,574 6,274 − 300
         July − 13,941 − 6,201 − 437 − 5,090 − 273 − 401 1,497 − 9,238 −
         Aug 32,551 13,553 − 715 − 2,954 14,226 2,996 − 2,327 21,325 −
         Sep − 12,754 − 12,887 − 4,961 − 4,768 3,291 − 6,449 − 4,093 4,226 −
*For definitions, see the explanatory notes in the Statistical Supplement 2 Treuhand agency. — 4Gross sales means only initial sales of newly issued
Capital market statistics on p 21 ff. — 1Excluding registered bank debt securities. — 5Maximum maturity according to the terms of issue. — 6Gross
securities. — 2Including cross-border financing within groups from January sales less redemptions. 
2011. — 3Including Federal Railways Fund, Federal Post Office and
49*VII Capital market

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
E U R O S Y S T E M
Monthly Report
November 2011
VII Capital market
 
3 Amounts outstanding of debt securities issued by residents  * 
 
 
€ million nominal value
Bank debt securities  1 Memo item
 Foreign  DM/euro
End of year Debt securities bonds issued
or month/ issued by Corporate by German-
Maturity Mortgage Public Other bank bonds Public managed special purpose
in years Total Total (non-MFIs) syndicates credit institutions debt securities debt securities Pfandbriefe Pfandbriefe
1999 2,097,926 1,322,863 134,814 655,024 163,284 369,741 6,280 768,783 339,560
2000 2,265,121 1,445,736 140,751 685,122 157,374 462,488 13,599 805,786 322,856
2001 2,349,243 1,506,640 147,684 675,868 201,721 481,366 22,339 820,264 292,199
2002 2,481,220 1,563,034 155,620 649,061 222,427 535,925 36,646 881,541 247,655
2003 2,605,775 1,603,906 158,321 606,541 266,602 572,442 55,076 946,793 192,666
2004 2,773,007 1,685,766 159,360 553,927 316,745 655,734 73,844 1,013,397 170,543
2005 2,914,723 1,751,563 157,209 519,674 323,587 751,093 83,942 1,079,218 134,580
2006 3,044,145 1,809,899 144,397 499,525 368,476 797,502 99,545 1,134,701 115,373
2007 3,130,723 1,868,066 133,501 452,896 411,041 870,629 95,863 1,166,794 85,623
2008 3,250,195 1,876,583 150,302 377,091 490,641 858,550 178,515 1,195,097 54,015
2009 3,326,635 1,801,029 151,160 296,445 516,221 837,203 227,024 1,298,581 32,978
2010 3,348,201 2 1,570,490 147,529 232,954 544,517 2 645,491 250,774 2 1,526,937 22,074
2011          Apr 3,380,943 1,565,583 151,857 215,274 553,094 645,358 270,457 1,544,902 17,391
         May 3,400,959 1,560,246 152,539 213,554 558,994 635,158 271,624 1,569,089 16,464
         June 3,385,603 1,535,042 151,243 209,916 557,291 616,592 275,197 1,575,363 16,164
         July 3,371,662 1,528,843 150,806 204,826 557,018 616,193 276,694 1,566,125 16,164
         Aug 3,404,214 1,542,396 150,091 201,872 571,245 619,189 274,368 1,587,450 16,164
         Sep 3,391,460 1,529,509 145,130 197,104 574,536 612,740 270,275 1,591,676 16,164
Breakdown by remaining period to maturity  3 Position at end-September 2011 
1,327,162 643,701 65,881 97,406 230,678 249,734 59,644 623,818 4,086    less than 2
772,975 397,255 45,408 55,191 131,608 165,049 59,774 315,946 5,303 2 to less than 4
509,891 254,451 22,409 25,902 83,224 122,915 28,833 226,607 2,973 4 to less than 6
214,841 85,207 7,527 10,562 46,976 20,141 15,833 113,800 273 6 to less than 8
194,819 58,568 3,347 3,920 39,322 11,979 6,555 129,697 218 8 to less than 10
57,925 19,228 510 2,583 11,437 4,697 10,528 28,169 1,657 10 to less than 15
83,914 15,126 14 325 7,296 7,490 2,978 65,810 687 15 to less than 20
229,932 55,974 35 1,214 23,993 30,732 86,130 87,828 967 20 and more
*Including debt securities temporarily held in the issuers’ portfolios. — month under review until final maturity for debt securities falling due en
1Excluding debt securities handed to the trustee for temporary safe bloc and until mean maturity of the residual amount outstanding for debt
custody. — 2Sectoral reclassification of debt securities. — 3Calculated from securities not falling due en bloc. 
50* 
 
4 Shares in circulation issued by residents  * 
 
 
€ million nominal value
Change in domestic public limited companies’ capital due to
Memo item
Share circulation
at market values
cash payments contribution (market capita-
and ex- merger reduction lisation) Share capital = Net increase or contribution of shares,
change of of claims and circulation at net decrease (−) mining shares, of capital level at end
issue of and other transfer change of and of period end of period during period convertible GmbH shares,
Period under review under review bonds  1 etc of assets bonus shares real assets legal form liquidation under review  2 
1999 133,513 11,747 5,519 2,008 190 1,075 2,099 1,560 − 708 1,603,304
2000 147,629 14,115 3,620 3,694 618 8,089 − 1,986 1,827 − 1,745 1,353,000
2001 166,187 18,561 7,987 4,057 1,106 8,448 1,018 − 905 − 3,152 1,205,613
2002 168,716 2,528 4,307 1,291 486 1,690 − 868 − 2,152 − 2,224 647,492
2003 162,131 − 6,585 4,482 923 211 513 − 322 − 10,806 − 1,584 851,001
2004 164,802 2,669 3,960 1,566 276 696 220 − 1,760 − 2,286 887,217
2005 163,071 − 1,733 2,470 1,040 694 268 − 1,443 − 3,060 − 1,703 1,058,532
2006 163,764 695 2,670 3,347 604 954 − 1,868 − 1,256 − 3,761 1,279,638
2007 164,560 799 3,164 1,322 200 269 − 682 − 1,847 − 1,636 1,481,930
2008 168,701 4,142 5,006 1,319 152 0 − 428 − 608 − 1,306 830,622
2009 175,691 6,989 12,476 398 97 − − 3,741 − 1,269 − 974 927,256
2010 174,596 − 1,096 3,265 497 178 10 − 486 − 993 − 3,569 1,091,220
2011          Apr 175,396 272 303 30 − − − 1 − 36 − 25 1,162,665
         May 174,520 − 876 1,413 − 3 − 0 18 − 2,310 1,133,630
         June 177,023 2,503 2,860 147 10 − − 66 9 − 457 1,137,397
         July 177,208 185 107 221 97 9 − 14 − 78 − 157 1,101,653
         Aug 176,989 − 219 192 1 − − − 242 − 102 − 68 919,444
         Sep 176,899 − 90 85 71 1 − − 100 − 75 − 72 873,180
*Excluding shares of public limited investment companies. — 1Including ber 2007) or the Neuer Markt (stock market segment was closed down on
shares issued out of company profits. — 2Enterprises listed on the Regulated 24 March 2003) are included as well as enterprises listed on the Open Market.
Market (the introduction of which marked the end of the division of organ- Source: Bundesbank calculations based on data of the Herausgebergemein-
ised trading segments into an official and a regulated market on 1 Novem- schaft Wertpapier-Mitteilungen and the Deutsche Börse AG. 
50*VII Capital market

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2011
VII Capital market
 
5 Yields and indices on German securities
 
 
               
Yields on debt securities outstanding issued by residents  1 Price indices  2,3 
Public debt securities Bank debt securities Debt securities Shares
Listed
Federal securities
With a residual With a residual
maturity of maturity of Corporate German German
more than 9 more than 9 bonds bond iBoxx CDAX share
and including and including (non- index share price index € Germany
Total Total Total 10 years  4 Total 10 years MFIs) (REX) price index index (DAX)
Average End-1998 End-1987 End-1987
Period % per annum daily rate = 100 = 100 = 1000
1999 4.3 4.3 4.3 4.5 4.3 4.9 5.0 110.60 92.52 445.95 6,958.14
2000 5.4 5.3 5.2 5.3 5.6 5.8 6.2 112.48 94.11 396.59 6,433.61
2001 4.8 4.7 4.7 4.8 4.9 5.3 5.9 113.12 94.16 319.38 5,160.10
2002 4.7 4.6 4.6 4.8 4.7 5.1 6.0 117.56 97.80 188.46 2,892.63
2003 3.7 3.8 3.8 4.1 3.7 4.3 5.0 117.36 97.09 252.48 3,965.16
2004 3.7 3.7 3.7 4.0 3.6 4.2 4.0 120.19 99.89 268.32 4,256.08
2005 3.1 3.2 3.2 3.4 3.1 3.5 3.7 120.92 101.09 335.59 5,408.26
2006 3.8 3.7 3.7 3.8 3.8 4.0 4.2 116.78 96.69 407.16 6,596.92
2007 4.3 4.3 4.2 4.2 4.4 4.5 5.0 114.85 94.62 478.65 8,067.32
2008 4.2 4.0 4.0 4.0 4.5 4.7 6.3 121.68 102.06 266.33 4,810.20
2009 3.2 3.1 3.0 3.2 3.5 4.0 5.5 123.62 100.12 320.32 5,957.43
2010 2.5 2.4 2.4 2.7 2.7 3.3 4.0 124.96 102.95 368.72 6,914.19
2011          July 2.7 2.6 2.6 2.7 3.1 3.5 4.2 125.79 103.94 368.64 7,158.77
         Aug 2.3 2.1 2.0 2.2 2.6 3.2 4.4 128.78 105.99 302.46 5,784.85
         Sep 1.9 1.7 1.7 1.8 2.4 2.7 4.6 129.54 108.24 285.00 5,502.02
         Oct 2.0 1.9 1.8 2.0 2.5 2.8 4.6 129.65 107.27 316.80 6,141.34
1Bearer debt securities with maximum maturities according to the terms of calculation. Monthly figures are calculated on the basis of the yields on all
issue of over 4 years if their mean residual maturities exceed 3 years. Conver- the business days in a month. The annual figures are the unweighted means
tible debt securities, etc. debt securities with unscheduled redemption, zero of the monthly figures. — 2End of year or month. — 3Source: Deutsche
-coupon bonds, floating -rate notes and bonds not denominated in euro are Börse AG. — 4Only debt securities eligible as underlying instruments for
not included. Group yields for the various categories of securities are futures contracts; calculated as unweighted averages. 
weighted by the amounts outstanding of the debt securities included in the
 
 
6 Sales and purchases of mutual fund shares in Germany
 
 
Sales Purchases
Domestic mutual funds  1  (sales receipts) Residents
Mutual funds open to the Credit institutions
general public including building
Other sectors  3 and loan associations  2 
of which
Sales Open- of which of which
= Secur- end Foreign Foreign
total Money ities- real Special- mutual mutual
pur- market based estate ised Foreign fund fund Non-resi-
chases Total Total funds funds funds funds funds  4 Total Total shares Total shares dents  5 
Period
DM million
1998 187,641 169,748 38,998 5,772 27,814 4,690 130,750 17,893 190,416 43,937 961 146,479 16,507 − 2,775
€ million
1999 111,282 97,197 37,684 3,347 23,269 7,395 59,513 14,086 105,521 19,862 − 637 85,659 14,722 5,761
2000 118,021 85,160 39,712 − 2,188 36,818 − 2,824 45,448 32,861 107,019 14,454 92 92,565 32,769 11,002
2001 97,077 76,811 35,522 12,410 9,195 10,159 41,289 20,266 96,127 10,251 2,703 85,876 17,563 951
2002 66,571 59,482 25,907 3,682 7,247 14,916 33,575 7,089 67,251 2,100 3,007 65,151 4,082 − 680
2003 47,754 43,943 20,079 − 924 7,408 14,166 23,864 3,811 49,547 − 2,658 734 52,205 3,077 − 1,793
2004 14,435 1,453 − 3,978 − 6,160 − 1,246 3,245 5,431 12,982 10,267 8,446 3,796 1,821 9,186 4,168
2005 85,268 41,718 6,400 − 124 7,001 − 3,186 35,317 43,550 79,252 21,290 7,761 57,962 35,789 6,016
2006 47,264 19,535 − 14,257 490 − 9,362 − 8,814 33,791 27,729 39,006 14,676 5,221 24,330 22,508 8,258
2007 55,778 13,436 − 7,872 − 4,839 − 12,848 6,840 21,307 42,342 51,309 − 229 4,240 51,538 38,102 4,469
2008 − 313 − 7,911 − 14,409 − 12,171 − 11,149 799 6,498 7,598 8,401 − 16,625 − 9,252 25,026 16,850 − 8,714
2009 41,972 43,747 10,966 − 5,047 11,749 2,686 32,780 − 1,776 36,566 − 14,995 − 8,178 51,561 6,402 5,406
2010 106,663 84,906 13,381 − 148 8,683 1,897 71,525 21,756 104,253 3,873 6,290 100,380 15,466 2,410
2011          July 4,617 6,417 2,803 − 113 3,105 10 3,615 − 1,800 1,966 − 1,115 − 2,134 3,081 334 2,651
         Aug − 3,397 − 1,284 − 2,453 392 − 2,355 − 103 1,169 − 2,113 − 3,372 410 230 − 3,782 − 2,343 − 25
         Sep 1,005 691 − 138 45 − 372 310 830 314 − 290 − 874 − 186 584 500 1,295
1Including public limited investment companies. — 2Book values. — fund shares by non-residents; transaction values. — The figures for the most
3Residual. — 4Net purchases or net sales (−) of foreign fund shares by recent date are provisional; revisions are not specially marked. 
residents; transaction values. — 5Net purchases or net sales (−) of domestic
51*VII Capital market

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
E U R O S Y S T E M
Monthly Report
November 2011
VIII  Financial accounts
  
1  Acquisition of financial assets and financing of private non-financial sectors
(non-consolidated)
  
  € billion
2009 2010 2011 
Item 2008 2009 2010 Q3 Q4 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 Q1 Q2
Households  1 
  I  Acquisition of financial assets
Currency and deposits 121.0 49.9 80.2 5.5 19.8 16.5 21.3 7.6 34.8 7.8 20.0
Debt securities  2 − 21.8 − 11.7 − 11.2 1.0 − 1.2 − 3.5 − 4.9 0.9 − 3.8 2.5 1.8
Shares − 9.5 16.3 13.4 0.7 3.3 2.6 5.1 − 1.6 7.2 3.3 0.5
Other equity 3.0 3.0 3.0 0.8 0.8 0.7 0.7 0.7 0.8 0.7 0.7
Mutual funds shares − 34.3 − 1.1 10.0 − 0.5 − 0.3 3.4 6.6 0.5 − 0.5 − 3.5 − 0.1
Claims on insurance
corporations  3 31.2 60.6 63.1 11.9 15.6 22.1 13.8 11.1 16.1 23.1 13.4
short-term claims 0.4 0.5 0.4 0.1 0.2 0.1 0.1 0.1 0.1 0.1 0.1
longer-term claims 30.8 60.1 62.7 11.8 15.4 22.0 13.7 11.0 16.0 22.9 13.3
Claims from company
pension commitments 7.4 10.0 7.8 2.5 2.5 1.9 2.0 1.9 2.0 2.0 2.1
Other claims  4 26.0 21.0 − 11.9 9.5 − 11.5 8.1 − 5.7 10.0 − 24.3 12.4 − 3.5
Total 123.0 147.9 154.3 31.4 28.9 51.8 38.9 31.2 32.4 48.2 35.0
  II Financing
Loans − 14.9 − 5.1 4.5 4.5 − 4.5 − 7.2 5.7 5.5 0.6 − 3.3 4.9
short-term loans 1.2 − 4.3 − 2.3 − 1.3 − 2.5 − 0.3 1.0 − 0.8 − 2.1 − 0.6 1.0
longer-term loans − 16.0 − 0.9 6.8 5.7 − 2.0 − 6.9 4.7 6.3 2.7 − 2.8 4.0
Other liabilities 0.4 1.1 0.4 − 0.1 0.4 0.4 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.0 0.2 0.0
Total − 14.4 − 4.0 4.9 4.4 − 4.1 − 6.8 5.7 5.4 0.6 − 3.2 5.0
Corporations
I   Acquisition of financial assets
Currency and deposits 11.2 24.7 9.4 12.9 2.4 5.5 − 21.9 20.1 5.8 2.0 − 15.8
Debt securities  2 − 0.4 4.9 − 0.1 − 0.1 0.1 − 0.6 0.4 1.7 − 1.6 3.5 − 0.7
Financial derivatives 16.6 − 6.0 26.6 3.7 0.2 2.0 3.3 4.2 17.2 5.2 2.3
Shares 41.7 28.8 32.9 0.1 3.9 5.3 1.2 9.1 17.4 3.5 7.7
Other equity 14.0 21.9 39.4 6.9 − 2.7 31.6 6.7 4.5 − 3.4 − 2.6 12.4
Mutual funds shares 52.1 − 42.1 49.7 − 35.9 7.5 8.8 7.7 12.5 20.7 4.8 22.0
Loans 50.6 87.1 95.2 19.2 24.8 26.5 28.7 22.9 17.1 31.7 25.4
short-term loans 34.4 53.8 70.4 12.7 12.8 20.2 20.0 17.0 13.2 25.8 23.6
longer-term loans 16.2 33.3 24.8 6.6 12.0 6.3 8.7 5.9 3.8 6.0 1.8
Claims on insurance
corporations  3 0.4 1.0 0.8 0.2 0.4 0.2 0.2 0.2 0.2 0.2 0.2
short-term claims 0.4 1.0 0.8 0.2 0.4 0.2 0.2 0.2 0.2 0.2 0.2
longer-term claims . . . . . . . . . . .
Other claims − 52.2 51.1 − 78.8 15.7 14.0 − 36.8 7.6 − 30.7 − 18.9 19.6 − 11.9
Total 134.2 171.4 175.3 22.8 50.5 42.4 33.8 44.6 54.5 67.9 41.7
  II Financing
Debt securities  2 9.6 − 7.1 9.6 3.5 1.2 8.7 − 0.5 − 3.6 5.1 7.7 − 0.3
Financial derivatives . . . . . . . . . . .
Shares 3.6 5.5 7.2 2.3 1.0 6.1 0.1 0.2 0.8 0.3 5.5
Other equity 19.7 7.2 9.1 1.6 5.1 1.7 1.6 5.2 0.6 4.0 1.2
Loans 79.0 57.4 62.8 1.4 10.9 29.2 11.4 20.0 2.2 22.4 32.6
short-term loans 46.8 10.3 60.7 − 0.4 − 0.8 29.7 20.7 8.5 1.7 4.0 34.0
longer-term loans 32.2 47.1 2.1 1.8 11.7 − 0.6 − 9.3 11.5 0.5 18.5 − 1.5
Claims from company
pension commitments 2.9 4.8 2.6 1.2 1.2 0.7 0.7 0.7 0.7 0.7 0.7
Other liabilities 22.3 45.7 37.0 9.1 0.4 3.9 9.0 − 23.3 47.3 6.5 − 15.9
Total 137.1 113.5 128.4 19.1 19.8 50.2 22.3 − 0.8 56.7 41.6 23.7
1Including non-profit institutions serving households. — 2Including money 4Including accumulated interest-bearing surplus shares with insurance
market paper. — 3Including private pension funds, burial funds, corporations. 
occupational pension schemes and supplementary pension funds. —
52*VIII  Financial accounts

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2011
VIII  Financial accounts
  
2  Financial assets and liabilities of private non-financial sectors
(non-consolidated)
  
  End-of-year level, end-of-quarter level; € billion
2009 2010 2011 
Item 2008 2009 2010 Q3 Q4 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 Q1 Q2
Households  1 
  I  Financial assets
Currency and deposits 1,737.5 1,788.1 1,868.3 1,768.4 1,788.1 1,804.6 1,825.9 1,833.4 1,868.3 1,876.1 1,896.1
Debt securities  2 267.1 265.5 254.1 266.7 265.5 264.7 259.1 259.6 254.1 254.8 258.3
Shares 181.9 201.7 243.5 185.2 201.7 214.1 208.5 215.0 243.5 257.2 260.1
Other equity 221.9 204.2 220.4 205.6 204.2 207.9 219.7 212.6 220.4 216.7 217.8
Mutual funds shares 376.7 412.5 431.3 406.7 412.5 423.1 416.4 422.7 431.3 422.1 416.9
Claims on insurance
corporations  3 1,214.8 1,282.7 1,347.7 1,265.7 1,282.7 1,305.2 1,318.5 1,330.2 1,347.7 1,370.8 1,384.3
short-term claims 81.3 81.8 82.2 81.6 81.8 81.9 82.0 82.1 82.2 82.3 82.5
longer-term claims 1,133.6 1,200.9 1,265.6 1,184.2 1,200.9 1,223.3 1,236.5 1,248.1 1,265.6 1,288.5 1,301.8
Claims from company
pension commitments 263.5 273.4 281.2 270.9 273.4 275.3 277.3 279.3 281.2 283.2 285.3
Other claims  4 39.8 38.7 38.7 38.9 38.7 38.8 38.8 38.7 38.7 38.2 38.7
Total 4,303.3 4,466.8 4,685.4 4,408.2 4,466.8 4,533.7 4,564.1 4,591.5 4,685.4 4,719.1 4,757.4
  II Liabilities
Loans 1,521.7 1,520.9 1,525.4 1,523.6 1,520.9 1,514.4 1,520.1 1,525.2 1,525.4 1,522.0 1,526.8
short-term loans 80.0 75.7 75.6 78.2 75.7 75.4 78.0 77.6 75.6 75.0 75.8
longer-term loans 1,441.7 1,445.1 1,449.8 1,445.4 1,445.1 1,439.0 1,442.1 1,447.7 1,449.8 1,447.0 1,451.0
Other liabilities 11.1 12.0 11.8 12.5 12.0 13.3 12.8 12.9 11.8 14.0 13.4
Total 1,532.9 1,532.8 1,537.2 1,536.0 1,532.8 1,527.7 1,532.9 1,538.2 1,537.2 1,536.0 1,540.2
Corporations
I   Financial assets
Currency and deposits 420.0 456.4 451.7 446.1 456.4 455.3 439.9 451.4 451.7 439.2 424.1
Debt securities  2 42.0 48.4 48.1 48.6 48.4 48.2 48.5 50.0 48.1 51.6 51.1
Financial derivatives . . . . . . . . . . .
Shares 757.0 822.4 910.1 816.4 822.4 854.2 828.6 851.1 910.1 921.3 933.9
Other equity 358.4 346.4 410.0 353.0 346.4 383.0 410.2 400.1 410.0 399.1 412.0
Mutual funds shares 102.3 108.8 119.3 105.4 108.8 114.4 113.7 118.8 119.3 119.9 120.0
Loans 363.0 450.1 545.3 425.3 450.1 476.6 505.3 528.2 545.3 577.0 602.4
short-term loans 240.5 294.2 364.6 281.4 294.2 314.4 334.4 351.4 364.6 390.4 414.0
longer-term loans 122.5 155.8 180.7 143.9 155.8 162.2 170.9 176.8 180.7 186.6 188.4
Claims on insurance
corporations  3 44.2 45.2 46.0 44.8 45.2 45.4 45.6 45.8 46.0 46.2 46.4
short-term claims 44.2 45.2 46.0 44.8 45.2 45.4 45.6 45.8 46.0 46.2 46.4
longer-term claims . . . . . . . . . . .
Other claims 933.1 916.1 733.7 915.2 916.1 910.6 952.5 923.8 733.7 758.1 763.5
Total 3,020.0 3,193.8 3,264.1 3,154.9 3,193.8 3,287.8 3,344.3 3,369.3 3,264.1 3,312.3 3,353.4
  II Liabilities
Debt securities  2 137.0 136.9 145.2 132.8 136.9 146.9 154.1 153.6 145.2 128.5 130.6
Financial derivatives . . . . . . . . . . .
Shares 963.5 1,081.3 1,301.8 1,043.3 1,081.3 1,118.8 1,089.5 1,159.5 1,301.8 1,322.3 1,357.5
Other equity 689.9 697.1 706.1 691.9 697.1 698.7 700.4 705.6 706.1 710.2 711.4
Loans 1,400.8 1,444.4 1,501.8 1,433.6 1,444.4 1,465.2 1,476.6 1,494.8 1,501.8 1,524.7 1,569.3
short-term loans 468.3 476.3 537.6 475.6 476.3 501.0 521.8 528.7 537.6 538.3 572.4
longer-term loans 932.6 968.0 964.1 958.0 968.0 964.2 954.8 966.1 964.1 986.4 996.9
Claims from company
pension commitments 218.4 223.2 225.8 222.0 223.2 223.8 224.5 225.1 225.8 226.5 227.1
Other liabilities 838.4 857.1 837.5 863.7 857.1 863.2 887.3 851.2 837.5 817.0 810.2
Total 4,247.8 4,439.9 4,718.2 4,387.3 4,439.9 4,516.7 4,532.4 4,589.8 4,718.2 4,729.1 4,806.0
1Including non-profit institutions serving households. — 2Including money 4Including accumulated interest-bearing surplus shares with insurance
market paper. — 3Including private pension funds, burial funds, corporations. 
occupational pension schemes and supplementary pension funds. —
53*VIII  Financial accounts

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
E U R O S Y S T E M
Monthly Report
November 2011
IX Public finances in Germany
 
1 General government: deficit and debt level as defined in the Maastricht Treaty
 
 
 
Social Social
General Central State Local security General Central State Local security
government government government government funds government government government government funds
Period € billion as a percentage of GDP
Deficit / surplus 1
2005 − 73.9 − 47.6 − 22.9 + 0.6 − 4.0 − 3.3 − 2.1 − 1.0 + 0.0 − 0.2
2006 − 37.9 − 34.4 − 11.8 + 3.3 + 5.0 − 1.6 − 1.5 − 0.5 + 0.1 + 0.2
2007 + 5.8 − 18.6 + 2.5 + 11.1 + 10.8 + 0.2 − 0.8 + 0.1 + 0.5 + 0.4
2008 p − 1.4 − 15.2 − 2.2 + 8.8 + 7.2 − 0.1 − 0.6 − 0.1 + 0.4 + 0.3
2009 p − 76.3 − 38.2 − 20.8 − 2.1 − 15.2 − 3.2 − 1.6 − 0.9 − 0.1 − 0.6
2010 2, p −105.9 − 79.9 − 22.6 − 5.7 + 2.3 − 4.3 − 3.2 − 0.9 − 0.2 + 0.1
2009          H1  p − 18.2 − 9.4 − 6.6 + 1.2 − 3.3 − 1.6 − 0.8 − 0.6 + 0.1 − 0.3
         H2  p − 58.0 − 28.7 − 14.2 − 3.2 − 11.9 − 4.7 − 2.3 − 1.2 − 0.3 − 1.0
2010          H1  2, p − 37.3 − 26.9 − 9.8 − 3.7 + 3.1 − 3.1 − 2.2 − 0.8 − 0.3 + 0.3
         H2  p − 68.8 − 53.1 − 12.8 − 2.1 − 0.9 − 5.4 − 4.2 − 1.0 − 0.2 − 0.1
2011          H1  pe − 7.2 − 14.7 − 2.0 − 0.6 + 10.0 − 0.6 − 1.2 − 0.2 − 0.1 + 0.8
Debt level 3 End of year or quarter
2005 1,526.3 935.3 482.3 121.5 2.7 68.6 42.0 21.7 5.5 0.1
2006 1,574.7 970.7 492.1 125.1 1.7 68.1 42.0 21.3 5.4 0.1
2007 1,582.5 978.0 494.1 123.4 1.6 65.2 40.3 20.3 5.1 0.1
2008 1,649.0 1,007.6 531.3 123.2 1.5 66.7 40.7 21.5 5.0 0.1
2009 pe 1,767.7 1,075.7 574.8 129.1 1.3 74.4 45.3 24.2 5.4 0.1
2010 pe 2,061.8 1,317.6 622.4 134.5 1.3 83.2 53.2 25.1 5.4 0.1
2009          Q1  pe 1,679.3 1,028.3 538.9 124.1 1.6 68.9 42.2 22.1 5.1 0.1
         Q2  pe 1,745.9 1,074.4 559.2 125.3 1.4 72.8 44.8 23.3 5.2 0.1
         Q3  pe 1,754.8 1,077.0 563.3 126.4 1.5 73.9 45.3 23.7 5.3 0.1
         Q4  pe 1,767.7 1,075.7 574.8 129.1 1.3 74.4 45.3 24.2 5.4 0.1
2010          Q1  pe 1,787.5 1,088.5 580.8 130.1 1.3 74.6 45.4 24.2 5.4 0.1
         Q2  pe 1,830.6 1,099.1 611.0 132.4 1.3 75.5 45.3 25.2 5.5 0.1
         Q3  pe 1,856.5 1,116.4 618.5 134.3 1.6 75.7 45.5 25.2 5.5 0.1
         Q4  pe 2,061.8 1,317.6 622.4 134.5 1.3 83.2 53.2 25.1 5.4 0.1
2011          Q1  pe 2,046.2 1,308.4 617.1 132.9 1.7 81.6 52.2 24.6 5.3 0.1
         Q2  pe 2,052.4 1,308.3 618.0 137.4 2.7 81.1 51.7 24.4 5.4 0.1
Source: Federal Statistical Office and Bundesbank calculations. — 1Unlike according to the national accounts. — 2Including the €4.4 billion proceeds
thefiscal balance as shown in the national accounts, the deficit as defined received from the 2010 frequency auction. — 3Quarterly GDP ratios are
in the Maastricht Treaty includes interest flows from swaps and forward based on the national output of the four preceding quarters. 
rate agreements. The half-year figures correspond to the deficit / surplus
 
 
2 General government: revenue, expenditure and fiscal deficit / surplus as shown in the national accounts *
 
 
 
Revenue Expenditure
of which of which
Compen- Gross Memo item
Social con- Social sation of capital Deficit / Total tax
Period Total Taxes tributions Other Total benefits employees Interest formation Other surplus burden  1 
€ billion
2005 969.3 475.7 397.1 96.5 1,043.5 579.7 176.8 63.2 31.4 192.4 − 74.1 883.7
2006 1,011.1 512.7 400.7 97.7 1,049.3 580.6 177.2 66.1 33.7 191.6 − 38.2 924.7
2007 1,062.3 558.4 400.9 103.0 1,056.8 579.4 178.2 68.5 36.0 194.6 + 5.5 971.3
2008 p 1,088.2 572.6 408.8 106.9 1,089.6 590.3 182.3 68.3 38.9 209.8 − 1.4 994.2
2009 p 1,066.0 546.3 409.8 109.9 1,142.1 622.6 189.7 63.8 41.4 224.6 − 76.1 966.3
2010 p 1,079.8 548.9 418.7 112.2 2 1,185.8 632.3 194.5 61.9 40.8 2 256.3 2 −106.0 977.7
as a percentage of GDP
2005 43.6 21.4 17.9 4.3 46.9 26.1 7.9 2.8 1.4 8.6 − 3.3 39.7
2006 43.7 22.2 17.3 4.2 45.3 25.1 7.7 2.9 1.5 8.3 − 1.7 40.0
2007 43.7 23.0 16.5 4.2 43.5 23.9 7.3 2.8 1.5 8.0 + 0.2 40.0
2008 p 44.0 23.1 16.5 4.3 44.0 23.9 7.4 2.8 1.6 8.5 − 0.1 40.2
2009 p 44.9 23.0 17.3 4.6 48.1 26.2 8.0 2.7 1.7 9.5 − 3.2 40.7
2010 p 43.6 22.2 16.9 4.5 2 47.9 25.5 7.9 2.5 1.6 2 10.3 2 − 4.3 39.5
Percentage growth rates
2005 + 1.9 + 2.5 − 0.1 + 7.7 + 1.0 + 0.9 − 0.2 + 0.1 − 3.5 + 3.1 . + 1.4
2006 + 4.3 + 7.8 + 0.9 + 1.2 + 0.6 + 0.2 + 0.3 + 4.6 + 7.4 − 0.4 . + 4.6
2007 + 5.1 + 8.9 + 0.1 + 5.4 + 0.7 − 0.2 + 0.6 + 3.6 + 6.7 + 1.5 . + 5.0
2008 p + 2.4 + 2.5 + 2.0 + 3.8 + 3.1 + 1.9 + 2.3 − 0.2 + 7.9 + 7.8 . + 2.4
2009 p − 2.0 − 4.6 + 0.2 + 2.8 + 4.8 + 5.5 + 4.0 − 6.6 + 6.5 + 7.1 . − 2.8
2010 p + 1.3 + 0.5 + 2.2 + 2.1 + 3.8 + 1.6 + 2.5 − 3.1 − 1.5 + 14.1 . + 1.2
Source: Federal Statistical Office. — *Figures in accordance with ESA 1995. be found on the Bundesbank’s website. — 1Taxes and social contributions
In the Monthly Reports up to December 2006, customs duties, the EU share plus customs duties and the EU share in VAT revenue. — 2Including the
in VAT revenue and EU subsidies were included in the national accounts’ €4.4 billion proceeds received from the 2010 frequency auction, which are
data (without affecting the fiscal deficit / surplus). This information can still deducted from other expenditure in the national accounts. 
54*IX Public finances in Germany

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2011
IX Public finances in Germany
 
3 General government: budgetary development (as per government’s financial statistics)
 
 
€ billion
Central, state and local government  1 Social security funds  2 General government, total
Revenue Expenditure
of which of which 3 
Finan- Person- Fixed Finan-
cial nel asset cial
transac- expend- Current forma- transac- Deficit / Rev- Expend- Deficit / Rev- Expend- Deficit /
Period Total  4 Taxes tions  5 Total  4 iture grants Interest tion tions  5 surplus enue  6 iture surplus enue iture surplus
2004 pe 545.9 442.8 24.1 610.4 173.4 236.9 64.8 34.3 9.6 − 64.5 469.7 468.6 + 1.1 926.8 990.2 − 63.4
2005 pe 568.9 452.1 31.3 620.6 172.1 245.3 64.0 33.0 14.3 − 51.7 467.8 471.3 − 3.4 947.4 1,002.5 − 55.1
2006 pe 590.9 488.4 18.8 626.2 169.7 252.1 64.4 33.7 11.6 − 35.3 486.3 466.6 + 19.7 988.2 1,003.8 − 15.6
2007 pe 644.8 538.2 17.7 644.2 182.2 250.0 66.2 34.6 9.5 + 0.6 475.3 466.4 + 8.9 1,025.6 1,016.1 + 9.6
2008 pe 668.9 561.2 13.4 677.4 187.3 259.9 67.3 36.4 18.6 − 8.5 485.5 478.9 + 6.6 1,058.5 1,060.4 − 1.9
2009 pe 630.4 524.0 9.2 721.3 195.2 270.4 64.0 40.5 38.0 − 90.9 492.0 505.9 − 13.9 1,020.5 1,125.3 −104.8
2010 pe 650.0 530.6 12.7 732.8 199.9 293.9 60.1 40.1 19.4 − 82.8 515.4 512.3 + 3.2 1,048.0 1,127.6 − 79.6
2009          Q1 p 156.6 128.7 1.7 175.4 45.9 67.2 22.8 5.0 10.0 − 18.9 117.9 122.3 − 4.4 250.8 274.1 − 23.3
         Q2 p 154.8 130.6 3.3 169.5 47.1 60.6 10.7 7.5 16.9 − 14.6 120.5 125.5 − 5.0 251.8 271.5 − 19.6
         Q3 p 148.8 124.4 2.1 174.9 47.6 65.0 19.8 10.5 4.5 − 26.0 120.1 127.6 − 7.5 245.2 278.7 − 33.5
         Q4 p 168.0 140.3 1.9 199.4 52.5 76.6 10.2 16.3 6.4 − 31.4 132.3 130.1 + 2.2 269.3 298.5 − 29.2
2010          Q1 p 147.9 121.6 2.6 180.4 47.6 74.8 21.2 5.5 4.9 − 32.5 123.6 127.6 − 4.0 242.2 278.7 − 36.6
         Q2 p 7 163.6 134.9 3.7 173.7 48.2 71.2 13.2 8.1 6.2 − 10.1 128.2 127.3 + 0.9 7 262.4 271.6 − 9.2
         Q3 p 153.2 127.6 3.0 177.3 48.3 69.8 16.1 10.5 3.4 − 24.0 124.7 125.6 − 1.0 251.0 276.0 − 25.0
         Q4 p 183.2 147.6 3.2 199.4 54.0 76.1 9.2 14.7 4.8 − 16.2 133.3 131.8 + 1.5 290.3 305.0 − 14.7
Source: Bundesbank calculations based on the data from the Federal Stat- 3The development of the types of expenditure recorded here is influenced
istical Office. — 1Including subsidiary budgets, from 2007 also including the in part by statistical changeovers. — 4Including discrepancies in clearing
post office pension fund; excluding the special fund ”Provision for final pay- transactions between central, state and local government. — 5On the rev-
ments for inflation-indexed Federal securities”, which was set up in 2009. enue side, this contains proceeds booked as disposals of equity interests and
Unlike the annual figures based on the annual calculations of the Federal as loan repayments. On the expenditure side, this contains the acquisition
Statistical Office, the quarterly figures do not include municipal special pur- of equity interests and loans granted. — 6Including Federal Government
pose associations and various special accounts. — 2The annual figures do liquidity assistance to the Federal Labour Office. — 7Including the €4.4
not tally with the sum of the quarterly figures, as the latter are all pro- billion proceeds received from the 2010 frequency auction. 
visional. The quarterly figures for some insurance sectors are estimated. —
4 Central, state and local government: budgetary development (as per government’s financial statistics)
 
 
€ billion
Central government State government  2,3 Local government  3 
Period Revenue  1 Expenditure Deficit / surplus Revenue Expenditure Deficit / surplus Revenue Expenditure Deficit / surplus
2004 233.9 273.6 − 39.7 233.5 257.1 − 23.6 147.0 150.1 − 3.1
2005 250.0 281.5 − 31.5 237.4 259.6 − 22.2 151.3 153.2 − 1.9
2006 254.6 282.8 − 28.2 250.3 260.1 − 9.8 161.1 157.4 + 3.7
2007 pe 277.4 292.1 − 14.7 275.9 267.5 + 8.4 171.3 162.4 + 8.9
2008 pe 292.0 303.8 − 11.8 279.3 278.0 + 1.3 176.9 169.0 + 7.9
2009 pe 282.6 317.1 − 34.5 266.2 293.7 − 27.5 172.0 178.9 − 6.9
2010 pe 288.0 332.4 − 44.4 278.5 302.0 − 23.5 176.5 183.9 − 7.4
2009          Q1 p 65.8 76.8 − 11.0 65.3 75.9 − 10.6 35.8 39.0 − 3.1
         Q2 p 71.3 68.6 + 2.7 66.1 67.9 − 1.8 41.1 42.2 − 1.1
         Q3 p 68.6 84.5 − 15.9 63.1 69.4 − 6.3 42.5 45.1 − 2.6
         Q4 p 77.0 87.2 − 10.2 70.7 79.4 − 8.7 50.6 51.0 − 0.4
2010          Q1 p 61.1 82.6 − 21.5 65.0 73.5 − 8.5 34.6 41.2 − 6.6
         Q2 p 4 75.6 80.6 − 5.0 68.3 69.1 − 0.8 42.2 43.5 − 1.3
         Q3 p 66.2 82.7 − 16.6 68.5 73.3 − 4.8 43.8 45.2 − 1.4
         Q4 p 85.2 86.5 − 1.3 75.8 85.0 − 9.2 53.8 52.3 + 1.5
2011          Q1 p 65.4 84.5 − 19.1 74.1 75.6 − 1.5 37.1 42.5 − 5.3
         Q2 p 76.6 73.5 + 3.1 76.0 75.8 + 0.2 45.4 44.3 + 1.1
Source: Bundesbank calculations based on the data from the Federal Stat- 3Unlike the annual figure based on the annual calculations of the Federal
istical Office. — 1Any amounts of the Bundesbank’s profit distribution Statistical Office, the quarterly figures do not include various special ac-
exceeding the reference value that were used to repay parts of the debt of counts and municipal special purpose associations. — 4Including the
central government’s special funds are not included here. — 2Including the €4.4 billion proceeds received from the 2010 frequency auction. 
local authority level of the city-states Berlin, Bremen and Hamburg. —
55*IX Public finances in Germany

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
E U R O S Y S T E M
Monthly Report
November 2011
IX Public finances in Germany
 
5 Central, state and local government: tax revenue
 
 
€ million
Central and state government and European Union
Memo item
Balance of Amounts deducted
Central State Local untransferred in the federal
Period Total Total government  1 government European Union  2 government  3 tax shares  4 budget  5 
2004 442,838 386,459 208,920 157,898 19,640 56,237 + 142 21,967
2005 452,078 392,313 211,779 158,823 21,711 59,750 + 16 21,634
2006 488,444 421,151 225,634 173,374 22,142 67,316 − 22 21,742
2007 538,243 465,554 251,747 191,558 22,249 72,551 + 138 21,643
2008 561,182 484,182 260,690 200,411 23,081 77,190 − 190 21,510
2009 524,000 455,615 252,842 182,273 20,501 68,419 − 34 24,846
2010 530,587 460,230 254,537 181,326 24,367 70,385 − 28 28,726
2009          Q1 128,787 109,674 55,941 46,212 7,521 13,289 + 5,824 5,154
         Q2 130,491 113,442 65,247 46,653 1,541 17,397 − 347 5,140
         Q3 124,437 108,572 62,354 42,335 3,883 15,865 − 1 7,333
         Q4 140,285 123,928 69,299 47,073 7,556 21,868 − 5,511 7,219
2010          Q1 121,321 104,370 54,316 41,777 8,278 11,299 + 5,652 7,133
         Q2 134,843 116,767 66,331 46,516 3,919 18,270 − 194 7,127
         Q3 127,311 109,956 61,146 43,102 5,709 17,564 − 209 7,329
         Q4 147,112 129,137 72,744 49,932 6,462 23,253 − 5,278 7,137
2011          Q1 135,590 115,878 60,579 46,582 8,717 13,640 + 6,071 6,989
         Q2 ... 126,086 71,530 50,289 4,266 ... ... 7,102
         Q3 ... 117,812 66,277 45,938 5,598 ... ... 7,662
2010          Sep . 42,402 23,348 16,932 2,122 . . 2,443
2011          Sep . 45,565 25,278 18,137 2,150 . . 2,376
Sources: Federal Ministry of Finance, Federal Statistical Office and Bundes- enue. — 3Including local government taxes in the city-states Berlin, Bremen
bank calculations. — 1Before deducting supplementary central government and Hamburg. — 4Difference between local government’s share in the
grants, shares in energy tax revenue, compensation for the transfer of joint taxes received by the state government cash offices in the period in
motor vehicle tax to central government, which are remitted to state govern- question (see Table IX. 6) and the amounts passed on to local government in
ment and consolidation aid. — 2Custom duties and shares in VAT and gross the same period. — 5 Volume of the positions mentioned under footnote 1. 
national income accruing to the EU from central government tax rev-
 
 
6 Central and state government and European Union: tax revenue, by type
 
 
€ million
Joint taxes
Memo
Income taxes  2 Turnover taxes  5 item
Local
Local govern-
Invest- business Central State ment
Assessed ment Turnover tax govern- govern- EU share in
Wage income Corpora- income Turnover tax on trans- ment ment customs joint
Period Total  1 Total tax  3 tax tion tax tax  4 Total tax imports fers  6 taxes  7 taxes  7 duties taxes
2004 409,517 159,104 123,896 5,394 13,123 16,691 137,366 104,715 32,651 5,661 84,554 19,774 3,059 23,058
2005 415,355 161,960 118,919 9,766 16,333 16,943 139,713 108,440 31,273 6,218 83,508 20,579 3,378 23,042
2006 446,139 182,614 122,612 17,567 22,898 19,537 146,688 111,318 35,370 7,013 84,215 21,729 3,880 24,988
2007 493,817 204,698 131,774 25,027 22,929 24,969 169,636 127,522 42,114 6,975 85,690 22,836 3,983 28,263
2008 515,498 220,483 141,895 32,685 15,868 30,035 175,989 130,789 45,200 6,784 86,302 21,937 4,002 31,316
2009 484,880 193,684 135,165 26,430 7,173 24,916 176,991 141,907 35,084 4,908 89,318 16,375 3,604 29,265
2010 488,731 192,816 127,904 31,179 12,041 21,691 180,042 136,459 43,582 5,925 93,426 12,146 4,378 28,501
2009          Q1 116,731 50,001 33,975 2,971 4,399 8,657 43,087 34,234 8,853 − 36 17,361 5,351 966 7,057
         Q2 120,543 48,503 30,481 9,141 342 8,539 43,424 35,176 8,248 1,499 21,085 5,186 846 7,102
         Q3 115,567 43,486 32,150 6,732 592 4,011 44,365 35,717 8,649 1,346 22,427 3,023 920 6,994
         Q4 132,040 51,695 38,559 7,586 1,841 3,708 46,114 36,780 9,334 2,099 28,445 2,815 872 8,112
2010          Q1 111,163 45,127 30,255 6,155 1,951 6,766 42,891 34,054 8,837 215 19,001 2,814 1,115 6,793
         Q2 123,859 51,667 30,447 9,681 3,830 7,710 44,343 33,779 10,564 1,311 22,682 2,914 943 7,092
         Q3 116,691 42,813 30,445 7,320 1,588 3,460 44,997 33,258 11,740 1,574 22,922 3,242 1,143 6,734
         Q4 137,019 53,209 36,757 8,023 4,672 3,756 47,810 35,369 12,441 2,825 28,821 3,177 1,177 7,882
2011          Q1 123,131 50,328 32,478 6,755 2,485 8,611 47,389 35,528 11,861 366 20,515 3,408 1,124 7,253
         Q2 133,727 57,624 34,144 9,366 4,215 9,900 46,091 33,082 13,010 1,692 24,026 3,207 1,087 7,641
         Q3 125,021 47,420 33,590 7,111 3,028 3,691 47,161 34,232 12,929 1,735 24,309 3,229 1,169 7,209
2010          Sep 45,421 21,072 9,487 8,373 2,392 820 14,851 10,932 3,918 18 7,975 1,096 409 3,019
2011          Sep 48,750 23,255 10,400 8,567 3,345 943 15,605 11,142 4,463 2 8,359 1,068 461 3,185
Source: Federal Ministry of Finance and Bundesbank calculations. — 1This child benefit and subsidies for supplementary private pension plans. —
total, unlike that in Table IX. 5, does not include the receipts from the equal- 4Final withholding tax on interest income and capital gains, non-assessed
isation of burdens levies, local business tax (less local business tax transfers taxes on earnings. — 5The allocation of revenue to central, state and local
to central and state government), real property taxes and other local govern- government, which is adjusted at more regular intervals, is regulated in
ment taxes, or the balance of untransferred tax shares. — 2Respective section 1 of the Revenue Adjustment Act. Respective percentage share of
percentage share of central, state and local government in revenue: wage central, state and local government in revenue for 2010: 53.2:44.8:2. The EU
tax and assessed income tax 42.5:42.5:15, corporation tax and non-assessed share is deducted from central government’s share. — 6Respective percent-
taxes on earnings 50:50:-, final withholding tax on interest income and capi- age share of central and state government for 2010: 21.7:78.3. — 7For the
tal gains, non-assessed taxes on earnings 44:44:12. — 3After deducting breakdown, see Table IX. 7. 
56*IX Public finances in Germany

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2011
IX Public finances in Germany
 
7 Central, state and local government: individual taxes  
 
 
€ million
Central government taxes  1 State government taxes  1 Local government taxes
Tax on of which
the acqui-
Soli- Motor Motor sition of Inher- Local Real
Period Energy Tobacco darity Insurance vehicle Electri- Spirits vehicle land and itance business property
tax tax surcharge tax tax  2 city tax tax Other tax  2 buildings tax Other  3 Total tax taxes
2004 41,782 13,630 10,108 8,751 . 6,597 2,195 1,492 7,740 4,646 4,284 3,105 38,982 28,373 9,939
2005 40,101 14,273 10,315 8,750 . 6,462 2,142 1,465 8,674 4,791 4,097 3,018 42,941 32,129 10,247
2006 39,916 14,387 11,277 8,775 . 6,273 2,160 1,428 8,937 6,125 3,763 2,904 49,319 38,370 10,399
2007 38,955 14,254 12,349 10,331 . 6,355 1,959 1,488 8,898 6,952 4,203 2,783 51,401 40,116 10,713
2008 39,248 13,574 13,146 10,478 . 6,261 2,126 1,470 8,842 5,728 4,771 2,596 52,468 41,037 10,807
2009 39,822 13,366 11,927 10,548 3,803 6,278 2,101 1,473 4,398 4,857 4,550 2,571 44,028 32,421 10,936
2010 39,838 13,492 11,713 10,284 8,488 6,171 1,990 1,449 − 5,290 4,404 2,452 47,780 35,712 11,315
2009          Q1 4,777 2,365 3,191 4,502 . 1,560 594 372 2,284 1,165 1,144 758 12,021 9,370 2,452
         Q2 10,059 3,560 3,057 1,999 . 1,569 478 363 2,114 1,131 1,334 608 11,447 8,433 2,860
         Q3 9,883 3,499 2,638 2,096 1,907 1,582 488 335 0 1,297 1,123 604 10,216 6,800 3,233
         Q4 15,103 3,942 3,040 1,952 1,897 1,567 542 402 − 1,264 950 601 10,344 7,818 2,391
2010          Q1 4,446 2,462 2,856 4,496 2,345 1,498 526 372 − 1,229 918 667 10,374 7,641 2,518
         Q2 9,596 3,327 3,100 2,060 2,235 1,570 437 357 − 1,207 1,115 591 12,295 9,201 2,915
         Q3 10,172 3,608 2,615 2,110 2,012 1,563 489 354 − 1,430 1,216 597 12,194 8,618 3,373
         Q4 15,625 4,096 3,142 1,619 1,895 1,540 538 366 − 1,425 1,156 597 12,918 10,252 2,508
2011          Q1 4,457 2,893 3,072 4,869 2,349 1,785 574 516 − 1,555 1,170 683 12,825 9,948 2,631
         Q2 10,002 3,300 3,450 2,017 2,215 1,960 482 599 − 1,464 1,129 614 ... ... ...
         Q3 10,058 3,418 2,879 2,145 2,006 1,763 541 1,499 − 1,581 1,039 609 ... ... ...
2010          Sep 3,507 1,175 1,272 540 642 557 165 119 − 503 383 210 . . .
2011          Sep 3,309 1,181 1,388 507 657 576 203 538 − 543 332 192 . . .
Sources: Federal Ministry of Finance, Federal Statistical Office and Bundes- ment. Postings to state government shown thereafter relate to the booking
bank calculations. — 1For the sum total, see Table IX. 6. — 2As of of cash flows. — 3 Notably betting, lottery and beer tax.   
1 July 2009, motor vehicle tax revenue is attributable to central govern-
 
 
8 German pension insurance scheme: budgetary development and assets *
 
 
€ million
Revenue  1,2 Expenditure  1,2 Assets  1,5 
of which of which
Equity
Payments interests, Memo
from Pen- mort- item
central sioners’ gages Adminis-
Contri- govern- Pension health Deficit / and other Real trative
Period Total butions  3 ment Total payments insurance  4 surplus Total Deposits  6 Securities loans  7 estate assets
2004 8 231,684 156,535 71,680 233,011 198,587 14,258 − 1,327 5,158 4,980 19 41 118 4,834
2005 229,428 156,264 71,917 233,357 199,873 13,437 − 3,929 1,976 1,794 16 42 123 4,888
2006 241,231 168,083 71,773 233,668 200,459 13,053 + 7,563 10,047 9,777 115 46 109 4,912
2007 236,642 162,225 72,928 235,459 201,642 13,665 + 1,183 12,196 11,270 765 46 115 4,819
2008 242,770 167,611 73,381 238,995 204,071 14,051 + 3,775 16,531 16,313 36 56 126 4,645
2009 244,689 169,183 74,313 244,478 208,475 14,431 + 211 16,821 16,614 23 64 120 4,525
2010 250,133 172,767 76,173 248,076 211,852 14,343 + 2,057 19,375 18,077 1,120 73 105 4,464
2009          Q1 58,681 39,891 18,500 60,105 51,554 3,633 − 1,424 14,902 14,699 15 56 132 4,618
         Q2 60,812 42,140 18,384 60,263 51,410 3,626 + 549 15,280 15,082 15 59 124 4,593
         Q3 59,783 41,142 18,364 61,841 52,869 3,580 − 2,058 13,647 13,428 40 60 119 4,585
         Q4 64,864 46,005 18,594 61,993 52,917 3,583 + 2,871 16,812 16,608 23 61 120 4,582
2010          Q1 59,761 40,601 18,917 61,861 53,059 3,582 − 2,100 14,922 14,717 20 64 120 4,490
         Q2 62,249 43,054 18,923 61,999 53,006 3,585 + 250 15,254 15,053 20 69 112 4,478
         Q3 61,237 42,048 18,912 62,091 53,102 3,589 − 854 14,853 14,656 20 68 109 4,474
         Q4 66,317 47,060 18,933 61,887 52,966 3,579 + 4,430 19,274 17,978 1,120 68 108 4,476
2011          Q1 60,804 41,608 18,902 62,188 53,176 3,742 − 1,384 18,063 17,069 819 74 101 4,482
         Q2 63,452 44,307 18,855 62,058 52,920 3,731 + 1,394 19,704 18,507 1,019 78 100 4,475
         Q3 62,354 43,109 18,902 62,844 53,341 3,761 − 490 19,959 19,266 519 79 94 4,445
Sources: Federal Ministry of Labour and Social Affairs and German pension ing and proceeds. — 3Including contributions for recipients of government
insurance scheme. — *Excluding the German pension insurance scheme for cash benefits. — 4Including long-term care insurance for pensioners until
the mining, railway and maritime industries. — 1The final annual figures 2004 Q1. — 5Largely corresponds to the sustainability reserves. End of year
do not tally with the quarterly figures, as the latter are all provisional. — or quarter. — 6Including cash. — 7Excluding loans to other social security
2Including financial compensation payments. Excluding investment spend- funds. — 8 Revenue includes proceeds from the disposal of equity interests. 
57*IX Public finances in Germany

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
E U R O S Y S T E M
Monthly Report
November 2011
IX Public finances in Germany
 
9 Federal Employment Agency: budgetary development *
 
 
€ million
Revenue Expenditure
of which of which
Grant or
of which of which loans
from
Unemploy- Measures central
Contri- ment sup- Western Eastern Job promo- Western Eastern financed Deficit / govern-
Period Total  1 butions Levies  2 Total  3 port 4,5 Germany Germany tion  5,6 Germany Germany by levies  7 surplus ment
2004 50,314 47,211 1,674 54,490 29,746 21,821 7,925 16,843 9,831 7,011 1,641 − 4,176 4,175
2005 52,692 46,989 1,436 53,089 27,654 20,332 7,322 11,590 7,421 4,169 1,450 − 397 397
2006 55,384 51,176 1,123 44,162 23,249 17,348 5,901 9,259 6,185 3,074 1,089 + 11,221 0
2007 42,838 32,264 971 36,196 17,356 13,075 4,282 8,370 5,748 2,623 949 + 6,643 −
2008 38,289 26,452 974 39,407 14,283 10,652 3,631 8,712 6,222 2,490 920 − 1,118 −
2009 34,254 22,046 1,000 48,057 20,866 16,534 4,332 11,595 8,794 2,801 1,946 − 13,803 −
2010 37,070 22,614 3,222 45,213 19,456 15,629 3,827 10,791 8,287 2,504 740 − 8,143 5,200
2009          Q1 6,283 5,248 192 10,396 4,723 3,556 1,167 2,318 1,688 630 480 − 4,113 −
         Q2 6,490 5,421 261 12,391 5,563 4,376 1,187 2,893 2,193 700 491 − 5,901 −
         Q3 6,853 5,316 250 12,480 5,465 4,439 1,026 3,026 2,325 701 630 − 5,626 −
         Q4 14,627 6,061 296 12,790 5,115 4,163 951 3,358 2,588 770 345 + 1,837 −
2010          Q1 10,020 5,196 714 11,681 6,475 5,112 1,362 2,957 2,263 694 208 − 1,661 −
         Q2 10,649 5,601 784 10,501 5,264 4,148 1,116 2,872 2,204 668 184 + 148 −
         Q3 8,109 5,527 808 8,887 4,082 3,353 729 2,431 1,863 567 193 − 778 −
         Q4 8,291 6,290 916 14,144 3,635 3,016 619 2,531 1,957 575 154 − 5,853 5,200
2011          Q1 10,259 5,853 123 9,583 4,602 3,701 901 2,660 2,048 612 186 + 676 −
         Q2 8,802 6,358 60 8,246 3,710 3,007 703 2,285 1,753 532 175 + 556 −
         Q3 7,467 6,205 76 7,450 3,293 2,707 586 1,910 1,464 446 187 + 17 −
Source: Federal Employment Agency. — *Excluding pension fund. — 1Ex- long-term care insurance schemes. 6Vocational training, measures to en-
cluding central government liquidity assistance. — 2Levies to promote courage job take-up, rehabilitation, job creation measures, subsidies
winter construction and to pay insolvency compensation to employees. — granted to Personnel Service Agencies, compensation top-up payments and
3From 2005, including a compensatory amount or a reintegration payment business start-up grants. — 7Promotion of winter construction and insolv-
to central government. — 4Unemployment benefit and short-time working ency compensation for employees. 
benefit. — 5Including contributions to the statutory health, pension and
 
 
10 Statutory health insurance scheme: budgetary development
 
 
€ million
Revenue  1 Expenditure  1 
of which of which
Central Thera- Adminis-
govern- peutical trative
Contri- ment Hospital Pharma- Medical Dental treatment Sickness expend- Deficit /
Period Total butions  2 funds  3 Total treatment ceuticals treatment treatment  4 and aids benefits iture  5 surplus
2004 144,279 140,120 1,000 140,260 47,594 21,811 22,955 11,263 8,281 6,367 8,196 + 4,020
2005 145,742 140,250 2,500 144,071 48,959 25,358 23,096 9,928 8,284 5,868 8,303 + 1,671
2006 149,929 142,183 4,200 148,297 50,327 25,835 23,896 10,364 8,303 5,708 8,319 + 1,632
2007 156,058 149,964 2,500 154,314 50,850 27,791 24,788 10,687 8,692 6,017 8,472 + 1,744
2008 162,516 155,883 2,500 161,334 52,623 29,145 25,887 10,926 9,095 6,583 8,680 + 1,182
2009 169,758 158,594 7,200 170,823 55,977 30,696 27,635 11,219 9,578 7,258 8,947 − 1,065
2010 179,878 160,792 15,700 176,036 56,697 30,147 28,432 11,419 10,609 7,797 9,553 + 3,842
2009          Q1 42,502 39,324 2,575 41,432 14,154 7,463 6,969 2,797 2,095 1,822 1,977 + 1,069
         Q2 42,540 40,464 1,377 42,400 14,092 7,652 6,810 2,857 2,392 1,779 2,083 + 140
         Q3 42,752 38,827 3,002 42,548 13,967 7,574 6,981 2,684 2,437 1,746 2,324 + 204
         Q4 41,635 39,992 246 44,445 13,892 8,052 7,021 2,904 2,607 1,895 2,604 − 2,809
2010          Q1 6 43,093 38,542 3,878 43,274 14,419 7,549 7,255 2,871 2,368 1,996 2,130 − 182
         Q2 44,440 39,826 3,889 43,999 14,037 7,870 7,128 2,882 2,669 1,955 2,261 + 441
         Q3 44,457 39,808 3,884 43,662 14,122 7,592 7,007 2,786 2,676 1,903 2,255 + 795
         Q4 47,505 42,600 4,049 44,842 14,144 7,307 7,107 2,952 2,853 1,943 2,876 + 2,663
2011          Q1 45,339 40,871 3,783 44,392 15,075 7,158 7,361 2,893 2,528 2,210 2,173 + 947
         Q2 46,887 42,370 3,783 44,955 14,601 7,239 7,372 3,001 2,834 2,106 2,263 + 1,931
Source: Federal Ministry of Health. — 1The final annual figures do not tally tures. — 5Net, ie after deducting reimbursements for expenses for levying
with the sum of the quarterly figures, as the latter are all provisional. Ex- contributions incurred by other social insurance funds. Including adminis-
cluding revenue and expenditure as part of the risk structure compensation trative expenditure on disease management programmes. — 6Data on indi-
scheme. — 2Including contributions from subsidised low-paid part-time vidual expenditure categories for 2010 only partly comparable with
employment. — 3Federal grant and liquidity assistance. — 4Including den- prior-year figures owing to a change in the statistical definition. 
58*IX Public finances in Germany

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2011
IX Public finances in Germany
 
11 Statutory long-term care insurance scheme: budgetary development
 
 
€ million
Revenue  1 Expenditure  1 
of which
Contributions to
of which Non-cash In-patient Nursing pension insur- Administrative Deficit /
Period Total Contributions  2 Total care benefits care benefit ance scheme  3 expenditure surplus
2004 16,817 16,654 17,605 2,365 8,349 4,049 925 851 − 788
2005 17,526 17,385 17,891 2,409 8,516 4,050 890 875 − 366
2006 17,749 17,611 18,064 2,437 8,671 4,017 862 886 − 315
2007 18,036 17,858 18,385 2,475 8,831 4,050 861 896 − 350
2008 19,785 19,608 19,163 2,605 9,054 4,225 868 941 + 622
2009 21,300 21,137 20,314 2,742 9,274 4,443 878 984 + 986
2010 21,864 21,659 21,539 2,933 9,567 4,673 869 1,028 + 325
2009          Q1 5,110 5,082 4,970 676 2,284 1,104 215 274 + 139
         Q2 5,275 5,253 4,977 662 2,308 1,100 217 248 + 298
         Q3 5,279 5,239 5,157 706 2,338 1,115 219 246 + 122
         Q4 5,650 5,614 5,223 710 2,358 1,148 225 228 + 427
2010          Q1 5,241 5,175 5,298 722 2,362 1,151 217 264 − 56
         Q2 5,398 5,369 5,302 707 2,378 1,167 219 258 + 95
         Q3 5,385 5,358 5,416 735 2,398 1,160 220 266 − 31
         Q4 5,760 5,739 5,432 743 2,417 1,195 225 229 + 328
2011          Q1 5,306 5,269 5,457 750 2,408 1,165 216 277 − 150
         Q2 5,519 5,496 5,396 713 2,417 1,173 210 263 + 123
Source: Federal Ministry of Health. — 1The final annual figures do not tally 2Since 2005 including special contributions for childless persons (0.25% of
with the sum of the quarterly figures, as the latter are all provisional. — income subject to insurance contributions). — 3 For non-professional carers. 
 
 
12 Central government: borrowing in 13 Central, state and local government: debt by
the market creditor *
 
€ million € million
Total new borrowing  1 of which of which Banking system Domestic non-banks
Change Change
in money in money Period Social
market market (End of year Bundes- Credit security Foreign
Period Gross  2 Net loans deposits or quarter) Total bank institutions funds Other  1 creditors  pe 
2004 + 227,441 + 44,410 + 1,844 + 802 2004 1,430,582 4,440 544,100 430 307,012 574,600
2005 + 224,922 + 35,479 + 4,511 + 6,041 2005 1,489,029 4,440 518,400 488 312,201 653,500
2006 + 221,873 + 32,656 + 3,258 + 6,308 2006 1,533,697 4,440 496,800 480 329,177 702,800
2007 + 214,995 + 6,996 + 1,086 − 4,900 2007 1,540,381 4,440 456,900 476 317,065 761,500
2008 + 233,356 + 26,208 + 6,888 + 9,036 2008 1,564,590 4,440 435,600 510 305,040 819,000
2009 + 312,729 + 66,821 − 8,184 + 106 2009 1,657,842 4,440 438,700 507 312,695 901,500
2010 + 302,694 + 42,397 − 5,041 + 1,607 2010 p 1,732,374 4,440 400,600 473 280,961 1,045,900
2009          Q1 + 66,560 + 20,334 − 2,256 − 7,856 2009          Q1 1,594,403 4,440 426,200 514 302,249 861,000
         Q2 + 96,270 + 46,283 − 2,791 + 26,434          Q2 1,646,307 4,440 430,300 520 301,347 909,700
         Q3 + 82,451 + 1,343 + 1,268 − 15,901          Q3 1,651,955 4,440 439,500 520 299,295 908,200
         Q4 + 67,448 − 1,139 − 4,406 − 2,572          Q4 1,657,842 4,440 438,700 507 312,695 901,500
2010          Q1 + 74,369 + 12,637 − 5,322 − 1,520 2010          Q1 p 1,678,191 4,440 450,100 508 318,743 904,400
         Q2 + 83,082 + 3,666 − 4,143 + 1,950          Q2 p 1,687,957 4,440 469,600 468 301,949 911,500
         Q3 + 79,589 + 14,791 + 250 − 4,625          Q3 p 1,712,685 4,440 470,200 473 297,372 940,200
         Q4 + 65,655 + 11,304 + 4,174 + 5,803          Q4 p 1,732,374 4,440 400,600 473 280,961 1,045,900
2011          Q1 + 76,394 + 15,958 − 607 − 5,206 2011          Q1 pe 1,747,302 4,440 410,800 525 268,137 1,063,400
         Q2 + 77,158 + 10,392 − 49 + 26,625
Source:  Federal  Republic  of  Germany  -  Finance Source: Bundesbank calculations based on data from the Federal Statistical 
Agency. — 1 Including the Financial  Market  Stabil- Office. — * Excluding direct intergovernmental borrowing. — 1 Calculated 
isation Fund,  the  Investment and Repayment Fund as a residual. 
and the Restructuring Fund for Credit Institutions. — 
2 After deducting repurchases. 
59*IX Public finances in Germany

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
E U R O S Y S T E M
Monthly Report
November 2011
IX Public finances in Germany
 
14 Central, state and local government: debt by category *
 
 
€ million
Loans from non-banks Old debt
Direct
Treasury Five-year lending
Period discount Federal Federal Federal by credit Social Equal-
(End of year paper Treasury notes savings bonds institu- security isation
or quarter) Total (Bubills)  1 notes  2,3 (Bobls)  2 notes (Bunds)  2 Day-bond tions  4 funds Other  4 claims  5 Other  5,6 
Central, state and local government
2005 1,489,029 36,945 310,044 174,423 11,055 521,801 . 366,978 488 62,765 4,443 88
2006 1,533,697 37,834 320,288 179,940 10,199 552,028 . 356,514 480 71,889 4,443 82
2007 1,540,381 39,510 329,108 177,394 10,287 574,512 . 329,588 476 74,988 4,443 76
2008 1,564,590 44,620 337,511 172,037 9,649 584,144 3,174 325,648 510 82,781 4,443 73
2009 1,657,842 105,970 361,727 174,219 9,471 594,999 2,495 300,927 507 103,014 4,442 71
2010          Q1 p 1,678,191 93,830 374,088 191,722 9,441 602,650 2,286 297,819 508 101,331 4,442 73
         Q2 p 1,687,957 82,661 378,912 192,682 9,438 617,987 2,123 296,325 468 102,843 4,440 78
         Q3 p 1,712,685 84,808 389,502 203,056 8,867 618,150 2,058 297,349 473 103,908 4,440 75
         Q4 p 1,732,374 87,042 391,976 195,534 8,704 628,757 1,975 297,584 429 115,931 4,440 2
2011          Q1 pe 1,747,302 84,961 393,494 211,821 8,500 629,716 1,845 297,787 495 114,241 4,440 2
Central government 7,8,9,10,11,12
2005 886,254 36,098 108,899 174,371 11,055 510,866 . 29,318 408 10,710 4,443 87
2006 918,911 37,798 103,624 179,889 10,199 541,404 . 30,030 408 11,036 4,443 82
2007 939,988 37,385 102,083 177,394 10,287 574,156 . 22,829 408 10,928 4,443 75
2008 966,197 40,795 105,684 172,037 9,649 583,930 3,174 35,291 448 10,674 4,443 72
2009 1,033,017 104,409 113,637 174,219 9,471 594,780 2,495 18,347 448 10,700 4,442 70
2010          Q1 1,045,654 93,630 117,695 191,722 9,441 602,345 2,286 13,303 448 10,270 4,442 73
         Q2 1,049,321 82,511 120,801 192,682 9,438 617,682 2,123 8,859 408 10,300 4,440 77
         Q3 1,064,111 82,908 124,948 203,056 8,867 617,845 2,058 9,084 408 10,425 4,440 74
         Q4 1,075,415 85,867 126,220 195,534 8,704 628,582 1,975 13,349 408 10,335 4,440 2
2011          Q1 1,091,373 82,607 129,208 211,821 8,500 629,541 1,845 13,056 408 9,945 4,440 2
         Q2 1,101,764 78,961 131,348 208,669 8,497 644,668 1,819 13,002 408 9,951 4,440 2
State government
2005 471,375 847 201,146 .... 221,163 3 48,216 . 1
2006 481,850 36 216,665 .... 209,270 2 55,876 . 1
2007 484,373 2,125 227,025 .... 194,956 2 60,264 . 1
2008 483,875 3,825 231,827 .... 179,978 3 68,241 . 1
2009 505,359 1,561 248,091 .... 167,310 8 88,389 . 1
2010          Q1 p 511,619 200 256,393 .... 167,878 10 87,137 . 1
         Q2 p 515,471 150 258,111 .... 168,581 10 88,618 . 1
         Q3 p 523,883 1,900 264,554 .... 167,854 15 89,558 . 1
         Q4 p 526,118 1,176 265,756 .... 162,452 1 96,733 . 1
2011          Q1 p 526,308 2,354 264,286 .... 164,167 67 95,433 . 1
         Q2 p 527,387 2,037 273,090 .... 154,767 62 97,431 . 1
Local government 13
2005 116,033 . − . . 466 . 111,889 77 3,601 . .
2006 118,380 . − . . 256 . 113,265 70 4,789 . .
2007 115,920 . − . . 256 . 111,803 66 3,796 . .
2008 114,518 . − . . 214 . 110,379 60 3,866 . .
2009 119,466 . − . . 219 . 115,270 52 3,925 . .
2010          Q1 p 120,918 . − . . 305 . 116,638 50 3,925 . .
         Q2 p 123,165 . − . . 305 . 118,885 50 3,925 . .
         Q3 p 124,691 . − . . 305 . 120,411 50 3,925 . .
         Q4 p 130,842 . − . . 175 . 121,784 20 8,863 . .
2011          Q1 pe 129,622 . − . . 175 . 120,564 20 8,863 . .
Special funds 7,8,9,14
2005 15,367 . − 51 . 10,469 . 4,609 − 238 . .
2006 14,556 . − 51 . 10,368 . 3,950 − 188 . .
2007 100 . − − . 100 . − − − . .
2008 − . − − . − . − − − . .
2009 − . − − . − . − − − . .
2010          Q1 − . − − . − . − − − . .
         Q2 − . − − . − . − − − . .
         Q3 − . − − . − . − − − . .
         Q4 − . − − . − . − − − . .
2011          Q1 − . − − . − . − − − . .
         Q2 − . − − . − . − − − . .
Source: Bundesbank calculations based on data from the Federal Statistical ance of Federal securities is recorded here under central government and its
Office. — *Excluding direct intergovernmental borrowing. — 1Including special funds in accordance with the agreed allocation ratios. — 8On
Treasury financing paper. — 2Excluding issuers’ holdings of their own secur- 1 January 2005 central government assumed joint responsibility for the
ities. — 3Treasury notes issued by state government include long-term debts of the German Unity Fund. From that date on, the aforementioned
notes. — 4Mainly loans against borrowers’ notes and cash advances. In- special fund is recorded under central government. — 9On 1 July 2007 cen-
cluding loans raised abroad. Other loans from non-banks, including loans tral government assumed joint responsibility for the debts of the ERP
from public supplementary pension funds and liabilities arising from the in- Special Fund. From that date on, the aforementioned special fund is
vestment assistance levy. — 5Excluding offsets against outstanding recorded under central government. — 10From December 2008, including
claims. — 6Old debt mainly denominated in foreign currency, in accordance debt of the Financial Market Stabilisation Fund. — 11From March 2009, in-
with the London Debts Agreement, old liabilities arising from housing con- cluding debt of the Investment and Repayment Fund. — 12From January
struction and liabilities arising from housing construction by the former 2011, including debt of the Restructuring Fund for Credit Institutions. —
GDR’s armed forces and from housing construction in connection with the 13Including debt of municipal special purpose associations. Data other than
return of the troops of the former USSR stationed in eastern Germany to year-end figures have been estimated. — 14ERP Special Fund (up to the
their home country; excluding debt securities in own portfolios. — 7In con- end of June 2007), German Unity Fund (up to the end of 2004) and In-
trast to the capital market statistics, the debt incurred through the joint issu- demnification Fund. 
60*IX Public finances in Germany

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2011
X Economic conditions in Germany
  
1 Origin and use of domestic product, distribution of national income
  
  
  
  2009   2010   2011
  2008   2009   2010   2008   2009   2010   Q4   Q1   Q2   Q3   Q4   Q1   Q2
Item Index 2005=100 Annual percentage change
At  constant  prices,  chained
  I Origin of domestic product
Production sector
(excluding construction) 109.9 90.2 99.0 − 2.0 − 17.9 9.8 − 7.8 7.2 12.5 9.2 10.3 11.0 6.4
Construction 99.0 94.9 96.6 − 0.3 − 4.1 1.7 − 1.9 − 1.7 6.2 2.7 − 0.9 10.1 2.1
Wholesale/retail trade, transport
and storage, hotel and
restaurant services 109.9 104.2 108.1 3.0 − 5.2 3.8 − 2.0 1.7 3.6 4.7 4.9 6.3 4.5
Information and communication 124.0 135.1 141.8 5.0 9.0 5.0 14.5 4.0 5.4 4.5 6.0 1.7 2.1
Financial and insurance
activities 115.5 128.9 128.8 2.3 11.6 − 0.1 3.5 2.5 − 0.3 − 2.5 − 0.0 − 0.1 − 1.6
Real estate activities 105.5 107.6 107.8 1.7 2.0 0.2 3.5 1.3 − 0.3 0.4 − 0.5 0.0 0.8
Business services  1 112.2 99.1 102.8 1.9 − 11.7 3.8 − 9.9 1.7 3.7 5.5 4.1 4.4 3.9
Public services, education and
health 104.9 107.1 108.8 2.8 2.1 1.6 3.5 2.8 1.7 1.7 0.2 0.3 0.7
Other services 105.7 106.5 107.8 1.7 0.8 1.2 2.4 1.6 1.5 1.7 − 0.0 − 0.3 − 0.8
Gross value added 109.1 103.0 107.2 1.2 − 5.6 4.1 − 1.7 3.3 4.8 4.2 4.1 4.5 3.0
Gross domestic product  2 108.3 102.7 106.5 1.1 − 5.1 3.7 − 1.6 2.6 4.4 4.0 3.8 5.0 2.8
 II Use of domestic product
Private consumption  3 101.9 101.8 102.5 0.6 − 0.1 0.6 0.0 − 0.1 − 0.2 0.9 1.8 1.9 1.4
Government consumption 105.5 109.0 110.9 3.1 3.3 1.7 3.3 2.7 1.2 1.5 1.2 0.6 1.3
Machinery and equipment 127.9 98.7 109.1 3.6 − 22.8 10.5 − 20.8 0.3 9.3 13.1 17.6 16.5 11.6
Premises 104.3 101.2 103.4 − 0.7 − 3.0 2.2 0.6 − 1.9 6.1 3.4 0.1 13.2 2.4
Other investment  4 125.1 125.9 131.9 7.0 0.6 4.7 − 0.6 4.3 4.3 4.3 5.9 4.8 4.8
Changes in inventories  5  6 . . . 0.0 − 0.9 0.6 − 0.6 0.0 1.7 0.3 0.5 0.1 0.1
Domestic use 106.0 103.2 105.7 1.3 − 2.6 2.4 − 2.0 0.4 3.3 2.4 3.4 3.6 2.3
Net exports  6 . . . 0.0 − 2.6 1.5 0.3 2.2 1.3 1.6 0.7 1.6 0.6
Exports 125.4 108.3 123.2 2.7 − 13.6 13.7 − 5.0 8.4 17.7 15.0 13.9 13.3 7.7
Imports 121.8 110.6 123.5 3.3 − 9.2 11.7 − 6.4 3.6 16.6 12.2 14.6 11.0 7.3
Gross domestic product  2 108.3 102.7 106.5 1.1 − 5.1 3.7 − 1.6 2.6 4.4 4.0 3.8 5.0 2.8
At  current  prices  (€ billion)
III Use of domestic product
Private consumption  3 1,387.7 1,387.4 1,423.0 2.3 − 0.0 2.6 0.8 1.9 1.7 2.9 3.7 4.1 3.7
Government consumption 452.6 475.8 488.8 4.3 5.1 2.7 4.2 4.3 2.5 2.0 2.1 1.7 3.0
Machinery and equipment 201.4 155.1 170.8 3.0 − 23.0 10.1 − 20.8 − 0.0 9.1 12.9 17.2 16.4 11.5
Premises 231.5 227.1 235.0 2.6 − 1.9 3.5 1.5 − 1.5 7.7 5.2 1.4 16.2 5.3
Other investment  4 27.9 27.0 27.8 4.3 − 2.9 2.7 − 2.4 1.9 2.7 2.8 3.3 3.1 2.8
Changes in inventories  5 18.6 − 16.5 − 4.0 . . . . . . . . . .
Domestic use 2,319.6 2,256.0 2,341.4 2.7 − 2.7 3.8 − 1.7 1.8 4.7 3.7 4.9 5.3 4.5
Net exports 154.2 118.5 135.5 . . . . . . . . . .
Exports 1,189.2 995.9 1,159.8 3.8 − 16.2 16.5 − 7.3 8.4 20.7 19.1 17.6 18.1 10.9
Imports 1,035.0 877.4 1,024.4 6.1 − 15.2 16.7 − 11.6 4.1 22.0 19.1 22.0 20.1 13.7
Gross domestic product  2 2,473.8 2,374.5 2,476.8 1.9 − 4.0 4.3 − 0.2 3.7 5.1 4.4 4.1 5.3 3.7
IV Prices (2005 = 100)
Private consumption 104.2 104.3 106.3 1.7 0.1 1.9 0.8 2.0 1.9 2.0 1.9 2.2 2.3
Gross domestic product 102.7 103.9 104.6 0.8 1.2 0.6 1.4 1.1 0.7 0.4 0.3 0.2 0.9
Terms of trade 97.6 101.3 99.2 − 1.5 3.8 − 2.0 3.4 − 0.5 − 1.9 − 2.4 − 3.0 − 3.6 − 2.9
V  Distribution of national income
Compensation of employees 1,229.8 1,231.5 1,262.9 3.6 0.1 2.5 − 0.5 1.3 2.6 2.9 3.3 4.3 5.1
Entrepreneurial and property
income 664.4 574.7 635.0 − 3.7 − 13.5 10.5 3.4 14.2 15.8 7.0 6.3 5.6 − 0.3
National income 1,894.2 1,806.2 1,897.8 0.9 − 4.6 5.1 0.6 5.5 6.4 4.4 4.2 4.8 3.4
Memo item: Gross national
income 2,505.5 2,424.9 2,522.8 1.4 − 3.2 4.0 0.9 4.0 4.9 3.7 3.6 5.0 3.2
Source: Federal Statistical Office; figures computed in September 2011. — tangible fixed asset formation (inter alia, computer software and entertain-
1Professional, scientific, technical, administration and support service activi- ment, literary or artistic originals) and cultivated assets. — 5Including net in-
ties. — 2Gross value added plus taxes on products (netted with subsidies on crease in valuables. — 6 Contribution of growth to GDP. 
products). — 3Including non-profit institutions serving households. — 4In-
61*X Economic conditions in Germany

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
E U R O S Y S T E M
Monthly Report
November 2011
 X Economic conditions in Germany
 
2 Output in the production sector  * 
 
 
Adjusted for working-day variations  o 
of which
Industry
of which:   by main industrial grouping of which:   by economic sector
Manu-
Manu- facture of
facture of computers,
Motor basic metals electronic
and vehicles, and optical
Production Inter- Non- fabricated products Machinery trailers
sector, Construc- mediate Capital Durable durable metal and and semi- and electrical
total tion Energy Total goods goods goods goods products equipment equipment trailers
2005=100  
  
% of total  1 100.00 5.56 8.76 85.69 33.96 35.37 2.78 13.58 12.15 10.82 12.48 12.34
Period
2006 105.4 105.8 101.0 105.8 107.1 106.0 107.3 101.7 107.3 112.8 107.5 102.6
2007 111.6 108.9 98.2 113.1 114.5 114.9 108.4 105.8 114.0 124.4 119.5 109.7
2008 111.5 108.3 95.6 113.4 114.2 116.8 104.0 104.4 114.4 128.8 124.5 104.5
2009 94.3 108.2 90.6 93.7 93.3 92.0 87.6 100.6 87.5 100.9 92.2 82.0
2010 103.9 108.4 93.6 104.6 107.2 103.7 95.7 102.4 101.7 117.5 101.5 102.3
 
2010          Feb 91.5 55.4 98.2 93.1 96.1 89.9 91.4 94.3 91.1 103.3 82.6 92.0
         Mar 106.3 105.2 98.6 107.2 109.5 106.3 99.3 105.7 105.4 115.8 102.8 108.3
         Apr 101.2 123.2 90.6 100.9 106.1 97.5 90.8 98.9 100.3 109.8 93.2 99.6
         May 103.4 122.8 91.2 103.4 108.9 100.6 92.1 99.5 102.6 112.9 95.8 104.7
         June 106.5 127.7 81.5 107.6 110.7 108.1 96.4 100.6 105.8 120.0 104.8 108.8
         July 105.2 132.3 86.5 105.4 111.2 101.7 90.0 103.5 105.1 119.7 100.0 97.8
         Aug 98.7 124.6 82.0 98.8 106.5 91.4 84.4 101.9 99.0 115.6 95.2 78.5
         Sep 111.8 133.6 83.8 113.2 114.4 114.7 107.2 107.5 108.9 127.4 110.8 119.1
         Oct 114.7 135.2 94.4 115.5 117.7 115.6 110.0 110.7 112.7 132.2 110.2 121.0
         Nov 115.4 127.8 98.3 116.4 115.9 119.7 109.2 110.8 111.8 134.2 116.6 119.4
         Dec 101.8 64.0 108.6 103.5 93.2 116.6 88.8 98.1 89.9 118.8 129.3 95.8
2011          Jan 100.8 75.6 105.5 102.0 108.4 97.7 94.0 99.1 103.5 120.6 92.2 101.2
         Feb 105.2 86.6 95.2 107.4 110.4 108.3 99.5 99.0 106.8 126.1 101.5 117.0
         Mar 2 118.6 2 121.4 98.6 120.4 122.2 124.0 109.8 109.0 118.5 136.8 123.2 128.6
         Apr 2 110.9 2 129.6 84.4 112.4 116.3 112.7 99.8 104.1 112.0 126.1 110.3 116.9
         May 2 111.1 2 131.3 78.9 113.1 117.0 114.3 97.2 103.4 114.0 127.6 110.3 119.3
         June 2 114.0 2 132.1 77.4 116.5 120.0 119.6 94.8 104.3 116.7 137.0 120.9 117.1
         July  x 2 116.0 2 140.3 78.9 118.2 122.5 119.8 101.8 106.4 117.7 143.4 119.2 119.5
         Aug  x 2 107.0 2 130.6 77.3 108.5 115.4 106.6 85.0 101.0 108.1 136.4 109.2 98.1
         Sep  x p 2 117.8 2 138.9 e 78.7 120.5 121.9 124.9 110.5 107.6 116.3 147.5 123.4 127.1
 
Annual percentage change  
  
2006 + 5.7 + 6.3 + 0.9 + 6.2 + 7.4 + 6.4 + 7.6 + 2.1 + 7.6 + 13.0 + 8.0 + 3.0
2007 + 5.9 + 2.9 − 2.8 + 6.9 + 6.9 + 8.4 + 1.0 + 4.0 + 6.2 + 10.3 + 11.2 + 6.9
2008 − 0.1 − 0.6 − 2.6 + 0.3 − 0.3 + 1.7 − 4.1 − 1.3 + 0.4 + 3.5 + 4.2 − 4.7
2009 − 15.4 − 0.1 − 5.2 − 17.4 − 18.3 − 21.2 − 15.8 − 3.6 − 23.5 − 21.7 − 25.9 − 21.5
2010 + 10.2 + 0.2 + 3.3 + 11.6 + 14.9 + 12.7 + 9.2 + 1.8 + 16.2 + 16.5 + 10.1 + 24.8
 
2010          Feb + 5.9 − 17.9 + 5.4 + 7.1 + 10.8 + 7.0 + 7.4 − 1.3 + 10.7 + 6.9 − 8.6 + 40.5
         Mar + 9.2 + 0.9 + 6.5 + 10.2 + 16.7 + 7.4 + 6.5 + 3.3 + 20.6 + 11.0 − 2.1 + 28.5
         Apr + 13.7 + 4.7 + 10.0 + 14.9 + 21.8 + 15.2 + 8.6 + 0.0 + 23.8 + 20.3 + 7.2 + 42.1
         May + 12.6 + 4.3 + 12.9 + 13.3 + 20.2 + 11.5 + 10.7 + 1.7 + 22.1 + 20.5 + 7.5 + 25.2
         June + 10.5 + 3.1 − 3.1 + 12.2 + 16.9 + 11.4 + 14.9 + 2.3 + 19.4 + 21.7 + 10.1 + 19.3
         July + 11.2 + 4.8 + 0.5 + 12.8 + 16.3 + 13.3 + 12.4 + 3.8 + 19.7 + 20.5 + 16.3 + 17.0
         Aug + 11.0 + 2.1 − 2.8 + 13.3 + 15.4 + 15.5 + 14.1 + 4.0 + 17.0 + 20.5 + 21.3 + 20.4
         Sep + 8.2 + 3.5 − 2.4 + 9.5 + 12.2 + 10.1 + 7.8 + 1.7 + 13.4 + 16.6 + 8.1 + 15.5
         Oct + 12.5 + 7.2 + 1.0 + 14.0 + 13.7 + 18.6 + 11.7 + 3.8 + 16.1 + 18.1 + 22.6 + 23.7
         Nov + 11.3 + 5.4 + 2.7 + 12.6 + 12.1 + 17.6 + 6.3 + 2.8 + 12.6 + 17.8 + 25.4 + 19.6
         Dec + 11.7 − 23.7 + 4.8 + 14.6 + 11.9 + 23.3 + 7.1 + 0.1 + 12.9 + 19.2 + 25.4 + 34.6
2011          Jan + 12.4 + 53.0 − 3.7 + 13.0 + 13.4 + 18.4 + 6.1 + 1.4 + 17.2 + 21.0 + 19.4 + 22.4
         Feb + 15.0 + 56.3 − 3.1 + 15.4 + 14.9 + 20.5 + 8.9 + 5.0 + 17.2 + 22.1 + 22.9 + 27.2
         Mar 2 + 11.6 2 + 15.4 + 0.0 + 12.3 + 11.6 + 16.7 + 10.6 + 3.1 + 12.4 + 18.1 + 19.8 + 18.7
         Apr 2 + 9.6 2 + 5.2 − 6.8 + 11.4 + 9.6 + 15.6 + 9.9 + 5.3 + 11.7 + 14.8 + 18.3 + 17.4
         May 2 + 7.4 2 + 6.9 − 13.5 + 9.4 + 7.4 + 13.6 + 5.5 + 3.9 + 11.1 + 13.0 + 15.1 + 13.9
         June 2 + 7.0 2 + 3.4 − 5.0 + 8.3 + 8.4 + 10.6 − 1.7 + 3.7 + 10.3 + 14.2 + 15.4 + 7.6
         July  x 2 + 10.3 2 + 6.0 − 8.8 + 12.1 + 10.2 + 17.8 + 13.1 + 2.8 + 12.0 + 19.8 + 19.2 + 22.2
         Aug  x 2 + 8.4 2 + 4.8 − 5.7 + 9.8 + 8.4 + 16.6 + 0.7 − 0.9 + 9.2 + 18.0 + 14.7 + 25.0
         Sep  x p 2 + 5.4 2 + 4.0 e − 6.1 + 6.4 + 6.6 + 8.9 + 3.1 + 0.1 + 6.8 + 15.8 + 11.4 + 6.7
Source of the unadjusted figures: Federal Statistical Office. — *For explan- eral Statistical Office, by way of estimates, to the results of the annual
atory notes, see Statistical Supplement "Seasonally adjusted business overall survey in the construction sector (average + 4%). — xProvision-
statistics", Tables II.10 to II.12. — oUsing the Census X-12-ARIMA method, al; adjusted in advance by the Federal Statistical Office, by way of estimates,
version 0.2.8. — 1Share of gross value added at factor cost of the pro- to the results of the Quarterly Production Survey. — eUnadjusted figures
duction sector in the base year 2005. — 2Adjusted in advance by the Fed- estimated by the Federal Statistical Office. 
62* X Economic conditions in Germany

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2011
 X Economic conditions in Germany
 
3 Orders received by industry *
 
 
Adjusted for working-day variations  o 
of which
of which
Industry Intermediate goods Capital goods Consumer goods Durable goods Non-durable goods
Annual Annual Annual Annual Annual Annual
percent- percent- percent- percent- percent- percent-
age age age age age age
Period 2005=100 change 2005=100 change 2005=100 change 2005=100 change 2005=100 change 2005=100 change
total  
  
2006 110.7 + 11.0 114.0 + 14.3 109.4 + 9.7 105.3 + 5.5 108.4 + 8.7 104.3 + 4.5
2007 123.0 + 11.1 125.2 + 9.8 123.2 + 12.6 111.9 + 6.3 110.3 + 1.8 112.5 + 7.9
2008 115.5 − 6.1 121.2 − 3.2 112.9 − 8.4 108.1 − 3.4 103.5 − 6.2 109.7 − 2.5
2009 87.5 − 24.2 89.3 − 26.3 85.2 − 24.5 94.8 − 12.3 88.5 − 14.5 96.9 − 11.7
2010 109.0 + 24.6 114.3 + 28.0 106.8 + 25.4 99.8 + 5.3 101.4 + 14.6 99.3 + 2.5
 
2010          Sep 112.9 + 18.5 117.5 + 20.4 111.4 + 19.9 103.6 + 1.9 111.7 + 1.0 100.8 + 2.1
         Oct 112.6 + 22.4 119.3 + 21.6 109.4 + 25.9 104.0 + 4.8 115.9 + 14.8 100.0 + 1.5
         Nov 121.0 + 25.0 121.8 + 20.6 123.1 + 31.5 102.1 + 2.4 110.7 + 11.4 99.3 − 0.4
         Dec 111.3 + 24.4 107.9 + 23.6 116.6 + 27.6 89.3 + 2.6 87.6 + 0.7 89.9 + 3.3
2011          Jan 118.1 + 21.3 128.5 + 22.3 113.5 + 23.2 102.4 + 3.5 105.2 + 13.6 101.5 + 0.5
         Feb 122.1 + 25.0 126.2 + 21.0 121.0 + 30.2 110.9 + 10.7 104.8 + 12.7 113.0 + 10.0
         Mar 129.5 + 14.8 139.8 + 17.7 125.6 + 14.6 110.0 + 3.1 114.3 + 6.9 108.4 + 1.6
         Apr 120.3 + 13.7 127.7 + 10.4 118.2 + 17.0 100.8 + 8.4 108.0 + 9.5 98.3 + 8.0
         May 122.8 + 15.4 128.9 + 13.1 122.2 + 18.8 99.5 + 3.5 103.4 + 0.5 98.2 + 4.7
         June 129.1 + 11.7 128.3 + 7.8 133.8 + 15.6 100.6 + 1.1 107.0 + 0.9 98.4 + 1.1
         July 122.3 + 11.0 129.6 + 8.8 119.0 + 13.1 112.3 + 7.6 111.9 + 10.5 112.4 + 6.6
         Aug 110.7 + 6.0 118.3 + 8.6 106.9 + 4.7 102.6 + 2.8 95.8 + 6.6 105.0 + 1.8
         Sep  p 117.2 + 3.8 121.8 + 3.7 115.4 + 3.6 108.9 + 5.1 121.0 + 8.3 104.8 + 4.0
from the domestic market  
  
2006 109.0 + 9.3 113.3 + 13.6 106.4 + 6.8 103.4 + 3.7 111.0 + 11.3 100.9 + 1.2
2007 118.7 + 8.9 124.7 + 10.1 115.8 + 8.8 107.0 + 3.5 109.6 − 1.3 106.1 + 5.2
2008 113.1 − 4.7 121.8 − 2.3 107.5 − 7.2 103.9 − 2.9 107.1 − 2.3 102.9 − 3.0
2009 88.0 − 22.2 89.9 − 26.2 86.5 − 19.5 87.4 − 15.9 89.9 − 16.1 86.6 − 15.8
2010 104.5 + 18.8 115.9 + 28.9 97.8 + 13.1 88.6 + 1.4 93.9 + 4.4 86.9 + 0.3
 
2010          Sep 108.5 + 16.5 119.1 + 22.0 102.0 + 15.5 95.2 − 3.3 109.6 − 10.1 90.5 − 0.2
         Oct 110.2 + 18.9 123.0 + 21.5 102.7 + 19.7 92.5 + 2.0 112.1 + 8.1 86.1 − 0.3
         Nov 113.5 + 19.3 125.1 + 20.4 107.6 + 21.4 91.9 + 2.6 105.3 + 8.1 87.6 + 0.7
         Dec 99.5 + 17.8 104.9 + 19.9 99.0 + 19.6 76.8 − 3.3 78.2 − 5.3 76.4 − 2.4
2011          Jan 112.4 + 17.3 128.2 + 22.2 103.4 + 15.7 88.3 − 0.8 95.7 + 10.4 85.9 − 4.2
         Feb 115.2 + 21.4 127.1 + 22.0 108.6 + 23.5 96.3 + 7.4 99.5 + 16.2 95.3 + 4.6
         Mar 123.3 + 12.6 138.8 + 16.6 115.1 + 10.7 96.4 + 1.3 107.0 + 7.0 92.9 − 0.9
         Apr 114.9 + 10.4 131.0 + 10.1 106.1 + 11.1 88.1 + 7.3 102.1 + 16.3 83.5 + 4.0
         May 126.8 + 23.2 135.2 + 16.9 126.6 + 32.4 88.4 + 5.5 101.0 + 7.3 84.3 + 4.7
         June 116.6 + 8.0 128.4 + 6.0 111.8 + 10.7 88.7 + 4.0 98.5 + 8.8 85.5 + 2.3
         July 120.3 + 12.1 135.7 + 10.9 111.4 + 14.5 97.8 + 6.7 108.2 + 20.6 94.4 + 2.3
         Aug 108.5 + 8.5 123.3 + 9.7 98.7 + 8.0 93.5 + 3.8 99.2 + 13.2 91.7 + 0.9
         Sep  p 113.0 + 4.1 123.0 + 3.3 106.7 + 4.6 101.7 + 6.8 126.0 + 15.0 93.8 + 3.6
from abroad  
  
2006 112.2 + 12.5 114.6 + 14.8 111.5 + 11.8 107.5 + 7.7 105.7 + 6.0 108.1 + 8.3
2007 126.8 + 13.0 125.7 + 9.7 128.5 + 15.2 117.3 + 9.1 111.0 + 5.0 119.5 + 10.5
2008 117.6 − 7.3 120.6 − 4.1 116.7 − 9.2 112.6 − 4.0 99.9 − 10.0 117.1 − 2.0
2009 87.0 − 26.0 88.6 − 26.5 84.3 − 27.8 102.8 − 8.7 87.1 − 12.8 108.4 − 7.4
2010 112.9 + 29.8 112.5 + 27.0 113.2 + 34.3 111.9 + 8.9 109.0 + 25.1 112.9 + 4.2
 
2010          Sep 116.8 + 20.2 115.6 + 18.6 118.0 + 22.8 112.6 + 6.9 113.9 + 14.8 112.2 + 4.4
         Oct 114.6 + 25.4 115.0 + 21.7 114.1 + 30.1 116.5 + 7.6 119.7 + 21.9 115.4 + 3.1
         Nov 127.5 + 29.7 118.1 + 21.0 134.1 + 38.0 113.2 + 2.4 116.1 + 14.5 112.2 − 1.4
         Dec 121.5 + 29.4 111.3 + 27.9 129.0 + 32.4 102.7 + 7.9 97.1 + 6.2 104.7 + 8.4
2011          Jan 123.1 + 24.7 128.9 + 22.4 120.6 + 28.3 117.6 + 7.4 114.7 + 16.3 118.7 + 4.7
         Feb 128.1 + 28.0 125.2 + 19.8 129.7 + 34.5 126.7 + 13.6 110.2 + 9.7 132.6 + 14.9
         Mar 134.9 + 16.7 141.0 + 18.9 133.0 + 17.1 124.6 + 4.6 121.6 + 6.8 125.6 + 3.8
         Apr 125.0 + 16.6 123.9 + 10.7 126.8 + 20.9 114.5 + 9.4 114.0 + 4.0 114.7 + 11.5
         May 119.4 + 9.1 121.8 + 8.8 119.1 + 10.3 111.5 + 2.0 105.9 − 5.3 113.5 + 4.7
         June 140.0 + 14.6 128.2 + 9.9 149.3 + 18.5 113.4 − 1.3 115.5 − 5.1 112.6 + 0.2
         July 124.1 + 10.1 122.7 + 6.3 124.4 + 12.4 127.9 + 8.3 115.7 + 2.3 132.2 + 10.4
         Aug 112.6 + 4.0 112.7 + 7.3 112.6 + 2.6 112.5 + 2.0 92.4 + 0.1 119.7 + 2.7
         Sep  p 120.8 + 3.4 120.5 + 4.2 121.5 + 3.0 116.6 + 3.6 115.9 + 1.8 116.9 + 4.2
Source of the unadjusted figures: Federal Statistical Office. — *For explana- statistics", Tables II.14 to II.16. — oUsing the Census X-12-ARIMA method,
tory notes, see Statistical Supplement "Seasonally adjusted business version 0.2.8. 
63* X Economic conditions in Germany

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
E U R O S Y S T E M
Monthly Report
November 2011
 X Economic conditions  in Germany
 
4 Orders received by construction *   
 
 
Adjusted for working-day variations  o 
Breakdown by type of construction Breakdown by client  1 
 Building    
Housing Industrial Public sector Civil Public
Total Total construction construction construction engineering Industry sector
Annual Annual Annual Annual Annual Annual Annual Annual
percent- percent- percent- percent- percent- percent- percent- percent-
age age age age age age age age
Period change change change change change change change change 2005 = 100 2005 = 100 2005 = 100 2005 = 100 2005 = 100 2005 = 100 2005 = 100 2005 = 100
2007 114.0 + 8.5 112.5 + 5.5 98.5 − 5.6 123.2 + 12.4 108.5 + 6.7 115.4 + 11.5 120.7 + 10.7 113.7 + 11.9
2008 113.4 − 0.5 114.7 + 2.0 94.4 − 4.2 127.9 + 3.8 116.7 + 7.6 112.0 − 2.9 123.3 + 2.2 111.4 − 2.0
2009 107.4 − 5.3 100.7 − 12.2 94.2 − 0.2 100.7 − 21.3 115.5 − 1.0 114.4 + 2.1 104.9 − 14.9 115.6 + 3.8
2010 109.0 + 1.5 106.7 + 6.0 103.3 + 9.7 105.4 + 4.7 118.9 + 2.9 111.3 − 2.7 111.0 + 5.8 109.4 − 5.4
 
2010          Aug 117.7 − 0.6 119.8 + 8.6 112.7 + 15.7 124.7 + 7.6 119.8 − 0.8 115.4 − 8.9 120.3 + 2.7 117.1 − 8.9
         Sep 123.2 + 0.0 118.8 + 2.6 130.1 + 18.5 106.3 − 4.1 134.9 − 7.6 127.8 − 2.3 116.0 + 0.0 127.5 − 6.3
         Oct 113.9 + 4.3 110.8 + 6.4 107.0 + 3.9 111.6 + 9.6 117.0 + 2.2 117.2 + 2.4 125.5 + 14.6 105.3 − 5.5
         Nov 92.1 + 1.7 93.8 + 0.8 96.1 + 7.3 92.8 + 0.0 92.0 − 10.1 90.3 + 2.6 97.2 + 0.5 85.3 + 0.5
         Dec 90.3 − 8.8 96.0 − 3.2 101.3 + 13.7 92.3 − 5.1 96.5 − 24.7 84.2 − 14.8 95.1 − 6.6 80.7 − 19.5
2011          Jan 76.9 + 8.2 84.4 + 21.3 77.5 + 38.1 94.0 + 25.5 68.1 − 17.5 69.1 − 5.0 94.2 + 19.5 59.3 − 15.0
         Feb 94.1 + 3.6 102.3 + 17.2 97.7 + 28.2 114.3 + 29.9 72.5 − 34.2 85.6 − 9.4 114.5 + 26.5 72.0 − 26.1
         Mar 134.3 + 5.8 133.8 + 9.8 142.6 + 24.5 130.6 + 6.0 124.3 − 7.4 134.9 + 2.0 147.3 + 13.0 117.8 − 8.6
         Apr 122.9 + 7.7 118.6 + 6.5 135.9 + 20.1 111.6 + 7.5 102.9 − 22.4 127.3 + 8.8 124.9 + 16.0 115.2 − 4.8
         May 127.6 + 10.1 135.6 + 25.2 148.5 + 36.5 127.4 + 23.6 134.1 + 7.9 119.3 − 3.7 126.0 + 12.5 120.4 − 2.0
         June 136.2 + 6.2 137.7 + 10.1 129.3 + 17.2 136.6 + 7.3 160.7 + 6.3 134.5 + 2.4 140.4 + 4.3 134.8 + 4.3
         July 137.0 + 11.1 124.1 + 5.3 133.9 + 17.7 115.2 − 0.9 132.0 − 0.1 150.4 + 16.6 129.7 + 5.1 145.7 + 14.5
         Aug 123.6 + 5.0 125.4 + 4.7 130.1 + 15.4 129.2 + 3.6 102.1 − 14.8 121.7 + 5.5 132.5 + 10.1 111.9 − 4.4
Source of the unadjusted figures: Federal Statistical Office. — *Values exclu- X-12-ARIMA method, version 0.2.8. — 1Excluding housing construction
sive of value-added tax; for explanatory notes, see Statistical Supplement orders. 
"Seasonally adjusted business statistics", Tables II.21. — oUsing the Census
 
 
5 Retail trade turnover, sales of motor vehicles *
 
 
Adjusted for calendar variations  o 
Retail trade
of which:  by enterprises’ main product range  1 
Construction Retail sale of
and flooring pharmaceutical Wholesale
Textiles, Information materials and medical and retail trade
clothing and household goods, cosmetic and repair of
Food, beverages, foodwear and communications appliances and toilet motor vehicles
Total tobacco  2 leather goods equipment furniture articles and motorcycles
At current At prices in
prices year 2005 At current prices
Annual Annual Annual Annual Annual Annual Annual Annual
percent- percent- percent- percent- percent- percent- percent- percent-
age age age age age age age age
change change change change change change change change
Period % % % % % % % % 2005 = 100 2005 = 100 2005 = 100 2005 = 100 2005 = 100 2005 = 100 2005 = 100 2005 = 100
2007 3 99.4 − 1.6 99.0 − 1.3 99.5 − 0.6 103.7 + 1.2 110.2 + 7.7 98.6 − 4.6 104.2 + 2.1 100.6 − 5.8
2008 101.5 + 2.1 98.9 − 0.1 100.8 + 1.3 104.8 + 1.1 116.4 + 5.6 99.7 + 1.1 107.1 + 2.8 95.8 − 4.8
2009 4 98.1 − 3.3 96.2 − 2.7 98.8 − 2.0 101.5 − 3.1 117.0 + 0.5 97.1 − 2.6 110.0 + 2.7 96.8 + 1.0
2010 5 100.4 + 2.3 97.3 + 1.1 99.6 + 0.8 106.0 + 4.4 118.8 + 1.5 99.5 + 2.5 114.2 + 3.8 92.3 − 4.6
 
2010          Sep  5 98.6 + 3.2 95.5 + 2.0 94.5 + 0.7 117.1 + 7.8 112.8 + 2.5 98.4 + 1.2 112.6 + 4.6 95.7 + 0.4
         Oct 104.9 + 2.4 101.5 + 1.3 101.1 + 3.0 125.5 + 0.3 119.7 − 1.6 107.5 + 4.6 117.5 + 3.9 103.2 + 4.1
         Nov 104.3 + 2.2 100.8 + 0.2 100.3 + 2.2 111.4 + 7.9 130.5 − 3.5 107.1 + 2.1 116.9 − 1.2 101.3 + 11.1
         Dec 120.7 + 2.0 117.1 + 0.5 118.6 + 1.6 130.2 + 1.0 180.9 − 0.5 105.3 + 0.4 130.6 + 1.5 89.2 + 8.5
2011          Jan 93.4 + 4.0 90.7 + 2.8 92.8 + 0.2 89.4 + 4.0 132.2 + 9.2 87.6 + 9.1 110.1 + 4.4 83.6 + 19.8
         Feb 90.7 + 4.3 87.1 + 2.4 91.0 + 2.2 83.3 + 5.6 105.4 − 0.5 88.9 + 7.1 106.2 + 1.1 91.1 + 22.8
         Mar 103.6 + 2.1 98.6 + 0.4 103.6 + 1.4 108.4 + 2.1 110.2 − 0.8 107.7 + 1.3 114.1 − 2.4 110.2 + 11.4
         Apr 103.7 + 3.5 98.1 + 1.9 103.4 + 4.6 116.7 + 8.1 100.2 − 0.4 109.1 + 5.4 112.4 + 0.0 105.4 + 8.9
         May 100.6 − 0.4 95.3 − 2.1 100.8 − 0.5 102.8 + 0.8 102.3 − 5.7 102.1 − 2.7 112.4 − 0.3 102.8 + 8.9
         June 100.1 + 2.7 95.1 + 1.0 102.7 + 4.6 101.9 + 1.2 103.6 − 5.0 100.0 + 0.9 111.8 + 0.4 102.7 + 2.8
         July 103.8 + 2.5 99.3 + 1.2 102.6 + 0.9 109.1 + 4.7 111.8 + 1.1 103.9 + 4.6 116.5 + 0.2 102.3 + 6.2
         Aug 99.7 + 1.5 95.4 + 0.1 100.2 + 3.3 97.3 − 4.3 109.7 − 4.3 100.0 + 0.9 111.7 − 1.2 91.9 + 4.8
         Sep 101.0 + 2.4 96.1 + 0.6 96.7 + 2.3 109.6 − 6.4 111.8 − 0.9 101.4 + 3.0 113.0 + 0.4 98.6 + 3.0
Source of the unadjusted figures: Federal Statistical Office. — *Excluding eliminated by chain-linking. — 4In January 2009 new reporting sample in-
value-added tax;  For explanatory notes, see Statistical Supplement "Sea- cluding new entities; statistical breaks in the reporting sample elimin ated by
sonally adjusted business statistics", Tables II.24. — oUsing the Census chain-linking. — 5Figures from January 2010 are provisional in some cases re-
X-12-ARIMA method, version 0.2.8. — 1In stores. — 2Including stalls and vised, and particularly uncertain in recent months owing to estimates for
markets. — 3Expansion of the reporting population to include new entities missing reports. 
in January 2006 and January 2007; statistical breaks in reporting population
64* X Economic conditions in Germany

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2011
 X Economic conditions  in Germany
 
6 Labour market * 
 
 
 
Employment  1 Employment subject to social security contributions  2 Short time workers  3 Unemployment  4 
Total of which: of which: of which:
Solely
jobs
Services exempt Recipients
excluding from of insured
Produc- temporary social unem- Unem- Temporary
tion employ- employ- contri- Cyclically ployment ploy- Vacan-
 Annual Annual sector ment ment butions  2 Total induced  5 Total benefits ment cies,  4,7 
Thou- change Thou- change rate 4,6 thou-
sands in % sands in % Thousands in % sands
2006 39,192 + 0.6 26,366 + 0.5 . . . 4,819 67 54 4,487 1,663 10.8 356
2007 39,857 + 1.7 26,942 + 2.2 8,533 . . 4,861 68 26 3,760 1,245 9.0 423
2008 40,344 + 1.2 27,510 + 2.1 8,659 17,958 679 4,866 102 58 3,258 1,006 7.8 389
2009 40,362 + 0.0 27,493 − 0.1 8,521 18,210 549 4,904 1,144 1,078 8 3,415 8 1,190 8 8.1 301
2010 40,553 + 0.5 27,757 + 1.0 8,426 18,438 679 4,883 503 429 3,238 1,075 7.7 359
2008          Q3 40,506 + 1.2 27,617 + 2.1 8,701 17,974 717 4,849 44 33 3,154 947 7.5 416
         Q4 40,724 + 0.9 27,916 + 1.8 8,771 18,259 674 4,885 157 128 3,021 926 7.2 362
2009          Q1 40,120 + 0.5 27,390 + 0.9 8,563 18,083 550 4,864 999 855 3,533 1,284 8.4 312
         Q2 40,305 + 0.2 27,379 + 0.1 8,515 18,133 512 4,906 1,436 1,411 8 3,475 8 1,207 8 8.3 300
         Q3 40,418 − 0.2 27,482 − 0.5 8,500 18,204 557 4,913 1,136 1,103 3,418 1,186 8.1 300
         Q4 40,606 − 0.3 27,720 − 0.7 8,504 18,423 579 4,934 1,007 944 3,232 1,083 7.7 290
2010          Q1 39,993 − 0.3 27,307 − 0.3 8,308 18,244 561 4,854 987 804 3,601 1,327 8.6 296
         Q2 40,460 + 0.4 27,592 + 0.8 8,377 18,346 648 4,885 517 485 3,261 1,053 7.8 353
         Q3 40,740 + 0.8 27,886 + 1.5 8,469 18,454 740 4,889 265 239 3,132 1,003 7.5 395
         Q4 41,019 + 1.0 28,242 + 1.9 8,548 18,710 767 4,905 242 188 2,959 920 7.0 392
2011          Q1 r 40,541 r + 1.4 27,944 + 2.3 8,428 18,578 740 4,852 291 158 3,290 1,088 7.8 411
         Q2 r 40,987 r + 1.3 9 28,264 9 + 2.4 9 8,534 9 18,720 9 786 9 4,886 ... 9 107 2,977 850 10 7.1 470
         Q3 11 41,235 11 + 1.2 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 2,893 843 6.9 497
2008          June 40,345 + 1.3 27,458 + 2.2 8,646 17,877 710 4,882 50 39 3,151 906 7.5 418
         July 40,392 + 1.3 27,440 + 2.2 8,652 17,842 722 4,872 43 31 3,201 963 7.6 422
         Aug 40,433 + 1.2 27,684 + 2.1 8,721 18,019 715 4,820 39 29 3,187 961 7.6 417
         Sep 40,693 + 1.2 27,996 + 2.1 8,810 18,243 718 4,829 50 39 3,073 917 7.3 409
         Oct 40,825 + 1.0 28,020 + 1.8 8,802 18,299 699 4,868 71 61 2,989 883 7.1 393
         Nov 40,789 + 1.0 27,914 + 1.6 8,773 18,269 663 4,913 130 120 2,980 902 7.1 367
         Dec 40,557 + 0.8 27,632 + 1.5 8,662 18,178 598 4,920 270 201 3,094 994 7.4 327
2009          Jan 40,116 + 0.7 27,379 + 1.1 8,565 18,063 561 4,848 594 452 3,480 1,263 8.3 302
         Feb 40,103 + 0.6 27,307 + 0.7 8,529 18,052 533 4,848 1,079 919 3,542 1,293 8.5 318
         Mar 40,140 + 0.4 27,337 + 0.4 8,530 18,088 513 4,872 1,325 1,194 3,576 1,296 8.5 317
         Apr 40,262 + 0.3 27,383 + 0.2 8,524 18,132 507 4,901 1,446 1,426 3,575 1,270 8.5 305
         May 40,324 + 0.1 27,395 − 0.1 8,509 18,154 508 4,914 1,469 1,443 8 3,449 8 1,192 8 8.2 299
         June 40,330 + 0.0 27,380 − 0.3 8,493 18,135 531 4,932 1,394 1,365 3,401 1,159 8.1 297
         July 40,317 − 0.2 27,314 − 0.5 8,464 18,080 551 4,935 1,248 1,215 3,454 1,210 8.2 298
         Aug 40,357 − 0.2 27,542 − 0.5 8,507 18,249 565 4,891 1,055 1,022 3,463 1,211 8.2 300
         Sep 40,581 − 0.3 27,800 − 0.7 8,564 18,430 578 4,893 1,104 1,072 3,338 1,137 7.9 302
         Oct 40,684 − 0.3 27,786 − 0.8 8,534 18,449 581 4,909 1,109 1,076 3,221 1,071 7.7 298
         Nov 40,675 − 0.3 27,731 − 0.7 8,497 18,434 589 4,961 982 947 3,208 1,069 7.6 291
         Dec 40,460 − 0.2 27,488 − 0.5 8,400 18,341 553 4,971 929 809 3,268 1,108 7.8 281
2010          Jan 39,965 − 0.4 27,249 − 0.5 8,295 18,214 550 4,840 1,057 874 3,610 1,339 8.6 271
         Feb 39,933 − 0.4 27,230 − 0.3 8,269 18,210 560 4,814 1,031 829 3,635 1,356 8.6 298
         Mar 40,082 − 0.1 27,398 + 0.2 8,318 18,277 596 4,846 874 709 3,560 1,285 8.5 320
         Apr 40,310 + 0.1 27,553 + 0.6 8,371 18,335 627 4,875 632 599 3,399 1,140 8.1 335
         May 40,485 + 0.4 27,667 + 1.0 8,395 18,382 665 4,898 499 467 3,236 1,036 7.7 355
         June 40,585 + 0.6 27,710 + 1.2 8,414 18,365 707 4,916 420 390 3,148 983 7.5 370
         July 40,606 + 0.7 27,691 + 1.4 8,419 18,320 732 4,915 313 286 3,186 1,029 7.6 391
         Aug 40,688 + 0.8 27,976 + 1.6 8,493 18,508 752 4,864 244 219 3,183 1,030 7.6 396
         Sep 40,926 + 0.9 28,269 + 1.7 8,573 18,700 766 4,859 237 214 3,026 948 7.2 398
         Oct 41,072 + 1.0 28,296 + 1.8 8,566 18,738 769 4,886 231 209 2,941 908 7.0 401
         Nov 41,088 + 1.0 28,277 + 2.0 8,562 18,723 779 4,932 215 194 2,927 903 6.9 394
         Dec 40,897 + 1.1 28,033 + 2.0 8,460 18,635 743 4,931 279 162 3,011 949 7.1 380
2011          Jan r 40,487 r + 1.3 27,863 + 2.3 8,399 18,540 732 4,842 322 177 3,346 1,146 7.9 375
         Feb r 40,510 r + 1.4 27,912 + 2.5 8,416 18,560 738 4,831 305 155 3,313 1,107 7.9 417
         Mar r 40,625 r + 1.4 28,080 + 2.5 8,477 18,632 759 4,836 246 143 3,210 1,010 7.6 442
         Apr r 40,846 r + 1.3 28,214 + 2.4 8,518 18,703 771 4,857 133 117 3,078 907 7.3 461
         May r 41,007 r + 1.3 9 28,347 9 + 2.5 9 8,556 9 18,764 9 797 9 4,918 ... 9 107 2,960 839 10 7.0 470
         June r 41,109 r + 1.3 9 28,383 9 + 2.4 9 8,579 9 18,756 9 820 9 4,929 ... 9 97 2,893 804 6.9 480
         July r 41,118 r + 1.3 9 28,353 9 + 2.4 9 8,590 9 18,710 9 830 9 4,918 ... 9 71 2,939 859 7.0 492
         Aug r 41,177 r + 1.2 9 28,647 9 + 2.4 9 8,658 9 18,918 9 842 9 4,872 ... 9 56 2,945 867 7.0 497
         Sep 11 41,411 11 + 1.2 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 2,796 802 6.6 501
         Oct ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 2,737 779 6.5 500
Sources: Federal Statistical Office; Federal Employment Agency. — *Annual persons formally on the books of private employment agencies. — 9Unadjus-
and quarterly figures: averages; calculated by the Bundesbank; deviations ted data estimated by the Federal Employment Agency. The estimates for
from the official figures are due to rounding. — 1Workplace concept; aver- Germany in 2008 and 2009 deviated from the final data by a maximum of
ages. — 2Monthly figures: end of month. — 3Number within a given 0.2 % for employees subject to social contributions, by a maximum of 2.0 %
month — 4Mid-month level. — 5Until the end of 2006, short-time work ex- for persons solely in jobs exempt from social contributions and, in 2009, by a
cluding construction and agriculture; from 2007, in accordance with section maximum of 14 % for cyclically induced short-time work. — 10From May
170 of the third Book of the Social Security Code. — 6Relative to the total 2011, calculated on the basis of new labour force figures. — 11Initial pre-
civilian labour force. — 7Excluding government-assisted forms of employ- liminary estimate by the Federal Statistical Office. 
ment and seasonal jobs. — 8From May 2009, unemployed excluding
65* X Economic conditions in Germany

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
E U R O S Y S T E M
Monthly Report
November 2011
 X Economic conditions  in Germany
 
7 Prices
 
 
 
Consumer price index HWWI
Indices of Index of World Market
of which foreign trade prices Prices  of Raw Materials  5 
Other Index of
durable producer
and non- prices of
durable industrial Index of
consumer Services Con- products producer
goods excluding prices of sold on the struction
excluding house House price domestic agricultural Other raw
Total Food Energy  1 rents  3 rents  3 index  2 market  4 products  4 Exports Imports Energy  6 materials  7 energy  1,2 
Period 2005 = 100 2010 = 100
Index level  
  
2006 8 101.6 101.9 100.3 108.5 101.0 101.1 102.4 8 105.4 107.3 101.8 104.4 84.4 80.7
2007 9 10 103.9 105.9 101.7 112.8 103.9 102.2 109.3 106.8 119.9 103.0 105.1 86.0 87.5
2008 106.6 112.7 102.5 123.6 105.8 103.5 113.0 112.7 124.3 104.8 109.9 109.7 92.0
2009 107.0 111.2 103.9 116.9 107.4 104.6 114.4 108.0 100.6 102.5 100.5 72.8 74.5
2010 108.2 113.0 104.4 121.5 108.0 105.8 115.4 109.7 114.0 106.0 108.3 100.0 100.0
 
2009          Dec 107.8 110.4 104.5 115.9 109.5 105.1 106.5 102.5 102.7 101.2 83.8 82.8
2010          Jan 107.1 111.7 103.7 118.5 106.9 105.2 107.3 103.2 103.3 102.9 89.0 85.7
         Feb 107.5 112.0 104.1 117.5 107.7 105.3 114.5 107.3 104.7 103.7 103.9 89.6 85.7
         Mar 108.0 113.1 104.5 120.6 107.9 105.5 108.0 105.2 104.5 105.7 96.5 89.5
         Apr 107.9 114.0 104.5 122.2 106.7 105.6 108.9 106.3 105.5 107.8 105.1 97.2
         May 108.0 113.2 104.4 122.5 107.2 105.7 115.2 109.2 108.2 106.0 108.4 100.6 98.9
         June 108.1 113.4 104.2 122.4 107.5 105.8 109.9 110.4 106.4 109.4 102.6 100.4
         July 108.4 113.6 103.6 121.4 109.2 105.9 110.4 111.3 106.4 109.2 98.8 101.2
         Aug 108.4 112.6 104.0 121.2 109.4 106.0 115.8 110.4 r 117.7 106.8 109.4 99.3 104.8
         Sep 108.3 112.5 104.7 121.7 108.0 106.0 110.7 r 119.3 107.1 109.7 99.0 106.6
         Oct 108.4 112.2 105.1 122.1 107.9 106.1 111.1 r 119.8 106.8 109.5 98.9 104.1
         Nov 108.5 113.2 105.3 122.8 107.3 106.3 116.1 111.3 r 122.5 107.1 110.8 104.3 108.1
         Dec 109.6 114.4 105.1 125.4 110.0 106.4 112.1 r 126.9 108.0 113.3 115.7 116.1
2011          Jan 109.2 114.7 104.5 128.7 107.9 106.5 113.4 r 127.7 108.9 115.0 121.1 121.4
         Feb 109.8 115.8 104.8 129.5 108.8 106.7 117.4 114.2 r 131.3 109.3 116.3 126.5 122.8
         Mar 110.3 115.6 105.4 133.3 108.7 106.8 114.7 r 131.4 109.6 117.6 135.5 117.7
         Apr 110.5 115.6 105.6 135.0 108.9 106.9 115.9 r 133.6 109.9 117.9 141.0 117.8
         May 11 110.5 116.3 105.7 134.1 108.4 107.0 118.5 115.9 r 134.4 110.0 117.2 132.5 115.7
         June 110.6 116.3 105.5 133.5 109.3 107.1 116.0 r 133.4 110.0 116.5 130.5 114.0
         July 111.0 116.0 105.0 134.3 111.0 107.2 116.8 r 130.2 110.3 117.4 135.1 115.0
         Aug 111.0 115.4 105.4 133.2 110.8 107.3 119.3 116.5 r 129.1 110.2 116.6 127.5 112.9
         Sep 111.1 115.3 106.3 135.3 109.5 107.4 116.8 129.4 110.2 117.3 135.7 114.1
         Oct 111.1 115.4 106.8 135.7 109.0 107.5 ... ... ... ... 132.0 105.1
Annual percentage change  
  
2006 8 + 1.6 + 1.9 + 0.3 + 8.5 + 1.0 + 1.1 + 2.4 8 + 5.4 + 7.3 + 1.8 + 4.4 + 16.4 + 25.5
2007 9 10 + 2.3 + 3.9 + 1.4 + 4.0 + 2.9 + 1.1 + 6.7 + 1.3 + 11.7 + 1.2 + 0.7 + 1.9 + 8.4
2008 + 2.6 + 6.4 + 0.8 + 9.6 + 1.8 + 1.3 + 3.4 + 5.5 + 3.7 + 1.7 + 4.6 + 27.6 + 5.1
2009 + 0.4 − 1.3 + 1.4 − 5.4 + 1.5 + 1.1 + 1.2 − 4.2 − 19.1 − 2.2 − 8.6 − 33.6 − 19.0
2010 + 1.1 + 1.6 + 0.5 + 3.9 + 0.6 + 1.1 + 0.9 + 1.6 + 13.3 + 3.4 + 7.8 + 37.4 + 34.2
 
2009          Dec + 0.9 − 2.0 + 1.5 + 1.0 + 1.1 + 1.1 − 5.2 − 6.6 − 0.4 − 1.0 + 57.8 + 22.8
2010          Jan + 0.8 − 1.4 + 1.0 + 0.9 + 0.8 + 1.1 − 3.4 − 3.3 + 0.4 + 1.4 + 56.4 + 24.0
         Feb + 0.6 − 1.1 + 0.7 + 0.1 + 0.6 + 1.0 + 0.1 − 2.9 − 2.1 + 0.8 + 2.6 + 55.8 + 23.1
         Mar + 1.1 + 0.3 + 0.8 + 4.0 + 1.1 + 1.1 − 1.5 + 0.4 + 2.0 + 5.0 + 61.9 + 30.8
         Apr + 1.0 + 1.5 + 0.6 + 5.2 − 0.1 + 1.1 + 0.6 + 3.3 + 3.0 + 7.9 + 65.0 + 34.4
         May + 1.2 + 1.3 + 0.7 + 4.9 + 0.5 + 1.1 + 0.9 + 0.9 + 6.1 + 3.6 + 8.5 + 44.3 + 32.6
         June + 0.9 + 1.2 + 0.3 + 2.8 + 0.6 + 1.1 + 1.7 + 8.0 + 3.9 + 9.1 + 27.5 + 31.8
         July + 1.2 + 2.6 + 0.3 + 4.7 + 0.4 + 1.1 + 3.7 + 10.2 + 4.1 + 9.9 + 30.3 + 36.6
         Aug + 1.0 + 2.8 + 0.2 + 2.5 + 0.6 + 1.1 + 1.2 + 3.2 r + 17.5 + 4.2 + 8.6 + 18.9 + 33.3
         Sep + 1.3 + 3.0 + 0.3 + 4.6 + 0.7 + 1.1 + 3.9 r + 21.5 + 4.6 + 9.9 + 30.1 + 42.3
         Oct + 1.3 + 2.9 + 0.4 + 5.1 + 0.6 + 1.1 + 4.3 r + 21.7 + 4.3 + 9.2 + 22.6 + 37.3
         Nov + 1.5 + 3.4 + 1.1 + 5.0 + 0.4 + 1.2 + 1.5 + 4.4 r + 20.7 + 4.5 + 10.0 + 23.6 + 38.8
         Dec + 1.7 + 3.6 + 0.6 + 8.2 + 0.5 + 1.2 + 5.3 r + 23.8 + 5.2 + 12.0 + 38.1 + 40.2
2011          Jan + 2.0 + 2.7 + 0.8 + 8.6 + 0.9 + 1.2 + 5.7 r + 23.7 + 5.4 + 11.8 + 36.1 + 41.7
         Feb + 2.1 + 3.4 + 0.7 + 10.2 + 1.0 + 1.3 + 2.5 + 6.4 r + 25.4 + 5.4 + 11.9 + 41.2 + 43.3
         Mar + 2.1 + 2.2 + 0.9 + 10.5 + 0.7 + 1.2 + 6.2 r + 24.9 + 4.9 + 11.3 + 40.4 + 31.5
         Apr + 2.4 + 1.4 + 1.1 + 10.5 + 2.1 + 1.2 + 6.4 r + 25.7 + 4.2 + 9.4 + 34.2 + 21.2
         May 11 + 2.3 + 2.7 + 1.2 + 9.5 + 1.1 + 1.2 + 2.9 + 6.1 r + 24.2 + 3.8 + 8.1 + 31.7 + 17.0
         June + 2.3 + 2.6 + 1.2 + 9.1 + 1.7 + 1.2 + 5.6 r + 20.8 + 3.4 + 6.5 + 27.2 + 13.5
         July + 2.4 + 2.1 + 1.4 + 10.6 + 1.6 + 1.2 + 5.8 r + 17.0 + 3.7 + 7.5 + 36.7 + 13.6
         Aug + 2.4 + 2.5 + 1.3 + 9.9 + 1.3 + 1.2 + 3.0 + 5.5 r + 9.7 + 3.2 + 6.6 + 28.4 + 7.7
         Sep + 2.6 + 2.5 + 1.5 + 11.2 + 1.4 + 1.3 + 5.5 + 8.5 + 2.9 + 6.9 + 37.1 + 7.0
         Oct + 2.5 + 2.9 + 1.6 + 11.1 + 1.0 + 1.3 ... ... ... ... + 33.5 + 1.0
Source: Federal Statistical Office; HWWI Index of World Market Prices. — October 2006, increase in the prices of tobacco products. — 9From January
1Electricity, gas and other fuels. — 2Bundesbank calculation based on data 2007, increase in the standard rate of value-added tax and in insurance tax
provided by the Federal Statistical Office. — 3Net rents. — 4Excluding from 16% to 19%. — 10Introduction of university tuition fees in some
value-added tax. — 5For the euro area, in euro. — 6Coal and crude oil. — federal states. — 11 From May 2011, increase in tobacco tax. 
7Food, beverages and tobacco as well as industrial raw materials. — 8From
66* X Economic conditions in Germany

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2011
X Economic conditions in Germany
  
8 Households’ income *
  
  
  
Gross wages and Net wages and Monetary social Saving
salaries  1 salaries  2 Mass income  4 Saving  6 ratio  7 benefits received  3 Disposable income  5 
Annual Annual Annual Annual Annual Annual
percent- percent- percent- percent- percent- percent-
age age age age age age
Period change change change change change change % € billion € billion € billion € billion € billion € billion
2003 920.2 − 0.0 615.6 − 0.8 358.4 3.0 974.0 0.6 1,411.8 2.3 147.3 6.1 10.4
2004 924.7 0.5 627.9 2.0 359.5 0.3 987.3 1.4 1,435.4 1.7 151.8 3.1 10.6
2005 922.1 − 0.3 625.5 − 0.4 359.8 0.1 985.3 − 0.2 1,463.9 2.0 156.9 3.3 10.7
2006 935.0 1.4 627.8 0.4 358.5 − 0.4 986.3 0.1 1,502.0 2.6 162.5 3.6 10.8
2007 965.9 3.3 646.2 2.9 353.6 − 1.4 999.8 1.4 1,524.8 1.5 168.1 3.4 11.0
2008 1,002.3 3.8 664.0 2.8 355.4 0.5 1,019.4 2.0 1,571.2 3.0 183.5 9.2 11.7
2009 1,000.1 − 0.2 661.5 − 0.4 386.8 8.8 1,048.3 2.8 1,560.5 − 0.7 173.1 − 5.7 11.1
2010 1,026.7 2.7 688.5 4.1 391.6 1.2 1,080.1 3.0 1,603.8 2.8 180.8 4.5 11.3
2010          Q1 238.2 1.5 159.6 3.7 100.2 4.4 259.8 4.0 395.5 2.2 59.6 3.9 15.1
         Q2 249.1 2.9 164.2 4.4 98.0 1.4 262.2 3.3 397.4 2.1 43.3 5.3 10.9
         Q3 254.2 2.9 174.3 3.6 97.3 − 0.6 271.6 2.0 405.1 3.1 38.8 4.6 9.6
         Q4 285.2 3.2 190.4 4.6 96.1 − 0.3 286.5 2.9 405.8 3.8 39.1 4.3 9.6
2011          Q1 249.4 4.7 165.4 3.6 98.0 − 2.1 263.4 1.4 409.1 3.4 59.4 − 0.4 14.5
         Q2 262.8 5.5 172.8 5.3 96.2 − 1.9 269.0 2.6 411.0 3.4 43.7 0.9 10.6
Source: Federal Statistical Office; figures computed in September 2011. — plus monetary social benefits received. — 5Mass income plus operating
*Households including non-profit institutions serving households. — 1Resi- surplus, mixed income, property income (net), other current transfers
dence concept. — 2After deducting the wage tax payable on gross wages received, income of non-profit institutions serving households, less taxes (ex-
and salaries and employees’ contributions to the social security funds. — cluding wage tax and consumption-related taxes) and other current trans-
3Social security benefits in cash from the social security funds, central, state fers paid. Including the increase in claims on company pension funds. — 6In-
and local government and foreign countries, pension payments (net), cluding the increase in claims on company pension funds. — 7Saving as a
private funded social benefits, less social contributions on social benefits, percentage of disposable income. 
consumption-related taxes and public charges. — 4Net wages and salaries
  
  
  
9 Pay rates (overall economy)
  
  
  
Index of negotiated wages 1 
on a monthly basis
Memo item:
Total excluding Wages and salaries
on an hourly basis Total one-off payments Basic pay rates  2 per employee  3 
Annual Annual Annual Annual Annual
Period percentage percentage percentage percentage percentage
2005 = 100 change 2005 = 100 change 2005 = 100 change 2005 = 100 change 2005 = 100 change
2003 98.3 2.0 98.1 2.0 98.2 2.1 97.7 2.4 99.2 1.1
2004 99.1 0.8 98.9 0.9 99.1 0.9 99.0 1.3 99.7 0.5
2005 100.0 0.9 100.0 1.1 100.0 0.9 100.0 1.0 100.0 0.3
2006 100.9 0.9 101.2 1.2 100.8 0.8 100.8 0.8 100.8 0.8
2007 102.1 1.2 102.5 1.3 102.2 1.4 102.2 1.4 102.2 1.4
2008 104.9 2.8 105.4 2.8 105.3 3.0 105.5 3.2 104.5 2.3
2009 107.0 2.0 107.5 2.0 107.6 2.2 108.1 2.4 104.2 − 0.3
2010 108.7 1.6 109.3 1.6 109.3 1.6 109.9 1.7 106.4 2.1
2010          Q2 102.2 2.1 102.7 2.2 102.4 1.7 109.8 1.7 103.6 2.4
         Q3 110.6 1.1 111.1 1.1 111.4 1.3 110.1 1.5 105.0 2.0
         Q4 121.2 1.5 121.8 1.5 121.9 1.3 110.3 1.4 116.6 2.1
2011          Q1 102.6 1.7 103.1 1.7 102.9 1.3 110.6 1.1 103.2 3.2
         Q2 103.6 1.3 104.1 1.4 104.2 1.7 111.6 1.6 107.8 4.1
         Q3 112.7 1.9 113.3 1.9 113.5 1.9 112.2 1.9 . .
2011          Mar 102.6 1.4 103.1 1.4 103.3 1.5 110.7 1.0 . .
         Apr 104.0 1.7 104.5 1.7 104.1 1.4 111.3 1.4 . .
         May 103.7 1.3 104.2 1.3 104.4 2.0 111.6 1.6 . .
         June 103.1 1.0 103.6 1.0 104.0 1.7 111.9 1.8 . .
         July 130.7 1.7 131.4 1.7 131.8 1.7 112.1 1.9 . .
         Aug 103.8 2.1 104.3 2.1 104.3 2.0 112.3 2.0 . .
         Sep 103.7 2.0 104.2 2.0 104.4 1.9 112.3 1.9 . .
1Current data are normally revised on account of additional reports. — (13 thmonthly salary payment) and retirement provisions). — 3Source:
2Excluding one-off payments and covenants (capital formation benefits, Federal Statistical Office; figures computed in September 2011. 
special payments, such as annual bonuses, holiday pay, Christmas bonuses
67*X Economic conditions in Germany

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
E U R O S Y S T E M
Monthly Report
November 2011
XI External sector
 
1 Major items of the balance of payments of the euro area *
 
 
€ million
2011 2010  r)
Item 2008  r 2009  r 2010  r Q4 Q1  r Q2 r June  r July r Aug
Current account − 143,536 − 25,902 − 42,161 + 3,429 − 30,217 − 20,812 + 221 − 2,045 − 6,317A
1 Goods
Exports (fob) 1,588,541 1,302,519 1,560,030 421,688 423,350 437,972 145,449 148,097 139,397
Imports (fob) 1,610,358 1,266,490 1,547,089 416,224 436,362 440,632 144,954 144,773 142,514
Balance − 21,814 + 36,029 + 12,940 + 5,465 − 13,012 − 2,661 + 494 + 3,324 − 3,117
2 Services
Receipts 513,253 473,914 518,804 135,718 122,984 133,320 47,325 47,057 46,262
Expenditure 471,192 438,828 472,871 125,224 115,977 115,823 39,214 41,552 42,640
Balance + 42,061 + 35,087 + 45,934 + 10,495 + 7,006 + 17,497 + 8,111 + 5,506 + 3,622
3 Income − 66,789 − 5,833 + 2,253 + 4,308 + 10,247 − 14,443 − 234 − 650 + 1,137
4 Current transfers
Transfers from non-residents 91,839 94,472 87,597 30,954 24,660 19,581 5,843 5,342 5,913
Transfers to non-residents 188,834 185,658 190,889 47,791 59,119 40,785 13,993 15,566 13,872
Balance − 96,994 − 91,186 − 103,288 − 16,837 − 34,459 − 21,204 − 8,150 − 10,224 − 7,959
Capital account + 9,991 + 7,274 + 5,495 + 1,257 + 2,403 + 699 + 340 + 472 + 2,131B
Financial account (net capital exports: − + 121,338 + 14,005 + 44,064 + 9,545 + 15,745 + 20,558 + 9,202 + 2,492 + 9,798C)
1 Direct investment − 231,147 − 102,822 − 49,916 + 79,481 − 9,867 − 28,452 + 7,758 + 623 − 291
By resident units abroad − 336,609 − 334,698 − 174,868 + 19,625 − 89,347 − 59,462 + 154 − 12,229 + 6,495
By non-resident units in the euro area + 105,461 + 231,875 + 124,955 + 59,857 + 79,478 + 31,009 + 7,604 + 12,852 − 6,787
2 Portfolio investment + 261,411 + 261,374 + 148,031 + 19,475 + 128,531 + 155,599 + 93,698 − 21,104 + 36,004
By resident units abroad − 4,992 − 93,955 − 145,578 − 46,097 − 27,116 − 33,459 + 19,283 + 5,629 + 67,144
Equity + 93,692 − 53,446 − 76,509 − 40,749 + 1,023 − 17,034 − 1,396 − 1,646 + 38,848
Bonds and notes − 72,141 − 45,690 − 109,328 − 920 − 5,302 − 29,436 − 4,362 + 4,757 + 25,673
Money market instruments − 26,543 + 5,179 + 40,259 − 4,429 − 22,836 + 13,010 + 25,040 + 2,517 + 2,622
By non-resident units in the euro area + 266,402 + 355,327 + 293,614 + 65,573 + 155,647 + 189,058 + 74,415 − 26,733 − 31,139
Equity − 108,578 + 121,603 + 128,883 + 47,407 + 88,223 − 12,260 + 1,802 + 8,568 − 15,131
Bonds and notes + 175,450 + 143,195 + 174,246 + 43,067 + 22,073 + 174,821 + 67,751 − 30,696 − 5,865
Money market instruments + 199,528 + 90,529 − 9,519 − 24,902 + 45,351 + 26,497 + 4,861 − 4,605 − 10,144
3 Financial derivatives − 84,453 + 21,081 + 17,414 + 8,935 − 2,247 + 3,385 + 1,949 − 4,584 − 1,136
4 Other investment + 178,885 − 170,182 − 61,178 − 96,793 − 89,099 − 114,315 − 95,714 + 28,460 − 28,027
Eurosystem + 290,439 − 233,295 + 11,839 + 11,217 + 5,982 + 2,624 + 738 + 14,269 + 6,575
General government + 15,182 + 7,136 + 24,595 + 10,710 + 34,913 + 11,263 + 1,795 + 12,287 + 1,143
MFIs (excluding the Eurosystem) − 132,076 + 67,795 − 19,251 − 71,635 − 126,173 − 79,164 − 80,931 − 4,836 − 50,820
Long-term − 226,162 − 21,385 + 35,013 + 3,087 + 35,609 − 18,610 + 2,786 + 3,106 − 4,608
Short-term + 94,087 + 89,182 − 54,269 − 74,723 − 161,782 − 60,554 − 83,717 − 7,942 − 46,212
Other sectors + 5,340 − 11,817 − 78,359 − 47,084 − 3,822 − 49,038 − 17,315 + 6,740 + 15,075
5 Reserve assets (Increase: −) − 3,358 + 4,558 − 10,290 − 1,554 − 11,572 + 4,341 + 1,511 − 902 + 3,249
Errors and omissions + 12,207 + 4,624 − 7,396 − 14,230 + 12,068 − 445 − 9,763 − 919 − 5,612D
* Source: European Central Bank.  
  
68*XI External sector

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2011
XI External sector
 
2 Major items of the balance of payments of the Federal Republic of Germany
(balances)
 
 
Current account Financial account Capital trans-
fers and
of which acquisition/
disposal of Change in
Supple- non- reserve assets
Balance mentary produced at trans- Errors
on current Foreign trade Current action and non-financial
Period account trade  1 items  2 Services  3 Income transfers assets Total  4 value  5 omissions
DM million
1997 − 17,336 + 116,467 − 7,875 − 68,692 − 4,740 − 52,496 + 52 + 6,671 + 6,640 + 10,613
1998 − 28,696 + 126,970 − 8,917 − 75,053 − 18,635 − 53,061 + 1,289 + 25,683 − 7,128 + 1,724
1999 − 49,241 + 127,542 − 15,947 − 90,036 − 22,325 − 48,475 − 301 − 20,332 + 24,517 + 69,874
2000 − 68,913 + 115,645 − 17,742 − 95,848 − 16,302 − 54,666 + 13,345 + 66,863 + 11,429 − 11,295
2001 + 830 + 186,771 − 14,512 − 97,521 − 21,382 − 52,526 − 756 − 23,068 + 11,797 + 22,994
€ million
1999 − 25,177 + 65,211 − 8,153 − 46,035 − 11,415 − 24,785 − 154 − 10,396 + 12,535 + 35,726
2000 − 35,235 + 59,128 − 9,071 − 49,006 − 8,335 − 27,950 + 6,823 + 34,187 + 5,844 − 5,775
2001 + 424 + 95,495 − 7,420 − 49,862 − 10,932 − 26,856 − 387 − 11,794 + 6,032 + 11,757
2002 + 42,973 + 132,788 − 8,552 − 35,728 − 18,019 − 27,517 − 212 − 38,448 + 2,065 − 4,313
2003 + 40,917 + 129,921 − 11,148 − 34,506 − 15,067 − 28,283 + 311 − 61,758 + 445 + 20,529
2004 + 102,833 + 156,096 − 16,470 − 29,375 + 20,431 − 27,849 + 435 − 122,984 + 1,470 + 19,717
2005 + 112,906 + 158,179 − 14,057 − 27,401 + 24,896 − 28,712 − 1,369 − 129,635 + 2,182 + 18,098
2006 + 144,999 + 159,048 − 12,888 − 17,346 + 44,893 − 28,708 − 258 − 175,474 + 2,934 + 30,732
2007 + 181,150 + 195,348 − 9,816 − 14,852 + 43,310 − 32,841 + 104 − 210,151 − 953 + 28,897
2008 + 154,833 + 178,297 − 14,058 − 11,585 + 35,565 − 33,386 − 215 − 160,196 − 2,008 + 5,577
2009 + 133,744 + 138,697 − 11,604 − 10,437 + 50,105 − 33,017 + 74 − 145,427 + 3,200 + 11,609
2010  r + 141,495 + 154,863 − 11,415 − 8,349 + 44,483 − 38,086 − 637 − 140,301 − 1,613 − 557
2008          Q4 + 37,045 + 33,972 − 3,977 + 1,529 + 12,613 − 7,092 − 661 − 43,830 − 1,584 + 7,446
2009          Q1 + 24,869 + 27,576 − 3,657 − 1,984 + 14,543 − 11,609 + 22 − 3,419 + 321 − 21,471
         Q2 + 26,201 + 34,119 − 2,666 − 2,973 + 3,742 − 6,021 + 291 − 49,965 + 41 + 23,473
         Q3 + 32,190 + 36,092 − 2,679 − 8,269 + 15,210 − 8,164 + 37 − 22,056 + 2,269 − 10,171
         Q4 + 50,485 + 40,910 − 2,603 + 2,789 + 16,610 − 7,222 − 276 − 69,987 + 569 + 19,778
2010          Q1  r + 34,435 + 37,736 − 2,535 − 965 + 14,296 − 14,098 + 271 − 32,811 − 651 − 1,896
         Q2  r + 28,375 + 37,249 − 2,835 − 2,596 + 3,131 − 6,573 − 443 − 31,734 − 801 + 3,802
         Q3  r + 30,808 + 38,895 − 2,973 − 7,127 + 12,900 − 10,886 + 6 − 25,709 + 344 − 5,105
         Q4  r + 47,877 + 40,982 − 3,072 + 2,339 + 14,156 − 6,529 − 472 − 50,046 − 506 + 2,641
2011          Q1  r + 35,336 + 40,808 − 4,402 − 217 + 13,293 − 14,146 + 912 − 54,840 − 1,393 + 18,593
         Q2  r + 27,199 + 38,304 − 3,805 − 2,381 + 686 − 5,606 − 251 − 29,207 − 438 + 2,259
         Q3  p + 29,954 + 39,779 − 6,344 − 6,577 + 13,386 − 10,289 + 107 − 17,645 − 639 − 12,416
2009          Apr + 7,432 + 10,066 − 774 + 147 + 709 − 2,715 + 313 − 9,810 − 590 + 2,065
         May + 6,088 + 10,327 − 1,031 − 335 − 2,171 − 703 + 101 − 8,738 + 342 + 2,549
         June + 12,680 + 13,726 − 860 − 2,785 + 5,203 − 2,603 − 123 − 31,416 + 288 + 18,858
         July + 12,894 + 15,592 − 978 − 3,813 + 4,661 − 2,568 + 24 − 3,788 − 92 − 9,130
         Aug + 7,503 + 8,999 − 959 − 2,985 + 5,433 − 2,985 − 10 − 8,514 + 743 + 1,021
         Sep + 11,792 + 11,501 − 743 − 1,471 + 5,116 − 2,611 + 23 − 9,753 + 1,618 − 2,062
         Oct + 11,383 + 12,466 − 591 − 1,195 + 5,619 − 4,916 − 249 − 23,201 − 651 + 12,067
         Nov + 16,586 + 15,962 − 1,485 + 379 + 5,525 − 3,794 + 91 − 22,777 + 1,522 + 6,100
         Dec + 22,516 + 12,482 − 526 + 3,605 + 5,466 + 1,488 − 117 − 24,010 − 302 + 1,611
2010          Jan  r + 5,738 + 8,277 − 1,038 − 1,499 + 4,526 − 4,528 + 64 + 13,557 − 55 − 19,359
         Feb  r + 10,667 + 13,215 − 286 − 17 + 4,637 − 6,882 + 430 − 17,923 − 782 + 6,826
         Mar  r + 18,031 + 16,244 − 1,210 + 551 + 5,133 − 2,687 − 223 − 28,445 + 187 + 10,637
         Apr  r + 11,810 + 12,995 − 816 + 390 + 1,479 − 2,239 − 200 − 9,518 − 116 − 2,092
         May  r + 3,350 + 10,143 − 1,289 − 1,166 − 2,827 − 1,510 − 53 − 8,748 − 671 + 5,451
         June  r + 13,215 + 14,111 − 730 − 1,820 + 4,478 − 2,824 − 190 − 13,468 − 14 + 444
         July  r + 9,708 + 12,967 − 1,263 − 2,721 + 4,435 − 3,710 + 420 + 19,207 + 20 − 29,335
         Aug  r + 6,007 + 9,456 − 955 − 3,158 + 4,229 − 3,566 − 112 − 18,532 + 119 + 12,637
         Sep  r + 15,094 + 16,473 − 756 − 1,249 + 4,236 − 3,610 − 302 − 26,385 + 205 + 11,593
         Oct  r + 14,204 + 14,518 − 644 − 826 + 4,734 − 3,577 − 221 + 557 + 234 − 14,539
         Nov  r + 14,370 + 13,884 − 1,051 + 892 + 4,699 − 4,053 − 169 − 21,728 + 81 + 7,527
         Dec  r + 19,303 + 12,580 − 1,376 + 2,273 + 4,723 + 1,102 − 81 − 28,875 − 820 + 9,654
2011          Jan  r + 7,040 + 10,108 − 1,356 − 1,191 + 3,543 − 4,065 + 542 − 6,102 − 182 − 1,480
         Feb  r + 8,702 + 11,928 − 1,088 + 350 + 4,623 − 7,111 + 528 − 20,372 − 23 + 11,142
         Mar  r + 19,594 + 18,772 − 1,958 + 624 + 5,126 − 2,971 − 158 − 28,367 − 1,188 + 8,931
         Apr  r + 8,992 + 10,821 − 1,186 − 729 + 1,805 − 1,720 − 177 − 15,203 − 563 + 6,388
         May  r + 6,657 + 14,787 − 904 − 449 − 5,763 − 1,015 − 65 − 13,540 + 24 + 6,948
         June  r + 11,550 + 12,696 − 1,715 − 1,203 + 4,643 − 2,871 − 10 − 463 + 101 − 11,078
         July  r + 7,786 + 10,561 − 1,432 − 2,137 + 4,465 − 3,672 − 141 + 5,117 − 428 − 12,761
         Aug + 6,486 + 11,790 − 2,207 − 4,296 + 4,465 − 3,266 + 375 − 15,912 + 109 + 9,051
         Sep  p + 15,682 + 17,428 − 2,705 − 144 + 4,455 − 3,351 − 127 − 6,850 − 320 − 8,706
1Special trade according to the official foreign trade statistics: imports cif, the account of residents and deduction of goods returned. — 3Excluding
exports fob. From January 2007 onwards, excluding supplies of goods the expenditure on freight and insurance included in the cif import
for/after repair/maintenance, which, up to December 2006, were deducted figure. — 4Financial account balance including change in reserve assets.
via supplementary trade items. — 2Inter alia warehouse transactions for Capital exports: − . — 5 Increase: − . 
69*XI External sector

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
E U R O S Y S T E M
Monthly Report
November 2011
XI External sector
 
3 Foreign trade (special trade) of the Federal Republic of Germany,
by country and group of countries *
 
 € million
 2011
Country / group of countries  2008  2009  2010 r Jan / Aug May  r Jun r Jul r Aug r Sep p 
All countries  1 Exports 984,140 803,312 951,959 696,702 92,164 88,299 85,811 85,282 95,018
Imports 805,842 664,615 797,097 595,239 77,377 75,603 75,250 73,492 77,590
Balance + 178,297 + 138,697 + 154,863 + 101,463 + 14,787 + 12,696 + 10,561 + 11,790 + 17,428
I Exports 733,092 585,826 675,024 497,013 65,497 64,022 59,929 59,642 ...European countries
Imports 567,062 463,721 541,720 411,169 53,981 53,201 52,414 49,288 ...
Balance + 166,031 + 122,105 + 133,305 + 85,844 + 11,517 + 10,820 + 7,515 + 10,355 ...
Exports 622,637 500,654 570,879 415,694 54,557 54,012 49,731 48,658 ... 1 EU member states (27)
Imports 460,887 380,323 444,375 334,634 43,842 44,799 41,883 39,795 ...
Balance + 161,750 + 120,331 + 126,504 + 81,060 + 10,715 + 9,212 + 7,848 + 8,863 ...
Euro-area (17) Exports 421,120 343,701 388,103 279,351 36,805 36,798 33,295 31,604 ...
countries Imports 315,410 258,729 300,135 225,442 29,677 30,618 28,038 26,304 ...
Balance + 105,710 + 84,972 + 87,968 + 53,909 + 7,128 + 6,180 + 5,258 + 5,301 ...
of which
Austria Exports 54,689 46,093 52,156 38,442 5,055 4,898 4,759 4,810 ...
Imports 33,180 27,565 33,013 24,841 3,294 3,270 3,245 3,000 ...
Balance + 21,509 + 18,528 + 19,144 + 13,601 + 1,761 + 1,628 + 1,515 + 1,810 ...
Belgium and Exports 55,230 46,262 50,545 35,824 4,763 4,482 4,003 4,436 ...
Luxembourg Imports 39,959 30,694 36,026 27,338 3,493 3,643 3,364 3,390 ...
Balance + 15,271 + 15,568 + 14,519 + 8,486 + 1,270 + 839 + 638 + 1,045 ...
France Exports 93,718 81,304 89,582 66,356 8,839 8,891 7,660 7,265 ...
Imports 63,369 53,338 60,673 43,859 6,041 6,850 4,985 4,982 ...
Balance + 30,349 + 27,966 + 28,909 + 22,497 + 2,798 + 2,041 + 2,675 + 2,282 ...
Italy Exports 62,015 50,620 58,589 41,541 5,472 5,573 5,172 4,033 ...
Imports 46,842 37,197 41,977 32,239 4,255 4,353 4,345 3,576 ...
Balance + 15,173 + 13,423 + 16,611 + 9,302 + 1,216 + 1,220 + 827 + 457 ...
Netherlands Exports 65,799 53,195 62,978 45,860 5,919 6,305 5,512 5,427 ...
Imports 67,971 55,583 67,205 54,165 7,025 6,890 6,832 6,615 ...
Balance − 2,172 − 2,388 − 4,227 − 8,305 − 1,106 − 585 − 1,320 − 1,188 ...
Spain Exports 42,676 31,281 34,222 23,387 3,136 3,072 2,848 2,372 ...
Imports 20,701 18,959 21,955 15,160 1,997 2,082 1,860 1,377 ...
Balance + 21,975 + 12,322 + 12,267 + 8,226 + 1,139 + 990 + 988 + 995 ...
Other EU member Exports 201,517 156,953 182,775 136,342 17,752 17,214 16,436 17,054 ...
states Imports 145,478 121,594 144,240 109,191 14,165 14,181 13,846 13,492 ...
Balance + 56,039 + 35,359 + 38,536 + 27,151 + 3,588 + 3,033 + 2,590 + 3,562 ...
of which
United Exports 64,175 53,240 58,666 43,162 5,503 5,233 5,380 5,215 ...
Kingdom Imports 41,646 32,452 37,923 28,839 3,601 3,522 3,888 3,578 ...
Balance + 22,529 + 20,787 + 20,743 + 14,323 + 1,902 + 1,711 + 1,492 + 1,637 ...
Exports 110,455 85,172 104,145 81,320 10,940 10,010 10,198 10,984 ... 2 Other European
Imports 106,174 83,398 97,345 76,536 10,139 8,402 10,530 9,492 ... countries
Balance + 4,281 + 1,774 + 6,800 + 4,784 + 801 + 1,608 − 333 + 1,492 ...
of which
Switzerland Exports 39,027 35,510 41,659 31,143 4,115 3,707 3,840 4,256 ...
Imports 31,299 28,096 32,507 24,015 3,239 2,967 3,052 3,233 ...
Balance + 7,728 + 7,414 + 9,152 + 7,129 + 876 + 740 + 788 + 1,023 ...
II Exports 249,199 216,466 276,635 199,159 26,472 24,240 25,842 25,615 ...Non-European
Imports 238,050 200,303 255,377 184,093 23,396 22,402 22,855 24,209 ... countries
Balance + 11,150 + 16,163 + 21,258 + 15,066 + 3,075 + 1,838 + 2,987 + 1,406 ...
Exports 19,636 17,412 19,968 13,589 1,741 1,700 1,786 1,707 ... 1 Africa
Imports 20,661 14,235 17,040 15,376 1,448 2,021 1,892 2,046 ...
Balance − 1,024 + 3,177 + 2,929 − 1,787 + 293 − 321 − 106 − 339 ...
Exports 101,866 78,727 99,464 71,590 9,417 8,889 9,325 9,257 ... 2 America
Imports 73,884 60,498 71,680 52,898 7,457 6,668 6,276 6,690 ...
Balance + 27,982 + 18,229 + 27,784 + 18,692 + 1,960 + 2,221 + 3,049 + 2,567 ...
of which
Exports 71,428 54,356 65,574 47,422 6,199 5,925 6,159 6,085 ... United States
Imports 46,464 39,283 45,241 31,963 4,520 3,785 3,677 3,976 ...
Balance + 24,965 + 15,074 + 20,333 + 15,460 + 1,679 + 2,140 + 2,482 + 2,108 ...
Exports 120,102 113,179 148,231 107,711 14,389 12,864 13,884 13,906 ... 3 Asia
Imports 140,585 122,823 163,523 113,135 14,137 13,381 14,394 15,073 ...
Balance − 20,483 − 9,644 − 15,293 − 5,423 + 252 − 518 − 509 − 1,166 ...
of which
Middle East Exports 27,498 23,598 28,138 17,260 2,241 2,024 2,202 2,255 ...
Imports 7,943 5,506 6,878 5,029 631 622 718 743 ...
Balance + 19,555 + 18,092 + 21,260 + 12,231 + 1,610 + 1,401 + 1,484 + 1,512 ...
Japan Exports 12,732 10,875 13,149 9,516 1,129 1,129 1,285 1,258 ...
Imports 23,130 18,946 22,475 15,543 1,897 1,855 1,921 1,968 ...
Balance − 10,398 − 8,071 − 9,326 − 6,026 − 768 − 727 − 636 − 710 ...
Exports 34,065 37,273 53,791 42,466 5,835 5,142 5,409 5,446 ... People‘s Republic
Imports 60,825 56,706 77,270 51,357 6,674 6,271 6,304 7,099 ... of China  2 
Balance − 26,760 − 19,434 − 23,479 − 8,891 − 839 − 1,128 − 896 − 1,653 ...
Exports 32,572 28,606 38,183 27,366 3,736 3,181 3,523 3,440 ... Emerging markets
Imports 33,152 28,338 39,562 26,874 3,318 3,022 3,434 3,385 ... in South-East Asia  3 
Balance − 580 + 268 − 1,379 + 492 + 418 + 159 + 89 + 55 ...
Exports 7,595 7,147 8,972 6,269 925 787 848 744 ... 4 Oceania and
Imports 2,920 2,747 3,134 2,684 354 332 294 400 ... polar regions
Balance + 4,674 + 4,401 + 5,838 + 3,585 + 571 + 455 + 553 + 344 ...
 
*Source: Federal Statistical Office. Exports (fob) by country of destination, supplies for ships and aircraft and other data not classifiable by region. —
imports (cif) by country of origin. Individual countries and groups of 2Excluding Hong Kong. — 3Brunei Darussalam, Hong Kong, Indonesia,
countries according to the current position. — 1Including fuel and other Malaysia, Philippines, Republic of Korea, Singapore, Taiwan and Thailand. 
70*XI External sector

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2011
XI External sector
 
4 Services and income of the Federal Republic of Germany
(balances)
 
€ million
Services
Other services
of which
 
Patents Compen- Services  of Construction
Trans- Financial and sation of Investment Government self-employed and  assembly
Period Total Travel  1 services licences Total income portation  2 services  3 persons  4 work,  repairs employees  5 
2006 − 17,346 − 32,771 + 5,723 + 2,232 − 1,895 + 3,736 + 5,629 − 1,790 + 3,980 − 773 + 45,666
2007 − 14,852 − 34,324 + 6,756 + 2,801 − 2,016 + 3,309 + 8,622 − 1,964 + 3,197 + 252 + 43,058
2008 − 11,585 − 34,718 + 8,300 + 4,106 − 1,337 + 2,372 + 9,691 − 1,648 + 3,145 + 463 + 35,103
2009 − 10,437 − 33,341 + 6,873 + 3,848 + 804 + 2,369 + 9,011 − 1,256 + 2,563 − 126 + 50,231
2010 − 8,349 − 32,778 + 7,056 + 3,709 + 992 + 2,470 + 10,202 − 1,155 + 2,887 − 269 + 44,751
2010          Q1 − 965 − 5,171 + 1,497 + 920 + 112 + 608 + 1,068 − 246 + 584 + 443 + 13,853
         Q2 − 2,596 − 8,514 + 2,038 + 663 + 438 + 595 + 2,184 − 267 + 716 + 294 + 2,837
         Q3 − 7,127 − 13,252 + 1,910 + 1,033 − 289 + 596 + 2,875 − 329 + 649 − 584 + 13,484
         Q4 + 2,339 − 5,841 + 1,611 + 1,093 + 731 + 671 + 4,075 − 313 + 938 − 423 + 14,578
2011          Q1 − 217 − 5,563 + 1,402 + 709 − 141 + 596 + 2,781 − 248 + 618 + 410 + 12,883
         Q2 − 2,381 − 8,180 + 2,153 + 805 + 400 + 675 + 1,767 − 248 + 669 + 287 + 399
         Q3 − 6,577 − 13,656 + 1,804 + 1,028 − 148 + 655 + 3,740 − 359 + 550 − 562 + 13,948
2010          Nov + 892 − 1,640 + 550 + 330 + 197 + 271 + 1,184 − 101 + 375 − 185 + 4,884
         Dec + 2,273 − 1,025 + 565 + 525 + 609 + 187 + 1,412 − 124 + 302 − 74 + 4,796
2011          Jan − 1,191 − 1,994 + 411 + 391 − 198 + 187 + 13 − 87 + 150 + 131 + 3,413
         Feb + 350 − 1,486 + 489 + 64 + 244 + 194 + 845 − 64 + 264 + 130 + 4,494
         Mar + 624 − 2,083 + 502 + 253 − 187 + 215 + 1,924 − 97 + 204 + 150 + 4,977
         Apr − 729 − 1,830 + 645 + 301 + 86 + 229 − 160 − 47 + 235 + 94 + 1,711
         May − 449 − 2,576 + 783 + 291 + 313 + 234 + 506 − 117 + 196 + 102 − 5,864
         June − 1,203 − 3,774 + 724 + 213 + 1 + 212 + 1,421 − 84 + 238 + 92 + 4,552
         July − 2,137 − 4,238 + 727 + 434 − 90 + 223 + 808 − 108 + 116 − 185 + 4,650
         Aug − 4,296 − 5,479 + 609 + 224 + 35 + 224 + 90 − 125 + 205 − 185 + 4,650
         Sep − 144 − 3,940 + 468 + 370 − 93 + 208 + 2,841 − 126 + 229 − 193 + 4,648
1From January 2001, figures subject to significant uncertainty. — 2Ex- vices supplied. — 4Engineering and other technical services, research and
cluding the expenditure on freight included in the cif import figure. — development, commercial services, etc. — 5 Wages and salaries. 
3Including the receipts from foreign military agencies for goods and ser-
5 Current transfers of the Federal Republic of Germany 6 Capital transfers
(balances) (balances)
€ million € million
Public  1 Private  1 
International
organisations  2 
 
of which Other Other
European current Workers’ current
Period Total Total Total Communities Total remittances transfers Total  4 Public  1 Private  1 transfers  3 
2006 − 28,708 − 15,998 − 16,404 − 14,850 + 406 − 12,710 − 2,927 − 9,783 − 258 − 1,947 + 1,689
2007 − 32,841 − 17,393 − 19,331 − 17,548 + 1,939 − 15,448 − 2,997 − 12,451 + 104 − 2,034 + 2,138
2008 − 33,386 − 17,003 − 18,741 − 16,645 + 1,738 − 16,384 − 3,079 − 13,304 − 215 − 1,857 + 1,642
2009 − 33,017 − 18,830 − 19,044 − 16,603 + 214 − 14,187 − 2,995 − 11,192 + 74 − 1,704 + 1,778
2010 − 38,086 − 22,960 − 22,607 − 19,542 − 353 − 15,126 − 3,035 − 12,092 − 637 − 2,044 + 1,407
2010          Q1 − 14,098 − 10,921 − 10,086 − 8,986 − 835 − 3,177 − 759 − 2,418 + 271 − 402 + 673
         Q2 − 6,573 − 2,298 − 4,393 − 3,771 + 2,095 − 4,275 − 759 − 3,516 − 443 − 403 − 40
         Q3 − 10,886 − 7,168 − 6,457 − 5,662 − 711 − 3,718 − 759 − 2,960 + 6 − 425 + 431
         Q4 − 6,529 − 2,573 − 1,670 − 1,123 − 903 − 3,956 − 759 − 3,197 − 472 − 815 + 343
2011          Q1 − 14,146 − 10,553 − 9,872 − 8,949 − 682 − 3,593 − 744 − 2,849 + 912 − 405 + 1,317
         Q2 − 5,606 − 1,061 − 4,865 − 4,255 + 3,804 − 4,545 − 744 − 3,801 − 251 − 429 + 178
         Q3 − 10,289 − 6,777 − 6,123 − 5,456 − 653 − 3,513 − 744 − 2,769 + 107 − 484 + 591
2010          Nov − 4,053 − 2,758 − 2,271 − 2,145 − 487 − 1,296 − 253 − 1,043 − 169 − 202 + 33
         Dec + 1,102 + 2,901 + 2,935 + 3,108 − 35 − 1,799 − 253 − 1,546 − 81 − 436 + 355
2011          Jan − 4,065 − 2,943 − 2,904 − 2,415 − 39 − 1,122 − 248 − 874 + 542 − 122 + 664
         Feb − 7,111 − 5,882 − 5,439 − 5,128 − 443 − 1,229 − 248 − 981 + 528 − 108 + 636
         Mar − 2,971 − 1,729 − 1,529 − 1,406 − 200 − 1,242 − 248 − 994 − 158 − 175 + 17
         Apr − 1,720 − 590 − 1,637 − 1,272 + 1,046 − 1,130 − 248 − 882 − 177 − 128 − 49
         May − 1,015 + 1,061 − 1,666 − 1,562 + 2,727 − 2,076 − 248 − 1,828 − 65 − 141 + 76
         June − 2,871 − 1,532 − 1,562 − 1,421 + 30 − 1,339 − 248 − 1,091 − 10 − 160 + 150
         July − 3,672 − 2,479 − 2,107 − 1,932 − 373 − 1,193 − 248 − 945 − 141 − 161 + 20
         Aug − 3,266 − 2,099 − 1,826 − 1,484 − 273 − 1,167 − 248 − 919 + 375 − 150 + 525
         Sep − 3,351 − 2,198 − 2,191 − 2,040 − 8 − 1,153 − 248 − 905 − 127 − 173 + 46
1The classification of “public” and “private” transfers depends on the (excluding capital transfers). — 3Payments to developing countries, pension
sector to which the participating domestic body belongs. — 2Current contri- payments, tax revenue and refunds, etc. — 4Where identifiable; in
butions to the budgets of international organisations and to the EU budget particular, debt forgiveness. 
71*XI External sector

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
E U R O S Y S T E M
Monthly Report
November 2011
XI External sector
 
7 Financial account of the Federal Republic of Germany
 
 
€ million
2010 2011
Item 2008 2009 2010 Q4 Q1 Q2 Q3 July Aug Sep
I Net German investment abroad
(Increase/capital exports: −) − 200,157 − 10,911 − 399,139 − 102,141 − 51,097 − 71,793 − 164,149 − 3,192 − 104,026 − 56,931
1 Direct investment  1 − 52,663 − 56,292 − 80,756 − 11,270 − 26,355 + 889 − 5,551 + 418 − 1,728 − 4,240
Equity capital − 52,227 − 51,427 − 43,540 − 11,525 − 6,874 − 8,469 − 2,121 + 1,980 − 2,533 − 1,568
Reinvested earnings  2 + 17,073 − 22,735 − 23,470 − 5,058 − 9,236 − 6,461 − 8,571 − 2,910 − 2,510 − 3,150
Other capital transactions
of German direct investors − 17,508 + 17,871 − 13,745 + 5,312 − 10,245 + 15,819 + 5,141 + 1,347 + 3,315 + 478
2 Portfolio investment + 25,099 − 69,144 − 171,328 − 115,741 − 20,714 − 16,302 + 12,846 + 7,142 + 2,274 + 3,429
Shares 3 + 39,133 − 2,821 + 173 − 2,285 + 4,793 − 8,418 + 11,407 + 3,420 + 3,472 + 4,515
Mutual fund shares  4 − 7,600 + 1,775 − 21,753 − 3,190 − 2,916 − 2,299 + 3,599 + 1,800 + 2,113 − 314
Bonds and notes  5 − 24,151 − 81,203 − 156,134 − 115,902 − 19,965 + 2,491 + 2,179 + 4,082 + 444 − 2,347
Money market instruments + 17,717 + 13,105 + 6,387 + 5,636 − 2,626 − 8,075 − 4,339 − 2,161 − 3,754 + 1,575
3 Financial derivatives  6 − 30,235 + 12,368 − 17,608 + 267 − 11,474 − 5,292 − 6,770 − 448 − 3,195 − 3,128
4 Other investment − 140,350 + 98,957 − 127,834 + 25,109 + 8,838 − 50,650 − 164,034 − 9,876 − 101,486 − 52,673
MFIs  7,8 − 71,888 + 176,553 + 138,535 + 96,260 + 34,446 − 21,915 − 28,085 − 1,698 − 38,874 + 12,487
Long-term − 142,271 + 25,779 + 77,701 + 26,615 + 5,073 + 2,120 − 9,914 − 7,886 − 1,561 − 468
Short-term + 70,382 + 150,774 + 60,833 + 69,645 + 29,373 − 24,035 − 18,171 + 6,188 − 37,313 + 12,954
Enterprises and households − 26,758 − 18,390 − 57,669 − 2,768 − 27,258 − 8,652 − 35,153 − 12,003 − 18,317 − 4,833
Long-term − 23,572 − 22,263 − 39,834 − 7,214 − 9,599 − 1,200 + 2,703 − 3,104 + 465 + 5,343
Short-term  7 − 3,187 + 3,872 − 17,835 + 4,446 − 17,660 − 7,452 − 37,856 − 8,899 − 18,782 − 10,176
General government + 2,896 + 2,061 − 61,067 − 52,494 − 675 − 6,772 + 12,276 + 10,947 + 2,467 − 1,138
Long-term − 238 − 596 − 52,757 − 41,371 + 1,777 − 377 + 574 + 191 + 76 + 307
Short-term  7 + 3,135 + 2,657 − 8,309 − 11,122 − 2,452 − 6,395 + 11,702 + 10,756 + 2,391 − 1,445
Bundesbank − 44,600 − 61,267 − 147,633 − 15,890 + 2,325 − 13,311 − 113,073 − 7,123 − 46,762 − 59,188
5 Change in reserve assets at
transaction values (Increase: −) − 2,008 + 3,200 − 1,613 − 506 − 1,393 − 438 − 639 − 428 + 109 − 320
II Net foreign investment in Germany
(Increase/capital imports: +) + 39,962 − 134,516 + 258,838 + 52,095 − 3,743 + 42,586 + 146,504 + 8,309 + 88,114 + 50,081
1 Direct investment  1 + 2,879 + 27,085 + 34,833 + 10,267 + 856 + 2,774 + 7,759 + 266 + 614 + 6,879
Equity capital + 22,800 + 8,528 + 7,955 − 212 − 1,513 + 757 + 1,853 − 489 + 810 + 1,532
Reinvested earnings  2 − 21,491 + 1,389 + 5,303 + 343 + 3,911 − 438 + 1,599 + 939 + 1,154 − 494
Other capital transactions
of foreign direct investors + 1,571 + 17,168 + 21,575 + 10,137 − 1,542 + 2,455 + 4,306 − 185 − 1,351 + 5,841
2 Portfolio investment + 26,328 − 13,571 + 46,408 + 8,003 + 47,794 + 71,478 + 18,390 − 4,765 + 33,352 − 10,198
Shares  3 − 34,734 + 2,334 − 4,073 − 2,089 − 4,920 + 11,748 − 4,193 + 224 − 2,657 − 1,760
Mutual fund shares − 8,715 + 5,406 + 2,408 + 1,160 + 2,399 + 864 + 3,922 + 2,651 − 25 + 1,295
Bonds and notes  5 + 29,841 − 71,690 + 48,308 − 7,321 + 32,448 + 37,583 + 4,676 − 17,327 + 24,071 − 2,067
Money market instruments + 39,935 + 50,379 − 235 + 16,253 + 17,866 + 21,283 + 13,985 + 9,688 + 11,963 − 7,666
3 Other investment + 10,755 − 148,031 + 177,597 + 33,824 − 52,393 − 31,666 + 120,356 + 12,808 + 54,149 + 53,400
MFIs  7,8 − 57,268 − 114,873 + 76,198 − 49,228 − 39,262 − 30,470 + 84,283 − 947 + 47,491 + 37,739
Long-term + 12,805 − 23,849 − 5,855 − 640 − 3,597 − 6,879 − 508 + 1,327 − 52 − 1,783
Short-term − 70,073 − 91,024 + 82,052 − 48,588 − 35,666 − 23,592 + 84,791 − 2,274 + 47,543 + 39,522
Enterprises and households + 47,437 − 6,087 + 2,683 − 6,861 − 3,420 + 2,064 + 27,179 + 9,972 + 4,902 + 12,304
Long-term + 26,991 + 1,773 − 5,173 − 2,679 − 5,685 − 6,183 − 3,365 + 699 − 973 − 3,092
Short-term  7 + 20,445 − 7,860 + 7,856 − 4,182 + 2,265 + 8,247 + 30,544 + 9,272 + 5,875 + 15,397
General government + 6,235 − 5,290 + 93,198 + 86,286 − 8,670 − 406 + 5,793 + 2,413 − 1,552 + 4,932
Long-term − 1,161 − 2,013 − 232 + 299 + 243 + 1,755 + 2,094 + 124 − 35 + 2,005
Short-term  7 + 7,396 − 3,276 + 93,430 + 85,987 − 8,913 − 2,161 + 3,699 + 2,288 − 1,518 + 2,928
Bundesbank + 14,351 − 21,782 + 5,518 + 3,627 − 1,042 − 2,854 + 3,102 + 1,371 + 3,308 − 1,577
III Financial account balance  9 
(Net capital exports: −) − 160,196 − 145,427 − 140,301 − 50,046 − 54,840 − 29,207 − 17,645 + 5,117 − 15,912 − 6,850
1From 1996, new definition for direct investment. — 2Estimated. — action values shown here are mostly derived from changes in stocks. Purely
3Including participation rights. — 4From 1991, including retained statistical changes have been eliminated as far as possible. — 8Excluding
earnings. — 5From 1975, excluding accrued interest. — 6Options, whether the Deutsche Bundesbank. — 9Financial account balance including change
evidenced by securities or not, and financial futures contracts. — 7The trans- in reserve assets. 
72*XI External sector

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2011
XI External sector
 
8 External position of the Bundesbank up to end-1998 *
 
 
DM million
Reserve assets and other claims on non-residents Liabilities vis-à-vis non-residents
Reserve assets
Reserve
position
in the
Inter- Liabilities
national arising Net Liabilities
Monetary arising from external
Fund and Claims Loans and from liquidity position
Foreign special on the external Treasury (col 1 other claims
End of year currency drawing ECB  2 on non- trans- discount less
or month Total Total Gold rights (net) Total paper col 8) balances  1 residents  3 actions  4 
1234567891 0 1 1
1996 120,985 119,544 13,688 72,364 11,445 22,048 1,441 15,604 15,604 − 105,381
1997 127,849 126,884 13,688 76,673 13,874 22,649 966 16,931 16,931 − 110,918
1998 135,085 134,005 17,109 100,363 16,533 − 1,079 15,978 15,978 − 119,107
*Valuation of the gold holdings and the claims on non-residents in Monetary Cooperation Fund (EMCF)). — 3Including loans to the World
accordance with section 26 (2) of the Bundesbank Act and the provisions of Bank. — 4Including liquidity paper sold to non-residents by the
the Commercial Code, especially section 253. In the course of the year, Bundesbank; excluding the liquidity Treasury discount paper sold to
valuation at the preceding year’s balance sheet rates. — 1Mainly US dollar non-residents between March 1993 and March 1995, as shown in column 10. 
assets. — 2European Central Bank (up to 1993, claims on the European
 
 
 
9 External position of the Bundesbank in European monetary union o
€ million
Reserve assets and other claims on non-residents
Reserve assets
Reserve
position
Other in the Inter-
national claims on Net
Monetary Other residents external
Fund and claims on Claims in other position
Gold special Foreign non-euro- within the euro-area (col 1 Liabilities
End of year and gold drawing currency area Eurosystem member less vis-à-vis non-
or month Total Total rights reserves (net)  2 states col 9) receivables residents  1,3 residents  3,4 
1234567891 0
1999          Jan  5 95,316 93,940 29,312 8,461 56,167 140 1,225 11 8,169 87,146
1999 141,958 93,039 32,287 8,332 52,420 9,162 39,746 11 6,179 135,779
2000 100,762 93,815 32,676 7,762 53,377 313 6,620 14 6,592 94,170
2001 76,147 93,215 35,005 8,721 49,489 312 − 17,385 5 8,752 67,396
2002 103,948 85,002 36,208 8,272 40,522 312 18,466 167 9,005 94,942
2003 95,394 76,680 36,533 7,609 32,538 312 17,945 456 10,443 84,951
2004 93,110 71,335 35,495 6,548 29,292 312 20,796 667 7,935 85,175
2005 130,268 86,181 47,924 4,549 33,708 350 42,830 906 6,285 123,983
2006 104,389 84,765 53,114 3,011 28,640 350 18,344 931 4,819 99,570
2007 179,492 92,545 62,433 2,418 27,694 350 84,064 2,534 16,005 163,488
2008 230,775 99,185 68,194 3,285 27,705 350 128,668 2,573 30,169 200,607
2009 323,286 125,541 83,939 15,969 25,634 350 189,936 7,460 9,126 314,160
2010 524,695 162,100 115,403 18,740 27,957 50 337,869 24,676 14,620 510,075
2010          July 452,125 145,637 98,074 18,507 29,056 50 283,223 23,216 11,557 440,569
         Aug 473,073 155,245 106,417 18,798 30,030 50 294,597 23,181 10,910 462,163
         Sep 496,333 150,758 105,059 18,188 27,511 50 321,979 23,547 10,995 485,338
         Oct 472,762 150,481 105,507 17,972 27,002 50 298,661 23,569 12,729 460,032
         Nov 497,807 162,835 115,698 18,397 28,740 50 311,444 23,479 11,281 486,526
         Dec 524,695 162,100 115,403 18,740 27,957 50 337,869 24,676 14,620 510,075
2011          Jan 492,995 152,428 106,493 18,667 27,268 50 314,944 25,574 13,719 479,276
         Feb 515,777 156,964 111,426 18,532 27,005 50 333,010 25,754 12,100 503,677
         Mar 516,360 155,718 110,136 19,253 26,329 50 335,543 25,049 13,569 502,791
         Apr 502,690 157,344 112,655 18,818 25,871 50 321,422 23,875 12,011 490,679
         May 522,887 162,854 116,831 19,202 26,821 50 335,955 24,028 11,566 511,322
         June 531,716 159,745 114,087 19,098 26,560 50 348,854 23,067 10,700 521,016
         July 549,738 170,639 123,740 19,901 26,998 50 355,977 23,072 12,077 537,661
         Aug 622,802 184,687 138,174 19,774 26,739 50 402,739 35,327 15,380 607,422
         Sep 686,659 181,430 131,912 20,862 28,655 50 461,927 43,253 13,809 672,850
         Oct 704,976 181,946 133,987 20,434 27,525 50 477,830 45,150 13,147 691,829
oClaims and liabilities vis-à-vis all countries within and outside the euro November 2000, including the TARGET positions which were previously
area. Up to December 2000, the levels at the end of each quarter are shown, shown (in columns 6 and 9) as bilateral assets and liabilities vis-à-vis national
owing to revaluations, at market prices; within each quarter, however, the central banks outside the Eurosystem. — 3See footnote 2. — 4Excluding
levels are computed on the basis of cumulative transaction values. From allocations of special drawing rights (SDR) by the International Monetary
January 2001, all end-of-month levels are valued at market prices. — Fund (IMF) for an amount of SDR 12,059 million. — 5Euro opening balance
1Including loans to the World Bank. — 2Including the balances in the sheet of the Bundesbank as at 1 January 1999. 
Bundesbank’s cross-border payments within the Eurosystem. From
73*XI External sector

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
E U R O S Y S T E M
Monthly Report
November 2011
XI External sector
 
10 Assets and liabilities of enterprises in Germany (other than banks)
vis-à-vis non-residents *
 
€ million
Claims on non-residents Liabilities vis-à-vis non-residents
Claims on foreign non-banks Liabilities  vis-à-vis foreign non-banks
from trade credits from trade credits
Balances Loans
with from Credit Advance from from Credit Advance
End of year foreign financial terms payments foreign financial terms payments
or month Total banks Total Total granted effected Total banks Total Total used received operations operations
All countries
 
2007 509,178 162,654 346,524 196,178 150,346 139,842 10,504 650,966 111,543 539,423 404,904 134,519 82,979 51,540
2008 553,465 173,255 380,210 227,055 153,155 140,520 12,635 707,704 147,242 560,462 424,211 136,251 79,980 56,271
2009 593,591 209,729 383,862 240,727 143,135 130,605 12,530 754,355 159,667 594,688 457,468 137,220 80,759 56,461
2010  r 670,695 242,028 428,667 272,426 156,241 143,032 13,209 806,295 161,201 645,094 498,310 146,784 88,288 58,496
2011          Apr  r 696,810 245,892 450,918 284,647 166,271 150,763 15,508 813,412 155,908 657,504 506,775 150,729 86,431 64,298
         May  r 718,924 258,838 460,086 291,826 168,260 152,515 15,745 820,631 156,396 664,235 513,556 150,679 85,337 65,342
         June 708,789 258,103 450,686 281,190 169,496 153,825 15,671 831,722 157,780 673,942 522,016 151,926 86,973 64,953
         July 722,209 267,205 455,004 287,583 167,421 151,778 15,643 842,832 164,298 678,534 526,366 152,168 86,505 65,663
         Aug 735,308 283,424 451,884 288,335 163,549 147,577 15,972 848,127 170,558 677,569 530,211 147,358 80,839 66,519
         Sep 747,446 281,374 466,072 294,213 171,859 156,096 15,763 874,588 178,393 696,195 540,214 155,981 89,610 66,371
Industrial countries 1
 
2007 452,354 160,666 291,688 180,564 111,124 103,104 8,020 590,245 110,291 479,954 384,024 95,930 69,347 26,583
2008 489,430 171,387 318,043 207,807 110,236 101,002 9,234 643,652 145,045 498,607 402,020 96,587 68,148 28,439
2009 531,796 208,571 323,225 220,778 102,447 93,566 8,881 684,984 157,343 527,641 431,525 96,116 68,912 27,204
2010  r 598,167 240,915 357,252 249,497 107,755 98,428 9,327 724,754 158,632 566,122 464,105 102,017 73,987 28,030
2011          Apr  r 619,487 244,734 374,753 260,065 114,688 102,907 11,781 730,638 153,525 577,113 472,222 104,891 72,242 32,649
         May  r 640,601 257,640 382,961 266,647 116,314 104,150 12,164 738,788 154,018 584,770 479,695 105,075 71,852 33,223
         June 630,725 256,817 373,908 255,877 118,031 105,863 12,168 749,820 155,366 594,454 487,851 106,603 73,664 32,939
         July 642,801 265,862 376,939 261,928 115,011 102,822 12,189 759,886 161,866 598,020 492,028 105,992 72,618 33,374
         Aug 655,871 282,043 373,828 262,698 111,130 98,702 12,428 765,235 168,121 597,114 495,833 101,281 67,216 34,065
         Sep 666,757 280,155 386,602 268,204 118,398 106,016 12,382 790,566 175,900 614,666 505,351 109,315 75,202 34,113
EU member states 1
 
2007 364,105 154,644 209,461 127,080 82,381 75,942 6,439 489,234 105,022 384,212 318,769 65,443 46,262 19,181
2008 398,833 164,762 234,071 151,391 82,680 75,192 7,488 536,351 137,208 399,143 331,498 67,645 46,188 21,457
2009 443,431 200,400 243,031 165,986 77,045 70,051 6,994 579,596 141,633 437,963 367,980 69,983 48,977 21,006
2010  r 494,360 230,746 263,614 184,862 78,752 71,525 7,227 617,255 149,927 467,328 395,566 71,762 50,035 21,727
2011          Apr  r 516,479 234,048 282,431 197,082 85,349 75,711 9,638 624,071 145,839 478,232 402,600 75,632 49,441 26,191
         May  r 536,675 246,676 289,999 203,907 86,092 76,343 9,749 630,753 146,259 484,494 408,972 75,522 48,923 26,599
         June 527,918 246,356 281,562 194,117 87,445 77,673 9,772 640,902 147,106 493,796 416,538 77,258 50,922 26,336
         July 541,068 255,413 285,655 200,458 85,197 75,431 9,766 650,146 154,060 496,086 419,899 76,187 49,502 26,685
         Aug 549,770 267,045 282,725 201,265 81,460 71,490 9,970 653,554 158,524 495,030 422,331 72,699 45,530 27,169
         Sep 556,220 263,070 293,150 206,207 86,943 77,057 9,886 672,648 164,861 507,787 429,045 78,742 51,498 27,244
of which:  Euro-area member states 2
 
2007 251,718 118,112 133,606 79,745 53,861 49,537 4,324 367,318 56,632 310,686 269,095 41,591 28,964 12,627
2008 281,518 130,226 151,292 96,968 54,324 49,408 4,916 415,221 81,703 333,518 290,093 43,425 29,768 13,657
2009 321,991 159,740 162,251 114,378 47,873 43,179 4,694 466,064 91,792 374,272 332,280 41,992 28,397 13,595
2010  r 366,774 184,299 182,475 130,430 52,045 47,239 4,806 496,543 97,287 399,256 351,352 47,904 33,444 14,460
2011          Apr  r 383,318 185,118 198,200 140,424 57,776 51,820 5,956 500,873 95,658 405,215 355,135 50,080 33,472 16,608
         May  r 401,448 195,688 205,760 147,119 58,641 52,611 6,030 508,998 96,987 412,011 361,143 50,868 33,911 16,957
         June 394,643 192,988 201,655 141,579 60,076 54,085 5,991 518,130 97,430 420,700 368,894 51,806 35,021 16,785
         July 409,922 204,629 205,293 147,241 58,052 52,067 5,985 531,725 105,614 426,111 374,540 51,571 34,587 16,984
         Aug 413,495 210,079 203,416 148,459 54,957 48,930 6,027 530,471 105,236 425,235 375,913 49,322 31,959 17,363
         Sep 421,901 210,456 211,445 152,804 58,641 52,617 6,024 545,823 110,643 435,180 382,194 52,986 35,514 17,472
Emerging economies and developing countries 3
 
2007 56,824 1,988 54,836 15,614 39,222 36,738 2,484 60,721 1,252 59,469 20,880 38,589 13,632 24,957
2008 64,035 1,868 62,167 19,248 42,919 39,518 3,401 64,052 2,197 61,855 22,191 39,664 11,832 27,832
2009 61,795 1,158 60,637 19,949 40,688 37,039 3,649 69,371 2,324 67,047 25,943 41,104 11,847 29,257
2010 72,528 1,113 71,415 22,929 48,486 44,604 3,882 81,541 2,569 78,972 34,205 44,767 14,301 30,466
2011          Apr 77,323 1,158 76,165 24,582 51,583 47,856 3,727 82,774 2,383 80,391 34,553 45,838 14,189 31,649
         May 78,323 1,198 77,125 25,179 51,946 48,365 3,581 81,843 2,378 79,465 33,861 45,604 13,485 32,119
         June 78,064 1,286 76,778 25,313 51,465 47,962 3,503 81,902 2,414 79,488 34,165 45,323 13,309 32,014
         July 79,408 1,343 78,065 25,655 52,410 48,956 3,454 82,946 2,432 80,514 34,338 46,176 13,887 32,289
         Aug 79,437 1,381 78,056 25,637 52,419 48,875 3,544 82,892 2,437 80,455 34,378 46,077 13,623 32,454
         Sep 80,689 1,219 79,470 26,009 53,461 50,080 3,381 84,022 2,493 81,529 34,863 46,666 14,408 32,258
* Up to and including November 2009 the assets and liabilities vis-à-vis Romania. — 2From January 2007, including Slovenia; from January 2008,
non-residents of households in Germany. The assets and liabilities vis-à-vis including Cyprus and Malta; from January 2009, including Slovakia; from
non-residents of banks (MFIs) in Germany are shown in Table 4 of Section IV, January 2011 including Estonia. — 3All countries that are not regarded as
“Banks”. Statistical increases and decreases have not been eliminated; to industrial countries. Up to December 2010 including Niederländische
this extent, the changes in totals are not comparable with the figures Antillen; from January 2011 including Bonaire, St.Eustatius, Saba and
shown in Table XI.7. — 1From January 2007, including Bulgaria and Curacao and St.Martin (Dutch part). 
74*XI External sector

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2011
XI External sector
 
11 ECB euro reference exchange rates of selected currencies *
 
 
EUR 1 = currency units ...
Yearly Australia Canada China Denmark Japan Norway Sweden Switzerland United States United Kingdom
or monthly       
average AUD CAD CNY  1 DKK JPY NOK SEK CHF GBP USD
1999 1.6523 1.5840 . 7.4355 121.32 8.3104 8.8075 1.6003 0.65874 1.0658
2000 1.5889 1.3706 2 7.6168 7.4538 99.47 8.1129 8.4452 1.5579 0.60948 0.9236
2001 1.7319 1.3864 7.4131 7.4521 108.68 8.0484 9.2551 1.5105 0.62187 0.8956
2002 1.7376 1.4838 7.8265 7.4305 118.06 7.5086 9.1611 1.4670 0.62883 0.9456
2003 1.7379 1.5817 9.3626 7.4307 130.97 8.0033 9.1242 1.5212 0.69199 1.1312
2004 1.6905 1.6167 10.2967 7.4399 134.44 8.3697 9.1243 1.5438 0.67866 1.2439
2005 1.6320 1.5087 10.1955 7.4518 136.85 8.0092 9.2822 1.5483 0.68380 1.2441
2006 1.6668 1.4237 10.0096 7.4591 146.02 8.0472 9.2544 1.5729 0.68173 1.2556
2007 1.6348 1.4678 10.4178 7.4506 161.25 8.0165 9.2501 1.6427 0.68434 1.3705
2008 1.7416 1.5594 10.2236 7.4560 152.45 8.2237 9.6152 1.5874 0.79628 1.4708
2009 1.7727 1.5850 9.5277 7.4462 130.34 8.7278 10.6191 1.5100 0.89094 1.3948
2010 1.4423 1.3651 8.9712 7.4473 116.24 8.0043 9.5373 1.3803 0.85784 1.3257
2010          May 1.4436 1.3060 8.5794 7.4413 115.83 7.8907 9.6641 1.4181 0.85714 1.2565
         June 1.4315 1.2674 8.3245 7.4409 110.99 7.9062 9.5723 1.3767 0.82771 1.2209
         July 1.4586 1.3322 8.6538 7.4522 111.73 8.0201 9.4954 1.3460 0.83566 1.2770
         Aug 1.4337 1.3411 8.7520 7.4495 110.04 7.9325 9.4216 1.3413 0.82363 1.2894
         Sep 1.3943 1.3515 8.8104 7.4476 110.26 7.9156 9.2241 1.3089 0.83987 1.3067
         Oct 1.4164 1.4152 9.2665 7.4567 113.67 8.1110 9.2794 1.3452 0.87638 1.3898
         Nov 1.3813 1.3831 9.0895 7.4547 112.69 8.1463 9.3166 1.3442 0.85510 1.3661
         Dec 1.3304 1.3327 8.7873 7.4528 110.11 7.9020 9.0559 1.2811 0.84813 1.3220
2011          Jan 1.3417 1.3277 8.8154 7.4518 110.38 7.8199 8.9122 1.2779 0.84712 1.3360
         Feb 1.3543 1.3484 8.9842 7.4555 112.77 7.8206 8.7882 1.2974 0.84635 1.3649
         Mar 1.3854 1.3672 9.1902 7.4574 114.40 7.8295 8.8864 1.2867 0.86653 1.3999
         Apr 1.3662 1.3834 9.4274 7.4574 120.42 7.8065 8.9702 1.2977 0.88291 1.4442
         May 1.3437 1.3885 9.3198 7.4566 116.47 7.8384 8.9571 1.2537 0.87788 1.4349
         June 1.3567 1.4063 9.3161 7.4579 115.75 7.8302 9.1125 1.2092 0.88745 1.4388
         July 1.3249 1.3638 9.2121 7.4560 113.26 7.7829 9.1340 1.1766 0.88476 1.4264
         Aug 1.3651 1.4071 9.1857 7.4498 110.43 7.7882 9.1655 1.1203 0.87668 1.4343
         Sep 1.3458 1.3794 8.7994 7.4462 105.75 7.7243 9.1343 1.2005 0.87172 1.3770
         Oct 1.3525 1.3981 8.7308 7.4442 105.06 7.7474 9.1138 1.2295 0.87036 1.3706
*Averages: Bundesbank calculations based on the daily euro reference to March 2005, ECB indicative rates. — 2Average from 13 January to
exchange rates published by the ECB; for additional euro reference 29 December 2000. 
exchange rates, see Statistical Supplement 5 Exchange rate statistics. — 1Up
12 Euro member countries and irrevocable euro conversion rates in the third stage
of European Economic and Monetary Union
From Country Currency ISO currency code EUR 1 = currency units ...
1999  January 1 Austria Austrian schilling ATS 13.7603
Belgium Belgian franc BEF 40.3399
Finland Finnish markka FIM 5.94573
France French franc FRF 6.55957
Germany Deutsche Mark DEM 1.95583
Ireland Irish pound IEP 0.787564
Italy Italian lira ITL 1,936.27
Luxembourg Luxembourg franc LUF 40.3399
Netherlands Dutch guilder NLG 2.20371
Portugal Portuguese escudo PTE 200.482
Spain Spanish peseta ESP 166.386
2001  January 1 Greece Greek drachma GRD 340.750
2007  January 1 Slovenia Slovenian tolar SIT 239.640
2008  January 1 Cyprus Cyprus pound CYP 0.585274
Malta Maltese lira MTL 0.429300
2009  January 1 Slovakia Slovak koruna SKK 30.1260
2011  January 1 Estonia Estonian kroon EEK 15.6466
75*XI External sector

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
E U R O S Y S T E M
Monthly Report
November 2011
XI  External  sector
 
13  Effective exchange rates of the Euro and indicators of the German economy’s price competitiveness *
 
 
1999 Q1 = 100
Effective exchange rate of the Euro Indicators of the German economy’s price competitiveness
EER-20  1 EER-40  2 Based on the deflators of total sales  3 Based on consumer price indices
24 selected industrial countries  4 In real terms
In real terms based on
In real based on unit In real
24 terms the deflators labour terms Non-
based on of gross costs of based on Euro- euro- selected
36 36 56 consumer domestic national consumer area area industrial
Period Nominal price indices product  3 economy  3 Nominal price indices Total countries countries countries  5 6 countries  4 countries  5 countries  7 
1999 96.2 96.0 95.9 96.4 96.5 95.8 97.7 99.5 95.6 97.6 98.2 98.0 97.7
2000 86.9 86.5 86.0 85.7 87.9 85.8 91.5 97.1 85.0 91.0 92.8 91.9 90.9
2001 87.6 87.2 86.6 84.8 90.4 87.1 91.0 95.8 85.4 90.1 92.9 91.3 90.8
2002 90.0 90.3 89.5 87.9 94.8 90.7 91.6 94.9 87.9 90.5 93.5 91.9 91.7
2003 100.6 101.5 100.4 98.3 106.8 101.6 95.0 93.9 96.9 94.2 97.0 96.5 96.7
2004 104.4 105.3 103.2 102.2 111.4 105.2 95.1 92.6 99.1 94.2 98.4 98.0 98.2
2005 102.9 103.8 101.3 99.8 109.4 102.7 93.9 91.2 98.1 92.2 98.4 96.9 96.5
2006 102.8 103.8 100.5 98.7 109.4 102.0 92.5 89.6 97.1 90.5 98.5 96.4 95.8
2007 106.4 106.8 102.7 100.5 113.0 104.3 93.5 88.8 101.0 90.9 100.8 97.9 97.1
2008 110.4 109.9 105.1 104.1 117.9 107.1 93.8 87.3 104.4 90.8 102.4 98.4 97.6
2009 111.7 110.6 106.1 106.0 120.6 108.0 93.3 87.3 103.1 91.3 102.0 98.5 97.9
2010 104.6 103.0 98.4 98.0 112.3 99.3 90.6 86.7 96.8 p 88.2 98.9 94.5 92.9
2008          Mar 112.5 112.2 119.8 109.4 103.4 99.9 99.2
         Apr 113.6 113.1 121.2 110.3 103.6 99.8 99.2
         May 113.1 112.7 107.7 106.9 120.4 109.6 94.9 87.3 107.5 91.8 103.6 99.7 98.9
         June 112.8 112.4 120.3 109.4 103.5 99.3 98.6
         July 113.0 112.4 120.5 109.4 103.8 99.3 98.6
         Aug 110.8 110.0 105.4 104.5 117.7 106.6 94.1 87.0 105.8 90.6 102.7 98.1 97.1
         Sep 109.1 108.2 116.3 105.2 101.9 97.4 96.5
         Oct 105.6 105.0 113.7 102.8 99.9 95.8 95.1
         Nov 104.8 104.3 101.6 100.8 112.9 102.0 91.8 87.1 99.4 89.4 99.8 95.6 94.9
         Dec 110.0 109.5 118.7 107.2 101.8 98.0 97.6
2009          Jan 109.8 109.3 118.7 107.1 101.5 97.9 97.5
         Feb 108.7 108.1 104.6 104.5 117.8 106.2 92.2 87.0 100.7 90.6 100.7 97.7 97.3
         Mar 111.2 110.3 120.5 108.3 101.7 98.4 98.1
         Apr 110.3 109.5 119.1 107.1 101.6 98.0 97.4
         May 110.9 109.9 105.8 105.5 119.6 107.3 93.2 87.4 102.7 91.3 101.7 98.1 97.5
         June 112.0 111.0 120.8 108.4 102.1 98.8 98.2
         July 111.6 110.4 120.6 107.8 102.0 98.4 97.8
         Aug 111.6 110.5 106.4 105.9 120.7 108.0 93.7 87.5 103.8 91.5 102.1 98.5 97.9
         Sep 112.9 111.4 122.0 108.8 102.4 98.8 98.2
         Oct 114.2 112.7 123.0 109.6 102.9 99.4 98.7
         Nov 114.0 112.4 107.5 107.9 122.9 109.4 94.2 87.5 105.4 91.9 102.7 99.2 98.5
         Dec 113.0 111.2 121.7 108.1 102.5 98.9 98.0
2010          Jan 110.8 109.0 119.2 105.6 101.5 97.6 96.5
         Feb 108.0 106.1 102.3 102.3 116.3 102.8 92.4 87.1 100.9 89.9 100.4 96.2 95.0
         Mar 107.4 105.8 115.2 102.2 100.4 95.9 94.5
         Apr 106.1 104.5 113.5 100.6 99.7 95.0 93.4
         May 102.8 101.4 97.1 96.8 109.9 97.5 90.2 86.7 95.7 87.7 98.3 93.6 91.8
         June 100.6 99.3 107.7 95.6 97.2 92.7 90.8
         July 102.5 101.0 109.9 97.5 97.8 93.5 91.8
         Aug 102.1 100.5 96.5 95.4 109.5 97.0 89.7 86.6 94.5 p 87.3 97.6 93.2 91.5
         Sep 102.5 100.8 110.0 97.2 97.8 93.3 91.6
         Oct 106.0 104.1 113.8 100.3 99.3 94.8 93.3
         Nov 104.7 102.7 97.7 97.7 112.5 99.0 90.3 86.5 96.4 p 87.8 98.9 94.4 92.7
         Dec 102.6 100.6 110.1 96.8 98.0 93.4 91.6
2011          Jan 102.4 100.3 110.1 96.7 97.9 93.1 p 91.4
         Feb 103.4 101.1 96.9 96.4 111.4 97.6 89.8 86.1 95.7 p 87.3 98.3 93.5 p 92.0
         Mar 105.2 p 103.1 113.2 p 99.4 98.8 94.2 p 92.7
         Apr 107.0 p 104.9 115.0 p 101.1 99.8 95.1 p 93.5
         May 106.0 p 103.8 99.5 99.2 114.1 p 100.1 p 91.1 p 86.3 98.7 p 88.3 99.2 94.4 p 92.9
         June 106.1 p 104.0 114.4 p 100.3 99.2 94.4 p 93.0
         July 105.2 p 102.6 113.4 p 99.1 98.9 p 94.0 p 92.5
         Aug 104.9 p 102.3 ... ... 113.8 p 99.4 ... ... ... ... 98.4 p 93.8 p 92.6
         Sep 103.8 p 101.4 112.8 p 98.7 97.9 p 93.4 p 92.2
         Oct 104.0 p 101.7 113.3 p 99.2 p 97.8 p 93.4 p 92.4
*The effective exchange rate corresponds to the weighted external value of Includes countries belonging to the EER-20 group (see footnote 1) and
the currency concerned. The method of calculating the indicators of the additional Algeria, Argentina, Brazil, Chile, Croatia, Iceland, India,
German economy’s price competitiveness is consistent with the procedure Indonesia, Israel, Malaysia, Mexico, Morocco, New Zealand, Philippines,
used by the ECB to compute the effective exchange rates of the euro (see Russian Federation, South Africa, Taiwan, Thailand, Turkey and
Monthly Report, November 2001, pp  50-53, May 2007, pp  31-35, May 2008, Venezuela. — 3Annual and quarterly averages. — 4Euro-area countries
p  40 and November 2010, pp  44-45). For details of the methodology see (from 2001 including Greece, from 2007 including Slovenia, from 2008
the ECB’s Occasional Paper No  2 (www.ecb.int). A decline in the figures including Cyprus and Malta, from 2009 including Slovakia, from 2011
implies an increase in competitiveness. — 1ECB calculations are based on including Estonia) as well as Canada, Denmark, Japan, Norway, Sweden,
the weighted averages of the changes in the bilateral exchange rates of the Switzerland, United Kingdom and United States. — 5Euro-area countries
euro against the currencies of the following countries: Australia, Bulgaria, Ca- and countries belonging to the EER-20 group. — 6Owing to missing data
nada, China, Czech Republic, Denmark, Hong Kong, Hungary, Japan, Latvia, for the deflator of total sales, China is not included in this calculation. —
Lithuania, Norway, Poland, Romania, Singapore, South Korea, Sweden, 7Euro-area countries and countries belonging to the EER-40 group (see
Switzerland, United Kingdom and United States. Where price and wage footnote 2). 
indices were not available, estimates were used. — 2ECB calculations.
76*XI  External sector

Overview of  
publications  
by the Deutsche  
BundesbankThis overview provides information 
about selected recent economic and 
statistical publications by the Deutsche 
Bundesbank. Unless otherwise indi -
cated, these publications are available 
in both English and German, in printed 
form and on the Bundesbank’s web -
site.
The publications are available free of 
charge from the Communication Div -
ision. For a small fee to cover costs, a 
file which is updated monthly and 
 contains approximately 40,000 time 
series published by the Bundesbank 
can be obtained on CD-ROM from the 
Division Statistical data processing, 
mathematical methods or downloaded 
from the Bundesbank-ExtraNet site. 
Orders should be sent, in writing, to 
one of the addresses listed on the re -
verse of the title page. Selected time 
series can also be downloaded from 
the internet.
Annual Report
Financial Stability Review
Monthly Report
For information on the articles published between 
2000 and 2010 see the index attached to the Janu -
ary 2011 Monthly Report.
77*DEUTSCHE  
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report  
November 2011

Monthly Report articles
December 2010
– Outlook for the German economy – macroeco -
nomic projections for 2011 and 2012
– German enterprises’ profitability and financing 
in 2009
– Development, information content and regula -
tion of the market for credit default swaps
January 2011
– The banknote cycle and banknote recycling in 
Germany
– Foreign demand for euro banknotes issued in 
Germany
– Investor behaviour in theory and practice
– Requirements regarding the cyclical adjust -
ment procedure under the new debt rule
February 2011
– The curr ent economic situation in Germany
March 2011
– German balance of payments in 2 010
– Approaches to the measurement and macro -
prudential treatment of systemic risk
– The implications of the financial crisis  
for monetary policy
April 2011
– Effective exchange rates from financial market 
data
– The US labour market in the curr ent cycle
– European Council decisions on the prevention 
and resolution of future sovereign debt crises
May 2011
– The curr ent economic situation in GermanyJune 2011
– Outlook for the German economy – macroeco -
nomic projections for 2011 and 2012
– Sovereign yield spreads in the euro area
– Extended MFI inter est rate statistics:  
methodology and first results
– Fundamental features of the German Bank Re -
struct uring Act
July 2011
–  Developments in the exports of the four largest 
euro-area member states since the launch of 
monetary union
– Leasing financing in Germany
– Reliability and revision profile of selected Ger -
man economic indicators
– Deutsche Bundesbank Spring Conference  
2011 – fiscal and monetary policy challenges in 
the short and long run
August 2011
– The curr ent economic situation in Germany
September 2011
– The performance of German credit institutions 
in 2010
– German banks’ lending to the domestic private 
sector since summer 2009
– International cooperation in banking regula -
tion: past and present
October 2011
– The debt brake in Germany – key aspects and 
implementation
– Germany’ s external position against the back -
ground of increasing economic policy surveil -
lance
November 2011
– The curr ent economic situation in Germany
78*DEUTSCHE  
BUNDESBANK
E U R O S Y S T E M
Monthly Report  
November 2011

Statistical Supplements to the  
Monthly Report
 1 Banking statistics 1, 2
 2 Capital market statistics 1, 2
 3 Balance of payments statistics 1, 2
 4 Seasonally adjusted business statistics 1, 2
 5 Exchange rate statistics 2
Special Publications
Makro-ökonometrisches Mehr-Länder-Modell, 
 November 1996 3
Europäische Organisationen und Gremien im Be -
reich von Währung und Wirtschaft, May 1997 3
Die Zahlungsbilanz der ehemaligen DDR 1975 bis 
1989, August 1999 3
The market for German Federal securities,  
May 2000
Macro-Econometric Multi-Country Model: MEMMOD, 
June 2000
Bundesbank Act, September 2002
Weltweite Organisationen und Gremien im Bereich 
von Währung und Wirtschaft, March 2003 3
Die Europäische Union: Grundlagen und Politik -
bereiche außerhalb der Wirtschafts-und Wäh -
rungsunion, April 2005 3
Die Deutsche Bundesbank – Aufgabenfelder, 
rechtlicher Rahmen, Geschichte, April 2006 3
European economic and monetary union,  
April 2008
Special Statistical Publications*
 1 Banking statistics guidelines and customer clas -
sification, July 20112 2 Bankenstatistik Kundensystematik Firmenver -
zeichnisse, September 2011 2, 3
 3 Aufbau der bankstatistischen T abellen,  
June 2011 2, 3
 4 Financial accounts for Germany 2005 to 2010, 
September 2011 2
 5 Extrapolated results from financial statements 
of German enterprises 1994 to 2003, March 
2006 2
 6 Verhältniszahlen aus Jahresabschlüssen deut -
scher Unternehmen von 2007 bis 2008, March 
2011 2, 3
 7 Notes on the coding list for the balance of pay -
ments statistics, March 2009 2
 8 The balance of payments statistics of the 
 Federal Republic of Germany, 2nd edition,  
February 1991 o
 9 Securities deposits,  
August 2005
 10 Foreign direct investment stock statistics,  
April 2011 1, 2
 11 Balance of payments by region, August 2011  2, 3
 12 Technologische Dienstleistungen in der Zah -
lungsbilanz, June 2011 3
* Unless stated otherwise, these publications are avail -
able on the Bundesbank’s website in German and Eng -
lish.
o Not available on the website.
1 Only the headings and explanatory notes to the data 
contained in the German originals are available in English.
2 Available on the website only.
3 Available in German only.
79*DEUTSCHE  
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report  
November 2011

Discussion Papers*
Series 1  
Economic Studies
17/2011  
Recent developments in quantitative models of 
sovereign default
18/2011  
Exchange rate dynamics, expectations, and monet -
ary policy
19/2011  
An information economics perspective on main 
bank relationships and firm R&D
20/2011  
Foreign demand for euro banknotes issued in 
 Germany: estimation using direct approaches
21/2011  
Foreign demand for euro banknotes issued in 
 Germany: estimation using indirect approaches
22/2011  
Using cash to monitor liquidity –  implications for 
payments, currency demand and withdrawal be -
havior
23/2011  
Home-field advantage or a matter of ambiguity 
aversion? Local bias among German individual in -
vestors
24/2011  
Monetary transmission right from the start: on the 
information content of the eurosystem’s main refi -
nancing operations
25/2011  
Output sensitivity of inflation in the euro area: in -
direct evidence from disaggregated consumer 
prices
 26/2011  
Detecting multiple breaks in long memory: the 
case of U.S. inflationSeries 2  
Banking and Financial Studies
09/2011  
The importance of qualitative risk assessment in 
banking supervision before and during the crisis
10/2011  
Bank bailouts, interventions, and moral hazard
11/2011  
Improvements in rating models for the German 
corporate sector
12/2011  
 The effect of the interbank network structure on 
contagion and common shocks
13/2011  
Banks’ management of the net interest margin: 
evidence from Germany
14/2011  
A hierarchical Archimedean copula for portfolio 
credit risk modelling
Banking legislation
 1 Bundesbank Act and Statute of the European 
System of Central Banks and of the European 
Central Bank, June 1998
 2 Gesetz über das Kr editwesen, February 2009 3
 2a Solvabilitäts- und Liquiditätsverordnung, Feb -
ruary 2008 3
* Discussion Papers which appeared from 2000 onwards 
are available on the website.   
 
For footnotes, see p 79*.
80*DEUTSCHE  
BUNDESBANK
E U R O S Y S T E M
Monthly Report  
November 2011

