MONTHLY REPORT
MAY JUNE JULY AUGUST SEPTEMBER
2011
Vol 63
No 5

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
EUROSYSTEM
Monthly Report
May 2011
Deutsche Bundesbank
Wilhelm-Epstein-Strasse 14
60431 Frankfurt am Main
Germany
Postal address
Postfach 10 06 02
60006 Frankfurt am Main
Germany
Tel +49 69 9566-0
Fax +49 69 9566 3077
Telex 41227 within Germany
414431 from abroad
http://www.bundesbank.de
Reproduction permitted only if source is stated.
ISSN 0418-8292 (print edition)
ISSN 1862-1325 (online edition)
The German original of this Monthly Report
went to press at 4.30 pm on 18 May 2011.Annual and weekly publishing schedules for
selected statistics of the Deutsche Bundes-
bank can be downloaded from our website.
The statistical data are also published on the
website.
The Monthly Report is published by the
Deutsche Bundesbank, Frankfurt am Main,
by virtue of section 18 of the Bundesbank
Act. It is available to interested parties free of
charge.
This is a translation of the original German-
language version, which is the sole authorita-
tive text.

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
May 2011
ContentsThe current economic situation
in Germany 5
Overview 6
Global and European setting 13
Fiscal developments in the euro area 22
Monetary policy and banking business 25
Money market management and
liquidity needs 26
Financial markets 36
Economic conditions in Germany 45
The possible growth effects of
increased immigration from the
new EU member states 58
Public finances 60
German states receiving consolidation
aid – initial deficit reduction require-
ments not very ambitious 70
Statistical Section 1*
Key economic data for the euro area 5*
Overall monetary survey in the euro area 8*
Consolidated financial statement
of the Eurosystem 16*
Banks 20*
Minimum reserves 42*
Interest rates 43*
Capital market 48*
Financial accounts 52*
Public finances in Germany 54*
Economic conditions in Germany 61*
External sector 68*

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
EUROSYSTEM
Monthly Report
May 2011
Overview of publications by the
Deutsche Bundesbank 77*
Abbreviations and symbols
eEstimated
pProvisional
pePartly estimated
rRevised
...Data available at a later date
.Data unknown, not to be published or
not meaningful
0Less than 0.5 but more than nil
–Nil
Discrepancies in the totals are due to rounding.

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
May 2011
5The current economic
situation in Germany

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
EUROSYSTEM
Monthly Report
May 2011
6OverviewGerman economy gets off to exceptionally
g o o ds t a r tt ot h ey e a r
The world economy got off to a dynamic
start to 2011, already having recovered from
the dip of the second and third quarters of
last year by the end of 2010. The emerging
market economies remained the primary
drivers of growth. At the same time, the cyc-
lical upturn in the euro area regained a lot of
momentum after weakening in the final
quarter of 2010, mainly owing to the severe
winter weather.
The rapid pace of global growth at the begin-
ning of 2011 is all the more remarkable given
that, even before the natural disaster in
Japan, several factors per se were weighing
on worldwide growth. These notably include
the political unrest in North Africa and the
Middle East, which significantly aggravated
already high demand-driven inflation in crude
oil prices.
Global purchasing managers indices suggest,
however, that the world economy has shifted
down a gear of late. Besides recent events in
Japan, this can probably be attributed mainly
to the perceptible loss of consumer purchas-
ing power as a result of considerably higher
energy and food prices. On the other hand,
inflation on the commodities markets has
eased appreciably. Against this backdrop, the
outlook for the global economy remains fa-
vourable.
In the first few months of 2011, develop-
ments on the international financial markets
were largely driven by the positive economicGlobal
economy
Financial
markets

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
May 2011
7setting and growing concerns about inflation.
Both factors pushed up capital market ratesin some instances. The political unrest in sev-eral North African countries and the devastat-ing earthquake in Japan unnerved the mar-kets only temporarily.
By contrast, the worsening sovereign debt
crisis drove bond yields in some euro-areaperipheral countries up to new record highs.At the beginning of April 2011, Portugal ap-plied for international financial assistance,which the euro-area finance ministers ap-proved on May 16. Moreover, investors har-boured renewed doubts about Greek’s con-solidation path. The international equitymarkets were largely unaffected by thesenegative factors; with the exception of theJapanese market, they have all rallied in theyear to date, mainly because corporate re-sults, buoyed by cyclical factors, have ex-ceeded expectations. On the foreign exchangemarkets, diverging interest rate expectations,in particular, led to shifting parities. While theUS dollar weakened, the euro strengthenedon balance.
The ongoing dynamism of the global econ-
omy and the still extremely expansionarymonetary policy setting helped to maintainthe positive economic momentum in the euroarea over the winter months. The recovery,which has to date largely been export-driven,has boosted business confidence, suggestingthat domestic demand, too, will take offshortly and increasingly underpin economicactivity. Bearing this in mind along with thecontinued rise in commodity prices, the Gov-erning Council of the ECB concluded in thecourse of the first quarter that the upside
risks to price stability in the euro areawarranted an adjustment of the very accom-modative monetary policy stance. At the be-ginning of April, therefore, the GoverningCouncil decided to raise key interest rates by25 bp.
During the first quarter of 2011, banks re-
duced their excess liquidity appreciably. Onthe one hand, this drove average overnightrates higher still, bringing them closer to themain refinancing rate. On the other hand, thepolicy of full allotment pursued in refinancingoperations meant that demand-driven fluctu-ations in excess liquidity were reflected in theovernight rate. From a monetary policyperspective, this heightened volatility was notproblematic, however, as market playersunderstood the demand-driven reasons forthe greater volatility in ultra-short moneymarket rates.
M3 growth accelerated perceptibly in the first
quarter of 2011. The upward trend in under-lying monetary growth – the measure that isultimately relevant for inflation – that hasbeen evident over several quarters thereforecontinued. Among the counterparts of M3,loans to the private sector in the euro areaagain rose sharply in the first quarter of2011. As before, this was largely driven bystrong growth in lending for house purchase.In addition, loans to non-financial corpor-ations also expanded significantly, after re-cording clear falls in the previous quarter.
The German economy expanded very sharply
after the start of 2011. According to a flash
Monetary
policy
Germany

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
EUROSYSTEM
Monthly Report
May 2011
8estimate released by the Federal Statistical
Office, seasonally and calendar-adjusted real
gross domestic product (GDP) rose by 1.5%
in the first three months of 2011 compared
with the previous quarter, in which aggregate
output had increased by a mere 0.4% amid
cold and snowy winter weather in December.
Output growth was clearly lifted during the
reporting period by backloading and catch-
ing-up effects. The quarterly GDP growth
rate therefore considerably overstates the
underlying economic momentum. Nonethe-
less, the economic advance is unmistakable.
The massive drop in economic activity caused
by the financial and economic crisis has been
completely recouped over the past two years.
The economic upswing in Germany, which
was triggered by the global economic recov-
ery, has now spread from those sectors that
were immediate beneficiaries to the overall
economy.
In many industries, investment and hiring
plans are geared to expansion as production
capacity utilisation is at normal levels. The
decidedly good state of the labour market,
combined with the prospect of perceptible
earnings growth, is making households more
willing to undertake major purchases. This is
benefiting private consumption and residen-
tial housing construction, especially as finan-
cing conditions are favourable.
Following the turn of the year 2010-11, ex-
ports initially maintained their somewhat sub-
dued trend of the preceding months before
surging in March. The basis for the upward
trend remains in place as economic momen-
tum in the emerging markets is still strong,despite having eased somewhat in the mean-
time, and current economic dynamics in
other important traditional sales markets
remain buoyant.
Investment is likely to have been the main
driver of growth in Germany in the first three
months of 2011. One factor was construc-
tion, which given milder weather conditions
in the first quarter of 2011 rapidly regained
the considerable weather-related output
losses sustained in December 2010 and also
benefited from sharply higher demand. Pur-
chases of machinery and equipment are also
likely to have risen further.
Expanding investment is likewise reflected in
lending data. During the winter months,
loans to non-financial corporations rose at a
rate last seen in the fourth quarter of 2008,
with borrowing up across all maturity seg-
ments. Loans to households also developed
positively. Overall, loans to households have
thus recorded gains for the eighth quarter in
succession.
The moderate increase in private consump-
tion appears to have continued after the turn
of the year. Although rising consumer infla-
tion depressed purchasing power, house-
holds’ income situation improved perceptibly
on the back of higher employment, a further
normalisation in hours worked and large
bonus payments.
The labour market revival continued in the
first few months of 2011. As in 2010, an
above-average number of jobs subject to
social security contributions were created.

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
May 2011
9Virtually all industries reported that they had
filled additional such jobs. In manufacturing,in particular, headcount has acceleratedsharply of late. Employment growth in indus-try is likely to have gained momentumbecause working hours, which were sharplyreduced during the crisis, have now almostreturned to pre-crisis levels. At the sametime, the decline in unemployment acceler-ated in the first quarter of 2011. Leadinglabour market indicators suggest that em-ployment growth will continue. The numberof job vacancies reported to the Federal Em-ployment Agency continues to rise sharply.As the Federal Employment Agency sees onlypart of the jobs on offer throughout theeconomy, the actual number of vacancies islikely to be significantly higher.
In the first few months of 2011, the price
climate was still dominated by inflationary ef-fects stemming mainly from the internationalcommodity markets. This is particularly evi-dent in the case of import prices. Sharplyhigher crude oil prices fed through directly toconsumer prices for petrol, diesel and heatingoil. Other than that, price developments weresubdued overall. Nonetheless, those compon-ents more influenced by domestic supply anddemand conditions are clearly showing aslow albeit discontinuous rise in price infla-tion.
As it gains a broader base, the upturn could
support economic activity in Germany forsome time to come. This is also indicated bythe favourable external and internal condi-tions. Growth opportunities resulting fromincreasing immigration into Germany couldalso play a role. Nonetheless, the pace of
growth is likely to ease somewhat in the fore-seeable future following the explosive start to2011.
The stabilising effects emanating from do-
mestic demand can only take full effect in atension-free environment. Potential risks inthis respect accompany the current scenarioin that the economy is traversing the corridorof normal utilisation at what appears to be avirtually undiminished pace of expansioncompared to the previous recovery phase,and that both enterprises’ business expect-ations and consumers’ economic and incomeoutlook have reached highs exceptionallyearly on in this cycle. In addition, the priceclimate has deteriorated significantly.
Both the crisis-ridden year 2009 and the
high-growth year 2010 witnessed an expan-sionary fiscal policy, large general govern-ment deficits and the debt ratio soaring tonew historical record levels. A marked im-provement is now on the cards, however, aslong as budgetary consolidation is imple-mented as planned and new burdens arisingfrom the financial and sovereign debt crisisremain within narrow bounds. The deficitratio could consequently fall below 2% in2011, after it rose to 3.3% in 2010. This not-ably mirrors a clear structural improvement,although the ongoing cyclical recovery is alsomaking an important contribution. All otherthings being equal, a lower deficit coupledwith relatively high nominal GDP growthshould bring the debt ratio down from its re-cord 2010 level. However, the European sup-port programmes for other euro-area coun-
Public finances

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
EUROSYSTEM
Monthly Report
May 2011
10tries will create additional debt, and uncer-
tainty in connection with support measures
for German financial institutions remains
high.
The German government presented its up-
dated stability programme in April, outlining
the adjustment path towards achieving a
structurally balanced general government
budget in 2015. In a welcome development,
the unexpectedly favourable macroeconomic
setting is, as stipulated in the excessive deficit
procedure initiated against Germany, to be
used to achieve a lower deficit path rather
than to dilute the fiscal policy course. The
deadline set by the Ecofin Council in Decem-
ber 2009 – which was, even then, excessively
long – to bring the deficit below the 3%
ceiling in 2013 will be reached ahead of
schedule. By contrast, progress along the
adjustment path towards the medium-term
objective is likely to be slower than specified
in the preventive arm of the European Stabil-
ity and Growth Pact. This is regrettable, not
least given efforts at EU level to give this part
of the Pact, in particular, greater binding
force.
Overall, it is now crucial that the more favour-
able conjuncture is not seen as an opportun-
ity to relax the consolidation course before
the medium-term objective is achieved. Re-
maining on track is essential given the worry-
ingly high levels of government debt. This is
warranted even more by the present benign
macroeconomic situation. Moreover, the
time window for making adequate fiscal
allowance for the imminent demographic
burdens ensuing from an ageing populationis rapidly narrowing. In addition, the new
constitutional budgetary rules for central and
state governments stipulate much stricter
deficit ceilings. Given such stricter limits, it
appears indispensable to leave a larger mar-
gin of safety between the deficit targets and
the deficit ceilings to prevent having to take
procyclical consolidation measures should the
GDP outturn be worse than expected or in
the event of other negative shocks. This is
another reason why it is highly advisable to
use the “good times” to reduce deficits more
quickly.
However, safety margins should not be cre-
ated artificially by using dubious interpret-
ation to extend the upper bounds. Yet pre-
cisely this appears to be the intention in the
Federal Government’s current plans as well as
in the agreements that were recently signed
with the states receiving consolidation aid.
Outdated and inflated estimates of the struc-
tural deficit in 2010 are being used as the
basis for determining the ceilings for the
structural deficit reduction path from 2011 to
2016 for the Federal Government and to
2020 for the states receiving consolidation
aid. This violates the intention of the debt
brake. For central government alone, this in-
creases the scope for new borrowing by a
total of approximately €50 billion. This add-
itional leeway can potentially lead to higher
debt even if it is not fully utilised at the cur-
rent end, as it can later be used by crediting
the difference to the fiscal control account.
Overall, therefore, the implementation of the
new national budgetary rules to date con-
tinues to merit a critical assessment. It would,

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
May 2011
11for instance, be appropriate to base the
ceilings for the deficit reduction path on theactual 2010 deficit outturn. The Federal Gov-ernment’s deficits as specified in its March2011 benchmark outline are similar to thefigures calculated in this way. Finally, thefavourable macroeconomic conditions shouldthen be used to more speedily comply withthe rules on the debt brake, which come intoeffect from 2016, establishing a safety mar-gin below the constitutional borrowing limitsas early as possible.
The public finance situation in numerous
euro-area member states is much more critic-al than in Germany, and deficit ratios in par-ticular are significantly higher. All memberstates except Estonia and Luxembourg arecurrently subject to an excessive deficit pro-cedure. The European Commission’s mostrecent economic forecast underscores thedanger that many countries might fail tomeet the European fiscal consolidation re-quirements. In order both to comply with theminimum requirements for structural deficitreduction and to meet the deficit correctiondeadline, additional consolidation efforts overand above the measures specified to date arerequired in many cases.
Greece faces particular challenges. Although
the deficit ratio of 10.5% for 2010 representsa considerable improvement on the previousyear, it is well above the target of 8.1% thatwas agreed when the aid programme wasput together in May of last year. In its springeconomic forecast, the European Commis-sion expects the target to be missed again inthe current year unless additional measuresare taken (deficit ratio of 9.5% rather than
7.5%). By granting loans and reducing theinterest rate payable on them – which is itselfproblematic, not least given the moral hazardthis entails – Greece’s European partnershave provided enormous ex ante assistance.
The aid commitments are therefore rightlysubject to strict conditionality. The Greekgovernment is thus obligated to return to thedeficit reduction path outlined in the adjust-ment programme this year, resorting – asagreed – to additional readjustment measuresif need be. Any softening of the targetswould call into doubt both the sustainabilityof Greece’s debt and the credibility of futureEuropean agreements. The comprehensiveand rapid consolidation steps plus the eco-nomic reforms needed to comply with the ad-justment programme undoubtedly involveconsiderable difficulties and hardship. Theyare, however, ultimately unavoidable in orderto restore sustainable public finances, andthey are also the precondition for aid pay-ments, without which the adjustment pathwould be even more daunting. In order tostrengthen confidence in sound public fi-nances in the individual euro-area memberstates going forward, it is vital to strengthenincentives for nations to solve their fiscal prob-lems on their own and to ensure that shiftingthe burden onto third parties is not seen as aviable option.
Portugal, too, recently had to apply for inter-
national financial assistance, with the euro-area finance ministers approving a compre-hensive aid package on May 16. Under thisprogramme, Portugal will receive €78 billionworth of financial aid for three years, funded

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
EUROSYSTEM
Monthly Report
May 2011
12in equal parts by the IMF, the European
Financial Stabilisation Mechanism (EFSM) and
the European Financial Stability Facility (EFSF).
The fiscal adjustment programme is largely
based on the consolidation plan presented in
March 2011. It does not, however, envisage
a return to the deficit reduction path an-
nounced in May 2010. The fiscal objectives
that have now been agreed are less ambitious
than the previous deficit reduction path, even
taking into consideration statistical revisions
for 2010 and the more muted macroeconom-
ic outlook. Strict compliance with the rules is
vital given the precarious budgetary situation,
the failure to tackle structural issues in thepast and the particular conditions of the aid
programme.
In Ireland, the new government is sticking to
the agreed objective of bringing the deficit
ratio back below the 3% limit by 2015. The
necessary measures have, however, been
fully approved only for the current year.
Other areas still need to be detailed in the
budget plans for the next few years. Weaker
economic growth could jeopardise the fiscal
plans. But potential further costs in connec-
tion with restructuring the Irish banking sec-
tor pose an even greater risk.

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
May 2011
13Global and European
settingWorld economic activity
The world economy got off to a dynamic
start in 2011, having already recovered from
the dip of the second and third quarters of
last year by the end of 2010. The emerging
market economies remained the primary
drivers of growth. Global industrial output
saw an exceptionally sharp rise in January-
February, increasing by a seasonally adjusted
21/2% on the fourth quarter of 2010. The
global purchasing managers index for services
also rose significantly in the first two months
of the year. The rapid pace of global growth
at the beginning of 2011 is all the more re-
markable given that, even before the natural
disaster in Japan, several factors per se were
weighing on worldwide growth. These
notably include the political unrest in North
Africa and the Middle East, which signifi-
cantly aggravated already high demand-
driven inflation in crude oil prices. Further-
more, the severe floods in Australia not only
caused harvest losses, they also disrupted
exports of metal ores and coal.
Global purchasing managers indices for
manufacturing and services suggest, how-
ever, that the world economy shifted down a
gear in March-April. This was probably due,
first, to the perceptible loss of consumer
purchasing power as a result of considerably
higher energy and food prices. The threat of
second-round effects led many central banks,
particularly in the emerging economies, to
raise interest rates. Second, the earthquake
and tsunami in Japan and the major incidents
they caused at nuclear power stations also
played a role. The large number of fatalitiesWorld economy
off to buoyant
start in 2011 ...
... but slower
pace in early
spring

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
EUROSYSTEM
Monthly Report
May 2011
14and the long-term effects of releasing radio-
active material into the environment make
these events, first and foremost, a human
tragedy, with the economic fallout paling in
comparison. Nonetheless, the economic
implications are considerable; alongside the
destruction of real assets, reduced production
– which is discussed in more detail below – is
especially important in this regard. As things
stand, however, the negative economic
repercussions for the rest of the world are
universally thought to be minor. This is chiefly
because the Japanese economy is compara-
tively closed and because those Japanese
enterprises that are involved in international
supply chains are remarkably flexible. This
flexibility is the main reason why the widely
feared bottlenecks in intermediate electronic
goods have not materialised to date. Further-more, catch-up effects in production and the
expansionary impact of reconstruction are
likely to strengthen as early as the second
half of the year.
Excluding Japan, which had not yet released
current national accounts data when this
report went to press, real gross domestic
product (GDP) in the industrial countries
grew at a seasonally adjusted quarter-on-
quarter rate of1/2% in the first quarter of
2011 – around the same pace as in the previ-
ous quarter. This is based on initial estimates
made using provisional data for the United
States, the United Kingdom and the euro
area. While growth in the euro area and
the United Kingdom picked up considerably
after their fourth-quarter results had been
dampened by severe winter weather, growth
in the US economy was more subdued.
The strong momentum in the world economy
was a key factor in the high inflation on the
commodity markets. However, this inflation
eased significantly towards the end of the
period, first for non-energy commodities and
later for crude oil, too. World market prices
for food, beverages and tobacco rose again
considerably in the course of January but
stagnated in February and March. Prices for
industrial raw materials were likewise only
slightly higher at the close of the quarter than
at the end of January. Owing to the political
unrest in some oil-producing countries in
North Africa and the Middle East, prices for
crude oil rose incrementally from US$931/2in
the last week of December to US$117 at the
end of March, with the events in Japan hav-
ing only a brief dampening effect. ThisGlobal industrial output
Source:  Centraal  Planbureau.  —  1 OECD 
countries  excluding  Turkey,  Mexico,  South 
Korea, Poland, Slovakia, Czech Republic and 
Hungary.
Deutsche Bundesbank2007 2008 2009 2010 2011808590951001051101151202008 Q1 = 100, seasonally adjusted, log scale
Total
of which
Advanced
economies 1
Emerging
economies
Jan-
FebStill perceptible
GDP growth in
industrial
countries
excluding Japan
High inflation
on commodity
markets

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
May 2011
15increase continued in April. After falling
sharply in early May, however, oil prices hadreturned to their end-March level at lastreport. Forward prices initially kept pace withrising spot prices at the beginning of theyear. Nonetheless, when concerns about thecrisis-stricken Arab countries amplified therise in oil prices, futures market prices camedown significantly, signalling a future declinein spot prices.
The sharp rise in energy and food prices at
the turn of the year had a perceptible impacton consumer price indices. The emergingeconomies were particularly hard hit. Inrecent months, many central banks in Asiaand Latin America, including China, India andBrazil, have further tightened their monetarypolicy to avert the threat of second-roundeffects. In the industrial countries, too, pricescontinued to rise significantly in the first quar-ter of 2011. After seasonal adjustment, theysaw a renewed increase of 1% on the period,and the year-on-year rate rose from +1.7%to +2.1%. The core rate (excluding energyand food) reached 1.2%, having stood at0.9% in the fourth quarter.
In its April World Economic Outlook (WEO),
the IMF responded to the substantial rise inglobal inflation with a further upward revi-sion of its January inflation forecast – particu-larly for 2011. The figure was raised by 0.6percentage point to 2.2% for the advancedeconomies and by 0.9 percentage point to6.9% for the emerging and developing econ-omies. However, the forecast for world GDPgrowth (+4.4%) was left unchanged; themoderate downward revisions for Japan andthe United States were offset by higher
growth forecasts for several other countries,including Germany. The IMF’s projection forgrowth in world trade (+7.4%) is now notice-ably more favourable than at the beginningof the year.
Emerging economiesChina’s aggregate output was up by 9
3/4%
on the year in the first quarter of 2011. Ac-cording to the first seasonally adjusted figuresever to be released by China’s NationalBureau of Statistics, quarter-on-quarter realGDP growth stood at 2%, compared with+2
1/2% previously. This continuing high pace
was probably due, not least, to the ongoingbuoyancy of exports; nominal exports (in USdollar terms) were up by no less than one-quarter on the year. In value terms, importsrose by as much as one-third. This reflectsboth the clear increase in import prices forcommodities and strong domestic demand,which represents the second pillar of China’seconomic growth. The upward trend in carsales has levelled off considerably in recentmonths, however. This is because, first, a taxconcession for the purchase of small cars ex-pired at the beginning of the year. Second,the city authorities in Beijing have imposed aceiling on the number of new registrations soas to alleviate traffic congestion and heavysmog.
1
1Although motor vehicle imports, a large part of which
come from Germany, have held up relatively well, it
seems likely that they, too, will see a moderation in their
previously exceptionally strong growth.Ongoing
deterioration
in price climate
New IMF World
Economic
Outlook:
inflation
forecast raised
againStrong growth
continuing in
China ...

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
EUROSYSTEM
Monthly Report
May 2011
16Concerns that the Chinese economy could
overheat despite the tightening of monetary
and lending policy have been reinforced by
strong growth and by recent inflation devel-
opments. Consumer price inflation rose from
4.6% in December 2010 to 5.3% in April
2011. This was attributable not only to higher
food prices but also to non-food inflation,
which had reached 2.7% – a high level for
China – at last report.
The Indian economy achieved average GDP
growth of 101/2% in 2010, thus slightly
outpacing China. For the beginning of 2011,
the still rather fragmentary picture provided
by the indicators suggests that aggregate
output has remained on a steep growth path.
Nonetheless, the steep rise in consumer
prices continued throughout the reporting
period despite the Indian central bank’s more
restrictive monetary policy; the rate of infla-
tion stood at 8.8% in March. Besides food
prices, which are still rising substantially des-
pite a good harvest, this was also attributable
to higher prices for clothing and energy.
After the turn of the year, the Brazilian econ-
omy remained on the more moderate growth
path it had embarked upon in the second
half of 2010. Real retail sales in the first quar-
ter point to continuing brisk consumption.
The strong growth in imports of consumer
goods indicates that imported goods (includ-
ing, increasingly, those from China) – which
have become cheaper in comparison with
domestically produced goods owing to
the sharp appreciation of the Brazilian real –
account for a growing share of household
spending. The unemployment rate remainedat a historic low thanks to the favourable eco-
nomic developments. Given the tightening of
the labour market, nominal wages have
been increasing at double-digit rates since
mid-2010. Consumer price inflation has ac-
celerated in recent months, reaching 6.5% in
April. In particular, inflation in services rose
significantly, partly because enterprises seem
to have been largely able to pass higher wage
costs on to consumers.
According to an initial estimate by the Rus-
sian Federal State Statistics Service, real GDP
in Russia increased by 4% year on year in the
first quarter of 2011; the pace of growth was
thus marginally below that recorded in the
fourth quarter of 2010. The macroeconomic
recovery is being bolstered to a large extent
by the high oil price, which caused export
revenues (as measured in US dollars) to rise
by 24% in the first quarter. In addition, the
Russian car manufacturing industry, which
more than halved its output in the crisis year
of 2009, is currently experiencing a substan-
tial boom; car sales climbed by just over 60%
year on year in the first four months of 2011.
The scrappage scheme for old cars intro-
duced by the Russian government last year is
likely to have played a particularly prominent
role in this development. At 9.6%, the rate of
inflation recorded in April was appreciably
higher than at the end of 2010. Food infla-
tion is still especially strong.
United States
In the first quarter of 2011, the US economy
was unable to match the previous quarter’s
strong growth owing, among other things, to... but high
price pressure
indicates
possible
overheating
of economy
Strong
economic
expansion in
India last year
Continuing
upturn in BrazilRussian
economy on a
solid growth
path

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
May 2011
17special factors. According to the initial esti-
mate, real GDP rose by a seasonally adjusted
1/2% on the quarter, having increased by3/4%
a period earlier. The weaker macroeconomicgrowth was partly attributable to a lull inhouseholds’ previously brisk consumption.While US consumers had upped their expend-iture by 1% in the fourth quarter of 2010, thefirst-quarter rate was more moderate, at+
3/4%. However, this was not caused by
an unfavourable development in disposableincome, which actually saw a nominalquarter-on-quarter increase of 1
3/4% in the
first quarter as a result of the ongoing labourmarket recovery and lower social securitycontributions.
2Instead, the slower pace of
growth in real private consumption was prob-ably largely due to the erosion of consumerpurchasing power by sharply higher energyand food prices. After seasonal adjustment,the consumer price index was up by just over1
1/4% on the period in the first quarter of
2011. Even excluding energy and food, how-ever, seasonally adjusted inflation came tojust under
1/2%. The corresponding year-on-
year rates rose from 1.3% to 2.1% and from0.7% to 1.1 % respectively in the same period.Furthermore, the moderation in growth re-corded in the winter was connected with thefall of just over 1
1/4% in public sector de-
mand. Above all, it was spending on defencegoods – which is generally fairly volatile –that fell. Moreover, the beginning of the yearsaw declining activity in both housing con-struction and industrial and commercial con-struction.
While households’ strong appetite for con-
sumption had caught enterprises off-guardin the fourth quarter of 2010 and almost
brought inventory building to a standstill,weaker-than-expected first-quarter privateconsumption could explain the significantrise in the level of inventories. This resultedin a contribution of
1/4percentage point to
growth. By contrast, foreign trade no longerhad any notable effect on GDP. Although themomentum of exports decelerated some-what compared with the previous quarter,the rise in imports was even more moderate.
JapanFollowing a brief pause in the fourth quarter
of 2010, the economic recovery in Japan hadbeen accelerating perceptibly in the first twomonths of 2011 when the country was hit bythe Tohoku earthquake and the ensuingtsunami on 11 March. Industrial output andreal exports of goods had gathered signifi-cant momentum at the beginning of theyear, and the labour market recovery hadstrengthened markedly, too. The impact ofthe natural disaster on first-quarter GDP istherefore likely to have been relatively limited(no official data were yet available as thisreport went to press). On a quarterly average,both industrial output (-1
3/4%) and real
exports (-1%) declined fairly moderately onthe quarter. However, industrial output(-15%) and the volume of goods exports(-8%) slumped in March. All in all, the ad-verse effects of the earthquake and tsunamion economic output are likely to be muchstronger in the second quarter.US economy
unable to
match pace of
previous
quarter in Q1
2The December 2010 tax relief package introduced a
one-year cut of 2 percentage points in employees’ contri-
butions to social security starting on 1 January 2011.Perceptible
build-up of in-
ventories but
neutral contri-
bution to
growth from
foreign trade
Tohoku
earthquake
hits the
Japanese
economy in a
phase of
recovery

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
EUROSYSTEM
Monthly Report
May 2011
18The substantial fall in output was attributable
not only to the destruction wreaked upon
infrastructure in the areas directly hit by the
disaster but also to electricity outages and
interrupted supply chains that also affected
some parts of the country that had not
directly suffered the devastation of the earth-
quake and tsunami. By the end of April, the
energy company Tepco was able to restore
around half of the capacity for electricity gen-
eration that had been temporarily shut down.
Even so, Japan may face electricity shortages
again in the summer months, when energy
consumption reaches its seasonal peak.
Nonetheless, the country may already see
strong macroeconomic growth in the third
quarter of 2011, as reconstruction activities
increase.United Kingdom
According to the first preliminary estimate,
seasonally adjusted growth in real GDP, at
1/2%, just about offset the weather-related
decline in the fourth quarter of 2010. The
absence of a clearer expansion is primarily
due to the fact that construction output did
not experience a countermovement once
weather conditions had returned to normal.
In fact, the downward trend in construction
output, at -43/4%, was more pronounced
than in the previous quarter, which saw a
decline of 21/4%. By contrast, the financial
sector and business-related services posted
an increase of 1% in their value added,
the sharpest since the summer of 2007, and
this substantially bolstered macroeconomic
growth from the output side. While this, too,
was probably partly due to catch-up effects
after the severe winter weather in December
brought much of public life to a standstill, it
still more than offset the previous quarter’s
decrease. Manufacturing continued its steady
recovery, although since the cyclical trough in
the summer of 2009 it had still only recouped
just under half of its decline in output. The
labour market, too, is still a long way off its
pre-crisis situation. The unemployment rate,
which had increased by just under 3 percent-
age points to 8% between the beginning of
2008 and its cyclical peak in February 2010,
stood at 7.7% in January 2011. Owing to the
VAT hike at the beginning of the year and the
sharp rise in energy and food prices, headline
inflation in the winter months was up by just
over 11/2% on the quarter after seasonal
adjustment. The annual rate increased from
3.4% to 4.2% – again clearly above the infla-Selected economic
indicators for Japan
Source: Global Insight. — 1 Excluding ships 
and  boats  as  well  as  railway  locomotives 
and rolling stock.
Deutsche BundesbankOct Nov Dec Jan Feb Mar
2010 20115560657075808590951001051101152010 Q4 = 100, seasonally adjusted, log scale
Total industrial output
Manufacture
of transport
equipment 1Real exports of goods
Slump in
output due,
among other
things, to
bottlenecks
in electricity
generation and
intermediate
goodsUK economy
back on growth
track

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
May 2011
19tion target of 2%. The rate excluding energy
and food was 3.4%.
New EU member states
In the new EU countries (EU 7)3as a whole,
the cyclical upturn continued to progress well
in the first quarter of 2011. In the Czech
Republic, real GDP expanded by a seasonally
adjusted1/2% on the previous period, when
growth was only half as high. The Hungarian
economy increased its output by3/4%, com-
pared with1/2% previously. In Poland, too,
economic output is likely to have risen signifi-
cantly (GDP figures are not yet available); the
quarter-on-quarter rise in industrial output
stood at 2% in the first quarter. In the EU 7,
consumer price inflation, as measured by the
Harmonised Index of Consumer Prices (HICP),
was 4.3% on average for the first fourth
months of the year – perceptibly above the
fourth-quarter figure (3.9%). The rate of
inflation is still being buoyed to a large extent
by the considerable rise in food and energy
prices. Nonetheless, the annual rate rose
even without these goods, climbing from
2.7% to 3.0%.
Macroeconomic trends in the euro area
The cyclical upturn in the euro area4acceler-
ated considerably in the first quarter, having
been dampened, above all, by the onset of
severe winter weather in the final quarter of
2010. After seasonal adjustment, quarter-on-
quarter real GDP growth, at3/4%, was more
than twice as strong as before; year-on-year
growth stood at 21/2%. The underlying cyclic-al trend is likely to be somewhat more
moderate, however, as the figure for the
previous quarter was low and at least part of
the output that was lost in the autumn was
recouped in the first quarter of 2011. The
perceptible widening of growth disparities
among the euro-area countries must also be
viewed in this light. The more northerly mem-
ber states – which have, in any case, experi-
enced significantly more positive economic
developments than the south of the euro
area since the recovery began in mid-2009 –
accounted for the bulk of the weather-
related increase in output.
Of the 13 euro-area countries that have
already released data on GDP growth in the
first quarter, Estonia (+2%) and Germany
(+11/2%) recorded the best results after sea-
sonal adjustment, followed by Belgium,
France, the Netherlands and Austria, which
all posted growth of 1%. Of the peripheral
countries, Portugal again saw its real GDP
decline, whereas Spain posted an increase.
Although Greece also reported a rise in real
GDP, this result is not very robust owing to
changes in the statistical methodology used.
No first-quarter data is yet available for Ire-
land.
In the first quarter of 2011, aggregate output
in the euro area was still 2% below its pre-
crisis level. This gap is unlikely to be closed
until 2012. The latest forecasts from inter-
national institutions predict growth of 11/2%
to 2% for 2011. All of these forecasts assume
3This group comprises the non-euro-area countries that
joined the European Union in 2004 and 2007.
4Estonia joined the euro area on 1 January 2011.Recovery in EU
7 progressing
well
Brisk start to
the year but still
major growth
disparities
within euro
areaPre-crisis level
unlikely to be
matched until
2012

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
EUROSYSTEM
Monthly Report
May 2011
20that the events in Japan will have no note-
worthy economic impact on the euro area,
and this appears highly plausible as things
stand. The negative impact of the military
conflict in Libya on overall euro-area growth
is also likely to be negligible even though the
significant trade between some southern
European countries and Libya has virtually
come to a halt.
The livelier macroeconomic growth in the
winter months is largely attributable to the
production sector. In the first quarter, con-
struction output was up by a seasonally
adjusted 1% on the period owing to the
aforementioned weather-related shifts. This
was the first time that construction output
had grown since the second quarter of 2010,
when weather-related catch-up effects had
likewise played a role. Construction activity
in the euro area has fallen by around one-
quarter since its cyclical peak at the end of
2006 because of the marked process of
adjustment in some member states that had
experienced extreme developments on their
real estate markets in the run-up to the crisis.
Industrial output rose by a seasonally adjusted
1% on the quarter in the first quarter of
2011. The production of intermediate goods
rose particularly sharply in the reporting
period (+3%). Output of capital goods and
durable consumer goods climbed by 11/2%
and 11/4% respectively, whereas the figure for
non-durable goods was virtually unchanged
from the fourth quarter of 2010. Energy
production fell significantly (-2%) owing pri-
marily to the weather. Given the noticeable
expansion in industrial output, capacity util-
isation in the manufacturing sector in AprilAggregate output
in the euro area
Sources:  national  statistics,  Eurostat  and 
Bundesbank calculations.
Deutsche Bundesbank2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011102104106108
100102104106108110
100102104106
9698100102104
1021041061081102005 = 100, seasonally adjusted,
quarterly, log scale
Euro area
SpainItalyFranceof which
GermanyStrong stimuli
from the pro-
duction sector

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
May 2011
21almost returned to its long-term average for
the first time since October 2008.
Leading indicators suggest that the upward
trend in industry is likely to continue in thenear future. After seasonal adjustment, neworders in January-February were 4% abovethe average of the previous three months. Ex-cluding the manufacture of other transportequipment, for which orders tend to fluctu-ate widely month on month because of largeorders, they increased by as much as 5%.However, euro-area industrial activity seemsto have become somewhat more subduedtowards the end of the period. The EuropeanCommission’s industrial confidence indicator,for instance, fell slightly in April, although itremained fairly close to the cyclical peakrecorded in 2007.
In the first two months of the year, one of
the main driving forces on the demand sidewere extra-euro-area exports of goods,which expanded by a seasonally adjusted6
1/4% in value terms compared with the
fourth quarter, thus rising back above thepre-crisis level for the first time. Growth inthe value of imports, at 7
3/4%, was even
stronger in the reporting period owing, notleast, to the sharp increase in prices on thecommodity markets. In real terms, exportsare again likely to have outpaced imports.Final domestic demand probably also made apositive contribution to growth in the firstfew months of the year. Both the rise in theproduction of machinery and equipment andthe strong growth in construction output in-dicate a perceptible increase in gross fixedcapital formation. By contrast, real retail salesremained at their fourth-quarter level in the
first quarter of 2011. Moreover, the numberof new motor vehicle registrations climbedmuch more moderately, which is consistentwith the fact that, according to the EuropeanCommission’s survey, consumer confidencehas not improved since the end of 2010. Thisis likely to be due, first, to the appreciableloss of purchasing power resulting from thesharp rise in energy and food prices. Second,the events in Japan are likely to have de-pressed sentiment.
In the fourth quarter of 2010 and the first
quarter of 2011, the economic recovery inthe euro area spread to the labour market. Inthe final quarter of 2010 – the latest periodfor which data are available – there was ayear-on-year increase (
1/4%) in the number of
employed persons for the first time in twoyears. While employment increased sharply inthe higher-growth countries, particularly Ger-many, most peripheral countries witnessed asustained fall in employment. Euro-areaunemployment appears to have passed itscyclical peak at the beginning of the fourthquarter of 2010; the seasonally adjustedfigure fell by 350,000 to 15.6 million byMarch. The rate of unemployment has beenslightly below the 10% mark (9.9%) againsince February. However, the euro-area aver-age still masks very large differences betweenindividual countries, with rates ranging from4.2% in the Netherlands to 20.7% in Spain.Youth unemployment rates vary even morewidely; only the Netherlands and Germanyhave single-digit figures.High export
growth, lively
investment
activity but
subdued
consumer
demandFirst signs of
easing on
labour market

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
EUROSYSTEM
Monthly Report
May 2011
22Deutsche BundesbankFiscal developments in the euro area
Despite lower general government deficits, debt ratio still ex-
pected to rise perceptibly
At the end of April 2011, Eurostat published the general govern-
ment deficits and debt levels of the EU member states as part of
the European budgetary surveillance procedure. Apparently, the
euro-area deficit fell slightly last year, having previously reached
the highest figure recorded since European monetary union
was established (from 6.3% to 6.0% of gross domestic product
(GDP)). Cyclical developments were a slight mitigating factor,
and the phasing-out of measures to support the economy as well
as the application of consolidation measures also reduced the
deficit somewhat, while the transfer of capital in connection
with financial market support measures increased. The debt ratio
continued to rise sharply, from 79.3% to 85.1%. The high deficits
and deficit-debt adjustments (processes that are neutral in terms
of their impact on the deficit but increase debt levels), such as
government recapitalisations of banks and the assumption of
risky assets by government resolution agencies, were the key
factors here.1
In its spring forecast, the European Commission expects the
euro-area deficit to drop clearly to 4.3% of GDP in 2011. This is
only partially due to cyclical factors, instead largely reflecting a
structural improvement, particularly on the expenditure side.2
The Commission is forecasting a similar picture for the further
reduction in the deficit to 3.5% of GDP for 2012. In this context,
debt-servicing costs, which are rising sharply at the current end,
predominantly due to rapidly growing government debt, will also
be driven increasingly by the assumption of higher interest rates.
According to the Commission forecast, overall government debt
in the euro area will rise by around 3 percentage points to 881/2%
of GDP between the end of 2010 and the end of 2012, largely as
a result of stubbornly high deficits.
Most countries are still in breach – often considerably –
of the reference values for deficit and debt ratios
Looking at the euro-area aggregate masks significant disparities
between the individual countries. The Commission estimates
that 5 of the 17 euro-area countries (Estonia, Luxembourg, Fin-
land, Germany and Malta) will comply with the 3% deficit limit
this year. Ireland will record the highest deficit ratio at 101/2%,
followed by Greece with just under 91/2%. Figures of around 6%
are forecast for Spain, Portugal, France and Slovenia. Moreover,
the debt ratios in four countries that also have high deficits will
exceed 100% (Greece, Italy, Ireland and Portugal). However, in
Belgium, France and Germany, too, debt relative to GDP is a very
long way off the reference value.
All of the euro-area member states apart from Estonia and Luxem-
bourg are currently subject to an excessive deficit procedure. The
Commission forecast highlights the danger that numerous coun-
tries will not meet the European agreements and requirementslaid down as part of the deficit procedures. In order both to
achieve the minimum budgetary adjustment requirement
(defined as an average annual improvement in the structural
balance) and to comply with the deficit correction deadline,
additional consolidation efforts over and above the measures
detailed to date are frequently required.
Without additional measures, the Commission expects the debt
ratios in all of the euro-area countries except for Germany, Italy
and Malta to rise by the end of 2012. Particularly sharp increases
in the debt ratios compared with 2010 are projected for Ireland
and Greece (more than 20 percentage points), and Portugal and
Spain will also experience large increases (14 percentage points
and 11 percentage points respectively). By far the highest debt
ratio is reported for Greece, at 166%. The ratios are almost 120%
in Italy and Ireland. In 2012, only Estonia, Luxembourg, Slovakia,
Slovenia and Finland are likely to comply with the 60% reference
value for the debt ratio.
Situation particularly difficult in Greece, Portugal and Ireland
Although Greece made considerable progress in achieving a
deficit ratio of 10.5% in 2010 (4.9 percentage points), it still
clearly missed the target of 8.1% agreed when the programme
was established; the figure was also higher than expected at the
end of 2010 (9.4%). The main reason for this is likely to have
been a base effect from a renewed upwards revision of the
budgetary deficit for 2009, but principally also the fact that the
agreed consolidation targets were missed. By contrast, overall
economic growth in nominal terms was no worse than projected
when the programme was drawn up. For the current year, the
Commission in its spring forecast expects a deficit ratio of 9.5% if
no additional measures are taken, meaning that the 7.5% target
agreed for 2011 would also be missed by a significant margin.
By granting loans and reducing the interest rate payable on
them – which is itself problematic, not least given the moral
hazard this entails – Greece’s European partners have provided
enormous ex ante assistance. The assistance commitments are
therefore rightly subject to strict conditionality. The Greek
government must therefore return to the deficit reduction path
laid down in the adjustment programme this year, resorting – as
agreed – to additional readjustment measures if need be. Any
watering down of the targets would call into further doubt both
the sustainability of Greece’s debt and the credibility of future
European agreements. It is now up to Greece to press ahead
with comprehensive and timely consolidation as well as economic
reforms. This will undoubtedly involve considerable difficulties
and hardship. It is, however, ultimately unavoidable in order to
restore sustainable public finances and as a precondition for as-
sistance payments, without which the adjustment path would be
considerably more daunting. In order to bolster confidence in
sound public finances in the individual euro-area member states
going forward, it is vital to strengthen the incentives for nations
to solve their fiscal problems on their own responsibility and to
1Guarantees and support measures similar to guarantees that were
also deployed in the context of the financial crisis are generally not
reflected in the figures if they have not (yet) been taken up. Accord-
ing to Eurostat, risky contingent liabilities, which in 2010 had no im-pact on either the deficit or debt levels, equate to 61/2% of GDP in the
euro area. — 2Moreover, financial market support measures in Ire-
land, which had increased the Irish deficit ratio by 20 percentage
points in 2010, will no longer be a factor. Looking at the euro area,

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
May 2011
23ensure that shifting the burden onto third parties is not seen as a
viable option.
Faced with an impending loss of confidence in the financial mar-
kets, Portugal had announced in May 2010 that it would acceler-
ate the originally planned reduction of the deficit. Owing mainly
to statistical revisions (in particular the reclassification of eco-
nomic units to the general government sector) and capital trans-
fers to support the financial sector, the country missed the
budget target for 2010 by a significant margin – although it
would only have been achieved with the help of a large-scale
one-off measure anyway.3After a consolidation programme
that had been agreed in March 2011 as part of the European
Council package to solve the debt crisis failed to pass parliament,
elections had been called for June and it had become apparent
that, without support measures, Portugal had no recourse to
wholesale funding at conditions considered sustainable, Portu-
gal applied for financial help in April 2011. On 16 May 2011, the
euro-area finance ministers agreed a comprehensive assistance
programme. Under this programme, Portugal will receive €78 bil-
lion worth of financial support for three years, funded in equal
parts by the IMF, the European Financial Stabilisation Mechanism
(EFSM) and the European Financial Stability Facility (EFSF). This is
intended, in particular, to cover funding requirements and
ongoing deficits, while €12 billion are earmarked to stabilise
the banking sector. The adjustment programme, which wasagreed jointly with the major Portuguese opposition parties, in-
cludes structural reforms to improve competitiveness, measures
to stabilise the financial sector, plans to bring forward privatisa-
tions and numerous fiscal measures. However, it does not aim to
return to the deficit reduction path announced in May 2010, and
the reference value of 3% for the deficit ratio will not be met
until 2013.4
The fiscal adjustment programme is largely based on the consoli-
dation plan presented in March 2011. The fiscal objectives that
have now been agreed are less ambitious than the previous def-
icit reduction path, also taking into account the statistical revi-
sions for 2010 and the more muted macroeconomic outlook, and
should be easier to achieve. Given the precarious budgetary situ-
ation, the failure to tackle structural issues in the past and the
particular conditions of the support programme, strict compli-
ance with the rules is imperative.
In Ireland, the new government is sticking to the agreed ob-
jective of bringing the deficit ratio back below the 3% ceiling
by 2015. The necessary measures have, however, been fully
approved only for the current year. Other areas still need to be
detailed in the budget plans for the next few years. Weaker eco-
nomic growth could jeopardise the fiscal plans. Further potential
costs in connection with the restructuring of the Irish banking
sector pose an even greater risk, however.
this equates to 0.3% of GDP. — 3The effect of the reclassification is
likely to continue to affect the deficit into the current year at around
1/2% of GDP. — 4Based on a deficit of 9.1% of GDP last year, the
following figures are now projected (budgetary targets of May 2010in brackets): 5.9% (4.6%) in 2011, 4.5% (3.0%) in 2012 and 3.0%
(2.0%) in 2013. Real GDP is expected to decline by around 2% in both2011 and 2012 and to rise by 1.2% in 2013. — 5For Greece and Portu-
gal, adjustment programme targets.Forecast and plans for the public finances of the euro-area countries
European Commission spring 2011 forecastStability programmes,5
April 2011
Budget balance as a percentage of GDPGovernment debt as a percentage
of GDPBudget balance as a
percentage of GDP
Country 2009 2010 2011 2012 2009 2010 2011 2012 2011 2012 2013Deadline
to correctexcessivedeficit
Austria – 4.1 – 4.6 – 3.7 – 3.3 69.6 72.3 73.8 75.4 – 3.9 – 3.3 – 2.9 2013
Belgium – 5.9 – 4.1 – 3.7 – 4.2 96.2 96.8 97.0 97.5 – 3.6 – 2.8 – 1.8 2012Cyprus – 6.0 – 5.3 – 5.1 – 4.9 58.0 60.8 62.3 64.3 – 4.0 – 2.6 – 2.0 2012Estonia – 1.7 0.1 – 0.6 – 2.4 7.2 6.6 6.1 6.9 – 0.4 – 2.1 0.1 –Finland – 2.6 – 2.5 – 1.0 – 0.7 43.8 48.4 50.6 52.2 – 0.9 – 0.7 – 0.9 2011France – 7.5 – 7.0 – 5.8 – 5.3 78.3 81.7 84.7 86.8 – 5.7 – 4.6 – 3.0 2013Germany – 3.0 – 3.3 – 2.0 – 1.2 73.5 83.2 82.4 81.1 – 2
1/2 –11/2 – 1.0 2013
Greece – 15.4 – 10.5 – 9.5 – 9.3 127.1 142.8 157.7 166.1 – 7.6 – 6.5 – 4.8 2014Ireland – 14.3 – 32.4 – 10.5 – 8.8 65.6 96.2 112.0 117.9 – 10.0 – 8.6 – 7.2 2015Italy – 5.4 – 4.6 – 4.0 – 3.2 116.1 119.0 120.3 119.8 – 3.9 – 2.7 – 1.5 2012Luxembourg – 0.9 – 1.7 – 1.0 – 1.1 14.6 18.4 17.2 19.0 – 1.0 – 1.5 – 1.2 –Malta – 3.7 – 3.6 – 3.0 – 3.0 67.6 68.0 68.0 67.9 – 2.8 – 2.1 – 1.6 2011Netherlands – 5.5 – 5.4 – 3.7 – 2.3 60.8 62.7 63.9 64.0 – 3.7 – 2.2 – 1.8 2013Portugal – 10.1 – 9.1 – 5.9 – 4.5 83.0 93.0 101.7 107.4 – 5.9 – 4.5 – 3.0 2013Slovakia – 8.0 – 7.9 – 5.1 – 4.6 35.4 41.0 44.8 46.8 – 4.9 – 3.8 – 2.9 2013Slovenia – 6.0 – 5.6 – 5.8 – 5.0 35.2 38.0 42.8 46.0 – 5.5 – 3.9 – 2.9 2013Spain – 11.1 – 9.2 – 6.3 – 5.3 53.3 60.1 68.1 71.0 – 6.0 – 4.4 – 3.0 2013Euro area – 6.3 – 6.0 – 4.3 – 3.5 79.3 85.4 87.7 88.5 . . . –
Source: European Commission, spring 2011 forecast.

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
EUROSYSTEM
Monthly Report
May 2011
24Consumer price inflation in the euro area has
accelerated considerably of late. In the first
four months of 2011, consumer prices rose
by no less than 11/2% after seasonal adjust-
ment, and year-on-year HICP inflation in-
creased from 2.2% in December to 2.8% in
April. This was mainly due to the steep rise incrude oil prices on the world markets, which
led to sharp appreciation in consumer prices
for energy. Food prices have likewise climbed
significantly in the past few months, driven
by global developments. The rate of inflation
for services broke away from its cyclical low
but remained below the rates recorded im-
mediately before the crisis despite some
countries having substantially increased their
VAT rates. This reflects, among other things,
the impact of the wage moderation caused
by high unemployment in the euro area. For
goods excluding energy and food, sharp price
rises in the upstream stages of the economy
have not yet fed through to a discernible in-
crease in price inflation. However, the change
in the statistical treatment of seasonal goods
introduced at the beginning of 2011 has
increased the volatility of this time series
and hampered year-on-year comparisons.
This makes promptly estimating the price
trend considerably more difficult. In view of
the disruptive factors still affecting crude oil
markets and the robust global economic ac-
tivity, year-on-year HICP inflation is unlikely
to fall below 2% in the near term.2007 2008 2009 2010 2011100105110115120125130135140145150€ bn, seasonally and calendar adjusted
–50+5+10Log scale
Exports of goods
Imports of 
goods
Lin scale
Balance of tradeEuro-area external trade
Source: ECB.
Deutsche Bundesbank
Inflation clearly
above 2%

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
May 2011
25Monetary policy and
banking businessMonetary policy and money market
developments
The ongoing global economic recovery and
the still very expansionary monetary policy
contributed to the continued positive eco-
nomic developments in the euro area over
the winter months. The recovery, driven large-
ly by export growth to date, has strengthened
business confidence and makes a rapid up-
turn in domestic demand, especially gross
fixed capital formation, look likely, which
should in turn increasingly buoy the econ-
omy. Against this backdrop and given the
continued upwards movement in commodity
prices, the Governing Council of the ECB con-
cluded that the upside risks to price stability
in the euro area warranted an adjustment of
the exceptionally accommodative monetary
policy stance. In early April it therefore de-
cided to raise key interest rates by 25 basis
points with effect from 13 April 2011. As the
present corridor width of 150 basis points
was left untouched, the Eurosystem is cur-
rently remunerating balances held in the
deposit facility at1/2% and charging 2% for
recourse to the marginal lending facility. The
main refinancing rate stands at 11/4%.
During the first quarter of 2011, banks re-
duced their excess liquidity appreciably, amid
fluctuations. On the one hand, this led to a
further narrowing of the average spread be-
tween overnight rates and the main refinan-
cing rate. On the other hand, full allotment
in refinancing operations caused demand-
driven fluctuations in excess liquidity to be
reflected in the overnight rate. From a mon-
etary policy perspective, however, this in-ECB Governing
Council raises
key interest
rates by 25 bp
Lower excess
liquidity triggers
a rise in
overnight rates

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
EUROSYSTEM
Monthly Report
May 2011
26Deutsche BundesbankMoney market management and liquidity needs
During the three reserve maintenance periods from
19 January to 12 April 2011, euro-area credit institutions’
need for central bank liquidity determined by autonomous
liquidity factors fell by €44.4 billion in net terms. The de-
mand for liquidity from banknotes in circulation decreased
by €9.5 billion, owing to the usual seasonal fall in demand
for banknotes in the January-February 2011 maintenance
period, counteracting the sharply increased demand in the
pre-Christmas period. Changes in the remaining autono-
mous factors also contributed to a decline in demand for
liquidity in the period under review. First, general govern-
ment deposits with the Eurosystem went down by €8.2 bil-
lion on balance and, second, if the net foreign reserves and
the other factors are taken together, a move which elim-
inates liquidity-neutral valuation effects, there was a re-
newed decrease in liquidity needs of €26.7 billion. One rea-
son for this outcome was that several national central
banks of the Eurosystem increased their holdings of euro-
denominated securities not related to monetary policy.
However, the disbursements of the Bundesbank profits in
the amount of €2.2 billion on 8 March also contributed to
this effect. Minimum reserve requirements declined by a
total of €1.2 billion in the three maintenance periods and
led to a further decline in demand for central bank liquid-
ity.
As in previous months, the Eurosystem made it easier for
credit institutions to obtain liquidity by fully meeting their
demand for central bank liquidity – over and above the
benchmark amount. Liquidity-providing open-market op-
erations continued to be carried out as fixed-rate tenders
with full allotment of the submitted bids (see table on
page 29). In addition, at its meeting on 3 March 2011, the
Governing Council of the ECB decided to continue the full
allotment policy both in main and longer-term refinancing
operations at least until the end of the June-July 2011
maintenance period. The three-month refinancing oper-
ations will again be allotted at the fixed rate, which is in-
dexed to the average of the minimum bid rates or the
main refinancing rates of the main refinancing operations
over the life of this operation.
Having benefited from the reduced demand for liquidity
from autonomous factors and the reserve requirement, de-
mand for liquidity in open-market operations decreased
markedly in the period under review. Comparing period
averages, despite the volume of longer-term refinancing
operations growing by around €19 billion (net), the vol-
ume of main refinancing operations declined substantially
by around €100 billion. The banks’ weakened demand led
to a perceptibly lower outstanding refinancing volumeand caused average recourse to the deposit facility in the
Eurosystem per maintenance period to fall considerably:
comparing period averages, a net decrease of just over €43
billion was recorded in the period under review. By con-
trast, recourse to the marginal lending facility, which was
generally rather moderate over the three maintenance
periods under review, increased temporarily in the Febru-
ary-March period: Due to special effects arising from the
restructuring of the Irish banking sector, recourse peaked
at as high as €17 billion.
The purchases made as part of the Securities Market Pro-
gramme (SMP) continued in the period under review,
albeit to a small extent. Overall, the amount outstanding
– even if matured securities are taken into account – in-
creased by €0.5 billion to total €77.0 billion in this period.
The weekly liquidity-absorbing fine-tuning operations al-
most fully neutralised the liquidity-providing effect that
resulted from the programme. Only in the January-Febru-
ary maintenance period did a slight underbidding occur in
the course of an SMP liquidity absorbing tender. Further-
more, the Eurosystem continued to conduct a liquidity-
absorbing fine-tuning operation on the last day of every
maintenance period throughout the period under review
in order to withdraw excess central bank liquidity no long-
er needed to meet reserve requirements.
The merely three week long January-February 2011 main-
tenance period was characterised by at times scarce liquid-
ity which resulted from a relatively low level of excess li-
quidity (ie central bank liquidity exceeding the benchmark
amount) and left its mark on overnight money in the form
of increased volatility and high rates. Despite the fact that,
in the first two weeks of the period, the outstanding
volume of main and longer-term refinancing operations
(excluding liquidity-absorbing fine-tuning operations) was
– at an average of around €484 billion – slightly above the
level recorded in the last week of the preceding period, an
increased demand for liquidity from autonomous factors,
the hitherto limited progress in fulfilling the minimum re-
serve requirements and – notwithstanding these circum-
stances – the high recourse to the deposit facility (meas-
ured in terms of excess liquidity), led to a certain liquidity
shortage. Boosted by end-of-the-month effects, the EONIA
climbed to 1.32% and was thus well above the main refi-
nancing rate of 1.00%. In response to this, credit institu-
tions significantly increased their demand for liquidity by
around €48 billion to €214 billion in the final main refinan-
cing operation of the period. This, in turn, led to a sharp
decline of up to 0.35% in EONIA fixings and a rebound in
recourse to the deposit facility. The daily use of the deposit

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
May 2011
27facility averaged €39 billion over the period compared
with €66 billion in the previous period. At the same time,
the reduced liquidity supply caused EONIA to rise to an
average of 0.85% in this period, which was substantially
up on the previous period (0.47%). The underlying EONIA-
turnover remained virtually unchanged at an average of
€40.9 billion compared with the previous period (€40.4 bil-
lion). Secured overnight money trading on Eurex Repo’s
GC Pooling trading platform saw a similar development in
rates. On a volume-weighted average, the overnight rate
was recorded at 0.93% (previous period 0.43%), while the
respective turnover averaged €9.4billion (previous period
€12.4 billion).
In the February-March maintenance period, demand for li-
quidity from the banks declined noticeably, primarily in
the case of the main refinancing operations. This was due
to the average allotment volume in the main refinancing
operations dropping to €134 billion, having still stood at
€185 billion in the previous period. As a result, recourse to
the deposit facility also decreased to €27 billion on average
over the period. With regard to overnight rates, the devel-
opment of EONIA followed the typical pattern. With high
fixings at the beginning of the period (up to 1.093%),
which were mainly attributable to frontloading on the
part of credit institutions, the rates for overnight money
gradually declined to 0.38% as the period progressed.
EONIA was thus recorded at 0.66% on average – almost
20 basis points lower than in the previous period. This de-
cline had virtually no impact on underlying trading activity
as the relevant average EONIA-turnover (€41.1 billion) re-
mained at the average level of the previous period. On
average over the period, the secured overnight rate on GC
Pooling was likewise significantly down on the period at
0.62% while turnover increased (average volume €11.9 bil-
lion).
Credit institutions’ interest in main refinancing operations
continued to subside in the March-April maintenance
period – no more than €97 billion were demanded and al-
lotted in these operations on average over the period. To-
wards the end of the maintenance period the outstanding
volume of main and longer-term refinancing operations
(excluding fine-tuning operations) stood at roughly €407
billion (€70 billion less compared with the beginning of
the January-February reserve period). In addition, recourse
to the deposit facility in the Eurosystem decreased to an
average of €23 billion in this period. EONIA trended stead-
ily downwards from 0.84% at the beginning of the main-
tenance period to 0.53% on the penultimate day. How-
ever, the reference rate peaked at the end of the quarter(end-March) – at 0.90%. The period average (0.67%) re-
mained at the previous periods’ level. Secured overnight
money trading on GC Pooling followed a similar path to
EONIA in this maintenance period too, with the exception
of the end of the quarter, there was a gradual fall in rates
which ultimately generated an average of 0.63% over the
period (given an average turnover of €11.5 billion).
In the subsequent April-May maintenance period, the
main refinancing operations and reserve period tenders
were conducted at the new main refinancing rate of
1.25% after the Governing Council of the ECB decided to
increase the key interest rate by 25 basis points at its meet-
ing on 7 April.Factors determining bank liquidity1
€ billion; changes in the daily averages of the reserve
maintenance periods vis-à-vis the previous period
2011
Item19 Jan
to
8 Feb9 Feb
to
8 Mar9 Mar
to
12 Apr
I Provision (+) or absorption (–) of
central bank balances due to changes
in autonomous factors
1 Banknotes in circulation
(increase: –) + 11.9 + 1.1 – 3.5
2 Government deposits with the
Eurosystem (increase: –) – 19.9 + 11.4 + 16.7
3 Net foreign assets2+ 22.2 + 0.3 – 5.9
4 Other factors2– 18.4 + 13.2 + 15.3
Total – 4.2 + 26.0 + 22.6
II Monetary policy operations of the
Eurosystem
1 Open market operations
(a) Main refinancing operations – 11.6 – 51.0 – 37.1
(b) Longer-term refinancing
operations + 1.6 + 2.8 + 14.4
(c) Other operations – 11.5 + 1.7 + 0.5
2 Standing facilities
(a) Marginal lending facility – 0.4 + 7.5 – 6.8
(b) Deposit facility (increase: –) + 27.3 + 12.3 + 3.9
Total + 5.4 – 26.7 – 25.1
III Change in credit institutions’ current
accounts (I + II) + 1.2 – 0.7 – 2.4
IV Change in the minimum reserve
requirement (increase: –) – 1.8 + 0.7 + 2.3
1For longer-term trends and the Deutsche Bundesbank’s contribu-
tion, see pages 14* and 15* of the Statistical Section of this Monthly
Report. — 2Including end-of-quarter valuation adjustments with no
impact on liquidity.

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
EUROSYSTEM
Monthly Report
May 2011
28creased volatility was not problematic as, in
the light of developments in the longer-term
money market sector, it did not impair the
ability of the main refinancing rate to signal
the monetary policy stance. This was not
least due to the fact that market participants
understood the demand-driven reasons for
the greater volatility in very short-term money
market rates.Following its monetary policy meeting at the
beginning of March, the Governing Council
of the ECB highlighted the upside risks to
price stability. Notwithstanding the increased
fluctuations in very short-term money market
rates, this generated a perceptible increase in
longer-term money market rates, accompan-
ied by greatly reduced volatility in this market
segment. This prompt upward revision of
interest rate expectations bolstered and
strengthened the gradual upward movement
exhibited by both the secured (Eurepo) and
the unsecured (Euribor) money market rates
since the second half of 2010. As the upward
trend in secured money market rates was
more pronounced than in unsecured interest
rates across all maturities, the yield spread be-
tween the two rates (depo-repo spread),
which can be interpreted as a risk premium,
narrowed from the beginning of the year on-
wards and is now below its average of the
last twelve months across all maturities. That
said, the renewed widening of the differential
between the 12-month and three-month
depo-repo spreads observed since the escal-
ation of the sovereign debt crisis in May 2010
indicates a growing maturity-based differenti-
ation in market participants’ risk perception.
At the beginning of March, the Governing
Council of the ECB decided to continue con-
ducting all its refinancing operations with full
allotment for as long as necessary, but at
least until mid-July 2011.Money market interest rates
in the euro area
1 Monthly averages. — 2 Only on 8 October 
2008 2.75%. — 3 Three-month Euribor less 
three-month Eurepo. —  Average from 1 
to 17 May 2011.
Deutsche Bundesbank2008 2009 2010 201100.51.01.52.02.53.03.54.04.55.05.56.06.57.0
050100150200Difference between unsecured 
and secured three-month 
interbank lending rates 1, 32
Basis
points%
Marginal lending rate
Three-month Euribor1
EONIA1
Minimum bid rate or fixed
interest rate for main
refinancing operations
Deposit rateLonger-term
money market
rates on
increasing
upward trend
Full allotment
to be continued

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
May 2011
29Monetary developments in the euro area
M3 growth accelerated perceptibly in the first
quarter of 2011. During the period under re-
view, renewed strong lending to the private
sector, along with large inflows of funds from
abroad, proved instrumental in boosting
monetary expansion in the euro area. Against
this background, the trend acceleration in
the annual growth rate of M3 in evidencesince the second quarter of 2010 continued
apace.
Looking at the components of M3, during
the period under review domestic investors’
interest was mainly focused on short-term
deposits which, since they are remunerated
at close-to-market rates, were being accumu-
lated heavily even prior to the latest rate
increase by the Eurosystem in April 2011.Open market operations of the Eurosystem*
Value
dateType of
transaction 1Maturity
in daysActual
allotment
in € billionDeviation
from the
benchmark
in € billion 2Marginal
rate/fixed
rate
%Allotment
ratio
%Weighted
rate
%Cover
ratio 3Number
of bidders
19.01.11 MRO (FRT) 7 176.9 – 50.6 1.00 100.00 – 1.00 171
19.01.11 S-LTRO (FRT) 21 70.4 – 1.00 100.00 – 1.00 45
19.01.11 FTO (–) 7 – 76.5 – 0.80 20.73 0.69 1.36 62
26.01.11 MRO (FRT) 7 165.6 – 29.9 1.00 100.00 – 1.00 209
26.01.11 FTO (–) 7 – 76.5 – 0.99 80.53 0.89 1.16 58
27.01.11 LTRO (FRT) 91 71.1 – 1.04 4 100.00 – 1.00 165
02.02.11 MRO (FRT) 7 213.7 83.7 1.00 100.00 – 1.00 371
02.02.11 FTO (–) 7 – 68.2 – 1.00 100.00 0.85 1.00 53
08.02.11 FTO (–) 1 – 158.7 – 0.80 100.00 0.78 1.00 161
09.02.11 MRO (FRT) 7 156.7 – 25.3 1.00 100.00 – 1.00 220
09.02.11 S-LTRO (FRT) 28 61.5 – 1.00 100.00 – 1.00 42
09.02.11 FTO (–) 7 – 76.5 – 0.95 98.51 0.87 1.22 66
16.02.11 MRO (FRT) 7 137.0 59.0 1.00 100.00 – 1.00 253
16.02.11 FTO (–) 7 – 76.5 – 0.80 76.69 0.71 1.34 73
23.02.11 MRO (FRT) 7 119.5 12.5 1.00 100.00 – 1.00 189
23.02.11 FTO (–) 7 – 77.0 – 0.70 22.89 0.58 1.24 74
24.02.11 LTRO (FRT) 91 39.8 – ... 4 100.00 – 1.00 192
02.03.11 MRO (FRT) 7 124.4 53.4 1.00 100.00 – 1.00 182
02.03.11 FTO (–) 7 – 77.5 – 0.65 18.73 0.56 1.23 71
08.03.11 FTO (–) 1 – 95.8 – 0.80 100.00 0.79 1.00 141
09.03.11 MRO (FRT) 7 111.3 – 45.7 1.00 100.00 – 1.00 185
09.03.11 S-LTRO (FRT) 35 82.5 – 1.00 100.00 – 1.00 52
09.03.11 FTO (–) 7 – 77.5 – 0.90 63.38 0.83 1.23 65
16.03.11 MRO (FRT) 7 100.5 64.5 1.00 100.00 – 1.00 177
16.03.11 FTO (–) 7 – 77.5 – 0.69 73.89 0.66 1.54 74
23.03.11 MRO (FRT) 7 89.4 65.4 1.00 100.00 – 1.00 173
23.03.11 FTO (–) 7 – 77.5 – 0.70 36.09 0.64 1.38 63
30.03.11 MRO (FRT) 7 100.4 – 48.1 1.00 100.00 – 1.00 174
30.03.11 FTO (–) 7 – 76.5 – 1.00 79.75 0.72 1.01 58
31.03.11 LTRO (FRT) 91 129.5 – ... 4 100.00 – 1.00 290
06.04.11 MRO (FRT) 7 84.5 53.0 1.00 100.00 – 1.00 161
06.04.11 FTO (–) 7 – 77.0 – 0.64 46.41 0.59 1.57 76
12.04.11 FTO (–) 1 – 78.9 – 0.80 100.00 0.79 1.00 131
*For more information on the Eurosystem’s operations
from 13 October 2010 to 18 January 2011, see Deutsche
Bundesbank, Monthly Report, February 2011, p 25. —
1MRO: main refinancing operation, LTRO: longer-term
refinancing operation, S-LTRO: supplementary longer-
term refinancing operation, FTO: fine-tuning operation(+: liquidity providing operation, –: liquidity absorbing
operation), FRT: fixed-rate tender. — 2Calculation accor-
ding to publication after MRO allotment. — 3Ratio of
total bids to the allotment amount. — 4The interest rate
corresponds to the average minimum bid rate of the
MROs conducted over the life of this operation.
Deutsche Bundesbank
Discernible
monetary
growth in first
quarter of 2011Greater
demand for M3
components
remunerated at
close-to-market
rates

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
EUROSYSTEM
Monthly Report
May 2011
30Taken as a whole, in the first quarter of 2011,
M3 components remunerated at close-to-
market rates boasted seasonally adjusted and
annualised three-month growth of 41/2%,
and were thus well above the figure recorded
in the previous quarter. At the same time,
seasonally adjusted annual growth, at just
over 2%, entered positive territory for the
first time since mid-2009.
By contrast, during the period under review,
growth in currency in circulation and over-
night deposits, which together form the M1
aggregate, was again down in the reporting
period from the preceding quarters. Overall,
at just under 11/2%, the seasonally-adjusted
and annualised three-month rate for the re-
porting quarter fell to its lowest level since
mid-2008.In the reporting period, M3 growth was also
dampened by the marked net outflows in
marketable financial instruments. This was
essentially due to the sizeable net outflows
from money market fund shares already ob-
served since mid-2009 that are likely a reflec-
tion of the comparatively low remuneration
on this form of investment. Conversely, short-
term debt securities of monetary financial in-
stitutions held by non-banks (with a maturity
of up to two years) recorded noticeable posi-
tive net inflows for the first time since the be-
ginning of 2010, which is probably due to ris-
ing interest rates at the short end of the ma-
turity spectrum.
Among the counterparts of M3, loans to the
euro area private sector again rose sharply in
the first quarter of 2011. The upward trend
seen in the preceding three quarters thus
continued between January and March 2011.
In seasonally adjusted and annualised terms,
unsecuritised lending in the reporting period
increased by 21/2%. From a sectoral perspec-
tive it can be discerned that, unchanged
from the previous quarter, loans to house-
holds continued to be granted on a large
scale. As before, this was largely driven by
the strong growth in lending for house
purchase, the majority component of house-
hold borrowing, at a current seasonally ad-
justed and annualised three-month rate of
61/2%. In addition, loans to non-financial cor-
porations also increased significantly follow-
ing clear outflows in the previous quarter; the
corresponding seasonally adjusted and annu-
alised three-month rate for this sector stood
at just under 31/2%. In this sector, lending
was focused on short and long-term matur-Monetary developments in the euro
area
Changes in € billion, seasonally adjusted
2010 2011Monetary aggregate in a balance
sheet context Q4 Q1
Monetary aggregate M3
(=1+2-3-4-5) 21,759 50,007
Components:
Currency in circulation and
overnight deposits (M1) 17,094 15,554
Other short-term deposits
(M2-M1) 4,875 40,293
Marketable instruments (M3-M2) – 210 – 5,840
Counterparts
1. Total credit to non-MFIs in
the euro area 236,308 25,213
Credit to general govern-
ment 176,396 – 43,758
Credit to private-sector
non-MFIs in the euro area 59,912 68,971
2. Net external assets – 36,230 163,019
3. Central government deposits 30,219 – 22,064
4. Longer-term financial
liabilities to other non-MFIs
in the euro area 82,441 82,134
5. Other counterparts of M3
(residual) – 65,659 – 78,155
Deutsche Bundesbank
Demand for
highly liquid M3
components
still decliningMarketable
financial
instruments see
discernible
decrease
Expansion
of lending
business with
domestic private
non-banks

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
May 2011
31ities while medium-term loans (with a matur-
ity of over one and up to five years) againshrank by a significant margin in the report-ing period. Furthermore, euro-area banks’lending operations to the domestic privatesector in the months January to March 2011were characterised by a perceptible decreasein loans to other financial intermediaries.However, as such loans are mainly indirectinterbank transactions, they are not per se
accompanied by constrained lending to theprivate non-banking sector.
In the quarter under review, inflows of loans
to the domestic private sector were accom-panied by a considerable drop in lending togeneral government, which had still bur-geoned substantially as late as the final quar-ter of 2010. Banks reduced their holdings ofsecurities issued by the public sector as wellas of unsecured loans. At the same time,there was also a marked decrease in the cen-tral governments’ deposits, which are notpart of the monetary aggregate M3. On bal-ance, however, banks’ net credit supply togeneral government declined by a significantmargin, thus dampening the M3 growth seenin the first quarter of 2011.
By contrast, the net external assets of the
euro-area MFI sector, which had been scaledback somewhat in earlier quarters, rose ex-tremely sharply, which in and of itself had anexpansionary effect on monetary growth.This was attributable to a large increase in ex-ternal assets combined with a marked declinein external liabilities. Conversely, in the re-porting period M3 growth was again re-strained by significant monetary capital for-Components and
counterparts of the money stock in the euro area
1 In  percent,  12-month  flows. —  2 In  per-
centage points. —  3 Taken in isolation, an 
increase curbs M3 growth.
Deutsche Bundesbank2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 201150510152025
–+++++
–10–50+5+10+15+20+25+30
505101520
–++++Seasonally adjusted, quarterly
... components of the money stock
... counterparts
Sectoral growth contributions 2of which
Loans to the private sectorGrowth rate 1 of M3 and 
the contributions to growth 2 of the ...
Remaining balancesheet itemsNet external
asset position
Longer-term financialliabilities to other non-MFIs
 3
Growth rate 1 
Financial 
corporations
Non-financial 
corporationsHouseholds Credit to the
private sector M2 – M1
M3 – M2 M1M3
M3Considerable
drop in loans
to general
government
Extremely sharp
rise in net
external asset
position flanked
by significant
monetary capital
formation

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
EUROSYSTEM
Monthly Report
May 2011
32mation, which was primarily driven by the
sharp increase in long-term bank debt secur-
ities (with a maturity of over two years).
Considered as a whole, the upward trend
in the underlying monetary dynamics – the
measure that is ultimately relevant for infla-
tion – that has been in place for a number of
quarters continued in the first quarter of
2011. That monetary expansion accelerated
was also reflected in inflation risk indicators
derived from monetary data, some of which
currently point to pronounced upside risks to
price stability over the monetary policy hori-
zon. However, the high degree of uncertainty
associated with these indicators at present
should not be overlooked.German banks’ deposit and lending
business with domestic customers
At just over 21/2%, deposit growth among
German banks resurged in the first quarter of
2011 following a mere 1% in the previous
quarter. As in the euro area as a whole, this
revival was primarily due to growing add-
itions to short-term deposits. In this context,
Germany likewise experienced particularly
strong inflows of short-term time deposits
(with an agreed maturity of up to two years).
This development is most likely attributable
to the relatively high rate of interest on this
form of investment compared with other in-
vestment options.
As in the preceding three quarters, there was
a further net reduction in longer-term bank
deposits in Germany in the first quarter of
2011 which, compared with the previous re-
porting period, occurred at a slightly acceler-
ated pace. This reduction, which spanned all
sectors, is likely to have been due to the fact
that the interest rate on longer-term bank de-
posits in Germany did not go up to the same
extent as capital market yields.
At a seasonally adjusted and annualised
three-month rate of -31/2%, German banks’
lending to domestic non-banks went down in
the reporting period, which, as in the previ-
ous quarter, was largely the result of reduced
lending to general government. This devel-
opment was flanked by a slight decline in
banks’ lending to the domestic private sector,
mainly on the back of reduced loan volumes,
which fell to a seasonally adjusted and annu-
alised three-month rate of just over -1/2%Lending and deposits of monetary
financial institutions (MFIs) in
Germany*
Changes in € billion, seasonally adjusted
2010 2011
Item Q4 Q1
Deposits of domestic non-MFIs 1
Overnight 13.8 1.7
With agreed maturities
of up to 2 years – 11.8 18.4
of over 2 years 0.1 – 4.9
Redeemable at notice
of up to 3 months 8.7 3.4
of over 3 months – 3.7 0.4
Lending
to domestic enterprises and
households
Loans 21.9 – 4.0
of which to households 2 5.1 2.2
to non-financial
corporations 3 – 1.6 12.5
Securities 3.3 0.0
to domestic general government
Loans 70.0 – 15.4
Securities 3.9 – 10.7
*As well as banks (including building and loan associations,
but excluding the Bundesbank), monetary financial institu-
tions (MFIs) here also include money market funds. End-of-
quarter data, adjusted for statistical changes. — 1Enterprises,
households and general government excluding central
government. — 2Including non-profit institutions serving
households. — 3Including non-financial quasi-corporations.
Deutsche Bundesbank
Slight upside
risks to price
stability from
a monetary
perspectiveGreater
demand for
short-term
bank deposits
of late
Continued
reduction of
longer-term
deposit types
Slight decline in
banks’ lending
to the domestic
private sector,...

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
May 2011
33after having stood at just under 4% in the pre-
vious quarter. The clear expansion of credit tonon-financial corporations and householdswas overshadowed by the decrease in loans tofinancial corporations, following a consider-able increase one quarter previously. Theextreme volatility of unsecuritised loans tofinancial corporations since the fourth quarterof 2008 therefore continued unabated.
At a seasonally adjusted and annualised
three-month rate of 6
1/2%, the increase in
lending to non-financial corporations wasequivalent in strength to that last seen in thefourth quarter of 2008. Growth was recordedin all maturity segments, with short-termloans experiencing the greatest percentageincrease. Unsecuritised loans to householdsalso put in a positive performance (
1/2% net).
The moderately negative performance ofconsumer credit and of other loans to house-holds was offset by the perceptible increasein lending for house purchase (1
1/2%). While
mortgage rates went up again slightly, theyremain reasonably priced in a long-term com-parison. Overall, loans to households havenow recorded gains for the eighth consecu-tive quarter.
German banks’ lending policies are likely to
have supported developments in terms ofcredit to the private sector during the firstquarter of this year, with banks participatingin the Bank Lending Survey (BLS) reportingthat they had relaxed their lending policiesappreciably in that quarter. In the previousquarter, this had only applied to a few indi-vidual sectors of the bank lending business.According to the results of the latest surveyround, credit standards in lending to both en-
terprises and households eased somewhat inthe reporting period. Furthermore, the mar-gins on average loans were narrowed consid-erably in some cases. Higher-risk borrowers,too, benefited from somewhat lower marginsin consumer credit, whereas margins for risk-ier loans to enterprises and private loansfor house purchase remained virtually un-changed. This was very much due to partici-pating banks’ renewed optimism in their per-ception of risk. The banks expect little changeto credit standards in the coming quarter.
At the same time, they observed a clear in-
crease in demand for loans to the private sec-tor; owing to increased fixed investment andcurrently low interest rates, this concernedmainly long-term loans.Loans of German banks to 
selected domestic sectors
1 Year-on-year rate of change.
Deutsche Bundesbank2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 201121012345
––+++++Financial
corporations
Non-financial
corporations
HouseholdsGrowth contributions
in percentage pointsSeasonally adjusted, quarterly
Growth rate 1 in %
... whereas
loans to
non-financial
corporations
returned to
late-2008
growth rate
Banks relaxed
their lending
policies
appreciably in
the first quarter
of 2011
Marked
increase in
demand

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
EUROSYSTEM
Monthly Report
May 2011
34Banking conditions in Germany
1 According to harmonised MFI interest rate statistics. — 2 According to the Bank Lending Survey, difference 
between the numbers of respondents reporting “tightened considerably” and “tightened somewhat”and the 
numbers of respondents reporting “eased somewhat” and “eased considerably” as a percentage of the re-
sponses given. — 3 Expectations for  2011 Q2.
Deutsche Bundesbank02 03 04 05 06 07 08 09 10 20113.54.04.55.05.56.06.57.07.58.08.59.09.510.0
–300+30
–300+30
–60–300+30+60
2002 03 04 05 06 07 08 09 10 11–60–300+302.02.53.03.54.04.55.05.56.06.57.0
603003060
––++
9060300306090
–––+++Credit to non-financial corporations Credit to households
% pa
%%% pa
%%
%
%Change in credit standards 2
Average loansRiskier loans
Average loansAverage loansRiskier loans
Riskier loans
Consumer creditLoans to enterprisesConsumer credit... with an initial rate fixation of 
    over 1 year and up to 5 years
Loans for house purchase... with an initial rate fixation of 
    over 5 yearsLoans to enterprises ...
... with an initial rate fixation
    of up to 1 year ...
Loans for house purchase... over €1 millionLoans for house purchase
with an initial rate fixation of 
over 5 years and up to 10 years... over €1 million
Loans to enterprisesConsumer credit ...
... with an initial rate fixation
    of over 5 years ...
... up to €1 million
3
Change in loan margins 2... up to €1 million
3
3Bank interest rates (new business) 1
3.03.54.04.55.05.5

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
May 2011
35Compared with the results for Germany,
credit supply conditions in the euro area as awhole in the first quarter of 2011 were, asexpected, more restrictive; credit standardswere tightened in all surveyed lines of busi-ness. The European banks cited not only cyc-lical but, given the ongoing sovereign debtcrisis, also – and primarily – bank-related fac-tors as reasons for this development.
As in the previous surveys, the BLS once
again contained an ad hoc question on theimpact of the financial crisis on respondents’wholesale funding. According to the bankmanagers surveyed in Germany, there was lit-tle change to access to wholesale funding onthe money and capital markets comparedwith the previous quarter, an assessmentlargely shared by the other European banksincluded in the sample.In the first quarter of 2011, the reporting in-
stitutions recorded a renewed increase inlending rates, particularly for loans with alonger period of interest rate fixation; this in-crease, however, was more pronounced thana quarter earlier. Interest rates for long-termloans for house purchase rose by just under50 basis points to 4.3%. Long-term loansto non-financial corporations were likewisepriced at a much higher level, standing at4.0% for large-scale loans and 4.3% forsmall-scale loans as this report went to press.Short-term loans to households were alsosomewhat more expensive compared withthe previous quarter, while the correspondingconditions for loans to enterprises fell by justunder ten basis points, irrespective of the sizeof the loan. Adjustments in the short-termsegment therefore lagged behind develop-ments in the money and capital markets.
Euro-area credit
standards
tightened,
however
Access to
wholesale
funding broadly
unchangedBank loans more
expensive,
particularly
those with
longer periods
of interest rate
fixation

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
EUROSYSTEM
Monthly Report
May 2011
36Financial marketsFinancial market environment
In the first months of 2011, developments
on the international financial markets were
largely characterised by the further improve-
ment in the economic outlook and by grow-
ing inflation worries; in some cases, both re-
sulted in rising capital market rates. The polit-
ical unrest in a number of North African
countries as well as the devastating earth-
quake in Japan led to heightened uncertainty
in the markets, but only temporarily. By con-
trast, the worsening debt crisis in individual
euro-area peripheral countries drove their
bond yields to record levels. For instance, Por-
tugal applied for international financial assist-
ance at the beginning of April 2011, which
the euro-area finance ministers approved on
16 May. Moreover, investors once again fo-
cused on doubts about Greece’s consolida-
tion path. The international equity markets
were largely unaffected by these negative
factors; with the exception of Japan, they
have rallied since the beginning of the year,
mainly because corporate earnings exceeded
expectations due to cyclical factors. The dif-
ferent interest rate expectations, in particular,
resulted in a shifting exchange rate land-
scape. Whilst the US dollar eased, the euro
recorded gains on balance.
Exchange rates
On the foreign exchange markets, the global
economic recovery and the increasing up-
ward trend in prices have been in the spot-
light since the beginning of the year. Market
players have increasingly been raising theFinancial
market trends
Euro exchange
rate develop-
ments against
the US
dollar, ...

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
May 2011
37question whether the strongly expansionary
monetary policy in the industrial countriesshould be tightened somewhat. The Govern-ing Council of the ECB also voiced concernabout inflation risks during its meeting at thebeginning of March. Rising inflation was alsoreported from the USA at that time, but theFederal Reserve placed more emphasis on thecontinuing risks for the economic upturn andproblems on the labour market. The impres-sion taking hold on the market that thetightening of monetary policy will materialiseearlier on this side of the Atlantic than in theUSA resulted in an increasingly positive yieldspread for the euro area and in an appreci-ation of the euro against the US dollar.
This monetary policy constellation gave rise
to continued appreciation pressure for theeuro in the spring, too. However, tensions inthe sovereign bond markets of some euro-area peripheral countries interrupted theappreciation of the euro temporarily, forexample when a rating agency downgradedthe credit rating of Greek bonds markedly inMarch. The Governing Council of the ECB didthen indeed raise the main policy rate at thebeginning of April, which reinforced theinterest rate spread vis-à-vis the USA. Invest-ors’ attention subsequently turned to theprecarious budgetary position of the USA,additionally burdening the US dollar. Bothcontroversy about the increase in the USborrowing limit and the downgrading of theoutlook for US bonds played a part in this.The appreciation of the euro came to an end,however, after the ECB Governing Councilmeeting at the beginning of May, whensome market players’ expectations of risinginterest rates in the euro area were deferred
to the future somewhat. In addition, reneweddiscussions about the fiscal situation inGreece and a further downgrading of itsbonds’ credit rating weighed on the euro. Asthis report went to press, the euro stood atUS$1.42, which represents an appreciation of6
1/2% since the beginning of the year.
Anticipation of an upcoming rise in lending
rates in the single currency area helped theeuro to gains against the yen, too, in the firsttwo months of the year. In March, the euro-yen rate was largely influenced by the tragicevents in Japan. At first, the yen appreciatedsubstantially, owing to speculation on a surgein capital inflows to Japan, which – it wasconjectured – would be fed by paymentsfrom reinsurers and the repatriation of fundsExchange rate of the euro 
against the US dollar and interest rate spreadbetween the euro area and the United States
Deutsche BundesbankJan Feb Mar Apr May
20111.301.331.361.391.421.451.48
0.40.60.81.01.21.4Daily data
US$
Per-
centagepointsLog scale
Euro exchange rate
Lin scale
Interest rate spread ...
... for three-month
    money market rates... for ten-year
government bonds
against the
yen ...

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
EUROSYSTEM
Monthly Report
May 2011
38by Japanese households and enterprises.
Owing to concerns about market develop-
ments becoming difficult to control, the cen-
tral banks of the G7 countries decided on
concerted yen sales, which led to an abrupt
depreciation of the yen. Given the likely
budgetary burdens arising from reconstruc-
tion, the Bank of Japan’s additional supply of
liquidity and the significant correction in the
outlook for the Japanese economy, the euro
appreciated further against the yen in the
weeks that followed. In addition, the
expectation of a sustained expansionary
Japanese monetary policy together with
speculation on further foreign exchange
intervention in the event of a marked yen
appreciation raised the attractiveness of the
yen as a financing currency for carry trades.
Recently, however, a correction movement
commenced against the yen similar to that
against the US dollar, putting the euro at 115
yen at the end of the reporting period, 61/2%
stronger than at the beginning of the year.
In view of the especially high inflation in the
United Kingdom and the corresponding ex-
pectation of upcoming monetary tightening,
the euro came under pressure against the
pound sterling at the beginning of the year.
This changed, however, after the Bank of
England indicated in mid-February that the
surge of inflation was caused by the general
increase in commodity prices along with the
increase in British value added tax and the
pound’s depreciation during the crisis. After
having contradicted market expectations in
this connection that it was preparing the
ground for a rise in lending rates, the euro
began to appreciate. News of the compara-tively sluggish economic recovery in the UK
brought the pound sterling under additional
pressure. In spite of the persistently high in-
flation rates, the Bank of England confirmed
it would continue the exceptionally relaxed
monetary policy during its meetings in March
and April which supported a further appreci-
ation of the euro. In May, market players’
relative interest rate expectations for the euro
and pound sterling shifted once again, caus-
ing the euro to weaken. As this report went
to press, it was trading at 0.88 pound
sterling, 21/2% stronger than at the beginning
of 2011.
Since the beginning of 2011, the euro’s aver-
age value vis-à-vis the currencies of 20 major
trading partners has appreciated by 3%.
While the single currency gained ground
against the above-mentioned currencies, it
depreciated against the currencies of central
European EU member states Poland, Romania,
the Czech Republic and Hungary. The price
competitiveness of euro-area suppliers com-
pared with important trading partners has
deteriorated further as a result of the euro
appreciation and continues to stand at an
unfavourable level.
Securities markets and portfolio
investment
The positive global economic development
also shaped events on the bond markets of
major industrial countries in early 2011. In
addition, growing inflation worries against
the backdrop of sharp price increases for
commodities and food influenced the nomin-... and against
the pound
sterlingEffective euro
exchange rate
International
bond markets

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
May 2011
39al yields. Recently the markets again focused
more strongly on the European debt crisis,which led to shifts in Federal bonds (Bunds),with a yield-reducing effect. Thus, since theend of December 2010, yields on Bunds witha residual maturity of ten years have in-creased only marginally by ten basis points tojust over 3%. By contrast, in spite of somefluctuations in the reporting period, yields onUS government bonds with the same matur-ity have dropped somewhat on balance tojust under 3
1/4%. Sentiment indicators that
fell short of market expectations, safe-havenflows as well as the Fed’s announcement tocontinue to keep central bank interest rateslow recently had a yield-lowering effect. Onthe other hand, a major US rating agency’sannouncement that it would give a negativeoutlook for the USA’s credit rating in view ofthe high level of sovereign debt only had atemporary yield-increasing effect on the bondmarket.
After Ireland had already requested inter-
national support to resolve its budgetaryproblems at the end of November 2010, Por-tugal requested international financial assist-ance at the beginning of April. Negotiationsabout a new austerity package had previouslyfailed in the Portuguese parliament, theminority government had announced it wasstepping down and the major rating agencieshad downgraded Portugal’s credit rating.Until this time, the yield spreads of ten-yearPortuguese government bonds to Bunds ofthe same maturity had increased by almost180 basis points compared with the begin-ning of the year. Since then, the yield spreadhas expanded again, albeit in extraordinarilythin markets, by just under 50 basis points to
599 basis points. Greek government bondyields have also increased significantly sincethe beginning of the year. Thus yields on ten-year government bonds climbed to almost16% for a time. The corresponding two-yearbonds yielded just under 25% for a shorttime. The huge increase in yields is probablyattributable to doubt about Greece’s abilityto consolidate and the associated debate ona possible debt restructuring. Through theincrease in risk premiums, the GDP-weightedyield dispersion expanded again in the euroarea and recently hovered just below a newall-time high, after declining somewhat inJanuary. The GDP-weighted average yieldspread of long-term euro-area governmentbonds over Bunds recently stood at the highlevel of 184 basis points.Yield spreads
in the euro area
Sources: Thomson Reuters and Bundesbank 
calculations.
Deutsche Bundesbank2009 2010 201101002003004005006007008009001,0001,1001,2001,300Daily data
Spread of ten-year 
government bonds against Bunds
GreeceBasis
points
Ireland
PortugalItaly
Spain
Further intensi-
fication of
European debt
crisis

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
EUROSYSTEM
Monthly Report
May 2011
40Increased inflation expectations manifested
themselves in the shift of the German yield
curve at the beginning of the year, rising for
shorter maturities in particular. The emphasis
on medium-term inflation risks following the
ECB Governing Council’s monetary policy
meeting in March was also reflected in the
upward revisions of interest rate expectations
in the market. Overall, the yield curve shifted
upwards across all maturities. In the shorter-
term maturity spectrum the increase was
stronger, which caused the yield curve to
flatten. The difference between ten and two-
year yields declined by 85 basis points to
147 basis points, moving closer to the even
smaller five-year average.
The financing conditions for European enter-
prises with the lowest investment-gradecategory, BBB, in the bond markets improved
slightly, in line with robust economic develop-
ments and waning stock price uncertainty.
All in all, at the end of the reporting period,
yields on euro-denominated corporate bonds
– as measured by the iBoxx bond index,
which comprises bonds issued by banks and
non-banks – were, at just shy of 51/2%, slight-
ly more than one-quarter percentage point
below the figure at the end of December. In
view of the slight increase in Bund yields, the
corresponding interest rate spreads narrowed
by just below 50 basis points. The lower pre-
mium for corporate bonds reflects investors’
increasing appetite for risk as well as the
market’s assessment of a lower credit risk for
those enterprises able to tap the capital
markets; this is also reflected in the markets
for corporate credit default swaps. Here the
credit derivatives index iTraxx Europe, which
is composed of credit default swaps referen-
cing investment grade credits with a maturity
of five years, has fallen by seven basis points
since the end of December and the compar-
able index for lower-rated enterprises (iTraxx
Europe Crossover) by 79 basis points.
The favourable financial market setting was
only partly reflected in buying and selling fig-
ures in the German bond market. In the first
quarter of 2011, total gross issue volume was
€3711/2billion, so that it was down on the
previous quarter’s €425 billion. After deduct-
ing the likewise lower redemptions and tak-
ing account of changes in issuers’ holdings of
their own bonds, domestic debt securities to-
talling €44 billion net were sold. In addition,
foreign borrowers sold debt securities for €22
billion on the German market. These wereYield curve on the German 
bond market *
* Interest rates for (hypothetical) zero-cou-
pon bonds (Svensson model), based on lis-
ted Federal securities.
Deutsche Bundesbank00123456789 1 000.51.01.52.02.53.03.5
Residual maturity in years%
18 May 2011
30 December 2010
Upward shift in
yield curveFinancing
conditions for
enterprises
Net sales in the
bond market
down

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
May 2011
41almost solely euro-denominated paper on
balance. Funds totalling €66 billion were thusraised in the German bond market in thereporting period.
Domestic enterprises used the improving
financing conditions in the capital market toissue debt securities worth €20
1/2billion net
in the first quarter of 2011. These weremainly bonds with a maturity of more thanone year. Here it should be noted that sinceJanuary 2011, issues of financial productslaunched in Germany, which are generallysold en bloc to group companies domiciled
abroad, are additionally recorded as sales ofother financial intermediaries. These mainlycomprise certificates. Total sales of this kindof paper reached €16 billion.
In the first quarter of 2011, the public sector
raised €19 billion in the bond market, com-pared with net redemptions of €85
1/2billion
in the previous quarter. Here central govern-ment issued mainly Federal notes (€16 bil-lion), to a lesser extent two-year FederalTreasury notes (Schätze) and 30-year Federalbonds (€3 billion and €2 billion respectively).By contrast, the German Federal governmentredeemed Federal Treasury discount paper(Bubills) and ten-year bonds totalling €3 bil-lion and €
1/2billion respectively. The German
Länder did not tap the capital market onbalance.
By contrast, domestic credit institutions
expanded their capital market debt slightlybetween January and March, by €4
1/2billion.
Here they issued mainly other bank debtsecurities (€9 billion), which allow flexiblestructuring, as well as mortgage Pfandbriefe
(€5
1/2billion) and specialised credit institu-
tions’ debt securities (€21/2billion). These
contrasted with redemptions of public Pfand-briefe (€12
1/2billion).
In the first quarter of 2011, foreign investors
were the main buyers; including the above-mentioned certificates, they added bondsworth €50 billion to their portfolios. Domesticnon-banks purchased debt securities for€27
1/2billion, primarily adding foreign secur-
ities. By contrast, German credit institutionsdisposed of interest-bearing paper in theamount of €11
1/2billion; in net terms they
sold exclusively domestic paper.
International stock markets were initially
bolstered by the continued improvement inInvestment activity in the German
securities markets
€ billion
2010 2011
Item Q1 Q4 Q1Debt securities
Residents 32.4 106.3 16.0
Credit institutions 2.1 – 28.9 – 11.4of which
Foreign debt securities 1.5 – 21.4 0.5
Non-banks 30.3 135.2 27.4of which
Domestic debt securities 11.9 3.5 5.9
Non-residents 7.6 8.9 49.8
Shares
Residents 7.7 25.9 8.9
Credit institutions 3.0 9.0 5.8of which
Domestic shares 3.8 7.7 7.6
Non-banks 4.7 16.8 3.1of which
Domestic shares 3.3 6.4 2.6
Non-residents – 0.4 – 2.6 – 8.9
Mutual fund shares
Investment in specialised funds 13.9 23.4 14.2
Investment in funds open tothe general public 7.0 2.7 0.6of which: Share-based funds – 0.4 4.0 0.2
Deutsche BundesbankIssues by
non-banks
Borrowing
by German
government
Sales of bank
debt securitiesPurchase of
debt securities

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
EUROSYSTEM
Monthly Report
May 2011
42economic prospects at the beginning of the
year, which was reflected in the better-than-
expected corporate results. Political unrest in
several North African countries and related
concerns about rising commodity prices then
led to an interruption in the upturn, however,
and (temporarily) to increased uncertainty in
the markets. In addition, the rise in the Euro-
system’s key interest rates, indicated at the
beginning of March and implemented inApril, initially dampened investors’ risk appe-
tite, as it heralded the end of the phase of
exceptionally low euro-area interest rates,
which the markets had originally not expect-
ed until the middle of the year. Equity mar-
kets suffered a setback in mid-March after
the devastating earthquake and nuclear
power plant catastrophe in Japan, which
prompted stock prices to plummet world-
wide. However, with the exception of the
Japanese equity market, all major internation-
al indices were able to recoup their losses
within a short period of time; this under-
scores investors’ confidence in the economic
upturn, which was supported further by posi-
tive corporate data at the start of the report-
ing season. Recently, uncertainty rose on the
stock market, however, leading to slight
price decreases. Measured against the broad-
based CDAX and Euro Stoxx indices, German
and European equities rose by 2% and 21/2%
respectively on balance from the end of De-
cember; US stocks (S&P 500) showed a some-
what stronger rise (+ 51/2%), whereas Japan-
ese shares were 61/2% lower.
The excess return investors demand for an
investment in European shares (Euro Stoxx) as
compared to a safe investment, which can be
calculated using a dividend discount model,
has risen since the end of last year – in spite
of price gains – by just over one-quarter
percentage point to around 7%. It therefore
remains considerably above the five-year
average (51/2%). This indicates that the price
level is well-founded and that investors are
still relatively cautious. This is also suggested
by the fact that the implied risk premium for
exposure to European banking stocks recent-203050100200
0510152025
2007 2008 2009 2010 201110203040506070Equity market
Sources: Thomson Reuters and Bundesbank 
calculations. —  1 Measure  of  the  risk  pre-
mium  demanded  by  investors.  Calculated 
from  three-stage  dividend  discount  model 
using three to five-year IBES expectations of 
profit  growth  and  long-term  GDP  growth 
expectations  (concensus  forecast). —  2 Ex-
pected  future  volatility,  calculated  from 
prices of options on the Euro Stoxx. Month-
ly averages.
Deutsche BundesbankEuro Stoxx 
banks
Lin scale
Equity risk premiums 1
Euro StoxxEuro Stoxx
Euro Stoxx 
banks%31 December 2006 = 100, log scale
Stock price indicesEnd-of-month levels
%
Implied volatility of the Euro Stoxx 2
International
stock prices up
despite short-
term setbacksEquity risk
premium

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
May 2011
43ly showed a further marked increase (to
91/4%). Investors are therefore demanding
significantly higher risk compensation forbank shares in comparison with other equi-ties for the first time since mid-2009.
Despite – on the whole – favourable price
development, issuance activity in the Germanstock market was still relatively subdued inthe first quarter of 2011. Domestic enter-prises issued €1
1/2billion worth of new shares,
the majority of which were unlisted equities.The outstanding amount of foreign equitiesin the German market sank by €1
1/2billion.
Equities were purchased primarily by Germancredit institutions (€6 billion), which boughtonly domestic shares on balance (€7
1/2billion).
Resident non-banks bought shares for €3 bil-lion, with domestic paper again accountingfor the lion’s share. By contrast, foreign in-vestors sold German shares (€9 billion intotal) – as was often the case in previousyears in the run-up to the dividend paymentdates.
During the reporting period, domestic invest-
ment companies recorded inflows of €15 bil-lion, after raising funds totalling €26 billion inthe previous three months. The fresh fundsbenefited mainly specialised funds reservedfor institutional investors (€14 billion). Of themutual funds open to the general public, inparticular mixed securities-based funds wereable to place mutual fund units (€1 billion),as were, albeit to a lesser extent, mixed fundsand open-end real estate funds (€
1/2billion
each). By contrast, bond-based funds re-deemed their own shares (€1
1/2billion).
Foreign funds traded in the German marketMajor items of the balance of
payments
€ billion
2010 2011
Item Q1 Q4 Q1
I Current account 1, 2 + 34.6 + 46.3 + 35.3
Foreign trade 1, 3 + 37.8 + 39.5 + 41.0
Services 1 – 0.9 + 2.2 – 0.3
Income 1 + 14.3 + 14.2 + 13.2
Current transfers 1 – 14.1 – 6.5 – 14.1
II Capital transfers 1, 4 + 0.3 – 0.5 + 0.9
III Financial account 1
(Net capital exports: –) – 32.8 – 42.5 – 57.1
1 Direct investment – 36.2 – 1.0 – 30.0
German investment
abroad – 43.3 – 11.3 – 28.3
Foreign investment in
Germany + 7.1 + 10.3 – 1.8
2 Portfolio investment – 15.2 – 107.7 + 26.8
German investment
abroad – 24.3 – 115.7 – 20.3
Shares + 3.4 – 2.3 + 4.6
Mutual fund shares – 7.8 – 3.2 – 2.8
Debt securities – 19.9 – 110.3 – 22.1
Bonds and notes 5 – 20.2 – 115.9 – 19.3
of which
Euro-denominated
bonds and notes – 28.1 – 60.7 – 18.2
Money market
instruments + 0.3 + 5.6 – 2.7
Foreign investment
in Germany + 9.2 + 8.0 + 47.1
Shares – 0.2 – 2.1 – 5.1
Mutual fund shares + 1.7 + 1.2 + 2.4
Debt securities + 7.6 + 8.9 + 49.8
Bonds and notes 5 + 13.2 – 7.3 + 31.4
of which
Public bonds and
notes + 16.5 + 8.4 + 22.7
Money market
instruments – 5.6 + 16.3 + 18.4
3 Financial derivatives 6 – 3.6 + 0.3 – 8.7
4 Other investment 7 + 22.9 + 66.4 – 43.8
Monetary financial
institutions 8 + 75.4 + 47.0 – 4.8
of which: short-term + 65.3 + 21.1 – 6.3
Enterprises and
households – 22.6 – 2.4 – 30.8
of which: short-term – 13.4 + 7.5 – 15.3
General government – 1.0 + 34.1 – 9.5
of which: short-term + 0.9 + 75.2 – 11.4
Bundesbank – 28.9 – 12.3 + 1.3
5 Change in reserve assets at
transaction values
(increase: –) 9 – 0.7 – 0.5 – 1.4
IV Errors and omissions – 2.0 – 3.3 + 20.8
1Balance. — 2Including supplementary trade items. — 3Special
trade according to the official foreign trade statistics (source:
Federal Statistical Office). — 4Including the acquisition/disposal
of non-produced non-financial assets. — 5Original maturity of
more than one year. — 6Securitised and non-securitised options
as well as financial futures contracts. — 7Includes financial and
trade credits, bank deposits and other assets. — 8Excluding the
Bundesbank. — 9Excluding allocation of SDRs and excluding
changes due to value adjustments.
Deutsche BundesbankStock market
funding and
stock purchases
Sales and
purchases of
mutual fund
shares

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
EUROSYSTEM
Monthly Report
May 2011
44acquired new resources totalling €3 billion
net in the first quarter of 2011. Domestic
non-banks were the main buyers, adding mu-
tual fund shares worth €15 billion to their
portfolios. This was domestic paper for the
most part. Foreign investors invested €21/2bil-
lion in domestic funds. Domestic credit insti-
tutions acquired mutual fund units worth
€1/2billion.
Direct investment
In the first quarter of 2011, there were net
outflows in direct investment from Germany
(€30 billion), after the flows were close to
balance in the last quarter of 2010. The main
reason for this was that domestic companies
increased their capital transfer to foreign
countries from €111/2billion to €281/2billion.
Intra-group financial and trade credits
accounted for €101/2billion of this sum.
Reinvested earnings and equity capital in-creases constituted a further €91/2billion and
€81/2billion respectively. Direct investment
last year was mainly focused on the Nether-
lands (€141/2billion), Austria (€51/2billion), the
United Kingdom (€21/2billion) as well as out-
side Europe, the USA (€3 billion). Holding
companies and manufacture of transport
equipment played a prominent role, with net
capital exports of €61/2billion and €41/2billion
respectively.
Transactions by foreign proprietors with their
German affiliates also led to capital exports
(€2 billion). Here they reduced their equity
capital in Germany by €41/2billion, primarily
as a result of the withdrawal of a French com-
pany’s involvement in a German energy
supply company. Money also flowed out of
Germany under intra-group loans (€11/2bil-
lion). By contrast, €4 billion reached affiliates
of foreign enterprises in Germany through
reinvested earnings.German direct
investment
abroadForeign direct
investment in
Germany

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
May 2011
45Economic conditions in
GermanyMacroeconomic situation
The German economy grew very strongly
after the new year 2011. According to a flash
estimate released by the Federal Statistical
Office, seasonally and calendar-adjusted real
gross domestic product (GDP) rose by 1.5%
in the first quarter of 2011, compared to the
previous quarter in which overall economic
output had expanded only moderately, at
0.4%, given cold and snowy winter weather
in December. During the period under re-
view, output growth was affected perceptibly
by catching-up effects. Quarter-on-quarter
GDP therefore considerably overstates under-
lying economic momentum. Nonetheless,
economic progress is unmistakable. The mas-
sive drop in economic activity caused by the
financial and economic crisis have been com-
pletely recouped in the past two years, with
two-thirds of the upswing coming in the past
twelve-month period. Year-on-year GDP
growth stood at a calendar-adjusted rate of
4.9% in the first quarter of 2011.
The economic upswing in Germany, triggered
by the global economic recovery, has now
spread beyond the directly affected sectors to
the overall economy. Despite the fact that
foreign demand lost some steam over the
past winter two-quarter period, the overall
global economic environment has remained
stable; on this basis, domestic enterprises
have retained their confidence. Many sectors’
investment and employment schedules are
geared towards growth given normal utilisa-
tion of production capacity, thereby generat-
ing an increasing amount of further-reaching
stimuli. The exceptionally good state of theGerman
economy grew
very strongly in
2011 Q1
Increasingly
balanced
demand profile

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
EUROSYSTEM
Monthly Report
May 2011
46labour market, in conjunction with the
prospect of perceptible earnings growth, is
promoting households’ propensity to make
big-ticket purchases. Private consumption
and residential housing construction have
benefited, especially as financing conditions
are favourable.
Following the turn of 2010-11, exports main-
tained their subdued trend of the preceding
months – after seasonal adjustment – before
then skyrocketing in March. Average first-
quarter total exports were a seasonally ad-
justed 4% higher in terms of value than a
quarter earlier. Taking inflation into account
reduces this figure by around one-half. The
basis for the upward trend remains intact
since economic activity in key sales markets
has remained brisk.In the first two months of 2011, business
with China once again showed the strongest
growth. Moreover, the value of goods sales
to the USA rose more strongly than in the
three preceding quarters. Among Germany’s
trading partners in Europe, exports to its east-
ern neighbours showed the strongest growth
once again; the sharp growth in exports to
Russia following the turn of the year, how-
ever, has to be seen in the light of the weak
autumn 2010 result.
The gap between nominal and real move-
ments was more pronounced for imports
than for exports. Imports probably rose only
slightly in real terms but cost a seasonally
adjusted 51/2% more than a quarter earlier;
prices rose considerably towards the end of
the reporting period. In this situation, energy
imports declined, above all. Enterprises were
also reluctant to purchase other goods from
foreign manufacturers. The deterioration in
the terms of trade was the major reason why
the trade surplus closed lower in the winter
of 2011, after seasonal adjustment, than in
the two preceding quarters.
The tragic events in Japan which have caused
extensive output losses there since March are
unlikely to be having any tangible impact on
the growth process in Germany. However,
Japan’s small share of the German economy’s
exports and imports is not the major factor.
Whether or not, with respect to Germany’s
imports from Japan, supply bottlenecks are
impairing domestic value added is not just a
function of the extent of bilateral trade rela-
tions. Given that Japan is very highly net-
worked with all of East Asia and this doesOverall output
Deutsche Bundesbank2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011102104106108110112114
–6–4–20+2+42000 = 100, price and seasonally adjusted
Log scale
GDP
Year-on-year
change%
Lin scale
Upward trend
in exports still
intactImports virtually
unchanged
amidst strong
price rises
Tragic events in
Japan probably
impacted little
on activity in
Germany

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
May 2011
47have a magnitude that is significant for
Germany’s imports, indirect effects, in and ofthemselves, could cause more damage.Disruptions in international production links,however, are likely only if Japanese sellersof complex inputs and intermediate goods– such as possibly some electronic com-ponents – have a central position in the worldmarket and are simultaneously not able toensure deliveries through factories other thanthose currently disrupted by earthquakes, thetsunami or power shortages. There currentlyseem to be few signs of this being the case,though.
The range of products exported by Japan to
Germany also shows specialisation not just inmotor vehicles but also in particular in elec-trical machinery and equipment and alsooptical and photography instruments. These
are largely capital goods or higher-end con-sumer goods, the time of purchase of whichcan usually be flexibly chosen by buyerswithin product-related or technological con-straints – with the exception of unforeseendisruptions.
Investment is likely to have been the main
driver of growth in Germany in the first quar-ter of 2011. The key factor was construction,which rapidly recouped the considerableweather-related output losses of last Decem-ber in the winter months amidst normalweather conditions and also benefited fromsharply rising demand. The procurement ofmachinery and equipment is also likely tohave risen further. The favourable economicoutlook has led most firms, looking at healthyKey groups of goods sold by Japanese firms in Germany’s range of imports*
Results for 2010
Memo item
Imports (€ million)
Group of goodsJapan’s
share oftotal im-ports(as a per-centage) From Japan Total
Optical and photographic instruments and equipment 37.2 1,282 3,443
Office machinery 32.8 2,317 7,069
Machinery for other goods sectors (including machines to manufacture electronic
construction components) 17.0 976 5,753
Other electrical equipment and components (inter alia LED/LCD) 16.9 818 4,836Instruments and appliances for measuring, testing and navigating 10.1 1,160 11,464Bearings, gears, gearing and driving elements 9.5 525 5,507Hydraulic and pneumatic systems as well as other pumps and compressors 9.1 720 7,878Consumer electronics 7.2 727 10,090
Electronic construction components 6.7 1,555 23,356Other chemical productse 6.6 650 9,867Motor vehicles and engines, motorcycles 3.4 1,357 40,154Parts and accessories for motor vehicles 3.0 861 28,276Computers and peripheral equipment 2.8 665 23,363
All goods 2.7 22,065 806,163
*Imports from Japan with a volume in excess of € 500
million.
Deutsche Bundesbank
Investment
extremely
buoyant also
due to
catching-up
effects in
construction

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
EUROSYSTEM
Monthly Report
May 2011
48capacity utilisation and ample scope for in-
ternal financing, to make further investment,
even though investment in large equipment
and vehicles calmed down in a sense follow-
ing the expiry of the favourable tax depreci-
ation rules at the end of 2010. Moreover,
during the period under review inventory
investment is likely to have developed favour-
ably. This is based on offsetting effects fol-
lowing autumn 2010, in which dampeningfactors played a role. For instance, at that
time inventories of just-finished capital
goods, in particular, were being depleted. In
addition, towards the end of 2010, the
increased output of, in particular, machinery
and commercially used automobiles depleted
inventories of inputs and intermediate goods,
especially since ice and snow on transport
routes brought the flow of spare parts to a
standstill in many places.
The moderate increase in private consump-
tion probably continued after the turn of the
year 2010-11. Although rising consumer
price inflation had, in and of itself, a dampen-
ing impact on purchasing power, household
incomes improved perceptibly, however,
thanks to rising employment and a continued
return to normal in working hours as well as
high bonus payments. Amidst all the current
uncertainty surrounding the statistical data,
which remain unsatisfactory, retail sales are
still likely to have risen on the quarter after
seasonal adjustment. In addition, fuel con-
sumption recovered following sharply limited
mobility the preceding December owing to
bad weather. In the light of high prices, heat-
ing oil was in much less demand than at the
beginning of the heating season. Private car
business tended to be muted during the
period under review.
Sectoral trends
A solid underlying pace has been the defining
feature of the upswing in the industrial sector
for months. In the first quarter of 2011, the
growth of industrial output, at a seasonallyUnderlying trends
in foreign trade
1 Adjusted for the price indices for foreign 
trade.
Deutsche Bundesbank90100110120130
100110120Seasonally adjusted, quarterly
To non-euro-area countries
To euro-area countries2005 = 100, log scale
Exports of goods  (price-adjusted)1
Jan-
FebTotal
Jan
Feb
€ bn
2007 2008 2009 2010 201190100110120130
Lin scale
Foreign trade balance90100110120
Imports of goods in total
(price-adjusted)1
0204060Muted increase
in household
consumption
Solid upswing
in the industrial
sector

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
May 2011
49adjusted 21/4% on the quarter, did not match
its rate of autumn 2010 (+3%); however, thisis largely the mathematical consequence ofcertain fluctuations in the monthly trend.
After a second half of 2010 in which output
of capital goods was clearly the leader ingrowth, the production of inputs regainedthe lead following the turn of the year. Onereason this sector grew by 4
1/2% was that
firms scaled back production last Decemberin the light of stoppages in the transport ofgoods. Another was that inputs and inter-mediate products for the manufacture ofcars and machinery, which was running fullthrottle in the final quarter of 2010 and wasslowed down somewhat in the reportingquarter, were increasingly being taken frominventories. The subsequent return of inven-tories to normal levels triggered a surge indemand in upstream business sectors. After ahalf with no output growth, the seasonallyadjusted manufacture of consumer goodsonce again rose perceptibly.
In the winter of 2011, manufacturing cap-
acity utilisation continued to increase. The ifoinstitute survey results for April were visiblyabove their multi-year average, indicatingthat the use of industrial plant and equip-ment has now surpassed normal levels. It isnot least thanks to output growth in thereporting quarter that capacity utilisation inthe manufacture of inputs was significantlyhigher than its sectoral average, whereas inthe manufacture of capital goods the corres-ponding benchmark was not surpassed byvery much.The construction sector used the first few
months of 2011 to rapidly catch up on workthat was not completed because of the earlyand severe onset of winter weather inDecember, with construction output risingduring the reporting period by a seasonallyadjusted 15
3/4% following a fall of 61/4%i n
autumn 2010. In building construction, thesurplus, despite perceptibly lower falls in thepreceding quarter, was only slightly weakerLog scale
Industry
Lin scale
Year-on-year
change
Log scale
Construction
Lin scale
Year-on-yearchange%%Output in industry and in 
construction
Deutsche Bundesbank2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 20119095100105110115120
–20–15–10–50+5+10+15
95100105110115120125
–10–50+5+10+15+20+25+30+352005 = 100, seasonally adjusted, quarterly
Manufacturing
capacity utilisa-
tion surpassed
normal levels
Construction
output running
full steam
ahead

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
EUROSYSTEM
Monthly Report
May 2011
50than in civil engineering. This shows that the
business situation was relatively favourable
owing to the pick-up in residential and com-
mercial construction. In civil engineering, on
the other hand, the cutbacks in spending on
public infrastructure projects have left a
visible mark.
Activity in wholesale trade and the transport
sector have recovered visibly after seasonal
adjustment following the turn of 2010-11.
Since these areas had also been hit very hard
by the inclement winter weather the previous
December, catching-up effects played a
substantial role here. One sign of this is that
the mileage of toll-liable vehicles in March
2011 was, after seasonal adjustment, not
only 61/2% higher than in a weak December
but even up by 23/4% from the level of Oc-
tober and November 2010. Business in the
other services sectors is likely to have con-
tinued its positive trends. This is indicated
both by a renewed increase in surveyed insti-
tutions’ assessment of the business situation
according to the ifo institute’s survey in the
reporting quarter and also by the continued
growth of employment in these sectors.
According to the ZEW’s surveys, in the first
quarter of 2011 the very favourable overall
sentiment among sellers of information and
communication technology, advertising and
consultancy services took a damper.
Employment and labour market
The labour market continued its recovery in
the first few months of 2011. According to
Federal Statistical Office estimates, the num-ber of persons in work in Germany rose
by 142,000 after seasonal adjustment. This
represents an increase of 0.3% over the aver-
age of the autumn months. Like last year, an
above-average number of jobs subject to
social security contributions were created. In
the first two months of the winter, the
increase in this area amounted to 168,000
persons or 0.6%. The seasonally adjusted
number of self-employed persons rose as
well, whereas exclusively low-paid part-time
work virtually stagnated.
Additional jobs subject to social security con-
tributions were created in nearly all sectors. It
is particularly in manufacturing where em-
ployment growth accelerated significantly as
of late, rising in the first two months of the
winter by a seasonally adjusted 34,000 per-
sons, around double the growth of the two
preceding quarters. In the temporary employ-
ment sector, the employees of which are
often active in the industrial sector, the rise
was of similar strength. Staffing also in-
creased in other business-related services,
transport and logistics, trade and in the
health and education sector.
Employment growth in industry is likely to
have gained momentum because working
hours, which were sharply reduced there
during the crisis, have now almost returned
to pre-crisis levels. By contrast, the industrial
sectors, according to data from the Federal
Statistical Office, were still employing 31/4%
less staff in the reporting quarter than three
years earlier despite perceptible gains in the
past few months. This is due largely to the
automotive industry, the mechanical en-Services sectors
overall growing
Strong growth
in employ-
ment ...... rests particu-
larly on broadly
based rise in
employment
subject to social
security contri-
butions
Employment
gains also now
accelerating in
industrial sector

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
May 2011
51gineering sector and the metal-working and
electrical engineering industries. There shouldaccordingly be a considerable scope for rehir-ing, even if the employment figures for 2007and 2008 are not necessarily a firm yardstickbecause of advancing structural change andalso in the light of the exceptionally favour-able sectoral conditions at the time.
The decline in unemployment accelerated in
the first quarter of 2011. A seasonally adjust-ed 3.06 million people were officially un-employed, 80,000 fewer than in the fourthquarter of 2010. The unemployment ratedeclined by 0.2 percentage point to 7.3%.This was due exclusively to the reduction injob seekers receiving unemployment benefitsunder the statutory unemployment insurancescheme, whereas the number of unemployedreceiving the basic welfare allowance re-mained unchanged on the quarter. It must benoted, however, that the cyclical effect,which also exists in the case of the largelylong-term unemployed, was obscured by thefact that, in the past few months, only a veryfew one-euro jobs were created. This labourmarket policy instrument had already beencut back at the end of last year, yet the paceof the reduction increased further after theturn of the year. In April 2011 there wereonly 135,000 workfare placements, just halfas many as a year earlier. Since other activelabour market policy measures such as em-ployment grants for recipients of the basicwelfare allowance, placement by privateemployment agencies or the promotion ofself-employment have likewise been cut backconsiderably, total underemployment hasfallen faster than official unemployment. TheLabour market
1 From  May  2009,  unemployed  excluding 
persons newly registered on the books of private employment agencies.
Deutsche Bundesbank2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 201138.539.039.540.040.541.0
26.026.527.027.528.028.5–5000+500+1,000
2.53.03.54.04.55.0
–1,000–5000+500Seasonally adjusted, quarterly
Million
Million
MillionThou-
sand
Thou-
sand
Thou-
sand
Year-on-year changeOfficially unemployed 1UnemployedTotalEmployed
Unsubsidised vacancies
(scale enlarged)Occupied positionsJobs subject to social security
contributionsYear-on-year change
AprilAprilAprilJan-
Feb
200300400500Accelerated
decline in
official
unemployment

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
EUROSYSTEM
Monthly Report
May 2011
52year-on-year decline was 488,000 persons in
the first quarter of 2011, as against a decline
of 312,000 under the narrower definition. In
April 2011, official unemployment continued
to decline, dropping under the three-million
mark after seasonal adjustment for the first
time since 1992. The unemployment rate
went down to 7.1%.
Leading labour market indicators suggest
that employment growth will continue. The
seasonally adjusted number of job vacancies
reported to the Federal Labour Agency rose
to 437,000 in the first quarter of 2011. Of
these, 403,000 vacancies alone were for jobs
subject to social security contributions – a
quarter-on-quarter increase of around one-
tenth after seasonal adjustment. The vast
majority of these vacancies need to be filled
immediately. This value was once again
considerably higher in April. Want ads by
temporary work agencies, with a share of
more than two-fifths, were once again dom-
inant, yet there were also considerable
increases in vacancies in manufacturing,
transport, trade and the technical and scien-
tific activities. The health and education
sector continued to seek staff in large num-
bers. As the Federal Employment Agency sees
only part of the jobs on offer throughout the
economy, the number of job vacancies is ac-
tually likely to be significantly higher. Accord-
ing to the IAB survey on job vacancies in the
economy as a whole, in the first quarter there
were 1.05 million vacancies, which represents
an increase of three-fifths on the year. The ifo
employment barometer, which measures the
planned staffing levels for trade and industry
over the next three months, hit a new all-time high in the winter. It was particularly in
manufacturing that enterprises’ willingness
to hire new staff picked up significantly.
Wages and prices
The pay agreements concluded in the first
quarter, with perceptible increases in sched-
uled rates of pay, reflect the favourable eco-
nomic situation. The pay settlement for the
chemical industry envisages a 4.1% increase
in base pay starting in May 2011 over a
period of 15 months. In construction, gradual
pay rises were agreed in a total volume of
3.9% for western Germany, with the increase
somewhat higher than that in eastern Ger-
many owing to the intended adjustment of
wage levels. In the textiles industry, the
current year will see an increase in scheduled
rates of pay of 3.6%; the increase at
Deutsche Telekom will be somewhat more
than 3% but at least €75. In the public sector
of the Federal states (excluding Berlin and
Hesse), the wage bargainers agreed on a
gradual increase in pay of 1.5% starting in
April 2011 and a further 1.9% plus a basic
amount of €17 beginning in January 2012.1
In addition, several other sectors are seeing
one-off payments of varying sizes.
The new agreements will not have a substan-
tial impact on the level of total negotiated
wages until the second quarter of 2011. The
underlying momentum of wage growth will
therefore pick up visibly in the coming
months. Wages resulting from collective
1The agreement is generally transferred to state and
local government civil servants.Outlook
remains very
positive for the
labour marketSignificantly
higher pay
agreements in
2011 Q1 ...
... but increase
in negotiated
wages initially
only slightly
stronger

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
May 2011
53agreements rose during the reporting period
by 1.7% on the year according to Bundes-bank statistics, only slightly faster than in thefourth quarter of 2010 (+1.5%).
2Growth of
actual earnings is likely to have outpaced thatof negotiated pay in the first quarter of 2011owing to a normalisation of regular workinghours and the granting of premium andbonus payments.
There are near-term plans to introduce add-
itional sector-based minimum wage levels.Now that full mobility of labour within the EUhas been introduced with effect from 1 May2011,
3the social partners had an interest in
enforcing mandatory minimum wages fortemporary work throughout the sector. Eventhough the Act on Labour Leasing ( Arbeit-
nehmerüberlassungsgesetz ) created the pre-
conditions, the relevant legal regulation hadnot yet been adopted as this report went topress. In addition, the minimum wages in thesecurity services industry, which vary fromone Federal state to another, will be declaredgenerally binding with effect from 1 June2011.
The first few months of 2011 saw a continu-
ation of the price increases driven mainly bythe international commodity markets. Thiswas evidenced particularly by import prices,which rose nearly 5% on the period afterseasonal adjustment. Leaving out everythingelse altogether, energy prices, which rose byover 17%, accounted for around half of theoverall increase in import prices. The prices ofinputs, which often have a large share ofcommodity goods, rose sharply, at 4.3%.Consumer goods inflation, at 1.4%, was rela-tively moderate, yet still considerably higher
than in the two preceding quarters. Thesharp rise in the price of food, beverage andtobacco imports had a direct impact ondomestic consumer prices. The prices of cap-ital goods remained unchanged. Comparedto the first quarter of 2010, import priceswere up by nearly 12%.
As was already the case in autumn 2010, this
pattern also shows up in sales prices in theGerman industrial sector (albeit in a weakerform owing to the lesser importance ofrefined petroleum products). For the sameNegotiated rates of pay
1 Excluding additional benefits and lump-
sum payments.
Deutsche Bundesbank2004 05 06 07 08 09 10 201100.51.01.52.02.53.03.5Year-on-year change, on monthly basis
Negotiated rates of pay, total
Basic pay 1%
Q1
2The Federal Statistical Office, whose index excludes civil
servants, reports an increase of 0.9% for the negotiated
rates of basic pay, as against 1.1 % according to the
Bundesbank’s negotiated pay rate statistics.
3Exceptions are Romania and Bulgaria, whose nationals
will be eligible for full labour mobility within the EU by
1 January 2014 at the latest.Expansion of
sector-specific
minimum
wages in spring
2011
Significant
increase in
import
prices, ...... sales prices
in the industrial
sector, ...

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
EUROSYSTEM
Monthly Report
May 2011
54reason, foreign sales prices (+1.8% seasonally
adjusted) grew less strongly on the period
than domestic sales prices (+2.5%). Excluding
energy, the gap was much smaller. The prices
obtained domestically by enterprises were
6.1% higher on the year and those for for-
eign sales 5.3% higher. With export prices
having fully recovered for some time already
and imports even solidly outperforming their
pre-crisis levels during the reporting period,
domestic prices just about pulled even with
their pre-crisis levels in line with the develop-
ment of economic activity. Overshooting
import prices caused the terms of trade in
goods to deteriorate considerably.
Surging prices for commodities have probably
joined the buoyant construction activity as
the key reason for the sharp rise in construc-
tion prices of not less than 1.1% quarter-on-
quarter. They were thus up by 2.5% on the
year. Real estate prices likewise continued
their ascent. According to calculations by the
Association of German Pfandbrief Banks ( Ver-
band deutscher Pfandbriefbanken ), the prices
for owner-occupied housing rose by 0.6%
from the last quarter of 2010 and 3.1% year-
on-year.
Sharply higher crude oil prices impacted
directly on consumer prices for petrol, diesel
and heating oil. Refined petroleum products
were just over 8% more expensive on
the period, after seasonal adjustment, after
already going up by just under 7% in the
autumn. Other than that, price developments
were subdued overall. Nonetheless, those
components more influenced by domestic
supply and demand conditions clearly evi-100105110
Export pricesImport, export, producer and 
consumer prices
1 Producer price index for industrial prod-
ucts in domestic sales. — 2 Not seasonally 
adjusted, quarterly. — 3 National consumer 
price index.
Deutsche Bundesbank2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 201197100105110115120
97100105110115
100105110115120
100105110
–10+1+2+32005 = 100, seasonally adjusted
Lin scale
Year-on-year change 2Consumer prices 3Construction
prices 2Producer prices 1Import pricesLog scale
%
Apr... construction
and real estate
prices ...
... and
consumer
prices

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
May 2011
55denced a slow, though not always continual,
increase in price inflation. This is equally the
case for housing rents and for services and
other goods (excluding energy and food).
Among foods, the global markets projected
price stimuli particularly for dairy products
and coffee, which were nearly fully offset by
favourable developments in the area of sea-
sonal foods. On average for the quarter,
year-on-year consumer price inflation was
running at 2.1% following 1.5% a quarter
earlier. Excluding energy, the figure was
1.1%.
In April 2011, owing, amongst other things,
to a continued rise in crude oil prices, annual
consumer price inflation picked up once
again to 2.4% according to the national Con-
sumer Price Index (CPI) and 2.7% according
to the Harmonised Index of Consumer Prices
(HICP). Year-on-year CPI inflation excluding
energy rose to 1.5%, for which the late
Easter date was partly responsible. Price
developments in the coming months will be
decisively influenced by whether the extre-
mely violent corrections in the international
commodity markets that began in early May
represent a permanent level shift, which
would benefit consumers relatively quickly in
the case of energy and, with caveats, foods
and flatten the upward trend in consumer
prices.
Orders received and outlook
The current upturn, which is becoming in-
creasingly broad-based, could support eco-
nomic activity in Germany for some time. Thisis favoured by favourable external and intern-
al conditions. The growth opportunities as a
result of increasing migration to Germany
could also play a role (see also box on
pages 58 and 59). The stabilising effects
emanating from domestic demand can only
take full effect in a stress-free environment,
however. Risks exist also because, to date,
the economy appears to be growing at virtu-
ally undiminished pace compared to the
previous recovery phase even given normal
utilisation, and both enterprises’ business
expectations and consumers’ economic and
income prospects have peaked at an excep-
tionally early stage in this cycle. In addition,
the price climate has deteriorated significantly.
Whereas manufacturing firms’ assessment of
their business situation continued to improve
after the turn of 2010-11 according to the ifo
business survey, the expectations component
was down a bit. This could indicate that the
impressive start to 2011 is likely to be fol-
lowed by an easing of the pace of growth in
the foreseeable future. In addition, events in
Japan have amplified uncertainty about
future economic developments, which could
have caused a certain reluctance to place
new orders; order activity in March was con-
siderably weaker, after seasonal adjustment,
than in the preceding two months. On the
whole, the industrial sector received a sea-
sonally adjusted 21/2% more orders in the first
quarter of 2011 than in the preceding quar-
ter, the favourable result of which (+3%) had
been aided by particularly numerous large
orders.Outlook
Chances of a
longer-term
upturnGoods orders
up further ...

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
EUROSYSTEM
Monthly Report
May 2011
56The flow of orders was broadly based during
the reporting period. Capital goods orders,
already at an elevated level a quarter earlier
owing to special effects, were up by 1% after
seasonal adjustment. Demand for inputs
showed considerable growth (+41/2%) for the
first time since last spring. Consumer goods
orders were up by 11/4%, or just as strongly as
in autumn 2010. The flow of orders was also
regionally more balanced than a quarter earl-ier, with the industrial sector once again
receiving considerably more new orders not
just from domestic customers. Following sev-
eral months of stagnation, orders from euro-
area partners rebounded considerably; some
large orders also had a significant impact.
During the reporting period, orders from out-
side the euro area fell off slightly, although
this was tempered by the exceptionally strong
growth of nearly 10% a quarter earlier.
According to the Order-Capacity Index,
orders received in the first quarter of 2011
surpassed the production capacity of the in-
dustrial sector working on orders by just over
4%. However, it is not just the high number
of continuously incoming orders which is
influencing demand conditions; in the mean-
time, the manufacturing industry’s assess-
ment of order books is as favourable as in the
first quarter of 2008, just before the crisis-
related slump. Moreover, the order backlog
stood at just under three production months
during the reporting period, a level typically
associated with boom periods.
The outlook for the construction sector has
improved considerably since the beginning
of 2011. Although the previous quarter’s
weather-related low level is part of the reason
for the strong growth in new orders received
by the construction industry in the first two
winter months (+61/4%), a more decisive
factor has been the skyrocketing demand for
new dwellings as well as for commercial of-
fice buildings. Commercial customers placed
just under one-fifth more orders in January
and February 2011 (more recent data are
not yet available), after seasonal adjustment,Demand conditions in industry 
from a cyclical perspective
1 Deviation of incoming orders from produc-
tion  capacity  in  orders-based  industry. — 
2 According  to  the  ifo  business  survey. — 
3 Balance  of  firms  responding  with  “relat-
ively large” to those responding with “too 
low”.
Deutsche Bundesbank2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011201510505101520
––––++++
–60–50–40–30–20–100+10+20
2.02.22.42.62.83.03.2Order-Capacity Index1%
Order levels2Per-
centage
points
Longer-term
averageAssessments3
ReservesPro-
duction
months
0Seasonally adjusted, quarterly
... and broadly
based ...... and stocks of
orders have
returned to
substantial sizes
Strong increase
in demand for
construction

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
May 2011
57than last autumn; this is probably related to
plans to expand capacity in many sectors ofthe economy, thus leading to an increasedneed for production facilities and office build-ings. The strength and structure of the revivalof residential construction are likewise note-worthy. The volume of new orders was justunder 8% higher than the previous quarter’saverage, after seasonal adjustment, in thefirst two months of this year. Apartment con-struction is likely to have been the maindriver, as it was in the second half of the pastyear. This is consistent with a considerablepick-up in real-estate prices, especially inlarge cities.
Although consumer sentiment has remained
good, all in all, workers are increasingly realis-ing that a considerable portion of agreedwage increases could be eroded by risinginflation. Despite the fact that this, in and ofitself, dampens the consumer climate, con-sumers’ propensity to purchase remained inexpansionary territory. This indicates that, inparticular, the favourable employment out-look is currently dominating consumer senti-ment. Household consumption could there-fore continue its muted upward movement inthe months to come.
Despite the fact that the very strong GDP
growth in the first quarter of 2011 is proof ofthe robustness of the German economicupturn, it must not be overlooked that theoutput growth was marked by special effects.Given that the economy’s capacity utilisationhas already reached a very high level, eco-nomic activity is likely to slow down.Demand for industrial goods 
and construction work
Deutsche Bundesbank2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 20118090100110120130
–40–30–20–1000+10+20+30
100110120130
758090100
100110120
8090100
Jan-
Feb
Jan-
Feb90100110120
–20–100+10+20Volume, 2005 = 100,
seasonally adjusted, quarterly
DomesticForeignLog scaleTotal industrial 
ordersLog scale
Lin scale
Year-on-year change
Total construction 
orders
Lin scale
Year-on-year change%
%Household
consumption
dominated by
inflationary
tendencies
Sound growth
path despite a
calming of sorts

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
EUROSYSTEM
Monthly Report
May 2011
58Deutsche BundesbankThe possible growth effects of increased immigration from the new EU member states
Since the start of May, workers in the eight central
and east European countries that joined the EU in
2004 (EU-8) have been able to move freely within the
European Union.1A possible result may be that migra-
tion from these countries to Germany and Austria in
particular, which maintained restrictions on the free
movement of workers from the EU-8 to the last, will
increase significantly.2Against this background, ques-
tions were raised about the magnitude of the expect-
ed migration movements and their macroeconomic
implications, both for the German economy and for
the immigrants’ countries of origin.
In the years 2004 to 2010, on balance an estimated
11/2million people migrated from the EU-8 to the old
EU member states (EU-15). Most immigrants came
from Poland, the most populous new member, with a
tradition of relatively high labour mobility. Migrants
from the EU-8 have focused on countries such as the
United Kingdom and Ireland, which had opened their
labour markets early due to temporarily very buoyant
labour demand. In consequence, only about one-
tenth of the migration stream from the EU-8 moved
to Germany between 2004 and 2010,3while the UK
benefited from about half of this net migration. Now
that Germany and Austria have lifted their restrictions
on freedom of mobility for people from the EU-8
countries, migration flows will now probably shift,
partly because the economies of these two countries
are performing much better than those states that
were the main destination countries before the crisis.
The current forecasts of migration from the EU-8 to
Germany vary considerably in some cases. According to
recent press reports, the European Commission expects
some 100,000 migrants per year from this region. The
Federal Employment Agency and the Institute for
Employment Research ( Institut für Arbeitsmarkt und
Berufsforschung , IAB) expect up to 140,000 such immi-
grants annually.4A recent study by the Cologne Insti-tute for Economic Research ( Institut der deutschen
Wirtschaft, IW ) put the level of Germany-bound migra-
tion from these countries even higher still.5
In the following, the possible effects on the medium-
term growth potential of Germany based on three
scenarios for migration from the EU-8 to Germany will
be analysed. The benchmark is the (hypothetical) path
of potential output that would arise if cross-border
migration in the future were to almost even out – as
happened on average for the years 2006 to 2009.6In
this case, an important component of the macroeco-
nomic picture is that the currently very high demand
for labour will probably not be covered adequately by
domestic reserves, therefore possibly creating add-
itional wage and price pressures. The enterprises’
earnings prospects would receive a damper, and fixed
capital formation would progress slower.
The estimates documented here are subject to great
uncertainty. Currently, the level of net immigration
can only be roughly estimated. There are also few
clues about the qualifications of potential migrants
and their relationship to the domestic labour pool.
The main scenario, the median of the variants con-
sidered here, assumes annual net immigration of
100,000 people from the EU-8 this year and in the
next two years. It is natural to assume that this influx
is due to the domestic knock-on effect and therefore
primarily consists of those willing to work. Structural
unemployment and wages in Germany would conse-
quently develop largely along the previously foreseen
paths. The labour supply would widen accordingly,
and potential output would ipso facto be an esti-
mated 0.4% above the reference path until 2013. The
total capital stock would also adjust – usually with a
slight time-lag. Capacity effects on the production
technology would have to be included. But this would
also give an added boost to housing construction, the
1Workers from Romania and Bulgaria, which acceded in 2007, will
be granted free movement in full not later than 1 January 2014. —
2In addition, during the transition period both countries limited the
freedom to provide services for certain economic activities, such as in
the construction sector. On the other hand, there were exemptions
for particular groups of people, at least in Germany. See Sachverstän-
digenrat zur Begutachtung der gesamtwirtschaftlichen Entwicklung,
Annual Report 2010/2011, p 292 (in German only). — 3See T Baas andH Brücker (2011), Mehr Chancen als Risiken für Deutschland, IAB
Kurzbericht (IAB Brief Report) 10/2011, particularly Table 1 (in Ger-
man only). — 4See press reports from late April and the IAB press re-
lease of 29 April 2011. — 5In the IW study, based on the surveys in
the EU-8, potential net migration in the years 2011 and 2012 is pro-
jected to be around 800,000, which is understood to be an upper
limit. The IW points out, however, that polls only reflect intentions
and that usually a proportion of respondents will not follow through

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
May 2011
59arithmetical indirect effect of which would be around
0.3%. The overall effect on potential output, which isnot expected to peak until 2013, however, would thusrun to an increase of 0.7%.
A “conservative” variant for the years 2011 to 2013
predicts the migration of approximately 50,000 EU-8citizens per year. It is assumed that, due to a sharphike in the years prior to the crisis, a large proportionof those willing to migrate from central and easternEurope have now migrated and that numerous mi-grants from the EU-8 have established themselves asself-employed in Germany
7or work in the shadow
economy. Although this group might now change orlegalise its status, the actual labour supply in Germanywould not rise. Compared with the main scenario, itwould indeed lead to a greater reduction in structuralunemployment, but the moderating influence ofimmigration on wage and price formation would belimited. The medium-term overall effect on potentialoutput would be 0.4% in this “conservative” variant.
The scenario with relatively high immigration assumes
a net addition of 200,000 persons per year from theEU-8. This boost would lead in the short term to great-er competition for vacancies, meaning the number ofunemployed would initially likely decline less sharplythan in the main scenario. However, the risk of wagegrowth being driven by labour supply shortageswould fall considerably. Given the plausible assump-tion that needs-based immigration via complemen-tarity would precisely benefit the problem groups inthe German labour market, the risk of persistentdisplacement effects would be limited. Moreover,overall employment growth, in conjunction with theadditional demand for goods that this would induce,could lead to increased investment and create add-itional labour demand stimuli in many sectors of theeconomy. Under these conditions, the estimates sug-gest an overall medium-term effect of 1.2% on poten-
tial output.
For the countries of origin, the migration scenarios
considered here definitely represent a bleeding ofhuman capital, which in and of itself may result ingrowth loss.
8Since the processes are based on eco-
nomic incentive effects, however, efficiency gains arelikely, and growth opportunities thus greater, if onelooks at the single European market as a whole.Furthermore, in the next few years migration couldbe more important as an instrument for evening outeconomic cycles within Europe. The roles of individualmember states could change, as the example of Ger-many shows. Whereas during the past decade manyworkers from eastern Germany in particular weresearching for work in other European countries, suchas in the tourism industry of German-speaking Alpineregions and the Swiss health system, in Germany theneed for foreign workers is growing again. Converse-ly, a country like Ireland has transformed within ashort space of time from a country of immigration toa country of emigration because of the crisis. It is alsoconceivable that emigration from the southern mem-ber countries, which are currently going through atough period, will resurge after largely drying up dur-ing the 1990s and the last decade.
In essence, migration within a single economic and
monetary area is normal and desirable from an eco-nomic perspective. In the United States, internal mi-gration has long been much more pronounced thanin Europe, which may partly be due to the lack of alanguage barrier. Increased migration within the euroarea could reduce the differences between memberstates’ labour markets, which alleviates the adjust-ment burden to be borne by wages and facilitatesmonetary policy in achieving its primary objective ofensuring price stability.
on these intentions. See Cologne Institute for Economic Research,
Migrations- und Arbeitsmarktwirkungen der Arbeitnehmerfreizügig-keit, April 2011, especially p 13 (in German only). — 6According to a
recent report by the Federal Statistical Office, net immigration to Ger-many amounted to 128,000 in 2010, the strongest rise since 2003; thisshows that Germany is increasingly becoming a migration destinationonce again. — 7Entrepreneurs from a member state of the European
Union can move to any other member state and pursue self-employ-ment throughout the Union (freedom of establishment). However,
they must meet the qualification requirements of that profession inthe country of establishment. Independent Polish craftsmen arealready on the German labour market and are recorded in the officialstatistics as migrants. — 8See R Barrell, J Fitzgerald and R Riley
(2010), EU Enlargement and Migration: Assessing the MacroeconomicImpacts, Journal of Common Market Studies, Vol 48, pp 373-395.

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
EUROSYSTEM
Monthly Report
May 2011
60Public finances* General government budget
Both the crisis-ridden year 2009 and the
high-growth year 2010 witnessed an expan-
sionary fiscal policy, large general govern-
ment deficits and debt ratios soaring to new
historical record levels. A marked improve-
ment is now on the cards, however, as long
as budgetary consolidation is implemented as
planned and new burdens arising from the
financial and sovereign debt crisis remain
within narrow bounds. The deficit ratio could
consequently fall below 2% in 2011, after it
rose to 3.3% in 2010. This notably mirrors a
clear structural improvement, although the
ongoing cyclical recovery, which is more than
compensating for the dropout of positive
one-off effects (especially proceeds from the
auction of radio frequencies) that were re-
corded in 2010, is also making an important
contribution. All other things being equal, a
lower deficit coupled with relatively high
nominal GDP growth should bring the debt
ratio down from its record 2010 level
(83.2%).1However, the European support
programmes for other euro-area countries
will create additional debt, and uncertainty in
connection with support measures for Ger-
man financial institutions remains high.
*The analysis in the “General government budget” sec-
tion is based on data contained in the national accounts
and on the Maastricht ratios. The subsequent reporting
on the budgets of the various levels of government and
social security schemes is based on the budgetary figures
as defined in the government’s financial statistics (which
are generally in line with the budgetary accounts).
1This figure includes debt in connection with support
measures for financial institutions since 2008 of 131/2%
of GDP. Although this is largely offset by financial assets,
the related risks are high. The same is true for govern-
ment guarantees in connection with the financial and
sovereign debt crisis.Public finances
improving in
2011

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
May 2011
61There is only little scope for change in the
government revenue ratio in 2011. Growth inrevenue as a result of raising the contributionrates to the statutory health insurancescheme and the Federal Employment Agencyand of various increases in taxes and socialcontributions, especially as part of centralgovernment’s consolidation package, willlargely be offset in particular by a decline inthe contribution rate for insolvency benefitpayments as well as tax shortfalls followingthe lagged effects of earlier relief measures(especially greater tax deductibility of insur-ance contributions).
The expenditure ratio is expected to decline
significantly. Favourable economic conditionsare causing the ratio to fall chiefly via anincrease in GDP in the denominator. In add-ition, no further major asset transfers to sup-port financial institutions are on the horizon(in 2010, this item amounted to
1/2%o f
GDP). Moreover, labour market expenditureis falling not only owing to cyclical factors butalso to a structural decrease in unemploy-ment figures, the expiry of spending increasesin the wake of the economic crisis and to sav-ings as part of central government’s consoli-dation package.
Current plans envisage a further decline in
the deficit in 2012. From today’s perspective,cyclical and one-off effects will be of onlyminor importance. The revenue ratio is ex-pected to remain largely unchanged whereasthe expenditure ratio is forecast to declineagain. Muted developments in pension ex-penditure and a continued slight declinein labour market expenditure in structuralterms, too, will be instrumental in this con-
text. In addition, government investment isexpected to decrease as the investmentmeasures from the economic stimulus pack-ages – which have an especially large timelag – will then have come to an end and con-solidation requirements at local governmentlevel will still be considerable.
The Federal Government presented its up-
dated stability programme on 13 April 2011,outlining the adjustment path towardsachieving a structurally balanced general gov-ernment budget in 2015. The figures arebased on the macroeconomic forecast fromJanuary 2011 and on an extrapolation of taxrevenue that the Federal Government hasadjusted in accordance with this forecast. On14 April 2011, the Federal Government pub-lished an updated forecast of key macroeco-nomic data, which – on the whole – is some-what more favourable. The expected averagedevelopments of those variables relevant forpublic finances (especially gross wages andsalaries, nominal private consumption andthe labour market) for the period from 2011to 2015 appear rather cautious, not leastgiven the updated forecast data. Accordingto the programme, the deficit ratio will fall to2
1/2% in 2011 and then continue to decrease
gradually in the years thereafter until itreaches
1/2% in 2015. The consolidation
measures agreed by Federal Government insummer 2010 were included in the calcula-tions in an only slightly amended form, eventhough some details of these measures haveyet to be specified.Almost no
change in
revenue ratio
Expenditure
ratio declining
due to sharp
GDP growth
and falling
transfers to
financial
institutions
Further
improvement
in 2012 due
to muted
spending
developmentsFederal Govern-
ment envisages
structurally
balanced
general govern-
ment budget
by 2015

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
EUROSYSTEM
Monthly Report
May 2011
62In a welcome development, the unexpectedly
favourable macroeconomic setting is – as
stipulated in the excessive deficit procedure
initiated against Germany – to be used to
achieve a lower deficit path rather than to
dilute the fiscal policy course. The deadline
set by the Ecofin Council in December 2009
– which was, even then, excessively long – to
bring the deficit below the 3% ceiling by
2013 will be reached ahead of schedule (for
information on the development of public
finances in the euro area, see the box on
pages 22 and 23). By contrast, progress along
the adjustment path towards the medium-
term objective is likely to be slower than spe-
cified in the preventive arm of the European
Stability and Growth Pact.2This is regrettable,
not least given efforts at EU level to give this
part of the Pact, in particular, greater bindingforce.3Overall, it is now crucial that the more
favourable conjuncture is not seen as an op-
portunity to relax the consolidation course
before the medium-term objective is
achieved. Remaining on track is essential
given the worryingly high levels of govern-
ment debt. This is warranted even more
by the currently benign macroeconomic
situation. Moreover, the time window forKey data of the Federal Government’s updated stability programme
Item 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015
Real GDP growth (as %)
Stability programme April 2011 3.6 2.3 1.8 11/2 11/2 11/2
Stability programme January 2010 1.4 2 2 2 – –
General government fiscal balance (as % of GDP)
Stability programme April 2011 – 3.3 – 21/2 –11/2 –1 –1/2 –1/2
Stability programme January 2010 – 51/2 –41/2 –31/2 –3 – –
Structural fiscal balance (as % of GDP)
Stability programme April 2011 – 2 – 2 – 1 – 1 –1/2 –0
Stability programme January 2010 – 41/2 –4 –3 –21/2 ––
Debt level (as % of GDP)
Stability programme April 2011 83.2 82 81 791/2 771/2 751/2
Stability programme January 2010 761/2 791/2 81 82 – –
Source: Federal Ministry of Finance.
Deutsche Bundesbank
2The figures in the government’s plans have been
rounded, thus rendering them less transparent on the
whole. The preventive arm of the Pact stipulates that the
structural deficit ratio should generally be reduced by 0.5
percentage point, and at an accelerated pace in “good
times”, until the medium-term objective is achieved.
However, the stability programme foresees a structural
improvement of only 11/2percentage points in total for
the four years from 2011 to 2014.
3For more information on pending EU reforms in the
area of public finances, see Deutsche Bundesbank, Euro-
pean Council decisions on the prevention and resolution
of future sovereign debt crises, Monthly Report, April
2011, pp 53-58.Achieve
structurally
balanced
budget
promptly

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
May 2011
63making adequate fiscal allowance for the
imminent demographic burdens ensuing
from an ageing population is rapidly narrow-
ing.4In addition, the new national budgetary
rules generally stipulate a budgetary position
that is (close-to-) balanced as a binding ceil-
ing and not a target value for new borrow-
ing. It is therefore highly advisable to leave a
sufficient margin of safety below the consti-
tutional ceilings in “good times”.5
Budgetary development of central, state
and local government
Tax revenue
Tax revenue6increased in the first quarter of
2011 by almost 11% compared with the
same quarter in 2010 (see the adjacent chart
and the table on page 64). The sharp rise is
predominantly due to favourable economic
developments but also to positive special
factors. Revenue from income-related taxes
went up by 111/2%. Strong growth in wage
tax primarily reflects the positive trend in pay.
On top of this there was a slight decline in
deduction amounts (child benefit, subsidies
for supplementary private pension plans).
Revenue from profit-related taxes rose by
20% in total.7After a very low level in 2010
as a result of the crisis, corporation tax
recorded considerable additional receipts.
Furthermore, the grant to homebuyers,
which is deducted from the assessed income
tax revenue total and is mainly paid out in
March, has been gradually phased out since
2006. At over 91/2%, revenue from consump-
tion-related taxes also rose sharply. However,the strong growth in turnover tax is likely to
overstate underlying growth. The previous
year’s level was very low and intra-year devel-
opments in this item are generally very vola-Tax revenue *
* Including  EU  shares  in  German  tax  rev-
enue, excluding receipts from local govern-
ment taxes.
Deutsche Bundesbank86420246810
––––+++++
2009 2010 2011Year-on-year change, quarterly
%
4See Deutsche Bundesbank, Demographic change and
the long-term sustainability of public finances in Ger-
many, Monthly Report, July 2009, pp 29-44.
5See Deutsche Bundesbank, Reform of German budget-
ary rules, Monthly Report, October 2007, pp 47-68;
Deutsche Bundesbank, The reform of the borrowing
limits for central and state government, Monthly Report,
May 2009, pp 78-79; J Kremer and D Stegarescu (2009),
Neue Schuldenregeln: Sicherheitsabstand für eine stetige
Finanzpolitik, Wirtschaftsdienst, Vol 89/9, pp 630 ff (avail-
able in German only) as well as J Kremer and K Wendorff
(2010), Für eine stetige Finanzpolitik: Konjunkturbereini-
gung und Berücksichtigung von Schätzfehlern, in: C Kas-
trop, G Meister-Scheufelen and M Sudhof (eds), Die
neuen Schuldenregeln im Grundgesetz, 2010, pp 416-
431 (available in German only).
6Including EU shares in German tax revenue but exclud-
ing receipts from local government taxes, which are not
yet known for the quarter under review.
7It should be noted that the development of the individ-
ual taxes is distorted by a one-off sizeable refund of cor-
poration tax coupled with additional revenue of the same
amount for non-assessed taxes on earnings.Sharp rise in tax
revenue in Q1

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
EUROSYSTEM
Monthly Report
May 2011
64tile. There was also a clear increase in revenue
from other excise duties, which was particu-
larly attributable to the deferred booking of
insurance tax cash flows and to frontloading
effects for tobacco tax prior to the rate rise in
May.
According to the latest official tax estimate,
tax receipts for 2011 as a whole are expected
to rise by 41/2% (including local government
taxes).8This growth primarily reflects favour-
able macroeconomic developments but also a
rebound from 2010’s muted level. As far as
legislative changes are concerned, the effects
of various tax increases (in particular, nuclear
fuel tax, air traffic tax, tobacco tax and a
reduction in the electricity and energy tax
concessions) as well as the phasing out of
grants to homebuyers outweigh revenueshortfalls in other areas (in particular, de-
ferred shortfalls due to greater tax deduct-
ibility of insurance contributions). Growth is
curbed by the fact that sizeable tax refunds
in connection with court rulings have been
included in the calculations.9
A faster pace of growth in revenue of 51/2%i s
expected for 2012. The improvement in rele-
vant key macroeconomic figures is set to con-
tinue, the effect of legislative changes is
again expected to be positive (in particular,
the phasing out of grants to homebuyers and
of depreciation allowances as part of the first
economic stimulus package) and the above-
mentioned tax refunds are set to expire for
the most part. For the medium-term planning
period up to 2015, an average annual
increase of just over 31/2% is forecast, with
legislative changes and special factors not ex-
pected to play a significant role. The tax ratio
(as defined in the government’s financial stat-
istics) is projected to increase from 21.2% in
2010 to 22.3% in 2015. Fiscal drag is to con-
tribute around1/2percentage point or €111/2
billion to this rise if account is taken of both
the positive revenue effect of the progressive
structure of the income tax schedule and the
below-average development owing to the ex-Tax revenue
Q1
2010 2011Estimate
for
2011 1, 2
Type of tax € billionYear-
on-year
percent-
age
changeYear-
on-year
percent-
age
change
Tax revenue,
total 2 111.2 123.1 + 10.8 + 4.4
of which
Wage tax 30.3 32.5 + 7.3 + 5.1
Profit-related
taxes 3 14.9 17.9 + 20.0 + 2.3
Assessed
income tax 6.2 6.8 + 9.7 – 9.6
Corporation
tax 2.0 2.5 + 27.4 + 11.8
Investment
income tax 4 6.8 8.6 + 27.3 + 14.0
Turnover taxes 5 42.9 47.4 + 10.5 + 4.1
Energy tax 4.4 4.5 + 0.3 + 0.5
Tobacco tax 2.5 2.9 + 17.5 – 0.4
1According to official tax estimate of May 2011. — 2Includ-
ing EU shares in German tax revenue, excluding receipts
from local government taxes. — 3Employee refunds, grants
paid to homebuyers and investors deducted from
revenue. — 4Withholding tax on interest income and cap-
ital gains, non-assessed taxes on earnings. — 5Turnover tax
and import turnover tax.
Deutsche Bundesbank
8The estimate is based on the Federal Government’s cur-
rent macroeconomic forecast, which foresees real GDP
growth of 2.6% and nominal GDP growth of 3.5% for
2011 (November 2010: 1.8% and 3.0%, respectively).
Growth for 2012 is forecast to be 1.8% and 3.5%, re-
spectively (November 2010: nominal GDP growth:
2.8%). In the medium term (up to 2015), nominal
growth is assumed to be 3.0% per year.
9The Federal Government expects shortfalls, in particu-
lar, in connection with the Meilicke case (recognition of
corporation tax paid abroad in the taxation of dividends
under the tax imputation procedure that was abolished
in 2001). These have been estimated at just over €31/2bil-
lion for 2011 and just under €11/2billion for 2012.Clear rise in
receipts
expected in
2011Clear rise
expected in
future, too

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
May 2011
65tensive price inelasticity of specific excise
duties.
Compared with the latest medium-term tax
estimate from spring 2010, the underlyingmacroeconomic assumptions have improvedconsiderably and expectations have beenrevised upwards also vis-à-vis last autumn.Furthermore, legislative changes – in particu-lar, in connection with central government’sconsolidation package – have been resolvedin the intermittent period and these are ex-pected to generate additional revenue of €3billion to €4 billion per year on balance from2011 onwards. These two factors account forthe bulk of the upward revisions to the taxestimate from May 2010 and a good part ofthe corrections to the tax estimate fromNovember 2010. Compared with the May2010 estimate, revenue for 2010 was €20
1/2
billion (3/4% of GDP) higher. Corrections for
the individual years are forecast to continueto rise and the estimate for 2014 is €49 billion(1
3/4% of GDP) above the figures from last
May. In comparison with the autumn 2010forecast, additional revenue of €5 billion in2010
10is expected to increase to €211/2billion
in 2012.
Central government budgetIn the first quarter of 2011, the central gov-
ernment deficit fell by €2
1/2billion on the year
to €19 billion. Revenue was 7% up on theyear (€4
1/2billion) with tax receipts rising by
a very sharp 111/2% (€6 billion). However,
non-tax revenue contracted mainly as a resultof the Bundesbank’s lower profit distribution.Spending grew by 2
1/2% (€2 billion). The larg-est single contribution came from €1 billion
higher payments to the Federal EmploymentAgency, which was running a deficit and wasno longer able to use reserves as it had done,in part, at the beginning of 2010. Butpayments to the post office pension fundwere also much higher than one year previ-ously. By contrast, expenditure on unemploy-ment benefit II, in particular, declined mainlyowing to the abolition of pension contri-butions on behalf of recipients of unemploy-ment benefit II.
The decline in the deficit is set to continue as
2011 progresses, although the €4
1/2billion
windfall from the auction of radio frequen-cies in May 2010 will drop out. Overall, thereis likely to be a clear undershooting of theforecast deficit of just over €48
1/2billion. The
latest tax estimate projects that tax revenuewill be €8 billion higher than budgeted.Furthermore, better-than-anticipated devel-opments on the labour market imply lowerexpenditure to offset the Federal Employ-ment Agency’s deficit and on benefits for thelong-term unemployed amounting to a totalof around €5 billion. Expenditure on interestand calls on guarantees is also likely to beperceptibly lower than forecast, thus enab-ling revenue shortfalls of almost €1 billionfrom the Bundesbank’s profit to be morethan offset. All in all, it should be possible tocut the deficit from €44
1/2billion in 2010 to
around €30 billion in 2011.
10The revision for 2010 is mainly attributable to the fact
that revenue from – the generally very volatile – profit-re-
lated taxes was unexpectedly high in the final quarter of
2010.Additional
revenue
vis-à-vis earlier
expectations
Decline in
deficit at start
of year ...... expected to
continue and
enable clear
undershooting
of budget
target

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
EUROSYSTEM
Monthly Report
May 2011
66To improve compliance with the rules on the
debt brake, the Federal Government has
made fundamental changes to the process of
drawing up budgets. Up to now, individual
ministries have submitted their budget plans
every spring and these were then altered in
subsequent negotiations to ensure that they
adhered as closely as possible to fiscal targets.
In mid-March 2011, for the first time, the
Federal Government set out benchmark
figures for the budget – based on the
macroeconomic forecast in its January
Annual Economic Report – clearly affirming
the expenditure ceilings for individual minis-
tries, which have to be substantiated in time
for the cabinet decision on the 2012 budget
and medium-term financial plan up to 2015
scheduled for the beginning of July.Now that current forecasts estimate tax rev-
enue to be much higher than in the summer
2010 financial plan, new borrowing is to be
limited to €311/2billion in 2012 compared
with €40 billion in previous budget planning.
As this improvement is expected to continue
in subsequent years, net borrowing for 2014
has now been put at €151/2billion. This figure
is then only expected to drop slightly to €131/2
billion in 2015. The projected development of
the structural deficit, which is key for the
debt brake, can only be approximated as no
information is available on the financial trans-
actions to be deducted. However, the im-
puted net effect is likely to be small. The cyc-
lical components are assumed to have a slight
negative impact on the budget, even in
2015.11Overall, the framework data show a
clear decline in the structural deficit. By the
end of 2015, borrowing would then be close
to the constitutional limit of 0.35% of GDP
to be applied from 2016 onwards.
Overall, the target benchmark figures seem
achievable and, if the volume of consolida-
tion announced is implemented rigorously
and macroeconomic expectations continue to
improve, should be notably undershot. The
updated tax estimate forecasts additional
income for the period from 2012 to 2015 of
between €41/2billion and €61/2billion per year
compared with previous estimates. However,
particularly given the lack of international
agreement so far on a financial market tax, itCentral government fiscal 
deficit / surplus
20092011
Deutsche Bundesbank20112010
Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4252015105051015
–––––+++
–45–40–35–30–25–20–15–10–5€ bnCumulative from start of year
2010Quarterly results
2009€ bn
11For a detailed critique of the method used, see
Deutsche Bundesbank, Requirements regarding the cyc-
lical adjustment procedure under the new debt rule,
Monthly Report, January 2011, pp 55-60. The underlying
cyclical adjustment procedure was also largely criticised
at a hearing of the Budget Committee of the German
Bundestag on 21 March 2011, see www.bundestag.de.Benchmark
figures from
March for the
2012 budget ...... show clear
decline in struc-
tural deficit is
expected
As things
currently stand,
benchmark
figures
unambitious

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
May 2011
67is doubtful whether the financial market tax
revenue of €2 billion forecast by the FederalGovernment for the years from 2012 willbe generated. Furthermore, the global sav-ings of almost €5 billion included in the latestfinancial plan for 2014 have not yet beenremoved but rather carried over to 2015.Consequently, there is still a substantial needfor clarification.
12
The new constitutional debt brake is a muchstricter deficit ceiling than previous arrange-ments. It is thus essential to plan a largersafety margin between the deficit target andthe maximum amount permitted to ensurethat if GDP develops unexpectedly unfavour-ably or if other negative shocks occur, it is notnecessary to take additional consolidationmeasures that have a procyclical impact.
13
However, such a safety margin should not beset by using a questionable interpretation ofthe rule to extend the ceiling. Yet preciselythis situation seems to be on the cards, as– contrary to the intention of the debt brake –an outdated and significantly overstated esti-mate of the structural deficit from 2010 isbeing used in current plans as the startingvalue to determine the ceiling for the path toreduce the structural deficit between 2011and 2016. This enlarges the scope for bor-rowing by a cumulated amount of approxi-mately €50 billion.
14Even if the scope is not
fully utilised at the current end, this could stillpotentially increase debt because, as a rule,this amount is then credited to the controlaccount and can be used in budget executionin the coming years to compensate for unex-pected deficits. Instead it would be appropri-ate to base the ceilings for the deficit reduc-
tion path on the actual 2010 deficit. The def-icits in the government’s benchmark figuresare close to the values calculated in this way.Not least the favourable macroeconomic con-ditions should be used to more rapidly com-ply with the provisions of the debt brakewhich come into effect from 2016, and to setup a desirable safety margin below the con-stitutional limits as early as possible. Experi-ence has shown that in good times the courseembarked upon is generally not ambitiousenough and that this makes compliance withthe rules thereafter difficult. Given the tough-er borrowing limit, it is essential that everyeffort is taken to avoid making this mistake.
Financial transactions should also be con-
sidered in a consistent manner in connectionwith the debt brake. This can be demon-strated using the example of the financial re-lations with the Federal Employment Agency.For instance, the reforms of unemploymentbenefit II prescribed by the Federal Constitu-tional Court stipulate a gradual transfer ofthe annual costs of currently around €4 bil-
12After the German government had decided on its
benchmark figures for the 2012 budget, agreement was
reached at EU level that €41/2billion is to be paid as cap-
ital to the ESM each year from 2013 to 2017. This will
increase net borrowing and the deficit as defined in the
government’s financial statistics. However, as far as both
the deficit as defined in the national accounts and central
government’s constitutional debt ceiling (which is based
on this deficit) are concerned, it is irrelevant as the trans-
fer is recorded as a financial transaction and is therefore
not to be included in the debt brake. Should shortfalls
arise as a result, the burdens would have to be included
in the debt brake.
13See also the literature cited in footnote 5.
14For more information, see the statement by the Bun-
desbank at a hearing of the Budget Committee on
21 March 2011 at www.bundestag.de. The Federal
Court of Auditors is also calling for the ceiling for the
period up to 2016 to be linked to the actual deficit level
in 2010.Plan a clear
safety margin
below
borrowing limit
Set ceiling
for deficit
reduction path
appropriatelyAvoid transfer-
ring burdens
and thus cir-
cumventing the
debt brake

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
EUROSYSTEM
Monthly Report
May 2011
68lion for the basic allowance for elderly per-
sons and people with reduced earning cap-
acity, which have so far been paid by local
government, to central government. To fund
this, the VAT-financed grants to the Federal
Employment Agency, which were introduced
in 2007, are to be effectively halved by 2014,
which will take a toll on the Federal Employ-
ment Agency’s structural financial situation. If
this results in deficits for the Federal Employ-
ment Agency, then an examination should be
launched into whether corresponding com-
pensation payments by central government,
which are factored into the budget as loans
and are subsequently classified as a financial
transaction and thus not included in the debt
rule, actually still have the character of a
financial transaction in the sense of whether
the structure thereof is of a profitable finan-
cial asset. Their present form of an unlimited
and non-interest-bearing loan – coupled with
extensive cuts of regular grants – is already a
sign that they exhibit elements of a transfer,
thus indicating that it appears appropriate to
count them towards the exploitation of the
debt limit. In any case, it should be guaran-
teed that any future debt relief or assumption
is generally classified as expenditure, thus
lowering the scope for borrowing elsewhere.
Central government’s off-budget entities re-
corded a deficit of €1 billion in the first
quarter of 2011 compared with a deficit of
€11/2billion in the same period last year. After
the formal end of the assistance period, the
Financial Market Stabilisation Fund (SoFFin)
recorded a slight surplus from fees for con-
tinuing guarantees. At the start of 2010, it
had a deficit of €11/2billion. The Investmentand Repayment Fund (IRF), which was set up
in 2009 to combat the economic crisis and is,
in particular, to finance government invest-
ment commenced by the end of 2010, re-
corded a deficit of €11/2billion in the first
quarter of 2011 (2010 Q1: €1/2billion). This
rise in the deficit is attributable to higher
drawdowns of funds for investment by state
and local government as well as to the ab-
sence of a transfer from the Bundesbank’s
profit to repay debt as the profit did not
exceed the amount reserved for the central
government budget, which was lowered to
€3 billion for 2011. For 2010 as a whole, the
off-budget entities posted a deficit of €71/2
billion. In 2011, above all the repayment of
SoFFin capital injections in the amount of
around €10 billion, which has already begun,
is likely to be much higher than the outstand-
ing IRF drawdowns. As things currently stand,
the off-budget entities are expected to post a
significant surplus.15
State government16
The deficit of state government’s core
budgets halved in the first quarter of 2011,
compared with the same period one year
previously, falling from just over €7 billion to
€31/2billion. This improvement is due to a
strong rise in revenue of 9% (€51/2billion),
chiefly driven by sharp growth in tax revenue
(+91/2%). Inflows from the IRF increased at an
even faster pace. At 21/2% (just over €11/2bil-
15This does not include transactions by the resolution
agencies.
16The development of local government finances in the
final quarter of 2010 was analysed in greater detail in the
short articles in the Bundesbank’s April 2011 Monthly
Report. These are the most recent data available.Off-budget
entities record
deficit at start
of year, but
clear surplus on
the horizon for
2011 as a
wholeFurther decline
in deficit in
2011 Q1, ...

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
May 2011
69lion), the rise in expenditure was much weak-
er. While growth in personnel expenditure re-
mained relatively subdued (+11/2%) prior to
the recent pay rises, other operating expend-
iture (+3%) and, in particular, overall invest-
ment expenditure (+7%) grew at much
stronger rates.
Despite favourable economic developments
and corresponding additional tax revenue,
the full-year situation is not expected to im-
prove greatly on 2010. This is because, after
a good start to the year, tax revenue is ex-
pected to grow at a slower pace during the
rest of the year and burdens are forecast
owing to increased spending, for example on
other operating expenditure, to the latest pay
settlement, which comes into force in the
spring and, in many federal states, also ap-
plies to both public sector employees with
civil servant status and retired civil servants,
as well as to transfers to local government.
The budget plans, some of which had not yet
been finalised in the first quarter, forecast a
€4 billion rise in the deficit vis-à-vis the actual
level provisionally recorded for 201017to
€261/2billion. However, if the additional rev-
enue from the latest tax estimate (roughly €6
billion compared to the November 2010
level, which has been used in the calculations
for the most part) is factored in, the results
should be much more favourable and there
could even be a slight improvement on the
past year. Counter to the very favourable
macroeconomic developments, a number of
federal states, including North Rhine-West-
phalia – despite the constitutional court’s
ruling on the supplementary budget for
201018– plan to overshoot the regular bor-rowing limit to avert a disruption of the
macroeconomic equilibrium.
In addition to the recipients of consolidation
aid (see the box on pages 70 and 71), it would
also be appropriate for the other federal
states to use the currently very favourable
macroeconomic developments to reduce
high deficits rapidly and promptly implement
the new debt rules. Provisions to this effect
should be enshrined in state government
constitutions – and not only in state budget-
ary rules19– and be combined with binding
minimum adjustment paths that aim at rapid
budgetary consolidation.
Social security funds20
Statutory pension insurance scheme
The German statutory pension insurance
scheme recorded a deficit of almost €11/2bil-
lion in the first quarter of 2011. However,
compared with the same period last year (-€2
17Once the constitutional court’s ruling on the supple-
mentary budget of North Rhine-Westphalia for 2010 has
been implemented, the value is likely to be lowered by
€11/2billion.
18For more information, see Deutsche Bundesbank, Im-
plications of the ruling on the supplementary budget of
North Rhine-Westphalia for 2010, Monthly Report, April
2011, pp 10-11.
19For example, in the coalition agreement of the new
majority parliamentary groups in Baden-Württemberg
there is mention of the provisions set forth in the German
constitution but not of the strict debt brake stipulated in
the state budgetary rules. The debt brake makes provi-
sions for repaying loans taken up during the crisis and
prevents the accumulation of more debt before 2020 to
avoid inflicting additional burdens on future taxpayers.
20The financial development of the statutory health and
public long-term care insurance schemes in the final
quarter of 2010 was discussed in the short articles of the
March 2011 Monthly Report. These are the most recent
data available.... but no
significant
improvement
expected for
2011 as a
wholeEnsure that
deficit is
reduced
resolutely
Lower deficit
in Q1

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
EUROSYSTEM
Monthly Report
May 2011
70Deutsche BundesbankGerman states receiving consolidation aid – initial deficit reduction requirements not very ambitious
During the consultations on the introduction of
the national debt brake, some states had already
indicated before the outbreak of the financial crisis
that they would find it particularly difficult to bal-
ance their budgets from 2020 without taking on
new debt. Article 143d of the German constitution
(Grundgesetz ) laid the foundation for the five
highly indebted states of Berlin, Bremen, Saarland,
Saxony-Anhalt and Schleswig-Holstein to receive
consolidation aid during the transitional period
from 2011 up to and including 2019. The total an-
nual amount of €800 million – of which €300 mil-
lion is for Bremen, €260 million for Saarland and
€80 million each for the other three recipient
states – will be financed by central and state gov-
ernment (including the recipient states) in equal
measure; the contributions of the individual states
will be deducted from turnover tax revenue. In
principle, this money will only be paid if the recipi-
ent states comply with the consolidation require-
ments to be specified in the respective administra-
tive agreements.
Following a long negotiation process, these ad-
ministrative agreements were signed by mid-April,
thereby enabling payments to be made, as planned,
from mid-2011 onwards. The upper bounds for
structural borrowing, which will decline in equal
annual steps until the structural budget deficits are
completely eliminated by 2020, have been set indi-
vidually for Berlin, Bremen, Saarland, Saxony-Anhalt
and Schleswig-Holstein. They are based on the
fiscal balance of the state’s core budget and of the
off-budget entities with borrowing authorisations,
after adjustment for financial transactions and cyc-
lical influences as well as for outstanding settle-
ments from the various stages of the state govern-
ment revenue-sharing scheme, from 2010. As is the
case for central government, the cyclical adjust-
ment procedure is based on the method used in
the EU budgetary surveillance procedure.However, the starting structural deficit value was
not calculated on the basis of actual tax revenue
but on outdated state government data (the
respective 2010 tax estimates). As a one-off, the
additional tax revenue of state government as a
whole (€71/2billion, or 21/2% of total expenditure)
vis-à-vis these tax estimates is classified in its en-
tirety as cyclically induced for 2010, thus resulting
in a substantially higher starting structural deficit
value. By contrast, when drawing up the budget
for subsequent years, this amount of additional
revenue is largely classified as structural, thereby
providing considerable short-term relief from the
pressure to consolidate. There is therefore a danger
– as in the case of the strategic starting level de-
finition at central government level1– of a particu-
larly favourable period for reducing the deficit
going largely unused and severe cuts – ultimately
unavoidable – being deferred. It would be ex-
tremely worrying, especially in such a setting, if the
Stability Council, which has the power to sanction
any failure to meet deficit reduction targets by
withholding consolidation aid, were to exculpate
any overstepping of the respective deficit limits by
making allowances for state-specific special factors
or exceptional circumstances.
The additional room for manoeuvre secured by
using the tax estimates from May 2010 rather than
the actual values for 2010 becomes particularly
clear when considering the example of the state of
Berlin. According to the cash statistics, a deficit of
€1.4 billion is recorded for the reference year 2010.
The first item to be subtracted from this figure is fi-
nancial transactions, such as loans granted, which
placed a burden of just over €0.15 billion net on
the budget and reduced the starting structural
deficit value accordingly. Furthermore, the cyclical
impact on the budget must be deducted. Using
the European cyclical adjustment procedure and
the data as of February 2011, the Federal Ministry
of Finance estimated an output gap for Germany
for 2010 of -1.8% of potential output.2For Berlin’s
1For information on the central government issue, see Deutsche Bun-
desbank, Public finances, Monthly Report, February 2011, p 71 f. —
2See Federal Ministry of Finance, Die Ermittlung der Konjunkturkom-ponente des Bundes im Rahmen der neuen Schuldenregel, Monthly
Report, February 2011, p 69 (available in German only).

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
May 2011
71budget, this corresponds to a cyclical burden of
roughly €0.4 billion, which further reduces thestarting structural deficit value. This is offset byburdens arising from the time lag of one quarterin the settlement of various stages of thestate government revenue-sharing scheme in theamount of €0.25 billion, which are based onBerlin’s particularly favourable tax revenue situ-ation at the end of 2010. Thus, overall, a startingstructural deficit value of roughly €1.1 billion isobtained. In order to comply with the consolida-tion requirement to receive aid – a reduction in thestructural deficit ceiling of one-tenth of therespective starting value – this ceiling would haveto be lowered by just over €0.1 billion in each ofthe subsequent years up to 2020. This would resultin a structural deficit ceiling for 2011 of €1 billion.
By contrast, in accordance with the administrative
agreement, on the basis of Berlin’s tax estimatesfrom May 2010, a starting structural deficit value of€2 billion results in an upper limit of €1.8 billion for2011, thereby producing additional room for man-oeuvre of €0.8 billion. With reference to the min-imum requirements, Berlin could even postpone itsconsolidation efforts for several years and enlargethe structural deficit vis-à-vis 2010 by €0.7 billion.Yet the current extremely favourable macroeco-nomic developments mean that it would actuallybe advisable to rapidly implement the necessaryconsolidation measures. Otherwise, there is a riskof these measures having to be implemented in asignificantly more difficult macroeconomic setting.Furthermore, higher deficits would result in add-itional debts and, consequently, higher interestburdens – and high interest burdens, in particular,have been identified as one of the main causes ofthe budgetary problems. Decisive action should betaken at the current end to prevent this.
According to rough calculations, using figures
from the May 2010 tax estimates results in less ser-ious distortions for the other states. This is prob-
ably chiefly due to the fact that the figures usedwere based more closely on those in the tax esti-mate. For the future, the decision to use the in-come calculated in a state’s regionalised official taxestimate as an upper limit for projected revenuewhen monitoring compliance with the consolida-tion requirements seems adequate. However, theexample of Berlin clearly demonstrates that includ-ing safety margins when calculating the startingdeficits – for example, by referring to an outdatedtax revenue estimate – is at odds with the intentionof the consolidation requirements enshrined in theGerman constitution and should therefore be re-considered.
Moreover, it appears inappropriate to include one-
off effects or special factors that apply for a verylimited period of time in the calculation of thestarting point for a deficit reduction path for awhole decade. This evidently concerns Saarland inparticular, which – in addition to larger short-termburdens arising from special funds set up to stabil-ise the economy – has, for example, provided add-itional funds for several years in advance to a uni-versity. This clearly undermines the basic conceptof a 2010 reference deficit.
Overall, during its introduction phase, the imple-
mentation of the new debt brake lacks stringencyin key areas and, in this respect, runs contrary tothe intention of the rule. The phenomenon, whichhas been observed time and time again in the past,of putting off the necessary consolidation meas-ures to the future, has resurfaced. This is all themore concerning given the currently very favour-able conditions. It is essential that an ambitiousapproach to reduce deficits is adopted, particularlyin the highly indebted states, in order to firmlycurb the interest burden and have a realistic chanceof complying with the provisions enshrined in theGerman constitution from 2020 onwards.

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
EUROSYSTEM
Monthly Report
May 2011
72billion), the financial situation has improved.
At just over 11/2%, revenue growth was much
weaker than in the preceding quarters; yet,
at1/2%, growth in expenditure was even
slower. At just over 4%, employees’ compul-
sory contributions increased sharply. How-
ever, this was offset by a fall of over one-
third in contribution receipts on behalf of the
unemployed – owing not only to the im-
proved labour market situation but also to a
large extent to central government cutting
pension contributions on behalf of recipients
of unemployment benefit II as part of its
consolidation package. Overall, contribution
receipts rose by 21/2%. By contrast, central
government grants were not up on the previ-
ous year because they were calculated on the
basis of, inter alia , the slightly negative
growth in wages and salaries in 2009. Pen-sion expenditure in the first quarter hardly
changed on the year. This was due to the
waiver of the pension adjustment in mid-
2010 and to a persistently very weak rise in
the number of pensions. However, contribu-
tions by the pension insurance scheme to the
statutory health insurance scheme on behalf
of pensioners shot up following a rise in the
general contribution rate at the beginning of
the year from 14.9% to 15.5%.
Contrary to original expectations, it is now
looking likely that the statutory pension insur-
ance scheme will be able to post a surplus
again for 2011 as a whole. Pensions will be
raised by 0.99% on 1 July 2011. This means
that the calculated increase has been halved
to make up for some of the financial effects
of waiving pension cuts in recent years. While
the reserves are likely to rise, the upper inter-
vention threshold of 1.5 of monthly expend-
iture – the overshooting of which is to be
prevented by lowering the contribution rate –
will not yet have been reached. This is also
unlikely to happen in 2012. However, should
the positive macroeconomic developments
continue, the contribution rate would need
to be lowered in 2013. It is now essential to
implement all of the agreed pension adjust-
ment rules rigorously and not – as was often
the case in the past – to increase spending at
will without duly considering foreseeable
demographic burdens.
Federal Employment Agency
The Federal Employment Agency recorded a
surplus of over €1/2billion in the first quarter
of 2011, compared with a deficit of just overFinances of the
German statutory
pension insurance scheme
Deutsche Bundesbank2008 2009 2010 20115860626466
–20+2+4Quarterly
Lin scale
Surplus (+) or deficit (–)€ bnExpenditure€ bn
Log scale
Revenue
Surplus possible
in 2011
Surplus thanks
to positive
economic de-
velopments

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
May 2011
73€11/2billion one year previously. Whereas rev-
enue rose by just under 21/2%, expenditure
fell by 18%. The extremely favourable eco-nomic developments left their mark on theFederal Employment Agency’s financial pos-ition. Employees’ insurance contributionsrose – inter alia as a result of raising the con-
tribution rate from 2.8% to 3.0% – by12
1/2% (adjusted for the increase in the con-
tribution rate: +5%). However, this was off-set by the absence of receipts from insolvencybenefit contributions after the contributionrate was cut from 0.41 % to 0.0%. The regulargrant from central government, which is cal-culated on the basis of turnover tax revenue,was 4% higher than one year previously.However, this is also due to the fact that apayment was made earlier than last year. Anincrease of just over 1% is forecast for 2011as a whole. The sharp decline on the expend-iture side is split almost equally betweenlower payments for unemployment benefit(-19%) and reduced spending on short-timeworking benefits (-67%). Expenditure onactive labour market policy measures de-clined by 20%. Excluding the refunds ofsocial security contributions for short-timeworking made to employers – which werestill sizeable in 2010 in the wake of the reces-sion – that fall into this category, expenditureon this item fell by 11
1/2%.
The central government loan to offset the
deficit of almost €51/2billion included in the
Federal Employment Agency’s budget planseems to be far too high, especially since theunderlying central government projections ofwage and employment trends from autumn2010 now seem rather pessimistic. Assumingthe macroeconomic upturn continues, the
coming years should see a further easing inthe financial situation and it should be pos-sible to repay part of this year’s loan as earlyas next year. In the longer term, however,with a contribution rate of 3.0%, the FederalEmployment Agency seems to be clearlyunderfinanced, especially if central govern-ment cuts its regular grant to the FederalEmployment Agency, which was introducedFinances of the
Federal Employment Agency
1 Including  transfers  to  the  civil  servants’ 
pension fund set up in 2008. — 2 Excluding 
central government liquidity assistance.
Deutsche Bundesbank2008 2009 2010 20116810121416
1.82.43.03.64.24.85.46.06.6
642024
–––++Quarterly
€ bn€ bnLog scale
Expenditure, 
total 1
Revenue 2€ bn
Expenditure on ...
... vocational training... unemployment
    benefit and    short-time working    benefits
Lin scale
Surplus (+) or deficit (–)
Loan to offset
deficit likely to
be much lower
than forecast

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
EUROSYSTEM
Monthly Report
May 2011
74in 2007 when the standard rate of VAT was
raised from 16% to 19%, by around €4 bil-
lion as planned. This would create the risk of
the Federal Employment Agency accumulat-
ing debt on behalf of central government ifthe payments from central government ear-
marked for offsetting the deficit were to be
classified as a loan and thus excluded from
the definition stipulated by the new debt
brake.

Statistical
Section
1*DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
May 2011

ContentsI Key economic data for the euro area
1 Monetary developments and interest
rates 5*
2 External transactions and positions 5*
3 General economic indicators 6*
II Overall monetary survey in the
euro area
1 The money stock and its counterparts 8*
2 Consolidated balance sheet of mon-
etary financial institutions (MFIs) 10*
3 Banking system’s liquidity position 14*
III Consolidated financial statement
of the Eurosystem
1 Assets 16*2 Liabilities 18*
IV Banks
1 Assets and liabilities of monetary
financial institutions (excluding theBundesbank) in Germany 20*
2 Principal assets and liabilities of banks
(MFIs) in Germany, by category ofbanks 24*
3 Assets and liabilities of banks (MFIs)
in Germany vis-à-vis residents 26*
4 Assets and liabilities of banks (MFIs)
in Germany vis-à-vis non-residents 28*
2*DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
EUROSYSTEM
Monthly Report
May 2011

5 Lending by banks (MFIs) in Germany
to domestic non-banks (non-MFIs) 30*
6 Lending by banks (MFIs) in Germany
to domestic enterprises and house-
holds, housing loans, sectors of
economic activity 32*
7 Deposits of domestic non-banks
(non-MFIs) at banks (MFIs)
in Germany 34*
8 Deposits of domestic households
and non-profit institutions atbanks (MFIs) in Germany 36*
9 Deposits of domestic government
at banks (MFIs) in Germany, bycreditor group 36*
10 Savings deposits and bank savings
bonds of banks (MFIs) in Germanysold to non-banks (non-MFIs) 38*
11 Debt securities and money market
paper outstanding of banks (MFIs)in Germany 38*
12 Building and loan associations (MFIs)
in Germany 39*
13 Assets and liabilities of the foreign
branches and foreign subsidiaries ofGerman banks (MFIs) 40*
V Minimum reserves
1 Reserve ratios 42*2 Reserve maintenance in Germany up
to the end of 1998 42*
3 Reserve maintenance in the euro
area 42*VI Interest rates
1 ECB interest rates 43*
2 Base rates 43*3 Eurosystem monetary policy oper-
ations allotted through tenders 43*
4 Money market rates, by month 43*
5 Interest rates for outstanding
amounts and new business ofbanks (MFIs) in the Europeanmonetary union 44*
6 Interest rates and volumes for out-
standing amounts and new business
of German banks (MFIs) 45*
VII Capital market
1 Sales and purchases of debt securities
and shares in Germany 48*
2 Sales of debt securities issued by
residents 49*
3 Amounts outstanding of debt
securities issued by residents 50*
4 Shares in circulation issued by
residents 50*
5 Yields and indices on German
securities 51*
6 Sales and purchases of mutual
fund shares in Germany 51*
VIII Financial accounts
1 Acquisition of financial assets and
financing of private non-financialsectors 52*
2 Financial assets and liabilities of private
non-financial sectors 53*
3*DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
May 2011

IX Public finances in Germany
1 General government: deficit and debt
level as defined in the Maastricht Treaty 54*
2 General government: revenue,
expenditure and fiscal deficit/surplus
as shown in the national accounts 54*
3 General government: budgetary
development (as per government’sfinancial statistics) 55*
4 Central, state and local government:
budgetary development (as per
government’s financial statistics) 55*
5 Central, state and local government:
tax revenue 56*
6 Central and state government and
European Union: tax revenue, by type 56*
7 Central, state and local government:
individual taxes 57*
8 German pension insurance scheme:
budgetary development and assets 57*
9 Federal Employment Agency:
budgetary development 58*
10 Statutory health insurance scheme:
budgetary development 58*
11 Statutory long-term care insurance
scheme: budgetary development 59*
12 Central government: borrowing in
the market 59*
13 Central, state and local government:
debt by creditor 59*
14 Central, state and local government:
debt by category 60*
X Economic conditions in Germany
1 Origin and use of domestic product,
distribution of national income 61*
2 Output in the production sector 62*3 Orders received by industry 63*
4 Orders received by construction 64*5 Retail trade turnover 64*6 Labour market 65*7 Prices 66*8 Households’ income 67*9 Pay rates and actual earnings 67*
XI External sector
1 Major items of the balance of
payments of the euro area 68*
2 Major items of the balance of
payments of the Federal Republic
of Germany 69*
3 Foreign trade (special trade) of the
Federal Republic of Germany, bycountry and group of countries 70*
4 Services and income of the
Federal Republic of Germany 71*
5 Current transfers of the Federal
Republic of Germany 71*
6 Capital transfers 71*7 Financial account of the Federal
Republic of Germany 72*
8 External position of the Bundesbank 73*9 External position of the Bundesbank
in the European Monetary Union 73*
10 Assets and liabilities of enterprises
in Germany (other than banks)vis-à-vis non-residents 74*
11 ECB euro reference exchange rates
of selected currencies 75*
12 Euro member countries and
irrevocable euro conversion ratesin the third stage of EuropeanEconomic and Monetary Union 75*
13 Effective exchange rates of the euro
and indicators of the Germaneconomy’s price competitiveness 76*
4*DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
EUROSYSTEM
Monthly Report
May 2011

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
May 2011
 I Key economic data for the euro area  
 
1 Monetary developments and interest rates
 
 
 
 
 Money stock in various definitions  1,2 Determinants of the money stock  1 Interest rates
 M 3  3 
MFI lending to Yield on Euro-
 3-month enterprises Monetary pean govern-
MFI lending, and capital 3-month ment bonds moving  average
M1 M2 (centred) total households formation  4 Eonia  5,7 Euribor  6,7 outstanding  8 
Period Annual percentage change % per annum as a monthly average
2009          July 12.0 4.6 3.0 3.0 3.8 2.3 5.9 0.36 0.97 4.0
         Aug 13.3 4.4 2.4 2.4 3.3 1.6 6.2 0.35 0.86 3.8         Sep 12.9 3.6 1.8 1.5 3.5 1.4 6.4 0.36 0.77 3.8
         Oct 11.8 2.3 0.3 0.6 3.3 0.9 7.2 0.36 0.74 3.7
         Nov 12.6 1.8 − 0.2 − 0.1 2.8 0.7 7.0 0.36 0.72 3.7         Dec 12.3 1.6 − 0.4 − 0.2 2.5 0.7 6.7 0.35 0.71 3.7
2010          Jan 11.5 1.8 0.1 − 0.2 1.8 0.2 6.5 0.34 0.68 3.8
         Feb 11.0 1.6 − 0.4 − 0.1 1.8 0.2 5.7 0.34 0.66 3.8         Mar 11.0 1.7 − 0.1 − 0.2 1.8 0.2 5.9 0.35 0.64 3.7
         Apr 10.5 1.3 − 0.3 − 0.1 1.8 0.4 6.0 0.35 0.64 3.7
         May 10.3 1.5 0.0 0.0 1.7 0.1 5.1 0.34 0.69 3.6         June 9.3 1.5 0.3 0.1 1.5 0.0 3.9 0.35 0.73 3.6
         July 8.2 1.5 0.2 0.5 1.9 0.7 4.2 0.48 0.85 3.6
         Aug 7.7 2.0 1.1 0.8 2.3 1.2 3.8 0.43 0.90 3.3         Sep 6.2 2.0 1.1 1.1 2.2 1.2 3.6 0.45 0.88 3.4
         Oct 4.9 2.1 1.1 1.4 3.2 1.2 3.7 0.70 1.00 3.3
         Nov 4.6 2.3 2.1 1.6 3.9 1.9 4.0 0.59 1.04 3.7         Dec 4.3 2.2 1.7 1.8 3.4 1.6 3.8 0.50 1.02 4.1
2011          Jan 3.2 2.3 1.5 1.8 3.8 2.1 3.6 0.66 1.02 4.2
         Feb 2.9 2.4 2.1 2.0 3.8 2.3 4.1 0.71 1.09 4.3         Mar 3.0 2.6 2.3 ... 3.2 2.2 3.9 0.66 1.18 4.4
         Apr ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 0.97 1.32 4.5
1 Source: ECB. — 2 Seasonally adjusted. — 3 Excluding money market fund euro-area non-MFIs. — 5 Euro OverNight Index Average. — 6 Euro
shares
units, money market paper and debt securities with a maturity of up Interbank Offered Rate. — 7 See also footnotes to Table VI.4, p 43*. —
to two years held by non-euro-area residents. — 4 Longer-term liabilities to 8  GDP-weighted yield on ten-year government bonds. 
 
 
2 External transactions and positions  * 
  
 
Selected items of the euro-area balance of payments Euro exchange rates  1 
Current account Capital account Effective exchange rate  3 
of which Direct Securities Other Reserve
Balance Trade balance Balance investment investment assets Dollar rate Nominal Real  4 transactions  2 
Period € million Euro/US-$ Q1 1999 = 100
2009          July + 11,990 + 14,608 − 21,813 − 17,221 − 6,881 + 6,003 − 3,713 1.4088 111.6 110.4
         Aug − 3,943 − 972 − 1,150 + 14,279 + 10,175 − 26,362 + 757 1.4268 111.6 110.5
         Sep − 2,179 + 2,756 + 4,731 − 34,640 + 50,364 − 14,282 + 3,289 1.4562 112.9 111.4
         Oct + 591 + 6,481 − 2,418 + 4,667 + 10,335 − 16,765 − 654 1.4816 114.2 112.7
         Nov + 185 + 4,218 + 4,931 − 7,332 + 3,497 + 7,274 + 1,492 1.4914 114.0 112.4         Dec + 13,154 + 5,629 − 16,699 + 9,968 + 29,409 − 55,245 − 831 1.4614 113.0 111.2
2010          Jan − 12,303 − 8,016 + 11,041 − 10,776 + 42,418 − 22,132 + 1,529 1.4272 110.8 109.0
         Feb − 5,581 + 4,067 + 2,337 − 1,721 − 10,490 + 18,174 − 3,626 1.3686 108.0 106.1         Mar − 50 + 5,568 + 2,662 − 32,710 − 4,285 + 42,197 − 2,541 1.3569 107.4 105.8
         Apr − 4,220 + 1,439 + 5,129 − 18,428 + 37,294 − 13,655 − 81 1.3406 106.1 104.6
         May − 15,987 − 1,495 + 20,315 − 3,763 + 51,367 − 27,216 − 73 1.2565 102.8 101.4         June + 1,650 + 3,348 − 80 − 7,645 + 6,952 − 508 + 1,121 1.2209 100.6 99.4
         July + 5,499 + 7,231 + 440 − 618 − 26,486 + 30,676 − 3,132 1.2770 102.5 101.1
         Aug − 7,096 − 3,842 + 2,282 − 26,934 + 4,997 + 25,818 − 1,599 1.2894 102.1 100.6         Sep − 4,559 + 4,826 + 1,160 − 3,220 + 6,783 − 2,178 − 225 1.3067 102.5 100.8
         Oct + 3,990 + 6,365 − 3,145 − 27,707 + 8,799 + 15,999 − 236 1.3898 106.0 104.1
         Nov − 3,561 − 115 + 15,768 + 45,163 + 15,791 − 45,186 + 1 1.3661 104.7 102.7         Dec + 5,564 + 1,347 − 23,557 + 9,777 + 18,039 − 50,055 − 1,318 1.3220 102.6 100.5
2011          Jan − 20,789 − 14,128 + 18,328 + 6,485 − 20,770 + 38,337 − 5,724 1.3360 102.4 100.3
         Feb − 9,499 − 993 + 3,266 − 19,640 + 88,828 − 66,954 + 1,031 1.3649 103.4 101.1         Mar ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 1.3999 105.2 103.0
         Apr ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 1.4442 107.0 104.9
*  Source: ECB. — 1  See also Tables XI.12 and 13, pp 75−76. — 2  Including
financial derivatives. — 3  Vis-à-vis the currencies of The-EER-20 group. —
4  Based on consumer prices. 
5* I Key economic data for the euro area 

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
E U R O S Y S T E M
Monthly Report
May 2011
I. Key economic data for the euro area 
 
3  General economic indicators
 
 
                   
 
Period Euro area Belgium Germany Estonia Finland France Greece Ireland Italy
 
Real gross domestic product 1,2
 
2008 0.4 1.0 1.0 − 5.1 0.9 − 0.1 1.0 − 3.5 − 1.3
2009 − 4.1 − 2.7 − 4.7 − 13.9 − 8.2 − 2.7 − 2.0 − 7.6 − 5.22010 1.8 2.2 3.6 3.1 3.1 1.5 − 4.5 − 1.0 1.3
2009          Q4 − 2.1 − 0.2 − 1.3 − 8.8 − 5.5 − 0.7 − 1.1 − 5.8 − 2.7
2010          Q1 0.8 1.6 2.5 − 2.6 − 0.6 1.0 0.7 − 1.3 0.9
         Q2 2.0 2.8 4.3 3.1 4.6 1.9 − 4.0 − 1.8 1.8
         Q3 2.0 1.9 3.9 5.0 3.0 1.7 − 4.8 − 0.3 1.3         Q4 2.0 2.4 3.8 6.7 5.2 1.3 − 8.8 − 0.7 1.1
2011          Q1 2.5 ... 5.2 8.0 5.3 2.3 − 7.7 ... ...
 
Industrial production 1,3
 
2008 − 1.7 2.4 0.0 − 4.7 1.0 − 2.8 − 4.2 − 2.2 − 3.5
2009 − 14.7 − 8.8 − 16.3 − 23.9 − 18.1 − 12.6 − 9.2 − 4.5 − 18.82010 7.4 11.0 10.9 20.2 5.5 5.2 − 6.6 7.4 6.4
2009          Q4 − 7.3 − 1.0 − 8.8 − 13.0 − 12.4 − 5.6 − 7.2 − 8.7 − 10.0
2010          Q1 5.2 12.6 7.1 5.4 − 1.0 4.8 − 7.2 3.2 4.3
         Q2 9.4 14.7 12.8 17.6 6.4 6.7 − 6.4 4.1 9.1
         Q3 7.1 8.1 10.6 23.8 6.1 4.0 − 6.7 11.0 7.2         Q4 8.1 8.8 12.7 33.8 10.1 5.5 − 6.3 12.4 5.0
2011          Q1
e 6.4 ... 4p 12.0 31.2 2.6 4.7 p − 5.8 p − 0.8 2.0
 
Capacity utilisation in industry 5
 
2008 83.4 83.2 86.9 70.7 84.7 86.2 76.4 ... 76.0
2009 71.2 72.0 72.0 58.1 67.0 73.6 70.7 ... 66.12010 76.0 77.9 79.7 67.1 75.6 77.2 68.1 ... 68.3
2010          Q1 72.4 75.1 74.4 61.6 71.3 74.3 69.0 ... 65.5
         Q2 76.0 78.2 79.4 66.6 73.6 78.6 69.7 ... 67.7         Q3 77.4 79.0 81.9 68.8 78.2 77.5 66.6 ... 69.2         Q4 78.2 79.4 83.1 71.2 79.1 78.4 67.1 ... 70.9
2011          Q1 80.3 81.2 85.6 73.5 81.8 81.8 69.5 ... 72.5
         Q2 81.3 82.6 86.8 73.4 83.0 81.9 68.8 ... 74.3
 
Standardised unemployment rate 6,7
 
2008 7.6 7.0 7.5 5.5 6.4 7.8 7.7 6.3 6.7
2009 9.6 7.9 7.8 13.8 8.3 9.5 9.5 11.9 7.82010 10.1 8.3 7.1 16.9 8.4 9.7 12.6 13.7 8.4
2010          Oct 10.1 8.1 7.2 8.1 9.7 14.1 14.2 8.5
         Nov 10.1 8.0 6.7 8.1 9.6 14.1 14.5 8.4         Dec 10.0 7.9 6.6 14.3 8.1 9.6 14.1 14.8 8.3
2011          Jan 10.0 7.8 6.6 8.1 9.6 ... 14.9 8.3
         Feb 9.9 7.7 6.1 8.2 9.5 ... 14.8 8.2         Mar 9.9 7.7 6.2 ... 8.2 9.5 ... 14.7 8.3
 
Harmonised Index of Consumer Prices 1
 
2008 8 3.3 4.5 2.8 10.6 3.9 3.2 4.2 3.1 3.5
2009 9 0.3 0.0 0.2 0.2 1.6 0.1 1.3 − 1.7 0.8
2010 1.6 2.3 1.2 2.7 1.7 1.7 4.7 − 1.6 1.6
2010          Nov 1.9 3.0 1.6 5.0 2.4 1.8 4.8 − 0.8 1.9
         Dec 2.2 3.4 1.9 5.4 2.8 2.0 5.2 − 0.2 2.1
2011          Jan 10 2.3 3.7 2.0 5.1 3.1 2.0 4.9 0.2 1.9
         Feb 2.4 3.5 2.2 5.5 3.5 1.8 4.2 0.9 2.1
         Mar 2.7 3.5 2.3 5.1 3.5 2.2 4.3 1.2 2.8
         Apr p 2.8 3.3 2.7 5.4 3.4 2.2 3.7 1.5 2.9
 
General government financial balance 11
 
2008 − 2.0 − 1.3 0.1 − 2.8 4.2 − 3.3 − 9.8 − 7.3 − 2.7
2009 − 6.3 − 5.9 − 3.0 − 1.7 − 2.6 − 7.5 − 15.4 − 14.3 − 5.42010 − 6.0 − 4.1 − 3.3 0.1 − 2.5 − 7.0 − 10.5 − 32.4 − 4.6
 
General government debt 11
 
2008 69.9 89.6 66.3 4.6 34.1 67.7 110.7 44.4 106.32009 79.3 96.2 73.5 7.2 43.8 78.3 127.1 65.6 116.12010 85.2 96.8 83.2 6.6 48.4 81.7 142.8 96.2 119.0
Sources: National data, European Commission, Eurostat, European Central for working-day variations. — 4  Provisional; adjusted in advance by the
Bank. Latest data are partly based on press reports and are provisional. — Federal Statistical Office by way of estimates to the results of the Quarterl y
1  Annual percentage change. — 2  GDP of the euro area calculated from Production Survey. — 5  Manufacturing, in %; seasonally adjusted; data are
seasonally adjusted data. — 3  Manufacturing, mining and energy; adjusted collected in January, April, July and October. — 6  As a percentage of
6*I. Key economic data for the euro area 

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
May 2011
I.  Key economic data for the euro area 
 
3  General economic indicators
 
 
                   
 
Luxembourg Malta Netherlands Austria Portugal Slovakia Slovenia Spain Cyprus Period
 
Real gross domestic product 1,2
 
1.4 5.3 1.9 2.2 0.0 5.8 3.7 0.9 3.6 2008
− 3.6 − 3.4 − 3.9 − 3.9 − 2.5 − 4.8 − 8.1 − 3.7 − 1.7 2009
3.5 3.7 1.8 2.0 1.3 4.0 1.2 − 0.1 1.0 2010
1.8 − 1.4 − 2.2 − 0.9 − 1.1 − 3.6 − 5.7 − 2.6 − 2.8 2009          Q4
0.9 4.1 0.5 0.2 1.7 4.7 − 1.2 − 1.4 − 0.9 2010          Q1
5.3 3.4 2.2 2.5 1.6 4.2 2.1 0.2 0.6          Q2
3.3 3.1 1.8 2.5 1.0 3.8 1.7 0.0 1.9          Q34.7 3.9 2.5 3.0 1.0 3.5 2.1 0.6 2.5          Q4
... ... 3.2 4.2 ... 3.5 ... ... 1.8 2011          Q1
 
Industrial production1,3
 
− 5.2 − 1.4 1.3 − 4.1 3.3 1.7 − 7.3 4.1 2008
− 15.9 − − 7.6 − 11.3 − 8.6 − 13.8 − 17.6 − 15.8 − 8.6 2009
10.5 − 7.1 6.6 1.6 18.9 6.5 0.8 p − 1.9 2010
2.8 − − 1.4 − 4.9 − 4.5 1.3 − 8.4 − 5.6 − 8.7 2009          Q4
15.8 − 7.6 0.6 3.3 19.8 − 0.6 0.3 − 2.5 2010          Q1
14.8 − 10.8 8.1 2.5 24.4 10.5 2.9 − 2.1          Q2
5.7 − 4.2 8.4 − 0.2 15.3 8.3 − 0.2 − 0.3          Q3
6.3 − 5.9 9.1 1.0 16.7 8.0 0.4 p − 2.6          Q4
p 3.1 − 1.2 ... − 0.1 11.3 9.0 1.7 ... 2011          Q1
 
Capacity utilisation in industry 5
 
84.7 80.6 83.3 86.6 79.7 72.8 83.9 79.5 72.0 2008
65.4 70.1 76.0 77.4 72.6 54.0 70.9 70.0 66.3 200978.5 77.7 78.9 81.9 75.0 58.0 76.0 71.1 62.5 2010
76.4 78.4 77.4 78.7 74.4 58.0 72.7 68.4 61.7 2010          Q1
79.3 76.6 78.8 82.0 75.9 57.2 75.0 70.9 63.1          Q2
80.3 78.7 79.6 83.2 75.0 58.9 77.9 72.6 61.4          Q378.1 77.0 79.7 83.7 74.5 57.9 78.2 72.5 63.6          Q4
82.9 80.6 80.7 84.6 73.5 68.0 79.9 73.5 63.3 2011          Q1
87.3 81.1 81.1 86.3 76.4 55.4 82.2 74.7 ...          Q2
 
Standardised unemployment rate 6,7
 
4.9 5.9 3.1 3.8 7.7 9.5 4.4 11.3 3.6 2008
5.1 7.0 3.7 4.8 9.6 12.0 5.9 18.0 5.3 20094.5 6.8 4.5 4.4 11.0 14.4 7.3 20.1 6.5 2010
4.5 6.6 4.4 4.2 11.2 14.3 7.6 20.6 6.8 2010          Oct 
4.6 6.4 4.4 4.2 11.2 14.1 7.7 20.5 6.8          Nov 
4.6 6.5 4.3 4.2 11.2 14.0 8.0 20.4 6.8          Dec 
4.4 6.3 4.3 4.6 11.2 14.0 8.0 20.5 7.0 2011          Jan 
4.4 6.4 4.3 4.7 11.1 14.0 8.1 20.6 7.2          Feb 
4.5 6.3 4.2 4.3 11.1 13.9 8.1 20.7 7.2          Mar 
 
Harmonised Index of Consumer Prices 1
 
4.1 4.7 2.2 3.2 2.7 3.9 5.5 4.1 4.4 2008
0.0 1.8 1.0 0.4 − 0.9 0.9 0.9 − 0.2 0.2 20092.8 2.0 0.9 1.7 1.4 0.7 2.1 2.0 2.6 2010
2.5 3.4 1.4 1.8 2.2 1.0 1.6 2.3 1.7 2010          Nov 
3.1 4.0 1.8 2.2 2.4 1.3 2.2 2.9 1.9          Dec 
3.4 3.3 2.0 2.5 3.6 3.2 2.3 3.0 3.0 2011          Jan 
3.9 2.7 2.0 3.1 3.5 3.5 2.0 3.4 3.1          Feb 
4.0 2.8 2.0 3.3 3.9 3.8 2.4 3.3 3.2          Mar 
4.0 2.4
p 2.2 p 3.7 4.0 3.9 2.0 3.5 3.5          Apr 
 
General government financial balance 11
 
3.0 − 4.5 0.6 − 0.9 − 3.5 − 2.1 − 1.8 − 4.2 0.9 2008
− 0.9 − 3.7 − 5.5 − 4.1 − 10.1 − 8.0 − 6.0 − 11.1 − 6.0 2009
− 1.7 − 3.6 − 5.4 − 4.6 − 9.1 − 7.9 − 5.6 − 9.2 − 5.3 2010
 
General government debt 11
 
13.6 61.5 58.2 63.8 71.6 27.8 21.9 39.8 48.3 200814.6 67.6 60.8 69.6 83.0 35.4 35.2 53.3 58.0 200918.4 68.0 62.7 72.3 93.0 41.0 38.0 60.1 60.8 2010
the civilian labour force; seasonally adjusted. — 7  Standardised unemploy- Estonia from 2011 onwards. — 11  As a percentage of GDP; euro-area
ment rate of Germany: Bundesbank calculation based on unadjusted data aggregate: European Central Bank (ESA 1995), member states: European
from the Federal Statistical Office. — 8  Including Malta and Cyprus from Commission (Maastricht Treaty definition). 
2008 onwards. — 9  Including Slovakia from 2009 onwards. — 10  Including
7*I.  Key economic data for the euro area 

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
E U R O S Y S T E M
Monthly Report
May 2011
II Overall monetary survey in the euro area 
 
1 The money stock and its counterparts *
  
(a) Euro area 
  
€ billion
I Lending to non-banks (non-MFIs) II Net claims on III Monetary capital formation at monetary
in the euro area non-euro-area residents financial institutions (MFIs) in the euro area
Enterprises General
and households government Debt
Deposits securities
Liabil- with an Deposits with
Claims ities to agreed at agreed maturitieson non- non-euro- maturity notice of of over Capital
of which of which euro-area area of over over 2 years and
Period Total Total Total Total residents residents Total 2 years 3 months (net)  
2 Securities Securities reserves  3 
2009          Aug − 52.7 − 62.0 − 0.8 9.3 4.9 26.3 − 22.8 − 49.1 37.2 6.7 0.7 16.8 12.9
         Sep 72.4 50.7 5.7 21.8 31.2 − 13.9 − 35.1 − 21.1 22.4 16.3 1.0 − 8.4 13.6
         Oct − 5.8 − 39.7 − 1.4 33.9 14.0 10.1 12.2 2.2 5.3 1.7 2.2 − 0.6 1.9
         Nov 42.5 44.9 13.8 − 2.4 2.4 − 7.1 4.8 11.9 29.0 9.5 0.6 4.6 14.3         Dec − 35.3 − 2.3 3.7 − 33.0 − 28.4 48.8 − 51.3 − 100.0 41.9 20.6 − 1.1 − 14.3 36.7
2010          Jan − 11.2 − 31.1 − 1.5 20.0 8.6 5.1 61.4 56.3 34.1 11.1 1.0 30.8 − 8.7
         Feb 20.8 − 6.1 − 9.4 26.9 31.9 − 15.1 14.2 29.3 − 1.9 6.4 − 0.7 − 6.5 − 1.0         Mar 63.7 6.1 − 20.8 57.6 33.5 − 16.2 − 24.7 − 8.5 35.9 2.6 − 0.1 23.2 10.3
         Apr 87.6 72.9 42.6 14.6 11.5 − 25.1 71.5 96.6 20.8 16.2 − 2.0 6.2 0.3
         May 10.9 − 18.6 − 41.7 29.5 15.2 27.0 30.5 3.5 1.6 − 3.1 − 1.8 − 7.7 14.2         June 82.3 30.3 − 13.2 51.9 33.7 − 8.5 − 156.0 − 147.5 4.1 − 5.8 − 2.4 − 19.0 31.4
         July 32.6 45.6 30.1 − 13.0 − 2.1 − 32.6 − 41.3 − 8.8 49.6 29.5 − 2.2 8.0 14.3
         Aug 6.3 6.4 14.4 − 0.1 − 7.3 − 0.4 91.2 91.6 12.6 7.6 − 1.4 − 3.7 10.2         Sep 63.4 44.8 2.4 18.6 13.7 8.0 − 44.2 − 52.3 12.2 2.9 − 2.7 15.8 − 3.9
         Oct 150.4 − 36.6 − 19.8 187.0 107.6 − 82.4 − 38.3 44.2 10.6 − 7.1 − 1.7 12.6 6.8
         Nov 160.7 143.7 51.6 17.0 − 37.7 8.2 15.4 7.2 52.1 29.1 0.2 1.0 21.8         Dec − 117.3 − 45.2 − 25.5 − 72.1 − 75.9 50.4 − 88.9 − 139.3 32.5 20.0 − 0.5 − 3.6 16.7
2011          Jan 48.3 27.3 2.1 21.0 23.4 4.9 86.2 81.3 21.8 − 2.0 1.6 24.8 − 2.6
         Feb 20.8 23.9 − 0.3 − 3.1 10.4 21.5 31.6 10.0 34.1 − 5.1 0.5 22.9 15.9         Mar − 28.7 − 6.2 − 24.4 − 22.5 − 11.5 107.9 − 33.0 − 140.9 22.2 9.4 − 0.2 13.1 − 0.2
  
  
(b) German contribution
 
I Lending to non-banks (non-MFIs) II Net claims on III Monetary capital formation at monetary
in the euro area non-euro-area residents financial institutions (MFIs) in the euro area
Enterprises Generaland households government Debt
Deposits securities
Liabil- with an Deposits with
Claims ities to agreed at agreed maturitieson non- non-euro- maturity notice of of over Capital
of which of which euro-area area of over over 2 years and
Period Total Total Total Total residents residents Total 2 years 3 months (net)  
2 Securities Securities reserves  3 
2009          Aug − 27.5 − 18.8 − 6.4 − 8.7 − 3.2 1.9 − 13.3 − 15.2 1.5 1.9 0.8 1.8 − 2.9
         Sep 22.3 18.7 0.5 3.6 6.5 − 6.7 − 28.0 − 21.3 − 12.0 2.9 1.2 − 17.1 0.9
         Oct − 0.1 − 19.2 − 5.1 19.1 7.3 9.2 − 0.9 − 10.1 − 0.5 − 0.9 2.4 − 1.3 − 0.7
         Nov − 0.4 6.6 2.4 − 7.0 1.3 − 0.4 − 1.2 − 0.8 − 0.9 2.2 0.9 − 10.0 6.0         Dec − 37.4 − 30.0 − 9.7 − 7.4 − 1.4 10.6 − 9.3 − 19.9 − 12.5 0.7 − 1.1 − 12.8 0.6
2010          Jan 16.6 5.4 8.1 11.1 8.1 − 15.1 6.8 21.9 − 6.1 2.4 − 1.6 − 0.3 − 6.7
         Feb − 12.8 − 15.3 − 11.1 2.5 5.7 − 22.1 − 18.4 3.8 − 6.8 0.5 − 0.7 − 6.3 − 0.4         Mar − 2.5 − 8.8 − 5.2 6.2 7.0 − 14.0 2.8 16.8 2.9 1.1 0.1 2.7 − 0.9
         Apr 54.7 50.6 24.7 4.1 2.3 − 13.0 40.5 53.5 − 3.7 0.1 − 1.9 − 0.6 − 1.4
         May − 36.4 − 54.5 − 52.2 18.1 7.8 − 35.4 13.5 48.9 − 17.0 − 5.3 − 1.8 1.7 − 11.6         June 15.1 − 10.3 − 9.7 25.3 20.4 − 17.8 − 62.2 − 44.4 − 4.9 0.7 − 1.3 − 3.4 − 0.9
         July − 2.9 − 1.5 − 4.5 − 1.4 2.9 − 30.9 − 38.5 − 7.5 − 6.5 − 0.2 − 2.2 − 12.2 8.1
         Aug 8.7 6.9 1.6 1.8 1.8 7.2 12.0 4.8 − 3.4 2.4 − 1.8 − 2.4 − 1.7         Sep − 16.1 − 24.0 − 5.2 7.9 4.0 − 2.2 − 23.0 − 20.9 − 0.4 − 1.0 − 2.4 2.2 0.7
         Oct 101.0 7.6 1.6 93.4 88.7 5.0 − 3.4 − 8.4 2.3 − 2.1 − 1.4 − 4.4 10.2
         Nov 40.6 33.5 5.2 7.1 − 69.0 − 5.2 6.4 11.6 4.3 − 0.2 0.5 3.1 0.8         Dec − 72.0 − 39.6 − 4.2 − 32.4 − 22.5 18.4 − 11.7 − 30.1 − 0.5 − 0.2 − 0.0 − 0.7 0.4
2011          Jan 30.1 19.0 16.9 11.1 6.2 9.5 6.0 − 3.5 5.8 − 2.5 − 0.5 2.3 6.5
         Feb − 0.8 13.5 − 7.2 − 14.3 − 2.4 − 4.0 3.8 7.7 2.2 − 1.8 0.0 0.0 3.9         Mar − 29.6 − 17.1 − 0.5 − 12.5 − 2.2 26.8 − 26.4 − 53.2 − 3.6 − 1.7 0.2 − 4.6 2.5
*The data in this table are based on the consolidated balance sheet of deduction of inter-MFI participations. — 4Including the counterparts of
monetary financial institutions (MFIs) (Table II.2); statistical breaks have monetary liabilities of central governments. — 5Including the monetary
been eliminated from the flow figures (see also the “Notes on the figures“ liabilities of central governments (Post Office, Treasury). — 6In Germany,
in the “Explanatory notes“ in the Statistical Supplement to the Monthly only savings deposits. — 7Paper held by residents outside the euro area has
Report 1, p 30). — 1Source: ECB. — 2Excluding MFIs’ portfolios. — 3After been eliminated. — 8Less German MFIs’ holdings of paper issued by
8*II Overall monetary survey in the euro area 

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
May 2011
II Overall monetary survey in the euro area
 
 
 
(a) Euro area 
 
V Other factors VI Money stock M3 (balance I plus II less III less IV less V)
Money stock M2 Debt secur-
of which ities with
Intra- Money stock M1 maturities
Eurosystem Deposits of up toliability/ with an Deposits Money 2 years
IV De- claim agreed at agreed market (incl money
posits of related to Currency maturity notice of Repo fund market    
banknote in circu- Overnight of up to up to 3 transac-
shares paper)    central  gov-
ernments Total  4 issue Total Total Total lation deposits  5 2 years  5 tions (net)  2,7  Period (net)  2,7,8 months  5,6 
− 12.3 − 11.7 − − 39.5 − 15.6 7.4 − 4.3 11.7 − 39.9 16.9 − 10.5 1.2 − 14.6 2009          Aug 
20.8 8.7 − 6.6 9.6 62.6 − 0.5 63.1 − 59.6 6.7 24.5 − 19.5 − 8.0          Sep 
22.3 − 9.1 − − 14.3 26.1 55.6 4.8 50.8 − 44.1 14.7 − 25.8 − 4.8 − 9.8          Oct 
− 13.6 40.1 − − 20.1 − 7.0 38.5 4.7 33.9 − 49.3 3.8 5.5 − 15.0 − 3.6          Nov 
− 57.3 − 54.2 − 83.0 97.0 84.3 19.9 64.4 − 23.9 36.6 12.5 − 26.3 − 0.2          Dec 
30.7 − 9.3 − − 61.5 − 46.7 − 4.2 − 12.8 8.6 − 71.5 29.1 − 19.9 4.7 0.4 2010          Jan 
− 3.9 40.0 − − 28.5 − 28.9 − 16.6 2.4 − 19.0 − 21.4 9.1 15.3 − 8.2 − 6.7          Feb 
− 6.0 9.9 − 7.7 − 3.2 4.1 9.1 − 4.9 − 16.2 8.8 18.4 − 16.6 9.1          Mar 
− 20.0 − 18.0 − 79.7 55.6 81.6 4.0 77.5 − 35.3 9.4 21.0 1.8 1.4          Apr 
36.8 − 8.2 − 7.7 14.7 27.4 6.4 21.0 − 11.0 − 1.7 4.1 − 4.0 − 7.2          May
20.5 15.4 − 33.7 25.2 40.9 6.5 34.4 − 19.1 3.4 39.0 − 24.3 − 6.2          June
− 22.6 − 11.9 − − 15.0 14.4 − 10.4 8.4 − 18.8 14.6 10.1 − 22.1 − 8.5 1.2          July
− 20.2 − 4.3 − 17.8 3.9 − 31.9 − 6.0 − 25.9 23.0 12.8 2.7 11.7 − 0.5          Aug 
3.4 37.5 − 18.4 16.1 7.2 − 1.2 8.5 5.5 3.4 22.2 − 18.8 − 1.2          Sep 
78.1 − 7.9 − − 12.8 37.7 9.1 2.2 6.9 25.0 3.6 − 29.6 − 14.9 − 6.0          Oct 17.1 42.0 − 57.7 − 2.2 10.9 1.2 9.7 − 16.7 3.7 49.6 12.9 − 2.6          Nov 
− 97.1 − 54.2 − 51.8 89.3 65.0 18.4 46.7 3.3 21.0 − 5.2 − 32.8 0.7          Dec 
51.8 63.2 − − 83.6 − 42.2 − 45.3 − 12.6 − 32.7 − 15.0 18.1 − 36.2 − 9.8 4.6 2011          Jan 
13.4 − 27.0 − 21.9 − 20.6 − 31.3 − 0.0 − 31.3 7.9 2.7 39.7 4.7 − 1.9          Feb 
− 30.6 47.5 − 40.1 28.8 16.0 2.7 13.3 9.8 3.0 − 6.9 − 1.7 19.9          Mar 
 
 
 (b) German contribution 
 
V Other factors VI Money stock M3 (balance I plus II less III less IV less V)  10 
of which Components of the money stock
Intra- Debt securities
Eurosystem Deposits with
liability/ with an Deposits Money maturities
IV De- claim agreed at agreed market of up to 2 years
posits of related to Currency maturity notice of Repo fund (incl money    
banknote in circu- Overnight of up to up to 3 transac- shares market    central  gov-
ernments Total issue  9,11 lation Total deposits 2 years months  6 tions (net)  7,8 paper)(net)  7  Period
1.7 − 18.5 1.6 − 1.4 − 10.2 12.8 − 18.0 4.5 − 10.6 − 0.1 1.1 2009          Aug 
− 2.3 20.1 1.6 0.1 9.6 20.5 − 26.1 3.1 11.9 0.1 0.0          Sep 
1.4 11.1 1.5 0.8 − 3.1 27.9 − 30.7 4.2 − 0.4 − 0.1 − 3.9          Oct 
− 7.8 2.0 0.3 1.5 5.9 24.0 − 16.8 3.0 − 2.3 − 0.2 − 1.7          Nov 
− 8.9 2.4 0.0 4.3 − 7.8 − 16.6 3.7 10.0 − 0.5 − 0.6 − 3.8          Dec 
− 6.1 16.4 0.7 − 2.9 − 2.7 29.3 − 27.6 4.7 − 12.3 0.7 2.5 2010          Jan 
− 3.8 − 30.9 2.1 0.6 6.6 0.3 − 11.6 5.9 10.7 − 0.2 1.5          Feb 
− 1.6 − 3.3 0.5 2.9 − 14.6 − 14.7 − 0.0 1.8 1.0 − 0.5 − 2.1          Mar 
0.2 4.5 0.9 0.6 40.8 40.5 − 21.9 2.0 20.8 − 0.2 − 0.4          Apr 1.6 − 65.7 0.6 1.2 9.3 11.8 − 5.3 2.0 0.7 0.4 − 0.3          May
− 1.0 6.5 − 0.8 2.3 − 3.3 1.7 − 0.3 0.7 1.2 − 0.7 − 6.0          June
1.5 − 23.0 0.3 1.7 − 5.9 − 0.2 − 3.0 3.7 − 10.4 0.5 3.5          July
7.5 − 14.7 2.0 − 1.3 26.5 4.7 1.5 1.7 11.7 − 0.3 7.2          Aug 
− 8.5 − 11.3 2.6 − 0.4 1.9 1.0 3.6 2.6 − 8.0 − 0.2 2.9          Sep 
20.8 110.6 0.9 0.0 − 27.7 2.5 − 0.2 2.7 − 10.8 − 0.1 − 21.7          Oct 
3.3 − 18.8 − 0.1 1.1 46.7 26.4 − 5.2 2.1 23.9 0.3 − 0.8          Nov 
− 6.7 − 29.2 0.5 3.8 − 17.2 − 8.7 8.5 8.6 − 22.2 0.1 − 3.6          Dec 
5.4 32.5 0.7 − 2.8 − 4.1 14.7 − 6.2 2.7 − 12.2 0.1 − 3.1 2011          Jan 
1.9 − 17.6 1.1 − 0.2 8.8 − 14.4 4.1 2.1 18.8 − 0.1 − 1.7          Feb 
− 8.2 16.5 0.6 0.6 − 7.5 2.6 4.5 0.8 − 14.3 0.1 − 1.4          Mar 
euro-area MFIs. — 9Including national banknotes still in circulation. — M2 or M3. — 11The difference between the volume of euro banknotes
10The German contributions to the Eurosystem’s monetary aggregates actually issued by the Bundesbank and the amount disclosed in accordance
should on no account be interpreted as national monetary aggregates and with the accounting regime chosen by the Eurosystem (see also footnote 2
are therefore not comparable with the erstwhile German money stocks M1, on banknote circulation in Table III.2). 
9*II Overall monetary survey in the euro area

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
E U R O S Y S T E M
Monthly Report
May 2011
II Overall monetary survey in the euro area
 
2 Consolidated balance sheet of monetary financial institutions (MFIs) *
 
 
 
Assets
Lending to non-banks (non-MFIs) in the euro area
Enterprises and households General government
Claims
Total Shares and on non-
End of assets or Debt other Debt euro-area Other
year/month liabilities Total Total Loans securities  2 equities Total Loans securities  3 residents assets
 Euro area ( € billion) 1
 
2009          Feb 24,431.4 15,727.7 13,049.3 10,839.8 1,434.3 775.3 2,678.4 1,001.0 1,677.4 5,303.7 3,400.0
         Mar 24,157.6 15,752.4 13,037.4 10,818.3 1,451.1 768.0 2,715.0 991.9 1,723.1 5,034.0 3,371.2
         Apr 24,239.6 15,845.6 13,087.1 10,815.4 1,476.2 795.6 2,758.4 1,003.0 1,755.4 5,093.8 3,300.2
         May 23,917.6 15,851.6 13,089.6 10,812.5 1,484.4 792.8 2,762.0 994.7 1,767.3 4,960.3 3,105.7         June 24,085.4 15,956.3 13,122.0 10,839.1 1,500.0 782.9 2,834.4 1,017.6 1,816.7 4,910.2 3,218.9
         July 24,038.3 15,924.6 13,081.0 10,802.0 1,499.7 779.3 2,843.6 1,018.3 1,825.3 4,871.7 3,242.0
         Aug 23,953.8 15,873.5 13,019.7 10,737.8 1,499.6 782.3 2,853.8 1,022.7 1,831.1 4,860.9 3,219.5         Sep 23,906.8 15,948.6 13,069.0 10,771.9 1,499.5 797.6 2,879.6 1,013.2 1,866.4 4,779.2 3,179.1
         Oct 23,852.8 15,934.7 13,022.4 10,725.9 1,497.4 799.1 2,912.3 1,033.0 1,879.3 4,786.5 3,131.6
         Nov 24,008.1 15,973.4 13,064.7 10,755.2 1,497.9 811.5 2,908.7 1,025.5 1,883.2 4,796.0 3,238.7         Dec 23,861.8 15,973.4 13,100.7 10,783.9 1,504.6 812.1 2,872.6 1,021.1 1,851.5 4,808.4 3,080.0
2010          Jan 24,083.6 15,984.0 13,091.2 10,773.7 1,501.5 816.0 2,892.8 1,032.7 1,860.1 4,940.8 3,158.9
         Feb 24,254.2 16,009.3 13,084.7 10,777.0 1,505.9 801.8 2,924.6 1,027.9 1,896.7 5,011.5 3,233.4         Mar 24,303.3 16,067.4 13,086.0 10,800.7 1,491.6 793.8 2,981.4 1,052.1 1,929.3 4,997.5 3,238.5
         Apr 24,625.7 16,141.3 13,147.3 10,822.5 1,499.3 825.5 2,994.0 1,055.5 1,938.5 5,121.4 3,362.9
         May 25,228.8 16,179.2 13,144.5 10,864.9 1,478.6 801.0 3,034.7 1,070.2 1,964.5 5,347.5 3,702.2         June 25,239.7 16,380.0 13,288.9 10,988.1 1,517.6 783.2 3,091.0 1,091.6 1,999.4 5,245.5 3,614.2
         July 24,956.3 16,400.2 13,318.7 10,980.2 1,553.5 785.1 3,081.5 1,080.4 2,001.0 5,050.0 3,506.2
         Aug 25,597.2 16,419.1 13,330.0 10,978.7 1,555.2 796.2 3,089.1 1,088.1 2,001.0 5,235.7 3,942.4         Sep 25,183.5 16,440.5 13,338.7 10,983.1 1,557.8 797.8 3,101.9 1,092.4 2,009.4 5,034.0 3,708.9
         Oct 25,154.9 16,582.6 13,296.2 10,959.9 1,531.6 804.7 3,286.4 1,172.0 2,114.4 4,975.3 3,597.0
         Nov 25,466.1 16,738.6 13,449.7 11,069.7 1,563.7 816.3 3,289.0 1,227.6 2,061.4 5,146.8 3,580.8         Dec 25,827.6 16,594.8 13,372.2 11,028.0 1,545.0 799.2 3,222.6 1,238.6 1,984.0 5,003.5 4,229.4
2011          Jan 25,702.0 16,659.3 13,414.1 11,066.6 1,532.5 815.0 3,245.2 1,236.3 2,008.9 5,013.6 4,029.1
         Feb 25,752.0 16,695.3 13,461.7 11,113.9 1,540.3 807.5 3,233.6 1,216.7 2,016.9 5,051.2 4,005.5         Mar 25,449.1 16,645.8 13,437.4 11,117.1 1,510.7 809.7 3,208.4 1,205.4 2,003.0 4,949.2 3,854.2
 German contribution ( € billion) 
2009          Feb 5,315.0 3,672.2 3,058.5 2,544.1 235.8 278.6 613.8 372.8 241.0 1,348.2 294.6
         Mar 5,282.0 3,674.0 3,065.2 2,555.9 235.1 274.3 608.8 368.1 240.7 1,278.5 329.5
         Apr 5,330.0 3,694.6 3,079.0 2,557.4 234.9 286.8 615.6 369.8 245.8 1,319.6 315.8
         May 5,261.9 3,684.9 3,068.7 2,556.8 234.0 277.8 616.2 365.5 250.8 1,292.8 284.3         June 5,220.8 3,698.7 3,082.9 2,566.5 246.0 270.4 615.8 363.7 252.1 1,270.5 251.6
         July 5,173.5 3,689.5 3,059.0 2,545.9 245.8 267.3 630.6 376.6 254.0 1,238.5 245.5
         Aug 5,149.9 3,660.3 3,038.5 2,532.0 242.9 263.6 621.8 371.0 250.7 1,223.4 266.3         Sep 5,131.7 3,679.7 3,054.4 2,548.0 242.8 263.6 625.2 368.1 257.1 1,186.5 265.5
         Oct 5,128.8 3,677.6 3,033.3 2,532.0 240.4 260.9 644.2 379.8 264.4 1,184.0 267.3
         Nov 5,131.5 3,675.6 3,041.1 2,537.6 240.3 263.2 634.6 368.9 265.7 1,184.3 271.6         Dec 5,084.8 3,642.7 3,015.1 2,520.4 235.5 259.1 627.6 363.0 264.6 1,188.8 253.3
2010          Jan 5,123.4 3,660.2 3,021.3 2,516.0 239.8 265.5 638.8 366.1 272.7 1,211.6 251.5
         Feb 5,099.1 3,649.6 3,008.2 2,513.7 237.7 256.8 641.4 362.9 278.5 1,208.0 241.5
         Mar 5,105.8 3,638.3 2,993.1 2,509.7 233.9 249.6 645.2 362.2 283.0 1,209.3 258.2
         Apr 5,210.6 3,693.3 3,044.0 2,535.9 231.3 276.8 649.3 364.1 285.2 1,262.7 254.6
         May 5,259.6 3,664.4 2,996.6 2,539.6 209.1 247.9 667.8 374.7 293.1 1,324.9 270.3         June 5,236.5 3,680.2 2,988.1 2,540.8 205.5 241.8 692.1 377.7 314.4 1,272.2 284.0
         July 5,144.1 3,670.8 2,980.4 2,537.8 200.7 242.0 690.4 373.1 317.3 1,195.0 278.3
         Aug 5,201.0 3,683.3 2,991.4 2,546.6 199.6 245.1 691.9 373.2 318.7 1,228.9 288.8         Sep 5,107.4 3,659.4 2,960.3 2,520.3 198.8 241.2 699.1 376.7 322.3 1,172.2 275.8
         Oct 5,191.7 3,756.9 2,964.7 2,523.0 197.8 243.9 792.2 381.2 411.0 1,162.4 272.4
         Nov 5,311.7 3,822.0 3,004.1 2,557.1 195.3 251.8 817.8 457.5 360.3 1,207.0 282.8         Dec 6,121.8 3,742.7 2,958.5 2,518.9 192.7 246.9 784.2 447.6 336.6 1,183.6 1,195.5
2011          Jan 6,033.2 3,767.9 2,972.6 2,516.5 194.1 262.0 795.3 452.3 342.9 1,170.1 1,095.2
         Feb 5,986.9 3,764.4 2,983.4 2,535.7 193.4 254.3 781.0 440.8 340.2 1,175.3 1,047.2
         Mar 5,835.3 3,730.5 2,962.9 2,515.9 190.2 256.8 767.6 430.3 337.3 1,134.9 970.0
*Monetary financial institutions (MFIs) comprise banks (including building and other money market paper issued by general government. — 4Euro
and loan associations), money market funds, and the European Central currency in circulation (see also footnote 8 on p 12*). Excluding MFIs‘ cash in
Bank and national central banks (the Eurosystem). — 1Source: ECB. — hand (in euro). The German contribution includes the volume of euro bank-
2Including money market paper of enterprises. — 3Including Treasury bills notes put into circulation by the Bundesbank in accordance with
10*II Overall monetary survey in the euro area

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
May 2011
II Overall monetary survey in the euro area
 
 
 
 
 
Liabilities
Deposits of non-banks (non-MFIs) in the euro area
Enterprises and households
With agreed At agreed
maturities of notice of  6 
over
Currency 1 year and
in of which up to up to over up to over  End of
Total in euro  5 Total Overnight 1 year 2 years 2 years 3 months 3 months year/month circulation  4 
Euro area ( € billion) 1
 
715.8 9,788.5 9,135.6 9,182.2 3,185.0 2,004.1 250.6 2,025.4 1,599.9 117.2 2009          Feb 
719.8 9,817.5 9,163.2 9,201.8 3,203.3 1,962.0 252.2 2,046.6 1,620.0 117.8          Mar 
729.1 9,880.6 9,242.4 9,279.4 3,254.9 1,945.8 253.8 2,062.3 1,643.9 118.8          Apr 
731.9 9,886.5 9,258.7 9,291.8 3,276.2 1,900.8 252.5 2,084.2 1,657.9 120.2          May734.9 9,955.5 9,300.4 9,337.1 3,354.1 1,842.7 242.1 2,107.2 1,669.7 121.3          June
745.3 9,887.2 9,285.1 9,326.9 3,341.9 1,801.2 254.5 2,118.7 1,688.2 122.4          July
741.0 9,857.4 9,281.6 9,320.7 3,350.7 1,759.6 257.8 2,124.5 1,704.9 123.2          Aug 740.5 9,895.9 9,303.8 9,338.4 3,407.1 1,701.4 254.6 2,139.3 1,711.5 124.4          Sep 
745.3 9,941.5 9,322.4 9,365.2 3,460.8 1,654.9 256.7 2,140.0 1,726.0 126.9          Oct 
750.0 9,922.5 9,324.0 9,357.1 3,485.6 1,605.4 259.9 2,148.6 1,730.0 127.7          Nov 769.9 9,986.1 9,441.3 9,495.9 3,559.9 1,590.9 262.2 2,189.1 1,767.0 126.9          Dec 
757.1 10,012.4 9,432.8 9,488.0 3,579.5 1,521.0 265.1 2,200.1 1,796.9 125.4 2010          Jan 
759.5 9,995.7 9,424.9 9,472.7 3,559.8 1,502.0 269.0 2,211.1 1,805.9 124.9          Feb 
768.6 9,982.3 9,414.3 9,467.8 3,560.6 1,485.2 268.3 2,213.8 1,814.8 125.1          Mar 
772.6 10,030.5 9,478.5 9,537.2 3,638.5 1,449.9 270.3 2,232.0 1,824.4 122.1          Apr 
779.0 10,088.5 9,479.8 9,550.9 3,660.4 1,442.0 270.3 2,234.8 1,823.1 120.4          May785.5 10,220.8 9,597.6 9,654.7 3,698.0 1,428.6 269.0 2,322.0 1,817.7 119.5          June
793.9 10,213.9 9,630.0 9,689.6 3,687.4 1,439.1 270.5 2,347.4 1,827.8 117.4          July
788.0 10,212.7 9,636.9 9,704.8 3,664.4 1,455.0 272.6 2,355.7 1,840.8 116.1          Aug 786.8 10,212.2 9,650.2 9,695.7 3,667.2 1,457.1 263.9 2,349.7 1,843.9 113.8          Sep 
789.0 10,316.5 9,679.9 9,725.7 3,673.2 1,476.6 273.7 2,342.1 1,847.6 112.4          Oct 
790.2 10,397.4 9,726.1 9,784.0 3,677.6 1,464.2 277.9 2,399.7 1,851.8 112.9          Nov 808.6 10,377.9 9,814.9 9,878.3 3,730.1 1,470.7 272.8 2,419.1 1,873.0 112.5          Dec 
796.2 10,412.1 9,797.6 9,854.2 3,706.0 1,451.8 276.1 2,416.0 1,892.0 112.2 2011          Jan 
796.2 10,421.0 9,795.0 9,847.9 3,672.3 1,456.6 278.8 2,428.1 1,899.3 113.0          Feb 
798.9 10,419.2 9,825.3 9,873.5 3,682.7 1,449.5 290.2 2,435.5 1,902.7 113.0          Mar 
 German contribution ( € billion) 
177.7 2,834.1 2,754.4 2,660.1 872.0 432.0 52.8 758.1 434.7 110.6 2009          Feb 
179.0 2,821.3 2,740.2 2,650.6 870.1 418.5 52.7 760.7 437.3 111.3          Mar 
180.6 2,854.6 2,759.1 2,667.2 880.6 418.0 52.0 764.7 439.8 112.1          Apr 
180.7 2,860.9 2,753.2 2,661.0 884.4 401.8 51.8 767.2 442.2 113.6          May182.2 2,856.1 2,755.9 2,666.6 902.2 372.6 50.8 780.8 445.7 114.6          June
185.6 2,840.1 2,747.1 2,663.6 907.2 358.8 50.2 781.5 450.2 115.7          July
184.2 2,832.1 2,748.8 2,667.0 919.1 344.4 49.1 783.3 454.6 116.5          Aug 184.3 2,830.8 2,750.2 2,671.8 937.9 324.4 47.9 786.2 457.7 117.7          Sep 
185.0 2,834.4 2,752.2 2,676.5 966.4 295.8 47.6 784.8 461.8 120.1          Oct 
186.5 2,839.6 2,767.0 2,687.1 987.8 280.1 46.6 787.0 464.7 120.9          Nov 190.8 2,828.4 2,763.3 2,688.5 975.3 283.8 46.9 788.0 474.6 119.8          Dec 
187.9 2,830.4 2,772.0 2,696.8 1,005.5 261.0 44.4 788.2 479.4 118.3 2010          Jan 
188.5 2,829.6 2,776.4 2,695.8 1,003.1 253.7 43.7 792.4 485.3 117.6          Feb 
191.4 2,816.4 2,765.5 2,687.3 992.2 254.0 42.8 793.5 487.1 117.7          Mar 
192.1 2,836.8 2,782.6 2,710.0 1,035.2 234.4 42.0 793.6 489.0 115.8          Apr 
193.2 2,841.8 2,783.5 2,706.9 1,043.4 229.2 40.8 788.5 490.9 114.0          May195.5 2,842.8 2,787.0 2,702.1 1,041.7 229.2 39.0 787.9 491.6 112.7          June
197.2 2,841.1 2,785.3 2,706.3 1,047.6 227.6 37.8 787.4 495.2 110.6          July
195.8 2,857.9 2,794.5 2,710.2 1,050.3 226.9 37.5 789.7 496.9 108.8          Aug 195.4 2,851.5 2,797.8 2,709.0 1,049.9 226.9 37.5 788.8 499.4 106.6          Sep 
195.5 2,873.7 2,798.5 2,717.1 1,055.7 229.3 37.9 786.8 502.1 105.2          Oct 
196.6 2,925.7 2,845.2 2,764.3 1,078.2 227.8 38.2 810.2 504.1 105.7          Nov 200.4 2,926.8 2,855.0 2,772.1 1,069.6 235.1 38.1 811.1 512.4 105.7          Dec 
197.6 2,939.7 2,862.6 2,782.4 1,084.8 230.8 38.0 808.5 515.1 105.3 2011          Jan 
197.4 2,931.4 2,853.1 2,769.4 1,070.2 231.9 38.2 806.5 517.1 105.4          Feb 
198.0 2,929.0 2,858.6 2,771.8 1,070.0 234.8 38.7 804.8 517.9 105.6          Mar 
the accounting regime chosen by the Eurosystem (see footnote 3 on item “Intra-Eurosystem liability/claim related to banknote issue“ (see “Other
banknote circulation in Table III.2). The volume of currency actually put into liability items“). — 5Excluding central governments’ deposits. — 6In
circulation by the Bundesbank can be calculated by adding to this total the Germany, only saving deposits. 
11*II Overall monetary survey in the euro area

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
E U R O S Y S T E M
Monthly Report
May 2011
II Overall monetary survey in the euro area
 
2 Consolidated balance sheet of monetary financial institutions (MFIs) (cont’d) *
 
 
 
Liabilities (cont’d)
Deposits of non-banks (non-MFIs) in the euro area (cont’d)  
 
General government Repo transactions Debt securitieswith non-banks
Other general government in the euro area
With agreed At agreedmaturities of notice of  
2 
Money
over of which market of which
Central 1 year and Enterprises fund denom-
End of govern- up to up to over up to over and shares inatedyear/month ments Total Overnight 1 year 2 years 2 years 3 months 3 months Total households (net)  
3 Total in euro
 Euro area ( € billion) 1
 
2009          Feb 339.0 267.3 130.2 97.0 5.2 24.6 2.3 8.0 327.4 324.6 780.3 2,840.9 2,209.3
         Mar 351.7 264.1 134.9 89.2 4.6 24.9 2.6 7.9 338.5 335.5 781.1 2,794.1 2,194.4
         Apr 337.4 263.8 139.9 83.8 4.8 24.9 2.8 7.7 338.2 335.4 782.1 2,807.6 2,193.2
         May 331.5 263.1 138.1 84.7 4.9 24.9 3.0 7.5 336.2 333.4 771.9 2,802.4 2,211.0         June 352.3 266.2 146.0 80.3 4.6 25.0 3.1 7.3 347.3 344.5 742.3 2,799.2 2,198.1
         July 298.2 262.0 146.0 74.9 4.9 25.5 3.5 7.2 321.3 318.9 758.5 2,802.4 2,203.3
         Aug 274.5 262.2 148.2 72.3 5.1 25.7 3.8 7.1 310.8 308.8 759.9 2,798.6 2,197.2
         Sep 295.2 262.2 154.7 65.9 5.2 25.7 3.9 6.8 335.2 333.0 741.1 2,769.7 2,187.1
         Oct 317.5 258.7 151.6 65.1 5.2 26.0 4.2 6.6 309.4 307.2 735.5 2,756.8 2,176.7
         Nov 304.0 261.5 158.1 61.8 5.0 26.1 4.1 6.4 314.8 312.7 722.3 2,751.8 2,173.2         Dec 246.7 243.5 143.9 58.8 4.8 25.9 4.0 6.2 327.5 324.8 647.5 2,752.5 2,167.3
2010          Jan 277.3 247.1 144.4 56.8 4.8 28.2 4.3 8.6 307.6 306.1 652.2 2,799.3 2,183.7
         Feb 273.4 249.5 146.5 56.8 4.7 28.4 4.7 8.4 323.0 321.4 644.0 2,794.0 2,162.4         Mar 267.4 247.0 142.2 58.8 4.6 28.5 4.9 8.1 341.4 339.6 628.3 2,828.1 2,191.7
         Apr 247.5 245.8 141.0 58.6 4.5 28.6 5.1 7.9 362.4 360.4 634.2 2,843.0 2,193.5
         May 284.2 253.3 145.6 61.6 4.4 28.4 5.4 7.8 366.8 364.8 630.3 2,868.3 2,180.3         June 304.8 261.2 149.7 64.6 3.9 30.0 5.5 7.6 405.9 404.4 605.7 2,854.4 2,169.1
         July 282.2 242.0 131.7 63.0 3.6 30.5 5.7 7.5 383.6 382.2 596.7 2,836.9 2,171.6
         Aug 262.1 245.7 131.4 67.0 3.3 30.8 5.9 7.4 386.4 385.0 608.2 2,847.9 2,161.6         Sep 265.5 251.0 132.0 72.2 3.3 30.1 6.4 7.0 408.4 406.9 589.5 2,830.8 2,172.5
         Oct 343.7 247.0 133.2 66.9 3.4 30.3 6.5 6.8 382.9 381.4 574.3 2,830.5 2,173.0
         Nov 360.8 252.5 141.4 64.3 3.4 30.4 6.6 6.5 432.7 431.1 586.5 2,866.2 2,183.4         Dec 264.2 235.4 125.0 64.0 3.4 30.1 6.5 6.3 427.4 425.4 552.4 2,857.7 2,182.2
2011          Jan 316.4 241.5 127.4 65.4 3.4 30.1 6.9 8.2 391.1 389.7 542.6 2,883.0 2,217.6
         Feb 329.9 243.2 126.1 67.7 3.4 30.6 7.4 8.0 430.7 429.1 549.9 2,900.2 2,232.7         Mar 299.3 246.4 125.9 71.1 3.4 30.9 7.4 7.8 426.3 424.9 571.0 2,915.8 2,263.4
 German contribution ( € billion) 
2009          Feb 45.4 128.6 37.1 65.0 3.9 21.1 1.0 0.4 74.0 74.0 12.0 814.7 563.9
         Mar 48.6 122.2 36.3 59.5 3.4 21.4 1.1 0.5 87.7 87.7 11.4 779.4 542.7
         Apr 62.7 124.6 41.4 56.8 3.5 21.3 1.2 0.5 92.6 92.6 11.2 782.5 531.5
         May 74.7 125.1 41.0 57.6 3.5 21.3 1.2 0.5 90.9 90.9 10.9 776.7 538.0
         June 65.8 123.7 43.0 54.3 3.2 21.3 1.3 0.6 93.4 93.4 10.7 764.5 521.5
         July 60.0 116.5 40.3 49.4 3.3 21.5 1.4 0.6 82.4 82.4 9.6 754.9 510.6
         Aug 50.2 114.9 41.1 46.6 3.4 21.5 1.6 0.6 71.7 71.7 9.5 755.1 507.7
         Sep 47.9 111.2 42.4 41.7 3.4 21.5 1.6 0.7 83.7 83.7 9.6 734.0 498.1
         Oct 49.3 108.5 41.6 39.5 3.4 21.7 1.6 0.7 83.3 83.3 9.5 727.1 492.8
         Nov 41.6 110.9 44.1 39.3 3.3 21.7 1.7 0.7 81.0 81.0 9.3 713.6 483.0         Dec 32.7 107.3 40.7 39.5 3.2 21.4 1.8 0.7 80.5 80.5 8.7 703.3 470.7
2010          Jan 26.6 107.0 40.3 37.4 3.1 23.7 1.7 0.7 68.2 68.2 9.4 712.0 466.2
         Feb 22.7 111.1 43.4 38.4 3.1 23.7 1.7 0.7 78.9 78.9 9.2 711.0 456.3
         Mar 21.2 107.9 39.6 39.1 3.0 23.7 1.8 0.7 79.8 79.8 8.6 714.4 458.2
         Apr 21.4 105.4 37.4 38.8 2.9 23.8 1.8 0.7 100.7 100.7 8.4 715.8 451.0
         May 23.0 112.0 42.2 40.6 2.8 23.7 2.0 0.7 101.4 101.4 8.8 733.9 451.9         June 21.9 118.8 45.4 43.2 2.4 25.0 2.0 0.7 102.7 102.7 8.1 729.6 450.9
         July 23.5 111.3 38.4 42.9 2.1 25.1 2.0 0.7 92.2 92.2 8.6 709.2 437.0
         Aug 30.9 116.8 41.0 45.7 2.0 25.4 2.1 0.7 104.0 104.0 8.3 720.7 436.1         Sep 22.4 120.1 41.2 48.9 2.1 25.1 2.2 0.6 95.9 95.9 8.1 710.8 437.1
         Oct 43.2 113.3 37.6 45.6 2.1 25.2 2.2 0.6 85.0 85.0 8.0 682.1 408.8
         Nov 46.5 114.9 41.9 43.0 2.1 25.2 2.2 0.6 109.0 109.0 8.3 716.8 433.9         Dec 39.8 114.9 40.6 44.6 2.0 25.0 2.2 0.5 86.7 86.7 8.4 708.5 425.8
2011          Jan 45.2 112.1 39.6 42.7 1.9 25.0 2.3 0.5 74.5 74.5 8.4 703.2 426.8
         Feb 47.1 114.9 39.7 45.6 1.7 25.2 2.3 0.5 93.2 93.2 8.4 698.6 424.5         Mar 38.9 118.3 42.0 46.6 1.8 25.2 2.3 0.5 78.9 78.9 8.5 685.3 426.2
*Monetary financial institutions (MFIs) comprise banks (including building 5Excluding liabilities arising from securities issued. — 6After deduction of
and loan associations), money market funds, and the European Central inter-MFI participations. — 7The German contributions to the Eurosystem’s
Bank and national central banks (the Eurosystem). — 1Source: ECB. — 2In monetary aggregates should on no account be interpreted as national
Germany, only savings deposits. — 3Excluding holdings of MFIs; for the monetary aggregates and are therefore not comparable with the erstwhile
German contribution, excluding German MFIs’ portfolios of securities issued German money stocks M1, M2 or M3. — 8including DM banknotes still in
by MFIs in the euro area. — 4In Germany, bank debt securities with circulation (see also footnote 4 on p 10*). — 9For the German contribution,
maturities of up to one year are classed as money market paper. — the difference between the volume of euro banknotes actually issued
12*II Overall monetary survey in the euro area

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
May 2011
II Overall monetary survey in the euro area
 
 
 
 
 
 Memo item
 Other liability items Monetary aggregates  7 
 (From 2002, German contribution
issued (net)  3 excludes currency in circulation)
With maturities of
of which Monetary
Intra- liabilities
Eurosystem- of centralliability/ govern-
over Liabilities Excess claim Monetary ments1 year and to non- Capital of related to capital (Post
up to up to over euro-area and inter-MFI banknote forma- Office, End of1 year  
4 2 years 2 years residents  5 reserves  6 liabilities Total  8 issue  9 M1 10 M2 11 M3 12 tion 13 year/month Treasury)  14 
Euro area ( € billion) 1
 
88.3 126.5 2,626.1 4,860.7 1,666.1 − 94.1 3,545.8 − 4,101.9 8,093.8 9,415.5 6,467.4 103.6 2009          Feb 
65.9 128.5 2,599.8 4,643.8 1,643.7 − 82.8 3,501.8 − 4,130.8 8,094.0 9,407.1 6,440.6 105.5          Mar 
66.0 139.9 2,601.8 4,671.1 1,645.1 − 83.0 3,468.9 − 4,197.5 8,165.0 9,490.1 6,460.4 106.2          Apr 
53.5 144.7 2,604.1 4,513.0 1,655.4 − 102.3 3,322.7 − 4,221.1 8,157.4 9,462.8 6,496.3 107.4          May38.6 143.2 2,617.4 4,436.4 1,689.8 − 62.5 3,442.5 − 4,311.6 8,186.1 9,456.6 6,567.8 108.7          June
25.3 145.5 2,631.6 4,384.1 1,698.1 − 58.5 3,499.8 − 4,311.0 8,170.1 9,420.1 6,603.6 109.7          July
12.1 144.3 2,642.3 4,308.2 1,716.8 − 68.4 3,529.4 − 4,317.6 8,153.0 9,379.3 6,639.7 109.6          Aug 
7.0 141.1 2,621.6 4,234.8 1,740.1 − 66.9 3,516.4 − 4,379.3 8,153.6 9,377.5 6,657.9 108.7          Sep 
− 1.6 140.3 2,618.1 4,226.8 1,747.0 − 93.7 3,484.2 − 4,434.6 8,178.4 9,361.4 6,664.5 108.6          Oct 
− 2.4 136.5 2,617.7 4,213.0 1,780.6 − 58.1 3,611.1 − 4,472.3 8,170.0 9,340.4 6,707.1 110.2          Nov 
3.6 129.2 2,619.7 4,237.7 1,802.6 − 23.3 3,361.3 − 4,559.6 8,278.5 9,385.1 6,770.3 117.2          Dec 
2.5 129.3 2,667.6 4,358.2 1,798.6 − 22.8 3,421.0 − 4,557.4 8,237.6 9,329.1 6,828.5 107.8 2010          Jan 
1.1 124.2 2,668.7 4,421.5 1,814.7 − 5.7 3,507.6 − 4,542.6 8,216.8 9,309.0 6,856.2 107.8          Feb 
11.7 122.4 2,693.9 4,423.5 1,832.2 − 41.8 3,540.8 − 4,546.8 8,214.0 9,317.9 6,901.6 106.1          Mar 
15.6 119.9 2,707.4 4,549.4 1,841.1 − 59.9 3,652.4 − 4,629.3 8,272.8 9,404.8 6,939.1 107.8          Apr 
22.2 106.8 2,739.3 4,703.3 1,877.9 − 41.0 3,955.8 − 4,663.8 8,301.2 9,427.0 7,008.6 109.4          May22.5 101.1 2,730.9 4,601.6 1,956.8 6.1 3,802.8 − 4,713.4 8,332.8 9,467.7 7,166.7 110.4          June
27.7 99.6 2,709.5 4,486.8 1,940.9 − 12.0 3,715.5 − 4,697.8 8,337.5 9,444.9 7,153.3 114.8          July
27.2 99.9 2,720.8 4,634.6 1,981.6 12.9 4,124.9 − 4,667.9 8,342.2 9,463.7 7,212.4 113.7          Aug 32.4 96.3 2,702.2 4,440.0 1,956.3 9.9 3,949.6 − 4,668.4 8,344.7 9,471.1 7,159.2 111.9          Sep 
25.5 96.9 2,708.2 4,455.9 1,968.5 28.8 3,808.4 − 4,675.9 8,379.9 9,459.5 7,168.3 109.8          Oct 
23.2 96.9 2,746.1 4,583.5 2,002.9 25.5 3,781.2 − 4,692.0 8,388.7 9,528.1 7,298.4 111.4          Nov 29.7 91.9 2,736.1 4,372.7 2,023.2 59.1 4,348.7 − 4,753.7 8,472.0 9,573.2 7,327.4 117.9          Dec 
32.5 93.9 2,756.5 4,414.4 2,005.0 52.7 4,204.9 − 4,711.1 8,434.3 9,494.2 7,328.1 109.0 2011          Jan 
38.5 86.7 2,775.0 4,409.6 2,035.3 65.3 4,143.8 − 4,674.5 8,414.6 9,520.0 7,389.9 106.8          Feb 
56.8 88.4 2,770.7 4,186.2 2,025.5 79.6 4,026.7 − 4,687.3 8,438.1 9,580.0 7,383.2 106.3          Mar 
 German contribution ( € billion) 
34.5 33.5 746.8 770.8 407.4 − 376.1 778.2 140.7 909.1 1,898.4 2,052.3 2,044.4 − 2009          Feb 
19.3 31.4 728.8 751.2 400.0 − 382.6 813.6 140.4 906.4 1,878.9 2,028.6 2,022.7 −          Mar 
24.5 33.4 724.5 774.4 390.7 − 373.8 797.8 141.8 922.0 1,893.1 2,054.9 2,013.9 −          Apr 
25.8 32.5 718.4 727.4 389.3 − 361.3 767.1 142.2 925.5 1,883.5 2,043.6 2,010.3 −          May
22.0 26.6 715.9 731.4 407.9 − 390.7 747.5 141.9 945.2 1,873.0 2,025.8 2,041.0 −          June
23.3 25.1 706.4 724.8 408.0 − 397.8 751.5 141.8 947.5 1,860.8 2,001.2 2,033.8 −          July
24.7 24.9 705.6 718.3 408.3 − 407.6 762.6 143.4 960.2 1,859.9 1,990.7 2,035.8 −          Aug 
26.3 23.2 684.5 690.3 409.6 − 396.2 769.8 144.9 980.3 1,856.9 1,999.7 2,020.1 −          Sep 
23.7 21.9 681.5 678.5 411.0 − 388.6 773.6 146.5 1,008.0 1,857.8 1,996.2 2,019.8 −          Oct 
21.5 22.4 669.7 674.6 424.7 − 384.9 773.7 146.8 1,031.9 1,867.7 2,001.8 2,024.8 −          Nov 23.1 17.0 663.2 663.8 423.6 − 390.1 766.7 146.8 1,015.9 1,865.7 1,994.9 2,016.8 −          Dec 
25.4 17.2 669.3 693.8 419.4 − 364.7 755.0 147.6 1,045.8 1,872.9 1,993.1 2,019.7 − 2010          Jan 
27.4 16.7 666.9 703.0 424.6 − 394.6 737.4 149.6 1,046.5 1,872.4 2,004.6 2,026.0 −          Feb 
27.3 15.3 671.8 721.0 424.3 − 419.9 761.1 150.2 1,031.8 1,859.6 1,990.6 2,031.8 −          Mar 
27.5 14.7 673.7 777.7 429.9 − 411.7 753.1 151.1 1,072.5 1,881.6 2,032.7 2,037.4 −          Apr 
26.7 15.3 692.0 847.8 431.1 − 469.8 764.6 151.7 1,085.6 1,891.9 2,044.0 2,050.0 −          May23.5 13.1 693.0 807.3 431.2 − 475.4 790.2 150.9 1,087.1 1,894.5 2,041.9 2,050.6 −          June
25.4 14.7 669.1 784.5 426.1 − 483.3 765.7 151.2 1,086.0 1,893.7 2,034.6 2,019.1 −          July
33.6 13.9 673.3 797.3 433.5 − 496.8 776.1 153.2 1,091.3 1,902.4 2,062.0 2,031.3 −          Aug 35.2 14.8 660.8 757.5 430.4 − 517.7 770.9 155.8 1,091.1 1,908.0 2,061.9 2,012.4 −          Sep 
13.0 15.2 653.9 745.2 440.6 − 414.3 771.5 156.7 1,093.3 1,912.7 2,033.8 2,012.2 −          Oct 
28.0 18.4 670.4 772.9 451.7 − 439.4 766.9 156.6 1,120.1 1,937.4 2,101.1 2,063.8 −          Nov 27.4 15.4 665.7 736.5 450.9 − 456.6 1,660.7 157.1 1,110.2 1,944.6 2,082.5 2,058.9 −          Dec 
24.2 15.5 663.5 727.0 447.6 − 421.8 1,554.6 157.8 1,124.4 1,955.2 2,077.8 2,050.4 − 2011          Jan 
26.1 11.8 660.6 732.7 455.8 − 446.9 1,513.6 158.9 1,109.9 1,946.8 2,086.4 2,054.0 −          Feb 
23.2 12.7 649.4 673.4 455.5 − 438.2 1,442.9 159.5 1,112.0 1,954.1 2,077.4 2,040.9 −          Mar 
by the Bundesbank and the amount disclosed in accordance with the (excluding central governments’ deposits) and (for the euro area) central
accounting regime chosen by the Eurosystem (see also footnote 3 on governments’ monetary liabilities with such maturities. — 12M2 plus repo
banknote circulation in Table III.2). — 10Overnight deposits (excluding transactions, money market fund shares, money market paper and debt
central governments’ deposits), and (for the euro area) currency in securities up to 2 years. — 13Deposits with agreed maturities of over 2
circulation, central governments’ overnight monetary liabilities, which are years and at agreed notice of over 3 months, debt securities with matur ities
not included in the consolidated balance sheet. — 11M1 plus deposits with of over 2 years, capital and reserves. — 14 Non-existent in Germany. 
agreed maturities of up to 2 years and at agreed notice of up to 3 months
13*II Overall monetary survey in the euro area

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
E U R O S Y S T E M
Monthly Report
May 2011
II  Overall monetary survey in the euro area
  
 3  Banking system’s liquidity position  * 
Stocks
  
€ billion; period averages of daily positions
Liquidity-providing factors Liquidity-absorbing factors
Monetary policy operations of the Eurosystem
Credit
institutions‘
current
account
Net assets Longer- Other Other balances
Reserve in gold Main term Marginal liquidity- liquidity- Banknotes Central Other (includingmaintenance and foreign refinancing refinancing lending providing Deposit absorbing in government factors minimum Baseperiod currency operations operations facility facility deposits (net)  
6 reserves)  7 money  8 operations  3 operations  4 circulation  5 
ending in  1 
Eurosystem  2  
  
2008          Oct 417.3 174.1 334.3 7.5 5.9 19.9 45.5 684.3 55.2 − 82.6 216.8 921.0
         Nov 549.0 301.6 452.5 12.7 4.2 213.7 2.3 722.1 85.0 78.2 218.6 1 154.4         Dec 580.5 337.3 457.2 2.7 − 200.9 4.9 731.1 107.8 114.3 218.7 1 150.7
2009          Jan 581.3 219.2 613.6 2.9 − 238.5 3.3 753.1 99.9 100.6 221.5 1 213.1
         Feb 547.4 224.9 551.4 2.1 − 175.4 6.1 740.2 102.7 79.3 222.1 1 137.7         Mar 512.7 224.3 472.4 1.6 − 95.5 4.0 741.5 110.1 41.4 218.6 1 055.5
         Apr 508.0 230.5 443.1 1.1 − 57.8 3.7 747.3 139.0 13.3 221.6 1 026.6
         May 512.4 239.7 426.9 0.7 − 42.7 3.1 757.5 141.9 13.7 220.8 1 021.0
         June 487.9 238.8 400.6 0.7 − 22.3 2.1 759.8 141.7 − 15.8 217.9 1 000.0
         July 457.1 221.4 504.9 1.3 − 119.7 9.9 763.1 137.9 − 65.1 219.2 1 102.0
         Aug 433.6 94.1 694.0 0.3 2.8 185.1 22.1 770.8 133.9 − 103.9 216.9 1 172.8
         Sep 427.6 74.8 645.4 0.3 8.4 136.7 18.5 769.1 125.7 − 110.4 216.9 1 122.7
         Oct 421.4 79.1 616.9 0.3 14.3 109.6 12.9 768.8 139.0 − 113.1 214.7 1 093.1
         Nov 413.0 52.3 626.1 0.3 20.1 86.5 12.0 770.7 148.7 − 118.9 212.8 1 070.0
         Dec 407.6 55.8 593.4 0.7 24.6 65.7 9.9 775.2 150.1 − 130.2 211.4 1 052.3
2010          Jan 413.0 60.6 648.4 0.4 28.4 147.0 8.1 796.8 119.8 − 132.1 211.2 1 155.0
         Feb 425.6 59.7 662.2 0.2 33.5 168.3 13.3 783.6 122.6 − 117.5 210.9 1 162.8         Mar 426.9 80.5 641.1 0.9 38.0 186.4 10.5 784.6 113.2 − 119.3 211.8 1 182.9
         Apr 439.8 77.7 650.5 0.4 43.6 200.7 8.4 792.9 113.6 − 116.1 212.5 1 206.1
         May 457.0 76.7 666.4 0.9 49.4 218.2 11.4 796.6 112.1 − 100.3 212.4 1 227.2         June 462.4 110.0 706.7 0.3 86.9 288.8 34.1 806.2 123.1 − 98.4 212.5 1 307.5
         July 500.9 167.5 573.2 0.3 140.2 230.4 54.4 813.0 126.5 − 56.5 214.4 1 257.8
         Aug 543.4 185.4 432.2 0.1 121.4 96.7 67.5 819.3 95.2 − 11.8 215.7 1 131.7
         Sep 543.2 153.1 435.0 0.6 121.8 83.7 66.9 816.0 86.8 − 15.0 215.3 1 115.0
         Oct 531.3 164.5 392.6 0.7 128.3 68.8 64.8 814.1 96.4 − 39.8 213.1 1 096.1
         Nov 511.3 183.0 340.0 0.8 124.5 41.9 68.8 813.5 92.1 − 72.0 215.2 1 070.7
         Dec 511.1 179.5 336.3 1.9 130.4 44.7 70.8 815.9 94.4 − 79.1 212.5 1 073.1
2011          Jan 527.5 197.0 316.6 0.5 140.9 66.5 73.5 833.9 81.3 − 85.1 212.4 1 112.8
         Feb 549.7 185.4 318.2 0.1 137.2 39.2 81.3 822.0 101.2 − 66.7 213.6 1 074.8         Mar 550.0 134.4 321.0 7.6 137.9 26.9 80.3 820.9 89.8 − 79.9 212.9 1 060.7
         Apr 544.1 97.3 335.4 0.8 137.6 23.0 79.5 824.4 73.1 − 95.2 210.5 1 057.9
Deutsche Bundesbank
2008          Oct 114.4 74.8 118.6 0.9 3.6 10.1 8.6 186.2 0.2 55.9 51.2 247.5
         Nov 138.6 103.6 163.2 2.7 2.0 88.8 1.1 198.9 0.3 68.7 52.3 339.9         Dec 146.9 105.1 158.5 2.0 − 84.2 1.1 197.9 0.2 77.2 52.0 334.0
2009          Jan 141.2 72.4 198.1 2.4 − 91.5 1.2 195.8 4.1 68.5 52.8 340.2
         Feb 132.9 79.4 178.5 1.3 − 77.9 2.2 185.0 2.5 71.4 53.2 316.1
         Mar 135.3 72.9 147.8 1.2 − 51.9 1.7 185.3 9.6 55.7 52.9 290.1
         Apr 142.9 74.7 122.8 0.7 − 38.9 1.6 186.3 14.6 46.2 53.4 278.7
         May 150.7 87.5 111.9 0.1 − 24.1 1.3 189.1 26.2 56.3 53.3 266.5
         June 145.7 95.0 103.4 0.7 − 15.4 0.6 189.3 32.3 54.3 52.8 257.4
         July 138.0 81.0 141.5 0.6 − 49.4 4.5 190.2 23.5 40.4 53.2 292.8
         Aug 128.6 47.6 189.1 0.1 0.8 70.1 4.9 192.0 23.5 23.6 52.2 314.2
         Sep 126.0 40.6 178.0 0.1 2.9 51.8 4.3 192.3 23.6 23.4 52.2 296.4
         Oct 124.2 37.3 175.9 0.2 4.9 49.4 3.0 192.5 23.7 22.4 51.5 293.3
         Nov 120.7 34.6 178.8 0.2 6.2 34.2 4.3 192.5 23.6 34.8 51.0 277.7
         Dec 116.3 33.7 171.1 0.6 7.2 25.7 2.7 193.3 18.8 37.8 50.5 269.5
2010          Jan 112.1 42.8 168.9 0.1 7.9 44.8 2.3 198.4 10.7 25.3 50.3 293.5
         Feb 112.3 42.2 168.6 0.1 8.9 50.3 5.2 195.6 5.4 25.4 50.2 296.1         Mar 112.6 51.8 157.9 0.8 10.0 67.8 5.0 196.5 2.1 11.8 50.0 314.3
         Apr 116.2 40.9 164.9 0.2 11.5 69.8 3.4 198.0 0.3 11.9 50.3 318.2
         May 121.1 40.5 164.7 0.1 12.8 74.9 4.2 199.0 0.7 10.2 50.2 324.1
         June 122.2 43.0 166.4 0.0 22.1 113.1 17.1 201.5 0.8 − 29.2 50.5 365.0
         July 133.9 55.2 112.8 0.1 32.7 81.0 22.3 202.5 0.4 − 22.7 51.2 334.7
         Aug 145.8 61.7 52.8 0.1 28.4 32.7 20.7 204.2 0.5 − 21.6 52.3 289.2
         Sep 145.5 52.6 50.3 0.2 28.4 24.8 26.5 204.2 0.5 − 30.9 52.0 280.9
         Oct 142.2 54.4 40.5 0.1 29.3 27.0 32.4 204.0 0.5 − 48.3 51.0 281.9
         Nov 136.7 63.7 28.9 0.0 28.8 21.2 35.7 202.9 0.4 − 53.6 51.5 275.5         Dec 136.5 60.5 32.5 0.1 29.3 21.2 41.0 203.3 0.2 − 57.7 51.0 275.5
2011          Jan 141.9 55.2 34.1 0.1 31.2 28.2 42.0 207.7 0.3 − 66.9 51.3 287.2
         Feb 148.1 44.6 44.0 0.0 31.6 19.8 43.0 204.6 0.2 − 51.0 51.8 276.2         Mar 148.4 31.3 44.7 0.0 31.7 14.6 48.4 204.8 0.2 − 63.7 51.8 271.2
         Apr 146.6 24.1 45.5 0.0 31.9 13.6 38.9 205.2 0.2 − 61.5 51.7 270.4
Discrepancies may arise from rounding. — *The banking system’s liquidity programme and the Eurosystem’s securities markets programme. — 4From
position is defined as the current account holdings in euro of euro-area Aug. 2009, includes liquidity absorbed as a result of the Eurosystem’s
credit institutions with the Eurosystem. Amounts are derived from the conso- foreign exchange swap operations. — 5From 2002, euro banknotes and oth-
lidated financial statement of the Eurosystem and the financial statement er banknotes which have been issued by the national central banks of theof the Bundesbank. — 1Figures are daily averages for the reserve mainte- Eurosystem and which are still in circulation. In accordance with the ac-
nance period ending in the month indicated. — 2Source: ECB. — 3Includes counting procedure chosen by the Eurosystem for the issue of euro bank-
liquidity provided under the Eurosystem’s covered bond purchase notes, 8% of the total value of the euro banknotes in circulation are alloca-
14*II  Overall monetary survey in the euro area

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
May 2011
II  Overall monetary survey in the euro area
  
  
Flows
  
Liquidity-providing factors Liquidity-absorbing factors
Monetary policy operations of the Eurosystem
Credit
institutions‘
currentaccount
Net assets Longer- Other Other balances
in gold Main term Marginal liquidity- liquidity- Banknotes Central Other (including Reserveand foreign refinancing refinancing lending providing Deposit absorbing in government factors minimum Base maintenancecurrency operations operations facility facility deposits (net)  
6 reserves)  7 money  8 period operations  3 operations  4 circulation  5 
ending in  1 
Eurosystem  2  
  
+ 40.7 + 10.6 + 34.3 + 7.4 + 5.9 + 19.3 + 44.8 − 0.7 − 5.9 + 38.6 + 2.8 + 21.5 2008          Oct 
+ 131.7 + 127.5 + 118.2 + 5.2 − 1.7 +193.8 − 43.2 + 37.8 + 29.8 +160.8 + 1.8 + 233.4          Nov 
+ 31.5 + 35.7 + 4.7 − 10.0 − 4.2 − 12.8 + 2.6 + 9.0 + 22.8 + 36.1 + 0.1 − 3.7          Dec 
+ 0.8 − 118.1 + 156.4 + 0.2 − + 37.6 − 1.6 + 22.0 − 7.9 − 13.7 + 2.8 + 62.4 2009          Jan 
− 33.9 + 5.7 − 62.2 − 0.8 − − 63.1 + 2.8 − 12.9 + 2.8 − 21.3 + 0.6 − 75.4          Feb 
− 34.7 − 0.6 − 79.0 − 0.5 − − 79.9 − 2.1 + 1.3 + 7.4 − 37.9 − 3.5 − 82.2          Mar 
− 4.7 + 6.2 − 29.3 − 0.5 − − 37.7 − 0.3 + 5.8 + 28.9 − 28.1 + 3.0 − 28.9          Apr 
+ 4.4 + 9.2 − 16.2 − 0.4 − − 15.1 − 0.6 + 10.2 + 2.9 + 0.4 − 0.8 − 5.6          May
− 24.5 − 0.9 − 26.3 − 0.0 − − 20.4 − 1.0 + 2.3 − 0.2 − 29.5 − 2.9 − 21.0          June
− 30.8 − 17.4 + 104.3 + 0.6 − + 97.4 + 7.8 + 3.3 − 3.8 − 49.3 + 1.3 + 102.0          July
− 23.5 − 127.3 + 189.1 − 1.0 + 2.8 + 65.4 + 12.2 + 7.7 − 4.0 − 38.8 − 2.3 + 70.8          Aug 
− 6.0 − 19.3 − 48.6 − 0.0 + 5.6 − 48.4 − 3.6 − 1.7 − 8.2 − 6.5 − 0.0 − 50.1          Sep 
− 6.2 + 4.3 − 28.5 + 0.0 + 5.9 − 27.1 − 5.6 − 0.3 + 13.3 − 2.7 − 2.2 − 29.6          Oct 
− 8.4 − 26.8 + 9.2 − 0.0 + 5.8 − 23.1 − 0.9 + 1.9 + 9.7 − 5.8 − 1.9 − 23.1          Nov 
− 5.4 + 3.5 − 32.7 + 0.4 + 4.5 − 20.8 − 2.1 + 4.5 + 1.4 − 11.3 − 1.4 − 17.7          Dec 
+ 5.4 + 4.8 + 55.0 − 0.3 + 3.8 + 81.3 − 1.8 + 21.6 − 30.3 − 1.9 − 0.2 + 102.7 2010          Jan 
+ 12.6 − 0.9 + 13.8 − 0.2 + 5.1 + 21.3 + 5.2 − 13.2 + 2.8 + 14.6 − 0.3 + 7.8          Feb 
+ 1.3 + 20.8 − 21.1 + 0.7 + 4.5 + 18.1 − 2.8 + 1.0 − 9.4 − 1.8 + 0.9 + 20.1          Mar 
+ 12.9 − 2.8 + 9.4 − 0.5 + 5.6 + 14.3 − 2.1 + 8.3 + 0.4 + 3.2 + 0.7 + 23.2          Apr 
+ 17.2 − 1.0 + 15.9 + 0.5 + 5.8 + 17.5 + 3.0 + 3.7 − 1.5 + 15.8 − 0.1 + 21.1          May+ 5.4 + 33.3 + 40.3 − 0.6 + 37.5 + 70.6 + 22.7 + 9.6 + 11.0 + 1.9 + 0.1 + 80.3          June
+ 38.5 + 57.5 − 133.5 − 0.0 + 53.3 − 58.4 + 20.3 + 6.8 + 3.4 + 41.9 + 1.9 − 49.7          July
+ 42.5 + 17.9 − 141.0 − 0.2 − 18.8 −133.7 + 13.1 + 6.3 − 31.3 + 44.7 + 1.3 − 126.1          Aug 
− 0.2 − 32.3 + 2.8 + 0.5 + 0.4 − 13.0 − 0.6 − 3.3 − 8.4 − 3.2 − 0.4 − 16.7          Sep 
− 11.9 + 11.4 − 42.4 + 0.1 + 6.5 − 14.9 − 2.1 − 1.9 + 9.6 − 24.8 − 2.2 − 18.9          Oct 
− 20.0 + 18.5 − 52.6 + 0.1 − 3.8 − 26.9 + 4.0 − 0.6 − 4.3 − 32.2 + 2.1 − 25.4          Nov 
− 0.2 − 3.5 − 3.7 + 1.1 + 5.9 + 2.8 + 2.0 + 2.4 + 2.3 − 7.1 − 2.7 + 2.4          Dec 
+ 16.4 + 17.5 − 19.7 − 1.4 + 10.5 + 21.8 + 2.7 + 18.0 − 13.1 − 6.0 − 0.1 + 39.7 2011          Jan 
+ 22.2 − 11.6 + 1.6 − 0.4 − 3.7 − 27.3 + 7.8 − 11.9 + 19.9 + 18.4 + 1.2 − 38.0          Feb 
+ 0.3 − 51.0 + 2.8 + 7.5 + 0.7 − 12.3 − 1.0 − 1.1 − 11.4 − 13.2 − 0.7 − 14.1          Mar 
− 5.9 − 37.1 + 14.4 − 6.8 − 0.3 − 3.9 − 0.8 + 3.5 − 16.7 − 15.3 − 2.4 − 2.8          Apr 
Deutsche Bundesbank
+ 13.8 − 1.9 + 13.5 + 0.8 + 3.6 + 10.0 + 8.5 + 0.5 + 0.1 + 9.7 + 0.9 + 11.4 2008          Oct 
+ 24.2 + 28.8 + 44.6 + 1.9 − 1.6 + 78.6 − 7.5 + 12.7 + 0.1 + 12.8 + 1.1 + 92.4          Nov 
+ 8.3 + 1.5 − 4.6 − 0.8 − 2.0 − 4.6 + 0.0 − 1.0 − 0.2 + 8.5 − 0.3 − 5.9          Dec 
− 5.7 − 32.7 + 39.5 + 0.4 − + 7.3 + 0.1 − 2.1 + 4.0 − 8.7 + 0.9 + 6.1 2009          Jan 
− 8.3 + 7.0 − 19.5 − 1.0 − − 13.6 + 0.9 − 10.8 − 1.7 + 2.9 + 0.3 − 24.0          Feb 
+ 2.3 − 6.4 − 30.7 − 0.2 − − 26.1 − 0.4 + 0.3 + 7.2 − 15.7 − 0.2 − 26.0          Mar 
+ 7.6 + 1.8 − 25.1 − 0.5 − − 12.9 − 0.1 + 1.0 + 5.0 − 9.5 + 0.5 − 11.4          Apr 
+ 7.8 + 12.8 − 10.9 − 0.6 − − 14.8 − 0.3 + 2.7 + 11.6 + 10.1 − 0.2 − 12.2          May
− 5.0 + 7.5 − 8.5 + 0.5 − − 8.7 − 0.6 + 0.2 + 6.2 − 2.0 − 0.5 − 9.1          June
− 7.7 − 13.9 + 38.1 − 0.0 − + 34.1 + 3.8 + 0.9 − 8.9 − 13.9 + 0.4 + 35.4          July
− 9.3 − 33.5 + 47.6 − 0.5 + 0.8 + 20.6 + 0.4 + 1.8 + 0.0 − 16.8 − 1.0 + 21.5          Aug 
− 2.6 − 7.0 − 11.1 + 0.0 + 2.1 − 18.2 − 0.6 + 0.3 + 0.1 − 0.2 + 0.1 − 17.9          Sep 
− 1.8 − 3.3 − 2.1 + 0.0 + 2.0 − 2.5 − 1.2 + 0.2 + 0.1 − 1.0 − 0.8 − 3.1          Oct 
− 3.5 − 2.7 + 3.0 − 0.0 + 1.3 − 15.2 + 1.2 + 0.1 − 0.1 + 12.5 − 0.4 − 15.6          Nov 
− 4.4 − 0.9 − 7.7 + 0.4 + 1.0 − 8.5 − 1.6 + 0.7 − 4.8 + 3.0 − 0.5 − 8.2          Dec 
− 4.2 + 9.1 − 2.2 − 0.5 + 0.7 + 19.1 − 0.4 + 5.1 − 8.1 − 12.6 − 0.2 + 24.0 2010          Jan 
+ 0.2 − 0.6 − 0.3 + 0.0 + 1.0 + 5.5 + 3.0 − 2.8 − 5.2 + 0.1 − 0.1 + 2.6          Feb 
+ 0.3 + 9.6 − 10.6 + 0.7 + 1.1 + 17.4 − 0.3 + 0.9 − 3.3 − 13.6 − 0.1 + 18.2          Mar 
+ 3.6 − 10.8 + 7.0 − 0.7 + 1.5 + 2.0 − 1.6 + 1.6 − 1.8 + 0.1 + 0.3 + 3.9          Apr 
+ 4.9 − 0.4 − 0.2 − 0.1 + 1.3 + 5.0 + 0.8 + 1.0 + 0.5 − 1.7 − 0.1 + 5.9          May
+ 1.1 + 2.5 + 1.7 − 0.0 + 9.3 + 38.2 + 12.9 + 2.5 + 0.1 − 39.4 + 0.3 + 40.9          June
+ 11.7 + 12.2 − 53.6 + 0.0 + 10.7 − 32.1 + 5.1 + 1.0 − 0.4 + 6.5 + 0.8 − 30.3          July
+ 11.9 + 6.6 − 60.0 + 0.0 − 4.3 − 48.3 − 1.5 + 1.7 + 0.1 + 1.1 + 1.0 − 45.6          Aug 
− 0.3 − 9.1 − 2.5 + 0.1 + 0.0 − 7.9 + 5.8 + 0.0 − 0.1 − 9.3 − 0.3 − 8.3          Sep 
− 3.3 + 1.8 − 9.8 − 0.1 + 0.9 + 2.2 + 5.9 − 0.2 − 0.0 − 17.4 − 1.0 + 1.0          Oct 
− 5.6 + 9.3 − 11.6 − 0.1 − 0.5 − 5.8 + 3.3 − 1.1 − 0.1 − 5.3 + 0.5 − 6.4          Nov − 0.2 − 3.1 + 3.6 + 0.1 + 0.6 + 0.0 + 5.3 + 0.5 − 0.2 − 4.1 − 0.5 − 0.0          Dec 
+ 5.5 − 5.4 + 1.5 − 0.0 + 1.9 + 7.0 + 1.1 + 4.3 + 0.0 − 9.2 + 0.4 + 11.6 2011          Jan 
+ 6.2 − 10.6 + 9.9 − 0.1 + 0.3 − 8.4 + 0.9 − 3.1 − 0.0 + 15.9 + 0.5 − 11.0          Feb 
+ 0.3 − 13.3 + 0.7 − 0.0 + 0.2 − 5.2 + 5.5 + 0.3 − 0.0 − 12.7 − 0.1 − 5.0          Mar 
− 1.8 − 7.2 + 0.9 + 0.0 + 0.1 − 1.0 − 9.5 + 0.3 + 0.0 + 2.2 − 0.0 − 0.7          Apr 
ted on a monthly basis to the ECB. The counterpart of this adjustment is has put into circulation is likewise shown under “Other factors”. From 2003
shown under “Other factors”. The remaining 92% of the value of the euro euro banknotes only. — 6Remaining items in the consolidated financial
banknotes in circulation is allocated, likewise on a monthly basis, to the statement of the Eurosystem and the financial statement of theNCBs, with each NCB showing in its balance sheet the percentage of the Bundesbank. — 7Equal to the difference between the sum of liquidity-pro-
euro banknotes in circulation that corresponds to its paid-up share in the viding factors and the sum of liquidity-absorbing factors. — 8Calculated as
ECB’s capital. The difference between the value of the euro banknotes the sum of the “deposit facility”, “banknotes in circulation” and “creditallocated to an NCB and the value of the euro banknotes which that NCB institutions’ current account holdings”. 
15*II  Overall monetary survey in the euro area

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
E U R O S Y S T E M
Monthly Report
May 2011
III Consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem
 
1 Assets *
 
 
€ billion
Claims on non-euro area Claims on non-euro area residents denominated
in foreign currency residents denominated in euro
Balances with
Claims on banks, security
On investments, euro area Balances Claims
reporting external loans residents with banks, arising from
date/ Gold and other denominated security the credit
End of Total and gold Receivables external in foreign investments facility undermonth  
1 assets receivables Total from the IMF assets currency Total and loans ERM II
 Eurosystem 2
 
2010 Sep                  3 1,963.2 352.0 237.7 73.7 163.9 28.0 17.0 17.0 −
                              10 1,973.3 352.0 236.7 73.5 163.3 28.2 17.8 17.8 −
                              17 1,970.5 351.9 236.5 74.0 162.5 28.2 17.5 17.5 −
                              24 1,971.4 351.9 236.3 73.9 162.4 27.7 17.3 17.3 −
         Oct                  1 3 1,865.9 3 334.4 3 219.6 3 70.1 3 149.5 3 24.9 17.6 17.6 −
                                8 1,868.0 334.4 219.9 70.0 149.9 24.3 18.3 18.3 −
                              15 1,876.9 334.4 219.9 70.0 149.9 24.2 17.2 17.2 −
                              22 1,878.0 334.4 219.8 70.0 149.8 23.8 17.9 17.9 −
                              29 1,895.7 334.4 220.8 69.9 151.0 23.7 17.8 17.8 −
         Nov                  5 1,886.4 334.4 220.3 69.8 150.4 23.7 19.0 19.0 −
                              12 1,879.0 334.4 219.6 69.7 149.9 23.8 19.4 19.4 −
                              19 1,888.4 334.4 220.3 69.7 150.6 23.4 19.7 19.7 −
                              26 1,916.0 334.4 220.0 69.5 150.5 24.3 19.9 19.9 −
         Dec                  3 1,924.1 334.4 219.3 69.6 149.6 24.7 19.6 19.6 −
                              10 1,951.7 334.4 220.1 69.6 150.5 24.8 20.3 20.3 −
                              17 1,945.2 334.4 219.6 69.3 150.3 25.3 19.6 19.6 −
                              24 1,926.2 334.4 220.2 70.2 149.9 26.0 19.1 19.1 −
                              31 3 2,004.4 3 367.4 3 224.0 3 71.3 3 152.7 3 26.9 22.6 22.6 −
2011 Jan                  7 1,965.9 367.4 225.0 71.4 153.6 26.8 19.3 19.3 −
                              14 1,957.1 367.4 226.6 71.4 155.2 26.0 20.7 20.7 −
                              21 1,961.1 367.4 228.3 72.9 155.4 25.5 19.1 19.1 −
                              28 1,965.6 367.4 228.3 72.9 155.4 26.1 19.2 19.2 −
         Feb                  4 2,015.6 367.4 229.4 72.6 156.8 26.1 18.4 18.4 −
                              11 1,956.1 367.4 229.8 72.6 157.1 26.0 21.8 21.8 −
                              18 1,958.5 367.4 227.5 72.6 154.8 26.4 21.3 21.3 −
                              25 1,952.3 367.4 226.5 72.6 153.9 26.5 21.9 21.9 −
         Mar                  4 1,939.2 367.4 230.7 75.4 155.3 26.4 22.0 22.0 −
                              11 1,953.0 367.4 232.2 75.5 156.7 26.0 18.8 18.8 −
                              18 1,940.4 367.4 233.8 76.9 156.9 25.6 20.5 20.5 −
                              25 1,928.1 367.4 232.9 76.5 156.4 25.6 20.4 20.4 −
         Apr                  1 3 1,888.5 3 350.7 3 221.9 3 74.1 3 147.8 3 23.9 20.9 20.9 −
                                8 1,873.1 350.7 219.6 74.2 145.4 24.2 23.1 23.1 −
                              15 1,885.0 350.7 219.3 74.2 145.0 23.6 24.9 24.9 −
                              22 1,887.9 350.7 218.1 74.2 143.8 23.5 23.2 23.2 −
                              29 1,894.1 350.7 216.8 74.2 142.6 23.3 22.4 22.4 −
         May                 6 1,901.9 350.7 218.1 74.1 144.0 23.4 21.1 21.1 −
 Deutsche Bundesbank
2009          June 3 628.3 3 73.0 31.7 4.5 27.2 3 30.8 0.3 0.3 −
         July 572.3 73.0 31.8 4.7 27.1 25.3 0.3 0.3 −
         Aug 571.2 73.0 41.6 15.1 26.5 24.0 0.3 0.3 −
         Sep 3 577.7 3 74.9 3 41.9 16.3 3 25.6 3 21.6 0.3 0.3 −
         Oct 557.2 74.9 42.5 16.6 25.9 16.9 0.3 0.3 −
         Nov 551.7 74.9 41.0 15.9 25.1 13.0 0.3 0.3 −
         Dec 3 588.2 3 83.9 41.6 16.0 25.6 4.4 0.3 0.3 −
2010          Jan 571.8 83.9 41.7 16.0 25.7 − 0.3 0.3 −         Feb 591.6 83.9 42.4 16.7 25.7 −−−−
         Mar 
3 608.6 3 90.2 3 44.7 3 17.2 3 27.5 −−−−
         Apr 615.5 90.2 44.8 17.2 27.6 −−−−
         May 673.4 90.2 45.5 17.9 27.6 0.1 − − −         June
3 713.7 3 110.7 3 49.9 3 19.0 3 30.9 0.2 − − −
         July 625.3 110.6 49.9 19.1 30.8 0.2 − − −
         Aug 624.7 110.6 49.8 19.0 30.7 0.0 − − −
         Sep 3 623.2 3 105.1 3 45.7 3 18.2 3 27.5 −−−−
         Oct 619.1 105.1 45.5 18.1 27.4 −−−−
         Nov 621.0 105.1 45.4 17.9 27.5 −−−−
         Dec 3 671.2 3 115.4 46.7 18.7 28.0 −−−−
2011          Jan 628.7 115.4 46.9 18.9 27.9 −−−−
         Feb 639.5 115.4 46.9 18.9 28.0 −−−−
         Mar 3 632.2 3 110.1 3 45.6 3 19.3 3 26.3 −−−−
         Apr 610.1 110.1 46.1 19.3 26.9 −−−−
 
*The consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem comprises the statements of the national central banks of the euro area member states
financial statement of the European Central Bank (ECB) and the financial (NCBs). The balance sheet items for foreign currency, securities, gold
16*III Consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
May 2011
III Consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem
 
 
 
 
 
Lending to euro area credit institutions related to monetary policy operations Securities of euro area residents
denominated in euro in euro
 Other
 claims on euro area
Longer- Fine-  credit Securities General    On
Main re- term re- tuning Structural Credits institutions held for government    reportingfinancing financing reverse reverse Marginal related denomi- monetary debt deno-    date/opera- opera- opera- opera- lending to margin nated in policy Other minated in Other    End of
Total tions tions tions tions facility calls euro Total purposes securities euro assets    month  
1 
Eurosystem 2
 
591.8 153.1 438.7 − − 0.0 0.1 32.3 423.9 122.1 301.7 35.0 245.5 2010 Sep                  3
592.2 153.7 437.5 − − 1.0 0.1 30.7 426.3 122.4 303.9 35.0 254.3                               10
589.1 151.6 437.5 − − − 0.1 30.0 428.3 122.7 305.7 35.0 253.9                               17
592.5 153.8 437.5 − − 1.2 0.1 27.6 429.3 122.8 306.5 35.0 253.7                               24
514.1 166.4 316.7 29.4 − 1.6 0.0 26.3 431.3 124.3 307.0 35.0 3 262.6          Oct                  1
514.2 197.0 316.7 − − 0.4 0.0 29.1 433.3 124.3 309.0 35.0 259.4                                 8
518.5 186.0 331.1 − − 1.4 0.0 29.9 434.9 124.3 310.5 35.0 263.0                               15
516.1 184.0 331.1 − − 0.9 0.0 30.7 435.6 124.3 311.3 35.0 264.7                               22
534.1 183.4 350.4 − − 0.3 0.0 30.2 437.3 124.3 313.0 35.0 262.3                               29
528.9 178.4 350.4 − − 0.1 0.0 28.4 438.7 125.0 313.6 35.0 258.1          Nov                  5
515.8 175.0 326.1 12.6 − 2.1 0.0 28.3 440.7 126.1 314.6 35.0 262.1                               12
515.5 186.0 326.1 − − 3.4 0.0 28.8 444.0 126.8 317.3 35.0 267.2                               19
523.2 177.1 345.2 − − 0.9 0.0 31.6 446.5 128.1 318.4 35.0 281.2                               26
525.8 179.7 345.2 − − 0.9 0.0 33.0 450.6 130.1 320.6 35.0 281.8          Dec                  3
547.6 197.3 349.7 − − 0.6 0.0 33.9 454.2 132.8 321.4 35.0 281.5                               10
538.8 187.8 349.7 − − 1.3 0.0 37.5 456.4 133.4 323.0 35.0 278.7                               17
513.1 193.5 298.2 20.6 − 0.8 0.0 42.0 459.6 134.5 325.1 35.0 276.9                               24
546.7 227.9 298.2 20.6 − 0.0 0.0 45.7 3 457.4 134.8 3 322.6 35.0 3 278.7                               31
494.0 195.7 298.2 − − 0.0 0.0 46.8 458.4 134.9 323.5 35.0 293.1 2011 Jan                  7
478.4 180.1 298.2 − − 0.0 0.0 45.0 461.5 137.2 324.3 35.0 296.7                               14
477.5 176.9 300.5 − − 0.1 0.0 49.3 463.0 137.2 325.8 35.0 296.0                               21
494.8 165.6 329.2 − − − 0.1 46.9 465.1 137.2 327.9 35.0 282.8                               28
542.9 213.7 329.2 − − 0.0 0.0 48.8 466.8 137.2 329.7 34.9 280.9          Feb                  4
477.7 156.7 320.3 − − 0.7 0.0 49.3 467.7 137.2 34.9 34.9 281.5                               11
471.5 137.0 320.3 − − 14.2 0.0 51.5 469.1 137.8 331.2 34.9 288.9                               18
458.4 119.5 321.8 − − 17.1 0.0 48.5 469.8 138.2 331.6 34.9 298.4                               25
447.0 124.4 321.8 − − 0.8 0.0 47.8 471.3 138.2 333.1 34.9 291.7          Mar                  4
454.2 111.3 342.9 − − 0.0 0.0 50.6 471.9 138.2 333.7 34.9 296.8                               11
443.5 100.5 342.9 − − 0.1 0.0 48.7 470.4 138.0 332.5 34.9 295.5                               18
435.7 89.4 342.9 − − 3.4 0.0 45.5 470.7 137.3 333.3 34.9 294.9                               25
424.0 100.4 322.9 − − 0.7 0.0 42.1 3 471.0 137.6 3 333.5 34.9 3 299.1          Apr                  1
407.7 84.5 322.9 − − 0.2 0.0 44.6 471.6 137.5 334.1 35.1 296.5                                 8
418.4 94.1 324.0 − − 0.2 0.0 43.5 470.4 136.6 333.8 35.1 299.2                               15
421.5 97.4 324.0 − − 0.0 0.0 44.9 471.9 136.6 335.3 35.1 299.1                               22
434.3 117.9 316.3 − − 0.0 0.1 49.6 472.1 136.5 335.5 34.5 290.5                               29
444.0 127.5 316.3 − − 0.0 0.1 52.2 471.4 136.5 334.9 34.5 286.4          May                  6
 Deutsche Bundesbank
273.5 71.6 201.6 − − 0.3 − 6.5 4.4 − 4.4 4.4 3 203.8 2009          June
231.8 48.8 182.9 − − 0.1 − 4.5 6.5 1.2 5.3 4.4 194.6          July
220.9 45.9 175.0 − − 0.1 − 6.0 8.5 3.2 5.3 4.4 192.4          Aug 
205.6 33.0 168.8 − − 3.8 − 6.8 10.6 5.3 5.3 4.4 211.6          Sep 
212.9 35.1 177.7 − − 0.1 − 6.8 11.6 6.4 5.3 4.4 186.8          Oct 
206.0 35.3 170.6 − − 0.0 − 6.9 12.9 7.6 5.3 4.4 192.3          Nov 223.6 53.6 170.0 − − 0.0 − 7.1 13.2 7.9 5.3 4.4 209.6          Dec 
210.3 41.7 168.5 − − 0.0 − 7.7 14.1 8.8 5.3 4.4 209.4 2010          Jan 
209.1 51.6 157.3 − − 0.1 − 7.2 15.6 10.3 5.3 4.4 228.9          Feb 
206.1 40.9 164.7 − − 0.6 − 7.3 17.0 11.8 5.3 4.4 239.0          Mar 
206.1 41.6 164.5 − − 0.0 − 7.8 18.1 12.9 5.3 4.4 244.2          Apr 
210.2 43.3 166.8 − − 0.1 − 8.4 28.4 23.1 5.3 4.4 286.3          May225.6 58.6 167.0 − − 0.0 − 8.8 33.4 28.1 5.3 4.4 280.8          June
115.0 61.7 53.3 − − 0.0 − 9.3 33.7 28.4 5.3 4.4 302.3          July
103.8 52.9 50.3 − − 0.6 − 8.7 33.7 28.4 5.3 4.4 313.8          Aug 
85.3 56.4 24.0 4.1 − 0.8 − 8.9 33.9 28.6 5.3 4.4
3 339.9          Sep 
103.0 69.1 33.8 − − 0.2 − 10.6 34.0 28.7 5.3 4.4 316.5          Oct 
93.0 59.1 33.8 − − 0.0 − 9.1 34.7 29.5 5.3 4.4 329.3          Nov 
103.1 68.4 33.5 1.2 − − − 9.6 36.1 30.9 5.2 4.4 355.9          Dec 
82.5 37.8 44.4 − − 0.3 − 10.0 36.8 31.6 5.2 4.4 332.7 2011          Jan 
74.9 29.8 45.1 − − 0.0 − 10.0 37.1 31.8 5.2 4.4 350.9          Feb 
71.7 25.5 46.1 − − 0.1 − 9.6 37.2 31.9 5.2 4.4 353.5          Mar 
64.8 18.7 46.1 − − 0.0 − 8.3 37.0 31.9 5.1 4.4 339.3          Apr 
 
and financial instruments are valued at market rates at the end of the quar- for the Bundesbank: end-of month financial statement. — 2Source: ECB. —
ter.— 1For the Eurosystem: financial statements for specific weekly dates; 3 Changes are due mainly to revalutions at the end of the quarter. 
17*III Consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
E U R O S Y S T E M
Monthly Report
May 2011
III Consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem
 
2 Liabilities *
 
 
€ billion
Liabilities to euro area credit institutions related to Liabilities to
monetary policy operations denominated in euro other euro area residents
denominated in euro
 
Other
Current liabilities
accounts to euro-
On (covering Fine- area creditreporting the tuning Deposits institutions Debtdate/ Banknotes minimum Fixed- reverse deno- certifi- General related to
End of Total in circu- reserve Deposit term opera- margin minated cates govern- Othermonth  
1 liabilities lation  2 Total system) facility deposits tions calls in euro issued Total ment liabilities
 Eurosystem 4
 
2010 Sep                  3 1,963.2 816.8 359.8 176.3 122.4 61.0 − 0.1 1.5 − 103.8 97.0 6.8
                              10 1,973.3 816.0 371.5 261.4 49.1 61.0 − 0.1 1.7 − 99.8 92.9 6.8
                              17 1,970.5 814.2 375.0 252.3 61.6 61.0 − 0.1 1.6 − 96.5 89.4 7.1
                              24 1,971.4 812.0 366.7 221.0 84.1 61.5 − 0.1 1.5 − 111.5 104.6 6.9
         Oct                  1 5 1,865.9 814.8 301.3 190.3 49.5 61.5 − 0.1 1.3 − 104.9 98.1 6.8
                                8 1,868.0 815.9 309.7 151.7 94.4 63.5 − 0.1 1.2 − 99.2 93.2 5.9
                              15 1,876.9 814.0 328.0 228.7 35.8 63.5 − 0.1 0.7 − 92.2 86.0 6.2
                              22 1,878.0 811.2 319.7 230.5 25.7 63.5 − 0.1 0.6 − 101.5 95.2 6.3
                              29 1,895.7 815.0 319.1 205.2 50.3 63.5 − 0.0 1.4 − 116.2 109.8 6.4
         Nov                  5 1,886.4 816.3 335.3 190.0 81.7 63.5 − 0.0 3.0 − 87.1 80.9 6.2
                              12 1,879.0 814.5 329.3 245.1 20.2 64.0 − 0.1 3.9 − 84.5 78.2 6.4
                              19 1,888.4 812.8 316.2 222.2 28.9 65.0 − 0.0 4.0 − 108.0 101.6 6.3
                              26 1,916.0 814.0 316.7 196.9 53.8 66.0 − 0.1 5.0 − 118.7 112.5 6.2
         Dec                  3 1,924.1 824.5 337.9 185.8 84.9 67.0 − 0.2 10.1 − 99.5 91.8 7.7
                              10 1,951.7 828.5 361.4 268.1 24.1 69.0 − 0.2 3.7 − 104.5 96.6 7.9
                              17 1,945.2 833.8 379.2 266.7 40.3 72.0 − 0.2 2.1 − 78.2 70.4 7.8
                              24 1,926.2 842.3 334.7 206.1 55.4 72.5 − 0.7 2.5 − 87.7 79.7 7.9
                              31 5 2,004.4 839.7 378.0 212.7 104.5 60.8 − 0.0 2.8 − 79.8 71.7 8.1
2011 Jan                  7 1,965.9 834.8 332.5 176.9 81.0 73.5 − 1.2 2.3 − 89.3 81.6 7.8
                              14 1,957.1 827.8 327.5 145.9 107.2 74.0 − 0.5 2.9 − 88.2 80.4 7.8
                              21 1,961.1 823.1 313.3 209.1 27.5 76.5 − 0.2 3.0 − 112.1 103.9 8.2
                              28 1,965.6 821.4 312.9 211.9 24.4 76.5 − 0.1 4.3 − 120.0 112.1 7.9
         Feb                  4 2,015.6 823.0 379.1 239.3 71.4 68.2 − 0.1 9.5 − 95.8 88.1 7.8
                              11 1,956.1 821.7 332.4 238.8 17.0 76.5 − 0.1 2.9 − 90.2 82.4 7.8
                              18 1,958.5 819.5 333.2 222.1 34.5 76.5 − 0.1 2.8 − 91.2 83.5 7.8
                              25 1,952.3 819.6 314.1 212.3 24.7 77.0 − 0.1 2.8 − 105.7 97.9 7.8
         Mar                  4 1,939.2 824.9 303.7 182.7 43.2 77.5 − 0.4 3.6 − 99.3 91.6 7.7
                              11 1,953.0 824.4 327.1 234.1 15.3 77.5 − 0.3 3.1 − 91.7 84.0 7.7
                              18 1,940.4 823.9 321.0 222.4 20.2 77.5 − 1.0 3.9 − 85.0 77.1 7.9
                              25 1,928.1 822.2 303.3 206.3 19.4 77.5 − 0.1 4.2 − 90.9 83.0 7.9
         Apr                  1 5 1,888.5 826.0 308.4 205.8 26.1 76.5 − 0.1 5.0 − 73.0 64.9 8.0
                                8 1,873.1 828.5 296.2 188.6 30.5 77.0 − 0.1 5.2 − 68.4 60.6 7.8
                              15 1,885.0 830.9 309.6 222.4 10.0 77.0 − 0.1 5.1 − 65.6 57.8 7.8
                              22 1,887.9 837.6 293.7 204.5 13.1 76.0 − 0.1 5.3 − 74.6 66.8 7.9
                              29 1,894.1 834.4 286.5 187.7 27.3 71.4 − 0.1 5.1 − 92.2 84.4 7.8
         May                 6 1,901.9 834.7 331.5 215.0 54.2 62.2 − 0.1 4.9 − 53.7 46.1 7.6
 Deutsche Bundesbank
2009          June 5 628.3 190.6 176.7 75.1 101.5 − − − − − 23.7 23.4 0.4
         July 572.3 192.9 120.7 44.5 76.2 − − − − − 23.9 23.5 0.4
         Aug 571.2 191.6 107.4 46.2 61.2 − − − − − 24.0 23.5 0.4
         Sep 5 577.7 191.5 109.7 76.1 33.6 − − − − − 24.0 23.6 0.4
         Oct 557.2 192.6 86.5 50.7 35.9 − − − − − 24.0 23.6 0.4
         Nov 551.7 193.7 87.0 59.0 28.0 − − − − − 16.0 15.6 0.4
         Dec 5 588.2 201.3 112.2 76.7 35.5 − − − − − 10.4 10.0 0.4
2010          Jan 571.8 195.6 106.3 60.9 45.4 − − − − − 4.1 3.7 0.4
         Feb 591.6 195.8 127.6 55.2 72.3 − − − − − 0.7 0.3 0.4
         Mar 5 608.6 199.0 135.7 82.3 53.4 − − − − − 0.6 0.2 0.4
         Apr 615.5 199.2 139.1 58.6 80.5 − − − − − 0.7 0.2 0.5
         May 673.4 201.0 193.0 52.8 123.9 16.2 − − − − 0.9 0.3 0.6         June
5 713.7 202.7 208.8 108.6 82.9 17.3 − − − − 0.6 0.1 0.4
         July 625.3 204.8 115.9 61.8 34.7 19.4 − − − − 1.0 0.5 0.5
         Aug 624.7 203.2 115.3 62.4 29.8 23.1 − − − − 1.0 0.6 0.4
         Sep 5 623.2 203.0 121.3 64.9 28.2 28.2 − − − − 1.0 0.6 0.4
         Oct 619.1 203.5 114.4 62.1 20.8 31.4 − − − − 0.9 0.2 0.7
         Nov 621.0 203.9 116.9 54.8 23.7 38.4 − − − − 0.9 0.2 0.6         Dec 
5 671.2 209.6 146.4 71.4 38.5 36.5 − − − − 0.9 0.2 0.8
2011          Jan 628.7 204.5 109.4 50.5 16.6 42.3 − − − − 2.0 0.2 1.8
         Feb 639.5 204.2 120.7 58.2 13.0 49.5 − − − − 0.6 0.2 0.5
         Mar 5 632.2 205.2 119.9 63.9 17.1 38.9 − − − − 0.6 0.2 0.5
         Apr 610.1 207.8 95.9 47.9 11.7 36.3 − − − − 0.8 0.4 0.4
 
*The consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem comprises the the Bundesbank: end-of-month financial statements. — 2According to the
financial statement of the European Central Bank (ECB) and the financial accounting regime chosen by the Eurosystem on the issue of euro bank-
statements of the national central banks of the euro area member states notes, a share of 8% of the total value of the euro banknotes in circulation(NCBs). The balance sheet items for foreign currency, securities, gold and is allocated to the ECB on a monthly basis. The counterpart of thisfinancial instruments are valued at market rates at the end of the quar- adjustment is disclosed as an “Intra-Eurosystem liability related to euroter. — 1For Eurosystem: financial statements for specific weekly dates; for
18*III Consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
May 2011
III Consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem
 
 
 
 
 
Liabilities to non-euro area
residents denominated in
foreign currency
Intra-  Eurosystem  
Liabilities Liabilities Liabilities Counterpart liability     Onto non-euro to euro area Deposits, arising of special related to     reportingarea residents residents balances from the drawing euro  Capital    date/denominated in foreign and other rights allocated Other banknote Revaluation and    End of credit facility
in euro currency Total liabilities under ERM II by the IMF issue  
2 accounts reserves    month  1 liabilities  3 
Eurosystem 4
 
38.9 1.0 16.9 16.9 − 56.7 161.0 − 328.8 78.2 2010 Sep                  3
39.7 1.0 16.1 16.1 − 56.7 163.8 − 328.8 78.2                               10
40.1 1.0 15.4 15.4 − 56.7 163.0 − 328.8 78.2                               17
40.4 2.1 13.8 13.8 − 56.7 159.6 − 328.8 78.2                               24
41.9 1.1 5 13.1 5 13.1 − 5 53.7 5 158.8 − 5 296.7 78.2          Oct                  1
42.6 1.6 12.4 12.4 − 53.7 156.9 − 296.7 78.2                                 8
42.4 0.9 12.8 12.8 − 53.7 157.3 − 296.7 78.2                               15
41.5 2.1 10.9 10.9 − 53.7 161.8 − 296.7 78.2                               22
42.0 0.9 12.9 12.9 − 53.7 159.6 − 296.7 78.2                               29
41.9 1.4 11.7 11.7 − 53.7 161.1 − 296.7 78.2          Nov                  5
40.8 0.8 12.1 12.1 − 53.7 164.5 − 296.7 78.2                               12
41.0 0.9 12.2 12.2 − 53.7 164.8 − 296.7 78.2                               19
42.6 1.0 13.1 13.1 − 53.7 176.1 − 296.7 78.2                               26
43.8 1.8 11.6 11.6 − 53.7 166.2 − 296.7 78.2          Dec                  3
43.6 1.1 13.7 13.7 − 53.7 166.6 − 296.7 78.2                               10
43.2 1.3 14.0 14.0 − 53.7 164.7 − 296.7 78.2                               17
44.7 1.7 14.4 14.4 − 53.7 169.7 − 296.7 78.2                               24
47.7 2.0 14.3 14.3 − 5 54.5 5 175.9 − 5 331.5 78.1                               31
43.6 2.2 14.7 14.7 − 54.6 181.9 − 331.5 78.5 2011 Jan                  7
46.7 2.4 14.7 14.7 − 54.6 182.3 − 331.5 78.5                               14
46.1 3.1 13.8 13.8 − 54.6 181.7 − 331.5 78.7                               21
44.6 2.9 14.7 14.7 − 54.6 180.0 − 331.5 78.7                               28
43.1 2.1 16.7 16.7 − 54.6 181.5 − 331.5 78.8          Feb                  4
43.5 2.4 16.7 16.7 − 54.6 181.0 − 331.5 79.2                               11
42.4 3.1 14.4 14.4 − 54.6 186.4 − 331.5 79.2                               18
44.3 2.3 14.4 14.4 − 54.6 183.4 − 331.5 79.4                               25
43.4 2.9 14.9 14.9 − 54.6 180.6 − 331.5 79.8          Mar                  4
42.4 2.4 16.3 16.3 − 54.6 179.6 − 331.5 79.8                               11
41.8 2.0 15.8 15.8 − 54.6 181.0 − 331.5 79.9                               18
43.3 1.6 15.1 15.1 − 54.6 181.2 − 331.5 80.1                               25
42.3 1.3 5 14.5 5 14.5 − 5 52.6 5 179.1 − 5 305.9 80.5          Apr                  1
41.7 1.1 14.0 14.0 − 52.6 178.0 − 305.9 81.4                                 8
41.5 1.0 12.7 12.7 − 52.6 178.8 − 305.9 81.4                               15
42.3 1.0 13.0 13.0 − 52.6 180.4 − 305.9 81.4                               22
41.2 0.9 11.8 11.8 − 52.6 182.3 − 305.9 81.2                               29
40.2 1.9 11.9 11.9 − 52.6 183.2 − 305.9 81.2          May                  6
 Deutsche Bundesbank
9.3 0.0 0.8 0.8 − 1.3 5 12.4 141.9 5 66.6 5.0 2009          June
6.7 0.0 1.2 1.2 − 1.3 12.2 141.8 66.6 5.0          July
8.1 0.0 0.9 0.9 − 11.9 12.4 143.4 66.6 5.0          Aug 
8.6 0.0 0.1 0.1 − 13.0 5 13.2 144.9 5 67.6 5.0          Sep 
8.5 0.0 0.5 0.5 − 13.0 12.9 146.5 67.6 5.0          Oct 
9.3 0.0 0.0 0.0 − 13.0 13.2 146.8 67.6 5.0          Nov 
9 . 1 0 . 0−−− 13.1 13.5 146.8 5 76.8 5.0          Dec 
9.8 0.0 0.2 0.2 − 13.1 13.2 147.6 76.8 5.0 2010          Jan 
9.3 0.0 0.3 0.3 − 13.1 13.4 149.6 76.8 5.0          Feb 
9.3 0.0 0.1 0.1 − 13.6 10.3 150.2 5 84.8 5.0          Mar 
11.5 0.0 0.3 0.3 − 13.6 10.2 151.1 84.8 5.0          Apr 
12.8 0.0 0.2 0.2 − 13.6 10.4 151.7 84.8 5.0          May
11.0 0.0 0.2 0.2 − 5 14.5 5 11.3 150.9 5 108.8 5.0          June
11.2 0.0 0.3 0.3 − 14.5 12.5 151.2 108.8 5.0          July
10.5 0.0 0.5 0.5 − 14.5 12.8 153.2 108.8 5.0          Aug 
10.8 0.0 0.1 0.1 − 5 13.7 5 12.4 155.8 5 99.9 5.0          Sep 
12.6 0.0 0.1 0.1 − 13.7 12.3 156.7 99.9 5.0          Oct 
11.0 0.0 0.2 0.2 − 13.7 12.8 156.6 99.9 5.0          Nov 14.5 0.0 0.2 0.2 − 14.0 13.1 157.1
5 110.5 5.0          Dec 
12.2 0.0 0.2 0.2 − 14.0 13.1 157.8 110.5 5.0 2011          Jan 
12.0 0.0 0.1 0.1 − 14.0 13.5 158.9 110.5 5.0          Feb 
13.4 0.0 0.2 0.2 − 13.5 11.7 159.5 5 103.3 5.0          Mar 
11.7 0.0 0.3 0.3 − 13.5 11.7 160.1 103.3 5.0          Apr 
 
banknote issue“. The remaining 92 % of the value of the euro banknote in the aforementioned accounting regime and the value of euro banknotes
circulation is also allocated to the NCBs on a monthly basis, and each NCB put into circulation is also disclosed as an “Intra-Eurosystem claim/ liabil ity
shows in its balance sheet the share of the euro banknotes issued which related to banknote issue“. — 3For the Deutsche Bundesbank: including
corresponds to its paid-up share in the ECB’s capital. The difference DM banknotes still in circulation. — 4Source: ECB. — 5Changes are due
between the value of the euro banknotes allocated to the NCB according to mainly to revaluations at the end of the quarter. 
19*III Consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
E U R O S Y S T E M
Monthly Report
May 2011
IV Banks
 
1 Assets and liabilities of monetary financial institutions (excluding the Bundesbank) in Germany *
  Assets
 
 
€ billion
Lending to banks (MFIs) in the euro area Lending to non-banks (non-MFIs) in the
to banks in the home country to banks in other member states to non-banks in the home country
Enterprises and house-
holds
Secur- Secur-
Balance ities ities
sheet Cash issued issued
Period total  1 in hand Total Total Loans by banks Total Loans by banks Total Total Total Loans
 End of year or month
 
2002 6,394.2 17.9 2,118.0 1,769.1 1,164.3 604.9 348.9 271.7 77.2 3,340.2 3,092.2 2,505.8 2,240.8
2003 6,432.0 17.3 2,111.5 1,732.0 1,116.8 615.3 379.5 287.7 91.8 3,333.2 3,083.1 2,497.4 2,241.2
2004 6,617.4 15.1 2,174.3 1,750.2 1,122.9 627.3 424.2 306.3 117.9 3,358.7 3,083.4 2,479.7 2,223.8
2005 6,859.4 15.3 2,276.0 1,762.5 1,148.4 614.1 513.5 356.3 157.2 3,407.6 3,085.2 2,504.6 2,226.3
2006 7,154.4 16.4 2,314.4 1,718.6 1,138.6 580.0 595.8 376.8 219.0 3,462.1 3,085.5 2,536.1 2,241.92007 7,592.4 17.8 2,523.4 1,847.9 1,290.4 557.5 675.4 421.6 253.8 3,487.3 3,061.8 2,556.0 2,288.82008 7,892.7 17.8 2,681.8 1,990.2 1,404.3 585.8 691.6 452.9 238.8 3,638.2 3,163.0 2,686.9 2,357.32009 7,436.1 17.2 2,480.5 1,813.2 1,218.4 594.8 667.3 449.5 217.8 3,638.3 3,187.9 2,692.9 2,357.5
2010 8,304.7 16.5 2,361.6 1,787.8 1,276.9 510.9 573.9 372.8 201.0 3,724.5 3,302.9 2,669.1 2,354.72009          June 7,710.6 15.0 2,601.5 1,943.5 1,333.1 610.4 658.0 436.9 221.2 3,694.3 3,211.7 2,725.6 2,388.3         July 7,619.1 14.0 2,558.6 1,890.7 1,277.0 613.7 667.8 448.3 219.5 3,685.1 3,205.7 2,706.7 2,372.4
         Aug 7,590.2 14.0 2,563.6 1,886.5 1,270.3 616.2 677.2 458.7 218.4 3,655.8 3,183.7 2,691.4 2,361.6
         Sep 7,519.5 13.9 2,512.5 1,862.6 1,253.1 609.6 649.9 432.3 217.6 3,675.2 3,199.8 2,705.4 2,375.4
         Oct 7,498.4 14.2 2,496.7 1,824.6 1,219.2 605.4 672.2 456.2 216.0 3,673.1 3,202.2 2,692.0 2,365.5
         Nov 7,493.5 13.8 2,496.0 1,826.7 1,224.7 602.0 669.4 448.7 220.6 3,671.2 3,201.7 2,700.0 2,372.5         Dec 7,436.1 17.2 2,480.5 1,813.2 1,218.4 594.8 667.3 449.5 217.8 3,638.3 3,187.9 2,692.9 2,357.5
2010          Jan 7,452.7 14.3 2,465.1 1,806.6 1,220.4 586.2 658.5 440.7 217.8 3,655.8 3,198.2 2,695.9 2,354.2
         Feb 7,449.5 14.2 2,491.6 1,830.8 1,250.2 580.5 660.8 444.5 216.3 3,645.2 3,184.7 2,682.5 2,350.8         Mar 7,454.6 14.4 2,489.7 1,832.0 1,250.3 581.7 657.7 440.2 217.5 3,633.9 3,180.8 2,673.6 2,347.0
         Apr 7,570.0 14.0 2,507.1 1,843.7 1,263.9 579.8 663.5 448.2 215.3 3,688.9 3,222.8 2,711.0 2,360.2
         May 7,681.0 14.7 2,593.2 1,897.6 1,326.4 571.2 695.6 480.6 215.0 3,650.9 3,211.1 2,688.9 2,364.6         June 7,641.3 14.2 2,583.7 1,899.5 1,341.3 558.2 684.2 464.9 219.3 3,664.0 3,228.2 2,685.0 2,368.0
         July 7,438.3 14.7 2,457.9 1,777.3 1,234.5 542.8 680.6 473.5 207.1 3,654.1 3,219.4 2,680.5 2,364.5
         Aug 7,517.6 14.5 2,489.7 1,792.7 1,252.0 540.6 697.1 488.6 208.4 3,667.0 3,229.6 2,688.4 2,373.2         Sep 7,387.2 14.9 2,447.4 1,780.3 1,245.4 535.0 667.0 460.9 206.1 3,642.6 3,209.0 2,665.8 2,353.9
         Oct 7,397.5 15.2 2,353.9 1,759.6 1,246.2 513.4 594.3 389.3 205.0 3,758.9 3,327.9 2,675.0 2,360.5
         Nov 7,508.4 14.8 2,376.9 1,776.3 1,259.7 516.5 600.7 397.7 203.0 3,804.8 3,368.9 2,704.7 2,389.3         Dec 8,304.7 16.5 2,361.6 1,787.8 1,276.9 510.9 573.9 372.8 201.0 3,724.5 3,302.9 2,669.1 2,354.7
2011          Jan 8,183.8 14.1 2,322.8 1,748.8 1,239.7 509.1 573.9 374.7 199.2 3,748.8 3,322.9 2,684.7 2,356.7
         Feb 8,142.3 14.5 2,332.2 1,751.5 1,243.1 508.4 580.6 380.6 200.1 3,745.3 3,322.0 2,697.7 2,377.4         Mar 7,955.2 14.5 2,294.7 1,735.5 1,233.9 501.6 559.2 363.4 195.8 3,711.8 3,293.5 2,680.7 2,358.7
 Changes 3
2003 90.7 − 0.6 − 12.2 − 44.1 − 42.6 − 1.5 31.9 18.8 13.1 30.0 23.6 22.8 26.4
2004 209.7 − 2.1 71.6 24.0 10.9 13.1 47.6 17.1 30.5 44.0 17.4 − 0.4 − 1.3
2005 191.4 0.1 96.5 10.3 22.8 − 12.5 86.2 48.1 38.0 59.7 14.1 37.1 15.5
2006 353.9 1.1 81.2 0.5 28.0 − 27.6 80.8 19.5 61.3 55.9 1.5 32.5 13.2
2007 515.3 1.5 215.6 135.5 156.2 − 20.8 80.1 44.1 36.0 54.1 − 1.0 38.6 53.22008 314.0 − 0.1 184.4 164.2 127.3 36.9 20.2 34.6 − 14.4 140.2 102.5 130.8 65.42009 −454.8 − 0.5 −189.5 −166.4 −182.1 15.8 − 23.2 − 2.5 − 20.7 17.3 38.2 16.9 6.5
2010 −135.1 − 0.7 − 90.6 3.0 58.3 − 55.3 − 93.6 − 78.5 − 15.1 77.5 107.1 − 13.7 0.62009          July − 93.3 − 1.1 − 42.9 − 52.7 − 56.1 3.3 9.8 11.4 − 1.6 − 8.5 − 5.2 − 18.1 − 15.1
         Aug − 9.7 0.0 6.0 − 3.5 − 6.0 2.5 9.5 10.6 − 1.1 − 27.5 − 20.9 − 14.3 − 9.8         Sep − 57.5 − 0.0 − 49.6 − 23.0 − 16.5 − 6.5 − 26.6 − 25.9 − 0.7 22.3 17.5 15.4 15.0
         Oct − 16.3 0.3 − 15.2 − 37.5 − 33.4 − 4.2 22.4 24.1 − 1.7 − 0.1 3.5 − 12.4 − 8.6
         Nov 2.5 − 0.4 0.4 2.9 6.1 − 3.1 − 2.6 − 7.2 4.6 − 0.4 0.2 6.1 5.1
         Dec − 79.7 3.4 − 17.7 − 14.9 − 8.0 − 6.9 − 2.8 0.2 − 3.1 − 37.4 − 16.8 − 9.9 − 17.4
2010          Jan − 8.8 − 2.9 − 17.4 − 8.1 0.8 − 8.9 − 9.3 − 9.4 0.1 16.6 11.3 3.9 − 1.7
         Feb − 7.2 − 0.2 25.8 24.0 29.6 − 5.6 1.8 3.4 − 1.7 − 12.8 − 14.7 − 14.4 − 4.5         Mar 4.9 0.3 0.5 2.6 − 0.3 2.9 − 2.1 − 4.4 2.3 − 2.5 1.2 − 4.5 − 3.2
         Apr 107.9 − 0.5 16.4 11.0 13.1 − 2.1 5.4 7.8 − 2.3 54.7 42.4 37.9 13.2
         May 63.7 0.7 80.8 50.4 59.5 − 9.1 30.4 31.0 − 0.6 − 45.6 − 15.4 − 25.6 1.1         June − 50.5 − 0.6 − 11.2 0.7 13.8 − 13.1 − 11.9 − 16.1 4.2 11.1 15.6 − 5.3 2.0
         July −166.1 0.6 −118.1 −116.0 −101.0 − 15.0 − 2.1 9.9 − 11.9 − 3.2 − 4.5 − 0.5 0.4
         Aug 60.6 − 0.3 29.2 13.6 15.9 − 2.4 15.6 14.5 1.1 8.7 7.3 5.2 6.2         Sep − 88.7 0.4 − 36.3 − 8.8 − 3.6 − 5.2 − 27.5 − 26.0 − 1.5 − 16.5 − 15.2 − 17.5 − 14.3
         Oct 20.7 0.4 − 72.6 − 0.9 1.7 − 2.6 − 71.7 − 70.7 − 0.9 100.9 102.9 11.7 9.2
         Nov 80.9 − 0.5 25.6 22.0 10.8 11.2 3.5 5.8 − 2.3 39.4 36.9 25.8 25.0         Dec −152.6 1.7 − 13.1 12.6 18.1 − 5.5 − 25.6 − 24.0 − 1.6 − 73.2 − 60.5 − 30.3 − 32.8
2011          Jan −106.0 − 2.4 − 35.7 − 37.3 − 36.0 − 1.2 1.5 2.9 − 1.4 29.3 24.2 19.4 5.7
         Feb − 39.3 0.3 10.1 3.2 3.7 − 0.5 7.0 6.1 0.9 − 1.1 0.4 14.6 22.0         Mar −183.9 − 0.0 − 34.2 − 12.1 − 9.2 − 2.8 − 22.1 − 17.2 − 4.9 − 32.7 − 27.8 − 16.4 − 18.2
*This table serves to supplement the “Overall monetary survey“ in section data from money market funds. — 1See footnote 1 in Table IV.2. —
II. Unlike the other tables in section IV, this table includes − in addition to 2Including debt securities arising from the exchange of equalisation
the figures reported by banks (including building and loan associations) −
20*IV Banks

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
May 2011
IV Banks
 
 
 
  
 
euro area Claims on
non-euro-area
to non-banks in other member states residents
 General Enterprises and General
 government households government
Secur- Secur- of which Secur- of which Other
ities Total Loans ities  2 Total Total Loans Total Loans ities Total Loans assets  1   Period
End of year or month
 
265.0 586.4 448.5 137.9 248.0 125.0 63.6 123.0 25.5 97.5 738.1 589.2 179.9 2002
256.2 585.6 439.6 146.1 250.2 133.5 62.7 116.6 25.9 90.7 806.4 645.6 163.6 2003
255.9 603.8 423.0 180.8 275.3 140.6 61.9 134.7 25.7 109.0 897.8 730.4 171.4 2004
278.2 580.7 408.7 171.9 322.4 169.1 65.0 153.3 30.7 122.6 993.8 796.8 166.7 2005
294.1 549.5 390.2 159.2 376.6 228.1 85.2 148.5 26.1 122.4 1,172.7 936.2 188.8 2006267.3 505.8 360.7 145.0 425.5 294.6 124.9 130.9 26.0 104.9 1,339.5 1,026.9 224.4 2007329.6 476.1 342.8 133.4 475.1 348.1 172.1 127.0 27.6 99.4 1,279.2 1,008.6 275.7 2008335.4 495.0 335.1 160.0 450.4 322.2 162.9 128.2 23.5 104.7 1,062.6 821.1 237.5 2009
314.5 633.8 418.4 215.3 421.6 289.2 164.2 132.4 24.8 107.6 1,021.0 792.7 1,181.0 2010337.3 486.1 336.5 149.7 482.5 357.3 178.2 125.2 22.7 102.5 1,165.0 912.3 234.8 2009          June
334.3 499.0 348.5 150.5 479.4 352.3 173.5 127.1 23.6 103.5 1,132.8 882.1 228.8          July
329.8 492.4 342.9 149.5 472.1 347.1 170.4 124.9 23.7 101.2 1,107.4 856.8 249.5          Aug 
330.0 494.3 340.0 154.3 475.4 349.0 172.6 126.4 23.6 102.8 1,069.0 822.5 248.8          Sep 
326.5 510.2 351.7 158.5 470.9 341.3 166.5 129.6 23.7 105.9 1,063.7 822.7 250.7          Oct 
327.5 501.7 340.9 160.8 469.5 341.0 165.1 128.4 23.5 105.0 1,057.5 818.6 255.0          Nov 335.4 495.0 335.1 160.0 450.4 322.2 162.9 128.2 23.5 104.7 1,062.6 821.1 237.5          Dec 
341.7 502.3 338.0 164.4 457.5 325.5 161.9 132.1 23.7 108.3 1,081.5 838.8 236.0 2010          Jan 
331.7 502.2 334.8 167.4 460.5 325.7 162.9 134.8 23.7 111.1 1,072.7 832.8 225.9          Feb 
326.6 507.3 335.5 171.8 453.1 319.6 162.7 133.5 22.3 111.2 1,073.9 833.9 242.6          Mar 
350.8 511.8 337.7 174.1 466.1 332.9 175.7 133.1 22.0 111.2 1,120.2 879.4 239.8          Apr 
324.3 522.2 343.8 178.4 439.8 307.7 175.0 132.1 26.4 105.7 1,167.0 923.7 255.2          May317.0 543.2 349.1 194.1 435.8 303.1 172.8 132.7 24.2 108.5 1,111.1 865.0 268.4          June
316.0 538.9 344.7 194.2 434.7 299.9 173.2 134.8 23.9 110.9 1,048.9 810.6 262.7          July
315.2 541.2 344.9 196.3 437.4 303.0 173.4 134.4 23.8 110.5 1,073.1 834.1 273.3          Aug 312.0 543.1 346.6 196.5 433.7 294.4 166.4 139.2 25.7 113.5 1,020.8 787.3 261.6          Sep 
314.6 652.9 350.9 302.0 431.0 289.7 162.6 141.3 25.8 115.5 1,011.3 781.3 258.2          Oct 
315.4 664.2 427.3 237.0 435.9 299.5 167.8 136.4 25.8 110.6 1,043.4 810.3 268.5          Nov 314.5 633.8 418.4 215.3 421.6 289.2 164.2 132.4 24.8 107.6 1,021.0 792.7 1,181.0          Dec 
328.0 638.2 421.7 216.5 425.9 287.9 159.8 138.0 26.2 111.8 1,017.1 786.3 1,081.0 2011          Jan 
320.2 624.3 410.1 214.2 423.3 285.7 158.2 137.6 26.3 111.3 1,017.4 790.0 1,033.0          Feb 
322.1 612.8 399.4 213.4 418.3 282.2 157.2 136.2 26.4 109.7 978.6 748.1 955.6          Mar 
Changes 3
− 3.6 0.8 − 8.7 9.6 6.4 13.1 2.6 − 6.8 − 0.8 − 6.0 115.4 97.7 − 42.0 2003
0.9 17.8 − 17.0 34.9 26.6 8.2 3.1 18.4 0.0 18.4 111.0 100.2 − 14.7 2004
21.7 − 23.0 − 14.3 − 8.6 45.5 27.4 2.2 18.2 4.6 13.5 57.2 31.3 − 22.2 2005
19.3 − 31.0 − 18.6 − 12.4 54.5 59.6 20.9 − 5.2 − 1.3 − 3.8 205.8 165.7 9.8 2006
− 14.6 − 39.6 − 29.3 − 10.3 55.1 73.7 41.5 − 18.6 0.0 − 18.6 223.0 136.7 21.1 2007
65.4 − 28.3 − 16.9 − 11.5 37.7 42.2 40.3 − 4.5 1.6 − 6.1 − 40.1 − 7.5 29.7 2008
10.5 21.3 − 5.1 26.4 − 20.9 − 20.9 − 7.1 0.0 − 3.9 3.9 −182.2 −162.2 − 99.8 2009
− 14.2 120.8 83.3 37.4 − 29.6 − 36.4 0.2 6.8 3.0 3.7 − 74.9 − 61.9 − 46.4 2010
− 3.0 12.9 12.0 0.9 − 3.3 − 5.2 − 4.6 1.9 0.9 1.0 − 31.6 − 29.5 − 9.1 2009          July
− 4.4 − 6.7 − 5.6 − 1.0 − 6.6 − 4.5 − 2.6 − 2.1 0.1 − 2.2 − 9.6 − 9.8 21.5          Aug 
0.5 2.0 − 2.8 4.9 4.8 3.2 3.2 1.6 − 0.0 1.6 − 28.4 − 25.3 − 1.8          Sep 
− 3.8 15.9 11.7 4.2 − 3.6 − 6.8 − 5.5 3.2 0.0 3.1 − 1.8 3.2 0.5          Oct 
1.0 − 5.9 − 8.2 2.3 − 0.6 0.5 − 0.9 − 1.1 − 0.1 − 0.9 − 0.7 0.9 3.6          Nov 
7.5 − 6.9 − 5.9 − 1.0 − 20.6 − 20.1 − 2.9 − 0.4 − 0.1 − 0.4 − 9.0 − 10.7 − 18.9          Dec 
5.6 7.3 2.8 4.5 5.3 1.5 − 1.0 3.8 0.2 3.6 6.1 6.4 − 11.2 2010          Jan 
− 10.0 − 0.2 − 3.2 3.0 1.8 − 0.9 0.3 2.7 − 0.0 2.7 − 17.3 − 13.8 − 2.7          Feb 
− 1.3 5.7 0.7 5.0 − 3.7 − 4.2 − 0.4 0.5 − 1.4 2.0 3.1 − 1.2 3.7          Mar 
24.7 4.5 2.2 2.3 12.3 12.7 12.7 − 0.4 − 0.4 0.0 40.7 40.7 − 3.4          Apr 
− 26.7 10.2 6.0 4.2 − 30.2 − 28.9 − 3.3 − 1.4 4.4 − 5.7 13.9 15.0 13.9          May− 7.3 20.9 5.2 15.7 − 4.4 − 4.9 − 2.5 0.5 − 0.3 0.8 − 62.1 − 64.3 12.3          June
− 0.9 − 4.0 − 4.1 0.1 1.3 − 1.0 2.5 2.3 − 0.2 2.5 − 39.1 − 33.6 − 6.1          July
− 1.0 2.1 0.0 2.0 1.4 1.7 − 0.8 − 0.3 − 0.1 − 0.2 12.4 13.0 10.6          Aug − 3.1 2.2 1.9 0.4 − 1.3 − 6.6 − 4.5 5.3 2.0 3.3 − 24.0 − 21.2 − 12.3          Sep 
2.5 91.2 4.6 86.6 − 2.0 − 4.2 − 3.3 2.1 0.1 2.0 − 3.4 − 0.5 − 4.6          Oct 0.7 11.1 76.1 − 65.0 2.6 7.7 3.2 − 5.1 − 0.1 − 5.0 7.5 6.7 8.9          Nov 2.5 − 30.2 − 8.8 − 21.4 − 12.7 − 9.3 − 2.6 − 3.4 − 1.0 − 2.4 − 12.7 − 9.0 − 55.5          Dec 
13.7 4.8 3.5 1.3 5.1 − 0.4 − 3.6 5.5 1.4 4.0 5.2 2.4 −102.4 2011          Jan 
− 7.4 − 14.2 − 12.0 − 2.2 − 1.5 − 1.1 − 1.3 − 0.4 0.1 − 0.5 3.1 6.2 − 51.9          Feb 
1.9 − 11.5 − 10.6 − 0.8 − 4.9 − 3.5 − 1.0 − 1.4 0.1 − 1.6 − 38.7 − 42.0 − 78.2          Mar 
claims. — 3Statistical breaks have been eliminated from the flow figures
(see also footnote * in Table II.1). 
21*IV Banks

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
E U R O S Y S T E M
Monthly Report
May 2011
IV Banks
 
1 Assets and liabilities of monetary financial institutions (excluding the Bundesbank) in Germany *
  Liabilities
 
€ billion
Deposits of banks (MFIs) Deposits of non-banks (non-MFIs) in the euro area
in the euro area
Deposits of non-banks in the home country Deposits of non-banks
With agreed At agreed
of banks maturities notice
Balance in the in other of which of which
sheet home member Over- up to up to Over-
Period total  1 Total country states Total Total night Total 2 years Total 3 months Total night
 End of year or month
 
2002 6,394.2 1,478.7 1,236.2 242.4 2,170.0 2,034.9 574.8 884.9 279.3 575.3 472.9 87.4 8.1
2003 6,432.0 1,471.0 1,229.4 241.6 2,214.6 2,086.9 622.1 874.5 248.0 590.3 500.8 81.8 9.3
2004 6,617.4 1,528.4 1,270.8 257.6 2,264.2 2,148.5 646.2 898.9 239.9 603.5 515.5 71.9 8.8
2005 6,859.4 1,569.6 1,300.8 268.8 2,329.1 2,225.4 715.8 906.2 233.4 603.4 519.1 62.2 9.6
2006 7,154.4 1,637.7 1,348.6 289.0 2,449.2 2,341.6 745.8 1,009.3 310.1 586.5 487.4 62.0 13.92007 7,592.4 1,778.6 1,479.0 299.6 2,633.6 2,518.3 769.6 1,193.3 477.9 555.4 446.0 75.1 19.62008 7,892.7 1,827.7 1,583.0 244.7 2,798.2 2,687.3 809.5 1,342.7 598.7 535.2 424.8 74.2 22.4
2009 7,436.1 1,589.7 1,355.6 234.0 2,818.0 2,731.3 997.8 1,139.1 356.4 594.4 474.4 63.9 17.7
2010 8,304.7 1,495.8 1,240.1 255.7 2,925.8 2,817.6 1,090.0 1,109.4 303.7 618.2 512.5 68.4 19.3
2009          June 7,710.6 1,695.3 1,469.0 226.3 2,832.4 2,716.6 918.7 1,238.2 461.7 559.7 445.1 73.2 26.0
         July 7,619.1 1,641.3 1,417.8 223.4 2,816.2 2,706.5 922.3 1,218.7 442.0 565.5 449.7 73.2 24.7
         Aug 7,590.2 1,635.5 1,414.6 220.8 2,808.1 2,707.6 933.8 1,203.1 424.4 570.8 454.3 73.7 25.8         Sep 7,519.5 1,603.4 1,381.3 222.1 2,806.8 2,706.2 953.3 1,177.9 398.2 575.1 457.4 76.2 26.5
         Oct 7,498.4 1,602.0 1,373.6 228.4 2,797.5 2,696.7 981.3 1,133.7 367.5 581.7 461.5 74.9 26.2
         Nov 7,493.5 1,599.1 1,375.7 223.4 2,823.6 2,724.5 1,005.5 1,133.4 353.0 585.6 464.5 73.0 25.9         Dec 7,436.1 1,589.7 1,355.6 234.0 2,818.0 2,731.3 997.8 1,139.1 356.4 594.4 474.4 63.9 17.7
2010          Jan 7,452.7 1,596.8 1,348.9 247.9 2,826.3 2,736.7 1,025.2 1,113.9 330.5 597.6 479.2 66.6 20.1
         Feb 7,449.5 1,597.3 1,361.7 235.6 2,828.9 2,736.7 1,025.5 1,108.4 323.8 602.9 485.1 69.6 20.4         Mar 7,454.6 1,566.6 1,328.7 237.9 2,815.8 2,725.0 1,009.4 1,110.9 325.3 604.7 486.8 69.7 21.9
         Apr 7,570.0 1,599.7 1,340.9 258.7 2,836.1 2,737.0 1,044.7 1,087.5 301.4 604.8 488.8 77.9 27.3
         May 7,681.0 1,629.3 1,356.0 273.3 2,840.9 2,749.1 1,063.1 1,081.1 299.5 605.0 490.8 69.1 21.9         June 7,641.3 1,616.8 1,365.8 251.0 2,842.3 2,750.9 1,064.3 1,082.1 299.7 604.4 491.5 69.5 22.3
         July 7,438.3 1,515.4 1,244.1 271.3 2,840.1 2,745.2 1,061.3 1,078.1 297.4 605.9 495.1 71.8 24.2
         Aug 7,517.6 1,534.6 1,253.2 281.4 2,856.9 2,756.0 1,068.3 1,081.9 298.3 605.8 496.8 70.4 22.5         Sep 7,387.2 1,482.4 1,218.3 264.1 2,850.5 2,758.9 1,069.7 1,083.1 300.6 606.1 499.4 69.7 20.9
         Oct 7,397.5 1,517.9 1,247.9 270.0 2,872.8 2,759.8 1,071.3 1,081.1 300.4 607.4 502.2 69.9 21.2
         Nov 7,508.4 1,513.5 1,245.8 267.7 2,924.8 2,802.1 1,093.6 1,098.6 295.5 609.9 504.2 76.3 25.7         Dec 8,304.7 1,495.8 1,240.1 255.7 2,925.8 2,817.6 1,090.0 1,109.4 303.7 618.2 512.5 68.4 19.3
2011          Jan 8,183.8 1,489.1 1,221.1 268.0 2,937.6 2,823.6 1,099.8 1,103.4 299.7 620.4 515.1 69.0 22.7
         Feb 8,142.3 1,472.6 1,208.0 264.6 2,930.8 2,817.3 1,088.0 1,106.8 303.2 622.5 517.2 66.5 21.4         Mar 7,955.2 1,454.6 1,191.7 262.9 2,928.4 2,820.8 1,089.3 1,108.0 305.6 623.5 518.0 68.7 22.1
 Changes 4
2003 90.7 3.8 − 3.3 7.1 44.7 50.3 48.8 − 13.6 − 31.6 15.1 28.0 − 3.8 1.4
2004 209.7 62.3 42.8 19.6 53.5 64.9 26.3 25.5 − 8.3 13.1 14.7 − 9.3 − 0.4
2005 191.4 32.8 26.9 5.8 65.0 75.5 69.4 7.3 − 6.9 − 1.2 2.9 − 8.0 0.5
2006 353.9 105.6 81.5 24.1 122.9 118.6 30.4 105.0 77.1 − 16.8 − 31.7 0.5 4.42007 515.3 148.3 134.8 13.5 185.1 177.3 24.6 183.9 167.8 − 31.1 − 41.4 13.6 5.62008 314.0 65.8 121.5 − 55.8 162.4 173.1 38.8 154.6 123.5 − 20.2 − 21.2 − 7.4 − 0.12009 −454.8 −235.3 −224.5 − 10.8 31.9 43.9 205.0 −220.4 −259.3 59.3 50.3 − 9.6 − 4.1
2010 −135.1 − 75.5 − 99.6 24.0 72.4 59.8 92.2 − 56.5 − 55.7 24.0 38.3 − 4.4 2.1
2009          July − 93.3 − 54.0 − 51.1 − 2.9 − 16.1 − 10.1 3.5 − 19.4 − 19.7 5.8 4.6 0.0 − 1.3
         Aug − 9.7 − 5.1 − 2.6 − 2.4 3.6 1.3 11.6 − 15.6 − 17.6 5.3 4.5 0.6 1.1         Sep − 57.5 − 31.3 − 33.0 1.7 − 0.7 − 1.0 19.8 − 25.1 − 26.1 4.3 3.1 2.8 0.8
         Oct − 16.3 − 1.0 − 7.3 6.3 4.3 3.8 28.1 − 31.0 − 30.6 6.6 4.2 − 1.0 − 0.3
         Nov 2.5 − 2.1 2.8 − 4.9 13.5 15.1 24.4 − 13.1 − 14.4 3.8 3.0 − 1.8 − 0.3         Dec − 79.7 − 11.8 − 21.8 10.0 − 6.5 6.1 − 8.3 5.5 3.2 8.9 9.9 − 9.3 − 8.3
2010          Jan − 8.8 5.3 − 7.9 13.2 7.4 4.8 26.9 − 25.3 − 26.0 3.2 4.7 2.4 2.3
         Feb − 7.2 3.6 12.0 − 8.3 − 5.9 − 0.4 − 0.1 − 5.6 − 6.8 5.2 5.9 − 5.1 0.3         Mar 4.9 − 15.7 − 17.8 2.1 − 13.3 − 11.8 − 16.1 2.4 1.5 1.8 1.8 0.1 1.4
         Apr 107.9 33.5 12.9 20.6 18.9 10.6 35.1 − 24.5 − 25.0 0.1 2.0 8.2 5.4
         May 63.7 25.0 11.9 13.0 2.9 10.7 17.3 − 6.8 − 2.1 0.2 2.0 − 9.4 − 5.6         June − 50.5 − 14.0 8.7 − 22.7 0.8 1.5 1.6 0.5 − 0.3 − 0.6 0.6 0.2 0.3
         July −166.1 − 94.4 −116.0 21.6 − 0.8 − 4.6 − 2.2 − 3.8 − 2.2 1.5 3.6 2.6 2.0
         Aug 60.6 16.9 7.6 9.2 16.0 10.2 6.6 3.7 0.8 − 0.1 1.7 − 1.6 − 1.8         Sep − 88.7 − 47.4 − 31.8 − 15.6 − 4.6 4.3 2.5 1.5 2.5 0.3 2.6 − 0.4 − 1.5
         Oct 20.7 36.7 30.4 6.3 22.5 1.0 1.8 − 2.2 − 0.1 1.3 2.7 0.3 0.4
         Nov 80.9 − 8.9 − 4.9 − 4.0 26.9 17.6 22.1 − 7.0 − 6.0 2.6 2.0 6.1 4.4         Dec −152.6 − 16.1 − 4.6 − 11.5 1.6 15.9 − 3.2 10.6 8.0 8.5 8.6 − 7.8 − 5.6
2011          Jan −106.0 − 4.9 − 17.9 13.0 12.4 6.5 10.2 − 5.9 − 3.9 2.2 2.7 0.7 3.5
         Feb − 39.3 − 16.2 − 13.1 − 3.1 − 6.7 − 6.1 − 11.7 3.5 3.5 2.1 2.1 − 2.5 − 1.4         Mar −183.9 − 17.9 − 16.3 − 1.6 − 2.4 3.5 1.3 1.2 2.4 1.0 0.8 2.2 0.7
*This table serves to supplement the “Overall monetary survey“ in section data from money market funds. — 1See footnote 1 in Table IV.2. —
II. Unlike the other tables in section IV, this table includes − in addition to 2Excluding deposits of central governments. — 3In Germany, debt
the figures reported by banks (including building and loan associations) −
22*IV Banks

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
May 2011
IV Banks
 
 
 
 
 
 Debt securities
issued  3 
in other member states  2 Deposits of
central governments
With agreed At agreed Liabilities
maturities notice arising
of which from Money of which Liabilities
domestic market with to non- repos with
of which of which central non-banks fund euro- Capital maturities
up to up to govern- in the shares of up to area and Other
Total 2 years Total 3 months Total ments euro area issued  3 Total reserves   Period 2 years  3 residents Liabilities  1 
End of year or month
 
74.6 9.9 4.7 3.6 47.7 45.6 3.3 36.7 1,468.2 71.6 599.2 343.0 309.8 2002
68.6 11.4 3.9 3.1 45.9 44.2 14.1 36.7 1,486.9 131.3 567.8 340.2 300.8 2003
59.8 9.8 3.3 2.7 43.8 41.4 14.8 31.5 1,554.8 116.9 577.1 329.3 317.2 2004
50.2 9.8 2.4 2.0 41.6 38.8 19.5 31.7 1,611.9 113.8 626.2 346.8 324.5 2005
45.9 9.3 2.3 1.9 45.5 41.9 17.1 32.0 1,636.7 136.4 638.5 389.6 353.7 200653.2 22.0 2.3 1.8 40.1 38.3 26.6 28.6 1,637.6 182.3 661.0 428.2 398.2 200749.5 24.9 2.4 1.8 36.6 34.8 61.1 16.4 1,609.9 233.3 666.3 461.7 451.5 2008
43.7 17.0 2.5 2.0 22.8 22.2 80.5 11.4 1,500.5 146.3 565.6 454.8 415.6 2009
46.4 16.1 2.8 2.2 39.8 38.7 86.7 9.8 1,407.8 82.3 636.0 452.8 1,289.9 2010
44.7 19.1 2.5 1.9 42.6 40.6 93.4 13.6 1,571.0 185.5 652.1 441.8 411.0 2009          June
46.0 19.7 2.5 1.9 36.6 34.6 82.4 12.4 1,565.9 181.1 647.3 441.5 412.0          July
45.3 19.2 2.5 1.9 26.8 25.0 71.7 12.2 1,570.3 177.8 626.3 443.6 422.6          Aug 47.1 19.2 2.5 1.9 24.4 22.7 83.7 12.4 1,543.3 171.9 599.7 442.8 427.3          Sep 
46.2 18.8 2.5 1.9 25.9 23.2 83.3 12.3 1,530.6 161.7 591.4 439.4 442.0          Oct 
44.6 16.3 2.5 1.9 26.1 24.2 81.0 12.0 1,518.8 158.0 589.4 440.6 429.1          Nov 43.7 17.0 2.5 2.0 22.8 22.2 80.5 11.4 1,500.5 146.3 565.6 454.8 415.6          Dec 
44.0 15.5 2.5 2.0 23.0 21.3 68.2 12.2 1,503.2 142.7 598.0 441.8 406.3 2010          Jan 
46.6 15.1 2.5 2.0 22.6 20.7 78.9 12.0 1,496.5 140.1 608.5 441.6 385.9          Feb 
45.2 13.6 2.6 2.0 21.1 20.4 79.8 11.6 1,503.2 138.0 622.6 445.8 409.3          Mar 
48.0 16.8 2.6 2.0 21.2 19.8 100.7 11.3 1,501.9 132.1 672.6 448.0 399.8          Apr 
44.5 13.9 2.6 2.1 22.7 20.6 101.4 11.3 1,503.4 127.7 738.4 447.0 409.4          May44.6 14.1 2.7 2.1 21.9 20.8 102.7 11.0 1,487.2 111.3 705.4 443.4 432.6          June
44.9 13.1 2.7 2.1 23.0 19.6 92.2 10.7 1,448.5 106.8 686.7 439.9 404.9          July
45.3 13.9 2.7 2.1 30.4 20.4 104.0 10.3 1,457.6 111.1 701.7 438.1 414.3          Aug 46.2 14.8 2.7 2.1 21.9 20.7 95.9 10.2 1,440.3 108.5 667.1 433.6 407.3          Sep 
46.0 14.6 2.7 2.1 43.1 34.1 85.0 9.8 1,407.4 87.7 657.4 440.1 407.1          Oct 
47.8 15.5 2.7 2.2 46.3 41.3 109.0 9.8 1,423.6 87.7 674.0 452.8 401.0          Nov 46.4 16.1 2.8 2.2 39.8 38.7 86.7 9.8 1,407.8 82.3 636.0 452.8 1,289.9          Dec 
43.5 13.7 2.8 2.2 45.0 37.1 74.5 9.9 1,400.8 80.6 631.5 454.3 1,186.1 2011          Jan 
42.3 14.3 2.8 2.2 47.0 37.8 93.2 9.8 1,396.0 83.0 634.1 460.2 1,145.7          Feb 
43.8 16.3 2.9 2.3 38.9 36.2 78.9 10.0 1,372.6 77.5 575.5 461.5 1,073.7          Mar 
Changes 4
− 4.4 2.0 − 0.8 − 0.4 − 1.8 − 1.4 10.7 − 0.5 49.6 − 2.2 4.9 − 3.3 − 19.4 2003
− 8.3 − 1.4 − 0.6 − 0.4 − 2.1 − 2.8 0.8 − 5.2 73.2 − 14.8 21.7 − 10.5 14.0 2004
− 7.7 − 0.4 − 0.9 − 0.7 − 2.5 − 3.0 4.7 0.2 39.1 − 9.5 22.0 14.4 13.3 2005
− 3.9 − 0.3 − 0.1 − 0.2 3.9 3.1 − 3.3 0.3 34.4 21.7 32.4 27.9 33.7 2006
8.0 13.0 0.0 − 0.1 − 5.8 − 4.3 8.1 − 3.4 20.3 48.7 48.8 42.9 65.1 2007
− 7.4 0.7 0.1 − 0.0 − 3.3 − 3.2 36.1 − 12.2 − 33.8 50.4 − 0.0 39.2 56.6 2008− 5.6 − 7.6 0.1 0.2 − 2.4 − 0.8 19.4 − 5.0 −104.9 − 87.3 − 95.5 − 0.1 − 65.2 2009
− 6.8 − 5.8 0.3 0.3 17.0 16.5 6.2 − 1.6 −105.8 − 62.4 54.3 − 8.0 − 76.9 2010
1.3 0.6 0.0 0.0 − 6.0 − 6.0 − 11.0 − 1.2 − 4.8 − 4.4 − 4.6 − 0.2 − 1.4 2009          July
− 0.5 − 0.4 0.0 0.0 1.7 1.9 − 10.6 − 0.3 6.1 − 3.3 − 18.2 2.5 12.4          Aug 
2.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 − 2.5 − 2.3 11.9 0.2 − 22.7 − 5.9 − 21.3 0.2 6.1          Sep 
− 0.7 − 0.1 0.0 0.0 1.5 0.5 − 0.4 − 0.1 − 11.0 − 10.2 − 7.1 − 3.1 2.1          Oct 
− 1.5 − 2.4 − 0.0 0.0 0.2 0.9 − 2.3 − 0.2 − 10.1 − 3.7 0.8 1.5 1.4          Nov − 1.1 0.6 0.0 0.0 − 3.3 − 1.9 − 0.5 − 0.6 − 24.6 − 11.8 − 31.4 12.8 − 17.1          Dec 
0.1 − 1.6 0.0 0.0 0.2 − 0.9 − 12.3 0.8 − 4.4 − 3.5 26.4 − 14.7 − 17.2 2010          Jan 
− 5.5 − 4.8 0.0 0.0 − 0.4 − 0.6 10.7 − 0.1 − 11.0 − 2.7 6.2 − 1.2 − 9.5          Feb − 1.4 − 1.5 0.0 0.0 − 1.5 − 0.4 1.0 − 0.4 6.0 − 2.0 13.0 4.0 10.3          Mar 
2.7 3.1 0.0 0.0 0.1 − 0.5 20.8 − 0.3 − 4.0 − 6.0 47.5 1.6 − 10.1          Apr 
− 3.8 − 3.2 0.0 0.0 1.5 0.8 0.7 − 0.0 − 16.1 − 4.5 49.5 − 5.2 7.0          May− 0.1 0.0 0.0 0.0 − 0.9 0.2 1.2 − 0.3 − 20.7 − 16.4 − 35.6 − 4.7 22.7          June
0.6 − 0.8 0.0 0.0 1.1 − 1.2 − 10.4 − 0.2 − 26.3 − 4.4 − 6.6 − 0.9 − 26.4          July0.2 0.6 0.0 0.0 7.4 0.7 11.7 − 0.4 1.5 4.2 8.9 − 3.3 9.3          Aug 1.2 1.1 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 8.6 0.3 − 8.0 − 0.1 − 0.8 − 2.3 − 19.4 − 1.4 − 6.9          Sep 
− 0.1 − 0.1 0.0 0.0 21.3 13.4 − 10.8 − 0.4 − 29.8 − 20.7 − 6.5 7.1 1.9          Oct 
1.6 0.8 0.0 0.0 3.2 7.1 23.9 − 0.0 10.7 1.2 3.9 9.9 14.6          Nov 
− 2.2 0.6 0.1 0.1 − 6.5 − 2.5 − 22.2 0.1 − 11.1 − 5.3 − 33.1 0.8 − 72.7          Dec 
− 2.8 − 2.3 0.0 0.0 5.2 − 1.6 − 12.2 0.0 − 1.2 − 1.6 0.2 2.9 −103.1 2011          Jan 
− 1.1 0.6 0.0 0.0 1.9 0.7 18.8 − 0.1 − 1.6 2.4 4.2 6.2 − 44.0          Feb 
1.5 2.0 0.0 0.0 − 8.1 − 1.6 − 14.3 0.2 − 20.4 − 5.1 − 58.6 2.2 − 72.6          Mar 
securities with maturities of up to one year are classed as money market together with money market fund shares. — 4Statistical breaks have been
paper; up to the January 2002 Monthly Report they were published eliminated from the flow figures (see also footnote * in Table II.1). 
23*IV Banks

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
E U R O S Y S T E M
Monthly Report
May 2011
IV Banks
 
2 Principal assets and liabilities of banks (MFIs) in Germany, by category of banks *
 
 
€ billion
  Lending to banks (MFIs)  Lending to non-banks (non-MFIs)
 
 of which of which 
Loans
 Cash in hand and credit
Number of balances forreporting Balance with Balances up to and for Partici- Securities Securities
End of institu- sheet central and issued by including more than issued by pating Othermonth tions total  
1 banks Total loans banks Total 1 year 1 year Bills non-banks interests assets  1 
All categories of banks
 
2010          Oct 1,918 7,472.4 79.6 2,833.2 2,072.7 750.5 4,035.2 464.9 2,711.7 0.8 814.3 146.6 377.7
         Nov 1,917 7,583.6 72.4 2,874.2 2,113.6 749.8 4,100.7 573.3 2,730.5 0.8 758.4 147.7 388.5
         Dec 1,919 8,352.3 96.1 2,840.4 2,088.1 742.8 3,994.7 511.7 2,719.9 1.0 724.1 145.6 1,275.4
2011          Jan 1,921 8,233.0 68.1 2,824.2 2,072.7 740.9 4,016.0 524.9 2,710.6 0.9 736.5 149.4 1,175.2
         Feb 1,921 8,191.6 76.2 2,826.1 2,073.8 740.8 4,013.6 534.4 2,712.6 0.9 723.4 148.3 1,127.6
         Mar 1,921 8,003.0 81.5 2,755.4 2,012.7 732.9 3,969.0 500.3 2,703.7 0.8 725.9 148.5 1,048.6
Commercial banks 6
2011          Feb 282 2,940.7 32.0 951.5 841.0 106.4 1,089.1 246.9 627.8 0.4 188.0 76.4 791.8
         Mar 283 2,822.2 41.0 907.2 801.5 103.1 1,061.9 220.6 625.3 0.3 190.6 76.5 735.7
   Big banks 7
2011          Feb 4 1,987.4 20.5 587.9 526.8 57.4 546.7 156.2 258.4 0.3 106.6 68.9 763.4         Mar 4 1,875.6 30.9 547.2 490.9 54.1 520.1 131.4 255.9 0.3 108.5 69.1 708.4
   Regional banks and other commercial banks
2011          Feb 168 742.5 9.7 230.9 183.0 47.7 470.8 67.3 323.8 0.1 78.9 6.6 24.5
         Mar 168 736.1 8.2 227.3 179.1 48.0 470.8 66.2 324.2 0.1 79.6 6.5 23.3
   Branches of foreign banks
2011          Feb 110 210.8 1.8 132.6 131.3 1.3 71.6 23.4 45.6 0.0 2.5 0.9 3.9
         Mar 111 210.5 1.9 132.7 131.6 1.1 71.0 23.0 45.2 0.0 2.6 0.9 4.1
Landesbanken
2011          Feb 10 1,427.3 6.3 547.5 408.5 135.3 667.2 101.7 421.6 0.1 134.5 19.7 186.6         Mar 10 1,398.6 5.4 537.2 398.4 135.2 665.1 102.9 417.8 0.1 136.4 19.7 171.2
Savings banks
2011          Feb 429 1,071.0 19.8 247.4 84.1 161.8 768.5 59.9 602.0 0.2 106.4 16.9 18.3         Mar 429 1,067.9 19.2 244.9 82.5 160.8 769.4 61.0 602.2 0.2 105.9 16.8 17.7
 
Regional institutions of credit cooperatives  
 
2011          Feb 2 268.1 0.9 159.5 122.6 36.9 63.1 16.7 19.1 0.0 26.6 14.6 29.9
         Mar 2 261.2 0.1 155.4 118.7 36.6 61.3 15.8 18.9 0.0 25.9 14.8 29.6
Credit cooperatives
2011          Feb 1,138 701.7 14.5 184.5 66.4 117.1 472.8 31.6 375.0 0.1 66.1 11.6 18.3
         Mar 1,138 702.0 14.0 183.7 66.2 116.4 474.8 32.5 376.0 0.1 66.1 11.6 18.0
Mortgage banks
2011          Feb 18 681.6 0.6 174.7 96.1 78.1 485.3 54.4 324.3 − 101.7 1.2 19.9         Mar 18 672.1 0.7 181.7 103.8 77.4 468.7 43.9 320.7 − 100.6 1.2 19.9
Building and loan associations
2011          Feb 24 201.7 0.1 64.6 44.9 19.6 128.6 1.4 112.5 . 14.7 0.4 8.1         Mar 23 198.0 0.1 60.6 41.8 18.8 129.0 1.6 112.7 . 14.8 0.4 8.0
Special purpose banks
2011          Feb 18 899.5 1.9 496.4 410.2 85.6 339.0 22.0 230.2 − 85.5 7.6 54.6         Mar 18 880.9 1.0 484.7 399.8 84.6 339.0 22.1 230.3 − 85.5 7.6 48.5
Memo item: Foreign banks 8
2011          Feb 151 897.3 8.6 347.9 294.5 53.3 438.7 74.2 271.9 0.2 88.5 6.0 96.1         Mar 152 880.6 8.0 343.5 291.2 52.3 432.5 68.7 270.7 0.1 89.5 6.2 90.3
  of which:  Banks majority-owned by foreign banks 9
2011          Feb 41 686.5 6.7 215.3 163.2 52.0 367.1 50.8 226.3 0.2 86.1 5.1 92.2
         Mar 41 670.0 6.1 210.8 159.6 51.2 361.5 45.7 225.5 0.1 86.9 5.3 86.2
*For the period up to December 1998, section IV (except for Table IV.1) of 25 May 2009, derivative financial instruments in the trading portfolio
shows the assets and liabilities of banks (excluding building and loan (trading portfolio derivatives) within the meaning of section 340e (3)
associations) in Germany; from January 1999, the assets and liabilities of sentence 1 of the German Commercial Code (Handelsgesetzbuch) read inmonetary financial institutions (MFIs) in Germany. The assets and liabilities conjunction with section 35 (1) No 1a of the Credit Institution Accoun ting
of foreign branches, of money market funds (which are also classified as Regulation (Verordnung über die Rechnungslegung der Kreditinstitute) are
MFIs) and of the Bundesbank are not included. For the definitions of the classified under "Other assets and liabilities" as of the December 2010
respective items, see the footnotes to Table IV.3. — 1Owing to the Act reporting date. Trading portfolio derivatives are listed separately in the
Modernising Accounting Law (Gesetz zur Modernisierung des Bilanzrechts) Statistical Supplement to the Monthly Report 1, Banking statistics in Tab les
24*IV Banks

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
May 2011
IV Banks
 
 
 
 
 
Deposits of banks (MFIs) Deposits of non-banks (non-MFIs) Capital
 including  
of which of which published
reserves,
Time deposits  2 Savings deposits  4 partici-
pation
Memo rights
item Bearer capital,
for for of which debt Liabilities funds for
up to and more arising At three Bank general Other securities
Sight Time Sight including than from savings out- banking liabi-   End of months’
Total deposits deposits Total deposits 1 year 1 year  2 repos  3 Total notice bonds risks lities  1   month standing  5 
All categories of banks
 
1,996.8 438.6 1,558.2 3,136.5 1,199.5 396.1 809.1 162.0 617.1 509.6 114.7 1,468.0 378.7 492.3 2010          Oct 
2,003.9 464.2 1,539.6 3,217.6 1,243.9 402.8 838.1 187.0 619.8 511.7 113.0 1,496.3 379.4 486.5          Nov 
1,979.6 394.0 1,585.6 3,163.1 1,189.2 398.2 834.1 131.9 628.2 520.2 113.5 1,479.1 380.8 1,349.7          Dec 
1,959.4 432.0 1,527.5 3,173.5 1,236.5 366.8 826.3 130.8 630.4 522.9 113.6 1,469.4 385.0 1,245.7 2011          Jan 
1,943.7 418.1 1,525.6 3,187.3 1,231.7 384.9 823.7 160.4 632.5 525.0 114.5 1,468.0 387.4 1,205.3          Feb 
1,887.2 380.5 1,506.7 3,150.3 1,202.4 378.5 821.2 128.6 633.5 525.8 114.6 1,442.8 390.6 1,132.1          Mar 
Commercial banks 6
746.9 284.9 462.0 1,081.1 567.6 158.6 197.8 80.5 129.2 103.5 27.9 204.3 133.6 774.8 2011          Feb 
720.8 254.3 466.4 1,051.3 541.1 155.3 196.9 58.5 130.2 103.4 27.8 199.5 133.2 717.4          Mar 
Big banks 7
461.6 209.0 252.6 542.5 280.1 83.6 91.9 75.7 77.2 73.3 9.7 169.6 84.1 729.6 2011          Feb 
441.1 185.6 255.5 512.5 251.5 83.1 91.3 54.1 77.0 73.0 9.6 164.9 84.0 673.0          Mar 
Regional banks and other commercial banks
149.2 47.2 102.0 478.0 255.4 62.6 90.6 4.8 52.0 30.1 17.3 34.8 42.1 38.5 2011          Feb 
141.6 39.3 102.4 480.5 256.4 63.6 90.0 4.4 53.1 30.4 17.4 34.6 41.7 37.7          Mar 
Branches of foreign banks
136.1 28.7 107.4 60.6 32.0 12.3 15.3 − 0.1 0.1 0.8 0.0 7.5 6.6 2011          Feb 
138.0 29.5 108.6 58.3 33.2 8.6 15.6 − 0.0 0.0 0.8 − 7.5 6.7          Mar 
Landesbanken
389.5 57.2 332.3 383.9 87.5 106.9 173.9 69.2 14.4 11.1 1.3 386.0 65.4 202.5 2011          Feb 
381.6 58.0 323.6 381.5 88.0 104.9 173.0 63.3 14.3 11.0 1.2 381.7 65.5 188.3          Mar 
Savings banks
186.3 22.0 164.3 745.9 324.0 42.9 15.0 − 301.0 247.7 63.1 24.2 60.7 53.8 2011          Feb 
183.3 21.1 162.2 745.0 323.1 42.4 15.4 − 300.9 248.1 63.1 24.2 61.5 53.9          Mar 
 
Regional institutions of credit cooperatives
 
133.2 27.6 105.7 34.0 8.6 9.6 13.5 2.3 − − 2.3 57.5 12.3 31.1 2011          Feb 
126.4 25.4 101.1 34.0 8.1 10.1 13.4 2.2 − − 2.3 58.6 12.3 29.9          Mar 
Credit cooperatives
99.7 4.9 94.8 504.9 222.6 46.6 29.3 − 187.2 162.0 19.1 22.0 42.4 32.7 2011          Feb 
98.8 5.5 93.3 505.1 222.2 46.9 29.5 − 187.4 162.7 19.2 21.7 42.8 33.5          Mar 
Mortgage banks
201.4 5.6 195.8 202.8 12.1 11.3 179.0 4.7 0.3 0.3 0.0 233.2 19.3 24.8 2011          Feb 
194.7 4.5 190.2 200.4 11.6 10.4 178.1 1.8 0.3 0.3 − 232.6 19.0 25.4          Mar 
Building and loan associations
30.7 4.0 26.7 138.9 0.6 1.0 136.1 − 0.4 0.4 0.9 7.2 7.7 17.3 2011          Feb 
27.9 2.0 25.9 139.3 0.5 0.9 136.5 − 0.4 0.4 0.9 5.7 7.6 17.5          Mar 
Special purpose banks
155.8 11.9 143.9 95.8 8.7 8.0 79.1 3.7 − − − 533.5 46.0 68.5 2011          Feb 
153.7 9.8 143.9 93.7 7.7 7.5 78.5 2.8 − − − 518.8 48.6 66.0          Mar 
Memo item:   Foreign banks 8
273.7 87.7 186.0 401.9 211.3 67.3 90.2 22.3 20.1 19.9 12.9 67.9 44.1 109.7 2011          Feb 
265.4 78.6 186.8 399.5 211.3 65.2 89.8 21.6 20.2 20.0 13.0 68.1 44.3 103.2          Mar 
of which:   Banks majority-owned by foreign banks 9
137.6 59.0 78.6 341.3 179.3 54.9 74.9 22.3 20.1 19.9 12.1 67.9 36.7 103.0 2011          Feb 
127.4 49.2 78.2 341.2 178.1 56.6 74.2 21.6 20.1 19.9 12.2 68.1 36.8 96.5          Mar 
I.1 to I.3. — 2For building and loan associations: Including deposits under AG, Dresdner Bank AG (up to Nov. 2009), Commerzbank AG, UniCredit Bank
savings and loan contracts (see Table IV.12). — 3Included in time AG (formerly Bayerische Hypo- und Vereinsbank AG) and Deutsche Postbank
deposits. — 4Excluding deposits under savings and loan contracts (see also AG. — 8Sum of the banks majority-owned by foreign banks and included in
footnote 2). — 5Including subordinated negotiable bearer debt securities; other categories of banks and the category ”Branches (with dependent
excluding non-negotiable bearer debt securities. — 6Commercial banks legal status) of foreign banks”. — 9Separate presentation of the banks
comprise the sub-groups ”Big banks”, ”Regional banks and other majority-owned by foreign banks included in other banking categories. 
commercial banks” and ”Branches of foreign banks”. — 7Deutsche Bank
25*IV Banks

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
E U R O S Y S T E M
Monthly Report
May 2011
IV Banks
 
3 Assets and liabilities of banks (MFIs) in Germany vis-à-vis residents *
 
€ billion
Lending to domestic banks (MFIs)  2,3 Lending to domestic non-banks (non-MFIs)  3,6 
Treasury
Cash in Negotiable bills and
hand Credit money negotiable
balances market Memo money mar- (euro-area Securities
banknotes with the Credit paper item ket paper issued Securities
and Bundes- balances issued by issued by Fiduciary issued by by non-
Period coins)  1 bank Total and loans Bills  4 banks banks loans  5 Total Loans Bills  4 non-banks banks  7 
End of year or month *
 
2001 14.2 56.3 1,676.0 1,078.9 0.0 5.6 591.5 2.8 3,014.1 2,699.4 4.8 4.4 301.5
2002 17.5 45.6 1,691.3 1,112.3 0.0 7.8 571.2 2.7 2,997.2 2,685.0 4.1 3.3 301.92003 17.0 46.7 1,643.9 1,064.0 0.0 8.8 571.0 2.3 2,995.6 2,677.0 3.7 3.4 309.62004 14.9 41.2 1,676.3 1,075.8 0.0 7.4 592.9 2.1 3,001.3 2,644.0 2.7 2.6 351.0
2005 15.1 47.9 1,684.5 1,096.8 0.0 6.7 580.9 2.1 2,995.1 2,632.7 2.4 2.4 357.6
2006 16.0 49.4 1,637.8 1,086.3 − 9.3 542.2 1.9 3,000.7 2,630.3 1.9 2.0 366.52007 17.5 64.6 1,751.8 1,222.5 0.0 25.3 504.0 2.3 2,975.7 2,647.9 1.6 1.5 324.72008 17.4 102.6 1,861.7 1,298.1 0.0 55.7 507.8 2.0 3,071.1 2,698.9 1.2 3.1 367.92009 16.9 78.9 1,711.5 1,138.0 − 31.6 541.9 2.2 3,100.1 2,691.8 0.8 4.0 403.5
2010 16.0 79.6 1,686.3 1,195.4 − 7.5 483.5 1.8 3,220.9 2,770.4 0.8 27.9 421.8
2009          Oct 13.8 61.2 1,739.8 1,156.2 0.0 15.8 567.8 1.8 3,116.9 2,716.5 0.7 5.3 394.4
         Nov 13.5 73.8 1,729.6 1,149.1 0.0 13.6 566.9 1.9 3,117.3 2,712.8 0.7 5.4 398.4
         Dec 16.9 78.9 1,711.5 1,138.0 − 31.6 541.9 2.2 3,100.1 2,691.8 0.8 4.0 403.5
2010          Jan 13.9 60.9 1,723.0 1,157.7 0.0 29.8 535.5 2.0 3,111.5 2,691.3 0.8 4.0 415.3
         Feb 13.6 59.2 1,748.8 1,188.8 0.0 28.2 531.8 2.0 3,103.1 2,684.8 0.7 3.2 414.4         Mar 13.9 89.5 1,720.0 1,158.7 − 27.2 534.1 1.9 3,098.8 2,681.7 0.8 3.1 413.3
         Apr 13.6 66.4 1,754.8 1,195.3 − 26.5 533.0 1.9 3,140.8 2,697.2 0.7 2.0 440.9
         May 14.2 57.5 1,817.8 1,267.0 − 26.5 524.3 1.9 3,130.1 2,707.8 0.6 2.5 419.2         June 13.7 116.1 1,761.1 1,223.2 0.0 26.5 511.4 1.9 3,147.5 2,716.5 0.6 8.1 422.4
         July 14.3 66.8 1,688.7 1,165.6 − 26.4 496.7 1.8 3,139.7 2,708.6 0.6 9.9 420.6
         Aug 13.9 66.8 1,704.5 1,183.5 − 27.1 493.9 1.8 3,150.2 2,717.5 0.6 9.2 423.0         Sep 14.2 74.1 1,685.0 1,169.5 − 24.5 491.1 1.9 3,129.7 2,699.9 0.6 8.9 420.3
         Oct 14.7 64.4 1,674.2 1,180.2 − 6.9 487.1 1.8 3,249.0 2,710.7 0.6 28.2 509.4
         Nov 14.0 57.6 1,697.3 1,200.6 − 8.6 488.1 1.8 3,290.2 2,815.9 0.6 26.1 447.6         Dec 16.0 79.6 1,686.3 1,195.4 − 7.5 483.5 1.8 3,220.9 2,770.4 0.8 27.9 421.8
2011          Jan 13.6 54.0 1,673.1 1,183.9 − 7.9 481.3 1.7 3,241.2 2,777.7 0.7 29.2 433.6
         Feb 13.6 61.7 1,668.2 1,179.5 − 9.4 479.3 1.7 3,240.3 2,786.9 0.7 29.4 423.4         Mar 14.0 67.0 1,646.6 1,164.7 − 7.7 474.2 1.7 3,211.7 2,757.5 0.6 24.6 429.0
Changes *
2002 + 3.3 − 10.7 + 15.0 + 33.1 + 0.0 + 2.3 − 20.3 − 0.2 − 19.2 − 18.0 − 0.8 − 1.1 + 1.7
2003 − 0.5 + 1.1 − 47.2 − 48.2 + 0.0 + 1.0 + 0.1 − 0.3 + 0.1 − 8.0 − 0.4 + 0.3 + 9.32004 − 2.1 − 5.5 + 35.9 + 15.1 + 0.0 − 1.4 + 22.1 − 0.2 + 3.3 − 35.0 − 1.0 + 1.1 + 39.2
2005 + 0.2 + 6.7 + 8.4 + 21.0 − 0.0 − 0.8 − 11.9 − 0.0 − 6.7 − 11.8 − 0.3 − 0.2 + 6.6
2006 + 0.9 + 1.5 − 3.6 + 24.5 − 0.0 + 2.6 − 30.6 − 0.2 − 12.4 − 20.3 − 0.5 − 0.4 + 8.8
2007 + 1.5 + 15.2 + 114.8 + 137.6 + 0.0 + 17.0 − 39.8 + 0.4 − 15.9 + 12.1 − 0.3 − 0.5 − 27.22008 − 0.1 + 39.4 + 125.9 + 90.1
+ 0.0 + 30.6 + 5.2 − 0.8 + 92.0 + 47.3 − 0.4 + 1.8 + 43.3
2009 − 0.5 − 23.6 − 147.2 − 157.3 − 0.0 − 24.1 + 34.3 + 0.2 + 25.7 − 11.2 − 0.4 + 1.4 + 35.9
2010 − 0.9 + 0.6 − 19.3 + 61.5 + 0.0 − 24.0 − 56.8 − 0.3 + 130.5 + 78.7 + 0.0 + 23.8 + 28.0
2009          Oct + 0.3 − 26.9 − 11.3 − 7.0 + 0.0 − 3.2 − 1.1 − 0.0 + 6.4 + 1.8 + 0.0 − 1.7 + 6.3
         Nov − 0.3 + 12.6 − 10.2 − 7.1 + 0.0 − 2.3 − 0.9 + 0.0 + 0.4 − 3.7 − 0.0 + 0.1 + 4.0         Dec + 3.4 + 5.1 − 17.9 − 11.1 − 0.0 + 18.1 − 24.8 + 0.3 − 20.2 − 23.8 + 0.1 − 1.4 + 4.9
2010          Jan − 3.0 − 18.1 + 11.5 + 19.7 + 0.0 − 1.8 − 6.4 − 0.2 + 11.2 − 0.6 + 0.0 + 0.0 + 11.8
         Feb − 0.4 − 1.7 + 26.3 + 31.7 − 0.0 − 1.6 − 3.7 − 0.0 − 8.9 − 7.0 − 0.1 − 0.9 − 1.0         Mar + 0.4 + 30.3 − 27.0 − 30.1 − 0.0 − 0.5 + 3.6 − 0.0 + 0.2 − 3.2 + 0.0 − 0.1 + 3.4
         Apr − 0.4 − 23.1 + 34.8 + 36.5 − − 0.7 − 1.1 − 0.0 + 42.1 + 15.5 − 0.1 − 1.1 + 27.7
         May + 0.7 − 8.9 + 63.0 + 71.7 − − 0.0 − 8.7 − 0.0 − 10.7 + 10.5 − 0.0 + 0.5 − 21.8         June − 0.5 + 58.6 − 56.7 − 43.7 + 0.0 − 0.4 − 12.6 + 0.0 + 17.5 + 8.7 − 0.0 + 5.5 + 3.3
         July + 0.5 − 49.3 − 69.2 − 54.4 − 0.0 − 0.1 − 14.7 − 0.1 − 7.8 − 7.8 + 0.1 + 1.6 − 1.7
         Aug − 0.3 − 0.0 + 15.8 + 17.9 − + 0.7 − 2.8 − + 10.5 + 8.8 − 0.0 − 0.7 + 2.4         Sep + 0.3 + 7.4 − 19.5 − 14.0 − − 2.7 − 2.8 + 0.0 − 20.6 − 17.6 − 0.1 − 0.2 − 2.7
         Oct + 0.4 − 9.8 − 10.8 + 10.7 − − 17.5 − 4.0 − 0.0 + 120.1 + 11.7 + 0.1 + 19.3 + 89.1
         Nov − 0.6 − 6.8 + 23.1 + 20.4 − + 1.7 + 1.1 − 0.0 + 41.1 + 105.0 − 0.0 − 2.1 − 61.8         Dec + 2.0 + 22.0 − 10.7 − 4.9 − − 1.1 − 4.6 + 0.0 − 64.1 − 45.4 + 0.2 + 1.8 − 20.7
2011          Jan − 2.4 − 25.6 − 13.2 − 11.4 − + 0.5 − 2.2 − 0.1 + 20.3 + 7.3 − 0.1 + 1.3 + 11.8
         Feb − 0.1 + 7.7 − 4.9 − 4.4 − + 1.5 − 2.0 − − 0.9 + 9.2 − 0.0 + 0.2 − 10.2         Mar + 0.4 + 5.3 − 21.6 − 14.8 − − 1.7 − 5.1 + 0.0 − 28.6 − 29.4 − 0.1 − 4.7 + 5.6
*See Table IV.2, footnote*; statistical breaks have been eliminated from the rediscounted bills and bills sent for collection from the banks’ portfol ios
changes. The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as prior to maturity). — 5From 1999, no longer included in loans or deposits
provisional. Subsequent revisions which appear in the following Monthly (see also footnote 3). — 6Up to December 1998, including loans to domestic
Report, are not specially marked. — 1Up to December 1998, domestic building and loan associations. — 7Excluding debt securities arising from
banknotes and coins. — 2Up to December 1998, excluding loans to the exchange of equalisation claims (see also footnote 8). — 8Including
domestic building and loan associations. — 3Up to December 1998, debt securities arising from the exchange of equalisation claims. —
including fiduciary loans (see also footnote 5). — 4Up to December 1998, 9Including liabilities arising from registered debt securities, registered
bill-based lending (bill holdings plus endorsement liabilities arising from money market paper and non-negotiable bearer debt securities;
26*IV Banks

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
May 2011
IV Banks
 
 
 
 
 Deposits of domestic banks (MFIs)  3,9,10  Deposits of domestic non-banks (non-MFIs)  3,15 
Partici-
pating
interests
in
Memo domestic Memo Memo
item banks Sight Time Redis- item Sight Time Savings Bank item Equalisa-tion Fiduciary and deposits deposits counted Fiduciary de- deposits de- savings Fiduciary
claims  
8 loans  5 Total 11,12  12,13  bills 14 loans  5 Total 13,16  bonds  18 loans  5   Period enterprises posits  11 posits  17 
End of year or month *
 
4.0 57.0 95.9 1,204.9 123.1 1,081.6 0.3 27.2 2,034.0 526.4 827.0 574.5 106.0 43.3 2001
3.0 54.8 119.0 1,244.0 127.6 1,116.2 0.2 25.6 2,085.9 575.6 830.6 575.3 104.4 42.1 20022.0 56.8 109.2 1,229.6 116.8 1,112.6 0.2 27.8 2,140.3 624.0 825.7 590.3 100.3 40.5 20031.0 61.8 99.6 1,271.2 119.7 1,151.4 0.1 30.3 2,200.0 646.9 851.2 603.5 98.4 43.7 2004
− 56.6 108.5 1,300.0 120.5 1,179.4 0.1 26.5 2,276.6 717.0 864.4 603.4 91.9 42.4 2005
− 53.0 106.3 1,348.2 125.4 1,222.7 0.0 22.3 2,394.6 747.7 962.8 586.5 97.5 37.8 2006− 51.1 109.4 1,478.6 122.1 1,356.5 0.0 20.0 2,579.1 779.9 1,125.4 555.4 118.4 36.4 2007− 47.2 111.2 1,582.5 138.5 1,444.0 0.0 41.6 2,781.4 834.6 1,276.1 535.2 135.4 32.3 2008− 43.9 106.1 1,355.1 128.9 1,226.2 0.0 35.7 2,829.7 1,029.5 1,102.6 594.5 103.2 43.4 2009
− 33.7 96.8 1,237.9 135.3 1,102.6 0.0 13.8 2,936.6 1,104.4 1,117.1 618.2 96.9 37.5 2010
− 42.9 103.7 1,372.8 126.2 1,246.7 0.0 35.8 2,812.0 1,014.0 1,110.4 581.8 105.9 42.2 2009          Oct 
− 42.8 102.7 1,375.3 150.5 1,224.8 0.0 35.5 2,825.5 1,037.6 1,098.1 585.6 104.2 42.2          Nov 
− 43.9 106.1 1,355.1 128.9 1,226.2 0.0 35.7 2,829.7 1,029.5 1,102.6 594.5 103.2 43.4          Dec 
− 43.4 104.3 1,348.2 142.4 1,205.8 0.0 35.7 2,820.3 1,051.3 1,070.0 597.7 101.3 43.0 2010          Jan 
− 43.3 98.9 1,360.7 150.4 1,210.3 0.0 36.0 2,830.1 1,055.9 1,070.5 602.9 100.8 43.0          Feb 
− 42.9 98.7 1,327.9 129.4 1,198.5 0.0 36.1 2,819.0 1,040.0 1,073.7 604.7 100.5 42.8          Mar 
− 42.8 98.6 1,340.4 140.3 1,200.1 0.0 36.1 2,852.0 1,070.3 1,077.0 604.8 99.9 42.7          Apr 
− 42.8 97.8 1,355.5 139.6 1,215.9 0.0 37.1 2,867.5 1,089.6 1,073.1 605.1 99.7 42.7          May− 42.5 97.6 1,365.2 140.1 1,225.0 0.0 36.8 2,867.5 1,090.5 1,073.1 604.4 99.5 42.4          June
− 42.3 96.1 1,243.3 134.7 1,108.6 0.0 35.6 2,851.1 1,084.9 1,061.3 605.9 98.9 42.2          July
− 42.3 95.6 1,252.5 138.9 1,113.7 0.0 35.9 2,873.4 1,094.7 1,074.2 605.9 98.7 42.2          Aug − 42.1 95.3 1,217.8 138.6 1,079.1 0.0 35.1 2,867.2 1,083.3 1,079.4 606.1 98.4 42.1          Sep 
− 42.0 95.1 1,247.7 137.0 1,110.7 0.0 34.9 2,872.3 1,091.1 1,075.1 607.4 98.6 42.0          Oct 
− 41.7 95.3 1,245.6 150.1 1,095.5 0.0 35.1 2,946.1 1,129.6 1,110.2 610.0 96.3 42.0          Nov − 33.7 96.8 1,237.9 135.3 1,102.6 0.0 13.8 2,936.6 1,104.4 1,117.1 618.2 96.9 37.5          Dec 
− 33.5 98.4 1,220.9 148.0 1,072.9 0.0 13.7 2,928.6 1,125.9 1,085.0 620.4 97.2 37.3 2011          Jan 
− 33.5 98.2 1,207.7 135.8 1,071.9 0.0 13.7 2,942.8 1,121.6 1,100.7 622.5 98.0 37.4          Feb 
− 33.3 98.3 1,191.4 126.7 1,064.8 0.0 13.7 2,930.5 1,112.1 1,096.6 623.5 98.3 37.2          Mar 
Changes *
− 1.0 − 2.1 + 24.2 + 37.9 + 1.7 + 36.3 − 0.1 − 1.5 + 51.7 + 48.4 + 4.1 + 0.8 − 1.6 − 1.1 2002
− 1.0 + 2.1 − 9.8 − 5.6 − 9.5 + 3.9 + 0.0 + 2.4 + 54.0 + 48.4 − 4.8 + 15.1 − 4.8 − 1.2 2003− 1.1 + 3.0 − 9.6 + 41.3 + 2.9 + 38.5 − 0.1 + 2.4 + 62.0 + 24.4 + 25.9 + 13.1 − 1.5 + 1.2 2004
− 1.0 − 4.9 + 8.9 + 28.9 + 0.8 + 28.0 + 0.0 − 3.5 + 76.6 + 70.7 + 12.4 − 1.2 − 5.4 − 1.2 2005
− − 3.7 − 2.2 + 79.0 + 8.6 + 70.5 − 0.1 − 4.5 + 118.0 + 30.0 + 97.7 − 16.8 + 7.2 − 4.1 2006
− − 2.3 + 3.1 + 132.0 − 3.3 + 135.3 − 0.0 − 2.3 + 181.1 + 31.6 + 160.5 − 31.1 + 20.1 − 2.0 2007− − 5.4 + 7.8 + 124.3 + 23.0 + 101.3 − 0.0 − 3.6 + 207.6 + 54.3 + 156.6 − 20.2 + 17.0 − 1.3 2008− − 4.2 + 0.7 − 225.4 − 9.7 − 215.7 − 0.0 − 5.7 + 59.7 + 211.4 − 179.3 + 59.3 − 31.6 − 0.9 2009
− − 2.1 − 9.2 − 96.8 + 22.3 − 119.1 − 0.0 − 0.2 + 77.4 + 76.0 − 18.9 + 24.0 − 3.7 − 1.7 2010
− − 0.3 − 4.1 − 7.8 − 3.8 − 4.1 + 0.0 − 0.5 + 1.7 + 26.8 − 29.3 + 6.6 − 2.5 + 0.1 2009          Oct 
− − 0.1 − 0.9 + 2.5 + 24.4 − 21.9 − 0.0 − 0.3 + 13.5 + 23.6 − 12.3 + 3.8 − 1.7 + 0.0          Nov 
− + 0.0 + 3.3 − 20.2 − 21.7 + 1.5 + 0.0 + 0.2 + 4.3 − 8.1 + 4.5 + 8.9 − 1.0 + 0.1          Dec 
− − 0.5 − 1.7 − 6.9 + 13.6 − 20.4 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 9.5 + 21.9 − 32.6 + 3.2 − 1.9 − 0.5 2010          Jan 
− − 0.1 − 5.4 + 12.4 + 7.9 + 4.5 + 0.0 + 0.3 + 9.9 + 4.6 + 0.5 + 5.2 − 0.5 − 0.0          Feb 
− − 0.4 − 0.2 − 17.2 − 5.4 − 11.8 − 0.0 + 0.0 − 11.2 − 15.9 + 3.2 + 1.8 − 0.4 − 0.2          Mar 
− − 0.1 − 0.1 + 13.6 + 10.9 + 2.7 − 0.0 + 0.0 + 32.0 + 30.3 + 2.2 + 0.1 − 0.6 − 0.0          Apr 
− − 0.0 − 0.9 + 15.1 − 0.7 + 15.8 − 0.0 + 1.0 + 15.4 + 19.3 − 3.9 + 0.2 − 0.2 − 0.0          May− − 0.3 − 0.2 + 9.7 + 0.5 + 9.1 + 0.0 − 0.3 + 0.0 + 1.4 − 0.5 − 0.6 − 0.3 − 0.3          June
− − 0.1 − 1.4 − 118.6 − 5.1 − 113.5 + 0.0 − 1.2 − 16.4 − 5.6 − 11.8 + 1.5 − 0.5 − 0.2          July
− − 0.1 − 0.5 + 9.2 + 4.1 + 5.1 − 0.0 + 0.3 + 17.6 + 9.8 + 8.2 − 0.1 − 0.3 − 0.0          Aug − − 0.2 − 0.3 − 34.7 − 0.2 − 34.5 − 0.0 − 0.8 − 6.2 − 11.4 + 5.2 + 0.3 − 0.2 − 0.1          Sep 
− − 0.1 − 0.2 + 29.9 − 1.7 + 31.5 + 0.0 − 0.2 + 4.9 + 7.9 − 4.5 + 1.3 + 0.2 − 0.1          Oct 
− − 0.1 + 0.2 − 2.1 + 13.1 − 15.2 − 0.0 + 0.4 + 50.3 + 39.3 + 8.2 + 2.6 + 0.3 − 0.0          Nov − − 0.1 + 1.6 − 7.2 − 14.8 + 7.6 + 0.0 + 0.2 − 9.4 − 25.5 + 6.9 + 8.5 + 0.6 − 0.3          Dec 
− − 0.2 + 1.6 − 17.0 + 12.7 − 29.8 − 0.0 − 0.1 − 8.1 + 21.6 − 32.1 + 2.2 + 0.3 − 0.2 2011          Jan 
− + 0.0 − 0.2 − 13.4 − 12.2 − 1.2 + 0.0 + 0.0 + 14.2 − 4.4 + 15.7 + 2.1 + 0.8 + 0.0          Feb 
− − 0.2 + 0.1 − 16.3 − 9.2 − 7.1 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 12.3 − 9.5 − 4.3 + 1.0 + 0.5 − 0.2          Mar 
including subordinated liabilities. — 10Up to December 1998, excluding endorsement liabilities arising from rediscounted bills. — 15Up to
liabilities to domestic building and loan associations and money market December 1998, including liabilities to domestic building and loan
funds. — 11Up to December 1998, including time deposits with terms of associations and money market funds. — 16Since the inclusion of building
less than one month. — 12Including liabilities arising from monetary policy and loan associations in January 1999, including deposits under savings and
operations with the Bundesbank. — 13Up to December 1998, excluding loan contracts (see Table IV.12). — 17Excluding deposits under savings and
time deposits with terms of less than one month. — 14Own acceptances loan contracts (see also footnote 16). — 18Including liabilities arising from
and promissory notes outstanding and, up to December 1998, including non-negotiable bearer debt securities. 
27*IV Banks

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
E U R O S Y S T E M
Monthly Report
May 2011
IV Banks
 
4 Assets and liabilities of banks (MFIs) in Germany vis-à-vis non-residents *
 
€ billion
Lending to foreign banks (MFIs)  2 Lending to foreign non-banks (non-MFIs)  2 
Treasury
Cash in bills and
hand Loans and bills  3 negotiable Credit balances and loans, bills  3 Negotiable
(non- money money
euro-area Medium market Memo Medium market
banknotes and paper item and paper Securities Securities
and Short- long- issued by issued by Fiduciary Short- long- issued by issued by
Period coins)  1 Total Total term term banks banks loans  4 Total Total term term non-banks non-banks
End of year or month *
 
2001 0.4 596.1 521.7 383.7 138.0 0.8 73.6 3.5 570.3 347.2 99.7 247.5 5.2 217.9
2002 0.3 690.6 615.3 468.0 147.2 0.9 74.4 2.7 558.8 332.6 92.6 240.0 9.3 216.9
2003 0.3 769.6 675.8 515.7 160.1 1.5 92.3 1.6 576.3 344.8 110.9 233.9 6.0 225.4
2004 0.2 889.4 760.2 606.5 153.7 2.8 126.3 1.5 629.5 362.5 136.6 225.9 10.9 256.1
2005 0.2 1,038.8 860.0 648.5 211.5 5.8 173.0 1.5 712.0 387.9 132.8 255.1 9.3 314.8
2006 0.4 1,266.9 1,003.2 744.5 258.7 13.3 250.4 0.8 777.0 421.0 156.0 264.9 7.2 348.92007 0.3 1,433.5 1,105.9 803.6 302.4 13.4 314.2 0.5 908.3 492.9 197.5 295.4 27.5 387.92008 0.3 1,446.6 1,131.6 767.2 364.3 15.6 299.5 1.9 908.4 528.9 151.4 377.5 12.9 366.62009 0.3 1,277.4 986.1 643.5 342.6 6.2 285.0 2.9 815.7 469.6 116.9 352.7 9.8 336.3
2010 0.5 1,154.1 892.7 607.7 285.1 2.1 259.3 1.8 773.8 461.4 112.6 348.8 10.1 302.3
2009          Oct 0.4 1,278.7 987.6 637.1 350.5 7.8 283.3 3.0 836.3 480.4 127.2 353.3 13.1 342.7
         Nov 0.3 1,274.1 981.6 637.6 344.1 9.0 283.5 3.0 828.7 473.2 124.5 348.8 13.2 342.3         Dec 0.3 1,277.4 986.1 643.5 342.6 6.2 285.0 2.9 815.7 469.6 116.9 352.7 9.8 336.3
2010          Jan 0.4 1,278.4 986.8 647.2 339.6 5.3 286.2 2.9 829.2 477.1 121.1 356.0 12.1 340.1
         Feb 0.6 1,269.6 980.1 640.5 339.5 4.5 285.0 2.9 835.3 483.0 122.5 360.5 10.5 341.8         Mar 0.5 1,272.2 980.1 640.2 339.8 4.8 287.3 3.0 822.5 478.7 119.5 359.2 11.1 332.7
         Apr 0.4 1,307.0 1,019.7 681.4 338.3 4.6 282.8 3.0 852.3 505.3 143.7 361.7 11.4 335.6
         May 0.5 1,356.5 1,073.9 725.7 348.3 6.6 276.0 3.0 854.4 531.2 156.2 375.0 10.6 312.7         June 0.4 1,301.1 1,019.9 678.6 341.2 6.1 275.1 3.0 832.7 506.4 134.6 371.8 11.5 314.9
         July 0.4 1,259.9 988.7 678.4 310.3 3.5 267.6 2.9 813.6 492.1 130.7 361.4 12.3 309.2
         Aug 0.5 1,293.4 1,020.2 708.5 311.7 3.8 269.5 2.8 821.9 499.5 135.0 364.5 11.0 311.5         Sep 0.6 1,234.3 965.4 666.0 299.4 2.6 266.3 2.7 796.0 474.6 119.2 355.4 12.9 308.4
         Oct 0.6 1,159.1 892.5 604.4 288.1 3.1 263.4 2.7 786.3 466.0 115.9 350.1 15.3 304.9
         Nov 0.8 1,176.9 913.0 619.6 293.5 2.2 261.7 2.7 810.4 488.1 129.5 358.6 11.5 310.8
         Dec 0.5 1,154.1 892.7 607.7 285.1 2.1 259.3 1.8 773.8 461.4 112.6 348.8 10.1 302.3
2011          Jan 0.5 1,151.1 888.7 609.2 279.5 2.8 259.6 1.8 774.8 458.0 114.9 343.2 13.9 302.9
         Feb 0.9 1,157.9 894.3 612.9 281.5 2.0 261.5 1.8 773.2 460.3 118.3 342.1 12.9 300.0         Mar 0.5 1,108.8 848.0 571.0 277.0 2.0 258.7 1.8 757.3 446.7 110.0 336.7 13.7 296.9
Changes *
2002 − 0.1 + 120.3 + 118.0 + 99.4 + 18.6 + 0.1 + 2.2 − 0.9 + 21.2 + 12.7 − 0.4 + 13.2 + 4.6 + 3.9
2003 − 0.1 + 103.8 + 84.6 + 65.2 + 19.3 + 0.6 + 18.7 − 0.4 + 46.3 + 35.1 + 24.0 + 11.0 − 2.7 + 13.92004 − 0.1 + 128.3 + 89.4 + 95.3 − 5.9 + 1.3 + 37.6 − 0.1 + 65.8 + 29.5 + 31.7 − 2.2 + 5.1 + 31.1
2005 + 0.0 + 127.3 + 78.9 + 26.3 + 52.6 + 2.9 + 45.4 − 0.0 + 59.4 + 7.3 − 9.4 + 16.7 − 1.8 + 54.0
2006 + 0.1 + 238.3 + 153.5 + 109.7 + 43.8 + 7.5 + 77.2 − 0.7 + 81.4 + 51.6 + 25.9 + 25.8 − 1.8 + 31.52007 − 0.0 + 190.3 + 123.7 + 72.9 + 50.8 + 7.5 + 59.1 − 0.4 + 167.7 + 94.3 + 50.1 + 44.2 + 20.1 + 53.32008 + 0.0 + 8.5 + 20.2 − 43.0 + 63.2 + 2.1 − 13.7 − 0.0 + 4.3 + 45.1 − 31.9 + 77.0 − 14.5 − 26.32009 − 0.0 − 170.0 − 141.3 − 122.5 − 18.8 − 10.3 − 18.4 − 0.2 − 72.8 − 43.8 − 31.7 − 12.1 − 3.3 − 25.7
2010 + 0.1 − 141.5 − 116.2 − 47.3 − 68.9 − 4.8 − 20.4 − 0.2 − 62.0 − 24.5 − 12.6 − 11.9 + 0.4 − 38.0
2009          Oct − 0.0 + 19.4 + 21.7 + 30.1 − 8.4 − 0.4 − 2.0 − 0.0 − 1.2 − 0.1 + 1.9 − 1.9 + 2.1 − 3.2
         Nov − 0.0 − 1.3 − 2.8 + 2.2 − 5.1 + 1.2 + 0.3 − 0.0 − 4.3 − 4.6 − 2.1 − 2.5 + 0.0 + 0.2         Dec + 0.0 − 6.4 − 4.8 + 0.8 − 5.6 − 2.8 + 1.1 − 0.1 − 22.6 − 11.2 − 9.2 − 2.0 − 3.4 − 8.1
2010          Jan + 0.1 − 7.4 − 7.5 − 1.0 − 6.5 − 0.9 + 1.0 + 0.0 + 5.4 + 2.5 + 2.8 − 0.3 + 2.3 + 0.5
         Feb + 0.2 − 14.1 − 11.8 − 9.2 − 2.6 − 0.9 − 1.5 − 0.0 − 0.0 + 1.2 + 0.6 + 0.6 − 1.6 + 0.4         Mar − 0.1 + 2.5 − 1.5 − 1.1 − 0.4 + 0.3 + 3.7 + 0.1 − 6.7 − 5.8 − 3.3 − 2.5 + 0.7 − 1.6
         Apr − 0.1 + 34.9 + 36.3 + 39.4 − 3.1 − 0.3 − 1.1 − 0.0 + 23.0 + 24.0 + 23.5 + 0.5 + 0.3 − 1.3
         May + 0.1 + 30.6 + 35.8 + 34.5 + 1.2 + 2.0 − 7.1 + 0.0 − 18.3 + 10.2 + 8.8 + 1.4 − 0.8 − 27.7         June − 0.1 − 59.9 − 58.1 − 49.0 − 9.2 − 1.1 − 0.6 − 0.0 − 24.8 − 27.2 − 24.5 − 2.7 + 0.9 + 1.5
         July + 0.0 − 26.9 − 17.5 + 6.9 − 24.5 − 2.5 − 6.8 − 0.1 − 5.0 − 2.6 − 1.0 − 1.6 + 0.9 − 3.3
         Aug + 0.1 + 25.8 + 24.1 + 26.3 − 2.2 + 0.2 + 1.5 − 0.2 + 1.2 + 1.6 + 0.7 + 0.9 − 1.4 + 1.0         Sep + 0.1 − 40.8 − 37.6 − 33.1 − 4.5 − 1.0 − 2.2 − 0.0 − 9.1 − 10.7 − 12.5 + 1.8 + 2.0 − 0.4
         Oct − 0.1 − 71.3 − 69.1 − 59.6 − 9.5 + 0.5 − 2.7 − 0.0 − 6.0 − 5.5 − 2.6 − 2.9 + 2.4 − 2.9
         Nov + 0.2 + 2.5 + 5.9 + 7.6 − 1.7 − 1.0 − 2.4 + 0.0 + 9.9 + 10.1 + 11.0 − 0.9 − 3.8 + 3.5         Dec − 0.3 − 17.5 − 15.1 − 9.1 − 5.9 − 0.2 − 2.2 − 0.0 − 31.4 − 22.3 − 16.2 − 6.1 − 1.4 − 7.7
2011          Jan + 0.0 + 2.9 + 1.6 + 4.5 − 2.9 + 0.7 + 0.5 + 0.0 + 6.3 + 1.0 + 3.2 − 2.2 + 3.8 + 1.5
         Feb + 0.4 + 8.2 + 7.0 + 4.4 + 2.6 − 0.8 + 2.0 − 0.0 − 0.1 + 3.5 + 3.7 − 0.2 − 1.0 − 2.6         Mar − 0.4 − 42.7 − 39.6 − 38.3 − 1.4 + 0.0 − 3.2 − 0.0 − 9.6 − 8.5 − 7.1 − 1.4 + 0.9 − 2.0
*See Table IV.2, footnote*; statistical breaks have been eliminated from the banknotes and coins. — 2Up to December 1998, including fiduciary loans
changes. The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as (see also footnote 4). — 3Up to December 1998, bill-based lending (bill
provisional. Subsequent revisions, which appear in the following Monthly holdings plus endorsement liabilities arising from rediscounted bills a nd bills
Report, are not specially marked. — 1Up to December 1998, foreign sent for collection from the banks’ portfolios prior to maturity). —
28*IV Banks

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
May 2011
IV Banks
 
 
 
 
 Deposits of foreign banks (MFIs)  2 Deposits of foreign non-banks (non-MFIs)  2 
 Partici- Time deposits (including
pating Time deposits (including bank savings deposits and bank
interests savings bonds) savings bonds)in foreign
Memo banks Medium Memo Medium Memo
item and and item and item
Fiduciary enter- Sight Short- long- Fiduciary Sight Short- long- Fiduciaryloans  
4 prises  5 Total Total  7 term  7 term loans  4 Total Total  7 term  7 term loans  4   Period deposits  6 deposits  6 
End of year or month *
 
13.8 47.6 622.7 91.9 530.8 434.5 96.3 1.4 350.6 34.0 316.6 97.6 219.0 5.3 2001
15.6 44.8 614.2 101.6 512.7 410.4 102.3 1.1 319.2 33.5 285.7 87.0 198.7 4.5 2002
11.6 41.4 590.7 95.1 495.6 387.7 107.9 0.4 307.3 32.2 275.1 102.4 172.7 3.6 2003
9.8 39.3 603.3 87.0 516.2 403.2 113.0 0.5 311.2 36.6 274.7 123.4 151.2 0.8 2004
10.6 37.2 651.7 102.9 548.8 420.4 128.4 0.6 316.4 62.0 254.4 119.4 135.0 1.2 2005
5.8 50.4 689.7 168.1 521.6 397.3 124.3 0.4 310.1 82.1 228.0 111.5 116.5 1.5 2006
5.7 48.3 738.9 164.7 574.1 461.2 113.0 0.2 303.1 76.0 227.1 122.3 104.8 3.1 2007
25.5 45.1 703.3 218.1 485.1 362.3 122.9 0.3 286.1 92.2 193.9 95.1 98.8 2.5 200832.1 45.4 652.6 213.6 439.0 307.4 131.6 0.2 216.3 78.1 138.2 73.7 64.5 1.9 2009
15.6 48.8 741.7 258.7 483.0 349.3 133.6 0.1 226.5 84.8 141.7 76.7 64.9 1.5 2010
32.3 49.2 657.2 226.4 430.9 291.5 139.4 0.2 245.0 103.8 141.1 75.5 65.7 1.9 2009          Oct 
32.1 51.1 651.3 235.9 415.4 281.6 133.7 0.2 241.0 93.2 147.8 82.1 65.7 1.9          Nov 
32.1 45.4 652.6 213.6 439.0 307.4 131.6 0.2 216.3 78.1 138.2 73.7 64.5 1.9          Dec 
32.4 48.0 683.5 253.9 429.6 299.0 130.6 0.2 237.2 96.1 141.0 74.7 66.4 1.9 2010          Jan 
32.8 47.7 678.1 253.6 424.5 293.3 131.2 0.2 244.5 92.6 152.0 82.3 69.7 1.9          Feb 
32.8 49.2 701.7 278.4 423.3 289.7 133.6 0.1 236.2 92.4 143.8 76.8 67.0 1.8          Mar 
32.9 49.9 750.2 270.8 479.3 345.4 134.0 0.1 266.4 111.4 155.0 88.8 66.2 1.8          Apr 
33.9 49.9 815.8 311.0 504.8 367.4 137.4 0.1 271.2 116.0 155.2 88.7 66.5 1.7          May33.6 55.9 780.1 331.9 448.2 310.4 137.8 0.1 254.3 110.3 144.1 77.7 66.4 1.7          June
32.4 49.9 779.1 311.8 467.3 336.6 130.7 0.1 260.8 112.2 148.6 82.4 66.2 1.7          July
32.9 51.5 803.7 324.2 479.5 347.2 132.3 0.1 267.5 114.7 152.8 87.3 65.6 1.8          Aug 32.2 51.2 756.4 293.5 462.9 330.4 132.5 0.1 254.5 104.3 150.1 85.6 64.6 1.7          Sep 
32.1 51.5 749.1 301.7 447.5 316.9 130.6 0.1 264.2 108.4 155.8 87.5 68.4 1.7          Oct 
32.5 52.5 758.3 314.2 444.1 311.8 132.3 0.1 271.5 114.3 157.1 86.9 70.2 1.7          Nov 
15.6 48.8 741.7 258.7 483.0 349.3 133.6 0.1 226.5 84.8 141.7 76.7 64.9 1.5          Dec 
15.6 51.0 738.6 284.0 454.6 321.6 133.0 0.1 245.0 110.5 134.5 70.3 64.2 1.5 2011          Jan 
15.6 50.0 735.9 282.3 453.7 321.0 132.7 0.1 244.5 110.1 134.3 72.2 62.1 1.5          Feb 
15.6 50.2 695.8 253.9 441.9 310.5 131.4 0.1 219.8 90.3 129.4 68.6 60.8 1.5          Mar 
Changes *
+ 1.7 + 1.6 + 22.7 + 14.6 + 8.1 − 1.3 + 9.4 − 0.3 + 4.6 + 0.8 + 3.8 − 4.6 + 8.4 − 0.9 2002
− 0.7 − 1.9 + 5.7 − 2.0 + 7.7 − 2.4 + 10.0 − 0.0 + 4.5 + 0.4 + 4.1 + 20.6 − 16.5 + 1.9 2003+ 0.7 − 1.5 + 19.8 − 6.1 + 25.9 + 21.1 + 4.8 + 0.1 + 13.0 + 5.4 + 7.6 + 22.8 − 15.2 − 0.3 2004
+ 0.8 − 3.5 + 28.6 + 12.6 + 16.0 + 4.9 + 11.1 + 0.1 − 4.9 + 23.9 − 28.8 − 7.7 − 21.1 + 0.4 2005
− 5.1 + 13.8 + 56.2 + 68.3 − 12.1 − 13.7 + 1.6 − 0.2 − 0.8 + 21.2 − 22.0 − 5.1 − 17.0 − 0.2 2006− 0.1 − 0.8 + 67.3 + 1.5 + 65.8 + 74.0 − 8.3 − 0.1 + 4.6 − 5.5 + 10.2 + 16.6 − 6.4 + 1.6 2007+ 0.7 − 3.1 − 50.1 + 52.2 − 102.3 − 120.7 + 18.5 + 0.1 − 12.4 + 16.1 − 28.5 − 19.4 − 9.1 − 0.6 2008− 3.2 + 0.1 − 81.4 − 2.1 − 79.3 − 57.5 − 21.7 − 0.2 − 33.5 − 13.3 − 20.1 − 17.0 − 3.1 − 0.6 2009
+ 0.2 + 1.4 + 79.6 + 42.0 + 37.5 + 38.1 − 0.6 − 0.1 − 2.7 + 6.0 − 8.7 − 3.3 − 5.5 − 0.4 2010
− 0.2 − 0.1 − 6.9 + 7.9 − 14.8 − 12.5 − 2.3 − + 8.2 + 9.3 − 1.1 − 0.4 − 0.7 − 0.1 2009          Oct 
− 0.2 + 2.0 − 3.6 + 10.2 − 13.9 − 8.8 − 5.1 − − 3.3 − 10.4 + 7.1 + 6.9 + 0.2 − 0.0          Nov 
− 0.0 − 6.1 − 5.4 − 24.4 + 19.0 + 22.5 − 3.5 − 0.0 − 26.4 − 15.6 − 10.8 − 9.1 − 1.7 − 0.0          Dec 
+ 0.3 + 2.2 + 25.6 + 39.0 − 13.3 − 11.3 − 2.0 − 0.0 + 19.4 + 17.7 + 1.7 + 0.4 + 1.3 + 0.1 2010          Jan 
+ 0.4 − 0.5 − 5.0 − 1.5 − 3.5 − 3.6 + 0.1 − 0.0 − 1.4 − 3.9 + 2.5 + 3.0 − 0.5 − 0.0          Feb 
+ 0.0 + 1.4 + 22.4 + 24.4 − 2.0 − 4.2 + 2.2 − 0.0 − 8.6 − 0.2 − 8.4 − 5.6 − 2.8 − 0.1          Mar 
+ 0.1 + 0.5 + 46.4 − 8.3 + 54.6 + 54.8 − 0.1 − + 29.5 + 18.8 + 10.7 + 11.7 − 1.0 − 0.0          Apr 
+ 1.0 − 1.0 + 52.5 + 36.3 + 16.2 + 15.1 + 1.1 − 0.0 + 0.2 + 2.8 − 2.6 − 1.9 − 0.8 − 0.0          May− 0.3 + 5.7 − 37.8 + 20.5 − 58.3 − 58.1 − 0.1 − 0.0 − 17.8 − 6.0 − 11.8 − 11.4 − 0.4 − 0.0          June
− 1.1 − 5.8 + 9.2 − 16.6 + 25.7 + 31.1 − 5.4 − 0.0 + 9.9 + 3.3 + 6.6 + 6.0 + 0.6 + 0.0          July
+ 0.5 + 1.5 + 19.4 + 10.6 + 8.7 + 8.0 + 0.7 − 0.0 + 4.9 + 1.9 + 3.0 + 4.1 − 1.1 + 0.0          Aug − 0.8 − 0.1 − 34.1 − 26.2 − 7.9 − 10.3 + 2.4 − 0.0 − 9.1 − 9.0 − 0.1 − 0.1 − 0.0 − 0.1          Sep 
− 0.0 + 0.3 − 4.5 + 9.1 − 13.6 − 12.1 − 1.5 − + 10.6 + 4.3 + 6.3 + 2.4 + 4.0 + 0.1          Oct 
+ 0.4 + 0.8 − 2.3 + 8.5 − 10.8 − 10.6 − 0.2 − 0.0 + 3.3 + 4.7 − 1.4 − 2.2 + 0.8 − 0.0          Nov − 0.2 − 3.6 − 12.3 − 53.8 + 41.6 + 39.4 + 2.1 − 0.0 − 43.6 − 28.2 − 15.3 − 9.7 − 5.6 − 0.2          Dec 
− 0.1 + 2.3 + 1.0 + 26.4 − 25.5 − 25.6 + 0.1 − 0.0 + 19.7 + 26.0 − 6.4 − 5.9 − 0.5 − 0.0 2011          Jan 
+ 0.0 − 1.0 − 1.1 − 1.2 + 0.1 + 0.3 − 0.2 − 0.0 − 0.1 − 0.2 + 0.1 + 2.0 − 1.9 + 0.0          Feb 
− 0.0 + 0.2 − 35.5 − 26.7 − 8.8 − 8.4 − 0.3 − 0.0 − 23.2 − 19.2 − 4.0 − 3.1 − 0.9 − 0.0          Mar 
4From 1999, no longer included in loans and deposits (see also footnote terms of less than one month. — 7Up to December 1998, excluding time
2). — 5Up to December 1998, including working capital supplied to deposits with terms of less than one month. 
branches abroad. — 6Up to December 1998, including time deposits with
29*IV Banks

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
E U R O S Y S T E M
Monthly Report
May 2011
IV Banks
 
5 Lending by banks (MFIs) in Germany to domestic non-banks (non-MFIs) *
 
€ billion
Lending to domestic Short-term lending Medium and long-term
non-banks, total  1,2 
      to general government to enter- to enterprises and households  1 
 
including excluding Negoti-
negotiable money able
market paper, Loans money
Period securities, and market Treasury
equalisation claims Total Total paper Total Loans bills Total Total bills 3,4 
End of year or month *
 
2001 3,014.1 2,704.2 387.9 356.7 355.2 1.5 31.2 28.2 2.9 2,626.2 2,070.2
2002 2,997.2 2,689.1 365.4 331.9 331.0 1.0 33.5 31.1 2.4 2,631.8 2,079.7
2003 2,995.6 2,680.6 355.2 315.0 313.4 1.6 40.2 38.4 1.8 2,640.4 2,096.1
2004 3,001.3 2,646.7 320.9 283.8 283.0 0.8 37.1 35.3 1.8 2,680.4 2,114.2
2005 2,995.1 2,635.1 309.7 273.5 272.9 0.6 36.2 34.4 1.8 2,685.4 2,141.3
2006 3,000.7 2,632.2 303.1 269.8 269.3 0.6 33.3 31.9 1.4 2,697.6 2,181.82007 2,975.7 2,649.5 331.2 301.8 301.5 0.3 29.4 28.2 1.2 2,644.6 2,168.32008 3,071.1 2,700.1 373.0 337.5 335.3 2.2 35.5 34.5 1.0 2,698.1 2,257.82009 3,100.1 2,692.6 347.3 306.3 306.2 0.1 41.0 37.1 3.9 2,752.8 2,299.7
2010 3,220.9 2,771.3 428.0 283.0 282.8 0.2 145.0 117.2 27.7 2,793.0 2,305.6
2009          Oct 3,116.9 2,717.2 381.6 326.3 325.9 0.4 55.3 50.4 4.9 2,735.3 2,281.4
         Nov 3,117.3 2,713.4 374.5 327.2 327.0 0.2 47.4 42.1 5.2 2,742.7 2,289.4         Dec 3,100.1 2,692.6 347.3 306.3 306.2 0.1 41.0 37.1 3.9 2,752.8 2,299.7
2010          Jan 3,111.5 2,692.1 349.7 305.0 304.8 0.2 44.7 40.9 3.8 2,761.8 2,305.2
         Feb 3,103.1 2,685.6 343.5 299.8 299.6 0.2 43.7 40.8 2.9 2,759.6 2,302.2         Mar 3,098.8 2,682.4 348.9 302.9 302.6 0.3 46.1 43.2 2.8 2,749.9 2,290.3
         Apr 3,140.8 2,697.9 358.7 311.7 311.5 0.3 46.9 45.2 1.7 2,782.2 2,318.9
         May 3,130.1 2,708.4 361.7 310.6 310.3 0.2 51.1 48.8 2.3 2,768.4 2,298.8         June 3,147.5 2,717.1 376.1 313.2 312.9 0.3 63.0 55.2 7.8 2,771.4 2,292.6
         July 3,139.7 2,709.3 366.0 305.7 305.4 0.3 60.4 50.8 9.6 2,773.7 2,296.5
         Aug 3,150.2 2,718.1 367.2 309.8 309.6 0.2 57.3 48.4 9.0 2,783.1 2,300.7         Sep 3,129.7 2,700.4 351.1 293.4 293.2 0.2 57.8 49.0 8.8 2,778.5 2,294.8
         Oct 3,249.0 2,711.4 378.0 297.5 297.2 0.3 80.5 52.5 28.0 2,871.0 2,300.2
         Nov 3,290.2 2,816.5 470.8 318.0 317.7 0.3 152.8 126.9 25.9 2,819.5 2,309.5
         Dec 3,220.9 2,771.3 428.0 283.0 282.8 0.2 145.0 117.2 27.7 2,793.0 2,305.6
2011          Jan 3,241.2 2,778.4 440.2 290.4 290.2 0.2 149.8 120.8 29.0 2,801.1 2,314.1
         Feb 3,240.3 2,787.6 446.4 308.5 308.2 0.3 137.9 108.8 29.1 2,794.0 2,309.0         Mar 3,211.7 2,758.1 415.7 292.6 292.4 0.3 123.1 98.7 24.4 2,796.0 2,307.8
Changes *
2002 − 19.2 − 18.8 − 23.4 − 25.7 − 25.2 − 0.5 + 2.3 + 2.9 − 0.6 + 4.3 + 7.6
2003 + 0.1 − 8.4 − 10.0 − 16.7 − 17.5 + 0.9 + 6.7 + 7.3 − 0.6 + 10.1 + 16.02004 + 3.3 − 36.0 − 31.7 − 30.5 − 29.7 − 0.8 − 1.2 − 3.2 + 1.9 + 35.0 + 15.6
2005 − 6.7 − 12.1 − 11.5 − 10.6 − 10.4 − 0.2 − 0.9 − 0.9 + 0.0 + 4.8 + 26.8
2006 − 12.4 − 20.8 − 7.1 − 4.5 − 4.4 − 0.0 − 2.7 − 2.3 − 0.4 − 5.2 + 23.62007 − 15.9 + 11.8 + 27.6 + 31.5 + 31.7 − 0.2 − 3.9 − 3.7 − 0.3 − 43.5 − 7.12008 + 92.0 + 46.9 + 43.1 + 36.8 + 34.9 + 1.8 + 6.3 + 6.3 − 0.0 + 48.9 + 83.42009 + 25.7 − 11.6 − 26.1 − 31.5 − 30.0 − 1.5 + 5.5 + 2.5 + 2.9 + 51.8 + 36.6
2010 + 130.5 + 78.7 + 80.4 − 23.4 − 23.5 + 0.1 + 103.8 + 80.1 + 23.7 + 50.1 + 14.9
2009          Oct + 6.4 + 1.8 − 1.6 − 11.1 − 11.2 + 0.0 + 9.5 + 11.2 − 1.7 + 8.0 + 1.7
         Nov + 0.4 − 3.7 − 7.0 + 0.9 + 1.1 − 0.2 − 7.9 − 8.2 + 0.3 + 7.4 + 5.4         Dec − 20.2 − 23.7 − 27.2 − 20.8 − 20.8 − 0.0 − 6.4 − 5.0 − 1.4 + 7.1 + 7.5
2010          Jan + 11.2 − 0.6 + 2.3 − 1.5 − 1.6 + 0.1 + 3.8 + 3.8 − 0.1 + 9.0 + 5.5
         Feb − 8.9 − 7.1 − 6.2 − 5.1 − 5.2 + 0.0 − 1.0 − 0.1 − 0.9 − 2.8 − 3.5         Mar + 0.2 − 3.1 + 5.4 + 3.0 + 3.0 + 0.0 + 2.4 + 2.5 − 0.1 − 5.2 − 8.1
         Apr + 42.1 + 15.5 + 9.7 + 8.9 + 8.9 − 0.0 + 0.9 + 2.0 − 1.1 + 32.3 + 28.6
         May − 10.7 + 10.5 + 3.0 − 1.2 − 1.1 − 0.0 + 4.2 + 3.6 + 0.6 − 13.7 − 20.0         June + 17.5 + 8.7 + 12.5 + 0.7 + 0.7 + 0.0 + 11.8 + 6.3 + 5.5 + 5.0 − 4.3
         July − 7.8 − 7.8 − 10.3 − 7.5 − 7.5 + 0.0 − 2.8 − 4.4 + 1.6 + 2.4 + 3.9
         Aug + 10.5 + 8.8 + 0.6 + 3.6 + 3.7 − 0.1 − 3.0 − 2.4 − 0.6 + 9.9 + 4.8         Sep − 20.6 − 17.7 − 13.4 − 13.8 − 13.8 − 0.0 + 0.4 + 0.6 − 0.2 − 7.2 − 8.6
         Oct + 120.1 + 11.7 + 26.9 + 4.1 + 4.0 + 0.1 + 22.7 + 3.5 + 19.2 + 93.3 + 6.0
         Nov + 41.1 + 105.0 + 92.7 + 20.3 + 20.3 − 0.0 + 72.3 + 74.4 − 2.1 − 51.5 + 9.3         Dec − 64.1 − 45.2 − 42.8 − 34.9 − 34.8 − 0.1 − 7.9 − 9.7 + 1.8 − 21.3 + 1.3
2011          Jan + 20.3 + 7.2 + 12.2 + 7.3 + 7.3 + 0.0 + 4.8 + 3.5 + 1.3 + 8.1 + 8.5
         Feb − 0.9 + 9.1 + 6.2 + 18.6 + 18.6 + 0.1 − 12.4 − 12.5 + 0.1 − 7.1 − 5.1         Mar − 28.6 − 29.5 − 30.7 − 15.9 − 15.9 + 0.0 − 14.8 − 10.1 − 4.8 + 2.1 − 1.2
*See Table IV.2, footnote*; statistical breaks have been eliminated from the including fiduciary loans (see also footnote 9). — 3Up to December 1998,
changes. The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as bill-based lending (bill holdings plus endorsement liabilities arising from
provisional. Subsequent revisions, which appear in the following Monthly rediscounted bills and bills sent for collection from the banks’ portfoli os
Report, are not specially marked. — 1Up to December 1998, including loans prior to maturity). — 4From 1999, including small amounts of medium-term
to domestic building and loan associations. — 2Up to December 1998, series of bills. — 5From 1999, breakdown of securities by medium
30*IV Banks

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
May 2011
IV Banks
 
 
 
 
lending  2,5 
prises and households  1,2 to general government  2 
Loans Loans
Memo Memo
item Equal- item
Medium- Long- Fiduciary Medium- Long- Secur- isation Fiduciary
Total term  6 term  7 loans  8 Total Total term  6 term  7 loans  8   Period Securities  5 ities 5,9 claims  10 
End of year or month *
 
1,880.5 191.1 1,689.4 189.7 48.9 556.0 440.3 25.6 414.6 111.8 4.0 8.0 2001
1,909.8 193.5 1,716.3 169.9 47.3 552.1 417.1 27.4 389.7 132.0 3.0 7.5 2002
1,927.7 195.0 1,732.8 168.3 49.9 544.3 401.0 34.6 366.4 141.3 2.0 7.0 2003
1,940.8 194.3 1,746.5 173.5 55.3 566.1 387.7 32.9 354.8 177.5 1.0 6.5 2004
1,953.4 194.7 1,758.8 187.9 52.1 544.1 374.4 32.9 341.4 169.7 − 4.5 2005
1,972.7 194.5 1,778.1 209.1 48.2 515.8 358.4 31.7 326.6 157.4 − 4.8 20061,987.3 207.7 1,779.6 181.1 46.5 476.2 332.5 31.9 300.6 143.7 − 4.7 20072,022.0 222.0 1,800.0 235.8 42.8 440.3 308.2 29.7 278.5 132.1 − 4.5 20082,051.3 242.7 1,808.6 248.4 39.6 453.1 298.0 32.2 265.8 155.1 − 4.3 2009
2,070.0 238.1 1,831.8 235.7 30.7 487.3 301.2 36.1 265.1 186.1 − 3.1 2010
2,039.6 236.9 1,802.7 241.8 38.7 453.9 301.3 32.5 268.8 152.6 − 4.2 2009          Oct 
2,045.5 236.9 1,808.6 243.9 38.5 453.4 298.8 32.6 266.2 154.6 − 4.3          Nov 
2,051.3 242.7 1,808.6 248.4 39.6 453.1 298.0 32.2 265.8 155.1 − 4.3          Dec 
2,049.4 241.4 1,808.0 255.8 39.2 456.6 297.0 31.5 265.5 159.5 − 4.2 2010          Jan 
2,051.2 241.9 1,809.4 251.0 39.1 457.3 294.0 30.8 263.2 163.4 − 4.2          Feb 
2,044.4 237.5 1,806.9 245.9 38.7 459.6 292.2 30.5 261.8 167.4 − 4.1          Mar 
2,048.7 237.7 1,811.0 270.1 38.7 463.3 292.5 30.9 261.6 170.8 − 4.1          Apr 
2,054.3 237.6 1,816.7 244.6 38.6 469.6 295.0 31.4 263.6 174.6 − 4.1          May2,055.1 237.2 1,817.9 237.5 38.4 478.8 293.9 31.3 262.6 184.9 − 4.1          June
2,059.1 237.2 1,821.9 237.3 38.3 477.2 294.0 31.9 262.1 183.3 − 4.1          July
2,063.6 236.7 1,826.9 237.2 38.3 482.3 296.5 33.9 262.6 185.8 − 4.0          Aug 2,060.7 236.2 1,824.5 234.2 38.1 483.7 297.6 34.0 263.6 186.1 − 4.0          Sep 
2,063.2 236.9 1,826.3 237.0 38.0 570.8 298.4 34.7 263.7 272.4 − 4.0          Oct 
2,071.6 238.5 1,833.1 237.9 37.8 510.0 300.3 35.7 264.6 209.6 − 3.9          Nov 
2,070.0 238.1 1,831.8 235.7 30.7 487.3 301.2 36.1 265.1 186.1 − 3.1          Dec 
2,066.5 237.0 1,829.6 247.6 30.5 486.9 301.0 37.2 263.8 186.0 − 3.0 2011          Jan 
2,069.2 236.8 1,832.5 239.8 30.5 485.0 301.3 37.9 263.4 183.6 − 3.0          Feb 
2,066.3 238.7 1,827.6 241.5 30.3 488.2 300.7 38.2 262.5 187.5 − 3.0          Mar 
Changes *
+ 26.6 − 2.1 + 28.7 − 19.0 − 1.6 − 3.4 − 23.1 + 1.0 − 24.1 + 20.7 − 1.0 − 0.5 2002
+ 17.9 + 0.2 + 17.8 − 1.9 + 2.6 − 5.9 − 16.1 + 4.9 − 21.0 + 11.2 − 1.0 − 0.5 2003+ 10.7 + 0.2 + 10.5 + 4.9 + 3.6 + 19.4 − 13.8 − 0.9 − 12.9 + 34.3 − 1.1 − 0.6 2004
+ 12.5 + 1.7 + 10.8 + 14.3 − 3.0 − 22.1 − 13.4 + 0.9 − 14.2 − 7.7 − 1.0 − 2.0 2005
+ 2.3 + 0.2 + 2.2 + 21.2 − 3.9 − 28.8 − 16.4 − 1.4 − 15.0 − 12.4 − + 0.3 2006+ 9.6 + 10.1 − 0.6 − 16.7 − 2.2 − 36.3 − 25.8 + 0.1 − 26.0 − 10.5 − − 0.1 2007+ 28.8 + 12.0 + 16.8 + 54.7 − 5.3 − 34.5 − 23.2 − 2.3 − 20.8 − 11.4 − − 0.1 2008+ 23.5 + 17.3 + 6.3 + 13.1 − 3.9 + 15.2 − 7.6 + 2.5 − 10.2 + 22.8 − − 0.2 2009
+ 18.6 − 4.0 + 22.6 − 3.8 − 1.7 + 35.2 + 3.5 + 3.5 − 0.0 + 31.7 − − 0.3 2010
+ 1.3 − 0.3 + 1.6 + 0.4 − 0.2 + 6.3 + 0.5 + 0.1 + 0.4 + 5.8 − − 0.0 2009          Oct 
+ 3.3 + 0.0 + 3.3 + 2.1 − 0.2 + 2.0 + 0.1 + 0.0 + 0.0 + 2.0 − + 0.0          Nov 
+ 3.0 + 3.0 + 0.0 + 4.5 + 0.1 − 0.4 − 0.8 − 0.4 − 0.4 + 0.4 − − 0.0          Dec 
− 1.9 − 1.3 − 0.6 + 7.4 − 0.4 + 3.4 − 0.9 − 0.7 − 0.3 + 4.4 − − 0.1 2010          Jan 
+ 1.3 − 0.1 + 1.4 − 4.8 − 0.1 + 0.8 − 3.1 − 0.7 − 2.4 + 3.8 − − 0.0          Feb 
− 6.8 − 4.4 − 2.5 − 1.2 − 0.4 + 2.8 − 1.8 − 0.4 − 1.4 + 4.6 − − 0.0          Mar 
+ 4.4 + 0.2 + 4.2 + 24.2 − 0.1 + 3.7 + 0.3 + 0.5 − 0.2 + 3.5 − − 0.0          Apr 
+ 5.5 − 0.1 + 5.6 − 25.6 − 0.0 + 6.3 + 2.5 + 0.4 + 2.0 + 3.8 − − 0.0          May+ 2.7 + 0.6 + 2.1 − 7.0 − 0.3 + 9.3 − 1.0 − 0.4 − 0.6 + 10.3 − − 0.0          June
+ 4.1 + 0.0 + 4.1 − 0.2 − 0.1 − 1.4 + 0.0 + 0.6 − 0.6 − 1.5 − − 0.0          July
+ 5.0 − 0.3 + 5.3 − 0.2 − 0.0 + 5.1 + 2.5 + 2.0 + 0.5 + 2.5 − − 0.0          Aug − 5.6 − 0.5 − 5.1 − 3.0 − 0.2 + 1.4 + 1.1 + 0.0 + 1.0 + 0.3 − − 0.0          Sep 
+ 3.2 + 0.7 + 2.5 + 2.8 − 0.1 + 87.3 + 1.0 + 0.8 + 0.2 + 86.3 − − 0.0          Oct 
+ 8.3 + 1.6 + 6.8 + 1.0 − 0.0 − 60.8 + 1.9 + 1.0 + 1.0 − 62.8 − − 0.0          Nov − 1.5 − 0.3 − 1.2 + 2.8 − 0.0 − 22.6 + 0.9 + 0.4 + 0.5 − 23.5 − − 0.0          Dec 
− 3.5 − 1.2 − 2.3 + 12.0 − 0.2 − 0.4 − 0.3 + 1.1 − 1.3 − 0.2 − − 0.0 2011          Jan 
+ 2.7 − 0.2 + 2.9 − 7.8 + 0.0 − 2.0 + 0.4 + 0.7 − 0.4 − 2.3 − − 0.0          Feb 
− 2.9 + 1.9 − 4.8 + 1.7 − 0.2 + 3.2 − 0.6 + 0.3 − 0.9 + 3.8 − − 0.0          Mar 
and long-term lending no longer possible. — 6Up to December 1998, 1999, of more than five years. — 8From 1999, no longer included in lending
maturity or period of notice of more than one year to less than four years; (see also footnote 2). — 9Excluding debt securities arising from the
from 1999, more than one year up to and including five years. — 7Up to exchange of equalisation claims (see also footnote 10). — 10Including debt
December 1998, maturity or period of notice of four years and more; from securities arising from the exchange of equalisation claims. 
31*IV Banks

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
E U R O S Y S T E M
Monthly Report
May 2011
IV Banks
 
6 Lending by banks (MFIs) in Germany to domestic enterprises and households, housing loans,
sectors of economic activity *
 
€ billion
Lending to domestic enterprises and households (excluding holdings of negotiable money market paper and excluding securities po rtfolios)  1 
of which  
 
Housing loans Lending to enterprises and self-employed persons
 
Whole-
sale and Electricity,gas and retail Financial
Mortgage water trade; Agri- Transport- intermedi-
loans supply; repair of culture, ation and ationsecured refuse motor forestry, storage; (excludingby disposal, vehicles fishing post and MFIs) and
Mortgage residen- Other of which mining and and telecom- insurance
loans, tial real housing Housing Manufac- and Construc- motor- aqua- munica- com-
Period Total total Total estate loans Total loans turing quarrying tion cycles culture tions panies
Lending, total End of year or quarter *
 
2009 2,357.6 1,155.1 1,094.7 905.0 189.7 1,327.1 301.4 145.8 68.5 63.2 122.1 36.4 74.7 165.2
2010          Mar 2,347.1 1,151.5 1,090.4 902.0 188.5 1,320.8 299.6 143.9 69.5 63.7 122.2 37.6 77.2 162.7
         June 2,368.1 1,157.6 1,091.0 901.8 189.2 1,339.2 299.0 143.5 72.3 64.2 120.6 39.6 81.5 171.8         Sep 2,353.9 1,151.9 1,096.6 905.8 190.8 1,320.0 300.2 138.1 73.0 63.4 120.1 40.5 78.1 160.6
         Dec 2,352.9 1,153.8 1,101.6 907.8 193.8 1,317.2 302.4 134.1 75.5 61.7 120.3 40.3 78.8 157.5
2011          Mar 2,358.7 1,150.4 1,098.9 906.8 192.1 1,325.0 300.5 138.0 76.9 61.8 121.8 40.5 77.3 161.1
 Short-term lending
2009 306.3 − 8.4 − 8.4 266.9 4.5 36.3 6.0 14.2 39.7 3.0 7.1 90.7
2010          Mar 302.7 − 8.1 − 8.1 264.2 4.3 36.6 6.1 15.1 39.7 3.5 7.7 87.3
         June 313.0 − 7.4 − 7.4 272.6 3.8 36.4 6.4 14.9 38.8 3.9 7.9 95.6         Sep 293.3 − 8.1 − 8.1 252.6 4.0 34.8 5.2 14.6 39.0 3.7 7.3 82.7         Dec 282.9 − 7.7 − 7.7 243.2 3.8 32.2 5.2 13.2 39.4 3.0 6.6 78.9
2011          Mar 292.4 − 7.7 − 7.7 253.3 3.9 36.8 5.3 13.7 41.2 3.3 7.1 81.8
 Medium-term lending
2009 242.7 − 32.4 − 32.4 173.9 11.8 32.6 4.8 9.0 13.9 3.7 13.6 25.5
2010          Mar 237.5 − 32.2 − 32.2 168.9 11.6 30.4 5.1 8.9 14.6 3.7 13.2 26.1
         June 237.2 − 32.4 − 32.4 169.3 11.8 30.3 5.2 9.3 13.6 3.8 13.5 26.9         Sep 236.2 − 33.0 − 33.0 167.8 11.9 28.2 5.0 9.3 13.3 4.1 13.1 27.7         Dec 238.1 − 32.8 − 32.8 169.1 11.4 27.5 5.2 9.2 13.4 3.9 12.9 29.0
2011          Mar 238.7 − 32.6 − 32.6 169.9 11.1 27.7 5.3 9.0 13.7 3.8 12.3 30.4
 Long-term lending
2009 1,808.6 1,155.1 1,053.9 905.0 148.9 886.4 285.1 76.9 57.7 40.0 68.5 29.8 54.0 49.0
2010          Mar 1,806.9 1,151.5 1,050.1 902.0 148.1 887.7 283.6 77.0 58.3 39.8 67.9 30.3 56.3 49.3
         June 1,817.9 1,157.6 1,051.1 901.8 149.3 897.2 283.4 76.8 60.7 40.0 68.2 32.0 60.2 49.2         Sep 1,824.5 1,151.9 1,055.6 905.8 149.8 899.7 284.3 75.1 62.8 39.5 67.7 32.7 57.7 50.2         Dec 1,831.8 1,153.8 1,061.1 907.8 153.4 904.9 287.1 74.5 65.1 39.3 67.6 33.4 59.3 49.6
2011          Mar 1,827.6 1,150.4 1,058.7 906.8 151.9 901.8 285.4 73.6 66.3 39.0 66.9 33.4 57.9 49.0
 
Lending, total Change during quarter *
 
2010          Q1 − 11.2 − 3.4 − 4.7 − 3.0 − 1.7 − 6.3 − 1.4 − 1.9 + 1.0 + 0.5 + 0.1 + 0.5 + 2.5 − 4.5
         Q2 + 21.0 + 2.7 + 0.5 + 0.7 − 0.1 + 18.2 − 0.6 − 0.4 + 2.7 + 0.4 − 1.6 + 2.1 + 4.4 + 8.7         Q3 − 14.1 + 2.3 + 5.1 + 3.6 + 1.5 − 19.5 + 1.1 − 4.2 + 0.7 − 0.8 − 0.5 + 0.9 − 3.4 − 11.2         Q4 − 0.4 + 3.6 + 4.2 + 3.6 + 0.5 − 2.8 + 0.7 − 3.9 + 2.4 − 1.7 + 0.3 − 0.3 + 0.7 − 3.1
2011          Q1 + 6.3 − 2.5 − 1.8 − 0.2 − 1.7 + 8.2 − 1.0 + 3.9 + 1.4 + 0.0 + 1.5 + 0.3 − 1.5 + 3.8
 Short-term lending
2010          Q1 − 3.8 − − 0.3 − − 0.3 − 2.9 − 0.2 + 0.3 + 0.1 + 0.8 − 0.0 + 0.4 + 0.6 − 3.5
         Q2 + 8.4 − − 0.7 − − 0.7 + 7.9 − 0.6 − 0.2 + 0.3 − 0.2 − 0.9 + 0.3 + 0.2 + 8.1         Q3 − 17.7 − + 0.2 − + 0.2 − 17.8 + 0.1 − 1.7 − 1.2 − 0.4 + 0.2 − 0.2 − 0.6 − 10.4         Q4 − 10.5 − − 0.4 − − 0.4 − 9.4 − 0.2 − 2.6 + 0.0 − 1.4 + 0.3 − 0.7 − 0.7 − 3.8
2011          Q1 + 10.0 − − 0.0 − − 0.0 + 10.6 + 0.1 + 4.6 + 0.1 + 0.6 + 1.8 + 0.3 + 0.5 + 3.5
 Medium-term lending
2010          Q1 − 5.8 − − 0.2 − − 0.2 − 5.6 − 0.2 − 2.3 + 0.3 − 0.1 + 0.6 − 0.1 − 0.3 − 1.6
         Q2 + 0.7 − + 0.5 − + 0.5 − 0.1 + 0.2 − 0.0 − 0.1 + 0.3 − 1.0 + 0.1 − 0.1 + 0.7         Q3 − 0.8 − + 0.5 − + 0.5 − 1.7 + 0.1 − 0.9 − 0.2 + 0.1 − 0.3 + 0.3 − 0.4 + 0.9         Q4 + 1.9 − − 0.2 − − 0.2 + 1.4 − 0.5 − 0.7 + 0.2 − 0.1 + 0.1 − 0.2 − 0.2 + 1.3
2011          Q1 + 0.5 − − 0.2 − − 0.2 + 0.8 − 0.3 + 0.2 + 0.1 − 0.2 + 0.3 − 0.1 − 0.6 + 0.9
 Long-term lending
2010          Q1 − 1.7 − 3.4 − 4.2 − 3.0 − 1.2 + 2.1 − 1.1 + 0.1 + 0.6 − 0.2 − 0.5 + 0.3 + 2.3 + 0.6
         Q2 + 11.9 + 2.7 + 0.7 + 0.7 + 0.0 + 10.4 − 0.2 − 0.2 + 2.4 + 0.2 + 0.2 + 1.6 + 4.3 − 0.1         Q3 + 4.4 + 2.3 + 4.3 + 3.6 + 0.8 + 0.0 + 1.0 − 1.7 + 2.1 − 0.5 − 0.4 + 0.8 − 2.5 − 1.6         Q4 + 8.1 + 3.6 + 4.7 + 3.6 + 1.1 + 5.3 + 1.4 − 0.7 + 2.2 − 0.2 − 0.1 + 0.6 + 1.5 − 0.6
2011          Q1 − 4.2 − 2.5 − 1.6 − 0.2 − 1.4 − 3.2 − 0.8 − 0.9 + 1.2 − 0.3 − 0.7 + 0.0 − 1.3 − 0.6
*Excluding lending by foreign branches. Breakdown of lending by building have been eliminated from the changes. The figures for the latest date are
and loan associations by areas and sectors estimated. Statistical alterations always to be regarded as provisional; subsequent alterations, which will
32*IV Banks

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
May 2011
IV Banks
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Lending to
 Lending to employees and other individuals non-profit institutions
Memo items Other lending Services sector (including the professions)
of which of which
Debitbalanceson wage,
Other Lending salary
real to self- Lending and of which
Housing Holding estate employed to craft Housing pension Housing Instalment
Total companies Total loans Total loans  
3 accounts Total loans   Period enterprises activities persons  2 enterprises
End of year or quarter * Lending, total 
 
651.2 181.2 46.5 170.5 378.9 54.3 1,017.5 790.0 227.5 142.0 15.8 13.0 3.3 2009
643.9 179.5 44.9 171.7 378.1 54.4 1,013.4 787.5 225.8 141.8 15.0 13.0 3.3 2010          Mar 
645.7 177.3 44.1 175.0 381.1 55.0 1,016.0 788.7 227.4 143.8 14.2 12.9 3.4          June
646.2 176.8 46.8 176.4 381.2 54.4 1,020.8 792.9 228.0 154.0 14.7 13.1 3.5          Sep 
649.0 178.5 46.8 175.8 380.4 53.5 1,022.4 795.7 226.7 155.0 13.9 13.3 3.5          Dec 
647.6 175.8 47.0 178.7 378.2 53.9 1,020.3 794.9 225.4 155.1 13.7 13.5 3.5 2011          Mar 
Short-term lending
69.9 11.1 12.1 14.6 33.3 8.3 38.7 4.0 34.7 3.0 15.8 0.7 0.0 2009
68.2 10.6 11.7 14.8 33.8 8.9 37.8 3.8 34.0 3.0 15.0 0.7 0.0 2010          Mar 
68.7 10.5 11.7 14.5 34.1 8.8 39.6 3.7 35.9 2.8 14.2 0.8 0.0          June
65.3 9.9 11.6 14.3 33.1 8.5 40.0 4.0 36.0 2.6 14.7 0.7 0.0          Sep 64.7 9.6 11.7 13.9 32.2 7.7 38.9 3.9 35.1 2.6 13.9 0.9 0.0          Dec 
64.2 9.4 12.3 13.5 31.9 8.4 38.2 3.7 34.5 2.6 13.7 0.9 0.0 2011          Mar 
Medium-term lending
70.8 8.5 11.0 21.7 27.6 4.0 68.2 20.5 47.7 40.9 − 0.6 0.0 2009
66.9 8.4 9.5 21.7 27.4 3.9 68.1 20.5 47.6 40.9 − 0.6 0.0 2010          Mar 
66.8 8.5 8.8 21.8 27.8 3.8 67.4 20.6 46.8 41.5 − 0.5 0.0          June
67.1 8.7 9.8 21.3 28.0 3.7 67.9 21.0 46.9 41.7 − 0.5 0.0          Sep 68.1 8.8 10.1 21.3 28.1 3.8 68.5 21.3 47.1 42.0 − 0.5 0.0          Dec 
67.8 8.6 10.0 22.1 28.0 3.9 68.2 21.4 46.8 41.7 − 0.5 0.0 2011          Mar 
Long-term lending
510.4 161.6 23.5 134.1 318.0 42.0 910.6 765.5 145.0 98.0 − 11.7 3.3 2009
508.8 160.5 23.7 135.1 316.9 41.6 907.5 763.2 144.3 97.9 − 11.7 3.3 2010          Mar 
510.2 158.3 23.6 138.7 319.1 42.3 909.1 764.4 144.7 99.5 − 11.6 3.3          June
513.8 158.1 25.4 140.8 320.0 42.2 913.0 767.8 145.1 109.6 − 11.9 3.5          Sep 516.2 160.2 25.0 140.6 320.1 42.0 915.0 770.5 144.5 110.4 − 11.9 3.5          Dec 
515.7 157.9 24.7 143.1 318.3 41.6 913.9 769.8 144.1 110.8 − 12.0 3.5 2011          Mar 
 
Change during quarter * Lending, total 
 
− 4.6 − 1.8 − 1.6 + 0.9 − 0.8 + 0.2 − 4.9 − 3.3 − 1.6 − 0.2 − 0.8 − 0.0 + 0.0 2010          Q1
+ 2.1 − 2.0 − 0.9 + 3.2 + 2.7 − 0.1 + 2.9 + 1.1 + 1.7 + 1.9 − 0.7 − 0.1 + 0.0          Q2
− 1.0 + 0.4 + 1.3 + 0.3 + 0.2 − 0.6 + 5.2 + 3.8 + 1.4 + 0.9 + 0.4 + 0.2 + 0.1          Q3+ 2.9 + 1.4 + 0.2 − 0.4 − 0.8 − 0.9 + 2.1 + 3.4 − 1.3 + 0.7 − 0.8 + 0.2 + 0.0          Q4
− 1.2 + 0.1 + 0.1 + 0.1 − 2.2 + 0.4 − 2.1 − 0.8 − 1.2 + 0.1 − 0.2 + 0.2 − 0.0 2011          Q1
Short-term lending
− 1.5 − 0.5 − 0.4 + 0.2 + 0.5 + 0.7 − 0.9 − 0.1 − 0.8 − 0.0 − 0.8 − + 0.0 2010          Q1
+ 0.2 − 0.1 + 0.0 − 0.3 + 0.1 − 0.1 + 0.5 − 0.1 + 0.6 − 0.2 − 0.7 + 0.0 − 0.0          Q2
− 3.6 − 0.5 − 0.3 − 0.3 − 1.2 − 0.3 + 0.2 + 0.1 + 0.1 − 0.1 + 0.4 − 0.0 + 0.0          Q3− 0.6 − 0.4 + 0.1 − 0.4 − 1.0 − 0.8 − 1.2 − 0.2 − 1.0 − 0.0 − 0.8 + 0.1 − 0.0          Q4
− 0.7 − 0.1 + 0.4 − 0.5 − 0.3 + 0.7 − 0.7 − 0.1 − 0.6 − 0.0 − 0.2 + 0.1 − 0.0 2011          Q1
Medium-term lending
− 2.1 − 0.1 − 1.5 − 0.0 − 0.2 − 0.1 − 0.2 − 0.0 − 0.1 + 0.0 − − 0.0 − 0.0 2010          Q1
+ 0.0 − 0.1 − 0.5 − 0.1 + 0.4 − 0.1 + 0.9 + 0.4 + 0.5 + 0.6 − − 0.1 + 0.0          Q2
− 1.2 + 0.3 − 0.2 − 0.6 + 0.2 − 0.1 + 0.9 + 0.4 + 0.4 + 0.3 − + 0.0 + 0.0          Q3+ 1.0 + 0.0 + 0.3 + 0.0 + 0.1 + 0.0 + 0.6 + 0.3 + 0.3 + 0.3 − + 0.0 − 0.0          Q4
+ 0.1 − 0.1 − 0.1 + 0.7 − 0.1 + 0.1 − 0.3 + 0.1 − 0.3 − 0.3 − + 0.0 − 0.0 2011          Q1
Long-term lending
− 1.0 − 1.2 + 0.2 + 0.7 − 1.1 − 0.4 − 3.9 − 3.1 − 0.7 − 0.1 − + 0.0 + 0.0 2010          Q1
+ 1.9 − 1.8 − 0.4 + 3.7 + 2.3 + 0.1 + 1.6 + 0.9 + 0.6 + 1.5 − − 0.0 + 0.0          Q2
+ 3.8 + 0.7 + 1.8 + 1.2 + 1.1 − 0.2 + 4.1 + 3.2 + 0.9 + 0.7 − + 0.2 + 0.1          Q3+ 2.4 + 1.8 − 0.2 + 0.0 + 0.0 − 0.2 + 2.8 + 3.3 − 0.5 + 0.4 − + 0.1 + 0.0          Q4
− 0.6 + 0.2 − 0.3 − 0.1 − 1.7 − 0.3 − 1.1 − 0.8 − 0.3 + 0.3 − + 0.1 − 0.0 2011          Q1
appear in the following Monthly Report, are not specially marked. — mortgage loans and housing loans, even in the form of instalment credi t. 
1Excluding fiduciary loans. — 2Including sole proprietors. — 3Excluding
33*IV Banks

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
E U R O S Y S T E M
Monthly Report
May 2011
IV Banks
 
7 Deposits of domestic non-banks (non-MFIs) at banks (MFIs) in Germany *
 
 
€ billion
Time deposits  1,2   Memo item
  
 for more than 1 year  2 Included Subordinated
 liabilities in time
for up for up (excluding deposits:
to and to and for more Bank negotiable liabilities
Deposits, Sight including including than Savings savings Fiduciary debt arising
Period total deposits Total 1 year Total 2 years 2 years bonds  4 loans securities) from repos deposits  3 
Domestic non-banks, total End of year or month *
 
2008 2,781.4 834.6 1,276.1 530.6 745.6 32.6 713.0 535.2 135.4 32.3 34.4 59.3
2009 2,829.7 1,029.5 1,102.6 339.5 763.1 32.1 731.0 594.5 103.2 43.4 35.6 76.8
2010 2,936.6 1,104.4 1,117.1 329.3 787.8 25.1 762.7 618.2 96.9 37.5 37.2 80.9
2010          Apr 2,852.0 1,070.3 1,077.0 319.0 758.1 28.6 729.5 604.8 99.9 42.7 38.1 95.3
         May 2,867.5 1,089.6 1,073.1 321.6 751.5 27.3 724.2 605.1 99.7 42.7 38.0 97.8         June 2,867.5 1,090.5 1,073.1 323.1 750.0 25.8 724.2 604.4 99.5 42.4 37.8 96.1
         July 2,851.1 1,084.9 1,061.3 314.4 746.9 24.7 722.2 605.9 98.9 42.2 37.8 86.4
         Aug 2,873.4 1,094.7 1,074.2 324.6 749.6 24.3 725.2 605.9 98.7 42.2 37.6 97.5         Sep 2,867.2 1,083.3 1,079.4 331.4 748.0 24.2 723.9 606.1 98.4 42.1 37.6 89.1
         Oct 2,872.3 1,091.1 1,075.1 316.3 758.9 24.6 734.2 607.4 98.6 42.0 37.4 78.6
         Nov 2,946.1 1,129.6 1,110.2 323.6 786.6 24.7 762.0 610.0 96.3 42.0 37.4 103.7         Dec 2,936.6 1,104.4 1,117.1 329.3 787.8 25.1 762.7 618.2 96.9 37.5 37.2 80.9
2011          Jan 2,928.6 1,125.9 1,085.0 304.4 780.6 25.0 755.6 620.4 97.2 37.3 37.0 68.0
         Feb 2,942.8 1,121.6 1,100.7 320.6 780.0 24.9 755.1 622.5 98.0 37.4 37.1 90.9
         Mar 2,930.5 1,112.1 1,096.6 317.9 778.7 25.4 753.3 623.5 98.3 37.2 36.8 75.0
Changes *
2009 + 59.7 + 211.4 − 179.3 − 207.5 + 28.2 − 0.5 + 28.7 + 59.3 − 31.6 − 0.9 + 1.4 + 17.5
2010 + 77.4 + 76.0 − 18.9 − 12.6 − 6.3 − 7.0 + 0.7 + 24.0 − 3.7 − 1.7 + 1.6 + 4.1
2010          Apr + 32.0 + 30.3 + 2.2 + 2.8 − 0.6 − 0.5 − 0.1 + 0.1 − 0.6 − 0.0 − 0.1 + 20.8
         May + 15.4 + 19.3 − 3.9 + 2.7 − 6.6 − 1.2 − 5.3 + 0.2 − 0.2 − 0.0 − 0.1 + 2.5         June + 0.0 + 1.4 − 0.5 + 1.1 − 1.6 − 1.6 + 0.0 − 0.6 − 0.3 − 0.3 − 0.2 − 1.7
         July − 16.4 − 5.6 − 11.8 − 8.7 − 3.1 − 1.1 − 2.1 + 1.5 − 0.5 − 0.2 + 0.0 − 9.7
         Aug + 17.6 + 9.8 + 8.2 + 10.2 − 2.0 − 0.4 − 1.6 − 0.1 − 0.3 − 0.0 − 0.2 + 11.1         Sep − 6.2 − 11.4 + 5.2 + 6.7 − 1.5 − 0.2 − 1.3 + 0.3 − 0.2 − 0.1 − − 8.5
         Oct + 4.9 + 7.9 − 4.5 − 15.1 + 10.6 + 0.5 + 10.1 + 1.3 + 0.2 − 0.1 − 0.1 − 10.5
         Nov + 50.3 + 39.3 + 8.2 + 6.4 + 1.7 + 0.0 + 1.7 + 2.6 + 0.3 − 0.0 − 0.1 + 25.2         Dec − 9.4 − 25.5 + 6.9 + 5.7 + 1.2 + 0.5 + 0.7 + 8.5 + 0.6 − 0.3 − 0.2 − 22.8
2011          Jan − 8.1 + 21.6 − 32.1 − 24.9 − 7.2 − 0.1 − 7.1 + 2.2 + 0.3 − 0.2 − 0.1 − 12.9
         Feb + 14.2 − 4.4 + 15.7 + 16.3 − 0.6 − 0.1 − 0.5 + 2.1 + 0.8 + 0.0 + 0.0 + 22.9         Mar − 12.3 − 9.5 − 4.3 − 2.7 − 1.6 + 0.5 − 2.1 + 1.0 + 0.5 − 0.2 − 0.2 − 15.9
Domestic government End of year or month *
2008 164.7 34.2 127.8 75.4 52.5 3.6 48.8 1.2 1.5 24.2 3.9 −
2009 129.3 41.8 83.4 43.0 40.4 3.6 36.8 2.6 1.5 35.7 3.9 0.52010 153.4 46.1 103.0 47.7 55.3 2.6 52.7 2.8 1.5 34.7 6.2 0.4
2010          Apr 124.4 39.2 81.2 39.6 41.6 3.3 38.3 2.6 1.5 35.4 6.3 −
         May 131.9 43.8 83.9 42.6 41.3 3.1 38.3 2.8 1.5 35.4 6.2 −         June 139.0 47.1 87.5 45.4 42.1 2.5 39.6 2.8 1.6 35.3 6.2 0.2
         July 130.5 40.5 85.7 43.9 41.8 2.1 39.7 2.8 1.6 35.2 6.2 0.1
         Aug 137.0 43.0 89.6 47.5 42.0 2.0 40.0 2.8 1.6 35.1 6.2 0.4
         Sep 140.6 43.4 93.0 51.6 41.3 1.9 39.4 2.8 1.5 35.1 6.2 1.4
         Oct 147.3 41.7 101.3 47.3 54.0 2.2 51.8 2.8 1.5 35.0 6.2 0.1
         Nov 156.0 49.1 102.6 45.8 56.7 2.1 54.7 2.8 1.5 35.0 6.2 1.0         Dec 153.4 46.1 103.0 47.7 55.3 2.6 52.7 2.8 1.5 34.7 6.2 0.4
2011          Jan 149.0 49.6 95.1 44.8 50.3 2.5 47.8 2.8 1.5 34.5 6.2 0.0
         Feb 152.7 48.7 99.6 49.4 50.2 2.3 47.9 2.9 1.5 34.5 6.2 3.2         Mar 154.4 50.2 99.9 50.1 49.7 2.4 47.3 2.9 1.5 34.4 6.1 1.4
Changes *
2009 − 23.9 + 7.5 − 32.9 − 32.2 − 0.7 − 0.0 − 0.7 + 1.4 + 0.1 − 0.5 + 0.0 + 0.5
2010 + 23.9 + 4.1 + 19.7 + 4.7 + 14.9 − 1.0 + 16.0 + 0.3 − 0.1 − 1.0 + 2.3 − 0.1
2010          Apr − 3.2 − 1.1 − 2.1 − 1.7 − 0.4 − 0.2 − 0.3 + 0.0 + 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.9
         May + 7.3 + 4.4 + 2.7 + 3.0 − 0.2 − 0.2 − 0.0 + 0.2 − − 0.0 − 0.0 −         June + 7.1 + 3.3 + 3.6 + 2.8 + 0.8 − 0.5 + 1.3 + 0.0 + 0.1 − 0.1 − 0.0 + 0.2
         July − 8.5 − 6.6 − 1.8 − 1.5 − 0.3 − 0.4 + 0.1 + 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.1 − − 0.1
         Aug + 6.5 + 2.6 + 3.9 + 3.6 + 0.3 − 0.1 + 0.4 + 0.0 + 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.0 + 0.3         Sep + 3.6 + 0.3 + 3.4 + 4.1 − 0.7 − 0.1 − 0.6 + 0.0 − 0.1 − 0.1 − + 1.0
         Oct + 6.7 − 1.6 + 8.4 − 4.3 + 12.7 + 0.3 + 12.4 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 1.3
         Nov + 8.7 + 7.4 + 1.2 − 1.5 + 2.7 − 0.1 + 2.8 + 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.0 + 0.9         Dec − 2.6 − 3.1 + 0.5 + 1.9 − 1.4 + 0.5 − 1.9 − 0.0 + 0.0 − 0.3 − 0.0 − 0.6
2011          Jan − 4.4 + 3.5 − 7.9 − 2.9 − 5.0 − 0.0 − 4.9 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.2 − 0.0 − 0.4
         Feb + 3.7 − 0.9 + 4.5 + 4.6 − 0.1 − 0.2 + 0.1 + 0.0 + 0.0 − 0.0 + 0.0 + 3.2         Mar + 1.7 + 1.5 + 0.3 + 0.8 − 0.5 + 0.1 − 0.6 − 0.0 + 0.0 − 0.1 − 0.1 − 1.8
*See Table IV.2, footnote *; statistical breaks have been eliminated from provisional. Subsequent revisions, which appear in the following Monthly
the changes. The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as Report, are not specially marked. — 1Including subordinated liabilities and
34*IV Banks

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
May 2011
IV Banks
 
7 Deposits of domestic non-banks (non-MFIs) at banks (MFIs) in Germany * (cont’d)
 
 
€ billion
Time deposits  1,2   Memo item
  
 for more than 1 year  2 Included Subordinated
 liabilities in time
for up for up (excluding deposits:
to and to and for more Bank negotiable liabilities
Deposits, Sight including including than Savings savings Fiduciary debt arising
Period total deposits Total 1 year Total 2 years 2 years bonds  4 loans securities) from repos deposits  3 
Domestic enterprises and households End of year or month *
 
2008 2,616.7 800.5 1,148.3 455.2 693.1 29.0 664.1 534.0 133.9 8.1 30.5 59.3
2009 2,700.4 987.6 1,019.2 296.5 722.7 28.5 694.2 591.9 101.6 7.7 31.7 76.3
2010 2,783.2 1,058.3 1,014.1 281.6 732.5 22.5 710.0 615.4 95.4 2.9 31.0 80.5
2010          Apr 2,727.6 1,031.1 995.9 279.4 716.5 25.3 691.2 602.3 98.3 7.3 31.8 95.3
         May 2,735.5 1,045.8 989.2 279.0 710.2 24.3 685.9 602.3 98.2 7.3 31.7 97.8         June 2,728.5 1,043.4 985.6 277.7 707.9 23.3 684.6 601.7 97.9 7.1 31.6 95.9
         July 2,720.6 1,044.5 975.7 270.5 705.1 22.6 682.5 603.1 97.4 7.1 31.6 86.3
         Aug 2,736.4 1,051.7 984.6 277.1 707.5 22.3 685.2 603.0 97.1 7.1 31.4 97.1         Sep 2,726.6 1,039.9 986.4 279.7 706.7 22.2 684.5 603.3 96.9 7.0 31.4 87.7
         Oct 2,725.0 1,049.4 973.8 268.9 704.9 22.5 682.4 604.6 97.2 7.0 31.2 78.5
         Nov 2,790.1 1,080.4 1,007.6 277.7 729.9 22.6 707.3 607.2 94.8 7.0 31.2 102.8         Dec 2,783.2 1,058.3 1,014.1 281.6 732.5 22.5 710.0 615.4 95.4 2.9 31.0 80.5
2011          Jan 2,779.6 1,076.4 989.9 259.6 730.3 22.5 707.8 617.6 95.7 2.8 30.9 68.0
         Feb 2,790.1 1,072.9 1,001.1 271.3 729.8 22.6 707.2 619.7 96.5 2.9 30.9 87.7
         Mar 2,776.1 1,061.9 996.7 267.8 728.9 23.0 706.0 620.7 96.8 2.7 30.7 73.6
Changes *
2009 + 83.6 + 203.8 − 146.4 − 175.3 + 28.9 − 0.5 + 29.4 + 57.9 − 31.7 − 0.4 + 1.4 + 17.0
2010 + 53.5 + 71.9 − 38.6 − 17.3 − 21.3 − 6.0 − 15.3 + 23.8 − 3.6 − 0.7 − 0.7 + 4.2
2010          Apr + 35.1 + 31.3 + 4.3 + 4.5 − 0.2 − 0.3 + 0.2 + 0.1 − 0.6 − 0.0 − 0.1 + 21.6
         May + 8.1 + 14.9 − 6.6 − 0.3 − 6.3 − 1.0 − 5.3 + 0.0 − 0.2 + 0.0 − 0.1 + 2.5         June − 7.0 − 1.9 − 4.1 − 1.8 − 2.3 − 1.1 − 1.3 − 0.6 − 0.3 − 0.2 − 0.2 − 1.9
         July − 7.9 + 1.1 − 10.0 − 7.2 − 2.8 − 0.6 − 2.1 + 1.5 − 0.5 − 0.0 + 0.0 − 9.6
         Aug + 11.1 + 7.2 + 4.3 + 6.6 − 2.3 − 0.3 − 2.0 − 0.1 − 0.3 + 0.0 − 0.2 + 10.8         Sep − 9.8 − 11.8 + 1.8 + 2.6 − 0.8 − 0.1 − 0.7 + 0.2 − 0.2 − 0.1 − − 9.4
         Oct − 1.8 + 9.5 − 12.9 − 10.8 − 2.1 + 0.2 − 2.3 + 1.3 + 0.2 − 0.0 − 0.1 − 9.2
         Nov + 41.7 + 31.9 + 6.9 + 7.9 − 1.0 + 0.1 − 1.1 + 2.5 + 0.3 − 0.0 − 0.1 + 24.3         Dec − 6.9 − 22.4 + 6.4 + 3.9 + 2.6 − 0.1 + 2.7 + 8.6 + 0.6 − 0.0 − 0.2 − 22.3
2011          Jan − 3.7 + 18.1 − 24.2 − 22.0 − 2.2 − 0.1 − 2.1 + 2.2 + 0.3 − 0.0 − 0.1 − 12.5
         Feb + 10.6 − 3.5 + 11.2 + 11.7 − 0.5 + 0.1 − 0.6 + 2.1 + 0.8 + 0.0 + 0.0 + 19.8         Mar − 14.0 − 10.9 − 4.6 − 3.4 − 1.2 + 0.4 − 1.6 + 1.0 + 0.5 − 0.1 − 0.1 − 14.1
of which:  Domestic enterprises End of year or month *
2008 1,073.5 292.6 757.7 223.7 534.0 7.7 526.3 3.8 19.3 7.8 22.0 59.3
2009 1,105.6 336.4 743.6 187.5 556.1 9.1 547.0 5.5 20.2 7.6 21.8 76.32010 1,124.3 344.6 755.5 196.0 559.5 7.5 552.0 6.3 17.9 2.8 21.3 80.5
2010          Apr 1,110.4 349.3 734.6 186.4 548.2 8.4 539.8 6.2 20.2 7.2 21.7 95.3
         May 1,115.0 357.5 731.0 188.7 542.3 8.2 534.1 6.3 20.2 7.2 21.7 97.8         June 1,105.6 351.6 727.4 187.5 539.9 7.6 532.3 6.4 20.1 7.0 21.8 95.9
         July 1,092.2 346.8 718.4 181.3 537.2 7.5 529.7 6.5 20.5 7.0 21.8 86.3
         Aug 1,110.5 356.3 727.2 187.9 539.3 7.5 531.8 6.5 20.5 7.0 21.5 97.1
         Sep 1,101.8 343.1 731.8 194.0 537.9 7.4 530.4 6.5 20.4 6.9 21.6 87.7
         Oct 1,092.1 346.2 719.0 183.6 535.4 7.5 527.9 6.5 20.4 6.9 21.4 78.5
         Nov 1,145.3 369.3 751.8 192.1 559.7 7.4 552.3 6.4 17.9 6.9 21.4 102.8         Dec 1,124.3 344.6 755.5 196.0 559.5 7.5 552.0 6.3 17.9 2.8 21.3 80.5
2011          Jan 1,119.8 364.2 731.6 174.9 556.6 7.5 549.1 6.3 17.7 2.7 21.2 68.0
         Feb 1,124.8 358.7 742.0 186.9 555.1 7.4 547.6 6.4 17.8 2.8 21.2 87.7         Mar 1,108.5 347.3 737.5 184.1 553.4 7.9 545.4 6.4 17.4 2.6 21.1 73.6
Changes *
2009 + 32.6 + 61.6 − 31.5 − 53.1 + 21.6 + 1.4 + 20.3 + 1.6 + 0.9 − 0.4 − 0.3 + 17.0
2010 − 10.6 + 9.8 − 21.6 + 6.1 − 27.6 − 1.6 − 26.0 + 0.9 + 0.3 − 0.7 − 0.5 + 4.2
2010          Apr + 25.8 + 19.7 + 6.0 + 6.6 − 0.6 + 0.0 − 0.6 + 0.1 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.1 + 21.6
         May + 4.8 + 8.4 − 3.6 + 2.3 − 6.0 − 0.2 − 5.7 + 0.1 − 0.0 + 0.0 − 0.0 + 2.5         June − 9.4 − 5.4 − 4.0 − 1.6 − 2.4 − 0.7 − 1.8 + 0.1 − 0.0 − 0.2 + 0.1 − 1.9
         July − 13.4 − 4.8 − 9.0 − 6.2 − 2.8 − 0.1 − 2.7 + 0.0 + 0.3 − 0.1 − 0.0 − 9.6
         Aug + 13.6 + 9.5 + 4.1 + 6.6 − 2.5 + 0.0 − 2.6 + 0.1 − 0.0 + 0.0 − 0.2 + 10.8         Sep − 8.7 − 13.2 + 4.6 + 6.1 − 1.4 − 0.1 − 1.4 − 0.0 − 0.1 − 0.1 + 0.1 − 9.4
         Oct − 10.0 + 3.1 − 13.1 − 10.4 − 2.7 + 0.1 − 2.8 − 0.0 + 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.1 − 9.2
         Nov + 29.8 + 23.9 + 6.0 + 7.7 − 1.7 − 0.1 − 1.6 − 0.1 + 0.1 − 0.0 − 0.0 + 24.3         Dec − 21.0 − 24.6 + 3.6 + 3.8 − 0.2 + 0.1 − 0.3 − 0.0 + 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.1 − 22.3
2011          Jan − 4.5 + 19.6 − 23.9 − 21.0 − 2.9 − 0.0 − 2.9 − 0.0 − 0.2 − 0.0 − 0.1 − 12.5
         Feb + 5.1 − 5.5 + 10.4 + 12.0 − 1.6 − 0.1 − 1.5 + 0.1 + 0.1 + 0.0 − 0.0 + 19.8         Mar − 16.3 − 11.5 − 4.8 − 2.8 − 2.0 + 0.5 − 2.5 − 0.0 − 0.1 − 0.1 − 0.1 − 14.1
liabilities arising from registered debt securities. — 2Including deposits under savings and loan contracts (see also footnote 2). — 4Including
under savings and loan contracts (see Table IV.12). — 3Excluding deposits liabilities arising from non-negotiable bearer debt securities. 
35*IV Banks

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
E U R O S Y S T E M
Monthly Report
May 2011
IV Banks
 
8 Deposits of domestic households and non-profit institutions at banks (MFIs) in Germany *
 
 
€ billion
Sight deposits Time deposits  1,2 
by creditor group by creditor group
Deposits of Domestic households Domestic households
domestichouseholdsand Domestic
non-profit Self- non-profit Self-
employed Other institu- employed Other institutions,
Period total Total Total persons Employees tions Total Total persons Employees individuals individuals
End of year or month *
 
2008 1,543.2 507.8 491.8 85.1 336.5 70.3 16.0 390.6 367.2 50.4 281.0 35.8
2009 1,594.9 651.3 631.3 112.5 424.6 94.3 19.9 275.6 258.5 24.5 213.2 20.72010 1,658.9 713.7 692.4 123.8 471.2 97.4 21.3 258.6 241.4 21.2 203.7 16.4
2010          Oct 1,632.9 703.2 680.3 121.8 463.5 95.0 22.8 254.8 238.3 21.6 200.1 16.6
         Nov 1,644.7 711.2 689.6 122.3 471.0 96.4 21.5 255.8 239.6 22.0 201.1 16.4
         Dec 1,658.9 713.7 692.4 123.8 471.2 97.4 21.3 258.6 241.4 21.2 203.7 16.4
2011          Jan 1,659.8 712.2 690.0 124.7 467.7 97.6 22.1 258.3 241.4 21.2 204.0 16.2
         Feb 1,665.3 714.1 691.8 123.6 470.2 97.9 22.4 259.1 242.3 22.0 203.9 16.4         Mar 1,667.6 714.7 692.1 121.5 472.2 98.4 22.5 259.3 242.6 22.1 204.2 16.3
Changes *
2009 + 51.0 + 142.2 + 138.3 + 27.4 + 88.3 + 22.6 + 4.0 − 115.0 − 108.7 − 25.8 − 67.7 − 15.2
2010 + 64.0 + 62.1 + 60.8 + 11.3 + 40.4 + 9.1 + 1.4 − 17.0 − 17.1 − 3.3 − 9.7 − 4.1
2010          Oct + 8.2 + 6.4 + 6.3 + 3.2 + 2.7 + 0.4 + 0.1 + 0.3 + 0.1 − 0.1 + 0.4 − 0.2
         Nov + 11.8 + 8.0 + 9.3 + 0.4 + 7.5 + 1.4 − 1.3 + 1.0 + 1.3 + 0.4 + 1.0 − 0.1         Dec + 14.2 + 2.2 + 2.5 + 1.5 + 0.2 + 0.7 − 0.2 + 2.8 + 1.8 − 0.8 + 2.6 − 0.0
2011          Jan + 0.9 − 1.5 − 2.4 + 0.9 − 3.4 + 0.2 + 0.9 − 0.3 + 0.0 − 0.1 + 0.3 − 0.2
         Feb + 5.5 + 2.0 + 1.8 − 1.1 + 2.5 + 0.3 + 0.2 + 0.8 + 0.8 + 0.8 − 0.1 + 0.2         Mar + 2.3 + 0.5 + 0.4 − 2.1 + 2.0 + 0.5 + 0.2 + 0.1 + 0.3 + 0.1 + 0.3 − 0.1
*See Table IV.2, footnote*; statistical breaks have been eliminated from the Report, are not specially marked. — 1Including subordinated liabilities and
changes. The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as liabilities arising from registered debt securities. — 2Including deposits
provisional. Subsequent revisions, which appear in the following MonthlyDEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
E U R O S Y S T E M
Monthly Report
May 2011
 
  
9 Deposits of domestic government at banks (MFIs) in Germany, by creditor group 
*
 
€ billion
Deposits
   
Federal Government and its special funds  1 State governments
Time deposits Time deposits
Savings Savings
for up deposits Memo for up deposits Memo
Domestic to and for more and bank item to and for more and bank item
government, Sight including than savings Fiduciary Sight including than savings Fiduciary
Period total Total deposits 1 year 1 year bonds  2 loans Total deposits 1 year 1 year bonds  2 loans
End of year or month *
 
2008 164.7 34.8 2.3 3.7 28.9 0.0 6.6 28.2 6.9 9.9 11.3 0.1 17.3
2009 129.3 22.2 1.3 3.7 17.1 0.1 17.3 23.1 7.1 5.8 10.1 0.1 18.02010 153.4 38.7 5.7 3.3 29.6 0.1 17.0 28.2 8.5 6.7 12.9 0.2 17.2
2010          Oct 147.3 34.1 4.2 1.9 28.0 0.1 17.2 34.5 8.7 12.6 13.1 0.2 17.4
         Nov 156.0 41.3 7.4 3.0 30.8 0.1 17.2 28.9 8.1 7.5 13.1 0.2 17.3
         Dec 153.4 38.7 5.7 3.3 29.6 0.1 17.0 28.2 8.5 6.7 12.9 0.2 17.2
2011          Jan 149.0 37.1 10.0 2.3 24.7 0.1 17.0 28.6 8.7 6.9 12.9 0.2 17.1
         Feb 152.7 37.8 9.1 4.0 24.6 0.1 17.0 29.6 7.1 9.7 12.7 0.2 17.1         Mar 154.4 36.2 8.3 3.8 24.1 0.1 17.0 35.1 12.2 10.2 12.6 0.2 17.1
Changes *
2009 − 23.9 − 0.8 − 1.0 + 0.4 − 0.3 + 0.0 − 0.1 − 5.1 + 0.2 − 4.1 − 1.1 + 0.0 − 0.4
2010 + 23.9 + 16.5 + 4.4 − 0.4 + 12.5 + 0.0 − 0.2 + 5.2 + 1.5 + 0.9 + 2.8 + 0.0 − 0.7
2010          Oct + 6.7 + 13.4 + 2.0 − 1.1 + 12.5 + 0.0 − 0.0 − 5.2 − 1.7 − 3.4 − 0.1 − 0.0 − 0.0
         Nov + 8.7 + 7.1 + 3.2 + 1.2 + 2.8 − 0.0 + 0.0 − 5.6 − 0.5 − 5.1 + 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.0         Dec − 2.6 − 2.5 − 1.7 + 0.3 − 1.1 − − 0.2 − 0.6 + 0.4 − 0.8 − 0.2 − 0.0 − 0.1
2011          Jan − 4.4 − 1.6 + 4.3 − 1.0 − 5.0 − − 0.1 + 0.4 + 0.2 + 0.2 − 0.0 + 0.0 − 0.1
         Feb + 3.7 + 0.7 − 0.9 + 1.7 − 0.0 − 0.0 + 0.0 + 1.0 − 1.6 + 2.8 − 0.2 + 0.0 − 0.0         Mar + 1.7 − 1.6 − 0.8 − 0.3 − 0.5 − 0.0 − 0.0 + 5.5 + 5.1 + 0.5 − 0.1 − − 0.0
*See Table IV.2, footnote *; excluding deposits of the Treuhand agency and which are included in ”Enterprises”. Statistical breaks have been eliminat ed
its successor organisations, of the Federal Railways, east German Railways from the changes. The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded
and Federal Post Office, and, from 1995, of Deutsche Bahn AG, Deutsche as provisional. Subsequent revisions, which appear in the followingPost AG and Deutsche Telekom AG, and of publicly owned enterprises,
36*IV Banks

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
May 2011
IV Banks
 
 
 
 
 
 Savings deposits  3  Memo item
 
 by maturity
 more than 1 year  2 
Included Subordinated
of which liabilities in time
Domestic Domestic (excluding deposits:
up to and up to and Bank negotiable liabilities non-profit non-profit
institu- including including more than Domestic institu- savings Fiduciary debt arising
tions 1 year Total 2 years 2 years Total tions bonds  4 loans from repos   Period households securities)  5 
End of year or month *
 
23.4 231.5 159.2 21.3 137.9 530.2 523.1 7.1 114.6 0.3 8.5 − 2008
17.2 109.0 166.6 19.4 147.2 586.5 577.5 9.0 81.5 0.1 9.8 − 200917.3 85.7 173.0 15.0 158.0 609.1 599.2 9.9 77.5 0.1 9.7 − 2010
16.5 85.4 169.5 15.0 154.5 598.1 588.0 10.1 76.8 0.1 9.8 − 2010          Oct 
16.3 85.6 170.2 15.2 155.0 600.8 590.9 9.8 77.0 0.1 9.8 −          Nov 
17.3 85.7 173.0 15.0 158.0 609.1 599.2 9.9 77.5 0.1 9.7 −          Dec 
16.9 84.7 173.7 15.0 158.7 611.3 601.3 9.9 78.0 0.1 9.7 − 2011          Jan 
16.9 84.4 174.8 15.1 159.6 613.3 603.3 10.0 78.8 0.1 9.7 −          Feb 
16.7 83.7 175.5 15.0 160.5 614.3 604.3 10.0 79.4 0.1 9.7 −          Mar 
Changes *
− 6.2 − 122.2 + 7.2 − 1.9 + 9.1 + 56.3 + 54.4 + 1.9 − 32.6 + 0.0 + 1.7 − 2009
+ 0.1 − 23.3 + 6.4 − 4.4 + 10.8 + 22.8 + 22.0 + 0.9 − 4.0 − 0.0 − 0.2 + 0.0 2010
+ 0.1 − 0.4 + 0.6 + 0.1 + 0.5 + 1.3 + 1.4 − 0.0 + 0.2 − + 0.0 − 2010          Oct 
− 0.3 + 0.2 + 0.7 + 0.2 + 0.5 + 2.6 + 2.9 − 0.3 + 0.2 − − 0.0 −          Nov + 1.0 + 0.0 + 2.8 − 0.2 + 3.0 + 8.6 + 8.5 + 0.1 + 0.5 + 0.0 − 0.1 −          Dec 
− 0.3 − 1.0 + 0.7 − 0.0 + 0.7 + 2.2 + 2.2 + 0.0 + 0.5 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 2011          Jan 
− 0.1 − 0.3 + 1.1 + 0.2 + 0.9 + 2.0 + 2.0 + 0.0 + 0.8 − 0.0 + 0.1 −          Feb 
− 0.2 − 0.6 + 0.8 − 0.1 + 0.9 + 1.0 + 0.9 + 0.0 + 0.6 + 0.0 − 0.0 −          Mar 
under savings and loan contracts (see Table IV.12). — 3Excluding deposits liabilities arising from non-negotiable bearer debt securities. — 5Included in
under savings and loan contracts (see also footnote 2). — 4Including time deposits. DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
May 2011
 
  
 
 
 
 
Local government and local government associations
(including municipal special-purpose associations) Social security funds
Time deposits  3 Time deposits
Savings Savings
for up deposits Memo for up deposits Memo
to and for more and bank item to and for more and bank item
Sight including than savings Fiduciary Sight including than savings Fiduciary
Total deposits 1 year 1 year bonds  2,4 loans Total deposits 1 year 1 year bonds  2 loans   Period
End of year or month *
 
42.5 14.3 22.0 3.9 2.2 0.2 59.2 10.7 39.8 8.4 0.3 0.0 2008
38.0 20.2 10.3 4.2 3.3 0.4 46.0 13.3 23.1 8.9 0.6 0.0 200937.4 19.5 9.9 4.5 3.5 0.4 49.1 12.3 27.9 8.3 0.6 0.0 2010
34.0 17.0 9.0 4.5 3.5 0.4 44.7 11.8 23.8 8.4 0.6 0.0 2010          Oct 
36.0 18.1 9.9 4.5 3.5 0.4 49.9 15.5 25.5 8.3 0.6 0.0          Nov 
37.4 19.5 9.9 4.5 3.5 0.4 49.1 12.3 27.9 8.3 0.6 0.0          Dec 
33.6 16.3 9.3 4.5 3.5 0.4 49.7 14.6 26.3 8.3 0.6 0.0 2011          Jan 
36.0 17.7 10.1 4.6 3.5 0.4 49.3 14.8 25.6 8.3 0.6 0.0          Feb 
35.0 16.6 10.2 4.6 3.6 0.4 48.1 13.1 26.0 8.5 0.6 0.0          Mar 
Changes *
− 4.4 + 5.9 − 11.7 + 0.3 + 1.1 − 0.0 − 13.6 + 2.5 − 16.8 + 0.4 + 0.3 − 0.0 2009
− 0.6 − 0.6 − 0.5 + 0.2 + 0.2 − 0.0 + 2.9 − 1.2 + 4.7 − 0.6 − 0.1 − 0.0 2010
− 1.7 − 0.8 − 0.8 + 0.0 − 0.0 + 0.0 + 0.2 − 1.1 + 1.0 + 0.3 + 0.0 − 2010          Oct 
+ 1.9 + 1.1 + 0.8 + 0.0 + 0.0 − + 5.2 + 3.7 + 1.6 − 0.1 − 0.0 −          Nov 
+ 1.4 + 1.5 + 0.0 − 0.0 + 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.9 − 3.2 + 2.4 − 0.0 − 0.0 −          Dec 
− 3.8 − 3.2 − 0.6 + 0.0 − 0.0 − + 0.6 + 2.2 − 1.6 + 0.0 + 0.0 − 2011          Jan 
+ 2.4 + 1.4 + 0.8 + 0.1 + 0.1 − 0.0 − 0.4 + 0.3 − 0.7 + 0.0 − 0.0 −          Feb 
− 1.0 − 1.1 + 0.0 − + 0.0 − 0.0 − 1.2 − 1.8 + 0.4 + 0.2 − 0.0 − 0.0          Mar 
Monthly Report, are not specially marked. — 1Federal Railways Fund, liabilities arising from non-negotiable bearer debt securities. — 3Including
Indemnification Fund, Redemption Fund for Inherited Liabilities, ERP Special deposits under savings and loan contracts. — 4Excluding deposits under
Fund, German Unity Fund, Equalisation of Burdens Fund. — 2Including savings and loan contracts (see also footnote 3). 
37*IV Banks

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
E U R O S Y S T E M
Monthly Report
May 2011
IV Banks
 
10 Savings deposits and bank savings bonds of banks (MFIs) in Germany sold to non-banks (non-MFIs) *
 
 
€ billion
Savings deposits  1 Bank savings bonds,  3  sold to
of residents of non-residents domestic non-banks
at three months’ at more than three Memo
notice months’ notice item of which
Interest With
of which of which of which credited maturities
Special Special At three on of moresavings savings savings non-banks, than foreign months’
Period Total Total Total Total Total notice deposits total Total 2 years facilities  
2 facilities  2 non-banks
End of year or month *
 
2008 544.1 535.2 424.8 344.0 110.4 103.2 8.9 6.3 14.9 150.8 135.4 59.6 15.4
2009 604.1 594.5 474.5 379.4 120.0 112.1 9.6 7.0 13.8 118.8 103.2 68.3 15.6
2010 628.2 618.2 512.5 412.3 105.7 96.6 9.9 7.7 10.9 113.5 96.9 72.0 16.6
2010          Nov 619.8 610.0 504.2 404.7 105.8 96.8 9.8 7.5 0.5 113.0 96.3 71.8 16.7
         Dec 628.2 618.2 512.5 412.3 105.7 96.6 9.9 7.7 6.9 113.5 96.9 72.0 16.6
2011          Jan 630.4 620.4 515.2 414.0 105.3 96.4 9.9 7.7 0.4 113.6 97.2 72.0 16.4
         Feb 632.5 622.5 517.2 415.6 105.3 96.4 9.9 7.7 0.3 114.5 98.0 72.4 16.5         Mar 633.5 623.5 518.0 417.0 105.5 96.4 10.0 7.8 0.3 114.6 98.3 72.5 16.3
Changes *
2009 + 60.0 + 59.3 + 50.3 + 35.8 + 8.9 + 7.8 + 0.7 + 0.8 . − 30.6 − 31.6 + 9.5 + 1.0
2010 + 24.3 + 24.0 + 38.3 + 33.1 − 14.3 − 15.5 + 0.3 + 0.6 . − 2.7 − 3.7 + 6.3 + 1.0
2010          Nov + 2.6 + 2.6 + 2.0 + 1.9 + 0.5 + 0.5 + 0.0 + 0.1 . + 0.9 + 0.3 + 0.2 + 0.6
         Dec + 8.7 + 8.5 + 8.6 + 7.6 − 0.0 − 0.3 + 0.2 + 0.2 . + 0.4 + 0.6 + 0.2 − 0.1
2011          Jan + 2.2 + 2.2 + 2.7 + 1.7 − 0.5 − 0.2 + 0.0 + 0.1 . + 0.2 + 0.3 + 0.0 − 0.1
         Feb + 2.1 + 2.1 + 2.1 + 1.6 + 0.0 − + 0.0 + 0.0 . + 0.9 + 0.8 + 0.4 + 0.0         Mar + 1.0 + 1.0 + 0.8 + 1.4 + 0.2 + 0.1 + 0.0 + 0.0 . + 0.5 + 0.5 + 0.4 − 0.1
*See Table IV.2, footnote*; statistical breaks have been eliminated from the loan contracts, which are classified as time deposits. — 2Savings deposits
changes. The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as bearing interest at a rate which exceeds the minimum or basic rate of
provisional. Subsequent revisions, which appear in the following Monthly interest. — 3Including liabilities arising from non-negotiable bearer debt
Report, are not specially marked. — 1Excluding deposits under savings and securities. 
 
  
 
11 Debt securities and money market paper outstanding of banks (MFIs) in Germany 
*
 
€ billion
Non-negotiable bearer debt securities
Negotiable bearer debt securities and money market paper and money market paper  5 
of which of which
with maturities of Subordinated
with maturities of
Certifi- more more non-
Floating Zero Foreign cates up to and more up to and more than 1 year than 1 year negotiable negotiable
rate coupon currency of including including than including including than debt debt
Period Total bonds  1 deposit 1 year 2 years 2 years Total 1 year 2 years 2 years bonds  1,2 bonds  3,4 securities securities
End of year or month *
 
2008 1,640.1 395.9 50.7 314.1 64.0 162.6 153.3 1,324.2 2.3 0.2 1.3 0.8 52.5 1.6
2009 1,529.8 380.6 43.9 317.4 70.4 115.9 105.8 1,308.2 0.9 0.0 0.3 0.6 46.1 1.8
2010 1,536.2 342.0 40.7 366.5 89.0 97.0 56.8 1,376.7 0.7 0.0 0.0 0.6 44.1 1.5
2010          Nov 1,452.1 301.2 25.3 359.9 86.0 98.7 53.4 1,291.6 0.7 0.0 0.1 0.6 44.1 1.6
         Dec 1,435.1 287.2 27.8 359.2 82.8 94.0 54.1 1,281.4 0.7 0.0 0.0 0.6 43.9 1.5
2011          Jan 1,425.6 286.2 25.9 349.4 77.8 86.5 55.7 1,276.1 0.7 0.0 0.0 0.6 43.8 1.5
         Feb 1,424.4 287.1 25.5 349.2 81.5 91.8 54.6 1,269.1 0.7 0.0 0.1 0.6 43.6 1.5         Mar 1,397.9 294.7 27.0 333.1 76.4 87.1 53.0 1,250.0 0.6 0.0 0.1 0.6 44.9 1.5
Changes *
2009 − 110.1 − 15.3 − 6.8 + 4.7 + 6.4 − 46.7 − 47.8 − 15.6 − 1.4 − 0.2 − 1.0 − 0.2 − 6.4 + 0.5
2010 + 15.4 − 37.5 + 3.2 + 49.1 + 18.6 − 18.8 − 48.9 + 76.0 − 0.2 + 0.0 − 0.2 − 0.0 − 2.0 − 0.3
2010          Nov + 28.3 + 2.3 + 3.4 + 22.7 + 7.1 + 10.8 + 4.3 + 16.2 − 0.0 − + 0.0 − 0.0 + 0.4 + 0.0
         Dec − 17.0 − 8.6 + 2.5 − 0.7 − 3.2 − 4.7 + 0.8 − 10.2 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.2 − 0.0
2011          Jan − 9.5 − 0.9 − 1.9 − 9.8 − 5.0 − 7.5 + 1.6 − 5.2 − 0.0 − + 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.2 − 0.0
         Feb + 0.5 + 0.8 + 0.7 + 0.7 + 3.7 + 5.3 − 1.1 − 5.4 + 0.0 − 0.0 + 0.0 + 0.0 − 0.1 − 0.0         Mar − 26.5 + 0.3 + 0.1 − 16.4 − 5.1 − 5.5 − 2.0 − 19.0 − 0.1 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.1 + 1.3 − 0.0
*See Table IV.2, footnote*; statistical breaks have been eliminated from the rate notes and zero coupon bonds denominated in foreign currencies. —
changes. The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as 4Bonds denominated in non-euro-area currencies. — 5Non-negotiable
provisional. Subsequent revisions, which appear in the following Monthly bearer debt securities are classified among bank savings bonds (see also
Report, are not specially marked. — 1Including debt securities denominated Table IV.10, footnote 2). 
in foreign currencies. — 2Issue value when floated. — 3Including floating
38*IV Banks

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
May 2011
IV  Banks
  
12  Building  and  loan  associations (MFIs) in Germany *
  Interim statements
  
€ billion
Lending to banks (MFIs) Lending to non-banks (non-MFIs) Deposits of banks Deposits of non-
(MFIs)  5 banks (non-MFIs)
Credit Building loans Secur- Memo
bal- item ities (in-
ances cluding Bearer New
and Loans Treasury Deposits Deposits debt Capital con-
Num- loans under bills under under secur- (includ- tractsber (ex- Bank savings Interim and savings savings ities ing pub- enteredof Balance cluding debt and loan and Other Treasury and loan Sight and loan Sight and out- lished into in
End of sheet building Building secur- con- bridging building discount con- and time con- time de- stand- re- year or associ-
year/month ations loans  
2 ities 3 tracts loans loans tracts deposits tracts posits  6 ing month  8 total  13 loans)  1 paper)  4 serves)  7 
All  building  and  loan  associations
2010 24 198.9 42.8 0.0 18.9 27.8 72.0 14.3 14.4 0.6 29.7 130.9 7.3 5.5 7.5 92.7
2011          Jan 24 199.2 42.7 0.0 19.3 27.6 72.0 14.4 14.7 0.6 29.7 131.5 7.1 5.5 7.6 7.6
         Feb 24 201.7 45.0 0.0 19.7 27.4 72.0 14.5 14.7 0.6 30.1 131.9 7.0 7.2 7.7 7.6
         Mar 23 198.0 41.8 0.0 18.9 27.3 72.4 14.5 14.8 0.6 27.3 132.4 6.9 5.7 7.6 8.6
Private  building  and  Ioan  associations
  
2011          Jan 14 144.8 26.6 0.0 13.6 17.9 57.5 12.8 8.7 0.4 26.4 86.6 6.9 5.5 5.0 4.8
         Feb 14 147.3 28.7 0.0 13.9 17.7 57.5 12.9 8.7 0.4 26.8 87.0 6.8 7.2 5.0 4.8
         Mar 13 143.3 25.4 0.0 13.1 17.7 57.8 12.9 8.8 0.4 23.9 87.4 6.7 5.7 4.9 5.5
Public  building  and  Ioan  associations
  
2011          Jan 10 54.4 16.1 0.0 5.7 9.7 14.5 1.6 6.0 0.2 3.4 44.9 0.2 − 2.7 2.8
         Feb 10 54.5 16.3 0.0 5.7 9.7 14.5 1.6 5.9 0.2 3.3 44.9 0.2 − 2.7 2.8
         Mar 10 54.7 16.4 0.0 5.8 9.6 14.6 1.6 6.0 0.2 3.4 45.0 0.2 − 2.7 3.1
Trends in building and loan association business
  
€ billion
Changes in deposits Capital promised Capital disbursed Disbursement Interest and
under savings and commitments repayments
loan contracts Allocations outstanding at received on
end of period building loans  10 
Deposits under Loans under
Repay- savings and savings andments loan contracts loan contracts  
9 Newly
Interest of granted
credited interim deposits of which of which
on under Applied Applied and of
which of Memo Amounts deposits cancelled to settle- to settle- bridging
under savings of ment of ment of loans Under which item paid intosavings savings and which interim interim and alloc- Repay- Housing
and and loan loan Net and and other ated ments bonuses
loan ac- con- con- alloca- bridging bridging building con- during re-
Period tracts tracts Total Total Total loans Total loans loans Total tracts Total quarter counts  
9 tions  11 ceived  12 
All  building  and  loan  associations
2010 27.8 2.6 5.5 43.6 29.3 37.9 17.0 4.3 7.8 4.0 13.2 11.8 7.5 11.8 9.6 0.5
2011          Jan 2.4 0.0 0.4 3.4 2.3 2.8 1.3 0.3 0.5 0.3 1.0 12.0 7.6 0.9 0.1
         Feb 2.3 0.0 0.5 3.9 2.5 3.0 1.4 0.3 0.6 0.3 1.0 12.5 7.7 0.9 0.0
         Mar 2.6 0.0 0.6 3.9 2.6 3.6 1.6 0.4 0.7 0.3 1.3 12.4 7.6 1.0 ... 0.1
Private  building  and  Ioan  associations
  
2011          Jan 1.5 0.0 0.2 2.4 1.5 2.0 0.9 0.3 0.4 0.2 0.8 7.4 3.8 0.6 0.0
         Feb 1.5 0.0 0.2 2.5 1.5 2.1 0.9 0.2 0.4 0.2 0.8 7.6 3.9 0.6 0.0
         Mar 1.8 0.0 0.3 2.8 1.7 2.6 1.1 0.3 0.5 0.3 1.0 7.6 3.8 0.7 ... 0.0
Public  building  and  Ioan  associations
  
2011          Jan 0.9 − 0.2 1.0 0.8 0.8 0.4 0.1 0.2 0.1 0.2 4.7 3.7 0.3 0.0
         Feb 0.8 − 0.2 1.3 1.0 0.9 0.5 0.1 0.2 0.1 0.2 4.9 3.9 0.3 0.0
         Mar 0.9 0.0 0.3 1.2 0.9 1.0 0.5 0.1 0.2 0.1 0.3 4.8 3.8 0.3 ... 0.0
*Excluding assets and liabilities and/or transactions of foreign branches. amount covered by the contracts; only contracts newly entered into, for
The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as provisional. which the contract fee has been fully paid. Increases in the sum contracted
Subsequent revisions, which appear in the following Monthly Report, are count as new contracts. — 9For disbursements of deposits under savings
not specially marked. — 1Including postal giro account balances, claims on and loan contracts arising from the allocation of contracts see “Capital
building and loan associations, claims arising from registered debt securities disbursed“. — 10Including housing bonuses credited. — 11Only allocations
and central bank credit balances. — 2Loans under savings and loan accepted by the beneficiaries; including allocations applied to settlement of
contracts and interim and bridging loans. — 3Including money market interim and bridging loans. — 12The amounts already credited to the
paper and small amounts of other securities issued by banks. — 4Including accounts of savers or borrowers are also included in “Amounts paid into
equalisation claims. — 5Including liabilities to building and loan savings and loan accounts“ and “Interest and repayments received on
associations. — 6Including small amounts of savings deposits. — 7Including building loans“. — 13 See Table IV.2, footnote 1. 
participation rights capital and fund for general banking risks. — 8Total
39*IV  Banks

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
E U R O S Y S T E M
Monthly Report
May 2011
IV  Banks
  
13 Assets and liabilities of the foreign branches and foreign subsidiaries of German banks (MFIs) *
  
  
€ billion
Number of Lending to banks (MFIs) Lending to non-banks (non-MFIs) Other  assets  7 
Loans Credit  balances and loans
German   
banks(MFIs)   
with
foreign foreign Derivative
branches Money Money financial
branches  1 
and/or and/or market to to market instruments
foreign foreign Balance paper, German foreign paper, in the
subsi- subsi- sheet German Foreign secur- non- non- secur- trading TX1
Period diaries diaries total Total Total banks banks Total Total banks banks ities  2 Total portfolio ities 2,3 
Foreign  branches End of year or month *
  
2007 52 218 2,042.4 813.8 743.1 238.6 504.5 70.7 1,066.8 811.4 21.6 789.8 255.3 161.8 −
2008 56 226 1,715.5 730.7 669.1 244.9 424.2 61.6 825.3 630.4 20.2 610.3 194.9 159.5 −2009 51 211 1,461.6 579.2 539.1 210.1 328.9 40.2 691.5 534.7 20.7 514.0 156.7 190.9 −
2010          May 55 215 1,695.9 691.9 659.0 233.3 425.7 32.9 807.2 622.2 37.4 584.8 185.0 196.8 −
         June 55 215 1,674.3 679.4 647.8 226.8 421.0 31.6 777.5 598.0 22.5 575.5 179.5 217.4 −
         July 56 216 1,584.2 633.6 603.0 230.7 372.3 30.6 742.3 564.5 23.4 541.1 177.8 208.3 −
         Aug 56 217 1,596.6 663.4 633.2 235.7 397.4 30.2 736.2 570.9 22.7 548.1 165.4 197.0 −         Sep 56 217 1,548.3 634.3 605.5 228.8 376.7 28.8 721.1 560.7 21.3 539.4 160.4 192.9 −
         Oct 56 217 1,582.8 640.1 612.1 225.7 386.4 28.1 706.1 547.4 21.6 525.8 158.8 236.5 −
         Nov 56 215 1,636.3 648.0 620.2 232.1 388.1 27.8 725.7 557.5 24.0 533.6 168.2 262.6 −         Dec 55 212 2,226.3 591.4 564.8 232.0 332.8 26.6 696.7 532.5 27.5 505.0 164.2 938.2 633.9
2011          Jan 55 211 2,072.1 583.8 558.1 221.8 336.3 25.8 712.9 550.9 27.1 523.8 162.0 775.4 614.1
         Feb 55 211 2,041.4 570.4 545.7 210.6 335.1 24.8 697.6 542.8 26.6 516.2 154.8 773.4 585.7
Changes *
2008 + 4 + 8 −359.4 − 98.5 − 89.3 + 6.3 − 95.5 − 9.2 −256.8 −190.7 − 1.5 −189.3 −66.1 − 4.1 −
2009 − 5 − 15 −247.9 −148.8 −127.3 − 34.7 − 92.6 − 21.5 −131.7 − 94.6 + 0.5 − 95.1 −37.1 + 32.6 −
2010          June − − − 34.2 − 12.6 − 11.2 − 6.5 − 4.7 − 1.4 − 38.5 − 31.5 − 14.9 − 16.6 − 7.0 + 16.9 −
         July + 1 + 1 − 49.0 − 28.3 − 27.6 + 3.8 − 31.4 − 0.7 − 12.7 − 15.7 + 1.0 − 16.7 + 3.0 − 8.0 −
         Aug − + 1 − 7.1 + 21.7 + 22.3 + 5.1 + 17.2 − 0.6 − 16.8 − 1.9 − 0.7 − 1.2 −14.9 − 12.1 −         Sep − − − 1.3 − 10.3 − 9.5 − 6.9 − 2.5 − 0.8 + 11.4 + 10.4 − 1.4 + 11.8 + 0.9 − 2.4 −
         Oct − − + 42.3 + 8.5 + 9.1 − 3.1 + 12.2 − 0.6 − 10.1 − 9.5 + 0.3 − 9.8 − 0.6 + 43.9 −
         Nov − − 2 + 12.4 − 9.5 − 8.8 + 6.4 − 15.3 − 0.7 − 2.0 − 6.9 + 2.3 − 9.2 + 4.9 + 23.9 −         Dec − 1 − 3 +606.6 − 50.2 − 49.3 − 0.1 − 49.2 − 1.0 − 19.7 − 17.8 + 3.5 − 21.3 − 2.0 +676.6 −
2011          Jan − − 1 −139.5 − 0.7 + 0.0 − 10.2 + 10.3 − 0.7 + 23.5 + 23.9 − 0.4 + 24.3 − 0.4 −162.2 − 19.8
         Feb − − − 26.8 − 11.6 − 10.6 − 11.2 + 0.6 − 1.0 − 13.3 − 6.6 − 0.5 − 6.2 − 6.7 − 1.9 − 28.4
  
  
Foreign  subsidiaries End of year or month *
  
2007 39 120 590.8 267.8 202.4 104.8 97.5 65.5 263.9 176.0 37.8 138.1 87.9 59.0 −
2008 38 116 594.9 244.9 183.1 85.5 97.6 61.8 267.8 196.5 42.2 154.3 71.3 82.2 −2009 36 97 474.1 205.4 157.0 87.4 69.6 48.4 217.0 154.7 38.7 115.9 62.4 51.7 −
2010          May 37 98 521.0 224.0 176.7 98.9 77.9 47.3 222.2 166.3 38.3 128.0 55.9 74.7 −
         June 37 99 494.4 215.4 167.6 95.8 71.9 47.8 224.7 168.6 38.7 129.9 56.1 54.3 −
         July 38 99 495.0 212.9 168.2 88.6 79.6 44.7 227.0 173.1 39.8 133.3 53.9 55.1 −
         Aug 38 99 495.8 218.4 172.6 86.8 85.9 45.8 224.4 171.7 39.4 132.2 52.7 53.0 −         Sep 37 96 489.4 214.8 170.7 88.8 81.8 44.1 220.1 168.8 38.2 130.6 51.4 54.5 −
         Oct 37 96 500.7 221.7 178.4 96.0 82.4 43.4 216.6 164.9 36.9 128.1 51.7 62.4 −
         Nov 37 95 498.2 223.0 180.4 95.6 84.8 42.6 218.4 167.2 37.8 129.4 51.1 56.8 −         Dec 37 93 495.1 220.9 178.7 98.8 79.9 42.1 218.3 168.8 37.7 131.2 49.5 55.9 −
2011          Jan 37 94 492.5 222.7 180.6 99.6 81.0 42.0 217.6 167.2 38.1 129.1 50.4 52.3 −
         Feb 37 94 490.1 221.5 182.1 100.5 81.6 39.4 215.9 165.3 37.4 127.9 50.6 52.7 −
Changes *
2008 − 1 − 4 − 0.2 − 24.2 − 19.8 − 19.3 − 0.5 − 4.4 + 1.1 + 17.5 + 4.4 + 13.2 −16.4 + 22.9 −
2009 − 2 − 19 −120.2 − 39.8 − 26.9 + 1.9 − 28.8 − 12.9 − 50.0 − 41.1 − 3.5 − 37.6 − 8.9 − 30.4 −
2010          June − + 1 − 28.8 − 9.6 − 9.8 − 3.1 − 6.7 + 0.2 + 1.3 + 1.1 + 0.4 + 0.7 + 0.2 − 20.5 −
         July + 1 − + 5.9 + 0.1 + 1.9 − 7.1 + 9.1 − 1.8 + 4.7 + 6.8 + 1.0 + 5.8 − 2.2 + 1.1 −
         Aug − − − 2.4 + 4.1 + 3.6 − 1.9 + 5.5 + 0.4 − 4.2 − 3.0 − 0.3 − 2.7 − 1.2 − 2.2 −         Sep − 1 − 3 − 0.1 − 0.5 − 0.1 + 2.1 − 2.2 − 0.4 − 1.4 − 0.1 − 1.3 + 1.2 − 1.3 + 1.8 −
         Oct − − + 12.9 + 7.7 + 8.2 + 7.1 + 1.0 − 0.5 − 2.7 − 3.0 − 1.3 − 1.7 + 0.3 + 7.9 −
         Nov − − 1 − 8.9 − 2.1 − 0.2 − 0.3 + 0.1 − 1.9 − 1.0 − 0.5 + 0.9 − 1.4 − 0.5 − 5.8 −         Dec − − 2 − 1.5 − 1.1 − 1.0 + 3.2 − 4.2 − 0.1 + 0.4 + 2.1 − 0.1 + 2.2 − 1.7 − 0.8 −
2011          Jan − + 1 − 0.2 + 2.9 + 2.6 + 0.8 + 1.8 + 0.3 + 0.5 − 0.4 + 0.4 − 0.9 + 0.9 − 3.6 −
         Feb − − − 1.9 − 0.9 + 1.7 + 0.9 + 0.7 − 2.6 − 1.5 − 1.7 − 0.7 − 1.0 + 0.2 + 0.5 −
*In this table “foreign“ also includes the country of domicile of the foreign ies.) The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as provision al;
branches and foreign subsidiaries. Statistical revisions have been eliminated subsequent revisions, which appear in the following Monthly Report , are
from the changes. (Breaks owing to changes in the reporting population not specially marked. — 1Several branches in a given country of domicile
have not been eliminated from the flow figures for the foreign subsidiar-
40*IV  Banks

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
May 2011
IV  Banks
  
  
  
  
  
Deposits Other  liabilities  6,7 
of banks (MFIs) of non-banks (non-MFIs)
German non-banks  4 
Money
market
paper Derivative
and debt financial
Medium Working instruments securities
and out- capital in the
German Foreign Short- long- Foreign stand- and own trading
Total Total banks Total Total term term ing  5 funds Total portfolio   Period banks non-banks
End of year or month * Foreign  branches
  
1,723.7 1,191.0 547.7 643.3 532.7 55.3 51.2 4.1 477.4 186.0 29.2 103.5 − 2007
1,446.1 1,070.4 554.3 516.1 375.7 45.0 36.5 8.5 330.7 126.6 35.6 107.2 − 20081,125.9 798.0 449.6 348.4 327.9 37.4 33.8 3.5 290.5 157.5 33.9 144.4 − 2009
1,328.6 877.4 446.3 431.1 451.2 38.9 35.4 3.5 412.3 178.0 35.2 154.0 − 2010          May
1,298.9 867.0 425.3 441.7 431.9 39.7 36.1 3.6 392.2 181.1 35.2 159.1 −          June
1,211.4 801.7 404.5 397.2 409.7 41.9 38.1 3.7 367.9 185.3 34.7 152.8 −          July
1,229.0 829.5 407.0 422.6 399.4 42.9 39.0 3.8 356.6 178.6 34.9 154.1 −          Aug 1,177.7 772.3 392.5 379.9 405.4 42.6 38.8 3.8 362.8 183.1 34.4 153.1 −          Sep 
1,208.9 804.6 390.1 414.5 404.3 45.4 39.6 5.8 358.9 186.7 34.1 153.1 −          Oct 
1,240.7 815.2 395.9 419.2 425.6 47.0 41.1 5.9 378.6 193.0 34.2 168.3 −          Nov 1,131.3 751.9 398.2 353.7 379.4 44.9 39.2 5.7 334.5 187.1 34.7 873.3 648.7          Dec 
1,155.7 759.6 400.8 358.8 396.1 44.2 38.9 5.4 351.9 187.8 35.0 693.6 610.9 2011          Jan 
1,150.3 752.8 387.7 365.0 397.5 45.1 39.8 5.3 352.4 188.4 35.0 667.8 582.3          Feb 
Changes *
− 304.0 −139.7 + 6.5 −146.3 −164.3 − 10.3 − 14.7 + 4.4 −153.9 − 59.4 + 6.5 − 2.4 − 2008
− 312.0 −267.8 −104.7 −163.1 − 44.2 − 7.6 − 2.6 − 5.0 − 36.6 + 30.9 − 1.7 + 34.9 − 2009
− 33.6 − 9.6 − 20.4 + 10.9 − 24.0 + 0.8 + 0.7 + 0.0 − 24.8 + 3.1 + 0.0 − 3.7 − 2010          June
− 57.3 − 48.4 − 20.8 − 27.6 − 8.9 + 2.1 + 2.0 + 0.1 − 11.1 + 4.2 − 0.6 + 4.7 −          July
+ 3.7 + 20.0 + 2.5 + 17.5 − 16.3 + 1.0 + 0.9 + 0.1 − 17.3 − 6.7 + 0.3 − 4.4 −          Aug − 17.7 − 37.9 − 14.5 − 23.4 + 20.2 − 0.3 − 0.3 − 0.0 + 20.5 + 4.6 − 0.6 + 12.4 −          Sep 
+ 36.8 + 35.2 − 2.3 + 37.5 + 1.6 + 2.8 + 0.9 + 1.9 − 1.2 + 3.6 − 0.3 + 2.1 −          Oct 
+ 1.5 − 6.8 + 5.8 − 12.6 + 8.2 + 1.6 + 1.4 + 0.1 + 6.7 + 6.3 + 0.1 + 4.5 −          Nov − 96.5 − 56.3 + 2.2 − 58.5 − 40.2 − 2.1 − 1.9 − 0.2 − 38.1 − 5.9 + 0.5 + 708.5 −          Dec 
+ 34.6 + 13.3 + 2.7 + 10.7 + 21.3 − 0.7 − 0.4 − 0.3 + 21.9 + 0.8 + 0.3 − 175.1 − 37.7 2011          Jan 
− 2.2 − 5.0 − 13.1 + 8.1 + 2.8 + 0.9 + 1.0 − 0.1 + 1.9 + 0.5 + 0.0 − 25.2 − 28.6          Feb 
  
  
End of year or month * Foreign  subsidiaries
  
437.3 270.1 118.2 151.9 167.2 37.1 30.3 6.8 130.1 69.5 28.6 55.4 − 2007
453.7 277.7 145.1 132.7 176.0 32.8 24.1 8.7 143.2 57.7 30.5 52.9 − 2008377.6 218.5 125.4 93.1 159.1 37.0 29.6 7.4 122.1 33.3 24.3 38.9 − 2009
414.7 239.0 139.8 99.2 175.7 31.5 24.2 7.3 144.1 31.0 27.4 47.8 − 2010          May
386.2 219.2 127.1 92.1 167.0 30.3 23.0 7.3 136.8 31.1 27.9 49.1 −          June
387.1 218.3 127.5 90.9 168.8 31.1 23.7 7.3 137.7 30.7 32.7 44.5 −          July
387.5 219.2 128.4 90.8 168.3 31.7 24.3 7.4 136.7 31.2 32.9 44.2 −          Aug 380.6 214.8 129.3 85.5 165.8 30.6 23.3 7.3 135.2 30.3 31.6 46.8 −          Sep 
390.8 224.6 135.1 89.5 166.2 31.1 23.7 7.5 135.1 30.2 31.7 48.1 −          Oct 
387.1 221.2 137.6 83.6 165.9 30.0 22.4 7.5 136.0 29.6 31.8 49.7 −          Nov 387.4 221.1 136.4 84.7 166.3 31.0 23.6 7.3 135.3 28.9 31.8 46.9 −          Dec 
387.2 221.2 135.5 85.7 166.0 32.5 25.0 7.4 133.5 27.7 30.2 47.5 − 2011          Jan 
386.1 218.4 131.5 86.8 167.7 31.3 23.9 7.4 136.4 26.7 30.4 47.0 −          Feb 
Changes *
+ 12.1 + 4.8 + 26.9 − 22.1 + 7.3 − 4.3 − 6.3 + 2.0 + 11.6 − 11.8 + 1.9 − 2.4 − 2008
− 76.0 − 59.1 − 19.7 − 39.5 − 16.9 + 4.2 + 5.5 − 1.4 − 21.1 − 24.3 − 6.2 − 13.6 − 2009
− 29.8 − 20.5 − 12.8 − 7.7 − 9.3 − 1.2 − 1.2 − 0.0 − 8.1 + 0.0 + 0.5 + 0.5 − 2010          June
+ 4.8 + 0.8 + 0.4 + 0.5 + 4.0 + 0.8 + 0.7 + 0.1 + 3.2 − 0.3 + 4.7 − 3.3 −          July
− 1.9 − 0.3 + 0.9 − 1.2 − 1.6 + 0.6 + 0.5 + 0.1 − 2.2 + 0.5 + 0.2 − 1.1 −          Aug − 2.1 − 2.1 + 0.9 − 3.0 + 0.0 − 1.0 − 0.9 − 0.1 + 1.1 − 0.9 − 1.2 + 4.2 −          Sep 
+ 11.3 + 10.2 + 5.8 + 4.4 + 1.1 + 0.5 + 0.3 + 0.2 + 0.6 − 0.1 + 0.0 + 1.7 −          Oct 
− 8.7 − 5.7 + 2.5 − 8.2 − 3.0 − 1.2 − 1.2 + 0.1 − 1.9 − 0.6 + 0.1 + 0.3 −          Nov + 1.7 + 0.5 − 1.1 + 1.6 + 1.2 + 1.0 + 1.2 − 0.2 + 0.2 − 0.7 + 0.1 − 2.7 −          Dec 
+ 1.6 + 0.9 − 0.9 + 1.8 + 0.7 + 1.5 + 1.4 + 0.1 − 0.8 − 1.3 − 1.6 + 1.1 − 2011          Jan 
− 0.6 − 2.6 − 4.0 + 1.4 + 2.0 − 1.2 − 1.1 − 0.1 + 3.2 − 1.0 + 0.2 − 0.5 −          Feb 
are regarded as a single branch. — 2Treasury bills, Treasury discount non-negotiable debt securities. — 5Issues of negotiable and
paper and other money market paper, debt securities. — 3Including non-negotiable debt securities and money market paper. — 6Including
own debt securities. — 4Excluding subordinated liabilities and subordinated liabilities. — 7 See also Table IV.2, footnote 1. 
41*IV  Banks

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
E U R O S Y S T E M
Monthly Report
May 2011
V  Minimum reserves
 
1  Reserve ratios
Germany Euro area
 
% of liabilities subject to reserve requirements % of reserve base  1 
Sight Time
Applicable from liabilities liabilities Applicable from Ratio Savings deposits
1995  Aug 1 2    2    1.5    1999  Jan 1 2    
 
   
1Article 3 of the Regulation of the European Central Bank on the appli-
cation of minimum reserves (excluding liabilities to which a reserve ratio of
0% applies pursuant to Article 4 (1)). 
 
  
2  Reserve maintenance in Germany up to the end of 1998
− pursuant to the Minimum Reserves Order of the Bundesbank 
 
DM million
Liabilities subject to reserve requirements Excess reserves  4 
Monthly Required % of the
average  1 Total reserves  2 Level Deficiencies Sight liabilities Time liabilities Savings deposits Actual reserves  3 required  reserves
1995          Dec 2,066,565 579,337 519,456 967,772 36,492 37,337 845 2.3 3
1996          Dec 2,201,464 655,483 474,342 1,071,639 38,671 39,522 851 2.2 41997          Dec 2,327,879 734,986 476,417 1,116,477 40,975 41,721 745 1.8 31998          Dec 2,576,889 865,444 564,878 1,146,567 45,805 46,432 627 1.4 4
1Pursuant to sections 5 to 7 of the Minimum Reserves Order. 2Amount balances of the credit institutions subject to reserve requirements on their
after applying the reserve ratios to the liabilities subject to reserve require- giro accounts at the Bundesbank. — 4 Actual reserves less required reserves. 
ments (section 5 (1) of the Minimum Reserves Order). — 3Average credit
 
 
3  Reserve maintenance in the euro area
− from 1999, pursuant to the ECB Regulation on the application of minimum reserves in accordance with
Article 19.1 of the Statute of the ESCB 
 
Maintenance Required reserves
period before deduction Required reserves
of lump-sum Lump-sum beginning in  1 after deduction of
Reserve base  2 allowance  3 allowance  4 Deficiencies  7 lump-sum allowance Current account  5 Excess reserves  6 
Euro area ( € billion)
 
2010          Sep 10,621.6 212.4 0.5 211.9 213.1 1.2 0.0
         Oct 10,726.7 214.5 0.5 214.0 215.2 1.2 0.0
         Nov 10,614.2 212.3 0.5 211.8 212.5 0.7 0.5         Dec  
8 10,559.5 211.2 0.5 210.7 212.4 1.7 0.0
2011          Jan 10,640.0 212.8 0.5 212.3 213.6 1.3 0.0
         Feb 10,606.9 212.1 0.5 211.6 212.9 1.3 0.0
         Mar 10,491.8 209.8 0.5 209.3 210.5 1.1 0.0
         Apr  p,9 10,438.9 208.8 0.5 208.3 209.5 1.2 ...
         May  p ... ... ... 206.9 ... ... ...
Of which:  Germany ( € million)
2010          Sep 2,543,184 50,864 186 50,678 50,965 287 0
         Oct 2,565,552 51,311 186 51,125 51,499 374 1
         Nov 2,541,821 50,836 186 50,651 50,982 331 0
         Dec 2,530,997 50,620 185 50,435 51,336 901 0
2011          Jan 2,578,387 51,568 185 51,382 51,834 452 1
         Feb 2,580,325 51,606 186 51,421 51,756 335 0
         Mar 2,576,678 51,534 186 51,348 51,711 363 1
         Apr  p 2,563,152 51,263 186 51,077 51,437 360 0
         May  p 2,524,058 50,481 186 50,296 ... ... ...
1From March 2004, the reserve maintenance period will start on the of the credit institutions at the national central banks. — 6Average credit
settlement day of the main refinancing operation immediately following balances less required reserves after deduction of the lump-sum
the meeting of the Governing Council of the ECB for which the monthly allowance. — 7Required reserves after deduction of the lump-sum
discussion of the monetary policy stance is scheduled. — 2Article 3 of the allowance. — 8Required reserves after deduction of the lump-sum
Regulation of the European Central Bank on the application of minimum allowance, including required reserves of Estonia ( €0.223 billion). Required
reserves (excluding liabilities to which a reserve ratio of 0% applies, pur- reserves of the euro area up to 31 December 2010 amounted to €210.5
suant to Article 4 (1)). — 3Amount after applying the reserve ratios to the billion. — 9The total number of deficiencies was not available when this
reserve base. — 4Article 5 (2) of the Regulation of the European Central report went to press. 
Bank on the application of minimum reserves. — 5Average credit balances
42*V  Minimum reserves

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
May 2011
VI Interest rates
 
1 ECB interest rates 2 Base rates
 
 
% per annum % per annum
Main refinancing Main refinancing
operations operations Base Base
Mar- Mar- rate rate
ginal ginal as per as per Minimum Minimum
Applicable Deposit Fixed bid lending Applicable Deposit Fixed bid lending Applicable Civil Applicable Civil
from facility rate rate facility from facility rate rate facility from Code  1 from Code  1 
2002 Dec                  6 1.75 − 2.75 3.75 2008 July                  9 3.25 − 4.25 5.25 2002 Jan                1 2.57 2007 Jan                1 2.70
         Oct                  8 2.75 − 3.75 4.75          July                1 2.47          July                1 3.19
2003 Mar                  7 1.50 − 2.50 3.50          Oct                  9 3.25 3.75 − 4.25
         June                 6 1.00 − 2.00 3.00          Nov                12 2.75 3.25 − 3.75 2003 Jan                1 1.97 2008 Jan                1 3.32
         Dec                10 2.00 2.50 − 3.00          July                1 1.22          July                1 3.19
2005 Dec                  6 1.25 − 2.25 3.25
2009 Jan                21 1.00 2.00 − 3.00 2004 Jan                1 1.14 2009 Jan                1 1.62
2006 Mar                  8 1.50 − 2.50 3.50          Mar                11 0.50 1.50 − 2.50          July                1 1.13          July                1  2 0.12
         June               15 1.75 − 2.75 3.75          Apr                  8 0.25 1.25 − 2.25
         Aug                  9 2.00 − 3.00 4.00          May                13 0.25 1.00 − 1.75 2005 Jan                1 1.21
         Oct                11 2.25 − 3.25 4.25          July                1 1.17
         Dec                13 2.50 − 3.50 4.50 2011 Apr                13 0.50 1.25 − 2.00
2006 Jan                1 1.37
2007 Mar                14 2.75 − 3.75 4.75          July                1 1.95
         June               13 3.00 − 4.00 5.00
1Pursuant to section 247 of the Civil Code. — 2Since 1 July 2009  
unchanged. 
 
  
3 Eurosystem monetary policy operations allotted through tenders 
*
 
 
Fixed rate tenders Variable rate tenders
Bid Allotment Minimum Weighted
amount amount Fixed rate bid rate Marginal rate  1 average rate
Date of Running for
settlement € million % per annum ... days
Main refinancing operations
2011 Apr                  6 84,533 84,533 1.00 − − − 7
         Apr                13 94,134 94,134 1.25 − − − 7
         Apr                20 97,372 97,372 1.25 − − − 7
         Apr                27 117,883 117,883 1.25 − − − 7
         May                 4 127,538 127,538 1.25 − − − 7
         May               11 124,754 124,754 1.25 − − − 7
Longer-term refinancing operations
2011 Mar                  9 82,500 82,500 1.00 − − − 35
         Mar                31 129,458 129,458 2 . . .−−− 9 1
         Apr                13 83,687 83,687 1.25 − − − 28
         Apr                28 63,411 63,411 2 . . .−−− 9 1
         May               11 80,653 80,653 1.25 − − − 35
Source: ECB. — *Enlargement of the euro area on 1 January 2011 to will be fixed at the average minimum bid rate of the main refinancing
include Estonia. — 1Lowest or highest interest rate at which funds were operations over the life of this operation. 
allotted or collected. — 2Interest payment on the maturity date; the rate
 
  
4 Money market rates, by month
 
 
% per annum
Money market rates reported by Frankfurt banks  1 EURIBOR  3 
One-week One-month Six-month Nine-month Twelve- Three-month
Overnight money Three-month funds EONIA  2 funds funds funds funds funds month funds
Reporting Monthly Lowest and Monthly Lowest and
period averages highest rates averages highest rates Monthly averages
2010          Oct 0.66 0.27 − 0.92 0.93 0.76 − 1.06 0.70 0.74 0.78 1.00 1.22 1.36 1.50
         Nov 0.53 0.25 − 0.80 1.01 0.93 − 1.10 0.59 0.73 0.83 1.04 1.27 1.41 1.54         Dec 0.45
4 0.25 − 1.00 1.00 0.92 − 1.05 0.50 0.66 0.81 1.02 1.25 1.39 1.53
2011          Jan 0.61 0.25 − 1.60 0.98 0.90 − 1.09 0.66 0.69 0.79 1.02 1.25 1.41 1.55
         Feb 0.66 0.25 − 1.25 1.05 0.97 − 1.13 0.71 0.83 0.89 1.09 1.35 1.54 1.71
         Mar 0.60 0.25 − 0.85 1.12 0.98 − 1.25 0.66 0.81 0.90 1.18 1.48 1.72 1.92
         Apr 0.94 0.43 − 1.50 1.28 1.14 − 1.40 0.97 1.07 1.13 1.32 1.62 1.86 2.09
1Money market rates are not fixed or quoted officially; the monthly aver- of real turnover according to the act/360 method and published via
ages computed from daily quotations are unweighted. — 2Euro OverNight Moneyline Telerate. — 3Euro Interbank Offered Rate: unweighted average
Index Average: weighted average overnight rate for interbank operations rate calculated by Moneyline Telerate since 30 December 1998 according to
calculated by the European Central Bank since 4 January 1999 on the basis the act/360 method. — 4 At end-December, 0.30% to 1.00%. 
43*VI Interest rates

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
E U R O S Y S T E M
Monthly Report
May 2011
VI Interest rates
 
5 Interest rates for outstanding amounts and new business of banks (MFIs) in the European monetary union *
(a) Outstanding amounts o
 
Effective interest rate % per annum  1 
Non-financial Loans to households Loans to
Households’ corporations’ non-financial
deposits deposits Housing loans Consumer credit and other loans corporations
with an agreed maturity of with a maturity of
over 1 year over 1 year over 1 year
End of up to over up to over up to and up to over up to and up to over up to and up to over
month 2 years 2 years 2 years 2 years 1 year 5 years 5 years 1 year 5 years 5 years 1 year 5 years 5 years
2010          Aug 2.17 2.72 1.57 3.11 3.79 3.89 3.81 7.79 6.46 5.20 3.37 3.29 3.34
         Sep 2.19 2.74 1.62 3.07 3.83 3.88 3.83 7.89 6.46 5.22 3.42 3.29 3.38
         Oct 2.22 2.70 1.68 3.07 3.80 3.86 3.83 7.86 6.45 5.20 3.48 3.34 3.38
         Nov 2.25 2.72 1.70 3.11 3.77 3.86 3.85 7.73 6.47 5.22 3.51 3.39 3.42         Dec 2.28 2.70 1.76 3.09 3.73 3.83 3.81 7.70 6.41 5.19 3.49 3.41 3.42
2011          Jan  
4 2.31 2.71 1.78 3.07 3.71 3.80 3.80 7.82 6.40 5.17 3.60 3.44 3.42
         Feb 2.34 2.73 1.80 3.09 3.68 3.81 3.82 7.85 6.43 5.20 3.64 3.47 3.47
         Mar 2.37 2.71 1.85 3.14 3.71 3.80 3.84 7.89 6.39 5.19 3.68 3.51 3.50
 
 
(b) New business +
 
Effective interest rate % per annum  1 
Households’ deposits Non-financial corporations’ deposits
with an agreed maturity of redeemable at notice of with an agreed maturity of
over 1 year over 1 year
Reporting up to and up to over up to over up to and up to over
period Overnight 1 year 2 years 2 years 3 months 3 months Overnight 1 year 2 years 2 years
2010          Aug 0.43 2.21 2.54 2.36 1.50 1.91 0.45 1.01 2.01 2.22
         Sep 0.43 2.25 2.76 2.28 1.55 1.85 0.46 1.11 2.18 2.81
         Oct 0.43 2.35 2.75 2.80 1.54 1.82 0.50 1.18 2.36 2.53
         Nov 0.44 2.33 2.65 2.67 1.54 1.83 0.50 1.16 2.45 2.41         Dec 0.43 2.27 2.77 2.59 1.55 1.84 0.51 1.19 2.56 2.60
2011          Jan  
4 0.43 2.38 2.61 2.77 1.53 1.85 0.54 1.29 2.42 2.52
         Feb 0.44 2.36 2.74 2.80 1.60 1.86 0.52 1.32 2.37 2.69
         Mar 0.45 2.34 2.78 2.89 1.61 1.88 0.54 1.37 2.53 2.80
 
 
Loans to households
Consumer credit Housing loans Other loans
with an initial rate fixation with an initial rate fixation
floating floating floating over 1 year over 1 year over 5 years over 1 year
Reporting Over- rate or up and up to over rate or up and up to and up to over and up to over rate or up
period drafts  2 Total  3 to 1 year 5 years 5 years Total  3 to 1 year 5 years 10 years 10 years to 1 year 5 years 5 years
2010          Aug 8.78 7.37 5.38 6.26 7.87 3.76 2.83 3.62 3.95 3.81 3.35 4.52 4.14
         Sep 8.81 7.33 5.52 6.18 7.87 3.62 2.75 3.56 3.84 3.74 3.33 4.35 4.07
         Oct 8.73 7.17 5.36 6.03 7.71 3.61 2.76 3.55 3.78 3.69 3.37 4.43 4.21
         Nov 8.67 7.17 5.39 6.08 7.64 3.65 2.80 3.53 3.76 3.70 3.55 4.37 4.17         Dec 8.64 6.89 5.16 5.95 7.23 3.68 2.78 3.52 3.80 3.71 3.39 4.31 4.15
2011          Jan  
4 8.70 7.18 5.05 6.13 7.83 3.83 2.94 3.69 3.91 3.84 3.37 4.32 4.30
         Feb 8.85 7.31 5.38 6.13 7.83 3.90 2.96 3.83 4.06 3.92 3.51 4.71 4.47
         Mar 8.84 7.33 5.44 6.23 7.83 3.96 3.01 3.82 4.15 4.03 3.57 4.77 4.61
 
 
Loans to non-financial corporations
Loans up to €1 million with an initial rate fixation Loans over €1 million with an initial rate fixation
Reporting floating rate or over 1 year and floating rate or over 1 year and
period Overdrafts  2 up to 1 year up to 5 years over 5 years up to 1 year up to 5 years over 5 years
2010          Aug 3.75 3.39 4.14 3.84 2.28 2.91 3.65
         Sep 3.80 3.35 4.10 3.78 2.26 2.72 3.51
         Oct 3.83 3.46 4.16 3.82 2.32 2.94 3.46
         Nov 3.85 3.56 4.26 3.82 2.42 3.05 3.53         Dec 3.86 3.50 4.18 3.86 2.59 2.82 3.51
2011          Jan  
4 4.00 3.46 4.15 3.86 2.45 2.95 3.74
         Feb 4.01 3.60 4.37 4.03 2.62 3.29 3.81
         Mar 4.02 3.70 4.49 4.19 2.62 2.90 3.84
Source: ECB. — For footnotes *, o, 1see p 45*. For footnote + see p 46*. — other related charges which may occur for enquiries, administration,
2From June 2010 including revolving loans, convenience and extended preparation of the documents, guarantees and credit insurance. —
credit card debt. — 3Annual percentage rate of charge, which contains 4 Enlargement of the euro area on 1 January 2011 to include Estonia. 
44*VI Interest rates

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
May 2011
VI Interest rates
 
6 Interest rates and volumes for outstanding amounts and new business of German banks (MFIs) *
(a) Outstanding amounts o
 
 
Households’ deposits Non-financial corporations’ deposits
with an agreed maturity of
up to 2 years over 2 years up to 2 years over 2 years
Effective Effective Effective Effective
End of interest rate  1 Volume  2 interest rate  1 Volume  2 interest rate  1 Volume  2 interest rate  1 Volume  2 
month % pa € million % pa € million % pa € million % pa € million
2010          Mar 1.77 138,799 2.38 203,418 0.83 86,535 4.04 24,304
         Apr 1.74 135,398 2.37 204,546 0.83 87,161 4.05 24,331
         May 1.70 130,925 2.37 205,790 0.83 85,444 4.06 24,284
         June 1.70 129,294 2.47 207,028 0.85 83,947 3.92 22,642
         July 1.65 126,987 2.46 207,585 0.89 86,081 3.90 22,755
         Aug 1.62 126,748 2.46 208,128 0.91 88,667 3.90 22,595
         Sep 1.59 123,619 2.45 208,722 0.92 90,432 3.90 22,520
         Oct 1.59 123,550 2.44 209,255 0.97 93,815 3.86 22,535
         Nov 1.59 123,828 2.42 209,940 1.00 93,412 3.85 22,646         Dec 1.57 123,875 2.41 213,208 1.02 96,284 3.83 22,637
2011          Jan 1.58 123,263 2.40 213,962 1.08 93,539 3.80 22,856
         Feb 1.58 123,712 2.40 215,243 1.10 94,028 3.80 22,983         Mar 1.58 123,032 2.37 216,568 1.14 96,691 3.79 23,106
 
 
Housing loans to households  3 Consumer credit and other loans to households  4, 5 
with a maturity of
over 1 year and over 1 year and
up to 1 year  6 up to 5 years over 5 years up to 1 year  6 up to 5 years over 5 years
Effective Effective Effective Effective Effective Effective
interest interest interest interest interest interest
End of rate  1 Volume  2 rate 1 Volume  2 rate 1 Volume  2 rate 1 Volume  2 rate 1 Volume  2 rate 1 Volume  2 
month % pa % pa % pa % pa % pa % pa € million € million € million € million € million € million
2010          Mar 4.34 5,409 4.22 25,698 4.83 919,684 8.40 66,783 5.22 69,966 5.83 310,443
         Apr 4.19 5,308 4.20 25,751 4.81 920,311 8.31 65,798 5.21 69,811 5.82 311,285
         May 4.16 5,432 4.17 25,886 4.80 920,455 8.34 65,888 5.18 69,992 5.79 311,983
         June 4.07 5,042 4.17 25,736 4.74 920,866 8.38 69,258 6.00 69,419 5.79 312,492
         July 3.92 5,045 4.14 25,877 4.73 922,884 8.25 66,947 5.97 69,924 5.78 313,416
         Aug 4.05 5,504 4.10 26,087 4.72 923,541 8.28 66,989 5.95 69,869 5.77 313,830
         Sep 4.18 5,496 4.07 26,301 4.70 925,117 8.42 68,206 5.93 69,703 5.75 313,591
         Oct 4.14 5,455 4.05 26,375 4.73 926,841 8.25 66,398 5.89 69,962 5.79 313,936
         Nov 4.06 5,394 4.01 26,558 4.71 927,903 8.06 66,324 5.78 70,098 5.77 314,010         Dec 3.99 5,369 3.97 26,563 4.64 927,171 8.13 68,321 5.73 70,042 5.74 312,604
2011          Jan 3.91 5,251 3.95 26,421 4.62 926,224 8.20 65,462 5.71 69,810 5.69 311,915
         Feb 3.82 5,036 3.92 26,475 4.61 926,667 8.20 64,486 5.70 69,108 5.68 312,164         Mar 3.88 5,244 3.89 26,702 4.60 926,845 8.25 65,739 5.66 69,606 5.67 311,059
 
 
Loans to non-financial corporations with a maturity of
up to 1 year  6 over 1 year and up to 5 years over 5 years
End of Volume  2 Volume  2 Volume  2 Effective interest rate  1 Effective interest rate  1 Effective interest rate  1 
month % pa € million % pa € million % pa € million
2010          Mar 3.77 139,354 3.49 139,466 3.93 544,224
         Apr 3.77 135,797 3.45 138,677 3.92 546,900
         May 3.76 136,914 3.44 137,604 3.91 547,945
         June 3.71 137,411 3.52 136,207 3.85 549,949
         July 3.71 132,479 3.56 134,907 3.86 552,591
         Aug 3.74 130,788 3.59 133,990 3.86 553,853
         Sep 3.83 132,925 3.57 134,337 3.87 551,283
         Oct 3.88 131,772 3.63 133,816 3.87 551,206
         Nov 3.82 132,041 3.65 134,424 3.87 555,004         Dec 3.82 128,142 3.66 133,617 3.87 555,314
2011          Jan 3.89 130,003 3.68 132,483 3.85 555,165
         Feb 3.88 133,863 3.68 133,024 3.86 557,886         Mar 3.90 135,214 3.70 133,747 3.87 556,255
*The MFI interest rate statistics are based on the interest rates applied by interest rates are calculated either as annualised agreed interest rates o ra s
MFIs and the related volumes of euro-denominated deposits and loans to narrowly defined effective rates. Both calculation methods cover all interes t
households and non-financial corporations domiciled in the euro area. The payments on deposits and loans but not any other related charges which
household sector comprises individuals (including sole proprietors) and may occur for enquiries, administration, preparation of the documents,non-profit institutions serving households. Non-financial corporations in- guarantees and credit insurance. — 2Data based on monthly balance sheet
clude all enterprises other than insurance companies, banks and other finan- statistics. — 3Secured and unsecured loans for home purchase, including
cial institutions. The interest rate statistics gathered on a harmonised basis building and home improvements; including loans granted by building and
in the euro area from January 2003 are being collected in Germany on a loan associations and interim credits as well as transmitted loans granted bysample basis. The most recent figures are in all cases to be regarded as provi- the reporting agents in their own name and for their own account. —sional. Subsequent revisions appearing in the following Monthly Report are 4Consumer credit is defined as loans granted for the purpose of personal
not specially marked. Further information on the MFI interest rate statistics use in the consumption of goods and services. — 5For the purpose of these
can be found on the Bundesbank’s website (Statistics / Reporting system / statistics, other loans are loans granted for other purposes such as busines s,
Banking statistics / MFI interest rate statistics). — oThe statistics on out- debt consolidation, education etc. — 6Including overdrafts (see also
standing amounts are collected at the end of the month. — 1The effective footnotes 11 to 13 p 47*). 
45*VI Interest rates

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
E U R O S Y S T E M
Monthly Report
May 2011
VI Interest rates
 
6 Interest rates and volumes for outstanding amounts and new business of German banks (MFIs) *  (cont’d)
(b) New business +
 
 
Households’ deposits
with an agreed maturity of redeemable at notice of  8 
Overnight up to 1 year over 2 years up to 3 months over 3 months over 1 year and up to 2 years
Effective Effective Effective Effective Effective Effective
interest interest interest interest interest interest
Reporting rate  1 Volume  2 rate 1 Volume  7 rate 1 Volume  7 rate 1 Volume  7 rate 1 Volume  2 rate 1 Volume  2 
period % pa % pa % pa % pa % pa % pa € million € million € million € million € million € million
2010          Mar 0.70 670,474 1.35 18,487 1.90 1,418 2.43 2,485 1.40 486,809 2.03 117,551
         Apr 0.69 681,563 1.07 15,049 1.83 935 2.36 1,946 1.31 488,783 1.98 115,665
         May 0.69 688,068 0.96 13,756 1.78 701 3.16 2,319 1.31 490,706 1.95 113,839
         June 0.76 691,840 0.94 12,881 1.46 545 3.18 2,388 1.36 491,359 1.95 112,572
         July 0.73 698,095 1.10 14,993 2.21 1,171 2.22 1,514 1.32 495,008 1.91 110,429
         Aug 0.74 695,737 1.03 13,926 2.35 1,245 2.13 1,253 1.32 496,668 1.90 108,681
         Sep 0.74 697,415 1.04 13,929 2.26 1,354 2.12 1,477 1.40 499,188 1.83 106,394
         Oct 0.75 703,734 1.13 13,062 2.04 1,166 2.23 1,691 1.37 501,900 1.80 105,025
         Nov 0.74 711,278 1.16 13,413 1.80 1,342 2.16 1,756 1.36 503,907 1.81 105,590         Dec 0.71 714,112 1.06 13,862 1.99 1,075 2.13 2,300 1.39 512,222 1.82 105,583
2011          Jan 0.72 712,891 1.29 17,554 2.14 1,570 2.49 2,259 1.34 514,833 1.83 105,207
         Feb 0.74 714,176 1.24 15,659 2.21 1,621 2.67 2,278 1.36 516,856 1.84 105,268         Mar 0.75 714,780 1.18 13,674 2.20 1,980 2.42 2,293 1.37 517,707 1.85 105,429
 
 
Non-financial corporations’ deposits
with an agreed maturity of
Overnight up to 1 year over 1 year and up to 2 years over 2 years
Effective Effective Effective Effective
Reporting interest rate  1 Volume  2 interest rate  1 Volume  7 interest rate  1 Volume  7 interest rate  1 Volume  7 
period % pa € million % pa € million % pa € million % pa € million
2010          Mar 0.45 243,829 0.47 34,452 1.87 344 3.04 473
         Apr 0.45 248,053 0.44 34,914 1.79 334 3.29 281
         May 0.44 249,328 0.43 32,850 1.79 185 2.89 193
         June 0.43 247,746 0.51 29,165 1.76 331 2.29 172
         July 0.44 246,466 0.60 38,656 1.68 479 2.56 183
         Aug 0.44 250,809 0.59 32,128 1.59 353 2.32 243
         Sep 0.45 250,770 0.59 35,618 1.72 475 2.81 139
         Oct 0.50 251,184 0.75 35,976 1.69 376 2.28 248
         Nov 0.47 257,369 0.73 38,509 1.86 288 2.70 381         Dec 0.46 260,801 0.68 51,978 2.60 452 2.81 811
2011          Jan 0.53 255,910 0.77 43,391 1.72 383 2.63 388
         Feb 0.47 244,336 0.87 31,168 1.90 706 3.02 783         Mar 0.48 247,548 0.90 35,003 2.03 430 2.48 448
 
 
Loans to households
Consumer credit with an initial rate fixation of  4 Other loans with an initial rate fixation of  5 
floating rate or over 1 year and floating rate or over 1 year and
Total up to 1 year  10 up to 5 years over 5 years up to 1 year  10 up to 5 years over 5 years
Annual
Effective Effective Effective Effective Effective Effective percentage
rate of interest interest interest interest interest interest
Reporting charge  9 rate 1 Volume  7 rate 1 Volume  7 rate 1 Volume  7 rate 1 Volume  7 rate 1 Volume  7 rate 1 Volume  7 
period % pa % pa % pa % pa % pa % pa % pa € million € million € million € million € million € million
2010          Mar 6.72 4.13 2,685 5.14 2,385 8.20 2,179 2.22 7,183 4.48 1,205 4.41 2,487
         Apr 6.74 4.27 2,297 5.14 2,247 8.24 1,979 2.26 6,504 4.12 1,307 4.42 2,110
         May 6.61 4.31 2,041 5.04 2,074 8.09 1,719 2.17 5,191 4.26 1,082 4.32 2,021
         June 6.83 3.39 1,032 5.50 2,324 8.28 2,174 2.21 5,611 4.10 1,925 4.05 2,456
         July 7.10 3.50 775 5.63 2,285 8.46 2,223 2.37 5,072 4.18 1,701 4.01 2,740
         Aug 7.18 3.47 734 5.76 2,080 8.46 2,036 2.39 4,240 4.47 857 3.92 2,206
         Sep 7.09 3.43 731 5.67 2,142 8.43 2,084 2.40 4,582 4.15 1,061 3.88 2,581
         Oct 6.89 3.45 908 5.49 2,170 8.28 2,092 2.53 4,941 4.33 1,025 4.00 2,246
         Nov 6.75 3.45 729 5.42 2,175 8.03 2,041 2.57 4,301 4.31 1,519 3.93 2,536         Dec 6.34 3.16 771 5.27 1,943 7.66 1,686 2.58 5,582 4.15 1,326 3.98 3,534
2011          Jan 6.99 3.36 1,042 5.51 2,029 8.43 2,108 2.58 5,362 4.13 1,387 4.15 2,234
         Feb 6.93 3.30 958 5.43 2,167 8.30 2,108 2.53 4,860 4.56 1,039 4.27 2,456         Mar 6.99 3.52 945 5.57 2,652 8.28 2,537 2.63 5,036 4.56 1,328 4.45 2,882
For footnotes * and 1to6, see p 45*. — +In the case of deposits with an business at the end of the month has to be incorporated in the calculation
agreed maturity and all loans excluding revolving loans and overdrafts, of average rates of interest. — 7Estimated. The volume of new business is
credit card debt, new business covers all new agreements between extrapolated to form the underlying total using the Horvitz-Thompson esti-
households or non-financial corporations and the bank. The interest rates mator. — 8Including non-financial corporations’ deposits; including fidelity
are calculated as volume-weighted average rates across all new agreements and growth premia. — 9Annual percentage rate of charge, which contains
concluded during the reporting month. In the case of overnight deposits, other related charges which may occur for enquiries, administration, prepa r-
deposits redeemable at notice, revolving loans and overdrafts, credit card ation of the documents, guarantees and credit insurance. — 10Excluding
debt, new business is collected in the same way as outstanding amounts for overdrafts. the sake of simplicity. This means that all outstanding deposit and lending
46*VI Interest rates

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
May 2011
VI Interest rates
 
6 Interest rates and volumes for outstanding amounts and new business of German banks (MFIs) *  (cont’d)
(b) New business +
 
 
Loans to households (cont’d)
Housing loans with an initial rate fixation of  3 
Total over 1 year and up to 5 years over 10 years floating rate or up to 1 year  10 over 5 years and up to 10 years
Effective Effective Effective Effective Annual percentage
Reporting Volume  7 Volume  7 Volume  7 Volume  7 rate of charge  9 interest rate  1 interest rate  1 interest rate  1 interest rate  1 
period % pa % pa € milion % pa € million % pa € million % pa € million
2010          Mar 3.96 3.04 2,660 3.56 2,470 4.09 5,889 4.30 4,291
         Apr 3.97 3.08 2,723 3.56 2,485 4.07 5,485 4.36 4,104
         May 3.89 3.16 2,233 3.42 2,271 4.01 5,238 4.10 4,104
         June 3.78 3.19 2,215 3.36 2,323 3.89 5,495 3.90 4,866
         July 3.68 3.11 3,092 3.35 2,843 3.79 6,802 3.76 5,358
         Aug 3.73 3.27 2,125 3.31 2,330 3.80 5,932 3.83 4,770
         Sep 3.62 3.28 2,039 3.25 2,340 3.65 6,342 3.64 5,591
         Oct 3.61 3.21 2,797 3.34 2,407 3.58 6,464 3.59 5,318
         Nov 3.65 3.42 1,977 3.25 2,378 3.61 6,393 3.66 5,467
         Dec 3.76 3.38 2,524 3.31 2,659 3.70 7,049 3.77 5,500
2011          Jan 3.82 3.38 3,444 3.43 2,803 3.85 6,692 4.06 4,159
         Feb 3.99 3.56 2,101 3.60 2,470 4.02 5,832 4.15 4,308
         Mar 4.07 3.49 2,777 3.70 2,793 4.10 6,742 4.26 5,214
 
 
Loans to households (cont’d) Loans to non-financial corporations
Revolving loans  11 Revolving loans  11 Revolving loans  11  and overdrafts  12 Revolving loans  11  and overdrafts  12 
and overdrafts  12 credit card debt  13 and overdrafts  12 credit card debt  13 
Effective Effective Effective Effective
Reporting interest rate  1 Volume  14 interest rate  1 Volume  14 interest rate  1 Volume  14 interest rate  1 Volume  14 
period % pa € million % pa € million % pa € million % pa € million
2010          Mar 10.36 43,281 10.36 43,281 5.03 66,593 5.03 66,593
         Apr 10.34 41,655 10.34 41,655 5.06 64,035 5.06 64,035
         May 10.38 41,645 10.38 41,645 5.09 63,191 5.09 63,191
         June 10.18 39,362 10.20 44,263 4.75 70,537 4.74 70,717
         July 10.02 40,207 9.97 45,246 4.72 66,073 4.72 66,293
         Aug 10.09 40,545 10.06 45,747 4.75 64,337 4.74 64,516
         Sep 10.17 41,644 10.15 46,795 4.83 65,969 4.82 66,162
         Oct 9.96 40,404 9.91 45,605 4.91 64,108 4.90 64,296
         Nov 9.92 39,670 9.85 44,999 4.87 63,904 4.86 64,101
         Dec 10.04 41,264 9.96 46,527 4.87 62,342 4.86 62,512
2011          Jan 10.11 39,415 10.01 44,746 4.92 64,347 4.91 64,520
         Feb 10.19 38,548 10.12 43,724 4.92 67,580 4.91 67,762
         Mar 10.19 39,285 10.08 44,538 4.89 67,799 4.87 68,034
 
 
Loans to non-financial corporations (cont’d)
Loans up to €1 million with an initial rate fixation of  15 Loans over €1 million with an initial rate fixation of  15 
floating rate or over 1 year and floating rate or over 1 year and
up to 1 year  10 up to 5 years over 5 years up to 1 year  10 up to 5 years over 5 years
Effective Effective Effective Effective Effective Effective
interest interest interest interest interest interest
Reporting rate  1 Volume  7 rate 1 Volume  7 rate 1 Volume  7 rate 1 Volume  7 rate 1 Volume  7 rate 1 Volume  7 
period % pa % pa % pa % pa % pa % pa € million € million € million € million € million € million
2010          Mar 3.41 11,490 4.70 1,076 4.16 1,337 2.32 50,429 3.69 1,629 3.81 6,274
         Apr 3.28 9,965 4.52 1,147 4.08 1,180 2.35 50,433 3.92 1,730 4.06 3,542
         May 3.45 10,055 4.52 897 3.94 1,304 2.45 42,240 3.59 1,102 3.74 3,990
         June 3.52 7,084 4.45 1,318 3.82 1,458 2.37 49,115 3.29 1,939 3.62 4,607
         July 3.30 7,084 4.35 1,381 3.79 1,508 2.46 47,412 2.97 2,312 3.25 4,474
         Aug 3.51 5,640 4.35 1,113 3.71 1,319 2.62 37,588 3.39 1,401 3.66 3,808
         Sep 3.49 7,124 4.40 1,227 3.65 1,454 2.37 43,643 3.40 1,725 3.66 4,437
         Oct 3.42 7,024 4.25 1,296 3.73 1,504 2.44 45,964 3.33 1,851 3.47 4,341
         Nov 3.84 6,989 4.27 1,329 3.66 1,525 2.64 38,043 3.47 2,006 3.44 4,998
         Dec 3.77 7,119 4.24 1,472 3.81 1,815 2.78 52,023 3.26 3,889 3.56 7,562
2011          Jan 3.36 6,823 4.25 1,315 3.96 1,288 2.50 44,418 3.34 2,283 3.95 4,794
         Feb 3.59 5,971 4.51 1,247 4.08 1,211 2.69 34,963 4.05 1,522 3.98 3,950
         Mar 3.69 7,429 4.54 1,538 4.28 1,427 2.69 46,728 3.84 2,216 3.97 5,175
For footnotes *and 1to6, see p 45*. For footnotes +and 7to10, see whether they are within or beyond the limits agreed between customers
p 46*. — 11From June 2010 including revolving loans which have all the and the bank. — 13From June 2010 including convenience and extended
following features: (a) the borrower may use or withdraw the funds to a credit card debt. — 14From January 2003 up to May 2010 estimated. The
pre-approved credit limit without giving prior notice to the lender; (b) the volume of outstanding amounts reported was extrapolated to form the
amount of available credit can increase and decrease as funds are borrowed underlying total using the Horvitz-Thompson estimator. From June 2010 the
and repaid; (c) the loan may be used repeatedly; (d) there is no obligation data are based on monthly balance sheet statistics. — 15The amount refers
of regular repayment of funds. — 12Overdrafts are defined as debit to the single loan transaction considered as new business. 
balances on current accounts. They include all bank overdrafts regardless of
47*VI Interest rates

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
E U R O S Y S T E M
Monthly Report
May 2011
VII Capital market
 
1 Sales and purchases of debt securities and shares in Germany *
 
 
 
Debt securities
Sales Purchases
Domestic debt securities  1 Residents
Credit in- Bundes-
Sales stitutions bank
= Public Foreign including open
total Bank Corporate debt debt building marketpur- debt bonds secur- secur- and loan Non- oper- Non-
Period chases Total securities ities  
3 ities 4 Total  5 banks  7 ations  6 residents  8 (non-MFIs)  2 associations  6 
DM million
1998 418,841 308,201 254,367 3,143 50,691 110,640 245,802 203,342 42,460 − 173,038
€ million
1999 292,663 198,068 156,399 2,184 39,485 94,595 155,766 74,728 81,038 − 136,898
2000 226,393 157,994 120,154 12,605 25,234 68,399 151,568 91,447 60,121 − 74,825
2001 180,227 86,656 55,918 14,473 16,262 93,571 111,281 35,848 75,433 − 68,946
2002 175,396 124,035 47,296 14,506 62,235 51,361 60,476 13,536 46,940 − 114,9202003 184,679 134,455 31,404 30,262 72,788 50,224 105,557 35,748 69,809 − 79,1222004 233,890 133,711 64,231 10,778 58,703 100,179 108,119 121,841 − 13,723 − 125,772
2005 252,658 110,542 39,898 2,682 67,965 142,116 94,718 61,740 32,978 − 157,940
2006 242,006 102,379 40,995 8,943 52,446 139,627 125,423 68,893 56,530 − 116,5832007 217,798 90,270 42,034 20,123 28,111 127,528 − 26,762 96,476 − 123,238 − 244,5602008 72,574 66,139 − 45,712 86,527 25,322 6,435 2,798 68,049 − 65,251 − 69,7762009 67,560 − 538 − 114,902 22,709 91,655 68,098 88,871 12,973 75,898 − − 21,311
2010 148,535 − 1,212 − 7,621 24,044 − 17,635 149,747 100,463 − 103,271 203,734 − 48,072
2011          Jan 23,027 13,170 3,004 11,049 − 883 9,857 5,230 7,228 − 1,998 − 17,797
         Feb 47,298 38,334 17,372 8,095 12,867 8,964 15,401 − 3,185 18,586 − 31,897         Mar − 4,489 − 7,740 − 15,811 1,204 6,867 3,251 − 4,585 − 15,441 10,856 − 96
 
  
Shares
Sales Purchases
Sales Residents
=total Domestic Foreign Credit insti- Non-purchases shares  
9 shares  10 Total  11 tutions  6,12 Non-banks  7 residents  13 
Period
DM million
1998 249,504 48,796 200,708 149,151 20,252 128,899 100,353
€ million
1999 150,013 36,010 114,003 103,136 18,637 84,499 46,877
2000 140,461 22,733 117,729 164,654 23,293 141,361 − 24,194
2001 82,665 17,575 65,091 − 2,252 − 14,714 12,462 84,918
2002 39,338 9,232 30,106 18,398 − 23,236 41,634 20,9412003 11,896 16,838 − 4,946 − 15,121 7,056 − 22,177 27,0162004 − 3,317 10,157 − 13,474 7,432 5,045 2,387 − 10,748
2005 32,364 13,766 18,597 1,036 10,208 − 9,172 31,329
2006 26,276 9,061 17,214 7,528 11,323 − 3,795 18,7482007 − 5,009 10,053 − 15,062 − 62,308 − 6,702 − 55,606 57,2992008 − 28,613 11,326 − 39,939 1,542 − 23,079 24,621 − 30,1532009 37,903 23,962 13,940 32,176 − 8,335 40,511 5,725
2010 35,469 20,049 15,422 37,798 7,340 30,458 − 2,329
2011          Jan 3,977 630 3,347 10,852 9,782 1,070 − 6,875
         Feb − 3,376 429 − 3,805 − 7,439 − 9,946 2,507 4,063         Mar − 662 257 − 919 5,440 5,932 − 492 − 6,102
*Up to end-1999, debt securities in this table comprise bonds and money funds. — 8Net purchases or net sales (−) of domestic debt securities by
market paper issued by domestic banks; from January 2000, they comprise non-residents; transaction values. — 9Excluding shares of public limited
all debt securities. For mutual fund shares, see Table VII.6. — 1Net sales at investment companies; at issue prices. — 10Net purchases or net sales (−) of
market values plus/minus changes in issuers’ portfolios of their own debt foreign shares (including direct investment)  by  residents;  transa ction  val-
securities. — 2Including cross-border financing within groups from January ues. — 11Domestic and foreign shares. — 12Up to end-1998, excluding
2011. — 3Including Federal Railways Fund, Federal Post Office and syndicated shares. — 13Net purchases or net sales (−) of domestic shares
Treuhand agency. — 4Net purchases or net sales (−) of foreign debt (including direct investment) by non-residents; transaction values. — The
securities by residents; transaction values. — 5Domestic and foreign debt figures for the most recent date are provisional; revisions are not specially
securities. — 6Book values; statistically adjusted. — 7Residual; also marked. 
including purchases of domestic and foreign securities by domestic mutual
48*VII Capital market

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
May 2011
VII Capital market
 
2 Sales of debt securities issued by residents * 
 
 
Up to end-1998, DM nominal million value; from 1999, € million nominal value
Bank debt securities  1 Memo item
 Foreign  DM/euro
bonds issued Debt securities
Corporate by German- issued by special
Mortgage Public purpose credit Other bank bonds Public managed
Period Total Total Pfandbriefe Pfandbriefe institutions (non-MFIs)  2 syndicates debt securities debt securities  3 
Gross sales  4 
1998 1,030,827 789,035 71,371 344,609 72,140 300,920 3,392 238,400 149,542
€ million
1999 571,269 448,216 27,597 187,661 59,760 173,200 2,570 120,483 57,202
2000 659,148 500,895 34,528 143,107 94,556 228,703 8,114 150,137 31,597
2001 687,988 505,646 34,782 112,594 106,166 252,103 11,328 171,012 10,6052002 818,725 569,232 41,496 119,880 117,506 290,353 17,574 231,923 10,3132003 958,917 668,002 47,828 107,918 140,398 371,858 22,510 268,406 2,8502004 990,399 688,844 33,774 90,815 162,353 401,904 31,517 270,040 12,344
2005 988,911 692,182 28,217 103,984 160,010 399,969 24,352 272,380 600
2006 925,863 622,055 24,483 99,628 139,193 358,750 29,975 273,834 692007 1,021,533 743,616 19,211 82,720 195,722 445,963 15,043 262,872 −2008 1,337,337 961,271 51,259 70,520 382,814 456,676 95,093 280,974 −2009 1,533,616 1,058,815 40,421 37,615 331,566 649,215 76,379 398,423 −
2010 1,375,138 757,754 36,226 33,539 363,828 324,160 53,654 563,731 −
2010          Dec 96,034 49,743 2,192 1,968 25,359 20,224 2,191 44,100 −2011          Jan 145,192 71,843 3,964 7,367 32,011 28,500 16,461 56,888 −
         Feb 111,051 67,755 4,060 2,070 35,484 26,142 9,905 33,391 −         Mar 101,051 43,257 4,215 1,147 20,434 17,462 8,052 49,742 −
of which:  Debt securities with maturities of more than four years  5 
1998 694,414 496,444 59,893 288,619 54,385 93,551 2,847 195,122 139,645
€ million
1999 324,888 226,993 16,715 124,067 37,778 48,435 2,565 95,331 44,013
2000 319,330 209,187 20,724 102,664 25,753 60,049 6,727 103,418 27,008
2001 299,751 202,337 16,619 76,341 42,277 67,099 7,479 89,933 6,4802002 309,157 176,486 16,338 59,459 34,795 65,892 12,149 120,527 9,2132003 369,336 220,103 23,210 55,165 49,518 92,209 10,977 138,256 2,8502004 424,769 275,808 20,060 48,249 54,075 153,423 20,286 128,676 4,320
2005 425,523 277,686 20,862 63,851 49,842 143,129 16,360 131,479 400
2006 337,969 190,836 17,267 47,814 47,000 78,756 14,422 132,711 692007 315,418 183,660 10,183 31,331 50,563 91,586 13,100 118,659 −2008 387,516 190,698 13,186 31,393 54,834 91,289 84,410 112,407 −2009 361,999 185,575 20,235 20,490 59,809 85,043 55,240 121,185 −
2010 381,687 169,174 15,469 15,139 72,796 65,769 34,649 177,863 −
2010          Dec 17,438 10,060 820 415 1,230 7,595 1,001 6,377 −2011          Jan 49,634 23,769 2,897 3,300 10,364 7,209 8,323 17,542 −
         Feb 31,706 16,747 1,295 509 6,588 8,355 2,507 12,453 −         Mar 33,572 13,001 2,021 253 2,960 7,767 4,484 16,087 −
Net sales  6 
1998 327,991 264,627 22,538 162,519 18,461 61,111 3,118 60,243 84,308
€ million
1999 209,096 170,069 2,845 80,230 31,754 55,238 2,185 36,840 22,728
2000 155,615 122,774 5,937 29,999 30,089 56,751 7,320 25,522 − 16,705
2001 84,122 60,905 6,932 − 9,254 28,808 34,416 8,739 14,479 − 30,6572002 131,976 56,393 7,936 − 26,806 20,707 54,561 14,306 61,277 − 44,5462003 124,556 40,873 2,700 − 42,521 44,173 36,519 18,431 65,253 − 54,9902004 167,233 81,860 1,039 − 52,615 50,142 83,293 18,768 66,605 − 22,124
2005 141,715 65,798 − 2,151 − 34,255 37,242 64,962 10,099 65,819 − 35,963
2006 129,423 58,336 − 12,811 − 20,150 44,890 46,410 15,605 55,482 − 19,2082007 86,579 58,168 − 10,896 − 46,629 42,567 73,127 − 3,683 32,093 − 29,7502008 119,472 8,517 15,052 − 65,773 25,165 34,074 82,653 28,302 − 31,6072009 76,441 − 75,554 858 − 80,646 25,579 − 21,345 48,508 103,482 − 21,037
2010 21,566 − 87,646 − 3,754 − 63,368 28,296 − 48,822 23,748 85,464 − 10,904
2010          Dec − 114,835 − 20,706 − 2,815 − 4,158 − 2,456 − 11,277 − 1,879 − 92,250 − 5242011          Jan 5,379 7,347 1,032 − 3,289 2,947 6,657 8,567 − 10,534 − 1,250
         Feb 28,590 16,658 2,846 − 5,212 11,715 7,309 7,537 4,396 − 3,110         Mar − 22,725 − 20,633 1,158 − 2,744 − 9,928 − 9,118 2,041 − 4,134 − 197
*For definitions, see the explanatory notes in the Statistical Supplement 2 Treuhand agency. — 4Gross sales means only initial sales of newly issued
Capital market statistics on p 21 ff. — 1Excluding registered bank debt securities. — 5Maximum maturity according to the terms of issue. — 6Gross
securities. — 2Including cross-border financing within groups from January sales less redemptions. 
2011. — 3Including Federal Railways Fund, Federal Post Office and
49*VII Capital market

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
E U R O S Y S T E M
Monthly Report
May 2011
VII Capital market
 
3 Amounts outstanding of debt securities issued by residents  * 
 
 
€ million nominal value
Bank debt securities  1 Memo item
 Foreign  DM/euro
End of year Debt securities bonds issued
or month/ issued by Corporate by German-
Maturity Mortgage Public Other bank bonds Public managed special purpose
in years Total Total (non-MFIs) syndicates credit institutions debt securities debt securities Pfandbriefe Pfandbriefe
1999 2,097,926 1,322,863 134,814 655,024 163,284 369,741 6,280 768,783 339,560
2000 2,265,121 1,445,736 140,751 685,122 157,374 462,488 13,599 805,786 322,856
2001 2,349,243 1,506,640 147,684 675,868 201,721 481,366 22,339 820,264 292,1992002 2,481,220 1,563,034 155,620 649,061 222,427 535,925 36,646 881,541 247,6552003 2,605,775 1,603,906 158,321 606,541 266,602 572,442 55,076 946,793 192,6662004 2,773,007 1,685,766 159,360 553,927 316,745 655,734 73,844 1,013,397 170,543
2005 2,914,723 1,751,563 157,209 519,674 323,587 751,093 83,942 1,079,218 134,580
2006 3,044,145 1,809,899 144,397 499,525 368,476 797,502 99,545 1,134,701 115,3732007 3,130,723 1,868,066 133,501 452,896 411,041 870,629 95,863 1,166,794 85,623
2008 3,250,195 1,876,583 150,302 377,091 490,641 858,550 178,515 1,195,097 54,015
2009 3,326,635 1,801,029 151,160 296,445 516,221 837,203 227,024 1,298,581 32,978
2010 3,348,201
2 1,570,490 147,529 232,954 544,517 2 645,491 250,774 2 1,526,937 22,074
2010          Oct 3,351,597 2 1,591,766 151,718 239,151 541,185 2 659,712 248,929 2 1,510,902 22,598
         Nov 3,463,036 1,591,196 150,344 237,112 546,973 656,768 252,653 1,619,187 22,598
         Dec 3,348,201 1,570,490 147,529 232,954 544,517 645,491 250,774 1,526,937 22,074
2011          Jan 3,353,580 1,577,837 148,561 229,665 547,464 652,148 259,340 1,516,402 20,824
         Feb 3,382,171 1,594,496 151,406 224,453 559,179 659,457 266,877 1,520,798 17,714
         Mar 3,359,446 1,573,863 152,564 221,709 549,250 650,340 268,919 1,516,664 17,517
Breakdown by remaining period to maturity  3 Position at end-March 2011 
1,283,221 641,486 68,040 112,088 206,404 254,953 54,759 586,977 5,081    less than 2
777,592 409,556 46,190 58,145 142,812 162,409 57,343 310,693 5,511 2 to less than 4
523,828 274,875 25,883 29,076 73,211 146,707 27,183 221,769 2,104 4 to less than 6
208,100 88,616 7,338 12,325 44,749 24,202 13,233 106,251 1,292 6 to less than 8
187,819 53,732 4,599 6,049 29,353 13,731 7,680 126,406 185 8 to less than 10
55,266 30,049 470 2,532 20,486 6,561 9,413 15,804 1,648 10 to less than 15
85,783 16,954 19 396 7,792 8,747 3,166 65,663 729 15 to less than 20
237,839 58,596 25 1,099 24,445 33,027 96,144 83,100 967 20 and more
*Including debt securities temporarily held in the issuers’ portfolios. — month under review until final maturity for debt securities falling due en
1Excluding debt securities handed to the trustee for temporary safe bloc and until mean maturity of the residual amount outstanding for debt
custody. — 2Sectoral reclassification of debt securities. — 3Calculated from securities not falling due en bloc. 
50* 
 
4 Shares in circulation issued by residents  * 
  
€ million nominal value
Change in domestic public limited companies’ capital due to
Memo item
Share circulation
at market values
cash payments contribution (market capita-
and ex- merger reduction lisation) Share capital = Net increase or contribution of shares,
change of of claims and circulation at net decrease (−) mining shares, of capital level at end
issue of and other transfer change of and of period end of period during period convertible GmbH shares,
Period under review under review bonds  1 etc of assets bonus shares real assets legal form liquidation under review  2 
1999 133,513 11,747 5,519 2,008 190 1,075 2,099 1,560 − 708 1,603,304
2000 147,629 14,115 3,620 3,694 618 8,089 − 1,986 1,827 − 1,745 1,353,000
2001 166,187 18,561 7,987 4,057 1,106 8,448 1,018 − 905 − 3,152 1,205,6132002 168,716 2,528 4,307 1,291 486 1,690 − 868 − 2,152 − 2,224 647,4922003 162,131 − 6,585 4,482 923 211 513 − 322 − 10,806 − 1,584 851,0012004 164,802 2,669 3,960 1,566 276 696 220 − 1,760 − 2,286 887,217
2005 163,071 − 1,733 2,470 1,040 694 268 − 1,443 − 3,060 − 1,703 1,058,532
2006 163,764 695 2,670 3,347 604 954 − 1,868 − 1,256 − 3,761 1,279,6382007 164,560 799 3,164 1,322 200 269 − 682 − 1,847 − 1,636 1,481,9302008 168,701 4,142 5,006 1,319 152 0 − 428 − 608 − 1,306 830,6222009 175,691 6,989 12,476 398 97 − − 3,741 − 1,269 − 974 927,256
2010 174,596 − 1,096 3,265 497 178 10 − 486 − 993 − 3,569 1,091,220
2010          Oct 174,653 38 1,114 1 7 − − 13 − 78 − 994 1,035,244
         Nov 174,642 − 12 107 12 9 − 5 − 16 − 129 1,104,788         Dec 174,596 − 46 270 0 4 − − 37 − 21 − 263 1,091,220
2011          Jan 175,062 466 592 − 308 − − 6 − 197 − 231 1,109,831
         Feb 174,978 − 84 92 2 1 − 0 − 156 − 24 1,129,599         Mar 175,124 145 253 19 6 − − 73 − 16 − 44 1,108,591
*Excluding shares of public limited investment companies. — 1Including ber 2007) or the Neuer Markt (stock market segment was closed down on
shares issued out of company profits. — 2Enterprises listed on the Regulated 24 March 2003) are included as well as enterprises listed on the Open Market.
Market (the introduction of which marked the end of the division of organ- Source: Bundesbank calculations based on data of the Herausgebergemein-
ised trading segments into an official and a regulated market on 1 Novem- schaft Wertpapier-Mitteilungen and the Deutsche Börse AG. 
50*VII Capital market

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
May 2011
VII Capital market
 
5 Yields and indices on German securities
 
 
               
Yields on debt securities outstanding issued by residents  1 Price indices  2,3 
Public debt securities Bank debt securities Debt securities Shares
Listed
Federal securities
With a residual With a residual
maturity of maturity of Corporate German German
more than 9 more than 9 bonds bond iBoxx CDAX shareand including and including (non- index share price index
€ Germany
Total Total Total 10 years  4 Total 10 years MFIs) (REX) price index index (DAX)
Average End-1998 End-1987 End-1987
Period % per annum daily rate = 100 = 100 = 1000
1999 4.3 4.3 4.3 4.5 4.3 4.9 5.0 110.60 92.52 445.95 6,958.14
2000 5.4 5.3 5.2 5.3 5.6 5.8 6.2 112.48 94.11 396.59 6,433.61
2001 4.8 4.7 4.7 4.8 4.9 5.3 5.9 113.12 94.16 319.38 5,160.102002 4.7 4.6 4.6 4.8 4.7 5.1 6.0 117.56 97.80 188.46 2,892.632003 3.7 3.8 3.8 4.1 3.7 4.3 5.0 117.36 97.09 252.48 3,965.162004 3.7 3.7 3.7 4.0 3.6 4.2 4.0 120.19 99.89 268.32 4,256.08
2005 3.1 3.2 3.2 3.4 3.1 3.5 3.7 120.92 101.09 335.59 5,408.26
2006 3.8 3.7 3.7 3.8 3.8 4.0 4.2 116.78 96.69 407.16 6,596.922007 4.3 4.3 4.2 4.2 4.4 4.5 5.0 114.85 94.62 478.65 8,067.322008 4.2 4.0 4.0 4.0 4.5 4.7 6.3 121.68 102.06 266.33 4,810.202009 3.2 3.1 3.0 3.2 3.5 4.0 5.5 123.62 100.12 320.32 5,957.43
2010 2.5 2.4 2.4 2.7 2.7 3.3 4.0 124.96 102.95 368.72 6,914.19
2011          Jan 2.8 2.7 2.7 3.0 3.0 4.3 3.9 122.48 101.19 375.09 7,077.48
         Feb 3.0 2.9 2.9 3.2 3.2 4.4 4.0 122.70 101.08 384.22 7,272.32         Mar 3.1 3.0 3.0 3.2 3.3 4.0 3.9 121.46 99.73 374.45 7,041.31
         Apr 3.2 3.1 3.1 3.3 3.5 4.1 4.1 121.95 100.28 394.79 7,514.46
1Bearer debt securities with maximum maturities according to the terms of the calculation. Monthly figures are calculated on the basis of the yields on
issue of over 4 years if their mean residual maturities exceed 3 years. Conver- all the business days in a month. The annual figures are the unweighted
tible debt securities, etc. debt securities with unscheduled redemption, zero means of the monthly figures. — 2End of year or month. — 3Source:
-coupon bonds, floating -rate notes and bonds not denominated in DM or Deutsche Börse AG. — 4Only debt securities eligible as underlying
euro are not included. Group yields for the various categories of securities instruments for futures contracts; calculated as unweighted averages.are weighted by the amounts outstanding of the debt securities included in
 
 
6 Sales and purchases of mutual fund shares in Germany
 
 
Sales Purchases
Domestic mutual funds  1  (sales receipts) Residents
Mutual funds open to the Credit institutions
general public including building
Non-banks  3 and loan associations  2 
of which
Sales Open- of which of which
= Secur- end Foreign Foreign
total Money ities- real Special- mutual mutualpur- market based estate ised Foreign fund fund Non-resi-chases Total Total funds funds funds funds funds  
4 Total Total shares Total shares dents  5 
Period
DM million
1998 187,641 169,748 38,998 5,772 27,814 4,690 130,750 17,893 190,416 43,937 961 146,479 16,507 − 2,775
€ million
1999 111,282 97,197 37,684 3,347 23,269 7,395 59,513 14,086 105,521 19,862 − 637 85,659 14,722 5,761
2000 118,021 85,160 39,712 − 2,188 36,818 − 2,824 45,448 32,861 107,019 14,454 92 92,565 32,769 11,002
2001 97,077 76,811 35,522 12,410 9,195 10,159 41,289 20,266 96,127 10,251 2,703 85,876 17,563 9512002 66,571 59,482 25,907 3,682 7,247 14,916 33,575 7,089 67,251 2,100 3,007 65,151 4,082 − 6802003 47,754 43,943 20,079 − 924 7,408 14,166 23,864 3,811 49,547 − 2,658 734 52,205 3,077 − 1,7932004 14,435 1,453 − 3,978 − 6,160 − 1,246 3,245 5,431 12,982 10,267 8,446 3,796 1,821 9,186 4,168
2005 85,268 41,718 6,400 − 124 7,001 − 3,186 35,317 43,550 79,252 21,290 7,761 57,962 35,789 6,016
2006 47,264 19,535 − 14,257 490 − 9,362 − 8,814 33,791 27,729 39,006 14,676 5,221 24,330 22,508 8,2582007 55,778 13,436 − 7,872 − 4,839 − 12,848 6,840 21,307 42,342 51,309 − 229 4,240 51,538 38,102 4,4692008 − 313 − 7,911 − 14,409 − 12,171 − 11,149 799 6,498 7,598 8,401 − 16,625 − 9,252 25,026 16,850 − 8,714
2009 41,972 43,747 10,966 − 5,047 11,749 2,686 32,780 − 1,776 36,566 − 14,995 − 8,178 51,561 6,402 5,406
2010 106,663 84,906 13,381 − 148 8,683 1,897 71,525 21,756 104,253 3,873 6,290 100,380 15,466 2,410
2011          Jan 9,590 7,045 1,640 16 424 639 5,405 2,545 8,576 820 683 7,756 1,862 1,014
         Feb 9,453 6,917 454 − 55 165 194 6,463 2,536 8,497 196 262 8,301 2,274 956         Mar − 1,428 805 − 1,478 139 − 1,243 − 492 2,284 − 2,233 − 1,891 − 668 180 − 1,223 − 2,413 463
1Including public limited investment companies. — 2Book values. — fund shares by non-residents; transaction values. — The figures for the most
3Residual. — 4Net purchases or net sales (−) of foreign fund shares by recent date are provisional; revisions are not specially marked. 
residents; transaction values. — 5Net purchases or net sales (−) of domestic
51*VII Capital market

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
E U R O S Y S T E M
Monthly Report
May 2011
VIII  Financial accounts
  
1  Acquisition of financial assets and financing of private non-financial sectors
(non-consolidated)
  
  € billion
2009 2010 
Item 2008 2009 2010 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4
Households  1 
  I  Acquisition of financial assets
Currency and deposits 121.0 49.9 80.2 9.4 15.2 5.5 19.8 16.5 21.3 7.6 34.8
Debt securities  2 1.4 3.6 − 14.0 12.1 0.7 2.1 − 11.3 5.1 1.3 0.6 − 21.0
Shares − 45.5 − 1.0 2.2 − 2.0 − 1.0 1.0 1.0 1.0 1.0 − 0.6 0.8
Other equity 3.0 3.0 3.0 0.7 0.8 0.8 0.8 0.7 0.7 0.7 0.8Mutual funds shares 8.2 22.1 8.9 9.3 5.1 6.7 1.1 5.9 − 3.4 7.5 − 1.0
Claims on insurance
corporations  
3 31.2 60.6 63.1 20.0 13.1 11.9 15.6 22.1 13.8 11.1 16.1
short-term claims 0.4 0.5 0.4 0.1 0.1 0.1 0.2 0.1 0.1 0.1 0.1longer-term claims 30.8 60.1 62.7 19.9 13.0 11.8 15.4 22.0 13.7 11.0 16.0
Claims from company
pension commitments 7.3 9.9 10.2 2.4 2.5 2.4 2.5 2.5 2.6 2.5 2.6
Other claims  
4 − 2.8 − 1.1 0.0 − 0.2 − 0.3 − 0.3 − 0.2 0.1 − 0.0 − 0.1 − 0.0
Total 123.8 147.0 153.6 51.7 35.9 30.1 29.2 54.0 37.2 29.4 33.0
  II Financing
Loans − 14.9 − 5.1 4.5 − 7.7 2.5 4.5 − 4.5 − 7.2 5.7 5.5 0.6
short-term loans 1.2 − 4.3 − 2.3 − 0.4 − 0.1 − 1.3 − 2.5 − 0.3 1.0 − 0.8 − 2.1
longer-term loans − 16.0 − 0.9 6.8 − 7.2 2.6 5.7 − 2.0 − 6.9 4.7 6.3 2.7
Other liabilities 0.4 1.1 0.4 0.5 0.3 − 0.1 0.4 0.4 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.0
Total − 14.4 − 4.0 4.9 − 7.2 2.8 4.4 − 4.1 − 6.8 5.7 5.4 0.6
Corporations
I  Acquisition of financial assets
Currency and deposits 11.2 23.6 2.4 − 1.3 10.2 12.6 2.1 5.5 − 21.9 20.1 − 1.3
Debt securities  2 − 11.7 − 17.6 61.1 − 8.3 − 22.6 − 22.0 35.3 13.5 44.9 − 24.5 27.2
Financial derivatives 16.6 − 6.0 26.6 − 9.7 − 0.3 3.7 0.2 2.0 3.3 4.2 17.3Shares 86.7 85.1 23.1 20.1 42.0 29.3 − 6.2 8.6 − 9.6 5.2 19.0
Other equity 15.7 21.8 39.0 10.4 7.2 6.9 − 2.8 31.7 6.9 3.1 − 2.8
Mutual funds shares − 7.8 − 41.7 5.1 − 3.3 − 10.1 − 15.6 − 12.8 − 1.3 4.4 0.3 1.7
Loans 50.6 87.1 85.5 27.5 15.6 19.2 24.8 26.5 28.7 17.8 12.5
short-term loans 34.4 53.8 65.3 17.0 11.3 12.7 12.8 20.2 20.0 16.9 8.2
longer-term loans 16.2 33.3 20.2 10.5 4.3 6.6 12.0 6.3 8.7 0.9 4.3
Claims on insurance
corporations  
3 0.4 1.0 0.8 0.2 0.2 0.2 0.4 0.2 0.2 0.2 0.2
short-term claims 0.4 1.0 0.8 0.2 0.2 0.2 0.4 0.2 0.2 0.2 0.2
longer-term claims . . . . . . . . . . .
Other claims − 35.2 − 2.4 − 55.5 − 6.4 − 10.3 − 5.8 20.0 − 31.3 − 20.8 15.8 − 19.1
Total 126.7 150.7 188.2 29.2 31.9 28.6 61.1 55.4 36.0 42.1 54.7
  II Financing
Debt securities  2 9.6 − 7.1 9.6 − 9.9 − 1.8 3.5 1.2 8.7 − 0.5 − 3.6 5.1
Financial derivatives . . . . . . . . . . .
Shares 3.6 5.5 7.2 1.9 0.3 2.3 1.0 6.1 0.1 0.2 0.8
Other equity 19.7 7.2 9.1 1.2 − 0.7 1.6 5.1 1.7 1.6 5.2 0.6
Loans 80.6 59.9 24.8 33.4 12.3 2.4 11.8 27.1 14.1 16.4 − 32.8
short-term loans 47.2 10.7 44.6 12.7 − 1.0 − 0.3 − 0.7 29.8 20.7 8.5 − 14.5
longer-term loans 33.4 49.2 − 19.8 20.8 13.3 2.7 12.4 − 2.7 − 6.6 7.8 − 18.3
Claims from company
pension commitments 2.9 4.8 4.8 1.2 1.2 1.2 1.2 1.2 1.2 1.2 1.2
Other liabilities 26.3 39.8 39.7 24.6 7.2 7.8 0.2 2.8 6.4 7.2 23.3
Total 142.7 110.1 95.2 52.4 18.4 18.8 20.4 47.6 22.9 26.6 − 1.8
1Including non-profit institutions serving households. — 2Including money 4Including accumulated interest-bearing surplus shares with insurance
market paper. — 3Including private pension funds, burial funds, corporations. 
occupational pension schemes and supplementary pension funds. —
52*VIII  Financial accounts

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
May 2011
VIII  Financial accounts
  
2  Financial assets and liabilities of private non-financial sectors
(non-consolidated)
  
  End-of-year level, end-of-quarter level; € billion
2009 2010 
Item 2008 2009 2010 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4
Households  1 
  I  Financial assets
Currency and deposits 1,737.5 1,788.1 1,868.3 1,746.8 1,762.9 1,768.4 1,788.1 1,804.6 1,825.9 1,833.4 1,868.3
Debt securities  2 359.2 412.6 403.4 348.9 353.6 401.8 412.6 426.5 427.3 439.6 403.4
Shares 181.9 191.7 230.6 154.3 166.2 175.2 191.7 204.1 198.5 204.9 230.6
Other equity 171.4 165.1 174.9 159.2 160.9 160.8 165.1 169.1 180.5 168.8 174.9Mutual funds shares 503.4 548.7 587.4 502.4 525.6 541.6 548.7 560.9 549.3 564.8 587.4
Claims on insurance
corporations  
3 1,214.8 1,282.7 1,347.7 1,230.1 1,247.8 1,265.7 1,282.7 1,305.2 1,318.5 1,330.2 1,347.7
short-term claims 81.3 81.8 82.2 81.4 81.5 81.6 81.8 81.9 82.0 82.1 82.2
longer-term claims 1,133.6 1,200.9 1,265.6 1,148.7 1,166.3 1,184.2 1,200.9 1,223.3 1,236.5 1,248.1 1,265.6
Claims from company
pension commitments 262.4 272.3 282.5 264.9 267.4 269.8 272.3 274.8 277.4 279.9 282.5
Other claims  4 39.8 38.7 38.7 39.5 39.2 38.9 38.7 38.8 38.8 38.7 38.7
Total 4,470.5 4,699.9 4,933.5 4,446.0 4,523.6 4,622.3 4,699.9 4,784.0 4,816.1 4,860.2 4,933.5
  II Liabilities
Loans 1,521.7 1,520.9 1,525.4 1,514.2 1,519.1 1,523.6 1,520.9 1,514.4 1,520.1 1,525.2 1,525.4
short-term loans 80.0 75.7 75.6 79.6 79.5 78.2 75.7 75.4 78.0 77.6 75.6
longer-term loans 1,441.7 1,445.1 1,449.8 1,434.6 1,439.6 1,445.4 1,445.1 1,439.0 1,442.1 1,447.7 1,449.8
Other liabilities 10.5 11.1 10.8 11.7 11.8 11.5 11.1 12.6 12.1 12.3 10.8
Total 1,532.3 1,532.0 1,536.2 1,525.9 1,530.9 1,535.0 1,532.0 1,527.0 1,532.2 1,537.5 1,536.2
Corporations
I  Financial assets
Currency and deposits 420.0 455.2 450.5 415.8 425.1 445.2 455.2 454.1 438.8 450.3 450.5
Debt securities  2 114.8 101.4 163.2 103.9 88.6 73.2 101.4 114.9 162.9 135.9 163.2
Financial derivatives . . . . . . . . . . .
Shares 660.6 818.8 1,011.5 597.5 689.7 747.2 818.8 868.6 841.6 875.0 1,011.5
Other equity 286.3 293.1 344.6 275.2 284.1 289.5 293.1 330.6 358.4 336.7 344.6
Mutual funds shares 67.9 64.3 63.5 62.9 58.0 85.9 64.3 68.0 70.9 70.8 63.5
Loans 363.0 450.1 535.6 390.5 406.1 425.3 450.1 476.6 505.3 523.1 535.6
short-term loans 240.5 294.2 359.5 257.4 268.8 281.4 294.2 314.4 334.4 351.3 359.5
longer-term loans 122.5 155.8 176.1 133.1 137.3 143.9 155.8 162.2 170.9 171.8 176.1
Claims on insurance
corporations  3 44.2 45.2 46.0 44.4 44.6 44.8 45.2 45.4 45.6 45.8 46.0
short-term claims 44.2 45.2 46.0 44.4 44.6 44.8 45.2 45.4 45.6 45.8 46.0
longer-term claims . . . . . . . . . . .
Other claims 933.1 916.1 748.1 959.5 896.5 915.2 916.1 910.6 952.5 934.7 748.1
Total 2,890.0 3,144.2 3,363.0 2,849.8 2,892.8 3,026.4 3,144.2 3,268.8 3,376.0 3,372.2 3,363.0
  II Liabilities
Debt securities  2 137.0 136.9 145.2 129.2 124.5 132.8 136.9 146.9 154.1 153.6 145.2
Financial derivatives . . . . . . . . . . .
Shares 963.5 1,081.3 1,301.8 814.4 948.4 1,043.3 1,081.3 1,118.8 1,089.5 1,159.5 1,301.8
Other equity 689.9 697.1 706.1 691.1 690.3 691.9 697.1 698.7 700.4 705.6 706.1
Loans 1,407.7 1,453.5 1,473.9 1,440.5 1,449.4 1,441.8 1,453.5 1,472.5 1,487.1 1,502.0 1,473.9
short-term loans 469.6 478.0 523.0 479.6 477.9 477.2 478.0 502.8 523.6 530.5 523.0
longer-term loans 938.1 975.4 950.9 961.0 971.4 964.6 975.4 969.8 963.5 971.5 950.9
Claims from companypension commitments 218.4 223.2 228.0 219.6 220.8 222.0 223.2 224.4 225.6 226.8 228.0
Other liabilities 831.9 848.0 831.9 903.7 835.0 855.0 848.0 852.8 873.7 868.9 831.9
Total 4,248.2 4,439.9 4,686.9 4,198.5 4,268.3 4,386.8 4,439.9 4,514.2 4,530.3 4,616.3 4,686.9
1Including non-profit institutions serving households. — 2Including money 4Including accumulated interest-bearing surplus shares with insurance
market paper. — 3Including private pension funds, burial funds, corporations. 
occupational pension schemes and supplementary pension funds. —
53*VIII  Financial accounts

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
E U R O S Y S T E M
Monthly Report
May 2011
IX Public finances in Germany
 
1 General government: deficit and debt level as defined in the Maastricht Treaty
 
 
 
Social Social
General Central State Local security General Central State Local security
government government government government funds government government government government funds
Period € billion as a percentage of GDP
Deficit / surplus 1
2005 − 74.0 − 47.4 − 22.5 − 0.2 − 3.9 − 3.3 − 2.1 − 1.0 − 0.0 − 0.2
2006 − 36.8 − 34.2 − 10.5 + 2.9 + 5.1 − 1.6 − 1.5 − 0.5 + 0.1 + 0.22007
p + 6.6 − 18.2 + 4.1 + 9.8 + 10.9 + 0.3 − 0.7 + 0.2 + 0.4 + 0.4
2008 p + 2.8 − 15.6 + 1.8 + 7.8 + 8.8 + 0.1 − 0.6 + 0.1 + 0.3 + 0.4
2009 p − 72.9 − 39.4 − 16.2 − 4.0 − 13.3 − 3.0 − 1.6 − 0.7 − 0.2 − 0.6
2010 2, pe − 81.6 − 57.5 − 17.2 − 10.0 + 3.0 − 3.3 − 2.3 − 0.7 − 0.4 + 0.1
2009          H1  p − 18.7 − 9.6 − 5.2 + 0.2 − 4.0 − 1.6 − 0.8 − 0.4 + 0.0 − 0.3
         H2  p − 54.0 − 29.5 − 11.0 − 4.1 − 9.4 − 4.4 − 2.4 − 0.9 − 0.3 − 0.8
2010          H1  2, pe − 36.8 − 26.5 − 9.5 − 4.8 + 3.9 − 3.0 − 2.2 − 0.8 − 0.4 + 0.3
         H2  pe − 45.2 − 31.4 − 7.7 − 5.2 − 0.9 − 3.5 − 2.4 − 0.6 − 0.4 − 0.1
Debt level 3 End of year or quarter
2005 1,524.4 935.3 482.3 120.0 2.7 68.0 41.7 21.5 5.4 0.12006 1,571.7 970.7 492.1 122.4 1.7 67.6 41.7 21.2 5.3 0.12007 1,578.8 978.0 494.1 120.2 1.6 64.9 40.2 20.3 4.9 0.1
2008 1,644.1 1,007.6 531.3 118.8 1.5 66.3 40.6 21.4 4.8 0.1
2009
pe 1,760.8 1,075.7 573.6 123.8 1.3 73.5 44.9 23.9 5.2 0.1
2010 pe 2,079.6 1,342.2 621.0 130.1 1.3 83.2 53.7 24.9 5.2 0.1
2009          Q1  pe 1,675.0 1,028.3 539.8 119.4 1.6 68.4 42.0 22.0 4.9 0.1
         Q2  pe 1,740.7 1,074.4 559.4 120.4 1.4 72.1 44.5 23.2 5.0 0.1
         Q3  pe 1,748.7 1,077.0 562.8 121.2 1.5 73.0 44.9 23.5 5.1 0.1
         Q4  pe 1,760.8 1,075.7 573.6 123.8 1.3 73.5 44.9 23.9 5.2 0.1
2010          Q1  pe 1,781.4 1,088.5 580.6 124.6 1.3 73.7 45.1 24.0 5.2 0.1
         Q2  pe 1,823.4 1,099.1 609.8 126.7 1.3 74.5 44.9 24.9 5.2 0.1
         Q3  pe 1,848.1 1,116.4 616.4 128.4 1.6 74.8 45.2 24.9 5.2 0.1
         Q4  pe 2,079.6 1,342.2 621.0 130.1 1.3 83.2 53.7 24.9 5.2 0.1
Source: Federal Statistical Office and Bundesbank calculations. — 1Unlike according to the national accounts. — 2Including the €4.4 billion proceeds
the fiscal balance as shown in the national accounts, the deficit as defined received from the 2010 frequency auction. — 3Quarterly GDP ratios are
in the Maastricht Treaty includes interest flows from swaps and forward based on the national output of the four preceding quarters. 
rate agreements. The half-year figures correspond to the deficit / surplus
 
 
2 General government: revenue, expenditure and fiscal deficit / surplus as shown in the national accounts *
  
 
Revenue Expenditure
of which of which
Compen- Gross Memo item
Social con- Social sation of capital Deficit / Total tax
Period Total Taxes tributions Other Total benefits employees Interest formation Other surplus burden  1 
€ billion
2005 976.1 493.2 396.5 86.4 1,050.3 597.0 168.9 62.6 30.3 191.5 − 74.2 900.5
2006 1,017.1 530.6 400.1 86.3 1,054.2 598.4 168.3 65.6 32.4 189.6 − 37.1 942.02007
p 1,065.8 576.4 400.2 89.2 1,059.4 597.3 168.3 67.3 34.4 192.1 + 6.3 988.6
2008 p 1,088.5 590.1 407.8 90.5 1,085.6 606.8 170.7 66.7 36.8 204.7 + 2.8 1,010.8
2009 p 1,066.0 564.5 409.9 91.7 1,138.7 640.1 177.6 62.2 39.3 219.5 − 72.7 984.6
2010 pe 1,082.1 568.3 420.3 93.6 2 1,164.1 654.7 181.8 59.8 39.0 2 228.9 2 − 82.0 998.5
as a percentage of GDP
2005 43.5 22.0 17.7 3.9 46.8 26.6 7.5 2.8 1.4 8.5 − 3.3 40.22006 43.7 22.8 17.2 3.7 45.3 25.7 7.2 2.8 1.4 8.1 − 1.6 40.52007
p 43.8 23.7 16.5 3.7 43.6 24.6 6.9 2.8 1.4 7.9 + 0.3 40.6
2008 p 43.9 23.8 16.4 3.6 43.8 24.5 6.9 2.7 1.5 8.3 + 0.1 40.7
2009 p 44.5 23.5 17.1 3.8 47.5 26.7 7.4 2.6 1.6 9.2 − 3.0 41.1
2010 pe 43.3 22.7 16.8 3.7 2 46.6 26.2 7.3 2.4 1.6 2 9.2 2 − 3.3 40.0
Percentage growth rates
2005 + 1.9 + 2.5 + 0.0 + 8.1 + 0.9 + 0.8 − 0.4 + 0.4 − 4.4 + 3.2 . + 1.42006 + 4.2 + 7.6 + 0.9 − 0.1 + 0.4 + 0.2 − 0.4 + 4.7 + 7.0 − 1.0 . + 4.62007
p + 4.8 + 8.6 + 0.0 + 3.3 + 0.5 − 0.2 + 0.0 + 2.7 + 6.0 + 1.3 . + 4.9
2008 p + 2.1 + 2.4 + 1.9 + 1.5 + 2.5 + 1.6 + 1.4 − 1.0 + 7.1 + 6.6 . + 2.2
2009 p − 2.1 − 4.3 + 0.5 + 1.2 + 4.9 + 5.5 + 4.1 − 6.7 + 7.0 + 7.2 . − 2.6
2010 pe + 1.5 + 0.7 + 2.5 + 2.1 + 2.2 + 2.3 + 2.3 − 3.8 − 0.9 + 4.3 . + 1.4
Source: Federal Statistical Office. — *Figures in accordance with ESA 1995. be found on the Bundesbank’s website. — 1Taxes and social contributions
In the Monthly Reports up to December 2006, customs duties, the EU share plus customs duties and the EU share in VAT revenue. — 2Including the
in VAT revenue and EU subsidies were included in the national accounts’ €4.4 billion proceeds received from the 2010 frequency auction, which are
data (without affecting the fiscal deficit / surplus). This information can still deducted from other expenditure in the national accounts.  
54*IX Public finances in Germany

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
May 2011
IX Public finances in Germany
 
3 General government: budgetary development (as per government’s financial statistics)
 
 
€ billion
Central, state and local government  1 Social security funds  2 General government, total
Revenue Expenditure
of which of which 3 
Finan- Person- Fixed Finan-
cial nel asset cialtransac- expend- Current forma- transac- Deficit / Rev- Expend- Deficit / Rev- Expend- Deficit /
Period Total  
4 Taxes tions  5 Total  4 iture grants Interest tion tions  5 surplus enue  6 iture surplus enue iture surplus
2003 pe 547.0 442.2 21.5 614.2 174.0 235.0 65.6 36.3 10.0 − 67.2 467.6 474.4 − 6.8 925.2 999.1 − 73.9
2004 pe 545.9 442.8 24.1 610.4 173.4 236.9 64.8 34.3 9.6 − 64.5 469.7 468.6 + 1.1 926.8 990.2 − 63.4
2005 pe 568.9 452.1 31.3 620.6 172.1 245.3 64.0 33.0 14.3 − 51.7 467.8 471.3 − 3.4 947.4 1,002.5 − 55.1
2006 pe 590.9 488.4 18.8 626.2 169.7 252.1 64.4 33.7 11.6 − 35.3 486.3 466.6 + 19.7 988.2 1,003.8 − 15.6
2007 pe 644.8 538.2 17.7 644.2 182.2 250.0 66.2 34.6 9.5 + 0.6 475.3 466.4 + 8.9 1,025.6 1,016.1 + 9.6
2008 pe 668.9 561.2 13.4 677.4 187.3 259.9 67.3 36.4 18.6 − 8.5 485.5 478.9 + 6.6 1,058.5 1,060.4 − 1.9
2009 pe 630.4 524.0 9.2 721.3 195.2 270.4 64.0 40.5 38.0 − 90.9 492.0 505.9 − 13.9 1,020.5 1,125.3 −104.8
2008          Q1 p 160.0 130.8 3.0 164.5 43.7 65.5 24.7 5.3 2.0 − 4.5 114.1 119.4 − 5.3 250.4 260.2 − 9.8
         Q2 p 166.1 143.5 2.1 151.5 44.9 61.4 11.1 7.2 1.7 + 14.6 120.6 120.1 + 0.5 263.0 247.9 + 15.1
         Q3 p 159.7 137.2 1.3 167.1 45.9 62.6 21.2 9.0 1.5 − 7.4 118.6 118.9 − 0.3 254.5 262.2 − 7.7
         Q4 p 180.9 149.4 6.7 192.4 51.2 68.7 10.0 13.6 13.3 − 11.5 130.4 121.7 + 8.7 287.4 290.2 − 2.8
2009          Q1 p 156.6 128.7 1.7 175.4 45.9 67.2 22.8 5.0 10.0 − 18.9 117.9 122.3 − 4.4 250.8 274.1 − 23.3
         Q2 p 154.8 130.6 3.3 169.5 47.1 60.6 10.7 7.5 16.9 − 14.6 120.5 125.5 − 5.0 251.8 271.5 − 19.6
         Q3 p 148.8 124.4 2.1 174.9 47.6 65.0 19.8 10.5 4.5 − 26.0 120.1 127.6 − 7.5 245.2 278.7 − 33.5
         Q4 p 168.3 140.3 1.9 199.8 52.8 75.9 10.4 16.4 6.4 − 31.5 132.3 130.1 + 2.2 269.5 298.8 − 29.3
2010          Q1 p 147.9 121.6 2.6 180.4 47.6 74.8 21.2 5.5 4.9 − 32.5 123.6 127.6 − 4.0 242.2 278.8 − 36.6
         Q2 p 7 163.6 134.9 3.7 173.6 48.2 71.2 13.2 8.1 6.2 − 10.1 128.2 127.3 + 0.9 7 262.3 271.5 − 9.2
         Q3 p 153.2 127.6 3.0 177.3 48.3 69.8 16.1 10.5 3.4 − 24.0 124.7 125.6 − 1.0 251.0 276.0 − 25.0
Source: Bundesbank calculations based on the data from the Federal Stat- 3The development of the types of expenditure recorded here is influenced
istical Office. — 1Including subsidiary budgets, from 2007 also including the in part by statistical changeovers. — 4Including discrepancies in clearing
post office pension fund; excluding the special fund ”Provision for final pay- transactions between central, state and local government. — 5On the rev-
ments for inflation-indexed Federal securities”, which was set up in 2009. enue side, this contains proceeds booked as disposals of equity interests and
Unlike the annual figures based on the annual calculations of the Federal as loan repayments. On the expenditure side, this contains the acquisitionStatistical Office, the quarterly figures do not include municipal special pur- of equity interests and loans granted. — 6Including Federal Government
pose associations and various special accounts. — 2The annual figures do liquidity assistance to the Federal Labour Office. — 7Including the
€4.4
not tally with the sum of the quarterly figures, as the latter are all pro- billion proceeds received from the 2010 frequency auction. 
visional. The quarterly figures for some insurance sectors are estimated. —
4 Central, state and local government: budgetary development (as per government’s financial statistics)
 
 
€ billion
Central government State government  2,3 Local government  3 
Period Revenue  1 Expenditure Deficit / surplus Revenue Expenditure Deficit / surplus Revenue Expenditure Deficit / surplus
2003 239.6 278.8 − 39.2 229.2 259.7 − 30.5 142.1 149.9 − 7.8
2004 233.9 273.6 − 39.7 233.5 257.1 − 23.6 147.0 150.1 − 3.1
2005 250.0 281.5 − 31.5 237.4 259.6 − 22.2 151.3 153.2 − 1.9
2006 254.6 282.8 − 28.2 250.3 260.1 − 9.8 161.1 157.4 + 3.72007
pe 277.4 292.1 − 14.7 275.9 267.5 + 8.4 171.3 162.4 + 8.9
2008 pe 292.0 303.8 − 11.8 279.3 278.0 + 1.3 176.9 169.0 + 7.9
2009 pe 282.6 317.1 − 34.5 266.2 293.7 − 27.5 172.0 178.9 − 6.9
2010 pe 288.0 332.4 − 44.4 278.5 302.0 − 23.5 176.5 183.9 − 7.4
2008          Q1 p 64.1 75.6 − 11.5 67.7 67.7 − 0.1 37.3 37.4 − 0.1
         Q2 p 73.0 68.3 + 4.7 70.7 64.2 + 6.5 42.7 39.7 + 3.0
         Q3 p 71.2 82.7 − 11.4 67.3 66.3 + 1.0 43.8 41.1 + 2.7
         Q4 p 83.7 77.3 + 6.4 72.6 78.7 − 6.0 51.0 49.0 + 2.0
2009          Q1 p 65.8 76.8 − 11.0 65.3 75.9 − 10.6 35.8 39.0 − 3.1
         Q2 p 71.3 68.6 + 2.7 66.1 67.9 − 1.8 41.1 42.2 − 1.1
         Q3 p 68.6 84.5 − 15.9 63.1 69.4 − 6.3 42.5 45.1 − 2.6
         Q4 p 77.0 87.2 − 10.2 70.7 79.4 − 8.7 50.6 51.0 − 0.4
2010          Q1 p 61.1 82.6 − 21.5 65.0 73.5 − 8.5 34.6 41.2 − 6.6
         Q2 p 4 75.6 80.6 − 5.0 68.3 69.1 − 0.8 42.2 43.5 − 1.3
         Q3 p 66.2 82.7 − 16.6 68.5 73.3 − 4.8 43.8 45.2 − 1.4
         Q4 p 85.2 86.5 − 1.3 75.8 85.0 − 9.2 53.8 52.3 + 1.5
Source: Bundesbank calculations based on the data from the Federal Stat- 3Unlike the annual figure based on the annual calculations of the Federal
istical Office. — 1Any amounts of the Bundesbank’s profit distribution Statistical Office, the quarterly figures do not include various special ac-
exceeding the reference value that were used to repay parts of the debt of counts and municipal special purpose associations. — 4Including the
central government’s special funds are not included here. — 2Including the €4.4 billion proceeds received from the 2010 frequency auction. 
local authority level of the city-states Berlin, Bremen and Hamburg. —
55*IX Public finances in Germany

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
E U R O S Y S T E M
Monthly Report
May 2011
IX Public finances in Germany
 
5 Central, state and local government: tax revenue
 
 
€ million
Central and state government and European Union Memo item
Supplementary
central govern-
Balance of ment grants, state
Central State Local untransferred government’s share
Period Total Total government  1 government European Union  2 government  3 tax shares  4 of energy tax
2004 442,838 386,459 208,920 157,898 19,640 56,237 + 142 21,967
2005 452,078 392,313 211,779 158,823 21,711 59,750 + 16 21,634
2006 488,444 421,151 225,634 173,374 22,142 67,316 − 22 21,742
2007 538,243 465,554 251,747 191,558 22,249 72,551 + 138 21,643
2008 561,182 484,182 260,690 200,411 23,081 77,190 − 190 21,5102009 524,000 455,615 252,842 182,273 20,501 68,419 − 34 20,275
2010 530,587 460,230 254,537 181,326 24,367 70,385 − 28 19,734
2009          Q1 128,787 109,674 55,941 46,212 7,521 13,289 + 5,824 5,154
         Q2 130,491 113,442 65,247 46,653 1,541 17,397 − 347 5,140         Q3 124,437 108,572 62,354 42,335 3,883 15,865 − 1 5,048         Q4 140,285 123,928 69,299 47,073 7,556 21,868 − 5,511 4,933
2010          Q1 121,321 104,370 54,316 41,777 8,278 11,299 + 5,652 4,885
         Q2 134,843 116,767 66,331 46,516 3,919 18,270 − 194 4,879
         Q3 127,311 109,956 61,146 43,102 5,709 17,564 − 209 5,081         Q4 147,112 129,137 72,744 49,932 6,462 23,253 − 5,278 4,889
2011          Q1 ... 115,878 60,579 46,582 8,717 ... ... 4,741
2010          Mar . 36,592 21,096 14,308 1,188 . . 1,6282011          Mar . 42,727 24,457 16,838 1,432 . . 1,580
Source: Federal Ministry of Finance, Federal Statistical Office and Bundes- cruing to the EU from central government tax revenue. — 3Including local
bank calculations. — 1Before deducting supplementary central government government taxes in the city-states Berlin, Bremen and Hamburg. — 4Differ-
grants, shares in energy tax revenue and compensation for the transfer of ence between local government’s share in the joint taxes received by the
motor vehicle tax to central government, which are remitted to state govern- state government cash offices in the period in question (see Table IX. 6) a nd
ment. — 2Custom duties and shares in VAT and gross national income ac- the amounts passed on to local government in the same period. 
 
 
6 Central and state government and European Union: tax revenue, by type
 
 
€ million
Joint taxes
Memo
Income taxes  2 Turnover taxes  5 item
Local
Local govern-
Invest- business Central State ment
Assessed ment Turnover tax govern- govern- EU share in
Wage income Corpora- income Turnover tax on trans- ment ment customs joint
Period Total  1 Total tax  3 tax tion tax tax  4 Total tax imports fers  6 taxes  7 taxes  7 duties taxes
2004 409,517 159,104 123,896 5,394 13,123 16,691 137,366 104,715 32,651 5,661 84,554 19,774 3,059 23,058
2005 415,355 161,960 118,919 9,766 16,333 16,943 139,713 108,440 31,273 6,218 83,508 20,579 3,378 23,042
2006 446,139 182,614 122,612 17,567 22,898 19,537 146,688 111,318 35,370 7,013 84,215 21,729 3,880 24,988
2007 493,817 204,698 131,774 25,027 22,929 24,969 169,636 127,522 42,114 6,975 85,690 22,836 3,983 28,2632008 515,498 220,483 141,895 32,685 15,868 30,035 175,989 130,789 45,200 6,784 86,302 21,937 4,002 31,3162009 484,880 193,684 135,165 26,430 7,173 24,916 176,991 141,907 35,084 4,908 89,318 16,375 3,604 29,265
2010 488,731 192,816 127,904 31,179 12,041 21,691 180,042 136,459 43,582 5,925 93,426 12,146 4,378 28,501
2009          Q1 116,731 50,001 33,975 2,971 4,399 8,657 43,087 34,234 8,853 − 36 17,361 5,351 966 7,057
         Q2 120,543 48,503 30,481 9,141 342 8,539 43,424 35,176 8,248 1,499 21,085 5,186 846 7,102         Q3 115,567 43,486 32,150 6,732 592 4,011 44,365 35,717 8,649 1,346 22,427 3,023 920 6,994         Q4 132,040 51,695 38,559 7,586 1,841 3,708 46,114 36,780 9,334 2,099 28,445 2,815 872 8,112
2010          Q1 111,163 45,127 30,255 6,155 1,951 6,766 42,891 34,054 8,837 215 19,001 2,814 1,115 6,793
         Q2 123,859 51,667 30,447 9,681 3,830 7,710 44,343 33,779 10,564 1,311 22,682 2,914 943 7,092         Q3 116,691 42,813 30,445 7,320 1,588 3,460 44,997 33,258 11,740 1,574 22,922 3,242 1,143 6,734         Q4 137,019 53,209 36,757 8,023 4,672 3,756 47,810 35,369 12,441 2,825 28,821 3,177 1,177 7,882
2011          Q1 123,131 50,328 32,478 6,755 2,485 8,611 47,389 35,528 11,861 366 20,515 3,408 1,124 7,253
2010          Mar 39,125 18,935 9,169 5,836 2,839 1,090 11,138 8,225 2,913 11 7,726 1,003 312 2,5332011          Mar 45,590 22,382 10,088 6,859 4,241 1,193 12,903 9,073 3,830 11 8,666 1,256 373 2,863
Source: Federal Ministry of Finance and Bundesbank calculations. — 1This child benefit and subsidies for supplementary private pension plans. —
total, unlike that in Table IX. 5, does not include the receipts from the equal- 4Final withholding tax on interest income and capital gains, non-assessed
isation of burdens levies, local business tax (less local business tax transfers taxes on earnings. — 5The allocation of revenue to central, state and local
to central and state government), real property taxes and other local govern- government, which is adjusted at more regular intervals, is regulated i n
ment taxes, or the balance of untransferred tax shares. — 2Respective section 1 of the Revenue Adjustment Act. Respective percentage share of
percentage share of central, state and local government in revenue: wage central, state and local government in revenue for 2010: 53.2:44.8:2. The EU
tax and assessed income tax 42.5:42.5:15, corporation tax and non-assessed share is deducted from central government’s share. — 6Respective percent-
taxes on earnings 50:50:-, final withholding tax on interest income and capi- age share of central and state government for 2010: 21.7:78.3. — 7For the
tal gains, non-assessed taxes on earnings 44:44:12. — 3After deducting breakdown, see Table IX. 7. 
56*IX Public finances in Germany

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
May 2011
IX Public finances in Germany
  
7 Central, state and local government: individual taxes   
  
€ million
Central government taxes  1 State government taxes  1 Local government taxes
Tax on of which
the acqui-
Soli- Motor Motor sition of Inher- Local Real
Period Energy Tobacco darity Insurance vehicle Electri- Spirits vehicle land and itance business property
tax tax surcharge tax tax  2 city tax tax Other tax  2 buildings tax Other  3 Total tax taxes
2004 41,782 13,630 10,108 8,751 . 6,597 2,195 1,492 7,740 4,646 4,284 3,105 38,982 28,373 9,939
2005 40,101 14,273 10,315 8,750 . 6,462 2,142 1,465 8,674 4,791 4,097 3,018 42,941 32,129 10,247
2006 39,916 14,387 11,277 8,775 . 6,273 2,160 1,428 8,937 6,125 3,763 2,904 49,319 38,370 10,3992007 38,955 14,254 12,349 10,331 . 6,355 1,959 1,488 8,898 6,952 4,203 2,783 51,401 40,116 10,7132008 39,248 13,574 13,146 10,478 . 6,261 2,126 1,470 8,842 5,728 4,771 2,596 52,468 41,037 10,8072009 39,822 13,366 11,927 10,548 3,803 6,278 2,101 1,473 4,398 4,857 4,550 2,571 44,028 32,421 10,936
2010 39,838 13,492 11,713 10,284 8,488 6,171 1,990 1,449 − 5,290 4,404 2,452 47,780 35,712 11,315
2009          Q1 4,777 2,365 3,191 4,502 . 1,560 594 372 2,284 1,165 1,144 758 12,021 9,370 2,452
         Q2 10,059 3,560 3,057 1,999 . 1,569 478 363 2,114 1,131 1,334 608 11,447 8,433 2,860         Q3 9,883 3,499 2,638 2,096 1,907 1,582 488 335 0 1,297 1,123 604 10,216 6,800 3,233
         Q4 15,103 3,942 3,040 1,952 1,897 1,567 542 402 − 1,264 950 601 10,344 7,818 2,391
2010          Q1 4,446 2,462 2,856 4,496 2,345 1,498 526 372 − 1,229 918 667 10,374 7,641 2,518
         Q2 9,596 3,327 3,100 2,060 2,235 1,570 437 357 − 1,207 1,115 591 12,295 9,201 2,915         Q3 10,172 3,608 2,615 2,110 2,012 1,563 489 354 − 1,430 1,216 597 12,194 8,618 3,373         Q4 15,625 4,096 3,142 1,619 1,895 1,540 538 366 − 1,425 1,156 597 12,918 10,252 2,508
2011          Q1 4,457 2,893 3,072 4,869 2,349 1,785 574 516 − 1,555 1,170 683 ... ... ...
2010          Mar 2,779 1,266 1,263 744 810 641 130 93 − 453 359 192 . . .2011          Mar 3,028 1,724 1,411 586 818 831 119 149 − 541 406 309 . . .
Source: Federal Ministry of Finance, Federal Statistical Office and Bundes- ment. Postings to state government shown thereafter relate to the booki ng
bank calculations. — 1For the sum total, see Table IX. 6. — 2As of of cash flows. — 3 Notably betting, lottery and beer tax.   
1 July 2009, motor vehicle tax revenue is attributable to central govern-
 
 
8 German pension insurance scheme: budgetary development and assets *
  
€ million
Revenue  1,2 Expenditure  1,2 Assets  1,5 
of which of which
Equity
Payments interests, Memo
from Pen- mort- item
central sioners’ gages Adminis-
Contri- govern- Pension health Deficit / and other Real trative
Period Total butions  3 ment Total payments insurance  4 surplus Total Deposits  6 Securities loans  7 estate assets
2004 8 231,684 156,535 71,680 233,011 198,587 14,258 − 1,327 5,158 4,980 19 41 118 4,834
2005 229,428 156,264 71,917 233,357 199,873 13,437 − 3,929 1,976 1,794 16 42 123 4,888
2006 241,231 168,083 71,773 233,668 200,459 13,053 + 7,563 10,047 9,777 115 46 109 4,912
2007 236,642 162,225 72,928 235,459 201,642 13,665 + 1,183 12,196 11,270 765 46 115 4,8192008 242,770 167,611 73,381 238,995 204,071 14,051 + 3,775 16,531 16,313 36 56 126 4,6452009 244,689 169,183 74,313 244,478 208,475 14,431 + 211 16,821 16,614 23 64 120 4,525
2010
p 249,563 172,763 75,685 247,838 212,133 14,335 + 1,725 19,274 17,978 1,120 68 108 4,476
2008          Q1 57,611 39,028 18,241 58,952 50,795 3,473 − 1,341 10,730 9,459 1,095 46 130 4,792
         Q2 60,574 41,958 18,241 59,346 50,714 3,482 + 1,228 11,923 10,267 1,466 61 128 4,704
         Q3 59,525 40,769 18,215 60,124 51,418 3,539 − 599 11,727 10,421 1,128 50 127 4,690         Q4 64,495 45,851 18,231 60,100 51,301 3,548 + 4,395 16,912 16,399 336 50 126 4,677
2009          Q1 58,681 39,891 18,500 60,105 51,554 3,633 − 1,424 14,902 14,699 15 56 132 4,618
         Q2 60,812 42,140 18,384 60,263 51,410 3,626 + 549 15,280 15,082 15 59 124 4,593
         Q3 59,783 41,142 18,364 61,841 52,869 3,580 − 2,058 13,647 13,428 40 60 119 4,585         Q4 64,864 46,005 18,594 61,993 52,917 3,583 + 2,871 16,812 16,608 23 61 120 4,582
2010          Q1 59,761 40,601 18,917 61,861 53,059 3,582 − 2,100 14,922 14,717 20 64 120 4,490
         Q2 62,249 43,054 18,923 61,999 53,006 3,585 + 250 15,254 15,053 20 69 112 4,478         Q3 61,237 42,048 18,912 62,091 53,102 3,589 − 854 14,853 14,656 20 68 109 4,474         Q4 66,317 47,060 18,933 61,887 52,966 3,579 + 4,430 19,274 17,978 1,120 68 108 4,476
2011          Q1 60,804 41,608 18,902 62,188 53,176 3,742 − 1,384 18,063 17,069 819 74 101 4,482
Source: Federal Ministry of Labour and Social Affairs and German pension ing and proceeds. — 3Including contributions for recipients of government
insurance scheme. — *Excluding the German pension insurance scheme for cash benefits. — 4Including long-term care insurance for pensioners until
the mining, railway and maritime industries. — 1The final annual figures 2004 Q1. — 5Largely corresponds to the sustainability reserves. End of year
do not tally with the quarterly figures, as the latter are all provisional. — or quarter. — 6Including cash. — 7Excluding loans to other social security
2Including financial compensation payments. Excluding investment spend- funds. — 8 Revenue includes proceeds from the disposal of equity interests. 
57*IX Public finances in Germany

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
E U R O S Y S T E M
Monthly Report
May 2011
IX Public finances in Germany
 
9 Federal Employment Agency: budgetary development *
 
 
€ million
Revenue Expenditure
Grant or
of which of which working
capital
of which of which loansfrom
Unemploy- Measures central
Contri- ment sup- Western Eastern Job promo- Western Eastern financed Deficit / govern-
Period Total  
1 butions Levies  2 Total  3 port 4,5 Germany Germany tion  5,6 Germany Germany by levies  7 surplus ment
2004 50,314 47,211 1,674 54,490 29,746 21,821 7,925 16,843 9,831 7,011 1,641 − 4,176 4,175
2005 52,692 46,989 1,436 53,089 27,654 20,332 7,322 11,590 7,421 4,169 1,450 − 397 397
2006 55,384 51,176 1,123 44,162 23,249 17,348 5,901 9,259 6,185 3,074 1,089 + 11,221 02007 42,838 32,264 971 36,196 17,356 13,075 4,282 8,370 5,748 2,623 949 + 6,643 −2008 38,289 26,452 974 39,407 14,283 10,652 3,631 8,712 6,222 2,490 920 − 1,118 −2009 34,254 22,046 1,000 48,057 20,866 16,534 4,332 11,595 8,794 2,801 1,946 − 13,803 −
2010 37,070 22,614 3,222 45,213 19,456 15,629 3,827 10,791 8,287 2,504 740 − 8,143 −
2008          Q1 8,714 5,955 83 11,295 4,299 3,183 1,116 2,088 1,473 615 327 − 2,581 −
         Q2 9,690 6,931 211 10,367 3,739 2,761 978 2,182 1,556 626 255 − 677 −         Q3 9,330 6,317 272 8,648 3,245 2,442 804 2,053 1,462 592 149 + 683 −         Q4 10,555 7,248 409 9,098 3,001 2,267 733 2,389 1,731 657 189 + 1,458 −
2009          Q1 6,283 5,248 192 10,396 4,723 3,556 1,167 2,318 1,688 630 480 − 4,113 −
         Q2 6,490 5,421 261 12,391 5,563 4,376 1,187 2,893 2,193 700 491 − 5,901 −         Q3 6,853 5,316 250 12,480 5,465 4,439 1,026 3,026 2,325 701 630 − 5,626 −         Q4 14,627 6,061 296 12,790 5,115 4,163 951 3,358 2,588 770 345 + 1,837 −
2010          Q1 10,020 5,196 714 11,681 6,475 5,112 1,362 2,957 2,263 694 208 − 1,661 −
         Q2 10,649 5,601 784 10,501 5,264 4,148 1,116 2,872 2,204 668 184 + 148 −         Q3 8,109 5,527 808 8,887 4,082 3,353 729 2,431 1,863 567 193 − 778 −         Q4 8,291 6,290 916 14,144 3,635 3,016 619 2,531 1,957 575 154 − 5,853 −
Source: Federal Employment Agency. — *Excluding pension fund. — 1Ex- long-term care insurance schemes. 6Vocational training, measures to en-
cluding central government liquidity assistance. — 2Levies to promote courage job take-up, rehabilitation, job creation measures, subsidies
winter construction and to pay insolvency compensation to employees. — granted to Personnel Service Agencies, compensation top-up payments and
3From 2005, including a compensatory amount or a reintegration payment business start-up grants. — 7Promotion of winter construction and insolv-
to central government. — 4Unemployment benefit and short-time working ency compensation for employees. 
benefit. — 5Including contributions to the statutory health, pension and
 
 
10 Statutory health insurance scheme: budgetary development
 
 
€ million
Revenue  1 Expenditure  1 
of which of which
Central Thera- Adminis-
govern- peutical trative
Contri- ment Hospital Pharma- Medical Dental treatment Sickness expend- Deficit /
Period Total butions  2 funds  3 Total treatment ceuticals treatment treatment  4 and aids benefits iture  5 surplus
2004 144,279 140,120 1,000 140,260 47,594 21,811 22,955 11,263 8,281 6,367 8,196 + 4,020
2005 145,742 140,250 2,500 144,071 48,959 25,358 23,096 9,928 8,284 5,868 8,303 + 1,671
2006 149,929 142,183 4,200 148,297 50,327 25,835 23,896 10,364 8,303 5,708 8,319 + 1,6322007 156,058 149,964 2,500 154,314 50,850 27,791 24,788 10,687 8,692 6,017 8,472 + 1,7442008 162,516 155,883 2,500 161,334 52,623 29,145 25,887 10,926 9,095 6,583 8,680 + 1,1822009 169,758 158,594 7,200 170,823 55,977 30,696 27,635 11,219 9,578 7,258 8,947 − 1,065
2010
p 179,495 160,775 15,700 175,777 58,135 30,349 27,147 11,491 10,546 7,797 9,523 + 3,717
2008          Q1 37,937 37,136 − 39,010 13,410 7,084 6,409 2,711 2,011 1,643 1,898 − 1,073
         Q2 40,361 38,491 1,250 40,232 13,387 7,339 6,434 2,728 2,292 1,644 2,021 + 129
         Q3 39,185 38,338 − 39,733 13,012 7,215 6,415 2,660 2,271 1,602 2,045 − 548         Q4 44,387 41,838 1,250 42,165 12,913 7,588 6,812 2,894 2,461 1,672 2,704 + 2,222
2009          Q1 42,502 39,324 2,575 41,432 14,154 7,463 6,969 2,797 2,095 1,822 1,977 + 1,069
         Q2 42,540 40,464 1,377 42,400 14,092 7,652 6,810 2,857 2,392 1,779 2,083 + 140
         Q3 42,752 38,827 3,002 42,548 13,967 7,574 6,981 2,684 2,437 1,746 2,324 + 204         Q4 41,635 39,992 246 44,445 13,892 8,052 7,021 2,904 2,607 1,895 2,604 − 2,809
2010          Q1
6 43,093 38,542 3,878 43,274 14,769 7,555 6,933 2,871 2,363 1,996 2,130 − 182
         Q2 44,440 39,826 3,889 43,999 14,384 7,876 6,815 2,882 2,664 1,955 2,261 + 441
         Q3 44,457 39,808 3,884 43,662 14,499 7,599 6,656 2,786 2,671 1,903 2,255 + 795         Q4 47,505 42,600 4,049 44,842 14,483 7,319 6,742 2,952 2,848 1,943 2,876 + 2,663
Source: Federal Ministry of Health. — 1The final annual figures do not tally tures. — 5Net, ie after deducting reimbursements for expenses for levying
with the sum of the quarterly figures, as the latter are all provisional. Ex- contributions incurred by other social insurance funds. Including admin is-
cluding revenue and expenditure as part of the risk structure compensation trative expenditure on disease management programmes. — 6Data on indi-
scheme. — 2Including contributions from subsidised low-paid part-time vidual expenditure categories for 2010 only partly comparable with
employment. — 3Federal grant and liquidity assistance. — 4Including den- prior-year figures owing to a change in the statistical definition. 
58*IX Public finances in Germany

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
May 2011
IX Public finances in Germany
 
11 Statutory long-term care insurance scheme: budgetary development
 
 
€ million
Revenue  1 Expenditure  1 
of which
Contributions to
of which Non-cash In-patient Nursing pension insur- Administrative Deficit /
Period Total Contributions  2 Total care benefits care benefit ance scheme  3 expenditure surplus
2004 16,817 16,654 17,605 2,365 8,349 4,049 925 851 − 788
2005 17,526 17,385 17,891 2,409 8,516 4,050 890 875 − 366
2006 17,749 17,611 18,064 2,437 8,671 4,017 862 886 − 315
2007 18,036 17,858 18,385 2,475 8,831 4,050 861 896 − 3502008 19,785 19,608 19,163 2,605 9,054 4,225 868 941 + 6222009 21,300 21,137 20,314 2,742 9,274 4,443 878 984 + 986
2010
p 21,784 21,641 21,448 2,907 9,555 4,672 881 1,017 + 336
2008          Q1 4,421 4,381 4,681 641 2,229 1,022 210 255 − 261
         Q2 4,597 4,563 4,703 634 2,251 1,025 221 230 − 106
         Q3 5,167 5,133 4,872 665 2,280 1,089 218 234 + 295         Q4 5,583 5,535 4,884 662 2,293 1,103 219 220 + 698
2009          Q1 5,110 5,082 4,970 676 2,284 1,104 215 274 + 139
         Q2 5,275 5,253 4,977 662 2,308 1,100 217 248 + 298         Q3 5,279 5,239 5,157 706 2,338 1,115 219 246 + 122         Q4 5,650 5,614 5,223 710 2,358 1,148 225 228 + 427
2010          Q1 5,241 5,175 5,298 722 2,362 1,151 217 264 − 56
         Q2 5,398 5,369 5,302 707 2,378 1,167 219 258 + 95         Q3 5,385 5,358 5,416 735 2,398 1,160 220 266 − 31         Q4 5,760 5,739 5,432 743 2,417 1,195 225 229 + 328
Source: Federal Ministry of Health. — 1The final annual figures do not tally 2Since 2005 including special contributions for childless persons (0.25% of
with the sum of the quarterly figures, as the latter are all provisional. — income subject to insurance contributions). — 3 For non-professional carers. 
 
 
12 Central government: borrowing in 13 Central, state and local government: debt by
the market creditor *
 
€ million € million
Total new borrowing  1 of which of which Banking system Domestic non-banks
Change Change
in money in money Social
market market End of year Bundes- Credit security Foreign
Period Gross  2 Net loans deposits or quarter Total bank institutions funds Other  1 creditors  pe 
2004 + 227,441 + 44,410 + 1,844 + 802 2004 1,430,582 4,440 544,100 430 307,012 574,600
2005 + 224,922 + 35,479 + 4,511 + 6,041 2005 1,489,029 4,440 518,400 488 312,201 653,500
2006 + 221,873 + 32,656 + 3,258 + 6,308 2006 1,533,697 4,440 496,800 480 329,177 702,800
2007 + 214,995 + 6,996 + 1,086 − 4,900 2007 1,540,381 4,440 456,900 476 316,665 761,9002008 + 233,356 + 26,208 + 6,888 + 9,036 2008 1,564,590 4,440 435,600 510 320,740 803,3002009 + 312,729 + 66,821 − 8,184 + 106 2009 1,657,842 4,440 438,700 507 332,795 881,400
2010 + 302,694 + 42,397 − 5,041 + 1,607 2010
pe 1,732,442 4,440 400,600 473 301,129 1,025,800
2008          Q1 + 69,510 + 10,443 + 12,306 − 705 2008          Q1 1,541,759 4,440 467,200 475 305,244 764,400
         Q2 + 52,618 + 7,478 + 4,872 + 10,289          Q2 1,554,151 4,440 462,100 506 292,406 794,700
         Q3 + 53,933 − 2,231 − 10,736 − 12,088          Q3 1,547,336 4,440 431,800 506 295,190 815,400         Q4 + 57,296 + 10,519 + 447 + 11,541          Q4 1,564,590 4,440 435,600 510 320,740 803,300
2009          Q1 + 66,560 + 20,334 − 2,256 − 7,856 2009          Q1 1,594,403 4,440 426,200 514 321,949 841,300
         Q2 + 96,270 + 46,283 − 2,791 + 26,434          Q2 1,646,307 4,440 430,300 520 324,547 886,500
         Q3 + 82,451 + 1,343 + 1,268 − 15,901          Q3 1,651,955 4,440 439,500 520 320,395 887,100         Q4 + 67,448 − 1,139 − 4,406 − 2,572          Q4 1,657,842 4,440 438,700 507 332,795 881,400
2010          Q1 + 74,369 + 12,637 − 5,322 − 1,520 2010          Q1
p 1,678,191 4,440 450,100 508 338,843 884,300
         Q2 + 83,082 + 3,666 − 4,143 + 1,950          Q2 p 1,687,957 4,440 469,600 468 322,049 891,400
         Q3 + 79,589 + 14,791 + 250 − 4,625          Q3 p 1,712,685 4,440 470,200 473 317,572 920,000
         Q4 + 65,655 + 11,304 + 4,174 + 5,803          Q4 pe 1,732,442 4,440 400,600 473 301,129 1,025,800
Source:  Federal  Republic  of  Germany  -  Finance Source: Bundesbank calculations based on data from the Federal Statistical 
Agency. — 1 Including the Financial  Market  Stabil- Office. — * Excluding direct intergovernmental borrowing. — 1 Calculated 
isation Fund (SoFFin) and the Investment and Repay- as a residual. 
ment Fund. — 2 After deducting repurchases. 
59*IX Public finances in Germany

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
E U R O S Y S T E M
Monthly Report
May 2011
IX Public finances in Germany
 
14 Central, state and local government: debt by category *
 
 
€ million
Loans from non-banks Old debt
Direct
Treasury Five-year lending
discount Federal Federal Federal by credit Social Equal-
End of year paper Treasury notes savings bonds institu- security isationor quarter Total (Bubills)  
1 notes  2,3 (Bobls)  2 notes (Bunds)  2 Day-bond tions  4 funds Other  4 claims  5 Other  5,6 
Central, state and local government
2005 1,489,029 36,945 310,044 174,423 11,055 521,801 . 366,978 488 62,765 4,443 88
2006 1,533,697 37,834 320,288 179,940 10,199 552,028 . 356,514 480 71,889 4,443 822007 1,540,381 39,510 329,108 177,394 10,287 574,512 . 329,588 476 74,988 4,443 76
2008 1,564,590 44,620 337,511 172,037 9,649 584,144 3,174 325,648 510 82,781 4,443 73
2009          Q3 1,651,955 109,876 347,083 181,326 9,450 587,608 2,746 315,889 520 92,945 4,443 72
         Q4 1,657,842 105,970 361,727 174,219 9,471 594,999 2,495 300,927 507 103,014 4,442 71
2010          Q1
p 1,678,191 93,830 374,088 191,722 9,441 602,650 2,286 297,819 508 101,331 4,442 73
         Q2 p 1,687,957 82,661 378,912 192,682 9,438 617,987 2,123 296,325 468 102,843 4,440 78
         Q3 p 1,712,685 84,808 389,502 203,056 8,867 618,150 2,058 297,349 473 103,908 4,440 75
         Q4 pe 1,732,442 87,767 392,860 195,534 8,704 628,887 1,975 303,082 473 108,719 4,440 2
Central government 7,8,9,10,11
2005 886,254 36,098 108,899 174,371 11,055 510,866 . 29,318 408 10,710 4,443 87
2006 918,911 37,798 103,624 179,889 10,199 541,404 . 30,030 408 11,036 4,443 822007 939,988 37,385 102,083 177,394 10,287 574,156 . 22,829 408 10,928 4,443 75
2008 966,197 40,795 105,684 172,037 9,649 583,930 3,174 35,291 448 10,674 4,443 72
2009          Q3 1,034,156 107,415 107,171 181,326 9,450 587,493 2,746 22,877 448 10,718 4,443 71
         Q4 1,033,017 104,409 113,637 174,219 9,471 594,780 2,495 18,347 448 10,700 4,442 70
2010          Q1 1,045,654 93,630 117,695 191,722 9,441 602,345 2,286 13,303 448 10,270 4,442 73
         Q2 1,049,321 82,511 120,801 192,682 9,438 617,682 2,123 8,859 408 10,300 4,440 77         Q3 1,064,111 82,908 124,948 203,056 8,867 617,845 2,058 9,084 408 10,425 4,440 74         Q4 1,075,415 85,867 126,220 195,534 8,704 628,582 1,975 13,349 408 10,335 4,440 2
State government
2005 471,375 847 201,146 .... 221,163 3 48,216 . 1
2006 481,850 36 216,665 .... 209,270 2 55,876 . 1
2007 484,373 2,125 227,025 .... 194,956 2 60,264 . 1
2008 483,875 3,825 231,827 .... 179,978 3 68,241 . 1
2009          Q3 501,092 2,461 239,911 .... 180,349 12 78,358 . 1
         Q4 505,359 1,561 248,091 .... 167,310 8 88,389 . 1
2010          Q1 p 511,619 200 256,393 .... 167,878 10 87,137 . 1
         Q2 p 515,471 150 258,111 .... 168,581 10 88,618 . 1
         Q3 p 523,883 1,900 264,554 .... 167,854 15 89,558 . 1
         Q4 p 530,916 1,900 266,640 .... 167,901 15 94,459 . 1
Local government 12
2005 116,033 . − . . 466 . 111,889 77 3,601 . .
2006 118,380 . − . . 256 . 113,265 70 4,789 . .2007 115,920 . − . . 256 . 111,803 66 3,796 . .
2008 114,518 . − . . 214 . 110,379 60 3,866 . .
2009          Q3 116,707 . − . . 114 . 112,663 60 3,870 . .
         Q4 119,466 . − . . 219 . 115,270 52 3,925 . .
2010          Q1
p 120,918 . − . . 305 . 116,638 50 3,925 . .
         Q2 p 123,165 . − . . 305 . 118,885 50 3,925 . .
         Q3 p 124,691 . − . . 305 . 120,411 50 3,925 . .
         Q4 pe 126,112 . − . . 305 . 121,832 50 3,925 . .
Special funds 7,8,9,13
2005 15,367 . − 51 . 10,469 . 4,609 − 238 . .
2006 14,556 . − 51 . 10,368 . 3,950 − 188 . .2007 100 . − − . 100 . − − − . .
2008 − . − − . − . − − − . .
2009          Q3 − . − − . − . − − − . .
         Q4 − . − − . − . − − − . .
2010          Q1 − . − − . − . − − − . .
         Q2 − . − − . − . − − − . .         Q3 − . − − . − . − − − . .         Q4 − . − − . − . − − − . .
Source: Bundesbank calculations based on data from the Federal Statistical trast to the capital market statistics, the debt incurred through the joi nt issu-
Office. — *Excluding direct intergovernmental borrowing. — 1Including ance of Federal securities is recorded here under central government and its
Treasury financing paper. — 2Excluding issuers’ holdings of their own secur- special funds in accordance with the agreed allocation ratios. — 8On 1
ities. — 3Treasury notes issued by state government include long-term January 2005 central government assumed joint responsibility for the debts
notes. — 4Mainly loans against borrowers’ notes and cash advances. In- of the German Unity Fund. From that date on, the aforementioned special
cluding loans raised abroad. Other loans from non-banks, including loans fund is recorded under central government. — 9On 1 July 2007 central
from public supplementary pension funds and liabilities arising from the in- government assumed joint responsibility for the debts of the ERP Specia l
vestment assistance levy. — 5Excluding offsets against outstanding Fund. From that date on, the aforementioned special fund is recorded
claims. — 6Old debt mainly denominated in foreign currency, in accordance under central government. — 10From December 2008, including debt of
with the London Debts Agreement, old liabilities arising from housing con- the Financial Market Stabilisation Fund (SoFFin). — 11From March 2009, in-
struction and liabilities arising from housing construction by the former cluding debt of the Investment and Repayment Fund. — 12Including debt
GDR’s armed forces and from housing construction in connection with the of municipal special purpose associations. Data other than year-end figures
return of the troops of the former USSR stationed in eastern Germany to have been estimated. — 13ERP Special Fund (up to the end of June 2007),
their home country; excluding debt securities in own portfolios. — 7In con- German Unity Fund (up to the end of 2004) and Indemnification Fund. 
60*IX Public finances in Germany

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
May 2011
X Economic conditions in Germany
  
1 Origin and use of domestic product, distribution of national income
  
  
  
  2009   2010
  2008   2009   2010   2008   2009   2010   Q2   Q3   Q4   Q1   Q2   Q3   Q4
Item Index 2000=100 Annual percentage change
At  constant  prices,  chained
  I Origin of domestic product
Production sector
(excluding construction) 112.7 93.9 103.4 − 3.4 − 16.7 10.1 − 22.9 − 15.9 − 6.9 7.5 13.0 8.9 11.2
Construction 77.9 76.5 77.8 − 1.0 − 1.8 1.7 − 3.3 0.7 0.5 − 1.9 5.9 2.2 − 0.2
Wholesale/retail trade, hotel andrestaurant services, transportand storage  
1 118.9 111.8 115.4 4.4 − 6.0 3.2 − 7.5 − 5.8 − 3.7 0.7 3.6 4.2 4.4
Financing, renting and business
services  2 118.2 116.8 119.0 2.7 − 1.2 1.9 − 1.7 − 1.3 − 0.5 1.4 1.7 2.3 2.2
Public and private services  3 108.5 110.4 112.7 2.4 1.7 2.1 1.5 1.9 2.5 2.6 1.5 2.1 2.3
Gross value added 112.3 106.4 110.6 1.1 − 5.3 4.0 − 7.6 − 4.9 − 1.9 2.8 4.6 4.0 4.5
Gross domestic product  4 110.4 105.2 109.0 1.0 − 4.7 3.6 − 6.8 − 4.4 − 1.3 2.3 4.3 3.9 4.0
 II Use of domestic product
Private consumption  5 103.5 103.3 103.8 0.7 − 0.2 0.4 0.3 − 0.6 − 0.3 − 0.3 − 0.6 1.1 1.4
Government consumption 107.2 110.2 112.8 2.3 2.9 2.3 2.7 3.3 2.1 3.1 1.4 2.0 2.8
Machinery and equipment 127.2 98.4 109.1 3.5 − 22.6 10.9 − 25.7 − 23.4 − 20.5 1.8 9.6 12.9 17.6
Premises 87.0 85.7 88.2 1.2 − 1.5 2.8 − 3.4 0.9 2.1 − 1.1 6.7 4.1 0.8
Other investment  6 145.0 153.2 163.0 6.5 5.6 6.4 5.0 5.8 6.1 6.5 7.3 6.3 5.6
Changes in inventories  7  8 . . . − 0.2 − 0.3 0.6 − 0.7 0.1 − 0.5 − 0.1 2.1 0.2 0.3
Domestic use 102.7 100.8 103.3 1.2 − 1.9 2.5 − 2.6 − 1.4 − 2.0 0.4 3.6 2.6 3.4Net exports  
8 . . . − 0.1 − 2.9 1.3 − 4.4 − 3.1 0.6 1.8 1.0 1.4 0.9
Exports 168.6 144.5 164.9 2.5 − 14.3 14.1 − 19.9 − 15.3 − 4.7 7.3 17.4 15.7 15.9
Imports 146.0 132.3 148.9 3.3 − 9.4 12.6 − 13.0 − 9.9 − 6.7 3.2 17.1 13.6 16.4
Gross domestic product  4 110.4 105.2 109.0 1.0 − 4.7 3.6 − 6.8 − 4.4 − 1.3 2.3 4.3 3.9 4.0
At  current  prices  (€ billion)
III Use of domestic product
Private consumption  5 1,413.2 1,411.1 1,444.7 2.5 − 0.2 2.4 0.3 − 0.9 0.2 1.6 1.4 3.1 3.3
Government consumption 449.6 472.1 486.7 3.4 5.0 3.1 4.9 6.1 3.6 4.4 2.6 2.2 3.0Machinery and equipment 201.6 154.7 170.0 2.9 − 23.3 9.9 − 26.3 − 24.1 − 21.3 0.6 8.6 12.1 17.1
Premises 241.5 240.1 249.8 4.5 − 0.6 4.0 − 2.4 0.8 2.7 − 1.0 8.1 5.7 2.2
Other investment  
6 28.3 27.9 28.3 2.8 − 1.4 1.4 − 1.7 − 2.0 − 1.4 0.9 1.8 1.7 1.3
Changes in inventories  7 − 12.4 − 27.3 − 11.0 . . . . . . . . . .
Domestic use 2,321.8 2,278.6 2,368.6 2.8 − 1.9 3.9 − 2.6 − 1.6 − 1.8 1.7 5.2 4.0 4.8Net exports 159.5 118.5 130.2 . . . . . . . . . .
Exports 1,177.9 978.8 1,146.4 3.2 − 16.9 17.1 − 23.1 − 18.5 − 6.5 7.8 20.8 20.0 19.7Imports 1,018.4 860.3 1,016.2 5.2 − 15.5 18.1 − 19.5 − 17.6 − 11.5 4.3 23.2 20.9 24.0
Gross domestic product  
4 2,481.2 2,397.1 2,498.8 2.0 − 3.4 4.2 − 5.7 − 2.8 0.0 3.3 5.1 4.3 4.3
IV Prices (2000 = 100)
Private consumption 112.4 112.5 114.7 1.7 0.1 2.0 0.0 − 0.3 0.6 1.9 2.0 2.0 1.9Gross domestic product 109.0 110.5 111.2 1.0 1.4 0.6 1.2 1.7 1.3 1.0 0.8 0.4 0.3Terms of trade 99.1 103.1 100.8 − 1.2 4.0 − 2.2 3.8 5.3 3.4 − 0.6 − 2.2 − 2.5 − 3.1
V Distribution of national income
Compensation of employees 1,223.3 1,225.9 1,259.7 3.6 0.2 2.8 0.4 − 0.2 − 0.6 1.4 2.7 3.2 3.6Entrepreneurial and propertyincome 647.7 566.0 641.6 − 1.4 − 12.6 13.4 − 21.6 − 7.4 1.9 17.6 20.1 8.8 8.5
National income 1,871.0 1,791.8 1,901.3 1.8 − 4.2 6.1 − 7.3 − 2.8 0.2 6.6 7.9 5.1 5.0
Memo item: Gross national
income 2,520.9 2,430.9 2,531.9 1.8 − 3.6 4.2 − 5.7 − 3.0 − 0.3 3.3 5.2 4.0 4.1
Source: Federal Statistical Office; figures computed in February 2011. — 1In- products). — 5Including non-profit institutions serving households. — 6In-
cluding communication services. — 2Financial intermediation, real estate tangible fixed asset formation (inter alia, computer software and entertain-
activities, renting and business services. — 3Including care-at-home servi- ment, literary or artistic originals) and cultivated assets. — 7Including net in-
ces. — 4Gross value added plus taxes on products (netted with subsidies on crease in valuables. — 8 Contribution of growth to GDP. 
61*X Economic conditions in Germany

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
E U R O S Y S T E M
Monthly Report
May 2011
 X Economic conditions in Germany
 
2 Output in the production sector  * 
 
 
Adjusted for working-day variations  o 
of which
Industry
of which:   by main industrial grouping of which:   by economic sector
Manu-
Manu- facture of
facture of computers,
Motor basic metals electronic
and vehicles, and optical
Production Inter- Non- fabricated products Machinery trailers
sector, Construc- mediate Capital Durable durable metal and and semi- and electrical
total tion Energy Total goods goods goods goods products equipment equipment trailers
2005=100  
  
% of total  1 100.00 5.56 8.76 85.69 33.96 35.37 2.78 13.58 12.15 10.82 12.48 12.34
Period
2006 105.4 105.8 101.0 105.8 107.1 106.0 107.3 101.7 107.3 112.9 107.5 102.6
2007 111.6 108.9 98.2 113.1 114.5 114.9 108.4 105.8 114.0 124.4 119.4 109.72008 111.5 108.3 95.6 113.4 114.2 116.8 104.0 104.4 114.4 128.8 124.5 104.52009 94.3 108.2 90.6 93.7 93.3 92.0 87.6 100.6 87.5 100.8 92.2 82.0
2010  
r 103.9 108.5 93.6 104.6 107.1 103.8 95.7 102.4 101.7 117.5 101.6 102.4
 
2009          July 94.6 126.2 86.1 93.4 95.6 89.9 80.1 99.7 87.8 99.2 86.0 83.7
         Aug 88.9 122.1 84.4 87.2 92.3 79.1 74.0 98.0 84.6 95.9 78.5 65.1         Sep 103.3 129.1 85.9 103.4 102.0 104.2 99.4 105.8 96.0 109.2 102.5 103.1
         Oct 102.0 126.0 93.5 101.3 103.5 97.5 98.5 106.6 97.1 111.8 89.9 97.8
         Nov 103.7 121.2 95.7 103.4 103.4 101.8 102.7 107.8 99.3 113.9 93.0 99.8         Dec 91.1 84.0 103.6 90.3 83.2 94.8 82.8 97.9 79.5 99.7 103.4 71.4
2010          Jan  
r 89.7 49.3 109.6 90.3 95.6 82.5 88.6 97.6 88.3 99.8 77.2 82.6
         Feb  r 91.5 55.4 98.2 93.1 96.1 89.9 91.4 94.3 91.0 103.3 82.6 92.0
         Mar  r 106.4 105.3 98.6 107.3 109.5 106.3 99.4 105.8 105.4 115.8 102.8 108.4
         Apr  r 101.2 123.2 90.6 100.9 106.1 97.5 90.8 98.9 100.3 109.8 93.2 99.6
         May  r 103.4 122.8 91.2 103.4 108.9 100.6 92.1 99.5 102.6 112.9 95.8 104.6
         June  r 106.5 127.7 81.5 107.6 110.7 108.2 96.4 100.6 105.9 119.9 104.8 108.9
         July  r 105.2 132.3 86.5 105.4 111.2 101.7 90.0 103.5 105.1 119.8 100.0 97.8
         Aug  r 98.7 124.6 82.0 98.8 106.5 91.4 84.4 101.9 99.0 115.6 95.2 78.5
         Sep  r 111.8 133.6 83.8 113.2 114.4 114.7 107.3 107.5 109.0 127.4 110.8 119.2
         Oct  r 114.7 135.2 94.4 115.5 117.7 115.6 110.0 110.6 112.6 132.2 110.2 120.9
         Nov  r 115.4 127.9 98.3 116.4 115.9 119.7 109.2 110.8 111.8 134.2 116.6 119.4
         Dec  r 101.9 64.1 108.6 103.6 93.0 117.1 88.5 98.0 89.7 118.8 130.1 96.4
2011          Jan  x 101.1 75.5 105.5 102.3 109.3 97.3 94.1 99.8 104.7 121.3 91.2 100.9
         Feb  x 105.4 86.6 95.2 107.7 111.3 107.9 99.6 99.9 108.0 126.7 100.2 116.9
         Mar  x p 118.3 2 122.4 98.0 120.1 122.8 122.4 109.3 109.3 119.0 137.2 120.4 128.7
 
Annual percentage change  
  
2006 + 5.7 + 6.3 + 0.9 + 6.1 + 7.4 + 6.4 + 7.6 + 2.1 + 7.6 + 13.1 + 8.0 + 2.9
2007 + 5.9 + 2.9 − 2.8 + 6.9 + 6.9 + 8.4 + 1.0 + 4.0 + 6.2 + 10.2 + 11.1 + 6.92008 − 0.1 − 0.6 − 2.6 + 0.3 − 0.3 + 1.7 − 4.1 − 1.3 + 0.4 + 3.5 + 4.3 − 4.72009 − 15.4 − 0.1 − 5.2 − 17.4 − 18.3 − 21.2 − 15.8 − 3.6 − 23.5 − 21.7 − 25.9 − 21.5
2010  
r + 10.2 + 0.3 + 3.3 + 11.6 + 14.8 + 12.8 + 9.2 + 1.8 + 16.2 + 16.6 + 10.2 + 24.9
 
2009          July − 16.4 + 2.9 − 3.4 − 18.8 − 19.8 − 23.0 − 15.8 − 4.4 − 25.9 − 24.4 − 32.0 − 20.2
         Aug − 16.1 + 3.8 − 1.4 − 18.7 − 19.0 − 23.8 − 17.7 − 5.3 − 24.9 − 23.8 − 31.0 − 22.8         Sep − 12.2 + 3.1 − 4.1 − 13.8 − 14.4 − 17.2 − 14.1 − 1.8 − 19.9 − 19.6 − 20.8 − 9.5
         Oct − 11.8 + 2.3 − 4.7 − 13.5 − 11.9 − 18.2 − 13.1 − 4.5 − 17.4 − 15.9 − 28.6 − 6.2
         Nov − 7.5 + 3.7 − 1.7 − 8.7 − 4.9 − 15.0 − 8.1 − 0.8 − 9.2 − 14.7 − 26.5 − 1.2
         Dec − 4.6 − 1.1 + 3.8 − 5.6 + 0.7 − 11.9 − 2.1 − 1.7 − 0.6 − 9.1 − 24.1 + 15.9
2010          Jan  
r + 3.3 − 16.2 + 4.1 + 4.2 + 10.1 + 0.6 + 4.5 − 1.2 + 7.3 + 4.3 − 10.4 + 21.5
         Feb  r + 5.9 − 17.9 + 5.5 + 7.1 + 10.8 + 7.0 + 7.4 − 1.2 + 10.6 + 6.9 − 8.6 + 40.7
         Mar  r + 9.4 + 1.0 + 6.5 + 10.3 + 16.7 + 7.3 + 6.7 + 3.4 + 20.6 + 11.0 − 2.1 + 28.4
         Apr  r + 13.7 + 4.8 + 10.0 + 14.9 + 21.8 + 15.2 + 8.6 + 0.0 + 23.8 + 20.3 + 7.2 + 41.9
         May  r + 12.6 + 4.3 + 12.9 + 13.3 + 20.2 + 11.5 + 10.7 + 1.7 + 22.1 + 20.5 + 7.5 + 25.1
         June  r + 10.5 + 3.1 − 3.1 + 12.2 + 16.9 + 11.5 + 14.9 + 2.3 + 19.5 + 21.6 + 10.1 + 19.4
         July  r + 11.2 + 4.8 + 0.5 + 12.8 + 16.3 + 13.1 + 12.4 + 3.8 + 19.7 + 20.8 + 16.3 + 16.8
         Aug  r + 11.0 + 2.0 − 2.8 + 13.3 + 15.4 + 15.5 + 14.1 + 4.0 + 17.0 + 20.5 + 21.3 + 20.6
         Sep  r + 8.2 + 3.5 − 2.4 + 9.5 + 12.2 + 10.1 + 7.9 + 1.6 + 13.5 + 16.7 + 8.1 + 15.6
         Oct  r + 12.5 + 7.3 + 1.0 + 14.0 + 13.7 + 18.6 + 11.7 + 3.8 + 16.0 + 18.2 + 22.6 + 23.6
         Nov  r + 11.3 + 5.5 + 2.7 + 12.6 + 12.1 + 17.6 + 6.3 + 2.8 + 12.6 + 17.8 + 25.4 + 19.6
         Dec  r + 11.9 − 23.7 + 4.8 + 14.7 + 11.8 + 23.5 + 6.9 + 0.1 + 12.8 + 19.2 + 25.8 + 35.0
2011          Jan  x + 12.7 + 53.1 − 3.7 + 13.3 + 14.3 + 17.9 + 6.2 + 2.3 + 18.6 + 21.5 + 18.1 + 22.2
         Feb  x + 15.2 + 56.3 − 3.1 + 15.7 + 15.8 + 20.0 + 9.0 + 5.9 + 18.7 + 22.7 + 21.3 + 27.1
         Mar  x p + 11.2 2 + 16.2 − 0.6 + 11.9 + 12.1 + 15.1 + 10.0 + 3.3 + 12.9 + 18.5 + 17.1 + 18.7
Source of the unadjusted figures: Federal Statistical Office. — *For explan- eral Statistical Office, by way of estimates, to the results of the annual
atory notes, see Statistical Supplement "Seasonally adjusted business overall survey in the construction sector (average + 4%). — rConstruction
statistics", Tables II.10 to II.12. — oUsing the Census X-12-ARIMA method, not affected by revisions. — xProvisional; adjusted in advance by the Fed-
version 0.2.8. — 1Share of gross value added at factor cost of the pro- eral Statistical Office, by way of estimates, to the results of the Quarterly Pro-
duction sector in the base year 2005. — 2Adjusted in advance by the Fed- duction Survey. 
62* X Economic conditions in Germany

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
May 2011
 X Economic conditions in Germany
 
3 Orders received by industry *
 
 
Adjusted for working-day variations  o 
of which
of which
Industry Intermediate goods Capital goods Consumer goods Durable goods Non-durable goods
Annual Annual Annual Annual Annual Annual
percent- percent- percent- percent- percent- percent-age age age age age age
Period 2005=100 change 2005=100 change 2005=100 change 2005=100 change 2005=100 change 2005=100 change
total  
  
2006 110.7 + 11.0 113.9 + 14.2 109.4 + 9.7 105.3 + 5.6 108.4 + 8.7 104.3 + 4.5
2007 123.1 + 11.2 125.2 + 9.9 123.2 + 12.6 111.9 + 6.3 110.3 + 1.8 112.5 + 7.92008 115.5 − 6.2 121.2 − 3.2 112.9 − 8.4 108.1 − 3.4 103.5 − 6.2 109.7 − 2.52009 87.5 − 24.2 89.3 − 26.3 85.2 − 24.5 94.8 − 12.3 88.5 − 14.5 96.9 − 11.7
2010 109.0 + 24.6 114.3 + 28.0 106.8 + 25.4 99.8 + 5.3 101.4 + 14.6 99.3 + 2.5
 
2010          Mar 112.7 + 26.6 118.8 + 37.3 109.5 + 22.3 106.7 + 8.8 106.9 + 20.8 106.7 + 5.2
         Apr 105.7 + 32.5 115.7 + 40.8 101.0 + 31.0 93.0 + 6.4 98.6 + 22.5 91.0 + 1.3
         May 106.4 + 28.2 114.0 + 35.6 102.9 + 26.4 96.1 + 7.7 102.9 + 24.1 93.8 + 2.7         June 115.5 + 28.8 119.0 + 29.8 115.6 + 31.1 99.5 + 9.5 106.0 + 20.9 97.3 + 5.9
         July 110.2 + 22.2 119.1 + 29.9 105.2 + 19.5 104.4 + 7.0 101.3 + 18.2 105.4 + 3.6
         Aug 104.4 + 24.4 108.9 + 24.2 102.1 + 27.5 99.8 + 7.3 89.9 + 18.3 103.1 + 4.4         Sep 112.9 + 18.5 117.5 + 20.4 111.3 + 19.9 103.6 + 1.9 111.7 + 1.0 100.8 + 2.1
         Oct 112.6 + 22.4 119.3 + 21.6 109.4 + 25.9 104.0 + 4.8 115.9 + 14.8 100.0 + 1.5
         Nov 120.9 + 24.9 121.8 + 20.6 123.1 + 31.5 102.1 + 2.4 110.6 + 11.3 99.3 − 0.4         Dec 111.1 + 24.1 107.9 + 23.6 116.4 + 27.5 89.3 + 2.6 87.6 + 0.7 89.9 + 3.3
2011          Jan 118.1 + 21.0 128.5 + 22.3 113.6 + 23.1 102.4 + 3.5 105.2 + 13.5 101.5 + 0.5
         Feb 122.1 + 25.0 126.2 + 20.9 121.0 + 30.2 111.0 + 10.8 104.8 + 12.7 113.1 + 10.1         Mar  
p 128.9 + 14.4 139.6 + 17.5 124.5 + 13.7 110.8 + 3.8 113.7 + 6.4 109.8 + 2.9
from the domestic market  
  
2006 109.0 + 9.3 113.3 + 13.6 106.4 + 6.8 103.3 + 3.6 111.0 + 11.3 100.9 + 1.2
2007 118.7 + 8.9 124.7 + 10.1 115.8 + 8.8 106.9 + 3.5 109.6 − 1.3 106.1 + 5.22008 113.1 − 4.7 121.8 − 2.3 107.5 − 7.2 103.9 − 2.8 107.1 − 2.3 102.9 − 3.02009 88.0 − 22.2 89.9 − 26.2 86.5 − 19.5 87.4 − 15.9 89.9 − 16.1 86.6 − 15.8
2010 104.5 + 18.8 115.9 + 28.9 97.8 + 13.1 88.6 + 1.4 93.9 + 4.4 86.9 + 0.3
 
2010          Mar 109.5 + 21.5 119.0 + 38.7 104.0 + 11.0 95.2 + 5.0 100.0 + 12.6 93.6 + 2.5
         Apr 104.1 + 27.9 119.0 + 45.1 95.5 + 17.8 82.1 + 2.2 87.8 + 9.6 80.3 − 0.1
         May 103.0 + 22.5 115.8 + 39.0 95.6 + 12.1 83.8 + 2.7 94.1 + 13.0 80.5 − 0.6
         June 108.0 + 23.3 121.1 + 33.2 101.0 + 17.6 85.3 + 4.0 90.5 + 5.6 83.6 + 3.5
         July 107.3 + 13.9 122.4 + 32.0 97.3 + 0.7 91.7 + 4.4 89.7 + 5.7 92.3 + 3.9
         Aug 100.0 + 15.2 112.4 + 25.4 91.4 + 8.7 90.1 + 1.5 87.6 + 7.0 90.9 − 0.2         Sep 108.5 + 16.5 119.1 + 22.0 101.9 + 15.4 95.2 − 3.3 109.6 − 10.1 90.5 − 0.2
         Oct 110.2 + 18.9 123.0 + 21.5 102.7 + 19.7 92.5 + 2.0 112.1 + 8.1 86.1 − 0.3
         Nov 113.5 + 19.3 125.1 + 20.4 107.6 + 21.4 91.9 + 2.6 105.3 + 8.1 87.6 + 0.7         Dec 99.4 + 17.6 104.9 + 19.9 98.9 + 19.4 76.8 − 3.3 78.2 − 5.3 76.4 − 2.4
2011          Jan 112.4 + 17.2 128.2 + 22.2 103.4 + 15.5 88.3 − 0.8 95.7 + 10.4 85.9 − 4.2
         Feb 115.2 + 21.4 127.1 + 22.0 108.6 + 23.5 96.3 + 7.4 99.5 + 16.2 95.3 + 4.6         Mar  
p 122.6 + 12.0 138.5 + 16.4 113.7 + 9.3 98.1 + 3.0 108.3 + 8.3 94.8 + 1.3
from abroad  
  
2006 112.2 + 12.5 114.6 + 14.9 111.5 + 11.8 107.5 + 7.7 105.7 + 6.1 108.1 + 8.3
2007 126.8 + 13.0 125.7 + 9.7 128.5 + 15.2 117.3 + 9.1 111.0 + 5.0 119.6 + 10.62008 117.6 − 7.3 120.6 − 4.1 116.6 − 9.3 112.6 − 4.0 99.9 − 10.0 117.1 − 2.12009 87.0 − 26.0 88.6 − 26.5 84.3 − 27.7 102.8 − 8.7 87.1 − 12.8 108.4 − 7.4
2010 112.9 + 29.8 112.5 + 27.0 113.2 + 34.3 111.9 + 8.9 109.0 + 25.1 112.9 + 4.2
 
2010          Mar 115.4 + 31.0 118.6 + 36.0 113.3 + 31.0 119.1 + 12.3 113.8 + 29.2 121.1 + 7.5
         Apr 107.1 + 36.6 111.9 + 35.6 104.9 + 41.2 104.7 + 10.1 109.6 + 35.3 102.9 + 2.7
         May 109.4 + 33.3 112.0 + 31.8 108.1 + 37.4 109.3 + 12.3 111.8 + 35.5 108.4 + 5.7
         June 122.1 + 33.4 116.7 + 26.0 125.8 + 39.9 114.8 + 14.3 121.7 + 35.7 112.4 + 7.9
         July 112.8 + 30.1 115.4 + 27.4 110.8 + 35.1 118.1 + 9.1 113.1 + 30.6 119.8 + 3.4
         Aug 108.3 + 33.0 105.0 + 22.7 109.7 + 41.9 110.3 + 13.1 92.3 + 31.9 116.6 + 8.8         Sep 116.8 + 20.2 115.6 + 18.6 117.9 + 22.8 112.7 + 7.0 113.9 + 14.8 112.2 + 4.4
         Oct 114.6 + 25.5 115.0 + 21.7 114.2 + 30.4 116.5 + 7.6 119.8 + 22.0 115.4 + 3.1
         Nov 127.4 + 29.6 118.1 + 21.0 134.0 + 37.9 113.2 + 2.4 116.0 + 14.4 112.2 − 1.4         Dec 121.3 + 29.2 111.3 + 27.9 128.7 + 32.3 102.7 + 7.9 97.1 + 6.2 104.7 + 8.4
2011          Jan 123.1 + 24.3 128.9 + 22.3 120.8 + 28.1 117.7 + 7.4 114.8 + 16.3 118.7 + 4.7
         Feb 128.1 + 27.8 125.2 + 19.7 129.7 + 34.4 126.8 + 13.7 110.2 + 9.7 132.7 + 15.0         Mar  
p 134.3 + 16.4 140.8 + 18.7 132.1 + 16.6 124.5 + 4.5 119.2 + 4.7 126.3 + 4.3
Source of the unadjusted figures: Federal Statistical Office. — *For explana- statistics", Tables II.14 to II.16. — oUsing the Census X-12-ARIMA method,
tory notes, see Statistical Supplement "Seasonally adjusted business version 0.2.8. 
63* X Economic conditions in Germany

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
E U R O S Y S T E M
Monthly Report
May 2011
 X Economic conditions  in Germany
 
4 Orders received by construction *   
 
 
Adjusted for working-day variations  o 
Breakdown by type of construction Breakdown by client  1 
 Building    
Housing Industrial Public sector Civil Public
Total Total construction construction construction engineering Industry sector
Annual Annual Annual Annual Annual Annual Annual Annual
percent- percent- percent- percent- percent- percent- percent- percent-age age age age age age age age
Period change change change change change change change change
2005 = 100 2005 = 100 2005 = 100 2005 = 100 2005 = 100 2005 = 100 2005 = 100 2005 = 100
2007 114.0 + 8.5 112.5 + 5.5 98.5 − 5.6 123.2 + 12.4 108.5 + 6.7 115.4 + 11.5 120.7 + 10.7 113.7 + 11.9
2008 113.4 − 0.5 114.7 + 2.0 94.4 − 4.2 127.9 + 3.8 116.7 + 7.6 112.0 − 2.9 123.3 + 2.2 111.4 − 2.02009 107.4 − 5.3 100.7 − 12.2 94.2 − 0.2 100.7 − 21.3 115.5 − 1.0 114.4 + 2.1 104.9 − 14.9 115.6 + 3.8
2010 109.0 + 1.5 106.7 + 6.0 103.3 + 9.7 105.4 + 4.7 118.9 + 2.9 111.3 − 2.7 111.0 + 5.8 109.4 − 5.4
 
2010          Feb 90.8 + 18.1 87.3 + 16.7 76.2 + 8.9 88.0 + 18.3 110.2 + 26.2 94.5 + 19.6 90.5 + 16.0 97.4 + 23.8
         Mar 126.9 + 11.9 121.9 + 11.7 114.5 + 19.8 123.2 + 7.6 134.2 + 10.3 132.2 + 12.2 130.3 + 16.9 128.9 + 5.0
         Apr 114.1 + 0.5 111.4 + 9.5 113.2 + 7.6 103.8 + 5.7 132.6 + 25.7 117.0 − 7.1 107.7 + 5.8 121.0 − 6.1
         May 115.9 + 0.1 108.3 + 1.7 108.8 + 12.7 103.1 − 2.5 124.3 − 5.9 123.9 − 1.3 112.0 + 0.8 122.9 − 4.5         June 128.2 − 1.4 125.1 + 13.3 110.3 + 1.8 127.3 + 21.6 151.2 + 12.4 131.4 − 12.6 134.6 + 12.9 129.3 − 13.8
         July 123.3 − 0.4 117.8 + 7.1 113.8 + 5.7 116.2 + 9.0 132.1 + 4.5 129.0 − 6.7 123.4 + 10.0 127.2 − 10.6
         Aug 117.7 − 0.6 119.8 + 8.6 112.7 + 15.7 124.7 + 7.6 119.8 − 0.8 115.4 − 8.9 120.3 + 2.7 117.1 − 8.9         Sep 123.2
+ 0.0 118.8 + 2.6 130.1 + 18.5 106.3 − 4.1 134.9 − 7.6 127.8 − 2.3 116.0 + 0.0 127.5 − 6.3
         Oct 113.9 + 4.3 110.8 + 6.4 107.0 + 3.9 111.6 + 9.6 117.0 + 2.2 117.2 + 2.4 125.5 + 14.6 105.3 − 5.5
         Nov 92.1 + 1.7 93.8 + 0.8 96.1 + 7.3 92.8 + 0.0 92.0 − 10.1 90.3 + 2.6 97.2 + 0.5 85.3 + 0.5
         Dec 90.3 − 8.8 96.0 − 3.2 101.3 + 13.7 92.3 − 5.1 96.5 − 24.7 84.2 − 14.8 95.1 − 6.6 80.7 − 19.5
2011          Jan 76.9 + 8.2 84.4 + 21.3 77.5 + 38.1 94.0 + 25.5 68.1 − 17.5 69.1 − 5.0 94.2 + 19.5 59.3 − 15.0
         Feb 94.1 + 3.6 102.3 + 17.2 97.7 + 28.2 114.3 + 29.9 72.5 − 34.2 85.6 − 9.4 114.5 + 26.5 72.0 − 26.1
Source of the unadjusted figures: Federal Statistical Office. — *Values exclu- X-12-ARIMA method, version 0.2.8. — 1Excluding housing construction
sive of value-added tax; for explanatory notes, see Statistical Supplement orders. 
"Seasonally adjusted business statistics", Tables II.21. — oUsing the Census
 
 
5. Retail trade turnover, sales of motor vehicles *
  
Adjusted for calendar variations  o 
Retail trade
of which:  by enterprises’ main product range  1 
Construction Retail sale of
and flooring pharmaceutical Wholesale
Textiles, Information materials and medical and retail trade
clothing and household goods, cosmetic and repair of
Food, beverages, foodwear and communications appliances and toilet motor vehicles
Total tobacco  2 leather goods equipment furniture articles and motorcycles
At current At prices in
prices year 2005 At current prices
Annual Annual Annual Annual Annual Annual Annual Annual
percent- percent- percent- percent- percent- percent- percent- percent-age age age age age age age agechange change change change change change change change
Period % % % % % % % %
2005 = 100 2005 = 100 2005 = 100 2005 = 100 2005 = 100 2005 = 100 2005 = 100 2005 = 100
2006 3 101.0 + 1.1 100.3 + 0.4 100.1 + 0.2 102.5 + 2.5 102.3 + 2.2 103.4 + 3.4 102.1 + 2.2 106.8 + 7.3
2007 3 99.4 − 1.6 99.0 − 1.3 99.5 − 0.6 103.7 + 1.2 110.2 + 7.7 98.6 − 4.6 104.2 + 2.1 100.7 − 5.7
2008 101.5 + 2.1 98.9 − 0.1 100.8 + 1.3 104.7 + 1.0 116.4 + 5.6 99.7 + 1.1 107.1 + 2.8 95.8 − 4.9
2009 4 98.1 − 3.3 96.2 − 2.7 98.8 − 2.0 101.5 − 3.1 117.0 + 0.5 97.1 − 2.6 110.0 + 2.7 96.8 + 1.0
2010 5 100.3 + 2.2 97.2 + 1.0 99.6 + 0.8 105.8 + 4.2 118.9 + 1.6 99.0 + 2.0 114.6 + 4.2 92.1 − 4.9
 
2010          Mar  5 101.4 + 1.9 98.1 + 0.4 102.3 + 1.7 105.8 + 7.0 111.3 − 0.6 105.9 + 3.3 116.6 + 6.2 99.2 − 14.6
         Apr 100.2 + 0.0 96.3 − 1.2 99.0 − 3.1 108.3 − 1.5 101.0 + 3.0 104.6 + 0.1 112.6 + 2.9 97.4 − 10.2
         May 101.3 + 3.3 97.6 + 2.2 101.8 − 0.6 102.8 + 2.5 109.2 + 13.3 104.8 + 5.9 113.1 + 6.6 93.9 − 10.1         June 97.1 + 4.1 93.9 + 3.4 97.3 + 1.1 101.0 + 8.6 108.8 + 6.7 98.7 + 5.1 111.4 + 5.4 99.6 − 6.2
         July 101.0 + 4.1 97.9 + 2.5 101.6 + 4.0 104.2 + 4.2 111.5 + 1.5 99.6 + 3.3 116.9 + 4.9 96.5 − 4.1
         Aug 98.2 + 4.0 95.3 + 2.9 97.4 − 1.4 100.8 + 11.0 114.8 + 7.6 98.3 + 4.7 113.1 + 6.7 86.7 − 3.2         Sep 98.7 + 3.4 95.6 + 2.1 94.3 + 0.5 116.7 + 7.6 113.3 + 3.0 98.1 + 0.9 112.8 + 4.8 94.8 − 0.5
         Oct 104.8 + 2.3 101.4 + 1.2 100.7 + 2.5 125.9 + 0.6 119.9 − 1.5 106.1 + 3.2 118.1 + 4.4 102.9 + 3.7
         Nov 104.1 + 2.0 100.7 + 0.1 99.8 + 1.7 111.2 + 7.6 130.1 − 3.8 106.2 + 1.1 117.7 − 0.5 100.8 + 10.5         Dec 120.6 + 1.9 117.0 + 0.4 118.6 + 1.6 131.1 + 1.7 179.3 − 1.4 104.2 − 0.7 132.0 + 2.6 88.3 + 7.6
2011          Jan 93.2 + 4.3 90.5 + 3.0 92.7
+ 0.0 89.1 + 4.8 132.2 + 8.6 86.3 + 8.8 111.2 + 5.0 83.0 + 17.1
         Feb 90.4 + 3.8 86.8 + 2.0 90.9 + 1.3 81.6 + 6.0 105.0 − 0.5 88.2 + 7.2 106.7 + 1.5 90.4 + 21.3
         Mar 102.3 + 0.9 97.4 − 0.7 102.4 + 0.1 107.1 + 1.2 108.6 − 2.4 106.7 + 0.8 113.4 − 2.7 108.3 + 9.2
Source of the unadjusted figures: Federal Statistical Office. — *Excluding eliminated by chain-linking. — 4In January 2009 new reporting sample in-
value-added tax;  For explanatory notes, see Statistical Supplement "Sea- cluding new entities; statistical breaks in the reporting sample elimin ated by
sonally adjusted business statistics", Tables II.24. — oUsing the Census chain-linking. — 5Figures from January 2010 are provisional in some cases re-
X-12-ARIMA method, version 0.2.8. — 1In stores. — 2Including stalls and vised, and particularly uncertain in recent months owing to estimates for
markets. — 3Expansion of the reporting population to include new entities; missing reports. 
in January 2006 and January 2007; statistical breaks in reporting population
64* X Economic conditions in Germany

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
May 2011
 X Economic conditions  in Germany
 
6 Labour market * 
 
 
 
Employment  1 Employment subject to social security contributions  2 Short time workers  3 Unemployment  4 
Total of which: of which: of which:
Solely
jobs
Services exempt Recipients
excluding from of insured
Produc- temporary social unem- Unem- Temporary
tion employ- employ- contri- Cyclically ployment ploy- Vacan-
 Annual Annual sector ment ment butions  2 Total induced  5 Total benefits ment cies,  4,7 
Thou- change Thou- change rate 4,6 thou-
sands in % sands in % Thousands in % sands
2006 39,074 + 0.6 26,366 + 0.5 . . . 4,819 67 54 4,487 1,663 10.8 356
2007 39,724 + 1.7 26,942 + 2.2 8,533 . . 4,861 68 26 3,760 1,245 9.0 423
2008 40,277 + 1.4 27,510 + 2.1 8,659 17,958 679 4,866 102 58 3,258 1,006 7.8 3892009 40,271
+ 0.0 27,493 − 0.1 8,521 18,210 549 4,904 1,144 1,078 8 3,415 8 1,190 8 8.1 301
2010 r 40,490 r + 0.5 9 27,758 9 + 1.0 9 8,426 9 18,439 9 679 9 4,887 ... 9 429 3,238 1,075 7.7 359
2008          Q1 39,761 + 1.6 27,143 + 2.3 8,549 17,748 649 4,866 151 28 3,583 1,180 8.5 373
         Q2 40,179 + 1.5 27,364 + 2.2 8,615 17,852 677 4,865 53 42 3,276 971 7.8 403         Q3 40,432 + 1.4 27,617 + 2.1 8,701 17,974 717 4,849 44 33 3,154 947 7.5 416
         Q4 40,733 + 1.1 27,916 + 1.8 8,771 18,259 674 4,885 157 128 3,021 926 7.2 362
2009          Q1 39,937 + 0.4 27,390 + 0.9 8,563 18,083 550 4,864 999 855 3,533 1,284 8.4 312
         Q2 40,186
+ 0.0 27,379 + 0.1 8,515 18,133 512 4,906 1,436 1,411 8 3,475 8 1,207 8 8.3 300
         Q3 40,347 − 0.2 27,482 − 0.5 8,500 18,204 557 4,913 1,136 1,103 3,418 1,186 8.1 300
         Q4 40,613 − 0.3 27,720 − 0.7 8,504 18,423 579 4,934 1,007 944 3,232 1,083 7.7 290
2010          Q1 r 39,862 r − 0.2 27,307 − 0.3 8,308 18,244 561 4,854 987 804 3,601 1,327 8.6 296
         Q2 r 40,366 r + 0.4 27,592 + 0.8 8,377 18,346 648 4,885 517 485 3,261 1,053 10 7.8 353
         Q3 r 40,677 r + 0.8 27,886 + 1.5 8,469 18,454 740 4,889 265 239 3,132 1,003 7.5 395
         Q4 r 41,053 r + 1.1 9 28,246 9 + 1.9 9 8,550 9 18,713 9 767 9 4,921 ... 9 189 2,959 920 7.0 392
2011          Q1 11 40,414 11 + 1.4 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 3,290 1,088 7.8 411
2007          Dec 40,184 + 1.5 27,224 + 2.2 8,578 17,802 651 4,943 78 14 3,395 1,034 8.1 3682008          Jan 39,690 + 1.6 27,084 + 2.3 8,533 17,715 644 4,859 138 25 3,647 1,229 8.7 351
         Feb 39,726 + 1.6 27,119 + 2.4 8,541 17,734 647 4,840 161 30 3,606 1,197 8.6 376         Mar 39,868 + 1.6 27,225 + 2.3 8,570 17,789 658 4,855 156 29 3,496 1,113 8.3 392         Apr 40,049 + 1.5 27,332 + 2.2 8,607 17,839 666 4,857 59 47 3,403 1,043 8.1 395         May 40,197 + 1.4 27,419 + 2.1 8,628 17,883 681 4,869 51 40 3,273 963 7.8 398         June 40,291 + 1.4 27,458 + 2.2 8,646 17,877 710 4,882 50 39 3,151 906 7.5 418         July 40,292 + 1.5 27,440 + 2.2 8,652 17,842 722 4,872 43 31 3,201 963 7.6 422         Aug 40,348 + 1.3 27,684 + 2.1 8,721 18,019 715 4,820 39 29 3,187 961 7.6 417         Sep 40,657 + 1.3 27,996 + 2.1 8,810 18,243 718 4,829 50 39 3,073 917 7.3 409         Oct 40,843 + 1.2 28,020 + 1.8 8,802 18,299 699 4,868 71 61 2,989 883 7.1 393         Nov 40,799 + 1.1 27,914 + 1.6 8,773 18,269 663 4,913 130 120 2,980 902 7.1 367         Dec 40,558 + 0.9 27,632 + 1.5 8,662 18,178 598 4,920 270 201 3,094 994 7.4 327
2009          Jan 39,920 + 0.6 27,379 + 1.1 8,565 18,063 561 4,848 594 452 3,480 1,263 8.3 302
         Feb 39,916 + 0.5 27,307 + 0.7 8,529 18,052 533 4,848 1,079 919 3,542 1,293 8.5 318         Mar 39,976 + 0.3 27,337 + 0.4 8,530 18,088 513 4,872 1,325 1,194 3,576 1,296 8.5 317         Apr 40,114 + 0.2 27,383 + 0.2 8,524 18,132 507 4,901 1,446 1,426 3,575 1,270 8.5 305         May 40,200
+ 0.0 27,395 − 0.1 8,509 18,154 508 4,914 1,469 1,443 8 3,449 8 1,192 8 8.2 299
         June 40,244 − 0.1 27,380 − 0.3 8,493 18,135 531 4,932 1,394 1,365 3,401 1,159 8.1 297
         July 40,214 − 0.2 27,314 − 0.5 8,464 18,080 551 4,935 1,248 1,215 3,454 1,210 8.2 298         Aug 40,272 − 0.2 27,542 − 0.5 8,507 18,249 565 4,891 1,055 1,022 3,463 1,211 8.2 300         Sep 40,554 − 0.3 27,800 − 0.7 8,564 18,430 578 4,893 1,104 1,072 3,338 1,137 7.9 302
         Oct 40,685 − 0.4 27,786 − 0.8 8,534 18,449 581 4,909 1,109 1,076 3,221 1,071 7.7 298         Nov 40,663 − 0.3 27,731 − 0.7 8,497 18,434 589 4,961 982 947 3,208 1,069 7.6 291         Dec 40,490 − 0.2 27,488 − 0.5 8,400 18,341 553 4,971 929 809 3,268 1,108 7.8 281
2010          Jan 
r 39,827 r − 0.2 27,249 − 0.5 8,295 18,214 550 4,840 1,057 874 3,610 1,339 8.6 271
         Feb r 39,802 r − 0.3 27,230 − 0.3 8,269 18,210 560 4,814 1,031 829 3,635 1,356 8.6 298
         Mar r 39,957 r + 0.0 27,398 + 0.2 8,318 18,277 596 4,846 874 709 3,560 1,285 8.5 320
         Apr r 40,201 r + 0.2 27,553 + 0.6 8,371 18,335 627 4,875 632 599 3,399 1,140 8.1 335
         May r 40,391 r + 0.5 27,667 + 1.0 8,395 18,382 665 4,898 499 467 3,236 1,036 10 7.7 355
         June r 40,506 r + 0.7 27,710 + 1.2 8,414 18,365 707 4,916 420 390 3,148 983 7.5 370
         July r 40,509 r + 0.7 27,691 + 1.4 8,419 18,320 732 4,915 313 286 3,186 1,029 7.6 391
         Aug r 40,602 r + 0.8 27,976 + 1.6 8,493 18,508 752 4,864 244 219 3,183 1,030 7.6 396
         Sep r 40,921 r + 0.9 28,269 + 1.7 8,573 18,700 766 4,859 237 214 3,026 948 7.2 398
         Oct r 41,098 r + 1.0 28,296 + 1.8 8,566 18,738 769 4,886 231 209 2,941 908 7.0 401
         Nov r 41,116 r + 1.1 9 28,284 9 + 2.0 9 8,565 9 18,727 9 779 9 4,964 ... 9 194 2,927 903 6.9 394
         Dec r 40,945 r + 1.1 9 28,049 9 + 2.0 9 8,464 9 18,646 9 743 9 4,968 ... 9 163 3,011 949 7.1 380
2011          Jan r 40,361 r + 1.3 9 27,887 9 + 2.3 9 8,405 9 18,557 9 733 9 4,853 ... 9 166 3,346 1,146 7.9 375
         Feb r 40,370 r + 1.4 9 27,929 9 + 2.6 9 8,419 9 18,574 9 738 9 4,843 ... 9 151 3,313 1,107 7.9 417
         Mar 11 40,511 11 + 1.4 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 3,210 1,010 7.6 442
         Apr ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 3,078 907 7.3 461
Sources: Federal Statistical Office; Federal Employment Agency. — *Annual persons formally on the books of private employment agencies. — 9Unadjus-
and quarterly figures: averages; calculated by the Bundesbank; deviations ted data estimated by the Federal Employment Agency. The estimates for
from the official figures are due to rounding. — 1Workplace concept; aver- Germany in 2008 and 2009 deviated from the final data by a maximum of
ages. — 2Monthly figures: end of month. — 3Number within a given 0.2 % for employees subject to social contributions, by a maximum of 2.0 %
month — 4Mid-month level. — 5Until the end of 2006, short-time work ex- for persons solely in jobs exempt from social contributions and, in 2009, by a
cluding construction and agriculture; from 2007, in accordance with section maximum of 14 % for cyclically induced short-time work. — 10From May
170 of the third Book of the Social Security Code. — 6Relative to the total 2010, calculated on the basis of new labour force figures. — 11Initial pre-
civilian labour force. — 7Excluding government-assisted forms of employ- liminary estimate by the Federal Statistical Office. 
ment and seasonal jobs. — 8From May 2009, unemployed excluding
65* X Economic conditions in Germany

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
E U R O S Y S T E M
Monthly Report
May 2011
 X Economic conditions  in Germany
 
7 Prices
 
 
 
Consumer price index HWWI
Indices of Index of World Market
of which foreign trade prices Prices  of Raw Materials  5 
Other Index of
durable producer
and non- prices ofdurable industrial Index ofconsumer Services Con- products producergoods excluding prices of sold on the struction
excluding house House price domestic agricultural Other raw
Total Food Energy  
1 rents  3 rents  3 index  2 market  4 products  4 Exports Imports Energy  6 materials  7 energy  1,2 
Period 2005 = 100 2010 = 100
Index level  
  
2006 8 101.6 101.9 100.3 108.5 101.0 101.1 102.4 8 105.4 107.3 101.8 104.4 84.4 80.7
2007 9 10 103.9 105.9 101.7 112.8 103.9 102.2 109.3 106.8 119.9 103.0 105.1 86.0 87.5
2008 106.6 112.7 102.5 123.6 105.8 103.5 113.0 112.7 124.3 104.8 109.9 109.7 92.0
2009 107.0 111.2 103.9 116.9 107.4 104.6 114.4 108.0 100.6 102.5 100.5 72.8 74.5
2010 108.2 113.0 104.4 121.5 108.0 105.8 115.4 109.7 p 114.0 106.0 108.3 100.0 100.0
 
2009          June 107.1 112.1 103.9 119.1 106.9 104.6 108.1 102.3 102.4 100.3 80.5 76.2
         July 107.1 110.7 103.3 116.0 108.8 104.7 106.5 101.0 102.2 99.4 75.8 74.1
         Aug 107.3 109.5 103.8 118.2 108.7 104.8 114.4 107.0 100.3 102.5 100.7 83.5 78.6
         Sep 106.9 109.2 104.4 116.4 107.3 104.8 106.5 98.2 102.4 99.8 76.1 74.9
         Oct 107.0 109.0 104.7 116.2 107.3 104.9 106.5 98.3 102.4 100.3 80.7 75.8
         Nov 106.9 109.5 104.2 116.9 106.9 105.0 114.4 106.6 101.5 102.5 100.7 84.4 77.9         Dec 107.8 110.4 104.5 115.9 109.5 105.1 106.5 102.5 102.7 101.2 83.8 82.8
2010          Jan 107.1 111.7 103.7 118.5 106.9 105.2 107.3 103.2 103.3 102.9 89.0 85.7
         Feb 107.5 112.0 104.1 117.5 107.7 105.3 114.5 107.3 104.7 103.7 103.9 89.6 85.7         Mar 108.0 113.1 104.5 120.6 107.9 105.5 108.0 105.2 104.5 105.7 96.5 89.5
         Apr 107.9 114.0 104.5 122.2 106.7 105.6 108.9 106.3 105.5 107.8 105.1 97.2
         May 108.0 113.2 104.4 122.5 107.2 105.7 115.2 109.2 108.2 106.0 108.4 100.6 98.9         June 108.1 113.4 104.2 122.4 107.5 105.8 109.9 110.5 106.4 109.4 102.6 100.4
         July 108.4 113.6 103.6 121.4 109.2 105.9 110.4 111.4 106.4 109.2 98.8 101.2
         Aug 108.4 112.6 104.0 121.2 109.4 106.0 115.8 110.4 117.7 106.8 109.4 99.3 104.8
         Sep 108.3 112.5 104.7 121.7 108.0 106.0 110.7 119.3 107.1 109.7 99.0 106.6
         Oct 108.4 112.2 105.1 122.1 107.9 106.1 111.1 119.8 106.8 109.5 98.9 104.1
         Nov 108.5 113.2 105.3 122.8 107.3 106.3 116.1 111.3 122.6 107.1 110.8 104.3 108.1         Dec 109.6 114.4 105.1 125.4 110.0 106.4 112.1
p 127.0 108.0 113.3 115.7 116.1
2011          Jan 109.2 114.7 104.5 128.7 107.9 106.5 113.4 p 11 131.0 108.9 115.0 121.1 121.4
         Feb 109.8 115.8 104.8 129.5 108.8 106.7 117.4 114.2 ... 109.3 116.3 126.5 122.8
         Mar 110.3 115.6 105.4 133.3 108.7 106.8 114.7 ... 109.6 117.6 135.5 117.7
         Apr 110.5 115.6 105.6 135.0 108.9 106.9 ... ... ... ... 141.0 117.8
Annual percentage change  
  
2006 8 + 1.6 + 1.9 + 0.3 + 8.5 + 1.0 + 1.1 + 2.4 8 + 5.4 + 7.3 + 1.8 + 4.4 + 16.4 + 25.5
2007 9 10 + 2.3 + 3.9 + 1.4 + 4.0 + 2.9 + 1.1 + 6.7 + 1.3 + 11.7 + 1.2 + 0.7 + 1.9 + 8.4
2008 + 2.6 + 6.4 + 0.8 + 9.6 + 1.8 + 1.3 + 3.4 + 5.5 + 3.7 + 1.7 + 4.6 + 27.6 + 5.1
2009 + 0.4 − 1.3 + 1.4 − 5.4 + 1.5 + 1.1 + 1.2 − 4.2 − 19.1 − 2.2 − 8.6 − 33.6 − 19.0
2010 + 1.1 + 1.6 + 0.5 + 3.9 + 0.6 + 1.1 + 0.9 + 1.6 p + 13.3 + 3.4 + 7.8 + 37.4 + 34.2
 
2009          June + 0.1 − 0.9 + 1.6 − 7.9 + 1.5 + 1.1 − 4.6 − 21.2 − 2.9 − 11.7 − 43.1 − 25.3
         July − 0.5 − 2.4 + 1.5 − 11.5 + 1.6 + 1.1 − 7.8 − 22.5 − 3.6 − 13.0 − 46.4 − 26.1
         Aug + 0.0 − 3.0 + 1.6 − 7.0 + 1.6 + 1.1 + 0.4 − 6.9 − 21.4 − 3.2 − 11.4 − 34.4 − 18.2
         Sep − 0.3 − 3.0 + 1.5 − 9.0 + 1.3 + 1.0 − 7.6 − 20.3 − 3.2 − 11.4 − 34.1 − 17.9
         Oct + 0.0 − 3.4 + 1.5 − 7.0 + 1.6 + 1.0 − 7.6 − 16.8 − 2.6 − 8.1 − 10.6 − 3.9
         Nov + 0.4 − 2.2 + 1.1 − 2.5 + 1.2 + 1.0 + 0.4 − 5.9 − 10.4 − 1.7 − 5.0 + 19.2 + 3.2
         Dec + 0.9 − 2.0 + 1.5 + 1.0 + 1.1 + 1.1 − 5.2 − 6.6 − 0.4 − 1.0 + 57.8 + 22.8
2010          Jan + 0.8 − 1.4 + 1.0 + 0.9 + 0.8 + 1.1 − 3.4 − 3.3 + 0.4 + 1.4 + 56.4 + 24.0
         Feb + 0.6 − 1.1 + 0.7 + 0.1 + 0.6 + 1.0 + 0.1 − 2.9 − 2.1 + 0.8 + 2.6 + 55.8 + 23.1         Mar + 1.1 + 0.3 + 0.8 + 4.0 + 1.1 + 1.1 − 1.5 + 0.4 + 2.0 + 5.0 + 61.9 + 30.8
         Apr + 1.0 + 1.5 + 0.6 + 5.2 − 0.1 + 1.1 + 0.6 + 3.3 + 3.0 + 7.9 + 65.0 + 34.4
         May + 1.2 + 1.3 + 0.7 + 4.9 + 0.5 + 1.1 + 0.9 + 0.9 + 6.0 + 3.6 + 8.5 + 44.3 + 32.6         June + 0.9 + 1.2 + 0.3 + 2.8 + 0.6 + 1.1 + 1.7 + 8.0 + 3.9 + 9.1 + 27.5 + 31.8
         July + 1.2 + 2.6 + 0.3 + 4.7 + 0.4 + 1.1 + 3.7 + 10.3 + 4.1 + 9.9 + 30.3 + 36.6
         Aug + 1.0 + 2.8 + 0.2 + 2.5 + 0.6 + 1.1 + 1.2 + 3.2 + 17.3 + 4.2 + 8.6 + 18.9 + 33.3         Sep + 1.3 + 3.0 + 0.3 + 4.6 + 0.7 + 1.1 + 3.9 + 21.5 + 4.6 + 9.9 + 30.1 + 42.3
         Oct + 1.3 + 2.9 + 0.4 + 5.1 + 0.6 + 1.1 + 4.3 + 21.9 + 4.3 + 9.2 + 22.6 + 37.3
         Nov + 1.5 + 3.4 + 1.1 + 5.0 + 0.4 + 1.2 + 1.5 + 4.4 + 20.8 + 4.5 + 10.0 + 23.6 + 38.8         Dec + 1.7 + 3.6 + 0.6 + 8.2 + 0.5 + 1.2 + 5.3
p + 23.9 + 5.2 + 12.0 + 38.1 + 40.2
2011          Jan + 2.0 + 2.7 + 0.8 + 8.6 + 0.9 + 1.2 + 5.7 p 11 + 26.9 + 5.4 + 11.8 + 36.1 + 41.7
         Feb + 2.1 + 3.4 + 0.7 + 10.2 + 1.0 + 1.3 + 2.5 + 6.4 ... + 5.4 + 11.9 + 41.2 + 43.3         Mar + 2.1 + 2.2 + 0.9 + 10.5 + 0.7 + 1.2 + 6.2 ... + 4.9 + 11.3 + 40.4 + 31.5
         Apr + 2.4 + 1.4 + 1.1 + 10.5 + 2.1 + 1.2 ... ... ... ... + 34.2 + 21.2
Source: Federal Statistical Office; HWWI Index of World Market Prices. — October 2006, increase in the prices of tobacco products. — 9From January
1Electricity, gas and other fuels. — 2Bundesbank calculation based on data 2007, increase in the standard rate of value-added tax and in insurance tax
provided by the Federal Statistical Office. — 3Net rents. — 4Excluding from 16% to 19%. — 10Introduction of university tuition fees in some
value-added tax. — 5For the euro area, in euro. — 6Coal and crude oil. — federal states. — 11Data for animals estimated except for poultry (taken
7Food, beverages and tobacco as well as industrial raw materials. — 8From from previous month). 
66* X Economic conditions in Germany

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
May 2011
X Economic conditions in Germany
  
8 Households’ income *
  
  
  
Gross wages and Net wages and Monetary social Saving
salaries  1 salaries  2 Mass income  4 Saving  6 ratio  7 benefits received  3 Disposable income  5 
Annual Annual Annual Annual Annual Annual
percent- percent- percent- percent- percent- percent-
age age age age age age
Period change change change change change change % € billion € billion € billion € billion € billion € billion
2003 908.3 0.0 589.0 − 0.5 378.3 2.9 967.2 0.8 1,431.8 2.1 147.2 5.6 10.3
2004 914.6 0.7 603.3 2.4 378.2 − 0.0 981.5 1.5 1,454.5 1.6 151.4 2.9 10.4
2005 912.1 − 0.3 602.4 − 0.2 378.6 0.1 981.0 − 0.1 1,481.0 1.8 155.6 2.7 10.5
2006 926.6 1.6 605.0 0.4 378.1 − 0.1 983.1 0.2 1,518.7 2.5 160.9 3.4 10.6
2007 957.6 3.3 622.8 2.9 373.3 − 1.3 996.1 1.3 1,545.8 1.8 166.8 3.7 10.82008 994.5 3.9 641.3 3.0 374.4 0.3 1,015.7 2.0 1,600.7 3.6 187.5 12.4 11.72009 992.4 − 0.2 639.2 − 0.3 403.3 7.7 1,042.5 2.6 1,587.8 − 0.8 176.8 − 5.7 11.1
2010 1,020.5 2.8 665.6 4.1 409.6 1.6 1,075.2 3.1 1,630.9 2.7 186.2 5.4 11.4
2009          Q3 246.5 − 0.6 163.5 − 0.6 102.3 9.7 265.7 3.1 393.3 − 1.4 37.6 − 6.7 9.6
         Q4 273.3 − 0.7 175.7 − 0.1 100.7 7.9 276.4 2.7 403.3 − 0.6 38.9 − 7.8 9.6
2010          Q1 235.8 1.4 153.5 3.0 103.7 4.9 257.2 3.8 405.2 2.3 62.2 6.2 15.3
         Q2 247.3 3.1 158.4 4.8 102.2 0.7 260.6 3.2 402.8 1.9 44.4 6.3 11.0         Q3 254.4 3.2 170.1 4.1 101.6 − 0.7 271.7 2.3 406.0 3.2 39.2 4.1 9.6         Q4 282.9 3.5 183.7 4.5 102.1 1.4 285.7 3.4 417.0 3.4 40.5 4.2 9.7
Source: Federal Statistical Office; figures computed in February 2011. — plus monetary social benefits received. — 5Mass income plus operating
*Households including non-profit institutions serving households. — 1Resi- surplus, mixed income, property income (net), other current transfers
dence concept. — 2After deducting the wage tax payable on gross wages received, income of non-profit institutions serving households, less taxes (ex-
and salaries and employees’ contributions to the social security funds. — cluding wage tax and consumption-related taxes) and other current trans-
3Social security benefits in cash from the social security funds, central, state fers paid. Including the increase in claims on company pension funds. —6In-
and local government and foreign countries, pension payments (net), cluding the increase in claims on company pension funds. — 7Saving as a
private funded social benefits, less social contributions on social benefits, percentage of disposable income. consumption-related taxes and public charges. — 4Net wages and salaries
  
  
  
9 Pay rates (overall economy)
    
  
Index of negotiated wages 1 
on a monthly basis
Memo item:
Total excluding Wages and salaries
on an hourly basis Total one-off payments Basic pay rates  2 per employee  3 
Annual Annual Annual Annual Annual
Period percentage percentage percentage percentage percentage
2000 = 100 change 2000 = 100 change 2000 = 100 change 2000 = 100 change 2000 = 100 change
2003 106.7 2.0 106.6 2.0 106.8 2.1 106.9 2.4 104.5 1.3
2004 107.6 0.8 107.6 0.9 107.7 0.9 108.3 1.3 105.1 0.6
2005 108.6 0.9 108.7 1.1 108.7 0.9 109.4 1.0 105.4 0.3
2006 109.6 0.9 110.0 1.2 109.5 0.8 110.3 0.8 106.4 0.92007 110.8 1.2 111.4 1.3 111.1 1.4 111.9 1.4 108.0 1.52008 113.9 2.8 114.6 2.8 114.4 3.0 115.4 3.2 110.4 2.22009 116.3 2.1 116.9 2.0 117.0 2.2 118.2 2.4 110.2 − 0.2
2010 118.1 1.6 118.8 1.6 118.8 1.6 120.2 1.7 112.7 2.3
2009          Q4 129.8 1.2 130.5 1.1 130.7 1.9 119.0 2.3 120.5 − 0.1
2010          Q1 109.6 1.8 110.2 1.8 110.4 2.1 119.6 2.2 105.7 1.8
         Q2 111.0 2.1 111.6 2.1 111.3 1.6 120.1 1.7 109.5 2.6         Q3 120.2 1.1 120.8 1.1 121.1 1.3 120.4 1.5 112.0 2.3         Q4 131.7 1.5 132.4 1.5 132.4 1.3 120.6 1.3 123.3 2.3
2011          Q1 111.4 1.7 112.1 1.7 111.8 1.2 120.9 1.1 . .
2010          Sep 110.3 0.5 110.9 0.5 111.2 1.4 120.5 1.4 . .
         Oct 110.5 1.4 111.1 1.4 111.3 1.3 120.6 1.4 . .
         Nov 170.7 1.1 171.7 1.1 172.2 1.2 120.6 1.4 . .         Dec 113.8 2.1 114.4 2.2 113.7 1.5 120.6 1.3 . .
2011          Jan 112.4 2.7 113.0 2.7 111.6 1.1 120.9 1.1 . .
         Feb 110.7 0.9 111.3 0.9 111.6 1.1 120.9 1.1 . .         Mar 111.3 1.4 112.0 1.4 112.2 1.5 121.0 1.0 . .
1Current data are normally revised on account of additional reports. — (13
thmonthly salary payment) and retirement provisions). — 3Source:
2Excluding one-off payments and covenants (capital formation benefits, Federal Statistical Office; figures computed in February 2011. 
special payments, such as annual bonuses, holiday pay, Christmas bonuses
67*X Economic conditions in Germany

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
E U R O S Y S T E M
Monthly Report
May 2011
XI External sector
 
1 Major items of the balance of payments of the euro area *
 
 
€ million
2010 2011
Item 2008 2009 2010 Q2 Q3 Q4 Dec Jan Feb
Current account − 142,440 − 25,713 − 36,654 − 18,557 − 6,156 + 5,993 + 5,564 − 20,789 − 9,499A
1 Goods
Exports (fob) 1,590,237 1,303,553 1,564,299 388,689 403,170 422,299 137,038 127,464 137,175
Imports (fob) 1,612,768 1,266,047 1,543,579 385,398 394,956 414,703 135,691 141,592 138,167
Balance − 22,530 + 37,506 + 20,723 + 3,292 + 8,215 + 7,597 + 1,347 − 14,128 − 993
2 Services
Receipts 514,449 473,937 515,051 128,932 138,497 134,379 47,478 40,793 37,490Expenditure 473,340 440,170 474,012 117,226 123,881 124,052 43,566 39,323 35,381
Balance + 41,107 + 33,768 + 41,040 + 11,706 + 14,617 + 10,327 + 3,912 + 1,469 + 2,109
3 Income − 63,280 − 6,404 + 1,795 − 14,758 + 1,442 + 3,978 + 1,618 + 111 + 2,911
4 Current transfers
Transfers from non-residents 91,214 93,905 87,653 18,861 15,620 31,439 16,131 8,745 12,426
Transfers to non-residents 188,950 184,484 187,858 37,657 46,048 47,344 17,443 16,985 25,952
Balance − 97,739 − 90,581 − 100,209 − 18,797 − 30,429 − 15,907 − 1,312 − 8,240 − 13,526
Capital account + 9,243 + 6,565 + 7,719 + 1,685 + 1,015 + 2,540 + 2,056 + 352 + 2,169B
Financial account (net capital exports: − + 141,476 + 9,977 + 34,352 + 25,364 + 3,882 − 10,934 − 23,557 + 18,328 + 3,266C)
1 Direct investment − 236,012 − 109,378 − 78,582 − 29,836 − 30,772 + 27,233 + 9,777 + 6,485 − 19,640
By resident units abroad − 328,779 − 325,268 − 166,507 − 83,667 − 28,148 − 7,110 − 13 − 26,270 − 5,939By non-resident units in the euro area + 92,767 + 215,888 + 87,924 + 53,831 − 2,624 + 34,342 + 9,789 + 32,755 − 13,701
2 Portfolio investment + 283,263 + 270,688 + 143,205 + 93,706 − 17,058 + 41,636 + 13,482 − 18,077 + 90,893
By resident units abroad + 7,206 − 84,281 − 140,714 + 19,585 − 53,150 − 42,905 + 19,553 − 39,464 + 1,847
Equity + 98,025 − 46,825 − 81,030 + 8,065 − 10,627 − 42,735 − 9,251 + 6,139 − 4,660Bonds and notes − 80,737 − 30,209 − 103,694 + 5,682 − 59,657 − 66 + 14,798 − 37,457 − 2,728Money market instruments − 10,082 − 7,247 + 44,009 + 5,838 + 17,134 − 104 + 14,006 − 8,146 + 9,236
By non-resident units in the euro area + 276,057 + 354,966 + 283,920 + 74,121 + 36,092 + 84,542 − 6,071 + 21,388 + 89,046
Equity − 84,591 + 111,842 + 147,481 + 18,665 + 39,711 + 77,018 + 28,587 + 9,008 + 31,899
Bonds and notes + 177,761 + 123,263 + 134,369 + 70,198 − 37,394 + 33,201 + 17,797 + 913 + 28,811Money market instruments + 182,890 + 119,862 + 2,072 − 14,743 + 33,776 − 25,676 − 52,455 + 11,467 + 28,336
3 Financial derivatives − 82,869 + 37,207 + 7,974 + 1,907 + 2,352 + 993 + 4,557 − 2,693 − 2,065
4 Other investment + 180,452 − 193,096 − 28,066 − 41,379 + 54,316 − 79,242 − 50,055 + 38,337 − 66,954
Eurosystem + 290,397 − 233,231 + 11,819 + 2,791 − 4,056 + 11,212 + 5,998 + 7,541 + 1,609
General government + 14,929 + 1,751 + 24,774 − 6,282 + 9,241 + 11,172 + 19,112 + 19,502 + 6,029MFIs (excluding the Eurosystem) − 132,067 + 68,489 − 11,362 − 109 + 17,698 − 77,043 − 66,232 + 4,619 − 58,727
Long-term − 226,153 − 21,394 + 39,817 − 7,499 + 40,536 + 1,338 − 8,911 + 30,652 + 729Short-term + 94,082 + 89,887 − 51,173 + 7,391 − 22,836 − 78,379 − 57,320 − 26,032 − 59,457
Other sectors + 7,198 − 30,105 − 53,297 − 37,780 + 31,432 − 24,583 − 8,933 + 6,675 − 15,865
5 Reserve assets (Increase: −) − 3,358 + 4,558 − 10,180 + 967 − 4,956 − 1,553 − 1,318 − 5,724 + 1,031
Errors and omissions − 8,281 + 9,170 − 5,421 − 8,493 + 1,257 + 2,400 + 15,937 + 2,108 + 4,064D
* Source: European Central Bank.  
  
68*XI External sector

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
May 2011
XI External sector
 
2 Major items of the balance of payments of the Federal Republic of Germany
(balances)
 
 
Current account Financial account Capital trans-
fers and
of which acquisition/
disposal of Change in
Supple- non- reserve assets
Balance mentary produced at trans- Errorson current Foreign trade Current action and non-financial
Period account trade  
1 items  2 Services  3 Income transfers assets Total  4 value  5 omissions
DM million
1997 − 17,336 + 116,467 − 7,875 − 68,692 − 4,740 − 52,496 + 52 + 6,671 + 6,640 + 10,613
1998 − 28,696 + 126,970 − 8,917 − 75,053 − 18,635 − 53,061 + 1,289 + 25,683 − 7,128 + 1,7241999 − 25,177 + 65,211 − 8,153 − 46,035 − 11,415 − 24,785 − 154 − 10,396 + 12,535 + 35,726
2000 − 68,913 + 115,645 − 17,742 − 95,848 − 16,302 − 54,666 + 13,345 + 66,863 + 11,429 − 11,295
2001 + 830 + 186,771 − 14,512 − 97,521 − 21,382 − 52,526 − 756 − 23,068 + 11,797 + 22,994
€ million
1999 − 25,177 + 65,211 − 8,153 − 46,035 − 11,415 − 24,785 − 154 − 10,396 + 12,535 + 35,726
2000 − 35,235 + 59,128 − 9,071 − 49,006 − 8,335 − 27,950 + 6,823 + 34,187 + 5,844 − 5,775
2001 + 424 + 95,495 − 7,420 − 49,862 − 10,932 − 26,856 − 387 − 11,794 + 6,032 + 11,7572002 + 42,973 + 132,788 − 8,552 − 35,728 − 18,019 − 27,517 − 212 − 38,448 + 2,065 − 4,3132003 + 40,917 + 129,921 − 11,148 − 34,506 − 15,067 − 28,283 + 311 − 61,758 + 445 + 20,529
2004 + 102,833 + 156,096 − 16,470 − 29,375 + 20,431 − 27,849 + 435 − 122,984 + 1,470 + 19,717
2005 + 112,906 + 158,179 − 14,057 − 27,401 + 24,896 − 28,712 − 1,369 − 129,635 + 2,182 + 18,0982006 + 144,999 + 159,048 − 12,888 − 17,346 + 44,893 − 28,708 − 258 − 175,474 + 2,934 + 30,7322007 + 181,150 + 195,348 − 9,816 − 14,852 + 43,310 − 32,841 + 104 − 210,151 − 953 + 28,8972008 + 154,833 + 178,297 − 14,058 − 11,585 + 35,565 − 33,386 − 215 − 160,196 − 2,008 + 5,577
2009 + 133,744 + 138,697 − 11,604 − 10,437 + 50,105 − 33,017 + 74 − 145,427 + 3,200 + 11,609
2010 + 141,443 + 154,473 − 11,415 − 8,012 + 44,483 − 38,086 − 637 − 131,361 − 1,613 − 9,445
2008          Q2 + 40,869 + 53,167 − 3,097 − 3,486 − 275 − 5,440 + 243 − 47,180 − 889 + 6,069
         Q3 + 30,791 + 40,225 − 3,157 − 8,932 + 11,710 − 9,054 − 299 − 11,462 + 1,630 − 19,031         Q4 + 37,045 + 33,972 − 3,977 + 1,529 + 12,613 − 7,092 − 661 − 43,830 − 1,584 + 7,446
2009          Q1 + 24,869 + 27,576 − 3,657 − 1,984 + 14,543 − 11,609 + 22 − 3,419 + 321 − 21,471
         Q2 + 26,201 + 34,119 − 2,666 − 2,973 + 3,742 − 6,021 + 291 − 49,965 + 41 + 23,473         Q3 + 32,190 + 36,092 − 2,679 − 8,269 + 15,210 − 8,164 + 37 − 22,056 + 2,269 − 10,171         Q4 + 50,485 + 40,910 − 2,603 + 2,789 + 16,610 − 7,222 − 276 − 69,987 + 569 + 19,778
2010          Q1 + 34,573 + 37,830 − 2,535 − 920 + 14,296 − 14,098 + 271 − 32,811 − 651 − 2,034
         Q2 + 28,587 + 37,408 − 2,835 − 2,543 + 3,131 − 6,573 − 443 − 31,884 − 801 + 3,740         Q3 + 32,007 + 39,711 − 2,973 − 6,744 + 12,900 − 10,886 + 6 − 24,125 + 344 − 7,888         Q4 + 46,275 + 39,524 − 3,072 + 2,196 + 14,156 − 6,529 − 472 − 42,540 − 506 − 3,263
2011          Q1  
p + 35,342 + 40,961 − 4,366 − 345 + 13,181 − 14,089 + 916 − 57,101 − 1,393 + 20,842
2008          Oct + 13,173 + 16,666 − 1,119 − 2,267 + 4,015 − 4,121 − 201 − 19,464 − 3,373 + 6,492
         Nov + 8,661 + 9,967 − 1,846 + 185 + 4,126 − 3,772 − 85 − 11,880 − 269 + 3,305         Dec + 15,210 + 7,339 − 1,013 + 3,611 + 4,471 + 802 − 375 − 12,486 + 2,058 − 2,350
2009          Jan + 4,004 + 7,404 − 1,390 − 1,910 + 3,845 − 3,946 − 57 + 16,328 + 2,245 − 20,275
         Feb + 8,308 + 8,770 − 1,046 − 92 + 4,985 − 4,309 − 85 − 2,693 − 271 − 5,529         Mar + 12,556 + 11,401 − 1,221 + 18 + 5,712 − 3,354 + 165 − 17,054 − 1,652 + 4,333
         Apr + 7,432 + 10,066 − 774 + 147 + 709 − 2,715 + 313 − 9,810 − 590 + 2,065
         May + 6,088 + 10,327 − 1,031 − 335 − 2,171 − 703 + 101 − 8,738 + 342 + 2,549         June + 12,680 + 13,726 − 860 − 2,785 + 5,203 − 2,603 − 123 − 31,416 + 288 + 18,858
         July + 12,894 + 15,592 − 978 − 3,813 + 4,661 − 2,568 + 24 − 3,788 − 92 − 9,130
         Aug + 7,503 + 8,999 − 959 − 2,985 + 5,433 − 2,985 − 10 − 8,514 + 743 + 1,021         Sep + 11,792 + 11,501 − 743 − 1,471 + 5,116 − 2,611 + 23 − 9,753 + 1,618 − 2,062
         Oct + 11,383 + 12,466 − 591 − 1,195 + 5,619 − 4,916 − 249 − 23,201 − 651 + 12,067
         Nov + 16,586 + 15,962 − 1,485 + 379 + 5,525 − 3,794 + 91 − 22,777 + 1,522 + 6,100         Dec + 22,516 + 12,482 − 526 + 3,605 + 5,466 + 1,488 − 117 − 24,010 − 302 + 1,611
2010          Jan + 5,568 + 8,094 − 1,038 − 1,485 + 4,526 − 4,528 + 64 + 13,557 − 55 − 19,189
         Feb + 10,209 + 12,745 − 286 − 4 + 4,637 − 6,882 + 430 − 17,923 − 782 + 7,284         Mar + 18,796 + 16,991 − 1,210 + 569 + 5,133 − 2,687 − 223 − 28,445 + 187 + 9,872
         Apr + 12,001 + 13,178 − 816 + 399 + 1,479 − 2,239 − 200 − 9,518 − 116 − 2,283
         May + 3,131 + 9,905 − 1,289 − 1,148 − 2,827 − 1,510 − 53 − 8,898 − 671 + 5,820         June + 13,455 + 14,325 − 730 − 1,794 + 4,478 − 2,824 − 190 − 13,468 − 14 + 204
         July + 10,366 + 13,623 − 1,263 − 2,719 + 4,435 − 3,710 + 420 + 19,207 + 20 − 29,994
         Aug + 5,700 + 9,175 − 955 − 3,184 + 4,229 − 3,566 − 112 − 18,532 + 119 + 12,944         Sep + 15,941 + 16,913 − 756 − 842 + 4,236 − 3,610 − 302 − 24,801 + 205 + 9,161
         Oct + 13,418 + 14,298 − 644 − 1,392 + 4,734 − 3,577 − 221 + 2,909 + 234 − 16,106
         Nov + 13,579 + 13,065 − 1,051 + 919 + 4,699 − 4,053 − 169 − 19,376 + 81 + 5,966         Dec + 19,278 + 12,161 − 1,376 + 2,668 + 4,723 + 1,102 − 81 − 26,074 − 820 + 6,877
2011          Jan + 7,099 + 10,124 − 1,356 − 1,191 + 3,587 − 4,065 + 542 − 4,351 − 182 − 3,289
         Feb + 8,718 + 11,929 − 1,089 + 342 + 4,646 − 7,111 + 528 − 20,602 − 23 + 11,357         Mar  
p + 19,526 + 18,908 − 1,921 + 503 + 4,949 − 2,913 − 153 − 32,147 − 1,188 + 12,775
1Special trade according to the official foreign trade statistics: imports cif, the account of residents and deduction of goods returned. — 3Excluding
exports fob. From January 2007 onwards, excluding supplies of goods the expenditure on freight and insurance included in the cif import
for/after repair/maintenance, which, up to December 2006, were deducted figure. — 4Financial account balance including change in reserve assets.
via supplementary trade items. — 2Inter alia warehouse transactions for Capital exports: − . — 5 Increase: − . 
69*XI External sector

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
E U R O S Y S T E M
Monthly Report
May 2011
XI External sector
 
3 Foreign trade (special trade) of the Federal Republic of Germany,
by country and group of countries *
 
 € million
 2010  2011
Country / group of countries  2008  2009  2010 Oct Nov Dec Jan Feb Mar  p 
All countries  1 Exports 984,140 803,312 951,899 85,877 87,201 81,724 78,554 84,068 98,266
Imports 805,842 664,615 797,426 71,579 74,136 69,563 68,430 72,139 79,358Balance + 178,297 + 138,697 + 154,473 + 14,298 + 13,065 + 12,161 + 10,124 + 11,929 + 18,908
I Exports 733,092 585,826 682,376 62,562 62,436 57,798 56,686 60,010 ...European countries
Imports 567,062 463,721 552,976 50,271 50,058 48,420 45,882 49,918 ...Balance + 166,031 + 122,105 + 129,400 + 12,290 + 12,378 + 9,377 + 10,804 + 10,092 ...
Exports 622,637 500,654 578,225 52,763 52,217 48,975 48,330 50,683 ... 1 EU member states (27)
Imports 460,887 380,323 455,896 41,668 41,410 39,853 37,226 40,734 ...
Balance + 161,750 + 120,331 + 122,329 + 11,095 + 10,807 + 9,123 + 11,104 + 9,948 ...
Euro-area (17) Exports 421,120 343,701 393,227 35,522 35,380 33,534 32,708 34,329 ...
countries Imports 315,410 258,729 307,730 27,720 27,709 26,657 24,780 27,498 ...
Balance + 105,710 + 84,972 + 85,497 + 7,802 + 7,671 + 6,877 + 7,928 + 6,831 ...
of which
Austria Exports 54,689 46,093 53,721 4,913 4,902 4,537 4,331 4,652 ...
Imports 33,180 27,565 34,315 3,152 3,103 2,999 2,678 2,979 ...Balance + 21,509 + 18,528 + 19,406 + 1,760 + 1,799 + 1,537 + 1,653 + 1,673 ...
Belgium and Exports 55,230 46,262 52,165 4,555 4,276 4,230 4,305 4,555 ...Luxembourg Imports 39,959 30,694 36,678 3,335 3,229 3,123 2,993 3,194 ...
Balance + 15,271 + 15,568 + 15,487 + 1,220 + 1,046 + 1,107 + 1,312 + 1,361 ...
France Exports 93,718 81,304 90,694 8,221 8,238 7,500 7,992 8,053 ...
Imports 63,369 53,338 61,751 5,208 5,591 5,404 4,594 5,570 ...Balance + 30,349 + 27,966 + 28,943 + 3,013 + 2,647 + 2,096 + 3,397 + 2,484 ...
Italy Exports 62,015 50,620 58,477 5,541 5,489 5,031 4,874 5,114 ...
Imports 46,842 37,197 43,667 4,014 3,931 3,676 3,403 4,012 ...Balance + 15,173 + 13,423 + 14,810 + 1,527 + 1,559 + 1,355 + 1,471 + 1,102 ...
Netherlands Exports 65,799 53,195 63,235 5,733 5,460 5,992 5,124 5,601 ...
Imports 67,971 55,583 68,767 6,160 6,181 6,305 5,990 6,381 ...Balance − 2,172 − 2,388 − 5,532 − 428 − 721 − 314 − 866 − 780 ...
Spain Exports 42,676 31,281 34,381 2,971 3,081 2,702 2,801 2,927 ...
Imports 20,701 18,959 22,258 2,052 1,956 1,739 1,834 1,939 ...
Balance + 21,975 + 12,322 + 12,122 + 919 + 1,125 + 963 + 967 + 988 ...
Other EU member Exports 201,517 156,953 184,998 17,241 16,837 15,442 15,622 16,354 ...states Imports 145,478 121,594 148,166 13,947 13,701 13,196 12,446 13,236 ...
Balance + 56,039 + 35,359 + 36,832 + 3,293 + 3,136 + 2,246 + 3,176 + 3,118 ...
of which
United Exports 64,175 53,240 59,487 5,434 5,233 4,664 5,089 5,358 ...Kingdom Imports 41,646 32,452 38,594 3,520 3,761 3,522 3,205 3,443 ...
Balance + 22,529 + 20,787 + 20,894 + 1,914 + 1,472 + 1,143 + 1,884 + 1,915 ...
Exports 110,455 85,172 104,151 9,799 10,219 8,822 8,356 9,327 ... 2 Other European
Imports 106,174 83,398 97,080 8,604 8,648 8,568 8,656 9,184 ... countries
Balance + 4,281 + 1,774 + 7,071 + 1,195 + 1,571 + 254 − 300 + 143 ...
of which
Switzerland Exports 39,027 35,510 41,712 3,791 3,913 3,420 3,557 3,644 ...
Imports 31,299 28,096 32,485 2,845 2,933 2,515 2,503 2,812 ...
Balance + 7,728 + 7,414 + 9,227 + 946 + 980 + 905 + 1,054 + 832 ...
II Exports 249,199 216,466 276,825 24,057 25,491 23,853 21,803 24,018 ...Non-European
Imports 238,050 200,303 253,163 22,183 24,959 21,142 22,547 22,203 ... countries
Balance + 11,150 + 16,163 + 23,662 + 1,874 + 532 + 2,711 − 744 + 1,815 ...
Exports 19,636 17,412 20,033 1,606 1,652 1,649 1,594 1,639 ... 1 Africa
Imports 20,661 14,235 16,991 1,249 1,860 1,314 1,811 2,283 ...
Balance − 1,024 + 3,177 + 3,043 + 357 − 208 + 336 − 217 − 644 ...
Exports 101,866 78,727 99,924 9,053 9,336 7,993 7,758 8,749 ... 2 America
Imports 73,884 60,498 71,294 6,214 6,777 6,234 5,885 5,997 ...
Balance + 27,982 + 18,229 + 28,630 + 2,839 + 2,560 + 1,759 + 1,873 + 2,752 ...
of which
Exports 71,428 54,356 65,570 5,844 6,461 5,308 5,209 5,850 ... United States
Imports 46,464 39,283 45,063 3,854 4,298 3,857 3,551 3,821 ...Balance + 24,965 + 15,074 + 20,507 + 1,990 + 2,162 + 1,451 + 1,658 + 2,029 ...
Exports 120,102 113,179 147,870 12,674 13,732 13,469 11,800 12,944 ... 3 Asia
Imports 140,585 122,823 161,776 14,394 16,058 13,305 14,584 13,665 ...
Balance − 20,483 − 9,644 − 13,906 − 1,720 − 2,327 + 165 − 2,783 − 721 ...
of which
Middle East Exports 27,498 23,598 28,126 2,158 2,721 2,545 1,905 2,171 ...
Imports 7,943 5,506 6,881 579 845 591 562 584 ...Balance + 19,555 + 18,092 + 21,245 + 1,579 + 1,876 + 1,954 + 1,343 + 1,587 ...
Japan Exports 12,732 10,875 13,114 1,204 1,136 1,099 1,171 1,206 ...
Imports 23,130 18,946 22,065 2,012 2,096 1,687 1,966 1,762 ...Balance − 10,398 − 8,071 − 8,951 − 807 − 959 − 588 − 795 − 555 ...
Exports 34,065 37,273 53,636 4,727 5,047 4,919 4,618 5,049 ... People‘s Republic
Imports 60,825 56,706 76,528 7,130 7,568 6,550 6,657 6,298 ... of China  
2 
Balance − 26,760 − 19,434 − 22,892 − 2,403 − 2,521 − 1,631 − 2,038 − 1,249 ...
Exports 32,572 28,606 38,054 3,273 3,546 3,330 3,009 3,202 ... Emerging markets
Imports 33,152 28,338 39,025 3,164 3,982 3,002 3,704 3,382 ... in South-East Asia  3 
Balance − 580 + 268 − 971 + 109 − 437 + 327 − 695 − 180 ...
Exports 7,595 7,147 8,997 724 771 741 651 685 ... 4 Oceania and
Imports 2,920 2,747 3,102 326 265 289 268 257 ... polar regions
Balance + 4,674 + 4,401 + 5,895 + 398 + 506 + 452 + 383 + 428 ...
 
*Source: Federal Statistical Office. Exports (fob) by country of destination, the year 2010 the figures on “All countries” include revisions which ha ve
imports (cif) by country of origin. Individual countries and groups of not yet been broken down by region. — 2Excluding Hong Kong. —
countries according to the current position. — 1Including fuel and other 3Brunei Darussalam, Hong Kong, Indonesia, Malaysia, Philippines,
supplies for ships and aircraft and other data not classifiable by region. For Republic of Korea, Singapore, Taiwan and Thailand. 
70*XI External sector

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
May 2011
XI External sector
 
4 Services and income of the Federal Republic of Germany
(balances)
 
€ million
Services
Other services
of which
 
Patents Compen- Services  of Construction
Trans- Financial and sation of Investment Government self-employed and  assembly
Period Total Travel  1 services licences Total income portation  2 services  3 persons  4 work,  repairs employees  5 
2006 − 17,346 − 32,771 + 5,723 + 2,232 − 1,895 + 3,736 + 5,629 − 1,790 + 3,980 − 773 + 45,666
2007 − 14,852 − 34,324 + 6,756 + 2,801 − 2,016 + 3,309 + 8,622 − 1,964 + 3,197 + 252 + 43,058
2008 − 11,585 − 34,718 + 8,300 + 4,106 − 1,337 + 2,372 + 9,691 − 1,648 + 3,145 + 463 + 35,1032009 − 10,437 − 33,341 + 6,873 + 3,848 + 804 + 2,369 + 9,011 − 1,256 + 2,563 − 126 + 50,2312010 − 8,012 − 32,440 + 7,056 + 3,709 + 992 + 2,470 + 10,202 − 1,155 + 2,887 − 269 + 44,751
2009          Q3 − 8,269 − 13,845 + 1,312 + 776 + 231 + 592 + 2,664 − 298 + 729 − 674 + 15,885
         Q4 + 2,789 − 5,750 + 1,478 + 1,533 + 1,504 + 494 + 3,529 − 313 + 1,012 − 509 + 17,119
2010          Q1 − 920 − 5,126 + 1,497 + 920 + 112 + 608 + 1,068 − 246 + 584 + 443 + 13,853
         Q2 − 2,543 − 8,461 + 2,038 + 663 + 438 + 595 + 2,184 − 267 + 716 + 294 + 2,837         Q3 − 6,744 − 12,869 + 1,910 + 1,033 − 289 + 596 + 2,875 − 329 + 649 − 584 + 13,484         Q4 + 2,196 − 5,984 + 1,611 + 1,093 + 731 + 671 + 4,075 − 313 + 938 − 423 + 14,578
2011          Q1 − 345 − 5,563 + 1,454 + 697 − 181 + 596 + 2,652 − 253 + 555 + 410 + 12,772
2010          May − 1,148 − 2,699 + 655 + 105 + 107 + 228 + 455 − 84 + 92 + 110 − 2,937
         June − 1,794 − 3,782 + 702 + 127 − 109 + 186 + 1,080 − 101 + 410 + 96 + 4,382
         July − 2,719 − 4,003 + 690 + 290 − 424 + 172 + 556 − 154 + 240 − 194 + 4,629
         Aug − 3,184 − 5,307 + 702 + 450 + 179 + 201 + 591 − 72 + 148 − 197 + 4,427         Sep − 842 − 3,560 + 518 + 294 − 43 + 223 + 1,727 − 104 + 260 − 192 + 4,428
         Oct − 1,392 − 3,742 + 496 + 239 − 75 + 213 + 1,479 − 88 + 261 − 164 + 4,898
         Nov + 919 − 1,612 + 550 + 330 + 197 + 271 + 1,184 − 101 + 375 − 185 + 4,884         Dec + 2,668 − 630 + 565 + 525 + 609 + 187 + 1,412 − 124 + 302 − 74 + 4,796
2011          Jan − 1,191 − 1,994 + 411 + 391 − 198 + 187 + 13 − 87 + 150 + 131 + 3,456
         Feb + 342 − 1,486 + 489 + 57 + 244 + 194 + 845 − 64 + 264 + 130 + 4,516         Mar + 503 − 2,083 + 554 + 249 − 227 + 215 + 1,795 − 102 + 141 + 150 + 4,800
1From January 2001, figures subject to significant uncertainty. — 2Ex- vices supplied. — 4Engineering and other technical services, research and
cluding the expenditure on freight included in the cif import figure. — development, commercial services, etc. — 5 Wages and salaries. 
3Including the receipts from foreign military agencies for goods and ser-
5 Current transfers of the Federal Republic of Germany 6 Capital transfers
(balances) (balances)
€ million € million
Public  1 Private  1 
International
organisations  2 
 
of which Other Other
European current Workers’ current
Period Total Total Total Communities Total remittances transfers Total  4 Public  1 Private  1 transfers  3 
2006 − 28,708 − 15,998 − 16,404 − 14,850 + 406 − 12,710 − 2,927 − 9,783 − 258 − 1,947 + 1,689
2007 − 32,841 − 17,393 − 19,331 − 17,548 + 1,939 − 15,448 − 2,997 − 12,451 + 104 − 2,034 + 2,138
2008 − 33,386 − 17,003 − 18,741 − 16,645 + 1,738 − 16,384 − 3,079 − 13,304 − 215 − 1,857 + 1,6422009 − 33,017 − 18,830 − 19,044 − 16,603 + 214 − 14,187 − 2,995 − 11,192 + 74 − 1,704 + 1,7782010 − 38,086 − 22,960 − 22,607 − 19,542 − 353 − 15,126 − 3,035 − 12,092 − 637 − 2,044 + 1,407
2009          Q3 − 8,164 − 5,011 − 4,289 − 3,766 − 721 − 3,154 − 749 − 2,405 + 37 − 361 + 398
         Q4 − 7,222 − 3,744 − 2,785 − 2,216 − 959 − 3,478 − 749 − 2,729 − 276 − 633 + 357
2010          Q1 − 14,098 − 10,921 − 10,086 − 8,986 − 835 − 3,177 − 759 − 2,418 + 271 − 402 + 673
         Q2 − 6,573 − 2,298 − 4,393 − 3,771 + 2,095 − 4,275 − 759 − 3,516 − 443 − 403 − 40         Q3 − 10,886 − 7,168 − 6,457 − 5,662 − 711 − 3,718 − 759 − 2,960 + 6 − 425 + 431         Q4 − 6,529 − 2,573 − 1,670 − 1,123 − 903 − 3,956 − 759 − 3,197 − 472 − 815 + 343
2011          Q1 − 14,089 − 10,549 − 9,871 − 8,947 − 678 − 3,540 − 744 − 2,796 + 916 − 400 + 1,317
2010          May − 1,510 − 208 − 1,688 − 1,598 + 1,480 − 1,303 − 253 − 1,050 − 53 − 126 + 73
         June − 2,824 − 1,258 − 1,183 − 1,007 − 75 − 1,566 − 253 − 1,313 − 190 − 160 − 31
         July − 3,710 − 2,402 − 2,115 − 1,928 − 287 − 1,308 − 253 − 1,055 + 420 − 147 + 567
         Aug − 3,566 − 2,399 − 2,066 − 1,673 − 332 − 1,167 − 253 − 914 − 112 − 129 + 17         Sep − 3,610 − 2,368 − 2,277 − 2,061 − 91 − 1,243 − 253 − 990 − 302 − 149 − 153
         Oct − 3,577 − 2,716 − 2,335 − 2,085 − 381 − 862 − 253 − 609 − 221 − 177 − 45
         Nov − 4,053 − 2,758 − 2,271 − 2,145 − 487 − 1,296 − 253 − 1,043 − 169 − 202 + 33         Dec + 1,102 + 2,901 + 2,935 + 3,108 − 35 − 1,799 − 253 − 1,546 − 81 − 436 + 355
2011          Jan − 4,065 − 2,943 − 2,904 − 2,415 − 39 − 1,122 − 248 − 874 + 542 − 122 + 664
         Feb − 7,111 − 5,882 − 5,439 − 5,128 − 443 − 1,229 − 248 − 981 + 528 − 108 + 636         Mar − 2,913 − 1,724 − 1,528 − 1,405 − 197 − 1,188 − 248 − 940 − 153 − 171 + 17
1The classification of “public” and “private” transfers depends on the (excluding capital transfers). — 3Payments to developing countries, pension
sector to which the participating domestic body belongs. — 2Current contri- payments, tax revenue and refunds, etc. — 4Where identifiable; in
butions to the budgets of international organisations and to the EU budget particular, debt forgiveness. 
71*XI External sector

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
E U R O S Y S T E M
Monthly Report
May 2011
XI External sector
 
7 Financial account of the Federal Republic of Germany
 
 
€ million
2010 2011
Item 2008 2009 2010 Q2 Q3 Q4 Q1 Jan Feb Mar
I Net German investment abroad
(Increase/capital exports: −) − 200,157 − 10,911 − 390,404 − 125,583 − 78,073 − 94,990 − 47,953 − 17,318 − 57,425 + 26,791
1 Direct investment  1 − 52,663 − 56,292 − 79,172 − 33,710 + 9,117 − 11,270 − 28,276 − 9,711 − 7,113 − 11,453
Equity capital − 52,227 − 51,427 − 41,956 − 11,754 + 638 − 11,525 − 8,526 − 2,990 − 1,141 − 4,395
Reinvested earnings  2 + 17,073 − 22,735 − 23,470 − 3,164 − 7,992 − 5,058 − 9,280 − 3,648 − 3,874 − 1,758
Other capital transactionsof German direct investors − 17,508 + 17,871 − 13,745 − 18,792 + 16,471 + 5,312 − 10,471 − 3,073 − 2,098 − 5,300
2 Portfolio investment + 25,099 − 69,144 − 171,328 − 6,340 − 24,915 − 115,741 − 20,274 − 13,025 − 7,402 + 153
Shares
3 + 39,133 − 2,821 + 173 − 3,687 + 2,793 − 2,285 + 4,645 − 623 + 4,098 + 1,171
Mutual fund shares  4 − 7,600 + 1,775 − 21,753 − 3,058 − 7,721 − 3,190 − 2,848 − 2,545 − 2,536 + 2,233
Bonds and notes  5 − 24,151 − 81,203 − 156,134 − 2,800 − 17,250 − 115,902 − 19,336 − 7,105 − 10,733 − 1,497
Money market instruments + 17,717 + 13,105 + 6,387 + 3,204 − 2,738 + 5,636 − 2,736 − 2,752 + 1,769 − 1,753
3 Financial derivatives  6 − 30,235 + 12,368 − 17,608 − 6,343 − 7,898 + 267 − 8,721 − 426 − 3,972 − 4,323
4 Other investment − 140,350 + 98,957 − 120,683 − 78,389 − 54,720 + 32,261 + 10,712 + 6,026 − 38,915 + 43,602
MFIs  7,8 − 71,888 + 176,553 + 138,535 − 23,039 + 41,677 + 96,260 + 34,446 − 3,012 − 11,048 + 48,505
Long-term − 142,271 + 25,779 + 77,701 + 10,159 + 29,327 + 26,615 + 5,073 + 4,768 − 2,461 + 2,765Short-term + 70,382 + 150,774 + 60,833 − 33,198 + 12,350 + 69,645 + 29,373 − 7,780 − 8,587 + 45,740
Enterprises and households − 26,758 − 18,390 − 50,518 − 8,192 − 34,893 + 4,384 − 26,556 − 17,717 − 9,361 + 522
Long-term − 23,572 − 22,263 − 39,834 − 8,296 − 13,769 − 7,214 − 9,440 − 4,356 − 7,189 + 2,105Short-term  
7 − 3,187 + 3,872 − 10,684 + 104 − 21,124 + 11,598 − 17,115 − 13,360 − 2,172 − 1,583
General government + 2,896 + 2,061 − 61,067 − 5,158 − 942 − 52,494 + 496 + 3,829 − 441 − 2,892
Long-term − 238 − 596 − 52,757 − 10,726 + 656 − 41,371 + 2,948 + 918 + 2,474 − 443
Short-term  7 + 3,135 + 2,657 − 8,309 + 5,569 − 1,598 − 11,122 − 2,452 + 2,911 − 2,915 − 2,449
Bundesbank − 44,600 − 61,267 − 147,633 − 42,000 − 60,563 − 15,890 + 2,325 + 22,925 − 18,065 − 2,534
5 Change in reserve assets at
transaction values (Increase: −) − 2,008 + 3,200 − 1,613 − 801 + 344 − 506 − 1,393 − 182 − 23 − 1,188
II Net foreign investment in Germany
(Increase/capital imports: +) + 39,962 − 134,516 + 259,043 + 93,699 + 53,947 + 52,449 − 9,148 + 12,967 + 36,823 − 58,938
1 Direct investment  1 + 2,879 + 27,085 + 34,833 + 9,548 + 7,947 + 10,267 − 1,762 + 1,498 − 4,386 + 1,126
Equity capital + 22,800 + 8,528 + 7,955 + 4,551 + 3,862 − 212 − 4,374 + 1,284 − 4,487 − 1,171
Reinvested earnings  2 − 21,491 + 1,389 + 5,303 − 1,875 + 3,130 + 343 + 3,912 + 1,468 + 1,342 + 1,102
Other capital transactionsof foreign direct investors + 1,571 + 17,168 + 21,575 + 6,872 + 955 + 10,137 − 1,300 − 1,253 − 1,242 + 1,195
2 Portfolio investment + 26,328 − 13,571 + 46,408 − 2,784 + 32,037 + 8,003 + 47,107 + 11,185 + 41,408 − 5,487
Shares  
3 − 34,734 + 2,334 − 4,073 − 3,812 + 1,989 − 2,089 − 5,117 − 7,626 + 8,555 − 6,046
Mutual fund shares − 8,715 + 5,406 + 2,408 + 64 − 504 + 1,160 + 2,433 + 1,014 + 956 + 463Bonds and notes  
5 + 29,841 − 71,690 + 48,308 + 20,913 + 21,537 − 7,321 + 31,400 + 12,462 + 20,944 − 2,006
Money market instruments + 39,935 + 50,379 − 235 − 19,949 + 9,015 + 16,253 + 18,390 + 5,335 + 10,953 + 2,102
3 Other investment + 10,755 − 148,031 + 177,802 + 86,935 + 13,964 + 34,179 − 54,492 + 284 − 199 − 54,577
MFIs  7,8 − 57,268 − 114,873 + 76,198 + 72,898 + 745 − 49,228 − 39,262 + 20,881 − 1,542 − 58,601
Long-term + 12,805 − 23,849 − 5,855 − 1,317 − 2,417 − 640 − 3,597 − 303 − 2,106 − 1,188Short-term − 70,073 − 91,024 + 82,052 + 74,214 + 3,162 − 48,588 − 35,666 + 21,183 + 564 − 57,413
Enterprises and households + 47,437 − 6,087 + 2,751 + 11,153 + 9,159 − 6,793 − 4,215 + 4,837 − 8,930 − 122
Long-term + 26,991 + 1,773 − 5,173 − 1,853 − 2,014 − 2,679 − 6,021 − 1,756 − 1,815 − 2,451Short-term  
7 + 20,445 − 7,860 + 7,924 + 13,006 + 11,174 − 4,114 + 1,806 + 6,593 − 7,115 + 2,329
General government + 6,235 − 5,290 + 93,335 + 1,101 + 4,230 + 86,572 − 9,974 − 24,538 + 11,896 + 2,668
Long-term − 1,161 − 2,013 − 232 − 48 + 101 + 299 − 1,060 − 1,030 − 30 − 0Short-term  
7 + 7,396 − 3,276 + 93,567 + 1,149 + 4,129 + 86,273 − 8,913 − 23,508 + 11,926 + 2,669
Bundesbank + 14,351 − 21,782 + 5,518 + 1,784 − 170 + 3,627 − 1,042 − 896 − 1,623 + 1,477
III Financial account balance  9 
(Net capital exports: −) − 160,196 − 145,427 − 131,361 − 31,884 − 24,125 − 42,540 − 57,101 − 4,351 − 20,602 − 32,147
1From 1996, new definition for direct investment. — 2Estimated. — action values shown here are mostly derived from changes in stocks. Purely
3Including participation rights. — 4From 1991, including retained statistical changes have been eliminated as far as possible. — 8Excluding
earnings. — 5From 1975, excluding accrued interest. — 6Options, whether the Deutsche Bundesbank. — 9Financial account balance including change
evidenced by securities or not, and financial futures contracts. — 7The trans- in reserve assets. 
72*XI External sector

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
May 2011
XI External sector
 
8 External position of the Bundesbank up to end-1998 *
 
 
DM million
Reserve assets and other claims on non-residents Liabilities vis-à-vis non-residents
Reserve assets
Reserve
positionin theInter- Liabilitiesnational arising Net Liabilities
Monetary arising from externalFund and Claims Loans and from liquidity position
Foreign special on the external Treasury (col 1 other claims
End of year currency drawing ECB  
2 on non- trans- discount less
or month Total Total Gold rights (net) Total paper col 8) balances  1 residents  3 actions  4 
1234567891 0 1 1
1996 120,985 119,544 13,688 72,364 11,445 22,048 1,441 15,604 15,604 − 105,381
1997 127,849 126,884 13,688 76,673 13,874 22,649 966 16,931 16,931 − 110,9181998 135,085 134,005 17,109 100,363 16,533 − 1,079 15,978 15,978 − 119,107
*Valuation of the gold holdings and the claims on non-residents in Monetary Cooperation Fund (EMCF)). — 3Including loans to the World
accordance with section 26 (2) of the Bundesbank Act and the provisions of Bank. — 4Including liquidity paper sold to non-residents by the
the Commercial Code, especially section 253. In the course of the year, Bundesbank; excluding the liquidity Treasury discount paper sold to
valuation at the preceding year’s balance sheet rates. — 1Mainly US dollar non-residents between March 1993 and March 1995, as shown in column 10. 
assets. — 2European Central Bank (up to 1993, claims on the European
  
 
9 External position of the Bundesbank in European monetary union o
€ million
Reserve assets and other claims on non-residents
Reserve assets
Reserveposition
Other in the Inter-national claims on NetMonetary Other residents externalFund and claims on Claims in other position
Gold special Foreign non-euro- within the euro-area (col 1 Liabilities
End of year and gold drawing currency area Eurosystem member less vis-à-vis non-
or month Total Total rights reserves (net)  
2 states col 9) receivables residents  1,3 residents  3,4 
1234567891 0
1999          Jan  5 95,316 93,940 29,312 8,461 56,167 140 1,225 11 8,169 87,146
1999 141,958 93,039 32,287 8,332 52,420 9,162 39,746 11 6,179 135,779
2000 100,762 93,815 32,676 7,762 53,377 313 6,620 14 6,592 94,1702001 76,147 93,215 35,005 8,721 49,489 312 − 17,385 5 8,752 67,396
2002 103,948 85,002 36,208 8,272 40,522 312 18,466 167 9,005 94,942
2003 95,394 76,680 36,533 7,609 32,538 312 17,945 456 10,443 84,951
2004 93,110 71,335 35,495 6,548 29,292 312 20,796 667 7,935 85,175
2005 130,268 86,181 47,924 4,549 33,708 350 42,830 906 6,285 123,9832006 104,389 84,765 53,114 3,011 28,640 350 18,344 931 4,819 99,570
2007 179,492 92,545 62,433 2,418 27,694 350 84,064 2,534 16,005 163,4882008 230,775 99,185 68,194 3,285 27,705 350 128,668 2,573 30,169 200,607
2009 323,286 125,541 83,939 15,969 25,634 350 189,936 7,460 9,126 314,160
2010 524,695 162,100 115,403 18,740 27,957 50 337,869 24,676 14,620 510,075
2010          Jan 326,161 127,966 84,917 16,350 26,699 350 189,759 8,086 10,066 316,095
         Feb 352,969 134,669 89,796 17,327 27,546 50 209,481 8,770 9,573 343,396         Mar 364,072 134,826 90,158 17,176 27,491 50 219,417 9,780 9,421 354,651
         Apr 377,729 142,021 96,677 17,290 28,054 50 225,677 9,982 11,833 365,897
         May 444,480 157,385 108,045 18,854 30,486 50 267,464 19,580 13,024 431,455         June 444,756 160,629 110,727 19,039 30,863 50 261,416 22,662 11,220 433,536
         July 452,125 145,637 98,074 18,507 29,056 50 283,223 23,216 11,557 440,569
         Aug 473,073 155,245 106,417 18,798 30,030 50 294,597 23,181 10,910 462,163         Sep 496,333 150,758 105,059 18,188 27,511 50 321,979 23,547 10,995 485,338
         Oct 472,762 150,481 105,507 17,972 27,002 50 298,661 23,569 12,729 460,032
         Nov 497,807 162,835 115,698 18,397 28,740 50 311,444 23,479 11,281 486,526         Dec 524,695 162,100 115,403 18,740 27,957 50 337,869 24,676 14,620 510,075
2011          Jan 492,995 152,428 106,493 18,667 27,268 50 314,944 25,574 13,719 479,276
         Feb 515,777 156,964 111,426 18,532 27,005 50 333,010 25,754 12,100 503,677         Mar 516,360 155,718 110,136 19,253 26,329 50 335,543 25,049 13,569 502,791
         Apr 502,690 157,344 112,655 18,818 25,871 50 321,422 23,875 12,011 490,679
oClaims and liabilities vis-à-vis all countries within and outside the euro November 2000, including the TARGET positions which were previously
area. Up to December 2000, the levels at the end of each quarter are shown, shown (in columns 6 and 9) as bilateral assets and liabilities vis-à-vis natio nal
owing to revaluations, at market prices; within each quarter, however, the central banks outside the Eurosystem. — 3See footnote 2. — 4Excluding
levels are computed on the basis of cumulative transaction values. From allocations of special drawing rights (SDR) by the International Monetary
January 2001, all end-of-month levels are valued at market prices. — Fund (IMF) for an amount of SDR 12,059 million. — 5Euro opening balance
1Including loans to the World Bank. — 2Including the balances in the sheet of the Bundesbank as at 1 January 1999. 
Bundesbank’s cross-border payments within the Eurosystem. From
73*XI External sector

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
E U R O S Y S T E M
Monthly Report
May 2011
XI External sector
 
10 Assets and liabilities of enterprises in Germany (other than banks)
vis-à-vis non-residents *
 
€ million
Claims on non-residents Liabilities vis-à-vis non-residents
Claims on foreign non-banks Liabilities  vis-à-vis foreign non-banks
from trade credits from trade credits
Balances Loans
with from Credit Advance from from Credit Advance
End of year foreign financial terms payments foreign financial terms payments
or month Total banks Total Total granted effected Total banks Total Total used received operations operations
All countries
 
2007 509,178 162,654 346,524 196,178 150,346 139,842 10,504 650,966 111,543 539,423 404,904 134,519 82,979 51,540
2008 553,465 173,255 380,210 227,055 153,155 140,520 12,635 707,704 147,242 560,462 424,211 136,251 79,980 56,271
2009 593,591 209,729 383,862 240,727 143,135 130,605 12,530 754,355 159,667 594,688 457,468 137,220 80,759 56,461
2010 670,695 242,028 428,667 272,426 156,241 143,032 13,209 804,695 159,601 645,094 498,310 146,784 88,288 58,496
2010          Oct 683,202 252,235 430,967 272,552 158,415 145,453 12,962 781,921 158,873 623,048 478,370 144,678 85,057 59,621
         Nov 691,745 256,099 435,646 275,907 159,739 146,465 13,274 790,855 157,005 633,850 490,909 142,941 84,471 58,470         Dec 670,695 242,028 428,667 272,426 156,241 143,032 13,209 804,695 159,601 645,094 498,310 146,784 88,288 58,496
2011          Jan 690,671 262,346 428,325 274,046 154,279 140,978 13,301 807,638 161,551 646,087 502,425 143,662 84,387 59,275
         Feb 689,862 253,345 436,517 275,156 161,361 148,044 13,317 797,610 156,466 641,144 495,967 145,177 85,043 60,134         Mar 696,403 244,947 451,456 286,702 164,754 151,699 13,055 802,787 151,778 651,009 502,145 148,864 88,337 60,527
Industrial countries 1
 
2007 452,354 160,666 291,688 180,564 111,124 103,104 8,020 590,245 110,291 479,954 384,024 95,930 69,347 26,583
2008 489,430 171,387 318,043 207,807 110,236 101,002 9,234 643,652 145,045 498,607 402,020 96,587 68,148 28,439
2009 531,796 208,571 323,225 220,778 102,447 93,566 8,881 684,984 157,343 527,641 431,525 96,116 68,912 27,204
2010 598,167 240,915 357,252 249,497 107,755 98,428 9,327 723,154 157,032 566,122 464,105 102,017 73,987 28,030
2010          Oct 611,474 251,150 360,324 250,499 109,825 100,639 9,186 701,318 156,477 544,841 445,402 99,439 70,917 28,522
         Nov 618,770 255,037 363,733 252,972 110,761 101,378 9,383 709,900 154,412 555,488 457,039 98,449 70,807 27,642         Dec 598,167 240,915 357,252 249,497 107,755 98,428 9,327 723,154 157,032 566,122 464,105 102,017 73,987 28,030
2011          Jan 618,547 261,226 357,321 250,880 106,441 97,001 9,440 725,638 158,983 566,655 468,599 98,056 69,707 28,349
         Feb 615,968 252,260 363,708 251,747 111,961 102,555 9,406 716,406 153,899 562,507 462,532 99,975 71,262 28,713         Mar 620,348 243,569 376,779 262,884 113,895 104,506 9,389 720,437 149,238 571,199 467,684 103,515 74,105 29,410
EU member states 1
 
2007 364,105 154,644 209,461 127,080 82,381 75,942 6,439 489,234 105,022 384,212 318,769 65,443 46,262 19,181
2008 398,833 164,762 234,071 151,391 82,680 75,192 7,488 536,351 137,208 399,143 331,498 67,645 46,188 21,457
2009 443,431 200,400 243,031 165,986 77,045 70,051 6,994 579,596 141,633 437,963 367,980 69,983 48,977 21,006
2010 494,360 230,746 263,614 184,862 78,752 71,525 7,227 615,655 148,327 467,328 395,566 71,762 50,035 21,727
2010          Oct 507,565 241,041 266,524 185,621 80,903 73,746 7,157 601,915 148,864 453,051 382,610 70,441 48,398 22,043
         Nov 512,954 244,791 268,163 186,970 81,193 73,999 7,194 606,808 146,835 459,973 390,409 69,564 48,192 21,372         Dec 494,360 230,746 263,614 184,862 78,752 71,525 7,227 615,655 148,327 467,328 395,566 71,762 50,035 21,727
2011          Jan 514,651 250,221 264,430 186,587 77,843 70,465 7,378 618,229 151,016 467,213 397,705 69,508 47,397 22,111
         Feb 513,981 242,234 271,747 188,797 82,950 75,582 7,368 611,257 146,864 464,393 392,439 71,954 49,531 22,423         Mar 515,280 232,896 282,384 198,253 84,131 76,842 7,289 613,845 141,104 472,741 398,178 74,563 51,576 22,987
of which:  Euro-area member states 2
 
2007 251,718 118,112 133,606 79,745 53,861 49,537 4,324 367,318 56,632 310,686 269,095 41,591 28,964 12,627
2008 281,518 130,226 151,292 96,968 54,324 49,408 4,916 415,221 81,703 333,518 290,093 43,425 29,768 13,657
2009 321,991 159,740 162,251 114,378 47,873 43,179 4,694 466,064 91,792 374,272 332,280 41,992 28,397 13,595
2010 366,774 184,299 182,475 130,430 52,045 47,239 4,806 494,943 95,687 399,256 351,352 47,904 33,444 14,460
2010          Oct 366,788 183,493 183,295 129,606 53,689 48,902 4,787 479,397 92,637 386,760 339,379 47,381 32,835 14,546
         Nov 372,095 188,272 183,823 129,880 53,943 49,177 4,766 486,352 93,415 392,937 345,919 47,018 32,648 14,370         Dec 366,774 184,299 182,475 130,430 52,045 47,239 4,806 494,943 95,687 399,256 351,352 47,904 33,444 14,460
2011          Jan 381,459 198,108 183,351 130,629 52,722 47,870 4,852 494,333 94,767 399,566 352,951 46,615 31,853 14,762
         Feb 377,720 189,390 188,330 132,081 56,249 51,403 4,846 492,687 94,236 398,451 350,174 48,277 33,248 15,029         Mar 383,310 183,763 199,547 142,592 56,955 52,164 4,791 493,604 90,991 402,613 352,111 50,502 35,014 15,488
Emerging economies and developing countries 3
 
2007 56,824 1,988 54,836 15,614 39,222 36,738 2,484 60,721 1,252 59,469 20,880 38,589 13,632 24,957
2008 64,035 1,868 62,167 19,248 42,919 39,518 3,401 64,052 2,197 61,855 22,191 39,664 11,832 27,832
2009 61,795 1,158 60,637 19,949 40,688 37,039 3,649 69,371 2,324 67,047 25,943 41,104 11,847 29,257
2010 72,528 1,113 71,415 22,929 48,486 44,604 3,882 81,541 2,569 78,972 34,205 44,767 14,301 30,466
2010          Oct 71,728 1,085 70,643 22,053 48,590 44,814 3,776 80,603 2,396 78,207 32,968 45,239 14,140 31,099
         Nov 72,975 1,062 71,913 22,935 48,978 45,087 3,891 80,955 2,593 78,362 33,870 44,492 13,664 30,828         Dec 72,528 1,113 71,415 22,929 48,486 44,604 3,882 81,541 2,569 78,972 34,205 44,767 14,301 30,466
2011          Jan 72,124 1,120 71,004 23,166 47,838 43,977 3,861 82,000 2,568 79,432 33,826 45,606 14,680 30,926
         Feb 73,894 1,085 72,809 23,409 49,400 45,489 3,911 81,204 2,567 78,637 33,435 45,202 13,781 31,421         Mar 76,055 1,378 74,677 23,818 50,859 47,193 3,666 82,350 2,540 79,810 34,461 45,349 14,232 31,117
* Up to and including November 2009 the assets and liabilities vis-à-vis Romania. — 2From January 2007, including Slovenia; from January 2008,
non-residents of households in Germany. The assets and liabilities vis-à-vis including Cyprus and Malta; from January 2009, including Slovakia; fr om
non-residents of banks (MFIs) in Germany are shown in Table 4 of Section IV, January 2011 including Estonia. — 3All countries that are not regarded as
“Banks”. Statistical increases and decreases have not been eliminated; to industrial countries. Up to December 2010 including Niederländische
this extent, the changes in totals are not comparable with the figures Antillen; from January 2011 including Bonaire, St.Eustatius, Saba andshown in Table XI.7. — 1From January 2007, including Bulgaria and Curacao and St.Martin (Dutch part). 
74*XI External sector

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
May 2011
XI External sector
 
11 ECB euro reference exchange rates of selected currencies *
 
 
EUR 1 = currency units ...
Yearly Australia Canada China Denmark Japan Norway Sweden Switzerland United States United Kingdom
or monthly       
average AUD CAD CNY  1 DKK JPY NOK SEK CHF GBP USD
1999 1.6523 1.5840 . 7.4355 121.32 8.3104 8.8075 1.6003 0.65874 1.0658
2000 1.5889 1.3706 2 7.6168 7.4538 99.47 8.1129 8.4452 1.5579 0.60948 0.9236
2001 1.7319 1.3864 7.4131 7.4521 108.68 8.0484 9.2551 1.5105 0.62187 0.8956
2002 1.7376 1.4838 7.8265 7.4305 118.06 7.5086 9.1611 1.4670 0.62883 0.94562003 1.7379 1.5817 9.3626 7.4307 130.97 8.0033 9.1242 1.5212 0.69199 1.13122004 1.6905 1.6167 10.2967 7.4399 134.44 8.3697 9.1243 1.5438 0.67866 1.2439
2005 1.6320 1.5087 10.1955 7.4518 136.85 8.0092 9.2822 1.5483 0.68380 1.2441
2006 1.6668 1.4237 10.0096 7.4591 146.02 8.0472 9.2544 1.5729 0.68173 1.2556
2007 1.6348 1.4678 10.4178 7.4506 161.25 8.0165 9.2501 1.6427 0.68434 1.3705
2008 1.7416 1.5594 10.2236 7.4560 152.45 8.2237 9.6152 1.5874 0.79628 1.47082009 1.7727 1.5850 9.5277 7.4462 130.34 8.7278 10.6191 1.5100 0.89094 1.3948
2010 1.4423 1.3651 8.9712 7.4473 116.24 8.0043 9.5373 1.3803 0.85784 1.3257
2009          Nov 1.6223 1.5805 10.1827 7.4415 132.97 8.4143 10.3331 1.5105 0.89892 1.4914
         Dec 1.6185 1.5397 9.9777 7.4419 131.21 8.4066 10.4085 1.5021 0.89972 1.4614
2010          Jan 1.5624 1.4879 9.7436 7.4424 130.34 8.1817 10.1939 1.4765 0.88305 1.4272
         Feb 1.5434 1.4454 9.3462 7.4440 123.46 8.0971 9.9505 1.4671 0.87604 1.3686
         Mar 1.4882 1.3889 9.2623 7.4416 123.03 8.0369 9.7277 1.4482 0.90160 1.3569
         Apr 1.4463 1.3467 9.1505 7.4428 125.33 7.9323 9.6617 1.4337 0.87456 1.3406
         May 1.4436 1.3060 8.5794 7.4413 115.83 7.8907 9.6641 1.4181 0.85714 1.2565
         June 1.4315 1.2674 8.3245 7.4409 110.99 7.9062 9.5723 1.3767 0.82771 1.2209
         July 1.4586 1.3322 8.6538 7.4522 111.73 8.0201 9.4954 1.3460 0.83566 1.2770
         Aug 1.4337 1.3411 8.7520 7.4495 110.04 7.9325 9.4216 1.3413 0.82363 1.2894
         Sep 1.3943 1.3515 8.8104 7.4476 110.26 7.9156 9.2241 1.3089 0.83987 1.3067
         Oct 1.4164 1.4152 9.2665 7.4567 113.67 8.1110 9.2794 1.3452 0.87638 1.3898
         Nov 1.3813 1.3831 9.0895 7.4547 112.69 8.1463 9.3166 1.3442 0.85510 1.3661
         Dec 1.3304 1.3327 8.7873 7.4528 110.11 7.9020 9.0559 1.2811 0.84813 1.3220
2011          Jan 1.3417 1.3277 8.8154 7.4518 110.38 7.8199 8.9122 1.2779 0.84712 1.3360
         Feb 1.3543 1.3484 8.9842 7.4555 112.77 7.8206 8.7882 1.2974 0.84635 1.3649
         Mar 1.3854 1.3672 9.1902 7.4574 114.40 7.8295 8.8864 1.2867 0.86653 1.3999
         Apr 1.3662 1.3834 9.4274 7.4574 120.42 7.8065 8.9702 1.2977 0.88291 1.4442
*Averages: Bundesbank calculations based on the daily euro reference to March 2005, ECB indicative rates. — 2Average from 13 January to
exchange rates published by the ECB; for additional euro reference 29 December 2000. 
exchange rates, see Statistical Supplement 5 Exchange rate statistics. — 1Up
12 Euro member countries and irrevocable euro conversion rates in the third stage
of European Economic and Monetary Union
From Country Currency ISO currency code EUR 1 = currency units ...
1999  January 1 Austria Austrian schilling ATS 13.7603
Belgium Belgian franc BEF 40.3399
Finland Finnish markka FIM 5.94573
France French franc FRF 6.55957
Germany Deutsche Mark DEM 1.95583Ireland Irish pound IEP 0.787564Italy Italian lira ITL 1,936.27Luxembourg Luxembourg franc LUF 40.3399Netherlands Dutch guilder NLG 2.20371Portugal Portuguese escudo PTE 200.482Spain Spanish peseta ESP 166.386
2001  January 1 Greece Greek drachma GRD 340.7502007  January 1 Slovenia Slovenian tolar SIT 239.6402008  January 1 Cyprus Cyprus pound CYP 0.585274
Malta Maltese lira MTL 0.429300
2009  January 1 Slovakia Slovak koruna SKK 30.1260
2011  January 1 Estonia Estonian kroon EEK 15.6466
75*XI External sector

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
E U R O S Y S T E M
Monthly Report
May 2011
XI  External  sector
 
13  Effective exchange rates of the Euro and indicators of the German economy’s price competitiveness *
 
 
1999 Q1 = 100
Effective exchange rate of the Euro Indicators of the German economy’s price competitiveness
EER-20  1 EER-40  2 Based on the deflators of total sales  3 Based on consumer price indices
24 selected industrial countries  4 In real terms
In real terms based on
In real based on unit In real
24 terms the deflators labour terms Non-
based on of gross costs of based on Euro- euro- selected
36 36 56 consumer domestic national consumer area area industrial
Period Nominal price indices product  3 economy  3 Nominal price indices Total countries countries countries  5 6 countries  4 countries  5 countries  7 
1999 96.2 96.1 95.9 96.5 96.5 95.8 97.7 99.5 95.6 97.6 98.1 98.0 97.7
2000 86.9 86.5 85.9 85.6 87.9 85.8 91.6 97.1 85.1 91.0 92.8 91.9 90.9
2001 87.6 87.2 86.5 84.8 90.4 87.1 91.2 95.9 85.6 90.3 92.9 91.3 90.82002 90.0 90.3 89.5 87.9 94.8 90.7 91.8 95.1 88.1 90.7 93.5 91.9 91.72003 100.6 101.5 100.3 98.3 106.8 101.6 95.1 94.1 96.9 94.3 97.0 96.5 96.72004 104.4 105.3 103.0 102.1 111.4 105.3 95.4 93.0 99.3 94.5 98.4 98.0 98.2
2005 102.9 103.8 101.1 99.8 109.4 102.7 94.1 91.5 98.3 92.4 98.4 96.9 96.5
2006 102.8 103.8 100.4 98.9 109.4 102.0 92.9 89.8 97.7 90.9 98.5 96.4 95.82007 106.4 106.8 102.5 100.9 113.0 104.3 93.8 89.0 101.6 91.3 100.8 97.9 97.12008 110.4 109.9 105.0 104.3 117.9 107.1 94.0 87.4 104.9 91.1 102.4 98.4 97.62009 111.7 110.6 106.0 105.9 120.6 108.0 93.7 87.6 103.7 91.7 102.0 98.5 97.9
2010 104.6 103.0 98.4 98.2 112.3 99.3
p 91.1 p 87.0 97.6 p 88.6 98.9 94.5 p 92.9
2007          Sep 106.8 107.1 113.5 104.6 101.2 98.1 97.3
         Oct 107.9 108.1 114.4 105.2 101.6 98.4 97.5
         Nov 109.4 109.5 104.3 103.1 116.1 106.7 94.2 88.2 103.9 91.5 102.5 99.4 98.5
         Dec 109.5 109.4 116.0 106.3 102.3 99.0 98.0
2008          Jan 110.1 109.9 116.6 106.8 102.4 99.0 98.0
         Feb 109.8 109.2 105.7 104.5 116.4 106.2 94.6 88.0 105.5 91.8 102.5 98.7 97.7         Mar 112.5 112.2 119.8 109.4 103.4 99.9 99.2
         Apr 113.6 113.1 121.2 110.3 103.6 99.8 99.2
         May 113.1 112.7 107.5 107.1 120.4 109.6 95.3 87.5 108.1 92.1 103.6 99.7 99.0         June 112.8 112.5 120.3 109.4 103.5 99.3 98.5
         July 113.0 112.4 120.5 109.4 103.9 99.3 98.6
         Aug 110.8 110.0 105.2 104.9 117.7 106.6 94.3 87.1 106.1 90.9 102.8 98.2 97.1         Sep 109.1 108.3 116.3 105.2 101.9 97.4 96.5
         Oct 105.6 105.0 113.7 102.8 99.8 95.8 95.1
         Nov 104.8 104.3 101.6 100.9 112.9 102.0 92.0 87.1 99.8 89.6 99.8 95.6 94.9         Dec 110.0 109.5 118.7 107.2 101.7 97.9 97.5
2009          Jan 109.8 109.3 118.7 107.1 101.5 97.9 97.5
         Feb 108.7 108.1 104.4 104.3 117.8 106.2 92.6 87.2 101.2 91.0 100.7 97.7 97.4         Mar 111.2 110.3 120.5 108.3 101.7 98.4 98.1
         Apr 110.3 109.5 119.1 107.1 101.6 98.0 97.5
         May 110.9 109.9 105.7 105.3 119.6 107.3 93.6 87.6 103.3 91.7 101.7 98.1 97.5         June 112.0 111.1 120.8 108.4 102.1 98.8 98.2
         July 111.6 110.4 120.6 107.8 102.0 98.4 97.8
         Aug 111.6 110.5 106.2 105.9 120.7 108.0 94.1 87.8 104.4 92.0 102.1 98.5 97.9         Sep 112.9 111.4 122.0 108.8 102.4 98.8 98.3
         Oct 114.2 112.7 123.0 109.6 102.9 99.4 98.7
         Nov 114.0 112.4 107.4 108.0 122.9 109.4 94.5 87.6 106.0 92.3 102.7 99.2 98.5         Dec 113.0 111.2 121.7 108.1 102.4 98.8 98.0
2010          Jan 110.8 109.0 119.2 105.6 101.5 97.6
p 96.5
         Feb 108.0 106.1 102.2 102.5 116.3 102.8 92.6 87.3 101.3 90.2 100.4 96.2 p 95.0
         Mar 107.4 105.8 115.2 102.2 100.4 95.9 p 94.5
         Apr 106.1 104.6 113.5 100.6 99.8 95.1 p 93.5
         May 102.8 101.4 97.2 97.0 109.9 97.5 90.8 87.1 96.6 88.3 98.3 93.7 p 91.9
         June 100.6 99.4 107.7 95.6 97.1 92.6 p 90.8
         July 102.5 101.1 109.9 97.5 97.8 93.5 p 91.8
         Aug 102.1 100.6 96.4 95.7 109.5 97.0 90.2 87.0 95.2 p 87.8 97.6 93.2 p 91.6
         Sep 102.5 100.8 110.0 97.2 97.7 93.2 p 91.6
         Oct 106.0 104.1 113.8 100.3 99.3 94.8 p 93.2
         Nov 104.7 102.7 97.8 97.6 112.5 99.0 p 90.7 p 86.6 97.2 p 88.2 98.9 94.3 p 92.7
         Dec 102.6 100.5 110.1 96.8 97.9 93.3 p 91.6
2011          Jan 102.4 100.3 110.1 96.6 97.8 p 93.0 p 91.4
         Feb 103.4 101.1 ... ... 111.4 97.6 ... ... ... ... 98.3 p 93.5 p 92.0
         Mar 105.2 p 103.0 113.2 p 99.4 p 98.9 p 94.3 p 92.7
         Apr 107.0 p 104.9 115.0 p 101.0 p 99.7 p 94.9 p 93.4
*The effective exchange rate corresponds to the weighted external value of Includes countries belonging to the EER-20 group (see footnote 1) and
the currency concerned. The method of calculating the indicators of the additional Algeria, Argentina, Brazil, Chile, Croatia, Iceland, India,
German economy’s price competitiveness is consistent with the procedure Indonesia, Israel, Malaysia, Mexico, Morocco, New Zealand, Philippines,used by the ECB to compute the effective exchange rates of the euro (see Russian Federation, South Africa, Taiwan, Thailand, Turkey andMonthly Report, November 2001, pp  50-53, May 2007, pp  31-35, May 2008, Venezuela. — 3Annual and quarterly averages. — 4Euro-area countries
p  40 and November 2010, pp  44-45). For details of the methodology see (from 2001 including Greece, from 2007 including Slovenia, from 2008the ECB’s Occasional Paper No  2 (www.ecb.int). A decline in the figures including Cyprus and Malta, from 2009 including Slovakia, from 2011implies an increase in competitiveness. — 1ECB calculations are based on including Estonia) as well as Canada, Denmark, Japan, Norway, Sweden,
the weighted averages of the changes in the bilateral exchange rates of the Switzerland, United Kingdom and United States. — 5Euro-area countries
euro against the currencies of the following countries: Australia, Bulgaria, Ca- and countries belonging to the EER-20 group. — 6Owing to missing data
nada, China, Czech Republic, Denmark, Hong Kong, Hungary, Japan, Latvia, for the deflator of total sales, China is not included in this calculation. —Lithuania, Norway, Poland, Romania, Singapore, South Korea, Sweden, 7Euro-area countries and countries belonging to the EER-40 group (see
Switzerland, United Kingdom and United States. Where price and wage footnote 2). indices were not available, estimates were used. — 2ECB calculations.
76*XI  External sector

Overview of
publications
by the Deutsche
BundesbankThis overview provides information
about selected recent economic and
statistical publications by the Deutsche
Bundesbank. Unless otherwise indi-
cated, these publications are available
in both English and German, in printed
form and on the Bundesbank’s web-
site.
The publications are available free of
charge from the Communication Div-
ision. For a small fee to cover costs, a
file which is updated monthly and
contains approximately 40,000 time
series published by the Bundesbank
can be obtained on CD-ROM from the
Division Statistical data processing,
mathematical methods or downloaded
from the Bundesbank-ExtraNet site.
Orders should be sent, in writing, to
one of the addresses listed on the re-
verse of the title page. Selected time
series can also be downloaded from
the internet.
Annual Report
Financial Stability Review
Monthly Report
For information on the articles published between
2000 and 2010 see the index attached to the Janu-
ary 2011 Monthly Report.
77*DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
May 2011

Monthly Report articles
June 2010
– Outlook for the German economy – macro-
economic projections for 2010 and 2011
– Uncertainty of macroeconomic forecasts
– Extended investment cycle with stable prices:
supply and demand in the German housing
market from a longer-term perspective
– The whole and its parts: problems with the
aggregation of seasonally adjusted data
July 2010
– On the problems of macroeconomic imbal-
ances in the euro area
– Nominal and real exchange rate movements
during the financial crisis
– Deutsche Bundesbank Spring Conference
2010 – International risk sharing and global
imbalances
August 2010
– The current economic situation in Germany
September 2010
– The performance of German credit institutions
in 2009
– The Act Modernising Accounting Law from a
banking supervision perspective
– Supervisory disclosure under Pillar 3 of BaselII
October 2010
– Germany in the financial and economic crisis
November 2010
– The current economic situation in GermanyDecember 2010
– Outlook for the German economy – macro-
economic projections for 2011 and 2012
– German enterprises’ profitability and financing
in 2009
– Development, information content and regula-
tion of the market for credit default swaps
January 2011
– The banknote cycle and banknote recycling in
Germany
– Foreign demand for euro banknotes issued in
Germany
– Investor behaviour in theory and practice
– Requirements regarding the cyclical adjust-
ment procedure under the new debt rule
February 2011
– The current economic situation in Germany
March 2011
– German balance of payments in 2010
– Approaches to the measurement and macro-
prudential treatment of systemic risk
– The implications of the financial crisis
for monetary policy
April 2011
– Effective exchange rates from financial market
data
– The US labour market in the current cycle
– European Council decisions on the prevention
and resolution of future sovereign debt crises
May 2011
– The current economic situation in Germany
78*DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
EUROSYSTEM
Monthly Report
May 2011

Statistical Supplements to the
Monthly Report
1 Banking statistics1, 2
2 Capital market statistics1, 2
3 Balance of payments statistics1, 2
4 Seasonally adjusted business statistics1, 2
5 Exchange rate statistics2
Special Publications
Makro-ökonometrisches Mehr-Länder-Modell,
November 19963
Europäische Organisationen und Gremien im Be-
reich von Währung und Wirtschaft, May 19973
Die Zahlungsbilanz der ehemaligen DDR 1975 bis
1989, August 19993
The market for German Federal securities,
May 2000
Macro-Econometric Multi-Country Model: MEMMOD,
June 2000
Bundesbank Act, September 2002
Weltweite Organisationen und Gremien im Bereich
von Währung und Wirtschaft, March 20033
Die Europäische Union: Grundlagen und Politik-
bereiche außerhalb der Wirtschafts- und Wäh-
rungsunion, April 20053
Die Deutsche Bundesbank – Aufgabenfelder,
rechtlicher Rahmen, Geschichte, April 20063
European economic and monetary union,
April 2008
Special Statistical Publications*o
1 Banking statistics guidelines and customer clas-
sification, July 200822 Bankenstatistik Kundensystematik Firmenver-
zeichnisse, March 20112, 3
3 Aufbau der bankstatistischen Tabellen,
July 20082, 3
4 Financial accounts for Germany 1991 to 2009,
June 20102
5 Extrapolated results from financial statements
of German enterprises 1994 to 2003, March
20062
6 Verhältniszahlen aus Jahresabschlüssen deut-
scher Unternehmen von 2007 bis 2008, March
20112, 3
7 Notes on the coding list for the balance of pay-
ments statistics, March 20092
8 The balance of payments statistics of the Fed-
eral Republic of Germany, 2nd edition,
February 1991o
9 Securities deposits,
August 2005
10 Foreign direct investment stock statistics,
April 20111, 2
11 Balance of payments by region,
August 20102
12 Technologische Dienstleistungen in der Zah-
lungsbilanz, June 20083
79*DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
May 2011
1Only the headings and explanatory notes to the data
contained in the German originals are available in English.
2Available on the website only.
3Available in German only.*Unless stated otherwise, these publications are avail-
able on the Bundesbank’s website in German and Eng-
lish.
oNot available on the website.

80*DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
EUROSYSTEM
Monthly Report
May 2011
Discussion Papers*
Series 1
Economic Studies
01/2011
Long-run growth expectations and „global imbal-
ances“
02/2011
Robust monetary policy in a New Keynesian model
with imperfect interest rate pass-through
03/2011
The impact of fiscal policy on economic activity
over the business cycle – evidence from a threshold
VAR analysis
04/2011
Classical time-varying FAVAR models – estimation,
forecasting and structural analysis
05/2011
The changing international transmission of finan-
cial shocks: evidence from a classical time-varying
FAVAR
06/2011
FiMod – a DSGE model for fiscal policy simulations
07/2011
Portfolio holdings in the euro area – home bias
and the role of international, domestic and sector-
specific factors
08/2011
Seasonality in house prices
09/2011
The third pillar in Europe: institutional factors and
individual decisions
10/2011
In search for yield? Survey-based evidence on bank
risk taking
11/2011
Fatigue in payment diaries – empirical evidence
from GermanySeries 2
Banking and Financial Studies
03/2011
Do capital buffers mitigate volatility of bank lend-
ing? A simulation study
04/2011
The price impact of leading relationships
05/2011
Does modeling framework matter? A comparative
study of structural and reduced-form models
06/2011
Contagion at the interbank market with stochastic
LGD
07/2011
The two-sided effect of financial globalization on
output volatility
08/2011
Systemic risk contributions: a credit portfolio ap-
proach
Banking legislation
1 Bundesbank Act and Statute of the European
System of Central Banks and of the European
Central Bank, June 1998
2 Gesetz über das Kreditwesen, February 20093
2a Solvabilitäts- und Liquiditätsverordnung, Feb-
ruary 20083
*Discussion Papers which appeared from 2000 onwards
are available on the website.
For footnotes, see p 79*.

