Monthly Report
May 2012
Vol 64  
No 5

Deutsche Bundesbank  
Wilhelm-Epstein-Strasse 14  
60431 Frankfurt am Main  
Germany
Postal address  
Postfach 10 06 02  
60006 Frankfurt am Main  
Germany
Tel +49 69 9566-0
Fax +49 69 9566 3077
Telex 41227 within Germany  
 414431 from abroad
http://www.bundesbank.de
Reproduction permitted only if source is stated.
ISSN 0418-8292 (print edition)  
ISSN 1862-1325 (online edition)
The German original of this Monthly Report  
went to press at 4.30 pm on 21 May 2012.Annual and weekly publishing schedules for 
 selected statistics of the Deutsche Bundes-  
bank can be downloaded from our website. 
The statistical data are also published on the 
website.
The Monthly Report  is published by the 
 Deutsche Bundesbank, Frankfurt am Main,  
by virtue of section  18 of the Bundesbank  
Act. It is available to interested parties free of 
charge.
This is a translation of the original German -
language version, which is the sole authorita -
tive text.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2012  
2

Contents
The current economic situation in Germany  ................................................  5
Overview  ........................................................................................................................  6
Global and European setting  ..................................................................................  11
Have the business cycles of emerging economies decoupled from those of advanced 
economies?  ........................................................................................................................  12
The decline in labour force participation in the USA  ...........................................................  19
Monetary policy and banking business  ..............................................................  25
Money market management and liquidity needs  ................................................................  26
Substantial government bond purchases by Eurosystem and commercial banks  .................  32
Financial markets  ........................................................................................................  39
Economic conditions in Germany  .........................................................................  47
Public finances  .............................................................................................................  57
Fiscal developments in the euro area  ..................................................................................  60Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2012  
3

Statistical Section ....................................................................................................  1•
Key economic data for the euro area  ..................................................................................  5•
Overall monetary survey in the euro area  ............................................................................  8•
Consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem  ............................................................  16•
Banks  ..................................................................................................................................  20•
Minimum reserves  ...............................................................................................................  42•
Interest rates  .......................................................................................................................  43•
Capital market  ....................................................................................................................  48•
Financial accounts  ...............................................................................................................  52•
Public finances in Germany  .................................................................................................  54•
Economic conditions in Germany  ........................................................................................  61•
External sector  ....................................................................................................................  68•
Overview of publications by the Deutsche Bundesbank  ..........................  77•
Abbreviations and symbols
e Estimated
p Provisional
pe Partly estimated
r Revised
… Data available at a later date
. Data unknown, not to be published or not meaningful
0 Less than 0.5 but more than nil
– Nil
Discrepancies in the totals are due to rounding.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2012  
4

The current economic situation  
in GermanyDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2012  
5

German economy robust in 
difficult European setting
The global economy accelerated somewhat at 
the beginning of 2012 although the strong rise 
in oil prices acted as a brake. Overall, global 
industrial output picked up appreciably in the 
first two months of the year as compared with 
the last quarter of 2011, when it had risen only 
slightly. Global trade, which had stagnated in 
the final quarter of 2011, likewise grew at a 
brisk rate. Macroeconomic momentum was 
higher in the emerging market economies than 
in the advanced economies, so that the de -
coupling of trend growth between the emer -
ging market economies and the industrial 
countries that has been in evidence since the 
mid-1990s continued. Whereas the US econ -
omy remained on a sound expansion path, the 
euro-area economy continued to stagnate. 
While the negative confidence effects emanat -
ing from the nervous financial markets on ac -
count of the sovereign debt crisis, which per -
sisted at the end of 2011, have since diminished 
somewhat, renewed uncertainty has arisen in 
recent weeks.
The global economy could pick up speed as the 
year progresses. This is suggested by easing 
pressure from the oil markets. Moreover, mon -
etary policy in the industrial countries still has 
an exceptionally expansionary stance, and sev -
eral emerging market economies have now 
also loosened their policy stance perceptibly. 
Nonetheless, the global economic revival re -
mains fragile and is exposed to non-negligible 
downside risks. For instance, an intensification 
of the Iran conflict could drive up oil prices dra -
matically and thereby undermine the as yet 
muted expansionary forces. In addition, uncer -
tainty on the financial markets remains high, 
particularly with regard to developments in 
Greece. However, there are also opportunities. 
For example, the pace of economic activity in the emerging markets and in the United States 
could well exceed widely held expectations.
Given the resumption in global economic 
growth and the exceptionally expansionary 
monetary policy stance worldwide, the situa -
tion on the financial markets eased on balance 
in the first few months of this year. As the 
“flight” into safe-haven investments let up, 
stock market prices picked up appreciably and 
intra-euro-area yield differentials narrowed per -
ceptibly. European credit institutions were 
among the main beneficiaries as their funding 
conditions improved sharply at times, probably 
in part thanks to the crisis resolution decisions 
at the European level and the Eurosystem’s 
three-year refinancing operations. However, 
from April the situation deteriorated noticeably 
again. Alongside less favourable economic indi -
cators in some countries, this was prompted 
chiefly by concerns about the future of Greece 
and developments in Spain.
Inflation forecasts for 2012 were revised sharply 
upwards as this report went to press, mainly to 
take account of the resurgence in crude oil 
prices. However, the Governing Council of the 
ECB believes that inflation will return to a level 
compatible with price stability over the policy-
relevant horizon. Moreover, inflation expect -
ations are firmly anchored. This view is also 
borne out by the still muted underlying pace of 
monetary expansion and the trend in credit 
growth. Against this backdrop, the Governing 
Council of the ECB left its policy rates un -
changed.
The key requirement going forward is that the 
macroeconomic adjustment processes in the 
euro-area countries are compatible with price 
stability for the euro area as a whole and leave 
long-term inflation expectations broadly an -
chored. As in the preceding years, individual 
countries will report above-average or below-
average rates of price increase. While countries Global economy Financial 
 markets
Monetary policyOverviewDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2012  
6

requiring extensive structural reforms and those 
that have experienced excessive wage and 
price increases in the past will post below-
average inflation owing to the necessary cor -
rections, countries with low unemployment 
and favourable economic prospects – probably 
including Germany – will likely report margin -
ally higher-than-average rates of price increase 
at times. After the impact of raising indirect 
taxes is factored out, inflation is already well 
below average in the programme countries 
Greece and Portugal.
In terms of monetary policy, the reporting 
period was characterised by the implementa -
tion of the non-standard measures that the 
ECB Governing Council agreed on in December 
2011. In particular, the additional funding pro -
vided by the Eurosystem through its three-year 
longer-term refinancing operations and the im -
plementation of the measures adopted by the 
ECB Governing Council in the fourth quarter of 
2011 contributed to a more relaxed financing 
situation for banks in the euro area overall. 
However, the worsening state of the financial 
markets that has been in evidence since April 
again clearly demonstrates that the Eurosys -
tem’s measures could well turn out to be in -
effective if confidence in sustainable develop -
ments in individual countries, which monetary 
policymakers are unable to guarantee, deterio -
rates. The non-standard monetary policy meas -
ures themselves are also associated with risks 
and problems, especially if they extend beyond 
bridging short-term liquidity problems. For in -
stance, they potentially distort competition in 
the banking sector, and there is a danger that 
necessary structural reforms and adjustments 
both in fiscal policy and in the financial sector 
may be delayed or even prevented. The grow -
ing interconnectedness between the national 
banking system and public finances in several 
countries (not least in connection with banks’ 
increasing purchases of government bonds) 
runs counter to the fundamental goal of reduc -
ing systemic risks. It will be crucial to contain 
risks arising from monetary policy operations 
and phase out the non-standard measures in the future. Monetary policy and fiscal policy 
must remain segregated.
Current developments in Greece are extremely 
worrying. Greece is threatening not to imple -
ment the reform and consolidation measures 
that were agreed in return for the large-scale 
aid programmes. This jeopardises the con -
tinued provision of assistance. Greece would 
have to bear the consequences of such a scen -
ario. The challenges this would create for the 
euro area and Germany would be considerable, 
but manageable given prudent crisis manage -
ment. By contrast, a significant dilution of exist -
ing agreements would damage confidence in 
all euro-area agreements and treaties and 
strongly weaken incentives for national reform 
and consolidation measures. In such circum -
stances the institutional status quo  comprising 
liability, control and individual responsibility of 
member states would be fundamentally called 
into question.
When the Eurosystem provided Greece with 
large amounts of liquidity, it trusted that the 
programmes would be implemented and 
thereby ultimately assumed considerable risks. 
In the light of the current situation, it should 
not significantly increase these risks. Instead, 
the parliaments and governments of the mem -
ber states should decide on the manner in 
which any further financial assistance is pro -
vided and therefore whether the associated 
risks should be assumed.
The German economy managed to pull out of 
the lull in which it found itself at the end of last 
year and return to positive growth rates. Fol -
lowing a slight drop in economic output in the 
fourth quarter of 2011, seasonally and calendar-
adjusted real gross domestic product (GDP) 
rose by 0.5% on the preceding three months in 
the first quarter of 2012, according to the flash 
estimate produced by the Federal Statistical Of -
fice. The fact that expansionary forces retained 
the upper hand, despite the difficult situation in 
several euro-area partner countries, attests to 
the robust state of the German economy. Al -Current develop-
ments in Greece
GermanyDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2012  
7

though the temporary slowdown in the pace 
of economic growth noticeably dented enter -
prises’ investment, construction demand re -
mained essentially strong. Moreover, private 
consumption probably picked up again after 
the turn of the year. The expansionary monet -
ary policy stance will likewise have an increas -
ing effect. Nonetheless, the surprisingly strong 
GDP outturn probably overstates the prevailing 
underlying cyclical trend and cannot simply be 
projected forward over the coming quarters.
Exports rose over the reporting period in sea -
sonally adjusted terms, after failing to record 
quarter-on-quarter growth at the end of 2011 
for the first time since the current upturn 
began. The increase in goods exports in the 
first two months of 2012 was attributable in 
equal measure to euro-area and non-euro-area 
countries. However, demand from Germany’s 
euro-area partner countries is currently rela -
tively weak. Seasonally adjusted imports in the 
first three months of this year may have re -
mained at their prior-quarter level in real terms, 
with the German economy’s import demand 
vis-à-vis the euro-area partner countries hold -
ing up slightly better overall than vis-à-vis non-
euro-area countries. The comparatively robust 
German economy is therefore having some -
what of a stabilising influence on the other 
euro-area countries. The share of the current 
account surplus that is attributable to the euro-
area partner countries has tended to decline 
continuously since 2009.
Production can be expanded in the near future 
without a pressing need for investment in extra 
capacity. Unlike the less dynamic outlook for in -
vestment in machinery and equipment, the 
prospects for construction investment remain 
exceptionally buoyant. This is attributable not 
only to temporary weather-related catching-up 
effects, but also to overall robust domestic de -
mand, which is increasingly supporting the 
German economy.
Private consumption appears to have risen 
slightly in the early part of this year after declin -ing in the fourth quarter of 2011. Surveys show 
that retail business improved dramatically dur -
ing the initial part of 2012. Moreover, economic 
optimism among consumers has picked up 
again following the pronounced uncertainty at 
the middle of last year. Income expectations, 
too, have remained largely stable.
The favourable setting for private consumption 
is also being buoyed not least by the ongoing 
robust labour market situation. The positive la -
bour market development continued in Ger -
many during the winter. In the first quarter of 
2012, the number of persons in work in Ger -
many again rose markedly on the quarter. The 
increase, in turn, probably relates largely to 
additional regular jobs subject to social security 
contributions. The reduction in unemployment 
has, for some time, lagged the increase in em -
ployment in terms of numbers. This suggests 
that the additional demand for labour is being 
decreasingly covered from the reserve pool of 
unemployed. First, vacancies are increasingly 
being filled by persons in the latent labour 
force, which pushes up labour force participa -
tion. Second, there is growing immigration 
from abroad. The outlook for the labour mar -
ket remains positive, although the available 
leading indicators suggest that growth will 
slow in the immediate future.
Given this labour market situation, consider -
able wage increases look likely in this year’s pay 
round. This is indicated not only by the trade 
unions’ high wage demands but also by the 
wage agreements that have been reached to 
date.
Current price developments are being decisively 
influenced by external factors. For instance, the 
distinctly stronger inflationary pressure across 
all stages of the economy at the beginning of 
2012 can largely be attributed to the sharp rise 
in crude oil prices and the noticeable revival in 
the global economy, while the marked weak -
ening of the euro since last summer also played 
a role. Consumer prices even rose slightly more 
sharply in the first quarter of 2012 than in the Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2012  
8

fourth quarter of 2011. Sharply higher crude oil 
prices significantly drove up prices for petrol -
eum products especially, while gas and electri -
city rates were also raised.
The economic upturn could essentially remain 
in place in Germany during the second quarter. 
Industry will, however, probably only make a 
comparatively small contribution to this, as the 
stimuli from non-euro-area countries have, to 
date, been insufficient to lift production levels 
above normal utilisation given the further wan -
ing demand from the euro area. This also limits 
the degree to which investment could act as a 
rapid catalyst of economic expansion. By con -
trast, construction is likely to make a significant 
contribution to growth, and consumption, too, 
could pick up further. The exceptionally strong 
dynamics in the construction sector are, more -
over, having a knock-on effect on other areas 
of the economy.
After falling significantly to 1% in 2011, the 
general government deficit ratio in Germany 
looks set to record just a limited decline this 
year. The cyclical situation is unlikely to have a 
perceptible impact, as the macroeconomic ag -
gregates that are particularly relevant to gov -
ernment revenue and expenditure are proving 
relatively stable. There are likely to be structural 
improvements, in particular as a result of on -
going muted growth in pension payments and 
a continued drop in structural unemployment 
and in interest spending as a result of favour -
able funding conditions. The debt ratio, by 
contrast, could start to rise again, having fallen 
perceptibly to 81.2% by end-2011. Govern -
ment debt is on the rise as a result of aid for 
euro-area states and the debt-financing of the 
capital transferred to the European Stability 
Mechanism (ESM). In addition, support for Ger -
man financial institutions could be associated 
with a renewed transfer of liabilities and assets 
to the government sector.
In April, the German government presented its 
updated stability programme. The fact that it 
met the reference figure for the deficit ratio in 2011, ie two years before the deadline set in 
the excessive deficit procedure, is welcome, 
but also appropriate given the favourable eco -
nomic conditions. The Stability and Growth 
Pact additionally obligates general government 
to achieve and maintain a structurally close-to-
balance budget or a surplus. According to the 
German government’s budget plans, it is likely 
to meet the medium-term budget target it has 
set itself of a structural deficit ratio of at most 
0.5% of GDP , although this is largely due to the 
temporary high surpluses run up by the social 
security funds. However, the objective of 0.5% 
of GDP is not ambitious given the foreseeable 
demographic trends and the high government 
debt ratio.
The recently introduced national fiscal frame -
work enshrined the goal of achieving a (struc -
turally close-to) balanced budget in the consti -
tution as the strict borrowing limit for both 
central government and the state govern -
ments. Deviations are normally allowed during 
the current year at most. The resulting debt is 
additionally limited and must, where necessary, 
be reduced in line with a rule-bound path. The 
familiar estimation uncertainties associated 
with budget forecasting mean that it is recom -
mendable for central and state government to 
plan to achieve a budget surplus as a general 
rule so as to avoid having to make adjustments 
at short notice and with a procyclical impact. It 
is crucial, not least given the demographic chal -
lenges ahead and the considerable risks relat -
ing to the sovereign debt crisis, to rapidly re -
duce the debt ratio, which is very high and has 
grown almost incessantly. Against this back -
drop, the German government’s plans to meet 
the stipulations of the debt brake, which apply 
from 2016, from as early as 2014 are to be wel -
comed. It is problematic, however, that the 
original consolidation agreements were di -
luted, and the currently favourable environ -
ment will therefore not be fully used to reduce 
the central, state and local government deficits 
faster.Public financesDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2012  
9

In the light of all this, calls on German fiscal 
policymakers to loosen their fiscal policy stance 
in order to stimulate the economy appear in -
appropriate. A cyclical recovery is being fore -
cast for Germany in general, and the automatic 
stabilisers would be better suited to cushion an 
unexpected economic slowdown. Moreover, 
the impact of a German stimulus programme 
on demand in the European peripheral states 
would be very limited. Sound public finances 
and rigorous compliance with budgetary rules 
in Germany are, not least, a key stability anchor 
in the European sovereign debt crisis. Stability-oriented budgetary rules and confidence in 
their compliance are imperative, particularly for 
the extensive and extended consolidation pro -
cesses needed in several euro-area states. At -
tempting to kick-start the economy in the short 
term and putting off consolidation efforts to 
the long term are not conducive to regaining 
lost confidence. The key need, rather, is to rig -
orously implement growth-oriented structural 
reforms in Germany and the other euro-area 
states without jeopardising budgetary object -
ives.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2012  
10

World economic activity
The global economy accelerated somewhat at 
the beginning of 2012, although the strong rise 
in oil prices acted as a brake. A key factor be -
hind the accelerated pace was stronger eco -
nomic growth in Japan and a number of emer -
ging market economies. In addition, economic 
activity in Thailand returned to normal after se -
vere flooding had brought the local economy 
to a virtual standstill in the final quarter of 2011 
and caused output losses in other countries as 
well. In seasonally adjusted terms, industrial 
output in Thailand in the first quarter of 2012 
rose by no less than 39% quarter-on-quarter 
and in March was only 11% below pre-flooding 
levels.1 After a weak start to the year, the Chi -
nese economy was able to make up ground; 
however, average growth was not any stronger 
than in previous quarters. While real gross do -
mestic product (GDP) in the United States 
maintained solid growth, the euro-area econ -
omy continued to stagnate. The negative con -
fidence effects still emanating at the end of 
2011 from the nervous financial markets on ac -
count of the sovereign debt crisis appear to 
have diminished somewhat. Overall, global in -
dustrial output picked up appreciably by a sea -
sonally adjusted 1¾% in the first two months 
of the year as compared with the last quarter 
of 2011, in which it had risen by only ½%. 
Global trade, which had stagnated in the final 
quarter of 2011, grew at a similar rate at the 
beginning of the year.
At an initially estimated ½% after seasonal ad -
justment, real GDP growth in the major indus -
trial countries – the United States, Japan, the 
United Kingdom and the euro area – as a 
whole was slightly higher than in the final quar -
ter of 2011. It rose by 1¼% on the year. Growth 
in aggregate output in the emerging market 
economies, which Bundesbank autumn 2011 
estimates put at 1% after seasonal adjustment 
and thus at its weakest level since the major financial and economic crisis, gained consider -
able momentum over the first quarter of 2012 
and has even reached average rates in the most 
recent cycle. The fact that momentum in emer -
ging market economies is higher than in indus -
trial countries is consistent with the decoupling 
of trend growth between these two groups of 
countries that has been in evidence since the 
mid-1990s (see the box on pages 12 to 14).
The global economy could pick up speed as the 
year progresses. This is suggested by easing 
pressure from the oil markets. In addition, the 
ifo indicator for the world economic climate 
improved again in the second quarter and is 
now only slightly below its long-term average. 
Moreover, monetary policy in the industrial 
countries is still exceptionally expansionary, and 
several emerging market economies have now 
also further loosened their policy stance. None -
theless, the global economic revival remains 
fragile and is exposed to non-negligible down -
side risks. For instance, an intensification of the 
Iran conflict could drive up oil prices dramatic -
ally and thereby undermine the as yet muted 
expansionary forces. However, there are also 
opportunities. For example, the pace of eco -
nomic activity in the emerging markets and in 
the United States could well exceed widely held 
expectations.
Given the global economy’s rather buoyant 
start to the year, the IMF increased its growth 
forecast slightly to 3.5% for 2012 and 4.1% for 
2013, following a significant downward revi -
sion in January. This would put projected 
growth in 2013 well ahead of the average 
growth rate of the last cycle. The forecast for 
real world trade growth was raised by the same 
scale to 4.0% and 5.6%, respectively. Further -
more, on the whole, the rather cautious revi -Slight pick-up in 
world economic activity at start of year
Acceleration  
of GDP growth 
in industrial 
countries and emerging mar-ket economiesMomentum  
set to increase 
further
Upward revision 
of IMF growth and inflation forecast in AprilGlobal and European setting
1 At 1%, Thailand’s share in global industrial output is ra -
ther low; nevertheless, such a sharp change does result in 
a sizeable contribution to global economic growth of just 
under ½ percentage point.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2012  
11

Have the business cycles of emerging economies decoupled 
from those of advanced economies?
In international business cycle develop-
ments, for many years it was taken as read 
that “when the US economy sneezes, the 
rest of the world catches a cold”. The 
United States, together with the other ad-
vanced economies, did indeed set the pace for international economic developments in the second half of the twentieth century. At fi  rst glance, the global economic downturn following the recent fi  nancial and economic 
crisis would seem to fi  t this pattern. How-
ever, closer inspection reveals that the ad-
vanced economies experienced a more se-
vere slump than the group of emerging economies. In addition, a strong upswing had already begun in early 2009 in the major emerging economies, most notably China, whereas the recovery in many ad-
vanced economies was tentative or ground 
to a halt after a relatively short period of time, as was the case in some euro-area countries in the fi  nal quarter of 2011 and 
the fi  rst quarter of 2012. This two-speed re-covery is cited as evidence backing the “de-
coupling hypothesis”, which states that 
emerging economies’ business cycles have 
become more independent of those of the 
advanced economies. This hypothesis does 
not by any means seek to deny that crises in 
the United States or the advanced econ-
omies as a whole usually have an impact on 
the emerging economies. The term “de-
coupling” is therefore understood to mean 
a loosening, not a full elimination, of the 
relationship between the business cycles.1
Increasing globalisation, involving ever-
closer economic integration between ad-
vanced and emerging economies, is often 
put forward as an argument against the val-
idity of the decoupling hypothesis. Yet de-
coupling and globalisation are not mutually exclusive: decoupling by emerging econ-
omies can go hand in hand with growing 
integration within their group of countries. There are signs, for instance, that China has become an engine of growth in South East Asia and is making increasing use of supply 
chains involving its neighbouring countries 
in particular. As China’s economic power 
has grown, these countries appear to have 
increasingly aligned themselves with their dynamic neighbour. One indication of this change is that the four large euro-area economies (Germany, France, Italy and Spain) have increased their foreign trade with China very sharply in the past few years, while growth in their foreign trade 
with other countries in South East Asia has been very subdued.
2
Comparing growth rates in the advanced 
economies with those in the emerging and 
developing economies is a good starting point for investigating whether emerging economies might have decoupled. Particu-
larly since 2000, growth rates in these two 
groups of countries have moved almost en-tirely in the same direction, whereas in some 
previous phases they moved in completely opposite directions. In addition, growth 
rates in the emerging and developing econ-omies were mostly close to those in the ad-
vanced economies until the mid-1990s, when the difference in levels of growth began to widen increasingly. However, the 
1 See IMF, Does Slow Growth in Advanced Economies 
Necessarily Imply Slow Growth in Emerging Econ-
omies?, World Economic Outlook, October 2010, 
pp 13-15.2 See Deutsche Bundesbank, Developments in the ex-ports of the four largest euro-area member states since 
the launch of monetary union, Monthly Report, July 
2011, pp 15-34.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2012  
12

the two country groups (amplitude decoup-
ling).4
No signifi  cant path decoupling or ampli-tude decoupling can be identifi  ed in the past 30 years. Nor, though, has co-
movement between the business cycles of 
the advanced and emerging economies 
under analysis generally increased. Instead, 
recessions seem to coincide with greater 
co-movement between the business cycles 
and fewer growth gaps than periods of re-
covery. Unlike in previous recessions, how-
ever, the BIC countries were sometimes 
able to decouple signifi  cantly from the ad-
vanced economies during the 2008-2009 
economic crisis according to both measures of business cycle decoupling.
One explanation for this could be that, prior 
to the most recent recession, the emerging 
economies were better equipped to deal 
with external crisis effects than most of the 
advanced economies,5 as the emerging 
economies’ relatively large foreign currency reserves would suggest. Furthermore, fi  nan-cial institutions in Asia had become consid-erably more resilient as a result of the Asian 
crisis and, unlike many banks in the ad-vanced economies, had little exposure to 
risky assets. Above all, most emerging econ-
omies also had greater fi  scal policy leeway 
to take economic stabilisation measures during the crisis because their fi  scal pos-
itions were comparatively strong before its 
onset. Notably, China’s immense economic 
stimulus programme provided substantial 
support not only domestically but also for 
the world economy. There is also a theory 
that the recent economic slump in the ad-
vanced economies did not hit foreign trade 
between the emerging economies as hard 
as earlier recessions.
There are two caveats to this explanation, 
however. Firstly, only Asia, Latin America and Africa experienced a more moderate slump in foreign trade; in the CIS and the 
new EU member states in central and east-
ern Europe it was actually sharper than in 
the advanced economies. Secondly, China’s 
pivotal role must also be borne in mind; its 
still very rigid capital controls largely im-
munised it against contagion from the US fi  nancial market, and this proved to be a 
clear advantage in the recent fi  nancial crisis.
All in all, there has been a very clear trend 
decoupling between emerging and ad-
vanced economies since the mid-1990s. By 
contrast, it seems that business cycle de-
coupling tends to occur in periods of recov-ery. Downturns usually entail strong conta-
gion from advanced economies to emer-ging economies, although the group of emerging economies has remained rela-
tively unscathed by the most recent crisis.
4 We use a modifi  ed form of the Pearson correlation 
coeffi   cient as a measure of path decoupling and model 
amplitude decoupling using the absolute difference 
between the z-scores of the growth rates. This ap-proach is based on J Yetman, Exporting recessions: International links and the business cycle, Economics 
Letters, 110, pp 12-14, 2011.
5 See IMF, How Did Emerging Markets Cope in the 
Crisis?, Strategy, Policy, and Review Department, 2010.BIC countries (Brazil, India and China), the 
most important emerging economies,3 were 
already recording much higher growth rates 
than the advanced economies in the 1980s.
This box discusses both trend decoupling, ie 
decoupling of long-term growth trends, 
and business cycle decoupling, which fo-
cuses on short to medium-term deviations 
in the business cycle. As including a larger 
group of countries is unlikely to noticeably 
improve our fi  ndings, our analysis focuses 
on the BIC countries and the G7. The adja-
cent chart clearly illustrates that growth rates in the G7 are extremely similar to those for the advanced economies as a 
whole and that the rates for the BIC coun-
tries have been correlated closely with those of the emerging and developing 
economies since the mid-1990s at least.
To model a possible trend decoupling be-
tween the two groups, we decompose the 
GDP growth rates of both aggregates into 
trend and cyclical components using an HP 
fi  lter. From 1980 to the mid-1990s, the trend growth rates for the two groups of 
countries largely co-moved and the growth 
rates for the BIC countries were, on aver-age, just over 3 percentage points above 
those for the G7. From 2000, growth in the 
BIC countries gained substantial momen-
tum while the G7’s trend growth declined, 
increasing the difference between the two 
groups’ growth rates to more than 8 per-centage points by 2010. This indicates a clear trend decoupling between the BIC countries and the G7, which is primarily down to increased market liberalisation in 
the emerging economies and their intensi-
fi  ed involvement in global trade. Moreover, 
most emerging economies are benefi  ting greatly from population growth and are generating far stronger output growth in the still ongoing recovery than advanced economies, which operate at the forefront 
of technology.
Business cycle decoupling is more complex 
than trend decoupling. A decoupling of 
business cycles can be understood to mean highly asynchronous growth rates irrespect-
ive of the level of the business cycle com-
ponents (path decoupling) or, alternatively, 
a widening of cyclical growth gaps between 
3 As IMF data for Russia’s GDP growth are only avail-
able from 1993 onwards, we do not look at the BRIC group, which is often the subject of analysis.Comparison of economic growth in selected country groups
1 According to IMF definition. 2 Brazil, India and China. 3 Na-
tional Bureau of Economic Research.
Deutsche Bundesbank1980 85 90 95 00 05 20114202468101214
––+++++++
0+2+4+6+8+10Real GDP
G7G7BIC
BICCycleTrendDecomposition of growth ratesYear-on-year percentage change
Emerging and developing 
economies 1G7
BIC 2Advanced 
economies 1
642024
–––++US recessions 
according to NBER 3Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2012  
13

the two country groups (amplitude decoup-
ling).4
No signifi  cant path decoupling or ampli-tude decoupling can be identifi  ed in the past 30 years. Nor, though, has co-
movement between the business cycles of 
the advanced and emerging economies 
under analysis generally increased. Instead, 
recessions seem to coincide with greater 
co-movement between the business cycles 
and fewer growth gaps than periods of re-
covery. Unlike in previous recessions, how-
ever, the BIC countries were sometimes 
able to decouple signifi  cantly from the ad-
vanced economies during the 2008-2009 
economic crisis according to both measures of business cycle decoupling.
One explanation for this could be that, prior 
to the most recent recession, the emerging 
economies were better equipped to deal 
with external crisis effects than most of the 
advanced economies,5 as the emerging 
economies’ relatively large foreign currency reserves would suggest. Furthermore, fi  nan-cial institutions in Asia had become consid-erably more resilient as a result of the Asian 
crisis and, unlike many banks in the ad-vanced economies, had little exposure to 
risky assets. Above all, most emerging econ-
omies also had greater fi  scal policy leeway 
to take economic stabilisation measures during the crisis because their fi  scal pos-
itions were comparatively strong before its 
onset. Notably, China’s immense economic 
stimulus programme provided substantial 
support not only domestically but also for 
the world economy. There is also a theory 
that the recent economic slump in the ad-
vanced economies did not hit foreign trade 
between the emerging economies as hard 
as earlier recessions.
There are two caveats to this explanation, 
however. Firstly, only Asia, Latin America and Africa experienced a more moderate slump in foreign trade; in the CIS and the 
new EU member states in central and east-
ern Europe it was actually sharper than in 
the advanced economies. Secondly, China’s 
pivotal role must also be borne in mind; its 
still very rigid capital controls largely im-
munised it against contagion from the US fi  nancial market, and this proved to be a 
clear advantage in the recent fi  nancial crisis.
All in all, there has been a very clear trend 
decoupling between emerging and ad-
vanced economies since the mid-1990s. By 
contrast, it seems that business cycle de-
coupling tends to occur in periods of recov-ery. Downturns usually entail strong conta-
gion from advanced economies to emer-ging economies, although the group of emerging economies has remained rela-
tively unscathed by the most recent crisis.
4 We use a modifi  ed form of the Pearson correlation 
coeffi   cient as a measure of path decoupling and model 
amplitude decoupling using the absolute difference 
between the z-scores of the growth rates. This ap-proach is based on J Yetman, Exporting recessions: International links and the business cycle, Economics 
Letters, 110, pp 12-14, 2011.
5 See IMF, How Did Emerging Markets Cope in the 
Crisis?, Strategy, Policy, and Review Department, 2010.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2012  
14

sions to GDP growth forecasts have been made 
quite consistently for the group of advanced 
economies, on the one hand, and for emerging 
and developing economies, on the other. 
Growth of 1.4% and 5.7%, respectively, is now 
expected for 2012. Within the G7, corrections 
ranged from +0.2 to +0.4 percentage point on 
rates of between -1.9% (Italy) and +2.1% (USA 
and Canada). The forecast for Germany of 
+0.6% after calendar adjustment means a rise 
of only 0.4% before adjustment. Given the per -
ceptible overall economic growth recorded in 
the first quarter, this estimate appears to be ex -
tremely cautious. At 0.3%, the decline in euro-
area real GDP included in the IMF’s spring fore -
cast is somewhat more moderate than in the 
January estimate (-0.5%). Furthermore, the 
rather sharp rise in crude oil prices that has 
been recorded since the beginning of the year 
occasioned an upward revision of inflation 
rates in advanced economies to 1.9% in 2012 
and 1.7% in 2013, although the forecast for 
2012, in particular, is still probably too low.
Starting from an already high level at the end 
of 2011, crude oil prices soared again over the 
winter months. In March, the spot price for 
Brent North Sea oil was 16% up on its Decem -
ber level. Nevertheless, it continued to fall year-
on-year owing to more unfavourable develop -
ments in the same period. As was the case 
back then, supply-side factors were the main 
drivers of prices – in particular, the expected 
shortages as a result of the EU’s oil embargo 
against Iran, which will come into effect in the 
summer. Moreover, many market participants 
were concerned that the geopolitical dispute in 
the Persian Gulf could escalate further. Ultim -
ately, other conflicts in Yemen, South Sudan 
and Syria caused smaller output losses. The 
supply situation began to ease in April follow -
ing Saudi Arabia’s announcement that it would 
significantly increase production. As this report 
went to press, a barrel of Brent North Sea oil 
was trading at US$107½, with oil futures still 
trading at considerable discounts. The US dollar 
prices of other commodities have gone up only 
moderately since the end of 2011, meaning Renewed rise  
in oil prices …Aggregate output in industrial countries *
Sources: National statistics, Eurostat and Bundesbank calcula-
tions. * The United States, euro area, United Kingdom and Ja-
pan.
Deutsche Bundesbank2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012100102104106
100102104106108
102104106108
100102104106108
96981001021041062005 = 100, seasonally adjusted, quarterly, log scale
Industrial countries, total
United States
Euro area
United Kingdom
JapanDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2012  
15

that they were much cheaper in the first quar -
ter of 2012 than one year previously. In con -
trast to crude oil, subdued global economic 
growth is likely to have had a greater impact 
on commodities.
The recent oil price surge has again pushed up 
consumer price inflation in the industrial coun -
tries. In seasonally adjusted terms, energy 
prices rose by 4.2% in the first three months of 
2012; the basket of consumer goods as a 
whole went up by 1.0%. This puts year-on-year 
headline inflation at 2.5% in March, which is 
thus even somewhat higher than in December. 
Excluding energy and food, prices of other 
goods and services rose less sharply. In March, 
core inflation stood at 1.8% year-on-year.Selected emerging market 
economies
According to the seasonally adjusted estimate 
by China’s National Bureau of Statistics, China’s 
economic output rose by just under 2% in the 
first quarter, as it had done in the previous 
quarter. This constitutes an 8% increase on the 
previous year – the lowest growth rate since 
the beginning of 2009. The fact that growth 
remains moderate can be attributed to a num -
ber of factors. Exports experienced a further 
loss of momentum in the first quarter. Fewer 
goods were exported to the EU, China’s most 
important trading partner, than last year. Al -
though domestic demand in China was still 
high, the pace of expansion also slowed. Thus, 
in real terms, at +11% on the year, retail sales 
growth was only slightly lower than in the final 
quarter of 2011. Measures to cool the housing 
market, including restrictions on the purchase 
of second homes, have had a greater impact of 
late. The number of transactions for new and 
existing apartments fell by just under one-sixth 
throughout the country in the first quarter of 
2012. In addition, house prices have fallen no -
ticeably in many places. Irrespective of these 
developments, construction activities are still 
expanding at a rapid pace, largely due to sup -
porting effects from public residential construc -
tion. In the previous months, consumer price 
inflation continued to trend downwards. It 
amounted to 3.4% in April, and was thus 
¾ percentage point lower than in December 
2011. Easing inflation and the muted economic 
outlook spurred the Central Bank of China into 
lowering the minimum reserve ratio in February 
and May.
The pace of growth in the Indian economy, 
which slowed perceptibly in the final quarter of 
2011, appears to have remained on a rather flat 
upwards path at the beginning of 2012. This is 
indicated, first, by the inability to shake off the 
sluggishness of economic growth over the past 
few months and, second, by the persistently 
subdued pace of growth in the services sector, 
according to survey-based indicators. The Re -… again pushes 
up consumer price inflation  
in industrial countriesYear-on-year  expansion in 
China again 
slower
Slack growth  
in IndiaWorld market prices for crude oil,
industrial commodities and food,beverages and tobacco
Sources:  Thomson  Reuters  and  HWWI.  • Average  of  1  to 
11 May or 1 to 18 May 2012 (crude oil).
Deutsche Bundesbank2008 2009 2010 2011 20125060708090100120140160180US dollar basis, 2010 = 100, monthly averages, log scale
Crude oil (Brent)
Industrial
commoditiesFood, beveragesand tobaccoDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2012  
16

serve Bank of India lowered the key interest 
rate by 50 basis points in April and thus initi -
ated a change in interest policy. Although infla -
tion has eased somewhat over the past few 
months, it is still rather high. As measured by 
the consumer price index relevant for industrial 
workers, it was 7.2% in the first quarter of 
2012, compared with 8.4% in the final quarter 
of 2011.
Brazil’s real GDP , which grew only marginally in 
the second half of 2011, is likely to have picked 
up the pace somewhat in the past few months. 
This is suggested by an exceptionally sharp rise 
in real retail sales in the first quarter (4% on the 
quarter after seasonal adjustment). Consumer 
demand is supported by a labour market that is 
still good, a sharp rise in wages – minimum 
wages were also raised significantly at the be -
ginning of the year – as well as falling interest 
rates for consumer loans and mortgages as a 
result of the central bank loosening monetary 
policy. In the last two months alone, the Cen -
tral Bank of Brazil has cut the key interest rate 
by a total of 150 basis points to 9.0%. How -
ever, the situation is yet to improve noticeably 
for industry, which is saddled with competitive -
ness problems; in the first quarter, production 
was down again on the previous quarter. As a 
result, the government took further action to 
promote this sector and to restrict imports. 
Over the past few months, inflation has taken 
another downward turn and, in April, stood at 
5.1%.
According to a preliminary estimate by the Fed -
eral State Statistics Service, year-on-year real 
GDP growth accelerated from 4¾% in the final 
quarter of 2011 to 5% in the first quarter of 
2012. Domestic demand was the chief driver of 
growth. Real retail sales were 7½% up on the 
year in winter. Overall, the outlook for Russia 
remains bright; given rising oil prices, many 
international organisations – including the IMF 
– have upped their growth forecasts for Russia 
considerably. In recent months, consumer price 
inflation has stabilised at a very low level by his -
torical standards, reaching 3.6% in April.USA
In the first quarter of 2012, the US economy 
continued on its solid growth path. With a 
quarter-on-quarter rise of ½% after seasonal 
adjustment, real US GDP growth at the begin -
ning of the year was only slightly weaker even 
without a repeat of the sharp boost provided 
by inventory movements in the final quarter of 
2011. Private consumption, which was up ¾%, 
was a major driver of growth. In particular, real 
spending on motor vehicles soared again, dis -
persing fears that the sharp rise in the previous 
quarter was a one-off catch-up effect follow -
ing supply problems last spring. Thus, precisely 
in this spending category that is particularly 
susceptible to higher fuel costs, households 
have had to face strong headwinds. Higher 
petrol prices are the main culprits for a quarter-
on-quarter rise in consumer prices, as meas -
ured by the Consumer Price Index (CPI), of 
close to 1% in March. However, on the year, 
they fell by 0.3 percentage point to 2.7%. Yet, 
in the meantime, perceptible broad-based in -
flationary pressure has emerged; core inflation 
(adjusted for energy and food) remained 
slightly over the 2% mark. Growth in private 
consumption has been aided by a clear recov -
ery on the labour market. During the winter 
months, 688,000 non-farm jobs were created 
on balance (+½%) and the unemployment rate 
fell by 0.3 percentage point to 8.2% in March. 
In August 2011, this rate had still stood at 9.1%. 
This decline is likely to have been bolstered by 
major demographic shifts (see the box on 
pages 19 to 21). The fact that companies are 
continuing to create jobs and to invest more in 
new equipment and software shows their eco -
nomic optimism; however, this did not prevent 
commercial construction from suffering a set-
back of late. Given a rather solid upturn on the 
whole in private consumption and investment 
in equipment and software, the overall eco -
nomic recovery appears to be strong enough 
to shoulder the decisive fiscal consolidation. 
Even if the economy is then forced to cope 
with a temporary economic downturn, it is es -
sential to push ahead with ambitious budget Clear stimuli  
for Brazilian 
economy from domestic eco-nomic activity
Rate of expan-
sion still high  
in RussiaIncrease in 
 employment 
and consump-tion safeguards macroeconomic growthDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2012  
17

cuts to prevent an intensification of the crisis in 
the future and to ensure a sustained recovery 
over the medium term.
Japan
After a pause in growth in the final quarter of 
2011, Japan’s economy returned to a growth 
path at the beginning of 2012. In the first quar -
ter, real GDP was up by a seasonally adjusted 
1% on the quarter. This was due, first, to a re -
sumption in supplies to the Japanese export in -
dustry as the situation in Thailand had started 
to normalise. Foreign trade was thus no longer 
an obstacle to real GDP growth. Second, the 
upward trend in domestic demand continued. 
Private consumption, in particular, recorded 
sharp growth, additionally spurred on by gov -
ernment incentives to buy new cars. The auto -
motive sector had been hit hard by production 
stoppages in 2011, moderate growth in the 
global economy and the appreciation of the yen. The robust nature of domestic demand 
was reflected in stabilisation tendencies on the 
labour market and in price developments. In 
March 2012, the unemployment rate remained 
at its December 2011 level (4.5%). Further -
more, the fact that the basket of consumer 
goods had gone from being slightly cheaper on 
the year at the end of 2011 to slightly more ex -
pensive (+0.5%) in March was not down to 
higher energy costs alone. Excluding energy 
and food, consumer prices dropped in the 
twelve-month comparison by less than before, 
down from -1.1% to -0.5%.
United Kingdom
In the first quarter of 2012, the UK economy 
once again fell short of the seasonally adjusted 
level of activity recorded in the previous quar -
ter. However, a renewed decline in real GDP of 
¼% on the final quarter of 2011 was mainly 
due to a sharp reduction in construction out -
put, which is generally rather volatile. Never -
theless, the much-needed momentum was also 
absent from the rest of the economy. The ser -
vices sector, which accounts for three-quarters 
of overall economic output, was only just able 
to recoup the slight decline in real value added 
recorded in the final quarter of 2011. Output in 
manufacturing (excluding construction) con -
tinued to fall, albeit not as sharply as in the 
previous quarter. Earnings in this sector were 
bearing the brunt of the continued downswing 
in oil and gas production, in particular, whereas 
manufacturing output remained nearly steady. 
However, other indicators do not confirm the 
impression that there is a lack of an economic 
tailwind. While inflation – measured by the 
Harmonised Index of Consumer Prices (HICP) – 
slid by 0.7 percentage point during the winter 
months, at 3.5% in March, it again overshot 
the Bank of England’s target of 2% by a long 
way. At 2.6%, core inflation was ½ percentage 
point below its end-2011 level. In addition, the 
situation on the labour market eased some -
what. The rate of unemployment fell from 
8.3% in December to 8.1% in February, and the Expansionary 
forces clearly gain the upper handRenewed  cyclical set-backContributions to quarter-on-quarter 
growth in real US GDP
Source: Global Insight.
Deutsche Bundesbank2008 2009 2010 2011 20121086420246
–––––+++In percentage points, seasonally adjusted, in annualised terms
GDP (per cent)Changes in inventories
Net exports
Public demand
Private consumption
Private investment in
equipment and software
Private construction
investmentDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2012  
18

The decline in labour force participation in the USA
Since last summer, the US unemployment 
rate has been on a clear downward trend. 
In April of this year, it stood at 8.1% after 
seasonal adjustment and was thus a full 1 percentage point below its most recent 
peak of August 2011. Often, an attempt has been made to place this substantial decline in the context of labour force participation, 
which is also decreasing. It is claimed that 
the lower unemployment rate is due solely 
to the fact that many persons have not 
found employment and thus, discouraged, 
withdrawn from the labour market. Relative 
solely to the most recent period, however, 
just a brief glance at the data is enough to 
reveal the limitations of this argument. In 
April 2012, two million more persons were registered as being in work than in August 
2011, which means that the employment 
rate – the number of employed persons in 
relation to the working-age population  – 
has, in fact, increased slightly. Moreover, it 
was during this period that the most broadly defi  ned measure of underemployment − in 
which the Bureau of Labor Statistics (BLS) also includes persons only loosely con-nected with the working population or working part-time involuntarily  − in fact 
showed the sharpest decline since its incep-tion in 1994.
1
Admittedly, the labour force participation 
rate – the percentage of employed and un-employed in the working-age population – 
has been pointing downwards for a long time; since the peak of the most recent macroeconomic cycle in December 2007, 
the participation rate fell by 2.4 percentage 
points to 63.6% in April 2012, its lowest level since the end of 1981. Nevertheless, what should be taken into account in this 
context is that demographic change has al-
ready profoundly altered US society. There has been a considerable shift in the popula-tion structure, especially due to the ageing 
of the “baby boomer” generation (persons 
born in the years of high birth rates be-
tween the end of World War II and the mid-
1960s). Taking the fi  gures which the BLS also uses to estimate the unemployment rate, the percentage of persons aged at least 55 years in the working-age popula-tion as a whole (from 16 years) has in-
creased by just under 3 percentage points 
since the end of 2007. In line with this, the share of persons aged between 25 and 54 
years has declined by 2¾ percentage points. This, however, has serious implica-tions for the aggregate participation rate since labour force participation differs 
widely among these age groups (at the end of the period under review, the fi  gures were 
81.3% in the group of persons aged be-tween 25 to 54 years, compared with 
40.3% among older persons), even though they have been tending to converge some-what.
In order to estimate the impact of popula-
tion ageing, it is possible to calculate a 
hypothetical participation rate under the as-
sumption of labour force participation in the individual age groups persisting at its 
December 2007 level. It thus refl  ects solely the effects of a shift in the relative import-
ance of the individual age groups. Accord-
ingly, 1.1 percentage points, or almost half 
of the overall decline in the actual participa-
1 The U6 rate fell by 1.7 percentage points between 
August 2011 and April 2012. Taking September as the 
reference point, the decline totals 1.9 percentage 
points.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2012  
19

tion rate, can be attributed to this effect at 
the current end.2
The other half refl  ects the impact of the 
change in labour force participation in the 
individual age groups. This may be due in particular, but by no means exclusively, to 
cyclical effects. Although the drivers cannot be identifi  ed on the basis of the BLS data, it is at least possible to trace back the contri-
butions of the individual age groups. Fol-
lowing a longer-term trend, the labour par-
ticipation of the population aged 55 years 
and above has gone up further, cushioning the decline of almost ½ percentage point in 
the aggregate participation rate. The in-crease in labour force participation in this age group might have been even larger if the overall employment outlook had been 
more favourable.
One-half of the dampening effect of 
1¾ percentage points that can be ascribed 
to the rest of the population is due to the 
lower labour force participation among the age group of 25 to 54 year olds. In the ab-
sence of pronounced longer-term trends, 
this is likely mainly to refl  ect cyclical effects. 
The other half is due to the group of 16 
to 24 year olds. Although there was a par-
ticularly sharp decline in the labour market 
participation of this group, extending the observation period reveals a long-term downward trend that has progressed in 
waves rather than evenly. There has invari-
ably been a sharp fall in the participation rate of younger persons during periods of economic downturn without any counter-
movement occurring in the ensuing recov-
ery. Given this fact, it appears doubtful whether – or to what extent – the recent 
severe constriction in labour force participa-tion is actually cyclical in nature in this case. 
A lower participation might, not least, be 
consistent with longer periods of education and training.If we compare the hypothetical participa-tion rate, given constant labour force par-
ticipation of the individual age groups, with the actual aggregate participation rate over 
time, we notice that there were no signifi  -
cant deviations during the last recession. It 
was not until the macroeconomic upturn that the actual participation rate slipped downwards compared with the hypothet-ical one. It should be remembered, how-ever, that the reduction in employment 
lasted up to early 2010. Moreover, it is pos-
sible to imagine that it is only after they 
have been unemployed for some time that 
2 The Congressional Budget Offi   ce (CBO) estimates on 
the basis of a similar calculation that demographic 
change between the end of 2007 and early 2011 de-
pressed the participation rate by ½ percentage point. 
A more recent study by the Federal Reserve Bank of 
Chicago attributes merely one-quarter of the decline in the participation rate of persons aged between 16 and 
79 years of 1.8 percentage points during the period 
from 2008 to 2011 to demographic factors. In contrast 
to these studies, our analysis also comprises the per-
ceptible population shift at the beginning of 2012, 
which is due to the BLS data being adjusted to the re-sults of the latest census and can be identifi  ed by the 
kink in the hypothetical labour participation rate. In 
the case of such changeovers, the BLS does not, as a 
rule, revise the historical data. See CBO, CBO’s Labor 
Force Projections Through 2021, CBO Background 
Paper, March 2011, pp 10-11; D Aaronson, J Davis and 
L Hu, Explaining the Decline in the U. S. Labor Force 
Participation Rate, Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago, 
Chicago Fed Letter, No 296, March 2012.Actual and hypothetical 
participation rate
Deutsche Bundesbank2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 201263.564.064.565.065.566.066.5Per cent, seasonally adjusted
Recession 
according to 
NBERHypothetical
ActualDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2012  
20

persons turn away from the labour market 
and that there is therefore only a lagged 
“cyclical effect” depressing labour force 
participation. Since the middle of last year, 
in terms of the underlying trend there at 
least appears to have been no further in-
crease in this effect in the wake of the up-
turn in the labour market.
In July 2011, the participation rate, at -1½ percentage points, reached the max-
imum deviation from its hypothetical value. 
In order to assess the scale of this discrep-
ancy, an analogous calculation can be made 
for the preceding economic cycle. Taking, 
as the starting point, March 2001 – the pre-
vious cyclical peak according to the Na-tional Bureau of Economic Research – the 
hypothetical participation rate is undershot 
at most by ¾ percentage point; it is not until during 2005 that a perceptible im-
provement sets in. In order to put the rela-
tionships into perspective, it should add-itionally be considered that the downturn was much milder then, with the employ-
ment fi  gure falling by just two million, while the last recession cost a total of 8½ million jobs. Thus, although the possible cyclical ef-fect on labour force participation has been marked recently, it has not necessarily been out of the ordinary.
Finally, it should be noted that, in addition 
to economic activity, other factors also have 
an impact on the supply of labour. Eco-
nomic policy interventions, such as the re-
peated extension of the period of receiving 
unemployment benefi  ts and the lowering of the burden of income taxes, should be highlighted in this context. The impact of 
tax breaks is unlikely to have been confi  ned 
to the labour force but probably extended 
to the number of working hours supplied 
per person employed. The expected with-
drawal of these economic policy measures 
over the following years is likely to counter-act the positive effect of the cycle on labour 
force participation.
All things considered, the fact that the baby 
boomer generation is reaching retirement 
age has probably already played a key role 
in the decline in labour force participation 
over the past few years. Despite a cyclical recovery, demographic change over the 
next few years will probably tend to lower 
the labour participation rate further. Neg-lecting this factor might encourage over-
estimating the degree of slack in the econ-omy and thus underestimating the upward pressure on wages and prices.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2012  
21

number of recipients of unemployment bene -
fits again trended slightly downwards of late.
New EU member states
In the new EU member states as a whole 
(EU-7),2 economic activity – which had already 
slowed somewhat in the final quarter of 2011 – 
declined even further in the first quarter of 
2012. Hungary and the Czech Republic re -
corded a perceptible quarter-on-quarter fall in 
economic output. In addition, indicators for 
Poland, for which national accounts figures are 
not yet available, suggest that GDP growth has 
slowed considerably. As a result, the labour 
market situation in many states worsened; at 
10.1%, the aggregated unemployment rate in 
the first quarter of 2012 was slightly higher 
than one year previously. In this group of coun -
tries, consumer price inflation rose from 3.7% 
in the final quarter of 2011 to 3.9% in the first 
quarter of 2012. It ranged from 1.9% in Bul -
garia to 4.2% in Poland and 5.6% in Hungary, 
where the increase in turnover tax from 25% 
to 27% came into effect at the beginning of 
the year.
Macroeconomic trends  
in the euro area
Economic activity in the euro area had been 
slack in the final quarter of 2011 and this car -
ried over into 2012. In seasonally adjusted 
terms, real GDP stagnated in the first quarter of 
2012 at the depressed level of the previous 
quarter and stood at the same level as one year 
earlier. This is mainly due to weak domestic de -
mand, especially in the peripheral countries. Of 
the 13 member states for which initial GDP es -
timates for the first quarter of 2012 are already 
available, Finland and Slovakia recorded excep -
tionally strong quarter-on-quarter growth 
(+1¼% and +¾%, respectively). Aggregate 
output was up by ½% in Germany and Estonia, 
and by ¼% in Belgium and Austria. Real GDP in 
France and Portugal remained at the 2011 Q4 level, whereas it contracted again in seasonally 
adjusted terms in Italy and Spain. In Greece, 
where the Statistical Authority no longer pub -
lishes seasonally adjusted figures, the year-on-
year rate was down to -6¼%. No data have yet 
been published for Ireland.
The survey-based economic indicators, such as 
those from the Purchasing Managers’ Index 
and the EU survey on industrial confidence, 
that were published prior to April, give reason 
to believe that economic growth will remain 
weak in the second quarter. A renewed recov -
ery of the euro area is not expected to start 
until the second half of the year, and this up -
turn is likely to get off to a slow start. For 2012 
as a whole, the European Commission’s spring 
forecast, in line with projections by other inter -
national institutions, foresees a decline in GDP 
of ¼%. However, growth of 1% is expected 
again for 2013.
The stagnation of real GDP in the first quarter is 
largely attributable to the production sector. 
Construction output was 4½% down on the al -
ready depressed level recorded in the final 
quarter of 2011. This situation was aggravated 
by the persistently weak economy and weather-
related restrictions due to the prolonged period 
of frost in the more northerly member states in 
February. Furthermore, industrial production 
was down by ½% in seasonally adjusted terms 
in the first quarter of 2012 after having already 
fallen by 2% the previous quarter. On an aver -
age of the first-quarter months, it has dropped 
by 2% on the year. Broken down by categories 
of goods, ¼% more capital goods were pro -
duced in the euro area in the period under re -
view than in the final quarter of 2011. How -
ever, while the production of intermediate 
goods declined by ½%, the manufacture of 
consumer goods was even 2% lower than in 
the previous quarter. The fact that underutilisa -
tion of production capacities was again up 
slightly in the period from January to April is Further 
 slowdown  
in economic 
 activity
GDP stagnated 
in Q1Recovery not  expected until 
latter part of 2012
Downward 
trends in the production  sector
2 This group comprises the non-euro-area countries that 
joined the EU in 2004 and 2007.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2012  
22

consistent with this picture. Only those energy 
producers that belong to the non-manufacturing 
industrial sector were able to increase their 
output by a seasonally adjusted 1% in the first 
quarter of the year. Orders received in the or -
der-based manufacturing industry in January/
February were 1¼% and 4¾% short of last 
quarter’s and last year’s level after seasonal ad -
justment. Even orders received from the euro 
area itself declined considerably.
On the demand side, weak domestic activity 
was responsible for the economic standstill in 
the first quarter of 2012. The clear decline in 
construction coupled with a negligible rise in 
capital goods production indicates a lower level 
of gross fixed capital formation. Private con -
sumption is likely to have remained in the dol -
drums. Real retail sales (excluding cars) man -
aged to improve by ½% on the 2011 Q4 level; 
however, the number of new motor vehicle 
registrations plummeted (-6¾%). According to 
consumer confidence surveys, no noticeable 
pick-up in consumption is expected in the near 
future. However, in terms of aggregate eco -
nomic growth, increased exports to non-euro-
area countries are likely to have cushioned the 
contraction of private demand in the euro area. 
In January/February, the seasonally adjusted 
nominal exports of goods were 3% higher than 
in the final quarter of 2011. In nominal terms, 
imports of goods were more moderate than 
exports. Furthermore, a clear increase in the 
price of crude oil was behind this rise, meaning 
that growth in real imports is likely to have 
been even lower.
The situation on the labour market has deteri -
orated further over the first-quarter months. In 
seasonally adjusted terms, half a million more 
people were unemployed in March 2012 than 
at the end of 2011. Over this period, the un -
employment rate rose by 0.3 percentage point 
to 10.9%. Of the euro-area countries, Austria 
(4.0%), the Netherlands (5.0%), Luxembourg 
(5.2%) and Germany (5.6%) had the lowest un -
employment rates. However, in Spain and 
Greece, these rates were in excess of 20%. The number of persons under the age of 25 with -
out employment (known as the rate of youth 
unemployment) was a worryingly high 22.1% 
in the euro area in March. The number of 
 people in employment, which fell by a season -
ally adjusted 0.2% in the third and again in the 
fourth quarter, is likely to have continued its 
descent in the first quarter of 2012.
Seasonally adjusted consumer prices in the 
euro area again rose sharply on the quarter in 
the first three months of 2012. Price pressures 
were only marginally weaker than at the begin -
ning of 2011 meaning that year-on-year HICP 
inflation merely slipped from 2.9% in the final 
quarter of 2011 to 2.7%. The sharp rise in con -
sumer prices continued in April. The year-on-
year rate was down by only a little to 2.6%. 
The price surge in the first quarter of 2012 was 
broadly based; however, it was mainly deter -
mined by the higher price for refined petroleum 
products. This was chiefly due to much higher 
crude oil prices, the effects of which on con -No growth 
 stimuli from 
 domestic 
 demand
Outlook on 
 labour market 
still gloomySharp rise in consumer pricesReal GDP in the euro area
Deutsche Bundesbank2008 2009 2010 2011 201293949596979899100101
–5–4–3–2–10+1+2+3+4+52008 Q1 = 100, seasonally adjusted,
log scale
Annual averages, lin scale
Year-on-year percentage changeEuro area (17)Germany
Euro area (17)
excluding
Germany
Euro area (17) excluding 
GermanyGermany
Euro area (17)Q1Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2012  
23

sumer prices were further intensified by the 
continued depreciation of the euro against the 
US dollar. In addition, the prices for services rose considerably, partly as a result of some 
member states raising consumption tax rates.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2012  
24

Monetary policy and money 
market developments
The economic outlook for the euro area has 
once again deteriorated since the beginning of 
the year. At the same time, inflation forecasts 
for 2012 required significant upward revision, 
above all, given the renewed increase in crude 
oil prices. However, the Governing Council of 
the ECB believes that inflation will return to a 
level compatible with stability over the policy-
relevant horizon. This estimation is also sup -
ported by the still subdued underlying pace of 
monetary expansion: whereas the monetary 
aggregate M3 increased strongly in the report -
ing quarter, growth in loans to the private sec -
tor was perceptibly weaker in the euro area, 
leading to a distinct divergence between the 
development of M3 and lending to the private 
sector. Against this backdrop, the Governing 
Council of the ECB kept key rates at the level 
they had been at thus far. The main refinancing 
rate therefore remains unchanged at the histor -
ically low level of 1%. The interest rate for re -
course to the marginal lending facility remains 
unchanged at 1¾%, while the interest rate on 
the deposit facility, too – at ¼% – is the same 
as before.
From a monetary policy perspective, the report -
ing period was marked by the implementation 
of the non-standard measures agreed by the 
Governing Council of the ECB in December 
2011. In particular, on 29  February 2012 a 
second refinancing operation with the un -
usually long maturity of three years was 
offered, recourse to which –  at an overall 
amount of €529.5 billion – was extensive. The 
bidding and allotment volume of the first three-
year refinancing operation of 21  December 
2011 had stood at €489.2 billion. The bulk of 
the volume offered with the two three-year op -
erations went to Eurosystem counterparties 
based in Spain, Italy and France. While a large 
number of counterparties of the Bundesbank made use of the operations, too, the total vol -
ume allotted to these institutions was rather 
meagre by comparison.
Banks’ interest in the use of these special oper -
ations is mainly motivated by two aspects. On 
the one hand, the three-year operations repre -
sent a financing instrument, the interest rate of 
which may be a great deal lower than that of 
other comparable sources of financing – espe -
cially for banks facing higher interest rate 
spreads on the capital market. Hence, the insti -
tutions can, for example, replace maturing 
debt securities by participating in these three-
year refinancing operations. On the other hand, 
banks may also use the funds provided by the 
Eurosystem in order to conduct additional lend -
ing business without having to acquire the ne -
cessary funds on the market. While there are 
hardly any signs of banks increasing their lend -
ing to date, it is becoming more and more evi -
dent that institutions purchased fixed income 
securities from public issuers in particular (see 
box on pages 26 to 28).
The securities held by the Eurosystem under the 
Securities Market Programme (SMP) hardly in -
creased on balance from the beginning of the 
year. This development can be attributed to the 
Eurosystem’s clearly reduced interventionism 
on the one hand and to redemptions of matur -
ing debt on the other. Originally, the volume of 
the second Covered Bond Purchase Programme 
(CBPP2), which was agreed in October 2011 
and carried out as of November 2011, was in -
tended to be €40 billion by the end of October 
2012, of which an overall amount of around 
€11.5 billion has been accumulated by the Eu -
rosystem so far. It may be assumed that the 
three-year refinancing operations had the ef -
fect of reducing banks’ new covered bonds is -
suance while at the same time increasing the 
demand for these securities. Against this back -
drop, implementation of the CBPP2 was rather Governing 
Council of the ECB leaves key rates unchanged
Implementation 
of non-standard measures agreed in  DecemberMonetary policy and banking businessDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2012  
25

Money market management and liquidity needs
During the three reserve maintenance 
periods from 18 January to 10 April 2012, 
euro-area credit institutions’ need for cen-
tral bank liquidity determined by autono-
mous liquidity factors rose by €77.8 billion 
in net terms. This increase was driven mainly 
by general government deposits with the Eurosystem, which rose sharply by €78.6 
billion on balance. By contrast, the demand 
for liquidity from banknotes in circulation 
decreased by €12.5 billion, owing mainly to the usual seasonal fall in demand for bank-
notes in the January-February 2012 main-tenance period, counteracting the sharply increased demand in the pre-Christmas 
period. If net foreign reserves and the other 
factors are taken together, thereby elimin-
ating liquidity-neutral valuation effects, the 
need for liquidity likewise declined by €11.7 
billion. The minimum reserve requirement 
fell by €101.6 billion on average compared 
with the previous reporting period, mainly 
as a result of the ECB Governing Council’s 
decision of 8 December 2011 to halve the 
reserve ratio from 2% to 1% as of the main-tenance period beginning 18 January.
Although the fi  nancing needs of the credit 
institutions calculated from the changes in 
the autonomous factors and the lowering 
of the minimum reserve requirement fell by €23.8 billion on balance, credit institutions’ demand for funds in refi  nancing operations increased considerably. The main event dur-
ing the period under review was the allot-
ment of the second three-year tender which, with a volume of €529.5 billion, caused a strong rise in existing excess li-quidity. Like all other liquidity-providing open market operations, this tender was also conducted as a fi  xed-rate procedure 
with full allotment. In its decision of 6 Oc-
tober 2011, the ECB Governing Council an-nounced that the generous allotment policy 
of the main and longer-term refi  nancing 
operations was to be retained until the end 
of the June-July 2012 maintenance period. 
The longer-term refi  nancing operations 
with maturities of three months or more 
were again allotted at the fi  xed rate, which 
is indexed to the average refi  nancing rate of 
the main refi  nancing operations over the life of the operation. As a further non-
standard measure, at its meeting on 9 Feb-ruary 2012, the ECB Governing Council ap-
proved specifi  c national eligibility criteria 
and risk control measures for the temporary 
acceptance in a number of countries of additional credit claims as collateral in Eu-
rosystem credit operations.
The considerably higher demand for liquid-
ity in the refi  nancing operations was only 
visible in the volume of longer-term oper-ations which, comparing period averages, rose sharply by around €466 billion (net), 
while the volume of main refi  nancing oper-ations dropped by €113 billion. The notice-
ably higher overall volume of outstanding refi  nancing was accompanied by a strong increase of €372 billion in the average re-
course to the deposit facility in the period 
under review (comparing the period aver-
ages). By contrast, recourse to the marginal 
lending facility over the three observation 
periods was down slightly, with the facility 
sometimes tapped for amounts of up to 
€11.8 billion in the March-April period.
Purchases under the Securities Markets Pro-
gramme (SMP) were largely discontinued in the period under review; the last purchases 
were made on 9  February 2012. Because 
the volume of maturing SMP securities was 
larger than the volume of purchases, the 
portfolio fell by €3.5 billion to €214 billion Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2012  
26

during the period. The weekly liquidity-
absorbing fi  ne-tuning operations fully neu-
tralised the liquidity-providing effect result-
ing from the SMP . After the three-year ten-
ders, the willingness of banks to place li-
quidity in the liquidity-absorbing operations 
increased signifi  cantly, resulting in a differ-
ence of just one basis point between the 
allotment rates and the 0.25% interest rate 
of the deposit facility. The volume of the 
fi  rst Covered Bond Purchase Programme (CBPP) decreased by €1.3 billion to €56.8 
billion due to maturities. However, the new CBPP2 had increased by €4.9 billion to €9.6 billion by the end of the third maintenance period on 10 April.
In the January-February 2012 maintenance 
period, excess liquidity increased compared 
with the previous period due to the much 
higher refi  nancing volume resulting from the fi  rst three-year tender and the halving of the minimum reserve requirement to €103.3 billion. At €868.1 billion, the aver-age volume of outstanding open market operations, including the purchase pro-
grammes and the SMP absorption tenders, remained almost unchanged in comparison 
to the previous period (€864.6 billion). Be-
cause the average autonomous factors rose to €273.4 billion (after €258.8 billion in the previous period), the average excess liquid-
ity (central bank balances plus the deposit facility minus the marginal lending facility minus the reserve requirement) stood at 
€491.4 billion compared to €398.6 billion in 
the previous period. This caused the aver-
age recourse to the deposit facility to rise 
€89.7 billion to €489.0 billion. By contrast, 
recourse to the marginal lending facility in 
the Eurosystem declined, but still averaged 
€2.3 billion over the period (previous period: 
€6.0 billion). The unsecured overnight rate 
EONIA stood at 0.37% on average over the 
period, ie around 63 basis points below the 
main refi  nancing rate and therefore lower than in the previous period (55 basis points 
below the main refi  nancing rate). Secured overnight money on the Eurex Repo (GC 
Pooling, ECB Basket) reacted more strongly 
to the excess liquidity, standing at 0.27% 
on average. At around €30 billion on aver-
age, EONIA turnover was rather low; se-
cured overnight turnover on the GC Pooling trading platform amounted to €9.9 billion.
In the February-March maintenance period, 
the demand for liquidity increased substan-
tially, at fi  rst in the main refi  nancing oper-
ations and then, due to the second three-
year tender, in the longer-term refi  nancing 
operations, with shifts in the refi  nancing structure fi  nally causing demand for the 
main tender to fall again. The high level of 
interest also shown in the second three-
year tender exceeded market expectations. 
This non-standard measure led to a net li-
quidity infl  ow of €305 billion (compared 
with €213 billion in the fi  rst three-year ten-
der as at 22 December 2011). The number 
of participating credit institutions, which 
rose sharply to 800 (523 in the fi  rst tender), indicated that many banks did not want to 
pass up this opportunity. The average vol-ume of outstanding open market oper-
ations (including the purchase programmes and the SMP absorption tenders) rose con-
siderably by €149.7 billion to €1,017.8 bil-lion. Together, the two three-year tenders 
accounted for 90% of all tender operations. The average autonomous factors rose from 
€273.4 billion in the previous period to €290.2 billion, meaning that, on balance, 
average recourse to the deposit facility in-
creased by €132.0 billion to €621.0 billion. 
Recourse to the marginal lending facility in 
the Eurosystem averaged €2.2 billion. The 
EONIA stood at 0.36% on average over the 
period, down by one basis point in com-
parison to the previous period. The EONIA 
fl  uctuated within a very narrow range. At 0.245% on average, the secured rate for Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2012  
27

the overnight maturity on GC Pooling was 
therefore even lower than the deposit facil-
ity rate. Overall, the credited amount from 
the second three-year tender resulted in a 
decline in turnover in the interbank market 
of around 30% in both segments.
In the March-April maintenance period, the 
average volume of outstanding open mar-
ket operations rose a further €196.7 billion 
to €1,214.5 billion. The higher volume in 
the main tenders partially compensated for 
the clear increase in the autonomous fac-
tors by around €46 billion on average to €336.2 billion, which was due mainly to larger general government deposits. On 
balance, average recourse to the deposit fa-cility rose €150.4 billion to reach €771.3 bil-
lion. The overnight rate EONIA hardly fl  uc-
tuated in this period either and, at 0.355% 
on average, remained at the level of the 
previous period despite the further increase 
in liquidity. At the end of the quarter, the EONIA rose four basis points, following the 
typical pattern for these particular balance 
sheet data, albeit at a much more subdued 
level (previous year: +31 basis points). In 
this maintenance period, secured overnight 
money trading on GC Pooling – at least as 
measured by the published reference inter-
est rate for the ECB basket – fl  uctuated as 
little as the EONIA, which, with rather low 
average turnovers of €6.8 billion, recently 
led to an average secured overnight money rate of 0.25%, which was equal to the de-posit facility rate.Factors determining bank liquidity1
€ billion; changes in the daily averages of the reserve maintenance periods vis-à-vis the previous period
Item2012
18 Jan
to 
14 Feb15 Feb
to 
13 Mar14 Mar 
to 
10 Apr
I Provision (+) or  absorption (–) of  central bank balances due to changes 
in autonomous factors1 Banknotes in  circulation (increase: –) +  13.6 +   1.3 –   2.4
2 Government  deposits with the Eurosystem ( increase: –) –  32.4 –  28.9 –  17.3
3 Net foreign assets
2 +  14.4 –  10.1 –  20.6
4 Other factors 2 –  10.3 +  21.0 –   6.1
Total –  14.7 –  16.7 –  46.4
II Monetary policy  operations of the Eurosystem
1 Open market  operations
(a) Main refi  nancing operations –  48.8 –  31.5 –  32.7
(b) Longer-term refi  nancing  operations +  56.3 + 176.5 + 233.3
(c) Other operations –   3.9 +   4.7 –   3.8
2 Standing facilities
(a) Marginal lending facility –   3.7 –   0.1 +   0.8
(b) Deposit facility (increase: –) –  89.7 – 132.0 – 150.3
Total –  89.8 +  17.6 +  47.3
III Change in credit  institutions’  current accounts (I + II) – 104.2 +   0.8 +   0.7
IV Change in the  minimum reserve requirement ( increase: –) + 103.7 –   1.0 –   1.1
1 For longer-term trends and the Deutsche Bundesbank’s contribution, see pages 14 • and 15 • of the Statistical Section of this 
Monthly Report. 2 Including end-of- quarter valuation adjustments with no impact on liquidity.
Deutsche BundesbankDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2012  
28

sluggish compared with the first programme 
for the purchase of covered bonds.
As a result of the extensive participation by 
banks in the second three-year operation in 
particular, the volume of the refinancing oper -
ations increased again by around €250 billion 
compared with the end of 2011 to currently 
just over €1.1 trillion. This caused excess liquid -
ity in the banking system – measured in terms 
of average recourse to the deposit facility – to 
leap again to over €770 billion of late as an 
average for the reserve period from 11  April 
to 8 May 2012; it was thus again clearly above 
the previous record level. On the whole, there 
is currently no indication that the large-volume 
provision of funds to banks is directly giving rise 
to credit and monetary aggregate develop -
ments that have an inflationary effect. How -
ever, the risks associated with this must not be 
ignored. There is, for example, always the dan -
ger of creating wrong incentives for banks and 
other players when introducing non-standard 
monetary policy measures. It would be particu -
larly problematic if this led to necessary struc -
tural reforms in the real economy or the finan -
cial sector being delayed or not being carried 
out at all. In addition, monetary policy makers 
must focus on limiting the balance-sheet risks 
associated with the non-standard monetary 
policy measures and on maintaining the separ -
ation between monetary policy and financial 
policy tasks. It is essential that the measures 
taken do not create risks to price stability. 
Therefore, it is necessary to resort to such 
extraordinary instruments only in exceptional 
cases and temporarily.
The further increase in excess liquidity exerted 
virtually no further downward pressure on the 
interbank overnight rate: the unsecured over -
night rate EONIA has fallen by only a few basis 
points since the beginning of 2012 and cur -
rently stands at just under 0.35%, which is ap -
proximately 10 basis points above the deposit 
rate.The additional funds provided by the Eurosys -
tem with the three-year operations and the im -
plementation of the measures agreed by the 
Governing Council of the ECB in the fourth 
quarter of 2011 jointly contributed to a more 
relaxed financing situation for banks in the 
euro area. The decline of unsecured money 
market rates and risk premiums indicated in 
January continued steadily in the two subse -
quent months and finally slowed down some -
what in April. This means that the difference in 
interest rates on unsecured and secured money 
market operations with a maturity of three 
months has fallen by approximately 60 basis 
points since the beginning of the year to just 
under 0.6 percentage point of late.
Monetary developments  
in the euro area
In the first quarter of 2012, the broad monetary 
aggregate M3 recovered perceptibly from its Rise in excess 
 liquidity as a 
 result of the 
second three-year operation
Unsecured money market rates declining while depo-repo 
spreads 
 narrowerMoney market interest rates
in the euro area
1 Monthly  averages.  2 Only  on 8 October  2008  2.75%. 
3 Three-month  Euribor  less three-month  Eurepo.  • Average 
from 1 to 18 May 2012.
Deutsche Bundesbank2008 2009 2010 2011 201200.51.01.52.02.53.03.54.04.55.0
050100150200Difference between unsecured and secured 
three-month interbank lending rates 1, 32
Basis
points%
Marginal lending rate
Three-month Euribor 1
EONIA1
Minimum bid rate or
fixed interest rate formain refinancing operations
Deposit rateDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2012  
29

marked decline in the autumn months. The 
seasonally adjusted and annualised three-
month rate climbed by 11 percentage points to 
just under 8% between the end of December 
and the end of March. This sharp growth re -
sulted from portfolio shifts by non-banks in fa -
vour of sight deposits and short-term time de -
posits on the one hand. On the other hand, 
banks once again expanded securitised lending 
to general government strongly in the report -
ing quarter. Whereas growth of the monetary 
aggregate M3 in the first quarter picked up 
where the recovery up to the summer of 2011 
had left off, lending to the domestic private 
sector was less dynamic. The annual growth rate of loans (adjusted for loan sales and secu -
ritisations) to the private sector remained virtu -
ally unchanged at 1¼% in the first quarter of 
2012, while the annual growth rate of M3 rose 
from 1½% to just above 3% in the reporting 
quarter.
The strong growth in the monetary aggregate 
M3 in the first three-month period was sup -
ported by all components. A third of the in -
crease was attributable to the narrow monetary 
aggregate M1, the (seasonally adjusted and an -
nualised) three-month rate of which rose from 
½% at year-end to just over 5% at the end of 
the first quarter. The main reason for this rise Recovery  
of monetary 
 developments
Strong increase 
in short-term  deposits …Open market operations of the Eurosystem*
 
Value 
dateType of transaction
1Maturity in daysActual  allotment in € billionDeviation 
from the 
benchmark in € billion
2Marginal rate/fi  xed 
rate
%Allotment 
ratio
%Weighted 
rate
%Cover ratio
 3Numberof bidders
18.01.12 MRO (FRT) 7 126.9 471.9 1.00 100.00 – 1.00 143
18.01.12 S-LTRO (FRT) 28 38.7 – 1.00 100.00 – 1.00 44
18.01.12 FTO (–) 7 – 217.0 – 0.31 52.18 0.29 1.74 118
25.01.12 MRO (FRT) 7 130.3 577.8 1.00 100.00 – 1.00 136
25.01.12 FTO (–) 7 – 219.0 – 0.30 31.18 0.28 1.58 113
26.01.12 LTRO (FRT) 91 19.6 –
4 1.00 100.00 – 1.00 54
01.02.12 MRO (FRT) 7 115.6 593.1 1.00 100.00 – 1.00 135
01.02.12 FTO (–) 7 – 219.0 – 0.28 88.86 0.27 1.49 100
08.02.12 MRO (FRT) 7 109.5 572.5 1.00 100.00 – 1.00 135
08.02.12 FTO (–) 7 – 219.0 – 0.28 40.65 0.27 1.57 97
15.02.12 MRO (FRT) 7 142.8 465.3 1.00 100.00 – 1.00 160
15.02.12 FTO (–) 7 – 219.5 – 0.28 21.38 0.27 1.60 97
15.02.12 S-LTRO (FRT) 28 14.3 – 1.00 100.00 – 1.00 18
22.02.12 MRO (FRT) 7 166.5 567.0 1.00 100.00 – 1.00 169
22.02.12 FTO (–) 7 – 219.5 – 0.27 84.40 0.27 1.70 91
29.02.12 MRO (FRT) 7 29.5 359.5 1.00 100.00 – 1.00 83
29.02.12 FTO (–) 7 – 219.5 – 0.27 57.10 0.26 1.51 79
29.02.12 FTO (+) 1 133.9 – 1.00 100.00 – 1.00 71
01.03.12 S-LTRO (FRT) 1092 529.5 – 4 … 100.00 – 1.00 800
01.03.12 LTRO (FRT) 91 6.5 – 4 … 100.00 – 1.00 30
07.03.12 MRO (FRT) 7 17.5 922.5 1.00 100.00 – 1.00 65
07.03.12 FTO (–) 7 – 219.5 – 0.26 81.36 0.26 2.06 106
14.03.12 MRO (FRT) 7 42.2 780.7 1.00 100.00 – 1.00 75
14.03.12 FTO (–) 7 – 218.0 – 0.26 61.72 0.26 2.01 91
14.03.12 S-LTRO (FRT) 28 9.8 – 1.00 100.00 – 1.00 19
21.03.12 MRO (FRT) 7 59.5 919.0 1.00 100.00 – 1.00 78
21.03.12 FTO (–) 7 – 218.0 – 0.26 59.27 0.26 1.97 92
28.03.12 MRO (FRT) 7 61.1 894.1 1.00 100.00 – 1.00 81
28.03.12 FTO (–) 7 – 213.5 – 0.26 84.37 0.26 1.51 82
29.03.12 LTRO (FRT) 91 25.1 – 4 … 100.00 – 1.00 48
04.04.12 MRO (FRT) 7 62.6 891.1 1.00 100.00 – 1.00 80
04.04.12 FTO (–) 7 – 213.5 – 0.26 68.02 0.26 1.94 78
* For more information on the Eurosystem’s operations from 12 October 2011 to 17 January 2012, see Deutsche Bundesbank, Monthly 
 Report, February 2012, p 26. 1  MRO: main refi  nancing operation, LTRO: longer-term refi  nancing operation, S-LTRO: supplementary 
longer-term refi  nancing operation, FTO: fi  ne-tuning operation (+: liquidity providing operation, –: liquidity absorbing operation), FRT: fi  xed-rate tender. 2 Calculation according to publication after MRO allotment. 3 Ratio of total bids to the allotment amount. 4 The inter-
est rate corresponds to the average minimum bid rate or main refi  nancing rate of the MROs conducted over the life of this operation (may 
be rounded to two decimal places in the table).
Deutsche BundesbankDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2012  
30

was the sharp increase in sight deposits by 
other financial intermediaries (OFIs), which 
shifted funds away from longer-term forms of 
investment. However, with regard to short-term 
time deposits and savings deposits (M2-M1), 
the sharp upward movement was primarily 
driven by households’ portfolio decisions. The 
fact that interest on these deposits for house -
holds developed more favourably in the report -
ing quarter than interest on long-term deposits 
is likely to have played a role. As a result, the 
seasonally adjusted and annualised three-month 
rate of (M2-M1) increased to 8½%.
It was mainly the strong inflows to short-term 
bank debt securities that were responsible for 
the sharp increase in marketable instruments 
(M3-M2), although money market funds and 
repos recorded discernible increases, too, on 
balance. However, repo transactions expanded 
considerably only in January, whereby this in -
crease must be seen as a countermovement to 
the slump in December. By contrast, repos 
–  which also include secured money market 
operations via central counterparties  – fell 
again markedly in March. A likely reason for 
this is the generous supply of liquidity by the 
Eurosystem in the context of the two three-
year refinancing operations.
The mirror image of the portfolio shifts into M3 
components was a sharp decline in the MFI’s 
longer-term financial liabilities vis-à-vis other 
sectors (monetary capital). Here, notable out -
flows from long-term time deposits and the 
sharp decline in bank debt securities with a ma -
turity of over two years were only partially off -
set by the continued accumulation of capital 
and reserves. The continued reduction in long-
term bank debt securities, roughly half of which 
was again offset by the purchase of short-term 
bank debt securities contained in (M3-M2) by 
the private non-bank sector, reflects the private 
sector’s persistent reluctance with regard to 
the long-term financing of the banking sector. 
The rise in the attractiveness of short-term 
compared with long-term bank debt securities 
was likely attributable to the – from the invest -ors’ viewpoint – reduced risk as a result of the 
Eurosystem’s three-year refinancing operations.
The strongest positive influence on monetary 
growth exercised by the counterparts came 
from the banking sector’s increased lending to 
general government. Although this had already 
increased sharply in the two preceding quar -
ters, it accelerated even more in the first quar -
ter of 2012, which meant that the seasonally 
adjusted and annualised three-month rate rose 
from (a revised) 9.5% in December to 12.5% in 
March. This was caused almost exclusively by 
commercial banks purchasing securities, while 
the Eurosystem’s purchases of securities virtu -
ally ground to a halt in the reporting quarter. In 
contrast to lending in the form of securities, 
there was a visible reduction in loans extended 
by the banking sector to general government 
in the reporting quarter.
M3 growth was also supported by the percep -
tible increase in lending to the private sector. … and in 
 marketable 
 instruments
Strong reduction 
in monetary capitalRenewed strong increase in lend-
ing to general 
government  
in the form  
of  securitiesMonetary developments in the euro 
area *
Changes in € billion, seasonally adjusted
Monetary aggregate in a balance 
sheet context2011 2012
Q4 Q1
Monetary aggregate M3 
(=1+2-3-4-5) – 78.5 183.9
Components:
Currency in circulation and overnight deposits (M1) 4.2 61.4
Other shorter-term deposits (M2-M1) – 11.3 77.7
Marketable instruments (M3-M2) – 71.4 44.8
Counterparts
1. Total credit to non-MFIs in 
the euro area 49.3 151.7
Credit to general government 70.2 95.1
Credit to private-sector non-MFIs in the euro area
1 – 21.0 56.6
2. Net external assets – 52.2 – 13.0
3. Central government deposits 41.6 9.9
4. Longer-term fi  nancial liabilities to 
other non-MFIs in the euro area – 12.3 – 40.8
5. Other counterparts of M3 
(residual) – 46.3 14.3
* Changes for statistical reasons are eliminated. 1 Adjusted for 
loan sales and securitisation.
Deutsche BundesbankDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2012  
31

Substantial government bond purchases by Eurosystem 
and commercial banks
Over the last two quarters, the euro-area 
banking sector signifi  cantly increased credit 
to general government. In the last quarter 
of 2011, this increase amounted to €70.2 
billion in seasonally-adjusted terms. Credit 
to general government rose again percep-
tibly to reach €95.1 billion in the fi  rst three months of 2012.
Credit is provided to general government 
both in the form of loans and through se-
curitised lending, ie through the purchase 
of government bonds and other debt secur-
ities issued by the government. Whereas loans have declined on balance since the 
beginning of 2011, securities holdings have 
increased signifi  cantly and currently ac-
count for almost two-thirds of outstanding 
loans from the MFI sector to general gov-
ernment.
The chart opposite shows the quarterly seasonally-adjusted changes in securitised lending to general government, broken 
down into the contribution made by com-
mercial banks and the bond purchases made by the Eurosystem. The increase in 
the Eurosystem’s securitised lending to gen-
eral government in the second quarter of 
2012 was due to the purchases made under 
the Securities Market Programme (SMP) 
launched in May 2010. In 2011, the net in-fl  ow of €149 billion in securitised lending by the MFI sector to general government was 
attributable entirely to these purchases by the Eurosystem in the secondary market. 
Overall, ie including the decrease in loans, 
the supply of credit from the MFI sector to 
general government increased by €90 bil-lion in 2011, exceeding the net growth in 
loans to the private sector by just over €20 billion.
At €4.2 billion, bond purchases by the Eu-
rosystem made only a modest contribution to the increase in the MFI sector’s securi-
tised lending to general government in the 
fi  rst three months of 2012. By contrast, commercial banks signifi  cantly expanded 
their securitised lending to general govern-ment. In seasonally adjusted terms, they in-creased their credit to this sector by a total 
of €100.5 billion. As shown by the non-seasonally adjusted national data, this in-
crease was very largely attributable to Span-
ish and Italian banks, which purchased al-most exclusively domestic government 
bonds.1 This development took place along-
side the launch of the Eurosystem’s three-
year refi  nancing operations and the expan-sion of the collateral framework, which pro-
vided the banking sector with a large vol-ume of additional fi  nancing. As well as 
securitised lending to general government, 
securitised lending to the private sector also 
benefi  ted from this, expanding by just 
under €31 billion in the reporting quarter.
1 Seasonally adjusted data are not available at country 
level.Securitised lending to
general government
1 Source:  ECB.  2 Source:  Bundesbank  calculations  based  on 
ECB data.
Deutsche Bundesbank2008 2009 2010 2011 2012300306090120150
–+++++€ bn, quarterly flows, seasonally adjusted
by the Eurosystem1
by MFIs (excluding ESCB) 2Securitised lending
by MFIs 1Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2012  
32

This increase was partly characterised by the 
marked growth in lending to the private sector 
in the form of securities, which is likewise likely 
to be linked to the extensive provision of liquid -
ity from the three-year refinancing operations. 
As of February, commercial banks extended 
their equity holdings, whereas they had still ac -
quired a large amount of other securities in 
January. In addition, – over the first quarter as 
a whole – loans increased markedly too. This 
development was, however, exclusively attrib -
utable to strong inflows in January, which rep -
resented a countermovement to the outflows 
in December. On balance, the seasonally ad -
justed and annualised three-month rate of 
loans to the private sector (adjusted for credit 
sales and securitisations) rose to just under 1%, 
after just under -1% in December.
The main cause for this increase were loans 
from MFIs to households, which once again 
grew discernibly in the first quarter of 2012. 
The positive developments were, however, 
confined to the euro-area core countries, 
whereas lending to households by banks in the 
peripheral countries declined perceptibly in 
some cases against the backdrop, among other 
things, of continuously high levels of private 
debt. Supported almost exclusively by loans for 
house purchase, which continued to benefit 
from favourable financing conditions and gov -
ernment support schemes in some countries, 
the seasonally adjusted and annualised three-
month rate for loans to households in the euro 
area (adjusted for loan sales and securitisations) 
edged up slightly and stood at 1.5% at the end 
of March.
Loans to financial corporations, too, increased 
markedly in the reporting quarter. However, a 
large share of these loans ultimately forms the 
counterpart to indirect interbank transactions 
(reverse repos) contained in (M3-M2) and 
therefore represents no additional provision of 
funds to the private non-bank sector per se.
Unlike loans to households, loans to non-
financial corporations declined slightly in the Llending  
to  private sector 
in the form  
of  securities up, 
too
Discernible in-
crease in loans to householdsComponents and counterparts of the money stock in the euro area
1 Year-on-year  change  in percent.  2 In percentage  points. 
3 Adjusted  for loan  sales  and securitisation.  4 Taken  in isol-
ation,  an increase  curbs  M3 growth.  5 Adjusted  for loan  sales 
and securitisation  from  2010  Q1. 6 Non-monetary  financial 
corporations.
Deutsche Bundesbank2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012505101520
–++++
–10–50+5+10+15+20+25
505101520
–++++Seasonally adjusted, end-of-quarter data
... components of the money stock
... counterparts
Sectoral growth contributions 2of which
Loans to the private sector 5Growth rate 1 of M3 and the
contributions to growth 2 of the ...
M3
M3-M2M2-M1
M1
M3
Remaining balance
sheet items
Longer-term financial
liabilities to other non-MFIs 4Net external
asset positionCredit to the
private sector 3
Growth rate 1
Financial
corporations 6
Non-financial
corporations HouseholdsDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2012  
33

winter months after they had already fallen ap -
preciably in the preceding quarter. The coun -
termovement to the high outflows in Decem -
ber turned out to be rather weak in January 
and was substantially overshadowed by the 
outflows that followed in February and March. 
Hence, the three-month rate of loans to non-
financial corporations (adjusted for loan sales 
and securitisations) remained in negative terri -
tory, yet recorded a seasonally adjusted and an -
nualised increase from -3% to -0.5%. Loans 
with short and medium-term maturities de -
clined, whereas loans with maturities of over 
five years experienced growth – as in the pre -
ceding quarters. The overall modest extension 
of loans throughout the euro area is a result of 
the very heterogeneous developments in loans 
to non-financial corporations in the individual 
member states.
A slight decline in the net external asset pos -
ition of the banking sector vis-à-vis non-
residents also had per se a dampening effect 
on M3 as the perceptible increase in external 
liabilities was only partly offset by a rise in ex -
ternal claims.
Analysis of the components and counterparts 
of M3 clearly shows that monetary develop -
ments in the first quarter of 2012 were domin -
ated above all by portfolio shifts by the non-
bank sector and the purchase of securities by 
the banking sector. Both factors reflect the im -
pact of the Eurosystem’s non-standard monet -
ary policy measures at least to an extent. Con -
sequently, the sharp increase of M3 in the re -
porting quarter probably overstates the under -
lying monetary dynamics. This is confirmed by 
the divergence between monetary growth and 
the considerably weaker development in loans 
to the private sector.
Inflation forecasts on the basis of various mon -
etary indicators (monetary aggregates, short-
term deposits, loans) currently signal, on aver -
age, balanced risks to price stability for the next 
three years. However, the uncertainty associ -
ated with these forecasts remains high.The Bank Lending Survey (BLS) provides indica -
tions of what caused the overall muted devel -
opment of loans to the non-financial private 
sector in the reporting quarter. According to 
the results of the April round, the development 
of credit supply conditions for the euro area as 
a whole was again marked by restrictive adjust -
ments in the first quarter of 2012, which were 
more pronounced for loans to enterprises and 
for house purchase. However, on the whole, 
the level of tightening remained considerably 
below that of the previous quarter. Particularly 
the standards for loans to enterprises were 
tightened to a lesser degree.
At the same time, the reduction in the demand 
for funds reported by credit institutions was 
perceptibly higher compared with the previous 
quarter. Banks mainly attributed this to the low 
financing needs for fixed asset investment in 
lending to enterprises as well as to weak con -
sumer confidence, the subdued prospects for 
the housing market and the low propensity to 
purchase durable consumer goods.
Moreover, the banks reported a noticeable im -
provement in their funding environment com -
pared with the final quarter of 2011 against the 
backdrop of the non-standard monetary policy 
measures. Simultaneously, the negative influ -
ence of the sovereign debt crisis on banks’ 
funding conditions declined in the euro area as 
a whole. In addition, the sovereign debt crisis 
had only a slightly restrictive effect on credit 
standards in all the surveyed business areas.
German banks’ deposit  
and lending business  
with domestic customers
Following a slight decline in the previous quar -
ter, the deposit business of German banks re -
gained momentum in the first quarter of 2012. 
The seasonally adjusted and annualised three-
month rate rose to 4½%, thereby continuing 
the trend of the previous year’s first three quar -
ters. The expansion was solely sustained by Slight reduction 
in loans to  
non-financial corporations
Decline in net 
external asset position has slightly dampen-ing effect
Monetary devel-
opments marked by effects of non-standard monetary policy measures
Money based 
forecasts with 
balanced  inflation risksRenewed tight -
ening of euro-
area credit sup-ply condi-
tions …
… and a clear 
simultaneous  reduction  
in the demand 
for funds
Funding environ-
ment improved noticeably
German banks’ 
deposit business 
regains momen-
tumDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2012  
34

short-term maturities, the interest rates of 
which remained relatively attractive despite 
slipping slightly in the reporting quarter. Sight 
deposits and short-term time deposits in par -
ticular increased significantly. By contrast, there 
was a renewed and, in parts, clearly stronger 
decline in longer-term types of investment. This 
meant that the portfolio shifts away from long-
term to shorter-term deposits that had already 
been observed in the previous quarter con -
tinued at an accelerated pace in the reporting 
quarter.
A reduction in longer-term deposit types was 
recorded across all segments. While savings de -
posits with an agreed maturity of over three 
months receded to a similar extent as in the 
previous quarter, the decline in longer-term 
time deposits (with a maturity of over two 
years) accelerated discernibly in the first quarter 
of 2012. Particularly insurance corporations and 
other financial intermediaries contributed to 
this development.
German banks’ credit to domestic non-banks, 
however, edged up only slightly in the first 
quarter of 2012. Their seasonally adjusted and 
annualised three-month rate stood at just over 
½% and was (with around €5.2 billion of just 
under €5.3 billion) almost exclusively driven by 
an expansion in lending to domestic general 
government. Although loans to the domestic 
private sector grew perceptibly, this increase 
was offset by lending in the form of securities 
declining at a similar rate. This reduction was 
mainly attributable to a decrease in the other 
financial corporations’ capital market debt, 
which had already been observed for some 
time. In contrast to this, German banks ex -
tended their business with general government 
with regard to loans and to lending in the form 
of securities.
Lending to non-financial corporations, too, in -
creased markedly again in the first quarter of 
2012, whereby it recovered from its decline in 
the last quarter of 2011 which had been char -
acterised by a higher level of redemption pay -ments towards the end of the year. Quarter-
on-quarter developments were mainly shaped 
by a strong rise in January which represented a 
countermovement to the extensive decline in 
December. The fact that these movements fo -
cused on loans with short maturities supports 
the assumption that borrowers cleaned up 
their balance sheets to be able to present a 
lower level of debt at the end of the year. 
Nevertheless, long-term loans to non-financial 
corporations also posted a sharp increase in 
the first quarter of 2012. Particularly savings 
banks, but also regional banks and credit co -
operatives, contributed to the expansion of 
loans to non-financial corporations. Given a 
strong negative base effect, the clear expan -
sion of corporate loans in the reporting quarter 
was not matched by a corresponding increase 
in the annual growth rate. Instead, it recorded 
a slight decline in the course of the reporting 
quarter from 1.3% at end-December to 1.1% at 
end-March.Reduction in 
longer-term  deposit types 
continues
Only slight in-
crease in banks’ lending to 
 domestic  
non-banks
Significant ex-
pansion in loans to non-financial corporationsLending and deposits of monetary  fi  nancial institutions (MFIs) in Germany 
*
Changes in € billion, seasonally adjusted
Item2011 2012
Q4 Q1
Deposits of domestic non-MFIs 1
Overnight 12.5 24.9
With agreed maturities
of up to 2 years – 7.3 16.4
of over 2 years – 2.8 – 9.6
Redeemable at notice
of up to 3 months – 0.2 4.2
of over 3 months – 4.1 – 3.2
Lending
to domestic general government
Loans – 7.5 1.5
Securitised lending – 4.3 3.7
to domestic enterprises and 
households
Loans 20.5 5.7
of which to households 2 1.7 7.9
to non-fi  nancial  corporations 
3 – 3.2 9.8
Securitised lending – 7.9 – 5.6
* As well as banks (including building and loan associations, but 
excluding the Bundesbank), monetary fi  nancial institutions 
(MFIs) here also include money market funds. End-of-quarter 
data, adjusted for statistical changes. 1 Enterprises, households 
and general government excluding central government. 2  In-
cluding non-profi  t institutions serving households. 3  Corpor-
ations and quasi-corporations.
Deutsche BundesbankDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2012  
35

In addition to loans to non-financial corpor -
ations, German banks also increased their loans 
to domestic households discernibly in the re -
porting quarter. At just over 2%, in the report -
ing quarter these loans increased at a rate (sea -
sonally adjusted and annualised) not seen in 
almost ten years. As with non-financial corpor -
ations, growth was mainly attributable to re -
gional banks and credit cooperatives. This was 
caused by the continued growth in loans for 
house purchase, a major component of house -
hold borrowing – the annualised three-month 
rate of which accelerated to 1.6% – on the one 
hand, and by the perceptible increase in con -
sumer loans – the (seasonally adjusted and an -
nualised) growth rate of which climbed from 
3.0% at end-December to 5.0% at end-
March  – on the other hand. Looking at the 
year as a whole, the growth in loans to house -
holds at an annual rate of 1.1% at the end of 
the first quarter is, however, still to be de -
scribed as moderate.In the first quarter, the German banks that par -
ticipated in the BLS tightened credit standards 
minimally on the whole.1,2 It was only in the 
case of lending to small and medium-sized en -
terprises that institutions undertook a slight 
easing. The restrictive influences in loans to en -
terprises mainly originated from capital costs, 
whereas the institutions’ good liquidity position 
and competition within the banking sector had 
per se an expansive effect on standards. A 
clearly different development in terms of busi -
ness area and credit rating category was re -
corded for loan margins. While the surveyed 
banks widened the margins on riskier loans to 
enterprises, they saw no need to adjust the 
margins for average-risk loans. By contrast, the 
margins were tightened perceptibly in parts of 
the retail customer business with the exception 
of riskier loans for house purchase. All other 
surveyed credit conditions, however, remained 
virtually unchanged across all business areas.
In contrast to lending as reported by all banks 
for banking statistics purposes, the surveyed in -
stitutions at the same time reported unchanged 
demand for consumer credit as well as a per -
ceptible decline in demand for loans to enter -
prises in the first quarter of 2012. The reduced 
demand in loans to enterprises was, according 
to the information they provided, attributable 
above all to the enterprises’ resorting to in -
ternal funds and, to a somewhat lesser extent, 
to their procuring funds on the capital market. 
By contrast, the institutions recorded a percep -
tible increase in demand for loans for house 
purchase, which they attributed primarily to 
the consistently robust consumer confidence 
and the positive outlook for the housing mar -
ket.Discernible 
growth in loans to householdsLending  policies …
… and develop-
ments in  demand for 
loans mixedLoans of German banks to
selected sectors
1 Year-on-year  rate of change.  2 Non-financial  corporations 
and quasi-corporations.
Deutsche Bundesbank2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 201221012345
––+++++Growth contributions in percentage pointsSeasonally adjusted, end-of-quarter data
HouseholdsFinancial corporations
Non-financial corporations 2Growth rate 1 in %
1 The aggregate survey results for Germany may be found 
at www.bundesbank.de/volkswirtschaft/vo_veroeffentli -
chungen.en .php.
2 Starting with the April survey, the German sample of the 
BLS for the euro area was extended to currently 34 sur -
veyed institutions. Following the changes in the German 
banking sector during the past few years, this enlargement 
became necessary in order to maintain a high degree of 
representativeness in the future.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2012  
36

Banking conditions in Germany
1 According  to harmonised  MFI interest  rate statistics.  2 According  to the Bank  Lending  Survey,  difference  between  the number  of 
respondents  reporting  “tightened  considerably”  and “tightened  somewhat”  and the number  of respondents  reporting  “eased 
somewhat” and “eased considerably” as a percentage of the responses given. 3 Expectations for  2012 Q2.
Deutsche Bundesbank02 03 04 05 06 07 08 09 10 11 20123,54,04,55,05,56,06,57,07,58,08,59,09,5
–300+30
–300+30
–60–300+30+60
–60–300+30
2002 03 04 05 06 07 08 09 10 11 122,02,53,03,54,04,55,05,56,06,5
603003060
––++
9060300306090
–––+++Credit to non-financial corporations
% pa
%%% pa
%%
Riskier loans
Average loans%
Average loansRiskier loans
Average loans%
Loans to enterprises... with an initial rate fixation of
    over 1 year and up to 5 years
Change in credit standards 2Consumer credit ...
... with an initial rate fixation of
    over 5 years
... up to €1 million
Consumer creditBank interest rates (new business) 1
3
Change in loan margins 2Loans to enterprises ...
... with an initial rate
    fixation of up
    to 1 year ...
Riskier loans3,03,54,04,55,05,5
Consumer credit
Loans for house purchase... over €1 million... up to €1 million
3... over €1 million
Loans for house purchaseLoans for house purchase
with an initial rate fixation of
over 5 years and up to 10 years
Loans to enterprises
3... with an initial rate fixation
    of over 5 years ...Credit to householdsDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2012  
37

The survey for the first quarter again contained 
two additional questions on the impact of the 
financial and sovereign debt crisis on banks’ 
funding conditions and credit standards. Ac -
cording to the answers provided by the Ger -
man institutions, their access to funding 
sources improved perceptibly on the whole in 
the first quarter against the backdrop of the 
positive developments in the financial markets 
as a result of the two three-year tenders. This 
mostly affected access to the securitisation 
markets and the primary markets for bank 
bonds. On the whole, however, German banks’ 
current assessment was somewhat more sub -
dued compared to the data from European 
banks, after they had reported that their situ -
ation was deteriorating to a lesser extent in the 
last two surveys. Furthermore, the German 
banks indicated that the – in some cases – per -
ceptible recoveries on the European govern -
ment bond markets were having a positive ef -
fect on their funding conditions. However, the 
sovereign debt crisis had no influence on the 
credit conditions in the corporate and retail 
customer business.
In the first quarter of 2012, bank lending rates 
across all surveyed business sectors continued on the downward path they had set out on in 
the previous year. Here, the decline in interest 
rates for loans to enterprises was – at over 40 
basis points – about twice as strong for short 
rate fixation periods as for long periods. Inter -
est rates for loans with long rate fixation 
periods have been at a historical low since the 
previous quarter, and stood at an average of 
3.3% for large-scale loans and at 3.4% for 
small-scale loans at the end of the quarter. A 
similar pattern was recorded in interest rates on 
loans for house purchase. The decline in inter -
est rates on loans with short rate fixation 
periods was – at 33 basis points – rather pro -
nounced, whereas interest rates for loans with 
rate fixation periods of over five years were 
hardly lowered further and – averaging 3.4% – 
persisted at a low level. In contrast to the sea -
sonal pattern of the last few years, interest 
rates for consumer credit with rate fixation 
periods of up to five years fell again; only the 
conditions for loans with rate fixation periods 
of more than five years rose again slightly 
to 7.8% compared with the end of the year. On 
the whole, bank lending rates followed the 
broad downward trend of interest rates in the 
money and capital markets with no discernible 
lag.Funding condi-
tions improveConditions for bank loans 
 deterioratingDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2012  
38

Financial market setting
Tensions on the financial markets eased on bal -
ance during the first few months of this year, 
although the mood dampened again noticea -
bly of late. The exceptional easing of monetary 
policy on both sides of the Atlantic initially 
played a major part in calming the markets. In 
particular, the Eurosystem’s three-year refinanc -
ing operations facilitated capital market access 
for many issuers – above all, for the public sec -
tor debtors of Spain and Italy, which saw their 
yields fall significantly. By contrast, in an envi -
ronment of declining risk aversion and a largely 
positive underlying economic sentiment, the 
diminishing flight to safety led to a slight in -
crease in Bund yields during that period.
Regained confidence boosted the financial 
markets across the board in the first quarter. In 
addition to the markets for debt securities and 
corporate credit default swaps, it also had a 
positive effect on the stock markets, sending 
prices up. European credit institutions, whose 
financing conditions picked up significantly for 
a while, were the main beneficiaries. Neverthe -
less, they remain extremely sensitive to market 
participants’ reassessments of the solvency of 
sovereign debtors given their (growing) expo -
sure to government bonds.
This became apparent from April onwards, 
when the optimism of the first three months 
gave way to considerable disillusionment. Con -
cern about the future of Greece and the budg -
etary situation in Spain proved to be a negative 
factor, as did deteriorating economic signals. 
Renewed safe-haven flows resulted. In this set -
ting the euro depreciated slightly on the whole, 
amid fluctuations, from the beginning of the 
year.Exchange rates
On the foreign exchange markets, the focus in 
the last few months was on the debt crisis in 
several euro-area countries and on changes in 
appraisals of monetary policy measures on 
both sides of the Atlantic. After the euro-dollar 
exchange rate – buoyed by the approval of the 
new aid package for Greece and the unexpect -
edly sharp rise in the Ifo business climate 
index  – had stood at US$1.34 at the end of 
February, it fell again substantially. By mid-
March it was down to US$1.31. The euro was 
depressed by the application of collective ac -
tion clauses in Greece and growing concerns 
about the financial situation in Spain after the 
Spanish government announced it would not 
meet its budgetary objective for 2012. The 
Fed’s assessment that the economic situation 
in the US had improved somewhat against the 
backdrop of an easing of the US labour market 
put the euro under additional pressure at that 
time.
In the second half of March, the euro tempo -
rarily regained much of the lost ground after 
Spain’s successful bond auction and amid spec -
ulation that the Fed would be launching a new 
bond purchase programme. However, the euro 
again dropped below the US$1.31 mark in 
early April, when the publication of the min -
utes of a Federal Reserve meeting ended ex -
pectations of a new round of quantitative 
monetary policy easing in the United States. At 
the same time, the ECB signalled it would be 
continuing its non-standard monetary policy 
measures. On top of that, the situation on the 
Spanish and Italian bond markets deteriorated 
further.
Thereafter, the euro-dollar exchange rate 
largely moved sideways amid fluctuations. On 
the one hand, the euro was burdened by po -
litical uncertainties in several euro-area coun -
tries and concerns about the effectiveness of Factors influenc-
ing financial markets changeEuro down against the US dollar on  balance since 
beginning of the yearFinancial marketsDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2012  
39

the fiscal compact. On the other hand, it was 
supported by the publication of a renewed in -
crease of the Ifo Institute’s business climate in -
dex as well as by US labour market and growth 
figures that had fallen short of financial market 
players’ expectations. The downgrade of 
Spain’s creditworthiness by one rating agency 
had no lasting effect on exchange rate devel -
opments. The euro fell markedly of late after 
attempts to form a government in Greece 
failed and following the announcement of new 
elections. As this report went to press, the euro 
stood at US$1.28, which is equivalent to an ap -
preciation by 1½% since the beginning of the 
year.The euro was latterly 1% stronger against the 
yen compared with the start of 2012. For one 
thing, the yen was weakened by the expansion 
of quantitative easing of Japanese monetary 
policy. Moreover, the revelation of hidden forex 
market interventions by the Bank of Japan in 
the fourth quarter of 2011 led to speculation 
about further interventions in the event of a 
noticeable yen appreciation. As uncertainty 
grew about the ability to master the European 
debt crisis, jitters on the financial markets 
heightened again in recent weeks. This lent 
support to the yen, which is evidently consid -
ered a comparatively safe investment haven, 
and kept the rise of the euro-yen exchange rate 
within limits.
The euro fell against the pound sterling during 
the period under review. After one rating 
agency downgraded the outlook for Great Brit -
ain’s creditworthiness, the euro-pound sterling 
exchange rate made slight gains in the second 
half of March. However, the mood reversed 
again to the detriment of the euro in April, af -
ter the risks that existed in several euro-area 
countries in connection with the debt crisis 
again received more attention. As this report 
went to press, the euro stood at £0.81, which 
was 3½% below its value at the beginning of 
the year.
The euro’s average value vis-à-vis the curren -
cies of 20 major trading partners depreciated 
by about 1½% from the beginning of the year. 
Whereas the euro posted the above-mentioned 
slight exchange rate gains against the yen, it 
depreciated against most of the others of these 
currencies. The price competitiveness of euro-
area suppliers compared with important trad -
ing partners improved somewhat as the euro 
depreciated, but is still slightly unfavourable as 
measured by the long-term average.Euro appreciates 
against the yen …
… and depreci-
ates against the pound sterling
Effective euro 
exchange rateExchange rate of the euro
1 Exchange rate at the start of monetary union on 4 Janu-
ary 1999. 2 As calculated by the ECB against the currencies of 
20 countries.
Deutsche BundesbankJ F M A M J J A S O N D J F M A M J
2011 20121.201.301.401.50
95100110120130140
0.700.750.800.850.900.95
95100105110115Daily data; log scale
US$
¥
£against the ...
... US dollar
US$1.1789 1
... yen
¥133,73 1
... pound sterling
£0.7111 1
Nominal effective exchange rate 2
1999 Q1 = 100
103.11 1Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2012  
40

Securities markets and 
 portfolio transactions
Yields on US, German and Japanese govern -
ment bonds with a maturity of ten years rose 
slightly in the opening months of this year in line 
with the easing on the money markets, the decline 
in market players’ risk aversion and the – on 
the whole – positive underlying cyclical trend.1 
In April and May the re-emergence of uncer -
tainty about the sustainability of public finances 
and the robustness of the banking sector in 
several euro-area countries again led to falling 
long-term interest rates in the above-mentioned 
economies, which investors consider to be safe 
havens. As a result, the yield on German Bunds 
in particular fell by just over ½ percentage 
point compared with the beginning of the 
year; at mid-May it stood at a historically low 
level of just below 1.3%. Yield changes were 
less marked on balance in the USA and Japan, 
where ten-year government bonds of late 
yielded 23 and 13 basis points less than their 
respective levels at the beginning of 2012. The 
yield gap between US and German government 
paper widened to 41 basis points as a result. 
This is likely attributable to increasing safe-
haven flows, which were probably stronger in 
the case of Bunds than of US Treasuries.
The larger inflows to Bunds, which are con -
sidered to be particularly liquid and safe, were 
reflected in a flattening of the German yield 
curve, which is estimated on the basis of Fed -
eral securities. Whereas the near-money mar -
ket one-year interest rates changed only slightly 
on balance, yields decreased particularly in the 
medium and long-term maturity segment. The 
flattening of the yield curve was especially no -
ticeable in the maturity segment up to five 
years. Liquidity effects may have played a part 
in this – a supposition which is supported by International 
bond markets
German yield 
curve flatterLiquidity measure: spread ofKfW bonds over Bunds
Sources: Bloomberg and Bundesbank calculations.
Deutsche Bundesbank2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012020406080100120Basis points, weekly averages
Residual maturity ...
... 2 years
... 10 years
Yield spreads in the euro area
Sources:  Thomson  Reuters  and  Bundesbank  calculations. 
1 Debt haircut on 9 March 2012. 2 Standard deviation of yield 
spreads of euro-area government bonds.
Deutsche Bundesbank2009 2010 2011 201203006009001,2001,5001,8002,1002,4002,7003,0003,3003,6003,900
03006009001,200Basis points, daily data
Spread of ten-year
government bondsagainst Bunds
Dispersion of yield spreads
 2
GDP weightedUnweightedItaly
SpainGreece
IrelandPortugal1
1 The implied volatility, which is derived from options on 
the euro Bund future and is a measure of investor uncer -
tainty, hovered around its multi-year average of 6.6% in 
the spring months after rising to levels of more than 10% 
in November. It stood at 6.4% at last report. In the USA, 
the comparable option value for Treasuries was, at 4.7%, 
even close to its pre-crisis level of late.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2012  
41

the fact that the yield differential between 
bonds issued by the KfW, which are equally 
safe but differ in terms of liquidity, on the one 
hand and Bunds on the other widened consid -
erably. Investors evidently did not restrict their 
liquidity-driven demand to long-dated issues, 
however, but also had an appetite for medium 
maturities in particular.
The decline in nominal yields was also due in 
part to falling real interest rates, which, up to 
and including the ten-year segment, have in 
the meantime entered negative territory in Ger -
many. By contrast, the inflation expectations 
for the European index of consumer prices, which are derived by comparing inflation-
indexed and nominal bonds, remained un -
changed for the next ten years, whereas they 
fell on balance in the five-year segment. Thus, 
the forward inflation rate from five years up to 
ten years increased by some 10 basis points 
to 2.10%. However, the above-mentioned safe-
haven and liquidity inflows, which are usually 
first seen in nominal bonds, currently make it 
more difficult to interpret the break-even infla -
tion rates owing to time-varying and maturity-
dependent liquidity premiums.
The yield spreads between same-maturity 
bonds of different euro-area countries nar -
rowed at first compared with the end of 2011. 
Interest rate dispersion and the GDP-weighted 
yield spread of long-term government bonds of 
the other euro-area countries over comparable 
Bunds contracted after posting highs between 
the end of 2011 and March. The primary fac -
tors behind this included the Eurosystem’s sec -
ond three-year tender and the exchange – with 
considerable private sector involvement  – of 
old Greek sovereign bonds for new Greek 
bonds with maturities running up to 30 years 
and shorter-dated EFSF bonds. In April and in 
early May, however, unfavourable economic 
data and market perceptions that consolidation 
efforts in several euro-area countries were flag -
ging caused ten-year interest rates to rise and 
led to disappointing primary market issuance. 
With yields on Bunds decreasing at the same 
time, this led to a renewed widening of spreads. 
The GDP-weighted yield spread currently stands 
at 402 basis points, compared with 412 basis 
points at the beginning of the year.
During the reporting period, yields on BBB-
rated European corporate bonds fell –  amid 
fluctuations  – to 5.2%; they are therefore 
around 125 basis points below their five-year 
average.2 The interest rate spread over Bunds 
contracted to 391 basis points.Euro-area yield 
spreads at level of early 2012
Financing condi-
tions for enter-prises improvedFinancing conditions for euro-area enterprises
Sources: Bloomberg and Thomson Reuters. 1 BBB-rated bonds 
with a residual maturity of seven to ten years.
Deutsche Bundesbank2008 2009 2010 2011 201236912151821242730
50100150200250300350Weekly averages
%
Basis pointsYields 1
Credit default swap premiums
iTraxx Europe
Financials
iTraxx Europe 125iTraxx Europe
Non-FinancialsiBoxx Non-FinancialsiBoxx Financials
iBoxxCorporates
2 Yields on BBB-rated corporate bonds in the iBoxx bond 
index serve as a basis. This index covers bonds issued by 
banks and non-banks.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2012  
42

The changing financing conditions on the bond 
markets were partly reflected in the buying and 
selling figures on the German bond market 
where, overall, gross issuance totalled €396 bil -
lion in the first quarter of 2012. It was therefore 
higher than the level in the previous quarter 
(€339½ billion). After deducting redemptions, 
which also increased, and taking account of 
changes in issuers’ holdings of their own 
bonds, debt securities totalling €22 billion were 
sold on balance. In addition, foreign borrowers 
sold paper worth €38 billion in Germany. Thus, 
funds totalling €60 billion were raised on the 
German bond market in the reporting period.
In the first three-month period of 2012, the 
public sector raised €63½ billion in the bond 
market, compared with net redemptions of 
€10½ billion in the previous quarter. These fig -
ures include issues by resolution agencies of 
German banks which for statistical purposes 
are classified as belonging to the public sector. 
Central government issued mainly Federal 
notes (€13½ billion), and to a lesser extent 10 
and 30-year bonds (€3½ billion and €2½ bil -
lion respectively). By contrast, the German Fed -
eral government redeemed Federal Treasury 
discount paper (Bubills) and two-year Federal 
Treasury notes (Schätze) totalling €6 billion and 
€3½ billion net respectively. On balance, the 
German Länder tapped the capital market in 
the amount of €12 billion in the quarter under 
review.
Domestic enterprises redeemed debt securities 
worth €6 billion net in the first quarter of 2012. 
These were mainly bonds with a maturity of 
less than one year. Notably financial corpora -
tions, which do not count as belonging to the 
banking sector, have been scaling back their 
capital market debt for some time now, 
whereas the enterprises of the real economy 
have used the domestic capital market as a 
source of finance.3
Domestic credit institutions, which have posted 
strong growth in deposits and inflows of funds 
from abroad during the financial crisis, reduced their capital market debt further (by €35½ bil -
lion) in the first quarter of 2012. In particular, 
they redeemed other bank debt securities, 
which can be structured flexibly (€19 billion), as 
well as public Pfandbriefe (€14 billion) and 
mortgage Pfandbriefe (€5½ billion). Specialised 
credit institutions, meanwhile, issued debt se -
curities totalling €3 billion net.
In the first quarter of 2012, domestic non-
banks were the main buyers on the domestic 
bond market; they added paper worth €45½ 
billion to their portfolios. The focus of investor 
interest here was on foreign paper. A large part 
of the buying by non-banks was accounted for 
by mutual funds, which posted strong inflows 
of funds at the beginning of the year and in -
vested heavily in foreign bonds. Non-resident 
investors bought German debt securities for Net sales in the 
bond market up
Public sector 
borrowing
Net redemptions 
of corporate bonds
Net redemptions 
by credit institu-tionsPurchases of debt securitiesInvestment activity in the German securities markets
€ billion
Item2011 2012
Q1 Q4 Q1
Debt securities
Residents 26.4 –  9.4 47.9
Credit institutions – 11.4 – 31.9 1.9
of which
Foreign debt securities 0.5 – 22.7 – 0.2
Deutsche Bundesbank 0.9 13.8 0.5
Other sectors 36.8 8.6 45.5
of which
Domestic debt securities 15.8 –  0.2 8.6
Non-residents 40.2 – 35.8 12.2
Shares
Residents 8.3 15.2 7.1
Credit institutions 5.8 7.2 5.5
of which
Domestic shares 7.6 2.5 10.2
Non-banks 2.6 8.0 1.6
of which
Domestic shares 4.2 5.2 – 0.1
Non-residents – 10.5 –  5.6 – 8.7
Mutual fund sharesInvestment in specialised funds 14.2 22.6 21.6
Investment in funds open to the general public 0.6 –  2.7 – 0.5
of which
Share-based funds 0.2 0.8 – 0.9
Deutsche Bundesbank
3 Moreover, German enterprises issued a significant vol -
ume of debt securities at foreign financial centres through 
their financing enterprises. These issues are not included in 
the national figures analysed here.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2012  
43

€12 billion. On balance, these were solely 
bonds issued by the public sector. German 
credit institutions and the Deutsche Bundes -
bank also purchased interest-bearing paper for 
€2 billion and €½ billion respectively.
During the winter months the international 
stock markets initially underwent a period of 
rallying stock prices which was fuelled to a very 
great extent by the Eurosystem’s three-year re -
financing operations. As the yields on Spanish 
and Italian government bonds dropped, the 
stock prices primarily of banks with large expo -
sure in those countries rose. Moreover, a more optimistic worldwide economic outlook sent 
prices soaring at that time.
However, these drivers of the stock price rally 
began to falter in April. For instance, when the 
Spanish budget deficit proved to be higher 
than expected, doubts arose regarding the sus -
tainability of Spain’s public finances. In add -
ition, concerns about the country’s banks came 
to the fore. This made capital market access 
more difficult and led to Spain – and, of late, to 
several Spanish and Italian banks  – being 
downgraded. On top of that, slackening re -
form efforts and upcoming elections in various 
euro-area countries are likely to have unsettled 
market participants. Finally, leading indicators 
deteriorated in part, causing economic pro -
spects to diminish. This led to the onset of fall -
ing prices on equity markets throughout the 
euro area, particularly in the peripheral coun -
tries.
As this report went to press the Euro Stoxx 
index was 4.5% lower on balance than at the 
end of 2011. Since then, the corresponding 
bank index has fallen by as much as 19.4%. In 
fact, since reaching a high in March, it has de -
clined by 32.7%. In this context, the above-
average drop in European banks’ stock prices is 
closely related to their exposure to peripheral 
government bonds. This has again brought the 
risks stemming from the interconnectedness of 
governments and banks back to the fore. Ger -
man stocks fared somewhat better on the 
whole. At the time of going to press they were 
3.9% above the level at the turn of the year.
The risk indicators for the stock market mir -
rored stock price movements. The implied vola -
tility of options on the Euro Stoxx, which re -
flects the uncertainty regarding the further 
trend of stock prices, declined markedly up to 
March before rising again somewhat. Similarly, 
the risk premium on the European stock mar -
ket, which can be derived for the Euro Stoxx 
using a three-stage dividend discount model, 
rose in April against the previous month. It was 
thus back at its end-of-year level at the time of International 
stock markets supported by  liquidity effect 
and economic hopesStock market 
losses due to 
greater uncer-
tainty about  effectiveness of 
fiscal compact
Risk premiums down since end-2011, but rising again of lateEquity market
Sources:  Thomson  Reuters  and Bundesbank  calculations. 
1 End-of-month  levels;  derived  from  a three-stage  dividend  dis-
count  model  using  three  to five-year  IBES  earnings  growth  ex-
pectations.  2 Expected  future  volatility,  calculated  from  prices 
of options on the Euro Stoxx.
Deutsche BundesbankEuro Stoxx
Banks
Lin scale
Implied return on equity 1
Euro StoxxEuro Stoxx
Euro Stoxx
Banks%31 December 2006 = 100, log scale
Stock price indicesWeekly averages
% Implied volatility of the Euro Stoxx 21520305075100150
510152025
10203040506070
2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2012  
44

going to press. The risk compensation investors 
demand for investing in bank shares has in -
creased by ½ percentage point on balance 
since December amid, on the whole, improved 
earnings growth expectations following a tem -
porary decline.
Contrasting with the euro area, the develop -
ment of stock prices of US enterprises – and of 
US banks in particular – was less volatile in the 
past months. Since the beginning of the year, 
the broad S&P 500 index has risen by 3.0% on 
balance, with US bank shares advancing by as 
much as 11.4%. US bank shares performed bet -
ter, first, due to the fact that the euro-area sov -
ereign debt crisis is of less significance to US 
banks because they are less exposed to the 
euro area. Second, the Fed’s announcement 
that it will maintain its highly accommodating 
monetary policy is likely to have driven prices 
up.
Issuance activity in the German stock market 
was still relatively subdued in the first three 
months of 2012. Domestic enterprises issued 
€1½ billion worth of new shares; these were 
listed and unlisted equities in almost equal 
measure. The volume of foreign equities out -
standing on the German market fell by €3 bil -
lion. Equities were purchased primarily by Ger -
man credit institutions (€5½ billion), which in -
vested solely in domestic paper on balance 
(€10 billion). Resident non-banks bought shares 
for €1½ billion, with the main focus on foreign 
paper. By contrast, foreign investors sold Ger -
man shares totalling €8½ billion, as they had 
frequently done in the past in the run-up to 
dividend payment dates.
During the reporting period, domestic invest -
ment companies recorded inflows of €21 bil -
lion, after raising funds totalling €20 billion in 
the previous three months. The fresh funds 
benefited mainly specialised funds reserved for 
institutional investors (€21½ billion). Of the 
funds open to the general public, almost only 
open-end real estate funds sold new shares for 
€1½ billion. By contrast, share-based funds in Stock market 
funding and stock purchases
Sales and 
 purchases of 
mutual fund sharesMajor items of the balance of payments
€ billion
Item2011 2012
Q1 Q4 Q1
I Current account 1, 2 + 40.5 + 47.7 +  40.9
Foreign trade 1, 3 + 40.8 + 40.1 +  45.5
Services 1 +  1.9 +  0.8 –   0.5
Income 1 + 13.2 + 18.7 +  15.5
Current transfers 1 – 13.5 –  5.7 –  15.1
II Capital transfers 1, 4 +  1.0 –  0.2 +   0.2
III Financial account 1
(Net capital exports: –) – 63.2 – 36.4 –  60.7
1 Direct investment – 23.4 +  5.2 –  23.4
German investment 
abroad – 26.3 –  6.3 –  26.8
Foreign investment
in Germany +  3.0 + 11.5 +   3.4
2 Portfolio investment + 14.7 – 43.7 –  36.0
German investment abroad – 21.2 –  3.3 –  38.6
Shares +  5.3 –  5.7 +   5.8
Mutual fund shares –  3.7 +  1.7 –   6.3
Debt securities – 22.8 +  0.7 –  38.1
Bonds and notes
5 – 19.6 –  9.4 –  35.5
of which
Euro-denominated 
bonds and notes – 18.5 – 11.5 –  37.9
Money market  instruments –  3.1 + 10.0 –   2.6
Foreign investmentin Germany + 35.9 – 40.4 +   2.5
Shares –  6.3 –  5.5 –   8.6
Mutual fund shares +  2.0 +  0.9 –   1.0
Debt securities + 40.2 – 35.8 +  12.2
Bonds and notes
5 + 33.5 – 22.1 +  12.7
of which
Public bonds and 
notes + 23.7 +  5.2 +  28.9
Money market  instruments +  6.7 – 13.7 –   0.5
3 Financial derivatives
6 – 10.4 –  5.1 –   4.0
4 Other investment 7 – 42.8 +  7.6 +   3.6
Monetary fi  nancial
institutions 8 –  4.8 – 50.4 + 232.9
of which short-term –  6.3 – 34.0 + 215.5
Enterprises and
households – 31.2 + 40.9 –  23.3
of which short-term – 15.7 + 24.2 –  20.6
General government –  8.1 –  1.7 –  24.6
of which short-term – 11.0 –  2.8 –  25.8
Bundesbank +  1.3 + 18.7 – 181.3
5 Change in reserve assets 
at transaction values ( increase: –)
9 –  1.4 –  0.4 –   1.0
IV Errors and omissions + 21.7 – 11.1 +  19.5
1  Balance. 2  Including supplementary trade items. 3  Special 
trade according to the offi   cial foreign trade statistics (source: Federal Statistical Offi   ce). 4 Including the acquisition/disposal of 
non-produced non-fi  nancial assets. 5 Original maturity of more 
than one year. 6 Securitised and non-securitised options as well 
as fi  nancial futures contracts. 7  Includes fi  nancial and trade 
credits, bank deposits and other assets. 8 Excluding the Bundes-
bank. 9 Excluding allocation of SDRs and excluding changes due 
to value adjustments.
Deutsche BundesbankDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2012  
45

particular (€1 billion), but also money market 
funds and bond-based funds redeemed their 
own shares (€½ billion in each case). Foreign 
funds traded in the German market acquired 
new resources totalling €6½ billion net in the 
first quarter of 2012. Domestic non-banks were 
the main buyers, adding mutual fund shares 
worth €31½ billion to their portfolios. By con -
trast, domestic credit institutions and foreign 
investors disposed of mutual fund shares worth 
€3 billion and €1 billion net respectively.
Direct investment
As in cross-border portfolio investment, which 
closed the first quarter of 2012 with net capital 
exports of €36 billion, the direct investment ac -
count likewise recorded capital outflows in the 
reporting period (€23½ billion). With that, the 
phase of moderate direct investment inflows 
seen over the previous three quarters came to 
an end.The most recent developments were fuelled 
above all by buoyant direct investment activ -
ities of German enterprises abroad (€27 billion). 
On the one hand, German parent companies 
provided their foreign subsidiaries and branches 
with equity capital (€12½ billion); on the other, 
they reinvested earnings generated by their 
non-resident branches (€9 billion). In addition, 
they supplied funds via intra-group loans (€5½ 
billion). The bulk of German direct investment 
in the reporting period was concentrated on 
European countries, notably the Netherlands 
(€11½ billion) and Great Britain (€4 billion). 
China, too, was a major investment country for 
German enterprises (€4 billion).
Non-resident enterprises increased their direct 
investment stocks in Germany slightly in the 
first three months of the current year (+€3½ 
billion). This took the form, almost exclusively, 
of reinvested earnings at German-based 
branches of European parent companies.Net capital 
 exports through 
direct invest -
mentStrong increase in German direct 
investment 
abroad
Non-resident 
 enterprises 
trim direct  investment in 
 GermanyDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2012  
46

Macroeconomic situation
The German economy returned to a path of 
growth after the turn of 2011-12. Following a 
slight drop in economic output in autumn 
2011, seasonally and calendar-adjusted real 
gross domestic product (GDP) in the first three 
months of 2012 rose by 0.5% on the quarter 
according to the flash estimate by the Federal 
Statistical Office. Expansionary forces retained 
the upper hand in a difficult environment. The 
German economy was put under strain only for 
quite a short time by the considerable easing in 
demand for goods and services in the second 
half of 2011 due to the economic downturn in 
major global export markets and the ongoing 
euro-area sovereign debt crisis. Although the 
slowdown in the pace of economic activity 
weighed significantly on enterprises’ invest -
ment, the underlying trend in construction de -
mand remained strong. It is apparent that the 
losses in construction activity caused by the 
very cold winter weather in February were off -
set very rapidly. Moreover, private consumption 
probably picked up again after the turn of the 
year. The surprisingly good GDP outcome in 
the first quarter of 2012 is likely to overstate 
the underlying cyclical trend.
Exports rose over the reporting period in sea -
sonally adjusted terms, following no quarter-
on-quarter increase at the end of 2011 for the 
first time since the beginning of the current up -
turn. The reignition of the global economy also 
tallies with the fact that there was more de -
mand again for intermediate goods in the first 
two months of the current year – more recent 
detailed figures on German foreign trade are 
unavailable. By contrast, demand for machin -
ery and motor vehicles made in Germany de -
creased again after a fall in the previous quar -
ter, whilst foreign sales of consumer goods in -
creased.The increase in goods exports in the first two 
months of 2012 was attributable in equal 
measure to euro-area and non-euro-area coun -
tries. Nevertheless, demand stimuli from Ger -
many’s euro-area partner countries are cur -
rently relatively weak. This is reflected, among 
other things, by the fact that the marked de -
cline in goods exports last autumn has by no 
means been recovered. By contrast, there was 
merely an easing of the pace of growth in ex -
ports of goods to non-euro-area countries at 
the end of the year. The export trend in mar -
kets outside the euro area continued to point 
upwards over the winter months, not least 
owing to the strong pick-up in US business. In 
January and February 2012, goods exports to 
the US were, on average, not quite one-tenth 
up on the level of the previous quarter, which 
had already shown a notable increase of 4¾%. 
In addition, exports to the UK increased and 
sales of goods to Asia accelerated. Momentum 
came mainly from China and the newly indus -
trialised economies in Asia, whilst the South 
and East Asian emerging market economies 
were still lagging behind. Growth in business 
with central and east European EU countries 
was also comparatively subdued. Increased 
petrodollar recycling is suggested by the fact 
that exports of goods to OPEC countries 
jumped by one-third in the final quarter of 
2011 and remained at a heightened level after 
the turn of the year, despite some losses.
Seasonally adjusted imports after the turn of 
the year could have remained unchanged on 
the quarter in real terms. In the reporting 
period, nominal expenditure on imports of 
goods rose due to sharp price increases. The 
German economy’s demand for imports vis-à-
vis the euro-area partner countries is holding 
up slightly better overall than it is with non-
euro-area countries. In particular, despite cer -
tain signs of improvement at the current end, 
imports from Asia failed to overcome the mod -
erate underlying trend that set in during the GDP growth 
2012 Q1
Export growth 
again …… through 
reignition of 
global economy
By contrast, 
 imports 
 unchangedEconomic conditions in GermanyDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2012  
47

course of last year. By contrast, central and east 
European EU countries have probably been 
benefiting recently from the fact that German 
enterprises again had more demand for inputs 
and intermediate goods. Looking at energy im -
ports, the OPEC countries became a significant 
factor again at the beginning of the year, whilst 
imports from Russia fell markedly after a very 
strong second half of 2011.
Many enterprises are preparing themselves to 
step up production again rapidly in the next 
few months. This is indicated by the growth in 
domestic supplies and imports of inputs and 
intermediate goods. According to Ifo Institute 
data, the stock reach of raw and primary ma -
terials in manufacturing was significantly longer 
in the first quarter of 2012 than one year earl -
ier. By contrast, extending capacity currently 
appears less urgent. Even though vehicle fleets 
were probably renewed to a somewhat greater 
extent after the turn of the year, seasonally ad -
justed investment in machinery and equipment is likely to have decreased moderately in the 
reporting period, following a sideways move -
ment in the previous quarter.
Construction activity was negatively affected 
by output losses in connection with the very 
low temperatures in February. With regard to 
the number of ice days, February was far above 
the seasonal average, although the other win -
ter months were rather mild. There was a surge 
in construction activity as early as March. Ac -
cording to survey findings on the utilisation of 
construction machinery and weather-induced 
stoppages, however, output was curbed by ex -
ternal factors even in the last month of winter. 
Thus, in view of the extremely good orders situ -
ation in the construction sector, further catch-
up effects can be expected from spring on -
wards.
Private consumption could have picked up 
again somewhat in seasonally adjusted terms 
at the beginning of the year, after falling in the 
fourth quarter of 2011. Retail business im -
proved dramatically according to Ifo business 
surveys carried out during the winter months 
of 2012. Moreover, following the pronounced 
uncertainty in the middle of last year, economic 
optimism has become more widespread among 
consumers again. In this connection, income 
expectations, too, have remained largely stable. 
However, inflation restricted the scope for ex -
penditure perceptibly. High fuel prices, which 
are normally strongly felt, might have been one 
factor playing a key part in putting a dampener 
on the propensity to purchase.
Sectoral trends
Seasonally adjusted industrial output in the first 
three months of 2012 remained virtually un -
changed on the quarter. However, extended 
breaks in production during the Christmas 
period had then also contributed to a marked 
decline (-2%). These special measures were 
most widespread in the mechanical engineer -
ing and automotive sectors. The year began Pause in growth 
in machinery and equipment investmentConstruction  activity affected 
by adverse  weather 
 conditions
Slight recovery 
in private  consumption
Industrial output 
unchanged …Overall output
Deutsche Bundesbank2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012102104106108110112
–8–6–4–20+2+4+62005 = 100, price and seasonally adjusted
Log scale
GDP
%
Lin scale
Year-on-year changeDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2012  
48

well for these industries, following the very 
weak output figure in December. Even so, 
given depressed demand, there was no return 
to the high level of production of the summer 
months.1 Within the capital goods sector, the 
motor vehicle industry has so far been least af -
fected by the cyclical cooling tendencies of the 
second half of last year. Producers of inter -
mediate goods cut back their output by a sea -
sonally adjusted ½% on the quarter. The re -
cently resurgent demand for inputs and inter -
mediate products was evidently met in many 
cases by drawing on inventories. Consumer 
goods output fell somewhat more sharply in 
seasonally adjusted terms after the turn of the 
year (-1½%).
With regard to utilisation and demand condi -
tions, industrial activity was in a largely bal -
anced position at the beginning of 2012. A 
slowdown in new orders was followed in late 
2011 and early 2012 by a reduction in output 
towards normal utilisation; this is reached with 
a fixed capital utilisation of just over 84% of 
normal full capacity in manufacturing, as re -
ported in the Ifo business survey in January and 
April 2012. There is unlikely to be further ad -
justment pressure on industrial output, given 
that the order capacity index shows current 
orders having been in line with output at normal 
utilisation for roughly three quarters. In add -
ition, the reach of the order books stabilised at 
an average level, after peaking last summer.
Construction output declined considerably in 
seasonally adjusted terms in the winter months 
(-1½%). The quarterly figure was depressed by 
the fact that many outdoor construction activ -
ities had to be stopped in view of the very low 
temperatures in February. The -3¼% decline in 
civil engineering was stronger than that in 
building construction (-¾%). This was due not 
only to the fact that civil engineering projects 
react relatively strongly to adverse weather 
conditions; it is probably also related to the fact 
that this construction subsector is in a fairly 
weak state economically. In the first quarter 
2012, energy production rose by a seasonally adjusted ¾% on the quarter. The depressed 
level of output since numerous nuclear power 
plants were switched off in March last year 
thus fundamentally continued to exist.
In the trade sector, activity in the first few 
months of this year may have increased com -
pared with last autumn. According to Ifo Insti -
tute data, the assessment of the business situ -… normal 
 utilisation 
 maintained
Construction 
output burdened by severe frost, energy produc-
tion weak
Services show 
positive under-lying trend90100110120Underlying trends in foreign trade
1 Adjusted for the price indices for foreign trade.
Deutsche Bundesbank2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012Jan-
Feb95100110120130140
Jan-
Feb
100110120130Seasonally adjusted, quarterly
To non-euro-area countries
To euro-area countries2005 = 100, log scale
Exports of goods
price-adjusted 1
Total
0204060Lin scale
Foreign trade balanceImports of goodsprice-adjusted
 1100110120130140
€ bn
1 The high figure in the statistics recorded for mechanical 
engineering output in March 2012 is related to the fact 
that output from the previous period was to a considerable 
extent reported late and booked in this month. The index 
value therefore does not correspond to the underlying 
trend in this industrial sector.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2012  
49

ation has improved perceptibly, not only in re -
tail but also in the wholesale trade. This out -
come can be confirmed for the other surveyed 
service providers. Since the turn of the year, the 
underlying trend is likely to have been pointing 
upward again in the transport sector. For ex -
ample, the only reason why the mileage of do -
mestic heavy goods vehicles on toll roads de -
clined in the first quarter of 2012 in seasonally 
adjusted terms was that it was cut back due to 
adverse weather conditions in February.Employment and  
labour market
The winter saw a continuation of the positive 
labour market development in Germany. Ac -
cording to estimates by the Federal Statistical 
Office, the seasonally adjusted number of per -
sons in work in Germany in the first quarter of 
2012 rose by 192,000 on the quarter, an in -
crease of 0.5%. This, in turn, was probably due 
to additional jobs subject to social security con -
tributions. In January and February, the increase 
amounted to 157,000 persons, or 0.5%, com -
pared with the final quarter of 2011.2 In add -
ition, there were more self-employed persons. 
As in previous quarters, there was a declining 
number of government-assisted working ar -
rangements (“one-euro jobs”) and persons 
working exclusively in low-paid part-time jobs.
One part of growth in employment subject to 
social security contributions at the beginning of 
2012 came from manufacturing. Although 
there has been an ongoing rapid rise for two 
years now, the pre-crisis level has not quite 
been matched yet in this sector. There were 
also further substantial gains in business-related 
services (excluding temporary agency employ -
ment) and in trade. With the exception of the 
short cold spell in February, the winter was 
quite mild with little snow overall; this probably 
contributed to the relatively favourable season -
ally adjusted development in employment in 
the construction sector and in transport and lo -
gistics. There was also a slight rise in the tem -
porary agency employment sector in January 
and February, after growth had come to a halt 
in the previous two quarters. There were no 
gains in the public administration and educa -
tion sectors.Strong increase 
in employment again
Wide-ranging 
 increase in 
 employment 
subject to social security  contributionsOutput in industry and
in construction
Deutsche Bundesbank2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012Log scale
Industry
92100108116124
Lin scale
Year-on-year change–25–20–15–10–50+5+10+15
Lin scale
Year-on-year
change
94100108116124 Log scale
Construction
%
–15–10–50+5+10+15+20+25+30+35%2005 = 100, seasonally adjusted, quarterly
2 There is a considerable downward bias in the quarter-on-
quarter comparison of employment subject to social secur -
ity contributions. According to the Federal Employment 
Agency data, beginning with data for January 2012, 
around 70,000 persons who took up federal voluntary ser -
vice or a year of social or ecological voluntary work were 
removed from the statistics for employees subject to social 
security insurance contributions. The health and social ser -
vices sector, which accounts for around two-thirds of such 
jobs, was particularly affected by this.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2012  
50

The seasonally adjusted decline in unemploy -
ment was somewhat sharper in the first quar -
ter of 2012 in comparison with the previous 
two quarters. The largely mild weather is likely 
to have been a contributory factor here. In win -
ter 2012, the seasonally adjusted official un -
employment figure was 2.86 million. This rep -
resents a decline of around 46,000 on the 
quarter. As in the second half of 2011, this was 
predominantly driven by the favourable devel -
opment in unemployment amongst persons re -
ceiving the basic welfare allowance, whilst 
there was only a minor improvement in the 
case of unemployed persons claiming insur -
ance benefits. The official unemployment rate 
fell by 0.1 percentage point to 6.8%. Regis -
tered unemployment declined by 216,000 on 
the year, whilst total underemployment (ex -
cluding short-time work), which additionally 
takes account of changes in the active labour 
market policy, fell roughly twice as sharply. Sea -
sonally adjusted unemployment went up some -
what in April 2012, not least due to the fact 
that figures were recorded at the end of the 
Easter holidays; the unemployment rate re -
mained unchanged, however.
The reduction in unemployment has, for some 
time, lagged the increase in employment in 
terms of numbers. This suggests that additional 
demand for labour is being covered less and 
less from the pool of unemployed. First, vacan -
cies are being filled by persons in the latent la -
bour force, which increases labour force par -
ticipation. Secondly, there is increasing immi -
gration from abroad. Provisional data of the 
Federal Statistical Office show a migration sur -
plus of 279,000 persons for 2011. The eight 
central and east European EU member states 
(EU 8), to which complete free movement of 
workers has applied since May 2011, account 
for almost two-fifths of this, at around 103,000 
immigrants in net terms. However, the effective 
date of the new ruling had a rather minor influ -
ence, as immigration from this group of coun -
tries had already shown a marked rise earlier. 
The same effect is also shown by migration 
streams from Romania and Bulgaria. Although Decline in regis-
tered unemploy-ment continues
Strong immigra-
tion gainsLabour market
1 Excluding  seasonal  jobs  and jobs  located  abroad.  2 From 
May  2009,  unemployed  excluding  persons  newly  registered  on 
the books of private employment agencies.
Deutsche Bundesbank2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012April39.540.040.541.041.5
26.527.027.528.028.529.0–5000+500+1,000
2.53.03.54.04.5
–1,000–5000+500AprilSeasonally adjusted, quarterly
AprilMillion
Jan-
FebMillion
Million200300400500Thou-
sand
Thou-
sand
Thou-
sand Year-on-year changeOfficially unemployed 2UnemployedTotalEmployed
Unsubsidised vacancies 1
(scale enlarged)Occupied positionsJobs subject to social security
contributionsYear-on-year changeDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2012  
51

citizens of these two countries will not enjoy 
full labour mobility until the beginning of 2014, 
58,000 persons on balance moved from there 
to Germany in 2011, a further one-fifth of all 
net migration. Migration gains are also show -
ing a sharp trend rise compared with a number 
of countries in southern Europe, albeit at quite 
a low level.
The outlook for the labour market remains 
positive, although the available leading indica -
tors indicate that development will be slower in 
the near future in line with the quieter under -
lying economic trend. The Ifo employment bar -
ometer, which measures the planned staffing 
levels in trade and industry over the next three 
months, was clearly in expansionary territory in 
the first quarter of 2012. Although the index 
decreased slightly for the fourth time in succes -
sion in the first quarter, it remained at a com -
paratively high level at the current end. The 
Federal Employment Agency index for job va -
cancies, which is based on information on the 
current level and intake of job vacancies re -
ported to the Federal Employment Agency, 
peaked initially in January before declining 
slightly in seasonally adjusted terms by early 
spring. Even so, it is signalling a very high de -
mand for labour. This picture is confirmed by 
the IAB Job Vacancy Survey, according to which 
there were around 965,000 unsubsidised va -
cancies in the first quarter of 2012. This is 
somewhat less than in winter 2011 but still al -
most 50% more than two years ago. In par -
ticular, there were fewer vacancies in the 
wholesale and retail trade, and in hotel and 
restaurant services, whilst business-related ser -
vices reported significantly higher staffing re -
quirements.
Wages and prices
This year’s pay round is marked by considerable 
pay increases. Wage bargainers in the metal-
working and electrical engineering industries 
for the district of Baden-Württemberg agreed 
to a pay increase of 4.3% from May 2012 for the next 12 months. In the public sector, an 
agreement has been reached on a gradual in -
crease of 3.5% in scheduled rates of pay for 
central and local government employees – over 
a two-year period  – with retroactive effect 
from March 2012; a further rise of 1.4% in both 
January and August 2013 has also been 
agreed.3 A similar settlement in terms of total 
volume and profile was reached for the em -
ployees of Deutsche Telekom. Deutsche Post’s 
pay settlement envisages a 4% increase in basic 
pay over a slightly shorter period of 15 months 
from April 2012.
The negotiated rates of basic pay show a dis -
cernible acceleration. According to the Bundes -
bank’s negotiated pay rate statistics, their rise 
in the first quarter of 2012, at 2.5%, was sig -
nificantly sharper than in the fourth quarter of 
2011 (+2.1%).4 For negotiated rates of pay in -
cluding all ancillary agreements, which are 
often subject to fluctuations due to one-off 
payments, growth, at 1.8% in the first three 
months of 2012, was also slightly higher than 
in the preceding quarter (1.7%). In the report -
ing quarter, the year-on-year increase in actual 
earnings was probably somewhat sharper than 
that in negotiated wages.
Upward pressure on prices strengthened no -
ticeably at the start of 2012, at all stages of the 
economy. This was partly due to external influ -
ences, mainly the surge in crude oil prices and 
the perceptible increase in the pace of global 
economic activity, but also to the considerably 
weaker euro since last summer. Imports there -
fore rose significantly on the quarter by a sea -Outlook for 
 labour market 
remains  favourable
Higher pay rates 
in 2012 pay roundStronger growth in negotiated wages continues
Accelerated 
i ncrease in 
 import prices …
3 In line with a bill passed by the Federal Cabinet, the 
settlement will be adopted for Federal civil servants, albeit 
lowered by 0.2 percentage point at each step. Civil ser -
vants employed in local government are usually remuner -
ated in accordance with the Collective Agreement for the 
Public Sector of the Federal states.
4 The Federal Statistical Office, whose index excludes civil 
servants, reports an increase of 2.0% for negotiated rates 
of basic pay in the first quarter of 2012, compared with 
2.1% in the final quarter of 2011. Differences from the Bun -
desbank’s pay index result from the fact that the Federal 
Statistical Office reports only the monthly figure for January 
for the first quarter and thus does not include the public 
sector pay rise from March 2012 onwards.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2012  
52

sonally adjusted 2.4%. As inflation was even 
stronger at the beginning of 2011, the year-on-
year rate fell to +3.4%, however.
At the beginning of 2012, producers of com -
mercial goods achieved domestic and export 
prices which were, respectively, just under and 
just over 1% higher – in euro terms – than in 
the preceding quarter. This partly reflects the 
depreciation of the euro. In addition, the posi -
tive overall economic situation in Germany 
probably played a role. The corresponding 
year-on-year figures fell to +3.3% and +2.0%. 
There was a further deterioration in the terms 
of trade.
The clearly upward trend in construction activ -
ity and the higher prices of raw materials drove 
up construction prices perceptibly. There was 
an increase of 1.2% on the quarter and 3.2% 
on the year. According to calculations by the 
Association of German Pfandbrief Banks (Ver-
band deutscher Pfandbriefbanken),  purchase 
prices of owner-occupied housing went up by 
0.8% compared with the end of 2011 and by 
2.5% on the year.
The rise in consumer prices in the first quarter 
of 2012 was even somewhat sharper (season -
ally adjusted 0.6%) than in the fourth quarter 
of 2011. It was mainly the prices of petroleum 
products that were driven up perceptibly by the 
sharp increase in crude oil prices, but the prices 
of gas and electricity rates were also raised. En -
ergy prices were up 7.3% in total on the year. 
The fairly steep upward trend in food prices 
continued, reinforced at times by very un -
favourable weather conditions. For other 
goods, robust domestic demand facilitated the 
pass-through of price increases at the upstream 
levels of the economy. Services were noticeably 
more expensive, not only on account of higher 
rates charged in healthcare. The rise in rents 
remained moderate, however. The year-on-
year rise in food prices was 2.8%; other goods 
excluding energy were 1.9% up on the year 
and services (including housing rents) 1.2%. 
The inflation differential reflects both the fa -vourable global economic situation – with the 
exception of the euro area – and the still sub -
dued rise in labour costs and disposable in -
come in Germany. As the very sharp rise in the 
index in the first quarter of 2011 dropped out 
of the calculation of the year-on-year rate, this 
fell in the national CPI from +2.4% to +2.1%. In 
the Harmonised Index of Consumer Prices 
(HICP), the annual figure was +2.4% compared 
with +2.7%.
Consumer prices rose again in April by a sea -
sonally adjusted 0.2%. Fuel prices accelerated 
again. After seasonal adjustment, travel and 
holiday services also became considerably more 
expensive. However, this was countered by the 
abolition of student tuition fees in Baden-
Württemberg as a special factor. The annual 
CPI and HICP rates declined to +2.1% and 
+2.2% respectively.
Orders received and outlook
In terms of the underlying trend, the economic 
upturn could remain in place in Germany dur -
ing the second quarter. Industry, however, is 
likely to play no more than a comparatively 
small part in this, as, given continuing waning 
demand from the euro area, impulses from 
non-euro-area countries will hardly be enough … sales prices 
in the industrial sector …
… and con-
struction and real estate prices
Broad-based rise 
in consumer prices
Further  economic 
 rebound 
 possible  
in springNegotiated rates of pay
1 Excluding additional benefits and lump-sum payments.
Deutsche Bundesbank2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 201200.51.01.52.02.53.03.5Year-on-year percentage change, on monthly basis
Negotiated rates of pay,
total
Basic pay 1
Q1Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2012  
53

at present to boost output significantly beyond 
the normal level of utilisation. This also places 
limitations on investment picking up again. By 
contrast, construction is expected to make a 
significant contribution to growth. It is not only 
demand that continues to flourish in this sec -
tor; catching-up effects related to the weather-
related slowdown in February will also be sig -
nificant in the short term. Moreover, the excep -
tionally positive situation in construction is hav -
ing a knock-on effect on other sectors of the 
economy. Craft and construction-related ser -
vices will probably benefit from this in particu -
lar. In addition, there is consumer spending as -
sociated with moving into new apartments and 
homes.
Statistics for industrial new orders show an ac -
centuation of the economic picture of acceler -
ating demand for intermediate goods, while 
capital goods demand could initially remain 
subdued. Orders of capital goods rose by a sea -
sonally adjusted ¾% in the first quarter of 
2012, which was the first increase for three 
quarters. The pick-up in orders from countries 
outside the euro area was slightly stronger 
(+1¾%). In the reporting period, customers 
from euro-area partner countries ordered just 
under ¼% more intermediate goods, whilst 
growth in Germany was ¾%. Manufacturers of 
machinery and equipment had to contend with 
the fact that investment in Germany and 
abroad is currently in a resting phase. Mechan -
ical engineering is suffering most from this; it 
had to cope with a decline of 2¾% at the be -
ginning of the year, following a slump of 3¼% 
in the final quarter of 2011. Losses in domestic 
and export orders occurred from a level of eco -
nomic recovery. By contrast, demand for ma -
chinery and equipment from the euro area has 
been subdued for quite some time given the 
acute underutilisation in many places. Further -
more, euro-area orders for motor vehicles 
dwindled considerably after the turn of 2011-
2012. There was a 10% fall in orders received 
from the euro area by the German automotive 
industry, in line with the sharply declining regis -
trations in new motor vehicles in this area. Demand 
 impulses from 
non-euro-areaExport pricesImport, export, producer andconsumer prices
1 Producer price index for industrial products in domestic sales. 
2 Not  seasonally  adjusted,  quarterly.  3 National  consumer 
price index.
Deutsche Bundesbank2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012100105110115120125
105110115120
105110115 115120125
100105110115
10123
–+++2005 = 100, seasonally adjusted, monthly
Lin scale
Year-on-year change 2Consumer prices3Construction
prices2Producer prices1Import pricesLog scale
%
April100105110115Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2012  
54

There was a strong upsurge in demand in non-
euro-area countries for automobiles (+5¾%) in 
the first three months of 2012, following no 
more than a small increase in autumn. The 
period of stagnation for German car manufac -
turers persisted on the domestic market.
The lack of large orders in the reporting period 
was one reason why the flow of industrial 
orders did not show a positive development 
overall. Between January and March, orders in 
other transport equipment, where large orders 
are particularly frequent, were around one-
seventh down on the favourable level of the 
second half of 2011. There is an even greater 
decline compared with the first half of last year, 
when many large-scale orders were received. 
Given long processing times, the backlog of 
orders is likely to have been the reason for util -
isation in this industrial sector remaining at a 
high level up to now. Whilst incoming orders, 
including the manufacture of other transport 
equipment, declined by a seasonally adjusted 
¾%, there was a slight increase if this sector is 
excluded.
Business expectations in industry in the past 
few months have risen continuously from the 
temporary low in autumn 2011. However, the 
mood is far removed from the pronounced op -
timism prevailing until spring 2011. Confidence 
is evidently being depressed by the continuing 
weakness in the European sales market, which 
is still important for German goods, despite the 
global economy’s recovery.
The rosy expectations in construction are sus -
tained by broad-based impulses. New orders in 
the construction sector in January and February 
– more recent data are not yet available – were 
up one-tenth on the quarter. Besides the con -
tinued favourable development in orders in 
housing construction and commercial con -
struction, public sector construction also made 
a substantial contribution this time. After two 
rather subdued years in terms of awarding con -
tracts, January and February 2012 saw more 
public construction projects being commis -Small volume  
in large orders
Expectations  
in industry 
 cautiously 
 optimistic …
… but buoyant 
mood in con-structionDemand for industrial goods and construction work
Deutsche Bundesbank2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 20128090100110120130
–40–30–20–100 0+10+20+30
100110120130
758090100
100110120
8090100
Jan-
Feb
90100110120
Jan-
Feb
–20–100+10+20Volume, 2005 = 100, seasonally adjusted, quarterly
DomesticForeignLog scaleLog scale
Total
industrial
orders
Lin scale
Year-on-year change
Total construction orders
Lin scale
Year-on-year change%
%Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2012  
55

sioned than at any time since the economic 
stimulus packages in late 2009 and early 2010. 
In addition, there were numerous new road 
construction projects. The underlying trend in 
housing construction remains impressive, even 
though far fewer building permits were granted 
at the beginning of 2012 than in the previous 
final quarter of last year. The point in time to 
which the statistics are allocated can some -
times have a considerable influence on the 
monthly growth profile.Conditions are still advantageous for the fa -
vourable labour market setting and positive in -
come prospects being able to prevail in terms 
of consumer sentiment. Employee income will 
increase considerably. The latest dampener on 
the propensity to purchase nevertheless makes 
abundantly clear that consumer demand grows 
best in an intact price climate.Dampener  
in consumer 
 sentimentDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2012  
56

General government budget
After falling significantly to 1% in 2011, the 
general government deficit ratio in Germany 
looks set to record just a limited decline this 
year. Despite the low GDP growth rate com -
pared with the previous two years, economic 
developments are unlikely to have a substantial 
impact as the macroeconomic aggregates that 
are particularly relevant to government revenue 
and expenditure (gross wages and salaries, un -
employment figure, nominal private consump -
tion) are proving relatively stable. Although the 
perceptible incremental consolidation an -
nounced in 2010 will be interrupted in 2012, 
there will be limited structural improvements. 
Expansionary measures introduced to cushion 
the impact of the 2008-09 crisis are still being 
phased out (above all depreciation allowances 
and investment programmes). Moreover, it is 
likely that growth in pension payments will re -
main muted, structural unemployment will 
continue to decline and interest spending will 
decrease as a result of favourable funding con -
ditions.
The debt ratio, by contrast, could start to rise 
again, having fallen perceptibly to 81.2% by 
the end of 2011. Although the low deficit vis-à-
vis nominal GDP growth and the balance sheet 
contractions which are likely in principle for the 
bad banks will result in a decline per se , assist -
ance for euro-area states and the borrowed 
capital transferred to the European Stability 
Mechanism (ESM) will increase government 
debt. In addition, support for German financial 
institutions could entail a renewed transfer of 
liabilities and assets to the government sector.1
The revenue ratio could remain largely stable in 
2012. On the one hand, the pension contribu -
tion rate was cut perceptibly at the beginning 
of the year (by 0.3 percentage point to 19.6%) 
and the Bundesbank’s profit distribution was 
once again significantly reduced due to the higher level of risk provisioning required. On 
the other hand, the phase-out of more gener -
ous depreciation allowances and the favour -
able growth structure for government revenue 
are boosting the ratio.
Expenditure could also largely develop in paral -
lel with nominal GDP . Above all, the cyclical 
slowdown in GDP growth (in the denominator) 
masks a decline in the structural expenditure 
ratio. This decline is due in particular to previ -
ous reform measures restricting the pension in -
crease, the structural fall in unemployment, 
interest cost savings owing to the favourable 
funding conditions, and the expiry of the in -
vestment programmes introduced during the 
2008-09 crisis.
As things stand, the deficit ratio is set to remain 
largely unchanged in 2013. No notable cyclical 
influences are currently on the cards, and, in 
structural terms, opposing developments could 
more or less balance each other out. The struc -
tural revenue ratio could decline perceptibly, as 
the pension contribution rate will probably be 
cut to an even greater extent than in 2012 in 
order to comply with the upper reserve limit. 
Even so, the relief factors for both welfare and 
interest expenditure should continue to take 
effect, and the structural expenditure ratio is 
therefore likely to decrease on a similar scale.Only limited 
 decline in deficit 
expected for 2012
Debt ratio could 
start to rise again
Hardly any 
change  
in revenue  
ratio or …… expenditure 
ratio
Overall, hardly 
any change  
in deficit likely 
for 2013Public finances*
* The analysis in the “General government budget” section 
is based on data contained in the national accounts and on 
the Maastricht ratios. The subsequent reporting on the 
budgets of the various levels of government and social se -
curity schemes is based on the budgetary figures as defined 
in the government’s financial statistics (which are generally 
in line with the budgetary accounts).
1 In particular, a further transfer is being discussed in con -
nection with the dissolution of WestLB. As a precautionary 
measure, the option of SoFFin supporting financial institu -
tions has been extended again, although no specific cases 
are currently on the horizon.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2012  
57

On 18 April 2012, the Federal Government pre -
sented its updated stability programme,2 which 
specifies that the general government deficit is 
to be eliminated –  in both unadjusted and 
structural terms  – by 2014. The programme 
stipulates that general government must 
achieve a structural deficit ratio of no more 
than 0.5% as its “medium-term budgetary ob -
jective” within the context of the European Sta -
bility and Growth Pact. The Federal Govern -
ment expects this target to be achieved in 
2012, although its calculations admittedly as -
sume noticeable cyclical strains on public 
budgets.3 Furthermore, the temporary high 
surpluses run up by the social security funds 
will play a role in meeting the objective. After 
rising slightly to 82% in 2012, the debt ratio is 
expected to fall to 73% in 2016. Provided the 
assumed moderately tight budgetary stance is 
maintained, the plans appear achievable as 
things stand.4 However, another important pre -
requisite is the assumed smooth development 
of the economy. There is currently a great deal 
of uncertainty in this respect, particularly be -
cause of the sovereign debt crisis.
The fact that the German government already 
met the reference figure for the deficit ratio in 
2011, ie two years ahead of the deadline set in 
the excessive deficit procedure, is welcome 
and, given the favourable economic condi -tions, appropriate. It is also in line with the rec -
ommendation by the Economic and Financial 
Affairs (Ecofin) Council to accelerate the reduc -
tion of the deficit if the economic conditions 
turn out to be better than expected at the start 
of the procedure.5 The Stability and Growth 
Pact additionally obligates general government 
to achieve and maintain a structurally close-to-
balance budget or a surplus. If it fails to do so, 
prompt corrective action is to be taken. Ac -
cording to the Federal Government’s budget 
plans, general government is likely to achieve 
the self-imposed medium-term budgetary ob -
jective (a maximum structural deficit ratio of 
0.5% of GDP). However, the objective is unam -Balanced gen-
eral government budget envis-aged by 2014
Compliance with 
European rulesKey data of the Federal Government’s updated stability programme
 
Item 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016
Real GDP growth (as %)
Stability programme April 2012 3.0 0.7 1.6 1.6 1.6 1.6
Stability programme April 2011 2.3 1.8 1.6 1.6 1.6 –
General government fi  scal balance (as % of GDP)
Stability programme April 2012 – 1.0 – 1 – ½ – 0 0 0
Stability programme April 2011 – 2½ – 1½ – 1 – ½ – ½ –
Structural fi  scal balance (as % of GDP)
Stability programme April 2012 – 0.7 – ½ – ½ 0 0 0
Stability programme April 2011 – 2 – 1 – 1 – ½ – 0 –
Debt level (as % of GDP)
Stability programme April 2012 81.2 82 80 78 76 73
Stability programme April 2011 82 81 79½ 77½ 75½ –
Source: Federal Ministry of Finance.
Deutsche Bundesbank
2 The programme is based on the January 2012 forecast of 
macroeconomic developments as well as the Federal Gov -
ernment’s tax revenue estimates, which were adjusted in 
line with the forecast. The latest official tax estimate results 
indicate somewhat more favourable developments. See 
also pp 66 et seq.
3 The cyclical adjustment procedure employed in the con -
text of the Stability and Growth Pact and under the debt 
brake on the central government budget is fundamentally 
problematic owing to its complexity and vulnerability to 
manipulation. See Deutsche Bundesbank, On the cyclical 
adjustment procedure under the German central govern -
ment’s new debt rule, Monthly Report, November 2011, 
p 71. The prediction of a significantly negative cyclical influ -
ence on public finances does not currently seem plausible.
4 The impact of WestLB’s dissolution (which could poten -
tially increase the debt level, as discussed above) is not in -
cluded in the plans owing to a lack of concrete details.
5 See Council of the European Union, Council recommen -
dation to Germany with a view to bringing an end to the 
situation of an excessive government deficit, Brussels, 
30 November 2009, p 13.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2012  
58

bitious given the foreseeable financial burdens 
arising from demographic trends and the high 
government debt ratio.
In principle, the national fiscal framework re -
stricts new borrowing to a greater extent than 
the agreements adopted at European level. In 
particular, the framework enshrines a strict bor -
rowing limit in the form of a (structurally 
close-to) balanced budget for both central gov -
ernment and the federal states in the constitu -
tion. Under normal circumstances, deviations 
from this rule are only permitted during the 
current year, if at all. The resulting debt is add -
itionally limited and, where appropriate, must 
be repaid in line with a rule-bound path. In 
view of the well-known estimation uncertain -
ties associated with budget forecasting, it 
would be advisable for central and state gov -
ernment to plan to achieve budget surpluses as 
a general rule so as to avoid having to make 
adjustments at short notice and with a procy -
clical impact. As experience has shown, such 
adjustments can prove necessary when eco -
nomic downturns expose previously unseen 
structural budgetary gaps. For example, growth 
potential, and thus the scope for expenditure 
and for cutting tax and social contribution 
rates, has often been overestimated in the past, 
causing budgetary objectives to be missed. It is 
crucial, not least given the demographic chal -
lenges ahead and the considerable risks relat -
ing to the sovereign debt crisis, to rapidly re -
duce the debt ratio, which is very high and has 
seen near-incessant growth. Against this back -
drop, it is essential that the 2010 consolidation 
agreements are not watered down and that 
the current favourable environment is taken as 
an opportunity to reduce the central, state and 
local government deficits faster.
By contrast, the calls from some quarters for 
German fiscal policymakers to loosen their pol -
icy stance in order to stimulate the economy 
appear inappropriate. Unemployment is al -
ready relatively low and a recovery is forecast 
for Germany in general. Even if there were an 
unexpected economic slowdown, the auto -matic stabilisers would be better suited to 
cushioning its impact. Moreover, the effect of 
stabilisation measures on demand in the coun -
tries on the euro-area periphery would be very 
limited. A more important point is that sound 
public finances and rigorous compliance with 
budgetary rules in Germany are, not least, a 
key anchor of stability in the European sover -
eign debt crisis.
Some euro-area countries will need to undergo 
longer, large-scale consolidation processes, and 
it is in these states that stability-oriented 
budgetary rules and confidence that they will 
be obeyed are of crucial importance. The fiscal 
compact, which has yet to be ratified, can help 
to achieve this. Among other provisions, the 
compact obliges the signatories to enshrine the 
requirement for a structurally at least close-to-
balance general government budget in their 
national legislation.6 The extent to which the 
requirements for national budgetary rules will 
go beyond the provisions already enshrined in 
European law is currently unclear. This hinges 
on general principles for reducing existing 
structural deficits and the correction mechan -
isms that are triggered if the upper limit is ex -
ceeded. Proposals by the European Commis -
sion on both aspects are still outstanding. Al -
though, as in the case of the German debt 
brake, the recitals of the treaty propose a rule-
based repayment of the debt resulting from 
overshooting the deficit limit, such a provision 
currently appears unlikely. It is also uncertain 
whether the correction mechanisms are suffi -
ciently shielded from political influence.7 Ultim -
ately, the fiscal compact is by no means a fiscal 
union. National budgetary autonomy remains 
intact, individual member states are still re -
sponsible for the specific national arrange -
ments and subsequent implementation of the 
rules, and the compact does not provide any Reduce high 
debt ratio faster
Loosening the 
fiscal policy stance in Ger-many would be inappropriateFiscal compact can inspire  confidence, but 
strict condition-
ality not 
 currently fore-
seeable
6 See Deutsche Bundesbank, The fiscal compact and the 
European Stability Mechanism, Monthly Report, February 
2012, pp 60-63.
7 See also Deutsche Bundesbank, Statement at the public 
hearing of the Budget Committee on 7 May 2012.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2012  
59

Fiscal developments in the euro area
Signiﬁ  cant fall in aggregate euro-area 
government deﬁ  cits in 2011 but further rise in debt ratio; development could continue, albeit at a slower pace
At the end of April 2012, Eurostat published 
the government deﬁ  cits and debt levels of 
the EU member states as part of the Euro-
pean budgetary surveillance procedure. 
These ﬁ  gures revealed a marked decline in 
the euro-area deﬁ  cit ratio from 6.2% 
to 4.1% in 2011. According to European Commission calculations, this was sup-ported by economic activity, which was slightly positive overall (despite the slow-down in the second half of the year). The 
main contributing factor was a substantial 
structural improvement, however, which 
occurred primarily on the expenditure side, 
even though a greater amount was spent on interest payments as a result of rising 
debt levels and a higher average rate of in-
terest. The average euro-area debt ratio continued to increase in 2011, rising from 
85½% to 88%.1 This was attributable ﬁ  rst 
and foremost to deﬁ  cit ratios, which re-
mained high despite having fallen, but also to deﬁ  cit-debt adjustments (changes to the 
debt level not stemming from the deﬁ  cit). 
These adjustments include, for instance, the 
ﬁ  nancial assistance granted to euro-area member states during the sovereign debt 
crisis.
In its spring forecast, the European Com-
mission expects the euro-area deﬁ  cit to de-cline further to 3.2% of GDP in 2012, which 
is based on the assumption that the effect 
of further sizeable consolidation measures will clearly outweigh the limited negative impact of economic developments. Unlike in 2011, however, the structural improve-ment is likely to be driven primarily by in-creased revenues. Without additional con-
solidation measures, the Commission ex-
pects only a minor reduction in the deﬁ  cit 
to 2.9% of GDP for 2013. By contrast, the 
debt ratio is expected to see another sharp 
rise to just under 92% in 2012. This is at-tributable to still fairly high deﬁ  cit levels, comparatively low nominal GDP growth and further extensive debt-increasing  deﬁ  cit-debt adjustments. The debt ratio is 
expected to rise again slightly to 92½% in 
2013.
Additional efforts needed in many 
countries to meet deadlines for  correcting excessive deﬁ  cits
While the average debt ratio in the euro area has recently hovered at around the 
same level as in the UK and only slightly be-
low that of the USA (the ratio in Japan is more than twice as high), the euro-area deﬁ  cit ratio is already well below that of 
these countries (2011: USA 9.6%, UK 8.3%, 
Japan 8.2%). The remaining need for con-
solidation in the euro area in the coming 
years is therefore considerably lower on the 
whole. The euro-area aggregate masks large disparities between the individual countries, however. The Commission esti-
mates that eight of the 17 euro-area coun-
tries (Finland, Germany, Luxembourg, Italy, 
Estonia, Malta, Belgium and Austria) will comply with the 3% deﬁ  cit limit this year. 
Ireland is likely to record the highest deﬁ  cit ratio at over 8%, with Greece and Spain ex-
pected to perform only slightly better with 
ratios of over 7% and 6% respectively. Fig-
ures of over 4% are forecast for Slovakia, 
1 Unlike Eurostat, the European Commission also in-
cludes lending between euro-area countries in its debt 
level ﬁ  gures.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2012  
60

Portugal, France, the Netherlands and Slov-
enia. Cyprus’ defi  cit ratio is expected to be slightly above the 3% reference value. Gov-
ernment debt will exceed 100% of GDP in 
Greece, Italy, Ireland, Portugal and – albeit 
only marginally – in Belgium. Yet debt ratios 
in France, Germany and Spain are also a long way above the reference value of 
60%.
The majority of the euro-area member 
states (apart from Estonia, Finland and Lux-
embourg) are currently undergoing an ex-cessive defi  cit procedure. While a number of countries –  including Germany  – are 
likely to be released from the procedure in 
the near future, the Commission’s forecast 
underscores the danger that a large number 
of countries will not meet the agreements 
and requirements laid down under the defi  -
cit procedures. Based on the fi  gures in the 
Commission’s forecast, considerable addi-tional consolidation measures are still re-
quired in a number of countries if they are to comply with the defi  cit correction dead-
lines, as is specifi  ed in the stability pro-
grammes: these include six countries with a 2013 defi  cit correction deadline (Spain, Slo-
vakia, the Netherlands2, France, Slovenia 
and Portugal) as well as two countries whose deadline is the end of this year al-ready (Cyprus and Belgium
3). The budgets 
for 2013 are still being drawn up, however. A large number of measures have therefore 
still not been fl  eshed out suffi   ciently for them to be included in the forecast. Fur-thermore, overall economic developments 
have, in some cases, been more unfavour-
able than anticipated when the deadlines were set, meaning that more extensive 
measures will be required if the targets are 
to be met. In principle, it would seem ap-propriate in future –  especially in light of current reactions on the fi  nancial markets to failures to meet previously agreed tar-
gets – to carefully plan far-reaching adjust-ment processes and also to make provisions 
for unexpected unfavourable develop-
ments. The fact that a number of countries achieved only below-average improvements to their structural balances at the beginning 
of the defi  cit procedure and thus delayed most of the required consolidation is an-other reason why their remaining consoli-
dation requirement is so large.
Without additional measures, the Commis-
sion expects the debt ratios in all euro-area 
countries apart from Germany to rise until 
2013. Particularly sharp increases in the debt ratios compared with 2011 are pro-
jected for Spain (more than 18 percentage 
points), followed by Ireland (+12 percent-
age points) and Slovenia, Slovakia and Por-tugal (approximately 10 percentage points). 
By far the highest debt ratio for 2013 is 
forecast for Greece, at 168%. Only Estonia, Luxembourg, Slovakia, Slovenia and Finland are likely to comply with the 60% reference value in 2013.
Differing developments in the Troika 
programme countries Greece, Portugal and Ireland
Greece has adopted extensive consolidation 
measures since 2010 and recorded a 
1.2 percentage point decline in its defi  cit ratio in 2011. Following the exceptionally 
sharp defi  cit increase in the preceding years, 
however, the ratio still stood at 9.1%. 
Greece therefore missed the original target 
of 7.6% agreed when the programme was 
drawn up. This was due primarily to worse-than-expected economic developments and 
2 The Netherlands have adopted additional consolida-
tion measures in the meantime which are intended to ensure that the excessive defi  cit is corrected on sched-ule.
3 Belgium’s defi  cit ratio is expected to stand at pre-
cisely 3%. Nevertheless, the correction cannot be re-
garded as sustainable if – as anticipated – the refer-
ence value is exceeded again in 2013.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2012  
61

repeated failures to suffi   ciently implement 
the consolidation and reform measures 
agreed in the adjustment programme.
Less favourable developments forced 
Greece to postpone its return to the capital markets, which was originally scheduled for 
2012. In order to provide Greece with fur-
ther support and relief in its adjustment ef-
forts, discussions on further assistance in 
connection with a haircut for private credi-tors began in July 2011. A second assistance 
programme was fi  nally adopted in March 
2012, with the greatest contribution by far – €145 billion by the end of 2014 – coming 
from the euro-area countries via the Euro-
pean Financial Stability Facility (EFSF). The 
haircut and reduced interest rates on public 
assistance loans are intended to help re-store the sustainability of public fi  nances 
and reduce the debt ratio to 120% by 2020. 
The requirements for fi  scal consolidation have been relaxed discernibly compared 
with the original agreements. Greece must 
now achieve a primary defi  cit (defi  cit ex-
cluding interest expenditure) of 1% of GDP 
for 2012, whereas the original agreements 
specifi  ed that it had to post a slight primary 
surplus. The consolidation that began in 
2010 is scheduled to be completed in 2014 
with a primary surplus of 4.5% of GDP , 
which will then have to be maintained over a good number of years. The original agree-ments envisaged a primary surplus of 6% of GDP .
Despite the extensive additional fi  nancial 
support measures and the relief provided by 
the haircut, the situation in Greece is still 
extremely tense and characterised by great 
uncertainty. In particular, it is completely unclear at present what stance a future Greek government might take on the re-
forms agreed in the adjustment programme.However, Greece must comply with the agreed defi  cit targets and implement the 
measures contained in the adjustment pro-gramme in order to receive further fi  nancial assistance. Greece’s European partners – as well as its private creditors (by means of the haircut) – have provided substantial ex ante 
assistance so far, most recently by expand-ing the assistance loans. This fi  nancial sup-
port does buy Greece some time to imple-
ment the unavoidable fi  scal and macroeco-
nomic adjustments. Nevertheless, Greece 
has a duty and a responsibility to keep its 
side of the bargain and thus reduce uncer-
tainty in the euro area as a whole. The fi  scal and economic policy decisions ultimately lie 
with the Greek parliament and the Greek government, however. Under the current euro-area framework, the individual coun-
tries are expected to take responsibility for 
their own economic and fi  scal policies and 
the European level does not have any pow-
ers of intervention. This is incompatible with the extensive “communitisation” of 
 liability risks desired by some, which would 
upset the balance between liability and 
control even more. Against this backdrop, it is essential to tie aid payments to strict con-ditions and terminate them in the event of non-compliance. To do otherwise would set a precedent which would drastically under-
mine the credibility of other and future 
agreements as well as the incentives for en-suring sound public fi  nances.
Portugal perceptibly reduced its defi  cit ratio 
by 5.6 percentage points to 4.2% in 2011, 
thus improving on its agreed budgetary tar-
get of 5.9%. This decline was, however, 
due primarily to one-off measures, above all 
a transfer from private banks’ pension funds to the state’s social security scheme. Given 
the absence of these measures this year 
and the growing decline in GDP , the Com-
mission is expecting the defi  cit ratio to in-
crease again to 4.7% in 2012, despite sub-Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2012  
62

stantial consolidation measures. Nonethe-
less, Portugal would then only just miss the 
stability programme target of 4.5%. 
Whether Portugal achieves the forecast 
 defi  cit-to-GDP ratio of 3.1% for 2013, thus 
almost meeting its 2013 correction dead-
line, will ultimately hinge on how it imple-
ments the measures contained in the cur-rent stability programme, which it has yet 
to do.
Ireland’s defi  cit reduction is still on schedule 
and the 2011 defi  cit ratio, at 9.4%, was 
more than 1 percentage point below the target set in the adjustment programme, 
excluding the capital transfer to the fi  nan-
cial sector in the amount of 3.7% of GDP . 
Eurostat has yet to determine the booking 
amount of this capital transfer as the asso-
ciated restructuring plans are not yet com-
plete. According to the Commission’s esti-
mate, a further defi  cit decline to 8.3% of GDP is expected for this year, in line with 
the stability programme and the provisions 
of the adjustment programme. Neverthe-
less, Ireland still needs to fl  esh out its con-
solidation measures in order to achieve the 
defi  cit ratio of 7.5% forecast by the Com-
mission for 2013.
Spain, Italy and Cyprus under pressure 
from fi  nancial market participants
A number of other euro-area countries are 
also under close scrutiny from fi  nancial 
market participants, not least with respect 
to their fi  scal policies. Their government 
bond yields have risen again signifi  cantly of 
late and are now perceptibly above the 
level of countries with a very good rating. It 
should be borne in mind, however, that when compared with data from the past, 
the absolute level of nominal bond yields is 
by no means excessively high. Interest rates 
for new borrowing are also signifi  cantly 
lower averaged across the maturity spec-trum than those for ten-year bonds, which 
are often used as a benchmark. According 
to the Commission’s forecast, the average 
rate of interest paid on existing government debt in 2012 is still below the average level 
since the launch of monetary union. Irre-
spective of this, risk premiums, in particular, have proved to be a key incentive for con-solidation and reform efforts.
Spain clearly missed its defi  cit target for 
2011 (6% of GDP). The defi  cit ratio of 8.5% 
initially announced in the Eurostat notifi  ca-
tion has since been revised upwards again 
by the Spanish government to just under 
9%. On the whole, the signifi  cant and un-
expected deviation from the target is prob-
ably due mainly to lower-than-expected 
revenues, primarily in Spain’s regional gov-
ernments. This deviation, together with the 
weakening of the original defi  cit target for 
2012 (5.3% instead of 4.4% of GDP), has 
fuelled doubts about Spain’s adjustment path and its domestic coordination and 
compliance with the regulations. According 
to the Commission’s forecast, Spain risks missing its weakened defi  cit target by re-
cording a defi  cit ratio of 6.4% – partly be-
cause the decline in GDP is steeper than the 
government expected  – if no additional measures are implemented. One particu-
larly critical factor is that, according to the 
Commission’s forecast, Spain will miss the 2013 deadline for correcting its excessive defi  cit by a long way unless additional 
measures are taken. Furthermore, consider-
able uncertainty has arisen regarding the 
state of the Spanish fi  nancial system. This 
could place an additional strain on Spanish 
public fi  nances. It must be borne in mind, 
however, that the debt ratio of 87% pre-dicted for 2013 is still perceptibly lower 
than the euro-area average and 30 percent-
age points below the fi  gures for Portugal, 
Ireland and Italy, for instance.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2012  
63

Following the change of government in 
2011 and the adoption of extensive con-
solidation measures, Italy has succeeded in 
shoring up confi  dence on the  fi  nancial 
 markets, which had previously been experi-encing a continuous decline. The defi  cit ra-
tio fell by 0.7 percentage point to 3.9% in 
2011 and is likely to decline again signifi  -
cantly to 2% in 2012 according to the Com-
mission’s forecast. Italy would therefore meet the prescribed deadline of 2012 for correcting its excessive defi  cit despite the unfavourable macroeconomic develop-
ments. According to the forecast, the debt ratio will rise to 123.5% in 2012 but will fall 
again from 2013 onwards. While fi  scal 
consoli dation in Italy is making good head-
way, some important structural reforms –  especially with regard to the labour  market  – have yet to be implemented or 
risk being watered down. A rigorous imple-mentation of these measures is likely to in-
fl  uence not only Italy’s economic outlook, but also the sentiment among fi  nancial 
market participants and therefore play a de-cisive role in restoring sound public fi  -
nances.
Public fi  nances in Cyprus have also deterio-
rated dramatically as a result of the crisis. 
The defi  cit ratio rose by 1 percentage point 
in 2011 to 6.3%. Substantial consolidation 
is expected for 2012 amid contracting eco-
nomic output. According to the Commis-
sion’s forecast, however, Cyprus risks miss-
ing its 2012 correction deadline by record-
ing a defi  cit ratio of 3.4% this year. Al-
though Cyprus’ government debt has risen 
sharply over the past few years, for 2012 it 
will still be below the euro-area average, at 76.5% of GDP . The fact that Cyprus is none-
theless under scrutiny by market partici-
pants is probably due, not least, to its close 
fi  nancial linkages with Greece. Cyprus’ fi  -
nancial sector, which is large relative to its 
GDP , recorded extensive write-downs as a 
result of the Greek haircut.Forecast and plans for the public fi  nances of the euro-area countries
 
CountryEuropean Commission spring 2012 forecastStability programmes, 
April 2012
Deadline to correct 
excessive 
defi  cit Budget balance as a percentage of GDPGovernment debt as a percentage of GDPBudget balance as a percentage of GDP
2011 2012 2013 2011 2012 2013 2012 2013 2014
Austria –  2.6 – 3.0 – 1.9 72.2 74.2 74.3 – 3.0 – 2.1 – 1.5 2013
Belgium –  3.7 – 3.0 – 3.3 98.0 100.5 100.8 – 2.8 – 2.2 – 1.1 2012
Cyprus –  6.3 – 3.4 – 2.5 71.6 76.5 78.1 – 2.6 – 0.6 0.0 2012
Estonia 1.0 – 2.4 – 1.3 6.0 10.4 11.7 – 2.6 – 0.7 0.1 –
Finland –  0.5 – 0.7 – 0.4 48.6 50.5 51.7 – 1.1 – 0.5 – 0.1 –
France –  5.2 – 4.5 – 4.2 85.8 90.5 92.5 – 4.4 – 3.0 – 2.0 2013
Germany –  1.0 – 0.9 – 0.7 81.2 82.2 80.7 – 1.0 – 0.5 0.0 2013
Greece –  9.1 – 7.3 – 8.4 165.3 160.6 168.0 – 6.7 – 4.7 – 2.2 2014
Ireland – 13.1 – 8.3 – 7.5 108.2 116.1 120.2 – 8.3 – 7.5 – 4.8 2015
Italy –  3.9 – 2.0 – 1.1 120.1 123.5 121.8 – 1.7 – 0.5 – 0.1 2012
Luxembourg –  0.6 – 1.8 – 2.2 18.2 20.3 21.6 – 1.5 – 1.2 – 0.9 –
Malta –  2.7 – 2.6 – 2.9 72.0 74.8 75.2 – 2.2 – 1.7 – 1.1 2011
Netherlands –  4.7 – 4.4 – 4.6 65.2 70.1 73.0 – 4.2 – 3.0 2013
Portugal –  4.2 – 4.7 – 3.1 107.8 113.9 117.1 – 4.5 – 3.0 – 1.8 2013
Slovakia –  4.8 – 4.7 – 4.9 43.3 49.7 53.5 – 4.6 – 2.9 – 2.3 2013
Slovenia –  6.4 – 4.3 – 3.8 47.6 54.7 58.1 – 3.5 – 2.5 – 1.5 2013
Spain –  8.5 – 6.4 – 6.3 68.5 80.9 87.0 – 5.3 – 3.0 – 2.2 2013
Euro area –  4.1 – 3.2 – 2.9 88.0 91.8 92.6 . . . –
Source: European Commission.
Deutsche BundesbankDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2012  
64

powers of intervention at European level even 
if the rules are persistently violated.
To ensure confidence in the fiscal rules, it is 
therefore crucial that they are strictly imple -
mented at national level. It is very important 
that the crisis resolution mechanisms –  the 
European Financial Stability Facility (EFSF) and 
the European Stability Mechanism (ESM) – im -
pose considerable interest rate premiums on 
any future financial assistance they provide in 
order to boost incentives for governments to in -
dependently safeguard and achieve sound pub -
lic finances. Furthermore, it must be ensured 
that the agreed consolidation and reform meas -
ures are rigorously implemented. By contrast, 
renegotiating the measures only a few months 
after they were agreed would risk shaking con -
fidence in the success of the adjustment pro -
cess. This might affect not only the country 
concerned, but also other countries receiving 
assistance. Moreover, delaying consolidation 
could jeopardise confidence in the fiscal sus -
tainability of other countries that are still under -
going an excessive deficit procedure (see 
pages 60 to 64 for current information on the 
budgetary surveillance procedures). It appears 
that the key need is rather to rigorously imple -
ment growth-oriented structural reforms in Ger -
many and the other euro-area states without 
endangering budgetary objectives.
Budgetary development  
of central, state and local 
government
Tax revenue
Tax revenue8 rose by 6% in the first quarter of 
2012 compared with the same quarter of 2011 
(see chart and table on pages 66 and 67). This 
increase is due to favourable developments in 
the macroeconomic aggregates that are signifi -
cant for tax revenue (gross wages and salaries 
and nominal private consumption) as well as to 
positive special factors. Revenue from income-
related taxes went up by 12%. The growth in wage tax receipts reflects the positive develop -
ments in gross wages and salaries as well as 
the near-stagnation or fall in deduction 
amounts (child benefit and subsidies for sup -
plementary private pension plans), whereas le -
gislative changes resulted in slight revenue 
shortfalls (particularly the retroactive increase in 
the flat-rate allowance for employees’ ex -
penses). Revenue from profit-related taxes rose 
even more sharply on balance (+26%).9 How -
ever, the decline in the homebuyers grant 
– which is deducted from revenue, is predom -
inantly paid out during the first quarter of the 
year (in March) and has been undergoing a 
successive phase-out since 2006 – accounted 
for a significant share of this increase. In add -
ition to this, however, advance payments of as -
sessed taxes also continued to grow dynamic -
ally. Revenue from consumption-related taxes 
went up by 2%. Growth in turnover tax was 
higher, which was in line with the relatively fa -
vourable developments in nominal consump -
tion, as well as in nominal private housing in -
vestment. By contrast, revenue from other ex -
cise duties fell owing, in particular, to the extra -
ordinary effects for tobacco tax.
According to the latest official tax estimate, tax 
receipts for 2012 as a whole are expected to 
rise by 4% (including local government taxes).10 
This increase primarily reflects the assumptions 
regarding macroeconomic reference variables. 
Furthermore, fiscal drag11 and legislative Further watering 
down of agreed conditions for some euro-area countries would be problematic
Marked rise  
in tax revenue  
in Q1Marked revenue 
growth for year as a whole and …
8 Including EU shares in German tax revenue but excluding 
receipts from local government taxes, which are not yet 
known for the quarter under review.
9 Corporation tax revenue rose particularly strongly, mainly 
because of a negative base effect. This effect had caused 
non-assessed taxes on earnings to increase by the same 
amount in 2011. However, the normalisation of the latter 
during the reporting quarter was outweighed by new posi -
tive special factors.
10 This estimate is based on the Federal Government’s cur -
rent macroeconomic projection. In 2012, real GDP growth 
is expected to be +0.7% and nominal growth +2.3% (No -
vember 2011: +1.0% and +2.4%, respectively). For 2013, 
the corresponding figures are +1.6% and +3.2%. In the 
medium term, nominal annual growth of around 3% is 
forecast, as was predicted in November 2011.
11 In this context, this term comprises the revenue effects 
stemming from the progressive structure of the income tax 
schedule (positive) and the fact that specific excise duties 
are largely inelastic to price changes (negative).Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2012  
65

changes will result in additional revenue on bal -
ance. Significant legislative changes include the 
phase-out of more generous depreciation al -
lowances and the homebuyers grant.
For 2013 and on an average of the years from 
2014 to 2016, annual revenue growth of 
around 3½% is forecast. Although in the com -
ing years, and above all in 2013, macroeco -
nomic conditions are expected to be noticeably 
more favourable than in 2012, the legislative 
changes included in the calculations will have 
only a small impact on revenue.12 The planned 
cuts in the income tax rate in 2013 and 2014, 
which were initially rejected by the Bundesrat, 
have not yet been included. The cuts would 
lower revenue growth by ¼ percentage point 
in 2013 and ½ percentage point in 2014 (full 
annual effect: -€6 billion). The tax ratio (as de -
fined in the government’s financial statistics) is 
projected to increase to 23.2% in 2016 (2011: 
22.3%). Fiscal drag accounts for approximately 
½ percentage point, or €12 billion, of this rise. 
Furthermore, the growth structure and, to a 
limited extent, legislative changes will lead to 
an increase in the ratio. Overall, it should be 
borne in mind that the Federal Government’s 
macroeconomic projection and consequently 
the official tax estimate assume a smooth de -
velopment of the economy. There is a great deal of uncertainty in this respect, particularly 
because of the sovereign debt crisis.
Compared with the November 2011 tax esti -
mate – which forms the basis for central gov -
ernment’s regular budget and, to a large ex -
tent, the available plans for state government 
budgets for 2012 – only minor adjustments on 
balance have been made to the macroeco -
nomic benchmark figures. Although legislative 
changes made in the intervening period will re -
sult in (limited) shortfalls from 2012 onwards, 
these will largely be offset by a positive base 
effect (higher-than-expected revenue in 2011). 
Nevertheless, there was an upward revision to 
the estimates for 2012 to 2016 compared with 
the November forecast, particularly owing to 
the relatively dynamic intra-year developments. 
After adjustment for legislative changes made 
in the intervening period, an increase of be -
tween €7 billion and €8½ billion per year is ex -
pected for general government. Compared 
with the May 2011 forecast, which served as 
the basis for the last central government 
 medium-term plan of summer 2011, both the 
revisions to the macroeconomic benchmark 
figures from 2012 onward and the legislative 
changes made in the intervening period imply 
noticeable revenue shortfalls.13 However, the 
positive 2011 base effect is significantly higher 
than had been expected last May. After adjust -
ment for legislative changes made in the inter -
vening period, the revisions for 2012 to 2015 
amount to around €15 billion (½% of GDP).… in rest  
of planning 
period, tooUpward revi-
sions compared 
with last fore-
castTax revenue *
* Including  EU shares  in German  tax revenue,  excluding 
receipts from local government taxes.
Deutsche Bundesbank2010 2011 2012642024681012
–––++++++Year-on-year percentage change, quarterly
12 The inclusion of various court rulings also has a (limited) 
impact on the growth rate´s profile. For example, consider -
able tax refunds are expected, above all in 2013, particu -
larly as a result of a ruling by the European Court of Justice 
on the taxation of dividends among affiliated enterprises.
13 By contrast, the fact that estimates for tax refunds were 
revised in November 2011 in connection with the Meilicke 
case (treatment of corporation tax paid abroad in the tax -
ation of dividends under the tax imputation procedure that 
was abolished in 2001) is having a positive effect. In un -
adjusted terms, revenue was consequently just over €3½ 
billion higher in 2011 and will be €1 billion higher in 2012.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2012  
66

Central government budget
In the first quarter of 2012, the central govern -
ment deficit fell €1½ billion on the year to 
€17½ billion. Total revenue remained largely 
unchanged. Tax revenue saw an increase of 3% 
(€2 billion), although this was muted by the de -
ductions made for transfers to the EU budget, 
which were €1 billion higher. However, non-tax 
revenue was significantly lower. This was mainly 
attributable to the Bundesbank’s profit distribu -
tion being €1½ billion lower. Expenditure saw 
an overall decline (-1½%), to which the reduc -
tion of €1 billion in transfers to the social secur -
ity funds made the largest individual contribu -
tion. This decrease was chiefly due to the re -
duced pre-drawn recourse to the regular grant 
for the Federal Employment Agency, which is 
based on liquidity demand during the course of 
the year.
However, during the remainder of 2012, the 
deficit will increase again year-on-year owing 
to contributions of €8½ billion to the ESM. As 
the 2012 budget does not contain any authori -
sations for these contributions, the Federal 
Cabinet adopted a draft supplementary budget 
in March. On the basis of a Eurostat decision, 
the draft supplementary budget classifies the 
capital transfer as a financial transaction and it 
is therefore not taken into account in the bor -
rowing limit that is key to the debt brake. The 
other changes contained in the draft supple -
mentary budget do not affect the deficit on 
balance, meaning that the authorisation for net 
borrowing is to be extended from €26 billion to 
€35 billion. Additional burdens affecting the 
other items, particularly as a result of the Bun -
desbank’s lower distribution of profits, will pri -
marily be offset by the downward revision of 
€2 billion to estimates for interest expenditure. 
Furthermore, tax revenue is forecast to be €½ 
billion higher.14 On balance, the Federal Govern -
ment’s budget plan still contains a considerable 
renewed increase in the structural deficit com -
pared with the actual figure for 2011 (+€4 bil -
lion), not least owing to the significant slacken -
ing of the consolidation course agreed in 2010.However, the latest tax estimate foresees add -
itional tax revenue of €2½ billion vis-à-vis the 
draft supplementary budget. As in the preced -
ing years, lower-than-planned drawdowns of 
funds from the EU budget may provide add -
itional relief, even though measures have been 
taken which aim to increase the actual take-up 
of resources from the structural and cohesion 
funds. Moreover, given central government’s 
still extremely favourable (re-)financing condi -
tions, debt servicing costs look likely to de -
crease further. In particular, labour-market-
related  spending could also prove to be lower 
than expected. The renewed growth in the def -
icit compared with the actual figure for 2011 
should therefore remain within significantly 
narrower bounds. From a structural perspec -
tive, a further decline in the deficit currently ap -
pears possible. In view of the increasingly strict Further decline 
in deficit at start of year
Draft supple-
mentary budget to finance brought-forward ESM contribu-tions results in higher planned deficit, …… but more  favourable 
develop ments 
on the cardsTax revenue
 
Type of taxQ1 Estimate 
for 
2012 1, 2 2011 2012
€ billionYear-on-year 
percent-
age 
changeYear-
on-year 
percent-
age 
change
Tax revenue, total 
2 123.1 130.6 +  6.1 +  4.0
of which
Wage tax 32.5 34.1 +  5.0 +  5.5
Profi  t-related taxes 
3 17.9 22.5 + 25.8 +  6.6
Assessed  income tax 6.8 8.5 + 25.2 +  8.5
Corporation tax 2.5 5.5 . + 17.1
Investment  income tax 
4 8.6 8.5 –  0.9 –  1.9
Turnover taxes 5 47.4 49.0 +  3.3 +  3.3
Energy tax 4.5 4.4 –  1.2 –  0.2
Tobacco tax 2.9 2.3 – 20.3 –  1.5
1 According to offi   cial tax estimate of May 2012. 2 Including EU 
shares in German tax revenue, excluding receipts from local gov-ernment taxes. 3 Employee refunds, homebuyers grant and in-
vestment grant deducted from revenue. 4 Withholding tax on 
interest income and capital gains, non-assessed taxes on earn-
ings. 5 Turnover tax and import turnover tax.
Deutsche Bundesbank
14 However, as estimated GDP growth has now been re -
vised downward, the negative cyclical impact imputed for 
the central government budget is €1 billion higher.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2012  
67

restriction of borrowing through the debt 
brake, this certainly seems to be advisable.
When drawing up the budget in March this 
year, as in 2011, the Federal Government set 
benchmark figures for the next year’s budget 
and the financial plan on the basis of the 
macroeconomic assumptions in its Annual Eco -
nomic Report. The benchmark figures are sub -
ject to the proviso that they will be adjusted in 
line with any revisions to the underlying as -
sumptions or in accordance with government 
decisions. In 2011, the additional budgetary 
burdens agreed during subsequent budget 
preparations significantly moderated the bind -
ing effect of the benchmark figures. In order to 
be sure of fulfilling the debt brake requirements 
in the medium term, it appears imperative to 
refrain from loosening the planned course any 
further. Given the absence of data on the net 
burden resulting from financial transactions, it 
is not possible to analyse the structural plans 
more precisely. However, government esti -mates on the underlying cyclical components 
have been published. They expect a significant 
macroeconomic underutilisation in 2012, which 
will slowly be scaled back in the period extend -
ing to 2016. This is at odds with the prevailing 
assessment that the German economy is likely 
to remain within the corridor of normal utilisa -
tion in 2012 despite the slight losses owing to 
the weak phase at the end of 2011. The Federal 
Government’s assumption indicates a lower 
structural deficit and thus a reduced level of 
consolidation outstanding.
Overall, the deficits have been significantly re -
duced compared with the summer 2011 finan -
cial plan and the latest tax estimate forecasts a 
further decrease of around €1 billion (2014 and 
2015) and €3 billion (2013) vis-à-vis the bench -
mark figures set in March 2012. According to 
government data, the central government 
structural deficit for 2014 will already be below 
the 0.35% limit applicable from 2016 under the 
debt brake. This is essentially a welcome devel -
opment.
However, the forecast reduction in net borrow -
ing by around €5 billion per year vis-à-vis the 
latest financial plan is primarily due to lower es -
timates for interest expenditure, with revisions 
up to 2015 amounting to around €10 billion.15 
By contrast, the additional revenue expected in 
March 2012 vis-à-vis the May 2011 tax estimate 
will largely be set aside to fund income tax 
cuts. The childcare supplement planned from 
2013 onward is currently only counterfinanced 
through global expenditure savings. Cuts in 
payments to the social security funds are 
planned to provide relief for the central govern -
ment budget. In 2013, central government 
transfers to the health insurance fund are to be 
reduced by €2 billion on a one-off basis. Trans -
fers to the statutory pension insurance scheme 
are to be lowered by €1 billion annually. Ad -
justments to payments between central gov -
ernment and the Federal Employment Agency Benchmark fig-
ures for 2013 to 2016 have limited binding effectPlan to bring structural deficit below 0.35% of GDP as early as 2014
More favourable 
developments primarily due to lower interest expenditureCentral government fiscal deficit / surplus
Deutsche BundesbankQ1 Q2 Q3 Q42520151050510
–––––++
–45–40–35–30–25–20–15–10
20102010Quarterly results
Cumulative from start of year
20122012
20112011€ bn
15 This supersedes the previous global savings of €5 billion 
from 2014 onward.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2012  
68

are to relieve the central government budget 
by €2 billion in 2013 and by €1 billion annually 
thereafter. The statutory health and pension in -
surance schemes currently have substantial re -
serves, which appear to be a something of a 
temptation for policymakers. However, such 
ideas lose sight of the fact that stronger ex -
penditure growth and legally prescribed pen -
sion contribution cuts will probably quickly re -
duce the current surpluses and that, looking 
ahead, deficits even appear likely if there are no 
further corrections. The planned shifting of 
burdens will thus make it necessary to increase 
contribution rates or cut benefits within the 
foreseeable future. It would in principle be de -
sirable to clearly specify the social security 
funds’ “non-insurance-related benefits” and 
 finance these by means of rule-based central 
government grants. Otherwise, it will repeat -
edly look like fiscal policymakers are just chan -
ging track on a whim.
The benchmark figures contain some savings 
targets which have yet to be specifically imple -
mented. It is assumed, for example, that de -
fence ministry expenditure will decrease. The 
financial transactions tax, which is now planned 
to be introduced in 2014 and produce €2 bil -
lion annually in revenue, could be dropped if 
the current lack of agreement at European level 
persists. This poses a risk to the achievement of 
the savings requirements. However, possible 
negative macroeconomic developments and 
the repercussions of an intensification of the 
sovereign debt crisis are the main sources of 
uncertainty regarding compliance with the 
benchmark figures. Given the provisions of the 
debt brake, which will become progressively 
stricter over time, it would be advisable to use 
the assumed favourable economic conditions 
as an opportunity to reduce the deficit more 
sharply until there is a significant safety margin 
vis-à-vis the borrowing limit of 0.35% of GDP , 
rather than providing relief without the neces -
sary counterfinancing.
Central government’s off-budget entities are 
likely to have recorded a surplus in the first quarter of 2012, compared with a deficit of €1 
billion in the same period last year. The discon -
tinuation of the Investment and Repayment 
Fund’s support measures made the largest con -
tribution to the improved result. These meas -
ures had resulted in a deficit of €1½ billion in 
the same period of 2011. In light of the ten -
sions relating to the sovereign debt crisis, 
 SoFFin’s mandate was extended further at the 
beginning of the year. However, like one year 
previously, no recourse was taken to the assist -
ance available to financial institutions, nor were 
any repayments made. The post office pension 
fund and the pension reserve are likely to have 
once again recorded surpluses. Provided there 
are no new capital injections to financial insti -
tutions, the off-budget entities are currently ex -
pected to record a surplus for the year as a 
whole. This is primarily attributable to revenue 
from reserves and special funds for outlays on 
pensions as well as additional costs for redeem -
ing inflation-indexed securities. Even so, the 
surplus is likely to be significantly lower than 
the figure recorded in 2011 (€6 billion), which 
was due to capital repayments to SoFFin.
State government16
The deficit in the federal states’ core budgets 
decreased in the first quarter of 2012 com -
pared with the same period one year previ -
ously, falling by €1½ billion to €2½ billion. Rev -
enue continued to rise perceptibly (+4%) as a 
result of the favourable developments in tax re -
ceipts (+ 8½%). At 2%, growth in expenditure 
lagged significantly behind. Personnel costs, a 
major item of state government expenditure, 
were up by 3½% on the year, however. Fur -
thermore, current transfers to local govern -
ment rose by 8% as a result of the favourable 
developments in state government tax receipts, 
which are, in principle, key for determining 
general grants from state government to local Significant safety 
margin vis-à-vis constitutional borrowing limit advisableOff-budget  entities record 
surplus
Further decline 
in deficit in 2012 Q1, …
16 The development of local government finances in the 
final quarter of 2011 was analysed in greater detail in the 
short articles in the Bundesbank’s April 2012 Monthly Re -
port. These are the most recent data available.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2012  
69

government, and because the federal states 
were forwarding central government’s in -
creased contributions to the municipalities’ 
basic allowance costs.
With a fiscal balance of -€15 billion, state gov -
ernment budget plans for 2012 have largely 
not been adjusted in line with the favourable 
developments seen during the implementation 
of the 2011 core budgets (actual deficit: €9½ 
billion). According to the May tax estimate, 
state government is expected to record add -
itional revenue of €2½ billion vis-à-vis the fig -
ures in the budget plans. Compared with the 
actual 2011 figure, consolidation progress thus 
appears unlikely. Yet the debt brake stipulates 
that the federal states must completely elimin -
ate their (structural) deficits by 2020, and de -
cisive action should therefore be taken to ad -
dress the ongoing need for consolidation. Fur -
thermore, the federal states would also be well 
advised to create an appreciable safety margin 
with respect to the borrowing limit by 2020.
Particular attention needs to be paid to those 
federal states entitled in principle to consolida -
tion assistance in the transitional phase of the 
debt brake. Although these states must provide 
the Stability Council with evidence that they 
have carried out the agreed deficit reduction 
steps, the overly high starting values17 mean 
that this is initially unlikely to prove very chal -
lenging. In particular, the far-reaching consoli -
dation measures required in Bremen and Saar-Bremen and Saar-  and Saar-Saar-
land can probably be postponed further. Given 
past experience, it appears crucial for the Sta -
bility Council to urge these federal states to 
rapidly make the foreseeable necessary im -
provements. Otherwise, as in the case of re -
habilitation assistance during the last two dec -
ades, there is a danger that they will ultimately 
fail to comply with the constitutional borrow -
ing limits.
However, the other federal states that still have 
relatively high structural deficits ought to reso -
lutely use the favourable macroeconomic situ -
ation as an opportunity to balance their budgets as quickly as possible through consoli -
dation measures. In Hesse, North Rhine-
Westphalia and Rhineland Palatinate, progress 
on this task is being hampered by imbalances 
in local government budgets,18 which are still 
substantial on average and for which the fed -
eral state ultimately shares responsibility. There 
is currently no recognisable scope for expand -
ing benefits or cutting tax rates. Instead, it 
seems imperative to immediately set ambitious 
annual minimum reduction steps for the struc -
tural deficits in order to ensure that the debt 
brake requirements enshrined in the constitu -
tion are fulfilled in the future.
Social security funds19
Statutory pension insurance 
scheme
The statutory pension insurance scheme re -
corded a deficit of just under €1 billion in the 
first quarter of 2012, which was €½ billion 
lower than one year previously. At 2%, revenue 
grew by almost twice as much as expenditure. 
Despite the cut in the contribution rate from 
19.9% to 19.6% at the start of 2012, employ -… but plans for 
the year as a whole currently do not envisage any fiscal con-solidation pro-gress
Deficit reduction 
path for consoli-dation assist -
ance recipients not strict enough
Ensure resolute 
deficit reduction in other states, tooReduced deficit at start of year despite cut in contribution rate
17 The May 2010 tax estimate results were used as a basis 
for the 2010 reference year and the additional revenue that 
was already known when the starting value was deter -
mined was interpreted as being cyclically induced. The 
2010 starting structural deficit value was therefore set very 
high. From 2011 onward, these revisions to the estimate 
are effectively regarded as structural. The use of this pro -
cedure has resulted per se in a significantly lower structural 
deficit from 2011 onward in unadjusted terms and enabled 
these states to achieve the required reduction in the struc -
tural deficit for 2011. Together with the additional receipts 
for 2011 vis-à-vis the crucial November 2010 tax estimate, 
which were initially also classified as cyclically induced, this 
will probably enable them to achieve the required reduc -
tion in 2012, too. This will allow them to postpone consoli -
dation measures. One option worth considering would be 
to more closely link the deficit reduction for which evi -
dence must be provided to the comparable values for other 
states. See Deutsche Bundesbank, The role of the Stability 
Council, Monthly Report, October 2011, pp 20-23.
18 See Deutsche Bundesbank, Public finances, Monthly Re -
port, April 2012, pp 7-9.
19 The financial development of the statutory health and 
public long-term care insurance schemes in the final quar -
ter of 2011 was discussed in the short article in the March 
2012 Monthly Report. These are the most recent data avail -
able.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2012  
70

ees’ compulsory contributions increased by 
close to 2½%. If the contribution rate had re -
mained unchanged, they would have gone up 
by 4%. On balance, central government grants 
were up by just over 2% on the year. Although 
a lower contribution rate per se  reduces the 
general central government grant, the positive 
wage developments in 2010 – which are also 
significant for the adjustment of central gov -
ernment grants – had a greater impact. Spend -
ing on pensions rose by just over 1% in the first 
quarter. This roughly corresponds to the mid-
2011 adjustment rate (+0.99%). The impact of 
the slight increase in the number of pensions 
was once again largely offset by a decline in 
the average payment amount.
In mid-2012, pensions will be raised by 2.18% 
in western Germany and 2.26% in eastern Ger -
many. This is the result of relatively strong wage 
developments in 2011 and the exceptionally 
powerful adjustment-boosting effect of the 
sustainability factor,20 although the impact of 
both these factors will still be dampened by a 
reduction in the adjustment to compensate for 
pension cuts waived in previous years. During 
the remainder of the year, expenditure will rise 
at a faster pace owing to this sharper increase 
in pensions. In spite of the reduction in the 
contribution rate, growth in revenue could be 
just as strong as in 2011, when the discontinu -
ation of pension contributions on behalf of re -
cipients of unemployment benefit II resulted in 
shortfalls. Overall, the 2012 surplus is now likely 
to be much higher than expected when the 
contribution rate was set in autumn 2011. If 
the favourable macroeconomic developments 
continue, the contribution rate at the begin -
ning of 2013 is likely to be lower than the fig -
ure forecast to date (19.2%), even if central 
government funds are cut by €1 billion, as is 
planned.
The statutory pension insurance scheme’s ad -
vantageous financial situation at present should 
not blind us to the fact that demographic de -
velopments from around the middle of the cur -
rent decade will go hand in hand with a higher number of benefit recipients and a lower num -
ber of contributors. Notwithstanding the re -
duced adjustments and the rise in the statutory 
retirement age, the financial burdens associ -
ated with these demographic developments al -
ready require a trend increase in the contribu -
tion rate, which threatens to exceed the statu -
tory limit of 22% applicable until 2030 in the 
years thereafter even if the range of benefits is 
not expanded. Against this backdrop, it ap -
pears extremely problematic to propose add -
itional permanent benefits today which will en -
tail increasing costs over time –  such as the 
pension allowances or higher pensions for per -
sons with reduced earning capacity – without Cut in contribu-
tion rate to below 19.2%  
on the cards  
for 2013
Current favour-
able financial situation does not justify per-manent expan-sion of benefitsFinances of the German statutory pension insurance scheme
Deutsche Bundesbank2009 2010 2011 2012586062646668
–20+2+4+6€ bn, quarterly
Lin scale
Surplus (+) or deficit (–)ExpenditureLog scale
Revenue
20 Admittedly, the reduction in the pensioner ratios re -
sponsible for this is not solely due to the currently very fa -
vourable employment situation and the only moderate in -
crease in the number of pensioners, but also in particular 
to the fact that the number of “equivalence contributors” 
is calculated using (outdated) provisional average wages. 
This special factor will – conversely – perceptibly reduce the 
pension adjustment in 2013.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2012  
71

securing counterfinancing on a sustainable 
basis.
Federal Employment Agency
The Federal Employment Agency recorded a 
surplus of just under €1½ billion in the first quarter of 2012. The improvement of €½ bil -
lion year on year is understated by the fact that 
€1 billion less in central government funds 
were required to ensure liquidity supply during 
the first three months of 2012. Contribution re -
ceipts were up by 5½% on the year. However, 
revenue fell by just under 5½% overall owing 
to lower payments from central government. 
On the expenditure side, although a decline of 
almost 12% was recorded on balance, the 
trend of shrinking negative growth rates con -
tinued. By contrast, greater cost savings were 
made in the area of active labour market policy, 
which were up by one-fifth on the year at last 
report.
The macroeconomic assumptions underlying 
the Federal Employment Agency’s budget plan 
are likely to be exceeded. The 2012 surplus is 
thus likely to be higher than the figure of €½ 
billion which was forecast despite the cut in 
the rule-based central government grant (by 
just under €1 billion). Looking ahead, however, 
the Federal Employment Agency’s finances 
could come under pressure even without a 
weakening in the labour market if the central 
government grant is completely discontinued 
– as envisaged in the benchmark figures for the 
2013 central government budget – and, in re -
turn, the reintegration payment which the Fed -
eral Employment Agency makes to central gov -
ernment for its half-share in the mediation and 
administration costs for recipients of unemploy -
ment benefit II is abolished. On balance, the 
more these costs fall, the worse off the Federal 
Employment Agency will be compared with its 
situation under the legislative status quo . By 
contrast, only central government would be 
negatively affected if the costs were to go back 
up again in the future.Favourable 
 financial result 
at start of year
Surplus for year 
as a whole likely to be higher than plannedFinances of theFederal Employment Agency
1 Including  transfers  to the civil servants'  pension  fund. 
2 Excluding central government liquidity assistance.
Deutsche Bundesbank2009 2010 2011 20126810121416
1.72.02.53.03.54.04.55.06.07.0
642024
–––++€ bn, quarterly
Log scale
Expenditure,
total 1
Revenue 2
Expenditure on ...
... vocational training... unemployment
    benefits and short-
    time working benefits
Lin scale
Surplus (+) or deficit (–)Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2012  
72

Statistical 
SectionDeutsche Bundesbank 
Monthly Report  
May 2012  
1•

Contents
I Key economic data for the euro area
 1 Monetary developments and interest rates  ..................................................................  5•
 2 External transactions and positions  ..............................................................................  5•
 3 Gener al economic indicators  .......................................................................................  6•
II Overall monetary survey in the euro area
 1 The money stock and its counterparts  .........................................................................  8•
 2 Consolidated balance sheet of monetary financial institutions (MFIs)  ...........................  10•
 3 Banking system’s liquidity position  ...............................................................................  14•
III Consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem
 1 A ssets  ..........................................................................................................................  16•
 2 Liabilities  .....................................................................................................................  18•
IV Banks
 1 A ssets and liabilities of monetary financial institutions (excluding the Bundesbank)  
in Germany  .................................................................................................................  20•
 2 Principal assets and liabilities of banks (MFIs) in Germany, by category of banks  ..........  24•
 3 A ssets and liabilities of banks (MFIs) in Germany vis-à-vis residents  ..............................  26•
 4 A ssets and liabilities of banks (MFIs) in Germany vis-à-vis non-residents  .......................  28•
 5 Lending by banks (MFIs) in Germany to domestic non-banks (non-MFIs)  .....................  30•
 6 Lending by banks (MFIs) in Germany to domestic enterprises and households, 
 housing loans, sectors of economic activity  .................................................................  32•
 7 Deposits of domestic non-banks (non-MFIs) at banks (MFIs) in Germany  .....................  34•
 8 Deposits of domestic households and non-profit institutions at banks (MFIs) in 
 Germany  .....................................................................................................................  36•
 9 Deposits of domestic government at banks (MFIs) in Germany, by creditor group ........  36•
 1 0 Savings deposits and bank savings bonds of banks (MFIs) in Germany sold to  
non-banks (non-MFIs) ..................................................................................................  38•
 1 1 Debt securities and money market paper outstanding of banks (MFIs) in Germany  ...... 38•
 1 2 Building and loan associations (MFIs) in Germany  ........................................................  39•
 1 3 A ssets and liabilities of the foreign branches and foreign subsidiaries of  
German banks (MFIs)  ...................................................................................................  40•Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2012  
2•

V Minimum reserves
 1 Reserve ratios  ..............................................................................................................  42•
 2 Reserve maintenance in Germany up to the end of 1998  ............................................  42•
 3 Reserve maintenance in the euro area  .........................................................................  42•
VI Interest rates
 1 ECB interest rates  ........................................................................................................  43•
 2 Base rates  ....................................................................................................................  43•
 3 Eur osystem monetary policy operations allotted through tenders  ................................  43•
 4 Money market rates, by month  ...................................................................................  43•
 5 Inter est rates and volumes for outstanding amounts and new business of  
German banks (MFIs)  ...................................................................................................  44•
VII Capital market
 1 Sales and purchases of debt securities and shares in Germany  .....................................  48•
 2 Sales of debt securities issued by residents  ..................................................................  49•
 3 Amounts outstanding of debt securities issued by residents .........................................  50•
 4 Shar es in circulation issued by residents  .......................................................................  50•
 5 Y ields and indices on German securities  ......................................................................  51•
 6 Sales and purchases of mutual fund shares in Germany  ...............................................  51•
VIII Financial accounts
 1 A cquisition of financial assets and financing of private non-financial sectors  ................  52•
 2 Financial assets and liabilities of private non-financial sectors  ......................................  53•
IX Public finances in Germany
 1 G eneral government: deficit and debt level as defined in the Maastricht Treaty  ..................  54•
 2 Gener al government: revenue, expenditure and fiscal deficit/surplus as shown in  
the national accounts  ..................................................................................................  54•
 3 Gener al government: budgetary development (as per government’s financial 
 statistics)  .....................................................................................................................  55•
 4 Centr al, state and local government: budgetary development (as per government’s 
 financial statistics)  ........................................................................................................  55•
 5 Centr al, state and local government: tax revenue  ........................................................  56•
 6 C entral and state government and European Union: tax revenue, by type  .......................  56•
 7 Centr al, state and local government: individual taxes  ..................................................  57•Deutsche Bundesbank 
Monthly Report  
May 2012  
3•

 8 German pension insurance scheme: budgetary development and assets  ......................  57•
 9 F ederal Employment Agency: budgetary development  .................................................  58•
 1 0 S tatutory health insurance scheme: budgetary development  .......................................  58•
 1 1 S tatutory long-term care insurance scheme: budgetary development  ..........................  59•
 1 2 Centr al government: borrowing in the market  .............................................................  59•
 1 3 Centr al, state and local government: debt by creditor  .................................................  59•
 1 4 Centr al, state and local government: debt by category  ................................................  60•
X Economic conditions in Germany
 1 Origin and use of domestic product, distribution of national income  ...........................  61•
 2 Output in the production sector  ..................................................................................  62•
 3 Or ders received by industry  .........................................................................................  63•
 4 Or ders received by construction  ..................................................................................  64•
 5 Retail trade turnover, sales of motor vehicles  ...............................................................  64•
 6 Labour market  .............................................................................................................  65•
 7 Prices  ..........................................................................................................................  66•
 8 Households’ income  ....................................................................................................  67•
 9 Negotiated pay rates (overall economy)  .......................................................................  67•
XI External sector
 1 Major items of the balance of payments of the euro area  ...........................................  68•
 2 Major items of the balance of payments of the Federal Republic of Germany  ..............  69•
 3 F oreign trade (special trade) of the Federal Republic of Germany, by country and 
group of countries  .......................................................................................................  70•
 4 Services and income of the Federal Republic of Germany  ............................................  71•
 5 C urrent transfers of the Federal Republic of Germany  ..................................................  71•
 6 C apital transfers  ..........................................................................................................  71•
 7 Financial account of the Federal Republic of Germany  .................................................  72•
 8 External position of the Bundesbank up to end-1998  ..................................................  73•
 9 External position of the Bundesbank since the beginning of the  
European monetary union  ...........................................................................................  73•
 1 0 A ssets and liabilities of enterprises in Germany (other than banks) vis-à-vis  
non-residents  ..............................................................................................................  74•
 1 1 ECB euro reference exchange rates of selected currencies  ...........................................  75•
 1 2 Eur o-area member states and irrevocable euro conversion rates in the third stage  
of European Economic and Monetary Union  ...............................................................  75•
 1 3 Effective exchange rates of the euro and indicators of the German economy’s price 
competitiveness  ...........................................................................................................  76•Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2012  
4•

Deutsche Bundesbank
5  Monthly Report
May 2012
I Key economic data for the euro area 
 
1 Monetary developments and interest rates
 
 
 
 
 Money stock in various definitions 1,2 Determinants of the money stock 1 Interest rates
 M 3 3 
MFI lending to Yield on Euro-
 3-month enterprises Monetary pean govern-
MFI lending, and capital 3-month ment bonds moving  average
M1 M2 (centred) total households formation  4 Eonia 5,7 Euribor 6,7 outstanding 8 
Period Annual percentage change % Annual percentage as a monthly average
2010          July 8.2 1.5 0.3 0.5 2.0 0.7 3.8 0.48 0.85 3.5
         Aug 7.7 2.0 1.1 0.8 2.3 1.2 3.4 0.43 0.90 3.3         Sep 6.1 2.0 1.1 1.1 2.2 1.2 3.3 0.45 0.88 3.3
         Oct 4.9 2.1 1.1 1.4 3.2 1.2 3.4 0.70 1.00 3.3
         Nov 4.6 2.3 2.1 1.6 4.0 1.9 3.7 0.59 1.04 3.7
         Dec 4.4 2.3 1.7 1.8 3.5 1.6 3.6 0.50 1.02 4.1
2011          Jan 3.2 2.3 1.6 1.8 3.8 2.0 3.3 0.66 1.02 4.2
         Feb 2.9 2.4 2.2 2.0 3.8 2.3 3.8 0.71 1.09 4.3
         Mar 3.0 2.7 2.2 2.1 3.2 2.2 3.7 0.66 1.18 4.4
         Apr 1.6 2.4 1.9 2.1 3.2 2.3 3.8 0.97 1.32 4.5
         May 1.2 2.4 2.3 2.1 3.1 2.5 4.1 1.03 1.43 4.4
         June 1.3 2.3 1.9 2.1 2.6 2.1 4.4 1.12 1.49 4.4
         July 0.9 2.1 2.0 2.2 2.4 1.8 4.4 1.01 1.60 4.6
         Aug 1.7 2.3 2.7 2.5 2.4 1.7 4.4 0.91 1.55 4.1
         Sep 2.0 2.5 2.8 2.7 2.4 1.6 4.3 1.01 1.54 4.0
         Oct 1.7 1.9 2.6 2.4 1.6 2.2 4.3 0.96 1.58 4.3
         Nov 2.1 2.1 1.9 2.0 0.8 1.0 3.4 0.79 1.48 4.8
         Dec 1.7 1.8 1.5 2.0 1.0 0.5 2.9 0.63 1.43 4.8
2012          Jan 2.1 2.3 2.5 2.3 1.4 0.7 2.7 0.38 1.22 4.7
         Feb 2.5 2.8 2.8 2.8 1.4 0.4 2.1 0.37 1.05 4.5
         Mar 2.7 2.9 3.2 ... 1.8 0.5 1.2 0.36 0.86 4.0
         Apr ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 0.35 0.74 4.1
1 Source: ECB. 2 Seasonally adjusted. 3 Excluding money market fund sharesunits, OverNight Index Average. 6 Euro Interbank Offered Rate. 7 See also footnotes to
money market paper and debt securities with a maturity of up to two years held by Table VI.4, p 43  8 GDP-weighted yield on ten-year government bonds. Countries
non-euro-area residents. 4 Longer-term liabilities to euro-area non-MFIs. 5 Euro include:DE,FR,NL,BE,AT,FI,IE,PT,ES,IT,GR,SK. 
 
 
2 External transactions and positions  * 
  
 
Selected items of the euro-area balance of payments Euro exchange rates  1 
Current account Capital account Effective exchange rate 3 
of which Direct Securities Other Reserve
Balance Trade balance Balance investment investment assets Dollar rate Nominal Real  4 transactions 2 
Period € million Euro/US-$ Q1 1999 = 100
2010          July + 8,313 + 6,737 − 695 − 14,515 − 24,003 + 40,987 − 3,164 1.2770 101.6 99.8
         Aug − 4,051 − 4,274 − 431 − 27,749 + 2,525 + 26,392 − 1,600 1.2894 101.2 99.3
         Sep − 1,608 + 3,632 − 3,964 − 31,327 + 45,580 − 17,928 − 289 1.3067 101.5 99.5
         Oct + 6,489 + 5,539 − 4,023 − 10,487 + 2,691 + 4,009 − 236 1.3898 105.0 102.6
         Nov + 32 − 451 + 5,385 + 38,721 + 16,820 − 50,156 + 1 1.3661 103.7 101.2         Dec + 7,671 + 982 − 13,651 + 21,085 + 17,244 − 50,432 − 1,548 1.3220 101.7 99.2
2011          Jan − 16,778 − 14,241 + 6,408 + 4,282 − 30,171 + 38,221 − 5,924 1.3360 101.4 99.0
         Feb − 5,521 + 752 − 3,577 − 36,706 + 94,356 − 62,353 + 1,126 1.3649 102.4 99.8
         Mar + 1,040 + 3,367 − 8,108 − 10,401 + 71,409 − 62,256 − 6,860 1.3999 104.1 101.6
         Apr − 4,988 − 3,624 − 4,657 − 31,176 + 8,621 + 11,872 + 6,026 1.4442 105.9 103.3
         May − 13,949 + 471 + 18,894 − 4,247 + 42,910 − 16,645 − 3,124 1.4349 104.9 102.2         June + 322 + 797 + 6,964 + 3,592 + 91,099 − 89,308 + 1,582 1.4388 105.0 102.2
         July + 3,360 + 4,156 − 6,208 − 17,336 − 23,660 + 36,022 − 1,234 1.4264 104.0 101.0
         Aug − 1,416 − 4,309 − 580 + 7,194 + 18,195 − 29,352 + 3,383 1.4343 103.9 100.8         Sep + 780 + 2,991 + 10,292 − 9,031 + 25,642 − 7,908 + 1,589 1.3770 102.8 100.0
         Oct + 3,416 + 384 − 1,316 − 6,544 − 3,582 + 9,898 − 1,089 1.3706 103.0 100.3
         Nov + 8,880 + 5,730 − 21,875 − 42,591 + 31,392 − 10,439 − 238 1.3556 102.6 99.9
         Dec + 21,640 + 8,162 − 20,825 − 8,171 − 38,744 + 31,524 − 5,435 1.3179 100.8 98.2
2012          Jan − 10,111 − 9,168 + 10,415 − 6,379 − 47,505 + 64,843 − 544 1.2905 98.9 96.3
         Feb − 5,870 + 2,435 + 3,235 − 5,281 + 24,272 − 13,981 − 1,775 1.3224 99.6 97.2
         Mar ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 1.3201 99.8 97.3
         Apr ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 1.3162 99.5 96.9
*  Source: ECB. 1  See also Tables XI.12 and 13, pp 75−76
  2  Including
financial derivatives. 3  Vis-à-vis the currencies of The-EER-20 group. 4  Based on
consumer prices. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
6  Monthly Report
May 2012
I. Key economic data for the euro area 
 
3  General economic indicators
 
 
                   
 
Period Euro area Belgium Germany Estonia Finland France Greece Ireland Italy
 
Real gross domestic product 1,2
 
2009 − 4.3 − 2.8 − 5.1 − 14.3 − 8.3 − 3.1 − 3.2 − 7.0 − 5.5
2010 1.9 2.2 3.7 2.3 3.7 1.7 − 3.5 − 0.4 1.8
2011 1.5 1.9 3.0 7.6 2.9 1.7 − 6.9 ... 0.4
2010          Q4 2.1 2.2 3.8 6.0 5.8 1.6 − 8.6 − 0.2 1.9
2011          Q1 2.4 3.1 5.0 9.5 5.2 2.6 − 8.0 − 0.1 1.1
         Q2 1.6 2.3 3.0 8.4 1.8 1.9 − 7.3 1.9 1.2
         Q3 1.3 1.3 2.6 8.5 3.3 1.3 − 5.0 0.2 0.4
         Q4 0.7 1.0 1.5 4.5 1.4 1.0 − 7.5 0.7 − 0.8
2012          Q1 0.0 ... 1.7 3.9 ... 0.7 − 6.2 ... ...
 
Industrial production 1,3
 
2009 − 14.9 − 11.9 − 16.4 − 23.9 − 18.1 − 12.8 − 9.2 − 4.5 − 18.8
2010 7.3 8.3 10.8 22.9 5.1 4.7 − 6.6 7.6 6.8
2011 3.5 4.2 4 7.6 16.6 1.3 2.5 − 8.8 0.0 0.1
2010          Q4 8.0 7.0 12.7 34.6 9.4 5.1 − 6.3 12.8 5.4
2011          Q1 6.5 7.9 12.0 28.9 4.5 4.6 − 6.3 − 1.4 2.1
         Q2 4.0 3.9 8.1 23.4 3.0 2.3 − 11.6 − 0.1 2.1
         Q3 3.9 4.1 8.1 16.0 0.2 3.0 − 5.5 1.0 − 0.4
         Q4 − 0.2 1.1 4 2.8 1.6 − 2.0 0.2 − 11.9 0.7 − 3.3
2012          Q1 e − 1.9 ... 4,5p 1.1 − 1.9 − 4.6 − 1.6 p − 7.7 p − 2.1 − 5.8
 
Capacity utilisation in industry 6
 
2009 71.1 72.0 72.0 58.1 67.0 73.6 70.7 − 66.1
2010 75.8 77.9 79.7 67.1 73.5 77.2 68.1 − 68.3
2011 80.4 80.5 86.1 73.3 77.4 83.0 67.9 − 72.6
2011          Q1 80.0 81.2 85.6 73.5 77.0 81.8 69.5 − 72.5
         Q2 81.3 82.6 86.8 73.4 77.4 84.5 68.8 − 74.3
         Q3 80.5 80.1 86.7 73.0 77.9 83.0 67.5 − 72.1
         Q4 79.6 78.0 85.1 73.2 77.2 82.8 65.8 − 71.6
2012          Q1 79.8 79.0 85.3 70.5 78.1 82.4 65.5 − 70.7
         Q2 79.6 78.4 85.2 69.0 80.2 80.8 64.9 − 71.0
 
Standardised unemployment rate 7,8
 
2009 9.6 7.9 7.8 13.8 8.3 9.5 9.5 11.9 7.8
2010 10.1 8.3 7.1 16.9 8.4 9.8 12.6 13.7 8.4
2011 10.2 7.2 5.9 12.5 7.8 9.7 17.7 14.4 8.4
2011          Oct 10.4 7.2 5.6 7.6 9.8 19.7 14.7 8.8
         Nov 10.6 7.2 5.7 7.6 9.8 20.6 14.8 9.2
         Dec 10.6 7.1 5.6 11.7 7.6 9.9 21.0 14.7 9.3
2012          Jan 10.8 7.3 5.8 7.5 10.0 21.4 14.7 9.5
         Feb 10.8 7.3 5.6 7.5 10.0 21.7 14.7 9.6
         Mar 10.9 7.3 5.2 ... 7.5 10.0 ... 14.5 9.8
 
Harmonised Index of Consumer Prices 1
 
2009 9 0.3 0.0 0.2 0.2 1.6 0.1 1.3 − 1.7 0.8
2010 1.6 2.3 1.2 2.7 1.7 1.7 4.7 − 1.6 1.6
2011 10 2.7 3.5 2.5 5.1 3.3 2.3 3.1 1.2 2.9
2011          Nov 3.0 3.7 2.8 4.4 3.2 2.7 2.8 1.7 3.7
         Dec 2.7 3.2 2.3 4.1 2.6 2.7 2.2 1.4 3.7
2012          Jan 2.7 3.3 2.3 4.7 3.0 2.6 2.1 1.3 3.4
         Feb 2.7 3.3 2.5 4.4 3.0 2.5 1.7 1.6 3.4
         Mar 2.7 3.1 2.3 4.7 2.9 2.6 1.4 2.2 3.8
         Apr p 2.6 2.9 2.2 4.3 3.0 2.4 1.5 1.9 3.7
 
General government financial balance 11
 
2009 − 6.4 − 5.6 − 3.2 − 2.0 − 2.5 − 7.5 − 15.6 − 14.0 − 5.4
2010 − 6.2 − 3.8 − 4.3 0.2 − 2.5 − 7.1 − 10.3 − 31.2 − 4.6
2011 − 4.1 − 3.7 − 1.0 1.0 − 0.5 − 5.2 − 9.1 − 13.1 − 3.9
 
General government debt 11
 
2009 79.9 95.8 74.4 7.2 43.5 79.2 129.4 65.1 116.0
2010 85.3 96.0 83.0 6.7 48.4 82.3 145.0 92.5 118.6
2011 87.2 98.0 81.2 6.0 48.6 85.8 165.3 108.2 120.1
Sources: National data, European Commission, Eurostat, European Central Bank. 4  Provisional; adjusted in advance by the Federal Statistical Office by way of
Latest data are partly based on press reports and are provisional. 1  Annual percen- estimates to the results of the Quarterly Production Survey. 5  Positivly influenced by
tage change. 2  GDP of the euro area calculated from seasonally adjusted data. late reports.  6  Manufacturing, in %; seasonally adjusted; data are collected in
3  Manufacturing, mining and energy; adjusted for working-day variations.

Deutsche Bundesbank
7  Monthly Report
May 2012
I.  Key economic data for the euro area  
 
   
                   
 
Luxembourg Malta Netherlands Austria Portugal Slovakia Slovenia Spain Cyprus   Period
 
Real gross domestic product 1,2
 
− 5.3 − 2.7 − 3.5 − 3.8 − 2.9 − 4.9 − 8.0 − 3.7 − 1.9 2009
2.7 2.3 1.7 2.3 1.4 4.2 1.4 − 0.1 1.1 2010
1.6 2.1 1.2 3.1 − 1.6 3.3 − 0.2 0.7 0.5 2011
3.8 2.6 2.3 2.7 0.9 3.6 2.4 0.2 2.2 2010          Q42.8 2.9 2.7 4.9 − 0.6 3.4 2.1 0.9 1.6 2011          Q1
0.7 3.1 1.6 4.1 − 1.2 3.5 0.7 1.1 1.4          Q2
2.0 2.5 1.1 2.4 − 1.9 3.0 − 0.5 1.1 − 0.4          Q3
0.8 − 0.1 − 0.6 0.8 − 2.6 3.4 − 2.8 − 0.2 − 0.7          Q4
... ... − 1.1 1.9 ... 3.1 ... ... ... 2012          Q1
 
Industrial production1,3
 
− 16.0 − − 7.7 − 11.3 − 8.6 − 14.1 − 17.7 − 15.8 − 9.2 2009
9.4 − 7.8 6.7 1.7 18.3 6.0 0.8 − 2.0 2010
− 2.4 − − 0.8 7.2 − 2.0 7.1 1.9 − 1.4 − 7.7 2011
2.9 − 6.8 9.2 1.0 15.7 7.3 0.4 − 2.5 2010          Q42.6 − 0.7 11.9 0.2 11.8 6.9 1.8 − 3.7 2011          Q1
− 4.4 − − 1.4 9.4 − 1.5 8.7 2.7 − 1.1 − 4.0          Q2
− 1.4 − 2.6 6.3 − 2.3 5.0 − 0.1 − 1.4 − 12.5          Q3
− 6.2 − − 4.3 2.4 − 4.4 3.6 − 1.7 − 5.0 − 11.1          Q4
p − 11.1 − p − 1.2 ... − 6.1 p 7.7 p 0.2 − 5.8 ... 2012          Q1
 
Capacity utilisation in industry 6
 
65.4 70.1 76.0 77.4 72.6 54.0 70.9 70.0 65.2 2009
78.5 77.7 78.9 81.9 75.0 58.0 76.0 71.1 62.6 201083.2 78.7 80.3 85.4 74.4 61.6 80.4 73.3 61.4 2011
82.9 80.6 80.7 84.6 73.5 68.0 79.9 73.5 63.2 2011          Q1
87.3 81.1 81.1 86.3 76.4 55.4 82.2 74.7 62.9          Q2
82.7 76.9 80.6 85.8 74.3 60.6 80.1 72.6 61.3          Q3
79.8 76.0 78.9 85.0 73.5 62.3 79.5 72.2 58.1          Q4
79.2 74.2 79.8 85.1 74.1 67.5 79.7 72.5 56.7 2012          Q1
82.7 75.9 78.6 84.7 74.2 71.1 80.6 72.7 56.2          Q2
 
Standardised unemployment rate 7,8
 
5.1 6.9 3.7 4.8 10.6 12.0 5.9 18.0 5.3 20094.6 6.9 4.5 4.4 12.0 14.4 7.3 20.1 6.2 20104.8 6.5 4.4 4.2 12.9 13.5 8.2 21.7 7.8 2011
4.9 6.4 4.8 4.3 13.6 13.9 8.6 22.7 9.0 2011          Oct 
4.9 6.5 4.9 4.4 14.0 14.0 8.7 23.0 9.3          Nov 
5.1 6.7 4.9 4.1 14.6 14.1 8.7 23.2 9.5          Dec 
5.1 6.8 5.0 4.1 14.8 14.0 8.7 23.5 9.6 2012          Jan 
5.2 6.8 4.9 4.1 15.0 14.0 8.7 23.8 9.8          Feb 
5.2 6.8 5.0 4.0 15.3 13.9 8.5 24.1 10.0          Mar 
 
Harmonised Index of Consumer Prices 1
 
0.0 1.8 1.0 0.4 − 0.9 0.9 0.9 − 0.2 0.2 20092.8 2.0 0.9 1.7 1.4 0.7 2.1 2.0 2.6 20103.7 2.4 2.5 3.6 3.6 4.1 2.1 3.1 3.5 2011
4.0 1.5 2.6 3.9 3.8 4.8 2.8 2.9 4.0 2011          Nov 
3.4 1.3 2.5 3.4 3.5 4.6 2.1 2.4 4.2          Dec 
3.2 1.5 2.9 2.9 3.4 4.1 2.3 2.0 3.1 2012          Jan 
3.3 2.4 2.9 2.6 3.6 4.0 2.8 1.9 3.1          Feb 
2.9 2.4 2.9 2.6 3.1 3.9 2.4 1.8 3.5          Mar 
3.0 3.8
p 2.8 p 2.4 p 2.9 3.7 2.9 2.0 3.6          Apr 
 
General government financial balance 11
 
− 0.8 − 3.8 − 5.6 − 4.1 − 10.2 − 8.0 − 6.1 − 11.2 − 6.1 2009− 0.9 − 3.7 − 5.1 − 4.5 − 9.8 − 7.7 − 6.0 − 9.3 − 5.3 2010− 0.6 − 2.7 − 4.7 − 2.6 − 4.2 − 4.8 − 6.4 − 8.5 − 6.3 2011
 
General government debt 11
 
14.8 68.1 60.8 69.5 83.1 35.6 35.3 53.9 58.5 200919.1 69.4 62.9 71.9 93.3 41.1 38.8 61.2 61.5 201018.2 72.0 65.2 72.2 107.8 43.3 47.6 68.5 71.6 2011
January, April, July and October. 7  As a percentage of the civilian labour force; sea- 2009 onwards. 10  Including Estonia from 2011 onwards. 11  As a percentage of
sonally adjusted. 8  Standardised unemployment rate of Germany: calculation based GDP; euro-area aggregate: European Central Bank (ESA 1995), member states:
on unadjusted data from the Federal Statistical Office. 9  Including Slovakia from European Commission (Maastricht Treaty definition). 

Deutsche Bundesbank
8  Monthly Report
May 2012
II Overall monetary survey in the euro area 
 
1 The money stock and its counterparts *
(a) Euro area 
  
€ billion
I Lending to non-banks (non-MFIs) II Net claims on III Monetary capital formation at monetary
in the euro area non-euro-area residents financial institutions (MFIs) in the euro area
Enterprises General
and households government Debt
Deposits securities
Liabil- with an Deposits with
Claims ities to agreed at agreed maturities
on non- non-euro- maturity notice of of over Capital
of which of which euro-area area of over over 2 years and
Period Total Total Total Total residents residents Total 2 years 3 months (net)  2 Securities Securities reserves 3 
2010          Aug 2.9 3.6 12.6 − 0.7 − 8.0 − 6.2 91.8 98.1 10.4 6.9 − 1.4 − 2.4 7.2
         Sep 59.6 44.5 2.2 15.1 10.1 7.1 − 46.7 − 53.8 14.6 3.6 − 2.7 15.9 − 2.2
         Oct 153.1 − 37.1 − 20.2 190.2 110.7 − 82.9 − 37.6 45.2 9.4 − 7.5 − 1.7 12.4 6.2
         Nov 160.7 143.4 51.5 17.3 − 37.3 8.2 15.5 7.2 57.9 29.4 0.2 2.2 26.1
         Dec − 116.8 − 48.0 − 28.7 − 68.9 − 73.5 49.8 − 89.3 − 139.0 29.8 19.9 − 0.5 − 3.1 13.6
2011          Jan 47.4 27.5 3.1 19.8 23.5 13.6 84.5 70.9 17.1 − 1.4 1.5 22.8 − 5.9
         Feb 17.7 23.6 − 0.5 − 5.9 8.2 21.0 31.3 10.3 32.5 − 5.4 0.5 22.8 14.6
         Mar − 29.1 − 6.5 − 25.2 − 22.6 − 12.1 101.2 − 33.1 − 134.3 25.7 9.6 0.0 14.4 1.7         Apr 82.8 81.7 46.4 1.1 11.5 − 21.9 82.9 104.8 34.7 17.1 − 1.1 19.5 − 0.7
         May 5.6 19.0 − 21.9 − 13.4 9.9 7.9 83.2 75.3 25.2 1.4 − 0.5 10.9 13.4
         June 10.2 − 15.5 − 50.0 25.7 29.2 65.9 − 134.6 − 200.5 25.5 4.8 − 0.3 3.0 18.0
         July − 4.7 5.8 3.1 − 10.6 − 14.7 − 18.0 − 37.9 − 19.9 34.4 − 5.2 0.0 2.2 37.4
         Aug 7.3 − 10.9 − 12.6 18.2 32.1 28.3 72.3 44.0 8.3 0.5 − 0.4 − 1.7 9.9
         Sep 52.3 28.1 − 20.4 24.2 21.2 22.6 − 12.3 − 34.9 9.5 12.9 − 0.7 − 5.2 2.5
         Oct 35.9 36.7 36.4 − 0.8 − 0.6 − 50.8 − 89.8 − 39.1 10.0 24.5 0.0 − 18.5 4.0
         Nov 28.9 − 10.1 9.1 39.1 40.4 − 24.8 − 64.0 − 39.2 − 3.7 − 10.3 − 0.9 − 10.8 18.3
         Dec − 94.7 −111.4 − 15.6 16.7 1.6 16.9 − 19.8 − 36.7 − 4.4 13.5 − 0.7 − 41.8 24.6
2012          Jan 120.6 56.8 16.5 63.8 66.8 − 41.7 18.0 59.7 4.0 − 0.5 0.6 − 4.0 8.0
         Feb 14.9 − 15.5 4.5 30.4 46.6 20.8 20.3 − 0.6 − 13.1 − 4.2 − 1.4 − 7.2 − 0.2
         Mar 30.6 0.4 0.4 30.1 33.1 − 24.7 29.4 54.2 − 44.4 − 26.9 − 0.9 − 21.9 5.3
  
  
(b) German contribution
 
I Lending to non-banks (non-MFIs) II Net claims on III Monetary capital formation at monetary
in the euro area non-euro-area residents financial institutions (MFIs) in the euro area
Enterprises General
and households government Debt
Deposits securities
Liabil- with an Deposits with
Claims ities to agreed at agreed maturities
on non- non-euro- maturity notice of of over Capital
of which of which euro-area area of over over 2 years and
Period Total Total Total Total residents residents Total 2 years 3 months (net)  2 Securities Securities reserves 3 
2010          Aug 8.7 6.9 1.6 1.8 1.8 7.2 12.0 4.8 − 3.4 2.4 − 1.8 − 2.4 − 1.7
         Sep − 16.1 − 24.0 − 5.2 7.9 4.0 − 2.2 − 23.0 − 20.9 − 0.4 − 1.0 − 2.4 2.2 0.7         Oct 101.0 7.6 1.6 93.4 88.7 5.0 − 3.4 − 8.4 2.3 − 2.1 − 1.4 − 4.4 10.2
         Nov 40.6 33.5 5.2 7.1 − 69.0 − 5.2 6.4 11.6 4.3 − 0.2 0.5 3.1 0.8
         Dec − 72.0 − 39.6 − 4.2 − 32.4 − 22.5 18.4 − 11.7 − 30.1 − 0.5 − 0.2 − 0.0 − 0.7 0.42011          Jan 30.1 19.0 16.9 11.1 6.2 9.5 6.0 − 3.5 5.8 − 2.5 − 0.5 2.3 6.5
         Feb − 0.8 13.5 − 7.2 − 14.3 − 2.4 − 4.0 3.6 7.7 2.2 − 1.8 0.0 0.0 3.9
         Mar − 29.6 − 17.0 − 0.5 − 12.5 − 2.2 26.3 − 26.8 − 53.1 − 3.7 − 1.7 0.2 − 4.7 2.5
         Apr 29.0 36.8 22.4 − 7.7 3.2 18.9 50.0 31.2 2.4 − 1.3 − 0.8 3.0 1.4
         May − 26.0 − 16.3 − 24.7 − 9.7 1.3 5.5 1.4 − 4.1 − 10.3 − 0.3 − 0.1 − 3.5 − 6.4
         June − 23.3 − 13.4 − 12.4 − 10.0 − 6.4 17.2 − 41.4 − 58.5 4.8 0.2 − 0.2 2.0 2.8
         July − 0.8 − 2.0 − 4.0 1.3 − 3.9 − 9.4 − 5.0 4.4 − 5.0 − 0.3 0.0 − 6.3 1.5
         Aug 15.3 12.7 − 6.1 2.6 12.0 − 31.3 24.0 55.3 0.1 − 0.1 − 0.1 − 1.2 1.5
         Sep 12.7 9.6 − 5.5 3.1 3.6 − 41.3 − 15.9 25.4 − 8.2 − 3.8 − 0.5 − 2.4 − 1.5
         Oct 29.3 25.9 − 2.1 3.4 7.6 − 39.2 − 23.4 15.7 2.4 − 2.0 − 0.2 2.7 2.0
         Nov 3.7 4.2 1.7 − 0.5 2.1 − 13.7 − 0.1 13.7 − 7.3 − 1.4 − 0.9 − 3.8 − 1.3
         Dec − 54.4 − 48.0 − 4.8 − 6.4 − 9.5 72.2 − 9.7 − 81.9 − 8.0 − 0.3 − 0.8 − 4.3 − 2.6
2012          Jan 36.8 25.6 4.3 11.2 7.7 − 79.6 29.3 108.9 − 26.2 − 3.4 − 0.9 − 22.8 0.9
         Feb − 3.1 − 2.8 − 5.8 − 0.3 1.9 − 30.5 − 10.3 20.2 9.1 − 2.8 − 1.2 8.2 4.9
         Mar 2.1 1.2 8.4 0.9 3.2 − 51.7 5.1 56.9 − 6.7 − 4.9 − 0.8 − 6.2 5.1
*The data in this table are based on the consolidated balance sheet of monetary MFIs’ portfolios. 3After deduction of inter-MFI participations. 4Including the counter-
financial institutions (MFIs) (Table II.2); statistical breaks have been eliminated from parts of monetary liabilities of central governments. 5Including the monetary
the flow figures (see also the “Notes on the figures“ in the “Explanatory notes“ in the liabilities of central governments (Post Office, Treasury). 6In Germany, only savings
Statistical Supplement to the Monthly Report 1, p 30
  ).1Source: ECB. 2Excluding deposits. 7Paper held by residents outside the euro area has been eliminated.

Deutsche Bundesbank
9  Monthly Report
May 2012
II Overall monetary survey in the euro area
 
 
 
(a) Euro area 
 
V Other factors VI Money stock M3 (balance I plus II less III less IV less V)
Money stock M2 Debt secur-
of which ities with
Intra- Money stock M1 maturities
Eurosystem Deposits of up to
liability/ with an Deposits Money 2 years
IV De- claim agreed at agreed market (incl money
posits of related to Currency maturity notice of Repo fund market    
banknote in circu- Overnight of up to up to 3 transac- shares paper)    central  gov-
ernments Total 4 issue Total Total Total lation deposits 5 2 years 5 tions (net) 2,7  Period (net) 2,7,8 months  5,6 
− 20.2 − 10.9 − 17.4 4.0 − 34.9 − 6.0 − 28.9 26.2 12.7 2.6 11.7 − 0.9 2010          Aug 
3.4 29.8 − 19.0 16.0 8.4 − 1.2 9.6 4.4 3.1 22.3 − 18.8 − 0.7          Sep 
78.1 − 5.1 − − 12.2 36.5 9.1 2.2 6.9 23.9 3.6 − 28.4 − 15.0 − 5.4          Oct 
17.1 38.4 − 55.5 − 1.2 10.5 1.2 9.4 − 15.3 3.6 48.2 12.9 − 4.4          Nov 
− 97.1 − 51.1 − 51.3 89.7 66.0 18.4 47.6 2.6 21.1 − 5.2 − 34.0 0.9          Dec 
51.9 67.6 − − 75.7 − 41.2 − 44.9 − 12.6 − 32.3 − 16.0 19.7 − 36.1 − 5.2 6.8 2011          Jan 13.5 − 26.5 − 19.3 − 20.6 − 33.6 − 0.0 − 33.6 11.8 1.2 39.7 2.9 − 2.7          Feb 
− 29.1 49.8 − 25.7 26.3 16.7 2.5 14.2 6.8 2.8 − 15.0 − 2.1 16.5          Mar 
8.0 − 51.1 − 69.2 49.8 39.5 7.1 32.4 7.4 2.9 22.8 2.2 − 5.6          Apr 
− 17.0 − 14.3 − 19.6 − 7.6 − 15.7 5.0 − 20.7 7.5 0.7 38.7 − 3.5 − 7.9          May
51.6 − 13.0 − 12.0 30.6 55.2 9.2 46.0 − 22.6 − 2.0 − 11.4 − 20.6 13.5          June
− 22.0 − 25.9 − − 9.3 0.3 − 21.9 8.5 − 30.4 20.1 2.1 − 1.1 − 7.1 − 1.3          July− 60.4 13.1 − 74.6 10.0 − 22.0 − 4.7 − 17.2 26.6 5.4 45.8 21.9 − 3.3          Aug 
4.9 23.7 − 36.8 27.7 19.2 7.7 11.5 14.0 − 5.5 25.0 − 11.0 − 4.9          Sep 
0.5 9.4 − − 34.8 − 4.9 9.3 6.3 3.0 − 11.8 − 2.3 − 22.3 − 8.4 0.7          Oct 
2.7 23.1 − − 18.0 2.0 14.6 3.9 10.7 − 13.9 1.3 − 28.4 6.5 2.0          Nov 
− 5.4 − 114.6 − 46.6 99.4 83.3 16.2 67.2 3.3 12.8 − 67.4 − 4.7 19.2          Dec 
59.9 28.1 − − 13.2 − 27.6 − 53.4 − 14.4 − 39.0 8.9 16.8 17.1 7.9 − 10.6 2012          Jan 23.2 − 12.4 − 38.1 10.5 − 27.3 − 0.4 − 26.8 30.1 7.7 13.6 0.3 13.6          Feb 
− 13.8 − 29.3 − 93.3 68.5 46.4 2.3 44.1 12.4 9.6 − 14.9 13.9 25.9          Mar 
 
 
 (b) German contribution 
 
V Other factors VI Money stock M3 (balance I plus II less III less IV less V)  10 
of which Components of the money stock
Intra- Debt securities
Eurosystem Deposits with
liability/ with an Deposits Money maturities
IV De- claim agreed at agreed market of up to 2 yearsposits of related to Currency maturity notice of Repo fund (incl money    
banknote in circu- Overnight of up to up to 3 transac-
shares market    central  gov-
ernments Total issue 9,11 lation Total deposits 2 years months  6 tions (net) 7,8 paper)(net) 7  Period
7.5 − 14.7 2.0 − 1.3 26.5 4.7 1.5 1.7 11.7 − 0.3 7.2 2010          Aug 
− 8.5 − 11.3 2.6 − 0.4 1.9 1.0 3.6 2.6 − 8.0 − 0.2 2.9          Sep 
20.8 110.6 0.9 0.0 − 27.7 2.5 − 0.2 2.7 − 10.8 − 0.1 − 21.7          Oct 
3.3 − 18.8 − 0.1 1.1 46.7 26.4 − 5.2 2.1 23.9 0.3 − 0.8          Nov 
− 6.7 − 29.2 0.5 3.8 − 17.2 − 8.7 8.5 8.6 − 22.2 0.1 − 3.6          Dec 
5.4 32.5 0.7 − 2.8 − 4.1 14.7 − 6.2 2.7 − 12.2 0.1 − 3.1 2011          Jan 
1.9 − 17.7 1.1 − 0.2 8.8 − 15.5 5.2 2.1 18.8 − 0.1 − 1.7          Feb 
− 8.2 16.4 0.6 0.6 − 7.7 3.3 3.8 0.8 − 14.3 0.1 − 1.5          Mar 
− 4.5 26.7 0.7 1.5 23.3 7.3 10.2 − 1.3 10.4 − 0.2 − 3.1          Apr 
3.4 − 38.8 1.5 1.4 25.1 1.1 10.9 − 2.3 15.9 − 0.3 − 0.2          May
3.0 − 19.2 1.5 2.5 5.1 8.2 − 0.4 − 1.9 − 0.3 − 0.2 − 0.2          June
− 1.2 − 1.0 1.8 2.0 − 3.0 − 4.8 13.5 − 1.2 − 13.4 − 0.1 3.0          July− 0.1 − 46.6 2.6 − 1.0 30.7 12.3 6.6 − 1.4 10.3 0.4 2.6          Aug 
3.4 − 42.1 3.2 1.3 18.2 7.2 12.3 − 1.0 4.9 0.1 − 5.3          Sep 
− 2.7 − 11.9 0.1 1.8 2.4 10.0 − 2.7 − 0.2 − 1.2 − 0.0 − 3.5          Oct − 0.2 − 32.7 0.1 1.5 30.2 20.4 1.7 − 0.1 5.3 − 0.9 3.9          Nov 
0.2 31.9 − 0.4 3.5 − 6.2 − 1.8 6.2 5.5 − 14.1 − 0.1 − 2.0          Dec 
4.0 − 9.3 0.5 − 3.1 − 11.7 0.8 − 1.0 2.1 − 10.8 − 0.3 − 2.4 2012          Jan 
3.5 − 67.9 1.2 − 0.1 21.7 6.8 − 0.6 3.9 10.0 − 0.2 1.8          Feb 
− 10.7 − 34.6 3.2 − 0.2 2.3 8.7 − 0.8 0.4 − 3.6 − 0.2 − 2.2          Mar 
8Less German MFIs’ holdings of paper issued by euro-area MFIs. 9Including money stocks M1, M2 or M3. 11The difference between the volume of euro
national banknotes still in circulation. 10The German contributions to the Euro- banknotes actually issued by the Bundesbank and the amount disclosed in
system’s monetary aggregates should on no account be interpreted as national accordance with the accounting regime chosen by the Eurosystem (see also footnote
monetary aggregates and are therefore not comparable with the erstwhile German 2 on banknote circulation in Table III.2). 

Deutsche Bundesbank
10  Monthly Report
May 2012
II Overall monetary survey in the euro area
 
2 Consolidated balance sheet of monetary financial institutions (MFIs) *
 
 
 
Assets
Lending to non-banks (non-MFIs) in the euro area
Enterprises and households General government
Claims
Total Shares and on non-
End of assets or Debt other Debt euro-area Other
year/month liabilities Total Total Loans securities  2 equities Total Loans securities 3 residents assets
 Euro area (€ billion) 1
 
2010          Feb 24,216.3 15,980.0 13,086.5 10,777.2 1,505.9 803.3 2,893.5 1,027.9 1,865.6 5,013.3 3,223.0
         Mar 24,256.2 16,033.9 13,087.6 10,800.5 1,492.0 795.2 2,946.3 1,052.5 1,893.7 4,999.3 3,223.1
         Apr 24,578.3 16,106.3 13,145.8 10,820.2 1,499.2 826.4 2,960.6 1,055.5 1,905.1 5,122.8 3,349.2
         May 25,188.2 16,145.7 13,145.6 10,865.1 1,478.6 801.8 3,000.2 1,070.2 1,930.0 5,349.6 3,692.9
         June 25,178.9 16,341.5 13,288.5 10,988.6 1,516.0 783.8 3,053.0 1,091.5 1,961.5 5,247.3 3,590.1
         July 24,877.3 16,360.8 13,314.3 10,981.3 1,547.9 785.1 3,046.5 1,080.3 1,966.2 5,050.4 3,466.2
         Aug 25,533.3 16,377.4 13,323.8 10,978.8 1,549.4 795.6 3,053.6 1,087.9 1,965.7 5,236.5 3,919.3
         Sep 25,128.1 16,396.1 13,331.0 10,981.4 1,552.1 797.6 3,065.0 1,094.1 1,970.9 5,032.5 3,699.5
         Oct 25,096.7 16,540.3 13,287.4 10,958.0 1,524.3 805.0 3,252.9 1,173.7 2,079.1 4,974.4 3,582.1
         Nov 25,404.2 16,696.9 13,441.2 11,067.6 1,556.9 816.7 3,255.6 1,229.3 2,026.4 5,146.8 3,560.6
         Dec 25,756.7 16,555.5 13,365.4 11,027.0 1,538.1 800.4 3,190.1 1,240.4 1,949.7 5,005.6 4,195.6
2011          Jan 25,634.7 16,618.8 13,407.3 11,064.9 1,526.7 815.7 3,211.5 1,236.8 1,974.7 5,017.2 3,998.7
         Feb 25,675.2 16,652.8 13,455.8 11,112.3 1,535.3 808.2 3,197.0 1,216.6 1,980.4 5,053.9 3,968.5
         Mar 25,253.5 16,449.9 13,399.0 11,116.4 1,503.2 779.5 3,050.9 1,207.3 1,843.5 4,945.9 3,857.7
         Apr 25,395.8 16,521.0 13,473.2 11,140.4 1,510.0 822.8 3,047.7 1,197.2 1,850.6 4,965.8 3,909.0
         May 25,734.8 16,547.7 13,508.6 11,200.7 1,507.3 800.5 3,039.1 1,174.2 1,865.0 5,131.4 4,055.8
         June 25,430.4 16,555.3 13,496.2 11,224.8 1,482.1 789.3 3,059.2 1,170.5 1,888.6 4,982.4 3,892.7
         July 25,810.2 16,548.6 13,508.1 11,238.6 1,487.1 782.4 3,040.6 1,175.0 1,865.6 5,027.9 4,233.6
         Aug 26,396.4 16,555.1 13,484.2 11,238.7 1,479.7 765.8 3,071.0 1,162.7 1,908.3 5,116.8 4,724.4
         Sep 27,013.4 16,607.3 13,519.5 11,296.9 1,469.6 752.9 3,087.8 1,163.8 1,924.0 5,189.6 5,216.6
         Oct 26,667.7 16,621.9 13,549.1 11,267.1 1,529.9 752.1 3,072.8 1,163.5 1,909.3 5,027.3 5,018.5
         Nov 26,675.6 16,627.0 13,541.7 11,252.7 1,534.7 754.3 3,085.3 1,162.3 1,923.0 5,062.6 4,986.0
         Dec 26,771.6 16,563.5 13,431.2 11,163.0 1,528.7 739.5 3,132.3 1,178.0 1,954.4 5,031.9 5,176.2
2012          Jan 26,942.9 16,670.3 13,475.9 11,196.0 1,532.4 747.6 3,194.4 1,174.3 2,020.1 5,042.1 5,230.5
         Feb 26,932.2 16,682.6 13,449.5 11,165.3 1,539.1 745.1 3,233.1 1,158.5 2,074.6 5,012.8 5,236.8
         Mar 26,723.5 16,697.4 13,445.0 11,163.1 1,526.3 755.6 3,252.4 1,154.9 2,097.5 5,026.9 4,999.2
 German contribution (€ billion) 
2010          Feb 5,099.1 3,649.6 3,008.2 2,513.7 237.7 256.8 641.4 362.9 278.5 1,208.0 241.5
         Mar 5,105.8 3,638.3 2,993.1 2,509.7 233.9 249.6 645.2 362.2 283.0 1,209.3 258.2
         Apr 5,210.6 3,693.3 3,044.0 2,535.9 231.3 276.8 649.3 364.1 285.2 1,262.7 254.6
         May 5,259.6 3,664.4 2,996.6 2,539.6 209.1 247.9 667.8 374.7 293.1 1,324.9 270.3
         June 5,236.5 3,680.2 2,988.1 2,540.8 205.5 241.8 692.1 377.7 314.4 1,272.2 284.0
         July 5,144.1 3,670.8 2,980.4 2,537.8 200.7 242.0 690.4 373.1 317.3 1,195.0 278.3
         Aug 5,201.0 3,683.3 2,991.4 2,546.6 199.6 245.1 691.9 373.2 318.7 1,228.9 288.8
         Sep 5,107.4 3,659.4 2,960.3 2,520.3 198.8 241.2 699.1 376.7 322.3 1,172.2 275.8
         Oct 5,191.7 3,756.9 2,964.7 2,523.0 197.8 243.9 792.2 381.2 411.0 1,162.4 272.4
         Nov 5,311.7 3,822.0 3,004.1 2,557.1 195.3 251.8 817.8 457.5 360.3 1,207.0 282.8
         Dec 6,121.8 3,742.7 2,958.5 2,518.9 192.7 246.9 784.2 447.6 336.6 1,183.6 1,195.5
2011          Jan 6,033.2 3,767.9 2,972.6 2,516.5 194.1 262.0 795.3 452.3 342.9 1,170.1 1,095.2
         Feb 5,986.9 3,764.4 2,983.4 2,535.7 193.4 254.3 781.0 440.8 340.2 1,175.3 1,047.2
         Mar 5,835.3 3,730.5 2,962.9 2,515.9 190.2 256.8 767.6 430.3 337.3 1,134.9 970.0
         Apr 5,901.3 3,753.8 2,995.6 2,526.0 189.8 279.8 758.2 419.3 339.0 1,171.1 976.3
         May 5,944.1 3,731.5 2,982.7 2,537.9 189.2 255.6 748.8 408.5 340.3 1,192.1 1,020.6
         June 5,793.3 3,706.7 2,968.3 2,536.0 187.5 244.9 738.4 404.9 333.4 1,145.1 941.6
         July 5,929.3 3,709.0 2,969.1 2,540.8 185.6 242.7 739.9 410.3 329.6 1,158.0 1,062.2
         Aug 6,140.9 3,729.5 2,988.1 2,565.9 183.4 238.8 741.4 400.7 340.8 1,190.0 1,221.3
         Sep 6,294.6 3,744.9 3,001.5 2,584.8 181.4 235.4 743.4 400.3 343.1 1,193.9 1,355.7
         Oct 6,167.9 3,767.6 3,022.8 2,609.4 179.0 234.4 744.8 396.1 348.7 1,157.5 1,242.8
         Nov 6,189.0 3,771.3 3,030.2 2,615.1 181.7 233.3 741.1 393.6 347.5 1,179.7 1,238.0
         Dec 6,229.9 3,720.7 2,986.3 2,576.3 183.2 226.8 734.4 396.9 337.5 1,180.4 1,328.9
2012          Jan 6,292.8 3,751.9 3,007.6 2,594.7 182.4 230.4 744.4 400.3 344.0 1,212.0 1,328.9
         Feb 6,239.0 3,746.7 3,001.7 2,595.0 179.9 226.8 745.0 398.1 346.9 1,193.1 1,299.2
         Mar 6,185.1 3,751.3 3,002.6 2,587.7 182.1 232.9 748.7 395.8 352.9 1,191.6 1,242.1
*Monetary financial institutions (MFIs) comprise banks (including building and loan enterprises. 3Including Treasury bills and other money market paper issued by
associations), money market funds, and the European Central Bank and national general government. 4Euro currency in circulation (see also footnote 8 on p 12  )
central banks (the Eurosystem). 1Source: ECB. 2Including money market paper of Excluding MFIs‘ cash in hand (in euro). The German contribution includes the volume

Deutsche Bundesbank
11  Monthly Report
May 2012
II Overall monetary survey in the euro area
 
   
 
Liabilities
Deposits of non-banks (non-MFIs) in the euro area
Enterprises and households
With agreed At agreed
maturities of notice of 6 
over
Currency 1 year and
in of which up to up to over up to over  End of
Total in euro 5 Total Overnight 1 year 2 years 2 years 3 months 3 months year/month circulation 4 
Euro area (€ billion) 1
 
759.5 9,995.1 9,421.7 9,469.6 3,556.1 1,502.6 269.0 2,211.1 1,805.9 124.9 2010          Feb 
768.6 9,983.1 9,412.5 9,466.0 3,558.2 1,485.8 268.3 2,213.8 1,814.7 125.1          Mar 
772.6 10,030.1 9,475.3 9,534.0 3,635.0 1,449.8 270.3 2,232.7 1,824.1 122.1          Apr 
779.0 10,089.2 9,480.6 9,551.6 3,660.4 1,442.0 270.3 2,235.5 1,823.1 120.4          May785.5 10,216.5 9,594.2 9,650.5 3,694.7 1,426.0 269.0 2,318.6 1,822.6 119.5          June
793.9 10,208.3 9,625.3 9,684.0 3,682.5 1,438.2 270.5 2,342.7 1,832.8 117.4          July
788.0 10,206.4 9,631.4 9,698.6 3,656.5 1,457.3 272.6 2,350.3 1,845.7 116.1          Aug 786.8 10,205.5 9,644.5 9,689.0 3,660.5 1,458.3 263.9 2,344.0 1,848.5 113.8          Sep 
789.0 10,308.3 9,671.7 9,717.5 3,666.5 1,476.6 273.7 2,336.0 1,852.2 112.4          Oct 
790.2 10,390.5 9,719.2 9,777.1 3,670.5 1,465.7 277.9 2,393.8 1,856.3 112.9          Nov 808.6 10,371.2 9,808.2 9,871.6 3,726.6 1,469.0 272.6 2,413.2 1,877.7 112.5          Dec 
796.2 10,407.3 9,792.5 9,849.0 3,702.9 1,449.0 276.1 2,410.6 1,898.3 112.2 2011          Jan 
796.2 10,415.8 9,789.7 9,842.2 3,671.2 1,457.7 278.7 2,422.4 1,899.3 112.9          Feb 798.3 10,428.4 9,838.5 9,887.5 3,684.9 1,452.8 287.2 2,445.1 1,904.4 113.1          Mar 
805.5 10,487.6 9,892.1 9,941.0 3,712.5 1,455.7 286.4 2,464.9 1,909.4 112.2          Apr 
810.4 10,475.2 9,889.8 9,935.4 3,691.2 1,454.8 298.8 2,468.1 1,910.6 111.9          May819.7 10,550.4 9,912.6 9,949.6 3,729.3 1,426.5 300.7 2,472.4 1,908.8 111.9          June
828.2 10,523.0 9,912.6 9,955.0 3,711.4 1,441.2 306.9 2,472.2 1,911.2 112.0          July
823.4 10,480.8 9,929.7 9,968.2 3,692.4 1,457.0 313.0 2,477.4 1,916.6 111.9          Aug 831.2 10,532.9 9,961.7 10,016.5 3,713.7 1,473.1 312.8 2,494.1 1,911.6 111.3          Sep 
837.5 10,539.8 9,973.9 10,027.0 3,711.1 1,469.1 308.4 2,517.5 1,909.4 111.5          Oct 
841.4 10,535.7 9,962.1 10,007.7 3,709.8 1,449.6 312.6 2,510.7 1,915.2 109.8          Nov 857.5 10,626.9 10,053.3 10,119.5 3,790.4 1,456.2 310.5 2,525.0 1,928.0 109.4          Dec 
843.0 10,678.8 10,051.5 10,103.4 3,751.9 1,458.9 315.5 2,524.2 1,944.5 108.5 2012          Jan 
842.5 10,703.3 10,054.0 10,100.6 3,725.7 1,473.0 325.9 2,517.1 1,950.8 108.3          Feb 844.8 10,728.6 10,100.8 10,125.2 3,762.9 1,480.5 323.4 2,490.6 1,960.1 107.6          Mar 
 German contribution (€ billion) 
188.5 2,829.6 2,776.4 2,695.8 1,003.1 253.7 43.7 792.4 485.3 117.6 2010          Feb 
191.4 2,816.4 2,765.5 2,687.3 992.2 254.0 42.8 793.5 487.1 117.7          Mar 
192.1 2,836.8 2,782.6 2,710.0 1,035.2 234.4 42.0 793.6 489.0 115.8          Apr 
193.2 2,841.8 2,783.5 2,706.9 1,043.4 229.2 40.8 788.5 490.9 114.0          May
195.5 2,842.8 2,787.0 2,702.1 1,041.7 229.2 39.0 787.9 491.6 112.7          June
197.2 2,841.1 2,785.3 2,706.3 1,047.6 227.6 37.8 787.4 495.2 110.6          July
195.8 2,857.9 2,794.5 2,710.2 1,050.3 226.9 37.5 789.7 496.9 108.8          Aug 
195.4 2,851.5 2,797.8 2,709.0 1,049.9 226.9 37.5 788.8 499.4 106.6          Sep 
195.5 2,873.7 2,798.5 2,717.1 1,055.7 229.3 37.9 786.8 502.1 105.2          Oct 
196.6 2,925.7 2,845.2 2,764.3 1,078.2 227.8 38.2 810.2 504.1 105.7          Nov 
200.4 2,926.8 2,855.0 2,772.1 1,069.6 235.1 38.1 811.1 512.4 105.7          Dec 
197.6 2,939.7 2,862.6 2,782.4 1,084.8 230.8 38.0 808.5 515.1 105.3 2011          Jan 
197.4 2,931.4 2,853.1 2,769.4 1,066.1 236.0 38.2 806.5 517.1 105.4          Feb 
198.0 2,928.9 2,858.5 2,771.7 1,066.6 238.1 38.7 804.8 517.9 105.6          Mar 
199.5 2,937.5 2,871.5 2,786.1 1,074.5 246.3 39.5 803.5 517.6 104.8          Apr 
200.9 2,951.3 2,881.4 2,787.4 1,071.8 252.3 40.0 803.2 515.4 104.7          May
203.5 2,960.1 2,884.6 2,787.0 1,078.0 247.9 39.6 803.5 513.6 104.5          June
205.5 2,966.7 2,893.1 2,798.5 1,078.4 259.7 40.1 803.3 512.4 104.5          July
204.5 2,989.1 2,916.1 2,816.9 1,090.2 260.9 41.9 808.3 511.0 104.4          Aug 
205.8 3,008.4 2,930.1 2,832.6 1,099.5 271.9 42.5 804.8 510.1 103.9          Sep 
207.6 3,009.6 2,934.1 2,844.1 1,109.9 274.3 43.5 802.7 509.9 103.8          Oct 
209.1 3,030.2 2,954.6 2,858.9 1,128.2 272.4 44.5 801.4 510.4 102.0          Nov 
212.6 3,038.9 2,962.5 2,867.9 1,130.2 276.1 44.9 799.8 515.8 101.2          Dec 
209.6 3,040.0 2,961.3 2,864.8 1,130.9 274.7 44.8 796.2 518.1 100.3 2012          Jan 
209.4 3,049.0 2,965.8 2,864.0 1,135.8 268.6 45.4 793.2 521.0 100.0          Feb 
209.3 3,041.1 2,968.3 2,857.2 1,140.7 262.8 44.8 788.4 521.4 99.2          Mar 
of euro banknotes put into circulation by the Bundesbank in accordance with the Bundesbank can be calculated by adding to this total the item “Intra-Eurosystem
accounting regime chosen by the Eurosystem (see also footnote 3 on banknote liability/claim related to banknote issue“ (see “Other liability items“). 5Excluding
circulation in Table III.2). The volume of currency actually put into circulation by the central governments’ deposits. 6 In Germany, only savings deposits. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
12  Monthly Report
May 2012
II Overall monetary survey in the euro area
 
2 Consolidated balance sheet of monetary financial institutions (MFIs) (cont’d) *
 
 
 
Liabilities (cont’d)
Deposits of non-banks (non-MFIs) in the euro area (cont’d)  
 
General government Repo transactions Debt securities
with non-banks
Other general government in the euro area
With agreed At agreed
maturities of notice of 2 
Money
over of which market of which
Central 1 year and Enterprises fund denom-
End of govern- up to up to over up to over and shares inated
year/month ments Total Overnight 1 year 2 years 2 years 3 months 3 months Total households (net)  3 Total in euro
 Euro area (€ billion) 1
 
2010          Feb 275.9 249.5 146.5 56.8 4.7 28.4 4.7 8.4 323.0 321.4 643.9 2,760.8 2,137.7
         Mar 270.1 247.0 142.2 58.8 4.6 28.5 4.9 8.1 341.4 339.6 628.3 2,792.8 2,165.1
         Apr 250.3 245.8 141.0 58.6 4.5 28.6 5.1 7.9 362.4 360.4 634.4 2,806.9 2,166.2
         May 284.2 253.3 145.6 61.6 4.4 28.4 5.4 7.8 366.8 364.8 630.3 2,832.2 2,153.1
         June 304.5 261.4 149.9 64.7 3.9 30.0 5.5 7.6 406.6 405.1 605.7 2,819.7 2,141.4
         July 282.2 242.0 131.7 63.0 3.6 30.5 5.7 7.5 384.5 383.1 596.7 2,801.1 2,142.1
         Aug 262.1 245.7 131.4 67.0 3.3 30.8 5.9 7.4 387.2 385.8 608.1 2,813.4 2,133.6
         Sep 265.5 251.0 132.0 72.2 3.3 30.1 6.4 7.0 409.3 407.8 589.4 2,796.1 2,143.3
         Oct 343.7 247.0 133.2 66.9 3.4 30.3 6.5 6.8 385.0 383.5 574.3 2,796.1 2,144.2
         Nov 360.8 252.5 141.4 64.3 3.4 30.4 6.6 6.5 433.4 431.8 586.5 2,832.1 2,155.2
         Dec 264.2 235.4 125.6 63.5 3.4 30.1 6.5 6.3 428.1 426.1 552.4 2,822.9 2,152.9
2011          Jan 316.5 241.7 128.2 64.8 3.4 30.1 6.9 8.2 392.0 390.6 570.2 2,849.0 2,187.0
         Feb 330.0 243.5 127.1 67.1 3.4 30.6 7.4 8.0 431.6 430.0 575.6 2,865.3 2,201.5
         Mar 296.6 244.3 126.4 68.7 3.4 30.7 7.4 7.8 405.1 403.7 568.2 2,937.1 2,284.7
         Apr 304.4 242.2 124.1 68.8 3.6 30.7 7.5 7.5 427.7 426.3 570.2 2,943.0 2,292.5
         May 287.4 252.3 128.6 74.6 3.7 30.8 7.3 7.3 466.5 464.8 566.7 2,972.2 2,303.1
         June 339.0 261.8 135.0 77.7 3.8 30.8 7.3 7.1 455.0 453.4 545.9 2,991.3 2,315.7
         July 317.0 251.1 123.9 77.6 4.6 30.8 7.2 7.0 449.2 447.8 538.7 3,009.3 2,314.6
         Aug 256.6 256.1 125.1 82.1 4.6 30.2 7.3 6.8 494.8 492.7 560.4 2,995.9 2,304.4
         Sep 261.5 254.9 122.6 83.8 4.7 30.1 7.1 6.6 517.7 515.3 549.1 3,015.0 2,314.3
         Oct 261.9 250.8 125.9 76.5 4.8 30.2 7.0 6.4 495.1 492.4 540.7 2,979.0 2,301.3
         Nov 264.6 263.4 135.1 79.8 4.9 30.2 7.2 6.2 467.0 464.2 546.9 2,998.6 2,311.7
         Dec 259.3 248.1 117.7 81.6 5.2 30.3 7.4 5.9 396.9 394.2 520.3 3,007.0 2,297.9
2012          Jan 319.2 256.2 124.5 81.8 5.3 29.7 7.5 7.4 414.4 411.5 495.9 2,997.2 2,305.0
         Feb 342.2 260.4 122.2 87.9 5.5 29.8 8.0 7.1 427.8 425.5 474.7 2,989.0 2,309.9
         Mar 328.4 275.0 129.4 94.9 5.7 29.8 8.3 6.9 412.9 410.3 494.1 2,992.0 2,316.7
 German contribution (€ billion) 
2010          Feb 22.7 111.1 43.4 38.4 3.1 23.7 1.7 0.7 78.9 78.9 9.2 711.0 456.3
         Mar 21.2 107.9 39.6 39.1 3.0 23.7 1.8 0.7 79.8 79.8 8.6 714.4 458.2
         Apr 21.4 105.4 37.4 38.8 2.9 23.8 1.8 0.7 100.7 100.7 8.4 715.8 451.0
         May 23.0 112.0 42.2 40.6 2.8 23.7 2.0 0.7 101.4 101.4 8.8 733.9 451.9
         June 21.9 118.8 45.4 43.2 2.4 25.0 2.0 0.7 102.7 102.7 8.1 729.6 450.9
         July 23.5 111.3 38.4 42.9 2.1 25.1 2.0 0.7 92.2 92.2 8.6 709.2 437.0
         Aug 30.9 116.8 41.0 45.7 2.0 25.4 2.1 0.7 104.0 104.0 8.3 720.7 436.1
         Sep 22.4 120.1 41.2 48.9 2.1 25.1 2.2 0.6 95.9 95.9 8.1 710.8 437.1
         Oct 43.2 113.3 37.6 45.6 2.1 25.2 2.2 0.6 85.0 85.0 8.0 682.1 408.8
         Nov 46.5 114.9 41.9 43.0 2.1 25.2 2.2 0.6 109.0 109.0 8.3 716.8 433.9
         Dec 39.8 114.9 40.6 44.6 2.0 25.0 2.2 0.5 86.7 86.7 8.4 708.5 425.8
2011          Jan 45.2 112.1 39.6 42.7 1.9 25.0 2.3 0.5 74.5 74.5 8.4 703.2 426.8
         Feb 47.1 114.9 39.7 45.6 1.7 25.2 2.3 0.5 93.2 93.2 8.4 698.6 424.5
         Mar 38.9 118.3 42.0 46.6 1.8 25.2 2.3 0.5 78.9 78.9 8.5 686.0 426.2
         Apr 34.3 117.2 39.8 47.6 1.8 25.2 2.3 0.5 89.2 89.2 8.4 678.5 420.6
         May 37.7 126.3 44.2 52.1 1.9 25.2 2.3 0.5 105.2 105.2 8.0 681.7 417.9
         June 40.7 132.3 46.1 56.4 2.1 25.2 2.2 0.5 104.8 104.8 7.8 682.3 415.4
         July 39.5 128.7 41.3 57.0 2.8 25.1 2.1 0.5 91.8 91.8 5.3 684.4 410.9
         Aug 39.4 132.8 41.6 61.1 2.8 24.8 2.1 0.4 101.9 101.9 5.7 682.6 412.4
         Sep 42.9 132.9 41.1 61.8 3.0 24.7 2.0 0.4 107.0 107.0 5.8 687.1 406.9
         Oct 40.1 125.3 39.9 55.3 3.1 24.6 2.0 0.4 105.7 105.7 5.8 678.9 407.9
         Nov 39.9 131.4 43.3 57.9 3.2 24.6 2.0 0.4 111.1 111.1 4.9 689.5 411.6
         Dec 40.1 130.8 40.2 60.3 3.3 24.6 2.0 0.4 97.1 97.1 4.8 691.1 404.5
2012          Jan 44.1 131.1 40.0 60.6 3.4 24.8 1.8 0.4 86.7 86.2 4.5 663.1 384.3
         Feb 47.6 137.4 41.5 65.1 3.6 24.9 1.9 0.4 96.6 96.5 4.4 667.4 389.9
         Mar 36.9 147.0 45.4 70.6 3.7 24.9 1.9 0.4 93.1 93.0 4.1 660.0 379.3
*Monetary financial institutions (MFIs) comprise banks (including building and loan paper. 5Excluding liabilities arising from securities issued. 6After deduction of
associations), money market funds, and the European Central Bank and national inter-MFI participations. 7The German contributions to the Eurosystem’s monetary
central banks (the Eurosystem). 1Source: ECB. 2In Germany, only savings aggregates should on no account be interpreted as national monetary aggregates
deposits. 3Excluding holdings of MFIs; for the German contribution, excluding and are therefore not comparable with the erstwhile German money stocks M1, M2
German MFIs’ portfolios of securities issued by MFIs in the euro area. 4In Germany, or M3. 8including DM banknotes still in circulation (see also footnote 4 on
bank debt securities with maturities of up to one year are classed as money market p 10    )9For the German contribution, the difference between the volume of

Deutsche Bundesbank
13  Monthly Report
May 2012
II Overall monetary survey in the euro area
 
   
 
 Memo item
 Other liability items Monetary aggregates  7 
 (From 2002, German contribution
issued (net) 3 excludes currency in circulation)
With maturities of
of which Monetary
Intra- liabilities
Eurosystem- of centralliability/ govern-
over Liabilities Excess claim Monetary ments1 year and to non- Capital of related to capital (Post
up to up to over euro-area and inter-MFI banknote forma- Office, End of1 year 
4 2 years 2 years residents 5 reserves 6 liabilities Total 8 issue 9 M1 10 M2 11 M3 12 tion 13 year/month Treasury)  14 
Euro area (€ billion) 1
 
1.1 123.8 2,635.9 4,422.9 1,819.0 − 17.2 3,509.4 − 4,538.9 8,213.6 9,305.4 6,827.7 107.8 2010          Feb 
11.7 122.3 2,658.7 4,425.3 1,831.1 − 55.0 3,540.7 − 4,544.3 8,212.2 9,315.9 6,865.3 106.1          Mar 
15.6 118.8 2,672.5 4,551.2 1,845.1 − 77.8 3,653.3 − 4,625.9 8,269.0 9,399.9 6,908.9 107.8          Apr 
22.2 106.9 2,703.1 4,705.0 1,890.5 − 62.8 3,958.2 − 4,663.8 8,301.2 9,427.1 6,985.7 109.4          May
24.0 101.6 2,694.0 4,600.8 1,974.4 − 19.9 3,789.7 − 4,710.3 8,332.1 9,469.8 7,144.1 110.4          June
29.4 100.2 2,671.5 4,480.2 1,935.3 − 30.5 3,707.9 − 4,692.9 8,336.6 9,447.1 7,105.0 114.8          July
29.1 100.3 2,684.0 4,633.7 1,978.2 − 3.6 4,121.8 − 4,659.9 8,341.4 9,465.9 7,166.8 113.7          Aug 
33.9 96.7 2,665.5 4,438.2 1,956.1 − 3.4 3,950.1 − 4,661.8 8,343.7 9,473.0 7,116.5 111.9          Sep 
26.9 97.9 2,671.2 4,455.1 1,967.7 12.5 3,808.9 − 4,669.2 8,377.8 9,461.9 7,124.3 109.8          Oct 
24.6 97.2 2,710.3 4,582.7 2,004.6 9.3 3,775.1 − 4,684.9 8,387.7 9,529.2 7,258.5 111.4          Nov 
30.9 92.3 2,699.7 4,372.0 2,022.6 28.6 4,350.2 − 4,750.8 8,471.3 9,574.8 7,284.5 117.9          Dec 
35.6 94.6 2,718.9 4,381.0 2,003.3 28.1 4,207.7 − 4,708.7 8,434.8 9,526.8 7,283.4 109.0 2011          Jan 
38.9 89.2 2,737.3 4,376.8 2,033.3 33.0 4,147.6 − 4,674.3 8,414.9 9,549.8 7,344.4 106.8          Feb 
68.9 86.4 2,781.8 4,167.2 2,038.7 39.7 3,870.9 − 4,689.4 8,439.8 9,567.9 7,417.2 106.3          Mar 
71.2 87.9 2,784.0 4,207.4 2,043.0 5.4 3,906.2 − 4,723.0 8,480.7 9,637.3 7,442.3 107.4          Apr 
74.4 84.8 2,813.0 4,343.5 2,070.8 − 22.3 4,051.8 − 4,710.8 8,486.8 9,678.8 7,502.0 106.8          May
95.9 80.4 2,815.0 4,124.3 2,086.1 − 4.9 3,862.7 − 4,765.2 8,516.3 9,693.1 7,523.3 107.4          June
95.0 83.1 2,831.2 4,139.7 2,150.8 − 7.5 4,178.8 − 4,745.8 8,520.5 9,686.1 7,604.1 108.3          July
97.3 77.7 2,820.9 4,159.5 2,205.1 − 4.6 4,680.9 − 4,722.4 8,529.0 9,759.1 7,652.2 107.4          Aug 
94.8 75.7 2,844.5 4,216.8 2,183.9 − 15.5 5,182.4 − 4,748.1 8,567.1 9,804.3 7,670.5 106.6          Sep 
95.5 75.3 2,808.1 4,124.5 2,187.1 − 34.2 4,998.3 − 4,753.8 8,554.9 9,761.4 7,660.8 105.2          Oct 
90.9 82.2 2,825.5 4,148.5 2,200.8 − 23.8 4,960.6 − 4,769.5 8,564.3 9,751.2 7,683.3 108.8          Nov 
122.8 83.6 2,800.6 4,088.5 2,221.0 − 17.5 5,071.0 − 4,856.8 8,670.5 9,794.0 7,692.3 116.0          Dec 
112.8 92.4 2,792.0 4,102.7 2,274.9 − 63.7 5,199.9 − 4,801.9 8,640.6 9,756.0 7,736.5 107.7 2012          Jan 
119.4 99.6 2,770.1 4,078.7 2,290.9 − 38.8 5,164.0 − 4,772.2 8,647.8 9,769.3 7,723.3 106.5          Feb 
138.7 106.1 2,747.2 4,137.9 2,268.7 − 44.8 4,889.2 − 4,819.3 8,717.2 9,868.7 7,650.8 107.0          Mar 
 German contribution (€ billion) 
27.4 16.7 666.9 703.0 424.6 − 394.6 737.4 149.6 1,046.5 1,872.4 2,004.6 2,026.0 − 2010          Feb 
27.3 15.3 671.8 721.0 424.3 − 419.9 761.1 150.2 1,031.8 1,859.6 1,990.6 2,031.8 −          Mar 
27.5 14.7 673.7 777.7 429.9 − 411.7 753.1 151.1 1,072.5 1,881.6 2,032.7 2,037.4 −          Apr 
26.7 15.3 692.0 847.8 431.1 − 469.8 764.6 151.7 1,085.6 1,891.9 2,044.0 2,050.0 −          May
23.5 13.1 693.0 807.3 431.2 − 475.4 790.2 150.9 1,087.1 1,894.5 2,041.9 2,050.6 −          June
25.4 14.7 669.1 784.5 426.1 − 483.3 765.7 151.2 1,086.0 1,893.7 2,034.6 2,019.1 −          July
33.6 13.9 673.3 797.3 433.5 − 496.8 776.1 153.2 1,091.3 1,902.4 2,062.0 2,031.3 −          Aug 
35.2 14.8 660.8 757.5 430.4 − 517.7 770.9 155.8 1,091.1 1,908.0 2,061.9 2,012.4 −          Sep 
13.0 15.2 653.9 745.2 440.6 − 414.3 771.5 156.7 1,093.3 1,912.7 2,033.8 2,012.2 −          Oct 
28.0 18.4 670.4 772.9 451.7 − 439.4 766.9 156.6 1,120.1 1,937.4 2,101.1 2,063.8 −          Nov 
27.4 15.4 665.7 736.5 450.9 − 456.6 1,660.7 157.1 1,110.2 1,944.6 2,082.5 2,058.9 −          Dec 
24.2 15.5 663.5 727.0 447.6 − 421.8 1,554.6 157.8 1,124.4 1,955.2 2,077.8 2,050.4 − 2011          Jan 
26.1 11.8 660.6 732.7 455.8 − 446.9 1,513.6 158.9 1,105.8 1,946.8 2,086.4 2,054.0 −          Feb 
23.7 12.9 649.4 672.7 455.5 − 438.1 1,442.9 159.5 1,108.6 1,954.0 2,078.0 2,040.9 −          Mar 
19.8 13.6 645.1 694.9 457.3 − 413.4 1,448.8 160.1 1,114.2 1,969.4 2,100.4 2,036.3 −          Apr 
19.3 14.0 648.4 698.7 456.2 − 455.5 1,498.4 161.6 1,116.0 1,980.1 2,126.5 2,038.2 −          May
18.7 14.3 649.2 638.7 455.5 − 480.5 1,424.7 163.1 1,124.1 1,985.8 2,131.5 2,038.3 −          June
22.2 14.0 648.2 647.7 467.3 − 484.9 1,550.9 164.9 1,119.7 1,993.8 2,127.1 2,048.9 −          July
25.2 13.6 643.8 699.8 483.8 − 542.9 1,720.9 167.5 1,131.9 2,011.7 2,158.1 2,065.6 −          Aug 
21.8 11.9 653.4 738.9 476.2 − 600.2 1,871.4 170.7 1,140.5 2,031.7 2,178.3 2,063.4 −          Sep 
18.8 11.2 648.9 746.8 478.0 − 608.3 1,751.4 170.7 1,149.9 2,037.9 2,179.4 2,058.5 −          Oct 
22.5 11.7 655.3 769.8 478.8 − 639.8 1,744.5 170.9 1,171.5 2,061.9 2,212.1 2,062.5 −          Nov 
22.8 9.7 658.6 696.1 473.6 − 607.5 1,835.9 170.5 1,170.4 2,072.8 2,207.2 2,058.1 −          Dec 
19.7 10.3 633.1 801.2 486.8 − 614.9 1,825.4 171.0 1,170.9 2,074.3 2,195.5 2,041.5 − 2012          Jan 
20.2 11.4 635.8 815.9 493.4 − 670.9 1,783.3 172.2 1,177.3 2,082.8 2,215.4 2,047.8 −          Feb 
19.6 9.8 630.5 874.2 492.0 − 710.2 1,730.8 175.5 1,186.1 2,091.3 2,217.9 2,035.5 −          Mar 
euro banknotes actually issued by the Bundesbank and the amount disclosed in years and at agreed notice of up to 3 months (excluding central governments’accordance with the accounting regime chosen by the Eurosystem (see also footnote deposits) and (for the euro area) central governments’ monetary liabilities with such3 on banknote circulation in Table III.2). 10Overnight deposits (excluding central maturities. 12M2 plus repo transactions, money market fund shares, money market
governments’ deposits), and (for the euro area) currency in circulation, central paper and debt securities up to 2 years. 13Deposits with agreed maturities of over 2
governments’ overnight monetary liabilities, which are not included in the years and at agreed notice of over 3 months, debt securities with maturities of over 2consolidated balance sheet. 11M1 plus deposits with agreed maturities of up to 2 years, capital and reserves. 14 Non-existent in Germany. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
14  Monthly Report
May 2012
II  Overall monetary survey in the euro area
  
3  Banking system’s liquidity position  * 
Stocks
  
€ billion; period averages of daily positions
Liquidity-providing factors Liquidity-absorbing factors
Monetary policy operations of the Eurosystem
Credit
institutions‘
currentaccount
Net assets Longer- Other Other balances
Reserve in gold Main term Marginal liquidity- liquidity- Banknotes Central Other (including
maintenance and foreign refinancing refinancing lending providing Deposit absorbing in government factors minimum Base
period currency operations operations facility facility deposits (net)  
6 reserves) 7 money 8 operations 3 operations 4 circulation 5 
ending in 1 
Eurosystem  2  
  
2009          Oct 421.4 79.1 616.9 0.3 14.3 109.6 12.9 768.8 139.0 − 113.1 214.7 1 093.1
         Nov 413.0 52.3 626.1 0.3 20.1 86.5 12.0 770.7 148.7 − 118.9 212.8 1 070.0
         Dec 407.6 55.8 593.4 0.7 24.6 65.7 9.9 775.2 150.1 − 130.2 211.4 1 052.3
2010          Jan 413.0 60.6 648.4 0.4 28.4 147.0 8.1 796.8 119.8 − 132.1 211.2 1 155.0
         Feb 425.6 59.7 662.2 0.2 33.5 168.3 13.3 783.6 122.6 − 117.5 210.9 1 162.8
         Mar 426.9 80.5 641.1 0.9 38.0 186.4 10.5 784.6 113.2 − 119.3 211.8 1 182.9
         Apr 439.8 77.7 650.5 0.4 43.6 200.7 8.4 792.9 113.6 − 116.1 212.5 1 206.1
         May 457.0 76.7 666.4 0.9 49.4 218.2 11.4 796.6 112.1 − 100.3 212.4 1 227.2
         June 462.4 110.0 706.7 0.3 86.9 288.8 34.1 806.2 123.1 − 98.4 212.5 1 307.5
         July 500.9 167.5 573.2 0.3 140.2 230.4 54.4 813.0 126.5 − 56.5 214.4 1 257.8
         Aug 543.4 185.4 432.2 0.1 121.4 96.7 67.5 819.3 95.2 − 11.8 215.7 1 131.7
         Sep 543.2 153.1 435.0 0.6 121.8 83.7 66.9 816.0 86.8 − 15.0 215.3 1 115.0
         Oct 531.3 164.5 392.6 0.7 128.3 68.8 64.8 814.1 96.4 − 39.8 213.1 1 096.1
         Nov 511.3 183.0 340.0 0.8 124.5 41.9 68.8 813.5 92.1 − 72.0 215.2 1 070.7
         Dec 511.1 179.5 336.3 1.9 130.4 44.7 70.8 815.9 94.4 − 79.1 212.5 1 073.1
2011          Jan 527.5 197.0 316.6 0.5 140.9 66.5 73.5 833.9 81.3 − 85.1 212.4 1 112.8
         Feb 549.7 185.4 318.2 0.1 137.2 39.2 81.3 822.0 101.2 − 66.7 213.6 1 074.8
         Mar 550.0 134.4 321.0 7.6 137.9 26.9 80.3 820.9 89.8 − 79.9 212.9 1 060.7
         Apr 544.1 97.3 335.4 0.8 137.6 23.0 79.5 824.4 73.1 − 95.2 210.5 1 057.9
         May 525.9 109.2 320.5 0.4 136.6 22.8 76.8 833.9 61.3 − 111.6 209.5 1 066.1
         June 526.8 114.7 317.9 0.0 135.5 18.4 76.2 836.6 62.6 − 107.9 209.0 1 064.0
         July 533.6 146.0 311.6 0.2 134.2 29.5 76.9 846.2 73.4 − 111.2 210.9 1 086.6
         Aug 541.3 171.7 321.5 0.1 133.9 56.7 79.2 854.2 71.4 − 104.5 211.5 1 122.4
         Sep 540.3 135.1 389.8 0.3 178.0 121.8 109.8 853.2 52.3 − 103.0 209.5 1 184.5
         Oct 571.0 193.0 373.6 1.5 217.4 168.7 162.9 854.9 50.0 − 88.5 208.7 1 232.2
         Nov 612.1 196.1 387.1 2.8 231.9 204.6 178.0 861.4 57.9 − 80.8 208.9 1 274.8
         Dec 622.1 238.0 389.0 4.4 260.3 253.7 200.5 869.4 63.8 − 85.9 212.2 1 335.3
2012          Jan 683.9 169.4 627.3 6.0 278.6 399.3 210.8 883.7 67.7 − 8.7 212.3 1 495.3
         Feb 698.3 120.6 683.6 2.3 282.4 489.0 218.5 870.1 100.1 1.6 108.1 1 467.1
         Mar 688.2 89.1 860.1 2.2 288.1 621.0 219.5 868.8 129.0 − 19.4 108.9 1 598.6
         Apr 667.6 56.4 1 093.4 3.0 280.6 771.3 215.8 871.2 146.3 − 13.3 109.6 1 752.1
Deutsche Bundesbank
2009          Oct 124.2 37.3 175.9 0.2 4.9 49.4 3.0 192.5 23.7 22.4 51.5 293.3
         Nov 120.7 34.6 178.8 0.2 6.2 34.2 4.3 192.5 23.6 34.8 51.0 277.7
         Dec 116.3 33.7 171.1 0.6 7.2 25.7 2.7 193.3 18.8 37.8 50.5 269.5
2010          Jan 112.1 42.8 168.9 0.1 7.9 44.8 2.3 198.4 10.7 25.3 50.3 293.5
         Feb 112.3 42.2 168.6 0.1 8.9 50.3 5.2 195.6 5.4 25.4 50.2 296.1
         Mar 112.6 51.8 157.9 0.8 10.0 67.8 5.0 196.5 2.1 11.8 50.0 314.3
         Apr 116.2 40.9 164.9 0.2 11.5 69.8 3.4 198.0 0.3 11.9 50.3 318.2
         May 121.1 40.5 164.7 0.1 12.8 74.9 4.2 199.0 0.7 10.2 50.2 324.1
         June 122.2 43.0 166.4 0.0 22.1 113.1 17.1 201.5 0.8 − 29.2 50.5 365.0
         July 133.9 55.2 112.8 0.1 32.7 81.0 22.3 202.5 0.4 − 22.7 51.2 334.7
         Aug 145.8 61.7 52.8 0.1 28.4 32.7 20.7 204.2 0.5 − 21.6 52.3 289.2
         Sep 145.5 52.6 50.3 0.2 28.4 24.8 26.5 204.2 0.5 − 30.9 52.0 280.9
         Oct 142.2 54.4 40.5 0.1 29.3 27.0 32.4 204.0 0.5 − 48.3 51.0 281.9
         Nov 136.7 63.7 28.9 0.0 28.8 21.2 35.7 202.9 0.4 − 53.6 51.5 275.5
         Dec 136.5 60.5 32.5 0.1 29.3 21.2 41.0 203.3 0.2 − 57.7 51.0 275.5
2011          Jan 141.9 55.2 34.1 0.1 31.2 28.2 42.0 207.7 0.3 − 66.9 51.3 287.2
         Feb 148.1 44.6 44.0 0.0 31.6 19.8 43.0 204.6 0.2 − 51.0 51.8 276.2
         Mar 148.4 31.3 44.7 0.0 31.7 14.6 48.4 204.8 0.2 − 63.7 51.8 271.2
         Apr 146.6 24.1 45.5 0.0 31.9 13.6 38.9 205.2 0.2 − 61.5 51.7 270.4
         May 142.4 17.9 47.7 0.2 31.9 10.8 38.2 207.6 0.4 − 68.2 51.4 269.8
         June 142.5 10.6 41.5 0.0 31.7 8.1 33.4 208.7 0.3 − 75.8 51.7 268.4
         July 144.3 22.8 35.8 0.0 31.4 11.1 36.4 211.1 0.3 − 77.3 52.6 274.8
         Aug 146.7 13.6 36.5 0.0 31.3 15.4 35.2 213.0 0.2 − 88.4 52.7 281.1
         Sep 146.7 6.6 33.6 0.0 42.3 27.8 60.2 213.4 0.3 − 124.3 51.8 293.0
         Oct 155.5 10.7 20.8 0.0 52.3 41.5 86.8 213.5 0.3 − 155.0 52.2 307.2
         Nov 167.5 4.0 18.0 0.1 55.7 55.0 87.9 213.8 0.2 − 164.5 53.0 321.8
         Dec 168.7 3.0 17.6 0.1 63.2 60.4 126.2 216.3 0.7 − 205.5 54.4 331.2
2012          Jan 182.3 4.4 40.3 0.1 67.2 101.7 117.0 219.8 0.8 − 199.6 54.5 376.0
         Feb 183.2 1.8 46.7 0.0 69.2 141.9 130.5 216.9 0.8 − 217.6 28.3 387.1
         Mar 183.6 1.2 59.4 0.0 69.2 192.6 142.2 217.0 0.8 − 266.8 27.7 437.3
         Apr 182.0 1.2 73.8 0.1 68.8 257.2 142.7 218.1 0.7 − 321.6 28.8 504.1
Discrepancies may arise from rounding. *The banking system’s liquidity position is includes liquidity absorbed as a result of the Eurosystem’s foreign exchange swap
defined as the current account holdings in euro of euro-area credit institutions with operations. 5From 2002, euro banknotes and other banknotes which have been
the Eurosystem. Amounts are derived from the consolidated financial statement of issued by the national central banks of the Eurosystem and which are still in cir-the Eurosystem and the financial statement of the Bundesbank. 1Figures are daily av- culation. In accordance with the accounting procedure chosen by the Eurosystem for
erages for the reserve maintenance period ending in the month indicated. 2Source: the issue of euro banknotes, 8% of the total value of the euro banknotes in cir-
ECB. 3Includes liquidity provided under the Eurosystem’s covered bond purchase culation are allocated on a monthly basis to the ECB. The counterpart of this
programme and the Eurosystem’s securities markets programme. 4From Aug. 2009,

Deutsche Bundesbank
15  Monthly Report
May 2012
II  Overall monetary survey in the euro area
  
  
Flows
  
Liquidity-providing factors Liquidity-absorbing factors
Monetary policy operations of the Eurosystem
Credit
institutions‘
currentaccount
Net assets Longer- Other Other balances
in gold Main term Marginal liquidity- liquidity- Banknotes Central Other (including Reserve
and foreign refinancing refinancing lending providing Deposit absorbing in government factors minimum Base maintenance
currency operations operations facility facility deposits (net)  
6 reserves) 7 money 8 period operations 3 operations 4 circulation 5 
ending in 1 
Eurosystem  2  
  
− 6.2 + 4.3 − 28.5 + 0.0 + 5.9 − 27.1 − 5.6 − 0.3 + 13.3 − 2.7 − 2.2 − 29.6 2009          Oct 
− 8.4 − 26.8 + 9.2 − 0.0 + 5.8 − 23.1 − 0.9 + 1.9 + 9.7 − 5.8 − 1.9 − 23.1          Nov 
− 5.4 + 3.5 − 32.7 + 0.4 + 4.5 − 20.8 − 2.1 + 4.5 + 1.4 − 11.3 − 1.4 − 17.7          Dec 
+ 5.4 + 4.8 + 55.0 − 0.3 + 3.8 + 81.3 − 1.8 + 21.6 − 30.3 − 1.9 − 0.2 + 102.7 2010          Jan 
+ 12.6 − 0.9 + 13.8 − 0.2 + 5.1 + 21.3 + 5.2 − 13.2 + 2.8 + 14.6 − 0.3 + 7.8          Feb + 1.3 + 20.8 − 21.1 + 0.7 + 4.5 + 18.1 − 2.8 + 1.0 − 9.4 − 1.8 + 0.9 + 20.1          Mar 
+ 12.9 − 2.8 + 9.4 − 0.5 + 5.6 + 14.3 − 2.1 + 8.3 + 0.4 + 3.2 + 0.7 + 23.2          Apr 
+ 17.2 − 1.0 + 15.9 + 0.5 + 5.8 + 17.5 + 3.0 + 3.7 − 1.5 + 15.8 − 0.1 + 21.1          May+ 5.4 + 33.3 + 40.3 − 0.6 + 37.5 + 70.6 + 22.7 + 9.6 + 11.0 + 1.9 + 0.1 + 80.3          June
+ 38.5 + 57.5 − 133.5 − 0.0 + 53.3 − 58.4 + 20.3 + 6.8 + 3.4 + 41.9 + 1.9 − 49.7          July
+ 42.5 + 17.9 − 141.0 − 0.2 − 18.8 −133.7 + 13.1 + 6.3 − 31.3 + 44.7 + 1.3 − 126.1          Aug − 0.2 − 32.3 + 2.8 + 0.5 + 0.4 − 13.0 − 0.6 − 3.3 − 8.4 − 3.2 − 0.4 − 16.7          Sep 
− 11.9 + 11.4 − 42.4 + 0.1 + 6.5 − 14.9 − 2.1 − 1.9 + 9.6 − 24.8 − 2.2 − 18.9          Oct 
− 20.0 + 18.5 − 52.6 + 0.1 − 3.8 − 26.9 + 4.0 − 0.6 − 4.3 − 32.2 + 2.1 − 25.4          Nov 
− 0.2 − 3.5 − 3.7 + 1.1 + 5.9 + 2.8 + 2.0 + 2.4 + 2.3 − 7.1 − 2.7 + 2.4          Dec 
+ 16.4 + 17.5 − 19.7 − 1.4 + 10.5 + 21.8 + 2.7 + 18.0 − 13.1 − 6.0 − 0.1 + 39.7 2011          Jan 
+ 22.2 − 11.6 + 1.6 − 0.4 − 3.7 − 27.3 + 7.8 − 11.9 + 19.9 + 18.4 + 1.2 − 38.0          Feb 
+ 0.3 − 51.0 + 2.8 + 7.5 + 0.7 − 12.3 − 1.0 − 1.1 − 11.4 − 13.2 − 0.7 − 14.1          Mar 
− 5.9 − 37.1 + 14.4 − 6.8 − 0.3 − 3.9 − 0.8 + 3.5 − 16.7 − 15.3 − 2.4 − 2.8          Apr 
− 18.2 + 11.9 − 14.9 − 0.4 − 1.0 − 0.2 − 2.7 + 9.5 − 11.8 − 16.4 − 1.0 + 8.2          May+ 0.9 + 5.5 − 2.6 − 0.4 − 1.1 − 4.4 − 0.6 + 2.7 + 1.3 + 3.7 − 0.5 − 2.1          June
+ 6.8 + 31.3 − 6.3 + 0.2 − 1.3 + 11.1 + 0.7 + 9.6 + 10.8 − 3.3 + 1.9 + 22.6          July
+ 7.7 + 25.7 + 9.9 − 0.1 − 0.3 + 27.2 + 2.3 + 8.0 − 2.0 + 6.7 + 0.6 + 35.8          Aug − 1.0 − 36.6 + 68.3 + 0.2 + 44.1 + 65.1 + 30.6 − 1.0 − 19.1 + 1.5 − 2.0 + 62.1          Sep 
+ 30.7 + 57.9 − 16.2 + 1.2 + 39.4 + 46.9 + 53.1 + 1.7 − 2.3 + 14.5 − 0.8 + 47.7          Oct 
+ 41.1 + 3.1 + 13.5 + 1.3 + 14.5 + 35.9 + 15.1 + 6.5 + 7.9 + 7.7 + 0.2 + 42.6          Nov + 10.0 + 41.9 + 1.9 + 1.6 + 28.4 + 49.1 + 22.5 + 8.0 + 5.9 − 5.1 + 3.3 + 60.5          Dec 
+ 61.8 − 68.6 + 238.3 + 1.6 + 18.3 +145.6 + 10.3 + 14.3 + 3.9 + 77.2 + 0.1 + 160.0 2012          Jan 
+ 14.4 − 48.8 + 56.3 − 3.7 + 3.8 + 89.7 + 7.7 − 13.6 + 32.4 + 10.3 − 104.2 − 28.2          Feb 
− 10.1 − 31.5 + 176.5 − 0.1 + 5.7 +132.0 + 1.0 − 1.3 + 28.9 − 21.0 + 0.8 + 131.5          Mar 
− 20.6 − 32.7 + 233.3 + 0.8 − 7.5 +150.3 − 3.7 + 2.4 + 17.3 + 6.1 + 0.7 + 153.5          Apr 
Deutsche Bundesbank
− 1.8 − 3.3 − 2.1 + 0.0 + 2.0 − 2.5 − 1.2 + 0.2 + 0.1 − 1.0 − 0.8 − 3.1 2009          Oct 
− 3.5 − 2.7 + 3.0 − 0.0 + 1.3 − 15.2 + 1.2 + 0.1 − 0.1 + 12.5 − 0.4 − 15.6          Nov − 4.4 − 0.9 − 7.7 + 0.4 + 1.0 − 8.5 − 1.6 + 0.7 − 4.8 + 3.0 − 0.5 − 8.2          Dec 
− 4.2 + 9.1 − 2.2 − 0.5 + 0.7 + 19.1 − 0.4 + 5.1 − 8.1 − 12.6 − 0.2 + 24.0 2010          Jan 
+ 0.2 − 0.6 − 0.3 + 0.0 + 1.0 + 5.5 + 3.0 − 2.8 − 5.2 + 0.1 − 0.1 + 2.6          Feb + 0.3 + 9.6 − 10.6 + 0.7 + 1.1 + 17.4 − 0.3 + 0.9 − 3.3 − 13.6 − 0.1 + 18.2          Mar 
+ 3.6 − 10.8 + 7.0 − 0.7 + 1.5 + 2.0 − 1.6 + 1.6 − 1.8 + 0.1 + 0.3 + 3.9          Apr 
+ 4.9 − 0.4 − 0.2 − 0.1 + 1.3 + 5.0 + 0.8 + 1.0 + 0.5 − 1.7 − 0.1 + 5.9          May+ 1.1 + 2.5 + 1.7 − 0.0 + 9.3 + 38.2 + 12.9 + 2.5 + 0.1 − 39.4 + 0.3 + 40.9          June
+ 11.7 + 12.2 − 53.6 + 0.0 + 10.7 − 32.1 + 5.1 + 1.0 − 0.4 + 6.5 + 0.8 − 30.3          July
+ 11.9 + 6.6 − 60.0 + 0.0 − 4.3 − 48.3 − 1.5 + 1.7 + 0.1 + 1.1 + 1.0 − 45.6          Aug 
− 0.3 − 9.1 − 2.5 + 0.1 + 0.0 − 7.9 + 5.8 + 0.0 − 0.1 − 9.3 − 0.3 − 8.3          Sep 
− 3.3 + 1.8 − 9.8 − 0.1 + 0.9 + 2.2 + 5.9 − 0.2 − 0.0 − 17.4 − 1.0 + 1.0          Oct 
− 5.6 + 9.3 − 11.6 − 0.1 − 0.5 − 5.8 + 3.3 − 1.1 − 0.1 − 5.3 + 0.5 − 6.4          Nov 
− 0.2 − 3.1 + 3.6 + 0.1 + 0.6 + 0.0 + 5.3 + 0.5 − 0.2 − 4.1 − 0.5 − 0.0          Dec 
+ 5.5 − 5.4 + 1.5 − 0.0 + 1.9 + 7.0 + 1.1 + 4.3 + 0.0 − 9.2 + 0.4 + 11.6 2011          Jan 
+ 6.2 − 10.6 + 9.9 − 0.1 + 0.3 − 8.4 + 0.9 − 3.1 − 0.0 + 15.9 + 0.5 − 11.0          Feb + 0.3 − 13.3 + 0.7 − 0.0 + 0.2 − 5.2 + 5.5 + 0.3 − 0.0 − 12.7 − 0.1 − 5.0          Mar 
− 1.8 − 7.2 + 0.9 + 0.0 + 0.1 − 1.0 − 9.5 + 0.3 + 0.0 + 2.2 − 0.0 − 0.7          Apr 
− 4.2 − 6.2 + 2.2 + 0.2 + 0.0 − 2.8 − 0.7 + 2.4 + 0.1 − 6.7 − 0.3 − 0.7          May+ 0.2 − 7.3 − 6.3 − 0.2 − 0.2 − 2.7 − 4.7 + 1.1 − 0.1 − 7.6 + 0.2 − 1.4          June
+ 1.7 + 12.2 − 5.7 + 0.0 − 0.3 + 3.0 + 3.0 + 2.4 + 0.0 − 1.5 + 0.9 + 6.4          July
+ 2.4 − 9.2 + 0.7 − 0.0 − 0.0 + 4.3 − 1.2 + 1.9 − 0.1 − 11.1 + 0.1 + 6.3          Aug + 0.0 − 6.9 − 2.9 + 0.0 + 11.0 + 12.4 + 25.0 + 0.4 + 0.1 − 35.9 − 0.9 + 12.0          Sep 
+ 8.8 + 4.1 − 12.8 + 0.0 + 9.9 + 13.7 + 26.6 + 0.1 − 0.0 − 30.7 + 0.3 + 14.2          Oct 
+ 12.0 − 6.7 − 2.8 + 0.1 + 3.5 + 13.5 + 1.1 + 0.3 − 0.0 − 9.5 + 0.9 + 14.6          Nov 
+ 1.2 − 1.0 − 0.4 + 0.0 + 7.5 + 5.5 + 38.4 + 2.5 + 0.5 − 41.0 + 1.4 + 9.4          Dec 
+ 13.6 + 1.4 + 22.7 − 0.0 + 4.0 + 41.3 − 9.2 + 3.5 + 0.1 + 5.9 + 0.1 + 44.8 2012          Jan 
+ 0.9 − 2.6 + 6.4 − 0.1 + 2.0 + 40.2 + 13.5 − 2.9 − 0.1 − 18.0 − 26.2 + 11.1          Feb 
+ 0.4 − 0.6 + 12.7 + 0.0 +
 0.0 + 50.7 + 11.7 + 0.1 + 0.0 − 49.3 − 0.6 + 50.2          Mar 
−
1.6 + 0.0 + 14.4 + 0.1 − 0.4 + 64.7 + 0.5 + 1.1 − 0.0 − 54.7 + 1.1 + 66.8          Apr 
adjustment is shown under “Other factors”. The remaining 92% of the value of the “Other factors”. From 2003 euro banknotes only. 6Remaining items in the
euro banknotes in circulation is allocated, likewise on a monthly basis, to the NCBs, consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem and the financial statement of
with each NCB showing in its balance sheet the percentage of the euro banknotes in the Bundesbank. 7Equal to the difference between the sum of liquidity-providing
circulation that corresponds to its paid-up share in the ECB’s capital. The difference factors and the sum of liquidity-absorbing factors. 8Calculated as the sum of the
between the value of the euro banknotes allocated to an NCB and the value of the “deposit facility”, “banknotes in circulation” and “credit institutions’ current account
euro banknotes which that NCB has put into circulation is likewise shown under holdings”. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
16  Monthly Report
May 2012
III Consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem
 
1 Assets *
 
 
€ billion
Claims on non-euro area Claims on non-euro area residents denominated
in foreign currency residents denominated in euro
Balances with
Claims on banks, security
On investments, euro area Balances Claims
reporting external loans residents with banks, arising from
date/ Gold and other denominated security the credit
End of Total and gold Receivables external in foreign investments facility under
month 1 assets receivables Total from the IMF assets currency Total and loans ERM II
 Eurosystem 2
 
2011 Sep                  2 2,073.1 363.2 214.3 76.0 138.3 28.4 18.9 18.9 −
                                9 2,086.4 363.2 214.3 76.6 137.7 29.1 19.8 19.8 −
                              16 2,134.7 363.2 213.9 77.2 136.7 29.8 20.8 20.8 −
                              23 2,180.1 363.2 213.0 77.1 135.9 31.6 20.6 20.6 −
                              30 3 2,288.6 3 420.0 3 226.5 3 80.4 3 146.1 3 35.3 19.7 19.7 −
         Oct                  7 2,295.7 419.8 226.8 80.4 146.4 34.6 20.4 20.4 −
                              14 2,310.9 419.8 227.1 80.4 146.7 32.2 19.8 19.8 −
                              21 2,313.2 419.8 226.9 80.4 146.5 32.5 21.6 21.6 −
                              28 2,333.4 419.8 228.5 80.4 148.1 32.7 26.7 26.7 −
         Nov                  4 2,328.6 419.8 229.8 80.3 149.5 31.8 27.3 27.3 −
                              11 2,343.5 419.8 229.2 80.2 149.0 32.5 28.3 28.3 −
                              18 2,393.4 419.8 229.4 80.4 149.0 33.1 28.8 28.8 −
                              25 2,419.5 419.8 229.9 80.4 149.5 33.8 29.0 29.0 −
         Dec                  2 2,435.7 419.8 231.9 80.4 151.5 32.3 28.3 28.3 −
                                9 2,460.8 419.8 234.0 81.3 152.7 70.1 28.3 28.3 −
                              16 2,493.8 419.8 235.7 83.2 152.5 73.0 30.5 30.5 −
                              23 2,733.2 419.8 236.8 83.5 153.3 95.4 26.0 26.0 −
                              30 3 2,735.6 3 423.5 3 244.6 3 85.7 3 159.0 3 98.2 25.4 25.4 −
2012 Jan                  6 2,687.9 423.5 246.0 85.7 160.4 95.6 24.6 24.6 −
                              13 2,677.0 423.5 246.0 85.7 160.4 94.5 23.5 23.5 −
                              20 2,706.2 423.5 245.3 85.7 159.6 94.5 25.7 25.7 −
                              27 2,682.6 423.4 245.0 85.7 159.3 96.7 25.0 25.0 −
2012 Feb                  3 2,662.1 423.4 246.0 85.7 160.3 100.4 24.2 24.2 −
                              10 2,655.8 423.4 245.1 85.5 159.6 100.6 23.9 23.9 −
                              17 2,663.3 423.4 245.8 85.5 160.3 99.6 23.5 23.5 −
                              24 2,692.6 423.4 245.3 85.5 159.8 99.9 23.8 23.8 −
         Mar                  2 3,023.2 423.4 247.0 86.8 160.1 72.1 23.3 23.3 −
                                9 3,005.8 423.4 247.0 86.9 160.1 70.4 20.4 20.4 −
                              16 2,986.3 423.4 246.6 86.8 159.7 71.4 18.0 18.0 −
                              23 2,982.8 423.5 247.5 87.1 160.4 70.8 18.6 18.6 −
                              30 3 2,964.4 3 432.7 3 238.5 3 85.2 3 153.3 3 55.2 18.4 18.4 −
         Apr                  6 2,965.3 432.7 240.3 85.3 155.0 53.8 19.9 19.9 −
                              13 2,974.9 432.7 239.7 86.1 153.6 54.5 20.1 20.1 −
                              20 2,967.1 432.7 240.4 86.1 154.3 54.6 19.3 19.3 −
                              27 2,962.1 432.7 241.2 86.2 155.1 52.4 20.3 20.3 −
         May                  4 2,960.3 432.7 242.0 86.0 156.0 52.0 20.1 20.1 −
 Deutsche Bundesbank
2010          June 3 713.7 3 110.7 3 49.9 3 19.0 3 30.9 0.2−−−
         July 625.3 110.6 49.9 19.1 30.8 0.2−−−
         Aug 624.7 110.6 49.8 19.0 30.7 0.0−−−
         Sep 3 623.2 3 105.1 3 45.7 3 18.2 3 27.5 −−−−
         Oct 619.1 105.1 45.5 18.1 27.4 −−−−
         Nov 621.0 105.1 45.4 17.9 27.5 −−−−
         Dec 3 671.2 3 115.4 46.7 18.7 28.0 −−−−
2011          Jan 628.7 115.4 46.9 18.9 27.9 −−−−
         Feb 639.5 115.4 46.9 18.9 28.0 −−−−
         Mar 3 632.2 3 110.1 3 45.6 3 19.3 3 26.3 −−−−
         Apr 610.1 110.1 46.1 19.3 26.9 −−−−
         May 611.3 110.1 46.1 19.3 26.9 −−−−
         June 3 632.3 3 114.1 45.7 19.1 26.6 −−−−
         July 629.0 114.1 46.1 19.7 26.4 −−−−
         Aug 679.1 114.1 46.0 19.7 26.3 −−−−
         Sep 3 764.6 3 131.9 3 49.5 3 20.9 3 28.7 −−−−
         Oct 772.8 131.7 49.5 20.9 28.6 0.5−−−
         Nov 812.7 131.7 49.2 20.9 28.3 0.5−−−
         Dec 3 837.6 3 132.9 3 51.7 3 22.3 3 29.4 18.1−−−
2012          Jan 860.1 132.9 51.9 22.3 29.6 11.6−−−
         Feb 910.9 132.9 52.4 22.6 29.8 14.3−−−
         Mar 3 1 002.8 3 135.8 3 50.9 22.2 3 28.7 8.9−−−
         Apr 1 031.3 135.8 51.4 22.4 29.1 8.3−−−
 
*The consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem comprises the financial items for foreign currency, securities, gold and financial instruments are valued at the
statement of the European Central Bank (ECB) and the financial statements of the end of the quarter. 1For the Eurosystem: financial statements for specific weekly
national central banks of the euro area member states (NCBs). The balance sheet

Deutsche Bundesbank
17  Monthly Report
May 2012
III Consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem
 
   
 
Lending to euro area credit institutions related to monetary policy operations Securities of euro area residents
denominated in euro in euro
 Other claims on euro area
Longer- Fine-  credit Securities General    On
Main re- term re- tuning Structural Credits institutions held for government    reportingfinancing financing reverse reverse Marginal related denomi- monetary debt deno-    date/opera- opera- opera- opera- lending to margin nated in policy Other minated in Other    End of
Total tions tions tions tions facility calls euro Total purposes securities euro assets    month  
1 
Eurosystem 2
 
513.8 121.7 392.1 − − 0.0 0.0 50.1 523.0 188.6 334.5 33.9 327.5 2011 Sep                  2
507.5 115.4 392.1 − − 0.0 0.0 48.0 539.2 202.4 336.8 33.9 331.2                                 9534.6 163.8 369.6 − − 1.2 0.0 52.2 547.1 212.0 335.1 33.9 339.0                               16571.3 201.1 369.6 − − 0.5 0.0 50.2 552.1 215.9 336.2 33.9 344.1                               23588.8 208.3 378.9 − − 1.4 0.1 52.3
3 556.7 219.9 3 336.7 34.0 3 355.3                               30
580.7 198.9 378.9 − − 2.8 0.0 68.3 560.7 222.3 338.5 34.0 350.3          Oct                  7586.6 204.9 379.5 − − 2.2 0.0 78.2 562.4 224.5 337.9 34.0 350.7                               14585.2 201.2 379.5 − − 4.6 0.0 79.7 567.2 228.7 338.5 34.0 346.2                               21596.4 197.4 396.0 − − 2.9 0.2 85.0 571.3 232.7 338.6 34.0 338.9                               28
580.0 182.8 396.0 − − 1.2 0.0 85.5 578.4 242.2 336.2 34.0 342.0          Nov                  4
589.2 194.8 392.5 − − 2.0 0.0 89.1 581.2 246.1 335.2 34.0 340.2                               11625.5 230.3 392.5 − − 2.7 0.1 90.7 590.6 254.4 336.2 34.0 341.6                               18641.4 247.2 392.5 − − 1.7 0.1 93.2 600.9 263.3 337.6 34.0 337.4                               25
656.0 265.5 383.1 − − 7.0 0.5 92.4 605.7 267.6 338.1 33.9 335.2          Dec                  2
642.6 252.1 383.0 − − 7.4 0.1 90.0 606.7 268.7 338.0 33.9 335.3                                 9665.0 291.6 368.6 − − 4.5 0.2 89.6 610.2 272.5 337.7 33.9 336.2                               16879.1 169.0 703.9 − − 6.1 0.1 95.0 610.6 273.0 337.6 33.9 336.6                               23863.6 144.8 703.9 − − 14.8 0.1 78.7 618.6 273.9
3 344.8 33.9 3 349.2                               30
836.0 130.6 703.9 − − 1.4 0.1 66.8 619.0 274.8 344.1 33.9 342.5 2012 Jan                  6817.3 110.9 703.9 − − 2.4 0.1 69.5 623.0 278.8 344.2 33.9 345.7                               13831.7 126.9 701.5 − − 3.3 0.1 75.6 624.0 282.2 341.8 33.9 352.0                               20809.2 130.3 676.5 − − 2.4 0.1 72.3 624.8 282.6 342.3 33.9 352.2                               27
795.0 115.6 676.5 − − 2.8 0.1 73.3 623.2 282.5 340.7 31.2 345.4 2012 Feb                  3
787.3 109.5 676.5 − − 1.2 0.1 70.3 624.3 282.7 341.6 31.2 349.6                               10796.3 142.8 652.1 − − 1.4 0.0 69.2 624.7 283.0 341.6 31.2 349.5                               17819.7 166.5 652.1 − − 1.0 0.1 64.7 626.5 283.6 342.9 31.2 358.2                               24
1 130.4 29.5 1 100.1 − − 0.8 0.0 59.3 631.7 284.1 347.6 31.2 404.9          Mar                  21 118.3 17.5 1 100.1 − − 0.6 0.0 57.9 631.1 283.0 348.1 31.2 406.2                                 91 149.5 42.2 1 095.5 − − 11.8 0.0 55.3 630.4 283.4 347.0 31.2 360.5                               161 155.9 59.5 1 095.5 − − 0.8 0.0 57.7 626.3 279.3 346.9 31.2 351.5                               231 153.6 61.1 1 090.9 − − 1.6 − 59.6
3 627.5 3 280.2 3 347.3 31.1 3 348.0                               30
1 154.5 62.6 1 090.9 − − 1.0 − 60.8 628.0 280.4 347.5 31.1 344.3          Apr                  61 148.0 55.4 1 090.6 − − 2.0 − 62.5 627.7 280.7 347.0 31.1 358.5                               131 142.7 51.8 1 090.6 − − 0.3 0.0 183.7 609.7 281.1 328.5 31.1 252.9                               201 139.4 46.4 1 092.4 − − 0.6 0.0 184.7 608.3 281.6 326.7 31.1 251.9                               27
1 117.1 34.4 1 081.6 − − 1.1 − 204.7 607.2 281.7 325.5 30.6 254.0          May                  4
 Deutsche Bundesbank
225.6 58.6 167.0 − − 0.0 − 8.8 33.4 28.1 5.3 4.4 280.8 2010          June
115.0 61.7 53.3 − − 0.0 − 9.3 33.7 28.4 5.3 4.4 302.3          July
103.8 52.9 50.3 − − 0.6 − 8.7 33.7 28.4 5.3 4.4 313.8          Aug 
85.3 56.4 24.0 4.1 − 0.8 − 8.9 33.9 28.6 5.3 4.4 3 339.9          Sep 
103.0 69.1 33.8 − − 0.2 − 10.6 34.0 28.7 5.3 4.4 316.5          Oct 
93.0 59.1 33.8 − − 0.0 − 9.1 34.7 29.5 5.3 4.4 329.3          Nov 
103.1 68.4 33.5 1.2 − − − 9.6 36.1 30.9 5.2 4.4 355.9          Dec 
82.5 37.8 44.4 − − 0.3 − 10.0 36.8 31.6 5.2 4.4 332.7 2011          Jan 
74.9 29.8 45.1 − − 0.0 − 10.0 37.1 31.8 5.2 4.4 350.9          Feb 71.7 25.5 46.1 − − 0.1 − 9.6 37.2 31.9 5.2 4.4 353.5          Mar 
64.8 18.7 46.1 − − 0.0 − 8.3 37.0 31.9 5.1 4.4 339.3          Apr 
52.1 10.9 41.3 − − 0.0 − 7.7 36.8 31.7 5.1 4.4 353.9          May57.8 21.8 35.9 − − 0.2 − 6.7 36.5 31.4 5.1 4.4 366.9          June
45.8 9.8 36.0 − − 0.0 − 8.1 36.4 31.3 5.1 4.4 374.0          July
37.6 3.5 34.0 − − 0.0 − 7.8 48.4 43.5 4.9 4.4 420.9          Aug 31.1 12.6 18.4 − − 0.0 − 9.7 57.8 52.9 4.9 4.4 480.2          Sep 
21.3 3.5 17.7 − − 0.1 − 8.5 60.8 55.9 4.9 4.4 496.1          Oct 
21.6 3.8 17.7 − − 0.1 − 9.2 70.1 65.2 4.9 4.4 525.9          Nov 55.8 8.6 47.1 − − 0.0 − 8.5 71.9 67.0 4.9 4.4 494.3          Dec 
48.6 2.0 46.6 − − 0.0 − 8.4 74.1 69.2 4.9 4.4 528.2 2012          Jan 
48.0 0.9 46.6 0.5 − 0.0 − 8.5 73.9 69.1 4.8 4.4 576.4          Feb 74.6 1.2 73.2 − − 0.1 − 9.4 73.5 68.7 4.8 4.4 645.3          Mar 
74.9 1.2 73.7 − − 0.0 − 10.1 73.5 68.7 4.8 4.4 672.8          Apr 
 
dates; for the Bundesbank: end of month financial statement. 2Source: ECB.  
3 Changes are due mainly to revalutions at the end of the quarter. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
18  Monthly Report
May 2012
III Consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem
 
2 Liabilities *
 
 
€ billion
Liabilities to euro area credit institutions related to Liabilities to
monetary policy operations denominated in euro other euro area residents
denominated in euro
 
Other
Current liabilities
accounts to euro-
On (covering Fine- area credit
reporting the tuning Deposits institutions Debt
date/ Banknotes minimum Fixed- reverse deno- certifi- General related to
End of Total in circu- reserve Deposit term opera- margin minated cates govern- Other
month 1 liabilities lation 2 Total system) facility deposits tions calls in euro issued Total ment liabilities
 Eurosystem 4
 
2011 Sep                  2 2,073.1 853.0 447.0 179.7 151.1 115.5 − 0.6 4.2 − 53.3 44.9 8.5
                                9 2,086.4 853.2 455.3 139.3 181.8 129.0 − 5.2 3.6 − 54.3 45.6 8.7
                              16 2,134.7 852.7 506.2 241.5 111.5 143.0 − 10.2 3.7 − 49.0 40.3 8.7
                              23 2,180.1 852.5 530.0 223.5 150.7 152.5 − 3.4 4.6 − 64.4 56.4 8.0
                              30 5 2,288.6 857.4 563.0 204.9 199.6 156.5 − 2.0 3.3 − 59.7 51.6 8.1
         Oct                  7 2,295.7 859.6 571.5 154.1 255.6 160.5 − 1.3 2.0 − 62.4 54.3 8.1
                              14 2,310.9 859.5 598.0 298.6 136.2 163.0 − 0.2 3.5 − 53.3 45.2 8.1
                              21 2,313.2 858.3 580.3 213.1 202.1 165.0 − 0.2 3.7 − 77.2 69.2 8.0
                              28 2,333.4 863.1 596.6 178.7 248.1 169.5 − 0.3 3.5 − 75.1 66.8 8.3
         Nov                  4 2,328.6 867.1 601.0 135.3 288.4 173.5 − 3.8 4.1 − 58.7 51.0 7.7
                              11 2,343.5 866.5 623.2 294.9 144.7 183.0 − 0.6 2.6 − 57.9 49.8 8.1
                              18 2,393.4 865.1 661.9 236.5 236.8 187.0 − 1.6 7.2 − 65.3 57.4 7.9
                              25 2,419.5 865.1 663.6 211.9 256.3 194.5 − 1.0 1.9 − 97.0 88.9 8.1
         Dec                  2 2,435.7 874.0 708.0 180.7 332.7 194.2 − 0.3 1.6 − 63.1 53.6 9.5
                                9 2,460.8 879.6 681.5 139.2 334.9 207.0 − 0.3 2.7 − 70.5 61.5 9.0
                              16 2,493.8 882.6 719.9 298.1 214.1 207.5 − 0.2 3.2 − 55.3 45.8 9.5
                              23 2,733.2 890.9 888.2 265.0 411.8 211.0 − 0.4 3.4 − 77.5 66.0 11.5
                              30 5 2,735.6 888.7 849.5 223.5 413.9 211.0 − 1.1 2.4 − 79.6 65.5 14.1
2012 Jan                  6 2,687.9 883.7 832.4 156.5 463.6 211.5 − 0.8 1.1 − 90.7 79.6 11.1
                              13 2,677.0 876.6 840.8 132.5 493.3 213.0 − 2.0 1.4 − 87.5 76.5 11.0
                              20 2,706.2 871.8 845.3 134.7 491.8 217.0 − 1.8 1.5 − 108.9 98.8 10.1
                              27 2,682.6 869.2 797.9 88.9 488.9 219.0 − 1.0 1.7 − 136.1 125.9 10.2
2012 Feb                  3 2,662.1 871.5 815.2 83.9 511.4 219.0 − 0.9 2.0 − 93.8 83.6 10.2
                              10 2,655.8 870.0 812.1 83.2 507.9 219.0 − 2.0 2.2 − 94.3 84.1 10.1
                              17 2,663.3 869.4 807.2 132.5 454.4 219.5 − 0.9 1.9 − 110.6 100.5 10.1
                              24 2,692.6 867.4 793.4 93.7 477.3 219.5 − 2.9 2.3 − 153.6 142.2 11.4
         Mar                  2 3,023.2 870.6 1,148.9 91.4 820.8 219.5 − 17.1 7.4 − 147.1 135.4 11.8
                                9 3,005.8 870.6 1,132.7 97.9 798.0 219.5 − 17.3 7.4 − 146.0 134.3 11.7
                              16 2,986.3 869.1 1,109.1 132.2 758.8 218.0 − 0.2 1.5 − 153.0 138.9 14.0
                              23 2,982.8 867.1 1,092.9 89.3 785.4 218.0 − 0.2 1.6 − 167.9 156.5 11.4
                              30 5 2,964.4 869.9 1,101.2 108.7 778.7 213.5 − 0.3 2.1 − 149.6 137.5 12.1
         Apr                  6 2,965.3 880.9 1,085.0 86.0 784.8 213.5 − 0.7 2.3 − 157.6 146.0 11.6
                              13 2,974.9 874.3 1,086.2 129.0 742.8 214.0 − 0.4 2.4 − 169.8 158.8 11.0
                              20 2,967.1 869.7 1,084.2 93.5 775.7 214.0 − 1.0 2.4 − 166.6 155.3 11.3
                              27 2,962.1 872.7 1,099.5 91.3 794.0 214.0 − 0.3 2.4 − 140.6 129.9 10.7
         May                  4 2,960.3 876.1 1,112.8 96.9 801.5 214.0 − 0.5 2.3 − 119.9 108.5 11.4
 Deutsche Bundesbank
2010          June 5 713.7 202.7 208.8 108.6 82.9 17.3 − − − − 0.6 0.1 0.4
         July 625.3 204.8 115.9 61.8 34.7 19.4 − − − − 1.0 0.5 0.5
         Aug 624.7 203.2 115.3 62.4 29.8 23.1 − − − − 1.0 0.6 0.4
         Sep 5 623.2 203.0 121.3 64.9 28.2 28.2 − − − − 1.0 0.6 0.4
         Oct 619.1 203.5 114.4 62.1 20.8 31.4 − − − − 0.9 0.2 0.7
         Nov 621.0 203.9 116.9 54.8 23.7 38.4 − − − − 0.9 0.2 0.6
         Dec 5 671.2 209.6 146.4 71.4 38.5 36.5 − − − − 0.9 0.2 0.8
2011          Jan 628.7 204.5 109.4 50.5 16.6 42.3 − − − − 2.0 0.2 1.8
         Feb 639.5 204.2 120.7 58.2 13.0 49.5 − − − − 0.6 0.2 0.5
         Mar 5 632.2 205.2 119.9 63.9 17.1 38.9 − − − − 0.6 0.2 0.5
         Apr 610.1 207.8 95.9 47.9 11.7 36.3 − − − − 0.8 0.4 0.4
         May 611.3 208.6 95.0 54.3 7.7 32.9 − − − − 0.6 0.2 0.4
         June 5 632.3 210.9 108.5 63.3 8.7 36.5 − − − − 1.1 0.2 0.9
         July 629.0 213.1 100.3 52.5 13.2 34.6 − − − − 0.6 0.2 0.4
         Aug 679.1 211.6 145.5 60.5 16.0 68.9 − − − − 0.7 0.2 0.4
         Sep 5 764.6 213.5 205.5 69.8 56.8 78.8 − − − − 0.9 0.3 0.6
         Oct 772.8 215.2 212.1 59.9 58.4 93.9 − − − − 1.1 0.4 0.7
         Nov 812.7 216.1 249.8 49.6 58.2 142.0 − − − − 1.5 0.8 0.7
         Dec 5 837.6 221.3 228.9 76.4 66.1 86.4 − − − − 5.5 0.7 4.8
2012          Jan 860.1 216.3 294.1 34.6 119.7 139.7 − − − − 1.4 0.7 0.7
         Feb 910.9 216.0 342.5 29.9 166.4 146.2 − − − − 2.8 0.8 2.0
         Mar 5 1 002.8 216.6 424.5 30.9 248.2 145.4 − − − − 3.4 0.8 2.6
         Apr 1 031.3 217.6 452.3 33.0 276.9 142.4 − − 0.0 − 2.0 0.7 1.3
 
*The consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem comprises the financial specific weekly dates; for the Bundesbank: end-of-month financial statements.
statement of the European Central Bank (ECB) and the financial statements of the 2According to the accounting regime chosen by the Eurosystem on the issue of euro
national central banks of the euro area member states (NCBs). The balance sheet banknotes, a share of 8% of the total value of the euro banknotes in circulation is
items for foreign currency, securities, gold and financial instruments are valued at allocated to the ECB on a monthly basis. The counterpart of this adjustment ismarket rates at the end of the quarter. 1For Eurosystem: financial statements for disclosed as an “Intra-Eurosystem liability related to euro banknote issue". The

Deutsche Bundesbank
19  Monthly Report
May 2012
III Consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem
 
   
 
Liabilities to non-euro area
residents denominated inforeign currency
Intra-  Eurosystem  
Liabilities Liabilities Liabilities Counterpart liability     Onto non-euro to euro area Deposits, arising of special related to     reportingarea residents residents balances from the drawing euro  Capital    date/denominated in foreign and other rights allocated Other banknote Revaluation and    End of credit facility
in euro currency Total liabilities under ERM II by the IMF issue  
2 accounts reserves    month 1 liabilities 3 
Eurosystem 4
 
43.7 2.7 11.2 11.2 − 52.2 207.7 − 316.7 81.5 2011 Sep                  2
47.0 2.4 11.9 11.9 − 52.2 208.3 − 316.7 81.5                                 9
52.1 2.1 11.5 11.5 − 52.2 207.1 − 316.7 81.5                               16
56.3 2.3 12.2 12.2 − 52.2 207.4 − 316.7 81.5                               23
50.0 2.5 5 13.8 5 13.8 − 5 54.5 5 219.6 − 5 383.3 81.5                               30
48.3 3.7 12.3 12.3 − 54.5 216.8 − 383.3 81.5          Oct                  7
48.3 2.5 10.4 10.4 − 54.5 216.0 − 383.3 81.5                               14
48.2 1.9 11.0 11.0 − 54.5 213.2 − 383.3 81.5                               21
49.6 2.8 11.4 11.4 − 54.5 212.1 − 383.3 81.5                               28
49.4 2.7 11.5 11.5 − 54.5 214.9 − 383.3 81.5          Nov                  4
51.9 4.0 9.9 9.9 − 54.5 208.4 − 383.3 81.5                               11
51.5 3.7 9.6 9.6 − 54.5 209.9 − 383.3 81.5                               18
51.4 1.8 11.8 11.8 − 54.5 207.7 − 383.3 81.5                               25
51.2 4.4 8.9 8.9 − 54.5 205.3 − 383.3 81.5          Dec                  2
88.9 4.0 9.0 9.0 − 54.5 205.4 − 383.3 81.5                                 9
92.8 4.2 8.6 8.6 − 54.5 208.1 − 383.3 81.5                               16
132.2 5.1 8.6 8.6 − 54.5 208.0 − 383.3 81.5                               23
156.9 4.6 9.0 9.0 − 5 55.9 5 213.5 − 5 394.0 81.5                               30
124.4 5.6 8.4 8.4 − 55.9 210.1 − 394.0 81.5 2012 Jan                  6
117.7 3.2 9.8 9.8 − 55.9 208.5 − 394.0 81.6                               13
118.9 2.0 10.0 10.0 − 55.9 216.4 − 394.0 81.6                               20
118.6 2.8 9.5 9.5 − 55.9 215.3 − 394.0 81.6                               27
122.5 3.5 9.6 9.6 − 55.9 212.1 − 394.0 81.9 2012 Feb                  3
118.8 5.0 7.3 7.3 − 55.9 214.3 − 394.0 81.9                               10
118.2 4.7 7.4 7.4 − 55.9 212.3 − 394.0 81.7                               17
115.9 4.8 7.3 7.3 − 55.9 215.9 − 394.0 82.0                               24
90.9 4.4 7.9 7.9 − 55.9 213.1 − 394.0 83.0          Mar                  2
92.3 3.9 7.8 7.8 − 55.9 212.2 − 394.0 83.0                                 9
93.4 3.9 7.4 7.4 − 55.9 216.0 − 394.0 83.0                               16
90.7 3.1 8.7 8.7 − 55.9 217.9 − 394.0 83.0                               23
79.8 3.0 7.8 7.8 − 5 54.7 5 212.8 − 5 399.4 83.9                               30
74.1 4.7 7.6 7.6 − 54.7 215.2 − 399.4 83.9          Apr                  6
76.8 3.6 7.8 7.8 − 54.7 214.2 − 399.4 85.5                               13
76.5 3.8 8.6 8.6 − 54.7 215.7 − 399.4 85.5                               20
76.4 5.2 8.7 8.7 − 54.7 217.0 − 399.4 85.5                               27
77.5 4.6 10.0 10.0 − 54.7 217.2 − 399.4 85.5          May                  4
 Deutsche Bundesbank
11.0 0.0 0.2 0.2 − 5 14.5 5 11.3 150.9 5 108.8 5.0 2010          June
11.2 0.0 0.3 0.3 − 14.5 12.5 151.2 108.8 5.0          July10.5 0.0 0.5 0.5 − 14.5 12.8 153.2 108.8 5.0          Aug 10.8 0.0 0.1 0.1 −
5 13.7 5 12.4 155.8 5 99.9 5.0          Sep 
12.6 0.0 0.1 0.1 − 13.7 12.3 156.7 99.9 5.0          Oct 11.0 0.0 0.2 0.2 − 13.7 12.8 156.6 99.9 5.0          Nov 14.5 0.0 0.2 0.2 − 14.0 13.1 157.1
5 110.5 5.0          Dec 
12.2 0.0 0.2 0.2 − 14.0 13.1 157.8 110.5 5.0 2011          Jan 12.0 0.0 0.1 0.1 − 14.0 13.5 158.9 110.5 5.0          Feb 13.4 0.0 0.2 0.2 − 13.5 11.7 159.5
5 103.3 5.0          Mar 
11.7 0.0 0.3 0.3 − 13.5 11.7 160.1 103.3 5.0          Apr 11.3 0.0 0.3 0.3 − 13.5 12.1 161.6 103.3 5.0          May10.5 0.0 0.1 0.1 − 13.3 12.7 163.1
5 107.0 5.0          June
11.9 0.0 0.1 0.1 − 13.3 12.7 164.9 107.0 5.0          July15.3 0.0 0.1 0.1 − 13.3 13.2 167.5 107.0 5.0          Aug 13.6 0.0 0.2 0.2 −
5 13.9 14.3 170.7 5 127.1 5.0          Sep 
12.9 0.0 0.2 0.2 − 13.9 14.4 170.7 127.1 5.0          Oct 13.5 0.0 0.0 0.0 − 13.9 14.9 170.9 127.1 5.0          Nov 46.6 0.0 − − − 14.3
5 16.2 170.5 5 129.4 5.0          Dec 
11.9 0.0 0.0 0.0 − 14.3 16.5 171.0 129.4 5.0 2012          Jan 11.7 0.0 0.3 0.3 − 14.3 16.7 172.2 129.4 5.0          Feb 15.9 0.0 0.2 0.2 − 14.0 16.9 175.5
5 130.8 5.0          Mar 
14.2 0.0 0.4 0.4 − 14.0 17.5 177.6 130.8 5.0          Apr 
 
remaining 92 % of the value of the euro banknote in circulation is also allocated to notes put into circulation is also disclosed as an “Intra-Eurosystem claim/ liability
the NCBs on a monthly basis, and each NCB shows in its balance sheet the share of related to banknote issue“. 3For the Deutsche Bundesbank: including DM banknotes
the euro banknotes issued which corresponds to its paid-up share in the ECB’s still in circulation. 4Source: ECB. 5Changes are due mainly to revaluations at the
capital. The difference between the value of the euro banknotes allocated to the NCB end of the quarter. according to the aforementioned accounting regime and the value of euro bank-

Deutsche Bundesbank
20  Monthly Report
May 2012
IV Banks
 
1 Assets and liabilities of monetary financial institutions (excluding the Bundesbank) in Germany *
  Assets
 
€ billion
Lending to banks (MFIs) in the euro area Lending to non-banks (non-MFIs) in the
to banks in the home country to banks in other member states to non-banks in the home country
Enterprises and house-
holds
Secur- Secur-
Balance ities ities
sheet Cash issued issued
Period total 1 in hand Total Total Loans by banks Total Loans by banks Total Total Total Loans
 End of year or month
 
2003 6,432.0 17.3 2,111.5 1,732.0 1,116.8 615.3 379.5 287.7 91.8 3,333.2 3,083.1 2,497.4 2,241.2
2004 6,617.4 15.1 2,174.3 1,750.2 1,122.9 627.3 424.2 306.3 117.9 3,358.7 3,083.4 2,479.7 2,223.8
2005 6,859.4 15.3 2,276.0 1,762.5 1,148.4 614.1 513.5 356.3 157.2 3,407.6 3,085.2 2,504.6 2,226.3
2006 7,154.4 16.4 2,314.4 1,718.6 1,138.6 580.0 595.8 376.8 219.0 3,462.1 3,085.5 2,536.1 2,241.9
2007 7,592.4 17.8 2,523.4 1,847.9 1,290.4 557.5 675.4 421.6 253.8 3,487.3 3,061.8 2,556.0 2,288.8
2008 7,892.7 17.8 2,681.8 1,990.2 1,404.3 585.8 691.6 452.9 238.8 3,638.2 3,163.0 2,686.9 2,357.3
2009 7,436.1 17.2 2,480.5 1,813.2 1,218.4 594.8 667.3 449.5 217.8 3,638.3 3,187.9 2,692.9 2,357.5
2010 8,304.7 16.5 2,361.6 1,787.8 1,276.9 510.9 573.9 372.8 201.0 3,724.5 3,302.9 2,669.1 2,354.7
2011 8,393.3 16.4 2,394.4 1,844.5 1,362.2 482.2 550.0 362.3 187.7 3,673.5 3,270.5 2,709.4 2,415.1
2010          June 7,641.3 14.2 2,583.7 1,899.5 1,341.3 558.2 684.2 464.9 219.3 3,664.0 3,228.2 2,685.0 2,368.0
         July 7,438.3 14.7 2,457.9 1,777.3 1,234.5 542.8 680.6 473.5 207.1 3,654.1 3,219.4 2,680.5 2,364.5
         Aug 7,517.6 14.5 2,489.7 1,792.7 1,252.0 540.6 697.1 488.6 208.4 3,667.0 3,229.6 2,688.4 2,373.2
         Sep 7,387.2 14.9 2,447.4 1,780.3 1,245.4 535.0 667.0 460.9 206.1 3,642.6 3,209.0 2,665.8 2,353.9
         Oct 7,397.5 15.2 2,353.9 1,759.6 1,246.2 513.4 594.3 389.3 205.0 3,758.9 3,327.9 2,675.0 2,360.5
         Nov 7,508.4 14.8 2,376.9 1,776.3 1,259.7 516.5 600.7 397.7 203.0 3,804.8 3,368.9 2,704.7 2,389.3         Dec 8,304.7 16.5 2,361.6 1,787.8 1,276.9 510.9 573.9 372.8 201.0 3,724.5 3,302.9 2,669.1 2,354.7
2011          Jan 8,183.8 14.1 2,322.8 1,748.8 1,239.7 509.1 573.9 374.7 199.2 3,748.8 3,322.9 2,684.7 2,356.7
         Feb 8,142.3 14.5 2,332.2 1,751.5 1,243.1 508.4 580.6 380.6 200.1 3,745.3 3,322.0 2,697.7 2,377.4         Mar 7,955.1 14.5 2,294.6 1,735.4 1,233.8 501.6 559.2 363.4 195.8 3,711.8 3,293.5 2,680.7 2,358.7
         Apr 7,997.9 15.6 2,270.7 1,702.2 1,203.3 498.8 568.6 371.7 196.9 3,736.5 3,307.8 2,703.7 2,360.9
         May 8,045.9 15.5 2,281.5 1,702.0 1,201.3 500.7 579.5 377.0 202.5 3,714.4 3,289.2 2,694.7 2,376.5         June 7,885.8 15.2 2,268.6 1,696.4 1,206.0 490.5 572.2 372.2 200.0 3,690.4 3,269.3 2,681.2 2,374.9
         July 8,001.0 15.2 2,258.5 1,688.2 1,202.0 486.2 570.2 372.7 197.6 3,692.8 3,270.6 2,685.7 2,379.2
         Aug 8,263.5 14.7 2,337.8 1,750.1 1,265.2 484.9 587.7 390.3 197.4 3,699.5 3,279.0 2,706.1 2,403.3
         Sep 8,489.4 15.4 2,412.6 1,831.2 1,349.4 481.8 581.4 385.6 195.7 3,708.6 3,285.3 2,713.5 2,413.7
         Oct 8,353.9 15.4 2,407.5 1,830.0 1,347.6 482.3 577.5 385.1 192.4 3,728.0 3,311.1 2,742.8 2,445.3
         Nov 8,406.6 14.8 2,450.5 1,876.1 1,396.6 479.5 574.4 382.6 191.8 3,727.2 3,315.3 2,747.9 2,450.0         Dec 8,393.3 16.4 2,394.4 1,844.5 1,362.2 482.2 550.0 362.3 187.7 3,673.5 3,270.5 2,709.4 2,415.1
2012          Jan 8,517.7 14.5 2,470.6 1,921.9 1,444.6 477.3 548.7 362.6 186.1 3,702.0 3,298.2 2,729.8 2,437.1
         Feb 8,526.0 14.4 2,534.4 1,981.0 1,499.7 481.3 553.4 369.7 183.7 3,695.5 3,291.4 2,723.7 2,437.0         Mar 8,522.7 15.4 2,577.6 2,037.3 1,559.1 478.2 540.3 358.1 182.2 3,698.3 3,292.5 2,722.7 2,427.8
 Changes 3
2004 209.7 − 2.1 71.6 24.0 10.9 13.1 47.6 17.1 30.5 44.0 17.4 − 0.4 − 1.3
2005 191.4 0.1 96.5 10.3 22.8 − 12.5 86.2 48.1 38.0 59.7 14.1 37.1 15.5
2006 353.9 1.1 81.2 0.5 28.0 − 27.6 80.8 19.5 61.3 55.9 1.5 32.5 13.2
2007 515.3 1.5 215.6 135.5 156.2 − 20.8 80.1 44.1 36.0 54.1 − 1.0 38.6 53.2
2008 314.0 − 0.1 184.4 164.2 127.3 36.9 20.2 34.6 − 14.4 140.2 102.5 130.8 65.4
2009 −454.8 − 0.5 −189.5 −166.4 −182.1 15.8 − 23.2 − 2.5 − 20.7 17.3 38.2 16.9 6.5
2010 −135.1 − 0.7 − 90.6 3.0 58.3 − 55.3 − 93.6 − 78.5 − 15.1 77.5 107.1 − 13.7 0.6
2011 61.9 − 0.1 36.3 61.9 94.7 − 32.8 − 25.6 − 11.9 − 13.7 − 51.7 − 35.3 38.6 56.7
2010          July −166.1 0.6 −118.1 −116.0 −101.0 − 15.0 − 2.1 9.9 − 11.9 − 3.2 − 4.5 − 0.5 0.4
         Aug 60.6 − 0.3 29.2 13.6 15.9 − 2.4 15.6 14.5 1.1 8.7 7.3 5.2 6.2
         Sep − 88.7 0.4 − 36.3 − 8.8 − 3.6 − 5.2 − 27.5 − 26.0 − 1.5 − 16.5 − 15.2 − 17.5 − 14.3
         Oct 20.7 0.4 − 72.6 − 0.9 1.7 − 2.6 − 71.7 − 70.7 − 0.9 100.9 102.9 11.7 9.2
         Nov 80.9 − 0.5 25.6 22.0 10.8 11.2 3.5 5.8 − 2.3 39.4 36.9 25.8 25.0
         Dec −152.6 1.7 − 13.1 12.6 18.1 − 5.5 − 25.6 − 24.0 − 1.6 − 73.2 − 60.5 − 30.3 − 32.8
2011          Jan −106.0 − 2.4 − 35.7 − 37.3 − 36.0 − 1.2 1.5 2.9 − 1.4 29.3 24.2 19.4 5.7
         Feb − 39.5 0.3 10.1 3.2 3.7 − 0.5 6.9 6.1 0.9 − 1.1 0.4 14.6 22.0
         Mar −167.6 0.0 − 31.8 − 10.8 − 8.2 − 2.6 − 20.9 − 16.2 − 4.8 − 29.7 − 25.8 − 14.5 − 16.4         Apr 63.2 1.2 − 21.0 − 31.7 − 29.2 − 2.5 10.8 9.6 1.2 29.0 17.1 25.6 5.1
         May 27.4 − 0.1 7.4 − 1.9 − 3.5 1.6 9.3 3.9 5.4 − 25.8 − 21.2 − 11.3 13.1
         June −165.7 − 0.2 − 21.0 − 14.0 4.8 − 18.7 − 7.1 − 4.6 − 2.4 − 23.0 − 19.3 − 12.9 − 1.0         July 104.8 − 0.0 − 10.6 − 7.9 − 3.8 − 4.1 − 2.6 − 0.4 − 2.3 − 0.7 − 1.3 2.2 2.0
         Aug 263.1 − 0.5 80.7 69.9 71.0 − 1.1 10.8 10.9 − 0.0 1.0 1.9 14.0 17.7
         Sep 195.4 0.7 72.1 80.6 84.2 − 3.6 − 8.5 − 6.4 − 2.1 4.7 3.7 5.2 8.2
         Oct −116.4 − 0.0 − 1.4 1.1 0.2 0.9 − 2.4 0.7 − 3.2 24.7 29.5 32.9 34.1
         Nov 31.1 − 0.6 39.9 44.3 47.5 − 3.2 − 4.5 − 3.7 − 0.8 − 4.4 2.1 3.1 2.7
         Dec − 28.0 1.6 − 52.5 − 33.6 − 36.0 2.4 − 18.9 − 14.8 − 4.1 − 55.7 − 46.7 − 39.8 − 36.42012          Jan 132.9 − 1.9 78.4 78.4 83.1 − 4.7 0.0 0.8 − 0.8 34.8 31.1 23.8 24.2
         Feb 21.0 − 0.1 65.8 60.4 56.0 4.4 5.4 7.8 − 2.3 − 3.1 − 4.6 − 4.1 1.7
         Mar − 3.2 0.9 43.0 56.3 59.5 − 3.2 − 13.2 − 11.6 − 1.6 3.5 1.7 − 0.3 − 8.7
*This table serves to supplement the “Overall monetary survey“ in section II. Unlike by banks (including building and loan associations) − data from money market
the other tables in section IV, this table includes − in addition to the figures reported funds. 1See footnote 1 in Table IV.2. 2Including debt securities arising from the

Deutsche Bundesbank
21  Monthly Report
May 2012
IV Banks
 
   
 
euro area Claims on
non-euro-area
to non-banks in other member states residents
 General Enterprises and General government households government
Secur- Secur- of which Secur- of which Other
ities Total Loans ities 
2 Total Total Loans Total Loans ities Total Loans assets  1   Period
End of year or month
 
256.2 585.6 439.6 146.1 250.2 133.5 62.7 116.6 25.9 90.7 806.4 645.6 163.6 2003
255.9 603.8 423.0 180.8 275.3 140.6 61.9 134.7 25.7 109.0 897.8 730.4 171.4 2004
278.2 580.7 408.7 171.9 322.4 169.1 65.0 153.3 30.7 122.6 993.8 796.8 166.7 2005
294.1 549.5 390.2 159.2 376.6 228.1 85.2 148.5 26.1 122.4 1,172.7 936.2 188.8 2006267.3 505.8 360.7 145.0 425.5 294.6 124.9 130.9 26.0 104.9 1,339.5 1,026.9 224.4 2007329.6 476.1 342.8 133.4 475.1 348.1 172.1 127.0 27.6 99.4 1,279.2 1,008.6 275.7 2008335.4 495.0 335.1 160.0 450.4 322.2 162.9 128.2 23.5 104.7 1,062.6 821.1 237.5 2009
314.5 633.8 418.4 215.3 421.6 289.2 164.2 132.4 24.8 107.6 1,021.0 792.7 1,181.0 2010
294.3 561.1 359.8 201.2 403.1 276.9 161.2 126.2 32.6 93.6 995.1 770.9 1,313.8 2011
317.0 543.2 349.1 194.1 435.8 303.1 172.8 132.7 24.2 108.5 1,111.1 865.0 268.4 2010          June316.0 538.9 344.7 194.2 434.7 299.9 173.2 134.8 23.9 110.9 1,048.9 810.6 262.7          July
315.2 541.2 344.9 196.3 437.4 303.0 173.4 134.4 23.8 110.5 1,073.1 834.1 273.3          Aug 312.0 543.1 346.6 196.5 433.7 294.4 166.4 139.2 25.7 113.5 1,020.8 787.3 261.6          Sep 
314.6 652.9 350.9 302.0 431.0 289.7 162.6 141.3 25.8 115.5 1,011.3 781.3 258.2          Oct 
315.4 664.2 427.3 237.0 435.9 299.5 167.8 136.4 25.8 110.6 1,043.4 810.3 268.5          Nov 314.5 633.8 418.4 215.3 421.6 289.2 164.2 132.4 24.8 107.6 1,021.0 792.7 1,181.0          Dec 
328.0 638.2 421.7 216.5 425.9 287.9 159.8 138.0 26.2 111.8 1,017.1 786.3 1,081.0 2011          Jan 
320.2 624.3 410.1 214.2 423.3 285.7 158.2 137.6 26.3 111.3 1,017.4 790.0 1,033.0          Feb 322.1 612.8 399.4 213.4 418.3 282.2 157.2 136.2 26.4 109.7 978.6 748.1 955.6          Mar 
342.8 604.1 388.4 215.7 428.7 291.9 165.1 136.8 26.4 110.4 1,013.2 787.6 961.8          Apr 
318.2 594.5 377.9 216.6 425.2 288.0 161.4 137.2 26.2 111.0 1,028.3 796.9 1,006.2          May306.3 588.2 374.6 213.6 421.1 287.2 161.2 133.9 25.9 108.0 984.4 753.6 927.1          June
306.5 584.9 374.5 210.4 422.3 283.5 161.6 138.8 31.3 107.5 986.6 757.8 1,047.9          July
302.8 572.9 365.2 207.7 420.5 281.9 162.6 138.5 31.0 107.5 1,004.6 779.9 1,206.8          Aug 299.9 571.8 365.2 206.6 423.3 288.0 171.2 135.3 30.7 104.6 1,011.7 786.7 1,341.1          Sep 
297.4 568.3 361.3 207.0 417.0 280.0 164.0 137.0 30.3 106.6 974.8 754.2 1,228.2          Oct 
297.8 567.5 358.2 209.3 411.9 282.3 165.1 129.6 31.0 98.5 991.0 770.1 1,223.1          Nov 294.3 561.1 359.8 201.2 403.1 276.9 161.2 126.2 32.6 93.6 995.1 770.9 1,313.8          Dec 
292.8 568.3 363.6 204.8 403.8 277.7 157.6 126.1 32.3 93.8 1,016.2 794.5 1,314.3 2012          Jan 
286.7 567.7 361.3 206.4 404.1 278.1 158.1 126.1 32.4 93.7 996.6 778.9 1,285.0          Feb 295.0 569.8 359.9 209.9 405.8 279.9 159.9 125.9 31.5 94.3 1,004.1 782.1 1,227.4          Mar 
Changes 3
0.9 17.8 − 17.0 34.9 26.6 8.2 3.1 18.4 0.0 18.4 111.0 100.2 − 14.7 2004
21.7 − 23.0 − 14.3 − 8.6 45.5 27.4 2.2 18.2 4.6 13.5 57.2 31.3 − 22.2 200519.3 − 31.0 − 18.6 − 12.4 54.5 59.6 20.9 − 5.2 − 1.3 − 3.8 205.8 165.7 9.8 2006
− 14.6 − 39.6 − 29.3 − 10.3 55.1 73.7 41.5 − 18.6 0.0 − 18.6 223.0 136.7 21.1 2007
65.4 − 28.3 − 16.9 − 11.5 37.7 42.2 40.3 − 4.5 1.6 − 6.1 − 40.1 − 7.5 29.7 200810.5 21.3 − 5.1 26.4 − 20.9 − 20.9 − 7.1 0.0 − 3.9 3.9 −182.2 −162.2 − 99.8 2009
− 14.2 120.8 83.3 37.4 − 29.6 − 36.4 0.2 6.8 3.0 3.7 − 74.9 − 61.9 − 46.4 2010− 18.1 − 73.9 − 59.1 − 14.8 − 16.3 − 13.6 − 5.5 − 2.7 8.0 − 10.7 − 38.8 − 34.4 116.2 2011
− 0.9 − 4.0 − 4.1 0.1 1.3 − 1.0 2.5 2.3 − 0.2 2.5 − 39.1 − 33.6 − 6.1 2010          July
− 1.0 2.1 0.0 2.0 1.4 1.7 − 0.8 − 0.3 − 0.1 − 0.2 12.4 13.0 10.6          Aug − 3.1 2.2 1.9 0.4 − 1.3 − 6.6 − 4.5 5.3 2.0 3.3 − 24.0 − 21.2 − 12.3          Sep 
2.5 91.2 4.6 86.6 − 2.0 − 4.2 − 3.3 2.1 0.1 2.0 − 3.4 − 0.5 − 4.6          Oct 0.7 11.1 76.1 − 65.0 2.6 7.7 3.2 − 5.1 − 0.1 − 5.0 7.5 6.7 8.9          Nov 2.5 − 30.2 − 8.8 − 21.4 − 12.7 − 9.3 − 2.6 − 3.4 − 1.0 − 2.4 − 12.7 − 9.0 − 55.5          Dec 
13.7 4.8 3.5 1.3 5.1 − 0.4 − 3.6 5.5 1.4 4.0 5.2 2.4 −102.4 2011          Jan 
− 7.4 − 14.2 − 12.0 − 2.2 − 1.5 − 1.1 − 1.3 − 0.4 0.1 − 0.5 3.0 6.1 − 51.9          Feb 
1.9 − 11.3 − 10.5 − 0.8 − 3.9 − 2.6 − 0.1 − 1.3 0.2 − 1.5 − 27.9 − 32.3 − 78.2          Mar 
20.6 − 8.5 − 10.9 2.4 11.9 11.1 9.3 0.8 0.0 0.7 48.6 52.5 5.4          Apr 
− 24.4 − 9.9 − 10.7 0.8 − 4.6 − 5.0 − 4.6 0.4 − 0.3 0.6 1.7 − 2.8 44.1          May− 11.9 − 6.3 − 3.2 − 3.1 − 3.8 − 0.4 0.0 − 3.3 − 0.3 − 3.0 − 41.4 − 41.2 − 80.0          June
0.2 − 3.5 − 0.2 − 3.3 0.6 − 4.2 − 0.0 4.9 5.4 − 0.6 − 5.0 − 2.6 121.1          July
− 3.7 − 12.2 − 9.3 − 2.9 − 0.9 − 1.3 1.1 0.5 − 0.1 0.5 23.9 27.1 158.0          Aug − 3.0 − 1.5 − 0.2 − 1.3 1.0 4.4 6.8 − 3.4 − 0.3 − 3.0 − 14.7 − 13.4 132.6          Sep 
− 1.2 − 3.4 − 3.8 0.4 − 4.8 − 7.0 − 6.1 2.2 − 0.4 2.6 − 24.0 − 20.8 −115.8          Oct 
0.4 − 1.0 − 3.3 2.3 − 6.5 1.2 − 0.2 − 7.7 0.6 − 8.3 1.2 2.3 − 4.9          Nov 
− 3.4 − 6.9 1.6 − 8.5 − 9.0 − 8.2 − 6.7 − 0.8 1.5 − 2.4 − 9.5 − 11.7 88.2          Dec − 0.3 7.3 3.8 3.5 3.7 1.7 − 2.9 2.0 − 0.2 2.2 28.8 29.4 − 7.3 2012          Jan 
− 5.8 − 0.5 − 2.2 1.7 1.5 1.3 1.3 0.2 0.1 0.2 − 11.7 − 8.2 − 30.0          Feb 
8.4 2.0 − 1.4 3.4 1.8 2.0 1.9 − 0.2 − 0.9 0.7 7.5 3.2 − 58.2          Mar 
exchange of equalisation claims. 3Statistical breaks have been eliminated from
the flow figures (see also footnote * in Table II.1). 

Deutsche Bundesbank
22  Monthly Report
May 2012
IV Banks
 
1 Assets and liabilities of monetary financial institutions (excluding the Bundesbank) in Germany *
  Liabilities
 
€ billion
Deposits of banks (MFIs) Deposits of non-banks (non-MFIs) in the euro area
in the euro area
Deposits of non-banks in the home country Deposits of non-banks
With agreed At agreed
of banks maturities notice
Balance in the in other of which of which
sheet home member Over- up to up to Over-
Period total 1 Total country states Total Total night Total 2 years Total 3 months Total night
 End of year or month
 
2003 6,432.0 1,471.0 1,229.4 241.6 2,214.6 2,086.9 622.1 874.5 248.0 590.3 500.8 81.8 9.3
2004 6,617.4 1,528.4 1,270.8 257.6 2,264.2 2,148.5 646.2 898.9 239.9 603.5 515.5 71.9 8.8
2005 6,859.4 1,569.6 1,300.8 268.8 2,329.1 2,225.4 715.8 906.2 233.4 603.4 519.1 62.2 9.6
2006 7,154.4 1,637.7 1,348.6 289.0 2,449.2 2,341.6 745.8 1,009.3 310.1 586.5 487.4 62.0 13.9
2007 7,592.4 1,778.6 1,479.0 299.6 2,633.6 2,518.3 769.6 1,193.3 477.9 555.4 446.0 75.1 19.6
2008 7,892.7 1,827.7 1,583.0 244.7 2,798.2 2,687.3 809.5 1,342.7 598.7 535.2 424.8 74.2 22.4
2009 7,436.1 1,589.7 1,355.6 234.0 2,818.0 2,731.3 997.8 1,139.1 356.4 594.4 474.4 63.9 17.7
2010 8,304.7 1,495.8 1,240.1 255.7 2,925.8 2,817.6 1,090.0 1,109.4 303.7 618.2 512.5 68.4 19.3
2011 8,393.3 1,444.8 1,210.3 234.5 3,033.4 2,915.1 1,139.6 1,159.4 366.2 616.1 515.3 78.8 25.9
2010          June 7,641.3 1,616.8 1,365.8 251.0 2,842.3 2,750.9 1,064.3 1,082.1 299.7 604.4 491.5 69.5 22.3
         July 7,438.3 1,515.4 1,244.1 271.3 2,840.1 2,745.2 1,061.3 1,078.1 297.4 605.9 495.1 71.8 24.2
         Aug 7,517.6 1,534.6 1,253.2 281.4 2,856.9 2,756.0 1,068.3 1,081.9 298.3 605.8 496.8 70.4 22.5         Sep 7,387.2 1,482.4 1,218.3 264.1 2,850.5 2,758.9 1,069.7 1,083.1 300.6 606.1 499.4 69.7 20.9
         Oct 7,397.5 1,517.9 1,247.9 270.0 2,872.8 2,759.8 1,071.3 1,081.1 300.4 607.4 502.2 69.9 21.2
         Nov 7,508.4 1,513.5 1,245.8 267.7 2,924.8 2,802.1 1,093.6 1,098.6 295.5 609.9 504.2 76.3 25.7         Dec 8,304.7 1,495.8 1,240.1 255.7 2,925.8 2,817.6 1,090.0 1,109.4 303.7 618.2 512.5 68.4 19.3
2011          Jan 8,183.8 1,489.1 1,221.1 268.0 2,937.6 2,823.6 1,099.8 1,103.4 299.7 620.4 515.1 69.0 22.7
         Feb 8,142.3 1,472.6 1,208.0 264.6 2,930.8 2,817.3 1,083.9 1,110.9 307.2 622.5 517.2 66.5 21.4         Mar 7,955.1 1,454.6 1,191.7 262.9 2,928.3 2,820.7 1,085.9 1,111.3 308.8 623.5 518.0 68.7 22.1
         Apr 7,997.9 1,458.9 1,183.6 275.3 2,936.7 2,830.9 1,088.0 1,120.7 319.2 622.3 517.6 71.9 25.7
         May 8,045.9 1,422.2 1,163.9 258.3 2,950.7 2,841.8 1,090.4 1,131.5 330.2 619.9 515.3 71.3 25.1         June 7,885.8 1,401.2 1,158.5 242.6 2,959.0 2,844.9 1,096.5 1,130.7 330.2 617.7 513.4 73.4 26.6
         July 8,001.0 1,398.0 1,154.4 243.6 2,966.1 2,853.8 1,094.1 1,143.1 342.8 616.5 512.2 72.9 25.0
         Aug 8,263.5 1,413.8 1,163.7 250.1 2,988.4 2,873.6 1,105.9 1,152.7 351.5 615.0 510.8 75.6 25.5         Sep 8,489.4 1,430.6 1,176.1 254.6 3,007.5 2,884.0 1,111.5 1,159.1 361.4 613.4 509.7 80.7 28.3
         Oct 8,353.9 1,419.0 1,162.8 256.2 3,008.5 2,888.5 1,120.4 1,155.0 359.1 613.0 509.5 80.0 28.4
         Nov 8,406.6 1,427.1 1,177.3 249.8 3,028.6 2,912.1 1,145.2 1,155.4 360.5 611.5 509.8 77.3 25.3         Dec 8,393.3 1,444.8 1,210.3 234.5 3,033.4 2,915.1 1,139.6 1,159.4 366.2 616.1 515.3 78.8 25.9
2012          Jan 8,517.7 1,475.9 1,221.1 254.8 3,038.6 2,912.4 1,140.8 1,154.3 364.5 617.2 517.4 82.8 29.3
         Feb 8,526.0 1,484.7 1,232.3 252.4 3,046.2 2,915.6 1,144.2 1,151.6 364.1 619.8 520.2 83.7 31.0         Mar 8,522.7 1,501.9 1,232.1 269.8 3,037.7 2,924.1 1,154.4 1,150.3 366.0 619.4 520.6 77.3 28.9
 Changes 4
2004 209.7 62.3 42.8 19.6 53.5 64.9 26.3 25.5 − 8.3 13.1 14.7 − 9.3 − 0.4
2005 191.4 32.8 26.9 5.8 65.0 75.5 69.4 7.3 − 6.9 − 1.2 2.9 − 8.0 0.5
2006 353.9 105.6 81.5 24.1 122.9 118.6 30.4 105.0 77.1 − 16.8 − 31.7 0.5 4.4
2007 515.3 148.3 134.8 13.5 185.1 177.3 24.6 183.9 167.8 − 31.1 − 41.4 13.6 5.6
2008 314.0 65.8 121.5 − 55.8 162.4 173.1 38.8 154.6 123.5 − 20.2 − 21.2 − 7.4 − 0.1
2009 −454.8 −235.3 −224.5 − 10.8 31.9 43.9 205.0 −220.4 −259.3 59.3 50.3 − 9.6 − 4.1
2010 −135.1 − 75.5 − 99.6 24.0 72.4 59.8 92.2 − 56.5 − 55.7 24.0 38.3 − 4.4 2.1
2011 61.9 − 48.4 − 28.8 − 19.6 102.1 97.4 51.9 48.2 59.4 − 2.6 1.3 4.8 6.5
2010          July −166.1 − 94.4 −116.0 21.6 − 0.8 − 4.6 − 2.2 − 3.8 − 2.2 1.5 3.6 2.6 2.0         Aug 60.6 16.9 7.6 9.2 16.0 10.2 6.6 3.7 0.8 − 0.1 1.7 − 1.6 − 1.8
         Sep − 88.7 − 47.4 − 31.8 − 15.6 − 4.6 4.3 2.5 1.5 2.5 0.3 2.6 − 0.4 − 1.5
         Oct 20.7 36.7 30.4 6.3 22.5 1.0 1.8 − 2.2 − 0.1 1.3 2.7 0.3 0.4
         Nov 80.9 − 8.9 − 4.9 − 4.0 26.9 17.6 22.1 − 7.0 − 6.0 2.6 2.0 6.1 4.4
         Dec −152.6 − 16.1 − 4.6 − 11.5 1.6 15.9 − 3.2 10.6 8.0 8.5 8.6 − 7.8 − 5.6
2011          Jan −106.0 − 4.9 − 17.9 13.0 12.4 6.5 10.2 − 5.9 − 3.9 2.2 2.7 0.7 3.5
         Feb − 39.5 − 16.2 − 13.1 − 3.0 − 6.7 − 6.1 − 12.8 4.6 4.6 2.1 2.1 − 2.5 − 1.4         Mar −167.6 − 16.1 − 15.2 − 0.9 − 1.8 4.0 2.5 0.6 1.7 1.0 0.8 2.4 0.8
         Apr 63.2 6.6 − 6.9 13.5 9.4 10.8 3.6 9.3 10.4 − 2.1 − 1.3 3.3 3.7
         May 27.4 − 39.2 − 21.2 − 18.1 13.1 10.1 1.9 10.7 10.8 − 2.4 − 2.3 − 0.7 − 0.7
         June −165.7 − 20.9 − 5.3 − 15.6 8.5 3.3 6.2 − 0.7 − 0.0 − 2.1 − 1.9 2.1 1.5
         July 104.8 − 4.5 − 5.0 0.4 6.5 8.3 − 2.7 12.3 12.5 − 1.2 − 1.2 − 0.6 − 1.6
         Aug 263.1 16.8 12.6 4.1 17.1 19.9 11.8 9.6 8.8 − 1.6 − 1.4 − 2.7 0.4
         Sep 195.4 13.8 10.6 3.2 17.4 9.1 4.3 6.4 9.9 − 1.5 − 1.0 4.9 2.7
         Oct −116.4 − 9.6 − 12.0 2.4 2.0 5.2 9.6 − 3.9 − 2.2 − 0.4 − 0.3 − 0.5 0.2
         Nov 31.1 5.7 13.1 − 7.4 19.0 22.7 23.7 0.1 1.2 − 1.1 − 0.2 − 2.9 − 3.2
         Dec − 28.0 20.1 31.4 − 11.2 5.1 3.5 − 6.3 5.2 5.5 4.6 5.4 1.3 0.5
2012          Jan 132.9 32.2 11.5 20.7 5.7 − 2.4 1.5 − 5.0 − 1.7 1.1 2.1 4.1 3.5
         Feb 21.0 10.2 12.2 − 2.0 8.2 3.7 3.7 − 2.6 − 0.3 2.6 3.8 1.0 1.7
         Mar − 3.2 17.2 − 0.2 17.4 − 8.4 8.5 10.2 − 1.3 1.9 − 0.4 0.4 − 6.3 − 2.1
*This table serves to supplement the “Overall monetary survey“ in section II. Unlike by banks (including building and loan associations) − data from money market
the other tables in section IV, this table includes − in addition to the figures reported funds. 1See footnote 1 in Table IV.2. 2Excluding deposits of central

Deutsche Bundesbank
23  Monthly Report
May 2012
IV Banks
 
   
 
 Debt securities
issued 3 
in other member states 2 Deposits ofcentral governments
With agreed At agreed Liabilitiesmaturities notice arising
of which from Money of which Liabilities
domestic market with to non- repos with
of which of which central non-banks fund euro- Capital maturities
up to up to govern- in the shares of up to area and Other
Total 2 years Total 3 months Total ments euro area issued  
3 Total reserves   Period 2 years 3 residents Liabilities 1 
End of year or month
 
68.6 11.4 3.9 3.1 45.9 44.2 14.1 36.7 1,486.9 131.3 567.8 340.2 300.8 2003
59.8 9.8 3.3 2.7 43.8 41.4 14.8 31.5 1,554.8 116.9 577.1 329.3 317.2 2004
50.2 9.8 2.4 2.0 41.6 38.8 19.5 31.7 1,611.9 113.8 626.2 346.8 324.5 2005
45.9 9.3 2.3 1.9 45.5 41.9 17.1 32.0 1,636.7 136.4 638.5 389.6 353.7 200653.2 22.0 2.3 1.8 40.1 38.3 26.6 28.6 1,637.6 182.3 661.0 428.2 398.2 200749.5 24.9 2.4 1.8 36.6 34.8 61.1 16.4 1,609.9 233.3 666.3 461.7 451.5 200843.7 17.0 2.5 2.0 22.8 22.2 80.5 11.4 1,500.5 146.3 565.6 454.8 415.6 2009
46.4 16.1 2.8 2.2 39.8 38.7 86.7 9.8 1,407.8 82.3 636.0 452.8 1,289.9 2010
49.6 18.4 3.3 2.5 39.5 37.9 97.1 6.2 1,345.7 75.7 561.5 468.1 1,436.6 2011
44.6 14.1 2.7 2.1 21.9 20.8 102.7 11.0 1,487.2 111.3 705.4 443.4 432.6 2010          June
44.9 13.1 2.7 2.1 23.0 19.6 92.2 10.7 1,448.5 106.8 686.7 439.9 404.9          July
45.3 13.9 2.7 2.1 30.4 20.4 104.0 10.3 1,457.6 111.1 701.7 438.1 414.3          Aug 46.2 14.8 2.7 2.1 21.9 20.7 95.9 10.2 1,440.3 108.5 667.1 433.6 407.3          Sep 
46.0 14.6 2.7 2.1 43.1 34.1 85.0 9.8 1,407.4 87.7 657.4 440.1 407.1          Oct 
47.8 15.5 2.7 2.2 46.3 41.3 109.0 9.8 1,423.6 87.7 674.0 452.8 401.0          Nov 46.4 16.1 2.8 2.2 39.8 38.7 86.7 9.8 1,407.8 82.3 636.0 452.8 1,289.9          Dec 
43.5 13.7 2.8 2.2 45.0 37.1 74.5 9.9 1,400.8 80.6 631.5 454.3 1,186.1 2011          Jan 
42.3 14.3 2.8 2.2 47.0 37.8 93.2 9.8 1,396.0 83.0 634.1 460.2 1,145.7          Feb 43.8 16.3 2.9 2.3 38.9 36.2 78.9 10.0 1,373.4 78.2 575.5 460.7 1,073.7          Mar 
43.3 16.0 2.9 2.3 34.0 33.8 89.2 9.7 1,364.1 76.2 605.0 456.8 1,077.5          Apr 
43.3 16.2 2.9 2.3 37.6 34.8 105.2 9.5 1,368.4 77.2 605.4 460.7 1,123.8          May43.9 15.8 2.9 2.3 40.6 38.3 104.8 9.4 1,360.1 74.2 556.5 449.5 1,045.4          June
44.9 16.9 3.0 2.3 39.4 35.6 91.8 6.8 1,357.0 77.3 560.3 453.2 1,167.9          July
47.1 15.2 3.0 2.3 39.3 36.8 101.9 7.2 1,352.8 79.4 604.9 458.7 1,335.7          Aug 49.4 17.7 3.0 2.3 42.7 40.8 107.0 7.2 1,352.4 76.1 644.6 459.4 1,480.7          Sep 
48.5 17.1 3.1 2.4 40.0 37.9 105.7 7.2 1,341.7 74.0 650.4 462.7 1,358.7          Oct 
48.8 17.6 3.2 2.5 39.2 35.8 111.1 6.3 1,348.4 79.7 668.9 466.6 1,349.6          Nov 49.6 18.4 3.3 2.5 39.5 37.9 97.1 6.2 1,345.7 75.7 561.5 468.1 1,436.6          Dec 
50.1 19.0 3.4 2.6 43.4 40.9 86.7 5.9 1,311.1 74.3 702.3 468.9 1,428.2 2012          Jan 
49.2 18.6 3.4 2.6 46.9 45.2 96.6 5.7 1,316.9 75.6 719.2 471.8 1,384.9          Feb 44.9 16.0 3.5 2.6 36.3 35.6 93.1 5.5 1,305.3 72.4 772.9 477.2 1,329.2          Mar 
Changes 4
− 8.3 − 1.4 − 0.6 − 0.4 − 2.1 − 2.8 0.8 − 5.2 73.2 − 14.8 21.7 − 10.5 14.0 2004
− 7.7 − 0.4 − 0.9 − 0.7 − 2.5 − 3.0 4.7 0.2 39.1 − 9.5 22.0 14.4 13.3 2005
− 3.9 − 0.3 − 0.1 − 0.2 3.9 3.1 − 3.3 0.3 34.4 21.7 32.4 27.9 33.7 2006
8.0 13.0 0.0 − 0.1 − 5.8 − 4.3 8.1 − 3.4 20.3 48.7 48.8 42.9 65.1 2007
− 7.4 0.7 0.1 − 0.0 − 3.3 − 3.2 36.1 − 12.2 − 33.8 50.4 − 0.0 39.2 56.6 2008− 5.6 − 7.6 0.1 0.2 − 2.4 − 0.8 19.4 − 5.0 −104.9 − 87.3 − 95.5 − 0.1 − 65.2 2009
− 6.8 − 5.8 0.3 0.3 17.0 16.5 6.2 − 1.6 −105.8 − 62.4 54.3 − 8.0 − 76.9 2010
− 2.2 1.7 0.5 0.3 − 0.1 − 0.7 10.0 − 1.1 − 76.9 − 6.7 − 80.3 13.6 142.9 2011
0.6 − 0.8 0.0 0.0 1.1 − 1.2 − 10.4 − 0.2 − 26.3 − 4.4 − 6.6 − 0.9 − 26.4 2010          July0.2 0.6 0.0 0.0 7.4 0.7 11.7 − 0.4 1.5 4.2 8.9 − 3.3 9.3          Aug 1.2 1.1 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 8.6 0.3 − 8.0 − 0.1 − 0.8 − 2.3 − 19.4 − 1.4 − 6.9          Sep 
− 0.1 − 0.1 0.0 0.0 21.3 13.4 − 10.8 − 0.4 − 29.8 − 20.7 − 6.5 7.1 1.9          Oct 
1.6 0.8 0.0 0.0 3.2 7.1 23.9 − 0.0 10.7 1.2 3.9 9.9 14.6          Nov 
− 2.2 0.6 0.1 0.1 − 6.5 − 2.5 − 22.2 0.1 − 11.1 − 5.3 − 33.1 0.8 − 72.7          Dec 
− 2.8 − 2.3 0.0 0.0 5.2 − 1.6 − 12.2 0.0 − 1.2 − 1.6 0.2 2.9 −103.1 2011          Jan 
− 1.1 0.6 0.0 0.0 1.9 0.7 18.8 − 0.1 − 1.6 2.4 4.1 6.2 − 44.1          Feb 
1.6 2.1 0.0 0.0 − 8.1 − 1.6 − 14.3 0.2 − 12.4 − 3.7 − 53.4 2.3 − 72.1          Mar 
− 0.4 − 0.2 0.0 0.0 − 4.7 − 2.3 10.4 − 0.3 − 1.5 − 1.9 36.7 − 2.3 4.2          Apr − 0.0 0.1 0.0 0.0 3.6 1.0 15.9 − 0.2 − 3.4 0.9 − 5.8 2.4 44.7          May
0.6 − 0.4 0.0 0.0 3.0 3.5 − 0.3 − 0.1 − 15.4 − 3.7 − 47.8 − 11.0 − 78.6          June
0.9 1.0 0.0 0.0 − 1.2 − 2.7 − 13.4 − 0.1 − 8.6 3.0 0.6 2.7 121.6          July
− 3.1 − 2.2 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.1 1.1 10.3 0.4 − 1.1 2.2 47.0 5.4 167.2          Aug 
2.2 2.4 0.0 0.0 3.4 4.0 4.9 0.1 − 13.4 − 3.5 29.1 − 1.9 145.5          Sep 
− 0.8 − 0.5 0.1 0.0 − 2.7 − 2.9 − 1.2 − 0.0 − 2.8 − 1.8 12.0 4.7 −121.4          Oct 
0.2 0.4 0.1 0.1 − 0.7 − 2.1 5.3 − 0.9 − 4.2 5.3 11.0 2.3 − 7.2          Nov 
0.7 0.7 0.1 0.1 0.3 2.0 − 14.1 − 0.1 − 11.3 − 4.2 −113.8 − 0.0 86.1          Dec 
0.6 0.7 0.1 0.0 3.9 3.0 − 10.8 − 0.3 − 31.5 − 1.3 143.8 1.4 − 8.0 2012          Jan 
− 0.8 − 0.3 0.1 0.0 3.5 4.4 10.0 − 0.2 11.6 1.4 21.2 3.9 − 43.9          Feb 
− 4.3 − 2.7 0.0 0.0 − 10.6 − 9.7 − 3.6 − 0.2 − 11.4 − 3.0 53.7 5.2 − 55.7          Mar 
governments. 3In Germany, debt securities with maturities of up to one year are published together with money market fund shares. 4Statistical breaks have been
classed as money market paper; up to the January 2002 Monthly Report they were eliminated from the flow figures (see also footnote * in Table II.1). 

Deutsche Bundesbank
24  Monthly Report
May 2012
IV Banks
 
2 Principal assets and liabilities of banks (MFIs) in Germany, by category of banks*
 
 
€ billion
  Lending to banks (MFIs)  Lending to non-banks (non-MFIs)
 
 of which of which
 
Loans
 Cash in
 hand and
 credit
Number of balances for
reporting Balance with Balances up to and for Partici- Securities Securities
End of institu- sheet central and issued by including more than issued by pating Other
month tions total 1 banks Total loans banks Total 1 year 1 year Bills non-banks interests assets  1 
All categories of banks
 
2011          Oct 1,905 8,403.3 88.0 2,868.9 2,154.7 701.1 3,979.3 530.0 2,729.1 0.7 683.9 143.9 1,323.1
         Nov 1,904 8,457.2 72.4 2,937.6 2,227.3 695.9 3,983.8 523.6 2,743.7 0.7 690.5 144.6 1,318.8
         Dec 1,903 8,466.7 110.3 2,843.2 2,138.9 692.6 3,942.2 477.9 2,752.4 1.0 696.0 139.6 1,431.4
2012          Jan 1,899 8,589.5 64.3 2,987.3 2,287.1 687.0 3,965.8 504.7 2,749.5 0.9 694.6 141.4 1,430.7
         Feb 1,900 8,597.5 65.2 3,040.6 2,338.4 689.2 3,949.5 500.2 2,746.5 0.7 686.5 140.9 1,401.3
         Mar 1,900 8,594.0 91.2 3,050.2 2,350.6 686.3 3,970.0 507.5 2,743.2 0.7 703.1 139.3 1,343.2
Commercial banks 6
2012          Feb 283 3,293.4 31.2 1,151.2 1,052.6 96.3 1,064.1 236.9 643.6 0.3 173.7 72.5 974.5
         Mar 283 3,299.1 59.6 1,162.6 1,065.5 94.6 1,079.0 240.3 641.8 0.3 186.6 70.9 927.1
   Big banks 7
2012          Feb 4 2,151.3 20.6 625.3 573.0 50.7 494.0 152.3 249.0 0.3 83.1 65.0 946.4
         Mar 4 2,112.6 48.5 594.6 543.3 49.6 506.0 154.3 246.8 0.3 95.0 63.6 900.0
   Regional banks and other commercial banks
2012          Feb 169 797.9 9.0 254.1 209.9 43.5 504.1 64.8 352.3 0.1 86.6 6.9 23.9
         Mar 168 815.0 7.8 271.8 228.1 42.9 506.1 66.8 353.3 0.1 85.6 6.8 22.5
   Branches of foreign banks
2012          Feb 110 344.2 1.7 271.8 269.7 2.0 66.0 19.8 42.2 0.0 3.9 0.5 4.2
         Mar 111 371.5 3.3 296.2 294.0 2.1 66.9 19.2 41.6 0.0 6.0 0.5 4.6
Landesbanken
2012          Feb 10 1,443.3 6.4 523.7 394.1 123.7 658.1 116.6 410.3 0.1 126.7 17.1 238.0
         Mar 10 1,442.5 5.8 529.8 401.3 122.6 658.9 114.8 409.2 0.1 130.5 17.1 231.0
Savings banks
2012          Feb 426 1,089.4 14.1 256.7 103.4 151.3 783.8 58.8 619.6 0.1 105.2 16.2 18.5
         Mar 426 1,088.6 13.7 254.3 100.3 151.9 786.3 59.9 620.1 0.1 106.1 16.2 18.0
 
Regional institutions of credit cooperatives  
 
2012          Feb 2 288.1 1.1 169.4 132.5 36.8 61.4 12.0 20.9 0.0 27.8 14.9 41.3
         Mar 2 287.5 0.7 167.0 130.2 36.7 63.6 13.6 21.0 0.0 28.8 14.9 41.4
Credit cooperatives
2012          Feb 1,121 728.5 10.1 194.7 75.7 117.4 494.2 31.7 393.7 0.1 68.6 11.7 17.8
         Mar 1,121 731.5 9.8 194.7 74.1 118.9 497.7 32.8 395.0 0.1 69.7 11.7 17.6
Mortgage banks
2012          Feb 18 591.5 0.2 177.8 109.5 68.4 393.0 7.2 298.0 − 87.8 0.8 19.6
         Mar 18 576.3 0.3 170.4 102.7 67.7 387.0 7.4 295.5 − 84.0 0.8 17.8
Building and loan associations
2012          Feb 23 198.1 0.0 60.0 42.5 17.5 130.0 1.5 115.3 . 13.1 0.4 7.7
         Mar 23 198.9 0.0 60.4 42.6 17.8 130.4 1.6 115.7 . 13.1 0.4 7.7
Special purpose banks
2012          Feb 17 965.2 2.0 507.1 428.2 77.8 364.9 35.4 245.0 − 83.7 7.4 83.8
         Mar 17 969.5 1.4 511.0 434.1 76.1 367.2 37.0 245.0 − 84.4 7.4 82.5
Memo item: Foreign banks 8
2012          Feb 149 1,067.9 14.5 501.3 447.7 51.8 432.3 72.0 268.9 0.1 89.2 5.7 114.1
         Mar 150 1,106.5 18.8 534.9 482.8 50.4 436.1 75.6 267.2 0.1 90.9 5.7 111.0
  of which:  Banks majority-owned by foreign banks 9
2012          Feb 39 723.6 12.8 229.5 178.1 49.8 366.3 52.2 226.7 0.1 85.3 5.2 109.8
         Mar 39 735.0 15.6 238.7 188.7 48.3 369.1 56.4 225.5 0.1 84.9 5.2 106.4
*Assets and liabilities of monetary financial institutions (MFIs) in Germany. The assets meaning of section 340e (3) sentence 1 of the German Commercial Code (Handels-
and liabilities of foreign branches, of money market funds (which are also classified gesetzbuch) read in conjunction with section 35 (1) No 1a of the Credit Institutionas MFIs) and of the Bundesbank are not included. For the definitions of the respective Accounting Regulation (Verordnung über die Rechnungslegung der Kreditinstitute)items, see the footnotes to Table IV.3. 1Owing to the Act Modernising Accounting are classified under "Other assets and liabilities" as of the December 2010 reporting
Law (Gesetz zur Modernisierung des Bilanzrechts) of 25 May 2009, derivative date. Trading portfolio derivatives are listed separately in the Statistical Supplementfinancial instruments in the trading portfolio (trading portfolio derivatives) within the to the Monthly Report 1, Banking statistics, in Tables I.1 to I.3. 2For building and

Deutsche Bundesbank
25  Monthly Report
May 2012
IV Banks
 
   
 
Deposits of banks (MFIs) Deposits of non-banks (non-MFIs) Capital
 including  
of which of which published
reserves,
Time deposits 2 Savings deposits 4 partici-pation
Memo rights
item Bearer capital,
for for of which debt Liabilities
funds for
up to and more arising At three Bank general Other securities
Sight Time Sight including than from savings out- banking liabi-   End of months’
Total deposits deposits Total deposits 1 year 1 year 2 repos 3 Total notice bonds risks lities 1   month standing 5 
All categories of banks
 
1,908.1 436.2 1,471.9 3,275.7 1,277.4 436.3 817.7 165.7 623.0 517.1 121.3 1,410.6 393.2 1,415.8 2011          Oct 
1,939.6 466.4 1,473.2 3,296.3 1,299.1 435.6 817.9 168.1 621.5 517.6 122.2 1,421.1 393.2 1,407.0          Nov 1,865.8 357.4 1,508.4 3,271.7 1,260.6 445.0 817.0 138.3 626.3 523.1 122.9 1,418.6 394.4 1,516.2          Dec 
2,034.6 464.2 1,570.4 3,269.5 1,284.3 423.4 812.6 134.0 627.5 525.3 121.8 1,382.9 396.1 1,506.4 2012          Jan 
2,060.5 498.6 1,561.9 3,287.2 1,293.3 432.2 810.7 149.5 630.2 528.2 120.9 1,386.2 401.0 1,462.6          Feb 2,116.2 504.2 1,612.0 3,289.4 1,303.6 429.3 806.2 158.2 629.8 528.6 120.6 1,376.0 405.9 1,406.4          Mar 
Commercial banks 6
886.0 350.4 535.6 1,141.2 579.4 194.3 207.2 82.1 128.9 103.6 31.3 181.0 133.6 951.7 2012          Feb 941.0 360.3 580.8 1,144.7 589.3 188.1 206.0 86.5 129.6 104.6 31.6 174.8 134.0 904.7          Mar 
Big banks 7
477.8 207.5 270.2 549.3 266.3 107.9 86.4 78.6 78.0 73.8 10.7 141.1 81.2 901.8 2012          Feb 489.3 192.2 297.1 552.1 275.4 101.3 85.7 81.7 78.9 74.7 10.8 135.1 81.2 854.9          Mar 
Regional banks and other commercial banks
156.2 55.4 100.8 514.6 265.8 76.3 102.1 3.5 50.9 29.8 19.5 39.5 45.5 42.1 2012          Feb 177.7 70.0 107.7 511.3 263.8 76.0 101.1 4.8 50.7 29.9 19.7 38.7 45.7 41.7          Mar 
Branches of foreign banks
252.1 87.5 164.6 77.2 47.3 10.1 18.7 − 0.0 0.0 1.1 0.3 6.9 7.7 2012          Feb 274.0 98.0 176.0 81.3 50.2 10.8 19.2 − 0.0 0.0 1.1 1.0 7.1 8.2          Mar 
Landesbanken
389.0 56.8 332.2 385.5 100.6 109.5 160.2 54.3 14.1 10.2 1.1 352.1 65.5 251.3 2012          Feb 386.1 53.1 333.0 396.9 110.2 113.0 158.7 58.3 14.1 10.1 1.0 348.5 64.7 246.3          Mar 
Savings banks
182.1 24.4 157.7 766.3 338.5 47.5 15.3 1.0 299.8 249.8 65.2 20.5 66.4 54.1 2012          Feb 181.9 23.0 158.9 765.0 340.1 45.7 15.3 0.8 299.1 249.5 64.7 20.2 69.6 51.9          Mar 
 
Regional institutions of credit cooperatives
 
143.7 26.0 117.6 35.6 10.7 10.0 12.7 4.0 − − 2.3 55.1 13.1 40.6 2012          Feb 142.7 27.4 115.3 35.5 7.9 12.7 12.6 4.5 − − 2.3 55.8 13.2 40.4          Mar 
Credit cooperatives
107.2 8.1 99.1 522.8 237.0 49.5 29.7 0.0 186.7 163.9 20.0 18.9 46.3 33.3 2012          Feb 111.3 8.3 103.0 521.7 237.4 48.6 29.4 0.0 186.4 163.8 19.9 17.9 47.2 33.4          Mar 
Mortgage banks
162.0 9.6 152.4 192.9 14.4 10.6 167.7 2.6 0.3 0.3 . 193.2 18.3 25.1 2012          Feb 159.4 8.7 150.7 184.4 7.4 10.6 166.2 2.3 0.3 0.3 . 191.0 18.3 23.2          Mar 
Building and loan associations
23.6 1.3 22.3 144.0 0.4 0.9 141.4 − 0.4 0.4 1.0 5.4 8.4 16.6 2012          Feb 23.7 1.4 22.3 144.4 0.4 0.9 141.8 − 0.4 0.4 1.0 5.4 8.4 17.0          Mar 
Special purpose banks
167.0 21.9 145.2 98.9 12.4 10.0 76.5 5.4 − − . 560.0 49.4 89.8 2012          Feb 170.2 22.2 148.0 96.9 10.8 9.7 76.3 5.8 − − . 562.4 50.6 89.4          Mar 
Memo item:   Foreign banks 8
395.6 150.5 245.1 436.9 228.9 79.8 93.6 26.4 19.6 19.4 15.2 63.1 45.5 126.8 2012          Feb 434.3 178.5 255.7 442.8 234.3 80.3 93.2 29.0 19.6 19.4 15.5 60.0 45.7 123.8          Mar 
of which:   Banks majority-owned by foreign banks 9
143.5 63.1 80.5 359.7 181.6 69.7 74.8 26.4 19.5 19.3 14.1 62.7 38.6 119.1 2012          Feb 160.3 80.5 79.8 361.5 184.1 69.5 74.0 29.0 19.6 19.4 14.4 59.1 38.6 115.6          Mar 
loan associations: Including deposits under savings and loan contracts (see Table Nov. 2009), Commerzbank AG, UniCredit Bank AG (formerly Bayerische Hypo- und
IV.12). 3Included in time deposits. 4Excluding deposits under savings and loan Vereinsbank AG) and Deutsche Postbank AG. 8Sum of the banks majority-owned by
contracts (see also footnote 2). 5Including subordinated negotiable bearer debt foreign banks and included in other categories of banks and the category ”Branches
securities; excluding non-negotiable bearer debt securities. 6Commercial banks (with dependent legal status) of foreign banks”. 9Separate presentation of the banks
comprise the sub-groups ”Big banks”, ”Regional banks and other commercial banks” majority-owned by foreign banks included in other banking categories. and ”Branches of foreign banks”. 7Deutsche Bank AG, Dresdner Bank AG (up to

Deutsche Bundesbank
26  Monthly Report
May 2012
IV Banks
 
3 Assets and liabilities of banks (MFIs) in Germany vis-à-vis residents *
 
 
€ billion
Lending to domestic banks (MFIs) Lending to domestic non-banks (non-MFIs)
Treasury
Cash in Negotiable bills and
hand Credit money negotiable
balances market Memo money mar- (euro-area Securities
banknotes with the Credit paper item ket paper issued Securities
and Bundes- balances issued by issued by Fiduciary issued by by non-
Period coins) bank Total and loans Bills banks banks loans Total Loans Bills non-banks banks  1 
End of year or month *
 
2002 17.5 45.6 1,691.3 1,112.3 0.0 7.8 571.2 2.7 2,997.2 2,685.0 4.1 3.3 301.9
2003 17.0 46.7 1,643.9 1,064.0 0.0 8.8 571.0 2.3 2,995.6 2,677.0 3.7 3.4 309.6
2004 14.9 41.2 1,676.3 1,075.8 0.0 7.4 592.9 2.1 3,001.3 2,644.0 2.7 2.6 351.0
2005 15.1 47.9 1,684.5 1,096.8 0.0 6.7 580.9 2.1 2,995.1 2,632.7 2.4 2.4 357.6
2006 16.0 49.4 1,637.8 1,086.3 − 9.3 542.2 1.9 3,000.7 2,630.3 1.9 2.0 366.5
2007 17.5 64.6 1,751.8 1,222.5 0.0 25.3 504.0 2.3 2,975.7 2,647.9 1.6 1.5 324.7
2008 17.4 102.6 1,861.7 1,298.1 0.0 55.7 507.8 2.0 3,071.1 2,698.9 1.2 3.1 367.9
2009 16.9 78.9 1,711.5 1,138.0 − 31.6 541.9 2.2 3,100.1 2,691.8 0.8 4.0 403.5
2010 16.0 79.6 1,686.3 1,195.4 − 7.5 483.5 1.8 3,220.9 2,770.4 0.8 27.9 421.8
2011 15.8 93.8 1,725.6 1,267.9 − 7.1 450.7 2.1 3,197.8 2,774.6 0.8 6.4 415.9
2010          Oct 14.7 64.4 1,674.2 1,180.2 − 6.9 487.1 1.8 3,249.0 2,710.7 0.6 28.2 509.4
         Nov 14.0 57.6 1,697.3 1,200.6 − 8.6 488.1 1.8 3,290.2 2,815.9 0.6 26.1 447.6
         Dec 16.0 79.6 1,686.3 1,195.4 − 7.5 483.5 1.8 3,220.9 2,770.4 0.8 27.9 421.8
2011          Jan 13.6 54.0 1,673.1 1,183.9 − 7.9 481.3 1.7 3,241.2 2,777.7 0.7 29.2 433.6
         Feb 13.6 61.7 1,668.2 1,179.5 − 9.4 479.3 1.7 3,240.3 2,786.9 0.7 29.4 423.4
         Mar 14.0 67.0 1,646.6 1,164.7 − 7.7 474.2 1.7 3,211.7 2,757.5 0.6 24.6 429.0
         Apr 15.1 49.1 1,630.9 1,152.3 − 5.4 473.2 1.7 3,226.5 2,748.7 0.6 25.6 451.6
         May 14.6 56.4 1,623.7 1,143.2 − 5.7 474.8 1.7 3,209.4 2,753.8 0.5 23.7 431.3
         June 14.4 66.6 1,607.5 1,137.4 − 5.2 465.0 1.7 3,191.7 2,748.9 0.5 21.6 420.7
         July 14.5 57.5 1,610.1 1,144.0 − 5.1 460.9 1.6 3,193.1 2,753.1 0.5 18.7 420.7
         Aug 14.0 64.1 1,665.1 1,200.6 − 5.3 459.2 1.7 3,201.3 2,768.0 0.5 16.7 416.2
         Sep 14.7 78.8 1,731.5 1,270.1 − 6.0 455.4 1.7 3,207.6 2,778.3 0.6 14.5 414.2
         Oct 14.7 72.6 1,736.2 1,274.4 − 6.5 455.3 1.7 3,233.3 2,806.1 0.6 15.7 411.0
         Nov 14.1 57.6 1,797.7 1,338.5 − 7.4 451.9 1.7 3,237.6 2,807.6 0.5 14.4 415.0
         Dec 15.8 93.8 1,725.6 1,267.9 − 7.1 450.7 2.1 3,197.8 2,774.6 0.8 6.4 415.9
2012          Jan 13.8 49.8 1,846.4 1,394.4 − 7.3 444.6 2.1 3,226.6 2,800.0 0.7 4.9 421.1
         Feb 13.6 50.8 1,904.6 1,448.5 − 6.8 449.4 2.1 3,220.3 2,797.7 0.5 5.6 416.4
         Mar 14.5 75.8 1,936.0 1,482.9 − 6.8 446.2 2.1 3,222.9 2,787.1 0.5 4.9 430.4
Changes *
2003 − 0.5 + 1.1 − 47.2 − 48.2 + 0.0 + 1.0 + 0.1 − 0.3 + 0.1 − 8.0 − 0.4 + 0.3 + 9.3
2004 − 2.1 − 5.5 + 35.9 + 15.1 + 0.0 − 1.4 + 22.1 − 0.2 + 3.3 − 35.0 − 1.0 + 1.1 + 39.2
2005 + 0.2 + 6.7 + 8.4 + 21.0 − 0.0 − 0.8 − 11.9 − 0.0 − 6.7 − 11.8 − 0.3 − 0.2 + 6.6
2006 + 0.9 + 1.5 − 3.6 + 24.5 − 0.0 + 2.6 − 30.6 − 0.2 − 12.4 − 20.3 − 0.5 − 0.4 + 8.8
2007 + 1.5 + 15.2 + 114.8 + 137.6 + 0.0 + 17.0 − 39.8 + 0.4 − 15.9 + 12.1 − 0.3 − 0.5 − 27.2
2008 − 0.1 + 39.4 + 125.9 + 90.1 + 0.0 + 30.6 + 5.2 − 0.8 + 92.0 + 47.3 − 0.4 + 1.8 + 43.3
2009 − 0.5 − 23.6 − 147.2 − 157.3 − 0.0 − 24.1 + 34.3 + 0.2 + 25.7 − 11.2 − 0.4 + 1.4 + 35.9
2010 − 0.9 + 0.6 − 19.3 + 61.5 + 0.0 − 24.0 − 56.8 − 0.3 + 130.5 + 78.7 + 0.0 + 23.8 + 28.0
2011 − 0.2 + 14.2 + 47.3 + 80.5 − − 0.4 − 32.8 − 0.1 − 30.6 − 3.2 + 0.0 − 21.5 − 5.9
2010          Oct + 0.4 − 9.8 − 10.8 + 10.7 − − 17.5 − 4.0 − 0.0 + 120.1 + 11.7 + 0.1 + 19.3 + 89.1
         Nov − 0.6 − 6.8 + 23.1 + 20.4 − + 1.7 + 1.1 − 0.0 + 41.1 + 105.0 − 0.0 − 2.1 − 61.8
         Dec + 2.0 + 22.0 − 10.7 − 4.9 − − 1.1 − 4.6 + 0.0 − 64.1 − 45.4 + 0.2 + 1.8 − 20.7
2011          Jan − 2.4 − 25.6 − 13.2 − 11.4 − + 0.5 − 2.2 − 0.1 + 20.3 + 7.3 − 0.1 + 1.3 + 11.8
         Feb − 0.1 + 7.7 − 4.9 − 4.4 − + 1.5 − 2.0 − − 0.9 + 9.2 − 0.0 + 0.2 − 10.2
         Mar + 0.4 + 5.3 − 21.6 − 14.8 − − 1.7 − 5.1 + 0.0 − 28.6 − 29.4 − 0.1 − 4.7 + 5.6
         Apr + 1.1 − 17.8 − 15.7 − 12.4 − − 2.3 − 0.9 + 0.0 + 14.8 − 8.8 + 0.0 + 0.9 + 22.7
         May − 0.5 + 7.2 − 7.3 − 9.1 − + 0.3 + 1.6 − 0.0 − 17.1 + 5.1 − 0.1 − 1.9 − 20.3
         June − 0.3 + 10.3 − 16.2 − 5.8 − − 0.5 − 9.8 + 0.0 − 17.5 − 4.7 − 0.0 − 2.1 − 10.7
         July + 0.2 − 9.1 + 2.6 + 6.6 − − 0.0 − 4.0 − 0.0 + 1.4 + 4.2 + 0.0 − 2.8 + 0.0
         Aug − 0.5 + 6.6 + 62.3 + 63.8 − + 0.2 − 1.7 + 0.0 + 0.7 + 7.3 − 0.0 − 2.1 − 4.6
         Sep + 0.6 + 14.7 + 66.3 + 69.5 − + 0.7 − 3.8 − 0.0 + 6.3 + 10.3 + 0.1 − 2.2 − 1.9
         Oct + 0.0 − 6.1 + 5.5 + 5.1 − + 0.5 − 0.1 + 0.0 + 25.7 + 27.8 − 0.0 + 1.2 − 3.3
         Nov − 0.6 − 15.1 + 61.5 + 64.1 − + 0.8 − 3.5 + 0.0 + 4.3 + 1.6 − 0.0 − 1.3 + 4.1
         Dec + 1.7 + 36.2 − 72.0 − 70.6 − − 0.3 − 1.2 + 0.0 − 39.9 − 33.0 + 0.3 − 8.0 + 0.9
2012          Jan − 2.0 − 44.0 + 120.7 + 126.5 − + 0.2 − 6.1 − 0.1 + 29.0 + 25.3 − 0.1 − 1.5 + 5.3
         Feb − 0.2 + 1.0 + 58.3 + 54.1 − − 0.5 + 4.7 + 0.0 − 6.4 − 2.3 − 0.1 + 0.7 − 4.7
         Mar + 0.9 + 25.1 + 31.4 + 34.4 − + 0.1 − 3.1 − 0.0 + 2.7 − 10.6 − 0.0 − 0.7 + 14.0
*See Table IV.2, footnote*; statistical breaks have been eliminated from the changes. (see also footnote 2). 2Including debt securities arising from the exchange of
The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as provisional. Subsequent equalisation claims. 3Including liabilities arising from registered debt securities,
revisions which appear in the following Monthly Report, are not specially registered money market paper and non-negotiable bearer debt securities; including
marked. 1Excluding debt securities arising from the exchange of equalisation claims subordinated liabilities. 4Including liabilities arising from monetary policy operations

Deutsche Bundesbank
27  Monthly Report
May 2012
IV Banks
 
   
 
 Deposits of domestic banks (MFIs)  3 Deposits of domestic non-banks (non-MFIs)
Partici-
patinginterestsin
Memo domestic Memo Memo
item banks Sight Time Redis- item Sight Time Savings Bank item Equalisa-tion Fiduciary and deposits deposits counted Fiduciary de- deposits de- savings Fiduciaryclaims 
2 loans Total 4 4 bills 5 loans Total posits 6 posits 7 bonds 8 loans   Period enterprises
End of year or month *
 
3.0 54.8 119.0 1,244.0 127.6 1,116.2 0.2 25.6 2,085.9 575.6 830.6 575.3 104.4 42.1 2002
2.0 56.8 109.2 1,229.6 116.8 1,112.6 0.2 27.8 2,140.3 624.0 825.7 590.3 100.3 40.5 20031.0 61.8 99.6 1,271.2 119.7 1,151.4 0.1 30.3 2,200.0 646.9 851.2 603.5 98.4 43.7 2004
− 56.6 108.5 1,300.0 120.5 1,179.4 0.1 26.5 2,276.6 717.0 864.4 603.4 91.9 42.4 2005− 53.0 106.3 1,348.2 125.4 1,222.7 0.0 22.3 2,394.6 747.7 962.8 586.5 97.5 37.8 2006− 51.1 109.4 1,478.6 122.1 1,356.5 0.0 20.0 2,579.1 779.9 1,125.4 555.4 118.4 36.4 2007− 47.2 111.2 1,582.5 138.5 1,444.0 0.0 41.6 2,781.4 834.6 1,276.1 535.2 135.4 32.3 2008− 43.9 106.1 1,355.1 128.9 1,226.2 0.0 35.7 2,829.7 1,029.5 1,102.6 594.5 103.2 43.4 2009
− 33.7 96.8 1,237.9 135.3 1,102.6 0.0 13.8 2,936.6 1,104.4 1,117.1 618.2 96.9 37.5 2010
− 36.3 94.6 1,210.1 114.8 1,095.3 0.0 36.1 3,046.9 1,168.3 1,156.2 616.1 106.3 36.5 2011
− 42.0 95.1 1,247.7 137.0 1,110.7 0.0 34.9 2,872.3 1,091.1 1,075.1 607.4 98.6 42.0 2010          Oct 
− 41.7 95.3 1,245.6 150.1 1,095.5 0.0 35.1 2,946.1 1,129.6 1,110.2 610.0 96.3 42.0          Nov − 33.7 96.8 1,237.9 135.3 1,102.6 0.0 13.8 2,936.6 1,104.4 1,117.1 618.2 96.9 37.5          Dec 
− 33.5 98.4 1,220.9 148.0 1,072.9 0.0 13.7 2,928.6 1,125.9 1,085.0 620.4 97.2 37.3 2011          Jan 
− 33.5 98.2 1,207.7 135.8 1,071.9 0.0 13.7 2,942.8 1,121.6 1,100.7 622.5 98.0 37.4          Feb − 33.3 98.3 1,191.5 126.6 1,064.8 0.0 13.7 2,930.5 1,112.1 1,096.6 623.5 98.3 37.2          Mar 
− 33.1 98.2 1,183.6 132.1 1,051.5 0.0 13.5 2,948.4 1,127.1 1,099.2 622.3 99.8 37.0          Apr 
− 33.0 96.7 1,164.0 119.8 1,044.1 0.0 13.6 2,976.6 1,125.7 1,129.3 619.9 101.7 37.0          May− 33.0 94.7 1,158.5 120.1 1,038.4 0.0 13.6 2,980.6 1,123.7 1,136.4 617.8 102.7 36.7          June
− 32.7 94.8 1,154.4 122.4 1,031.9 0.0 13.3 2,976.5 1,130.6 1,125.8 616.6 103.5 36.6          July
− 32.7 94.9 1,163.0 123.3 1,039.7 0.0 13.5 3,007.6 1,139.2 1,149.1 615.0 104.2 36.7          Aug − 32.7 94.9 1,175.6 133.0 1,042.6 0.0 13.5 3,026.3 1,151.3 1,157.3 613.5 104.3 36.7          Sep 
− 32.5 95.0 1,162.7 132.5 1,030.2 0.0 13.4 3,027.0 1,160.9 1,148.1 613.1 105.0 36.7          Oct 
− 32.5 94.9 1,177.1 136.1 1,041.0 0.0 13.7 3,054.5 1,188.0 1,149.2 611.5 105.8 36.7          Nov − 36.3 94.6 1,210.1 114.8 1,095.3 0.0 36.1 3,046.9 1,168.3 1,156.2 616.1 106.3 36.5          Dec 
− 35.3 93.8 1,221.0 137.1 1,083.9 0.0 35.4 3,036.8 1,181.1 1,133.1 617.2 105.3 35.8 2012          Jan 
− 35.1 93.4 1,232.2 141.0 1,091.2 0.0 35.2 3,054.9 1,187.1 1,143.5 619.8 104.6 35.6          Feb − 34.8 91.8 1,231.9 135.9 1,096.0 0.0 35.3 3,049.6 1,188.9 1,136.9 619.4 104.3 35.3          Mar 
Changes *
− 1.0 + 2.1 − 9.8 − 5.6 − 9.5 + 3.9 + 0.0 + 2.4 + 54.0 + 48.4 − 4.8 + 15.1 − 4.8 − 1.2 2003− 1.1 + 3.0 − 9.6 + 41.3 + 2.9 + 38.5 − 0.1 + 2.4 + 62.0 + 24.4 + 25.9 + 13.1 − 1.5 + 1.2 2004
− 1.0 − 4.9 + 8.9 + 28.9 + 0.8 + 28.0 + 0.0 − 3.5 + 76.6 + 70.7 + 12.4 − 1.2 − 5.4 − 1.2 2005
− − 3.7 − 2.2 + 79.0 + 8.6 + 70.5 − 0.1 − 4.5 + 118.0 + 30.0 + 97.7 − 16.8 + 7.2 − 4.1 2006
− − 2.3 + 3.1 + 132.0 − 3.3 + 135.3 − 0.0 − 2.3 + 181.1 + 31.6 + 160.5 − 31.1 + 20.1 − 2.0 2007− − 5.4 + 7.8 + 124.3 + 23.0 + 101.3 − 0.0 − 3.6 + 207.6 + 54.3 + 156.6 − 20.2 + 17.0 − 1.3 2008− − 4.2 + 0.7 − 225.4 − 9.7 − 215.7 − 0.0 − 5.7 + 59.7 + 211.4 − 179.3 + 59.3 − 31.6 − 0.9 2009
− − 2.1 − 9.2 − 96.8 + 22.3 − 119.1 − 0.0 − 0.2 + 77.4 + 76.0 − 18.9 + 24.0 − 3.7 − 1.7 2010
− − 1.1 − 2.2 − 25.0 − 20.0 − 5.1 − 0.0 + 0.1 + 111.2 + 63.7 + 40.9 − 2.6 + 9.3 − 1.1 2011
− − 0.1 − 0.2 + 29.9 − 1.7 + 31.5 + 0.0 − 0.2 + 4.9 + 7.9 − 4.5 + 1.3 + 0.2 − 0.1 2010          Oct 
− − 0.1 + 0.2 − 2.1 + 13.1 − 15.2 − 0.0 + 0.4 + 50.3 + 39.3 + 8.2 + 2.6 + 0.3 − 0.0          Nov − − 0.1 + 1.6 − 7.2 − 14.8 + 7.6 + 0.0 + 0.2 − 9.4 − 25.5 + 6.9 + 8.5 + 0.6 − 0.3          Dec 
− − 0.2 + 1.6 − 17.0 + 12.7 − 29.8 − 0.0 − 0.1 − 8.1 + 21.6 − 32.1 + 2.2 + 0.3 − 0.2 2011          Jan 
− + 0.0 − 0.2 − 13.4 − 12.2 − 1.2 + 0.0 + 0.0 + 14.2 − 4.4 + 15.7 + 2.1 + 0.8 + 0.0          Feb − − 0.2 + 0.1 − 16.3 − 9.2 − 7.0 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 12.3 − 9.5 − 4.3 + 1.0 + 0.5 − 0.2          Mar 
− − 0.2 − 0.1 − 7.9 + 5.4 − 13.3 − 0.0 − 0.1 + 17.9 + 15.9 + 3.0 − 2.1 + 1.0 − 0.1          Apr 
− − 0.0 − 1.5 − 19.6 − 12.2 − 7.4 + 0.0 + 0.1 + 28.3 − 1.4 + 30.1 − 2.4 + 1.9 − 0.1          May− − 0.1 − 2.0 − 5.5 + 0.3 − 5.7 + 0.0 + 0.0 + 4.0 − 2.0 + 7.0 − 2.1 + 1.0 − 0.3          June
− − 0.3 + 0.1 − 3.8 + 2.6 − 6.4 + 0.0 − 0.3 − 4.4 + 6.6 − 10.6 − 1.2 + 0.8 − 0.1          July
− + 0.0 + 0.2 + 11.4 + 1.1 + 10.3 − + 0.1 + 31.0 + 8.5 + 23.4 − 1.6 + 0.7 + 0.1          Aug − − − 0.0 + 12.6 + 9.7 + 2.8 − 0.0 + 0.1 + 18.7 + 11.8 + 8.4 − 1.5 + 0.0 − 0.1          Sep 
− − 0.2 + 0.1 − 12.9 − 0.5 − 12.4 − 0.0 − 0.1 + 0.7 + 9.6 − 9.2 − 0.4 + 0.8 + 0.0          Oct 
− + 0.0 − 0.2 + 14.5 + 3.6 + 10.8 − 0.0 + 0.3 + 27.5 + 26.8 + 1.1 − 1.1 + 0.7 − 0.0          Nov − + 0.1 − 0.3 + 33.0 − 21.3 + 54.3 − 0.0 + 0.2 − 6.2 − 19.8 + 8.4 + 4.6 + 0.5 − 0.2          Dec 
− − 1.0 − 0.8 + 10.9 + 22.3 − 11.3 + 0.0 − 0.7 − 10.4 + 12.9 − 23.4 + 1.1 − 1.0 − 0.7 2012          Jan 
− − 0.3 − 0.5 + 11.1 + 3.9 + 7.3 − 0.0 − 0.2 + 18.1 + 5.9 + 10.3 + 2.6 − 0.7 − 0.2          Feb − − 0.3 − 1.6 − 0.2 − 5.0 + 4.8 − 0.0 + 0.1 − 5.4 + 1.9 − 6.5 − 0.4 − 0.3 − 0.2          Mar 
with the Bundesbank. 5Own acceptances and promissory notes outstanding. 6Since savings and loan contracts (see also footnote 8). 8Including liabilities arising from
the inclusion of building and loan associations in January 1999, including deposits non-negotiable bearer debt securities. 
under savings and loan contracts (see Table IV.12). 7Excluding deposits under

Deutsche Bundesbank
28  Monthly Report
May 2012
IV Banks
 
4 Assets and liabilities of banks (MFIs) in Germany vis-à-vis non-residents *
 
 
€ billion
Lending to foreign banks (MFIs) Lending to foreign non-banks (non-MFIs)
Treasury
Cash in bills and
hand Loans and bills negotiable Credit balances and loans, bills Negotiable
(non- money money
euro-area Medium market Memo Medium market
banknotes and paper item and paper Securities Securities
and Short- long- issued by issued by Fiduciary Short- long- issued by issued by
Period coins) Total Total term term banks banks loans Total Total term term non-banks non-banks
End of year or month *
 
2002 0.3 690.6 615.3 468.0 147.2 0.9 74.4 2.7 558.8 332.6 92.6 240.0 9.3 216.9
2003 0.3 769.6 675.8 515.7 160.1 1.5 92.3 1.6 576.3 344.8 110.9 233.9 6.0 225.4
2004 0.2 889.4 760.2 606.5 153.7 2.8 126.3 1.5 629.5 362.5 136.6 225.9 10.9 256.1
2005 0.2 1,038.8 860.0 648.5 211.5 5.8 173.0 1.5 712.0 387.9 132.8 255.1 9.3 314.8
2006 0.4 1,266.9 1,003.2 744.5 258.7 13.3 250.4 0.8 777.0 421.0 156.0 264.9 7.2 348.9
2007 0.3 1,433.5 1,105.9 803.6 302.4 13.4 314.2 0.5 908.3 492.9 197.5 295.4 27.5 387.9
2008 0.3 1,446.6 1,131.6 767.2 364.3 15.6 299.5 1.9 908.4 528.9 151.4 377.5 12.9 366.6
2009 0.3 1,277.4 986.1 643.5 342.6 6.2 285.0 2.9 815.7 469.6 116.9 352.7 9.8 336.3
2010 0.5 1,154.1 892.7 607.7 285.1 2.1 259.3 1.8 773.8 461.4 112.6 348.8 10.1 302.3
2011 0.6 1,117.6 871.0 566.3 304.8 4.6 241.9 2.6 744.4 455.8 102.0 353.8 8.5 280.1
2010          Oct 0.6 1,159.1 892.5 604.4 288.1 3.1 263.4 2.7 786.3 466.0 115.9 350.1 15.3 304.9
         Nov 0.8 1,176.9 913.0 619.6 293.5 2.2 261.7 2.7 810.4 488.1 129.5 358.6 11.5 310.8
         Dec 0.5 1,154.1 892.7 607.7 285.1 2.1 259.3 1.8 773.8 461.4 112.6 348.8 10.1 302.3
2011          Jan 0.5 1,151.1 888.7 609.2 279.5 2.8 259.6 1.8 774.8 458.0 114.9 343.2 13.9 302.9
         Feb 0.9 1,157.9 894.3 612.9 281.5 2.0 261.5 1.8 773.2 460.3 118.3 342.1 12.9 300.0
         Mar 0.5 1,108.8 848.0 571.0 277.0 2.0 258.7 1.8 757.3 446.7 110.0 336.7 13.7 296.9
         Apr 0.5 1,150.6 890.7 615.6 275.1 4.5 255.3 1.8 770.2 459.8 129.8 330.1 15.2 295.1
         May 0.8 1,161.7 895.0 618.3 276.8 6.0 260.7 1.8 779.4 466.3 132.2 334.0 17.5 295.7
         June 0.9 1,121.8 858.3 581.3 277.0 5.8 257.6 1.8 764.6 454.2 122.1 332.1 15.2 295.1
         July 0.7 1,119.9 860.5 578.8 281.7 6.5 252.9 1.8 769.4 463.0 122.5 340.5 17.1 289.4
         Aug 0.7 1,154.4 895.5 608.5 287.0 5.4 253.5 1.8 768.4 468.0 130.3 337.7 19.9 280.4
         Sep 0.8 1,158.8 901.8 608.3 293.5 5.8 251.1 1.8 767.1 472.2 127.5 344.8 17.5 277.4
         Oct 0.7 1,132.7 880.4 587.7 292.7 6.5 245.8 1.8 746.0 453.2 113.3 339.9 19.9 272.9
         Nov 0.7 1,139.9 888.9 593.7 295.2 7.0 244.1 1.8 746.2 459.9 114.6 345.3 10.9 275.4
         Dec 0.6 1,117.6 871.0 566.3 304.8 4.6 241.9 2.6 744.4 455.8 102.0 353.8 8.5 280.1
2012          Jan 0.7 1,141.0 892.7 595.1 297.6 5.9 242.3 2.6 739.1 454.4 101.4 353.0 11.2 273.5
         Feb 0.8 1,136.0 890.0 599.6 290.4 6.3 239.8 2.6 729.2 449.1 99.6 349.5 10.0 270.1
         Mar 0.9 1,114.2 867.7 579.8 287.9 6.4 240.1 2.6 747.1 463.8 116.4 347.4 10.6 272.7
Changes *
2003 − 0.1 + 103.8 + 84.6 + 65.2 + 19.3 + 0.6 + 18.7 − 0.4 + 46.3 + 35.1 + 24.0 + 11.0 − 2.7 + 13.9
2004 − 0.1 + 128.3 + 89.4 + 95.3 − 5.9 + 1.3 + 37.6 − 0.1 + 65.8 + 29.5 + 31.7 − 2.2 + 5.1 + 31.1
2005 + 0.0 + 127.3 + 78.9 + 26.3 + 52.6 + 2.9 + 45.4 − 0.0 + 59.4 + 7.3 − 9.4 + 16.7 − 1.8 + 54.0
2006 + 0.1 + 238.3 + 153.5 + 109.7 + 43.8 + 7.5 + 77.2 − 0.7 + 81.4 + 51.6 + 25.9 + 25.8 − 1.8 + 31.5
2007 − 0.0 + 190.3 + 123.7 + 72.9 + 50.8 + 7.5 + 59.1 − 0.4 + 167.7 + 94.3 + 50.1 + 44.2 + 20.1 + 53.3
2008 + 0.0 + 8.5 + 20.2 − 43.0 + 63.2 + 2.1 − 13.7 − 0.0 + 4.3 + 45.1 − 31.9 + 77.0 − 14.5 − 26.3
2009 − 0.0 − 170.0 − 141.3 − 122.5 − 18.8 − 10.3 − 18.4 − 0.2 − 72.8 − 43.8 − 31.7 − 12.1 − 3.3 − 25.7
2010 + 0.1 − 141.5 − 116.2 − 47.3 − 68.9 − 4.8 − 20.4 − 0.2 − 62.0 − 24.5 − 12.6 − 11.9 + 0.4 − 38.0
2011 + 0.1 − 48.4 − 32.6 − 45.3 + 12.7 + 2.5 − 18.4 + 0.0 − 38.9 − 13.6 − 12.8 − 0.9 − 1.6 − 23.6
2010          Oct − 0.1 − 71.3 − 69.1 − 59.6 − 9.5 + 0.5 − 2.7 − 0.0 − 6.0 − 5.5 − 2.6 − 2.9 + 2.4 − 2.9
         Nov + 0.2 + 2.5 + 5.9 + 7.6 − 1.7 − 1.0 − 2.4 + 0.0 + 9.9 + 10.1 + 11.0 − 0.9 − 3.8 + 3.5
         Dec − 0.3 − 17.5 − 15.1 − 9.1 − 5.9 − 0.2 − 2.2 − 0.0 − 31.4 − 22.3 − 16.2 − 6.1 − 1.4 − 7.7
2011          Jan + 0.0 + 2.9 + 1.6 + 4.5 − 2.9 + 0.7 + 0.5 + 0.0 + 6.3 + 1.0 + 3.2 − 2.2 + 3.8 + 1.5
         Feb + 0.4 + 8.2 + 7.0 + 4.4 + 2.6 − 0.8 + 2.0 − 0.0 − 0.1 + 3.5 + 3.7 − 0.2 − 1.0 − 2.6
         Mar − 0.4 − 42.7 − 39.6 − 38.3 − 1.4 + 0.0 − 3.2 − 0.0 − 9.6 − 8.5 − 7.1 − 1.4 + 0.9 − 2.0
         Apr + 0.0 + 50.1 + 50.6 + 48.9 + 1.7 + 2.5 − 3.0 − 0.0 + 20.8 + 19.7 + 21.2 − 1.5 + 1.5 − 0.4
         May + 0.4 + 2.8 − 3.7 − 1.7 − 2.0 + 1.5 + 5.0 − 0.0 + 2.0 + 0.4 + 0.9 − 0.5 + 2.3 − 0.7         June + 0.0 − 38.4 − 35.2 − 36.2 + 0.9 − 0.2 − 3.0 + 0.0 − 13.2 − 10.8 − 9.8 − 1.0 − 2.2 − 0.2
         July − 0.1 − 7.3 − 3.0 − 5.1 + 2.1 + 0.7 − 5.0 + 0.0 + 0.4 + 5.3 − 0.4 + 5.6 + 1.9 − 6.8
         Aug − 0.1 + 30.7 + 31.1 + 28.5 + 2.7 − 1.1 + 0.7 + 0.0 + 1.8 + 7.4 + 8.2 − 0.8 + 2.8 − 8.4
         Sep + 0.1 − 9.8 − 7.3 − 8.0 + 0.7 + 0.5 − 3.0 − − 13.3 − 5.7 − 5.1 − 0.6 − 2.5 − 5.1
         Oct − 0.1 − 17.9 − 13.5 − 16.1 + 2.6 + 0.7 − 5.1 − 0.0 − 14.3 − 13.5 − 13.1 − 0.5 + 2.4 − 3.2
         Nov + 0.0 − 2.5 − 0.9 + 0.8 − 1.7 + 0.4 − 2.1 + 0.0 − 8.0 − 0.1 − 0.3 + 0.2 − 9.0 + 1.1
         Dec − 0.1 − 24.5 − 19.8 − 27.1 + 7.2 − 2.4 − 2.3 + 0.0 − 11.5 − 12.3 − 14.1 + 1.8 − 2.4 + 3.2
2012          Jan + 0.1 + 27.0 + 25.1 + 29.4 − 4.3 + 1.3 + 0.5 − 0.0 − 2.2 + 1.2 + 0.6 + 0.6 + 2.8 − 6.1
         Feb + 0.1 + 0.1 + 2.1 + 7.1 − 5.0 + 0.3 − 2.4 − 0.0 − 5.6 − 1.8 − 1.0 − 0.8 − 1.2 − 2.6
         Mar + 0.1 − 22.9 − 23.6 − 20.4 − 3.2 + 0.2 + 0.6 − 0.0 + 16.1 + 13.5 + 16.4 − 2.9 + 0.5 + 2.1
*See Table IV.2, footnote*; statistical breaks have been eliminated from the changes.   
The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as provisional. Subsequent   
revisions, which appear in the following Monthly Report, are not specially marked.      
  

Deutsche Bundesbank
29  Monthly Report
May 2012
IV Banks
 
   
 
 Deposits of foreign banks (MFIs) Deposits of foreign non-banks (non-MFIs) Partici- Time deposits (including
pating Time deposits (including bank savings deposits and bank
interests savings bonds) savings bonds)in foreign
Memo banks Medium Memo Medium Memo
item and and item and item
Fiduciary enter- Sight Short- long- Fiduciary Sight Short- long- Fiduciaryloans prises Total deposits Total term term loans Total deposits Total term term loans   Period
End of year or month *
 
15.6 44.8 614.2 101.6 512.7 410.4 102.3 1.1 319.2 33.5 285.7 87.0 198.7 4.5 2002
11.6 41.4 590.7 95.1 495.6 387.7 107.9 0.4 307.3 32.2 275.1 102.4 172.7 3.6 2003
9.8 39.3 603.3 87.0 516.2 403.2 113.0 0.5 311.2 36.6 274.7 123.4 151.2 0.8 2004
10.6 37.2 651.7 102.9 548.8 420.4 128.4 0.6 316.4 62.0 254.4 119.4 135.0 1.2 2005
5.8 50.4 689.7 168.1 521.6 397.3 124.3 0.4 310.1 82.1 228.0 111.5 116.5 1.5 20065.7 48.3 738.9 164.7 574.1 461.2 113.0 0.2 303.1 76.0 227.1 122.3 104.8 3.1 2007
25.5 45.1 703.3 218.1 485.1 362.3 122.9 0.3 286.1 92.2 193.9 95.1 98.8 2.5 200832.1 45.4 652.6 213.6 439.0 307.4 131.6 0.2 216.3 78.1 138.2 73.7 64.5 1.9 2009
15.6 48.8 741.7 258.7 483.0 349.3 133.6 0.1 226.5 84.8 141.7 76.7 64.9 1.5 2010
32.9 45.0 655.7 242.6 413.1 289.4 123.7 0.1 224.8 92.3 132.5 66.9 65.5 1.3 2011
32.1 51.5 749.1 301.7 447.5 316.9 130.6 0.1 264.2 108.4 155.8 87.5 68.4 1.7 2010          Oct 
32.5 52.5 758.3 314.2 444.1 311.8 132.3 0.1 271.5 114.3 157.1 86.9 70.2 1.7          Nov 15.6 48.8 741.7 258.7 483.0 349.3 133.6 0.1 226.5 84.8 141.7 76.7 64.9 1.5          Dec 
15.6 51.0 738.6 284.0 454.6 321.6 133.0 0.1 245.0 110.5 134.5 70.3 64.2 1.5 2011          Jan 
15.6 50.0 735.9 282.3 453.7 321.0 132.7 0.1 244.5 110.1 134.3 72.2 62.1 1.5          Feb 15.6 50.2 695.8 253.9 441.9 310.5 131.4 0.1 219.8 90.3 129.4 68.6 60.8 1.5          Mar 
15.5 50.2 725.6 265.7 459.8 329.8 130.0 0.1 232.6 105.7 126.9 68.0 58.9 1.5          Apr 
15.5 50.2 707.7 273.4 434.3 303.4 130.9 0.1 235.5 109.8 125.7 66.2 59.4 1.4          May15.4 49.7 653.1 253.2 399.9 274.1 125.7 0.1 229.5 102.4 127.0 66.5 60.5 1.5          June
15.3 49.0 656.1 248.3 407.8 279.8 128.0 0.1 229.5 102.8 126.7 66.2 60.5 1.5          July
15.4 48.8 705.7 256.5 449.2 321.1 128.1 0.1 232.9 101.9 131.0 66.0 65.0 1.4          Aug 15.5 48.9 745.9 304.7 441.1 312.8 128.4 0.1 242.0 110.6 131.4 65.9 65.5 1.4          Sep 
15.5 48.9 745.4 303.7 441.8 319.3 122.5 0.1 248.6 116.6 132.0 67.4 64.7 1.4          Oct 
15.7 49.8 762.5 330.3 432.2 308.3 123.9 0.1 241.8 111.1 130.7 65.7 64.9 1.3          Nov 32.9 45.0 655.7 242.6 413.1 289.4 123.7 0.1 224.8 92.3 132.5 66.9 65.5 1.3          Dec 
32.6 47.6 813.6 327.1 486.5 363.7 122.8 0.1 232.7 103.1 129.6 64.7 64.9 1.3 2012          Jan 
32.3 47.4 828.4 357.6 470.8 348.3 122.5 0.1 232.3 106.2 126.1 62.1 64.0 1.3          Feb 32.3 47.5 884.3 368.3 516.0 388.5 127.6 0.1 239.9 114.6 125.2 63.1 62.2 1.2          Mar 
Changes *
− 0.7 − 1.9 + 5.7 − 2.0 + 7.7 − 2.4 + 10.0 − 0.0 + 4.5 + 0.4 + 4.1 + 20.6 − 16.5 + 1.9 2003+ 0.7 − 1.5 + 19.8 − 6.1 + 25.9 + 21.1 + 4.8 + 0.1 + 13.0 + 5.4 + 7.6 + 22.8 − 15.2 − 0.3 2004
+ 0.8 − 3.5 + 28.6 + 12.6 + 16.0 + 4.9 + 11.1 + 0.1 − 4.9 + 23.9 − 28.8 − 7.7 − 21.1 + 0.4 2005
− 5.1 + 13.8 + 56.2 + 68.3 − 12.1 − 13.7 + 1.6 − 0.2 − 0.8 + 21.2 − 22.0 − 5.1 − 17.0 − 0.2 2006− 0.1 − 0.8 + 67.3 + 1.5 + 65.8 + 74.0 − 8.3 − 0.1 + 4.6 − 5.5 + 10.2 + 16.6 − 6.4 + 1.6 2007+ 0.7 − 3.1 − 50.1 + 52.2 − 102.3 − 120.7 + 18.5 + 0.1 − 12.4 + 16.1 − 28.5 − 19.4 − 9.1 − 0.6 2008− 3.2 + 0.1 − 81.4 − 2.1 − 79.3 − 57.5 − 21.7 − 0.2 − 33.5 − 13.3 − 20.1 − 17.0 − 3.1 − 0.6 2009
+ 0.2 + 1.4 + 79.6 + 42.0 + 37.5 + 38.1 − 0.6 − 0.1 − 2.7 + 6.0 − 8.7 − 3.3 − 5.5 − 0.4 2010
− 0.1 − 3.9 − 88.8 − 13.8 − 75.0 − 61.8 − 13.1 − 0.0 − 9.3 + 6.4 − 15.6 − 10.4 − 5.3 − 0.2 2011
− 0.0 + 0.3 − 4.5 + 9.1 − 13.6 − 12.1 − 1.5 − + 10.6 + 4.3 + 6.3 + 2.4 + 4.0 + 0.1 2010          Oct 
+ 0.4 + 0.8 − 2.3 + 8.5 − 10.8 − 10.6 − 0.2 − 0.0 + 3.3 + 4.7 − 1.4 − 2.2 + 0.8 − 0.0          Nov − 0.2 − 3.6 − 12.3 − 53.8 + 41.6 + 39.4 + 2.1 − 0.0 − 43.6 − 28.2 − 15.3 − 9.7 − 5.6 − 0.2          Dec 
− 0.1 + 2.3 + 1.0 + 26.4 − 25.5 − 25.6 + 0.1 − 0.0 + 19.7 + 26.0 − 6.4 − 5.9 − 0.5 − 0.0 2011          Jan 
+ 0.0 − 1.0 − 1.1 − 1.2 + 0.1 + 0.3 − 0.2 − 0.0 − 0.1 − 0.2 + 0.1 + 2.0 − 1.9 + 0.0          Feb − 0.0 + 0.2 − 35.5 − 26.7 − 8.8 − 8.4 − 0.3 − 0.0 − 23.2 − 19.2 − 4.0 − 3.1 − 0.9 − 0.0          Mar 
− 0.0 + 0.1 + 35.9 + 14.0 + 21.8 + 23.5 − 1.7 − + 14.6 + 16.1 − 1.5 − 0.0 − 1.4 + 0.0          Apr 
+ 0.0 − 0.1 − 23.3 + 5.8 − 29.0 − 28.9 − 0.1 − 0.0 + 1.1 + 3.3 − 2.3 − 2.4 + 0.1 − 0.0          May− 0.1 − 0.4 − 53.5 − 19.8 − 33.7 − 28.9 − 4.8 − 0.0 − 5.7 − 7.2 + 1.5 + 0.4 + 1.2 + 0.1          June
− 0.1 − 0.8 − 0.1 − 5.9 + 5.9 + 4.3 + 1.6 + 0.0 − 0.9 + 0.0 − 0.9 − 0.7 − 0.3 − 0.1          July
+ 0.1 − 0.1 + 49.0 + 8.7 + 40.3 + 39.8 + 0.6 − 0.0 − 1.4 − 0.7 − 0.7 − 0.0 − 0.7 − 0.1          Aug + 0.1 − 0.1 + 30.9 + 45.0 − 14.0 − 12.4 − 1.6 − 0.0 + 6.2 + 7.5 − 1.3 − 1.0 − 0.3 + 0.0          Sep 
+ 0.0 + 0.1 + 4.8 + 0.8 + 4.0 + 8.8 − 4.9 − + 8.3 + 6.7 + 1.6 + 1.9 − 0.3 − 0.1          Oct 
+ 0.2 + 0.7 + 10.7 + 24.3 − 13.6 − 13.7 + 0.2 − − 8.9 − 6.4 − 2.6 − 2.3 − 0.3 − 0.0          Nov − 0.2 − 4.9 − 107.6 − 85.1 − 22.6 − 20.6 − 1.9 − 0.0 − 18.7 − 19.5 + 0.8 + 0.6 + 0.1 − 0.0          Dec 
− 0.3 + 2.6 + 159.9 + 87.4 + 72.6 + 73.0 − 0.4 − + 8.7 + 11.1 − 2.4 − 2.0 − 0.4 + 0.0 2012          Jan 
− 0.2 − 0.0 + 17.9 + 31.6 − 13.7 − 14.1 + 0.4 − 0.0 + 0.5 + 3.4 − 2.9 − 2.3 − 0.6 − 0.0          Feb + 0.0 + 0.0 + 55.6 + 10.3 + 45.3 + 40.5 + 4.8 − 0.0 + 7.3 + 8.3 − 1.0 + 0.9 − 1.9 − 0.1          Mar 

Deutsche Bundesbank
30  Monthly Report
May 2012
IV Banks
 
5 Lending by banks (MFIs) in Germany to domestic non-banks (non-MFIs) *
 
 
€ billion
Lending to domestic Short-term lending Medium and long-term
non-banks, total
      to enterprises and households to general government to enter-
 
including excluding Negoti-
negotiable money able
market paper, Loans money
Period securities, and market Treasury
equalisation claims Total Total bills paper Total Loans bills Total Total
End of year or month *
 
2002 2,997.2 2,689.1 365.4 331.9 331.0 1.0 33.5 31.1 2.4 2,631.8 2,079.7
2003 2,995.6 2,680.6 355.2 315.0 313.4 1.6 40.2 38.4 1.8 2,640.4 2,096.1
2004 3,001.3 2,646.7 320.9 283.8 283.0 0.8 37.1 35.3 1.8 2,680.4 2,114.2
2005 2,995.1 2,635.1 309.7 273.5 272.9 0.6 36.2 34.4 1.8 2,685.4 2,141.3
2006 3,000.7 2,632.2 303.1 269.8 269.3 0.6 33.3 31.9 1.4 2,697.6 2,181.8
2007 2,975.7 2,649.5 331.2 301.8 301.5 0.3 29.4 28.2 1.2 2,644.6 2,168.3
2008 3,071.1 2,700.1 373.0 337.5 335.3 2.2 35.5 34.5 1.0 2,698.1 2,257.8
2009 3,100.1 2,692.6 347.3 306.3 306.2 0.1 41.0 37.1 3.9 2,752.8 2,299.7
2010 3,220.9 2,771.3 428.0 283.0 282.8 0.2 145.0 117.2 27.7 2,793.0 2,305.6
2011 3,197.8 2,775.4 383.3 316.5 316.1 0.4 66.8 60.7 6.0 2,814.5 2,321.9
2010          Oct 3,249.0 2,711.4 378.0 297.5 297.2 0.3 80.5 52.5 28.0 2,871.0 2,300.2
         Nov 3,290.2 2,816.5 470.8 318.0 317.7 0.3 152.8 126.9 25.9 2,819.5 2,309.5
         Dec 3,220.9 2,771.3 428.0 283.0 282.8 0.2 145.0 117.2 27.7 2,793.0 2,305.6
2011          Jan 3,241.2 2,778.4 440.2 290.4 290.2 0.2 149.8 120.8 29.0 2,801.1 2,314.1
         Feb 3,240.3 2,787.6 446.4 308.5 308.2 0.3 137.9 108.8 29.1 2,794.0 2,309.0
         Mar 3,211.7 2,758.1 415.7 292.7 292.4 0.3 123.1 98.7 24.4 2,796.0 2,307.8
         Apr 3,226.5 2,749.3 409.8 295.8 295.5 0.4 114.0 88.8 25.2 2,816.7 2,328.1
         May 3,209.4 2,754.3 405.8 305.2 304.8 0.4 100.6 77.2 23.3 2,803.6 2,311.3
         June 3,191.7 2,749.4 404.1 307.1 306.6 0.5 97.0 75.9 21.1 2,787.6 2,298.0
         July 3,193.1 2,753.6 399.4 305.8 305.4 0.4 93.6 75.3 18.4 2,793.7 2,303.9
         Aug 3,201.3 2,768.5 399.9 318.2 317.8 0.5 81.7 65.5 16.2 2,801.4 2,311.9
         Sep 3,207.6 2,778.8 406.2 326.3 325.8 0.5 79.9 65.9 14.0 2,801.4 2,311.2
         Oct 3,233.3 2,806.6 433.2 355.4 354.7 0.7 77.8 62.8 15.0 2,800.1 2,311.3
         Nov 3,237.6 2,808.2 424.2 352.0 351.4 0.6 72.2 58.4 13.8 2,813.4 2,319.9
         Dec 3,197.8 2,775.4 383.3 316.5 316.1 0.4 66.8 60.7 6.0 2,814.5 2,321.9
2012          Jan 3,226.6 2,800.6 409.1 339.2 338.7 0.6 69.8 65.5 4.4 2,817.6 2,320.7
         Feb 3,220.3 2,798.2 406.9 338.2 337.4 0.8 68.7 63.8 4.9 2,813.4 2,315.9
         Mar 3,222.9 2,787.6 396.8 329.5 328.6 0.9 67.3 63.3 4.0 2,826.1 2,325.3
Changes *
2003 + 0.1 − 8.4 − 10.0 − 16.7 − 17.5 + 0.9 + 6.7 + 7.3 − 0.6 + 10.1 + 16.0
2004 + 3.3 − 36.0 − 31.7 − 30.5 − 29.7 − 0.8 − 1.2 − 3.2 + 1.9 + 35.0 + 15.6
2005 − 6.7 − 12.1 − 11.5 − 10.6 − 10.4 − 0.2 − 0.9 − 0.9 + 0.0 + 4.8 + 26.8
2006 − 12.4 − 20.8 − 7.1 − 4.5 − 4.4 − 0.0 − 2.7 − 2.3 − 0.4 − 5.2 + 23.6
2007 − 15.9 + 11.8 + 27.6 + 31.5 + 31.7 − 0.2 − 3.9 − 3.7 − 0.3 − 43.5 − 7.1
2008 + 92.0 + 46.9 + 43.1 + 36.8 + 34.9 + 1.8 + 6.3 + 6.3 − 0.0 + 48.9 + 83.4
2009 + 25.7 − 11.6 − 26.1 − 31.5 − 30.0 − 1.5 + 5.5 + 2.5 + 2.9 + 51.8 + 36.6
2010 + 130.5 + 78.7 + 80.4 − 23.4 − 23.5 + 0.1 + 103.8 + 80.1 + 23.7 + 50.1 + 14.9
2011 − 30.6 − 3.2 − 45.2 + 33.6 + 33.3 + 0.2 − 78.7 − 57.0 − 21.7 + 14.6 + 9.4
2010          Oct + 120.1 + 11.7 + 26.9 + 4.1 + 4.0 + 0.1 + 22.7 + 3.5 + 19.2 + 93.3 + 6.0
         Nov + 41.1 + 105.0 + 92.7 + 20.3 + 20.3 − 0.0 + 72.3 + 74.4 − 2.1 − 51.5 + 9.3
         Dec − 64.1 − 45.2 − 42.8 − 34.9 − 34.8 − 0.1 − 7.9 − 9.7 + 1.8 − 21.3 + 1.3
2011          Jan + 20.3 + 7.2 + 12.2 + 7.3 + 7.3 + 0.0 + 4.8 + 3.5 + 1.3 + 8.1 + 8.5
         Feb − 0.9 + 9.1 + 6.2 + 18.6 + 18.6 + 0.1 − 12.4 − 12.5 + 0.1 − 7.1 − 5.1
         Mar − 28.6 − 29.5 − 30.7 − 15.9 − 15.9 + 0.0 − 14.8 − 10.1 − 4.8 + 2.1 − 1.2
         Apr + 14.8 − 8.8 − 5.9 + 3.2 + 3.1 + 0.1 − 9.1 − 9.9 + 0.8 + 20.7 + 20.3
         May − 17.1 + 5.0 − 4.1 + 9.3 + 9.3 − − 13.4 − 11.6 − 1.9 − 13.1 − 16.8
         June − 17.5 − 4.7 − 1.4 + 2.1 + 2.0 + 0.1 − 3.6 − 1.3 − 2.3 − 16.1 − 13.3
         July + 1.4 + 4.2 − 4.7 − 1.3 − 1.2 − 0.1 − 3.4 − 0.6 − 2.7 + 6.1 + 5.9
         Aug + 0.7 + 7.3 + 0.3 + 12.4 + 12.3 + 0.1 − 12.0 − 9.8 − 2.2 + 0.3 + 0.5
         Sep + 6.3 + 10.3 + 6.3 + 8.0 + 8.0 + 0.0 − 1.7 + 0.5 − 2.2 − 0.0 − 0.7
         Oct + 25.7 + 27.8 + 26.6 + 28.7 + 28.5 + 0.2 − 2.1 − 3.1 + 1.0 − 0.9 + 0.5
         Nov + 4.3 + 1.5 − 9.0 − 3.4 − 3.3 − 0.1 − 5.6 − 4.4 − 1.2 + 13.3 + 8.6
         Dec − 39.9 − 32.7 − 41.0 − 35.6 − 35.4 − 0.2 − 5.4 + 2.4 − 7.8 + 1.2 + 2.1
2012          Jan + 29.0 + 25.2 + 25.8 + 22.7 + 22.6 + 0.2 + 3.1 + 4.7 − 1.7 + 3.2 − 1.1
         Feb − 6.4 − 2.4 − 2.2 − 1.1 − 1.2 + 0.2 − 1.1 − 1.7 + 0.5 − 4.2 − 4.8
         Mar + 2.7 − 10.6 − 10.1 − 8.7 − 8.8 + 0.1 − 1.4 − 0.6 − 0.9 + 12.8 + 9.4
*See Table IV.2, footnote*; statistical breaks have been eliminated from the changes. marked. 1Excluding debt securities arising from the exchange of equalisation claims
The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as provisional. Subsequent (see also footnote 2). 2Including debt securities arising from the exchange of
revisions, which appear in the following Monthly Report, are not specially equalisation claims. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
31  Monthly Report
May 2012
IV Banks
 
   
 
lending
prises and households to general governmentLoans Loans
Memo Memo
item Equal- item
Medium- Long- Fiduciary Medium- Long- Secur- isation Fiduciary
Total term term loans Total Total term term ities 
1 claims 2 loans   Period Securities
End of year or month *
 
1,909.8 193.5 1,716.3 169.9 47.3 552.1 417.1 27.4 389.7 132.0 3.0 7.5 2002
1,927.7 195.0 1,732.8 168.3 49.9 544.3 401.0 34.6 366.4 141.3 2.0 7.0 20031,940.8 194.3 1,746.5 173.5 55.3 566.1 387.7 32.9 354.8 177.5 1.0 6.5 2004
1,953.4 194.7 1,758.8 187.9 52.1 544.1 374.4 32.9 341.4 169.7 − 4.5 2005
1,972.7 194.5 1,778.1 209.1 48.2 515.8 358.4 31.7 326.6 157.4 − 4.8 20061,987.3 207.7 1,779.6 181.1 46.5 476.2 332.5 31.9 300.6 143.7 − 4.7 20072,022.0 222.0 1,800.0 235.8 42.8 440.3 308.2 29.7 278.5 132.1 − 4.5 20082,051.3 242.7 1,808.6 248.4 39.6 453.1 298.0 32.2 265.8 155.1 − 4.3 2009
2,070.0 238.1 1,831.8 235.7 30.7 487.3 301.2 36.1 265.1 186.1 − 3.1 2010
2,099.5 247.9 1,851.7 222.4 32.7 492.6 299.1 41.1 258.0 193.5 − 3.6 2011
2,063.2 236.9 1,826.3 237.0 38.0 570.8 298.4 34.7 263.7 272.4 − 4.0 2010          Oct 
2,071.6 238.5 1,833.1 237.9 37.8 510.0 300.3 35.7 264.6 209.6 − 3.9          Nov 
2,070.0 238.1 1,831.8 235.7 30.7 487.3 301.2 36.1 265.1 186.1 − 3.1          Dec 
2,066.5 237.0 1,829.6 247.6 30.5 486.9 301.0 37.2 263.8 186.0 − 3.0 2011          Jan 
2,069.2 236.8 1,832.5 239.8 30.5 485.0 301.3 37.9 263.4 183.6 − 3.0          Feb 2,066.3 238.6 1,827.6 241.5 30.3 488.2 300.7 38.2 262.5 187.5 − 3.0          Mar 
2,065.4 236.2 1,829.2 262.7 30.1 488.6 299.6 38.6 261.1 189.0 − 3.0          Apr 
2,071.7 237.7 1,833.9 239.6 30.1 492.3 300.6 38.8 261.8 191.7 − 3.0          May2,068.2 234.6 1,833.6 229.8 30.0 489.5 298.7 39.0 259.7 190.9 − 2.9          June
2,073.7 235.8 1,838.0 230.2 29.7 489.7 299.2 39.7 259.5 190.5 − 2.9          July
2,085.5 244.8 1,840.8 226.4 29.8 489.5 299.7 40.0 259.8 189.8 − 2.9          Aug 2,087.9 245.2 1,842.7 223.3 29.8 490.1 299.2 39.8 259.4 190.9 − 2.9          Sep 
2,090.6 245.9 1,844.8 220.7 29.6 488.8 298.5 40.6 257.9 190.3 − 2.9          Oct 
2,098.6 246.8 1,851.9 221.2 29.6 493.6 299.8 40.7 259.1 193.8 − 2.9          Nov 2,099.5 247.9 1,851.7 222.4 32.7 492.6 299.1 41.1 258.0 193.5 − 3.6          Dec 
2,098.4 246.8 1,851.6 222.3 31.8 496.9 298.1 40.9 257.2 198.8 − 3.5 2012          Jan 
2,099.5 245.9 1,853.7 216.4 31.6 497.4 297.5 41.1 256.4 200.0 − 3.5          Feb 2,099.2 246.4 1,852.7 226.1 31.3 500.9 296.6 40.9 255.8 204.2 − 3.5          Mar 
Changes *
+ 17.9 + 0.2 + 17.8 − 1.9 + 2.6 − 5.9 − 16.1 + 4.9 − 21.0 + 11.2 − 1.0 − 0.5 2003+ 10.7 + 0.2 + 10.5 + 4.9 + 3.6 + 19.4 − 13.8 − 0.9 − 12.9 + 34.3 − 1.1 − 0.6 2004
+ 12.5 + 1.7 + 10.8 + 14.3 − 3.0 − 22.1 − 13.4 + 0.9 − 14.2 − 7.7 − 1.0 − 2.0 2005
+ 2.3 + 0.2 + 2.2 + 21.2 − 3.9 − 28.8 − 16.4 − 1.4 − 15.0 − 12.4 − + 0.3 2006
+ 9.6 + 10.1 − 0.6 − 16.7 − 2.2 − 36.3 − 25.8 + 0.1 − 26.0 − 10.5 − − 0.1 2007
+ 28.8 + 12.0 + 16.8 + 54.7 − 5.3 − 34.5 − 23.2 − 2.3 − 20.8 − 11.4 − − 0.1 2008
+ 23.5 + 17.3 + 6.3 + 13.1 − 3.9 + 15.2 − 7.6 + 2.5 − 10.2 + 22.8 − − 0.2 2009
+ 18.6 − 4.0 + 22.6 − 3.8 − 1.7 + 35.2 + 3.5 + 3.5 − 0.0 + 31.7 − − 0.3 2010
+ 22.6 + 2.2 + 20.4 − 13.2 − 1.0 + 5.2 − 2.1 + 4.9 − 7.0 + 7.3 − − 0.2 2011
+ 3.2 + 0.7 + 2.5 + 2.8 − 0.1 + 87.3 + 1.0 + 0.8 + 0.2 + 86.3 − − 0.0 2010          Oct 
+ 8.3 + 1.6 + 6.8 + 1.0 − 0.0 − 60.8 + 1.9 + 1.0 + 1.0 − 62.8 − − 0.0          Nov 
− 1.5 − 0.3 − 1.2 + 2.8 − 0.0 − 22.6 + 0.9 + 0.4 + 0.5 − 23.5 − − 0.0          Dec 
− 3.5 − 1.2 − 2.3 + 12.0 − 0.2 − 0.4 − 0.3 + 1.1 − 1.3 − 0.2 − − 0.0 2011          Jan 
+ 2.7 − 0.2 + 2.9 − 7.8 + 0.0 − 2.0 + 0.4 + 0.7 − 0.4 − 2.3 − − 0.0          Feb 
− 2.9 + 1.2 − 4.2 + 1.7 − 0.2 + 3.2 − 0.6 + 0.3 − 0.9 + 3.8 − − 0.0          Mar 
− 0.9 − 2.4 + 1.5 + 21.2 − 0.2 + 0.4 − 1.1 + 0.3 − 1.5 + 1.5 − − 0.0          Apr 
+ 6.3 + 1.6 + 4.6 − 23.0 − 0.0 + 3.7 + 1.0 + 0.2 + 0.8 + 2.7 − + 0.0          May
− 3.4 − 3.1 − 0.3 − 9.8 − 0.1 − 2.8 − 2.0 + 0.2 − 2.1 − 0.8 − − 0.0          June
+ 5.5 + 1.1 + 4.4 + 0.4 − 0.3 + 0.2 + 0.5 + 0.7 − 0.2 − 0.4 − − 0.0          July
+ 4.3 + 1.6 + 2.8 − 3.8 + 0.1 − 0.2 + 0.5 + 0.2 + 0.3 − 0.7 − − 0.0          Aug 
+ 2.4 + 0.4 + 1.9 − 3.0 + 0.0 + 0.6 − 0.5 − 0.2 − 0.3 + 1.1 − − 0.0          Sep 
+ 3.1 + 1.1 + 2.1 − 2.7 − 0.2 − 1.3 − 0.7 + 0.7 − 1.5 − 0.6 − + 0.0          Oct 
+ 8.0 + 0.9 + 7.1 + 0.6 + 0.0 + 4.8 + 1.3 + 0.1 + 1.2 + 3.5 − − 0.0          Nov 
+ 1.0 + 1.1 − 0.1 + 1.2 + 0.1 − 1.0 − 0.7 + 0.4 − 1.1 − 0.3 − − 0.0          Dec 
− 1.1 − 1.1 − 0.0 + 0.1 − 0.9 + 4.3 − 1.0 − 0.2 − 0.8 + 5.3 − − 0.1 2012          Jan 
+ 1.1 − 0.9 + 2.0 − 5.9 − 0.2 + 0.6 − 0.6 + 0.2 − 0.8 + 1.2 − − 0.0          Feb 
− 0.4 + 0.6 − 0.9 + 9.7 − 0.2 + 3.4 − 0.8 − 0.2 − 0.6 + 4.3 − − 0.0          Mar 

Deutsche Bundesbank
32  Monthly Report
May 2012
IV Banks
 
6 Lending by banks (MFIs) in Germany to domestic enterprises and households, housing loans,
sectors of economic activity *
 
€ billion
Lending to domestic enterprises and households (excluding holdings of negotiable money market paper and excluding securities portfolios) 1 
of which  
 
Housing loans Lending to enterprises and self-employed persons
 
Whole-sale and Electricity,gas and retail Financial
Mortgage water trade; Agri- Transport- intermedi-
loans supply; repair of culture, ation and ation
secured refuse motor forestry, storage; (excluding
by disposal, vehicles fishing post and MFIs) and
Mortgage residen- Other of which mining and and telecom- insurance
loans, tial real housing Housing Manufac- and Construc- motor- aqua- munica- com-
Period Total total Total estate loans Total loans turing quarrying tion cycles culture tions panies
Lending, total End of year or quarter *
 
2010 2,352.9 1,153.8 1,101.6 907.8 193.8 1,317.2 302.4 134.1 75.5 61.7 120.3 40.3 78.8 157.5
2011          Mar 2,358.7 1,150.4 1,098.9 906.8 192.1 1,325.0 300.5 138.0 76.9 61.8 121.8 40.5 77.3 161.1
         June 2,374.9 1,163.7 1,102.8 909.3 193.4 1,337.2 301.3 137.1 78.9 60.7 121.6 41.6 77.0 173.6         Sep 2,413.7 1,166.3 1,108.3 911.8 196.5 1,367.3 302.1 134.7 81.3 60.9 125.6 42.6 79.2 196.6         Dec 2,415.7 1,167.3 1,114.0 914.0 200.0 1,368.0 305.0 134.6 84.4 59.6 124.0 42.7 80.1 196.4
2012          Mar 2,427.8 1,164.1 1,114.9 912.6 202.2 1,380.7 305.6 137.0 86.3 60.2 125.6 43.1 78.4 202.7
 Short-term lending
2010 282.9 − 7.7 − 7.7 243.2 3.8 32.2 5.2 13.2 39.4 3.0 6.6 78.9
2011          Mar 292.5 − 7.7 − 7.7 253.3 3.9 36.8 5.3 13.7 41.2 3.3 7.1 81.8
         June 306.7 − 7.7 − 7.7 267.0 4.0 38.1 5.8 13.5 41.5 3.7 7.1 93.9
         Sep 325.8 − 7.9 − 7.9 286.0 4.1 36.6 6.3 13.2 43.8 3.8 7.0 112.8
         Dec 316.2 − 7.7 − 7.7 276.7 3.9 33.8 6.0 11.9 41.8 3.3 7.0 111.0
2012          Mar 328.7 − 7.5 − 7.5 289.7 3.8 36.8 6.7 12.7 43.1 3.5 7.1 117.2
 Medium-term lending
2010 238.1 − 32.8 − 32.8 169.1 11.4 27.5 5.2 9.2 13.4 3.9 12.9 29.0
2011          Mar 238.6 − 32.6 − 32.6 169.9 11.1 27.7 5.3 9.0 13.7 3.8 12.3 30.3
         June 234.7 − 33.2 − 33.2 165.8 11.4 26.4 5.3 8.7 13.7 3.9 11.8 30.7
         Sep 245.2 − 33.6 − 33.6 173.4 11.2 26.6 5.6 9.2 15.2 4.1 11.9 34.1
         Dec 247.9 − 34.5 − 34.5 176.7 11.8 28.2 6.0 9.4 15.5 4.0 11.8 35.4
2012          Mar 246.4 − 34.8 − 34.8 175.4 11.9 27.3 6.0 9.4 15.6 4.0 11.4 35.9
 Long-term lending
2010 1,831.8 1,153.8 1,061.1 907.8 153.4 904.9 287.1 74.5 65.1 39.3 67.6 33.4 59.3 49.6
2011          Mar 1,827.6 1,150.4 1,058.7 906.8 151.9 901.8 285.4 73.6 66.3 39.0 66.9 33.4 57.9 49.0
         June 1,833.6 1,163.7 1,061.8 909.3 152.4 904.4 285.9 72.6 67.8 38.5 66.4 34.0 58.1 48.9         Sep 1,842.7 1,166.3 1,066.9 911.8 155.1 907.9 286.9 71.5 69.4 38.5 66.6 34.7 60.3 49.7         Dec 1,851.7 1,167.3 1,071.8 914.0 157.8 914.6 289.3 72.6 72.4 38.3 66.7 35.4 61.2 49.9
2012          Mar 1,852.7 1,164.1 1,072.6 912.6 159.9 915.6 289.9 73.0 73.6 38.1 66.9 35.6 59.9 49.6
 
Lending, total Change during quarter *
 
2011          Q1 + 6.3 − 1.9 − 1.8 − 0.1 − 1.7 + 8.2 − 0.9 + 3.9 + 1.4 + 0.1 + 1.5 + 0.3 − 1.5 + 3.8
         Q2 + 16.4 + 3.3 + 4.0 + 2.2 + 1.8 + 12.2 + 1.1 − 0.9 + 2.0 − 0.9 − 0.2 + 1.0 − 0.3 + 12.5         Q3 + 31.3 + 4.0 + 5.4 + 2.9 + 2.5 + 24.6 + 0.7 − 3.0 + 2.3 − 0.2 + 2.8 + 0.9 + 2.0 + 21.0         Q4 + 1.9 + 1.8 + 5.1 + 2.0 + 3.1 + 0.4 + 2.1 − 1.1 + 3.0 − 1.3 − 1.6 + 0.1 + 1.9 − 0.2
2012          Q1 + 12.1 − 1.3 + 1.1 + 0.5 + 0.6 + 11.9 + 0.9 + 2.3 + 1.9 + 0.5 + 1.6 + 0.4 − 1.6 + 6.3
 Short-term lending
2011          Q1 + 10.0 − − 0.0 − − 0.0 + 10.6 + 0.1 + 4.6 + 0.1 + 0.6 + 1.8 + 0.3 + 0.5 + 3.6
         Q2 + 14.4 − + 0.1 − + 0.1 + 13.7 + 0.1 + 1.3 + 0.6 − 0.2 + 0.3 + 0.4 − 0.0 + 12.1         Q3 + 19.1 − + 0.2 − + 0.2 + 18.9 + 0.1 − 1.3 + 0.5 − 0.3 + 2.3 + 0.1 − 0.1 + 18.7         Q4 − 10.2 − + 0.1 − + 0.1 − 9.3 + 0.0 − 2.8 − 0.2 − 1.3 − 2.0 − 0.5 + 0.0 − 1.8
2012          Q1 + 12.5 − − 0.2 − − 0.2 + 13.0 − 0.0 + 3.0 + 0.7 + 0.8 + 1.3 + 0.2 + 0.1 + 6.2
 Medium-term lending
2011          Q1 − 0.1 − − 0.3 − − 0.3 + 0.1 − 0.3 + 0.2 + 0.1 − 0.2 + 0.3 − 0.1 − 0.6 + 0.7
         Q2 − 3.8 − + 0.7 − + 0.7 − 4.0 + 0.2 − 1.2 − 0.1 − 0.3 + 0.0 + 0.0 − 0.5 + 0.4         Q3 + 3.1 − + 0.3 − + 0.3 + 2.1 − 0.2 − 0.6 + 0.3 + 0.1 + 0.4 + 0.2 − 0.0 + 1.7         Q4 + 3.1 − + 0.9 − + 0.9 + 3.3 + 0.6 + 1.6 + 0.3 + 0.2 + 0.3 − 0.1 − 0.1 + 1.4
2012          Q1 − 1.4 − + 0.3 − + 0.3 − 1.8 + 0.1 − 1.0 + 0.0 − 0.1 + 0.1 + 0.0 − 0.5 + 0.5
 Long-term lending
2011          Q1 − 3.6 − 1.9 − 1.5 − 0.1 − 1.4 − 2.5 − 0.7 − 0.9 + 1.2 − 0.3 − 0.7 + 0.0 − 1.3 − 0.4
         Q2 + 5.8 + 3.3 + 3.2 + 2.2 + 1.0 + 2.6 + 0.7 − 0.9 + 1.5 − 0.4 − 0.5 + 0.6 + 0.2 − 0.1         Q3 + 9.1 + 4.0 + 4.9 + 2.9 + 2.0 + 3.6 + 0.8 − 1.1 + 1.6 + 0.0 + 0.2 + 0.7 + 2.2 + 0.5         Q4 + 9.0 + 1.8 + 4.1 + 2.0 + 2.1 + 6.3 + 1.4 + 0.1 + 2.9 − 0.2 + 0.1 + 0.7 + 1.9 + 0.2
2012          Q1 + 1.1 − 1.3 + 1.1 + 0.5 + 0.5 + 0.8 + 0.9 + 0.3 + 1.2 − 0.2 + 0.2 + 0.2 − 1.3 − 0.3
*Excluding lending by foreign
branches. Breakdown of lending by building and loan from the changes. The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as pro-
associations by areas and sectors estimated. Statistical alterations have been eliminated visional; subsequent alterations, which will appear in the following Monthly Report,

Deutsche Bundesbank
33  Monthly Report
May 2012
IV Banks
 
   
 
 
 
 Lending to
 Lending to employees and other individuals non-profit institutions
Memo items Other lending Services sector (including the professions)
of which of which
Debitbalanceson wage,
Other Lending salaryreal to self- Lending and of which
Housing Holding estate employed to craft Housing pension Housing Instalment
Total companies Total loans Total loans 
3 accounts Total loans   Period enterprises activities persons 2 enterprises
End of year or quarter * Lending, total 
 
649.0 178.5 46.8 175.8 380.4 53.5 1,022.4 795.7 226.7 155.0 13.9 13.3 3.5 2010
647.6 175.8 47.0 178.7 378.2 53.9 1,020.3 794.9 225.4 155.1 13.7 13.5 3.5 2011          Mar 
646.7 178.3 44.6 177.9 379.5 53.6 1,024.2 798.0 226.2 145.7 13.9 13.6 3.5          June646.5 177.9 44.5 178.4 381.8 52.8 1,033.1 802.7 230.3 149.0 14.0 13.4 3.5          Sep 646.3 180.0 42.9 177.9 382.9 51.7 1,034.3 805.6 228.7 147.8 13.5 13.4 3.5          Dec 
647.4 180.5 42.9 178.4 381.9 52.0 1,033.5 805.8 227.7 147.7 13.3 13.6 3.5 2012          Mar 
Short-term lending
64.7 9.6 11.7 13.9 32.2 7.7 38.9 3.9 35.1 2.6 13.9 0.9 0.0 2010
64.2 9.4 12.3 13.5 31.9 8.4 38.2 3.7 34.5 2.6 13.7 0.9 0.0 2011          Mar 
63.3 9.5 11.7 13.2 32.1 8.5 38.7 3.7 35.0 2.5 13.9 1.1 0.0          June62.4 9.5 11.6 13.4 31.1 8.0 38.9 3.8 35.1 2.6 14.0 1.0 0.0          Sep 61.9 9.6 11.1 13.2 30.4 7.2 38.5 3.9 34.7 2.5 13.5 0.9 0.0          Dec 
62.6 9.1 11.9 13.3 30.5 7.9 37.9 3.7 34.3 2.5 13.3 1.0 0.0 2012          Mar 
Medium-term lending
68.1 8.8 10.1 21.3 28.1 3.8 68.5 21.3 47.1 42.0 − 0.5 0.0 2010
67.8 8.6 10.0 22.1 28.0 3.9 68.2 21.4 46.8 41.7 − 0.5 0.0 2011          Mar 
65.3 8.4 8.3 21.6 28.2 3.7 68.3 21.8 46.5 41.5 − 0.5 0.0          June
66.7 8.2 8.5 21.2 30.8 3.6 71.3 22.4 48.9 43.7 − 0.5 0.0          Sep 
66.3 8.1 8.4 20.4 31.2 3.6 70.6 22.7 47.9 42.8 − 0.6 0.0          Dec 
65.8 8.1 7.8 20.0 31.3 3.6 70.4 22.9 47.5 42.3 − 0.6 0.0 2012          Mar 
Long-term lending
516.2 160.2 25.0 140.6 320.1 42.0 915.0 770.5 144.5 110.4 − 11.9 3.5 2010
515.7 157.9 24.7 143.1 318.3 41.6 913.9 769.8 144.1 110.8 − 12.0 3.5 2011          Mar 
518.0 160.4 24.5 143.1 319.2 41.4 917.2 772.5 144.8 101.7 − 12.0 3.4          June
517.3 160.3 24.4 143.8 319.8 41.2 922.9 776.6 146.3 102.7 − 11.9 3.4          Sep 
518.1 162.4 23.4 144.3 321.3 40.9 925.2 779.1 146.1 102.5 − 11.9 3.4          Dec 
519.0 163.3 23.2 145.2 320.0 40.5 925.2 779.2 145.9 102.9 − 12.0 3.5 2012          Mar 
 
Change during quarter * Lending, total 
 
− 1.2 + 0.1 + 0.1 + 0.0 − 2.2 + 0.4 − 2.1 − 0.8 − 1.3 + 0.1 − 0.2 + 0.2 − 0.0 2011          Q1
− 1.0 + 1.4 − 2.5 + 0.2 + 1.3 − 0.4 + 4.1 + 2.9 + 1.1 + 0.4 + 0.1 + 0.1 − 0.0          Q2− 1.3 − 0.5 − 0.2 + 0.3 − 0.1 − 0.8 + 6.8 + 4.7 + 2.1 + 1.3 + 0.2 − 0.1 − 0.0          Q3− 0.3 + 1.3 − 0.9 − 0.3 + 1.0 − 1.1 + 1.6 + 3.1 − 1.5 − 0.7 − 0.6 − 0.1 + 0.0          Q4
+ 0.5 + 0.5 − 0.0 + 0.5 − 1.0 + 0.3 − 0.0 + 0.2 − 0.2 + 0.7 − 0.1 + 0.3 + 0.1 2012          Q1
Short-term lending
− 0.8 − 0.1 + 0.4 − 0.6 − 0.3 + 0.7 − 0.7 − 0.1 − 0.6 − 0.0 − 0.2 + 0.1 − 0.0 2011          Q1
− 0.8 + 0.2 − 0.6 − 0.2 + 0.3 + 0.1 + 0.6 − 0.0 + 0.6 − 0.1 + 0.1 + 0.1 + 0.0          Q2− 0.9 − 0.1 − 0.2 + 0.1 − 1.0 − 0.4 + 0.2 + 0.1 + 0.1 + 0.1 + 0.2 − 0.1 − 0.0          Q3− 0.6 + 0.1 − 0.6 − 0.1 − 0.7 − 0.8 − 0.9 + 0.1 − 0.9 − 0.2 − 0.6 − 0.1 −          Q4
+ 0.7 − 0.5 + 0.8 + 0.0 + 0.1 + 0.6 − 0.6 − 0.2 − 0.4 − 0.0 − 0.1 + 0.1 − 0.0 2012          Q1
Medium-term lending
− 0.3 − 0.2 − 0.1 + 0.4 − 0.2 + 0.1 − 0.3 + 0.1 − 0.4 − 0.3 − + 0.0 − 0.0 2011          Q1
− 2.4 − 0.2 − 1.7 − 0.5 + 0.3 − 0.2 + 0.2 + 0.4 − 0.2 − 0.2 − + 0.0 − 0.0          Q2
+ 0.1 − 0.3 + 0.1 − 0.6 + 0.3 − 0.1 + 1.0 + 0.6 + 0.4 + 0.2 − + 0.0 − 0.0          Q3
− 0.4 − 0.1 − 0.1 − 0.6 + 0.3 + 0.0 − 0.2 + 0.3 − 0.5 − 0.5 − + 0.0 −          Q4
− 0.9 + 0.1 − 0.6 − 0.4 + 0.2 − 0.0 + 0.4 + 0.2 + 0.1 + 0.1 − + 0.1 + 0.0 2012          Q1
Long-term lending
− 0.2 + 0.3 − 0.2 + 0.1 − 1.7 − 0.3 − 1.1 − 0.7 − 0.4 + 0.3 − + 0.1 − 0.0 2011          Q1
+ 2.2 + 1.4 − 0.2 + 0.9 + 0.8 − 0.2 + 3.2 + 2.5 + 0.7 + 0.7 − − 0.0 − 0.0          Q2
− 0.5 − 0.1 − 0.2 + 0.8 + 0.6 − 0.3 + 5.6 + 4.1 + 1.6 + 1.0 − − 0.1 − 0.0          Q3
+ 0.6 + 1.3 − 0.3 + 0.5 + 1.4 − 0.3 + 2.7 + 2.7 + 0.0 − 0.0 − − 0.0 + 0.0          Q4
+ 0.7 + 0.9 − 0.2 + 0.8 − 1.3 − 0.3 + 0.2 + 0.1 + 0.1 + 0.6 − + 0.1 + 0.1 2012          Q1
are not specially marked. 1 Excluding fiduciary loans. 2 Including sole proprietors. 
3 Excluding mortgage loans and housing loans, even in the form of instalment credit. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
34  Monthly Report
May 2012
IV Banks
 
7 Deposits of domestic non-banks (non-MFIs) at banks (MFIs) in Germany*
 
 
€ billion
Time deposits 1,2   Memo item
  
 for more than 1 year 2 Subordinated
 liabilities
for up for up (excluding
to and to and for more Bank negotiable Liabilities
Deposits, Sight including including than Savings savings Fiduciary debt arising
Period total deposits Total 1 year Total 2 years 2 years bonds  4 loans securities) from repos deposits 3 
Domestic non-banks, total End of year or month*
 
2009 2,829.7 1,029.5 1,102.6 339.5 763.1 32.1 731.0 594.5 103.2 43.4 35.6 76.8
2010 2,936.6 1,104.4 1,117.1 329.3 787.8 25.1 762.7 618.2 96.9 37.5 37.2 80.9
2011 3,046.9 1,168.3 1,156.2 386.1 770.2 31.5 738.7 616.1 106.3 36.5 35.8 97.1
2011          Apr 2,948.4 1,127.1 1,099.2 323.6 775.7 26.0 749.7 622.3 99.8 37.0 36.7 84.7
         May 2,976.6 1,125.7 1,129.3 354.4 775.0 26.7 748.3 619.9 101.7 37.0 36.7 102.8
         June 2,980.6 1,123.7 1,136.4 363.7 772.7 26.0 746.7 617.8 102.7 36.7 36.6 103.5
         July 2,976.5 1,130.6 1,125.8 352.4 773.4 27.2 746.2 616.6 103.5 36.6 36.6 87.4
         Aug 3,007.6 1,139.2 1,149.1 374.6 774.5 28.4 746.1 615.0 104.2 36.7 36.4 99.4
         Sep 3,026.3 1,151.3 1,157.3 385.1 772.2 29.2 743.0 613.5 104.3 36.7 36.2 106.0
         Oct 3,027.0 1,160.9 1,148.1 376.8 771.3 30.2 741.1 613.1 105.0 36.7 36.0 104.2
         Nov 3,054.5 1,188.0 1,149.2 377.8 771.4 31.0 740.5 611.5 105.8 36.7 35.9 109.5
         Dec 3,046.9 1,168.3 1,156.2 386.1 770.2 31.5 738.7 616.1 106.3 36.5 35.8 97.1
2012          Jan 3,036.8 1,181.1 1,133.1 366.8 766.3 31.4 734.9 617.2 105.3 35.8 35.2 85.8
         Feb 3,054.9 1,187.1 1,143.5 378.3 765.1 32.5 732.6 619.8 104.6 35.6 34.9 97.0
         Mar 3,049.6 1,188.9 1,136.9 374.4 762.5 33.1 729.4 619.4 104.3 35.3 34.7 91.7
Changes*
2010 + 77.4 + 76.0 − 18.9 − 12.6 − 6.3 − 7.0 + 0.7 + 24.0 − 3.7 − 1.7 + 1.6 + 4.1
2011 + 111.2 + 63.7 + 40.9 + 57.0 − 16.1 + 6.5 − 22.6 − 2.6 + 9.3 − 1.1 − 1.4 + 16.0
2011          Apr + 17.9 + 15.9 + 3.0 + 5.6 − 2.6 + 0.6 − 3.2 − 2.1 + 1.0 − 0.1 − 0.1 + 9.7
         May + 28.3 − 1.4 + 30.1 + 30.8 − 0.7 + 0.7 − 1.4 − 2.4 + 1.9 − 0.1 − 0.1 + 18.1         June + 4.0 − 2.0 + 7.0 + 9.3 − 2.3 − 0.7 − 1.6 − 2.1 + 1.0 − 0.3 − 0.1 + 0.7
         July − 4.4 + 6.6 − 10.6 − 11.3 + 0.7 + 1.2 − 0.6 − 1.2 + 0.8 − 0.1 − 0.0 − 16.4
         Aug + 31.0 + 8.5 + 23.4 + 22.2 + 1.1 + 1.2 − 0.0 − 1.6 + 0.7 + 0.1 − 0.2 + 12.1         Sep + 18.7 + 11.8 + 8.4 + 10.7 − 2.3 + 0.8 − 3.1 − 1.5 + 0.0 − 0.1 − 0.2 + 6.6
         Oct + 0.7 + 9.6 − 9.2 − 8.3 − 0.9 + 1.1 − 2.0 − 0.4 + 0.8 + 0.0 − 0.2 − 1.8
         Nov + 27.5 + 26.8 + 1.1 + 1.0 + 0.1 + 0.8 − 0.7 − 1.1 + 0.7 − 0.0 − 0.1 + 5.3         Dec − 6.2 − 19.8 + 8.4 + 8.3 + 0.1 + 0.5 − 0.4 + 4.6 + 0.5 − 0.2 − 0.2 − 12.4
2012          Jan − 10.4 + 12.9 − 23.4 − 19.2 − 4.2 − 0.1 − 4.1 + 1.1 − 1.0 − 0.7 − 0.5 − 11.3
         Feb + 18.1 + 5.9 + 10.3 + 11.5 − 1.1 + 1.1 − 2.3 + 2.6 − 0.7 − 0.2 − 0.3 + 11.2         Mar − 5.4 + 1.9 − 6.5 − 3.9 − 2.6 + 0.6 − 3.2 − 0.4 − 0.3 − 0.2 − 0.2 − 5.2
Domestic government End of year or month*
2009 129.3 41.8 83.4 43.0 40.4 3.6 36.8 2.6 1.5 35.7 3.9 0.5
2010 153.4 46.1 103.0 47.7 55.3 2.6 52.7 2.8 1.5 34.7 6.2 0.4
2011 168.5 46.2 118.4 69.5 48.8 3.8 45.0 2.4 1.5 34.0 5.9 3.1
2011          Apr 150.8 46.8 99.6 51.3 48.3 2.5 45.9 2.9 1.5 34.4 6.1 0.9
         May 160.9 50.3 106.3 57.5 48.8 2.9 45.9 2.8 1.5 34.4 6.1 2.7
         June 170.4 52.0 114.1 65.8 48.3 2.6 45.7 2.7 1.6 34.1 6.1 6.1
         July 164.1 49.5 110.5 61.6 48.9 3.3 45.7 2.6 1.6 34.0 6.0 0.2
         Aug 169.4 50.4 114.9 66.6 48.3 3.3 45.0 2.6 1.5 34.1 6.0 2.1
         Sep 173.5 52.4 117.1 68.4 48.6 3.4 45.2 2.5 1.5 34.1 6.0 4.4
         Oct 162.9 49.2 109.8 61.2 48.5 3.6 45.0 2.4 1.5 34.1 6.0 3.5
         Nov 167.0 49.5 113.7 64.9 48.8 3.7 45.1 2.4 1.4 34.1 5.9 2.9
         Dec 168.5 46.2 118.4 69.5 48.8 3.8 45.0 2.4 1.5 34.0 5.9 3.1
2012          Jan 171.8 49.1 119.0 71.3 47.7 3.3 44.4 2.3 1.4 33.4 6.0 2.2
         Feb 182.4 55.8 123.0 75.4 47.6 3.5 44.1 2.3 1.4 33.3 6.0 2.8
         Mar 182.4 51.9 126.8 79.0 47.8 3.8 44.0 2.3 1.4 33.2 5.9 1.8
Changes*
2010 + 23.9 + 4.1 + 19.7 + 4.7 + 14.9 − 1.0 + 16.0 + 0.3 − 0.1 − 1.0 + 2.3 − 0.1
2011 + 14.6 + 0.1 + 15.0 + 21.4 − 6.5 + 1.2 − 7.7 − 0.4 + 0.0 − 0.7 − 0.2 + 2.7
2011          Apr − 4.0 − 3.3 − 0.7 + 0.8 − 1.4 + 0.0 − 1.4 + 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.0 + 0.0 − 0.4         May + 10.1 + 3.4 + 6.7 + 6.2 + 0.4 + 0.4 + 0.0 − 0.1 + 0.0 − 0.1 − + 1.7
         June + 9.5 + 1.8 + 7.8 + 8.3 − 0.5 − 0.3 − 0.2 − 0.1 + 0.1 − 0.3 − 0.0 + 3.4
         July − 6.3 − 2.6 − 3.6 − 4.2 + 0.7 + 0.7 − 0.0 − 0.1 + 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 5.9
         Aug + 5.3 + 1.0 + 4.4 + 5.0 − 0.7 + 0.0 − 0.7 − 0.0 − 0.1 + 0.1 − 0.1 + 1.9         Sep + 4.1 + 1.9 + 2.2 + 1.9 + 0.4 + 0.1 + 0.2 − 0.1 − 0.1 − 0.0 + 0.0 + 2.4
         Oct − 10.6 − 3.2 − 7.3 − 7.2 − 0.1 + 0.1 − 0.2 − 0.1 − 0.0 + 0.0 − 0.0 − 1.0
         Nov + 4.1 + 0.3 + 3.9 + 3.7 + 0.2 + 0.1 + 0.1 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.6         Dec + 1.5 − 3.3 + 4.7 + 4.7 + 0.1 + 0.1 − 0.1 − 0.0 + 0.1 − 0.1 + 0.0 + 0.2
2012          Jan + 3.3 + 2.9 + 0.6 + 1.8 − 1.1 − 0.5 − 0.6 − 0.1 − 0.1 − 0.7 + 0.0 − 0.9
         Feb + 10.6 + 6.7 + 4.0 + 4.1 − 0.1 + 0.2 − 0.3 + 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.0 + 0.0 + 0.7         Mar − 0.1 − 3.8 + 3.8 + 3.6 + 0.2 + 0.3 − 0.1 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.1 − 0.1 − 1.0
*See Table IV.2, footnote *; statistical breaks have been eliminated from the specially marked. 1Including subordinated liabilities and liabilities arising from
changes. The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as provisional. registered debt securities. 2Including deposits under savings and loan contracts (see
Subsequent revisions, which appear in the following Monthly Report, are not

Deutsche Bundesbank
35  Monthly Report
May 2012
IV Banks
 
7 Deposits of domestic non-banks (non-MFIs) at banks (MFIs) in Germany * (cont’d)
 
 
€ billion
Time deposits 1,2   Memo item
  
 for more than 1 year 2 Subordinated
 liabilities
for up for up (excluding
to and to and for more Bank negotiable Liabilities
Deposits, Sight including including than Savings savings Fiduciary debt arising
Period total deposits Total 1 year Total 2 years 2 years bonds  4 loans securities) from repos deposits 3 
Domestic enterprises and households End of year or month*
 
2009 2,700.4 987.6 1,019.2 296.5 722.7 28.5 694.2 591.9 101.6 7.7 31.7 76.3
2010 2,783.2 1,058.3 1,014.1 281.6 732.5 22.5 710.0 615.4 95.4 2.9 31.0 80.52011 2,878.4 1,122.0 1,037.9 316.5 721.3 27.7 693.7 613.8 104.8 2.5 29.8 94.0
2011          Apr 2,797.5 1,080.3 999.6 272.3 727.3 23.5 703.8 619.5 98.2 2.6 30.6 83.7
         May 2,815.7 1,075.4 1,023.0 296.9 726.2 23.8 702.4 617.1 100.1 2.6 30.6 100.1         June 2,810.2 1,071.6 1,022.3 297.9 724.4 23.4 701.0 615.1 101.1 2.6 30.5 97.4
         July 2,812.3 1,081.1 1,015.3 290.8 724.5 24.0 700.5 614.0 101.9 2.6 30.6 87.1
         Aug 2,838.2 1,088.7 1,034.3 308.0 726.2 25.1 701.2 612.5 102.7 2.6 30.4 97.3         Sep 2,852.8 1,098.8 1,040.2 316.6 723.6 25.8 697.8 611.0 102.8 2.6 30.2 101.5
         Oct 2,864.1 1,111.6 1,038.3 315.5 722.8 26.6 696.2 610.6 103.6 2.5 30.1 100.7
         Nov 2,887.5 1,138.5 1,035.5 312.9 722.7 27.3 695.4 609.1 104.3 2.6 30.0 106.6         Dec 2,878.4 1,122.0 1,037.9 316.5 721.3 27.7 693.7 613.8 104.8 2.5 29.8 94.0
2012          Jan 2,865.0 1,132.0 1,014.1 295.5 718.6 28.1 690.5 615.0 103.9 2.5 29.3 83.6
         Feb 2,872.5 1,131.3 1,020.5 303.0 717.5 29.0 688.5 617.5 103.2 2.3 28.9 94.1         Mar 2,867.2 1,137.0 1,010.2 295.4 714.7 29.3 685.4 617.1 102.9 2.1 28.8 89.9
Changes*
2010 + 53.5 + 71.9 − 38.6 − 17.3 − 21.3 − 6.0 − 15.3 + 23.8 − 3.6 − 0.7 − 0.7 + 4.2
2011 + 96.6 + 63.6 + 25.9 + 35.5 − 9.6 + 5.2 − 14.9 − 2.2 + 9.3 − 0.3 − 1.2 + 13.3
2011          Apr + 21.8 + 19.2 + 3.7 + 4.9 − 1.2 + 0.6 − 1.7 − 2.1 + 1.1 − 0.1 − 0.1 + 10.1
         May + 18.2 − 4.8 + 23.5 + 24.6 − 1.1 + 0.3 − 1.4 − 2.3 + 1.9 − 0.0 − 0.1 + 16.4         June − 5.5 − 3.8 − 0.7 + 1.0 − 1.8 − 0.4 − 1.4 − 2.0 + 1.0 − 0.0 − 0.1 − 2.7
         July + 1.8 + 9.2 − 7.0 − 7.0 + 0.0 + 0.6 − 0.5 − 1.1 + 0.8 − 0.0 + 0.0 − 10.6
         Aug + 25.7 + 7.5 + 19.0 + 17.2 + 1.8 + 1.1 + 0.7 − 1.5 + 0.8 − 0.0 − 0.2 + 10.3         Sep + 14.7 + 9.9 + 6.2 + 8.8 − 2.6 + 0.7 − 3.3 − 1.5 + 0.1 − 0.0 − 0.2 + 4.2
         Oct + 11.3 + 12.8 − 1.9 − 1.1 − 0.8 + 1.0 − 1.8 − 0.4 + 0.8 − 0.0 − 0.1 − 0.8
         Nov + 23.4 + 26.5 − 2.8 − 2.7 − 0.1 + 0.7 − 0.8 − 1.1 + 0.8 + 0.0 − 0.1 + 5.9         Dec − 7.7 − 16.5 + 3.7 + 3.7 + 0.1 + 0.4 − 0.3 + 4.6 + 0.5 − 0.0 − 0.2 − 12.6
2012          Jan − 13.8 + 10.0 − 24.0 − 21.0 − 3.1 + 0.4 − 3.5 + 1.2 − 0.9 − 0.0 − 0.6 − 10.4
         Feb + 7.5 − 0.7 + 6.4 + 7.4 − 1.0 + 0.9 − 2.0 + 2.5 − 0.7 − 0.2 − 0.3 + 10.5         Mar − 5.3 + 5.7 − 10.3 − 7.5 − 2.8 + 0.3 − 3.1 − 0.4 − 0.3 − 0.1 − 0.1 − 4.2
of which:  Domestic enterprises End of year or month*
2009 1,105.6 336.4 743.6 187.5 556.1 9.1 547.0 5.5 20.2 7.6 21.8 76.3
2010 1,124.3 344.6 755.5 196.0 559.5 7.5 552.0 6.3 17.9 2.8 21.3 80.5
2011 1,156.5 374.8 758.9 222.9 536.0 9.4 526.7 5.6 17.2 2.5 20.3 94.0
2011          Apr 1,121.5 359.3 738.5 186.6 551.8 8.3 543.5 6.4 17.2 2.6 21.0 83.7
         May 1,137.8 354.0 760.1 210.3 549.8 8.6 541.3 6.4 17.4 2.5 20.9 100.1
         June 1,130.0 348.4 757.7 210.2 547.5 8.2 539.3 6.3 17.5 2.5 20.8 97.4
         July 1,123.6 351.9 747.8 200.9 546.9 8.3 538.6 6.3 17.5 2.5 20.9 87.1
         Aug 1,150.5 360.9 765.8 217.5 548.3 9.2 539.1 6.3 17.6 2.5 20.7 97.3
         Sep 1,163.0 370.1 769.2 224.4 544.8 9.6 535.2 6.3 17.5 2.5 20.6 101.5
         Oct 1,168.4 376.9 767.7 224.8 543.0 9.8 533.1 6.2 17.6 2.5 20.5 100.7
         Nov 1,175.3 390.6 761.7 220.2 541.6 9.9 531.7 5.7 17.3 2.5 20.4 106.6
         Dec 1,156.5 374.8 758.9 222.9 536.0 9.4 526.7 5.6 17.2 2.5 20.3 94.0
2012          Jan 1,137.0 381.2 733.2 201.4 531.9 9.3 522.5 5.6 16.9 2.4 19.8 83.6
         Feb 1,134.0 373.1 738.3 209.1 529.2 9.7 519.5 5.7 16.9 2.2 19.7 94.1
         Mar 1,125.8 376.3 727.0 201.1 525.9 9.8 516.1 5.8 16.7 2.1 19.6 89.9
Changes*
2010 − 10.6 + 9.8 − 21.6 + 6.1 − 27.6 − 1.6 − 26.0 + 0.9 + 0.3 − 0.7 − 0.5 + 4.2
2011 + 33.6 + 29.1 + 5.1 + 27.6 − 22.5 + 1.9 − 24.4 − 0.3 − 0.3 − 0.3 − 1.1 + 13.3
2011          Apr + 13.3 + 12.0 + 1.3 + 3.0 − 1.6 + 0.4 − 2.0 + 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.1 − 0.1 + 10.1
         May + 16.4 − 5.3 + 21.6 + 23.6 − 2.0 + 0.2 − 2.2 − 0.1 + 0.2 − 0.0 − 0.1 + 16.4         June − 7.9 − 5.5 − 2.4 − 0.1 − 2.4 − 0.4 − 2.0 − 0.0 + 0.1 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 2.7
         July − 6.7 + 3.2 − 9.9 − 9.3 − 0.5 + 0.2 − 0.7 − 0.0 + 0.0 − 0.0 + 0.0 − 10.6
         Aug + 26.8 + 8.8 + 17.9 + 16.6 + 1.4 + 0.9 + 0.5 + 0.0 + 0.1 − 0.0 − 0.1 + 10.3         Sep + 12.5 + 9.0 + 3.7 + 7.1 − 3.4 + 0.4 − 3.9 − 0.0 − 0.1 − 0.0 − 0.2 + 4.2
         Oct + 5.5 + 6.8 − 1.5 + 0.4 − 1.9 + 0.3 − 2.2 − 0.0 + 0.1 − 0.0 − 0.1 − 0.8
         Nov + 6.9 + 13.3 − 6.0 − 4.6 − 1.4 + 0.1 − 1.5 − 0.1 − 0.3 − − 0.1 + 5.9         Dec − 17.4 − 15.9 − 1.4 + 2.7 − 4.1 − 0.5 − 3.6 − 0.1 − 0.1 − 0.0 − 0.1 − 12.6
2012          Jan − 19.8 + 6.4 − 26.0 − 21.5 − 4.5 − 0.1 − 4.4 + 0.0 − 0.3 − 0.0 − 0.5 − 10.4
         Feb − 3.0 − 8.1 + 5.1 + 7.7 − 2.6 + 0.4 − 3.0 + 0.1 − 0.1 − 0.2 − 0.1 + 10.5         Mar − 8.2 + 3.2 − 11.4 − 8.0 − 3.3 + 0.1 − 3.4 + 0.1 − 0.2 − 0.1 − 0.1 − 4.2
Table IV.12). 3Excluding deposits under savings and loan contracts (see also foot-   
note 2). 4 Including liabilities arising from non-negotiable bearer debt securities.   
   
  

Deutsche Bundesbank
36  Monthly Report
May 2012
IV Banks
 
8 Deposits of domestic households and non-profit institutions at banks (MFIs) in Germany*
 
 
€ billion
Sight deposits Time deposits 1,2 
by creditor group by creditor group
Deposits of Domestic households Domestic households
domestic
householdsand Domestic
non-profit Self- non-profit Self-
employed Other institu- employed Other institutions,
Period total Total Total persons Employees tions Total Total persons Employees individuals individuals
End of year or month*
 
2009 1,594.9 651.3 631.3 112.5 424.6 94.3 19.9 275.6 258.5 24.5 213.2 20.7
2010 1,658.9 713.7 692.4 123.8 471.2 97.4 21.3 258.6 241.4 21.2 203.7 16.4
2011 1,721.9 747.3 724.9 131.5 490.4 103.0 22.4 278.9 261.1 23.3 218.5 19.3
2011          Oct 1,695.7 734.8 711.6 131.2 479.8 100.6 23.1 270.6 252.9 22.9 211.9 18.1
         Nov 1,712.2 747.9 725.7 132.8 490.3 102.6 22.2 273.8 256.3 23.2 214.5 18.7
         Dec 1,721.9 747.3 724.9 131.5 490.4 103.0 22.4 278.9 261.1 23.3 218.5 19.3
2012          Jan 1,728.0 750.8 727.0 133.6 489.1 104.3 23.8 280.9 262.7 23.2 219.9 19.6
         Feb 1,738.5 758.2 734.2 134.1 494.5 105.6 24.0 282.2 263.8 23.0 221.1 19.8
         Mar 1,741.4 760.7 735.4 132.4 496.5 106.6 25.3 283.2 264.8 22.7 221.9 20.1
Changes*
2010 + 64.0 + 62.1 + 60.8 + 11.3 + 40.4 + 9.1 + 1.4 − 17.0 − 17.1 − 3.3 − 9.7 − 4.1
2011 + 63.0 + 34.5 + 33.5 + 7.8 + 19.7 + 6.0 + 1.1 + 20.8 + 20.3 + 2.1 + 15.2 + 3.0
2011          Oct + 5.8 + 6.0 + 3.7 + 3.5 − 0.3 + 0.5 + 2.3 − 0.5 + 1.8 + 0.2 + 1.4 + 0.3
         Nov + 16.5 + 13.2 + 14.1 + 1.6 + 10.5 + 2.0 − 0.9 + 3.2 + 3.3 + 0.3 + 2.5 + 0.5
         Dec + 9.7 − 0.7 − 0.8 − 1.3 + 0.1 + 0.4 + 0.1 + 5.1 + 4.8 + 0.1 + 4.1 + 0.6
2012          Jan + 6.1 + 3.6 + 2.1 + 2.2 − 0.8 + 0.8 + 1.4 + 2.0 + 1.6 − 0.1 + 1.4 + 0.3
         Feb + 10.5 + 7.4 + 7.2 + 0.4 + 5.4 + 1.3 + 0.2 + 1.3 + 1.1 − 0.2 + 1.1 + 0.2
         Mar + 3.0 + 2.5 + 1.2 − 1.7 + 2.0 + 0.9 + 1.3 + 1.0 + 1.0 − 0.3 + 0.9 + 0.4
*See Table IV.2, footnote*; statistical breaks have been eliminated from the changes. revisions, which appear in the following Monthly Report, are not specially
The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as provisional. Subsequent marked. 1Including subordinated liabilities and liabilities arising from registered debt
 
  
9 Deposits of domestic government at banks (MFIs) in Germany, by creditor group
*
 
€ billion
Deposits
   
Federal Government and its special funds  1 State governments
Time deposits Time deposits
Savings Savings
for up deposits Memo for up deposits Memo
Domestic to and for more and bank item to and for more and bank item
government, Sight including than savings Fiduciary Sight including than savings Fiduciary
Period total Total deposits 1 year 1 year bonds 2 loans Total deposits 1 year 1 year bonds 2 loans
End of year or month*
 
2009 129.3 22.2 1.3 3.7 17.1 0.1 17.3 23.1 7.1 5.8 10.1 0.1 18.0
2010 153.4 38.7 5.7 3.3 29.6 0.1 17.0 28.2 8.5 6.7 12.9 0.2 17.2
2011 168.5 37.9 6.2 9.4 22.2 0.1 16.9 34.8 11.4 10.7 12.5 0.2 16.8
2011          Oct 162.9 37.9 9.6 6.1 22.1 0.1 16.9 34.9 11.8 10.4 12.5 0.2 16.8
         Nov 167.0 35.8 6.4 7.2 22.2 0.1 16.9 32.7 12.0 8.0 12.6 0.2 16.8
         Dec 168.5 37.9 6.2 9.4 22.2 0.1 16.9 34.8 11.4 10.7 12.5 0.2 16.8
2012          Jan 171.8 40.9 9.2 10.9 20.8 0.1 16.9 37.7 11.4 13.6 12.5 0.2 16.1
         Feb 182.4 45.2 14.4 10.4 20.4 0.1 16.9 39.7 10.2 16.9 12.5 0.2 16.0
         Mar 182.4 35.6 6.6 8.5 20.4 0.0 16.9 49.3 14.9 21.8 12.5 0.2 16.0
Changes*
2010 + 23.9 + 16.5 + 4.4 − 0.4 + 12.5 + 0.0 − 0.2 + 5.2 + 1.5 + 0.9 + 2.8 + 0.0 − 0.7
2011 + 14.6 − 0.7 + 0.5 + 6.3 − 7.5 + 0.0 − 0.2 + 6.6 + 2.9 + 4.0 − 0.4 + 0.0 − 0.5
2011          Oct − 10.6 − 2.9 − 2.0 − 0.7 − 0.2 + 0.0 + 0.0 − 5.1 − 0.5 − 4.6 − 0.1 − 0.0 + 0.0
         Nov + 4.1 − 2.1 − 3.2 + 1.0 + 0.1 + 0.0 + 0.0 − 2.2 + 0.2 − 2.4 + 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.0
         Dec + 1.5 + 2.0 − 0.2 + 2.3 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.1 + 2.1 − 0.6 + 2.7 − 0.0 + 0.0 − 0.0
2012          Jan + 3.3 + 3.0 + 3.0 + 1.4 − 1.4 − 0.0 − 0.0 + 2.9 + 0.1 + 2.9 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.7
         Feb + 10.6 + 4.4 + 5.2 − 0.5 − 0.4 − 0.0 + 0.0 + 2.0 − 1.3 + 3.3 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.1
         Mar − 0.1 − 9.7 − 7.8 − 1.9 + 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.0 + 9.6 + 4.7 + 5.0 − 0.1 − 0.0 − 0.0
*See Table IV.2, footnote *; excluding deposits of the Treuhand agency and its Telekom AG, and of publicly owned enterprises, which are included in ”Enterprises”.
successor organisations, of the Federal Railways, east German Railways and Federal Statistical breaks have been eliminated from the changes. The figures for the latest
Post Office, and, from 1995, of Deutsche Bahn AG, Deutsche Post AG and Deutsche date are always to be regarded as provisional. Subsequent revisions, which appear in

Deutsche Bundesbank
37  Monthly Report
May 2012
IV Banks
 
   
 
 Savings deposits 3  Memo item
 
 by maturity
 more than 1 year 2 
Subordinated
of which liabilities
Domestic Domestic (excluding
up to and up to and Bank negotiable Liabilities non-profit non-profit
institu- including including more than Domestic institu- savings Fiduciary debt arising
tions 1 year Total 2 years 2 years Total tions bonds  4 loans from repos   Period households securities) 5 
End of year or month*
 
17.2 109.0 166.6 19.4 147.2 586.5 577.5 9.0 81.5 0.1 9.8 − 2009
17.3 85.7 173.0 15.0 158.0 609.1 599.2 9.9 77.5 0.1 9.7 − 201017.8 93.6 185.3 18.3 167.0 608.2 599.0 9.2 87.6 0.1 9.6 − 2011
17.6 90.8 179.8 16.8 163.0 604.4 595.0 9.4 86.0 0.0 9.6 − 2011          Oct 
17.5 92.7 181.1 17.4 163.7 603.4 594.3 9.1 87.0 0.1 9.6 −          Nov 17.8 93.6 185.3 18.3 167.0 608.2 599.0 9.2 87.6 0.1 9.6 −          Dec 
18.2 94.2 186.7 18.8 168.0 609.3 600.1 9.2 86.9 0.0 9.5 − 2012          Jan 
18.4 93.9 188.3 19.3 169.0 611.8 602.4 9.4 86.3 0.0 9.2 −          Feb 18.4 94.4 188.8 19.5 169.3 611.3 601.8 9.5 86.2 0.0 9.2 −          Mar 
Changes*
+ 0.1 − 23.3 + 6.4 − 4.4 + 10.8 + 22.8 + 22.0 + 0.9 − 4.0 − 0.0 − 0.2 + 0.0 2010
+
0.5 + 8.0 + 12.9 + 3.3 + 9.5 − 1.8 − 1.1 − 0.7 + 9.5 − 0.0 − 0.1 − 2011
− 2.3 − 1.5 + 1.0 + 0.6 + 0.4 − 0.4 − 0.3 − 0.0 + 0.7 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 2011          Oct 
− 0.1 + 1.9 + 1.3 + 0.6 + 0.7 − 1.0 − 0.7 − 0.3 + 1.1 + 0.0 − 0.0 −          Nov 
+ 0.3 + 1.0 + 4.2 + 0.9 + 3.3 + 4.7 + 4.7 + 0.1 + 0.5 − 0.0 − 0.0 −          Dec 
+ 0.4 + 0.5 + 1.4 + 0.5 + 1.0 + 1.2 + 1.2 + 0.0 − 0.6 − 0.0 − 0.1 − 2012          Jan 
+ 0.2 − 0.3 + 1.6 + 0.5 + 1.1 + 2.5 + 2.3 + 0.2 − 0.6 − 0.0 − 0.2 −          Feb 
+ 0.1 + 0.5 + 0.5 + 0.2 + 0.3 − 0.5 − 0.6 + 0.1 − 0.1 − 0.0 − 0.0 −          Mar 
securities. — 2Including deposits under savings and loan contracts (see Table 2). 4Including liabilities arising from non-negotiable bearer debt
IV.12). 3Excluding deposits under savings and loan contracts (see also foot-note securities. 5 Included in time deposits. 
 
     
 
Local government and local government associations
(including municipal special-purpose associations) Social security funds
Time deposits 3 Time deposits
Savings Savings
for up deposits Memo for up deposits Memo
to and for more and bank item to and for more and bank item
Sight including than savings Fiduciary Sight including than savings Fiduciary
Total deposits 1 year 1 year bonds 2,4 loans Total deposits 1 year 1 year bonds 2 loans   Period
End of year or month*
 
38.0 20.2 10.3 4.2 3.3 0.4 46.0 13.3 23.1 8.9 0.6 0.0 2009
37.4 19.5 9.9 4.5 3.5 0.4 49.1 12.3 27.9 8.3 0.6 0.0 201039.3 18.1 13.0 5.0 3.2 0.4 56.5 10.5 36.4 9.1 0.4 0.0 2011
35.9 15.3 12.3 5.1 3.2 0.4 54.2 12.6 32.3 8.8 0.4 0.0 2011          Oct 
38.6 17.5 12.9 5.0 3.2 0.4 59.9 13.7 36.8 9.0 0.4 0.0          Nov 39.3 18.1 13.0 5.0 3.2 0.4 56.5 10.5 36.4 9.1 0.4 0.0          Dec 
35.5 14.6 12.6 5.1 3.1 0.4 57.8 13.9 34.2 9.3 0.3 0.0 2012          Jan 
38.4 17.1 13.1 5.2 3.1 0.4 59.0 14.1 35.0 9.6 0.3 0.0          Feb 37.6 16.4 12.8 5.3 3.1 0.4 59.8 14.0 35.8 9.7 0.3 0.0          Mar 
Changes*
− 0.6 − 0.6 − 0.5 + 0.2 + 0.2 − 0.0 + 2.9 − 1.2 + 4.7 − 0.6 − 0.1 − 0.0 2010+ 1.8 − 1.4 + 2.9 + 0.5 − 0.2 − 0.0 + 7.0 − 1.9 + 8.2 + 0.9 − 0.2 − 0.0 2011
− 1.8 − 1.3 − 0.4 − 0.0 − 0.0 − − 0.8 + 0.5 − 1.4 + 0.2 − 0.0 − 2011          Oct 
+ 2.7 + 2.2 + 0.6 − 0.1 − 0.0 − + 5.7 + 1.1 + 4.5 + 0.2 − 0.0 −          Nov 
+ 0.8 + 0.7 + 0.1 − 0.1 + 0.1 − − 3.4 − 3.2 − 0.4 + 0.1 − 0.0 −          Dec 
− 3.9 − 3.6 − 0.3 + 0.1 − 0.1 − + 1.3 + 3.4 − 2.2 + 0.2 − 0.0 − 2012          Jan 
+ 3.0 + 2.5 + 0.4 + 0.1 − 0.0 − 0.0 + 1.3 + 0.2 + 0.8 + 0.3 + 0.0 −          Feb 
− 0.8 − 0.7 − 0.2 + 0.1 − 0.0 − 0.0 + 0.8 − 0.1 + 0.8 + 0.1 − 0.0 − 0.0          Mar 
the following Monthly Report, are not specially marked. 1Federal Railways Fund, non-negotiable bearer debt securities. 3Including deposits under savings and loan
Indemnification Fund, Redemption Fund for Inherited Liabilities, ERP Special Fund, contracts. 4 Excluding deposits under savings and loan contracts (see also footnote 3). 
German Unity Fund, Equalisation of Burdens Fund. 2Including liabilities arising from

Deutsche Bundesbank
38  Monthly Report
May 2012
IV Banks
 
10 Savings deposits and bank savings bonds of banks (MFIs) in Germany sold to non-banks (non-MFIs)*
 
 
€ billion
Savings deposits 1 Bank savings bonds 3  , sold to
of residents of non-residents domestic non-banks
at three months’ at more than three Memo
notice months’ notice item of which
Interest With
of which of which of which credited maturities
Special Special At three on of more
savings savings savings non-banks, than foreign months’
Period Total Total Total Total Total notice deposits total Total 2 years facilities 2 facilities 2 non-banks
End of year or month*
 
2009 604.1 594.5 474.5 379.4 120.0 112.1 9.6 7.0 13.8 118.8 103.2 68.3 15.6
2010 628.2 618.2 512.5 412.3 105.7 96.6 9.9 7.7 10.9 113.5 96.9 72.0 16.6
2011 626.3 616.1 515.3 413.7 100.8 91.3 10.2 7.8 10.0 122.9 106.3 76.1 16.6
2011          Nov 621.5 611.5 509.9 409.6 101.6 92.3 10.0 7.7 0.5 122.2 105.8 76.0 16.4
         Dec 626.3 616.1 515.3 413.7 100.8 91.3 10.2 7.8 6.2 122.9 106.3 76.1 16.6
2012          Jan 627.5 617.2 517.4 414.7 99.9 90.3 10.3 7.9 0.4 121.8 105.3 75.7 16.5
         Feb 630.2 619.8 520.2 417.0 99.6 89.7 10.4 8.0 0.3 120.9 104.6 75.3 16.3
         Mar 629.8 619.4 520.6 416.8 98.8 88.8 10.4 8.0 0.3 120.6 104.3 75.1 16.3
Changes*
2010 + 24.3 + 24.0 + 38.3 + 33.1 − 14.3 − 15.5 + 0.3 + 0.6 . − 2.7 − 3.7 + 6.3 + 1.0
2011 − 2.4 − 2.6 + 1.3 + 0.2 − 3.9 − 4.3 + 0.2 + 0.1 . + 9.4 + 9.3 + 4.0 + 0.2
2011          Nov − 1.0 − 1.1 − 0.2 − 0.2 − 0.9 − 0.9 + 0.1 + 0.1 . + 0.9 + 0.7 − 0.3 + 0.2
         Dec + 4.8 + 4.6 + 5.4 + 4.1 − 0.8 − 1.0 + 0.2 + 0.1 . + 0.7 + 0.5 + 0.0 + 0.2
2012          Jan + 1.2 + 1.1 + 2.1 + 1.0 − 1.0 − 1.0 + 0.1 + 0.1 . − 1.1 − 1.0 − 0.4 − 0.1
         Feb + 2.7 + 2.6 + 3.8 + 3.3 − 1.3 − 1.6 + 0.1 + 0.1 . − 0.9 − 0.7 − 0.4 − 0.1
         Mar − 0.3 − 0.4 + 0.4 − 0.2 − 0.8 − 0.9 + 0.1 + 0.0 . − 0.3 − 0.3 − 0.1 − 0.0
*See Table IV.2, footnote*; statistical breaks have been eliminated from the changes. as time deposits. 2Savings deposits bearing interest at a rate which exceeds the
The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as provisional. Subsequent minimum or basic rate of interest. 3Including liabilities arising from non-negotiable
revisions, which appear in the following Monthly Report, are not specially bearer debt securities. 
marked. 1Excluding deposits under savings and loan contracts, which are classified
 
  
11 Debt securities and money market paper outstanding of banks (MFIs) in Germany
*
 
€ billion
Negotiable bearer debt securities and money market paper Non-negotiable
bearer debt
of which securities and
money market
with maturities of paper 6 Subordinated
up to more than 1 year up to
and including 1 year of which and including 2 years
with
Certifi- of which of which non- maturities
Floating Zero Foreign cates without without more of more negotiable negotiable
rate coupon currency of a nominal a nominal than than debt debt
Total bonds 1 deposit Total Total 2 years Total 2 years securities securities bonds 1,2 bonds 3,4 guarantee 5 guarantee 5 
Period
End of year or month*
 
2009 1,529.8 380.6 43.9 317.4 70.4 115.9 . 105.8 . 1,308.2 0.9 0.6 46.1 1.8
2010 1,435.1 287.2 27.8 359.2 82.8 97.0 4.6 56.8 6.5 1,281.4 0.7 0.6 43.9 1.5
2011 1,375.4 303.9 26.8 366.8 75.3 95.2 3.0 53.6 4.5 1,226.6 0.6 0.4 43.2 1.5
2011          Nov 1,377.8 303.9 26.2 357.4 80.1 97.8 3.6 54.8 5.0 1,225.3 0.5 0.4 43.3 1.5
         Dec 1,375.4 303.9 26.8 366.8 75.3 95.2 3.0 53.6 4.5 1,226.6 0.6 0.4 43.2 1.5
2012          Jan 1,339.6 302.8 23.5 358.3 73.3 91.8 3.1 54.4 4.8 1,193.4 0.9 0.3 43.2 1.5
         Feb 1,344.0 303.0 26.2 354.2 69.9 89.3 3.1 55.7 4.9 1,199.0 1.3 0.3 42.1 1.3
         Mar 1,336.2 302.3 26.2 358.7 70.4 90.7 3.2 52.5 4.7 1,193.0 0.4 0.3 39.9 1.3
Changes*
2010 − 94.2 − 92.8 − 9.8 + 41.9 + 12.4 − 18.8 . − 48.9 . − 26.4 − 0.2 − 0.0 − 2.1 − 0.3
2011 − 59.0 + 16.4 − 4.1 + 8.1 − 7.5 − 2.1 − 1.6 − 2.9 − 2.0 − 54.0 − 0.0 − 0.2 − 0.8 − 0.0
2011          Nov + 9.1 + 2.4 + 0.9 + 11.1 + 5.2 + 8.0 − 0.1 + 1.5 − 0.2 − 0.3 + 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.1 + 0.0         Dec − 2.4 + 0.1 + 0.7 + 9.4 − 4.8 − 2.3 − 0.6 − 1.5 − 0.5 + 1.4 + 0.2 − 0.0 − 0.1 + 0.0
2012          Jan − 35.8 − 1.2 − 3.9 − 8.5 − 2.1 − 3.4 + 0.1 + 0.8 + 0.3 − 33.2 + 0.3 − 0.0 + 0.1 − 0.0
         Feb + 4.4 + 0.2 + 2.7 − 4.0 − 3.3 − 2.5 + 0.0 + 1.2 + 0.1 + 5.6 + 0.4 + 0.0 − 1.1 − 0.2
         Mar − 8.5 − 0.7 + 0.0 + 3.9 + 0.4 + 0.7 + 0.1 − 3.1 − 0.2 − 6.1 − 0.3 + 0.0 − 2.3 + 0.0
*See Table IV.2, footnote*; statistical breaks have been eliminated from the coupon bonds denominated in foreign currencies. 4Bonds denominated in
changes. The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as provisional. non-euro-area currencies. 5Negotiable bearer debt securities respectively money
Subsequent revisions, which appear in the following Monthly Report, are not market paper with a nominal guarantee of less than 100%. 6Non-negotiable
specially marked. 1Including debt securities denominated in foreign bearer debt securities are classified among bank savings bonds (see also Table IV.10,
currencies. 2Issue value when floated. 3Including floating rate notes and zero footnote 2). 

Deutsche Bundesbank
39  Monthly Report
May 2012
IV  Banks
  
12 Building  and  loan  associations (MFIs) in Germany *)
Interim statements
  
€ billion
Lending to banks (MFIs)
Lending to non-banks (non-MFIs) Deposits of banks Deposits of non-
(MFIs) 5 banks (non-MFIs)
Credit Building loans Secur- Memo
bal- item ities (in-
ances cluding Bearer New
and Loans Treasury Deposits Deposits debt Capital con-
Num- loans under bills under under secur- (includ- tractsber (ex- Bank savings Interim and savings savings ities ing pub- enteredof Balance cluding debt and loan and Other Treasury and loan Sight and loan Sight and out- lished into in
End of sheet building Building secur- con- bridging building discount con- and time con- time de- stand- re- year or associ-
year/month ations loans 
2 ities 3 tracts loans loans tracts deposits tracts posits  6 ing month 8 total 13 loans) 1 paper) 4 serves) 7 
All  building  and  loan  associations
2011 23 197.5 41.4 0.0 17.6 27.1 74.2 15.9 13.0 0.7 22.8 136.7 6.9 5.4 8.3 99.2
2012          Jan 23 198.2 42.3 0.0 17.5 26.9 74.4 15.8 13.1 0.7 23.5 137.1 6.7 5.4 8.4 7.6
         Feb 23 198.1 42.5 0.0 17.5 26.7 74.5 15.7 13.1 0.7 22.9 137.4 6.6 5.4 8.4 7.6
         Mar 23 198.9 42.6 0.0 17.8 26.5 74.9 15.9 13.1 0.7 23.0 137.8 6.6 5.4 8.4 8.5
Private  building  and  Ioan  associations
  
2012          Jan 13 142.2 25.0 0.0 12.0 17.6 59.2 14.1 7.1 0.4 20.4 90.6 6.5 5.4 5.7 4.9
         Feb 13 142.1 25.0 0.0 11.9 17.4 59.3 14.0 7.1 0.4 20.0 90.9 6.4 5.4 5.7 4.8         Mar 13 142.8 25.1 0.0 12.2 17.4 59.7 14.1 7.0 0.5 20.1 91.2 6.4 5.4 5.7 5.2
Public  building  and  Ioan  associations
  
2012          Jan 10 56.0 17.4 0.0 5.6 9.3 15.2 1.7 6.1 0.3 3.1 46.5 0.2 − 2.7 2.8
         Feb 10 56.0 17.5 0.0 5.5 9.2 15.2 1.7 6.1 0.3 2.9 46.6 0.2 − 2.7 2.8         Mar 10 56.2 17.5 0.0 5.6 9.1 15.3 1.8 6.1 0.3 2.9 46.6 0.2 − 2.7 3.3
Trends in building and loan association business
  
€ billion
Changes in deposits
Capital promised Capital disbursed Disbursement Interest and
under savings and commitments repayments
loan contracts Allocations outstanding at received on
end of period building loans 10 
Deposits under Loans under
Repay- savings and savings and
ments loan contracts loan contracts 9 Newly
Interest of granted
credited interim deposits of which of which
on under Applied Applied and ofwhich of Memo Amounts deposits
cancelled to settle- to settle- bridging
under savings of ment of ment of loans Under which item paid intosavings savings and which interim interim and alloc- Repay- Housing
and and loan loan Net and and other ated ments bonuses
loan ac- con- con- alloca- bridging bridging building con- during re-
Period tracts tracts Total Total Total loans Total loans loans Total tracts Total quarter counts 
9 tions 11 ceived 12 
All  building  and  loan  associations
2011 27.6 2.5 6.1 46.2 31.0 40.9 18.1 4.4 8.2 4.1 14.6 12.1 7.5 11.0 9.3 0.5
2012          Jan 2.3 0.0 0.5 3.4 2.4 3.0 1.4 0.3 0.6 0.3 1.0 12.0 7.5 0.9 0.0
         Feb 2.2 0.0 0.6 3.7 2.5 2.8 1.3 0.3 0.5 0.3 1.0 12.5 7.7 0.9 0.0
         Mar 2.5 0.0 0.6 4.1 2.6 3.5 1.6 0.3 0.6 0.3 1.3 12.6 7.6 1.0 ... 0.0
Private  building  and  Ioan  associations
  
2012          Jan 1.5 0.0 0.3 2.4 1.7 2.2 1.0 0.3 0.4 0.2 0.8 7.6 4.1 0.6 0.0
         Feb 1.4 0.0 0.3 2.4 1.4 2.0 0.9 0.2 0.3 0.2 0.7 7.9 4.1 0.6 0.0
         Mar 1.7 0.0 0.3 3.0 1.7 2.5 1.1 0.3 0.4 0.2 1.0 8.1 4.1 0.6 ... 0.0
Public  building  and  Ioan  associations
  
2012          Jan 0.8 0.0 0.2 0.9 0.7 0.8 0.4 0.1 0.2 0.1 0.2 4.4 3.4 0.3 0.0
         Feb 0.8 0.0 0.3 1.3 1.1 0.9 0.4 0.1 0.2 0.1 0.2 4.6 3.6 0.3 0.0
         Mar 0.8 0.0 0.3 1.2 0.9 1.0 0.5 0.1 0.2 0.1 0.3 4.5 3.5 0.3 ... 0.0
*Excluding assets and liabilities and/or transactions of foreign branches. The figures general banking risks. 8Total amount covered by the contracts; only contracts newly
for the latest date are always to be regarded as provisional. Subsequent revisions, entered into, for which the contract fee has been fully paid. Increases in the sumwhich appear in the following Monthly Report, are not specially marked. 1Including contracted count as new contracts. 9For disbursements of deposits under savings
postal giro account balances, claims on building and loan associations, claims arising and loan contracts arising from the allocation of contracts see “Capitalfrom registered debt securities and central bank credit balances. 2Loans under disbursed“. 10Including housing bonuses credited. 11Only allocations accepted by
savings and loan contracts and interim and bridging loans. 3Including money market the beneficiaries; including allocations applied to settlement of interim and bridging
paper and small amounts of other securities issued by banks. 4Including equalisation loans. 12The amounts already credited to the accounts of savers or borrowers are
claims. 5Including liabilities to building and loan associations. 6Including small also included in “Amounts paid into savings and loan accounts“ and “Interest and
amounts of savings deposits. 7Including participation rights capital and fund for repayments received on building loans“. 13 See Table IV.2, footnote 1. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
40  Monthly Report
May 2012
IV  Banks
  
13 Assets and liabilities of the foreign branches and foreign subsidiaries of German banks (MFIs) *
  
  
€ billion
Number of Lending to banks (MFIs) Lending to non-banks (non-MFIs) Other  assets 7 
Loans Credit  balances and loans
German   
banks(MFIs)   with of which
foreign foreign Derivative
branches Money Money financial
branches  1 
and/or and/or market to to market instruments
foreign foreign Balance paper, German foreign paper, in the
subsi- subsi- sheet German Foreign secur- non- non- secur- trading
Period diaries diaries total 7 Total Total banks banks Total Total banks banks ities  2 Total portfolio ities 2,3 
Foreign  branches End of year or month *
  
2009 51 211 1,461.6 579.2 539.1 210.1 328.9 40.2 691.5 534.7 20.7 514.0 156.7 190.9 −
2010 55 212 2,226.3 591.4 564.8 232.0 332.8 26.6 696.7 532.5 27.5 505.0 164.2 938.2 633.9
2011 56 209 2,316.6 603.9 584.9 199.1 385.8 19.0 642.5 504.3 23.2 481.0 138.2 1,070.2 885.0
2011          May 55 212 2,023.3 579.5 556.2 204.0 352.2 23.3 682.3 526.8 24.9 501.9 155.6 761.5 600.1
         June 55 211 1,962.2 533.9 511.8 179.1 332.7 22.1 664.5 509.9 24.5 485.3 154.6 763.8 600.8
         July 55 211 2,028.0 526.1 503.4 182.4 321.0 22.7 676.6 523.5 25.0 498.5 153.1 825.3 651.9
         Aug 55 213 2,181.7 562.0 539.9 193.1 346.8 22.1 680.7 527.2 24.6 502.7 153.4 939.1 772.8
         Sep 55 210 2,445.8 613.7 592.3 194.2 398.1 21.4 700.2 545.6 24.5 521.1 154.6 1,131.8 957.1
         Oct 56 210 2,236.0 564.4 543.6 185.5 358.1 20.8 688.0 547.2 24.0 523.2 140.8 983.6 819.2
         Nov 56 210 2,291.2 576.4 555.1 181.5 373.6 21.4 683.5 541.5 23.8 517.7 142.0 1,031.3 853.4
         Dec 56 209 2,316.6 603.9 584.9 199.1 385.8 19.0 642.5 504.3 23.2 481.0 138.2 1,070.2 885.0
2012          Jan 56 211 2,336.3 632.7 614.4 223.4 391.0 18.3 668.0 529.0 22.9 506.1 139.0 1,035.7 836.8
         Feb 56 211 2,328.3 653.0 634.6 212.3 422.4 18.4 655.2 518.8 21.9 496.8 136.4 1,020.1 797.4
Changes *
2010 + 4 + 1 +695.5 − 8.7 + 5.5 + 21.9 − 16.4 − 14.2 − 36.3 − 35.6 + 6.8 − 42.4 − 0.7 +740.6 −
2011 + 1 − 3 + 56.9 − 4.6 + 3.2 − 32.9 + 36.2 − 7.9 − 68.9 − 40.9 − 4.3 − 36.7 −28.0 +130.4 + 251.0
2011          June − − 1 − 55.9 − 44.1 − 42.9 − 24.9 − 18.1 − 1.2 − 14.4 − 14.1 − 0.4 − 13.7 − 0.4 + 2.6 + 0.7
         July − − + 52.3 − 13.3 − 13.8 + 3.3 − 17.1 + 0.5 + 5.0 + 8.0 + 0.4 + 7.6 − 3.0 + 60.6 + 51.1
         Aug − + 2 +161.4 + 38.4 + 38.9 + 10.7 + 28.2 − 0.5 + 8.7 + 7.4 − 0.4 + 7.8 + 1.3 +114.4 + 120.9
         Sep − − 3 +221.9 + 32.2 + 33.2 + 1.1 + 32.1 − 1.1 − 1.3 + 1.7 − 0.1 + 1.8 − 3.1 +191.0 + 184.3
         Oct + 1 − −184.7 − 36.5 − 36.1 − 8.7 − 27.4 − 0.4 − 0.6 + 10.9 − 0.5 + 11.4 −11.5 −147.7 − 137.9
         Nov − − + 26.3 − 1.5 − 1.9 − 4.0 + 2.2 + 0.3 − 18.7 − 17.1 − 0.2 − 16.9 − 1.6 + 46.5 + 34.2
         Dec − − 1 − 0.9 + 16.0 + 18.6 + 17.6 + 0.9 − 2.6 − 54.6 − 48.4 − 0.6 − 47.8 − 6.2 + 37.6 + 31.6
2012          Jan − + 2 + 30.1 + 33.9 + 34.5 + 24.3 + 10.2 − 0.6 + 30.3 + 28.6 − 0.3 + 28.9 + 1.7 − 34.1 − 48.2
         Feb − − + 8.7 + 27.5 + 27.4 − 11.1 + 38.5 + 0.1 − 4.3 − 3.3 − 1.0 − 2.3 − 1.0 − 14.5 − 39.3
    
Foreign  subsidiaries End of year or month *
  
2009 36 97 474.1 205.4 157.0 87.4 69.6 48.4 217.0 154.7 38.7 115.9 62.4 51.7 −
2010 37 93 495.1 220.9 178.7 98.8 79.9 42.1 218.3 168.8 37.7 131.2 49.5 55.9 −
2011 35 87 478.6 210.3 172.8 95.3 77.5 37.5 210.5 165.1 35.6 129.5 45.5 57.7 −
2011          May 36 93 495.2 225.8 186.6 99.7 86.8 39.3 214.2 165.7 35.9 129.8 48.5 55.1 −
         June 36 93 481.8 216.0 177.0 99.1 77.9 39.0 213.1 165.1 36.5 128.6 47.9 52.8 −
         July 35 91 480.7 211.3 172.8 100.2 72.7 38.5 215.9 167.3 36.6 130.7 48.6 53.5 −
         Aug 35 89 478.6 220.9 182.5 103.0 79.5 38.4 207.9 160.4 36.4 124.0 47.5 49.7 −
         Sep 35 89 493.1 225.6 188.5 107.1 81.4 37.1 214.2 167.9 36.6 131.3 46.2 53.3 −
         Oct 35 88 486.8 221.4 185.0 106.8 78.2 36.3 212.4 166.8 36.5 130.3 45.6 53.0 −
         Nov 35 88 491.6 225.4 188.8 107.2 81.6 36.6 212.1 167.0 36.6 130.3 45.1 54.1 −
         Dec 35 87 478.6 210.3 172.8 95.3 77.5 37.5 210.5 165.1 35.6 129.5 45.5 57.7 −
2012          Jan 35 86 472.7 208.2 171.5 92.6 78.9 36.7 212.0 165.8 35.0 130.8 46.2 52.4 −
         Feb 35 86 470.0 209.8 174.1 93.7 80.4 35.7 210.1 164.2 34.3 129.8 45.9 50.1 −
Changes *
2010 + 1 − 4 + 9.2 + 9.0 + 17.8 + 11.4 + 6.4 − 8.8 − 3.8 + 9.2 − 1.1 + 10.3 −12.9 + 3.9 −
2011 − 2 − 6 − 20.1 − 12.2 − 7.2 − 3.5 − 3.7 − 5.0 − 9.6 − 5.5 − 2.1 − 3.4 − 4.0 + 1.6 −
2011          June − − − 13.0 − 9.6 − 9.3 − 0.6 − 8.7 − 0.2 − 1.1 − 0.6 + 0.6 − 1.1 − 0.6 − 2.3 −
         July − 1 − 2 − 3.5 − 5.6 − 4.8 + 1.1 − 5.9 − 0.8 + 1.5 + 0.8 + 0.1 + 0.7 + 0.6 + 0.7 −
         Aug − − 2 − 0.8 + 10.2 + 10.1 + 2.9 + 7.2 + 0.1 − 7.3 − 6.2 − 0.2 − 6.0 − 1.1 − 3.7 −
         Sep − − + 10.2 + 2.3 + 4.4 + 4.1 + 0.4 − 2.1 + 4.6 + 5.8 + 0.2 + 5.7 − 1.2 + 3.3 −
         Oct − − 1 − 3.4 − 2.8 − 2.5 − 0.3 − 2.2 − 0.3 − 0.5 + 0.2 − 0.1 + 0.3 − 0.7 − 0.1 −
         Nov − − + 1.3 + 2.1 + 2.5 + 0.4 + 2.1 − 0.3 − 1.7 − 1.3 + 0.1 − 1.4 − 0.4 + 0.9 −
         Dec − − 1 − 16.2 − 16.6 − 17.1 − 11.9 − 5.2 + 0.5 − 3.1 − 3.3 − 1.1 − 2.3 + 0.3 + 3.4 −
2012          Jan − − 1 − 4.7 − 1.4 − 0.8 − 2.7 + 1.9 − 0.6 + 1.9 + 1.2 − 0.6 + 1.8 + 0.7 − 5.2 −
         Feb − − − 0.8 + 2.5 + 3.2 + 1.1 + 2.1 − 0.7 − 1.1 − 0.8 − 0.7 − 0.2 − 0.3 − 2.2 −
*In this table “foreign“ also includes the country of domicile of the foreign branches the flow figures for the foreign subsidiaries.) The figures for the latest date are
and foreign subsidiaries. Statistical revisions have been eliminated from the changes. always to be regarded as provisional; subsequent revisions, which appear in the(Breaks owing to changes in the reporting population have not been eliminated from following Monthly Report, are not specially marked. 1Several branches in a given

Deutsche Bundesbank
41  Monthly Report
May 2012
IV  Banks
  
      
  
Deposits Other  liabilities 6,7 
of banks (MFIs) of non-banks (non-MFIs)
German non-banks 4 
Money
market of whichpaper Derivativeand debt financial
Medium Working instruments
securities
and out- capital in the
German Foreign Short- long- Foreign stand- and own trading
Total Total banks Total Total term term ing 5 funds Total portfolio   Period banks non-banks
End of year or month * Foreign  branches
  
1,125.9 798.0 449.6 348.4 327.9 37.4 33.8 3.5 290.5 157.5 33.9 144.4 − 2009
1,131.3 751.9 398.2 353.7 379.4 44.9 39.2 5.7 334.5 187.1 34.7 873.3 648.7 20101,179.6 814.0 406.6 407.4 365.6 35.9 30.3 5.6 329.7 141.2 38.6 957.2 880.2 2011
1,134.5 761.8 394.7 367.1 372.7 40.4 35.1 5.3 332.3 172.7 36.6 679.5 594.1 2011          May
1,090.2 715.1 384.0 331.0 375.2 40.2 35.0 5.2 334.9 163.3 36.9 671.8 594.0          June
1,099.1 724.7 386.4 338.2 374.5 38.7 33.4 5.2 335.8 162.7 37.1 729.1 653.2          July
1,148.4 780.4 404.2 376.2 368.0 39.0 33.8 5.2 328.9 153.9 37.2 842.3 766.3          Aug 1,212.6 826.7 413.9 412.8 385.9 38.0 32.6 5.4 347.9 156.2 37.7 1,039.3 955.4          Sep 
1,163.5 774.3 392.6 381.7 389.2 39.6 34.1 5.5 349.6 140.0 38.1 894.4 812.0          Oct 
1,172.8 782.0 403.3 378.7 390.8 36.9 31.3 5.6 353.9 141.3 38.3 938.8 843.1          Nov 1,179.6 814.0 406.6 407.4 365.6 35.9 30.3 5.6 329.7 141.2 38.6 957.2 880.2          Dec 
1,247.4 873.2 439.0 434.2 374.1 35.1 29.3 5.8 339.0 140.8 38.5 909.7 828.8 2012          Jan 
1,265.7 870.1 413.4 456.7 395.6 32.7 25.9 6.9 362.9 140.2 38.8 883.6 792.4          Feb 
Changes *
− 34.9 − 65.3 − 50.8 − 14.5 + 30.3 + 7.5 + 5.4 + 2.2 + 22.8 + 29.7 + 0.8 + 700.0 − 2010
+ 27.0 + 50.1 + 8.4 + 41.7 − 23.1 − 9.0 − 8.9 − 0.0 − 14.2 − 45.8 + 3.9 + 71.9 + 231.5 2011
− 41.1 − 45.4 − 10.7 − 34.7 + 4.3 − 0.2 − 0.1 − 0.1 + 4.5 − 9.4 + 0.3 − 5.6 − 0.1 2011          June
− 0.0 + 5.0 + 2.4 + 2.6 − 5.0 − 1.5 − 1.5 − 0.0 − 3.4 − 0.6 + 0.2 + 52.7 + 59.2          July
+ 54.7 + 58.4 + 17.7 + 40.6 − 3.6 + 0.4 + 0.4 − 0.0 − 4.0 − 8.8 + 0.1 + 115.4 + 113.1          Aug + 34.9 + 29.2 + 9.8 + 19.4 + 5.7 − 1.0 − 1.2 + 0.2 + 6.7 + 2.3 + 0.6 + 184.1 + 189.1          Sep 
− 31.9 − 42.0 − 21.3 − 20.7 + 10.1 + 1.5 + 1.5 + 0.1 + 8.6 − 16.2 + 0.4 − 137.0 − 143.4          Oct 
− 11.0 − 3.6 + 10.6 − 14.2 − 7.4 − 2.7 − 2.8 + 0.1 − 4.7 + 1.3 + 0.2 + 35.8 + 31.1          Nov − 11.3 + 22.6 + 3.3 + 19.3 − 33.8 − 0.9 − 1.0 + 0.0 − 32.9 − 0.1 + 0.2 + 10.2 + 37.1          Dec 
+ 75.5 + 63.7 + 32.5 + 31.2 + 11.8 − 0.8 − 1.0 + 0.2 + 12.6 − 0.4 − 0.1 − 44.9 − 51.4 2012          Jan 
+ 30.7 + 4.3 − 25.6 + 29.9 + 26.4 − 2.4 − 3.5 + 1.1 + 28.8 − 0.6 + 0.3 − 21.6 − 36.4          Feb 
  
  
End of year or month * Foreign  subsidiaries
  
377.6 218.5 125.4 93.1 159.1 37.0 29.6 7.4 122.1 33.3 24.3 38.9 − 2009
387.4 221.1 136.4 84.7 166.3 31.0 23.6 7.3 135.3 28.9 31.8 46.9 − 2010377.5 229.6 142.4 87.2 147.9 26.7 19.8 6.9 121.2 25.1 30.8 45.2 − 2011
393.9 232.0 139.8 92.2 161.9 29.8 22.4 7.3 132.1 24.7 30.5 46.1 − 2011          May
384.4 222.0 134.2 87.8 162.5 30.2 22.9 7.3 132.2 24.6 30.5 42.3 −          June
379.0 220.6 133.7 86.9 158.5 30.8 23.4 7.4 127.7 25.5 30.6 45.6 −          July
377.4 218.3 131.1 87.2 159.1 30.6 23.7 7.0 128.5 25.6 30.4 45.2 −          Aug 
390.8 227.3 134.3 93.0 163.5 30.8 23.8 7.0 132.8 25.6 30.6 46.1 −          Sep 
384.5 223.7 135.1 88.7 160.8 30.1 23.1 6.9 130.7 25.1 30.6 46.6 −          Oct 
388.1 227.8 136.5 91.3 160.3 29.5 22.5 7.0 130.8 25.3 31.2 47.0 −          Nov 
377.5 229.6 142.4 87.2 147.9 26.7 19.8 6.9 121.2 25.1 30.8 45.2 −          Dec 
371.2 219.7 131.9 87.8 151.5 29.0 22.1 6.9 122.4 25.0 30.1 46.4 − 2012          Jan 
368.2 215.8 129.6 86.2 152.4 28.9 22.1 6.9 123.4 24.9 30.6 46.4 −          Feb 
Changes *
+ 1.5 − 1.7 + 11.0 − 12.7 + 3.2 − 6.0 − 5.9 − 0.1 + 9.2 − 4.4 + 7.5 + 4.6 − 2010
− 12.5 + 7.1 + 6.0 + 1.1 − 19.6 − 4.2 − 3.8 − 0.4 − 15.3 − 3.8 − 1.0 − 2.8 − 2011
− 9.1 − 9.9 − 5.7 − 4.2 + 0.8 + 0.5 + 0.5 − 0.0 + 0.3 − 0.1 − 0.0 − 3.8 − 2011          June
− 6.9 − 2.2 − 0.4 − 1.8 − 4.7 + 0.5 + 0.5 + 0.1 − 5.3 + 0.8 + 0.1 + 2.5 −          July
− 0.7 − 1.8 − 2.6 + 0.8 + 1.1 − 0.1 + 0.3 − 0.4 + 1.2 + 0.1 − 0.3 + 0.1 −          Aug 
+ 9.7 + 7.3 + 3.2 + 4.1 + 2.4 + 0.1 + 0.1 + 0.0 + 2.3 + 0.1 + 0.2 + 0.2 −          Sep 
− 4.0 − 2.4 + 0.8 − 3.2 − 1.6 − 0.7 − 0.6 − 0.1 − 0.9 − 0.5 − 0.0 + 1.2 −          Oct 
+ 0.8 + 2.8 + 1.4 + 1.3 − 2.0 − 0.6 − 0.7 + 0.1 − 1.3 + 0.2 + 0.7 − 0.3 −          Nov 
− 13.1 + 0.6 + 5.9 − 5.4 − 13.6 − 2.7 − 2.6 − 0.1 − 10.9 − 0.2 − 0.4 − 2.6 −          Dec 
− 5.2 − 9.3 − 10.5 + 1.2 + 4.2 + 2.3 + 2.3 + 0.0 + 1.9 − 0.1 − 0.8 + 1.4 − 2012          Jan 
− 1.7 − 3.2 − 2.3 − 0.9 + 1.5 − 0.1 − 0.0 − 0.1 + 1.6 − 0.1 + 0.5 + 0.5 −          Feb 
country of domicile are regarded as a single branch. 2Treasury bills, Treasury securities. 5Issues of negotiable and non-negotiable debt securities and money
discount paper and other money market paper, debt securities. 3Including own debt market paper. 6 Including subordinated liabilities. 7 See also Table IV.2, footnote  1. 
securities. 4Excluding subordinated liabilities and non-negotiable debt

Deutsche Bundesbank
42  Monthly Report
May 2012
V  Minimum reserves
 
1  Reserve ratios
Germany Euro area
 
% of liabilities subject to reserve requirements % of reserve base  1 
Sight Time
Applicable from liabilities liabilities Savings deposits Applicable from Ratio
1995  Aug 1 2    2    1.5    1999  Jan 1 2    
 2012  Jan 18 1    
 
  
1Article 3 of the Regulation of the European Central Bank on the application of
minimum reserves (excluding liabilities to which a reserve ratio of 0% applies pur-
suant to Article 4 (1)). 
 
  
2  Reserve maintenance in Germany up to the end of 1998
− pursuant to the Minimum Reserves Order of the Bundesbank 
 
DM million
Liabilities subject to reserve requirements Excess reserves 4 
Monthly Required % of the
average 1 Total Sight liabilities Time liabilities Savings deposits reserves  2 Level Deficiencies Actual reserves 3 required  reserves
1995          Dec 2,066,565 579,337 519,456 967,772 36,492 37,337 845 2.3 3.1
1996          Dec 2,201,464 655,483 474,342 1,071,639 38,671 39,522 851 2.2 4.3
1997          Dec 2,327,879 734,986 476,417 1,116,477 40,975 41,721 745 1.8 3.3
1998          Dec 2,576,889 865,444 564,878 1,146,567 45,805 46,432 627 1.4 3.8
1Pursuant to sections 5 to 7 of the Minimum Reserves Order. 2Amount after tutions subject to reserve requirements on their giro accounts at the Bundesbank.
applying the reserve ratios to the liabilities subject to reserve requirements (section 5 4 Actual reserves less required reserves. 
(1) of the Minimum Reserves Order). 3Average credit balances of the credit insti-
  
3  Reserve maintenance in the euro area
− from 1999, pursuant to the ECB Regulation on the application of minimum reserves in accordance with
Article 19.1 of the Statute of the ESCB 
 
Maintenance Required reserves
period before deduction Required reserves
beginning in 1 of lump-sum Lump-sum after deduction of
Reserve base 2 allowance 3 allowance 4 lump-sum allowance Current account 5 Excess reserves 6 Deficiencies 7 
Euro area (€ billion)
 
2011          Sep 10,330.1 206.6 0.5 206.1 208.7 2.6 0.0
         Oct 10,334.1 206.7 0.5 206.2 208.9 2.8 0.0
         Nov 10,412.4 208.2 0.5 207.7 212.2 4.5 0.0
         Dec 10,376.3 207.5 0.5 207.0 212.3 5.3 0.0
2012          Jan 10,382.1 103.8 0.5 103.3 108.1 4.7 0.0
         Feb 10,478.6 104.8 0.5 104.3 108.9 4.6 0.0
         Mar  p 10,585.8 105.9 0.5 105.4 109.6 4.3 0.0
         Apr  p,8 10,571.3 105.7 0.5 105.2 110.5 5.3 ...
         May p ... ... ... 106.6 ... ... ...
Of which:  Germany (€ million)
2011          Sep 2,532,338 50,647 184 50,463 52,154 1,691 0
         Oct 2,588,110 51,762 184 51,579 53,005 1,426 0
         Nov 2,664,713 53,294 184 53,111 54,403 1,292 1
         Dec 2,666,422 53,328 184 53,145 54,460 1,315 1
2012          Jan 2,712,641 27,126 182 26,944 28,281 1,337 0
         Feb 2,649,840 26,498 183 26,315 27,658 1,343 0
         Mar 2,771,416 27,714 183 27,531 28,782 1,251 1
         Apr  p 2,792,741 27,927 183 27,745 28,917 1,172 0
         May p 2,830,635 28,306 183 28,124 ... ... ...
1From March 2004, the reserve maintenance period will start on the settlement day to the reserve base. 4Article 5 (2) of the Regulation of the European Central Bank on
of the main refinancing operation immediately following the meeting of the the application of minimum reserves. 5Average credit balances of the credit insti-
Governing Council of the ECB for which the monthly discussion of the monetary tutions at the national central banks. 6Average credit balances less required reserves
policy stance is scheduled. 2Article 3 of the Regulation of the European Central Bank after deduction of the lump-sum allowance. 7Required reserves after deduction of
on the application of minimum reserves (excluding liabilities to which a reserve ratio the lump-sum allowance. 8The total number of deficiencies was not available when
of 0% applies, pursuant to Article 4 (1)). 3Amount after applying the reserve ratios this report went to press. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
43  Monthly Report
May 2012
VI Interest rates
 
1 ECB interest rates 2 Base rates
 
 
% per annum % per annum
Main refinancing Main refinancing
operations operations Base Base
Mar- Mar- rate rateginal ginal as per as per
Minimum Minimum
Applicable Deposit Fixed bid lending Applicable Deposit Fixed bid lending Applicable Civil Applicable Civilfrom facility rate rate facility from facility rate rate facility from Code  
1 from Code 1 
2002 Dec                  6 1.75 − 2.75 3.75 2008 July                  9 3.25 − 4.25 5.25 2002 Jan                1 2.57 2007 Jan                1 2.70
         Oct                  8 2.75 − 3.75 4.75          July                1 2.47          July                1 3.19
2003 Mar                  7 1.50 − 2.50 3.50          Oct                  9 3.25 3.75 − 4.25         June                  6 1.00 − 2.00 3.00          Nov                12 2.75 3.25 − 3.75 2003 Jan                1 1.97 2008 Jan                1 3.32
         Dec                10 2.00 2.50 − 3.00          July                1 1.22          July                1 3.19
2005 Dec                  6 1.25 − 2.25 3.25
2009 Jan                21 1.00 2.00 − 3.00 2004 Jan                1 1.14 2009 Jan                1 1.62
2006 Mar                  8 1.50 − 2.50 3.50          Mar                11 0.50 1.50 − 2.50          July                1 1.13          July                1 0.12         June                15 1.75 − 2.75 3.75          Apr                  8 0.25 1.25 − 2.25         Aug                  9 2.00 − 3.00 4.00          May                13 0.25 1.00 − 1.75 2005 Jan                1 1.21 2011 July                1 0.37         Oct                11 2.25 − 3.25 4.25          July                1 1.17
         Dec                13 2.50 − 3.50 4.50 2011 Apr                13 0.50 1.25 − 2.00 2012 Jan                1 0.12
         July                13 0.75 1.50 − 2.25 2006 Jan                1 1.37
2007 Mar                14 2.75 − 3.75 4.75          Nov                  9 0.50 1.25 − 2.00          July                1 1.95         June                13 3.00 − 4.00 5.00          Dez                14 0.25 1.00 − 1.75
1 Pursuant to section 247 of the Civil Code.  
 
  
3 Eurosystem monetary policy operations allotted through tenders 
*
 
 
Fixed rate tenders Variable rate tenders
Bid Allotment Minimum Weighted
amount amount Fixed rate bid rate Marginal rate  1 average rate
Date of Running for
settlement € million % per annum ... days
Main refinancing operations
2012 Apr                11 55,362 55,362 1.00−−−7
         Apr                18 51,775 51,775 1.00−−−7
         Apr                25 46,369 46,369 1.00−−−7
         May                  2 34,420 34,420 1.00−−−7
         May                  9 39,287 39,287 1.00−−−7
         May                16 42,988 42,988 1.00−−−7
Longer-term refinancing operations
2012 Mar                29 25,127 25,127 2 ... − − − 91
         Apr                11 11,389 11,389 1.00−−− 2 8
         Apr                26 21,338 21,338 2 ... − − − 91
         May                  9 12,988 12,988 1.00−−− 3 5
*Source: ECB. 1Lowest or highest interest rate at which funds were allotted or average minimum bid rate of the main refinancing operations over the life of this
collected. 2Interest payment on the maturity date; the rate will be fixed at the operation. 
 
  
4 Money market rates, by month
 
 
% per annum
Money market rates reported by Frankfurt banks  1 EURIBOR 3 
One-week One-month Six-month Nine-month Twelve- Three-month
Overnight money Three-month funds EONIA  2 funds funds funds funds funds month funds
Reporting Monthly Lowest and Monthly Lowest and
period averages highest rates averages highest rates Monthly averages
2011          Oct 0.87 0.75 − 1.30 1.52 1.43 − 1.59 0.96 1.17 1.36 1.58 1.78 1.94 2.11
         Nov 0.70 0.50 − 1.30 1.44 1.33 − 1.60 0.79 0.95 1.23 1.48 1.71 1.88 2.04         Dec 0.52
4 0.20 − 1.05 1.38 1.25 − 1.48 0.63 0.82 1.14 1.43 1.67 1.84 2.00
2012          Jan 0.28 0.20 − 0.38 1.17 1.00 − 1.35 0.38 0.49 0.84 1.22 1.50 1.69 1.84         Feb 0.26 0.15 − 0.35 0.99 0.85 − 1.13 0.37 0.37 0.63 1.05 1.35 1.53 1.68         Mar 0.25 0.15 − 0.35 0.80 0.65 − 0.97 0.36 0.32 0.47 0.86 1.16 1.35 1.50
         Apr 0.26 0.15 − 0.33 0.69 0.59 − 0.78 0.35 0.32 0.41 0.74 1.04 1.22 1.37
1Money market rates are not fixed or quoted officially; the monthly averages act/360 method and published via Reuters. 3Euro Interbank Offered Rate:
computed from daily quotations are unweighted. 2Euro OverNight Index Average: unweighted average rate calculated by Reuters since 30 December 1998 according
weighted average overnight rate for interbank operations calculated by the European to the act/360 method. 4 At end-December, 0.25% to 0.75%. 
Central Bank since 4 January 1999 on the basis of real turnover according to the

Deutsche Bundesbank
44  Monthly Report
May 2012
VI Interest rates
 
5 Interest rates and volumes for outstanding amounts and new business of German banks (MFIs) *
(a) Outstanding amounts o
 
 
Households’ deposits Non-financial corporations’ deposits
with an agreed maturity of
up to 2 years over 2 years up to 2 years over 2 years
Effective Effective Effective Effective
End of interest rate 1 Volume 2 interest rate 1 Volume 2 interest rate 1 Volume 2 interest rate 1 Volume 2 
month % pa € million % pa € million % pa € million % pa € million
2011          Mar 1.58 123,032 2.37 216,569 1.14 96,691 3.79 23,106
         Apr 1.61 125,585 2.36 217,665 1.25 97,961 3.76 23,816
         May 1.65 127,375 2.36 219,602 1.33 100,259 3.75 23,709
         June 1.68 128,443 2.36 220,838 1.41 98,484 3.74 23,964
         July 1.73 131,401 2.35 221,490 1.50 100,631 3.72 24,136
         Aug 1.78 132,093 2.35 222,091 1.52 104,430 3.71 24,181
         Sep 1.81 134,117 2.34 222,719 1.52 109,607 3.68 24,053
         Oct 1.84 134,147 2.34 222,983 1.55 110,904 3.67 23,951
         Nov 1.87 137,615 2.33 223,747 1.53 108,388 3.64 23,470
         Dec 1.87 139,689 2.32 227,255 1.50 104,838 3.60 23,384
2012          Jan 1.86 140,362 2.32 227,974 1.43 107,611 3.59 22,576
         Feb 1.86 140,215 2.32 228,654 1.39 105,698 3.58 22,973
         Mar 1.86 140,842 2.31 229,015 1.30 102,010 3.56 22,835
 
 
Housing loans to households 3 Loans for consumption and other purposes to households  4, 5 
with a maturity of
over 1 year and over 1 year and
up to 1 year 6 up to 5 years over 5 years up to 1 year 6 up to 5 years over 5 years
Effective Effective Effective Effective Effective Effective
interest interest interest interest interest interest
End of rate 1 Volume 2 rate 1 Volume 2 rate 1 Volume 2 rate 1 Volume 2 rate 1 Volume 2 rate 1 Volume 2 
month % pa % pa % pa % pa % pa % pa € million € million € million € million € million € million
2011          Mar 3.88 5,244 3.89 26,702 4.60 926,845 8.25 65,739 5.66 69,606 5.68 311,059
         Apr 3.95 5,202 3.88 26,839 4.59 927,168 8.22 63,985 5.64 69,778 5.68 312,376
         May 4.04 5,248 3.87 27,063 4.58 928,319 8.30 64,040 5.60 70,343 5.68 313,138
         June 4.13 5,203 3.86 27,213 4.58 929,355 8.46 66,552 5.56 69,359 5.68 312,069
         July 4.17 5,292 3.87 27,349 4.57 930,437 8.45 63,944 5.55 69,328 5.69 312,900
         Aug 4.20 5,315 3.86 27,537 4.56 931,968 8.52 63,858 5.67 74,147 5.68 313,504
         Sep 4.23 5,284 3.85 27,817 4.55 934,054 8.56 65,653 5.66 74,384 5.68 313,747
         Oct 4.21 5,240 3.83 27,897 4.54 935,360 8.59 64,981 5.59 73,804 5.68 313,742
         Nov 4.22 5,165 3.81 28,069 4.53 937,366 8.52 63,648 5.56 73,789 5.66 315,187
         Dec 4.15 5,300 3.78 28,122 4.51 937,763 8.52 64,522 5.53 73,322 5.65 313,944
2012          Jan 4.09 5,137 3.75 28,154 4.49 936,543 8.48 63,374 5.52 73,596 5.62 313,820
         Feb 4.06 5,054 3.73 28,188 4.47 936,749 8.37 63,122 5.49 73,581 5.61 313,827
         Mar 4.03 5,100 3.70 28,398 4.46 937,687 8.34 64,286 5.45 73,531 5.59 313,188
  
Loans to non-financial corporations with a maturity of
up to 1 year 6 over 1 year and up to 5 years over 5 years
End of Volume 2 Volume 2 Volume 2 Effective interest rate 1 Effective interest rate 1 Effective interest rate 1 
month % pa € million % pa € million % pa € million
2011          Mar 3.90 135,214 3.70 133,748 3.87 556,255
         Apr 3.96 134,351 3.75 130,873 3.90 558,075
         May 3.99 134,221 3.78 130,465 3.91 558,898
         June 4.15 137,565 3.86 127,937 3.94 560,966
         July 4.09 137,256 3.95 127,958 3.98 561,830
         Aug 4.12 135,305 4.04 129,991 3.98 562,983
         Sep 4.16 139,120 4.03 129,919 3.98 561,294
         Oct 4.11 137,986 4.02 128,882 3.97 565,182
         Nov 4.02 139,610 3.97 128,882 3.96 566,756
         Dec 4.00 133,627 3.93 128,385 3.93 567,781
2012          Jan 3.84 136,423 3.83 127,581 3.88 569,546
         Feb 3.69 139,689 3.72 126,323 3.86 571,604
         Mar 3.64 141,139 3.61 126,677 3.79 571,433
*The MFI interest rate statistics are based on the interest rates applied by MFIs and interest rates or as narrowly defined effective rates. Both calculation methods cover
the related volumes of euro-denominated deposits and loans to households and non- all interest payments on deposits and loans but not any other related charges which
financial corporations domiciled in the euro area. The household sector comprises may occur for enquiries, administration, preparation of the documents, guaranteesindividuals (including sole proprietors) and non-profit institutions serving households. and credit insurance. 2Data based on monthly balance sheet statistics. 3Secured
Non-financial corporations include all enterprises other than insurance companies, and unsecured loans for home purchase, including building and home improvements;banks and other financial institutions. The interest rate statistics gathered on a including loans granted by building and loan associations and interim credits as wellharmonised basis in the euro area from January 2003 are collected in Germany on a as transmitted loans granted by the reporting agents in their own name and for theirsample basis. The most recent figures are in all cases to be regarded as provisional. own account. 4Loans for consumption are defined as loans granted for the purpose
Subsequent revisions appearing in the following Monthly Report are not specially of personal use in the consumption of goods and services. 5For the purpose of these
marked. Further information on the MFI interest rate statistics can be found on the statistics, other loans are loans granted for other purposes such as business, debtBundesbank’s website (Statistics / Reporting system / Banking statistics / MFI interest consolidation, education etc. 6Including overdrafts (see also footnotes 13 to 15
rate statistics). oThe statistics on outstanding amounts are collected at the end of p 47
   ). 
the month. 1The effective interest rates are calculated either as annualised agreed

Deutsche Bundesbank
45  Monthly Report
May 2012
VI Interest rates
 
5 Interest rates and volumes for outstanding amounts and new business of German banks (MFIs) *  (cont’d)
(b) New business +
 
 
Households’ deposits
with an agreed maturity of redeemable at notice of  8 
Overnight up to 1 year over 2 years up to 3 months over 3 months over 1 year and up to 2 years
Effective Effective Effective Effective Effective Effective
interest interest interest interest interest interest
Reporting rate 1 Volume 2 rate 1 Volume 7 rate 1 Volume 7 rate 1 Volume 7 rate 1 Volume 2 rate 1 Volume 2 
period % pa % pa % pa % pa % pa % pa € million € million € million € million € million € million
2011          Mar 
0.75 714,781 1.18 13,674 2.20 1,980 2.42 2,293 1.37 517,707 1.85 105,429
         Apr 0.74 720,878 1.36 15,283 2.28 1,988 2.78 2,473 1.40 517,337 1.87 104,640
         May 0.79 721,441 1.36 15,015 2.31 1,980 2.81 3,088 1.40 515,120 1.88 104,562
         June 0.81 723,542 1.40 14,485 2.61 1,707 2.79 2,458 1.43 513,314 1.89 104,371
         July 0.87 729,146 1.55 17,846 2.53 2,140 2.80 2,398 1.42 512,173 1.90 104,420
         Aug 0.90 728,134 1.53 17,115 2.50 1,828 2.80 1,953 1.43 510,749 1.91 104,307
         Sep 0.91 729,249 1.53 18,506 2.46 1,244 2.70 1,530 1.47 509,809 1.92 103,815
         Oct 0.92 735,055 1.60 17,069 2.28 1,938 2.74 1,711 1.48 509,641 1.94 103,670
         Nov 0.91 748,146 1.57 16,851 2.17 2,261 2.83 1,934 1.43 510,106 1.94 101,829
         Dec 0.91 747,612 1.38 17,013 2.23 1,980 2.77 2,049 1.45 515,587 1.94 101,085
2012          Jan 0.89 751,235 1.50 18,304 2.30 1,724 3.03 2,422 1.43 517,814 1.94 100,172
         Feb 0.88 758,730 1.42 13,756 2.33 1,677 2.96 2,354 1.40 520,675 1.93 99,932
         Mar 0.84 761,178 1.35 14,308 2.27 1,148 2.81 2,252 1.34 521,107 1.93 99,132
 
 
Non-financial corporations’ deposits
with an agreed maturity of
Overnight up to 1 year over 1 year and up to 2 years over 2 years
Effective Effective Effective Effective
Reporting interest rate 1 Volume 2 interest rate 1 Volume 7 interest rate 1 Volume 7 interest rate 1 Volume 7 
period % pa € million % pa € million % pa € million % pa € million
2011          Mar 
0.48 247,548 0.90 35,003 2.03 430 2.48 448
         Apr 0.58 245,883 1.12 33,097 2.09 625 2.55 845
         May 0.58 248,625 1.20 37,292 2.31 433 2.94 472
         June 0.62 245,634 1.25 36,331 2.08 434 2.63 465
         July 0.63 246,433 1.29 39,877 2.22 774 2.77 574
         Aug 0.63 249,188 1.23 38,033 2.53 428 2.55 515
         Sep 0.66 252,851 1.24 34,917 2.09 411 2.11 415
         Oct 0.64 257,807 1.24 36,857 2.08 621 3.45 2,007
         Nov 0.60 260,684 1.04 40,868 2.09 576 2.21 494
         Dec 0.55 267,881 1.01 41,975 2.10 766 2.36 841
2012          Jan 0.52 255,889 0.72 39,165 2.16 520 2.29 842
         Feb 0.48 253,442 0.60 34,105 2.04 594 2.28 543
         Mar 0.46 258,560 0.63 28,015 1.95 523 2.32 531
 
 
Loans to households
Loans for other purposes to households with an initial rate fxation of  5 
of which loans to sole proprietors 10 
floating rate or over 1 year and floating rate or over 1 year and
up to 1 year 9 up to 5 years over 5 years up to 1 year  9 up to 5 years over 5 years
Effective Effective Effective Effective Effective Effectiveinterest interest interest interest interest interest
Reporting rate 
1 Volume 7 rate 1 Volume 7 rate 1 Volume 7 rate 1 Volume 7 rate 1 Volume 7 rate 1 Volume 7 
period % pa % pa % pa % pa % pa % pa € million € million € million € million € million € million
2011          Mar 
2.63 5,036 4.56 1,328 4.45 2,880 2.70 3,273 4.67 988 4.44 1,711
         Apr 2.81 4,744 4.56 1,175 4.61 2,360 2.86 3,116 4.66 844 4.56 1,342
         May 2.93 3,980 4.71 1,150 4.63 2,605 3.02 2,670 4.81 795 4.64 1,381
         June 3.04 4,559 4.42 1,092 4.62 2,391 3.17 3,034 4.64 654 4.62 1,377
         July 3.13 5,314 4.68 1,599 4.54 2,613 3.24 3,393 4.76 740 4.57 1,486
         Aug 3.14 4,211 4.81 1,087 4.36 2,051 3.22 2,473 4.98 830 4.34 1,152
         Sep 3.05 4,332 4.69 1,122 4.09 2,576 3.17 2,638 4.80 854 4.07 1,556
         Oct 3.06 5,025 4.54 1,044 4.03 2,524 3.17 2,978 4.65 813 4.00 1,372
         Nov 3.04 3,631 4.59 992 3.82 2,109 3.16 2,318 4.78 785 3.76 1,336
         Dec 2.78 4,968 4.51 1,233 3.77 3,272 3.08 2,987 4.69 948 3.74 1,878
2012          Jan 2.62 5,028 4.42 1,148 3.77 2,326 2.94 2,812 4.60 886 3.71 1,482
         Feb 2.48 3,938 4.17 988 3.72 1,987 2.70 2,277 4.34 736 3.68 1,038
         Mar 2.41 4,328 4.35 1,107 3.64 2,677 2.57 2,712 4.46 877 3.59 1,531
For footnotes * and 1 to 6, see p 44  .+In the case of deposits with an agreed for the sake of simplicity. This means that all outstanding deposit and lending
maturity and all loans excluding revolving loans and overdrafts, credit card debt, new business at the end of the month has to be incorporated in the calculation of averagebusiness covers all new agreements between households or non-financial corpor- rates of interest. 7Estimated. The volume of new business is extrapolated to form
ations and the bank. The interest rates are calculated as volume-weighted average the underlying total using the Horvitz-Thompson estimator. 8Including non-financial
rates of all new agreements concluded during the reporting month. In the case of corporations’ deposits; including fidelity and growth premia. 9Excluding over-
overnight deposits, deposits redeemable at notice, revolving loans and overdrafts, drafts. 10 Collected from June 2010. 
credit card debt, new business is collected in the same way as outstanding amounts

Deutsche Bundesbank
46  Monthly Report
May 2012
VI Interest rates
 
5 Interest rates and volumes for outstanding amounts and new business of German banks (MFIs) *  (cont’d)
(b) New business +
 
 
Loans to households (cont’d)
Loans for consumption with an initial rate fixation of  4 
Total floating rate or over 1 year and
Total up to 1 year 9 up to 5 years over 5 years (including charges)
Effective Effective Effective Effective Annual percentage
Reporting Volume 7 Volume 7 Volume 7 Volume 7 rate of charge  11 interest rate 1 interest rate 1 interest rate 1 interest rate 1 
period % pa % pa € million % pa € million % pa € million % pa € million
Total loans
2011          Mar 6.99 6.37 6,134 3.52 945 5.57 2,652 8.28 2,537
         Apr 6.86 6.20 5,700 3.28 1,029 5.55 2,417 8.23 2,254
         May 7.11 6.39 6,269 3.68 1,086 5.69 2,625 8.25 2,558
         June 7.00 6.34 5,203 3.42 879 5.72 2,258 8.27 2,066
         July 7.07 6.30 5,699 3.47 1,164 5.75 2,307 8.35 2,228
         Aug 7.09 6.35 5,764 3.56 1,039 5.74 2,364 8.19 2,361
         Sep 7.11 6.45 5,323 3.63 826 5.69 2,243 8.24 2,254
         Oct 6.93 6.35 5,498 3.36 1,042 5.80 2,189 8.27 2,267
         Nov 6.63 6.12 5,317 3.68 1,000 5.63 2,293 7.87 2,024
         Dec 6.23 5.77 4,659 3.08 970 5.59 2,086 7.64 1,603
2012          Jan 6.78 6.28 5,308 3.25 1,009 5.65 2,083 8.25 2,216
         Feb 6.74 6.19 5,116 3.20 943 5.58 2,062 8.12 2,111
         Mar 6.47 6.04 6,101 3.00 884 5.35 2,649 7.80 2,568
of which: collateralised loans 12
2011          Mar . 4.84 429 2.72 105 6.24 182 4.61 142
         Apr . 4.88 440 2.84 116 6.17 200 4.69 124
         May . 4.85 527 3.04 168 6.40 207 4.74 152
         June . 5.16 423 3.14 109 6.52 201 4.69 113
         July . 5.01 466 3.24 130 6.26 215 4.69 121
         Aug . 4.81 461 2.98 119 5.99 207 4.60 135
         Sep . 4.63 417 2.88 111 5.81 191 4.35 115
         Oct . 4.41 422 2.91 117 5.61 181 4.09 124
         Nov . 4.22 434 2.84 112 5.30 187 3.85 135
         Dec . 4.19 454 2.93 161 5.55 172 3.92 121
2012          Jan . 4.16 419 2.70 138 5.61 159 3.93 122
         Feb . 4.16 471 2.76 145 5.39 196 3.86 130
         Mar . 4.09 495 2.22 136 5.70 193 3.76 166
 
 
Loans to households (cont’d)
Housing loans with an initial rate fixation of  3 
Total floating rate or over 1 year and over 5 years and
Total up to 1 year 9 up to 5 years up to 10 years over 10 years (including charges)
Effective Effective Effective Effective Effective Annual percentage
Reporting Volume 7 Volume 7 Volume 7 Volume 7 Volume 7 rate of charge  11 interest rate  1 interest rate  1 interest rate  1 interest rate  1 interest rate  1 
period % pa % pa % pa % pa % pa % pa € million € million € million € million € million
Total loans
2011          Mar 4.07 3.99 17,526 3.49 2,777 3.70 2,793 4.10 6,742 4.26 5,214
         Apr 4.18 4.09 16,705 3.51 2,760 3.73 2,601 4.18 6,626 4.50 4,718
         May 4.23 4.16 16,448 3.82 2,503 3.84 2,531 4.23 6,594 4.41 4,820
         June 4.18 4.11 13,933 3.78 2,189 3.82 2,051 4.19 5,334 4.32 4,359
         July 4.12 4.02 15,868 3.68 3,131 3.82 2,395 4.13 6,067 4.25 4,275
         Aug 4.06 3.98 15,599 3.89 2,277 3.69 2,348 4.01 6,041 4.13 4,933
         Sep 3.85 3.75 15,331 3.77 2,112 3.52 2,146 3.80 5,951 3.80 5,122
         Oct 3.70 3.61 16,291 3.68 2,782 3.39 2,329 3.61 6,261 3.67 4,919
         Nov 3.65 3.56 16,139 3.74 1,960 3.31 2,371 3.58 6,429 3.58 5,379
         Dec 3.61 3.51 16,758 3.67 2,283 3.24 2,450 3.54 6,571 3.54 5,454
2012          Jan 3.59 3.50 15,645 3.60 2,614 3.21 2,417 3.48 6,480 3.64 4,134
         Feb 3.52 3.40 14,182 3.55 2,330 3.05 2,069 3.37 5,408 3.53 4,375
         Mar 3.38 3.29 16,280 3.29 1,982 2.92 2,433 3.29 6,512 3.45 5,353
of which: collateralised loans 12
2011          Mar . 3.92 8,740 3.34 1,077 3.64 1,439 4.02 3,544 4.17 2,680
         Apr . 4.04 8,763 3.33 1,330 3.69 1,323 4.09 3,440 4.49 2,670
         May . 4.09 8,592 3.65 1,093 3.78 1,342 4.16 3,638 4.33 2,519
         June . 4.03 7,153 3.64 994 3.73 1,055 4.11 2,874 4.25 2,230
         July . 3.94 8,563 3.53 1,652 3.77 1,280 4.05 3,296 4.18 2,335
         Aug . 3.91 8,077 3.72 1,009 3.60 1,236 3.93 3,239 4.12 2,593
         Sep . 3.68 7,509 3.63 900 3.40 1,116 3.73 3,015 3.77 2,478
         Oct . 3.56 8,089 3.58 1,143 3.33 1,208 3.54 3,318 3.69 2,420
         Nov . 3.47 8,174 3.49 893 3.24 1,194 3.51 3,334 3.54 2,753
         Dec . 3.43 8,248 3.52 999 3.19 1,267 3.45 3,377 3.48 2,605
2012          Jan . 3.45 7,647 3.52 1,181 3.17 1,241 3.43 3,214 3.62 2,011
         Feb . 3.32 6,776 3.42 1,040 2.94 1,011 3.30 2,586 3.47 2,139
         Mar . 3.19 7,577 3.07 863 2.82 1,220 3.22 3,001 3.38 2,493
For footnotes * and 1 to 6, see p 44  . For footnotes +, 7 to 10, see p 45  . For related charges which may occur for enquiries, administration, preparation of the
footnote 12, see p 47  .11Annual percentage rate of charge, which contains other documents, guarantees and credit insurance. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
47  Monthly Report
May 2012
VI Interest rates
 
5 Interest rates and volumes for outstanding amounts and new business of German banks (MFIs) *  (cont’d)
(b) New business +
 
 
Loans to households (cont’d) Loans to non-financial corporations
of which of which
Revolving loans 13 Revolving loans 13 
and overdrafts 14 Revolving loans 13 Extended and overdrafts 14 Revolving loans 13 
credit card debt 15 and overdrafts 14 credit card debt credit card debt 15 and overdrafts 14 
Effective Effective Effective Effective Effective
Reporting Volume 16 Volume 16 Volume 2 Volume 16 Volume 16 interest rate 1 interest rate 1 interest rate 1 interest rate 1 interest rate 1 
period % pa € million % pa € million % pa € million % pa € million % pa € million
2011          Mar 
10.08 44,548 10.19 39,295 14.88 3,251 4.87 68,034 4.89 67,799
         Apr 10.08 42,907 10.20 37,543 14.94 3,281 4.95 66,106 4.96 65,901
         May 10.16 43,083 10.30 37,679 14.96 3,315 4.91 65,330 4.93 65,099
         June 10.18 44,814 10.27 39,450 14.94 3,362 5.07 69,283 5.08 69,071
         July 10.23 42,851 10.30 37,415 15.04 3,425 4.91 67,586 4.93 67,417
         Aug 10.30 43,085 10.36 37,638 15.11 3,455 4.96 66,000 4.97 65,817
         Sep 10.30 45,279 10.37 39,701 15.17 3,506 5.09 71,055 5.11 70,844
         Oct 10.35 44,961 10.43 38,918 14.72 3,974 5.05 67,933 5.07 67,720
         Nov 10.31 43,494 10.31 37,586 14.71 3,957 4.90 68,235 4.92 68,016
         Dec 10.29 44,555 10.32 38,538 14.71 4,004 4.88 64,672 4.89 64,484
2012          Jan 10.31 45,884 10.34 39,955 14.63 3,956 4.66 68,909 4.68 68,690
         Feb 10.24 45,809 10.27 39,877 14.67 3,919 4.56 70,840 4.57 70,603
         Mar 10.21 46,975 10.23 40,974 14.47 3,998 4.59 72,216 4.61 71,960
 
 
Loans to non-financial corporations (cont’d)
Loans up to €1 million with an initial rate fixation of  17 Loans over €1 million with an initial rate fixation of  17 
floating rate or over 1 year and floating rate or over 1 year and
up to 1 year 9 up to 5 years over 5 years up to 1 year  9 up to 5 years over 5 years
Effective Effective Effective Effective Effective Effectiveinterest interest interest interest interest interest
Reporting rate 
1 Volume 7 rate 1 Volume 7 rate 1 Volume 7 rate 1 Volume 7 rate 1 Volume 7 rate 1 Volume 7 
period % pa % pa % pa % pa % pa % pa € million € million € million € million € million € million
Total loans
2011          Mar 3.69 7,429 4.54 1,537 4.28 1,426 2.69 46,728 3.84 2,216 3.97 5,171
         Apr 3.63 6,876 4.63 1,303 4.37 1,254 2.87 45,450 3.82 2,177 4.70 5,871
         May 3.95 6,606 4.71 1,378 4.36 1,362 2.91 38,493 3.67 1,083 4.10 4,057
         June 3.93 6,808 4.64 1,264 4.33 1,143 3.06 44,897 3.62 2,839 4.23 4,181
         July 3.87 7,200 4.70 1,380 4.33 1,382 3.02 47,966 3.79 2,894 4.18 5,167
         Aug 3.97 6,317 4.75 1,470 4.10 1,181 3.01 36,905 3.92 1,639 3.99 4,143
         Sep 3.99 6,991 4.60 1,459 3.87 1,244 2.96 44,993 3.61 3,111 3.69 4,992
         Oct 3.91 7,207 4.62 1,344 3.82 1,141 3.16 47,753 3.91 1,777 3.54 4,837
         Nov 3.92 6,655 4.69 1,407 3.68 1,320 2.89 38,491 3.67 1,894 3.61 5,240
         Dec 3.92 7,289 4.61 1,726 3.58 1,695 2.93 49,228 3.71 2,955 3.59 7,554
2012          Jan 3.60 7,211 4.49 1,460 3.62 1,209 2.64 43,437 3.37 1,916 3.39 4,357
         Feb 3.56 6,539 4.41 1,323 3.45 1,076 2.58 37,564 3.47 1,352 3.51 3,243
         Mar 3.51 7,654 4.31 1,751 3.41 1,348 2.44 43,912 2.85 1,893 3.33 4,674
of which: collateralised loans 12
2011          Mar 3.69 1,426 4.25 194 4.12 388 2.75 9,342 3.70 743 4.09 976
         Apr 3.76 1,476 4.37 199 4.20 337 2.76 9,355 3.88 922 4.60 2,009
         May 4.11 1,312 4.53 172 4.18 363 2.95 7,064 3.73 221 4.12 946
         June 4.00 1,343 4.40 156 4.05 321 3.08 8,797 3.54 1,049 4.30 1,271
         July 4.04 1,536 4.41 190 4.04 428 3.13 10,905 3.52 999 4.36 1,227
         Aug 4.17 1,230 4.38 147 3.96 289 3.06 6,690 4.06 531 3.88 917
         Sep 4.06 1,346 4.09 139 3.61 333 3.16 9,236 3.62 1,071 3.71 1,056
         Oct 3.93 1,454 3.82 160 3.57 360 3.15 10,313 4.37 551 3.51 1,452
         Nov 4.05 1,171 3.92 142 3.41 406 3.02 6,850 3.97 767 3.45 1,365
         Dec 3.97 1,374 3.69 229 3.15 464 3.16 9,859 3.44 1,035 3.41 1,878
2012          Jan 3.73 1,520 3.74 169 3.56 380 2.78 9,986 3.43 749 3.37 975
         Feb 3.67 988 3.78 120 3.26 345 2.42 6,229 3.88 536 3.20 891
         Mar 3.41 1,210 3.62 164 3.14 360 2.58 8,860 3.12 550 3.27 1,466
For footnotes * and 1 to 6, see p 44  . For footnotes + and 7 to 10, see p 45  . For they are within or beyond the limits agreed between customers and the
footnote 11, see p 46  .12Collected from June 2010. For the purposes of the bank. 15From June 2010 including convenience and extended credit card debt.
interest rate statistis, a loan is considered to be secured if collateral (among others Convenience credit is defined as the credit granted at an interest rate of 0% in thefinancial collateral, real estate collateral, debt securities) in at leat the same value as period between payment transactions effectuated with the card during one billingthe loan amount has been posted, pledged or assigned. 13From June 2010 cycle and the date at which the debt balances from this specific billing cycle become
including revolving loans which have all the following features: (a) the borrower may due. 16From January 2003 up to May 2010 estimated. The volume of outstanding
use or withdraw the funds to a pre-approved credit limit without giving prior notice amounts reported was extrapolated to form the underlying total using theto the lender; (b) the amount of available credit can increase and decrease as funds Horvitz-Thompson estimator. From June 2010 the data are based on monthlyare borrowed and repaid; (c) the loan may be used repeatedly; (d) there is no balance sheet statistics. 17The amount refers to the single loan transaction
obligation of regular repayment of funds. 14Overdrafts are defined as debit considered as new business. 
balances on current accounts. They include all bank overdrafts regardless of whether

Deutsche Bundesbank
48  Monthly Report
May 2012
VII Capital market
 
1 Sales and purchases of debt securities and shares in Germany
 
 
€ million
Debt securities
Sales Purchases
Domestic debt securities 1 Residents
Credit in-
Sales stitutions
= Public Foreign including
total Bank Corporate debt debt building
pur- debt bonds secur- secur- and loan Deutsche Other Non-
Period chases Total securities ities 3 ities 4 Total 5 Bundesbank sectors 7 residents 8 (non-MFIs) 2 associations 6 
2000 226,393 157,994 120,154 12,605 25,234 68,399 151,568 91,447 . 60,121 74,825
2001 180,227 86,656 55,918 14,473 16,262 93,571 111,281 35,848 . 75,433 68,946
2002 175,396 124,035 47,296 14,506 62,235 51,361 60,476 13,536 . 46,940 114,920
2003 184,679 134,455 31,404 30,262 72,788 50,224 105,557 35,748 . 69,809 79,122
2004 233,890 133,711 64,231 10,778 58,703 100,179 108,119 121,841 . − 13,723 125,772
2005 252,658 110,542 39,898 2,682 67,965 142,116 94,718 61,740 . 32,978 157,940
2006 242,006 102,379 40,995 8,943 52,446 139,627 125,423 68,893 . 56,530 116,583
2007 217,798 90,270 42,034 20,123 28,111 127,528 − 26,762 96,476 . − 123,238 244,560
2008 76,490 66,139 − 45,712 86,527 25,322 10,351 18,236 68,049 . − 49,813 58,254
2009 69,549 − 538 − 114,902 22,709 91,655 70,087 89,169 12,973 8,645 67,550 − 19,620
2010 148,944 − 1,212 − 7,621 24,044 − 17,635 150,156 100,647 − 103,271 22,967 180,952 48,297
2011 40,799 13,575 − 46,796 850 59,521 27,224 − 16,574 − 94,793 36,805 41,413 57,373
2011          May 31,850 24,797 − 1,904 3,332 23,369 7,053 − 6,592 2,140 88 − 8,820 38,442
         June − 23,658 − 16,468 − 24,220 3,159 4,593 − 7,190 − 10,966 − 18,102 − 336 7,472 − 12,692
         July − 15,963 − 13,921 − 8,597 2,528 − 7,852 − 2,042 − 8,219 − 12,490 288 3,983 − 7,744
         Aug 41,216 38,421 16,683 903 20,835 2,795 5,361 − 9,417 11,917 2,861 35,855
         Sep − 11,824 − 12,170 − 11,839 − 2,901 2,570 346 − 1,695 − 12,051 9,339 1,017 − 10,129
         Oct − 21,458 − 21,880 − 3,824 − 10,980 − 7,076 422 − 2,501 − 4,494 2,994 − 1,001 − 18,957
         Nov 22,841 21,495 8,326 − 2,825 15,994 1,346 11,512 − 8,744 9,305 10,951 11,329
         Dec − 46,609 − 44,168 − 15,514 − 9,196 − 19,458 − 2,441 − 18,440 − 18,677 1,538 − 1,301 − 28,1692012          Jan − 5,244 − 28,450 − 31,833 − 6,174 9,557 23,206 10,955 − 1,929
r) 1,652 r) 11,232 − 16,199
         Feb 44,827 38,149 8,709 − 2,597 32,037 6,678 8,230 1,270 − 397 7,357 36,597
         Mar 20,456 12,235 − 12,463 2,730 21,968 8,221 28,701 2,516 − 741 26,926 − 8,245
 
 
€ million
Shares
Sales Purchases
Sales Residents
=
total Domestic Foreign Credit insti- Non-
Period purchases shares 9 shares 10 Total 11 tutions 6,12 Other sectors 13 residents 14 
2000 140,461 22,733 117,729 164,654 23,293 141,361 − 24,194
2001 82,665 17,575 65,091 − 2,252 − 14,714 12,462 84,918
2002 39,338 9,232 30,106 18,398 − 23,236 41,634 20,941
2003 11,896 16,838 − 4,946 − 15,121 7,056 − 22,177 27,016
2004 − 3,317 10,157 − 13,474 7,432 5,045 2,387 − 10,748
2005 32,364 13,766 18,597 1,036 10,208 − 9,172 31,329
2006 26,276 9,061 17,214 7,528 11,323 − 3,795 18,748
2007 − 5,009 10,053 − 15,062 − 62,308 − 6,702 − 55,606 57,299
2008 − 29,452 11,326 − 40,778 2,743 − 23,079 25,822 − 32,194
2009 38,164 23,962 14,200 30,357 − 8,335 38,692 7,809
2010 37,211 20,049 17,162 38,973 7,340 31,633 − 1,761
2011 24,779 21,713 3,066 30,880 670 30,210 − 6,102
2011          May 10,679 5,851 4,828 − 4,452 − 12,646 8,194 15,131
         June 9,775 6,427 3,348 − 4,921 − 10,241 5,320 14,696
         July − 5,906 137 − 6,043 − 5,660 − 2,396 − 3,264 − 246
         Aug − 2,474 203 − 2,677 − 101 − 5,224 5,123 − 2,373
         Sep − 4,211 91 − 4,302 − 2,157 − 4,409 2,252 − 2,054
         Oct 1,734 183 1,551 759 − 2,068 2,827 975
         Nov − 1,579 303 − 1,882 3,390 − 575 3,965 − 4,969
         Dec 9,457 1,643 7,814 11,070 9,865 1,205 − 1,613
2012          Jan − 1,385 262 − 1,647 2,020 − 106 2,126 − 3,405
         Feb − 2,026 730 − 2,756 − 5,771 − 5,696 − 75 3,745
         Mar 1,789 380 1,409 10,853 11,295 − 442 − 9,064
1Net sales at market values plus/minus changes in issuers’ portfolios of their own values. 9Excluding shares of public limited investment companies; at issue prices.
debt securities. 2Including cross-border financing within groups from January 2011. 10Net purchases or net sales (−) of foreign shares (including direct investment)  by  
3Including Federal Railways Fund, Federal Post Office and Treuhand agency. 4Net residents;  transaction  values. 11Domestic and foreign shares. 12Up to end-1998,
purchases or net sales (−) of foreign debt securities by residents; transaction excluding syndicated shares. 13Residual; also including purchases of domestic and
values. 5Domestic and foreign debt securities. 6Book values; statistically adjusted. foreign securities by domestic mutual funds. 14Net purchases or net sales (−) of
7Residual; also including purchases of domestic and foreign securities by domestic domestic shares (including direct investment) by non-residents; transaction values. —
mutual funds. Up to end-2008, data comprise Deutsche Bundesbank. 8Net pur- The figures for the most recent date are provisional; revisions are not specially
chases or net sales (−) of domestic debt securities by non-residents; transaction marked. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
49  Monthly Report
May 2012
 VII Capital market
 
2 Sales of debt securities issued by residents *  
 
 
€ million nominal value
Bank debt securities 1 Memo item
 Foreign  DM/euro
bonds issued Debt securities
Corporate by German- issued by special
Mortgage Public purpose credit Other bank bonds Public managed
Period Total Total Pfandbriefe Pfandbriefe institutions (non-MFIs)  2 syndicates debt securities debt securities 3 
Gross sales  4 
2000 659,148 500,895 34,528 143,107 94,556 228,703 8,114 150,137 31,597
2001 687,988 505,646 34,782 112,594 106,166 252,103 11,328 171,012 10,605
2002 818,725 569,232 41,496 119,880 117,506 290,353 17,574 231,923 10,313
2003 958,917 668,002 47,828 107,918 140,398 371,858 22,510 268,406 2,850
2004 990,399 688,844 33,774 90,815 162,353 401,904 31,517 270,040 12,344
2005 988,911 692,182 28,217 103,984 160,010 399,969 24,352 272,380 600
2006 925,863 622,055 24,483 99,628 139,193 358,750 29,975 273,834 69
2007 1,021,533 743,616 19,211 82,720 195,722 445,963 15,043 262,872 −
2008 1,337,337 961,271 51,259 70,520 382,814 456,676 95,093 280,974 −
2009 1,533,616 1,058,815 40,421 37,615 331,566 649,215 76,379 398,423 −
2010 1,375,138 757,754 36,226 33,539 363,828 324,160 53,654 563,731 −
2011 1,337,772 658,781 31,431 24,295 376,876 226,180 86,615 592,376 −
2011          Aug 124,006 67,984 774 1,187 45,089 20,934 3,615 52,407 −
         Sep 101,062 52,907 2,522 836 34,485 15,065 3,124 45,031 −
         Oct 103,611 45,220 3,147 758 23,553 17,762 2,660 55,732 −
         Nov 130,444 67,824 1,805 1,113 37,452 27,454 5,272 57,347 −
         Dec 84,412 46,202 2,899 1,047 27,120 15,136 2,413 35,797 −
2012          Jan 135,380 61,975 2,431 2,418 40,690 16,437 1,373 72,031 −
         Feb 126,002 68,028 5,349 494 39,974 22,211 3,594 54,380 −
         Mar 118,097 61,583 5,423 1,650 37,126 17,383 8,203 48,311 −
of which: Debt securities with maturities of more than four years  5 
2000 319,330 209,187 20,724 102,664 25,753 60,049 6,727 103,418 27,008
2001 299,751 202,337 16,619 76,341 42,277 67,099 7,479 89,933 6,4802002 309,157 176,486 16,338 59,459 34,795 65,892 12,149 120,527 9,2132003 369,336 220,103 23,210 55,165 49,518 92,209 10,977 138,256 2,8502004 424,769 275,808 20,060 48,249 54,075 153,423 20,286 128,676 4,320
2005 425,523 277,686 20,862 63,851 49,842 143,129 16,360 131,479 400
2006 337,969 190,836 17,267 47,814 47,000 78,756 14,422 132,711 692007 315,418 183,660 10,183 31,331 50,563 91,586 13,100 118,659 −2008 387,516 190,698 13,186 31,393 54,834 91,289 84,410 112,407 −2009 361,999 185,575 20,235 20,490 59,809 85,043 55,240 121,185 −
2010 381,687 169,174 15,469 15,139 72,796 65,769 34,649 177,863 −
2011 368,039 153,309 13,142 8,500 72,985 58,684 41,299 173,431 −
2011          Aug 27,396 11,663 428 82 7,542 3,612 1,647 14,086 −
         Sep 29,195 13,259 189 160 9,464 3,446 741 15,195 −
         Oct 21,178 8,593 1,220 208 4,106 3,058 1,477 11,108 −
         Nov 27,334 8,922 488 240 989 7,205 3,650 14,762 −         Dec 15,338 6,669 519 628 1,412 4,111 1,344 7,325 −
2012          Jan 36,293 16,603 932 1,617 10,284 3,770 241 19,449 −
         Feb 44,069 23,168 3,479 85 12,714 6,889 1,889 19,012 −         Mar 38,456 17,308 2,892 732 7,621 6,064 7,096 14,051 −
Net sales  6 
2000 155,615 122,774 5,937 29,999 30,089 56,751 7,320 25,522 − 16,7052001 84,122 60,905 6,932 − 9,254 28,808 34,416 8,739 14,479 − 30,6572002 131,976 56,393 7,936 − 26,806 20,707 54,561 14,306 61,277 − 44,5462003 124,556 40,873 2,700 − 42,521 44,173 36,519 18,431 65,253 − 54,9902004 167,233 81,860 1,039 − 52,615 50,142 83,293 18,768 66,605 − 22,124
2005 141,715 65,798 − 2,151 − 34,255 37,242 64,962 10,099 65,819 − 35,963
2006 129,423 58,336 − 12,811 − 20,150 44,890 46,410 15,605 55,482 − 19,2082007 86,579 58,168 − 10,896 − 46,629 42,567 73,127 − 3,683 32,093 − 29,7502008 119,472 8,517 15,052 − 65,773 25,165 34,074 82,653 28,302 − 31,6072009 76,441 − 75,554 858 − 80,646 25,579 − 21,345 48,508 103,482 − 21,037
2010 21,566 − 87,646 − 3,754 − 63,368 28,296 − 48,822 23,748 85,464 − 10,904
2011 22,518 − 54,582 1,657 − 44,290 32,904 − 44,852 − 3,189 80,289 − 5,989
2011          Aug 32,551 13,553 − 715 − 2,954 14,226 2,996 − 2,327 21,325 −
         Sep − 12,754 − 12,887 − 4,961 − 4,768 3,291 − 6,449 − 4,093 4,226 −
         Oct − 7,104 − 1,098 2,389 − 2,289 46 − 1,244 − 10,840 4,834 −
         Nov 29,635 6,035 1,482 − 4,203 3,522 5,233 − 2,959 26,559 − 69         Dec − 43,269 − 18,535 184 − 1,948 − 682 − 16,088 − 8,891 − 15,844 − 10
2012          Jan − 39,565 − 31,796 − 2,816 − 7,963 − 8,669 − 12,348 − 3,675 − 4,094 −
         Feb 32,588 13,452 2,934 − 2,054 10,606 1,966 − 1,278 20,414 −         Mar − 4,544 − 9,811 − 3,048 − 2,598 2,319 − 6,484 2,459 2,808 − 23
*For definitions, see the explanatory notes in the Statistical Supplement 2 Capital Railways Fund, Federal Post Office and Treuhand agency. 4Gross sales means only
market statistics on p 21 ff. 1Excluding registered bank debt securities. 2Including initial sales of newly issued securities. 5Maximum maturity according to the terms of
cross-border financing within groups from January 2011. 3Including Federal issue. 6 Gross sales less redemptions. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
50  Monthly Report
May 2012
VII Capital market
 
3 Amounts outstanding of debt securities issued by residents  * 
 
 
€ million nominal value
Bank debt securities 1 Memo item
 Foreign  DM/euro
End of year Debt securities bonds issued
or month/ issued by Corporate by German-
Maturity Mortgage Public special purpose Other bank bonds Public managed
in years Total Total Pfandbriefe Pfandbriefe credit institutions debt securities (non-MFIs) debt securities syndicates
2000 2,265,121 1,445,736 140,751 685,122 157,374 462,488 13,599 805,786 322,856
2001 2,349,243 1,506,640 147,684 675,868 201,721 481,366 22,339 820,264 292,199
2002 2,481,220 1,563,034 155,620 649,061 222,427 535,925 36,646 881,541 247,655
2003 2,605,775 1,603,906 158,321 606,541 266,602 572,442 55,076 946,793 192,666
2004 2,773,007 1,685,766 159,360 553,927 316,745 655,734 73,844 1,013,397 170,543
2005 2,914,723 1,751,563 157,209 519,674 323,587 751,093 83,942 1,079,218 134,580
2006 3,044,145 1,809,899 144,397 499,525 368,476 797,502 99,545 1,134,701 115,373
2007 3,130,723 1,868,066 133,501 452,896 411,041 870,629 95,863 1,166,794 85,623
2008 3,250,195 1,876,583 150,302 377,091 490,641 858,550 178,515 1,195,097 54,015
2009 3,326,635 1,801,029 151,160 296,445 516,221 837,203 227,024 1,298,581 32,978
2010 3,348,201 2 1,570,490 147,529 232,954 544,517 2 645,491 250,774 2 1,526,937 22,074
2011 3,370,721 1,515,911 149,185 188,663 577,423 600,640 247,585 1,607,226 16,085
2011          Sep 3,391,460 1,529,509 145,130 197,104 574,536 612,740 270,275 1,591,676 16,164
         Oct 3,384,356 1,528,411 147,519 194,815 574,582 611,495 259,435 1,596,510 16,164
         Nov 3,413,991 1,534,446 149,001 190,612 578,104 616,729 256,476 1,623,069 16,095
         Dec 3,370,721 1,515,911 149,185 188,663 577,423 600,640 247,585 1,607,226 16,085
2012          Jan 3,331,156 1,484,115 146,368 180,700 568,754 588,292 243,910 1,603,132 16,085
         Feb 3,363,744 1,497,567 149,303 178,646 579,360 590,258 242,632 1,623,546 16,085
         Mar 3,359,200 1,487,756 146,255 176,047 581,679 583,775 245,091 1,626,354 16,062
Breakdown by remaining period to maturity  3 Position at end-March 2012 
1,289,794 617,317 63,411 90,085 225,196 238,625 50,247 622,229 5,258    less than 2
852,428 449,974 50,318 45,388 142,280 211,986 52,408 350,047 4,220 2 to less than 4
443,001 194,790 20,717 24,645 85,274 64,153 32,849 215,361 2,800 4 to less than 6
219,122 86,110 7,759 8,678 52,855 16,817 15,587 117,424 306 6 to less than 8
206,552 54,424 3,362 3,370 35,904 11,789 6,308 145,820 380 8 to less than 10
47,338 20,297 576 2,429 11,853 5,440 10,137 16,904 1,912 10 to less than 15
81,862 13,640 10 296 6,721 6,613 2,698 65,524 219 15 to less than 20
219,105 51,205 100 1,156 21,597 28,352 74,855 93,046 967 20 and more
*Including debt securities temporarily held in the issuers’ portfolios. 1Excluding maturity for debt securities falling due en bloc and until mean maturity of the
debt securities handed to the trustee for temporary safe custody. 2Sectoral residual amount outstanding for debt securities not falling due en bloc. 
reclassification of debt securities. 3Calculated from month under review until final
  
4 Shares in circulation issued by residents
 * 
  
€ million nominal value
Change in domestic public limited companies’ capital due to
Memo item
Share circulationat market values
contribution (market capita- cash 
payments
Share capital = Net increase or and ex- contribution of shares, merger reduction lisation)
circulation at net decrease (−) change of of claims mining shares, and of capital level at end
end of period during period convertible issue of and other GmbH shares, transfer change of and of period
Period under review under review bonds 1 bonus shares real assets etc of assets legal form liquidation under review  2 
2000 147,629 14,115 3,620 3,694 618 8,089 − 1,986 1,827 − 1,745 1,353,000
2001 166,187 18,561 7,987 4,057 1,106 8,448 1,018 − 905 − 3,152 1,205,613
2002 168,716 2,528 4,307 1,291 486 1,690 − 868 − 2,152 − 2,224 647,492
2003 162,131 − 6,585 4,482 923 211 513 − 322 − 10,806 − 1,584 851,001
2004 164,802 2,669 3,960 1,566 276 696 220 − 1,760 − 2,286 887,217
2005 163,071 − 1,733 2,470 1,040 694 268 − 1,443 − 3,060 − 1,703 1,058,532
2006 163,764 695 2,670 3,347 604 954 − 1,868 − 1,256 − 3,761 1,279,638
2007 164,560 799 3,164 1,322 200 269 − 682 − 1,847 − 1,636 1,481,930
2008 168,701 4,142 5,006 1,319 152 0 − 428 − 608 − 1,306 830,622
2009 175,691 6,989 12,476 398 97 − − 3,741 − 1,269 − 974 927,256
2010 174,596 − 1,096 3,265 497 178 10 − 486 − 993 − 3,569 1,091,220
2011 177,167 2,570 6,390 552 462 9 − 552 − 762 − 3,532 924,214
2011          Sep 176,899 − 90 85 71 1 − − 100 − 75 − 72 873,180
         Oct 176,943 44 77 51 12 − − 48 − 6 − 42 975,868
         Nov 177,014 71 136 9 11 − 0 − 37 − 48 942,940
         Dec 177,167 153 280 1 13 − − 2 − 86 − 54 924,214
2012          Jan 177,231 63 151 1 1 − − 5 − 47 − 37 1,012,812
         Feb 177,599 368 557 − 2 − − 11 − 19 − 161 1,070,023
         Mar 177,902 303 119 3 376 − − 25 − 88 − 83 1,075,219
*Excluding shares of public limited investment companies. 1Including shares issued ket segment was closed down on 24 March 2003) are included as well as enterprises
out of company profits. 2Enterprises listed on the Regulated Market (the introduc- listed on the Open Market. Source: Bundesbank calculations based on data of the
tion of which marked the end of the division of organised trading segments into an Herausgebergemeinschaft Wertpapier-Mitteilungen and the Deutsche Börse AG. official and a regulated market on 1 November 2007) or the Neuer Markt (stock mar-

Deutsche Bundesbank
51  Monthly Report
May 2012
 VII Capital market
 
5 Yields and indices on German securities
 
 
               
Yields on debt securities outstanding issued by residents  1 Price indices 2,3 
Public debt securities Bank debt securities Debt securities Shares
Listed
Federal securities
With a residual With a residual
maturity of maturity of Corporate German German
9 and more than 9 bonds bond iBoxx CDAX share
including and including (non- index share price index € Germany
Total Total Total 10 years 4 Total 10 years MFIs) (REX) price index index (DAX)
Average End-1998 End-1987 End-1987
Period % per annum daily rate = 100 = 100 = 1000
2000 5.4 5.3 5.2 5.3 5.6 5.8 6.2 112.48 94.11 396.59 6,433.61
2001 4.8 4.7 4.7 4.8 4.9 5.3 5.9 113.12 94.16 319.38 5,160.102002 4.7 4.6 4.6 4.8 4.7 5.1 6.0 117.56 97.80 188.46 2,892.632003 3.7 3.8 3.8 4.1 3.7 4.3 5.0 117.36 97.09 252.48 3,965.162004 3.7 3.7 3.7 4.0 3.6 4.2 4.0 120.19 99.89 268.32 4,256.08
2005 3.1 3.2 3.2 3.4 3.1 3.5 3.7 120.92 101.09 335.59 5,408.26
2006 3.8 3.7 3.7 3.8 3.8 4.0 4.2 116.78 96.69 407.16 6,596.922007 4.3 4.3 4.2 4.2 4.4 4.5 5.0 114.85 94.62 478.65 8,067.322008 4.2 4.0 4.0 4.0 4.5 4.7 6.3 121.68 102.06 266.33 4,810.202009 3.2 3.1 3.0 3.2 3.5 4.0 5.5 123.62 100.12 320.32 5,957.43
2010 2.5 2.4 2.4 2.7 2.7 3.3 4.0 124.96 102.95 368.72 6,914.19
2011 2.6 2.4 2.4 2.6 2.9 3.5 4.3 131.48 109.53 304.60 5,898.35
2011          Nov 1.9 1.7 1.7 1.9 2.4 2.7 4.4 128.90 106.38 313.93 6,088.84
         Dec 1.9 1.7 1.6 1.9 2.4 2.7 4.6 131.48 109.53 304.60 5,898.35
2012          Jan 1.7 1.6 1.5 1.8 2.2 2.6 4.3 131.37 109.30 332.18 6,458.91
         Feb 1.7 1.6 1.6 1.9 2.0 2.5 4.0 131.35 109.16 352.13 6,856.08         Mar 1.7 1.6 1.6 1.8 2.0 2.4 4.0 131.43 109.00 356.61 6,946.83
         Apr 1.6 1.5 1.4 1.6 1.9 2.4 3.9 132.70 109.92 345.43 6,761.19
1Bearer debt securities with maximum maturities according to the terms of issue of ding of the debt securities included in the calculation. Monthly figures are calculated
over 4 years if their mean residual maturities exceed 3 years. Convertible debt on the basis of the yields on all the business days in a month. The annual figures are
securities, etc. debt securities with unscheduled redemption, zero -coupon bonds, the unweighted means of the monthly figures. 2End of year or month. 3Source:
floating -rate notes and bonds not denominated in euro are not included. Group Deutsche Börse AG. 4Only debt securities eligible as underlying instruments for
yields for the various categories of securities are weighted by the amounts outstan- futures contracts; calculated as unweighted averages. 
 
 
6 Sales and purchases of mutual fund shares in Germany
  
€ million
Sales Purchases
Domestic mutual funds 1  (sales receipts) Residents
Mutual funds open to the Credit institutions
general public including building
Other sectors 3 and loan associations 2 
of which
Sales Open- of which of which
= Secur- end Foreign Foreign
total Money ities- real Special- mutual mutualpur- market based estate ised Foreign fund fund Non-resi-
Period chases Total Total funds funds funds funds funds  
4 Total Total shares Total shares dents 5 
2000 118,021 85,160 39,712 − 2,188 36,818 − 2,824 45,448 32,861 107,019 14,454 92 92,565 32,769 11,002
2001 97,077 76,811 35,522 12,410 9,195 10,159 41,289 20,266 96,127 10,251 2,703 85,876 17,563 9512002 66,571 59,482 25,907 3,682 7,247 14,916 33,575 7,089 67,251 2,100 3,007 65,151 4,082 − 6802003 47,754 43,943 20,079 − 924 7,408 14,166 23,864 3,811 49,547 − 2,658 734 52,205 3,077 − 1,7932004 14,435 1,453 − 3,978 − 6,160 − 1,246 3,245 5,431 12,982 10,267 8,446 3,796 1,821 9,186 4,168
2005 85,268 41,718 6,400 − 124 7,001 − 3,186 35,317 43,550 79,252 21,290 7,761 57,962 35,789 6,016
2006 47,264 19,535 − 14,257 490 − 9,362 − 8,814 33,791 27,729 39,006 14,676 5,221 24,330 22,508 8,2582007 55,778 13,436 − 7,872 − 4,839 − 12,848 6,840 21,307 42,342 51,309 − 229 4,240 51,538 38,102 4,4692008 2,598 − 7,911 − 14,409 − 12,171 − 11,149 799 6,498 10,509 11,315 − 16,625 − 9,252 27,940 19,761 − 8,717
2009 48,081 43,747 10,966 − 5,047 11,749 2,686 32,780 4,333 36,339 − 14,995 − 8,178 51,334 12,511 11,742
2010 107,350 84,906 13,381 − 148 8,683 1,897 71,525 22,443 104,778 3,873 6,290 100,905 16,153 2,5722011 45,362 45,221 − 1,340 − 379 − 2,037 1,562 46,561 142 37,651 − 7,576 − 694 45,227 836 7,711
2011          Sep 1,228 691 − 138 45 − 372 310 830 537 − 55 − 874 − 186 819 723 1,283         Oct 5,417 5,165 342 − 36 441 − 3 4,823 252 4,347 − 320 349 4,667 − 97 1,070
         Nov 6,324 5,742 − 1,011 − 70 − 1,571 − 61 6,753 582 7,457 − 61 404 7,518 178 − 1,133         Dec 6,474 9,000 − 2,006 − 26 − 1,288 443 11,006 − 2,526 5,536 − 3,690 − 1,411 9,226 − 1,115 938
2012          Jan 5,897 4,068 723 − 332 597 611 3,345 1,829 6,186 − 1,426 113 7,612 1,716 − 289
         Feb 14,938 13,402 − 582 − 169 − 831 431 13,984 1,536 15,218 − 1,186 192 16,404 1,344 − 280         Mar 6,551 3,595 − 668 − 145 − 859 396 4,263 2,956 6,999 − 284 641 7,283 2,315 − 448
1Including public limited investment companies. 2Book values. 3Residual. 4Net transaction values. — The figures for the most recent date are provisional; revisions
purchases or net sales (−) of foreign fund shares by residents; transaction values. are not specially marked. 
5Net purchases or net sales (−) of domestic fund shares by non-residents;

Deutsche Bundesbank
52  Monthly Report
May 2012
VIII  Financial accounts
  
1  Acquisition of financial assets and financing of private non-financial sectors
(non-consolidated)
  
  € billion
2010 2011 
Item 2009 2010 2011 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4
Households  1 
  I  Acquisition of financial assets
Currency and deposits 49.9 72.7 66.7 14.7 19.1 5.3 33.6 6.4 17.4 15.6 27.3
Debt securities 2 − 12.6 − 11.5 − 1.9 − 3.5 − 5.0 0.9 − 3.8 2.5 1.8 − 4.0 − 2.2
Shares 16.3 13.4 14.3 2.6 5.1 − 1.6 7.2 3.3 0.5 5.3 5.3
Other equity 3.0 3.0 3.0 0.7 0.7 0.7 0.8 0.7 0.7 0.8 0.7
Mutual funds shares − 1.0 10.0 − 14.5 3.4 6.6 0.5 − 0.5 − 3.5 − 0.1 − 7.0 − 4.0
Claims on insurance
corporations 3 62.5 60.5 48.1 21.4 12.2 10.6 16.2 16.9 10.5 8.4 12.3
short-term claims 0.3 − 0.7 0.7 − 0.1 − 0.1 − 0.1 − 0.4 0.1 0.2 0.2 0.2
longer-term claims 62.2 61.2 47.4 21.6 12.3 10.7 16.6 16.7 10.2 8.2 12.2
Claims from companypension commitments 10.0 7.8 8.0 1.9 2.0 1.9 2.0 2.0 2.1 2.0 2.0
Other claims 
4 17.3 − 2.1 25.1 10.5 − 2.0 12.9 − 23.4 20.4 3.0 10.1 − 8.3
Total 145.3 153.9 148.8 51.7 38.8 31.2 32.1 48.6 35.9 31.1 33.2
  II Financing
Loans − 7.6 4.4 10.5 − 7.3 5.6 5.5 0.6 − 3.9 4.9 6.8 2.7
short-term loans − 4.3 − 2.3 − 2.1 − 0.3 1.0 − 0.8 − 2.1 − 0.6 1.0 − 0.9 − 1.6
longer-term loans − 3.4 6.6 12.6 − 6.9 4.5 6.3 2.7 − 3.3 3.9 7.7 4.3
Other liabilities 1.0 0.1 0.4 0.4 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.3 0.3 0.1 0.0 − 0.0
Total − 6.6 4.5 10.8 − 6.9 5.6 5.4 0.3 − 3.5 4.9 6.8 2.6
Corporations
I   Acquisition of financial assets
Currency and deposits 25.0 7.3 21.0 3.4 − 20.9 18.9 5.9 5.4 − 17.1 1.6 31.1
Debt securities 2 4.8 − 0.1 4.9 − 0.7 0.4 1.7 − 1.6 3.5 − 0.7 0.9 1.2
Financial derivatives − 5.5 26.8 14.5 2.2 3.3 4.0 17.3 5.1 2.9 4.3 2.1
Shares 31.2 33.5 30.5 5.4 0.5 10.1 17.6 3.1 7.8 9.0 10.6
Other equity 29.1 48.7 32.8 32.3 7.3 6.0 3.1 1.6 15.8 5.1 10.3
Mutual funds shares − 2.6 8.8 23.8 1.5 0.5 7.6 − 0.7 0.9 10.3 2.7 9.9
Loans 87.1 95.2 87.3 26.5 28.7 22.9 17.1 31.8 25.4 31.7 − 1.6
short-term loans 53.8 70.4 70.8 20.2 20.0 17.0 13.2 25.8 23.6 22.2 − 0.8
longer-term loans 33.3 24.8 16.5 6.3 8.7 5.9 3.8 6.0 1.8 9.5 − 0.8
Claims on insurancecorporations 
3 0.8 − 0.7 − 0.6 − 0.2 − 0.2 − 0.2 − 0.2 − 0.2 − 0.2 − 0.2 − 0.2
short-term claims 0.8 − 0.7 − 0.6 − 0.2 − 0.2 − 0.2 − 0.2 − 0.2 − 0.2 − 0.2 − 0.2
longer-term claims . . . . . . . . . . .
Other claims 11.7 − 66.5 − 5.4 − 34.6 18.6 − 36.6 − 13.8 12.4 16.0 10.5 − 44.2
Total 181.8 152.9 208.6 35.8 38.2 34.3 44.5 63.6 60.2 65.6 19.2
  II Financing
Debt securities 2 − 7.1 9.6 3.8 8.7 − 0.5 − 3.6 5.1 7.7 − 0.3 4.2 − 7.8
Financial derivatives . . . . . . . . . . .
Shares 5.5 7.2 7.4 6.1 0.1 0.2 0.8 0.3 5.5 − 0.3 1.9
Other equity 10.3 5.7 11.9 2.1 3.1 1.5 − 0.9 5.3 1.5 1.7 3.4
Loans 57.3 62.3 108.1 24.9 15.0 21.0 1.4 16.1 36.2 51.8 4.1
short-term loans 9.6 55.2 79.2 30.2 21.1 9.0 − 5.0 8.8 28.3 35.6 6.6
longer-term loans 47.7 7.1 28.9 − 5.3 − 6.0 12.0 6.4 7.3 7.9 16.2 − 2.4
Claims from companypension commitments 4.8 2.6 2.6 0.7 0.7 0.7 0.7 0.7 0.7 0.7 0.7
Other liabilities 45.9 33.7 56.0 4.3 8.2 − 25.9 47.1 22.7 − 4.6 15.8 22.1
Total 116.7 121.2 189.8 46.7 26.6 − 6.3 54.2 52.7 39.0 73.8 24.4
1Including non-profit institutions serving households. 2Including money market and supplementary pension funds. 4Including accumulated interest-bearing surplus
paper. 3Including private pension funds, burial funds, occupational pension schemes shares with insurance corporations. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
53  Monthly Report
May 2012
VIII  Financial accounts
  
2  Financial assets and liabilities of private non-financial sectors
(non-consolidated)
  
  End-of-year level, end-of-quarter level; € billion
2010 2011 
Item
2009 2010 2011 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4
Households  1 
  I  Financial assets
Currency and deposits 1,788.1 1,860.8 1,927.5 1,802.8 1,821.9 1,827.2 1,860.8 1,867.2 1,884.6 1,900.2 1,927.5
Debt securities 2 265.5 254.1 247.1 264.7 259.1 259.6 254.1 254.8 258.3 247.8 247.1
Shares 201.7 243.5 221.5 214.1 208.5 215.0 243.5 257.2 260.1 206.3 221.5
Other equity 201.0 196.5 202.6 200.3 208.1 195.6 196.5 192.0 192.6 196.1 202.6
Mutual funds shares 416.2 435.4 394.9 426.9 420.1 426.5 435.4 426.2 421.1 389.2 394.9
Claims on insurance
corporations 3 1,286.4 1,347.2 1,393.0 1,300.7 1,315.9 1,330.7 1,347.2 1,363.2 1,373.2 1,381.3 1,393.0
short-term claims 74.4 73.7 74.5 74.3 74.2 74.1 73.7 73.9 74.1 74.3 74.5
longer-term claims 1,212.0 1,273.4 1,318.6 1,226.4 1,241.7 1,256.6 1,273.4 1,289.3 1,299.1 1,307.0 1,318.6
Claims from company
pension commitments 273.4 281.2 289.2 275.3 277.3 279.3 281.2 283.2 285.2 287.2 289.2
Other claims 4 38.7 39.0 38.9 38.6 38.4 38.1 39.0 39.1 39.2 39.0 38.9
Total 4,471.0 4,657.9 4,714.8 4,523.4 4,549.3 4,571.9 4,657.9 4,683.0 4,714.4 4,647.1 4,714.8
  II Liabilities
Loans 1,518.0 1,522.4 1,536.8 1,511.5 1,517.1 1,522.2 1,522.4 1,518.5 1,523.2 1,534.4 1,536.8
short-term loans 75.7 75.6 73.9 75.4 78.0 77.6 75.6 75.0 75.8 75.0 73.9
longer-term loans 1,442.3 1,446.8 1,463.0 1,436.1 1,439.1 1,444.6 1,446.8 1,443.5 1,447.4 1,459.4 1,463.0
Other liabilities 12.1 11.6 13.0 13.4 12.9 13.1 11.6 13.4 12.8 13.2 13.0
Total 1,530.1 1,533.9 1,549.8 1,525.0 1,530.0 1,535.3 1,533.9 1,531.9 1,536.1 1,547.6 1,549.8
Corporations
I   Financial assets
Currency and deposits 457.1 450.1 460.5 453.9 438.5 449.9 450.1 440.4 425.5 429.9 460.5
Debt securities 2 48.4 48.1 52.6 48.2 48.5 50.0 48.1 51.6 51.1 51.6 52.6
Financial derivatives . . . . . . . . . . .
Shares 822.4 908.4 804.8 853.8 827.8 849.9 908.4 920.7 933.7 773.2 804.8
Other equity 354.3 388.6 428.2 384.0 405.0 385.1 388.6 379.9 395.4 405.8 428.2
Mutual funds shares 108.8 119.3 123.1 114.4 113.7 118.8 119.3 119.9 120.0 117.6 123.1
Loans 450.1 545.3 632.6 476.6 505.3 528.2 545.3 577.1 602.5 634.2 632.6
short-term loans 294.2 364.6 435.4 314.4 334.4 351.4 364.6 390.4 414.0 436.2 435.4
longer-term loans 155.8 180.7 197.1 162.2 170.9 176.8 180.7 186.7 188.5 198.0 197.1
Claims on insurance
corporations 3 40.2 39.6 38.9 40.1 39.9 39.8 39.6 39.4 39.2 39.1 38.9
short-term claims 40.2 39.6 38.9 40.1 39.9 39.8 39.6 39.4 39.2 39.1 38.9longer-term claims . . . . . . . . . . .
Other claims 916.1 739.3 761.1 910.5 952.2 923.5 739.3 764.6 777.4 747.5 761.1
Total 3,197.5 3,238.7 3,301.9 3,281.6 3,331.0 3,345.2 3,238.7 3,293.5 3,344.8 3,198.9 3,301.9
  II Liabilities
Debt securities 
2 136.9 145.2 152.0 146.9 154.1 153.6 145.2 128.5 130.6 155.9 152.0
Financial derivatives . . . . . . . . . . .
Shares 1,081.3 1,301.8 1,110.5 1,118.8 1,089.5 1,159.5 1,301.8 1,322.3 1,357.5 1,046.6 1,110.5
Other equity 702.3 708.0 719.9 704.3 707.4 708.9 708.0 713.3 714.8 716.5 719.9
Loans 1,444.2 1,506.4 1,624.6 1,461.2 1,476.5 1,496.1 1,506.4 1,520.8 1,564.8 1,616.8 1,624.6
short-term loans 476.6 533.7 609.1 502.1 523.3 531.0 533.7 539.0 567.3 602.5 609.1
longer-term loans 967.6 972.7 1,015.5 959.1 953.2 965.1 972.7 981.8 997.5 1,014.3 1,015.5
Claims from companypension commitments 223.2 225.8 228.4 223.8 224.5 225.1 225.8 226.5 227.1 227.8 228.4
Other liabilities 856.8 833.5 855.9 863.3 886.7 847.9 833.5 829.7 834.1 823.1 855.9
Total 4,444.7 4,720.7 4,691.3 4,518.3 4,538.7 4,591.1 4,720.7 4,741.0 4,828.9 4,586.5 4,691.3
1Including non-profit institutions serving households. 2Including money market and supplementary pension funds. 4Including accumulated interest-bearing surplus
paper. 3Including private pension funds, burial funds, occupational pension schemes shares with insurance corporations. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
54  Monthly Report
May 2012
IX Public finances in Germany
 
1 General government: deficit and debt level as defined in the Maastricht Treaty
 
 
 
Social Social
General Central State Local security General Central State Local security
government government government government funds government government government government funds
Period € billion as a percentage of GDP
Deficit/surplus1
2006 − 37.9 − 34.4 − 11.8 + 3.3 + 5.0 − 1.6 − 1.5 − 0.5 + 0.1 + 0.2
2007 + 5.8 − 18.6 + 2.5 + 11.1 + 10.8 + 0.2 − 0.8 + 0.1 + 0.5 + 0.4
2008 p − 1.4 − 15.2 − 2.2 + 8.8 + 7.2 − 0.1 − 0.6 − 0.1 + 0.4 + 0.3
2009 p − 76.3 − 38.2 − 20.9 − 2.1 − 15.2 − 3.2 − 1.6 − 0.9 − 0.1 − 0.6
2010 2, p − 105.9 − 79.7 − 22.8 − 5.7 + 2.3 − 4.3 − 3.2 − 0.9 − 0.2 + 0.1
2011 pe − 25.8 − 27.0 − 14.8 + 0.8 + 15.1 − 1.0 − 1.0 − 0.6 + 0.0 + 0.6
2010          H1  2, p − 37.3 − 26.9 − 9.8 − 3.7 + 3.1 − 3.1 − 2.2 − 0.8 − 0.3 + 0.3
         H2  p − 68.8 − 53.1 − 12.8 − 2.1 − 0.9 − 5.4 − 4.2 − 1.0 − 0.2 − 0.1
2011          H1  pe − 5.8 − 15.2 − 2.4 + 1.4 + 10.3 − 0.5 − 1.2 − 0.2 + 0.1 + 0.8
         H2  pe − 19.6 − 11.2 − 12.6 − 0.6 + 4.8 − 1.5 − 0.9 − 1.0 − 0.0 + 0.4
Debt level3 End of year or quarter
2006 1,574.6 970.7 492.1 127.2 1.7 68.0 42.0 21.3 5.5 0.1
2007 1,582.4 978.0 494.1 125.6 1.6 65.2 40.3 20.3 5.2 0.1
2008 1,649.3 1,007.6 531.3 125.4 1.5 66.7 40.7 21.5 5.1 0.1
2009 1,766.9 1,075.7 574.3 131.3 1.3 74.4 45.3 24.2 5.5 0.1
2010 pe 2,056.7 1,317.1 621.2 134.5 1.3 83.0 53.2 25.1 5.4 0.1
2011 pe 2,088.5 1,328.6 637.6 140.0 1.3 81.2 51.7 24.8 5.4 0.1
2010          Q1 pe 1,786.9 1,088.5 580.2 132.5 1.3 74.6 45.4 24.2 5.5 0.1
         Q2 pe 1,828.9 1,099.1 609.6 134.9 1.3 75.4 45.3 25.1 5.6 0.1
         Q3 pe 1,853.7 1,116.4 616.1 136.7 1.6 75.6 45.5 25.1 5.6 0.1
         Q4 pe 2,056.7 1,317.1 621.2 134.5 1.3 83.0 53.2 25.1 5.4 0.1
2011          Q1 pe 2,057.3 1,318.4 618.3 136.7 1.7 82.0 52.6 24.6 5.4 0.1
         Q2 pe 2,070.7 1,324.2 624.1 138.0 2.7 81.8 52.3 24.6 5.4 0.1
         Q3 pe 2,084.0 1,334.2 628.1 138.4 1.3 81.6 52.2 24.6 5.4 0.0
         Q4 pe 2,088.5 1,328.6 637.6 140.0 1.3 81.2 51.7 24.8 5.4 0.1
Sources: Federal Statistical Office and Bundesbank calculations. 1Unlike the fiscal bal- counts. 2Including the €4.4 billion proceeds received from the 2010 frequency auc-
ance as shown in the national accounts, the deficit as defined in the Maastricht tion. 3Quarterly GDP ratios are based on the national output of the four preceding
Treaty includes interest flows from swaps and forward rate agreements. The quarters. 
half-year figures correspond to the deficit/surplus according to the national ac-
 
 
2 General government: revenue, expenditure and fiscal deficit/surplus as shown in the national accounts*
  
 
Revenue Expenditure
of which of which
Compen- Gross Memo item
Social con- Social sation of capital Deficit/ Total tax
Period Total Taxes tributions Other Total benefits employees Interest formation Other surplus burden  1 
€ billion
2006 1,011.1 512.7 400.7 97.7 1,049.3 580.6 177.2 66.1 33.7 191.6 − 38.2 924.7
2007 1,062.3 558.4 400.9 103.0 1,056.8 579.4 178.2 68.5 36.0 194.6 + 5.5 971.3
2008 p 1,088.2 572.6 408.8 106.9 1,089.6 590.3 182.3 68.3 38.9 209.8 − 1.4 994.2
2009 p 1,066.0 546.3 409.8 109.9 1,142.1 622.6 189.7 63.8 41.4 224.6 − 76.1 966.3
2010 p 1,079.8 548.9 418.7 112.2 2 1,185.8 632.3 194.5 61.9 40.8 2 256.3 2 − 106.0 977.7
2011 pe 1,148.2 587.8 435.3 125.1 1,173.5 630.9 199.8 67.7 42.3 232.9 − 25.3 1,033.6
as a percentage of GDP
2006 43.7 22.2 17.3 4.2 45.3 25.1 7.7 2.9 1.5 8.3 − 1.7 40.0
2007 43.7 23.0 16.5 4.2 43.5 23.9 7.3 2.8 1.5 8.0 + 0.2 40.0
2008 p 44.0 23.1 16.5 4.3 44.0 23.9 7.4 2.8 1.6 8.5 − 0.1 40.2
2009 p 44.9 23.0 17.3 4.6 48.1 26.2 8.0 2.7 1.7 9.5 − 3.2 40.7
2010 p 43.6 22.2 16.9 4.5 2 47.9 25.5 7.9 2.5 1.6 2 10.3 2 − 4.3 39.5
2011 pe 44.7 22.9 16.9 4.9 45.6 24.5 7.8 2.6 1.6 9.1 − 1.0 40.2
Percentage growth rates
2006 + 4.3 + 7.8 + 0.9 + 1.2 + 0.6 + 0.2 + 0.3 + 4.6 + 7.4 − 0.4 . + 4.6
2007 + 5.1 + 8.9 + 0.1 + 5.4 + 0.7 − 0.2 + 0.6 + 3.6 + 6.7 + 1.5 . + 5.0
2008 p + 2.4 + 2.5 + 2.0 + 3.8 + 3.1 + 1.9 + 2.3 − 0.2 + 7.9 + 7.8 . + 2.4
2009 p − 2.0 − 4.6 + 0.2 + 2.8 + 4.8 + 5.5 + 4.0 − 6.6 + 6.5 + 7.1 . − 2.8
2010 p + 1.3 + 0.5 + 2.2 + 2.1 + 3.8 + 1.6 + 2.5 − 3.1 − 1.5 + 14.1 . + 1.2
2011 pe + 6.3 + 7.1 + 4.0 + 11.5 − 1.0 − 0.2 + 2.7 + 9.3 + 3.6 − 9.1 . + 5.7
Source: Federal Statistical Office. *Figures in accordance with ESA 1995. In the website. 1Taxes and social contributions plus customs duties and the EU share in
Monthly Reports up to December 2006, customs duties, the EU share in VAT revenue VAT revenue. 2Including the €4.4 billion proceeds received from the 2010 frequency
and EU subsidies were included in the national accounts’ data (without affecting the auction, which are deducted from other expenditure in the national accounts. 
fiscal deficit/surplus). This information can still be found on the Bundesbank’s

Deutsche Bundesbank
55  Monthly Report
May 2012
IX Public finances in Germany
 
3 General government: budgetary development (as per government’s financial statistics)
 
 
€ billion
Central, state and local government  1 Social security funds 2 General government, total
Revenue Expenditure
of which of which 3 
Finan- Person- Fixed Finan-
cial nel asset cialtransac- expend- Current forma- transac- Deficit / Rev- Expend- Deficit / Rev- Expend- Deficit /
Period Total 
4 Taxes tions 5 Total 4 iture grants Interest tion tions 5 surplus enue 6 iture surplus enue iture surplus
2004 pe 545.8 442.8 24.1 610.4 173.4 236.9 64.8 34.3 9.6 − 64.5 469.7 468.6 + 1.1 926.8 990.2 − 63.4
2005 pe 568.9 452.1 31.3 620.6 172.1 245.3 64.0 33.0 14.3 − 51.7 467.8 471.3 − 3.4 947.4 1,002.5 − 55.1
2006 pe 590.9 488.4 18.8 626.2 169.7 252.1 64.4 33.7 11.6 − 35.3 486.3 466.6 + 19.7 988.2 1,003.8 − 15.6
2007 pe 644.8 538.2 17.7 644.2 182.2 250.0 66.2 34.6 9.5 + 0.6 475.3 466.4 + 8.9 1,025.6 1,016.1 + 9.5
2008 pe 668.9 561.2 13.4 677.4 187.3 259.9 67.3 36.4 18.6 − 8.5 485.5 478.9 + 6.6 1,058.5 1,060.5 − 1.9
2009 pe 631.4 524.0 9.2 720.9 194.9 271.1 63.7 40.4 38.0 − 89.5 492.0 505.9 − 13.9 1,021.4 1,124.9 − 103.4
2010 pe 650.5 530.6 12.7 732.7 199.8 293.9 60.1 40.1 19.4 − 82.2 516.9 512.9 + 4.0 1,049.8 1,128.0 − 78.2
2009          Q1 p 156.6 128.7 1.7 175.4 45.9 67.2 22.8 5.0 10.0 − 18.9 117.9 122.3 − 4.4 250.8 274.1 − 23.3
         Q2 p 154.8 130.6 3.3 169.4 47.1 60.6 10.7 7.5 16.9 − 14.6 120.5 125.5 − 5.0 251.8 271.4 − 19.6
         Q3 p 148.9 124.4 2.1 174.9 47.6 65.0 19.8 10.5 4.5 − 26.0 120.1 127.6 − 7.5 245.2 278.7 − 33.5
         Q4 p 169.4 140.3 1.9 199.5 52.5 76.6 10.2 16.3 6.4 − 30.2 132.3 130.1 + 2.2 270.6 298.6 − 28.0
2010          Q1 p 147.9 121.6 2.6 180.4 47.6 74.8 21.2 5.5 4.9 − 32.5 123.6 127.6 − 4.0 242.2 278.7 − 36.5
         Q2 p 7 163.6 134.9 3.7 173.6 48.1 71.2 13.2 8.1 6.2 − 10.0 128.2 127.3 + 0.9 7 262.3 271.5 − 9.2
         Q3 p 153.8 127.6 3.0 177.3 48.3 69.8 16.1 10.5 3.4 − 23.6 124.7 125.6 − 1.0 251.5 276.0 − 24.5
         Q4 p 183.4 147.6 3.2 199.5 54.0 76.1 9.2 14.7 4.8 − 16.2 133.3 131.8 + 1.5 290.4 305.1 − 14.7
2011          Q1 p 162.9 134.9 4.1 183.6 49.7 73.8 21.2 6.3 4.6 − 20.7 127.3 127.2 + 0.1 261.0 281.5 − 20.5
         Q2 p 189.6 145.6 18.6 172.7 50.0 68.0 10.9 8.7 8.7 + 16.9 130.3 126.2 + 4.1 292.5 271.5 + 21.0
Source: Bundesbank calculations based on the data from the Federal Statistical mated. 3The development of the types of expenditure recorded here is influenced in
Office. 1Including subsidiary budgets, from 2007 also including the post office pen- part by statistical changeovers. 4Including discrepancies in clearing transactions be-
sion fund; excluding the special fund ”Provision for final payments for inflation-in- tween central, state and local government. 5On the revenue side, this contains pro-
dexed Federal securities”, which was set up in 2009. Unlike the annual figures based ceeds booked as disposals of equity interests and as loan repayments. On the expend-on the annual calculations of the Federal Statistical Office, the quarterly figures do iture side, this contains the acquisition of equity interests and loans granted. 6In-
not include municipal special purpose associations and various special ac- cluding Federal Government liquidity assistance to the Federal Labour Office. 7In-
counts. 2The annual figures do not tally with the sum of the quarterly figures, as the cluding the €4.4 billion proceeds received from the 2010 frequency auction. 
latter 
are all provisional. The quarterly figures for some insurance sectors are esti-
4 Central, state and local government: budgetary development (as per government’s financial statistics)
 
 
€ billion
Central government
State government  2,3 Local government 3 
Period Revenue 1 Expenditure Deficit / surplus Revenue Expenditure Deficit / surplus Revenue Expenditure Deficit / surplus
2004 233.9 273.6 − 39.7 233.5 257.1 − 23.6 147.0 150.1 − 3.1
2005 250.0 281.5 − 31.5 237.4 259.6 − 22.2 151.3 153.2 − 1.9
2006 254.6 282.8 − 28.2 250.3 260.1 − 9.8 161.1 157.4 + 3.72007 
pe 277.4 292.1 − 14.7 275.9 267.5 + 8.4 171.3 162.4 + 8.9
2008 pe 292.0 303.8 − 11.8 279.3 278.1 + 1.2 176.9 169.0 + 7.9
2009 pe 282.6 317.1 − 34.5 265.9 293.4 − 27.5 172.0 178.9 − 6.9
2010 pe 288.0 332.4 − 44.4 278.5 302.1 − 23.6 176.5 183.9 − 7.4
2011 pe 307.1 324.8 − 17.7 304.0 315.4 − 11.4 185.6 187.0 − 1.4
2009          Q1 p 65.8 76.8 − 11.0 65.3 75.9 − 10.6 35.8 39.0 − 3.1
         Q2 p 71.3 68.6 + 2.7 66.1 67.9 − 1.8 41.1 42.2 − 1.1
         Q3 p 68.6 84.5 − 15.9 63.1 69.4 − 6.3 42.5 45.1 − 2.6
         Q4 p 77.0 87.2 − 10.2 70.5 79.0 − 8.5 50.6 51.0 − 0.4
2010          Q1 p 61.1 82.6 − 21.5 65.0 73.5 − 8.5 34.6 41.2 − 6.6
         Q2 p 4 75.6 80.6 − 5.0 68.3 69.1 − 0.8 42.2 43.5 − 1.3
         Q3 p 66.2 82.7 − 16.6 68.5 73.3 − 4.8 43.8 45.2 − 1.4
         Q4 p 85.2 86.5 − 1.3 75.8 85.0 − 9.2 53.8 52.3 + 1.5
2011          Q1 p 65.4 84.5 − 19.1 74.1 75.6 − 1.5 37.1 42.5 − 5.3
         Q2 p 76.6 73.5 + 3.1 76.0 75.8 + 0.2 45.4 44.3 + 1.1
         Q3 p 72.6 84.8 − 12.2 71.9 75.1 − 3.2 46.4 46.6 − 0.2
         Q4 p 92.5 82.0 + 10.5 81.1 87.7 − 6.6 54.7 51.9 + 2.8
Source: Bundesbank calculations based on the data from the Federal Statistical Berlin, Bremen and Hamburg. 3Unlike the annual figure based on the annual calcu-
Office. 1Any amounts of the Bundesbank’s profit distribution exceeding the refer- lations of the Federal Statistical Office, the quarterly figures do not include various
ence value that were used to repay parts of the debt of central government’s special special accounts and municipal special purpose associations. 4Including the
funds are not included here. 2Including the local authority level of the city-states €4.4 billion proceeds received from the 2010 frequency auction. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
56  Monthly Report
May 2012
IX Public finances in Germany
 
5 Central, state and local government: tax revenue
 
 
€ million
Central and state government and European Union
Memo item
Balance of Amounts deducted
Central State Local untransferred in the federal
Period Total Total government 1 government European Union 2 government 3 tax shares 4 budget 5 
2005 452,078 392,313 211,779 158,823 21,711 59,750 + 16 21,634
2006 488,444 421,151 225,634 173,374 22,142 67,316 − 22 21,742
2007 538,243 465,554 251,747 191,558 22,249 72,551 + 138 21,643
2008 561,182 484,182 260,690 200,411 23,081 77,190 − 190 21,510
2009 524,000 455,615 252,842 182,273 20,501 68,419 − 34 24,846
2010 530,587 460,230 254,537 181,326 24,367 70,385 − 28 28,726
2011 573,352 496,739 276,599 195,676 24,464 76,570 + 43 28,615
2010          Q1 121,321 104,370 54,316 41,777 8,278 11,299 + 5,652 7,133
         Q2 134,843 116,767 66,331 46,516 3,919 18,270 − 194 7,127
         Q3 127,311 109,956 61,146 43,102 5,709 17,564 − 209 7,329
         Q4 147,112 129,137 72,744 49,932 6,462 23,253 − 5,278 7,137
2011          Q1 135,590 115,878 60,579 46,582 8,717 13,640 + 6,071 6,989
         Q2 145,636 126,086 71,530 50,289 4,266 19,544 + 6 7,102
         Q3 136,382 117,812 66,277 45,938 5,598 18,916 − 346 7,662
         Q4 155,744 136,963 78,213 52,866 5,883 24,469 − 5,688 6,863
2012          Q1 ... 122,846 62,467 50,558 9,821 ... ... 6,831
2011          Mar . 42,727 24,457 16,838 1,432 . . 2,330
2012          Mar . 45,740 24,655 18,903 2,182 . . 2,277
Sources: Federal Ministry of Finance, Federal Statistical Office and Bundesbank calcu- from central government tax revenue. 3Including local government taxes in the
lations. 1Before deducting supplementary central government grants, shares in city-states Berlin, Bremen and Hamburg. 4Difference between local government’s
energy tax revenue, compensation for the transfer of motor vehicle tax to central share in the joint taxes received by the state government cash offices in the period in
government, which are remitted to state government and consolidation question (see Table IX. 6) and the amounts passed on to local government in theaid.2Custom duties and shares in VAT and gross national income accruing to the EU same period. 5 Volume of the positions mentioned under footnote 1. 
 
 
6 Central and state government and European Union: tax revenue, by type
  
€ million
Joint taxes
Memo
Income taxes 2 Turnover taxes 5 item
Local
Local govern-
Invest- business Central State ment
Assessed ment Turnover tax govern- govern- EU share in
Wage income Corpora- income Turnover tax on trans- ment ment customs joint
Period Total 1 Total tax 3 tax tion tax tax 4 Total tax imports fers 6 taxes 7 taxes 7 duties taxes
2005 415,355 161,960 118,919 9,766 16,333 16,943 139,713 108,440 31,273 6,218 83,508 20,579 3,378 23,042
2006 446,139 182,614 122,612 17,567 22,898 19,537 146,688 111,318 35,370 7,013 84,215 21,729 3,880 24,988
2007 493,817 204,698 131,774 25,027 22,929 24,969 169,636 127,522 42,114 6,975 85,690 22,836 3,983 28,263
2008 515,498 220,483 141,895 32,685 15,868 30,035 175,989 130,789 45,200 6,784 86,302 21,937 4,002 31,316
2009 484,880 193,684 135,165 26,430 7,173 24,916 176,991 141,907 35,084 4,908 89,318 16,375 3,604 29,265
2010 488,731 192,816 127,904 31,179 12,041 21,691 180,042 136,459 43,582 5,925 93,426 12,146 4,378 28,501
2011 527,256 213,534 139,749 31,996 15,634 26,155 190,033 138,957 51,076 6,888 99,134 13,095 4,571 30,517
2010          Q1 111,163 45,127 30,255 6,155 1,951 6,766 42,891 34,054 8,837 215 19,001 2,814 1,115 6,793
         Q2 123,859 51,667 30,447 9,681 3,830 7,710 44,343 33,779 10,564 1,311 22,682 2,914 943 7,092
         Q3 116,691 42,813 30,445 7,320 1,588 3,460 44,997 33,258 11,740 1,574 22,922 3,242 1,143 6,734
         Q4 137,019 53,209 36,757 8,023 4,672 3,756 47,810 35,369 12,441 2,825 28,821 3,177 1,177 7,882
2011          Q1 123,131 50,328 32,478 6,755 2,485 8,611 47,389 35,528 11,861 366 20,515 3,408 1,124 7,253
         Q2 133,727 57,624 34,144 9,366 4,215 9,900 46,091 33,082 13,010 1,692 24,026 3,207 1,087 7,641
         Q3 125,021 47,420 33,590 7,111 3,028 3,691 47,161 34,232 12,929 1,735 24,309 3,229 1,169 7,209
         Q4 145,377 58,162 39,538 8,764 5,907 3,954 49,392 36,115 13,276 3,096 30,285 3,251 1,191 8,414
2012          Q1 130,623 56,569 34,106 8,456 5,471 8,537 48,966 36,340 12,626 275 20,059 3,629 1,126 7,777
2011          Mar 45,590 22,382 10,088 6,859 4,241 1,193 12,903 9,073 3,830 11 8,666 1,256 373 2,863
2012          Mar 48,867 26,212 10,699 8,024 5,171 2,318 13,305 8,996 4,309 11 7,620 1,321 398 3,127
Source: Federal Ministry of Finance and Bundesbank calculations. 1This total, unlike deducting child benefit and subsidies for supplementary private pension
that in Table IX. 5, does not include the receipts from the equalisation of burdens plans. 4Final withholding tax on interest income and capital gains, non-assessed
levies, local business tax (less local business tax transfers to central and state govern- taxes on earnings. 5The allocation of revenue to central, state and local govern-
ment), real property taxes and other local government taxes, or the balance of un- ment, which is adjusted at more regular intervals, is regulated in section 1 of the Rev-transferred tax shares. 2Respective percentage share of central, state and local enue Adjustment Act. Respective percentage share of central, state and local govern-
government in revenue: wage tax and assessed income tax 42.5:42.5:15, corpor- ment in revenue for 2011: 53.9:44.1:2.0. The EU share is deducted from centralation tax and non-assessed taxes on earnings 50:50:-, final withholding tax on inter- government’s share. 6Respective percentage share of central and state government
est income and capital gains, non-assessed taxes on earnings 44:44:12. 3After for 2011: 22.1:77.9. 7 For the breakdown, see Table IX. 7. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
57  Monthly Report
May 2012
IX Public finances in Germany
 
7 Central, state and local government: individual taxes  
 
 
€ million
Central government taxes 1 State government taxes 1 Local government taxes
Tax on of which
the acqui-
Soli- Motor Motor sition of Inherit- Local Real
Period Energy Tobacco darity Insurance vehicle Electri- Spirits vehicle land and ance business property
tax tax surcharge tax tax 2 city tax tax Other tax 2 buildings tax Other 3 Total tax taxes
2005 40,101 14,273 10,315 8,750 . 6,462 2,142 1,465 8,674 4,791 4,097 3,018 42,941 32,129 10,247
2006 39,916 14,387 11,277 8,775 . 6,273 2,160 1,428 8,937 6,125 3,763 2,904 49,319 38,370 10,3992007 38,955 14,254 12,349 10,331 . 6,355 1,959 1,488 8,898 6,952 4,203 2,783 51,401 40,116 10,7132008 39,248 13,574 13,146 10,478 . 6,261 2,126 1,470 8,842 5,728 4,771 2,596 52,468 41,037 10,8072009 39,822 13,366 11,927 10,548 3,803 6,278 2,101 1,473 4,398 4,857 4,550 2,571 44,028 32,421 10,936
2010 39,838 13,492 11,713 10,284 8,488 6,171 1,990 1,449 − 5,290 4,404 2,452 47,780 35,712 11,315
2011 40,036 14,414 12,781 10,755 8,422 7,247 2,149 3,330 − 6,366 4,246 2,484 52,984 40,424 11,674
2010          Q1 4,446 2,462 2,856 4,496 2,345 1,498 526 372 − 1,229 918 667 10,374 7,641 2,518
         Q2 9,596 3,327 3,100 2,060 2,235 1,570 437 357 − 1,207 1,115 591 12,295 9,201 2,915         Q3 10,172 3,608 2,615 2,110 2,012 1,563 489 354 − 1,430 1,216 597 12,194 8,618 3,373         Q4 15,625 4,096 3,142 1,619 1,895 1,540 538 366 − 1,425 1,156 597 12,918 10,252 2,508
2011          Q1 4,457 2,893 3,072 4,869 2,349 1,785 574 516 − 1,555 1,170 683 12,825 9,948 2,631
         Q2 10,002 3,300 3,450 2,017 2,215 1,960 482 599 − 1,464 1,129 614 13,601 10,366 3,031         Q3 10,058 3,418 2,879 2,145 2,006 1,763 541 1,499 − 1,581 1,039 609 13,095 9,386 3,473         Q4 15,519 4,803 3,379 1,723 1,852 1,739 553 716 − 1,766 907 578 13,463 10,724 2,540
2012          Q1 4,406 2,305 3,308 5,180 2,328 1,714 576 241 − 1,876 1,057 696 ... ... ...
2011          Mar 3,028 1,724 1,411 586 818 831 119 149 − 541 406 309 . . .2012          Mar 2,734 946 1,535 623 759 566 127 331 − 631 387 304 . . .
Sources: Federal Ministry of Finance, Federal Statistical Office and Bundesbank calcu- enue is attributable to central government. Postings to state government shown there-
lations. 1For the sum total, see Table IX. 6. 2As of 1 July 2009, motor vehicle tax rev- after relate to the booking of cash flows. 3 Notably betting, lottery and beer tax.   
 
 
8 German pension insurance scheme: budgetary development and assets*
  
€ million
Revenue 1,2 Expenditure 1,2 Assets 1,5 
of which of which
Equity
Payments interests, Memo
from Pen- mort- item
central sioners’ gages Adminis-
Contri- govern- Pension health Deficit/ and other Real trative
Period Total butions 3 ment Total payments insurance 4 surplus Total Deposits 6 Securities loans 7 estate assets
2005 229,428 156,264 71,917 233,357 199,873 13,437 − 3,929 1,976 1,794 16 42 123 4,888
2006 241,231 168,083 71,773 233,668 200,459 13,053 + 7,563 10,047 9,777 115 46 109 4,9122007 236,642 162,225 72,928 235,459 201,642 13,665 + 1,183 12,196 11,270 765 46 115 4,8192008 242,770 167,611 73,381 238,995 204,071 14,051 + 3,775 16,531 16,313 36 56 126 4,6452009 244,689 169,183 74,313 244,478 208,475 14,431 + 211 16,821 16,614 23 64 120 4,525
2010 250,133 172,767 76,173 248,076 211,852 14,343 + 2,057 19,375 18,077 1,120 73 105 4,464
2011 
p 254,358 177,415 75,689 249,913 212,808 15,007 + 4,445 25,339 22,226 2,919 79 114 4,410
2009          Q1 58,681 39,891 18,500 60,105 51,554 3,633 − 1,424 14,902 14,699 15 56 132 4,618         Q2 60,812 42,140 18,384 60,263 51,410 3,626 + 549 15,280 15,082 15 59 124 4,593         Q3 59,783 41,142 18,364 61,841 52,869 3,580 − 2,058 13,647 13,428 40 60 119 4,585         Q4 64,864 46,005 18,594 61,993 52,917 3,583 + 2,871 16,812 16,608 23 61 120 4,582
2010          Q1 59,761 40,601 18,917 61,861 53,059 3,582 − 2,100 14,922 14,717 20 64 120 4,490
         Q2 62,249 43,054 18,923 61,999 53,006 3,585 + 250 15,254 15,053 20 69 112 4,478         Q3 61,237 42,048 18,912 62,091 53,102 3,589 − 854 14,853 14,656 20 68 109 4,474         Q4 66,317 47,060 18,933 61,887 52,966 3,579 + 4,430 19,274 17,978 1,120 68 108 4,476
2011          Q1 60,804 41,608 18,902 62,188 53,176 3,742 − 1,384 18,063 17,069 819 74 101 4,482
         Q2 63,452 44,307 18,855 62,058 52,920 3,731 + 1,394 19,704 18,507 1,019 78 100 4,475         Q3 62,354 43,109 18,902 62,844 53,341 3,761 − 490 19,959 19,266 519 79 94 4,445         Q4 67,748 48,391 19,030 62,823 53,371 3,774 + 4,925 25,339 22,226 2,919 79 114 4,410
2012          Q1 62,038 42,411 19,318 62,883 53,747 3,779 − 845 24,261 21,839 2,219 88 116 4,366
Sources: Federal Ministry of Labour and Social Affairs and German pension insurance cluding investment spending and proceeds. 3Including contributions for recipients
scheme. *Excluding the German pension insurance scheme for the mining, railway of government cash benefits. 4Including long-term care insurance for pensioners
and maritime industries. 1The final annual figures do not tally with the quarterly fig- until 2004 Q1. 5Largely corresponds to the sustainability reserves. End of year or
ures, as the latter are all provisional. 2Including financial compensation payments. Ex- quarter. 6 Including cash. 7 Excluding loans to other social security funds. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
58  Monthly Report
May 2012
IX Public finances in Germany
 
9 Federal Employment Agency: budgetary development*
 
 
€ million
Revenue Expenditure
of which of which Deficit
offsetting
Unemployment support 1,2 Job promotion 2,3 grant orloan from
Measures central
Contri- Western Eastern Western Eastern financed Deficit/ govern-
Period Total 
4 butions Levies 5 Total 6 Total Germany Germany Total Germany Germany by levies  7 surplus ment
2005 52,692 46,989 1,436 53,089 27,654 20,332 7,322 11,590 7,421 4,169 1,450 − 397 397
2006 55,384 51,176 1,123 44,162 23,249 17,348 5,901 9,259 6,185 3,074 1,089 + 11,221 0
2007 42,838 32,264 971 36,196 17,356 13,075 4,282 8,370 5,748 2,623 949 + 6,643 −
2008 38,289 26,452 974 39,407 14,283 10,652 3,631 8,712 6,222 2,490 920 − 1,118 −
2009 34,254 22,046 1,000 48,057 20,866 16,534 4,332 11,595 8,794 2,801 1,946 − 13,803 −
2010 37,070 22,614 3,222 45,213 19,456 15,629 3,827 10,791 8,287 2,504 740 − 8,143 5,200
2009          Q1 6,283 5,248 192 10,396 4,723 3,556 1,167 2,318 1,688 630 480 − 4,113 −
         Q2 6,490 5,421 261 12,391 5,563 4,376 1,187 2,893 2,193 700 491 − 5,901 −
         Q3 6,853 5,316 250 12,480 5,465 4,439 1,026 3,026 2,325 701 630 − 5,626 −
         Q4 14,627 6,061 296 12,790 5,115 4,163 951 3,358 2,588 770 345 + 1,837 −
2010          Q1 10,020 5,196 714 11,681 6,475 5,112 1,362 2,957 2,263 694 208 − 1,661 −
         Q2 10,649 5,601 784 10,501 5,264 4,148 1,116 2,872 2,204 668 184 + 148 −
         Q3 8,109 5,527 808 8,887 4,082 3,353 729 2,431 1,863 567 193 − 778 −
         Q4 8,291 6,290 916 14,144 3,635 3,016 619 2,531 1,957 575 154 − 5,853 5,200
2011          Q1 10,259 5,853 123 9,583 4,602 3,701 901 2,660 2,048 612 186 + 676 −
         Q2 8,802 6,358 60 8,246 3,710 3,007 703 2,285 1,753 532 175 + 556 −
         Q3 7,467 6,205 76 7,450 3,293 2,707 586 1,910 1,464 446 187 + 17 −
Source: Federal Employment Agency. *Excluding pension fund. 1Unemployment icit offsetting grant or loan. 5Levies to promote winter construction and to pay insolv-
benefit and short-time working benefit. 2Including contributions to the statutory ency compensation to employees. 6From 2005, including a compensatory amount
health, pension and long-term care insurance schemes. 3Vocational training, meas- or a reintegration payment to central government. 7Promotion of winter con-
ures to encourage job take-up, rehabilitation, job creation measures, compensation struction and insolvency compensation for employees. top-up payments and business start-up grants. 4Excluding central government def-
 
 
10 Statutory health insurance scheme: budgetary development
  
€ million
Revenue 1 Expenditure 1 
of which of which
Central Thera- Adminis-
govern- peutical trative
Contri- ment Hospital Pharma- Medical Dental treatment Sickness expend- Deficit/
Period Total butions 2 funds 3 Total treatment ceuticals treatment treatment  4 and aids benefits iture 5 surplus
2005 145,742 140,250 2,500 144,071 48,959 25,358 23,096 9,928 8,284 5,868 8,303 + 1,671
2006 149,929 142,183 4,200 148,297 50,327 25,835 23,896 10,364 8,303 5,708 8,319 + 1,632
2007 156,058 149,964 2,500 154,314 50,850 27,791 24,788 10,687 8,692 6,017 8,472 + 1,744
2008 162,516 155,883 2,500 161,334 52,623 29,145 25,887 10,926 9,095 6,583 8,680 + 1,182
2009 169,758 158,594 7,200 170,823 55,977 30,696 27,635 11,219 9,578 7,258 8,947 − 1,065
2010 179,878 160,792 15,700 176,036 56,697 30,147 28,432 11,419 10,609 7,797 9,553 + 3,842
2011 p 188,957 170,830 15,300 179,657 58,688 29,014 29,054 11,660 11,241 8,510 9,410 + 9,300
2009          Q1 42,502 39,324 2,575 41,432 14,154 7,463 6,969 2,797 2,095 1,822 1,977 + 1,069
         Q2 42,540 40,464 1,377 42,400 14,092 7,652 6,810 2,857 2,392 1,779 2,083 + 140
         Q3 42,752 38,827 3,002 42,548 13,967 7,574 6,981 2,684 2,437 1,746 2,324 + 204
         Q4 41,635 39,992 246 44,445 13,892 8,052 7,021 2,904 2,607 1,895 2,604 − 2,809
2010          Q1 6 43,093 38,542 3,878 43,274 14,419 7,549 7,255 2,871 2,368 1,996 2,130 − 182
         Q2 44,440 39,826 3,889 43,999 14,037 7,870 7,128 2,882 2,669 1,955 2,261 + 441
         Q3 44,457 39,808 3,884 43,662 14,122 7,592 7,007 2,786 2,676 1,903 2,255 + 795
         Q4 47,505 42,600 4,049 44,842 14,144 7,307 7,107 2,952 2,853 1,943 2,876 + 2,663
2011          Q1 45,339 40,871 3,783 44,392 15,075 7,158 7,361 2,893 2,528 2,210 2,173 + 947
         Q2 46,887 42,370 3,783 44,955 14,601 7,239 7,372 3,001 2,834 2,106 2,263 + 1,931
         Q3 46,865 42,298 3,783 44,432 14,594 7,236 7,160 2,768 2,762 2,069 2,292 + 2,433
         Q4 49,866 45,291 3,950 45,878 14,418 7,382 7,161 2,997 3,117 2,125 2,682 + 3,988
Source: Federal Ministry of Health. 1The final annual figures do not tally with the penses for levying contributions incurred by other social insurance funds. Including ad-
sum of the quarterly figures, as the latter are all provisional. Excluding revenue and ministrative expenditure on disease management programmes. 6Data on individual
expenditure as part of the risk structure compensation scheme. 2Including contri- expenditure categories for 2010 only partly comparable with prior-year figures owing
butions from subsidised low-paid part-time employment. 3Federal grant and liquid- to a change in the statistical definition. 
ity assistance. 4Including dentures. 5Net, ie after deducting reimbursements for ex-

Deutsche Bundesbank
59  Monthly Report
May 2012
IX Public finances in Germany
 
11 Statutory long-term care insurance scheme: budgetary development
 
 
€ million
Revenue 1 Expenditure 1 
of which
Contributions to
of which Non-cash In-patient Nursing pension insur- Administrative Deficit/
Period Total Contributions 2 Total care benefits care benefit ance scheme 3 expenditure surplus
2005 17,526 17,385 17,891 2,409 8,516 4,050 890 875 − 366
2006 17,749 17,611 18,064 2,437 8,671 4,017 862 886 − 3152007 18,036 17,858 18,385 2,475 8,831 4,050 861 896 − 3502008 19,785 19,608 19,163 2,605 9,054 4,225 868 941 + 6222009 21,300 21,137 20,314 2,742 9,274 4,443 878 984 + 986
2010 21,864 21,659 21,539 2,933 9,567 4,673 869 1,028 + 325
2011 
p 22,243 22,129 21,930 2,979 9,708 4,744 869 1,035 + 313
2009          Q1 5,110 5,082 4,970 676 2,284 1,104 215 274 + 139         Q2 5,275 5,253 4,977 662 2,308 1,100 217 248 + 298         Q3 5,279 5,239 5,157 706 2,338 1,115 219 246 + 122         Q4 5,650 5,614 5,223 710 2,358 1,148 225 228 + 427
2010          Q1 5,241 5,175 5,298 722 2,362 1,151 217 264 − 56
         Q2 5,398 5,369 5,302 707 2,378 1,167 219 258 + 95         Q3 5,385 5,358 5,416 735 2,398 1,160 220 266 − 31         Q4 5,760 5,739 5,432 743 2,417 1,195 225 229 + 328
2011          Q1 5,306 5,269 5,457 750 2,408 1,165 216 277 − 150
         Q2 5,519 5,496 5,396 713 2,417 1,173 210 263 + 123         Q3 5,513 5,486 5,551 774 2,442 1,191 221 255 − 38         Q4 5,904 5,877 5,526 742 2,442 1,216 223 240 + 378
Source: Federal Ministry of Health. 1The final annual figures do not tally with the special contributions for childless persons (0.25% of income subject to insurance
sum of the quarterly figures, as the latter are all provisional. 2Since 2005 including contributions). 3 For non-professional carers. 
 
 
12 Central government: borrowing in the 13 Central, state and local government: debt by creditor*
market
 
€ million € million
T
otal new borrowing 1 of which of which Banking system Domestic non-banks
Change Change
in money in money Period Socialmarket market (End of year Bundes- Credit security Foreign
Period Gross 
2 Net loans deposits or quarter) Total bank institutions funds Other  1 creditors pe 
2005 + 224,922 + 35,479 + 4,511 + 6,041 2005 1,489,029 4,440 518,400 488 312,201 653,500
2006 + 221,873 + 32,656 + 3,258 + 6,308 2006 1,533,697 4,440 496,800 480 329,177 702,8002007 + 214,995 + 6,996 + 1,086 − 4,900 2007 1,540,381 4,440 456,900 476 317,065 761,5002008 + 233,356 + 26,208 + 6,888 + 9,036 2008 1,564,590 4,440 435,600 510 305,040 819,0002009 + 312,729 + 66,821 − 8,184 + 106 2009 1,657,842 4,440 438,700 507 312,695 901,500
2010 + 302,694 + 42,397 − 5,041 + 1,607 2010 1,731,561 4,440 399,000 429 387,092 940,600
2011 + 264,572 + 5,890 − 4,876 − 9,036 2011 
pe 1,750,187 4,440 350,800 445 414,402 980,100
2009          Q1 + 66,560 + 20,334 − 2,256 − 7,856 2009          Q1 1,594,403 4,440 426,200 514 302,249 861,000         Q2 + 96,270 + 46,283 − 2,791 + 26,434          Q2 1,646,307 4,440 430,300 520 301,347 909,700         Q3 + 82,451 + 1,343 + 1,268 − 15,901          Q3 1,651,955 4,440 439,500 520 299,295 908,200         Q4 + 67,448 − 1,139 − 4,406 − 2,572          Q4 1,657,842 4,440 438,700 507 312,695 901,500
2010          Q1 + 74,369 + 12,637 − 5,322 − 1,520 2010          Q1 1,678,191 4,440 450,100 508 318,743 904,400
         Q2 + 83,082 + 3,666 − 4,143 + 1,950          Q2 1,687,957 4,440 469,600 468 301,949 911,500         Q3 + 79,589 + 14,791 + 250 − 4,625          Q3 1,712,685 4,440 470,200 473 297,372 940,200         Q4 + 65,655 + 11,304 + 4,174 + 5,803          Q4 1,731,561 4,440 399,000 429 387,092 940,600
2011          Q1 + 76,394 + 15,958 − 607 − 5,206 2011          Q1 
p 1,747,327 4,440 407,000 495 374,793 960,600
         Q2 + 77,158 + 10,392 − 49 + 26,625          Q2 p 1,759,954 4,440 398,900 490 360,524 995,600
         Q3 + 59,256 − 8,152 − 4,177 − 22,608          Q3 p 1,756,287 4,440 382,500 490 379,457 989,400
         Q4 + 51,764 − 12,308 − 42 − 7,847          Q4 pe 1,750,187 4,440 350,800 445 414,402 980,100
Source:  Federal  Republic  of  Germany − Finance Agency. Source:  Bundesbank  calculations  based  on  data   from  the  Federal  Statistical 
1 Including  the  Financial  Market  Stabilisation Fund,  the In- Office. * Excluding direct intergovernmental borrowing. 1 Calculated as a residual. 
vestment and  Repayment Fund  and  the  Restructuring Fund for Credit Institutions. 2 After deducting repurchases. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
60  Monthly Report
May 2012
IX Public finances in Germany
 
14 Central, state and local government: debt by category*
 
 
€ million
Loans from non-banks Old debt
Direct
Treasury Five-year lending
Period discount Federal Federal Federal by credit Social Equal-
(End of year paper Treasury notes savings bonds institu- security isation
or quarter) Total (Bubills) 1 notes 2,3 (Bobls) 2 notes (Bunds) 2 Day-bond tions 4 funds Other 4 claims 5 Other 5,6 
Central, state and local government
2006 1,533,697 37,834 320,288 179,940 10,199 552,028 . 356,514 480 71,889 4,443 82
2007 1,540,381 39,510 329,108 177,394 10,287 574,512 . 329,588 476 74,988 4,443 76
2008 1,564,590 44,620 337,511 172,037 9,649 584,144 3,174 325,648 510 82,781 4,443 73
2009 1,657,842 105,970 361,727 174,219 9,471 594,999 2,495 300,927 507 103,014 4,442 71
2010          Q3 1,712,685 84,808 389,502 203,056 8,867 618,150 2,058 297,349 473 103,908 4,440 75
         Q4 1,731,561 87,042 391,976 195,534 8,704 628,757 1,975 301,501 429 111,201 4,440 2
2011          Q1 p 1,747,327 84,961 391,885 211,821 8,500 629,716 1,845 301,877 495 111,786 4,440 2
         Q2 p 1,759,954 80,998 402,903 208,669 8,497 644,844 1,819 293,502 490 113,789 4,440 2
         Q3 p 1,756,287 74,764 410,222 219,785 8,349 634,402 1,970 289,482 490 112,382 4,440 2
         Q4 pe 1,750,187 60,172 413,931 214,211 8,208 644,688 2,154 289,055 445 112,881 4,440 2
Central government7,8,9,10,11
2006 918,911 37,798 103,624 179,889 10,199 541,404 . 30,030 408 11,036 4,443 82
2007 939,988 37,385 102,083 177,394 10,287 574,156 . 22,829 408 10,928 4,443 75
2008 966,197 40,795 105,684 172,037 9,649 583,930 3,174 35,291 448 10,674 4,443 72
2009 1,033,017 104,409 113,637 174,219 9,471 594,780 2,495 18,347 448 10,700 4,442 70
2010          Q3 1,064,111 82,908 124,948 203,056 8,867 617,845 2,058 9,084 408 10,425 4,440 74
         Q4 1,075,415 85,867 126,220 195,534 8,704 628,582 1,975 13,349 408 10,335 4,440 2
2011          Q1 1,091,373 82,607 129,208 211,821 8,500 629,541 1,845 13,056 408 9,945 4,440 2
         Q2 1,101,764 78,961 131,348 208,669 8,497 644,668 1,819 13,002 408 9,951 4,440 2
         Q3 1,093,612 73,277 132,428 219,785 8,349 634,226 1,970 9,091 408 9,637 4,440 2
         Q4 1,081,304 58,297 130,648 214,211 8,208 644,513 2,154 9,382 363 9,087 4,440 2
State government
2006 481,850 36 216,665 .... 209,270 2 55,876 . 1
2007 484,373 2,125 227,025 .... 194,956 2 60,264 . 1
2008 483,875 3,825 231,827 .... 179,978 3 68,241 . 1
2009 505,359 1,561 248,091 .... 167,310 8 88,389 . 1
2010          Q3 523,883 1,900 264,554 .... 167,854 15 89,558 . 1
         Q4 527,669 1,176 265,756 .... 166,277 1 94,459 . 1
2011          Q1 p 527,173 2,354 262,677 .... 166,641 67 95,433 . 1
         Q2 p 528,253 2,037 271,555 .... 157,167 62 97,431 . 1
         Q3 p 532,321 1,487 277,794 .... 156,640 62 96,338 . 1
         Q4 p 537,061 1,875 283,283 .... 154,453 62 97,387 . 1
Local government12
2006 118,380 . − . . 256 . 113,265 70 4,789 . .
2007 115,920 . − . . 256 . 111,803 66 3,796 . .
2008 114,518 . − . . 214 . 110,379 60 3,866 . .
2009 119,466 . − . . 219 . 115,270 52 3,925 . .
2010          Q3 124,691 . − . . 305 . 120,411 50 3,925 . .
         Q4 128,477 . − . . 175 . 121,874 20 6,407 . .
2011          Q1 p 128,782 . − . . 175 . 122,179 20 6,407 . .
         Q2 p 129,937 . − . . 175 . 123,334 20 6,407 . .
         Q3 p 130,354 . − . . 175 . 123,751 20 6,407 . .
         Q4 pe 131,822 . − . . 175 . 125,219 20 6,407 . .
Special funds7,8,13
2006 14,556 . − 51 . 10,368 . 3,950 − 188 . .
2007 100 . − − . 100 . − − − . .
2008 − . − − . − . − − − . .
2009 − . − − . − . − − − . .
2010          Q3 − . − − . − . − − − . .
         Q4 − . − − . − . − − − . .
2011          Q1 − . − − . − . − − − . .
         Q2 − . − − . − . − − − . .
         Q3 − . − − . − . − − − . .
         Q4 − . − − . − . − − − . .
Source: Bundesbank calculations based on data from the Federal Statistical portfolios. 7In contrast to the capital market statistics, the debt incurred through the
Office. *Excluding direct intergovernmental borrowing. 1Including Treasury finan- joint issuance of Federal securities is recorded here under central government and its
cing paper. 2Excluding issuers’ holdings of their own securities. 3Treasury notes special funds in accordance with the agreed allocation ratios. 8On 1 July 2007 cen-
issued by state government include long-term notes. 4Mainly loans against bor- tral government assumed joint responsibility for the debts of the ERP Special Fund.
rowers’ notes and cash advances. Including loans raised abroad. Other loans from From that date on, the aforementioned special fund is recorded under central govern-
non-banks, including loans from public supplementary pension funds and liabilities ment. 9From December 2008, including debt of the Financial Market Stabilisation
arising from the investment assistance levy. 5Excluding offsets against outstanding Fund. 10From March 2009, including debt of the Investment and Repayment
claims. 6Old debt mainly denominated in foreign currency, in accordance with the Fund. 11From January 2011, including debt of the Restructuring Fund for Credit Insti-
London Debts Agreement, old liabilities arising from housing construction and liabil- tutions. 12Including debt of municipal special purpose associations. Data other than
ities arising from housing construction by the former GDR’s armed forces and from year-end figures have been estimated. 13ERP Special Fund (up to the end of June
housing construction in connection with the return of the troops of the former USSR 2007), German Unity Fund (up to the end of 2004) and Indemnification Fund. stationed in eastern Germany to their home country; excluding debt securities in own

Deutsche Bundesbank
61  Monthly Report
May 2012
X Economic conditions in Germany
  
1 Origin and use of domestic product, distribution of national income
  
  
  
  2010   2011
  2009   2010   2011   2009   2010   2011   Q2   Q3   Q4   Q1   Q2   Q3   Q4
Item Index 2005=100 Annual percentage change
At  constant  prices,  chained
  I Origin of domestic product
Production sector
(excluding construction) 90.2 99.0 104.8 − 17.9 9.8 5.9 12.5 9.2 10.3 10.7 6.8 6.0 0.7Construction 94.9 96.6 100.0 − 4.1 1.7 3.5 6.2 2.7 − 0.9 9.6 0.2 0.0 5.6Wholesale/retail trade, transportand storage, hotel and restaurantservices 104.2 108.1 112.2 − 5.2 3.8 3.7 3.6 4.7 4.9 6.1 3.7 3.1 2.3Information and communication 135.1 141.8 144.4 9.0 5.0 1.8 5.4 4.5 6.0 1.3 1.6 2.3 2.2Financial and insuranceactivities 128.9 128.8 129.9 11.6 − 0.1 0.9 − 0.3 − 2.5 − 0.0 0.3 − 0.3 2.5 1.1Real estate activities 107.6 107.8 108.4 2.0 0.2 0.6 − 0.3 0.4 − 0.5 − 0.1 0.6 0.5 1.3Business services 
1 99.1 102.8 107.1 − 11.7 3.8 4.2 3.7 5.5 4.1 4.9 4.6 3.8 3.6
Public services, education and
health 107.1 108.8 109.7 2.1 1.6 0.8 1.7 1.7 0.2 0.8 0.7 0.7 1.1Other services 106.5 107.8 106.6 0.8 1.2 − 1.1 1.5 1.7 − 0.0 − 0.6 − 1.4 − 1.6 − 0.6
Gross value added 103.0 107.2 110.4 − 5.6 4.1 2.9 4.8 4.2 4.1 4.5 3.0 2.7 1.6Gross domestic product 
2 102.7 106.5 109.7 − 5.1 3.7 3.0 4.4 4.0 3.8 5.0 3.0 2.6 1.5
 II Use of domestic product
Private consumption 3 101.8 102.5 104.0 − 0.1 0.6 1.5 − 0.2 0.9 1.8 2.1 1.5 1.7 0.7
Government consumption 109.0 110.9 112.4 3.3 1.7 1.4 1.2 1.5 1.2 0.5 1.8 1.6 1.6
Machinery and equipment 98.7 109.1 117.3 − 22.8 10.5 7.6 9.3 13.1 17.6 15.3 9.1 6.1 2.1Premises 101.2 103.4 109.4 − 3.0 2.2 5.8 6.1 3.4 0.1 13.4 3.0 2.4 6.5Other investment 
4 125.9 131.9 138.2 0.6 4.7 4.8 4.3 4.3 5.9 4.8 4.7 5.0 4.8
Changes in inventories 5, 6 . . . − 0.9 0.6 0.0 1.7 0.3 0.5 0.1 − 0.2 0.2 − 0.1
Domestic use 103.2 105.7 108.1 − 2.6 2.4 2.3 3.3 2.4 3.4 3.5 2.1 2.3 1.5Net exports 
6 . . . − 2.6 1.5 0.8 1.3 1.6 0.7 1.6 1.0 0.4 0.2
Exports 108.3 123.2 133.3 − 13.6 13.7 8.2 17.7 15.0 13.9 12.7 7.6 7.9 5.3Imports 110.6 123.5 132.7 − 9.2 11.7 7.4 16.6 12.2 14.6 10.3 6.3 7.7 5.7
Gross domestic product 
2 102.7 106.5 109.7 − 5.1 3.7 3.0 4.4 4.0 3.8 5.0 3.0 2.6 1.5
At  current  prices  (€ billion)
III Use of domestic product
Private consumption 3 1,387.4 1,423.0 1,474.4 − 0.0 2.6 3.6 1.7 2.9 3.7 4.2 3.7 3.8 2.8
Government consumption 475.8 488.8 502.9 5.1 2.7 2.9 2.5 2.0 2.1 1.8 3.6 3.1 3.1Machinery and equipment 155.1 170.8 183.5 − 23.0 10.1 7.4 9.1 12.9 17.2 15.1 8.9 6.0 2.0Premises 227.1 235.0 255.5 − 1.9 3.5 8.7 7.7 5.2 1.4 16.3 5.7 5.4 9.8Other investment 
4 27.0 27.8 28.6 − 2.9 2.7 3.1 2.7 2.8 3.3 2.9 3.0 2.7 3.6
Changes in inventories 5 − 16.5 − 4.0 − 5.7 . . . . . . . . . .
Domestic use 2,256.0 2,341.4 2,439.4 − 2.7 3.8 4.2 4.7 3.7 4.9 5.3 4.1 4.1 3.4Net exports 118.5 135.5 131.4 . . . . . . . . . .
Exports 995.9 1,159.8 1,289.2 − 16.2 16.5 11.2 20.7 19.1 17.6 17.5 10.8 10.1 7.1Imports 877.4 1,024.4 1,157.7 − 15.2 16.7 13.0 22.0 19.1 22.0 19.3 12.2 12.0 9.5
Gross domestic product 
2 2,374.5 2,476.8 2,570.8 − 4.0 4.3 3.8 5.1 4.4 4.1 5.3 3.9 3.5 2.6
IV Prices (2005=100)
Private consumption 104.3 106.3 108.5 0.1 1.9 2.1 1.9 2.0 1.9 2.1 2.2 2.0 2.1Gross domestic product 103.9 104.6 105.4 1.2 0.6 0.8 0.7 0.4 0.3 0.3 0.9 0.9 1.0Terms of trade 101.3 99.2 96.8 3.8 − 2.0 − 2.4 − 1.9 − 2.4 − 3.0 − 3.6 − 2.5 − 1.9 − 1.9
V  Distribution of national income
Compensation of employees 1,231.5 1,262.9 1,318.3 0.1 2.5 4.4 2.6 2.9 3.3 4.5 5.0 4.3 3.9Entrepreneurial and propertyincome 574.7 635.0 644.4 − 13.5 10.5 1.5 15.8 7.0 6.3 5.2 − 0.2 2.6 − 2.2
National income 1,806.2 1,897.8 1,962.7 − 4.6 5.1 3.4 6.4 4.4 4.2 4.7 3.3 3.7 2.1
Memo item: Gross national
income 2,424.9 2,522.8 2,612.4 − 3.2 4.0 3.6 4.9 3.7 3.6 5.1 3.4 3.6 2.3
Source: Federal Statistical Office; figures computed in February 2012. 1Professional, stitutions serving households. 4Intangible fixed asset formation (inter alia, computer
scientific, technical, administration and support service activities. 2Gross value added software and entertainment, literary or artistic originals) and cultivated assets. 5In-
plus taxes on products (netted with subsidies on products). 3Including non-profit in- cluding net increase in valuables. 6 Contribution of growth to GDP. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
62  Monthly Report
May 2012
 X Economic conditions in Germany
 
2 Output in the production sector*
 
 
Adjusted for working-day variations  o 
Industry
by main industrial grouping of which:  by economic sector
Manu-
Manu- facture of
facture of computers,basic metals Motor
electronic
and vehicles, and optical
Production Inter- Non- fabricated products Machinery trailers
sector, Construc- mediate Capital Durable durable metal and and semi- and electrical
total tion Energy Total goods goods goods goods products equipment equipment trailers
2005=100  
  
% of total 1 100.00 5.56 8.76 85.69 33.96 35.37 2.78 13.58 12.15 10.82 12.48 12.34
Period
2007 111.6 108.8 98.2 113.1 114.5 114.9 108.4 105.8 114.0 124.4 119.5 109.7
2008 111.5 108.3 95.6 113.4 114.2 116.8 104.0 104.4 114.4 128.8 124.5 104.5
2009 94.3 108.2 90.6 93.7 93.3 92.0 87.6 100.6 87.5 100.9 92.2 82.0
2010 103.9 108.5 93.6 104.6 107.1 103.7 95.7 102.4 101.7 117.5 101.5 102.3
2011 r 112.1 123.0 87.7 113.9 115.8 116.7 100.4 104.5 111.5 134.6 115.3 116.3
 
2010          Nov 115.4 127.7 98.3 116.4 115.9 119.7 109.2 110.8 111.8 134.2 116.6 119.4
         Dec 101.8 64.6 108.6 103.5 93.2 116.6 88.8 98.1 89.9 118.8 129.3 95.8
2011          Jan r 100.9 75.7 106.9 101.9 108.1 97.7 94.0 98.9 102.7 120.5 92.2 101.2
         Feb r 105.1 86.5 95.9 107.3 110.2 108.3 99.5 99.0 106.0 126.0 101.5 117.0
         Mar r 118.8 123.4 100.1 120.4 121.9 124.1 109.8 109.2 117.7 136.7 123.2 128.6
         Apr r 110.9 132.0 83.8 112.3 116.0 112.8 99.9 104.0 111.2 126.1 110.3 116.9
         May r 111.1 133.6 78.6 113.0 116.7 114.4 97.3 103.5 113.1 127.6 110.4 119.3
         June r 113.9 134.1 76.5 116.4 119.7 119.6 94.8 104.4 115.8 137.0 120.9 117.2
         July r 116.0 142.9 80.1 117.9 122.2 119.7 101.7 106.0 117.0 142.3 119.2 119.5
         Aug r 107.1 133.1 78.7 108.3 115.1 106.4 84.9 100.8 107.5 135.3 109.2 98.1
         Sep r 117.9 140.6 78.6 120.5 121.8 124.9 111.1 107.7 116.2 146.4 123.2 127.2
         Oct r 119.6 141.4 88.2 121.4 122.3 125.2 112.7 110.9 119.2 144.4 118.5 129.7
         Nov r 120.7 139.9 94.4 122.2 120.4 129.2 111.2 110.8 118.4 147.1 126.0 127.7
         Dec r 103.0 93.0 90.8 104.9 95.5 117.8 88.4 98.3 93.2 125.4 129.4 93.2
2012          Jan x 102.2 81.1 93.4 104.4 109.6 103.0 93.5 97.5 104.0 124.6 98.8 109.2
         Feb x 105.1 68.3 93.3 108.7 110.1 113.5 96.1 95.3 107.1 128.5 109.1 122.3
         Mar  x,p 2,3 120.7 2 131.2 e 95.2 3 122.6 121.6 3 130.7 105.8 107.3 117.3 141.8 3 134.7 132.9
 
Annual percentage change  
 
2007 + 5.9 + 2.9 − 2.8 + 6.9 + 6.9 + 8.4 + 1.0 + 4.0 + 6.2 + 10.3 + 11.2 + 6.9
2008 − 0.1 − 0.5 − 2.6 + 0.3 − 0.3 + 1.7 − 4.1 − 1.3 + 0.4 + 3.5 + 4.2 − 4.7
2009 − 15.4 − 0.1 − 5.2 − 17.4 − 18.3 − 21.2 − 15.8 − 3.6 − 23.5 − 21.7 − 25.9 − 21.5
2010 + 10.2 + 0.3 + 3.3 + 11.6 + 14.8 + 12.7 + 9.2 + 1.8 + 16.2 + 16.5 + 10.1 + 24.8
2011 r + 7.9 + 13.4 − 6.3 + 8.9 + 8.1 + 12.5 + 4.9 + 2.1 + 9.6 + 14.6 + 13.6 + 13.7
 
2010          Nov + 11.3 + 5.4 + 2.7 + 12.6 + 12.1 + 17.6 + 6.3 + 2.8 + 12.6 + 17.8 + 25.4 + 19.6
         Dec + 11.7 − 23.3 + 4.8 + 14.6 + 11.9 + 23.3 + 7.1 + 0.1 + 12.9 + 19.2 + 25.4 + 34.6
2011          Jan r + 12.5 + 52.6 − 2.5 + 12.8 + 13.1 + 18.4 + 6.1 + 1.2 + 16.3 + 20.9 + 19.4 + 22.4
         Feb r + 14.9 + 56.1 − 2.3 + 15.3 + 14.7 + 20.5 + 8.9 + 5.0 + 16.4 + 22.0 + 22.9 + 27.2
         Mar r + 11.8 + 17.7 + 1.5 + 12.3 + 11.4 + 16.7 + 10.6 + 3.3 + 11.7 + 18.0 + 19.8 + 18.7
         Apr r + 9.6 + 7.1 − 7.5 + 11.3 + 9.3 + 15.7 + 10.0 + 5.2 + 10.9 + 14.8 + 18.3 + 17.4
         May r + 7.4 + 8.8 − 13.8 + 9.3 + 7.2 + 13.7 + 5.6 + 4.0 + 10.2 + 13.0 + 15.2 + 13.9
         June r + 6.9 + 5.0 − 6.1 + 8.2 + 8.1 + 10.6 − 1.7 + 3.8 + 9.5 + 14.2 + 15.4 + 7.7
         July r + 10.3 + 8.0 − 7.4 + 11.9 + 9.9 + 17.7 + 13.0 + 2.4 + 11.3 + 18.9 + 19.2 + 22.2
         Aug r + 8.5 + 6.8 − 4.0 + 9.6 + 8.1 + 16.4 + 0.6 − 1.1 + 8.6 + 17.0 + 14.7 + 25.0
         Sep r + 5.5 + 5.2 − 6.2 + 6.4 + 6.5 + 8.9 + 3.6 + 0.2 + 6.7 + 14.9 + 11.2 + 6.8
         Oct r + 4.3 + 4.6 − 6.6 + 5.1 + 3.9 + 8.3 + 2.5 + 0.2 + 5.8 + 9.2 + 7.5 + 7.2
         Nov r + 4.6 + 9.6 − 4.0 + 5.0 + 3.9 + 7.9 + 1.8 + 0.0 + 5.9 + 9.6 + 8.1 + 7.0
         Dec r + 1.2 + 44.0 − 16.4 + 1.4 + 2.5 + 1.0 − 0.5 + 0.2 + 3.7 + 5.6 + 0.1 − 2.7
2012          Jan x + 1.3 + 7.1 − 12.6 + 2.5 + 1.4 + 5.4 − 0.5 − 1.4 + 1.3 + 3.4 + 7.2 + 7.9
         Feb x + 0.0 − 21.0 − 2.7 + 1.3 − 0.1 + 4.8 − 3.4 − 3.7 + 1.0 + 2.0 + 7.5 + 4.5
         Mar  x,p 2,3 + 1.6 2 + 6.3 e − 4.9 3 + 1.8 − 0.2 3 + 5.3 − 3.6 − 1.7 − 0.3 + 3.7 3 + 9.3 + 3.3
Source of the unadjusted figures: Federal Statistical Office. *For explanatory notes, annual overall survey in the construction sector (average + 4%). 3Positivly influenced
see Statistical Supplement Seasonally adjusted business statistics, Tables II.10 to by late reports. rConstruction not affected by revisions. xProvisional; adjusted in ad-
II.12. oUsing the Census X-12-ARIMA method, version 0.2.8. 1Share of gross value vance by the Federal Statistical Office, by way of estimates, to the results of the
added at factor cost of the production sector in the base year 2005. 2Adjusted in ad- Quarterly Production Survey. eUnadjusted figures estimated by the Federal Statistical
vance by the Federal Statistical Office, by way of estimates, to the results of the Office. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
63  Monthly Report
May 2012
X Economic conditions in Germany
 
3 Orders received by industry *
 
 
Adjusted for working-day variations  o 
Industry Intermediate goods Capital goods Consumer goods Durable goods Non-durable goods
Annual Annual Annual Annual Annual Annual
percent- percent- percent- percent- percent- percent-age age age age age age
Period 2005=100 change 2005=100 change 2005=100 change 2005=100 change 2005=100 change 2005=100 change
Total
2007 123.0 + 11.1 125.2 + 9.9 123.2 + 12.6 111.9 + 6.3 110.3 + 1.8 112.5 + 7.9
2008 115.6 − 6.0 121.2 − 3.2 112.9 − 8.4 108.1 − 3.4 103.5 − 6.2 109.7 − 2.5
2009 87.5 − 24.3 89.3 − 26.3 85.3 − 24.4 94.8 − 12.3 88.5 − 14.5 96.9 − 11.7
2010 109.1 + 24.7 114.3 + 28.0 106.9 + 25.3 99.8 + 5.3 101.4 + 14.6 99.3 + 2.5
2011 120.5 + 10.4 125.3 + 9.6 119.8 + 12.1 104.1 + 4.3 107.4 + 5.9 103.0 + 3.7
2011          Mar 130.1 + 15.0 140.2 + 18.0 126.3 + 14.5 110.3 + 3.3 115.3 + 7.8 108.7 + 1.8
         Apr 119.6 + 13.0 127.6 + 10.3 117.2 + 15.9 99.7 + 7.2 107.7 + 9.2 97.1 + 6.7
         May 123.5 + 16.3 129.0 + 13.2 123.4 + 20.4 99.4 + 3.4 103.8 + 1.0 97.9 + 4.4
         June 129.7 + 11.9 127.7 + 7.3 135.4 + 16.5 99.9 + 0.4 106.7 + 0.6 97.6 + 0.3
         July 121.8 + 10.5 130.1 + 9.2 117.6 + 11.9 112.8 + 8.0 112.2 + 10.8 112.9 + 7.1
         Aug 111.2 + 6.5 118.8 + 9.1 107.5 + 5.3 102.6 + 2.8 96.1 + 6.9 104.9 + 1.7
         Sep 117.4 + 3.7 122.0 + 3.9 115.8 + 3.7 107.9 + 4.2 122.2 + 9.4 103.1 + 2.3
         Oct 118.6 + 5.5 121.7 + 2.0 118.3 + 8.3 106.4 + 2.3 115.4 − 0.3 103.4 + 3.4
         Nov 117.6 − 2.9 119.8 − 1.6 118.2 − 4.1 104.2 + 2.0 108.7 − 1.8 102.7 + 3.4
         Dec 113.4 + 1.6 106.7 − 1.1 120.8 + 3.1 92.0 + 2.9 89.5 + 1.9 92.9 + 3.3
2012          Jan 114.8 − 4.7 125.2 − 5.7 109.8 − 4.7 101.6 − 0.9 101.8 − 4.0 101.5 + 0.2
         Feb 116.1 − 5.3 122.1 − 3.6 113.6 − 6.5 105.4 − 5.0 96.5 − 8.0 108.5 − 4.1
         Mar  p 128.9 − 0.9 130.9 − 6.6 130.1 + 3.0 111.5 + 1.1 113.4 − 1.6 110.9 + 2.0
From the domestic market
2007 118.7 + 8.9 124.7 + 10.1 115.8 + 8.8 107.0 + 3.5 109.6 − 1.3 106.1 + 5.2
2008 113.1 − 4.7 121.8 − 2.3 107.5 − 7.2 103.9 − 2.9 107.1 − 2.3 102.9 − 3.0
2009 88.0 − 22.2 89.9 − 26.2 86.5 − 19.5 87.4 − 15.9 89.9 − 16.1 86.6 − 15.8
2010 104.5 + 18.8 115.9 + 28.9 97.8 + 13.1 88.6 + 1.4 93.9 + 4.4 86.9 + 0.3
2011 115.3 + 10.3 127.8 + 10.3 109.0 + 11.5 92.1 + 4.0 104.1 + 10.9 88.2 + 1.5
2011          Mar 123.6 + 12.9 139.2 + 17.0 115.5 + 11.1 96.1 + 0.8 106.8 + 6.7 92.6 − 1.2
         Apr 114.9 + 10.4 131.3 + 10.3 106.1 + 11.1 86.8 + 5.7 101.9 + 16.1 81.9 + 2.0
         May 126.6 + 22.9 134.8 + 16.4 126.6 + 32.4 88.2 + 5.3 100.6 + 7.0 84.1 + 4.5
         June 116.1 + 7.5 127.7 + 5.5 111.5 + 10.3 88.0 + 3.2 98.6 + 8.8 84.6 + 1.2
         July 120.0 + 11.8 135.8 + 10.9 110.8 + 13.9 97.7 + 6.5 107.6 + 20.0 94.5 + 2.4
         Aug 109.0 + 9.0 123.6 + 10.0 99.4 + 8.8 94.3 + 4.7 99.7 + 13.8 92.6 + 1.9
         Sep 113.5 + 4.6 123.7 + 3.9 107.1 + 5.0 101.4 + 6.5 126.7 + 15.6 93.2 + 3.0
         Oct 113.4 + 2.9 126.5 + 2.8 105.2 + 2.4 97.2 + 5.1 117.5 + 4.9 90.6 + 5.2
         Nov 114.6 + 1.0 125.2 + 0.1 109.5 + 1.8 93.7 + 1.8 110.8 + 5.1 88.1 + 0.6
         Dec 101.0 + 1.5 103.0 − 1.8 103.5 + 4.5 77.7 + 1.0 84.0 + 7.3 75.6 − 1.0
2012          Jan 110.7 − 3.3 126.7 − 5.3 100.9 − 1.9 90.2 + 2.3 101.3 + 5.9 86.6 + 0.9
         Feb 109.6 − 5.7 120.7 − 6.2 102.9 − 5.9 94.4 − 2.1 97.6 − 2.0 93.4 − 2.0
         Mar  p 120.1 − 2.8 131.7 − 5.4 114.6 − 0.8 96.0 − 0.1 108.6 + 1.7 91.9 − 0.8
From abroad
2007 126.7 + 12.9 125.7 + 9.7 128.4 + 15.2 117.3 + 9.1 111.0 + 5.0 119.5 + 10.5
2008 117.7 − 7.1 120.6 − 4.1 116.7 − 9.1 112.6 − 4.0 100.0 − 9.9 117.1 − 2.0
2009 87.0 − 26.1 88.6 − 26.5 84.4 − 27.7 102.8 − 8.7 87.1 − 12.9 108.4 − 7.4
2010 113.0 + 29.9 112.5 + 27.0 113.4 + 34.4 111.9 + 8.9 109.0 + 25.1 112.9 + 4.2
2011 125.0 + 10.6 122.4 + 8.8 127.4 + 12.3 117.0 + 4.6 110.6 + 1.5 119.2 + 5.6
2011          Mar 135.7 + 16.7 141.4 + 19.2 133.9 + 16.7 125.7 + 5.4 123.8 + 8.6 126.4 + 4.3
         Apr 123.7 + 15.4 123.3 + 10.2 125.1 + 19.1 113.7 + 8.6 113.5 + 3.6 113.8 + 10.6
         May 120.8 + 10.8 122.3 + 9.2 121.1 + 12.8 111.5 + 2.0 107.0 − 4.2 113.1 + 4.3
         June 141.6 + 15.4 127.8 + 9.5 152.2 + 20.0 112.7 − 1.9 114.8 − 5.7 112.0 − 0.4
         July 123.3 + 9.4 123.5 + 7.0 122.4 + 10.7 129.0 + 9.2 116.9 + 3.4 133.2 + 11.2
         Aug 113.1 + 4.4 113.3 + 7.9 113.2 + 3.2 111.6 + 1.2 92.5 + 0.2 118.4 + 1.5
         Sep 120.8 + 3.1 120.0 + 3.8 121.9 + 2.9 115.0 + 2.0 117.6 + 3.2 114.1 + 1.7
         Oct 123.2 + 7.7 116.3 + 1.1 127.6 + 12.1 116.4 − 0.1 113.3 − 5.3 117.5 + 1.8
         Nov 120.3 − 5.8 113.7 − 3.7 124.3 − 7.5 115.6 + 2.1 106.6 − 8.2 118.8 + 5.9
         Dec 124.1 + 1.6 111.0 − 0.3 133.0 + 2.3 107.5 + 4.6 95.0 − 2.4 111.9 + 6.8
2012          Jan 118.3 − 6.0 123.5 − 6.0 116.1 − 6.2 113.9 − 3.4 102.3 − 12.2 118.0 − 0.3
         Feb 121.7 − 5.0 123.7 − 0.6 121.2 − 6.8 117.3 − 7.5 95.3 − 13.5 125.1 − 5.7
         Mar  p 136.6 + 0.7 130.0 − 8.1 141.1 + 5.4 128.2 + 2.0 118.2 − 4.5 131.8 + 4.3
Source of the unadjusted figures: Federal Statistical Office. *For explanatory notes, II.16. o Using the Census X-12-ARIMA method, version 0.2.8. 
see Statistical Supplement Seasonally adjusted business statistics, Tables II.14 to

Deutsche Bundesbank
64  Monthly Report
May 2012
 X Economic conditions in Germany
 
4 Orders received by construction *   
 
 
Adjusted for working-day variations  o 
Breakdown by type of construction Breakdown by client  1 
 Building    
Housing Industrial Public sector Civil Public
Total Total construction construction construction engineering Industry sector
Annual Annual Annual Annual Annual Annual Annual Annual
percent- percent- percent- percent- percent- percent- percent- percent-
age age age age age age age age
Period change change change change change change change change 2005 = 100 2005 = 100 2005 = 100 2005 = 100 2005 = 100 2005 = 100 2005 = 100 2005 = 100
2008 113.4 − 0.4 114.7 + 2.0 94.4 − 4.2 127.9 + 3.8 116.7 + 7.7 112.0 − 2.9 123.3 + 2.2 111.5 − 1.9
2009 107.4 − 5.3 100.7 − 12.2 94.1 − 0.3 100.7 − 21.3 115.5 − 1.0 114.4 + 2.1 104.9 − 14.9 115.6 + 3.7
2010 109.0 + 1.5 106.7 + 6.0 103.3 + 9.8 105.3 + 4.6 118.9 + 2.9 111.3 − 2.7 111.0 + 5.8 109.4 − 5.4
2011 117.1 + 7.4 120.1 + 12.6 125.0 + 21.0 120.0 + 14.0 109.2 − 8.2 114.0 + 2.4 125.6 + 13.2 105.2 − 3.8
 
2011          Feb 94.1 + 3.5 102.3 + 17.0 97.7 + 28.0 114.3 + 29.9 72.5 − 34.3 85.6 − 9.4 114.5 + 26.5 72.0 − 26.1
         Mar 134.3 + 5.8 133.6 + 9.9 142.3 + 24.7 130.5 + 6.0 124.1 − 7.2 135.1 + 2.0 147.3 + 13.0 117.8 − 8.6
         Apr 122.9 + 7.7 118.7 + 6.6 136.1 + 20.2 111.6 + 7.5 103.1 − 22.2 127.2 + 8.7 124.9 + 16.0 115.2 − 4.8
         May 127.5 + 9.9 135.2 + 24.7 147.7 + 35.5 127.2 + 23.3 133.6 + 7.4 119.6 − 3.5 126.0 + 12.4 120.5 − 1.9         June 136.2 + 6.2 137.9 + 10.4 129.6 + 17.7 136.7 + 7.5 161.0 + 6.7 134.3 + 2.1 140.4 + 4.3 134.7 + 4.2
         July 137.0 + 11.1 124.4 + 5.6 134.3 + 17.9 115.3 − 0.8 132.3 + 0.2 150.2 + 16.4 129.7 + 5.1 145.6 + 14.5
         Aug 123.6 + 5.0 125.3 + 4.6 129.9 + 15.3 129.1 + 3.5 102.0 − 14.9 121.9 + 5.6 132.6 + 10.2 111.9 − 4.4         Sep 127.9 + 3.9 127.6 + 7.6 127.7 − 1.7 130.6 + 23.0 117.5 − 12.8 128.1 + 0.2 134.1 + 15.7 121.7 − 4.5
         Oct 112.8 − 1.0 122.3 + 10.4 126.8 + 18.5 128.1 + 14.8 92.6 − 20.9 102.9 − 12.1 128.2 + 2.2 91.3 − 13.3
         Nov 106.3 + 15.4 114.6 + 22.3 122.9 + 28.0 112.6 + 21.5 102.6 + 11.5 97.6 + 8.0 117.1 + 20.5 88.3 + 3.5         Dec 105.8 + 17.2 114.4 + 19.2 127.7 + 26.1 109.4 + 18.5 101.3 + 5.0 96.8 + 15.0 117.8 + 23.9 84.5 + 4.7
2012          Jan 89.5 + 16.4 97.0 + 14.8 103.2 + 33.0 96.6 + 2.8 84.2 + 23.5 81.6 + 18.1 103.3 + 9.7 69.7 + 17.5
         Feb 105.2 + 11.8 109.3 + 6.8 116.4 + 19.1 106.9 − 6.5 101.1 + 39.4 101.0 + 18.0 110.4 − 3.6 95.3 + 32.4
Source of the unadjusted figures: Federal Statistical Office. *Values exclusive of adjusted business statistics, Tables II.21. oUsing the Census X-12-ARIMA method,
value-added tax; for explanatory notes, see Statistical Supplement Seasonally version 0.2.8. 1 Excluding housing construction orders. 
 
 
5 Retail trade turnover, sales of motor vehicles *
  
Adjusted for calendar variations o 
Retail trade
of which: by enterprises main product range  1 
Construction Retail sale of
and flooring pharmaceutical Wholesale
Textiles, Information materials, and medical and retail trade
clothing and household goods, cosmetic and repair of
Food, beverages, foodwear and communications appliances, and toilet motor vehicles
Total tobacco 2 leather goods equipment furniture articles and motorcycles
At current At prices in
prices year 2005 At current prices
Annual Annual Annual Annual Annual Annual Annual Annual
percent- percent- percent- percent- percent- percent- percent- percent-
age age age age age age age age
Period change change change change change change change change 2005 = 100 2005 = 100 2005 = 100 2005 = 100 2005 = 100 2005 = 100 2005 = 100 2005 = 100
2008 101.5 + 2.1 98.8 − 0.2 100.7 + 1.2 104.6 + 0.9 116.3 + 5.5 99.5 + 0.9 107.2 + 2.9 95.8 − 4.8
2009 3 98.1 − 3.3 96.2 − 2.6 98.8 − 1.9 101.5 − 3.0 117.0 + 0.6 97.1 − 2.4 110.0 + 2.6 96.8 + 1.0
2010 100.4 + 2.3 97.4 + 1.2 99.6 + 0.8 106.1 + 4.5 120.5 + 3.0 99.5 + 2.5 114.2 + 3.8 92.3 − 4.6
2011 4 103.1 + 2.7 98.5 + 1.1 102.0 + 2.4 108.4 + 2.2 120.8 + 0.2 103.1 + 3.6 114.8 + 0.5 99.3 + 7.6
 
2011          Mar  4 103.6 + 2.0 98.7 + 0.4 103.7 + 1.5 108.9 + 2.3 112.6 − 0.3 107.7 + 1.3 114.3 − 2.2 110.2 + 11.4
         Apr 103.7 + 3.4 98.2 + 1.8 103.5 + 4.7 117.1 + 8.4 102.4 + 0.1 109.1 + 5.4 112.6 + 0.3 105.2 + 8.7
         May 100.6 − 0.3 95.4 − 2.0 100.8 − 0.5 103.2 + 1.5 104.4 − 5.3 102.0 − 2.5 112.6 − 0.1 102.7 + 8.8         June 100.1 + 2.7 95.3 + 1.1 102.7 + 4.6 102.2 + 1.5 105.9 − 4.4 100.0 + 0.9 111.9 + 0.4 102.5 + 2.6
         July 103.7 + 2.4 99.4 + 1.2 102.6 + 0.9 109.2 + 4.7 114.0 + 1.4 103.6 + 4.4 116.4 + 0.1 102.2 + 6.1
         Aug 100.0 + 1.9 95.7 + 0.3 100.3 + 3.5 97.7 − 3.7 112.1 − 3.5 100.1 + 1.1 112.0 − 0.8 91.8 + 4.7         Sep 102.0 + 3.4 97.0 + 1.5 98.1 + 3.8 110.0 − 6.1 113.6 − 0.8 102.2 + 3.9 114.0 + 1.3 99.0 + 3.4
         Oct 108.4 + 3.2 103.0 + 1.3 104.1 + 2.9 132.0 + 4.8 121.9 + 0.5 111.6 + 3.6 117.0 − 0.3 108.3 + 5.0
         Nov 107.4 + 3.1 102.3 + 1.4 103.3 + 3.1 112.7 + 1.3 132.8 + 0.5 111.5 + 4.2 118.5 + 1.5 104.3 + 2.9         Dec 123.5 + 2.3 118.7 + 1.3 120.7 + 1.8 133.7 + 2.6 186.6 + 2.1 112.9 + 7.3 131.9 + 0.9 90.6 + 1.5
2012          Jan 93.9 + 0.5 89.6 − 1.3 94.0 + 1.3 89.6 + 0.2 124.3 − 7.8 88.7 + 1.5 110.4 +
 0.0 82.6 − 1.0
         Feb 91.1 + 0.0 85.6 − 2.2 93.8 + 2.9 78.9 − 6.2 103.6 − 4.0 85.8 − 4.0 106.9 + 0.7 90.6 − 0.4
         Mar 106.8 + 3.1 99.9 + 1.2 105.3 + 1.5 116.2 + 6.7 114.0 + 1.2 113.6 + 5.5 116.4 + 1.8 114.3 + 3.7
Source of the unadjusted figures: Federal Statistical Office. *Excluding value-added cluding new entities; statistical breaks in the reporting sample eliminated by
tax;  For explanatory notes, see Statistical Supplement Seasonally adjusted business chain-linking. 4Figures from January 2011 are provisional, in some cases revised, and
statistics, Tables II.24. oUsing the Census X-12-ARIMA method, version 0.2.8. 1In particularly uncertain in recent months owing to estimates for missing reports. 
stores. 2Including stalls and markets. 3In January 2009 new reporting sample in-

Deutsche Bundesbank
65  Monthly Report
May 2012
 X Economic conditions in Germany
 
6 Labour market * 
 
 
 
Employment 1 Employment subject to social security contributions  2 Short time workers 3 Unemployment 4 
Total of which: of which: of which:
Solely
jobs
Services exempt Recipients
excluding from of insured
Produc- temporary social unem- Unem- Temporary
tion employ- employ- contri- Cyclically ployment ploy- Vacan-
 Annual Annual sector ment ment butions 2 Total induced 5 Total benefits ment cies, 4,7 
Thou- percentage Thou- rate 4,6 thou- percentage
sands change sands change Thousands in % sands
2007 39,857 + 1.7 26,942 + 2.2 8,533 . . 4,861 68 26 3,760 1,245 9.0 423
2008 40,344 + 1.2 27,510 + 2.1 8,659 17,958 679 4,866 102 58 3,258 1,006 7.8 3892009 40,362 +
 0.0 27,493 − 0.1 8,521 18,210 549 4,904 1,144 1,078 8 3,415 8 1,190 8 8.1 301
2010 40,553 + 0.5 27,757 + 1.0 8,426 18,438 679 4,883 503 429 3,238 1,075 7.7 3592011
r 41,095 + 1.3 9 28,436 9 + 2.4 9 8,583 9 18,834 9 798 9 4,863 ... 9 100 2,976 892 7.1 466
2009          Q1 40,120 + 0.5 27,390 + 0.9 8,563 18,083 550 4,864 999 855 3,533 1,284 8.4 312         Q2 40,305 + 0.2 27,379 + 0.1 8,515 18,133 512 4,906 1,436 1,411
8 3,475 8 1,207 8 8.3 r 301
         Q3 40,418 − 0.2 27,482 − 0.5 8,500 18,204 557 4,913 1,136 1,103 3,418 1,186 8.1 300         Q4 40,606 − 0.3 27,720 − 0.7 8,504 18,423 579 4,934 1,007 944 3,232 1,083 7.7 290
2010          Q1 39,993 − 0.3 27,307 − 0.3 8,308 18,244 561 4,854 987 804 3,601 1,327 8.6
r 297
         Q2 40,460 + 0.4 27,592 + 0.8 8,377 18,346 648 4,885 517 485 3,261 1,053 7.8 r 354
         Q3 40,740 + 0.8 27,886 + 1.5 8,469 18,454 740 4,889 265 239 3,132 1,003 7.5 395
         Q4 41,019 + 1.0 28,242 + 1.9 8,548 18,710 767 4,905 242 188 2,959 920 7.0 392
2011          Q1 r 40,531 r + 1.3 27,944 + 2.3 8,428 18,578 740 4,852 291 158 3,290 1,088 7.8 r 412
         Q2 r 40,994 + 1.3 28,266 + 2.4 8,535 18,721 786 4,867 121 107 2,977 850 10 7.1 470
         Q3 r 41,282 + 1.3 28,566 + 2.4 8,638 18,862 836 4,865 76 64 2,893 843 6.9 497
         Q4 r 41,575 + 1.4 9 28,967 9 + 2.6 9 8,729 9 19,176 9 829 9 4,867 ... 9 72 2,743 787 6.5 486
2012          Q1 11 41,143 11 + 1.5 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 3,074 998 7.3 472
2008          Dec 40,557 + 0.8 27,632 + 1.5 8,662 18,178 598 4,920 270 201 3,094 994 7.4 r 328
2009          Jan 40,116 + 0.7 27,379 + 1.1 8,565 18,063 561 4,848 594 452 3,480 1,263 8.3 302
         Feb 40,103 + 0.6 27,307 + 0.7 8,529 18,052 533 4,848 1,079 919 3,542 1,293 8.5 318         Mar 40,140 + 0.4 27,337 + 0.4 8,530 18,088 513 4,872 1,325 1,194 3,576 1,296 8.5 317         Apr 40,262 + 0.3 27,383 + 0.2 8,524 18,132 507 4,901 1,446 1,426 3,575 1,270 8.5
r 306
         May 40,324 + 0.1 27,395 − 0.1 8,509 18,154 508 4,914 1,469 1,443 8 3,449 8 1,192 8 8.2 299
         June 40,330 + 0.0 27,380 − 0.3 8,493 18,135 531 4,932 1,394 1,365 3,401 1,159 8.1 297
         July
40,317 − 0.2 27,314 − 0.5 8,464 18,080 551 4,935 1,248 1,215 3,454 1,210 8.2 298
         Aug 40,357 − 0.2 27,542 − 0.5 8,507 18,249 565 4,891 1,055 1,022 3,463 1,211 8.2 300         Sep 40,581 − 0.3 27,800 − 0.7 8,564 18,430 578 4,893 1,104 1,072 3,338 1,137 7.9 302         Oct 40,684 − 0.3 27,786 − 0.8 8,534 18,449 581 4,909 1,109 1,076 3,221 1,071 7.7 298         Nov 40,675 − 0.3 27,731 − 0.7 8,497 18,434 589 4,961 982 947 3,208 1,069 7.6 291         Dec 40,460 − 0.2 27,488 − 0.5 8,400 18,341 553 4,971 929 809 3,268 1,107 7.8 281
2010          Jan 39,965 − 0.4 27,249 − 0.5 8,295 18,214 550 4,840 1,057 874 3,610 1,339 8.6 271
         Feb 39,933 − 0.4 27,230 − 0.3 8,269 18,210 560 4,814 1,031 829 3,635 1,356 8.6 298         Mar 40,082 − 0.1 27,398 + 0.2 8,318 18,277 596 4,846 874 709 3,560 1,285 8.5 320         Apr 40,310 + 0.1 27,553 + 0.6 8,371 18,335 627 4,875 632 599 3,399 1,140 8.1 335         May 40,485 + 0.4 27,667 + 1.0 8,395 18,382 665 4,898 499 467 3,236 1,036 7.7
r 356
         June 40,585 + 0.6 27,710 + 1.2 8,414 18,365 707 4,916 420 390 3,148 983 7.5 370         July 40,606 + 0.7 27,691 + 1.4 8,419 18,320 732 4,915 313 286 3,186 1,029 7.6 391         Aug 40,688 + 0.8 27,976 + 1.6 8,493 18,508 752 4,864 244 219 3,183 1,030 7.6
r 397
         Sep 40,926 + 0.9 28,269 + 1.7 8,573 18,700 766 4,859 237 214 3,026 948 7.2 398         Oct 41,072 + 1.0 28,296 + 1.8 8,566 18,738 769 4,886 231 209 2,941 907 7.0 401         Nov 41,088 + 1.0 28,277 + 2.0 8,562 18,723 779 4,932 215 194 2,927 903 6.9
r 395
         Dec 40,897 + 1.1 28,033 + 2.0 8,460 18,635 743 4,931 279 162 3,011 949 7.1 380
2011          Jan r 40,475 + 1.3 27,863 + 2.3 8,399 18,540 732 4,842 322 177 3,346 1,146 7.9 375
         Feb r 40,502 + 1.4 27,912 + 2.5 8,416 18,560 738 4,831 305 155 3,313 1,107 7.9 r 418
         Mar r 40,616 r + 1.3 28,080 + 2.5 8,477 18,632 759 4,836 246 143 3,210 1,010 7.6 442
         Apr r 40,844 r + 1.3 28,214 + 2.4 8,518 18,703 771 4,857 133 117 3,078 907 7.3 461
         May r 41,016 + 1.3 28,354 + 2.5 8,559 18,768 798 4,880 122 107 2,960 839 10 7.0 470
         June r 41,121 + 1.3 28,381 + 2.4 8,580 18,753 821 4,894 110 96 2,893 804 6.9 480
         July r 41,138 + 1.3 28,356 + 2.4 8,591 18,712 831 4,890 81 68 2,939 859 7.0 492
         Aug r 41,236 + 1.3 28,658 + 2.4 8,660 18,922 843 4,840 71 59 2,945 867 7.0 497
         Sep r 41,472 + 1.3 28,984 + 2.5 8,746 19,149 845 4,833 76 65 2,796 802 6.6 r 502
         Oct r 41,627 r + 1.4 29,039 + 2.6 8,750 19,206 839 4,851 81 70 2,737 778 6.5 500
         Nov r 41,642 r + 1.3 9 28,986 9 + 2.5 9 8,740 9 19,188 9 834 9 4,885 ... 9 75 2,713 769 6.4 492
         Dec r 41,456 + 1.4 9 28,765 9 + 2.6 9 8,651 9 19,120 9 783 9 4,895 ... 9 71 2,780 813 6.6 467
2012          Jan r 41,105 r + 1.6 9 28,591 9 + 2.6 9 8,613 9 19,009 9 758 9 4,787 ... 9 77 3,084 1,011 7.3 452
         Feb r 41,111 r + 1.5 9 28,605 9 + 2.5 9 8,603 9 19,034 9 753 9 4,718 ... 9 87 3,110 1,028 7.4 473
         Mar 11 41,212 11 + 1.5 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 3,028 955 7.2 r 491
         Apr ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 2,963 893 7.0 499
Sources: Federal Statistical Office; Federal Employment Agency. *Annual and ployed excluding persons formally on the books of private employment
quarterly figures: averages; calculated by the Bundesbank; deviations from the offi- agencies. 9Unadjusted data estimated by the Federal Employment Agency. The esti-
cial figures are due to rounding. 1Workplace concept; averages. 2Monthly figures: mates for Germany in 2008 and 2009 deviated from the final data by a maximum of
end of month. 3Number within a given month. 4Mid-month level. 5Until the end 0.2 % for employees subject to social contributions, by a maximum of 2.0 % for per-
of 2006, short-time work excluding construction and agriculture; from 2007, in accor- sons solely in jobs exempt from social contributions, and, in 2009, by a maximum of
dance with section 170 of the third Book of the Social Security Code. 6Relative to 14 % for cyclically induced short-time work. 10From May 2011, calculated on the
the total civilian labour force. 7Excluding government-assisted forms of employ- basis of new labour force figures. 11Initial preliminary estimate by the Federal Statis-
ment and seasonal jobs, including jobs located abroad. 8From May 2009, unem- tical Office. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
66  Monthly Report
May 2012
 X Economic conditions in Germany
 
7 Prices
 
 
 
Consumer price index HWWI
Indices of Index of World Market
of which foreign trade prices Prices of Raw Materials 5 
Other Index of
durable producer
and non- prices of
durable industrial Index of
consumer Services Con- products producer
goods excluding prices of sold on the struction
excluding house House price domestic agricultural Other raw
Total Food Energy 1 rents 3 rents 3 index 2 market 4 products 4 Exports Imports Energy 6 materials  7 energy 1,2 
Period 2005 = 100 2010 = 100
Index level  
  
2007 8,9 103.9 105.9 101.7 112.8 103.9 102.2 109.3 106.8 119.9 103.0 105.1 86.0 87.5
2008 106.6 112.7 102.5 123.6 105.8 103.5 113.0 112.7 124.3 104.8 109.9 109.7 92.0
2009 107.0 111.2 103.9 116.9 107.4 104.6 114.4 108.0 100.7 102.5 100.5 72.8 74.5
2010 108.2 113.0 104.4 121.5 108.0 105.8 115.4 109.7 114.1 106.0 108.3 100.0 100.0
2011 10 110.7 115.8 105.7 133.7 109.3 107.1 118.7 115.9 128.6 109.9 117.0 132.2 113.5
 
2010          June 108.1 113.4 104.2 122.4 107.5 105.8 109.9 110.5 106.4 109.4 102.6 100.4
         July 108.4 113.6 103.6 121.4 109.2 105.9 110.4 111.4 106.4 109.2 98.8 101.2
         Aug 108.4 112.6 104.0 121.2 109.4 106.0 115.8 110.4 117.8 106.8 109.4 99.3 104.8
         Sep 108.3 112.5 104.7 121.7 108.0 106.0 110.7 119.3 107.1 109.7 99.0 106.6
         Oct 108.4 112.2 105.1 122.1 107.9 106.1 111.1 120.1 106.8 109.5 98.9 104.1
         Nov 108.5 113.2 105.3 122.8 107.3 106.3 116.1 111.3 122.7 107.1 110.8 104.3 108.1
         Dec 109.6 114.4 105.1 125.4 110.0 106.4 112.1 127.1 108.0 113.3 115.7 116.1
2011          Jan 109.2 114.7 104.5 128.7 107.9 106.5 113.4 127.9 108.9 115.0 121.1 121.4
         Feb 109.8 115.8 104.8 129.5 108.8 106.7 117.4 114.2 131.4 109.3 116.3 126.5 122.8
         Mar 110.3 115.6 105.4 133.3 108.7 106.8 114.7 131.3 109.6 117.6 135.5 117.7
         Apr 110.5 115.6 105.6 135.0 108.9 106.9 115.9 133.7 109.9 117.9 141.0 117.8
         May 10 110.5 116.3 105.7 134.1 108.4 107.0 118.5 115.9 134.4 110.0 117.2 132.5 115.7
         June 110.6 116.3 105.5 133.5 109.3 107.1 116.0 133.2 110.0 116.5 130.5 114.0
         July 111.0 116.0 105.0 134.3 111.0 107.2 116.8 130.4 110.3 117.4 135.1 115.0
         Aug 111.0 115.4 105.4 133.2 110.8 107.3 119.3 116.5 129.2 110.2 116.6 127.5 112.9
         Sep 111.1 115.3 106.3 135.3 109.5 107.4 116.8 129.3 110.2 117.3 135.7 114.1
         Oct 111.1 115.4 106.8 135.7 109.0 107.5 117.0 128.2 110.0 116.9 132.0 105.1
         Nov 111.1 116.0 106.8 136.4 108.5 107.6 119.7 117.1 129.3 110.2 117.4 134.5 103.0
         Dec 111.9 116.7 106.6 135.4 111.3 107.7 116.6 127.6 110.3 117.7 134.9 103.7
2012          Jan 10 111.5 117.8 106.3 138.0 109.0 107.9 117.3 p 127.1 111.2 119.2 141.2 109.4
         Feb 112.3 118.9 106.9 139.9 110.2 108.0 121.1 117.8 p 129.6 111.5 120.4 148.4 109.3
         Mar 112.6 119.2 107.4 142.2 109.8 108.0 118.5 p 131.0 111.7 121.2 155.0 110.5
         Apr 112.8 119.1 107.6 142.8 109.9 108.1 118.7 ... ... ... 148.6 110.2
Annual percentage change  
  
2007 8,9 + 2.3 + 3.9 + 1.4 + 4.0 + 2.9 + 1.1 + 6.7 + 1.3 + 11.7 + 1.2 + 0.7 + 1.9 + 8.4
2008 + 2.6 + 6.4 + 0.8 + 9.6 + 1.8 + 1.3 + 3.4 + 5.5 + 3.7 + 1.7 + 4.6 + 27.6 + 5.1
2009 + 0.4 − 1.3 + 1.4 − 5.4 + 1.5 + 1.1 + 1.2 − 4.2 − 19.0 − 2.2 − 8.6 − 33.6 − 19.0
2010 + 1.1 + 1.6 + 0.5 + 3.9 + 0.6 + 1.1 + 0.9 + 1.6 + 13.3 + 3.4 + 7.8 + 37.4 + 34.2
2011 10 + 2.3 + 2.5 + 1.2 + 10.0 + 1.2 + 1.2 + 2.9 + 5.7 + 12.7 + 3.7 + 8.0 + 32.2 + 13.5
 
2010          June + 0.9 + 1.2 + 0.3 + 2.8 + 0.6 + 1.1 + 1.7 + 8.0 + 3.9 + 9.1 + 27.5 + 31.8
         July + 1.2 + 2.6 + 0.3 + 4.7 + 0.4 + 1.1 + 3.7 + 10.3 + 4.1 + 9.9 + 30.3 + 36.6
         Aug + 1.0 + 2.8 + 0.2 + 2.5 + 0.6 + 1.1 + 1.2 + 3.2 + 17.4 + 4.2 + 8.6 + 18.9 + 33.3
         Sep + 1.3 + 3.0 + 0.3 + 4.6 + 0.7 + 1.1 + 3.9 + 21.4 + 4.6 + 9.9 + 30.1 + 42.3
         Oct + 1.3 + 2.9 + 0.4 + 5.1 + 0.6 + 1.1 + 4.3 + 21.9 + 4.3 + 9.2 + 22.6 + 37.3
         Nov + 1.5 + 3.4 + 1.1 + 5.0 + 0.4 + 1.2 + 1.5 + 4.4 + 20.6 + 4.5 + 10.0 + 23.6 + 38.8
         Dec + 1.7 + 3.6 + 0.6 + 8.2 + 0.5 + 1.2 + 5.3 + 23.8 + 5.2 + 12.0 + 38.1 + 40.2
2011          Jan + 2.0 + 2.7 + 0.8 + 8.6 + 0.9 + 1.2 + 5.7 + 23.7 + 5.4 + 11.8 + 36.1 + 41.7
         Feb + 2.1 + 3.4 + 0.7 + 10.2 + 1.0 + 1.3 + 2.5 + 6.4 + 25.3 + 5.4 + 11.9 + 41.2 + 43.3
         Mar + 2.1 + 2.2 + 0.9 + 10.5 + 0.7 + 1.2 + 6.2 + 24.6 + 4.9 + 11.3 + 40.4 + 31.5
         Apr + 2.4 + 1.4 + 1.1 + 10.5 + 2.1 + 1.2 + 6.4 + 25.5 + 4.2 + 9.4 + 34.2 + 21.2
         May 10 + 2.3 + 2.7 + 1.2 + 9.5 + 1.1 + 1.2 + 2.9 + 6.1 + 24.1 + 3.8 + 8.1 + 31.7 + 17.0
         June + 2.3 + 2.6 + 1.2 + 9.1 + 1.7 + 1.2 + 5.6 + 20.5 + 3.4 + 6.5 + 27.2 + 13.5
         July + 2.4 + 2.1 + 1.4 + 10.6 + 1.6 + 1.2 + 5.8 + 17.1 + 3.7 + 7.5 + 36.7 + 13.6
         Aug + 2.4 + 2.5 + 1.3 + 9.9 + 1.3 + 1.2 + 3.0 + 5.5 + 9.7 + 3.2 + 6.6 + 28.4 + 7.7
         Sep + 2.6 + 2.5 + 1.5 + 11.2 + 1.4 + 1.3 + 5.5 + 8.4 + 2.9 + 6.9 + 37.1 + 7.0
         Oct + 2.5 + 2.9 + 1.6 + 11.1 + 1.0 + 1.3 + 5.3 + 6.7 + 3.0 + 6.8 + 33.5 + 1.0
         Nov + 2.4 + 2.5 + 1.4 + 11.1 + 1.1 + 1.2 + 3.1 + 5.2 + 5.4 + 2.9 + 6.0 + 29.0 − 4.7
         Dec + 2.1 + 2.0 + 1.4 + 8.0 + 1.2 + 1.2 + 4.0 + 0.4 + 2.1 + 3.9 + 16.6 − 10.7
2012          Jan 10 + 2.1 + 2.7 + 1.7 + 7.2 + 1.0 + 1.3 + 3.4 p − 0.6 + 2.1 + 3.7 + 16.6 − 9.9
         Feb + 2.3 + 2.7 + 2.0 + 8.0 + 1.3 + 1.2 + 3.2 + 3.2 p − 1.4 + 2.0 + 3.5 + 17.3 − 11.0
         Mar + 2.1 + 3.1 + 1.9 + 6.7 + 1.0 + 1.1 + 3.3 p − 0.2 + 1.9 + 3.1 + 14.4 − 6.1
         Apr + 2.1 + 3.0 + 1.9 + 5.8 + 0.9 + 1.1 + 2.4 ... ... ... + 5.4 − 6.5
Source: Federal Statistical Office; for the Index of World Market Prices of Raw beverages and tobacco as well as industrial raw materials. 8From January 2007,
Materials: HWWI. 1Electricity, gas and other fuels. 2Bundesbank calculation based increase in the standard rate of value-added tax and in insurance tax from 16% to
on data provided by the Federal Statistical Office. 3Net rents. 4Excluding 19%. 9Introduction of university tuition fees in some federal states. 10From May
value-added tax. 5For the euro area, in euro. 6Coal and crude oil (Brent). 7Food, 2011 and from January 2012, increase in tobacco tax. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
67  Monthly Report
May 2012
X Economic conditions in Germany
  
8 Households’ income *
  
  
  
Gross wages and Net wages and Monetary social Saving
salaries 1 salaries 2 Mass income 4 Saving 6 ratio 7 benefits received 3 Disposable income 5 
Annual Annual Annual Annual Annual Annual
percent- percent- percent- percent- percent- percent- Asage age age age age age percent-
Period change change change change change change age € billion € billion € billion € billion € billion € billion
2004
924.7 0.5 627.9 2.0 359.5 0.3 987.3 1.4 1,435.4 1.7 151.8 3.1 10.6
2005 922.1 − 0.3 625.5 − 0.4 359.8 0.1 985.3 − 0.2 1,463.9 2.0 156.9 3.3 10.7
2006 935.0 1.4 627.8 0.4 358.5 − 0.4 986.3 0.1 1,502.0 2.6 162.5 3.6 10.8
2007 965.9 3.3 646.2 2.9 353.6 − 1.4 999.8 1.4 1,524.8 1.5 168.1 3.4 11.0
2008 1,002.3 3.8 664.0 2.8 355.4 0.5 1,019.4 2.0 1,571.2 3.0 183.5 9.2 11.7
2009 1,000.1 − 0.2 661.5 − 0.4 386.8 8.8 1,048.3 2.8 1,560.5 − 0.7 173.1 − 5.7 11.1
2010 1,026.7 2.7 688.5 4.1 391.6 1.2 1,080.1 3.0 1,603.8 2.8 180.8 4.5 11.3
2011 1,074.7 4.7 713.6 3.7 385.9 − 1.4 1,099.5 1.8 1,655.8 3.2 181.4 0.3 11.0
2010          Q3 254.2 2.9 174.3 3.6 97.3 − 0.6 271.6 2.0 405.1 3.1 38.8 4.6 9.6
         Q4 285.2 3.2 190.4 4.6 96.1 − 0.3 286.5 2.9 405.8 3.8 39.1 4.3 9.6
2011          Q1 249.8 4.9 165.7 3.8 98.4 − 1.8 264.1 1.6 408.9 3.4 58.8 − 1.4 14.4
         Q2 262.5 5.4 170.5 3.9 95.9 − 2.2 266.4 1.6 410.5 3.3 43.2 − 0.1 10.5
         Q3 265.5 4.4 180.2 3.4 96.3 − 1.1 276.5 1.8 419.2 3.5 39.0 0.5 9.3
         Q4 296.9 4.1 197.2 3.6 95.4 − 0.7 292.6 2.1 417.2 2.8 40.4 3.2 9.7
Source: Federal Statistical Office; figures computed in February 2012. *Households in- salaries plus monetary social benefits received. 5Mass income plus operating surplus,
cluding non-profit institutions serving households. 1Residence concept. 2After mixed income, property income (net), other current transfers received, income of
deducting the wage tax payable on gross wages and salaries and employees’ non-profit institutions serving households, less taxes (excluding wage tax andcontributions to the social security funds. 3Social security benefits in cash from the consumption-related taxes) and other current transfers paid. Including the increase in
social security funds, central, state and local government and foreign countries, claims on company pension funds. 6Including the increase in claims on company pen-
pension payments (net), private funded social benefits, less social contributions on sion funds. 7 Saving as a percentage of disposable income. 
social benefits, consumption-related taxes and public charges. 4Net wages and
  
  
  
9 Negotiated pay rates (overall economy)
    
  
Index of negotiated wages 1 
On a monthly basis
Memo item:
Total excluding Wages and salaries
On an hourly basis Total one-off payments Basic pay rates  2 per employee 3 
Annual Annual Annual Annual Annual
Period percentage percentage percentage percentage percentage
2005=100 change 2005=100 change 2005=100 change 2005=100 change 2005=100 change
2004 99.1 0.8 98.9 0.8 99.1 0.8 98.9 1.1 99.7 0.5
2005 100.0 0.9 100.0 1.1 100.0 0.9 100.0 1.1 100.0 0.3
2006 100.9 0.9 101.2 1.2 100.8 0.8 100.8 0.8 100.8 0.82007 102.1 1.2 102.5 1.3 102.2 1.5 102.2 1.4 102.2 1.42008 104.9 2.7 105.4 2.8 105.3 3.0 105.5 3.2 104.5 2.32009 107.0 2.0 107.5 2.0 107.6 2.2 108.0 2.4 104.2 − 0.3
2010 108.7 1.6 109.2 1.6 109.3 1.6 109.9 1.7 106.4 2.1
2011 110.5 1.7 111.1 1.7 111.2 1.7 111.7 1.7 109.9 3.3
2010          Q4 121.1 1.5 121.6 1.5 121.7 1.3 110.3 1.4 116.6 2.1
2011          Q1 102.6 1.7 103.1 1.7 102.9 1.3 110.6 1.1 103.4 3.4
         Q2 103.7 1.3 104.2 1.3 104.3 1.7 111.6 1.7 107.7 3.9         Q3 112.7 1.9 113.3 1.9 113.5 1.9 112.2 2.0 108.3 3.1         Q4 123.1 1.7 123.7 1.7 124.1 2.0 112.6 2.1 119.9 2.8
2012          Q1 104.6 1.9 105.0 1.8 105.4 2.4 113.4 2.5 . .
2011          Sep 103.7 2.1 104.2 2.1 104.4 2.0 112.4 2.0 . .
         Oct 103.6 1.8 104.2 1.9 104.5 2.1 112.5 2.0 . .
         Nov 159.5 1.9 160.4 1.9 160.9 1.9 112.6 2.1 . .
         Dec 106.1 1.3 106.7 1.3 107.0 2.1 112.6 2.1 . .
2012          Jan 104.4 0.9 104.9 0.9 105.2 2.3 113.1 2.3 . .
         Feb 104.4 2.4 104.8 2.4 105.2 2.3 113.2 2.4 . .
         Mar 104.9 2.3 105.4 2.2 105.8 2.4 113.9 2.9 . .
1Current data are normally revised on account of additional reports. 2Excluding and retirement provisions). 3Source: Federal Statistical Office; figures computed in
one-off payments and covenants (capital formation benefits, special payments, such February 2012. 
as annual bonuses, holiday pay, Christmas bonuses (13
thmonthly salary payment)

Deutsche Bundesbank
68  Monthly Report
May 2012
XI External sector
 
1 Major items of the balance of payments of the euro area *
 
 
€ million
2011 2012
Item 2009 2010 2011 Q2 Q3 Q4 Dec Jan Feb
Current account − 21,927 − 6,792 − 3,214 − 18,615 + 2,724 + 33,936 + 21,640 − 10,111 − 5,870 A
1 Goods
Exports (fob) 1,304,133 1,566,838 1,773,759 438,694 444,620 462,672 151,789 142,942 152,651
Imports (fob) 1,272,817 1,551,745 1,769,126 441,050 441,783 448,398 143,628 152,110 150,216
Balance + 31,315 + 15,093 + 4,636 − 2,356 + 2,838 + 14,276 + 8,162 − 9,168 + 2,435
2 Services
Receipts 478,915 523,989 550,102 134,429 147,297 143,746 51,029 41,083 40,949
Expenditure 442,472 474,430 489,021 118,038 127,653 126,567 44,252 38,906 38,209
Balance + 36,443 + 49,562 + 61,083 + 16,391 + 19,646 + 17,179 + 6,777 + 2,177 + 2,740
3 Income + 3,452 + 31,809 + 31,694 − 11,736 + 8,786 + 19,772 + 8,250 + 4,146 + 4,951
4 Current transfers
Transfers from non-residents 94,275 87,619 92,738 19,097 16,783 32,338 16,301 9,535 11,194
Transfers to non-residents 187,413 190,877 193,364 40,011 45,329 49,628 17,850 16,801 27,189
Balance − 93,139 − 103,256 − 100,624 − 20,914 − 28,545 − 17,289 − 1,548 − 7,266 − 15,995
Capital account + 6,717 + 6,374 + 10,812 + 760 + 1,706 + 6,004 + 1,620 + 126 + 1,611 B
Financial account (net capital exports: − + 9,436 − 2,536 − 24,588 + 21,201 + 3,504 − 44,016 − 20,825 + 10,415 + 3,235 C)
1 Direct investment − 105,115 − 113,923 − 151,135 − 31,831 − 19,173 − 57,306 − 8,171 − 6,379 − 5,281
By resident units abroad − 336,994 − 275,765 − 348,294 − 60,003 − 56,620 − 106,855 − 38,651 − 26,778 − 12,436
By non-resident units in the euro area + 231,881 + 161,847 + 197,160 + 28,174 + 37,446 + 49,549 + 30,480 + 20,398 + 7,156
2 Portfolio investment + 265,687 + 165,086 + 308,279 + 139,053 + 34,957 − 1,774 − 35,571 − 43,381 + 18,033
By resident units abroad − 90,379 − 143,000 + 47,173 − 39,889 + 63,062 + 46,796 − 16,968 − 28,322 − 26,909
Equity − 53,080 − 76,713 + 69,010 − 26,809 + 53,704 + 36,763 + 7,672 − 2,886 − 3,518
Bonds and notes − 42,904 − 106,698 + 8,978 − 25,549 + 17,805 + 21,540 − 3,352 − 20,476 − 19,245
Money market instruments + 5,603 + 40,410 − 30,816 + 12,466 − 8,447 − 11,505 − 21,288 − 4,959 − 4,146
By non-resident units in the euro area + 356,067 + 308,086 + 261,105 + 178,942 − 28,105 − 48,571 − 18,603 − 15,059 + 44,942
Equity + 124,649 + 144,180 + 120,510 − 4,274 − 22,301 + 42,267 + 31,523 + 9,891 − 1,033
Bonds and notes + 140,501 + 184,216 + 167,030 + 170,830 + 2,145 − 31,461 − 20,570 − 32,020 + 44,618
Money market instruments + 90,917 − 20,310 − 26,435 + 12,386 − 7,949 − 59,378 − 29,556 + 7,070 + 1,357
3 Financial derivatives + 20,020 + 18,534 − 20,812 + 3,577 − 14,780 − 9,160 − 3,173 − 4,124 + 6,239
4 Other investment − 175,713 − 61,718 − 150,724 − 94,081 − 1,238 + 30,983 + 31,524 + 64,843 − 13,981
Eurosystem − 233,287 + 11,839 + 137,194 + 2,612 + 32,478 + 96,122 + 99,632 − 37,586 − 62
General government + 5,412 + 23,912 + 71,265 + 13,366 + 29,203 − 7,945 + 5,198 + 7,858 + 6,244
MFIs (excluding the Eurosystem) + 67,661 − 19,451 − 339,224 − 79,396 − 58,358 − 75,239 − 106,719 + 100,845 − 18,259
Long-term − 21,557 + 46,891 − 15,205 − 18,862 + 800 − 32,737 − 13,335 + 18,597 + 773
Short-term + 89,218 − 66,344 − 324,020 − 60,535 − 59,158 − 42,503 − 93,384 + 82,249 − 19,032
Other sectors − 15,501 − 78,018 − 19,958 − 30,661 − 4,560 + 18,044 + 33,413 − 6,275 − 1,904
5 Reserve assets (Increase: −) + 4,558 − 10,519 − 10,198 + 4,484 + 3,738 − 6,762 − 5,435 − 544 − 1,775
Errors and omissions + 5,775 + 2,957 + 16,988 − 3,348 − 7,933 + 4,075 − 2,436 − 430 + 1,023 D
* Source: European Central Bank. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
69  Monthly Report
May 2012
XI External sector
 
2 Major items of the balance of payments of the Federal Republic of Germany
(balances)
 
 
Current account Capital trans- Financial account
fers andacquisition/ of whichdisposal of Change in
Supple- non- reserve assets
Balance mentary produced at trans- Errorson current Foreign trade Current non-financial action and
Period account trade 
1 items 2 Services 3 Income transfers assets Total 4 value 5 omissions
DM million
1998 − 28,696 + 126,970 − 8,917 − 75,053 − 18,635 − 53,061 + 1,289 + 25,683 − 7,128 + 1,724
1999 − 50,528 + 127,542 − 15,947 − 90,036 − 24,363 − 47,724 − 301 − 20,332 + 24,517 + 71,161
2000 − 69,351 + 115,645 − 17,742 − 95,848 − 16,956 − 54,450 + 13,345 + 66,863 + 11,429 − 10,8572001 − 23 + 186,771 − 14,512 − 97,521 − 22,557 − 52,204 − 756 − 23,068 + 11,797 + 23,847
€ million
1999
− 25,834 + 65,211 − 8,153 − 46,035 − 12,457 − 24,401 − 154 − 10,396 + 12,535 + 36,384
2000 − 35,459 + 59,128 − 9,071 − 49,006 − 8,670 − 27,840 + 6,823 + 34,187 + 5,844 − 5,5512001 − 12 + 95,495 − 7,420 − 49,862 − 11,533 − 26,692 − 387 − 11,794 + 6,032 + 12,1932002 + 42,669 + 132,788 − 8,552 − 35,728 − 18,888 − 26,951 − 212 − 38,448 + 2,065 − 4,0102003 + 40,525 + 129,921 − 11,148 − 34,506 − 15,677 − 28,064 + 311 − 61,758 + 445 + 20,921
2004 + 102,368 + 156,096 − 16,470 − 29,375 + 19,681 − 27,564 + 435 − 122,984 + 1,470 + 20,181
2005 + 112,591 + 158,179 − 14,057 − 27,401 + 24,391 − 28,522 − 1,369 − 129,635 + 2,182 + 18,4132006 + 144,739 + 159,048 − 12,888 − 17,346 + 44,460 − 28,536 − 258 − 175,474 + 2,934 + 30,9922007 + 180,914 + 195,348 − 9,816 − 14,852 + 42,918 − 32,685 + 104 − 210,151 − 953 + 29,1332008 + 153,633 + 178,297 − 13,628 − 10,258 + 32,379 − 33,157 − 210 − 173,910 − 2,008 + 20,487
2009 + 140,558 + 138,697 − 15,052 − 8,049 + 58,120 − 33,158 + 29 − 155,440 + 3,200 + 14,853
2010 + 150,668 + 154,863 − 11,613 − 4,258 + 49,864 − 38,187 − 586 − 147,439 − 1,613 − 2,643
2011 
r + 147,653 + 158,084 − 18,852 − 6,494 + 48,415 − 33,501 + 641 − 161,937 − 2,836 + 13,643
2009          Q2 + 29,121 + 34,119 − 3,541 − 2,591 + 6,976 − 5,842 + 247 − 55,923 + 41 + 26,555         Q3 + 34,506 + 36,092 − 3,500 − 7,900 + 18,061 − 8,247 + 37 − 24,732 + 2,269 − 9,810         Q4 + 51,139 + 40,910 − 3,414 + 4,356 + 16,817 − 7,531 − 276 − 68,715 + 569 + 17,853
2010          Q1 + 34,259 + 37,736 − 2,522 − 22 + 13,233 − 14,165 + 262 − 28,714 − 651 − 5,807
         Q2 + 29,466 + 37,249 − 2,885 − 1,708 + 3,198 − 6,388 − 434 − 30,781 − 801 + 1,750         Q3 + 33,665 + 38,895 − 2,953 − 6,174 + 14,666 − 10,770 + 9 − 27,534 + 344 − 6,140         Q4 + 53,278 + 40,982 − 3,254 + 3,646 + 18,767 − 6,864 − 423 − 60,410 − 506 + 7,555
2011          Q1 + 40,512 + 40,808 − 1,811 + 1,864 + 13,169 − 13,518 + 958 − 63,197 − 1,393 + 21,727
         Q2 + 25,915 + 37,984 − 4,637 − 2,855 + 100 − 4,677 − 278 − 46,097 − 438 + 20,461         Q3 
r + 33,514 + 39,178 − 6,161 − 6,298 + 16,414 − 9,619 + 115 − 16,218 − 639 − 17,411
         Q4 r + 47,711 + 40,113 − 6,243 + 796 + 18,732 − 5,688 − 153 − 36,425 − 366 − 11,133
2012          Q1 p + 40,926 + 45,490 − 4,511 − 486 + 15,529 − 15,096 + 219 − 60,678 − 963 + 19,532
2009          Oct + 11,343 + 12,466 − 910 − 1,159 + 5,965 − 5,019 − 249 − 23,560 − 651 + 12,466         Nov + 16,360 + 15,962 − 1,755 + 435 + 5,617 − 3,898 + 90 − 18,830 + 1,522 + 2,379         Dec + 23,435 + 12,482 − 749 + 5,079 + 5,236 + 1,386 − 117 − 26,326 − 302 + 3,008
2010          Jan + 5,869 + 8,277 − 990 − 918 + 4,047 − 4,548 + 64 + 14,475 − 55 − 20,407
         Feb + 10,254 + 13,215 − 300 + 71 + 4,171 − 6,904 + 431 − 16,220 − 782 + 5,536         Mar + 18,137 + 16,244 − 1,233 + 824 + 5,015 − 2,713 − 232 − 26,969 + 187 + 9,065
         Apr + 11,779 + 12,995 − 732 + 798 + 914 − 2,196 − 199 − 7,750 − 116 − 3,830
         May + 4,669 + 10,143 − 1,346 − 830 − 1,842 − 1,455 − 49 − 7,771 − 671 + 3,151         June + 13,017 + 14,111 − 806 − 1,677 + 4,126 − 2,737 − 185 − 15,260 − 14 + 2,429
         July + 10,363 + 12,967 − 1,096 − 2,392 + 4,604 − 3,720 + 423 + 19,095 + 20 − 29,880
         Aug + 6,641 + 9,456 − 1,091 − 3,085 + 4,797 − 3,436 − 112 − 18,626 + 119 + 12,097         Sep + 16,661 + 16,473 − 765 − 697 + 5,264 − 3,613 − 302 − 28,002 + 205 + 11,643
         Oct + 15,025 + 14,518 − 782 − 591 + 5,582 − 3,701 − 220 − 96 + 234 − 14,708
         Nov + 15,965 + 13,884 − 1,110 + 1,104 + 6,096 − 4,008 − 169 − 29,202 + 81 + 13,406         Dec + 22,288 + 12,580 − 1,361 + 3,133 + 7,090 + 846 − 34 − 31,112 − 820 + 8,858
2011          Jan + 8,632 + 10,108 − 1,024 + 172 + 3,417 − 4,042 + 541 − 11,110 − 182 + 1,938
         Feb + 10,622 + 11,928 + 254 + 439 + 4,568 − 6,568 + 528 − 20,926 − 23 + 9,776         Mar + 21,259 + 18,772 − 1,042 + 1,253 + 5,184 − 2,908 − 110 − 31,161 − 1,188 + 10,013
         Apr + 7,450 + 10,821 − 1,811 − 795 + 771 − 1,536 − 198 − 21,317 − 563 + 14,065
         May + 7,438 + 14,627 − 1,034 + 197 − 5,779 − 574 − 65 − 17,656 + 24 + 10,284         June + 11,028 + 12,536 − 1,793 − 2,257 + 5,108 − 2,567 − 16 − 7,124 + 101 − 3,888
         July 
r + 8,268 + 10,414 − 1,420 − 2,480 + 5,216 − 3,462 − 139 + 7,188 − 428 − 15,316
         Aug  r + 7,988 + 11,645 − 2,228 − 4,099 + 5,712 − 3,042 + 383 − 15,547 + 109 + 7,175
         Sep  r + 17,258 + 17,119 − 2,512 + 281 + 5,485 − 3,115 − 129 − 7,859 − 320 − 9,270
         Oct  r + 10,707 + 11,303 − 1,945 − 967 + 5,781 − 3,465 − 178 − 12,743 + 55 + 2,214
         Nov  r + 15,776 + 15,915 − 1,802 − 137 + 5,404 − 3,603 + 119 − 10,001 + 263 − 5,895
         Dec  r + 21,228 + 12,895 − 2,496 + 1,901 + 7,547 + 1,380 − 94 − 13,681 − 684 − 7,453
2012          Jan  r + 9,482 + 13,189 − 1,384 − 2,205 + 4,169 − 4,287 − 27 − 14,628 − 140 + 5,173
         Feb + 11,691 + 14,865 − 1,925 + 402 + 5,632 − 7,283 + 240 − 12,706 − 547 + 775
         Mar  p + 19,753 + 17,436 − 1,201 + 1,316 + 5,728 − 3,526 + 6 − 33,343 − 276 + 13,584
1Special trade according to the official foreign trade statistics: imports cif, exports deduction of goods returned. 3Excluding the expenditure on freight and insurance
fob. From January 2007 onwards, excluding supplies of goods for/after included in the cif import figure. 4Financial account balance including change in
repair/maintenance, which, up to December 2006, were deducted via supplementary reserve assets. Capital exports: − . 5 Increase: − . 
trade items. 2Inter alia warehouse transactions for the account of residents and

Deutsche Bundesbank
70  Monthly Report
May 2012
 XI External sector
 
 3 Foreign trade (special trade) of the Federal Republic of Germany,
 by country and group of countries *
 
 € million
 2011  2012
Country / group of countries  2009  2010  2011 r Oct r Nov r Dec r Jan r Feb r Mar p 
All countries 1 Exports 803,312 951,959 1,060,035 89,170 94,801 85,013 85,982 91,213 98,912
Imports 664,615 797,097 901,950 77,867 78,886 72,118 72,793 76,348 81,476Balance + 138,697 + 154,863 + 158,085 + 11,303 + 15,915 + 12,895 + 13,189 + 14,865 + 17,436
I Exports 585,826 675,024 751,485 62,876 67,098 57,151 60,371 63,609 ... European countries
Imports 463,721 541,720 624,539 53,720 54,960 50,862 50,133 53,744 ...
Balance + 122,105 + 133,305 + 126,946 + 9,155 + 12,138 + 6,289 + 10,238 + 9,865 ...
Exports 500,654 570,879 627,150 52,373 55,883 47,286 50,981 53,330 ... 1 EU member states (27)
Imports 380,323 444,375 507,608 43,802 44,748 40,357 39,950 43,388 ...
Balance + 120,331 + 126,504 + 119,543 + 8,571 + 11,135 + 6,929 + 11,031 + 9,942 ...
Euro-area (17) Exports 343,701 388,103 420,399 34,716 37,547 31,641 34,140 35,334 ...
countries Imports 258,729 300,135 339,990 28,812 29,613 27,009 26,658 28,948 ...
Balance + 84,972 + 87,968 + 80,409 + 5,903 + 7,933 + 4,632 + 7,482 + 6,387 ...
of which
Austria Exports 46,093 52,156 57,663 4,817 5,223 4,384 4,627 4,995 ...
Imports 27,565 33,013 37,476 3,169 3,404 2,938 2,837 3,211 ...
Balance + 18,528 + 19,144 + 20,187 + 1,648 + 1,819 + 1,446 + 1,790 + 1,784 ...
Belgium and Exports 46,262 50,545 53,166 4,387 4,540 3,972 4,073 4,128 ...
Luxembourg Imports 30,694 36,026 41,302 3,553 3,571 3,155 3,173 3,519 ...
Balance + 15,568 + 14,519 + 11,864 + 835 + 969 + 817 + 900 + 609 ...
France Exports 81,304 89,582 101,516 8,175 9,612 7,913 8,735 9,129 ...
Imports 53,338 60,673 66,267 5,880 5,622 5,159 5,210 5,162 ...
Balance + 27,966 + 28,909 + 35,249 + 2,296 + 3,990 + 2,754 + 3,525 + 3,966 ...
Italy Exports 50,620 58,589 62,085 5,198 5,435 4,335 4,749 4,974 ...
Imports 37,197 41,977 48,190 4,124 4,107 3,797 3,718 4,280 ...
Balance + 13,423 + 16,611 + 13,894 + 1,074 + 1,328 + 538 + 1,032 + 694 ...
Netherlands Exports 53,195 62,978 69,280 5,710 6,054 5,636 5,994 5,831 ...
Imports 55,583 67,205 82,029 6,570 7,077 6,971 6,723 7,318 ...
Balance − 2,388 − 4,227 − 12,749 − 859 − 1,022 − 1,335 − 730 − 1,487 ...
Spain Exports 31,281 34,222 34,869 2,921 3,109 2,386 2,727 2,814 ...
Imports 18,959 21,955 22,490 1,803 1,914 1,715 1,825 2,105 ...
Balance + 12,322 + 12,267 + 12,378 + 1,117 + 1,195 + 670 + 901 + 709 ...
Other EU member Exports 156,953 182,775 206,751 17,657 18,336 15,645 16,842 17,996 ...
states Imports 121,594 144,240 167,618 14,990 15,135 13,348 13,292 14,441 ...
Balance + 35,359 + 38,536 + 39,133 + 2,668 + 3,202 + 2,297 + 3,550 + 3,555 ...
of which
United Exports 53,240 58,666 65,451 5,598 5,823 4,975 5,710 6,161 ...
Kingdom Imports 32,452 37,923 44,854 4,210 4,029 3,544 3,623 3,775 ...
Balance + 20,787 + 20,743 + 20,596 + 1,388 + 1,794 + 1,431 + 2,087 + 2,385 ...
Exports 85,172 104,145 124,334 10,503 11,215 9,865 9,390 10,280 ... 2 Other European
Imports 83,398 97,345 116,931 9,918 10,212 10,505 10,183 10,356 ... countries
Balance + 1,774 + 6,800 + 7,403 + 584 + 1,003 − 640 − 793 − 77 ...
of which
Switzerland Exports 35,510 41,659 47,708 3,985 4,359 3,762 3,977 4,070 ...
Imports 28,096 32,507 36,878 3,374 3,283 2,930 3,007 3,264 ...
Balance + 7,414 + 9,152 + 10,830 + 611 + 1,076 + 832 + 970 + 807 ...
II Exports 216,466 276,635 307,817 26,215 27,658 27,810 25,575 27,541 ... Non-European
Imports 200,303 255,377 277,411 24,146 23,925 21,255 22,659 22,604 ... countries
Balance + 16,163 + 21,258 + 30,406 + 2,068 + 3,733 + 6,554 + 2,916 + 4,937 ...
Exports 17,412 19,968 20,581 1,669 1,705 1,796 1,580 1,656 ... 1 Africa
Imports 14,235 17,040 21,859 1,648 1,628 1,458 1,828 1,939 ...
Balance + 3,177 + 2,929 − 1,278 + 21 + 77 + 337 − 248 − 283 ...
Exports 78,727 99,464 110,361 9,567 9,988 9,495 10,050 10,302 ... 2 America
Imports 60,498 71,680 80,009 6,864 7,106 6,519 6,123 6,294 ...
Balance + 18,229 + 27,784 + 30,352 + 2,704 + 2,882 + 2,976 + 3,927 + 4,008 ...
of which
Exports 54,356 65,574 73,694 6,541 6,770 6,443 7,042 6,940 ... United States
Imports 39,283 45,241 48,334 4,282 4,233 4,136 3,807 4,147 ...
Balance + 15,074 + 20,333 + 25,360 + 2,259 + 2,537 + 2,307 + 3,236 + 2,793 ...
Exports 113,179 148,231 167,451 14,209 15,200 15,758 13,126 14,687 ... 3 Asia
Imports 122,823 163,523 171,532 15,306 14,873 13,000 14,335 14,118 ...
Balance − 9,644 − 15,293 − 4,080 − 1,097 + 327 + 2,758 − 1,209 + 569 ...
of which
Middle East Exports 23,598 28,138 28,709 2,618 2,897 3,575 2,155 2,652 ...
Imports 5,506 6,878 7,887 866 727 526 582 602 ...
Balance + 18,092 + 21,260 + 20,823 + 1,752 + 2,170 + 3,049 + 1,573 + 2,050 ...
Japan Exports 10,875 13,149 15,118 1,446 1,357 1,299 1,407 1,415 ...
Imports 18,946 22,475 23,546 2,070 2,076 1,857 1,862 1,824 ...
Balance − 8,071 − 9,326 − 8,428 − 624 − 719 − 558 − 455 − 409 ...
Exports 37,273 53,791 64,762 5,406 5,860 5,438 5,035 5,550 ... People‘s Republic
Imports 56,706 77,270 79,373 7,237 7,143 6,317 6,946 6,223 ... of China 
2 
Balance − 19,434 − 23,479 − 14,611 − 1,831 − 1,282 − 879 − 1,912 − 672 ...
Exports 28,606 38,183 41,532 3,362 3,551 3,626 3,271 3,677 ... Emerging markets
Imports 28,338 39,562 39,197 3,097 3,077 2,783 3,105 3,251 ... in South-East Asia 3 
Balance + 268 − 1,379 + 2,335 + 265 + 474 + 844 + 166 + 426 ...
Exports 7,147 8,972 9,423 769 766 761 820 897 ... 4 Oceania and
Imports 2,747 3,134 4,011 329 319 278 373 253 ... polar regions
Balance + 4,401 + 5,838 + 5,412 + 440 + 447 + 483 + 447 + 644 ...
 
*Source: Federal Statistical Office. Exports (fob) by country of destination, imports other data not classifiable by region. 2Excluding Hong Kong. 3Brunei Darussalam,
(cif) by country of origin. Individual countries and groups of countries according to Hong Kong, Indonesia, Malaysia, Philippines, Republic of Korea, Singapore, Taiwan
the current position. 1Including fuel and other supplies for ships and aircraft and and Thailand. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
71  Monthly Report
May 2012
XI External sector
 
4 Services and income of the Federal Republic of Germany
(balances)
 
€ million
Services
Other services
of which
 
Patents
Compen- Services  of Construction
Trans- Financial and sation of Investment Government self-employed and  assembly
Period Total Travel 1 services licences Total income portation 2 services  3 persons  4 work,  repairs employees 5 
2007 − 14,852 − 34,324 + 6,756 + 2,801 − 2,016 + 3,309 + 8,622 − 1,964 + 3,197 − 140 + 43,058
2008 − 10,258 − 34,718 + 8,319 + 3,936 − 1,313 + 2,376 + 11,142 − 1,641 + 3,229 + 216 + 32,1642009 − 8,049 − 33,341 + 6,940 + 4,276 + 136 + 2,370 + 11,570 − 1,266 + 2,966 + 764 + 57,3562010 − 4,258 − 32,778 + 7,359 + 4,175 + 1,153 + 2,456 + 13,376 − 1,152 + 3,405 + 1,392 + 48,4722011 − 6,494 − 32,692 + 7,475 + 3,702 + 843 + 2,546 + 11,632 − 1,221 + 3,212 + 1,596 + 46,820
2010          Q3 − 6,174 − 13,252 + 1,940 + 1,110 − 279 + 591 + 3,716 − 328 + 803 − 268 + 14,933
         Q4 + 3,646 − 5,841 + 1,781 + 1,005 + 886 + 674 + 5,141 − 304 + 1,121 + 642 + 18,125
2011          Q1 + 1,864 − 4,911 + 1,540 + 724 + 350 + 579 + 3,583 − 246 + 795 + 995 + 12,174
         Q2 − 2,855 − 8,067 + 2,199 + 485 + 264 + 679 + 1,585 − 264 + 735 + 310 − 210         Q3 − 6,298 − 14,091 + 1,807 + 942 − 172 + 691 + 4,525 − 325 + 730 − 212 + 16,626         Q4 + 796 − 5,623 + 1,929 + 1,552 + 402 + 597 + 1,940 − 386 + 952 + 503 + 18,229
2012          Q1 − 486 − 5,344 + 1,728 + 1,165 − 549 + 632 + 1,882 − 347 + 518 + 1,032 + 14,498
2011          May + 197 − 2,100 + 822 + 274 + 316 + 235 + 649 − 116 + 216 + 109 − 5,888
         June − 2,257 − 4,660 + 704 + 176 + 1 + 213 + 1,310 − 84 + 280 + 99 + 5,009
         July − 2,480 − 4,680 + 713 + 408 − 112 + 234 + 957 − 109 + 183 − 68 + 5,285
         Aug − 4,099 − 5,361 + 591 + 172 + 41 + 236 + 222 − 126 + 232 − 68 + 5,781         Sep + 281 − 4,051 + 504 + 361 − 102 + 222 + 3,347 − 90 + 315 − 76 + 5,561
         Oct − 967 − 3,429 + 676 + 963 + 210 + 210 + 403 − 142 + 248 + 144 + 5,637
         Nov − 137 − 1,484 + 533 + 236 + 339 + 225 + 13 − 118 + 308 + 143 + 5,260         Dec + 1,901 − 711 + 720 + 353 − 148 + 162 + 1,524 − 126 + 396 + 216 + 7,332
2012          Jan − 2,205 − 1,626 + 512 + 464 − 643 + 197 − 1,109 − 127 + 82 + 335 + 3,834
         Feb + 402 − 1,804 + 566 + 311 + 146 + 198 + 985 − 94 + 133 + 335 + 5,298         Mar + 1,316 − 1,914 + 650 + 389 − 53 + 237 + 2,006 − 126 + 303 + 361 + 5,366
1From January 2001, figures subject to significant uncertainty. 2Excluding the other technical services, research and development, commercial services, etc.
expenditure on freight included in the cif import figure. 3Including the receipts 5 Wages and salaries. 
from foreign military agencies for goods and services supplied. 4Engineering and
5 Current transfers of the Federal Republic of Germany 6 Capital transfers
(balances) (balances)
€ million € million
Public 1 Private 1 
International
organisations 2 
 
of which Other Other
European current Workers’ current
Period Total Total Total Communities Total remittances transfers Total  4 Public 1 Private 1 transfers 3 
2007 − 32,685 − 17,237 − 19,331 − 17,548 + 2,094 − 15,448 − 2,997 − 12,451 + 104 − 2,034 + 2,138
2008 − 33,157 − 16,834 − 18,746 − 16,644 + 1,911 − 16,322 − 3,079 − 13,243 − 210 − 1,853 + 1,6422009 − 33,158 − 19,041 − 19,041 − 16,578 + 0 − 14,116 − 2,995 − 11,122 + 29 − 1,704 + 1,7332010 − 38,187 − 23,514 − 22,844 − 19,474 − 670 − 14,673 − 3,035 − 11,638 − 586 − 2,039 + 1,4532011 − 33,501 − 20,173 − 22,158 − 19,105 + 1,985 − 13,328 − 2,977 − 10,351 + 641 − 2,323 + 2,964
2010          Q3 − 10,770 − 7,223 − 6,462 − 5,652 − 761 − 3,547 − 759 − 2,788 + 9 − 425 + 434
         Q4 − 6,864 − 3,144 − 1,898 − 1,097 − 1,246 − 3,719 − 759 − 2,961 − 423 − 810 + 386
2011          Q1 − 13,518 − 10,302 − 9,594 − 8,571 − 708 − 3,215 − 744 − 2,471 + 958 − 406 + 1,364
         Q2 − 4,677 − 754 − 4,833 − 4,210 + 4,079 − 3,922 − 744 − 3,178 − 278 − 475 + 197         Q3 − 9,619 − 6,730 − 6,145 − 5,458 − 585 − 2,889 − 744 − 2,145 + 115 − 484 + 599         Q4 − 5,688 − 2,387 − 1,586 − 867 − 801 − 3,300 − 744 − 2,556 − 153 − 958 + 804
2012          Q1 − 15,096 − 11,977 − 11,245 − 10,138 − 732 − 3,119 − 770 − 2,349 + 219 − 401 + 620
2011          May − 574 + 1,234 − 1,621 − 1,517 + 2,855 − 1,807 − 248 − 1,559 − 65 − 142 + 77
         June − 2,567 − 1,447 − 1,564 − 1,424 + 118 − 1,120 − 248 − 872 − 16 − 202 + 187
         July − 3,462 − 2,471 − 2,120 − 1,945 − 350 − 992 − 248 − 744 − 139 − 162 + 22
         Aug − 3,042 − 2,092 − 1,841 − 1,484 − 252 − 950 − 248 − 702 + 383 − 150 + 534         Sep − 3,115 − 2,167 − 2,184 − 2,028 + 17 − 948 − 248 − 700 − 129 − 172 + 43
         Oct − 3,465 − 2,502 − 2,056 − 1,935 − 446 − 964 − 248 − 715 − 178 − 227 + 49
         Nov − 3,603 − 2,602 − 2,163 − 1,920 − 439 − 1,000 − 248 − 752 + 119 − 207 + 326         Dec + 1,380 + 2,717 + 2,632 + 2,988 + 84 − 1,337 − 248 − 1,089 − 94 − 524 + 430
2012          Jan − 4,287 − 3,163 − 2,980 − 2,398 − 182 − 1,124 − 257 − 868 − 27 − 99 + 72
         Feb − 7,283 − 6,287 − 5,903 − 5,584 − 385 − 996 − 257 − 739 + 240 − 116 + 356         Mar − 3,526 − 2,527 − 2,362 − 2,155 − 165 − 999 − 257 − 742 + 6 − 186 + 192
1The classification of “public” and “private” transfers depends on the sector to transfers). 3Payments to developing countries, pension payments, tax revenue and
which the participating domestic body belongs. 2Current contributions to the refunds, etc. 4 Where identifiable; in particular, debt forgiveness. 
budgets of international organisations and to the EU budget (excluding capital

Deutsche Bundesbank
72  Monthly Report
May 2012
XI External sector
 
7 Financial account of the Federal Republic of Germany
 
 
€ million
2011 2012
Item 2009 2010 2011 Q2 Q3 Q4 Q1 Jan Feb Mar
I Net German investment abroad
(Increase/capital exports: −) − 21,427 − 408,695 − 230,661 − 67,804 − 164,784 + 54,282 − 258,348 − 116,206 − 59,447 − 82,695
1 Direct investment 1 − 54,269 − 82,543 − 39,110 − 445 − 6,058 − 6,269 − 26,756 − 8,137 − 12,184 − 6,435
Equity capital − 52,154 − 49,646 − 19,830 − 9,359 − 3,273 + 852 − 12,322 − 6,139 − 4,496 − 1,687
Reinvested earnings 2 − 19,895 − 19,287 − 30,162 − 5,883 − 8,306 − 7,060 − 9,032 − 3,871 − 3,853 − 1,308
Other capital transactions
of German direct investors + 17,780 − 13,609 + 10,882 + 14,798 + 5,522 − 60 − 5,402 + 1,874 − 3,836 − 3,440
2 Portfolio investment − 76,809 − 173,826 − 25,215 − 14,964 + 14,290 − 3,333 − 38,593 − 22,291 − 3,866 − 12,436
Shares 3 − 2,388 − 1,227 + 2,151 − 8,945 + 11,514 − 5,697 + 5,834 + 2,745 + 4,348 − 1,259
Mutual fund shares 4 − 4,332 − 22,444 − 142 − 1,992 + 3,874 + 1,692 − 6,322 − 1,829 − 1,536 − 2,956
Bonds and notes 5 − 83,438 − 156,239 − 22,285 + 3,712 + 3,013 − 9,368 − 35,539 − 19,910 − 7,340 − 8,289
Money market instruments + 13,349 + 6,084 − 4,939 − 7,739 − 4,112 + 10,040 − 2,566 − 3,296 + 662 + 68
3 Financial derivatives 6 + 11,337 − 17,935 − 28,740 − 5,511 − 7,737 − 5,109 − 3,955 − 735 − 1,458 − 1,763
4 Other investment + 95,114 − 132,778 − 134,761 − 46,446 − 164,640 + 69,359 − 188,081 − 84,904 − 41,393 − 61,785
MFIs 7,8 + 176,551 + 138,533 + 45,158 − 21,918 − 28,089 + 60,719 − 17,306 − 26,538 − 491 + 9,723
Long-term + 25,777 + 77,699 − 11,869 + 2,117 − 9,918 − 9,141 + 15,178 + 3,458 + 5,729 + 5,991
Short-term + 150,774 + 60,833 + 57,027 − 24,035 − 18,171 + 69,860 − 32,484 − 29,996 − 6,220 + 3,732
Enterprises and households − 20,175 − 60,136 − 25,242 − 5,891 − 34,766 + 45,377 − 26,846 − 22,707 + 1,697 − 5,835
Long-term − 24,046 − 42,172 + 7,269 − 672 + 2,266 + 17,413 + 1,235 − 765 − 739 + 2,739
Short-term 7 + 3,871 − 17,964 − 32,510 − 5,220 − 37,032 + 27,964 − 28,081 − 21,942 + 2,436 − 8,574
General government + 5 − 63,542 − 16,605 − 5,326 + 11,287 − 22,723 + 8,352 − 837 + 6,316 + 2,872
Long-term − 2,652 − 53,332 + 2,224 − 430 − 415 + 861 + 83 − 964 + 354 + 693
Short-term 7 + 2,657 − 10,209 − 18,829 − 4,895 + 11,702 − 23,584 + 8,269 + 128 + 5,962 + 2,179
Bundesbank − 61,267 − 147,633 − 138,073 − 13,311 − 113,073 − 14,015 − 152,281 − 34,822 − 48,914 − 68,545
5 Change in reserve assets at
transaction values (Increase: −) + 3,200 − 1,613 − 2,836 − 438 − 639 − 366 − 963 − 140 − 547 − 276
II Net foreign investment in Germany
(Increase/capital imports: +) − 134,013 + 261,256 + 68,725 + 21,706 + 148,566 − 90,707 + 197,671 + 101,578 + 46,741 + 49,352
1 Direct investment 1 + 17,389 + 35,382 + 29,063 + 4,891 + 9,724 + 11,471 + 3,391 − 3,571 + 2,412 + 4,550
Equity capital + 9,094 + 9,574 + 4,990 + 1,073 + 2,178 + 1,982 + 111 − 10 + 251 − 130
Reinvested earnings 2 − 8,437 + 1,883 + 5,752 − 759 + 1,605 + 1,069 + 3,652 + 190 + 2,437 + 1,025
Other capital transactionsof foreign direct investors + 16,732 + 23,924 + 18,321 + 4,577 + 5,941 + 8,421 − 372 − 3,752 − 276 + 3,655
2 Portfolio investment − 4,246 + 46,134 + 62,264 + 49,070 + 17,661 − 40,407 + 2,549 − 19,892 + 40,196 − 17,755
Shares 
3 + 3,630 − 4,736 − 2,820 + 13,155 − 4,230 − 5,486 − 8,587 − 3,404 + 3,879 − 9,062
Mutual fund shares + 11,744 + 2,572 + 7,711 + 894 + 3,909 + 875 − 1,016 − 289 − 280 − 448
Bonds and notes 5 − 70,113 + 57,767 + 48,711 + 32,551 + 4,735 − 22,081 + 12,655 − 15,577 + 32,972 − 4,741
Money market instruments + 50,493 − 9,470 + 8,662 + 2,469 + 13,247 − 13,715 − 503 − 623 + 3,624 − 3,504
3 Other investment − 147,155 + 179,741 − 22,603 − 32,254 + 121,182 − 61,771 + 191,731 + 125,041 + 4,133 + 62,557
MFIs 7,8 − 115,025 + 76,346 − 96,666 − 30,539 + 84,283 − 111,131 + 250,167 + 168,671 + 18,226 + 63,270
Long-term − 24,001 − 5,706 − 18,326 − 6,948 − 508 − 7,257 + 2,164 − 675 + 43 + 2,796
Short-term − 91,024 + 82,052 − 78,340 − 23,591 + 84,791 − 103,874 + 248,003 + 169,346 + 18,183 + 60,475
Enterprises and households − 5,059 + 3,835 + 24,275 + 1,544 + 28,394 − 4,452 + 3,545 − 4,871 − 2,400 + 10,816
Long-term + 2,804 − 4,587 − 13,946 − 6,739 − 2,861 − 659 − 3,959 − 373 − 1,102 − 2,484
Short-term 7 − 7,863 + 8,423 + 38,221 + 8,282 + 31,255 − 3,793 + 7,504 − 4,498 − 1,298 + 13,300
General government − 5,290 + 94,041 + 17,836 − 405 + 5,403 + 21,066 − 32,997 − 4,142 − 13,220 − 15,634
Long-term − 2,013 + 611 + 4,417 + 1,755 + 1,705 + 272 + 1,025 + 1,027 − 9 + 8
Short-term 7 − 3,276 + 93,430 + 13,419 − 2,161 + 3,699 + 20,794 − 34,022 − 5,169 − 13,211 − 15,641
Bundesbank − 21,782 + 5,518 + 31,952 − 2,854 + 3,102 + 32,746 − 28,984 − 34,616 + 1,528 + 4,104
III Financial account balance 9 
(Net capital exports: −) − 155,440 − 147,439 − 161,937 − 46,097 − 16,218 − 36,425 − 60,678 − 14,628 − 12,706 − 33,343
1From 1996, new definition for direct investment. 2Estimated. 3Including from changes in stocks. Purely statistical changes have been eliminated as far as
participation rights. 4From 1991, including retained earnings. 5From 1975, possible. 8Excluding the Deutsche Bundesbank. 9Financial account balance
excluding accrued interest. 6Options, whether evidenced by securities or not, and including change in reserve assets. 
financial futures contracts. 7The transaction values shown here are mostly derived

Deutsche Bundesbank
73  Monthly Report
May 2012
XI External sector
 
8 External position of the Bundesbank up to end-1998 *
 
 
DM million
Reserve assets and other claims on non-residents Liabilities vis-à-vis non-residents
Reserve assets
Reserve
positionin theInter- Liabilitiesnational arising Net Liabilities
Monetary arising from externalFund and Claims Loans and from Treasury position
Foreign special on the external discount (col 1 other claims
End of year currency drawing ECB 
2 on non- trans- liquidity less
or month Total Total Gold rights (net) Total paper col 8) balances 1 residents 3 actions 4 
1234567891 0 1 1
1997 127,849 126,884 13,688 76,673 13,874 22,649 966 16,931 16,931 − 110,918
1998 135,085 134,005 17,109 100,363 16,533 − 1,079 15,978 15,978 − 119,107
*Valuation of the gold holdings and the claims on non-residents in accordance with claims on the European Monetary Cooperation Fund (EMCF)). 3Including loans to
section 26 (2) of the Bundesbank Act and the provisions of the Commercial Code, the World Bank. 4Including liquidity paper sold to non-residents by the Bundesbank;
especially section 253. In the course of the year, valuation at the preceding year’s excluding the Treasury discount liquidity paper sold to non-residents between March
balance sheet rates. 1Mainly US dollar assets. 2European Central Bank (up to 1993, 1993 and March 1995, as shown in column 10. 
  
 
9 External position of the Bundesbank since the beginning of European monetary union o
€ million
Reserve assets and other claims on non-residents
Reserve assets
Reserveposition
Other in the Inter-national
claims on Net
Monetary Other residents external
Fund and claims on Claims in other position
Gold special Foreign non-euro- within the euro-area (col 1 Liabilities
End of year and gold drawing currency area Eurosystem member less vis-à-vis non-
or month Total Total rights reserves (net) 2 states col 9) receivables residents 1,3 residents 3,4 
1234567891 0
1999          Jan  5 95,316 93,940 29,312 8,461 56,167 140 1,225 11 8,169 87,146
1999 141,958 93,039 32,287 8,332 52,420 9,162 39,746 11 6,179 135,779
2000 100,762 93,815 32,676 7,762 53,377 313 6,620 14 6,592 94,1702001 76,147 93,215 35,005 8,721 49,489 312 − 17,385 5 8,752 67,3962002 103,948 85,002 36,208 8,272 40,522 312 18,466 167 9,005 94,9422003 95,394 76,680 36,533 7,609 32,538 312 17,945 456 10,443 84,951
2004 93,110 71,335 35,495 6,548 29,292 312 20,796 667 7,935 85,175
2005 130,268 86,181 47,924 4,549 33,708 350 42,830 906 6,285 123,9832006 104,389 84,765 53,114 3,011 28,640 350 18,344 931 4,819 99,5702007 179,492 92,545 62,433 2,418 27,694 350 84,064 2,534 16,005 163,4882008 230,775 99,185 68,194 3,285 27,705 350 128,668 2,573 30,169 200,607
2009 323,286 125,541 83,939 15,969 25,634 350 189,936 7,460 9,126 314,160
2010 524,695 162,100 115,403 18,740 27,957 50 337,869 24,676 14,620 510,0752011 714,662 184,603 132,874 22,296 29,433 50 475,942 54,067 46,557 668,106
2011          Jan 492,995 152,428 106,493 18,667 27,268 50 314,944 25,574 13,719 479,276
         Feb 515,777 156,964 111,426 18,532 27,005 50 333,010 25,754 12,100 503,677         Mar 516,360 155,718 110,136 19,253 26,329 50 335,543 25,049 13,569 502,791
         Apr 502,690 157,344 112,655 18,818 25,871 50 321,422 23,875 12,011 490,679
         May 522,887 162,854 116,831 19,202 26,821 50 335,955 24,028 11,566 511,322         June 531,716 159,745 114,087 19,098 26,560 50 348,854 23,067 10,700 521,016
         July 549,738 170,639 123,740 19,901 26,998 50 355,977 23,072 12,077 537,661
         Aug 622,802 184,687 138,174 19,774 26,739 50 402,739 35,327 15,380 607,422         Sep 686,659 181,430 131,912 20,862 28,655 50 461,927 43,253 13,809 672,850
         Oct 704,976 181,946 133,987 20,434 27,525 50 477,830 45,150 13,147 691,829
         Nov 746,357 187,984 138,669 20,850 28,465 50 507,480 50,843 13,517 732,840         Dec 714,662 184,603 132,874 22,296 29,433 50 475,942 54,067 46,557 668,106
2012          Jan 763,406 195,056 144,034 22,115 28,907 50 510,763 57,539 11,941 751,466
         Feb 814,053 195,654 145,234 22,073 28,346 50 559,678 58,672 13,460 800,593         Mar 875,780 186,628 135,777 22,177 28,674 50 628,223 60,880 17,564 858,215
         Apr 909,192 189,556 137,380 22,624 29,551 50 656,813 62,773 15,312 893,879
oClaims and liabilities vis-à-vis all countries within and outside the euro area. Up to From November 2000, including the TARGET positions which were previously shown
December 2000, the levels at the end of each quarter are shown, owing to (in columns 6 and 9) as bilateral assets and liabilities vis-à-vis national central banks
revaluations, at market prices; within each quarter, however, the levels are computed outside the Eurosystem. 3See footnote 2. 4Excluding allocations of special drawing
on the basis of cumulative transaction values. From January 2001, all end-of-month rights (SDR) by the International Monetary Fund (IMF) for an amount of SDR 12,059levels are valued at market prices. 1Including loans to the World Bank. 2Including million. 5 Euro opening balance sheet of the Bundesbank as at 1 January 1999. 
the balances in the Bundesbank’s cross-border payments within the Eurosystem.

Deutsche Bundesbank
74  Monthly Report
May 2012
XI External sector
 
10 Assets and liabilities of enterprises in Germany (other than banks)
vis-à-vis non-residents *
 
€ million
Claims on non-residents Liabilities vis-à-vis non-residents
Claims on foreign non-banks Liabilities  vis-à-vis foreign non-banks
from trade credits from trade credits
Balances Loans
with from Credit Advance from from Credit Advance
End of year foreign financial terms payments foreign financial terms payments
or month Total banks Total Total granted effected Total banks Total Total used received operations operations
All countries
 
2008 553,465 173,255 380,210 227,055 153,155 140,520 12,635 707,704 147,242 560,462 424,211 136,251 79,980 56,271
2009 593,591 209,729 383,862 240,727 143,135 130,605 12,530 754,355 159,667 594,688 457,468 137,220 80,759 56,461
2010 670,695 242,028 428,667 272,426 156,241 143,032 13,209 807,185 162,091 645,094 498,310 146,784 88,288 58,496
2011 698,599 242,387 456,212 285,123 171,089 155,392 15,697 871,795 172,099 699,696 538,839 160,857 95,131 65,726
2011          Oct 740,634 282,189 458,445 285,063 173,382 157,245 16,137 856,672 170,420 686,252 530,194 156,058 89,188 66,870
         Nov 735,365 280,058 455,307 280,241 175,066 159,064 16,002 863,546 171,758 691,788 535,238 156,550 90,016 66,534         Dec 698,599 242,387 456,212 285,123 171,089 155,392 15,697 871,795 172,099 699,696 538,839 160,857 95,131 65,726
2012          Jan 722,309 261,710 460,599 291,722 168,877 153,191 15,686 864,554 168,828 695,726 542,970 152,756 85,822 66,934
         Feb 725,163 267,912 457,251 284,395 172,856 157,289 15,567 863,390 164,935 698,455 542,026 156,429 89,400 67,029         Mar 741,704 267,768 473,936 294,113 179,823 164,554 15,269 884,857 179,671 705,186 547,728 157,458 91,478 65,980
Industrial countries
 
2008 489,430 171,387 318,043 207,807 110,236 101,002 9,234 643,652 145,045 498,607 402,020 96,587 68,148 28,439
2009 531,796 208,571 323,225 220,778 102,447 93,566 8,881 684,984 157,343 527,641 431,525 96,116 68,912 27,204
2010 598,167 240,915 357,252 249,497 107,755 98,428 9,327 725,644 159,522 566,122 464,105 102,017 73,987 28,030
2011 615,925 240,265 375,660 258,453 117,207 104,915 12,292 785,925 169,535 616,390 502,139 114,251 80,491 33,760
2011          Oct 659,316 280,854 378,462 259,393 119,069 106,367 12,702 773,897 167,982 605,915 495,642 110,273 75,572 34,701         Nov 652,069 278,121 373,948 253,827 120,121 107,574 12,547 779,122 169,165 609,957 499,120 110,837 76,618 34,219         Dec 615,925 240,265 375,660 258,453 117,207 104,915 12,292 785,925 169,535 616,390 502,139 114,251 80,491 33,760
2012          Jan 639,522 259,674 379,848 264,589 115,259 102,788 12,471 780,035 166,263 613,772 507,461 106,311 71,917 34,394
         Feb 641,586 265,992 375,594 257,104 118,490 106,041 12,449 778,680 163,236 615,444 506,459 108,985 74,997 33,988         Mar 655,930 265,755 390,175 266,547 123,628 111,245 12,383 800,893 177,899 622,994 512,176 110,818 77,453 33,365
EU member states
 
2008 398,833 164,762 234,071 151,391 82,680 75,192 7,488 536,351 137,208 399,143 331,498 67,645 46,188 21,457
2009 443,431 200,400 243,031 165,986 77,045 70,051 6,994 579,596 141,633 437,963 367,980 69,983 48,977 21,006
2010 494,360 230,746 263,614 184,862 78,752 71,525 7,227 618,145 150,817 467,328 395,566 71,762 50,035 21,727
2011 508,071 225,583 282,488 196,132 86,356 76,472 9,884 660,137 157,465 502,672 421,679 80,993 54,370 26,623
2011          Oct 550,469 262,433 288,036 201,259 86,777 76,790 9,987 654,562 157,748 496,814 418,032 78,782 51,470 27,312         Nov 543,743 260,025 283,718 195,277 88,441 78,531 9,910 656,788 157,980 498,808 419,025 79,783 52,673 27,110         Dec 508,071 225,583 282,488 196,132 86,356 76,472 9,884 660,137 157,465 502,672 421,679 80,993 54,370 26,623
2012          Jan 536,237 244,841 291,396 206,447 84,949 74,957 9,992 659,450 157,438 502,012 426,445 75,567 48,425 27,142
         Feb 537,065 250,025 287,040 199,385 87,655 77,715 9,940 658,478 154,746 503,732 425,454 78,278 51,545 26,733         Mar 545,075 247,195 297,880 206,931 90,949 81,118 9,831 677,597 168,917 508,680 430,082 78,598 52,112 26,486
of which: Euro-area member states 1
 
2008 281,518 130,226 151,292 96,968 54,324 49,408 4,916 415,221 81,703 333,518 290,093 43,425 29,768 13,657
2009 321,991 159,740 162,251 114,378 47,873 43,179 4,694 466,064 91,792 374,272 332,280 41,992 28,397 13,595
2010 366,774 184,299 182,475 130,430 52,045 47,239 4,806 497,433 98,177 399,256 351,352 47,904 33,444 14,460
2011 372,493 171,907 200,586 142,530 58,056 52,125 5,931 529,244 103,827 425,417 370,898 54,519 37,188 17,331
2011          Oct 409,480 202,996 206,484 147,971 58,513 52,445 6,068 530,982 108,197 422,785 369,501 53,284 35,600 17,684         Nov 407,003 202,786 204,217 144,847 59,370 53,549 5,821 531,117 105,771 425,346 372,123 53,223 35,705 17,518         Dec 372,493 171,907 200,586 142,530 58,056 52,125 5,931 529,244 103,827 425,417 370,898 54,519 37,188 17,331
2012          Jan 399,214 189,787 209,427 152,078 57,349 51,379 5,970 537,000 107,028 429,972 379,358 50,614 32,922 17,692
         Feb 397,379 194,652 202,727 144,157 58,570 52,634 5,936 536,991 104,667 432,324 380,302 52,022 34,780 17,242         Mar 393,646 184,614 209,032 148,399 60,633 54,737 5,896 541,751 106,052 435,699 383,336 52,363 35,372 16,991
Emerging economies and developing countries 2
 
2008 64,035 1,868 62,167 19,248 42,919 39,518 3,401 64,052 2,197 61,855 22,191 39,664 11,832 27,832
2009 61,795 1,158 60,637 19,949 40,688 37,039 3,649 69,371 2,324 67,047 25,943 41,104 11,847 29,257
2010 72,528 1,113 71,415 22,929 48,486 44,604 3,882 81,541 2,569 78,972 34,205 44,767 14,301 30,466
2011 82,674 2,122 80,552 26,670 53,882 50,477 3,405 85,870 2,564 83,306 36,700 46,606 14,640 31,966
2011          Oct 81,318 1,335 79,983 25,670 54,313 50,878 3,435 82,775 2,438 80,337 34,552 45,785 13,616 32,169         Nov 83,296 1,937 81,359 26,414 54,945 51,490 3,455 84,424 2,593 81,831 36,118 45,713 13,398 32,315         Dec 82,674 2,122 80,552 26,670 53,882 50,477 3,405 85,870 2,564 83,306 36,700 46,606 14,640 31,966
2012          Jan 82,787 2,036 80,751 27,133 53,618 50,403 3,215 84,519 2,565 81,954 35,509 46,445 13,905 32,540
         Feb 83,577 1,920 81,657 27,291 54,366 51,248 3,118 84,710 1,699 83,011 35,567 47,444 14,403 33,041         Mar 85,774 2,013 83,761 27,566 56,195 53,309 2,886 83,964 1,772 82,192 35,552 46,640 14,025 32,615
* Up to and including November 2009 the assets and liabilities vis-à-vis non-residents Cyprus and Malta; from January 2009, including Slovakia; from January 2011
of households in Germany. The assets and liabilities vis-à-vis non-residents of banks including Estonia. 2All countries that are not regarded as industrial countries. Up to
(MFIs) in Germany are shown in Table 4 of Section IV, “Banks”. Statistical increases December 2010 including Niederländische Antillen; from January 2011 includingand decreases have not been eliminated; to this extent, the changes in totals are not Bonaire, St.Eustatius, Saba and Curacao and St.Martin (Dutch part). comparable with the figures shown in Table XI.7. 1From January 2008, including

Deutsche Bundesbank
75  Monthly Report
May 2012
XI External sector
 
11 ECB euro reference exchange rates of selected currencies *
 
 
EUR 1 = currency units ...
Yearly Australia Canada China Denmark Japan Norway Sweden Switzerland United States United Kingdom
or monthly       
average AUD CAD CNY 1 DKK JPY NOK SEK CHF GBP USD
1999 1.6523 1.5840 . 7.4355 121.32 8.3104 8.8075 1.6003 0.65874 1.0658
2000 1.5889 1.3706 2 7.6168 7.4538 99.47 8.1129 8.4452 1.5579 0.60948 0.9236
2001 1.7319 1.3864 7.4131 7.4521 108.68 8.0484 9.2551 1.5105 0.62187 0.8956
2002 1.7376 1.4838 7.8265 7.4305 118.06 7.5086 9.1611 1.4670 0.62883 0.94562003 1.7379 1.5817 9.3626 7.4307 130.97 8.0033 9.1242 1.5212 0.69199 1.13122004 1.6905 1.6167 10.2967 7.4399 134.44 8.3697 9.1243 1.5438 0.67866 1.2439
2005 1.6320 1.5087 10.1955 7.4518 136.85 8.0092 9.2822 1.5483 0.68380 1.2441
2006 1.6668 1.4237 10.0096 7.4591 146.02 8.0472 9.2544 1.5729 0.68173 1.25562007 1.6348 1.4678 10.4178 7.4506 161.25 8.0165 9.2501 1.6427 0.68434 1.37052008 1.7416 1.5594 10.2236 7.4560 152.45 8.2237 9.6152 1.5874 0.79628 1.47082009 1.7727 1.5850 9.5277 7.4462 130.34 8.7278 10.6191 1.5100 0.89094 1.3948
2010 1.4423 1.3651 8.9712 7.4473 116.24 8.0043 9.5373 1.3803 0.85784 1.3257
2011 1.3484 1.3761 8.9960 7.4506 110.96 7.7934 9.0298 1.2326 0.86788 1.3920
2010          Dec 1.3304 1.3327 8.7873 7.4528 110.11 7.9020 9.0559 1.2811 0.84813 1.3220
2011          Jan 1.3417 1.3277 8.8154 7.4518 110.38 7.8199 8.9122 1.2779 0.84712 1.3360
         Feb 1.3543 1.3484 8.9842 7.4555 112.77 7.8206 8.7882 1.2974 0.84635 1.3649         Mar 1.3854 1.3672 9.1902 7.4574 114.40 7.8295 8.8864 1.2867 0.86653 1.3999
         Apr 1.3662 1.3834 9.4274 7.4574 120.42 7.8065 8.9702 1.2977 0.88291 1.4442
         May 1.3437 1.3885 9.3198 7.4566 116.47 7.8384 8.9571 1.2537 0.87788 1.4349         June 1.3567 1.4063 9.3161 7.4579 115.75 7.8302 9.1125 1.2092 0.88745 1.4388
         July 1.3249 1.3638 9.2121 7.4560 113.26 7.7829 9.1340 1.1766 0.88476 1.4264
         Aug 1.3651 1.4071 9.1857 7.4498 110.43 7.7882 9.1655 1.1203 0.87668 1.4343         Sep 1.3458 1.3794 8.7994 7.4462 105.75 7.7243 9.1343 1.2005 0.87172 1.3770
         Oct 1.3525 1.3981 8.7308 7.4442 105.06 7.7474 9.1138 1.2295 0.87036 1.3706
         Nov 1.3414 1.3897 8.6154 7.4412 105.02 7.7868 9.1387 1.2307 0.85740 1.3556         Dec 1.3003 1.3481 8.3563 7.4341 102.55 7.7451 9.0184 1.2276 0.84405 1.3179
2012          Jan 1.2405 1.3073 8.1465 7.4353 99.33 7.6752 8.8503 1.2108 0.83210 1.2905
         Feb 1.2327 1.3193 8.3314 7.4341 103.77 7.5522 8.8196 1.2071 0.83696 1.3224         Mar 1.2538 1.3121 8.3326 7.4354 108.88 7.5315 8.8873 1.2061 0.83448 1.3201
         Apr 1.2718 1.3068 8.2921 7.4393 107.00 7.5698 8.8650 1.2023 0.82188 1.3162
*Averages: Bundesbank calculations based on the daily euro reference exchange Statistical Supplement 5, Exchange rate statistics. 1Up to March 2005, ECB indicative
rates published by the ECB; for additional euro reference exchange rates, see rates. 2 Average from 13 January to 29 December 2000. 
12 Euro-area member states and irrevocable euro conversion rates in the third stage
of European Economic and Monetary Union
From Country Currency ISO currency code EUR 1 = currency units ...
1999  January 1 Austria Austrian schilling ATS 13.7603
Belgium Belgian franc BEF 40.3399
Finland Finnish markka FIM 5.94573
France French franc FRF 6.55957
Germany Deutsche Mark DEM 1.95583
Ireland Irish pound IEP 0.787564
Italy Italian lira ITL 1,936.27
Luxembourg Luxembourg franc LUF 40.3399
Netherlands Dutch guilder NLG 2.20371
Portugal Portuguese escudo PTE 200.482
Spain Spanish peseta ESP 166.386
2001  January 1 Greece Greek drachma GRD 340.750
2007  January 1 Slovenia Slovenian tolar SIT 239.640
2008  January 1 Cyprus Cyprus pound CYP 0.585274
Malta Maltese lira MTL 0.429300
2009  January 1 Slovakia Slovak koruna SKK 30.1260
2011  January 1 Estonia Estonian kroon EEK 15.6466

Deutsche Bundesbank
76  Monthly Report
May 2012
XI  External sector
 
13  Effective exchange rates of the Euro and indicators of the German economy’s price competitiveness *
 
 
1999 Q1=100
Effective exchange rate of the Euro Indicators of the German economy’s price competitiveness
EER-20  1 EER-40  2 Based on the deflators of total sales  3 Based on consumer price indices
24 selected industrial countries  4 In real terms
In real terms based on
In real based on unit In real
24 terms the deflators labour terms
based on of gross costs of based on Non- selected
36 36 56 consumer domestic national consumer Euro-area euro-area industrial
Period Nominal price indices product  3 economy  3 Nominal price indices Total countries countries countries  5 6 countries  4 countries  5 countries  7 
1999 96.2 96.0 95.9 96.4 96.5 95.8 97.7 99.5 95.6 97.6 98.2 98.0 97.7
2000 87.0 86.5 86.1 85.7 87.9 85.8 91.5 97.1 85.0 90.9 92.9 91.9 90.9
2001 87.6 87.2 86.8 84.8 90.4 87.1 91.0 95.8 85.4 90.1 92.9 91.4 90.8
2002 90.0 90.3 89.8 87.9 94.8 90.7 91.7 94.9 87.9 90.5 93.5 91.9 91.8
2003 100.6 101.5 100.8 98.4 106.8 101.6 95.0 93.9 96.9 94.2 97.0 96.5 96.7
2004 104.4 105.3 103.7 102.1 111.3 105.2 95.2 92.7 99.2 94.2 98.4 98.0 98.2
2005 102.9 103.8 101.7 99.8 109.3 102.7 94.0 91.4 98.2 92.2 98.5 96.9 96.5
2006 102.8 103.8 100.8 98.7 109.3 102.0 92.7 89.9 97.2 90.6 98.6 96.4 95.8
2007 106.2 106.5 102.8 100.2 112.8 104.0 93.6 89.1 101.0 91.0 100.8 97.8 96.9
2008 109.4 108.6 104.0 102.8 116.9 105.9 93.8 87.6 104.2 90.5 102.2 97.8 97.0
2009 110.6 109.2 104.9 104.8 119.7 106.8 93.4 87.7 102.9 91.3 101.7 97.9 97.4
2010 103.6 101.6 96.8 p 97.2 111.4 98.1 90.9 87.2 96.6 88.2 98.8 93.9 92.2
2011 103.4 100.7 p 95.1 p 95.8 112.1 97.6 90.1 86.6 95.5 87.4 98.2 93.1 91.7
2008          Oct 104.5 103.6 112.7 101.6 99.8 95.1 94.5
         Nov 103.6 102.8 100.3 99.2 111.8 100.8 91.9 87.4 99.3 89.3 99.8 94.9 94.3
         Dec 108.8 108.0 117.5 105.9 101.5 97.3 96.9
2009          Jan 108.6 107.8 117.7 105.9 101.3 97.3 96.9
         Feb 107.7 106.9 103.8 103.2 117.0 105.3 92.3 87.3 100.5 90.7 100.6 97.2 96.9
         Mar 110.0 108.8 119.5 107.0 101.4 97.7 97.5
         Apr 109.1 108.0 118.2 105.8 101.4 97.3 96.8
         May 109.8 108.5 104.6 104.2 118.7 106.1 93.3 87.8 102.5 91.3 101.5 97.5 96.9
         June 111.0 109.7 120.0 107.3 101.9 98.3 97.7
         July 110.6 109.1 119.7 106.7 101.8 97.8 97.2
         Aug 110.6 109.1 105.0 105.0 119.8 106.8 93.8 88.0 103.6 91.4 101.9 97.9 97.4
         Sep 111.8 110.0 121.1 107.6 102.1 98.2 97.6
         Oct 113.1 111.2 122.0 108.3 102.6 98.8 98.1
         Nov 113.0 111.0 106.1 106.9 122.0 108.1 94.2 87.9 105.0 91.7 102.4 98.6 97.9
         Dec 111.9 109.8 120.8 106.8 102.2 98.2 97.4
2010          Jan 109.7 107.6 118.3 104.4 101.2 97.0 95.9
         Feb 107.0 104.8 101.1 101.4 115.3 101.6 92.5 87.6 100.5 89.8 100.2 95.6 94.4
         Mar 106.2 104.3 114.2 100.8 100.2 95.2 93.8
         Apr 105.0 103.0 112.5 99.3 99.5 94.4 92.7
         May 101.8 100.0 95.6 96.0 109.0 96.3 90.4 87.2 95.5 87.8 98.3 93.1 91.2
         June 99.8 98.1 106.9 94.4 97.2 92.1 90.2
         July 101.6 99.8 109.2 96.4 97.8 92.9 91.2
         Aug 101.2 99.3 94.6 94.6 108.8 95.9 90.0 87.3 94.2 87.4 97.6 92.7 91.0
         Sep 101.5 99.5 109.2 96.0 97.7 92.7 91.0
         Oct 105.0 102.6 112.9 99.0 99.1 94.2 92.6
         Nov 103.7 101.2 95.9 p 96.8 111.7 97.7 90.5 87.0 96.1 87.7 98.8 93.7 92.0
         Dec 101.7 99.2 109.3 95.6 97.8 92.7 90.9
2011          Jan 101.4 99.0 109.3 95.5 97.8 92.4 90.7
         Feb 102.4 99.8 94.9 p 95.3 110.6 96.5 90.1 86.8 95.3 87.3 98.2 92.9 91.3
         Mar 104.1 101.6 112.3 98.1 98.6 93.6 92.0
         Apr 105.9 103.3 114.0 99.6 99.6 94.4 92.8
         May 104.9 102.2 97.1 p 97.7 113.2 98.6 91.1 86.8 98.0 88.1 99.0 93.7 92.1
         June 105.0 102.2 113.4 98.8 99.0 93.7 92.2
         July 104.0 101.0 112.4 97.7 98.6 93.3 91.8
         Aug 103.9 100.8 95.1 p 95.7 112.9 98.0 90.0 86.5 95.4 87.3 98.2 93.2 91.9
         Sep 102.8 100.0 112.0 97.4 97.7 92.7 91.5
         Oct 103.0 100.3 112.6 97.9 97.8 92.9 91.8
         Nov 102.6 99.9 p 93.3 p 94.5 112.1 97.4 89.2 86.4 93.5 86.9 97.6 92.8 91.6
         Dec 100.8 98.2 110.3 95.8 96.8 91.8 90.5
2012          Jan 98.9 p 96.3 108.0 p 93.7 96.1 p 90.8 p 89.3
         Feb 99.6 p 97.2 ... ... 108.4 p 94.1 ... ... ... ... 96.9 p 91.3 p 89.7
         Mar 99.8 p 97.3 108.6 p 94.3 96.9 p 91.2 p 89.6
         Apr 99.5 p 96.9 108.4 p 94.1 p 96.5 p 91.0 p 89.4
*The effective exchange rate corresponds to the weighted external value of the used. 2ECB calculations. Includes countries belonging to the EER-20 group (see
currency concerned. The method of calculating the indicators of the German footnote 1) and additional Algeria, Argentina, Brazil, Chile, Croatia, Iceland, India,
economy’s price competitiveness is consistent with the procedure used by the ECB to Indonesia, Israel, Malaysia, Mexico, Morocco, New Zealand, Philippines, Russiancompute the effective exchange rates of the euro (see Monthly Report, November Federation, South Africa, Taiwan, Thailand, Turkey and Venezuela. 3Annual and
2001, pp  50-53, May 2007, pp  31-35 and February 2012, pp  34-35). For details of quarterly averages. 4Euro-area countries (from 2001 including Greece, from 2007
the methodology see the ECB’s Occasional Paper No  2 (www.ecb.int). A decline in including Slovenia, from 2008 including Cyprus and Malta, from 2009 includingthe figures implies an increase in competitiveness. 1ECB calculations are based on Slovakia, from 2011 including Estonia) as well as Canada, Denmark, Japan, Norway,
the weighted averages of the changes in the bilateral exchange rates of the euro Sweden, Switzerland, United Kingdom and United States. 5Euro-area countries and
against the currencies of the following countries: Australia, Bulgaria, Canada, China, countries belonging to the EER-20 group. 6Owing to missing data for the deflator of
Czech Republic, Denmark, Hong Kong, Hungary, Japan, Latvia, Lithuania, Norway, total sales, China is not included in this calculation. 7Euro-area countries and
Poland, Romania, Singapore, South Korea, Sweden, Switzerland, United Kingdom countries belonging to the EER-40 group (see footnote 2). and United States. Where price and wage indices were not available, estimates were

Overview of publications by the  
Deutsche Bundesbank
This overview provides information about selected recent economic and statistical publica -
tions by the Deutsche Bundesbank. Unless otherwise indicated, these publications are avail -
able in both English and German, in printed form and on the Bundesbank’s website.
The publications are available free of charge from the Communication Division. For a small 
fee to cover costs, a file which is updated monthly and contains approximately 40,000 time series published by the Bundesbank can be obtained on CD-ROM from the Division Statis -
tical data processing, mathematical methods or downloaded from the Bundesbank-ExtraNet site. Orders should be sent, in writing, to one of the addresses listed on the reverse of the title page. Selected time series can also be downloaded from the internet.
Annual Report
Financial Stability ReviewMonthly Report
For information on the articles published be -
tween 2000 and 2011 see the index attached 
to the January 2012 Monthly Report.
Monthly Report articles
June 2011
– Outlook for the German economy – macro -
economic projections for 2011 and 2012
– Sovereign yield spreads in the euro area
– Extended MFI interest rate statistics: meth -
odology and first results
– Fundamental features of the German Bank 
Restructuring ActJuly 2011
–  Developments in the exports of the four 
largest euro-area member states since the 
launch of monetary union
– Leasing financing in Germany
– Reliability and revision profile of selected 
German economic indicators
– Deutsche Bundesbank Spring Conference 
2011 – fiscal and monetary policy challenges 
in the short and long run
August 2011
– The current economic situation in Germany
September 2011
– The performance of German credit institu -
tions in 2010
– German banks’ lending to the domestic pri -
vate sector since summer 2009
– International cooperation in banking regula-tion: past and present
October 2011
– The debt brake in Germany – key aspects 
and implementationDeutsche Bundesbank 
Monthly Report  
May 2012  
77•

– Germany’s external position against the 
background of increasing economic policy 
surveillance
November 2011
– The current economic situation in Germany
December 2011
– Outlook for the German economy – macro -
economic projections for 2012 and 2013
– German enterprises’ profitability and finan -
cing in 2010
– Direct investment and financial constraints 
before and during the financial crisis
January 2012
– Long-term developments in corporate finan -
cing in Germany – evidence based on the 
financial accounts
– The PHF: a survey of household wealth and 
finances in Germany
– The European single market in payments 
nearing completion
February 2012
– The current economic situation in Germany
March 2012
– Germany’s balance of payments in 2011
– National and international financial market 
shocks and the real economy – an empirical 
view
April 2012
– Potential growth of the German economy – 
medium-term outlook against the backdrop 
of demographic strains
– The European Systemic Risk Board: from 
 institutional foundation to credible macro -
prudential oversight
May 2012
– The current economic situation in GermanyStatistical Supplements to the 
Monthly Report
 1 Banking statistics 1 , 2
 2 C apital market statistics 1 , 2
 3 Balance of payments statistics 1 , 2
 4 Seasonal ly adjusted business statistics 1 , 2
 5 Exchange rate statistics 2
Special Publications
Makro-ökonometrisches Mehr-Länder-Modell, 
November 1996 3
Europäische Organisationen und Gremien im Bereich von Währung und Wirtschaft, May 
1997 3
Die Zahlungsbilanz der ehemaligen DDR 1975 
bis 1989, August 1999 3
The market for German Federal securities, 
May 2000
Macro-Econometric Multi-Country Model: MEM -
MOD, June 2000
Bundesbank Act, September 2002
Weltweite Organisationen und Gremien im Be -
reich von Währung und Wirtschaft, March 
2003 3
Die Europäische Union: Grundlagen und Politik-
bereiche außerhalb der Wirtschafts-und Wäh -
rungsunion, April 2005 3
Die Deutsche Bundesbank – Aufgabenfelder, 
rechtlicher Rahmen, Geschichte, April 2006 3
European economic and monetary union, April 
2008
For footnotes, see p 80•.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2012  
78•

Special Statistical Publications*
 1 B anking statistics guidelines and customer 
classification, January 20122
 2 Bankenstatistik �u ndensystematik Firmen- Bankenstatistik �u ndensystematik Firmen -
verzeichnisse, March 20122, 3
 3 A ufbau der bankstatistischen Tabellen, 
June 20112, 3
 4 F inancial accounts for Germany 2005 to 
2010, September 20112
 5 E xtrapolated results from financial state -
ments of German enterprises 1994 to 
2003, March 2006 2
 6 V erhältniszahlen aus Jahresabschlüssen 
deutscher Unternehmen von 2007 bis 
2008, March 20112, 3
 7 Notes on the coding list for the balance of 
payments statistics, March 2009 2
 8 T he balance of payments statistics of the 
Federal Republic of Germany, 2nd edition, 
February 1991o
 9 Securities deposits, August 2005
 1 0 F oreign direct investment stock statistics, 
April 20121, 2
 1 1 B alance of payments by region, August 
20112, 3
 1 2 T echnologische Dienstleistungen in der 
Zahlungsbilanz, June 20113Discussion Papers*
04/2012  
Stress testing German banks against a global 
cost-of-capital shock
05/2012  
Regulation, credit risk transfer with CDS, and 
bank lending
06/2012  
Maturity shortening and market failure
07/2012  
Towards an explanation of cross-country asym -
metries in monetary transmission
08/2012  
Does Wagner’s law ruin sustainability of Ger -
man public finances?
09/2012  
Bankregulation and stability: an examination of 
the Basel market risk framework
10/2012  
Capital regulation, liquidity requirements and 
taxation in a dynamic model of banking
11/2012  
Credit portfolio modelling and its effect on 
capital requirements
12/2012  
Trend growth expectations and the U.S. house 
prices before and after the crisis
* Unless stated otherwise, as of 2000 these publications 
have been made available on the Bundesbank’s website in 
German and English. Since the beginning of 2012, no 
longer subdivided into series 1 and series 2.
o Not available on the website.For footnotes, see p 80•.Deutsche Bundesbank 
Monthly Report  
May 2012  
79•

Banking legislation
 1 B undesbank Act and Statute of the Euro -
pean System of Central Banks and of the 
European Central Bank, June 1998
 2 Gesetz über das �re ditwesen, February 
20093 2 a Solvabilitäts- und Liquiditätsverordnung, 
February 20083
1 Only the headings and explanatory notes to the data con -
tained in the German originals are available in English.
2 Available on the website only.
3 Available in German only.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2012  
80•

