Monthly Report
August 2012
Vol 64  
No 8

Deutsche Bundesbank  
Wilhelm-Epstein-Strasse 14  
60431 Frankfurt am Main  
Germany
Postal address  
Postfach 10 06 02  
60006 Frankfurt am Main  
Germany
Tel +49 69 9566-0
Fax +49 69 9566 3077
Telex 41227 within Germany  
 414431 from abroad
http://www.bundesbank.de
Reproduction permitted only if source is stated.
ISSN 0418-8292 (print edition)  
ISSN 1862-1325 (online edition)
The German original of this Monthly Report  
went to press at 11 am on 17 August 2012.Annual and weekly publishing schedules for 
 selected statistics of the Deutsche Bundes-  
bank can be downloaded from our website. 
The statistical data are also published on the 
website.
The Monthly Report  is published by the 
 Deutsche Bundesbank, Frankfurt am Main,  
by virtue of section  18 of the Bundesbank  
Act. It is available to interested parties free of 
charge.
This is a translation of the original German-
language version, which is the sole authorita -
tive text.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2012  
2

Contents
The current economic situation in Germany  ................................................  5
Overview  ........................................................................................................................  6
Global and European setting  ..................................................................................  11
Possible macroeconomic effects of the “fiscal cliff” in the United States  .............................  15
Monetary policy and banking business  ..............................................................  22
Money market management and liquidity needs  ................................................................  23
Financial markets  ........................................................................................................  35
Local bias in German households’ equity portfolios  ............................................................  42
Economic conditions in Germany  .........................................................................  46
Public finances  .............................................................................................................  57
The European Council and Euro Area Summit statements of 28 and 29 June 2012 
 regarding the stabilisation of the euro area  ........................................................................  59
Calculating structural deficits in the central government budget – some technical 
 comments  ..........................................................................................................................  64
Some evidence on biased cyclical adjustment within fiscal rules  .........................................  68Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2012  
3

Statistical Section ....................................................................................................  1 •
Key economic data for the euro area  ..................................................................................  5 •
Overall monetary survey in the euro area  ............................................................................  8 •
Consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem  ............................................................  16 •
Banks  ..................................................................................................................................  20 •
Minimum reserves  ...............................................................................................................  42 •
Interest rates  .......................................................................................................................  43 •
Capital market  ....................................................................................................................  48 •
Financial accounts  ...............................................................................................................  52 •
Public finances in Germany  .................................................................................................  54 •
Economic conditions in Germany  ........................................................................................  61 •
External sector  ....................................................................................................................  68 •
Overview of publications by the Deutsche Bundesbank  ..........................  77 •
Abbreviations and symbols
e Estimated
p Provisional
pe Partly estimated
r Revised
… Data available at a later date
. Data unknown, not to be published or not meaningful
0 Less than 0.5 but more than nil
– Nil
Discrepancies in the totals are due to rounding.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2012  
4

The current economic situation  
in GermanyDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2012  
5

Overview
The German economy 
against the backdrop of  
the dip in global growth
After picking up at the start of 2012, global 
economic activity weakened distinctly in the 
second quarter. Although the current economic 
policy debate has highlighted the euro-area 
debt crisis, it is only partly to blame for the 
weaker global momentum. Other industrial 
countries, too, still have considerable macro -
economic imbalances to overcome. Another 
likely contributory factor was the lingering im -
pact of the first-quarter surge in crude oil prices 
on purchasing power in oil-consuming coun -
tries. Moreover, domestic problems have be -
come increasingly prominent in some emerging 
market economies. All in all, the second-quarter 
dip in global growth affected most of the major 
industrial countries and emerging market econ -
omies. Aggregate output contracted slightly in 
the euro area and considerably in the United 
Kingdom, while the rate of expansion slowed 
elsewhere (including in the United States, Japan 
and China). Global industrial output in April-
May stagnated at its first-quarter level. How -
ever, global gross domestic product (GDP), 
which tends to follow a flatter path than indus -
trial output, is likely to have risen slightly.
Global economic activity is likely to pick up 
gradually in the second half of the year, al -
though developments on the financial and oil 
markets pose downside risks. Overall, the stim -
uli from the still very expansionary monetary 
policy stance in the industrial countries and the 
recent loosening in the emerging market econ -
omies could regain the upper hand.
Weaker activity in the world economy and a 
renewed flare-up of the euro-area debt crisis 
shaped events on the international financial 
markets from spring 2012 onwards. With re -
gard to Europe, the mood was dominated by 
concerns about Spain’s banking system and public finances and doubts over the implemen -
tation of reform programmes in some euro-
area countries. Financing conditions for banks 
and governments on the southern European 
capital markets initially continued to worsen, 
whilst a flight to safety drove down yields in 
Germany, the United States and Japan. Equity 
markets were depressed for a time by the 
gloomier economic picture, a further percent -
age rise in non-performing real estate loans in 
some countries, and financial institutions’ in -
creased exposure to sovereign bonds. It was 
subsequently announced that Spain would be 
receiving financial support to recapitalise its 
banking sector and that the Eurosystem might 
consider taking further non-standard monetary 
policy measures. These declarations led, in par -
ticular, to a recovery in equity prices. They also 
delivered a limited boost to the euro, which, 
however, had predominantly depreciated in the 
preceding months.
At its monetary policy meeting at the begin -
ning of July, the Governing Council of the ECB 
lowered the three key interest rates by ¼ per -
centage point. Its rationale for this decision 
was that the ongoing deterioration in the euro 
area’s economic outlook had further damp -
ened inflationary pressure over the policy-
relevant horizon and that the underlying pace 
of monetary expansion remained subdued.
The evolution of the broad monetary aggre -
gate M3 has been unusually volatile since the 
financial crisis worsened in summer 2011. Over -
all, however, the underlying pace of monetary 
expansion remained muted in the second quar -
ter of 2012. Although portfolio shifts towards 
highly liquid assets and the continued rise in 
bank lending to euro-area governments bol -
stered M3 growth, bank lending to the euro-
area private sector continued to weaken. Lend -
ing patterns varied greatly within the euro area, 
with credit growth recorded in member states 
which had retained their high credit rating and Global economy
International 
 financial 
 marketsMonetary policyDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2012  
6

credit outflows from the countries hit hardest 
by the crisis, which are undergoing a substan -
tial structural adjustment process.
To support bank lending to the non-financial 
private sector, the ECB Governing Council de -
cided in the second quarter to further relax the 
collateral requirements to be met by banks in 
return for Eurosystem refinancing. By contrast, 
when the buy-back scheme for marketable 
debt instruments issued or guaranteed by 
Greece expired on 25 July 2012, these instru -
ments became ineligible for use as collateral in 
monetary policy operations for the time being 
as they do not comply with the Eurosystem’s 
rating threshold for marketable assets. How -
ever, the Greek central bank is still supplying its 
domestic financial sector with ample liquidity 
assistance.
Towards the end of the reporting period, safe-
haven flows to countries with a high credit rat -
ing decelerated somewhat overall compared 
with spring. Nonetheless, Spain in particular 
continued to suffer net outflows of capital, 
which were offset by a greater supply of liquid -
ity from the Eurosystem. Net inflows of liquidity 
to Germany, reflected in its TARGET2 balance, 
largely ground to a halt. At the end of July, Ger -
many’s TARGET2 claims stood at just under 
€730 billion.
Although the ECB Governing Council did not 
adopt any further non-standard measures at its 
latest meeting on 2  August 2012, it did an -
nounce that it might consider expanding such 
measures substantially. In particular, the Gov -
erning Council indicated that it would, under 
certain conditions, support a new, possibly ex -
tensive government bond purchase programme 
in order to correct what it deemed to be severe 
disruptions in the price formation process on 
these markets. The Governing Council stated 
that the activation of an EFSF/ESM programme 
for the country in question would be a neces -
sary condition for any interventions by the Eu -
rosystem. The Eurosystem’s securities purchase 
programme would focus on the shorter end of the yield curve. Its volume could be unlimited 
and would in any event be sufficient to achieve 
the programme’s objectives. The Eurosystem’s 
committees are to prepare the details of the 
programme and the Governing Council’s deci -
sion. The Bundesbank remains of the opinion 
that, in particular, government bond purchases 
by the Eurosystem should be viewed critically 
and entail, not least, substantial stability policy 
risks. It is the responsibility of fiscal policymak -
ers – the governments and parliaments of the 
euro-area countries  – to decide whether to 
possibly considerably enlarge the communitisa -
tion of solvency risks; such steps should not be 
taken via central bank balance sheets.
Despite the difficult economic situation in some 
euro-area countries and the dip in global eco -
nomic activity, the German economy continued 
to expand in the second quarter of 2012, albeit 
at a slower pace. The Federal Statistical Office’s 
flash estimate points to quarter-on-quarter 
GDP growth of 0.3% in the second quarter of 
2012 (after seasonal and calendar adjustment), 
compared with 0.5% in the first quarter. Enter -
prises’ average capacity utilisation remained 
around normal. Although the external demand 
stimuli were less pronounced in the first half of 
2012, they were strong enough in tandem with 
expanding domestic activity to enable output 
to increase in line with potential growth.
Germany’s exports may have risen almost as 
sharply in the second quarter of 2012 as during 
the first three months of the year. While export 
growth to non-euro-area countries continued 
virtually unabated, exports to euro-area coun -
tries stagnated as expected. As the sizeable de -
mand losses of autumn 2011 were barely re -
couped in the first quarter of 2012, this side -
ways motion means that, on balance, Germa -
ny’s euro-area business was dominated by 
contractionary dynamics as a result of the ad -
justment-induced recessions in some member 
countries.
The uncertainty triggered by the euro-area debt 
crisis evidently continued to dampen invest -German 
 economyDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2012  
7

ment in machinery and equipment. Purchases 
of moveable fixed assets have now been falter -
ing for the past three quarters. This is because 
few companies are looking to expand produc -
tion capacity at the moment. Capacity utilisa -
tion in manufacturing has fallen since autumn 
2011, although it remains just within the 
longer-term average range. By contrast, con -
struction investment increased in the second 
quarter. This owed something to the rebound 
following the sharp weather-related reduction 
in activity in February but also to building firms’ 
very buoyant order situation. Towards the end 
of last year, a very large number of building 
permits were granted for new residential and 
commercial properties. In addition, public sec -
tor demand surged after the turn of the year.
Although the uncertainty triggered by the debt 
crisis is also weighing on households’ purchas -
ing decisions, the underlying domestic setting 
for private consumption remains positive. 
Thanks to the favourable labour market situ -
ation and strong wage growth, consumer 
spending rose further in the second quarter of 
2012 in seasonally adjusted terms. The weak -
ening of inflation pressure probably bolstered 
consumer confidence, while households’ real 
spending capacity was definitely boosted by 
falling petrol and heating oil prices.
Having stagnated in the first quarter of 2012, 
imports recorded a marked quarter-on-quarter 
increase in the spring (after seasonal adjust -
ment). However, growth in imports has lagged 
behind that in exports since the beginning of 
2012. This is partly because of an underlying 
trend in which construction activity, with its 
relatively low import content, has increasingly 
become the main driver of domestic economic 
expansion. Imports from euro-area countries 
and EU member states in central and eastern 
Europe were higher in the second quarter of 
2012 than in the first three months of the year. 
The total value of imports from other parts of 
the world (apart from China) largely decreased, 
although this fall should be viewed in the light 
of the marked decline in energy prices.The growing concerns about the economic 
situation are reflected in more cautious recruit -
ment plans. Although the continued rise in em -
ployment in the second quarter confirmed the 
positive underlying labour market trend, em -
ployed persons were working fewer hours to -
wards the end of the period and, after seasonal 
adjustment, the number of unemployed per -
sons rose somewhat quarter on quarter for the 
first time since the cyclical upturn began. The 
available leading indicators suggest that the la -
bour market may continue to lose momentum 
in the coming months.
The social partners negotiated appreciable 
wage rises in this year’s pay round. Whereas in 
the service sector negotiators mostly concluded 
progressive wage increments staggered over a 
longer period, the latest pay deals in industry 
tended to feature large wage rises and run for 
a shorter term. On top of the collective agree -
ments for core staff, wage bargainers in the 
metal-working and electrical engineering sec -
tor and the chemical industry agreed on phased 
wage add-ons for agency-hired temporary 
workers.
The price climate initially improved somewhat 
in the second quarter of 2012 as a result of the 
gloomier global economic outlook. Cheapen -
ing commodities eased price pressure across all 
stages of the economy, although the weaken -
ing euro exerted a countervailing influence on 
the price level. In the course of the second 
quarter, the rising trend in consumer prices 
ground to a halt in seasonally adjusted terms. 
Annual consumer price inflation stood at 1.9% 
in the period under review, compared with 
2.1% in the first quarter. Going forward, infla -
tion is likely to edge up, however, in view of 
the renewed price upturn in the international 
commodities markets and the euro’s ongoing 
depreciation.
The prevailing uncertainty in the euro area 
could have a greater negative impact on eco -
nomic activity in Germany in the second half of 
the year. This is borne out by the Ifo surveys, Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2012  
8

which point to a considerable deterioration in 
the business outlook for trade and industry in 
the second quarter. This is chiefly attributable 
to the impact of firms’ worsening sentiment on 
investment and, above all, to direct effects via 
foreign trade.
However, as long as demand for German prod -
ucts from non-euro-area countries remains es -
sentially intact despite the deteriorating expect -
ations, a reversal of the cyclical trend in Ger -
many is highly unlikely. Under this constellation, 
key components of domestic demand should 
remain buoyant; construction demand is still 
strong and the outlook for private consump -
tion continues to be favourable. This is due, not 
least, to the fact that job and income oppor -
tunities are considered to be comparatively 
good in Germany regardless of the cyclical tur -
bulence.
Germany’s public finances are likely to record a 
mixed performance this year. After falling to 1% 
last year, the deficit ratio could decline further 
in 2012 and would thus be low by international 
standards. The main factors encouraging such 
a decrease are the favourable growth structure 
for government revenue, moderate develop -
ments in pension and labour market expend -
iture and exceptionally good financing condi -
tions. By contrast, the debt ratio is likely to rise 
from the very high level recorded last year 
(81.2%). The debt-increasing impact of the re -
gional bank WestLB’s liquidation and of the 
European assistance mechanisms outweighs 
the downward trend that had begun to 
emerge. Germany’s general government deficit 
may change only slightly next year. Various op -
posing influences – such as the continued loos -
ening of the fiscal policy stance on the one 
hand and the ongoing subdued trend in social 
and interest expenditure on the other – could 
roughly cancel each other out. However, the 
debt ratio could fall, driven down by GDP 
growth in the denominator. But this scenario is 
subject to certain risks, not least in connection 
with the euro-area debt crisis.The supplementary budget for 2012 will lead to 
a clear year-on-year rise in central govern -
ment’s structural deficit, although some of the 
estimates on which this is based are rather cau -
tious. Central government’s multi-year fiscal 
plan envisages that it will already comply with 
the borrowing ceiling of 0.35% of GDP (which 
will be compulsory from 2016 onwards) in 
2013 and achieve a slight structural surplus by 
2016, thus continuing the favourable budget 
developments seen since 2010. However, this 
projection largely depends on additional tax 
revenue stemming from robust growth in the 
German economy (and low financing costs), 
which is assumed to continue up to the end of 
the fiscal plan. As the debt brake imposes strict 
limits on structural borrowing, it would seem 
imprudent, not least in view of past experience, 
to delay the consolidation originally planned – 
as is to some extent envisaged – and to signifi -
cantly erode the safety margin below the bor -
rowing limit.
As Germany’s general government deficit ratio 
was significantly below the 3% threshold in 
2011, the EU excessive deficit procedure initi -
ated against Germany at the end of 2009 was 
closed. This and the now historically low gen -
eral government deficit are welcome develop -
ments. Yet despite the currently very favourable 
macroeconomic setting for Germany’s public 
finances, many state and local governments 
are still running deficits, some of them sizeable. 
This is partly masked by high but temporary 
surpluses in the social security funds. The very 
high debt ratio, which has risen almost without 
interruption since the 1970s, reflects past fail -
ures to consolidate public finances. In view of 
the foreseeable future budget burdens stem -
ming from demographic developments, and 
the substantial risks to public finances, policy -
makers should make use of the current favour -
able conditions in order to resolutely consoli -
date and start making the deficit cuts that are 
still required without delay. The automatic sta -
bilisers will cushion the impact of any risks that 
might materialise. The aim should be to swiftly 
comply with the permanent consolidation re -Public financesDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2012  
9

quirements enshrined in the national debt 
brakes for central and state government. Fur -
thermore, appreciable and binding safety mar -
gins below the national borrowing limits should 
be introduced as a general principle. Given the 
high estimation uncertainty regarding the state 
and development of structural budgets, such 
buffers that can absorb the impact of negative 
shocks are a key condition for being able to 
pursue a stable, target-oriented fiscal policy. 
This would allow the debt ratio to be rapidly 
lowered, which would yield an extra benefit in 
view of its current very high level. Confidence 
in German public finances is a key anchor of 
stability in the current crisis, but it cannot be 
taken for granted.
At the European Council meetings at the end 
of June, the heads of state or government of 
the euro-area countries considered the possibil -
ity of closer fiscal and economic policy cooper -
ation. However, they have yet to clarify what 
precise form this cooperation would take, and 
intend to discuss the details at a later date. 
Among other issues, the question of whether 
and to what extent national sovereignty should 
be transferred to the European level and 
whether there should be a greater communiti -
sation of government debt appears open to 
dispute. In the near future, the European Com -mission intends to present proposals for a sin -
gle supervisory mechanism for financial institu -
tions. It is emphasised that this would be a ne -
cessary condition for permitting the planned 
European Stability Mechanism (ESM) to provide 
financial assistance not just to governments but 
also directly to banks. To maintain an adequate 
balance between liability and control, however, 
this would necessitate the introduction of 
powers of intervention, including in fiscal and 
economic policy, as well as their rigorous de -
ployment. It would therefore make sense for 
the EMU countries to assume joint liability (via 
the ESM) only for those risks which arise after 
the single supervisory mechanism has been set 
up. Changes would be needed in the frame -
work for banking supervision and regulation to 
ensure that interconnections between banks 
and governments do not increase excessively, 
thereby transferring substantial sovereign solv -
ency risks to other member states by the back 
door of granting financial support to the bank -
ing sector. A single supervisory mechanism for 
financial institutions could constitute an im -
portant step towards a more stable institutional 
framework for the single market. However, it is 
not an appropriate solution – at least in the 
short and medium term – to the current Euro -
pean sovereign debt and banking crisis.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2012  
10

Global and European setting
World economic activity
After picking up at the start of 2012, global 
economic activity again weakened distinctly in 
the second quarter. This slowdown appears to 
be attributable only in part to the renewed in -
tensification of the euro-area sovereign debt 
crisis. The after-effects of the sharp rise in crude 
oil prices in the first quarter of 2012 are also 
likely to have played a role. This is especially 
true for the United States, where the loss of 
purchasing power owing to higher oil prices 
had a much greater impact than the negative 
spillover effects from Europe. Moreover, do -
mestic problems have been increasingly prom -
inent in some emerging markets. Global indus -
trial output in April-May stagnated at the level 
of the first quarter, in which it grew by 1½%. 
However, global gross domestic product (GDP), 
which tends to follow a flatter path than indus -
trial output, is likely to have risen slightly.
The second-quarter dip in global growth af -
fected most of the major industrial countries 
and emerging markets. Real GDP contracted 
slightly in the euro area and considerably in the 
United Kingdom, while the rate of expansion 
slowed elsewhere (including the United States, 
Japan and China). As its slowdown was only 
marginal, the USA became the growth leader 
among the major industrial countries. Accord -
ing to initial estimates, after seasonal adjust -
ment, aggregate output in the USA, Japan, the 
UK and the euro area as a whole in the second 
quarter of 2012 was only slightly higher than in 
the first quarter. However, it was still up by 
1¼% year-on-year.
Global economic activity is likely to pick up 
gradually in the second half of the year, al -
though developments on the financial and oil 
markets pose a risk. In such an environment, 
the stimuli from the still very expansionary 
monetary policy stance in the advanced econ -
omies and the recent loosening in the emer -ging markets could regain the upper hand. 
However, after recording two consecutive rises, 
the ifo indicator for the world economic cli -
mate fell significantly in the third quarter.
At the beginning of July, the IMF made only 
minimal changes to its spring forecast for the 
global economy from April. This was based on 
the assumption that the unrest on the financial 
markets owing to the sovereign debt and bank -
ing crisis in the euro area will ease gradually, 
that the sharp deficit reduction in the USA cur -
rently scheduled by the expiration of legislation 
next year will be softened and that the loosen -
ing of macro policy in the emerging markets 
will prove to be effective. The flash estimate for 
global GDP growth in 2012 has been lowered 
marginally to 3.5%. However, this is due to the 
fact that results for the first quarter were more 
favourable than expected in April as well as a 
subsequent considerable downward revision of 
growth rates for the following three quarters. 
In regional terms, the somewhat more cautious 
assessment of the outlook for growth in the 
major emerging markets in Asia and Latin 
America was an important factor here. At 
+1.4%, there was no change in the forecast for 
the advanced economies as a whole. However, 
broken down by country, the IMF made a dis -
tinct upward revision for Germany (from +0.6% 
to +1.0%), improved its outlook for Japan, but 
lowered the rates for the UK and the group of 
new industrial countries in Asia (South Korea, 
Hong Kong, Taiwan and Singapore) rather sub -
stantially. The global GDP forecast for 2013 was 
reduced by ¼ percentage point to 3.9%; the 
adjustments for the major economic areas 
were fairly even. Current forecasts for the 
growth of global trade, at 3.8% in 2012 and 
5.1% in 2013, are ¼ and ½ percentage point 
lower, respectively. The IMF has left its flash es -
timate for prices for industrial countries and 
emerging markets for 2012 and 2013 virtually 
unchanged despite the fact that it assumes oil 
prices to be much lower than in its April fore -Slower global 
economic  momentum  
in Q2
Pace slower in 
both industrial countries and emerging  marketsMinimal adjust -
ment to IMF 
spring forecastDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2012  
11

cast. Overall, this appears to have made the as -
sessment of the price outlook more plausible.
A combination of weaker demand and in -
creased supply-side risks sent crude oil prices 
on a roller-coaster ride throughout the report -
ing period. Given growing indications of slower 
global economic activities, prices initially fell 
considerably in the spring months. On the 
crude oil market, the substantial expansion of 
production in Saudi Arabia and a temporary 
détente in the dispute surrounding the Iranian 
nuclear programme were the reasons why the 
price for a barrel of Brent crude oil, at times, 
dropped well below the US$100 mark and pre -
miums for forward deliveries contracted. On a 
quarterly average, the spot quotation fell to its 
level of the fourth quarter of 2011. However, in 
July, the oil price soared, inter alia , as a result 
of resurgent political tensions in the Middle 
East. As this report went to press, the spot 
price for a barrel of Brent crude oil was 
US$113½ whereas oil futures were again much cheaper. From mid-2012, food prices also 
soared. This was due, in particular, to concerns 
about weather-related crop failures for corn, 
wheat and soybeans. By contrast, prices for in -
dustrial raw materials remained subdued, in 
line with the gloomier global economic envir -
onment.
The temporary sharp fall in crude oil prices ab -
ruptly halted the rise in consumer prices in in -
dustrial countries in the second quarter of 
2012. After seasonal adjustment, in the second 
quarter, the index (aggregated according to 
Bundesbank calculations) stood on average 
only slightly above the level of the first quarter, 
in which it rose by 0.7%. The year-on-year level 
contracted by ½ percentage point and, at 
1.9%, fell below the 2% mark again for the first 
time since the final quarter of 2010. The price 
of the basket of consumer goods, excluding 
energy and food, continued to rise moderately. 
The year-on-year rise of 1.6% was not much 
lower than in the first quarter.
Selected emerging market 
economies
In China, the pace of overall economic growth 
slowed again in the second quarter. Year-on-
year real GDP growth fell from 8% in the first 
quarter to 7½%. Above all, the expansion of 
industrial output slowed again considerably in 
the second quarter. A flatter upward trend in 
Chinese exports owing to weak import devel -
opments in major sales markets, especially in a 
number of European countries, is just one of 
the reasons. Much more importantly, however, 
Chinese domestic activity continued to lose 
momentum. This is especially true for invest -
ments, which had always made the largest 
contribution to aggregate growth over the past 
few years. As a result, in recent months the 
Chinese authorities have taken a number of 
measures to support the economy. First, they 
have shortened the government planning com -
mission’s approval process for major projects 
and, second, pushed ahead with the govern -Temporary sharp 
fall in crude oil prices… dampened consumer price inflation
Growth remains 
moderate in ChinaGlobal industrial output and world trade
Source:  Centraal  Planbureau.  1 OECD  excluding  Turkey,  Mex-
ico, South  Korea,  Poland,  Slovakia,  the Czech  Republic  and 
Hungary.
Deutsche Bundesbank2008 2009 2010 2011 2012808590951001051101151201251301352008 = 100, seasonally adjusted, quarterly, log scale
80859095100105110115Global industrial output
Industrial countries 1
World trade volumeEmerging markets
Total
April-
May
April-
MayDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2012  
12

ment programme to build affordable housing. 
Third, they have cut the regulated lending rates 
for commercial banks in two stages. The mon -
etary policy scope for cutting interest rates was 
provided by falling consumer inflation. In July, 
annual CPI inflation fell to 1.8% – its lowest 
rate since January 2010.
In India the upturn in aggregate economic ac -
tivity again weakened considerably in the first 
quarter (these are the most recent data avail -
able). Year-on-year real GDP growth fell 
to 5½%, and thus the lowest level in three 
years. In the past few months, the economy is 
likely to have remained on this rather flat ex -
pansion path. This is indicated, not least, by 
slow-moving growth in industrial output. The 
production of capital goods, in particular, 
pointed sharply downwards in the second 
quarter, suggesting that investment demand is 
subdued. A notable factor seems to be that the 
high government budgetary deficit and the 
slow pace of economic policy structural re -
forms have increasingly undermined the confi -
dence of investors, especially those from 
abroad. According to the new national con -
sumer price index, inflation stood at 10.2% in 
the second quarter. As inflation remained per -
sistently high, the Reserve Bank of India did not 
continue to ease monetary policy after lower -
ing interest rates in April 2012.
In Brazil, economic output is likely to have gone 
up only slightly in the spring – as was the case 
in the first quarter. This is indicated by the fact 
that output in the industrial sector, which is 
saddled with competitiveness problems, again 
fell by 1% on the previous quarter in seasonally 
adjusted terms. Furthermore, comparatively 
low growth in employment in the services sec -
tor indicates that expansion here is also sub -
dued. To stimulate the forces for growth, the 
Brazilian government has announced a series 
of measures in recent months, including a spe -
cial government investment programme for in -
frastructural projects. The Central Bank of Brazil 
has continued to cut interest rates in light of 
the slow economic growth and the decline in inflationary pressures. In July, consumer price 
inflation stood at 5.2%, compared with 7.1% in 
the third quarter of 2011.
Aggregate growth in Russia, as in many other 
countries, has lost momentum over the past 
few months. According to initial information 
from the Russian federal statistics service, year-
on-year real GDP growth in the second quarter 
slowed to 4% after previously having amounted 
to 5%. This is due, in particular, to a flatter rise 
in industrial output, to which the marked cut -
backs in oil and gas production made a contri -
bution. Consumer price inflation, which has 
shown a distinct downward trend since May 
2011, rose for the first time in June and July on 
the back of higher food prices and increases in 
administered prices. At last count, it stood at 
5.6%.Expansion 
abated in India
Economic 
 activity in Brazil 
lacking 
 momentumEconomic 
growth in Russia slowerWorld market prices for crude oil,industrial commodities and food,beverages and tobacco
Sources:  Thomson  Reuters  and HWWI.  • Average  of 1 to 
10 August or 1 to 15 August 2012 (crude oil).
Deutsche Bundesbank2008 2009 2010 2011 20125060708090100120140160180US dollar basis, 2010 = 100, monthly averages, log scale
Crude oil (Brent)
Industrial
commoditiesFood, beveragesand tobaccoDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2012  
13

USA
The US economy maintained its moderate 
growth path in the second quarter of 2012. At 
just under ½% in seasonally adjusted terms, 
the quarter-on-quarter rise in real GDP was 
similar to that recorded in the first quarter. The 
slight slowdown is mainly due to a weaker ex -
pansion of private consumption. This, in turn, is 
chiefly attributable to the fact that real spend -
ing on motor vehicles fell to the level recorded 
at the end of 2011, likely due not least to the 
delayed impact of the sharp hikes in petrol 
prices in the first-quarter months. Given the 
outlook for consumption, it appears beneficial 
that households’ disposable income has in -
creased again considerably in real terms. In -
come growth in nominal terms slowed signifi -
cantly because only half (329,000) the number 
of new non-farm jobs were created in the 
second quarter as in the first. Unemployment 
slid slightly to 8.2% on average over the sec -
ond-quarter months. However, consumer price 
inflation diminished substantially following an 
easing on the crude oil market. The Consumer 
Price Index was up slightly from the first quar -
ter in seasonally adjusted terms but down by 
almost one percentage point on the year to 
+1.9%. However, excluding food and energy, 
inflation rose slightly to 2.3%.Public sector demand, both at state and federal 
government level, fell further in the second 
quarter, although not to the extent experi -
enced in the previous quarter. So far, govern -
ment consumption and investment cutbacks 
have notably restrained economic recovery 
after this type of expenditure had proven to be 
an important means of providing support dur -
ing the recession. By contrast, despite various 
strains, domestic private final demand in the 
last ten quarters has grown rather steadily at 
an average annual rate of 3%; however, total 
domestic final demand grew at a rate of only 
2%. Massive tax hikes, which, under current le -
gislation, will come into effect at the beginning 
of 2013 –  the same time as sizeable federal 
spending cuts – are likely to curb private de -
mand, too (see the box on pages 15 to 17). It is 
difficult to forecast the extent to which the im -
pending drastic consolidation is already having 
a negative effect on the economy. Concerns 
are being voiced, especially in the defence in -
dustry, that the fiscal outlook is delaying the 
creation of new jobs and investment. Never -
theless, investment in machinery and equip -
ment again improved somewhat in the second 
quarter.
Japan
After a growth surge in the first quarter when 
real GDP went up by 1¼% on the quarter, Ja -
pan’s aggregate output rose by a mere ¼% 
after seasonal adjustment in the second quar -
ter. This slowdown was predominantly attribut -
able to the fact that private consumption, 
which had previously experienced a buoyant 
expansion, virtually stagnated. Nevertheless, 
the consumption of durable goods, driven by 
government purchasing incentives for cars, 
again soared. In contrast to the previous quar -
ter, households have now scaled back spend -
ing on other goods. Moreover, changes in in -
ventories no longer made a contribution to 
aggregate growth, which was additionally 
reined in somewhat by foreign trade. However, 
both the private and the public sector substan -Moderate 
growth path maintained …… despite on-going declining government  demand
Recovery still 
volatileReal domestic final demand in theUnited States
Sources:  US Bureau  of Economic  Analysis  and Bundesbank  cal-
culations.
Deutsche Bundesbank2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 201286420246
––––+++Year-on-year percentage change
General government demand
Private
domestic final
demandTotal
domestic final
demandDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2012  
14

Possible macroeconomic effects of the “fi  scal cliff” 
in the United States
In recent years, temporary fi  scal measures 
have often been advocated as a means of 
bolstering economic activity. What is gener-
ally overlooked, however, is that, while 
growth is boosted as a result of implement-
ing such measures, it is also dampened 
when the measures have run their course. 
Under current law, the turn of 2012-13 will 
see various stimulus measures and tax 
breaks – some of which go back as far as 
2001 and 2003 – expiring at the same time 
as automatic spending cuts take effect as 
part of consolidation efforts. The very fact 
that the term “fi  scal cliff” has been coined 
to describe this situation points to the far-
reaching effects on the US economy which 
are expected to stem from this abrupt re-
duction in the defi  cit.
According to Congressional Budget Offi   ce 
(CBO) data, the combined measures would 
improve the balance of the US federal 
budget next year by 5% of gross domestic 
product (GDP). As the vast majority of new 
provisions will enter into force at the start 
of the year, an extensive and sudden con-
solidation on this scale would result in a 
contraction of aggregate US output in the 
fi  rst half of 2013. Not only would this be a technical recession, ie two successive quar-ters of negative economic growth; it would 
also meet the more comprehensive defi  n-ition of a recession as applied by the Na-tional Bureau of Economic Research. Over 
the course of 2013, ie looking at the fourth quarter compared with the same quarter in 2012, US real GDP growth could, according to the CBO, be dampened by 1 to 6¾ per-centage points, or by an average of 4 per-
centage points.1 The CBO arrives at these 
fi  gures by determining both model-based and historically derived multipliers for the individual fi  scal measures. The cited range illustrates the uncertainty that is generally 
associated with such estimates.2
Simulations using NiGEM, the global eco-
nomic model of the National Institute of 
Economic and Social Research (NIESR), are 
presented below. They make it possible not 
only to derive the short-term domestic ef-
fects of fi  scal measures in a consistent, the-
oretically substantiated and econometrically 
estimated model framework with forward-
looking agents in major markets, but also 
to analyse international spillover effects and long-term effects. The starting point for the simulations is provided by the CBO data on the scale of the individual measures. On the assumption that these will be implemented at the beginning of 2013, the measures are 
redistributed from the fi  scal year, which runs from 1 October to 30 September, to 
the calendar year. In line with this, the in-
come tax rate, transfer payments and (real) 
government consumption, all of which are 
contained in NiGEM, are permanently 
shocked. To do this, the long-term budget 
target, which in itself guarantees an equilib-rium path of public fi  nances in the model, is 
fi  rst endogenised in order to allow a sus-
tained improvement in the budget balance. 
The simulations already start at the begin-
ning of 2012 in order to identify any antici-
patory effects, insofar as they can be cap-
tured in NiGEM.
1 See Congressional Budget Offi   ce, Economic Effects 
of Reducing the Fiscal Restraint That Is Scheduled to 
Occur in 2013, May 2012.
2 See F Reichling und C Whalen, Assessing the Short-
Term Effects on Output of Changes in Federal Fiscal 
Policies, CBO Working Paper 2012-08.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2012  
15

These, too, show the operation of strongly 
contractionary forces which may be suffi   -
cient to drag the US economy into a tech-
nical recession in the fi  rst half of 2013. 
Compared with the baseline, the growth rate of real US GDP in the course of 2013 
will be dampened by 2¼ percentage points and its annual average rate by 1¾ percent-
age points. One key reason output losses 
will be signifi  cantly lower than in the CBO’s 
estimates is likely to be the endogenously 
derived interest rate path. As general gov-
ernment demand for credit will decline in the long run, the real long-term interest 
rate will fall and private investment activity 
will pick up, thus cushioning the retarding 
impacts. As the agents in the fi  nancial mar-
kets ultimately behave in a forward-looking 
manner, the real long-term interest rate will 
already begin to fall at the announcement 
of drastic consolidation measures. This will 
lead to a slighty positive effect on aggre-
gate output in 2012. On the other hand, the CBO assumes that heightened uncer-tainty about the outlook for the economy will hold back growth by roughly 
1⁄10 per-
centage point in both summer and autumn 
of this year. As a confi  dence channel has not been built into NiGEM, such effects cannot be simulated in the model, how-
ever.
On the other hand, embedding the US economy in a global framework can yield other insights. For example, the decline in US interest rates in combination with the 
forward-looking behaviour of the agents in 
the forex market causes an immediate de-
preciation of the US dollar against other 
currencies. This depreciation is so sharp that 
US consumer prices – despite dampening 
effects stemming from the real economy – 
show a clear rise in comparison with the 
baseline. For this reason, the Fed initially re-sponds to the announcement of consolida-tion by means of a considerable increase in 
the nominal federal funds rate, before this 
is reversed again in connection with the re-
cessionary tendencies from 2013 onwards. 
Nevertheless, the endogenous interest rate 
adjustment – the long-term interest rate 
relevant to investment decisions arises from 
the expected future short-term interest 
rates – plays an important role in stabilising 
aggregate output. Thus, the medium-term 
output losses are markedly higher still in a 
simulation in which policy rates are fi  xed 
over a longer period of time.3
The lower aggregate demand in the United 
States and the euro’s appreciation, which is 
a mirror image of the US dollar’s depreci-
ation, do, in and of themselves, place a 
3 It should be noted, however, that fi  xing policy rates 
in the model represents a deception of the 
forward-looking agents in the fi  nancial and labour 
markets. In view of a shock which dampens aggregate demand, they expect an interest rate cut. In the end, it 
is this monetary policy shock which causes the add-
itional output losses.Impact of the scheduled consolidation in the United States on real GDP according to NiGEM simulations
Deutsche Bundesbank2012 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20203.02.52.01.51.00.500.51.0
––––––++Percentage deviation from baseline
–1.0–0.50+0.5+1.0+1.5+2.0in the USA
in the euro areaBudget target and policy
rates both endogenous
Budget target fixed,
policy rates endogenous
Budget target endogenous,
policy rates fixedDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2012  
16

strain in the short term on economic activity 
in the euro area. In the wake of cheaper 
imports, however, euro-area consumer 
prices decline considerably compared with 
the baseline, thereby fl  attening the path of policy rates.
4 In the long run, economic ac-
tivity on this side of the Atlantic will increase clearly compared with the baseline, in fact, 
and will grow at least somewhat in the world as a whole. Ultimately, the decisive 
factor is a global “crowding in” via an im-
mediate lowering of the real rate of inter-
est, which stimulates private investment in 
particular.
In this connection, the long-term effects on 
output depend on how sustained the 
underlying fi  scal shocks are. On the as-
sumption that they persist, the US fi  scal bal-
ance shows a steady improvement com-pared with the baseline and the govern-ment debt to (nominal) GDP ratio will fall sharply. If, however, the budget target is 
endogenised only for two years, and, say, a defi  cit target of 2% of GDP is set, to achieve 
which the rate of income tax is also en-
dogenised, most of the tax hikes will have 
been reversed again over the passage of 
time in the simulation. This means that, in 
the United States, the output losses be-
come smaller compared with the baseline: 
in 2023, aggregate output will only be ¼% lower along with a simultaneous halving of the budget defi  cit to GDP ratio to the stipu-lated 2%.
All things considered, we fi  nd that stepping 
over the “fi  scal cliff” will pose a temporary setback for the aggregate upturn in the US economy, but not necessarily for global re-
covery. In the long run, the US federal 
budget would be restored to health and the 
global interest rate level would fall. What 
should also be taken into consideration is 
that uncertainty about the long-term direc-
tion of US fi  scal policy would cease to be a factor – one that is possibly placing a strain on economic activity at present.
Admittedly, there are various reasons to in-
terpret the simulation results with caution. 
For example, no consideration has been 
given here to a not-improbable scenario in 
which the fi  scal measures are in force only 
for a few weeks or months before a newly 
elected Congress ends up deciding to 
“backpedal” on consolidation. Distribution 
effects in conjunction with tax hikes and 
their effects on the economy as a whole 
have also been left aside. Since, in general, 
the current legislation is not anticipated to 
be implemented in full, it is doubtful 
whether monetary policy could actually cushion the dampening effects of these 
measures on the economy in time and on 
the outlined scale if, against all odds, the 
measures were indeed implemented in full. 
Confi  dence effects are not generally mod-
elled in NiGEM: they therefore play no part 
in the simulations, either in the run-up to consolidation or in transmitting negative 
stimuli to the euro area. Nor is it possible, 
on the other hand, to model the macroeco-nomic dislocations of a crisis of confi  dence 
that, in an alternative scenario, could arise 
if the US federal government budget defi  cit 
were not comprehensively reduced in the near future. Prolonging the status quo  
might prevent a technical recession in the fi  rst half of 2013, but, for the time being, could also cement uncertainty about the 
long-term fi  scal outlook.
4 The zero lower bound of the nominal policy rate is 
invariably maintained, however. Since it is assumed in 
the baseline that the policy rate will return to normal 
over time, there exists suffi   cient scope to ease monet-
ary policy via a fl  attening of this (expected) interest 
rate path.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2012  
17

tially stepped up gross fixed capital formation, 
driven by reconstruction efforts following the 
devastation caused by the catastrophe in 2011. 
In addition to the volatile but continued eco -
nomic recovery, the situation on the labour 
market eased. At 4.3% in June, unemployment 
fell to its lowest level since September 2011. 
Furthermore, the consumer price deflationary 
tendencies weakened somewhat. The price of 
the basket of consumer goods excluding en -
ergy and food fell by 0.5% on the year in the 
second quarter and therefore slightly less than 
in the first quarter. In total, the Consumer Price 
Index was 0.2% up on the year.
United Kingdom
According to an initial estimate, aggregate out -
put in the United Kingdom fell in the second 
quarter of 2012 by a seasonally adjusted ¾% 
from the first quarter. It was thus at its lowest 
level since the first quarter of 2010 and 4½% 
short of the high recorded in the fourth quarter 
of 2008. This substantial contraction of late is 
also due to special factors, in particular an add -
itional public holiday to celebrate the queen’s 
jubilee.1 Construction was again the largest 
contributor to the contraction in GDP; output 
in this sector was nearly 10% down on the pre -
vious year. However, the sovereign debt crisis 
on the continent, often cited in public debate, 
is not likely to have had any discernible impact 
on this sector, which has virtually no cross-  
border ties. Monthly indicators are instead 
pointing to a sharp reduction in new public 
sector construction projects as a result of fiscal 
consolidation efforts and the end of prepar -
ations for the Olympics. Output in the rest of 
the production sector was down on the quar -
ter in the second quarter but by no means by 
as much as in the construction sector. In the 
services sector, output remained virtually un -
changed. Real gross value added in the public 
sector even increased further. The labour mar -
ket also weathered the downturn in overall 
economic activity. Unemployment in May was 
at its lowest level since June 2011 (8.0%). The ongoing easing of the price climate was re -
flected in a fall in inflation according to the 
Harmonised Index of Consumer Prices (HICP) 
from 3.5% in the first quarter of 2012 to 2.8% 
in the second. Core inflation (excluding energy 
and unprocessed food) also fell to its lowest 
level since the fourth quarter of 2009 (2.3%).
New EU member states
Economic output in the new EU member states 
as a whole (EU-7),2 which stagnated in the first 
quarter, is likely to have increased moderately 
in the three-month period just concluded. For 
instance, following a sideways movement in 
the first quarter, real GDP was up by ¼% in Bul -
garia and ½% in Romania. In Poland, for which 
no national accounts figures are yet available, 
overall economic output is likely to have again 
seen an expansion. However, despite positive 
effects stemming from jointly hosting the UEFA 
European Football Championship, economic 
activity was probably slightly weaker than in 
the first quarter of the year. By contrast, the 
Czech Republic and Hungary recorded a further 
decline in GDP (both -¼%). In most countries in 
this region, the situation on the labour market 
has changed only marginally over the past few 
months; at last count, the aggregated un -
employment rate amounted to 9.7%. In this 
group of countries, consumer price inflation fell 
from 3.8% in the first quarter to 3.5% in the 
second quarter. It ranged from 1.8% in Bulgaria 
to 3.9% in Poland and 5.5% in Hungary, where 
the increase in turnover tax from 25% to 27% 
came into effect at the beginning of the year.Recession driven 
by downturn in constructionModerate  aggregate growth
1 As this public holiday was in June and most data are not 
yet available for this month, this has also increased the un -
certainty associated with the initial official GDP estimate. 
The likelihood of a distinct revision is thus greater than 
usual.
2 This group comprises the non-euro-area countries that 
joined the EU in 2004 and 2007.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2012  
18

Macroeconomic trends  
in the euro area
Euro-area economic output declined some -
what in the second-quarter months, represent -
ing a continuation of the downturn which 
began in the final quarter of 2011 and was 
interrupted in the first quarter of 2012 only 
thanks to solid growth in Germany. In season -
ally adjusted terms, real GDP fell in the second 
quarter by ¼% on the quarter and ½% on the 
year. Negative economic growth in the second 
quarter is attributable, inter alia,  to the con -
tinued deterioration of the economic situation 
in the euro-area periphery. This was due, first, 
to the uncertain political situation in Greece be -
tween parliamentary elections which, at times, 
brought the already faltering reform process to 
a complete standstill. Second, the sovereign 
debt and banking crisis intensified in Spain and 
Cyprus in particular, and the recession in Italy 
continued unabated. The negative trends in 
these countries continued to undermine confi -
dence and to have a direct affect on aggregate 
demand in the other euro-area states via the 
foreign trade channel. Economic growth in the 
euro area was further hit by the fact that inter -
national economic ties provided a much smaller 
boost to growth than in the first quarter.
According to the figures for 13 countries avail -
able to date, while GDP grew in Germany (¼%) 
and in a number of smaller countries and stag -
nated in France, it fell considerably in Italy 
(¾%), Spain (½%), Portugal (1¼%) and Cyprus 
(¾%). The economies in Belgium and Finland 
have also contracted this year for the first time. 
In Greece, where the Statistical Authority no 
longer publishes seasonally adjusted figures, 
GDP was 6¼% down on the year and 17½% 
down on the pre-crisis level. In the euro-area 
countries excluding Germany, working-day ad -
justed aggregate output has fallen by no less 
than 1% since the second quarter of 2011.
The available leading indicators, which are 
mostly based on surveys, do not point to a cyc -
lical improvement any time soon. In July, the Slight decline in 
GDP in Q2 …
… and situation 
still heteroge-
neous across 
countriesAggregate output in the euro area
Source: Eurostat.
Deutsche Bundesbank2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 20121011021031041051061071082005 = 100, seasonally adjusted, quarterly, log scale
102103104105106107108109110111112
96979899100101102103104105
102103104105106107108109110101102103104105106
Italy
SpainFranceof which
GermanyEuro areaDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2012  
19

Purchasing Managers’ Index for manufacturing 
was still well below the expansion threshold. 
Furthermore, surveys of industrial confidence 
conducted on behalf of the European Commis -
sion continued to signal a downbeat mood. 
Above all, output expectations and the assess -
ment of the order books took a further turn for 
the worse last month. Subsequently, aggregate 
output is expected to again record a moderate 
decline in the third quarter and, at best, a slight 
upturn is forecast for the last quarter. This will 
result in a contraction of somewhere between 
¼% and ½% for 2012 as a whole.
Broken down by sector, in the spring the eco -
nomic slowdown in the euro area was focused 
on manufacturing (excluding construction). 
Output in this sector fell by a similar amount 
(½%) as in the previous quarter and was 2½% 
down on the year. With the exception of the 
energy sector, where output increased by a 
seasonally adjusted 1% from the first quarter, 
all major industrial sectors were affected by this 
fall. Capital goods production was particularly 
hard hit – namely by 1½%. The production of 
intermediate and durable goods both went 
down by ¾% and that of non-durables stag -
nated at the level of a quarter earlier. The nega -
tive growth of industrial output in the second 
quarter entailed a renewed fall in capacity util -
isation in manufacturing, removing the latter 
even further from its long-term average. In 
April-May, construction output was ¼% down 
on the average first-quarter level, although the 
prolonged period of frost in February in the 
more northerly member states had resulted in 
distinct weather-related restrictions.
On the demand side, the only notable positive 
boost that the euro area received in the second 
quarter came from exports. Seasonally adjusted 
nominal sales to non-euro-area countries in -
creased in the second quarter by 2% on the 
quarter and 9% on the year. Nominal imports, 
by contrast, fell by ¼% on the quarter and 
were up by only 2½% on the year due to per -
sistently weak domestic demand and lower 
prices for crude oil and other commodities on the international markets. In unadjusted terms, 
euro-area foreign trade’s contribution to 
growth is likely to have been positive in the 
second quarter. On the other hand, given the 
declining manufacture of machinery and equip -
ment and the slowdown in construction activ -
ity, gross fixed capital formation is likely to have 
continued its downward slide. Similarly, lower 
real retail sales and new car registrations in the 
second quarter indicate that private consump -
tion probably trended slightly downwards in 
the reporting period. According to the most re -
cent consumer confidence surveys, consump -
tion is not expected to pick up in the near fu -
ture.
The labour market situation in the euro area 
deteriorated further in the second quarter. Sea -
sonally adjusted standardised unemployment 
went up by approximately 400,000 from 
March to June when it totalled 17.8 million; at 
last count, it was 2 million higher than one year 
previously. The corresponding unemployment 
rate rose from 10.9% in the first quarter 
to 11.2% in the second. Unemployment growth 
appears to have slowed in a number of crisis 
countries in the second quarter; however, this 
contrasts with a weaker fall overall in the euro 
area and a slight rise in member states with 
relatively favourable economic growth. The 
number of persons in work in the euro area, 
which fell in seasonally adjusted terms by 0.2% 
in the first quarter of 2012, is likely to have 
slipped further of late.
In the second quarter of 2012, consumer prices 
rose at a much weaker pace (0.5% after sea -
sonal adjustment) than in either of the two pre -
vious quarters. As the quarter progressed, this 
figure even fell to 0.1%. This was chiefly due to 
a steep fall in energy prices in May and June. 
Prices for other goods and services went up by 
just as much as in the previous quarter. Year-
on-year headline HICP inflation was down from 
2.7% to 2.5%. Annual inflation was particularly 
high in Italy (3.6%). However, this was due to 
various increases in taxes, social contributions 
and administered prices. HICP inflation in No sign of immi-
nent turnaround revealed  
by leading  indicators
Renewed fall  
in output for 
 industry
Exports key 
 pillar of  economyUnemployment continuing to rise in crisis countries
Slower rise in 
consumer pricesDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2012  
20

France (2.3%) was slightly and in Spain 
(1.9% − due to the economic crisis) perceptibly 
below the euro-area average. In July, consumer 
prices were up again in seasonally adjusted terms owing to rising crude oil prices. The year-
on-year rate persisted at 2.4%, as in the two 
previous months.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2012  
21

Monetary policy and banking business
Monetary policy and money 
market developments
At its monetary policy meeting at the begin -
ning of July, the ECB Governing Council de -
cided to lower the three key interest rates by 
¼ percentage point. This decision reflected the 
Governing Council’s view that the ongoing de -
terioration in the euro-area economic outlook 
had further dampened inflationary pressure 
over the policy-relevant horizon. In explaining 
the interest rate decision, the Governing Coun -
cil also pointed out that its assessment was 
supported by the subdued underlying dynamics 
of monetary expansion. After the most recent 
cut, the main refinancing rate now lies at a re -
cord low of 0.75%. Bank balances in the de -
posit facility are earning, at 0%, no interest for 
the first time. For the monetary policy counter -
parties of the Eurosystem, the exceptional situ -
ation arises in which excess liquidity holdings in 
the deposit facility no longer earn more interest 
than excess reserves, which are held interest-
free on current accounts with the national cen -
tral banks. For this reason, the deposit facility 
was used more sparingly in the maintenance 
period ending on 7 August. Accordingly, insti -
tutions’ deposits on current accounts with the 
Eurosystem rose.
With regard to non-standard monetary policy 
measures, the Governing Council decided in 
the second quarter to continue full allotment 
for its refinancing operations until the begin -
ning of 2013, and to make further changes to 
the requirements pertaining to collateral which 
Eurosystem central banks can accept for refi -
nancing operations. For instance, at the meet -
ing on 20 June, it was decided to lower the 
rating requirements and eligibility criteria for 
certain types of asset-backed securities (ABS) 
once again. To offset the higher risks resulting 
from the reduction of the rating threshold, this 
collateral will be subject to higher haircuts.By contrast, the expiry on 25 July 2012 of the 
buy-back scheme for marketable debt instru -
ments issued or guaranteed by Greece ren -
dered these instruments ineligible for use as 
collateral in monetary policy operations for the 
time being, as they do not comply with the 
Euro system’s rating threshold for marketable 
assets. However, the Greek financial sector is 
still being provided with ample emergency 
 liquidity assistance via the Greek central bank.
Towards the end of the reporting period, li -
quidity flows to countries with a high credit rat -
ing decelerated somewhat overall compared 
with the spring. Nonetheless, Spain in particu -
lar continued to suffer constant outflows of li -
quidity, which the Eurosystem offset by increas -
ing its liquidity provision. Inflows of liquidity to 
Germany, reflected in its TARGET2 balance, vir -
tually came to a standstill. At the end of July, 
TARGET2 claims amounted to just under €730 
billion.
No further non-standard measures were 
adopted at the Governing Council’s last meet -
ing on 2 August; however, at the subsequent 
press conference, ECB President Draghi pre -
sented the prospect of expanding these meas -
ures substantially. In particular, the Governing 
Council would, under certain conditions, sup -
port a new, possibly extensive government 
bond purchase programme in order to elimin -
ate what it considers to be severe distortions in 
the price formation process on these markets. 
Moreover, the activation of an EFSF/ESM pro -
gramme for the country in question would be 
the main precondition for any such interven -
tions by the Eurosystem. The Eurosystem’s pur -
chase programme is to focus on the shorter 
end of the yield curve. Its volume could be un -
limited and should in any event be sufficient to 
achieve the programme’s objectives. The Euro -
system’s committees are to prepare the details 
of the programme and the Governing Council’s 
decision. The Bundesbank remains of the opin -ECB Governing 
Council cuts key interest rates  
to record low
Collateral frame-
work expanded 
againProspect  
of further 
non-standard measuresDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2012  
22

Money market management and liquidity needs
During the three reserve maintenance 
periods from 11 April to 10 July 2012, euro-
area credit institutions’ need for central 
bank liquidity determined by autonomous 
liquidity factors rose by €88.6 billion in net 
terms. This increase was primarily due to the sum of changes in net foreign assets and other factors which, taken together, eliminate valuation effects with no impact on liquidity. The amount in question de-clined by a total of €74.8 billion in the period under review, thus increasing the 
need for central bank liquidity. Moreover, a 
net increase of €21.3 billion in the volume 
of banknotes in circulation across the three 
maintenance periods under review also served to amplify the liquidity-absorbing 
 effect. By contrast, the opposite effect was 
induced by general government deposits 
which, from the perspective of period aver-ages, went down by €7.5 billion in liquidity-providing terms. In addition to the develop-ment of autonomous factors, the minimum reserve requirement went up by €1.6 billion in net terms over the three reserve periods, 
thus increasing the need for central bank 
 liquidity.
In the period under review, liquidity-providing open market operations con-tinued to be carried out as fi  xed-rate ten-ders with full allotment of the submitted bids (see table on page 27). This allowed 
the Eurosystem to continue to meet credit 
institutions’ demand for central bank liquid-
ity to the full amount. At its meeting on 
6 June 2012, the Governing Council of the 
ECB decided to continue this allotment pol-
icy both in its main and longer-term refi  -
nancing operations at least until the end of 
the December 2012-January 2013 mainten-
ance period. As part of this policy, the three-month tenders conducted prior to this date would in each case be allotted at the fi  xed rate corresponding to the average 
rate of the main refi  nancing operations conducted over the life of the respective 
operation.
As a result of the very high bids and allot-
ments recorded for the two three-year ten-ders of December 2011 and the end of Feb-
ruary 2012 (which entailed a total bid and 
allotted amount of around €1,019 billion), credit institutions in the euro area had so 
much central bank liquidity at their disposal 
that, for this reason alone, it was possible to meet the needs from autonomous fac-
tors and the minimum reserve requirement 
on each day of the period under review. Notwithstanding this fact, the volume of main refi  nancing operations went up by 
around €104 billion in net terms during this 
period, thus mirroring the increase in au-
tonomous factors. Parallel to this, there was 
a decline in the corresponding volume of longer-term refinancing operations of 
around €18 billion. Average recourse to the 
deposit facility in the individual mainten-ance periods during the period under re-view consequently remained virtually un-changed, with all three period averages standing at €771 billion. During the three 
periods under review, recourse to the mar-
ginal lending facility averaged €1.0 billion, €1.6 billion and €1.8 billion respectively, thus falling below the average of all the preceding periods since the end of 2011. 
Owing to the high levels of excess liquidity, the overnight interest rates continued to be oriented to the deposit facility rate.
Between 11 April and 10 July 2012, no pur-
chases were initiated by the Eurosystem 
under the Securities Markets Programme (SMP). Instead, even if revaluations are Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2012  
23

 included, maturing issues caused the Euro-
system’s holdings of SMP securities to de-
plete by around €2.8 billion to total €211.3 
billion. As usual, weekly liquidity-absorbing 
fi  ne-tuning operations equivalent to the 
volume of SMP holdings were conducted. 
Credit institutions showed a keen interest in 
these tenders, leading to consistent allot-ment rates of 0.26% in each of the three 
periods under review and therefore a spread compared to the deposit facility rate of just 
1 basis point. During the period under re-
view, the volume of securities purchased 
under the fi  rst Covered Bond Purchase Pro-
gramme (CBPP) declined by around €1.0 bil-lion to €55.9 billion as a result of maturing 
covered bonds and revaluations. Con-
versely, the balance sheet holdings of secur-
ities purchased under the purchase pro-
gramme CBPP2 rose by €4.5 billion to €14.1 billion during the same period.
As in the previous period, the April-May 2012 maintenance period was character-
ised by the extremely comfortable liquidity 
conditions which had prevailed ever since 
the allotment of the second three-year ten-
der at the end of February 2012. The out-
standing tender volume (excluding liquidity-absorbing fi  ne-tuning operations) averaged €1,136 billion over the period and was thus 
almost unchanged compared with its level 
at the same time one period earlier (€1,150 
billion). At an average of €47 billion, the 
main refi  nancing operation again accounted 
for no more than a small part of this amount. The resulting very high level of 
 excess liquidity – with liquidity needs from 
autonomous factors and the minimum re-
serve requirement standing at an average of around €427 billion over the period – trans-lated not just into extensive use of the de-
posit facility but also persisting low over-
night rates. In the reserve period in ques-
tion, EONIA consistently averaged 0.34% 
and was thus 66 basis points below the main refi  nancing rate (previous period’s fi  g-
ure: 65 basis points below the key interest 
rate). However, secured overnight money 
on Eurex Repo’s Euro GC Pooling (ECB bas-ket) was traded at an even lower rate which averaged 0.25%, making it equal to the de-posit facility rate (as in the previous period). Averaging around €28 billion, the relatively low EONIA turnover showed little change in 
comparison to the previous period but still 
fell below the annual average of 2011 
(around €33 billion). The corresponding se-
cured overnight turnover of the GC Pooling 
trading platform went up slightly on aver-
age over the period to stand at €7.0 billion 
(compared with €6.8 billion in the previous 
period), but still remained well below the 
previous year’s average of €12.6 billion.
The developments observed in the previous 
period continued in the May-June 2012 
maintenance period. The more than ample 
liquidity supply continued to generate high 
recourse to the deposit facility and low overnight rates. Towards the end of the maintenance period, the volume of main refi  nancing operations saw a clear upturn 
after a number of Greek banks were recap-italised and readmitted as counterparties to 
the Eurosystem’s monetary policy oper-ations. Overnight rates remained quite 
stable, averaging 0.33% over the period for 
EONIA and 0.25% in the case of GC Pool-
ing. This contrasted with the underlying turnover, which saw a decline. During the 
maintenance period, EONIA turnover fell to 
an average level of around €21 billion, 
about €7 billion below the fi  gure recorded 
one period earlier. GC Pooling’s overnight turnover (ECB basket) likewise dropped to 
€5.8 billion.
In the June-July 2012 maintenance period 
there was a marked increase in liquidity 
needs from autonomous factors and the 
minimum reserve requirements (averaging Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2012  
24

€532 billion compared with €424 billion in 
the previous period), accompanied by a 
higher level of participation in the main ten-
ders. Demand in the main refi  nancing oper-
ations rose to peak at €180 billion at the 
end of June 2012 after occasionally hover-
ing between €30 billion and €40 billion in 
the two preceding periods. This caused the 
outstanding volume of liquidity-providing 
tender operations to increase to €1,236 bil-lion on average and the share of main refi  -
nancing operations in this total fi  gure to swell to an average level of 13% after ac-counting for 5% of the previous period’s 
fi  gure (€1,129 billion). During the period in 
question, EONIA virtually levelled off at 0.33%. It was only at the half-year point 
that the reference rate went up by 5 basis 
points, which refl  ected a typical pattern, al-
beit to a far lesser extent (compared with 
the increase of 72 basis points recorded at 
half-year end in 2011). With respect to se-
cured overnight money trading on the GC 
Pooling platform, there was somewhat in-creased volatility as the period progressed; 
the volume-weighted rate went up by as 
little as 3 basis points on the last day of the 
period at half-year end. However, the 
period average once again stood at 0.25%. 
As regards overnight turnover, the picture was mixed. While the EONIA turnover in-creased to average around €25 billion across the period, the corresponding se-
cured turnover traded on GC pooling once again contracted slightly (€5.2 billion).Factors determining bank liquidity1
€ billion; changes in the daily averages of the reserve maintenance periods vis-à-vis the previous period
Item2012
11 April 
to
8 May9 May
to
12 June13 June
to
10 July
I Provision (+) or  absorption (–) of  central bank balances due to changes 
in autonomous factors1 Banknotes in  circulation (increase: –) –  1.5 –  8.1 –  11.7
2 Government  deposits with the Eurosystem ( increase: –) +  9.2 + 19.3 –  21.0
3 Net foreign assets
2 –  8.3 –  2.5 +   9.9
4 Other factors 2 + 15.2 –  4.3 –  84.8
Total + 14.6 +  4.4 – 107.6
II Monetary policy  operations of the Eurosystem
1 Open market  operations
(a) Main refi  nancing operations –  9.4 + 11.1 + 102.6
(b) Longer-term refi  nancing  operations –  4.7 – 17.7 +   3.9
(c) Other operations +  2.5 +  1.0 +   1.5
2 Standing facilities
(a) Marginal lending facility –  2.0 +  0.6 +   0.2
(b) Deposit facility (increase: –) –  0.1 +  0.6 +   0.2
Total – 13.7 –  4.4 + 108.4
III Change in credit  institutions’  current accounts (I + II) +  0.9 +  0.3 +   0.7
IV Change in the  minimum reserve requirement ( increase: –) +  0.1 –  1.4 –   0.3
1 For longer-term trends and the Deutsche Bundesbank’s contribution, see pages 14 • and 15 • of the Statistical Section of this 
Monthly Report. 2 Including end-of- quarter valuation adjustments with no impact on liquidity.
Deutsche BundesbankDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2012  
25

ion that a critical view should be taken, in par -
ticular, of government bond purchases by the 
Eurosystem as they entail, not least, substantial 
stability policy risks. It is the responsibility of fis -
cal policy makers and of the governments and 
parliaments of the euro-area countries to de -
cide whether the mutualisation of solvency 
risks should perhaps be extended even further; 
such steps should not be taken via central bank 
balance sheets.
Notwithstanding the discussion on further 
non-standard measures, the Eurosystem’s se -
curities holdings within the scope of the Secur -
ities Markets Programme fell slightly, as in the 
previous reporting period, to just over €211 bil -
lion. This was because no further transactions 
had been carried out by the Eurosystem since 
March 2011, and because matured paper had 
been redeemed. So far, a total of currently 
€14.8 billion has been accumulated by the Eu -
rosystem under the second covered bond pur -
chase programme (CBPP2). In parallel to this, debt instruments bought under the first 
covered bond purchase programme matured.
After a further strong rise in the refinancing 
volume in the previous quarter as a result of 
the second very long-term refinancing oper -
ation with a maturity of three years, the bank -
ing system’s surplus liquidity –  measured in 
terms of average recourse to the deposit facility 
plus excess reserves on current accounts –, at 
around €747 billion of late, remained at a very 
high level on average over the maintenance 
period running from 11 July to 7 August 2012.
The reduction in the key interest rates passed 
on 5 July is reflected almost entirely in the un -
secured money market rates. The unsecured 
overnight rate EONIA initially stagnated in a 
sideways movement at around 0.33% from the 
beginning of the second quarter, and promptly 
fell to currently around 0.11% once the key 
interest rate decision had taken effect on 
11  July. The spread between EONIA and the 
rate on the deposit facility therefore rose only 
slightly. The decline in longer-term unsecured 
money market rates since the beginning of the 
year virtually came to a standstill in the course 
of the second quarter. However, it did pick up 
again at a considerably higher pace after the 
ECB Governing Council’s interest rate decision. 
For unsecured three-month money, banks are 
currently reporting interest rates of around 
0.34%. This represents a decline of just over 
30 bp compared with the end of June. Rates of 
around -0.01% are currently being quoted for 
money market operations backed by the best 
collateral. These rates are thus merely around 
10 basis points lower than they were before 
the key interest rate cut. In line with this, com -
pared with the beginning of the second quar -
ter there was another sharp fall of around 
27  basis points in the spread between un -
secured and secured money market rates with 
a maturity of three months to around 35 basis 
points of late.Securities hold-
ings from mon-etary policy  programmes  unchanged  
on balanceUnsecured money market rates still declin-ing after reduc-tion in key inter-est ratesMoney market interest ratesin the euro area
1 Monthly  averages.  2 Three-month  Euribor  less three-month 
Eurepo. • Average 1 to 15 August 2012.
Deutsche Bundesbank2009 2010 2011 201200.51.01.52.02.53.03.5
050100150Difference between unsecured and secured
three-month interbank lending rates 1, 2Basis
points%
Marginal lending rate
Three-month Euribor 1
EONIA 1
Minimum bid rate or
fixed interest rate for
main refinancing operations
Deposit rateDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2012  
26

Monetary developments  
in the euro area
The development of the broad monetary ag -
gregate M3 has been unusually volatile since 
the sovereign debt crisis worsened again in 
summer 2011. The growth of the seasonally ad -
justed and annualised three-month rate slowed 
down in the reporting quarter to 2½% at the 
end of June, after just over 7½% at the end of 
March and just over -3% at the end of Decem -
ber. Disregarding the temporary effects of the 
financial crisis and the considerable provision of 
liquidity via the three-year refinancing oper -
ations conducted as non-standard monetary policy measures in December 2011 and Febru -
ary 2012, the increase in M3 is still to be re -
garded as moderate. The monetary expansion 
in the spring months was supported both by 
further portfolio shifts by non-banks in favour 
of sight deposits and by inflows to repo trans -
actions. By contrast, bank lending to private 
non-banks declined clearly. Hence, the decoup -
ling of monetary growth from weak lending to 
the domestic private sector since the beginning 
of the year continued. As a result, the annual 
growth rate of these loans (adjusted for loan 
sales and securitisation) fell from 1.2% to 0.3% 
in the second quarter of 2012, while the annual Monetary devel-
opments remain moderateOpen market operations of the Eurosystem*
 
Value 
dateType of transaction
1Maturity in daysActual  allotment in € billionDeviation 
from the 
benchmark in € billion
2Marginal rate/fi  xed 
rate
%Allotment 
ratio
%Weighted 
rate
%Cover ratio
 3Numberof bidders
11.04.12 MRO (FRT) 7 55.4 758.4 1.00 100.00 – 1.00 82
11.04.12 FTO (–) 7 – 214.0 – 0.26 77.06 0.26 1.71 66
11.04.12 S-LTRO (FRT) 28 11.4 – 1.00 100.00 – 1.00 20
18.04.12 MRO (FRT) 7 51.8 908.8 1.00 100.00 – 1.00 85
18.04.12 FTO (–) 7 – 214.0 – 0.26 61.77 0.26 2.05 75
25.04.12 MRO (FRT) 7 46.4 904.4
1.00 100.00 – 1.00 82
25.04.12 FTO (–) 7 – 214.0 – 0.26 63.79 0.26 1.92 70
26.04.12 LTRO (FRT) 91 21.3 –4 0.96 100.00 – 1.00 39
02.05.12 MRO (FRT) 7 34.4 1038.9 1.00 100.00 – 1.00 77
02.05.12 FTO (–) 7 – 214.0 – 0.26 62.48 0.26 1.82 58
09.05.12 MRO (FRT) 7 39.3 787.8 1.00 100.00 – 1.00 80
09.05.12 FTO (–) 7 – 214.0 – 0.26 59.06 0.26 2.06 74
09.05.12 S-LTRO (FRT) 35 13.0 – 1.00 100.00 – 1.00 20
16.05.12 MRO (FRT) 7 43.0 949.0 1.00 100.00 – 1.00 84
16.05.12 FTO (–) 7 – 214.0 – 0.26 54.19 0.26 2.19 75
23.05.12 MRO (FRT) 7 37.9 944.9 1.00 100.00 – 1.00 84
23.05.12 FTO (–) 7 – 212.0 – 0.26 54.99 0.26 2.22 70
30.05.12 MRO (FRT) 7 51.2 897.2 1.00 100.00 – 1.00 87
30.05.12 FTO (–) 7 – 212.0 – 0.26 61.14 0.26 1.98 66
31.05.12 LTRO (FRT) 91 8.3 –4 … 100.00 – 1.00 33
06.06.12 MRO (FRT) 7 119.4 888.9 1.00 100.00 – 1.00 96
06.06.12 FTO (–) 7 – 212.0 – 0.26 61.48 0.26 1.98 71
13.06.12 MRO (FRT) 7 131.7 774.2 1.00 100.00 – 1.00 94
13.06.12 FTO (–) 7 – 212.0 – 0.26 82.09 0.26 2.06 72
13.06.12 S-LTRO (FRT) 35 18.9 – 1.00 100.00 – 1.00 21
20.06.12 MRO (FRT) 7 167.3 902.3 1.00 100.00 – 1.00 101
20.06.12 FTO (–) 7 – 210.5 – 0.26 65.88 0.26 1.84 66
27.06.12 MRO (FRT) 7 180.4 890.9 1.00 100.00 – 1.00 105
27.06.12 FTO (–) 7 – 210.5 – 0.26 78.83 0.26 1.37 62
28.06.12 LTRO (FRT) 91 26.3 –4 … 100.00 – 1.00 50
04.07.12 MRO (FRT) 7 163.6 909.6 1.00 100.00 – 1.00 92
04.07.12 FTO (–) 7 – 210.5 – 0.26 62.45 0.26 1.89 73
* For more information on the Eurosystem’s operations from 18 January 2012 to 10 April 2012, see Deutsche Bundesbank, Monthly 
 Report, May 2012, p 30. 1  MRO: main refi  nancing operation, LTRO: longer-term refi  nancing operation, S-LTRO: supplementary longer-
term refi  nancing operation, FTO: fi  ne-tuning operation (+: liquidity providing operation, –: liquidity absorbing operation), FRT: fi  xed-rate 
tender. 2 Calculation according to publication after MRO allotment. 3 Ratio of total bids to the allotment amount. 4 The interest rate 
corresponds to the average minimum bid rate or main refi  nancing rate of the MROs conducted over the life of this operation (may be rounded to two decimal places in the table).
Deutsche BundesbankDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2012  
27

growth rate of M3 remained at 3.2% in the re -
porting period.
Two-thirds of the second-quarter increase in 
M3 stemmed from the narrow monetary ag -
gregate M1, even though its seasonally ad -
justed and annualised three-month rate 
dropped from 5½% at the end of the first quar -
ter to 3% at the end of the second quarter. The 
biggest contribution to growth was made by 
considerable inflows to sight deposits of house -
holds and non-financial corporations. The rea -
sons behind these inflows were portfolio shifts 
away from short-term time deposits and finan -
cial instruments outside M3. The volume of 
these shifts was sufficient to more than offset 
the strong reduction in sight deposits through 
other financial intermediaries (OFIs). The re -
maining third of the rise in M3 was a result of 
the positive development in marketable finan -
cial instruments (M3-M2), which was mainly 
attributable to a noticeable increase in repo 
transactions. For the most part, these transac -
tions comprise secured interbank transactions 
settled through central counterparties, which 
do not represent transactions by the money-
holding sector.
The build-up of other short-term bank deposits 
(M2-M1), which had mostly produced a dis -
cernibly positive effect on the growth of the monetary aggregate in the preceding quarters, 
came to a halt in the second quarter. The finan -
cing conditions characterised by uncertainty 
and low interest rates led non-financial corpor -
ations and households in particular to shift 
short-term time deposits within M3 towards 
more liquid sight deposits and short-term sav -
ings deposits. This, in turn, caused the season -
ally adjusted and annualised three-month rate 
(M2-M1) to stagnate at 0% at the end of June, 
compared with 8% at the end of March.
The increase in M3 contrasted with a broad-
based decline in bank lending to the euro-area 
private sector in the second quarter. Commer -
cial banks shed a large amount of privately is -
sued shares and other securities between April 
and June, after they had accumulated these to 
a marked extent in the previous quarter as a 
result of the extensive provision of liquidity via 
the three-year refinancing operations. The re -
duction in fixed income securities was particu -
larly pronounced, but resulted mainly from the 
expiry of banks’ retained loan securitisations, 
and so did not represent an overall slump in 
demand for securities.
Loans to the domestic private sector (adjusted 
for loan sales and securitisation) likewise re -
corded a distinct outflow in the second quarter. 
Their seasonally adjusted and annualised three-Perceptible in-
crease in sight deposits and marketable  instruments
Stagnation of 
other short-term depositsLending in the form of secur-ities to private sector declin-ing …
… loans to 
 financial corpor-ations record outflows, tooConsolidated balance sheet of the MFI sector in the euro area*
Changes in € billion, seasonally adjusted
Liabilities 2012 Q2 2012 Q1
Central government deposits – 24.7 10.2
Monetary aggregate M3 56.3 182.2
of which components
Currency in circulation and 
overnight deposits (M1) 36.7 65.8
Other shorter-term bank deposits 
(M2-M1) 0.0 74.0
Marketable instruments (M3-M2) 19.6 42.5
Monetary capital – 71.4 – 29.9Assets 2012 Q2 2012 Q1
Loans to non-MFIs in the euro area –  9.3 19.8
of which
to general government 24.8 –  8.7
to private non-MFIs 1 – 34.1 28.6
Lending in the form of securities to 
non-MFIs in the euro area – 36.7 140.5
of which
to general government 18.3 108.1
to private non-MFIs – 55.1 32.5
Net external assets – 23.2 – 15.3
Other counterparts of M3 29.5 17.4
* Changes for statistical reasons eliminated. 1 Adjusted for loan sales and securitisation.
Deutsche BundesbankDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2012  
28

month rate fell from 1% at the end of March to 
just over -1% at the end of June. This develop -
ment was triggered, in particular, by loans to 
financial corporations, which are often indirect 
interbank transactions such as reverse repos 
and do not represent any additional outflow of 
funds from the private non-bank sector per se . 
Nor did loans to non-financial corporations and 
households strengthen monetary growth sub -
stantially, however; instead, they stagnated 
and rose only marginally respectively in the 
second quarter. Nevertheless, lending patterns 
varied greatly within the euro area, with a rise 
recorded for member states which had retained 
their high credit rating and outflows for the 
countries which have been hit hardest by the 
debt crisis and are undergoing a substantial 
structural adjustment process.
The seasonally adjusted and annualised three-
month rate of loans (adjusted for loan sales 
and securitisation) to euro-area households fell 
from 1½% at the end of March to just under 
½% at the end of June. As in the previous quar -
ter, the increase was attributable to loans for 
house purchase, with the consistently favour -
able financing conditions probably playing a 
part. By contrast, consumer credit continued to 
decline slightly. The three-month rate of loans 
(adjusted for loan sales and securitisation) to 
non-financial corporations left negative terri -
tory after two quarters and rose from -½% at 
the end of March to 0% at the end of June. 
This was mainly attributable to the short-term 
maturity range whereas, on balance, long-term 
loans to non-financial corporations were down 
for the first time since the time series began in 
2003. On the whole, the hope that ample cen -
tral bank liquidity provided through the two 
three-year refinancing operations could sup -
port lending to the private sector has not been 
fulfilled thus far. Instead, bank lending appears 
to have been overshadowed, above all, by the 
economic downturn in the euro area, greater 
uncertainty among borrowers as well as bal -
ance sheet consolidations in some euro-area 
countries.Marginal 
 increase in lend-
ing to house-holds; stagna-tion in lending to non-financial corporationsComponents and counterparts of the money stock in the euro area
1 Year-on-year  change  in percent.  2 In percentage  points. 
3 Adjusted  for loan  sales  and securitisation.  4 Taken  in isol-
ation,  an increase  curbs  M3 growth.  5 Adjusted  for loan  sales 
and securitisation  from  2010  Q1. 6 Non-monetary  financial 
corporations.
Deutsche Bundesbank2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012505101520
–++++
–10–50+5+10+15+20+25
505101520
–++++Seasonally adjusted, end-of-quarter data
... components of the money stock
... counterparts
Sectoral growth contributions 2of which
Loans to the private sector 5Growth rate 1 of M3 and the
contributions to growth 2 of the ...
M3
M3-M2M2-M1
M1
M3
Remaining balance
sheet items
Longer-term financial
liabilities to other non-MFIs 4Net external
asset positionCredit to theprivate sector 3
Growth rate 1
Financialcorporations 6
Non-financialcorporations HouseholdsDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2012  
29

The development of the net external asset pos -
ition of the euro-area MFI sector vis-à-vis 
non-residents also had per se  a dampening ef -
fect on M3, the reduction of which gathered 
pace slightly compared with the previous quar -
ter. This development was driven by a clear de -
crease in external claims, which was only par -
tially compensated for by the simultaneous de -
cline in external liabilities.
The growth of M3 was mainly supported by 
the substantial decline in the MFIs’ longer-term 
financial liabilities vis-à-vis other sectors (mon -
etary capital). Monetary capital, which had 
risen almost continuously from the beginning 
of the monetary union until well into 2011 
– thereby exerting a dampening effect on mon -
etary growth – has increasingly been recording 
outflows since autumn 2011. These outflows 
reached a temporary peak in the reporting 
quarter. While the accumulation of capital and 
reserves by MFIs persisted, longer-term time 
deposits posted a strong decline that stemmed 
mainly from financial corporations. This was 
primarily the result of a decline in banks’ loan 
securitisation activities. Moreover, the current 
uncertainty in the financial markets and the re -
sulting demand of institutional investors for li -
quid funds also played a role. In addition, the 
major reduction in long-term bank debt secur -
ities, which has been observed since autumn 
2011, continued. This development reflects the 
private sector’s persistent caution with regard 
to the long-term financing of the banking sec -
tor. Unlike in the previous quarters, however, 
the outflow was not partially offset by a coun -
termovement in short-term bank debt secur -
ities in the reporting quarter.
Another positive influence on monetary growth 
was exercised by the continued increase in 
MFIs’ lending to general government, which 
– amidst some volatility – has expanded sub -
stantially since autumn 2008. The seasonally 
adjusted and annualised three-month rate fell 
from just over 13% (revised) at the end of 
March to 5½% at the end of June. However, 
this drop is mainly accounted for by the strong temporary effect that the three-year refinan -
cing operations had on banks’ demand for 
government bonds in certain euro-area coun -
tries in the first quarter. By contrast, lending to 
the public sector was up significantly compared 
with the previous quarters.
The underlying pace of monetary expansion re -
mained subdued on the whole in the second 
quarter of 2012. Although portfolio shifts to -
wards highly liquid assets and the continued 
rise in bank lending to domestic general gov -
ernment bolstered M3 growth, bank lending to 
the domestic private sector continued to 
weaken. Such a decoupling of monetary devel -
opments from private lending was last seen in 
the years 2001 to 2003, when extensive port -
folio shifts towards M3 took place as a result of 
heightened uncertainty in the real economy 
and the geopolitical arena.
Inflation forecasts on the basis of various mon -
etary indicators (monetary aggregates, 
short-term deposits, loans) currently signal no 
particular risk to price stability for the next 
three years on average. However, the uncer -
tainty associated with these forecasts remains 
high.
German banks’ deposit and 
lending business with 
 domestic customers
The deposit business of banks in Germany grew 
with even more momentum in the reporting 
quarter than in the winter months. The season -
ally adjusted and annualised three-month rate 
climbed to 7%, thereby attaining a level last 
seen at the end of 2008. As in the preceding 
quarters, the increase was solely sustained by 
short-term types of investment, the interest 
rates on which did not lose as much of their 
appeal in relative terms, although they did fall 
slightly in the reporting quarter. As in the quar -
ter before, growth was driven by sight deposits 
in particular, but short-term time and savings 
deposits saw substantial inflows again, too. Moderate 
 decline in the 
net external asset position
Further substan-
tial reduction  
in monetary 
capital …
… as well as a 
clear increase in loans to domes-tic general  governmentUnderlying mon-etary growth still subdued
Money-based 
forecasts with no particular risks to price stability
Accelerated 
growth in the deposit business of German 
banksDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2012  
30

This was again countered by a considerable de -
cline in longer-term types of investment. 
Hence, the portfolio shifts away from long-term 
towards shorter-term types of deposits con -
tinued through the spring quarter of 2012.
In the case of longer-term deposits, time de -
posits with a maturity of over two years once 
again fell significantly. The decline was brought 
on by further portfolio shifts by insurance com -
panies and OFIs which, unlike in the previous 
quarters, were no longer compensated for by 
inflows of deposits from households. In con -
trast to the longer-term time deposits, the de -
crease in savings deposits with longer periods 
of notice slowed down markedly in the report -
ing quarter. Movements in this market segment 
are usually almost exclusively attributable to 
households’ portfolio decisions.
Unlike the deposit business, the lending busi -
ness of German banks with domestic non-
banks again increased only slightly in the 
second quarter of 2012 on balance. The (sea -
sonally adjusted and annualised) increase of 
½% over the previous quarter was exclusively 
supported by an expansion in loans to domes -
tic general government. However, the increase 
in lending must also be seen in the context of 
restructuring measures in the banking sector, 
which led to transfers between the banking 
and government sector in June. By contrast, 
loans to general government declined in April 
and May. Lending to the private sector fell on 
balance in the second quarter, however, as the 
moderate increase in June was not sufficient to 
fully offset the considerable decline in April. 
The reduction applied both to loans and securi -
tised lending to the domestic private sector, 
with the latter declining for the fifth consecu -
tive quarter. The development of securitised 
loans in the reporting quarter was, however, 
also influenced by special factors. For instance, 
the major decline in April is connected to a 
change in tax law which has caused securities 
transactions that are regularly conducted be -
tween banks and financial corporations to lose 
their appeal.The decline in loans to the private sector was 
exclusively attributable to significantly reduced 
lending to financial corporations. These were 
mostly reverse repo transactions, the reduction 
of which does not in itself represent a classical 
withdrawal of funds for the private non-
banking sector. However, the other two com -
ponents (loans to non-financial corporations 
and loans to households) recorded increases, 
which could have been a result of the – again – 
more favourable financing conditions in the 
second quarter. In contrast to the develop -
ments in the euro area as a whole, loans to 
non-financial corporations in Germany were 
again considerably extended in the reporting 
quarter, with inflows covering all maturity seg -
ments. Landesbanken, savings banks and co -
operative banks in particular contributed to this 
expansion. While the corresponding seasonally 
adjusted and annualised three-month rate – at 
2½% – stabilised in the reporting quarter at the 
end-March level, the annual growth rate rose 
by one percentage point to 2% at the end of Reduction of 
longer-term de-posits continues at somewhat slower pace
Only slight in-
crease in banks’ lending to  domestic  
non-banks
Significant ex-pansion in loans to non-financial corporationsLending and deposits of monetary  fi  nancial institutions (MFIs) in Germany 
*
Changes in € billion, seasonally adjusted
Item2012
Q1 Q2
Deposits of domestic non-MFIs 1
Overnight 26.4 42.6
With agreed maturities
of up to 2 years 10.5 11.4
of over 2 years – 8.9 – 7.0
Redeemable at notice
of up to 3 months 3.4 3.7
of over 3 months – 3.2 – 0.8
Lending
to domestic general government
Loans 0.4 10.3
Securitised lending 3.2 1.0
to domestic enterprises and 
households
Loans 4.6 – 2.6
of which to households 2 6.3 4.1
to non-fi  nancial  corporations 
3 5.2 5.1
Securitised lending – 5.5 – 5.2
* As well as banks (including building and loan associations, but 
excluding the Bundesbank), monetary fi  nancial institutions 
(MFIs) here also include money market funds. End-of-quarter 
data, adjusted for statistical changes. 1 Enterprises, households 
and general government excluding central government. 2  In-
cluding non-profi  t institutions serving households. 3  Corpor-
ations and quasi-corporations.
Deutsche BundesbankDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2012  
31

June, with the end of a base effect also playing 
a role.
Besides loans to non-financial corporations, 
German banks also discernibly increased their 
loans to domestic households in the reporting 
quarter. Nevertheless, with a seasonally ad -
justed and annualised growth rate of just over 
1%, lending to this sector grew somewhat less 
strongly than in the first three months of 2012. 
This was due to consumer credit, which de -
clined somewhat between April and June 2012. 
By contrast, the growth of loans for house pur -
chase accelerated again slightly from 1.5% at 
the end of March to 1.7% at the end of June 
(annualised values). In the case of loans to 
households, it was primarily savings banks, re -
gional banks and cooperative banks that con -
tributed to the growth, whereas mortgage 
banks and big banks scaled back their business 
in this area. As in the previous quarter, the 
12-month rate of loans to households remained 
at 1.1%.According to the latest Bank Lending Survey re -
sults, credit standards for lending to 
non-financial corporations in Germany re -
mained virtually unchanged in the second 
quarter of 2012.1 A deterioration in sector-
specific and firm-specific factors, along with 
higher costs of capital, counterbalanced banks’ 
good liquidity situation. Credit conditions were 
more restrictive than one quarter before, espe -
cially with regard to margins. According to the 
survey respondents, large enterprises were hit 
harder by the tightened credit conditions than 
small and medium enterprises. At the same 
time, there was a fall in demand for loans to 
enterprises among the banks participating in 
the survey, whereas the more comprehensive 
banking statistics recorded an increase in lend -
ing to this sector.
In addition, banks tightened their credit stand -
ards for private loans for house purchase 
slightly, but not for consumer credit. Credit 
conditions in both lines of business were ad -
justed only marginally. At the same time, the 
surveyed banks reported a sharp rise in de -
mand for private loans for house purchase. This 
increase was again driven by the positive out -
look in the housing market, low interest rates 
and robust consumer confidence. Demand for 
consumer credit, however, remained un -
changed from the preceding quarter.
The July survey round was supplemented by 
several ad hoc  questions on banks’ funding 
conditions and the impact that the stricter cap -
ital regime and the sovereign debt crisis were 
having on lending. The institutions surveyed re -
ported a perceptible deterioration in their 
long-term retail funding, whereas access to all 
other funding sources changed relatively little 
on the whole. By contrast, the European Bank -
ing Authority’s provisions for large, inter -
national banks and the institutions’ prepar -
ations for the stricter Basel III capital regime Discernible 
growth in loans to householdsGerman banks’ credit standards 
for corporations 
unchanged
Standards of 
 private loans for 
house purchase slightly tighter, however
Tighter capital 
regime with clear impact on business policyLoans of German banks toselected sectors
1 Year-on-year  rate of change.  2 Non-financial  corporations 
and quasi-corporations.
Deutsche Bundesbank2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 201221012345
––+++++Growth contributions in percentage pointsSeasonally adjusted, end-of-quarter data
HouseholdsFinancial corporations
Non-financial corporations 2Growth rate 1 in %
1 The aggregate survey results for Germany may be found 
at http://www.bundesbank.de/Redaktion/EN/Standardarti -
kel/Core_business_areas/Monetary_policy/volkswirtschaft_
bank_lending_survey.html.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2012  
32

Banking conditions in Germany
1 According  to harmonised  MFI interest  rate statistics.  2 According  to the Bank  Lending  Survey,  difference  between  the number  of 
respondents  reporting  “tightened  considerably”  and “tightened  somewhat”  and the number  of respondents  reporting  “eased 
somewhat” and “eased considerably” as a percentage of the responses given. 3 Expectations for  2012 Q3.
Deutsche Bundesbank02 03 04 05 06 07 08 09 10 1120123.03.54.04.55.05.56.06.57.07.58.08.59.09.5
–300+30
–300+30
–60–300+30+60
–60–300+30
2002 03 04 05 06 07 08 09 10 11 122.02.53.03.54.04.55.05.56.06.5
603003060
––++
9060300306090
–––+++Credit to non-financial corporations
% pa
%%% pa
%%
Riskier loans
Average loans%
Average loansRiskier loans
Average loans%
Loans to enterprises... with an initial rate fixation of
    over 1 year and up to 5 years
Change in credit standards 2Consumer credit ...
... with an initial rate fixation of
    over 5 years
... up to €1 million
Consumer creditBank interest rates (new business) 1
3
Change in loan margins 2Loans to enterprises ...
... with an initial rate
    fixation of up
    to 1 year ...
Riskier loans3.03.54.04.55.05.5
Consumer credit
Loans for house purchase... over €1 million... up to €1 million
3... over €1 million
Loans for house
purchaseLoans for house purchase
with an initial rate fixation of
over 5 years and up to 10 years
Loans to enterprises
3... with an initial rate fixation
    of over 5 years ...Credit to householdsDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2012  
33

had a considerable impact on institutions’ busi -
ness policy. Amongst other things, this led 
banks to make a marked reduction in their risk-
weighted assets and an increase in their equity 
capital, particularly by retaining profits, in the 
first half of the year. By contrast, the surveyed 
banks expect the impact of the stricter provi -
sions for risk-weighted assets to be limited in 
the second half of the year. On balance, one in 
four banks will continue to shed riskier loans, 
however. In addition, as in the first half of the 
year, banks are planning to strengthen their 
capital position by means of retained earnings. 
Moreover, lending to large enterprises in par -
ticular will be subject to tighter credit standards 
as a result of the stricter capital regime. By con -
trast, in the previous quarter – as in the preced -
ing quarters  –, the sovereign debt crisis had 
virtually no impact on German banks’ funding 
situation or their credit standards.
Credit standards in the euro area, on the other 
hand, were tightened again slightly. This was 
due not only to restrictive bank-related factors 
but also to a deterioration in the institutions’ 
perception of risk. At the same time, demand 
fell further in all surveyed business lines. As was 
to be expected, the sovereign debt crisis had a 
stronger effect on the funding conditions of 
the banks in the Europe-wide sample. Re -
spondents reported somewhat more difficult conditions across all surveyed markets and 
sources. Also more significant than in the Ger -
man subsample was the impact of the stricter 
capital regime on risk-weighted assets. Accord -
ing to the surveyed banks, the latter were 
strongly reduced in the first six months of the 
year.
Under the influence of falling interest rates in 
the money and capital markets, the bank inter -
est rates of the German reporting institutions 
decreased markedly again in the second quar -
ter, in many segments reaching their lowest 
point since the start of the series in 2003. Cor -
respondingly, long-term loans to enterprises 
were priced around 25 bp lower compared 
with the end of March. The weighted average 
of all new loan agreements was last recorded 
at 3.2% for small-volume and 3.1% for large-
volume loans. Loans for house purchase with 
an interest rate fixation period of over ten years 
were likewise concluded at 3.2% – almost 30 
bp below the March value. For long-term con -
sumer credit, the reporting institutions de -
manded an average of 7.7% at the end of the 
reporting period. Some strong interest rate cuts 
were again made in deposits, too. This meant 
that longer-term time deposits in particular 
earned perceptibly lower rates of interest than 
just one quarter before.Sovereign debt 
crisis has stronger influ-ence on refinan-cing and credit supply policy of European banksBank interest rates in Ger-many down againDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2012  
34

Financial markets
Financial market setting
Growing concerns about economic growth 
and a renewed flare-up of the euro area’s sov -
ereign debt crisis shaped events on the inter -
national financial markets from the spring on -
wards. With regard to Europe, the mood was 
dominated by concerns about Spain’s banking 
system and its public finances, as well as doubts 
about implementation of the reform pro -
grammes in some euro-area countries. The re -
sult was a further worsening in funding terms 
for banks and governments on the southern 
European capital markets, whilst a flight to 
safety drove down bond yields in Germany, the 
United States and Japan. The equity markets 
were depressed for a time by the gloomier eco -
nomic picture, a further percentage rise in 
non-performing real estate loans on banks’ bal -
ance sheets in some countries, and credit insti -
tutions’ increased exposure to sovereign bonds. 
It was subsequently announced that Spain 
would be receiving financial support to recapit -
alise its banking sector and that the Eurosystem 
might consider taking further non-standard 
monetary policy measures. These declarations 
led, in particular, to a recovery in equity prices. 
On the foreign exchange markets, however, 
the euro predominantly depreciated.
Exchange rates
In the first few months of the year, the sover -
eign debt crisis in the euro area scarcely im -
pacted on the value of the euro. It was only 
from the spring that the single currency depre -
ciated significantly against other key currencies. 
The similar way in which the euro has per -
formed against the US dollar, the yen and the 
pound sterling indicates that exchange rate 
movements have been driven chiefly by the 
euro-area debt crisis, with other factors playing 
a lesser role.The euro depreciated against the US dollar by 
around 8% on balance compared to the end of 
March. For a time, the euro dropped to its low -
est level against the dollar since June 2010. 
Most of the decline occurred in May in the 
wake of accumulating negative reports from 
the euro area – Greece’s difficulties in forming 
a government, the election result in France and 
resulting fears that fiscal consolidation might 
be watered down, concerns about the stability 
of the Spanish banking sector, climbing yields 
on Spanish and Italian government bonds, and 
unfavourable macroeconomic data in a num -
ber of euro-area countries.
In the first half of June, the euro initially made 
good a small part of its losses. One factor that 
buoyed the euro was the markets’ expectation 
of a further easing in US monetary policy fol -
lowing weak US payroll data and a decline in 
consumer prices. Another was the prospective 
granting of considerable assistance by the 
European Financial Stability Facility (EFSF) to the 
Spanish banking sector. The outcome of repeat 
elections in Greece had a positive impact, too, 
as it increased the probability, in the eyes of 
market participants, of Greece remaining within 
the euro area. The EU summit decisions at the 
end of June likewise lifted the euro against the 
dollar, albeit only temporarily. In July, the euro 
resumed its downward trend. Its exchange rate 
against the dollar was depressed, first, by un -
certainty about the constitutional compatibility 
of the European Stability Mechanism (ESM) and 
of the European fiscal compact, as well as by a 
cut in the euro area’s policy interest rate, and, 
second, by the absence of any indication of a 
new programme of monetary easing on the 
part of the US central bank. It is only recently 
that the euro has recovered slightly against the 
dollar, following ECB President Mario Draghi’s 
announcement that the ECB would do what -
ever it takes to preserve the euro. As this report 
went to press, the euro stood at US$1.23.Stiffer financing 
terms for south-ern European borrowers
Euro down 
against the US dollarDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2012  
35

The value of the euro declined even more 
steeply from the end of March against the yen, 
which, like the US dollar, arguably benefited 
from investors’ heightened risk aversion and 
the resulting capital inflows. The yen was add -
itionally supported by unexpectedly strong GDP 
growth data for the first quarter of 2012, from 
which the markets inferred that further monet -
ary loosening in Japan was unlikely. The euro 
temporarily fell to its lowest level against the 
yen since autumn 2000. At the end of the 
period under review the euro recovered slightly 
to ¥97, partly owing to weaker growth in Japan 
in the second quarter. This was about 11% down on the euro’s comparable level at the 
end of March.
The euro also recorded losses against the 
pound sterling in the period under review, al -
though, totalling around 6%, the decline was 
less marked than against the yen and the US 
dollar. In this case, too, the euro’s depreciation 
was triggered primarily by the intensifying 
euro-area sovereign debt crisis. The euro might 
have lost even more ground against the pound 
had it not been for market expectations that 
the Bank of England would expand its asset 
purchase programme and the publication of 
data indicating that the UK economy was stall -
ing, which lessened the probability of monet -
ary policy tightening in the near future. Most 
recently, the euro was trading at £0.78 against 
the pound.
The euro has lost about 6% of its external value 
compared with the end of the first quarter 
against the currencies of its 20 largest trading 
partners. Most recently, the single currency was 
trading 8½% below its level at the launch of 
monetary union. In real terms, too, ie taking 
account of the inflation differentials between 
the euro area and its major trading partners, 
the effective euro exchange rate declined sig -
nificantly in the period under review. The price 
competitiveness of euro-area exporters has im -
proved accordingly. It is now somewhat better 
than the long-term average.
Securities markets and 
 portfolio transactions
The yields of US, German and Japanese ten-
year government bonds fell to new lows at 
mid-year. Demand for liquid and safe debt in -
struments was pushed up starkly by investors’ 
increased risk perception and the tensions in 
the euro area, as well as by uncertainty about 
the prospects for growth in all three of these 
major economies. In the United States, the lat -
est macroeconomic figures were in part well 
down on the first quarter. US Treasury yields Euro also down 
against the yen …… and against 
the pound
Drop in effective 
euro exchange rate
International 
bond marketsExchange rate of the euro
1 Exchange  rate at the start  of monetary  union  on 4 Janu-
ary 1999.  2 As  calculated  by the ECB against  the currencies  of 
20 countries.
Deutsche BundesbankAMJJASONDJFMAMJJAS
2011 20121.201.301.401.50
95100110120130140
0.700.750.800.850.900.95
95100105110115Daily data; log scale
US$
¥
£against the ...
... US dollar
US$1.1789 1
... yen
¥133.73 1
... pound sterling
£0.7111 1
Nominal effective exchange rate 2
1999 Q1 = 100
103.11 1Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2012  
36

came under additional pressure from height -
ened expectations of further monetary easing 
in the second half of the year and political dila -
toriness in addressing the drastic fiscal consoli -
dation due to come into effect at the start of 
next year under current law (“fiscal cliff”). Mar -
ket expectations for economic growth in Japan 
were dampened by a weaker net export trend 
– the result, in particular, of slacker growth in 
China – and decisions to introduce fiscal con -
solidation measures in 2013. Growing political 
and economic uncertainty in the euro area has 
recently prompted analysts to lower their 
growth expectations for Germany. On balance, 
ten-year sovereign bond yields fell vis-à-vis the 
first quarter by ¼ percentage point in Ger -
many, ½ percentage point in the USA and by a 
marginal amount in Japan; at 1.5%, 1.8% and 
0.9% respectively, they are at low levels.
Yields on ten-year government bonds within 
the euro area, by contrast, diverged compared 
to the first quarter of 2012. Both the (un -
weighted) interest rate dispersion and the GDP-
weighted yield spread of longer-dated govern -
ment bonds of other euro countries over Ger -
man Bunds with a comparable maturity were 
of late well above their five-year average, at 
668 and 333 basis points respectively. Doubts 
about implementation of the reform pro -
grammes announced in several countries as 
well as worries about the Spanish banking sys -
tem forced up yields in southern member states 
until the end of May. A brief uplift in confi -
dence in June in connection with the rescue 
package for the Spanish banking sector was 
followed in July by a resurgence of fears con -
cerning a possible Greek exit from the euro 
area and the sustainability of public finances in 
some member states. Ireland, on the other 
hand, provides an example of how the capital 
market rewards determined reform efforts: 
yields on Irish government bonds have fallen 
considerably against the highs of last year. 
Most recently, the yield on long-term Irish 
bonds was 6.3%, compared with 14.4% in July 
2011. At these reduced yields, Ireland was able to raise capital on the market for the first time 
since autumn 20101.
Following a speech at the end of July in which 
ECB President Mario Draghi raised the prospect 
of further Eurosystem measures to stabilise the 
financial markets, and his allusion at a press 
conference on 2 August to a new bond pur -
chase programme focusing on shorter matur -
ities, yields fell significantly in some euro-area 
peripheral countries. The decline was most pro -Wider yield 
spreads in the euro area
Divergent yield curve move-mentsYield spreads in the euro area
Sources:  Thomson  Reuters  and Bundesbank  calculations. 
1 Debt  haircut  on 9 March  2012.  2 Standard  deviation  of yield 
spreads of euro-area government bonds.
Deutsche Bundesbank2009 2010 2011 201203006009001,2001,5001,8002,1002,4002,7003,0003,3003,6003,900
03006009001,200Basis points, daily data
Spread of ten-year
government bondsagainst Bunds
Dispersion of yield spreads
 2
GDP weightedUnweightedItaly
SpainGreece
IrelandPortugal1
1 Ireland has not issued any ten-year government bonds 
since January 2010. The residual maturity of the Irish 
benchmark bond (maturing in October 2020) is thus still 
over eight years.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2012  
37

nounced in the maturity bucket up to two 
years, but also left its mark on longer-dated 
paper. This was mirrored to an extent in an up -
ward shift in the German yield curve over the 
same period, possibly as a result of a fall-off in 
safe-haven inflows.
Previously, however, the German yield curve 
had flattened and shifted downwards. For 
money market-like one-year maturities, Ger -
man sovereign debt has consistently offered a 
negative return since the start of July – of most 
recently 7 basis points. Long-term yields on 
German government bonds have dipped even 
more against the end of the first quarter. In the period under review Bunds fluctuated within a 
range of 1% to 1½%, driven principally by the 
inflows and outflows of investors in search of 
liquidity and safety. This is reflected, for in -
stance, in the inverse relationship between 
Bund yields and a liquidity measure  – the 
spread between agency bonds issued by Ger -
many’s KfW banking group, which are equally 
safe but of varying liquidity, and German Bunds. 
The fact that German government bonds are in 
greater demand because they offer a liquid and 
safe store of value is also demonstrated by the 
negative correlation between their yields and 
indicators expressing uncertainty, such as the 
implied volatility on bond or equity markets de -
rived from option contracts.
Inflation expectations for the European con -
sumer price index, calculated by comparing 
index-linked and nominal bonds, have risen 
slightly, with the forward inflation rate from 
five to ten years moving up 39 basis points 
to 2.5%. This is attributable to the fact that real 
yields – now negative over the whole maturity 
range up to ten years  – are dropping more 
sharply than nominal yields.
Yields on investment-grade European corpor -
ate bonds decreased against the end of the 
first quarter of 2012. Corporate bonds with a 
residual maturity of seven to ten years and a 
BBB rating were yielding 4.4% as this report 
went to print.2 The corporate bond spread over 
German Bunds, whose yields weakened in the 
period under review, as mentioned above, also 
narrowed.
Despite reduced yields, capital-raising on the 
German bond market remained moderate in 
the second quarter of 2012. The gross issuance 
volume amounted to €339½ billion, which was 
below the figure for the previous quarter (€396 
billion). After deducting redemptions, which 
were also down, and taking account of changes Improved 
 funding terms for firms
Net redemptions 
on the German bond marketYield curve on selected bond markets
Source  for Italy  and Spain:  Bloomberg.  1 Interest  rates  on (hy-
pothetical)  zero-coupon  bonds  (Svensson  method),  based  on 
listed Federal securities.
Deutsche Bundesbank0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 100.500.51.01.52.0
–++++
Residual maturity in years25 July 2012
25 July 201225 July 201216 August 2012
16 August 2012
16 August 201230 March 20123.03.54.04.55.05.56.06.57.07.52.53.03.54.04.55.05.56.06.57.0Italy
Spain
Germany 1in %
2 This is based on yields on corporate bonds included in 
the different rating grades of the iBoxx bond indices. These 
indices cover bonds issued by both banks and non-banks.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2012  
38

in issuers’ holdings of their own securities, the 
outstanding volume of German bonds de -
creased by a net €2 billion. However, foreign 
borrowers placed debt securities worth €2 bil -
lion on the German market. On balance, the 
volume of bonds circulating in Germany shrank 
by €½ billion.
The public sector raised €23 billion on the bond 
market in the second quarter of 2012, com -
pared with €63½ billion in the previous three 
months. These figures include issues from reso -
lution agencies of German banks – these issues 
are ascribed to the public sector for statistical 
purposes. Central government itself issued 
mainly ten-year Bunds (€14 billion), and to a 
lesser extent 30-year Bunds (€5 billion). This 
contrasted with net redemptions of two-year 
Schätze and five-year Bobls totalling €4 billion 
and €2½ billion respectively. Overall, the Ger -
man state governments tapped the capital 
market for €13 billion in the period under re -
view.
Domestic companies still appear to have com -
paratively little need for capital. They redeemed 
debt securities for €5½ billion net between 
April and June. These were solely bonds and 
notes with maturities of over one year.
Domestic credit institutions, which continued 
to receive abundant funds from abroad and re -
corded rapid deposit growth, likewise further 
curtailed their capital market debt in Germany 
in the quarter under review, paying down €20 
billion. In particular, they redeemed “other 
bank bonds”, which can be structured flexibly 
(€15 billion), and public Pfandbriefe (€11½ bil -
lion). These redemptions were partly offset by 
net issuance of mortgage Pfandbriefe and debt 
securities of specialised credit institutions to the 
value of €4½ billion and €2½ billion respect -
ively.
A breakdown of bond purchases clearly reveals 
the safe-haven motif underlying the financial 
flows. The largest category of buyers on the 
domestic bond market in the second quarter of Public sector 
borrowing
Net redemptions 
of corporate bonds
Net redemptions 
by credit  institutions
Purchase of debt 
securitiesCorporate bond yields in the euro area*
Source:  Markit.  * BBB-rated  bonds  with  a residual  maturity  of 
seven to ten years.
Deutsche Bundesbank2008 2009 2010 2011 2012036912151821242730Weekly averages
%
iBoxx Non-FinancialsiBoxx Financials
iBoxx
Corporates
Investment activity in the German securities markets
€ billion
Item2011 2012
Q2 Q1 Q2
Debt securities
Residents – 29.0 47.3 – 18.0
Credit institutions – 17.5 1.9 – 21.6
of which
Foreign debt securities –  2.6 – 0.2 – 14.8
Deutsche Bundesbank 0.5 0.5 –  1.2
Other sectors – 11.9 44.9 4.8
of which
Domestic debt securities – 19.0 7.2 – 13.3
Non-residents 35.0 13.6 17.7
Shares
Residents 15.3 7.1 –  3.9
Credit institutions –  0.3 5.5 – 11.4
of which
Domestic shares –  5.1 10.2 – 11.9
Non-banks 15.5 1.6 7.4
of which
Domestic shares 8.2 – 0.2 4.2
Non-residents 14.7 – 8.7 9.2
Mutual fund sharesInvestment in specialised funds 4.2 21.6 15.8
Investment in funds open to the general public 0.5 – 0.5 –  0.4
of which
Share-based funds 1.4 – 0.9 –  1.4
Deutsche BundesbankDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2012  
39

2012 were foreign investors, who added Ger -
man debt instruments totalling €17½ billion to 
their portfolios. They favoured public sector is -
suers. Domestic non-banks also purchased 
debt securities for €5 billion net, though these 
were exclusively foreign securities. These pur -
chases were accompanied by net sales and re -
demptions by credit institutions and the 
Deutsche Bundesbank amounting to €21½ bil -
lion and €1 billion respectively, both of which 
mainly sold off foreign securities.
The gloomier economic outlook and the escal -
ation of the debt crisis in some southern Euro -
pean countries also made themselves felt on the equity markets. Market players’ attention 
focused in particular on the Spanish banks, 
which came under pressure from plummeting 
prices on the Spanish property market and 
doubts about the sustainability of the country’s 
public finances. The banks’ share prices 
dropped considerably in some instances, partly 
owing to their increased exposure to sovereign 
bonds from crisis-hit countries incurred in the 
wake of the three-year longer-term refinancing 
operations. This underscores yet again the 
problematic close interlinkage between credit 
institutions and governments in the financial 
and sovereign debt crisis.
In June, however, the equity markets re -
bounded. This mood swing was driven partly 
by the expectation that recapitalisation would 
be provided for distressed Spanish banks. In 
addition, share prices received a boost from the 
formation of a government in Greece, hopes of 
an easing in US monetary policy and the assis -
tance measures from the Eurosystem mooted 
in July. On balance, European equities, as meas -
ured by the Euro Stoxx, were most recently 
1½% down on their level at the end of March. 
Persistent market anxiety showed itself in par -
ticular in the price movements of European 
bank stocks, which have lost about 12% of 
their value since April.
The fall in share prices went hand in hand with 
a reduced price-earnings ratio and heightened 
risk aversion on the part of equity investors. 
The implied equity risk premium, which can be 
calculated using a three-stage dividend dis -
count model and analysts’ (I/B/E/S) earnings ex -
pectations, saw an increase for bank stocks in 
particular. Accordingly, investors were prepared 
to hold shares only at reduced prices. To hold 
bank stocks they required an implied return of 
14% in July, compared with 11% for the market 
as a whole (Euro Stoxx). Back in March, the re -
turn required for investing in bank shares and 
in the market as a whole was 7% and 8% re -
spectively. Stock markets 
focus on  Spanish banksHigher risk  premiums on equitiesEquity market
Sources:  Thomson  Reuters  and Bundesbank  calculations. 
1 End-of-month  levels;  derived  from  a three-stage  dividend  dis-
count  model  using  three  to five-year  IBES  earnings  growth  ex-
pectations.  2 Expected  future  volatility,  calculated  from  prices 
of options on the Euro Stoxx.
Deutsche BundesbankEuro Stoxx
Banks
Lin scale
Implied return on equity 1
Euro StoxxEuro Stoxx
Euro Stoxx
Banks%31 December 2006 = 100, log scale
Stock price indicesWeekly averages
% Implied volatility of the Euro Stoxx 21520305075100150
510152025
10203040506070
2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2012  
40

Risk premiums also rose on the US equity mar -
ket. However, the determinants differed from 
those in the euro area: earnings expectations 
12 months forward for S&P 500 enterprises 
– unlike for Euro Stoxx firms – have risen since 
April. In addition, US stocks have held their 
price level.
Issuing activity on the German equity market 
remained relatively muted in the second quar -
ter of 2012. Domestic companies issued €1½ 
billion of new shares, split equally between 
listed and non-listed equities. The volume of 
foreign shares on the German market concur -
rently increased by €4 billion. Shares were 
bought primarily by non-resident investors (€9 
billion) – as is usual after key dividend payment 
dates. Resident non-banks bought equities in 
the amount of €7½ billion, whereas domestic 
credit institutions offloaded €11½ billion worth 
of stocks, after being net buyers in the first 
quarter.
During the reporting period, domestic collect -
ive investment firms recorded net inflows of 
€15½ billion, as against €21 billion in the previ -
ous three months. The inflows were channelled 
exclusively to specialised funds reserved for in -
stitutional investors (€16 billion). In the retail 
fund market, open-end real estate funds, mixed 
funds and bond funds attracted new subscrip -
tions to the value of €½ billion each. However, 
equity funds and mixed securities-based funds 
redeemed share units (€1½ billion and €½ bil -
lion respectively). Mutual funds distributed by 
foreign companies on the German market also 
recorded net outflows totalling €3½ billion in 
the second quarter of 2012. Domestic non-
banks were the main buyers, adding €16½ bil -
lion worth of mutual fund shares to their port -
folios. Their interest was exclusively in German 
mutual fund shares. By contrast, foreign invest -
ors and domestic credit institutions disposed of 
fund units amounting to €2½ billion and €2 
billion net respectively.Stock market 
funding and stock purchases
Sales and 
 purchases of mutual fund sharesMajor items of the balance of payments
€ billion
Item2011 2012
Q2 Q1 Q2
I Current account 1, 2 + 25.7 +  41.1 + 35.6
Foreign trade 1, 3 + 38.0 +  45.4 + 47.9
Services 1 –  3.0 –   0.4 –  1.4
Income 1 +  0.1 +  15.7 +  4.9
Current transfers 1 –  4.7 –  15.1 –  6.7
II Capital transfers 1, 4 –  0.3 +   0.2 +  0.4
III Financial account 1
(Net capital exports: –) – 46.1 –  61.4 – 63.5
1 Direct investment +  4.4 –  23.3 –  9.8
German investment 
abroad –  0.4 –  27.0 – 12.8
Foreign investment
in Germany +  4.9 +   3.7 +  3.0
2 Portfolio investment + 34.1 –  35.4 + 24.5
German investment abroad – 15.0 –  39.4 –  0.0
Shares –  8.9 +   5.9 –  1.4
Mutual fund shares –  2.0 –   6.3 +  3.3
Debt securities –  4.0 –  38.9 –  1.9
Bonds and notes
5 +  3.7 –  36.4 –  3.6
of which
Euro-denominated 
bonds and notes +  6.7 –  38.5 –  4.5
Money market  instruments –  7.7 –   2.6 +  1.7
Foreign investmentin Germany + 49.1 +   4.0 + 24.6
Shares + 13.2 –   8.6 +  9.3
Mutual fund shares +  0.9 –   1.0 –  2.4
Debt securities + 35.0 +  13.6 + 17.7
Bonds and notes
5 + 32.6 +  14.1 + 11.9
of which
Public bonds and 
notes + 30.7 +  29.2 + 23.1
Money market  instruments +  2.5 –   0.5 +  5.8
3 Financial derivatives
6 –  5.5 –   3.5 –  6.9
4 Other investment 7 – 78.7 +   1.8 – 70.5
Monetary fi  nancial
institutions 8 – 52.5 + 232.9 – 12.7
of which short-term – 47.6 + 215.5 – 16.6
Enterprises and
households –  4.3 –  25.2 –  1.0
of which short-term +  3.1 –  22.4 –  2.1
General government –  5.7 –  24.7 – 11.1
of which short-term –  7.1 –  25.8 – 11.9
Bundesbank – 16.2 – 181.3 – 45.7
5 Change in reserve assets 
at transaction values ( increase: –)
9 –  0.4 –   1.0 –  0.8
IV Errors and omissions + 20.6 +  20.1 + 27.5
1  Balance. 2  Including supplementary trade items. 3  Special 
trade according to the offi   cial foreign trade statistics (source: 
Federal Statistical Offi   ce). 4 Including the acquisition/disposal of non-produced non-fi  nancial assets. 5 Original maturity of more 
than one year. 6 Securitised and non-securitised options as well 
as fi  nancial futures contracts. 7
  Includes fi  nancial and trade 
credits, bank deposits and other assets. 8 Excluding the Bundes-bank. 9 Excluding allocation of SDRs and excluding changes due 
to value adjustments.
Deutsche BundesbankDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2012  
41

Local bias in German households’ equity portfolios
Classical portfolio theory suggests that 
utility-maximising investors benefi  t opti-
mally from a broadly diversifi  ed portfolio of risky assets. Yet evidence on real-life invest-
ment decisions paints a different picture. 
Recent research indicates not only that in-
vestors eschew foreign shares1 but –  in 
addition to this – tilt their domestic share-
holdings towards fi  rms that are located close to their home. This phenomenon of overweighting locally headquartered com-panies in a domestic equity portfolio has been dubbed “local bias” in the literature and has proved robust across a variety of countries and for both retail and institu-
tional investors.2 The signifi  cance of an in-
vestor’s location for his or her investment decisions can be attested for Germany, 
too.3
The database for the following analysis of 
German households’ investment behaviour 
in terms of overweighting local equities was 
taken from the Bundesbank’s quarterly Se-
curities deposits statistics. Broken down by 
customer group, they capture the total se-
curities holdings of all deposit account-keeping banks located in Germany and 
therefore show which domestic equities are 
held by German households with a given 
bank. The study spans the period from De-
cember 2005 until December 2009 and covers 1,317 different equities, virtually all 
listed German enterprises. It makes sense to 
focus on portfolios held at the savings banks and credit cooperatives because these two categories of domestic banks 
traditionally have a clear regional customer 
base. Given this constraint, it may be as-
sumed that the households covered live in 
the vicinity of their particular bank. For the 
above period, this narrower dataset still 
comprises a total of 1,715 banks.Local bias measure
To differentiate between local and non-local equities from an individual investor’s perspective, a suitable distance-based 
measure needs to be determined. A radius 
of 100 kilometres around a given investor’s location is commonly used in the literature. 
This radius is also used in our study to en-
sure that our fi  ndings are comparable with 
other research results. Although this radius 
is ultimately an arbitrary choice, it turns out 
that choosing different distances has little 
impact on the results. The local bias meas-
ure is calculated by comparing the frac-tional market value of an investor’s total 
portfolio of German equities that is invested locally with the fractional market capitalisa-
tion of the total domestic market portfolio 
within the same radius.4 This takes due ac-
count of the varying degree of agglomer-ation of listed companies in different Ger-
man regions. The excess share of local equi-
1 This familiar phenomenon is known in the literature 
as home bias.
2 The literature on local bias was pioneered by the 
study by J D Coval and T J Moskowitz (1999), Home 
Bias at Home: Local Equity Preference in Domestic Portfolios, in Journal of Finance 54, pp 2045-2073. 
The authors’ paper shows that US fund managers dis-play a preference for investing in local fi  rms. Evidence 
of local bias among US households is provided by 
M S Seasholes and N Zhu (2010), Individual Investors 
and Local Bias, Journal of Finance 65, pp 1987-2010. 
This phenomenon among households has also been 
found inter alia in various Scandinavian countries (Fin-
land: M Grinblatt and M Keloharju (2001), How Dis-
tance, Language, and Culture Infl  uence Stockholdings 
and Trades, Journal of Finance 56, pp 1053-1073; Sweden: A Bodnaruk (2009), Proximity Always Mat-
ters: Evidence from Swedish Data, in Review of Finance 13, pp 629-656).3 For more details, see M Baltzer, O Stolper and A Wal-ter (2011), Home-fi  eld advantage or a matter of ambi-
guity aversion? Local bias among German individual 
investors, Deutsche Bundesbank Discussion Paper, Ser-ies 1, No 23/2011.4 As is customary in the literature, the market value of 
free-fl  oat domestic equities is used as the denomin-
ator.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2012  
42

ties in the investor’s portfolio compared 
with the corresponding market fraction 
measures the local bias. The thus calculated 
average household equity investment in local companies during the observation period actually came to 20.1%, whereas it should have averaged only 11.8% accord-
ing to the local fraction of the overall mar-
ket portfolio. This means that the under-
lying data reveal a substantial average over-
weigh in local equities of 8.3 percentage 
points.5
This fi  nding might be (partly) explainable by 
the allocation of company shares to em-ployees as part of their overall remuner-ation package. Even though this form of employee remuneration still plays a much less prominent role in Germany than it does, say, in the Anglo-Saxon world, Ger-man public limited companies also run 
schemes under which staff can buy shares 
in their company at a certain discount, usu-
ally subject to a lock-up period of several years. Assuming that the employee lives close to the company for which he/she 
works, these shares would be allocated to 
the local portion of that employee’s port-folio, thereby increasing the local bias in his/her equity portfolio accordingly. How-
ever, this possible impact has no bearing on 
our study since during the lock-up period 
the employee shares are usually held in an 
escrow account operated by the company 
on the employee’s behalf.6 Accordingly, the 
Bundesbank’s Securities deposits statistics 
assign the employee shares in question not 
to households but to the relevant company.
Information asymmetries relating 
to local equities
Some papers in the local bias literature posit 
informed (ie rational) investor choice as a 
possible explanation for the deviation in in-
vestment behaviour from classical portfolio theory, assuming that local investors enjoy a 
positive information asymmetry in respect 
of local fi  rms. Return-relevant information 
asymmetries are thought to be particularly 
likely in the case of smaller companies that 
are little known outside their region. That, 
the argument goes, explains why local in-vestments are overweighted. In the litera-
ture, this hypothesis is normally tested em-
pirically by comparing the returns on local 
equity investments with those of the total 
portfolio. Seasholes and Zhu (2010) point to 
a number of possible methodological pit-
falls in connection with determining an ex-
cess return for local equity investments. 
One of the authors’ key caveats is that the 
returns on local equity investments should 
be adjusted using the appropriate bench-
mark portfolio. When calculating a local ex-
cess return, therefore, not only the total 
market return but also the return of the re-
spective market index solely comprising 
local equities should be included in the re-
gression as an explanatory variable. Only if 
a statistically signifi  cant coeffi   cient remains 
after adjustment with these two indices can 
a return-relevant outperformance by local investments truly be inferred. For the Ger-man data, the regressions conducted on 
quarterly returns, regardless of the respect-ive specifi  cation, result in no excess returns that are signifi  cantly different from zero for 
local investments, confi  rming the fi  ndings 
of Seasholes and Zhu (2010) for US house-
holds. If the information and transaction costs incurred are additionally factored in, 
the portfolio individually composed of local 
5 By comparison, T M Doskeland and H K Hvide (2011, 
Do Individual Investors Have Asymmetric Information 
Based on Work Experience?, in Journal of Finance 66, 
pp 1011-1041) use a comparable measure and fi  nd a 
local bias of 13 percentage points for Norwegian 
households. Seasholes and Zhu (2010, op cit) have cal-
culated a corresponding fi  gure of 14 percentage points for US retail investors.
6 See D Dorn and G Huberman (2005), Talk and Ac-
tion: What Investors Say and What They Do, in Review of Finance 9, pp 437-481, here p 469.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2012  
43

companies actually generates a lower over-
all return than one invested exclusively in 
the market index.
Non-return-relevant familiarityAn alternative explanation for the local bias 
phenomenon is that an investor over-
weights local equities due to his or her pref-
erence for the familiar. This is based on the 
assumption that investors systematically 
perceive non-local companies as a riskier in-
vestment solely for reasons of geographical 
distance.7 Accordingly, an investor’s prefer-
ence for local equities is said to be driven 
primarily by his/her personal risk percep-
tion.8 Boyle et al (2012) offer a theoretical 
concept by including familiarity with certain 
assets (“ambiguity aversion”) as an add-
itional dimension of the portfolio selection 
process.9 The optimal portfolio then con-
sists of a mix of familiar and unfamiliar assets. According to this approach, the 
portfolio mix responds dynamically to chan-
ging correlations between the assets. The 
underlying intuition is that unfamiliar assets become less benefi  cial for portfolio diversifi  -cation in times of higher correlation so that it is no longer worthwhile for an ambiguity-
averse investor to continue holding these assets and he/she instead gives a stronger 
weighting to familiar stocks – an effect the authors dub the “fl  ight to familiarity”. In ap-plying this concept empirically to the data-
set used here, it is important to make sure 
that the change in local bias was actually 
triggered by an active portfolio shift by the 
investor. A simple analysis of the overall 
change in local bias over time is insuffi   cient as different price movements of local equi-
ties vis-à-vis non-local equities might also be responsible for a change in the local/non-local investment mix. For this reason, the actual portfolio changes are observed 
by keeping prices constant. A regression in-cluding the change in the local equity frac-tion attributable to active trading as a de-
pendent variable shows the expected posi-
tively signifi  cant impact of the change in correlation among all shares in the port-folio. An increase in correlation leads to a corresponding rise in the percentage of 
local equities, and vice versa. It remains to 
be seen whether the portfolio shift really was caused by purchases of local equities 
(and not sales of non-local shares). For this 
reason a dummy variable is introduced, which is given the value of 1 if trades in local shares are mostly buy orders. This dummy variable proves to be positive and 
statistically signifi  cant, which indicates that 
corresponding purchases of local invest-
ments take place in times of increased cor-relation and thus confi  rms the “fl  ight to fa-miliarity” induced by purchases.
In summary, it can be stated that German 
households are clearly overinvested in local 
companies, irrespective of their ownership 
of employee shares. Further, it can be seen 
that, on average, they do not possess any 
return-relevant information advantages that 
would justify the observed local bias. Ra-
ther, investors’ non-return-relevant familiar-
ity with local equities seems to be of rele-
vance. This suggests that, besides risk and 
return considerations, investors’ familiarity 
with the investment in question plays a role in their portfolio selection decisions.
7 See W N Goetzman and A Kumar (2008), Equity 
Portfolio Diversifi  cation, in Review of Finance 12, 
pp 433-463.
8 See also most recently M Giannetti and L Laeven 
(2012), Local bias and Stock Market Conditions, CEPR 
Discussion Paper.
9 P Boyle, L Garlappi, R Uppal and T Wang (2012), 
Keynes Meets Markowitz: The Trade-off Between Fa-
miliarity and Diversifi  cation, in Management Science 
58, pp 253-272.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2012  
44

Direct investment
In contrast to cross-border portfolio invest -
ment, in which €24½ billion net flowed into 
Germany, the direct investment account re -
corded net capital exports of €10 billion in the 
second quarter of 2012. However, this was 
much less than the prior-quarter outflow 
(€23½ billion).
The reduced outflows can be attributed mainly 
to the fact that domestic parent companies 
provided their foreign affiliates with less capital 
(€13 billion, after €27 billion in the first quar -
ter). They supplied them with additional funds 
primarily in the form of equity capital and re -invested earnings (together totalling €7 billion) 
as well as direct investment loans (€6 billion). 
The euro-area countries, particularly Luxem -
bourg (€5 billion) and the Netherlands (€2½ 
billion), as well as the USA (€3 billion) were the 
geographical focus of German direct invest -
ment abroad in the second quarter.
Foreign proprietors likewise provided their sub -
sidiaries and branches in Germany with add -
itional funds (€3 billion, after €3½ billion be -
tween January and March). Intra-group loans 
played a significant role in this (€5 billion). The 
principal investors were enterprises from euro-
area partner countries.Outflows  
in direct 
 investment
German direct 
investment abroadForeign direct investment in GermanyDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2012  
45

Economic conditions in Germany
Macroeconomic situation
Despite the difficult economic situation in some 
euro-area countries and the dip in global eco -
nomic activity, the German economy continued 
to expand in the second quarter of 2012, albeit 
at a slower pace. The Federal Statistical Office’s 
flash estimate recorded quarter-on-quarter 
GDP growth of 0.3% in the second quarter of 
2012 (after seasonal and calendar adjustment), 
compared with 0.5% in the first quarter.1 Enter -
prises’ average capacity utilisation remained 
around normal. Although the external demand 
stimuli were less pronounced in the first half of 
2012, they were still strong enough, in tandem  
with expanding domestic activity, to enable 
output to grow in line with its potential. The 
uncertainty triggered by the euro-area sover -
eign debt crisis continued to dampen invest -
ment in machinery and equipment, but was 
also reflected in more cautious recruitment 
plans of late. By contrast, construction and 
consumer demand have hardly been affected 
by the confidence effects so far and have even 
benefited from them in some cases.
Germany’s exports may have risen almost as 
steeply in the second quarter of 2012 as during 
the first three months of the year. While export 
growth to non-euro-area countries continued 
virtually unabated, exports to euro-area coun -
tries stagnated. As the sizeable falls in demand 
in the latter part of 2011 were barely recouped 
in the first quarter of 2012, this sideways mo -
tion means that Germany’s overall euro-area 
business was dominated by contractionary dy -
namics. Since the current business cycle peak in 
the third quarter of 2011, which, in terms of 
value, came close to matching the level at the 
end of the previous upswing, dampening ef -
fects have predominated, emanating mainly 
from Italy and Spain. The value of goods ex -
ported to France stagnated. The underlying up -
ward trend in exports to the Netherlands and Austria remained on an upward course, how -
ever.
Business with customers in non-euro-area 
countries was barely touched by the global 
economic downturn. The pace of growth var -
ied considerably across countries, however. 
Growth in exports to the USA, for example, 
slowed down fairly abruptly after regaining 
momentum in late 2011 and early 2012. This 
also applies to the majority of German enter -
prises’ key trading partners in South and East 
Asia. Exports to the United Kingdom remained 
buoyant, however, despite recessionary ten -
dencies. Significant export gains were gener -
ated in Russia again. Exports to central and 
eastern European countries also posted a fur -
ther increase.
The growth in exports was driven primarily by 
manufacturers of capital goods, as opposed to 
producers of intermediate goods who had 
been the main driving force in the first quarter. 
Exports of information and communication 
technology (ICT) products, as well as electrical 
equipment received a significant boost. Fur -
thermore, foreign customers once again pur -
chased a greater number of German motor ve -
hicles, especially in the premium car segment. 
Exports of machinery and equipment were ra -
ther sluggish. In the intermediate goods sector, 
there was a further expansion of exports in the 
chemicals industry, whereas manufacturers of 
metals and metal products suffered a setback 
in the international markets. Exports of con -
sumer goods likewise rose.Subdued GDP 
growth in 2012 Q2
Exports to euro 
area flat, …… but exports to non-euro-area countries still rising
Above-average 
growth in  capital goods exports
1 During the regular revision of the German national ac -
counts, which is carried out every year in the summer 
months, GDP growth for the year 2010 was raised by 
0.5 percentage point to 4.2%. This would indicate that the 
German economy recovered faster from the steep drop in 
output than has been documented in the GDP results to 
date. The new data are more consistent with the overall 
macroeconomic picture of an ongoing upturn, which was 
characterised from the outset by a jump in employment 
and a very buoyant business climate among enterprises.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2012  
46

Construction investment is likely to have ex -
panded in the second quarter. This owed some -
thing to the rebound following the sharp 
weather-related reduction in activity in Febru -
ary but also to building firms’ very buoyant 
order situation. Towards the end of last year, 
an extremely large number of building permits 
were granted for new residential and commer -
cial properties. In addition, public sector de -
mand surged after the turn of the year.
By contrast, purchases of moveable fixed assets 
continued to stagnate in the second quarter of 
2012. Investment in machinery and equipment 
has been subdued now for the past three quar -
ters. This is because few companies are looking 
to expand production capacities at the mo -
ment. Capacity utilisation in manufacturing has 
fallen since autumn 2011 and is now back 
within the longer-term average range. Further -
more, German firms’ economic outlook was 
dampened by the escalation of the euro debt 
crisis, from which they have not yet fully re -
covered despite the temporary easing at the 
end of last year, and the heightened uncer -
tainty is causing them to adopt a “wait-and-
see” approach. This is above all the case for 
purchases of new machinery. By contrast, ve -
hicle fleets continued to be modernised on a 
large scale. This is shown by the number of 
registrations for commercial vehicles, which be -
tween April and June were up on the previous 
quarter in seasonally adjusted terms.
Private consumption showed a further season -
ally adjusted rise in the second quarter of 2012. 
Consumer demand benefited from the favour -
able labour market situation and the substan -
tial wage increases. Moreover, the slowing rate 
of inflation is likely to have boosted consumer 
confidence. The decline in petrol and heating 
oil prices undoubtedly increased households’ 
real spending capacity. This benefited the retail 
trade sector, the turnover of which saw a 
marked recovery in the reporting period in sea -
sonally adjusted terms. A large number of 
homeowners took advantage of the lower en -
ergy prices to replenish their heating oil tanks. By contrast, expenditure on automobile pur -
chases was scaled back. One indication of this 
is that the number of new private passenger 
car registrations in the second quarter was sig -
nificantly lower than in the preceding quarters.
Following zero growth in the first quarter of 
2012, imports saw a marked quarter-on-quarter 
increase in the second quarter (after seasonal 
adjustment). However, imports have not kept 
pace with export growth since the beginning 
of 2012. This is partly because of an underlying 
trend in which construction activity, with its 
relatively low import content, has increasingly 
become the main driver of domestic economic 
activity, whereas investment in machinery and 
equipment has lacked momentum of late and 
private consumption has been developing at a 
steady moderate pace. Domestic enterprises 
purchased fewer intermediate goods from for -
eign manufacturers between April and June, 
whereas they had been keen buyers of inputs 
in the first quarter. By contrast, demand for Strong growth  
in construction 
investment, not just due to catch-up effects
Investment in 
machinery and equipment still sluggish
Moderate up-
turn in private consumption continuingDistinct rise  
in importsOverall output
Deutsche Bundesbank2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012102104106108110112
–8–6–4–20+2+4+62005 = 100, price and seasonally adjusted
Log scale
GDP
%
Lin scale
Year-on-year changeDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2012  
47

foreign-manufactured computers, electronic 
and optical products as well as electrical equip -
ment surged. Demand for imported machinery 
was also somewhat greater.
Deliveries from euro-area countries and EU 
member states in central and eastern Europe 
went up in the second quarter of 2012. The 
value of imports from other parts of the world 
(apart from China) largely decreased. It should 
be borne in mind, however, that the reduction 
in nominal imports from Russia and the OPEC 
countries is probably due to declining energy 
prices, while the growing rise in the effective 
price of US-produced goods caused by ex -change rate movements may have additionally 
dulled import dynamics from the United States.
Sectoral trends
Industrial output in the second quarter of 2012 
was down slightly by a seasonally adjusted ½% 
on the previous three months. This was attrib -
utable primarily to the steep decline in capital 
goods production (-1½%). The 2½% decline in 
the mechanical engineering sector owed much, 
however, to a statistical effect, as the index 
level in the first quarter was greatly inflated by 
post-bookings. The automotive industry cut 
back its output significantly in the second quar -
ter (-3%) due to high stockpiles. This, however, 
presumably affected mass-market vehicle 
manufacturers most as they struggled with 
weaker demand, especially from the euro area. 
By contrast, production of top-range models 
still appears to be very strong. Manufacturers 
of intermediate goods marginally increased 
their output (+¼%), while consumer goods 
production declined somewhat in seasonally 
adjusted terms (-¼%).
The lack of momentum in industrial activity 
seen over the past three quarters is reflected in 
the fact that capacity utilisation of fixed assets 
has been progressively scaled back. According 
to surveys carried out by the Ifo Institute, 
manufacturing capacity utilisation in July, at 
83% of the normal take-up rate, fell below the 
longer-term average for the first time in almost 
two years. The level of utilisation in the capital 
goods sector was more clearly below the multi-
year average than in the case of intermediate 
goods.
Construction output picked up considerably in 
the second quarter of 2012 (+4½%) compared 
with the previous three months. Weather-
related catch-up effects played an important 
role in this, as is attested in the individual sub -
sectors of the construction industry. Civil engin -
eering activity, which is generally more strongly 
affected by the cold weather, expanded some -Imports from 
Europe strongerSlight fall in in-dustrial output
Manufacturing 
capacity utilisa-tion slightly below normal
Clear rise in 
construction, but energy pro-duction a little lower90100110120Underlying trends in foreign trade
1 Adjusted for the price indices for foreign trade.
Deutsche Bundesbank2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012Apr-
May 95100110120130140
Apr-
May
100110120130Seasonally adjusted, quarterly
To non-euro-area countries
To euro-area countries2005 = 100, log scale
Exports of goods
price-adjusted 1
Total
0204060Lin scaleForeign trade balanceImports of goodsprice-adjusted
 1100110120130140150
€ bnDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2012  
48

what more substantially than in the case of 
building construction. This runs counter to the 
current underlying trend in which, owing to the 
robust demand for residential and commercial 
properties, buildings are developing more dy -
namically than infrastructure projects, which 
are largely reliant on public sector spending. 
Energy output in the second quarter was cut 
back slightly (-½%) in seasonally adjusted 
terms, compared with the period from January 
to March.
Economic activity in the services sectors is likely 
to have been more buoyant overall than in in -
dustry. This is suggested by Ifo Institute data, 
according to which firms’ optimistic assess -
ments of the business situation have been ad -
justed downwards only fairly marginally. Never -
theless, there are signs that the downturn in 
industrial output affected industry-related ser -
vice providers, in particular. This is borne out, 
for example, by the fact that the mileage of 
domestic heavy goods vehicles on toll roads 
rose only slightly on the first quarter in season -
ally adjusted terms. Declines were also re -
corded in the wholesale trade. Consumption-
related service providers performed better only 
in certain areas. While the retail trade fared 
well overall, motor vehicle sales dipped discern -
ibly. The turnover of hotels and restaurants also 
failed to reach the level of the first three 
months. Conversely, construction-related ser -
vice providers benefited from the upturn in the 
building trade.
Employment and  
labour market
Although the positive trend on the labour mar -
ket was confirmed in the second quarter by the 
continued rise in employment, the slower pace 
of economic activity made itself felt. Employed 
persons, for instance, were working fewer 
hours towards the end of the period under re -
view and, after seasonal adjustment, the num -
ber of unemployed persons rose somewhat 
quarter on quarter for the first time since the cyclical upturn began. This suggests that, des -
pite an expansionary underlying trend, the 
growing concerns about the economy are now 
being reflected in more cautious recruitment 
plans.
According to estimates by the Federal Statis -
tical Office, the seasonally adjusted number of 
persons in work in Germany went up by 
92,000, or 0.2%, compared with the first quar -
ter of 2012. Job growth was consequently 
weaker than in previous quarters. The majority 
of newly created positions were again regular 
jobs subject to social security contributions. By 
contrast, there was a further decline in the Service sector up 
on balance
More cautious 
recruitment plansSlower rise in employmentOutput in industry andin construction
Deutsche Bundesbank2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012Log scale
Industry
92100108116124
Lin scale
Year-on-year change–25–20–15–10–50+5+10+15
Lin scale
Year-on-year
change
94100108116124 Log scale
Construction
%
–15–10–50+5+10+15+20+25+30+35%2005 = 100, seasonally adjusted, quarterlyDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2012  
49

number of persons working exclusively in 
low-paid part-time employment and in the 
number of government-sponsored workfare ar -
rangements (“one-euro jobs”), whereas there 
was little change in the number of self-employed 
persons.
According to initial estimates by the Federal 
Employment Agency, employment fully subject 
to social security contributions rose consider -
ably in April and May. Nevertheless, with a sea -
sonally adjusted increase of 98,000 persons, or 
0.3%, vis-à-vis the first-quarter average, the 
rise failed to match the particularly robust 
growth figures recorded in the preceding quar -
ters. This was due, among other factors, to 
slower growth in employment in the cyclically 
sensitive manufacturing industry as well as in 
the closely related trade and logistics sectors. 
There was a further reduction in agency-hired 
temporary staff. Their number was down by 
around 1% compared with the peak level 
reached one year previously. Employment in 
the health and education sectors as well as in 
business-related services (excluding temporary 
agency hirings) continued to grow substan -
tially. Considerable increases were likewise re -
corded in other services sectors, such as hotels 
and restaurants, information and communica -
tion as well as in education and training.
Given the subdued economic growth, the fur -
ther increase in employment was accompanied 
by a reduced number of effective working 
hours. The adjustment was made primarily 
through working time accounts. According to 
information provided by the Institute for Em -
ployment Research (IAB), the first six months of 
2012 represented the first net reduction in 
working time accounts since the beginning of 
2010.
The number of persons officially registered as 
unemployed in the second quarter went up 
slightly by a seasonally adjusted 12,000 on the 
first three months to 2.88 million. The un -
employment rate remained unchanged at 
6.8%. The customary spring pick-up in eco -More regular 
jobs especially in services sector
Reduced 
 working hours
No further fall  
in official 
 unemploymentLabour market
1 Excluding  seasonal  jobs  and jobs  located  abroad.  2 From 
May  2009,  unemployed  excluding  persons  newly  registered  on 
the books of private employment agencies.
Deutsche Bundesbank2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012July39.540.040.541.041.5
26.527.027.528.028.529.0–5000+500+1,000
2.53.03.54.04.5
–1,000–5000+500JulySeasonally adjusted, quarterly
JulyMillion
Apr-
MayMillion
Million200300400500Thou-
sand
Thou-
sand
Thou-
sand Year-on-year changeOfficially unemployed 2UnemployedTotalEmployed
Unsubsidised vacancies 1
(scale enlarged)Occupied positionsJobs subject to social security
contributionsYear-on-year changeDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2012  
50

nomic activity was relatively muted this year 
following the largely mild winter weather. The 
previous downward trend in unemployment 
did, however, level off to some extent. This was 
due in part to the fact that, given the dramatic 
decline by over two million in the number of 
unemployed persons since 2005, the jobless 
pool has been reduced so much that firms are 
now finding it quite hard to recruit new staff. 
Hence, the ongoing upturn in employment is 
now primarily drawing on previously non-
employed members of the resident population 
and on immigrants.
It is precisely the short-term unemployed, who 
have a relatively good chance of finding new 
work, that have been in short supply on the 
labour market for quite some time now. The 
seasonally adjusted number of recently un -
employed workers claiming insurance benefits 
stood at around 880,000 and thus matched 
the prior-year figure. Normal labour market 
turnover, together with necessary adjustments 
in terms of retraining and relocating, produces 
a certain core level of short-term unemploy -
ment that remains stubbornly entrenched even 
in a boom. At the current end, the moderate 
rise in unemployment is translating directly into 
an increase in the number of short-term jobless 
workers claiming unemployment insurance. In 
addition to this recent rise, the exceptionally fa -
vourable economic climate a year ago means 
that relatively few unemployed persons are 
transferring at present from the short-term in -
surance scheme to the longer-term welfare 
benefits scheme. This was the main reason for 
the further slight seasonally adjusted decline in 
the number of unemployed persons receiving 
the basic welfare allowance in the period under 
review by around 9,000 persons. By contrast, 
fewer people dropped out of the basic welfare 
system to take up gainful employment. Regis -
tered unemployment in July 2012 rose again 
slightly on the month by 7,000 persons.
The available leading indicators suggest that 
the labour market could continue to lose mo -
mentum in the coming months. The BA-X job index saw a marked decline in the second 
quarter for the first time since the beginning of 
the recovery three years ago. Besides a re -
peated reduction in new vacancies, the existing 
number of reported (unassisted) vacancies also 
declined perceptibly. Vacancies for regular jobs 
fully subject to social security contributions fell 
by around 7,000 to 460,000 in seasonally ad -
justed terms, which is more or less equal to the 
level recorded in the fourth quarter of 2011. 
The Ifo employment barometer, which provides 
information about planned staffing levels in 
trade and industry over the next three months, 
fell again in the second quarter of 2012. Des -
pite the ongoing decline over the past five 
quarters, however, the indicator is still at a high 
level.
Wages and prices
Employers and employees negotiated consider -
able wage rises in the pay negotiations that 
were concluded in the second quarter of 2012, 
as was the case at the beginning of this year’s 
pay round. While the services segments princi -
pally agreed incremental wage increases span -
ning fairly long contractual periods, negotiators 
in industry tended to go for strong rises with a 
fairly short duration. The wage increases were, 
for the most part, agreed in the form of per -
manent percentage increases, whereas one-off 
lump sum payments played only a negligible 
role.
In addition to the collective agreements for 
core staff, negotiators in the metal-working 
and electrical engineering sector and the chem -
ical industry agreed on phased sectoral wage 
add-ons for temporarily hired workers.2 The 
agreed incremental wage add-ons, which will 
come into effect in the first two sectors on 
1 November 2012, should help to reduce the 
income gap of temporary workers compared Rise in 
short-term  unemployment
Dwindling 
 momentum set 
to continueSizeable wage increases in this year’s pay round
Graduated rise 
in earnings of agency hirings
2 Graduated wage add-ons were also recently agreed for 
agency-hired temporary workers involved in the manufac -
ture of rubber and plastic products and in the rail transport 
sector.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2012  
51

with permanent salaried employees in relation 
to the length of their contracts. This collective 
improvement for temporary hirings also satis -
fies the need for action called for by some pol -
iticians. This new deal will not excessively bur -
den company payrolls as it primarily affects the 
lower pay groups. However, the employment 
opportunities per se , especially for low-skilled 
workers, will be squeezed owing to the rising 
cost of their labour.
The underlying momentum of wage growth is 
still very much pointing upwards. According to 
the Bundesbank’s pay rate statistics, basic rates 
of pay in the second quarter went up by 2.7% 
on the year, after increasing by 2.6% in the first 
quarter of 2012.3 For negotiated rates of pay 
including all ancillary agreements, the rate of 
growth, at 2.6%, was perceptibly higher than 
in the first quarter (1.9%). Given that generous 
bonus payments were also paid out to employ -
ees of large industrial enterprises, growth in ac -
tual earnings is likely to have been similarly 
high.
On 1 August of this year, in the absence of a 
clear vote by the labour ministry’s collective 
bargaining committee, the German govern -
ment introduced – by way of a federal regula -
tion – a new generally binding minimum wage 
for staff working in education and training. The binding minimum wage has been set at a high 
level considering that, in western Germany, 
only skilled construction workers receive a 
higher sector-specific minimum wage and that, 
in eastern Germany, the new minimum wage is 
higher than in any other sector.
The deterioration of the global economic out -
look was reflected in falling commodity prices 
in the second quarter of 2012. In terms of im -
port prices, this was partly neutralised by the 
euro’s depreciation. Nevertheless, import prices 
declined by a seasonally adjusted 1.6% com -
pared with the previous quarter. The fall was 
particularly pronounced in the case of energy 
prices. By contrast, the upward trend in the 
prices of capital goods and consumer goods 
continued virtually unabated. The year-on-year 
rate of increase in import prices eased further 
to 2.0%.
Domestic sales prices remained unchanged on 
a quarterly average, although they declined 
gradually during the course of the quarter, as 
was the case with imports. The year-on-year 
rate of increase narrowed to 2.1%. Export 
prices held up at the level of the first quarter. 
As a result, the terms of trade picked up slightly 
after falling in the first three months of 2012 to 
the lowest level recorded since the first half of 
the 1980s.
The construction industry, by contrast, was able 
to push through marked price increases in the 
second quarter as a result of the buoyant busi -
ness activity in that sector. Construction prices 
rose 2.8% on the year. The price of residential 
real estate also continued to accelerate. Ac -
cording to calculations by the Association of 
German Pfandbrief Banks (Verband deutscher 
Pfandbriefbanken),  property prices rose quite Wage growth 
remains at a high level
Spread of 
sector-wide  minimum wagesImport prices falling, …
… as are indus-
trial sales prices
Construction 
and property prices still risingNegotiated rates of pay
1 Excluding additional benefits and lump-sum payments.
Deutsche Bundesbank2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 201200.51.01.52.02.53.03.5Year-on-year percentage change, on monthly basis
Negotiated rates of pay,
total
Basic pay 1
H1
3 The Federal Statistical Office, whose index excludes gov -
ernment employees with civil servant status, reports an in -
crease of 2.2% in negotiated rates of basic pay in the 
second quarter, compared with 2.0% in the first quarter. 
Differences compared with the Bundesbank’s pay index 
also result from the fact that the Federal Statistical Office 
only reports the April figure for the second quarter.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2012  
52

steeply by 1.3% on the first quarter of 2012 
and by 3.5% on the year.
Although consumer prices did not increase fur -
ther in the course of the second quarter, they 
nonetheless rose by a seasonally adjusted 0.2% 
on a quarterly average, after going up by 0.7% 
in the first quarter. Consequently, the price in -
crease in the first half of 2012, at +1.1% on the 
previous period, was even somewhat sharper 
than in the second half of 2011. In the months 
from April to June, price developments were in -
fluenced primarily by the drop in crude oil 
prices. As a result, the prices of refined petrol -
eum products declined by 3.9%; this was still 
not enough to fully offset the sharp rise in late 
2011 and early 2012, however. Heating oil and 
fuel were 2.5% more expensive in June than 
one year earlier. Fairly significant reductions 
were also evident in the case of dairy products. 
By contrast, some other food products became 
considerably dearer, which was partly attribut -
able to the weather. The upward trend in prices 
continued in the case of other goods (exclud -
ing energy and food), which was probably also 
due to the stable domestic demand and the 
relatively weak euro. A further marked rise oc -
curred in the price of services owing, not least, 
to the cost of travel and holiday services. The 
increase in rents remained very subdued. On 
balance, the annual Consumer Price Index (CPI) 
fell from 2.1% on a quarterly average to 1.9%, 
while the Harmonised Index of Consumer 
Prices (HICP) declined from 2.4% to 2.1%.
Consumer prices edged up in July by a season -
ally adjusted 0.1%. A distinct rise was also re -
corded in the price of petroleum products 
owing to the reversal in crude oil prices. Food 
prices eased, however. The prices of other 
goods and services remained largely un -
changed. The year-on-year increase in the CPI 
stood at 1.7%, as in the previous month, while 
the HICP measure went down from 2.0% 
to 1.9%.No further rise 
in consumer prices
Export pricesImport, export, producer andconsumer prices
1 Producer  price  index  for industrial  products  in domestic  sales. 
2 Not  seasonally  adjusted,  quarterly.  3 National  consumer 
price index.
Deutsche Bundesbank2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012100105110115120125
105110115120
105110115 115120125
100105110115
10123
–+++2005 = 100, seasonally adjusted, monthly
Lin scale
Year-on-year change 2Consumer prices3Construction
prices2Producer prices1Import pricesLog scale
%
July100105110115Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2012  
53

Orders received and outlook
In the second half of the year, the further in -
tensification of the sovereign debt crisis in the 
euro area and the resulting uncertainty could 
have a greater negative impact on economic 
activity in Germany. Alongside the impact of 
waning confidence in the euro area on invest -
ment activity, this notably relates to the direct 
effects transmitted via foreign trade. This is be -
cause the adjustment crises in the countries on 
the euro-area periphery are no longer exerting 
substantial downward pressure solely on their 
domestic economy but are now also spilling 
over to the rest of the euro area via a number 
of transmission channels which have been 
opened up by the single currency area. How -
ever, as long as demand for German products 
from non-euro-area countries remains essen -
tially intact despite the deteriorating expect -
ations, a reversal of the underlying cyclical 
trend in Germany is highly unlikely, especially as 
under this constellation, key components of 
domestic demand should remain buoyant.
According to the Ifo surveys, the business out -
look for trade and industry deteriorated signifi -
cantly in the second quarter. Industrial enter -
prises, in particular, scaled back their expect -
ations in light of the economic risks on major 
foreign markets. The generally more domestic -
ally oriented service providers were much more 
optimistic about their future business activities, 
however. Service providers outside the trade 
sector, for example, downgraded their expect -
ations only marginally. The optimistic under -
lying sentiment in the retail trade sector is hold -
ing up, whereas it deteriorated significantly in 
the wholesale trade owing to its dependency 
on industrial activity. It is noteworthy that the 
construction industry scaled back its business 
expectations significantly in the course of the 
first six months, although the starting level at 
the beginning of the year was exceptionally 
high.
Industrial orders in the second quarter of 2012 
rose slightly by a seasonally adjusted ¾% quar -Marked increase 
in economic risks for the second half  
of 2012
Marked 
 deterioration  
in business  expectations  
in  industryDemand for industrial goods and construction work
Deutsche Bundesbank2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 20128090100110120130
–40–30–20–1000+10+20+30
100110120130
758090100
100110120
8090100
90100110120
Apr-
May
Apr-
May
–20–100+10+20Volume, 2005 = 100, seasonally adjusted, quarterly
DomesticForeignLog scaleLog scale
Total
industrial
orders
Lin scale
Year-on-year change
Total construction orders
Lin scale
Year-on-year change%
%Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2012  
54

ter on quarter. A dampening effect was gener -
ated by orders of intermediate goods (-¼%). By 
contrast, producers of consumer goods re -
corded a considerable 1½% increase, and 
orders from manufacturers of capital goods 
picked up again for the first time since the 
summer of 2011 (+1%). However, the relative 
weakness of this sector in the current eco -
nomic cycle is reflected by the fact that orders 
were still down 6½% on the year.
The regional breakdown of orders also shows 
that in the second quarter, those geographical 
areas that had previously declined were able to 
make up some ground. Thus the seasonally ad -
justed rise in orders from euro-area countries, 
at 1½%, was equally as strong as the growth in 
orders from non-euro-area countries, whereas 
domestic orders fell by ½%. It should be noted, 
however, that subcontracts for aircraft produc -
tion that are passed on within the euro area as 
part of the European production network are 
statistically assigned to the euro area, even if 
– as was the case on numerous occasions in 
the reporting period – the original order origin -
ated from outside the euro area. The year-on-
year comparison, which this time also reflects 
the fall-off from the peak order level in the cur -
rent cycle, shows a significant decline in orders 
from the euro area.4 The drop in domestic 
orders was only half as big, while orders from 
countries outside the euro area even recorded 
slight growth.
The flow of construction orders was more 
moderate in April and May – more recent stat -
istical data are unavailable at present – follow -
ing a considerable boost across all subsectors 
at the beginning of the year. The drop in con -
struction orders is consistent with the fact that 
significantly fewer building permits were 
granted in the first three months of this year 
than at the end of 2011, when, however, orders 
had surged. Growth in new building permits 
was extremely brisk during the reporting 
period. Measured in terms of the estimated 
costs, permits for both residential and commer -
cial construction were up by around one sev -enth on the average of the first quarter. Taking 
both the weaker performance at the beginning 
of the year and the wave of permits granted in 
the second quarter together, it becomes evi -
dent in the case of residential construction, in 
particular, that the dynamic pace of expansion 
witnessed last year has not been matched so 
far this year.
Despite growing concerns about the economy, 
households’ propensity to consume is expected 
to remain at a high level in the coming months. 
The main reason for this is that, to date, in -
come expectations have been entirely de -
coupled from the perceived downward drift in 
the economic outlook, which is clearly discern -
ible in the household surveys conducted by the 
German consumer research institution (GfK). 
This is presumably attributable to the fact that Low inflow  
of orders  
on the whole
Weaker demand 
from non-euro-
area countries, 
but rise in orders 
from Germany 
and other euro-area states
Construction 
 demand more 
moderatePropensity to 
consume still 
highEconomic and income expectations
of consumers
2010010203040
––++++
– 15 0 + 15 + 30 + 45
Source:  GfK.  1 Balance  of the positive  and negative  data  as a 
percentage  of all responses;  deviation  from  the multi-year  aver-
age.
Deutsche Bundesbank2007
2008Jan-July 2012
2011
2010
2009Income expectation
Economic expectation2004200220012000
2006Balance1
4 The size of the year-on-year change was also affected by 
the fact that an exceptionally number of large orders were 
placed in the second quarter of 2011.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2012  
55

an increasing number of workers are now see -
ing the significant wage increases for the first 
half of the year on their wage slips, as well as 
additional sizeable bonus payments in some 
cases, and are now assessing the risk to their 
personal job security as limited in view of the 
very favourable employment situation. Added 
to this is the fact that work and income oppor -tunities are considered to be comparatively 
good in Germany, also from a longer-term per -
spective, notwithstanding the changing cyclical 
conditions. The phase during which structurally 
induced wage restraints had a dampening ef -
fect on income expectations, even during 
boom periods, now seems to be over.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2012  
56

Public finances*
General government budget
Germany’s public finances are likely to record a 
mixed performance this year.1 After falling 
to 1% last year, the deficit ratio could decline 
further in 2012 to around ½%, which would be 
low by international standards. By contrast, the 
debt ratio is likely to rise from the very high 
level recorded last year (81.2%). The cyclical 
impact on the deficit is expected to be more or 
less neutral. The revenue ratio could increase. 
The main reason for this is the favourable 
growth structure for government revenue, ie 
the macroeconomic reference variables that 
are particularly important for public finances 
(gross wages and salaries, nominal private con -
sumption) will probably grow at a faster pace 
than nominal gross domestic product (GDP). 
Revenue shortfalls as a result of legislative 
changes, particularly lowering the contribution 
rate to the statutory pension insurance scheme, 
will have only a partial countervailing effect. A 
slight decline in the expenditure ratio may be 
anticipated. For one thing, the pension increase 
was limited on an annual average and, for an -
other, unemployment is likely to fall slightly on 
the year. In addition, exceptionally good re-
financing conditions are holding down interest 
expenditure. Furthermore, the stimulus pro -
grammes introduced during the 2008-09 crisis 
have now been phased out.
The debt ratio has increased sharply since 
2008, particularly owing to the support meas -
ures for German financial institutions, and the 
assistance provided to help contain the euro-
area debt crisis has also been pushing up the 
debt level since 2010. Additional distinct bur -
dens will accumulate in the course of the cur -
rent year. Thus the liquidation of the regional 
public bank WestLB will once again transfer li -
abilities (and risky assets) to the government 
sector. In addition, the agreed loans from the 
European Financial Stability Facility (EFSF) to Ire -
land, Greece, Portugal and Spain as well as capital injections to the European Stability 
Mechanism (ESM) could, on their own, further 
increase the debt level by more than 2% of 
GDP .2 The above-mentioned factors outweigh 
the downward trend in the debt ratio that had 
begun to emerge, which is due to the low def -
icit ratio relative to nominal GDP growth and 
the redemptions envisaged in connection with 
the “bad banks”.
Germany’s general government deficit will 
barely change next year. Divergent develop -
ments look set to cancel each other out. On 
the one hand, the statutory pension contribu -
tion rate will probably be significantly lowered 
to meet the upper reserve limit. Moreover, fis -
cal policy will be loosened further by new 
budgetary burdens which are not permanently 
counterfinanced, such as the planned income Limited decline 
in deficit in 2012, but …
… debt ratio 
will probably rise againUnchanged  deficit and  declining debt ratio in 2013
* The analysis in the “General government budget” section 
is based on data contained in the national accounts and on 
the Maastricht ratios. The subsequent reporting on the 
budgets of the various levels of government and social se -
curity schemes is based on the figures as defined in the 
government’s financial statistics (which are generally in line 
with the budget accounts).
1 There are risks not least in connection with the European 
debt crisis. The comments below are based on the assump -
tion that any deteriorations will remain within narrow 
bounds.
2 The scale of this debt effect is uncertain, particularly with 
regard to the establishment of the ESM and the assistance 
for Spain. Furthermore, Cyprus has also applied for a sup -
port programme, although its impact on the German debt 
level would be very limited. The Federal Constitutional 
Court is currently reviewing constitutional challenges and 
petitions in the court proceedings against the Act concern -
ing the Treaty on the Establishment of the ESM of 2 Febru -
ary 2012, which are linked to applications for a temporary 
injunction against the Act being signed onto the statute 
book. A summary judgment is to be made on 12 Septem -
ber 2012. Given the size of the German capital share, the 
ESM treaty can enter into force only if it is ratified by Ger -
many. The impact of the assistance provided to Spain in 
2012 on the debt level depends, first, on how much of it is 
drawn down by the end of year, which cannot be pre -
dicted. Second, it is expressly envisaged that the assistance 
programme will be transferred to the ESM. Because the 
EFSF merely acts as a “vehicle” through which the guaran -
tor countries can implement the support measures, its 
 liabilities are assigned to these countries in line with their 
share of liability, which has a bearing on the debt level. 
However, there are no plans to apply a similar procedure 
for recording the ESM’s liabilities, as it is to be classified as 
an autonomous international entity.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2012  
57

tax cuts or the introduction of a childcare sup -
plement. On the other hand, the continued 
muted growth in social and interest expend -
iture is likely to relieve the budget. The debt 
ratio, by contrast, could start to dip, as de -
scribed above, if, over and above the afore -
mentioned measures, no additional measures 
which push up the debt level are taken to pro -
vide support for German financial institutions 
or to contain the European debt crisis.
As the deficit ratio was significantly below the 
3% threshold in 2011, in June the Council of 
the European Union decided to close the ex -
cessive deficit procedure against Germany, 
which had been initiated at the end of 2009. 
This and the now historically low general gov -
ernment deficit are welcome developments. 
With regards to the European fiscal targets, in 
the context of country-specific recommenda -
tions under the EU semester, Germany was par -
ticularly called upon to achieve the “medium-
term budgetary objective” of a structural deficit 
ratio of at most 0.5% of GDP in 2012.3
The macroeconomic setting for Germany’s 
public finances is currently very favourable on 
the whole. Nevertheless, many state and local 
governments are still running deficits, some of 
them sizeable. This is partly masked by high but 
temporary surpluses in the social security funds. 
The very high debt ratio, which has risen al -
most without interruption since the 1970s, re -
flects past failures to consolidate public fi -
nances. In view of the foreseeable future 
budget burdens stemming from demographic 
developments, and the substantial risks to pub -
lic finances – not least as a result of the debt 
crisis4 – policymakers should make use of the 
current favourable conditions in order to reso -
lutely consolidate. Overall, loosening fiscal pol -
icy through new budgetary burdens which are 
not counterfinanced on a sustainable basis 
therefore appears inappropriate. Moreover, 
international calls for inter alia  Germany to 
switch to an expansionary fiscal policy are thus 
problematic. Confidence in German public fi -
nances is a key anchor of stability in the current crisis, but it cannot be taken for granted. Fur -
thermore, a more expansionary budgetary pol -
icy in Germany is in any case likely to generate 
very little direct economic impetus for the per -
ipheral countries.
All in all, an ambitious fiscal policy stance is de -
sirable. The automatic stabilisers will cushion 
the impact of any risks that might materialise. 
The aim should be to swiftly comply with the 
permanent consolidation requirements en -
shrined in the national debt brakes for central 
and state government. Furthermore, appre -
ciable and binding safety margins below the 
national borrowing limits should be introduced 
as a general principle. Given the high estima -
tion uncertainty regarding the state and devel -
opment of structural budgets, such buffers that 
can absorb the impact of negative shocks are a 
key condition for being able to pursue a stable, 
target-oriented fiscal policy. This would allow 
the debt ratio to be rapidly lowered, which 
would yield an extra benefit in view of its cur -
rent very high level.
Budgetary development  
of central, state and local 
government
Tax revenue
Tax revenue5 was up by 3% on the year in the 
second quarter (see chart and table on pages 61 
and 62). The pace of growth was thus some -
what weaker than in the first quarter, although 
this was probably partly due to temporary spe -
cial factors affecting profit-related taxes. Rev -
enue from income-related taxes went up by 
4%. Wage tax receipts once again recorded Excessive deficit 
procedure against Ger-many closed, compliance with medium-term objective in 2012 recom-mended
Further deficits 
despite favour-able macroeco-nomic settingAmbitious fiscal policy desirable
Weaker rise  
in tax revenue  
in Q2
3 See Council of the European Union, Council recommen -
dation on the National Reform Programme 2012 of Ger -
many and delivering a Council opinion on the Stability Pro -
gramme of Germany, 2012-2016, Brussels, 10 July 2012.
4 For more information on the European Council’s and the 
Euro Area Summit’s statements of 28 and 29 June 2012 on 
the stabilisation of the euro area, see the box on pp 59-61.
5 Including EU shares in German tax revenue but excluding 
receipts from local government taxes, which are not yet 
known for the quarter under review.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2012  
58

The European Council and Euro Area Summit statements 
of 28 and 29 June 2012 regarding the stabilisation of the euro area
On 29  June 2012, the European Council 
reached its conclusions on the future struc-
ture of the EMU’s institutional framework. 
These include a general agreement to de-
velop – by the end of 2012 – possibilities for 
closer cooperation in fi  scal and economic 
policy and to strengthen the democratic 
 legitimacy of such cooperation. In the Euro Area Summit statement, the heads of state 
or government of the euro-area countries 
called, in particular, for the establishment of a single supervisory mechanism for fi  nancial institutions, involving the ECB. It is empha-sised that this would be a necessary condi-
tion for permitting the planned European Stability Mechanism (ESM)
1 to provide fi  -
nancial assistance not just to governments 
but also directly to banks. The European Commission intends to present legislative 
proposals on a single European supervisory 
mechanism shortly. The statement further 
affi   rms that the European Financial Stability Facility (EFSF) and the ESM will use their in-struments in a fl  exible and effi   cient manner 
in order to stabilise the markets for coun-
tries that are respecting their commitments under the various European procedures (in-cluding rules laid down in the Stability and 
Growth Pact and the Macroeconomic Im-
balance Procedure). In future, the ECB is to 
be more involved in conducting EFSF/ESM 
market operations. Furthermore, the state-
ment stresses that the fi  nancial support to 
be provided to Spain by the EFSF for recap-
italisation of its banking system will not 
gain seniority status after its pending trans-fer to the ESM (as envisaged for such trans-
fers in preamble 13 of the ESM Treaty).  Finally, the European Council has decided on a “Compact for Growth and Jobs” to 
allow, for instance, the lending capacities of the European Investment Bank (EIB) to be 
extended and the Structural Fund resources from the EU budget to be used to promote economic growth more broadly.
Single supervisory mechanism for banks
A more centralised system of banking 
supervision can essentially help to better 
factor in cross-border effects arising, for ex-ample, from banking groups that operate in several countries, and may facilitate the uni-
form implementation of harmonised regu-
lations without taking national interests into account. A standardised EU-wide ap-
proach would be desirable in principle, po-
tentially with an opt-out for non-euro-area 
member states. In the long term, all banks 
should be covered by the new single super-
visory mechanism so as to prevent regula-
tory arbitrage. However, giving the ECB ex-
tensive responsibilities in banking supervi-
sion entails the risk of coming into confl  ict 
with the primary objective of monetary pol-
icy, namely to safeguard price stability. 
Moreover, the decisions of a supranational 
banking supervisor, which may be far- 
reaching in some cases and could ultimately also affect national fi  scal policy, basically re-
quire democratic legitimacy and control. 
This holds true regardless of the institution 
responsible.
1 The ESM Treaty will enter into force only when coun-
tries representing 90% of the capital commitments 
have ratifi  ed it. This will not be achieved without Ger-
many, where ratifi  cation of the Treaty has been sus-
pended until the Federal Constitutional Court (Bundes-
verfassungsgericht) announces its summary judgment 
on the constitutionality of the legislation to ratify the 
ESM Treaty and of the ESM Financing Act (ESM-
Finanzierungsgesetz) on 12 September 2012.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2012  
59

Using the ESM to recapitalise banks directly 
can reduce the interdependencies between 
the creditworthiness of banks and sover-eign states, as is essentially desired. How-
ever, this simultaneously leads to risks being redistributed among the member states. To 
maintain a balance between liability and 
control, this would necessitate – depending on the specifi  c structure chosen – the intro-duction of adequate powers of intervention 
in fi  scal and economic policy, as well as 
their rigorous execution. It would therefore 
make sense for the EMU countries to as-sume joint liability (via the ESM) only for those risks which arise after the single supervisory mechanism has been set up. 
Nevertheless, shared responsibility for bank-
ing supervision should not entail granting 
insolvent banks fi  nancial support on a per-
manent basis, not least to limit the risks for 
the taxpayers in the member states. In-stead, such banks should be promptly re-structured, possibly recapitalised and/or li-
quidated in an orderly manner.
The interconnections between banks and 
governments will not be completely severed 
by introducing joint liability for distressed 
banks. In order to limit the risks to fi  nancial institutions arising from high levels of public 
sector debt, the framework for banking 
supervision and regulation also needs to be 
adjusted in terms of its treatment of gov-ernment bonds. For example, capital re-
quirement ratios could be laid down com-
mensurate with risk or large exposures could be limited accordingly. This would 
more heavily restrict banks’ exposure to in-dividual governments. It would be essential – especially if individual countries are facing 
diffi   cult fi  nancing conditions  – to ensure that the interconnections between banks and governments do not increase exces-sively, thereby transferring substantial sov-ereign solvency risks to other member 
states by the back door of granting fi  nancial support to the banking sector. A single European supervisory mechanism could constitute an important step towards a 
more stable institutional framework for the single market. However, it would not be an 
appropriate solution – at least in the short 
and medium term  – to the current Euro-
pean sovereign debt and banking crisis.
Financial assistance programme 
 requirements
Interest rate premiums on emergency loans 
as well as strict economic and fi  scal policy 
conditions are key to ensuring that a coun-
try receiving fi  nancial assistance still has an 
incentive to correct undesirable develop-ments quickly and to regain access to the capital markets without delay. From this perspective, the tendency to water down 
conditionality is a matter for concern – say 
by basically making the fi  nancial assistance 
provided under an EFSF/ESM programme 
subject only to the rules that have to be ad-hered to anyway under the upstream fi  scal 
and macroeconomic correction mechan-
isms.
Secondary market purchases
The reference in the Euro Area Summit 
statement to the ECB’s agreeing “to serve as an agent to EFSF/ESM in conducting 
market operations in an effective and effi   -
cient manner” indicates the ECB’s involve-ment as a service provider. On 2  August 
2012, the ECB Governing Council then an-
nounced that it would buy government 
bonds on the secondary market in conjunc-tion with the EFSF and ESM programmes on a potentially sizeable scale. Secondary mar-ket bond purchases are also possible within 
the framework of EFSF and ESM pro-
grammes themselves. Outright purchases 
by the Eurosystem might massively expand 
the volume of funds provided under assis-Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2012  
60

significant growth, which mainly reflects the 
positive pay and employment trends. Receipts 
from profit-related taxes increased by 1% over -
all. Revenue from corporation tax and assessed 
income tax continued to expand dynamically, 
although this development was more or less 
cancelled out by a decline in receipts from non-
assessed taxes on earnings. However, this de -
crease appears to be linked to a change in the 
procedure for deducting withholding tax on 
dividends, which has resulted in delays in in -
coming payments. Revenue from consumption-
related taxes went up by just over ½%. Al -
though receipts from turnover tax grew at a 
somewhat weaker pace than their macroeco -
nomic reference variables, significant intra-year 
fluctuations in turnover tax revenue6 are per -
fectly normal.According to the official tax estimate from May, 
tax receipts for 2012 as a whole are expected 
to rise by 4% (including local government 
taxes). This growth reflects above all the antici -
pated positive developments in the macroeco -Considerable 
growth expected for year as a wholetance programmes. Risks to taxpayers aris-
ing from EFSF and ESM secondary market 
purchases are essentially not much different 
from risks arising from Eurosystem pur-
chases (see also the comments concerning 
the ECB Governing Council’s decisions on 
pages 22 and 26).
Compact for Growth and Jobs
In the Compact for Growth and Jobs, the 
EU governments affi   rm their commitment to the European single market. This initia-
tive is to be welcomed, as structural reforms 
in member states, the further dismantling of barriers to competition at EU level and 
the reduction of excessive bureaucratic pro-
cedures can boost potential growth in the 
EU. Furthermore, the EIB’s lending capacity 
is to be strengthened by €60 billion by in-
creasing its paid-in capital by €10 billion (of 
which Germany accounts for €1.6 billion). To generate the desired additional macro-economic stimuli, free-rider absorption ef-fects should be minimised. Furthermore, the EIB is requested to launch “project 
bonds” which, as a supplement to private 
funds, are to help kick-start additional infra-
structure projects worth €4½ billion. It is 
important in this connection to ensure that 
governments have suffi   cient administrative 
capacities to select and control the projects. 
Overall, care must be taken to ensure that 
such new subsidisation instruments do not 
mask the level of national government debt 
or evade the EU budget prohibition on 
debt-fi  nancing. Finally, Structural Fund re-
sources are to be reallocated to combating youth unemployment and subsidising small and medium-sized enterprises. In this case, too, much effort will need to be directed at ensuring that public resources are used effi   -ciently – not least in the light of past experi-ence.
Tax revenue*
* Including  EU shares  in German  tax revenue,  excluding 
receipts from local government taxes.
Deutsche Bundesbank2010 2011 2012642024681012
–––++++++Year-on-year percentage change, quarterly
6 Fluctuations in revenue may stem in particular from the 
at times large refunds or back payments that are due in 
cases where advance payments made during the course of 
the year deviate from the final amount of tax payable.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2012  
61

nomic reference variables. Fiscal drag7 and le -
gislative changes (particularly the expiry of the 
homebuyers’ grant and more generous depre -
ciation allowances) are also likely to produce 
additional revenue on balance.
Central government budget
In the second quarter, at €6 billion, central gov -
ernment’s budget surplus was €2½ billion 
higher than one year previously. Revenue rose 
by 2% (€1½ billion). Growth in tax revenue 
(1%, or €½ billion) was dampened by higher 
transfers of €1 billion to the EU budget. Ex -
penditure fell by 2% (-€1½ billion). In particu -
lar, relief was provided by the €1 billion decline 
in interest expenditure, primarily owing to dis -
counts when issuing new securities. Transfers 
to the social security funds were also €1 billion 
down on the year. This was mainly due to the 
Federal Employment Agency’s lower liquidity 
requirements and the planned reduction in payments to the health insurance fund. Fur -
thermore, spending in connection with long-
term unemployment fell by €½ billion in the 
light of the buoyant labour market.
In June, a supplementary budget for 2012 was 
passed in connection with having to fund the 
first contributions to the ESM in the amount of 
€8½ billion. The net borrowing appropriation 
was reduced by €2½ billion to €32.1 billion 
compared with the draft supplementary 
budget. This reduction more or less corres -
ponds to the additional revenue expected in 
the May tax estimate.8Marked rise in 
surplus in Q2Supplementary budget despite relief …Tax revenue
 
Type of taxH1 Estimate 
for 
2012 1,2Q2
2011 2012 2011 2012
Year-on-year changeYear-
on-year change Year-on-year change
€ billion € billion as % as % € billion € billion as %
Tax revenue, total
2 256.9 268.2 + 11.4 +  4.4 +  4.0 133.7 137.6 + 3.9 +  2.9
of which
Wage tax 66.6 70.3 +  3.6 +  5.5 +  5.5 34.1 36.1 + 2.0 +  5.9
Profi  t-related taxes 3 41.3 46.1 +  4.8 + 11.7 +  6.6 23.5 23.7 + 0.2 +  0.9
Assessed income tax 16.1 18.5 +  2.3 + 14.5 +  8.5 9.4 10.0 + 0.6 +  6.9
Corporation tax 6.7 10.5 +  3.8 + 56.2 + 17.1 4.2 5.0 + 0.8 + 18.5
Investment income 
tax4 18.5 17.2 –  1.3 –  7.0 –  1.9 9.9 8.7 – 1.2 – 12.3
Turnover taxes 5 93.5 95.6 +  2.1 +  2.2 +  3.3 46.1 46.6 + 0.5 +  1.1
Energy tax 14.5 14.1 –  0.3 –  2.4 –  0.2 10.0 9.7 – 0.3 –  2.9
Tobacco tax 6.2 5.9 –  0.3 –  5.5 –  1.5 3.3 3.5 + 0.3 +  7.6
1 According to offi   cial tax estimate of May 2012. 2 Including EU shares in German tax revenue, but excluding receipts from local govern-
ment taxes. 3 Employee refunds, homebuyers’ grant and investment grant deducted from revenue. 4 Withholding tax on interest income and capital gains, non-assessed taxes on earnings. 5 Turnover tax and import turnover tax.
Deutsche Bundesbank
7 In this context, this term denotes the balance of the rev -
enue effects stemming from the progressive structure of 
the income tax schedule (positive) and the fact that specific 
excise duties are largely inelastic to price changes (nega -
tive).
8 Additional relief, such as the further reduction in interest 
expenditure, has been cancelled out in particular by the 
marked wage increases for central government employees 
that have come into effect in the meantime.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2012  
62

Despite the high level of employment and a 
fairly normal level of capacity utilisation, the 
German government anticipates a marked cyc -
lical burden on the central government budget 
in 2012. This amounts to €4 billion according 
to the new estimate of potential output in the 
government’s spring forecast. With net bor -
rowing due to financial transactions9 amount -
ing to €5 billion, primarily owing to the ESM 
contributions, structural borrowing totals €23 
billion. This is quite a sharp rise compared with 
the current reference figure for 2011 of €19 bil -
lion (for more information on the method of 
calculating the structural deficits, see the box 
on pages 64 and 65).
The higher structural deficit projected in the 
June supplementary budget is partly due to a 
departure from the original consolidation path 
decided in the summer of 2010. However, it 
also reflects the fact that some of the appropri -
ations are cautious from today’s perspective. 
As in previous years, it seems likely that above 
all interest expenditure and labour-market-
related burdens could remain below budget es -
timates. The fact that in mid-2012 central gov -
ernment’s total deficit was €4 billion down on 
the year also indicates that, in the absence of 
unexpected burdens, a markedly better-than-
expected result will probably be recorded once 
again. On the basis of the above calculation, a 
further reduction in the structural deficit there -
fore seems possible.
In accordance with the top-down procedure 
for drawing up budgets, which was introduced 
in 2011, central government’s 2013 draft fed -
eral budget from the end of June is based on 
the benchmark figures approved by the Federal 
Cabinet in March. In the draft, the budgeted 
amount for new borrowing was reduced by €1 
billion to €18.8 billion. Extra tax revenue of 
€3½ billion and lower debt servicing costs 
were counterbalanced in particular by a €4½ 
billion higher capital transfer to the ESM. How -
ever, personnel expenditure estimates were 
also adjusted for the impact of the recent pay 
increases. The new budget procedure could be made more binding if any deficit-increasing 
measures or extraordinary effects that are 
adopted after the benchmark figures are 
agreed, and which are not exempted as being 
attributable to a higher cyclical burden or to an 
acquisition of financial assets with recoverable 
value, were to be mandatorily offset by sav -
ings.
Compared with the target figure in the 2012 
supplementary budget, the draft budget for 
2013 envisages a significant reduction in net 
borrowing in the amount of €13½ billion. 
Much of this is allocated to higher revenue, in -
cluding a €7½ billion increase in tax receipts. 
Additional spending of €1½ billion from the 
first stage of the scheduled lowering of income 
tax rates is planned to be largely counterbal -… alongside 
structural deficit increase com-pared with 2011, …
… but lower-
than-estimated deficit plausible
Benchmark 
 figures for 2013 
budget plan not fully binding2013 draft budget shows marked fall  
in deficit …Central government fiscal deficit/surplus
Deutsche BundesbankQ1 Q2 Q3 Q42520151050510
–––––++
–45–40–35–30–25–20–15–10
20102010Quarterly results
Cumulative from start of year
20122012
20112011€ bn
9 Financial transactions are understood to comprise rev -
enue from sales of participating interests, loan repayments 
and borrowing in the public sector as well as expenditure 
on acquisitions of participating interests, loans granted and 
debt repayments in the public sector.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2012  
63

Calculating structural defi  cits in the central government 
budget – some technical comments
Under the debt brake, structural net bor-
rowing is the key number in the central 
government budget as the borrowing limit 
laid down in Article 115 of the German 
Basic Law is based on this variable. To cal-
culate this variable, net borrowing (defi  cit less coin seigniorage) is adjusted to take  account of both cyclical factors and the  balance resulting from the acquisition and realisation of fi  nancial assets (fi  nancial 
transactions).
The respective values can change signifi  -
cantly during the time that elapses between 
budget drafting and outturn. For instance, 
the actual fi  gure for net borrowing regularly 
deviates from the target values. The same 
applies to fi  nancial transactions; in addition, 
some of the activities recorded under this 
heading may be reclassifi  ed later.1 The esti-
mated infl  uence of cyclical factors may also be signifi  cantly revised even after the end of 
the respective year, eg if ongoing macro-economic developments differ from previ-
ous assumptions or the (unobservable) po-
tential growth path for gross domestic 
product (GDP) is adjusted owing to changes to the estimation methodology.
2
The implementation regulation concerning 
the central government debt brake (Article 
115 Regulation) stipulates that the cyclical impact on the central government budget 
has to be calculated differently for budget 
drafting, on the one hand, and for supple-mentary budgets and budget close-out, on 
the other. When drawing up the budget, 
the cyclical effect is to be determined using 
the available macroeconomic data and 
forecasts of central government, based on 
a current estimate of potential output. But 
when drawing up a supplementary budget or closing the books, the rules provide for a greatly simplifi  ed calculation approach. It is simply assumed that any deviation of nom-
inal GDP growth from the original expect-
ations which have since been presumed or 
observed is solely the result of cyclical fac-
tors. The estimate of potential output is not 
1 For example, capital injections granted to multilateral 
development banks are no longer booked as fi  nancial transactions, as they were in 2011, but instead as cap-ital transfers, thus increasing structural net borrowing. Calls on and repayments of guarantees to other coun-tries were apparently reclassifi  ed even in the course of 
budget implementation: when the 2011 budget was 
being drawn up, the items were still categorised as 
 fi  nancial transactions, but when the books were closed this was no longer the case.2 The cyclical adjustment methodology used for deter-mining the cyclical component under the new budget-
ary rule was amended with effect from the second quarter of 2011 due to the adoption of a change 
made by the EU, meaning that, for this reason alone, the respective fi  gures from 2012 onwards are not fully comparable with those from previous years.Deriving different variables of central government’s structural net borrowing
€ bn
2011
Actual2012 
Supple-
mentary budget
1) Net borrowing 17½ 32
2) Cyclical component in the 
Budget Act – 2½ – 6
3) Cyclical component after 
budget implementation 
( simplifi  ed procedure) 1
4) Cyclical component accord-
ing to spring projection 
2012 (complete re-estimate) – 1 – 4
5) Financial transactions 
 according to respective  defi  nition of the budget year 2 – 5
6) Financial transactions 
 according to the defi  nition for 2012 3 – 5
7) Currently reported structural 
borrowing under respective budgetary rules [7) = 1) + 5) + (3) or 2))] 20 21
8) Comparable structural 
 borrowing [8) = 1) + 4) + 6)] 19 23
Deutsche BundesbankDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2012  
64

anced, inter alia  by the estimated income from 
a tax repatriation agreement with Switzerland, 
although the Bundesrat has so far blocked the 
agreement. A marked decline in expenditure is 
the other factor contributing to the projected 
deficit reduction. Given the ongoing very fa -
vourable financing conditions, interest expend -
iture is expected to fall by €2½ billion. Even 
more is to be saved by cutting transfers to the 
social security funds. In the light of the health 
insurance fund’s accrued surpluses, payments 
to it will be reduced by €2 billion on a one-off 
basis. Furthermore, it is planned to discontinue 
the regular central government transfer to the 
Federal Employment Agency (which is financed 
through turnover tax) and, in return, to abolish 
the Federal Employment Agency’s welfare ad -
ministration payment to central government. 
This, too, will produce a €2 billion saving for 
the central government budget in 2013. An 
additionally envisaged discretionary cut of €1 
billion in payments to the statutory pension in -
surance scheme will largely be offset by the budgeted year-on-year increase for this item. 
By contrast, the childcare supplement – a new 
social payment which is planned to be intro -
duced in 2013  – is expected to generate a 
limited burden of just under €½ billion during 
its first year.
The draft budget for 2013 envisages a distinct 
improvement in structural terms, too. Structural 
net borrowing is forecast to decline by €14 bil -
lion compared with the recalculated deficit tar -
get of €23 billion for 2012 (which, as explained 
above, has been adjusted for the new estimate 
of potential output from spring 2012), down to 
€9 billion. The presumed negative cyclical im -
pact amounts to €3½ billion and net burdens 
from financial transactions to €6 billion. Central 
government is therefore already set to comply 
with the ceiling of 0.35% of GDP , which will be 
compulsory from 2016 onwards, in 2013. Many 
of the budget appropriations appear rather 
cautious from today’s perspective. As in recent 
years, transfers to the EU budget could be … and complies 
with 0.35% structural bor-rowing limit, but debt crisis risks remainupdated. By contrast, in the course of a full 
cyclical adjustment recalculation the devi-
ation to a large extent induces a revision of 
the potential output fi  gure as well.3 The 
simplifi  ed approach therefore means that 
higher-than-forecast GDP growth in the year in question results in less budgetary leeway than in the case of a complete re-estimate, whereas lower growth expands 
the policy radius.
Overall, it is evident that recourse to differ-
ent calculation methods for determining 
the structural defi  cits is warranted, depend-
ing on the analytical goal. The actual struc-tural development should be analysed with-
out regard to the procedural rules that 
apply to the different phases of the budget-ary cycle. Hence, for each year under obser-
vation, a cylical adjustment should be initi-
ated on the basis of the currently valid esti-
mate of potential GDP , and fi  nancial trans-actions should be deducted using a uniform 
defi  nition. Conversely, when gauging the extent to which budgetary developments comply with the procedural rules for the 
debt brake and calculating what values are to be recorded on the control account, the simplifi  ed cyclical adjustment procedure has 
to be used along with the currently valid defi  nition of fi  nancial transactions for the 
respective budget.
3 The German Basic Law stipulates that cyclical factors 
are to be taken into account over time in a symmetric 
fashion in order to prevent an additional systematic 
rise in debt. This gives rise to the need for the proced-
ure for estimating potential output to ensure a sym-metric balance between upswing and downswing 
phases. Ultimately, this means that whenever a down-ward revision of GDP is not just temporary, the growth 
path of potential GDP as a whole is revised down-
wards, and vice versa.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2012  
65

lower than projected. On the expenditure side, 
it is likely that above all the costs of interest 
payments and long-term unemployment have 
once again been overstated. By contrast, the 
budget figures do not yet include additional 
central government expenditure, particularly 
on extending day care for small children and 
with regard to assuming a total share of €1 bil -
lion of the costs for the basic allowance for the 
elderly and disabled, as decided under the 
agreement between central and state govern -
ment on implementing the fiscal compact. 
There are risks, too, in association with the 
Bundesbank’s estimated profit transfer of €1½ 
billion. Nevertheless, for 2013 as a whole – as 
in recent years – a lower-than-estimated deficit 
(of around €15 billion, compared with the fig -
ure of €18.8 billion in the draft budget) ap -
pears quite feasible provided there is not a fur -
ther marked loosening of fiscal policy. How -
ever, this favourable outlook is based on the 
assumption of ongoing marked macroeco -
nomic growth, very low interest rates and the 
absence of burdens from guarantees in con -
nection with the euro-area debt crisis.
The budgeted decline in the deficit should not 
hide the fact that the clear departure from the 
June 2010 consolidation programme which 
started in 2012 is set to continue. Revenue to -
talling €2 billion from the financial transactions 
tax, which was initially planned to be intro -
duced in 2012, is not evident for 2013 either. 
The savings of around €2 billion each for the 
German armed forces and long-term un -
employment, as envisaged for 2013 under the 
2010 consolidation programme, are not appar -
ent in the plans. The favourable budgetary de -
velopments since 2010, which are projected to 
continue in the budget plans, are largely due to 
additional tax revenue on the back of the Ger -
man economy’s robust development, as well as 
to sizeable cost relief relating to debt servicing. 
This entails considerable risks and means that 
the planned abandonment of sustainable gen -
eral government consolidation measures, com -
bined with a lowering of income tax rates and 
new (social) expenditure burdens for a central government budget that traditionally records a 
deficit, should be viewed in an even more crit -
ical light.
The medium-term fiscal plan up to 2016 envis -
ages a gradual reduction in net borrowing, cul -
minating in its complete elimination by the end 
of the planning period. If capacity utilisation 
remains normal and the net acquisition of fi -
nancial assets is moderate, this amounts to a 
slight structural surplus in the final year. Al -
though interest expenditure is forecast to in -
crease significantly in keeping with prudent ac -
counting, the annual income of €2 billion from 
a financial transactions tax as well as the 
planned reduction in defence expenditure, 
which are both assumed from 2014 onwards, 
appear to entail risks. Furthermore, it would 
seem appropriate for the central government 
budget to contain measures to counterfinance 
its significant assumption of the costs of local 
government integration measures for disabled 
persons, as announced in connection with the 
fiscal compact. Moreover, the fiscal plan is 
based on the assumption that real GDP will in -
crease by 1½% each year until 2016 and thus 
somewhat faster than the imputed potential 
growth rate. On the basis of a posited (but 
questionable) perceptible underutilisation at 
the current end, the output gap will thus sup -
posedly not be closed until 2016 (for more in -
formation, see the box on cross-country evi -
dence regarding bias in real-time cyclical ad -
justment on pages 68 to 70). This recalls the 
planning pattern of past fiscal plans whose 
goals often had to be abandoned owing to 
downward revisions to growth estimates. As 
the debt brake places a strict limit on structural 
borrowing, the planned reduction in the safety 
margin to around €10 billion in 2016 appears 
risky, particularly given the high level of uncer -
tainty.
Central government’s off-budget entities re -
corded a surplus of €1½ billion in the second 
quarter, compared with €12½ billion one year 
previously owing to banks’ repayment of cap -
ital assistance to the Financial Market Stabilisa -But continuing 
departure from 2010 consolida-tion programmeFiscal plan  targets slight structural  surplus in 2016 
but reduces safety margin
Surplus for off-
budget entitiesDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2012  
66

tion Fund (SoFFin). As in 2011, the precaution -
ary fund for final payments for inflation-indexed 
Federal securities recorded a distinct surplus. In 
the case of the civil servants’ pension reserves, 
too, income continued to distinctly outweigh 
expenditure. For the year as a whole, the over -
all off-budget surplus will probably be signifi -
cantly below the figure of €6 billion recorded 
one year previously. However, under the Maas -
tricht deficit definition – which disregards re -
ductions of equity holdings – it should improve 
considerably. This is mainly due to the non-
recurrence of the marked outflows from the In -
vestment and Repayment Fund, which expired 
at the end of 2011.
State government10
State government’s core budgets recorded a 
surplus of €2 billion in the second quarter of 
2012 compared with €1½ billion one year be -
fore. Although tax revenue rose by 3½%, total revenue stagnated, primarily due to a drop in 
investment income following the end of central 
government’s stimulus programme, which had 
been introduced in 2009. On the expenditure 
side, the reduction in corresponding spending 
on fixed asset formation and investment trans -
fers to local government lowered the overall 
level of outpayments somewhat on balance 
(-½%). The May tax estimate suggests that rev -
enue will grow at a weaker pace during the 
remainder of 2012. At the same time, state 
government faces increased spending pres -
sures owing not least to personnel costs, cur -
rent transfers to local government and a capital 
injection in connection with the liquidation of 
the public regional bank WestLB. This will prob -
ably hinder a marked decline in the deficit.
Despite slightly 
higher surplus in Q2, full-year fall in deficit uncer-tainCentral government’s medium-term fi  nancial planning from 2012 to 2016 and structural net borrowing under the debt brake
€ billion
ItemActual
2010Actual2011Target2012
1Draft2013Fiscal plan
2014 2015 2016
Expenditure
2 303.6 296.2 312.7 302.2 302.9 303.3 309.9
of which
  Investment 3 26.1 25.4 27.0 25.6 25.4 25.2 24.9
Revenue 2, 4 259.6 278.9 280.6 283.4 289.8 298.6 309.9
of which
Tax revenue 2 226.2 248.1 252.2 259.8 269.1 277.3 288.5
Net borrowing 44.0 17.3 32.1 18.8 13.1 4.7 –
plus cyclical component 5 – 12.3 0.8 – 5.9 – 3.7 – 2.8 – 1.4 0.0
plus balance of fi  nancial transactions 6 0.8 2.0 – 4.9 – 6.1 – 4.7 – 0.5 – 0.8
Structural net borrowing 32.5 20.1 21.3 9.0 5.6 2.8 – 0.8
as a percentage of GDP 7 1.4 0.8 0.9 0.4 0.2 0.1 – 0.0
Memo item
Structural net borrowing 8
Upper limit according to Federal Ministry of Finance 53.2 45.6 39.4 33.0 25.5 17.9 9.8
1 Including supplementary central government budget for 2012. 2 After deducting supplementary central government grants, shares in energy tax revenue, compensation under the 2009 motor vehicle tax reform and consolidation assistance from 2011 onwards, which are 
all remitted to state government. 3 Excluding participating interests in the ESM. 4 Including proceeds from coin seigniorage. 5 Figure for 
2010 is taken from central government’s 2011 spring forecast. Figure for 2011 is taken from the budgetary accounts. Figure for 2012 as stated in the supplementary budget. For 2013 to 2016, as stated in central government’s 2012 spring forecast. 6 As defi  ned for the re-
spective fi  scal year. 7 Nominal GDP in the year preceding the drafting of the budget (data as at 2012 spring forecast). 8 Central govern-
ment did not record an actual result for structural net borrowing for the base year 2010. The defi  cit reduction path from 2011 to 2015 is based on the June 2010 estimate of the starting structural defi  cit value for 2010 (2.2% of GDP) and a reduction of 0.31% of GDP per year.
Deutsche Bundesbank
10 The development of local government finances in the 
first quarter of 2012 was analysed in greater detail in the 
short article in the Bundesbank Monthly Report of July 
2012. These are the most recent data available.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2012  
67

Some evidence on biased cyclical adjustment within fi  scal 
rules
Problem
Under the forthcoming European fi  scal 
compact, most EU member states are com-
mitted to implementing national fi  scal rules 
concerning cyclically adjusted general gov-
ernment budget balances in line with the Stability and Growth Pact. The basic as-
sumption is that the ups and downs of the 
economic cycle are largely symmetrical in 
the longer term, meaning that there is nei-ther a prevalence of weak or strong phases nor any resultant lasting effects on the debt 
ratio. Although this is essentially a useful benchmark, cyclical effects cannot be ob-
served directly and are not uniquely meas-
urable. They must therefore be estimated 
using the information available at the time 
following a procedure deemed adequate.
In the specifi  c cyclical adjustment proced-ures which are used in the context of the 
Stability and Growth Pact and the German 
central government’s fi  scal rule, the cyclical 
component of the general government 
budget balance is the product of the macro-
economic output gap and the average re-
sponsiveness of the state budget to this gap 
(budget sensitivity). The latter thus gauges 
the impact of cyclical fl  uctuations in gross 
domestic product (GDP) on the budget bal-
ance and is usually assumed to be time-
invariant.1 The output gap is defi  ned as the 
deviation of GDP from the estimated poten-tial output and thus serves as a measure of the economy’s cyclical position.
2
The German debt brake and the Stability 
and Growth Pact basically aim to keep the 
debt ratio at a sustainable level whilst also 
using the automatic stabilising effect of 
temporary cyclically induced fl  uctuations in 
the budget balance (“automatic stabil-isers”). If a long-run increase in the debt 
ratio caused by cyclical components is to be 
prevented, surpluses and defi  cits that have 
been classifi  ed as cyclically induced have to balance over time. Under the given method, 
this means that negative and positive out-
put gaps which are used to calculate the cyclical components must neutralise over 
time. If this does not already apply for the 
output gaps estimated in real time,3 the rule 
should contain a corrective mechanism which prevents debt from accumulating. 
The existing literature suggests that output gap estimates at the current end are subject 
to considerable uncertainty and are often 
revised signifi  cantly at a later stage.4
Results of an empirical study
When investigating the risk of a potential 
structural build-up of debt due to systemat-ically biased estimations, it is of some inter-
est to observe the extent to which these 
have occurred in the past. A recent empir-
1 Both the European Commission and the German 
government use the results of the following study for 
this purpose: N Girouard and C André (2005), Measur-
ing cyclically-adjusted budget balances for OECD countries, OECD Economics Department Working 
Paper No 434.2 For a representation of the requirements for cyclical adjustment procedures used in the context of budget-ary rules and an assessment of the procedures used by the European Union and the German government, see 
also Deutsche Bundesbank, Requirements regarding 
the cyclical adjustment procedure under the new debt 
rule, Monthly Report, January 2011, pp 55-60 and 
Deutsche Bundesbank, On the cyclical adjustment pro-
cedure under the German central government’s new 
debt rule, Monthly Report, November 2011, p 71.3 For the German government’s fi  scal rule the real-time 
estimate produced in autumn 2012 is relevant to the 
planned adoption of the 2013 budget in the Bundes-
tag. The assessment of compliance with the rule is then based on the summer 2014 estimate. To assess 
compliance with the rule, a simplifi  ed estimation pro-
cedure is applied from the start of the budget year, see comments on pp 64-65. The following comments are of a general nature, however, and do not refer directly to the German rule.
4 See, for example, A Orphanides and S van Norden 
(2002), The unreliability of output-gap estimates in real time, Review of Economics and Statistics, 84, pp 569-583 or M Marcellino and A Musso (2011), The reliabil-ity of real-time estimates of the euro area output gap, Economic Modelling, 28, pp 1842-1856.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2012  
68

ical study5 therefore analyses the bias in 
cyclical components that would have ma-
terialised since the mid-1990s had they 
been calculated using real-time estimates of 
the output gap by the OECD, European 
Commission or IMF. The data set for the re-
spective institution covers 12 to 15 EU member states over a period of 10 to 16 years.
6 These real-time data are compared 
with the respective institution’s estimate 
from autumn 2011.
The unbiasedness of the real-time output gaps is tested using the following regres-
sion model:
gap
it ii t rev =+
where revgapit = gapﬁ n a lit – gapreal-timeit de-
notes the revision to the output gap be-
tween the fi  nal estimation in autumn 2011 
(gapfinalit) and the real-time vintage 
(gapreal-timeit). i denotes the countries and t 
the years. Based on this simple regression, 
the unbiasedness of the real-time estimates can be checked using a Wald or F-test with the null hypothesis that the country-specifi  c constants 
αi are jointly not signifi  cantly dif-
ferent from zero. Positive αi indicate that 
the real-time output gaps were systematic-ally smaller (ie showed less favourable eco-
nomic conditions) than the autumn 2011 
estimates, which are used as a benchmark 
in this study. This would imply that real-time 
estimates of the cyclical component were 
largely too unfavourable and that too much 
of the defi  cit was thus interpreted as cyc-lical (negative bias). Finally, 
εit denotes an 
error term. The table on page 70 presents 
the results of the estimation model for the 
OECD data, for which the largest data set is available. Results for the four real-time vin-
tages, spring t-1, autumn t-1, spring t and 
autumn t, are listed in the columns.
The tests for unbiasedness are rejected for 
all four real-time vintages, as seen in the re-
sults of the Wald tests. The estimates for the country-specifi  c constants are almost 
entirely positive, which means that real-time estimates of economic conditions were sys-
tematically too unfavourable in real time.7 
In other words, cyclically adjusted defi  cits based on these estimates would be too 
low. Most of the country-specifi  c constants 
are also individually signifi  cantly different from zero. The magnitude of the bias is considerable: on an unweighted average 
across the entire cross-section of countries, the real-time output gap, depending on the 
vintage, is 0.9 to 1.3 percentage points 
below the value calculated last autumn. EU and IMF real-time data show a similar bias.
The real-time bias in the cyclical compon-ents can then easily be derived based on the bias in the output gaps and using the budget sensitivities applied under the Sta-bility and Growth Pact and the German government’s fi  scal rule. The unweighted 
cross-country average of the real-time bias 
in cyclical components is around -½% of 
GDP per year; if these data had been used 
for a national fi  scal rule, the annual scope 
for borrowing would thus have been around ½% of GDP too high compared 
with the autumn 2011 estimates.
The estimation results refl  ect the period 
1996 to 2011 and are not necessarily repre-sentative for the future. They are, however, not a peculiarity of the severe economic cri-
sis in 2008-2009 and the preceding boom 
period, as a restriction of the data set shows. Moreover, further empirical evi-dence from the described study and fi  nd-
5 See G Kempkes (2012), Cyclical adjustment in fi  scal 
rules: some evidence on real-time bias for EU-15 coun-
tries, Bundesbank Discussion Paper No 15/2012.6 The countries and years covered in the data sets dif-
fer slightly among the three institutions. OECD: Ger-
many, France, Italy, Spain, Greece, Ireland, Austria, the 
Netherlands, Belgium Finland, Sweden, Portugal, the UK, Denmark, 1996-2011. European Commission: countries as for OECD plus Luxembourg, 2002-2011. IMF: countries as for OECD but without Greece and 
Denmark, 2000-2011.
7 Negative coeffi   cients are estimated for only fi  ve of 
the 56 country-specifi  c constants. Only two of these 
are statistically signifi  cant, namely the coeffi   cients esti-mated for Greece on the basis of the real-time vintages for year t– 1. However, the current high estimation un-
certainty with regard to Greece’s potential output 
must be taken into consideration here.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2012  
69

ings from the literature suggest that other 
standard cyclical adjustment methods also 
lead to biased real-time estimates.
Conclusions
The results of the empirical study highlight 
the risk that fi  scal rules which refer to cyclic-
ally adjusted budget balances may system-
atically fail to achieve the desired debt limi-
tation on account of a regular overesti-
mation of potential output (ie an overesti-
mation of cyclical strains) at the current 
end. To ensure that this does not regularly 
lead to overly high borrowing compared to 
the respective national fi  scal rule’s defi  cit 
limit, assessments of compliance with the 
rule should not be based solely on the cyc-lically adjusted budget balance estimated in 
real time, as is usual in Germany and the EU. Instead, possible biases in the real-time 
cyclical components should be taken into 
account. A fi  rst step could be to keep a re-cord of each cyclical component used to as-
sess compliance with the rule. If after ap-proximately one full economic cycle (eg 
eight to ten years) the cyclical components do not turn out to be roughly balanced on average, the borrowing limit for the subse-quent period could be raised or lowered ac-
cordingly. Such a correction mechanism 
would be relatively easy to implement and 
would automatically become less important if estimation methods were improved.Test for unbiasedness of real-time output gaps1
Endogenous variable revgapit: revision of estimated output gap between autumn 2011 and spring t-1 (column 1), 
autumn t-1 (column 2), spring t (column 3) and autumn t (column 4)
Itemrevgapit
spring t-1
(1)revgapit
autumn t-1(2)rev
gapit
spring t(3)rev
gapit
autumn t(4)
Germany 0.69 0.69 0.92 0.64
(0.61) (0.46) (0.27)*** (0.31)**
France 0.65 0.98 1.03 1.04
(0.48) (0.37)*** (0.30)*** (0.28)***
Italy 2.06 2.1 2.39 1.85
(0.48)*** (0.37)*** (0.30)*** (0.39)***
Spain 1.61 1.65 1.98 1.51
(0.36)*** (0.19)*** (0.26)*** (0.30)***
Ireland 1.32 2.01 2.06 1.34
(0.73)* (0.61)*** (0.59)*** (0.67)**
Austria 0.86 1 1.01 0.78
(0.55) (0.40)** (0.28)*** (0.34)**
Netherlands 1.37 1.51 1.56 1.14
(0.67)** (0.44)*** (0.34)*** (0.39)***
Belgium 1.28 1.43 1.51 1.11
(0.58)** (0.50)*** (0.34)*** (0.39)***
Finland – 0.36 0.17 0.29 0.29
(0.73) (0.75) (0.34) (0.31)
Sweden 0.79 0.69 0.97 0.78
(0.76) (0.54) (0.46)** (0.39)**
Portugal 2.38 2.4 2.78 2.17
(0.45)*** (0.36)*** (0.30)*** (0.36)***
United Kingdom 0.96 0.98 1.04 0.88
(0.45)** (0.45)** (0.39)*** (0.36)**
Denmark 0.28 0.66 0.93 0.96
(0.61) (0.52) (0.33)*** (0.28)***
Greece – 1.19 – 1.25 – 0.66 – 0.51
(0.55)** (0.58)** (0.44) (0.48)
N 196 210 210 224
Wald test, H0: 
αi = 0 1,279.3*** 8,729.5*** 1,360.6*** 100.4***
Constant in a pooled model 0.91 1.08 1.3 1.06
(0.45)*** (0.28)*** (0.18)*** (0.17)***
1 Standard errors (in parentheses) are robust in the presence of autocorrelation, heteroscedasticity and contemporaneous cross-country correlation. * Signifi  cant at the 10% level, ** signifi  cant at the 5% level, *** signifi  cant at the 1% level.
Deutsche BundesbankDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2012  
70

The Stability Council determined at its meeting 
in May that the five federal states receiving 
consolidation assistance complied with the def -
icit reduction requirements for the 2011 fiscal 
year. Some of the federal states even achieved 
sizeable safety margins below the upper limits 
for structural deficits. However, the respective 
requirements are based on overstated total 
structural deficits in the 2010 reference year, 
which, in particular, did not take account of 
additional structural tax revenue which was al -
ready known about. In order to catch up with 
the other federal states as required, it is also 
crucial that the aided states take action to re -
duce the margin by which their structural def -
icit exceeds the average value for all the federal 
states. If the states receiving consolidation as -
sistance are not obligated to reduce this deficit 
overhang at a faster pace, there is a danger 
that they may further postpone the permanent 
benefit cuts or even tax hikes needed in the 
foreseeable future to comply with the debt 
brake in the medium term, and that they will 
then also have to implement these measures in 
a less favourable macroeconomic setting.
Social security funds11
Statutory pension insurance 
scheme
The statutory pension insurance scheme re -
corded a surplus of almost €2 billion in the 
second quarter, which was €½ billion higher 
than at the same time last year. At 2%, revenue 
continued to increase at a stronger pace than 
expenditure (just under 1½%). Contribution re -
ceipts rose by almost 2½% on the year.12 By 
contrast, payments from the central govern -
ment budget increased by only just over 1%, 
not least as a result of the cut in the contribu -
tion rate.
In the second quarter, spending on pensions 
was up by just over 1% on the year. This re -
sulted from the mid-2011 adjustment (+0.99%), 
a slight increase in the number of current pen -sion payments and a decline in the average 
payment amount after adjustment for the pen -
sion increase. On 1 July 2012, pensions were 
raised by 2.18% in western Germany and 
2.26% in eastern Germany. This was mainly 
driven by the relatively robust developments in 
gross wages and salaries in 2011 as well as the 
exceptionally strong adjustment-boosting ef -
fect of the stability factor,13 though the rise was 
dampened by a clawback of pension cuts 
waived in previous years.Stability Council 
confirms con-solidation com-pliance of aided states in 2011
Higher surplus 
despite lowering of contribution rate
Low mid-2011 
pension increase still impacting on expenditureFinances of the German statutory pension insurance scheme
Deutsche Bundesbank2010 2011 2012586062646668
–20+2+4+6€ bn, quarterly
Lin scale
Surplus (+) or deficit (–)ExpenditureLog scale
Revenue
11 The financial development of the public long-term care 
and statutory health insurance schemes in the first quarter 
of 2012 was analysed in the short articles of the Monthly 
Reports of June and July. These are the most recent data 
available.
12 After adjustment for the lowering of the contribution 
rate from 19.9% to 19.6% on 1  January 2012, revenue 
from contributions increased by almost 4%.
13 The reduction in the pensioner-contributor ratio respon -
sible for this is not solely due to the very robust employ -
ment situation and the merely moderate increase in the 
number of pensioners. Another significant factor is that the 
number of “standardised contributors” is calculated using 
(outdated) provisional average wages. This factor will 
markedly reduce the pension increase in 2013.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2012  
71

A somewhat steeper rise in expenditure can 
thus be expected during the second half of the 
year owing to the pension adjustment. But in -
come is likely to increase just as strongly as in 
the first six months. Following the improve -
ment in the first half of the year, the surplus for 
2012 as a whole could be somewhat higher 
than the figure recorded in 2011 (just over €4½ 
billion). Depending on the assessment of fur -
ther financial developments in 2013 and even 
taking into account the planned €1 billion cut 
in the general central government grant, a rule-
induced cut in the contribution rate to below 
19.0% (the level that was most recently calcu -lated by the official estimators) cannot be ruled 
out.
In the light of the demographic changes, which 
are set to have an increasingly stronger finan -
cial impact from the middle of the current dec -
ade onwards, the 2013 contribution rate will 
suffice for a time only. It is likely that the re -
serves will be depleted in the near future and 
that distinctly higher contribution rates will 
soon be required. Benefit increases, such as the 
mooted top-up for very low pensions or higher 
pensions for persons with reduced earning 
capacity, will thus have to be financed by even 
higher taxes or contributions in the long term.
Federal Employment Agency
The Federal Employment Agency recorded a 
surplus of €½ billion in the second quarter of 
2012, as it had done one year previously. How -
ever, the Agency received just over €½ billion 
less in central government liquidity grants, so 
that after adjustment for financial transactions 
with the central government budget, there was 
once again a marked improvement in the re -
sult. On the revenue side, this was helped by 
the ongoing significant growth in contributions 
(+4%). On the expenditure side, spending on 
active labour market policy was once again re -
duced by a round one-fifth. By contrast, ex -
penditure on unemployment benefit barely fell. 
Insolvency benefit payments, in particular, re -
corded strong growth. Overall, the Federal Em -
ployment Agency’s revenue decreased by al -
most 5½%, while its expenditure fell by just 
over 5%.
In the first half of 2012, the Federal Employ -
ment Agency’s surplus was €½ billion higher 
than the figure recorded one year previously, 
and its finances for the year as a whole are also 
expected to improve. Contribution receipts are 
forecast to record further strong growth in the 
wake of the relatively high wage agreements 
from spring 2012. Moreover, despite the cut of 
almost €1 billion for the year as a whole, in a After renewed 
high surplus for 2012 as a whole, …
… cut in contri-
bution rate to below 19% in 2013 conceiv-ableTemporary  favourable  financial  situation does not justify  permanent benefit rises
Financial 
 situation better in Q2
Financial 
 improvement also expected for 2012 as a wholeFinances of theFederal Employment Agency
1 Including  transfers  to the civil servants'  pension  fund.  2 Ex-
cluding central government liquidity assistance.
Deutsche Bundesbank2010 2011 20127810121416
1.72.02.53.03.54.04.55.06.07.0–6–4–20+2+4€ bn, quarterly
Log scale
Expenditure,
total 1
Revenue 2
Log scale
Expenditure on ...
... vocational training... unemployment benefits
    and short-time
    working benefitsLin scale
Surplus (+) or deficit (–)Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2012  
72

year-on-year comparison, more funds are ex -
pected to flow from the central government 
budget in the second half of the year as a result 
of the significantly lower payments so far this 
year. The decline in outlays on job promotion 
schemes is likely to continue. However, spend -
ing on unemployment benefit, which is influ -
enced by the short-term employment trend, is set to pick up again. In June, the number of 
recipients of unemployment benefit started to 
increase. Nevertheless, overall it can be as -
sumed that the surplus of €½ billion for the 
year as a whole – as forecast by the Federal 
Employment Agency in its budget plan – will be 
exceeded.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2012  
73

Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2012  
74

Statistical 
SectionDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report 
August 2012  
1•

Contents
I Key economic data for the euro area
 1 Monetary developments and interest rates  ..................................................................  5•
 2 External transactions and positions  ..............................................................................  5•
 3 Gener al economic indicators  .......................................................................................  6•
II Overall monetary survey in the euro area
 1 The money stock and its counterparts  .........................................................................  8•
 2 Consolidated balance sheet of monetary financial institutions (MFIs)  ...........................  10•
 3 Banking system’s liquidity position  ...............................................................................  14•
III Consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem
 1 Assets  ..........................................................................................................................  16•
 2 Liabilities  .....................................................................................................................  18•
IV Banks
 1 A ssets and liabilities of monetary financial institutions (excluding the Bundesbank)  
in Germany  .................................................................................................................  20•
 2 Principal assets and liabilities of banks (MFIs) in Germany, by category of banks  ..........  24•
 3 A ssets and liabilities of banks (MFIs) in Germany vis-à-vis residents  ..............................  26•
 4 A ssets and liabilities of banks (MFIs) in Germany vis-à-vis non-residents  .......................  28•
 5 Lending by banks (MFIs) in Germany to domestic non-banks (non-MFIs)  .....................  30•
 6 Lending by banks (MFIs) in Germany to domestic enterprises and households, 
 housing loans, sectors of economic activity  .................................................................  32•
 7 Deposits of domestic non-banks (non-MFIs) at banks (MFIs) in Germany  .....................  34•
 8 Deposits of domestic households and non-profit institutions at banks (MFIs) in 
 Germany  .....................................................................................................................  36•
 9 Deposits of domestic government at banks (MFIs) in Germany, by creditor group ........  36•
 1 0 Savings deposits and bank savings bonds of banks (MFIs) in Germany sold to  
non-banks (non-MFIs) ..................................................................................................  38•
 1 1 Debt securities and money market paper outstanding of banks (MFIs) in Germany  ...... 38•
 1 2 Building and loan associations (MFIs) in Germany  ........................................................  39•
 1 3 A ssets and liabilities of the foreign branches and foreign subsidiaries of  
German banks (MFIs)  ...................................................................................................  40•Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report 
August 2012  
2•

V Minimum reserves
 1 Reserve ratios  ..............................................................................................................  42•
 2 Reserve maintenance in Germany up to the end of 1998  ............................................  42•
 3 Reserve maintenance in the euro area  .........................................................................  42•
VI Interest rates
 1 ECB interest rates  ........................................................................................................  43•
 2 Base rates  ....................................................................................................................  43•
 3 Eur osystem monetary policy operations allotted through tenders  ................................  43•
 4 Money market rates, by month  ...................................................................................  43•
 5 Inter est rates and volumes for outstanding amounts and new business of  
German banks (MFIs)  ...................................................................................................  44•
VII Capital market
 1 Sales and purchases of debt securities and shares in Germany  .....................................  48•
 2 Sales of debt securities issued by residents  ..................................................................  49•
 3 Amounts outstanding of debt securities issued by residents .........................................  50•
 4 Shar es in circulation issued by residents  .......................................................................  50•
 5 Y ields and indices on German securities  ......................................................................  51•
 6 Sales and purchases of mutual fund shares in Germany  ...............................................  51•
VIII Financial accounts
 1 A cquisition of financial assets and financing of private non-financial sectors  ................  52•
 2 Financial assets and liabilities of private non-financial sectors  ......................................  53•
IX Public finances in Germany
 1 Gener al government: deficit and debt level as defined in the Maastricht Treaty  ..................  54•
 2 Gener al government: revenue, expenditure and fiscal deficit/surplus as shown in  
the national accounts  ..................................................................................................  54•
 3 Gener al government: budgetary development (as per government’s financial 
 statistics)  .....................................................................................................................  55•
 4 Centr al, state and local government: budgetary development (as per government’s 
 financial statistics)  ........................................................................................................  55•
 5 Centr al, state and local government: tax revenue  ........................................................  56•
 6 Centr al and state government and European Union: tax revenue, by type  .......................  56•
 7 Centr al, state and local government: individual taxes  ..................................................  57•Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report 
August 2012  
3•

 8 German pension insurance scheme: budgetary development and assets  ......................  57•
 9 F ederal Employment Agency: budgetary development  .................................................  58•
 1 0 S tatutory health insurance scheme: budgetary development  .......................................  58•
 1 1 S tatutory long-term care insurance scheme: budgetary development  ..........................  59•
 1 2 Centr al government: borrowing in the market  .............................................................  59•
 1 3 Centr al, state and local government: debt by creditor  .................................................  59•
 1 4 Centr al, state and local government: debt by category  ................................................  60•
X Economic conditions in Germany
 1 Origin and use of domestic product, distribution of national income  ...........................  61•
 2 Output in the production sector  ..................................................................................  62•
 3 Or ders received by industry  .........................................................................................  63•
 4 Or ders received by construction  ..................................................................................  64•
 5 Retail trade turnover, sales of motor vehicles  ...............................................................  64•
 6 Labour market  .............................................................................................................  65•
 7 Prices  ..........................................................................................................................  66•
 8 Households’ income  ....................................................................................................  67•
 9 Negotiated pay rates (overall economy)  .......................................................................  67•
XI External sector
 1 Major items of the balance of payments of the euro area  ...........................................  68•
 2 Major items of the balance of payments of the Federal Republic of Germany  ..............  69•
 3 F oreign trade (special trade) of the Federal Republic of Germany, by country and 
group of countries  .......................................................................................................  70•
 4 Services and income of the Federal Republic of Germany  ............................................  71•
 5 C urrent transfers of the Federal Republic of Germany  ..................................................  71•
 6 C apital transfers  ..........................................................................................................  71•
 7 Financial account of the Federal Republic of Germany  .................................................  72•
 8 External position of the Bundesbank up to end-1998  ..................................................  73•
 9 External position of the Bundesbank since the beginning of the  
European monetary union  ...........................................................................................  73•
 1 0 A ssets and liabilities of enterprises in Germany (other than banks) vis-à-vis  
non-residents  ..............................................................................................................  74•
 1 1 ECB euro reference exchange rates of selected currencies  ...........................................  75•
 1 2 Eur o-area member states and irrevocable euro conversion rates in the third stage  
of European Economic and Monetary Union  ...............................................................  75•
 1 3 Effective exchange rates of the euro and indicators of the German economy’s price 
competitiveness  ...........................................................................................................  76•Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report 
August 2012  
4•

Deutsche Bundesbank
5  Monthly Report
August 2012
I Key economic data for the euro area 
 
1 Monetary developments and interest rates
 
 
 
 
 Money stock in various definitions 1,2 Determinants of the money stock 1 Interest rates
 M 3 3 
MFI lending to Yield on Euro-
 3-month enterprises Monetary pean govern-
MFI lending, and capital 3-month ment bonds moving  average
M1 M2 (centred) total households formation  4 Eonia 5,7 Euribor 6,7 outstanding 8 
Period Annual percentage change % Annual percentage as a monthly average
2010          Oct 4.9 2.1 1.1 1.4 3.2 1.2 3.4 0.70 1.00 3.3
         Nov 4.6 2.3 2.1 1.6 4.0 1.9 3.8 0.59 1.04 3.7         Dec 4.4 2.3 1.7 1.8 3.5 1.6 3.7 0.50 1.02 4.1
2011          Jan 3.2 2.3 1.6 1.8 3.8 2.1 3.3 0.66 1.02 4.2
         Feb 2.9 2.4 2.2 2.0 3.8 2.3 3.8 0.71 1.09 4.3
         Mar 3.0 2.7 2.2 2.1 3.2 2.2 3.7 0.66 1.18 4.4
         Apr 1.6 2.4 1.9 2.2 3.2 2.2 3.8 0.97 1.32 4.5
         May 1.2 2.4 2.3 2.1 3.1 2.5 4.1 1.03 1.43 4.4
         June 1.3 2.3 2.0 2.1 2.6 2.1 4.3 1.12 1.49 4.4
         July 0.9 2.1 2.0 2.2 2.4 1.8 4.4 1.01 1.60 4.6
         Aug 1.7 2.3 2.7 2.5 2.4 1.7 4.3 0.91 1.55 4.1
         Sep 2.0 2.5 2.9 2.7 2.3 1.6 4.3 1.01 1.54 4.0
         Oct 1.7 1.9 2.6 2.5 1.6 2.1 4.2 0.96 1.58 4.3
         Nov 2.1 2.1 1.9 2.0 0.8 1.0 3.3 0.79 1.48 4.8
         Dec 1.7 1.8 1.5 2.0 0.9 0.5 2.8 0.63 1.43 4.8
2012          Jan 2.1 2.3 2.5 2.3 1.4 0.7 2.7 0.38 1.22 4.7
         Feb 2.6 2.8 2.8 2.8 1.4 0.4 2.0 0.37 1.05 4.5
         Mar 2.8 3.0 3.2 2.9 1.8 0.5 1.3 0.36 0.86 4.0
         Apr 1.8 2.5 2.6 2.9 1.4 − 0.1 0.7 0.35 0.74 4.1
         May 3.3 2.9 3.1 3.0 1.5 − 0.2 − 0.2 0.34 0.68 4.1
         June 3.5 3.0 3.2 ... 1.4 − 0.4 − 0.5 0.33 0.66 4.2
         July ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 0.18 0.50 4.0
1 Source: ECB. 2 Seasonally adjusted. 3 Excluding money market fund sharesunits, OverNight Index Average. 6 Euro Interbank Offered Rate. 7 See also footnotes to
money market paper and debt securities with a maturity of up to two years held by Table VI.4, p 43  8 GDP-weighted yield on ten-year government bonds. Countries
non-euro-area residents. 4 Longer-term liabilities to euro-area non-MFIs. 5 Euro include:DE,FR,NL,BE,AT,FI,IE,PT,ES,IT,GR,SK. 
 
 
2 External transactions and positions  * 
  
 
Selected items of the euro-area balance of payments Euro exchange rates  1 
Current account Capital account Effective exchange rate 3 
of which Direct Securities Other Reserve
Balance Trade balance Balance investment investment assets Dollar rate Nominal Real  4 transactions 2 
Period € million Euro/US-$ Q1 1999 = 100
2010          Oct + 6,489 + 5,539 − 4,023 − 10,487 + 2,691 + 4,009 − 236 1.3898 105.0 102.6
         Nov + 32 − 451 + 5,385 + 38,721 + 16,820 − 50,156 + 1 1.3661 103.7 101.2         Dec + 7,671 + 982 − 13,651 + 21,085 + 17,244 − 50,432 − 1,548 1.3220 101.7 99.2
2011          Jan − 16,778 − 14,241 + 6,408 + 4,282 − 30,171 + 38,221 − 5,924 1.3360 101.4 99.0
         Feb − 5,521 + 752 − 3,577 − 36,706 + 94,356 − 62,353 + 1,126 1.3649 102.4 99.9
         Mar + 1,040 + 3,367 − 8,108 − 10,401 + 71,409 − 62,256 − 6,860 1.3999 104.1 101.6
         Apr − 4,988 − 3,624 − 4,657 − 31,176 + 8,621 + 11,872 + 6,026 1.4442 105.9 103.4
         May − 13,949 + 471 + 18,894 − 4,247 + 42,910 − 16,645 − 3,124 1.4349 104.9 102.2         June + 322 + 797 + 6,964 + 3,592 + 91,099 − 89,308 + 1,582 1.4388 105.0 102.2
         July + 3,360 + 4,156 − 6,208 − 17,336 − 23,660 + 36,022 − 1,234 1.4264 104.0 101.0
         Aug − 1,416 − 4,309 − 580 + 7,194 + 18,195 − 29,352 + 3,383 1.4343 103.9 100.8         Sep + 780 + 2,991 + 10,292 − 9,031 + 25,642 − 7,908 + 1,589 1.3770 102.8 99.9
         Oct + 3,742 + 616 + 1,404 − 5,555 − 4,274 + 12,321 − 1,089 1.3706 103.0 100.2         Nov + 9,058 + 5,534 − 19,565 − 44,999 + 33,885 − 8,212 − 238 1.3556 102.6 99.9
         Dec + 22,059 + 8,419 − 22,028 − 4,340 − 43,945 + 31,691 − 5,435 1.3179 100.8 98.1
2012          Jan − 12,369 − 8,076 + 22,182 + 3,644 − 49,076 + 68,128 − 516 1.2905 98.9 96.3
         Feb − 3,421 + 3,253 + 4,355 − 189 + 12,873 − 6,570 − 1,758 1.3224 99.6 97.2
         Mar + 9,758 + 10,168 − 23,220 − 8,757 − 46,291 + 31,181 + 647 1.3201 99.8 97.4
         Apr + 1,297 + 5,438 − 1,844 − 9,561 + 3,475 + 7,189 − 2,947 1.3162 99.5 97.2
         May − 2,549 + 6,250 − 4,167 + 10,577 + 21,934 − 35,223 − 1,455 1.2789 98.0 95.7
         June ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 1.2526 97.2 94.9
         July ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 1.2288 95.3 93.0
*  Source: ECB. 1  See also Tables XI.12 and 13, pp 75−76
  2  Including
financial derivatives. 3  Vis-à-vis the currencies of The-EER-20 group. 4  Based on
consumer prices. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
6  Monthly Report
August 2012
I. Key economic data for the euro area 
 
3  General economic indicators
 
 
                   
 
Period Euro area Belgium Germany Estonia Finland France Greece Ireland Italy
 
Real gross domestic product 1,2
 
2009 − 4.4 − 2.8 − 5.1 − 14.3 − 8.5 − 3.1 − 3.2 − 7.0 − 5.5
2010 2.0 2.4 4.2 2.3 3.3 1.7 − 3.5 − 0.4 1.8
2011 1.5 1.8 3.0 7.6 2.7 1.7 − 6.9 ... 0.4
2011          Q1 2.4 2.9 5.2 9.5 5.2 2.6 − 8.0 − 0.9 1.3
         Q2 1.7 2.0 3.1 8.4 1.9 1.9 − 7.3 2.9 1.3
         Q3 1.3 1.5 2.6 8.5 3.2 1.3 − 5.0 1.0 0.3
         Q4 0.7 0.8 1.4 4.5 1.1 1.0 − 7.5 2.8 − 1.1
2012          Q1 0.0 0.4 1.7 3.6 1.6 0.7 − 6.5 1.2 − 1.1
         Q2 − 0.4 ... 0.5 ... ... − 0.2 − 6.2 ... ...
 
Industrial production 1,3
 
2009 − 14.9 − 11.9 − 16.3 − 23.9 − 18.1 − 12.8 − 9.2 − 4.5 − 18.8
2010 7.3 8.4 10.9 22.9 5.1 4.7 − 6.6 7.6 6.8
2011 3.4 4.2 7.6 16.6 1.3 2.0 − 8.0 0.0 0.1
2011          Q1 6.5 7.8 12.0 28.9 4.5 4.2 − 5.4 − 1.4 2.1
         Q2 4.0 4.0 8.0 23.4 3.0 1.8 − 10.9 − 0.1 2.1
         Q3 3.9 4.1 8.1 16.0 0.2 2.3 − 4.8 1.0 − 0.4
         Q4 − 0.2 1.1 2.8 1.6 − 2.0 − 0.3 − 11.1 0.7 − 3.3
2012          Q1 − 1.8 − 3.7 4 0.8 − 1.9 − 4.1 − 1.9 − 8.4 0.5 − 5.8
         Q2 e − 2.5 ... 5p − 0.7 − 2.9 − 1.9 − 1.8 p − 2.0 p 4.5 − 8.0
 
Capacity utilisation in industry 6
 
2009 71.1 72.0 72.0 58.1 67.0 73.6 70.7 − 66.1
2010 75.8 77.9 79.7 67.1 73.5 77.2 68.1 − 68.3
2011 80.4 80.5 86.1 73.3 77.8 83.0 67.9 − 72.6
2011          Q2 81.3 82.6 86.8 73.4 77.4 84.5 68.8 − 74.3
         Q3 80.5 80.1 86.7 73.0 77.9 83.0 67.5 − 72.1
         Q4 79.6 78.0 85.1 73.2 78.9 82.8 65.8 − 71.6
2012          Q1 79.8 79.0 85.3 70.5 77.0 82.4 65.5 − 70.7
         Q2 79.7 78.4 85.2 69.0 80.2 81.8 64.9 − 71.0
         Q3 77.8 76.9 82.6 71.3 80.2 81.1 63.9 − 69.7
 
Standardised unemployment rate 7,8
 
2009 9.6 7.9 7.8 13.8 8.3 9.5 9.5 11.9 7.8
2010 10.1 8.3 7.1 16.9 8.4 9.7 12.6 13.7 8.4
2011 10.1 7.2 6.0 12.5 7.8 9.6 17.7 14.4 8.4
2012          Jan 10.8 7.1 5.8 7.5 9.9 21.5 14.8 9.6
         Feb 10.9 7.1 5.5 7.5 10.0 21.7 14.8 9.9
         Mar 11.0 7.1 5.3 10.9 7.5 10.0 22.0 14.8 10.4
         Apr 11.1 7.1 5.3 7.5 10.0 22.5 14.6 10.6
         May 11.2 7.1 5.7 7.6 10.0 ... 14.7 10.6
         June 11.2 7.2 5.3 ... 7.5 10.1 ... 14.8 10.8
 
Harmonised Index of Consumer Prices 1
 
2009 9 0.3 0.0 0.2 0.2 1.6 0.1 1.3 − 1.7 0.8
2010 1.6 2.3 1.2 2.7 1.7 1.7 4.7 − 1.6 1.6
2011 10 2.7 3.5 2.5 5.1 3.3 2.3 3.1 1.2 2.9
2012          Feb 2.7 3.3 2.5 4.4 3.0 2.5 1.7 1.6 3.4
         Mar 2.7 3.1 2.3 4.7 2.9 2.6 1.4 2.2 3.8
         Apr 2.6 2.9 2.2 4.3 3.0 2.4 1.5 1.9 3.7
         May 2.4 2.6 2.2 4.1 3.1 2.3 0.9 1.9 3.5
         June 2.4 2.2 2.0 4.4 2.9 2.3 1.0 1.9 3.6
         July p 2.4 2.0 1.9 4.1 3.1 2.2 0.9 2.0 3.6
 
General government financial balance 11
 
2009 − 6.4 − 5.6 − 3.2 − 2.0 − 2.5 − 7.5 − 15.6 − 14.0 − 5.4
2010 − 6.2 − 3.8 − 4.3 0.2 − 2.5 − 7.1 − 10.3 − 31.2 − 4.6
2011 − 4.1 − 3.7 − 1.0 1.0 − 0.5 − 5.2 − 9.1 − 13.1 − 3.9
 
General government debt 11
 
2009 79.9 95.8 74.4 7.2 43.5 79.2 129.4 65.1 116.0
2010 85.3 96.0 83.0 6.7 48.4 82.3 145.0 92.5 118.6
2011 87.3 98.0 81.2 6.0 48.6 85.8 165.3 108.2 120.1
Sources: National data, European Commission, Eurostat, European Central Bank. 4  Positivly influenced by late reports.  5  Provisional; adjusted in advance by the
Latest data are partly based on press reports and are provisional. 1  Annual percen- Federal Statistical Office by way of estimates to the results of the Quarterly
tage change. 2  GDP of the euro area calculated from seasonally adjusted data. Production Survey. 6  Manufacturing, in %; seasonally adjusted; data are collected in
3  Manufacturing, mining and energy; adjusted for working-day variations.

Deutsche Bundesbank
7  Monthly Report
August 2012
I.  Key economic data for the euro area  
 
   
                   
 
Luxembourg Malta Netherlands Austria Portugal Slovakia Slovenia Spain Cyprus   Period
 
Real gross domestic product 1,2
 
− 5.3 − 2.6 − 3.7 − 3.8 − 2.9 − 4.9 − 8.0 − 3.7 − 1.9 2009
2.7 2.5 1.6 2.0 1.4 4.2 1.4 − 0.1 1.1 2010
1.6 2.1 1.0 2.7 − 1.6 3.3 − 0.2 0.7 0.5 2011
1.9 3.2 2.6 4.7 − 0.8 3.4 2.1 0.9 1.6 2011          Q1
0.7 2.8 1.4 4.1 − 1.2 3.5 0.7 1.1 1.5          Q2
2.5 2.8 0.9 1.8 − 2.0 3.0 − 0.5 1.1 − 0.3          Q3
1.1 − 0.3 − 0.8 0.4 − 2.6 3.4 − 2.8 − 0.2 − 0.8          Q4
− 0.1 − 1.0 − 0.8 2.0 − 2.3 3.0 − 0.2 − 0.3 − 1.6 2012          Q1
... ... − 0.5 0.2 ... 2.7 ... ... ...          Q2
 
Industrial production1,3
 
− 16.1 − − 7.7 − 11.3 − 8.6 − 14.1 − 17.7 − 15.8 − 9.0 2009
9.4 − 7.8 6.7 1.7 18.3 6.0 0.8 − 2.1 2010
− 2.4 − − 0.8 7.2 − 2.0 7.1 2.9 − 1.4 − 7.7 2011
2.6 − 0.7 11.9 0.2 11.8 7.9 1.8 − 3.7 2011          Q1
− 4.4 − − 1.4 9.4 − 1.5 8.7 3.6 − 1.1 − 4.1          Q2
− 1.5 − 2.6 6.3 − 2.3 5.0 0.9 − 1.4 − 12.5          Q3
− 6.3 − − 4.3 2.5 − 4.4 3.6 − 0.7 − 5.0 − 11.1          Q4
− 7.0 − − 1.2 0.9 − 5.5 9.1 0.0 − 5.8 − 13.2 2012          Q1
p − 4.5 − p 1.8 ... − 6.3 p 11.1 p 0.8 − 7.0 ...          Q2
 
Capacity utilisation in industry 6
 
65.4 70.1 76.0 77.4 72.6 54.0 70.9 70.0 65.2 200978.5 77.7 78.9 81.9 75.0 58.0 76.0 71.1 62.6 201083.2 78.7 80.3 85.4 74.4 61.6 80.4 73.3 61.4 2011
87.3 81.1 81.1 86.3 76.4 55.4 82.2 74.7 62.9 2011          Q2
82.7 76.9 80.6 85.8 74.3 60.6 80.1 72.6 61.2          Q3
79.8 76.0 78.9 85.0 73.5 62.3 79.5 72.2 58.1          Q4
79.2 74.2 79.8 85.1 74.1 67.5 79.7 72.5 56.9 2012          Q1
82.7 75.9 78.6 84.7 74.2 71.1 80.6 72.7 56.9          Q2
78.1 76.2 78.3 84.9 74.2 71.2 79.4 70.7 59.1          Q3
 
Standardised unemployment rate 7,8
 
5.1 6.9 3.7 4.8 10.6 12.1 5.9 18.0 5.5 20094.6 6.9 4.5 4.4 12.0 14.5 7.3 20.1 6.4 20104.9 6.5 4.4 4.2 12.9 13.6 8.2 21.7 7.9 2011
5.2 6.2 5.0 4.1 14.7 13.7 8.3 23.5 9.8 2012          Jan 
5.2 6.0 4.9 4.1 14.8 13.7 8.2 23.8 10.0          Feb 
5.3 5.9 5.0 4.1 15.1 13.6 8.0 24.1 10.3          Mar 
5.3 5.8 5.2 4.0 15.2 13.7 8.2 24.4 10.5          Apr 
5.4 6.0 5.1 4.2 15.2 13.7 8.2 24.7 10.6          May
5.4 6.2 5.1 4.5 15.4 13.8 8.2 24.8 10.5          June
 
Harmonised Index of Consumer Prices 1
 
0.0 1.8 1.0 0.4 − 0.9 0.9 0.9 − 0.2 0.2 20092.8 2.0 0.9 1.7 1.4 0.7 2.1 2.0 2.6 20103.7 2.5 2.5 3.6 3.6 4.1 2.1 3.1 3.5 2011
3.3 2.6 2.9 2.6 3.6 4.0 2.8 1.9 3.1 2012          Feb 
2.9 2.6 2.9 2.6 3.1 3.9 2.4 1.8 3.5          Mar 
3.0 3.8 2.8 2.3 2.9 3.7 2.9 2.0 3.6          Apr 
2.7 3.7 2.5 2.2 2.7 3.4 2.4 1.9 3.7          May
2.6 4.4 2.5
p 2.2 2.7 3.7 2.4 1.8 2.9          June
2.7 4.2 p 2.6 ... 2.8 3.8 2.6 2.2 3.8          July
 
General government financial balance 11
 
− 0.8 − 3.8 − 5.6 − 4.1 − 10.2 − 8.0 − 6.1 − 11.2 − 6.1 2009− 0.9 − 3.7 − 5.1 − 4.5 − 9.8 − 7.7 − 6.0 − 9.3 − 5.3 2010− 0.6 − 2.7 − 4.7 − 2.6 − 4.2 − 4.8 − 6.4 − 8.5 − 6.3 2011
 
General government debt 11
 
14.8 68.1 60.8 69.5 83.1 35.6 35.3 53.9 58.5 200919.1 69.4 62.9 71.9 93.3 41.1 38.8 61.2 61.5 201018.2 72.0 65.2 72.2 107.8 43.3 47.6 68.5 71.6 2011
January, April, July and October. 7  As a percentage of the civilian labour force; sea- 2009 onwards. 10  Including Estonia from 2011 onwards. 11  As a percentage of
sonally adjusted. 8  Standardised unemployment rate of Germany: calculation based GDP; euro-area aggregate: European Central Bank (ESA 1995), member states:
on unadjusted data from the Federal Statistical Office. 9  Including Slovakia from European Commission (Maastricht Treaty definition). 

Deutsche Bundesbank
8  Monthly Report
August 2012
II Overall monetary survey in the euro area 
 
1 The money stock and its counterparts *
(a) Euro area 
  
€ billion
I Lending to non-banks (non-MFIs) II Net claims on III Monetary capital formation at monetary
in the euro area non-euro-area residents financial institutions (MFIs) in the euro area
Enterprises General
and households government Debt
Deposits securities
Liabil- with an Deposits with
Claims ities to agreed at agreed maturities
on non- non-euro- maturity notice of of over Capital
of which of which euro-area area of over over 2 years and
Period Total Total Total Total residents residents Total 2 years 3 months (net)  2 Securities Securities reserves 3 
2010          Nov 160.6 143.4 51.5 17.2 − 37.3 8.3 15.5 7.2 58.3 29.4 0.2 2.6 26.1
         Dec − 118.2 − 46.4 − 27.2 − 71.8 − 73.5 49.7 − 89.4 − 139.0 30.8 20.9 − 0.5 − 3.4 13.8
2011          Jan 49.7 26.9 2.5 22.9 23.4 13.3 84.5 71.2 16.7 − 2.0 1.5 23.1 − 5.8
         Feb 17.4 23.7 − 0.5 − 6.3 7.9 21.0 31.3 10.3 33.3 − 4.7 0.5 22.9 14.6
         Mar − 31.7 − 8.4 − 27.0 − 23.3 − 12.2 101.0 − 32.9 − 133.9 23.6 7.5 0.0 14.2 1.9         Apr 81.0 79.2 44.7 1.8 11.6 − 21.9 82.6 104.5 31.4 13.8 − 1.1 19.4 − 0.7
         May 5.8 19.3 − 21.6 − 13.5 9.9 7.9 83.3 75.3 25.7 1.4 − 0.5 11.3 13.4
         June 9.6 − 16.1 − 50.6 25.6 29.1 65.8 − 134.7 − 200.5 24.5 4.2 − 0.3 2.6 18.0
         July − 5.4 5.3 2.5 − 10.7 − 14.8 − 18.1 − 37.6 − 19.5 33.4 − 6.0 0.0 2.0 37.3
         Aug 7.9 − 10.3 − 12.6 18.2 32.1 28.4 72.4 44.0 9.3 1.5 − 0.4 − 1.8 9.9
         Sep 52.5 28.1 − 20.0 24.3 21.0 22.7 − 12.4 − 35.0 9.8 12.9 − 0.7 − 4.9 2.5
         Oct 35.5 36.8 36.1 − 1.2 − 0.5 − 50.6 − 89.9 − 39.3 9.5 24.2 0.0 − 18.4 3.7
         Nov 28.1 − 11.3 8.3 39.5 40.3 − 24.8 − 63.7 − 38.9 − 4.4 − 11.2 − 0.9 − 10.6 18.2
         Dec − 95.0 −111.4 − 15.9 16.5 1.5 16.9 − 20.1 − 36.9 − 4.4 13.9 − 0.7 − 42.4 24.8
2012          Jan 123.3 57.9 17.7 65.4 67.6 − 44.2 17.3 61.6 4.8 0.5 0.6 − 4.5 8.3
         Feb 14.9 − 15.7 4.5 30.6 46.8 21.6 18.5 − 3.1 − 11.8 − 3.5 − 1.4 − 6.8 − 0.1
         Mar 34.7 2.1 1.0 32.6 35.4 − 25.2 33.2 58.4 − 35.5 − 26.6 − 0.8 − 17.8 9.7
         Apr 10.7 7.1 15.6 3.5 − 3.5 − 26.8 − 12.8 13.9 − 9.7 − 6.2 − 0.3 − 7.3 4.1
         May 25.5 − 5.0 − 10.1 30.6 28.9 12.1 24.4 12.3 − 38.8 − 31.8 − 1.1 − 23.6 17.8
         June 2.5 − 35.9 − 60.5 38.4 14.9 23.5 − 78.3 − 101.8 2.9 − 8.4 − 1.1 − 13.4 25.8
  
  
(b) German contribution
 
I Lending to non-banks (non-MFIs) II Net claims on III Monetary capital formation at monetary
in the euro area non-euro-area residents financial institutions (MFIs) in the euro area
Enterprises General
and households government Debt
Deposits securities
Liabil- with an Deposits with
Claims ities to agreed at agreed maturities
on non- non-euro- maturity notice of of over Capital
of which of which euro-area area of over over 2 years and
Period Total Total Total Total residents residents Total 2 years 3 months (net)  2 Securities Securities reserves 3 
2010          Nov 40.6 33.5 5.2 7.1 − 69.0 − 5.7 6.4 12.0 4.2 − 0.2 0.5 3.1 0.8
         Dec − 72.0 − 39.7 − 4.3 − 32.3 − 22.4 18.4 − 11.7 − 30.1 − 0.5 − 0.2 − 0.0 − 0.7 0.42011          Jan 30.1 19.1 17.0 11.0 6.0 9.6 5.8 − 3.8 5.8 − 2.5 − 0.5 2.3 6.5
         Feb − 0.8 13.5 − 7.2 − 14.3 − 2.4 − 4.0 3.6 7.6 2.2 − 1.8 0.0 0.1 3.9
         Mar − 29.5 − 17.0 − 0.5 − 12.5 − 2.2 26.5 − 26.8 − 53.2 − 3.7 − 1.7 0.2 − 4.6 2.5
         Apr 29.1 36.8 22.4 − 7.7 3.2 19.0 50.0 31.0 2.3 − 1.3 − 0.8 2.9 1.4
         May − 26.0 − 16.3 − 24.7 − 9.7 1.3 5.3 1.4 − 3.9 − 10.3 − 0.3 − 0.1 − 3.5 − 6.4
         June − 23.3 − 13.4 − 12.4 − 10.0 − 6.4 17.2 − 41.3 − 58.5 4.8 0.2 − 0.2 2.0 2.8
         July − 1.0 − 2.2 − 4.2 1.3 − 3.9 − 9.9 − 5.4 4.5 − 4.6 − 0.3 0.0 − 5.9 1.5
         Aug 15.3 12.7 − 6.1 2.6 12.0 − 31.2 24.0 55.1 0.1 − 0.1 − 0.1 − 1.2 1.5
         Sep 12.7 9.6 − 5.5 3.1 3.6 − 41.6 − 15.9 25.7 − 8.2 − 3.8 − 0.5 − 2.4 − 1.5
         Oct 29.3 25.9 − 2.1 3.4 7.6 − 39.2 − 23.4 15.8 2.4 − 2.0 − 0.2 2.7 2.0
         Nov 3.7 4.2 1.7 − 0.5 2.1 − 13.7 − 0.1 13.6 − 7.3 − 1.4 − 0.9 − 3.8 − 1.3
         Dec − 54.4 − 48.0 − 4.8 − 6.4 − 9.5 72.3 − 9.7 − 82.0 − 8.0 − 0.3 − 0.8 − 4.3 − 2.6
2012          Jan 36.8 25.6 4.3 11.2 7.7 − 79.5 29.1 108.7 − 26.2 − 3.4 − 0.9 − 22.7 0.9
         Feb − 3.1 − 2.8 − 5.8 − 0.3 1.9 − 30.3 − 10.6 19.7 9.1 − 2.8 − 1.2 8.2 4.9
         Mar 2.1 1.2 8.4 0.9 3.2 − 51.5 5.1 56.6 − 6.8 − 4.9 − 0.8 − 6.2 5.1
         Apr 18.0 16.0 12.9 2.0 − 3.2 − 12.4 − 0.5 11.9 1.4 − 1.4 − 0.3 2.3 0.8
         May − 33.6 − 25.4 − 20.6 − 8.2 − 2.7 − 21.2 − 4.6 16.6 − 12.5 − 3.0 − 0.8 − 6.0 − 2.7         June 10.1 − 7.5 − 9.2 17.6 7.0 − 27.2 − 29.1 − 1.9 1.6 − 3.0 − 1.0 − 1.4 7.0
*The data in this table are based on the consolidated balance sheet of monetary MFIs’ portfolios. 3After deduction of inter-MFI participations. 4Including the counter-
financial institutions (MFIs) (Table II.2); statistical breaks have been eliminated from parts of monetary liabilities of central governments. 5Including the monetary
the flow figures (see also the “Notes on the figures“ in the “Explanatory notes“ in the liabilities of central governments (Post Office, Treasury). 6In Germany, only savings
Statistical Supplement to the Monthly Report 1, p 30
  ).1Source: ECB. 2Excluding deposits. 7Paper held by residents outside the euro area has been eliminated.

Deutsche Bundesbank
9  Monthly Report
August 2012
II Overall monetary survey in the euro area
 
 
 
(a) Euro area 
 
V Other factors VI Money stock M3 (balance I plus II less III less IV less V)
Money stock M2 Debt secur-
of which ities with
Intra- Money stock M1 maturities
Eurosystem Deposits of up to
liability/ with an Deposits Money 2 years
IV De- claim agreed at agreed market (incl money
posits of related to Currency maturity notice of Repo fund market    
banknote in circu- Overnight of up to up to 3 transac- shares paper)    central  gov-
ernments Total 4 issue Total Total Total lation deposits 5 2 years 5 tions (net) 2,7  Period (net) 2,7,8 months  5,6 
17.1 37.9 − 55.5 − 1.2 10.5 1.2 9.4 − 15.3 3.6 48.2 12.9 − 4.4 2010          Nov 
− 97.1 − 53.4 − 51.1 89.7 66.0 18.4 47.6 2.6 21.1 − 5.2 − 34.0 0.7          Dec 
51.9 70.0 − − 75.6 − 41.2 − 44.9 − 12.6 − 32.3 − 16.0 19.7 − 36.1 − 5.2 6.9 2011          Jan 
13.5 − 27.7 − 19.4 − 20.6 − 33.6 − 0.0 − 33.6 11.8 1.2 39.6 2.9 − 2.5          Feb 
− 29.1 49.0 − 25.9 26.3 16.6 2.5 14.1 6.8 2.8 − 14.9 − 2.1 16.6          Mar 
8.0 − 49.5 − 69.1 49.9 39.6 7.1 32.5 7.4 2.9 22.7 2.2 − 5.7          Apr 
− 17.0 − 14.6 − 19.7 − 7.6 − 15.7 5.0 − 20.7 7.5 0.7 38.7 − 3.5 − 7.9          May
51.6 − 12.7 − 12.1 30.6 55.2 9.2 46.0 − 22.6 − 2.0 − 11.4 − 20.6 13.5          June
− 22.0 − 25.7 − − 9.3 0.3 − 21.9 8.5 − 30.4 20.1 2.1 − 1.1 − 7.1 − 1.3          July− 60.4 12.9 − 74.6 10.0 − 22.0 − 4.7 − 17.2 26.6 5.4 45.8 21.9 − 3.3          Aug 
4.9 23.6 − 36.9 27.7 19.2 7.7 11.5 14.0 − 5.5 25.0 − 11.0 − 4.8          Sep 
0.5 9.8 − − 34.9 − 4.9 9.3 6.3 3.0 − 11.8 − 2.3 − 22.3 − 8.4 0.6          Oct 
4.2 21.5 − − 17.9 2.0 14.6 3.9 10.7 − 13.9 1.3 − 28.4 6.5 2.1          Nov 
− 6.9 − 113.2 − 46.4 99.1 83.0 16.2 66.9 3.3 12.8 − 67.2 − 4.7 19.1          Dec 
59.9 28.2 − − 13.9 − 28.0 − 52.8 − 14.4 − 38.4 8.0 16.7 17.1 6.9 − 9.9 2012          Jan 23.2 − 15.5 − 40.6 11.2 − 24.1 − 0.4 − 23.7 27.6 7.7 13.8 2.2 13.5          Feb 
− 13.8 − 31.0 − 89.9 68.8 47.0 2.4 44.6 11.6 10.2 − 14.5 10.7 24.9          Mar 
− 36.3 22.3 − 7.6 0.9 2.9 2.7 0.2 − 6.5 4.5 3.7 9.2 − 6.2          Apr 
27.4 − 6.4 − 55.3 20.9 37.4 8.7 28.7 − 23.1 6.7 33.2 12.6 − 11.5          May
17.0 − 39.1 − 45.3 54.9 73.8 11.4 62.4 − 24.8 5.9 0.3 − 22.4 12.5          June
 
 
 (b) German contribution 
 
V Other factors VI Money stock M3 (balance I plus II less III less IV less V)  10 
of which Components of the money stock
Intra- Debt securities
Eurosystem Deposits with
liability/ with an Deposits Money maturities
IV De- claim agreed at agreed market of up to 2 yearsposits of related to Currency maturity notice of Repo fund (incl money    
banknote in circu- Overnight of up to up to 3 transac-
shares market    central  gov-
ernments Total issue 9,11 lation Total deposits 2 years months  6 tions (net) 7,8 paper)(net) 7  Period
3.3 − 19.0 − 0.1 1.1 46.3 26.3 − 5.1 2.1 23.9 0.3 − 1.1 2010          Nov 
− 6.7 − 28.2 0.5 3.8 − 17.1 − 8.9 8.8 8.6 − 22.2 0.1 − 3.5          Dec 
5.4 32.6 0.7 − 2.8 − 3.9 15.2 − 6.7 2.7 − 12.2 0.1 − 2.9 2011          Jan 
1.9 − 17.3 1.1 − 0.2 8.8 − 15.5 5.2 2.1 18.8 − 0.1 − 1.6          Feb 
− 8.2 16.7 0.6 0.6 − 7.6 3.3 3.8 0.8 − 14.3 0.1 − 1.3          Mar 
− 4.5 26.0 0.7 1.5 23.5 7.3 10.2 − 1.3 10.4 − 0.2 − 3.0          Apr 
3.4 − 38.5 1.5 1.4 25.0 1.1 10.9 − 2.3 15.9 − 0.3 − 0.3          May
3.0 − 19.2 1.5 2.5 5.2 8.2 − 0.4 − 1.9 − 0.3 − 0.2 − 0.2          June
− 1.2 0.4 1.8 2.0 − 5.5 − 4.8 13.5 − 1.2 − 13.4 − 2.5 3.0          July− 0.1 − 47.5 2.6 − 1.0 30.8 12.3 6.6 − 1.4 10.3 0.4 2.7          Aug 
3.4 − 42.5 3.2 1.3 17.9 7.2 12.3 − 1.0 4.9 0.1 − 5.6          Sep 
− 2.7 − 11.9 0.1 1.8 2.4 10.0 − 2.7 − 0.2 − 1.2 − 0.0 − 3.5          Oct − 0.2 − 32.8 0.1 1.5 30.2 20.4 1.7 − 0.1 5.3 − 0.9 3.9          Nov 
0.2 32.0 − 0.4 3.5 − 6.2 − 1.8 6.2 5.5 − 14.1 − 0.1 − 2.0          Dec 
4.0 − 7.6 0.5 − 3.1 − 11.7 0.8 − 1.0 2.1 − 10.8 − 0.3 − 2.4 2012          Jan 
3.5 − 67.8 1.2 − 0.1 21.7 9.8 − 3.6 3.9 10.0 − 0.2 1.8          Feb 
− 10.7 − 33.3 3.2 − 0.2 2.7 8.7 − 0.8 0.4 − 3.6 − 0.2 − 1.9          Mar 
1.9 − 16.2 2.1 1.0 17.9 10.4 3.1 − 1.2 7.2 0.0 − 1.7          Apr 
− 0.0 − 62.6 1.7 2.1 20.3 17.2 2.9 0.1 5.3 0.0 − 5.1          May
1.7 − 36.0 1.7 2.8 16.4 18.0 6.6 0.1 − 9.4 0.2 0.9          June
8Less German MFIs’ holdings of paper issued by euro-area MFIs. 9Including money stocks M1, M2 or M3. 11The difference between the volume of euro
national banknotes still in circulation. 10The German contributions to the Euro- banknotes actually issued by the Bundesbank and the amount disclosed in
system’s monetary aggregates should on no account be interpreted as national accordance with the accounting regime chosen by the Eurosystem (see also footnote
monetary aggregates and are therefore not comparable with the erstwhile German 2 on banknote circulation in Table III.2). 

Deutsche Bundesbank
10  Monthly Report
August 2012
II Overall monetary survey in the euro area
 
2 Consolidated balance sheet of monetary financial institutions (MFIs) *
 
 
 
Assets
Lending to non-banks (non-MFIs) in the euro area
Enterprises and households General government
Claims
Total Shares and on non-
End of assets or Debt other Debt euro-area Other
year/month liabilities Total Total Loans securities  2 equities Total Loans securities 3 residents assets
 Euro area (€ billion) 1
 
2010          May 25,188.2 16,145.8 13,145.6 10,865.1 1,478.6 801.8 3,000.2 1,070.2 1,930.0 5,349.6 3,692.9
         June 25,178.9 16,341.5 13,288.5 10,988.6 1,516.0 783.8 3,053.0 1,091.5 1,961.5 5,247.3 3,590.1
         July 24,877.3 16,360.8 13,314.3 10,981.3 1,547.9 785.1 3,046.5 1,080.3 1,966.2 5,050.4 3,466.2
         Aug 25,533.3 16,377.4 13,323.8 10,978.8 1,549.4 795.6 3,053.6 1,087.9 1,965.7 5,236.5 3,919.3
         Sep 25,128.1 16,396.1 13,331.0 10,981.4 1,552.1 797.6 3,065.0 1,094.1 1,970.9 5,032.5 3,699.5
         Oct 25,096.7 16,540.3 13,287.4 10,958.0 1,524.3 805.0 3,252.9 1,173.7 2,079.1 4,974.4 3,582.1
         Nov 25,404.2 16,696.9 13,441.2 11,067.6 1,556.9 816.7 3,255.6 1,229.3 2,026.4 5,146.8 3,560.6
         Dec 25,762.1 16,561.5 13,375.4 11,027.1 1,547.7 800.6 3,186.2 1,236.5 1,949.7 5,005.0 4,195.6
2011          Jan 25,642.0 16,627.2 13,416.6 11,065.0 1,535.7 815.9 3,210.6 1,236.0 1,974.7 5,016.7 3,998.1
         Feb 25,682.6 16,661.0 13,464.9 11,112.5 1,544.3 808.1 3,196.1 1,215.8 1,980.4 5,053.4 3,968.2
         Mar 25,258.5 16,455.5 13,406.1 11,116.5 1,510.0 779.6 3,049.4 1,205.9 1,843.5 4,945.7 3,857.3
         Apr 25,395.8 16,521.8 13,474.9 11,139.7 1,512.2 823.0 3,046.9 1,196.3 1,850.6 4,965.4 3,908.7
         May 25,734.9 16,548.6 13,510.3 11,200.0 1,510.2 800.1 3,038.3 1,173.4 1,865.0 5,130.9 4,055.4
         June 25,430.0 16,555.7 13,497.3 11,224.1 1,483.8 789.5 3,058.4 1,169.7 1,888.7 4,981.9 3,892.4
         July 25,809.6 16,548.5 13,508.8 11,238.0 1,488.2 782.6 3,039.8 1,174.2 1,865.6 5,027.8 4,233.3
         Aug 26,396.3 16,555.4 13,485.3 11,238.8 1,480.7 765.7 3,070.2 1,161.9 1,908.3 5,116.8 4,724.1
         Sep 27,011.4 16,607.4 13,520.1 11,296.6 1,470.6 752.8 3,087.4 1,163.4 1,924.0 5,189.7 5,214.3
         Oct 26,666.9 16,621.0 13,549.1 11,267.1 1,529.9 752.1 3,071.9 1,162.6 1,909.3 5,027.6 5,018.3
         Nov 26,673.3 16,625.4 13,540.3 11,252.0 1,533.8 754.5 3,085.1 1,162.1 1,923.0 5,062.8 4,985.0
         Dec 26,767.5 16,560.1 13,429.7 11,162.5 1,527.8 739.4 3,130.4 1,177.6 1,952.7 5,032.2 5,175.2
2012          Jan 26,950.7 16,673.9 13,476.4 11,195.2 1,533.6 747.6 3,197.5 1,174.8 2,022.6 5,045.0 5,231.8
         Feb 26,940.6 16,687.5 13,450.2 11,164.5 1,540.3 745.3 3,237.3 1,158.9 2,078.4 5,014.9 5,238.2
         Mar 26,737.2 16,707.4 13,445.7 11,162.2 1,527.6 755.9 3,261.7 1,155.5 2,106.2 5,032.8 4,997.0
         Apr 26,828.4 16,702.9 13,444.0 11,155.4 1,521.6 767.0 3,258.9 1,159.5 2,099.4 5,055.9 5,069.6
         May 27,782.4 16,719.9 13,445.6 11,173.9 1,521.1 750.6 3,274.4 1,161.3 2,113.1 5,199.1 5,863.4
         June 27,204.4 16,726.7 13,384.3 11,189.5 1,463.3 731.5 3,342.3 1,185.0 2,157.4 5,088.9 5,388.8
 German contribution (€ billion) 
2010          May 5,259.6 3,664.4 2,996.6 2,539.6 209.1 247.9 667.8 374.7 293.1 1,324.9 270.3
         June 5,236.5 3,680.2 2,988.1 2,540.8 205.5 241.8 692.1 377.7 314.4 1,272.2 284.0
         July 5,144.1 3,670.8 2,980.4 2,537.8 200.7 242.0 690.4 373.1 317.3 1,195.0 278.3
         Aug 5,201.0 3,683.3 2,991.4 2,546.6 199.6 245.1 691.9 373.2 318.7 1,228.9 288.8
         Sep 5,107.4 3,659.4 2,960.3 2,520.3 198.8 241.2 699.1 376.7 322.3 1,172.2 275.8
         Oct 5,210.5 3,775.7 2,964.7 2,523.0 197.8 243.9 811.0 381.2 429.8 1,162.4 272.4
         Nov 5,311.7 3,822.0 3,004.1 2,557.1 195.3 251.8 817.8 457.5 360.3 1,207.0 282.8
         Dec 6,121.9 3,742.7 2,958.4 2,518.9 192.6 246.9 784.3 447.6 336.7 1,183.6 1,195.6
2011          Jan 6,033.2 3,767.9 2,972.6 2,516.5 194.1 262.0 795.3 452.3 342.9 1,170.1 1,095.2
         Feb 5,986.9 3,764.4 2,983.4 2,535.7 193.4 254.3 781.0 440.8 340.2 1,175.3 1,047.2
         Mar 5,835.3 3,730.5 2,962.9 2,515.9 190.2 256.8 767.6 430.3 337.3 1,134.9 970.0
         Apr 5,901.3 3,753.8 2,995.6 2,526.0 189.8 279.8 758.2 419.3 339.0 1,171.1 976.3
         May 5,944.1 3,731.5 2,982.7 2,537.9 189.2 255.6 748.8 408.5 340.3 1,192.1 1,020.6
         June 5,793.3 3,706.7 2,968.3 2,536.0 187.5 244.9 738.4 404.9 333.4 1,145.1 941.6
         July 5,929.3 3,709.0 2,969.1 2,540.8 185.6 242.7 739.9 410.3 329.6 1,158.0 1,062.2
         Aug 6,140.9 3,729.5 2,988.1 2,565.9 183.4 238.8 741.4 400.7 340.8 1,190.0 1,221.3
         Sep 6,294.6 3,744.9 3,001.5 2,584.8 181.4 235.4 743.4 400.3 343.1 1,193.9 1,355.7
         Oct 6,167.9 3,767.6 3,022.8 2,609.4 179.0 234.4 744.8 396.1 348.7 1,157.5 1,242.8
         Nov 6,189.0 3,771.3 3,030.2 2,615.1 181.7 233.3 741.1 393.6 347.5 1,179.7 1,238.0
         Dec 6,229.9 3,720.7 2,986.3 2,576.3 183.2 226.8 734.4 396.9 337.5 1,180.4 1,328.9
2012          Jan 6,292.8 3,751.9 3,007.6 2,594.7 182.4 230.4 744.4 400.3 344.0 1,212.0 1,328.9
         Feb 6,239.0 3,746.7 3,001.7 2,595.0 179.9 226.8 745.0 398.1 346.9 1,193.1 1,299.2
         Mar 6,185.1 3,751.3 3,002.6 2,587.7 182.1 232.9 748.7 395.8 352.9 1,191.6 1,242.1
         Apr 6,250.5 3,775.2 3,022.0 2,594.1 179.8 248.0 753.3 401.1 352.2 1,198.9 1,276.4
         May 6,499.3 3,745.2 3,001.6 2,594.7 178.2 228.7 743.5 395.8 347.7 1,221.4 1,532.7
         June 6,339.8 3,752.8 2,970.9 2,592.7 156.5 221.7 781.8 406.4 375.4 1,183.7 1,403.3
*Monetary financial institutions (MFIs) comprise banks (including building and loan enterprises. 3Including Treasury bills and other money market paper issued by
associations), money market funds, and the European Central Bank and national general government. 4Euro currency in circulation (see also footnote 8 on p 12  )
central banks (the Eurosystem). 1Source: ECB. 2Including money market paper of Excluding MFIs‘ cash in hand (in euro). The German contribution includes the volume

Deutsche Bundesbank
11  Monthly Report
August 2012
II Overall monetary survey in the euro area
 
   
 
Liabilities
Deposits of non-banks (non-MFIs) in the euro area
Enterprises and households
With agreed At agreed
maturities of notice of 6 
over
Currency 1 year and
in of which up to up to over up to over  End of
Total in euro 5 Total Overnight 1 year 2 years 2 years 3 months 3 months year/month circulation 4 
Euro area (€ billion) 1
 
779.0 10,089.2 9,480.6 9,551.6 3,660.4 1,442.0 270.3 2,235.5 1,823.1 120.4 2010          May
785.5 10,216.5 9,594.2 9,650.5 3,694.7 1,426.0 269.0 2,318.6 1,822.6 119.5          June
793.9 10,208.3 9,625.3 9,684.0 3,682.5 1,438.2 270.5 2,342.7 1,832.8 117.4          July
788.0 10,206.4 9,631.4 9,698.6 3,656.5 1,457.3 272.6 2,350.3 1,845.7 116.1          Aug 786.8 10,205.5 9,644.5 9,689.0 3,660.5 1,458.3 263.9 2,344.0 1,848.5 113.8          Sep 
789.0 10,308.3 9,671.7 9,717.5 3,666.5 1,476.6 273.7 2,336.0 1,852.2 112.4          Oct 
790.2 10,390.5 9,719.2 9,777.1 3,670.5 1,465.7 277.9 2,393.8 1,856.3 112.9          Nov 808.6 10,387.3 9,824.2 9,888.6 3,726.6 1,469.0 272.6 2,430.2 1,877.7 112.5          Dec 
796.2 10,422.7 9,807.9 9,865.4 3,702.9 1,449.0 276.1 2,427.0 1,898.3 112.2 2011          Jan 
796.2 10,431.9 9,805.9 9,859.3 3,671.2 1,457.7 278.7 2,439.5 1,899.3 112.9          Feb 798.3 10,438.8 9,848.9 9,898.8 3,684.8 1,452.8 287.2 2,456.5 1,904.4 113.1          Mar 
805.5 10,491.9 9,896.4 9,946.3 3,712.5 1,455.7 286.4 2,470.1 1,909.4 112.2          Apr 
810.4 10,479.6 9,894.2 9,940.7 3,691.2 1,454.8 298.8 2,473.4 1,910.6 111.9          May819.7 10,554.2 9,916.5 9,954.3 3,729.3 1,426.5 300.7 2,477.1 1,908.8 111.9          June
828.2 10,522.3 9,911.9 9,955.5 3,711.4 1,441.2 306.9 2,472.7 1,911.2 112.0          July
823.4 10,481.1 9,930.0 9,969.4 3,692.4 1,457.0 313.0 2,478.6 1,916.6 111.9          Aug 831.2 10,533.2 9,961.9 10,017.7 3,713.7 1,473.1 312.8 2,495.3 1,911.6 111.3          Sep 
837.5 10,538.9 9,973.1 10,027.1 3,711.1 1,469.1 308.5 2,517.6 1,909.4 111.5          Oct 
841.4 10,535.5 9,960.4 10,006.8 3,709.8 1,449.6 312.5 2,509.9 1,915.2 109.8          Nov 857.5 10,625.2 10,051.6 10,118.7 3,790.1 1,456.2 310.5 2,524.5 1,928.1 109.4          Dec 
843.0 10,677.5 10,050.4 10,102.1 3,752.2 1,458.1 315.4 2,523.6 1,944.5 108.5 2012          Jan 
842.5 10,703.5 10,054.2 10,100.9 3,729.1 1,469.8 325.6 2,517.3 1,950.8 108.3          Feb 844.9 10,729.4 10,101.7 10,126.1 3,766.9 1,476.6 323.2 2,491.1 1,960.7 107.6          Mar 
847.6 10,687.8 10,092.5 10,125.0 3,774.2 1,481.6 310.9 2,485.8 1,965.1 107.5          Apr 
856.3 10,707.0 10,078.2 10,100.8 3,799.7 1,455.3 310.8 2,456.8 1,971.6 106.6          May867.8 10,755.5 10,113.2 10,103.5 3,858.3 1,424.9 302.6 2,434.7 1,977.3 105.6          June
 German contribution (€ billion) 
193.2 2,841.8 2,783.5 2,706.9 1,043.4 229.2 40.8 788.5 490.9 114.0 2010          May
195.5 2,842.1 2,787.0 2,701.4 1,042.2 227.9 39.0 787.9 491.6 112.7          June
197.2 2,840.2 2,785.3 2,705.4 1,046.5 227.8 37.8 787.4 495.2 110.6          July
195.8 2,857.1 2,794.5 2,709.4 1,046.2 230.2 37.5 789.7 496.9 108.8          Aug 
195.4 2,850.6 2,797.8 2,708.1 1,046.7 229.1 37.5 788.8 499.4 106.6          Sep 
195.5 2,873.7 2,798.5 2,717.1 1,052.7 232.4 37.9 786.8 502.1 105.2          Oct 
196.6 2,925.7 2,845.2 2,764.3 1,074.9 231.1 38.2 810.2 504.1 105.7          Nov 
200.4 2,926.8 2,855.0 2,772.1 1,066.1 238.5 38.1 811.1 512.4 105.7          Dec 
197.6 2,939.7 2,862.6 2,782.4 1,081.9 233.7 38.0 808.5 515.1 105.3 2011          Jan 
197.4 2,931.4 2,853.1 2,769.4 1,066.1 236.0 38.2 806.5 517.1 105.4          Feb 
198.0 2,928.9 2,858.5 2,771.7 1,066.6 238.1 38.7 804.8 517.9 105.6          Mar 
199.5 2,937.5 2,871.5 2,786.1 1,074.5 246.3 39.5 803.5 517.6 104.8          Apr 
200.9 2,951.3 2,881.4 2,787.4 1,071.8 252.3 40.0 803.2 515.4 104.7          May
203.5 2,960.1 2,884.6 2,787.0 1,078.0 247.9 39.6 803.5 513.6 104.5          June
205.5 2,966.7 2,893.1 2,798.5 1,078.4 259.7 40.1 803.3 512.4 104.5          July
204.5 2,989.1 2,916.1 2,816.9 1,090.2 260.9 41.9 808.3 511.0 104.4          Aug 
205.8 3,008.4 2,930.1 2,832.6 1,099.5 271.9 42.5 804.8 510.1 103.9          Sep 
207.6 3,009.6 2,934.1 2,844.1 1,109.9 274.3 43.5 802.7 509.9 103.8          Oct 
209.1 3,030.2 2,954.6 2,858.9 1,128.2 272.4 44.5 801.4 510.4 102.0          Nov 
212.6 3,038.9 2,962.5 2,867.9 1,130.2 276.1 44.9 799.8 515.8 101.2          Dec 
209.6 3,040.0 2,961.3 2,864.8 1,130.9 274.7 44.8 796.2 518.1 100.3 2012          Jan 
209.4 3,049.0 2,965.8 2,864.0 1,138.8 265.6 45.4 793.2 521.0 100.0          Feb 
209.3 3,041.1 2,968.3 2,857.2 1,143.7 259.8 44.8 788.4 521.4 99.2          Mar 
210.3 3,054.1 2,981.2 2,867.5 1,156.8 260.2 44.1 787.2 520.2 98.9          Apr 
212.3 3,072.2 2,998.5 2,874.4 1,170.8 257.5 43.8 784.0 520.2 98.1          May
215.2 3,094.3 3,019.5 2,863.0 1,182.2 252.1 43.4 768.1 520.1 97.1          June
of euro banknotes put into circulation by the Bundesbank in accordance with the Bundesbank can be calculated by adding to this total the item “Intra-Eurosystem
accounting regime chosen by the Eurosystem (see also footnote 3 on banknote liability/claim related to banknote issue“ (see “Other liability items“). 5Excluding
circulation in Table III.2). The volume of currency actually put into circulation by the central governments’ deposits. 6 In Germany, only savings deposits. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
12  Monthly Report
August 2012
II Overall monetary survey in the euro area
 
2 Consolidated balance sheet of monetary financial institutions (MFIs) (cont’d) *
 
 
 
Liabilities (cont’d)
Deposits of non-banks (non-MFIs) in the euro area (cont’d)  
 
General government Repo transactions Debt securities
with non-banks
Other general government in the euro area
With agreed At agreed
maturities of notice of 2 
Money
over of which market of which
Central 1 year and Enterprises fund denom-
End of govern- up to up to over up to over and shares inated
year/month ments Total Overnight 1 year 2 years 2 years 3 months 3 months Total households (net)  3 Total in euro
 Euro area (€ billion) 1
 
2010          May 284.2 253.3 145.6 61.6 4.4 28.4 5.4 7.8 366.8 364.8 630.3 2,832.2 2,149.3
         June 304.5 261.4 149.9 64.7 3.9 30.0 5.5 7.6 406.6 405.1 605.7 2,819.7 2,141.4
         July 282.2 242.0 131.7 63.0 3.6 30.5 5.7 7.5 384.5 383.1 596.7 2,801.1 2,142.1
         Aug 262.1 245.7 131.4 67.0 3.3 30.8 5.9 7.4 387.2 385.8 608.1 2,813.4 2,133.6
         Sep 265.5 251.0 132.0 72.2 3.3 30.1 6.4 7.0 409.3 407.8 589.4 2,796.1 2,143.3
         Oct 343.7 247.0 133.2 66.9 3.4 30.3 6.5 6.8 385.0 383.5 574.3 2,796.1 2,144.2
         Nov 360.8 252.5 141.4 64.3 3.4 30.4 6.6 6.5 433.4 431.8 586.5 2,832.1 2,155.2
         Dec 264.2 234.5 125.6 63.5 3.4 29.2 6.5 6.3 428.1 426.1 552.4 2,823.0 2,152.9
2011          Jan 316.5 240.8 128.2 64.8 3.4 29.2 6.9 8.2 392.0 390.6 570.2 2,849.0 2,187.0
         Feb 330.0 242.6 127.1 67.1 3.4 29.7 7.4 8.0 431.5 430.0 575.6 2,865.3 2,201.4
         Mar 296.6 243.4 126.4 68.7 3.4 29.8 7.4 7.8 405.2 403.8 568.2 2,937.1 2,284.7
         Apr 304.4 241.3 124.1 68.8 3.6 29.8 7.5 7.5 427.7 426.3 570.2 2,942.9 2,292.4
         May 287.4 251.5 128.6 74.6 3.7 29.9 7.3 7.3 466.5 464.8 566.7 2,972.2 2,303.1
         June 339.0 260.9 135.0 77.7 3.8 29.9 7.3 7.1 455.0 453.4 545.9 2,991.3 2,315.6
         July 317.0 249.8 123.9 77.6 4.6 29.6 7.2 7.0 449.2 447.8 538.7 3,009.2 2,314.5
         Aug 256.6 255.2 125.1 82.1 4.6 29.3 7.3 6.8 494.8 492.7 560.4 2,995.8 2,304.3
         Sep 261.5 254.0 122.6 83.8 4.7 29.2 7.1 6.6 517.7 515.1 549.0 3,014.9 2,314.2
         Oct 261.9 249.9 125.9 76.5 4.8 29.3 7.0 6.4 495.1 492.4 540.7 2,979.5 2,301.8
         Nov 266.1 262.5 135.1 79.8 4.9 29.3 7.2 6.2 467.0 464.2 546.9 2,999.0 2,312.1
         Dec 259.3 247.2 117.7 81.6 5.2 29.5 7.4 5.9 397.1 394.4 520.3 3,006.4 2,297.2
2012          Jan 319.2 256.2 124.5 81.8 5.3 29.7 7.5 7.4 414.5 411.7 496.8 2,993.8 2,301.6
         Feb 342.2 260.4 122.1 87.9 5.5 29.8 8.0 7.1 428.1 425.7 487.4 2,986.2 2,307.0
         Mar 328.5 274.9 129.3 94.8 5.7 29.8 8.3 6.9 413.6 410.9 498.0 2,991.6 2,316.1
         Apr 289.8 273.1 123.0 99.4 5.6 29.6 8.7 6.8 419.9 417.5 507.1 2,985.0 2,292.5
         May 317.2 289.1 131.2 106.4 5.9 30.0 9.0 6.6 428.7 422.8 519.6 2,982.5 2,270.3
         June 334.2 317.7 134.8 117.8 6.6 42.8 9.3 6.5 428.8 425.0 497.0 2,977.5 2,277.0
 German contribution (€ billion) 
2010          May 23.0 112.0 42.2 40.6 2.8 23.7 2.0 0.7 101.4 101.4 8.8 733.9 451.9
         June 21.9 118.8 45.4 43.2 2.4 25.0 2.0 0.7 103.4 103.4 8.1 729.6 450.9
         July 23.5 111.3 38.4 42.9 2.1 25.1 2.0 0.7 93.1 93.1 8.6 709.2 437.0
         Aug 30.9 116.8 41.0 45.7 2.0 25.4 2.1 0.7 104.7 104.7 8.3 720.7 436.1
         Sep 22.4 120.1 41.2 48.9 2.1 25.1 2.2 0.6 96.8 96.8 8.1 710.8 437.1
         Oct 43.2 113.3 37.6 45.6 2.1 25.2 2.2 0.6 85.0 85.0 8.0 700.8 427.5
         Nov 46.5 114.9 41.9 43.0 2.1 25.2 2.2 0.6 109.0 109.0 8.3 716.8 433.9
         Dec 39.8 114.9 40.6 44.6 2.0 25.0 2.2 0.5 86.7 86.7 8.4 708.5 425.8
2011          Jan 45.2 112.1 39.6 42.7 1.9 25.0 2.3 0.5 74.5 74.5 8.4 703.2 426.8
         Feb 47.1 114.9 39.7 45.6 1.7 25.2 2.3 0.5 93.2 93.2 8.4 698.6 424.5
         Mar 38.9 118.3 42.0 46.6 1.8 25.2 2.3 0.5 78.9 78.9 8.5 686.0 426.2
         Apr 34.3 117.2 39.8 47.6 1.8 25.2 2.3 0.5 89.2 89.2 8.4 678.5 420.6
         May 37.7 126.3 44.2 52.1 1.9 25.2 2.3 0.5 105.2 105.2 8.0 681.7 417.9
         June 40.7 132.3 46.1 56.4 2.1 25.2 2.2 0.5 104.8 104.8 7.8 682.3 415.4
         July 39.5 128.7 41.3 57.0 2.8 25.1 2.1 0.5 91.8 91.8 5.3 684.4 410.9
         Aug 39.4 132.8 41.6 61.1 2.8 24.8 2.1 0.4 101.9 101.9 5.7 682.6 412.4
         Sep 42.9 132.9 41.1 61.8 3.0 24.7 2.0 0.4 107.0 107.0 5.8 687.1 406.9
         Oct 40.1 125.3 39.9 55.3 3.1 24.6 2.0 0.4 105.7 105.7 5.8 678.9 407.9
         Nov 39.9 131.4 43.3 57.9 3.2 24.6 2.0 0.4 111.1 111.1 4.9 689.5 411.6
         Dec 40.1 130.8 40.2 60.3 3.3 24.6 2.0 0.4 97.1 97.1 4.8 691.1 404.5
2012          Jan 44.1 131.1 40.0 60.6 3.4 24.8 1.8 0.4 86.7 86.2 4.5 663.1 384.3
         Feb 47.6 137.4 41.5 65.1 3.6 24.9 1.9 0.4 96.6 96.5 4.4 667.4 389.9
         Mar 36.9 147.0 45.4 70.6 3.7 24.9 1.9 0.4 93.1 93.0 4.1 660.3 379.3
         Apr 36.4 150.2 42.9 76.6 3.7 24.8 1.9 0.4 102.9 102.9 4.2 664.4 380.6
         May 36.4 161.4 47.2 82.8 3.9 25.1 2.0 0.4 108.3 105.0 4.2 666.3 373.8
         June 38.1 193.1 53.6 94.5 4.6 37.9 2.1 0.4 98.9 97.7 4.4 662.5 374.0
*Monetary financial institutions (MFIs) comprise banks (including building and loan paper. 5Excluding liabilities arising from securities issued. 6After deduction of
associations), money market funds, and the European Central Bank and national inter-MFI participations. 7The German contributions to the Eurosystem’s monetary
central banks (the Eurosystem). 1Source: ECB. 2In Germany, only savings aggregates should on no account be interpreted as national monetary aggregates
deposits. 3Excluding holdings of MFIs; for the German contribution, excluding and are therefore not comparable with the erstwhile German money stocks M1, M2
German MFIs’ portfolios of securities issued by MFIs in the euro area. 4In Germany, or M3. 8including DM banknotes still in circulation (see also footnote 4 on
bank debt securities with maturities of up to one year are classed as money market p 10    )9For the German contribution, the difference between the volume of

Deutsche Bundesbank
13  Monthly Report
August 2012
II Overall monetary survey in the euro area
 
   
 
 Memo item
 Other liability items Monetary aggregates  7 
 (From 2002, German contribution
issued (net) 3 excludes currency in circulation)
With maturities of
of which Monetary
Intra- liabilities
Eurosystem- of centralliability/ govern-
over Liabilities Excess claim Monetary ments1 year and to non- Capital of related to capital (Post
up to up to over euro-area and inter-MFI banknote forma- Office, End of1 year 
4 2 years 2 years residents 5 reserves 6 liabilities Total 8 issue 9 M1 10 M2 11 M3 12 tion 13 year/month Treasury)  14 
Euro area (€ billion) 1
 
22.2 106.8 2,703.2 4,705.0 1,890.5 − 62.8 3,958.2 − 4,663.8 8,301.2 9,427.1 6,985.8 109.4 2010          May
24.0 101.6 2,694.0 4,600.8 1,974.4 − 19.9 3,789.7 − 4,710.3 8,332.1 9,469.8 7,144.1 110.4          June
29.4 100.2 2,671.5 4,480.2 1,935.3 − 30.5 3,707.9 − 4,692.9 8,336.6 9,447.1 7,105.0 114.8          July
29.1 100.3 2,684.0 4,633.7 1,978.2 − 3.6 4,121.8 − 4,659.9 8,341.4 9,465.9 7,166.8 113.7          Aug 
33.9 96.7 2,665.5 4,438.2 1,956.1 − 3.4 3,950.1 − 4,661.8 8,343.7 9,473.0 7,116.5 111.9          Sep 
26.9 97.9 2,671.2 4,455.1 1,967.7 12.5 3,808.9 − 4,669.2 8,377.8 9,461.9 7,124.3 109.8          Oct 
24.6 97.2 2,710.3 4,582.7 2,004.6 9.3 3,775.1 − 4,684.9 8,387.7 9,529.2 7,258.5 111.4          Nov 
30.9 92.3 2,699.8 4,367.5 2,022.9 28.2 4,344.2 − 4,750.8 8,471.3 9,574.8 7,300.9 117.9          Dec 
35.6 94.6 2,718.9 4,376.8 2,003.6 27.7 4,203.8 − 4,708.7 8,434.8 9,526.8 7,299.1 109.0 2011          Jan 
38.9 89.2 2,737.2 4,372.7 2,033.3 32.8 4,143.2 − 4,674.3 8,414.9 9,549.7 7,360.6 106.8          Feb 
68.9 86.4 2,781.8 4,163.3 2,038.8 39.2 3,869.6 − 4,689.3 8,439.8 9,568.0 7,427.8 106.3          Mar 
71.2 87.7 2,784.0 4,203.2 2,043.2 5.2 3,906.1 − 4,723.0 8,480.7 9,637.2 7,446.9 107.4          Apr 
74.4 84.8 2,813.0 4,339.3 2,070.9 − 22.5 4,051.7 − 4,710.8 8,486.8 9,678.8 7,506.7 106.8          May
95.9 80.4 2,814.9 4,120.2 2,086.2 − 5.2 3,862.8 − 4,765.2 8,516.3 9,693.1 7,527.2 107.4          June
95.0 83.1 2,831.1 4,139.7 2,151.0 − 7.4 4,178.8 − 4,745.8 8,520.5 9,686.1 7,603.5 108.3          July
97.3 77.7 2,820.8 4,159.5 2,205.1 − 4.9 4,680.9 − 4,722.4 8,529.0 9,759.1 7,652.4 107.4          Aug 
94.8 75.7 2,844.4 4,216.8 2,183.9 − 15.7 5,180.4 − 4,748.1 8,567.1 9,804.3 7,670.7 106.6          Sep 
95.5 75.3 2,808.7 4,124.3 2,186.8 − 34.5 4,998.6 − 4,753.8 8,554.9 9,761.4 7,660.2 105.2          Oct 
90.9 82.3 2,825.8 4,148.4 2,200.5 − 25.4 4,960.0 − 4,769.5 8,564.3 9,751.2 7,681.6 108.8          Nov 
122.9 83.8 2,799.7 4,088.3 2,219.6 − 18.5 5,071.5 − 4,856.5 8,670.2 9,794.1 7,688.6 116.0          Dec 
111.6 92.3 2,789.9 4,114.2 2,273.8 − 64.3 5,201.4 − 4,802.1 8,639.9 9,755.1 7,732.8 107.7 2012          Jan 
118.1 99.4 2,768.7 4,077.8 2,291.3 − 38.6 5,162.4 − 4,775.6 8,647.9 9,780.8 7,722.4 106.5          Feb 
136.7 104.1 2,750.8 4,147.3 2,271.9 − 56.7 4,897.3 − 4,823.3 8,717.5 9,869.6 7,658.1 107.0          Mar 
121.3 108.4 2,755.3 4,187.0 2,269.8 − 54.9 4,979.1 − 4,827.7 8,723.8 9,880.2 7,654.8 107.8          Apr 
112.0 107.2 2,763.3 4,290.6 2,277.0 − 55.1 5,775.6 − 4,871.6 8,755.3 9,922.5 7,640.3 109.1          May
131.5 102.2 2,743.8 4,165.0 2,308.7 − 54.4 5,258.5 − 4,945.4 8,809.2 9,967.7 7,642.1 109.9          June
 German contribution (€ billion) 
26.7 15.3 692.0 847.8 431.1 − 469.8 764.6 151.7 1,085.6 1,891.9 2,044.0 2,050.0 − 2010          May
23.5 13.1 693.0 807.3 431.2 − 475.4 790.2 150.9 1,087.6 1,893.8 2,041.9 2,050.6 −          June
25.4 14.7 669.1 784.5 426.1 − 483.3 765.7 151.2 1,084.9 1,892.8 2,034.6 2,019.1 −          July
33.6 13.9 673.3 797.3 433.5 − 496.8 776.1 153.2 1,087.2 1,901.6 2,062.0 2,031.3 −          Aug 
35.2 14.8 660.8 757.5 430.4 − 517.7 770.9 155.8 1,087.9 1,907.1 2,061.9 2,012.4 −          Sep 
31.8 15.2 653.9 745.2 440.6 − 414.3 771.5 156.7 1,090.3 1,912.7 2,052.6 2,012.2 −          Oct 
28.0 18.4 670.4 772.9 451.7 − 439.4 766.9 156.6 1,116.8 1,937.4 2,101.1 2,063.8 −          Nov 
27.4 15.4 665.7 736.6 450.9 − 456.6 1,660.7 157.1 1,106.7 1,944.6 2,082.5 2,058.9 −          Dec 
24.2 15.5 663.5 727.0 447.6 − 421.8 1,554.6 157.8 1,121.5 1,955.2 2,077.8 2,050.4 − 2011          Jan 
26.1 11.8 660.6 732.7 455.8 − 446.9 1,513.6 158.9 1,105.8 1,946.8 2,086.4 2,054.0 −          Feb 
23.7 12.9 649.4 672.7 455.5 − 438.1 1,442.9 159.5 1,108.6 1,954.0 2,078.0 2,040.9 −          Mar 
19.8 13.6 645.1 694.9 457.3 − 413.4 1,448.8 160.1 1,114.2 1,969.4 2,100.4 2,036.3 −          Apr 
19.3 14.0 648.4 698.7 456.2 − 455.5 1,498.4 161.6 1,116.0 1,980.1 2,126.5 2,038.2 −          May
18.7 14.3 649.2 638.7 455.5 − 480.5 1,424.7 163.1 1,124.1 1,985.8 2,131.5 2,038.3 −          June
22.2 14.0 648.2 647.7 467.3 − 484.9 1,550.9 164.9 1,119.7 1,993.8 2,127.1 2,048.9 −          July
25.2 13.6 643.8 699.8 483.8 − 542.9 1,720.9 167.5 1,131.9 2,011.7 2,158.1 2,065.6 −          Aug 
21.8 11.9 653.4 738.9 476.2 − 600.2 1,871.4 170.7 1,140.5 2,031.7 2,178.3 2,063.4 −          Sep 
18.8 11.2 648.9 746.8 478.0 − 608.3 1,751.4 170.7 1,149.9 2,037.9 2,179.4 2,058.5 −          Oct 
22.5 11.7 655.3 769.8 478.8 − 639.8 1,744.5 170.9 1,171.5 2,061.9 2,212.1 2,062.5 −          Nov 
22.8 9.7 658.6 696.1 473.6 − 607.5 1,835.9 170.5 1,170.4 2,072.8 2,207.2 2,058.1 −          Dec 
19.7 10.3 633.1 801.2 486.8 − 614.9 1,825.4 171.0 1,170.9 2,074.3 2,195.5 2,041.5 − 2012          Jan 
20.2 11.4 635.8 815.9 493.4 − 670.9 1,783.3 172.2 1,180.3 2,082.8 2,215.4 2,047.8 −          Feb 
19.9 9.8 630.5 873.9 492.0 − 710.2 1,730.8 175.5 1,189.1 2,091.3 2,218.3 2,035.5 −          Mar 
16.6 11.5 636.3 889.0 497.3 − 733.8 1,772.5 177.6 1,199.7 2,106.4 2,241.6 2,044.8 −          Apr 
13.4 9.9 643.0 919.2 495.5 − 796.5 2,029.9 179.3 1,218.0 2,128.2 2,264.1 2,046.1 −          May
13.7 10.5 638.3 913.9 501.1 − 829.6 1,894.5 181.0 1,235.7 2,152.5 2,280.0 2,042.9 −          June
euro banknotes actually issued by the Bundesbank and the amount disclosed in years and at agreed notice of up to 3 months (excluding central governments’
accordance with the accounting regime chosen by the Eurosystem (see also footnote deposits) and (for the euro area) central governments’ monetary liabilities with such3 on banknote circulation in Table III.2). 10Overnight deposits (excluding central maturities. 12M2 plus repo transactions, money market fund shares, money market
governments’ deposits), and (for the euro area) currency in circulation, central paper and debt securities up to 2 years. 13Deposits with agreed maturities of over 2
governments’ overnight monetary liabilities, which are not included in the years and at agreed notice of over 3 months, debt securities with maturities of over 2consolidated balance sheet. 11M1 plus deposits with agreed maturities of up to 2 years, capital and reserves. 14 Non-existent in Germany. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
14  Monthly Report
August 2012
II  Overall monetary survey in the euro area
  
3  Banking system’s liquidity position  * 
Stocks
  
€ billion; period averages of daily positions
Liquidity-providing factors Liquidity-absorbing factors
Monetary policy operations of the Eurosystem
Credit
institutions‘
currentaccount
Net assets Longer- Other Other balances
Reserve in gold Main term Marginal liquidity- liquidity- Banknotes Central Other (including
maintenance and foreign refinancing refinancing lending providing Deposit absorbing in government factors minimum Base
period currency operations operations facility facility deposits (net)  
6 reserves) 7 money 8 operations 3 operations 4 circulation 5 
ending in 1 
Eurosystem  2  
  
2010          Jan 413.0 60.6 648.4 0.4 28.4 147.0 8.1 796.8 119.8 − 132.1 211.2 1 155.0
         Feb 425.6 59.7 662.2 0.2 33.5 168.3 13.3 783.6 122.6 − 117.5 210.9 1 162.8
         Mar 426.9 80.5 641.1 0.9 38.0 186.4 10.5 784.6 113.2 − 119.3 211.8 1 182.9
         Apr 439.8 77.7 650.5 0.4 43.6 200.7 8.4 792.9 113.6 − 116.1 212.5 1 206.1
         May 457.0 76.7 666.4 0.9 49.4 218.2 11.4 796.6 112.1 − 100.3 212.4 1 227.2
         June 462.4 110.0 706.7 0.3 86.9 288.8 34.1 806.2 123.1 − 98.4 212.5 1 307.5
         July 500.9 167.5 573.2 0.3 140.2 230.4 54.4 813.0 126.5 − 56.5 214.4 1 257.8
         Aug 543.4 185.4 432.2 0.1 121.4 96.7 67.5 819.3 95.2 − 11.8 215.7 1 131.7
         Sep 543.2 153.1 435.0 0.6 121.8 83.7 66.9 816.0 86.8 − 15.0 215.3 1 115.0
         Oct 531.3 164.5 392.6 0.7 128.3 68.8 64.8 814.1 96.4 − 39.8 213.1 1 096.1
         Nov 511.3 183.0 340.0 0.8 124.5 41.9 68.8 813.5 92.1 − 72.0 215.2 1 070.7
         Dec 511.1 179.5 336.3 1.9 130.4 44.7 70.8 815.9 94.4 − 79.1 212.5 1 073.1
2011          Jan 527.5 197.0 316.6 0.5 140.9 66.5 73.5 833.9 81.3 − 85.1 212.4 1 112.8
         Feb 549.7 185.4 318.2 0.1 137.2 39.2 81.3 822.0 101.2 − 66.7 213.6 1 074.8
         Mar 550.0 134.4 321.0 7.6 137.9 26.9 80.3 820.9 89.8 − 79.9 212.9 1 060.7
         Apr 544.1 97.3 335.4 0.8 137.6 23.0 79.5 824.4 73.1 − 95.2 210.5 1 057.9
         May 525.9 109.2 320.5 0.4 136.6 22.8 76.8 833.9 61.3 − 111.6 209.5 1 066.1
         June 526.8 114.7 317.9 0.0 135.5 18.4 76.2 836.6 62.6 − 107.9 209.0 1 064.0
         July 533.6 146.0 311.6 0.2 134.2 29.5 76.9 846.2 73.4 − 111.2 210.9 1 086.6
         Aug 541.3 171.7 321.5 0.1 133.9 56.7 79.2 854.2 71.4 − 104.5 211.5 1 122.4
         Sep 540.3 135.1 389.8 0.3 178.0 121.8 109.8 853.2 52.3 − 103.0 209.5 1 184.5
         Oct 571.0 193.0 373.6 1.5 217.4 168.7 162.9 854.9 50.0 − 88.5 208.7 1 232.2
         Nov 612.1 196.1 387.1 2.8 231.9 204.6 178.0 861.4 57.9 − 80.8 208.9 1 274.8
         Dec 622.1 238.0 389.0 4.4 260.3 253.7 200.5 869.4 63.8 − 85.9 212.2 1 335.3
2012          Jan 683.9 169.4 627.3 6.0 278.6 399.3 210.8 883.7 67.7 − 8.7 212.3 1 495.3
         Feb 698.3 120.6 683.6 2.3 282.4 489.0 218.5 870.1 100.1 1.6 108.1 1 467.1
         Mar 688.2 89.1 860.1 2.2 288.1 621.0 219.5 868.8 129.0 − 19.4 108.9 1 598.6
         Apr 667.6 56.4 1 093.4 3.0 280.6 771.3 215.8 871.2 146.3 − 13.3 109.6 1 752.1
         May 659.3 47.0 1 088.7 1.0 281.3 771.4 214.0 872.7 137.1 − 28.5 110.5 1 754.6
         June 656.8 58.1 1 071.0 1.6 281.1 770.8 212.8 880.8 117.8 − 24.2 110.8 1 762.3
         July 666.7 160.7 1 074.9 1.8 280.7 770.6 210.9 892.5 138.8 60.6 111.5 1 774.6
Deutsche Bundesbank
2010          Jan 112.1 42.8 168.9 0.1 7.9 44.8 2.3 198.4 10.7 25.3 50.3 293.5
         Feb 112.3 42.2 168.6 0.1 8.9 50.3 5.2 195.6 5.4 25.4 50.2 296.1
         Mar 112.6 51.8 157.9 0.8 10.0 67.8 5.0 196.5 2.1 11.8 50.0 314.3
         Apr 116.2 40.9 164.9 0.2 11.5 69.8 3.4 198.0 0.3 11.9 50.3 318.2
         May 121.1 40.5 164.7 0.1 12.8 74.9 4.2 199.0 0.7 10.2 50.2 324.1
         June 122.2 43.0 166.4 0.0 22.1 113.1 17.1 201.5 0.8 − 29.2 50.5 365.0
         July 133.9 55.2 112.8 0.1 32.7 81.0 22.3 202.5 0.4 − 22.7 51.2 334.7
         Aug 145.8 61.7 52.8 0.1 28.4 32.7 20.7 204.2 0.5 − 21.6 52.3 289.2
         Sep 145.5 52.6 50.3 0.2 28.4 24.8 26.5 204.2 0.5 − 30.9 52.0 280.9
         Oct 142.2 54.4 40.5 0.1 29.3 27.0 32.4 204.0 0.5 − 48.3 51.0 281.9
         Nov 136.7 63.7 28.9 0.0 28.8 21.2 35.7 202.9 0.4 − 53.6 51.5 275.5
         Dec 136.5 60.5 32.5 0.1 29.3 21.2 41.0 203.3 0.2 − 57.7 51.0 275.5
2011          Jan 141.9 55.2 34.1 0.1 31.2 28.2 42.0 207.7 0.3 − 66.9 51.3 287.2
         Feb 148.1 44.6 44.0 0.0 31.6 19.8 43.0 204.6 0.2 − 51.0 51.8 276.2
         Mar 148.4 31.3 44.7 0.0 31.7 14.6 48.4 204.8 0.2 − 63.7 51.8 271.2
         Apr 146.6 24.1 45.5 0.0 31.9 13.6 38.9 205.2 0.2 − 61.5 51.7 270.4
         May 142.4 17.9 47.7 0.2 31.9 10.8 38.2 207.6 0.4 − 68.2 51.4 269.8
         June 142.5 10.6 41.5 0.0 31.7 8.1 33.4 208.7 0.3 − 75.8 51.7 268.4
         July 144.3 22.8 35.8 0.0 31.4 11.1 36.4 211.1 0.3 − 77.3 52.6 274.8
         Aug 146.7 13.6 36.5 0.0 31.3 15.4 35.2 213.0 0.2 − 88.4 52.7 281.1
         Sep 146.7 6.6 33.6 0.0 42.3 27.8 60.2 213.4 0.3 − 124.3 51.8 293.0
         Oct 155.5 10.7 20.8 0.0 52.3 41.5 86.8 213.5 0.3 − 155.0 52.2 307.2
         Nov 167.5 4.0 18.0 0.1 55.7 55.0 87.9 213.8 0.2 − 164.5 53.0 321.8
         Dec 168.7 3.0 17.6 0.1 63.2 60.4 126.2 216.3 0.7 − 205.5 54.4 331.2
2012          Jan 182.3 4.4 40.3 0.1 67.2 101.7 117.0 219.8 0.8 − 199.6 54.5 376.0
         Feb 183.2 1.8 46.7 0.0 69.2 141.9 130.5 216.9 0.8 − 217.6 28.3 387.1
         Mar 183.6 1.2 59.4 0.0 69.2 192.6 142.2 217.0 0.8 − 266.8 27.7 437.3
         Apr 182.0 1.2 73.8 0.1 68.8 257.2 142.7 218.1 0.7 − 321.6 28.8 504.1
         May 181.3 1.3 73.4 0.1 68.8 260.5 144.6 217.8 0.7 − 327.5 28.9 507.2
         June 180.4 3.8 74.6 0.5 68.7 276.9 150.3 219.8 0.8 − 349.1 29.3 526.0
         July 180.3 3.1 76.5 0.1 68.6 293.3 152.1 222.3 1.0 − 369.8 29.6 545.2
Discrepancies may arise from rounding. *The banking system’s liquidity position is includes liquidity absorbed as a result of the Eurosystem’s foreign exchange swap
defined as the current account holdings in euro of euro-area credit institutions with operations. 5From 2002, euro banknotes and other banknotes which have been
the Eurosystem. Amounts are derived from the consolidated financial statement of issued by the national central banks of the Eurosystem and which are still in cir-the Eurosystem and the financial statement of the Bundesbank. 1Figures are daily av- culation. In accordance with the accounting procedure chosen by the Eurosystem for
erages for the reserve maintenance period ending in the month indicated. 2Source: the issue of euro banknotes, 8% of the total value of the euro banknotes in cir-
ECB. 3Includes liquidity provided under the Eurosystem’s covered bond purchase culation are allocated on a monthly basis to the ECB. The counterpart of this
programme and the Eurosystem’s securities markets programme. 4From Aug. 2009,

Deutsche Bundesbank
15  Monthly Report
August 2012
II  Overall monetary survey in the euro area
  
  
Flows
  
Liquidity-providing factors Liquidity-absorbing factors
Monetary policy operations of the Eurosystem
Credit
institutions‘
currentaccount
Net assets Longer- Other Other balances
in gold Main term Marginal liquidity- liquidity- Banknotes Central Other (including Reserve
and foreign refinancing refinancing lending providing Deposit absorbing in government factors minimum Base maintenance
currency operations operations facility facility deposits (net)  
6 reserves) 7 money 8 period operations 3 operations 4 circulation 5 
ending in 1 
Eurosystem  2  
  
+ 5.4 + 4.8 + 55.0 − 0.3 + 3.8 + 81.3 − 1.8 + 21.6 − 30.3 − 1.9 − 0.2 + 102.7 2010          Jan 
+ 12.6 − 0.9 + 13.8 − 0.2 + 5.1 + 21.3 + 5.2 − 13.2 + 2.8 + 14.6 − 0.3 + 7.8          Feb 
+ 1.3 + 20.8 − 21.1 + 0.7 + 4.5 + 18.1 − 2.8 + 1.0 − 9.4 − 1.8 + 0.9 + 20.1          Mar 
+ 12.9 − 2.8 + 9.4 − 0.5 + 5.6 + 14.3 − 2.1 + 8.3 + 0.4 + 3.2 + 0.7 + 23.2          Apr 
+ 17.2 − 1.0 + 15.9 + 0.5 + 5.8 + 17.5 + 3.0 + 3.7 − 1.5 + 15.8 − 0.1 + 21.1          May
+ 5.4 + 33.3 + 40.3 − 0.6 + 37.5 + 70.6 + 22.7 + 9.6 + 11.0 + 1.9 + 0.1 + 80.3          June
+ 38.5 + 57.5 − 133.5 − 0.0 + 53.3 − 58.4 + 20.3 + 6.8 + 3.4 + 41.9 + 1.9 − 49.7          July
+ 42.5 + 17.9 − 141.0 − 0.2 − 18.8 −133.7 + 13.1 + 6.3 − 31.3 + 44.7 + 1.3 − 126.1          Aug 
− 0.2 − 32.3 + 2.8 + 0.5 + 0.4 − 13.0 − 0.6 − 3.3 − 8.4 − 3.2 − 0.4 − 16.7          Sep 
− 11.9 + 11.4 − 42.4 + 0.1 + 6.5 − 14.9 − 2.1 − 1.9 + 9.6 − 24.8 − 2.2 − 18.9          Oct 
− 20.0 + 18.5 − 52.6 + 0.1 − 3.8 − 26.9 + 4.0 − 0.6 − 4.3 − 32.2 + 2.1 − 25.4          Nov 
− 0.2 − 3.5 − 3.7 + 1.1 + 5.9 + 2.8 + 2.0 + 2.4 + 2.3 − 7.1 − 2.7 + 2.4          Dec 
+ 16.4 + 17.5 − 19.7 − 1.4 + 10.5 + 21.8 + 2.7 + 18.0 − 13.1 − 6.0 − 0.1 + 39.7 2011          Jan 
+ 22.2 − 11.6 + 1.6 − 0.4 − 3.7 − 27.3 + 7.8 − 11.9 + 19.9 + 18.4 + 1.2 − 38.0          Feb + 0.3 − 51.0 + 2.8 + 7.5 + 0.7 − 12.3 − 1.0 − 1.1 − 11.4 − 13.2 − 0.7 − 14.1          Mar 
− 5.9 − 37.1 + 14.4 − 6.8 − 0.3 − 3.9 − 0.8 + 3.5 − 16.7 − 15.3 − 2.4 − 2.8          Apr 
− 18.2 + 11.9 − 14.9 − 0.4 − 1.0 − 0.2 − 2.7 + 9.5 − 11.8 − 16.4 − 1.0 + 8.2          May
+ 0.9 + 5.5 − 2.6 − 0.4 − 1.1 − 4.4 − 0.6 + 2.7 + 1.3 + 3.7 − 0.5 − 2.1          June
+ 6.8 + 31.3 − 6.3 + 0.2 − 1.3 + 11.1 + 0.7 + 9.6 + 10.8 − 3.3 + 1.9 + 22.6          July
+ 7.7 + 25.7 + 9.9 − 0.1 − 0.3 + 27.2 + 2.3 + 8.0 − 2.0 + 6.7 + 0.6 + 35.8          Aug 
− 1.0 − 36.6 + 68.3 + 0.2 + 44.1 + 65.1 + 30.6 − 1.0 − 19.1 + 1.5 − 2.0 + 62.1          Sep 
+ 30.7 + 57.9 − 16.2 + 1.2 + 39.4 + 46.9 + 53.1 + 1.7 − 2.3 + 14.5 − 0.8 + 47.7          Oct 
+ 41.1 + 3.1 + 13.5 + 1.3 + 14.5 + 35.9 + 15.1 + 6.5 + 7.9 + 7.7 + 0.2 + 42.6          Nov 
+ 10.0 + 41.9 + 1.9 + 1.6 + 28.4 + 49.1 + 22.5 + 8.0 + 5.9 − 5.1 + 3.3 + 60.5          Dec 
+ 61.8 − 68.6 + 238.3 + 1.6 + 18.3 +145.6 + 10.3 + 14.3 + 3.9 + 77.2 + 0.1 + 160.0 2012          Jan 
+ 14.4 − 48.8 + 56.3 − 3.7 + 3.8 + 89.7 + 7.7 − 13.6 + 32.4 + 10.3 − 104.2 − 28.2          Feb 
− 10.1 − 31.5 + 176.5 − 0.1 + 5.7 +132.0 + 1.0 − 1.3 + 28.9 − 21.0 + 0.8 + 131.5          Mar 
− 20.6 − 32.7 + 233.3 + 0.8 − 7.5 +150.3 − 3.7 + 2.4 + 17.3 + 6.1 + 0.7 + 153.5          Apr 
− 8.3 − 9.4 − 4.7 − 2.0 + 0.7 + 0.1 − 1.8 + 1.5 − 9.2 − 15.2 + 0.9 + 2.5          May− 2.5 + 11.1 − 17.7 + 0.6 − 0.2 − 0.6 − 1.2 + 8.1 − 19.3 + 4.3 + 0.3 + 7.7          June
+ 9.9 + 102.6 + 3.9 + 0.2 − 0.4 − 0.2 − 1.9 + 11.7 + 21.0 + 84.8 + 0.7 + 12.3          July
Deutsche Bundesbank
− 4.2 + 9.1 − 2.2 − 0.5 + 0.7 + 19.1 − 0.4 + 5.1 − 8.1 − 12.6 − 0.2 + 24.0 2010          Jan 
+ 0.2 − 0.6 − 0.3 + 0.0 + 1.0 + 5.5 + 3.0 − 2.8 − 5.2 + 0.1 − 0.1 + 2.6          Feb 
+ 0.3 + 9.6 − 10.6 + 0.7 + 1.1 + 17.4 − 0.3 + 0.9 − 3.3 − 13.6 − 0.1 + 18.2          Mar 
+ 3.6 − 10.8 + 7.0 − 0.7 + 1.5 + 2.0 − 1.6 + 1.6 − 1.8 + 0.1 + 0.3 + 3.9          Apr 
+ 4.9 − 0.4 − 0.2 − 0.1 + 1.3 + 5.0 + 0.8 + 1.0 + 0.5 − 1.7 − 0.1 + 5.9          May
+ 1.1 + 2.5 + 1.7 − 0.0 + 9.3 + 38.2 + 12.9 + 2.5 + 0.1 − 39.4 + 0.3 + 40.9          June
+ 11.7 + 12.2 − 53.6 + 0.0 + 10.7 − 32.1 + 5.1 + 1.0 − 0.4 + 6.5 + 0.8 − 30.3          July
+ 11.9 + 6.6 − 60.0 + 0.0 − 4.3 − 48.3 − 1.5 + 1.7 + 0.1 + 1.1 + 1.0 − 45.6          Aug 
− 0.3 − 9.1 − 2.5 + 0.1 + 0.0 − 7.9 + 5.8 + 0.0 − 0.1 − 9.3 − 0.3 − 8.3          Sep 
− 3.3 + 1.8 − 9.8 − 0.1 + 0.9 + 2.2 + 5.9 − 0.2 − 0.0 − 17.4 − 1.0 + 1.0          Oct 
− 5.6 + 9.3 − 11.6 − 0.1 − 0.5 − 5.8 + 3.3 − 1.1 − 0.1 − 5.3 + 0.5 − 6.4          Nov − 0.2 − 3.1 + 3.6 + 0.1 + 0.6 + 0.0 + 5.3 + 0.5 − 0.2 − 4.1 − 0.5 − 0.0          Dec 
+ 5.5 − 5.4 + 1.5 − 0.0 + 1.9 + 7.0 + 1.1 + 4.3 + 0.0 − 9.2 + 0.4 + 11.6 2011          Jan 
+ 6.2 − 10.6 + 9.9 − 0.1 + 0.3 − 8.4 + 0.9 − 3.1 − 0.0 + 15.9 + 0.5 − 11.0          Feb 
+ 0.3 − 13.3 + 0.7 − 0.0 + 0.2 − 5.2 + 5.5 + 0.3 − 0.0 − 12.7 − 0.1 − 5.0          Mar 
− 1.8 − 7.2 + 0.9 + 0.0 + 0.1 − 1.0 − 9.5 + 0.3 + 0.0 + 2.2 − 0.0 − 0.7          Apr 
− 4.2 − 6.2 + 2.2 + 0.2 + 0.0 − 2.8 − 0.7 + 2.4 + 0.1 − 6.7 − 0.3 − 0.7          May
+ 0.2 − 7.3 − 6.3 − 0.2 − 0.2 − 2.7 − 4.7 + 1.1 − 0.1 − 7.6 + 0.2 − 1.4          June
+ 1.7 + 12.2 − 5.7 + 0.0 − 0.3 + 3.0 + 3.0 + 2.4 + 0.0 − 1.5 + 0.9 + 6.4          July
+ 2.4 − 9.2 + 0.7 − 0.0 − 0.0 + 4.3 − 1.2 + 1.9 − 0.1 − 11.1 + 0.1 + 6.3          Aug 
+ 0.0 − 6.9 − 2.9 + 0.0 + 11.0 + 12.4 + 25.0 + 0.4 + 0.1 − 35.9 − 0.9 + 12.0          Sep 
+ 8.8 + 4.1 − 12.8 + 0.0 + 9.9 + 13.7 + 26.6 + 0.1 − 0.0 − 30.7 + 0.3 + 14.2          Oct 
+ 12.0 − 6.7 − 2.8 + 0.1 + 3.5 + 13.5 + 1.1 + 0.3 − 0.0 − 9.5 + 0.9 + 14.6          Nov 
+ 1.2 − 1.0 − 0.4 + 0.0 + 7.5 + 5.5 + 38.4 + 2.5 + 0.5 − 41.0 + 1.4 + 9.4          Dec 
+ 13.6 + 1.4 + 22.7 − 0.0 + 4.0 + 41.3 − 9.2 + 3.5 + 0.1 + 5.9 + 0.1 + 44.8 2012          Jan 
+ 0.9 − 2.6 + 6.4 − 0.1 + 2.0 + 40.2 + 13.5 − 2.9 − 0.1 − 18.0 − 26.2 + 11.1          Feb + 0.4 − 0.6 + 12.7 + 0.0 +
 0.0 + 50.7 + 11.7 + 0.1 + 0.0 − 49.3 − 0.6 + 50.2          Mar 
−
1.6 + 0.0 + 14.4 + 0.1 − 0.4 + 64.7 + 0.5 + 1.1 − 0.0 − 54.7 + 1.1 + 66.8          Apr 
− 0.7 + 0.1 − 0.4 − 0.0 − 0.0 + 3.3 + 1.8 − 0.3 − 0.0 − 5.9 + 0.1 + 3.1          May
− 0.9 + 2.5 + 1.1 + 0.4 − 0.1 + 16.4 + 5.7 + 2.0 + 0.1 − 21.6 + 0.4 + 18.8          June
− 0.1 − 0.7 + 1.9 − 0.4 − 0.1 + 16.4 + 1.8 + 2.5 + 0.3 − 20.7 + 0.3 + 19.2          July
adjustment is shown under “Other factors”. The remaining 92% of the value of the “Other factors”. From 2003 euro banknotes only. 6Remaining items in the
euro banknotes in circulation is allocated, likewise on a monthly basis, to the NCBs, consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem and the financial statement of
with each NCB showing in its balance sheet the percentage of the euro banknotes in the Bundesbank. 7Equal to the difference between the sum of liquidity-providing
circulation that corresponds to its paid-up share in the ECB’s capital. The difference factors and the sum of liquidity-absorbing factors. 8Calculated as the sum of the
between the value of the euro banknotes allocated to an NCB and the value of the “deposit facility”, “banknotes in circulation” and “credit institutions’ current accounteuro banknotes which that NCB has put into circulation is likewise shown under holdings”. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
16  Monthly Report
August 2012
III Consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem
 
1 Assets *
 
 
€ billion
Claims on non-euro area Claims on non-euro area residents denominated
in foreign currency residents denominated in euro
Balances with
Claims on banks, security
On investments, euro area Balances Claims
reporting external loans residents with banks, arising from
date/ Gold and other denominated security the credit
End of Total and gold Receivables external in foreign investments facility under
month 1 assets receivables Total from the IMF assets currency Total and loans ERM II
 Eurosystem 2
 
2011 Dec                  2 2,435.7 419.8 231.9 80.4 151.5 32.3 28.3 28.3 −
                                9 2,460.8 419.8 234.0 81.3 152.7 70.1 28.3 28.3 −
                              16 2,493.8 419.8 235.7 83.2 152.5 73.0 30.5 30.5 −
                              23 2,733.2 419.8 236.8 83.5 153.3 95.4 26.0 26.0 −
                              30 2,735.6 423.5 244.6 85.7 159.0 98.2 25.4 25.4 −
2012 Jan                  6 2,687.9 423.5 246.0 85.7 160.4 95.6 24.6 24.6 −
                              13 2,677.0 423.5 246.0 85.7 160.4 94.5 23.5 23.5 −
                              20 2,706.2 423.5 245.3 85.7 159.6 94.5 25.7 25.7 −
                              27 2,682.6 423.4 245.0 85.7 159.3 96.7 25.0 25.0 −
         Feb                  3 2,662.1 423.4 246.0 85.7 160.3 100.4 24.2 24.2 −
                              10 2,655.8 423.4 245.1 85.5 159.6 100.6 23.9 23.9 −
                              17 2,663.3 423.4 245.8 85.5 160.3 99.6 23.5 23.5 −
                              24 2,692.6 423.4 245.3 85.5 159.8 99.9 23.8 23.8 −
         Mar                  2 3,023.2 423.4 247.0 86.8 160.1 72.1 23.3 23.3 −
                                9 3,005.8 423.4 247.0 86.9 160.1 70.4 20.4 20.4 −
                              16 2,986.3 423.4 246.6 86.8 159.7 71.4 18.0 18.0 −
                              23 2,982.8 423.5 247.5 87.1 160.4 70.8 18.6 18.6 −
                              30 2,964.4 432.7 238.5 85.2 153.3 55.2 18.4 18.4 −
         Apr                  6 2,965.3 432.7 240.3 85.3 155.0 53.8 19.9 19.9 −
                              13 2,974.9 432.7 239.7 86.1 153.6 54.5 20.1 20.1 −
                              20 2,967.1 432.7 240.4 86.1 154.3 54.6 19.3 19.3 −
                              27 2,962.1 432.7 241.2 86.2 155.1 52.4 20.3 20.3 −
2012 May                  4 2,960.3 432.7 242.0 86.0 156.0 52.0 20.1 20.1 −
                              11 2,971.5 432.7 242.1 86.0 156.1 51.5 19.5 19.5 −
                              18 2,975.3 432.7 242.2 86.1 156.2 51.0 19.0 19.0 −
                              25 2,980.3 432.7 242.9 86.0 156.8 48.2 17.5 17.5 −
         June                  1 3,002.6 432.7 243.6 86.1 157.5 49.1 17.6 17.6 −
                                8 3,009.7 432.7 244.5 86.1 158.4 49.1 16.6 16.6 −
                              15 3,027.3 432.7 246.5 86.6 159.9 48.2 17.6 17.6 −
                              22 3,057.9 432.7 247.0 86.5 160.5 48.9 18.3 18.3 −
                              29 3,102.2 433.8 260.9 89.8 171.1 51.9 17.5 17.5 −
         July                  6 3,085.0 433.8 261.0 90.0 171.0 54.2 16.9 16.9 −
                              13 3,099.6 433.8 261.4 90.1 171.3 55.5 17.2 17.2 −
                              20 3,079.7 433.8 261.4 90.1 171.3 52.7 15.7 15.7 −
                              27 3,094.1 433.8 260.4 90.2 170.2 57.5 15.9 15.9 −
         Aug                  3 3,085.2 433.8 260.8 90.2 170.5 56.4 15.8 15.8 −
 Deutsche Bundesbank
2010          Sep 623.2 105.1 45.7 18.2 27.5 −−−−
         Oct 619.1 105.1 45.5 18.1 27.4 −−−−
         Nov 621.0 105.1 45.4 17.9 27.5 −−−−
         Dec 671.2 115.4 46.7 18.7 28.0 −−−−
2011          Jan 628.7 115.4 46.9 18.9 27.9 −−−−
         Feb 639.5 115.4 46.9 18.9 28.0 −−−−
         Mar 632.2 110.1 45.6 19.3 26.3 −−−−
         Apr 610.1 110.1 46.1 19.3 26.9 −−−−
         May 611.3 110.1 46.1 19.3 26.9 −−−−
         June 632.3 114.1 45.7 19.1 26.6 −−−−
         July 629.0 114.1 46.1 19.7 26.4 −−−−
         Aug 679.1 114.1 46.0 19.7 26.3 −−−−
         Sep 764.6 131.9 49.5 20.9 28.7 −−−−
         Oct 772.8 131.7 49.5 20.9 28.6 0.5−−−
         Nov 812.7 131.7 49.2 20.9 28.3 0.5−−−
         Dec 837.6 132.9 51.7 22.3 29.4 18.1−−−
2012          Jan 860.1 132.9 51.9 22.3 29.6 11.6−−−
         Feb 910.9 132.9 52.4 22.6 29.8 14.3−−−
         Mar 1 002.8 135.8 50.9 22.2 28.7 8.9−−−
         Apr 1 031.3 135.8 51.4 22.4 29.1 8.3−−−
         May 1 087.0 135.8 51.6 22.3 29.3 6.9−−−
         June 1 119.4 136.1 54.2 23.3 30.8 6.2−−−
         July 1 112.9 136.1 54.1 23.3 30.8 3.2−−−
 
*The consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem comprises the financial national central banks of the euro area member states (NCBs). The balance sheet
statement of the European Central Bank (ECB) and the financial statements of the items for foreign currency, securities, gold and financial instruments are valued at the

Deutsche Bundesbank
17  Monthly Report
August 2012
III Consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem
 
   
 
Lending to euro area credit institutions related to monetary policy operations Securities of euro area residents
denominated in euro in euro
 Other claims on euro area
Longer- Fine-  credit Securities General    On
Main re- term re- tuning Structural Credits institutions held for government    reportingfinancing financing reverse reverse Marginal related denomi- monetary debt deno-    date/opera- opera- opera- opera- lending to margin nated in policy Other minated in Other    End of
Total tions tions tions tions facility calls euro Total purposes securities euro assets    month  
1 
Eurosystem 2
 
656.0 265.5 383.1 − − 7.0 0.5 92.4 605.7 267.6 338.1 33.9 335.2 2011 Dec                  2
642.6 252.1 383.0 − − 7.4 0.1 90.0 606.7 268.7 338.0 33.9 335.3                                 9665.0 291.6 368.6 − − 4.5 0.2 89.6 610.2 272.5 337.7 33.9 336.2                               16879.1 169.0 703.9 − − 6.1 0.1 95.0 610.6 273.0 337.6 33.9 336.6                               23863.6 144.8 703.9 − − 14.8 0.1 78.7 618.6 273.9 344.8 33.9 349.2                               30
836.0 130.6 703.9 − − 1.4 0.1 66.8 619.0 274.8 344.1 33.9 342.5 2012 Jan                  6
817.3 110.9 703.9 − − 2.4 0.1 69.5 623.0 278.8 344.2 33.9 345.7                               13831.7 126.9 701.5 − − 3.3 0.1 75.6 624.0 282.2 341.8 33.9 352.0                               20809.2 130.3 676.5 − − 2.4 0.1 72.3 624.8 282.6 342.3 33.9 352.2                               27
795.0 115.6 676.5 − − 2.8 0.1 73.3 623.2 282.5 340.7 31.2 345.4          Feb                  3
787.3 109.5 676.5 − − 1.2 0.1 70.3 624.3 282.7 341.6 31.2 349.6                               10796.3 142.8 652.1 − − 1.4 0.0 69.2 624.7 283.0 341.6 31.2 349.5                               17819.7 166.5 652.1 − − 1.0 0.1 64.7 626.5 283.6 342.9 31.2 358.2                               24
1 130.4 29.5 1 100.1 − − 0.8 0.0 59.3 631.7 284.1 347.6 31.2 404.9          Mar                  21 118.3 17.5 1 100.1 − − 0.6 0.0 57.9 631.1 283.0 348.1 31.2 406.2                                 91 149.5 42.2 1 095.5 − − 11.8 0.0 55.3 630.4 283.4 347.0 31.2 360.5                               161 155.9 59.5 1 095.5 − − 0.8 0.0 57.7 626.3 279.3 346.9 31.2 351.5                               231 153.6 61.1 1 090.9 − − 1.6 − 59.6 627.5 280.2 347.3 31.1 348.0                               30
1 154.5 62.6 1 090.9 − − 1.0 − 60.8 628.0 280.4 347.5 31.1 344.3          Apr                  6
1 148.0 55.4 1 090.6 − − 2.0 − 62.5 627.7 280.7 347.0 31.1 358.5                               13
1 142.7 51.8 1 090.6 − − 0.3 0.0 183.7 609.7 281.1 328.5 31.1 252.9                               201 139.4 46.4 1 092.4 − − 0.6 0.0 184.7 608.3 281.6 326.7 31.1 251.9                               27
1 117.1 34.4 1 081.6 − − 1.1 − 204.7 607.2 281.7 325.5 30.6 254.0 2012 May                  4
1 124.1 39.3 1 083.2 − − 1.6 − 208.4 607.6 282.0 325.6 30.6 255.0                               11
1 127.0 43.0 1 083.2 − − 0.8 0.0 212.5 604.7 280.2 324.5 30.6 255.6                               18
1 101.7 37.9 1 061.8 − − 2.1 0.0 246.6 605.1 280.6 324.5 30.6 255.0                               25
1 115.5 51.2 1 063.6 − − 0.7 0.0 250.6 605.1 280.8 324.3 30.6 257.8          June                  1
1 185.1 119.4 1 063.6 − − 1.9 0.1 189.5 605.7 281.2 324.4 30.6 255.9                                 81 206.3 131.7 1 071.5 − − 3.0 0.0 191.7 603.3 280.2 323.1 30.6 250.4                               151 240.5 167.3 1 071.5 − − 1.5 0.3 186.4 602.4 280.3 322.1 30.6 251.0                               221 260.9 180.4 1 079.7 − − 0.7 0.0 186.4 602.3 281.0 321.3 30.1 258.6                               29
1 243.5 163.6 1 078.3 − − 1.3 0.3 184.2 601.8 281.3 320.5 30.0 259.5          July                  6
1 248.5 163.7 1 083.7 − − 0.7 0.4 187.0 602.5 281.5 321.0 30.0 263.8                               131 241.3 156.8 1 083.7 − − 0.7 0.0 179.2 602.1 280.9 321.2 30.0 263.5                               201 207.6 130.7 1 075.5 − − 1.2 0.2 225.9 601.8 280.8 321.0 30.0 261.1                               27
1 209.4 132.8 1 075.5 − − 1.0 0.1 215.4 602.5 280.9 321.6 30.0 261.1          Aug                  3
 Deutsche Bundesbank
85.3 56.4 24.0 4.1 − 0.8 − 8.9 33.9 28.6 5.3 4.4 339.9 2010          Sep 
103.0 69.1 33.8 − − 0.2 − 10.6 34.0 28.7 5.3 4.4 316.5          Oct 
93.0 59.1 33.8 − − 0.0 − 9.1 34.7 29.5 5.3 4.4 329.3          Nov 
103.1 68.4 33.5 1.2 − − − 9.6 36.1 30.9 5.2 4.4 355.9          Dec 
82.5 37.8 44.4 − − 0.3 − 10.0 36.8 31.6 5.2 4.4 332.7 2011          Jan 
74.9 29.8 45.1 − − 0.0 − 10.0 37.1 31.8 5.2 4.4 350.9          Feb 
71.7 25.5 46.1 − − 0.1 − 9.6 37.2 31.9 5.2 4.4 353.5          Mar 
64.8 18.7 46.1 − − 0.0 − 8.3 37.0 31.9 5.1 4.4 339.3          Apr 
52.1 10.9 41.3 − − 0.0 − 7.7 36.8 31.7 5.1 4.4 353.9          May
57.8 21.8 35.9 − − 0.2 − 6.7 36.5 31.4 5.1 4.4 366.9          June
45.8 9.8 36.0 − − 0.0 − 8.1 36.4 31.3 5.1 4.4 374.0          July
37.6 3.5 34.0 − − 0.0 − 7.8 48.4 43.5 4.9 4.4 420.9          Aug 
31.1 12.6 18.4 − − 0.0 − 9.7 57.8 52.9 4.9 4.4 480.2          Sep 
21.3 3.5 17.7 − − 0.1 − 8.5 60.8 55.9 4.9 4.4 496.1          Oct 
21.6 3.8 17.7 − − 0.1 − 9.2 70.1 65.2 4.9 4.4 525.9          Nov 
55.8 8.6 47.1 − − 0.0 − 8.5 71.9 67.0 4.9 4.4 494.3          Dec 
48.6 2.0 46.6 − − 0.0 − 8.4 74.1 69.2 4.9 4.4 528.2 2012          Jan 
48.0 0.9 46.6 0.5 − 0.0 − 8.5 73.9 69.1 4.8 4.4 576.4          Feb 
74.6 1.2 73.2 − − 0.1 − 9.4 73.5 68.7 4.8 4.4 645.3          Mar 
74.9 1.2 73.7 − − 0.0 − 10.1 73.5 68.7 4.8 4.4 672.8          Apr 
79.7 3.6 76.1 − − 0.0 − 8.0 73.4 68.6 4.8 4.4 727.0          May
79.5 2.5 77.0 − − 0.1 − 8.8 73.1 68.7 4.3 4.4 757.2          June
78.6 2.9 75.7 − − 0.0 − 7.6 73.2 68.8 4.3 4.4 755.7          July
 
end of the quarter. 1For the Eurosystem: financial statements for specific weekly  
dates; for the Bundesbank: end of month financial statement. 2 Source: ECB. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
18  Monthly Report
August 2012
III Consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem
 
2 Liabilities *
 
 
€ billion
Liabilities to euro area credit institutions related to Liabilities to
monetary policy operations denominated in euro other euro area residents
denominated in euro
 
Other
Current liabilities
accounts to euro-
On (covering Fine- area credit
reporting the tuning Deposits institutions Debt
date/ Banknotes minimum Fixed- reverse deno- certifi- General related to
End of Total in circu- reserve Deposit term opera- margin minated cates govern- Other
month 1 liabilities lation 2 Total system) facility deposits tions calls in euro issued Total ment liabilities
 Eurosystem 4
 
2011 Dec                  2 2,435.7 874.0 708.0 180.7 332.7 194.2 − 0.3 1.6 − 63.1 53.6 9.5
                                9 2,460.8 879.6 681.5 139.2 334.9 207.0 − 0.3 2.7 − 70.5 61.5 9.0
                              16 2,493.8 882.6 719.9 298.1 214.1 207.5 − 0.2 3.2 − 55.3 45.8 9.5
                              23 2,733.2 890.9 888.2 265.0 411.8 211.0 − 0.4 3.4 − 77.5 66.0 11.5
                              30 2,735.6 888.7 849.5 223.5 413.9 211.0 − 1.1 2.4 − 79.6 65.5 14.1
2012 Jan                  6 2,687.9 883.7 832.4 156.5 463.6 211.5 − 0.8 1.1 − 90.7 79.6 11.1
                              13 2,677.0 876.6 840.8 132.5 493.3 213.0 − 2.0 1.4 − 87.5 76.5 11.0
                              20 2,706.2 871.8 845.3 134.7 491.8 217.0 − 1.8 1.5 − 108.9 98.8 10.1
                              27 2,682.6 869.2 797.9 88.9 488.9 219.0 − 1.0 1.7 − 136.1 125.9 10.2
         Feb                  3 2,662.1 871.5 815.2 83.9 511.4 219.0 − 0.9 2.0 − 93.8 83.6 10.2
                              10 2,655.8 870.0 812.1 83.2 507.9 219.0 − 2.0 2.2 − 94.3 84.1 10.1
                              17 2,663.3 869.4 807.2 132.5 454.4 219.5 − 0.9 1.9 − 110.6 100.5 10.1
                              24 2,692.6 867.4 793.4 93.7 477.3 219.5 − 2.9 2.3 − 153.6 142.2 11.4
         Mar                  2 3,023.2 870.6 1,148.9 91.4 820.8 219.5 − 17.1 7.4 − 147.1 135.4 11.8
                                9 3,005.8 870.6 1,132.7 97.9 798.0 219.5 − 17.3 7.4 − 146.0 134.3 11.7
                              16 2,986.3 869.1 1,109.1 132.2 758.8 218.0 − 0.2 1.5 − 153.0 138.9 14.0
                              23 2,982.8 867.1 1,092.9 89.3 785.4 218.0 − 0.2 1.6 − 167.9 156.5 11.4
                              30 2,964.4 869.9 1,101.2 108.7 778.7 213.5 − 0.3 2.1 − 149.6 137.5 12.1
         Apr                  6 2,965.3 880.9 1,085.0 86.0 784.8 213.5 − 0.7 2.3 − 157.6 146.0 11.6
                              13 2,974.9 874.3 1,086.2 129.0 742.8 214.0 − 0.4 2.4 − 169.8 158.8 11.0
                              20 2,967.1 869.7 1,084.2 93.5 775.7 214.0 − 1.0 2.4 − 166.6 155.3 11.3
                              27 2,962.1 872.7 1,099.5 91.3 794.0 214.0 − 0.3 2.4 − 140.6 129.9 10.7
2012 May                  4 2,960.3 876.1 1,112.8 96.9 801.5 214.0 − 0.5 2.3 − 119.9 108.5 11.4
                              11 2,971.5 875.2 1,125.0 146.8 763.1 214.0 − 1.1 7.6 − 110.6 99.7 10.9
                              18 2,975.3 878.3 1,107.2 102.5 789.7 214.0 − 1.0 8.5 − 125.1 114.0 11.1
                              25 2,980.3 879.7 1,062.8 90.0 760.1 212.0 − 0.6 3.3 − 153.9 143.0 11.0
         June                  1 3,002.6 884.9 1,091.7 94.0 785.0 212.0 − 0.7 3.4 − 129.0 118.1 10.9
                                8 3,009.7 888.6 1,088.3 87.1 788.2 212.0 − 1.0 3.9 − 124.7 113.8 10.9
                              15 3,027.3 891.5 1,105.2 150.9 741.2 212.0 − 1.1 3.9 − 119.1 107.7 11.4
                              22 3,057.9 890.3 1,084.1 97.0 775.3 210.5 − 1.3 3.8 − 161.4 150.6 10.8
                              29 3,102.2 893.7 1,105.5 116.7 772.9 210.5 − 5.5 3.7 − 158.5 146.3 12.1
         July                  6 3,085.0 897.5 1,100.6 91.8 795.2 210.5 − 3.1 6.6 − 147.3 134.9 12.4
                              13 3,099.6 897.7 1,082.0 479.7 386.8 211.5 − 3.9 6.6 − 145.8 131.9 13.9
                              20 3,079.7 896.4 1,056.7 493.0 349.4 211.5 − 2.8 3.7 − 158.0 137.3 20.8
                              27 3,094.1 897.3 1,066.9 515.7 337.0 211.5 − 2.6 3.8 − 152.1 130.3 21.9
         Aug                  3 3,085.2 902.2 1,063.8 549.7 300.4 211.5 − 2.3 4.3 − 144.2 120.5 23.7
 Deutsche Bundesbank
2010          Sep 623.2 203.0 121.3 64.9 28.2 28.2 − − − − 1.0 0.6 0.4
         Oct 619.1 203.5 114.4 62.1 20.8 31.4 − − − − 0.9 0.2 0.7
         Nov 621.0 203.9 116.9 54.8 23.7 38.4 − − − − 0.9 0.2 0.6
         Dec 671.2 209.6 146.4 71.4 38.5 36.5 − − − − 0.9 0.2 0.8
2011          Jan 628.7 204.5 109.4 50.5 16.6 42.3 − − − − 2.0 0.2 1.8
         Feb 639.5 204.2 120.7 58.2 13.0 49.5 − − − − 0.6 0.2 0.5
         Mar 632.2 205.2 119.9 63.9 17.1 38.9 − − − − 0.6 0.2 0.5
         Apr 610.1 207.8 95.9 47.9 11.7 36.3 − − − − 0.8 0.4 0.4
         May 611.3 208.6 95.0 54.3 7.7 32.9 − − − − 0.6 0.2 0.4
         June 632.3 210.9 108.5 63.3 8.7 36.5 − − − − 1.1 0.2 0.9
         July 629.0 213.1 100.3 52.5 13.2 34.6 − − − − 0.6 0.2 0.4
         Aug 679.1 211.6 145.5 60.5 16.0 68.9 − − − − 0.7 0.2 0.4
         Sep 764.6 213.5 205.5 69.8 56.8 78.8 − − − − 0.9 0.3 0.6
         Oct 772.8 215.2 212.1 59.9 58.4 93.9 − − − − 1.1 0.4 0.7
         Nov 812.7 216.1 249.8 49.6 58.2 142.0 − − − − 1.5 0.8 0.7
         Dec 837.6 221.3 228.9 76.4 66.1 86.4 − − − − 5.5 0.7 4.8
2012          Jan 860.1 216.3 294.1 34.6 119.7 139.7 − − − − 1.4 0.7 0.7
         Feb 910.9 216.0 342.5 29.9 166.4 146.2 − − − − 2.8 0.8 2.0
         Mar 1 002.8 216.6 424.5 30.9 248.2 145.4 − − − − 3.4 0.8 2.6
         Apr 1 031.3 217.6 452.3 33.0 276.9 142.4 − − 0.0 − 2.0 0.7 1.3
         May 1 087.0 219.9 464.8 33.4 275.0 156.3 − − 0.0 − 2.6 0.6 2.0
         June 1 119.4 222.5 457.1 33.3 262.9 160.9 − − − − 3.2 1.2 2.0
         July 1 112.9 223.6 421.7 178.3 88.1 155.2 − − − − 19.5 7.3 12.2
 
*The consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem comprises the financial specific weekly dates; for the Bundesbank: end-of-month financial statements.
statement of the European Central Bank (ECB) and the financial statements of the 2According to the accounting regime chosen by the Eurosystem on the issue of euro
national central banks of the euro area member states (NCBs). The balance sheet banknotes, a share of 8% of the total value of the euro banknotes in circulation is
items for foreign currency, securities, gold and financial instruments are valued at allocated to the ECB on a monthly basis. The counterpart of this adjustment ismarket rates at the end of the quarter. 1For Eurosystem: financial statements for disclosed as an “Intra-Eurosystem liability related to euro banknote issue". The

Deutsche Bundesbank
19  Monthly Report
August 2012
III Consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem
 
   
 
Liabilities to non-euro area
residents denominated inforeign currency
Intra-  Eurosystem  
Liabilities Liabilities Liabilities Counterpart liability     Onto non-euro to euro area Deposits, arising of special related to     reportingarea residents residents balances from the drawing euro  Capital    date/denominated in foreign and other rights allocated Other banknote Revaluation and    End of credit facility
in euro currency Total liabilities under ERM II by the IMF issue  
2 accounts reserves    month 1 liabilities 3 
Eurosystem 4
 
51.2 4.4 8.9 8.9 − 54.5 205.3 − 383.3 81.5 2011 Dec                  2
88.9 4.0 9.0 9.0 − 54.5 205.4 − 383.3 81.5                                 9
92.8 4.2 8.6 8.6 − 54.5 208.1 − 383.3 81.5                               16
132.2 5.1 8.6 8.6 − 54.5 208.0 − 383.3 81.5                               23
156.9 4.6 9.0 9.0 − 55.9 213.5 − 394.0 81.5                               30
124.4 5.6 8.4 8.4 − 55.9 210.1 − 394.0 81.5 2012 Jan                  6
117.7 3.2 9.8 9.8 − 55.9 208.5 − 394.0 81.6                               13
118.9 2.0 10.0 10.0 − 55.9 216.4 − 394.0 81.6                               20
118.6 2.8 9.5 9.5 − 55.9 215.3 − 394.0 81.6                               27
122.5 3.5 9.6 9.6 − 55.9 212.1 − 394.0 81.9          Feb                  3
118.8 5.0 7.3 7.3 − 55.9 214.3 − 394.0 81.9                               10
118.2 4.7 7.4 7.4 − 55.9 212.3 − 394.0 81.7                               17
115.9 4.8 7.3 7.3 − 55.9 215.9 − 394.0 82.0                               24
90.9 4.4 7.9 7.9 − 55.9 213.1 − 394.0 83.0          Mar                  2
92.3 3.9 7.8 7.8 − 55.9 212.2 − 394.0 83.0                                 9
93.4 3.9 7.4 7.4 − 55.9 216.0 − 394.0 83.0                               16
90.7 3.1 8.7 8.7 − 55.9 217.9 − 394.0 83.0                               23
79.8 3.0 7.8 7.8 − 54.7 212.8 − 399.4 83.9                               30
74.1 4.7 7.6 7.6 − 54.7 215.2 − 399.4 83.9          Apr                  6
76.8 3.6 7.8 7.8 − 54.7 214.2 − 399.4 85.5                               13
76.5 3.8 8.6 8.6 − 54.7 215.7 − 399.4 85.5                               20
76.4 5.2 8.7 8.7 − 54.7 217.0 − 399.4 85.5                               27
77.5 4.6 10.0 10.0 − 54.7 217.2 − 399.4 85.5 2012 May                  4
82.1 4.1 10.1 10.1 − 54.7 217.1 − 399.4 85.5                               11
85.0 4.5 9.1 9.1 − 54.7 217.9 − 399.4 85.5                               18
107.2 6.7 7.1 7.1 − 54.7 219.8 − 399.4 85.5                               25
116.4 5.5 9.3 9.3 − 54.7 222.9 − 399.4 85.4          June                  1
129.6 4.0 9.9 9.9 − 54.7 220.7 − 399.4 85.7                                 8
138.8 2.9 10.1 10.1 − 54.7 215.8 − 399.4 85.7                               15
149.7 2.9 8.8 8.8 − 54.7 217.0 − 399.4 85.7                               22
149.9 3.3 9.6 9.6 − 56.9 225.5 − 409.8 85.7                               29
139.7 4.0 9.7 9.7 − 56.9 227.1 − 409.8 85.7          July                  6
172.2 4.9 10.0 10.0 − 56.9 228.0 − 409.8 85.7                               13
173.2 5.9 8.4 8.4 − 56.9 225.0 − 409.8 85.7                               20
185.0 5.4 9.0 9.0 − 56.9 222.1 − 409.8 85.7                               27
179.7 6.2 8.2 8.2 − 56.9 224.1 − 409.8 85.7          Aug                  3
 Deutsche Bundesbank
10.8 0.0 0.1 0.1 − 13.7 12.4 155.8 99.9 5.0 2010          Sep 
12.6 0.0 0.1 0.1 − 13.7 12.3 156.7 99.9 5.0          Oct 
11.0 0.0 0.2 0.2 − 13.7 12.8 156.6 99.9 5.0          Nov 
14.5 0.0 0.2 0.2 − 14.0 13.1 157.1 110.5 5.0          Dec 
12.2 0.0 0.2 0.2 − 14.0 13.1 157.8 110.5 5.0 2011          Jan 
12.0 0.0 0.1 0.1 − 14.0 13.5 158.9 110.5 5.0          Feb 
13.4 0.0 0.2 0.2 − 13.5 11.7 159.5 103.3 5.0          Mar 
11.7 0.0 0.3 0.3 − 13.5 11.7 160.1 103.3 5.0          Apr 
11.3 0.0 0.3 0.3 − 13.5 12.1 161.6 103.3 5.0          May
10.5 0.0 0.1 0.1 − 13.3 12.7 163.1 107.0 5.0          June
11.9 0.0 0.1 0.1 − 13.3 12.7 164.9 107.0 5.0          July
15.3 0.0 0.1 0.1 − 13.3 13.2 167.5 107.0 5.0          Aug 
13.6 0.0 0.2 0.2 − 13.9 14.3 170.7 127.1 5.0          Sep 
12.9 0.0 0.2 0.2 − 13.9 14.4 170.7 127.1 5.0          Oct 
13.5 0.0 0.0 0.0 − 13.9 14.9 170.9 127.1 5.0          Nov 
46.6 0.0 − − − 14.3 16.2 170.5 129.4 5.0          Dec 
11.9 0.0 0.0 0.0 − 14.3 16.5 171.0 129.4 5.0 2012          Jan 
11.7 0.0 0.3 0.3 − 14.3 16.7 172.2 129.4 5.0          Feb 
15.9 0.0 0.2 0.2 − 14.0 16.9 175.5 130.8 5.0          Mar 
14.2 0.0 0.4 0.4 − 14.0 17.5 177.6 130.8 5.0          Apr 
52.0 0.0 0.4 0.4 − 14.0 18.2 179.3 130.8 5.0          May
83.2 0.0 0.2 0.2 − 14.5 19.5 181.0 133.3 5.0          June
90.9 0.0 0.0 0.0 − 14.5 19.9 184.5 133.3 5.0          July
 
remaining 92 % of the value of the euro banknote in circulation is also allocated to according to the aforementioned accounting regime and the value of euro bank-
the NCBs on a monthly basis, and each NCB shows in its balance sheet the share of notes put into circulation is also disclosed as an “Intra-Eurosystem claim/ liabilitythe euro banknotes issued which corresponds to its paid-up share in the ECB’s related to banknote issue“. 3For the Deutsche Bundesbank: including DM banknotes
capital. The difference between the value of the euro banknotes allocated to the NCB still in circulation. 4 Source: ECB. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
20  Monthly Report
August 2012
IV Banks
 
1 Assets and liabilities of monetary financial institutions (excluding the Bundesbank) in Germany *
  Assets
 
€ billion
Lending to banks (MFIs) in the euro area Lending to non-banks (non-MFIs) in the
to banks in the home country to banks in other member states to non-banks in the home country
Enterprises and house-
holds
Secur- Secur-
Balance ities ities
sheet Cash issued issued
Period total 1 in hand Total Total Loans by banks Total Loans by banks Total Total Total Loans
 End of year or month
 
2003 6,432.0 17.3 2,111.5 1,732.0 1,116.8 615.3 379.5 287.7 91.8 3,333.2 3,083.1 2,497.4 2,241.2
2004 6,617.4 15.1 2,174.3 1,750.2 1,122.9 627.3 424.2 306.3 117.9 3,358.7 3,083.4 2,479.7 2,223.8
2005 6,859.4 15.3 2,276.0 1,762.5 1,148.4 614.1 513.5 356.3 157.2 3,407.6 3,085.2 2,504.6 2,226.3
2006 7,154.4 16.4 2,314.4 1,718.6 1,138.6 580.0 595.8 376.8 219.0 3,462.1 3,085.5 2,536.1 2,241.9
2007 7,592.4 17.8 2,523.4 1,847.9 1,290.4 557.5 675.4 421.6 253.8 3,487.3 3,061.8 2,556.0 2,288.8
2008 7,892.7 17.8 2,681.8 1,990.2 1,404.3 585.8 691.6 452.9 238.8 3,638.2 3,163.0 2,686.9 2,357.3
2009 7,436.1 17.2 2,480.5 1,813.2 1,218.4 594.8 667.3 449.5 217.8 3,638.3 3,187.9 2,692.9 2,357.5
2010 8,304.8 16.5 2,361.6 1,787.8 1,276.9 510.9 573.9 372.8 201.0 3,724.5 3,303.0 2,669.2 2,354.7
2011 8,393.3 16.4 2,394.4 1,844.5 1,362.2 482.2 550.0 362.3 187.7 3,673.5 3,270.5 2,709.4 2,415.1
2010          Sep 7,387.2 14.9 2,447.4 1,780.3 1,245.4 535.0 667.0 460.9 206.1 3,642.6 3,209.0 2,665.8 2,353.9
         Oct 7,397.5 15.2 2,353.9 1,759.6 1,246.2 513.4 594.3 389.3 205.0 3,758.9 3,327.9 2,675.0 2,360.5
         Nov 7,508.4 14.8 2,376.9 1,776.3 1,259.7 516.5 600.7 397.7 203.0 3,804.8 3,368.9 2,704.7 2,389.3         Dec 8,304.8 16.5 2,361.6 1,787.8 1,276.9 510.9 573.9 372.8 201.0 3,724.5 3,303.0 2,669.2 2,354.7
2011          Jan 8,183.8 14.1 2,322.8 1,748.8 1,239.7 509.1 573.9 374.7 199.2 3,748.8 3,322.9 2,684.7 2,356.7
         Feb 8,142.3 14.5 2,332.2 1,751.5 1,243.1 508.4 580.6 380.6 200.1 3,745.3 3,322.0 2,697.7 2,377.4         Mar 7,955.1 14.5 2,294.6 1,735.4 1,233.8 501.6 559.2 363.4 195.8 3,711.8 3,293.5 2,680.7 2,358.7
         Apr 7,997.9 15.6 2,270.7 1,702.2 1,203.3 498.8 568.6 371.7 196.9 3,736.5 3,307.8 2,703.7 2,360.9
         May 8,045.9 15.5 2,281.5 1,702.0 1,201.3 500.7 579.5 377.0 202.5 3,714.4 3,289.2 2,694.7 2,376.5         June 7,885.8 15.2 2,268.6 1,696.4 1,206.0 490.5 572.2 372.2 200.0 3,690.4 3,269.3 2,681.2 2,374.9
         July 8,001.0 15.2 2,258.5 1,688.2 1,202.0 486.2 570.2 372.7 197.6 3,692.8 3,270.6 2,685.7 2,379.2
         Aug 8,263.5 14.7 2,337.8 1,750.1 1,265.2 484.9 587.7 390.3 197.4 3,699.5 3,279.0 2,706.1 2,403.3
         Sep 8,489.4 15.4 2,412.6 1,831.2 1,349.4 481.8 581.4 385.6 195.7 3,708.6 3,285.3 2,713.5 2,413.7
         Oct 8,353.9 15.4 2,407.5 1,830.0 1,347.6 482.3 577.5 385.1 192.4 3,728.0 3,311.1 2,742.8 2,445.3
         Nov 8,406.6 14.8 2,450.5 1,876.1 1,396.6 479.5 574.4 382.6 191.8 3,727.2 3,315.3 2,747.9 2,450.0         Dec 8,393.3 16.4 2,394.4 1,844.5 1,362.2 482.2 550.0 362.3 187.7 3,673.5 3,270.5 2,709.4 2,415.1
2012          Jan 8,517.7 14.5 2,470.6 1,921.9 1,444.6 477.3 548.7 362.6 186.1 3,702.0 3,298.2 2,729.8 2,437.1
         Feb 8,526.0 14.4 2,534.4 1,981.0 1,499.7 481.3 553.4 369.7 183.7 3,695.5 3,291.4 2,723.7 2,437.0         Mar 8,522.7 15.4 2,577.6 2,037.3 1,559.1 478.2 540.3 358.1 182.2 3,698.3 3,292.5 2,722.7 2,427.8
         Apr 8,599.6 15.3 2,593.3 2,049.9 1,574.4 475.5 543.4 365.1 178.2 3,719.9 3,314.2 2,739.4 2,430.9
         May 8,859.6 15.5 2,605.1 2,060.4 1,585.9 474.5 544.7 365.3 179.4 3,692.5 3,288.7 2,722.4 2,434.0         June 8,662.8 15.5 2,566.1 2,041.1 1,571.3 469.8 525.0 351.0 174.1 3,699.4 3,297.2 2,692.7 2,432.4
 Changes 3
2004 212.0 − 2.1 73.7 24.0 10.9 13.1 49.7 19.2 30.5 44.0 17.4 − 0.4 − 1.3
2005 187.9 0.1 93.0 10.4 22.8 − 12.5 82.6 44.6 38.1 59.7 14.2 37.2 15.5
2006 356.8 1.1 84.2 0.5 28.0 − 27.6 83.7 22.4 61.3 56.0 1.5 32.5 13.3
2007 518.3 1.5 218.9 135.5 156.3 − 20.8 83.4 47.4 36.0 54.1 − 1.0 38.7 53.2
2008 313.3 − 0.1 183.6 164.3 127.5 36.9 19.3 33.7 − 14.4 140.4 102.6 130.9 65.5
2009 −454.5 − 0.5 −189.0 −166.4 −182.2 15.8 − 22.5 − 1.8 − 20.7 17.4 38.3 17.0 6.6
2010 −136.3 − 0.7 −111.6 − 15.6 58.5 − 74.1 − 95.9 − 80.9 − 15.1 96.4 126.0 − 13.7 0.7
2011 54.1 − 0.1 32.6 58.7 91.7 − 33.0 − 26.0 − 12.1 − 13.9 − 51.8 − 35.3 38.7 56.7
2010          Oct 20.5 0.4 − 91.6 − 19.7 1.7 − 21.4 − 71.9 − 70.9 − 0.9 119.7 121.7 11.7 9.2
         Nov 81.0 − 0.5 25.6 22.1 10.9 11.2 3.5 5.8 − 2.3 39.5 36.9 25.8 25.0
         Dec −152.5 1.7 − 13.0 12.6 18.1 − 5.5 − 25.6 − 24.0 − 1.6 − 73.2 − 60.5 − 30.4 − 32.8
2011          Jan −109.5 − 2.4 − 35.8 − 37.2 − 36.0 − 1.2 1.4 2.8 − 1.4 29.3 24.2 19.5 5.7
         Feb − 39.5 0.3 10.1 3.2 3.7 − 0.5 6.9 6.1 0.9 − 1.1 0.4 14.6 22.0
         Mar −167.5 0.0 − 31.8 − 10.8 − 8.2 − 2.6 − 20.9 − 16.2 − 4.8 − 29.7 − 25.8 − 14.5 − 16.4
         Apr 63.2 1.2 − 21.0 − 31.7 − 29.2 − 2.5 10.7 9.6 1.2 29.1 17.1 25.7 5.1
         May 27.4 − 0.1 7.4 − 1.9 − 3.5 1.6 9.3 3.9 5.4 − 25.8 − 21.2 − 11.3 13.1
         June −165.7 − 0.2 − 21.0 − 14.0 4.8 − 18.7 − 7.1 − 4.6 − 2.4 − 23.0 − 19.3 − 12.9 − 1.0         July 102.3 − 0.0 − 12.4 − 9.5 − 5.1 − 4.4 − 2.9 − 0.5 − 2.5 − 0.9 − 1.3 2.2 2.0
         Aug 263.0 − 0.5 80.7 69.9 71.0 − 1.1 10.8 10.9 − 0.0 1.0 1.9 14.0 17.7
         Sep 193.7 0.7 70.4 78.9 82.5 − 3.6 − 8.5 − 6.4 − 2.1 4.7 3.7 5.2 8.2
         Oct −116.4 − 0.0 − 1.4 1.1 0.2 0.9 − 2.4 0.7 − 3.2 24.7 29.5 32.9 34.1
         Nov 31.1 − 0.6 39.9 44.3 47.5 − 3.2 − 4.5 − 3.7 − 0.8 − 4.4 2.1 3.1 2.7
         Dec − 27.9 1.6 − 52.5 − 33.6 − 36.0 2.4 − 18.9 − 14.8 − 4.1 − 55.7 − 46.7 − 39.8 − 36.42012          Jan 132.8 − 1.9 78.4 78.4 83.0 − 4.7 0.1 0.8 − 0.8 34.8 31.1 23.8 24.2
         Feb 20.7 − 0.1 65.8 60.4 56.0 4.4 5.5 7.8 − 2.3 − 3.2 − 4.6 − 4.1 1.7
         Mar − 7.0 0.9 42.3 55.8 59.1 − 3.3 − 13.5 − 11.8 − 1.6 3.0 1.5 − 0.5 − 8.9         Apr 68.9 − 0.1 17.5 15.1 17.9 − 2.7 2.4 6.5 − 4.2 18.0 18.8 13.9 0.1
         May 226.6 0.2 6.4 7.4 9.1 − 1.7 − 1.0 − 1.8 0.9 − 33.0 − 29.2 − 20.4 − 0.4
         June −196.7 − 0.0 − 39.0 − 19.3 − 14.6 − 4.8 − 19.7 − 14.4 − 5.3 9.1 10.5 − 7.7 0.5
*This table serves to supplement the “Overall monetary survey“ in section II. Unlike by banks (including building and loan associations) − data from money market
the other tables in section IV, this table includes − in addition to the figures reported funds. 1See footnote 1 in Table IV.2. 2Including debt securities arising from the

Deutsche Bundesbank
21  Monthly Report
August 2012
IV Banks
 
   
 
euro area Claims on
non-euro-area
to non-banks in other member states residents
 General Enterprises and General government households government
Secur- Secur- of which Secur- of which Other
ities Total Loans ities 
2 Total Total Loans Total Loans ities Total Loans assets  1   Period
End of year or month
 
256.2 585.6 439.6 146.1 250.2 133.5 62.7 116.6 25.9 90.7 806.4 645.6 163.6 2003
255.9 603.8 423.0 180.8 275.3 140.6 61.9 134.7 25.7 109.0 897.8 730.4 171.4 2004
278.2 580.7 408.7 171.9 322.4 169.1 65.0 153.3 30.7 122.6 993.8 796.8 166.7 2005
294.1 549.5 390.2 159.2 376.6 228.1 85.2 148.5 26.1 122.4 1,172.7 936.2 188.8 2006267.3 505.8 360.7 145.0 425.5 294.6 124.9 130.9 26.0 104.9 1,339.5 1,026.9 224.4 2007329.6 476.1 342.8 133.4 475.1 348.1 172.1 127.0 27.6 99.4 1,279.2 1,008.6 275.7 2008335.4 495.0 335.1 160.0 450.4 322.2 162.9 128.2 23.5 104.7 1,062.6 821.1 237.5 2009
314.5 633.8 418.4 215.3 421.6 289.2 164.2 132.4 24.8 107.6 1,021.0 792.7 1,181.1 2010
294.3 561.1 359.8 201.2 403.1 276.9 161.2 126.2 32.6 93.6 995.1 770.9 1,313.8 2011
312.0 543.1 346.6 196.5 433.7 294.4 166.4 139.2 25.7 113.5 1,020.8 787.3 261.6 2010          Sep 
314.6 652.9 350.9 302.0 431.0 289.7 162.6 141.3 25.8 115.5 1,011.3 781.3 258.2          Oct 
315.4 664.2 427.3 237.0 435.9 299.5 167.8 136.4 25.8 110.6 1,043.4 810.3 268.5          Nov 314.5 633.8 418.4 215.3 421.6 289.2 164.2 132.4 24.8 107.6 1,021.0 792.7 1,181.1          Dec 
328.0 638.2 421.7 216.5 425.9 287.9 159.8 138.0 26.2 111.8 1,017.1 786.3 1,081.0 2011          Jan 
320.2 624.3 410.1 214.2 423.3 285.7 158.2 137.6 26.3 111.3 1,017.4 790.0 1,033.0          Feb 322.1 612.8 399.4 213.4 418.3 282.2 157.2 136.2 26.4 109.7 978.6 748.1 955.6          Mar 
342.8 604.1 388.4 215.7 428.7 291.9 165.1 136.8 26.4 110.4 1,013.2 787.6 961.8          Apr 
318.2 594.5 377.9 216.6 425.2 288.0 161.4 137.2 26.2 111.0 1,028.3 796.9 1,006.2          May306.3 588.2 374.6 213.6 421.1 287.2 161.2 133.9 25.9 108.0 984.4 753.6 927.1          June
306.5 584.9 374.5 210.4 422.3 283.5 161.6 138.8 31.3 107.5 986.6 757.8 1,047.9          July
302.8 572.9 365.2 207.7 420.5 281.9 162.6 138.5 31.0 107.5 1,004.6 779.9 1,206.8          Aug 299.9 571.8 365.2 206.6 423.3 288.0 171.2 135.3 30.7 104.6 1,011.7 786.7 1,341.1          Sep 
297.4 568.3 361.3 207.0 417.0 280.0 164.0 137.0 30.3 106.6 974.8 754.2 1,228.2          Oct 
297.8 567.5 358.2 209.3 411.9 282.3 165.1 129.6 31.0 98.5 991.0 770.1 1,223.1          Nov 294.3 561.1 359.8 201.2 403.1 276.9 161.2 126.2 32.6 93.6 995.1 770.9 1,313.8          Dec 
292.8 568.3 363.6 204.8 403.8 277.7 157.6 126.1 32.3 93.8 1,016.2 794.5 1,314.3 2012          Jan 
286.7 567.7 361.3 206.4 404.1 278.1 158.1 126.1 32.4 93.7 996.6 778.9 1,285.0          Feb 295.0 569.8 359.9 209.9 405.8 279.9 159.9 125.9 31.5 94.3 1,004.1 782.1 1,227.4          Mar 
308.5 574.8 365.3 209.6 405.7 282.6 163.2 123.1 31.4 91.7 1,008.5 786.8 1,262.6          Apr 
288.3 566.3 359.8 206.5 403.8 279.3 160.7 124.6 31.5 93.0 1,027.6 804.5 1,518.8          May260.4 604.5 370.2 234.3 402.2 278.2 160.3 124.0 31.8 92.2 992.6 772.1 1,389.2          June
Changes 3
0.9 17.8 − 17.0 34.9 26.6 8.2 3.1 18.4 0.0 18.4 111.1 100.3 − 14.7 2004
21.7 − 23.0 − 14.3 − 8.6 45.5 27.4 2.2 18.2 4.7 13.5 57.1 31.2 − 22.2 200519.3 − 31.0 − 18.6 − 12.4 54.5 59.6 20.9 − 5.1 − 1.3 − 3.8 205.7 165.7 9.8 2006
− 14.6 − 39.6 − 29.3 − 10.3 55.1 73.6 41.5 − 18.6 0.0 − 18.6 222.7 136.5 21.1 2007
65.4 − 28.4 − 16.9 − 11.5 37.8 42.3 40.4 − 4.5 1.6 − 6.1 − 40.3 − 7.6 29.7 200810.5 21.3 − 5.1 26.4 − 20.9 − 20.9 − 7.1 0.0 − 3.9 3.9 −182.5 −162.3 − 99.8 2009
− 14.3 139.7 83.4 56.3 − 29.6 − 36.4 0.2 6.8 3.1 3.7 − 74.1 − 61.9 − 46.3 2010− 18.0 − 74.0 − 59.1 − 14.9 − 16.6 − 13.8 − 5.5 − 2.7 8.0 − 10.7 − 39.5 − 34.9 112.9 2011
2.5 110.0 4.6 105.4 − 2.0 − 4.2 − 3.3 2.1 0.1 2.0 − 3.4 − 0.5 − 4.6 2010          Oct 0.7 11.1 76.2 − 65.0 2.6 7.7 3.2 − 5.1 − 0.1 − 5.0 7.5 6.6 8.9          Nov 2.4 − 30.1 − 8.8 − 21.3 − 12.7 − 9.3 − 2.6 − 3.4 − 1.0 − 2.4 − 12.7 − 9.0 − 55.4          Dec 
13.8 4.7 3.5 1.2 5.1 − 0.4 − 3.6 5.5 1.4 4.0 5.1 2.3 −105.7 2011          Jan 
− 7.4 − 14.2 − 12.0 − 2.2 − 1.5 − 1.1 − 1.3 − 0.4 0.1 − 0.5 3.0 6.1 − 51.9          Feb 
1.9 − 11.3 − 10.5 − 0.8 − 3.9 − 2.6 − 0.1 − 1.3 0.2 − 1.5 − 27.9 − 32.2 − 78.2          Mar 
20.6 − 8.5 − 10.9 2.4 11.9 11.1 9.3 0.8 0.0 0.7 48.6 52.4 5.4          Apr 
− 24.4 − 9.9 − 10.7 0.8 − 4.6 − 5.0 − 4.6 0.4 − 0.3 0.6 1.7 − 2.8 44.1          May− 11.9 − 6.3 − 3.2 − 3.1 − 3.8 − 0.4 0.0 − 3.3 − 0.3 − 3.0 − 41.4 − 41.2 − 80.0          June
0.2 − 3.5 − 0.2 − 3.3 0.4 − 4.5 − 0.0 4.9 5.4 − 0.6 − 5.5 − 2.9 121.1          July
− 3.7 − 12.2 − 9.3 − 2.9 − 0.9 − 1.3 1.1 0.5 − 0.1 0.5 23.8 27.0 158.0          Aug − 3.0 − 1.5 − 0.2 − 1.3 1.0 4.4 6.8 − 3.4 − 0.3 − 3.0 − 14.7 − 13.4 132.6          Sep 
− 1.2 − 3.4 − 3.8 0.4 − 4.8 − 7.0 − 6.1 2.2 − 0.4 2.6 − 24.0 − 20.8 −115.8          Oct 
0.4 − 1.0 − 3.3 2.3 − 6.5 1.2 − 0.2 − 7.7 0.6 − 8.3 1.2 2.3 − 4.9          Nov 
− 3.4 − 6.9 1.6 − 8.5 − 9.0 − 8.2 − 6.7 − 0.8 1.5 − 2.4 − 9.5 − 11.7 88.2          Dec − 0.3 7.3 3.8 3.5 3.7 1.7 − 2.9 2.0 − 0.2 2.2 28.7 29.3 − 7.3 2012          Jan 
− 5.8 − 0.5 − 2.2 1.7 1.5 1.3 1.3 0.2 0.1 0.2 − 12.0 − 8.4 − 30.0          Feb 
8.4 2.0 − 1.4 3.4 1.5 1.7 1.7 − 0.2 − 0.9 0.6 4.9 0.8 − 58.2          Mar 
13.8 4.8 5.3 − 0.5 − 0.8 2.0 2.9 − 2.8 − 0.1 − 2.7 − 0.6 0.3 34.1          Apr 
− 19.9 − 8.8 − 5.6 − 3.2 − 3.9 − 5.1 − 4.4 1.2 0.1 1.1 − 2.6 − 2.5 255.6          May− 8.1 18.2 10.4 7.8 − 1.5 − 1.4 − 0.3 − 0.1 0.2 − 0.3 − 35.2 − 32.3 −131.6          June
exchange of equalisation claims. 3Statistical breaks have been eliminated from
the flow figures (see also footnote * in Table II.1). 

Deutsche Bundesbank
22  Monthly Report
August 2012
IV Banks
 
1 Assets and liabilities of monetary financial institutions (excluding the Bundesbank) in Germany *
  Liabilities
 
€ billion
Deposits of banks (MFIs) Deposits of non-banks (non-MFIs) in the euro area
in the euro area
Deposits of non-banks in the home country Deposits of non-banks
With agreed At agreed
of banks maturities notice
Balance in the in other of which of which
sheet home member Over- up to up to Over-
Period total 1 Total country states Total Total night Total 2 years Total 3 months Total night
 End of year or month
 
2003 6,432.0 1,471.0 1,229.4 241.6 2,214.6 2,086.9 622.1 874.5 248.0 590.3 500.8 81.8 9.3
2004 6,617.4 1,528.4 1,270.8 257.6 2,264.2 2,148.5 646.2 898.9 239.9 603.5 515.5 71.9 8.8
2005 6,859.4 1,569.6 1,300.8 268.8 2,329.1 2,225.4 715.8 906.2 233.4 603.4 519.1 62.2 9.6
2006 7,154.4 1,637.7 1,348.6 289.0 2,449.2 2,341.6 745.8 1,009.3 310.1 586.5 487.4 62.0 13.9
2007 7,592.4 1,778.6 1,479.0 299.6 2,633.6 2,518.3 769.6 1,193.3 477.9 555.4 446.0 75.1 19.6
2008 7,892.7 1,827.7 1,583.0 244.7 2,798.2 2,687.3 809.5 1,342.7 598.7 535.2 424.8 74.2 22.4
2009 7,436.1 1,589.7 1,355.6 234.0 2,818.0 2,731.3 997.8 1,139.1 356.4 594.4 474.4 63.9 17.7
2010 8,304.8 1,495.8 1,240.1 255.7 2,925.8 2,817.6 1,086.5 1,112.9 307.2 618.2 512.5 68.4 19.3
2011 8,393.3 1,444.8 1,210.3 234.5 3,033.4 2,915.1 1,139.6 1,159.4 366.2 616.1 515.3 78.8 25.9
2010          Sep 7,387.2 1,482.4 1,218.3 264.1 2,849.5 2,758.0 1,066.6 1,085.3 302.8 606.1 499.4 69.7 20.9
         Oct 7,397.5 1,517.9 1,247.9 270.0 2,872.8 2,759.8 1,068.3 1,084.2 303.5 607.4 502.2 69.9 21.2
         Nov 7,508.4 1,513.5 1,245.8 267.7 2,924.8 2,802.1 1,090.3 1,101.8 298.7 609.9 504.2 76.3 25.7         Dec 8,304.8 1,495.8 1,240.1 255.7 2,925.8 2,817.6 1,086.5 1,112.9 307.2 618.2 512.5 68.4 19.3
2011          Jan 8,183.8 1,489.1 1,221.1 268.0 2,937.6 2,823.6 1,096.9 1,106.3 302.6 620.4 515.1 69.0 22.7
         Feb 8,142.3 1,472.6 1,208.0 264.6 2,930.8 2,817.3 1,083.9 1,110.9 307.2 622.5 517.2 66.5 21.4         Mar 7,955.1 1,454.6 1,191.7 262.9 2,928.3 2,820.7 1,085.9 1,111.3 308.8 623.5 518.0 68.7 22.1
         Apr 7,997.9 1,458.9 1,183.6 275.3 2,936.7 2,830.9 1,088.0 1,120.7 319.2 622.3 517.6 71.9 25.7
         May 8,045.9 1,422.2 1,163.9 258.3 2,950.7 2,841.8 1,090.4 1,131.5 330.2 619.9 515.3 71.3 25.1         June 7,885.8 1,401.2 1,158.5 242.6 2,959.0 2,844.9 1,096.5 1,130.7 330.2 617.7 513.4 73.4 26.6
         July 8,001.0 1,398.0 1,154.4 243.6 2,966.1 2,853.8 1,094.1 1,143.1 342.8 616.5 512.2 72.9 25.0
         Aug 8,263.5 1,413.8 1,163.7 250.1 2,988.4 2,873.6 1,105.9 1,152.7 351.5 615.0 510.8 75.6 25.5         Sep 8,489.4 1,430.6 1,176.1 254.6 3,007.5 2,884.0 1,111.5 1,159.1 361.4 613.4 509.7 80.7 28.3
         Oct 8,353.9 1,419.0 1,162.8 256.2 3,008.5 2,888.5 1,120.4 1,155.0 359.1 613.0 509.5 80.0 28.4
         Nov 8,406.6 1,427.1 1,177.3 249.8 3,028.6 2,912.1 1,145.2 1,155.4 360.5 611.5 509.8 77.3 25.3         Dec 8,393.3 1,444.8 1,210.3 234.5 3,033.4 2,915.1 1,139.6 1,159.4 366.2 616.1 515.3 78.8 25.9
2012          Jan 8,517.7 1,475.9 1,221.1 254.8 3,038.6 2,912.4 1,140.8 1,154.3 364.5 617.2 517.4 82.8 29.3
         Feb 8,526.0 1,484.7 1,232.3 252.4 3,046.2 2,915.6 1,147.2 1,148.6 361.0 619.8 520.2 83.7 31.0         Mar 8,522.7 1,501.9 1,232.1 269.8 3,037.7 2,924.1 1,157.4 1,147.3 363.0 619.4 520.6 77.3 28.9
         Apr 8,599.6 1,501.9 1,222.4 279.5 3,052.2 2,938.9 1,170.0 1,151.0 368.0 617.9 519.4 77.4 28.3
         May 8,859.6 1,494.1 1,219.3 274.8 3,069.6 2,955.6 1,185.8 1,152.7 372.2 617.1 519.5 78.2 30.1         June 8,662.8 1,469.6 1,207.6 262.0 3,091.1 2,975.0 1,203.3 1,155.7 378.1 616.0 519.4 78.9 30.3
 Changes 4
2004 212.0 62.5 42.8 19.7 53.5 64.9 26.3 25.5 − 8.3 13.1 14.7 − 9.3 − 0.4
2005 187.9 32.8 27.0 5.9 65.0 75.5 69.4 7.3 − 6.9 − 1.2 2.9 − 8.0 0.5
2006 356.8 105.6 81.5 24.1 122.9 118.6 30.4 105.0 77.1 − 16.8 − 31.7 0.4 4.4
2007 518.3 148.4 134.8 13.6 185.1 177.3 24.5 183.9 167.8 − 31.1 − 41.4 13.6 5.6
2008 313.3 65.8 121.7 − 55.8 162.3 173.1 38.7 154.6 123.5 − 20.2 − 21.2 − 7.5 − 0.1
2009 −454.5 −235.4 −224.6 − 10.8 31.9 43.9 205.0 −220.4 −259.3 59.3 50.3 − 9.6 − 4.1
2010 −136.3 − 75.2 − 99.4 24.2 72.3 59.7 88.7 − 53.0 − 52.2 24.0 38.3 − 4.4 2.2
2011 54.1 − 48.4 − 28.8 − 19.6 102.1 97.4 52.4 47.6 58.8 − 2.6 1.3 4.8 6.5
2010          Oct 20.5 36.7 30.4 6.3 23.4 1.9 1.9 − 1.3 0.8 1.3 2.7 0.3 0.4
         Nov 81.0 − 8.8 − 4.8 − 4.0 26.9 17.6 21.9 − 6.9 − 5.9 2.6 2.0 6.1 4.4
         Dec −152.5 − 16.1 − 4.6 − 11.4 1.6 15.9 − 3.5 10.8 8.2 8.5 8.6 − 7.8 − 5.6
2011          Jan −109.5 − 4.9 − 17.9 13.0 12.4 6.5 10.7 − 6.5 − 4.4 2.2 2.7 0.7 3.5
         Feb − 39.5 − 16.2 − 13.1 − 3.0 − 6.7 − 6.1 − 12.8 4.6 4.6 2.1 2.1 − 2.5 − 1.4         Mar −167.5 − 16.1 − 15.2 − 0.9 − 1.8 4.0 2.5 0.6 1.7 1.0 0.8 2.4 0.8
         Apr 63.2 6.6 − 6.9 13.4 9.5 10.8 3.6 9.3 10.4 − 2.1 − 1.3 3.4 3.7
         May 27.4 − 39.2 − 21.2 − 18.1 13.1 10.1 1.9 10.7 10.8 − 2.4 − 2.3 − 0.7 − 0.7
         June −165.7 − 20.9 − 5.3 − 15.6 8.5 3.3 6.2 − 0.7 − 0.0 − 2.1 − 1.9 2.1 1.5         July 102.3 − 4.5 − 5.0 0.4 6.5 8.3 − 2.8 12.3 12.5 − 1.2 − 1.2 − 0.6 − 1.6
         Aug 263.0 16.8 12.6 4.1 17.1 19.9 11.8 9.6 8.8 − 1.6 − 1.4 − 2.7 0.4
         Sep 193.7 13.8 10.6 3.2 17.4 9.1 4.3 6.4 9.9 − 1.5 − 1.0 4.9 2.7
         Oct −116.4 − 9.6 − 12.0 2.4 2.0 5.2 9.6 − 3.9 − 2.2 − 0.4 − 0.3 − 0.5 0.2
         Nov 31.1 5.7 13.1 − 7.4 19.0 22.7 23.7 0.1 1.2 − 1.1 − 0.2 − 2.9 − 3.2
         Dec − 27.9 20.1 31.4 − 11.2 5.1 3.5 − 6.3 5.2 5.5 4.6 5.4 1.3 0.5
2012          Jan 132.8 32.1 11.5 20.7 5.7 − 2.4 1.5 − 5.0 − 1.7 1.1 2.1 4.1 3.5
         Feb 20.7 10.2 12.2 − 2.0 8.2 3.7 6.7 − 5.6 − 3.3 2.6 3.8 1.0 1.7
         Mar − 7.0 16.7 − 0.6 17.3 − 8.6 8.4 10.1 − 1.3 1.9 − 0.4 0.4 − 6.4 − 2.1         Apr 68.9 1.8 − 7.6 9.4 14.0 12.1 12.5 1.1 2.4 − 1.5 − 1.2 0.0 − 0.6
         May 226.6 − 11.5 − 5.4 − 6.1 15.7 15.2 14.8 1.2 3.8 − 0.8 0.0 0.5 1.7
         June −196.7 − 24.5 − 11.7 − 12.8 21.5 19.4 17.4 3.1 5.9 − 1.1 − 0.1 0.7 0.1
*This table serves to supplement the “Overall monetary survey“ in section II. Unlike by banks (including building and loan associations) − data from money market
the other tables in section IV, this table includes − in addition to the figures reported funds. 1See footnote 1 in Table IV.2. 2Excluding deposits of central

Deutsche Bundesbank
23  Monthly Report
August 2012
IV Banks
 
   
 
 Debt securities
issued 3 
in other member states 2 Deposits ofcentral governments
With agreed At agreed Liabilitiesmaturities notice arising
of which from Money of which Liabilities
domestic market with to non- repos with
of which of which central non-banks fund euro- Capital maturities
up to up to govern- in the shares of up to area and Other
Total 2 years Total 3 months Total ments euro area issued  
3 Total reserves   Period 2 years 3 residents Liabilities 1 
End of year or month
 
68.6 11.4 3.9 3.1 45.9 44.2 14.1 36.8 1,486.9 131.3 567.8 340.1 300.8 200359.8 9.8 3.3 2.7 43.8 41.4 14.8 31.5 1,554.8 116.9 577.1 329.3 317.2 2004
50.2 9.8 2.4 2.0 41.6 38.8 19.5 31.7 1,611.9 113.8 626.2 346.9 324.5 2005
45.9 9.3 2.3 1.9 45.5 41.9 17.1 32.0 1,636.7 136.4 638.5 389.6 353.7 200653.2 22.0 2.3 1.8 40.1 38.3 26.6 28.6 1,637.6 182.3 661.0 428.2 398.2 200749.5 24.9 2.4 1.8 36.6 34.8 61.1 16.4 1,609.9 233.3 666.3 461.7 451.5 200843.7 17.0 2.5 2.0 22.8 22.2 80.5 11.4 1,500.5 146.3 565.6 454.8 415.6 2009
46.4 16.1 2.8 2.2 39.8 38.7 86.7 9.8 1,407.8 82.3 636.0 452.6 1,290.2 2010
49.6 18.4 3.3 2.5 39.5 37.9 97.1 6.2 1,345.7 75.7 561.5 468.1 1,436.6 2011
46.2 14.8 2.7 2.1 21.9 20.7 96.8 10.2 1,440.3 108.5 667.1 433.6 407.3 2010          Sep 46.0 14.6 2.7 2.1 43.1 34.1 85.0 9.8 1,407.4 87.7 657.4 440.1 407.1          Oct 
47.8 15.5 2.7 2.2 46.3 41.3 109.0 9.8 1,423.6 87.7 674.0 452.8 401.0          Nov 46.4 16.1 2.8 2.2 39.8 38.7 86.7 9.8 1,407.8 82.3 636.0 452.6 1,290.2          Dec 
43.5 13.7 2.8 2.2 45.0 37.1 74.5 9.9 1,400.8 80.6 631.5 454.3 1,186.1 2011          Jan 
42.3 14.3 2.8 2.2 47.0 37.8 93.2 9.8 1,396.0 83.0 634.1 460.2 1,145.7          Feb 43.8 16.3 2.9 2.3 38.9 36.2 78.9 10.0 1,373.4 78.2 575.5 460.7 1,073.7          Mar 
43.3 16.0 2.9 2.3 34.0 33.8 89.2 9.7 1,364.1 76.2 605.0 456.8 1,077.5          Apr 
43.3 16.2 2.9 2.3 37.6 34.8 105.2 9.5 1,368.4 77.2 605.4 460.7 1,123.8          May43.9 15.8 2.9 2.3 40.6 38.3 104.8 9.4 1,360.1 74.2 556.5 449.5 1,045.4          June
44.9 16.9 3.0 2.3 39.4 35.6 91.8 6.8 1,357.0 77.3 560.3 453.2 1,167.9          July
47.1 15.2 3.0 2.3 39.3 36.8 101.9 7.2 1,352.8 79.4 604.9 458.7 1,335.7          Aug 49.4 17.7 3.0 2.3 42.7 40.8 107.0 7.2 1,352.4 76.1 644.6 459.4 1,480.7          Sep 
48.5 17.1 3.1 2.4 40.0 37.9 105.7 7.2 1,341.7 74.0 650.4 462.7 1,358.7          Oct 
48.8 17.6 3.2 2.5 39.2 35.8 111.1 6.3 1,348.4 79.7 668.9 466.6 1,349.6          Nov 49.6 18.4 3.3 2.5 39.5 37.9 97.1 6.2 1,345.7 75.7 561.5 468.1 1,436.6          Dec 
50.1 19.0 3.4 2.6 43.4 40.9 86.7 5.9 1,311.1 74.3 702.3 468.9 1,428.2 2012          Jan 
49.2 18.6 3.4 2.6 46.9 45.2 96.6 5.7 1,316.9 75.6 719.2 471.8 1,384.9          Feb 44.9 16.0 3.5 2.6 36.3 35.6 93.1 5.5 1,305.7 72.7 772.9 476.9 1,329.2          Mar 
45.6 16.7 3.5 2.6 35.8 33.4 102.9 5.5 1,303.7 68.5 788.9 477.2 1,367.2          Apr 
44.5 15.9 3.6 2.7 35.8 31.5 108.3 5.5 1,304.1 63.6 775.2 482.5 1,620.2          May44.9 16.5 3.8 2.8 37.2 33.8 98.9 5.7 1,291.5 62.8 737.7 489.5 1,478.8          June
Changes 4
− 8.3 − 1.4 − 0.6 − 0.4 − 2.1 − 2.8 0.8 − 5.3 73.6 − 14.6 21.7 − 10.5 15.8 2004
− 7.7 − 0.3 − 0.9 − 0.7 − 2.5 − 3.0 4.7 0.2 38.7 − 9.9 22.0 14.8 9.7 2005
− 3.9 − 0.3 − 0.1 − 0.2 3.9 3.1 − 3.3 0.3 34.8 22.1 32.4 27.5 36.6 2006
8.0 12.9 0.0 − 0.1 − 5.8 − 4.3 8.1 − 3.4 20.9 49.3 48.7 42.3 68.3 2007
− 7.5 0.6 0.1 − 0.0 − 3.3 − 3.2 36.1 − 12.2 − 33.9 50.2 − 0.1 39.3 56.1 2008− 5.7 − 7.7 0.1 0.2 − 2.4 − 0.8 19.4 − 5.0 −104.6 − 87.1 − 95.3 − 0.3 − 65.0 2009
− 6.8 − 5.8 0.3 0.3 17.0 16.5 6.2 − 1.6 −106.7 − 63.2 54.4 − 7.1 − 78.6 2010
− 2.2 1.7 0.5 0.3 − 0.1 − 0.7 10.0 − 3.7 − 76.9 − 6.6 − 80.5 13.7 137.8 2011
− 0.1 − 0.1 0.0 0.0 21.3 13.4 − 11.8 − 0.4 − 29.7 − 20.6 − 6.5 7.0 1.7 2010          Oct 
1.6 0.8 0.0 0.0 3.2 7.1 23.9 − 0.0 10.3 0.9 3.8 10.4 14.5          Nov 
− 2.2 0.6 0.1 0.1 − 6.5 − 2.5 − 22.2 0.1 − 11.0 − 5.2 − 33.0 0.7 − 72.7          Dec − 2.8 − 2.3 0.0 0.0 5.2 − 1.6 − 12.2 0.0 − 1.1 − 1.5 0.0 2.8 −106.6 2011          Jan 
− 1.1 0.6 0.0 0.0 1.9 0.7 18.8 − 0.1 − 1.5 2.4 4.1 6.2 − 44.1          Feb 
1.6 2.1 0.0 0.0 − 8.1 − 1.6 − 14.3 0.2 − 12.2 − 3.5 − 53.4 2.1 − 72.1          Mar 
− 0.4 − 0.1 0.0 0.0 − 4.7 − 2.3 10.4 − 0.3 − 1.4 − 1.8 36.6 − 2.5 4.3          Apr − 0.0 0.1 0.0 0.0 3.6 1.0 15.9 − 0.2 − 3.5 0.8 − 5.8 2.6 44.7          May
0.6 − 0.4 0.0 0.0 3.0 3.5 − 0.3 − 0.1 − 15.4 − 3.7 − 47.8 − 11.0 − 78.6          June
0.9 1.0 0.0 0.0 − 1.2 − 2.7 − 13.4 − 2.6 − 8.7 2.9 0.6 2.8 121.6          July
− 3.1 − 2.2 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.1 1.1 10.3 0.4 − 1.0 2.3 47.0 5.3 167.2          Aug 
2.2 2.4 0.0 0.0 3.4 4.0 4.9 0.1 − 13.7 − 3.8 29.1 − 1.6 143.8          Sep 
− 0.8 − 0.5 0.1 0.0 − 2.7 − 2.9 − 1.2 − 0.0 − 2.8 − 1.8 12.0 4.7 −121.4          Oct 
0.2 0.4 0.1 0.1 − 0.7 − 2.1 5.3 − 0.9 − 4.2 5.3 11.0 2.3 − 7.2          Nov 
0.7 0.7 0.1 0.1 0.3 2.0 − 14.1 − 0.1 − 11.3 − 4.2 −113.8 − 0.0 86.1          Dec 
0.6 0.7 0.1 0.0 3.9 3.0 − 10.8 − 0.3 − 31.4 − 1.3 143.6 1.4 − 7.9 2012          Jan 
− 0.8 − 0.3 0.1 0.0 3.5 4.4 10.0 − 0.2 11.6 1.4 20.7 3.9 − 43.7          Feb 
− 4.3 − 2.7 0.0 0.0 − 10.6 − 9.7 − 3.6 − 0.2 − 12.5 − 3.0 52.5 4.9 − 56.2          Mar 
0.7 0.7 − 0.0 − 0.0 1.9 0.2 7.2 − 0.0 − 5.8 − 4.3 13.8 − 0.3 38.3          Apr 
− 1.3 − 0.9 0.1 0.1 0.0 − 1.9 5.3 0.0 − 13.8 − 5.4 − 24.4 2.8 252.6          May
0.4 0.6 0.2 0.1 1.3 2.3 − 9.5 0.2 − 13.3 − 1.5 − 37.5 7.7 −141.3          June
governments. 3In Germany, debt securities with maturities of up to one year are published together with money market fund shares. 4Statistical breaks have been
classed as money market paper; up to the January 2002 Monthly Report they were eliminated from the flow figures (see also footnote * in Table II.1). 

Deutsche Bundesbank
24  Monthly Report
August 2012
IV Banks
 
2 Principal assets and liabilities of banks (MFIs) in Germany, by category of banks*
 
 
€ billion
  Lending to banks (MFIs)  Lending to non-banks (non-MFIs)
 
 of which of which
 
Loans
 Cash in
 hand and
 credit
Number of balances for
reporting Balance with Balances up to and for Partici- Securities Securities
End of institu- sheet central and issued by including more than issued by pating Other
month tions total 1 banks Total loans banks Total 1 year 1 year Bills non-banks interests assets  1 
All categories of banks
 
2012          Jan 1,899 8,589.5 64.3 2,987.3 2,287.1 687.0 3,965.8 504.7 2,749.5 0.9 694.6 141.4 1,430.7
         Feb 1,900 8,597.5 65.2 3,040.6 2,338.4 689.2 3,949.5 500.2 2,746.5 0.7 686.5 140.9 1,401.3
         Mar 1,900 8,594.0 91.2 3,050.1 2,350.6 686.2 3,970.1 507.5 2,743.2 0.7 703.1 139.3 1,343.2
         Apr 1,902 8,671.4 70.7 3,088.4 2,395.1 680.4 3,994.8 519.1 2,746.4 0.7 713.9 138.4 1,379.1
         May 1,900 8,932.2 92.0 3,088.9 2,395.9 679.6 3,976.1 508.2 2,760.2 0.6 693.3 138.8 1,636.4
         June 1,897 8,708.2 104.7 3,017.3 2,335.4 668.8 3,967.8 507.9 2,755.5 0.6 690.2 139.1 1,479.3
Commercial banks 6
2012          May 283 3,567.4 59.9 1,195.6 1,101.9 93.0 1,078.3 237.6 655.2 0.2 177.5 70.1 1,163.4
         June 280 3,370.4 72.5 1,134.5 1,044.8 88.9 1,069.1 234.0 654.6 0.3 173.1 70.3 1,024.0
   Big banks 7
2012          May 4 2,363.6 47.1 613.4 566.0 47.4 505.6 152.5 258.3 0.2 87.1 62.6 1,134.9
         June 4 2,174.5 56.6 561.8 516.1 45.6 497.0 148.1 256.8 0.2 85.1 62.6 996.7
   Regional banks and other commercial banks
2012          May 167 829.2 8.4 280.2 236.1 43.3 510.3 66.3 357.0 0.1 86.6 6.9 23.5
         June 165 822.0 9.3 273.6 231.4 41.5 510.1 66.6 358.4 0.1 84.7 7.1 21.9
   Branches of foreign banks
2012          May 112 374.6 4.5 302.0 299.8 2.2 62.4 18.7 39.9 0.0 3.8 0.6 5.1
         June 111 373.8 6.7 299.1 297.3 1.8 62.0 19.3 39.3 0.0 3.2 0.6 5.4
Landesbanken
2012          May 10 1,470.7 3.9 527.8 403.1 119.9 664.2 117.5 415.3 0.1 126.6 16.8 258.0
         June 10 1,452.3 5.3 508.3 385.7 118.2 669.9 123.6 413.0 0.1 127.9 16.8 252.1
Savings banks
2012          May 426 1,094.9 14.8 254.7 100.8 151.7 791.3 59.2 623.9 0.1 107.9 16.2 17.8
         June 426 1,093.6 14.2 251.6 98.8 150.5 793.8 60.7 624.4 0.1 108.4 16.4 17.6
 
Regional institutions of credit cooperatives  
 
2012          May 2 300.1 1.9 166.8 130.6 36.1 62.8 12.5 21.5 0.0 28.5 14.9 53.7
         June 2 290.3 0.7 167.1 131.4 35.6 62.4 12.2 21.6 0.0 28.4 14.7 45.4
Credit cooperatives
2012          May 1,121 735.3 10.3 193.1 71.5 120.0 502.4 32.5 398.8 0.1 70.9 11.7 17.9
         June 1,121 736.8 10.3 191.7 70.1 120.1 503.4 33.5 398.4 0.1 71.4 11.7 19.7
Mortgage banks
2012          May 17 562.2 0.3 171.0 102.7 65.2 372.7 7.1 281.8 − 83.8 0.8 17.3
         June 17 558.7 0.3 170.0 103.3 63.6 370.0 7.1 279.9 − 83.0 0.8 17.5
Building and loan associations
2012          May 23 199.8 0.0 61.1 43.5 17.6 130.7 1.6 115.8 . 13.3 0.4 7.7
         June 23 200.1 0.0 60.7 43.4 17.3 131.4 1.6 116.2 . 13.6 0.4 7.7
Special purpose banks
2012          May 18 1,001.8 0.8 518.7 441.7 76.1 373.7 40.3 248.0 − 84.7 8.0 100.5
         June 18 1,006.1 1.5 533.5 457.8 74.7 367.7 35.2 247.4 − 84.4 8.0 95.4
Memo item: Foreign banks 8
2012          May 152 1,138.6 29.0 540.1 489.1 48.0 427.3 69.9 265.7 0.1 89.7 5.7 136.5
         June 151 1,116.7 31.0 533.6 485.2 45.4 426.2 71.1 265.3 0.1 87.7 5.7 120.2
  of which:  Banks majority-owned by foreign banks 9
2012          May 40 764.0 24.6 238.1 189.3 45.7 364.8 51.2 225.8 0.1 85.9 5.1 131.4
         June 40 742.9 24.3 234.5 187.9 43.6 364.2 51.8 226.0 0.1 84.5 5.1 114.8
*Assets and liabilities of monetary financial institutions (MFIs) in Germany. The assets meaning of section 340e (3) sentence 1 of the German Commercial Code (Handels-
and liabilities of foreign branches, of money market funds (which are also classified gesetzbuch) read in conjunction with section 35 (1) No 1a of the Credit Institutionas MFIs) and of the Bundesbank are not included. For the definitions of the respective Accounting Regulation (Verordnung über die Rechnungslegung der Kreditinstitute)items, see the footnotes to Table IV.3. 1Owing to the Act Modernising Accounting are classified under "Other assets and liabilities" as of the December 2010 reporting
Law (Gesetz zur Modernisierung des Bilanzrechts) of 25 May 2009, derivative date. Trading portfolio derivatives are listed separately in the Statistical Supplementfinancial instruments in the trading portfolio (trading portfolio derivatives) within the to the Monthly Report 1, Banking statistics, in Tables I.1 to I.3. 2For building and

Deutsche Bundesbank
25  Monthly Report
August 2012
IV Banks
 
   
 
Deposits of banks (MFIs) Deposits of non-banks (non-MFIs) Capital
 including  
of which of which published
reserves,
Time deposits 2 Savings deposits 4 partici-pation
Memo rights
item Bearer capital,
for for of which debt Liabilities
funds for
up to and more arising At three Bank general Other securities
Sight Time Sight including than from savings out- banking liabi-   End of months’
Total deposits deposits Total deposits 1 year 1 year 2 repos 3 Total notice bonds risks lities 1   month standing 5 
All categories of banks
 
2,034.6 464.2 1,570.4 3,269.5 1,284.3 423.4 812.6 134.0 627.5 525.3 121.8 1,382.9 396.1 1,506.4 2012          Jan 
2,060.5 498.6 1,561.9 3,287.2 1,293.3 432.2 810.7 149.5 630.2 528.2 120.9 1,386.2 401.0 1,462.6          Feb 2,116.2 504.1 1,612.1 3,289.4 1,303.6 429.3 806.2 158.2 629.8 528.6 120.6 1,376.0 405.8 1,406.5          Mar 
2,128.1 499.8 1,628.3 3,317.9 1,313.0 452.5 803.9 166.9 628.3 527.4 120.1 1,374.4 406.0 1,445.0          Apr 
2,109.2 548.1 1,561.1 3,338.1 1,332.0 456.6 802.0 175.0 627.6 527.5 119.9 1,380.5 405.5 1,698.8          May2,054.5 493.4 1,561.0 3,342.9 1,343.3 454.3 799.5 156.7 626.7 527.5 119.0 1,369.3 411.2 1,530.4          June
Commercial banks 6
932.4 401.1 531.2 1,182.5 602.1 209.0 210.2 97.9 128.8 103.8 32.5 171.8 131.0 1,149.6 2012          May896.6 346.4 550.2 1,170.8 598.5 201.8 209.8 82.6 128.3 103.4 32.5 170.3 131.3 1,001.3          June
Big banks 7
481.5 215.4 266.1 575.2 278.6 117.2 90.4 92.4 77.8 73.7 11.2 132.2 77.7 1,096.9 2012          May452.0 192.9 259.1 563.7 275.4 109.4 90.4 77.2 77.5 73.3 11.1 130.2 77.9 950.7          June
Regional banks and other commercial banks
178.3 69.4 108.9 521.5 270.0 80.5 99.9 5.5 50.9 30.1 20.2 38.8 46.0 44.6 2012          May172.5 65.4 107.2 521.4 269.3 81.6 99.4 5.4 50.8 30.1 20.3 39.4 46.1 42.7          June
Branches of foreign banks
272.6 116.3 156.3 85.8 53.5 11.3 19.8 − 0.0 0.0 1.1 0.8 7.4 8.1 2012          May272.0 88.1 183.9 85.7 53.7 10.8 20.1 − 0.1 0.1 1.1 0.7 7.4 8.0          June
Landesbanken
381.4 49.6 331.8 399.6 106.1 121.5 156.8 62.1 14.1 9.9 1.0 346.2 64.7 278.8 2012          May368.0 46.4 321.7 410.4 112.7 126.6 156.0 57.3 14.1 9.9 1.0 340.4 64.3 269.1          June
Savings banks
179.9 21.4 158.5 772.0 350.5 44.0 15.3 0.8 298.6 249.6 63.6 19.8 72.4 50.8 2012          May178.1 22.3 155.8 772.0 352.7 42.9 15.2 0.9 298.3 249.8 62.9 19.2 76.6 47.8          June
 
Regional institutions of credit cooperatives
 
144.1 27.6 116.5 34.4 8.7 10.9 12.5 3.0 − − 2.3 55.0 13.0 53.6 2012          May140.3 28.2 112.1 36.6 9.6 12.3 12.4 4.6 − − 2.3 54.4 12.9 46.0          June
Credit cooperatives
111.5 5.7 105.8 525.0 244.0 47.1 28.9 0.0 185.4 163.5 19.6 17.4 47.5 33.9 2012          May111.7 6.1 105.7 525.8 245.8 46.6 28.7 0.0 185.4 163.8 19.4 17.2 48.9 33.1          June
Mortgage banks
153.8 9.6 144.2 182.4 7.4 13.9 160.8 5.1 0.3 0.3 . 185.4 17.2 23.4 2012          May152.0 9.0 143.0 182.2 9.4 12.3 160.1 4.7 0.3 0.3 . 183.9 17.2 23.4          June
Building and loan associations
24.2 1.3 22.8 144.8 0.4 0.9 142.2 − 0.4 0.4 1.0 5.3 8.4 17.1 2012          May23.6 1.5 22.1 145.0 0.4 0.9 142.4 − 0.4 0.4 1.0 5.3 8.4 17.7          June
Special purpose banks
182.0 31.8 150.2 97.5 12.7 9.3 75.4 6.1 − − . 579.5 51.2 91.6 2012          May184.1 33.5 150.6 100.1 14.2 11.0 75.0 6.6 − − . 578.5 51.4 92.0          June
Memo item:   Foreign banks 8
433.2 196.2 237.0 456.2 241.9 85.8 93.2 28.7 19.5 19.3 15.8 56.4 45.9 146.9 2012          May430.0 168.8 261.3 455.7 241.3 86.0 93.1 25.8 19.4 19.2 15.9 54.9 45.9 130.2          June
of which:   Banks majority-owned by foreign banks 9
160.6 80.0 80.7 370.4 188.4 74.5 73.3 28.7 19.5 19.3 14.7 55.7 38.5 138.8 2012          May158.1 80.7 77.4 369.9 187.6 75.2 73.0 25.8 19.4 19.2 14.8 54.2 38.5 122.2          June
loan associations: Including deposits under savings and loan contracts (see Table Nov. 2009), Commerzbank AG, UniCredit Bank AG (formerly Bayerische Hypo- und
IV.12). 3Included in time deposits. 4Excluding deposits under savings and loan Vereinsbank AG) and Deutsche Postbank AG. 8Sum of the banks majority-owned by
contracts (see also footnote 2). 5Including subordinated negotiable bearer debt foreign banks and included in other categories of banks and the category ”Branches
securities; excluding non-negotiable bearer debt securities. 6Commercial banks (with dependent legal status) of foreign banks”. 9Separate presentation of the banks
comprise the sub-groups ”Big banks”, ”Regional banks and other commercial banks” majority-owned by foreign banks included in other banking categories. and ”Branches of foreign banks”. 7Deutsche Bank AG, Dresdner Bank AG (up to

Deutsche Bundesbank
26  Monthly Report
August 2012
IV Banks
 
3 Assets and liabilities of banks (MFIs) in Germany vis-à-vis residents *
 
 
€ billion
Lending to domestic banks (MFIs) Lending to domestic non-banks (non-MFIs)
Treasury
Cash in Negotiable bills and
hand Credit money negotiable
balances market Memo money mar- (euro-area Securities
banknotes with the Credit paper item ket paper issued Securities
and Bundes- balances issued by issued by Fiduciary issued by by non-
Period coins) bank Total and loans Bills banks banks loans Total Loans Bills non-banks banks  1 
End of year or month *
 
2002 17.5 45.6 1,691.3 1,112.3 0.0 7.8 571.2 2.7 2,997.2 2,685.0 4.1 3.3 301.9
2003 17.0 46.7 1,643.9 1,064.0 0.0 8.8 571.0 2.3 2,995.6 2,677.0 3.7 3.4 309.6
2004 14.9 41.2 1,676.3 1,075.8 0.0 7.4 592.9 2.1 3,001.3 2,644.0 2.7 2.6 351.0
2005 15.1 47.9 1,684.5 1,096.8 0.0 6.7 580.9 2.1 2,995.1 2,632.7 2.4 2.4 357.6
2006 16.0 49.4 1,637.8 1,086.3 − 9.3 542.2 1.9 3,000.7 2,630.3 1.9 2.0 366.5
2007 17.5 64.6 1,751.8 1,222.5 0.0 25.3 504.0 2.3 2,975.7 2,647.9 1.6 1.5 324.7
2008 17.4 102.6 1,861.7 1,298.1 0.0 55.7 507.8 2.0 3,071.1 2,698.9 1.2 3.1 367.9
2009 16.9 78.9 1,711.5 1,138.0 − 31.6 541.9 2.2 3,100.1 2,691.8 0.8 4.0 403.5
2010 16.0 79.6 1,686.3 1,195.4 − 7.5 483.5 1.8 3,220.9 2,770.4 0.8 27.9 421.8
2011 15.8 93.8 1,725.6 1,267.9 − 7.1 450.7 2.1 3,197.8 2,774.6 0.8 6.4 415.9
2011          Jan 13.6 54.0 1,673.1 1,183.9 − 7.9 481.3 1.7 3,241.2 2,777.7 0.7 29.2 433.6
         Feb 13.6 61.7 1,668.2 1,179.5 − 9.4 479.3 1.7 3,240.3 2,786.9 0.7 29.4 423.4
         Mar 14.0 67.0 1,646.6 1,164.7 − 7.7 474.2 1.7 3,211.7 2,757.5 0.6 24.6 429.0
         Apr 15.1 49.1 1,630.9 1,152.3 − 5.4 473.2 1.7 3,226.5 2,748.7 0.6 25.6 451.6
         May 14.6 56.4 1,623.7 1,143.2 − 5.7 474.8 1.7 3,209.4 2,753.8 0.5 23.7 431.3
         June 14.4 66.6 1,607.5 1,137.4 − 5.2 465.0 1.7 3,191.7 2,748.9 0.5 21.6 420.7
         July 14.5 57.5 1,610.1 1,144.0 − 5.1 460.9 1.6 3,193.1 2,753.1 0.5 18.7 420.7
         Aug 14.0 64.1 1,665.1 1,200.6 − 5.3 459.2 1.7 3,201.3 2,768.0 0.5 16.7 416.2
         Sep 14.7 78.8 1,731.5 1,270.1 − 6.0 455.4 1.7 3,207.6 2,778.3 0.6 14.5 414.2
         Oct 14.7 72.6 1,736.2 1,274.4 − 6.5 455.3 1.7 3,233.3 2,806.1 0.6 15.7 411.0
         Nov 14.1 57.6 1,797.7 1,338.5 − 7.4 451.9 1.7 3,237.6 2,807.6 0.5 14.4 415.0
         Dec 15.8 93.8 1,725.6 1,267.9 − 7.1 450.7 2.1 3,197.8 2,774.6 0.8 6.4 415.9
2012          Jan 13.8 49.8 1,846.4 1,394.4 − 7.3 444.6 2.1 3,226.6 2,800.0 0.7 4.9 421.1
         Feb 13.6 50.8 1,904.6 1,448.5 − 6.8 449.4 2.1 3,220.3 2,797.7 0.5 5.6 416.4
         Mar 14.5 75.8 1,936.0 1,482.9 − 6.8 446.2 2.1 3,222.9 2,787.1 0.5 4.9 430.4
         Apr 14.5 55.4 1,968.9 1,518.5 − 6.6 443.8 2.0 3,244.7 2,795.6 0.5 5.7 442.8
         May 14.8 76.4 1,959.2 1,509.0 − 5.9 444.3 2.0 3,219.1 2,793.4 0.5 4.5 420.7
         June 14.7 89.2 1,927.0 1,481.6 − 6.1 439.3 2.1 3,227.6 2,802.1 0.5 6.1 418.9
Changes *
2003 − 0.5 + 1.1 − 47.2 − 48.2 + 0.0 + 1.0 + 0.1 − 0.3 + 0.1 − 8.0 − 0.4 + 0.3 + 9.3
2004 − 2.1 − 5.5 + 35.9 + 15.1 + 0.0 − 1.4 + 22.1 − 0.2 + 3.3 − 35.0 − 1.0 + 1.1 + 39.2
2005 + 0.2 + 6.7 + 8.4 + 21.0 − 0.0 − 0.8 − 11.9 − 0.0 − 6.7 − 11.8 − 0.3 − 0.2 + 6.6
2006 + 0.9 + 1.5 − 3.6 + 24.5 − 0.0 + 2.6 − 30.6 − 0.2 − 12.4 − 20.3 − 0.5 − 0.4 + 8.8
2007 + 1.5 + 15.2 + 114.8 + 137.6 + 0.0 + 17.0 − 39.8 + 0.4 − 15.9 + 12.1 − 0.3 − 0.5 − 27.2
2008 − 0.1 + 39.4 + 125.9 + 90.1 + 0.0 + 30.6 + 5.2 − 0.8 + 92.0 + 47.3 − 0.4 + 1.8 + 43.3
2009 − 0.5 − 23.6 − 147.2 − 157.3 − 0.0 − 24.1 + 34.3 + 0.2 + 25.7 − 11.2 − 0.4 + 1.4 + 35.9
2010 − 0.9 + 0.6 − 19.3 + 61.5 + 0.0 − 24.0 − 56.8 − 0.3 + 130.5 + 78.7 + 0.0 + 23.8 + 28.0
2011 − 0.2 + 14.2 + 47.3 + 80.5 − − 0.4 − 32.8 − 0.1 − 30.6 − 3.2 + 0.0 − 21.5 − 5.9
2011          Jan − 2.4 − 25.6 − 13.2 − 11.4 − + 0.5 − 2.2 − 0.1 + 20.3 + 7.3 − 0.1 + 1.3 + 11.8
         Feb − 0.1 + 7.7 − 4.9 − 4.4 − + 1.5 − 2.0 − − 0.9 + 9.2 − 0.0 + 0.2 − 10.2
         Mar + 0.4 + 5.3 − 21.6 − 14.8 − − 1.7 − 5.1 + 0.0 − 28.6 − 29.4 − 0.1 − 4.7 + 5.6
         Apr + 1.1 − 17.8 − 15.7 − 12.4 − − 2.3 − 0.9 + 0.0 + 14.8 − 8.8 + 0.0 + 0.9 + 22.7
         May − 0.5 + 7.2 − 7.3 − 9.1 − + 0.3 + 1.6 − 0.0 − 17.1 + 5.1 − 0.1 − 1.9 − 20.3
         June − 0.3 + 10.3 − 16.2 − 5.8 − − 0.5 − 9.8 + 0.0 − 17.5 − 4.7 − 0.0 − 2.1 − 10.7
         July + 0.2 − 9.1 + 2.6 + 6.6 − − 0.0 − 4.0 − 0.0 + 1.4 + 4.2 + 0.0 − 2.8 + 0.0
         Aug − 0.5 + 6.6 + 62.3 + 63.8 − + 0.2 − 1.7 + 0.0 + 0.7 + 7.3 − 0.0 − 2.1 − 4.6
         Sep + 0.6 + 14.7 + 66.3 + 69.5 − + 0.7 − 3.8 − 0.0 + 6.3 + 10.3 + 0.1 − 2.2 − 1.9
         Oct + 0.0 − 6.1 + 5.5 + 5.1 − + 0.5 − 0.1 + 0.0 + 25.7 + 27.8 − 0.0 + 1.2 − 3.3
         Nov − 0.6 − 15.1 + 61.5 + 64.1 − + 0.8 − 3.5 + 0.0 + 4.3 + 1.6 − 0.0 − 1.3 + 4.1
         Dec + 1.7 + 36.2 − 72.0 − 70.6 − − 0.3 − 1.2 + 0.0 − 39.9 − 33.0 + 0.3 − 8.0 + 0.9
2012          Jan − 2.0 − 44.0 + 120.7 + 126.5 − + 0.2 − 6.1 − 0.1 + 29.0 + 25.3 − 0.1 − 1.5 + 5.3
         Feb − 0.2 + 1.0 + 58.3 + 54.1 − − 0.5 + 4.7 + 0.0 − 6.4 − 2.3 − 0.1 + 0.7 − 4.7
         Mar + 0.9 + 25.1 + 31.3 + 34.4 − + 0.1 − 3.2 − 0.0 + 2.7 − 10.6 − 0.0 − 0.7 + 14.0
         Apr + 0.0 − 20.4 + 36.1 + 38.8 − − 0.3 − 2.4 − 0.0 + 18.6 + 5.4 − 0.0 + 0.8 + 12.5
         May + 0.3 + 21.0 − 9.7 − 9.5 − − 0.7 + 0.5 + 0.0 − 25.6 − 2.2 − 0.0 − 1.1 − 22.2
         June − 0.1 + 12.8 − 32.2 − 27.4 − + 0.2 − 5.1 + 0.1 + 10.2 + 10.4 − 0.0 + 1.6 − 1.8
*See Table IV.2, footnote*; statistical breaks have been eliminated from the changes. (see also footnote 2). 2Including debt securities arising from the exchange of
The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as provisional. Subsequent equalisation claims. 3Including liabilities arising from registered debt securities,
revisions which appear in the following Monthly Report, are not specially registered money market paper and non-negotiable bearer debt securities; including
marked. 1Excluding debt securities arising from the exchange of equalisation claims subordinated liabilities. 4Including liabilities arising from monetary policy operations

Deutsche Bundesbank
27  Monthly Report
August 2012
IV Banks
 
   
 
 Deposits of domestic banks (MFIs)  3 Deposits of domestic non-banks (non-MFIs)
Partici-
patinginterestsin
Memo domestic Memo Memo
item banks Sight Time Redis- item Sight Time Savings Bank item Equalisa-tion Fiduciary and deposits deposits counted Fiduciary de- deposits de- savings Fiduciaryclaims 
2 loans Total 4 4 bills 5 loans Total posits 6 posits 7 bonds 8 loans   Period enterprises
End of year or month *
 
3.0 54.8 119.0 1,244.0 127.6 1,116.2 0.2 25.6 2,085.9 575.6 830.6 575.3 104.4 42.1 2002
2.0 56.8 109.2 1,229.6 116.8 1,112.6 0.2 27.8 2,140.3 624.0 825.7 590.3 100.3 40.5 20031.0 61.8 99.6 1,271.2 119.7 1,151.4 0.1 30.3 2,200.0 646.9 851.2 603.5 98.4 43.7 2004
− 56.6 108.5 1,300.0 120.5 1,179.4 0.1 26.5 2,276.6 717.0 864.4 603.4 91.9 42.4 2005− 53.0 106.3 1,348.2 125.4 1,222.7 0.0 22.3 2,394.6 747.7 962.8 586.5 97.5 37.8 2006− 51.1 109.4 1,478.6 122.1 1,356.5 0.0 20.0 2,579.1 779.9 1,125.4 555.4 118.4 36.4 2007− 47.2 111.2 1,582.5 138.5 1,444.0 0.0 41.6 2,781.4 834.6 1,276.1 535.2 135.4 32.3 2008− 43.9 106.1 1,355.1 128.9 1,226.2 0.0 35.7 2,829.7 1,029.5 1,102.6 594.5 103.2 43.4 2009
− 33.7 96.8 1,237.9 135.3 1,102.6 0.0 13.8 2,936.6 1,104.4 1,117.1 618.2 96.9 37.5 2010
− 36.3 94.6 1,210.1 114.8 1,095.3 0.0 36.1 3,046.9 1,168.3 1,156.2 616.1 106.3 36.5 2011
− 33.5 98.4 1,220.9 148.0 1,072.9 0.0 13.7 2,928.6 1,125.9 1,085.0 620.4 97.2 37.3 2011          Jan 
− 33.5 98.2 1,207.7 135.8 1,071.9 0.0 13.7 2,942.8 1,121.6 1,100.7 622.5 98.0 37.4          Feb − 33.3 98.3 1,191.5 126.6 1,064.8 0.0 13.7 2,930.5 1,112.1 1,096.6 623.5 98.3 37.2          Mar 
− 33.1 98.2 1,183.6 132.1 1,051.5 0.0 13.5 2,948.4 1,127.1 1,099.2 622.3 99.8 37.0          Apr 
− 33.0 96.7 1,164.0 119.8 1,044.1 0.0 13.6 2,976.6 1,125.7 1,129.3 619.9 101.7 37.0          May− 33.0 94.7 1,158.5 120.1 1,038.4 0.0 13.6 2,980.6 1,123.7 1,136.4 617.8 102.7 36.7          June
− 32.7 94.8 1,154.4 122.4 1,031.9 0.0 13.3 2,976.5 1,130.6 1,125.8 616.6 103.5 36.6          July
− 32.7 94.9 1,163.0 123.3 1,039.7 0.0 13.5 3,007.6 1,139.2 1,149.1 615.0 104.2 36.7          Aug − 32.7 94.9 1,175.6 133.0 1,042.6 0.0 13.5 3,026.3 1,151.3 1,157.3 613.5 104.3 36.7          Sep 
− 32.5 95.0 1,162.7 132.5 1,030.2 0.0 13.4 3,027.0 1,160.9 1,148.1 613.1 105.0 36.7          Oct 
− 32.5 94.9 1,177.1 136.1 1,041.0 0.0 13.7 3,054.5 1,188.0 1,149.2 611.5 105.8 36.7          Nov − 36.3 94.6 1,210.1 114.8 1,095.3 0.0 36.1 3,046.9 1,168.3 1,156.2 616.1 106.3 36.5          Dec 
− 35.3 93.8 1,221.0 137.1 1,083.9 0.0 35.4 3,036.8 1,181.1 1,133.1 617.2 105.3 35.8 2012          Jan 
− 35.1 93.4 1,232.2 141.0 1,091.2 0.0 35.2 3,054.9 1,187.1 1,143.5 619.8 104.6 35.6          Feb − 34.8 91.8 1,231.9 135.9 1,096.1 0.0 35.3 3,049.6 1,188.9 1,136.9 619.4 104.3 35.3          Mar 
− 35.3 91.7 1,222.2 135.0 1,087.2 0.0 35.7 3,072.6 1,197.7 1,153.2 617.9 103.8 35.5          Apr 
− 35.3 90.9 1,218.9 137.8 1,081.1 0.0 36.4 3,092.8 1,216.8 1,155.6 617.1 103.3 35.5          May− 35.2 91.1 1,207.1 134.1 1,073.0 0.0 36.3 3,106.0 1,233.8 1,153.5 616.1 102.6 35.2          June
Changes *
− 1.0 + 2.1 − 9.8 − 5.6 − 9.5 + 3.9 + 0.0 + 2.4 + 54.0 + 48.4 − 4.8 + 15.1 − 4.8 − 1.2 2003− 1.1 + 3.0 − 9.6 + 41.3 + 2.9 + 38.5 − 0.1 + 2.4 + 62.0 + 24.4 + 25.9 + 13.1 − 1.5 + 1.2 2004
− 1.0 − 4.9 + 8.9 + 28.9 + 0.8 + 28.0 + 0.0 − 3.5 + 76.6 + 70.7 + 12.4 − 1.2 − 5.4 − 1.2 2005
− − 3.7 − 2.2 + 79.0 + 8.6 + 70.5 − 0.1 − 4.5 + 118.0 + 30.0 + 97.7 − 16.8 + 7.2 − 4.1 2006
− − 2.3 + 3.1 + 132.0 − 3.3 + 135.3 − 0.0 − 2.3 + 181.1 + 31.6 + 160.5 − 31.1 + 20.1 − 2.0 2007− − 5.4 + 7.8 + 124.3 + 23.0 + 101.3 − 0.0 − 3.6 + 207.6 + 54.3 + 156.6 − 20.2 + 17.0 − 1.3 2008− − 4.2 + 0.7 − 225.4 − 9.7 − 215.7 − 0.0 − 5.7 + 59.7 + 211.4 − 179.3 + 59.3 − 31.6 − 0.9 2009
− − 2.1 − 9.2 − 96.8 + 22.3 − 119.1 − 0.0 − 0.2 + 77.4 + 76.0 − 18.9 + 24.0 − 3.7 − 1.7 2010
− − 1.1 − 2.2 − 25.0 − 20.0 − 5.1 − 0.0 + 0.1 + 111.2 + 63.7 + 40.9 − 2.6 + 9.3 − 1.1 2011
− − 0.2 + 1.6 − 17.0 + 12.7 − 29.8 − 0.0 − 0.1 − 8.1 + 21.6 − 32.1 + 2.2 + 0.3 − 0.2 2011          Jan 
− + 0.0 − 0.2 − 13.4 − 12.2 − 1.2 + 0.0 + 0.0 + 14.2 − 4.4 + 15.7 + 2.1 + 0.8 + 0.0          Feb − − 0.2 + 0.1 − 16.3 − 9.2 − 7.0 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 12.3 − 9.5 − 4.3 + 1.0 + 0.5 − 0.2          Mar 
− − 0.2 − 0.1 − 7.9 + 5.4 − 13.3 − 0.0 − 0.1 + 17.9 + 15.9 + 3.0 − 2.1 + 1.0 − 0.1          Apr 
− − 0.0 − 1.5 − 19.6 − 12.2 − 7.4 + 0.0 + 0.1 + 28.3 − 1.4 + 30.1 − 2.4 + 1.9 − 0.1          May− − 0.1 − 2.0 − 5.5 + 0.3 − 5.7 + 0.0 + 0.0 + 4.0 − 2.0 + 7.0 − 2.1 + 1.0 − 0.3          June
− − 0.3 + 0.1 − 3.8 + 2.6 − 6.4 + 0.0 − 0.3 − 4.4 + 6.6 − 10.6 − 1.2 + 0.8 − 0.1          July
− + 0.0 + 0.2 + 11.4 + 1.1 + 10.3 − + 0.1 + 31.0 + 8.5 + 23.4 − 1.6 + 0.7 + 0.1          Aug − − − 0.0 + 12.6 + 9.7 + 2.8 − 0.0 + 0.1 + 18.7 + 11.8 + 8.4 − 1.5 + 0.0 − 0.1          Sep 
− − 0.2 + 0.1 − 12.9 − 0.5 − 12.4 − 0.0 − 0.1 + 0.7 + 9.6 − 9.2 − 0.4 + 0.8 + 0.0          Oct 
− + 0.0 − 0.2 + 14.5 + 3.6 + 10.8 − 0.0 + 0.3 + 27.5 + 26.8 + 1.1 − 1.1 + 0.7 − 0.0          Nov − + 0.1 − 0.3 + 33.0 − 21.3 + 54.3 − 0.0 + 0.2 − 6.2 − 19.8 + 8.4 + 4.6 + 0.5 − 0.2          Dec 
− − 1.0 − 0.8 + 10.9 + 22.3 − 11.3 + 0.0 − 0.7 − 10.4 + 12.9 − 23.4 + 1.1 − 1.0 − 0.7 2012          Jan 
− − 0.3 − 0.5 + 11.1 + 3.9 + 7.3 − 0.0 − 0.2 + 18.1 + 5.9 + 10.3 + 2.6 − 0.7 − 0.2          Feb − − 0.3 − 1.6 − 0.2 − 5.1 + 4.9 − 0.0 + 0.1 − 5.4 + 1.9 − 6.5 − 0.4 − 0.3 − 0.2          Mar 
− + 0.5 − 0.2 − 7.1 + 0.2 − 7.3 + 0.0 + 0.4 + 20.4 + 9.0 + 13.5 − 1.5 − 0.5 + 0.2          Apr 
− + 0.0 − 0.8 − 3.3 + 2.8 − 6.1 + 0.0 + 0.8 + 20.2 + 19.2 + 2.4 − 0.8 − 0.5 − 0.0          May− − 0.2 + 0.2 − 11.8 − 3.7 − 8.1 − − 0.1 + 13.1 + 16.9 − 2.0 − 1.1 − 0.7 − 0.3          June
with the Bundesbank. 5Own acceptances and promissory notes outstanding. 6Since savings and loan contracts (see also footnote 8). 8Including liabilities arising from
the inclusion of building and loan associations in January 1999, including deposits non-negotiable bearer debt securities. 
under savings and loan contracts (see Table IV.12). 7Excluding deposits under

Deutsche Bundesbank
28  Monthly Report
August 2012
IV Banks
 
4 Assets and liabilities of banks (MFIs) in Germany vis-à-vis non-residents *
 
 
€ billion
Lending to foreign banks (MFIs) Lending to foreign non-banks (non-MFIs)
Treasury
Cash in bills and
hand Loans and bills negotiable Credit balances and loans, bills Negotiable
(non- money money
euro-area Medium market Memo Medium market
banknotes and paper item and paper Securities Securities
and Short- long- issued by issued by Fiduciary Short- long- issued by issued by
Period coins) Total Total term term banks banks loans Total Total term term non-banks non-banks
End of year or month *
 
2002 0.3 690.6 615.3 468.0 147.2 0.9 74.4 2.7 558.8 332.6 92.6 240.0 9.3 216.9
2003 0.3 769.6 675.8 515.7 160.1 1.5 92.3 1.6 576.3 344.8 110.9 233.9 6.0 225.4
2004 0.2 889.4 760.2 606.5 153.7 2.8 126.3 1.5 629.5 362.5 136.6 225.9 10.9 256.1
2005 0.2 1,038.8 860.0 648.5 211.5 5.8 173.0 1.5 712.0 387.9 132.8 255.1 9.3 314.8
2006 0.4 1,266.9 1,003.2 744.5 258.7 13.3 250.4 0.8 777.0 421.0 156.0 264.9 7.2 348.9
2007 0.3 1,433.5 1,105.9 803.6 302.4 13.4 314.2 0.5 908.3 492.9 197.5 295.4 27.5 387.9
2008 0.3 1,446.6 1,131.6 767.2 364.3 15.6 299.5 1.9 908.4 528.9 151.4 377.5 12.9 366.6
2009 0.3 1,277.4 986.1 643.5 342.6 6.2 285.0 2.9 815.7 469.6 116.9 352.7 9.8 336.3
2010 0.5 1,154.1 892.7 607.7 285.1 2.1 259.3 1.8 773.8 461.4 112.6 348.8 10.1 302.3
2011 0.6 1,117.6 871.0 566.3 304.8 4.6 241.9 2.6 744.4 455.8 102.0 353.8 8.5 280.1
2011          Jan 0.5 1,151.1 888.7 609.2 279.5 2.8 259.6 1.8 774.8 458.0 114.9 343.2 13.9 302.9
         Feb 0.9 1,157.9 894.3 612.9 281.5 2.0 261.5 1.8 773.2 460.3 118.3 342.1 12.9 300.0
         Mar 0.5 1,108.8 848.0 571.0 277.0 2.0 258.7 1.8 757.3 446.7 110.0 336.7 13.7 296.9
         Apr 0.5 1,150.6 890.7 615.6 275.1 4.5 255.3 1.8 770.2 459.8 129.8 330.1 15.2 295.1
         May 0.8 1,161.7 895.0 618.3 276.8 6.0 260.7 1.8 779.4 466.3 132.2 334.0 17.5 295.7
         June 0.9 1,121.8 858.3 581.3 277.0 5.8 257.6 1.8 764.6 454.2 122.1 332.1 15.2 295.1
         July 0.7 1,119.9 860.5 578.8 281.7 6.5 252.9 1.8 769.4 463.0 122.5 340.5 17.1 289.4
         Aug 0.7 1,154.4 895.5 608.5 287.0 5.4 253.5 1.8 768.4 468.0 130.3 337.7 19.9 280.4
         Sep 0.8 1,158.8 901.8 608.3 293.5 5.8 251.1 1.8 767.1 472.2 127.5 344.8 17.5 277.4
         Oct 0.7 1,132.7 880.4 587.7 292.7 6.5 245.8 1.8 746.0 453.2 113.3 339.9 19.9 272.9
         Nov 0.7 1,139.9 888.9 593.7 295.2 7.0 244.1 1.8 746.2 459.9 114.6 345.3 10.9 275.4
         Dec 0.6 1,117.6 871.0 566.3 304.8 4.6 241.9 2.6 744.4 455.8 102.0 353.8 8.5 280.1
2012          Jan 0.7 1,141.0 892.7 595.1 297.6 5.9 242.3 2.6 739.1 454.4 101.4 353.0 11.2 273.5
         Feb 0.8 1,136.0 890.0 599.6 290.4 6.3 239.8 2.6 729.2 449.1 99.6 349.5 10.0 270.1
         Mar 0.9 1,114.2 867.7 579.8 287.9 6.4 240.0 2.6 747.1 463.8 116.4 347.4 10.6 272.8
         Apr 0.7 1,119.5 876.5 588.8 287.8 6.4 236.6 2.6 750.1 470.0 122.6 347.4 9.0 271.1
         May 0.7 1,129.6 886.9 596.5 290.4 7.5 235.3 2.6 757.0 475.2 119.8 355.4 9.3 272.6
         June 0.8 1,090.3 853.7 566.5 287.2 7.1 229.5 2.6 740.2 461.4 109.6 351.7 7.5 271.3
Changes *
2003 − 0.1 + 103.8 + 84.6 + 65.2 + 19.3 + 0.6 + 18.7 − 0.4 + 46.3 + 35.1 + 24.0 + 11.0 − 2.7 + 13.9
2004 − 0.1 + 128.3 + 89.4 + 95.3 − 5.9 + 1.3 + 37.6 − 0.1 + 65.8 + 29.5 + 31.7 − 2.2 + 5.1 + 31.1
2005 + 0.0 + 127.3 + 78.9 + 26.3 + 52.6 + 2.9 + 45.4 − 0.0 + 59.4 + 7.3 − 9.4 + 16.7 − 1.8 + 54.0
2006 + 0.1 + 238.3 + 153.5 + 109.7 + 43.8 + 7.5 + 77.2 − 0.7 + 81.4 + 51.6 + 25.9 + 25.8 − 1.8 + 31.5
2007 − 0.0 + 190.3 + 123.7 + 72.9 + 50.8 + 7.5 + 59.1 − 0.4 + 167.7 + 94.3 + 50.1 + 44.2 + 20.1 + 53.3
2008 + 0.0 + 8.5 + 20.2 − 43.0 + 63.2 + 2.1 − 13.7 − 0.0 + 4.3 + 45.1 − 31.9 + 77.0 − 14.5 − 26.3
2009 − 0.0 − 170.0 − 141.3 − 122.5 − 18.8 − 10.3 − 18.4 − 0.2 − 72.8 − 43.8 − 31.7 − 12.1 − 3.3 − 25.7
2010 + 0.1 − 141.5 − 116.2 − 47.3 − 68.9 − 4.8 − 20.4 − 0.2 − 62.0 − 24.5 − 12.6 − 11.9 + 0.4 − 38.0
2011 + 0.1 − 48.4 − 32.6 − 45.3 + 12.7 + 2.5 − 18.4 + 0.0 − 38.9 − 13.6 − 12.8 − 0.9 − 1.6 − 23.6
2011          Jan + 0.0 + 2.9 + 1.6 + 4.5 − 2.9 + 0.7 + 0.5 + 0.0 + 6.3 + 1.0 + 3.2 − 2.2 + 3.8 + 1.5
         Feb + 0.4 + 8.2 + 7.0 + 4.4 + 2.6 − 0.8 + 2.0 − 0.0 − 0.1 + 3.5 + 3.7 − 0.2 − 1.0 − 2.6
         Mar − 0.4 − 42.7 − 39.6 − 38.3 − 1.4 + 0.0 − 3.2 − 0.0 − 9.6 − 8.5 − 7.1 − 1.4 + 0.9 − 2.0
         Apr + 0.0 + 50.1 + 50.6 + 48.9 + 1.7 + 2.5 − 3.0 − 0.0 + 20.8 + 19.7 + 21.2 − 1.5 + 1.5 − 0.4
         May + 0.4 + 2.8 − 3.7 − 1.7 − 2.0 + 1.5 + 5.0 − 0.0 + 2.0 + 0.4 + 0.9 − 0.5 + 2.3 − 0.7         June + 0.0 − 38.4 − 35.2 − 36.2 + 0.9 − 0.2 − 3.0 + 0.0 − 13.2 − 10.8 − 9.8 − 1.0 − 2.2 − 0.2
         July − 0.1 − 7.3 − 3.0 − 5.1 + 2.1 + 0.7 − 5.0 + 0.0 + 0.4 + 5.3 − 0.4 + 5.6 + 1.9 − 6.8
         Aug − 0.1 + 30.7 + 31.1 + 28.5 + 2.7 − 1.1 + 0.7 + 0.0 + 1.8 + 7.4 + 8.2 − 0.8 + 2.8 − 8.4
         Sep + 0.1 − 9.8 − 7.3 − 8.0 + 0.7 + 0.5 − 3.0 − − 13.3 − 5.7 − 5.1 − 0.6 − 2.5 − 5.1
         Oct − 0.1 − 17.9 − 13.5 − 16.1 + 2.6 + 0.7 − 5.1 − 0.0 − 14.3 − 13.5 − 13.1 − 0.5 + 2.4 − 3.2
         Nov + 0.0 − 2.5 − 0.9 + 0.8 − 1.7 + 0.4 − 2.1 + 0.0 − 8.0 − 0.1 − 0.3 + 0.2 − 9.0 + 1.1
         Dec − 0.1 − 24.5 − 19.8 − 27.1 + 7.2 − 2.4 − 2.3 + 0.0 − 11.5 − 12.3 − 14.1 + 1.8 − 2.4 + 3.2
2012          Jan + 0.1 + 27.0 + 25.1 + 29.4 − 4.3 + 1.3 + 0.5 − 0.0 − 2.2 + 1.2 + 0.6 + 0.6 + 2.8 − 6.1
         Feb + 0.1 + 0.1 + 2.1 + 7.1 − 5.0 + 0.3 − 2.4 − 0.0 − 5.6 − 1.8 − 1.0 − 0.8 − 1.2 − 2.6
         Mar + 0.1 − 23.0 − 23.6 − 20.4 − 3.2 + 0.2 + 0.5 − 0.0 + 16.2 + 13.5 + 16.4 − 2.9 + 0.5 + 2.1
         Apr − 0.1 + 2.2 + 5.6 + 7.2 − 1.7 − 0.0 − 3.4 − 0.0 − 0.0 + 3.9 + 6.1 − 2.2 − 1.5 − 2.4
         May − 0.0 − 3.6 − 3.0 + 0.7 − 3.7 + 1.1 − 1.7 + 0.0 − 6.1 − 5.8 − 5.7 − 0.1 + 0.2 − 0.6         June + 0.1 − 39.5 − 33.6 − 32.1 − 1.6 − 0.4 − 5.5 + 0.0 − 10.0 − 7.2 − 5.4 − 1.8 − 1.8 − 0.9
*See Table IV.2, footnote*; statistical breaks have been eliminated from the changes.   
The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as provisional. Subsequent   
revisions, which appear in the following Monthly Report, are not specially marked.      
  

Deutsche Bundesbank
29  Monthly Report
August 2012
IV Banks
 
   
 
 Deposits of foreign banks (MFIs) Deposits of foreign non-banks (non-MFIs) Partici- Time deposits (including
pating Time deposits (including bank savings deposits and bank
interests savings bonds) savings bonds)in foreign
Memo banks Medium Memo Medium Memo
item and and item and item
Fiduciary enter- Sight Short- long- Fiduciary Sight Short- long- Fiduciaryloans prises Total deposits Total term term loans Total deposits Total term term loans   Period
End of year or month *
 
15.6 44.8 614.2 101.6 512.7 410.4 102.3 1.1 319.2 33.5 285.7 87.0 198.7 4.5 2002
11.6 41.4 590.7 95.1 495.6 387.7 107.9 0.4 307.3 32.2 275.1 102.4 172.7 3.6 2003
9.8 39.3 603.3 87.0 516.2 403.2 113.0 0.5 311.2 36.6 274.7 123.4 151.2 0.8 2004
10.6 37.2 651.7 102.9 548.8 420.4 128.4 0.6 316.4 62.0 254.4 119.4 135.0 1.2 2005
5.8 50.4 689.7 168.1 521.6 397.3 124.3 0.4 310.1 82.1 228.0 111.5 116.5 1.5 20065.7 48.3 738.9 164.7 574.1 461.2 113.0 0.2 303.1 76.0 227.1 122.3 104.8 3.1 2007
25.5 45.1 703.3 218.1 485.1 362.3 122.9 0.3 286.1 92.2 193.9 95.1 98.8 2.5 200832.1 45.4 652.6 213.6 439.0 307.4 131.6 0.2 216.3 78.1 138.2 73.7 64.5 1.9 2009
15.6 48.8 741.7 258.7 483.0 349.3 133.6 0.1 226.5 84.8 141.7 76.7 64.9 1.5 2010
32.9 45.0 655.7 242.6 413.1 289.4 123.7 0.1 224.8 92.3 132.5 66.9 65.5 1.3 2011
15.6 51.0 738.6 284.0 454.6 321.6 133.0 0.1 245.0 110.5 134.5 70.3 64.2 1.5 2011          Jan 
15.6 50.0 735.9 282.3 453.7 321.0 132.7 0.1 244.5 110.1 134.3 72.2 62.1 1.5          Feb 15.6 50.2 695.8 253.9 441.9 310.5 131.4 0.1 219.8 90.3 129.4 68.6 60.8 1.5          Mar 
15.5 50.2 725.6 265.7 459.8 329.8 130.0 0.1 232.6 105.7 126.9 68.0 58.9 1.5          Apr 
15.5 50.2 707.7 273.4 434.3 303.4 130.9 0.1 235.5 109.8 125.7 66.2 59.4 1.4          May15.4 49.7 653.1 253.2 399.9 274.1 125.7 0.1 229.5 102.4 127.0 66.5 60.5 1.5          June
15.3 49.0 656.1 248.3 407.8 279.8 128.0 0.1 229.5 102.8 126.7 66.2 60.5 1.5          July
15.4 48.8 705.7 256.5 449.2 321.1 128.1 0.1 232.9 101.9 131.0 66.0 65.0 1.4          Aug 15.5 48.9 745.9 304.7 441.1 312.8 128.4 0.1 242.0 110.6 131.4 65.9 65.5 1.4          Sep 
15.5 48.9 745.4 303.7 441.8 319.3 122.5 0.1 248.6 116.6 132.0 67.4 64.7 1.4          Oct 
15.7 49.8 762.5 330.3 432.2 308.3 123.9 0.1 241.8 111.1 130.7 65.7 64.9 1.3          Nov 32.9 45.0 655.7 242.6 413.1 289.4 123.7 0.1 224.8 92.3 132.5 66.9 65.5 1.3          Dec 
32.6 47.6 813.6 327.1 486.5 363.7 122.8 0.1 232.7 103.1 129.6 64.7 64.9 1.3 2012          Jan 
32.3 47.4 828.4 357.6 470.8 348.3 122.5 0.1 232.3 106.2 126.1 62.1 64.0 1.3          Feb 32.3 47.5 884.3 368.3 516.0 388.5 127.6 0.1 239.9 114.6 125.2 63.1 62.2 1.2          Mar 
32.4 46.7 905.9 364.8 541.1 416.2 124.9 0.1 245.3 115.3 130.0 67.9 62.1 1.2          Apr 
33.1 47.9 890.3 410.3 480.0 353.8 126.2 0.1 245.3 115.1 130.1 67.6 62.5 1.2          May32.7 48.0 847.4 359.3 488.0 364.5 123.5 0.1 236.9 109.6 127.3 65.2 62.2 1.1          June
Changes *
− 0.7 − 1.9 + 5.7 − 2.0 + 7.7 − 2.4 + 10.0 − 0.0 + 4.5 + 0.4 + 4.1 + 20.6 − 16.5 + 1.9 2003+ 0.7 − 1.5 + 19.8 − 6.1 + 25.9 + 21.1 + 4.8 + 0.1 + 13.0 + 5.4 + 7.6 + 22.8 − 15.2 − 0.3 2004
+ 0.8 − 3.5 + 28.6 + 12.6 + 16.0 + 4.9 + 11.1 + 0.1 − 4.9 + 23.9 − 28.8 − 7.7 − 21.1 + 0.4 2005
− 5.1 + 13.8 + 56.2 + 68.3 − 12.1 − 13.7 + 1.6 − 0.2 − 0.8 + 21.2 − 22.0 − 5.1 − 17.0 − 0.2 2006− 0.1 − 0.8 + 67.3 + 1.5 + 65.8 + 74.0 − 8.3 − 0.1 + 4.6 − 5.5 + 10.2 + 16.6 − 6.4 + 1.6 2007+ 0.7 − 3.1 − 50.1 + 52.2 − 102.3 − 120.7 + 18.5 + 0.1 − 12.4 + 16.1 − 28.5 − 19.4 − 9.1 − 0.6 2008− 3.2 + 0.1 − 81.4 − 2.1 − 79.3 − 57.5 − 21.7 − 0.2 − 33.5 − 13.3 − 20.1 − 17.0 − 3.1 − 0.6 2009
+ 0.2 + 1.4 + 79.6 + 42.0 + 37.5 + 38.1 − 0.6 − 0.1 − 2.7 + 6.0 − 8.7 − 3.3 − 5.5 − 0.4 2010
− 0.1 − 3.9 − 88.8 − 13.8 − 75.0 − 61.8 − 13.1 − 0.0 − 9.3 + 6.4 − 15.6 − 10.4 − 5.3 − 0.2 2011
− 0.1 + 2.3 + 1.0 + 26.4 − 25.5 − 25.6 + 0.1 − 0.0 + 19.7 + 26.0 − 6.4 − 5.9 − 0.5 − 0.0 2011          Jan 
+ 0.0 − 1.0 − 1.1 − 1.2 + 0.1 + 0.3 − 0.2 − 0.0 − 0.1 − 0.2 + 0.1 + 2.0 − 1.9 + 0.0          Feb − 0.0 + 0.2 − 35.5 − 26.7 − 8.8 − 8.4 − 0.3 − 0.0 − 23.2 − 19.2 − 4.0 − 3.1 − 0.9 − 0.0          Mar 
− 0.0 + 0.1 + 35.9 + 14.0 + 21.8 + 23.5 − 1.7 − + 14.6 + 16.1 − 1.5 − 0.0 − 1.4 + 0.0          Apr 
+ 0.0 − 0.1 − 23.3 + 5.8 − 29.0 − 28.9 − 0.1 − 0.0 + 1.1 + 3.3 − 2.3 − 2.4 + 0.1 − 0.0          May− 0.1 − 0.4 − 53.5 − 19.8 − 33.7 − 28.9 − 4.8 − 0.0 − 5.7 − 7.2 + 1.5 + 0.4 + 1.2 + 0.1          June
− 0.1 − 0.8 − 0.1 − 5.9 + 5.9 + 4.3 + 1.6 + 0.0 − 0.9 + 0.0 − 0.9 − 0.7 − 0.3 − 0.1          July
+ 0.1 − 0.1 + 49.0 + 8.7 + 40.3 + 39.8 + 0.6 − 0.0 − 1.4 − 0.7 − 0.7 − 0.0 − 0.7 − 0.1          Aug + 0.1 − 0.1 + 30.9 + 45.0 − 14.0 − 12.4 − 1.6 − 0.0 + 6.2 + 7.5 − 1.3 − 1.0 − 0.3 + 0.0          Sep 
+ 0.0 + 0.1 + 4.8 + 0.8 + 4.0 + 8.8 − 4.9 − + 8.3 + 6.7 + 1.6 + 1.9 − 0.3 − 0.1          Oct 
+ 0.2 + 0.7 + 10.7 + 24.3 − 13.6 − 13.7 + 0.2 − − 8.9 − 6.4 − 2.6 − 2.3 − 0.3 − 0.0          Nov − 0.2 − 4.9 − 107.6 − 85.1 − 22.6 − 20.6 − 1.9 − 0.0 − 18.7 − 19.5 + 0.8 + 0.6 + 0.1 − 0.0          Dec 
− 0.3 + 2.6 + 159.9 + 87.4 + 72.6 + 73.0 − 0.4 − + 8.7 + 11.1 − 2.4 − 2.0 − 0.4 + 0.0 2012          Jan 
− 0.2 − 0.0 + 17.9 + 31.6 − 13.7 − 14.1 + 0.4 − 0.0 + 0.5 + 3.4 − 2.9 − 2.3 − 0.6 − 0.0          Feb + 0.0 + 0.0 + 55.6 + 10.3 + 45.3 + 40.5 + 4.8 − 0.0 + 7.3 + 8.3 − 1.0 + 0.9 − 1.9 − 0.1          Mar 
+ 0.1 − 0.8 + 19.5 − 3.9 + 23.4 + 26.6 − 3.1 − + 4.8 + 0.4 + 4.4 + 4.6 − 0.2 − 0.0          Apr 
+ 0.7 + 1.0 − 25.4 + 42.3 − 67.7 − 67.1 − 0.6 − 0.0 − 3.4 − 1.7 − 1.7 − 1.2 − 0.4 + 0.0          May− 0.4 + 0.2 − 40.6 − 49.3 + 8.8 + 11.0 − 2.3 − 0.0 − 7.6 − 5.2 − 2.4 − 2.2 − 0.2 − 0.1          June

Deutsche Bundesbank
30  Monthly Report
August 2012
IV Banks
 
5 Lending by banks (MFIs) in Germany to domestic non-banks (non-MFIs) *
 
 
€ billion
Lending to domestic Short-term lending Medium and long-term
non-banks, total
      to enterprises and households to general government to enter-
 
including excluding Negoti-
negotiable money able
market paper, Loans money
Period securities, and market Treasury
equalisation claims Total Total bills paper Total Loans bills Total Total
End of year or month *
 
2002 2,997.2 2,689.1 365.4 331.9 331.0 1.0 33.5 31.1 2.4 2,631.8 2,079.7
2003 2,995.6 2,680.6 355.2 315.0 313.4 1.6 40.2 38.4 1.8 2,640.4 2,096.1
2004 3,001.3 2,646.7 320.9 283.8 283.0 0.8 37.1 35.3 1.8 2,680.4 2,114.2
2005 2,995.1 2,635.1 309.7 273.5 272.9 0.6 36.2 34.4 1.8 2,685.4 2,141.3
2006 3,000.7 2,632.2 303.1 269.8 269.3 0.6 33.3 31.9 1.4 2,697.6 2,181.8
2007 2,975.7 2,649.5 331.2 301.8 301.5 0.3 29.4 28.2 1.2 2,644.6 2,168.3
2008 3,071.1 2,700.1 373.0 337.5 335.3 2.2 35.5 34.5 1.0 2,698.1 2,257.8
2009 3,100.1 2,692.6 347.3 306.3 306.2 0.1 41.0 37.1 3.9 2,752.8 2,299.7
2010 3,220.9 2,771.3 428.0 283.0 282.8 0.2 145.0 117.2 27.7 2,793.0 2,305.6
2011 3,197.8 2,775.4 383.3 316.5 316.1 0.4 66.8 60.7 6.0 2,814.5 2,321.9
2011          Jan 3,241.2 2,778.4 440.2 290.4 290.2 0.2 149.8 120.8 29.0 2,801.1 2,314.1
         Feb 3,240.3 2,787.6 446.4 308.5 308.2 0.3 137.9 108.8 29.1 2,794.0 2,309.0
         Mar 3,211.7 2,758.1 415.7 292.7 292.4 0.3 123.1 98.7 24.4 2,796.0 2,307.8
         Apr 3,226.5 2,749.3 409.8 295.8 295.5 0.4 114.0 88.8 25.2 2,816.7 2,328.1
         May 3,209.4 2,754.3 405.8 305.2 304.8 0.4 100.6 77.2 23.3 2,803.6 2,311.3
         June 3,191.7 2,749.4 404.1 307.1 306.6 0.5 97.0 75.9 21.1 2,787.6 2,298.0
         July 3,193.1 2,753.6 399.4 305.8 305.4 0.4 93.6 75.3 18.4 2,793.7 2,303.9
         Aug 3,201.3 2,768.5 399.9 318.2 317.8 0.5 81.7 65.5 16.2 2,801.4 2,311.9
         Sep 3,207.6 2,778.8 406.2 326.3 325.8 0.5 79.9 65.9 14.0 2,801.4 2,311.2
         Oct 3,233.3 2,806.6 433.2 355.4 354.7 0.7 77.8 62.8 15.0 2,800.1 2,311.3
         Nov 3,237.6 2,808.2 424.2 352.0 351.4 0.6 72.2 58.4 13.8 2,813.4 2,319.9
         Dec 3,197.8 2,775.4 383.3 316.5 316.1 0.4 66.8 60.7 6.0 2,814.5 2,321.9
2012          Jan 3,226.6 2,800.6 409.1 339.2 338.7 0.6 69.8 65.5 4.4 2,817.6 2,320.7
         Feb 3,220.3 2,798.2 406.9 338.2 337.4 0.8 68.7 63.8 4.9 2,813.4 2,315.9
         Mar 3,222.9 2,787.6 396.8 329.5 328.6 0.9 67.3 63.3 4.0 2,826.1 2,325.3
         Apr 3,244.7 2,796.1 402.9 329.6 328.7 0.9 73.3 68.5 4.8 2,841.8 2,341.9
         May 3,219.1 2,793.9 393.6 325.6 324.4 1.2 68.0 64.6 3.3 2,825.5 2,328.8
         June 3,227.6 2,802.6 404.9 324.4 323.9 0.5 80.5 74.9 5.6 2,822.7 2,300.2
Changes *
2003 + 0.1 − 8.4 − 10.0 − 16.7 − 17.5 + 0.9 + 6.7 + 7.3 − 0.6 + 10.1 + 16.0
2004 + 3.3 − 36.0 − 31.7 − 30.5 − 29.7 − 0.8 − 1.2 − 3.2 + 1.9 + 35.0 + 15.6
2005 − 6.7 − 12.1 − 11.5 − 10.6 − 10.4 − 0.2 − 0.9 − 0.9 + 0.0 + 4.8 + 26.8
2006 − 12.4 − 20.8 − 7.1 − 4.5 − 4.4 − 0.0 − 2.7 − 2.3 − 0.4 − 5.2 + 23.6
2007 − 15.9 + 11.8 + 27.6 + 31.5 + 31.7 − 0.2 − 3.9 − 3.7 − 0.3 − 43.5 − 7.1
2008 + 92.0 + 46.9 + 43.1 + 36.8 + 34.9 + 1.8 + 6.3 + 6.3 − 0.0 + 48.9 + 83.4
2009 + 25.7 − 11.6 − 26.1 − 31.5 − 30.0 − 1.5 + 5.5 + 2.5 + 2.9 + 51.8 + 36.6
2010 + 130.5 + 78.7 + 80.4 − 23.4 − 23.5 + 0.1 + 103.8 + 80.1 + 23.7 + 50.1 + 14.9
2011 − 30.6 − 3.2 − 45.2 + 33.6 + 33.3 + 0.2 − 78.7 − 57.0 − 21.7 + 14.6 + 9.4
2011          Jan + 20.3 + 7.2 + 12.2 + 7.3 + 7.3 + 0.0 + 4.8 + 3.5 + 1.3 + 8.1 + 8.5
         Feb − 0.9 + 9.1 + 6.2 + 18.6 + 18.6 + 0.1 − 12.4 − 12.5 + 0.1 − 7.1 − 5.1
         Mar − 28.6 − 29.5 − 30.7 − 15.9 − 15.9 + 0.0 − 14.8 − 10.1 − 4.8 + 2.1 − 1.2
         Apr + 14.8 − 8.8 − 5.9 + 3.2 + 3.1 + 0.1 − 9.1 − 9.9 + 0.8 + 20.7 + 20.3
         May − 17.1 + 5.0 − 4.1 + 9.3 + 9.3 − − 13.4 − 11.6 − 1.9 − 13.1 − 16.8
         June − 17.5 − 4.7 − 1.4 + 2.1 + 2.0 + 0.1 − 3.6 − 1.3 − 2.3 − 16.1 − 13.3
         July + 1.4 + 4.2 − 4.7 − 1.3 − 1.2 − 0.1 − 3.4 − 0.6 − 2.7 + 6.1 + 5.9
         Aug + 0.7 + 7.3 + 0.3 + 12.4 + 12.3 + 0.1 − 12.0 − 9.8 − 2.2 + 0.3 + 0.5
         Sep + 6.3 + 10.3 + 6.3 + 8.0 + 8.0 + 0.0 − 1.7 + 0.5 − 2.2 − 0.0 − 0.7
         Oct + 25.7 + 27.8 + 26.6 + 28.7 + 28.5 + 0.2 − 2.1 − 3.1 + 1.0 − 0.9 + 0.5
         Nov + 4.3 + 1.5 − 9.0 − 3.4 − 3.3 − 0.1 − 5.6 − 4.4 − 1.2 + 13.3 + 8.6
         Dec − 39.9 − 32.7 − 41.0 − 35.6 − 35.4 − 0.2 − 5.4 + 2.4 − 7.8 + 1.2 + 2.1
2012          Jan + 29.0 + 25.2 + 25.8 + 22.7 + 22.6 + 0.2 + 3.1 + 4.7 − 1.7 + 3.2 − 1.1
         Feb − 6.4 − 2.4 − 2.2 − 1.1 − 1.2 + 0.2 − 1.1 − 1.7 + 0.5 − 4.2 − 4.8
         Mar + 2.7 − 10.6 − 10.1 − 8.7 − 8.8 + 0.1 − 1.4 − 0.6 − 0.9 + 12.8 + 9.4
         Apr + 18.6 + 5.3 + 3.4 − 2.6 − 2.6 − 0.0 + 6.0 + 5.2 + 0.8 + 15.2 + 16.3
         May − 25.6 − 2.3 − 8.9 − 3.6 − 3.9 + 0.3 − 5.3 − 3.8 − 1.5 − 16.7 − 13.5
         June + 10.2 + 10.4 + 11.4 − 1.1 − 0.5 − 0.7 + 12.5 + 10.3 + 2.2 − 1.2 − 6.9
*See Table IV.2, footnote*; statistical breaks have been eliminated from the changes. marked. 1Excluding debt securities arising from the exchange of equalisation claims
The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as provisional. Subsequent (see also footnote 2). 2Including debt securities arising from the exchange of
revisions, which appear in the following Monthly Report, are not specially equalisation claims. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
31  Monthly Report
August 2012
IV Banks
 
   
 
lending
prises and households to general governmentLoans Loans
Memo Memo
item Equal- item
Medium- Long- Fiduciary Medium- Long- Secur- isation Fiduciary
Total term term loans Total Total term term ities 
1 claims 2 loans   Period Securities
End of year or month *
 
1,909.8 193.5 1,716.3 169.9 47.3 552.1 417.1 27.4 389.7 132.0 3.0 7.5 2002
1,927.7 195.0 1,732.8 168.3 49.9 544.3 401.0 34.6 366.4 141.3 2.0 7.0 20031,940.8 194.3 1,746.5 173.5 55.3 566.1 387.7 32.9 354.8 177.5 1.0 6.5 2004
1,953.4 194.7 1,758.8 187.9 52.1 544.1 374.4 32.9 341.4 169.7 − 4.5 2005
1,972.7 194.5 1,778.1 209.1 48.2 515.8 358.4 31.7 326.6 157.4 − 4.8 2006
1,987.3 207.7 1,779.6 181.1 46.5 476.2 332.5 31.9 300.6 143.7 − 4.7 2007
2,022.0 222.0 1,800.0 235.8 42.8 440.3 308.2 29.7 278.5 132.1 − 4.5 2008
2,051.3 242.7 1,808.6 248.4 39.6 453.1 298.0 32.2 265.8 155.1 − 4.3 2009
2,070.0 238.1 1,831.8 235.7 30.7 487.3 301.2 36.1 265.1 186.1 − 3.1 2010
2,099.5 247.9 1,851.7 222.4 32.7 492.6 299.1 41.1 258.0 193.5 − 3.6 2011
2,066.5 237.0 1,829.6 247.6 30.5 486.9 301.0 37.2 263.8 186.0 − 3.0 2011          Jan 
2,069.2 236.8 1,832.5 239.8 30.5 485.0 301.3 37.9 263.4 183.6 − 3.0          Feb 
2,066.3 238.6 1,827.6 241.5 30.3 488.2 300.7 38.2 262.5 187.5 − 3.0          Mar 
2,065.4 236.2 1,829.2 262.7 30.1 488.6 299.6 38.6 261.1 189.0 − 3.0          Apr 
2,071.7 237.7 1,833.9 239.6 30.1 492.3 300.6 38.8 261.8 191.7 − 3.0          May2,068.2 234.6 1,833.6 229.8 30.0 489.5 298.7 39.0 259.7 190.9 − 2.9          June
2,073.7 235.8 1,838.0 230.2 29.7 489.7 299.2 39.7 259.5 190.5 − 2.9          July
2,085.5 244.8 1,840.8 226.4 29.8 489.5 299.7 40.0 259.8 189.8 − 2.9          Aug 2,087.9 245.2 1,842.7 223.3 29.8 490.1 299.2 39.8 259.4 190.9 − 2.9          Sep 
2,090.6 245.9 1,844.8 220.7 29.6 488.8 298.5 40.6 257.9 190.3 − 2.9          Oct 
2,098.6 246.8 1,851.9 221.2 29.6 493.6 299.8 40.7 259.1 193.8 − 2.9          Nov 2,099.5 247.9 1,851.7 222.4 32.7 492.6 299.1 41.1 258.0 193.5 − 3.6          Dec 
2,098.4 246.8 1,851.6 222.3 31.8 496.9 298.1 40.9 257.2 198.8 − 3.5 2012          Jan 
2,099.5 245.9 1,853.7 216.4 31.6 497.4 297.5 41.1 256.4 200.0 − 3.5          Feb 2,099.2 246.4 1,852.7 226.1 31.3 500.9 296.6 40.9 255.8 204.2 − 3.5          Mar 
2,102.2 247.1 1,855.1 239.7 31.7 499.9 296.8 40.6 256.2 203.1 − 3.6          Apr 
2,109.6 248.6 1,861.1 219.2 31.7 496.7 295.2 40.1 255.1 201.5 − 3.6          May2,108.5 248.3 1,860.1 191.8 31.5 522.4 295.3 39.8 255.5 227.1 − 3.6          June
Changes *
+ 17.9 + 0.2 + 17.8 − 1.9 + 2.6 − 5.9 − 16.1 + 4.9 − 21.0 + 11.2 − 1.0 − 0.5 2003+ 10.7 + 0.2 + 10.5 + 4.9 + 3.6 + 19.4 − 13.8 − 0.9 − 12.9 + 34.3 − 1.1 − 0.6 2004
+ 12.5 + 1.7 + 10.8 + 14.3 − 3.0 − 22.1 − 13.4 + 0.9 − 14.2 − 7.7 − 1.0 − 2.0 2005
+ 2.3 + 0.2 + 2.2 + 21.2 − 3.9 − 28.8 − 16.4 − 1.4 − 15.0 − 12.4 − + 0.3 2006+ 9.6 + 10.1 − 0.6 − 16.7 − 2.2 − 36.3 − 25.8 + 0.1 − 26.0 − 10.5 − − 0.1 2007+ 28.8 + 12.0 + 16.8 + 54.7 − 5.3 − 34.5 − 23.2 − 2.3 − 20.8 − 11.4 − − 0.1 2008+ 23.5 + 17.3 + 6.3 + 13.1 − 3.9 + 15.2 − 7.6 + 2.5 − 10.2 + 22.8 − − 0.2 2009
+ 18.6 − 4.0 + 22.6 − 3.8 − 1.7 + 35.2 + 3.5 + 3.5 − 0.0 + 31.7 − − 0.3 2010
+ 22.6 + 2.2 + 20.4 − 13.2 − 1.0 + 5.2 − 2.1 + 4.9 − 7.0 + 7.3 − − 0.2 2011
− 3.5 − 1.2 − 2.3 + 12.0 − 0.2 − 0.4 − 0.3 + 1.1 − 1.3 − 0.2 − − 0.0 2011          Jan 
+ 2.7 − 0.2 + 2.9 − 7.8 + 0.0 − 2.0 + 0.4 + 0.7 − 0.4 − 2.3 − − 0.0          Feb − 2.9 + 1.2 − 4.2 + 1.7 − 0.2 + 3.2 − 0.6 + 0.3 − 0.9 + 3.8 − − 0.0          Mar 
− 0.9 − 2.4 + 1.5 + 21.2 − 0.2 + 0.4 − 1.1 + 0.3 − 1.5 + 1.5 − − 0.0          Apr 
+ 6.3 + 1.6 + 4.6 − 23.0 − 0.0 + 3.7 + 1.0 + 0.2 + 0.8 + 2.7 − + 0.0          May− 3.4 − 3.1 − 0.3 − 9.8 − 0.1 − 2.8 − 2.0 + 0.2 − 2.1 − 0.8 − − 0.0          June
+ 5.5 + 1.1 + 4.4 + 0.4 − 0.3 + 0.2 + 0.5 + 0.7 − 0.2 − 0.4 − − 0.0          July
+ 4.3 + 1.6 + 2.8 − 3.8 + 0.1 − 0.2 + 0.5 + 0.2 + 0.3 − 0.7 − − 0.0          Aug + 2.4 + 0.4 + 1.9 − 3.0 + 0.0 + 0.6 − 0.5 − 0.2 − 0.3 + 1.1 − − 0.0          Sep 
+ 3.1 + 1.1 + 2.1 − 2.7 − 0.2 − 1.3 − 0.7 + 0.7 − 1.5 − 0.6 − + 0.0          Oct 
+ 8.0 + 0.9 + 7.1 + 0.6 + 0.0 + 4.8 + 1.3 + 0.1 + 1.2 + 3.5 − − 0.0          Nov + 1.0 + 1.1 − 0.1 + 1.2 + 0.1 − 1.0 − 0.7 + 0.4 − 1.1 − 0.3 − − 0.0          Dec 
− 1.1 − 1.1 − 0.0 + 0.1 − 0.9 + 4.3 − 1.0 − 0.2 − 0.8 + 5.3 − − 0.1 2012          Jan 
+ 1.1 − 0.9 + 2.0 − 5.9 − 0.2 + 0.6 − 0.6 + 0.2 − 0.8 + 1.2 − − 0.0          Feb − 0.4 + 0.6 − 0.9 + 9.7 − 0.2 + 3.4 − 0.8 − 0.2 − 0.6 + 4.3 − − 0.0          Mar 
+ 2.6 + 0.7 + 1.9 + 13.7 + 0.3 − 1.1 + 0.2 − 0.3 + 0.5 − 1.2 − + 0.2          Apr 
+ 7.1 + 1.2 + 5.9 − 20.6 + 0.0 − 3.2 − 1.6 − 0.4 − 1.2 − 1.6 − − 0.0          May+ 0.5 − 0.1 + 0.6 − 7.4 − 0.2 + 5.7 + 0.1 − 0.4 + 0.5 + 5.6 − − 0.0          June

Deutsche Bundesbank
32  Monthly Report
August 2012
IV Banks
 
6 Lending by banks (MFIs) in Germany to domestic enterprises and households, housing loans,
sectors of economic activity *
 
€ billion
Lending to domestic enterprises and households (excluding holdings of negotiable money market paper and excluding securities portfolios) 1 
of which  
 
Housing loans Lending to enterprises and self-employed persons
 
Whole-sale and Electricity,gas and retail Financial
Mortgage water trade; Agri- Transport- intermedi-
loans supply; repair of culture, ation and ation
secured refuse motor forestry, storage; (excluding
by disposal, vehicles fishing post and MFIs) and
Mortgage residen- Other of which mining and and telecom- insurance
loans, tial real housing Housing Manufac- and Construc- motor- aqua- munica- com-
Period Total total Total estate loans Total loans turing quarrying tion cycles culture tions panies
Lending, total End of year or quarter *
 
2010 2,352.9 1,153.8 1,101.6 907.8 193.8 1,317.2 302.4 134.1 75.5 61.7 120.3 40.3 78.8 157.5
2011          June 2,374.9 1,163.7 1,102.8 909.3 193.4 1,337.2 301.3 137.1 78.9 60.7 121.6 41.6 77.0 173.6
         Sep 2,413.7 1,166.3 1,108.3 911.8 196.5 1,367.3 302.1 134.7 81.3 60.9 125.6 42.6 79.2 196.6         Dec 2,415.7 1,167.3 1,114.0 914.0 200.0 1,368.0 305.0 134.6 84.4 59.6 124.0 42.7 80.1 196.4
2012          Mar 2,427.8 1,164.1 1,114.9 912.6 202.2 1,380.7 305.6 137.0 86.3 60.2 125.6 43.1 78.4 202.7
         June 2,432.4 1,164.7 1,118.0 912.4 205.6 1,385.2 307.6 136.8 88.6 60.6 125.4 44.2 80.3 196.1
 Short-term lending
2010 282.9 − 7.7 − 7.7 243.2 3.8 32.2 5.2 13.2 39.4 3.0 6.6 78.9
2011          June 306.7 − 7.7 − 7.7 267.0 4.0 38.1 5.8 13.5 41.5 3.7 7.1 93.9
         Sep 325.8 − 7.9 − 7.9 286.0 4.1 36.6 6.3 13.2 43.8 3.8 7.0 112.8
         Dec 316.2 − 7.7 − 7.7 276.7 3.9 33.8 6.0 11.9 41.8 3.3 7.0 111.0
2012          Mar 328.7 − 7.5 − 7.5 289.7 3.8 36.8 6.7 12.7 43.1 3.5 7.1 117.2
         June 324.0 − 7.6 − 7.6 285.0 3.8 37.5 6.8 13.3 42.8 4.0 7.4 110.4
 Medium-term lending
2010 238.1 − 32.8 − 32.8 169.1 11.4 27.5 5.2 9.2 13.4 3.9 12.9 29.0
2011          June 234.7 − 33.2 − 33.2 165.8 11.4 26.4 5.3 8.7 13.7 3.9 11.8 30.7
         Sep 245.2 − 33.6 − 33.6 173.4 11.2 26.6 5.6 9.2 15.2 4.1 11.9 34.1
         Dec 247.9 − 34.5 − 34.5 176.7 11.8 28.2 6.0 9.4 15.5 4.0 11.8 35.4
2012          Mar 246.4 − 34.8 − 34.8 175.4 11.9 27.3 6.0 9.4 15.6 4.0 11.4 35.9
         June 248.4 − 34.9 − 34.9 176.7 11.7 26.9 6.3 9.3 15.8 4.0 11.6 36.2
 Long-term lending
2010 1,831.8 1,153.8 1,061.1 907.8 153.4 904.9 287.1 74.5 65.1 39.3 67.6 33.4 59.3 49.6
2011          June 1,833.6 1,163.7 1,061.8 909.3 152.4 904.4 285.9 72.6 67.8 38.5 66.4 34.0 58.1 48.9         Sep 1,842.7 1,166.3 1,066.9 911.8 155.1 907.9 286.9 71.5 69.4 38.5 66.6 34.7 60.3 49.7         Dec 1,851.7 1,167.3 1,071.8 914.0 157.8 914.6 289.3 72.6 72.4 38.3 66.7 35.4 61.2 49.9
2012          Mar 1,852.7 1,164.1 1,072.6 912.6 159.9 915.6 289.9 73.0 73.6 38.1 66.9 35.6 59.9 49.6
         June 1,860.1 1,164.7 1,075.5 912.4 163.1 923.5 292.0 72.4 75.5 38.0 66.8 36.2 61.3 49.5
 
Lending, total Change during quarter *
 
2011          Q2 + 16.4 + 3.3 + 4.0 + 2.2 + 1.8 + 12.2 + 1.1 − 0.9 + 2.0 − 0.9 − 0.2 + 1.0 − 0.3 + 12.5         Q3 + 31.3 + 4.0 + 5.4 + 2.9 + 2.5 + 24.6 + 0.7 − 3.0 + 2.3 − 0.2 + 2.8 + 0.9 + 2.0 + 21.0         Q4 + 1.9 + 1.8 + 5.1 + 2.0 + 3.1 + 0.4 + 2.1 − 1.1 + 3.0 − 1.3 − 1.6 + 0.1 + 1.9 − 0.2
2012          Q1 + 12.1 − 1.3 + 1.1 + 0.5 + 0.6 + 11.9 + 0.9 + 2.3 + 1.9 + 0.5 + 1.6 + 0.4 − 1.6 + 6.3
         Q2 + 3.2 + 3.2 + 4.5 + 1.1 + 3.4 − 1.5 + 1.9 − 0.2 + 2.3 + 0.5 − 0.5 + 1.0 + 2.6 − 9.8
 Short-term lending
2011          Q2 + 14.4 − + 0.1 − + 0.1 + 13.7 + 0.1 + 1.3 + 0.6 − 0.2 + 0.3 + 0.4 − 0.0 + 12.1         Q3 + 19.1 − + 0.2 − + 0.2 + 18.9 + 0.1 − 1.3 + 0.5 − 0.3 + 2.3 + 0.1 − 0.1 + 18.7         Q4 − 10.2 − + 0.1 − + 0.1 − 9.3 + 0.0 − 2.8 − 0.2 − 1.3 − 2.0 − 0.5 + 0.0 − 1.8
2012          Q1 + 12.5 − − 0.2 − − 0.2 + 13.0 − 0.0 + 3.0 + 0.7 + 0.8 + 1.3 + 0.2 + 0.1 + 6.2
         Q2 − 7.0 − + 0.1 − + 0.1 − 7.2 − 0.0 + 0.9 + 0.1 + 0.7 − 0.2 + 0.5 + 0.3 − 9.9
 Medium-term lending
2011          Q2 − 3.8 − + 0.7 − + 0.7 − 4.0 + 0.2 − 1.2 − 0.1 − 0.3 + 0.0 + 0.0 − 0.5 + 0.4         Q3 + 3.1 − + 0.3 − + 0.3 + 2.1 − 0.2 − 0.6 + 0.3 + 0.1 + 0.4 + 0.2 − 0.0 + 1.7         Q4 + 3.1 − + 0.9 − + 0.9 + 3.3 + 0.6 + 1.6 + 0.3 + 0.2 + 0.3 − 0.1 − 0.1 + 1.4
2012          Q1 − 1.4 − + 0.3 − + 0.3 − 1.8 + 0.1 − 1.0 + 0.0 − 0.1 + 0.1 + 0.0 − 0.5 + 0.5
         Q2 + 1.8 − + 0.3 − + 0.3 + 0.7 − 0.1 − 0.6 + 0.3 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.0 + 0.1 + 0.3
 Long-term lending
2011          Q2 + 5.8 + 3.3 + 3.2 + 2.2 + 1.0 + 2.6 + 0.7 − 0.9 + 1.5 − 0.4 − 0.5 + 0.6 + 0.2 − 0.1         Q3 + 9.1 + 4.0 + 4.9 + 2.9 + 2.0 + 3.6 + 0.8 − 1.1 + 1.6 + 0.0 + 0.2 + 0.7 + 2.2 + 0.5         Q4 + 9.0 + 1.8 + 4.1 + 2.0 + 2.1 + 6.3 + 1.4 + 0.1 + 2.9 − 0.2 + 0.1 + 0.7 + 1.9 + 0.2
2012          Q1 + 1.1 − 1.3 + 1.1 + 0.5 + 0.5 + 0.8 + 0.9 + 0.3 + 1.2 − 0.2 + 0.2 + 0.2 − 1.3 − 0.3
         Q2 + 8.3 + 3.2 + 4.2 + 1.1 + 3.0 + 5.0 + 2.0 − 0.6 + 1.9 − 0.2 − 0.3 + 0.6 + 2.1 − 0.2
*Excluding lending by foreign
branches. Breakdown of lending by building and loan from the changes. The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as pro-
associations by areas and sectors estimated. Statistical alterations have been eliminated visional; subsequent alterations, which will appear in the following Monthly Report,

Deutsche Bundesbank
33  Monthly Report
August 2012
IV Banks
 
   
 
 
 
 Lending to
 Lending to employees and other individuals non-profit institutions
Memo items Other lending Services sector (including the professions)
of which of which
Debitbalanceson wage,
Other Lending salaryreal to self- Lending and of which
Housing Holding estate employed to craft Housing pension Housing Instalment
Total companies Total loans Total loans 
3 accounts Total loans   Period enterprises activities persons 2 enterprises
End of year or quarter * Lending, total 
 
649.0 178.5 46.8 175.8 380.4 53.5 1,022.4 795.7 226.7 155.0 13.9 13.3 3.5 2010
646.7 178.3 44.6 177.9 379.5 53.6 1,024.2 798.0 226.2 145.7 13.9 13.6 3.5 2011          June
646.5 177.9 44.5 178.4 381.8 52.8 1,033.1 802.7 230.3 149.0 14.0 13.4 3.5          Sep 646.3 180.0 42.9 177.9 382.9 51.7 1,034.3 805.6 228.7 147.8 13.5 13.4 3.5          Dec 
647.4 180.5 42.9 178.4 381.9 52.0 1,033.5 805.8 227.7 147.7 13.3 13.6 3.5 2012          Mar 
653.3 181.6 43.3 178.8 387.9 51.9 1,033.6 806.9 226.8 147.3 13.3 13.6 3.5          June
Short-term lending
64.7 9.6 11.7 13.9 32.2 7.7 38.9 3.9 35.1 2.6 13.9 0.9 0.0 2010
63.3 9.5 11.7 13.2 32.1 8.5 38.7 3.7 35.0 2.5 13.9 1.1 0.0 2011          June
62.4 9.5 11.6 13.4 31.1 8.0 38.9 3.8 35.1 2.6 14.0 1.0 0.0          Sep 61.9 9.6 11.1 13.2 30.4 7.2 38.5 3.9 34.7 2.5 13.5 0.9 0.0          Dec 
62.6 9.1 11.9 13.3 30.5 7.9 37.9 3.7 34.3 2.5 13.3 1.0 0.0 2012          Mar 
62.8 9.4 11.8 13.1 30.9 7.9 38.0 3.8 34.2 2.2 13.3 1.0 0.0          June
Medium-term lending
68.1 8.8 10.1 21.3 28.1 3.8 68.5 21.3 47.1 42.0 − 0.5 0.0 2010
65.3 8.4 8.3 21.6 28.2 3.7 68.3 21.8 46.5 41.5 − 0.5 0.0 2011          June
66.7 8.2 8.5 21.2 30.8 3.6 71.3 22.4 48.9 43.7 − 0.5 0.0          Sep 
66.3 8.1 8.4 20.4 31.2 3.6 70.6 22.7 47.9 42.8 − 0.6 0.0          Dec 
65.8 8.1 7.8 20.0 31.3 3.6 70.4 22.9 47.5 42.3 − 0.6 0.0 2012          Mar 
66.6 8.1 8.1 20.0 31.9 3.6 71.0 23.1 47.9 42.9 − 0.6 0.0          June
Long-term lending
516.2 160.2 25.0 140.6 320.1 42.0 915.0 770.5 144.5 110.4 − 11.9 3.5 2010
518.0 160.4 24.5 143.1 319.2 41.4 917.2 772.5 144.8 101.7 − 12.0 3.4 2011          June
517.3 160.3 24.4 143.8 319.8 41.2 922.9 776.6 146.3 102.7 − 11.9 3.4          Sep 
518.1 162.4 23.4 144.3 321.3 40.9 925.2 779.1 146.1 102.5 − 11.9 3.4          Dec 
519.0 163.3 23.2 145.2 320.0 40.5 925.2 779.2 145.9 102.9 − 12.0 3.5 2012          Mar 
523.9 164.1 23.4 145.7 325.0 40.5 924.6 779.9 144.7 102.2 − 12.0 3.5          June
 
Change during quarter * Lending, total 
 
− 1.0 + 1.4 − 2.5 + 0.2 + 1.3 − 0.4 + 4.1 + 2.9 + 1.1 + 0.4 + 0.1 + 0.1 − 0.0 2011          Q2− 1.3 − 0.5 − 0.2 + 0.3 − 0.1 − 0.8 + 6.8 + 4.7 + 2.1 + 1.3 + 0.2 − 0.1 − 0.0          Q3− 0.3 + 1.3 − 0.9 − 0.3 + 1.0 − 1.1 + 1.6 + 3.1 − 1.5 − 0.7 − 0.6 − 0.1 + 0.0          Q4
+ 0.5 + 0.5 − 0.0 + 0.5 − 1.0 + 0.3 − 0.0 + 0.2 − 0.2 + 0.7 − 0.1 + 0.3 + 0.1 2012          Q1
+ 2.6 + 1.1 + 0.3 − 0.0 + 1.9 − 0.1 + 4.7 + 2.7 + 2.0 + 1.5 − 0.1 − 0.0 − 0.0          Q2
Short-term lending
− 0.8 + 0.2 − 0.6 − 0.2 + 0.3 + 0.1 + 0.6 − 0.0 + 0.6 − 0.1 + 0.1 + 0.1 + 0.0 2011          Q2− 0.9 − 0.1 − 0.2 + 0.1 − 1.0 − 0.4 + 0.2 + 0.1 + 0.1 + 0.1 + 0.2 − 0.1 − 0.0          Q3− 0.6 + 0.1 − 0.6 − 0.1 − 0.7 − 0.8 − 0.9 + 0.1 − 0.9 − 0.2 − 0.6 − 0.1 −          Q4
+ 0.7 − 0.5 + 0.8 + 0.0 + 0.1 + 0.6 − 0.6 − 0.2 − 0.4 − 0.0 − 0.1 + 0.1 − 0.0 2012          Q1
+ 0.4 + 0.3 − 0.1 − 0.2 + 0.4 − 0.0 + 0.3 + 0.1 + 0.1 − 0.0 − 0.1 − 0.0 −          Q2
Medium-term lending
− 2.4 − 0.2 − 1.7 − 0.5 + 0.3 − 0.2 + 0.2 + 0.4 − 0.2 − 0.2 − + 0.0 − 0.0 2011          Q2+ 0.1 − 0.3 + 0.1 − 0.6 + 0.3 − 0.1 + 1.0 + 0.6 + 0.4 + 0.2 − + 0.0 − 0.0          Q3
− 0.4 − 0.1 − 0.1 − 0.6 + 0.3 + 0.0 − 0.2 + 0.3 − 0.5 − 0.5 − + 0.0 −          Q4
− 0.9 + 0.1 − 0.6 − 0.4 + 0.2 − 0.0 + 0.4 + 0.2 + 0.1 + 0.1 − + 0.1 + 0.0 2012          Q1
+ 0.6 − 0.0 + 0.2 + 0.0 + 0.4 − + 1.1 + 0.4 + 0.7 + 0.9 − + 0.0 − 0.0          Q2
Long-term lending
+ 2.2 + 1.4 − 0.2 + 0.9 + 0.8 − 0.2 + 3.2 + 2.5 + 0.7 + 0.7 − − 0.0 − 0.0 2011          Q2
− 0.5 − 0.1 − 0.2 + 0.8 + 0.6 − 0.3 + 5.6 + 4.1 + 1.6 + 1.0 − − 0.1 − 0.0          Q3
+ 0.6 + 1.3 − 0.3 + 0.5 + 1.4 − 0.3 + 2.7 + 2.7 + 0.0 − 0.0 − − 0.0 + 0.0          Q4
+ 0.7 + 0.9 − 0.2 + 0.8 − 1.3 − 0.3 + 0.2 + 0.1 + 0.1 + 0.6 − + 0.1 + 0.1 2012          Q1
+ 1.6 + 0.8 + 0.1 + 0.1 + 1.1 − 0.1 + 3.3 + 2.1 + 1.2 + 0.6 − − 0.0 − 0.0          Q2
are not specially marked. 1 Excluding fiduciary loans. 2 Including sole proprietors. 
3 Excluding mortgage loans and housing loans, even in the form of instalment credit. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
34  Monthly Report
August 2012
IV Banks
 
7 Deposits of domestic non-banks (non-MFIs) at banks (MFIs) in Germany*
 
 
€ billion
Time deposits 1,2   Memo item
  
 for more than 1 year 2 Subordinated
 liabilities
for up for up (excluding
to and to and for more Bank negotiable Liabilities
Deposits, Sight including including than Savings savings Fiduciary debt arising
Period total deposits Total 1 year Total 2 years 2 years bonds  4 loans securities) from repos deposits 3 
Domestic non-banks, total End of year or month*
 
2009 2,829.7 1,029.5 1,102.6 339.5 763.1 32.1 731.0 594.5 103.2 43.4 35.6 76.8
2010 2,936.6 1,104.4 1,117.1 329.3 787.8 25.1 762.7 618.2 96.9 37.5 37.2 80.9
2011 3,046.9 1,168.3 1,156.2 386.1 770.2 31.5 738.7 616.1 106.3 36.5 35.8 97.1
2011          July 2,976.5 1,130.6 1,125.8 352.4 773.4 27.2 746.2 616.6 103.5 36.6 36.6 87.4
         Aug 3,007.6 1,139.2 1,149.1 374.6 774.5 28.4 746.1 615.0 104.2 36.7 36.4 99.4
         Sep 3,026.3 1,151.3 1,157.3 385.1 772.2 29.2 743.0 613.5 104.3 36.7 36.2 106.0
         Oct 3,027.0 1,160.9 1,148.1 376.8 771.3 30.2 741.1 613.1 105.0 36.7 36.0 104.2
         Nov 3,054.5 1,188.0 1,149.2 377.8 771.4 31.0 740.5 611.5 105.8 36.7 35.9 109.5
         Dec 3,046.9 1,168.3 1,156.2 386.1 770.2 31.5 738.7 616.1 106.3 36.5 35.8 97.1
2012          Jan 3,036.8 1,181.1 1,133.1 366.8 766.3 31.4 734.9 617.2 105.3 35.8 35.2 85.8
         Feb 3,054.9 1,187.1 1,143.5 378.3 765.1 32.5 732.6 619.8 104.6 35.6 34.9 97.0
         Mar 3,049.6 1,188.9 1,136.9 374.4 762.5 33.1 729.4 619.4 104.3 35.3 34.7 91.7
         Apr 3,072.6 1,197.7 1,153.2 392.8 760.4 32.9 727.5 617.9 103.8 35.5 34.6 100.8
         May 3,092.8 1,216.8 1,155.6 397.2 758.4 33.2 725.2 617.1 103.3 35.5 34.6 106.3
         June 3,106.0 1,233.8 1,153.5 397.4 756.1 33.7 722.4 616.1 102.6 35.2 34.4 97.5
Changes*
2010 + 77.4 + 76.0 − 18.9 − 12.6 − 6.3 − 7.0 + 0.7 + 24.0 − 3.7 − 1.7 + 1.6 + 4.1
2011 + 111.2 + 63.7 + 40.9 + 57.0 − 16.1 + 6.5 − 22.6 − 2.6 + 9.3 − 1.1 − 1.4 + 16.0
2011          July − 4.4 + 6.6 − 10.6 − 11.3 + 0.7 + 1.2 − 0.6 − 1.2 + 0.8 − 0.1 − 0.0 − 16.4
         Aug + 31.0 + 8.5 + 23.4 + 22.2 + 1.1 + 1.2 − 0.0 − 1.6 + 0.7 + 0.1 − 0.2 + 12.1         Sep + 18.7 + 11.8 + 8.4 + 10.7 − 2.3 + 0.8 − 3.1 − 1.5 + 0.0 − 0.1 − 0.2 + 6.6
         Oct + 0.7 + 9.6 − 9.2 − 8.3 − 0.9 + 1.1 − 2.0 − 0.4 + 0.8 + 0.0 − 0.2 − 1.8
         Nov + 27.5 + 26.8 + 1.1 + 1.0 + 0.1 + 0.8 − 0.7 − 1.1 + 0.7 − 0.0 − 0.1 + 5.3         Dec − 6.2 − 19.8 + 8.4 + 8.3 + 0.1 + 0.5 − 0.4 + 4.6 + 0.5 − 0.2 − 0.2 − 12.4
2012          Jan − 10.4 + 12.9 − 23.4 − 19.2 − 4.2 − 0.1 − 4.1 + 1.1 − 1.0 − 0.7 − 0.5 − 11.3
         Feb + 18.1 + 5.9 + 10.3 + 11.5 − 1.1 + 1.1 − 2.3 + 2.6 − 0.7 − 0.2 − 0.3 + 11.2         Mar − 5.4 + 1.9 − 6.5 − 3.9 − 2.6 + 0.6 − 3.2 − 0.4 − 0.3 − 0.2 − 0.2 − 5.2
         Apr + 20.4 + 9.0 + 13.5 + 15.5 − 2.1 − 0.1 − 1.9 − 1.5 − 0.5 + 0.2 − 0.1 + 6.5
         May + 20.2 + 19.2 + 2.4 + 4.4 − 2.0 + 0.3 − 2.3 − 0.8 − 0.5 − 0.0 + 0.0 + 5.5         June + 13.1 + 16.9 − 2.0 + 0.2 − 2.3 + 0.5 − 2.8 − 1.1 − 0.7 − 0.3 − 0.2 − 8.8
Domestic government End of year or month*
2009 129.3 41.8 83.4 43.0 40.4 3.6 36.8 2.6 1.5 35.7 3.9 0.5
2010 153.4 46.1 103.0 47.7 55.3 2.6 52.7 2.8 1.5 34.7 6.2 0.4
2011 168.5 46.2 118.4 69.5 48.8 3.8 45.0 2.4 1.5 34.0 5.9 3.1
2011          July 164.1 49.5 110.5 61.6 48.9 3.3 45.7 2.6 1.6 34.0 6.0 0.2
         Aug 169.4 50.4 114.9 66.6 48.3 3.3 45.0 2.6 1.5 34.1 6.0 2.1
         Sep 173.5 52.4 117.1 68.4 48.6 3.4 45.2 2.5 1.5 34.1 6.0 4.4
         Oct 162.9 49.2 109.8 61.2 48.5 3.6 45.0 2.4 1.5 34.1 6.0 3.5
         Nov 167.0 49.5 113.7 64.9 48.8 3.7 45.1 2.4 1.4 34.1 5.9 2.9
         Dec 168.5 46.2 118.4 69.5 48.8 3.8 45.0 2.4 1.5 34.0 5.9 3.1
2012          Jan 171.8 49.1 119.0 71.3 47.7 3.3 44.4 2.3 1.4 33.4 6.0 2.2
         Feb 182.4 55.8 123.0 75.4 47.6 3.5 44.1 2.3 1.4 33.3 6.0 2.8
         Mar 182.4 51.9 126.8 79.0 47.8 3.8 44.0 2.3 1.4 33.2 5.9 1.8
         Apr 183.5 52.8 127.0 80.2 46.8 3.8 43.0 2.3 1.4 33.4 5.9 0.5
         May 196.1 57.5 134.8 87.5 47.3 4.0 43.3 2.4 1.3 33.4 5.9 3.8
         June 227.7 64.3 159.5 98.9 60.6 4.7 55.9 2.6 1.3 33.1 5.9 1.5
Changes*
2010 + 23.9 + 4.1 + 19.7 + 4.7 + 14.9 − 1.0 + 16.0 + 0.3 − 0.1 − 1.0 + 2.3 − 0.1
2011 + 14.6 + 0.1 + 15.0 + 21.4 − 6.5 + 1.2 − 7.7 − 0.4 + 0.0 − 0.7 − 0.2 + 2.7
2011          July − 6.3 − 2.6 − 3.6 − 4.2 + 0.7 + 0.7 − 0.0 − 0.1 + 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 5.9         Aug + 5.3 + 1.0 + 4.4 + 5.0 − 0.7 + 0.0 − 0.7 − 0.0 − 0.1 + 0.1 − 0.1 + 1.9         Sep + 4.1 + 1.9 + 2.2 + 1.9 + 0.4 + 0.1 + 0.2 − 0.1 − 0.1 − 0.0 + 0.0 + 2.4
         Oct − 10.6 − 3.2 − 7.3 − 7.2 − 0.1 + 0.1 − 0.2 − 0.1 − 0.0 + 0.0 − 0.0 − 1.0
         Nov + 4.1 + 0.3 + 3.9 + 3.7 + 0.2 + 0.1 + 0.1 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.6         Dec + 1.5 − 3.3 + 4.7 + 4.7 + 0.1 + 0.1 − 0.1 − 0.0 + 0.1 − 0.1 + 0.0 + 0.2
2012          Jan + 3.3 + 2.9 + 0.6 + 1.8 − 1.1 − 0.5 − 0.6 − 0.1 − 0.1 − 0.7 + 0.0 − 0.9
         Feb + 10.6 + 6.7 + 4.0 + 4.1 − 0.1 + 0.2 − 0.3 + 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.0 + 0.0 + 0.7         Mar − 0.1 − 3.8 + 3.8 + 3.6 + 0.2 + 0.3 − 0.1 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.1 − 0.1 − 1.0
         Apr + 0.6 + 0.9 − 0.2 + 1.0 − 1.2 + 0.0 − 1.2 − 0.0 − 0.0 + 0.2 + 0.0 − 1.3
         May + 12.6 + 4.7 + 7.8 + 7.3 + 0.5 + 0.2 + 0.3 + 0.1 − 0.0 − 0.0 − + 3.4
         June + 16.7 + 5.2 + 11.3 + 10.9 + 0.4 + 0.7 − 0.3 + 0.2 − 0.0 − 0.3 − 0.0 − 2.4
*See Table IV.2, footnote *; statistical breaks have been eliminated from the specially marked. 1Including subordinated liabilities and liabilities arising from
changes. The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as provisional. registered debt securities. 2Including deposits under savings and loan contracts (see
Subsequent revisions, which appear in the following Monthly Report, are not

Deutsche Bundesbank
35  Monthly Report
August 2012
IV Banks
 
7 Deposits of domestic non-banks (non-MFIs) at banks (MFIs) in Germany * (cont’d)
 
 
€ billion
Time deposits 1,2   Memo item
  
 for more than 1 year 2 Subordinated
 liabilities
for up for up (excluding
to and to and for more Bank negotiable Liabilities
Deposits, Sight including including than Savings savings Fiduciary debt arising
Period total deposits Total 1 year Total 2 years 2 years bonds  4 loans securities) from repos deposits 3 
Domestic enterprises and households End of year or month*
 
2009 2,700.4 987.6 1,019.2 296.5 722.7 28.5 694.2 591.9 101.6 7.7 31.7 76.32010 2,783.2 1,058.3 1,014.1 281.6 732.5 22.5 710.0 615.4 95.4 2.9 31.0 80.52011 2,878.4 1,122.0 1,037.9 316.5 721.3 27.7 693.7 613.8 104.8 2.5 29.8 94.0
2011          July 2,812.3 1,081.1 1,015.3 290.8 724.5 24.0 700.5 614.0 101.9 2.6 30.6 87.1
         Aug 2,838.2 1,088.7 1,034.3 308.0 726.2 25.1 701.2 612.5 102.7 2.6 30.4 97.3         Sep 2,852.8 1,098.8 1,040.2 316.6 723.6 25.8 697.8 611.0 102.8 2.6 30.2 101.5
         Oct 2,864.1 1,111.6 1,038.3 315.5 722.8 26.6 696.2 610.6 103.6 2.5 30.1 100.7
         Nov 2,887.5 1,138.5 1,035.5 312.9 722.7 27.3 695.4 609.1 104.3 2.6 30.0 106.6         Dec 2,878.4 1,122.0 1,037.9 316.5 721.3 27.7 693.7 613.8 104.8 2.5 29.8 94.0
2012          Jan 2,865.0 1,132.0 1,014.1 295.5 718.6 28.1 690.5 615.0 103.9 2.5 29.3 83.6
         Feb 2,872.5 1,131.3 1,020.5 303.0 717.5 29.0 688.5 617.5 103.2 2.3 28.9 94.1         Mar 2,867.2 1,137.0 1,010.2 295.4 714.7 29.3 685.4 617.1 102.9 2.1 28.8 89.9
         Apr 2,889.1 1,144.9 1,026.1 312.5 713.6 29.1 684.5 615.6 102.4 2.1 28.7 100.4
         May 2,896.8 1,159.4 1,020.8 309.7 711.1 29.2 681.9 614.7 102.0 2.1 28.7 102.5         June 2,878.3 1,169.5 994.0 298.5 695.5 29.0 666.6 613.5 101.3 2.1 28.5 96.0
Changes*
2010 + 53.5 + 71.9 − 38.6 − 17.3 − 21.3 − 6.0 − 15.3 + 23.8 − 3.6 − 0.7 − 0.7 + 4.2
2011 + 96.6 + 63.6 + 25.9 + 35.5 − 9.6 + 5.2 − 14.9 − 2.2 + 9.3 − 0.3 − 1.2 + 13.3
2011          July + 1.8 + 9.2 − 7.0 − 7.0 + 0.0 + 0.6 − 0.5 − 1.1 + 0.8 − 0.0 + 0.0 − 10.6
         Aug + 25.7 + 7.5 + 19.0 + 17.2 + 1.8 + 1.1 + 0.7 − 1.5 + 0.8 − 0.0 − 0.2 + 10.3         Sep + 14.7 + 9.9 + 6.2 + 8.8 − 2.6 + 0.7 − 3.3 − 1.5 + 0.1 − 0.0 − 0.2 + 4.2
         Oct + 11.3 + 12.8 − 1.9 − 1.1 − 0.8 + 1.0 − 1.8 − 0.4 + 0.8 − 0.0 − 0.1 − 0.8
         Nov + 23.4 + 26.5 − 2.8 − 2.7 − 0.1 + 0.7 − 0.8 − 1.1 + 0.8 + 0.0 − 0.1 + 5.9         Dec − 7.7 − 16.5 + 3.7 + 3.7 + 0.1 + 0.4 − 0.3 + 4.6 + 0.5 − 0.0 − 0.2 − 12.6
2012          Jan − 13.8 + 10.0 − 24.0 − 21.0 − 3.1 + 0.4 − 3.5 + 1.2 − 0.9 − 0.0 − 0.6 − 10.4
         Feb + 7.5 − 0.7 + 6.4 + 7.4 − 1.0 + 0.9 − 2.0 + 2.5 − 0.7 − 0.2 − 0.3 + 10.5         Mar − 5.3 + 5.7 − 10.3 − 7.5 − 2.8 + 0.3 − 3.1 − 0.4 − 0.3 − 0.1 − 0.1 − 4.2
         Apr + 19.8 + 8.1 + 13.7 + 14.6 − 0.9 − 0.2 − 0.7 − 1.5 − 0.5 + 0.0 − 0.1 + 7.8
         May + 7.6 + 14.5 − 5.4 − 2.9 − 2.5 + 0.1 − 2.6 − 0.9 − 0.5 − 0.0 + 0.0 + 2.1         June − 3.6 + 11.7 − 13.4 − 10.7 − 2.7 − 0.2 − 2.5 − 1.2 − 0.7 − 0.0 − 0.2 − 6.5
of which:  Domestic enterprises End of year or month*
2009 1,105.6 336.4 743.6 187.5 556.1 9.1 547.0 5.5 20.2 7.6 21.8 76.3
2010 1,124.3 344.6 755.5 196.0 559.5 7.5 552.0 6.3 17.9 2.8 21.3 80.5
2011 1,156.5 374.8 758.9 222.9 536.0 9.4 526.7 5.6 17.2 2.5 20.3 94.0
2011          July 1,123.6 351.9 747.8 200.9 546.9 8.3 538.6 6.3 17.5 2.5 20.9 87.1
         Aug 1,150.5 360.9 765.8 217.5 548.3 9.2 539.1 6.3 17.6 2.5 20.7 97.3
         Sep 1,163.0 370.1 769.2 224.4 544.8 9.6 535.2 6.3 17.5 2.5 20.6 101.5
         Oct 1,168.4 376.9 767.7 224.8 543.0 9.8 533.1 6.2 17.6 2.5 20.5 100.7
         Nov 1,175.3 390.6 761.7 220.2 541.6 9.9 531.7 5.7 17.3 2.5 20.4 106.6
         Dec 1,156.5 374.8 758.9 222.9 536.0 9.4 526.7 5.6 17.2 2.5 20.3 94.0
2012          Jan 1,137.0 381.2 733.2 201.4 531.9 9.3 522.5 5.6 16.9 2.4 19.8 83.6
         Feb 1,134.0 373.1 738.3 209.1 529.2 9.7 519.5 5.7 16.9 2.2 19.7 94.1
         Mar 1,125.8 376.3 727.0 201.1 525.9 9.8 516.1 5.8 16.7 2.1 19.6 89.9
         Apr 1,140.7 374.7 743.6 218.7 524.9 9.7 515.2 5.8 16.6 2.1 19.5 100.4
         May 1,144.2 384.2 737.6 215.6 522.0 9.8 512.1 5.9 16.5 2.1 19.5 102.5
         June 1,118.8 384.8 711.5 205.3 506.2 9.8 496.4 6.1 16.4 2.1 19.4 96.0
Changes*
2010 − 10.6 + 9.8 − 21.6 + 6.1 − 27.6 − 1.6 − 26.0 + 0.9 + 0.3 − 0.7 − 0.5 + 4.2
2011 + 33.6 + 29.1 + 5.1 + 27.6 − 22.5 + 1.9 − 24.4 − 0.3 − 0.3 − 0.3 − 1.1 + 13.3
2011          July − 6.7 + 3.2 − 9.9 − 9.3 − 0.5 + 0.2 − 0.7 − 0.0 + 0.0 − 0.0 + 0.0 − 10.6
         Aug + 26.8 + 8.8 + 17.9 + 16.6 + 1.4 + 0.9 + 0.5 + 0.0 + 0.1 − 0.0 − 0.1 + 10.3         Sep + 12.5 + 9.0 + 3.7 + 7.1 − 3.4 + 0.4 − 3.9 − 0.0 − 0.1 − 0.0 − 0.2 + 4.2
         Oct + 5.5 + 6.8 − 1.5 + 0.4 − 1.9 + 0.3 − 2.2 − 0.0 + 0.1 − 0.0 − 0.1 − 0.8
         Nov + 6.9 + 13.3 − 6.0 − 4.6 − 1.4 + 0.1 − 1.5 − 0.1 − 0.3 − − 0.1 + 5.9         Dec − 17.4 − 15.9 − 1.4 + 2.7 − 4.1 − 0.5 − 3.6 − 0.1 − 0.1 − 0.0 − 0.1 − 12.6
2012          Jan − 19.8 + 6.4 − 26.0 − 21.5 − 4.5 − 0.1 − 4.4 + 0.0 − 0.3 − 0.0 − 0.5 − 10.4
         Feb − 3.0 − 8.1 + 5.1 + 7.7 − 2.6 + 0.4 − 3.0 + 0.1 − 0.1 − 0.2 − 0.1 + 10.5         Mar − 8.2 + 3.2 − 11.4 − 8.0 − 3.3 + 0.1 − 3.4 + 0.1 − 0.2 − 0.1 − 0.1 − 4.2
         Apr + 13.6 − 0.4 + 14.1 + 14.9 − 0.8 − 0.1 − 0.7 − 0.0 − 0.1 + 0.0 − 0.1 + 7.8
         May + 3.4 + 9.5 − 6.1 − 3.2 − 2.9 + 0.1 − 3.1 + 0.1 − 0.1 − 0.0 − 0.0 + 2.1         June − 10.4 + 2.3 − 12.7 − 9.8 − 2.9 − 0.0 − 2.9 + 0.1 − 0.1 − 0.0 − 0.2 − 6.5
Table IV.12). 3Excluding deposits under savings and loan contracts (see also foot-   
note 2). 4 Including liabilities arising from non-negotiable bearer debt securities.   
   
  

Deutsche Bundesbank
36  Monthly Report
August 2012
IV Banks
 
8 Deposits of domestic households and non-profit institutions at banks (MFIs) in Germany*
 
 
€ billion
Sight deposits Time deposits 1,2 
by creditor group by creditor group
Deposits of Domestic households Domestic households
domestic
householdsand Domestic
non-profit Self- non-profit Self-
employed Other institu- employed Other institutions,
Period total Total Total persons Employees tions Total Total persons Employees individuals individuals
End of year or month*
 
2009 1,594.9 651.3 631.3 112.5 424.6 94.3 19.9 275.6 258.5 24.5 213.2 20.7
2010 1,658.9 713.7 692.4 123.8 471.2 97.4 21.3 258.6 241.4 21.2 203.7 16.4
2011 1,721.9 747.3 724.9 131.5 490.4 103.0 22.4 278.9 261.1 23.3 218.5 19.3
2012          Jan 1,728.0 750.8 727.0 133.6 489.1 104.3 23.8 280.9 262.7 23.2 219.9 19.6
         Feb 1,738.5 758.2 734.2 134.1 494.5 105.6 24.0 282.2 263.8 23.0 221.1 19.8
         Mar 1,741.4 760.7 735.4 132.4 496.5 106.6 25.3 283.2 264.8 22.7 221.9 20.1
         Apr 1,748.4 770.2 744.3 136.5 499.7 108.1 25.9 282.5 264.9 22.4 222.1 20.4
         May 1,752.6 775.2 750.7 137.4 503.5 109.8 24.5 283.2 265.8 22.8 222.3 20.7
         June 1,759.5 784.7 759.2 135.8 513.3 110.2 25.5 282.5 265.2 22.3 223.2 19.7
Changes*
2010 + 64.0 + 62.1 + 60.8 + 11.3 + 40.4 + 9.1 + 1.4 − 17.0 − 17.1 − 3.3 − 9.7 − 4.1
2011 + 63.0 + 34.5 + 33.5 + 7.8 + 19.7 + 6.0 + 1.1 + 20.8 + 20.3 + 2.1 + 15.2 + 3.0
2012          Jan + 6.1 + 3.6 + 2.1 + 2.2 − 0.8 + 0.8 + 1.4 + 2.0 + 1.6 − 0.1 + 1.4 + 0.3
         Feb + 10.5 + 7.4 + 7.2 + 0.4 + 5.4 + 1.3 + 0.2 + 1.3 + 1.1 − 0.2 + 1.1 + 0.2
         Mar + 3.0 + 2.5 + 1.2 − 1.7 + 2.0 + 0.9 + 1.3 + 1.0 + 1.0 − 0.3 + 0.9 + 0.4
         Apr + 6.3 + 8.5 + 7.7 + 2.6 + 3.7 + 1.4 + 0.8 − 0.4 + 0.2 − 0.3 + 0.3 + 0.3
         May + 4.2 + 5.0 + 6.3 + 0.8 + 3.9 + 1.7 − 1.4 + 0.7 + 0.9 + 0.4 + 0.2 + 0.3
         June + 6.9 + 9.5 + 8.6 − 1.6 + 8.4 + 1.8 + 0.9 − 0.7 − 0.6 − 0.5 − 0.1 − 0.1
*See Table IV.2, footnote*; statistical breaks have been eliminated from the changes. revisions, which appear in the following Monthly Report, are not specially
The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as provisional. Subsequent marked. 1Including subordinated liabilities and liabilities arising from registered debt
 
  
9 Deposits of domestic government at banks (MFIs) in Germany, by creditor group
*
 
€ billion
Deposits
   
Federal Government and its special funds  1 State governments
Time deposits Time deposits
Savings Savings
for up deposits Memo for up deposits Memo
Domestic to and for more and bank item to and for more and bank item
government, Sight including than savings Fiduciary Sight including than savings Fiduciary
Period total Total deposits 1 year 1 year bonds 2 loans Total deposits 1 year 1 year bonds 2 loans
End of year or month*
 
2009 129.3 22.2 1.3 3.7 17.1 0.1 17.3 23.1 7.1 5.8 10.1 0.1 18.0
2010 153.4 38.7 5.7 3.3 29.6 0.1 17.0 28.2 8.5 6.7 12.9 0.2 17.2
2011 168.5 37.9 6.2 9.4 22.2 0.1 16.9 34.8 11.4 10.7 12.5 0.2 16.8
2012          Jan 171.8 40.9 9.2 10.9 20.8 0.1 16.9 37.7 11.4 13.6 12.5 0.2 16.1
         Feb 182.4 45.2 14.4 10.4 20.4 0.1 16.9 39.7 10.2 16.9 12.5 0.2 16.0
         Mar 182.4 35.6 6.6 8.5 20.4 0.0 16.9 49.3 14.9 21.8 12.5 0.2 16.0
         Apr 183.5 33.4 10.0 3.8 19.5 0.0 16.9 48.2 11.9 23.9 12.3 0.2 16.1
         May 196.1 31.5 7.0 4.9 19.5 0.1 16.9 54.1 14.9 26.8 12.3 0.2 16.1
         June 227.7 33.8 9.9 4.7 19.2 0.1 16.7 84.5 19.4 40.1 24.8 0.2 16.0
Changes*
2010 + 23.9 + 16.5 + 4.4 − 0.4 + 12.5 + 0.0 − 0.2 + 5.2 + 1.5 + 0.9 + 2.8 + 0.0 − 0.7
2011 + 14.6 − 0.7 + 0.5 + 6.3 − 7.5 + 0.0 − 0.2 + 6.6 + 2.9 + 4.0 − 0.4 + 0.0 − 0.5
2012          Jan + 3.3 + 3.0 + 3.0 + 1.4 − 1.4 − 0.0 − 0.0 + 2.9 + 0.1 + 2.9 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.7
         Feb + 10.6 + 4.4 + 5.2 − 0.5 − 0.4 − 0.0 + 0.0 + 2.0 − 1.3 + 3.3 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.1
         Mar − 0.1 − 9.7 − 7.8 − 1.9 + 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.0 + 9.6 + 4.7 + 5.0 − 0.1 − 0.0 − 0.0
         Apr + 0.6 + 0.2 + 3.4 − 2.3 − 0.9 − 0.0 + 0.0 − 1.1 − 3.0 + 2.1 − 0.2 + 0.0 + 0.1
         May + 12.6 − 1.9 − 3.0 + 1.1 − 0.0 + 0.0 + 0.0 + 5.9 + 3.0 + 2.9 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.0
         June + 16.7 + 2.3 + 2.9 − 0.3 − 0.3 + 0.0 − 0.2 +16.2 + 3.0 +13.4 − 0.2 + 0.0 − 0.1
*See Table IV.2, footnote *; excluding deposits of the Treuhand agency and its Telekom AG, and of publicly owned enterprises, which are included in ”Enterprises”.
successor organisations, of the Federal Railways, east German Railways and Federal Statistical breaks have been eliminated from the changes. The figures for the latest
Post Office, and, from 1995, of Deutsche Bahn AG, Deutsche Post AG and Deutsche date are always to be regarded as provisional. Subsequent revisions, which appear in

Deutsche Bundesbank
37  Monthly Report
August 2012
IV Banks
 
   
 
 Savings deposits 3  Memo item
 
 by maturity
 more than 1 year 2 
Subordinated
of which liabilities
Domestic Domestic (excluding
up to and up to and Bank negotiable Liabilities non-profit non-profit
institu- including including more than Domestic institu- savings Fiduciary debt arising
tions 1 year Total 2 years 2 years Total tions bonds  4 loans from repos   Period households securities) 5 
End of year or month*
 
17.2 109.0 166.6 19.4 147.2 586.5 577.5 9.0 81.5 0.1 9.8 − 2009
17.3 85.7 173.0 15.0 158.0 609.1 599.2 9.9 77.5 0.1 9.7 − 2010
17.8 93.6 185.3 18.3 167.0 608.2 599.0 9.2 87.6 0.1 9.6 − 2011
18.2 94.2 186.7 18.8 168.0 609.3 600.1 9.2 86.9 0.0 9.5 − 2012          Jan 
18.4 93.9 188.3 19.3 169.0 611.8 602.4 9.4 86.3 0.0 9.2 −          Feb 
18.4 94.4 188.8 19.5 169.3 611.3 601.8 9.5 86.2 0.0 9.2 −          Mar 
17.6 93.8 188.7 19.4 169.3 609.8 600.2 9.6 85.9 0.0 9.2 −          Apr 
17.4 94.1 189.1 19.3 169.8 608.8 599.2 9.6 85.5 0.0 9.2 −          May
17.3 93.2 189.3 19.2 170.1 607.4 597.8 9.6 84.9 0.0 9.2 −          June
Changes*
+ 0.1 − 23.3 + 6.4 − 4.4 + 10.8 + 22.8 + 22.0 + 0.9 − 4.0 − 0.0 − 0.2 + 0.0 2010
+
0.5 + 8.0 + 12.9 + 3.3 + 9.5 − 1.8 − 1.1 − 0.7 + 9.5 − 0.0 − 0.1 − 2011
+ 0.4 + 0.5 + 1.4 + 0.5 + 1.0 + 1.2 + 1.2 + 0.0 − 0.6 − 0.0 − 0.1 − 2012          Jan 
+ 0.2 − 0.3 + 1.6 + 0.5 + 1.1 + 2.5 + 2.3 + 0.2 − 0.6 − 0.0 − 0.2 −          Feb 
+ 0.1 + 0.5 + 0.5 + 0.2 + 0.3 − 0.5 − 0.6 + 0.1 − 0.1 − 0.0 − 0.0 −          Mar 
− 0.6 − 0.3 − 0.1 − 0.1 + 0.0 − 1.5 − 1.6 + 0.1 − 0.4 − 0.0 + 0.0 −          Apr 
− 0.2 + 0.3 + 0.4 − 0.0 + 0.4 − 1.1 − 1.1 + 0.0 − 0.4 − 0.0 + 0.0 −          May
− 0.1 − 0.9 + 0.2 − 0.2 + 0.4 − 1.4 − 1.3 − 0.0 − 0.6 − 0.0 − 0.0 −          June
securities. 2Including deposits under savings and loan contracts (see Table 2). 4Including liabilities arising from non-negotiable bearer debt
IV.12). 3Excluding deposits under savings and loan contracts (see also foot-note securities. 5 Included in time deposits. 
 
     
 
Local government and local government associations
(including municipal special-purpose associations) Social security funds
Time deposits 3 Time deposits
Savings Savings
for up deposits Memo for up deposits Memo
to and for more and bank item to and for more and bank item
Sight including than savings Fiduciary Sight including than savings Fiduciary
Total deposits 1 year 1 year bonds 2,4 loans Total deposits 1 year 1 year bonds 2 loans   Period
End of year or month*
 
38.0 20.2 10.3 4.2 3.3 0.4 46.0 13.3 23.1 8.9 0.6 0.0 2009
37.4 19.5 9.9 4.5 3.5 0.4 49.1 12.3 27.9 8.3 0.6 0.0 2010
39.3 18.1 13.0 5.0 3.2 0.4 56.5 10.5 36.4 9.1 0.4 0.0 2011
35.5 14.6 12.6 5.1 3.1 0.4 57.8 13.9 34.2 9.3 0.3 0.0 2012          Jan 
38.4 17.1 13.1 5.2 3.1 0.4 59.0 14.1 35.0 9.6 0.3 0.0          Feb 
37.6 16.4 12.8 5.3 3.1 0.4 59.8 14.0 35.8 9.7 0.3 0.0          Mar 
37.8 16.6 12.6 5.5 3.1 0.4 64.1 14.4 39.9 9.4 0.3 0.0          Apr 
41.6 19.5 13.2 5.6 3.2 0.4 68.9 16.1 42.6 9.9 0.3 0.0          May
40.2 18.2 12.8 5.8 3.4 0.4 69.1 16.7 41.3 10.8 0.4 0.0          June
Changes*
− 0.6 − 0.6 − 0.5 + 0.2 + 0.2 − 0.0 + 2.9 − 1.2 + 4.7 − 0.6 − 0.1 − 0.0 2010
+ 1.8 − 1.4 + 2.9 + 0.5 − 0.2 − 0.0 + 7.0 − 1.9 + 8.2 + 0.9 − 0.2 − 0.0 2011
− 3.9 − 3.6 − 0.3 + 0.1 − 0.1 − + 1.3 + 3.4 − 2.2 + 0.2 − 0.0 − 2012          Jan 
+ 3.0 + 2.5 + 0.4 + 0.1 − 0.0 − 0.0 + 1.3 + 0.2 + 0.8 + 0.3 + 0.0 −          Feb 
− 0.8 − 0.7 − 0.2 + 0.1 − 0.0 − 0.0 + 0.8 − 0.1 + 0.8 + 0.1 − 0.0 − 0.0          Mar 
− 0.0 + 0.2 − 0.2 + 0.1 − 0.0 − 0.0 + 1.6 + 0.4 + 1.5 − 0.2 + 0.0 −          Apr 
+ 3.8 + 3.0 + 0.6 + 0.1 + 0.1 − + 4.8 + 1.7 + 2.7 + 0.5 + 0.0 −          May
− 1.4 − 1.3 − 0.4 + 0.2 + 0.1 − − 0.4 + 0.6 − 1.8 + 0.7 + 0.0 −          June
the following Monthly Report, are not specially marked. 1Federal Railways Fund, non-negotiable bearer debt securities. 3Including deposits under savings and loan
Indemnification Fund, Redemption Fund for Inherited Liabilities, ERP Special Fund, contracts. 4 Excluding deposits under savings and loan contracts (see also footnote 3). 
German Unity Fund, Equalisation of Burdens Fund. 2Including liabilities arising from

Deutsche Bundesbank
38  Monthly Report
August 2012
IV Banks
 
10 Savings deposits and bank savings bonds of banks (MFIs) in Germany sold to non-banks (non-MFIs)*
 
 
€ billion
Savings deposits 1 Bank savings bonds 3  , sold to
of residents of non-residents domestic non-banks
at three months’ at more than three Memo
notice months’ notice item of which
Interest With
of which of which of which credited maturities
Special Special At three on of more
savings savings savings non-banks, than foreign months’
Period Total Total Total Total Total notice deposits total Total 2 years facilities 2 facilities 2 non-banks
End of year or month*
 
2009 604.1 594.5 474.5 379.4 120.0 112.1 9.6 7.0 13.8 118.8 103.2 68.3 15.6
2010 628.2 618.2 512.5 412.3 105.7 96.6 9.9 7.7 10.9 113.5 96.9 72.0 16.6
2011 626.3 616.1 515.3 413.7 100.8 91.3 10.2 7.8 10.0 122.9 106.3 76.1 16.6
2012          Feb 630.2 619.8 520.2 417.0 99.6 89.7 10.4 8.0 0.3 120.9 104.6 75.3 16.3
         Mar 629.8 619.4 520.6 416.8 98.8 88.8 10.4 8.0 0.3 120.6 104.3 75.1 16.3
         Apr 628.3 617.9 519.5 415.5 98.4 88.3 10.4 7.9 0.3 120.1 103.8 74.8 16.3
         May 627.6 617.1 519.5 415.3 97.6 87.1 10.5 8.0 0.3 119.9 103.3 74.6 16.6
         June 626.7 616.1 519.4 414.6 96.6 86.1 10.6 8.1 0.3 119.0 102.6 74.3 16.4
Changes*
2010 + 24.3 + 24.0 + 38.3 + 33.1 − 14.3 − 15.5 + 0.3 + 0.6 . − 2.7 − 3.7 + 6.3 + 1.0
2011 − 2.4 − 2.6 + 1.3 + 0.2 − 3.9 − 4.3 + 0.2 + 0.1 . + 9.4 + 9.3 + 4.0 + 0.2
2012          Feb + 2.7 + 2.6 + 3.8 + 3.3 − 1.3 − 1.6 + 0.1 + 0.1 . − 0.9 − 0.7 − 0.4 − 0.1
         Mar − 0.3 − 0.4 + 0.4 − 0.2 − 0.8 − 0.9 + 0.1 + 0.0 . − 0.3 − 0.3 − 0.1 − 0.0
         Apr − 1.5 − 1.5 − 1.2 − 1.3 − 0.3 − 0.5 − 0.0 − 0.0 . − 0.5 − 0.5 − 0.3 + 0.0
         May − 0.7 − 0.8 + 0.0 − 0.2 − 0.8 − 1.2 + 0.1 + 0.1 . − 0.2 − 0.5 − 0.2 + 0.3
         June − 0.9 − 1.1 − 0.1 − 0.7 − 1.0 − 1.0 + 0.1 + 0.1 . − 0.9 − 0.7 − 0.3 − 0.2
*See Table IV.2, footnote*; statistical breaks have been eliminated from the changes. as time deposits. 2Savings deposits bearing interest at a rate which exceeds the
The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as provisional. Subsequent minimum or basic rate of interest. 3Including liabilities arising from non-negotiable
revisions, which appear in the following Monthly Report, are not specially bearer debt securities. 
marked. 1Excluding deposits under savings and loan contracts, which are classified
 
  
11 Debt securities and money market paper outstanding of banks (MFIs) in Germany
*
 
€ billion
Negotiable bearer debt securities and money market paper Non-negotiable
bearer debt
of which securities and
money market
with maturities of paper 6 Subordinated
up to more than 1 year up to
and including 1 year of which and including 2 years
with
Certifi- of which of which non- maturities
Floating Zero Foreign cates without without more of more negotiable negotiable
rate coupon currency of a nominal a nominal than than debt debt
Total bonds 1 deposit Total Total 2 years Total 2 years securities securities bonds 1,2 bonds 3,4 guarantee 5 guarantee 5 
Period
End of year or month*
 
2009 1,529.8 380.6 43.9 317.4 70.4 115.9 . 105.8 . 1,308.2 0.9 0.6 46.1 1.8
2010 1,435.1 287.2 27.8 359.2 82.8 97.0 4.6 56.8 6.5 1,281.4 0.7 0.6 43.9 1.5
2011 1,375.4 303.9 26.8 366.8 75.3 95.2 3.0 53.6 4.5 1,226.6 0.6 0.4 43.2 1.5
2012          Feb 1,344.0 303.0 26.2 354.2 69.9 89.3 3.1 55.7 4.9 1,199.0 1.3 0.3 42.1 1.3
         Mar 1,336.2 302.3 26.2 358.7 70.4 90.7 3.2 52.5 4.7 1,193.0 0.4 0.3 39.9 1.3
         Apr 1,334.6 303.5 23.8 361.9 67.4 85.5 3.2 53.8 4.9 1,195.2 0.3 0.3 39.8 1.3
         May 1,340.8 303.6 25.6 376.4 67.4 87.2 3.4 52.9 5.1 1,200.7 0.3 0.3 39.8 1.3
         June 1,329.9 300.0 27.0 372.5 68.5 89.2 3.2 51.5 4.8 1,189.2 0.3 0.3 39.4 1.3
Changes*
2010 − 94.2 − 92.8 − 9.8 + 41.9 + 12.4 − 18.8 . − 48.9 . − 26.4 − 0.2 − 0.0 − 2.1 − 0.3
2011 − 59.0 + 16.4 − 4.1 + 8.1 − 7.5 − 2.1 − 1.6 − 2.9 − 2.0 − 54.0 − 0.0 − 0.2 − 0.8 − 0.0
2012          Feb + 4.4 + 0.2 + 2.7 − 4.0 − 3.3 − 2.5 + 0.0 + 1.2 + 0.1 + 5.6 + 0.4 + 0.0 − 1.1 − 0.2
         Mar − 8.5 − 0.7 + 0.0 + 3.9 + 0.4 + 0.7 + 0.1 − 3.1 − 0.2 − 6.1 − 0.3 + 0.0 − 2.3 + 0.0
         Apr − 1.5 + 1.2 − 2.5 + 3.2 − 3.0 − 5.2 + 0.1 + 1.3 + 0.3 + 2.3 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.0
         May + 6.1 + 0.1 + 1.9 + 14.5 + 0.0 + 1.7 + 0.1 − 0.9 + 0.1 + 5.4 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.0 + 0.0
         June − 10.9 − 3.6 + 1.4 − 3.9 + 1.1 + 2.0 − 0.2 − 1.4 − 0.3 − 11.5 + 0.0 + 0.0 − 0.3 − 0.0
*See Table IV.2, footnote*; statistical breaks have been eliminated from the coupon bonds denominated in foreign currencies. 4Bonds denominated in
changes. The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as provisional. non-euro-area currencies. 5Negotiable bearer debt securities respectively money
Subsequent revisions, which appear in the following Monthly Report, are not market paper with a nominal guarantee of less than 100%. 6Non-negotiable
specially marked. 1Including debt securities denominated in foreign bearer debt securities are classified among bank savings bonds (see also Table IV.10,
currencies. 2Issue value when floated. 3Including floating rate notes and zero footnote 2). 

Deutsche Bundesbank
39  Monthly Report
August 2012
IV  Banks
  
12 Building  and  loan  associations (MFIs) in Germany *)
Interim statements
  
€ billion
Lending to banks (MFIs)
Lending to non-banks (non-MFIs) Deposits of banks Deposits of non-
(MFIs) 5 banks (non-MFIs)
Credit Building loans Secur- Memo
bal- item ities (in-
ances cluding Bearer New
and Loans Treasury Deposits Deposits debt Capital con-
Num- loans under bills under under secur- (includ- tractsber (ex- Bank savings Interim and savings savings ities ing pub- enteredof Balance cluding debt and loan and Other Treasury and loan Sight and loan Sight and out- lished into in
End of sheet building Building secur- con- bridging building discount con- and time con- time de- stand- re- year or associ-
year/month ations loans 
2 ities 3 tracts loans loans tracts deposits tracts posits  6 ing month 8 total 13 loans) 1 paper) 4 serves) 7 
All  building  and  loan  associations
2011 23 197.5 41.4 0.0 17.6 27.1 74.2 15.9 13.0 0.7 22.8 136.7 6.9 5.4 8.3 99.2
2012          Apr 23 199.2 43.0 0.0 17.7 26.4 75.0 15.8 13.2 0.7 23.4 137.9 6.6 5.4 8.4 8.0
         May 23 199.8 43.5 0.0 17.6 26.2 75.3 15.9 13.3 0.8 23.4 138.3 6.5 5.3 8.4 9.0         June 23 200.1 43.4 0.0 17.3 26.0 75.8 16.0 13.6 0.8 22.9 138.6 6.4 5.3 8.4 8.5
Private  building  and  Ioan  associations
  
2012          Apr 13 143.1 25.6 0.0 12.1 17.4 59.7 14.1 7.0 0.5 20.5 91.1 6.4 5.4 5.7 5.1         May 13 143.7 26.1 0.0 12.1 17.3 59.9 14.1 7.1 0.5 20.6 91.4 6.4 5.3 5.7 5.5         June 13 143.6 25.9 0.0 11.7 17.2 60.3 14.1 7.2 0.5 19.9 91.7 6.3 5.3 5.7 5.4
Public  building  and  Ioan  associations
  
2012          Apr 10 56.1 17.4 0.0 5.6 9.0 15.3 1.8 6.2 0.3 2.8 46.7 0.2 − 2.8 2.9         May 10 56.2 17.5 0.0 5.5 8.9 15.4 1.8 6.3 0.3 2.8 46.9 0.1 − 2.8 3.6         June 10 56.5 17.5 0.0 5.6 8.8 15.5 1.8 6.5 0.3 3.0 46.9 0.1 − 2.8 3.1
Trends in building and loan association business
  
€ billion
Changes in deposits
Capital promised Capital disbursed Disbursement Interest and
under savings and commitments repayments
loan contracts Allocations outstanding at received on
end of period building loans 10 
Deposits under Loans under
Repay- savings and savings and
ments loan contracts loan contracts 9 Newly
Interest of granted
credited interim deposits of which of which
on under Applied Applied and ofwhich of Memo Amounts deposits
cancelled to settle- to settle- bridging
under savings of ment of ment of loans Under which item paid intosavings savings and which interim interim and alloc- Repay- Housing
and and loan loan Net and and other ated ments bonuses
loan ac- con- con- alloca- bridging bridging building con- during re-
Period tracts tracts Total Total Total loans Total loans loans Total tracts Total quarter counts 
9 tions 11 ceived 12 
All  building  and  loan  associations
2011 27.6 2.5 6.1 46.2 31.0 40.9 18.1 4.4 8.2 4.1 14.6 12.1 7.5 11.0 9.3 0.5
2012          Apr 2.2 0.0 0.6 4.5 3.0 3.7 1.6 0.5 0.8 0.5 1.3 12.8 7.6 1.0 0.0
         May 2.3 0.0 0.5 4.0 2.5 3.3 1.4 0.3 0.5 0.3 1.3 13.0 7.7 1.0 0.0
         June 2.4 0.0 0.5 4.3 2.5 3.5 1.5 0.4 0.6 0.3 1.4 13.2 7.7 1.0 ... 0.0
Private  building  and  Ioan  associations
  
2012          Apr 1.4 0.0 0.3 3.3 2.1 2.8 1.2 0.4 0.6 0.4 1.0 8.2 4.1 0.7 0.0
         May 1.5 0.0 0.3 2.7 1.6 2.3 1.0 0.2 0.4 0.2 1.0 8.3 4.1 0.7 0.0
         June 1.6 0.0 0.3 3.1 1.7 2.5 1.0 0.3 0.4 0.2 1.1 8.6 4.2 0.7 ... 0.0
Public  building  and  Ioan  associations
  
2012          Apr 0.8 0.0 0.3 1.2 0.9 0.9 0.5 0.1 0.2 0.1 0.3 4.6 3.5 0.3 0.0
         May 0.9 0.0 0.3 1.3 1.0 0.9 0.5 0.1 0.2 0.1 0.3 4.7 3.6 0.3 0.0
         June 0.8 0.0 0.3 1.2 0.8 1.0 0.5 0.1 0.2 0.1 0.3 4.6 3.5 0.3 ... 0.0
*Excluding assets and liabilities and/or transactions of foreign branches. The figures general banking risks. 8Total amount covered by the contracts; only contracts newly
for the latest date are always to be regarded as provisional. Subsequent revisions, entered into, for which the contract fee has been fully paid. Increases in the sumwhich appear in the following Monthly Report, are not specially marked. 1Including contracted count as new contracts. 9For disbursements of deposits under savings
postal giro account balances, claims on building and loan associations, claims arising and loan contracts arising from the allocation of contracts see “Capitalfrom registered debt securities and central bank credit balances. 2Loans under disbursed“. 10Including housing bonuses credited. 11Only allocations accepted by
savings and loan contracts and interim and bridging loans. 3Including money market the beneficiaries; including allocations applied to settlement of interim and bridging
paper and small amounts of other securities issued by banks. 4Including equalisation loans. 12The amounts already credited to the accounts of savers or borrowers are
claims. 5Including liabilities to building and loan associations. 6Including small also included in “Amounts paid into savings and loan accounts“ and “Interest and
amounts of savings deposits. 7Including participation rights capital and fund for repayments received on building loans“. 13 See Table IV.2, footnote 1. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
40  Monthly Report
August 2012
IV  Banks
  
13 Assets and liabilities of the foreign branches and foreign subsidiaries of German banks (MFIs) *
  
  
€ billion
Number of Lending to banks (MFIs) Lending to non-banks (non-MFIs) Other  assets 7 
Loans Credit  balances and loans
German   
banks(MFIs)   with of which
foreign foreign Derivative
branches Money Money financial
branches  1 
and/or and/or market to to market instruments
foreign foreign Balance paper, German foreign paper, in the
subsi- subsi- sheet German Foreign secur- non- non- secur- trading
Period diaries diaries total 7 Total Total banks banks Total Total banks banks ities  2 Total portfolio ities 2,3 
Foreign  branches End of year or month *
  
2009 51 211 1,461.6 579.2 539.1 210.1 328.9 40.2 691.5 534.7 20.7 514.0 156.7 190.9 −
2010 55 212 2,226.3 591.4 564.8 232.0 332.8 26.6 696.7 532.5 27.5 505.0 164.2 938.2 633.9
2011 56 209 2,316.6 603.9 584.9 199.1 385.8 19.0 642.5 504.3 23.2 481.0 138.2 1,070.2 885.0
2011          Aug 55 213 2,181.7 562.0 539.9 193.1 346.8 22.1 680.7 527.2 24.6 502.7 153.4 939.1 772.8
         Sep 55 210 2,445.8 613.7 592.3 194.2 398.1 21.4 700.2 545.6 24.5 521.1 154.6 1,131.8 957.1
         Oct 56 210 2,236.0 564.4 543.6 185.5 358.1 20.8 688.0 547.2 24.0 523.2 140.8 983.6 819.2
         Nov 56 210 2,291.2 576.4 555.1 181.5 373.6 21.4 683.5 541.5 23.8 517.7 142.0 1,031.3 853.4
         Dec 56 209 2,316.6 603.9 584.9 199.1 385.8 19.0 642.5 504.3 23.2 481.0 138.2 1,070.2 885.0
2012          Jan 56 211 2,336.3 632.7 614.4 223.4 391.0 18.3 668.0 529.0 22.9 506.1 139.0 1,035.7 836.8
         Feb 56 211 2,328.3 653.0 634.6 212.3 422.4 18.4 655.2 518.8 21.9 496.8 136.4 1,020.1 797.4
         Mar 56 210 2,136.4 599.7 582.5 228.0 354.4 17.2 634.4 499.0 21.4 477.6 135.4 902.3 735.2
         Apr 56 210 2,196.8 620.2 603.7 226.4 377.2 16.6 635.4 502.9 21.8 481.1 132.4 941.2 756.9
         May 57 211 2,428.5 641.2 625.1 214.9 410.2 16.0 663.7 529.8 22.0 507.8 133.9 1,123.6 937.5
Changes *
2010 + 4 + 1 + 695.5 − 8.7 + 5.5 + 21.9 − 16.4 − 14.2 − 36.3 − 35.6 + 6.8 − 42.4 − 0.7 + 740.6 −
2011 + 1 − 3 + 56.9 − 4.6 + 3.2 − 32.9 + 36.2 − 7.9 − 68.9 − 40.9 − 4.3 − 36.7 − 28.0 + 130.4 + 251.0
2011          Sep − − 3 + 221.9 + 32.2 + 33.2 + 1.1 + 32.1 − 1.1 − 1.3 + 1.7 − 0.1 + 1.8 − 3.1 + 191.0 + 184.3
         Oct + 1 − − 184.7 − 36.5 − 36.1 − 8.7 − 27.4 − 0.4 − 0.6 + 10.9 − 0.5 + 11.4 − 11.5 − 147.7 − 137.9
         Nov − − + 26.3 − 1.5 − 1.9 − 4.0 + 2.2 + 0.3 − 18.7 − 17.1 − 0.2 − 16.9 − 1.6 + 46.5 + 34.2
         Dec − − 1 − 0.9 + 16.0 + 18.6 + 17.6 + 0.9 − 2.6 − 54.6 − 48.4 − 0.6 − 47.8 − 6.2 + 37.6 + 31.6
2012          Jan − + 2 + 30.1 + 33.9 + 34.5 + 24.3 + 10.2 − 0.6 + 30.3 + 28.6 − 0.3 + 28.9 + 1.7 − 34.1 − 48.2
         Feb − − + 8.7 + 27.5 + 27.4 − 11.1 + 38.5 + 0.1 − 4.3 − 3.3 − 1.0 − 2.3 − 1.0 − 14.5 − 39.3
         Mar − − 1 − 196.1 − 55.0 − 53.8 + 15.8 − 69.6 − 1.2 − 23.0 − 21.7 − 0.5 − 21.2 − 1.3 − 118.1 − 62.2
         Apr − − + 50.3 + 16.9 + 17.6 − 1.6 + 19.2 − 0.7 − 4.8 − 0.8 + 0.4 − 1.2 − 4.0 + 38.2 + 21.7
         May + 1 + 1 + 188.8 + 1.8 + 2.6 − 11.5 + 14.1 − 0.8 + 7.7 + 10.1 + 0.2 + 9.9 − 2.4 + 179.2 + 180.6
    
Foreign  subsidiaries End of year or month *
  
2009 36 97 474.1 205.4 157.0 87.4 69.6 48.4 217.0 154.7 38.7 115.9 62.4 51.7 −
2010 37 93 495.1 220.9 178.7 98.8 79.9 42.1 218.3 168.8 37.7 131.2 49.5 55.9 −
2011 35 87 478.6 210.3 172.8 95.3 77.5 37.5 210.5 165.1 35.6 129.5 45.5 57.7 −
2011          Aug 35 89 478.6 220.9 182.5 103.0 79.5 38.4 207.9 160.4 36.4 124.0 47.5 49.7 −
         Sep 35 89 493.1 225.6 188.5 107.1 81.4 37.1 214.2 167.9 36.6 131.3 46.2 53.3 −
         Oct 35 88 486.8 221.4 185.0 106.8 78.2 36.3 212.4 166.8 36.5 130.3 45.6 53.0 −
         Nov 35 88 491.6 225.4 188.8 107.2 81.6 36.6 212.1 167.0 36.6 130.3 45.1 54.1 −
         Dec 35 87 478.6 210.3 172.8 95.3 77.5 37.5 210.5 165.1 35.6 129.5 45.5 57.7 −
2012          Jan 35 86 472.7 208.2 171.5 92.6 78.9 36.7 212.0 165.8 35.0 130.8 46.2 52.4 −
         Feb 35 86 470.0 209.8 174.1 93.7 80.4 35.7 210.1 164.2 34.3 129.8 45.9 50.1 −
         Mar 35 86 464.5 208.7 175.0 95.9 79.1 33.7 210.5 165.3 34.1 131.1 45.2 45.3 −
         Apr 35 86 471.1 210.1 176.6 96.7 79.9 33.5 210.0 164.8 33.9 130.9 45.2 51.0 −
         May 35 85 473.4 209.0 178.3 96.3 82.0 30.7 213.7 168.2 34.3 133.9 45.5 50.7 −
Changes *
2010 + 1 − 4 + 9.2 + 9.0 + 17.8 + 11.4 + 6.4 − 8.8 − 3.8 + 9.2 − 1.1 + 10.3 − 12.9 + 3.9 −
2011 − 2 − 6 − 20.1 − 12.2 − 7.2 − 3.5 − 3.7 − 5.0 − 9.6 − 5.5 − 2.1 − 3.4 − 4.0 + 1.6 −
2011          Sep − − + 10.2 + 2.3 + 4.4 + 4.1 + 0.4 − 2.1 + 4.6 + 5.8 + 0.2 + 5.7 − 1.2 + 3.3 −
         Oct − − 1 − 3.4 − 2.8 − 2.5 − 0.3 − 2.2 − 0.3 − 0.5 + 0.2 − 0.1 + 0.3 − 0.7 − 0.1 −
         Nov − − + 1.3 + 2.1 + 2.5 + 0.4 + 2.1 − 0.3 − 1.7 − 1.3 + 0.1 − 1.4 − 0.4 + 0.9 −
         Dec − − 1 − 16.2 − 16.6 − 17.1 − 11.9 − 5.2 + 0.5 − 3.1 − 3.3 − 1.1 − 2.3 + 0.3 + 3.4 −
2012          Jan − − 1 − 4.7 − 1.4 − 0.8 − 2.7 + 1.9 − 0.6 + 1.9 + 1.2 − 0.6 + 1.8 + 0.7 − 5.2 −
         Feb − − − 0.8 + 2.5 + 3.2 + 1.1 + 2.1 − 0.7 − 1.1 − 0.8 − 0.7 − 0.2 − 0.3 − 2.2 −
         Mar − − − 6.0 − 1.4 + 0.6 + 2.2 − 1.5 − 2.1 + 0.2 + 0.9 − 0.2 + 1.1 − 0.7 − 4.8 −
         Apr − − + 5.5 + 0.9 + 1.3 + 0.9 + 0.4 − 0.4 − 1.0 − 1.0 − 0.2 − 0.8 + 0.0 + 5.6 −
         May − − 1 − 2.9 − 3.8 − 0.2 − 0.5 + 0.2 − 3.6 + 1.4 + 1.1 + 0.5 + 0.7 + 0.2 − 0.5 −
*In this table “foreign“ also includes the country of domicile of the foreign branches the flow figures for the foreign subsidiaries.) The figures for the latest date are
and foreign subsidiaries. Statistical revisions have been eliminated from the changes. always to be regarded as provisional; subsequent revisions, which appear in the(Breaks owing to changes in the reporting population have not been eliminated from following Monthly Report, are not specially marked. 1Several branches in a given

Deutsche Bundesbank
41  Monthly Report
August 2012
IV  Banks
  
      
  
Deposits Other  liabilities 6,7 
of banks (MFIs) of non-banks (non-MFIs)
German non-banks 4 
Money
market of whichpaper Derivativeand debt financial
Medium Working instruments
securities
and out- capital in the
German Foreign Short- long- Foreign stand- and own trading
Total Total banks Total Total term term ing 5 funds Total portfolio   Period banks non-banks
End of year or month * Foreign  branches
  
1,125.9 798.0 449.6 348.4 327.9 37.4 33.8 3.5 290.5 157.5 33.9 144.4 − 2009
1,131.3 751.9 398.2 353.7 379.4 44.9 39.2 5.7 334.5 187.1 34.7 873.3 648.7 20101,179.6 814.0 406.6 407.4 365.6 35.9 30.3 5.6 329.7 141.2 38.6 957.2 880.2 2011
1,148.4 780.4 404.2 376.2 368.0 39.0 33.8 5.2 328.9 153.9 37.2 842.3 766.3 2011          Aug 
1,212.6 826.7 413.9 412.8 385.9 38.0 32.6 5.4 347.9 156.2 37.7 1,039.3 955.4          Sep 
1,163.5 774.3 392.6 381.7 389.2 39.6 34.1 5.5 349.6 140.0 38.1 894.4 812.0          Oct 
1,172.8 782.0 403.3 378.7 390.8 36.9 31.3 5.6 353.9 141.3 38.3 938.8 843.1          Nov 1,179.6 814.0 406.6 407.4 365.6 35.9 30.3 5.6 329.7 141.2 38.6 957.2 880.2          Dec 
1,247.4 873.2 439.0 434.2 374.1 35.1 29.3 5.8 339.0 140.8 38.5 909.7 828.8 2012          Jan 
1,265.7 870.1 413.4 456.7 395.6 32.7 25.9 6.9 362.9 140.2 38.8 883.6 792.4          Feb 1,142.3 796.3 397.5 398.8 345.9 31.0 24.2 6.8 314.9 146.3 38.9 809.0 730.4          Mar 
1,180.1 803.8 384.7 419.1 376.4 31.1 24.3 6.8 345.3 147.6 38.9 830.1 753.1          Apr 
1,224.1 837.7 384.0 453.8 386.4 30.3 23.5 6.8 356.1 151.8 39.3 1,013.3 937.1          May
Changes *
− 34.9 − 65.3 − 50.8 − 14.5 + 30.3 + 7.5 + 5.4 + 2.2 + 22.8 + 29.7 + 0.8 + 700.0 − 2010
+ 27.0 + 50.1 + 8.4 + 41.7 − 23.1 − 9.0 − 8.9 − 0.0 − 14.2 − 45.8 + 3.9 + 71.9 + 231.5 2011
+ 34.9 + 29.2 + 9.8 + 19.4 + 5.7 − 1.0 − 1.2 + 0.2 + 6.7 + 2.3 + 0.6 + 184.1 + 189.1 2011          Sep 
− 31.9 − 42.0 − 21.3 − 20.7 + 10.1 + 1.5 + 1.5 + 0.1 + 8.6 − 16.2 + 0.4 − 137.0 − 143.4          Oct 
− 11.0 − 3.6 + 10.6 − 14.2 − 7.4 − 2.7 − 2.8 + 0.1 − 4.7 + 1.3 + 0.2 + 35.8 + 31.1          Nov − 11.3 + 22.6 + 3.3 + 19.3 − 33.8 − 0.9 − 1.0 + 0.0 − 32.9 − 0.1 + 0.2 + 10.2 + 37.1          Dec 
+ 75.5 + 63.7 + 32.5 + 31.2 + 11.8 − 0.8 − 1.0 + 0.2 + 12.6 − 0.4 − 0.1 − 44.9 − 51.4 2012          Jan 
+ 30.7 + 4.3 − 25.6 + 29.9 + 26.4 − 2.4 − 3.5 + 1.1 + 28.8 − 0.6 + 0.3 − 21.6 − 36.4          Feb − 126.6 − 75.6 − 15.9 − 59.8 − 51.0 − 1.8 − 1.7 − 0.1 − 49.2 + 6.1 + 0.1 − 75.7 − 62.0          Mar 
+ 30.6 + 3.4 − 12.8 + 16.2 + 27.2 + 0.1 + 0.1 + 0.0 + 27.1 + 1.3 + 0.1 + 18.3 + 22.7          Apr 
+ 12.2 + 15.5 − 0.8 + 16.2 − 3.3 − 0.8 − 0.8 + 0.0 − 2.5 + 4.2 + 0.3 + 172.0 + 184.0          May
  
  
End of year or month * Foreign  subsidiaries
  
377.6 218.5 125.4 93.1 159.1 37.0 29.6 7.4 122.1 33.3 24.3 38.9 − 2009
387.4 221.1 136.4 84.7 166.3 31.0 23.6 7.3 135.3 28.9 31.8 46.9 − 2010377.5 229.6 142.4 87.2 147.9 26.7 19.8 6.9 121.2 25.1 30.8 45.2 − 2011
377.4 218.3 131.1 87.2 159.1 30.6 23.7 7.0 128.5 25.6 30.4 45.2 − 2011          Aug 
390.8 227.3 134.3 93.0 163.5 30.8 23.8 7.0 132.8 25.6 30.6 46.1 −          Sep 
384.5 223.7 135.1 88.7 160.8 30.1 23.1 6.9 130.7 25.1 30.6 46.6 −          Oct 
388.1 227.8 136.5 91.3 160.3 29.5 22.5 7.0 130.8 25.3 31.2 47.0 −          Nov 
377.5 229.6 142.4 87.2 147.9 26.7 19.8 6.9 121.2 25.1 30.8 45.2 −          Dec 
371.2 219.7 131.9 87.8 151.5 29.0 22.1 6.9 122.4 25.0 30.1 46.4 − 2012          Jan 
368.2 215.8 129.6 86.2 152.4 28.9 22.1 6.9 123.4 24.9 30.6 46.4 −          Feb 
364.3 215.9 130.0 85.9 148.4 27.7 20.9 6.8 120.7 24.6 29.6 46.0 −          Mar 
370.6 222.9 129.2 93.8 147.7 26.8 19.9 6.8 121.0 24.5 29.3 46.6 −          Apr 
369.0 224.5 128.9 95.6 144.6 26.0 19.0 7.0 118.5 25.2 31.3 47.8 −          May
Changes *
+ 1.5 − 1.7 + 11.0 − 12.7 + 3.2 − 6.0 − 5.9 − 0.1 + 9.2 − 4.4 + 7.5 + 4.6 − 2010
− 12.5 + 7.1 + 6.0 + 1.1 − 19.6 − 4.2 − 3.8 − 0.4 − 15.3 − 3.8 − 1.0 − 2.8 − 2011
+ 9.7 + 7.3 + 3.2 + 4.1 + 2.4 + 0.1 + 0.1 + 0.0 + 2.3 + 0.1 + 0.2 + 0.2 − 2011          Sep 
− 4.0 − 2.4 + 0.8 − 3.2 − 1.6 − 0.7 − 0.6 − 0.1 − 0.9 − 0.5 − 0.0 + 1.2 −          Oct 
+ 0.8 + 2.8 + 1.4 + 1.3 − 2.0 − 0.6 − 0.7 + 0.1 − 1.3 + 0.2 + 0.7 − 0.3 −          Nov 
− 13.1 + 0.6 + 5.9 − 5.4 − 13.6 − 2.7 − 2.6 − 0.1 − 10.9 − 0.2 − 0.4 − 2.6 −          Dec 
− 5.2 − 9.3 − 10.5 + 1.2 + 4.2 + 2.3 + 2.3 + 0.0 + 1.9 − 0.1 − 0.8 + 1.4 − 2012          Jan 
− 1.7 − 3.2 − 2.3 − 0.9 + 1.5 − 0.1 − 0.0 − 0.1 + 1.6 − 0.1 + 0.5 + 0.5 −          Feb 
− 4.2 − 0.1 + 0.4 − 0.5 − 4.2 − 1.2 − 1.2 − 0.0 − 2.9 − 0.2 − 1.1 − 0.5 −          Mar 
+ 5.6 + 6.6 − 0.8 + 7.4 − 1.0 − 0.9 − 1.0 + 0.0 − 0.1 − 0.1 − 0.3 + 0.3 −          Apr 
− 5.9 − 0.8 − 0.3 − 0.4 − 5.1 − 0.7 − 0.9 + 0.1 − 4.4 + 0.7 + 2.1 + 0.3 −          May
country of domicile are regarded as a single branch. 2Treasury bills, Treasury securities. 5Issues of negotiable and non-negotiable debt securities and money
discount paper and other money market paper, debt securities. 3Including own debt market paper. 6 Including subordinated liabilities. 7 See also Table IV.2, footnote  1. 
securities. 4Excluding subordinated liabilities and non-negotiable debt

Deutsche Bundesbank
42  Monthly Report
August 2012
V  Minimum reserves
 
1  Reserve ratios
Germany Euro area
 
% of liabilities subject to reserve requirements % of reserve base  1 
Sight Time
Applicable from liabilities liabilities Savings deposits Applicable from Ratio
1995  Aug 1 2    2    1.5    1999  Jan 1 2    
 2012  Jan 18 1    
 
  
1Article 3 of the Regulation of the European Central Bank on the application of
minimum reserves (excluding liabilities to which a reserve ratio of 0% applies pur-
suant to Article 4 (1)). 
 
  
2  Reserve maintenance in Germany up to the end of 1998
− pursuant to the Minimum Reserves Order of the Bundesbank 
 
DM million
Liabilities subject to reserve requirements Excess reserves 4 
Monthly Required % of the
average 1 Total Sight liabilities Time liabilities Savings deposits reserves  2 Level Deficiencies Actual reserves 3 required  reserves
1995          Dec 2,066,565 579,337 519,456 967,772 36,492 37,337 845 2.3 3.1
1996          Dec 2,201,464 655,483 474,342 1,071,639 38,671 39,522 851 2.2 4.3
1997          Dec 2,327,879 734,986 476,417 1,116,477 40,975 41,721 745 1.8 3.3
1998          Dec 2,576,889 865,444 564,878 1,146,567 45,805 46,432 627 1.4 3.8
1Pursuant to sections 5 to 7 of the Minimum Reserves Order. 2Amount after tutions subject to reserve requirements on their giro accounts at the Bundesbank.
applying the reserve ratios to the liabilities subject to reserve requirements (section 5 4 Actual reserves less required reserves. 
(1) of the Minimum Reserves Order). 3Average credit balances of the credit insti-
  
3  Reserve maintenance in the euro area
− from 1999, pursuant to the ECB Regulation on the application of minimum reserves in accordance with
Article 19.1 of the Statute of the ESCB 
 
Maintenance Required reserves
period before deduction Required reserves
beginning in 1 of lump-sum Lump-sum after deduction of
Reserve base 2 allowance 3 allowance 4 lump-sum allowance Current account 5 Excess reserves 6 Deficiencies 7 
Euro area (€ billion)
 
2011          Dec 10,376.3 207.5 0.5 207.0 212.3 5.3 0.0
2012          Jan 10,382.1 103.8 0.5 103.3 108.1 4.7 0.0
         Feb 10,478.6 104.8 0.5 104.3 108.9 4.6 0.0
         Mar 10,585.8 105.9 0.5 105.4 109.6 4.3 0.0
         Apr 10,571.3 105.7 0.5 105.2 110.5 5.3 0.0
         May 10,707.2 107.1 0.5 106.6 110.8 4.2 0.0
         June p 10,739.9 107.4 0.5 106.9 111.5 4.6 0.0
         July p,8 10,747.8 107.5 0.5 107.0 510.2 403.2 ...
         Aug  p ... ... ... 107.1 ... ... ...
Of which:  Germany (€ million)
2011          Dec 2,666,422 53,328 184 53,145 54,460 1,315 1
2012          Jan 2,712,641 27,126 182 26,944 28,281 1,337 0
         Feb 2,649,840 26,498 183 26,315 27,658 1,343 0
         Mar 2,771,416 27,714 183 27,531 28,782 1,251 1
         Apr 2,792,741 27,927 183 27,745 28,917 1,172 0
         May 2,830,635 28,306 183 28,124 29,330 1,206 4
         June 2,854,770 28,548 183 28,365 29,610 1,245 1
         July p 2,861,640 28,616 182 28,434 184,846 156,412 1
         Aug  p 2,876,772 28,768 182 28,586 ... ... ...
1From March 2004, the reserve maintenance period will start on the settlement day to the reserve base. 4Article 5 (2) of the Regulation of the European Central Bank on
of the main refinancing operation immediately following the meeting of the the application of minimum reserves. 5Average credit balances of the credit insti-
Governing Council of the ECB for which the monthly discussion of the monetary tutions at the national central banks. 6Average credit balances less required reserves
policy stance is scheduled. 2Article 3 of the Regulation of the European Central Bank after deduction of the lump-sum allowance. 7Required reserves after deduction of
on the application of minimum reserves (excluding liabilities to which a reserve ratio the lump-sum allowance. 8The total number of deficiencies was not available when
of 0% applies, pursuant to Article 4 (1)). 3Amount after applying the reserve ratios this report went to press. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
43  Monthly Report
August 2012
VI Interest rates
 
1 ECB interest rates 2 Base rates
 
 
% per annum % per annum
Main refinancing Main refinancing
operations operations Base Base
Mar- Mar- rate rateginal ginal as per as per
Minimum Minimum
Applicable Deposit Fixed bid lending Applicable Deposit Fixed bid lending Applicable Civil Applicable Civilfrom facility rate rate facility from facility rate rate facility from Code  
1 from Code 1 
2005 Dec                  6 1.25 − 2.25 3.25 2009 Jan                21 1.00 2.00 − 3.00 2002 Jan                1 2.57 2007 Jan                1 2.70
         Mar                11 0.50 1.50 − 2.50          July                1 2.47          July                1 3.19
2006 Mar                  8 1.50 − 2.50 3.50          Apr                  8 0.25 1.25 − 2.25         June                15 1.75 − 2.75 3.75          May                13 0.25 1.00 − 1.75 2003 Jan                1 1.97 2008 Jan                1 3.32         Aug                  9 2.00 − 3.00 4.00          July                1 1.22          July                1 3.19
         Oct                11 2.25 − 3.25 4.25 2011 Apr                13 0.50 1.25 − 2.00
         Dec                13 2.50 − 3.50 4.50          July                13 0.75 1.50 − 2.25 2004 Jan                1 1.14 2009 Jan                1 1.62
         Nov                  9 0.50 1.25 − 2.00          July                1 1.13          July                1 0.12
2007 Mar                14 2.75 − 3.75 4.75          Dez                14 0.25 1.00 − 1.75
         June                13 3.00 − 4.00 5.00 2005 Jan                1 1.21 2011 July                1 0.37
2012 July                11 0.00 0.75 − 1.50          July                1 1.17
2008 July                  9 3.25 − 4.25 5.25 2012 Jan                1 0.12
         Oct                  8 2.75 − 3.75 4.75 2006 Jan                1 1.37
         Oct                  9 3.25 3.75 − 4.25          July                1 1.95
         Nov                12 2.75 3.25 − 3.75         Dec                10 2.00 2.50 − 3.00
1 Pursuant to section 247 of the Civil Code.  
 
  
3 Eurosystem monetary policy operations allotted through tenders 
*
 
 
Fixed rate tenders Variable rate tenders
Bid Allotment Minimum Weighted
amount amount Fixed rate bid rate Marginal rate  1 average rate
Date of Running for
settlement € million % per annum ... days
Main refinancing operations
2012 July                  4 163,629 163,629 1.00−−−7
         July                11 163,707 163,707 0.75−−−7
         July                18 156,752 156,752 0.75−−−7
         July                25 130,669 130,669 0.75−−−7
         Aug                  1 132,768 132,768 0.75−−−7
         Aug                  8 133,426 133,426 0.75−−−7
         Aug                15 130,578 130,578 0.75−−−7
Longer-term refinancing operations
2012 June                28 26,295 26,295 2 ... − − − 91
         July                11 24,398 24,398 0.75−−− 2 8
         July                26 8,450 8,450 2 ... − − − 98
         Aug                  8 25,180 25,180 0.75−−− 3 5
*Source: ECB. 1Lowest or highest interest rate at which funds were allotted or average minimum bid rate of the main refinancing operations over the life of this
collected. 2Interest payment on the maturity date; the rate will be fixed at the operation. 
 
  
4 Money market rates, by month 
*
 
 
% per annum
EONIA Swap Index 2 EURIBOR 3 
Monthly One-week One-month Three-month Six-month One-week One-month Three-month Six-month Twelve-month Twelve-month
average EONIA 1 funds funds funds funds funds funds funds funds funds funds
2012          Jan 0.38 0.38 0.38 0.36 0.34 0.35 0.49 0.84 1.22 1.50 1.84
         Feb 0.37 0.37 0.36 0.35 0.34 0.35 0.37 0.63 1.05 1.35 1.68         Mar 0.36 0.36 0.36 0.35 0.35 0.36 0.32 0.47 0.86 1.16 1.50
         Apr 0.35 0.35 0.35 0.34 0.34 0.34 0.32 0.41 0.74 1.04 1.37
         May 0.34 0.34 0.33 0.30 0.28 0.27 0.32 0.39 0.68 0.97 1.27         June 0.33 0.33 0.30 0.25 0.23 0.22 0.32 0.38 0.66 0.93 1.22
         July 0.18 0.15 0.14 0.12 0.11 0.11 0.16 0.22 0.50 0.78 1.06
*Averages are Bundesbank calculations. Neither the Deutsche Bundesbank nor act/360 method and published via Reuters. 2EONIA Swap Index: published rate
anyone else can be held liable for any irregularity or inaccuracy of the EONIA rate, since 20 June 2005 by Reuters as a reference rate for euro-money market-derivatives.
the EURIBOR rate and the EONIA Swap rate. 1Euro OverNight Index Average: As a Spot-figure (T+2) it is calculated according to the act/360 method. 3Euro Inter-
weighted average overnight rate for interbank operations calculated by the European bank Offered Rate: unweighted average rate calculated by Reuters sinceCentral Bank since 4 January 1999 on the basis of real turnover according to the 30 December 1998 according to the act/360 method. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
44  Monthly Report
August 2012
VI Interest rates
 
5 Interest rates and volumes for outstanding amounts and new business of German banks (MFIs) *
(a) Outstanding amounts o
 
 
Households’ deposits Non-financial corporations’ deposits
with an agreed maturity of
up to 2 years over 2 years up to 2 years over 2 years
Effective Effective Effective Effective
End of interest rate 1 Volume 2 interest rate 1 Volume 2 interest rate 1 Volume 2 interest rate 1 Volume 2 
month % pa € million % pa € million % pa € million % pa € million
2011          June 1.68 128,443 2.36 220,838 1.41 98,484 3.74 23,964
         July 1.73 131,401 2.35 221,490 1.50 100,631 3.72 24,136
         Aug 1.78 132,093 2.35 222,091 1.52 104,430 3.71 24,181
         Sep 1.81 134,117 2.34 222,719 1.52 109,607 3.68 24,053
         Oct 1.84 134,147 2.34 222,983 1.55 110,904 3.67 23,951
         Nov 1.87 137,615 2.33 223,747 1.53 108,388 3.64 23,470
         Dec 1.87 139,689 2.32 227,255 1.50 104,838 3.60 23,384
2012          Jan 1.86 140,362 2.32 227,974 1.43 107,611 3.59 22,576
         Feb 1.86 140,215 2.32 228,654 1.39 105,698 3.58 22,973
         Mar 1.86 140,842 2.31 229,012 1.30 99,012 3.56 22,835
         Apr 1.85 139,793 2.30 228,848 1.24 98,127 3.53 22,741
         May 1.83 139,697 2.29 229,121 1.19 96,040 3.51 22,861
         June 1.81 138,295 2.29 229,264 1.16 92,613 3.50 22,722
 
 
Housing loans to households 3 Loans for consumption and other purposes to households  4, 5 
with a maturity of
over 1 year and over 1 year and
up to 1 year 6 up to 5 years over 5 years up to 1 year 6 up to 5 years over 5 years
Effective Effective Effective Effective Effective Effective
interest interest interest interest interest interest
End of rate 1 Volume 2 rate 1 Volume 2 rate 1 Volume 2 rate 1 Volume 2 rate 1 Volume 2 rate 1 Volume 2 
month % pa % pa % pa % pa % pa % pa € million € million € million € million € million € million
2011          June 4.13 5,203 3.86 27,213 4.58 929,355 8.46 66,552 5.56 69,359 5.68 312,069
         July 4.17 5,292 3.87 27,349 4.57 930,437 8.45 63,944 5.55 69,328 5.69 312,900
         Aug 4.20 5,315 3.86 27,537 4.56 931,968 8.52 63,858 5.67 74,147 5.68 313,504
         Sep 4.23 5,284 3.85 27,817 4.55 934,054 8.56 65,653 5.66 74,384 5.68 313,747
         Oct 4.21 5,240 3.83 27,897 4.54 935,360 8.59 64,981 5.59 73,804 5.68 313,742
         Nov 4.22 5,165 3.81 28,069 4.53 937,366 8.52 63,648 5.56 73,789 5.66 315,187
         Dec 4.15 5,300 3.78 28,122 4.51 937,763 8.52 64,522 5.53 73,322 5.65 313,944
2012          Jan 4.09 5,137 3.75 28,154 4.49 936,543 8.48 63,374 5.52 73,596 5.62 313,820
         Feb 4.06 5,054 3.73 28,188 4.47 936,749 8.37 63,122 5.49 73,581 5.61 313,827
         Mar 4.03 5,100 3.70 28,402 4.46 937,726 8.34 64,286 5.45 73,527 5.59 313,149
         Apr 3.91 5,069 3.65 28,290 4.43 936,775 8.21 63,838 5.41 73,758 5.50 316,663
         May 3.85 5,187 3.62 28,501 4.41 938,392 8.17 63,708 5.36 74,466 5.48 317,022
         June 3.80 5,206 3.61 28,620 4.39 940,699 8.19 64,669 5.30 74,576 5.41 315,091
  
Loans to non-financial corporations with a maturity of
up to 1 year 6 over 1 year and up to 5 years over 5 years
End of Volume 2 Volume 2 Volume 2 Effective interest rate 1 Effective interest rate 1 Effective interest rate 1 
month % pa € million % pa € million % pa € million
2011          June 4.15 137,565 3.86 127,937 3.94 560,966
         July 4.09 137,256 3.95 127,958 3.98 561,830
         Aug 4.12 135,305 4.04 129,991 3.98 562,983
         Sep 4.16 139,120 4.03 129,919 3.98 561,294
         Oct 4.11 137,986 4.02 128,882 3.97 565,182
         Nov 4.02 139,610 3.97 128,882 3.96 566,756
         Dec 4.00 133,627 3.93 128,385 3.93 567,781
2012          Jan 3.84 136,423 3.83 127,581 3.88 569,546
         Feb 3.69 139,689 3.72 126,323 3.86 571,604
         Mar 3.64 141,139 3.61 126,677 3.79 571,433
         Apr 3.50 140,151 3.51 125,928 3.73 569,972
         May 3.46 140,062 3.46 126,583 3.70 572,592
         June 3.48 141,451 3.41 126,566 3.66 573,382
*The MFI interest rate statistics are based on the interest rates applied by MFIs and interest rates or as narrowly defined effective rates. Both calculation methods cover
the related volumes of euro-denominated deposits and loans to households and non- all interest payments on deposits and loans but not any other related charges which
financial corporations domiciled in the euro area. The household sector comprises may occur for enquiries, administration, preparation of the documents, guaranteesindividuals (including sole proprietors) and non-profit institutions serving households. and credit insurance. 2Data based on monthly balance sheet statistics. 3Secured
Non-financial corporations include all enterprises other than insurance companies, and unsecured loans for home purchase, including building and home improvements;banks and other financial institutions. The interest rate statistics gathered on a including loans granted by building and loan associations and interim credits as wellharmonised basis in the euro area from January 2003 are collected in Germany on a as transmitted loans granted by the reporting agents in their own name and for theirsample basis. The most recent figures are in all cases to be regarded as provisional. own account. 4Loans for consumption are defined as loans granted for the purpose
Subsequent revisions appearing in the following Monthly Report are not specially of personal use in the consumption of goods and services. 5For the purpose of these
marked. Further information on the MFI interest rate statistics can be found on the statistics, other loans are loans granted for other purposes such as business, debtBundesbank’s website (Statistics / Reporting system / Banking statistics / MFI interest consolidation, education etc. 6Including overdrafts (see also footnotes 13 to 15
rate statistics). oThe statistics on outstanding amounts are collected at the end of p 47
   ). 
the month. 1The effective interest rates are calculated either as annualised agreed

Deutsche Bundesbank
45  Monthly Report
August 2012
VI Interest rates
 
5 Interest rates and volumes for outstanding amounts and new business of German banks (MFIs) *  (cont’d)
(b) New business +
 
 
Households’ deposits
with an agreed maturity of redeemable at notice of  8 
Overnight up to 1 year over 2 years up to 3 months over 3 months over 1 year and up to 2 years
Effective Effective Effective Effective Effective Effective
interest interest interest interest interest interest
Reporting rate 1 Volume 2 rate 1 Volume 7 rate 1 Volume 7 rate 1 Volume 7 rate 1 Volume 2 rate 1 Volume 2 
period % pa % pa % pa % pa % pa % pa € million € million € million € million € million € million
2011          June
0.81 723,542 1.40 14,485 2.61 1,707 2.79 2,458 1.43 513,314 1.89 104,371
         July 0.87 729,146 1.55 17,846 2.53 2,140 2.80 2,398 1.42 512,173 1.90 104,420
         Aug 0.90 728,134 1.53 17,115 2.50 1,828 2.80 1,953 1.43 510,749 1.91 104,307
         Sep 0.91 729,249 1.53 18,506 2.46 1,244 2.70 1,530 1.47 509,809 1.92 103,815
         Oct 0.92 735,055 1.60 17,069 2.28 1,938 2.73 1,711 1.48 509,641 1.94 103,670
         Nov 0.91 748,146 1.57 16,851 2.17 2,261 2.83 1,934 1.43 510,106 1.94 101,829
         Dec 0.91 747,612 1.38 17,013 2.23 1,980 2.77 2,049 1.45 515,587 1.94 101,085
2012          Jan 0.89 751,235 1.50 18,304 2.30 1,724 3.03 2,422 1.43 517,814 1.94 100,172
         Feb 0.88 758,730 1.42 13,756 2.33 1,677 2.96 2,354 1.40 520,675 1.93 99,932
         Mar 0.84 761,183 1.35 14,308 2.27 1,148 2.81 2,252 1.34 521,107 1.93 99,132
         Apr 0.81 770,703 1.37 12,402 2.13 870 2.46 1,672 1.28 520,039 1.92 98,812
         May 0.79 775,639 1.26 14,178 1.99 828 2.33 1,487 1.27 519,995 1.89 98,036
         June 0.77 785,236 1.25 10,625 1.74 574 2.10 1,350 1.24 519,919 1.85 97,049
 
 
Non-financial corporations’ deposits
with an agreed maturity of
Overnight up to 1 year over 1 year and up to 2 years over 2 years
Effective Effective Effective Effective
Reporting interest rate 1 Volume 2 interest rate 1 Volume 7 interest rate 1 Volume 7 interest rate 1 Volume 7 
period % pa € million % pa € million % pa € million % pa € million
2011          June
0.62 245,634 1.25 36,331 2.08 434 2.63 465
         July 0.63 246,433 1.29 39,877 2.22 774 2.77 574
         Aug 0.63 249,188 1.23 38,033 2.53 428 2.55 515
         Sep 0.66 252,851 1.24 34,917 2.09 411 2.11 415
         Oct 0.64 257,807 1.24 36,857 2.08 621 2.31 1,363
         Nov 0.60 260,684 1.04 40,868 2.09 576 2.21 494
         Dec 0.55 267,881 1.01 41,975 2.10 766 2.36 841
2012          Jan 0.52 255,889 0.72 39,165 2.16 520 2.29 842
         Feb 0.48 253,442 0.60 34,105 2.04 594 2.28 543
         Mar 0.46 261,558 0.63 28,015 1.94 528 2.32 531
         Apr 0.43 264,667 0.55 23,820 1.68 392 2.53 470
         May 0.42 267,293 0.48 23,443 1.59 326 1.86 512
         June 0.40 270,503 0.45 22,861 1.54 312 1.58 383
 
 
Loans to households
Loans for other purposes to households with an initial rate fxation of  5 
of which loans to sole proprietors 10 
floating rate or over 1 year and floating rate or over 1 year and
up to 1 year 9 up to 5 years over 5 years up to 1 year  9 up to 5 years over 5 years
Effective Effective Effective Effective Effective Effectiveinterest interest interest interest interest interest
Reporting rate 
1 Volume 7 rate 1 Volume 7 rate 1 Volume 7 rate 1 Volume 7 rate 1 Volume 7 rate 1 Volume 7 
period % pa % pa % pa % pa % pa % pa € million € million € million € million € million € million
2011          June
3.04 4,559 4.42 1,092 4.62 2,391 3.17 3,034 4.64 654 4.62 1,377
         July 3.13 5,314 4.68 1,599 4.54 2,613 3.24 3,393 4.76 740 4.57 1,486
         Aug 3.14 4,211 4.81 1,087 4.36 2,051 3.22 2,473 4.98 830 4.34 1,152
         Sep 3.05 4,332 4.69 1,122 4.09 2,576 3.17 2,638 4.80 854 4.07 1,556
         Oct 3.06 5,025 4.54 1,044 4.03 2,524 3.17 2,978 4.65 813 4.00 1,372
         Nov 3.04 3,631 4.59 992 3.82 2,109 3.16 2,318 4.78 785 3.76 1,336
         Dec 2.78 4,968 4.51 1,233 3.77 3,272 3.08 2,987 4.69 948 3.74 1,878
2012          Jan 2.62 5,028 4.42 1,148 3.77 2,326 2.94 2,812 4.60 886 3.71 1,482
         Feb 2.48 3,938 4.17 988 3.72 1,987 2.70 2,277 4.34 736 3.68 1,038
         Mar 2.41 4,329 4.35 1,107 3.64 2,677 2.57 2,714 4.46 877 3.59 1,531
         Apr 2.31 4,441 4.31 1,294 3.68 2,095 2.57 2,463 4.52 937 3.61 1,222
         May 2.24 3,716 4.26 1,184 3.54 2,171 2.53 2,142 4.57 798 3.48 1,178
         June 2.25 4,835 4.32 1,220 3.33 2,603 2.50 2,768 4.54 801 3.28 1,577
For footnotes * and 1 to 6, see p 44  .+In the case of deposits with an agreed for the sake of simplicity. This means that all outstanding deposit and lending
maturity and all loans excluding revolving loans and overdrafts, credit card debt, new business at the end of the month has to be incorporated in the calculation of averagebusiness covers all new agreements between households or non-financial corpor- rates of interest. 7Estimated. The volume of new business is extrapolated to form
ations and the bank. The interest rates are calculated as volume-weighted average the underlying total using the Horvitz-Thompson estimator. 8Including non-financial
rates of all new agreements concluded during the reporting month. In the case of corporations’ deposits; including fidelity and growth premia. 9Excluding over-
overnight deposits, deposits redeemable at notice, revolving loans and overdrafts, drafts. 10 Collected from June 2010. 
credit card debt, new business is collected in the same way as outstanding amounts

Deutsche Bundesbank
46  Monthly Report
August 2012
VI Interest rates
 
5 Interest rates and volumes for outstanding amounts and new business of German banks (MFIs) *  (cont’d)
(b) New business +
 
 
Loans to households (cont’d)
Loans for consumption with an initial rate fixation of  4 
Total floating rate or over 1 year and
Total up to 1 year 9 up to 5 years over 5 years (including charges)
Effective Effective Effective Effective Annual percentage
Reporting Volume 7 Volume 7 Volume 7 Volume 7 rate of charge  11 interest rate 1 interest rate 1 interest rate 1 interest rate 1 
period % pa % pa € million % pa € million % pa € million % pa € million
Total loans
2011          June 7.00 6.34 5,203 3.42 879 5.72 2,258 8.27 2,066
         July 7.07 6.30 5,699 3.47 1,164 5.75 2,307 8.35 2,228
         Aug 7.09 6.35 5,764 3.56 1,039 5.74 2,364 8.19 2,361
         Sep 7.11 6.45 5,323 3.63 826 5.69 2,243 8.24 2,254
         Oct 6.93 6.35 5,498 3.36 1,042 5.80 2,189 8.27 2,267
         Nov 6.63 6.12 5,317 3.68 1,000 5.63 2,293 7.87 2,024
         Dec 6.23 5.77 4,659 3.08 970 5.59 2,086 7.64 1,603
2012          Jan 6.78 6.28 5,308 3.25 1,009 5.65 2,083 8.25 2,216
         Feb 6.74 6.19 5,116 3.20 943 5.58 2,062 8.12 2,111
         Mar 6.47 6.04 6,100 3.00 883 5.35 2,649 7.80 2,568
         Apr 6.47 6.01 5,641 3.10 874 5.25 2,459 7.93 2,308
         May 6.48 6.03 5,660 3.30 869 5.29 2,491 7.86 2,300
         June 6.48 6.08 5,408 3.64 672 5.30 2,488 7.68 2,248
of which: collateralised loans 12
2011          June . 5.16 423 3.14 109 6.52 201 4.69 113
         July . 5.01 466 3.24 130 6.26 215 4.69 121
         Aug . 4.81 461 2.98 119 5.99 207 4.60 135
         Sep . 4.63 417 2.88 111 5.81 191 4.35 115
         Oct . 4.41 422 2.91 117 5.61 181 4.09 124
         Nov . 4.22 434 2.84 112 5.30 187 3.85 135
         Dec . 4.19 454 2.93 161 5.55 172 3.92 121
2012          Jan . 4.16 419 2.70 138 5.61 159 3.93 122
         Feb . 4.16 471 2.76 145 5.39 196 3.86 130
         Mar . 4.10 494 2.22 135 5.70 193 3.76 166
         Apr . 4.10 443 2.14 123 5.59 189 3.79 131
         May . 4.21 404 2.17 110 5.70 186 3.69 108
         June . 4.16 439 2.62 105 5.56 185 3.52 149
 
 
Loans to households (cont’d)
Housing loans with an initial rate fixation of  3 
Total floating rate or over 1 year and over 5 years and
Total up to 1 year 9 up to 5 years up to 10 years over 10 years (including charges)
Effective Effective Effective Effective Effective Annual percentage
Reporting Volume 7 Volume 7 Volume 7 Volume 7 Volume 7 rate of charge  11 interest rate  1 interest rate  1 interest rate  1 interest rate  1 interest rate  1 
period % pa % pa % pa % pa % pa % pa € million € million € million € million € million
Total loans
2011          June 4.18 4.11 13,933 3.78 2,189 3.82 2,051 4.19 5,334 4.32 4,359
         July 4.12 4.02 15,868 3.68 3,131 3.82 2,395 4.13 6,067 4.25 4,275
         Aug 4.06 3.98 15,599 3.89 2,277 3.69 2,348 4.01 6,041 4.13 4,933
         Sep 3.85 3.75 15,331 3.77 2,112 3.52 2,146 3.80 5,951 3.80 5,122
         Oct 3.70 3.61 16,291 3.68 2,782 3.39 2,329 3.61 6,261 3.67 4,919
         Nov 3.65 3.56 16,139 3.74 1,960 3.31 2,371 3.58 6,429 3.58 5,379
         Dec 3.61 3.51 16,758 3.67 2,283 3.24 2,450 3.54 6,571 3.54 5,454
2012          Jan 3.59 3.50 15,645 3.60 2,614 3.21 2,417 3.48 6,480 3.64 4,134
         Feb 3.52 3.40 14,182 3.55 2,330 3.05 2,069 3.37 5,408 3.53 4,375
         Mar 3.37 3.29 16,280 3.29 1,982 2.92 2,433 3.29 6,512 3.45 5,353
         Apr 3.46 3.34 15,748 3.28 2,429 2.98 2,390 3.28 6,398 3.65 4,531
         May 3.30 3.21 15,197 3.24 2,246 2.90 2,116 3.17 6,267 3.39 4,568
         June 3.15 3.06 16,401 3.08 2,175 2.80 2,079 3.04 6,297 3.17 5,850
of which: collateralised loans 12
2011          June . 4.03 7,153 3.64 994 3.73 1,055 4.11 2,874 4.25 2,230
         July . 3.94 8,563 3.53 1,652 3.77 1,280 4.05 3,296 4.18 2,335
         Aug . 3.91 8,077 3.72 1,009 3.60 1,236 3.93 3,239 4.12 2,593
         Sep . 3.68 7,509 3.63 900 3.40 1,116 3.73 3,015 3.77 2,478
         Oct . 3.56 8,089 3.58 1,143 3.33 1,208 3.54 3,318 3.69 2,420
         Nov . 3.47 8,174 3.49 893 3.24 1,194 3.51 3,334 3.54 2,753
         Dec . 3.43 8,248 3.52 999 3.19 1,267 3.45 3,377 3.48 2,605
2012          Jan . 3.45 7,647 3.52 1,181 3.17 1,241 3.43 3,214 3.62 2,011
         Feb . 3.32 6,776 3.42 1,040 2.94 1,011 3.30 2,586 3.47 2,139
         Mar . 3.19 7,577 3.07 863 2.82 1,220 3.22 3,001 3.38 2,493
         Apr . 3.31 7,614 3.12 1,006 2.91 1,181 3.20 3,090 3.74 2,337
         May . 3.11 7,262 2.96 970 2.76 1,060 3.11 3,084 3.33 2,148
         June . 2.97 7,321 2.91 862 2.67 1,011 2.97 2,982 3.13 2,466
For footnotes * and 1 to 6, see p 44  . For footnotes +, 7 to 10, see p 45  . For related charges which may occur for enquiries, administration, preparation of the
footnote 12, see p 47  .11Annual percentage rate of charge, which contains other documents, guarantees and credit insurance. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
47  Monthly Report
August 2012
VI Interest rates
 
5 Interest rates and volumes for outstanding amounts and new business of German banks (MFIs) *  (cont’d)
(b) New business +
 
 
Loans to households (cont’d) Loans to non-financial corporations
of which of which
Revolving loans 13 Revolving loans 13 
and overdrafts 14 Revolving loans 13 Extended and overdrafts 14 Revolving loans 13 
credit card debt 15 and overdrafts 14 credit card debt credit card debt 15 and overdrafts 14 
Effective Effective Effective Effective Effective
Reporting Volume 16 Volume 16 Volume 2 Volume 16 Volume 16 interest rate 1 interest rate 1 interest rate 1 interest rate 1 interest rate 1 
period % pa € million % pa € million % pa € million % pa € million % pa € million
2011          June
10.18 44,814 10.27 39,450 14.94 3,362 5.07 69,283 5.08 69,071
         July 10.23 42,851 10.30 37,415 15.04 3,425 4.91 67,586 4.93 67,417
         Aug 10.30 43,085 10.36 37,638 15.11 3,455 4.96 66,000 4.97 65,817
         Sep 10.30 45,279 10.37 39,701 15.17 3,506 5.09 71,055 5.11 70,844
         Oct 10.35 44,961 10.43 38,918 14.72 3,974 5.05 67,933 5.07 67,720
         Nov 10.31 43,494 10.31 37,586 14.71 3,957 4.90 68,235 4.92 68,016
         Dec 10.29 44,555 10.32 38,538 14.71 4,004 4.88 64,672 4.89 64,484
2012          Jan 10.31 45,884 10.34 39,955 14.63 3,956 4.66 68,909 4.68 68,690
         Feb 10.24 45,809 10.27 39,877 14.67 3,919 4.56 70,840 4.57 70,603
         Mar 10.21 46,976 10.23 40,976 14.47 3,998 4.59 72,216 4.61 71,960
         Apr 10.05 47,352 10.12 41,135 14.51 4,000 4.43 70,726 4.45 70,471
         May 10.08 47,292 10.06 40,840 14.83 4,275 4.43 70,720 4.45 70,470
         June 10.07 48,231 10.02 41,837 14.82 4,305 4.52 72,118 4.54 71,876
 
 
Loans to non-financial corporations (cont’d)
Loans up to €1 million with an initial rate fixation of  17 Loans over €1 million with an initial rate fixation of  17 
floating rate or over 1 year and floating rate or over 1 year and
up to 1 year 9 up to 5 years over 5 years up to 1 year  9 up to 5 years over 5 years
Effective Effective Effective Effective Effective Effectiveinterest interest interest interest interest interest
Reporting rate 
1 Volume 7 rate 1 Volume 7 rate 1 Volume 7 rate 1 Volume 7 rate 1 Volume 7 rate 1 Volume 7 
period % pa % pa % pa % pa % pa % pa € million € million € million € million € million € million
Total loans
2011          June 3.93 6,808 4.64 1,264 4.33 1,143 3.06 44,897 3.62 2,839 4.23 4,181
         July 3.87 7,200 4.70 1,380 4.33 1,382 3.02 47,966 3.79 2,894 4.18 5,167
         Aug 3.97 6,317 4.75 1,470 4.10 1,181 3.01 36,905 3.92 1,639 3.99 4,143
         Sep 3.99 6,991 4.60 1,459 3.87 1,244 2.96 44,993 3.61 3,111 3.69 4,992
         Oct 3.91 7,207 4.62 1,344 3.82 1,141 3.16 47,753 3.91 1,777 3.54 4,837
         Nov 3.92 6,655 4.69 1,407 3.68 1,320 2.89 38,491 3.67 1,894 3.61 5,240
         Dec 3.92 7,289 4.61 1,726 3.58 1,695 2.93 49,228 3.71 2,955 3.59 7,554
2012          Jan 3.60 7,211 4.49 1,460 3.62 1,209 2.64 43,437 3.37 1,916 3.39 4,357
         Feb 3.56 6,539 4.41 1,323 3.45 1,076 2.58 37,564 3.47 1,352 3.51 3,243
         Mar 3.51 7,654 4.31 1,751 3.41 1,346 2.44 44,212 2.85 1,893 3.33 4,674
         Apr 3.34 7,349 4.21 1,537 3.50 1,172 2.37 41,491 3.04 2,187 3.42 4,166
         May 3.33 6,895 4.20 1,461 3.30 1,176 2.32 36,079 2.98 1,547 3.39 3,893
         June 3.37 7,267 4.14 1,469 3.16 1,357 2.39 43,154 2.89 2,333 3.07 5,764
of which: collateralised loans 12
2011          June 4.00 1,343 4.40 156 4.05 321 3.08 8,797 3.54 1,049 4.30 1,271
         July 4.04 1,536 4.41 190 4.04 428 3.13 10,905 3.52 999 4.36 1,227
         Aug 4.17 1,230 4.38 147 3.96 289 3.06 6,690 4.06 531 3.88 917
         Sep 4.06 1,346 4.09 139 3.61 333 3.16 9,236 3.62 1,071 3.71 1,056
         Oct 3.93 1,454 3.82 160 3.57 360 3.15 10,313 4.37 551 3.51 1,452
         Nov 4.05 1,171 3.92 142 3.41 406 3.02 6,850 3.97 767 3.45 1,365
         Dec 3.97 1,374 3.69 229 3.15 464 3.16 9,859 3.44 1,035 3.41 1,878
2012          Jan 3.73 1,520 3.74 169 3.56 380 2.78 9,986 3.43 749 3.37 975
         Feb 3.67 988 3.78 120 3.26 345 2.42 6,229 3.88 536 3.20 891
         Mar 3.41 1,210 3.62 164 3.14 360 2.58 8,860 3.12 550 3.27 1,466
         Apr 3.27 1,319 3.42 156 3.24 363 2.44 9,134 3.22 922 3.27 1,159
         May 3.29 1,132 3.43 138 3.02 306 2.35 6,868 3.81 375 3.17 786
         June 3.19 1,142 3.29 133 3.05 385 2.33 7,835 2.27 936 3.03 1,848
For footnotes * and 1 to 6, see p 44  . For footnotes + and 7 to 10, see p 45  . For they are within or beyond the limits agreed between customers and the
footnote 11, see p 46  .12Collected from June 2010. For the purposes of the bank. 15From June 2010 including convenience and extended credit card debt.
interest rate statistis, a loan is considered to be secured if collateral (among others Convenience credit is defined as the credit granted at an interest rate of 0% in thefinancial collateral, real estate collateral, debt securities) in at leat the same value as period between payment transactions effectuated with the card during one billingthe loan amount has been posted, pledged or assigned. 13From June 2010 cycle and the date at which the debt balances from this specific billing cycle become
including revolving loans which have all the following features: (a) the borrower may due. 16From January 2003 up to May 2010 estimated. The volume of outstanding
use or withdraw the funds to a pre-approved credit limit without giving prior notice amounts reported was extrapolated to form the underlying total using theto the lender; (b) the amount of available credit can increase and decrease as funds Horvitz-Thompson estimator. From June 2010 the data are based on monthlyare borrowed and repaid; (c) the loan may be used repeatedly; (d) there is no balance sheet statistics. 17The amount refers to the single loan transaction
obligation of regular repayment of funds. 14Overdrafts are defined as debit considered as new business. 
balances on current accounts. They include all bank overdrafts regardless of whether

Deutsche Bundesbank
48  Monthly Report
August 2012
VII Capital market
 
1 Sales and purchases of debt securities and shares in Germany
 
 
€ million
Debt securities
Sales Purchases
Domestic debt securities 1 Residents
Credit in-
Sales stitutions
= Public Foreign including
total Bank Corporate debt debt building
pur- debt bonds secur- secur- and loan Deutsche Other Non-
Period chases Total securities ities 3 ities 4 Total 5 Bundesbank sectors 7 residents 8 (non-MFIs) 2 associations 6 
2000 226,393 157,994 120,154 12,605 25,234 68,399 151,568 91,447 . 60,121 74,825
2001 180,227 86,656 55,918 14,473 16,262 93,571 111,281 35,848 . 75,433 68,946
2002 175,396 124,035 47,296 14,506 62,235 51,361 60,476 13,536 . 46,940 114,920
2003 184,679 134,455 31,404 30,262 72,788 50,224 105,557 35,748 . 69,809 79,122
2004 233,890 133,711 64,231 10,778 58,703 100,179 108,119 121,841 . − 13,723 125,772
2005 252,658 110,542 39,898 2,682 67,965 142,116 94,718 61,740 . 32,978 157,940
2006 242,006 102,379 40,995 8,943 52,446 139,627 125,423 68,893 . 56,530 116,583
2007 217,798 90,270 42,034 20,123 28,111 127,528 − 26,762 96,476 . − 123,238 244,560
2008 76,490 66,139 − 45,712 86,527 25,322 10,351 18,236 68,049 . − 49,813 58,254
2009 69,549 − 538 − 114,902 22,709 91,655 70,087 89,169 12,973 8,645 67,550 − 19,620
2010 148,944 − 1,212 − 7,621 24,044 − 17,635 150,156 100,647 − 103,271 22,967 180,952 48,297
2011 40,799 13,575 − 46,796 850 59,521 27,224 − 16,574 − 94,793 36,805 41,413 57,373
2011          Aug 41,216 38,421 16,683 903 20,835 2,795 5,361 − 9,417 11,917 2,861 35,855
         Sep − 11,824 − 12,170 − 11,839 − 2,901 2,570 346 − 1,695 − 12,051 9,339 1,017 − 10,129
         Oct − 21,458 − 21,880 − 3,824 − 10,980 − 7,076 422 − 2,501 − 4,494 2,994 − 1,001 − 18,957
         Nov 22,841 21,495 8,326 − 2,825 15,994 1,346 11,512 − 8,744 9,305 10,951 11,329
         Dec − 46,609 − 44,168 − 15,514 − 9,196 − 19,458 − 2,441 − 18,440 − 18,677 1,538 − 1,301 − 28,169
2012          Jan − 5,244 − 28,450 − 31,833 − 6,174 9,557 23,206 10,955 − 1,929 1,652 11,232 − 16,199
         Feb 44,827 38,149 8,709 − 2,597 32,037 6,678 8,230 1,270 − 397 7,357 36,597
         Mar 21,280 12,235 − 12,463 2,730 21,968 9,045 28,119 2,516 − 741 26,344 − 6,839
         Apr − 4,122 − 1,076 − 5,709 517 4,116 − 3,046 − 3,191 − 11,066 − 281 8,156 − 931         May 17,028 7,358 − 9,884 − 852 18,094 9,670 − 10,259 − 6,457 − 305 − 3,497 27,287
         June − 13,194 − 8,432 − 4,207 − 5,111 886 − 4,762 − 4,504 − 4,117 − 565 178 − 8,690
 
 
€ million
Shares
Sales Purchases
Sales Residents
=
total Domestic Foreign Credit insti- Non-
Period purchases shares 9 shares 10 Total 11 tutions 6,12 Other sectors 13 residents 14 
2000 140,461 22,733 117,729 164,654 23,293 141,361 − 24,194
2001 82,665 17,575 65,091 − 2,252 − 14,714 12,462 84,918
2002 39,338 9,232 30,106 18,398 − 23,236 41,634 20,941
2003 11,896 16,838 − 4,946 − 15,121 7,056 − 22,177 27,016
2004 − 3,317 10,157 − 13,474 7,432 5,045 2,387 − 10,748
2005 32,364 13,766 18,597 1,036 10,208 − 9,172 31,329
2006 26,276 9,061 17,214 7,528 11,323 − 3,795 18,748
2007 − 5,009 10,053 − 15,062 − 62,308 − 6,702 − 55,606 57,299
2008 − 29,452 11,326 − 40,778 2,743 − 23,079 25,822 − 32,194
2009 38,164 23,962 14,200 30,357 − 8,335 38,692 7,809
2010 37,211 20,049 17,162 38,973 7,340 31,633 − 1,761
2011 24,779 21,713 3,066 30,880 670 30,210 − 6,102
2011          Aug − 2,474 203 − 2,677 − 101 − 5,224 5,123 − 2,373
         Sep − 4,211 91 − 4,302 − 2,157 − 4,409 2,252 − 2,054
         Oct 1,734 183 1,551 759 − 2,068 2,827 975
         Nov − 1,579 303 − 1,882 3,390 − 575 3,965 − 4,969
         Dec 9,457 1,643 7,814 11,070 9,865 1,205 − 1,613
2012          Jan − 1,385 262 − 1,647 2,020 − 106 2,126 − 3,405
         Feb − 2,026 730 − 2,756 − 5,771 − 5,696 − 75 3,745
         Mar 1,828 380 1,448 10,849 11,295 − 446 − 9,021
         Apr − 1,149 66 − 1,215 11,115 10,558 557 − 12,264
         May 4,239 687 3,552 − 6,632 − 13,638 7,006 10,871
         June 2,202 725 1,477 − 8,414 − 8,285 − 129 10,616
1Net sales at market values plus/minus changes in issuers’ portfolios of their own values. 9Excluding shares of public limited investment companies; at issue prices.
debt securities. 2Including cross-border financing within groups from January 2011. 10Net purchases or net sales (−) of foreign shares (including direct investment)  by  
3Including Federal Railways Fund, Federal Post Office and Treuhand agency. 4Net residents;  transaction  values. 11Domestic and foreign shares. 12Up to end-1998,
purchases or net sales (−) of foreign debt securities by residents; transaction excluding syndicated shares. 13Residual; also including purchases of domestic and
values. 5Domestic and foreign debt securities. 6Book values; statistically adjusted. foreign securities by domestic mutual funds. 14Net purchases or net sales (−) of
7Residual; also including purchases of domestic and foreign securities by domestic domestic shares (including direct investment) by non-residents; transaction values. —
mutual funds. Up to end-2008, data comprise Deutsche Bundesbank. 8Net pur- The figures for the most recent date are provisional; revisions are not specially
chases or net sales (−) of domestic debt securities by non-residents; transaction marked. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
49  Monthly Report
August 2012
 VII Capital market
 
2 Sales of debt securities issued by residents *  
 
 
€ million nominal value
Bank debt securities 1 Memo item
 Foreign  DM/euro
bonds issued Debt securities
Corporate by German- issued by special
Mortgage Public purpose credit Other bank bonds Public managed
Period Total Total Pfandbriefe Pfandbriefe institutions (non-MFIs)  2 syndicates debt securities debt securities 3 
Gross sales  4 
2000 659,148 500,895 34,528 143,107 94,556 228,703 8,114 150,137 31,597
2001 687,988 505,646 34,782 112,594 106,166 252,103 11,328 171,012 10,605
2002 818,725 569,232 41,496 119,880 117,506 290,353 17,574 231,923 10,313
2003 958,917 668,002 47,828 107,918 140,398 371,858 22,510 268,406 2,850
2004 990,399 688,844 33,774 90,815 162,353 401,904 31,517 270,040 12,344
2005 988,911 692,182 28,217 103,984 160,010 399,969 24,352 272,380 600
2006 925,863 622,055 24,483 99,628 139,193 358,750 29,975 273,834 69
2007 1,021,533 743,616 19,211 82,720 195,722 445,963 15,043 262,872 −
2008 1,337,337 961,271 51,259 70,520 382,814 456,676 95,093 280,974 −
2009 1,533,616 1,058,815 40,421 37,615 331,566 649,215 76,379 398,423 −
2010 1,375,138 757,754 36,226 33,539 363,828 324,160 53,654 563,731 −
2011 1,337,772 658,781 31,431 24,295 376,876 226,180 86,615 592,376 −
2011          Nov 130,444 67,824 1,805 1,113 37,452 27,454 5,272 57,347 −
         Dec 84,412 46,202 2,899 1,047 27,120 15,136 2,413 35,797 −
2012          Jan 135,380 61,975 2,431 2,418 40,690 16,437 1,373 72,031 −
         Feb 126,002 68,028 5,349 494 39,974 22,211 3,594 54,380 −
         Mar 118,097 61,583 5,423 1,650 37,126 17,383 8,203 48,311 −
         Apr 93,894 43,152 1,167 1,290 28,607 12,089 4,346 46,396 −
         May 111,973 56,156 3,547 399 34,929 17,281 3,191 52,626 −
         June 112,303 55,433 6,671 396 34,322 14,045 4,982 51,888 −
of which: Debt securities with maturities of more than four years  5 
2000 319,330 209,187 20,724 102,664 25,753 60,049 6,727 103,418 27,008
2001 299,751 202,337 16,619 76,341 42,277 67,099 7,479 89,933 6,4802002 309,157 176,486 16,338 59,459 34,795 65,892 12,149 120,527 9,2132003 369,336 220,103 23,210 55,165 49,518 92,209 10,977 138,256 2,8502004 424,769 275,808 20,060 48,249 54,075 153,423 20,286 128,676 4,320
2005 425,523 277,686 20,862 63,851 49,842 143,129 16,360 131,479 400
2006 337,969 190,836 17,267 47,814 47,000 78,756 14,422 132,711 692007 315,418 183,660 10,183 31,331 50,563 91,586 13,100 118,659 −2008 387,516 190,698 13,186 31,393 54,834 91,289 84,410 112,407 −2009 361,999 185,575 20,235 20,490 59,809 85,043 55,240 121,185 −
2010 381,687 169,174 15,469 15,139 72,796 65,769 34,649 177,863 −
2011 368,039 153,309 13,142 8,500 72,985 58,684 41,299 173,431 −
2011          Nov 27,334 8,922 488 240 989 7,205 3,650 14,762 −
         Dec 15,338 6,669 519 628 1,412 4,111 1,344 7,325 −
2012          Jan 36,293 16,603 932 1,617 10,284 3,770 241 19,449 −
         Feb 44,069 23,168 3,479 85 12,714 6,889 1,889 19,012 −         Mar 38,456 17,308 2,892 732 7,621 6,064 7,096 14,051 −
         Apr 25,903 9,656 1,137 1,093 3,310 4,117 3,513 12,734 −
         May 31,194 10,197 2,152 154 3,815 4,076 1,804 19,193 −         June 29,740 12,223 4,734 271 2,883 4,335 2,435 15,081 −
Net sales  6 
2000 155,615 122,774 5,937 29,999 30,089 56,751 7,320 25,522 − 16,7052001 84,122 60,905 6,932 − 9,254 28,808 34,416 8,739 14,479 − 30,6572002 131,976 56,393 7,936 − 26,806 20,707 54,561 14,306 61,277 − 44,5462003 124,556 40,873 2,700 − 42,521 44,173 36,519 18,431 65,253 − 54,9902004 167,233 81,860 1,039 − 52,615 50,142 83,293 18,768 66,605 − 22,124
2005 141,715 65,798 − 2,151 − 34,255 37,242 64,962 10,099 65,819 − 35,963
2006 129,423 58,336 − 12,811 − 20,150 44,890 46,410 15,605 55,482 − 19,2082007 86,579 58,168 − 10,896 − 46,629 42,567 73,127 − 3,683 32,093 − 29,7502008 119,472 8,517 15,052 − 65,773 25,165 34,074 82,653 28,302 − 31,6072009 76,441 − 75,554 858 − 80,646 25,579 − 21,345 48,508 103,482 − 21,037
2010 21,566 − 87,646 − 3,754 − 63,368 28,296 − 48,822 23,748 85,464 − 10,904
2011 22,518 − 54,582 1,657 − 44,290 32,904 − 44,852 − 3,189 80,289 − 5,989
2011          Nov 29,635 6,035 1,482 − 4,203 3,522 5,233 − 2,959 26,559 − 69
         Dec − 43,269 − 18,535 184 − 1,948 − 682 − 16,088 − 8,891 − 15,844 − 10
2012          Jan − 39,565 − 31,796 − 2,816 − 7,963 − 8,669 − 12,348 − 3,675 − 4,094 −
         Feb 32,588 13,452 2,934 − 2,054 10,606 1,966 − 1,278 20,414 −         Mar − 4,544 − 9,811 − 3,048 − 2,598 2,319 − 6,484 2,459 2,808 − 23
         Apr − 7,571 − 6,146 − 638 − 380 − 304 − 4,824 − 2,325 900 − 31
         May 4,558 − 8,704 917 − 6,057 − 566 − 2,998 − 2,777 16,039 −         June − 3,812 − 8,094 4,534 − 5,786 3,009 − 9,851 − 3,589 7,871 − 33
*For definitions, see the explanatory notes in the Statistical Supplement 2 Capital Railways Fund, Federal Post Office and Treuhand agency. 4Gross sales means only
market statistics on p 21 ff. 1Excluding registered bank debt securities. 2Including initial sales of newly issued securities. 5Maximum maturity according to the terms of
cross-border financing within groups from January 2011. 3Including Federal issue. 6 Gross sales less redemptions. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
50  Monthly Report
August 2012
VII Capital market
 
3 Amounts outstanding of debt securities issued by residents  * 
 
 
€ million nominal value
Bank debt securities 1 Memo item
 Foreign  DM/euro
End of year Debt securities bonds issued
or month/ issued by Corporate by German-
Maturity Mortgage Public special purpose Other bank bonds Public managed
in years Total Total Pfandbriefe Pfandbriefe credit institutions debt securities (non-MFIs) debt securities syndicates
2000 2,265,121 1,445,736 140,751 685,122 157,374 462,488 13,599 805,786 322,856
2001 2,349,243 1,506,640 147,684 675,868 201,721 481,366 22,339 820,264 292,199
2002 2,481,220 1,563,034 155,620 649,061 222,427 535,925 36,646 881,541 247,655
2003 2,605,775 1,603,906 158,321 606,541 266,602 572,442 55,076 946,793 192,666
2004 2,773,007 1,685,766 159,360 553,927 316,745 655,734 73,844 1,013,397 170,543
2005 2,914,723 1,751,563 157,209 519,674 323,587 751,093 83,942 1,079,218 134,580
2006 3,044,145 1,809,899 144,397 499,525 368,476 797,502 99,545 1,134,701 115,373
2007 3,130,723 1,868,066 133,501 452,896 411,041 870,629 95,863 1,166,794 85,623
2008 3,250,195 1,876,583 150,302 377,091 490,641 858,550 178,515 1,195,097 54,015
2009 3,326,635 1,801,029 151,160 296,445 516,221 837,203 227,024 1,298,581 32,978
2010 3,348,201 2 1,570,490 147,529 232,954 544,517 2 645,491 250,774 2 1,526,937 22,074
2011 3,370,721 1,515,911 149,185 188,663 577,423 600,640 247,585 1,607,226 16,085
2011          Dec 3,370,721 1,515,911 149,185 188,663 577,423 600,640 247,585 1,607,226 16,085
2012          Jan 3,331,156 1,484,115 146,368 180,700 568,754 588,292 243,910 1,603,132 16,085
         Feb 3,363,744 1,497,567 149,303 178,646 579,360 590,258 242,632 1,623,546 16,085
         Mar 3,359,200 1,487,756 146,255 176,047 581,679 583,775 245,091 1,626,354 16,062
         Apr 3,351,629 1,481,610 145,617 175,668 581,375 578,951 242,766 1,627,253 16,031
         May 3,356,187 1,472,906 146,534 169,611 580,809 575,953 239,989 1,643,292 16,031
         June 3,352,375 1,464,811 151,068 163,825 583,818 566,101 2 215,673 2 1,671,891 15,998
Breakdown by remaining period to maturity  3 Position at end-June 2012 
1,299,328 622,726 65,236 84,982 241,752 230,754 45,181 631,422 7,694    less than 2
854,286 430,825 53,614 41,187 134,266 201,758 39,600 383,862 2,688 2 to less than 4
419,556 188,538 19,244 23,551 82,726 63,017 33,380 197,639 1,935 4 to less than 6
226,165 81,217 7,922 7,287 50,069 15,940 11,324 133,623 204 6 to less than 8
193,725 56,324 3,875 3,397 35,937 13,115 4,756 132,646 380 8 to less than 10
61,723 19,673 1,066 2,059 11,556 4,993 10,506 31,545 1,912 10 to less than 15
81,319 13,330 10 303 6,580 6,437 2,698 65,291 219 15 to less than 20
216,270 52,181 100 1,058 20,932 30,090 68,228 95,863 967 20 and more
*Including debt securities temporarily held in the issuers’ portfolios. 1Excluding maturity for debt securities falling due en bloc and until mean maturity of the
debt securities handed to the trustee for temporary safe custody. 2Sectoral residual amount outstanding for debt securities not falling due en bloc. 
reclassification of debt securities. 3Calculated from month under review until final
  
4 Shares in circulation issued by residents
 * 
  
€ million nominal value
Change in domestic public limited companies’ capital due to
Memo item
Share circulationat market values
contribution (market capita- cash 
payments
Share capital = Net increase or and ex- contribution of shares, merger reduction lisation)
circulation at net decrease (−) change of of claims mining shares, and of capital level at end
end of period during period convertible issue of and other GmbH shares, transfer change of and of period
Period under review under review bonds 1 bonus shares real assets etc of assets legal form liquidation under review  2 
2000 147,629 14,115 3,620 3,694 618 8,089 − 1,986 1,827 − 1,745 1,353,000
2001 166,187 18,561 7,987 4,057 1,106 8,448 1,018 − 905 − 3,152 1,205,613
2002 168,716 2,528 4,307 1,291 486 1,690 − 868 − 2,152 − 2,224 647,492
2003 162,131 − 6,585 4,482 923 211 513 − 322 − 10,806 − 1,584 851,001
2004 164,802 2,669 3,960 1,566 276 696 220 − 1,760 − 2,286 887,217
2005 163,071 − 1,733 2,470 1,040 694 268 − 1,443 − 3,060 − 1,703 1,058,532
2006 163,764 695 2,670 3,347 604 954 − 1,868 − 1,256 − 3,761 1,279,638
2007 164,560 799 3,164 1,322 200 269 − 682 − 1,847 − 1,636 1,481,930
2008 168,701 4,142 5,006 1,319 152 0 − 428 − 608 − 1,306 830,622
2009 175,691 6,989 12,476 398 97 − − 3,741 − 1,269 − 974 927,256
2010 174,596 − 1,096 3,265 497 178 10 − 486 − 993 − 3,569 1,091,220
2011 177,167 2,570 6,390 552 462 9 − 552 − 762 − 3,532 924,214
2011          Dec 177,167 153 280 1 13 − − 2 − 86 − 54 924,214
2012          Jan 177,231 63 151 1 1 − − 5 − 47 − 37 1,012,812
         Feb 177,599 368 557 − 2 − − 11 − 19 − 161 1,070,023
         Mar 177,902 303 119 3 376 − − 25 − 88 − 83 1,075,219
         Apr 177,912 10 57 −1−− − 9 − 4 0 1,053,431
         May 178,231 319 654 0−−0 − 2 − 3 33 971,168
         June 178,528 297 265 1 177 − − 2 − 51 − 93 969,686
*Excluding shares of public limited investment companies. 1Including shares issued ket segment was closed down on 24 March 2003) are included as well as enterprises
out of company profits. 2Enterprises listed on the Regulated Market (the introduc- listed on the Open Market. Source: Bundesbank calculations based on data of the
tion of which marked the end of the division of organised trading segments into an Herausgebergemeinschaft Wertpapier-Mitteilungen and the Deutsche Börse AG. official and a regulated market on 1 November 2007) or the Neuer Markt (stock mar-

Deutsche Bundesbank
51  Monthly Report
August 2012
 VII Capital market
 
5 Yields and indices on German securities
 
 
               
Yields on debt securities outstanding issued by residents  1 Price indices 2,3 
Public debt securities Bank debt securities Debt securities Shares
Listed
Federal securities
With a residual With a residual
maturity of maturity of Corporate German German
9 and more than 9 bonds bond iBoxx CDAX share
including and including (non- index share price index € Germany
Total Total Total 10 years 4 Total 10 years MFIs) (REX) price index index (DAX)
Average End-1998 End-1987 End-1987
Period % per annum daily rate = 100 = 100 = 1000
2000 5.4 5.3 5.2 5.3 5.6 5.8 6.2 112.48 94.11 396.59 6,433.61
2001 4.8 4.7 4.7 4.8 4.9 5.3 5.9 113.12 94.16 319.38 5,160.102002 4.7 4.6 4.6 4.8 4.7 5.1 6.0 117.56 97.80 188.46 2,892.632003 3.7 3.8 3.8 4.1 3.7 4.3 5.0 117.36 97.09 252.48 3,965.162004 3.7 3.7 3.7 4.0 3.6 4.2 4.0 120.19 99.89 268.32 4,256.08
2005 3.1 3.2 3.2 3.4 3.1 3.5 3.7 120.92 101.09 335.59 5,408.26
2006 3.8 3.7 3.7 3.8 3.8 4.0 4.2 116.78 96.69 407.16 6,596.922007 4.3 4.3 4.2 4.2 4.4 4.5 5.0 114.85 94.62 478.65 8,067.322008 4.2 4.0 4.0 4.0 4.5 4.7 6.3 121.68 102.06 266.33 4,810.202009 3.2 3.1 3.0 3.2 3.5 4.0 5.5 123.62 100.12 320.32 5,957.43
2010 2.5 2.4 2.4 2.7 2.7 3.3 4.0 124.96 102.95 368.72 6,914.19
2011 2.6 2.4 2.4 2.6 2.9 3.5 4.3 131.48 109.53 304.60 5,898.35
2012          Feb 1.7 1.6 1.6 1.9 2.0 2.5 4.0 131.35 109.16 352.13 6,856.08
         Mar 1.7 1.6 1.6 1.8 2.0 2.4 4.0 131.43 109.00 356.61 6,946.83
         Apr 1.6 1.5 1.4 1.6 1.9 2.4 3.9 132.70 109.92 345.43 6,761.19
         May 1.4 1.2 1.2 1.3 1.7 2.1 3.8 134.80 113.33 315.64 6,264.38         June 1.3 1.2 1.2 1.3 1.6 1.9 3.5 132.79 110.09 321.27 6,416.28
         July 1.2 1.1 1.1 1.2 1.4 2.0 3.0 134.55 112.15 338.31 6,772.26
1Bearer debt securities with maximum maturities according to the terms of issue of ding of the debt securities included in the calculation. Monthly figures are calculated
over 4 years if their mean residual maturities exceed 3 years. Convertible debt on the basis of the yields on all the business days in a month. The annual figures are
securities, etc. debt securities with unscheduled redemption, zero -coupon bonds, the unweighted means of the monthly figures. 2End of year or month. 3Source:
floating -rate notes and bonds not denominated in euro are not included. Group Deutsche Börse AG. 4Only debt securities eligible as underlying instruments for
yields for the various categories of securities are weighted by the amounts outstan- futures contracts; calculated as unweighted averages. 
 
 
6 Sales and purchases of mutual fund shares in Germany
  
€ million
Sales Purchases
Domestic mutual funds 1  (sales receipts) Residents
Mutual funds open to the Credit institutions
general public including building
Other sectors 3 and loan associations 2 
of which
Sales Open- of which of which
= Secur- end Foreign Foreign
total Money ities- real Special- mutual mutualpur- market based estate ised Foreign fund fund Non-resi-
Period chases Total Total funds funds funds funds funds  
4 Total Total shares Total shares dents 5 
2000 118,021 85,160 39,712 − 2,188 36,818 − 2,824 45,448 32,861 107,019 14,454 92 92,565 32,769 11,002
2001 97,077 76,811 35,522 12,410 9,195 10,159 41,289 20,266 96,127 10,251 2,703 85,876 17,563 9512002 66,571 59,482 25,907 3,682 7,247 14,916 33,575 7,089 67,251 2,100 3,007 65,151 4,082 − 6802003 47,754 43,943 20,079 − 924 7,408 14,166 23,864 3,811 49,547 − 2,658 734 52,205 3,077 − 1,7932004 14,435 1,453 − 3,978 − 6,160 − 1,246 3,245 5,431 12,982 10,267 8,446 3,796 1,821 9,186 4,168
2005 85,268 41,718 6,400 − 124 7,001 − 3,186 35,317 43,550 79,252 21,290 7,761 57,962 35,789 6,016
2006 47,264 19,535 − 14,257 490 − 9,362 − 8,814 33,791 27,729 39,006 14,676 5,221 24,330 22,508 8,2582007 55,778 13,436 − 7,872 − 4,839 − 12,848 6,840 21,307 42,342 51,309 − 229 4,240 51,538 38,102 4,4692008 2,598 − 7,911 − 14,409 − 12,171 − 11,149 799 6,498 10,509 11,315 − 16,625 − 9,252 27,940 19,761 − 8,717
2009 48,081 43,747 10,966 − 5,047 11,749 2,686 32,780 4,333 36,339 − 14,995 − 8,178 51,334 12,511 11,742
2010 107,350 84,906 13,381 − 148 8,683 1,897 71,525 22,443 104,778 3,873 6,290 100,905 16,153 2,5722011 45,362 45,221 − 1,340 − 379 − 2,037 1,562 46,561 142 37,651 − 7,576 − 694 45,227 836 7,711
2011          Dec 6,474 9,000 − 2,006 − 26 − 1,288 443 11,006 − 2,526 5,536 − 3,690 − 1,411 9,226 − 1,115 9382012          Jan 5,897 4,068 723 − 332 597 611 3,345 1,829 6,186 − 1,426 113 7,612 1,716 − 289
         Feb 14,938 13,402 − 582 − 169 − 831 431 13,984 1,536 15,218 − 1,186 192 16,404 1,344 − 280         Mar 6,558 3,595 − 668 − 145 − 859 396 4,263 2,963 7,011 − 284 642 7,295 2,321 − 453
         Apr − 1,329 283 − 3,367 − 7 − 4,322 107 3,650 − 1,612 5,572 3,745 − 218 1,827 − 1,394 − 6,901
         May 4,296 4,946 3,420 3 3,403 − 171 1,526 − 650 − 730 − 4,374 − 947 3,644 297 5,026         June 9,129 10,145 − 429 129 − 338 517 10,575 − 1,016 9,648 − 1,253 − 1,452 10,901 436 − 519
1Including public limited investment companies. 2Book values. 3Residual. 4Net transaction values. — The figures for the most recent date are provisional; revisions
purchases or net sales (−) of foreign fund shares by residents; transaction values. are not specially marked. 
5Net purchases or net sales (−) of domestic fund shares by non-residents;

Deutsche Bundesbank
52  Monthly Report
August 2012
VIII  Financial accounts
  
1  Acquisition of financial assets and financing of private non-financial sectors
(non-consolidated)
  
  € billion
2010 2011 2012 
Item 2009 2010 2011 Q2 Q3 Q4 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 Q1
Households  1 
  I  Acquisition of financial assets
Currency and deposits 49.9 72.7 66.7 19.1 5.3 33.6 6.4 17.4 15.6 27.3 21.1
Debt securities 2 − 12.6 − 11.5 − 1.9 − 5.0 0.9 − 3.8 2.5 1.8 − 4.0 − 2.2 − 2.8
Shares 16.3 13.4 14.3 5.1 − 1.6 7.2 3.3 0.5 5.3 5.3 0.7
Other equity 3.0 3.0 3.0 0.7 0.7 0.8 0.7 0.7 0.8 0.7 0.8
Mutual funds shares − 1.1 10.0 − 14.5 6.6 0.5 − 0.5 − 3.5 − 0.1 − 7.0 − 4.0 − 1.6
Claims on insurance
corporations 3 62.5 60.5 48.1 12.2 10.6 16.2 16.9 10.5 8.4 12.3 17.1
short-term claims 0.3 − 0.7 0.7 − 0.1 − 0.1 − 0.4 0.1 0.2 0.2 0.2 0.2
longer-term claims 62.2 61.2 47.4 12.3 10.7 16.6 16.7 10.2 8.2 12.2 16.9
Claims from companypension commitments 9.8 7.8 8.1 2.0 1.9 2.0 2.0 2.1 2.0 2.0 2.0
Other claims 
4 17.5 − 2.1 23.8 − 2.0 12.9 − 23.4 20.2 2.5 9.6 − 8.4 14.7
Total 145.3 153.9 147.6 38.8 31.2 32.1 48.4 35.4 30.7 33.1 52.1
  II Financing
Loans − 7.6 4.4 10.5 5.6 5.5 0.6 − 3.9 4.9 6.8 2.7 − 1.0
short-term loans − 4.3 − 2.3 − 2.1 1.0 − 0.8 − 2.1 − 0.6 1.0 − 0.9 − 1.6 − 0.1
longer-term loans − 3.4 6.6 12.6 4.5 6.3 2.7 − 3.3 3.9 7.7 4.3 − 0.9
Other liabilities 1.0 0.1 0.4 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.3 0.3 0.1 0.0 − 0.0 0.2
Total − 6.6 4.5 10.8 5.6 5.4 0.3 − 3.5 4.9 6.8 2.6 − 0.8
Corporations
I   Acquisition of financial assets
Currency and deposits 25.0 7.3 13.5 − 22.0 20.0 5.9 5.4 − 17.1 1.6 23.6 − 8.6
Debt securities 2 4.8 − 0.1 4.9 0.4 1.7 − 1.6 3.5 − 0.7 0.9 1.2 0.2
Financial derivatives − 5.5 26.8 14.5 3.3 4.0 17.3 5.1 2.9 4.3 2.1 1.8
Shares 22.6 21.6 22.6 − 2.5 8.3 13.6 2.1 5.4 7.5 7.5 8.8
Other equity 29.1 48.7 32.8 7.3 6.0 3.1 − 0.3 25.5 − 1.1 8.7 11.2
Mutual funds shares − 2.6 8.8 23.8 0.5 7.6 − 0.7 0.9 10.3 2.7 9.9 − 5.2
Loans 87.1 95.2 87.3 28.7 22.9 17.1 31.8 25.4 31.7 − 1.6 5.0
short-term loans 53.8 70.4 70.8 20.0 17.0 13.2 25.8 23.6 22.2 − 0.8 3.4
longer-term loans 33.3 24.8 16.5 8.7 5.9 3.8 6.0 1.8 9.5 − 0.8 1.6
Claims on insurancecorporations 
3 0.8 − 0.7 − 0.6 − 0.2 − 0.2 − 0.2 − 0.2 − 0.2 − 0.2 − 0.2 − 0.2
short-term claims 0.8 − 0.7 − 0.6 − 0.2 − 0.2 − 0.2 − 0.2 − 0.2 − 0.2 − 0.2 − 0.2
longer-term claims . . . . . . . . . . .
Other claims 11.7 − 68.6 − 9.3 18.0 − 37.3 − 14.0 10.2 13.0 7.1 − 39.6 27.1
Total 173.1 138.9 189.3 33.5 33.1 40.4 58.5 64.5 54.6 11.7 40.1
  II Financing
Debt securities 2 − 7.1 9.6 3.8 − 0.5 − 3.6 5.1 7.7 − 0.3 4.2 − 7.8 3.8
Financial derivatives . . . . . . . . . . .
Shares 5.5 7.2 7.4 0.1 0.2 0.8 0.3 5.5 − 0.3 1.9 0.6
Other equity 10.3 5.7 11.9 3.1 1.5 − 0.9 5.3 1.5 1.7 3.4 2.4
Loans 57.3 62.4 109.1 15.0 20.9 1.4 15.9 36.1 52.0 5.1 0.9
short-term loans 9.6 55.2 79.2 21.1 9.0 − 5.0 8.8 28.3 35.6 6.5 − 3.3
longer-term loans 47.7 7.1 29.9 − 6.0 12.0 6.5 7.2 7.8 16.4 − 1.5 4.2
Claims from companypension commitments 4.8 2.6 2.6 0.7 0.7 0.7 0.7 0.7 0.7 0.7 0.7
Other liabilities 45.9 33.6 55.3 8.2 − 25.9 47.0 22.0 6.2 10.5 16.6 14.4
Total 116.7 121.2 190.1 26.6 − 6.3 54.2 51.9 49.7 68.7 19.8 22.7
1Including non-profit institutions serving households. 2Including money market and supplementary pension funds. 4Including accumulated interest-bearing surplus
paper. 3Including private pension funds, burial funds, occupational pension schemes shares with insurance corporations. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
53  Monthly Report
August 2012
VIII  Financial accounts
  
2  Financial assets and liabilities of private non-financial sectors
(non-consolidated)
  
  End-of-year level, end-of-quarter level; € billion
2010 2011 
2012 
Item 2009 2010 2011 Q2 Q3 Q4 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 Q1
Households  1 
  I  Financial assets
Currency and deposits 1,788.1 1,860.8 1,927.5 1,821.9 1,827.2 1,860.8 1,867.2 1,884.6 1,900.2 1,927.5 1,948.6
Debt securities 2 265.5 254.1 247.1 259.1 259.6 254.1 254.8 258.3 247.8 247.1 249.5
Shares 201.7 243.5 221.5 208.5 215.0 243.5 257.2 260.1 206.3 221.5 252.4
Other equity 201.0 196.5 202.4 208.1 195.6 196.5 192.0 192.6 196.0 202.4 203.5
Mutual funds shares 416.2 435.4 394.9 420.1 426.5 435.4 426.2 421.1 389.2 394.9 410.8
Claims on insurance
corporations 3 1,286.4 1,347.2 1,393.0 1,315.9 1,330.7 1,347.2 1,363.2 1,373.2 1,381.3 1,393.0 1,410.2
short-term claims 74.4 73.7 74.5 74.2 74.1 73.7 73.9 74.1 74.3 74.5 74.7
longer-term claims 1,212.0 1,273.4 1,318.6 1,241.7 1,256.6 1,273.4 1,289.3 1,299.1 1,307.0 1,318.6 1,335.5
Claims from company
pension commitments 273.3 281.1 289.2 277.2 279.1 281.1 283.1 285.2 287.1 289.2 291.2
Other claims 4 38.7 39.0 38.9 38.4 38.1 39.0 39.1 39.2 39.0 38.9 39.0
Total 4,470.9 4,657.7 4,714.5 4,549.2 4,571.8 4,657.7 4,682.9 4,714.3 4,647.0 4,714.5 4,805.1
  II Liabilities
Loans 1,518.0 1,522.4 1,536.8 1,517.1 1,522.2 1,522.4 1,518.5 1,523.2 1,534.4 1,536.8 1,535.0
short-term loans 75.7 75.6 73.9 78.0 77.6 75.6 75.0 75.8 75.0 73.9 73.8
longer-term loans 1,442.3 1,446.8 1,463.0 1,439.1 1,444.6 1,446.8 1,443.5 1,447.4 1,459.4 1,463.0 1,461.2
Other liabilities 12.1 11.6 12.7 12.9 13.1 11.6 13.4 12.8 13.2 12.7 13.8
Total 1,530.1 1,533.9 1,549.5 1,530.0 1,535.3 1,533.9 1,531.9 1,536.0 1,547.6 1,549.5 1,548.8
Corporations
I   Financial assets
Currency and deposits 457.1 450.1 460.5 438.5 449.9 450.1 440.4 425.5 429.9 460.5 452.6
Debt securities 2 48.4 48.1 52.6 48.5 50.0 48.1 51.6 51.1 51.6 52.6 53.9
Financial derivatives . . . . . . . . . . .
Shares 822.4 908.4 804.8 827.8 849.9 908.4 920.7 933.7 773.2 804.8 898.5
Other equity 354.3 388.6 427.9 405.0 385.1 388.6 378.0 403.1 407.4 427.9 439.7
Mutual funds shares 108.8 119.3 123.1 113.7 118.8 119.3 119.9 120.0 117.6 123.1 120.5
Loans 450.1 545.3 632.6 505.3 528.2 545.3 577.1 602.5 634.2 632.6 637.6
short-term loans 294.2 364.6 435.4 334.4 351.4 364.6 390.4 414.0 436.2 435.4 438.8
longer-term loans 155.8 180.7 197.1 170.9 176.8 180.7 186.7 188.5 198.0 197.1 198.8
Claims on insurance
corporations 3 40.2 39.6 38.9 39.9 39.8 39.6 39.4 39.2 39.1 38.9 38.8
short-term claims 40.2 39.6 38.9 39.9 39.8 39.6 39.4 39.2 39.1 38.9 38.8longer-term claims . . . . . . . . . . .
Other claims 916.1 739.3 795.7 952.2 923.5 739.3 764.6 777.5 747.5 795.7 820.2
Total 3,197.5 3,238.7 3,336.2 3,331.0 3,345.2 3,238.7 3,291.6 3,352.6 3,200.5 3,336.2 3,461.8
  II Liabilities
Debt securities 
2 136.9 145.2 152.0 154.1 153.6 145.2 128.5 130.6 155.9 152.0 158.7
Financial derivatives . . . . . . . . . . .
Shares 1,081.3 1,301.8 1,110.5 1,089.5 1,159.5 1,301.8 1,322.3 1,357.5 1,046.6 1,110.5 1,282.5
Other equity 702.3 708.0 719.9 707.4 708.9 708.0 713.3 714.8 716.5 719.9 722.3
Loans 1,444.2 1,506.4 1,625.6 1,476.5 1,496.1 1,506.4 1,520.8 1,564.7 1,616.8 1,625.6 1,629.0
short-term loans 476.6 533.7 609.1 523.3 531.0 533.7 539.0 567.3 602.5 609.1 605.3
longer-term loans 967.6 972.7 1,016.5 953.2 965.1 972.7 981.7 997.4 1,014.3 1,016.5 1,023.7
Claims from companypension commitments 223.2 225.8 228.4 224.5 225.1 225.8 226.5 227.1 227.8 228.4 229.1
Other liabilities 856.8 833.5 855.6 886.7 847.9 833.5 829.0 844.2 827.9 855.6 870.0
Total 4,444.7 4,720.7 4,692.0 4,538.7 4,591.1 4,720.7 4,740.3 4,838.8 4,591.4 4,692.0 4,891.6
1Including non-profit institutions serving households. 2Including money market and supplementary pension funds. 4Including accumulated interest-bearing surplus
paper. 3Including private pension funds, burial funds, occupational pension schemes shares with insurance corporations. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
54  Monthly Report
August 2012
IX Public finances in Germany
 
1 General government: deficit and debt level as defined in the Maastricht Treaty
 
 
 
Social Social
General Central State Local security General Central State Local security
government government government government funds government government government government funds
Period € billion as a percentage of GDP
Deficit/surplus1
2006 − 37.9 − 34.4 − 11.8 + 3.3 + 5.0 − 1.6 − 1.5 − 0.5 + 0.1 + 0.2
2007 + 5.8 − 18.6 + 2.5 + 11.1 + 10.8 + 0.2 − 0.8 + 0.1 + 0.5 + 0.4
2008 p − 1.4 − 15.2 − 2.2 + 8.8 + 7.2 − 0.1 − 0.6 − 0.1 + 0.4 + 0.3
2009 p − 76.3 − 38.2 − 20.9 − 2.1 − 15.2 − 3.2 − 1.6 − 0.9 − 0.1 − 0.6
2010 2, p − 105.9 − 79.7 − 22.8 − 5.7 + 2.3 − 4.3 − 3.2 − 0.9 − 0.2 + 0.1
2011 pe − 26.3 − 25.8 − 14.7 + 0.8 + 13.5 − 1.0 − 1.0 − 0.6 + 0.0 + 0.5
2010          H1  2, p − 37.3 − 26.9 − 9.8 − 3.7 + 3.1 − 3.1 − 2.2 − 0.8 − 0.3 + 0.3
         H2  p − 68.8 − 53.1 − 12.8 − 2.1 − 0.9 − 5.4 − 4.2 − 1.0 − 0.2 − 0.1
2011          H1  pe − 5.3 − 15.0 − 2.5 + 1.9 + 10.3 − 0.4 − 1.2 − 0.2 + 0.1 + 0.8
         H2  pe − 20.3 − 10.3 − 12.1 − 1.0 + 3.2 − 1.5 − 0.8 − 0.9 − 0.1 + 0.2
Debt level3 End of year or quarter
2006 1,574.6 970.7 492.1 127.2 1.7 68.0 42.0 21.3 5.5 0.1
2007 1,582.4 978.0 494.1 125.6 1.6 65.2 40.3 20.3 5.2 0.1
2008 1,649.3 1,007.6 531.3 125.4 1.5 66.7 40.7 21.5 5.1 0.1
2009 1,766.9 1,075.7 574.3 131.3 1.3 74.4 45.3 24.2 5.5 0.1
2010 pe 2,056.7 1,317.1 621.2 134.5 1.3 83.0 53.2 25.1 5.4 0.1
2011 pe 2,088.5 1,328.6 637.6 140.0 1.3 81.2 51.7 24.8 5.4 0.1
2010          Q1 pe 1,786.9 1,088.5 580.2 132.5 1.3 74.6 45.4 24.2 5.5 0.1
         Q2 pe 1,828.9 1,099.1 609.6 134.9 1.3 75.4 45.3 25.1 5.6 0.1
         Q3 pe 1,853.7 1,116.4 616.1 136.7 1.6 75.6 45.5 25.1 5.6 0.1
         Q4 pe 2,056.7 1,317.1 621.2 134.5 1.3 83.0 53.2 25.1 5.4 0.1
2011          Q1 pe 2,057.3 1,318.4 618.3 136.7 1.7 82.0 52.6 24.6 5.4 0.1
         Q2 pe 2,070.7 1,324.2 624.1 138.0 2.7 81.8 52.3 24.6 5.4 0.1
         Q3 pe 2,084.0 1,334.2 628.1 138.4 1.3 81.6 52.2 24.6 5.4 0.0
         Q4 pe 2,088.5 1,328.6 637.6 140.0 1.3 81.2 51.7 24.8 5.4 0.1
2012          Q1 pe 2,112.0 1,345.2 641.5 142.9 1.3 81.6 51.9 24.8 5.5 0.1
Sources: Federal Statistical Office and Bundesbank calculations. 1Unlike the fiscal bal- counts. 2Including the €4.4 billion proceeds received from the 2010 frequency auc-
ance as shown in the national accounts, the deficit as defined in the Maastricht tion. 3Quarterly GDP ratios are based on the national output of the four preceding
Treaty includes interest flows from swaps and forward rate agreements. The quarters. 
half-year figures correspond to the deficit/surplus according to the national ac-
 
 
2 General government: revenue, expenditure and fiscal deficit/surplus as shown in the national accounts*
  
 
Revenue Expenditure
of which of which
Compen- Gross Memo item
Social con- Social sation of capital Deficit/ Total tax
Period Total Taxes tributions Other Total benefits employees Interest formation Other surplus burden  1 
€ billion
2006 1,011.1 512.7 400.7 97.7 1,049.3 580.6 177.2 66.1 33.7 191.6 − 38.2 924.7
2007 1,062.3 558.4 400.9 103.0 1,056.8 579.4 178.2 68.5 36.0 194.6 + 5.5 971.3
2008 p 1,088.2 572.6 408.8 106.9 1,089.6 590.3 182.3 68.3 38.9 209.8 − 1.4 994.2
2009 p 1,066.0 546.3 409.8 109.9 1,142.1 622.6 189.7 63.8 41.4 224.6 − 76.1 966.3
2010 p 1,079.8 548.9 418.7 112.2 2 1,185.8 632.3 194.5 61.9 40.8 2 256.3 2 − 106.0 977.7
2011 pe 1,148.7 588.3 435.2 125.3 1,174.3 632.8 199.7 66.0 42.0 233.7 − 25.6 1,033.9
as a percentage of GDP
2006 43.7 22.2 17.3 4.2 45.3 25.1 7.7 2.9 1.5 8.3 − 1.7 40.0
2007 43.7 23.0 16.5 4.2 43.5 23.9 7.3 2.8 1.5 8.0 + 0.2 40.0
2008 p 44.0 23.1 16.5 4.3 44.0 23.9 7.4 2.8 1.6 8.5 − 0.1 40.2
2009 p 44.9 23.0 17.3 4.6 48.1 26.2 8.0 2.7 1.7 9.5 − 3.2 40.7
2010 p 43.6 22.2 16.9 4.5 2 47.9 25.5 7.9 2.5 1.6 2 10.3 2 − 4.3 39.5
2011 pe 44.7 22.9 16.9 4.9 45.7 24.6 7.8 2.6 1.6 9.1 − 1.0 40.2
Percentage growth rates
2006 + 4.3 + 7.8 + 0.9 + 1.2 + 0.6 + 0.2 + 0.3 + 4.6 + 7.4 − 0.4 . + 4.6
2007 + 5.1 + 8.9 + 0.1 + 5.4 + 0.7 − 0.2 + 0.6 + 3.6 + 6.7 + 1.5 . + 5.0
2008 p + 2.4 + 2.5 + 2.0 + 3.8 + 3.1 + 1.9 + 2.3 − 0.2 + 7.9 + 7.8 . + 2.4
2009 p − 2.0 − 4.6 + 0.2 + 2.8 + 4.8 + 5.5 + 4.0 − 6.6 + 6.5 + 7.1 . − 2.8
2010 p + 1.3 + 0.5 + 2.2 + 2.1 + 3.8 + 1.6 + 2.5 − 3.1 − 1.5 + 14.1 . + 1.2
2011 pe + 6.4 + 7.2 + 3.9 + 11.7 − 1.0 + 0.1 + 2.7 + 6.7 + 3.0 − 8.8 . + 5.8
Source: Federal Statistical Office. *Figures in accordance with ESA 1995. In the website. 1Taxes and social contributions plus customs duties and the EU share in
Monthly Reports up to December 2006, customs duties, the EU share in VAT revenue VAT revenue. 2Including the €4.4 billion proceeds received from the 2010 frequency
and EU subsidies were included in the national accounts’ data (without affecting the auction, which are deducted from other expenditure in the national accounts. 
fiscal deficit/surplus). This information can still be found on the Bundesbank’s

Deutsche Bundesbank
55  Monthly Report
August 2012
IX Public finances in Germany
 
3 General government: budgetary development (as per government’s financial statistics)
 
 
€ billion
Central, state and local government  1 Social security funds 2 General government, total
Revenue Expenditure
of which of which 3 
Finan- Person- Fixed Finan-
cial nel asset cialtransac- expend- Current forma- transac- Deficit / Rev- Expend- Deficit / Rev- Expend- Deficit /
Period Total 
4 Taxes tions 5 Total 4 iture grants Interest tion tions 5 surplus enue 6 iture surplus enue iture surplus
2004 pe 545.8 442.8 24.1 610.4 173.4 236.9 64.8 34.3 9.6 − 64.5 469.7 468.6 + 1.1 926.8 990.2 − 63.4
2005 pe 568.9 452.1 31.3 620.6 172.1 245.3 64.0 33.0 14.3 − 51.7 467.8 471.3 − 3.4 947.4 1,002.5 − 55.1
2006 pe 590.9 488.4 18.8 626.2 169.7 252.1 64.4 33.7 11.6 − 35.3 486.3 466.6 + 19.7 988.2 1,003.8 − 15.6
2007 pe 644.8 538.2 17.7 644.2 182.2 250.0 66.2 34.6 9.5 + 0.6 475.3 466.4 + 8.9 1,025.6 1,016.1 + 9.5
2008 pe 668.9 561.2 13.4 677.4 187.3 259.9 67.3 36.4 18.6 − 8.5 485.5 478.9 + 6.6 1,058.5 1,060.5 − 1.9
2009 pe 631.4 524.0 9.2 720.9 194.9 271.1 63.7 40.4 38.0 − 89.5 492.0 505.9 − 13.9 1,021.4 1,124.9 − 103.4
2010 pe 650.5 530.6 12.7 732.7 199.8 293.9 60.1 40.1 19.4 − 82.2 516.9 512.9 + 4.0 1,049.7 1,128.0 − 78.2
2011 pe 712.5 573.4 30.6 737.3 208.3 283.6 60.0 42.4 22.9 − 24.8 526.6 511.6 + 15.0 1,127.2 1,137.1 − 9.8
2010          Q1 p 147.9 121.6 2.6 180.4 47.6 74.8 21.2 5.5 4.9 − 32.5 123.6 127.6 − 4.0 242.2 278.7 − 36.5
         Q2 p 7 163.6 134.9 3.7 173.6 48.1 71.2 13.2 8.1 6.2 − 10.0 128.2 127.3 + 0.9 7 262.3 271.5 − 9.2
         Q3 p 153.8 127.6 3.0 177.3 48.3 69.8 16.1 10.5 3.4 − 23.6 124.7 125.6 − 1.0 251.5 276.0 − 24.5
         Q4 p 183.4 147.6 3.2 199.5 54.0 76.1 9.2 14.7 4.8 − 16.2 133.3 131.8 + 1.5 290.4 305.1 − 14.7
2011          Q1 p 162.9 134.9 4.1 183.6 49.7 73.8 21.2 6.3 4.6 − 20.7 127.3 127.2 + 0.1 261.0 281.5 − 20.5
         Q2 p 189.6 145.6 18.6 172.7 50.0 68.0 10.9 8.7 8.7 + 16.9 130.3 126.2 + 4.1 292.5 271.5 + 21.0
         Q3 p 162.6 136.6 2.7 182.6 50.9 67.2 18.8 10.8 4.5 − 20.0 127.9 125.8 + 2.0 264.3 282.2 − 17.9
         Q4 p 195.7 156.3 5.0 196.5 55.9 72.8 8.9 15.3 5.0 − 0.8 140.1 132.0 + 8.1 307.3 300.0 + 7.3
Source: Bundesbank calculations based on the data from the Federal Statistical mated. 3The development of the types of expenditure recorded here is influenced in
Office. 1Including subsidiary budgets, from 2007 also including the post office pen- part by statistical changeovers. 4Including discrepancies in clearing transactions be-
sion fund; excluding the special fund ”Provision for final payments for inflation-in- tween central, state and local government. 5On the revenue side, this contains pro-
dexed Federal securities”, which was set up in 2009. Unlike the annual figures based ceeds booked as disposals of equity interests and as loan repayments. On the expend-on the annual calculations of the Federal Statistical Office, the quarterly figures do iture side, this contains the acquisition of equity interests and loans granted. 6In-
not include municipal special purpose associations and various special ac- cluding Federal Government liquidity assistance to the Federal Labour Office. 7In-
counts. 2The annual figures do not tally with the sum of the quarterly figures, as the cluding the €4.4 billion proceeds received from the 2010 frequency auction. 
latter 
are all provisional. The quarterly figures for some insurance sectors are esti-
4 Central, state and local government: budgetary development (as per government’s financial statistics)
 
 
€ billion
Central government
State government  2,3 Local government 3,4 
Period Revenue 1 Expenditure Deficit / surplus Revenue Expenditure Deficit / surplus Revenue Expenditure Deficit / surplus
2004 233.9 273.6 − 39.7 233.5 257.1 − 23.6 147.0 150.1 − 3.1
2005 250.0 281.5 − 31.5 237.4 259.6 − 22.2 151.3 153.2 − 1.9
2006 254.6 282.8 − 28.2 250.3 260.1 − 9.8 161.1 157.4 + 3.72007 
pe 277.4 292.1 − 14.7 275.9 267.5 + 8.4 171.3 162.4 + 8.9
2008 pe 292.0 303.8 − 11.8 279.3 278.1 + 1.2 176.9 169.0 + 7.9
2009 pe 282.6 317.1 − 34.5 265.9 293.4 − 27.5 172.0 178.9 − 6.9
2010 pe 288.0 332.4 − 44.4 278.5 302.1 − 23.6 176.5 183.9 − 7.4
2011 pe 307.1 324.8 − 17.7 304.0 315.4 − 11.4 185.6 187.0 − 1.4
2010          Q1 p 61.1 82.6 − 21.5 65.0 73.5 − 8.5 34.6 41.2 − 6.6
         Q2 p 5 75.6 80.6 − 5.0 68.3 69.1 − 0.8 42.2 43.5 − 1.3
         Q3 p 66.2 82.7 − 16.6 68.5 73.3 − 4.8 43.8 45.2 − 1.4
         Q4 p 85.2 86.5 − 1.3 75.8 85.0 − 9.2 53.8 52.3 + 1.5
2011          Q1 p 65.4 84.5 − 19.1 74.1 75.6 − 1.5 37.1 42.5 − 5.3
         Q2 p 76.6 73.5 + 3.1 76.0 75.8 + 0.2 45.4 44.3 + 1.1
         Q3 p 72.6 84.8 − 12.2 71.9 75.1 − 3.2 46.4 46.6 − 0.2
         Q4 p 92.5 82.0 + 10.5 81.1 87.7 − 6.6 54.7 51.9 + 2.8
2012          Q1 p 65.4 83.1 − 17.7 74.6 76.3 − 1.7 39.9 44.8 − 4.9
Source: Bundesbank calculations based on the data from the Federal Statistical lations of the Federal Statistical Office, the quarterly figures do not include various
Office. 1Any amounts of the Bundesbank’s profit distribution exceeding the refer- special accounts and municipal special purpose associations. 4From 2012 core
ence value that were used to repay parts of the debt of central government’s special budgets and off-budget entities; previously, only core budgets. 5Including the
funds are not included here. 2Including the local authority level of the city-states €4.4 billion proceeds received from the 2010 frequency auction. 
Berlin,
Bremen and Hamburg. 3Unlike the annual figure based on the annual calcu-

Deutsche Bundesbank
56  Monthly Report
August 2012
IX Public finances in Germany
 
5 Central, state and local government: tax revenue
 
 
€ million
Central and state government and European Union
Memo item
Balance of Amounts deducted
Central State Local untransferred in the federal
Period Total Total government 1 government European Union 2 government 3 tax shares 4 budget 5 
2005 452,078 392,313 211,779 158,823 21,711 59,750 + 16 21,634
2006 488,444 421,151 225,634 173,374 22,142 67,316 − 22 21,742
2007 538,243 465,554 251,747 191,558 22,249 72,551 + 138 21,643
2008 561,182 484,182 260,690 200,411 23,081 77,190 − 190 21,510
2009 524,000 455,615 252,842 182,273 20,501 68,419 − 34 24,846
2010 530,587 460,230 254,537 181,326 24,367 70,385 − 28 28,726
2011 573,352 496,739 276,599 195,676 24,464 76,570 + 43 28,615
2010          Q1 121,321 104,370 54,316 41,777 8,278 11,299 + 5,652 7,133
         Q2 134,843 116,767 66,331 46,516 3,919 18,270 − 194 7,127
         Q3 127,311 109,956 61,146 43,102 5,709 17,564 − 209 7,329
         Q4 147,112 129,137 72,744 49,932 6,462 23,253 − 5,278 7,137
2011          Q1 135,590 115,878 60,579 46,582 8,717 13,640 + 6,071 6,989
         Q2 145,636 126,086 71,530 50,289 4,266 19,544 + 6 7,102
         Q3 136,382 117,812 66,277 45,938 5,598 18,916 − 346 7,662
         Q4 155,744 136,963 78,213 52,866 5,883 24,469 − 5,688 6,863
2012          Q1 143,343 122,846 62,467 50,558 9,821 13,964 + 6,533 6,831
         Q2 ... 129,545 72,573 51,679 5,293 ... ... 6,878
2011          June . 49,712 28,083 20,195 1,434 . . 2,367
2012          June . 53,479 30,305 21,944 1,230 . . 2,293
Sources: Federal Ministry of Finance, Federal Statistical Office and Bundesbank calcu- from central government tax revenue. 3Including local government taxes in the
lations. 1Before deducting supplementary central government grants, shares in city-states Berlin, Bremen and Hamburg. 4Difference between local government’s
energy tax revenue, compensation for the transfer of motor vehicle tax to central share in the joint taxes received by the state government cash offices in the period in
government, which are remitted to state government and consolidation question (see Table IX. 6) and the amounts passed on to local government in theaid.2Custom duties and shares in VAT and gross national income accruing to the EU same period. 5 Volume of the positions mentioned under footnote 1. 
 
 
6 Central and state government and European Union: tax revenue, by type
  
€ million
Joint taxes
Memo
Income taxes 2 Turnover taxes 5 item
Local
Local govern-
Invest- business Central State ment
Assessed ment Turnover tax govern- govern- EU share in
Wage income Corpora- income Turnover tax on trans- ment ment customs joint
Period Total 1 Total tax 3 tax tion tax tax 4 Total tax imports fers 6 taxes 7 taxes 7 duties taxes
2005 415,355 161,960 118,919 9,766 16,333 16,943 139,713 108,440 31,273 6,218 83,508 20,579 3,378 23,042
2006 446,139 182,614 122,612 17,567 22,898 19,537 146,688 111,318 35,370 7,013 84,215 21,729 3,880 24,988
2007 493,817 204,698 131,774 25,027 22,929 24,969 169,636 127,522 42,114 6,975 85,690 22,836 3,983 28,263
2008 515,498 220,483 141,895 32,685 15,868 30,035 175,989 130,789 45,200 6,784 86,302 21,937 4,002 31,316
2009 484,880 193,684 135,165 26,430 7,173 24,916 176,991 141,907 35,084 4,908 89,318 16,375 3,604 29,265
2010 488,731 192,816 127,904 31,179 12,041 21,691 180,042 136,459 43,582 5,925 93,426 12,146 4,378 28,501
2011 527,256 213,534 139,749 31,996 15,634 26,155 190,033 138,957 51,076 6,888 99,134 13,095 4,571 30,517
2010          Q1 111,163 45,127 30,255 6,155 1,951 6,766 42,891 34,054 8,837 215 19,001 2,814 1,115 6,793
         Q2 123,859 51,667 30,447 9,681 3,830 7,710 44,343 33,779 10,564 1,311 22,682 2,914 943 7,092
         Q3 116,691 42,813 30,445 7,320 1,588 3,460 44,997 33,258 11,740 1,574 22,922 3,242 1,143 6,734
         Q4 137,019 53,209 36,757 8,023 4,672 3,756 47,810 35,369 12,441 2,825 28,821 3,177 1,177 7,882
2011          Q1 123,131 50,328 32,478 6,755 2,485 8,611 47,389 35,528 11,861 366 20,515 3,408 1,124 7,253
         Q2 133,727 57,624 34,144 9,366 4,215 9,900 46,091 33,082 13,010 1,692 24,026 3,207 1,087 7,641
         Q3 125,021 47,420 33,590 7,111 3,028 3,691 47,161 34,232 12,929 1,735 24,309 3,229 1,169 7,209
         Q4 145,377 58,162 39,538 8,764 5,907 3,954 49,392 36,115 13,276 3,096 30,285 3,251 1,191 8,414
2012          Q1 130,623 56,569 34,106 8,456 5,471 8,537 48,966 36,340 12,626 275 20,059 3,629 1,126 7,777
         Q2 137,597 59,832 36,148 10,010 4,995 8,679 46,600 32,871 13,730 1,661 25,235 3,255 1,013 8,052
2011          June 53,194 27,755 12,154 8,603 5,164 1,834 15,519 11,146 4,373 3 8,480 1,062 374 3,482
2012          June 57,169 32,087 13,077 9,163 5,235 4,611 14,663 10,414 4,249 2 9,019 1,060 338 3,690
Source: Federal Ministry of Finance and Bundesbank calculations. 1This total, unlike deducting child benefit and subsidies for supplementary private pension
that in Table IX. 5, does not include the receipts from the equalisation of burdens plans. 4Final withholding tax on interest income and capital gains, non-assessed
levies, local business tax (less local business tax transfers to central and state govern- taxes on earnings. 5The allocation of revenue to central, state and local govern-
ment), real property taxes and other local government taxes, or the balance of un- ment, which is adjusted at more regular intervals, is regulated in section 1 of the Rev-transferred tax shares. 2Respective percentage share of central, state and local enue Adjustment Act. Respective percentage share of central, state and local govern-
government in revenue: wage tax and assessed income tax 42.5:42.5:15, corpor- ment in revenue for 2011: 53.9:44.1:2.0. The EU share is deducted from centralation tax and non-assessed taxes on earnings 50:50:-, final withholding tax on inter- government’s share. 6Respective percentage share of central and state government
est income and capital gains, non-assessed taxes on earnings 44:44:12. 3After for 2011: 22.1:77.9. 7 For the breakdown, see Table IX. 7. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
57  Monthly Report
August 2012
IX Public finances in Germany
 
7 Central, state and local government: individual taxes  
 
 
€ million
Central government taxes 1 State government taxes 1 Local government taxes
Tax on of which
the acqui-
Soli- Motor Motor sition of Inherit- Local Real
Period Energy Tobacco darity Insurance vehicle Electri- Spirits vehicle land and ance business property
tax tax surcharge tax tax 2 city tax tax Other tax 2 buildings tax Other 3 Total tax taxes
2005 40,101 14,273 10,315 8,750 . 6,462 2,142 1,465 8,674 4,791 4,097 3,018 42,941 32,129 10,247
2006 39,916 14,387 11,277 8,775 . 6,273 2,160 1,428 8,937 6,125 3,763 2,904 49,319 38,370 10,3992007 38,955 14,254 12,349 10,331 . 6,355 1,959 1,488 8,898 6,952 4,203 2,783 51,401 40,116 10,7132008 39,248 13,574 13,146 10,478 . 6,261 2,126 1,470 8,842 5,728 4,771 2,596 52,468 41,037 10,8072009 39,822 13,366 11,927 10,548 3,803 6,278 2,101 1,473 4,398 4,857 4,550 2,571 44,028 32,421 10,936
2010 39,838 13,492 11,713 10,284 8,488 6,171 1,990 1,449 − 5,290 4,404 2,452 47,780 35,712 11,315
2011 40,036 14,414 12,781 10,755 8,422 7,247 2,149 3,330 − 6,366 4,246 2,484 52,984 40,424 11,674
2010          Q1 4,446 2,462 2,856 4,496 2,345 1,498 526 372 − 1,229 918 667 10,374 7,641 2,518
         Q2 9,596 3,327 3,100 2,060 2,235 1,570 437 357 − 1,207 1,115 591 12,295 9,201 2,915         Q3 10,172 3,608 2,615 2,110 2,012 1,563 489 354 − 1,430 1,216 597 12,194 8,618 3,373         Q4 15,625 4,096 3,142 1,619 1,895 1,540 538 366 − 1,425 1,156 597 12,918 10,252 2,508
2011          Q1 4,457 2,893 3,072 4,869 2,349 1,785 574 516 − 1,555 1,170 683 12,825 9,948 2,631
         Q2 10,002 3,300 3,450 2,017 2,215 1,960 482 599 − 1,464 1,129 614 13,601 10,366 3,031         Q3 10,058 3,418 2,879 2,145 2,006 1,763 541 1,499 − 1,581 1,039 609 13,095 9,386 3,473         Q4 15,519 4,803 3,379 1,723 1,852 1,739 553 716 − 1,766 907 578 13,463 10,724 2,540
2012          Q1 4,406 2,305 3,308 5,180 2,328 1,714 576 241 − 1,876 1,057 696 12,995 9,990 2,717
         Q2 9,707 3,550 3,644 2,011 2,258 1,966 490 1,610 − 1,683 972 601 ... ... ...
2011          June 3,487 1,026 1,592 543 707 745 171 210 − 518 343 201 . . .2012          June 3,300 1,163 1,769 549 687 843 164 544 − 563 294 203 . . .
Sources: Federal Ministry of Finance, Federal Statistical Office and Bundesbank calcu- enue is attributable to central government. Postings to state government shown there-
lations. 1For the sum total, see Table IX. 6. 2As of 1 July 2009, motor vehicle tax rev- after relate to the booking of cash flows. 3 Notably betting, lottery and beer tax.   
 
 
8 German pension insurance scheme: budgetary development and assets*
  
€ million
Revenue 1,2 Expenditure 1,2 Assets 1,5 
of which of which
Equity
Payments interests, Memo
from Pen- mort- item
central sioners’ gages Adminis-
Contri- govern- Pension health Deficit/ and other Real trative
Period Total butions 3 ment Total payments insurance 4 surplus Total Deposits 6 Securities loans 7 estate assets
2005 229,428 156,264 71,917 233,357 199,873 13,437 − 3,929 1,976 1,794 16 42 123 4,888
2006 241,231 168,083 71,773 233,668 200,459 13,053 + 7,563 10,047 9,777 115 46 109 4,9122007 236,642 162,225 72,928 235,459 201,642 13,665 + 1,183 12,196 11,270 765 46 115 4,8192008 242,770 167,611 73,381 238,995 204,071 14,051 + 3,775 16,531 16,313 36 56 126 4,6452009 244,689 169,183 74,313 244,478 208,475 14,431 + 211 16,821 16,614 23 64 120 4,525
2010 250,133 172,767 76,173 248,076 211,852 14,343 + 2,057 19,375 18,077 1,120 73 105 4,464
2011 254,968 177,424 76,200 250,241 212,602 15,015 + 4,727 24,965 22,241 2,519 88 117 4,379
2010          Q1 59,761 40,601 18,917 61,861 53,059 3,582 − 2,100 14,922 14,717 20 64 120 4,490
         Q2 62,249 43,054 18,923 61,999 53,006 3,585 + 250 15,254 15,053 20 69 112 4,478         Q3 61,237 42,048 18,912 62,091 53,102 3,589 − 854 14,853 14,656 20 68 109 4,474         Q4 66,317 47,060 18,933 61,887 52,966 3,579 + 4,430 19,274 17,978 1,120 68 108 4,476
2011          Q1 60,804 41,608 18,902 62,188 53,176 3,742 − 1,384 18,063 17,069 819 74 101 4,482
         Q2 63,452 44,307 18,855 62,058 52,920 3,731 + 1,394 19,704 18,507 1,019 78 100 4,475         Q3 62,354 43,109 18,902 62,844 53,341 3,761 − 490 19,959 19,266 519 79 94 4,445         Q4 67,748 48,391 19,030 62,823 53,371 3,774 + 4,925 25,339 22,226 2,919 79 114 4,410
2012          Q1 62,038 42,411 19,318 62,883 53,747 3,779 − 845 24,261 21,839 2,219 88 116 4,366
         Q2 64,721 45,318 19,086 62,885 53,532 3,772 + 1,836 26,026 23,950 1,869 92 115 4,356
Sources: Federal Ministry of Labour and Social Affairs and German pension insurance cluding investment spending and proceeds. 3Including contributions for recipients
scheme. *Excluding the German pension insurance scheme for the mining, railway of government cash benefits. 4Including long-term care insurance for pensioners
and maritime industries. 1The final annual figures do not tally with the quarterly fig- until 2004 Q1. 5Largely corresponds to the sustainability reserves. End of year or
ures, as the latter are all provisional. 2Including financial compensation payments. Ex- quarter. 6 Including cash. 7 Excluding loans to other social security funds. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
58  Monthly Report
August 2012
IX Public finances in Germany
 
9 Federal Employment Agency: budgetary development*
 
 
€ million
Revenue Expenditure
of which of which Deficit
offsetting
Unemployment support 1,2 Job promotion 2,3 grant orloan from
Measures central
Contri- Western Eastern Western Eastern financed Deficit/ govern-
Period Total 
4 butions Levies 5 Total 6 Total Germany Germany Total Germany Germany by levies  7 surplus ment
2005 52,692 46,989 1,436 53,089 27,654 20,332 7,322 11,590 7,421 4,169 1,450 − 397 397
2006 55,384 51,176 1,123 44,162 23,249 17,348 5,901 9,259 6,185 3,074 1,089 + 11,221 0
2007 42,838 32,264 971 36,196 17,356 13,075 4,282 8,370 5,748 2,623 949 + 6,643 −
2008 38,289 26,452 974 39,407 14,283 10,652 3,631 8,712 6,222 2,490 920 − 1,118 −
2009 34,254 22,046 1,000 48,057 20,866 16,534 4,332 11,595 8,794 2,801 1,946 − 13,803 −
2010 37,070 22,614 3,222 45,213 19,456 15,629 3,827 10,791 8,287 2,504 740 − 8,143 5,200
2011 pe 37,564 25,434 351 37,524 14,661 11,918 2,744 9,004 6,925 2,079 683 + 41 −
2010          Q1 10,020 5,196 714 11,681 6,475 5,112 1,362 2,957 2,263 694 208 − 1,661 −
         Q2 10,649 5,601 784 10,501 5,264 4,148 1,116 2,872 2,204 668 184 + 148 −
         Q3 8,109 5,527 808 8,887 4,082 3,353 729 2,431 1,863 567 193 − 778 −
         Q4 8,291 6,290 916 14,144 3,635 3,016 619 2,531 1,957 575 154 − 5,853 5,200
2011          Q1 10,259 5,853 123 9,583 4,602 3,701 901 2,660 2,048 612 186 + 676 −
         Q2 8,802 6,358 60 8,246 3,710 3,007 703 2,285 1,753 532 175 + 556 −
         Q3 7,467 6,205 76 7,450 3,293 2,707 586 1,910 1,464 446 187 + 17 −
         Q4 pe 11,037 7,017 92 12,245 3,056 2,502 554 2,149 1,660 489 134 − 1,209 −
2012          Q1 9,709 6,175 131 8,452 4,319 3,587 732 1,946 1,580 366 211 + 1,257 −
         Q2 8,331 6,620 142 7,816 3,707 3,105 601 1,765 1,429 336 329 + 515 −
Source: Federal Employment Agency. *Excluding pension fund. 1Unemployment icit offsetting grant or loan. 5Levies to promote winter construction and to pay insolv-
benefit and short-time working benefit. 2Including contributions to the statutory ency compensation to employees. 6From 2005, including a compensatory amount
health, pension and long-term care insurance schemes. 3Vocational training, meas- or a reintegration payment to central government. 7Promotion of winter con-
ures to encourage job take-up, rehabilitation, job creation measures, compensation struction and insolvency compensation for employees. top-up payments and business start-up grants. 4Excluding central government def-
 
 
10 Statutory health insurance scheme: budgetary development
  
€ million
Revenue 1 Expenditure 1 
of which of which
Central Thera- Adminis-
govern- peutical trative
Contri- ment Hospital Pharma- Medical Dental treatment Sickness expend- Deficit/
Period Total butions 2 funds 3 Total treatment ceuticals treatment treatment  4 and aids benefits iture 5 surplus
2005 145,742 140,250 2,500 144,071 48,959 25,358 23,096 9,928 8,284 5,868 8,303 + 1,671
2006 149,929 142,183 4,200 148,297 50,327 25,835 23,896 10,364 8,303 5,708 8,319 + 1,632
2007 156,058 149,964 2,500 154,314 50,850 27,791 24,788 10,687 8,692 6,017 8,472 + 1,744
2008 162,516 155,883 2,500 161,334 52,623 29,145 25,887 10,926 9,095 6,583 8,680 + 1,182
2009 169,758 158,594 7,200 170,823 55,977 30,696 27,635 11,219 9,578 7,258 8,947 − 1,065
2010 179,524 160,792 15,700 175,803 56,697 30,147 28,432 11,419 10,609 7,797 9,553 + 3,721
2011 189,034 170,860 15,300 179,597 58,501 28,939 29,056 11,651 11,193 8,529 9,486 + 9,437
2010          Q1 6 43,093 38,542 3,919 43,274 14,419 7,549 7,255 2,871 2,368 1,996 2,130 − 182
         Q2 44,440 39,826 3,931 43,999 14,037 7,870 7,128 2,882 2,669 1,955 2,261 + 441
         Q3 44,457 39,808 3,925 43,662 14,122 7,592 7,007 2,786 2,676 1,903 2,255 + 795
         Q4 47,580 42,600 3,925 44,842 14,144 7,307 7,107 2,952 2,853 1,943 2,876 + 2,738
2011          Q1 45,339 40,871 3,825 44,392 15,075 7,158 7,361 2,893 2,528 2,210 2,173 + 947
         Q2 46,887 42,370 3,825 44,955 14,601 7,239 7,372 3,001 2,834 2,106 2,263 + 1,931
         Q3 46,865 42,298 3,825 44,432 14,594 7,236 7,160 2,768 2,762 2,069 2,292 + 2,433
         Q4 49,866 45,291 3,825 45,878 14,418 7,382 7,161 2,997 3,117 2,125 2,682 + 3,988
2012          Q1 46,433 42,249 3,500 45,971 15,579 7,424 7,502 2,971 2,664 2,336 2,195 + 462
Source: Federal Ministry of Health. 1The final annual figures do not tally with the penses for levying contributions incurred by other social insurance funds. Including ad-
sum of the quarterly figures, as the latter are all provisional. Excluding revenue and ministrative expenditure on disease management programmes. 6Data on individual
expenditure as part of the risk structure compensation scheme. 2Including contri- expenditure categories for 2010 only partly comparable with prior-year figures owing
butions from subsidised low-paid part-time employment. 3Federal grant and liquid- to a change in the statistical definition. 
ity assistance. 4Including dentures. 5Net, ie after deducting reimbursements for ex-

Deutsche Bundesbank
59  Monthly Report
August 2012
IX Public finances in Germany
 
11 Statutory long-term care insurance scheme: budgetary development
 
 
€ million
Revenue 1 Expenditure 1 
of which
Contributions to
of which Non-cash In-patient Nursing pension insur- Administrative Deficit/
Period Total Contributions 2 Total care benefits care benefit ance scheme 3 expenditure surplus
2005 17,526 17,385 17,891 2,409 8,516 4,050 890 875 − 366
2006 17,749 17,611 18,064 2,437 8,671 4,017 862 886 − 315
2007 18,036 17,858 18,385 2,475 8,831 4,050 861 896 − 350
2008 19,785 19,608 19,163 2,605 9,054 4,225 868 941 + 622
2009 21,300 21,137 20,314 2,742 9,274 4,443 878 984 + 986
2010 21,864 21,659 21,539 2,933 9,567 4,673 869 1,028 + 325
2011 22,294 22,145 21,962 3,002 9,700 4,735 881 1,034 + 331
2010          Q1 5,241 5,175 5,298 722 2,362 1,151 217 264 − 56
         Q2 5,398 5,369 5,302 707 2,378 1,167 219 258 + 95
         Q3 5,385 5,358 5,416 735 2,398 1,160 220 266 − 31
         Q4 5,760 5,739 5,432 743 2,417 1,195 225 229 + 328
2011          Q1 5,306 5,269 5,457 750 2,408 1,165 216 277 − 150
         Q2 5,519 5,496 5,396 713 2,417 1,173 210 263 + 123
         Q3 5,513 5,486 5,551 774 2,442 1,191 221 255 − 38
         Q4 5,904 5,877 5,526 742 2,442 1,216 223 240 + 378
2012          Q1 5,493 5,450 5,700 774 2,469 1,248 223 283 − 207
Source: Federal Ministry of Health. 1The final annual figures do not tally with the special contributions for childless persons (0.25% of income subject to insurance
sum of the quarterly figures, as the latter are all provisional. 2Since 2005 including contributions). 3 For non-professional carers. 
 
 
12 Central government: borrowing in the 13 Central, state and local government: debt by creditor*
market
 
€ million € million
T
otal new borrowing 1 of which of which Banking system Domestic non-banks
Change Change
in money in money Period Socialmarket market (End of year Bundes- Credit security Foreign
Period Gross 
2 Net loans deposits or quarter) Total bank institutions funds Other  1 creditors pe 
2005 + 224,922 + 35,479 + 4,511 + 6,041 2005 1,489,029 4,440 518,400 488 312,201 653,500
2006 + 221,873 + 32,656 + 3,258 + 6,308 2006 1,533,697 4,440 496,800 480 329,177 702,800
2007 + 214,995 + 6,996 + 1,086 − 4,900 2007 1,540,381 4,440 456,900 476 317,065 761,500
2008 + 233,356 + 26,208 + 6,888 + 9,036 2008 1,564,590 4,440 435,600 510 305,040 819,000
2009 + 312,729 + 66,821 − 8,184 + 106 2009 1,657,842 4,440 438,700 507 312,695 901,500
2010 + 302,694 + 42,397 − 5,041 + 1,607 2010 1,731,561 4,440 399,000 429 387,092 940,600
2011 + 264,572 + 5,890 − 4,876 − 9,036 2011 p 1,752,064 4,440 355,400 445 411,679 980,100
2010          Q1 + 74,369 + 12,637 − 5,322 − 1,520 2010          Q1 1,678,191 4,440 450,100 508 318,743 904,400         Q2 + 83,082 + 3,666 − 4,143 + 1,950          Q2 1,687,957 4,440 469,600 468 301,949 911,500         Q3 + 79,589 + 14,791 + 250 − 4,625          Q3 1,712,685 4,440 470,200 473 297,372 940,200         Q4 + 65,655 + 11,304 + 4,174 + 5,803          Q4 1,731,561 4,440 399,000 429 387,092 940,600
2011          Q1 + 76,394 + 15,958 − 607 − 5,206 2011          Q1 
p 1,749,204 4,440 411,600 495 372,069 960,600
         Q2 + 77,158 + 10,392 − 49 + 26,625          Q2 p 1,761,831 4,440 403,500 490 357,801 995,600
         Q3 + 59,256 − 8,152 − 4,177 − 22,608          Q3 p 1,758,164 4,440 387,100 490 376,734 989,400
         Q4 + 51,764 − 12,308 − 42 − 7,847          Q4 p 1,752,064 4,440 355,400 445 411,679 980,100
2012          Q1 + 72,603 + 12,524 + 8,251 − 2,380 2012          Q1 pe 1,761,941 4,440 393,200 434 354,167 1,009,700
Source:  Federal  Republic  of  Germany − Finance Agency. Source:  Bundesbank  calculations  based  on  data   from  the  Federal  Statistical 
1 Including  the  Financial  Market  Stabilisation Fund,  the In- Office. * Excluding direct intergovernmental borrowing. 1 Calculated as a residual. 
vestment and  Repayment Fund  and  the  Restructuring Fund for Credit Institutions. 2 After deducting repurchases. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
60  Monthly Report
August 2012
IX Public finances in Germany
 
14 Central, state and local government: debt by category*
 
 
€ million
Loans from non-banks Old debt
Direct
Treasury Five-year lending
Period discount Federal Federal Federal by credit Social Equal-
(End of year paper Treasury notes savings bonds institu- security isation
or quarter) Total (Bubills) 1 notes 2,3 (Bobls) 2 notes (Bunds) 2 Day-bond tions 4 funds Other 4 claims 5 Other 5,6 
Central, state and local government
2006 1,533,697 37,834 320,288 179,940 10,199 552,028 . 356,514 480 71,889 4,443 82
2007 1,540,381 39,510 329,108 177,394 10,287 574,512 . 329,588 476 74,988 4,443 76
2008 1,564,590 44,620 337,511 172,037 9,649 584,144 3,174 325,648 510 82,781 4,443 73
2009 1,657,842 105,970 361,727 174,219 9,471 594,999 2,495 300,927 507 103,014 4,442 71
2010          Q4 1,731,561 87,042 391,976 195,534 8,704 628,757 1,975 301,501 429 111,201 4,440 2
2011          Q1 p 1,749,204 84,961 391,885 211,821 8,500 629,716 1,845 303,754 495 111,786 4,440 2
         Q2 p 1,761,831 80,998 402,903 208,669 8,497 644,844 1,819 295,379 490 113,789 4,440 2
         Q3 p 1,758,164 74,764 410,222 219,785 8,349 634,402 1,970 291,359 490 112,382 4,440 2
         Q4 p 1,752,064 60,172 413,931 214,211 8,208 644,688 2,154 290,932 445 112,881 4,440 2
2012          Q1 pe 1,761,941 54,592 410,685 226,486 7,869 646,872 2,134 297,554 434 110,873 4,440 2
Central government7,8,9,10,11
2006 918,911 37,798 103,624 179,889 10,199 541,404 . 30,030 408 11,036 4,443 82
2007 939,988 37,385 102,083 177,394 10,287 574,156 . 22,829 408 10,928 4,443 75
2008 966,197 40,795 105,684 172,037 9,649 583,930 3,174 35,291 448 10,674 4,443 72
2009 1,033,017 104,409 113,637 174,219 9,471 594,780 2,495 18,347 448 10,700 4,442 70
2010          Q4 1,075,415 85,867 126,220 195,534 8,704 628,582 1,975 13,349 408 10,335 4,440 2
2011          Q1 1,091,373 82,607 129,208 211,821 8,500 629,541 1,845 13,056 408 9,945 4,440 2
         Q2 1,101,764 78,961 131,348 208,669 8,497 644,668 1,819 13,002 408 9,951 4,440 2
         Q3 1,093,612 73,277 132,428 219,785 8,349 634,226 1,970 9,091 408 9,637 4,440 2
         Q4 1,081,304 58,297 130,648 214,211 8,208 644,513 2,154 9,382 363 9,087 4,440 2
2012          Q1 1,093,828 52,161 126,956 226,486 7,869 646,696 2,134 17,894 363 8,827 4,440 2
State government
2006 481,850 36 216,665 .... 209,270 2 55,876 . 1
2007 484,373 2,125 227,025 .... 194,956 2 60,264 . 1
2008 483,875 3,825 231,827 .... 179,978 3 68,241 . 1
2009 505,359 1,561 248,091 .... 167,310 8 88,389 . 1
2010          Q4 527,669 1,176 265,756 .... 166,277 1 94,459 . 1
2011          Q1 p 527,173 2,354 262,677 .... 166,641 67 95,433 . 1
         Q2 p 528,253 2,037 271,555 .... 157,167 62 97,431 . 1
         Q3 p 532,321 1,487 277,794 .... 156,640 62 96,338 . 1
         Q4 p 537,061 1,875 283,283 .... 154,453 62 97,387 . 1
2012          Q1 p 531,420 2,431 283,729 .... 149,569 51 95,639 . 1
Local government12
2006 118,380 . − . . 256 . 113,265 70 4,789 . .
2007 115,920 . − . . 256 . 111,803 66 3,796 . .
2008 114,518 . − . . 214 . 110,379 60 3,866 . .
2009 119,466 . − . . 219 . 115,270 52 3,925 . .
2010          Q4 128,477 . − . . 175 . 121,874 20 6,407 . .
2011          Q1 p 130,659 . − . . 175 . 124,056 20 6,407 . .
         Q2 p 131,814 . − . . 175 . 125,211 20 6,407 . .
         Q3 p 132,231 . − . . 175 . 125,628 20 6,407 . .
         Q4 p 133,699 . − . . 175 . 127,096 20 6,407 . .
2012          Q1 pe 136,693 . − . . 175 . 130,091 20 6,407 . .
Special funds7,8,13
2006 14,556 . − 51 . 10,368 . 3,950 − 188 . .
2007 100 . − − . 100 . − − − . .
2008 − . − − . − . − − − . .
2009 − . − − . − . − − − . .
2010          Q4 − . − − . − . − − − . .
2011          Q1 − . − − . − . − − − . .
         Q2 − . − − . − . − − − . .
         Q3 − . − − . − . − − − . .
         Q4 − . − − . − . − − − . .
2012         Q 1 −−−− .− . −−− . .
Source: Bundesbank calculations based on data from the Federal Statistical portfolios. 7In contrast to the capital market statistics, the debt incurred through the
Office. *Excluding direct intergovernmental borrowing. 1Including Treasury finan- joint issuance of Federal securities is recorded here under central government and its
cing paper. 2Excluding issuers’ holdings of their own securities. 3Treasury notes special funds in accordance with the agreed allocation ratios. 8On 1 July 2007 cen-
issued by state government include long-term notes. 4Mainly loans against bor- tral government assumed joint responsibility for the debts of the ERP Special Fund.
rowers’ notes and cash advances. Including loans raised abroad. Other loans from From that date on, the aforementioned special fund is recorded under central govern-
non-banks, including loans from public supplementary pension funds and liabilities ment. 9From December 2008, including debt of the Financial Market Stabilisation
arising from the investment assistance levy. 5Excluding offsets against outstanding Fund. 10From March 2009, including debt of the Investment and Repayment
claims. 6Old debt mainly denominated in foreign currency, in accordance with the Fund. 11From January 2011, including debt of the Restructuring Fund for Credit Insti-
London Debts Agreement, old liabilities arising from housing construction and liabil- tutions. 12Including debt of municipal special purpose associations. Data other than
ities arising from housing construction by the former GDR’s armed forces and from year-end figures have been estimated. 13ERP Special Fund (up to the end of June
housing construction in connection with the return of the troops of the former USSR 2007), German Unity Fund (up to the end of 2004) and Indemnification Fund. stationed in eastern Germany to their home country; excluding debt securities in own

Deutsche Bundesbank
61  Monthly Report
August 2012
X Economic conditions in Germany
  
1 Origin and use of domestic product, distribution of national income
  
  
  
  2010   2011   2012
  2009   2010   2011   2009   2010   2011   Q3   Q4   Q1   Q2   Q3   Q4   Q1
Item Index 2005=100 Annual percentage change
At  constant  prices,  chained
  I Origin of domestic product
Production sector
(excluding construction) 90.2 99.0 104.9 − 17.9 9.8 5.9 9.2 10.3 10.7 6.7 6.1 0.7 1.4Construction 94.9 96.6 99.7 − 4.1 1.7 3.3 2.7 − 0.9 9.5 0.4 − 0.0 4.6 − 0.4Wholesale/retail trade, transportand storage, hotel and restaurantservices 104.2 108.1 112.3 − 5.2 3.8 3.8 4.7 4.9 6.1 3.8 3.1 2.5 2.5Information and communication 135.1 141.8 144.4 9.0 5.0 1.8 4.5 6.0 1.2 1.5 2.3 2.2 3.6Financial and insuranceactivities 128.9 128.8 130.0 11.6 − 0.1 1.0 − 2.5 − 0.0 0.4 − 0.2 2.6 1.1 1.8Real estate activities 107.6 107.8 108.3 2.0 0.2 0.5 0.4 − 0.5 − 0.2 0.6 0.5 1.1 1.5Business services 
1 99.1 102.8 106.8 − 11.7 3.8 3.9 5.5 4.1 4.9 4.2 3.5 3.3 3.9
Public services, education and
health 107.1 108.8 109.7 2.1 1.6 0.8 1.7 0.2 0.8 0.8 0.7 1.0 0.9Other services 106.5 107.8 106.8 0.8 1.2 − 0.9 1.7 − 0.0 − 0.6 − 1.5 − 1.5 − 0.2 1.2
Gross value added 103.0 107.2 110.4 − 5.6 4.1 2.9 4.2 4.1 4.5 3.0 2.7 1.6 1.8Gross domestic product 
2 102.7 106.5 109.7 − 5.1 3.7 3.0 4.0 3.8 5.0 3.0 2.6 1.5 1.7
 II Use of domestic product
Private consumption 3 101.8 102.5 103.9 − 0.1 0.6 1.4 0.9 1.8 1.9 1.4 1.7 0.7 1.8
Government consumption 109.0 110.9 112.1 3.3 1.7 1.1 1.5 1.2 0.3 1.6 1.1 1.6 1.9
Machinery and equipment 98.7 109.1 117.3 − 22.8 10.5 7.6 13.1 17.6 15.3 9.1 6.1 2.1 2.5Premises 101.2 103.4 109.4 − 3.0 2.2 5.8 3.4 0.1 13.4 3.0 2.4 6.5 − 0.5Other investment 
4 125.9 131.9 138.2 0.6 4.7 4.8 4.3 5.9 4.8 4.7 5.0 4.8 4.0
Changes in inventories 5, 6 . . . − 0.9 0.6 0.2 0.3 0.5 0.1 0.1 0.5 0.2 − 0.4
Domestic use 103.2 105.7 108.3 − 2.6 2.4 2.5 2.4 3.4 3.4 2.4 2.4 1.8 1.2Net exports 
6 . . . − 2.6 1.5 0.7 1.6 0.7 1.8 0.7 0.3 − 0.1 0.5
Exports 108.3 123.2 133.3 − 13.6 13.7 8.2 15.0 13.9 13.2 7.6 8.0 4.6 5.9Imports 110.6 123.5 133.1 − 9.2 11.7 7.8 12.2 14.6 10.6 7.0 8.3 5.6 5.6
Gross domestic product 
2 102.7 106.5 109.7 − 5.1 3.7 3.0 4.0 3.8 5.0 3.0 2.6 1.5 1.7
At  current  prices  (€ billion)
III Use of domestic product
Private consumption 3 1,387.4 1,423.0 1,473.1 − 0.0 2.6 3.5 2.9 3.7 4.0 3.6 3.8 2.7 3.5
Government consumption 475.8 488.8 501.4 5.1 2.7 2.6 2.0 2.1 1.6 3.3 2.4 3.0 3.3Machinery and equipment 155.1 170.8 183.5 − 23.0 10.1 7.4 12.9 17.2 15.1 8.9 6.0 2.0 2.5Premises 227.1 235.0 255.5 − 1.9 3.5 8.7 5.2 1.4 16.3 5.7 5.4 9.8 2.4Other investment 
4 27.0 27.8 28.6 − 2.9 2.7 3.1 2.8 3.3 2.9 3.0 2.7 3.6 2.5
Changes in inventories 5 − 16.5 − 4.0 1.0 . . . . . . . . . .
Domestic use 2,256.0 2,341.4 2,443.2 − 2.7 3.8 4.3 3.7 4.9 5.2 4.4 4.2 3.7 2.8Net exports 118.5 135.5 127.7 . . . . . . . . . .
Exports 995.9 1,159.8 1,289.1 − 16.2 16.5 11.2 19.1 17.6 18.0 10.9 10.2 6.5 7.5Imports 877.4 1,024.4 1,161.5 − 15.2 16.7 13.4 19.1 22.0 19.5 12.9 12.5 9.5 7.7
Gross domestic product 
2 2,374.5 2,476.8 2,570.8 − 4.0 4.3 3.8 4.4 4.1 5.3 3.9 3.5 2.6 3.0
IV Prices (2005=100)
Private consumption 104.3 106.3 108.5 0.1 1.9 2.1 2.0 1.9 2.1 2.2 2.0 2.0 1.7Gross domestic product 103.9 104.6 105.4 1.2 0.6 0.8 0.4 0.3 0.3 0.9 0.9 1.0 1.3Terms of trade 101.3 99.2 96.9 3.8 − 2.0 − 2.4 − 2.4 − 3.0 − 3.6 − 2.5 − 1.9 − 1.8 − 0.4
V  Distribution of national income
Compensation of employees 1,231.5 1,262.9 1,318.7 0.1 2.5 4.4 2.9 3.3 4.5 5.0 4.3 3.9 3.8Entrepreneurial and propertyincome 574.7 635.0 651.9 − 13.5 10.5 2.7 7.0 6.3 5.1 − 0.3 4.3 1.1 2.7
National income 1,806.2 1,897.8 1,970.6 − 4.6 5.1 3.8 4.4 4.2 4.7 3.3 4.3 3.1 3.4
Memo item: Gross national
income 2,424.9 2,522.8 2,620.4 − 3.2 4.0 3.9 3.7 3.6 5.0 3.4 4.1 3.1 3.2
Source: Federal Statistical Office; figures computed in May 2012. 1Professional, sci- stitutions serving households. 4Intangible fixed asset formation (inter alia, computer
entific, technical, administration and support service activities. 2Gross value added software and entertainment, literary or artistic originals) and cultivated assets. 5In-
plus taxes on products (netted with subsidies on products). 3Including non-profit in- cluding net increase in valuables. 6 Contribution of growth to GDP. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
62  Monthly Report
August 2012
 X Economic conditions in Germany
 
2 Output in the production sector*
 
 
Adjusted for working-day variations  o 
Industry
by main industrial grouping of which: by economic sector
Manu-
Manu- facture of
facture of computers,basic metals Motor
electronic
and vehicles, and optical
Production Inter- Non- fabricated products Machinery trailers
sector, Construc- mediate Capital Durable durable metal and and semi- and electrical
total tion Energy Total goods goods goods goods products equipment equipment trailers
2005=100  
  
% of total 1 100.00 5.56 8.76 85.69 33.96 35.37 2.78 13.58 12.15 10.82 12.48 12.34
Period
2007 111.5 108.7 98.2 113.1 114.5 114.9 108.4 105.8 114.0 124.4 119.4 109.7
2008 111.5 108.4 95.5 113.3 114.2 116.8 104.0 104.4 114.4 128.8 124.5 104.5
2009 94.3 108.3 90.7 93.7 93.3 92.0 87.6 100.6 87.5 100.9 92.2 82.0
2010 103.9 108.5 93.6 104.6 107.2 103.8 95.7 102.4 101.7 117.5 101.6 102.3
2011 112.1 123.1 87.7 113.9 115.8 116.7 100.5 104.5 111.5 134.6 115.4 116.3
 
2011          Feb 105.2 86.5 96.1 107.3 110.2 108.3 99.5 99.0 106.0 126.0 101.5 117.0
         Mar 118.8 123.0 100.2 120.4 121.9 124.1 109.8 109.2 117.7 136.7 123.2 128.5
         Apr 110.8 132.0 83.7 112.3 116.0 112.8 99.9 104.0 111.2 126.1 110.3 117.0
         May 111.2 133.6 78.7 113.1 116.7 114.5 97.2 103.6 113.1 127.5 110.4 119.2
         June 113.9 134.1 76.4 116.4 119.7 119.6 94.9 104.3 115.8 137.1 120.9 117.3
         July 116.0 142.8 80.0 117.9 122.2 119.7 101.7 105.9 117.0 142.3 119.2 119.6
         Aug 107.1 133.0 78.7 108.3 115.1 106.4 84.9 100.8 107.5 135.2 109.2 98.1
         Sep 117.9 140.6 78.6 120.5 121.8 124.9 111.1 107.7 116.2 146.4 123.2 127.1
         Oct 119.6 141.4 88.1 121.4 122.3 125.2 112.8 110.9 119.2 144.5 118.5 129.8
         Nov 120.7 139.8 94.5 122.2 120.4 129.2 111.2 110.8 118.4 147.0 126.0 127.7
         Dec 103.2 94.2 90.8 105.0 95.5 118.0 88.6 98.3 93.3 125.5 129.8 93.6
2012          Jan r 102.0 80.9 93.4 104.2 109.2 102.8 93.4 97.2 103.6 124.3 98.4 108.8
         Feb r 104.7 68.1 92.7 108.4 109.7 113.2 96.0 95.2 106.7 128.3 108.6 121.8
         Mar r 2,3 120.2 2 126.8 94.2 3 122.4 121.3 3 130.6 105.6 107.4 117.0 141.0 3 134.5 132.9
         Apr x 2 109.7 2 132.0 84.4 110.8 114.1 113.9 93.6 97.9 109.1 127.5 112.2 118.0
         May x 2 110.9 2 135.9 79.7 112.4 115.4 115.3 94.8 100.8 111.7 129.7 113.7 116.9
         June x,p 2 113.6 2 138.1 e 76.5 115.8 117.5 121.3 96.3 101.1 114.5 137.1 122.0 119.7
 
Annual percentage change  
 
2007 + 5.8 + 2.8 − 2.8 + 6.9 + 6.9 + 8.4 + 1.0 + 4.0 + 6.2 + 10.2 + 11.1 + 6.9
2008 + 0.0 − 0.3 − 2.7 + 0.2 − 0.3 + 1.7 − 4.1 − 1.3 + 0.4 + 3.5 + 4.3 − 4.7
2009 − 15.4 − 0.1 − 5.0 − 17.3 − 18.3 − 21.2 − 15.8 − 3.6 − 23.5 − 21.7 − 25.9 − 21.5
2010 + 10.2 + 0.2 + 3.2 + 11.6 + 14.9 + 12.8 + 9.2 + 1.8 + 16.2 + 16.5 + 10.2 + 24.8
2011 + 7.9 + 13.5 − 6.3 + 8.9 + 8.0 + 12.4 + 5.0 + 2.1 + 9.6 + 14.6 + 13.6 + 13.7
 
2011          Feb + 15.0 + 55.9 − 2.4 + 15.3 + 14.7 + 20.5 + 8.9 + 5.0 + 16.4 + 22.0 + 22.7 + 27.2
         Mar + 11.7 + 17.8 + 1.5 + 12.2 + 11.3 + 16.7 + 10.6 + 3.2 + 11.7 + 18.0 + 20.0 + 18.8
         Apr + 9.5 + 7.1 − 7.6 + 11.3 + 9.3 + 15.7 + 10.0 + 5.2 + 10.9 + 14.8 + 18.3 + 17.5
         May + 7.4 + 8.8 − 13.7 + 9.3 + 7.2 + 13.8 + 5.4 + 4.1 + 10.2 + 12.9 + 15.2 + 13.8
         June + 6.9 + 5.0 − 6.3 + 8.2 + 8.1 + 10.5 − 1.6 + 3.6 + 9.5 + 14.3 + 15.4 + 7.9
         July + 10.3 + 7.9 − 7.5 + 11.9 + 9.9 + 17.7 + 13.0 + 2.3 + 11.3 + 18.8 + 19.2 + 22.3
         Aug + 8.5 + 6.7 − 4.0 + 9.6 + 8.1 + 16.4 + 0.6 − 1.1 + 8.6 + 17.0 + 14.7 + 25.0
         Sep + 5.5 + 5.2 − 6.3 + 6.4 + 6.5 + 8.9 + 3.6 + 0.2 + 6.7 + 15.0 + 11.2 + 6.7
         Oct + 4.3 + 4.6 − 6.6 + 5.1 + 3.9 + 8.3 + 2.5 + 0.3 + 5.8 + 9.3 + 7.5 + 7.3
         Nov + 4.6 + 9.6 − 4.0 + 5.0 + 3.9 + 7.9 + 1.9 + 0.0 + 5.9 + 9.5 + 8.1 + 7.0
         Dec + 1.3 + 44.0 − 16.4 + 1.4 + 2.5 + 0.9 − 0.4 + 0.2 + 3.8 + 5.6 + 0.1 − 2.7
2012          Jan r + 1.1 + 6.6 − 12.6 + 2.3 + 1.0 + 5.2 − 0.6 − 1.7 + 0.9 + 3.2 + 6.7 + 7.5
         Feb r − 0.5 − 21.3 − 3.5 + 1.0 − 0.5 + 4.5 − 3.5 − 3.8 + 0.7 + 1.8 + 7.0 + 4.1
         Mar r 2,3 + 1.2 2 + 3.1 − 6.0 3 + 1.7 − 0.5 3 + 5.2 − 3.8 − 1.6 − 0.6 + 3.1 3 + 9.2 + 3.4
         Apr x 2 − 1.0 2 + 0.0 + 0.8 − 1.3 − 1.6 + 1.0 − 6.3 − 5.9 − 1.9 + 1.1 + 1.7 + 0.9
         May x 2 − 0.3 2 + 1.7 + 1.3 − 0.6 − 1.1 + 0.7 − 2.5 − 2.7 − 1.2 + 1.7 + 3.0 − 1.9
         June x,p 2 − 0.3 2 + 3.0 e + 0.1 − 0.5 − 1.8 + 1.4 + 1.5 − 3.1 − 1.1 + 0.0 + 0.9 + 2.0
Source of the unadjusted figures: Federal Statistical Office. *For explanatory notes, annual overall survey in the construction sector (average + 4%). 3Positivly influenced
see Statistical Supplement Seasonally adjusted business statistics, Tables II.10 to by late reports. xProvisional; adjusted in advance by the Federal Statistical Office, by
II.12. oUsing the Census X-12-ARIMA method, version 0.2.8. 1Share of gross value way of estimates, to the results of the Quarterly Production Survey. eUnadjusted
added at factor cost of the production sector in the base year 2005. 2Adjusted in ad- figures estimated by the Federal Statistical Office. 
vance by the Federal Statistical Office, by way of estimates, to the results of the

Deutsche Bundesbank
63  Monthly Report
August 2012
X Economic conditions in Germany
 
3 Orders received by industry *
 
 
Adjusted for working-day variations  o 
Industry Intermediate goods Capital goods Consumer goods Durable goods Non-durable goods
Annual Annual Annual Annual Annual Annual
percent- percent- percent- percent- percent- percent-age age age age age age
Period 2005=100 change 2005=100 change 2005=100 change 2005=100 change 2005=100 change 2005=100 change
Total
2007 123.0 + 11.1 125.2 + 9.9 123.2 + 12.6 111.9 + 6.3 110.3 + 1.8 112.5 + 7.9
2008 115.5 − 6.1 121.2 − 3.2 112.9 − 8.4 108.1 − 3.4 103.5 − 6.2 109.7 − 2.5
2009 87.5 − 24.2 89.3 − 26.3 85.3 − 24.4 94.8 − 12.3 88.5 − 14.5 96.9 − 11.7
2010 109.1 + 24.7 114.3 + 28.0 106.9 + 25.3 99.8 + 5.3 101.5 + 14.7 99.3 + 2.5
2011 120.5 + 10.4 125.3 + 9.6 119.8 + 12.1 104.1 + 4.3 107.4 + 5.8 103.0 + 3.7
2011          June 129.7 + 11.9 127.7 + 7.3 135.4 + 16.5 99.9 + 0.4 106.6 + 0.5 97.6 + 0.3
         July 121.8 + 10.5 130.1 + 9.2 117.6 + 11.9 112.7 + 8.0 112.2 + 10.8 112.9 + 7.1
         Aug 111.2 + 6.5 118.8 + 9.1 107.5 + 5.3 102.6 + 2.8 96.1 + 6.9 104.9 + 1.7
         Sep 117.4 + 3.7 122.0 + 3.8 115.8 + 3.7 107.9 + 4.2 122.2 + 9.3 103.1 + 2.3
         Oct 118.6 + 5.5 121.7 + 2.0 118.3 + 8.3 106.4 + 2.3 115.4 − 0.3 103.4 + 3.4
         Nov 117.6 − 2.9 119.8 − 1.6 118.2 − 4.1 104.2 + 2.0 108.7 − 1.9 102.7 + 3.4
         Dec 113.4 + 1.6 106.7 − 1.1 120.8 + 3.1 92.0 + 2.9 89.5 + 1.9 92.9 + 3.3
2012          Jan 114.8 − 4.7 125.2 − 5.7 109.8 − 4.7 101.6 − 0.9 101.8 − 4.0 101.5 + 0.2
         Feb 116.1 − 5.3 122.1 − 3.6 113.6 − 6.5 105.4 − 5.0 96.5 − 8.0 108.5 − 4.1
         Mar 130.3 + 0.2 131.0 − 6.6 132.3 + 4.8 114.0 + 3.4 113.5 − 1.6 114.2 + 5.1
         Apr 116.8 − 2.3 122.5 − 4.0 116.1 − 0.9 96.2 − 3.5 100.5 − 6.7 94.7 − 2.5
         May 117.9 − 4.5 123.0 − 4.7 117.2 − 5.0 100.6 + 1.2 99.9 − 3.8 100.8 + 3.0
         June p 120.7 − 6.9 121.9 − 4.5 122.6 − 9.5 102.5 + 2.6 102.6 − 3.8 102.5 + 5.0
From the domestic market
2007 118.7 + 8.9 124.7 + 10.1 115.8 + 8.8 107.0 + 3.5 109.6 − 1.3 106.1 + 5.2
2008 113.1 − 4.7 121.8 − 2.3 107.5 − 7.2 103.9 − 2.9 107.1 − 2.3 102.9 − 3.0
2009 88.0 − 22.2 89.9 − 26.2 86.5 − 19.5 87.4 − 15.9 89.9 − 16.1 86.6 − 15.8
2010 104.5 + 18.8 115.9 + 28.9 97.8 + 13.1 88.6 + 1.4 93.9 + 4.4 86.9 + 0.3
2011 115.3 + 10.3 127.8 + 10.3 109.0 + 11.5 92.1 + 4.0 104.1 + 10.9 88.2 + 1.5
2011          June 116.1 + 7.5 127.7 + 5.5 111.5 + 10.3 88.0 + 3.2 98.6 + 8.8 84.6 + 1.2
         July 120.0 + 11.8 135.8 + 10.9 110.8 + 13.9 97.7 + 6.5 107.6 + 20.0 94.5 + 2.4
         Aug 109.0 + 9.0 123.6 + 10.0 99.4 + 8.8 94.3 + 4.7 99.7 + 13.8 92.6 + 1.9
         Sep 113.5 + 4.6 123.7 + 3.9 107.1 + 5.0 101.4 + 6.5 126.7 + 15.6 93.2 + 3.0
         Oct 113.4 + 2.9 126.5 + 2.8 105.2 + 2.4 97.2 + 5.1 117.5 + 4.9 90.6 + 5.2
         Nov 114.6 + 1.0 125.2 + 0.1 109.5 + 1.8 93.7 + 1.8 110.8 + 5.1 88.1 + 0.6
         Dec 101.0 + 1.5 103.0 − 1.8 103.5 + 4.5 77.7 + 1.0 84.0 + 7.3 75.6 − 1.0
2012          Jan 110.7 − 3.3 126.7 − 5.3 100.9 − 1.9 90.2 + 2.3 101.3 + 5.9 86.6 + 0.9
         Feb 109.6 − 5.7 120.7 − 6.2 102.9 − 5.9 94.4 − 2.1 97.6 − 2.0 93.4 − 2.0
         Mar 120.8 − 2.3 131.7 − 5.4 116.0 + 0.4 97.0 + 0.9 108.7 + 1.8 93.2 + 0.6
         Apr 112.2 − 2.3 125.8 − 4.2 105.7 − 0.4 84.9 − 2.2 95.1 − 6.7 81.6 − 0.4
         May 109.9 − 13.2 123.2 − 8.6 103.3 − 18.4 84.6 − 4.1 90.9 − 9.6 82.5 − 1.9
         June p 110.3 − 5.0 121.1 − 5.2 105.8 − 5.1 84.5 − 4.0 90.4 − 8.3 82.6 − 2.4
From abroad
2007 126.7 + 12.9 125.7 + 9.7 128.4 + 15.2 117.3 + 9.1 111.0 + 5.0 119.5 + 10.5
2008 117.7 − 7.1 120.6 − 4.1 116.7 − 9.1 112.6 − 4.0 99.9 − 10.0 117.1 − 2.0
2009 87.0 − 26.1 88.6 − 26.5 84.4 − 27.7 102.8 − 8.7 87.1 − 12.8 108.4 − 7.4
2010 113.0 + 29.9 112.5 + 27.0 113.4 + 34.4 111.9 + 8.9 109.1 + 25.3 112.9 + 4.2
2011 125.0 + 10.6 122.4 + 8.8 127.4 + 12.3 116.9 + 4.5 110.7 + 1.5 119.2 + 5.6
2011          June 141.6 + 15.4 127.8 + 9.5 152.2 + 20.0 112.7 − 1.9 114.7 − 5.8 112.0 − 0.4
         July 123.3 + 9.4 123.5 + 7.0 122.4 + 10.7 128.9 + 9.1 116.9 + 3.4 133.2 + 11.2
         Aug 113.1 + 4.4 113.3 + 7.9 113.2 + 3.2 111.6 + 1.2 92.5 + 0.2 118.4 + 1.5
         Sep 120.8 + 3.1 120.0 + 3.8 121.9 + 2.9 115.0 + 2.0 117.7 + 3.2 114.1 + 1.7
         Oct 123.2 + 7.7 116.3 + 1.1 127.6 + 12.1 116.4 − 0.1 113.3 − 5.3 117.5 + 1.8
         Nov 120.3 − 5.8 113.7 − 3.7 124.3 − 7.5 115.6 + 2.1 106.6 − 8.3 118.8 + 5.9
         Dec 124.1 + 1.6 111.0 − 0.3 133.0 + 2.3 107.5 + 4.6 95.1 − 2.3 111.9 + 6.8
2012          Jan 118.3 − 6.0 123.5 − 6.0 116.1 − 6.2 113.9 − 3.4 102.4 − 12.1 118.0 − 0.3
         Feb 121.7 − 5.0 123.7 − 0.6 121.2 − 6.8 117.3 − 7.5 95.3 − 13.5 125.1 − 5.7
         Mar 138.6 + 2.1 130.2 − 7.9 143.8 + 7.4 132.3 + 5.3 118.4 − 4.4 137.3 + 8.6
         Apr 120.8 − 2.3 118.7 − 3.7 123.4 − 1.4 108.3 − 4.7 106.0 − 6.6 109.1 − 4.1
         May 124.9 + 3.4 122.7 + 0.3 127.0 + 4.9 117.8 + 5.7 109.0 + 1.9 120.9 + 6.9
         June p 129.8 − 8.3 122.9 − 3.8 134.4 − 11.7 121.9 + 8.2 114.9 + 0.2 124.5 + 11.2
Source of the unadjusted figures: Federal Statistical Office. *For explanatory notes, II.16. o Using the Census X-12-ARIMA method, version 0.2.8. 
see Statistical Supplement Seasonally adjusted business statistics, Tables II.14 to

Deutsche Bundesbank
64  Monthly Report
August 2012
 X Economic conditions in Germany
 
4 Orders received by construction *   
 
 
Adjusted for working-day variations  o 
Breakdown by type of construction Breakdown by client  1 
 Building    
Housing Industrial Public sector Civil Public
Total Total construction construction construction engineering Industry sector
Annual Annual Annual Annual Annual Annual Annual Annual
percent- percent- percent- percent- percent- percent- percent- percent-
age age age age age age age age
Period change change change change change change change change 2005 = 100 2005 = 100 2005 = 100 2005 = 100 2005 = 100 2005 = 100 2005 = 100 2005 = 100
2008 113.4 − 0.4 114.7 + 2.0 94.4 − 4.2 127.9 + 3.8 116.7 + 7.7 112.0 − 2.9 123.3 + 2.2 111.5 − 1.9
2009 107.4 − 5.3 100.7 − 12.2 94.1 − 0.3 100.7 − 21.3 115.5 − 1.0 114.4 + 2.1 104.9 − 14.9 115.6 + 3.7
2010 109.0 + 1.5 106.7 + 6.0 103.3 + 9.8 105.3 + 4.6 118.9 + 2.9 111.3 − 2.7 111.0 + 5.8 109.4 − 5.4
2011 117.1 + 7.4 120.1 + 12.6 125.0 + 21.0 120.0 + 14.0 109.2 − 8.2 114.0 + 2.4 125.6 + 13.2 105.2 − 3.8
 
2011          May 127.5 + 9.9 135.2 + 24.7 147.7 + 35.5 127.2 + 23.3 133.6 + 7.4 119.6 − 3.5 126.0 + 12.4 120.5 − 1.9
         June 136.2 + 6.2 137.9 + 10.4 129.6 + 17.7 136.7 + 7.5 161.0 + 6.7 134.3 + 2.1 140.4 + 4.3 134.7 + 4.2
         July 137.0 + 11.1 124.4 + 5.6 134.3 + 17.9 115.3 − 0.8 132.3 + 0.2 150.2 + 16.4 129.7 + 5.1 145.6 + 14.5
         Aug 123.6 + 5.0 125.3 + 4.6 129.9 + 15.3 129.1 + 3.5 102.0 − 14.9 121.9 + 5.6 132.6 + 10.2 111.9 − 4.4         Sep 127.9 + 3.9 127.6 + 7.6 127.7 − 1.7 130.6 + 23.0 117.5 − 12.8 128.1 + 0.2 134.1 + 15.7 121.7 − 4.5
         Oct 112.8 − 1.0 122.3 + 10.4 126.8 + 18.5 128.1 + 14.8 92.6 − 20.9 102.9 − 12.1 128.2 + 2.2 91.3 − 13.3
         Nov 106.3 + 15.4 114.6 + 22.3 122.9 + 28.0 112.6 + 21.5 102.6 + 11.5 97.6 + 8.0 117.1 + 20.5 88.3 + 3.5         Dec 105.8 + 17.2 114.4 + 19.2 127.7 + 26.1 109.4 + 18.5 101.3 + 5.0 96.8 + 15.0 117.8 + 23.9 84.5 + 4.7
2012          Jan 89.5 + 16.4 97.0 + 14.8 103.2 + 33.0 96.6 + 2.8 84.2 + 23.5 81.6 + 18.1 103.3 + 9.7 69.7 + 17.5
         Feb 105.2 + 11.8 109.3 + 6.8 116.4 + 19.1 106.9 − 6.5 101.1 + 39.4 101.0 + 18.0 110.4 − 3.6 95.3 + 32.4
         Mar 148.3 + 10.4 157.7 + 18.0 152.7 + 7.3 168.5 + 29.1 133.2 + 7.3 138.5 + 2.5 157.4 + 6.9 137.4 + 16.6
         Apr 135.5 + 10.3 135.2 + 13.9 146.9 + 7.9 138.1 + 23.7 99.1 − 3.9 135.8 + 6.8 136.0 + 8.9 130.2 + 13.0
         May 129.9 + 1.9 127.0 − 6.1 134.3 − 9.1 127.2 +
 0.0 109.6 − 18.0 133.0 + 11.2 133.1 + 5.6 124.8 + 3.6
Source of the unadjusted figures: Federal Statistical Office. *Values exclusive of adjusted business statistics, Tables II.21. oUsing the Census X-12-ARIMA method,
value-added tax; for explanatory notes, see Statistical Supplement Seasonally version 0.2.8. 1 Excluding housing construction orders. 
 
 
5 Retail trade turnover, sales of motor vehicles *
  
Adjusted for calendar variations o 
Retail trade
of which: by enterprises main product range  1 
Construction Retail sale of
and flooring pharmaceutical Wholesale
Textiles, Information materials, and medical and retail trade
clothing and household goods, cosmetic and repair of
Food, beverages, foodwear and communications appliances, and toilet motor vehicles
Total tobacco 2 leather goods equipment furniture articles and motorcycles
At current At prices in
prices year 2005 At current prices
Annual Annual Annual Annual Annual Annual Annual Annual
percent- percent- percent- percent- percent- percent- percent- percent-
age age age age age age age age
Period change change change change change change change change 2005 = 100 2005 = 100 2005 = 100 2005 = 100 2005 = 100 2005 = 100 2005 = 100 2005 = 100
2008 101.5 + 2.1 98.8 − 0.2 100.7 + 1.2 104.6 + 0.9 116.3 + 5.5 99.5 + 0.9 107.2 + 2.9 95.8 − 4.8
2009 3 98.1 − 3.3 96.2 − 2.6 98.8 − 1.9 101.5 − 3.0 117.0 + 0.6 97.1 − 2.4 110.0 + 2.6 96.8 + 1.0
2010 100.4 + 2.3 97.4 + 1.2 99.6 + 0.8 106.1 + 4.5 120.5 + 3.0 99.5 + 2.5 114.2 + 3.8 92.3 − 4.6
2011 4 103.1 + 2.7 98.5 + 1.1 102.0 + 2.4 108.3 + 2.1 121.2 + 0.6 103.0 + 3.5 114.8 + 0.5 99.2 + 7.5
 
2011          June 100.1 + 2.7 95.3 + 1.1 102.8 + 4.7 102.1 + 1.4 106.5 − 3.9 99.9 + 0.8 111.9 + 0.4 102.5 + 2.6
         July 103.7 + 2.4 99.4 + 1.2 102.6 + 0.9 109.1 + 4.6 114.5 + 1.9 103.5 + 4.3 116.4 + 0.1 102.2 + 6.1
         Aug 100.0 + 1.9 95.8 + 0.4 100.3 + 3.5 97.6 − 3.8 112.7 − 2.9 100.0 + 1.0 111.9 − 0.9 91.8 + 4.7         Sep 102.0 + 3.4 97.1 + 1.6 98.1 + 3.8 109.9 − 6.1 114.2 − 0.3 102.1 + 3.8 114.0 + 1.3 98.9 + 3.3
         Oct 108.4 + 3.2 103.0 + 1.3 104.1 + 2.9 131.9 + 4.7 122.3 + 0.8 111.5 + 3.5 116.9 − 0.4 108.2 + 4.9
         Nov 107.4 + 3.1 102.3 + 1.4 103.3 + 3.1 112.6 + 1.2 133.2 + 0.7 111.4 + 4.1 118.5 + 1.5 104.0 + 2.6         Dec 123.5 + 2.3 118.7 + 1.3 120.8 + 1.9 133.6 + 2.5 187.0 + 2.4 112.8 + 7.2 131.9 + 0.9 90.7 + 1.6
2012          Jan 93.9 + 0.5 89.6 − 1.3 94.0 + 1.3 89.5 + 0.2 124.6 − 7.8 88.7 + 1.7 110.5 + 0.2 82.5 − 1.1
         Feb 91.2 + 0.1 85.7 − 2.1 93.8 + 2.7 78.5 − 6.5 104.2 − 3.7 85.9 − 3.7 107.1 + 0.9 90.5 − 0.5
         Mar 107.5 + 3.8 100.3 + 1.6 106.1 + 2.3 115.9 + 6.5 114.0 + 1.1 114.3 + 6.4 117.9 + 3.2 115.3 + 4.6
         Apr 105.8 + 2.0 98.6 + 0.4 106.4 + 2.7 111.9 − 4.4 110.4 + 7.1 109.1 + 0.1 115.3 + 2.5 105.7 + 0.5
         May 105.0 + 4.3 97.6 + 2.2 105.9 + 5.0 110.0 + 6.7 105.0 + 0.2 106.8 + 4.8 114.6 + 1.9 104.0 + 1.4         June 
5 102.1 + 2.0 94.9 − 0.4 104.3 + 1.5 100.6 − 1.5 112.2 + 5.4 100.9 + 1.0 110.2 − 1.5 103.6 + 1.1
Source of the unadjusted figures: Federal Statistical Office. *Excluding value-added chain-linking. 4Figures from January 2011 are provisional, and particularly uncertain
tax;  For explanatory notes, see Statistical Supplement Seasonally adjusted business in recent months owing to estimates for missing reports. 5Unadjusted figures
statistics, Tables II.24. oUsing the Census X-12-ARIMA method, version 0.2.8. 1In partially estimated by the Federal Statistical Office. As the estimate of missing reports
stores. 2Including stalls and markets. 3In January 2009 new reporting sample in- is based on data for Juni 2011, which had two selling days less, an upward revision is
cluding new entities; statistical breaks in the reporting sample eliminated by expected. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
65  Monthly Report
August 2012
 X Economic conditions in Germany
 
6 Labour market * 
 
 
 
Employment 1 Employment subject to social security contributions  2 Short time workers 3 Unemployment 4 
Total of which: of which: of which:
Solely
jobs
Services exempt Recipients
excluding from of insured
Produc- temporary social unem- Unem- Temporary
tion employ- employ- contri- Cyclically ployment ploy- Vacan-
 Annual Annual sector ment ment butions 2 Total induced Total benefits ment cies, 4,6 
Thou- percentage Thou- rate 4,5 thou- percentage
sands change sands change Thousands in % sands
2007 39,857 + 1.7 26,942 + 2.2 8,533 . . 4,861 68 26 3,760 1,245 9.0 423
2008 r 40,348 r + 1.2 27,510 + 2.1 8,659 17,958 679 4,866 102 58 3,258 1,006 7.8 389
2009 r 40,370 r + 0.1 27,493 − 0.1 8,521 18,210 549 4,904 1,144 1,078 7 3,415 7 1,190 7 8.1 301
2010 r 40,603 r + 0.6 27,757 + 1.0 8,426 18,438 679 4,883 503 429 3,238 1,075 7.7 359
2011 r 41,164 r + 1.4 28,440 + 2.5 8,583 18,836 798 4,865 148 100 2,976 892 7.1 466
2009          Q2 r 40,314 r + 0.2 27,379 + 0.1 8,515 18,133 512 4,906 1,436 1,411 7 3,475 7 1,207 7 8.3 301
         Q3 r 40,431 r − 0.2 27,482 − 0.5 8,500 18,204 557 4,913 1,136 1,103 3,418 1,186 8.1 300
         Q4 r 40,621 r − 0.2 27,720 − 0.7 8,504 18,423 579 4,934 1,007 944 3,232 1,083 7.7 290
2010          Q1 r 40,026 r − 0.2 27,307 − 0.3 8,308 18,244 561 4,854 987 804 3,601 1,327 8.6 297
         Q2 r 40,513 r + 0.5 27,592 + 0.8 8,377 18,346 648 4,885 517 485 3,261 1,053 7.8 354
         Q3 r 40,799 r + 0.9 27,886 + 1.5 8,469 18,454 740 4,889 265 239 3,132 1,003 7.5 395
         Q4 r 41,074 r + 1.1 28,242 + 1.9 8,548 18,710 767 4,905 242 188 2,959 920 7.0 392
2011          Q1 r 40,613 r + 1.5 27,944 + 2.3 8,428 18,578 740 4,852 291 158 3,290 1,088 7.8 412
         Q2 r 41,073 r + 1.4 28,266 + 2.4 8,535 18,721 786 4,867 121 107 2,977 850 7.1 470
         Q3 r 41,347 r + 1.3 28,566 + 2.4 8,638 18,862 836 4,865 76 64 2,893 843 6.9 497
         Q4 r 41,624 r + 1.3 28,983 + 2.6 8,732 19,184 830 4,874 102 72 2,743 787 6.5 486
2012          Q1 r 41,178 r + 1.4 8 28,649 8 + 2.5 8 8,624 8 19,046 8 760 8 4,799 ... 8 84 3,074 998 7.3 472
         Q2 9 41,588 9 + 1.3 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 2,876 847 10 6.8 499
2009          Mar r 40,136 r + 0.4 27,337 + 0.4 8,530 18,088 513 4,872 1,325 1,194 3,576 1,296 8.5 317
         Apr r 40,262 r + 0.3 27,383 + 0.2 8,524 18,132 507 4,901 1,446 1,426 3,575 1,270 8.5 306
         May r 40,334 r + 0.2 27,395 − 0.1 8,509 18,154 508 4,914 1,469 1,443 7 3,449 7 1,192 7 8.2 299
         June r 40,345 r + 0.0 27,380 − 0.3 8,493 18,135 531 4,932 1,394 1,365 3,401 1,159 8.1 297
         July r 40,327 r − 0.2 27,314 − 0.5 8,464 18,080 551 4,935 1,248 1,215 3,454 1,210 8.2 298
         Aug r 40,370 r − 0.2 27,542 − 0.5 8,507 18,249 565 4,891 1,055 1,022 3,463 1,211 8.2 300
         Sep r 40,596 r − 0.3 27,800 − 0.7 8,564 18,430 578 4,893 1,104 1,072 3,338 1,137 7.9 302
         Oct r 40,699 r − 0.3 27,786 − 0.8 8,534 18,449 581 4,909 1,109 1,076 3,221 1,071 7.7 298
         Nov r 40,691 r − 0.3 27,731 − 0.7 8,497 18,434 589 4,961 982 947 3,208 1,069 7.6 291
         Dec r 40,474 r − 0.2 27,488 − 0.5 8,400 18,341 553 4,971 929 809 3,268 1,107 7.8 281
2010          Jan r 39,987 r − 0.3 27,249 − 0.5 8,295 18,214 550 4,840 1,057 874 3,610 1,339 8.6 271
         Feb r 39,969 r − 0.3 27,230 − 0.3 8,269 18,210 560 4,814 1,031 829 3,635 1,356 8.6 298
         Mar r 40,121 r + 0.0 27,398 + 0.2 8,318 18,277 596 4,846 874 709 3,560 1,285 8.5 320
         Apr r 40,357 r + 0.2 27,553 + 0.6 8,371 18,335 627 4,875 632 599 3,399 1,140 8.1 335
         May r 40,538 r + 0.5 27,667 + 1.0 8,395 18,382 665 4,898 499 467 3,236 1,036 7.7 356
         June r 40,645 r + 0.7 27,710 + 1.2 8,414 18,365 707 4,916 420 390 3,148 983 7.5 370
         July r 40,663 r + 0.8 27,691 + 1.4 8,419 18,320 732 4,915 313 286 3,186 1,029 7.6 391
         Aug r 40,750 r + 0.9 27,976 + 1.6 8,493 18,508 752 4,864 244 219 3,183 1,030 7.6 397
         Sep r 40,984 r + 1.0 28,269 + 1.7 8,573 18,700 766 4,859 237 214 3,026 948 7.2 398
         Oct r 41,128 r + 1.1 28,296 + 1.8 8,566 18,738 769 4,886 231 209 2,941 907 7.0 401
         Nov r 41,142 r + 1.1 28,277 + 2.0 8,562 18,723 779 4,932 215 194 2,927 903 6.9 395
         Dec r 40,951 r + 1.2 28,033 + 2.0 8,460 18,635 743 4,931 279 162 3,011 949 7.1 380
2011          Jan r 40,556 r + 1.4 27,863 + 2.3 8,399 18,540 732 4,842 322 177 3,346 1,146 7.9 375
         Feb r 40,584 r + 1.5 27,912 + 2.5 8,416 18,560 738 4,831 305 155 3,313 1,107 7.9 418
         Mar r 40,698 r + 1.4 28,080 + 2.5 8,477 18,632 759 4,836 246 143 3,210 1,010 7.6 442
         Apr r 40,921 r + 1.4 28,214 + 2.4 8,518 18,703 771 4,857 133 117 3,078 907 7.3 461
         May r 41,098 r + 1.4 28,354 + 2.5 8,559 18,768 798 4,880 122 107 2,960 839 7.0 470
         June r 41,199 r + 1.4 28,381 + 2.4 8,580 18,753 821 4,894 110 96 2,893 804 6.9 480
         July r 41,212 r + 1.4 28,357 + 2.4 8,591 18,712 831 4,890 81 68 2,939 859 7.0 492
         Aug r 41,304 r + 1.4 28,658 + 2.4 8,660 18,922 843 4,840 71 59 2,945 867 7.0 497
         Sep r 41,524 r + 1.3 28,984 + 2.5 8,746 19,149 845 4,833 76 65 2,796 802 6.6 502
         Oct r 41,664 r + 1.3 29,039 + 2.6 8,750 19,206 839 4,851 81 70 2,737 778 6.5 500
         Nov r 41,691 r + 1.3 29,024 + 2.6 8,744 19,207 835 4,901 85 76 2,713 769 6.4 492
         Dec r 41,517 r + 1.4 28,787 + 2.7 8,655 19,128 784 4,909 140 72 2,780 813 6.6 467
2012          Jan r 41,152 r + 1.5 28,580 + 2.6 8,613 18,995 758 4,813 206 82 3,084 1,011 7.3 452
         Feb r 41,136 r + 1.4 8 28,600 8 + 2.5 8 8,603 8 19,028 8 752 8 4,745 ... 8 87 3,110 1,028 7.4 473
         Mar r 41,245 r + 1.3 8 28,748 8 + 2.4 8 8,657 8 19,101 8 758 8 4,771 ... 8 82 3,028 955 7.2 491
         Apr r 41,452 r + 1.3 8 28,853 8 + 2.3 8 8,690 8 19,157 8 765 8 4,801 ... 8 79 2,963 893 7.0 499
         May r 41,616 r + 1.3 8 28,946 8 + 2.1 8 8,717 8 19,202 8 780 8 4,822 ... 8 85 2,855 831 10 6.7 499
         June 9 41,695 9 + 1.2 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 2,809 817 6.6 499
         July ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 2,876 885 6.8 500
Sources: Federal Statistical Office; Federal Employment Agency. *Annual and ted data estimated by the Federal Employment Agency. The estimates for Germany
quarterly figures: averages; calculated by the Bundesbank; deviations from the offi- in 2010 and 2011 deviated from the final data by a maximum of 0.2 % for em-cial figures are due to rounding. 1Workplace concept; averages. 2Monthly figures: ployees subject to social contributions, by a maximum of 1.6 % for persons solely in
end of month. 3Number within a given month. 4Mid-month level. 5Relative to the jobs exempt from social contributions, and, in 2009, by a maximum of 18.8 % for
total civilian labour force. 6Excluding government-assisted forms of employment cyclically induced short-time work. 9Initial preliminary estimate by the Federal Statis-
and seasonal jobs, including jobs located abroad. 7From May 2009, unemployed tical Office. 10 From May 2012, calculated on the basis of new labour force figures. 
excluding persons formally on the books of private employment agencies. 8Unadjus-

Deutsche Bundesbank
66  Monthly Report
August 2012
 X Economic conditions in Germany
 
7 Prices
 
 
 
Consumer price index HWWI
Indices of Index of World Market
of which foreign trade prices Prices of Raw Materials 5 
Other Index of
durable producer
and non- prices of
durable industrial Index of
consumer Services Con- products producer
goods excluding prices of sold on the struction
excluding house House price domestic agricultural Other raw
Total Food Energy 1 rents 3 rents 3 index 2 market 4 products 4 Exports Imports Energy 6 materials  7 energy 1,2 
Period 2005 = 100 2010 = 100
Index level  
  
2007 8,9 103.9 105.9 101.7 112.8 103.9 102.2 109.3 106.8 119.9 103.0 105.1 86.0 87.5
2008 106.6 112.7 102.5 123.6 105.8 103.5 113.0 112.7 124.3 104.8 109.9 109.7 92.0
2009 107.0 111.2 103.9 116.9 107.4 104.6 114.4 108.0 100.7 102.5 100.5 72.8 74.5
2010 108.2 113.0 104.4 121.5 108.0 105.8 115.4 109.7 114.9 106.0 108.3 100.0 100.0
2011 10 110.7 115.8 105.7 133.7 109.3 107.1 118.7 115.9 129.6 109.9 117.0 132.2 113.5
 
2010          Sep 108.3 112.5 104.7 121.7 108.0 106.0 110.7 120.2 107.1 109.7 99.0 106.6
         Oct 108.4 112.2 105.1 122.1 107.9 106.1 111.1 120.9 106.8 109.5 98.9 104.1
         Nov 108.5 113.2 105.3 122.8 107.3 106.3 116.1 111.3 123.6 107.1 110.8 104.3 108.1
         Dec 109.6 114.4 105.1 125.4 110.0 106.4 112.1 127.9 108.0 113.3 115.7 116.1
2011          Jan 109.2 114.7 104.5 128.7 107.9 106.5 113.4 128.7 108.9 115.0 121.1 121.4
         Feb 109.8 115.8 104.8 129.5 108.8 106.7 117.4 114.2 132.3 109.3 116.3 126.5 122.8
         Mar 110.3 115.6 105.4 133.3 108.7 106.8 114.7 132.2 109.6 117.6 135.5 117.7
         Apr 110.5 115.6 105.6 135.0 108.9 106.9 115.9 134.5 109.9 117.9 141.0 117.8
         May 10 110.5 116.3 105.7 134.1 108.4 107.0 118.5 115.9 r 135.2 110.0 117.2 132.5 115.7
         June 110.6 116.3 105.5 133.5 109.3 107.1 116.0 134.1 110.0 116.5 130.5 114.0
         July 111.0 116.0 105.0 134.3 111.0 107.2 116.8 131.3 110.3 117.4 135.1 115.0
         Aug 111.0 115.4 105.4 133.2 110.8 107.3 119.3 116.5 130.1 110.2 116.6 127.5 112.9
         Sep 111.1 115.3 106.3 135.3 109.5 107.4 116.8 130.3 110.2 117.3 135.7 114.1
         Oct 111.1 115.4 106.8 135.7 109.0 107.5 117.0 129.2 110.0 116.9 132.0 105.1
         Nov 111.1 116.0 106.8 136.4 108.5 107.6 119.7 117.1 130.3 110.2 117.4 134.5 103.0
         Dec 111.9 116.7 106.6 135.4 111.3 107.7 116.6 128.7 110.3 117.7 134.9 103.7
2012          Jan 10 111.5 117.8 106.3 138.0 109.0 107.9 117.3 p 128.2 111.2 119.2 141.2 109.4
         Feb 112.3 118.9 106.9 139.9 110.2 108.0 121.1 117.8 p 130.8 111.5 120.4 148.4 109.3
         Mar 112.6 119.2 107.4 142.2 109.8 108.0 118.5 p 132.8 111.7 121.2 155.0 110.5
         Apr 112.8 119.1 107.6 142.8 109.9 108.1 118.7 p 134.1 111.9 120.6 148.6 110.2
         May 112.6 119.1 107.6 140.7 109.8 108.2 121.8 118.3 p 132.4 111.8 119.8 140.5 110.1
         June 112.5 120.5 107.3 138.8 110.0 108.3 117.8 p 130.1 111.5 118.0 124.5 108.9
         July 112.9 119.5 106.6 140.2 111.9 108.4 ... ... ... ... 136.5 116.8
Annual percentage change  
  
2007 8,9 + 2.3 + 3.9 + 1.4 + 4.0 + 2.9 + 1.1 + 6.7 + 1.3 + 11.7 + 1.2 + 0.7 + 1.9 + 8.4
2008 + 2.6 + 6.4 + 0.8 + 9.6 + 1.8 + 1.3 + 3.4 + 5.5 + 3.7 + 1.7 + 4.6 + 27.6 + 5.1
2009 + 0.4 − 1.3 + 1.4 − 5.4 + 1.5 + 1.1 + 1.2 − 4.2 − 19.0 − 2.2 − 8.6 − 33.6 − 19.0
2010 + 1.1 + 1.6 + 0.5 + 3.9 + 0.6 + 1.1 + 0.9 + 1.6 + 14.1 + 3.4 + 7.8 + 37.4 + 34.2
2011 10 + 2.3 + 2.5 + 1.2 + 10.0 + 1.2 + 1.2 + 2.9 + 5.7 + 12.8 + 3.7 + 8.0 + 32.2 + 13.5
 
2010          Sep + 1.3 + 3.0 + 0.3 + 4.6 + 0.7 + 1.1 + 3.9 + 22.3 + 4.6 + 9.9 + 30.1 + 42.3
         Oct + 1.3 + 2.9 + 0.4 + 5.1 + 0.6 + 1.1 + 4.3 + 22.7 + 4.3 + 9.2 + 22.6 + 37.3
         Nov + 1.5 + 3.4 + 1.1 + 5.0 + 0.4 + 1.2 + 1.5 + 4.4 + 21.5 + 4.5 + 10.0 + 23.6 + 38.8
         Dec + 1.7 + 3.6 + 0.6 + 8.2 + 0.5 + 1.2 + 5.3 + 24.5 + 5.2 + 12.0 + 38.1 + 40.2
2011          Jan + 2.0 + 2.7 + 0.8 + 8.6 + 0.9 + 1.2 + 5.7 + 24.5 + 5.4 + 11.8 + 36.1 + 41.7
         Feb + 2.1 + 3.4 + 0.7 + 10.2 + 1.0 + 1.3 + 2.5 + 6.4 + 26.1 + 5.4 + 11.9 + 41.2 + 43.3
         Mar + 2.1 + 2.2 + 0.9 + 10.5 + 0.7 + 1.2 + 6.2 + 25.4 + 4.9 + 11.3 + 40.4 + 31.5
         Apr + 2.4 + 1.4 + 1.1 + 10.5 + 2.1 + 1.2 + 6.4 + 26.3 + 4.2 + 9.4 + 34.2 + 21.2
         May 10 + 2.3 + 2.7 + 1.2 + 9.5 + 1.1 + 1.2 + 2.9 + 6.1 r + 24.8 + 3.8 + 8.1 + 31.7 + 17.0
         June + 2.3 + 2.6 + 1.2 + 9.1 + 1.7 + 1.2 + 5.6 + 21.4 + 3.4 + 6.5 + 27.2 + 13.5
         July + 2.4 + 2.1 + 1.4 + 10.6 + 1.6 + 1.2 + 5.8 + 17.9 + 3.7 + 7.5 + 36.7 + 13.6
         Aug + 2.4 + 2.5 + 1.3 + 9.9 + 1.3 + 1.2 + 3.0 + 5.5 + 10.4 + 3.2 + 6.6 + 28.4 + 7.7
         Sep + 2.6 + 2.5 + 1.5 + 11.2 + 1.4 + 1.3 + 5.5 + 8.4 + 2.9 + 6.9 + 37.1 + 7.0
         Oct + 2.5 + 2.9 + 1.6 + 11.1 + 1.0 + 1.3 + 5.3 + 6.9 + 3.0 + 6.8 + 33.5 + 1.0
         Nov + 2.4 + 2.5 + 1.4 + 11.1 + 1.1 + 1.2 + 3.1 + 5.2 + 5.4 + 2.9 + 6.0 + 29.0 − 4.7
         Dec + 2.1 + 2.0 + 1.4 + 8.0 + 1.2 + 1.2 + 4.0 + 0.6 + 2.1 + 3.9 + 16.6 − 10.7
2012          Jan 10 + 2.1 + 2.7 + 1.7 + 7.2 + 1.0 + 1.3 + 3.4 p − 0.4 + 2.1 + 3.7 + 16.6 − 9.9
         Feb + 2.3 + 2.7 + 2.0 + 8.0 + 1.3 + 1.2 + 3.2 + 3.2 p − 1.1 + 2.0 + 3.5 + 17.3 − 11.0
         Mar + 2.1 + 3.1 + 1.9 + 6.7 + 1.0 + 1.1 + 3.3 p + 0.5 + 1.9 + 3.1 + 14.4 − 6.1
         Apr + 2.1 + 3.0 + 1.9 + 5.8 + 0.9 + 1.1 + 2.4 p − 0.3 + 1.8 + 2.3 + 5.4 − 6.5
         May + 1.9 + 2.4 + 1.8 + 4.9 + 1.3 + 1.1 + 2.8 + 2.1 p − 2.1 + 1.6 + 2.2 + 6.0 − 4.8
         June + 1.7 + 3.6 + 1.7 + 4.0 + 0.6 + 1.1 + 1.6 p − 3.0 + 1.4 + 1.3 − 4.6 − 4.5
         July + 1.7 + 3.0 + 1.5 + 4.4 + 0.8 + 1.1 ... ... ... ... + 1.0 + 1.6
Source: Federal Statistical Office; for the Index of World Market Prices of Raw beverages and tobacco as well as industrial raw materials. 8From January 2007,
Materials: HWWI. 1Electricity, gas and other fuels. 2Bundesbank calculation based increase in the standard rate of value-added tax and in insurance tax from 16% to
on data provided by the Federal Statistical Office. 3Net rents. 4Excluding 19%. 9Introduction of university tuition fees in some federal states. 10From May
value-added tax. 5For the euro area, in euro. 6Coal and crude oil (Brent). 7Food, 2011 and from January 2012, increase in tobacco tax. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
67  Monthly Report
August 2012
X Economic conditions in Germany
  
8 Households’ income *
  
  
  
Gross wages and Net wages and Monetary social Saving
salaries 1 salaries 2 Mass income 4 Saving 6 ratio 7 benefits received 3 Disposable income 5 
Annual Annual Annual Annual Annual Annual
percent- percent- percent- percent- percent- percent- Asage age age age age age percent-
Period change change change change change change age € billion € billion € billion € billion € billion € billion
2004
924.7 0.5 627.9 2.0 359.5 0.3 987.3 1.4 1,435.4 1.7 151.8 3.1 10.6
2005 922.1 − 0.3 625.5 − 0.4 359.8 0.1 985.3 − 0.2 1,463.9 2.0 156.9 3.3 10.7
2006 935.0 1.4 627.8 0.4 358.5 − 0.4 986.3 0.1 1,502.0 2.6 162.5 3.6 10.8
2007 965.9 3.3 646.2 2.9 353.6 − 1.4 999.8 1.4 1,524.8 1.5 168.1 3.4 11.0
2008 1,002.3 3.8 664.0 2.8 355.4 0.5 1,019.4 2.0 1,571.2 3.0 183.5 9.2 11.7
2009 1,000.1 − 0.2 661.5 − 0.4 386.8 8.8 1,048.3 2.8 1,560.5 − 0.7 173.1 − 5.7 11.1
2010 1,026.7 2.7 688.5 4.1 391.6 1.2 1,080.1 3.0 1,603.8 2.8 180.8 4.5 11.3
2011 1,075.0 4.7 713.7 3.7 388.3 − 0.8 1,102.1 2.0 1,654.1 3.1 181.0 0.1 10.9
2010          Q4 285.2 3.2 190.4 4.6 96.1 − 0.3 286.5 2.9 405.8 3.8 39.1 4.3 9.6
2011          Q1 249.8 4.9 165.7 3.8 98.8 − 1.4 264.5 1.8 408.1 3.2 58.6 − 1.7 14.4
         Q2 262.5 5.4 170.5 3.9 96.3 − 1.8 266.8 1.8 410.0 3.2 43.2 − 0.3 10.5
         Q3 265.7 4.5 180.4 3.5 96.6 − 0.7 277.0 2.0 419.0 3.4 38.9 0.3 9.3
         Q4 297.1 4.2 197.2 3.6 96.6 0.6 293.8 2.6 417.1 2.8 40.4 3.3 9.7
2012          Q1 260.1 4.1 172.5 4.1 99.4 0.6 271.9 2.8 422.6 3.6 61.0 4.1 14.4
Source: Federal Statistical Office; figures computed in May 2012. *Households includ- salaries plus monetary social benefits received. 5Mass income plus operating surplus,
ing non-profit institutions serving households. 1Residence concept. 2After mixed income, property income (net), other current transfers received, income of
deducting the wage tax payable on gross wages and salaries and employees’ non-profit institutions serving households, less taxes (excluding wage tax andcontributions to the social security funds. 3Social security benefits in cash from the consumption-related taxes) and other current transfers paid. Including the increase in
social security funds, central, state and local government and foreign countries, claims on company pension funds. 6Including the increase in claims on company pen-
pension payments (net), private funded social benefits, less social contributions on sion funds. 7 Saving as a percentage of disposable income. 
social benefits, consumption-related taxes and public charges. 4Net wages and
  
  
  
9 Negotiated pay rates (overall economy)
    
  
Index of negotiated wages 1 
On a monthly basis
Memo item:
Total excluding Wages and salaries
On an hourly basis Total one-off payments Basic pay rates  2 per employee 3 
Annual Annual Annual Annual Annual
Period percentage percentage percentage percentage percentage
2005=100 change 2005=100 change 2005=100 change 2005=100 change 2005=100 change
2004 99.1 0.8 98.9 0.8 99.1 0.8 99.0 1.1 99.7 0.5
2005 100.0 0.9 100.0 1.1 100.0 0.9 100.0 1.1 100.0 0.3
2006 100.9 0.9 101.1 1.1 100.8 0.8 100.8 0.8 100.8 0.8
2007 102.1 1.2 102.5 1.3 102.2 1.5 102.2 1.4 102.2 1.4
2008 104.9 2.7 105.4 2.8 105.3 3.0 105.5 3.2 104.5 2.3
2009 107.0 2.0 107.5 2.0 107.6 2.2 108.0 2.4 104.2 − 0.3
2010 108.7 1.6 109.2 1.6 109.3 1.6 109.8 1.7 106.4 2.1
2011 110.5 1.7 111.1 1.7 111.2 1.8 111.7 1.7 109.9 3.3
2011          Q1 102.6 1.7 103.1 1.7 102.9 1.3 110.6 1.1 103.4 3.4
         Q2 103.7 1.4 104.3 1.4 104.3 1.8 111.6 1.7 107.7 3.9
         Q3 112.7 1.9 113.3 2.0 113.5 1.9 112.3 2.0 108.4 3.2
         Q4 123.1 1.7 123.7 1.8 124.1 2.0 112.6 2.1 119.9 2.8
2012          Q1 104.6 1.9 105.0 1.9 105.4 2.4 113.4 2.6 106.1 2.6
         Q2 106.5 2.7 107.0 2.6 107.3 2.9 114.6 2.7 . .
2011          Dec 106.1 1.3 106.7 1.4 107.0 2.2 112.6 2.1 . .
2012          Jan 104.4 1.0 104.9 0.9 105.2 2.4 113.2 2.4 . .
         Feb 104.4 2.4 104.8 2.4 105.2 2.4 113.2 2.4 . .
         Mar 104.9 2.3 105.4 2.3 105.8 2.4 113.9 2.9 . .
         Apr 106.2 1.7 106.7 1.7 107.1 2.4 114.0 2.4 . .
         May 107.1 3.4 107.6 3.3 107.9 3.4 114.7 2.7 . .
         June 106.1 2.9 106.6 2.8 107.0 2.8 115.1 2.9 . .
1Current data are normally revised on account of additional reports. 2Excluding and retirement provisions). 3Source: Federal Statistical Office; figures computed in
one-off payments and covenants (capital formation benefits, special payments, such May 2012. 
as annual bonuses, holiday pay, Christmas bonuses (13 thmonthly salary payment)

Deutsche Bundesbank
68  Monthly Report
August 2012
XI External sector
 
1 Major items of the balance of payments of the euro area *
 
 
€ million
2011 2012
Item 2009 2010 2011 Q3 Q4 Q1 Mar Apr May
Current account − 21,927 − 6,792 − 2,291 + 2,724 + 34,859 − 6,032 + 9,758 + 1,297 − 2,549 A
1 Goods
Exports (fob) 1,304,133 1,566,838 1,773,619 444,620 462,532 465,138 168,463 151,658 160,628
Imports (fob) 1,272,817 1,551,745 1,768,690 441,783 447,962 459,793 158,295 146,220 154,377
Balance + 31,315 + 15,093 + 4,929 + 2,838 + 14,569 + 5,345 + 10,168 + 5,438 + 6,250
2 Services
Receipts 478,915 523,989 557,300 147,297 150,944 137,200 48,152 44,714 49,502
Expenditure 442,472 474,430 493,673 127,653 131,219 122,108 41,500 39,332 42,463
Balance + 36,443 + 49,562 + 63,629 + 19,646 + 19,725 + 15,092 + 6,652 + 5,382 + 7,038
3 Income + 3,452 + 31,809 + 32,485 + 8,786 + 20,563 + 12,035 + 4,862 − 799 − 7,812
4 Current transfers
Transfers from non-residents 94,275 87,619 93,269 16,783 32,869 25,550 5,798 6,349 6,855
Transfers to non-residents 187,413 190,877 196,604 45,329 52,868 64,052 17,722 15,073 14,880
Balance − 93,139 − 103,256 − 103,334 − 28,545 − 19,999 − 38,503 − 11,924 − 8,725 − 8,026
Capital account + 6,717 + 6,374 + 10,733 + 1,706 + 5,925 + 1,898 − 124 + 415 + 1,478 B
Financial account (net capital exports: − + 9,436 − 2,536 − 20,761 + 3,504 − 40,189 + 3,317 − 23,220 − 1,844 − 4,167 C)
1 Direct investment − 105,115 − 113,923 − 148,723 − 19,173 − 54,894 − 5,302 − 8,757 − 9,561 + 10,577
By resident units abroad − 336,994 − 275,765 − 347,283 − 56,620 − 105,844 − 82,118 − 32,798 − 21,623 − 6,213
By non-resident units in the euro area + 231,881 + 161,847 + 198,562 + 37,446 + 50,951 + 76,816 + 24,041 + 12,061 + 16,791
2 Portfolio investment + 265,687 + 165,086 + 305,577 + 34,957 − 4,476 − 77,068 − 42,192 + 1,261 + 28,325
By resident units abroad − 90,379 − 143,000 + 49,283 + 63,062 + 48,906 − 138,196 − 55,335 + 11,432 − 5,803
Equity − 53,080 − 76,713 + 71,423 + 53,704 + 39,176 − 22,541 − 14,777 − 5,797 + 6,093
Bonds and notes − 42,904 − 106,698 + 16,649 + 17,805 + 29,211 − 69,550 − 18,615 + 7,649 − 13,174
Money market instruments + 5,603 + 40,410 − 38,793 − 8,447 − 19,482 − 46,106 − 21,944 + 9,580 + 1,277
By non-resident units in the euro area + 356,067 + 308,086 + 256,294 − 28,105 − 53,382 + 61,129 + 13,143 − 10,171 + 34,128
Equity + 124,649 + 144,180 + 121,694 − 22,301 + 43,451 + 40,954 + 36,792 − 10,052 − 2,897
Bonds and notes + 140,501 + 184,216 + 161,732 + 2,145 − 36,759 + 9,232 − 11,901 − 4,549 + 30,868
Money market instruments + 90,917 − 20,310 − 27,132 − 7,949 − 60,075 + 10,941 − 11,749 + 4,430 + 6,157
3 Financial derivatives + 20,020 + 18,534 − 21,510 − 14,780 − 9,858 − 5,426 − 4,099 + 2,214 − 6,391
4 Other investment − 175,713 − 61,718 − 145,907 − 1,238 + 35,800 + 92,739 + 31,181 + 7,189 − 35,223
Eurosystem − 233,287 + 11,839 + 137,194 + 32,478 + 96,122 − 72,767 − 34,980 + 1,128 + 42,402
General government + 5,412 + 23,912 + 71,925 + 29,203 − 7,285 + 18,780 + 3,831 + 4,695 − 2,147
MFIs (excluding the Eurosystem) + 67,661 − 19,451 − 338,024 − 58,358 − 74,039 + 155,918 + 69,954 − 2,214 − 48,477
Long-term − 21,557 + 46,891 − 12,914 + 800 − 30,446 + 12,810 − 6,345 − 18,018 + 9,863
Short-term + 89,218 − 66,344 − 325,109 − 59,158 − 43,592 + 143,110 + 76,299 + 15,804 − 58,339
Other sectors − 15,501 − 78,018 − 17,000 − 4,560 + 21,002 − 9,194 − 7,624 + 3,581 − 27,001
5 Reserve assets (Increase: −) + 4,558 − 10,519 − 10,198 + 3,738 − 6,762 − 1,627 + 647 − 2,947 − 1,455
Errors and omissions + 5,775 + 2,957 + 12,318 − 7,933 − 595 + 816 + 13,586 + 132 + 5,238 D
* Source: European Central Bank. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
69  Monthly Report
August 2012
XI External sector
 
2 Major items of the balance of payments of the Federal Republic of Germany
(balances)
 
 
Current account Capital trans- Financial account
fers andacquisition/ of whichdisposal of Change in
Supple- non- reserve assets
Balance mentary produced at trans- Errorson current Foreign trade Current non-financial action and
Period account trade 
1 items 2 Services 3 Income transfers assets Total 4 value 5 omissions
DM million
1998 − 28,696 + 126,970 − 8,917 − 75,053 − 18,635 − 53,061 + 1,289 + 25,683 − 7,128 + 1,724
1999 − 50,528 + 127,542 − 15,947 − 90,036 − 24,363 − 47,724 − 301 − 20,332 + 24,517 + 71,161
2000 − 69,351 + 115,645 − 17,742 − 95,848 − 16,956 − 54,450 + 13,345 + 66,863 + 11,429 − 10,8572001 − 23 + 186,771 − 14,512 − 97,521 − 22,557 − 52,204 − 756 − 23,068 + 11,797 + 23,847
€ million
1999
− 25,834 + 65,211 − 8,153 − 46,035 − 12,457 − 24,401 − 154 − 10,396 + 12,535 + 36,384
2000 − 35,459 + 59,128 − 9,071 − 49,006 − 8,670 − 27,840 + 6,823 + 34,187 + 5,844 − 5,5512001 − 12 + 95,495 − 7,420 − 49,862 − 11,533 − 26,692 − 387 − 11,794 + 6,032 + 12,1932002 + 42,669 + 132,788 − 8,552 − 35,728 − 18,888 − 26,951 − 212 − 38,448 + 2,065 − 4,0102003 + 40,525 + 129,921 − 11,148 − 34,506 − 15,677 − 28,064 + 311 − 61,758 + 445 + 20,921
2004 + 102,368 + 156,096 − 16,470 − 29,375 + 19,681 − 27,564 + 435 − 122,984 + 1,470 + 20,181
2005 + 112,591 + 158,179 − 14,057 − 27,401 + 24,391 − 28,522 − 1,369 − 129,635 + 2,182 + 18,4132006 + 144,739 + 159,048 − 12,888 − 17,346 + 44,460 − 28,536 − 258 − 175,474 + 2,934 + 30,9922007 + 180,914 + 195,348 − 9,816 − 14,852 + 42,918 − 32,685 + 104 − 210,151 − 953 + 29,1332008 + 153,633 + 178,297 − 13,628 − 10,258 + 32,379 − 33,157 − 210 − 173,910 − 2,008 + 20,487
2009 + 140,558 + 138,697 − 15,052 − 8,049 + 58,120 − 33,158 + 29 − 155,440 + 3,200 + 14,853
2010 + 150,668 + 154,863 − 11,613 − 4,258 + 49,864 − 38,187 − 586 − 147,439 − 1,613 − 2,6432011 
r + 146,563 + 158,085 − 18,852 − 7,584 + 48,415 − 33,501 + 641 − 154,487 − 2,836 + 7,283
2009          Q3 + 34,506 + 36,092 − 3,500 − 7,900 + 18,061 − 8,247 + 37 − 24,732 + 2,269 − 9,810         Q4 + 51,139 + 40,910 − 3,414 + 4,356 + 16,817 − 7,531 − 276 − 68,715 + 569 + 17,853
2010          Q1 + 34,259 + 37,736 − 2,522 − 22 + 13,233 − 14,165 + 262 − 28,714 − 651 − 5,807
         Q2 + 29,466 + 37,249 − 2,885 − 1,708 + 3,198 − 6,388 − 434 − 29,669 − 801 + 638         Q3 + 33,665 + 38,895 − 2,953 − 6,174 + 14,666 − 10,770 + 9 − 28,646 + 344 − 5,028         Q4 + 53,278 + 40,982 − 3,254 + 3,646 + 18,767 − 6,864 − 423 − 60,410 − 506 + 7,555
2011          Q1 + 40,440 + 40,808 − 1,811 + 1,792 + 13,169 − 13,518 + 958 − 63,197 − 1,393 + 21,798
         Q2 + 25,748 + 37,984 − 4,637 − 3,022 + 100 − 4,677 − 278 − 46,097 − 438 + 20,628         Q3 + 32,978 + 39,180 − 6,161 − 6,836 + 16,414 − 9,619 + 115 − 16,218 − 639 − 16,874         Q4 
r + 47,397 + 40,112 − 6,243 + 483 + 18,732 − 5,688 − 153 − 28,974 − 366 − 18,270
2012          Q1 r + 41,067 + 45,418 − 4,498 − 423 + 15,677 − 15,107 + 222 − 61,391 − 963 + 20,102
         Q2 p + 35,592 + 47,904 − 9,099 − 1,398 + 4,883 − 6,698 + 392 − 63,490 − 769 + 27,505
2010          Jan + 5,869 + 8,277 − 990 − 918 + 4,047 − 4,548 + 64 + 14,475 − 55 − 20,407         Feb + 10,254 + 13,215 − 300 + 71 + 4,171 − 6,904 + 431 − 16,220 − 782 + 5,536         Mar + 18,137 + 16,244 − 1,233 + 824 + 5,015 − 2,713 − 232 − 26,969 + 187 + 9,065
         Apr + 11,779 + 12,995 − 732 + 798 + 914 − 2,196 − 199 − 7,750 − 116 − 3,830
         May + 4,669 + 10,143 − 1,346 − 830 − 1,842 − 1,455 − 49 − 7,771 − 671 + 3,151         June + 13,017 + 14,111 − 806 − 1,677 + 4,126 − 2,737 − 185 − 14,148 − 14 + 1,317
         July + 10,363 + 12,967 − 1,096 − 2,392 + 4,604 − 3,720 + 423 + 19,095 + 20 − 29,880
         Aug + 6,641 + 9,456 − 1,091 − 3,085 + 4,797 − 3,436 − 112 − 19,738 + 119 + 13,209         Sep + 16,661 + 16,473 − 765 − 697 + 5,264 − 3,613 − 302 − 28,002 + 205 + 11,643
         Oct + 15,025 + 14,518 − 782 − 591 + 5,582 − 3,701 − 220 − 96 + 234 − 14,708
         Nov + 15,965 + 13,884 − 1,110 + 1,104 + 6,096 − 4,008 − 169 − 29,202 + 81 + 13,406         Dec + 22,288 + 12,580 − 1,361 + 3,133 + 7,090 + 846 − 34 − 31,112 − 820 + 8,858
2011          Jan + 8,609 + 10,108 − 1,024 + 149 + 3,417 − 4,042 + 541 − 11,110 − 182 + 1,960
         Feb + 10,600 + 11,928 + 254 + 417 + 4,568 − 6,568 + 528 − 20,926 − 23 + 9,798         Mar + 21,232 + 18,772 − 1,042 + 1,226 + 5,184 − 2,908 − 110 − 31,161 − 1,188 + 10,040
         Apr + 7,395 + 10,821 − 1,811 − 850 + 771 − 1,536 − 198 − 21,317 − 563 + 14,120
         May + 7,400 + 14,627 − 1,034 + 159 − 5,779 − 574 − 65 − 17,656 + 24 + 10,321         June + 10,953 + 12,536 − 1,793 − 2,331 + 5,108 − 2,567 − 16 − 7,124 + 101 − 3,813
         July + 8,287 + 10,414 − 1,420 − 2,461 + 5,216 − 3,462 − 139 + 7,188 − 428 − 15,336
         Aug + 7,929 + 11,646 − 2,228 − 4,159 + 5,712 − 3,042 + 383 − 15,547 + 109 + 7,234         Sep + 16,761 + 17,120 − 2,512 − 217 + 5,485 − 3,115 − 129 − 7,859 − 320 − 8,773
         Oct  
r + 10,249 + 11,302 − 1,945 − 1,425 + 5,781 − 3,465 − 178 − 10,260 + 55 + 188
         Nov  r + 15,868 + 15,916 − 1,802 − 46 + 5,404 − 3,603 + 119 − 7,577 + 263 − 8,410
         Dec  r + 21,280 + 12,894 − 2,496 + 1,954 + 7,547 + 1,380 − 94 − 11,137 − 684 − 10,048
2012          Jan  r + 9,482 + 13,189 − 1,384 − 2,205 + 4,169 − 4,287 − 27 − 14,628 − 140 + 5,173
         Feb  r + 11,690 + 14,864 − 1,925 + 402 + 5,632 − 7,283 + 240 − 12,706 − 547 + 776
         Mar  r + 19,895 + 17,365 − 1,188 + 1,380 + 5,875 − 3,537 + 9 − 34,056 − 276 + 14,153
         Apr  r + 11,019 + 14,468 − 2,280 + 629 + 922 − 2,720 + 310 − 21,193 − 581 + 9,864
         May + 8,093 + 15,559 − 4,075 − 1,019 − 726 − 1,646 + 239 − 19,978 − 207 + 11,647
         June p + 16,481 + 17,877 − 2,743 − 1,009 + 4,688 − 2,332 − 157 − 22,319 + 19 + 5,995
1Special trade according to the official foreign trade statistics: imports cif, exports deduction of goods returned. 3Excluding the expenditure on freight and insurance
fob. From January 2007 onwards, excluding supplies of goods for/after included in the cif import figure. 4Financial account balance including change in
repair/maintenance, which, up to December 2006, were deducted via supplementary reserve assets. Capital exports: − . 5 Increase: − . 
trade items. 2Inter alia warehouse transactions for the account of residents and

Deutsche Bundesbank
70  Monthly Report
August 2012
 XI External sector
 
 3 Foreign trade (special trade) of the Federal Republic of Germany,
 by country and group of countries *
 
 € million
 2012
Country / group of countries  2009  2010  2011 r Jan r Feb r Mar r Apr r May r Jun p 
All countries 1 Exports 803,312 951,959 1,060,037 85,982 91,213 98,759 87,149 92,710 94,618
Imports 664,615 797,097 901,953 72,793 76,349 81,394 72,681 77,151 76,741Balance + 138,697 + 154,863 + 158,085 + 13,189 + 14,864 + 17,365 + 14,468 + 15,559 + 17,877
I Exports 585,826 675,024 751,484 60,371 63,609 68,723 60,901 64,952 ... European countries
Imports 463,721 541,720 624,401 50,079 53,702 57,783 51,710 54,686 ...
Balance + 122,105 + 133,305 + 127,084 + 10,293 + 9,907 + 10,939 + 9,191 + 10,265 ...
Exports 500,654 570,879 627,150 50,981 53,330 56,872 50,455 53,831 ... 1 EU member states (27)
Imports 380,323 444,375 507,443 39,876 43,329 46,306 41,226 44,165 ...
Balance + 120,331 + 126,504 + 119,706 + 11,105 + 10,000 + 10,566 + 9,229 + 9,666 ...
Euro-area (17) Exports 343,701 388,103 420,263 34,122 35,298 37,925 33,085 35,791 ...
countries Imports 258,729 300,135 339,823 26,660 28,884 30,904 27,783 29,790 ...
Balance + 84,972 + 87,968 + 80,440 + 7,462 + 6,414 + 7,021 + 5,302 + 6,001 ...
of which
Austria Exports 46,093 52,156 57,647 4,572 4,936 5,292 4,826 4,900 ...
Imports 27,565 33,013 37,408 2,800 3,186 3,331 3,081 3,279 ...
Balance + 18,528 + 19,144 + 20,239 + 1,772 + 1,750 + 1,961 + 1,746 + 1,622 ...
Belgium and Exports 46,262 50,545 53,100 4,087 4,134 4,641 4,001 4,280 ...
Luxembourg Imports 30,694 36,026 41,317 3,194 3,527 3,904 3,312 3,335 ...
Balance + 15,568 + 14,519 + 11,783 + 893 + 607 + 737 + 690 + 945 ...
France Exports 81,304 89,582 101,496 8,726 9,130 9,495 7,843 9,075 ...
Imports 53,338 60,673 66,190 5,196 5,163 5,940 5,604 5,677 ...
Balance + 27,966 + 28,909 + 35,306 + 3,530 + 3,967 + 3,555 + 2,239 + 3,398 ...
Italy Exports 50,620 58,589 62,025 4,745 4,986 5,174 4,792 5,239 ...
Imports 37,197 41,977 48,155 3,720 4,266 4,495 4,071 4,434 ...
Balance + 13,423 + 16,611 + 13,870 + 1,025 + 720 + 680 + 721 + 805 ...
Netherlands Exports 53,195 62,978 69,321 6,013 5,825 6,682 5,845 6,045 ...
Imports 55,583 67,205 82,027 6,754 7,297 7,431 6,695 7,566 ...
Balance − 2,388 − 4,227 − 12,705 − 741 − 1,472 − 749 − 850 − 1,521 ...
Spain Exports 31,281 34,222 34,857 2,747 2,817 2,893 2,518 2,744 ...
Imports 18,959 21,955 22,541 1,821 2,104 2,062 1,734 2,052 ...
Balance + 12,322 + 12,267 + 12,316 + 926 + 713 + 831 + 784 + 692 ...
Other EU member Exports 156,953 182,775 206,887 16,860 18,031 18,946 17,370 18,040 ...
states Imports 121,594 144,240 167,621 13,216 14,445 15,402 13,442 14,375 ...
Balance + 35,359 + 38,536 + 39,266 + 3,643 + 3,586 + 3,545 + 3,928 + 3,666 ...
of which
United Exports 53,240 58,666 65,539 5,673 6,183 6,340 5,852 5,852 ...
Kingdom Imports 32,452 37,923 44,827 3,585 3,772 4,385 3,595 3,626 ...
Balance + 20,787 + 20,743 + 20,711 + 2,088 + 2,410 + 1,955 + 2,257 + 2,225 ...
Exports 85,172 104,145 124,334 9,390 10,280 11,851 10,446 11,121 ... 2 Other European
Imports 83,398 97,345 116,957 10,203 10,373 11,478 10,485 10,521 ... countries
Balance + 1,774 + 6,800 + 7,377 − 813 − 93 + 373 − 38 + 599 ...
of which
Switzerland Exports 35,510 41,659 47,708 3,977 4,070 4,603 3,930 4,050 ...
Imports 28,096 32,507 36,885 3,011 3,268 3,118 2,746 3,203 ...
Balance + 7,414 + 9,152 + 10,823 + 966 + 803 + 1,486 + 1,183 + 847 ...
II Exports 216,466 276,635 307,817 25,575 27,541 30,011 26,183 27,721 ... Non-European
Imports 200,303 255,377 277,550 22,715 22,646 23,610 20,970 22,465 ... countries
Balance + 16,163 + 21,258 + 30,267 + 2,860 + 4,895 + 6,401 + 5,213 + 5,256 ...
Exports 17,412 19,968 20,581 1,580 1,656 1,957 1,709 1,757 ... 1 Africa
Imports 14,235 17,040 21,863 1,832 1,943 2,267 1,768 1,929 ...
Balance + 3,177 + 2,929 − 1,282 − 252 − 287 − 310 − 58 − 172 ...
Exports 78,727 99,464 110,361 10,050 10,302 11,152 9,821 10,156 ... 2 America
Imports 60,498 71,680 79,980 6,123 6,297 7,253 6,410 6,912 ...
Balance + 18,229 + 27,784 + 30,381 + 3,927 + 4,005 + 3,900 + 3,412 + 3,244 ...
of which
Exports 54,356 65,574 73,694 7,042 6,940 7,392 6,478 6,832 ... United States
Imports 39,283 45,241 48,304 3,803 4,142 4,550 3,993 4,344 ...
Balance + 15,074 + 20,333 + 25,390 + 3,239 + 2,799 + 2,843 + 2,486 + 2,488 ...
Exports 113,179 148,231 167,451 13,126 14,687 15,900 13,778 14,927 ... 3 Asia
Imports 122,823 163,523 171,695 14,386 14,153 13,673 12,462 13,244 ...
Balance − 9,644 − 15,293 − 4,244 − 1,261 + 533 + 2,227 + 1,316 + 1,683 ...
of which
Middle East Exports 23,598 28,138 28,709 2,155 2,652 2,710 2,509 2,558 ...
Imports 5,506 6,878 7,891 587 609 713 477 538 ...
Balance + 18,092 + 21,260 + 20,818 + 1,568 + 2,044 + 1,997 + 2,032 + 2,019 ...
Japan Exports 10,875 13,149 15,118 1,407 1,415 1,494 1,249 1,332 ...
Imports 18,946 22,475 23,545 1,876 1,824 2,009 1,732 1,921 ...
Balance − 8,071 − 9,326 − 8,427 − 470 − 408 − 515 − 483 − 589 ...
Exports 37,273 53,791 64,762 5,035 5,550 6,135 5,322 5,961 ... People‘s Republic
Imports 56,706 77,270 79,490 6,970 6,243 5,789 5,762 6,098 ... of China 
2 
Balance − 19,434 − 23,479 − 14,728 − 1,935 − 693 + 346 − 441 − 137 ...
Exports 28,606 38,183 41,532 3,271 3,677 3,964 3,477 3,705 ... Emerging markets
Imports 28,338 39,562 39,230 3,108 3,254 3,211 2,995 3,108 ... in South-East Asia 3 
Balance + 268 − 1,379 + 2,301 + 163 + 423 + 753 + 482 + 597 ...
Exports 7,147 8,972 9,423 820 897 1,002 875 881 ... 4 Oceania and
Imports 2,747 3,134 4,012 374 253 417 331 379 ... polar regions
Balance + 4,401 + 5,838 + 5,411 + 446 + 644 + 585 + 544 + 502 ...
 
*Source: Federal Statistical Office. Exports (fob) by country of destination, imports other data not classifiable by region. 2Excluding Hong Kong. 3Brunei Darussalam,
(cif) by country of origin. Individual countries and groups of countries according to Hong Kong, Indonesia, Malaysia, Philippines, Republic of Korea, Singapore, Taiwan
the current position. 1Including fuel and other supplies for ships and aircraft and and Thailand. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
71  Monthly Report
August 2012
XI External sector
 
4 Services and income of the Federal Republic of Germany
(balances)
 
€ million
Services
Other services
of which
 
Patents
Compen- Services  of Construction
Trans- Financial and sation of Investment Government self-employed and  assembly
Period Total Travel 1 services licences Total income portation 2 services  3 persons  4 work,  repairs employees 5 
2007 − 14,852 − 34,324 + 6,756 + 2,801 − 2,016 + 3,309 + 8,622 − 1,964 + 3,197 − 140 + 43,058
2008 − 10,258 − 34,718 + 8,319 + 3,936 − 1,313 + 2,376 + 11,142 − 1,641 + 3,229 + 216 + 32,1642009 − 8,049 − 33,341 + 6,940 + 4,276 + 136 + 2,370 + 11,570 − 1,266 + 2,966 + 764 + 57,3562010 − 4,258 − 32,778 + 7,359 + 4,175 + 1,153 + 2,456 + 13,376 − 1,152 + 3,405 + 1,392 + 48,4722011 − 7,584 − 33,782 + 7,475 + 3,702 + 843 + 2,546 + 11,632 − 1,221 + 3,212 + 1,596 + 46,820
2010          Q4 + 3,646 − 5,841 + 1,781 + 1,005 + 886 + 674 + 5,141 − 304 + 1,121 + 642 + 18,125
2011          Q1 + 1,792 − 4,983 + 1,540 + 724 + 350 + 579 + 3,583 − 246 + 795 + 995 + 12,174
         Q2 − 3,022 − 8,234 + 2,199 + 485 + 264 + 679 + 1,585 − 264 + 735 + 310 − 210         Q3 − 6,836 − 14,629 + 1,807 + 942 − 172 + 691 + 4,525 − 325 + 730 − 212 + 16,626         Q4 + 483 − 5,936 + 1,929 + 1,552 + 402 + 597 + 1,940 − 386 + 952 + 503 + 18,229
2012          Q1 − 423 − 5,344 + 1,725 + 1,163 − 503 + 632 + 1,904 − 357 + 540 + 1,032 + 14,646
         Q2 − 1,398 − 8,228 + 2,505 + 1,050 + 122 + 681 + 2,472 − 375 + 416 + 310 + 4,573
2011          Aug − 4,159 − 5,421 + 591 + 172 + 41 + 236 + 222 − 126 + 232 − 68 + 5,781
         Sep − 217 − 4,549 + 504 + 361 − 102 + 222 + 3,347 − 90 + 315 − 76 + 5,561
         Oct − 1,425 − 3,886 + 676 + 963 + 210 + 210 + 403 − 142 + 248 + 144 + 5,637
         Nov − 46 − 1,393 + 533 + 236 + 339 + 225 + 13 − 118 + 308 + 143 + 5,260         Dec + 1,954 − 658 + 720 + 353 − 148 + 162 + 1,524 − 126 + 396 + 216 + 7,332
2012          Jan − 2,205 − 1,626 + 512 + 464 − 643 + 197 − 1,109 − 127 + 82 + 335 + 3,834
         Feb + 402 − 1,804 + 566 + 311 + 146 + 198 + 985 − 94 + 133 + 335 + 5,298         Mar + 1,380 − 1,914 + 647 + 388 − 6 + 237 + 2,028 − 136 + 324 + 361 + 5,514
         Apr + 629 − 1,887 + 764 + 481 + 66 + 204 + 1,002 − 110 + 147 + 91 + 831
         May − 1,019 − 2,349 + 842 + 335 + 104 + 231 − 181 − 157 + 82 + 108 − 834         June − 1,009 − 3,992 + 899 + 234 − 48 + 246 + 1,651 − 108 + 186 + 111 + 4,576
1From 2001 expenditure is based on household samples. 2Excluding the other technical services, research and development, commercial services, etc.
expenditure on freight included in the cif import figure. 3Including the receipts 5 Wages and salaries. 
from foreign military agencies for goods and services supplied. 4Engineering and
5 Current transfers of the Federal Republic of Germany 6 Capital transfers
(balances) (balances)
€ million € million
Public 1 Private 1 
International
organisations 2 
 
of which Other Other
European current Workers’ current
Period Total Total Total Communities Total remittances transfers Total  4 Public 1 Private 1 transfers 3 
2007 − 32,685 − 17,237 − 19,331 − 17,548 + 2,094 − 15,448 − 2,997 − 12,451 + 104 − 2,034 + 2,138
2008 − 33,157 − 16,834 − 18,746 − 16,644 + 1,911 − 16,322 − 3,079 − 13,243 − 210 − 1,853 + 1,6422009 − 33,158 − 19,041 − 19,041 − 16,578 + 0 − 14,116 − 2,995 − 11,122 + 29 − 1,704 + 1,7332010 − 38,187 − 23,514 − 22,844 − 19,474 − 670 − 14,673 − 3,035 − 11,638 − 586 − 2,039 + 1,4532011 − 33,501 − 20,173 − 22,158 − 19,105 + 1,985 − 13,328 − 2,977 − 10,351 + 641 − 2,323 + 2,964
2010          Q4 − 6,864 − 3,144 − 1,898 − 1,097 − 1,246 − 3,719 − 759 − 2,961 − 423 − 810 + 386
2011          Q1 − 13,518 − 10,302 − 9,594 − 8,571 − 708 − 3,215 − 744 − 2,471 + 958 − 406 + 1,364
         Q2 − 4,677 − 754 − 4,833 − 4,210 + 4,079 − 3,922 − 744 − 3,178 − 278 − 475 + 197         Q3 − 9,619 − 6,730 − 6,145 − 5,458 − 585 − 2,889 − 744 − 2,145 + 115 − 484 + 599         Q4 − 5,688 − 2,387 − 1,586 − 867 − 801 − 3,300 − 744 − 2,556 − 153 − 958 + 804
2012          Q1 − 15,107 − 11,976 − 11,245 − 10,137 − 731 − 3,131 − 770 − 2,361 + 222 − 401 + 623
         Q2 − 6,698 − 3,390 − 6,079 − 5,129 + 2,689 − 3,308 − 770 − 2,539 + 392 − 375 + 768
2011          Aug − 3,042 − 2,092 − 1,841 − 1,484 − 252 − 950 − 248 − 702 + 383 − 150 + 534
         Sep − 3,115 − 2,167 − 2,184 − 2,028 + 17 − 948 − 248 − 700 − 129 − 172 + 43
         Oct − 3,465 − 2,502 − 2,056 − 1,935 − 446 − 964 − 248 − 715 − 178 − 227 + 49
         Nov − 3,603 − 2,602 − 2,163 − 1,920 − 439 − 1,000 − 248 − 752 + 119 − 207 + 326         Dec + 1,380 + 2,717 + 2,632 + 2,988 + 84 − 1,337 − 248 − 1,089 − 94 − 524 + 430
2012          Jan − 4,287 − 3,163 − 2,980 − 2,398 − 182 − 1,124 − 257 − 868 − 27 − 99 + 72
         Feb − 7,283 − 6,287 − 5,903 − 5,584 − 385 − 996 − 257 − 739 + 240 − 116 + 356         Mar − 3,537 − 2,526 − 2,362 − 2,155 − 164 − 1,011 − 257 − 755 + 9 − 186 + 195
         Apr − 2,720 − 1,707 − 2,662 − 2,157 + 955 − 1,013 − 257 − 757 + 310 − 119 + 429
         May − 1,646 − 431 − 2,057 − 1,906 + 1,626 − 1,215 − 257 − 958 + 239 − 113 + 351         June − 2,332 − 1,252 − 1,360 − 1,067 + 108 − 1,080 − 257 − 823 − 157 − 144 − 13
1The classification of “public” and “private” transfers depends on the sector to transfers). 3Payments to developing countries, pension payments, tax revenue and
which the participating domestic body belongs. 2Current contributions to the refunds, etc. 4 Where identifiable; in particular, debt forgiveness. 
budgets of international organisations and to the EU budget (excluding capital

Deutsche Bundesbank
72  Monthly Report
August 2012
XI External sector
 
7 Financial account of the Federal Republic of Germany
 
 
€ million
2011 2012
Item 2009 2010 2011 Q3 Q4 Q1 Q2 Apr May June
I Net German investment abroad
(Increase/capital exports: −) − 21,427 − 408,695 − 223,211 − 164,784 + 61,733 − 269,909 − 122,671 − 40,989 − 79,870 − 1,812
1 Direct investment 1 − 54,269 − 82,543 − 39,110 − 6,058 − 6,269 − 27,025 − 12,782 − 7,024 − 2,667 − 3,092
Equity capital − 52,154 − 49,646 − 19,830 − 3,273 + 852 − 12,576 − 3,999 − 1,289 − 2,411 − 299
Reinvested earnings 2 − 19,895 − 19,287 − 30,162 − 8,306 − 7,060 − 9,032 − 2,790 − 1,902 − 21 − 867
Other capital transactions
of German direct investors + 17,780 − 13,609 + 10,882 + 5,522 − 60 − 5,417 − 5,993 − 3,833 − 234 − 1,925
2 Portfolio investment − 76,809 − 173,826 − 25,215 + 14,290 − 3,333 − 39,361 − 23 + 6,616 − 11,078 + 4,439
Shares 3 − 2,388 − 1,227 + 2,151 + 11,514 − 5,697 + 5,897 − 1,439 + 1,958 − 2,058 − 1,339
Mutual fund shares 4 − 4,332 − 22,444 − 142 + 3,874 + 1,692 − 6,329 + 3,278 + 1,612 + 650 + 1,016
Bonds and notes 5 − 83,438 − 156,239 − 22,285 + 3,013 − 9,368 − 36,364 − 3,608 + 457 − 5,883 + 1,818
Money market instruments + 13,349 + 6,084 − 4,939 − 4,112 + 10,040 − 2,565 + 1,746 + 2,589 − 3,787 + 2,945
3 Financial derivatives 6 + 11,337 − 17,935 − 28,740 − 7,737 − 5,109 − 3,487 − 6,937 − 1,156 − 3,416 − 2,365
4 Other investment + 95,114 − 132,778 − 127,311 − 164,640 + 76,809 − 199,073 − 102,160 − 38,845 − 62,502 − 813
MFIs 7,8 + 176,551 + 138,533 + 45,158 − 28,089 + 60,719 − 17,305 + 39,871 − 9,406 + 8,643 + 40,633
Long-term + 25,777 + 77,699 − 11,869 − 9,918 − 9,141 + 15,179 + 10,580 + 3,760 + 3,602 + 3,218
Short-term + 150,774 + 60,833 + 57,027 − 18,171 + 69,860 − 32,484 + 29,290 − 13,166 + 5,041 + 37,415
Enterprises and households − 20,175 − 60,136 − 17,791 − 34,766 + 52,828 − 27,047 − 14,714 + 7,186 − 9,602 − 12,298
Long-term − 24,046 − 42,172 + 7,269 + 2,266 + 17,413 + 1,201 + 3,057 − 1,204 − 582 + 4,843
Short-term 7 + 3,871 − 17,964 − 25,060 − 37,032 + 35,415 − 28,248 − 17,770 + 8,390 − 9,020 − 17,141
General government + 5 − 63,542 − 16,605 + 11,287 − 22,723 − 2,439 − 14,342 − 8,035 − 7,158 + 851
Long-term − 2,652 − 53,332 + 2,224 − 415 + 861 − 10,708 − 9,204 − 6,865 − 2,603 + 265
Short-term 7 + 2,657 − 10,209 − 18,829 + 11,702 − 23,584 + 8,269 − 5,138 − 1,169 − 4,555 + 586
Bundesbank − 61,267 − 147,633 − 138,073 − 113,073 − 14,015 − 152,281 − 112,975 − 28,591 − 54,385 − 30,000
5 Change in reserve assets at
transaction values (Increase: −) + 3,200 − 1,613 − 2,836 − 639 − 366 − 963 − 769 − 581 − 207 + 19
II Net foreign investment in Germany
(Increase/capital imports: +) − 134,013 + 261,256 + 68,725 + 148,566 − 90,707 + 208,518 + 59,181 + 19,796 + 59,891 − 20,507
1 Direct investment 1 + 17,389 + 35,382 + 29,063 + 9,724 + 11,471 + 3,698 + 2,965 + 5 + 872 + 2,088
Equity capital + 9,094 + 9,574 + 4,990 + 2,178 + 1,982 + 349 − 1,543 − 129 − 1,359 − 55
Reinvested earnings 2 − 8,437 + 1,883 + 5,752 + 1,605 + 1,069 + 3,652 − 499 + 980 − 1,095 − 385
Other capital transactionsof foreign direct investors + 16,732 + 23,924 + 18,321 + 5,941 + 8,421 − 303 + 5,007 − 847 + 3,326 + 2,528
2 Portfolio investment − 4,246 + 46,134 + 62,264 + 17,661 − 40,407 + 3,987 + 24,553 − 20,008 + 43,156 + 1,405
Shares 
3 + 3,630 − 4,736 − 2,820 − 4,230 − 5,486 − 8,550 + 9,281 − 12,175 + 10,843 + 10,613
Mutual fund shares + 11,744 + 2,572 + 7,711 + 3,909 + 875 − 1,021 − 2,394 − 6,901 + 5,026 − 519
Bonds and notes 5 − 70,113 + 57,767 + 48,711 + 4,735 − 22,081 + 14,070 + 11,893 + 6,579 + 17,365 − 12,051
Money market instruments + 50,493 − 9,470 + 8,662 + 13,247 − 13,715 − 512 + 5,773 − 7,510 + 9,923 + 3,361
3 Other investment − 147,155 + 179,741 − 22,603 + 121,182 − 61,771 + 200,833 + 31,663 + 39,798 + 15,864 − 23,999
MFIs 7,8 − 115,025 + 76,346 − 96,666 + 84,283 − 111,131 + 250,167 − 52,577 + 24,443 − 28,672 − 48,347
Long-term − 24,001 − 5,706 − 18,326 − 508 − 7,257 + 2,164 − 6,669 − 3,113 − 1,066 − 2,490
Short-term − 91,024 + 82,052 − 78,340 + 84,791 − 103,874 + 248,003 − 45,908 + 27,556 − 27,607 − 45,857
Enterprises and households − 5,059 + 3,835 + 24,275 + 28,394 − 4,452 + 1,861 + 13,692 + 9,631 + 5,293 − 1,233
Long-term + 2,804 − 4,587 − 13,946 − 2,861 − 659 − 3,974 − 1,962 − 198 − 587 − 1,177
Short-term 7 − 7,863 + 8,423 + 38,221 + 31,255 − 3,793 + 5,835 + 15,654 + 9,830 + 5,880 − 56
General government − 5,290 + 94,041 + 17,836 + 5,403 + 21,066 − 22,211 + 3,247 + 7,975 + 626 − 5,354
Long-term − 2,013 + 611 + 4,417 + 1,705 + 272 + 11,811 + 10,012 + 8,792 + 1,264 − 44
Short-term 7 − 3,276 + 93,430 + 13,419 + 3,699 + 20,794 − 34,022 − 6,766 − 817 − 639 − 5,310
Bundesbank − 21,782 + 5,518 + 31,952 + 3,102 + 32,746 − 28,984 + 67,301 − 2,251 + 38,617 + 30,935
III Financial account balance 9 
(Net capital exports: −) − 155,440 − 147,439 − 154,487 − 16,218 − 28,974 − 61,391 − 63,490 − 21,193 − 19,978 − 22,319
1From 1996, new definition for direct investment. 2Estimated. 3Including from changes in stocks. Purely statistical changes have been eliminated as far as
participation rights. 4From 1991, including retained earnings. 5From 1975, possible. 8Excluding the Deutsche Bundesbank. 9Financial account balance
excluding accrued interest. 6Options, whether evidenced by securities or not, and including change in reserve assets. 
financial futures contracts. 7The transaction values shown here are mostly derived

Deutsche Bundesbank
73  Monthly Report
August 2012
XI External sector
 
8 External position of the Bundesbank up to end-1998 *
 
 
DM million
Reserve assets and other claims on non-residents Liabilities vis-à-vis non-residents
Reserve assets
Reserve
positionin theInter- Liabilitiesnational arising Net Liabilities
Monetary arising from externalFund and Claims Loans and from Treasury position
Foreign special on the external discount (col 1 other claims
End of year currency drawing ECB 
2 on non- trans- liquidity less
or month Total Total Gold rights (net) Total paper col 8) balances 1 residents 3 actions 4 
1234567891 0 1 1
1997 127,849 126,884 13,688 76,673 13,874 22,649 966 16,931 16,931 − 110,918
1998 135,085 134,005 17,109 100,363 16,533 − 1,079 15,978 15,978 − 119,107
*Valuation of the gold holdings and the claims on non-residents in accordance with claims on the European Monetary Cooperation Fund (EMCF)). 3Including loans to
section 26 (2) of the Bundesbank Act and the provisions of the Commercial Code, the World Bank. 4Including liquidity paper sold to non-residents by the Bundesbank;
especially section 253. In the course of the year, valuation at the preceding year’s excluding the Treasury discount liquidity paper sold to non-residents between March
balance sheet rates. 1Mainly US dollar assets. 2European Central Bank (up to 1993, 1993 and March 1995, as shown in column 10. 
  
 
9 External position of the Bundesbank since the beginning of European monetary union o
€ million
Reserve assets and other claims on non-residents
Reserve assets
Reserveposition
Other in the Inter-national
claims on Net
Monetary Other residents external
Fund and claims on Claims in other position
Gold special Foreign non-euro- within the euro-area (col 1 Liabilities
End of year and gold drawing currency area Eurosystem member less vis-à-vis non-
or month Total Total rights reserves (net) 2 states col 9) receivables residents 1,3 residents 3,4 
1234567891 0
1999          Jan  5 95,316 93,940 29,312 8,461 56,167 140 1,225 11 8,169 87,146
1999 141,958 93,039 32,287 8,332 52,420 9,162 39,746 11 6,179 135,779
2000 100,762 93,815 32,676 7,762 53,377 313 6,620 14 6,592 94,1702001 76,147 93,215 35,005 8,721 49,489 312 − 17,385 5 8,752 67,3962002 103,948 85,002 36,208 8,272 40,522 312 18,466 167 9,005 94,9422003 95,394 76,680 36,533 7,609 32,538 312 17,945 456 10,443 84,951
2004 93,110 71,335 35,495 6,548 29,292 312 20,796 667 7,935 85,175
2005 130,268 86,181 47,924 4,549 33,708 350 42,830 906 6,285 123,9832006 104,389 84,765 53,114 3,011 28,640 350 18,344 931 4,819 99,5702007 179,492 92,545 62,433 2,418 27,694 350 84,064 2,534 16,005 163,4882008 230,775 99,185 68,194 3,285 27,705 350 128,668 2,573 30,169 200,607
2009 323,286 125,541 83,939 15,969 25,634 350 189,936 7,460 9,126 314,160
2010 524,695 162,100 115,403 18,740 27,957 50 337,869 24,676 14,620 510,0752011 714,662 184,603 132,874 22,296 29,433 50 475,942 54,067 46,557 668,106
2011          Apr 502,690 157,344 112,655 18,818 25,871 50 321,422 23,875 12,011 490,679
         May 522,888 162,854 116,831 19,202 26,821 50 335,955 24,028 11,566 511,322         June 531,716 159,745 114,087 19,098 26,560 50 348,854 23,067 10,700 521,016
         July 549,738 170,639 123,740 19,901 26,998 50 355,977 23,072 12,077 537,661
         Aug 622,802 184,687 138,174 19,774 26,739 50 402,739 35,327 15,380 607,422         Sep 686,659 181,430 131,912 20,862 28,655 50 461,927 43,253 13,809 672,850
         Oct 704,976 181,946 133,987 20,434 27,525 50 477,830 45,150 13,147 691,829
         Nov 746,357 187,984 138,669 20,850 28,465 50 507,480 50,843 13,517 732,840         Dec 714,662 184,603 132,874 22,296 29,433 50 475,942 54,067 46,557 668,106
2012          Jan 763,406 195,056 144,034 22,115 28,907 50 510,763 57,539 11,941 751,466
         Feb 814,053 195,654 145,234 22,073 28,346 50 559,678 58,672 13,460 800,593         Mar 875,780 186,628 135,777 22,177 28,674 50 628,223 60,880 17,564 858,215
         Apr 909,192 189,556 137,380 22,624 29,551 50 656,813 62,773 15,312 893,879
         May 964,557 193,057 138,000 23,400 31,658 50 711,198 60,252 53,949 910,608         June 992,341 190,248 136,094 23,320 30,834 50 741,198 60,845 84,880 907,461
         July 1,000,019 199,419 144,217 23,769 31,434 50 739,837 60,713 101,674 898,345
oClaims and liabilities vis-à-vis all countries within and outside the euro area. Up to From November 2000, including the TARGET positions which were previously shown
December 2000, the levels at the end of each quarter are shown, owing to (in columns 6 and 9) as bilateral assets and liabilities vis-à-vis national central banks
revaluations, at market prices; within each quarter, however, the levels are computed outside the Eurosystem. 3See footnote 2. 4Excluding allocations of special drawing
on the basis of cumulative transaction values. From January 2001, all end-of-month rights (SDR) by the International Monetary Fund (IMF) for an amount of SDR 12,059levels are valued at market prices. 1Including loans to the World Bank. 2Including million. 5 Euro opening balance sheet of the Bundesbank as at 1 January 1999. 
the balances in the Bundesbank’s cross-border payments within the Eurosystem.

Deutsche Bundesbank
74  Monthly Report
August 2012
XI External sector
 
10 Assets and liabilities of enterprises in Germany (other than banks)
vis-à-vis non-residents *
 
€ million
Claims on non-residents Liabilities vis-à-vis non-residents
Claims on foreign non-banks Liabilities  vis-à-vis foreign non-banks
from trade credits from trade credits
Balances Loans
with from Credit Advance from from Credit Advance
End of year foreign financial terms payments foreign financial terms payments
or month Total banks Total Total granted effected Total banks Total Total used received operations operations
All countries
 
2008 553,465 173,255 380,210 227,055 153,155 140,520 12,635 707,704 147,242 560,462 424,211 136,251 79,980 56,271
2009 593,591 209,729 383,862 240,727 143,135 130,605 12,530 754,355 159,667 594,688 457,468 137,220 80,759 56,461
2010 670,695 242,028 428,667 272,426 156,241 143,032 13,209 807,185 162,091 645,094 498,310 146,784 88,288 58,496
2011 698,599 242,387 456,212 285,123 171,089 155,392 15,697 871,795 172,099 699,696 538,839 160,857 95,131 65,726
2012          Jan 722,309 261,710 460,599 291,722 168,877 153,191 15,686 863,782 168,828 694,954 542,198 152,756 85,822 66,934
         Feb 725,163 267,912 457,251 284,395 172,856 157,289 15,567 863,390 164,935 698,455 542,026 156,429 89,400 67,029         Mar 741,704 267,768 473,936 294,113 179,823 164,554 15,269 884,857 179,671 705,186 547,728 157,458 91,478 65,980
         Apr 731,179 273,685 457,494 282,296 175,198 159,782 15,416 893,108 186,805 706,303 550,833 155,470 87,799 67,671
         May 743,829 284,290 459,539 284,039 175,500 159,925 15,575 900,866 190,453 710,413 554,919 155,494 87,470 68,024         June 767,110 292,965 474,145 290,977 183,168 167,572 15,596 914,110 187,148 726,962 569,191 157,771 90,635 67,136
Industrial countries
 
2008 489,430 171,387 318,043 207,807 110,236 101,002 9,234 643,652 145,045 498,607 402,020 96,587 68,148 28,439
2009 531,796 208,571 323,225 220,778 102,447 93,566 8,881 684,984 157,343 527,641 431,525 96,116 68,912 27,204
2010 598,167 240,915 357,252 249,497 107,755 98,428 9,327 725,644 159,522 566,122 464,105 102,017 73,987 28,030
2011 615,925 240,265 375,660 258,453 117,207 104,915 12,292 785,925 169,535 616,390 502,139 114,251 80,491 33,760
2012          Jan 639,522 259,674 379,848 264,589 115,259 102,788 12,471 780,035 166,263 613,772 507,461 106,311 71,917 34,394         Feb 641,586 265,992 375,594 257,104 118,490 106,041 12,449 778,680 163,236 615,444 506,459 108,985 74,997 33,988         Mar 655,930 265,755 390,175 266,547 123,628 111,245 12,383 800,893 177,899 622,994 512,176 110,818 77,453 33,365
         Apr 643,529 271,449 372,080 253,287 118,793 106,302 12,491 808,481 184,813 623,668 514,832 108,836 74,415 34,421
         May 655,424 282,054 373,370 255,106 118,264 105,634 12,630 815,924 188,450 627,474 519,538 107,936 73,404 34,532         June 674,725 290,650 384,075 261,513 122,562 109,841 12,721 828,820 185,152 643,668 534,165 109,503 75,167 34,336
EU member states
 
2008 398,833 164,762 234,071 151,391 82,680 75,192 7,488 536,351 137,208 399,143 331,498 67,645 46,188 21,457
2009 443,431 200,400 243,031 165,986 77,045 70,051 6,994 579,596 141,633 437,963 367,980 69,983 48,977 21,006
2010 494,360 230,746 263,614 184,862 78,752 71,525 7,227 618,145 150,817 467,328 395,566 71,762 50,035 21,727
2011 508,071 225,583 282,488 196,132 86,356 76,472 9,884 660,137 157,465 502,672 421,679 80,993 54,370 26,623
2012          Jan 536,237 244,841 291,396 206,447 84,949 74,957 9,992 659,450 157,438 502,012 426,445 75,567 48,425 27,142         Feb 537,065 250,025 287,040 199,385 87,655 77,715 9,940 658,478 154,746 503,732 425,454 78,278 51,545 26,733         Mar 545,075 247,195 297,880 206,931 90,949 81,118 9,831 677,597 168,917 508,680 430,082 78,598 52,112 26,486
         Apr 534,545 252,580 281,965 194,862 87,103 77,367 9,736 683,609 174,691 508,918 431,356 77,562 50,301 27,261
         May 544,438 261,908 282,530 196,179 86,351 76,598 9,753 689,122 177,406 511,716 433,963 77,753 50,274 27,479         June 556,095 267,744 288,351 199,927 88,424 78,574 9,850 700,142 173,731 526,411 448,196 78,215 51,043 27,172
of which: Euro-area member states 1
 
2008 281,518 130,226 151,292 96,968 54,324 49,408 4,916 415,221 81,703 333,518 290,093 43,425 29,768 13,657
2009 321,991 159,740 162,251 114,378 47,873 43,179 4,694 466,064 91,792 374,272 332,280 41,992 28,397 13,595
2010 366,774 184,299 182,475 130,430 52,045 47,239 4,806 497,433 98,177 399,256 351,352 47,904 33,444 14,460
2011 372,493 171,907 200,586 142,530 58,056 52,125 5,931 529,244 103,827 425,417 370,898 54,519 37,188 17,331
2012          Jan 399,214 189,787 209,427 152,078 57,349 51,379 5,970 537,000 107,028 429,972 379,358 50,614 32,922 17,692         Feb 397,379 194,652 202,727 144,157 58,570 52,634 5,936 536,991 104,667 432,324 380,302 52,022 34,780 17,242         Mar 393,646 184,614 209,032 148,399 60,633 54,737 5,896 541,751 106,052 435,699 383,336 52,363 35,372 16,991
         Apr 391,908 194,031 197,877 139,817 58,060 52,236 5,824 546,009 111,013 434,996 383,387 51,609 34,347 17,262
         May 400,992 202,648 198,344 140,607 57,737 51,831 5,906 555,783 119,752 436,031 384,114 51,917 34,499 17,418         June 401,177 197,988 203,189 144,038 59,151 53,095 6,056 560,861 115,028 445,833 393,811 52,022 34,726 17,296
Emerging economies and developing countries 2
 
2008 64,035 1,868 62,167 19,248 42,919 39,518 3,401 64,052 2,197 61,855 22,191 39,664 11,832 27,832
2009 61,795 1,158 60,637 19,949 40,688 37,039 3,649 69,371 2,324 67,047 25,943 41,104 11,847 29,257
2010 72,528 1,113 71,415 22,929 48,486 44,604 3,882 81,541 2,569 78,972 34,205 44,767 14,301 30,466
2011 82,674 2,122 80,552 26,670 53,882 50,477 3,405 85,870 2,564 83,306 36,700 46,606 14,640 31,966
2012          Jan 82,787 2,036 80,751 27,133 53,618 50,403 3,215 83,747 2,565 81,182 34,737 46,445 13,905 32,540         Feb 83,577 1,920 81,657 27,291 54,366 51,248 3,118 84,710 1,699 83,011 35,567 47,444 14,403 33,041         Mar 85,774 2,013 83,761 27,566 56,195 53,309 2,886 83,964 1,772 82,192 35,552 46,640 14,025 32,615
         Apr 87,650 2,236 85,414 29,009 56,405 53,480 2,925 84,627 1,992 82,635 36,001 46,634 13,384 33,250
         May 88,405 2,236 86,169 28,933 57,236 54,291 2,945 84,942 2,003 82,939 35,381 47,558 14,066 33,492         June 92,385 2,315 90,070 29,464 60,606 57,731 2,875 85,290 1,996 83,294 35,026 48,268 15,468 32,800
* Up to and including November 2009 the assets and liabilities vis-à-vis non-residents Cyprus and Malta; from January 2009, including Slovakia; from January 2011
of households in Germany. The assets and liabilities vis-à-vis non-residents of banks including Estonia. 2All countries that are not regarded as industrial countries. Up to
(MFIs) in Germany are shown in Table 4 of Section IV, “Banks”. Statistical increases December 2010 including Niederländische Antillen; from January 2011 includingand decreases have not been eliminated; to this extent, the changes in totals are not Bonaire, St.Eustatius, Saba and Curacao and St.Martin (Dutch part). comparable with the figures shown in Table XI.7. 1From January 2008, including

Deutsche Bundesbank
75  Monthly Report
August 2012
XI External sector
 
11 ECB euro reference exchange rates of selected currencies *
 
 
EUR 1 = currency units ...
Yearly Australia Canada China Denmark Japan Norway Sweden Switzerland United States United Kingdom
or monthly       
average AUD CAD CNY 1 DKK JPY NOK SEK CHF GBP USD
1999 1.6523 1.5840 . 7.4355 121.32 8.3104 8.8075 1.6003 0.65874 1.0658
2000 1.5889 1.3706 2 7.6168 7.4538 99.47 8.1129 8.4452 1.5579 0.60948 0.9236
2001 1.7319 1.3864 7.4131 7.4521 108.68 8.0484 9.2551 1.5105 0.62187 0.8956
2002 1.7376 1.4838 7.8265 7.4305 118.06 7.5086 9.1611 1.4670 0.62883 0.94562003 1.7379 1.5817 9.3626 7.4307 130.97 8.0033 9.1242 1.5212 0.69199 1.13122004 1.6905 1.6167 10.2967 7.4399 134.44 8.3697 9.1243 1.5438 0.67866 1.2439
2005 1.6320 1.5087 10.1955 7.4518 136.85 8.0092 9.2822 1.5483 0.68380 1.2441
2006 1.6668 1.4237 10.0096 7.4591 146.02 8.0472 9.2544 1.5729 0.68173 1.25562007 1.6348 1.4678 10.4178 7.4506 161.25 8.0165 9.2501 1.6427 0.68434 1.37052008 1.7416 1.5594 10.2236 7.4560 152.45 8.2237 9.6152 1.5874 0.79628 1.47082009 1.7727 1.5850 9.5277 7.4462 130.34 8.7278 10.6191 1.5100 0.89094 1.3948
2010 1.4423 1.3651 8.9712 7.4473 116.24 8.0043 9.5373 1.3803 0.85784 1.3257
2011 1.3484 1.3761 8.9960 7.4506 110.96 7.7934 9.0298 1.2326 0.86788 1.3920
2011          Mar 1.3854 1.3672 9.1902 7.4574 114.40 7.8295 8.8864 1.2867 0.86653 1.3999
         Apr 1.3662 1.3834 9.4274 7.4574 120.42 7.8065 8.9702 1.2977 0.88291 1.4442
         May 1.3437 1.3885 9.3198 7.4566 116.47 7.8384 8.9571 1.2537 0.87788 1.4349         June 1.3567 1.4063 9.3161 7.4579 115.75 7.8302 9.1125 1.2092 0.88745 1.4388
         July 1.3249 1.3638 9.2121 7.4560 113.26 7.7829 9.1340 1.1766 0.88476 1.4264
         Aug 1.3651 1.4071 9.1857 7.4498 110.43 7.7882 9.1655 1.1203 0.87668 1.4343         Sep 1.3458 1.3794 8.7994 7.4462 105.75 7.7243 9.1343 1.2005 0.87172 1.3770
         Oct 1.3525 1.3981 8.7308 7.4442 105.06 7.7474 9.1138 1.2295 0.87036 1.3706
         Nov 1.3414 1.3897 8.6154 7.4412 105.02 7.7868 9.1387 1.2307 0.85740 1.3556         Dec 1.3003 1.3481 8.3563 7.4341 102.55 7.7451 9.0184 1.2276 0.84405 1.3179
2012          Jan 1.2405 1.3073 8.1465 7.4353 99.33 7.6752 8.8503 1.2108 0.83210 1.2905
         Feb 1.2327 1.3193 8.3314 7.4341 103.77 7.5522 8.8196 1.2071 0.83696 1.3224         Mar 1.2538 1.3121 8.3326 7.4354 108.88 7.5315 8.8873 1.2061 0.83448 1.3201
         Apr 1.2718 1.3068 8.2921 7.4393 107.00 7.5698 8.8650 1.2023 0.82188 1.3162
         May 1.2825 1.2916 8.0806 7.4335 101.97 7.5655 8.9924 1.2012 0.80371 1.2789         June 1.2550 1.2874 7.9676 7.4325 99.26 7.5401 8.8743 1.2011 0.80579 1.2526
         July 1.1931 1.2461 7.8288 7.4384 97.07 7.4579 8.5451 1.2011 0.78827 1.2288
*Averages: Bundesbank calculations based on the daily euro reference exchange Statistical Supplement 5, Exchange rate statistics. 1Up to March 2005, ECB indicative
rates published by the ECB; for additional euro reference exchange rates, see rates. 2 Average from 13 January to 29 December 2000. 
12 Euro-area member states and irrevocable euro conversion rates in the third stage
of European Economic and Monetary Union
From Country Currency ISO currency code EUR 1 = currency units ...
1999  January 1 Austria Austrian schilling ATS 13.7603
Belgium Belgian franc BEF 40.3399
Finland Finnish markka FIM 5.94573
France French franc FRF 6.55957
Germany Deutsche Mark DEM 1.95583
Ireland Irish pound IEP 0.787564
Italy Italian lira ITL 1,936.27
Luxembourg Luxembourg franc LUF 40.3399
Netherlands Dutch guilder NLG 2.20371
Portugal Portuguese escudo PTE 200.482
Spain Spanish peseta ESP 166.386
2001  January 1 Greece Greek drachma GRD 340.750
2007  January 1 Slovenia Slovenian tolar SIT 239.640
2008  January 1 Cyprus Cyprus pound CYP 0.585274
Malta Maltese lira MTL 0.429300
2009  January 1 Slovakia Slovak koruna SKK 30.1260
2011  January 1 Estonia Estonian kroon EEK 15.6466

Deutsche Bundesbank
76  Monthly Report
August 2012
XI  External sector
 
13  Effective exchange rates of the Euro and indicators of the German economy’s price competitiveness *
 
 
1999 Q1=100
Effective exchange rate of the Euro Indicators of the German economy’s price competitiveness
EER-20  1 EER-40  2 Based on the deflators of total sales  3 Based on consumer price indices
24 selected industrial countries  4 In real terms
In real terms based on
In real based on unit In real
24 terms the deflators labour terms
based on of gross costs of based on Non- selected
36 36 56 consumer domestic national consumer Euro-area euro-area industrial
Period Nominal price indices product  3 economy  3 Nominal price indices Total countries countries countries  5 6 countries  4 countries  5 countries  7 
1999 96.2 96.0 95.9 96.4 96.5 95.8 97.7 99.5 95.6 97.7 98.2 98.0 97.7
2000 87.0 86.5 86.1 85.7 87.9 85.8 91.5 97.0 85.0 91.0 92.9 91.9 90.9
2001 87.6 87.2 86.8 84.9 90.4 87.1 91.0 95.8 85.4 90.1 92.9 91.4 90.8
2002 90.0 90.3 89.8 88.0 94.8 90.7 91.6 94.9 87.8 90.5 93.5 91.9 91.8
2003 100.6 101.5 100.9 98.5 106.8 101.6 94.9 93.9 96.8 94.1 97.0 96.5 96.7
2004 104.4 105.3 103.7 102.1 111.3 105.2 95.2 92.7 99.1 94.2 98.4 98.0 98.2
2005 102.9 103.8 101.7 99.8 109.3 102.7 93.9 91.4 98.0 92.2 98.5 96.9 96.5
2006 102.8 103.8 100.8 98.8 109.3 102.0 92.7 89.9 97.1 90.6 98.6 96.4 95.8
2007 106.2 106.5 102.8 100.3 112.8 104.0 93.6 89.1 101.0 90.9 100.8 97.8 96.9
2008 109.4 108.6 104.0 102.8 116.9 105.9 93.8 87.6 104.2 90.5 102.2 97.8 97.0
2009 110.6 109.2 104.9 105.0 119.7 106.8 93.5 87.8 103.0 91.3 101.7 97.9 97.4
2010 103.6 101.6 96.8 p 97.2 111.4 98.1 90.9 87.3 96.6 88.2 98.8 93.9 92.2
2011 103.4 100.7 p 95.1 p 95.8 112.1 97.6 90.2 86.8 95.5 87.5 98.2 93.1 91.7
2009          Jan 108.6 107.8 117.7 105.9 101.3 97.3 96.9
         Feb 107.7 106.9 103.9 103.0 117.0 105.3 92.4 87.4 100.6 90.7 100.6 97.2 96.9
         Mar 110.0 108.8 119.5 107.0 101.4 97.8 97.5
         Apr 109.1 108.0 118.2 105.9 101.4 97.4 96.8
         May 109.8 108.5 104.6 104.4 118.7 106.1 93.3 87.8 102.7 91.3 101.5 97.5 96.9
         June 111.0 109.7 120.0 107.3 101.9 98.3 97.7
         July 110.6 109.1 119.7 106.7 101.8 97.8 97.2
         Aug 110.6 109.1 105.0 105.2 119.8 106.8 93.9 88.0 103.7 91.5 101.9 97.9 97.4
         Sep 111.8 110.0 121.1 107.6 102.1 98.2 97.6
         Oct 113.1 111.2 122.0 108.3 102.6 98.8 98.1
         Nov 113.0 111.0 106.1 107.1 122.0 108.1 94.2 87.9 105.0 91.7 102.3 98.6 97.9
         Dec 111.9 109.8 120.8 106.8 102.1 98.2 97.4
2010          Jan 109.7 107.6 118.3 104.4 101.2 97.0 95.9
         Feb 107.0 104.8 101.2 101.5 115.3 101.7 92.5 87.6 100.6 89.8 100.2 95.6 94.4
         Mar 106.2 104.3 114.2 100.8 100.2 95.3 93.8
         Apr 105.0 103.1 112.5 99.3 99.5 94.4 92.7
         May 101.8 100.0 95.7 96.1 109.0 96.3 90.4 87.1 95.5 87.8 98.3 93.1 91.2
         June 99.8 98.1 106.9 94.4 97.2 92.1 90.2
         July 101.6 99.8 109.2 96.3 97.8 92.9 91.2
         Aug 101.2 99.3 94.7 94.6 108.8 95.9 90.1 87.3 94.2 87.5 97.6 92.7 91.0
         Sep 101.5 99.5 109.2 96.0 97.7 92.7 91.0
         Oct 105.0 102.6 112.9 99.0 99.1 94.2 92.6
         Nov 103.7 101.2 95.9 p 96.7 111.7 97.7 90.6 87.1 96.0 87.8 98.8 93.7 92.0
         Dec 101.7 99.2 109.3 95.6 97.8 92.7 90.9
2011          Jan 101.4 99.0 109.3 95.5 97.7 92.4 90.7
         Feb 102.4 99.9 94.9 p 95.2 110.6 96.5 90.2 87.0 95.3 87.4 98.2 92.9 91.3
         Mar 104.1 101.6 112.3 98.1 98.7 93.6 92.0
         Apr 105.9 103.4 114.0 99.7 99.6 94.4 92.8
         May 104.9 102.2 97.1 p 97.7 113.2 98.6 91.1 86.9 98.0 88.1 99.0 93.7 92.1
         June 105.0 102.2 113.4 98.8 98.9 93.7 92.2
         July 104.0 101.0 112.4 97.7 98.6 93.3 91.7
         Aug 103.9 100.8 95.1 p 95.6 112.9 98.0 90.1 86.7 95.4 87.3 98.2 93.1 91.9
         Sep 102.8 99.9 112.0 97.4 97.7 92.7 91.5
         Oct 103.0 100.2 112.6 97.8 97.8 92.9 91.8
         Nov 102.6 99.9 p 93.2 p 94.5 112.1 97.4 89.3 86.5 93.5 87.0 97.6 92.8 91.6
         Dec 100.8 98.1 110.3 95.8 96.8 91.7 90.5
2012          Jan 98.9 96.3 108.0 p 93.7 96.1 90.8 p 89.4
         Feb 99.6 97.2 p 90.5 p 91.6 108.4 p 94.2 p 88.7 p 86.7 91.4 p 86.1 96.9 91.4 p 89.8
         Mar 99.8 97.4 108.6 p 94.3 96.9 91.2 p 89.6
         Apr 99.5 p 97.2 108.4 p 94.2 96.8 p 91.2 p 89.6
         May 98.0 p 95.7 ... ... 107.2 p 93.1 ... ... ... ... 96.0 p 90.4 p 88.9
         June 97.2 p 94.9 106.6 p 92.5 p 95.5 p 89.9 p 88.5
         July 95.3 p 93.0 104.4 p 90.5 p 94.8 p 89.0 p 87.4
*The effective exchange rate corresponds to the weighted external value of the not available, estimates were used. 2ECB calculations. Includes countries belonging
currency concerned. The method of calculating the indicators of the German to the EER-20 group (see footnote 1) and additional Algeria, Argentina, Brazil, Chile,
economy’s price competitiveness is consistent with the procedure used by the ECB to Croatia, Iceland, India, Indonesia, Israel, Malaysia, Mexico, Morocco, New Zealand,compute the effective exchange rates of the euro (see Monthly Report, November Philippines, Russian Federation, South Africa, Taiwan, Thailand, Turkey and2001, pp  50-53, May 2007, pp  31-35 and February 2012, pp  34-35). For more Venezuela. 3Annual and quarterly averages. 4Euro-area countries (from 2001
detailed information on methodology see the ECB’s Occasional Paper No  134 including Greece, from 2007 including Slovenia, from 2008 including Cyprus and(www.ecb.int). A decline in the figures implies an increase in competitiveness. 1ECB Malta, from 2009 including Slovakia, from 2011 including Estonia) as well as Canada,
calculations are based on the weighted averages of the changes in the bilateral Denmark, Japan, Norway, Sweden, Switzerland, United Kingdom and United States.exchange rates of the euro against the currencies of the following countries: Austra- 5Euro-area countries and countries belonging to the EER-20 group. 6Owing to
lia, Bulgaria, Canada, China, Czech Republic, Denmark, Hong Kong, Hungary, Japan, missing data for the deflator of total sales, China is not included in this calculation.Latvia, Lithuania, Norway, Poland, Romania, Singapore, South Korea, Sweden, 7 Euro-area countries and countries belonging to the EER-40 group (see footnote 2). 
Switzerland, United Kingdom and United States. Where price and wage indices were

Overview of publications by the  
Deutsche Bundesbank
This overview provides information about selected recent economic and statistical publica -
tions by the Deutsche Bundesbank. Unless otherwise indicated, these publications are avail -
able in both English and German, in printed form and on the Bundesbank’s website.
The publications are available free of charge from the Communication Division. For a small 
fee to cover costs, a file which is updated monthly and contains approximately 40,000 time series published by the Bundesbank can be obtained on CD-ROM from the Division Statis -
tical data processing, mathematical methods or downloaded from the Bundesbank-ExtraNet site. Orders should be sent, in writing, to one of the addresses listed on the reverse of the title page. Selected time series can also be downloaded from the internet.
Annual Report
Financial Stability ReviewMonthly Report
For information on the articles published be -
tween 2000 and 2011 see the index attached 
to the January 2012 Monthly Report.
Monthly Report articles
September 2011
– The performance of German credit institu -
tions in 2010
– German banks’ lending to the domestic pri -
vate sector since summer 2009
– International cooperation in banking regula -
tion: past and present
October 2011
– The debt brake in Germany – key aspects 
and implementation– Germany’s external position against the 
background of increasing economic policy 
surveillance
November 2011
– The current economic situation in Germany
December 2011
– Outlook for the German economy – macro -
economic projections for 2012 and 2013
– German enterprises’ profitability and finan -
cing in 2010
– Direct investment and financial constraints 
before and during the financial crisis
January 2012
– Long-term developments in corporate finan -
cing in Germany – evidence based on the 
financial accounts
– The PHF: a survey of household wealth and finances in Germany
– The European single market in payments 
nearing completion
February 2012
– The current economic situation in GermanyDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report 
August 2012  
77•

March 2012
– Germany’s balance of payments in 2011
– National and international financial market 
shocks and the real economy – an empirical 
view
April 2012
– Potential growth of the German economy – medium-term outlook against the backdrop 
of demographic strains
– The European Systemic Risk Board: from 
 institutional foundation to credible macro -
prudential oversight
May 2012
– The current economic situation in Germany
June 2012
– Outlook for the German economy – macro -
economic projections for 2012 and 2013
– The price of crude oil and its impact on eco -
nomic activity in the industrial countries
– The role of the “Basel interest rate shock” in 
the supervisory assessment of interest rate 
risks in the banking book
July 2012
– The euro as an anchor currency and core of 
a currency bloc
– Deutsche Bundesbank Spring Conference 
2012 – monetary policy, inflation and inter -
national linkages
– The new CPSS-IOSCO Principles for financial 
market infrastructures
August 2012
– The current economic situation in GermanyStatistical Supplements to the 
Monthly Report
 1 Banking statistics 1, 2
 2 C apital market statistics 1, 2
 3 Balance of payments statistics 1, 2
 4 Seasonal ly adjusted business statistics 1, 2
 5 Exchange rate statistics 2
Special Publications
Makro-ökonometrisches Mehr-Länder-Modell, 
November 1996 3
Europäische Organisationen und Gremien im Bereich von Währung und Wirtschaft, May 
1997 3
Die Zahlungsbilanz der ehemaligen DDR 1975 
bis 1989, August 1999 3
The market for German Federal securities, 
May 2000
Macro-Econometric Multi-Country Model: MEM -
MOD, June 2000
Bundesbank Act, September 2002
Weltweite Organisationen und Gremien im Be -
reich von Währung und Wirtschaft, March 
2003 3
Die Europäische Union: Grundlagen und Politik-
bereiche außerhalb der Wirtschafts-und Wäh-
rungsunion, April 2005 3
Die Deutsche Bundesbank – Aufgabenfelder, 
rechtlicher Rahmen, Geschichte, April 2006 3
European economic and monetary union, April 
2008
For footnotes, see p 80•.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report 
August 2012  
78•

Special Statistical Publications*
 1 Banking statistics guidelines and customer  
classification, January 20122
 2 Bankenstatistik Kundensystematik Firmen-
verzeichnisse, June 20122, 3
 3 Aufbau der bankstatistischen T abellen, 
June 20112, 3
 4 Financial accounts for Germany 2006 to 
2011, June 20122
 5 E xtrapolated results from financial state -
ments of German enterprises 1994 to 
2003, March 2006 2
 6 V erhältniszahlen aus Jahresabschlüssen 
deutscher Unternehmen von 2008 bis 
2009, May 20122, 3
 7 Notes on the coding list for the balance of 
payments statistics, March 2009 2
 8 The balance of payments statistics of the  
Federal Republic of Germany, 2nd edition, 
February 1991o
 9 Securities deposits, August 2005
 1 0 F oreign direct investment stock statistics, 
April 20121, 2
 1 1 Balance of payments by region,  
July 2012
 1 2 T echnologische Dienstleistungen in der 
Zahlungsbilanz, June 20113Discussion Papers*
08/2012  
Does Wagner’s law ruin sustainability of Ger -
man public finances?
09/2012  
Bankregulation and stability: an examination of 
the Basel market risk framework
10/2012  
Capital regulation, liquidity requirements and 
taxation in a dynamic model of banking11/2012  
Credit portfolio modelling and its effect on 
capital requirements
12/2012  
Trend growth expectations and the U.S. house 
prices before and after the crisis
13/2012  
The PHF: a comprehensive panel survey on 
household finances and wealth in Germany 
14/2012  
The effectiveness of monetary policy in steering 
money market rates during the financial crisis 
15/2012  
Cyclical adjustment in fiscal rules: some evi -
dence on real-time bias for EU-15 countries
16/2012  
Credit risk connectivity in the financial industry 
and stabilization effects of government bailouts
17/2012  
Determinants of bank interest margins: impact 
of maturity transformation
* Unless stated otherwise, as of 2000 these publications 
have been made available on the Bundesbank’s website in 
German and English. Since the beginning of 2012, no 
longer subdivided into series 1 and series 2.
o Not available on the website.For footnotes, see p 80•.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report 
August 2012  
79•

Banking legislation
 1 Bundesbank A ct and Statute of the Euro -
pean System of Central Banks and of the 
European Central Bank, June 1998
 2 Gesetz über das Kreditwesen, February 
20093 2a Solvabilitäts- und Liquiditätsverordnung, 
February 20083
1 Only the headings and explanatory notes to the data con -
tained in the German originals are available in English.
2 Available on the website only.3 Available in German only.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report 
August 2012  
80•

