Monthly Report
February 2012
Vol 64 
No 2

Deutsche Bundesbank 
Wilhelm-Epstein-Strasse 14 60431 Frankfurt am Main Germany
Postal address 
Postfach 10 06 02 60006 Frankfurt am Main Germany
Tel +49 69 9566-0
Fax +49 69 9566 3077
Telex 41227 within Germany 
 414431 from abroad
http://www.bundesbank.deReproduction permitted only if source is stated.ISSN 0418-8292 (print edition) 
ISSN 1862-1325 (online edition)
The German original of this Monthly Report 
went to press at 11 am on 17 February 2012.Annual and weekly publishing schedules for  selected statistics of the Deutsche Bundes- 
bank can be downloaded from our website. The statistical data are also published on the 
website.
The Monthly Report  is published by the 
 Deutsche Bundesbank, Frankfurt am Main,  
by virtue of section  18 of the Bundesbank  
Act. It is available to interested parties free of 
charge.
This is a translation of the original German -
language version, which is the sole authorita -
tive text.Deutsche Bundesbank 
Monthly Report February 2012 2

Contents
The current economic situation in Germany  ................................................  5
Overview  ........................................................................................................................  6
Global and European setting  ..................................................................................  11
The euro and prices – in Germany and the euro area .........................................................  17
Monetary policy and banking business  ..............................................................  21
Money market management and liquidity needs ................................................................  22
Financial markets  ........................................................................................................  33
Recalculated weights for indicators of the German economy’s price competitiveness .........  34
Economic conditions in Germany  .........................................................................  43
House prices in 2011 in Germany ........................................................................................  50
Public finances  .............................................................................................................  55
The structural development of public finances in Germany –  
results of the disaggregated framework for 2011 ...............................................................  56
The fiscal compact and the European Stability Mechanism .................................................  60
Debt brake: safety margin vis-à-vis strict borrowing limit ....................................................  66Deutsche Bundesbank 
Monthly Report 
February 2012 
3

Statistical Section ....................................................................................................  1•
Key economic data for the euro area ..................................................................................  5•
Overall monetary survey in the euro area ............................................................................  8•
Consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem ............................................................  16•
Banks ..................................................................................................................................  20•
Minimum reserves ...............................................................................................................  42•
Interest rates .......................................................................................................................  43•
Capital market ....................................................................................................................  48•
Financial accounts ...............................................................................................................  52•
Public finances in Germany .................................................................................................  54•
Economic conditions in Germany ........................................................................................  61•
External sector ....................................................................................................................  68•
Overview of publications by the Deutsche Bundesbank  ..........................  77•
Abbreviations and symbols
e Estimated
p Provisional
pe Partly estimated
r Revised
… Data available at a later date
. Data unknown, not to be published or not meaningful
0 Less than 0.5 but more than nil
– Nil
Discrepancies in the totals are due to rounding.Deutsche Bundesbank 
Monthly Report February 2012 4

The current economic situation 
in GermanyDeutsche Bundesbank 
Monthly Report 
February 2012 
5

German economy suffers 
temporary  sluggishness
The world economy performed robustly last 
year despite having to contend with numerous 
shocks. In the fourth quarter, however, the glo-
bal upturn started to falter. The main reason 
was a widespread weakening of economic mo-
mentum, not least in the emerging market economies where monetary policy was tight -
ened perceptibly during 2011 in response to clear signs of economic overheating. In the 
euro area, the worsening sovereign debt crisis 
has had a severe knock-on effect on overall 
economic developments in the countries con -
cerned. The dampening influences have mean-while also spilled over to other euro-area coun-
tries via the trade and confidence channels. The extent of the negative impact on other 
countries differs, however. Thus the US econ -
omy, in particular, is likely to have remained 
relatively unscathed.
The short-term economic outlook for the glo -
bal economy has brightened of late. This more 
positive environment should remain in place provided that the sovereign debt crisis in Eu -
rope and the situation on the oil markets do not deteriorate noticeably in the near future. 
Business and household surveys have recently 
mostly barely fallen or have actually risen. 
Moreover, the marked rebound in share prices suggests increasing economic optimism. This is 
underpinned by the ongoing strongly expan -
sionary monetary policy bias in several indus -
trial countries and the actual or prospective 
easing of the monetary stance in the emerging 
market economies. Overall, some of the cur -
rent forecasts by international organisations 
look overly pessimistic.
Diverging and volatile economic expectations are also determining events on the financial 
markets. Of late, however, market participants’ 
risk aversion has waned somewhat as the eco-nomic prospects have improved. This was at -
tributable inter alia to the resolutions agreed at 
the summit meetings of the EU heads of state 
or government and the consolidation and re -
form measures announced by the new Italian 
and Spanish governments. Investors were un -
deterred by the fact that the rating agencies, 
for the first time, downgraded previously top-
notch sovereigns such as Austria and France. 
Confidence on the financial markets was addi-
tionally buoyed by the monetary policy deci -
sions taken by the ECB Governing Council and 
the US Federal Reserve’s announcement that it 
would keep its benchmark federal funds rate low until 2014. On balance there have been considerable stock market gains, particularly 
since the turn of the year, while yields on Bunds and US Treasuries have been squeezed by safe haven flows on the one hand and changing as-
sessments of the economic outlook on the 
other into a fairly narrow band.
The gloomier macroeconomic outlook and its 
consequences for inflation prospects prompted the ECB Governing Council to reverse the inter -
est rate hikes agreed in April and July by cutting rates twice in the fourth quarter of 2011. More-
over, the reserve ratio was reduced from 2% 
to 1% with effect from 18 January 2012.
In addition, growing tensions on the financial 
markets and the difficulties encountered by banks in some member states in wholesale 
market funding led the ECB Governing Council 
to introduce further non-standard monetary 
policy measures. Ultimately, these are intended to shield the banking sector’s lending to house-
holds and non-financial corporations from a 
potentially excessive fall-out from the financial 
market tensions. At the beginning of October, 
the Governing Council therefore decided to launch a second covered bond purchase pro -
gramme (CBPP2) to help resolve banks’ longer-term funding problems. The Governing Council 
also decided to offer two additional longer-Global economy
Financial 
 marketsMonetary policyOverviewDeutsche Bundesbank 
Monthly Report February 2012 6

term refinancing operations (LTROs) with matu-
rities of 12 and 13 months respectively. In De-
cember, central bank liquidity was, for the first 
time ever, provided in two LTROs with a three-
year maturity. These operations will be con -
ducted as fixed-rate tenders with full allotment. 
The interest rate will be indexed to the main refinancing rate, and these operations will 
– like regular main refinancing operations – re-
quire sufficient collateral from the counterpar -
ties. The first three-year operation was carried 
out on 21 December 2011. The record sum of 
€489.2 billion was allotted.
In addition, a number of measures to extend the collateral framework were agreed at the 
beginning of December. These can, on applica-tion, be applied by individual central banks and are not subject to risk-sharing. The Bundesbank 
sees no need for such measures to provide li -
quidity in Germany. The German banking sys -
tem is currently very generously supplied with 
liquidity as a result of the inflow of funds from 
other euro-area countries. This is evident, not 
least, in the strong use of the deposit facility by German credit institutions. The considerable in-
flows of funds in recent months are a sign of 
the ongoing disruptions on the interbank mar -
ket. This lack of confidence and the inflows to 
Germany are reflected in the sharp increase in 
the Bundesbank’s claims under the TARGET2 
payment system.
The strong uptake of the first three-year opera-
tion sent excess liquidity in the banking system to a new record high averaged over the main-
tenance period from mid-December 2011 to 
mid-January 2012. By contrast, M3 growth de-
celerated sharply in the last quarter of 2011. 
The perceptible outflows from many subcom -
ponents of M3 were, in many instances, coun-
termovements to the large uncertainty-related 
inflows seen over the summer months. How -
ever, monetary developments were also muted by a weak trend in lending to the domestic pri-vate sector. At the end of December, the asso-
ciated annualised and seasonally adjusted three-month rate reached its lowest figure since the third quarter of 2009, with loans to 
non-financial corporations in particular re -
duced.
Germany’s economic upturn started to falter in 
the fourth quarter of 2011. According to the 
flash estimate released by the Federal Statistical 
Office, real gross domestic product (GDP) in the fourth quarter was 0.2% down on the quarter 
after seasonal and calendar adjustment. The 
economic dip, which had been on the horizon 
for some months, was triggered by the slow -
down in global economic growth combined 
with strains on the euro area’s real economy.
Numerous enterprises have in recent months registered a drop in demand, especially from abroad, and have adapted their short-term plans accordingly. For example, they have scaled back purchases of intermediate goods and probably also postponed non-urgent in -
vestments in various instances. However, enter -
prises are unlikely to have reappraised their me-dium to long-term strategic plans on the whole, 
as the problems are widely regarded as being 
temporary in nature.
The slowdown in the global economy clearly dented German enterprises’ exports in the 
fourth quarter of 2011. Over the reporting pe-
riod, deliveries of goods to foreign business 
partners declined in seasonally adjusted terms 
for the first time since the onset of the recovery 
in mid-2009. Dampening effects emanated from the euro area, in particular. Import mo -
mentum dissipated completely in the fourth quarter of 2011 as production and demand 
growth slowed.
In line with the weakened import dynamics, 
private consumption in the fourth quarter of 
2011 is also unlikely to have matched the 
quicker pace seen in the third quarter. How -
ever, retailers probably benefited from house -
holds’ increased propensity to consume in the 
run-up to Christmas. According to the ifo busi-
ness survey, they rated their business situation 
in December as being much better than either German 
 economyDeutsche Bundesbank 
Monthly Report 
February 2012 
7

in the preceding months or in the following 
January.
The positive sentiment among households is 
proving a key catalyst for housing construction. 
Wage growth and the perceived low risk of re-dundancy, in combination with the still very fa-vourable financing conditions, are making buy-ing property more attractive. The improved in-come prospects are also buoying the buy-to-let 
market, which buyers currently appear prima -
rily to see as a form of investment that is likely to maintain its value.
The cyclical upswing in investment in machin -
ery and equipment, by contrast, seems to have 
been interrupted around year-end 2011. One 
reason for this is that industrial enterprises are 
waiting until they have greater clarity on their 
business prospects again before expanding 
their plant.
Germany’s labour market remains on course for growth despite the temporary economic 
slowdown. Employment continued to acceler -
ate appreciably in the last quarter of 2011. Jobs 
subject to social security contributions again 
slightly outpaced overall employment. Employ-
ment growth was accompanied by increased 
immigration from the eight central and east Eu-
ropean EU member states, to which complete 
free movement of workers has applied since 
May 2011. The effects of lifting the restrictions 
on workers from these countries does not, 
however, alone explain the higher immigration. Greece, Italy, Spain and Portugal accounted for roughly 10% of net immigration. A year earlier, 
migration to and from these countries was 
more or less balanced.
The overall propitious economic situation last 
year was clearly reflected in earnings. In 2011, 
gross wages and salaries per employee rose at 
a pace last seen in 1993. One reason for this 
was the negotiation of collective wage agree -
ments with higher scheduled increases in pay 
rates. Another was that employers made, in 
some cases considerable, special and bonus payments on a voluntary basis. For the current 
year, a shift towards higher negotiated wage 
increases coupled with smaller wage drift looks 
likely.
Consumer price inflation was marked by the 
sharp rise in energy prices in the final quarter of 2011, although the inflation rate excluding en-
ergy also showed a slight acceleration. How -
ever, assuming slower energy-price inflation, 
year-on-year inflation should tend to moderate from its present level over the next few months.
The outlook for the German economy im -
proved perceptibly towards the end of the re -
porting period, though risks relating to the sov-ereign debt crisis remain. In the first quarter of 
2012, external factors will continue to weigh on production. From the second quarter on -
wards, cyclical stimuli could gain the upper 
hand, however. The assumption underlying the 
Bundesbank’s economic forecast in December 
of a fairly rapid resumption of growth looks more likely to materialise at the present junc -
ture. Vigorous construction demand will pro -
vide the economy with a strong stimulus for 
the foreseeable future. This also applies to the 
winter months – unless weather conditions 
mean that production has to be interrupted for prolonged periods. But in this case there would probably be considerable catching-up effects in the spring. Private consumption is likely to con-tinue to bolster economic activity. This is being 
driven by the persistent positive sentiment among consumers. They appear to see only 
limited income risks at present. As a result, sav-
ing is not a primary motive at the moment. Monetary policy will continue to exert a very 
expansionary influence, and ample liquidity will ensure very low interest rates.
Germany’s public finances improved last year. The deficit ratio fell from 4.3% to 1.0%. This 
was mainly due to the phasing-out of financial 
market support measures, favourable cyclical 
effects and additional budget relief from higher 
tax revenues and reduced labour market-
related spending.Public financesDeutsche Bundesbank 
Monthly Report February 2012 8

In the current year, by contrast, the deficit ratio 
looks set to remain virtually unchanged as 
things currently stand. Assuming a limited eco-
nomic slowdown and barring any major addi -
tional impact from the financial and sovereign 
debt crisis, there should be a slight structural 
improvement. Germany’s fiscal consolidation aims therefore appear very unambitious, and the calls – which have also been made at an international level – for Germany to relax its consolidation course have no basis in sub -
stance.
Both central government and numerous state 
governments are still falling well short of the 
medium-term objective of a structurally close-
to-balance budget. At the general government 
level this is, however, masked by high surpluses 
run up by the social security funds. It is also 
becoming apparent that the debt ratio will re-
main well above the reference value of 60% for many years to come, even assuming that 
the sovereign debt crisis does not escalate fur -
ther. Against this backdrop, further consolida -
tion should not be delayed, and a structurally 
balanced budget, which is now enshrined in the German constitution through the debt brake for central and state governments, 
should be brought about rapidly. Nor does the economic outlook justify any relaxation of con-solidation efforts, besides which the automatic 
stabilisers would take effect should the econ -
omy weaken significantly (which does not cur -
rently appear probable). Strict implementation 
of the national budgetary rules is also impor -
tant in order to avoid undermining the credibil-ity of the planned European fiscal compact.
At the European level, the heads of state or 
government of the euro-area countries agreed 
at the beginning of December 2011 to “move 
towards a stronger economic union”, and an -
nounced the above-mentioned fiscal compact. A key component of the compact is that gen-eral government budgets shall be at least close 
to balance in structural terms. Although the 
Stability and Growth Pact includes very similar 
requirements, the fiscal compact is to hardcode them into national legislation (preferably into 
the constitution). Moreover, it envisages an au-
tomatic correction mechanism that is triggered 
if targets are missed by a wide margin, for 
which the Commission will subsequently pro -
pose uniform principles. The Commission will also verify the transposition of the budgetary rules into national legislation. Another impor -
tant element is a stronger automatic sanction 
mechanism, in which Council members with 
voting rights undertake to follow the Commis-sion’s recommendation if they fail to meet the 
deficit criterion unless a qualified majority op -
poses (what is known as a reverse qualified ma-
jority).
The objectives of the fiscal compact are wel -
come. If placing them on a firmer legislative 
footing means that it is possible to make com-
pliance with a structurally at least close-to-
balance budget the norm, this would be an 
important contribution to ensuring the sustain-ability of public finances, and could create con-fidence. The compact’s success hinges crucially, however, on both its details, which have still to 
be spelled out, and its stringent implementa -
tion going forward. Yet aside from its potential 
to reinforce fiscal rules across the euro area, 
the fiscal compact in no way introduces a fiscal 
union. Outside the Stability and Growth Pact, 
the European authorities are to be given no su-
pranational right to intervene in national fiscal 
policy. This would not be the case even if the 
agreed national rules were not properly applied in practice. The fiscal compact does not, conse-
quently, justify any extensive joint liability (eg Eurobonds). Otherwise, there would be an even greater mismatch between liability and 
control than is currently already the case, and 
the framework of monetary union would be -
come increasingly inconsistent.
In order to overcome the crisis, agreement was 
reached to set up a permanent mechanism, the 
European Stability Mechanism, or ESM, which 
is scheduled to come into force in mid-2012 
and is to replace the European Financial Stabil-ity Facility (EFSF) in the medium term. It might Deutsche Bundesbank 
Monthly Report 
February 2012 
9

help to limit risks to financial stability in the 
euro area. However, it will weaken the basic no-bail-out principle that applies within the 
euro area and lessen incentives for sound pub-lic finances. Hence it is imperative that any as-sistance is tied to strict conditionality and granted only at appreciable interest rate pre -
miums. Under the ESM Treaty, it appears, how-
ever, that no interest rate premiums are to be 
charged as a general rule.Deutsche Bundesbank 
Monthly Report February 2012 10

World economic activity
The global upturn started to falter in the fourth 
quarter of 2011. The main reason was a wide-
spread weakening of economic momentum. 
Furthermore, severe flooding in Thailand in au-
tumn not only led to a severe impairment of 
local industrial output but also caused the elec-
tronics and automotive industries in other 
countries, especially Japan, to suffer output 
losses as a result of disruptions to cross-border 
deliveries. In the meantime, the production 
processes outside of Thailand are likely to have 
returned to normal. Overall, in seasonally ad -
justed terms, global industrial output in Octo -
ber-November has remained at the same level 
as the summer quarter, in which it rose by 1½%; nevertheless, this represents a year-on-
year increase of 4%. On an average of October and November, the volume of world trade has slipped to just below the level recorded in the third quarter.
The clear slowdown in the global cyclical up -
turn can also be attributed to the escalation of 
the euro-area sovereign debt crisis over the 
summer. As a result, in the crisis countries the 
pressure to consolidate intensified further, con-sumers’ and investors’ confidence took another turn for the worse and the financing conditions in trade and industry deteriorated. These damp-
ening influences have meanwhile also spilled 
over to other euro-area countries via the trade 
and confidence channels. The extent of the 
negative impact on other countries has tended to vary, however. The US economy in particular, 
which was again able to step up the pace of 
economic growth in the fourth quarter, is likely to have remained relatively unscathed. Further -
more the slow pace of expansion in the emer -
ging market economies (EMEs), where aggre -
gate growth is likely to have lagged clearly be-
hind trend growth for the third consecutive period, has less to do with problems in the euro area and more to do with the strong monetary policy tightening over the course of 
2011, which became necessary to combat the 
– in most cases – significant acceleration in in-flation.
Within the group of industrial countries, buoy-
ant growth in the United States contrasted 
with a decline in aggregate output in the euro 
area, the United Kingdom and Japan. In the 
final quarter of 2011, the growth of real gross 
domestic product (GDP) taken across these 
countries as a whole came to a virtual standstill 
according to provisional data. Compared with 
the fourth quarter of 2010, GDP increased by 
¾%.Assuming that the sovereign debt crisis in Eur -
ope does not worsen in the near future and 
escalate into a global financial crisis, and that 
the situation on the oil markets does not de -
teriorate, the short-term economic outlook for 
global economic activity appears to be some -
what more favourable again. This is corrobor -
ated by indicators based on economic surveys 
among enterprises and households – which are 
available at a relatively early juncture – many of which have recently barely fallen or have actu-
ally risen. Moreover, the marked rebound in 
share prices suggests growing optimism about 
the economy. This is underpinned by the on -
going strongly expansionary monetary policy in 
several industrial countries and the actual or 
prospective easing in the EMEs.
Given the pronounced cyclical slowdown, in January 2012 the IMF published a noticeable 
downward revision to its autumn (September) 
forecast. As a result, at 3.8%, global growth in 
2011 is ¼ percentage point lower and global 
GDP is now only forecast to rise by 3.3% in 
2012 compared with an estimate of 4.0% six 
months previously. The aggregate forecasts for 
advanced economies as well as for the EMEs 
and developing countries taken as a group for Global 
 economic dip
Euro-area debt 
crisis and tighter monetary policy in EMEs as main driversIn autumn 2011, 
stagnation  
of real GDP  
in industrial 
countries
Recent initial 
signs of slightly more positive outlook for  global economy
Downward 
 revision  
of IMF forecast 
in JanuaryGlobal and European settingDeutsche Bundesbank 
Monthly Report 
February 2012 
11

2012 have each been lowered by 0.7 percent-
age point to 1.2% and 5.4%, respectively. The 
forecast for industrial countries is therefore 
more on the pessimistic side. It is primarily the 
projections for the euro area that have been 
reduced. In addition, significant revisions were also made for the United Kingdom, Japan and a number of smaller countries. By contrast, the autumn forecast for the United States (+1.8%) 
was confirmed. According to the IMF, the global economy will again grow at a much 
stronger rate of +3.9% in 2013. Assuming that crude oil prices do not rise again over the fore-
cast horizon and that other commodity prices 
trend perceptibly downwards, inflation is ex -
pected to decrease considerably by 2013 – 
to 1.3% for advanced economies and 5.5% for 
EMEs and developing countries. Despite the somewhat pessimistic baseline scenario, the 
IMF continues to stress the downside risks, cit-ing an intensification of the sovereign debt cri-sis as the main driver.
The slowdown in global activity and especially 
in the manufacturing sector made itself felt in 
sharp price mark-downs in the commodities 
markets. As measured by the HWWI index, in-
dustrial commodities in the final quarter of 
2011 were 14¼% cheaper than in the previous 
quarter on a US-dollar basis; food, beverages and tobacco prices were down 11%. For the first time since summer 2009, the aggregate 
index (excluding energy) showed a decrease on the year. By contrast, the situation on the crude oil market eased only slightly. At US$108¾, the 
price per barrel of Brent crude oil in autumn 
was only 3% cheaper than in the summer, yet 
was still 24½% more expensive than one year 
previously. However, the year-on-year figure in the third quarter had been +45¾%. The reason for the high oil price is likely to be a continued 
short supply even though oil production in 
Libya is being restored at a quicker pace than 
originally expected. In general, crude oil prices 
pointed slightly upwards again at the begin -
ning of 2012. In addition to more favourable economic reports, growing geopolitical ten -
sions in the Persian Gulf were of particular im-Oil still 
 expensive 
 despite general 
price mark-downs for  commoditiesAggregate output in industrial countries *
Sources: National statistics, Eurostat and Bundesbank calcula-
tions. * The United States, euro area, United Kingdom and Ja-
pan.
Deutsche Bundesbank2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011100102104106
100102104106
102104106108
100102104106108
9496981001021041062005 = 100, seasonally adjusted, quarterly, log scale
Industrial countries, total
United States
Euro area
United Kingdom
JapanDeutsche Bundesbank 
Monthly Report February 2012 12

portance for crude oil prices. The euro price for 
Brent oil soared as a result of the euro’s devalu-ation, even reaching a new high on a monthly 
average for January. As this report went to 
press, crude oil was trading at US$119½; how-
ever, oil futures were still trading at consider -
able discounts.
In the final quarter of 2011, too, energy con -
tinued to shape general consumer price infla -
tion in industrial countries. Due to the slight 
decline in crude oil prices and to the base ef -
fect, year-on-year growth of energy prices nar -
rowed from +14.0% in the summer to +10.5% 
in the autumn. At the same time, headline in-
flation fell by 0.3 percentage point to 2.7%. As 
the energy price surges from winter 2011 are 
gradually no longer being included in the cal -
culations, inflation is likely to continue to fall noticeably in the coming months. Excluding the volatile energy and food prices, however, 
the inflation underlying the basket of consumer 
goods did not fall during the final months of 
2011. On a quarterly average, at 1.7%, core in-
flation was just as high as in the previous period. The deflationary tendencies that were 
feared at times, particularly in the United States and United Kingdom, therefore do not appear 
to be materialising for the group of industrial 
countries as a whole.
Selected emerging market 
economies
In the final quarter of 2011, economic momen-
tum in China slowed somewhat. According to 
the seasonally adjusted estimate by China’s Na-
tional Bureau of Statistics, real GDP increased 
by 2% from the summer, in which growth of 
2¼% had been recorded. The year-on-year fig-ure was surpassed by 9% in autumn. The main 
supply-side driver of this increase was the in -
dustrial sector, where output rose by just under 13% year-on-year. Compared with the summer 
quarter, the fall in the year-on-year rate of in -
dustrial output was minimal. Chinese exports 
continued to experience a loss of momentum in the autumn due to an economic slowdown in China’s major partner countries. However, at 
the same time, domestic demand appears to 
have picked up. This is indicated, for instance, 
by nominal retail sales, which increased in the 
final quarter at a somewhat faster rate than previously. In real terms, the growth acceler -
ation is likely to be even larger because head-
line inflation eased considerably towards the end of the year. Consumer price inflation fell 
from 6.1% in September to 4.1% in December. In light of declining inflationary pressure, cool-
ing tendencies in economic activity that have 
been observed since the beginning of 2011 as 
well as a flow of capital abroad, the People’s 
Bank of China cut the minimum reserve rate for 
banks in December. The lending policy has re-
cently also been eased somewhat.
According to the latest monthly indicators – a 
GDP estimate for the final quarter of 2011 is 
not yet available – India’s economic output has 
continued to expand at a restrained pace. In -Falling con-
sumer price in-flation in indus-trial countries
Slight slowdown 
in economic momentum in China
Expansion in  India curbed by 
tight monetary policyWorld market prices for crude oil,industrial commodities and food,beverages and tobacco
Sources:  Thomson  Reuters  and  HWWI.  • Average  of  1  to 
10 February or 1 to 15 February 2012 (crude oil).
Deutsche Bundesbank2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 20125060708090100120140160180US dollar basis, 2010 = 100, monthly averages, log scale
Crude oil (Brent)
Industrial
commodities
Food, beveragesand tobaccoDeutsche Bundesbank 
Monthly Report 
February 2012 
13

vestment, in particular, is likely to have re -
mained sluggish. For instance, the production 
of capital goods in the reporting quarter fell by 
one-sixth year-on-year. This is due, above all, to 
the tight monetary policy necessitated by the persistently high inflationary pressure. In the 
past few months, consumer price inflation has fallen markedly; in December it stood at 6.5% compared with 10.1% in September. Neverthe-
less, according to estimates by the Reserve Bank of India, the scope for cutting interest 
rates is still limited.
In seasonally adjusted terms, real GDP in Brazil 
went up marginally in the final quarter of 2011 
following a period of stagnation in the sum -
mer. Industrial output, which was already on a downward slope in the third quarter, again fell perceptibly. However, on a more positive note, over the past few months the Purchasing Man-
agers’ Index for manufacturing has risen con -
siderably from its low level, and in January it was back over the expansion threshold of 50 points. In the autumn months and at the be -
ginning of the year, consumer price inflation trended downwards slightly. It was 6.2% in January and was thus within the tolerance 
interval set by the central bank. As a result of 
this and of feeble aggregate growth, the Brazil-ian central bank continued on its course of cut-ting interest rates, which it started in mid-2011.
According to an initial estimate by the Russian 
Federal State Statistics Service, Russian eco -
nomic output increased by an average of 4¼% 
in 2011. These results suggest that economic 
output in the final quarter of 2011 – for which 
no published data are yet available – rose per -
ceptibly from the previous quarter. Private con-sumption is the main driver for the rather buoy-ant economic growth in Russia. Real retail sales in the fourth quarter were up 9¼% on the year. 
But investment, too – especially in construc -
tion – recently again grew sharply. Consumer price inflation continued to subside in the re -
porting period, falling from 7.2% in September 
to 6.1% in December. At a rate of 4.2% in 
January, it even stood at the lowest level since the transition to a market economy system in 
the early nineties.
United States
In the final quarter of 2011, seasonally adjusted real GDP in the United States increased by ¾% 
from the previous quarter. Despite the global 
economic slowdown, the US economy re -
corded its strongest growth since spring 2010; 
in 2011 GDP increased by a total of 1¾% on 
the previous year. The final spurt is primarily at-
tributable to diminishing temporary burdens which had previously curbed the pace of 
growth. The strong contribution to growth by 
inventory movements should also be seen in 
this light; aggregate output in the second and 
third quarters could not keep up with the rela-tively robust growth in demand, thereby ham-
pering the build-up of inventories. However, 
private consumption in autumn was predomin-
antly driven by sales of new cars returning to 
normal after Japanese manufacturers overcame 
delivery problems: real consumer spending on 
cars and car parts was up by 8¼% on the quar -
ter. The fact that consumption did not expand at a much faster rate than last summer, though, 
is due only in part to the mild weather condi-
tions in the northern parts of the country, which curbed energy consumption in season -
ally adjusted terms. The main reason is prob -
ably households’ real disposable income, which 
increased only marginally after having even slumped in the previous two quarters. The 
 savings ratio correspondingly fell a bit further. 
Declining inflation eased the burden on con -
sumers. In autumn, headline inflation –  as 
measured by the aggregate consumer price 
index – slipped by ½ percentage point to 3.3%, 
although, excluding energy and food, the rate 
increased to 2.2%. A decrease in the un -
employment rate in summer from 9.1% to 8.7% 
additionally brightened the labour market situ-ation.
Over the past few months, a number of indica-
tors have given reason to believe that the real Protracted slow-
down in growth in Brazil
Russian 
 economy still on 
expansionary pathRather buoyant economic  activityDeutsche Bundesbank 
Monthly Report February 2012 14

estate market could make a sustained recovery. 
This is supported by a clear increase in private 
residential investment in the fourth quarter. By 
contrast, enterprises could not maintain their 
dynamic investment growth. Real spending on 
non-residential buildings even shrank notice -
ably. Furthermore, public sector demand has 
put a noticeable brake on aggregate growth. Even if this is chiefly due to an extraordinary decline in military expenditure, the necessary 
fiscal consolidation will, over the medium term, prevent a strengthening of the upturn.
Japan
After the level of activity had more or less re -
turned to normal in the summer, the Japanese 
economy suffered a set-back in autumn. Sea -
sonally adjusted real GDP fell by ½% from the 
previous quarter, although this did not fully 
cancel out the earlier increase of 1¾%. Aggre-gate output still contracted by 1% year-on-year. The economic dampener at the end of the year 
was due entirely to foreign trade. Exports fell 
sharply not just as a result of the slackening of 
economic activity in Japan’s partner countries 
– especially in Asia – but also due to the appre-ciation of the yen. This was intensified by deliv-
ery problems following production stoppages 
as a consequence of the flooding in Thailand; 
however, these factors are likely to have caused only temporary losses in exports. On the other 
hand, domestic demand proved to be robust and induced a further rise in imports, which 
– when taken in isolation – also reduced GDP . Commercial investment was up on the quarter 
for the first time since summer 2010, whereas 
private consumption rose slightly following the 
clear increase in the third quarter and public 
sector investment continued to decline. Now 
that the situation in Thailand has returned to 
normal, efforts have been made in Japan to 
start rebuilding and the government has intro-
duced new support measures, the expansion -
ary forces are likely to regain the upper hand in 
2012. At 4.5%, the unemployment rate was 
still slightly lower in autumn than prior to the earthquake in March 2011. At the same time, 
year-on-year consumer price inflation des -
cended into negative territory (-0.3%). Exclud-
ing energy and food, the basket of consumer 
goods was as much as 1.0% cheaper on the 
year.
United Kingdom
According to an initial official estimate, UK 
GDP , adjusted for seasonal influences and price 
changes, fell by ¼% quarter-on-quarter in the 
final quarter of 2011. This economic slowdown 
is often associated with the debt crisis in a 
number of euro-area countries. However, the 
fact that it was spread quite broadly across the 
supply side indicates otherwise. It was not just the highly globalised manufacturing sector that 
posted a clear decline in output. Gross value 
added in the mining and quarrying sector con-
tinued its downward slide, which had already 
been extremely steep at times in previous quar -Set-back due to 
foreign trade
Recovery losing steamReal disposable income,real consumption and savings ratioof households in the United States
Source:  Bureau  of  Economic  Analysis.  1 Annualised,  price-
adjusted with the personal consumption deflator. 2 Savings as 
a percentage of disposable income.
Deutsche Bundesbank2010 20119,90010,00010,10010,20010,300Seasonally adjusted
9,1009,2009,3009,4009,500
3456In previous year's prices, chain-linked,
reference year: 2005, log scale
Real disposable income 1
Lin scale
Savings ratio 2Real consumer
spending 1US$ bn
0%US$ bnDeutsche Bundesbank 
Monthly Report 
February 2012 
15

ters. At the same time, the mild winter condi-
tions curbed electricity and gas production 
considerably; however, this failed to lift season-
ally adjusted construction activity above its 
summer level. In the services sector, the back-
bone of the UK economy, output stagnated 
following a ¾% increase in the third quarter. 
According to an estimate by the UK Office for 
National Statistics, the public sector strike at 
the end of November has had no discernible 
impact. Overall, the weak quarterly results are 
consistent with a generally sluggish recovery, 
which can be seen in the faint rise in GDP of 
just under 1% on average for 2011; excluding 
oil and gas production, however, gross value 
added rose by almost 1½%. After a perceptible deterioration in the labour market in the sum-
mer months, the standardised unemployment 
rate rose further to 8.4% in November. By con-trast, the bleak price climate for consumers has 
eased considerably of late, although average 
inflation in the final quarter – as measured by 
the Harmonised Index of Consumer Prices (HICP) – remained at 4.7%. Core inflation fell 
marginally to 3.4%.
New EU member states
In the group of new EU member states (EU-7),1 
economic output is likely to have once again 
grown noticeably in the final quarter following a rise of ¾% in the third quarter after seasonal adjustment. Real GDP in Hungary, Bulgaria and Latvia expanded perceptibly. Economic growth 
in Poland – for which only an estimate of the 
GDP results for the year is available so far 
(+4¼%) – also appears to have continued un -
abated. Regardless of the continued recovery trends in the region, the labour market situ -
ation in most of the countries remained diffi -
cult; the aggregate unemployment rate stood 
at 9.3% in the final quarter and thus only 
slightly lower than one year previously. In this 
group of countries, consumer price inflation 
rose from 3.5% in the third quarter to 3.7% in 
the final quarter, ranging from 2.5% in Bulgaria 
to 4.2% in Poland.Macroeconomic trends  
in the euro area
In the final quarter of the year, the euro area 
endured a phase of weak economic growth, 
signs of which had already begun to emerge in 
the second and third quarters of 2011. Real 
GDP in the euro area declined for the first time since spring 2009, by ¼% on the quarter after seasonal adjustment. Year-on-year GDP growth 
was a meagre ¾%. Thanks to a strong carry-
over from 2010 and buoyant activity at the be-ginning of the year, growth for 2011 as a whole amounted to 1½%. One reason for the decline 
in GDP in the final quarter was a pronounced 
slump in domestic demand, which was particu-
larly marked in the peripheral countries. This 
was intensified not only by the dampening ef-fects of consolidation measures, but also by the negative impact of a loss in confidence follow-ing the escalation of the sovereign debt crisis in the summer as well as a deterioration in finan-
cing conditions for enterprises. The other was 
that demand stimuli from non-euro-area mar -
kets diminished considerably due to the stalling 
economy in important EMEs. The quarter-on-
quarter decline in aggregate output was broad-
based in the euro area in that, in addition to crisis countries in southern Europe, a number 
of economies that were not directly affected by the sovereign debt crisis also recorded negative 
GDP growth, including Germany, Belgium and 
the Netherlands.2 Of the 12 euro-area coun -
tries for which such data are already available, 
only France and Slovakia have recorded an in-
crease in activity.
Even though the important leading indicators 
have either stabilised or resumed pointing up -
wards again of late, average GDP growth over 
2012 is expected to be only weak. According to 
the Eurosystem staff macroeconomic projec -Economic 
 recovery 
 continuesWeak end  
to the year
Growth likely  
to be minimal  
in 2012
1 This group comprises the non-euro-area countries that 
joined the European Union in 2004 and 2007.
2 As a result of problems with statistics, no seasonally ad-
justed national accounts figures have been published for 
Greece since spring 2011. In the autumn, real GDP was 7% down on the year; over 2011 as a whole it fell by 6¾%.Deutsche Bundesbank 
Monthly Report February 2012 16

The euro and prices – in Germany and the euro area
At the turn of 2001-02, three years after the 
beginning of the third stage of European eco-
nomic and monetary union (EMU), euro bank-
notes and coins were introduced. Ten years 
on, many have begun to take stock of price 
developments in Germany and the euro area, 
focusing on the entire period as a whole.1 
However, when analysing medium-term price 
trends in a macroeconomic context, a com-parison of developments in Germany with 
those in the rest of the euro area requires a 
distinction to be made between three phases.2
The period of preparation and transition prior 
to and at the beginning of the third stage was 
characterised by high GDP growth rates and 
low infl  ation in Germany and its partner coun-
tries. The large degree of price stability was fostered by falling international crude oil 
prices and the efforts undertaken by the new 
euro-area member states to achieve conver-
gence and stability, the effects of which lasted 
into the fi  rst couple of years of monetary 
union.
The sudden end to the New Economy boom 
in 2000 caused a perceptible slowdown in 
real economic growth; in Germany it even fell 
to the stagnation point. However, lively do-
mestic economic activity kept growth afl  oat in 
several of Germany’s euro-area partner coun-
tries. This was due primarily to the signifi  cant 
decline in interest rates that had already begun in the run-up to the third stage. This 
drove infl  ation rates up. Germany, however, suffered an adjustment crisis which put per-
ceptible downward pressure on wage growth 
but also highlighted the need for far-reaching 
labour market and social reforms. Although consumer prices likewise rose at an acceler-
ated pace, this was due to changes in the 
global environment and to a series of hikes in 
consumption-related taxes and not to brisk domestic activity. All in all, infl  ation in Ger-
many has been at the lower end of the spec-trum across Europe.Germany was the primary euro-area benefi  -
ciary of the global economic boom that began 
in the second half of the last decade, which 
was also connected with the resurgence of 
the south and east Asian emerging market 
economies. Key factors included not only Ger-many’s traditional focus on exports but also a 
pronounced slump in domestic demand in the preceding years, which motivated fi  rms to es-
tablish a greater presence in non-euro-area 
markets. The German economy, following its 
successful adjustment efforts, is likely to have made particularly good use of the integration 
of central and eastern Europe into the inter-
national division of labour. Germany’s GDP 
growth rates then surpassed those of its part-
ners by a large margin. Although the global 
fi  nancial and economic crisis directly hit Ger-
many harder than other euro-area countries, 
the subsequent global recovery not only re-
vealed the German economy’s renewed resili-
ence and vitality but also laid bare the un-
sound developments and structural weak-
nesses plaguing a number of euro-area coun-tries.
Compared with the fi  rst half of last decade, 
the situation in the euro area has, in a sense, 
undergone a complete about-face. Whereas 
the German real economy was lagging at that 
time, it is now running full steam ahead. By 
contrast, it is particularly the euro-area periph-eral countries that have now gone from being 
mostly leaders (in economic growth) to lag-
gards. Although the erstwhile divide in infl  a-
tion rates has not yet been completely levelled 
off, a tendency in this direction is visible. In 
1 This is not intended as an additional contribution to 
the debate on whether the introduction of euro bank-
notes and coins fuelled infl  ation. For more on that  debate, see Deutsche Bundesbank, The euro and prices two years on, Monthly Report, January 2004, 
pp 15-28.
2 Confi  ning the view to Germany and the rest of the 
euro area as two separate entities is not meant to 
imply that the latter represents a homogeneous group. 
It is intended, rather, as a stylised description which 
emphasises the specifi  c traits of trends in Germany.Deutsche Bundesbank 
Monthly Report 
February 2012 
17

the past fi  ve years, German HICP infl  ation was 
somewhat higher than in the preceding fi  ve-
year period, whereas infl  ation eased slightly in 
the rest of the euro area. However, it was still 
above German infl  ation rates; one important 
factor here is that, in several partner coun-
tries, indirect taxes and administered prices 
were raised sharply of late under the pressure 
to achieve the necessary fi  scal consolidation.
The differences between Germany and the 
rest of the euro area with regard to price de-velopments in the last decade even tend to be 
understated by offi   cial fi  gures because the 
HICP does not include the prices of owner-
occupied housing. Whereas residential hous-
ing price trends in Germany were extraordin-
arily tranquil over a long period, in a number of partner countries they rose sharply. As the 
fi  nancial and economic crisis progressed, 
these countries then witnessed corrections, in 
some cases severe. On the other hand, Ger-
many is currently seeing property prices pick 
up noticeably for the fi  rst time since the  reunifi  cation boom.
3 If the prices of owner-
occupied housing are thus included, the con-vergence of infl  ation rates between Germany 
and the rest of the euro area is likely to be 
further advanced than suggested by HICP in-
fl  ation rates.
In order to restore sustainable and competi-tive economic structures, several partner 
countries will have to have infl  ation rates 
below those of Germany for several years in 
succession. This is predicated on suitable 
wage moderation, especially under the con-
straint that price stability be maintained in the 
euro area as a whole. Extensive labour market 
reforms, including reforms to wage-setting 
mechanisms, would facilitate this process.Consumer prices and aggregate output
1 Harmonised  Index  of  Consumer  Prices  (HICP).  2 Gross  do-
mestic product, adjusted for price and calendar variations.
Deutsche Bundesbank1997 00 05 10 201100.51.01.52.02.53.0
++++++Annual data, year-on-year percentage change
0+0.5+1.0+1.5+2.0+2.5+3.0+3.5
5.04.03.02.01.001.02.03.04.05.0
–––––+++++
–4.0–3.0–2.0–1.00+1.0+2.0+3.0+4.0+5.0Consumer prices in Germany 1
Consumer prices in the euro area
excluding Germany 1
Scale reduced
Aggregate output in Germany 2
Aggregate output in the euro area
excluding Germany 2
pp
3 See the box entitled “House prices in 2011 in Ger-
many” in this issue of the Monthly Report, pp 50-51.Deutsche Bundesbank 
Monthly Report February 2012 18

tions in December, growth will be merely ¼% 
(mean of the projection range). In its interim 
forecast of January, the IMF even expects a 
contraction of ½%, putting it at the lower end 
of the forecast range. The calculations under -
lying the IMF’s forecast are based on a slight 
downturn from the fourth quarter of 2011 to 
the end of 2012.
On the supply side, negative GDP develop -
ments in the final quarter are chiefly due to the 
marked contraction of manufacturing output. 
Seasonally adjusted construction output in the 
October-November period fell by 2% on the 
third quarter, in which it had still managed to 
post an increase of ½%. The decline in indus -
trial output was more significant, falling by 1¾% from the third to the fourth quarter of 2011. This put it back below the end-2010 
level; however, over the year as a whole, it was still up by 3½%. In the reporting period, all in-
dustrial sectors were hit by a decline. For in -
stance, the production of capital and inter -
mediate goods fell by 1¼% and 1¾%, respect-ively, and 1% fewer consumer goods were pro-duced than in the previous quarter. In seasonally adjusted terms, orders received in October and November were down 4% from the already de-pressed Q3 level. This suggests that the down-
swing in the industrial sector continued into 2012, though it is likely to have slowed. This is underscored by the fact that industrial capacity utilisation went back up slightly be -
tween October and January but is still some -
what below its long-term average. In addition, 
the Purchasing Managers’ Index for manufac -
turing rose clearly in January and is now much closer to returning to the expansion threshold. 
Moreover, the industrial confidence indicator has stabilised at its long-term average in the past few months. This is primarily due to the fact that output expectations have improved 
considerably whereas the assessment of order 
books was once again unfavourable.
The contractionary stimuli affecting aggregate 
demand most likely came from gross fixed cap-
ital formation and private consumption. The decline both in construction activity and the 
production of machinery and equipment point 
to a perceptible reduction in investment ex -
penditure. Weak private consumption is clearly 
reflected in the sizeable decline in real retail sales (excluding cars) and new passenger car 
registrations. However, on a positive note, con-
sumer confidence improved somewhat at the 
beginning of the year after a protracted period of pessimism. Economic activity once again re-
ceived a major boost from exports to non-
euro-area countries, which, in the final quarter of 2011, were up 1½% from the previous quar -
ter in nominal terms. Imports rose by only ¼% meaning that, overall, foreign trade is likely to have had a positive impact on real GDP growth.
The unfavourable economic situation in the 
euro area caused the already tense labour mar -
ket situation to take another turn for the worse 
in the second half of 2011. Following a weak 
rise in the first half of the year, the number of 
persons employed went back down slightly in Downswing in 
manufacturing sector
Weakness  
of  domestic 
 demand broadly 
basedNegative 
 outlook  
on labour 
 marketIndicators of household consumption
in the euro area
1 Quarterly figures. Including registrations by enterprises, the 
self-employed and central, state and local government.
Deutsche Bundesbank2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012100102104106Seasonally adjusted, quarterly
No in thousands
2,2002,3002,4002,5002,6002,7002,8002,9003,0002005 = 100, log scale
Real retail sales
Lin scale
New car registrations 1
JanDeutsche Bundesbank 
Monthly Report 
February 2012 
19

the third quarter, but was still 0.3% higher than 
during the previous year. In addition, the in -
crease in unemployment, which started in 
spring, picked up again significantly in the final 
quarter. In seasonally adjusted terms, 326,000 
more people were out of work than in the 
summer and 680,000 more than last year. At 
10.4% in December, the unemployment rate 
was nearly ½ percentage point higher than in 
2010.
Year-on-year HICP inflation in the euro area de-
clined each month, falling from 3.0% in Sep -
tember 2011 to 2.7% in December 2011. Con-
sumer prices are likely to have gone up signifi-
cantly in January 2012 in seasonally adjusted 
terms due to higher energy prices. However, 
according to Eurostat’s estimate, the year-on-
year rate held steady at 2.7% due to a base effect. Assuming moderate growth rates over the next few months, year-on-year inflation 
could decline if the hikes in energy prices at the beginning of 2011 are removed from the calcu-
lations. The same is true for consumption-
related tax rises that have come into effect in a number of euro-area countries.
The price trend in autumn 2011 was mainly de-
termined by the contesting influences of crude 
oil prices and exchange rates. The perceptible 
depreciation of the euro raised energy prices 
for consumers to a similar extent as one year 
previously, despite a fall in crude oil prices. 
Prices excluding energy increased during the final quarter by slightly less than in the third 
quarter.
The inflation differential between the euro area 
and Germany, which had temporarily more or 
less closed, opened up again somewhat in the 
past few months. However, in the medium 
term, this could reverse itself in line with cyc -
lical movements (for more information, see the 
box on pages 17 and 18).Year-on-year 
consumer price inflation down slightlyDeutsche Bundesbank 
Monthly Report February 2012 20

Monetary policy and money 
market developments
The clouding of the overall economic outlook 
in the euro area and its consequences for infla-
tion prospects across the entire monetary union prompted the Governing Council of the ECB to 
completely reverse the interest rate hikes de -
cided in April and July 2011 by cutting rates twice in the autumn. As a result of the key 
interest rates being lowered by 25 basis points 
at the beginning of both November and De -
cember, the main refinancing rate has been back at its historically low level of 1% since 14  December 2011. By keeping the corridor breadth unchanged at 150 basis points, the 
interest rate for recourse to the marginal lend-ing facility has returned to 1¾%, with the inter -
est rate on the deposit facility set at ¼%.
In addition, concern about the growing ten -
sions in the financial markets potentially ham -
pering the banking sector’s lending to house -
holds and non-financial corporations caused 
the Governing Council of the ECB to introduce 
further non-standard monetary policy meas -
ures. Hence, at the beginning of October, it de-
cided to launch a second covered bond pur -
chase programme (CBPP2) to help resolve banks’ longer-term funding problems. Under this programme, securities amounting to a 
total of €40 billion are to be purchased by the end of October 2012. Also at the beginning of October, the Council took the decision to offer 
two additional long-term refinancing oper-
ations with maturities of initially 12 and subse-quently 13 months. The first of these two oper -
ations was carried out on 26 October 2011. At just under €57 billion, demand – and thus the 
allotment volume – was closer to the lower 
end of the forecast range.
As the crisis escalated further, in December the 
Governing Council of the ECB finally decided for the first time ever to provide central bank liquid -ity in two LTROs with a maturity of three years. 
The operations will be conducted as fixed rate 
tender procedures with full allotment and are 
interest indexed. This means that banks are not 
charged a pre-defined interest rate but, upon 
maturity of the transaction, they are charged the 
average key interest rate over the term. The first three-year operation was carried out on 21 De -
cember 2011 (effectively replacing the 13-month 
tender announced in October). At €489.2 bil -
lion, the amount allotted in this operation reached a record high. However, this amount also includes €45.7 million that were shifted from the 12-month LTRO allotted in October. The second three-year operation is scheduled 
for 29 February 2012. In addition, a number of 
measures to extend the collateral framework were agreed at the beginning of December. Moreover, the reserve ratio was reduced from 
2% to 1% with effect from 18 January 2012.
The significant deterioration of financial market 
conditions led to a renewed massive increase in 
banks’ demand for liquidity from the Eurosys -
tem in the fourth quarter. The sudden surge in the gross refinancing volume from €490 billion 
at the end of September to just under €700 
billion at the end of December was mainly at-
tributable to the substantial recourse to the 
first three-year LTRO. The excess liquidity in the banking system, which had already risen stead-ily in the preceding months, climbed to a new 
record high of €400 billion on average over the  reserve period from 14  December 2011 
to 17 January 2012. The two interest rate cuts as well as the increase in excess liquidity led to 
a fall in the overnight rate EONIA during the autumn from an average of 1.05% in the re -
serve period from 14 September to 11 October 
to 0.45% on average over the reserve period 
from 14 December to 17 January. As a conse -
quence, the spread between EONIA and the rate on the deposit facility narrowed from 30 
to 20 basis points.Key interest 
rates back to all-time low
Introduction of 
further non-standard meas-ures in October and December 
2011Growing excess 
liquidity puts 
more downward 
pressure on overnight rateMonetary policy and banking businessDeutsche Bundesbank 
Monthly Report 
February 2012 
21

Money market management and liquidity needs
During the three reserve maintenance peri-
ods from 12 October 2011 to 17 January 
2012, euro-area credit institutions’ need for 
central bank liquidity as determined by au-
tonomous liquidity factors rose by €13.4 bil-
lion in net terms. This development was 
mainly attributable to the total increase of 
€28.8 billion in the volume of banknotes in 
circulation during the period under review, 
which was mostly due to the usual seasonal 
increase around Christmas. Moreover, gen-eral government deposits with the Eurosys-
tem worth an additional €17.7 billion net also had a liquidity-absorbing effect. The 
opposite effect was induced by the sum of changes in net foreign assets and other fac-tors which, taken together, eliminate valua-tion effects with no impact on liquidity. This amount increased by a total of €33.1 billion 
in the period under review, thus reducing the need for central bank liquidity. Addi-tional emergency liquidity assistance 
granted by some national central banks in 
the Eurosystem  as well as a boost to for-eign reserves contributed to this increase. The credit institutions in the Eurosystem 
were easily able to meet their minimum re-serve requirements, which went up by €1.0 billion net in the period under review.
As liquidity-providing open-market opera-
tions continued to be carried out as fi  xed-
rate tenders with full allotment of the sub-mitted bids (see table on page 26), the vol-
ume of liquidity provided through the ten-
der operations was determined exclusively by the demand from credit institutions in 
the euro area. As in the previous periods, in 
most cases demand signifi  cantly exceeded 
the calculated requirement arising from au-tonomous factors and the minimum reserve 
requirement. In the fi  nal quarter of 2011, the ECB Governing Council made several 
monetary policy decisions affecting money 
market management: on 6 October 2011, it 
decided to maintain full allotment until at least the beginning of July 2012. At the same time, it announced that two one-year 
tenders would be conducted: one at the 
end of October and one at the end of De-cember 2011. It also announced a new cov-ered bond purchase programme (CBPP2). In 
addition to two interest rate reductions of 
25 basis points each at the beginning of 
November and December 2011, which ulti-
mately brought the rate down to 1%, on 8  December, the Governing Council de-cided to conduct two three-year tenders, 
one at the end of December 2011 (in place of the one-year tender) and one at the end 
of February 2012 with the option of early 
repayment after one year. It further decided to cut the reserve ratio from 2% to 1% as of 18 January 2012, to increase collateral avail-
ability and to discontinue the one-day  liquidity-absorbing fi  ne-tuning operations at the end of the reserve period as of the 
December 2011-January 2012 reserve main-tenance period.
The liquidity provided through tenders in-
creased sharply during the period under re-
view owing, in particular, to the very high 
demand for liquidity of around €490 billion 
in the fi  rst three-year tender, conducted at 
the end of December 2011. The volume of 
longer-term refinancing operations in-creased over the three reserve periods by €254 billion, while the overall volume of 
main refi  nancing operations only decreased 
by €24 billion in the same period. This caused the proportion of longer-term refi  -
nancing operations in the outstanding ten-
der volume (excluding liquidity-absorbing fi  ne-tuning operations) to rise from 65% 
to 86% over the course of the observation 
period. Recourse to the deposit facility in 
the Eurosystem rose very sharply and, com-
paring period averages, increased by €231 
billion in net terms over the three mainte-
nance periods under review. At the same time, however, recourse to the marginal lending facility increased perceptibly from an average of €2.8 billion to €6.0 billion, Deutsche Bundesbank 
Monthly Report February 2012 22

refl  ecting the ongoing segmentation of the 
money market.
The value of purchases effected under the  CBPP2 between November 2011 and 
17 January 2012 stood at €4.2 billion (given 
a 12-month target of €40 billion). In add-
ition, with regard to the Securities Markets Programme (SMP), the amount outstanding 
–  if matured securities are taken into ac-
count – increased by €52.8 billion to a total of €216.8 billion in the period under review. 
However, thanks to the continued weekly liquidity-absorbing fi  ne-tuning operations, 
the infl  ow of liquidity generated by the SMP 
purchases was completely neutralised dur-
ing the three observation maintenance peri-
ods, with just one small exception. During 
the same period, the balance sheet hold-
ings of securities purchased under the fi  rst 
CBPP fell by €0.9 billion to €58.4 billion as a 
result of maturing covered bonds and re-
valuations.
The most important event during the October-November 2011 maintenance pe-riod was the allotment of the fi  rst of the 
two one-year tenders decided upon at the 
beginning of October 2011. However, credit institutions showed little interest in this ten-der; a total of €56.9 billion was demanded 
and allotted. At just under €17 billion, the 
resulting net supply of liquidity was also 
relatively modest because the credit institu-
tions had reduced their volumes by just 
over €40 billion in the three-month tender 
which was renewed at the same time. Con-
sequently, at €583 billion on average, the 
total outstanding tender volume (excluding 
liquidity-absorbing fi  ne-tuning operations) 
recorded for this period was only slightly up 
from its level one period earlier (€567 bil-
lion). However, since the demand for liquid-
ity from autonomous factors also sank by 
around €18 billion on average over the pe-
riod, there was a noticeable rise in excess 
liquidity. This triggered a signifi  cant increase in recourse to the deposit facility in the Eu-
rosystem, which climbed to an average of 
€205 billion compared with €169 billion in the previous period. The more comfortable 
liquidity conditions also had an impact on overnight money. The fairly stable EONIA 
stood at 0.94% on average over the period 
and was thus 56 basis points below the 
main refi  nancing rate (previous period: -45 
basis points). In the same period, lower rates were also recorded in secured over-night money trading on Eurex Repo’s GC Pooling trading platform (ECB basket); on a volume-weighted average, the over-
night rate was 0.85% on average, just un-
der ten basis points below the EONIA. At €33.3 billion on average, EONIA turnover 
remained relatively low in this period (previ-
ous period: €32.6 billion), while secured 
overnight turnover on GC Pooling (ECB bas-
ket) declined slightly on average to €13.7 
billion (previous period: €15.2 billion).
During the November-December 2011 maintenance period, demand in the main refi  nancing operations continued to grow 
despite the more comfortable liquidity con-
ditions, averaging €238 billion across the period. The outstanding tender volume 
consequently rose to €627 billion on aver-
age while recourse to the deposit facility increased to €254 billion on average over 
the period. The EONIA did not fully mirror 
the reduction in the key interest rate (by 
25 basis points to 1.25%) and stood at an 
average of 0.74% over the period, ie 51 ba-sis points below the key interest rate. Paral-
lel to this, there was a reduction in the spread between the EONIA and the  volume-weighted average secured over-
night rate on GC Pooling, which averaged 
0.69%. At €31.4 billion (EONIA) and €15.0 
billion (GC Pooling) respectively, the under-
lying overnight turnovers showed little change in comparison to the previous pe-
riod.
The December 2011-January 2012 mainte-
nance period, during which a new main re-fi  nancing rate of 1% prevailed, was charac-
terised by the allotment of the fi  rst three-
year tender towards the end of December, 
which simultaneously replaced the one-year Deutsche Bundesbank 
Monthly Report 
February 2012 
23

tender originally scheduled for this date. A 
total of €489.2 billion was demanded and 
allotted, making it the highest ever tender 
volume since the establishment of the Eu-
rosystem. With 523 bidders, the volume 
was allotted to signifi  cantly fewer counter-
parties than the very fi  rst, similarly large 
one-year tender initiated at the end of June 2009 (1,121 bidders). The high levels of de-mand for the three-year tender were prob-
ably due in large part to uncertainties sur-
rounding refi  nancing and a general sense of cautiousness, although the attractive condi-tions for this period (allotment at the aver-age rate of the main refi  nancing operations 
carried out over the life of this operation) are also likely to have played a role. To 
make it easier for the credit institutions to 
switch from the main refi  nancing operation 
to the three-year tender, the Eurosystem 
additionally conducted a one-day liquidity-
providing bridge operation in the same 
week. However, the net liquidity effect from the allotment of the three-year tender was signifi  cantly lower than the actual allotment 
volume. Numerous banks used this oppor-
tunity to transfer their total volume of €45.7 billion obtained from the one-year tender at the end of September to the three-year ten-
der, signifi  cantly reducing their demand in the previous main refi  nancing operation and the regular three-month tender, with 
the effect that the Eurosystem only allotted 
an additional €213 billion in the week be-
fore Christmas. As a result, the outstanding tender volume rose strongly (to €801 billion 
on average over the period) and average recourse to the deposit facility in the Eu-
rosystem likewise increased sharply to €399 
billion, despite the fact that demand for li-
quidity from autonomous factors had risen to €258 on average. The overnight rates fell 
perceptibly following the allotment of the three-year tender, meaning that, on aver-age over the period, the EONIA declined 
to 0.45% (55 basis points below the key in-
terest rate) and the volume-weighted se-
cured overnight rate on GC Pooling dropped to 0.35% (65 basis points below the key in-terest rate). On account of the more favour-able liquidity conditions, the underlying 
turnover also shrank, most noticeably in the 
secured market, to €30.4 billion (EONIA) 
and €11.1 billion (GC Pooling).Factors determining bank liquidity1
€ billion; changes in the daily averages of the reserve
maintenance periods vis-à-vis the previous period
Item2011/2012
12 Oct 
to 
8 Nov9 Nov 
to 
13 Dec14 Dec 
to 
17 Jan
I Provision (+) or 
 absorption (–) of 
 central bank balances 
due to changes in au-
tonomous factors
1 Banknotes in 
 circulation
(increase: –) –  6.5 –  8.0 –  14.3
2 Government 
 deposits with theEurosystem ( increase: –) –  7.9 –  5.9 –   3.9
3 Net foreign assets
2 + 41.1 + 10.0 +  61.8
4 Other factors 2 –  7.7 +  5.1 –  77.2
Total + 19.0 +  1.2 –  33.6
II Monetary policy 
 operations of the
Eurosystem
1 Open market 
 operations(a) Main refi  nanc-
ing operations +  3.1 + 41.9 –  68.6
(b) Longer-term re-
fi  nancing 
 operations + 13.5 +  1.9 + 238.3
(c) Other opera-
tions –  0.6 +  5.9 +   8.0
2 Standing facilities
(a) Marginal lend-
ing facility +  1.3 +  1.6 +   1.6
(b) Deposit facility 
(increase: –) – 35.9 – 49.1 – 145.6
Total – 18.6 +  2.2 +  33.7
III Change in credit 
 institutions’  current 
accounts (I + II) +  0.2 +  3.3 +   0.1
IV Change in the 
 minimum reserverequirement 
( increase: –) –  0.1 –  1.6 +   0.7
1 For longer-term trends and the Deutsche Bundesbank’s contribution, see pages 14 • and 15 • of the Statistical Sec-
tion of this Monthly Report. 2  Including end-of- quarter 
valuation adjustments with no impact on liquidity.
Deutsche BundesbankDeutsche Bundesbank 
Monthly Report February 2012 24

The interest rate cut in November 2011, which 
came as a surprise for the markets, halted the 
previously observed upward trend in the longer-term unsecured money market rates. However, these unsecured rates only partially 
reflected the cuts in the key interest rates up to 
the end of the year. This was particularly the 
case for longer-term maturities and was most 
likely attributable to persistent doubts among 
banks about the soundness of their possible 
trading partners. By contrast, secured money 
market rates fell rather sharply from the begin-
ning of November and reached new lows in 
December. Hence, the different reactions to 
the monetary policy measures from the secured 
and unsecured rates led to a renewed expan -
sion of depo-repo spreads on balance, which 
then became entrenched at a high level in De-
cember and only receded again significantly once the first three-year operation had been 
carried out. The spread for three-month matur -
ities, which had risen to just under 100 basis points by the end of September, temporarily 
reached levels of over 120 basis points in De -
cember but has stood below 100 basis points 
again since the beginning of the year.
Monetary developments  
in the euro area
M3 growth weakened sharply in the last quar -
ter of 2011. The seasonally adjusted and annu-alised three-month rate of the broad monetary 
aggregate M3, which had stood at 7% at the 
end of September, dropped to -4½% in the final quarter of 2011. On the one hand, the marked decline in M3 in the autumn months represented a countermovement to the very 
strong uncertainty-related inflows in the previ-
ous quarter. For example, repo transactions by 
financial corporations, in particular, fell strongly 
in the autumn months after having sharply ex-
panded in the previous quarter. On the other 
hand, portfolio shifts into non-monetary assets 
and accelerated debt redemption by enter -
prises and households also resulted in substan-
tial outflows from sight deposits and short-term time deposits. In response to the above-
mentioned factors, the annual growth rates of 
M3 and loans to the domestic private sector decreased from just under 3% and 2½% re -
spectively in the third quarter to around 1½% 
and 1% respectively in the final quarter of 2011.
The strong decline of M3 in the fourth quarter 
can mainly be attributed to outflows from mar -
ketable instruments (M3-M2) and – to a lesser 
extent – from short-term time deposits and 
savings deposits (M2-M1). The extensive reduc-
tion in marketable instruments was due to a strong decline in repo transactions between October and December, having contributed a 
great deal to M3 growth in the previous quar -
ter. The reason for this development was, 
above all, the decline in secured money market 
transactions through central counterparties. 
This decline was presumably a reaction to the 
Eurosystem’s long-term refinancing operations 
in the fourth quarter and the associated gener -
ous supply of liquidity. Despite a further in -Money market 
rates down again,  depo-repo 
spreads widen
Weakening  
of monetary 
 developmentsSteep decline  
in reposMoney market interest rates
in the euro area
1 Monthly  averages.  2 Only  on  8  October  2008  2.75%. 
3 Three-month  Euribor  less  three-month  Eurepo.  • Average 
from 1 to 16 February 2012.
Deutsche Bundesbank2008 2009 2010 2011 201200.51.01.52.02.53.03.54.04.55.0
050100150200Difference between unsecured and secured 
three-month interbank lending rates 1, 32
Basis
points%
Marginal lending rate
Three-month Euribor 1
EONIA1
Minimum bid rate or
fixed interest rate formain refinancing operations
Deposit rateDeutsche Bundesbank 
Monthly Report 
February 2012 
25

crease of inflows into money market fund 
shares and bank debt securities contained in (M3-M2) in the fourth quarter, the slump in 
repos led to a discernible fall in the seasonally 
adjusted and annualised growth rate of (M3-
M2) to -21½% from a (revised) rate of 27% in the previous quarter.
With respect to short-term time deposits con -
tained in (M2-M1), which had recorded sub -
stantial inflows in the first three quarters, a per -
ceptible reduction could likewise be observed in the fourth quarter. Since the build-up of short-term savings deposits also ground to a halt, the seasonally adjusted and annualised three-month rate of shorter-term bank deposits 
(M2-M1) was down to just under -3½%. Fur -
thermore, a reduction in overnight deposits caused the highly liquid monetary aggregate M1, which had expanded considerably in the 
third quarter, to decline slightly as well.
Of the M3 counterparts, the decrease in the 
banking sector’s net external asset position vis-
à-vis non-residents had the strongest negative 
impact on monetary dynamics. This develop -
ment was driven by a strong reduction in exter -
nal assets, which was only partially compen -
sated for by the simultaneous decline in exter -
nal liabilities. The decrease in external assets Short-term time 
deposits also perceptibly downMarked  reduction in net 
external assetsOpen market operations of the Eurosystem*
 
Value 
dateType of transaction
1Maturity in daysActual 
 allotment 
in € billionDeviation from the 
benchmark 
in € billion
2Marginal rate/fi  xed 
rate
%Allotment 
ratio
%Weighted 
rate
%Cover ratio
 3Number
of bidders
12.10.11 MRO (FRT) 7 204.9 160.4 1.50 100.00 – 1.00 166
12.10.11 S-LTRO (FRT) 28 59.1 – 1.50 100.00 – 1.00 39
12.10.11 FTO (–) 7 – 163.0 – 0.98 77.97 0.95 1.48 108
19.10.11 MRO (FRT) 7 201.2 307.2 1.50 100.00 – 1.00 164
19.10.11 FTO (–) 7 – 165.0 – 0.91 22.77 0.89 1.60 108
26.10.11 MRO (FRT) 6 197.4 265.4 1.50 100.00 – 1.00 152
26.10.11 FTO (–) 6 – 169.5 – 0.87 99.66 0.85 1.37 87
27.10.11 LTRO (FRT) 91 44.6 – 4 1.17 100.00 – 1.00 91
27.10.11 S-LTRO (FRT) 371 56.9 – 4 … 100.00 – 1.00 181
01.11.11 MRO (FRT) 8 182.8 306.8 1.50 100.00 – 1.00 143
01.11.11 FTO (–) 8 – 173.5 – 0.87 65.12 0.83 1.14 71
08.11.11 FTO (–) 1 – 284.0 – 1.30 100.00 1.27 1.00 165
09.11.11 MRO (FRT) 7 194.8 165.3 1.25 100.00 – 1.00 150
09.11.11 S-LTRO (FRT) 35 55.5 – 1.25 100.00 – 1.00 47
09.11.11 FTO (–) 7 – 183.0 – 0.69 92.48 0.64 1.17 99
16.11.11 MRO (FRT) 7 230.3 365.8 1.25 100.00 – 1.00 161
16.11.11 FTO (–) 7 – 187.0 – 0.65 38.50 0.61 1.39 100
23.11.11 MRO (FRT) 7 247.2 390.2 1.25 100.00 – 1.00 178
23.11.11 FTO (–) 7 – 194.5 – 0.63 91.98 0.60 1.20 88
30.11.11 MRO (FRT) 7 265.5 394.5 1.25 100.00 – 1.00 192
30.11.11 FTO (–) 7 – 194.2 – 1.25 100.00 0.62 1.00 85
01.12.11 LTRO (FRT) 91 38.6 – 4 … 100.00 – 1.00 108
07.12.11 MRO (FRT) 7 252.1 382.6 1.25 100.00 – 1.00 197
07.12.11 FTO (–) 7 – 207.0 – 1.00 79.68 0.65 1.19 113
13.12.11 FTO (–) 1 – 258.0 – 1.05 100.00 1.03 1.01 137
14.12.11 MRO (FRT) 7 291.6 253.6 1.00 100.00 – 1.00 197
14.12.11 S-LTRO (FRT) 35 41.2 – 1.00 100.00 – 1.00 42
14.12.11 FTO (–) 7 – 207.5 – 0.80 1.01 0.49 1.16 110
21.12.11 FTO (+) 1 141.9 – 1.00 100.00 – 1.00 73
21.12.11 MRO (FRT) 7 169.0 146.5 1.00 100.00 – 1.00 146
21.12.11 FTO (–) 7 – 211.0 – 0.75 73.34 0.53 1.22 106
22.12.11 LTRO (FRT) 98 29.7 – 4 … 100.00 – 1.00 72
22.12.11 S-LTRO (FRT) 1134 489.2 – 4 … 100.00 – 1.00 523
28.12.11 FTO (–) 7 – 211.0 – 0.89 63.12 0.56 1.25 95
28.12.11 MRO (FRT) 7 144.8 637.8 1.00 100.00 – 1.00 171
04.01.12 FTO (–) 7 – 211.5 – 0.44 48.10 0.36 1.59 134
04.01.12 MRO (FRT) 7 130.6 635.6 1.00 100.00 – 1.00 138
11.01.12 FTO (–) 7 – 213.0 – 0.34 54.11 0.32 1.77 131
11.01.12 MRO (FRT) 7 110.9 552.9 1.00 100.00 – 1.00 131
* For more information on the Eurosystem’s operations from 13 July 2011 to 11 October 2011, see Deutsche Bundesbank, Monthly  Report, November 2011, p 30. 1 MRO: main refi  nancing operation, LTRO: longer-term refi  nancing operation, S-LTRO: supplementary 
longer-term refi  nancing operation, FTO: fi  ne-tuning operation (+: liquidity providing operation, –: liquidity absorbing operation), FRT: fi  xed-rate tender. 2 Calculation according to publication after MRO allotment. 3 Ratio of total bids to the allotment amount. 4 The inter-
est rate corresponds to the average minimum bid rate or main refi  nancing rate of the MROs conducted over the life of this operation (may 
be rounded to two decimal places in the table).
Deutsche BundesbankDeutsche Bundesbank 
Monthly Report February 2012 26

reflects the fact that, for some time now, euro-
area banks have been repatriating funds from 
abroad. By contrast, the decline in external li -
abilities reflects the withdrawal of funds previ-
ously made available to banks by non-residents.
Moreover, weak lending to the domestic pri -
vate sector had a dampening effect on monet-ary developments. At the end of December, its 
annualised and seasonally adjusted three-
month rate (adjusted for loan sales and securi-tisation), which had stood at 2½% in the previ-ous quarter, reached its lowest level (-1%) since summer 2009. The cutback mainly affected the corporate sector and in particular loans to non-financial corporations, for which the seasonally 
adjusted and annualised three-month rate entered clear negative territory in the period 
from October to December at just under -3%, after hovering at around 2½% in the preceding 
three quarters. The sharp outflows from non-
financial corporations recorded in the reporting quarter affected all maturities, but mainly those 
of a short and medium-term nature. The 
marked decline in short-term loans in Decem -
ber reflects at least in part the elevated level of 
redemption payments by corporations at the 
end of the year, which means that a counter -
movement can be expected in January. How -
ever, long-term lending, too, recorded a no -
ticeable quarter-on-quarter decline for the first 
time since 1999. On the whole, it should be borne in mind that data on lending to non-financial corporations cover the entire euro area and mask very heterogeneous develop -
ments in the individual member states.
In addition, there was a noticeable reduction in 
loans to financial corporations, too, in the re -
porting quarter. However, the majority of these 
loans were counterparts of highly volatile indir -
ect interbank transactions (reverse repos) con -
tained in (M3-M2). Therefore, restricted lend -
ing to this sector does not in itself represent a 
classical withdrawal of funds from the private 
non-banking sector.By contrast, loans to households (adjusted for 
loan sales and securitisation) saw a slight in -
crease in the final quarter of 2011. Driven, in 
particular, by loans for house purchase – the quantitatively most important component of 
household borrowing –, the seasonally adjusted 
and annualised three-month rate of loans to households stood at around 1% compared 
with just under 1½% in the previous quarter.
Money growth was also supported by the strong increase in credit to general govern -
ment, which had already risen markedly in the 
previous quarter. One reason for this was the 
purchasing of government securities by central 
banks of the Eurosystem, another was the non-
occurrence of a reduction in holdings of gov -
ernment securities by monetary financial insti -
tutions (excluding the ESCB) as had been fre -
quently observed at the end of the last few 
years. This caused the seasonally adjusted and annualised three-month rate for credit to gen-
eral government, which had stood at 8.5% at Weak lending to 
private sector, especially to non-financial corporations
Loans to finan-
cial corporations also downFurther increase in loans to 
households, 
however
Strong increase 
in credit to  general govern-
ment in form  
of securitiesMonetary developments in the euro area 
*
Changes in € billion, seasonally adjusted
Monetary aggregate in a balance 
sheet context2011
Q3 Q4
Monetary aggregate M3 
(=1+2-3-4-5) 164.3 – 111.3
Components:
Currency in circulation and overnight deposits (M1) 57.0 –   6.3
Other short-term deposits (M2-M1) 35.6 –  32.7
Marketable instruments (M3-M2) 71.7 –  72.2
Counterparts
1. Total credit to non-MFIs in 
the euro area 118.4 87.8
Credit to general government 62.6 119.7
Credit to private-sector non-MFIs in the euro area
1 55.8 –  31.9
2. Net external assets 23.8 –  77.6
3. Central government deposits – 35.6 39.3
4. Longer-term fi  nancial liabilities to 
other non-MFIs in the euro area 69.2 –  11.0
5. Other counterparts of M3 
(residual) 55.7 –  93.2
* Changes for statistical reasons are eliminated. 1 Adjusted for 
loan sales and securitisation.
Deutsche BundesbankDeutsche Bundesbank 
Monthly Report 
February 2012 
27

the end of September, to virtually double in the 
final quarter. The positive contribution to M3 
made by loans to general government was only 
partly offset by the increased deposits of cen -
tral governments in the fourth quarter.
The fact that monetary capital formation de -
clined for the first time in a long while also had 
an expansionary effect on M3 in the fourth 
quarter. Continued significant inflows into cap-
ital and reserves coupled with a slight increase 
in long-term time deposits were offset by 
marked outflows in the case of long-term sav-ings deposits and, above all, a sharp reduction in bank debt securities with a maturity of over 
two years. Half of the decline in long-term bank debt securities was compensated for by 
the rise in short-term bank debt securities con-
tained in (M3-M2), which was particularly evi-
dent in December. This partial substitution is 
probably a result of the Eurosystem’s three-year refinancing operation, which is likely – from the investors’ point of view – to have reduced the 
risk associated with said shorter-term debt in -
struments. Overall, the negative development 
of monetary capital indicates that the outflows from M3 are probably to some degree also at-tributable to portfolio shifts towards other non-monetary assets.
Inflation forecasts on the basis of various mon-
etary indicators (monetary aggregates, short-
term deposits, loans) currently signal balanced 
risks for price stability for the next three years 
on average. However, the uncertainty associ -
ated with these forecasts remains high.
German banks’ deposit  
and lending business  
with domestic customers
Following the pattern of monetary develop -
ments in the euro area, the deposit business of 
German banks likewise lost momentum in the 
last quarter of 2011, stagnating at a seasonally 
adjusted and annualised three-month rate of 
0% after experiencing a sharp expansion in the Monetary 
 capital forma-
tion negative
Money-based 
forecasts with 
balanced  inflation risks
Stagnation  
in the deposit 
businessComponents and counterparts of the money stock in the euro area
1 Year-on-year  change  in  percent.  2 In  percentage  points. 
3 Adjusted for loan sales and securitisation. 4 Taken in isol-
ation, an increase curbs M3 growth. 5 Adjusted for loan sales 
and  securitisation  from  2010  Q1.  6 Non-monetary  financial 
corporations.
Deutsche Bundesbank2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011505101520
–++++
–10–50+5+10+15+20+25+30
505101520
–++++Seasonally adjusted, end-of-quarter data
... components of the money stock
... counterparts
Sectoral growth contributions 2of which
Loans to the private sector 5Growth rate 1 of M3 and the
contributions of growth 2 of the ...
M3
M3-M2M2-M1
M1
M3
Remaining balance
sheet items
Longer-term financial
liabilities to other non-MFIs 4Net external
asset positionCredit to the
private sector 3
Growth rate 1
Financial
corporations 6
Non-financial
corporations HouseholdsDeutsche Bundesbank 
Monthly Report February 2012 28

preceding three quarters of the year. The key 
reason for the slowed growth, which had hith -
erto been stable, was a decline in both time de -
posits and long-term savings deposits. The de -
crease in these kinds of deposits was offset by a 
noticeable increase in overnight deposits, whose 
remuneration retained its appeal in the fourth quarter, unlike other shorter-term forms of in -
vestment. Apart from the portfolio shifts, an 
additional cause for the stagnant growth of de -
posits is likely to have been an end-of-year ef -
fect, which had already made itself felt in De -
cember of each of the last two years in the form 
of an increase in the repayment of short-
maturity loans to non-financial corporations and was linked to a fall in short-term time deposits.
The decline in longer-term deposits by domes-
tic customers with credit institutions in Ger -
many, which had already been observed in pre-
vious quarters, persisted strongly in the fourth 
quarter. In addition to the continued down -
ward tendency in longer-term time deposits, 
savings deposits with an agreed period of no-
tice of over three months fell markedly, too. 
While the decline in long-term savings deposits 
was mainly attributable to households, the re-
duction in time deposits was determined by in-
surance corporations and non-financial corpor -
ations.
In the last quarter of 2011, loans from German 
banks to domestic non-banks likewise deviated 
from the moderate growth path of the previ -
ous quarter. The corresponding seasonally ad -
justed and annualised three-month rate stood 
at around 0%. Although credit to the domestic 
private sector continued to increase, credit to 
general government decreased to virtually the 
same extent. As was the case in the previous 
quarter, it was mainly loans to financial corpor -
ations that made up the bulk of the increase in lending to the domestic private sector. Their in-
crease was due to the expansion of secured 
interbank transactions through a central coun-
terparty in October. However, such loans do 
not entail any increased provision of credit to 
the private non-bank sector.In contrast to lending behaviour in the euro 
area as a whole, only lending to non-financial 
corporations was down in the German private 
sector, meaning that the seasonally adjusted and annualised three-month rate of loans to non-financial corporations stood at -1½% at the end of the reporting quarter. This decline 
was largely determined by a sharp reduction in 
loans with short maturities in December. Big banks, in particular, recorded a decline in 
(short-term) loans to non-financial corporations 
at the end of the year. Longer-term maturity 
segments, however, recorded further increases.
In addition to loans to financial corporations, 
German banks also increased their loans to do-mestic households appreciably in the reporting quarter. However, at a (seasonally adjusted and 
annualised) growth rate of ½% during the re -
porting quarter, loans by German banks to 
households in Germany grew at a slightly lower 
rate than in the previous quarter. As in the past, 
cooperative banks and savings banks made the Reduction of 
longer-term  deposits 
 continues
Only marginal 
increase in banks’ lending to domestic non-banksLending to non-financial corpor-ations down 
due to end-of-
year effect
Decline in other 
loans to house-holds more than offset by expan-sion of loans for house purchaseLending and deposits of monetary  fi  nancial institutions (MFIs) in Germany 
*
Changes in € billion, seasonally adjusted
Item2011
Q3 Q4
Deposits of domestic non-MFIs 1
Overnight 26.9 13.2
With agreed maturities
of up to 2 years 26.9 – 7.1
of over 2 years –  2.3 – 2.8
Redeemable at notice
of up to 3 months –  0.7 – 0.2
of over 3 months 0.2 – 4.1
Lending
to domestic general government
Loans – 10.3 – 7.4
Securitised lending –  1.8 – 4.3
to domestic enterprises and 
households
Loans 23.7 20.5
of which to households 2 3.0 1.7
to non-fi  nancial  corporations 
3 4.2 – 3.2
Securitised lending –  5.3 – 7.8
* As well as banks (including building and loan associations, but 
excluding the Bundesbank), monetary fi  nancial institutions 
(MFIs) here also include money market funds. End-of-quarter 
data, adjusted for statistical changes. 1 Enterprises, households 
and general government excluding central government. 2  In-
cluding non-profi  t institutions serving households. 3  Corpor-
ations and quasi-corporations.
Deutsche BundesbankDeutsche Bundesbank 
Monthly Report 
February 2012 
29

greatest contribution to this expansion. In the 
final quarter of the year, however, the increase 
in household debt was almost exclusively driven 
by a further rise in loans for house purchase, growth of which, at just under 1½%, was slightly up on the quarter. By contrast, there 
was a slight decrease in other loans to house-holds.
According to data provided by banks partici -
pating in January’s Bank Lending Survey, credit standards for corporate clients and households remained largely unchanged. A mixed develop-
ment did, however, occur across all business 
areas with regard to margins, which in the case 
of loans to enterprises, were widened consider -
ably for average as well as for risky borrowers, 
left unadjusted in the case of loans to house -
holds for consumption purposes and narrowed 
considerably with regard to loans for house 
purchase.1 For the first quarter of 2012, the 
participating institutions intend to keep their 
credit standards unchanged for the most part, with the exception of a slight tightening in 
loans to enterprises.
At the same time, the participating banks re -
corded an overall perceptible increase in the 
demand for funds in the fourth quarter, which was especially pronounced in the case of loans for house purchase and long-term loans to en-terprises.
In contrast to Germany, credit standard devel -
opments in the fourth quarter in the rest of the 
euro area were characterised, along with re -
duced heterogeneity, by a marked tightening, 
which was particularly striking in the case of loans to enterprises and loans to households 
for house purchase. Furthermore, there was a 
sharp fall in demand, especially from house -
holds.
The Bank Lending Survey contained two add -
itional questions regarding the impact of the 
financial and sovereign debt crisis on the banks’ wholesale funding conditions and credit stand-
ards. The German banks surveyed perceived 
their funding situation on the money and cap-
ital markets as being only slightly worse. Ac -
cording to the data they provided, the tighter 
conditions for the issuance of medium to long-
term debt securities were mainly to blame. In 
the euro area, on the other hand, banks again 
reported a noticeable overall deterioration in funding conditions, especially in the large-
volume lending segment.
Furthermore, the German banks stated that the 
tensions in the European bond markets, taken 
in isolation, had led to a slight tightening of 
standards in lending to enterprises, whereas no 
impact was observed on standards in retail 
lending. Euro-area banks, however, found that 
the financial and sovereign debt crisis was 
exerting a restrictive influence on credit stand-ards in all business areas covered by the survey.Lending policies 
in Germany mixedCredit demand in Germany up perceptibly
Euro-area credit 
supply condi-tions tightened markedly
Constraints  
to funding 
 situation …
… and tighten-
ing of credit standards over the course of the financial and sovereign debt crisis stronger in the euro area than in GermanyLoans of German banks toselected sectors
1 Year-on-year rate of change. 2 Corporations and quasi-cor-
porations.
Deutsche Bundesbank2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 201121012345
––+++++Growth contributions
in percentage pointsSeasonally adjusted, end-of-quarter data
HouseholdsFinancial
corporations
Non-financialcorporations
 2Growth rate 1 in %
1 The aggregate survey results for Germany may be found 
at http://www.bundesbank.de/volkswirtschaft/vo_ veroef -
fentlichungen.en.php.Deutsche Bundesbank 
Monthly Report February 2012 30

Banking conditions in Germany
1 According to harmonised MFI interest rate statistics. 2 According to the Bank Lending Survey, difference between the numbers of re-
spondents reporting “tightened considerably” and “tightened somewhat”and the numbers of respondents reporting “eased some-
what” and “eased considerably” as a percentage of the responses given. 3 Expectations for  2012 Q1.
Deutsche Bundesbank02 03 04 05 06 07 08 09 10 11 20123.54.04.55.05.56.06.57.07.58.08.59.09.5
–300+30
–300+30
–60–300+30+60
–60–300+30
2002 03 04 05 06 07 08 09 10 11 122.02.53.03.54.04.55.05.56.06.5
603003060
––++
9060300306090
–––+++Credit to non-financial corporations
% pa
%%% pa
%%
Riskier loans
Average loansAverage loansRiskier loans%%
Average loansLoans to enterprises... with an initial rate fixation of
    over 1 year and up to 5 years
Change in credit standards 2Consumer credit ...
... with an initial rate fixation of
    over 5 years
Consumer credit... up to €1 millionBank interest rates (new business) 1
Change in loan margins 23Loans to enterprises ...
... with an initial rate    fixation of up
    to 1 year ...
Riskier loansConsumer credit3.03.54.04.55.05.5
Loans for house purchase... up to €1 million
... over €1 million
3... over €1 million
Loans for house purchaseLoans for house purchase
with an initial rate fixation of
over 5 years and up to 10 years
Loans to enterprises
3... with an initial rate fixation
    of over 5 years ...Credit to householdsDeutsche Bundesbank 
Monthly Report 
February 2012 
31

Moreover, banks were asked two further ques-
tions regarding the impact which higher capital requirements for banks were having on lending 
policies.2 Compared with the sample of Euro -
pean banks, the measures carried out by the surveyed German banks in preparation for a stricter regulation were less extensive in the 
second quarter of 2011. For instance, the par -
ticipating German institutions indicated that 
they mainly achieved an increase in their regu-
latory capital by retaining profits and reducing 
their exposure to risky loans, whereas the sur -
veyed European institutions also increasingly improved their capital base by issuing fund shares and reducing the number of average-risk loans. The German survey participants in -
tend to go on implementing the measures introduced in the second half of 2011 on a 
broader basis in the first half of 2012. It is like-wise planned to extend the lending restrictions 
to include borrowers with average credit rat -
ings as well during this period. The European respondents, however, reported that they ex -
pect a reduction in lending, especially to risky 
borrowers, accompanied by a lower issue vol -
ume of fund shares.
In the past half year, the surveyed German 
banks did not see any effects on credit stand-
ards in the surveyed business areas stemming 
from the more stringent capital requirements planned for the future. In light of the regula -
tion, they do intend to slightly tighten their standards for loans to enterprises in the first 
half of 2012, however. Unlike the surveyed Ger -
man institutions, the European banks indicated that they had already tightened their standards for lending to enterprises – and to large cor -
porations in particular – in view of the stricter 
capital requirements, as early as the second half of 2011. In addition, European banks are planning to implement further restrictive 
changes in this business area in the first half of 2012 as well.
In the final quarter of 2011, bank lending rates 
were down again across all business areas. 
Interest rates for long-term loans to enterprises 
stood at 3.6%, irrespective of their size, and 
were thus ten basis points below the level for 
the previous quarter for large-volume loans 
and just under 30 basis points below that for 
small-volume loans. The conditions for loans 
for house purchase with an interest rate fix -
ation of more than five years also decreased 
again by around 25 basis points to an average 
of 3.5% and at the end of the year stood at 
their lowest level since the start of the series in 
2003. Following the seasonal pattern of the 
past few years, conditions for consumer loans 
of all rate fixation periods fell sharply such that those for loans of over five years stood at 7.6% 
at the end of the year. On the whole, the de-
creases outweighed the developments in the 
capital markets. This is probably attributable to 
the slight lag in banks’ interest rate pass-
through and the very sharp declines in capital 
market rates in the previous quarter.Measures in 
preparation for stricter regula-tion more exten-sive in sample of European banks
Regulations in 
Germany cur-
rently have no 
impact on credit 
standards; slight tightening 
planned for the 
future, howeverConditions for long-term bank loans worsen
2 Stricter regulatory capital requirements of banks are set 
out in the new Basel III framework, the European Banking 
Authority’s guidelines that apply to major international credit institutions and other specific national regulations that have recently been approved or will be approved in 
the near future.Deutsche Bundesbank 
Monthly Report February 2012 32

Financial market setting
In the months of autumn and winter, the sover -
eign debt crisis affecting several euro-area 
countries had an increasing impact on the core 
of the euro area. For the first time, rating agen -
cies also downgraded the creditworthiness of previously top-rated debtors such as Austria 
and France. Moreover, diverging economic ex -
pectations shaped events on the financial mar -
kets. The assessment of economic prospects improved slightly of late. At the same time, market participants’ risk aversion eased some -
what. This development can be attributed to 
the results of the summit of EU heads of state 
or government and to the consolidation and re -
form measures announced by the new Italian 
and Spanish governments. The monetary policy decisions taken by the Governing Council of the ECB were another supporting factor, as was the 
Fed’s announcement that it would keep its benchmark rates low until 2014. After fluctu-ations had characterised the fourth quarter of 2011, the stock markets posted considerable price gains from the beginning of this year in 
particular, while yields on Bunds and US Treas -
uries moved within comparatively tight ranges, 
caught between safe haven flows and changing economic outlook assessments. On the foreign 
exchange markets, the euro came under pres -
sure for much of the reporting period.
Exchange rates
Once again, the foreign exchange markets fo-
cused on the euro-dollar exchange rate. The 
single currency depreciated considerably from 
the end of October 2011 onwards, when the 
euro still stood at more than US$1.40. First, the 
euro was burdened above all by a loss of in -
vestor confidence, beginning with Greece and 
spilling over into other euro-area countries. For 
example, the risk premiums on Italian and 
Spanish government bonds temporarily showed a marked rise. Moreover, the big rating agen -
cies downgraded or put on negative outlook 
the creditworthiness of a number of euro-area countries.
From December until mid-January, the diver -
ging trends with regard to the economic pro -
spects on either side of the Atlantic put the euro under additional pressure. Whereas the 
assessment of the euro area’s growth prospects was more subdued than before, not least given the need for consolidation measures, the posi-tive news from the US labour market in particu-
lar came as a surprise. Furthermore, mainly in 
the money market, the Eurosystem’s interest 
rate cuts reduced the interest rate spread of the 
euro area vis-à-vis the United States. When it became increasingly clear that the cyclical downturn would also affect Germany, and after one of the big rating agencies finally 
downgraded French sovereign bonds, the euro 
fell to an exchange rate of US$1.27 in mid-
January.
The euro subsequently regained some ground 
against the US dollar thanks, inter alia,  to a shift 
in interest rate outlook. The Eurosystem opted 
not to lower its key interest rates further, while 
the Fed announced that it would probably leave 
its key rate at close to zero until 2014. At the 
same time, the single currency benefited from a slight relaxation on the financial markets and the return of more favourable economic news from the euro area of late. By the end of the reporting 
period the euro stood at US$1.30, which is 
equivalent to a depreciation of 4% since the be -
ginning of the fourth quarter of 2011.
As against the US dollar, the euro fell against the yen from November onwards. This was partly because investments in yen were still 
considered to be relatively safe, whereas invest-ors perceived risks in parts of the euro area to 
be increasing. Moreover, the interest rate dif -
ferential between the euro area and Japan con-Financial market 
trends
Euro depreciates 
against US dol-lar on balance since beginning of OctoberEuro also down against the yen …Financial marketsDeutsche Bundesbank 
Monthly Report 
February 2012 
33

Recalculated weights for indicators of the German 
 economy’s price competitiveness
Indicators of price competitiveness are normally 
calculated as the weighted average of the rela-
tive price or cost development of a country com-
pared with major trading partners. The Bundes-
bank regularly calculates and publishes such in-
dicators for Germany.1 Both conceptually and in 
the calculation procedure used, the indicators 
are in line with the real effective exchange rates published by the European Central Bank for the 
euro.2 According to this procedure, the weight 
with which the trading partner is included in the 
indicator is determined on the basis of the re-
spective trade fl  ows of the countries involved. To take account of changes in the structure of the trade relations over time, a new matrix of trade 
links is used to calculate the current weights 
every three years. Previously, all indicator values 
from 2004 onwards were based on trade fl  ows in the years 2004 to 2006.
3 By contrast, the re-
calculated indicator values since 2007 now use 
weights derived from the trade links from 2007 to 2009.
The table on page 35 presents the recalculated 
weights which are used to compute the indica-
tor of the German economy’s price competitive-
ness against a broad group of 56 trading part-
ners. The weights for indicators vis-à-vis nar-rower groups of countries are determined by 
rescaling the weights of the broad group.4 The 
fl  uctuation in Germany’s trade relations is re-fl  ected in distinct shifts in the weights, which is 
also shown in a comparison of the weights for 
the years 2004 to 2006 with those for the 
period from 2007 onwards. As in previous three-year periods, the weight for China has increased further (to 8½%). In their relative signifi  cance for 
the indicators, Germany’s direct and indirect trade links with China are only exceeded by those with France (9%), albeit marginally. The weight for France decreased slightly, a fi  nding which also applies to Italy, Spain, Portugal and 
Ireland, but not Greece.5 One group of countries 
whose total relative signifi  cance for the indicator has increased almost as strongly as that of China 
is the central and east European countries that 
joined the European Union in 2004 and 2007. By 
contrast, continuing the development of previ-
ous years, the weights for the United States, the 
United Kingdom and Japan have declined, in 
part, noticeably.
The indicator based, from 2007 onwards, on the 
recalculated weights indicates that the German 
economy’s price competitiveness has since de-
veloped somewhat more favourably than the 
previously used indicator showed (see adjacent 
chart). The indicator based on consumer price indices against the broad group of 56 trading partners showed a 7½% improvement in price competitiveness, whilst according to the previ-
ous calculation it was 6½%. A similar shift may 
be seen for an indicator which is calculated 
against a slightly narrower group of 36 countries (6½% instead of 5½% previously).
1 See Table XI, 13 in the Statistical Section of the 
Monthly Report, for example.
2 The original calculation method is described in L Bul-
dorini, S Makrydakis and C Thimann (2002), The ef-fective exchange rates of the euro, ECB Occasional Paper No 2. However, this procedure was modifi  ed 
slightly at a later date. The modifi  cations are explained in Deutsche Bundesbank, Monthly Report, May 2007, pp 31-32.
3 The weights used previously are listed in the Deut-
sche Bundesbank, Monthly Report, November 2010, 
pp 42-43.
4 See Deutsche Bundesbank, Monthly Report, May 
2007, p 32.5 Greece’s weight is unchanged, but at just under ½% is very small.Price competitiveness of theGerman economy
1 Inverted scale: rising curve (decline in values) denotes an in-
crease in competitiveness.
Deutsche Bundesbank1999 00 01 02 03 04 05 06 07 08 09 10 11 1288
91
94
97
1001999 Q1 = 100, monthly, log scale 1
Indicator based on consumer price indices 
against 56 trading partners
Old weightsNew weightsDeutsche Bundesbank 
Monthly Report February 2012 34

Weighting scheme for the price competitiveness indicator of the German 
 economy against a broad group of 56 trading partners
In thousandths
Group of countries/country Up to 1997 1 1998-2000 2001-2003 2004-2006 From 2007 2
Narrow group of countries 776.7 770.0 743.6 708.0 675.0
Belgium 54.1 48.0 51.9 56.1 55.9
Estonia 0.5 0.7 0.9 1.0 1.0
Finland 10.7 11.1 11.0 10.9 10.4
France 109.1 106.3 100.0 92.8 88.5
Greece 4.7 4.5 4.3 4.4 4.4
Ireland 10.0 16.1 16.1 12.6 11.0
Italy 87.4 80.1 75.9 72.8 70.7
Luxembourg 3.7 3.1 3.7 4.1 4.2
Malta 0.5 0.5 0.5 0.4 0.5
Netherlands 61.3 64.7 63.2 67.2 70.0
Austria 43.8 42.3 41.1 41.8 42.2
Portugal 10.9 10.6 9.7 7.9 7.1
Slovakia 5.5 6.9 9.1 10.3 11.7
Slovenia 5.1 4.7 4.5 4.5 5.1
Spain 35.8 37.3 38.0 39.4 38.0
Cyprus 0.3 0.3 0.3 0.4 0.5
Denmark 15.4 13.9 14.2 13.3 13.3
Sweden 22.5 20.9 19.1 20.4 19.5
United Kingdom 82.1 81.5 77.3 70.6 60.2
Norway 7.1 6.1 5.7 5.4 5.7
Switzerland 43.1 37.9 37.2 34.9 35.2
Japan 61.0 54.6 44.9 39.2 34.4
Canada 8.1 8.7 8.9 8.3 7.6
USA 94.0 109.2 106.1 89.3 77.9
Countries additionally included 
in medium-sized group 121.6 134.2 161.3 191.2 219.1
Bulgaria 1.2 1.3 1.6 2.1 2.4
Latvia 0.5 0.7 0.9 0.8 0.9
Lithuania 1.0 1.1 1.5 1.6 1.9
Poland 18.6 21.8 25.1 27.0 33.4
Romania 4.0 4.3 5.4 7.0 8.7
Czech Republic 16.9 20.7 26.1 25.7 30.0
Hungary 11.0 16.6 18.9 19.4 18.6
China 26.7 31.3 44.8 66.3 86.7
Hong Kong SAR 11.2 10.0 10.0 9.9 8.7
Republic of Korea 16.2 13.8 14.5 19.0 17.5
Singapore 9.7 8.4 8.2 8.3 6.3
Australia 4.6 4.2 4.3 4.1 4.0
Countries additionally included 
in broad group 101.7 95.8 95.1 100.8 105.9
Iceland 0.3 0.5 0.5 0.6 0.6
Israel 4.2 4.3 3.9 3.1 3.1
Croatia 2.5 2.1 2.1 2.2 2.1
Russia 12.4 9.7 11.8 16.0 19.5
Turkey 13.4 13.4 13.3 16.0 16.0
Algeria 0.4 0.3 0.4 0.5 0.6
Morocco 1.3 1.4 1.3 1.2 1.3
South Africa 5.7 5.6 6.1 6.5 6.0
Argentina 2.1 1.8 1.2 1.2 1.5
Brazil 8.1 7.3 6.4 7.0 8.1
Chile 1.4 1.2 1.2 1.8 1.9
Mexico 5.0 7.6 7.9 7.6 8.0
Venezuela 0.8 0.8 0.7 0.6 0.6
India 7.5 6.1 6.6 8.3 10.8
Indonesia 5.7 4.2 4.0 3.4 3.4
Malaysia 7.3 6.6 6.6 6.1 5.8
Philippines 2.6 3.2 3.5 2.9 2.1
Taiwan 13.6 13.8 11.5 9.9 8.3
Thailand 6.7 5.3 5.4 5.2 5.6
New Zealand 0.7 0.6 0.7 0.7 0.6
Total 1,000.0 1,000.0 1,000.0 1,000.0 1,000.0
1 Basis 1995 to 1997. 2 Basis 2007 to 2009.Deutsche Bundesbank 
Monthly Report 
February 2012 
35

tracted. Despite the low nominal interest rates, 
real interest rates in Japan are also high by 
comparison. Although the pace of depreciation 
remained relatively moderate, at mid-January 
the euro fell to its lowest level against the yen 
since September 2000; it subsequently re -
gained some of its value, however. This was at-
tributable not only to the above-mentioned 
easing on the European financial markets but 
also to the less favourable economic data from 
Japan. As this report went to print, the euro 
stood at ¥102; this was 1½% down on the be-ginning of the fourth quarter of 2011.The single European currency also lost ground 
against the pound sterling, particularly in De -
cember 2011. At that time, the euro was bur -
dened by monetary policy easing in the euro area, whereas the Bank of England refrained 
from any additional monetary policy measures. 
At the end of the reporting period, the euro 
stood at £0.83, or 4½% lower than at the be-ginning of October 2011.
The euro depreciated by 3½% against the weighted average of the currencies of major trading partners from the beginning of the fourth quarter of 2011 onwards. Particularly 
high exchange rate losses were recorded above 
all in relation to the currencies of some com -
modity exporting countries and Asian countries, such as Australia, Canada, Singapore and South 
Korea, with the euro shedding between 6% and 12½%. This depreciation tended to im -
prove the price competitiveness of euro-area 
suppliers.
Securities markets and 
 portfolio transactions
Yields on ten-year German and Japanese gov -
ernment bonds dipped slightly again in recent 
months amid fluctuations, and as this report 
went to print stood at below 1.8% and 1% re-
spectively. In the United States, yields on debt 
securities of the same maturity were virtually 
unchanged at just above 1.9%. For a time, di-
verging economic data had led to a marked 
widening of the interest rate differential be -
tween the USA and Germany to more than 30 
basis points. Conversely, market participants’ concerns that the, in some cases, very high sovereign debt of some euro-area countries might not be contained on a sustained basis 
helped trigger a temporary, sharp rise in yields on Bunds. However, a countermovement set in at the end of November which was generated by a number of factors: first, the summit results aimed at strengthening the instruments for in-
creasing budgetary discipline were well re -
ceived. Second, the package of non-standard … and pound 
sterling
Effective euro 
exchange rate
International 
bond marketsExchange rate of the euro
1 Exchange rate at the start of monetary union on 4 Janu-
ary 1999. 2 As calculated by the ECB against the currencies of 
20 countries.
Deutsche BundesbankO N D J F M A M J J A S O N D J F M
2010 2011 20121.201.301.401.50
95100110120130140
0.700.750.800.850.900.95
95100105110115Daily data; log scale
US$
¥
£against the ...
... US dollar
US$1.1789 1
... yen
¥133,73 1
... pound sterling
£0.7111 1
Nominal effective exchange rate 2
1999 Q1 = 100
103.11 1Deutsche Bundesbank 
Monthly Report February 2012 36

monetary policy measures taken by the Euro -
system and the Fed seemed to be having an 
effect. After the beginning of the year, market 
observers began – with a time lag in relation to 
the United States – to take a less pessimistic view of the euro-area economic situation as 
well. The brighter sentiment was evidenced by a pronounced decline (by more than three per -
centage points) in the implied volatility of op -
tions on the Bund future, which is an indicator of investor uncertainty. At somewhat over 7%, 
the level is now no longer substantially above 
the five-year average. In the USA, the equiva -
lent figure for options on US Treasuries is, at 
5.6%, even close to the pre-crisis level.
Monetary policy decisions are also reflected in 
the German yield curve. Thus, the effect of the 
key rate cut in the euro area and the longer-
term funding opportunities was felt in the cap-ital market. Particularly the three-year maturity range, which the longer-term tender operation of December now covers for the first time, re-
sponded clearly, with yields falling by more 
than 40 basis points. The interest rate differen-
tial between ten and three-year maturities in -
creased discernibly, although the ten-year yield slipped by a further 13 basis points from a low 
level. This reflects the strong demand for Bunds, whose role as euro-area benchmark 
was consolidated in the reporting period after 
the series of downgrades.
By contrast, intra-euro-area yields widened fur -
ther from the end of September 2011. At mid-
February, the yield spread of long-term sover -
eign bonds of the other euro-area countries 
over Bunds of the same maturity was, at 380 
basis points, almost 90 basis points above the 
level at the end of the third quarter of 2011; 
indeed, the spread temporarily climbed to a re-
cord high of more than 400 basis points. Be -
sides liquidity aspects, this divergence primarily 
reflects differences in how investors assess the 
creditworthiness of sovereign issuers. More -
over, the potential commitments the euro-area 
countries have entered into as part of the res-
cue measures call the government guarantors’ Yield curve 
shifted down-wards
Yield spreads in 
the euro areaRatings of selectedEuropean countries
*
* Long-term foreign currency rating. A negative or positive out-
look is equivalent to one-third of a notch.
Deutsche Bundesbank2009 2010 2011 2012AAA
AAACaCaaB3B2B1Ba3Ba2Ba1Baa3Baa2Baa1A3A2A1Aa3Aa2Aa1Aaa
AA+
AA+AA
AAAA–
AA–A+
A+A
AA–
A–BBB+
BBB+BBB
BBBBBB–
BBB–BB+
BB+BB
BBBB–
BB–B+
B+B
BB–
B–CCC+
CCCCCC
NRCCBelgium
Greece
Ireland
Italy
France andAustria
Portugal
SpainMoody's
FitchStandard & Poor'sDeutsche Bundesbank 
Monthly Report 
February 2012 
37

credit quality into question. Thus, rating agen-
cies downgraded the credit quality of nine of 
the 17 euro-area member countries by at least 
one notch in the reporting period. Countries 
which had previously been Triple-A debtors, 
such as France and Austria, were also affected. 
With regard to Greece, market participants were unsettled by the fact that the country 
looked as if it would not meet primary object-
ives of the agreed consolidation programme. In 
addition, negotiations with private creditors 
about taking a voluntary haircut on their claims 
proved to be tough. The markets are burdened by the fact that, if the talks failed and without 
a new financial adjustment programme, the 
preconditions for a second rescue package that has become necessary in the meantime would not be fulfilled. Yields on Portuguese sovereign 
bonds, too, rose temporarily to more than 16%. What is more, doubts were growing 
among market participants as to whether Por -
tugal’s government debt, though considerably 
lower than that of Greece, is sustainable. This 
was probably partly because the country is in a 
recessionary phase and the structural reforms 
that have been initiated will only lead to growth stimuli with a time lag.
In contrast to Greece and Portugal, yields on ten-year sovereign bonds of the other euro-area peripheral countries fell from the end of 
November onwards. The summit results of Oc-
tober, December and January, which market participants interpreted as a first sign of sounder public finances, also contributed to this development. The consolidation plans of 
the new governments in Italy and Spain were 
likewise viewed positively. The Eurosystem’s 
monetary policy measures, which had a calm -
ing effect on financial market conditions, were 
probably another important reason for the de-
cline in yields.
The yields on bonds of BBB-rated European en-
terprises fell to 5.6% in the reporting period; 
this is about 80 basis points below the five-year Financing condi-
tions for enter-prises improvedYield curve on the Germanbond market
 *
* Interest rates for (hypothetical) zero-coupon bonds (Svens-
son method), based on listed Federal securities.
Deutsche Bundesbank0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 1000.51.01.52.0
Residual maturity in years%
16 February 201130 September 2011
Yield spreads in the euro area
Sources:  Thomson  Reuters  and  Bundesbank  calculations. 
1 Standard  deviation  of  yield  spreads  of  euro-area  govern-
ment bonds.
Deutsche Bundesbank2009 2010 2011 201203006009001,2001,5001,8002,1002,4002,7003,0003,300
03006009001,200Daily data
Spread of ten-year
government bondsagainst Bunds
Dispersion of yield spreads
 1
GDP weightedUnweightedBasis points
Basis pointsItaly
SpainGreece
IrelandPortugalDeutsche Bundesbank 
Monthly Report February 2012 38

average.1 The interest rate spread over Bunds 
narrowed to 395 basis points. The decline in 
bond yields was driven in particular by financial 
enterprises, for which financing conditions im-
proved noticeably amid signs of a certain de -
gree of relaxation on the market for govern -
ment debt securities. Bonds issued by real eco-
nomic enterprises also posted falling yields, however. The improved financing conditions 
for euro-area enterprises are in line with reced-ing risk aversion and appreciably reduced stock market uncertainty. This is reflected, moreover, 
in the European credit default swaps markets, 
where the premiums on CDS for enterprises of 
both the financial sector and the real economy 
contracted.
Gross issuance figures in the German bond 
market fell slightly in the final quarter of 2011. 
Overall, German borrowers issued paper worth €339½ billion, compared with €347½ billion in 
the previous three months. Taking account of 
redemptions and changes in issuers’ holdings 
of their own bonds, however, domestic issuers scaled back their capital market borrowing to a 
considerably greater extent, namely by €44½ 
billion. In the fourth quarter, domestic investors sold only a low volume of foreign debt instru-
ments. Thus, the total outstanding volume of bonds in Germany fell by €45½ billion in the 
quarter under review.
In the quarter under review, domestic enter -
prises redeemed €23 billion of their own bonds. Non-bank financial enterprises in particular cut 
back their capital market debt sharply (-€21½ 
billion). The redemptions possibly reflect the, at times, very low level of confidence that market 
participants placed in their financial counter -
parts in the reporting period. By contrast, non-
financial corporations have been much less dir -
ectly affected by the sovereign bond crisis; on 
balance, they left their capital market debt vir -
tually unchanged at -€1 billion. Furthermore, 
there are signs that issuing activity by domestic 
enterprises via foreign financing subsidiaries 
– which is not included in domestic sales statis-
tics – picked up noticeably of late.Given favourable tax revenues, public sector 
debt was reduced by €10½ billion in the fourth 
quarter of 2011 (including transactions by the 
resolution agencies). Above all, the Federal government redeemed Federal Treasury dis -
count paper (Bubills) totalling €15½ billion as 
well as 5-year Federal notes (Bobls) worth €5½ 
billion and two-year Federal Treasury notes 
(Schätze) worth €1 billion. By comparison, ten 
and 30-year bonds were issued totalling €11 billion and €2½ billion respectively. The ten-
year bond floated in November, which in a dif-ficult market environment had met with a com-paratively low level of bids in terms of the tar -
get issue volume, was topped up at an all-time low average return of just above 1.8% in Janu-ary 2012. For the first time, Federal money mar -
ket paper with a six-month maturity even 
posted a negative return in early January. The Decline in bond 
market issuance
Repayments  
by enterprises 
down markedlyRedemption of public sector debt securitiesInvestment activity in the German securities markets
€ billion
Item2010 2011
Q4 Q3 Q4
Debt securities
Residents 106.3 –  4.0 –  9.9
Credit institutions – 28.9 – 34.0 – 31.9
of which
Foreign debt securities – 21.4 – 18.3 – 22.7
Deutsche Bundesbank 2.3 21.6 13.8
Other sectors 132.8 8.4 8.2
of which
Domestic debt securities 3.4 9.2 –  0.4
Non-residents 8.9 18.9 – 35.6
Shares
Residents 25.9 –  8.1 15.4
Credit institutions 9.0 – 12.0 7.2
of which
Domestic shares 7.7 –  7.1 2.5
Non-banks 16.8 4.0 8.2
of which
Domestic shares 6.4 12.5 5.2
Non-residents –  2.6 –  5.0 –  5.5
Mutual fund sharesInvestment in specialised funds 23.4 5.6 22.6
Investment in funds open to the general public 2.7 0.2 –  2.7
of which
Share-based funds 4.0 0.7 0.8
Deutsche Bundesbank
1 Yields on BBB-rated corporate bonds in the iBoxx bond 
index are used as a basis. This index covers bonds issued by 
banks and non-banks.Deutsche Bundesbank 
Monthly Report 
February 2012 
39

Federal states tapped the bond market for €7 
billion net in the months October to December.
In the final quarter of 2011, domestic credit in-
stitutions reduced their capital market debt by 
€11 billion. Public Pfandbriefe in particular (€7 
billion) as well as other bank debt securities 
which can be structured flexibly (€5½ billion) 
were redeemed, whereas the outstanding vol-
ume of Mortgage Pfandbriefe and debt secur -
ities of specialised credit institutions including 
the public promotional banks rose slightly (€1½ 
billion and €½ billion respectively).In the fourth quarter of 2011, debt securities in 
Germany were purchased by the Bundesbank 
as part of the Eurosystem’s securities purchase programmes (€14 billion) as well as by domes-
tic non-banks, which added shares worth €8 
billion net to their portfolio.2 In both cases, al-
most only foreign paper was bought. By con -
trast, foreign investors and domestic credit in -
stitutions sold debt securities totalling €35½ 
billion and €32 billion respectively. Sales by 
credit institutions focussed on foreign bonds 
including paper issued by borrowers in euro-
area countries whose public finances are under strain. The sales figures are ultimately a reflec-tion of the greater credit risk which market par -
ticipants are now taking into account and in 
light of which they are reassessing their invest-ments.
In the fourth quarter of 2011, the international 
equity markets were also affected by the euro-
area debt crisis, economic-policy measures 
taken to contain the crisis and, of late, by im-
proving global economic perspectives. Up to 
the end of November, investors alternated be-
tween confidence rekindled by, inter alia,  the 
EU summit resolutions at the end of October 
and prospects of a strengthened capital base at 
financial institutions, and concerns about an escalation of the debt crisis in the euro-area peripheral countries. In this context, market participants focussed on Italy in particular. 
Equities were initially not able to post sustained price gains in this setting.
The consolidation and reform programmes in 
Italy and Spain, which met with a positive re -
sponse from market participants, the successful sovereign bond issues in a number of euro-area 
countries and the above-mentioned measures 
taken by the central banks increasingly boosted 
stock market investors’ confidence, however.3 Net redemption 
of bank debt  securitiesPurchase of debt 
securities
International 
 equity markets 
between debt crisis and im-proving eco-nomic activityEquity market
Sources:  Thomson  Reuters  and  Bundesbank  calculations. 
1 End-of-month  levels;  calculated  from  three-stage  dividend 
discount model using three to five-year IBES expectations of 
profit  growth.  2 Expected  future  volatility,  calculated  from 
prices of options on the Euro Stoxx.
Deutsche BundesbankEuro Stoxx
banks
Lin scale
Cost of equity 1
Euro StoxxEuro Stoxx
Euro Stoxx
banks%31 December 2006 = 100, log scale
Stock price indicesWeekly averages
% Implied volatility of the Euro Stoxx 220305075100150
510152025
10203040506070
2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012
2 However, this figure is calculated residually, as no report-
ing obligation exists specifically for non-banks; it is there -
fore subject to considerable uncertainty.
3 Thus, the implied volatility of stock options, a measure 
for market players’ uncertainty, declined perceptibly and 
was below the five-year average of late.Deutsche Bundesbank 
Monthly Report February 2012 40

Furthermore, brighter economic signals such as 
favourable US labour market data and positive 
economic indicators for Germany contributed towards the rise in stock prices. The rather mixed quarterly results for US and European 
enterprises and the downward revision of earn-ings expectations – which were especially pro-
nounced for European banks – are likely to have dampened stock market developments 
per se. Ultimately, however, these negative fac-
tors did not have a discernibly adverse impact 
on equity prices.
On balance, price gains on German and Euro-
pean equities, measured against the broad-
based CDAX and Euro Stoxx indices, amounted to 22% and 14% respectively from the end of September; US stocks (S&P 500) posted an in-crease of 20%. Price gains on Japanese stocks 
(Nikkei) were, at 6%, considerably lower, with 
the strong yen in particular burdening Japanese enterprises. Compared with the European mar -
ket as a whole, European bank stocks recorded 
a smaller increase in prices of 8%, whereby bank stocks from euro-area peripheral coun -
tries – with the exception of Ireland – slowed 
the development of European bank stock 
prices.
The capital costs of European listed enterprises 
(Euro Stoxx), which are composed of the safe 
real interest rate and the equity risk premium 
and can be calculated using a dividend dis -
count model, dropped appreciably in the re -
porting period. Latterly they amounted to 8½%, 
which was only slightly above the five-year 
average (8%). The decline is attributable exclu-sively to investors demanding a lower risk com-pensation for an investment in shares.
On balance, funding on the German stock mar -
ket totalled €2 billion in the reporting quarter. 
In addition, the outstanding volume of foreign 
shares in Germany rose by €7½ billion. Shares were acquired exclusively by domestic investors on balance. Domestic non-banks added shares worth €8 billion to their portfolios; meanwhile, 
domestic credit institutions increased their ex -Cost of capital 
down  appreciably
Low level of 
stock market fundingMajor items of the balance of payments
€ billion
Item2010 2011
Q4 Q3 Q4
I Current account 1, 2 +  47.9 +  29.8 + 43.9
Foreign trade 1, 3 +  41.0 +  39.2 + 40.2
Services 1 +   2.3 –   6.4 +  1.2
Income 1 +  14.2 +  13.5 + 13.4
Current transfers 1 –   6.5 –  10.3 –  5.6
II Capital transfers 1, 4 –   0.5 +   0.1 –  0.1
III Financial account 1
(Net capital exports: –) –  50.0 –  18.9 – 36.4
1 Direct investment –   1.0 +   2.0 +  5.1
German investment 
abroad –  11.3 –   5.6 –  5.9
Foreign investment
in Germany +  10.3 +   7.6 + 10.9
2 Portfolio investment – 107.7 +  30.6 – 43.2
German investment abroad – 115.7 +  12.3 –  3.0
Shares –   2.3 +  11.5 –  5.7
Mutual fund shares –   3.2 +   3.4 +  1.7
Debt securities – 110.3 –   2.6 +  1.0
Bonds and notes
5 – 115.9 +   1.8 –  9.3
of which
Euro-denominated 
bonds and notes –  60.7 +   3.1 – 11.5
Money market  instruments +   5.6 –   4.4 + 10.3
Foreign investmentin Germany +   8.0 +  18.3 – 40.2
Shares –   2.1 –   4.5 –  5.4
Mutual fund shares +   1.2 +   3.9 +  0.9
Debt securities +   8.9 +  18.9 – 35.6
Bonds and notes
5 –   7.3 +   5.3 – 21.9
of which
Public bonds and 
notes +   8.4 +   9.6 +  5.2
Money market  instruments +  16.3 +  13.6 – 13.8
3 Financial derivatives
6 +   0.3 –   7.2 –  5.4
4 Other investment 7 +  58.9 –  43.6 +  7.4
Monetary fi  nancial
institutions 8 +  47.0 +  56.2 – 50.8
of which short-term +  21.1 +  66.6 – 34.0
Enterprises and
households –   9.6 –   7.6 + 41.1
of which short-term +   0.3 –   6.8 + 23.6
General government +  33.8 +  17.9 –  1.6
of which short-term +  74.9 +  15.4 –  2.8
Bundesbank –  12.3 – 110.0 + 18.7
5 Change in reserve assets 
at transaction values ( increase: –)
9 –   0.5 –   0.6 –  0.4
IV Errors and omissions +   2.6 –  11.1 –  7.3
1  Balance. 2  Including supplementary trade items. 3  Special 
trade according to the offi   cial foreign trade statistics (source: Federal Statistical Offi   ce). 4 Including the acquisition/disposal of 
non-produced non-fi  nancial assets. 5 Original maturity of more 
than one year. 6 Securitised and non-securitised options as well 
as fi  nancial futures contracts. 7  Includes fi  nancial and trade 
credits, bank deposits and other assets. 8 Excluding the Bundes-
bank. 9 Excluding allocation of SDRs and excluding changes due 
to value adjustments.
Deutsche BundesbankDeutsche Bundesbank 
Monthly Report 
February 2012 
41

posure to equities by €7 billion. Whereas non-
banks tended to buy more domestic shares, 
foreign paper was the main focus of interest 
for credit institutions. Non-resident investors 
sold German equities to the value of €5½ bil -
lion.
During the reporting period, domestic invest -
ment companies recorded inflows of €20 bil -
lion, after raising €6 billion in the previous 
quarter. On balance, the fresh funds flowed 
solely into specialised funds reserved for institu-
tional investors (€22½ billion). Of the funds open to the general public, only share-based 
funds and open-end real estate funds attracted inflows (€1 billion and €½ billion respectively), 
whereas mainly bond funds and mixed securi -
ties-based funds recorded outflows (€2 billion 
and €1½ billion respectively). The outstanding 
volume of foreign mutual fund units in Ger -
many fell by €1½ billion.
As usual, mutual fund shares were bought mainly by domestic non-banks, which added 
€21½ billion worth of fund shares to their port-
folios. This involved only shares in domestic 
mutual funds. Non-resident investors acquired 
mutual fund shares worth €1 billion, while do-
mestic credit institutions disposed of fund 
shares to the value of €4 billion.
Direct investment
In contrast to cross-border portfolio invest -
ment, which posted net capital exports (€43 
billion) in the fourth quarter, direct investment resulted in net capital imports (€5 billion). With 
that, the trend of moderate direct investment 
inflows seen in the previous two quarters was 
continued.
Again, this mainly resulted from direct invest -
ment by foreign enterprises in Germany (€11 billion, after €7½ billion in the third quarter). 
Non-resident group parent companies granted 
their domestic affiliates direct investment loans 
in particular (€8½ billion). Transfers of funds in 
the form of reinvested earnings and equity cap-
ital together came to €2½ billion. Germany 
proved to be an attractive destination for direct 
investment primarily for enterprises from other 
European countries (€7 billion), notably Bel -
gium and Denmark. A significant part of the 
funds was channelled into manufacturing, not-
ably the chemical industry.
Domestic enterprises also provided their for -
eign affiliates with capital (€6 billion, after €5½ billion in the previous quarter). In this context, 
an important role was played by reinvested 
earnings (€7½ billion), although this amount is currently still largely based on estimates. Emer -
ging market and developing countries were a 
geographical focus of German direct invest -
ment abroad (€3½ billion), above all in Asia. Among the industrial countries, the emphasis was on European locations (€3½ billion), al -
though the picture here was very mixed. 
Whereas affiliates in Luxembourg (€4½ billion) and Sweden (€3½ billion) recorded high capital inflows from Germany, there was a large-scale 
withdrawal of liquidity (€13 billion) from the 
Netherlands, mainly through reverse loans.Strong sales  
of mutual fund 
shares
Inflows in direct 
investmentDeutsche Bundesbank 
Monthly Report February 2012 42

Macroeconomic situation
The upturn in the German economy started to 
falter in the fourth quarter of 2011. According to the Federal Statistical Office’s flash estimate, 
real gross domestic product (GDP) in the final 
three months of the year was 0.2% down on 
the quarter after seasonal and calendar adjust-
ment. The economic dip, which had been 
emerging for some months, was triggered by 
the slowdown in global economic growth 
combined with perceptible strains on the real 
economy due to the sovereign debt crisis in the 
euro area and the uncertainty which this is 
causing. The decline over the period under re-view is nevertheless placed into context by the 
fact that output in some branches of industry 
achieved a notably high level during the sum -
mer months owing to special measures such as shorter or no plant shutdowns. Overall capacity utilisation was at a normal level during the re-porting period and calendar-adjusted GDP was 2.0% up on the year.
Many enterprises have registered this fall in de-
mand, especially for exports, and have clearly 
made adjustments to their short-term plans. 
For instance, purchases of intermediate goods 
have been scaled back and non-urgent invest-
ments have been deferred in some cases. By 
contrast, enterprises are unlikely to have scruti-
nised their medium to long-term strategic deci-sions so far, as the disruptive factors are widely 
regarded as temporary. Personnel planning continued to be shaped by the fact that the search for skilled staff might, if anything, be -
come more difficult. The confidence of house-holds, which was largely unaffected by the un-
certainties of the financial markets, was sup -
ported by the positive underlying trend in the 
labour market along with the ample increase in 
wages. Not only do income expectations clearly 
contrast with the rather mixed outlook for the 
economy, there is also – irrespective of the greater scope for spending – a marked desire 
to buy, which is tending to buoy consumption.
According to the statements of the Federal 
Statistical Office, private consumption in the 
fourth quarter of 2011 is unlikely to have main-
tained its heightened level of the third quarter 
in seasonally adjusted terms. Despite this, re -
tailers felt an increased eagerness to spend on 
the part of households in Christmas trading. 
According to the Ifo business survey, they rated 
their business situation in December as much 
better than in the preceding months and also 
the following January. This conflicts with the 
official report of nominal retail sales in Decem-
ber: according to current data, this shows a 
seasonally adjusted fall of ½% compared with 
November.1 The quarterly result is thus no more 
than ¼% higher than retail takings between 
July and September.
The positive sentiment among households is 
also a key provider of stimulus for housing con-struction. Wage growth and the perceived low 
risk of redundancy, together with financing 
conditions that continue to be very favourable, 
have led to more and more households being 
confident enough to buy their own home. The improved income prospects are also giving im-petus to the buy-to-let market, from which in-
vestors are evidently primarily expecting the 
stability of real property ownership at present. 
Given sharply rising house prices, there is a 
need for a substantial expansion of the housing 
stock in order to satisfy the major private and 
commercial demand for residential property. Upturn started 
to falter in 2011 Q4
No change  
in underlying 
 cyclical trendMarked propen-
sity to consume on the part of households
Strong  
impulses from 
housing  construction …Economic conditions in Germany
1 The current index level for December 2011 in the raw 
data is 1% higher than the figure first published, which – in 
contrast to the revised data – received a great deal of pub-
lic attention. Near-time economic analysis, especially with 
regard to the assessment of private consumption, is made more difficult by the fact that, since the introduction of the 
new automatic sample rotation in July 2010, retail sales 
have been revised upwards by an average of ¾% following 
the initial publication – a revision pattern that cannot be classified as purely coincidental even taking into account 
the short observation period.Deutsche Bundesbank 
Monthly Report 
February 2012 
43

Construction firms probably maintained their 
housing construction activities during the re -
porting period at least at the same high level in 
seasonally adjusted terms as in the first nine 
months of last year, especially as there were no 
significant weather-related disruptions up to 
December.
While public sector construction is likely to have suffered a further downturn, heavy use 
has been made recently of construction sector capacity for commercial buildings, too. In 2011, 
many enterprises gave priority to the renova -
tion and expansion of business premises over investment in movable fixed assets, the pro -
curement of which had been given preferential tax treatment in 2010 owing to more generous tax depreciation rules. Added to this is the fact 
that loan financing – which is often used in construction projects on account of the large 
amounts of investment involved – is decidedly 
favourable for enterprises, too, at the moment. 
There may possibly exist some fears that the banks could considerably tighten their credit standards in the near future. Despite certain 
adjustments of the standards, there is no cause 
for heightened concern in this regard, how -
ever.
The cyclical upturn in investment in machinery 
and equipment is likely to have been inter -
rupted towards the end of 2011. One reason 
was that industrial enterprises wanted to wait 
until they had a clearer idea about the pros -
pects for business before enlarging their ma -
chine park. In this connection, it was an advan-
tage that, given the slowdown in demand, ca-
pacity utilisation was cut back in the fourth 
quarter from its very high level during the sum-
mer months, which meant that there was less 
pressure to set up new production facilities. In addition, investment in vehicle fleets had been increasing so strongly well into the third quar -
ter of last year that a lull in the final quarter of 2011 would not be unusual.
The slowdown in global economic activity 
clearly left its mark on German enterprises’ ex-port performance in the fourth quarter of 2011. 
During the reporting period, there was a sea -
sonally adjusted fall in exports of goods for the first time since the recovery began in mid-2009. 
Dampening effects came, in particular, from the euro area. The value of goods exports to euro-area partner countries on an average of 
October and November – more recent data for the regional and goods structure are unavaila-
ble at present – was a seasonally adjusted 2¾% down on the average of the preceding quarter. Besides this, sales to neighbouring 
central and east European countries, including 
Russia, were also tending to be weak, however. By contrast, exports to China returned to their 
upward trend following an interruption in 
growth in the second and third quarters of the 
year. Moreover, German exporters’ business with the United States noticeably picked up momentum. Weaker export demand con -
cerned mainly intermediate goods during the reporting period. There were also fewer ex -
ports of machine, motor vehicle and ICT goods, … and from 
commercial  constructionInterruption  
of pick-up in 
 investment in 
machinery and 
equipment
No further rise 
in exports  recentlyOverall output
Deutsche Bundesbank2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011102104106108110112
–8–6–4–20+2+4+62005 = 100, price and seasonally adjusted
Log scale
GDP
%
Lin scale
Year-on-year changeDeutsche Bundesbank 
Monthly Report February 2012 44

however. This contrasted with a moderate 
growth in exports of consumer goods.
Imports lost momentum entirely in the fourth 
quarter of 2011 in response to the slowdown in 
output and demand. Seasonally adjusted im -
ports of goods showed a perceptible fall on the 
quarter in real terms. Demand for intermediate goods and energy showed the largest decline. Imports of consumer goods also slowed some-
what following a comparatively sharp rise in 
the preceding quarter. By contrast, imports of 
capital goods showed a further increase. Im -
ports from the euro area as well as many Asian 
countries, including China, were trending downwards recently. On the other hand, US manufacturers were selling distinctly more 
goods in Germany again following the decline in the third quarter.
Sectoral trends
As expected, the fourth quarter saw a lull in the industrial upswing. Industrial output in the final 
three months of 2011 was a seasonally ad -
justed 2¼% down on its high level of the third 
quarter. This reflects the fact that the flow of orders was waning from mid-2011 onwards. 
The quite sharp decline in the reporting period 
was also due in part to a technical counter -
movement in response to output which had 
been stepped up sharply in some segments of 
industry during the holiday months as a result 
of special measures. Given declining demand, 
the holiday quotas “saved” in the summer were increasingly being used up towards the end of 
the year. This is suggested by the fact that, in 
December, the number of hours worked per 
person employed in industry was a seasonally 
adjusted 2% down on the monthly average for 
2011, while there was a noticeable peak in working hours in July. This “holiday effect” is 
also likely to be one reason why there was such 
an obvious fall in industrial output in Decem -
ber.Production of intermediate and capital goods 
fell by 2½% in seasonally adjusted terms in the reporting quarter. The increase in the output of 
capital goods was significantly larger than this 
in the preceding quarter, however, so that out-put between October and December – in con-
trast to the intermediate goods sector – was 
still up on the level of the second quarter. This is consistent with the overall economic picture 
of a temporary lull in growth insofar as revi -
sions to investment plans have tended to be 
minor, whereas purchases of inputs have been 
cut back perceptibly in order to save storage 
costs. Consumer goods output fell by a season-Subdued import 
activity
High level of 
 industrial output 
in the third quarter not matched  overall, …
… but capital 
goods output  
up on Q290100110120Underlying trends in foreign trade
1 Adjusted for the price indices for foreign trade.
Deutsche Bundesbank2007 2008 2009 2010 2011Oct-
Nov95100110120130140
Oct-
Nov
100110120130Seasonally adjusted, quarterly
To non-euro-area countries
To euro-area countries2005 = 100, log scale
Exports of goods
price-adjusted 1
Total
0204060Lin scaleForeign trade balanceImports of goodsprice-adjusted
 1100110120130140
€ bnDeutsche Bundesbank 
Monthly Report 
February 2012 
45

ally adjusted 1¼% in the reporting period, as in 
the preceding quarter.
According to Ifo Institute data, manufacturing 
firms rated their capacity utilisation at the turn 
of 2011-12 somewhat lower again than in the 
preceding October. With utilisation at 84½% of 
normal full capacity, the January figure for in -
dustry was nevertheless still somewhat above the multi-year average. In the intermediate 
goods industry, capacity utilisation at the cur -
rent end is estimated to be 83¼%, while the figure for the capital goods sector is 87½%. 
This gap is due to the generally higher utilisa -
tion in the case of capital goods. There is no identifiable difference in the degree of utilisa -
tion relative to the respective sectoral average.
Seasonally adjusted construction output was only ¼% up on the quarter in the autumn 
months. Building construction went up ¾% in 
the reporting period following an increase of ¼% in the preceding three-month period. By 
contrast, there was a noticeable decline in civil 
engineering with a further fall of -¾%. Building 
construction’s growth lead over civil engineer -
ing reflects the fact that the situation in hous-
ing and commercial construction is significantly 
better than in public sector construction at 
present. For the construction sector as a whole – leaving aside seasonal fluctuations due to the weather – an unchanged high degree of utilisa-
tion continues to be reported. Energy produc-
tion in autumn was a seasonally adjusted ½% 
up on the quarter. There was a considerable 
year-on-year shortfall owing to the decommis-sioning of nuclear power plants: the minus fig-
ure widened again perceptibly to -10% after 
-8¼% in the second and third quarters of 2011.
While many services industries are unlikely to 
have felt the direct effects of the slowdown in industrial activity, the wholesale sector was un-
able to avoid this. The activities of transport 
and logistics enterprises were probably also im-
paired. For example, the mileage of domestic heavy goods vehicles on roads subject to toll 
charges declined by 1% in seasonally adjusted 
terms in the fourth quarter compared with the summer months. The statistics show a real de-cline in sales among retailers, too, at the end of the period under review. Motor vehicle traders 
experienced a slight increase in activity, how -
ever. Many craft trades were still benefiting 
from the positive construction activity and con-
sumers’ propensity to purchase.
Employment and labour 
 market
Notwithstanding the cyclical slowdown, the la-
bour market in Germany remains on an expan-Further decline 
in capacity  utilisation at the 
start of the yearConstruction 
and energy out -
put somewhat higher
Many services 
industries less affected by the slowdown in  demandOutput in industry and
in construction
Deutsche Bundesbank2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011Log scale
Industry
92100108116124
Lin scale
Year-on-year change–25–20–15–10–50+5+10+15
Lin scale
Year-on-year
change
94100108116124 Log scale
Construction
%
–15–10–50+5+10+15+20+25+30+35%2005 = 100, seasonally adjusted, quarterlyDeutsche Bundesbank 
Monthly Report February 2012 46

sionary course. There was a marked rise in em-
ployment in the final quarter of 2011. Accord-
ing to the estimates of the Federal Statistical 
Office, the quarter-on-quarter increase, at a 
seasonally adjusted 129,000 persons in work in 
Germany (+0.3%), was roughly as high as in 
summer. The development in employment sub-
ject to social security contributions was again 
somewhat better than in employment overall. 
By contrast, there was a further decline in the 
number of government-assisted work opportu-nities (one-euro workfare jobs) as well as those 
solely in marginal employment. In seasonally adjusted terms, there was an increase in self-
employment.
In the first two months of the last quarter, em-
ployment subject to social security contribu -
tions increased by 135,000, or 0.5%, in season-
ally adjusted terms compared with the average 
of the third quarter. The largest gains were in 
business-related services (excluding temporary 
employment) as well as in the health and edu-
cation services. There was also substantial growth in the number of jobs in trade, the 
transport and logistics sector, the information 
and communications technology industry as well as in hotels and restaurants. It is striking that – unlike the situation just a few years ago  – greater use was not made of atypical employment relationships in these sectors. 
Even so, these newly created jobs are likely to have involved part-time employment subject to social security contributions to a certain extent. 
The rise in manufacturing employment was slightly below-average. Among the sectors 
showing no job growth recently were the pub-
lic authorities along with temporary employ -
ment, construction and education.
The growth in employment was accompanied 
by increased immigration of persons from the 
eight central and east European member states 
(EU 8) for whom complete freedom of move -
ment has applied since May 2011. At 
56,000 persons net between May and August 
2011 alone – more recent Federal Statistical  Office data are unavailable at present – more than twice as many immigrants came from 
these countries to Germany than in the com -
parable period of 2010.2 According to the Fed-
eral Employment Agency, employment subject 
to social security contributions of persons from 
the EU 8 countries increased by 47,000 in the 
four months up to August 2011, while there 
was merely a rise of 7,000 in the same period one year earlier. Part of the growth in employ-ment was accounted for by persons who were 
already living in Germany before May 2011, 
however. For the following three months up to 
November 2011, the Federal Employment Agency is assuming a further increase of around 15,000 in the number of employees 
subject to social security contributions from the “accession eight” countries.
The net migration gains are not due solely to the effects of granting complete freedom of movement to workers who are nationals of 
these countries. According to an initial estimate by the Federal Statistical Office, Germany’s mi-
gration balance in 2011, at +240,000, was 
higher than at any time since 2001. The main 
reason for increased immigration is likely to be 
the favourable economic and labour market 
situation in Germany in relation to other Euro-pean countries. Despite restrictions on freedom 
of movement that are still in force, more per -
sons from Romania and Bulgaria came to Ger -
many in the first eight months of 2011 than in 
the year before. Roughly one-tenth of net im-
migration came from Greece, Italy, Spain and Portugal. One year earlier, the migration bal -
ances with these countries were more or less 
level.
Recruiting employees abroad appears still to be 
a secondary option for most enterprises. Ac -
cording to the 2011 Labour Market Report of 
the Association of German Chambers of Indus-
try and Commerce (DIHK), in terms of prevent-Continued 
growth in  employment …
… mainly owing 
to additional jobs subject to 
social security 
contributions
Rising immigra-
tion and  employment 
numbers of  persons from 
EU 8 countriesMigration  balance clearly 
positive
Reports  
of shortages  
in qualified staff
2 The provisional data of the Central Register of Foreigners 
show a net inflow of only 34,000 persons from the EU 8 
countries for the eight months from May to December 
2011 and thus probably understate immigration from this 
region.Deutsche Bundesbank 
Monthly Report 
February 2012 
47

ing the emergence of shortages in qualified 
staff, preference is given to measures such as 
the targeted personnel development of young 
employees, increasing opportunities for voca -
tional education and training, and the expan -
sion of employment of older members of the 
workforce. Although, according to this survey, 
one enterprise in three reports difficulties in fill-
ing vacancies, this cannot be equated with a 
broadly based lack of specialised labour. Nor 
does it pose acute economic risks. According 
to the Ifo business survey, around one in ten manufacturing firms at present feels handi -
capped by shortages in the supply of labour. 
Irrespective of the current situation, the demo-graphic outlook means that enterprises and the 
social partners are faced with the task of de -
veloping and implementing strategies in good 
time to prevent a future shortage of qualified 
staff.
There was a further reduction in unemploy -
ment in the fourth quarter. At a seasonally ad-justed 2.91 million, there were around 39,000 
fewer persons registered as unemployed than 
in the third quarter. The unemployment rate fell by 0.1 percentage point to 6.9%. As in previous 
quarters, there was a relatively steady decline 
in unemployment among those receiving basic 
welfare benefits (SGB II). Furthermore, there was a discernible reduction (15,000) again in 
unemployment among persons claiming insur -
ance benefits (SGB III) after the decline had al-
most come to a standstill in the third quarter. 
Owing to the continued scaling-back of work 
opportunities in the additional cost variant (one-euro workfare jobs) and other active la -
bour market policy measures, overall under -
employment fell considerably more sharply on 
the year (-499,000) than registered unemploy-
ment (-216,000). In January 2012, there was a 
further marked fall in the official unemploy -
ment figure of 34,000. The unemployment rate 
fell to 6.7%.
The available leading indicators show that a 
continuing positive development may be ex -
pected on the labour market. As before, the Decline in offi-
cial unemploy-ment among both those  receiving basic 
welfare allow-ance and per-sons claiming insurance  benefits
Continued 
 positive outlook 
for the labour  marketLabour market
1 From May 2009, unemployed excluding persons newly regis-
tered on the books of private employment agencies.
Deutsche Bundesbank2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012Jan39.039.540.040.541.041.5
26.026.527.027.528.028.529.0–5000+500+1,000
2.53.03.54.04.55.0
–1,000–5000+500JanSeasonally adjusted, quarterly
JanMillion
Oct-
NovMillion
Million200300400500Thou-
sand
Thou-
sand
Thou-
sand Year-on-year changeOfficially unemployed 1UnemployedTotalEmployed
Unsubsidised vacancies
(scale enlarged)Occupied positionsJobs subject to social security
contributionsYear-on-year changeDeutsche Bundesbank 
Monthly Report February 2012 48

majority of enterprises are planning to increase 
staffing levels. The Ifo employment barometer, which measures the planned staffing levels for trade and industry over the next three months, shows a stable level for January compared with the average of the fourth quarter of 2011 after 
the index had been declining from its record 
high in the first quarter of last year. The fourth quarter saw a further sharp seasonally adjusted increase in the number of unassisted vacancies 
reported to the Federal Employment Agency. 
The BA-X job index, which is calculated on the 
basis of the level and intake of vacancies, showed a marked rise. Unlike in the last two 
quarters, both inflows and outflows of vacan -
cies increased again somewhat, which sug -
gests that the dynamics of the labour market are accelerating again. However, there was 
also a further considerable increase in the aver -
age time reported jobs remained vacant.
Wages and prices
The positive economic situation was clearly re-flected in employees’ earnings. Last year, gross wages and salaries per employee, at 3.4%, rose more sharply than at any time since 1993. One 
reason for this was higher collective wage 
agreements with higher scheduled increases in rates of pay. Another was that employers made 
− in some cases considerable − bonus and extraordinary payments on a voluntary basis. 
This was true, above all, of large industrial en-
terprises, which allowed their workforces to 
share in the success of their business. The nor -
malisation of regular working hours and the in-
crease in paid overtime also had the effect of 
boosting wages. For the current year, a shift towards higher negotiated wage increases 
along with a reduced wage drift appears likely. This is not due solely to the fact that pay agree-ments which have already been concluded are 
increasingly taking effect. An additional factor 
is that increases in remuneration are likely to be 
a key focus of the negotiations in this year’s 
pay round, which covers a number of key in -
dustries. In this context, it will be necessary to make an accurate assessment of the existing 
economic risks.
The moderate trend acceleration in negotiated 
basic rates of pay continued in the fourth quar -
ter. According to the Bundesbank’s statistics, 
they rose by 2.1% on the year in the final quar -
ter of 2011, compared with 2.0% in the third 
quarter.3 Including all one-off payments and 
ancillary agreements, the rise in negotiated earnings in 2011, at 1.7% on an annual aver -
age, was only marginally higher than in 2010 
(1.6%). One factor in this was that hardly any 
payment settlements were agreed in major sec-tors of the economy after mid-2011.
The rate of price increase was tending to accel-
erate in the final quarter of 2011. Opposing 
forces were in play on the external side. On the 
one hand, commodity prices were being de -
pressed by the global economic slowdown. Im-
porters of intermediate goods benefited most 
from this. At the same time, the euro depreci-
ated noticeably. This led to a clear rise again in 
the prices of energy imports. There was a sharp 
rise in the prices of consumer goods, too. Up-ward price pressure on imports of capital goods Sharp rise in 
 actual earnings 
in 2011, …… but growth  
in negotiated rates of pay still moderate
Increase in 
 import pricesNegotiated rates of pay
1 Excluding additional benefits and lump-sum payments.
Deutsche Bundesbank2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 201100.51.01.52.02.53.03.5Year-on-year percentage change, on monthly basis
Negotiated rates of pay,
total
Basic pay 1
3 The Federal Statistical Office, whose index excludes civil 
servants, reports an increase of 2.1% for the negotiated 
rates of basic pay in the fourth quarter, compared with 
1.8% in the third quarter.Deutsche Bundesbank 
Monthly Report 
February 2012 
49

House prices in 2011 in Germany
House prices in Germany rose sharply in 2011. 
The rate of price increase – calculated on the 
basis of data provided by BulwienGesa AG for 
125 towns and cities – was 5½%, a fi  gure con-
siderably higher than in 2010, which already re-
corded a perceptible increase of 2½%. For the fi  rst time since the reunifi  cation boom in the 
early 1990s, a cyclical upturn was accompanied 
in Germany by a marked price reaction on the housing markets. In comparison with the situ-
ation in other European countries, the German 
property market still occupies a special position, 
albeit with largely reversed price trends com-pared with the time prior to the  fi  nancial and 
economic crisis.
With regard to Germany as a whole, the upward 
trend in property prices is likely to be somewhat 
overstated owing to the provisional nature of 
the data provided. This is due to the fact that the 
momentum is focused on urban regions, ie those areas where the price information of 
 BulwienGesa AG over the reporting year is con-
centrated at present.1 This, however, does not 
qualify the underlying trend of a marked acceler-
ation in prices, especially as this is essentially 
confi  rmed by the other available indicators. Ac-
cording to the price index of the Association of 
German Pfandbrief Banks (Verband deutscher 
Pfandbriefbanken, vdp)  for owner-occupied 
housing, house prices rose by 2½% in 2011, 
compared with just ½% in the year before. Hy-
poport AG’s composite index shows that prices 
of new and existing owner-occupied apartments 
as well as single-family and two-family houses 
went up by 3½% in the reporting period, having increased by 2% in 2010. Looking at the annual 
average, the obvious upward trend, which has been a feature of the intra-year movement of 
these indicators since at least mid-2010, is re-
fl  ected only to a limited extent. The differences 
in the individual results are, however, also due, 
in part, to statistical inaccuracies stemming 
mainly from the variations in recording by region 
and type of dwelling as well as to differences in 
the way in which the data are compiled.2Rising house prices are to be seen in connection 
with the strong economic upturn, which was ac-
companied by a further improvement in the la-
bour market situation and brought perceptible 
income gains to households. However, an even 
more signifi  cant factor in long-term decisions, such as whether to buy a property, is likely to 
have been that households’ confi  dence with re-
gard to employment and income prospects has 
not been affected by the current economic slow-
down. Furthermore, households were still able to take up mortgage loans at extremely low 
rates of interest in 2011. In the fourth quarter of 
2011, banks were charging an average of 3.6% 
on loans for real estate purchases with matur-
ities of between fi  ve and ten years, which again 
matched the all-time low of the previous year 
following the somewhat less favourable interest 
rate conditions in the interim. Nevertheless, the 
development in prices meant that residential property did become slightly less affordable. 
Even so, surveys show that there was hardly any tightening of lending conditions during the year.
The pick-up in demand on the housing markets 
quickly led to perceptible price and quantity re-
actions as there has been a decline in the overall 
availability of housing over the past decade 
owing to very weak housing construction activ-
ity.3 The marked trend reversal in new construc-
1 Initial calculations on the basis of a signifi  cantly 
broadened regional dataset provided by BulwienGesa 
AG, which, however, only goes as far as 2010 at 
present, show weaker price developments – measured 
against the benchmark – than in the comparable 
period of the previous year. The main reason for this is 
that house prices in rural areas have not increased as 
strongly as in urban areas. The broadly based house 
price index of the Federal Statistical Offi   ce, which does 
not provide data beyond the reporting year 2010 at 
present either, also indicates more moderate dynamics 
for Germany as a whole. See J Dechent, Preisindizes 
für Wohnimmobilien, Wirtschaft und Statistik, Novem-
ber 2011, pp 1126-1134.
2 See also, for example, the information on property 
prices contained in the Bundesbank’s Monthly Reports 
of February 2009 (pp 52-53) and February 2010 
(pp 58-59).
3 See also Deutsche Bundesbank, Extended invest-
ment cycle with stable prices: supply and demand in 
the German housing market from a longer-term per-
spective, Monthly Report, June 2010, pp 47-58.Deutsche Bundesbank 
Monthly Report February 2012 50

tion activity since 2010 is not just further evi-
dence of the fact that demand has increased 
signifi  cantly in the intervening period; it also 
suggests that price pressure would have been 
even greater if supply had been less elastic. Ac-cording to the provisional fi  gures of the Federal 
Statistical Offi   ce, real housing investment went up by just under 6% in 2011. Building permits 
– measured in terms of the estimated costs for 
newly constructed housing – rose approximately by more than one-fi  fth on the volume of 2010.
The upward trend in prices now appears to have 
reached the German housing market on a broad 
front. The highest growth rates in 2011 – as in 
the previous year – were seen in larger towns 
and cities and their surrounding areas.4 This re-
fl  ects the attractiveness of urban agglomer-
ations, which are generally the fi  rst to benefi  t 
from an economic recovery. With regard to the 
price dynamics, the geographical location no longer plays a signifi  cant role, whereas differ-
ences in levels remain considerable. With regard 
to house price infl  ation differentials, conver-gence movements cannot ruled out, especially 
between the large towns and cities. On these 
comparatively transparent markets, compensat-
ing forces may have tended to become a more 
signifi  cant factor owing to the heightened pres-
ence of investors. The fact that capital invest-
ment decisions are again having a greater im-
pact in shaping the housing market in Germany 
is also apparent in the thriving demand for 
apartments in multiple-family dwellings. Despite 
extensive housing construction activity, demand 
has been outstripping supply considerably for some time now. This market situation led to a 
7% rise in the price of new apartments in 2011, 
after marked price infl  ation at 4% in 2010. The 
increase in resale prices was only marginally 
lower.
The brighter outlook for the German economy in 
terms of structural growth tends to justify the 
fact that optimism has increasingly returned to 
the German housing market, too. Nevertheless, 
it should be borne in mind that, from a longer-
term perspective, demand for housing will es-sentially be determined by the relatively un-
favourable demographic benchmark fi  gures, 
which themselves can be infl  uenced only to a limited extent by the emerging increase in mi-
gration. This also places a limit on the potential 
of macroeconomic growth. There is thus no guarantee that the prospective available scope 
for expenditure for housing purposes can be 
broadened to the extent that rising purchase 
prices can always be covered by rental income. 
The potential for a setback in prices is still man-
ageable, however. This risk should be faced, 
however, especially in the case of investment in residential property with the aim of safeguarding 
real value.
4 In larger towns and cities (around 500,000 inhabit-
ants or more), prices for semi-detached houses and 
owner-occupied apartments rose by 7% in 2011, com-
pared with 3¼% in 2010.Selected house price indices
1 Bundesbank calculations for semi-detached houses and own-
er-occupied  apartments  based  on  data  provided  by  Bul-
wienGesa AG.
Deutsche Bundesbank2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 20112010 = 100, log scale
949698100102104106
9698100102104
9698100102104106
949698100102Federal Statistical Office (Destatis)
house price indexHypoport AG composite indexAssociation of German Pfandbrief banks
Owner-occupied residential propertyDeutsche Bundesbank indicator
of 125 towns and cities 1annually
quarterlyDeutsche Bundesbank 
Monthly Report 
February 2012 
51

accelerated. Even so, the overall year-on-year 
rate of increase in import prices fell to 5.5%, 
since the sharp rise in crude oil prices one year earlier is no longer taken into consideration.
In the fourth quarter, German industry was 
able to push through price increases in domes-tic and export sales on a scale similar to those in the third quarter, namely by ½% on average. The annual rate for producer prices fell to 4.8% and for export prices to 2.7%. The weaker valu-ation of the euro in the forex markets was ac-
companied by a deterioration in the terms of 
trade.
Construction prices continued to accelerate in 
the wake of robust construction activity. The year-on-year figure remained largely un -
changed at nearly 3.1%. According to the cal-
culations of the Association of German Pfand-brief Banks (Verband deutscher Pfandbriefban-
ken),  purchase prices for owner-occupied 
housing were 0.2% up on the third quarter and 
2.3% higher than in the same period of 2010 
(see pages 50-51 for details of house prices in 2011).
Consumer inflation was marked by the sharp 
rise in energy prices as a result of the depreci-ation of the euro. If energy is excluded, the rate 
of price increase fell on the quarter, however, 
with the abolition of student tuition fees in North Rhine-Westphalia in October being a 
factor. Added to this were accelerated price re-
ductions in the case of clothing and shoes, 
probably on account of the mild weather con-ditions. If these special effects are subtracted, a 
gradual acceleration of inflation is evident in the underlying trend. Including energy, con -
sumer prices rose, at a seasonally adjusted 0.5%, somewhat more sharply on a quarterly 
average than in the preceding period. The an-
nual CPI figure was unchanged at 2.4% and HICP inflation was 2.7%. Over the quarter, however, the annual CPI rate of inflation fell 
from 2.6% in September to 2.1% in December 
and the HICP figure went down from 2.9% 
to 2.3%.… and in indus-
trial sales prices
Rising construc-
tion and real  estate prices
Gradual easing 
of consumer  inflationExport pricesImport, export, producer and
consumer prices
1 Producer  price  index  for  industrial  products  in  domestic 
sales.  2 Not  seasonally  adjusted,  quarterly.  3 National  con-
sumer price index.
Deutsche Bundesbank2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012100105110115120
102105110115120
100105110 110115120
100105110115
10123
–+++2005 = 100, seasonally adjusted, monthly
Lin scale
Year-on-year change 2Consumer prices3Construction
prices2Producer prices1Import pricesLog scale
%
Jan100105110Deutsche Bundesbank 
Monthly Report February 2012 52

Consumer prices rose sharply at the beginning 
of 2012 at a seasonally adjusted 0.3%. Petro -
leum products became clearly more expensive 
again owing to higher crude oil prices, the im-
pact of which was reinforced by the depreci -
ation of the euro. Furthermore, the prices of 
shoes and clothing were now reduced less sharply than usual. Services became markedly 
more expensive. Rents, too, were trending up-
wards. The annual CPI and HICP figures re -
mained unchanged at 2.1% and 2.3% respec -
tively. The year-on-year rate is likely to go up 
again in February before possibly easing again 
in the following months as the energy and 
food price shocks of early 2011 gradually drop out of the calculations.
Orders received and outlook
There was a perceptible improvement in the 
outlook for the German economy towards the end of the reporting period. In the first quarter 
of 2012, external retarding factors will weigh 
on production again. From spring onwards, the cyclical drivers of growth could gain the upper 
hand, however. A fairly rapid resumption of 
growth, which was the assumption underlying 
the December projection, now looks more 
likely. In a setting of somewhat calmer financial 
markets, enterprises are gaining new confi -
dence, while domestic demand remains on a sound expansionary course. According to the 
Ifo surveys, business expectations in trade and industry have made a clear recovery from their interim low in the autumn months.
4
In industry, assessments of the business situ -
ation were likewise tending to point upwards 
slightly towards the end of the period under Brighter outlook 
for growth
More industrial 
orders again from non-euro-area countriesDemand for industrial goods and construction work
Deutsche Bundesbank2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 20118090100110120130
–40–30–20–100 0+10+20+30
100110120130
758090100
100110120
8090100
Oct-
Nov
Oct-
Nov90100110120
–20–100+10+20Volume, 2005 = 100, seasonally adjusted, quarterly
DomesticForeignLog scaleTotal industrial 
ordersLog scale
Lin scale
Year-on-year change
Total construction orders
Lin scale
Year-on-year change%
%
4 The latest DIHK survey from the beginning of 2012 
shows that business expectations have deteriorated slightly 
since the preceding survey that took place between the 
end of August and the end of September 2011. This does not contradict the finding of the monthly Ifo business sur -
vey, however. First, the more pessimistic assessments in the former case date essentially to the period following the last DIHK survey. Second, new economic signals tend to show 
up in the DIHK survey with a certain time lag compared 
with the Ifo business survey.Deutsche Bundesbank 
Monthly Report 
February 2012 
53

review. Seasonally adjusted incoming orders, 
however, were easing off again in the fourth quarter. The quarter-on-quarter decline, at 1½%, was only half as strong as in the third quarter, although it should be borne in mind 
that the sharp fall in the third quarter was due to the volume of large orders returning to nor -
mal after the decidedly large volume in spring. 
Leaving aside the manufacture of other trans -
port equipment, orders of which were very heavily influenced by this, the reduction in 
goods orders during the reporting period, at a 
seasonally adjusted 2%, was, in fact, larger 
than in the preceding quarter (-¾%). The flow 
of orders from non-euro-area countries turned 
positive. Orders from this region between Oc -
tober and December were 4% up on the quar -
ter in seasonally adjusted terms. By contrast, 
there was a further (3%) fall in domestic orders 
and orders from non-euro-area countries 
slumped by as much as 5½%.
The sharp fall in demand for inputs in the 
fourth quarter suggests that the first few 
months of 2012 will also be marked by the dip in growth. Orders of intermediate goods were 
pointing upwards again in seasonally adjusted 
terms, however, even if weak demand from the euro area meant that the increase was no more than subdued. Machinery and vehicles made in 
Germany were nevertheless in heavy demand 
again from non-euro-area countries. Consumer 
goods demand in autumn 2011 was slightly down on the quarter overall, with domestic 
business being the decisive factor. The no more 
than moderate ½ percentage point decline in 
manufacturing capacity utilisation between Oc-tober and January suggests, in line with output expectations, that industrial production will de-
cline less sharply in the first quarter of 2012 
than it did towards the end of 2011.
Buoyant construction demand will give strong 
stimuli to the economy for the foreseeable fu-ture. This also applies to the winter months, 
unless weather conditions result in production 
being interrupted for prolonged periods. In 
that case, significant catching-up effects could be expected in spring, however. While civil en-gineering will probably tend to weaken owing to declining public sector demand, a period of high utilisation lies ahead for building construc-tion. The orders situation in this segment is de-cidedly favourable at present, not least because it is being underpinned equally by housing con-
struction and commercial construction. Meas -
ured by the estimated construction costs, the 
past three years have seen an underlying trend 
increase in building permits for housing con -
struction. In October and November 2011, the volume was a seasonally adjusted 1¾% up on 
the average of the preceding quarter. There 
was a surge in commercial construction during the same period. Despite generally high volatil-ity and the comparatively significant impact of 
major projects, it is notable that October and 
November saw commercial office buildings be-ing approved on a scale that exceeded the av-erage volume of the first nine months of 2011 
by more than one-quarter. The expansion in 
demand for commercial construction has been broadly based for some time now. It has been especially strong in factory buildings, however, while growth in newly approved office and ad-ministrative buildings has been more subdued.
Private consumption will continue to buoy eco-
nomic activity. The ongoing positive sentiment 
among consumers is the key factor in this re -
spect. As they see it, income risks exist only on 
a limited scale at present. As a result, savings 
motive are receding in importance, particularly 
as deposit rates are currently extremely low. 
Not only do households feel that the time has 
come to purchase large durable goods, they 
are also probably spending more on recreation, leisure and entertainment.Orders of inputs 
still on the  decline, but 
growth in capi-tal goods ordersConstruction de-mand strongly expansionary
Upward trend  
in private 
 consumptionDeutsche Bundesbank 
Monthly Report February 2012 54

General government budget
The general government deficit ratio declined 
significantly from 4.3% in 2010 to 1.0% last year. The deficit thus fell back below the 3% threshold two years before the deadline set 
under the excessive deficit procedure. The fa -
vourable economic developments were one 
important factor in this development. As in pre-
vious upturns, growth in tax revenue was per -
ceptibly stronger than that in the macroeco -
nomic reference variables which were positively 
affected by the business cycle. In addition, very large capital transfers to support financial insti-tutions (which amounted to just under 1½% of gross domestic product (GDP) in 2010) were al-most entirely absent in 2011, and the structural 
deficit also declined over and above that (see 
also the box on pages 56 to 57 for more infor -
mation on developments in 2011). However, 
the debt ratio was probably still above 80% at 
the end of 2011, although it is likely to have fallen below the record level recorded at the 
end of 2010 (83.2%).1 While the deficit pushed 
up the debt ratio, this was far outweighed by 
the strong impact of nominal GDP growth in the opposite direction. In addition, risk assets – and the associated liabilities – held at state 
“bad banks” and capital assistance were scaled 
back. These factors more than offset the debt 
growth caused by increased financial assistance for euro-area countries.
The general government revenue ratio rose sig-
nificantly to 44.6% (2010: 43.6%). Higher taxes and social contributions, such as the increase in contribution rates to the statutory health insur -
ance scheme and the Federal Employment 
Agency and the discretionary tax hikes arising 
from the central government consolidation package that was agreed in 2010, were par -
ticularly important factors in this development. The very dynamic growth in tax revenue during the upturn had an impact too, and non-tax rev-
enue also rose more rapidly than GDP . In par -ticular, interest income from financial market support measures increased considerably, al -
though this was accompanied by higher inter -
est expenditure on the liabilities assumed in 
that context.
The expenditure ratio fell sharply to 45.6% 
(2010: 47.9%). The favourable cyclical develop-
ments chiefly lowered the ratio via increased 
GDP in the denominator. In the area of fiscal 
measures, the aforementioned absence of sup-
port measures for the financial sector was the 
main factor contributing to the decline. Other 
factors included the structural fall in unemploy-
ment and the fact that pension payments rose 
only moderately, which dampened expend -
iture.
Assuming a limited economic slowdown and 
barring any major additional burdens from the 
financial and sovereign debt crisis, the deficit ratio should remain virtually unchanged this 
year. A fairly small cyclical fiscal burden would be roughly neutralised by a slight structural im-
provement. The substantial incremental con -
solidation originally announced will be inter -
rupted in 2012. However, various economic 
support measures brought in during the 2008-
2009 crisis (such as depreciation allowances and investment programmes, which were im -
plemented with long time lags in some cases) 
are being discontinued this year, and structur -
ally lower unemployment figures and muted spending on pensions could continue to 
dampen social payments. While the ground for 
reducing the debt ratio has essentially been laid, assistance for euro-area countries and Decline in deficit 
and debt ratios in 2011 
Revenue ratio 
rose significantlyDecreasing  expenditure 
ratio due to both cyclical and structural factors
Barely any 
change in deficit on the cards for 2012Public finances*
* The analysis in the “General government budget” section is based on data contained in the national accounts and on 
the Maastricht ratios. The subsequent reporting on the 
budgets of the various levels of government and social se-curity schemes is based on the budgetary figures as defined in the government’s financial statistics (which are generally in line with the budgetary accounts).1 The ratio stood at 81.8% at the end of the third quarter of 2011.Deutsche Bundesbank 
Monthly Report 
February 2012 
55

The structural development of public fi  nances in Germany – 
results of the disaggregated framework for 2011
According to provisional data from the  Federal 
Statistical Offi   ce, the general government def-
icit in Germany (as defi  ned in the national ac-
counts) fell signifi  cantly to 1.0% of gross do-
mestic product (GDP) in 2011, after standing 
at 4.3% in 2010. Using the “disaggregated 
framework” for analysing public fi  nances1, it is 
possible, fi  rstly, to estimate the role played by 
cyclical and specifi  c temporary effects and, 
secondly, to identify other changes, referred 
to here as structural, in the revenue and ex-
penditure ratios and their major determinants. 
The main results of this analysis for 2011 are 
presented below2.
The results show that favourable cyclical infl  u-
ences caused a decline of just over 0.8 percent-
age point in the defi  cit ratio. By contrast, 
clearly identifi  able specifi  c temporary effects, 
including the fact that both the proceeds from the 2010 radio frequency auction and 
the high insolvency benefi  t contributions in 
the same year were now absent, as well as tax 
shortfalls linked to a court ruling in 2011 on 
the taxation of dividends among affi   liated en-
terprises,3 led to a deterioration of just under 
0.4 percentage point in the fi  scal balance. As 
a result, the (structural) defi  cit ratio, adjusted 
for both cyclical effects and these specifi  c temporary effects and in relation to trend 
GDP , decreased considerably by 2.7 percent-
age points in 2011.
The unadjusted revenue ratio climbed 
1.0 percentage point, while the structural 
ratio showed an even stronger increase of 
1.4 percentage points. Growth in non-tax  revenue (+0.4 percentage point) contributed 
to this rise, which was infl  uenced by factors 
such as the assumption of risky assets (and 
 liabilities) by government “bad banks” and the clear increase in the resulting interest income 
(and interest expenditure of a similar volume). 
Furthermore, the macroeconomic variables 
particularly relevant to government revenue 
showed faster trend growth than GDP (posi-tive decoupling of the revenue base). This had the effect of raising the ratio by 0.2 percent-
age point. Legislative changes also contrib-
uted to the increasing ratio (+0.3 percentage 
point). The rise in social contribution rates (to 
the statutory health insurance scheme and 
the Federal Employment Agency) and (net) tax 
increases, most notably those aimed at con-solidating the central government budget 
( especially air traffi   c tax, nuclear fuel tax 
and subsidy cuts for energy taxes) were im-portant factors in this development. In add-
ition, the structural revenue ratio grew by 
0.4 percentage point (residual). This is largely 
attributable to the growth in revenue from 
profi  t-related taxes, which was stronger than 
can be explained by the development of 
entrepreneurial and property income (which 
serves as the macroeconomic reference 
 variable) and the estimated impact of legisla-
tive changes. Positive residuals such as these 
have been observed during upturns in the 
past and are generally related to the fact that 
the modelled temporal distribution does not 
fully refl  ect the complex pattern of advance 
tax payments and net backpayments, while 
the statistical reference variable does not ad-
equately capture fl  uctuations in the actual tax 
base.
The unadjusted expenditure ratio decreased 
signifi  cantly by 2.2 percentage points in 2011, 
while the structural ratio declined much less 
steeply (-1.3 percentage points), primarily as a 
1 For a more detailed description of the framework, 
including the standardised method of determining the 
cyclical component used in the European System of 
Central Banks, see Deutsche Bundesbank, A disaggre-
gated framework for analysing public fi  nances: Ger-
many’s fi  scal track record between 2000 and 2005, 
Monthly Report, March 2006, pages 61-76.2 These results are subject to subsequent amendments 
arising from revisions to the preliminary national ac-count fi  gures or to estimates of the macroeconomic 
outlook.3 In this analysis, the impact of support measures for fi  nancial institutes on the defi  cit is not included among the specifi  c temporary effects.Deutsche Bundesbank 
Monthly Report February 2012 56

result of the less pronounced increase in nom-
inal trend GDP . The interest expenditure ratio 
rose perceptibly,4 not least owing to the afore-
mentioned balance sheet extension, and the 
structural ratio of other expenditure (primary 
expenditure) thus fell somewhat more sharply 
(-1.6 percentage points). On balance, this was 
almost exclusively due to the near-absence of 
capital transfers to support fi  nancial institu-
tions in 2011 (just under 1½% of GDP in 
2010). Social payments also made a notice-
able contribution, chiefl  y as a result of the structural fall in unemployment fi  gures. An-
other factor was the decline in expenditure 
caused by temporary economic stimulus 
measures being phased out. By contrast, as in 
the preceding years, rises in employee com-pensation and intermediate goods increased 
the structural ratio slightly.
Overall, the signifi  cant reduction in the high 
defi  cit in 2011 was mainly the result of posi-
tive cyclical developments, an additional boom in profi  t-related taxes and the discon-
tinuation of extensive fi  nancial market sup-
port measures. Various increases in taxes and 
social contributions and the slower growth in 
social benefi  ts had a much lesser but still no-
ticeable impact.
4 The determinants of the change in the interest ex-
penditure ratio are not shown for last year because the 
debt level at end-2011 is not yet available.Structural development*
Year-on-year change in percentage points
Item 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011
Unadjusted fi  scal balance 1 0.4 1.7 1.9 – 0.3 – 3.2 – 1.1 3.2
Cyclical component 1 – 0.2 0.7 0.5 0.4 – 1.6 0.2 0.8
Temporary effects 1 0.1 – 0.1 0.0 – 0.2 0.3 0.2 – 0.4
Fiscal balance 0.5 1.1 1.4 – 0.5 – 1.6 – 1.5 2.7
Interest payable – 0.1 0.1 0.0 – 0.1 – 0.2 – 0.1 0.3
Owing to change in average interest rate – 0.1 0.0 0.1 – 0.1 – 0.3 – 0.4 .
Owing to change in debt level 0.1 0.1 0.0 0.0 0.1 0.3 .
Primary balance 0.5 1.1 1.4 – 0.5 – 1.9 – 1.7 3.0
Revenue 0.1 0.8 0.8 0.3 – 0.9 – 0.4 1.4
Taxes and social contributions – 0.1 0.6 0.7 0.2 – 0.9 – 0.5 1.0
Fiscal drag 0.0 0.0 0.1 0.0 0.1 0.0 0.0
Decoupling of base from GDP – 0.1 – 0.1 – 0.3 0.2 – 0.2 0.2 0.2
Legislative changes – 0.2 0.2 0.7 – 0.6 – 0.3 – 0.8 0.3
Residual 0.2 0.5 0.2 0.6 – 0.6 0.1 0.4
of which: profi  t-related taxes 2 0.1 0.4 0.2 0.5 – 0.6 0.3 0.3
Non-tax revenue 3 0.2 0.1 0.1 0.1 0.0 0.0 0.4
Primary expenditure – 0.4 – 0.4 – 0.6 0.8 1.0 1.2 – 1.6
Social payments 4 – 0.2 – 0.2 – 0.4 0.3 0.5 – 0.1 – 0.3
Subsidies – 0.1 0.0 – 0.1 0.0 0.1 0.0 – 0.1
Compensation of employees – 0.2 – 0.1 – 0.2 0.0 0.1 0.1 0.1
Intermediate consumption 0.1 0.1 0.0 0.2 0.2 0.1 0.1
Gross fi  xed capital formation – 0.1 0.1 0.1 0.1 0.1 – 0.1 0.0
Other expenditure 5 0.1 – 0.3 – 0.1 0.2 – 0.1 1.2 – 1.4
Memo item
Pension expenditure 6 – 0.1 – 0.1 – 0.3 0.0 0.0 0.0 – 0.1
Healthcare expenditure 7 0.1 0.1 0.1 0.2 0.3 0.1 0.0
Labour-market expenditure 8 0.1 – 0.1 – 0.2 0.1 0.0 – 0.2 – 0.3
* Adjusted for cyclical infl  uences and specifi  c temporary effects. In accordance with EDP defi  nition, ie includes swaps and 
forward rate agreements in interest rate expenditure and the fi  scal balance; fi  gures for 2011 in accordance with ESA 95. 
1 Year-on-year change in the ratio to nominal GDP . 2 Assessed income tax, corporation tax, local business tax, investment 
income tax. 3 Other current transfers receivable, sales and total capital revenue. 4 Including other current transfers to house-
holds. 5 Other current transfers payable to corporations and the rest of the world, other net acquisitions of non-fi  nancial 
assets and capital transfers. 6 Spending by the statutory pension insurance scheme, on civil servants’ pensions as well as pay-
ments by the Post Offi   ce Pension Fund and the Federal Railways Fund. 7 Spending by the statutory health insurance scheme 
and assistance towards civil servants’ healthcare costs. 8 Spending by the Federal Employment Agency (excluding the com-
pensatory amount (up to 2007)/reintegration payment (from 2008) paid to the central government) and central government expenditure on unemployment benefi  t II and on labour market reintegration measures.Deutsche Bundesbank 
Monthly Report 
February 2012 
57

possibly also German financial institutions will 
increase debt2, meaning that the ratio may 
even grow again.
The general government deficit developed very 
favourably in 2011. However, this should not 
blind us to the fact that the outcome was well 
short of the medium-term objective of a struc-
turally close-to-balance general government 
budget. The relatively good general govern -
ment budget situation was due, not least, to 
the surplus posted by the social security funds. 
Nonetheless, the institutional setting means 
that this surplus is merely temporary. By con -
trast, some state and local government budgets are still very strained. It is also becoming appar -
ent that the debt ratio will remain well above 
the reference value of 60% for many years to 
come, even assuming that the sovereign debt 
crisis does not escalate any further and demo-
graphic problems are addressed in a manner 
which does not increase the debt ratio.
Against this backdrop, it is important not to 
delay further consolidation, but rather to rap -
idly achieve a structurally balanced budget at 
all levels of government. The economic outlook 
also does not justify any relaxation of consoli -
dation efforts, besides which the automatic stabilisers would take effect should the econ -
omy weaken significantly (which does not cur -
rently appear likely). Calls from some quarters 
for Germany to loosen its fiscal policy stance in 
order to stimulate economic activity in other euro-area countries often overlook the fact 
that the impact of German fiscal policy on de-
mand elsewhere in Europe is very limited,3 
meaning that this strategy would probably be 
doomed to failure. Aside from that, much less consolidation is needed in Germany to achieve a structurally balanced budget than in most of its partner countries in Europe.
Particularly in view of the recent European 
agreements on tightening national fiscal rules 
(see pages 60 to 63), fiscal policymakers in Ger -
many must set an example in implementing na-
tional rules. Not least for that reason, both cen-tral government and the federal states should 
promptly cut their deficits and also aim to build 
in safety margins vis-à-vis the ceilings specified 
in the budgetary rules. The hesitant or less than 
rigorous implementation seen in some cases il-
lustrates the continuing conflict between cur -
rent consolidation needs and the political de -
sire for expansionary fiscal policy in the short term. Fiscal policymakers in Germany should 
both manage national budgets responsibly and 
strive to ensure at the European level that 
budgetary objectives truly are more than non-
binding recommendations in future – not least 
in order to limit the risks to German public fi -
nances. Sound public finances are vital to main-
taining governments’ room for manoeuvre, 
and credible steps in this direction are needed to overcome the current crisis of confidence.
Budgetary development  
of central, state and local 
government
Tax revenue
At almost 8%, tax revenue4 grew very buoy -
antly in 2011 (see chart and table on pages 64 
and 65), and was thus €2 billion higher than 
expected by the Working Group on Tax Esti -
mates in November. The rise in revenue from income-related taxes was above average, at 10½%. The increase in wage tax receipts 
(+9½%) was bolstered by the fall in deductions 
for child benefit and subsidies for supplemen -
tary private pension plans, but would still have 
been around 6½% without these effects. Growth in revenue from profit-related taxes Consolidation 
still needed des-pite favourable developments
Achieve structur-
ally balanced budget promptly
Strict compli-
ance with budgetary rulesBuoyant tax  revenue growth 
in 2011
Strong growth in income-related taxes
2 In particular, the possibility of the government sector as-suming further assets and liabilities in connection with the liquidation of WestLB is being discussed. The precautionary reactivation of SoFFin has created the option of supporting financial institutions in new cases of distress. However, spe-cific cases where this facility might be used are not under discussion at present.3 See IMF, Germany – Staff Report for the 2011 Article IV Consultation, June 2011, p 15.4 Including EU shares in German tax revenue but excluding 
receipts from local government taxes, which are not yet 
known for the last quarter recorded.Deutsche Bundesbank 
Monthly Report February 2012 58

was particularly strong (+13½%). Corporation 
tax income continued to rise very sharply fol -
lowing on from the previous year’s strong 
growth.5 Receipts from investment income tax 
also climbed steeply. While revenue from non-
assessed taxes on earnings (especially on divi -
dends) rose significantly, receipts from with -
holding tax on interest income and capital gains declined. Developments in assessed in -
come tax were less volatile and revenue grew 
relatively moderately, by 2½%; without the fall-
ing deductions arising from the homebuyers 
grant and from refunds to employees, it would 
actually have decreased. Revenue from 
 consumption-related taxes also rose signifi -
cantly by just over 5%, with growth in receipts 
from excise duties growing almost as strongly 
as those from turnover tax, mainly as a result of 
tax hikes affecting excise duties.
The latest official tax estimate in November 
2011 expected revenue (including local govern-
ment taxes) to rise by 3½% this year, with ro-
bust growth forecast for the especially high revenue-yielding macroeconomic reference 
variables. In the updated macroeconomic fore-
cast published by central government in Janu -
ary, the relevant economic developments ap -
pear only slightly less favourable. The impact of legislative changes and extraordinary effects on 
tax receipts is likely to be slightly positive on 
balance, especially owing to the expiry of both the homebuyers grant and depreciation allow-ances brought in under the economic stimulus package that was adopted at the end of 2008.
Central government budget
Central government posted a deficit of €17½ 
billion for 2011, which was €27 billion lower 
than that recorded for 2010. This was partly 
thanks to a sharp rise in revenue (6½%, or €19 
billion). Even stronger growth in tax revenue 
contrasted with a decline in other receipts, not-
ably owing to the absence of the one-off effect 
amounting to €4½ billion from the auction of 
radio frequencies in 2010. Expenditure fell by 2½% (€7½ billion). Alongside the absence of 
the payment to offset the Federal Employment 
Agency’s deficit, another important factor in 
this decline was the fall in expenditure on un-
employment benefit II, although this was 
mainly due to pension contributions on behalf of recipients of this benefit having been discon-tinued.
On balance, the deficit only came to just over a 
third of the figure estimated in the November Clear rise in 
 receipts from 
consumption-related taxes
Marked rise  
in revenue 
 expected for 
2012, too
Deficit in central 
government budget fell  substantially  
in 2011General government fiscal ratios *
* As defined in the national accounts. 1 Taxes and social con-
tributions plus customs duties and the EU share in VAT rev-
enue.
Deutsche Bundesbank39404142434445464748
–10+1+2+3+4As a percentage of GDP
Expenditure ratio
Revenue ratio
Taxes and social 
security ratio 1
2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011Deficit ratio
5 The development of the individual taxes is distorted by a 
one-off sizeable refund of corporation tax coupled with ad-
ditional revenue of the same amount for non-assessed 
taxes on earnings.Deutsche Bundesbank 
Monthly Report 
February 2012 
59

The fi  scal compact and the European Stability Mechanism
Since the onset of the sovereign debt crisis, 
the euro area has not only taken measures aimed at alleviating acute problems but has 
also been overhauling its fi  scal framework. 
The regulatory framework enshrined in the 
Treaty on the Functioning of the European 
Union, featuring national fi  scal responsibil-
ity and the no bail-out rule, is to remain un-
changed. Recently, for example, the pro-posal made in connection with Greece of 
intervening in a country’s budgetary auton-omy was clearly rejected. However, in order to more fi  rmly curb future risks to fi  nancial stability, measures to prevent imminent de-
faults in a euro-area country are to be im-
proved and – should this prove insuffi   cient 
in individual cases – the elimination of ob-
structions is to be made easier.
With a view to enhancing crisis prevention, 
the Stability and Growth Pact itself was 
modifi  ed with effect from the end of 2011. 
Beyond the fi  scal domain, the Euro Plus 
Pact and the macroeconomic imbalances procedure have been agreed.
1 Moreover, 
extensive changes are being made in the fi  eld of fi  nancial market regulation and 
supervision. In light of ongoing tensions in 
the fi  nancial markets, the heads of state or 
government of the euro-area countries 
additionally agreed at the beginning of De-cember 2011 to “move towards a stronger 
economic union” and announced a fi  scal compact. This declaration resulted in an intergovernmental Treaty on Stability, Co-
ordination and Governance in the Economic 
and Monetary Union, which was fi  nalised 
on 30 January 2012 and includes the fi  scal 
compact. It is to enter into force on 1 Janu-
ary 2013 provided at least 12 of the con-tracting parties have ratifi  ed it by then. Alongside the euro-area countries, the other EU member states, with the excep-tion of the United Kingdom and the Czech 
Republic, have also signed the treaty and 
plan to ratify it. Furthermore, with regard to 
improving crisis resolution, a treaty estab-lishing a permanent European Stability 
Mechanism (ESM) was adopted.
Fiscal compact
A key component of the fi  scal compact is 
the stipulation that general government 
budgets must be at least close to balance in structural terms.
2 Although the Stability and 
Growth Pact includes very similar require-ments, under the terms of the fi  scal com-
pact they are to be hardcoded into national legislation (preferably into the constitution). Moreover, the pact envisages an automatic 
correction mechanism that is triggered if targets are missed by a wide margin, for which the Commission will propose uni-
form principles at a later date. The Commis-
sion will also oversee the transposition of 
the budgetary rules into national legislation 
(“debt brake”). If it fi  nds fault with the 
transposition process, one or several of the 
contracting parties will bring a case before 
the European Court of Justice (ECJ). The 
contracting parties can also fi  le a case inde-
pendently of the Commission’s report if they consider implementation to be inad-
equate.3
1 See Deutsche Bundesbank, European Council deci-
sions on the prevention and resolution of future sover-
eign debt crises, Monthly Report, April 2011 pp 53-58.2 The structural defi  cit must not exceed 0.5% of GDP . If a country’s debt ratio is signifi  cantly below the 60% ceiling and the risks for the long-term sustainability of public fi  nances are considered to be low, the structural defi  cit may amount to a maximum of 1% of GDP . Tem-
porary deviations from the provisions are permitted 
only in exceptional circumstances (natural disasters, se-vere recessions).3 The decision of the ECJ will be binding. The next step in the event of non-compliance would be to bring an-other case before the court. The ECJ can then impose a fi  ne of up to 0.1% of national GDP .Deutsche Bundesbank 
Monthly Report February 2012 60

The objectives underlying the fi  scal com-
pact are welcome. If placing the fi  scal rules 
on a fi  rmer legislative footing means that 
compliance with a structurally at least close-
to-balance budget becomes the norm, this would be an important contribution to en-
suring the sustainability of public fi  nances, 
and could create confi  dence.
However, much hinges, inter alia, on the 
details awaiting clarifi  cation at supra-
national level by proposals from the Com-
mission. Furthermore, the corresponding detailed provisions must be formulated in such a way that the ECJ can make a clear 
assessment regarding the adequacy of the 
transposition into national legislation. These 
common principles concern, fi  rstly, the ad-
justment paths. Thus there is a need to de-
fi  ne the pace at which existing structural defi  cits are to be reduced, and, conse-quently, the deadline for achieving the 
budgetary objective. In so doing, it is essen-tial that a suffi   ciently ambitious path is set. The standard rule envisaged in the Stability 
and Growth Pact requiring a structural im-
provement of 0.5% of GDP on an annual average appears inadequate, at least for member states with serious public fi  nance 
problems. Furthermore, (equal) annual con-
solidation steps should be stipulated to 
thwart the danger of backloading the con-
solidation efforts to the very last years of the adjustment period. This temptation to backslide has often been observed in the past, with the result that the adjustment 
burden may be seen as excessive in the fi  nal 
years and so prompt appeals to postpone 
the correction deadline.
A second key need is to specify the basic 
features of the automatic correction mech-anism that is triggered if targets are missed. Stipulating rules for the repayment of debt resulting from overshooting the defi  cit limit – as have been introduced with the German debt brake – would constitute a signifi  cant step forward vis-à-vis the existing fi  scal rules at European level.
However, the success of the planned 
budgetary rules ultimately depends on their 
implementation and application in the na-
tional context. Both the general public and the national (constitutional) courts are likely to have an important role to play in this re-
spect as long as the appeal procedures in the member states are not narrowly con-
strained. Moreover, a high degree of trans-parency is essential when it comes to imple-menting the rules. However, as in the case 
of the Stability and Growth Pact, this still 
cannot rule out the risk of numerous excep-tions ultimately being tolerated.
In addition to provisions on national budgetary rules, the fi  scal compact also contains a stronger automatic sanctions mechanism in connection with the Euro-
pean excessive defi  cit procedure. Thus the 
Council members with voting rights pledge 
to follow the proposals or recommenda-
tions of the Commission in an excessive def-
icit procedure unless a qualifi  ed majority opposes this (what is known as a reverse 
qualifi  ed majority). This is to be welcomed 
and should also apply unequivocally to the debt criterion. This makes it more likely that 
the Commission’s position will prevail and could make the procedure less prone to fears that corresponding measures could also be passed against the voting parties themselves. However, budgetary discipline will only be promoted if the Commission 
also actually makes fi  scal soundness a prior-ity and demands more stringent compliance 
with the common budgetary rules than in 
the past.
Yet aside from its potential to reinforce fi  s-
cal rules, the fi  scal compact in no way intro-duces a “fi  scal union”. Outside the Stability Deutsche Bundesbank 
Monthly Report 
February 2012 
61

and Growth Pact, the European authorities 
are to be given no supranational right to 
intervene in national fi  scal policy. This would 
not even be the case if the agreed national rules were not properly applied in practice. The fi  scal compact does not, consequently, 
justify any extensive joint liability (eg Euro-
bonds). Otherwise, there would be an even greater mismatch between liability and con-trol than is already the case, and the frame-work of monetary union would become in-creasingly inconsistent.
European Stability Mechanism
In order to overcome the crisis, it was 
agreed to set up a permanent mechanism, 
the European Stability Mechanism (ESM), 
which is scheduled to come into force in 
mid-2012 and is to replace the European Fi-
nancial Stability Facility (EFSF) in the me-dium term.
4 The ESM’s maximum lending 
capacity (counting funds for primary and 
secondary market purchases) is to amount 
to €500 billion, including fi  nancial assist-
ance provided by the EFSF. However, it has been announced that this fi  gure will be re-
assessed in March. The ESM will have a 
total subscribed capital of €700 billion, €80 
billion of which is to be paid up in instal-ments over, in principle, a period of fi  ve years. Advance or additional payments might be required in order to support the 
ESM’s rating or offset any losses.
In addition to bond-fi  nanced assistance 
loans, the ESM – as is already the case for 
the EFSF – can also issue precautionary 
credit lines, grant loans to refi  nance fi  nan-
cial institutions to non-programme coun-
tries and make primary and secondary mar-
ket purchases. Furthermore, in principle, the effective lending capacity can be in-
creased by means of leveraging. The ESM’s fi  nancing and administrative costs are to be 
covered by the interest on the assistance loans. In addition, an appropriate margin is 
to be factored into the calculation. In line with the terms and conditions for EFSF loans to Ireland and Portugal, which have 
since been eased, it appears, however, that 
no interest rate premiums will be charged as a general rule. In accordance with the 
practice of the International Monetary Fund (IMF), involvement of private creditors is en-
visaged, should this prove necessary in 
order to restore the sustainability of public 
fi  nances. From 1 January 2013 onwards, all 
new government bond issues of ESM mem-
ber states (with a maturity of more than 
one year) are accordingly to include a col-
lective action clause to facilitate restructur-
ing. ESM loans will be junior only to IMF 
loans; they will be senior to the loans of all 
other creditors. From 1  March 2013, the 
transposition of the fi  scal compact’s provi-
sions into national legislation will be a pre-
requisite for receiving assistance from the 
ESM.
Important decisions, particularly regarding 
the amount of ESM capital and its max-
imum assistance volume, the granting of fi  -
nancial assistance and the conditions 
thereof, as well as the range of instruments available to the ESM, are to be made by the representatives of the member states within 
the respective ESM board5 “by mutual 
agreement”. However, in emergencies, 
where the Commission and the ECB jointly 
conclude that the fi  nancial stability of the 
euro area will otherwise be at risk, a quali-fi  ed majority of 85% of the capital will suf-
fi  ce (which nevertheless still implies a veto 
right for Germany).
4 The ESM treaty will enter into force as soon as mem-
ber states representing 90% of the capital commit-
ments have ratifi  ed it.
5 Each ESM member state sends its fi  nance minister as its representative to sit on the Board of Governors. Fur-
ther delegates from the countries form the Board of 
Directors.Deutsche Bundesbank 
Monthly Report February 2012 62

The ESM can help to contain risks to fi  nan-
cial stability in the euro area. However, it 
weakens the no bail-out rule that applies 
generally throughout the euro area. More-
over, any assistance mechanism has the po-
tential to reduce the incentives for sound 
public fi  nances and the effectiveness of the preventive rules. It is therefore crucial that, on the one hand, the granting of assistance 
is subject to strict conditionality and that 
non-compliance is penalised. On the other 
hand, the assistance loans should only be 
granted with appreciable interest rate pre-
miums. The IMF, for example, on which the European assistance mechanisms are in part explicitly modelled, envisages premiums to-
talling around 300 to 400 basis points. Waiving an interest rate premium would 
mean largely abandoning an important in-
centive to avoid tapping the assistance 
mechanism, or to at least rapidly return to 
the capital market. Countries providing as-
sistance which themselves have budgetary 
problems might end up paying higher inter-est rates than the countries receiving assist-
ance. It would prove diffi   cult to rigorously implement the EU budgetary rules, up to 
and including the imposition of sanctions if the rules are breached, if a country that has 
forfeited access to the capital market fol-lowing blatant breaches of the rules re-
ceives support from the ESM at heavily sub-sidised interest rates.
Looking at the extended set of instruments 
that the ESM has assumed from the EFSF, 
the authorisation of secondary market pur-
chases, in particular, is not promising.6 The 
envisaged preferred creditor status for ESM 
loans, which protects the taxpayers in the 
countries providing support, is to be wel-comed.
7 It is important that measures are 
taken to ensure that this status is not under-
mined by primary and secondary market 
purchases. The EFSF leverage models, which might also be transferred to the ESM, are at odds with the principle of preferred creditor 
status, as they effectively amount to junior 
status. With regard to parliamentary control 
and broad public acceptance, it is import-ant that the assistance mechanisms are 
transparent and verifi  able.
Given the recent ruling of the Federal Con-
stitutional Court on assistance for Greece 
and the euro rescue shield, calling for par-
liamentary control, it would seem problem-
atic for the Board of Governors of the ESM 
to be able to change important elements such as the set of instruments, the capital 
and the maximum lending volume, possibly 
even autonomously. As in the case of the EFSF, the German Bundestag can secure 
rights to participate in such decisions in the 
ratifi  cation process. Guidelines for the in-struments and conditions of the ESM can 
also be decided in this context.
6 For more information, see Deutsche Bundesbank, 
The debate on secondary market purchases by the fu-
ture European Stability Mechanism, Monthly Report, 
February 2011, pp 68-69.
7 By contrast, the EFSF generally has no preferred 
creditor status.Deutsche Bundesbank 
Monthly Report 
February 2012 
63

2010 budget plan (€49 billion). Tax revenue ex-
ceeded the estimates very clearly by €19 billion, 
and expenditure was €9½ billion lower. The 
largest single deviation from the estimates re -
sulted from the fact that the loan to offset the 
Federal Employment Agency’s deficit (€5½ bil-lion) was not required. However, the estimates 
were also significantly undershot for interest 
expenditure (by €2½ billion), payments for un-
employment benefit II (by €1 billion) and calls 
on guarantees (by €1 billion).
The structural deficit, which is of key import -
ance to the debt brake, was also lower in 2011 
than expected in the budget plan (€41½ bil -
lion). According to the available data, it 
amounted to €20 billion on balance, far below 
the constitutional limit of €45½ billion in the budget plan (see also pages 66 to 67). If the data remain unchanged, this amount will be credited to the control account at the begin -
ning of March.6 However, if the rules for calcu-
lating the starting value for the borrowing limit during the transitional period are applied more 
stringently, the limit was undershot by much 
less (€10 billion).
The 2012 central government budget plan en-
visages a clear rise of €9 billion in the deficit 
compared with the actual figure for 2011, re -
sulting in an estimated deficit of €26½ billion for 2012. The structural deficit would also in -
crease appreciably (to €25½ billion) based on 
the figures in the budget plan. However, some 
of the estimates are fairly cautious from today’s perspective, even based on the somewhat less 
favourable macroeconomic developments as -
sumed in the Annual Economic Report pub -
lished at the beginning of 2012. For example, 
the fact that transfers to the EU budget – which 
are deducted from tax revenue – are estimated 
to increase by one quarter (€5 billion) vis-à-vis 
the actual figure for 2011 means that revenue 
could turn out to be higher than assumed in 
the 2012 budget plan. The plan also provides 
for a rise of €4 billion in interest expenditure, 
which appears highly unlikely in view of the fa-
vourable financing conditions. If there are no 
calls on guarantees for loans to Greece, appro-
priations for guarantees will probably act as a 
buffer, along with estimates in connection with 
long-term unemployment. All in all, the re -
newed growth in the deficit could therefore re-main limited. However, the intended steady re-duction in the structural deficit during the tran-sitional period to ensure that the future limit of 
0.35% of GDP will be met in 2016 does not look likely at present. A large number of the measures that were adopted under the June 2010 consolidation package have since been 
dropped.7
Even before the 2012 Budget Act had come 
into force, it was announced that a supplemen-tary budget would be passed to provide funds 
for the European Stability Mechanism (ESM), which is to be set up earlier than planned. If 
the regular first annual tranche of the €4½ bil-lion capital transfer were brought forward, this 
could probably be funded from the existing 
borrowing authorisation, but a supplementary 
budget is needed for the spending authorisa -
tion. According to a provisional decision by Eu-rostat, the capital transfer could be classified as Result also con-
siderably better than in budget plan
Large amount 
credited to con-trol account but 
borrowing limit 
set too high2012 budget plan shows 
clear rise in 
 deficit, but 
 estimates 
 cautious
Supplementary 
budget needed to bring forward capital transfer to ESMTax revenue *
* Including  EU  shares  in  German  tax  revenue,  excluding  re-
ceipts from local government taxes.
Deutsche Bundesbank%
2009 2010 201186420246810
––––+++++Year-on-year change, quarterly
6 For a critical assessment of this, see Deutsche Bundes -
bank, The debt brake in Germany – key aspects and imple-mentation, Monthly Report, October 2011, pp 15-40.7 See Deutsche Bundesbank, Public finances, Monthly Re-port, November 2011, pp 63-76.Deutsche Bundesbank 
Monthly Report February 2012 64

a financial transaction. If it were booked as 
such, it would have no impact on the structural 
deficit, which influences the borrowing limit. 
Nonetheless, the extensive international assist-
ance measures harbour substantial risks for the 
central government budget, which must be 
taken into account through cautious budgetary 
planning, especially with a view to ensuring 
sustainable public finances in the long term.
The forthcoming decision in March on the 
benchmark figures for the 2013 central govern-
ment budget and for the financial plan up 
to 2016 needs to mark a return to the path of structural deficit reduction that has been inter -
rupted this year. The medium-term financial plan drawn up in summer 2011 already con -
tained substantial risks. More details are needed 
on the consolidation planned from 2013 on -
wards using €2 billion in revenue from a finan-
cial transactions tax, as well as on the esti -
mated savings in defence spending and the 
budgetary relief to be provided by better job mediation for the long-term unemployed. Fur -
thermore, the substantial global expenditure 
savings of €5 billion per year planned from 2014 onwards still need to be translated into concrete, sustainable consolidation measures, and both the newly planned income tax cuts and the childcare supplement need reliable counterfinancing from 2013 onwards. Other -
wise, there is a danger of these factors largely eroding the vitally important safety margin vis-à-vis the borrowing limit which was achieved in 2011. If that were to happen, negative surprises 
regarding developments in the structural def -
icit, eg following an economic downturn, would require immediate and potentially pro -
cyclical consolidation measures.
Central government’s off-budget entities 
posted a surplus of €7 billion in 2011, after re-cording a deficit of the same size one year pre-
viously. This was ultimately due to Commerz -
bank’s substantial repayment of capital contri-
butions to SoFFin, which consequently re -Return to 
 consolidation 
needed in deci-sion on bench-mark figures  
for financial planning
Clear surplus  
in off-budget entitiesTax revenue
 
Type of taxYear as a wholeEstimate 
for 2011 
as a whole 
1, 2, 3 Q4
2010 2011 Year-
on-year 
change2010 2011
Year-on-year change Year-on-year change
€ billion € billion as % as % € billion € billion as %
Tax revenue, total 2 488.7 527.3 + 38.5 +  7.9 +  7.5 137.0 145.4 + 8.4 +  6.1
of which
Wage tax 127.9 139.7 + 11.8 +  9.3 +  9.6 36.8 39.5 + 2.8 +  7.6
Profi  t-related taxes 4 64.9 73.8 +  8.9 + 13.7 + 11.2 16.5 18.6 + 2.2 + 13.2
Assessed income tax 31.2 32.0 +  0.8 +  2.6 +  0.7 8.0 8.8 + 0.7 +  9.2
Corporation tax 12.0 15.6 +  3.6 + 29.8 + 23.1 4.7 5.9 + 1.2 + 26.4
Investment income tax
5 21.7 26.2 +  4.5 + 20.6 + 19.8 3.8 4.0 + 0.2 +  5.3
Turnover taxes 6 180.0 190.0 + 10.0 +  5.5 +  5.7 47.8 49.4 + 1.6 +  3.3
Energy tax 39.8 40.0 +  0.2 +  0.5 +  1.0 15.6 15.5 – 0.1 –  0.7
Tobacco tax 13.5 14.4 +  0.9 +  6.8 +  2.5 4.1 4.8 + 0.7 + 17.3
1 According to offi   cial tax estimate of November 2011. 2 Including EU shares in German tax revenue, but excluding receipts from local 
government taxes. 3 Including (estimated) local government taxes, tax revenue was €35.6 billion above the November 2010 estimate, 
which formed the basis for the 2011 central government budget plan at the end of 2010. According to government estimates, had legis-
lative changes not been made in the meantime, the upward revision would have been €33.7 billion. 4 Employee refunds, homebuyers 
grant and investment grant deducted from revenue. 5 Withholding tax on interest income and capital gains, non-assessed taxes on earn-
ings. 6 Turnover tax and import turnover tax.
Deutsche BundesbankDeutsche Bundesbank 
Monthly Report 
February 2012 
65

Debt brake: safety margin vis-à-vis strict borrowing limit
The debt brake limits the increase in central gov-
ernment debt at both the planning and the 
budget execution stage. To this end, a control 
account was introduced to which the (positive 
or negative) difference between actual structural 
borrowing and the constitutional limit is booked. If debt on the account exceeds a certain thresh-old, which the implementation act fi  xes at 1% of 
GDP , corrective measures are, as a general rule, 
needed to reduce it.1
The preliminary outturn for the 2011 central gov-
ernment budget shows net borrowing of €17.3 
billion. After adjustment for fi  nancial transac-tions and cyclical effects,
2 structural borrowing 
works out at €20 billion.
From 2016 onwards, the constitutional limit for 
structural borrowing will be 0.35% of GDP . For 
the transitional period beginning in 2011, struc-tural borrowing in 2010 is the starting value on which the reduction of the limit in even steps is based. The German central government uses its 
June 2010 estimate of 2.2% of GDP (€53.2 bil-
lion) as the starting value for the limit.3 The limit 
for 2011 was therefore set at 1.9% of GDP 
(€45½ billion). The difference between this limit and the actual fi  gure means that the control ac-
count will be credited with 1% of GDP (€25½ 
billion).4 For the current year, the defi  cit is again 
well below the threshold defi  ned by the govern-
ment despite the planned consolidation pause, 
and under current plans a large sum would be credited to the control account again in the 2012 budget year. In view of the debt brake’s 
purpose of tightly restricting growth in debt dur-ing budgetary planning and execution, it still ap-
pears to make sense not to use the “ski jump effect” to book extensive credit to the control 
account. This is because, in the opposite case of 
the borrowing limit being exceeded during 
budget execution, the buffer on the control ac-
count would permanently allow higher debt 
levels, as the general redemption principle would be waived for this amount, contrary to the debt brake’s intention.In addition, one important characteristic of the 
new debt brake is revealed when looking at un-
expected budgetary and economic develop-
ments. For instance, of the €19 billion by which tax revenue in 2011 exceeded the estimated fi  g-ure,
5 only just over €3 billion is reported as being 
due to cyclical factors even though the overall 
difference in GDP growth was attributed to cyc-
lical factors. Ultimately, only a small percentage 
of the additional revenue was therefore fi  ltered 
out.
Conversely, when developments are less favour-
able than planned – such as during the fi  rst half 
of the last decade – a large percentage of tax shortfalls vis-à-vis the budget plans is generally 
likely to be treated not as cyclical, but rather as 
increasing the structural defi  cit. In an ongoing budget, residual borrowing authorisations or a 
supplementary budget, which allows the regular constitutional limit to be exceeded by 3% of tax 
1 There is no ceiling for credit balances.
2 On balance, net disposals of -€1.9 billion were re-
corded for fi  nancial transactions, which raises the 
structural defi  cit. When the budget was adopted, the 
cyclical component had been expected to make a 
negative impact of -€2.5 billion. As GDP growth turned 
out to be higher than expected at that time, the cyc-
lical component must be adjusted before a booking 
can be made to the control account. Specifi  cally, the 
economic growth not foreseen in the budget plan, 
which is, under the rules of the implementation regu-lation, classifi  ed in full as cyclical, formally accounts for budgetary relief of just over €3 billion, which means a positive cyclical effect of just under €1 billion (product of nominal growth differential (+0.8 percentage point), 
the corresponding sensitivity of the central govern-
ment budget (0.16) and nominal GDP).3 By contrast, the actual structural defi  cit (which is not reported offi   cially) was only 1.4% of GDP in 2010 (€34 billion).
4 If the limit were linked to the defi  cit actually re-
corded in 2010, however, the fi  gure would be just €10 billion. The “ski jump effect” brought about by the ar-
tifi  cially high starting point for the limit up to 2015 is 
discussed in greater detail in Deutsche Bundesbank, 
The debt brake in Germany – key aspects and imple-
mentation, Monthly Report, October 2011, pp 26-28.
5 Of the additional revenue just under €5 billion are, 
on balance, the result of lower payments to the EU, 
the fact that tax refunds expected in connection with 
the Meilicke case did not occur and legal changes 
made in the meantime, which leaves an adjusted dif-
ference of €14 billion.Deutsche Bundesbank 
Monthly Report February 2012 66

corded a cash surplus of €10½ billion. The 
precautionary special fund for repaying infla -
tion-indexed central government debt instru -
ments, the pension reserves and the post office 
pension fund all posted surpluses – as did the 
new Restructuring Fund as a result of its in -
come from the bank levy. By contrast, the In -
vestment and Repayment Fund (IRF), which was set up in 2009 to combat the economic 
crisis, recorded a deficit of €7½ billion because of final drawdowns.
There is a great deal of uncertainty surrounding 
developments in central government’s off-
budget entities in 2012. Following the expiry of 
the IRF’s measures and in view of the surpluses 
that will probably be recorded by the special 
funds and reserves formed to provide for sub-
sequent budgetary burdens, another positive 
budget balance would seem likely. However, an 
act reinstating the Financial Market Stabilisa -
tion Fund (SoFFin) has now been passed, au -
thorising the fund to take new assistance measures to stabilise financial institutions up to 
the end of 2012 and supplement them later if necessary. In addition, the restrictions on exist-
ing borrowing authorisations were lifted and 
their volume was increased by €20 billion. Al -
though no new applications for assistance are 
foreseeable at present, the German govern -
ment is thus taking precautions in case the sov-
ereign debt crisis worsens, as agreed by the 
European Council in December 2011.
However, this new borrowing authorisation for 
a special fund, which ultimately has no time 
limit, is a problematic “foreign body” in the 
context of the debt brake. The statement of le -
gislative intent accompanying the act introdu -
cing the debt brake stresses that special funds 
with their own borrowing authorisation are not compatible with the debt brake. For this reason, this legislation permits the use of special funds’ 
borrowing authorisations that were already in 
existence at the end of 2010, but evidently does not allow new authorisations. In the past, bor -Substantial 
 borrowing 
 authorisations 
for off-budget entities in 2012New borrowing authorisation  
for SoFFin  problematic  
for debt brakerevenue (currently €7½ billion), could be used. If 
this leeway to exceed the general borrowing 
limit were to prove insuffi   cient, an exemption 
clause would have to be used or a short-term 
consolidation package enacted.
When passing the next regular budget, any re-
maining fi  nancing gap would then have to be 
closed, however, and the constitutional borrow-
ing limit would have to be strictly met if the ex-
emption clause could (no longer) be used. Net-
ting with a control account balance is possible 
only when the limit is breached during the exe-cution of a budget.
6 Past experience shows that 
the necessary consolidation can be considerable and will probably tend to be procyclical.
7 Against 
this backdrop, we would urgently recommend maintaining a clear safety margin vis-à-vis the regular constitutional borrowing limit. It would 
be advisable to resume the consolidation steps 
agreed in June 2010 and at least to plan to 
maintain the margin vis-à-vis the limit scheduled for 2012 and thus to aim for a structural surplus from 2016 onwards. The very high debt ratio 
and the future strains as a result of demograph-ics mean that the reduction in government debt 
that this would entail (provided there are no 
negative surprises) appears appropriate.
6 However, it would be possible to deliberately run 
down the credit balance in the event of distorted 
budget estimates.
7 See Deutsche Bundesbank, Reform of German 
budgetary rules, Monthly Report, October 2007, 
pp 47-68 and J Kremer and D Stegarescu, Neue Schuldenregeln: Sicherheitsabstand für eine stetige 
Finanz politik, Wirtschaftsdienst, 9/2009, pp 630-636.Deutsche Bundesbank 
Monthly Report 
February 2012 
67

rowing via off-budget entities has noticeably 
contributed to the accumulation of government 
debt; ultimately, this complicates the task of en -
suring transparent adherence to the rules and 
effective monitoring by both the public and par -
liament. The new borrowing authorisation for SoFFin threatens to set a precedent which 
would rob the structural borrowing limit (0.35% 
of GDP from 2016 onwards) – which was in -
tended as a cast-iron rule – of some of its bind -
ing effect, as it allows the overall limit for the 
central government budget (including the spe -
cial funds) to be overshot ex ante without in -
voking the exemption clause. While we wel -
come the fact that actual borrowing above the 
limit must be subsequently repaid regardless of 
the balance on the control account, the tem -
poral disconnect between borrowing authorisa -
tions and their repayment plans weakens the 
key incentive established in the constitutional rules governing the exemption clause, which 
envisage that the decision on a repayment plan 
should be taken at the same time as that re -garding the exceptional borrowing authorisa-
tion itself. It would therefore have been advis -
able to include a necessary additional borrow -
ing authorisation in the central government budget rather than borrowing via off-budget entities.
8 Going forward, it will be important 
– not least in view of the fiscal compact recently adopted at the European level – to ensure that 
national debt rules are applied stringently and 
transparently and to refrain from opening up or using any scope for circumvention.
State government9
With a deficit of €9½ billion in 2011, the federal 
states’ finances were in appreciably better 
shape than planned (€23½ billion) and than a 
year earlier (€21½ billion). The main reason for 
the clear year-on-year improvement was the 
sharp increase of 7½% in revenue, with tax re -
ceipts also rising by 7½% (€14 billion), while ex -
penditure grew markedly but at a slower pace 
(+2½%). Ongoing payments to local govern -
ments rose by 5½%, reflecting not only an in -
crease in funds transferred from central govern -
ment but also larger payments in the tax-revenue-sharing arrangement with local gov -
ernment, which is essentially based on developments in tax receipts. Personnel ex -
penditure – a major component of state gov -
ernment spending – was up by 2½% on the 
year, mainly because of the increase in negoti -
ated pay rates agreed in the spring and its ex -
tension to employees with civil servant status 
and retired civil servants.
The available budget plans for 2012 envisage an 
improvement vis-à-vis the target figures for 2011. 
Compared with the significantly better budget 
outcome for 2011, however, they imply renewed 
growth of over €15 billion in the deficit. None -Clear decline in 
deficit in 2011
Plans for 2012 
show ongoing need for con-solidationCentral government fiscaldeficit / surplus
Deutsche BundesbankQ1 Q2 Q3 Q42520151050510
–––––++€ bn
–45–40–35–30–25–20–15–10–5
20102009
€ bnQuarterly results
Cumulative from start of year
20092011
20112010
8 See also the Bundesbank’s statement at the hearing of 
the Budget Committee on 23 January 2012 at www.bun -
destag.de.
9 The development of local government finances in the 
third quarter of 2011 was analysed in greater detail in the 
short articles in the Bundesbank’s January 2012 Monthly 
Report. These are the most recent data available.Deutsche Bundesbank 
Monthly Report February 2012 68

theless, the improvements during budget execu -
tion in 2011, which are only partly taken into 
account in the estimates, mean that the 2012 
budget outcome could likewise be better than 
expected. Given that economic conditions are at 
least near-normal, the borrowing plans pre-
sented by some federal states point to an on -
going, substantial need for consolidation, which is not confined to those states that have agreed 
restructuring programmes with the Stability 
Council. Reducing structural deficits remains an 
important task in almost all federal states.
The restructuring programmes for the federal 
states in budgetary hardship (Berlin, Bremen, 
Saarland and Schleswig-Holstein) presented at 
the Stability Council’s10 latest meeting in De -
cember 2011 envisage declining deficits for the 
years from 2012 to 2016. Like the plan for cen-
tral government, these programmes do not allow safety margins vis-à-vis the overly high deficit limits, contrary to the administrative agreements (to receive consolidation assist -
ance) signed in spring 2011.11 Bremen’s margin 
will, de facto, be fully eroded, and in Saarland 
the need for action to curb the deficit is even 
set to increase towards the end of the pro -
gramme period. The planned deficit reduction 
crucially depends on the marked growth in tax receipts expected up to 2015 and extrapolated 
for 2016 in the November 2011 tax estimate. 
By contrast, some of the planned spending cuts 
are left rather abstract. The programme for 
Bremen even states that the process of draw -
ing up the budget has not yet progressed far 
enough to name the specific measures that are required. Given that the Constitutional Court of Bremen ruled in August 2011 that Bremen was 
in extreme budgetary hardship – a status 
which, according to the Federal Constitutional 
Court’s ruling on Berlin in 2006, can actually 
only be declared once all possibilities for easing the budgetary situation have been exhausted – 
it remains to be seen whether the necessary 
savings can really be made.Social security funds12
Statutory pension insurance 
scheme
According to provisional figures, the statutory 
pension insurance scheme posted a surplus of 
€4½ billion in 2011, which was more than dou-
ble that recorded one year previously. Growth 
of 2% in revenue was partly offset by a rise of 
just under 1% in expenditure. The scheme’s re-serves thus swelled to €24 billion, or 1.4 times its monthly expenditure. Assuming that the la-bour market remains robust and wage growth Restructuring 
programmes lack sufficient detail in many cases
Surplus more than double that of previous yearFinances of the German statutory pension insurance scheme
Deutsche Bundesbank2009 2010 2011586062646668
–20+2+4Quarterly
Lin scale
Surplus (+) or deficit (–)€ bnExpenditure€ bn
Log scale
Revenue
10 See Deutsche Bundesbank, The role of the Stability 
Council, Monthly Report, October 2011, pp 20-23.
11 See Deutsche Bundesbank, German states receiving 
consolidation aid – initial deficit reduction requirements 
not very ambitious, Monthly Report, May 2011, pp 70-71.
12 The financial development of the statutory health and 
public long-term care insurance schemes in the third quar -
ter of 2011 was analysed in detail in the short articles of 
the Bundesbank’s December 2011 Monthly Report. These 
are the most recent data available.Deutsche Bundesbank 
Monthly Report 
February 2012 
69

is stable, on this basis – and given an un -
changed contribution rate – the threshold 
value of 1.5 times the scheme’s monthly ex -
penditure would be overshot at the end of 
2012. To prevent this from happening, the con-
tribution rate was lowered from 19.9% 
to 19.6% on 1 January 2012.
Revenue from contributions grew by more than 
2½% in total. At just over 4%, the increase in 
employees’ compulsory contributions was 
much sharper owing to the favourable employ-
ment and wage developments. By contrast, 
contributions on behalf of recipients of unem-
ployment benefit I and basic social welfare al -lowances contracted by two-fifths. This devel -
opment was influenced by the declining 
number of unemployment benefit I recipients, 
and even more strongly by the fact that pen -
sion contributions on behalf of recipients of 
unemployment benefit II were discontinued at 
the beginning of 2011. All in all, central govern-
ment grants were down slightly on the year 
because they had been largely extrapolated on 
the basis of (negative) wage growth in 2009.
Pension payments, the largest component on 
the expenditure side, increased moderately, by 
less than ½%. This was mainly due to low ad-
justments13 overall and to the near-stagnation 
in the number of pensions paid out. By con -
trast, the fact that the general contribution rate 
to the statutory health insurance scheme had 
been raised from 14.9% to 15.5% at the begin-ning of 2011 drove up expenditure. The contri-bution payments
14 made by the pension insur -
ance scheme to the statutory health insurance scheme thus rose by just over 4½%.
In 2012, the statutory pension insurance 
scheme’s finances will deteriorate as a result of 
the 0.3 percentage point cut in the contribu -
tion rate. Furthermore, a much sharper pension 
increase can be expected in mid-2012, essen -
tially because of the wage growth recorded in 
2011. In addition, the sustainability factor will 
increase the adjustment, as the rise in employ-ment – combined with only marginal growth in the number of pensions – has driven down the relevant pensioner ratios. However, the adjust-
ment will be dampened by another “Riester 
reform step” and, in particular, by the need to make up for pension cuts that were previously 
waived.15 Macroeconomic developments will 
be crucial in determining whether the contribu-
Cyclical growth 
in contributions dominates  revenue 
 developmentsExpenditure 
 developments 
moderate 
 overall
Deterioration in 
finances owing 
to contribution rate cutFinances of theFederal Employment Agency
1 Including transfers to the civil servants' pension fund. 2 Ex-
cluding central government liquidity assistance.
Deutsche Bundesbank2009 2010 20116810121416
1.72.02.53.03.54.04.55.06.07.0
642024
–––++€ bnQuarterly
Log scale
€ bnExpenditure,
total 1
Revenue 2
Expenditure on ...€ bn
... vocational training... unemployment
    benefits and short-
    time working benefits
Lin scale
Surplus (+) or deficit (–)
13 Pensions were not increased in mid-2010 and were 
raised by 0.99% in mid-2011.14 The statutory pension insurance scheme pays half of the 
general contribution to the health insurance scheme less 
the special contribution of 0.9%, just as employers do for their employees.15 The accumulated need for such compensation currently amounts to 2.85% in western Germany and 1.43% in east-ern Germany. It will be reduced by cutting calculated pen-sion increases by no more than one half.Deutsche Bundesbank 
Monthly Report February 2012 70

tion rate will be cut again in 2013. Fundamen-
tally, however, pressure to raise the contribu -
tion rate will re-emerge when the post-war 
“baby boomers” start to retire around the mid-
dle of this decade.
Federal Employment Agency
The Federal Employment Agency posted an al-most balanced budget for 2011, after recording 
a deficit of just over €8 billion in 2010. Al -
though revenue growth, at 1½%, was not par -
ticularly strong, expenditure fell by 17½%.16
Growth in the Federal Employment Agency’s 
contribution receipts was particularly strong in 
2011 (12½%), as the contribution rate had been 
raised from 2.8% to 3.0% at the beginning of 
the year. The favourable employment and wage 
developments also made an important contri -
bution to the sharp rise in revenue. However, 
contributions for insolvency benefit payments 
were cancelled for 2011 following a particularly 
high contribution rate of 0.41% in 2010. Total 
contributions therefore did not exceed the pre-vious year’s level. While the regular central gov-
ernment grant had been raised only slightly, a 
special payment of €½ billion from central gov-
ernment contributed to the appreciable im -
provement in revenue.17
Expenditure on unemployment benefit I de -
clined sharply by 17%. Spending on short-time working benefits fell by as much as two-thirds 
and nearly returned to its pre-crisis level. Out -
lays on active labour market policy likewise de-
creased by 17% (including refunds of social 
contributions for short-time work). Overall, the 
Federal Employment Agency thus benefited significantly from the very favourable labour 
market conditions.
In its budget plan, the Federal Employment Agency expects a slight surplus of €½ billion 
for 2012. This estimate assumes that unemploy-ment will continue to decline on average over 
2012 and employment will see another slight 
increase. It also includes the first scheduled cut of just under €1 billion in the rule-based central government grant. As things stand, the labour 
market developments could turn out to be more favourable. In addition, the expenditure 
appropriations for active labour market policy 
measures could be overly high, as has often 
been the case in the past. All in all, a larger sur -
plus could be attainable for the Federal Em -
ployment Agency this year.Balanced 
budget thanks to favourable  labour market 
developments
Strong growth  
in contribution 
receipts …
… but insol-
vency benefit contributions cancelledSharp decline in spending thanks to favourable  labour market 
developments
Surplus could  
be larger than 
estimated in budget plan
16 The Federal Employment Agency’s pension fund, which 
receives contributions from the Federal Employment Agency and pays the pensions of its civil servants, again 
recorded a surplus of just under €½ billion and its reserves thus amounted to just over €3½ billion.17 At the end of 2011, central government transferred just under €½ billion to compensate for the fact that the Fed-eral Employment Agency had paid pension insurance con-
tributions on behalf of employees in the entry or educa -
tional area of recognised workshops for disabled persons 
over a period of four years. Section 179 of the Social Secu-
rity Code VI specifies that central government shall no 
longer refund these contributions from 2012 onwards.Deutsche Bundesbank 
Monthly Report 
February 2012 
71

Deutsche Bundesbank 
Monthly Report February 2012 72

Statistical 
SectionDeutsche Bundesbank 
Monthly Report 
February 2012 
1•

Contents
I Key economic data for the euro area
 1 Monetary developments and interest rates  ..................................................................  5•
 2
 External 
transactions and positions
 ..............................................................................  5•
 3
 Gener
al economic indicators
 .......................................................................................  6•
II Overall monetary survey in the euro area
 1 The money stock and its counterparts  .........................................................................  8•
 2
 Consolidated 
balance sheet of monetary financial institutions (MFIs)
 ...........................  10•
 3
 Banking 
system’s liquidity position
 ...............................................................................  14•
III Consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem
 1 A ssets  ..........................................................................................................................  16•
 2
 Liabilities
 .....................................................................................................................  18•
IV Banks
 1 A ssets and liabilities of monetary financial institutions (excluding the Bundesbank)  
in Germany
 .................................................................................................................  20•
 2
 Principal 
assets and liabilities of banks (MFIs) in Germany, by category of banks
 ..........  24•
 3
 A
ssets and liabilities of banks (MFIs) in Germany vis-à-vis residents
 ..............................  26•
 4
 A
ssets and liabilities of banks (MFIs) in Germany vis-à-vis non-residents
 .......................  28•
 5
 Lending 
by banks (MFIs) in Germany to domestic non-banks (non-MFIs)
 .....................  30•
 6
 Lending 
by banks (MFIs) in Germany to domestic enterprises and households, 
 housing 
loans, sectors of economic activity
 .................................................................  32•
 7
 Deposits 
of domestic non-banks (non-MFIs) at banks (MFIs) in Germany
 .....................  34•
 8
 Deposits 
of domestic households and non-profit institutions at banks (MFIs) in 
 Germany
 .....................................................................................................................  36•
 9
 Deposits 
of domestic government at banks (MFIs) in Germany, by creditor group........  36•
 1
0
 Savings 
deposits and bank savings bonds of banks (MFIs) in Germany sold to  
non-banks (non-MFIs)..................................................................................................  38•
 1
1
 Debt 
securities and money market paper outstanding of banks (MFIs) in Germany
 ...... 38•
 1
2
 Building 
and loan associations (MFIs) in Germany
 ........................................................  39•
 1
3
 A
ssets and liabilities of the foreign branches and foreign subsidiaries of  
German banks (MFIs)
 ...................................................................................................  40•Deutsche Bundesbank 
Monthly Report February 2012 2•

V Minimum reserves
 1 Reserve ratios  ..............................................................................................................  42•
 2
 Reserve 
maintenance in Germany up to the end of 1998
 ............................................  42•
 3
 Reserve 
maintenance in the euro area
 .........................................................................  42•
VI Interest rates
 1 ECB interest rates  ........................................................................................................  43•
 2
 Base 
rates
 ....................................................................................................................  43•
 3
 Eur
osystem monetary policy operations allotted through tenders
 ................................  43•
 4
 Money 
market rates, by month
 ...................................................................................  43•
 5
 Inter
est rates and volumes for outstanding amounts and new business of  
German banks (MFIs)
 ...................................................................................................  44•
VII Capital market
 1 Sales and purchases of debt securities and shares in Germany  .....................................  48•
 2
 Sales 
of debt securities issued by residents
 ..................................................................  49•
 3
 Amounts 
outstanding of debt securities issued by residents.........................................  50•
 4
 Shar
es in circulation issued by residents
 .......................................................................  50•
 5
 Y
ields and indices on German securities
 ......................................................................  51•
 6
 Sales 
and purchases of mutual fund shares in Germany
 ...............................................  51•
VIII Financial accounts
 1 A cquisition of financial assets and financing of private non-financial sectors  ................  52•
 2
 Financial 
assets and liabilities of private non-financial sectors
 ......................................  53•
IX Public finances in Germany
 1 G eneral government: deficit and debt level as defined in the Maastricht Treaty  ..................  54•
 2
 Gener
al government: revenue, expenditure and fiscal deficit/surplus as shown in  
the national accounts
 ..................................................................................................  54•
 3
 Gener
al government: budgetary development (as per government’s financial 
 statistics)
 .....................................................................................................................  55•
 4
 Centr
al, state and local government: budgetary development (as per government’s 
 financial 
statistics)
 ........................................................................................................  55•
 5
 Centr
al, state and local government: tax revenue
 ........................................................  56•
 6
 C
entral and state government and European Union: tax revenue, by type  .......................  56•
 7
 Centr
al, state and local government: individual taxes
 ..................................................  57•D
eutsche Bundesbank 
Monthly Report 
February 2012 
3•

 8 German pension insurance scheme: budgetary development and assets  ......................  57•
 9
 F
ederal Employment Agency: budgetary development
 .................................................  58•
 1
0
 S
tatutory health insurance scheme: budgetary development
 .......................................  58•
 1
1
 S
tatutory long-term care insurance scheme: budgetary development
 ..........................  59•
 1
2
 Centr
al government: borrowing in the market
 .............................................................  59•
 1
3
 Centr
al, state and local government: debt by creditor
 .................................................  59•
 1
4
 Centr
al, state and local government: debt by category
 ................................................  60•
X Economic conditions in Germany
 1 Origin and use of domestic product, distribution of national income  ...........................  61•
 2
 Output 
in the production sector
 ..................................................................................  62•
 3
 Or
ders received by industry
 .........................................................................................  63•
 4
 Or
ders received by construction
 ..................................................................................  64•
 5
 Retail 
trade turnover, sales of motor vehicles
 ...............................................................  64•
 6
 Labour 
market
 .............................................................................................................  65•
 7
 Prices
 ..........................................................................................................................  66•
 8
 Households’ 
income
 ....................................................................................................  67•
 9
 Negotiated 
pay rates (overall economy)
 .......................................................................  67•
XI External sector
 1 Major items of the balance of payments of the euro area  ...........................................  68•
 2
 Major 
items of the balance of payments of the Federal Republic of Germany
 ..............  69•
 3
 F
oreign trade (special trade) of the Federal Republic of Germany, by country and 
group of countries
 .......................................................................................................  70•
 4
 Services 
and income of the Federal Republic of Germany
 ............................................  71•
 5
 C
urrent transfers of the Federal Republic of Germany
 ..................................................  71•
 6
 C
apital transfers
 ..........................................................................................................  71•
 7
 Financial 
account of the Federal Republic of Germany
 .................................................  72•
 8
 External 
position of the Bundesbank up to end-1998
 ..................................................  73•
 9
 External 
position of the Bundesbank in European Monetary Union
 ..............................  73•
 1
0
 A
ssets and liabilities of enterprises in Germany (other than banks) vis-à-vis  
non-residents
 ..............................................................................................................  74•
 1
1
 ECB 
euro reference exchange rates of selected currencies
 ...........................................  75•
 1
2
 Eur
o member countries and irrevocable euro conversion rates in the third stage of 
European Economic and Monetary Union....................................................................  75•
 1
3
 Effective 
exchange rates of the euro and indicators of the German economy’s price 
competitiveness
 ...........................................................................................................  76•Deutsche Bundesbank 
Monthly Report February 2012 4•

Deutsche Bundesbank
5  Monthly Report
February 2012
I Key economic data for the euro area 
 
1 Monetary developments and interest rates
 
 
 
 
 Money stock in various definitions 1,2 Determinants of the money stock 1 Interest rates
 M 3 3 
MFI lending to Yield on Euro-
 3-month enterprises Monetary pean govern-
MFI lending, and capital 3-month ment bonds moving  average
M1 M2 (centred) total households formation  4 Eonia 5,7 Euribor 6,7 outstanding 8 
Period Annual percentage change % Annual percentage as a monthly average
2010          Apr 10.5 1.3 − 0.3 − 0.1 1.8 0.4 5.9 0.35 0.64 3.6
         May 10.4 1.5 0.0 0.0 1.7 0.1 5.1 0.34 0.69 3.5         June 9.4 1.5 0.3 0.2 1.6 0.1 3.9 0.35 0.73 3.6
         July 8.3 1.5 0.3 0.5 2.0 0.7 3.9 0.48 0.85 3.5
         Aug 7.7 2.0 1.1 0.8 2.4 1.2 3.5 0.43 0.90 3.3
         Sep 6.1 2.0 1.1 1.1 2.3 1.2 3.4 0.45 0.88 3.3
         Oct 4.9 2.1 1.1 1.4 3.3 1.2 3.4 0.70 1.00 3.3
         Nov 4.6 2.3 2.1 1.6 4.0 1.9 3.8 0.59 1.04 3.7
         Dec 4.3 2.2 1.7 1.8 3.5 1.6 3.7 0.50 1.02 4.1
2011          Jan 3.2 2.3 1.6 1.8 3.8 2.1 3.4 0.66 1.02 4.2
         Feb 2.8 2.4 2.1 2.0 3.8 2.3 3.9 0.71 1.09 4.3
         Mar 2.9 2.6 2.2 2.1 3.3 2.2 3.7 0.66 1.18 4.4
         Apr 1.6 2.4 1.9 2.1 3.2 2.3 3.8 0.97 1.32 4.5
         May 1.2 2.4 2.3 2.1 3.1 2.5 4.1 1.03 1.43 4.4
         June 1.3 2.3 2.0 2.1 2.6 2.1 4.4 1.12 1.49 4.4
         July 1.0 2.2 2.1 2.3 2.4 1.8 4.4 1.01 1.60 4.6
         Aug 1.7 2.4 2.8 2.6 2.4 1.7 4.3 0.91 1.55 4.1
         Sep 2.0 2.5 2.9 2.8 2.3 1.6 4.2 1.01 1.54 4.0
         Oct 1.7 1.9 2.6 2.5 1.6 2.1 4.2 0.96 1.58 4.3
         Nov 2.1 2.1 2.0 2.1 0.8 1.0 3.4 0.79 1.48 4.8
         Dec 1.6 1.8 1.6 ... 1.0 0.4 2.9 0.63 1.43 4.8
2012          Jan ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 0.38 1.22 4.7
1 Source: ECB. 2 Seasonally adjusted. 3 Excluding money market fund sharesunits, OverNight Index Average. 6 Euro Interbank Offered Rate. 7 See also footnotes to
money market paper and debt securities with a maturity of up to two years held by Table VI.4, p 43  8 GDP-weighted yield on ten-year government bonds. Countries
non-euro-area residents. 4 Longer-term liabilities to euro-area non-MFIs. 5 Euro include:DE,FR,NL,BE,AT,FI,IE,PT,ES,IT,GR,SK. 
 
 
2 External transactions and positions  * 
  
 
Selected items of the euro-area balance of payments Euro exchange rates  1 
Current account Capital account Effective exchange rate 3 
of which Direct Securities Other Reserve
Balance Trade balance Balance investment investment assets Dollar rate Nominal Real  4 transactions 2 
Period € million Euro/US-$ Q1 1999 = 100
2010          Apr − 4,569 + 977 + 1,084 − 18,195 + 32,534 − 13,162 − 94 1.3406 105.0 103.0
         May − 15,208 − 1,980 + 13,726 − 15,266 + 51,236 − 22,167 − 77 1.2565 101.8 100.0         June + 1,817 + 3,044 + 562 − 2,400 + 13,188 − 11,374 + 1,148 1.2209 99.8 98.1
         July + 5,211 + 6,272 − 233 − 12,923 − 23,084 + 38,937 − 3,164 1.2770 101.6 99.8
         Aug − 7,462 − 4,602 + 667 − 30,651 + 4,623 + 28,294 − 1,600 1.2894 101.2 99.3
         Sep − 4,879 + 3,788 + 6,323 − 8,645 + 35,718 − 20,461 − 289 1.3067 101.5 99.5
         Oct + 3,892 + 5,665 + 1,998 − 8,663 + 4,959 + 5,939 − 237 1.3898 105.0 102.6         Nov − 3,426 − 839 + 13,388 + 45,413 + 21,484 − 53,510 + 1 1.3661 103.7 101.2         Dec + 2,963 + 639 − 5,841 + 42,731 + 1,967 − 49,222 − 1,318 1.3220 101.7 99.2
2011          Jan − 19,921 − 14,711 + 13,548 + 11,750 − 29,920 + 37,708 − 5,989 1.3360 101.4 98.9
         Feb − 9,290 − 827 + 2,180 − 27,869 + 94,422 − 65,344 + 971 1.3649 102.4 99.7
         Mar − 1,006 + 2,526 + 17 + 6,252 + 61,782 − 61,463 − 6,554 1.3999 104.1 101.6
         Apr − 4,864 − 3,878 − 3,971 − 29,764 + 16,137 + 3,635 + 6,021 1.4442 105.9 103.3
         May − 15,918 + 340 + 15,373 − 4,991 + 42,834 − 19,353 − 3,118 1.4349 104.9 102.2         June − 168 + 514 + 6,988 + 5,794 + 92,796 − 93,187 + 1,585 1.4388 105.0 102.3
         July + 1,414 + 3,754 − 3,768 − 17,227 − 25,427 + 40,088 − 1,203 1.4264 104.0 101.0
         Aug − 3,576 − 4,169 + 1,402 + 7,685 + 19,060 − 28,735 + 3,392 1.4343 103.9 100.8         Sep + 1,009 + 3,551 + 12,164 − 6,991 + 28,591 − 11,029 + 1,594 1.3770 102.8 99.9
         Oct + 2,608 + 1,745 − 5,025 − 7,643 − 27,306 + 31,005 − 1,082 1.3706 103.0 100.3         Nov + 985 + 6,431 − 3,569 − 6,815 + 3,181 + 298 − 232 1.3556 102.6 99.9
         Dec ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 1.3179 100.8 98.2
2012          Jan ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 1.2905 98.9 96.4
*  Source: ECB. 1  See also Tables XI.12 and 13, pp 75−76
  2  Including
financial derivatives. 3  Vis-à-vis the currencies of The-EER-20 group. 4  Based on
consumer prices. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
6  Monthly Report
February 2012
I. Key economic data for the euro area 
 
3  General economic indicators
 
 
                   
 
Period Euro area Belgium Germany Estonia Finland France Greece Ireland Italy
 
Real gross domestic product 1,2
 
2009 − 4.3 − 2.8 − 5.1 − 14.3 − 8.3 − 2.7 − 3.2 − 7.0 − 5.1
2010 1.9 2.3 3.7 2.3 3.7 1.5 − 3.5 − 0.4 1.5
2011 ... ... 3.0 ... ... ... ... ... ...
2010          Q3 2.1 2.1 4.0 4.5 3.3 1.7 − 4.6 0.3 1.4
         Q4 2.0 2.2 3.8 6.0 5.6 1.3 − 8.6 − 0.2 1.4
2011          Q1 2.4 3.0 5.0 9.5 5.0 2.4 − 8.3 0.2 0.7
         Q2 1.6 2.1 3.0 8.4 1.9 1.8 − 7.4 2.1 0.8
         Q3 1.3 1.5 2.6 8.5 2.7 1.4 − 5.0 − 0.1 0.0
         Q4 0.7 ... 1.5 4.0 ... ... ... ... ...
 
Industrial production 1,3
 
2009 − 14.8 − 9.5 − 16.4 − 23.9 − 18.1 − 12.8 − 9.2 − 4.5 − 18.8
2010 7.4 11.9 10.8 20.3 5.1 4.7 − 6.6 7.6 6.4
2011 e 3.6 ... 4p 7.6 17.6 1.4 2.4 p − 8.7 p 1.0 0.0
2010          Q3 7.1 9.5 10.6 23.9 5.8 3.3 − 6.7 11.5 7.2
         Q4 8.0 9.9 12.7 33.8 9.5 5.0 − 6.3 12.8 5.0
2011          Q1 6.6 8.2 11.9 31.6 4.6 4.5 − 6.3 0.9 2.2
         Q2 4.1 5.2 8.2 26.2 3.1 2.3 − 11.6 1.5 1.9
         Q3 4.0 6.5 8.1 17.2 0.4 2.9 − 5.5 2.1 − 0.5
         Q4 e − 0.2 ... 4p 2.6 0.2 − 2.0 0.1 p − 11.6 p − 0.2 − 3.4
 
Capacity utilisation in industry 5
 
2009 71.1 72.0 72.0 58.1 67.0 73.6 70.7 − 66.1
2010 75.8 77.9 79.7 67.1 73.5 77.2 68.1 − 68.3
2011 80.4 80.5 86.1 73.3 77.0 83.0 67.9 − 72.6
2010          Q4 77.9 79.4 83.1 71.2 74.8 78.4 67.1 − 70.9
2011          Q1 80.0 81.2 85.6 73.5 77.0 81.8 69.5 − 72.5
         Q2 81.3 82.6 86.8 73.4 77.4 84.5 68.8 − 74.3
         Q3 80.5 80.1 86.7 73.0 77.9 83.0 67.5 − 72.1
         Q4 79.6 78.0 85.1 73.2 75.7 82.8 65.8 − 71.6
2012          Q1 79.9 79.0 85.3 70.5 75.1 83.9 65.5 − 70.7
 
Standardised unemployment rate 6,7
 
2009 9.6 7.9 7.8 13.8 8.3 9.5 9.5 11.9 7.8
2010 10.1 8.3 7.1 16.9 8.4 9.8 12.6 13.7 8.4
2011 10.1 7.2 5.9 ... 7.8 9.7 ... 14.3 ...
2011          July 10.1 7.3 6.0 7.8 9.7 17.9 14.6 8.3
         Aug 10.2 7.4 6.0 7.7 9.6 18.4 14.6 8.3
         Sep 10.3 7.4 5.6 11.3 7.7 9.7 18.8 14.4 8.6
         Oct 10.3 7.3 5.6 7.6 9.7 19.2 14.4 8.5
         Nov 10.4 7.2 5.7 7.6 9.8 ... 14.4 8.8
         Dec 10.4 7.2 5.5 ... 7.6 9.9 ... 14.5 8.9
 
Harmonised Index of Consumer Prices 1
 
2009 8 0.3 0.0 0.2 0.2 1.6 0.1 1.3 − 1.7 0.8
2010 1.6 2.3 1.2 2.7 1.7 1.7 4.7 − 1.6 1.6
2011 9p 2.7 3.5 2.5 5.1 3.3 2.3 3.1 1.2 2.9
2011          Aug 2.5 3.4 2.5 5.6 3.5 2.4 1.4 1.0 2.3
         Sep 3.0 3.4 2.9 5.4 3.5 2.4 2.9 1.3 3.6
         Oct 3.0 3.4 2.9 4.7 3.2 2.5 2.9 1.5 3.8
         Nov 3.0 3.7 2.8 4.4 3.2 2.7 2.8 1.7 3.7
         Dec p 2.7 3.2 2.3 4.1 2.6 2.7 2.2 1.4 3.7
2012          Jan e 2.7 ... 2.3 ... ... ... ... ... ...
 
General government financial balance 10
 
2008 − 2.1 − 1.3 − 0.1 − 2.9 4.3 − 3.3 − 9.8 − 7.3 − 2.7
2009 − 6.4 − 5.8 − 3.2 − 2.0 − 2.5 − 7.5 − 15.8 − 14.2 − 5.4
2010 − 6.2 − 4.1 − 4.3 0.2 − 2.5 − 7.1 − 10.6 − 31.3 − 4.6
 
General government debt 10
 
2008 70.1 89.3 66.7 4.5 33.9 68.2 113.0 44.2 105.8
2009 79.8 95.9 74.4 7.2 43.3 79.0 129.3 65.2 115.5
2010 85.3 96.2 83.2 6.7 48.3 82.3 144.9 92.5 118.4
Sources: National data, European Commission, Eurostat, European Central Bank. 4  Provisional; adjusted in advance by the Federal Statistical Office by way of
Latest data are partly based on press reports and are provisional. 1  Annual percen- estimates to the results of the Quarterly Production Survey. 5  Manufacturing, in %;
tage change. 2  GDP of the euro area calculated from seasonally adjusted data. seasonally adjusted; data are collected in January, April, July and
3  Manufacturing, mining and energy; adjusted for working-day variations.

Deutsche Bundesbank
7  Monthly Report
February 2012
I.  Key economic data for the euro area  
 
   
                   
 
Luxembourg Malta Netherlands Austria Portugal Slovakia Slovenia Spain Cyprus   Period
 
Real gross domestic product 1,2
 
− 5.3 − 2.6 − 3.5 − 3.8 − 2.9 − 4.8 − 8.0 − 3.7 − 1.9 2009
2.7 2.9 1.7 2.3 1.4 4.0 1.4 − 0.1 1.1 2010
... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 2011
2.0 1.8 1.8 3.6 1.1 4.0 1.7 0.0 2.1 2010          Q3
3.9 3.2 2.3 2.6 1.0 3.7 2.4 0.2 2.3          Q4
2.9 2.0 2.8 5.3 − 0.7 3.4 2.2 1.1 1.6 2011          Q1
0.5 2.4 1.6 4.0 − 1.3 3.5 0.8 0.9 1.4          Q2
1.0 2.2 1.1 2.7 − 1.9 3.0 − 0.5 0.7 − 0.5          Q3
... ... − 0.7 ... ... 3.4 ... ... ...          Q4
 
Industrial production1,3
 
− 15.8 − − 7.6 − 11.3 − 8.6 − 13.8 − 17.7 − 15.8 − 9.0 2009
10.5 − 7.1 6.7 1.7 19.0 6.0 0.8 − 2.2 2010
p − 3.3 − − 0.9 ... − 2.1 p 7.0 3.2 − 1.5 ... 2011
5.7 − 4.2 9.6 − 0.2 15.3 7.3 − 0.2 − 0.4 2010          Q36.3 − 5.9 9.2 1.0 16.7 7.3 0.4 − 2.8          Q4
1.8 − 0.8 11.9 0.1 11.9 8.2 1.8 − 3.7 2011          Q1
− 3.7 − − 1.6 9.4 − 1.6 7.9 4.0 − 1.1 − 2.9          Q2
− 2.3 − 2.7 6.3 − 2.7 5.6 1.0 − 1.4 − 12.9          Q3
p − 8.6 − − 4.8 ... − 3.9 p 3.1 p − 0.3 − 5.0 ...          Q4
 
Capacity utilisation in industry 5
 
65.4 70.1 76.0 77.4 72.6 54.0 70.9 70.0 65.2 200978.5 77.7 78.9 81.9 75.0 58.0 76.0 71.1 62.6 201083.2 78.7 80.3 85.4 74.4 61.6 80.4 73.3 61.4 2011
78.1 77.0 79.7 83.7 74.5 57.9 78.2 72.5 63.9 2010          Q482.9 80.6 80.7 84.6 73.5 68.0 79.9 73.5 63.2 2011          Q1
87.3 81.1 81.1 86.3 76.4 55.4 82.2 74.7 62.9          Q2
82.7 76.9 80.6 85.8 74.3 60.6 80.1 72.6 61.3          Q3
79.8 76.0 78.9 85.0 73.5 62.3 79.5 72.2 58.1          Q4
79.2 74.2 79.8 85.1 74.1 67.5 79.7 72.5 56.7 2012          Q1
 
Standardised unemployment rate 6,7
 
5.1 6.9 3.7 4.8 10.6 12.0 5.9 18.0 5.3 2009
4.6 6.9 4.5 4.4 12.0 14.4 7.3 20.1 6.2 20104.8 6.4 4.4 4.1 12.7 13.4 8.1 21.6 7.7 2011
4.9 6.5 4.3 3.7 12.6 13.4 8.1 21.7 7.7 2011          July
4.9 6.4 4.4 3.7 12.6 13.4 8.0 22.1 8.0          Aug 
5.0 6.4 4.5 4.0 12.8 13.4 8.2 22.4 8.4          Sep 
4.9 6.4 4.8 4.1 13.0 13.5 8.2 22.7 8.7          Oct 
4.9 6.5 4.9 4.1 13.2 13.5 8.2 22.9 9.0          Nov 
5.2 6.5 4.9 4.1 13.6 13.4 8.2 22.9 9.3          Dec 
 
Harmonised Index of Consumer Prices 1
 
0.0 1.8 1.0 0.4 − 0.9 0.9 0.9 − 0.2 0.2 20092.8 2.0 0.9 1.7 1.4 0.7 2.1 2.0 2.6 20103.7
p 2.4 2.5 p 3.6 3.6 4.1 2.1 3.1 3.5 2011
3.7 2.3 3.2 3.7 2.8 4.1 1.2 2.7 2.7 2011          Aug 3.8 2.7 3.0 3.9 3.5 4.4 2.3 3.0 2.5          Sep 
3.8 2.4 2.8 3.8 4.0 4.6 2.9 3.0 3.2          Oct 
4.0 1.5 2.6 3.9 3.8 4.8 2.8 2.9 4.0          Nov 
3.4
p 1.3 2.5 p 3.4 3.5 4.6 2.1 2.4 4.2          Dec 
... ... p 2.9 ... 3.4 ... 2.3 ... ... 2012          Jan 
 
General government financial balance 10
 
3.0 − 4.6 0.5 − 0.9 − 3.6 − 2.1 − 1.9 − 4.5 0.9 2008
− 0.9 − 3.7 − 5.6 − 4.1 − 10.1 − 8.0 − 6.1 − 11.2 − 6.1 2009− 1.1 − 3.6 − 5.1 − 4.4 − 9.8 − 7.7 − 5.8 − 9.3 − 5.3 2010
 
General government debt 10
 
13.7 62.2 58.5 63.8 71.6 27.8 21.9 40.1 48.9 200814.8 67.8 60.8 69.5 83.0 35.5 35.3 53.8 58.5 200919.1 69.0 62.9 71.8 93.3 41.0 38.8 61.0 61.5 2010
October. 6  As a percentage of the civilian labour force; seasonally adjusted. 7  Stan- Estonia from 2011 onwards. 10  As a percentage of GDP; euro-area aggregate:
dardised unemployment rate of Germany: calculation based on unadjusted data from European Central Bank (ESA 1995), member states: European Commission
the Federal Statistical Office. 8  Including Slovakia from 2009 onwards. 9  Including (Maastricht Treaty definition). 

Deutsche Bundesbank
8  Monthly Report
February 2012
II Overall monetary survey in the euro area 
 
1 The money stock and its counterparts *
(a) Euro area 
  
€ billion
I Lending to non-banks (non-MFIs) II Net claims on III Monetary capital formation at monetary
in the euro area non-euro-area residents financial institutions (MFIs) in the euro area
Enterprises General
and households government Debt
Deposits securities
Liabil- with an Deposits with
Claims ities to agreed at agreed maturities
on non- non-euro- maturity notice of of over Capital
of which of which euro-area area of over over 2 years and
Period Total Total Total Total residents residents Total 2 years 3 months (net)  2 Securities Securities reserves 3 
2010          May 21.8 − 16.0 − 41.6 37.7 23.5 26.8 31.6 4.8 5.4 − 3.1 − 1.8 − 7.8 18.1
         June 87.4 37.2 − 10.4 50.2 31.9 − 9.2 − 156.1 − 146.9 7.2 − 6.0 − 2.4 − 18.3 33.9
         July 32.1 45.3 29.1 − 13.1 − 2.3 − 26.9 − 42.5 − 15.6 30.3 28.1 − 2.2 6.2 − 1.9
         Aug 3.4 3.6 12.6 − 0.2 − 7.5 − 6.4 91.8 98.3 10.9 6.9 − 1.4 − 1.9 7.3
         Sep 62.6 44.6 2.2 18.0 13.0 9.4 − 44.8 − 54.2 14.6 3.6 − 2.7 15.6 − 2.0
         Oct 149.9 − 37.1 − 20.2 187.0 107.5 − 82.9 − 37.8 45.1 9.2 − 7.5 − 1.7 12.1 6.3
         Nov 160.2 143.4 51.5 16.8 − 37.7 8.3 15.5 7.2 57.4 29.4 0.2 1.9 25.9
         Dec − 113.0 − 47.9 − 28.7 − 65.1 − 69.8 50.3 − 89.2 − 139.5 30.9 19.9 − 0.5 − 2.3 13.8
2011          Jan 43.9 27.6 3.2 16.3 19.9 12.3 84.1 71.8 16.2 − 1.4 1.5 22.2 − 6.1
         Feb 19.8 23.7 − 0.4 − 3.9 10.2 17.4 31.7 14.2 33.0 − 5.4 0.5 22.8 15.2
         Mar − 28.1 − 6.5 − 25.2 − 21.7 − 11.1 100.9 − 33.5 − 134.5 25.4 9.6 0.0 14.5 1.2         Apr 82.4 81.7 46.4 0.7 11.1 − 22.1 82.8 104.9 34.0 17.1 − 1.1 18.8 − 0.7
         May 6.0 19.1 − 21.9 − 13.1 10.2 8.0 83.3 75.3 25.4 1.4 − 0.5 11.1 13.4
         June 4.8 − 21.0 − 49.1 25.8 29.2 71.2 − 129.7 − 200.8 25.0 4.8 − 0.3 4.0 16.5
         July − 5.5 6.1 3.4 − 11.6 − 15.7 − 17.6 − 37.7 − 20.1 33.2 − 5.2 0.0 1.1 37.3
         Aug 7.0 − 10.8 − 12.6 17.8 31.8 26.2 69.7 43.5 8.2 0.5 − 0.4 − 1.9 10.0
         Sep 52.2 28.2 − 20.4 24.0 21.1 22.0 − 12.4 − 34.4 9.0 13.0 − 0.7 − 5.5 2.2
         Oct 35.6 37.0 36.1 − 1.4 − 1.1 − 52.5 − 90.7 − 38.2 10.3 24.5 − 0.0 − 18.3 4.1
         Nov 30.4 − 8.7 9.5 39.0 40.4 − 26.9 − 69.1 − 42.3 − 3.6 − 10.1 − 0.9 − 11.2 18.7
         Dec − 88.5 −123.2 − 22.7 34.8 19.9 14.6 − 29.3 − 43.9 − 4.0 6.8 − 0.7 − 40.2 30.1
  
  
(b) German contribution
 
I Lending to non-banks (non-MFIs) II Net claims on III Monetary capital formation at monetary
in the euro area non-euro-area residents financial institutions (MFIs) in the euro area
Enterprises General
and households government Debt
Deposits securities
Liabil- with an Deposits with
Claims ities to agreed at agreed maturities
on non- non-euro- maturity notice of of over Capital
of which of which euro-area area of over over 2 years and
Period Total Total Total Total residents residents Total 2 years 3 months (net)  2 Securities Securities reserves 3 
2010          May − 36.4 − 54.5 − 52.2 18.1 7.8 − 35.4 13.5 48.9 − 17.0 − 5.3 − 1.8 1.7 − 11.6         June 15.1 − 10.3 − 9.7 25.3 20.4 − 17.8 − 62.2 − 44.4 − 4.9 0.7 − 1.3 − 3.4 − 0.9
         July − 2.9 − 1.5 − 4.5 − 1.4 2.9 − 30.9 − 38.5 − 7.5 − 6.5 − 0.2 − 2.2 − 12.2 8.1         Aug 8.7 6.9 1.6 1.8 1.8 7.2 12.0 4.8 − 3.4 2.4 − 1.8 − 2.4 − 1.7
         Sep − 16.1 − 24.0 − 5.2 7.9 4.0 − 2.2 − 23.0 − 20.9 − 0.4 − 1.0 − 2.4 2.2 0.7
         Oct 101.0 7.6 1.6 93.4 88.7 5.0 − 3.4 − 8.4 2.3 − 2.1 − 1.4 − 4.4 10.2
         Nov 40.6 33.5 5.2 7.1 − 69.0 − 5.2 6.4 11.6 4.3 − 0.2 0.5 3.1 0.8
         Dec − 72.0 − 39.6 − 4.2 − 32.4 − 22.5 18.4 − 11.7 − 30.1 − 0.5 − 0.2 − 0.0 − 0.7 0.42011          Jan 30.1 19.0 16.9 11.1 6.2 9.5 6.0 − 3.5 5.8 − 2.5 − 0.5 2.3 6.5
         Feb − 0.8 13.5 − 7.2 − 14.3 − 2.4 − 4.0 3.6 7.7 2.2 − 1.8 0.0 0.0 3.9
         Mar − 29.6 − 17.0 − 0.5 − 12.5 − 2.2 26.3 − 26.8 − 53.1 − 3.7 − 1.7 0.2 − 4.7 2.5
         Apr 29.0 36.8 22.4 − 7.7 3.2 18.9 50.0 31.2 2.4 − 1.3 − 0.8 3.0 1.4
         May − 26.0 − 16.3 − 24.7 − 9.7 1.3 5.5 1.4 − 4.1 − 10.3 − 0.3 − 0.1 − 3.5 − 6.4
         June − 23.3 − 13.4 − 12.4 − 10.0 − 6.4 17.2 − 41.4 − 58.5 4.8 0.2 − 0.2 2.0 2.8
         July − 0.8 − 2.0 − 4.0 1.3 − 3.9 − 9.4 − 5.0 4.4 − 5.0 − 0.3 0.0 − 6.3 1.5
         Aug 15.3 12.7 − 6.1 2.6 12.0 − 31.3 24.0 55.3 0.1 − 0.1 − 0.1 − 1.2 1.5
         Sep 12.7 9.6 − 5.5 3.1 3.6 − 41.3 − 15.9 25.4 − 8.2 − 3.8 − 0.5 − 2.4 − 1.5
         Oct 29.3 25.9 − 2.1 3.4 7.6 − 39.2 − 23.5 15.7 2.5 − 2.0 − 0.2 2.7 2.0
         Nov 3.7 4.3 1.7 − 0.5 2.1 − 13.6 0.1 13.7 − 7.3 − 1.4 − 0.9 − 3.9 − 1.3
         Dec − 54.3 − 47.9 − 4.8 − 6.4 − 9.5 72.4 − 9.4 − 81.8 − 8.0 − 0.3 − 0.8 − 4.5 − 2.5
*The data in this table are based on the consolidated balance sheet of monetary MFIs’ portfolios. 3After deduction of inter-MFI participations. 4Including the counter-
financial institutions (MFIs) (Table II.2); statistical breaks have been eliminated from parts of monetary liabilities of central governments. 5Including the monetary
the flow figures (see also the “Notes on the figures“ in the “Explanatory notes“ in the liabilities of central governments (Post Office, Treasury). 6In Germany, only savings
Statistical Supplement to the Monthly Report 1, p 30
  ).1Source: ECB. 2Excluding deposits. 7Paper held by residents outside the euro area has been eliminated.

Deutsche Bundesbank
9  Monthly Report
February 2012
II Overall monetary survey in the euro area
 
 
 
(a) Euro area 
 
V Other factors VI Money stock M3 (balance I plus II less III less IV less V)
Money stock M2 Debt secur-
of which ities with
Intra- Money stock M1 maturities
Eurosystem Deposits of up to
liability/ with an Deposits Money 2 years
IV De- claim agreed at agreed market (incl money
posits of related to Currency maturity notice of Repo fund market    
banknote in circu- Overnight of up to up to 3 transac- shares paper)    central  gov-
ernments Total 4 issue Total Total Total lation deposits 5 2 years 5 tions (net) 2,7  Period (net) 2,7,8 months  5,6 
34.0 − 2.5 − 11.7 18.6 30.9 6.4 24.6 − 10.9 − 1.5 4.2 − 4.1 − 7.0 2010          May
20.2 18.0 − 32.9 24.5 41.7 6.5 35.2 − 20.6 3.4 39.8 − 24.4 − 7.0          June
− 22.3 11.4 − − 14.1 14.3 − 12.2 8.4 − 20.7 16.3 10.1 − 22.0 − 8.4 2.0          July
− 20.2 − 10.9 − 17.2 4.0 − 34.8 − 6.0 − 28.8 26.1 12.7 2.6 11.7 − 1.1          Aug 
3.4 34.4 − 19.7 16.0 8.3 − 1.2 9.5 4.5 3.1 22.3 − 18.8 − 0.0          Sep 
78.1 − 7.9 − − 12.3 36.5 9.1 2.2 6.9 23.8 3.6 − 28.4 − 15.0 − 5.5          Oct 17.1 38.4 − 55.6 − 1.2 10.5 1.2 9.3 − 15.3 3.6 48.2 12.9 − 4.3          Nov 
− 97.1 − 48.1 − 51.5 89.7 66.0 18.4 47.6 2.6 21.1 − 5.2 − 34.0 1.2          Dec 
51.9 64.5 − − 76.5 − 41.2 − 44.8 − 12.6 − 32.3 − 16.1 19.7 − 36.1 − 5.2 6.0 2011          Jan 13.5 − 29.1 − 19.9 − 20.5 − 33.6 − 0.0 − 33.6 12.0 1.2 39.7 2.9 − 2.2          Feb 
− 29.1 49.9 − 26.7 26.6 16.7 2.5 14.2 7.2 2.8 − 15.0 − 2.1 17.2          Mar 
8.0 − 51.0 − 69.3 49.7 39.5 7.1 32.4 7.3 2.9 22.8 2.2 − 5.5          Apr 
− 17.0 − 14.4 − 19.9 − 7.5 − 15.5 5.0 − 20.5 7.3 0.7 38.7 − 3.5 − 7.7          May
51.6 − 13.1 − 12.4 30.6 54.9 9.2 45.7 − 22.4 − 2.0 − 11.4 − 20.6 13.8          June
− 22.0 − 27.3 − − 7.0 0.3 − 21.8 8.5 − 30.4 20.1 2.1 − 1.1 − 4.6 − 1.6          July− 60.4 10.4 − 75.0 10.7 − 22.0 − 4.7 − 17.3 27.3 5.4 45.8 21.9 − 3.6          Aug 
4.9 23.7 − 36.6 27.6 19.3 7.7 11.5 13.9 − 5.5 25.0 − 11.1 − 5.0          Sep 
0.5 8.8 − − 36.5 − 4.7 9.4 6.3 3.0 − 11.8 − 2.3 − 22.4 − 10.9 1.5          Oct 
3.2 18.3 − − 14.4 0.7 13.2 3.9 9.3 − 13.5 0.9 − 29.4 12.8 1.6          Nov 
− 6.1 − 112.8 − 49.0 101.9 82.2 16.2 66.1 5.1 14.5 − 69.3 − 5.9 22.3          Dec 
 
 
 (b) German contribution 
 
V Other factors VI Money stock M3 (balance I plus II less III less IV less V)  10 
of which Components of the money stock
Intra- Debt securities
Eurosystem Deposits with
liability/ with an Deposits Money maturities
IV De- claim agreed at agreed market of up to 2 yearsposits of related to Currency maturity notice of Repo fund (incl money    
banknote in circu- Overnight of up to up to 3 transac-
shares market    central  gov-
ernments Total issue 9,11 lation Total deposits 2 years months  6 tions (net) 7,8 paper)(net) 7  Period
1.6 − 65.7 0.6 1.2 9.3 11.8 − 5.3 2.0 0.7 0.4 − 0.3 2010          May
− 1.0 6.5 − 0.8 2.3 − 3.3 1.7 − 0.3 0.7 1.2 − 0.7 − 6.0          June
1.5 − 23.0 0.3 1.7 − 5.9 − 0.2 − 3.0 3.7 − 10.4 0.5 3.5          July
7.5 − 14.7 2.0 − 1.3 26.5 4.7 1.5 1.7 11.7 − 0.3 7.2          Aug 
− 8.5 − 11.3 2.6 − 0.4 1.9 1.0 3.6 2.6 − 8.0 − 0.2 2.9          Sep 
20.8 110.6 0.9 0.0 − 27.7 2.5 − 0.2 2.7 − 10.8 − 0.1 − 21.7          Oct 
3.3 − 18.8 − 0.1 1.1 46.7 26.4 − 5.2 2.1 23.9 0.3 − 0.8          Nov 
− 6.7 − 29.2 0.5 3.8 − 17.2 − 8.7 8.5 8.6 − 22.2 0.1 − 3.6          Dec 
5.4 32.5 0.7 − 2.8 − 4.1 14.7 − 6.2 2.7 − 12.2 0.1 − 3.1 2011          Jan 1.9 − 17.7 1.1 − 0.2 8.8 − 15.5 5.2 2.1 18.8 − 0.1 − 1.7          Feb 
− 8.2 16.4 0.6 0.6 − 7.7 3.3 3.8 0.8 − 14.3 0.1 − 1.5          Mar 
− 4.5 26.7 0.7 1.5 23.3 7.3 10.2 − 1.3 10.4 − 0.2 − 3.1          Apr 
3.4 − 38.8 1.5 1.4 25.1 1.1 10.9 − 2.3 15.9 − 0.3 − 0.2          May
3.0 − 19.2 1.5 2.5 5.1 8.2 − 0.4 − 1.9 − 0.3 − 0.2 − 0.2          June
− 1.2 − 1.0 1.8 2.0 − 3.0 − 4.8 13.5 − 1.2 − 13.4 − 0.1 3.0          July− 0.1 − 46.6 2.6 − 1.0 30.7 12.3 6.6 − 1.4 10.3 0.4 2.6          Aug 
3.4 − 42.1 3.2 1.3 18.2 7.2 12.3 − 1.0 4.9 0.1 − 5.3          Sep 
− 2.7 − 12.1 0.1 1.8 2.4 10.0 − 2.7 − 0.2 − 1.2 − 0.0 − 3.5          Oct − 0.2 − 32.5 0.1 1.5 30.2 20.4 1.7 − 0.1 5.3 − 0.9 3.9          Nov 
0.2 32.2 − 0.4 3.5 − 6.3 − 1.7 6.2 5.5 − 14.1 − 0.1 − 2.1          Dec 
8Less German MFIs’ holdings of paper issued by euro-area MFIs. 9Including money stocks M1, M2 or M3. 11The difference between the volume of euro
national banknotes still in circulation. 10The German contributions to the Euro- banknotes actually issued by the Bundesbank and the amount disclosed in
system’s monetary aggregates should on no account be interpreted as national accordance with the accounting regime chosen by the Eurosystem (see also footnote
monetary aggregates and are therefore not comparable with the erstwhile German 2 on banknote circulation in Table III.2). 

Deutsche Bundesbank
10  Monthly Report
February 2012
II Overall monetary survey in the euro area
 
2 Consolidated balance sheet of monetary financial institutions (MFIs) *
 
 
 
Assets
Lending to non-banks (non-MFIs) in the euro area
Enterprises and households General government
Claims
Total Shares and on non-
End of assets or Debt other Debt euro-area Other
year/month liabilities Total Total Loans securities  2 equities Total Loans securities 3 residents assets
 Euro area (€ billion) 1
 
2009          Nov 24,007.9 15,973.4 13,064.7 10,755.2 1,497.9 811.5 2,908.7 1,025.5 1,883.2 4,796.4 3,238.1
         Dec 23,848.2 15,974.2 13,102.7 10,784.6 1,505.5 812.6 2,871.5 1,021.1 1,850.4 4,809.2 3,064.7
2010          Jan 24,070.7 15,985.1 13,092.5 10,774.4 1,501.6 816.5 2,892.6 1,032.8 1,859.8 4,941.8 3,143.7
         Feb 24,251.1 16,010.6 13,086.0 10,777.2 1,505.9 802.9 2,924.6 1,027.9 1,896.7 5,013.3 3,227.1
         Mar 24,293.2 16,068.3 13,087.2 10,800.5 1,492.0 794.7 2,981.1 1,052.5 1,928.6 4,998.9 3,226.0
         Apr 24,618.9 16,139.0 13,145.3 10,820.2 1,499.2 825.9 2,993.8 1,055.5 1,938.3 5,122.8 3,357.0
         May 25,231.1 16,179.5 13,145.1 10,865.1 1,478.6 801.3 3,034.4 1,070.2 1,964.2 5,349.6 3,702.1
         June 25,226.1 16,379.1 13,288.2 10,988.6 1,516.3 783.4 3,090.9 1,091.5 1,999.4 5,247.2 3,599.8
         July 24,924.5 16,395.4 13,314.0 10,981.3 1,548.1 784.7 3,081.4 1,080.3 2,001.1 5,050.3 3,478.8
         Aug 25,577.8 16,412.5 13,323.5 10,978.8 1,549.6 795.1 3,088.9 1,087.9 2,001.0 5,236.5 3,928.8
         Sep 25,172.1 16,434.0 13,330.7 10,981.4 1,552.3 797.1 3,103.3 1,094.1 2,009.2 5,034.4 3,703.6
         Oct 25,139.2 16,575.0 13,287.0 10,958.0 1,524.5 804.5 3,287.9 1,173.7 2,114.2 4,976.3 3,588.0
         Nov 25,450.6 16,731.2 13,440.9 11,067.6 1,557.1 816.2 3,290.3 1,229.3 2,061.0 5,148.7 3,570.8
         Dec 25,812.0 16,593.4 13,365.0 11,027.0 1,538.2 799.9 3,228.4 1,240.4 1,988.0 5,007.5 4,211.1
2011          Jan 25,684.2 16,653.2 13,406.9 11,064.9 1,526.8 815.2 3,246.3 1,236.8 2,009.4 5,019.1 4,011.8
         Feb 25,728.7 16,689.4 13,455.5 11,112.3 1,535.5 807.7 3,233.9 1,216.6 2,017.3 5,055.9 3,983.4
         Mar 25,308.2 16,487.4 13,398.7 11,116.4 1,503.3 779.0 3,088.8 1,207.3 1,881.4 4,947.4 3,873.3
         Apr 25,453.2 16,558.2 13,472.9 11,140.4 1,510.1 822.3 3,085.3 1,197.2 1,888.1 4,967.3 3,927.7
         May 25,791.3 16,585.2 13,508.2 11,200.8 1,507.4 800.0 3,077.0 1,174.2 1,902.8 5,132.9 4,073.3
         June 25,483.2 16,592.8 13,495.7 11,224.9 1,482.1 788.8 3,097.1 1,170.5 1,926.6 4,983.9 3,906.6
         July 25,845.6 16,585.1 13,507.6 11,238.6 1,487.1 781.9 3,077.5 1,175.0 1,902.5 5,029.2 4,231.3
         Aug 26,423.5 16,591.3 13,483.7 11,238.8 1,479.7 765.3 3,107.5 1,162.7 1,944.8 5,115.5 4,716.8
         Sep 27,052.7 16,643.3 13,519.1 11,297.0 1,469.6 752.4 3,124.3 1,163.8 1,960.4 5,188.2 5,221.1
         Oct 26,716.1 16,657.5 13,548.7 11,267.5 1,529.6 751.6 3,108.8 1,163.4 1,945.4 5,035.5 5,023.1
         Nov 26,718.9 16,667.5 13,546.4 11,257.8 1,535.1 753.5 3,121.1 1,162.1 1,959.0 5,067.9 4,983.5
         Dec 26,801.7 16,605.2 13,429.6 11,164.2 1,525.5 739.9 3,175.6 1,177.6 1,998.0 5,025.9 5,170.5
 German contribution (€ billion) 
2009          Nov 5,131.5 3,675.6 3,041.1 2,537.6 240.3 263.2 634.6 368.9 265.7 1,184.3 271.6
         Dec 5,084.8 3,642.7 3,015.1 2,520.4 235.5 259.1 627.6 363.0 264.6 1,188.8 253.3
2010          Jan 5,123.4 3,660.2 3,021.3 2,516.0 239.8 265.5 638.8 366.1 272.7 1,211.6 251.5
         Feb 5,099.1 3,649.6 3,008.2 2,513.7 237.7 256.8 641.4 362.9 278.5 1,208.0 241.5
         Mar 5,105.8 3,638.3 2,993.1 2,509.7 233.9 249.6 645.2 362.2 283.0 1,209.3 258.2
         Apr 5,210.6 3,693.3 3,044.0 2,535.9 231.3 276.8 649.3 364.1 285.2 1,262.7 254.6
         May 5,259.6 3,664.4 2,996.6 2,539.6 209.1 247.9 667.8 374.7 293.1 1,324.9 270.3
         June 5,236.5 3,680.2 2,988.1 2,540.8 205.5 241.8 692.1 377.7 314.4 1,272.2 284.0
         July 5,144.1 3,670.8 2,980.4 2,537.8 200.7 242.0 690.4 373.1 317.3 1,195.0 278.3
         Aug 5,201.0 3,683.3 2,991.4 2,546.6 199.6 245.1 691.9 373.2 318.7 1,228.9 288.8
         Sep 5,107.4 3,659.4 2,960.3 2,520.3 198.8 241.2 699.1 376.7 322.3 1,172.2 275.8
         Oct 5,191.7 3,756.9 2,964.7 2,523.0 197.8 243.9 792.2 381.2 411.0 1,162.4 272.4
         Nov 5,311.7 3,822.0 3,004.1 2,557.1 195.3 251.8 817.8 457.5 360.3 1,207.0 282.8
         Dec 6,121.8 3,742.7 2,958.5 2,518.9 192.7 246.9 784.2 447.6 336.6 1,183.6 1,195.5
2011          Jan 6,033.2 3,767.9 2,972.6 2,516.5 194.1 262.0 795.3 452.3 342.9 1,170.1 1,095.2
         Feb 5,986.9 3,764.4 2,983.4 2,535.7 193.4 254.3 781.0 440.8 340.2 1,175.3 1,047.2
         Mar 5,835.3 3,730.5 2,962.9 2,515.9 190.2 256.8 767.6 430.3 337.3 1,134.9 970.0
         Apr 5,901.3 3,753.8 2,995.6 2,526.0 189.8 279.8 758.2 419.3 339.0 1,171.1 976.3
         May 5,944.1 3,731.5 2,982.7 2,537.9 189.2 255.6 748.8 408.5 340.3 1,192.1 1,020.6
         June 5,793.3 3,706.7 2,968.3 2,536.0 187.5 244.9 738.4 404.9 333.4 1,145.1 941.6
         July 5,929.3 3,709.0 2,969.1 2,540.8 185.6 242.7 739.9 410.3 329.6 1,158.0 1,062.2
         Aug 6,140.9 3,729.5 2,988.1 2,565.9 183.4 238.8 741.4 400.7 340.8 1,190.0 1,221.3
         Sep 6,294.6 3,744.9 3,001.5 2,584.8 181.4 235.4 743.4 400.3 343.1 1,193.9 1,355.7
         Oct 6,167.9 3,767.6 3,022.8 2,609.4 179.0 234.4 744.8 396.1 348.7 1,157.5 1,242.8
         Nov 6,189.0 3,771.3 3,030.2 2,615.1 181.7 233.3 741.1 393.6 347.5 1,179.7 1,238.0
         Dec 6,230.1 3,720.7 2,986.3 2,576.4 183.2 226.8 734.4 396.9 337.5 1,180.4 1,329.0
*Monetary financial institutions (MFIs) comprise banks (including building and loan enterprises. 3Including Treasury bills and other money market paper issued by
associations), money market funds, and the European Central Bank and national general government. 4Euro currency in circulation (see also footnote 8 on p 12  )
central banks (the Eurosystem). 1Source: ECB. 2Including money market paper of Excluding MFIs‘ cash in hand (in euro). The German contribution includes the volume

Deutsche Bundesbank
11  Monthly Report
February 2012
II Overall monetary survey in the euro area
 
   
 
Liabilities
Deposits of non-banks (non-MFIs) in the euro area
Enterprises and households
With agreed At agreed
maturities of notice of 6 
over
Currency 1 year and
in of which up to up to over up to over  End of
Total in euro 5 Total Overnight 1 year 2 years 2 years 3 months 3 months year/month circulation 4 
Euro area (€ billion) 1
 
750.0 9,922.8 9,324.0 9,357.1 3,485.6 1,605.4 259.9 2,148.6 1,730.0 127.7 2009          Nov 
769.9 9,985.6 9,437.9 9,492.5 3,556.5 1,590.9 262.2 2,189.1 1,767.0 126.9          Dec 
757.1 10,012.0 9,430.2 9,485.4 3,576.3 1,521.6 265.1 2,200.1 1,796.9 125.4 2010          Jan 
759.5 9,995.1 9,421.7 9,469.6 3,556.1 1,502.6 269.0 2,211.1 1,805.9 124.9          Feb 768.6 9,983.1 9,412.5 9,466.0 3,558.2 1,485.8 268.3 2,213.8 1,814.7 125.1          Mar 
772.6 10,030.1 9,475.3 9,534.0 3,635.0 1,449.8 270.3 2,232.7 1,824.1 122.1          Apr 
779.0 10,089.2 9,480.6 9,551.6 3,660.4 1,442.0 270.3 2,235.5 1,823.1 120.4          May785.5 10,216.4 9,594.3 9,650.5 3,694.7 1,426.0 269.0 2,318.6 1,822.6 119.5          June
793.9 10,208.3 9,625.3 9,684.0 3,682.5 1,438.2 270.5 2,342.7 1,832.8 117.4          July
788.0 10,206.4 9,631.4 9,698.6 3,656.6 1,457.2 272.6 2,350.3 1,845.7 116.1          Aug 786.8 10,205.5 9,644.5 9,689.0 3,660.5 1,458.3 263.9 2,344.0 1,848.5 113.8          Sep 
789.0 10,308.3 9,671.7 9,717.5 3,666.6 1,476.6 273.7 2,336.0 1,852.2 112.4          Oct 
790.2 10,390.5 9,719.2 9,777.1 3,670.5 1,465.7 277.9 2,393.8 1,856.3 112.9          Nov 808.6 10,371.2 9,808.2 9,871.6 3,726.6 1,469.0 272.6 2,413.2 1,877.7 112.5          Dec 
796.3 10,407.3 9,792.5 9,849.0 3,702.9 1,449.0 276.1 2,410.6 1,898.3 112.2 2011          Jan 
796.2 10,415.9 9,789.7 9,842.4 3,671.2 1,457.7 278.7 2,422.4 1,899.3 112.9          Feb 798.3 10,428.8 9,838.7 9,887.9 3,684.9 1,453.3 287.2 2,445.1 1,904.4 113.1          Mar 
805.4 10,487.9 9,892.2 9,941.4 3,712.6 1,455.9 286.4 2,464.9 1,909.4 112.2          Apr 
810.4 10,475.6 9,889.9 9,935.8 3,691.5 1,454.9 298.8 2,468.1 1,910.6 111.9          May819.7 10,550.8 9,912.8 9,950.0 3,729.3 1,426.9 300.7 2,472.4 1,908.9 111.9          June
828.2 10,523.5 9,912.8 9,955.4 3,711.4 1,441.6 306.9 2,472.2 1,911.3 112.0          July
823.4 10,482.0 9,930.5 9,969.3 3,692.4 1,458.0 313.0 2,477.4 1,916.7 111.9          Aug 831.2 10,534.0 9,962.4 10,017.6 3,713.7 1,474.1 312.8 2,494.1 1,911.7 111.3          Sep 
837.5 10,541.1 9,975.0 10,028.3 3,711.2 1,470.2 308.4 2,517.5 1,909.5 111.5          Oct 
841.4 10,536.1 9,966.8 10,007.8 3,712.0 1,452.0 312.6 2,510.2 1,911.3 109.7          Nov 857.6 10,626.2 10,053.3 10,119.2 3,791.6 1,458.7 310.4 2,521.9 1,927.2 109.4          Dec 
 German contribution (€ billion) 
186.5 2,839.6 2,767.0 2,687.1 987.8 280.1 46.6 787.0 464.7 120.9 2009          Nov 
190.8 2,828.4 2,763.3 2,688.5 975.3 283.8 46.9 788.0 474.6 119.8          Dec 
187.9 2,830.4 2,772.0 2,696.8 1,005.5 261.0 44.4 788.2 479.4 118.3 2010          Jan 
188.5 2,829.6 2,776.4 2,695.8 1,003.1 253.7 43.7 792.4 485.3 117.6          Feb 
191.4 2,816.4 2,765.5 2,687.3 992.2 254.0 42.8 793.5 487.1 117.7          Mar 
192.1 2,836.8 2,782.6 2,710.0 1,035.2 234.4 42.0 793.6 489.0 115.8          Apr 
193.2 2,841.8 2,783.5 2,706.9 1,043.4 229.2 40.8 788.5 490.9 114.0          May
195.5 2,842.8 2,787.0 2,702.1 1,041.7 229.2 39.0 787.9 491.6 112.7          June
197.2 2,841.1 2,785.3 2,706.3 1,047.6 227.6 37.8 787.4 495.2 110.6          July
195.8 2,857.9 2,794.5 2,710.2 1,050.3 226.9 37.5 789.7 496.9 108.8          Aug 
195.4 2,851.5 2,797.8 2,709.0 1,049.9 226.9 37.5 788.8 499.4 106.6          Sep 
195.5 2,873.7 2,798.5 2,717.1 1,055.7 229.3 37.9 786.8 502.1 105.2          Oct 
196.6 2,925.7 2,845.2 2,764.3 1,078.2 227.8 38.2 810.2 504.1 105.7          Nov 
200.4 2,926.8 2,855.0 2,772.1 1,069.6 235.1 38.1 811.1 512.4 105.7          Dec 
197.6 2,939.7 2,862.6 2,782.4 1,084.8 230.8 38.0 808.5 515.1 105.3 2011          Jan 
197.4 2,931.4 2,853.1 2,769.4 1,066.1 236.0 38.2 806.5 517.1 105.4          Feb 
198.0 2,928.9 2,858.5 2,771.7 1,066.6 238.1 38.7 804.8 517.9 105.6          Mar 
199.5 2,937.5 2,871.5 2,786.1 1,074.5 246.3 39.5 803.5 517.6 104.8          Apr 
200.9 2,951.3 2,881.4 2,787.4 1,071.8 252.3 40.0 803.2 515.4 104.7          May
203.5 2,960.1 2,884.6 2,787.0 1,078.0 247.9 39.6 803.5 513.6 104.5          June
205.5 2,966.7 2,893.1 2,798.5 1,078.4 259.7 40.1 803.3 512.4 104.5          July
204.5 2,989.1 2,916.1 2,816.9 1,090.2 260.9 41.9 808.3 511.0 104.4          Aug 
205.8 3,008.4 2,930.1 2,832.6 1,099.5 271.9 42.5 804.8 510.1 103.9          Sep 
207.6 3,009.6 2,934.1 2,844.1 1,109.9 274.3 43.5 802.7 509.9 103.8          Oct 
209.1 3,030.2 2,954.6 2,858.9 1,128.2 272.4 44.5 801.4 510.4 102.0          Nov 
212.6 3,038.9 2,962.5 2,867.9 1,130.2 276.1 44.9 799.8 515.8 101.2          Dec 
of euro banknotes put into circulation by the Bundesbank in accordance with the Bundesbank can be calculated by adding to this total the item “Intra-Eurosystem
accounting regime chosen by the Eurosystem (see also footnote 3 on banknote liability/claim related to banknote issue“ (see “Other liability items“). 5Excluding
circulation in Table III.2). The volume of currency actually put into circulation by the central governments’ deposits. 6 In Germany, only savings deposits. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
12  Monthly Report
February 2012
II Overall monetary survey in the euro area
 
2 Consolidated balance sheet of monetary financial institutions (MFIs) (cont’d) *
 
 
 
Liabilities (cont’d)
Deposits of non-banks (non-MFIs) in the euro area (cont’d)  
 
General government Repo transactions Debt securities
with non-banks
Other general government in the euro area
With agreed At agreed
maturities of notice of 2 
Money
over of which market of which
Central 1 year and Enterprises fund denom-
End of govern- up to up to over up to over and shares inated
year/month ments Total Overnight 1 year 2 years 2 years 3 months 3 months Total households (net)  3 Total in euro
 Euro area (€ billion) 1
 
2009          Nov 304.2 261.5 158.1 61.8 5.0 26.1 4.1 6.4 314.8 312.7 722.3 2,751.8 2,173.2
         Dec 249.6 243.5 143.9 58.8 4.8 25.9 4.0 6.2 327.5 324.8 647.5 2,752.9 2,167.6
2010          Jan 279.6 247.1 144.4 56.8 4.8 28.2 4.3 8.6 307.0 305.5 652.1 2,799.3 2,183.8
         Feb 275.9 249.5 146.5 56.8 4.7 28.4 4.7 8.4 323.0 321.4 643.9 2,793.9 2,162.4
         Mar 270.1 247.0 142.2 58.8 4.6 28.5 4.9 8.1 341.4 339.6 628.3 2,828.4 2,192.1
         Apr 250.3 245.8 141.0 58.6 4.5 28.6 5.1 7.9 362.4 360.4 634.4 2,842.2 2,192.7
         May 284.2 253.3 145.6 61.6 4.4 28.4 5.4 7.8 366.8 364.8 630.3 2,868.5 2,180.5
         June 304.5 261.4 149.9 64.7 3.9 30.0 5.5 7.6 406.6 405.1 605.7 2,855.2 2,169.6
         July 282.2 242.0 131.7 63.0 3.6 30.5 5.7 7.5 384.5 383.1 596.7 2,835.5 2,169.9
         Aug 262.1 245.7 131.4 67.0 3.3 30.8 5.9 7.4 387.2 385.8 608.1 2,848.1 2,161.5
         Sep 265.5 251.0 132.0 72.2 3.3 30.1 6.4 7.0 409.3 407.8 589.4 2,831.2 2,172.7
         Oct 343.7 247.0 133.2 66.9 3.4 30.3 6.5 6.8 385.0 383.5 574.3 2,830.8 2,173.0
         Nov 360.8 252.5 141.4 64.3 3.4 30.4 6.6 6.5 433.4 431.8 586.5 2,866.4 2,183.4
         Dec 264.2 235.4 125.6 63.5 3.4 30.1 6.5 6.3 428.1 426.1 552.4 2,858.3 2,182.6
2011          Jan 316.5 241.7 128.2 64.8 3.4 30.1 6.9 8.2 392.0 390.6 570.2 2,883.0 2,216.3
         Feb 330.0 243.5 127.1 67.1 3.4 30.6 7.4 8.0 431.6 430.0 575.6 2,899.7 2,230.9
         Mar 296.6 244.3 126.4 68.7 3.4 30.7 7.4 7.8 405.1 403.7 568.2 2,972.1 2,314.4
         Apr 304.4 242.2 124.1 68.8 3.6 30.7 7.5 7.5 427.7 426.3 570.2 2,977.6 2,321.8
         May 287.4 252.3 128.6 74.6 3.7 30.8 7.3 7.3 466.5 464.8 566.7 3,007.2 2,332.4
         June 339.0 261.8 135.0 77.7 3.8 30.8 7.3 7.1 455.0 453.4 545.9 3,026.6 2,345.0
         July 317.0 251.1 123.9 77.6 4.6 30.8 7.2 7.0 449.2 447.8 538.7 3,043.5 2,343.2
         Aug 256.6 256.1 125.1 82.1 4.6 30.2 7.3 6.8 494.8 492.7 560.4 3,029.7 2,333.0
         Sep 261.5 254.9 122.6 83.8 4.7 30.1 7.1 6.6 517.7 515.3 549.1 3,048.3 2,342.5
         Oct 261.9 250.8 125.9 76.5 4.8 30.2 7.0 6.4 495.0 492.3 538.1 3,013.1 2,330.3
         Nov 265.1 263.2 135.2 79.7 4.9 30.2 7.0 6.2 465.9 463.2 550.6 3,032.2 2,340.4
         Dec 259.0 248.0 117.6 81.6 5.1 30.3 7.4 5.9 397.0 394.3 523.6 3,046.6 2,332.2
 German contribution (€ billion) 
2009          Nov 41.6 110.9 44.1 39.3 3.3 21.7 1.7 0.7 81.0 81.0 9.3 713.6 483.0
         Dec 32.7 107.3 40.7 39.5 3.2 21.4 1.8 0.7 80.5 80.5 8.7 703.3 470.7
2010          Jan 26.6 107.0 40.3 37.4 3.1 23.7 1.7 0.7 68.2 68.2 9.4 712.0 466.2
         Feb 22.7 111.1 43.4 38.4 3.1 23.7 1.7 0.7 78.9 78.9 9.2 711.0 456.3
         Mar 21.2 107.9 39.6 39.1 3.0 23.7 1.8 0.7 79.8 79.8 8.6 714.4 458.2
         Apr 21.4 105.4 37.4 38.8 2.9 23.8 1.8 0.7 100.7 100.7 8.4 715.8 451.0
         May 23.0 112.0 42.2 40.6 2.8 23.7 2.0 0.7 101.4 101.4 8.8 733.9 451.9
         June 21.9 118.8 45.4 43.2 2.4 25.0 2.0 0.7 102.7 102.7 8.1 729.6 450.9
         July 23.5 111.3 38.4 42.9 2.1 25.1 2.0 0.7 92.2 92.2 8.6 709.2 437.0
         Aug 30.9 116.8 41.0 45.7 2.0 25.4 2.1 0.7 104.0 104.0 8.3 720.7 436.1
         Sep 22.4 120.1 41.2 48.9 2.1 25.1 2.2 0.6 95.9 95.9 8.1 710.8 437.1
         Oct 43.2 113.3 37.6 45.6 2.1 25.2 2.2 0.6 85.0 85.0 8.0 682.1 408.8
         Nov 46.5 114.9 41.9 43.0 2.1 25.2 2.2 0.6 109.0 109.0 8.3 716.8 433.9
         Dec 39.8 114.9 40.6 44.6 2.0 25.0 2.2 0.5 86.7 86.7 8.4 708.5 425.8
2011          Jan 45.2 112.1 39.6 42.7 1.9 25.0 2.3 0.5 74.5 74.5 8.4 703.2 426.8
         Feb 47.1 114.9 39.7 45.6 1.7 25.2 2.3 0.5 93.2 93.2 8.4 698.6 424.5
         Mar 38.9 118.3 42.0 46.6 1.8 25.2 2.3 0.5 78.9 78.9 8.5 686.0 426.2
         Apr 34.3 117.2 39.8 47.6 1.8 25.2 2.3 0.5 89.2 89.2 8.4 678.5 420.6
         May 37.7 126.3 44.2 52.1 1.9 25.2 2.3 0.5 105.2 105.2 8.0 681.7 417.9
         June 40.7 132.3 46.1 56.4 2.1 25.2 2.2 0.5 104.8 104.8 7.8 682.3 415.4
         July 39.5 128.7 41.3 57.0 2.8 25.1 2.1 0.5 91.8 91.8 5.3 684.4 410.9
         Aug 39.4 132.8 41.6 61.1 2.8 24.8 2.1 0.4 101.9 101.9 5.7 682.6 412.4
         Sep 42.9 132.9 41.1 61.8 3.0 24.7 2.0 0.4 107.0 107.0 5.8 687.1 406.9
         Oct 40.1 125.3 39.9 55.3 3.1 24.6 2.0 0.4 105.7 105.7 5.8 678.9 407.9
         Nov 39.9 131.4 43.3 57.9 3.2 24.6 2.0 0.4 111.1 111.1 4.9 689.5 411.6
         Dec 40.1 130.8 40.2 60.3 3.3 24.6 2.0 0.4 97.1 97.1 4.8 690.9 404.5
*Monetary financial institutions (MFIs) comprise banks (including building and loan paper. 5Excluding liabilities arising from securities issued. 6After deduction of
associations), money market funds, and the European Central Bank and national inter-MFI participations. 7The German contributions to the Eurosystem’s monetary
central banks (the Eurosystem). 1Source: ECB. 2In Germany, only savings aggregates should on no account be interpreted as national monetary aggregates
deposits. 3Excluding holdings of MFIs; for the German contribution, excluding and are therefore not comparable with the erstwhile German money stocks M1, M2
German MFIs’ portfolios of securities issued by MFIs in the euro area. 4In Germany, or M3. 8including DM banknotes still in circulation (see also footnote 4 on
bank debt securities with maturities of up to one year are classed as money market p 10    )9For the German contribution, the difference between the volume of

Deutsche Bundesbank
13  Monthly Report
February 2012
II Overall monetary survey in the euro area
 
   
 
 Memo item
 Other liability items Monetary aggregates  7 
 (From 2002, German contribution
issued (net) 3 excludes currency in circulation)
With maturities of
of which Monetary
Intra- liabilities
Eurosystem- of centralliability/ govern-
over Liabilities Excess claim Monetary ments1 year and to non- Capital of related to capital (Post
up to up to over euro-area and inter-MFI banknote forma- Office, End of1 year 
4 2 years 2 years residents 5 reserves 6 liabilities Total 8 issue 9 M1 10 M2 11 M3 12 tion 13 year/month Treasury)  14 
Euro area (€ billion) 1
 
− 2.4 136.5 2,617.7 4,213.9 1,787.5 − 65.4 3,610.1 − 4,472.3 8,170.0 9,340.4 6,714.0 110.2 2009          Nov 
3.6 129.1 2,620.2 4,238.8 1,801.0 − 33.7 3,358.8 − 4,556.2 8,275.1 9,381.5 6,769.1 117.2          Dec 
2.5 128.9 2,668.0 4,359.1 1,798.5 − 34.6 3,420.0 − 4,554.1 8,234.9 9,325.5 6,828.9 107.8 2010          Jan 
1.1 123.8 2,669.1 4,422.9 1,819.0 − 15.6 3,509.4 − 4,538.9 8,213.6 9,305.4 6,860.9 107.8          Feb 
11.7 122.3 2,694.3 4,425.3 1,831.1 − 53.6 3,540.6 − 4,544.3 8,212.2 9,315.9 6,901.0 106.1          Mar 
15.6 118.8 2,707.7 4,551.2 1,845.1 − 72.5 3,653.3 − 4,625.9 8,269.0 9,399.9 6,944.2 107.8          Apr 
22.2 106.9 2,739.4 4,705.0 1,890.5 − 56.3 3,958.3 − 4,663.8 8,301.2 9,427.1 7,022.0 109.4          May
22.5 100.7 2,732.1 4,603.3 1,974.3 − 10.7 3,789.7 − 4,710.3 8,332.1 9,467.3 7,182.1 110.4          June
27.7 99.2 2,708.6 4,482.9 1,935.3 − 20.9 3,708.4 − 4,692.9 8,336.6 9,444.4 7,142.0 114.8          July
27.1 99.4 2,721.6 4,636.6 1,978.2 3.3 4,121.8 − 4,660.1 8,341.4 9,463.0 7,204.3 113.7          Aug 
32.4 96.1 2,702.8 4,440.7 1,956.1 2.9 3,950.1 − 4,661.8 8,343.7 9,470.9 7,153.8 111.9          Sep 
25.4 97.3 2,708.1 4,457.7 1,967.7 17.7 3,808.8 − 4,669.3 8,377.9 9,459.7 7,161.3 109.8          Oct 
23.1 96.5 2,746.8 4,585.2 2,004.6 18.8 3,775.1 − 4,685.0 8,387.7 9,527.1 7,295.0 111.4          Nov 
29.7 91.6 2,737.0 4,374.2 2,022.6 46.3 4,350.2 − 4,750.8 8,471.3 9,572.9 7,321.8 117.9          Dec 
33.8 93.7 2,755.5 4,384.0 2,003.3 40.5 4,207.7 − 4,708.7 8,434.8 9,524.1 7,320.0 109.0 2011          Jan 
37.6 88.3 2,773.9 4,383.8 2,033.7 46.0 4,146.1 − 4,674.4 8,415.1 9,547.7 7,381.4 106.8          Feb 
68.3 85.5 2,818.4 4,173.9 2,038.7 52.0 3,871.0 − 4,689.4 8,440.3 9,566.9 7,453.7 106.3          Mar 
70.8 86.9 2,819.9 4,214.2 2,043.0 17.6 3,909.6 − 4,723.0 8,481.0 9,636.3 7,478.2 107.4          Apr 
74.2 84.0 2,849.1 4,350.3 2,070.8 − 6.4 4,050.3 − 4,711.0 8,487.2 9,678.1 7,538.1 106.8          May
96.0 79.6 2,851.0 4,130.8 2,086.1 10.9 3,857.5 − 4,765.2 8,516.7 9,692.8 7,559.3 107.4          June
94.8 82.3 2,866.4 4,145.9 2,150.8 − 5.9 4,171.8 − 4,745.8 8,521.0 9,685.6 7,639.3 108.3          July
96.8 77.0 2,855.9 4,165.1 2,205.1 − 5.6 4,668.6 − 4,722.4 8,530.1 9,759.0 7,687.2 107.4          Aug 
94.1 75.1 2,879.2 4,222.8 2,183.8 − 16.5 5,182.3 − 4,748.1 8,568.2 9,804.0 7,705.1 106.6          Sep 
95.4 74.8 2,843.0 4,131.0 2,186.8 − 24.5 4,998.0 − 4,754.0 8,556.2 9,759.4 7,695.4 105.2          Oct 
90.5 81.6 2,860.0 4,155.0 2,200.9 − 21.0 4,957.9 − 4,771.8 8,564.8 9,753.5 7,717.2 108.8          Nov 
126.0 83.0 2,837.6 4,088.8 2,222.5 − 27.6 5,067.0 − 4,858.0 8,673.2 9,802.7 7,727.7 116.0          Dec 
 German contribution (€ billion) 
21.5 22.4 669.7 674.6 424.7 − 384.9 773.7 146.8 1,031.9 1,867.7 2,001.8 2,024.8 − 2009          Nov 
23.1 17.0 663.2 663.8 423.6 − 390.1 766.7 146.8 1,015.9 1,865.7 1,994.9 2,016.8 −          Dec 
25.4 17.2 669.3 693.8 419.4 − 364.7 755.0 147.6 1,045.8 1,872.9 1,993.1 2,019.7 − 2010          Jan 
27.4 16.7 666.9 703.0 424.6 − 394.6 737.4 149.6 1,046.5 1,872.4 2,004.6 2,026.0 −          Feb 
27.3 15.3 671.8 721.0 424.3 − 419.9 761.1 150.2 1,031.8 1,859.6 1,990.6 2,031.8 −          Mar 
27.5 14.7 673.7 777.7 429.9 − 411.7 753.1 151.1 1,072.5 1,881.6 2,032.7 2,037.4 −          Apr 
26.7 15.3 692.0 847.8 431.1 − 469.8 764.6 151.7 1,085.6 1,891.9 2,044.0 2,050.0 −          May
23.5 13.1 693.0 807.3 431.2 − 475.4 790.2 150.9 1,087.1 1,894.5 2,041.9 2,050.6 −          June
25.4 14.7 669.1 784.5 426.1 − 483.3 765.7 151.2 1,086.0 1,893.7 2,034.6 2,019.1 −          July
33.6 13.9 673.3 797.3 433.5 − 496.8 776.1 153.2 1,091.3 1,902.4 2,062.0 2,031.3 −          Aug 
35.2 14.8 660.8 757.5 430.4 − 517.7 770.9 155.8 1,091.1 1,908.0 2,061.9 2,012.4 −          Sep 
13.0 15.2 653.9 745.2 440.6 − 414.3 771.5 156.7 1,093.3 1,912.7 2,033.8 2,012.2 −          Oct 
28.0 18.4 670.4 772.9 451.7 − 439.4 766.9 156.6 1,120.1 1,937.4 2,101.1 2,063.8 −          Nov 
27.4 15.4 665.7 736.5 450.9 − 456.6 1,660.7 157.1 1,110.2 1,944.6 2,082.5 2,058.9 −          Dec 
24.2 15.5 663.5 727.0 447.6 − 421.8 1,554.6 157.8 1,124.4 1,955.2 2,077.8 2,050.4 − 2011          Jan 
26.1 11.8 660.6 732.7 455.8 − 446.9 1,513.6 158.9 1,105.8 1,946.8 2,086.4 2,054.0 −          Feb 
23.7 12.9 649.4 672.7 455.5 − 438.1 1,442.9 159.5 1,108.6 1,954.0 2,078.0 2,040.9 −          Mar 
19.8 13.6 645.1 694.9 457.3 − 413.4 1,448.8 160.1 1,114.2 1,969.4 2,100.4 2,036.3 −          Apr 
19.3 14.0 648.4 698.7 456.2 − 455.5 1,498.4 161.6 1,116.0 1,980.1 2,126.5 2,038.2 −          May
18.7 14.3 649.2 638.7 455.5 − 480.5 1,424.7 163.1 1,124.1 1,985.8 2,131.5 2,038.3 −          June
22.2 14.0 648.2 647.7 467.3 − 484.9 1,550.9 164.9 1,119.7 1,993.8 2,127.1 2,048.9 −          July
25.2 13.6 643.8 699.8 483.8 − 542.9 1,720.9 167.5 1,131.9 2,011.7 2,158.1 2,065.6 −          Aug 
21.8 11.9 653.4 738.9 476.2 − 600.2 1,871.4 170.7 1,140.5 2,031.7 2,178.3 2,063.4 −          Sep 
18.8 11.2 648.9 746.8 478.0 − 608.3 1,751.4 170.7 1,149.9 2,037.9 2,179.4 2,058.5 −          Oct 
22.5 11.7 655.3 769.8 478.8 − 639.8 1,744.5 170.9 1,171.5 2,061.9 2,212.1 2,062.5 −          Nov 
22.6 9.7 658.6 696.2 473.7 − 607.5 1,835.9 170.5 1,170.4 2,072.8 2,207.1 2,058.2 −          Dec 
euro banknotes actually issued by the Bundesbank and the amount disclosed in years and at agreed notice of up to 3 months (excluding central governments’accordance with the accounting regime chosen by the Eurosystem (see also footnote deposits) and (for the euro area) central governments’ monetary liabilities with such3 on banknote circulation in Table III.2). 10Overnight deposits (excluding central maturities. 12M2 plus repo transactions, money market fund shares, money market
governments’ deposits), and (for the euro area) currency in circulation, central paper and debt securities up to 2 years. 13Deposits with agreed maturities of over 2
governments’ overnight monetary liabilities, which are not included in the years and at agreed notice of over 3 months, debt securities with maturities of over 2consolidated balance sheet. 11M1 plus deposits with agreed maturities of up to 2 years, capital and reserves. 14 Non-existent in Germany. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
14  Monthly Report
February 2012
II  Overall monetary survey in the euro area
  
3  Banking system’s liquidity position  * 
Stocks
  
€ billion; period averages of daily positions
Liquidity-providing factors Liquidity-absorbing factors
Monetary policy operations of the Eurosystem
Credit
institutions‘
currentaccount
Net assets Longer- Other Other balances
Reserve in gold Main term Marginal liquidity- liquidity- Banknotes Central Other (including
maintenance and foreign refinancing refinancing lending providing Deposit absorbing in government factors minimum Base
period currency operations operations facility facility deposits (net)  
6 reserves) 7 money 8 operations 3 operations 4 circulation 5 
ending in 1 
Eurosystem  2  
  
2009          July 457.1 221.4 504.9 1.3 − 119.7 9.9 763.1 137.9 − 65.1 219.2 1 102.0
         Aug 433.6 94.1 694.0 0.3 2.8 185.1 22.1 770.8 133.9 − 103.9 216.9 1 172.8
         Sep 427.6 74.8 645.4 0.3 8.4 136.7 18.5 769.1 125.7 − 110.4 216.9 1 122.7
         Oct 421.4 79.1 616.9 0.3 14.3 109.6 12.9 768.8 139.0 − 113.1 214.7 1 093.1
         Nov 413.0 52.3 626.1 0.3 20.1 86.5 12.0 770.7 148.7 − 118.9 212.8 1 070.0
         Dec 407.6 55.8 593.4 0.7 24.6 65.7 9.9 775.2 150.1 − 130.2 211.4 1 052.3
2010          Jan 413.0 60.6 648.4 0.4 28.4 147.0 8.1 796.8 119.8 − 132.1 211.2 1 155.0
         Feb 425.6 59.7 662.2 0.2 33.5 168.3 13.3 783.6 122.6 − 117.5 210.9 1 162.8
         Mar 426.9 80.5 641.1 0.9 38.0 186.4 10.5 784.6 113.2 − 119.3 211.8 1 182.9
         Apr 439.8 77.7 650.5 0.4 43.6 200.7 8.4 792.9 113.6 − 116.1 212.5 1 206.1
         May 457.0 76.7 666.4 0.9 49.4 218.2 11.4 796.6 112.1 − 100.3 212.4 1 227.2
         June 462.4 110.0 706.7 0.3 86.9 288.8 34.1 806.2 123.1 − 98.4 212.5 1 307.5
         July 500.9 167.5 573.2 0.3 140.2 230.4 54.4 813.0 126.5 − 56.5 214.4 1 257.8
         Aug 543.4 185.4 432.2 0.1 121.4 96.7 67.5 819.3 95.2 − 11.8 215.7 1 131.7
         Sep 543.2 153.1 435.0 0.6 121.8 83.7 66.9 816.0 86.8 − 15.0 215.3 1 115.0
         Oct 531.3 164.5 392.6 0.7 128.3 68.8 64.8 814.1 96.4 − 39.8 213.1 1 096.1
         Nov 511.3 183.0 340.0 0.8 124.5 41.9 68.8 813.5 92.1 − 72.0 215.2 1 070.7
         Dec 511.1 179.5 336.3 1.9 130.4 44.7 70.8 815.9 94.4 − 79.1 212.5 1 073.1
2011          Jan 527.5 197.0 316.6 0.5 140.9 66.5 73.5 833.9 81.3 − 85.1 212.4 1 112.8
         Feb 549.7 185.4 318.2 0.1 137.2 39.2 81.3 822.0 101.2 − 66.7 213.6 1 074.8
         Mar 550.0 134.4 321.0 7.6 137.9 26.9 80.3 820.9 89.8 − 79.9 212.9 1 060.7
         Apr 544.1 97.3 335.4 0.8 137.6 23.0 79.5 824.4 73.1 − 95.2 210.5 1 057.9
         May 525.9 109.2 320.5 0.4 136.6 22.8 76.8 833.9 61.3 − 111.6 209.5 1 066.1
         June 526.8 114.7 317.9 0.0 135.5 18.4 76.2 836.6 62.6 − 107.9 209.0 1 064.0
         July 533.6 146.0 311.6 0.2 134.2 29.5 76.9 846.2 73.4 − 111.2 210.9 1 086.6
         Aug 541.3 171.7 321.5 0.1 133.9 56.7 79.2 854.2 71.4 − 104.5 211.5 1 122.4
         Sep 540.3 135.1 389.8 0.3 178.0 121.8 109.8 853.2 52.3 − 103.0 209.5 1 184.5
         Oct 571.0 193.0 373.6 1.5 217.4 168.7 162.9 854.9 50.0 − 88.5 208.7 1 232.2
         Nov 612.1 196.1 387.1 2.8 231.9 204.6 178.0 861.4 57.9 − 80.8 208.9 1 274.8
         Dec 622.1 238.0 389.0 4.4 260.3 253.7 200.5 869.4 63.8 − 85.9 212.2 1 335.3
2012          Jan 683.9 169.4 627.3 6.0 278.6 399.3 210.8 883.7 67.7 − 8.7 212.3 1 495.3
Deutsche Bundesbank
2009          July 138.0 81.0 141.5 0.6 − 49.4 4.5 190.2 23.5 40.4 53.2 292.8
         Aug 128.6 47.6 189.1 0.1 0.8 70.1 4.9 192.0 23.5 23.6 52.2 314.2
         Sep 126.0 40.6 178.0 0.1 2.9 51.8 4.3 192.3 23.6 23.4 52.2 296.4
         Oct 124.2 37.3 175.9 0.2 4.9 49.4 3.0 192.5 23.7 22.4 51.5 293.3
         Nov 120.7 34.6 178.8 0.2 6.2 34.2 4.3 192.5 23.6 34.8 51.0 277.7
         Dec 116.3 33.7 171.1 0.6 7.2 25.7 2.7 193.3 18.8 37.8 50.5 269.5
2010          Jan 112.1 42.8 168.9 0.1 7.9 44.8 2.3 198.4 10.7 25.3 50.3 293.5
         Feb 112.3 42.2 168.6 0.1 8.9 50.3 5.2 195.6 5.4 25.4 50.2 296.1
         Mar 112.6 51.8 157.9 0.8 10.0 67.8 5.0 196.5 2.1 11.8 50.0 314.3
         Apr 116.2 40.9 164.9 0.2 11.5 69.8 3.4 198.0 0.3 11.9 50.3 318.2
         May 121.1 40.5 164.7 0.1 12.8 74.9 4.2 199.0 0.7 10.2 50.2 324.1
         June 122.2 43.0 166.4 0.0 22.1 113.1 17.1 201.5 0.8 − 29.2 50.5 365.0
         July 133.9 55.2 112.8 0.1 32.7 81.0 22.3 202.5 0.4 − 22.7 51.2 334.7
         Aug 145.8 61.7 52.8 0.1 28.4 32.7 20.7 204.2 0.5 − 21.6 52.3 289.2
         Sep 145.5 52.6 50.3 0.2 28.4 24.8 26.5 204.2 0.5 − 30.9 52.0 280.9
         Oct 142.2 54.4 40.5 0.1 29.3 27.0 32.4 204.0 0.5 − 48.3 51.0 281.9
         Nov 136.7 63.7 28.9 0.0 28.8 21.2 35.7 202.9 0.4 − 53.6 51.5 275.5
         Dec 136.5 60.5 32.5 0.1 29.3 21.2 41.0 203.3 0.2 − 57.7 51.0 275.5
2011          Jan 141.9 55.2 34.1 0.1 31.2 28.2 42.0 207.7 0.3 − 66.9 51.3 287.2
         Feb 148.1 44.6 44.0 0.0 31.6 19.8 43.0 204.6 0.2 − 51.0 51.8 276.2
         Mar 148.4 31.3 44.7 0.0 31.7 14.6 48.4 204.8 0.2 − 63.7 51.8 271.2
         Apr 146.6 24.1 45.5 0.0 31.9 13.6 38.9 205.2 0.2 − 61.5 51.7 270.4
         May 142.4 17.9 47.7 0.2 31.9 10.8 38.2 207.6 0.4 − 68.2 51.4 269.8
         June 142.5 10.6 41.5 0.0 31.7 8.1 33.4 208.7 0.3 − 75.8 51.7 268.4
         July 144.3 22.8 35.8 0.0 31.4 11.1 36.4 211.1 0.3 − 77.3 52.6 274.8
         Aug 146.7 13.6 36.5 0.0 31.3 15.4 35.2 213.0 0.2 − 88.4 52.7 281.1
         Sep 146.7 6.6 33.6 0.0 42.3 27.8 60.2 213.4 0.3 − 124.3 51.8 293.0
         Oct 155.5 10.7 20.8 0.0 52.3 41.5 86.8 213.5 0.3 − 155.0 52.2 307.2
         Nov 167.5 4.0 18.0 0.1 55.7 55.0 87.9 213.8 0.2 − 164.5 53.0 321.8
         Dec 168.7 3.0 17.6 0.1 63.2 60.4 126.2 216.3 0.7 − 205.5 54.4 331.2
2012          Jan 182.3 4.4 40.3 0.1 67.2 101.7 117.0 219.8 0.8 − 199.6 54.5 376.0
Discrepancies may arise from rounding. *The banking system’s liquidity position is includes liquidity absorbed as a result of the Eurosystem’s foreign exchange swap
defined as the current account holdings in euro of euro-area credit institutions with operations. 5From 2002, euro banknotes and other banknotes which have been
the Eurosystem. Amounts are derived from the consolidated financial statement of issued by the national central banks of the Eurosystem and which are still in cir-the Eurosystem and the financial statement of the Bundesbank. 1Figures are daily av- culation. In accordance with the accounting procedure chosen by the Eurosystem for
erages for the reserve maintenance period ending in the month indicated. 2Source: the issue of euro banknotes, 8% of the total value of the euro banknotes in cir-
ECB. 3Includes liquidity provided under the Eurosystem’s covered bond purchase culation are allocated on a monthly basis to the ECB. The counterpart of this adjust-
programme and the Eurosystem’s securities markets programme. 4From Aug. 2009, ment is shown under “Other factors”. The remaining 92% of the value of the euro

Deutsche Bundesbank
15  Monthly Report
February 2012
II  Overall monetary survey in the euro area
  
  
Flows
  
Liquidity-providing factors Liquidity-absorbing factors
Monetary policy operations of the Eurosystem
Credit
institutions‘
currentaccount
Net assets Longer- Other Other balances
in gold Main term Marginal liquidity- liquidity- Banknotes Central Other (including Reserve
and foreign refinancing refinancing lending providing Deposit absorbing in government factors minimum Base maintenance
currency operations operations facility facility deposits (net)  
6 reserves) 7 money 8 period operations 3 operations 4 circulation 5 
ending in 1 
Eurosystem  2  
  
− 30.8 − 17.4 + 104.3 + 0.6 − + 97.4 + 7.8 + 3.3 − 3.8 − 49.3 + 1.3 + 102.0 2009          July
− 23.5 − 127.3 + 189.1 − 1.0 + 2.8 + 65.4 + 12.2 + 7.7 − 4.0 − 38.8 − 2.3 + 70.8          Aug 
− 6.0 − 19.3 − 48.6 − 0.0 + 5.6 − 48.4 − 3.6 − 1.7 − 8.2 − 6.5 − 0.0 − 50.1          Sep 
− 6.2 + 4.3 − 28.5 + 0.0 + 5.9 − 27.1 − 5.6 − 0.3 + 13.3 − 2.7 − 2.2 − 29.6          Oct 
− 8.4 − 26.8 + 9.2 − 0.0 + 5.8 − 23.1 − 0.9 + 1.9 + 9.7 − 5.8 − 1.9 − 23.1          Nov − 5.4 + 3.5 − 32.7 + 0.4 + 4.5 − 20.8 − 2.1 + 4.5 + 1.4 − 11.3 − 1.4 − 17.7          Dec 
+ 5.4 + 4.8 + 55.0 − 0.3 + 3.8 + 81.3 − 1.8 + 21.6 − 30.3 − 1.9 − 0.2 + 102.7 2010          Jan 
+ 12.6 − 0.9 + 13.8 − 0.2 + 5.1 + 21.3 + 5.2 − 13.2 + 2.8 + 14.6 − 0.3 + 7.8          Feb 
+ 1.3 + 20.8 − 21.1 + 0.7 + 4.5 + 18.1 − 2.8 + 1.0 − 9.4 − 1.8 + 0.9 + 20.1          Mar 
+ 12.9 − 2.8 + 9.4 − 0.5 + 5.6 + 14.3 − 2.1 + 8.3 + 0.4 + 3.2 + 0.7 + 23.2          Apr 
+ 17.2 − 1.0 + 15.9 + 0.5 + 5.8 + 17.5 + 3.0 + 3.7 − 1.5 + 15.8 − 0.1 + 21.1          May
+ 5.4 + 33.3 + 40.3 − 0.6 + 37.5 + 70.6 + 22.7 + 9.6 + 11.0 + 1.9 + 0.1 + 80.3          June
+ 38.5 + 57.5 − 133.5 − 0.0 + 53.3 − 58.4 + 20.3 + 6.8 + 3.4 + 41.9 + 1.9 − 49.7          July
+ 42.5 + 17.9 − 141.0 − 0.2 − 18.8 −133.7 + 13.1 + 6.3 − 31.3 + 44.7 + 1.3 − 126.1          Aug 
− 0.2 − 32.3 + 2.8 + 0.5 + 0.4 − 13.0 − 0.6 − 3.3 − 8.4 − 3.2 − 0.4 − 16.7          Sep 
− 11.9 + 11.4 − 42.4 + 0.1 + 6.5 − 14.9 − 2.1 − 1.9 + 9.6 − 24.8 − 2.2 − 18.9          Oct 
− 20.0 + 18.5 − 52.6 + 0.1 − 3.8 − 26.9 + 4.0 − 0.6 − 4.3 − 32.2 + 2.1 − 25.4          Nov 
− 0.2 − 3.5 − 3.7 + 1.1 + 5.9 + 2.8 + 2.0 + 2.4 + 2.3 − 7.1 − 2.7 + 2.4          Dec 
+ 16.4 + 17.5 − 19.7 − 1.4 + 10.5 + 21.8 + 2.7 + 18.0 − 13.1 − 6.0 − 0.1 + 39.7 2011          Jan 
+ 22.2 − 11.6 + 1.6 − 0.4 − 3.7 − 27.3 + 7.8 − 11.9 + 19.9 + 18.4 + 1.2 − 38.0          Feb + 0.3 − 51.0 + 2.8 + 7.5 + 0.7 − 12.3 − 1.0 − 1.1 − 11.4 − 13.2 − 0.7 − 14.1          Mar 
− 5.9 − 37.1 + 14.4 − 6.8 − 0.3 − 3.9 − 0.8 + 3.5 − 16.7 − 15.3 − 2.4 − 2.8          Apr 
− 18.2 + 11.9 − 14.9 − 0.4 − 1.0 − 0.2 − 2.7 + 9.5 − 11.8 − 16.4 − 1.0 + 8.2          May
+ 0.9 + 5.5 − 2.6 − 0.4 − 1.1 − 4.4 − 0.6 + 2.7 + 1.3 + 3.7 − 0.5 − 2.1          June
+ 6.8 + 31.3 − 6.3 + 0.2 − 1.3 + 11.1 + 0.7 + 9.6 + 10.8 − 3.3 + 1.9 + 22.6          July
+ 7.7 + 25.7 + 9.9 − 0.1 − 0.3 + 27.2 + 2.3 + 8.0 − 2.0 + 6.7 + 0.6 + 35.8          Aug 
− 1.0 − 36.6 + 68.3 + 0.2 + 44.1 + 65.1 + 30.6 − 1.0 − 19.1 + 1.5 − 2.0 + 62.1          Sep 
+ 30.7 + 57.9 − 16.2 + 1.2 + 39.4 + 46.9 + 53.1 + 1.7 − 2.3 + 14.5 − 0.8 + 47.7          Oct 
+ 41.1 + 3.1 + 13.5 + 1.3 + 14.5 + 35.9 + 15.1 + 6.5 + 7.9 + 7.7 + 0.2 + 42.6          Nov 
+ 10.0 + 41.9 + 1.9 + 1.6 + 28.4 + 49.1 + 22.5 + 8.0 + 5.9 − 5.1 + 3.3 + 60.5          Dec 
+ 61.8 − 68.6 + 238.3 + 1.6 + 18.3 +145.6 + 10.3 + 14.3 + 3.9 + 77.2 + 0.1 + 160.0 2012          Jan 
Deutsche Bundesbank
− 7.7 − 13.9 + 38.1 − 0.0 − + 34.1 + 3.8 + 0.9 − 8.9 − 13.9 + 0.4 + 35.4 2009          July
− 9.3 − 33.5 + 47.6 − 0.5 + 0.8 + 20.6 + 0.4 + 1.8 + 0.0 − 16.8 − 1.0 + 21.5          Aug 
− 2.6 − 7.0 − 11.1 + 0.0 + 2.1 − 18.2 − 0.6 + 0.3 + 0.1 − 0.2 + 0.1 − 17.9          Sep 
− 1.8 − 3.3 − 2.1 + 0.0 + 2.0 − 2.5 − 1.2 + 0.2 + 0.1 − 1.0 − 0.8 − 3.1          Oct 
− 3.5 − 2.7 + 3.0 − 0.0 + 1.3 − 15.2 + 1.2 + 0.1 − 0.1 + 12.5 − 0.4 − 15.6          Nov 
− 4.4 − 0.9 − 7.7 + 0.4 + 1.0 − 8.5 − 1.6 + 0.7 − 4.8 + 3.0 − 0.5 − 8.2          Dec 
− 4.2 + 9.1 − 2.2 − 0.5 + 0.7 + 19.1 − 0.4 + 5.1 − 8.1 − 12.6 − 0.2 + 24.0 2010          Jan 
+ 0.2 − 0.6 − 0.3 + 0.0 + 1.0 + 5.5 + 3.0 − 2.8 − 5.2 + 0.1 − 0.1 + 2.6          Feb 
+ 0.3 + 9.6 − 10.6 + 0.7 + 1.1 + 17.4 − 0.3 + 0.9 − 3.3 − 13.6 − 0.1 + 18.2          Mar 
+ 3.6 − 10.8 + 7.0 − 0.7 + 1.5 + 2.0 − 1.6 + 1.6 − 1.8 + 0.1 + 0.3 + 3.9          Apr 
+ 4.9 − 0.4 − 0.2 − 0.1 + 1.3 + 5.0 + 0.8 + 1.0 + 0.5 − 1.7 − 0.1 + 5.9          May
+ 1.1 + 2.5 + 1.7 − 0.0 + 9.3 + 38.2 + 12.9 + 2.5 + 0.1 − 39.4 + 0.3 + 40.9          June
+ 11.7 + 12.2 − 53.6 + 0.0 + 10.7 − 32.1 + 5.1 + 1.0 − 0.4 + 6.5 + 0.8 − 30.3          July
+ 11.9 + 6.6 − 60.0 + 0.0 − 4.3 − 48.3 − 1.5 + 1.7 + 0.1 + 1.1 + 1.0 − 45.6          Aug 
− 0.3 − 9.1 − 2.5 + 0.1 + 0.0 − 7.9 + 5.8 + 0.0 − 0.1 − 9.3 − 0.3 − 8.3          Sep 
− 3.3 + 1.8 − 9.8 − 0.1 + 0.9 + 2.2 + 5.9 − 0.2 − 0.0 − 17.4 − 1.0 + 1.0          Oct 
− 5.6 + 9.3 − 11.6 − 0.1 − 0.5 − 5.8 + 3.3 − 1.1 − 0.1 − 5.3 + 0.5 − 6.4          Nov − 0.2 − 3.1 + 3.6 + 0.1 + 0.6 + 0.0 + 5.3 + 0.5 − 0.2 − 4.1 − 0.5 − 0.0          Dec 
+ 5.5 − 5.4 + 1.5 − 0.0 + 1.9 + 7.0 + 1.1 + 4.3 + 0.0 − 9.2 + 0.4 + 11.6 2011          Jan 
+ 6.2 − 10.6 + 9.9 − 0.1 + 0.3 − 8.4 + 0.9 − 3.1 − 0.0 + 15.9 + 0.5 − 11.0          Feb 
+ 0.3 − 13.3 + 0.7 − 0.0 + 0.2 − 5.2 + 5.5 + 0.3 − 0.0 − 12.7 − 0.1 − 5.0          Mar 
− 1.8 − 7.2 + 0.9 + 0.0 + 0.1 − 1.0 − 9.5 + 0.3 + 0.0 + 2.2 − 0.0 − 0.7          Apr 
− 4.2 − 6.2 + 2.2 + 0.2 + 0.0 − 2.8 − 0.7 + 2.4 + 0.1 − 6.7 − 0.3 − 0.7          May
+ 0.2 − 7.3 − 6.3 − 0.2 − 0.2 − 2.7 − 4.7 + 1.1 − 0.1 − 7.6 + 0.2 − 1.4          June
+ 1.7 + 12.2 − 5.7 + 0.0 − 0.3 + 3.0 + 3.0 + 2.4 + 0.0 − 1.5 + 0.9 + 6.4          July
+ 2.4 − 9.2 + 0.7 − 0.0 − 0.0 + 4.3 − 1.2 + 1.9 − 0.1 − 11.1 + 0.1 + 6.3          Aug 
+ 0.0 − 6.9 − 2.9 + 0.0 + 11.0 + 12.4 + 25.0 + 0.4 + 0.1 − 35.9 − 0.9 + 12.0          Sep 
+ 8.8 + 4.1 − 12.8 + 0.0 + 9.9 + 13.7 + 26.6 + 0.1 − 0.0 − 30.7 + 0.3 + 14.2          Oct 
+ 12.0 − 6.7 − 2.8 + 0.1 + 3.5 + 13.5 + 1.1 + 0.3 − 0.0 − 9.5 + 0.9 + 14.6          Nov 
+ 1.2 − 1.0 − 0.4 + 0.0 + 7.5 + 5.5 + 38.4 + 2.5 + 0.5 − 41.0 + 1.4 + 9.4          Dec 
+ 13.6 + 1.4 + 22.7 − 0.0 + 4.0 + 41.3 − 9.2 + 3.5 + 0.1 + 5.9 + 0.1 + 44.8 2012          Jan 
banknotes in circulation is allocated, likewise on a monthly basis, to the NCBs, with consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem and the financial statement of
each NCB showing in its balance sheet the percentage of the euro banknotes in the Bundesbank. 7Equal to the difference between the sum of liquidity-providing
circulation that corresponds to its paid-up share in the ECB’s capital. The difference factors and the sum of liquidity-absorbing factors. 8Calculated as the sum of the
between the value of the euro banknotes allocated to an NCB and the value of the “deposit facility”, “banknotes in circulation” and “credit institutions’ current account
euro banknotes which that NCB has put into circulation is likewise shown under holdings”. “Other factors”. From 2003 euro banknotes only. 6Remaining items in the

Deutsche Bundesbank
16  Monthly Report
February 2012
III Consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem
 
1 Assets *
 
 
€ billion
Claims on non-euro area Claims on non-euro area residents denominated
in foreign currency residents denominated in euro
Balances with
Claims on banks, security
On investments, euro area Balances Claims
reporting external loans residents with banks, arising from
date/ Gold and other denominated security the credit
End of Total and gold Receivables external in foreign investments facility under
month 1 assets receivables Total from the IMF assets currency Total and loans ERM II
 Eurosystem 2
 
2011 June                  3 1,899.0 350.7 219.4 74.9 144.5 23.2 19.0 19.0 −
                              10 1,892.6 350.7 219.6 74.9 144.7 23.3 21.3 21.3 −
                              17 1,914.5 350.7 219.1 74.9 144.2 23.7 20.1 20.1 −
                              24 1,972.2 350.7 217.7 74.9 142.8 23.7 20.7 20.7 −
         July                  1 3 1,944.6 3 363.3 3 216.0 3 74.3 141.7 23.3 20.5 20.5 −
                                8 1,919.5 363.3 216.3 74.3 142.0 23.8 19.1 19.1 −
                              15 1,957.2 363.3 217.4 75.6 141.8 23.2 20.0 20.0 −
                              22 2,006.1 363.3 218.1 75.9 142.2 24.6 20.3 20.3 −
                              29 2,000.5 363.3 217.7 75.9 141.8 23.9 21.8 21.8 −
         Aug                  5 2,004.3 363.3 216.5 75.9 140.6 25.5 23.1 23.1 −
                              12 2,073.0 363.3 215.9 75.9 140.0 26.8 20.5 20.5 −
                              19 2,076.6 363.3 215.9 76.0 139.9 27.3 20.2 20.2 −
                              26 2,071.6 363.2 214.9 76.0 139.0 27.9 18.8 18.8 −
         Sep                  2 2,073.1 363.2 214.3 76.0 138.3 28.4 18.9 18.9 −
                                9 2,086.4 363.2 214.3 76.6 137.7 29.1 19.8 19.8 −
                              16 2,134.7 363.2 213.9 77.2 136.7 29.8 20.8 20.8 −
                              23 2,180.1 363.2 213.0 77.1 135.9 31.6 20.6 20.6 −
                              30 3 2,288.6 3 420.0 3 226.5 3 80.4 3 146.1 3 35.3 19.7 19.7 −
2011 Oct                  7 2,295.7 419.8 226.8 80.4 146.4 34.6 20.4 20.4 −
                              14 2,310.9 419.8 227.1 80.4 146.7 32.2 19.8 19.8 −
                              21 2,313.2 419.8 226.9 80.4 146.5 32.5 21.6 21.6 −
                              28 2,333.4 419.8 228.5 80.4 148.1 32.7 26.7 26.7 −
         Nov                  4 2,328.6 419.8 229.8 80.3 149.5 31.8 27.3 27.3 −
                              11 2,343.5 419.8 229.2 80.2 149.0 32.5 28.3 28.3 −
                              18 2,393.4 419.8 229.4 80.4 149.0 33.1 28.8 28.8 −
                              25 2,419.5 419.8 229.9 80.4 149.5 33.8 29.0 29.0 −
         Dec                  2 2,435.7 419.8 231.9 80.4 151.5 32.3 28.3 28.3 −
                                9 2,460.8 419.8 234.0 81.3 152.7 70.1 28.3 28.3 −
                              16 2,493.8 419.8 235.7 83.2 152.5 73.0 30.5 30.5 −
                              23 2,733.2 419.8 236.8 83.5 153.3 95.4 26.0 26.0 −
                              30 3 2,735.6 3 423.5 3 244.6 3 85.7 3 159.0 3 98.2 25.4 25.4 −
2012 Jan                  6 2,687.9 423.5 246.0 85.7 160.4 95.6 24.6 24.6 −
                              13 2,677.0 423.5 246.0 85.7 160.4 94.5 23.5 23.5 −
                              20 2,706.2 423.5 245.3 85.7 159.6 94.5 25.7 25.7 −
                              27 2,682.6 423.4 245.0 85.7 159.3 96.7 25.0 25.0 −
         Feb                  3 2,662.1 423.4 246.0 85.7 160.3 100.4 24.2 24.2 −
 Deutsche Bundesbank
2010          Mar 3 608.6 3 90.2 3 44.7 3 17.2 3 27.5 −−−−
         Apr 615.5 90.2 44.8 17.2 27.6 −−−−
         May 673.4 90.2 45.5 17.9 27.6 0.1−−−
         June 3 713.7 3 110.7 3 49.9 3 19.0 3 30.9 0.2−−−
         July 625.3 110.6 49.9 19.1 30.8 0.2−−−
         Aug 624.7 110.6 49.8 19.0 30.7 0.0−−−
         Sep 3 623.2 3 105.1 3 45.7 3 18.2 3 27.5 −−−−
         Oct 619.1 105.1 45.5 18.1 27.4 −−−−
         Nov 621.0 105.1 45.4 17.9 27.5 −−−−
         Dec 3 671.2 3 115.4 46.7 18.7 28.0 −−−−
2011          Jan 628.7 115.4 46.9 18.9 27.9 −−−−
         Feb 639.5 115.4 46.9 18.9 28.0 −−−−
         Mar 3 632.2 3 110.1 3 45.6 3 19.3 3 26.3 −−−−
         Apr 610.1 110.1 46.1 19.3 26.9 −−−−
         May 611.3 110.1 46.1 19.3 26.9 −−−−
         June 3 632.3 3 114.1 45.7 19.1 26.6 −−−−
         July 629.0 114.1 46.1 19.7 26.4 −−−−
         Aug 679.1 114.1 46.0 19.7 26.3 −−−−
         Sep 3 764.6 3 131.9 3 49.5 3 20.9 3 28.7 −−−−
         Oct 772.8 131.7 49.5 20.9 28.6 0.5−−−
         Nov 812.7 131.7 49.2 20.9 28.3 0.5−−−
         Dec 3 837.6 3 132.9 3 51.7 3 22.3 3 29.4 18.1−−−
2012          Jan 860.1 132.9 51.9 22.3 29.6 11.6−−−
 
*The consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem comprises the financial items for foreign currency, securities, gold and financial instruments are valued at the
statement of the European Central Bank (ECB) and the financial statements of the end of the quarter. 1For the Eurosystem: financial statements for specific weekly
national central banks of the euro area member states (NCBs). The balance sheet

Deutsche Bundesbank
17  Monthly Report
February 2012
III Consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem
 
   
 
Lending to euro area credit institutions related to monetary policy operations Securities of euro area residents
denominated in euro in euro
 Other claims on euro area
Longer- Fine-  credit Securities General    On
Main re- term re- tuning Structural Credits institutions held for government    reportingfinancing financing reverse reverse Marginal related denomi- monetary debt deno-    date/opera- opera- opera- opera- lending to margin nated in policy Other minated in Other    End of
Total tions tions tions tions facility calls euro Total purposes securities euro assets    month  
1 
Eurosystem 2
 
432.1 110.8 321.3 − − − 0.1 40.3 477.9 135.3 342.6 34.5 301.8 2011 June                  3
423.9 102.4 321.3 − − 0.0 0.1 36.6 477.9 135.2 342.7 34.5 304.8                               10445.9 135.6 310.3 − − 0.0 0.1 39.2 476.6 134.2 342.4 34.5 304.7                               17497.5 186.9 310.3 − − 0.2 0.1 41.0 478.8 134.1 344.7 34.5 307.6                               24
455.2 141.5 313.2 − − 0.5 0.0 45.2 485.0 134.4
3 350.7 34.0 3 302.2          July                  1
433.2 120.0 313.2 − − 0.0 0.1 45.8 486.2 134.4 351.9 33.9 297.9                                 8
465.2 153.6 311.5 − − 0.0 0.0 52.4 485.4 134.2 351.2 33.9 296.4                               15508.6 197.1 311.5 − − − 0.0 57.3 484.5 133.8 350.6 33.9 295.5                               22497.4 164.2 333.1 − − 0.0 0.1 59.2 484.4 133.7 350.6 33.9 298.8                               29
505.1 172.0 333.1 − − − 0.0 50.9 469.8 133.7 336.1 33.9 316.2          Aug                  5
548.1 157.1 390.8 − − 0.0 0.1 52.5 491.9 155.7 336.2 33.9 320.1                               12538.7 147.7 390.8 − − 0.1 0.1 49.1 504.7 170.0 334.7 33.9 323.6                               19524.6 133.7 390.8 − − − 0.1 49.8 510.3 175.3 335.0 33.9 328.1                               26
513.8 121.7 392.1 − − 0.0 0.0 50.1 523.0 188.6 334.5 33.9 327.5          Sep                  2
507.5 115.4 392.1 − − 0.0 0.0 48.0 539.2 202.4 336.8 33.9 331.2                                 9534.6 163.8 369.6 − − 1.2 0.0 52.2 547.1 212.0 335.1 33.9 339.0                               16571.3 201.1 369.6 − − 0.5 0.0 50.2 552.1 215.9 336.2 33.9 344.1                               23588.8 208.3 378.9 − − 1.4 0.1 52.3
3 556.7 219.9 3 336.7 34.0 3 355.3                               30
580.7 198.9 378.9 − − 2.8 0.0 68.3 560.7 222.3 338.5 34.0 350.3 2011 Oct                  7586.6 204.9 379.5 − − 2.2 0.0 78.2 562.4 224.5 337.9 34.0 350.7                               14585.2 201.2 379.5 − − 4.6 0.0 79.7 567.2 228.7 338.5 34.0 346.2                               21596.4 197.4 396.0 − − 2.9 0.2 85.0 571.3 232.7 338.6 34.0 338.9                               28
580.0 182.8 396.0 − − 1.2 0.0 85.5 578.4 242.2 336.2 34.0 342.0          Nov                  4
589.2 194.8 392.5 − − 2.0 0.0 89.1 581.2 246.1 335.2 34.0 340.2                               11625.5 230.3 392.5 − − 2.7 0.1 90.7 590.6 254.4 336.2 34.0 341.6                               18641.4 247.2 392.5 − − 1.7 0.1 93.2 600.9 263.3 337.6 34.0 337.4                               25
656.0 265.5 383.1 − − 7.0 0.5 92.4 605.7 267.6 338.1 33.9 335.2          Dec                  2
642.6 252.1 383.0 − − 7.4 0.1 90.0 606.7 268.7 338.0 33.9 335.3                                 9665.0 291.6 368.6 − − 4.5 0.2 89.6 610.2 272.5 337.7 33.9 336.2                               16879.1 169.0 703.9 − − 6.1 0.1 95.0 610.6 273.0 337.6 33.9 336.6                               23863.6 144.8 703.9 − − 14.8 0.1 78.7 618.6 273.9
3 344.8 33.9 3 349.2                               30
836.0 130.6 703.9 − − 1.4 0.1 66.8 619.0 274.8 344.1 33.9 342.5 2012 Jan                  6817.3 110.9 703.9 − − 2.4 0.1 69.5 623.0 278.8 344.2 33.9 345.7                               13831.7 126.9 701.5 − − 3.3 0.1 75.6 624.0 282.2 341.8 33.9 352.0                               20809.2 130.3 676.5 − − 2.4 0.1 72.3 624.8 282.6 342.3 33.9 352.2                               27
795.0 115.6 676.5 − − 2.8 0.1 73.3 623.2 282.5 340.7 31.2 345.4          Feb                  3
 Deutsche Bundesbank
206.1 40.9 164.7 − − 0.6 − 7.3 17.0 11.8 5.3 4.4 239.0 2010          Mar 
206.1 41.6 164.5 − − 0.0 − 7.8 18.1 12.9 5.3 4.4 244.2          Apr 
210.2 43.3 166.8 − − 0.1 − 8.4 28.4 23.1 5.3 4.4 286.3          May
225.6 58.6 167.0 − − 0.0 − 8.8 33.4 28.1 5.3 4.4 280.8          June
115.0 61.7 53.3 − − 0.0 − 9.3 33.7 28.4 5.3 4.4 302.3          July
103.8 52.9 50.3 − − 0.6 − 8.7 33.7 28.4 5.3 4.4 313.8          Aug 
85.3 56.4 24.0 4.1 − 0.8 − 8.9 33.9 28.6 5.3 4.4 3 339.9          Sep 
103.0 69.1 33.8 − − 0.2 − 10.6 34.0 28.7 5.3 4.4 316.5          Oct 
93.0 59.1 33.8 − − 0.0 − 9.1 34.7 29.5 5.3 4.4 329.3          Nov 
103.1 68.4 33.5 1.2 − − − 9.6 36.1 30.9 5.2 4.4 355.9          Dec 
82.5 37.8 44.4 − − 0.3 − 10.0 36.8 31.6 5.2 4.4 332.7 2011          Jan 
74.9 29.8 45.1 − − 0.0 − 10.0 37.1 31.8 5.2 4.4 350.9          Feb 71.7 25.5 46.1 − − 0.1 − 9.6 37.2 31.9 5.2 4.4 353.5          Mar 
64.8 18.7 46.1 − − 0.0 − 8.3 37.0 31.9 5.1 4.4 339.3          Apr 
52.1 10.9 41.3 − − 0.0 − 7.7 36.8 31.7 5.1 4.4 353.9          May57.8 21.8 35.9 − − 0.2 − 6.7 36.5 31.4 5.1 4.4 366.9          June
45.8 9.8 36.0 − − 0.0 − 8.1 36.4 31.3 5.1 4.4 374.0          July
37.6 3.5 34.0 − − 0.0 − 7.8 48.4 43.5 4.9 4.4 420.9          Aug 31.1 12.6 18.4 − − 0.0 − 9.7 57.8 52.9 4.9 4.4 480.2          Sep 
21.3 3.5 17.7 − − 0.1 − 8.5 60.8 55.9 4.9 4.4 496.1          Oct 
21.6 3.8 17.7 − − 0.1 − 9.2 70.1 65.2 4.9 4.4 525.9          Nov 55.8 8.6 47.1 − − 0.0 − 8.5 71.9 67.0 4.9 4.4 494.3          Dec 
48.6 2.0 46.6 − − 0.0 − 8.4 74.1 69.2 4.9 4.4 528.2 2012          Jan 
 
dates; for the Bundesbank: end of month financial statement. 2Source: ECB.  
3 Changes are due mainly to revalutions at the end of the quarter. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
18  Monthly Report
February 2012
III Consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem
 
2 Liabilities *
 
 
€ billion
Liabilities to euro area credit institutions related to Liabilities to
monetary policy operations denominated in euro other euro area residents
denominated in euro
 
Other
Current liabilities
accounts to euro-
On (covering Fine- area credit
reporting the tuning Deposits institutions Debt
date/ Banknotes minimum Fixed- reverse deno- certifi- General related to
End of Total in circu- reserve Deposit term opera- margin minated cates govern- Other
month 1 liabilities lation 2 Total system) facility deposits tions calls in euro issued Total ment liabilities
 Eurosystem 4
 
2011 June                  3 1,899.0 842.7 287.1 191.7 20.4 75.0 − 0.0 6.6 − 80.7 73.1 7.6
                              10 1,892.6 843.5 282.8 197.4 10.4 75.0 − 0.0 5.4 − 78.4 70.7 7.8
                              17 1,914.5 842.7 318.5 238.1 5.4 75.0 − 0.0 2.5 − 67.1 59.6 7.5
                              24 1,972.2 843.4 340.6 253.4 13.2 74.0 − 0.0 2.8 − 101.4 93.7 7.7
         July                  1 5 1,944.6 849.2 316.9 216.2 24.9 74.0 − 1.8 5.1 − 79.5 71.8 7.7
                                8 1,919.5 851.8 297.4 157.6 65.7 74.0 − 0.1 6.0 − 72.5 64.8 7.7
                              15 1,957.2 853.4 327.6 242.4 10.3 74.0 − 1.0 4.4 − 74.9 67.0 7.8
                              22 2,006.1 853.0 357.9 250.5 32.2 74.0 − 1.2 4.4 − 87.3 79.4 7.8
                              29 2,000.5 855.7 332.9 208.3 49.9 74.0 − 0.8 5.2 − 97.4 89.5 8.0
         Aug                  5 2,004.3 857.6 369.8 159.8 134.8 74.0 − 1.2 6.5 − 62.5 54.0 8.4
                              12 2,073.0 858.2 441.5 286.8 80.2 74.0 − 0.5 3.9 − 62.0 53.5 8.6
                              19 2,076.6 854.6 447.3 244.8 105.9 96.0 − 0.5 2.2 − 60.3 51.7 8.7
                              26 2,071.6 850.2 431.7 197.0 121.2 110.5 − 3.0 4.7 − 70.9 62.5 8.4
         Sep                  2 2,073.1 853.0 447.0 179.7 151.1 115.5 − 0.6 4.2 − 53.3 44.9 8.5
                                9 2,086.4 853.2 455.3 139.3 181.8 129.0 − 5.2 3.6 − 54.3 45.6 8.7
                              16 2,134.7 852.7 506.2 241.5 111.5 143.0 − 10.2 3.7 − 49.0 40.3 8.7
                              23 2,180.1 852.5 530.0 223.5 150.7 152.5 − 3.4 4.6 − 64.4 56.4 8.0
                              30 5 2,288.6 857.4 563.0 204.9 199.6 156.5 − 2.0 3.3 − 59.7 51.6 8.1
2011 Oct                  7 2,295.7 859.6 571.5 154.1 255.6 160.5 − 1.3 2.0 − 62.4 54.3 8.1
                              14 2,310.9 859.5 598.0 298.6 136.2 163.0 − 0.2 3.5 − 53.3 45.2 8.1
                              21 2,313.2 858.3 580.3 213.1 202.1 165.0 − 0.2 3.7 − 77.2 69.2 8.0
                              28 2,333.4 863.1 596.6 178.7 248.1 169.5 − 0.3 3.5 − 75.1 66.8 8.3
         Nov                  4 2,328.6 867.1 601.0 135.3 288.4 173.5 − 3.8 4.1 − 58.7 51.0 7.7
                              11 2,343.5 866.5 623.2 294.9 144.7 183.0 − 0.6 2.6 − 57.9 49.8 8.1
                              18 2,393.4 865.1 661.9 236.5 236.8 187.0 − 1.6 7.2 − 65.3 57.4 7.9
                              25 2,419.5 865.1 663.6 211.9 256.3 194.5 − 1.0 1.9 − 97.0 88.9 8.1
         Dec                  2 2,435.7 874.0 708.0 180.7 332.7 194.2 − 0.3 1.6 − 63.1 53.6 9.5
                                9 2,460.8 879.6 681.5 139.2 334.9 207.0 − 0.3 2.7 − 70.5 61.5 9.0
                              16 2,493.8 882.6 719.9 298.1 214.1 207.5 − 0.2 3.2 − 55.3 45.8 9.5
                              23 2,733.2 890.9 888.2 265.0 411.8 211.0 − 0.4 3.4 − 77.5 66.0 11.5
                              30 5 2,735.6 888.7 849.5 223.5 413.9 211.0 − 1.1 2.4 − 79.6 65.5 14.1
2012 Jan                  6 2,687.9 883.7 832.4 156.5 463.6 211.5 − 0.8 1.1 − 90.7 79.6 11.1
                              13 2,677.0 876.6 840.8 132.5 493.3 213.0 − 2.0 1.4 − 87.5 76.5 11.0
                              20 2,706.2 871.8 845.3 134.7 491.8 217.0 − 1.8 1.5 − 108.9 98.8 10.1
                              27 2,682.6 869.2 797.9 88.9 488.9 219.0 − 1.0 1.7 − 136.1 125.9 10.2
         Feb                  3 2,662.1 871.5 815.2 83.9 511.4 219.0 − 0.9 2.0 − 93.8 83.6 10.2
 Deutsche Bundesbank
2010          Mar 5 608.6 199.0 135.7 82.3 53.4 − − − − − 0.6 0.2 0.4
         Apr 615.5 199.2 139.1 58.6 80.5 − − − − − 0.7 0.2 0.5
         May 673.4 201.0 193.0 52.8 123.9 16.2 − − − − 0.9 0.3 0.6
         June 5 713.7 202.7 208.8 108.6 82.9 17.3 − − − − 0.6 0.1 0.4
         July 625.3 204.8 115.9 61.8 34.7 19.4 − − − − 1.0 0.5 0.5
         Aug 624.7 203.2 115.3 62.4 29.8 23.1 − − − − 1.0 0.6 0.4
         Sep 5 623.2 203.0 121.3 64.9 28.2 28.2 − − − − 1.0 0.6 0.4
         Oct 619.1 203.5 114.4 62.1 20.8 31.4 − − − − 0.9 0.2 0.7
         Nov 621.0 203.9 116.9 54.8 23.7 38.4 − − − − 0.9 0.2 0.6
         Dec 5 671.2 209.6 146.4 71.4 38.5 36.5 − − − − 0.9 0.2 0.8
2011          Jan 628.7 204.5 109.4 50.5 16.6 42.3 − − − − 2.0 0.2 1.8
         Feb 639.5 204.2 120.7 58.2 13.0 49.5 − − − − 0.6 0.2 0.5
         Mar 5 632.2 205.2 119.9 63.9 17.1 38.9 − − − − 0.6 0.2 0.5
         Apr 610.1 207.8 95.9 47.9 11.7 36.3 − − − − 0.8 0.4 0.4
         May 611.3 208.6 95.0 54.3 7.7 32.9 − − − − 0.6 0.2 0.4
         June 5 632.3 210.9 108.5 63.3 8.7 36.5 − − − − 1.1 0.2 0.9
         July 629.0 213.1 100.3 52.5 13.2 34.6 − − − − 0.6 0.2 0.4
         Aug 679.1 211.6 145.5 60.5 16.0 68.9 − − − − 0.7 0.2 0.4
         Sep 5 764.6 213.5 205.5 69.8 56.8 78.8 − − − − 0.9 0.3 0.6
         Oct 772.8 215.2 212.1 59.9 58.4 93.9 − − − − 1.1 0.4 0.7
         Nov 812.7 216.1 249.8 49.6 58.2 142.0 − − − − 1.5 0.8 0.7
         Dec 5 837.6 221.3 228.9 76.4 66.1 86.4 − − − − 5.5 0.7 4.8
2012          Jan 860.1 216.3 294.1 34.6 119.7 139.7 − − − − 1.4 0.7 0.7
 
*The consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem comprises the financial specific weekly dates; for the Bundesbank: end-of-month financial statements.
statement of the European Central Bank (ECB) and the financial statements of the 2According to the accounting regime chosen by the Eurosystem on the issue of euro
national central banks of the euro area member states (NCBs). The balance sheet banknotes, a share of 8% of the total value of the euro banknotes in circulation is
items for foreign currency, securities, gold and financial instruments are valued at allocated to the ECB on a monthly basis. The counterpart of this adjustment ismarket rates at the end of the quarter. 1For Eurosystem: financial statements for disclosed as an “Intra-Eurosystem liability related to euro banknote issue". The

Deutsche Bundesbank
19  Monthly Report
February 2012
III Consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem
 
   
 
Liabilities to non-euro area
residents denominated inforeign currency
Intra-  Eurosystem  
Liabilities Liabilities Liabilities Counterpart liability     Onto non-euro to euro area Deposits, arising of special related to     reportingarea residents residents balances from the drawing euro  Capital    date/denominated in foreign and other rights allocated Other banknote Revaluation and    End of credit facility
in euro currency Total liabilities under ERM II by the IMF issue  
2 accounts reserves    month 1 liabilities 3 
Eurosystem 4
 
40.0 2.4 11.3 11.3 − 52.6 188.5 − 305.9 81.2 2011 June                  3
38.1 1.6 11.9 11.9 − 52.6 190.8 − 305.9 81.5                               10
40.6 0.9 12.0 12.0 − 52.6 190.3 − 305.9 81.5                               17
38.0 1.5 10.1 10.1 − 52.6 194.4 − 305.9 81.5                               24
36.3 0.9 9.6 9.6 − 52.2 5 196.8 − 5 316.7 81.5          July                  1
37.1 1.9 8.5 8.5 − 52.2 194.0 − 316.7 81.5                                 8
38.9 3.2 6.9 6.9 − 52.2 197.6 − 316.7 81.5                               15
40.4 3.4 8.9 8.9 − 52.2 200.4 − 316.7 81.5                               22
40.2 1.6 10.2 10.2 − 52.2 207.1 − 316.7 81.5                               29
39.1 1.5 10.6 10.6 − 52.2 206.4 − 316.7 81.5          Aug                  5
40.0 1.6 11.5 11.5 − 52.2 204.1 − 316.7 81.5                               12
44.9 1.6 11.9 11.9 − 52.2 203.6 − 316.7 81.5                               19
44.6 2.1 11.8 11.8 − 52.2 205.4 − 316.7 81.5                               26
43.7 2.7 11.2 11.2 − 52.2 207.7 − 316.7 81.5          Sep                  2
47.0 2.4 11.9 11.9 − 52.2 208.3 − 316.7 81.5                                 9
52.1 2.1 11.5 11.5 − 52.2 207.1 − 316.7 81.5                               16
56.3 2.3 12.2 12.2 − 52.2 207.4 − 316.7 81.5                               23
50.0 2.5 5 13.8 5 13.8 − 5 54.5 5 219.6 − 5 383.3 81.5                               30
48.3 3.7 12.3 12.3 − 54.5 216.8 − 383.3 81.5 2011 Oct                  7
48.3 2.5 10.4 10.4 − 54.5 216.0 − 383.3 81.5                               14
48.2 1.9 11.0 11.0 − 54.5 213.2 − 383.3 81.5                               21
49.6 2.8 11.4 11.4 − 54.5 212.1 − 383.3 81.5                               28
49.4 2.7 11.5 11.5 − 54.5 214.9 − 383.3 81.5          Nov                  4
51.9 4.0 9.9 9.9 − 54.5 208.4 − 383.3 81.5                               11
51.5 3.7 9.6 9.6 − 54.5 209.9 − 383.3 81.5                               18
51.4 1.8 11.8 11.8 − 54.5 207.7 − 383.3 81.5                               25
51.2 4.4 8.9 8.9 − 54.5 205.3 − 383.3 81.5          Dec                  2
88.9 4.0 9.0 9.0 − 54.5 205.4 − 383.3 81.5                                 9
92.8 4.2 8.6 8.6 − 54.5 208.1 − 383.3 81.5                               16
132.2 5.1 8.6 8.6 − 54.5 208.0 − 383.3 81.5                               23
156.9 4.6 9.0 9.0 − 5 55.9 5 213.5 − 5 394.0 81.5                               30
124.4 5.6 8.4 8.4 − 55.9 210.1 − 394.0 81.5 2012 Jan                  6
117.7 3.2 9.8 9.8 − 55.9 208.5 − 394.0 81.6                               13
118.9 2.0 10.0 10.0 − 55.9 216.4 − 394.0 81.6                               20
118.6 2.8 9.5 9.5 − 55.9 215.3 − 394.0 81.6                               27
122.5 3.5 9.6 9.6 − 55.9 212.1 − 394.0 81.9          Feb                  3
 Deutsche Bundesbank
9.3 0.0 0.1 0.1 − 13.6 10.3 150.2 5 84.8 5.0 2010          Mar 
11.5 0.0 0.3 0.3 − 13.6 10.2 151.1 84.8 5.0          Apr 12.8 0.0 0.2 0.2 − 13.6 10.4 151.7 84.8 5.0          May11.0 0.0 0.2 0.2 −
5 14.5 5 11.3 150.9 5 108.8 5.0          June
11.2 0.0 0.3 0.3 − 14.5 12.5 151.2 108.8 5.0          July10.5 0.0 0.5 0.5 − 14.5 12.8 153.2 108.8 5.0          Aug 10.8 0.0 0.1 0.1 −
5 13.7 5 12.4 155.8 5 99.9 5.0          Sep 
12.6 0.0 0.1 0.1 − 13.7 12.3 156.7 99.9 5.0          Oct 11.0 0.0 0.2 0.2 − 13.7 12.8 156.6 99.9 5.0          Nov 14.5 0.0 0.2 0.2 − 14.0 13.1 157.1
5 110.5 5.0          Dec 
12.2 0.0 0.2 0.2 − 14.0 13.1 157.8 110.5 5.0 2011          Jan 12.0 0.0 0.1 0.1 − 14.0 13.5 158.9 110.5 5.0          Feb 13.4 0.0 0.2 0.2 − 13.5 11.7 159.5
5 103.3 5.0          Mar 
11.7 0.0 0.3 0.3 − 13.5 11.7 160.1 103.3 5.0          Apr 11.3 0.0 0.3 0.3 − 13.5 12.1 161.6 103.3 5.0          May10.5 0.0 0.1 0.1 − 13.3 12.7 163.1
5 107.0 5.0          June
11.9 0.0 0.1 0.1 − 13.3 12.7 164.9 107.0 5.0          July15.3 0.0 0.1 0.1 − 13.3 13.2 167.5 107.0 5.0          Aug 13.6 0.0 0.2 0.2 −
5 13.9 14.3 170.7 5 127.1 5.0          Sep 
12.9 0.0 0.2 0.2 − 13.9 14.4 170.7 127.1 5.0          Oct 13.5 0.0 0.0 0.0 − 13.9 14.9 170.9 127.1 5.0          Nov 46.6 0.0 − − − 14.3
5 16.2 170.5 5 129.4 5.0          Dec 
11.9 0.0 0.0 0.0 − 14.3 16.5 171.0 129.4 5.0 2012          Jan 
 
remaining 92 % of the value of the euro banknote in circulation is also allocated to notes put into circulation is also disclosed as an “Intra-Eurosystem claim/ liability
the NCBs on a monthly basis, and each NCB shows in its balance sheet the share of related to banknote issue“. 3For the Deutsche Bundesbank: including DM banknotes
the euro banknotes issued which corresponds to its paid-up share in the ECB’s still in circulation. 4Source: ECB. 5Changes are due mainly to revaluations at the
capital. The difference between the value of the euro banknotes allocated to the NCB end of the quarter. according to the aforementioned accounting regime and the value of euro bank-

Deutsche Bundesbank
20  Monthly Report
February 2012
IV Banks
 
1 Assets and liabilities of monetary financial institutions (excluding the Bundesbank) in Germany *
  Assets
 
 
€ billion
Lending to banks (MFIs) in the euro area Lending to non-banks (non-MFIs) in the
to banks in the home country to banks in other member states to non-banks in the home country
Enterprises and house-
holds
Secur- Secur-
Balance ities ities
sheet Cash issued issued
Period total 1 in hand Total Total Loans by banks Total Loans by banks Total Total Total Loans
 End of year or month
 
2003 6,432.0 17.3 2,111.5 1,732.0 1,116.8 615.3 379.5 287.7 91.8 3,333.2 3,083.1 2,497.4 2,241.2
2004 6,617.4 15.1 2,174.3 1,750.2 1,122.9 627.3 424.2 306.3 117.9 3,358.7 3,083.4 2,479.7 2,223.8
2005 6,859.4 15.3 2,276.0 1,762.5 1,148.4 614.1 513.5 356.3 157.2 3,407.6 3,085.2 2,504.6 2,226.3
2006 7,154.4 16.4 2,314.4 1,718.6 1,138.6 580.0 595.8 376.8 219.0 3,462.1 3,085.5 2,536.1 2,241.9
2007 7,592.4 17.8 2,523.4 1,847.9 1,290.4 557.5 675.4 421.6 253.8 3,487.3 3,061.8 2,556.0 2,288.8
2008 7,892.7 17.8 2,681.8 1,990.2 1,404.3 585.8 691.6 452.9 238.8 3,638.2 3,163.0 2,686.9 2,357.3
2009 7,436.1 17.2 2,480.5 1,813.2 1,218.4 594.8 667.3 449.5 217.8 3,638.3 3,187.9 2,692.9 2,357.5
2010 8,304.7 16.5 2,361.6 1,787.8 1,276.9 510.9 573.9 372.8 201.0 3,724.5 3,302.9 2,669.1 2,354.7
2011 8,393.5 16.4 2,394.5 1,844.5 1,362.2 482.3 550.0 362.3 187.7 3,673.6 3,270.5 2,709.4 2,415.1
2010          Mar 7,454.6 14.4 2,489.7 1,832.0 1,250.3 581.7 657.7 440.2 217.5 3,633.9 3,180.8 2,673.6 2,347.0
         Apr 7,570.0 14.0 2,507.1 1,843.7 1,263.9 579.8 663.5 448.2 215.3 3,688.9 3,222.8 2,711.0 2,360.2
         May 7,681.0 14.7 2,593.2 1,897.6 1,326.4 571.2 695.6 480.6 215.0 3,650.9 3,211.1 2,688.9 2,364.6         June 7,641.3 14.2 2,583.7 1,899.5 1,341.3 558.2 684.2 464.9 219.3 3,664.0 3,228.2 2,685.0 2,368.0
         July 7,438.3 14.7 2,457.9 1,777.3 1,234.5 542.8 680.6 473.5 207.1 3,654.1 3,219.4 2,680.5 2,364.5
         Aug 7,517.6 14.5 2,489.7 1,792.7 1,252.0 540.6 697.1 488.6 208.4 3,667.0 3,229.6 2,688.4 2,373.2
         Sep 7,387.2 14.9 2,447.4 1,780.3 1,245.4 535.0 667.0 460.9 206.1 3,642.6 3,209.0 2,665.8 2,353.9
         Oct 7,397.5 15.2 2,353.9 1,759.6 1,246.2 513.4 594.3 389.3 205.0 3,758.9 3,327.9 2,675.0 2,360.5
         Nov 7,508.4 14.8 2,376.9 1,776.3 1,259.7 516.5 600.7 397.7 203.0 3,804.8 3,368.9 2,704.7 2,389.3         Dec 8,304.7 16.5 2,361.6 1,787.8 1,276.9 510.9 573.9 372.8 201.0 3,724.5 3,302.9 2,669.1 2,354.7
2011          Jan 8,183.8 14.1 2,322.8 1,748.8 1,239.7 509.1 573.9 374.7 199.2 3,748.8 3,322.9 2,684.7 2,356.7
         Feb 8,142.3 14.5 2,332.2 1,751.5 1,243.1 508.4 580.6 380.6 200.1 3,745.3 3,322.0 2,697.7 2,377.4         Mar 7,955.1 14.5 2,294.6 1,735.4 1,233.8 501.6 559.2 363.4 195.8 3,711.8 3,293.5 2,680.7 2,358.7
         Apr 7,997.9 15.6 2,270.7 1,702.2 1,203.3 498.8 568.6 371.7 196.9 3,736.5 3,307.8 2,703.7 2,360.9
         May 8,045.9 15.5 2,281.5 1,702.0 1,201.3 500.7 579.5 377.0 202.5 3,714.4 3,289.2 2,694.7 2,376.5         June 7,885.8 15.2 2,268.6 1,696.4 1,206.0 490.5 572.2 372.2 200.0 3,690.4 3,269.3 2,681.2 2,374.9
         July 8,001.0 15.2 2,258.5 1,688.2 1,202.0 486.2 570.2 372.7 197.6 3,692.8 3,270.6 2,685.7 2,379.2
         Aug 8,263.5 14.7 2,337.8 1,750.1 1,265.2 484.9 587.7 390.3 197.4 3,699.5 3,279.0 2,706.1 2,403.3
         Sep 8,489.4 15.4 2,412.6 1,831.2 1,349.4 481.8 581.4 385.6 195.7 3,708.6 3,285.3 2,713.5 2,413.7
         Oct 8,353.9 15.4 2,407.5 1,830.0 1,347.6 482.3 577.5 385.1 192.4 3,728.0 3,311.1 2,742.8 2,445.3
         Nov 8,406.6 14.8 2,450.5 1,876.1 1,396.6 479.5 574.4 382.6 191.8 3,727.2 3,315.3 2,747.9 2,450.0         Dec 8,393.5 16.4 2,394.5 1,844.5 1,362.2 482.3 550.0 362.3 187.7 3,673.6 3,270.5 2,709.4 2,415.1
 Changes 3
2004 209.7 − 2.1 71.6 24.0 10.9 13.1 47.6 17.1 30.5 44.0 17.4 − 0.4 − 1.3
2005 191.4 0.1 96.5 10.3 22.8 − 12.5 86.2 48.1 38.0 59.7 14.1 37.1 15.5
2006 353.9 1.1 81.2 0.5 28.0 − 27.6 80.8 19.5 61.3 55.9 1.5 32.5 13.2
2007 515.3 1.5 215.6 135.5 156.2 − 20.8 80.1 44.1 36.0 54.1 − 1.0 38.6 53.2
2008 314.0 − 0.1 184.4 164.2 127.3 36.9 20.2 34.6 − 14.4 140.2 102.5 130.8 65.4
2009 −454.8 − 0.5 −189.5 −166.4 −182.1 15.8 − 23.2 − 2.5 − 20.7 17.3 38.2 16.9 6.5
2010 −135.1 − 0.7 − 90.6 3.0 58.3 − 55.3 − 93.6 − 78.5 − 15.1 77.5 107.1 − 13.7 0.6
2011 83.0 − 0.1 39.6 63.9 96.3 − 32.4 − 24.3 − 10.8 − 13.5 − 47.9 − 32.9 40.9 58.9
2010          Apr 107.9 − 0.5 16.4 11.0 13.1 − 2.1 5.4 7.8 − 2.3 54.7 42.4 37.9 13.2
         May 63.7 0.7 80.8 50.4 59.5 − 9.1 30.4 31.0 − 0.6 − 45.6 − 15.4 − 25.6 1.1
         June − 50.5 − 0.6 − 11.2 0.7 13.8 − 13.1 − 11.9 − 16.1 4.2 11.1 15.6 − 5.3 2.0
         July −166.1 0.6 −118.1 −116.0 −101.0 − 15.0 − 2.1 9.9 − 11.9 − 3.2 − 4.5 − 0.5 0.4
         Aug 60.6 − 0.3 29.2 13.6 15.9 − 2.4 15.6 14.5 1.1 8.7 7.3 5.2 6.2
         Sep − 88.7 0.4 − 36.3 − 8.8 − 3.6 − 5.2 − 27.5 − 26.0 − 1.5 − 16.5 − 15.2 − 17.5 − 14.3         Oct 20.7 0.4 − 72.6 − 0.9 1.7 − 2.6 − 71.7 − 70.7 − 0.9 100.9 102.9 11.7 9.2
         Nov 80.9 − 0.5 25.6 22.0 10.8 11.2 3.5 5.8 − 2.3 39.4 36.9 25.8 25.0
         Dec −152.6 1.7 − 13.1 12.6 18.1 − 5.5 − 25.6 − 24.0 − 1.6 − 73.2 − 60.5 − 30.3 − 32.8
2011          Jan −106.0 − 2.4 − 35.7 − 37.3 − 36.0 − 1.2 1.5 2.9 − 1.4 29.3 24.2 19.4 5.7
         Feb − 39.5 0.3 10.1 3.2 3.7 − 0.5 6.9 6.1 0.9 − 1.1 0.4 14.6 22.0
         Mar −167.6 0.0 − 31.8 − 10.8 − 8.2 − 2.6 − 20.9 − 16.2 − 4.8 − 29.7 − 25.8 − 14.5 − 16.4         Apr 63.2 1.2 − 21.0 − 31.7 − 29.2 − 2.5 10.8 9.6 1.2 29.0 17.1 25.6 5.1
         May 27.4 − 0.1 7.4 − 1.9 − 3.5 1.6 9.3 3.9 5.4 − 25.8 − 21.2 − 11.3 13.1
         June −165.7 − 0.2 − 21.0 − 14.0 4.8 − 18.7 − 7.1 − 4.6 − 2.4 − 23.0 − 19.3 − 12.9 − 1.0         July 104.8 − 0.0 − 10.6 − 7.9 − 3.8 − 4.1 − 2.6 − 0.4 − 2.3 − 0.7 − 1.3 2.2 2.0
         Aug 263.1 − 0.5 80.7 69.9 71.0 − 1.1 10.8 10.9 − 0.0 1.0 1.9 14.0 17.7
         Sep 195.4 0.7 72.1 80.6 84.2 − 3.6 − 8.5 − 6.4 − 2.1 4.7 3.7 5.2 8.2
         Oct −116.6 − 0.0 − 1.4 1.0 0.1 0.9 − 2.4 0.7 − 3.2 24.7 29.5 32.9 34.0
         Nov 31.4 − 0.6 40.0 44.4 47.6 − 3.2 − 4.5 − 3.7 − 0.8 − 4.4 2.1 3.1 2.7
         Dec − 6.9 1.6 − 49.3 − 31.6 − 34.4 2.8 − 17.6 − 13.7 − 4.0 − 52.0 − 44.3 − 37.5 − 34.2
*This table serves to supplement the “Overall monetary survey“ in section II. Unlike by banks (including building and loan associations) − data from money market
the other tables in section IV, this table includes − in addition to the figures reported funds. 1See footnote 1 in Table IV.2. 2Including debt securities arising from the

Deutsche Bundesbank
21  Monthly Report
February 2012
IV Banks
 
    
 
euro area Claims on
non-euro-area
to non-banks in other member states residents
 General Enterprises and General government households government
Secur- Secur- of which Secur- of which Other
ities Total Loans ities 
2 Total Total Loans Total Loans ities Total Loans assets  1   Period
End of year or month
 
256.2 585.6 439.6 146.1 250.2 133.5 62.7 116.6 25.9 90.7 806.4 645.6 163.6 2003
255.9 603.8 423.0 180.8 275.3 140.6 61.9 134.7 25.7 109.0 897.8 730.4 171.4 2004
278.2 580.7 408.7 171.9 322.4 169.1 65.0 153.3 30.7 122.6 993.8 796.8 166.7 2005
294.1 549.5 390.2 159.2 376.6 228.1 85.2 148.5 26.1 122.4 1,172.7 936.2 188.8 2006267.3 505.8 360.7 145.0 425.5 294.6 124.9 130.9 26.0 104.9 1,339.5 1,026.9 224.4 2007329.6 476.1 342.8 133.4 475.1 348.1 172.1 127.0 27.6 99.4 1,279.2 1,008.6 275.7 2008335.4 495.0 335.1 160.0 450.4 322.2 162.9 128.2 23.5 104.7 1,062.6 821.1 237.5 2009
314.5 633.8 418.4 215.3 421.6 289.2 164.2 132.4 24.8 107.6 1,021.0 792.7 1,181.0 2010
294.3 561.1 359.8 201.2 403.1 276.9 161.2 126.2 32.6 93.6 995.1 770.9 1,313.9 2011
326.6 507.3 335.5 171.8 453.1 319.6 162.7 133.5 22.3 111.2 1,073.9 833.9 242.6 2010          Mar 350.8 511.8 337.7 174.1 466.1 332.9 175.7 133.1 22.0 111.2 1,120.2 879.4 239.8          Apr 
324.3 522.2 343.8 178.4 439.8 307.7 175.0 132.1 26.4 105.7 1,167.0 923.7 255.2          May317.0 543.2 349.1 194.1 435.8 303.1 172.8 132.7 24.2 108.5 1,111.1 865.0 268.4          June
316.0 538.9 344.7 194.2 434.7 299.9 173.2 134.8 23.9 110.9 1,048.9 810.6 262.7          July
315.2 541.2 344.9 196.3 437.4 303.0 173.4 134.4 23.8 110.5 1,073.1 834.1 273.3          Aug 312.0 543.1 346.6 196.5 433.7 294.4 166.4 139.2 25.7 113.5 1,020.8 787.3 261.6          Sep 
314.6 652.9 350.9 302.0 431.0 289.7 162.6 141.3 25.8 115.5 1,011.3 781.3 258.2          Oct 
315.4 664.2 427.3 237.0 435.9 299.5 167.8 136.4 25.8 110.6 1,043.4 810.3 268.5          Nov 314.5 633.8 418.4 215.3 421.6 289.2 164.2 132.4 24.8 107.6 1,021.0 792.7 1,181.0          Dec 
328.0 638.2 421.7 216.5 425.9 287.9 159.8 138.0 26.2 111.8 1,017.1 786.3 1,081.0 2011          Jan 
320.2 624.3 410.1 214.2 423.3 285.7 158.2 137.6 26.3 111.3 1,017.4 790.0 1,033.0          Feb 322.1 612.8 399.4 213.4 418.3 282.2 157.2 136.2 26.4 109.7 978.6 748.1 955.6          Mar 
342.8 604.1 388.4 215.7 428.7 291.9 165.1 136.8 26.4 110.4 1,013.2 787.6 961.8          Apr 
318.2 594.5 377.9 216.6 425.2 288.0 161.4 137.2 26.2 111.0 1,028.3 796.9 1,006.2          May306.3 588.2 374.6 213.6 421.1 287.2 161.2 133.9 25.9 108.0 984.4 753.6 927.1          June
306.5 584.9 374.5 210.4 422.3 283.5 161.6 138.8 31.3 107.5 986.6 757.8 1,047.9          July
302.8 572.9 365.2 207.7 420.5 281.9 162.6 138.5 31.0 107.5 1,004.6 779.9 1,206.8          Aug 299.9 571.8 365.2 206.6 423.3 288.0 171.2 135.3 30.7 104.6 1,011.7 786.7 1,341.1          Sep 
297.4 568.3 361.3 207.0 417.0 280.0 164.0 137.0 30.3 106.6 974.8 754.2 1,228.2          Oct 
297.8 567.5 358.2 209.3 411.9 282.3 165.1 129.6 31.0 98.5 991.0 770.1 1,223.1          Nov 294.3 561.1 359.8 201.2 403.1 276.9 161.2 126.2 32.6 93.6 995.1 770.9 1,313.9          Dec 
Changes 3
0.9 17.8 − 17.0 34.9 26.6 8.2 3.1 18.4 0.0 18.4 111.0 100.2 − 14.7 2004
21.7 − 23.0 − 14.3 − 8.6 45.5 27.4 2.2 18.2 4.6 13.5 57.2 31.3 − 22.2 200519.3 − 31.0 − 18.6 − 12.4 54.5 59.6 20.9 − 5.2 − 1.3 − 3.8 205.8 165.7 9.8 2006
− 14.6 − 39.6 − 29.3 − 10.3 55.1 73.7 41.5 − 18.6 0.0 − 18.6 223.0 136.7 21.1 2007
65.4 − 28.3 − 16.9 − 11.5 37.7 42.2 40.3 − 4.5 1.6 − 6.1 − 40.1 − 7.5 29.7 200810.5 21.3 − 5.1 26.4 − 20.9 − 20.9 − 7.1 0.0 − 3.9 3.9 −182.2 −162.2 − 99.8 2009
− 14.2 120.8 83.3 37.4 − 29.6 − 36.4 0.2 6.8 3.0 3.7 − 74.9 − 61.9 − 46.4 2010− 18.0 − 73.8 − 59.0 − 14.8 − 15.0 − 12.4 − 4.4 − 2.6 8.0 − 10.6 − 24.8 − 21.7 116.3 2011
24.7 4.5 2.2 2.3 12.3 12.7 12.7 − 0.4 − 0.4 0.0 40.7 40.7 − 3.4 2010          Apr 
− 26.7 10.2 6.0 4.2 − 30.2 − 28.9 − 3.3 − 1.4 4.4 − 5.7 13.9 15.0 13.9          May− 7.3 20.9 5.2 15.7 − 4.4 − 4.9 − 2.5 0.5 − 0.3 0.8 − 62.1 − 64.3 12.3          June
− 0.9 − 4.0 − 4.1 0.1 1.3 − 1.0 2.5 2.3 − 0.2 2.5 − 39.1 − 33.6 − 6.1          July
− 1.0 2.1 0.0 2.0 1.4 1.7 − 0.8 − 0.3 − 0.1 − 0.2 12.4 13.0 10.6          Aug − 3.1 2.2 1.9 0.4 − 1.3 − 6.6 − 4.5 5.3 2.0 3.3 − 24.0 − 21.2 − 12.3          Sep 
2.5 91.2 4.6 86.6 − 2.0 − 4.2 − 3.3 2.1 0.1 2.0 − 3.4 − 0.5 − 4.6          Oct 0.7 11.1 76.1 − 65.0 2.6 7.7 3.2 − 5.1 − 0.1 − 5.0 7.5 6.7 8.9          Nov 2.5 − 30.2 − 8.8 − 21.4 − 12.7 − 9.3 − 2.6 − 3.4 − 1.0 − 2.4 − 12.7 − 9.0 − 55.5          Dec 
13.7 4.8 3.5 1.3 5.1 − 0.4 − 3.6 5.5 1.4 4.0 5.2 2.4 −102.4 2011          Jan 
− 7.4 − 14.2 − 12.0 − 2.2 − 1.5 − 1.1 − 1.3 − 0.4 0.1 − 0.5 3.0 6.1 − 51.9          Feb 
1.9 − 11.3 − 10.5 − 0.8 − 3.9 − 2.6 − 0.1 − 1.3 0.2 − 1.5 − 27.9 − 32.3 − 78.2          Mar 
20.6 − 8.5 − 10.9 2.4 11.9 11.1 9.3 0.8 0.0 0.7 48.6 52.5 5.4          Apr 
− 24.4 − 9.9 − 10.7 0.8 − 4.6 − 5.0 − 4.6 0.4 − 0.3 0.6 1.7 − 2.8 44.1          May− 11.9 − 6.3 − 3.2 − 3.1 − 3.8 − 0.4 0.0 − 3.3 − 0.3 − 3.0 − 41.4 − 41.2 − 80.0          June
0.2 − 3.5 − 0.2 − 3.3 0.6 − 4.2 − 0.0 4.9 5.4 − 0.6 − 5.0 − 2.6 121.1          July
− 3.7 − 12.2 − 9.3 − 2.9 − 0.9 − 1.3 1.1 0.5 − 0.1 0.5 23.9 27.1 158.0          Aug − 3.0 − 1.5 − 0.2 − 1.3 1.0 4.4 6.8 − 3.4 − 0.3 − 3.0 − 14.7 − 13.4 132.6          Sep 
− 1.2 − 3.4 − 3.8 0.4 − 4.8 − 7.0 − 6.1 2.2 − 0.4 2.6 − 24.1 − 20.9 −115.8          Oct 
0.4 − 1.0 − 3.3 2.3 − 6.5 1.2 − 0.2 − 7.7 0.6 − 8.3 1.4 2.5 − 4.9          Nov 
− 3.3 − 6.8 1.6 − 8.4 − 7.7 − 7.0 − 5.6 − 0.7 1.6 − 2.3 4.5 1.0 88.3          Dec 
exchange of equalisation claims. 3Statistical breaks have been eliminated from
the flow figures (see also footnote * in Table II.1). 

Deutsche Bundesbank
22  Monthly Report
February 2012
IV Banks
 
1 Assets and liabilities of monetary financial institutions (excluding the Bundesbank) in Germany *
  Liabilities
 
 
€ billion
Deposits of banks (MFIs) Deposits of non-banks (non-MFIs) in the euro area
in the euro area
Deposits of non-banks in the home country Deposits of non-banks
With agreed At agreed
of banks maturities notice
Balance in the in other of which of which
sheet home member Over- up to up to Over-
Period total 1 Total country states Total Total night Total 2 years Total 3 months Total night
 End of year or month
 
2003 6,432.0 1,471.0 1,229.4 241.6 2,214.6 2,086.9 622.1 874.5 248.0 590.3 500.8 81.8 9.3
2004 6,617.4 1,528.4 1,270.8 257.6 2,264.2 2,148.5 646.2 898.9 239.9 603.5 515.5 71.9 8.8
2005 6,859.4 1,569.6 1,300.8 268.8 2,329.1 2,225.4 715.8 906.2 233.4 603.4 519.1 62.2 9.6
2006 7,154.4 1,637.7 1,348.6 289.0 2,449.2 2,341.6 745.8 1,009.3 310.1 586.5 487.4 62.0 13.9
2007 7,592.4 1,778.6 1,479.0 299.6 2,633.6 2,518.3 769.6 1,193.3 477.9 555.4 446.0 75.1 19.6
2008 7,892.7 1,827.7 1,583.0 244.7 2,798.2 2,687.3 809.5 1,342.7 598.7 535.2 424.8 74.2 22.4
2009 7,436.1 1,589.7 1,355.6 234.0 2,818.0 2,731.3 997.8 1,139.1 356.4 594.4 474.4 63.9 17.7
2010 8,304.7 1,495.8 1,240.1 255.7 2,925.8 2,817.6 1,090.0 1,109.4 303.7 618.2 512.5 68.4 19.3
2011 8,393.5 1,444.8 1,210.3 234.5 3,033.4 2,915.1 1,139.6 1,159.4 366.2 616.1 515.3 78.8 25.9
2010          Mar 7,454.6 1,566.6 1,328.7 237.9 2,815.8 2,725.0 1,009.4 1,110.9 325.3 604.7 486.8 69.7 21.9
         Apr 7,570.0 1,599.7 1,340.9 258.7 2,836.1 2,737.0 1,044.7 1,087.5 301.4 604.8 488.8 77.9 27.3
         May 7,681.0 1,629.3 1,356.0 273.3 2,840.9 2,749.1 1,063.1 1,081.1 299.5 605.0 490.8 69.1 21.9         June 7,641.3 1,616.8 1,365.8 251.0 2,842.3 2,750.9 1,064.3 1,082.1 299.7 604.4 491.5 69.5 22.3
         July 7,438.3 1,515.4 1,244.1 271.3 2,840.1 2,745.2 1,061.3 1,078.1 297.4 605.9 495.1 71.8 24.2
         Aug 7,517.6 1,534.6 1,253.2 281.4 2,856.9 2,756.0 1,068.3 1,081.9 298.3 605.8 496.8 70.4 22.5         Sep 7,387.2 1,482.4 1,218.3 264.1 2,850.5 2,758.9 1,069.7 1,083.1 300.6 606.1 499.4 69.7 20.9
         Oct 7,397.5 1,517.9 1,247.9 270.0 2,872.8 2,759.8 1,071.3 1,081.1 300.4 607.4 502.2 69.9 21.2
         Nov 7,508.4 1,513.5 1,245.8 267.7 2,924.8 2,802.1 1,093.6 1,098.6 295.5 609.9 504.2 76.3 25.7         Dec 8,304.7 1,495.8 1,240.1 255.7 2,925.8 2,817.6 1,090.0 1,109.4 303.7 618.2 512.5 68.4 19.3
2011          Jan 8,183.8 1,489.1 1,221.1 268.0 2,937.6 2,823.6 1,099.8 1,103.4 299.7 620.4 515.1 69.0 22.7
         Feb 8,142.3 1,472.6 1,208.0 264.6 2,930.8 2,817.3 1,083.9 1,110.9 307.2 622.5 517.2 66.5 21.4         Mar 7,955.1 1,454.6 1,191.7 262.9 2,928.3 2,820.7 1,085.9 1,111.3 308.8 623.5 518.0 68.7 22.1
         Apr 7,997.9 1,458.9 1,183.6 275.3 2,936.7 2,830.9 1,088.0 1,120.7 319.2 622.3 517.6 71.9 25.7
         May 8,045.9 1,422.2 1,163.9 258.3 2,950.7 2,841.8 1,090.4 1,131.5 330.2 619.9 515.3 71.3 25.1         June 7,885.8 1,401.2 1,158.5 242.6 2,959.0 2,844.9 1,096.5 1,130.7 330.2 617.7 513.4 73.4 26.6
         July 8,001.0 1,398.0 1,154.4 243.6 2,966.1 2,853.8 1,094.1 1,143.1 342.8 616.5 512.2 72.9 25.0
         Aug 8,263.5 1,413.8 1,163.7 250.1 2,988.4 2,873.6 1,105.9 1,152.7 351.5 615.0 510.8 75.6 25.5         Sep 8,489.4 1,430.6 1,176.1 254.6 3,007.5 2,884.0 1,111.5 1,159.1 361.4 613.4 509.7 80.7 28.3
         Oct 8,353.9 1,419.0 1,162.8 256.2 3,008.5 2,888.5 1,120.4 1,155.0 359.1 613.0 509.5 80.0 28.4
         Nov 8,406.6 1,427.1 1,177.3 249.8 3,028.6 2,912.1 1,145.2 1,155.4 360.5 611.5 509.8 77.3 25.3         Dec 8,393.5 1,444.8 1,210.3 234.5 3,033.4 2,915.1 1,139.6 1,159.4 366.2 616.1 515.3 78.8 25.9
 Changes 4
2004 209.7 62.3 42.8 19.6 53.5 64.9 26.3 25.5 − 8.3 13.1 14.7 − 9.3 − 0.4
2005 191.4 32.8 26.9 5.8 65.0 75.5 69.4 7.3 − 6.9 − 1.2 2.9 − 8.0 0.5
2006 353.9 105.6 81.5 24.1 122.9 118.6 30.4 105.0 77.1 − 16.8 − 31.7 0.5 4.4
2007 515.3 148.3 134.8 13.5 185.1 177.3 24.6 183.9 167.8 − 31.1 − 41.4 13.6 5.6
2008 314.0 65.8 121.5 − 55.8 162.4 173.1 38.8 154.6 123.5 − 20.2 − 21.2 − 7.4 − 0.1
2009 −454.8 −235.3 −224.5 − 10.8 31.9 43.9 205.0 −220.4 −259.3 59.3 50.3 − 9.6 − 4.1
2010 −135.1 − 75.5 − 99.6 24.0 72.4 59.8 92.2 − 56.5 − 55.7 24.0 38.3 − 4.4 2.1
2011 83.0 − 46.0 − 27.2 − 18.8 103.1 98.3 52.5 48.4 59.6 − 2.6 1.3 4.9 6.5
2010          Apr 107.9 33.5 12.9 20.6 18.9 10.6 35.1 − 24.5 − 25.0 0.1 2.0 8.2 5.4
         May 63.7 25.0 11.9 13.0 2.9 10.7 17.3 − 6.8 − 2.1 0.2 2.0 − 9.4 − 5.6
         June − 50.5 − 14.0 8.7 − 22.7 0.8 1.5 1.6 0.5 − 0.3 − 0.6 0.6 0.2 0.3
         July −166.1 − 94.4 −116.0 21.6 − 0.8 − 4.6 − 2.2 − 3.8 − 2.2 1.5 3.6 2.6 2.0
         Aug 60.6 16.9 7.6 9.2 16.0 10.2 6.6 3.7 0.8 − 0.1 1.7 − 1.6 − 1.8
         Sep − 88.7 − 47.4 − 31.8 − 15.6 − 4.6 4.3 2.5 1.5 2.5 0.3 2.6 − 0.4 − 1.5
         Oct 20.7 36.7 30.4 6.3 22.5 1.0 1.8 − 2.2 − 0.1 1.3 2.7 0.3 0.4
         Nov 80.9 − 8.9 − 4.9 − 4.0 26.9 17.6 22.1 − 7.0 − 6.0 2.6 2.0 6.1 4.4
         Dec −152.6 − 16.1 − 4.6 − 11.5 1.6 15.9 − 3.2 10.6 8.0 8.5 8.6 − 7.8 − 5.6
2011          Jan −106.0 − 4.9 − 17.9 13.0 12.4 6.5 10.2 − 5.9 − 3.9 2.2 2.7 0.7 3.5
         Feb − 39.5 − 16.2 − 13.1 − 3.0 − 6.7 − 6.1 − 12.8 4.6 4.6 2.1 2.1 − 2.5 − 1.4         Mar −167.6 − 16.1 − 15.2 − 0.9 − 1.8 4.0 2.5 0.6 1.7 1.0 0.8 2.4 0.8
         Apr 63.2 6.6 − 6.9 13.5 9.4 10.8 3.6 9.3 10.4 − 2.1 − 1.3 3.3 3.7
         May 27.4 − 39.2 − 21.2 − 18.1 13.1 10.1 1.9 10.7 10.8 − 2.4 − 2.3 − 0.7 − 0.7
         June −165.7 − 20.9 − 5.3 − 15.6 8.5 3.3 6.2 − 0.7 − 0.0 − 2.1 − 1.9 2.1 1.5
         July 104.8 − 4.5 − 5.0 0.4 6.5 8.3 − 2.7 12.3 12.5 − 1.2 − 1.2 − 0.6 − 1.6
         Aug 263.1 16.8 12.6 4.1 17.1 19.9 11.8 9.6 8.8 − 1.6 − 1.4 − 2.7 0.4
         Sep 195.4 13.8 10.6 3.2 17.4 9.1 4.3 6.4 9.9 − 1.5 − 1.0 4.9 2.7
         Oct −116.6 − 9.6 − 12.1 2.4 2.0 5.2 9.6 − 3.9 − 2.2 − 0.4 − 0.3 − 0.5 0.2
         Nov 31.4 5.8 13.2 − 7.4 19.0 22.7 23.7 0.1 1.2 − 1.1 − 0.2 − 2.9 − 3.2
         Dec − 6.9 22.5 32.9 − 10.4 6.2 4.4 − 5.6 5.4 5.7 4.6 5.4 1.5 0.6
*This table serves to supplement the “Overall monetary survey“ in section II. Unlike by banks (including building and loan associations) − data from money market
the other tables in section IV, this table includes − in addition to the figures reported funds. 1See footnote 1 in Table IV.2. 2Excluding deposits of central

Deutsche Bundesbank
23  Monthly Report
February 2012
IV Banks
 
   
 
 
 Debt securities
issued 3 
in other member states 2 Deposits ofcentral governments
With agreed At agreed Liabilitiesmaturities notice arising
of which from Money of which Liabilities
domestic market with to non- repos with
of which of which central non-banks fund euro- Capital maturities
up to up to govern- in the shares of up to area and Other
Total 2 years Total 3 months Total ments euro area issued  
3 Total reserves   Period 2 years 3 residents Liabilities 1 
End of year or month
 
68.6 11.4 3.9 3.1 45.9 44.2 14.1 36.7 1,486.9 131.3 567.8 340.2 300.8 2003
59.8 9.8 3.3 2.7 43.8 41.4 14.8 31.5 1,554.8 116.9 577.1 329.3 317.2 2004
50.2 9.8 2.4 2.0 41.6 38.8 19.5 31.7 1,611.9 113.8 626.2 346.8 324.5 2005
45.9 9.3 2.3 1.9 45.5 41.9 17.1 32.0 1,636.7 136.4 638.5 389.6 353.7 200653.2 22.0 2.3 1.8 40.1 38.3 26.6 28.6 1,637.6 182.3 661.0 428.2 398.2 200749.5 24.9 2.4 1.8 36.6 34.8 61.1 16.4 1,609.9 233.3 666.3 461.7 451.5 200843.7 17.0 2.5 2.0 22.8 22.2 80.5 11.4 1,500.5 146.3 565.6 454.8 415.6 2009
46.4 16.1 2.8 2.2 39.8 38.7 86.7 9.8 1,407.8 82.3 636.0 452.8 1,289.9 2010
49.6 18.4 3.3 2.5 39.5 37.9 97.1 6.2 1,345.6 75.6 561.5 468.4 1,436.6 2011
45.2 13.6 2.6 2.0 21.1 20.4 79.8 11.6 1,503.2 138.0 622.6 445.8 409.3 2010          Mar 
48.0 16.8 2.6 2.0 21.2 19.8 100.7 11.3 1,501.9 132.1 672.6 448.0 399.8          Apr 
44.5 13.9 2.6 2.1 22.7 20.6 101.4 11.3 1,503.4 127.7 738.4 447.0 409.4          May44.6 14.1 2.7 2.1 21.9 20.8 102.7 11.0 1,487.2 111.3 705.4 443.4 432.6          June
44.9 13.1 2.7 2.1 23.0 19.6 92.2 10.7 1,448.5 106.8 686.7 439.9 404.9          July
45.3 13.9 2.7 2.1 30.4 20.4 104.0 10.3 1,457.6 111.1 701.7 438.1 414.3          Aug 46.2 14.8 2.7 2.1 21.9 20.7 95.9 10.2 1,440.3 108.5 667.1 433.6 407.3          Sep 
46.0 14.6 2.7 2.1 43.1 34.1 85.0 9.8 1,407.4 87.7 657.4 440.1 407.1          Oct 
47.8 15.5 2.7 2.2 46.3 41.3 109.0 9.8 1,423.6 87.7 674.0 452.8 401.0          Nov 46.4 16.1 2.8 2.2 39.8 38.7 86.7 9.8 1,407.8 82.3 636.0 452.8 1,289.9          Dec 
43.5 13.7 2.8 2.2 45.0 37.1 74.5 9.9 1,400.8 80.6 631.5 454.3 1,186.1 2011          Jan 
42.3 14.3 2.8 2.2 47.0 37.8 93.2 9.8 1,396.0 83.0 634.1 460.2 1,145.7          Feb 43.8 16.3 2.9 2.3 38.9 36.2 78.9 10.0 1,373.4 78.2 575.5 460.7 1,073.7          Mar 
43.3 16.0 2.9 2.3 34.0 33.8 89.2 9.7 1,364.1 76.2 605.0 456.8 1,077.5          Apr 
43.3 16.2 2.9 2.3 37.6 34.8 105.2 9.5 1,368.4 77.2 605.4 460.7 1,123.8          May43.9 15.8 2.9 2.3 40.6 38.3 104.8 9.4 1,360.1 74.2 556.5 449.5 1,045.4          June
44.9 16.9 3.0 2.3 39.4 35.6 91.8 6.8 1,357.0 77.3 560.3 453.2 1,167.9          July
47.1 15.2 3.0 2.3 39.3 36.8 101.9 7.2 1,352.8 79.4 604.9 458.7 1,335.7          Aug 49.4 17.7 3.0 2.3 42.7 40.8 107.0 7.2 1,352.4 76.1 644.6 459.4 1,480.7          Sep 
48.5 17.1 3.1 2.4 40.0 37.9 105.7 7.2 1,341.7 74.0 650.4 462.7 1,358.7          Oct 
48.8 17.6 3.2 2.5 39.2 35.8 111.1 6.3 1,348.4 79.7 668.9 466.6 1,349.6          Nov 49.6 18.4 3.3 2.5 39.5 37.9 97.1 6.2 1,345.6 75.6 561.5 468.4 1,436.6          Dec 
Changes 4
− 8.3 − 1.4 − 0.6 − 0.4 − 2.1 − 2.8 0.8 − 5.2 73.2 − 14.8 21.7 − 10.5 14.0 2004
− 7.7 − 0.4 − 0.9 − 0.7 − 2.5 − 3.0 4.7 0.2 39.1 − 9.5 22.0 14.4 13.3 2005
− 3.9 − 0.3 − 0.1 − 0.2 3.9 3.1 − 3.3 0.3 34.4 21.7 32.4 27.9 33.7 2006
8.0 13.0 0.0 − 0.1 − 5.8 − 4.3 8.1 − 3.4 20.3 48.7 48.8 42.9 65.1 2007
− 7.4 0.7 0.1 − 0.0 − 3.3 − 3.2 36.1 − 12.2 − 33.8 50.4 − 0.0 39.2 56.6 2008− 5.6 − 7.6 0.1 0.2 − 2.4 − 0.8 19.4 − 5.0 −104.9 − 87.3 − 95.5 − 0.1 − 65.2 2009
− 6.8 − 5.8 0.3 0.3 17.0 16.5 6.2 − 1.6 −105.8 − 62.4 54.3 − 8.0 − 76.9 2010
− 2.1 1.8 0.5 0.3 − 0.1 − 0.7 10.1 − 1.1 − 66.8 − 5.0 − 73.9 13.9 143.8 2011
2.7 3.1 0.0 0.0 0.1 − 0.5 20.8 − 0.3 − 4.0 − 6.0 47.5 1.6 − 10.1 2010          Apr 
− 3.8 − 3.2 0.0 0.0 1.5 0.8 0.7 − 0.0 − 16.1 − 4.5 49.5 − 5.2 7.0          May− 0.1 0.0 0.0 0.0 − 0.9 0.2 1.2 − 0.3 − 20.7 − 16.4 − 35.6 − 4.7 22.7          June
0.6 − 0.8 0.0 0.0 1.1 − 1.2 − 10.4 − 0.2 − 26.3 − 4.4 − 6.6 − 0.9 − 26.4          July0.2 0.6 0.0 0.0 7.4 0.7 11.7 − 0.4 1.5 4.2 8.9 − 3.3 9.3          Aug 1.2 1.1 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 8.6 0.3 − 8.0 − 0.1 − 0.8 − 2.3 − 19.4 − 1.4 − 6.9          Sep 
− 0.1 − 0.1 0.0 0.0 21.3 13.4 − 10.8 − 0.4 − 29.8 − 20.7 − 6.5 7.1 1.9          Oct 
1.6 0.8 0.0 0.0 3.2 7.1 23.9 − 0.0 10.7 1.2 3.9 9.9 14.6          Nov 
− 2.2 0.6 0.1 0.1 − 6.5 − 2.5 − 22.2 0.1 − 11.1 − 5.3 − 33.1 0.8 − 72.7          Dec 
− 2.8 − 2.3 0.0 0.0 5.2 − 1.6 − 12.2 0.0 − 1.2 − 1.6 0.2 2.9 −103.1 2011          Jan 
− 1.1 0.6 0.0 0.0 1.9 0.7 18.8 − 0.1 − 1.6 2.4 4.1 6.2 − 44.1          Feb 
1.6 2.1 0.0 0.0 − 8.1 − 1.6 − 14.3 0.2 − 12.4 − 3.7 − 53.4 2.3 − 72.1          Mar 
− 0.4 − 0.2 0.0 0.0 − 4.7 − 2.3 10.4 − 0.3 − 1.5 − 1.9 36.7 − 2.3 4.2          Apr − 0.0 0.1 0.0 0.0 3.6 1.0 15.9 − 0.2 − 3.4 0.9 − 5.8 2.4 44.7          May
0.6 − 0.4 0.0 0.0 3.0 3.5 − 0.3 − 0.1 − 15.4 − 3.7 − 47.8 − 11.0 − 78.6          June
0.9 1.0 0.0 0.0 − 1.2 − 2.7 − 13.4 − 0.1 − 8.6 3.0 0.6 2.7 121.6          July
− 3.1 − 2.2 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.1 1.1 10.3 0.4 − 1.1 2.2 47.0 5.4 167.2          Aug 
2.2 2.4 0.0 0.0 3.4 4.0 4.9 0.1 − 13.4 − 3.5 29.1 − 1.9 145.5          Sep 
− 0.8 − 0.6 0.1 0.0 − 2.7 − 2.9 − 1.2 − 0.0 − 2.8 − 1.8 11.9 4.7 −121.6          Oct 
0.2 0.4 0.1 0.1 − 0.7 − 2.1 5.3 − 0.9 − 4.2 5.3 11.1 2.3 − 6.9          Nov 
0.8 0.8 0.1 0.1 0.3 2.0 − 14.0 − 0.1 − 1.3 − 2.5 −107.4 0.2 87.0          Dec 
governments. 3In Germany, debt securities with maturities of up to one year are published together with money market fund shares. 4Statistical breaks have been
classed as money market paper; up to the January 2002 Monthly Report they were eliminated from the flow figures (see also footnote * in Table II.1). 

Deutsche Bundesbank
24  Monthly Report
February 2012
IV Banks
 
2 Principal assets and liabilities of banks (MFIs) in Germany, by category of banks*
 
 
€ billion
  Lending to banks (MFIs)  Lending to non-banks (non-MFIs)
 
 of which of which
 
Loans
 Cash in
 hand and
 credit
Number of balances for
reporting Balance with Balances up to and for Partici- Securities Securities
End of institu- sheet central and issued by including more than issued by pating Other
month tions total 1 banks Total loans banks Total 1 year 1 year Bills non-banks interests assets  1 
All categories of banks
 
2011          July 1,922 8,051.5 72.7 2,730.0 2,004.4 713.9 3,962.5 502.5 2,713.4 0.7 710.1 143.7 1,142.5
         Aug 1,920 8,313.8 79.1 2,819.5 2,096.1 712.7 3,969.7 512.9 2,723.0 0.7 696.6 143.8 1,301.7
         Sep 1,915 8,538.8 94.2 2,890.3 2,171.8 706.6 3,974.7 518.4 2,731.9 0.7 691.6 143.8 1,435.8
         Oct 1,905 8,403.3 88.0 2,868.9 2,154.7 701.1 3,979.3 530.0 2,729.1 0.7 683.9 143.9 1,323.1
         Nov 1,904 8,457.2 72.4 2,937.6 2,227.3 695.9 3,983.8 523.6 2,743.7 0.7 690.5 144.6 1,318.8
         Dec 1,903 8,466.2 110.4 2,843.2 2,138.9 692.6 3,941.7 477.9 2,751.9 1.0 696.0 139.6 1,431.4
Commercial banks 6
2011          Nov 285 3,203.1 28.9 1,067.1 966.2 98.7 1,091.4 258.9 640.5 0.3 173.4 73.7 942.1
         Dec 284 3,171.7 57.4 975.0 875.9 97.0 1,062.5 228.2 644.3 0.6 180.5 68.7 1,008.1
   Big banks 7
2011          Nov 4 2,120.7 13.7 601.8 546.5 53.8 526.5 167.1 252.5 0.2 89.1 65.9 912.8
         Dec 4 2,152.3 40.9 574.1 520.1 52.4 495.9 142.5 251.5 0.5 92.9 61.4 979.9
   Regional banks and other commercial banks
2011          Nov 171 819.2 12.2 277.5 233.1 43.8 497.8 70.4 344.9 0.1 81.9 6.9 24.7
         Dec 170 779.5 14.2 234.9 192.0 42.4 500.1 65.6 349.9 0.1 84.2 7.0 23.3
   Branches of foreign banks
2011          Nov 110 263.2 2.9 187.7 186.7 1.1 67.1 21.4 43.0 0.0 2.4 0.9 4.6
         Dec 110 239.9 2.2 166.0 163.8 2.2 66.5 20.2 42.8 0.1 3.4 0.4 4.8
Landesbanken
2011          Nov 10 1,423.2 5.3 517.8 385.2 126.4 670.4 123.5 414.1 0.1 127.2 17.4 212.3
         Dec 10 1,414.9 9.0 512.1 380.8 125.6 655.8 107.8 415.9 0.2 127.3 17.5 220.5
Savings banks
2011          Nov 427 1,092.4 20.8 254.0 101.4 150.7 782.2 59.1 617.9 0.1 105.0 17.5 17.9
         Dec 427 1,097.2 22.0 255.8 103.5 150.3 782.3 58.6 618.3 0.1 105.1 17.3 19.8
 
Regional institutions of credit cooperatives  
 
2011          Nov 2 283.8 1.3 168.8 130.3 38.5 61.8 13.7 20.6 0.0 26.7 15.0 37.0
         Dec 2 288.0 2.2 169.8 131.5 38.2 59.7 12.0 20.7 0.0 26.4 14.9 41.5
Credit cooperatives
2011          Nov 1,121 722.4 14.6 189.0 73.9 113.6 489.3 32.0 391.0 0.1 66.2 11.6 17.8
         Dec 1,121 727.9 15.5 192.1 77.0 114.0 490.4 31.7 391.9 0.1 66.7 11.6 18.2
Mortgage banks
2011          Nov 18 593.8 0.7 165.5 93.6 71.4 406.3 7.7 304.6 − 94.0 1.5 19.8
         Dec 18 602.4 1.4 173.3 101.8 70.9 403.3 8.5 302.6 − 92.2 1.5 22.9
Building and loan associations
2011          Nov 23 197.8 0.1 59.5 42.6 16.9 130.1 1.6 115.1 . 13.5 0.4 7.7
         Dec 23 197.5 0.1 58.9 41.3 17.6 130.2 1.6 115.6 . 13.0 0.4 7.9
Special purpose banks
2011          Nov 18 940.7 0.7 515.8 434.2 79.7 352.3 27.1 240.1 − 84.4 7.6 64.2
         Dec 18 966.7 2.9 506.2 427.1 79.0 357.5 29.4 242.7 − 84.8 7.7 92.5
Memo item: Foreign banks 8
2011          Nov 150 995.1 13.3 426.1 373.0 51.4 430.1 70.7 270.1 0.1 86.4 6.1 119.5
         Dec 150 951.6 14.6 379.8 326.5 51.6 431.4 69.3 269.9 0.3 90.1 5.6 120.2
  of which:  Banks majority-owned by foreign banks 9
2011          Nov 40 731.8 10.4 238.4 186.3 50.4 363.0 49.3 227.0 0.1 84.0 5.2 114.9
         Dec 40 711.6 12.3 213.8 162.7 49.4 365.0 49.2 227.1 0.2 86.7 5.2 115.3
*Assets and liabilities of monetary financial institutions (MFIs) in Germany. The assets meaning of section 340e (3) sentence 1 of the German Commercial Code (Handels-
and liabilities of foreign branches, of money market funds (which are also classified gesetzbuch) read in conjunction with section 35 (1) No 1a of the Credit Institutionas MFIs) and of the Bundesbank are not included. For the definitions of the respective Accounting Regulation (Verordnung über die Rechnungslegung der Kreditinstitute)items, see the footnotes to Table IV.3. 1Owing to the Act Modernising Accounting are classified under "Other assets and liabilities" as of the December 2010 reporting
Law (Gesetz zur Modernisierung des Bilanzrechts) of 25 May 2009, derivative date. Trading portfolio derivatives are listed separately in the Statistical Supplementfinancial instruments in the trading portfolio (trading portfolio derivatives) within the to the Monthly Report 1, Banking statistics, in Tables I.1 to I.3. 2For building and

Deutsche Bundesbank
25  Monthly Report
February 2012
IV Banks
 
   
 
Deposits of banks (MFIs) Deposits of non-banks (non-MFIs) Capital
 including  
of which of which published
reserves,
Time deposits 2 Savings deposits 4 partici-pation
Memo rights
item Bearer capital,
for for of which debt Liabilities
funds for
up to and more arising At three Bank general Other securities
Sight Time Sight including than from savings out- banking liabi-   End of months’
Total deposits deposits Total deposits 1 year 1 year 2 repos 3 Total notice bonds risks lities 1   month standing 5 
All categories of banks
 
1,810.5 370.7 1,439.8 3,206.0 1,233.4 410.7 815.7 146.8 626.5 519.9 119.7 1,418.0 391.4 1,225.6 2011          July1,868.7 379.8 1,488.9 3,240.5 1,241.1 432.8 821.4 160.9 624.9 518.4 120.4 1,418.2 392.7 1,393.7          Aug 1,921.5 437.8 1,483.7 3,268.3 1,261.9 443.2 819.2 162.9 623.3 517.4 120.7 1,418.3 392.9 1,537.9          Sep 
1,908.1 436.2 1,471.9 3,275.7 1,277.4 436.3 817.7 165.7 623.0 517.1 121.3 1,410.6 393.2 1,415.8          Oct 
1,939.6 466.4 1,473.2 3,296.3 1,299.1 435.6 817.9 168.1 621.5 517.6 122.2 1,421.1 393.2 1,407.0          Nov 1,865.8 357.4 1,508.4 3,271.3 1,260.6 445.0 816.6 138.3 626.3 523.1 122.9 1,418.6 394.4 1,516.1          Dec 
Commercial banks 6
802.5 318.5 483.9 1,146.8 594.1 192.0 205.1 95.3 124.3 96.3 31.5 191.1 130.8 931.9 2011          Nov 719.3 232.7 486.6 1,136.7 572.2 201.8 206.2 84.6 124.6 97.6 31.8 184.6 131.9 999.2          Dec 
Big banks 7
457.0 203.7 253.3 552.2 279.2 104.4 85.6 91.7 72.5 68.2 10.5 153.4 79.9 878.2 2011          Nov 430.1 160.9 269.2 547.9 263.7 114.4 86.1 79.4 73.0 68.7 10.7 146.6 80.0 947.6          Dec 
Regional banks and other commercial banks
167.8 63.3 104.5 525.0 273.9 77.4 102.1 3.6 51.7 28.0 20.0 37.7 43.8 44.8 2011          Nov 137.8 36.3 101.5 515.9 265.2 76.9 102.2 5.3 51.6 28.9 20.1 37.9 44.9 42.9          Dec 
Branches of foreign banks
177.7 51.5 126.2 69.6 41.0 10.2 17.4 − 0.0 0.0 1.0 0.1 7.0 8.9 2011          Nov 151.4 35.5 115.9 72.9 43.3 10.6 17.9 − 0.0 0.0 1.0 0.1 6.9 8.7          Dec 
Landesbanken
372.5 57.2 315.3 391.1 104.0 107.8 164.0 55.4 13.8 10.4 1.5 366.5 64.6 228.5 2011          Nov 366.2 39.5 326.6 378.9 91.5 109.7 162.4 44.0 13.9 10.4 1.5 363.0 64.9 241.9          Dec 
Savings banks
179.6 20.2 159.4 766.3 338.7 48.5 15.7 0.8 297.5 247.0 65.8 22.2 63.9 60.5 2011          Nov 182.2 20.4 161.7 769.4 338.1 49.4 15.7 0.8 300.1 249.5 66.1 21.9 64.0 59.7          Dec 
 
Regional institutions of credit cooperatives
 
137.8 30.5 107.3 41.8 11.1 15.2 13.2 7.1 − − 2.3 53.5 13.0 37.7 2011          Nov 140.7 26.8 114.0 38.3 10.5 12.4 13.1 3.5 − − 2.3 54.5 13.0 41.5          Dec 
Credit cooperatives
101.5 6.6 94.9 520.5 234.9 50.0 30.1 0.0 185.3 163.2 20.2 19.8 44.6 36.0 2011          Nov 104.1 6.4 97.6 524.2 235.3 51.3 30.3 0.0 187.0 165.0 20.2 19.6 44.8 35.1          Dec 
Mortgage banks
152.1 10.2 141.9 192.8 7.2 12.3 173.0 3.6 0.3 0.3 − 204.9 19.3 24.7 2011          Nov 163.6 9.1 154.5 188.0 5.7 11.0 171.0 2.5 0.3 0.3 − 204.3 19.3 27.2          Dec 
Building and loan associations
25.1 1.7 23.4 140.6 0.4 0.9 138.0 − 0.4 0.3 1.0 5.5 8.4 18.1 2011          Nov 23.5 1.4 22.1 143.5 0.6 0.9 140.7 − 0.4 0.4 1.0 5.4 8.3 16.8          Dec 
Special purpose banks
168.5 21.5 147.1 96.4 8.7 8.8 78.8 5.9 − − − 557.6 48.6 69.5 2011          Nov 166.3 21.1 145.2 92.4 6.7 8.4 77.2 3.0 − − − 565.2 48.2 94.7          Dec 
Memo item:   Foreign banks 8
323.7 122.7 201.0 429.0 219.9 82.2 92.2 30.3 19.3 19.1 15.5 63.6 45.0 133.8 2011          Nov 273.6 75.1 198.5 436.3 223.4 85.4 92.6 29.8 19.6 19.4 15.4 63.0 45.1 133.5          Dec 
of which:   Banks majority-owned by foreign banks 9
146.1 71.3 74.8 359.4 178.9 72.0 74.8 30.3 19.3 19.1 14.5 63.5 37.9 124.9 2011          Nov 122.2 39.6 82.6 363.4 180.0 74.8 74.7 29.8 19.5 19.3 14.3 63.0 38.2 124.9          Dec 
loan associations: Including deposits under savings and loan contracts (see Table Nov. 2009), Commerzbank AG, UniCredit Bank AG (formerly Bayerische Hypo- undIV.12). 3Included in time deposits. 4Excluding deposits under savings and loan Vereinsbank AG) and Deutsche Postbank AG. 8Sum of the banks majority-owned by
contracts (see also footnote 2). 5Including subordinated negotiable bearer debt foreign banks and included in other categories of banks and the category ”Branches
securities; excluding non-negotiable bearer debt securities. 6Commercial banks (with dependent legal status) of foreign banks”. 9Separate presentation of the banks
comprise the sub-groups ”Big banks”, ”Regional banks and other commercial banks” majority-owned by foreign banks included in other banking categories. and ”Branches of foreign banks”. 7Deutsche Bank AG, Dresdner Bank AG (up to

Deutsche Bundesbank
26  Monthly Report
February 2012
IV Banks
 
3 Assets and liabilities of banks (MFIs) in Germany vis-à-vis residents *
 
 
€ billion
Lending to domestic banks (MFIs) Lending to domestic non-banks (non-MFIs)
Treasury
Cash in Negotiable bills and
hand Credit money negotiable
balances market Memo money mar- (euro-area Securities
banknotes with the Credit paper item ket paper issued Securities
and Bundes- balances issued by issued by Fiduciary issued by by non-
Period coins) bank Total and loans Bills banks banks loans Total Loans Bills non-banks banks  1 
End of year or month *
 
2002 17.5 45.6 1,691.3 1,112.3 0.0 7.8 571.2 2.7 2,997.2 2,685.0 4.1 3.3 301.9
2003 17.0 46.7 1,643.9 1,064.0 0.0 8.8 571.0 2.3 2,995.6 2,677.0 3.7 3.4 309.6
2004 14.9 41.2 1,676.3 1,075.8 0.0 7.4 592.9 2.1 3,001.3 2,644.0 2.7 2.6 351.0
2005 15.1 47.9 1,684.5 1,096.8 0.0 6.7 580.9 2.1 2,995.1 2,632.7 2.4 2.4 357.6
2006 16.0 49.4 1,637.8 1,086.3 − 9.3 542.2 1.9 3,000.7 2,630.3 1.9 2.0 366.5
2007 17.5 64.6 1,751.8 1,222.5 0.0 25.3 504.0 2.3 2,975.7 2,647.9 1.6 1.5 324.7
2008 17.4 102.6 1,861.7 1,298.1 0.0 55.7 507.8 2.0 3,071.1 2,698.9 1.2 3.1 367.9
2009 16.9 78.9 1,711.5 1,138.0 − 31.6 541.9 2.2 3,100.1 2,691.8 0.8 4.0 403.5
2010 16.0 79.6 1,686.3 1,195.4 − 7.5 483.5 1.8 3,220.9 2,770.4 0.8 27.9 421.8
2011 15.8 93.8 1,725.6 1,267.9 − 7.1 450.7 2.1 3,197.3 2,774.1 0.8 6.4 415.9
2010          July 14.3 66.8 1,688.7 1,165.6 − 26.4 496.7 1.8 3,139.7 2,708.6 0.6 9.9 420.6
         Aug 13.9 66.8 1,704.5 1,183.5 − 27.1 493.9 1.8 3,150.2 2,717.5 0.6 9.2 423.0
         Sep 14.2 74.1 1,685.0 1,169.5 − 24.5 491.1 1.9 3,129.7 2,699.9 0.6 8.9 420.3
         Oct 14.7 64.4 1,674.2 1,180.2 − 6.9 487.1 1.8 3,249.0 2,710.7 0.6 28.2 509.4
         Nov 14.0 57.6 1,697.3 1,200.6 − 8.6 488.1 1.8 3,290.2 2,815.9 0.6 26.1 447.6
         Dec 16.0 79.6 1,686.3 1,195.4 − 7.5 483.5 1.8 3,220.9 2,770.4 0.8 27.9 421.8
2011          Jan 13.6 54.0 1,673.1 1,183.9 − 7.9 481.3 1.7 3,241.2 2,777.7 0.7 29.2 433.6
         Feb 13.6 61.7 1,668.2 1,179.5 − 9.4 479.3 1.7 3,240.3 2,786.9 0.7 29.4 423.4
         Mar 14.0 67.0 1,646.6 1,164.7 − 7.7 474.2 1.7 3,211.7 2,757.5 0.6 24.6 429.0
         Apr 15.1 49.1 1,630.9 1,152.3 − 5.4 473.2 1.7 3,226.5 2,748.7 0.6 25.6 451.6
         May 14.6 56.4 1,623.7 1,143.2 − 5.7 474.8 1.7 3,209.4 2,753.8 0.5 23.7 431.3
         June 14.4 66.6 1,607.5 1,137.4 − 5.2 465.0 1.7 3,191.7 2,748.9 0.5 21.6 420.7
         July 14.5 57.5 1,610.1 1,144.0 − 5.1 460.9 1.6 3,193.1 2,753.1 0.5 18.7 420.7
         Aug 14.0 64.1 1,665.1 1,200.6 − 5.3 459.2 1.7 3,201.3 2,768.0 0.5 16.7 416.2
         Sep 14.7 78.8 1,731.5 1,270.1 − 6.0 455.4 1.7 3,207.6 2,778.3 0.6 14.5 414.2
         Oct 14.7 72.6 1,736.2 1,274.4 − 6.5 455.3 1.7 3,233.3 2,806.1 0.6 15.7 411.0
         Nov 14.1 57.6 1,797.7 1,338.5 − 7.4 451.9 1.7 3,237.6 2,807.6 0.5 14.4 415.0
         Dec 15.8 93.8 1,725.6 1,267.9 − 7.1 450.7 2.1 3,197.3 2,774.1 0.8 6.4 415.9
Changes *
2003 − 0.5 + 1.1 − 47.2 − 48.2 + 0.0 + 1.0 + 0.1 − 0.3 + 0.1 − 8.0 − 0.4 + 0.3 + 9.3
2004 − 2.1 − 5.5 + 35.9 + 15.1 + 0.0 − 1.4 + 22.1 − 0.2 + 3.3 − 35.0 − 1.0 + 1.1 + 39.2
2005 + 0.2 + 6.7 + 8.4 + 21.0 − 0.0 − 0.8 − 11.9 − 0.0 − 6.7 − 11.8 − 0.3 − 0.2 + 6.6
2006 + 0.9 + 1.5 − 3.6 + 24.5 − 0.0 + 2.6 − 30.6 − 0.2 − 12.4 − 20.3 − 0.5 − 0.4 + 8.8
2007 + 1.5 + 15.2 + 114.8 + 137.6 + 0.0 + 17.0 − 39.8 + 0.4 − 15.9 + 12.1 − 0.3 − 0.5 − 27.2
2008 − 0.1 + 39.4 + 125.9 + 90.1 + 0.0 + 30.6 + 5.2 − 0.8 + 92.0 + 47.3 − 0.4 + 1.8 + 43.3
2009 − 0.5 − 23.6 − 147.2 − 157.3 − 0.0 − 24.1 + 34.3 + 0.2 + 25.7 − 11.2 − 0.4 + 1.4 + 35.9
2010 − 0.9 + 0.6 − 19.3 + 61.5 + 0.0 − 24.0 − 56.8 − 0.3 + 130.5 + 78.7 + 0.0 + 23.8 + 28.0
2011 − 0.2 + 14.3 + 47.3 + 80.5 − − 0.4 − 32.8 − 0.1 − 31.1 − 3.7 + 0.0 − 21.5 − 5.9
2010          July + 0.5 − 49.3 − 69.2 − 54.4 − 0.0 − 0.1 − 14.7 − 0.1 − 7.8 − 7.8 + 0.1 + 1.6 − 1.7
         Aug − 0.3 − 0.0 + 15.8 + 17.9 − + 0.7 − 2.8 − + 10.5 + 8.8 − 0.0 − 0.7 + 2.4
         Sep + 0.3 + 7.4 − 19.5 − 14.0 − − 2.7 − 2.8 + 0.0 − 20.6 − 17.6 − 0.1 − 0.2 − 2.7
         Oct + 0.4 − 9.8 − 10.8 + 10.7 − − 17.5 − 4.0 − 0.0 + 120.1 + 11.7 + 0.1 + 19.3 + 89.1
         Nov − 0.6 − 6.8 + 23.1 + 20.4 − + 1.7 + 1.1 − 0.0 + 41.1 + 105.0 − 0.0 − 2.1 − 61.8
         Dec + 2.0 + 22.0 − 10.7 − 4.9 − − 1.1 − 4.6 + 0.0 − 64.1 − 45.4 + 0.2 + 1.8 − 20.7
2011          Jan − 2.4 − 25.6 − 13.2 − 11.4 − + 0.5 − 2.2 − 0.1 + 20.3 + 7.3 − 0.1 + 1.3 + 11.8
         Feb − 0.1 + 7.7 − 4.9 − 4.4 − + 1.5 − 2.0 − − 0.9 + 9.2 − 0.0 + 0.2 − 10.2
         Mar + 0.4 + 5.3 − 21.6 − 14.8 − − 1.7 − 5.1 + 0.0 − 28.6 − 29.4 − 0.1 − 4.7 + 5.6
         Apr + 1.1 − 17.8 − 15.7 − 12.4 − − 2.3 − 0.9 + 0.0 + 14.8 − 8.8 + 0.0 + 0.9 + 22.7
         May − 0.5 + 7.2 − 7.3 − 9.1 − + 0.3 + 1.6 − 0.0 − 17.1 + 5.1 − 0.1 − 1.9 − 20.3
         June − 0.3 + 10.3 − 16.2 − 5.8 − − 0.5 − 9.8 + 0.0 − 17.5 − 4.7 − 0.0 − 2.1 − 10.7
         July + 0.2 − 9.1 + 2.6 + 6.6 − − 0.0 − 4.0 − 0.0 + 1.4 + 4.2 + 0.0 − 2.8 + 0.0
         Aug − 0.5 + 6.6 + 62.3 + 63.8 − + 0.2 − 1.7 + 0.0 + 0.7 + 7.3 − 0.0 − 2.1 − 4.6
         Sep + 0.6 + 14.7 + 66.3 + 69.5 − + 0.7 − 3.8 − 0.0 + 6.3 + 10.3 + 0.1 − 2.2 − 1.9
         Oct + 0.0 − 6.1 + 5.5 + 5.1 − + 0.5 − 0.1 + 0.0 + 25.7 + 27.8 − 0.0 + 1.2 − 3.3
         Nov − 0.6 − 15.1 + 61.5 + 64.1 − + 0.8 − 3.5 + 0.0 + 4.3 + 1.6 − 0.0 − 1.3 + 4.1
         Dec + 1.7 + 36.3 − 72.1 − 70.6 − − 0.3 − 1.2 + 0.0 − 40.4 − 33.5 + 0.3 − 8.0 + 0.9
*See Table IV.2, footnote*; statistical breaks have been eliminated from the changes. (see also footnote 2). 2Including debt securities arising from the exchange of
The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as provisional. Subsequent equalisation claims. 3Including liabilities arising from registered debt securities,
revisions which appear in the following Monthly Report, are not specially registered money market paper and non-negotiable bearer debt securities; including
marked. 1Excluding debt securities arising from the exchange of equalisation claims subordinated liabilities. 4Including liabilities arising from monetary policy operations

Deutsche Bundesbank
27  Monthly Report
February 2012
IV Banks
 
   
 
 Deposits of domestic banks (MFIs)  3 Deposits of domestic non-banks (non-MFIs)
Partici-
patinginterestsin
Memo domestic Memo Memo
item banks Sight Time Redis- item Sight Time Savings Bank item Equalisa-tion Fiduciary and deposits deposits counted Fiduciary de- deposits de- savings Fiduciaryclaims 
2 loans Total 4 4 bills 5 loans Total posits 6 posits 7 bonds 8 loans   Period enterprises
End of year or month *
 
3.0 54.8 119.0 1,244.0 127.6 1,116.2 0.2 25.6 2,085.9 575.6 830.6 575.3 104.4 42.1 2002
2.0 56.8 109.2 1,229.6 116.8 1,112.6 0.2 27.8 2,140.3 624.0 825.7 590.3 100.3 40.5 20031.0 61.8 99.6 1,271.2 119.7 1,151.4 0.1 30.3 2,200.0 646.9 851.2 603.5 98.4 43.7 2004
− 56.6 108.5 1,300.0 120.5 1,179.4 0.1 26.5 2,276.6 717.0 864.4 603.4 91.9 42.4 2005− 53.0 106.3 1,348.2 125.4 1,222.7 0.0 22.3 2,394.6 747.7 962.8 586.5 97.5 37.8 2006− 51.1 109.4 1,478.6 122.1 1,356.5 0.0 20.0 2,579.1 779.9 1,125.4 555.4 118.4 36.4 2007− 47.2 111.2 1,582.5 138.5 1,444.0 0.0 41.6 2,781.4 834.6 1,276.1 535.2 135.4 32.3 2008− 43.9 106.1 1,355.1 128.9 1,226.2 0.0 35.7 2,829.7 1,029.5 1,102.6 594.5 103.2 43.4 2009
− 33.7 96.8 1,237.9 135.3 1,102.6 0.0 13.8 2,936.6 1,104.4 1,117.1 618.2 96.9 37.5 2010
− 36.3 94.6 1,210.1 114.8 1,095.3 0.0 36.1 3,046.9 1,168.3 1,156.2 616.1 106.3 36.5 2011
− 42.3 96.1 1,243.3 134.7 1,108.6 0.0 35.6 2,851.1 1,084.9 1,061.3 605.9 98.9 42.2 2010          July
− 42.3 95.6 1,252.5 138.9 1,113.7 0.0 35.9 2,873.4 1,094.7 1,074.2 605.9 98.7 42.2          Aug − 42.1 95.3 1,217.8 138.6 1,079.1 0.0 35.1 2,867.2 1,083.3 1,079.4 606.1 98.4 42.1          Sep 
− 42.0 95.1 1,247.7 137.0 1,110.7 0.0 34.9 2,872.3 1,091.1 1,075.1 607.4 98.6 42.0          Oct 
− 41.7 95.3 1,245.6 150.1 1,095.5 0.0 35.1 2,946.1 1,129.6 1,110.2 610.0 96.3 42.0          Nov − 33.7 96.8 1,237.9 135.3 1,102.6 0.0 13.8 2,936.6 1,104.4 1,117.1 618.2 96.9 37.5          Dec 
− 33.5 98.4 1,220.9 148.0 1,072.9 0.0 13.7 2,928.6 1,125.9 1,085.0 620.4 97.2 37.3 2011          Jan 
− 33.5 98.2 1,207.7 135.8 1,071.9 0.0 13.7 2,942.8 1,121.6 1,100.7 622.5 98.0 37.4          Feb − 33.3 98.3 1,191.5 126.6 1,064.8 0.0 13.7 2,930.5 1,112.1 1,096.6 623.5 98.3 37.2          Mar 
− 33.1 98.2 1,183.6 132.1 1,051.5 0.0 13.5 2,948.4 1,127.1 1,099.2 622.3 99.8 37.0          Apr 
− 33.0 96.7 1,164.0 119.8 1,044.1 0.0 13.6 2,976.6 1,125.7 1,129.3 619.9 101.7 37.0          May− 33.0 94.7 1,158.5 120.1 1,038.4 0.0 13.6 2,980.6 1,123.7 1,136.4 617.8 102.7 36.7          June
− 32.7 94.8 1,154.4 122.4 1,031.9 0.0 13.3 2,976.5 1,130.6 1,125.8 616.6 103.5 36.6          July
− 32.7 94.9 1,163.0 123.3 1,039.7 0.0 13.5 3,007.6 1,139.2 1,149.1 615.0 104.2 36.7          Aug − 32.7 94.9 1,175.6 133.0 1,042.6 0.0 13.5 3,026.3 1,151.3 1,157.3 613.5 104.3 36.7          Sep 
− 32.5 95.0 1,162.7 132.5 1,030.2 0.0 13.4 3,027.0 1,160.9 1,148.1 613.1 105.0 36.7          Oct 
− 32.5 94.9 1,177.1 136.1 1,041.0 0.0 13.7 3,054.5 1,188.0 1,149.2 611.5 105.8 36.7          Nov − 36.3 94.6 1,210.1 114.8 1,095.3 0.0 36.1 3,046.9 1,168.3 1,156.2 616.1 106.3 36.5          Dec 
Changes *
− 1.0 + 2.1 − 9.8 − 5.6 − 9.5 + 3.9 + 0.0 + 2.4 + 54.0 + 48.4 − 4.8 + 15.1 − 4.8 − 1.2 2003− 1.1 + 3.0 − 9.6 + 41.3 + 2.9 + 38.5 − 0.1 + 2.4 + 62.0 + 24.4 + 25.9 + 13.1 − 1.5 + 1.2 2004
− 1.0 − 4.9 + 8.9 + 28.9 + 0.8 + 28.0 + 0.0 − 3.5 + 76.6 + 70.7 + 12.4 − 1.2 − 5.4 − 1.2 2005
− − 3.7 − 2.2 + 79.0 + 8.6 + 70.5 − 0.1 − 4.5 + 118.0 + 30.0 + 97.7 − 16.8 + 7.2 − 4.1 2006
− − 2.3 + 3.1 + 132.0 − 3.3 + 135.3 − 0.0 − 2.3 + 181.1 + 31.6 + 160.5 − 31.1 + 20.1 − 2.0 2007− − 5.4 + 7.8 + 124.3 + 23.0 + 101.3 − 0.0 − 3.6 + 207.6 + 54.3 + 156.6 − 20.2 + 17.0 − 1.3 2008− − 4.2 + 0.7 − 225.4 − 9.7 − 215.7 − 0.0 − 5.7 + 59.7 + 211.4 − 179.3 + 59.3 − 31.6 − 0.9 2009
− − 2.1 − 9.2 − 96.8 + 22.3 − 119.1 − 0.0 − 0.2 + 77.4 + 76.0 − 18.9 + 24.0 − 3.7 − 1.7 2010
− − 1.1 − 2.2 − 25.0 − 20.0 − 5.1 − 0.0 + 0.1 + 111.2 + 63.7 + 40.9 − 2.6 + 9.3 − 1.1 2011
− − 0.1 − 1.4 − 118.6 − 5.1 − 113.5 + 0.0 − 1.2 − 16.4 − 5.6 − 11.8 + 1.5 − 0.5 − 0.2 2010          July
− − 0.1 − 0.5 + 9.2 + 4.1 + 5.1 − 0.0 + 0.3 + 17.6 + 9.8 + 8.2 − 0.1 − 0.3 − 0.0          Aug − − 0.2 − 0.3 − 34.7 − 0.2 − 34.5 − 0.0 − 0.8 − 6.2 − 11.4 + 5.2 + 0.3 − 0.2 − 0.1          Sep 
− − 0.1 − 0.2 + 29.9 − 1.7 + 31.5 + 0.0 − 0.2 + 4.9 + 7.9 − 4.5 + 1.3 + 0.2 − 0.1          Oct 
− − 0.1 + 0.2 − 2.1 + 13.1 − 15.2 − 0.0 + 0.4 + 50.3 + 39.3 + 8.2 + 2.6 + 0.3 − 0.0          Nov − − 0.1 + 1.6 − 7.2 − 14.8 + 7.6 + 0.0 + 0.2 − 9.4 − 25.5 + 6.9 + 8.5 + 0.6 − 0.3          Dec 
− − 0.2 + 1.6 − 17.0 + 12.7 − 29.8 − 0.0 − 0.1 − 8.1 + 21.6 − 32.1 + 2.2 + 0.3 − 0.2 2011          Jan 
− + 0.0 − 0.2 − 13.4 − 12.2 − 1.2 + 0.0 + 0.0 + 14.2 − 4.4 + 15.7 + 2.1 + 0.8 + 0.0          Feb − − 0.2 + 0.1 − 16.3 − 9.2 − 7.0 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 12.3 − 9.5 − 4.3 + 1.0 + 0.5 − 0.2          Mar 
− − 0.2 − 0.1 − 7.9 + 5.4 − 13.3 − 0.0 − 0.1 + 17.9 + 15.9 + 3.0 − 2.1 + 1.0 − 0.1          Apr 
− − 0.0 − 1.5 − 19.6 − 12.2 − 7.4 + 0.0 + 0.1 + 28.3 − 1.4 + 30.1 − 2.4 + 1.9 − 0.1          May− − 0.1 − 2.0 − 5.5 + 0.3 − 5.7 + 0.0 + 0.0 + 4.0 − 2.0 + 7.0 − 2.1 + 1.0 − 0.3          June
− − 0.3 + 0.1 − 3.8 + 2.6 − 6.4 + 0.0 − 0.3 − 4.4 + 6.6 − 10.6 − 1.2 + 0.8 − 0.1          July
− + 0.0 + 0.2 + 11.4 + 1.1 + 10.3 − + 0.1 + 31.0 + 8.5 + 23.4 − 1.6 + 0.7 + 0.1          Aug − − − 0.0 + 12.6 + 9.7 + 2.8 − 0.0 + 0.1 + 18.7 + 11.8 + 8.4 − 1.5 + 0.0 − 0.1          Sep 
− − 0.2 + 0.1 − 12.9 − 0.5 − 12.4 − 0.0 − 0.1 + 0.7 + 9.6 − 9.2 − 0.4 + 0.8 + 0.0          Oct 
− + 0.0 − 0.2 + 14.5 + 3.6 + 10.8 − 0.0 + 0.3 + 27.5 + 26.8 + 1.1 − 1.1 + 0.7 − 0.0          Nov − + 0.1 − 0.3 + 33.0 − 21.3 + 54.3 − 0.0 + 0.2 − 6.2 − 19.8 + 8.4 + 4.6 + 0.5 − 0.2          Dec 
with the Bundesbank. 5Own acceptances and promissory notes outstanding. 6Since savings and loan contracts (see also footnote 8). 8Including liabilities arising from
the inclusion of building and loan associations in January 1999, including deposits non-negotiable bearer debt securities. 
under savings and loan contracts (see Table IV.12). 7Excluding deposits under

Deutsche Bundesbank
28  Monthly Report
February 2012
IV Banks
 
4 Assets and liabilities of banks (MFIs) in Germany vis-à-vis non-residents *
 
 
€ billion
Lending to foreign banks (MFIs) Lending to foreign non-banks (non-MFIs)
Treasury
Cash in bills and
hand Loans and bills negotiable Credit balances and loans, bills Negotiable
(non- money money
euro-area Medium market Memo Medium market
banknotes and paper item and paper Securities Securities
and Short- long- issued by issued by Fiduciary Short- long- issued by issued by
Period coins) Total Total term term banks banks loans Total Total term term non-banks non-banks
End of year or month *
 
2002 0.3 690.6 615.3 468.0 147.2 0.9 74.4 2.7 558.8 332.6 92.6 240.0 9.3 216.9
2003 0.3 769.6 675.8 515.7 160.1 1.5 92.3 1.6 576.3 344.8 110.9 233.9 6.0 225.4
2004 0.2 889.4 760.2 606.5 153.7 2.8 126.3 1.5 629.5 362.5 136.6 225.9 10.9 256.1
2005 0.2 1,038.8 860.0 648.5 211.5 5.8 173.0 1.5 712.0 387.9 132.8 255.1 9.3 314.8
2006 0.4 1,266.9 1,003.2 744.5 258.7 13.3 250.4 0.8 777.0 421.0 156.0 264.9 7.2 348.9
2007 0.3 1,433.5 1,105.9 803.6 302.4 13.4 314.2 0.5 908.3 492.9 197.5 295.4 27.5 387.9
2008 0.3 1,446.6 1,131.6 767.2 364.3 15.6 299.5 1.9 908.4 528.9 151.4 377.5 12.9 366.6
2009 0.3 1,277.4 986.1 643.5 342.6 6.2 285.0 2.9 815.7 469.6 116.9 352.7 9.8 336.3
2010 0.5 1,154.1 892.7 607.7 285.1 2.1 259.3 1.8 773.8 461.4 112.6 348.8 10.1 302.3
2011 0.6 1,117.6 871.0 566.3 304.8 4.6 241.9 2.6 744.4 455.8 102.0 353.8 8.5 280.1
2010          July 0.4 1,259.9 988.7 678.4 310.3 3.5 267.6 2.9 813.6 492.1 130.7 361.4 12.3 309.2
         Aug 0.5 1,293.4 1,020.2 708.5 311.7 3.8 269.5 2.8 821.9 499.5 135.0 364.5 11.0 311.5
         Sep 0.6 1,234.3 965.4 666.0 299.4 2.6 266.3 2.7 796.0 474.6 119.2 355.4 12.9 308.4
         Oct 0.6 1,159.1 892.5 604.4 288.1 3.1 263.4 2.7 786.3 466.0 115.9 350.1 15.3 304.9
         Nov 0.8 1,176.9 913.0 619.6 293.5 2.2 261.7 2.7 810.4 488.1 129.5 358.6 11.5 310.8
         Dec 0.5 1,154.1 892.7 607.7 285.1 2.1 259.3 1.8 773.8 461.4 112.6 348.8 10.1 302.3
2011          Jan 0.5 1,151.1 888.7 609.2 279.5 2.8 259.6 1.8 774.8 458.0 114.9 343.2 13.9 302.9
         Feb 0.9 1,157.9 894.3 612.9 281.5 2.0 261.5 1.8 773.2 460.3 118.3 342.1 12.9 300.0
         Mar 0.5 1,108.8 848.0 571.0 277.0 2.0 258.7 1.8 757.3 446.7 110.0 336.7 13.7 296.9
         Apr 0.5 1,150.6 890.7 615.6 275.1 4.5 255.3 1.8 770.2 459.8 129.8 330.1 15.2 295.1
         May 0.8 1,161.7 895.0 618.3 276.8 6.0 260.7 1.8 779.4 466.3 132.2 334.0 17.5 295.7
         June 0.9 1,121.8 858.3 581.3 277.0 5.8 257.6 1.8 764.6 454.2 122.1 332.1 15.2 295.1
         July 0.7 1,119.9 860.5 578.8 281.7 6.5 252.9 1.8 769.4 463.0 122.5 340.5 17.1 289.4
         Aug 0.7 1,154.4 895.5 608.5 287.0 5.4 253.5 1.8 768.4 468.0 130.3 337.7 19.9 280.4
         Sep 0.8 1,158.8 901.8 608.3 293.5 5.8 251.1 1.8 767.1 472.2 127.5 344.8 17.5 277.4
         Oct 0.7 1,132.7 880.4 587.7 292.7 6.5 245.8 1.8 746.0 453.2 113.3 339.9 19.9 272.9
         Nov 0.7 1,139.9 888.9 593.7 295.2 7.0 244.1 1.8 746.2 459.9 114.6 345.3 10.9 275.4
         Dec 0.6 1,117.6 871.0 566.3 304.8 4.6 241.9 2.6 744.4 455.8 102.0 353.8 8.5 280.1
Changes *
2003 − 0.1 + 103.8 + 84.6 + 65.2 + 19.3 + 0.6 + 18.7 − 0.4 + 46.3 + 35.1 + 24.0 + 11.0 − 2.7 + 13.9
2004 − 0.1 + 128.3 + 89.4 + 95.3 − 5.9 + 1.3 + 37.6 − 0.1 + 65.8 + 29.5 + 31.7 − 2.2 + 5.1 + 31.1
2005 + 0.0 + 127.3 + 78.9 + 26.3 + 52.6 + 2.9 + 45.4 − 0.0 + 59.4 + 7.3 − 9.4 + 16.7 − 1.8 + 54.0
2006 + 0.1 + 238.3 + 153.5 + 109.7 + 43.8 + 7.5 + 77.2 − 0.7 + 81.4 + 51.6 + 25.9 + 25.8 − 1.8 + 31.5
2007 − 0.0 + 190.3 + 123.7 + 72.9 + 50.8 + 7.5 + 59.1 − 0.4 + 167.7 + 94.3 + 50.1 + 44.2 + 20.1 + 53.3
2008 + 0.0 + 8.5 + 20.2 − 43.0 + 63.2 + 2.1 − 13.7 − 0.0 + 4.3 + 45.1 − 31.9 + 77.0 − 14.5 − 26.3
2009 − 0.0 − 170.0 − 141.3 − 122.5 − 18.8 − 10.3 − 18.4 − 0.2 − 72.8 − 43.8 − 31.7 − 12.1 − 3.3 − 25.7
2010 + 0.1 − 141.5 − 116.2 − 47.3 − 68.9 − 4.8 − 20.4 − 0.2 − 62.0 − 24.5 − 12.6 − 11.9 + 0.4 − 38.0
2011 + 0.1 − 48.4 − 32.6 − 45.3 + 12.7 + 2.5 − 18.4 + 0.0 − 38.9 − 13.6 − 12.8 − 0.9 − 1.6 − 23.6
2010          July + 0.0 − 26.9 − 17.5 + 6.9 − 24.5 − 2.5 − 6.8 − 0.1 − 5.0 − 2.6 − 1.0 − 1.6 + 0.9 − 3.3
         Aug + 0.1 + 25.8 + 24.1 + 26.3 − 2.2 + 0.2 + 1.5 − 0.2 + 1.2 + 1.6 + 0.7 + 0.9 − 1.4 + 1.0
         Sep + 0.1 − 40.8 − 37.6 − 33.1 − 4.5 − 1.0 − 2.2 − 0.0 − 9.1 − 10.7 − 12.5 + 1.8 + 2.0 − 0.4
         Oct − 0.1 − 71.3 − 69.1 − 59.6 − 9.5 + 0.5 − 2.7 − 0.0 − 6.0 − 5.5 − 2.6 − 2.9 + 2.4 − 2.9
         Nov + 0.2 + 2.5 + 5.9 + 7.6 − 1.7 − 1.0 − 2.4 + 0.0 + 9.9 + 10.1 + 11.0 − 0.9 − 3.8 + 3.5
         Dec − 0.3 − 17.5 − 15.1 − 9.1 − 5.9 − 0.2 − 2.2 − 0.0 − 31.4 − 22.3 − 16.2 − 6.1 − 1.4 − 7.7
2011          Jan + 0.0 + 2.9 + 1.6 + 4.5 − 2.9 + 0.7 + 0.5 + 0.0 + 6.3 + 1.0 + 3.2 − 2.2 + 3.8 + 1.5
         Feb + 0.4 + 8.2 + 7.0 + 4.4 + 2.6 − 0.8 + 2.0 − 0.0 − 0.1 + 3.5 + 3.7 − 0.2 − 1.0 − 2.6
         Mar − 0.4 − 42.7 − 39.6 − 38.3 − 1.4 + 0.0 − 3.2 − 0.0 − 9.6 − 8.5 − 7.1 − 1.4 + 0.9 − 2.0
         Apr + 0.0 + 50.1 + 50.6 + 48.9 + 1.7 + 2.5 − 3.0 − 0.0 + 20.8 + 19.7 + 21.2 − 1.5 + 1.5 − 0.4
         May + 0.4 + 2.8 − 3.7 − 1.7 − 2.0 + 1.5 + 5.0 − 0.0 + 2.0 + 0.4 + 0.9 − 0.5 + 2.3 − 0.7         June + 0.0 − 38.4 − 35.2 − 36.2 + 0.9 − 0.2 − 3.0 + 0.0 − 13.2 − 10.8 − 9.8 − 1.0 − 2.2 − 0.2
         July − 0.1 − 7.3 − 3.0 − 5.1 + 2.1 + 0.7 − 5.0 + 0.0 + 0.4 + 5.3 − 0.4 + 5.6 + 1.9 − 6.8
         Aug − 0.1 + 30.7 + 31.1 + 28.5 + 2.7 − 1.1 + 0.7 + 0.0 + 1.8 + 7.4 + 8.2 − 0.8 + 2.8 − 8.4
         Sep + 0.1 − 9.8 − 7.3 − 8.0 + 0.7 + 0.5 − 3.0 − − 13.3 − 5.7 − 5.1 − 0.6 − 2.5 − 5.1
         Oct − 0.1 − 17.9 − 13.5 − 16.1 + 2.6 + 0.7 − 5.1 − 0.0 − 14.3 − 13.5 − 13.1 − 0.5 + 2.4 − 3.2
         Nov + 0.0 − 2.5 − 0.9 + 0.8 − 1.7 + 0.4 − 2.1 + 0.0 − 8.0 − 0.1 − 0.3 + 0.2 − 9.0 + 1.1
         Dec − 0.1 − 24.5 − 19.8 − 27.1 + 7.2 − 2.4 − 2.3 + 0.0 − 11.5 − 12.3 − 14.1 + 1.8 − 2.4 + 3.2
*See Table IV.2, footnote*; statistical breaks have been eliminated from the changes. revisions, which appear in the following Monthly Report, are not specially marked. 
The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as provisional. Subsequent

Deutsche Bundesbank
29  Monthly Report
February 2012
IV Banks
 
   
 
 Deposits of foreign banks (MFIs) Deposits of foreign non-banks (non-MFIs) Partici- Time deposits (including
pating Time deposits (including bank savings deposits and bank
interests savings bonds) savings bonds)in foreign
Memo banks Medium Memo Medium Memo
item and and item and item
Fiduciary enter- Sight Short- long- Fiduciary Sight Short- long- Fiduciaryloans prises Total deposits Total term term loans Total deposits Total term term loans   Period
End of year or month *
 
15.6 44.8 614.2 101.6 512.7 410.4 102.3 1.1 319.2 33.5 285.7 87.0 198.7 4.5 2002
11.6 41.4 590.7 95.1 495.6 387.7 107.9 0.4 307.3 32.2 275.1 102.4 172.7 3.6 2003
9.8 39.3 603.3 87.0 516.2 403.2 113.0 0.5 311.2 36.6 274.7 123.4 151.2 0.8 2004
10.6 37.2 651.7 102.9 548.8 420.4 128.4 0.6 316.4 62.0 254.4 119.4 135.0 1.2 2005
5.8 50.4 689.7 168.1 521.6 397.3 124.3 0.4 310.1 82.1 228.0 111.5 116.5 1.5 20065.7 48.3 738.9 164.7 574.1 461.2 113.0 0.2 303.1 76.0 227.1 122.3 104.8 3.1 2007
25.5 45.1 703.3 218.1 485.1 362.3 122.9 0.3 286.1 92.2 193.9 95.1 98.8 2.5 200832.1 45.4 652.6 213.6 439.0 307.4 131.6 0.2 216.3 78.1 138.2 73.7 64.5 1.9 2009
15.6 48.8 741.7 258.7 483.0 349.3 133.6 0.1 226.5 84.8 141.7 76.7 64.9 1.5 2010
32.9 45.0 655.7 242.6 413.1 289.4 123.7 0.1 224.4 92.3 132.1 66.9 65.2 1.3 2011
32.4 49.9 779.1 311.8 467.3 336.6 130.7 0.1 260.8 112.2 148.6 82.4 66.2 1.7 2010          July
32.9 51.5 803.7 324.2 479.5 347.2 132.3 0.1 267.5 114.7 152.8 87.3 65.6 1.8          Aug 32.2 51.2 756.4 293.5 462.9 330.4 132.5 0.1 254.5 104.3 150.1 85.6 64.6 1.7          Sep 
32.1 51.5 749.1 301.7 447.5 316.9 130.6 0.1 264.2 108.4 155.8 87.5 68.4 1.7          Oct 
32.5 52.5 758.3 314.2 444.1 311.8 132.3 0.1 271.5 114.3 157.1 86.9 70.2 1.7          Nov 15.6 48.8 741.7 258.7 483.0 349.3 133.6 0.1 226.5 84.8 141.7 76.7 64.9 1.5          Dec 
15.6 51.0 738.6 284.0 454.6 321.6 133.0 0.1 245.0 110.5 134.5 70.3 64.2 1.5 2011          Jan 
15.6 50.0 735.9 282.3 453.7 321.0 132.7 0.1 244.5 110.1 134.3 72.2 62.1 1.5          Feb 15.6 50.2 695.8 253.9 441.9 310.5 131.4 0.1 219.8 90.3 129.4 68.6 60.8 1.5          Mar 
15.5 50.2 725.6 265.7 459.8 329.8 130.0 0.1 232.6 105.7 126.9 68.0 58.9 1.5          Apr 
15.5 50.2 707.7 273.4 434.3 303.4 130.9 0.1 235.5 109.8 125.7 66.2 59.4 1.4          May15.4 49.7 653.1 253.2 399.9 274.1 125.7 0.1 229.5 102.4 127.0 66.5 60.5 1.5          June
15.3 49.0 656.1 248.3 407.8 279.8 128.0 0.1 229.5 102.8 126.7 66.2 60.5 1.5          July
15.4 48.8 705.7 256.5 449.2 321.1 128.1 0.1 232.9 101.9 131.0 66.0 65.0 1.4          Aug 15.5 48.9 745.9 304.7 441.1 312.8 128.4 0.1 242.0 110.6 131.4 65.9 65.5 1.4          Sep 
15.5 48.9 745.4 303.7 441.8 319.3 122.5 0.1 248.6 116.6 132.0 67.4 64.7 1.4          Oct 
15.7 49.8 762.5 330.3 432.2 308.3 123.9 0.1 241.8 111.1 130.7 65.7 64.9 1.3          Nov 32.9 45.0 655.7 242.6 413.1 289.4 123.7 0.1 224.4 92.3 132.1 66.9 65.2 1.3          Dec 
Changes *
− 0.7 − 1.9 + 5.7 − 2.0 + 7.7 − 2.4 + 10.0 − 0.0 + 4.5 + 0.4 + 4.1 + 20.6 − 16.5 + 1.9 2003+ 0.7 − 1.5 + 19.8 − 6.1 + 25.9 + 21.1 + 4.8 + 0.1 + 13.0 + 5.4 + 7.6 + 22.8 − 15.2 − 0.3 2004
+ 0.8 − 3.5 + 28.6 + 12.6 + 16.0 + 4.9 + 11.1 + 0.1 − 4.9 + 23.9 − 28.8 − 7.7 − 21.1 + 0.4 2005
− 5.1 + 13.8 + 56.2 + 68.3 − 12.1 − 13.7 + 1.6 − 0.2 − 0.8 + 21.2 − 22.0 − 5.1 − 17.0 − 0.2 2006− 0.1 − 0.8 + 67.3 + 1.5 + 65.8 + 74.0 − 8.3 − 0.1 + 4.6 − 5.5 + 10.2 + 16.6 − 6.4 + 1.6 2007+ 0.7 − 3.1 − 50.1 + 52.2 − 102.3 − 120.7 + 18.5 + 0.1 − 12.4 + 16.1 − 28.5 − 19.4 − 9.1 − 0.6 2008− 3.2 + 0.1 − 81.4 − 2.1 − 79.3 − 57.5 − 21.7 − 0.2 − 33.5 − 13.3 − 20.1 − 17.0 − 3.1 − 0.6 2009
+ 0.2 + 1.4 + 79.6 + 42.0 + 37.5 + 38.1 − 0.6 − 0.1 − 2.7 + 6.0 − 8.7 − 3.3 − 5.5 − 0.4 2010
− 0.1 − 3.9 − 88.8 − 13.8 − 75.0 − 61.8 − 13.1 − 0.0 − 9.6 + 6.4 − 16.0 − 10.4 − 5.6 − 0.2 2011
− 1.1 − 5.8 + 9.2 − 16.6 + 25.7 + 31.1 − 5.4 − 0.0 + 9.9 + 3.3 + 6.6 + 6.0 + 0.6 + 0.0 2010          July
+ 0.5 + 1.5 + 19.4 + 10.6 + 8.7 + 8.0 + 0.7 − 0.0 + 4.9 + 1.9 + 3.0 + 4.1 − 1.1 + 0.0          Aug − 0.8 − 0.1 − 34.1 − 26.2 − 7.9 − 10.3 + 2.4 − 0.0 − 9.1 − 9.0 − 0.1 − 0.1 − 0.0 − 0.1          Sep 
− 0.0 + 0.3 − 4.5 + 9.1 − 13.6 − 12.1 − 1.5 − + 10.6 + 4.3 + 6.3 + 2.4 + 4.0 + 0.1          Oct 
+ 0.4 + 0.8 − 2.3 + 8.5 − 10.8 − 10.6 − 0.2 − 0.0 + 3.3 + 4.7 − 1.4 − 2.2 + 0.8 − 0.0          Nov − 0.2 − 3.6 − 12.3 − 53.8 + 41.6 + 39.4 + 2.1 − 0.0 − 43.6 − 28.2 − 15.3 − 9.7 − 5.6 − 0.2          Dec 
− 0.1 + 2.3 + 1.0 + 26.4 − 25.5 − 25.6 + 0.1 − 0.0 + 19.7 + 26.0 − 6.4 − 5.9 − 0.5 − 0.0 2011          Jan 
+ 0.0 − 1.0 − 1.1 − 1.2 + 0.1 + 0.3 − 0.2 − 0.0 − 0.1 − 0.2 + 0.1 + 2.0 − 1.9 + 0.0          Feb − 0.0 + 0.2 − 35.5 − 26.7 − 8.8 − 8.4 − 0.3 − 0.0 − 23.2 − 19.2 − 4.0 − 3.1 − 0.9 − 0.0          Mar 
− 0.0 + 0.1 + 35.9 + 14.0 + 21.8 + 23.5 − 1.7 − + 14.6 + 16.1 − 1.5 − 0.0 − 1.4 + 0.0          Apr 
+ 0.0 − 0.1 − 23.3 + 5.8 − 29.0 − 28.9 − 0.1 − 0.0 + 1.1 + 3.3 − 2.3 − 2.4 + 0.1 − 0.0          May− 0.1 − 0.4 − 53.5 − 19.8 − 33.7 − 28.9 − 4.8 − 0.0 − 5.7 − 7.2 + 1.5 + 0.4 + 1.2 + 0.1          June
− 0.1 − 0.8 − 0.1 − 5.9 + 5.9 + 4.3 + 1.6 + 0.0 − 0.9 + 0.0 − 0.9 − 0.7 − 0.3 − 0.1          July
+ 0.1 − 0.1 + 49.0 + 8.7 + 40.3 + 39.8 + 0.6 − 0.0 − 1.4 − 0.7 − 0.7 − 0.0 − 0.7 − 0.1          Aug + 0.1 − 0.1 + 30.9 + 45.0 − 14.0 − 12.4 − 1.6 − 0.0 + 6.2 + 7.5 − 1.3 − 1.0 − 0.3 + 0.0          Sep 
+ 0.0 + 0.1 + 4.8 + 0.8 + 4.0 + 8.8 − 4.9 − + 8.3 + 6.7 + 1.6 + 1.9 − 0.3 − 0.1          Oct 
+ 0.2 + 0.7 + 10.7 + 24.3 − 13.6 − 13.7 + 0.2 − − 8.9 − 6.4 − 2.6 − 2.3 − 0.3 − 0.0          Nov − 0.2 − 4.9 − 107.6 − 85.1 − 22.6 − 20.6 − 1.9 − 0.0 − 19.1 − 19.5 + 0.4 + 0.6 − 0.2 − 0.0          Dec 

Deutsche Bundesbank
30  Monthly Report
February 2012
IV Banks
 
5 Lending by banks (MFIs) in Germany to domestic non-banks (non-MFIs) *
 
 
€ billion
Lending to domestic Short-term lending Medium and long-term
non-banks, total
      to enterprises and households to general government to enter-
 
including excluding Negoti-
negotiable money able
market paper, Loans money
Period securities, and market Treasury
equalisation claims Total Total bills paper Total Loans bills Total Total
End of year or month *
 
2002 2,997.2 2,689.1 365.4 331.9 331.0 1.0 33.5 31.1 2.4 2,631.8 2,079.7
2003 2,995.6 2,680.6 355.2 315.0 313.4 1.6 40.2 38.4 1.8 2,640.4 2,096.1
2004 3,001.3 2,646.7 320.9 283.8 283.0 0.8 37.1 35.3 1.8 2,680.4 2,114.2
2005 2,995.1 2,635.1 309.7 273.5 272.9 0.6 36.2 34.4 1.8 2,685.4 2,141.3
2006 3,000.7 2,632.2 303.1 269.8 269.3 0.6 33.3 31.9 1.4 2,697.6 2,181.8
2007 2,975.7 2,649.5 331.2 301.8 301.5 0.3 29.4 28.2 1.2 2,644.6 2,168.3
2008 3,071.1 2,700.1 373.0 337.5 335.3 2.2 35.5 34.5 1.0 2,698.1 2,257.8
2009 3,100.1 2,692.6 347.3 306.3 306.2 0.1 41.0 37.1 3.9 2,752.8 2,299.7
2010 3,220.9 2,771.3 428.0 283.0 282.8 0.2 145.0 117.2 27.7 2,793.0 2,305.6
2011 3,197.3 2,774.9 383.3 316.5 316.1 0.4 66.8 60.7 6.0 2,814.0 2,321.4
2010          July 3,139.7 2,709.3 366.0 305.7 305.4 0.3 60.4 50.8 9.6 2,773.7 2,296.5
         Aug 3,150.2 2,718.1 367.2 309.8 309.6 0.2 57.3 48.4 9.0 2,783.1 2,300.7
         Sep 3,129.7 2,700.4 351.1 293.4 293.2 0.2 57.8 49.0 8.8 2,778.5 2,294.8
         Oct 3,249.0 2,711.4 378.0 297.5 297.2 0.3 80.5 52.5 28.0 2,871.0 2,300.2
         Nov 3,290.2 2,816.5 470.8 318.0 317.7 0.3 152.8 126.9 25.9 2,819.5 2,309.5
         Dec 3,220.9 2,771.3 428.0 283.0 282.8 0.2 145.0 117.2 27.7 2,793.0 2,305.6
2011          Jan 3,241.2 2,778.4 440.2 290.4 290.2 0.2 149.8 120.8 29.0 2,801.1 2,314.1
         Feb 3,240.3 2,787.6 446.4 308.5 308.2 0.3 137.9 108.8 29.1 2,794.0 2,309.0
         Mar 3,211.7 2,758.1 415.7 292.7 292.4 0.3 123.1 98.7 24.4 2,796.0 2,307.8
         Apr 3,226.5 2,749.3 409.8 295.8 295.5 0.4 114.0 88.8 25.2 2,816.7 2,328.1
         May 3,209.4 2,754.3 405.8 305.2 304.8 0.4 100.6 77.2 23.3 2,803.6 2,311.3
         June 3,191.7 2,749.4 404.1 307.1 306.6 0.5 97.0 75.9 21.1 2,787.6 2,298.0
         July 3,193.1 2,753.6 399.4 305.8 305.4 0.4 93.6 75.3 18.4 2,793.7 2,303.9
         Aug 3,201.3 2,768.5 399.9 318.2 317.8 0.5 81.7 65.5 16.2 2,801.4 2,311.9
         Sep 3,207.6 2,778.8 406.2 326.3 325.8 0.5 79.9 65.9 14.0 2,801.4 2,311.2
         Oct 3,233.3 2,806.6 433.2 355.4 354.7 0.7 77.8 62.8 15.0 2,800.1 2,311.3
         Nov 3,237.6 2,808.2 424.2 352.0 351.4 0.6 72.2 58.4 13.8 2,813.4 2,319.9
         Dec 3,197.3 2,774.9 383.3 316.5 316.1 0.4 66.8 60.7 6.0 2,814.0 2,321.4
Changes *
2003 + 0.1 − 8.4 − 10.0 − 16.7 − 17.5 + 0.9 + 6.7 + 7.3 − 0.6 + 10.1 + 16.0
2004 + 3.3 − 36.0 − 31.7 − 30.5 − 29.7 − 0.8 − 1.2 − 3.2 + 1.9 + 35.0 + 15.6
2005 − 6.7 − 12.1 − 11.5 − 10.6 − 10.4 − 0.2 − 0.9 − 0.9 + 0.0 + 4.8 + 26.8
2006 − 12.4 − 20.8 − 7.1 − 4.5 − 4.4 − 0.0 − 2.7 − 2.3 − 0.4 − 5.2 + 23.6
2007 − 15.9 + 11.8 + 27.6 + 31.5 + 31.7 − 0.2 − 3.9 − 3.7 − 0.3 − 43.5 − 7.1
2008 + 92.0 + 46.9 + 43.1 + 36.8 + 34.9 + 1.8 + 6.3 + 6.3 − 0.0 + 48.9 + 83.4
2009 + 25.7 − 11.6 − 26.1 − 31.5 − 30.0 − 1.5 + 5.5 + 2.5 + 2.9 + 51.8 + 36.6
2010 + 130.5 + 78.7 + 80.4 − 23.4 − 23.5 + 0.1 + 103.8 + 80.1 + 23.7 + 50.1 + 14.9
2011 − 31.1 − 3.7 − 45.2 + 33.5 + 33.3 + 0.2 − 78.7 − 57.0 − 21.7 + 14.1 + 8.9
2010          July − 7.8 − 7.8 − 10.3 − 7.5 − 7.5 + 0.0 − 2.8 − 4.4 + 1.6 + 2.4 + 3.9
         Aug + 10.5 + 8.8 + 0.6 + 3.6 + 3.7 − 0.1 − 3.0 − 2.4 − 0.6 + 9.9 + 4.8
         Sep − 20.6 − 17.7 − 13.4 − 13.8 − 13.8 − 0.0 + 0.4 + 0.6 − 0.2 − 7.2 − 8.6
         Oct + 120.1 + 11.7 + 26.9 + 4.1 + 4.0 + 0.1 + 22.7 + 3.5 + 19.2 + 93.3 + 6.0
         Nov + 41.1 + 105.0 + 92.7 + 20.3 + 20.3 − 0.0 + 72.3 + 74.4 − 2.1 − 51.5 + 9.3
         Dec − 64.1 − 45.2 − 42.8 − 34.9 − 34.8 − 0.1 − 7.9 − 9.7 + 1.8 − 21.3 + 1.3
2011          Jan + 20.3 + 7.2 + 12.2 + 7.3 + 7.3 + 0.0 + 4.8 + 3.5 + 1.3 + 8.1 + 8.5
         Feb − 0.9 + 9.1 + 6.2 + 18.6 + 18.6 + 0.1 − 12.4 − 12.5 + 0.1 − 7.1 − 5.1
         Mar − 28.6 − 29.5 − 30.7 − 15.9 − 15.9 + 0.0 − 14.8 − 10.1 − 4.8 + 2.1 − 1.2
         Apr + 14.8 − 8.8 − 5.9 + 3.2 + 3.1 + 0.1 − 9.1 − 9.9 + 0.8 + 20.7 + 20.3
         May − 17.1 + 5.0 − 4.1 + 9.3 + 9.3 − − 13.4 − 11.6 − 1.9 − 13.1 − 16.8
         June − 17.5 − 4.7 − 1.4 + 2.1 + 2.0 + 0.1 − 3.6 − 1.3 − 2.3 − 16.1 − 13.3
         July + 1.4 + 4.2 − 4.7 − 1.3 − 1.2 − 0.1 − 3.4 − 0.6 − 2.7 + 6.1 + 5.9
         Aug + 0.7 + 7.3 + 0.3 + 12.4 + 12.3 + 0.1 − 12.0 − 9.8 − 2.2 + 0.3 + 0.5         Sep + 6.3 + 10.3 + 6.3 + 8.0 + 8.0 + 0.0 − 1.7 + 0.5 − 2.2 − 0.0 − 0.7
         Oct + 25.7 + 27.8 + 26.6 + 28.7 + 28.5 + 0.2 − 2.1 − 3.1 + 1.0 − 0.9 + 0.5
         Nov + 4.3 + 1.5 − 9.0 − 3.4 − 3.3 − 0.1 − 5.6 − 4.4 − 1.2 + 13.3 + 8.6
         Dec − 40.4 − 33.2 − 41.0 − 35.6 − 35.4 − 0.2 − 5.4 + 2.4 − 7.8 + 0.7 + 1.6
*See Table IV.2, footnote*; statistical breaks have been eliminated from the changes. revisions, which appear in the following Monthly Report, are not specially
The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as provisional. Subsequent marked. 1Excluding debt securities arising from the exchange of equalisation claims

Deutsche Bundesbank
31  Monthly Report
February 2012
IV Banks
 
   
lending
prises and households to general governmentLoans Loans
Memo Memo
item Equal- item
Medium- Long- Fiduciary Medium- Long- Secur- isation Fiduciary
Total term term loans Total Total term term ities 
1 claims 2 loans   Period Securities
End of year or month *
 
1,909.8 193.5 1,716.3 169.9 47.3 552.1 417.1 27.4 389.7 132.0 3.0 7.5 2002
1,927.7 195.0 1,732.8 168.3 49.9 544.3 401.0 34.6 366.4 141.3 2.0 7.0 20031,940.8 194.3 1,746.5 173.5 55.3 566.1 387.7 32.9 354.8 177.5 1.0 6.5 2004
1,953.4 194.7 1,758.8 187.9 52.1 544.1 374.4 32.9 341.4 169.7 − 4.5 2005
1,972.7 194.5 1,778.1 209.1 48.2 515.8 358.4 31.7 326.6 157.4 − 4.8 20061,987.3 207.7 1,779.6 181.1 46.5 476.2 332.5 31.9 300.6 143.7 − 4.7 20072,022.0 222.0 1,800.0 235.8 42.8 440.3 308.2 29.7 278.5 132.1 − 4.5 20082,051.3 242.7 1,808.6 248.4 39.6 453.1 298.0 32.2 265.8 155.1 − 4.3 2009
2,070.0 238.1 1,831.8 235.7 30.7 487.3 301.2 36.1 265.1 186.1 − 3.1 2010
2,099.0 247.4 1,851.7 222.4 32.7 492.6 299.1 41.1 258.0 193.5 − 3.6 2011
2,059.1 237.2 1,821.9 237.3 38.3 477.2 294.0 31.9 262.1 183.3 − 4.1 2010          July
2,063.6 236.7 1,826.9 237.2 38.3 482.3 296.5 33.9 262.6 185.8 − 4.0          Aug 
2,060.7 236.2 1,824.5 234.2 38.1 483.7 297.6 34.0 263.6 186.1 − 4.0          Sep 
2,063.2 236.9 1,826.3 237.0 38.0 570.8 298.4 34.7 263.7 272.4 − 4.0          Oct 
2,071.6 238.5 1,833.1 237.9 37.8 510.0 300.3 35.7 264.6 209.6 − 3.9          Nov 2,070.0 238.1 1,831.8 235.7 30.7 487.3 301.2 36.1 265.1 186.1 − 3.1          Dec 
2,066.5 237.0 1,829.6 247.6 30.5 486.9 301.0 37.2 263.8 186.0 − 3.0 2011          Jan 
2,069.2 236.8 1,832.5 239.8 30.5 485.0 301.3 37.9 263.4 183.6 − 3.0          Feb 2,066.3 238.6 1,827.6 241.5 30.3 488.2 300.7 38.2 262.5 187.5 − 3.0          Mar 
2,065.4 236.2 1,829.2 262.7 30.1 488.6 299.6 38.6 261.1 189.0 − 3.0          Apr 
2,071.7 237.7 1,833.9 239.6 30.1 492.3 300.6 38.8 261.8 191.7 − 3.0          May2,068.2 234.6 1,833.6 229.8 30.0 489.5 298.7 39.0 259.7 190.9 − 2.9          June
2,073.7 235.8 1,838.0 230.2 29.7 489.7 299.2 39.7 259.5 190.5 − 2.9          July
2,085.5 244.8 1,840.8 226.4 29.8 489.5 299.7 40.0 259.8 189.8 − 2.9          Aug 2,087.9 245.2 1,842.7 223.3 29.8 490.1 299.2 39.8 259.4 190.9 − 2.9          Sep 
2,090.6 245.9 1,844.8 220.7 29.6 488.8 298.5 40.6 257.9 190.3 − 2.9          Oct 
2,098.6 246.8 1,851.9 221.2 29.6 493.6 299.8 40.7 259.1 193.8 − 2.9          Nov 2,099.0 247.4 1,851.7 222.4 32.7 492.6 299.1 41.1 258.0 193.5 − 3.6          Dec 
Changes *
+ 17.9 + 0.2 + 17.8 − 1.9 + 2.6 − 5.9 − 16.1 + 4.9 − 21.0 + 11.2 − 1.0 − 0.5 2003+ 10.7 + 0.2 + 10.5 + 4.9 + 3.6 + 19.4 − 13.8 − 0.9 − 12.9 + 34.3 − 1.1 − 0.6 2004
+ 12.5 + 1.7 + 10.8 + 14.3 − 3.0 − 22.1 − 13.4 + 0.9 − 14.2 − 7.7 − 1.0 − 2.0 2005
+ 2.3 + 0.2 + 2.2 + 21.2 − 3.9 − 28.8 − 16.4 − 1.4 − 15.0 − 12.4 − + 0.3 2006+ 9.6 + 10.1 − 0.6 − 16.7 − 2.2 − 36.3 − 25.8 + 0.1 − 26.0 − 10.5 − − 0.1 2007+ 28.8 + 12.0 + 16.8 + 54.7 − 5.3 − 34.5 − 23.2 − 2.3 − 20.8 − 11.4 − − 0.1 2008+ 23.5 + 17.3 + 6.3 + 13.1 − 3.9 + 15.2 − 7.6 + 2.5 − 10.2 + 22.8 − − 0.2 2009
+ 18.6 − 4.0 + 22.6 − 3.8 − 1.7 + 35.2 + 3.5 + 3.5 − 0.0 + 31.7 − − 0.3 2010
+ 22.1 + 1.7 + 20.4 − 13.2 − 1.0 + 5.2 − 2.1 + 4.9 − 7.0 + 7.3 − − 0.2 2011
+ 4.1 + 0.0 + 4.1 − 0.2 − 0.1 − 1.4 + 0.0 + 0.6 − 0.6 − 1.5 − − 0.0 2010          July
+ 5.0 − 0.3 + 5.3 − 0.2 − 0.0 + 5.1 + 2.5 + 2.0 + 0.5 + 2.5 − − 0.0          Aug − 5.6 − 0.5 − 5.1 − 3.0 − 0.2 + 1.4 + 1.1 + 0.0 + 1.0 + 0.3 − − 0.0          Sep 
+ 3.2 + 0.7 + 2.5 + 2.8 − 0.1 + 87.3 + 1.0 + 0.8 + 0.2 + 86.3 − − 0.0          Oct 
+ 8.3 + 1.6 + 6.8 + 1.0 − 0.0 − 60.8 + 1.9 + 1.0 + 1.0 − 62.8 − − 0.0          Nov − 1.5 − 0.3 − 1.2 + 2.8 − 0.0 − 22.6 + 0.9 + 0.4 + 0.5 − 23.5 − − 0.0          Dec 
− 3.5 − 1.2 − 2.3 + 12.0 − 0.2 − 0.4 − 0.3 + 1.1 − 1.3 − 0.2 − − 0.0 2011          Jan 
+ 2.7 − 0.2 + 2.9 − 7.8 + 0.0 − 2.0 + 0.4 + 0.7 − 0.4 − 2.3 − − 0.0          Feb − 2.9 + 1.2 − 4.2 + 1.7 − 0.2 + 3.2 − 0.6 + 0.3 − 0.9 + 3.8 − − 0.0          Mar 
− 0.9 − 2.4 + 1.5 + 21.2 − 0.2 + 0.4 − 1.1 + 0.3 − 1.5 + 1.5 − − 0.0          Apr 
+ 6.3 + 1.6 + 4.6 − 23.0 − 0.0 + 3.7 + 1.0 + 0.2 + 0.8 + 2.7 − + 0.0          May− 3.4 − 3.1 − 0.3 − 9.8 − 0.1 − 2.8 − 2.0 + 0.2 − 2.1 − 0.8 − − 0.0          June
+ 5.5 + 1.1 + 4.4 + 0.4 − 0.3 + 0.2 + 0.5 + 0.7 − 0.2 − 0.4 − − 0.0          July
+ 4.3 + 1.6 + 2.8 − 3.8 + 0.1 − 0.2 + 0.5 + 0.2 + 0.3 − 0.7 − − 0.0          Aug + 2.4 + 0.4 + 1.9 − 3.0 + 0.0 + 0.6 − 0.5 − 0.2 − 0.3 + 1.1 − − 0.0          Sep 
+ 3.1 + 1.1 + 2.1 − 2.7 − 0.2 − 1.3 − 0.7 + 0.7 − 1.5 − 0.6 − + 0.0          Oct 
+ 8.0 + 0.9 + 7.1 + 0.6 + 0.0 + 4.8 + 1.3 + 0.1 + 1.2 + 3.5 − − 0.0          Nov + 0.5 + 0.6 − 0.2 + 1.2 + 0.1 − 1.0 − 0.7 + 0.4 − 1.1 − 0.3 − − 0.0          Dec 
(see also footnote 2). 2 Including debt securities arising from the exchange of equalisation claims. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
32  Monthly Report
February 2012
IV Banks
 
6 Lending by banks (MFIs) in Germany to domestic enterprises and households, housing loans,
sectors of economic activity *
 
€ billion
Lending to domestic enterprises and households (excluding holdings of negotiable money market paper and excluding securities portfolios) 1 
of which  
 
Housing loans Lending to enterprises and self-employed persons
 
Whole-sale and Electricity,gas and retail Financial
Mortgage water trade; Agri- Transport- intermedi-
loans supply; repair of culture, ation and ation
secured refuse motor forestry, storage; (excluding
by disposal, vehicles fishing post and MFIs) and
Mortgage residen- Other of which mining and and telecom- insurance
loans, tial real housing Housing Manufac- and Construc- motor- aqua- munica- com-
Period Total total Total estate loans Total loans turing quarrying tion cycles culture tions panies
Lending, total End of year or quarter *
 
2009 2,357.6 1,155.1 1,094.7 905.0 189.7 1,327.1 301.4 145.8 68.5 63.2 122.1 36.4 74.7 165.2
2010          Dec 2,352.9 1,153.8 1,101.6 907.8 193.8 1,317.2 302.4 134.1 75.5 61.7 120.3 40.3 78.8 157.5
2011          Mar 2,358.7 1,150.4 1,098.9 906.8 192.1 1,325.0 300.5 138.0 76.9 61.8 121.8 40.5 77.3 161.1
         June 2,374.9 1,163.7 1,102.8 909.3 193.4 1,337.2 301.3 137.1 78.9 60.7 121.6 41.6 77.0 173.6         Sep 2,413.7 1,166.3 1,108.3 911.8 196.5 1,367.3 302.1 134.7 81.3 60.9 125.6 42.6 79.2 196.6         Dec 2,415.2 1,167.3 1,114.0 914.0 200.0 1,368.0 305.0 134.6 84.4 59.6 124.0 42.7 80.1 196.4
 Short-term lending
2009 306.3 − 8.4 − 8.4 266.9 4.5 36.3 6.0 14.2 39.7 3.0 7.1 90.7
2010          Dec 282.9 − 7.7 − 7.7 243.2 3.8 32.2 5.2 13.2 39.4 3.0 6.6 78.9
2011          Mar 292.5 − 7.7 − 7.7 253.3 3.9 36.8 5.3 13.7 41.2 3.3 7.1 81.8
         June 306.7 − 7.7 − 7.7 267.0 4.0 38.1 5.8 13.5 41.5 3.7 7.1 93.9
         Sep 325.8 − 7.9 − 7.9 286.0 4.1 36.6 6.3 13.2 43.8 3.8 7.0 112.8
         Dec 316.2 − 7.7 − 7.7 276.7 3.9 33.8 6.0 11.9 41.8 3.3 7.0 111.0
 Medium-term lending
2009 242.7 − 32.4 − 32.4 173.9 11.8 32.6 4.8 9.0 13.9 3.7 13.6 25.5
2010          Dec 238.1 − 32.8 − 32.8 169.1 11.4 27.5 5.2 9.2 13.4 3.9 12.9 29.0
2011          Mar 238.6 − 32.6 − 32.6 169.9 11.1 27.7 5.3 9.0 13.7 3.8 12.3 30.3
         June 234.7 − 33.2 − 33.2 165.8 11.4 26.4 5.3 8.7 13.7 3.9 11.8 30.7
         Sep 245.2 − 33.6 − 33.6 173.4 11.2 26.6 5.6 9.2 15.2 4.1 11.9 34.1
         Dec 247.4 − 34.5 − 34.5 176.6 11.8 28.2 6.0 9.4 15.5 4.0 11.8 35.4
 Long-term lending
2009 1,808.6 1,155.1 1,053.9 905.0 148.9 886.4 285.1 76.9 57.7 40.0 68.5 29.8 54.0 49.0
2010          Dec 1,831.8 1,153.8 1,061.1 907.8 153.4 904.9 287.1 74.5 65.1 39.3 67.6 33.4 59.3 49.6
2011          Mar 1,827.6 1,150.4 1,058.7 906.8 151.9 901.8 285.4 73.6 66.3 39.0 66.9 33.4 57.9 49.0
         June 1,833.6 1,163.7 1,061.8 909.3 152.4 904.4 285.9 72.6 67.8 38.5 66.4 34.0 58.1 48.9         Sep 1,842.7 1,166.3 1,066.9 911.8 155.1 907.9 286.9 71.5 69.4 38.5 66.6 34.7 60.3 49.7         Dec 1,851.6 1,167.3 1,071.8 914.0 157.8 914.6 289.3 72.6 72.4 38.3 66.7 35.4 61.2 49.9
 
Lending, total Change during quarter *
 
2010          Q4 − 0.4 + 3.6 + 4.2 + 3.6 + 0.5 − 2.8 + 0.7 − 3.9 + 2.4 − 1.7 + 0.3 − 0.3 + 0.7 − 3.1
2011          Q1 + 6.3 − 1.9 − 1.8 − 0.1 − 1.7 + 8.2 − 0.9 + 3.9 + 1.4 + 0.1 + 1.5 + 0.3 − 1.5 + 3.8
         Q2 + 16.4 + 3.3 + 4.0 + 2.2 + 1.8 + 12.2 + 1.1 − 0.9 + 2.0 − 0.9 − 0.2 + 1.0 − 0.3 + 12.5         Q3 + 31.3 + 4.0 + 5.4 + 2.9 + 2.5 + 24.6 + 0.7 − 3.0 + 2.3 − 0.2 + 2.8 + 0.9 + 2.0 + 21.0         Q4 + 1.4 + 1.8 + 5.1 + 2.0 + 3.1 + 0.3 + 2.1 − 1.1 + 3.0 − 1.3 − 1.6 + 0.1 + 1.9 − 0.2
 Short-term lending
2010          Q4 − 10.5 − − 0.4 − − 0.4 − 9.4 − 0.2 − 2.6 + 0.0 − 1.4 + 0.3 − 0.7 − 0.7 − 3.8
2011          Q1 + 10.0 − − 0.0 − − 0.0 + 10.6 + 0.1 + 4.6 + 0.1 + 0.6 + 1.8 + 0.3 + 0.5 + 3.6
         Q2 + 14.4 − + 0.1 − + 0.1 + 13.7 + 0.1 + 1.3 + 0.6 − 0.2 + 0.3 + 0.4 − 0.0 + 12.1         Q3 + 19.1 − + 0.2 − + 0.2 + 18.9 + 0.1 − 1.3 + 0.5 − 0.3 + 2.3 + 0.1 − 0.1 + 18.7         Q4 − 10.2 − + 0.1 − + 0.1 − 9.3 + 0.0 − 2.8 − 0.2 − 1.3 − 2.0 − 0.5 + 0.0 − 1.8
 Medium-term lending
2010          Q4 + 1.9 − − 0.2 − − 0.2 + 1.4 − 0.5 − 0.7 + 0.2 − 0.1 + 0.1 − 0.2 − 0.2 + 1.3
2011          Q1 − 0.1 − − 0.3 − − 0.3 + 0.1 − 0.3 + 0.2 + 0.1 − 0.2 + 0.3 − 0.1 − 0.6 + 0.7
         Q2 − 3.8 − + 0.7 − + 0.7 − 4.0 + 0.2 − 1.2 − 0.1 − 0.3 + 0.0 + 0.0 − 0.5 + 0.4         Q3 + 3.1 − + 0.3 − + 0.3 + 2.1 − 0.2 − 0.6 + 0.3 + 0.1 + 0.4 + 0.2 − 0.0 + 1.7         Q4 + 2.6 − + 0.9 − + 0.9 + 3.3 + 0.6 + 1.6 + 0.3 + 0.2 + 0.3 − 0.1 − 0.1 + 1.4
 Long-term lending
2010          Q4 + 8.1 + 3.6 + 4.7 + 3.6 + 1.1 + 5.3 + 1.4 − 0.7 + 2.2 − 0.2 − 0.1 + 0.6 + 1.5 − 0.6
2011          Q1 − 3.6 − 1.9 − 1.5 − 0.1 − 1.4 − 2.5 − 0.7 − 0.9 + 1.2 − 0.3 − 0.7 + 0.0 − 1.3 − 0.4
         Q2 + 5.8 + 3.3 + 3.2 + 2.2 + 1.0 + 2.6 + 0.7 − 0.9 + 1.5 − 0.4 − 0.5 + 0.6 + 0.2 − 0.1         Q3 + 9.1 + 4.0 + 4.9 + 2.9 + 2.0 + 3.6 + 0.8 − 1.1 + 1.6 + 0.0 + 0.2 + 0.7 + 2.2 + 0.5         Q4 + 9.0 + 1.8 + 4.1 + 2.0 + 2.1 + 6.3 + 1.4 + 0.1 + 2.9 − 0.2 + 0.1 + 0.7 + 1.9 + 0.2
*Excluding lending by foreign branches. Breakdown of lending by building and loan ted from the changes. The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as
associations by areas and sectors estimated. Statistical alterations have been elimina- provisional; subsequent alterations, which will appear in the following Monthly

Deutsche Bundesbank
33  Monthly Report
February 2012
IV Banks
 
   
 
 
 
 Lending to
 Lending to employees and other individuals non-profit institutions
Memo items Other lending Services sector (including the professions)
of which of which
Debitbalanceson wage,
Other Lending salaryreal to self- Lending and of which
Housing Holding estate employed to craft Housing pension Housing Instalment
Total companies Total loans Total loans 
3 accounts Total loans   Period enterprises activities persons 2 enterprises
End of year or quarter * Lending, total 
 
651.2 181.2 46.5 170.5 378.9 54.3 1,017.5 790.0 227.5 142.0 15.8 13.0 3.3 2009
649.0 178.5 46.8 175.8 380.4 53.5 1,022.4 795.7 226.7 155.0 13.9 13.3 3.5 2010          Dec 
647.6 175.8 47.0 178.7 378.2 53.9 1,020.3 794.9 225.4 155.1 13.7 13.5 3.5 2011          Mar 
646.7 178.3 44.6 177.9 379.5 53.6 1,024.2 798.0 226.2 145.7 13.9 13.6 3.5          June646.5 177.9 44.5 178.4 381.8 52.8 1,033.1 802.7 230.3 149.0 14.0 13.4 3.5          Sep 646.3 180.0 42.9 177.9 382.9 51.7 1,033.9 805.6 228.2 147.4 13.5 13.4 3.5          Dec 
Short-term lending
69.9 11.1 12.1 14.6 33.3 8.3 38.7 4.0 34.7 3.0 15.8 0.7 0.0 2009
64.7 9.6 11.7 13.9 32.2 7.7 38.9 3.9 35.1 2.6 13.9 0.9 0.0 2010          Dec 
64.2 9.4 12.3 13.5 31.9 8.4 38.2 3.7 34.5 2.6 13.7 0.9 0.0 2011          Mar 
63.3 9.5 11.7 13.2 32.1 8.5 38.7 3.7 35.0 2.5 13.9 1.1 0.0          June62.4 9.5 11.6 13.4 31.1 8.0 38.9 3.8 35.1 2.6 14.0 1.0 0.0          Sep 61.9 9.6 11.1 13.2 30.4 7.2 38.5 3.9 34.7 2.5 13.5 0.9 0.0          Dec 
Medium-term lending
70.8 8.5 11.0 21.7 27.6 4.0 68.2 20.5 47.7 40.9 − 0.6 0.0 2009
68.1 8.8 10.1 21.3 28.1 3.8 68.5 21.3 47.1 42.0 − 0.5 0.0 2010          Dec 
67.8 8.6 10.0 22.1 28.0 3.9 68.2 21.4 46.8 41.7 − 0.5 0.0 2011          Mar 
65.3 8.4 8.3 21.6 28.2 3.7 68.3 21.8 46.5 41.5 − 0.5 0.0          June
66.7 8.2 8.5 21.2 30.8 3.6 71.3 22.4 48.9 43.7 − 0.5 0.0          Sep 
66.3 8.1 8.4 20.4 31.2 3.6 70.2 22.7 47.5 42.3 − 0.6 0.0          Dec 
Long-term lending
510.4 161.6 23.5 134.1 318.0 42.0 910.6 765.5 145.0 98.0 − 11.7 3.3 2009
516.2 160.2 25.0 140.6 320.1 42.0 915.0 770.5 144.5 110.4 − 11.9 3.5 2010          Dec 
515.7 157.9 24.7 143.1 318.3 41.6 913.9 769.8 144.1 110.8 − 12.0 3.5 2011          Mar 
518.0 160.4 24.5 143.1 319.2 41.4 917.2 772.5 144.8 101.7 − 12.0 3.4          June
517.3 160.3 24.4 143.8 319.8 41.2 922.9 776.6 146.3 102.7 − 11.9 3.4          Sep 
518.1 162.4 23.4 144.3 321.3 40.9 925.2 779.1 146.1 102.5 − 11.9 3.4          Dec 
 
Change during quarter * Lending, total 
 
+ 2.9 + 1.4 + 0.2 − 0.4 − 0.8 − 0.9 + 2.1 + 3.4 − 1.3 + 0.7 − 0.8 + 0.2 + 0.0 2010          Q4− 1.2 + 0.1 + 0.1 + 0.0 − 2.2 + 0.4 − 2.1 − 0.8 − 1.3 + 0.1 − 0.2 + 0.2 − 0.0 2011          Q1
− 1.0 + 1.4 − 2.5 + 0.2 + 1.3 − 0.4 + 4.1 + 2.9 + 1.1 + 0.4 + 0.1 + 0.1 − 0.0          Q2− 1.3 − 0.5 − 0.2 + 0.3 − 0.1 − 0.8 + 6.8 + 4.7 + 2.1 + 1.3 + 0.2 − 0.1 − 0.0          Q3− 0.3 + 1.3 − 0.9 − 0.3 + 1.0 − 1.1 + 1.1 + 3.1 − 1.9 − 1.1 − 0.6 − 0.1 + 0.0          Q4
Short-term lending
− 0.6 − 0.4 + 0.1 − 0.4 − 1.0 − 0.8 − 1.2 − 0.2 − 1.0 − 0.0 − 0.8 + 0.1 − 0.0 2010          Q4
− 0.8 − 0.1 + 0.4 − 0.6 − 0.3 + 0.7 − 0.7 − 0.1 − 0.6 − 0.0 − 0.2 + 0.1 − 0.0 2011          Q1
− 0.8 + 0.2 − 0.6 − 0.2 + 0.3 + 0.1 + 0.6 − 0.0 + 0.6 − 0.1 + 0.1 + 0.1 + 0.0          Q2− 0.9 − 0.1 − 0.2 + 0.1 − 1.0 − 0.4 + 0.2 + 0.1 + 0.1 + 0.1 + 0.2 − 0.1 − 0.0          Q3− 0.6 + 0.1 − 0.6 − 0.1 − 0.7 − 0.8 − 0.9 + 0.1 − 0.9 − 0.2 − 0.6 − 0.1 −          Q4
Medium-term lending
+ 1.0 + 0.0 + 0.3 + 0.0 + 0.1 + 0.0 + 0.6 + 0.3 + 0.3 + 0.3 − + 0.0 − 0.0 2010          Q4
− 0.3 − 0.2 − 0.1 + 0.4 − 0.2 + 0.1 − 0.3 + 0.1 − 0.4 − 0.3 − + 0.0 − 0.0 2011          Q1
− 2.4 − 0.2 − 1.7 − 0.5 + 0.3 − 0.2 + 0.2 + 0.4 − 0.2 − 0.2 − + 0.0 − 0.0          Q2
+ 0.1 − 0.3 + 0.1 − 0.6 + 0.3 − 0.1 + 1.0 + 0.6 + 0.4 + 0.2 − + 0.0 − 0.0          Q3
− 0.4 − 0.1 − 0.1 − 0.6 + 0.3 + 0.0 − 0.7 + 0.3 − 1.0 − 1.0 − + 0.0 −          Q4
Long-term lending
+ 2.4 + 1.8 − 0.2 + 0.0 + 0.0 − 0.2 + 2.8 + 3.3 − 0.5 + 0.4 − + 0.1 + 0.0 2010          Q4
− 0.2 + 0.3 − 0.2 + 0.1 − 1.7 − 0.3 − 1.1 − 0.7 − 0.4 + 0.3 − + 0.1 − 0.0 2011          Q1
+ 2.2 + 1.4 − 0.2 + 0.9 + 0.8 − 0.2 + 3.2 + 2.5 + 0.7 + 0.7 − − 0.0 − 0.0          Q2
− 0.5 − 0.1 − 0.2 + 0.8 + 0.6 − 0.3 + 5.6 + 4.1 + 1.6 + 1.0 − − 0.1 − 0.0          Q3
+ 0.6 + 1.3 − 0.3 + 0.5 + 1.4 − 0.3 + 2.7 + 2.7 + 0.0 − 0.0 − − 0.0 + 0.0          Q4
Report, are not specially marked. 1Excluding fiduciary loans. 2Including sole instalment credit. 
proprietors. 3Excluding mortgage loans and housing loans, even in the form of

Deutsche Bundesbank
34  Monthly Report
February 2012
IV Banks
 
7 Deposits of domestic non-banks (non-MFIs) at banks (MFIs) in Germany*
 
 
€ billion
Time deposits 1,2   Memo item
  
 for more than 1 year 2 Subordinated
 liabilities
for up for up (excluding
to and to and for more Bank negotiable Liabilities
Deposits, Sight including including than Savings savings Fiduciary debt arising
Period total deposits Total 1 year Total 2 years 2 years bonds  4 loans securities) from repos deposits 3 
Domestic non-banks, total End of year or month*
 
2009 2,829.7 1,029.5 1,102.6 339.5 763.1 32.1 731.0 594.5 103.2 43.4 35.6 76.8
2010 2,936.6 1,104.4 1,117.1 329.3 787.8 25.1 762.7 618.2 96.9 37.5 37.2 80.9
2011 3,046.9 1,168.3 1,156.2 386.1 770.2 31.5 738.7 616.1 106.3 36.5 35.8 97.1
2011          Jan 2,928.6 1,125.9 1,085.0 304.4 780.6 25.0 755.6 620.4 97.2 37.3 37.0 68.0
         Feb 2,942.8 1,121.6 1,100.7 320.6 780.0 24.9 755.1 622.5 98.0 37.4 37.1 90.9
         Mar 2,930.5 1,112.1 1,096.6 317.9 778.7 25.4 753.3 623.5 98.3 37.2 36.8 75.0
         Apr 2,948.4 1,127.1 1,099.2 323.6 775.7 26.0 749.7 622.3 99.8 37.0 36.7 84.7
         May 2,976.6 1,125.7 1,129.3 354.4 775.0 26.7 748.3 619.9 101.7 37.0 36.7 102.8
         June 2,980.6 1,123.7 1,136.4 363.7 772.7 26.0 746.7 617.8 102.7 36.7 36.6 103.5
         July 2,976.5 1,130.6 1,125.8 352.4 773.4 27.2 746.2 616.6 103.5 36.6 36.6 87.4
         Aug 3,007.6 1,139.2 1,149.1 374.6 774.5 28.4 746.1 615.0 104.2 36.7 36.4 99.4
         Sep 3,026.3 1,151.3 1,157.3 385.1 772.2 29.2 743.0 613.5 104.3 36.7 36.2 106.0
         Oct 3,027.0 1,160.9 1,148.1 376.8 771.3 30.2 741.1 613.1 105.0 36.7 36.0 104.2
         Nov 3,054.5 1,188.0 1,149.2 377.8 771.4 31.0 740.5 611.5 105.8 36.7 35.9 109.5
         Dec 3,046.9 1,168.3 1,156.2 386.1 770.2 31.5 738.7 616.1 106.3 36.5 35.8 97.1
Changes*
2010 + 77.4 + 76.0 − 18.9 − 12.6 − 6.3 − 7.0 + 0.7 + 24.0 − 3.7 − 1.7 + 1.6 + 4.1
2011 + 111.2 + 63.7 + 40.9 + 57.0 − 16.1 + 6.5 − 22.6 − 2.6 + 9.3 − 1.1 − 1.4 + 16.0
2011          Jan − 8.1 + 21.6 − 32.1 − 24.9 − 7.2 − 0.1 − 7.1 + 2.2 + 0.3 − 0.2 − 0.1 − 12.9
         Feb + 14.2 − 4.4 + 15.7 + 16.3 − 0.6 − 0.1 − 0.5 + 2.1 + 0.8 + 0.0 + 0.0 + 22.9         Mar − 12.3 − 9.5 − 4.3 − 2.7 − 1.6 + 0.5 − 2.1 + 1.0 + 0.5 − 0.2 − 0.2 − 15.9
         Apr + 17.9 + 15.9 + 3.0 + 5.6 − 2.6 + 0.6 − 3.2 − 2.1 + 1.0 − 0.1 − 0.1 + 9.7
         May + 28.3 − 1.4 + 30.1 + 30.8 − 0.7 + 0.7 − 1.4 − 2.4 + 1.9 − 0.1 − 0.1 + 18.1         June + 4.0 − 2.0 + 7.0 + 9.3 − 2.3 − 0.7 − 1.6 − 2.1 + 1.0 − 0.3 − 0.1 + 0.7
         July − 4.4 + 6.6 − 10.6 − 11.3 + 0.7 + 1.2 − 0.6 − 1.2 + 0.8 − 0.1 − 0.0 − 16.4
         Aug + 31.0 + 8.5 + 23.4 + 22.2 + 1.1 + 1.2 − 0.0 − 1.6 + 0.7 + 0.1 − 0.2 + 12.1         Sep + 18.7 + 11.8 + 8.4 + 10.7 − 2.3 + 0.8 − 3.1 − 1.5 + 0.0 − 0.1 − 0.2 + 6.6
         Oct + 0.7 + 9.6 − 9.2 − 8.3 − 0.9 + 1.1 − 2.0 − 0.4 + 0.8 + 0.0 − 0.2 − 1.8
         Nov + 27.5 + 26.8 + 1.1 + 1.0 + 0.1 + 0.8 − 0.7 − 1.1 + 0.7 − 0.0 − 0.1 + 5.3         Dec − 6.2 − 19.8 + 8.4 + 8.3 + 0.1 + 0.5 − 0.4 + 4.6 + 0.5 − 0.2 − 0.2 − 12.4
Domestic government End of year or month*
2009 129.3 41.8 83.4 43.0 40.4 3.6 36.8 2.6 1.5 35.7 3.9 0.5
2010 153.4 46.1 103.0 47.7 55.3 2.6 52.7 2.8 1.5 34.7 6.2 0.4
2011 168.5 46.2 118.4 69.5 48.8 3.8 45.0 2.4 1.5 34.0 5.9 3.1
2011          Jan 149.0 49.6 95.1 44.8 50.3 2.5 47.8 2.8 1.5 34.5 6.2 0.0
         Feb 152.7 48.7 99.6 49.4 50.2 2.3 47.9 2.9 1.5 34.5 6.2 3.2
         Mar 154.4 50.2 99.9 50.1 49.7 2.4 47.3 2.9 1.5 34.4 6.1 1.4
         Apr 150.8 46.8 99.6 51.3 48.3 2.5 45.9 2.9 1.5 34.4 6.1 0.9
         May 160.9 50.3 106.3 57.5 48.8 2.9 45.9 2.8 1.5 34.4 6.1 2.7
         June 170.4 52.0 114.1 65.8 48.3 2.6 45.7 2.7 1.6 34.1 6.1 6.1
         July 164.1 49.5 110.5 61.6 48.9 3.3 45.7 2.6 1.6 34.0 6.0 0.2
         Aug 169.4 50.4 114.9 66.6 48.3 3.3 45.0 2.6 1.5 34.1 6.0 2.1
         Sep 173.5 52.4 117.1 68.4 48.6 3.4 45.2 2.5 1.5 34.1 6.0 4.4
         Oct 162.9 49.2 109.8 61.2 48.5 3.6 45.0 2.4 1.5 34.1 6.0 3.5
         Nov 167.0 49.5 113.7 64.9 48.8 3.7 45.1 2.4 1.4 34.1 5.9 2.9
         Dec 168.5 46.2 118.4 69.5 48.8 3.8 45.0 2.4 1.5 34.0 5.9 3.1
Changes*
2010 + 23.9 + 4.1 + 19.7 + 4.7 + 14.9 − 1.0 + 16.0 + 0.3 − 0.1 − 1.0 + 2.3 − 0.1
2011 + 14.6 + 0.1 + 15.0 + 21.4 − 6.5 + 1.2 − 7.7 − 0.4 + 0.0 − 0.7 − 0.2 + 2.7
2011          Jan − 4.4 + 3.5 − 7.9 − 2.9 − 5.0 − 0.0 − 4.9 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.2 − 0.0 − 0.4         Feb + 3.7 − 0.9 + 4.5 + 4.6 − 0.1 − 0.2 + 0.1 + 0.0 + 0.0 − 0.0 + 0.0 + 3.2         Mar + 1.7 + 1.5 + 0.3 + 0.8 − 0.5 + 0.1 − 0.6 − 0.0 + 0.0 − 0.1 − 0.1 − 1.8
         Apr − 4.0 − 3.3 − 0.7 + 0.8 − 1.4 + 0.0 − 1.4 + 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.0 + 0.0 − 0.4
         May + 10.1 + 3.4 + 6.7 + 6.2 + 0.4 + 0.4 + 0.0 − 0.1 + 0.0 − 0.1 − + 1.7
         June + 9.5 + 1.8 + 7.8 + 8.3 − 0.5 − 0.3 − 0.2 − 0.1 + 0.1 − 0.3 − 0.0 + 3.4
         July − 6.3 − 2.6 − 3.6 − 4.2 + 0.7 + 0.7 − 0.0 − 0.1 + 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 5.9
         Aug + 5.3 + 1.0 + 4.4 + 5.0 − 0.7 + 0.0 − 0.7 − 0.0 − 0.1 + 0.1 − 0.1 + 1.9         Sep + 4.1 + 1.9 + 2.2 + 1.9 + 0.4 + 0.1 + 0.2 − 0.1 − 0.1 − 0.0 + 0.0 + 2.4
         Oct − 10.6 − 3.2 − 7.3 − 7.2 − 0.1 + 0.1 − 0.2 − 0.1 − 0.0 + 0.0 − 0.0 − 1.0
         Nov + 4.1 + 0.3 + 3.9 + 3.7 + 0.2 + 0.1 + 0.1 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.6         Dec + 1.5 − 3.3 + 4.7 + 4.7 + 0.1 + 0.1 − 0.1 − 0.0 + 0.1 − 0.1 + 0.0 + 0.2
*See Table IV.2, footnote *; statistical breaks have been eliminated from the Subsequent revisions, which appear in the following Monthly Report, are not
changes. The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as provisional. specially marked. 1Including subordinated liabilities and liabilities arising from

Deutsche Bundesbank
35  Monthly Report
February 2012
IV Banks
 
7 Deposits of domestic non-banks (non-MFIs) at banks (MFIs) in Germany * (cont’d)
 
 
€ billion
Time deposits 1,2   Memo item
  
 for more than 1 year 2 Subordinated
 liabilities
for up for up (excluding
to and to and for more Bank negotiable Liabilities
Deposits, Sight including including than Savings savings Fiduciary debt arising
Period total deposits Total 1 year Total 2 years 2 years bonds  4 loans securities) from repos deposits 3 
Domestic enterprises and households End of year or month*
 
2009 2,700.4 987.6 1,019.2 296.5 722.7 28.5 694.2 591.9 101.6 7.7 31.7 76.3
2010 2,783.2 1,058.3 1,014.1 281.6 732.5 22.5 710.0 615.4 95.4 2.9 31.0 80.52011 2,878.4 1,122.0 1,037.9 316.5 721.3 27.7 693.7 613.8 104.8 2.5 29.8 94.0
2011          Jan 2,779.6 1,076.4 989.9 259.6 730.3 22.5 707.8 617.6 95.7 2.8 30.9 68.0
         Feb 2,790.1 1,072.9 1,001.1 271.3 729.8 22.6 707.2 619.7 96.5 2.9 30.9 87.7         Mar 2,776.1 1,061.9 996.7 267.8 728.9 23.0 706.0 620.7 96.8 2.7 30.7 73.6
         Apr 2,797.5 1,080.3 999.6 272.3 727.3 23.5 703.8 619.5 98.2 2.6 30.6 83.7
         May 2,815.7 1,075.4 1,023.0 296.9 726.2 23.8 702.4 617.1 100.1 2.6 30.6 100.1         June 2,810.2 1,071.6 1,022.3 297.9 724.4 23.4 701.0 615.1 101.1 2.6 30.5 97.4
         July 2,812.3 1,081.1 1,015.3 290.8 724.5 24.0 700.5 614.0 101.9 2.6 30.6 87.1
         Aug 2,838.2 1,088.7 1,034.3 308.0 726.2 25.1 701.2 612.5 102.7 2.6 30.4 97.3         Sep 2,852.8 1,098.8 1,040.2 316.6 723.6 25.8 697.8 611.0 102.8 2.6 30.2 101.5
         Oct 2,864.1 1,111.6 1,038.3 315.5 722.8 26.6 696.2 610.6 103.6 2.5 30.1 100.7
         Nov 2,887.5 1,138.5 1,035.5 312.9 722.7 27.3 695.4 609.1 104.3 2.6 30.0 106.6         Dec 2,878.4 1,122.0 1,037.9 316.5 721.3 27.7 693.7 613.8 104.8 2.5 29.8 94.0
Changes*
2010 + 53.5 + 71.9 − 38.6 − 17.3 − 21.3 − 6.0 − 15.3 + 23.8 − 3.6 − 0.7 − 0.7 + 4.2
2011 + 96.6 + 63.6 + 25.9 + 35.5 − 9.6 + 5.2 − 14.9 − 2.2 + 9.3 − 0.3 − 1.2 + 13.3
2011          Jan − 3.7 + 18.1 − 24.2 − 22.0 − 2.2 − 0.1 − 2.1 + 2.2 + 0.3 − 0.0 − 0.1 − 12.5
         Feb + 10.6 − 3.5 + 11.2 + 11.7 − 0.5 + 0.1 − 0.6 + 2.1 + 0.8 + 0.0 + 0.0 + 19.8         Mar − 14.0 − 10.9 − 4.6 − 3.4 − 1.2 + 0.4 − 1.6 + 1.0 + 0.5 − 0.1 − 0.1 − 14.1
         Apr + 21.8 + 19.2 + 3.7 + 4.9 − 1.2 + 0.6 − 1.7 − 2.1 + 1.1 − 0.1 − 0.1 + 10.1
         May + 18.2 − 4.8 + 23.5 + 24.6 − 1.1 + 0.3 − 1.4 − 2.3 + 1.9 − 0.0 − 0.1 + 16.4         June − 5.5 − 3.8 − 0.7 + 1.0 − 1.8 − 0.4 − 1.4 − 2.0 + 1.0 − 0.0 − 0.1 − 2.7
         July + 1.8 + 9.2 − 7.0 − 7.0 + 0.0 + 0.6 − 0.5 − 1.1 + 0.8 − 0.0 + 0.0 − 10.6
         Aug + 25.7 + 7.5 + 19.0 + 17.2 + 1.8 + 1.1 + 0.7 − 1.5 + 0.8 − 0.0 − 0.2 + 10.3         Sep + 14.7 + 9.9 + 6.2 + 8.8 − 2.6 + 0.7 − 3.3 − 1.5 + 0.1 − 0.0 − 0.2 + 4.2
         Oct + 11.3 + 12.8 − 1.9 − 1.1 − 0.8 + 1.0 − 1.8 − 0.4 + 0.8 − 0.0 − 0.1 − 0.8
         Nov + 23.4 + 26.5 − 2.8 − 2.7 − 0.1 + 0.7 − 0.8 − 1.1 + 0.8 + 0.0 − 0.1 + 5.9         Dec − 7.7 − 16.5 + 3.7 + 3.7 + 0.1 + 0.4 − 0.3 + 4.6 + 0.5 − 0.0 − 0.2 − 12.6
of which:  Domestic enterprises End of year or month*
2009 1,105.6 336.4 743.6 187.5 556.1 9.1 547.0 5.5 20.2 7.6 21.8 76.3
2010 1,124.3 344.6 755.5 196.0 559.5 7.5 552.0 6.3 17.9 2.8 21.3 80.5
2011 1,156.5 374.8 758.9 222.9 536.0 9.4 526.7 5.6 17.2 2.5 20.3 94.0
2011          Jan 1,119.8 364.2 731.6 174.9 556.6 7.5 549.1 6.3 17.7 2.7 21.2 68.0
         Feb 1,124.8 358.7 742.0 186.9 555.1 7.4 547.6 6.4 17.8 2.8 21.2 87.7
         Mar 1,108.5 347.3 737.5 184.1 553.4 7.9 545.4 6.4 17.4 2.6 21.1 73.6
         Apr 1,121.5 359.3 738.5 186.6 551.8 8.3 543.5 6.4 17.2 2.6 21.0 83.7
         May 1,137.8 354.0 760.1 210.3 549.8 8.6 541.3 6.4 17.4 2.5 20.9 100.1
         June 1,130.0 348.4 757.7 210.2 547.5 8.2 539.3 6.3 17.5 2.5 20.8 97.4
         July 1,123.6 351.9 747.8 200.9 546.9 8.3 538.6 6.3 17.5 2.5 20.9 87.1
         Aug 1,150.5 360.9 765.8 217.5 548.3 9.2 539.1 6.3 17.6 2.5 20.7 97.3
         Sep 1,163.0 370.1 769.2 224.4 544.8 9.6 535.2 6.3 17.5 2.5 20.6 101.5
         Oct 1,168.4 376.9 767.7 224.8 543.0 9.8 533.1 6.2 17.6 2.5 20.5 100.7
         Nov 1,175.3 390.6 761.7 220.2 541.6 9.9 531.7 5.7 17.3 2.5 20.4 106.6
         Dec 1,156.5 374.8 758.9 222.9 536.0 9.4 526.7 5.6 17.2 2.5 20.3 94.0
Changes*
2010 − 10.6 + 9.8 − 21.6 + 6.1 − 27.6 − 1.6 − 26.0 + 0.9 + 0.3 − 0.7 − 0.5 + 4.2
2011 + 33.6 + 29.1 + 5.1 + 27.6 − 22.5 + 1.9 − 24.4 − 0.3 − 0.3 − 0.3 − 1.1 + 13.3
2011          Jan − 4.5 + 19.6 − 23.9 − 21.0 − 2.9 − 0.0 − 2.9 − 0.0 − 0.2 − 0.0 − 0.1 − 12.5
         Feb + 5.1 − 5.5 + 10.4 + 12.0 − 1.6 − 0.1 − 1.5 + 0.1 + 0.1 + 0.0 − 0.0 + 19.8         Mar − 16.3 − 11.5 − 4.8 − 2.8 − 2.0 + 0.5 − 2.5 − 0.0 − 0.1 − 0.1 − 0.1 − 14.1
         Apr + 13.3 + 12.0 + 1.3 + 3.0 − 1.6 + 0.4 − 2.0 + 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.1 − 0.1 + 10.1
         May + 16.4 − 5.3 + 21.6 + 23.6 − 2.0 + 0.2 − 2.2 − 0.1 + 0.2 − 0.0 − 0.1 + 16.4         June − 7.9 − 5.5 − 2.4 − 0.1 − 2.4 − 0.4 − 2.0 − 0.0 + 0.1 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 2.7
         July − 6.7 + 3.2 − 9.9 − 9.3 − 0.5 + 0.2 − 0.7 − 0.0 + 0.0 − 0.0 + 0.0 − 10.6
         Aug + 26.8 + 8.8 + 17.9 + 16.6 + 1.4 + 0.9 + 0.5 + 0.0 + 0.1 − 0.0 − 0.1 + 10.3         Sep + 12.5 + 9.0 + 3.7 + 7.1 − 3.4 + 0.4 − 3.9 − 0.0 − 0.1 − 0.0 − 0.2 + 4.2
         Oct + 5.5 + 6.8 − 1.5 + 0.4 − 1.9 + 0.3 − 2.2 − 0.0 + 0.1 − 0.0 − 0.1 − 0.8
         Nov + 6.9 + 13.3 − 6.0 − 4.6 − 1.4 + 0.1 − 1.5 − 0.1 − 0.3 − − 0.1 + 5.9         Dec − 17.4 − 15.9 − 1.4 + 2.7 − 4.1 − 0.5 − 3.6 − 0.1 − 0.1 − 0.0 − 0.1 − 12.6
registered debt securities. 2Including deposits under savings and loan contracts (see note 2). 4 Including liabilities arising from non-negotiable bearer debt securities. 
Table IV.12). 3Excluding deposits under savings and loan contracts (see also foot-

Deutsche Bundesbank
36  Monthly Report
February 2012
IV Banks
 
8 Deposits of domestic households and non-profit institutions at banks (MFIs) in Germany*
 
 
€ billion
Sight deposits Time deposits 1,2 
by creditor group by creditor group
Deposits of Domestic households Domestic households
domestic
householdsand Domestic
non-profit Self- non-profit Self-
employed Other institu- employed Other institutions,
Period total Total Total persons Employees tions Total Total persons Employees individuals individuals
End of year or month*
 
2009 1,594.9 651.3 631.3 112.5 424.6 94.3 19.9 275.6 258.5 24.5 213.2 20.7
2010 1,658.9 713.7 692.4 123.8 471.2 97.4 21.3 258.6 241.4 21.2 203.7 16.4
2011 1,721.9 747.3 724.9 131.5 490.4 103.0 22.4 278.9 261.1 23.3 218.5 19.3
2011          July 1,688.8 729.2 706.5 126.7 480.9 98.9 22.7 267.5 250.0 24.0 208.3 17.7
         Aug 1,687.7 727.9 706.1 129.2 478.0 99.0 21.8 268.5 250.7 23.3 209.6 17.9
         Sep 1,689.9 728.8 707.9 127.7 480.1 100.1 20.9 271.0 251.1 22.7 210.5 17.9
         Oct 1,695.7 734.8 711.6 131.2 479.8 100.6 23.1 270.6 252.9 22.9 211.9 18.1
         Nov 1,712.2 747.9 725.7 132.8 490.3 102.6 22.2 273.8 256.3 23.2 214.5 18.7
         Dec 1,721.9 747.3 724.9 131.5 490.4 103.0 22.4 278.9 261.1 23.3 218.5 19.3
Changes*
2010 + 64.0 + 62.1 + 60.8 + 11.3 + 40.4 + 9.1 + 1.4 − 17.0 − 17.1 − 3.3 − 9.7 − 4.1
2011 + 63.0 + 34.5 + 33.5 + 7.8 + 19.7 + 6.0 + 1.1 + 20.8 + 20.3 + 2.1 + 15.2 + 3.0
2011          July + 8.5 + 6.0 + 6.6 + 3.1 + 3.1 + 0.4 − 0.6 + 2.8 + 2.5 + 0.9 + 1.4 + 0.2
         Aug − 1.1 − 1.3 − 0.5 + 2.4 − 3.0 + 0.1 − 0.9 + 1.1 + 0.8 − 0.7 + 1.3 + 0.2
         Sep + 2.2 + 0.9 + 1.8 − 1.5 + 2.1 + 1.1 − 0.9 + 2.5 + 0.4 − 0.6 + 0.9 − 0.0
         Oct + 5.8 + 6.0 + 3.7 + 3.5 − 0.3 + 0.5 + 2.3 − 0.5 + 1.8 + 0.2 + 1.4 + 0.3
         Nov + 16.5 + 13.2 + 14.1 + 1.6 + 10.5 + 2.0 − 0.9 + 3.2 + 3.3 + 0.3 + 2.5 + 0.5
         Dec + 9.7 − 0.7 − 0.8 − 1.3 + 0.1 + 0.4 + 0.1 + 5.1 + 4.8 + 0.1 + 4.1 + 0.6
*See Table IV.2, footnote*; statistical breaks have been eliminated from the changes. revisions, which appear in the following Monthly Report, are not specially
The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as provisional. Subsequent marked. 1Including subordinated liabilities and liabilities arising from registered debt
 
  
9 Deposits of domestic government at banks (MFIs) in Germany, by creditor group
*
 
€ billion
Deposits
   
Federal Government and its special funds  1 State governments
Time deposits Time deposits
Savings Savings
for up deposits Memo for up deposits Memo
Domestic to and for more and bank item to and for more and bank item
government, Sight including than savings Fiduciary Sight including than savings Fiduciary
Period total Total deposits 1 year 1 year bonds 2 loans Total deposits 1 year 1 year bonds 2 loans
End of year or month*
 
2009 129.3 22.2 1.3 3.7 17.1 0.1 17.3 23.1 7.1 5.8 10.1 0.1 18.0
2010 153.4 38.7 5.7 3.3 29.6 0.1 17.0 28.2 8.5 6.7 12.9 0.2 17.2
2011 168.5 37.9 6.2 9.4 22.2 0.1 16.9 34.8 11.4 10.7 12.5 0.2 16.8
2011          July 164.1 35.6 8.3 4.8 22.4 0.1 16.8 37.6 11.6 13.1 12.7 0.2 16.9
         Aug 169.4 36.8 8.9 5.8 22.0 0.1 16.9 37.6 9.0 15.8 12.7 0.2 16.9
         Sep 173.5 40.8 11.5 6.9 22.3 0.1 16.9 40.1 12.3 15.0 12.6 0.2 16.8
         Oct 162.9 37.9 9.6 6.1 22.1 0.1 16.9 34.9 11.8 10.4 12.5 0.2 16.8
         Nov 167.0 35.8 6.4 7.2 22.2 0.1 16.9 32.7 12.0 8.0 12.6 0.2 16.8
         Dec 168.5 37.9 6.2 9.4 22.2 0.1 16.9 34.8 11.4 10.7 12.5 0.2 16.8
Changes*
2010 + 23.9 + 16.5 + 4.4 − 0.4 + 12.5 + 0.0 − 0.2 + 5.2 + 1.5 + 0.9 + 2.8 + 0.0 − 0.7
2011 + 14.6 − 0.7 + 0.5 + 6.3 − 7.5 + 0.0 − 0.2 + 6.6 + 2.9 + 4.0 − 0.4 + 0.0 − 0.5
2011          July − 6.3 − 2.7 + 2.1 − 4.8 − 0.0 + 0.0 − 0.0 − 2.3 − 2.5 − 0.2 + 0.4 + 0.0 − 0.0
         Aug + 5.3 + 1.1 + 0.6 + 0.9 − 0.4 − + 0.1 + 0.1 − 2.6 + 2.6 + 0.0 + 0.0 − 0.0
         Sep + 4.1 + 4.0 + 2.6 + 1.1 + 0.3 − + 0.0 + 2.4 + 3.3 − 0.7 − 0.2 − 0.0 − 0.0
         Oct − 10.6 − 2.9 − 2.0 − 0.7 − 0.2 + 0.0 + 0.0 − 5.1 − 0.5 − 4.6 − 0.1 − 0.0 + 0.0
         Nov + 4.1 − 2.1 − 3.2 + 1.0 + 0.1 + 0.0 + 0.0 − 2.2 + 0.2 − 2.4 + 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.0
         Dec + 1.5 + 2.0 − 0.2 + 2.3 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.1 + 2.1 − 0.6 + 2.7 − 0.0 + 0.0 − 0.0
*See Table IV.2, footnote *; excluding deposits of the Treuhand agency and its Telekom AG, and of publicly owned enterprises, which are included in ”Enterprises”.
successor organisations, of the Federal Railways, east German Railways and Federal Statistical breaks have been eliminated from the changes. The figures for the latest
Post Office, and, from 1995, of Deutsche Bahn AG, Deutsche Post AG and Deutsche date are always to be regarded as provisional. Subsequent revisions, which appear in

Deutsche Bundesbank
37  Monthly Report
February 2012
IV Banks
 
   
 
 Savings deposits 3  Memo item
 
 by maturity
 more than 1 year 2 
Subordinated
of which liabilities
Domestic Domestic (excluding
up to and up to and Bank negotiable Liabilities non-profit non-profit
institu- including including more than Domestic institu- savings Fiduciary debt arising
tions 1 year Total 2 years 2 years Total tions bonds  4 loans from repos   Period households securities) 5 
End of year or month*
 
17.2 109.0 166.6 19.4 147.2 586.5 577.5 9.0 81.5 0.1 9.8 − 2009
17.3 85.7 173.0 15.0 158.0 609.1 599.2 9.9 77.5 0.1 9.7 − 201017.8 93.6 185.3 18.3 167.0 608.2 599.0 9.2 87.6 0.1 9.6 − 2011
17.5 89.9 177.5 15.6 161.9 607.7 598.1 9.6 84.4 0.1 9.7 − 2011          July
17.8 90.6 178.0 15.9 162.1 606.2 596.7 9.5 85.1 0.1 9.6 −          Aug 19.9 92.3 178.8 16.2 162.6 604.7 595.3 9.4 85.3 0.1 9.6 −          Sep 
17.6 90.8 179.8 16.8 163.0 604.4 595.0 9.4 86.0 0.0 9.6 −          Oct 
17.5 92.7 181.1 17.4 163.7 603.4 594.3 9.1 87.0 0.1 9.6 −          Nov 
17.8 93.6 185.3 18.3 167.0 608.2 599.0 9.2 87.6 0.1 9.6 −          Dec 
Changes*
+ 0.1 − 23.3 + 6.4 − 4.4 + 10.8 + 22.8 + 22.0 + 0.9 − 4.0 − 0.0 − 0.2 + 0.0 2010
+
0.5 + 8.0 +12.9 + 3.3 + 9.5 − 1.8 − 1.1 − 0.7 + 9.5 − 0.0 − 0.1 − 2011
+ 0.4 + 2.3 + 0.6 + 0.4 + 0.2 − 1.1 − 1.0 − 0.0 + 0.8 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 2011          July
+ 0.3 + 0.6 + 0.4 + 0.2 + 0.2 − 1.5 − 1.5 − 0.0 + 0.7 − 0.0 − 0.0 −          Aug 
+ 2.2 + 1.7 + 0.8 + 0.3 + 0.5 − 1.4 − 1.4 − 0.1 + 0.2 − 0.0 − −          Sep 
− 2.3 − 1.5 + 1.0 + 0.6 + 0.4 − 0.4 − 0.3 − 0.0 + 0.7 − 0.0 − 0.0 −          Oct 
− 0.1 + 1.9 + 1.3 + 0.6 + 0.7 − 1.0 − 0.7 − 0.3 + 1.1 + 0.0 − 0.0 −          Nov 
+ 0.3 + 1.0 + 4.2 + 0.9 + 3.3 + 4.7 + 4.7 + 0.1 + 0.5 − 0.0 − 0.0 −          Dec 
securities. — 2Including deposits under savings and loan contracts (see Table 2). 4Including liabilities arising from non-negotiable bearer debt
IV.12). 3Excluding deposits under savings and loan contracts (see also foot-note securities. 5 Included in time deposits. 
 
     
 
Local government and local government associations
(including municipal special-purpose associations) Social security funds
Time deposits 3 Time deposits
Savings Savings
for up deposits Memo for up deposits Memo
to and for more and bank item to and for more and bank item
Sight including than savings Fiduciary Sight including than savings Fiduciary
Total deposits 1 year 1 year bonds 2,4 loans Total deposits 1 year 1 year bonds 2 loans   Period
End of year or month*
 
38.0 20.2 10.3 4.2 3.3 0.4 46.0 13.3 23.1 8.9 0.6 0.0 2009
37.4 19.5 9.9 4.5 3.5 0.4 49.1 12.3 27.9 8.3 0.6 0.0 201039.3 18.1 13.0 5.0 3.2 0.4 56.5 10.5 36.4 9.1 0.4 0.0 2011
36.1 16.3 11.4 5.0 3.4 0.4 54.8 13.3 32.2 8.8 0.6 0.0 2011          July
39.9 18.5 13.0 5.0 3.3 0.4 55.1 14.0 32.1 8.5 0.5 0.0          Aug 37.7 16.6 12.7 5.1 3.2 0.4 54.9 12.0 33.8 8.6 0.5 0.0          Sep 
35.9 15.3 12.3 5.1 3.2 0.4 54.2 12.6 32.3 8.8 0.4 0.0          Oct 
38.6 17.5 12.9 5.0 3.2 0.4 59.9 13.7 36.8 9.0 0.4 0.0          Nov 
39.3 18.1 13.0 5.0 3.2 0.4 56.5 10.5 36.4 9.1 0.4 0.0          Dec 
Changes*
− 0.6 − 0.6 − 0.5 + 0.2 + 0.2 − 0.0 + 2.9 − 1.2 + 4.7 − 0.6 − 0.1 − 0.0 2010
+ 1.8 − 1.4 + 2.9 + 0.5 − 0.3 − 0.0 + 7.0 − 1.9 + 8.2 + 0.9 − 0.2 − 0.0 2011
− 0.4 − 0.6 + 0.1 + 0.2 − 0.1 − − 0.8 − 1.6 + 0.6 + 0.1 + 0.0 − 2011          July
+ 3.7 + 2.2 + 1.5 + 0.0 − 0.1 − + 0.3 + 0.7 − 0.1 − 0.3 − 0.0 −          Aug − 2.2 − 2.0 − 0.2 + 0.1 − 0.1 − 0.0 − 0.2 − 2.0 + 1.7 + 0.1 − 0.1 −          Sep 
− 1.8 − 1.3 − 0.4 − 0.0 − 0.0 − − 0.8 + 0.5 − 1.4 + 0.2 − 0.0 −          Oct 
+ 2.7 + 2.2 + 0.6 − 0.1 − 0.0 − + 5.7 + 1.1 + 4.5 + 0.2 − 0.0 −          Nov + 0.8 + 0.7 + 0.1 − 0.0 + 0.1 − − 3.4 − 3.2 − 0.4 + 0.1 − 0.0 −          Dec 
the following Monthly Report, are not specially marked. 1Federal Railways Fund, non-negotiable bearer debt securities. 3Including deposits under savings and loan
Indemnification Fund, Redemption Fund for Inherited Liabilities, ERP Special Fund, contracts. 4 Excluding deposits under savings and loan contracts (see also footnote 3). 
German Unity Fund, Equalisation of Burdens Fund. 2Including liabilities arising from

Deutsche Bundesbank
38  Monthly Report
February 2012
IV Banks
 
10 Savings deposits and bank savings bonds of banks (MFIs) in Germany sold to non-banks (non-MFIs)*
 
 
€ billion
Savings deposits 1 Bank savings bonds 3  , sold to
of residents of non-residents domestic non-banks
at three months’ at more than three Memo
notice months’ notice item of which
Interest With
of which of which of which credited maturities
Special Special At three on of more
savings savings savings non-banks, than foreign months’
Period Total Total Total Total Total notice deposits total Total 2 years facilities 2 facilities 2 non-banks
End of year or month*
 
2009 604.1 594.5 474.5 379.4 120.0 112.1 9.6 7.0 13.8 118.8 103.2 68.3 15.6
2010 628.2 618.2 512.5 412.3 105.7 96.6 9.9 7.7 10.9 113.5 96.9 72.0 16.6
2011 626.3 616.1 515.3 413.7 100.8 91.3 10.2 7.8 10.0 122.9 106.3 76.1 16.6
2011          Aug 624.9 615.0 510.8 409.8 104.2 95.2 9.9 7.6 0.4 120.4 104.2 76.5 16.1
         Sep 623.3 613.5 509.8 409.3 103.7 94.5 9.8 7.6 0.3 120.7 104.3 76.4 16.5
         Oct 623.0 613.1 509.6 408.8 103.5 94.2 9.9 7.6 0.4 121.3 105.0 76.3 16.2
         Nov 621.5 611.5 509.9 409.6 101.6 92.3 10.0 7.7 0.5 122.2 105.8 76.0 16.4
         Dec 626.3 616.1 515.3 413.7 100.8 91.3 10.2 7.8 6.2 122.9 106.3 76.1 16.6
Changes*
2010 + 24.3 + 24.0 + 38.3 + 33.1 − 14.3 − 15.5 + 0.3 + 0.6 . − 2.7 − 3.7 + 6.3 + 1.0
2011 − 2.4 − 2.6 + 1.3 + 0.2 − 3.9 − 4.3 + 0.2 + 0.1 . + 9.5 + 9.3 + 4.0 + 0.2
2011          Aug − 1.6 − 1.6 − 1.4 − 1.0 − 0.2 − 0.2 − 0.0 − 0.1 . + 0.7 + 0.7 + 0.4 − 0.0
         Sep − 1.6 − 1.5 − 1.0 − 0.5 − 0.5 − 0.6 − 0.0 − 0.0 . + 0.4 + 0.0 − 0.0 + 0.3
         Oct − 0.4 − 0.4 − 0.3 − 0.5 − 0.2 − 0.4 + 0.1 + 0.0 . + 0.5 + 0.8 − 0.1 − 0.2
         Nov − 1.0 − 1.1 − 0.2 − 0.2 − 0.9 − 0.9 + 0.1 + 0.1 . + 0.9 + 0.7 − 0.3 + 0.2
         Dec + 4.8 + 4.6 + 5.4 + 4.1 − 0.8 − 1.0 + 0.2 + 0.1 . + 0.7 + 0.5 + 0.1 + 0.2
*See Table IV.2, footnote*; statistical breaks have been eliminated from the changes. as time deposits. 2Savings deposits bearing interest at a rate which exceeds the
The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as provisional. Subsequent minimum or basic rate of interest. 3Including liabilities arising from non-negotiable
revisions, which appear in the following Monthly Report, are not specially bearer debt securities. 
marked. 1Excluding deposits under savings and loan contracts, which are classified
 
  
11 Debt securities and money market paper outstanding of banks (MFIs) in Germany
*
 
€ billion
Negotiable bearer debt securities and money market paper Non-negotiable
bearer debt
of which securities and
money market
with maturities of paper 6 Subordinated
up to more than 1 year up to
and including 1 year of which and including 2 years
with
Certifi- of which of which non- maturities
Floating Zero Foreign cates without without more of more negotiable negotiable
rate coupon currency of a nominal a nominal than than debt debt
Total bonds 1 deposit Total Total 2 years Total 2 years securities securities bonds 1,2 bonds 3,4 guarantee 5 guarantee 5 
Period
End of year or month*
 
2009 1,529.8 380.6 43.9 317.4 70.4 115.9 . 105.8 . 1,308.2 0.9 0.6 46.1 1.8
2010 1,435.1 287.2 27.8 359.2 82.8 97.0 4.6 56.8 6.5 1,281.4 0.7 0.6 43.9 1.5
2011 1,375.4 303.9 26.8 366.8 75.3 95.2 3.0 53.6 4.5 1,226.6 0.6 0.4 43.1 1.5
2011          Aug 1,374.4 294.9 24.8 340.1 76.7 91.5 4.3 53.5 6.0 1,229.5 0.5 0.4 43.8 1.5
         Sep 1,374.6 297.4 24.9 351.9 73.5 89.6 3.6 52.5 5.2 1,232.5 0.5 0.4 43.7 1.5
         Oct 1,367.3 301.5 22.3 346.2 74.9 89.8 3.7 53.4 5.2 1,224.1 0.4 0.4 43.3 1.5
         Nov 1,377.8 303.9 26.2 357.4 80.1 97.8 3.6 54.8 5.0 1,225.3 0.5 0.4 43.3 1.5
         Dec 1,375.4 303.9 26.8 366.8 75.3 95.2 3.0 53.6 4.5 1,226.6 0.6 0.4 43.1 1.5
Changes*
2010 − 94.2 − 92.8 − 9.8 + 41.9 + 12.4 − 18.8 . − 48.9 . − 26.4 − 0.2 − 0.0 − 2.1 − 0.3
2011 − 59.0 + 16.4 − 4.1 + 8.1 − 7.5 − 2.1 − 1.6 − 2.9 − 2.0 − 54.0 − 0.0 − 0.2 − 0.8 − 0.0
2011          Aug + 0.6 + 0.3 + 0.7 + 1.4 + 8.0 + 8.0 − 1.4 − 1.6 − 2.3 − 5.8 − 0.0 − 0.1 − 0.4 − 0.0
         Sep + 0.2 + 2.5 + 0.1 + 11.8 − 3.3 − 2.4 − 0.7 − 0.4 − 0.9 + 3.0 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.1 + 0.0
         Oct − 7.4 + 4.0 − 2.6 − 5.6 + 1.4 + 0.2 + 0.1 + 0.9 + 0.1 − 8.4 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.3 − 0.0
         Nov + 9.1 + 2.4 + 0.9 + 11.1 + 5.2 + 8.0 − 0.1 + 1.5 − 0.2 − 0.3 + 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.1 + 0.0         Dec − 2.4 + 0.1 + 0.7 + 9.4 − 4.8 − 2.3 − 0.6 − 1.5 − 0.5 + 1.4 + 0.2 − 0.0 − 0.1 + 0.0
*See Table IV.2, footnote*; statistical breaks have been eliminated from the coupon bonds denominated in foreign currencies. 4Bonds denominated in
changes. The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as provisional. non-euro-area currencies. 5Negotiable bearer debt securities respectively money
Subsequent revisions, which appear in the following Monthly Report, are not market paper with a nominal guarantee of less than 100%. 6Non-negotiable
specially marked. 1Including debt securities denominated in foreign bearer debt securities are classified among bank savings bonds (see also Table IV.10,
currencies. 2Issue value when floated. 3Including floating rate notes and zero footnote 2). 

Deutsche Bundesbank
39  Monthly Report
February 2012
IV  Banks
  
12 Building  and  loan  associations (MFIs) in Germany *)
Interim statements
  
€ billion
Lending to banks (MFIs)
Lending to non-banks (non-MFIs) Deposits of banks Deposits of non-
(MFIs) 5 banks (non-MFIs)
Credit Building loans Secur- Memo
bal- item ities (in-
ances cluding Bearer New
and Loans Treasury Deposits Deposits debt Capital con-
Num- loans under bills under under secur- (includ- tractsber (ex- Bank savings Interim and savings savings ities ing pub- enteredof Balance cluding debt and loan and Other Treasury and loan Sight and loan Sight and out- lished into in
End of sheet building Building secur- con- bridging building discount con- and time con- time de- stand- re- year or associ-
year/month ations loans 
2 ities 3 tracts loans loans tracts deposits tracts posits  6 ing month 8 total 13 loans) 1 paper) 4 serves) 7 
All  building  and  loan  associations
2010 24 198.9 42.8 0.0 18.9 27.8 72.0 14.3 14.4 0.6 29.7 130.9 7.3 5.5 7.5 92.7
2011          Oct 23 197.7 42.4 0.0 17.2 27.5 73.6 15.5 13.5 0.7 24.7 133.6 6.7 5.6 8.4 7.6
         Nov 23 197.8 42.6 0.0 16.9 27.3 73.8 15.6 13.5 0.7 24.5 133.9 6.7 5.5 8.4 8.0         Dec 23 197.5 41.4 0.0 17.6 27.1 74.2 15.9 13.0 0.7 22.8 136.7 6.9 5.4 8.3 9.7
Private  building  and  Ioan  associations
  
2011          Oct 13 142.3 25.4 0.0 11.6 17.9 58.6 13.9 7.6 0.4 21.5 88.3 6.5 5.6 5.7 4.8         Nov 13 142.3 25.5 0.0 11.3 17.8 58.8 13.9 7.5 0.4 21.3 88.5 6.5 5.5 5.7 5.1         Dec 13 141.8 24.2 0.0 12.1 17.7 59.1 14.2 7.1 0.4 19.8 90.4 6.7 5.4 5.6 6.2
Public  building  and  Ioan  associations
  
2011          Oct 10 55.3 17.0 0.0 5.6 9.6 14.9 1.6 5.9 0.3 3.2 45.3 0.2 − 2.7 2.8         Nov 10 55.5 17.1 0.0 5.6 9.5 15.0 1.6 5.9 0.3 3.1 45.4 0.2 − 2.7 2.9         Dec 10 55.7 17.2 0.0 5.5 9.4 15.1 1.7 5.9 0.3 3.0 46.3 0.2 − 2.7 3.4
Trends in building and loan association business
  
€ billion
Changes in deposits
Capital promised Capital disbursed Disbursement Interest and
under savings and commitments repayments
loan contracts Allocations outstanding at received on
end of period building loans 10 
Deposits under Loans under
Repay- savings and savings and
ments loan contracts loan contracts 9 Newly
Interest of granted
credited interim deposits of which of which
on under Applied Applied and ofwhich of Memo Amounts deposits
cancelled to settle- to settle- bridging
under savings of ment of ment of loans Under which item paid intosavings savings and which interim interim and alloc- Repay- Housing
and and loan loan Net and and other ated ments bonuses
loan ac- con- con- alloca- bridging bridging building con- during re-
Period tracts tracts Total Total Total loans Total loans loans Total tracts Total quarter counts 
9 tions 11 ceived 12 
All  building  and  loan  associations
2010 27.8 2.6 5.5 43.6 29.3 37.9 17.0 4.3 7.8 4.0 13.2 11.8 7.5 11.8 9.6 0.5
2011          Oct 2.0 0.0 0.5 3.4 2.2 3.3 1.4 0.4 0.7 0.3 1.1 12.2 7.4 0.9 0.0
         Nov 2.2 0.0 0.6 3.7 2.4 3.3 1.4 0.3 0.6 0.3 1.3 12.1 7.4 0.9 0.0
         Dec 2.7 2.1 0.5 3.7 2.4 3.5 1.5 0.3 0.6 0.3 1.4 12.1 7.5 1.1 ... 0.0
Private  building  and  Ioan  associations
  
2011          Oct 1.3 0.0 0.3 2.7 1.7 2.4 1.0 0.3 0.5 0.3 0.9 7.6 4.0 0.6 0.0
         Nov 1.4 0.0 0.3 2.5 1.5 2.3 0.9 0.2 0.4 0.2 1.0 7.6 3.9 0.6 0.0
         Dec 1.9 1.2 0.3 2.5 1.6 2.5 1.0 0.3 0.4 0.2 1.1 7.6 4.1 0.8 ... 0.0
Public  building  and  Ioan  associations
  
2011          Oct 0.7 0.0 0.2 0.8 0.5 0.9 0.4 0.1 0.2 0.1 0.3 4.5 3.5 0.3 0.0
         Nov 0.8 0.0 0.2 1.2 0.9 1.0 0.5 0.1 0.2 0.1 0.3 4.5 3.5 0.3 0.0
         Dec 0.8 0.9 0.3 1.1 0.8 1.0 0.5 0.1 0.2 0.1 0.3 4.5 3.4 0.3 ... 0.0
*Excluding assets and liabilities and/or transactions of foreign branches. The figures general banking risks. 8Total amount covered by the contracts; only contracts newly
for the latest date are always to be regarded as provisional. Subsequent revisions, entered into, for which the contract fee has been fully paid. Increases in the sumwhich appear in the following Monthly Report, are not specially marked. 1Including contracted count as new contracts. 9For disbursements of deposits under savings
postal giro account balances, claims on building and loan associations, claims arising and loan contracts arising from the allocation of contracts see “Capitalfrom registered debt securities and central bank credit balances. 2Loans under disbursed“. 10Including housing bonuses credited. 11Only allocations accepted by
savings and loan contracts and interim and bridging loans. 3Including money market the beneficiaries; including allocations applied to settlement of interim and bridging
paper and small amounts of other securities issued by banks. 4Including equalisation loans. 12The amounts already credited to the accounts of savers or borrowers are
claims. 5Including liabilities to building and loan associations. 6Including small also included in “Amounts paid into savings and loan accounts“ and “Interest and
amounts of savings deposits. 7Including participation rights capital and fund for repayments received on building loans“. 13 See Table IV.2, footnote 1. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
40  Monthly Report
February 2012
IV  Banks
  
13 Assets and liabilities of the foreign branches and foreign subsidiaries of German banks (MFIs) *
  
  
€ billion
Number of Lending to banks (MFIs) Lending to non-banks (non-MFIs) Other  assets 7 
Loans Credit  balances and loans
German   
banks(MFIs)   with of which
foreign foreign Derivative
branches Money Money financial
branches  1 
and/or and/or market to to market instruments
foreign foreign Balance paper, German foreign paper, in the
subsi- subsi- sheet German Foreign secur- non- non- secur- trading
Period diaries diaries total 7 Total Total banks banks Total Total banks banks ities  2 Total portfolio ities 2,3 
Foreign  branches End of year or month *
  
2008 56 226 1,715.5 730.7 669.1 244.9 424.2 61.6 825.3 630.4 20.2 610.3 194.9 159.5 −
2009 51 211 1,461.6 579.2 539.1 210.1 328.9 40.2 691.5 534.7 20.7 514.0 156.7 190.9 −
2010 55 212 2,226.3 591.4 564.8 232.0 332.8 26.6 696.7 532.5 27.5 505.0 164.2 938.2 633.9
2011          Feb 55 211 2,041.4 570.4 545.7 210.6 335.1 24.8 697.6 542.8 26.6 516.2 154.8 773.4 585.7
         Mar 55 211 1,980.5 546.9 523.0 199.5 323.5 24.0 678.2 523.5 26.1 497.4 154.7 755.4 585.1
         Apr 55 211 2,057.3 567.6 544.1 213.6 330.6 23.5 673.2 518.2 25.5 492.7 155.0 816.4 642.8
         May 55 212 2,023.3 579.5 556.2 204.0 352.2 23.3 682.3 526.8 24.9 501.9 155.6 761.5 600.1
         June 55 211 1,962.2 533.9 511.8 179.1 332.7 22.1 664.5 509.9 24.5 485.3 154.6 763.8 600.8
         July 55 211 2,028.0 526.1 503.4 182.4 321.0 22.7 676.6 523.5 25.0 498.5 153.1 825.3 651.9
         Aug 55 213 2,181.7 562.0 539.9 193.1 346.8 22.1 680.7 527.2 24.6 502.7 153.4 939.1 772.8
         Sep 55 210 2,445.8 613.7 592.3 194.2 398.1 21.4 700.2 545.6 24.5 521.1 154.6 1,131.8 957.1
         Oct 56 210 2,236.0 564.4 543.6 185.5 358.1 20.8 688.0 547.2 24.0 523.2 140.8 983.6 819.2
         Nov 56 210 2,291.2 576.4 555.1 181.5 373.6 21.4 683.5 541.5 23.8 517.7 142.0 1,031.3 853.4
Changes *
2009 − 5 − 15 −247.9 −148.8 −127.3 − 34.7 − 92.6 − 21.5 −131.7 − 94.6 + 0.5 − 95.1 −37.1 + 32.6 −
2010 + 4 + 1 +695.5 − 8.7 + 5.5 + 21.9 − 16.4 − 14.2 − 36.3 − 35.6 + 6.8 − 42.4 − 0.7 +740.6 −
2011          Mar − − − 42.2 − 16.8 − 16.1 − 11.1 − 5.0 − 0.6 − 8.9 − 11.0 − 0.5 − 10.5 + 2.1 − 16.6 − 0.6
         Apr − − + 99.6 + 30.1 + 30.4 + 14.1 + 16.3 − 0.3 + 7.4 + 4.2 − 0.6 + 4.8 + 3.2 + 62.1 + 57.7
         May − + 1 − 54.5 + 3.1 + 3.5 − 9.6 + 13.1 − 0.4 − 1.6 + 0.2 − 0.6 + 0.8 − 1.8 − 56.0 − 42.6
         June − − 1 − 55.9 − 44.1 − 42.9 − 24.9 − 18.1 − 1.2 − 14.4 − 14.1 − 0.4 − 13.7 − 0.4 + 2.6 + 0.7
         July − − + 52.3 − 13.3 − 13.8 + 3.3 − 17.1 + 0.5 + 5.0 + 8.0 + 0.4 + 7.6 − 3.0 + 60.6 + 51.1
         Aug − + 2 +161.4 + 38.4 + 38.9 + 10.7 + 28.2 − 0.5 + 8.7 + 7.4 − 0.4 + 7.8 + 1.3 +114.4 + 120.9
         Sep − − 3 +221.9 + 32.2 + 33.2 + 1.1 + 32.1 − 1.1 − 1.3 + 1.7 − 0.1 + 1.8 − 3.1 +191.0 + 184.3
         Oct + 1 − −184.7 − 36.5 − 36.1 − 8.7 − 27.4 − 0.4 − 0.6 + 10.9 − 0.5 + 11.4 −11.5 −147.7 − 137.9
         Nov − − + 26.3 − 1.5 − 1.9 − 4.0 + 2.2 + 0.3 − 18.7 − 17.1 − 0.2 − 16.9 − 1.6 + 46.5 + 34.2
    
Foreign  subsidiaries End of year or month *
  
2008 38 116 594.9 244.9 183.1 85.5 97.6 61.8 267.8 196.5 42.2 154.3 71.3 82.2 −
2009 36 97 474.1 205.4 157.0 87.4 69.6 48.4 217.0 154.7 38.7 115.9 62.4 51.7 −
2010 37 93 495.1 220.9 178.7 98.8 79.9 42.1 218.3 168.8 37.7 131.2 49.5 55.9 −
2011          Feb 37 94 490.1 221.5 182.1 100.5 81.6 39.4 215.9 165.3 37.4 127.9 50.6 52.7 −
         Mar 37 94 484.4 219.4 180.3 100.2 80.1 39.1 214.5 164.5 36.3 128.3 49.9 50.5 −
         Apr 36 93 485.9 224.5 184.9 100.7 84.2 39.5 211.9 162.8 35.4 127.4 49.1 49.5 −
         May 36 93 495.2 225.8 186.6 99.7 86.8 39.3 214.2 165.7 35.9 129.8 48.5 55.1 −
         June 36 93 481.8 216.0 177.0 99.1 77.9 39.0 213.1 165.1 36.5 128.6 47.9 52.8 −
         July 35 91 480.7 211.3 172.8 100.2 72.7 38.5 215.9 167.3 36.6 130.7 48.6 53.5 −
         Aug 35 89 478.6 220.9 182.5 103.0 79.5 38.4 207.9 160.4 36.4 124.0 47.5 49.7 −
         Sep 35 89 493.1 225.6 188.5 107.1 81.4 37.1 214.2 167.9 36.6 131.3 46.2 53.3 −
         Oct 35 88 486.8 221.4 185.0 106.8 78.2 36.3 212.4 166.8 36.5 130.3 45.6 53.0 −
         Nov 35 88 491.6 225.4 188.8 107.2 81.6 36.6 212.1 167.0 36.6 130.3 45.1 54.1 −
Changes *
2009 − 2 − 19 −120.2 − 39.8 − 26.9 + 1.9 − 28.8 − 12.9 − 50.0 − 41.1 − 3.5 − 37.6 − 8.9 − 30.4 −
2010 + 1 − 4 + 9.2 + 9.0 + 17.8 + 11.4 + 6.4 − 8.8 − 3.8 + 9.2 − 1.1 + 10.3 −12.9 + 3.9 −
2011          Mar − − − 3.3 − 0.8 − 1.0 − 0.3 − 0.7 + 0.2 − 0.3 + 0.3 − 1.2 + 1.5 − 0.7 − 2.1 −
         Apr − 1 − 1 + 4.4 + 6.7 + 5.6 + 0.5 + 5.2 + 1.1 − 1.4 − 0.6 − 0.8 + 0.2 − 0.8 − 0.9 −
         May − − + 6.1 − 0.2 + 0.6 − 1.0 + 1.6 − 0.8 + 0.7 + 1.4 + 0.5 + 0.9 − 0.6 + 5.5 −
         June − − − 13.0 − 9.6 − 9.3 − 0.6 − 8.7 − 0.2 − 1.1 − 0.6 + 0.6 − 1.1 − 0.6 − 2.3 −
         July − 1 − 2 − 3.5 − 5.6 − 4.8 + 1.1 − 5.9 − 0.8 + 1.5 + 0.8 + 0.1 + 0.7 + 0.6 + 0.7 −
         Aug − − 2 − 0.8 + 10.2 + 10.1 + 2.9 + 7.2 + 0.1 − 7.3 − 6.2 − 0.2 − 6.0 − 1.1 − 3.7 −
         Sep − − + 10.2 + 2.3 + 4.4 + 4.1 + 0.4 − 2.1 + 4.6 + 5.8 + 0.2 + 5.7 − 1.2 + 3.3 −
         Oct − − 1 − 3.4 − 2.8 − 2.5 − 0.3 − 2.2 − 0.3 − 0.5 + 0.2 − 0.1 + 0.3 − 0.7 − 0.1 −
         Nov − − + 1.3 + 2.1 + 2.5 + 0.4 + 2.1 − 0.3 − 1.7 − 1.3 + 0.1 − 1.4 − 0.4 + 0.9 −
*In this table “foreign“ also includes the country of domicile of the foreign branches the flow figures for the foreign subsidiaries.) The figures for the latest date are
and foreign subsidiaries. Statistical revisions have been eliminated from the changes. always to be regarded as provisional; subsequent revisions, which appear in the
(Breaks owing to changes in the reporting population have not been eliminated from following Monthly Report, are not specially marked. 1Several branches in a given

Deutsche Bundesbank
41  Monthly Report
February 2012
IV  Banks
  
      
  
Deposits Other  liabilities 6,7 
of banks (MFIs) of non-banks (non-MFIs)
German non-banks 4 
Money
market of whichpaper Derivativeand debt financial
Medium Working instruments
securities
and out- capital in the
German Foreign Short- long- Foreign stand- and own trading
Total Total banks Total Total term term ing 5 funds Total portfolio   Period banks non-banks
End of year or month * Foreign  branches
  
1,446.1 1,070.4 554.3 516.1 375.7 45.0 36.5 8.5 330.7 126.6 35.6 107.2 − 2008
1,125.9 798.0 449.6 348.4 327.9 37.4 33.8 3.5 290.5 157.5 33.9 144.4 − 20091,131.3 751.9 398.2 353.7 379.4 44.9 39.2 5.7 334.5 187.1 34.7 873.3 648.7 2010
1,150.3 752.8 387.7 365.0 397.5 45.1 39.8 5.3 352.4 188.4 35.0 667.8 582.3 2011          Feb 
1,092.3 719.1 379.7 339.4 373.2 41.2 36.0 5.3 331.9 183.0 34.5 670.8 581.5          Mar 
1,111.1 737.1 397.3 339.8 374.0 39.8 34.6 5.2 334.1 177.5 34.3 734.4 636.6          Apr 
1,134.5 761.8 394.7 367.1 372.7 40.4 35.1 5.3 332.3 172.7 36.6 679.5 594.1          May1,090.2 715.1 384.0 331.0 375.2 40.2 35.0 5.2 334.9 163.3 36.9 671.8 594.0          June
1,099.1 724.7 386.4 338.2 374.5 38.7 33.4 5.2 335.8 162.7 37.1 729.1 653.2          July
1,148.4 780.4 404.2 376.2 368.0 39.0 33.8 5.2 328.9 153.9 37.2 842.3 766.3          Aug 1,212.6 826.7 413.9 412.8 385.9 38.0 32.6 5.4 347.9 156.2 37.7 1,039.3 955.4          Sep 
1,163.5 774.3 392.6 381.7 389.2 39.6 34.1 5.5 349.6 140.0 38.1 894.4 812.0          Oct 
1,172.8 782.0 403.3 378.7 390.8 36.9 31.3 5.6 353.9 141.3 38.3 938.8 843.1          Nov 
Changes *
− 312.0 −267.8 −104.7 −163.1 − 44.2 − 7.6 − 2.6 − 5.0 − 36.6 + 30.9 − 1.7 + 34.9 − 2009
− 34.9 − 65.3 − 50.8 − 14.5 + 30.3 + 7.5 + 5.4 + 2.2 + 22.8 + 29.7 + 0.8 + 700.0 − 2010
− 44.6 − 26.7 − 8.0 − 18.7 − 17.9 − 3.9 − 3.8 − 0.1 − 14.0 − 5.3 − 0.5 + 8.2 − 0.8 2011          Mar 
+ 35.5 + 26.9 + 17.6 + 9.3 + 8.6 − 1.4 − 1.4 − 0.1 + 10.0 − 5.5 − 0.2 + 69.8 + 55.1          Apr 
+ 9.4 + 17.6 − 2.6 + 20.1 − 8.2 + 0.6 + 0.5 + 0.1 − 8.8 − 4.8 + 2.3 − 61.4 − 42.5          May− 41.1 − 45.4 − 10.7 − 34.7 + 4.3 − 0.2 − 0.1 − 0.1 + 4.5 − 9.4 + 0.3 − 5.6 − 0.1          June
− 0.0 + 5.0 + 2.4 + 2.6 − 5.0 − 1.5 − 1.5 − 0.0 − 3.4 − 0.6 + 0.2 + 52.7 + 59.2          July
+ 54.7 + 58.4 + 17.7 + 40.6 − 3.6 + 0.4 + 0.4 − 0.0 − 4.0 − 8.8 + 0.1 + 115.4 + 113.1          Aug + 34.9 + 29.2 + 9.8 + 19.4 + 5.7 − 1.0 − 1.2 + 0.2 + 6.7 + 2.3 + 0.6 + 184.1 + 189.1          Sep 
− 31.9 − 42.0 − 21.3 − 20.7 + 10.1 + 1.5 + 1.5 + 0.1 + 8.6 − 16.2 + 0.4 − 137.0 − 143.4          Oct 
− 11.0 − 3.6 + 10.6 − 14.2 − 7.4 − 2.7 − 2.8 + 0.1 − 4.7 + 1.3 + 0.2 + 35.8 + 31.1          Nov 
  
  
End of year or month * Foreign  subsidiaries
  
453.7 277.7 145.1 132.7 176.0 32.8 24.1 8.7 143.2 57.7 30.5 52.9 − 2008
377.6 218.5 125.4 93.1 159.1 37.0 29.6 7.4 122.1 33.3 24.3 38.9 − 2009387.4 221.1 136.4 84.7 166.3 31.0 23.6 7.3 135.3 28.9 31.8 46.9 − 2010
386.1 218.4 131.5 86.8 167.7 31.3 23.9 7.4 136.4 26.7 30.4 47.0 − 2011          Feb 
384.9 218.8 132.0 86.8 166.1 31.1 23.9 7.2 135.0 24.7 30.1 44.7 −          Mar 
387.2 223.7 130.6 93.1 163.4 31.1 23.8 7.3 132.3 24.1 29.8 44.8 −          Apr 
393.9 232.0 139.8 92.2 161.9 29.8 22.4 7.3 132.1 24.7 30.5 46.1 −          May
384.4 222.0 134.2 87.8 162.5 30.2 22.9 7.3 132.2 24.6 30.5 42.3 −          June
379.0 220.6 133.7 86.9 158.5 30.8 23.4 7.4 127.7 25.5 30.6 45.6 −          July
377.4 218.3 131.1 87.2 159.1 30.6 23.7 7.0 128.5 25.6 30.4 45.2 −          Aug 
390.8 227.3 134.3 93.0 163.5 30.8 23.8 7.0 132.8 25.6 30.6 46.1 −          Sep 
384.5 223.7 135.1 88.7 160.8 30.1 23.1 6.9 130.7 25.1 30.6 46.6 −          Oct 
388.1 227.8 136.5 91.3 160.3 29.5 22.5 7.0 130.8 25.3 31.2 47.0 −          Nov 
Changes *
− 76.0 − 59.1 − 19.7 − 39.5 − 16.9 + 4.2 + 5.5 − 1.4 − 21.1 − 24.3 − 6.2 − 13.6 − 2009
+ 1.5 − 1.7 + 11.0 − 12.7 + 3.2 − 6.0 − 5.9 − 0.1 + 9.2 − 4.4 + 7.5 + 4.6 − 2010
+ 0.7 + 1.3 + 0.5 + 0.8 − 0.6 − 0.2 − 0.1 − 0.1 − 0.4 − 2.0 − 0.3 − 1.7 − 2011          Mar 
+ 4.8 + 6.1 − 1.4 + 7.5 − 1.3 + 0.0 − 0.1 + 0.1 − 1.3 − 0.5 − 0.3 + 0.5 −          Apr 
+ 4.3 + 7.1 + 9.2 − 2.1 − 2.8 − 1.4 − 1.4 − 0.0 − 1.4 + 0.5 + 0.7 + 0.5 −          May
− 9.1 − 9.9 − 5.7 − 4.2 + 0.8 + 0.5 + 0.5 − 0.0 + 0.3 − 0.1 − 0.0 − 3.8 −          June
− 6.9 − 2.2 − 0.4 − 1.8 − 4.7 + 0.5 + 0.5 + 0.1 − 5.3 + 0.8 + 0.1 + 2.5 −          July
− 0.7 − 1.8 − 2.6 + 0.8 + 1.1 − 0.1 + 0.3 − 0.4 + 1.2 + 0.1 − 0.3 + 0.1 −          Aug 
+ 9.7 + 7.3 + 3.2 + 4.1 + 2.4 + 0.1 + 0.1 + 0.0 + 2.3 + 0.1 + 0.2 + 0.2 −          Sep 
− 4.0 − 2.4 + 0.8 − 3.2 − 1.6 − 0.7 − 0.6 − 0.1 − 0.9 − 0.5 − 0.0 + 1.2 −          Oct 
+ 0.8 + 2.8 + 1.4 + 1.3 − 2.0 − 0.6 − 0.7 + 0.1 − 1.3 + 0.2 + 0.7 − 0.3 −          Nov 
country of domicile are regarded as a single branch. 2Treasury bills, Treasury securities. 5Issues of negotiable and non-negotiable debt securities and money
discount paper and other money market paper, debt securities. 3Including own debt market paper. 6 Including subordinated liabilities. 7 See also Table IV.2, footnote  1. 
securities. 4Excluding subordinated liabilities and non-negotiable debt

Deutsche Bundesbank
42  Monthly Report
February 2012
V  Minimum reserves
 
1  Reserve ratios
Germany Euro area
 
% of liabilities subject to reserve requirements % of reserve base  1 
Sight Time
Applicable from liabilities liabilities Savings deposits Applicable from Ratio
1995  Aug 1 2    2    1.5    1999  Jan 1 2    
 2012  Jan 18 1    
 
  
1Article 3 of the Regulation of the European Central Bank on the application of
minimum reserves (excluding liabilities to which a reserve ratio of 0% applies pur-
suant to Article 4 (1)). 
 
  
2  Reserve maintenance in Germany up to the end of 1998
− pursuant to the Minimum Reserves Order of the Bundesbank 
 
DM million
Liabilities subject to reserve requirements Excess reserves 4 
Monthly Required % of the
average 1 Total Sight liabilities Time liabilities Savings deposits reserves  2 Level Deficiencies Actual reserves 3 required  reserves
1995          Dec 2,066,565 579,337 519,456 967,772 36,492 37,337 845 2.3 3.1
1996          Dec 2,201,464 655,483 474,342 1,071,639 38,671 39,522 851 2.2 4.3
1997          Dec 2,327,879 734,986 476,417 1,116,477 40,975 41,721 745 1.8 3.3
1998          Dec 2,576,889 865,444 564,878 1,146,567 45,805 46,432 627 1.4 3.8
1Pursuant to sections 5 to 7 of the Minimum Reserves Order. 2Amount after tutions subject to reserve requirements on their giro accounts at the Bundesbank.
applying the reserve ratios to the liabilities subject to reserve requirements (section 5 4 Actual reserves less required reserves. 
(1) of the Minimum Reserves Order). 3Average credit balances of the credit insti-
  
3  Reserve maintenance in the euro area
− from 1999, pursuant to the ECB Regulation on the application of minimum reserves in accordance with
Article 19.1 of the Statute of the ESCB 
 
Maintenance Required reserves
period before deduction Required reserves
beginning in 1 of lump-sum Lump-sum after deduction of
Reserve base 2 allowance 3 allowance 4 lump-sum allowance Current account 5 Excess reserves 6 Deficiencies 7 
Euro area (€ billion)
 
2011          June 10,412.3 208.2 0.5 207.7 210.9 3.1 0.0
         July 10,464.9 209.3 0.5 208.8 211.5 2.7 0.0
         Aug 10,374.3 207.5 0.5 207.0 209.5 2.5 0.0
         Sep 10,330.1 206.6 0.5 206.1 208.7 2.6 0.0
         Oct 10,334.1 206.7 0.5 206.2 208.9 2.8 0.0
         Nov 10,412.4 208.2 0.5 207.7 212.2 4.5 0.0
         Dec  p 10,376.3 207.5 0.5 207.0 212.3 5.3 0.0
2012          Jan  p 10,382.1 103.8 0.5 103.3 ... ... ...
         Feb ... ... ... ... ... ... ...
Of which:  Germany (€ million)
2011          June 2,540,817 50,816 185 50,631 52,597 1,966 0
         July 2,552,960 51,059 185 50,874 52,734 1,860 1
         Aug 2,516,922 50,338 185 50,154 51,818 1,664 3
         Sep 2,532,338 50,647 184 50,463 52,154 1,691 0
         Oct 2,588,110 51,762 184 51,579 53,005 1,426 0
         Nov 2,664,713 53,294 184 53,111 54,403 1,292 1
         Dec  p 2,666,422 53,328 184 53,145 54,460 1,315 1
2012          Jan  p 2,712,641 27,126 182 26,944 ... ... ...
         Feb  p 2,649,840 26,498 183 26,315 ... ... ...
1From March 2004, the reserve maintenance period will start on the settlement day to the reserve base. 4Article 5 (2) of the Regulation of the European Central Bank on
of the main refinancing operation immediately following the meeting of the the application of minimum reserves. 5Average credit balances of the credit insti-
Governing Council of the ECB for which the monthly discussion of the monetary tutions at the national central banks. 6Average credit balances less required reserves
policy stance is scheduled. 2Article 3 of the Regulation of the European Central Bank after deduction of the lump-sum allowance. 7Required reserves after deduction of
on the application of minimum reserves (excluding liabilities to which a reserve ratio the lump-sum allowance. 
of 0% applies, pursuant to Article 4 (1)). 3Amount after applying the reserve ratios

Deutsche Bundesbank
43  Monthly Report
February 2012
VI Interest rates
 
1 ECB interest rates 2 Base rates
 
 
% per annum % per annum
Main refinancing Main refinancing
operations operations Base Base
Mar- Mar- rate rateginal ginal as per as per
Minimum Minimum
Applicable Deposit Fixed bid lending Applicable Deposit Fixed bid lending Applicable Civil Applicable Civilfrom facility rate rate facility from facility rate rate facility from Code  
1 from Code 1 
2002 Dec                  6 1.75 − 2.75 3.75 2008 July                  9 3.25 − 4.25 5.25 2002 Jan                1 2.57 2007 Jan                1 2.70
         Oct                  8 2.75 − 3.75 4.75          July                1 2.47          July                1 3.19
2003 Mar                  7 1.50 − 2.50 3.50          Oct                  9 3.25 3.75 − 4.25         June                  6 1.00 − 2.00 3.00          Nov                12 2.75 3.25 − 3.75 2003 Jan                1 1.97 2008 Jan                1 3.32
         Dec                10 2.00 2.50 − 3.00          July                1 1.22          July                1 3.19
2005 Dec                  6 1.25 − 2.25 3.25
2009 Jan                21 1.00 2.00 − 3.00 2004 Jan                1 1.14 2009 Jan                1 1.62
2006 Mar                  8 1.50 − 2.50 3.50          Mar                11 0.50 1.50 − 2.50          July                1 1.13          July                1 0.12         June                15 1.75 − 2.75 3.75          Apr                  8 0.25 1.25 − 2.25         Aug                  9 2.00 − 3.00 4.00          May                13 0.25 1.00 − 1.75 2005 Jan                1 1.21 2011 July                1 0.37         Oct                11 2.25 − 3.25 4.25          July                1 1.17
         Dec                13 2.50 − 3.50 4.50 2011 Apr                13 0.50 1.25 − 2.00 2012 Jan                1 0.12
         July                13 0.75 1.50 − 2.25 2006 Jan                1 1.37
2007 Mar                14 2.75 − 3.75 4.75          Nov                  9 0.50 1.25 − 2.00          July                1 1.95         June                13 3.00 − 4.00 5.00          Dez                14 0.25 1.00 − 1.75
1 Pursuant to section 247 of the Civil Code.  
 
  
3 Eurosystem monetary policy operations allotted through tenders 
*
 
 
Fixed rate tenders Variable rate tenders
Bid Allotment Minimum Weighted
amount amount Fixed rate bid rate Marginal rate  1 average rate
Date of Running for
settlement € million % per annum ... days
Main refinancing operations
2012 Jan                11 110,923 110,923 1.00−−−7
         Jan                18 126,877 126,877 1.00−−−7
         Jan                25 130,317 130,317 1.00−−−7
         Feb                  1 115,579 115,579 1.00−−−7
         Feb                  8 109,462 109,462 1.00−−−7
         Feb                15 142,751 142,751 1.00−−−7
Longer-term refinancing operations
2011 Dez                22 29,741 29,741 2 ... − − − 98
         Dez                22 489,191 489,191 2 ... − − − 1,134
2012 Jan                18 38,734 38,734 1.00−−− 2 8
         Jan                26 19,580 19,580 2 ... − − − 91
         Feb                15 14,325 14,325 1.00−−− 2 8
*Source: ECB. 1Lowest or highest interest rate at which funds were allotted or average minimum bid rate of the main refinancing operations over the life of this
collected. 2Interest payment on the maturity date; the rate will be fixed at the operation. 
 
  
4 Money market rates, by month
 
 
% per annum
Money market rates reported by Frankfurt banks  1 EURIBOR 3 
One-week One-month Six-month Nine-month Twelve- Three-month
Overnight money Three-month funds EONIA  2 funds funds funds funds funds month funds
Reporting Monthly Lowest and Monthly Lowest and
period averages highest rates averages highest rates Monthly averages
2011          July 0.95 0.50 − 1.45 1.55 1.44 − 1.63 1.01 1.32 1.42 1.60 1.82 1.99 2.18
         Aug 0.83 0.75 − 1.25 1.52 1.42 − 1.62 0.91 1.17 1.37 1.55 1.75 1.92 2.10
         Sep 0.93 0.75 − 1.70 1.49 1.42 − 1.57 1.01 1.13 1.35 1.54 1.74 1.90 2.07
         Oct 0.87 0.75 − 1.30 1.52 1.43 − 1.59 0.96 1.17 1.36 1.58 1.78 1.94 2.11
         Nov 0.70 0.50 − 1.30 1.44 1.33 − 1.60 0.79 0.95 1.23 1.48 1.71 1.88 2.04
         Dec 0.52 4 0.20 − 1.05 1.38 1.25 − 1.48 0.63 0.82 1.14 1.43 1.67 1.84 2.00
2012          Jan 0.28 0.20 − 0.38 1.17 1.00 − 1.35 0.38 0.49 0.84 1.22 1.50 1.69 1.84
1Money market rates are not fixed or quoted officially; the monthly averages act/360 method and published via Reuters. 3Euro Interbank Offered Rate:
computed from daily quotations are unweighted. 2Euro OverNight Index Average: unweighted average rate calculated by Reuters since 30 December 1998 according
weighted average overnight rate for interbank operations calculated by the European to the act/360 method. 4 At end-December, 0.25% to 0.75%. 
Central Bank since 4 January 1999 on the basis of real turnover according to the

Deutsche Bundesbank
44  Monthly Report
February 2012
VI Interest rates
 
5 Interest rates and volumes for outstanding amounts and new business of German banks (MFIs) *
(a) Outstanding amounts o
 
 
Households’ deposits Non-financial corporations’ deposits
with an agreed maturity of
up to 2 years over 2 years up to 2 years over 2 years
Effective Effective Effective Effective
End of interest rate 1 Volume 2 interest rate 1 Volume 2 interest rate 1 Volume 2 interest rate 1 Volume 2 
month % pa € million % pa € million % pa € million % pa € million
2010          Dec 1.57 123,875 2.41 213,208 1.02 98,840 3.83 22,637
2011          Jan 1.58 123,263 2.40 213,962 1.08 95,791 3.80 22,856
         Feb 1.58 123,712 2.40 215,243 1.10 96,346 3.80 22,983
         Mar 1.58 123,032 2.37 216,569 1.14 98,952 3.79 23,106
         Apr 1.61 125,585 2.36 217,665 1.25 100,520 3.76 23,816
         May 1.65 127,375 2.36 219,602 1.33 102,891 3.75 23,709
         June 1.68 128,443 2.36 220,838 1.41 100,866 3.74 23,964
         July 1.73 131,401 2.35 221,490 1.50 103,337 3.72 24,136
         Aug 1.78 132,093 2.35 222,091 1.52 107,467 3.71 24,181
         Sep 1.81 134,117 2.34 222,719 1.52 113,117 3.68 24,053
         Oct 1.84 134,147 2.34 222,983 1.55 114,045 3.67 23,951
         Nov 1.87 137,615 2.33 223,747 1.53 111,919 3.64 23,470
         Dec 1.87 139,689 2.32 227,249 1.50 108,518 3.60 23,384
 
 
Housing loans to households 3 Consumer credit and other loans to households  4, 5 
with a maturity of
over 1 year and over 1 year and
up to 1 year 6 up to 5 years over 5 years up to 1 year 6 up to 5 years over 5 years
Effective Effective Effective Effective Effective Effective
interest interest interest interest interest interest
End of rate 1 Volume 2 rate 1 Volume 2 rate 1 Volume 2 rate 1 Volume 2 rate 1 Volume 2 rate 1 Volume 2 
month % pa % pa % pa % pa % pa % pa € million € million € million € million € million € million
2010          Dec 3.99 5,369 3.97 26,563 4.64 927,171 8.14 68,321 5.73 70,042 5.70 312,604
2011          Jan 3.91 5,251 3.95 26,421 4.63 926,224 8.20 65,462 5.72 69,810 5.70 311,915
         Feb 3.82 5,036 3.92 26,475 4.62 926,667 8.20 64,486 5.70 69,108 5.69 312,164
         Mar 3.88 5,244 3.89 26,702 4.60 926,845 8.25 65,739 5.66 69,606 5.68 311,059
         Apr 3.95 5,202 3.88 26,839 4.59 927,168 8.22 63,985 5.64 69,778 5.68 312,376
         May 4.04 5,248 3.87 27,063 4.58 928,319 8.30 64,040 5.60 70,343 5.68 313,138
         June 4.13 5,203 3.86 27,213 4.58 929,355 8.46 66,552 5.56 69,359 5.68 312,069
         July 4.17 5,292 3.87 27,349 4.57 930,437 8.45 63,944 5.55 69,328 5.69 312,900
         Aug 4.20 5,315 3.86 27,537 4.56 931,968 8.52 63,858 5.67 74,147 5.68 313,504
         Sep 4.23 5,284 3.85 27,817 4.55 934,054 8.56 65,653 5.66 74,384 5.68 313,747
         Oct 4.21 5,240 3.83 27,897 4.54 935,360 8.59 64,981 5.59 73,804 5.68 313,742
         Nov 4.22 5,165 3.81 28,069 4.53 937,366 8.52 63,648 5.56 73,789 5.66 315,187
         Dec 4.15 5,302 3.78 28,122 4.51 937,764 8.52 64,520 5.51 73,322 5.65 313,944
  
Loans to non-financial corporations with a maturity of
up to 1 year 6 over 1 year and up to 5 years over 5 years
End of Volume 2 Volume 2 Volume 2 Effective interest rate 1 Effective interest rate 1 Effective interest rate 1 
month % pa € million % pa € million % pa € million
2010          Dec 3.82 128,142 3.66 133,617 3.86 555,314
2011          Jan 3.89 130,003 3.67 132,483 3.85 555,165
         Feb 3.88 133,863 3.68 133,024 3.86 557,886
         Mar 3.90 135,214 3.70 133,748 3.87 556,255
         Apr 3.96 134,351 3.75 130,873 3.90 558,075
         May 3.99 134,221 3.78 130,465 3.91 558,898
         June 4.15 137,565 3.86 127,937 3.94 560,966
         July 4.09 137,256 3.95 127,958 3.98 561,830
         Aug 4.12 135,305 4.04 129,991 3.98 562,983
         Sep 4.16 139,120 4.03 129,919 3.98 561,294
         Oct 4.11 137,986 4.02 128,882 3.97 565,182
         Nov 4.02 139,610 3.97 128,882 3.96 566,756
         Dec 4.00 133,628 3.93 128,385 3.93 567,783
*The MFI interest rate statistics are based on the interest rates applied by MFIs and agreed interest rates or as narrowly defined effective rates. Both calculation methods
the related volumes of euro-denominated deposits and loans to households and cover all interest payments on deposits and loans but not any other related charges
non-financial corporations domiciled in the euro area. The household sector which may occur for enquiries, administration, preparation of the documents,comprises individuals (including sole proprietors) and non-profit institutions serving guarantees and credit insurance. 2Data based on monthly balance sheet
households. Non-financial corporations include all enterprises other than insurance statistics. 3Secured and unsecured loans for home purchase, including building and
companies, banks and other financial institutions. The interest rate statistics gathered home improvements; including loans granted by building and loan associations andon a harmonised basis in the euro area from January 2003 are being collected in interim credits as well as transmitted loans granted by the reporting agents in theirGermany on a sample basis. The most recent figures are in all cases to be regarded as own name and for their own account. 4Consumer credit is defined as loans granted
provisional. Subsequent revisions appearing in the following Monthly Report are not for the purpose of personal use in the consumption of goods and services. 5For the
specially marked. Further information on the MFI interest rate statistics can be found purpose of these statistics, other loans are loans granted for other purposes such ason the Bundesbank’s website (Statistics / Reporting system / Banking statistics / MFI business, debt consolidation, education etc. 6Including overdrafts (see also
interest rate statistics). oThe statistics on outstanding amounts are collected at the footnotes 13 to 15 p 47
   ). 
end of the month. 1The effective interest rates are calculated either as annualised

Deutsche Bundesbank
45  Monthly Report
February 2012
VI Interest rates
 
5 Interest rates and volumes for outstanding amounts and new business of German banks (MFIs) *  (cont’d)
(b) New business +
 
 
Households’ deposits
with an agreed maturity of redeemable at notice of  8 
Overnight up to 1 year over 2 years up to 3 months over 3 months over 1 year and up to 2 years
Effective Effective Effective Effective Effective Effective
interest interest interest interest interest interest
Reporting rate 1 Volume 2 rate 1 Volume 7 rate 1 Volume 7 rate 1 Volume 7 rate 1 Volume 2 rate 1 Volume 2 
period % pa % pa % pa % pa % pa % pa € million € million € million € million € million € million
2010          Dec 
0.71 714,112 1.06 13,862 1.99 1,075 2.13 2,300 1.39 512,222 1.82 105,583
2011          Jan 0.72 712,891 1.29 17,554 2.14 1,570 2.49 2,259 1.34 514,833 1.83 105,207
         Feb 0.74 714,176 1.24 15,659 2.21 1,621 2.67 2,278 1.36 516,856 1.84 105,268
         Mar 0.75 714,781 1.18 13,674 2.20 1,980 2.42 2,293 1.37 517,707 1.85 105,429
         Apr 0.74 720,878 1.36 15,283 2.28 1,988 2.78 2,473 1.40 517,337 1.87 104,640
         May 0.79 721,441 1.36 15,015 2.31 1,980 2.81 3,088 1.40 515,120 1.88 104,562
         June 0.81 723,542 1.40 14,485 2.61 1,707 2.79 2,458 1.43 513,314 1.89 104,371
         July 0.87 729,146 1.55 17,846 2.53 2,140 2.80 2,398 1.42 512,173 1.90 104,420
         Aug 0.90 728,134 1.53 17,115 2.50 1,828 2.80 1,953 1.43 510,749 1.91 104,307
         Sep 0.91 729,249 1.53 18,506 2.46 1,244 2.70 1,530 1.47 509,809 1.92 103,815
         Oct 0.92 735,055 1.60 17,069 2.28 1,938 2.74 1,711 1.48 509,641 1.94 103,670
         Nov 0.91 748,146 1.57 16,851 2.17 2,261 2.83 1,934 1.43 510,106 1.94 101,829
         Dec 0.91 747,614 1.38 17,013 2.23 1,980 2.77 2,051 1.45 515,587 1.94 101,085
 
 
Non-financial corporations’ deposits
with an agreed maturity of
Overnight up to 1 year over 1 year and up to 2 years over 2 years
Effective Effective Effective Effective
Reporting interest rate 1 Volume 2 interest rate 1 Volume 7 interest rate 1 Volume 7 interest rate 1 Volume 7 
period % pa € million % pa € million % pa € million % pa € million
2010          Dec 
0.46 258,245 0.68 51,978 2.60 452 2.81 811
2011          Jan 0.53 253,658 0.77 43,391 1.72 383 2.63 388
         Feb 0.47 242,018 0.87 31,168 1.90 706 3.02 783
         Mar 0.48 245,287 0.90 35,003 2.03 430 2.48 448
         Apr 0.58 243,324 1.12 33,097 2.09 625 2.55 845
         May 0.58 245,993 1.20 37,292 2.31 433 2.94 472
         June 0.62 243,252 1.25 36,331 2.08 434 2.63 465
         July 0.63 243,727 1.29 39,877 2.22 774 2.77 574
         Aug 0.63 246,151 1.23 38,033 2.53 428 2.55 515
         Sep 0.66 249,341 1.24 34,917 2.09 411 2.11 415
         Oct 0.64 254,666 1.24 36,857 2.08 621 3.45 2,007
         Nov 0.60 257,153 1.04 40,868 2.09 576 2.21 494
         Dec 0.55 264,201 1.01 41,975 2.10 766 2.36 841
 
 
Loans to households
Other loans to households with an initial rate fixation of  5 
of which loans to sole proprietors 10 
floating rate or over 1 year and floating rate or over 1 year and
up to 1 year 9 up to 5 years over 5 years up to 1 year  9 up to 5 years over 5 years
Effective Effective Effective Effective Effective Effectiveinterest interest interest interest interest interest
Reporting rate 
1 Volume 7 rate 1 Volume 7 rate 1 Volume 7 rate 1 Volume 7 rate 1 Volume 7 rate 1 Volume 7 
period % pa % pa % pa % pa % pa % pa € million € million € million € million € million € million
2010          Dec 
2.58 5,582 4.15 1,326 3.98 3,534 2.67 3,302 4.29 889 3.96 1,781
2011          Jan 2.58 5,362 4.13 1,387 4.15 2,234 2.62 3,557 4.22 1,007 4.16 1,295
         Feb 2.53 4,860 4.56 1,039 4.27 2,456 2.62 2,727 4.68 676 4.28 1,411
         Mar 2.63 5,036 4.56 1,328 4.45 2,880 2.70 3,273 4.67 988 4.44 1,711
         Apr 2.81 4,744 4.56 1,175 4.61 2,360 2.86 3,116 4.66 844 4.56 1,342
         May 2.93 3,980 4.71 1,150 4.63 2,605 3.02 2,670 4.81 795 4.64 1,381
         June 3.04 4,559 4.42 1,092 4.62 2,391 3.17 3,034 4.64 654 4.62 1,377
         July 3.13 5,314 4.68 1,599 4.54 2,613 3.24 3,393 4.76 740 4.57 1,486
         Aug 3.14 4,211 4.81 1,087 4.36 2,051 3.22 2,473 4.98 830 4.34 1,152
         Sep 3.05 4,332 4.69 1,122 4.09 2,576 3.17 2,638 4.80 854 4.07 1,556
         Oct 3.06 5,025 4.54 1,044 4.03 2,524 3.17 2,978 4.65 813 4.00 1,372
         Nov 3.04 3,631 4.59 992 3.82 2,109 3.16 2,318 4.78 785 3.76 1,336
         Dec 2.78 4,968 4.51 1,233 3.77 3,272 3.08 2,987 4.69 948 3.74 1,878
For footnotes * and 1 to 6, see p 44  .+In the case of deposits with an agreed for the sake of simplicity. This means that all outstanding deposit and lending
maturity and all loans excluding revolving loans and overdrafts, credit card debt, new business at the end of the month has to be incorporated in the calculation of averagebusiness covers all new agreements between households or non-financial corpor- rates of interest. 7Estimated. The volume of new business is extrapolated to form
ations and the bank. The interest rates are calculated as volume-weighted average the underlying total using the Horvitz-Thompson estimator. 8Including non-financial
rates across all new agreements concluded during the reporting month. In the case corporations’ deposits; including fidelity and growth premia. 9Excluding over-
of overnight deposits, deposits redeemable at notice, revolving loans and overdrafts, drafts. 10 Collected from June 2010. 
credit card debt, new business is collected in the same way as outstanding amounts

Deutsche Bundesbank
46  Monthly Report
February 2012
VI Interest rates
 
5 Interest rates and volumes for outstanding amounts and new business of German banks (MFIs) *  (cont’d)
(b) New business +
 
 
Loans to households (cont’d)
Consumer credit with an initial rate fixation of  4 
Total floating rate or over 1 year and
Total up to 1 year 9 up to 5 years over 5 years (including charges)
Effective Effective Effective Effective Annual percentage
Reporting Volume 7 Volume 7 Volume 7 Volume 7 rate of charge  11 interest rate 1 interest rate 1 interest rate 1 interest rate 1 
period % pa % pa € million % pa € million % pa € million % pa € million
Total loans
2010          Dec 6.34 5.82 4,400 3.16 771 5.27 1,943 7.66 1,686
2011          Jan 6.99 6.26 5,179 3.36 1,042 5.51 2,029 8.43 2,108
         Feb 6.93 6.20 5,233 3.30 958 5.43 2,167 8.30 2,108
         Mar 6.99 6.37 6,134 3.52 945 5.57 2,652 8.28 2,537
         Apr 6.86 6.20 5,700 3.28 1,029 5.55 2,417 8.23 2,254
         May 7.11 6.39 6,269 3.68 1,086 5.69 2,625 8.25 2,558
         June 7.00 6.34 5,203 3.42 879 5.72 2,258 8.27 2,066
         July 7.07 6.30 5,699 3.47 1,164 5.75 2,307 8.35 2,228
         Aug 7.09 6.35 5,764 3.56 1,039 5.74 2,364 8.19 2,361
         Sep 7.11 6.45 5,323 3.63 826 5.69 2,243 8.24 2,254
         Oct 6.93 6.35 5,498 3.36 1,042 5.80 2,189 8.27 2,267
         Nov 6.63 6.12 5,317 3.68 1,000 5.63 2,293 7.87 2,024
         Dec 6.23 5.77 4,659 3.08 970 5.59 2,086 7.64 1,603
of which: collateralised loans 12
2010          Dec . 4.72 475 2.78 104 6.42 198 3.95 173
2011          Jan . 4.50 430 2.67 119 5.92 176 4.25 135
         Feb . 4.12 449 2.48 181 5.82 152 4.44 116
         Mar . 4.84 429 2.72 105 6.24 182 4.61 142
         Apr . 4.88 440 2.84 116 6.17 200 4.69 124
         May . 4.85 527 3.04 168 6.40 207 4.74 152
         June . 5.16 423 3.14 109 6.52 201 4.69 113
         July . 5.01 466 3.24 130 6.26 215 4.69 121
         Aug . 4.81 461 2.98 119 5.99 207 4.60 135
         Sep . 4.63 417 2.88 111 5.81 191 4.35 115
         Oct . 4.41 422 2.91 117 5.61 181 4.09 124
         Nov . 4.22 434 2.84 112 5.30 187 3.85 135
         Dec . 4.19 454 2.93 161 5.55 172 3.92 121
 
 
Loans to households (cont’d)
Housing loans with an initial rate fixation of  3 
Total floating rate or over 1 year and over 5 years and
Total up to 1 year 9 up to 5 years up to 10 years over 10 years (including charges)
Effective Effective Effective Effective Effective Annual percentage
Reporting Volume 7 Volume 7 Volume 7 Volume 7 Volume 7 rate of charge  11 interest rate  1 interest rate  1 interest rate  1 interest rate  1 interest rate  1 
period % pa % pa % pa % pa % pa % pa € million € million € million € million € million
Total loans
2010          Dec 3.76 3.62 17,749 3.38 2,524 3.31 2,659 3.70 7,049 3.77 5,517
2011          Jan 3.82 3.74 17,098 3.38 3,444 3.43 2,803 3.85 6,692 4.06 4,159
         Feb 3.99 3.92 14,711 3.56 2,101 3.60 2,470 4.02 5,832 4.15 4,308
         Mar 4.07 3.99 17,526 3.49 2,777 3.70 2,793 4.10 6,742 4.26 5,214
         Apr 4.18 4.09 16,705 3.51 2,760 3.73 2,601 4.18 6,626 4.50 4,718
         May 4.23 4.16 16,448 3.82 2,503 3.84 2,531 4.23 6,594 4.41 4,820
         June 4.18 4.11 13,933 3.78 2,189 3.82 2,051 4.19 5,334 4.32 4,359
         July 4.12 4.02 15,868 3.68 3,131 3.82 2,395 4.13 6,067 4.25 4,275
         Aug 4.06 3.98 15,599 3.89 2,277 3.69 2,348 4.01 6,041 4.13 4,933
         Sep 3.85 3.75 15,331 3.77 2,112 3.52 2,146 3.80 5,951 3.80 5,122
         Oct 3.70 3.61 16,291 3.68 2,782 3.39 2,329 3.61 6,261 3.67 4,919
         Nov 3.65 3.56 16,139 3.74 1,960 3.31 2,371 3.58 6,429 3.58 5,379
         Dec 3.61 3.51 16,758 3.67 2,283 3.24 2,450 3.54 6,571 3.54 5,454
of which: collateralised loans 12
2010          Dec . 3.57 8,982 3.28 1,055 3.29 1,401 3.62 3,753 3.76 2,773
2011          Jan . 3.66 8,664 3.22 1,431 3.36 1,477 3.76 3,560 3.98 2,196
         Feb . 3.86 7,820 3.43 916 3.58 1,366 3.96 3,235 4.07 2,303
         Mar . 3.92 8,740 3.34 1,077 3.64 1,439 4.02 3,544 4.17 2,680
         Apr . 4.04 8,763 3.33 1,330 3.69 1,323 4.09 3,440 4.49 2,670
         May . 4.09 8,592 3.65 1,093 3.78 1,342 4.16 3,638 4.33 2,519
         June . 4.03 7,153 3.64 994 3.73 1,055 4.11 2,874 4.25 2,230
         July . 3.94 8,563 3.53 1,652 3.77 1,280 4.05 3,296 4.18 2,335
         Aug . 3.91 8,077 3.72 1,009 3.60 1,236 3.93 3,239 4.12 2,593
         Sep . 3.68 7,509 3.63 900 3.40 1,116 3.73 3,015 3.77 2,478
         Oct . 3.56 8,089 3.58 1,143 3.33 1,208 3.54 3,318 3.69 2,420
         Nov . 3.47 8,174 3.49 893 3.24 1,194 3.51 3,334 3.54 2,753
         Dec . 3.43 8,248 3.52 999 3.19 1,267 3.45 3,377 3.48 2,605
For footnotes * and 1 to 6, see p 44  . For footnotes +, 7 to 10, see p 45  . For related charges which may occur for enquiries, administration, preparation of the
footnote 12, see p 47  .11Annual percentage rate of charge, which contains other documents, guarantees and credit insurance. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
47  Monthly Report
February 2012
VI Interest rates
 
5 Interest rates and volumes for outstanding amounts and new business of German banks (MFIs) *  (cont’d)
(b) New business +
 
 
Loans to households (cont’d) Loans to non-financial corporations
of which of which
Revolving loans 13 Revolving loans 13 
and overdrafts 14 Revolving loans 13 Extended and overdrafts 14 Revolving loans 13 
credit card debt 15 and overdrafts 14 credit card debt credit card debt 15 and overdrafts 14 
Effective Effective Effective Effective Effective
Reporting Volume 16 Volume 16 Volume 2 Volume 16 Volume 16 interest rate 1 interest rate 1 interest rate 1 interest rate 1 interest rate 1 
period % pa € million % pa € million % pa € million % pa € million % pa € million
2010          Dec 
9.95 46,527 10.04 41,264 14.85 3,266 4.86 62,512 4.87 62,342
2011          Jan 9.99 44,746 10.11 39,415 14.94 3,263 4.91 64,520 4.92 64,347
         Feb 10.09 43,724 10.19 38,548 14.88 3,250 4.91 67,762 4.92 67,580
         Mar 10.08 44,548 10.19 39,295 14.88 3,251 4.87 68,034 4.89 67,799
         Apr 10.08 42,907 10.20 37,543 14.94 3,281 4.95 66,106 4.96 65,901
         May 10.16 43,083 10.30 37,679 14.96 3,315 4.91 65,330 4.93 65,099
         June 10.18 44,814 10.27 39,450 14.94 3,362 5.07 69,283 5.08 69,071
         July 10.23 42,851 10.30 37,415 15.04 3,425 4.91 67,586 4.93 67,417
         Aug 10.30 43,085 10.36 37,638 15.11 3,455 4.96 66,000 4.97 65,817
         Sep 10.30 45,279 10.37 39,701 15.17 3,506 5.09 71,055 5.11 70,844
         Oct 10.35 44,961 10.43 38,918 14.72 3,974 5.05 67,933 5.07 67,720
         Nov 10.31 43,494 10.31 37,586 14.71 3,957 4.90 68,235 4.92 68,016
         Dec 10.29 44,535 10.32 38,518 14.71 4,004 4.88 64,670 4.89 64,482
 
 
Loans to non-financial corporations (cont’d)
Loans up to €1 million with an initial rate fixation of  17 Loans over €1 million with an initial rate fixation of  17 
floating rate or over 1 year and floating rate or over 1 year and
up to 1 year 9 up to 5 years over 5 years up to 1 year  9 up to 5 years over 5 years
Effective Effective Effective Effective Effective Effectiveinterest interest interest interest interest interest
Reporting rate 
1 Volume 7 rate 1 Volume 7 rate 1 Volume 7 rate 1 Volume 7 rate 1 Volume 7 rate 1 Volume 7 
period % pa % pa % pa % pa % pa % pa € million € million € million € million € million € million
Total loans
2010          Dec 3.77 7,119 4.24 1,472 3.81 1,798 2.78 52,023 3.26 3,889 3.56 7,562
2011          Jan 3.36 6,823 4.25 1,315 3.96 1,288 2.50 44,418 3.34 2,283 3.95 4,794
         Feb 3.59 5,971 4.51 1,247 4.08 1,211 2.69 34,963 4.05 1,522 3.98 3,950
         Mar 3.69 7,429 4.54 1,537 4.28 1,426 2.69 46,728 3.84 2,216 3.97 5,171
         Apr 3.63 6,876 4.63 1,303 4.37 1,254 2.87 45,450 3.82 2,177 4.70 5,871
         May 3.95 6,606 4.71 1,378 4.36 1,362 2.91 38,493 3.67 1,083 4.10 4,057
         June 3.93 6,808 4.64 1,264 4.33 1,143 3.06 44,897 3.62 2,839 4.23 4,181
         July 3.87 7,200 4.70 1,380 4.33 1,382 3.02 47,966 3.79 2,894 4.18 5,167
         Aug 3.97 6,317 4.75 1,470 4.10 1,181 3.01 36,905 3.92 1,639 3.99 4,143
         Sep 3.99 6,991 4.60 1,459 3.87 1,244 2.96 44,993 3.61 3,111 3.69 4,992
         Oct 3.91 7,207 4.62 1,344 3.82 1,141 3.16 47,753 3.91 1,777 3.54 4,837
         Nov 3.92 6,655 4.69 1,407 3.68 1,320 2.89 38,491 3.67 1,894 3.61 5,240
         Dec 3.92 7,295 4.58 1,909 3.58 1,695 2.93 49,227 3.71 2,955 3.59 7,554
of which: collateralised loans 12
2010          Dec 4.15 1,477 3.72 196 3.57 503 2.82 9,561 2.74 1,206 3.41 1,665
2011          Jan 3.59 1,605 3.70 209 3.86 386 2.51 9,039 3.38 950 4.09 1,135
         Feb 3.65 1,231 4.19 146 3.86 311 2.53 6,812 4.26 624 4.06 1,070
         Mar 3.69 1,426 4.25 194 4.12 388 2.75 9,342 3.70 743 4.09 976
         Apr 3.76 1,476 4.37 199 4.20 337 2.76 9,355 3.88 922 4.60 2,009
         May 4.11 1,312 4.53 172 4.18 363 2.95 7,064 3.73 221 4.12 946
         June 4.00 1,343 4.40 156 4.05 321 3.08 8,797 3.54 1,049 4.30 1,271
         July 4.04 1,536 4.41 190 4.04 428 3.13 10,905 3.52 999 4.36 1,227
         Aug 4.17 1,230 4.38 147 3.96 289 3.06 6,690 4.06 531 3.88 917
         Sep 4.06 1,346 4.09 139 3.61 333 3.16 9,236 3.62 1,071 3.71 1,056
         Oct 3.93 1,454 3.82 160 3.57 360 3.15 10,313 4.37 551 3.51 1,452
         Nov 4.05 1,171 3.92 142 3.41 406 3.02 6,850 3.97 767 3.45 1,365
         Dec 3.98 1,380 3.69 229 3.15 464 3.16 9,866 3.44 1,035 3.41 1,878
For footnotes * and 1 to 6, see p 44  . For footnotes + and 7 to 10, see p 45  . For they are within or beyond the limits agreed between customers and the
footnote 11, see p 46  .12Collected from June 2010. For the purposes of the bank. 15From June 2010 including convenience and extended credit card debt.
interest rate statistis, a loan is considered to be secured if collateral (among others Convenience credit is defined as the credit granted at an interest rate of 0% in thefinancial collateral, real estate collateral, debt securities) in at leat the same value as period between payment transactions effectuated with the card during one billingthe loan amount has been posted, pledged or assigned. 13From June 2010 cycle and the date at which the debt balances from this specific billing cycle become
including revolving loans which have all the following features: (a) the borrower may due. 16From January 2003 up to May 2010 estimated. The volume of outstanding
use or withdraw the funds to a pre-approved credit limit without giving prior notice amounts reported was extrapolated to form the underlying total using theto the lender; (b) the amount of available credit can increase and decrease as funds Horvitz-Thompson estimator. From June 2010 the data are based on monthlyare borrowed and repaid; (c) the loan may be used repeatedly; (d) there is no balance sheet statistics. 17The amount refers to the single loan transaction
obligation of regular repayment of funds. 14Overdrafts are defined as debit considered as new business. 
balances on current accounts. They include all bank overdrafts regardless of whether

Deutsche Bundesbank
48  Monthly Report
February 2012
VII Capital market
 
1 Sales and purchases of debt securities and shares in Germany *
 
 
€ million
Debt securities
Sales Purchases
Domestic debt securities 1 Residents
Credit in-
Sales stitutions
= Public Foreign including
total Bank Corporate debt debt building
pur- debt bonds secur- secur- and loan Deutsche Other Non-
Period chases Total securities ities 3 ities 4 Total 5 Bundesbank sectors 7 residents 8 (non-MFIs) 2 associations 6 
2000 226,393 157,994 120,154 12,605 25,234 68,399 151,568 91,447 . 60,121 74,825
2001 180,227 86,656 55,918 14,473 16,262 93,571 111,281 35,848 . 75,433 68,946
2002 175,396 124,035 47,296 14,506 62,235 51,361 60,476 13,536 . 46,940 114,920
2003 184,679 134,455 31,404 30,262 72,788 50,224 105,557 35,748 . 69,809 79,122
2004 233,890 133,711 64,231 10,778 58,703 100,179 108,119 121,841 . − 13,723 125,772
2005 252,658 110,542 39,898 2,682 67,965 142,116 94,718 61,740 . 32,978 157,940
2006 242,006 102,379 40,995 8,943 52,446 139,627 125,423 68,893 . 56,530 116,583
2007 217,798 90,270 42,034 20,123 28,111 127,528 − 26,762 96,476 . − 123,238 244,560
2008 72,574 66,139 − 45,712 86,527 25,322 6,435 2,798 68,049 . − 65,251 69,776
2009 67,560 − 538 − 114,902 22,709 91,655 68,098 88,871 12,973 8,645 67,253 − 21,311
2010 148,535 − 1,212 − 7,621 24,044 − 17,635 149,747 100,463 − 103,271 22,753 180,981 48,072
2011 43,375 13,575 − 46,796 850 59,521 29,800 − 49,098 − 94,793 36,823 8,873 92,473
2011          Feb 47,298 38,334 17,372 8,095 12,867 8,964 15,401 − 3,185 295 18,291 31,897
         Mar − 3,970 − 7,740 − 15,811 1,204 6,867 3,770 − 4,591 − 15,442 − 14 10,866 621
         Apr − 2,198 − 6,295 − 10,472 − 3,518 7,695 4,097 − 21,656 − 1,559 738 − 20,835 19,458
         May 31,995 24,797 − 1,904 3,332 23,369 7,198 − 11,522 2,140 88 − 13,750 43,517
         June − 22,178 − 16,468 − 24,220 3,159 4,593 − 5,710 − 18,069 − 18,102 − 336 369 − 4,109
         July − 15,843 − 13,921 − 8,597 2,528 − 7,852 − 1,922 − 8,204 − 12,490 288 3,998 − 7,639
         Aug 41,731 38,421 16,683 903 20,835 3,310 5,698 − 9,417 11,917 3,198 36,033
         Sep − 10,963 − 12,170 − 11,839 − 2,901 2,570 1,207 − 1,506 − 12,051 9,357 1,188 − 9,457
         Oct − 21,756 − 21,880 − 3,824 − 10,980 − 7,076 124 − 2,951 − 4,494 2,994 − 1,451 − 18,805
         Nov 22,841 21,495 8,326 − 2,825 15,994 1,346 11,512 − 8,744 9,305 10,951 11,329
         Dec − 46,609 − 44,168 − 15,514 − 9,196 − 19,458 − 2,441 − 18,440 − 18,677 1,538 − 1,301 − 28,169
 
 
€ million
Shares
Sales Purchases
Sales Residents
=
total Domestic Foreign Credit insti- Non-
Period purchases shares 9 shares 10 Total 11 tutions 6,12 Other sectors 13 residents 14 
2000 140,461 22,733 117,729 164,654 23,293 141,361 − 24,194
2001 82,665 17,575 65,091 − 2,252 − 14,714 12,462 84,918
2002 39,338 9,232 30,106 18,398 − 23,236 41,634 20,941
2003 11,896 16,838 − 4,946 − 15,121 7,056 − 22,177 27,016
2004 − 3,317 10,157 − 13,474 7,432 5,045 2,387 − 10,748
2005 32,364 13,766 18,597 1,036 10,208 − 9,172 31,329
2006 26,276 9,061 17,214 7,528 11,323 − 3,795 18,748
2007 − 5,009 10,053 − 15,062 − 62,308 − 6,702 − 55,606 57,299
2008 − 28,613 11,326 − 39,939 1,542 − 23,079 24,621 − 30,153
2009 37,903 23,962 13,940 32,176 − 8,335 40,511 5,725
2010 35,469 20,049 15,422 37,798 7,340 30,458 − 2,329
2011 23,844 21,713 2,130 30,513 670 29,843 − 6,669
2011          Feb − 3,376 429 − 3,805 − 7,439 − 9,946 2,507 4,063
         Mar − 1,903 257 − 2,160 4,002 5,932 − 1,930 − 5,905
         Apr 8,002 5,559 2,443 25,279 22,596 2,683 − 17,277
         May 10,649 5,851 4,798 − 4,314 − 12,646 8,332 14,963
         June 9,703 6,427 3,276 − 5,184 − 10,241 5,057 14,887
         July − 5,947 137 − 6,084 − 5,789 − 2,396 − 3,393 − 158
         Aug − 2,896 203 − 3,099 − 143 − 5,224 5,081 − 2,753
         Sep − 4,202 91 − 4,293 − 2,133 − 4,409 2,276 − 2,069
         Oct 1,798 183 1,615 761 − 2,068 2,829 1,037
         Nov − 1,561 303 − 1,864 3,408 − 575 3,983 − 4,969
         Dec 9,600 1,643 7,957 11,213 9,865 1,348 − 1,613
1Net sales at market values plus/minus changes in issuers’ portfolios of their own values. 9Excluding shares of public limited investment companies; at issue prices.
debt securities. 2Including cross-border financing within groups from January 2011. 10Net purchases or net sales (−) of foreign shares (including direct investment)  by  
3Including Federal Railways Fund, Federal Post Office and Treuhand agency. 4Net residents;  transaction  values. 11Domestic and foreign shares. 12Up to end-1998,
purchases or net sales (−) of foreign debt securities by residents; transaction excluding syndicated shares. 13Residual; also including purchases of domestic and
values. 5Domestic and foreign debt securities. 6Book values; statistically adjusted. foreign securities by domestic mutual funds. 14Net purchases or net sales (−) of
7Residual; also including purchases of domestic and foreign securities by domestic domestic shares (including direct investment) by non-residents; transaction values. —
mutual funds. Up to end-2008, data comprise Deutsche Bundesbank. 8Net pur- The figures for the most recent date are provisional; revisions are not specially
chases or net sales (−) of domestic debt securities by non-residents; transaction marked. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
49  Monthly Report
February 2012
 VII Capital market
 
2 Sales of debt securities issued by residents *  
 
 
€ million nominal value
Bank debt securities 1 Memo item
 Foreign  DM/euro
bonds issued Debt securities
Corporate by German- issued by special
Mortgage Public purpose credit Other bank bonds Public managed
Period Total Total Pfandbriefe Pfandbriefe institutions (non-MFIs)  2 syndicates debt securities debt securities 3 
Gross sales  4 
2000 659,148 500,895 34,528 143,107 94,556 228,703 8,114 150,137 31,597
2001 687,988 505,646 34,782 112,594 106,166 252,103 11,328 171,012 10,605
2002 818,725 569,232 41,496 119,880 117,506 290,353 17,574 231,923 10,313
2003 958,917 668,002 47,828 107,918 140,398 371,858 22,510 268,406 2,850
2004 990,399 688,844 33,774 90,815 162,353 401,904 31,517 270,040 12,344
2005 988,911 692,182 28,217 103,984 160,010 399,969 24,352 272,380 600
2006 925,863 622,055 24,483 99,628 139,193 358,750 29,975 273,834 69
2007 1,021,533 743,616 19,211 82,720 195,722 445,963 15,043 262,872 −
2008 1,337,337 961,271 51,259 70,520 382,814 456,676 95,093 280,974 −
2009 1,533,616 1,058,815 40,421 37,615 331,566 649,215 76,379 398,423 −
2010 1,375,138 757,754 36,226 33,539 363,828 324,160 53,654 563,731 −
2011 1,337,772 658,781 31,431 24,295 376,876 226,180 86,615 592,376 −
2011          May 109,277 61,243 3,490 3,146 38,582 16,025 7,751 40,283 −
         June 101,126 47,060 1,872 2,111 30,852 12,225 10,762 43,304 −
         July 101,359 41,497 1,040 559 25,022 14,875 8,459 51,403 −
         Aug 124,006 67,984 774 1,187 45,089 20,934 3,615 52,407 −
         Sep 101,062 52,907 2,522 836 34,485 15,065 3,124 45,031 −
         Oct 103,611 45,220 3,147 758 23,553 17,762 2,660 55,732 −
         Nov 130,444 67,824 1,805 1,113 37,452 27,454 5,272 57,347 −
         Dec 84,412 46,202 2,899 1,047 27,120 15,136 2,413 35,797 −
of which: Debt securities with maturities of more than four years  5 
2000 319,330 209,187 20,724 102,664 25,753 60,049 6,727 103,418 27,008
2001 299,751 202,337 16,619 76,341 42,277 67,099 7,479 89,933 6,4802002 309,157 176,486 16,338 59,459 34,795 65,892 12,149 120,527 9,2132003 369,336 220,103 23,210 55,165 49,518 92,209 10,977 138,256 2,8502004 424,769 275,808 20,060 48,249 54,075 153,423 20,286 128,676 4,320
2005 425,523 277,686 20,862 63,851 49,842 143,129 16,360 131,479 400
2006 337,969 190,836 17,267 47,814 47,000 78,756 14,422 132,711 692007 315,418 183,660 10,183 31,331 50,563 91,586 13,100 118,659 −2008 387,516 190,698 13,186 31,393 54,834 91,289 84,410 112,407 −2009 361,999 185,575 20,235 20,490 59,809 85,043 55,240 121,185 −
2010 381,687 169,174 15,469 15,139 72,796 65,769 34,649 177,863 −
2011 368,039 153,309 13,142 8,500 72,985 58,684 41,299 173,431 −
2011          May 29,509 10,462 1,570 349 5,217 3,327 2,596 16,450 −
         June 36,018 17,689 1,258 1,343 12,017 3,071 5,662 12,667 −
         July 28,753 9,215 658 319 4,574 3,664 4,898 14,640 −
         Aug 27,396 11,663 428 82 7,542 3,612 1,647 14,086 −         Sep 29,195 13,259 189 160 9,464 3,446 741 15,195 −
         Oct 21,178 8,593 1,220 208 4,106 3,058 1,477 11,108 −
         Nov 27,334 8,922 488 240 989 7,205 3,650 14,762 −         Dec 15,338 6,669 519 628 1,412 4,111 1,344 7,325 −
Net sales  6 
2000 155,615 122,774 5,937 29,999 30,089 56,751 7,320 25,522 − 16,7052001 84,122 60,905 6,932 − 9,254 28,808 34,416 8,739 14,479 − 30,6572002 131,976 56,393 7,936 − 26,806 20,707 54,561 14,306 61,277 − 44,5462003 124,556 40,873 2,700 − 42,521 44,173 36,519 18,431 65,253 − 54,9902004 167,233 81,860 1,039 − 52,615 50,142 83,293 18,768 66,605 − 22,124
2005 141,715 65,798 − 2,151 − 34,255 37,242 64,962 10,099 65,819 − 35,963
2006 129,423 58,336 − 12,811 − 20,150 44,890 46,410 15,605 55,482 − 19,2082007 86,579 58,168 − 10,896 − 46,629 42,567 73,127 − 3,683 32,093 − 29,7502008 119,472 8,517 15,052 − 65,773 25,165 34,074 82,653 28,302 − 31,6072009 76,441 − 75,554 858 − 80,646 25,579 − 21,345 48,508 103,482 − 21,037
2010 21,566 − 87,646 − 3,754 − 63,368 28,296 − 48,822 23,748 85,464 − 10,904
2011 22,518 − 54,582 1,657 − 44,290 32,904 − 44,852 − 3,189 80,289 − 5,989
2011          May 20,016 − 5,338 682 − 1,720 5,899 − 10,199 1,166 24,187 − 926
         June − 15,356 − 25,203 − 1,296 − 3,638 − 1,703 − 18,566 3,574 6,274 − 300
         July − 13,941 − 6,201 − 437 − 5,090 − 273 − 401 1,497 − 9,238 −
         Aug 32,551 13,553 − 715 − 2,954 14,226 2,996 − 2,327 21,325 −         Sep − 12,754 − 12,887 − 4,961 − 4,768 3,291 − 6,449 − 4,093 4,226 −
         Oct − 7,104 − 1,098 2,389 − 2,289 46 − 1,244 − 10,840 4,834 −
         Nov 29,635 6,035 1,482 − 4,203 3,522 5,233 − 2,959 26,559 − 69         Dec − 43,269 − 18,535 184 − 1,948 − 682 − 16,088 − 8,891 − 15,844 − 10
*For definitions, see the explanatory notes in the Statistical Supplement 2 Capital Railways Fund, Federal Post Office and Treuhand agency. 4Gross sales means only
market statistics on p 21 ff. 1Excluding registered bank debt securities. 2Including initial sales of newly issued securities. 5Maximum maturity according to the terms of
cross-border financing within groups from January 2011. 3Including Federal issue. 6 Gross sales less redemptions. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
50  Monthly Report
February 2012
VII Capital market
 
3 Amounts outstanding of debt securities issued by residents  * 
 
 
€ million nominal value
Bank debt securities 1 Memo item
 Foreign  DM/euro
End of year Debt securities bonds issued
or month/ issued by Corporate by German-
Maturity Mortgage Public special purpose Other bank bonds Public managed
in years Total Total Pfandbriefe Pfandbriefe credit institutions debt securities (non-MFIs) debt securities syndicates
2000 2,265,121 1,445,736 140,751 685,122 157,374 462,488 13,599 805,786 322,856
2001 2,349,243 1,506,640 147,684 675,868 201,721 481,366 22,339 820,264 292,199
2002 2,481,220 1,563,034 155,620 649,061 222,427 535,925 36,646 881,541 247,655
2003 2,605,775 1,603,906 158,321 606,541 266,602 572,442 55,076 946,793 192,666
2004 2,773,007 1,685,766 159,360 553,927 316,745 655,734 73,844 1,013,397 170,543
2005 2,914,723 1,751,563 157,209 519,674 323,587 751,093 83,942 1,079,218 134,580
2006 3,044,145 1,809,899 144,397 499,525 368,476 797,502 99,545 1,134,701 115,373
2007 3,130,723 1,868,066 133,501 452,896 411,041 870,629 95,863 1,166,794 85,623
2008 3,250,195 1,876,583 150,302 377,091 490,641 858,550 178,515 1,195,097 54,015
2009 3,326,635 1,801,029 151,160 296,445 516,221 837,203 227,024 1,298,581 32,978
2010 3,348,201 2 1,570,490 147,529 232,954 544,517 2 645,491 250,774 2 1,526,937 22,074
2011 3,370,721 1,515,911 149,185 188,663 577,423 600,640 247,585 1,607,226 16,085
2011          June 3,385,603 1,535,042 151,243 209,916 557,291 616,592 275,197 1,575,363 16,164
         July 3,371,662 1,528,843 150,806 204,826 557,018 616,193 276,694 1,566,125 16,164
         Aug 3,404,214 1,542,396 150,091 201,872 571,245 619,189 274,368 1,587,450 16,164
         Sep 3,391,460 1,529,509 145,130 197,104 574,536 612,740 270,275 1,591,676 16,164
         Oct 3,384,356 1,528,411 147,519 194,815 574,582 611,495 259,435 1,596,510 16,164
         Nov 3,413,991 1,534,446 149,001 190,612 578,104 616,729 256,476 1,623,069 16,095
         Dec 3,370,721 1,515,911 149,185 188,663 577,423 600,640 247,585 1,607,226 16,085
Breakdown by remaining period to maturity  3 Position at end-December 2011 
1,313,141 650,424 70,831 97,930 237,433 244,230 45,299 617,420 5,017    less than 2
813,240 415,784 47,759 48,841 136,584 182,601 60,903 336,553 4,293 2 to less than 4
471,655 230,198 19,976 24,307 81,812 104,102 28,521 212,936 2,991 4 to less than 6
207,268 74,094 6,849 10,110 39,584 17,550 15,998 117,176 278 6 to less than 8
209,925 56,608 3,213 2,928 39,461 11,006 6,311 147,006 195 8 to less than 10
51,054 20,434 495 3,018 11,594 5,327 10,150 20,470 2,075 10 to less than 15
81,887 13,543 11 325 7,179 6,028 2,728 65,616 269 15 to less than 20
222,549 54,824 50 1,203 23,775 29,796 77,675 90,050 967 20 and more
*Including debt securities temporarily held in the issuers’ portfolios. 1Excluding maturity for debt securities falling due en bloc and until mean maturity of the
debt securities handed to the trustee for temporary safe custody. 2Sectoral residual amount outstanding for debt securities not falling due en bloc. 
reclassification of debt securities. 3Calculated from month under review until final
  
4 Shares in circulation issued by residents
 * 
  
€ million nominal value
Change in domestic public limited companies’ capital due to
Memo item
Share circulationat market values
contribution (market capita- cash 
payments
Share capital = Net increase or and ex- contribution of shares, merger reduction lisation)
circulation at net decrease (−) change of of claims mining shares, and of capital level at end
end of period during period convertible issue of and other GmbH shares, transfer change of and of period
Period under review under review bonds 1 bonus shares real assets etc of assets legal form liquidation under review  2 
2000 147,629 14,115 3,620 3,694 618 8,089 − 1,986 1,827 − 1,745 1,353,000
2001 166,187 18,561 7,987 4,057 1,106 8,448 1,018 − 905 − 3,152 1,205,613
2002 168,716 2,528 4,307 1,291 486 1,690 − 868 − 2,152 − 2,224 647,492
2003 162,131 − 6,585 4,482 923 211 513 − 322 − 10,806 − 1,584 851,001
2004 164,802 2,669 3,960 1,566 276 696 220 − 1,760 − 2,286 887,217
2005 163,071 − 1,733 2,470 1,040 694 268 − 1,443 − 3,060 − 1,703 1,058,532
2006 163,764 695 2,670 3,347 604 954 − 1,868 − 1,256 − 3,761 1,279,638
2007 164,560 799 3,164 1,322 200 269 − 682 − 1,847 − 1,636 1,481,930
2008 168,701 4,142 5,006 1,319 152 0 − 428 − 608 − 1,306 830,622
2009 175,691 6,989 12,476 398 97 − − 3,741 − 1,269 − 974 927,256
2010 174,596 − 1,096 3,265 497 178 10 − 486 − 993 − 3,569 1,091,220
2011 177,167 2,570 6,390 552 462 9 − 552 − 762 − 3,532 924,214
2011          June 177,023 2,503 2,860 147 10 − − 66 9 − 457 1,137,397
         July 177,208 185 107 221 97 9 − 14 − 78 − 157 1,101,653
         Aug 176,989 − 219 192 1 − − − 242 − 102 − 68 919,444
         Sep 176,899 − 90 85 71 1 − − 100 − 75 − 72 873,180
         Oct 176,943 44 77 51 12 − − 48 − 6 − 42 975,868
         Nov 177,014 71 136 9 11 − 0 − 37 − 48 942,940
         Dec 177,167 153 280 1 13 − − 2 − 86 − 54 924,214
*Excluding shares of public limited investment companies. 1Including shares issued ket segment was closed down on 24 March 2003) are included as well as enterprises
out of company profits. 2Enterprises listed on the Regulated Market (the introduc- listed on the Open Market. Source: Bundesbank calculations based on data of the
tion of which marked the end of the division of organised trading segments into an Herausgebergemeinschaft Wertpapier-Mitteilungen and the Deutsche Börse AG. official and a regulated market on 1 November 2007) or the Neuer Markt (stock mar-

Deutsche Bundesbank
51  Monthly Report
February 2012
 VII Capital market
 
5 Yields and indices on German securities
 
 
               
Yields on debt securities outstanding issued by residents  1 Price indices 2,3 
Public debt securities Bank debt securities Debt securities Shares
Listed
Federal securities
With a residual With a residual
maturity of maturity of Corporate German German
9 and more than 9 bonds bond iBoxx CDAX share
including and including (non- index share price index € Germany
Total Total Total 10 years 4 Total 10 years MFIs) (REX) price index index (DAX)
Average End-1998 End-1987 End-1987
Period % per annum daily rate = 100 = 100 = 1000
2000 5.4 5.3 5.2 5.3 5.6 5.8 6.2 112.48 94.11 396.59 6,433.61
2001 4.8 4.7 4.7 4.8 4.9 5.3 5.9 113.12 94.16 319.38 5,160.102002 4.7 4.6 4.6 4.8 4.7 5.1 6.0 117.56 97.80 188.46 2,892.632003 3.7 3.8 3.8 4.1 3.7 4.3 5.0 117.36 97.09 252.48 3,965.162004 3.7 3.7 3.7 4.0 3.6 4.2 4.0 120.19 99.89 268.32 4,256.08
2005 3.1 3.2 3.2 3.4 3.1 3.5 3.7 120.92 101.09 335.59 5,408.26
2006 3.8 3.7 3.7 3.8 3.8 4.0 4.2 116.78 96.69 407.16 6,596.922007 4.3 4.3 4.2 4.2 4.4 4.5 5.0 114.85 94.62 478.65 8,067.322008 4.2 4.0 4.0 4.0 4.5 4.7 6.3 121.68 102.06 266.33 4,810.202009 3.2 3.1 3.0 3.2 3.5 4.0 5.5 123.62 100.12 320.32 5,957.43
2010 2.5 2.4 2.4 2.7 2.7 3.3 4.0 124.96 102.95 368.72 6,914.19
2011 2.6 2.4 2.4 2.6 2.9 3.5 4.3 131.48 109.53 304.60 5,898.35
2011          Aug 2.3 2.1 2.0 2.2 2.6 3.2 4.4 128.78 105.99 302.46 5,784.85
         Sep 1.9 1.7 1.7 1.8 2.4 2.7 4.6 129.54 108.24 285.00 5,502.02
         Oct 2.0 1.9 1.8 2.0 2.5 2.8 4.6 129.65 107.27 316.80 6,141.34
         Nov 1.9 1.7 1.7 1.9 2.4 2.7 4.4 128.90 106.38 313.93 6,088.84         Dec 1.9 1.7 1.6 1.9 2.4 2.7 4.6 131.48 109.53 304.60 5,898.35
2012          Jan 1.7 1.6 1.5 1.8 2.2 2.6 4.3 131.37 109.30 332.18 6,458.91
1Bearer debt securities with maximum maturities according to the terms of issue of ding of the debt securities included in the calculation. Monthly figures are calculated
over 4 years if their mean residual maturities exceed 3 years. Convertible debt on the basis of the yields on all the business days in a month. The annual figures are
securities, etc. debt securities with unscheduled redemption, zero -coupon bonds, the unweighted means of the monthly figures. 2End of year or month. 3Source:
floating -rate notes and bonds not denominated in euro are not included. Group Deutsche Börse AG. 4Only debt securities eligible as underlying instruments for
yields for the various categories of securities are weighted by the amounts outstan- futures contracts; calculated as unweighted averages. 
 
 
6 Sales and purchases of mutual fund shares in Germany
  
€ million
Sales Purchases
Domestic mutual funds 1  (sales receipts) Residents
Mutual funds open to the Credit institutions
general public including building
Other sectors 3 and loan associations 2 
of which
Sales Open- of which of which
= Secur- end Foreign Foreign
total Money ities- real Special- mutual mutualpur- market based estate ised Foreign fund fund Non-resi-
Period chases Total Total funds funds funds funds funds  
4 Total Total shares Total shares dents 5 
2000 118,021 85,160 39,712 − 2,188 36,818 − 2,824 45,448 32,861 107,019 14,454 92 92,565 32,769 11,002
2001 97,077 76,811 35,522 12,410 9,195 10,159 41,289 20,266 96,127 10,251 2,703 85,876 17,563 9512002 66,571 59,482 25,907 3,682 7,247 14,916 33,575 7,089 67,251 2,100 3,007 65,151 4,082 − 6802003 47,754 43,943 20,079 − 924 7,408 14,166 23,864 3,811 49,547 − 2,658 734 52,205 3,077 − 1,7932004 14,435 1,453 − 3,978 − 6,160 − 1,246 3,245 5,431 12,982 10,267 8,446 3,796 1,821 9,186 4,168
2005 85,268 41,718 6,400 − 124 7,001 − 3,186 35,317 43,550 79,252 21,290 7,761 57,962 35,789 6,016
2006 47,264 19,535 − 14,257 490 − 9,362 − 8,814 33,791 27,729 39,006 14,676 5,221 24,330 22,508 8,2582007 55,778 13,436 − 7,872 − 4,839 − 12,848 6,840 21,307 42,342 51,309 − 229 4,240 51,538 38,102 4,4692008 − 313 − 7,911 − 14,409 − 12,171 − 11,149 799 6,498 7,598 8,401 − 16,625 − 9,252 25,026 16,850 − 8,714
2009 41,972 43,747 10,966 − 5,047 11,749 2,686 32,780 − 1,776 36,566 − 14,995 − 8,178 51,561 6,402 5,406
2010 106,663 84,906 13,381 − 148 8,683 1,897 71,525 21,756 104,253 3,873 6,290 100,380 15,466 2,4102011 45,369 45,221 − 1,340 − 379 − 2,037 1,562 46,561 149 37,322 − 7,576 − 694 44,898 843 8,047
2011          June 2,627 2,249 − 469 − 113 − 441 426 2,718 378 3,423 − 439 − 5 3,862 383 − 796         July 4,617 6,417 2,803 − 113 3,105 10 3,615 − 1,800 1,966 − 1,115 − 2,134 3,081 334 2,651
         Aug − 3,397 − 1,284 − 2,453 392 − 2,355 − 103 1,169 − 2,113 − 3,372 410 230 − 3,782 − 2,343 − 25         Sep 1,228 691 − 138 45 − 372 310 830 537 − 55 − 874 − 186 819 723 1,283
         Oct 5,419 5,165 342 − 36 441 − 3 4,823 254 4,349 − 320 349 4,669 − 95 1,070
         Nov 6,324 5,742 − 1,011 − 70 − 1,571 − 61 6,753 582 7,457 − 61 404 7,518 178 − 1,133         Dec 6,474 9,000 − 2,006 − 26 − 1,288 443 11,006 − 2,526 5,536 − 3,690 − 1,411 9,226 − 1,115 938
1Including public limited investment companies. 2Book values. 3Residual. 4Net transaction values. — The figures for the most recent date are provisional; revisions
purchases or net sales (−) of foreign fund shares by residents; transaction values. are not specially marked. 
5Net purchases or net sales (−) of domestic fund shares by non-residents;

Deutsche Bundesbank
52  Monthly Report
February 2012
VIII  Financial accounts
  
1  Acquisition of financial assets and financing of private non-financial sectors
(non-consolidated)
  
  € billion
2010 2011 
Item 2008 2009 2010 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 Q1 Q2 Q3
Households  1 
  I  Acquisition of financial assets
Currency and deposits 121.0 49.9 80.2 16.5 21.3 7.6 34.8 7.8 20.0 18.2
Debt securities 2 − 22.4 − 12.6 − 11.5 − 3.5 − 5.0 0.9 − 3.8 2.5 1.8 − 4.1
Shares − 9.5 16.3 13.4 2.6 5.1 − 1.6 7.2 3.3 0.5 5.4
Other equity 3.0 3.0 3.0 0.7 0.7 0.7 0.8 0.7 0.7 0.8
Mutual funds shares − 34.3 − 1.1 10.0 3.4 6.6 0.5 − 0.5 − 3.5 − 0.1 − 7.0
Claims on insurance
corporations 3 31.2 60.6 63.1 22.1 13.8 11.1 16.1 23.1 13.4 12.4
short-term claims 0.4 0.5 0.4 0.1 0.1 0.1 0.1 0.1 0.1 0.1
longer-term claims 30.8 60.1 62.7 22.0 13.7 11.0 16.0 22.9 13.3 12.3
Claims from companypension commitments 7.4 10.0 7.8 1.9 2.0 1.9 2.0 2.0 2.1 2.0
Other claims 
4 26.6 21.9 − 11.9 8.1 − 5.6 10.1 − 24.4 13.3 − 2.5 3.2
Total 123.0 147.9 154.1 51.8 38.9 31.2 32.2 49.1 36.0 31.0
  II Financing
Loans − 14.9 − 5.1 4.5 − 7.2 5.7 5.5 0.6 − 3.3 4.9 6.7
short-term loans 1.2 − 4.3 − 2.3 − 0.3 1.0 − 0.8 − 2.1 − 0.6 1.0 − 0.9
longer-term loans − 16.0 − 0.9 6.8 − 6.9 4.7 6.3 2.7 − 2.8 4.0 7.6
Other liabilities 0.4 1.1 0.2 0.4 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.2 0.4 0.0 0.0
Total − 14.4 − 4.0 4.7 − 6.8 5.7 5.4 0.4 − 3.0 5.0 6.7
Corporations
I   Acquisition of financial assets
Currency and deposits 11.3 24.8 9.3 5.4 − 21.9 20.0 5.8 2.0 − 15.0 2.8
Debt securities 2 − 0.3 4.8 − 0.1 − 0.7 0.4 1.7 − 1.6 3.5 − 0.7 9.0
Financial derivatives 16.6 − 6.0 26.6 2.0 3.3 4.2 17.2 5.2 2.3 3.6
Shares 41.7 28.8 32.9 5.3 1.2 9.1 17.4 3.5 7.7 13.2
Other equity 11.5 35.6 56.7 35.9 9.0 8.2 3.5 1.0 15.6 7.0
Mutual funds shares − 18.9 − 13.6 − 3.4 − 9.2 6.6 1.6 − 2.4 0.6 13.2 11.2
Loans 50.6 87.1 95.2 26.5 28.7 22.9 17.1 31.7 25.4 38.7
short-term loans 34.4 53.8 70.4 20.2 20.0 17.0 13.2 25.8 23.6 27.2
longer-term loans 16.2 33.3 24.8 6.3 8.7 5.9 3.8 6.0 1.8 11.5
Claims on insurancecorporations 
3 0.4 1.0 0.8 0.2 0.2 0.2 0.2 0.2 0.2 0.2
short-term claims 0.4 1.0 0.8 0.2 0.2 0.2 0.2 0.2 0.2 0.2
longer-term claims . . . . . . . . . .
Other claims − 26.3 15.6 − 53.6 − 25.5 11.5 − 27.7 − 11.9 17.8 13.2 1.9
Total 86.6 178.0 164.4 39.9 39.0 40.2 45.3 65.5 61.8 87.4
  II Financing
Debt securities 2 9.6 − 7.1 9.6 8.7 − 0.5 − 3.6 5.1 7.7 − 0.3 4.2
Financial derivatives . . . . . . . . . .
Shares 3.6 5.5 7.2 6.1 0.1 0.2 0.8 0.3 5.5 − 0.3
Other equity 19.7 7.2 9.1 1.7 1.6 5.2 0.6 4.0 1.2 1.3
Loans 79.0 57.4 62.9 25.4 15.1 20.1 2.3 20.4 36.0 56.5
short-term loans 46.8 10.3 60.7 29.8 20.7 8.5 1.7 3.7 26.6 40.9
longer-term loans 32.2 47.1 2.1 − 4.3 − 5.7 11.6 0.5 16.7 9.3 15.7
Claims from companypension commitments 2.9 4.8 2.6 0.7 0.7 0.7 0.7 0.7 0.7 0.7
Other liabilities 22.4 45.6 36.7 3.8 9.1 − 23.6 47.3 17.0 − 8.7 22.7
Total 137.2 113.5 128.1 46.4 26.0 − 1.0 56.7 50.1 34.4 85.0
1Including non-profit institutions serving households. 2Including money market and supplementary pension funds. 4Including accumulated interest-bearing surplus
paper. 3Including private pension funds, burial funds, occupational pension schemes shares with insurance corporations. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
53  Monthly Report
February 2012
VIII  Financial accounts
  
2  Financial assets and liabilities of private non-financial sectors
(non-consolidated)
  
  End-of-year level, end-of-quarter level; € billion
2010 2011 
Item
2008 2009 2010 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 Q1 Q2 Q3
Households  1 
  I  Financial assets
Currency and deposits 1,737.5 1,788.1 1,868.3 1,804.6 1,825.9 1,833.4 1,868.3 1,876.1 1,896.1 1,914.3
Debt securities 2 267.1 265.5 254.1 264.7 259.1 259.6 254.1 254.8 258.3 247.8
Shares 181.9 201.7 243.5 214.1 208.5 215.0 243.5 257.2 260.1 206.8
Other equity 213.6 191.8 186.1 189.7 196.2 184.8 186.1 181.6 181.6 183.1
Mutual funds shares 379.8 416.2 435.4 426.9 420.1 426.5 435.4 426.2 421.1 389.2
Claims on insurance
corporations 3 1,214.8 1,282.7 1,347.7 1,305.2 1,318.5 1,330.2 1,347.7 1,370.8 1,384.3 1,396.7
short-term claims 81.3 81.8 82.2 81.9 82.0 82.1 82.2 82.3 82.5 82.5
longer-term claims 1,133.6 1,200.9 1,265.6 1,223.3 1,236.5 1,248.1 1,265.6 1,288.5 1,301.8 1,314.2
Claims from company
pension commitments 263.5 273.4 281.2 275.3 277.3 279.3 281.2 283.2 285.2 287.2
Other claims 4 39.8 38.7 38.7 38.8 38.8 38.7 38.7 38.2 38.7 37.5
Total 4,298.1 4,458.1 4,655.1 4,519.4 4,544.4 4,567.5 4,655.1 4,688.1 4,725.4 4,662.6
  II Liabilities
Loans 1,521.7 1,520.9 1,525.4 1,514.4 1,520.1 1,525.2 1,525.4 1,522.0 1,526.8 1,537.9
short-term loans 80.0 75.7 75.6 75.4 78.0 77.6 75.6 75.0 75.8 75.0
longer-term loans 1,441.7 1,445.1 1,449.8 1,439.0 1,442.1 1,447.7 1,449.8 1,447.0 1,451.0 1,462.9
Other liabilities 11.0 11.9 11.4 13.2 12.6 12.7 11.4 13.8 13.2 13.6
Total 1,532.7 1,532.8 1,536.8 1,527.7 1,532.8 1,538.0 1,536.8 1,535.8 1,540.0 1,551.5
Corporations
I   Financial assets
Currency and deposits 420.7 457.1 452.3 455.9 440.6 452.0 452.3 439.8 424.7 429.2
Debt securities 2 42.0 48.4 48.1 48.2 48.5 50.0 48.1 51.6 51.1 51.6
Financial derivatives . . . . . . . . . .
Shares 757.0 822.4 908.4 853.8 827.8 849.9 908.4 919.6 932.2 792.1
Other equity 366.7 358.8 397.7 389.4 410.3 393.0 397.7 387.5 401.6 410.1
Mutual funds shares 102.3 108.8 119.3 114.4 113.7 118.8 119.3 119.9 120.0 117.6
Loans 363.0 450.1 545.3 476.6 505.3 528.2 545.3 577.0 602.4 641.1
short-term loans 240.5 294.2 364.6 314.4 334.4 351.4 364.6 390.4 414.0 441.2
longer-term loans 122.5 155.8 180.7 162.2 170.9 176.8 180.7 186.6 188.4 199.9
Claims on insurance
corporations 3 44.2 45.2 46.0 45.4 45.6 45.8 46.0 46.2 46.4 46.6
short-term claims 44.2 45.2 46.0 45.4 45.6 45.8 46.0 46.2 46.4 46.6longer-term claims . . . . . . . . . .
Other claims 933.1 916.1 733.7 910.6 952.5 923.9 733.7 758.1 768.5 739.8
Total 3,029.0 3,206.9 3,250.8 3,294.5 3,344.3 3,361.6 3,250.8 3,299.8 3,347.0 3,227.9
  II Liabilities
Debt securities 
2 137.0 136.9 145.2 146.9 154.1 153.6 145.2 128.5 130.6 155.9
Financial derivatives . . . . . . . . . .
Shares 963.5 1,081.3 1,301.8 1,118.8 1,089.5 1,159.5 1,301.8 1,322.3 1,357.5 1,046.6
Other equity 689.9 697.1 706.1 698.7 700.4 705.6 706.1 710.2 711.4 712.7
Loans 1,400.8 1,444.4 1,504.3 1,461.4 1,476.4 1,494.7 1,504.3 1,525.2 1,570.3 1,626.0
short-term loans 468.3 476.3 537.0 501.3 522.2 529.5 537.0 537.7 565.8 606.3
longer-term loans 932.6 968.0 967.3 960.1 954.2 965.2 967.3 987.5 1,004.5 1,019.7
Claims from companypension commitments 218.4 223.2 225.8 223.8 224.5 225.1 225.8 226.5 227.1 227.8
Other liabilities 838.2 856.7 837.3 862.8 887.2 850.9 837.3 827.2 827.6 824.2
Total 4,247.7 4,439.5 4,720.5 4,512.5 4,532.1 4,589.4 4,720.5 4,739.8 4,824.4 4,593.0
1Including non-profit institutions serving households. 2Including money market and supplementary pension funds. 4Including accumulated interest-bearing surplus
paper. 3Including private pension funds, burial funds, occupational pension schemes shares with insurance corporations. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
54  Monthly Report
February 2012
IX Public finances in Germany
 
1 General government: deficit and debt level as defined in the Maastricht Treaty
 
 
 
Social Social
General Central State Local security General Central State Local security
government government government government funds government government government government funds
Period € billion as a percentage of GDP
Deficit/surplus1
2005 − 73.9 − 47.6 − 22.9 + 0.6 − 4.0 − 3.3 − 2.1 − 1.0 + 0.0 − 0.2
2006 − 37.9 − 34.4 − 11.8 + 3.3 + 5.0 − 1.6 − 1.5 − 0.5 + 0.1 + 0.2
2007 + 5.8 − 18.6 + 2.5 + 11.1 + 10.8 + 0.2 − 0.8 + 0.1 + 0.5 + 0.4
2008 p − 1.4 − 15.2 − 2.2 + 8.8 + 7.2 − 0.1 − 0.6 − 0.1 + 0.4 + 0.3
2009 p − 76.3 − 38.2 − 20.8 − 2.1 − 15.2 − 3.2 − 1.6 − 0.9 − 0.1 − 0.6
2010 2, p − 105.9 − 79.9 − 22.6 − 5.7 + 2.3 − 4.3 − 3.2 − 0.9 − 0.2 + 0.1
2009          H2  p − 58.0 − 28.7 − 14.2 − 3.2 − 11.9 − 4.7 − 2.3 − 1.2 − 0.3 − 1.0
2010          H1  2, p − 37.3 − 26.9 − 9.8 − 3.7 + 3.1 − 3.1 − 2.2 − 0.8 − 0.3 + 0.3
         H2  p − 68.8 − 53.1 − 12.8 − 2.1 − 0.9 − 5.4 − 4.2 − 1.0 − 0.2 − 0.1
2011          H1  pe − 5.7 − 14.7 − 3.1 + 1.7 + 10.3 − 0.5 − 1.2 − 0.2 + 0.1 + 0.8
Debt level3 End of year or quarter
2005 1,526.3 935.3 482.3 121.5 2.7 68.6 42.0 21.7 5.5 0.1
2006 1,574.7 970.7 492.1 125.1 1.7 68.1 42.0 21.3 5.4 0.1
2007 1,582.5 978.0 494.1 123.4 1.6 65.2 40.3 20.3 5.1 0.1
2008 1,649.0 1,007.6 531.3 123.2 1.5 66.7 40.7 21.5 5.0 0.1
2009 1,767.7 1,075.7 574.8 129.1 1.3 74.4 45.3 24.2 5.4 0.1
2010 pe 2,061.8 1,317.6 622.4 134.5 1.3 83.2 53.2 25.1 5.4 0.1
2010          Q1 pe 1,787.5 1,088.5 580.8 130.1 1.3 74.6 45.4 24.2 5.4 0.1
         Q2 pe 1,830.6 1,099.1 611.0 132.4 1.3 75.5 45.3 25.2 5.5 0.1
         Q3 pe 1,856.5 1,116.4 618.5 134.3 1.6 75.7 45.5 25.2 5.5 0.1
         Q4 pe 2,061.8 1,317.6 622.4 134.5 1.3 83.2 53.2 25.1 5.4 0.1
2011          Q1 pe 2,062.4 1,318.8 619.5 136.4 1.7 82.2 52.6 24.7 5.4 0.1
         Q2 pe 2,076.8 1,324.7 626.0 137.6 2.7 82.0 52.3 24.7 5.4 0.1
         Q3 pe 2,089.8 1,334.4 630.0 138.0 1.3 81.8 52.2 24.7 5.4 0.0
Sources: Federal Statistical Office and Bundesbank calculations. 1Unlike the fiscal bal- ures were released for the first half of the year. Therefore, the 2011 half-year figures
ance as shown in the national accounts, the deficit as defined in the Maastricht are not directly comparable with the annual figures. 2Including the €4.4 billion pro-
Treaty includes interest flows from swaps and forward rate agreements. The ceeds received from the 2010 frequency auction. 3Quarterly GDP ratios are based
half-year figures correspond to the deficit/surplus according to the national ac- on the national output of the four preceding quarters. 
counts. In connection with the publication of the 2011 annual figures, no revised fig-
 
 
2 General government: revenue, expenditure and fiscal deficit/surplus as shown in the national accounts*
  
 
Revenue Expenditure
of which of which
Compen- Gross Memo item
Social con- Social sation of capital Deficit/ Total tax
Period Total Taxes tributions Other Total benefits employees Interest formation Other surplus burden  1 
€ billion
2005 969.3 475.7 397.1 96.5 1,043.5 579.7 176.8 63.2 31.4 192.4 − 74.1 883.7
2006 1,011.1 512.7 400.7 97.7 1,049.3 580.6 177.2 66.1 33.7 191.6 − 38.2 924.7
2007 1,062.3 558.4 400.9 103.0 1,056.8 579.4 178.2 68.5 36.0 194.6 + 5.5 971.3
2008 p 1,088.2 572.6 408.8 106.9 1,089.6 590.3 182.3 68.3 38.9 209.8 − 1.4 994.2
2009 p 1,066.0 546.3 409.8 109.9 1,142.1 622.6 189.7 63.8 41.4 224.6 − 76.1 966.3
2010 p 1,079.8 548.9 418.7 112.2 2 1,185.8 632.3 194.5 61.9 40.8 2 256.3 2 − 106.0 977.7
2011 pe 1,146.0 585.5 435.8 124.8 1,172.7 630.3 200.0 70.3 41.4 230.7 − 26.7 1,031.6
as a percentage of GDP
2005 43.6 21.4 17.9 4.3 46.9 26.1 7.9 2.8 1.4 8.6 − 3.3 39.7
2006 43.7 22.2 17.3 4.2 45.3 25.1 7.7 2.9 1.5 8.3 − 1.7 40.0
2007 43.7 23.0 16.5 4.2 43.5 23.9 7.3 2.8 1.5 8.0 + 0.2 40.0
2008 p 44.0 23.1 16.5 4.3 44.0 23.9 7.4 2.8 1.6 8.5 − 0.1 40.2
2009 p 44.9 23.0 17.3 4.6 48.1 26.2 8.0 2.7 1.7 9.5 − 3.2 40.7
2010 p 43.6 22.2 16.9 4.5 2 47.9 25.5 7.9 2.5 1.6 2 10.3 2 − 4.3 39.5
2011 pe 44.6 22.8 17.0 4.9 45.6 24.5 7.8 2.7 1.6 9.0 − 1.0 40.1
Percentage growth rates
2005 + 1.9 + 2.5 − 0.1 + 7.7 + 1.0 + 0.9 − 0.2 + 0.1 − 3.5 + 3.1 . + 1.4
2006 + 4.3 + 7.8 + 0.9 + 1.2 + 0.6 + 0.2 + 0.3 + 4.6 + 7.4 − 0.4 . + 4.6
2007 + 5.1 + 8.9 + 0.1 + 5.4 + 0.7 − 0.2 + 0.6 + 3.6 + 6.7 + 1.5 . + 5.0
2008 p + 2.4 + 2.5 + 2.0 + 3.8 + 3.1 + 1.9 + 2.3 − 0.2 + 7.9 + 7.8 . + 2.4
2009 p − 2.0 − 4.6 + 0.2 + 2.8 + 4.8 + 5.5 + 4.0 − 6.6 + 6.5 + 7.1 . − 2.8
2010 p + 1.3 + 0.5 + 2.2 + 2.1 + 3.8 + 1.6 + 2.5 − 3.1 − 1.5 + 14.1 . + 1.2
2011 pe + 6.1 + 6.7 + 4.1 + 11.2 − 1.1 − 0.3 + 2.8 + 13.6 + 1.5 − 10.0 . + 5.5
Source: Federal Statistical Office. *Figures in accordance with ESA 1995. In the website. 1Taxes and social contributions plus customs duties and the EU share in
Monthly Reports up to December 2006, customs duties, the EU share in VAT revenue VAT revenue. 2Including the €4.4 billion proceeds received from the 2010 frequency
and EU subsidies were included in the national accounts’ data (without affecting the auction, which are deducted from other expenditure in the national accounts. 
fiscal deficit/surplus). This information can still be found on the Bundesbank’s

Deutsche Bundesbank
55  Monthly Report
February 2012
IX Public finances in Germany
 
3 General government: budgetary development (as per government’s financial statistics)
 
 
€ billion
Central, state and local government  1 Social security funds 2 General government, total
Revenue Expenditure
of which of which 3 
Finan- Person- Fixed Finan-
cial nel asset cialtransac- expend- Current forma- transac- Deficit / Rev- Expend- Deficit / Rev- Expend- Deficit /
Period Total 
4 Taxes tions 5 Total 4 iture grants Interest tion tions 5 surplus enue 6 iture surplus enue iture surplus
2004 pe 545.8 442.8 24.1 610.4 173.4 236.9 64.8 34.3 9.6 − 64.5 469.7 468.6 + 1.1 926.8 990.2 − 63.4
2005 pe 568.9 452.1 31.3 620.6 172.1 245.3 64.0 33.0 14.3 − 51.7 467.8 471.3 − 3.4 947.4 1,002.5 − 55.1
2006 pe 590.9 488.4 18.8 626.2 169.7 252.1 64.4 33.7 11.6 − 35.3 486.3 466.6 + 19.7 988.2 1,003.8 − 15.6
2007 pe 644.8 538.2 17.7 644.2 182.2 250.0 66.2 34.6 9.5 + 0.6 475.3 466.4 + 8.9 1,025.6 1,016.1 + 9.5
2008 pe 668.9 561.2 13.4 677.4 187.3 259.9 67.3 36.4 18.6 − 8.5 485.5 478.9 + 6.6 1,058.5 1,060.5 − 1.9
2009 pe 631.4 524.0 9.2 720.9 194.9 271.1 63.7 40.4 38.0 − 89.5 492.0 505.9 − 13.9 1,021.4 1,124.9 − 103.4
2010 pe 650.5 530.6 12.7 732.7 199.8 293.9 60.1 40.1 19.4 − 82.2 516.9 512.9 + 4.0 1,049.8 1,128.0 − 78.2
2009          Q1 p 156.6 128.7 1.7 175.4 45.9 67.2 22.8 5.0 10.0 − 18.9 117.9 122.3 − 4.4 250.8 274.1 − 23.3
         Q2 p 154.8 130.6 3.3 169.4 47.1 60.6 10.7 7.5 16.9 − 14.6 120.5 125.5 − 5.0 251.8 271.4 − 19.6
         Q3 p 148.9 124.4 2.1 174.9 47.6 65.0 19.8 10.5 4.5 − 26.0 120.1 127.6 − 7.5 245.2 278.7 − 33.5
         Q4 p 169.4 140.3 1.9 199.5 52.5 76.6 10.2 16.3 6.4 − 30.2 132.3 130.1 + 2.2 270.6 298.6 − 28.0
2010          Q1 p 147.9 121.6 2.6 180.4 47.6 74.8 21.2 5.5 4.9 − 32.5 123.6 127.6 − 4.0 242.2 278.7 − 36.5
         Q2 p 7 163.6 134.9 3.7 173.6 48.1 71.2 13.2 8.1 6.2 − 10.0 128.2 127.3 + 0.9 7 262.3 271.5 − 9.2
         Q3 p 153.8 127.6 3.0 177.3 48.3 69.8 16.1 10.5 3.4 − 23.6 124.7 125.6 − 1.0 251.5 276.0 − 24.5
         Q4 p 183.4 147.6 3.2 199.5 54.0 76.1 9.2 14.7 4.8 − 16.2 133.3 131.8 + 1.5 290.4 305.1 − 14.7
2011          Q1 p 162.9 134.9 4.1 183.6 49.7 73.8 21.2 6.3 4.6 − 20.7 127.3 127.2 + 0.1 261.0 281.5 − 20.5
         Q2 p 189.6 145.6 18.6 172.7 50.0 68.0 10.9 8.7 8.7 + 16.9 130.3 126.2 + 4.1 292.5 271.5 + 21.0
Source: Bundesbank calculations based on the data from the Federal Statistical mated. 3The development of the types of expenditure recorded here is influenced in
Office. 1Including subsidiary budgets, from 2007 also including the post office pen- part by statistical changeovers. 4Including discrepancies in clearing transactions be-
sion fund; excluding the special fund ”Provision for final payments for inflation-in- tween central, state and local government. 5On the revenue side, this contains pro-
dexed Federal securities”, which was set up in 2009. Unlike the annual figures based ceeds booked as disposals of equity interests and as loan repayments. On the expend-on the annual calculations of the Federal Statistical Office, the quarterly figures do iture side, this contains the acquisition of equity interests and loans granted. 6In-
not include municipal special purpose associations and various special ac- cluding Federal Government liquidity assistance to the Federal Labour Office. 7In-
counts. 2The annual figures do not tally with the sum of the quarterly figures, as the cluding the €4.4 billion proceeds received from the 2010 frequency auction. 
latter 
are all provisional. The quarterly figures for some insurance sectors are esti-
4 Central, state and local government: budgetary development (as per government’s financial statistics)
 
 
€ billion
Central government
State government  2,3 Local government 3 
Period Revenue 1 Expenditure Deficit / surplus Revenue Expenditure Deficit / surplus Revenue Expenditure Deficit / surplus
2004 233.9 273.6 − 39.7 233.5 257.1 − 23.6 147.0 150.1 − 3.1
2005 250.0 281.5 − 31.5 237.4 259.6 − 22.2 151.3 153.2 − 1.9
2006 254.6 282.8 − 28.2 250.3 260.1 − 9.8 161.1 157.4 + 3.72007 
pe 277.4 292.1 − 14.7 275.9 267.5 + 8.4 171.3 162.4 + 8.9
2008 pe 292.0 303.8 − 11.8 279.3 278.0 + 1.3 176.9 169.0 + 7.9
2009 pe 282.6 317.1 − 34.5 266.2 293.7 − 27.5 172.0 178.9 − 6.9
2010 pe 288.0 332.4 − 44.4 278.5 302.0 − 23.5 176.5 183.9 − 7.4
2009          Q1 p 65.8 76.8 − 11.0 65.3 75.9 − 10.6 35.8 39.0 − 3.1
         Q2 p 71.3 68.6 + 2.7 66.1 67.9 − 1.8 41.1 42.2 − 1.1
         Q3 p 68.6 84.5 − 15.9 63.1 69.4 − 6.3 42.5 45.1 − 2.6
         Q4 p 77.0 87.2 − 10.2 70.5 79.0 − 8.5 50.6 51.0 − 0.4
2010          Q1 p 61.1 82.6 − 21.5 65.0 73.5 − 8.5 34.6 41.2 − 6.6
         Q2 p 4 75.6 80.6 − 5.0 68.3 69.1 − 0.8 42.2 43.5 − 1.3
         Q3 p 66.2 82.7 − 16.6 68.5 73.3 − 4.8 43.8 45.2 − 1.4
         Q4 p 85.2 86.5 − 1.3 75.8 85.0 − 9.2 53.8 52.3 + 1.5
2011          Q1 p 65.4 84.5 − 19.1 74.1 75.6 − 1.5 37.1 42.5 − 5.3
         Q2 p 76.6 73.5 + 3.1 76.0 75.8 + 0.2 45.4 44.3 + 1.1
         Q3 p 72.6 84.8 − 12.2 71.9 75.1 − 3.2 46.4 46.6 − 0.2
Source: Bundesbank calculations based on the data from the Federal Statistical Berlin, Bremen and Hamburg. 3Unlike the annual figure based on the annual calcu-
Office. 1Any amounts of the Bundesbank’s profit distribution exceeding the refer- lations of the Federal Statistical Office, the quarterly figures do not include various
ence value that were used to repay parts of the debt of central government’s special special accounts and municipal special purpose associations. 4Including the
funds are not included here. 2Including the local authority level of the city-states €4.4 billion proceeds received from the 2010 frequency auction. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
56  Monthly Report
February 2012
IX Public finances in Germany
 
5 Central, state and local government: tax revenue
 
 
€ million
Central and state government and European Union
Memo item
Balance of Amounts deducted
Central State Local untransferred in the federal
Period Total Total government 1 government European Union 2 government 3 tax shares 4 budget 5 
2005 452,078 392,313 211,779 158,823 21,711 59,750 + 16 21,634
2006 488,444 421,151 225,634 173,374 22,142 67,316 − 22 21,742
2007 538,243 465,554 251,747 191,558 22,249 72,551 + 138 21,643
2008 561,182 484,182 260,690 200,411 23,081 77,190 − 190 21,510
2009 524,000 455,615 252,842 182,273 20,501 68,419 − 34 24,846
2010 530,587 460,230 254,537 181,326 24,367 70,385 − 28 28,726
2011 ... 496,739 276,599 195,676 24,464 ... ... 28,615
2010          Q1 121,321 104,370 54,316 41,777 8,278 11,299 + 5,652 7,133
         Q2 134,843 116,767 66,331 46,516 3,919 18,270 − 194 7,127
         Q3 127,311 109,956 61,146 43,102 5,709 17,564 − 209 7,329
         Q4 147,112 129,137 72,744 49,932 6,462 23,253 − 5,278 7,137
2011          Q1 135,590 115,878 60,579 46,582 8,717 13,640 + 6,071 6,989
         Q2 145,636 126,086 71,530 50,289 4,266 19,544 + 6 7,102
         Q3 136,382 117,812 66,277 45,938 5,598 18,916 − 346 7,662
         Q4 ... 136,963 78,213 52,866 5,883 ... ... 6,863
2010          Dec . 63,604 36,720 24,727 2,157 . . 2,379
2011          Dec . 66,185 38,821 25,694 1,670 . . 2,288
Sources: Federal Ministry of Finance, Federal Statistical Office and Bundesbank calcu- from central government tax revenue. 3Including local government taxes in the
lations. 1Before deducting supplementary central government grants, shares in city-states Berlin, Bremen and Hamburg. 4Difference between local government’s
energy tax revenue, compensation for the transfer of motor vehicle tax to central share in the joint taxes received by the state government cash offices in the period in
government, which are remitted to state government and consolidation question (see Table IX. 6) and the amounts passed on to local government in theaid.2Custom duties and shares in VAT and gross national income accruing to the EU same period. 5 Volume of the positions mentioned under footnote 1. 
 
 
6 Central and state government and European Union: tax revenue, by type
  
€ million
Joint taxes
Memo
Income taxes 2 Turnover taxes 5 item
Local
Local govern-
Invest- business Central State ment
Assessed ment Turnover tax govern- govern- EU share in
Wage income Corpora- income Turnover tax on trans- ment ment customs joint
Period Total 1 Total tax 3 tax tion tax tax 4 Total tax imports fers 6 taxes 7 taxes 7 duties taxes
2005 415,355 161,960 118,919 9,766 16,333 16,943 139,713 108,440 31,273 6,218 83,508 20,579 3,378 23,042
2006 446,139 182,614 122,612 17,567 22,898 19,537 146,688 111,318 35,370 7,013 84,215 21,729 3,880 24,988
2007 493,817 204,698 131,774 25,027 22,929 24,969 169,636 127,522 42,114 6,975 85,690 22,836 3,983 28,263
2008 515,498 220,483 141,895 32,685 15,868 30,035 175,989 130,789 45,200 6,784 86,302 21,937 4,002 31,316
2009 484,880 193,684 135,165 26,430 7,173 24,916 176,991 141,907 35,084 4,908 89,318 16,375 3,604 29,265
2010 488,731 192,816 127,904 31,179 12,041 21,691 180,042 136,459 43,582 5,925 93,426 12,146 4,378 28,501
2011 527,256 213,534 139,749 31,996 15,634 26,155 190,033 138,957 51,076 6,888 99,134 13,095 4,571 30,517
2010          Q1 111,163 45,127 30,255 6,155 1,951 6,766 42,891 34,054 8,837 215 19,001 2,814 1,115 6,793
         Q2 123,859 51,667 30,447 9,681 3,830 7,710 44,343 33,779 10,564 1,311 22,682 2,914 943 7,092
         Q3 116,691 42,813 30,445 7,320 1,588 3,460 44,997 33,258 11,740 1,574 22,922 3,242 1,143 6,734
         Q4 137,019 53,209 36,757 8,023 4,672 3,756 47,810 35,369 12,441 2,825 28,821 3,177 1,177 7,882
2011          Q1 123,131 50,328 32,478 6,755 2,485 8,611 47,389 35,528 11,861 366 20,515 3,408 1,124 7,253
         Q2 133,727 57,624 34,144 9,366 4,215 9,900 46,091 33,082 13,010 1,692 24,026 3,207 1,087 7,641
         Q3 125,021 47,420 33,590 7,111 3,028 3,691 47,161 34,232 12,929 1,735 24,309 3,229 1,169 7,209
         Q4 145,377 58,162 39,538 8,764 5,907 3,954 49,392 36,115 13,276 3,096 30,285 3,251 1,191 8,414
2010          Dec 68,024 34,746 17,496 9,274 6,024 1,952 16,022 11,811 4,212 1,378 14,345 1,153 380 4,420
2011          Dec 70,817 36,741 18,406 9,917 6,304 2,113 16,190 11,891 4,298 1,507 14,913 1,097 369 4,632
Source: Federal Ministry of Finance and Bundesbank calculations. 1This total, unlike deducting child benefit and subsidies for supplementary private pension
that in Table IX. 5, does not include the receipts from the equalisation of burdens plans. 4Final withholding tax on interest income and capital gains, non-assessed
levies, local business tax (less local business tax transfers to central and state govern- taxes on earnings. 5The allocation of revenue to central, state and local govern-
ment), real property taxes and other local government taxes, or the balance of un- ment, which is adjusted at more regular intervals, is regulated in section 1 of the Rev-transferred tax shares. 2Respective percentage share of central, state and local enue Adjustment Act. Respective percentage share of central, state and local govern-
government in revenue: wage tax and assessed income tax 42.5:42.5:15, corpor- ment in revenue for 2011: 53.9:44.1:2.0. The EU share is deducted from centralation tax and non-assessed taxes on earnings 50:50:-, final withholding tax on inter- government’s share. 6Respective percentage share of central and state government
est income and capital gains, non-assessed taxes on earnings 44:44:12. 3After for 2011: 22.1:77.9. 7 For the breakdown, see Table IX. 7. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
57  Monthly Report
February 2012
IX Public finances in Germany
 
7 Central, state and local government: individual taxes  
 
 
€ million
Central government taxes 1 State government taxes 1 Local government taxes
Tax on of which
the acqui-
Soli- Motor Motor sition of Inherit- Local Real
Period Energy Tobacco darity Insurance vehicle Electri- Spirits vehicle land and ance business property
tax tax surcharge tax tax 2 city tax tax Other tax 2 buildings tax Other 3 Total tax taxes
2005 40,101 14,273 10,315 8,750 . 6,462 2,142 1,465 8,674 4,791 4,097 3,018 42,941 32,129 10,247
2006 39,916 14,387 11,277 8,775 . 6,273 2,160 1,428 8,937 6,125 3,763 2,904 49,319 38,370 10,399
2007 38,955 14,254 12,349 10,331 . 6,355 1,959 1,488 8,898 6,952 4,203 2,783 51,401 40,116 10,713
2008 39,248 13,574 13,146 10,478 . 6,261 2,126 1,470 8,842 5,728 4,771 2,596 52,468 41,037 10,807
2009 39,822 13,366 11,927 10,548 3,803 6,278 2,101 1,473 4,398 4,857 4,550 2,571 44,028 32,421 10,936
2010 39,838 13,492 11,713 10,284 8,488 6,171 1,990 1,449 − 5,290 4,404 2,452 47,780 35,712 11,315
2011 40,036 14,414 12,781 10,755 8,422 7,247 2,149 3,330 − 6,366 4,246 2,484 ... ... ...
2010          Q1 4,446 2,462 2,856 4,496 2,345 1,498 526 372 − 1,229 918 667 10,374 7,641 2,518
         Q2 9,596 3,327 3,100 2,060 2,235 1,570 437 357 − 1,207 1,115 591 12,295 9,201 2,915
         Q3 10,172 3,608 2,615 2,110 2,012 1,563 489 354 − 1,430 1,216 597 12,194 8,618 3,373
         Q4 15,625 4,096 3,142 1,619 1,895 1,540 538 366 − 1,425 1,156 597 12,918 10,252 2,508
2011          Q1 4,457 2,893 3,072 4,869 2,349 1,785 574 516 − 1,555 1,170 683 12,825 9,948 2,631
         Q2 10,002 3,300 3,450 2,017 2,215 1,960 482 599 − 1,464 1,129 614 13,601 10,366 3,031
         Q3 10,058 3,418 2,879 2,145 2,006 1,763 541 1,499 − 1,581 1,039 609 13,095 9,386 3,473         Q4 15,519 4,803 3,379 1,723 1,852 1,739 553 716 − 1,766 907 578 ... ... ...
2010          Dec 8,602 1,807 1,953 457 657 541 199 131 − 501 411 241 . . .2011          Dec 8,409 2,134 2,046 490 612 565 203 454 − 623 278 196 . . .
Sources: Federal Ministry of Finance, Federal Statistical Office and Bundesbank calcu- enue is attributable to central government. Postings to state government shown there-
lations. 1For the sum total, see Table IX. 6. 2As of 1 July 2009, motor vehicle tax rev- after relate to the booking of cash flows. 3 Notably betting, lottery and beer tax.   
 
 
8 German pension insurance scheme: budgetary development and assets*
  
€ million
Revenue 1,2 Expenditure 1,2 Assets 1,5 
of which of which
Equity
Payments interests, Memo
from Pen- mort- item
central sioners’ gages Adminis-
Contri- govern- Pension health Deficit/ and other Real trative
Period Total butions 3 ment Total payments insurance 4 surplus Total Deposits 6 Securities loans 7 estate assets
2005 229,428 156,264 71,917 233,357 199,873 13,437 − 3,929 1,976 1,794 16 42 123 4,888
2006 241,231 168,083 71,773 233,668 200,459 13,053 + 7,563 10,047 9,777 115 46 109 4,912
2007 236,642 162,225 72,928 235,459 201,642 13,665 + 1,183 12,196 11,270 765 46 115 4,8192008 242,770 167,611 73,381 238,995 204,071 14,051 + 3,775 16,531 16,313 36 56 126 4,6452009 244,689 169,183 74,313 244,478 208,475 14,431 + 211 16,821 16,614 23 64 120 4,525
2010 250,133 172,767 76,173 248,076 211,852 14,343 + 2,057 19,375 18,077 1,120 73 105 4,464
2011 
p 254,358 177,415 75,689 249,913 212,808 15,007 + 4,445 25,339 22,226 2,919 79 114 4,410
2009          Q1 58,681 39,891 18,500 60,105 51,554 3,633 − 1,424 14,902 14,699 15 56 132 4,618         Q2 60,812 42,140 18,384 60,263 51,410 3,626 + 549 15,280 15,082 15 59 124 4,593         Q3 59,783 41,142 18,364 61,841 52,869 3,580 − 2,058 13,647 13,428 40 60 119 4,585         Q4 64,864 46,005 18,594 61,993 52,917 3,583 + 2,871 16,812 16,608 23 61 120 4,582
2010          Q1 59,761 40,601 18,917 61,861 53,059 3,582 − 2,100 14,922 14,717 20 64 120 4,490
         Q2 62,249 43,054 18,923 61,999 53,006 3,585 + 250 15,254 15,053 20 69 112 4,478         Q3 61,237 42,048 18,912 62,091 53,102 3,589 − 854 14,853 14,656 20 68 109 4,474         Q4 66,317 47,060 18,933 61,887 52,966 3,579 + 4,430 19,274 17,978 1,120 68 108 4,476
2011          Q1 60,804 41,608 18,902 62,188 53,176 3,742 − 1,384 18,063 17,069 819 74 101 4,482
         Q2 63,452 44,307 18,855 62,058 52,920 3,731 + 1,394 19,704 18,507 1,019 78 100 4,475         Q3 62,354 43,109 18,902 62,844 53,341 3,761 − 490 19,959 19,266 519 79 94 4,445         Q4 67,748 48,391 19,030 62,823 53,371 3,774 + 4,925 25,339 22,226 2,919 79 114 4,410
Sources: Federal Ministry of Labour and Social Affairs and German pension insurance cluding investment spending and proceeds. 3Including contributions for recipients
scheme. *Excluding the German pension insurance scheme for the mining, railway of government cash benefits. 4Including long-term care insurance for pensioners
and maritime industries. 1The final annual figures do not tally with the quarterly fig- until 2004 Q1. 5Largely corresponds to the sustainability reserves. End of year or
ures, as the latter are all provisional. 2Including financial compensation payments. Ex- quarter. 6 Including cash. 7 Excluding loans to other social security funds. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
58  Monthly Report
February 2012
IX Public finances in Germany
 
9 Federal Employment Agency: budgetary development*
 
 
€ million
Revenue Expenditure
of which of which Deficit
offsetting
Unemployment support 1,2 Job promotion 2,3 grant orloan from
Measures central
Contri- Western Eastern Western Eastern financed Deficit/ govern-
Period Total 
4 butions Levies 5 Total 6 Total Germany Germany Total Germany Germany by levies  7 surplus ment
2004 50,314 47,211 1,674 54,490 29,746 21,821 7,925 16,843 9,831 7,011 1,641 − 4,176 4,175
2005 52,692 46,989 1,436 53,089 27,654 20,332 7,322 11,590 7,421 4,169 1,450 − 397 397
2006 55,384 51,176 1,123 44,162 23,249 17,348 5,901 9,259 6,185 3,074 1,089 + 11,221 0
2007 42,838 32,264 971 36,196 17,356 13,075 4,282 8,370 5,748 2,623 949 + 6,643 −
2008 38,289 26,452 974 39,407 14,283 10,652 3,631 8,712 6,222 2,490 920 − 1,118 −
2009 34,254 22,046 1,000 48,057 20,866 16,534 4,332 11,595 8,794 2,801 1,946 − 13,803 −
2010 37,070 22,614 3,222 45,213 19,456 15,629 3,827 10,791 8,287 2,504 740 − 8,143 5,200
2009          Q1 6,283 5,248 192 10,396 4,723 3,556 1,167 2,318 1,688 630 480 − 4,113 −
         Q2 6,490 5,421 261 12,391 5,563 4,376 1,187 2,893 2,193 700 491 − 5,901 −
         Q3 6,853 5,316 250 12,480 5,465 4,439 1,026 3,026 2,325 701 630 − 5,626 −
         Q4 14,627 6,061 296 12,790 5,115 4,163 951 3,358 2,588 770 345 + 1,837 −
2010          Q1 10,020 5,196 714 11,681 6,475 5,112 1,362 2,957 2,263 694 208 − 1,661 −
         Q2 10,649 5,601 784 10,501 5,264 4,148 1,116 2,872 2,204 668 184 + 148 −
         Q3 8,109 5,527 808 8,887 4,082 3,353 729 2,431 1,863 567 193 − 778 −
         Q4 8,291 6,290 916 14,144 3,635 3,016 619 2,531 1,957 575 154 − 5,853 5,200
2011          Q1 10,259 5,853 123 9,583 4,602 3,701 901 2,660 2,048 612 186 + 676 −
         Q2 8,802 6,358 60 8,246 3,710 3,007 703 2,285 1,753 532 175 + 556 −
         Q3 7,467 6,205 76 7,450 3,293 2,707 586 1,910 1,464 446 187 + 17 −
Source: Federal Employment Agency. *Excluding pension fund. 1Unemployment icit offsetting grant or loan. 5Levies to promote winter construction and to pay insolv-
benefit and short-time working benefit. 2Including contributions to the statutory ency compensation to employees. 6From 2005, including a compensatory amount
health, pension and long-term care insurance schemes. 3Vocational training, meas- or a reintegration payment to central government. 7Promotion of winter con-
ures to encourage job take-up, rehabilitation, job creation measures, compensation struction and insolvency compensation for employees. top-up payments and business start-up grants. 4Excluding central government def-
 
 
10 Statutory health insurance scheme: budgetary development
  
€ million
Revenue 1 Expenditure 1 
of which of which
Central Thera- Adminis-
govern- peutical trative
Contri- ment Hospital Pharma- Medical Dental treatment Sickness expend- Deficit/
Period Total butions 2 funds 3 Total treatment ceuticals treatment treatment  4 and aids benefits iture 5 surplus
2004 144,279 140,120 1,000 140,260 47,594 21,811 22,955 11,263 8,281 6,367 8,196 + 4,020
2005 145,742 140,250 2,500 144,071 48,959 25,358 23,096 9,928 8,284 5,868 8,303 + 1,671
2006 149,929 142,183 4,200 148,297 50,327 25,835 23,896 10,364 8,303 5,708 8,319 + 1,632
2007 156,058 149,964 2,500 154,314 50,850 27,791 24,788 10,687 8,692 6,017 8,472 + 1,744
2008 162,516 155,883 2,500 161,334 52,623 29,145 25,887 10,926 9,095 6,583 8,680 + 1,182
2009 169,758 158,594 7,200 170,823 55,977 30,696 27,635 11,219 9,578 7,258 8,947 − 1,065
2010 179,878 160,792 15,700 176,036 56,697 30,147 28,432 11,419 10,609 7,797 9,553 + 3,842
2009          Q1 42,502 39,324 2,575 41,432 14,154 7,463 6,969 2,797 2,095 1,822 1,977 + 1,069
         Q2 42,540 40,464 1,377 42,400 14,092 7,652 6,810 2,857 2,392 1,779 2,083 + 140
         Q3 42,752 38,827 3,002 42,548 13,967 7,574 6,981 2,684 2,437 1,746 2,324 + 204
         Q4 41,635 39,992 246 44,445 13,892 8,052 7,021 2,904 2,607 1,895 2,604 − 2,809
2010          Q1 6 43,093 38,542 3,878 43,274 14,419 7,549 7,255 2,871 2,368 1,996 2,130 − 182
         Q2 44,440 39,826 3,889 43,999 14,037 7,870 7,128 2,882 2,669 1,955 2,261 + 441
         Q3 44,457 39,808 3,884 43,662 14,122 7,592 7,007 2,786 2,676 1,903 2,255 + 795
         Q4 47,505 42,600 4,049 44,842 14,144 7,307 7,107 2,952 2,853 1,943 2,876 + 2,663
2011          Q1 45,339 40,871 3,783 44,392 15,075 7,158 7,361 2,893 2,528 2,210 2,173 + 947
         Q2 46,887 42,370 3,783 44,955 14,601 7,239 7,372 3,001 2,834 2,106 2,263 + 1,931
         Q3 46,865 42,298 3,783 44,432 14,594 7,236 7,160 2,768 2,762 2,069 2,292 + 2,433
Source: Federal Ministry of Health. 1The final annual figures do not tally with the penses for levying contributions incurred by other social insurance funds. Including ad-
sum of the quarterly figures, as the latter are all provisional. Excluding revenue and ministrative expenditure on disease management programmes. 6Data on individual
expenditure as part of the risk structure compensation scheme. 2Including contri- expenditure categories for 2010 only partly comparable with prior-year figures owing
butions from subsidised low-paid part-time employment. 3Federal grant and liquid- to a change in the statistical definition. 
ity assistance. 4Including dentures. 5Net, ie after deducting reimbursements for ex-

Deutsche Bundesbank
59  Monthly Report
February 2012
IX Public finances in Germany
 
11 Statutory long-term care insurance scheme: budgetary development
 
 
€ million
Revenue 1 Expenditure 1 
of which
Contributions to
of which Non-cash In-patient Nursing pension insur- Administrative Deficit/
Period Total Contributions 2 Total care benefits care benefit ance scheme 3 expenditure surplus
2004 16,817 16,654 17,605 2,365 8,349 4,049 925 851 − 788
2005 17,526 17,385 17,891 2,409 8,516 4,050 890 875 − 366
2006 17,749 17,611 18,064 2,437 8,671 4,017 862 886 − 3152007 18,036 17,858 18,385 2,475 8,831 4,050 861 896 − 3502008 19,785 19,608 19,163 2,605 9,054 4,225 868 941 + 6222009 21,300 21,137 20,314 2,742 9,274 4,443 878 984 + 986
2010 21,864 21,659 21,539 2,933 9,567 4,673 869 1,028 + 325
2009          Q1 5,110 5,082 4,970 676 2,284 1,104 215 274 + 139
         Q2 5,275 5,253 4,977 662 2,308 1,100 217 248 + 298         Q3 5,279 5,239 5,157 706 2,338 1,115 219 246 + 122         Q4 5,650 5,614 5,223 710 2,358 1,148 225 228 + 427
2010          Q1 5,241 5,175 5,298 722 2,362 1,151 217 264 − 56
         Q2 5,398 5,369 5,302 707 2,378 1,167 219 258 + 95         Q3 5,385 5,358 5,416 735 2,398 1,160 220 266 − 31         Q4 5,760 5,739 5,432 743 2,417 1,195 225 229 + 328
2011          Q1 5,306 5,269 5,457 750 2,408 1,165 216 277 − 150
         Q2 5,519 5,496 5,396 713 2,417 1,173 210 263 + 123         Q3 5,513 5,486 5,551 774 2,442 1,191 221 255 − 38
Source: Federal Ministry of Health. 1The final annual figures do not tally with the special contributions for childless persons (0.25% of income subject to insurance
sum of the quarterly figures, as the latter are all provisional. 2Since 2005 including contributions). 3 For non-professional carers. 
 
 
12 Central government: borrowing in the 13 Central, state and local government: debt by creditor*
market
 
€ million € million
T
otal new borrowing 1 of which of which Banking system Domestic non-banks
Change Change
in money in money Period Socialmarket market (End of year Bundes- Credit security Foreign
Period Gross 
2 Net loans deposits or quarter) Total bank institutions funds Other  1 creditors pe 
2004 + 227,441 + 44,410 + 1,844 + 802 2004 1,430,582 4,440 544,100 430 307,012 574,600
2005 + 224,922 + 35,479 + 4,511 + 6,041 2005 1,489,029 4,440 518,400 488 312,201 653,500
2006 + 221,873 + 32,656 + 3,258 + 6,308 2006 1,533,697 4,440 496,800 480 329,177 702,8002007 + 214,995 + 6,996 + 1,086 − 4,900 2007 1,540,381 4,440 456,900 476 317,065 761,5002008 + 233,356 + 26,208 + 6,888 + 9,036 2008 1,564,590 4,440 435,600 510 305,040 819,0002009 + 312,729 + 66,821 − 8,184 + 106 2009 1,657,842 4,440 438,700 507 312,695 901,500
2010 + 302,694 + 42,397 − 5,041 + 1,607 2010 
p 1,732,374 4,440 395,100 429 286,505 1,045,900
2009          Q1 + 66,560 + 20,334 − 2,256 − 7,856 2009          Q1 1,594,403 4,440 426,200 514 302,249 861,000
         Q2 + 96,270 + 46,283 − 2,791 + 26,434          Q2 1,646,307 4,440 430,300 520 301,347 909,700         Q3 + 82,451 + 1,343 + 1,268 − 15,901          Q3 1,651,955 4,440 439,500 520 299,295 908,200         Q4 + 67,448 − 1,139 − 4,406 − 2,572          Q4 1,657,842 4,440 438,700 507 312,695 901,500
2010          Q1 + 74,369 + 12,637 − 5,322 − 1,520 2010          Q1 1,678,191 4,440 450,100 508 318,743 904,400
         Q2 + 83,082 + 3,666 − 4,143 + 1,950          Q2 1,687,957 4,440 469,600 468 301,949 911,500         Q3 + 79,589 + 14,791 + 250 − 4,625          Q3 1,712,685 4,440 470,200 473 297,372 940,200         Q4 + 65,655 + 11,304 + 4,174 + 5,803          Q4 
p 1,732,374 4,440 395,100 429 286,505 1,045,900
2011          Q1 + 76,394 + 15,958 − 607 − 5,206 2011          Q1 p 1,748,902 4,440 410,000 495 270,568 1,063,400
         Q2 + 77,158 + 10,392 − 49 + 26,625          Q2 p 1,761,568 4,440 400,800 490 247,538 1,108,300
         Q3 + 59,256 − 8,152 − 4,177 − 22,608          Q3 pe 1,757,914 4,440 384,400 490 240,484 1,128,100
Source:  Federal  Republic  of  Germany − Finance Agency. Source:  Bundesbank  calculations  based  on  data   from  the  Federal  Statistical 
1 Including  the  Financial  Market  Stabilisation Fund,  the In- Office. * Excluding direct intergovernmental borrowing. 1 Calculated as a residual. 
vestment and  Repayment Fund  and  the  Restructuring Fund for Credit Institutions. 2 After deducting repurchases. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
60  Monthly Report
February 2012
IX Public finances in Germany
 
14 Central, state and local government: debt by category*
 
 
€ million
Loans from non-banks Old debt
Direct
Treasury Five-year lending
Period discount Federal Federal Federal by credit Social Equal-
(End of year paper Treasury notes savings bonds institu- security isation
or quarter) Total (Bubills) 1 notes 2,3 (Bobls) 2 notes (Bunds) 2 Day-bond tions 4 funds Other 4 claims 5 Other 5,6 
Central, state and local government
2005 1,489,029 36,945 310,044 174,423 11,055 521,801 . 366,978 488 62,765 4,443 88
2006 1,533,697 37,834 320,288 179,940 10,199 552,028 . 356,514 480 71,889 4,443 82
2007 1,540,381 39,510 329,108 177,394 10,287 574,512 . 329,588 476 74,988 4,443 76
2008 1,564,590 44,620 337,511 172,037 9,649 584,144 3,174 325,648 510 82,781 4,443 73
2009 1,657,842 105,970 361,727 174,219 9,471 594,999 2,495 300,927 507 103,014 4,442 71
2010          Q3 1,712,685 84,808 389,502 203,056 8,867 618,150 2,058 297,349 473 103,908 4,440 75
         Q4 p 1,732,374 87,042 391,976 195,534 8,704 628,757 1,975 297,584 429 115,931 4,440 2
2011          Q1 p 1,748,902 84,961 391,885 211,821 8,500 629,716 1,845 300,997 495 114,241 4,440 2
         Q2 p 1,761,568 80,998 402,903 208,669 8,497 644,844 1,819 292,661 490 116,245 4,440 2
         Q3 pe 1,757,914 74,764 410,222 219,785 8,349 634,402 1,970 288,654 490 114,837 4,440 2
Central government7,8,9,10,11,12
2005 886,254 36,098 108,899 174,371 11,055 510,866 . 29,318 408 10,710 4,443 87
2006 918,911 37,798 103,624 179,889 10,199 541,404 . 30,030 408 11,036 4,443 82
2007 939,988 37,385 102,083 177,394 10,287 574,156 . 22,829 408 10,928 4,443 75
2008 966,197 40,795 105,684 172,037 9,649 583,930 3,174 35,291 448 10,674 4,443 72
2009 1,033,017 104,409 113,637 174,219 9,471 594,780 2,495 18,347 448 10,700 4,442 70
2010          Q3 1,064,111 82,908 124,948 203,056 8,867 617,845 2,058 9,084 408 10,425 4,440 74
         Q4 1,075,415 85,867 126,220 195,534 8,704 628,582 1,975 13,349 408 10,335 4,440 2
2011          Q1 1,091,373 82,607 129,208 211,821 8,500 629,541 1,845 13,056 408 9,945 4,440 2
         Q2 1,101,764 78,961 131,348 208,669 8,497 644,668 1,819 13,002 408 9,951 4,440 2
         Q3 1,093,612 73,277 132,428 219,785 8,349 634,226 1,970 9,091 408 9,637 4,440 2
State government
2005 471,375 847 201,146 .... 221,163 3 48,216 . 1
2006 481,850 36 216,665 .... 209,270 2 55,876 . 1
2007 484,373 2,125 227,025 .... 194,956 2 60,264 . 1
2008 483,875 3,825 231,827 .... 179,978 3 68,241 . 1
2009 505,359 1,561 248,091 .... 167,310 8 88,389 . 1
2010          Q3 523,883 1,900 264,554 .... 167,854 15 89,558 . 1
         Q4 p 526,118 1,176 265,756 .... 162,452 1 96,733 . 1
2011          Q1 p 524,422 2,354 262,677 .... 163,890 67 95,433 . 1
         Q2 p 525,501 2,037 271,555 .... 154,415 62 97,431 . 1
         Q3 p 529,570 1,487 277,794 .... 153,888 62 96,338 . 1
Local government13
2005 116,033 . − . . 466 . 111,889 77 3,601 . .
2006 118,380 . − . . 256 . 113,265 70 4,789 . .
2007 115,920 . − . . 256 . 111,803 66 3,796 . .
2008 114,518 . − . . 214 . 110,379 60 3,866 . .
2009 119,466 . − . . 219 . 115,270 52 3,925 . .
2010          Q3 124,691 . − . . 305 . 120,411 50 3,925 . .
         Q4 p 130,842 . − . . 175 . 121,784 20 8,863 . .
2011          Q1 p 133,108 . − . . 175 . 124,050 20 8,863 . .
         Q2 p 134,302 . − . . 175 . 125,244 20 8,863 . .
         Q3 pe 134,732 . − . . 175 . 125,674 20 8,863 . .
Special funds7,8,9,14
2005 15,367 . − 51 . 10,469 . 4,609 − 238 . .
2006 14,556 . − 51 . 10,368 . 3,950 − 188 . .
2007 100 . − − . 100 . − − − . .
2008 − . − − . − . − − − . .
2009 − . − − . − . − − − . .
2010          Q3 − . − − . − . − − − . .
         Q4 − . − − . − . − − − . .
2011          Q1 − . − − . − . − − − . .
         Q2 − . − − . − . − − − . .
         Q3 − . − − . − . − − − . .
Source: Bundesbank calculations based on data from the Federal Statistical joint issuance of Federal securities is recorded here under central government and its
Office. *Excluding direct intergovernmental borrowing. 1Including Treasury finan- special funds in accordance with the agreed allocation ratios. 8On 1 January 2005
cing paper. 2Excluding issuers’ holdings of their own securities. 3Treasury notes central government assumed joint responsibility for the debts of the German Unity
issued by state government include long-term notes. 4Mainly loans against bor- Fund. From that date on, the aforementioned special fund is recorded under central
rowers’ notes and cash advances. Including loans raised abroad. Other loans from government. 9On 1 July 2007 central government assumed joint responsibility for
non-banks, including loans from public supplementary pension funds and liabilities the debts of the ERP Special Fund. From that date on, the aforementioned specialarising from the investment assistance levy. 5Excluding offsets against outstanding fund is recorded under central government. 10From December 2008, including debt
claims. 6Old debt mainly denominated in foreign currency, in accordance with the of the Financial Market Stabilisation Fund. 11From March 2009, including debt of
London Debts Agreement, old liabilities arising from housing construction and liabil- the Investment and Repayment Fund. 12From January 2011, including debt of the Re-
ities arising from housing construction by the former GDR’s armed forces and from structuring Fund for Credit Institutions. 13Including debt of municipal special pur-
housing construction in connection with the return of the troops of the former USSR pose associations. Data other than year-end figures have been estimated. 14ERP
stationed in eastern Germany to their home country; excluding debt securities in own Special Fund (up to the end of June 2007), German Unity Fund (up to the end ofportfolios. 7In contrast to the capital market statistics, the debt incurred through the 2004) and Indemnification Fund. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
61  Monthly Report
February 2012
X Economic conditions in Germany
  
1 Origin and use of domestic product, distribution of national income
  
  
  
  2010   2011
  2009   2010   2011   2009   2010   2011   Q1   Q2   Q3   Q4   Q1   Q2   Q3
Item Index 2005=100 Annual percentage change
At  constant  prices,  chained
  I Origin of domestic product
Production sector
(excluding construction) 90.2 99.0 104.9 − 17.9 9.8 6.0 7.2 12.5 9.2 10.3 10.8 7.3 6.4Construction 94.9 96.6 99.9 − 4.1 1.7 3.5 − 1.7 6.2 2.7 − 0.9 9.5 0.8 0.8Wholesale/retail trade, transportand storage, hotel and restaurantservices 104.2 108.1 112.1 − 5.2 3.8 3.7 1.7 3.6 4.7 4.9 6.1 4.2 2.8Information and communication 135.1 141.8 144.2 9.0 5.0 1.7 4.0 5.4 4.5 6.0 1.2 1.5 1.3Financial and insuranceactivities 128.9 128.8 129.9 11.6 − 0.1 0.9 2.5 − 0.3 − 2.5 − 0.0 0.4 − 0.5 2.0Real estate activities 107.6 107.8 108.7 2.0 0.2 0.8 1.3 − 0.3 0.4 − 0.5 0.0 1.2 0.7Business services 
1 99.1 102.8 106.8 − 11.7 3.8 3.9 1.7 3.7 5.5 4.1 4.9 4.5 2.9
Public services, education and
health 107.1 108.8 109.9 2.1 1.6 1.0 2.8 1.7 1.7 0.2 0.6 0.7 0.5Other services 106.5 107.8 106.8 0.8 1.2 − 0.9 1.6 1.5 1.7 − 0.0 − 0.5 − 0.8 − 1.5
Gross value added 103.0 107.2 110.4 − 5.6 4.1 3.0 3.3 4.8 4.2 4.1 4.5 3.3 2.6Gross domestic product 
2 102.7 106.5 109.7 − 5.1 3.7 3.0 2.6 4.4 4.0 3.8 5.0 3.0 2.5
 II Use of domestic product
Private consumption 3 101.8 102.5 104.0 − 0.1 0.6 1.5 − 0.1 − 0.2 0.9 1.8 2.1 1.6 1.2
Government consumption 109.0 110.9 112.2 3.3 1.7 1.2 2.7 1.2 1.5 1.2 0.6 1.6 1.4
Machinery and equipment 98.7 109.1 118.1 − 22.8 10.5 8.3 0.3 9.3 13.1 17.6 15.3 9.9 7.9Premises 101.2 103.4 109.0 − 3.0 2.2 5.4 − 1.9 6.1 3.4 0.1 13.3 3.0 2.8Other investment 
4 125.9 131.9 138.1 0.6 4.7 4.8 4.3 4.3 4.3 5.9 4.8 4.8 5.0
Changes in inventories 5, 6 . . . − 0.9 0.6 − 0.1 0.0 1.7 0.3 0.5 0.1 − 0.3 0.2
Domestic use 103.2 105.7 108.0 − 2.6 2.4 2.2 0.4 3.3 2.4 3.4 3.5 2.1 2.2Net exports 
6 . . . − 2.6 1.5 0.8 2.2 1.3 1.6 0.7 1.6 1.0 0.4
Exports 108.3 123.2 133.2 − 13.6 13.7 8.2 8.4 17.7 15.0 13.9 12.7 7.7 7.9Imports 110.6 123.5 132.4 − 9.2 11.7 7.2 3.6 16.6 12.2 14.6 10.3 6.3 7.7
Gross domestic product 
2 102.7 106.5 109.7 − 5.1 3.7 3.0 2.6 4.4 4.0 3.8 5.0 3.0 2.5
At  current  prices  (€ billion)
III Use of domestic product
Private consumption 3 1,387.4 1,423.0 1,475.2 − 0.0 2.6 3.7 1.9 1.7 2.9 3.7 4.2 3.8 3.2
Government consumption 475.8 488.8 501.8 5.1 2.7 2.7 4.3 2.5 2.0 2.1 1.8 3.3 2.8Machinery and equipment 155.1 170.8 184.8 − 23.0 10.1 8.2 − 0.0 9.1 12.9 17.2 15.1 9.6 7.6Premises 227.1 235.0 254.5 − 1.9 3.5 8.3 − 1.5 7.7 5.2 1.4 16.2 5.8 5.8Other investment 
4 27.0 27.8 28.6 − 2.9 2.7 2.9 1.9 2.7 2.8 3.3 3.1 2.8 2.9
Changes in inventories 5 − 16.5 − 4.0 − 8.3 . . . . . . . . . .
Domestic use 2,256.0 2,341.4 2,436.5 − 2.7 3.8 4.1 1.8 4.7 3.7 4.9 5.3 4.1 4.0Net exports 118.5 135.5 133.5 . . . . . . . . . .
Exports 995.9 1,159.8 1,288.5 − 16.2 16.5 11.1 8.4 20.7 19.1 17.6 17.5 10.9 10.0Imports 877.4 1,024.4 1,155.0 − 15.2 16.7 12.8 4.1 22.0 19.1 22.0 19.3 12.2 11.8
Gross domestic product 
2 2,374.5 2,476.8 2,570.0 − 4.0 4.3 3.8 3.7 5.1 4.4 4.1 5.3 3.9 3.5
IV Prices (2005=100)
Private consumption 104.3 106.3 108.5 0.1 1.9 2.1 2.0 1.9 2.0 1.9 2.1 2.2 2.0Gross domestic product 103.9 104.6 105.4 1.2 0.6 0.8 1.1 0.7 0.4 0.3 0.3 0.9 1.0Terms of trade 101.3 99.2 96.9 3.8 − 2.0 − 2.4 − 0.5 − 1.9 − 2.4 − 3.0 − 3.6 − 2.5 − 1.8
V  Distribution of national income
Compensation of employees 1,231.5 1,262.9 1,319.9 0.1 2.5 4.5 1.3 2.6 2.9 3.3 4.4 4.8 4.0Entrepreneurial and propertyincome 574.7 635.0 644.4 − 13.5 10.5 1.5 14.2 15.8 7.0 6.3 5.6 1.5 3.4
National income 1,806.2 1,897.8 1,964.3 − 4.6 5.1 3.5 5.5 6.4 4.4 4.2 4.8 3.8 3.8
Memo item: Gross national
income 2,424.9 2,522.8 2,609.9 − 3.2 4.0 3.5 4.0 4.9 3.7 3.6 5.1 3.4 3.5
Source: Federal Statistical Office; figures computed in November 2011. Initial annual ing households. 4Intangible fixed asset formation (inter alia, computer software and
results for 2011: figures computed in January 2012. 1Professional, scientific, techni- entertainment, literary or artistic originals) and cultivated assets. 5Including net in-
cal, administration and support service activities. 2Gross value added plus taxes on crease in valuables. 6 Contribution of growth to GDP. 
products (netted with subsidies on products). 3Including non-profit institutions serv-

Deutsche Bundesbank
62  Monthly Report
February 2012
 X Economic conditions in Germany
 
2 Output in the production sector*
 
 
Adjusted for working-day variations  o 
Industry
by main industrial grouping of which:  by economic sector
Manu-
Manu- facture of
facture of computers,basic metals Motor
electronic
and vehicles, and optical
Production Inter- Non- fabricated products Machinery trailers
sector, Construc- mediate Capital Durable durable metal and and semi- and electrical
total tion Energy Total goods goods goods goods products equipment equipment trailers
2005=100  
  
% of total 1 100.00 5.56 8.76 85.69 33.96 35.37 2.78 13.58 12.15 10.82 12.48 12.34
Period
2007 111.6 108.8 98.2 113.1 114.5 114.9 108.4 105.8 114.0 124.4 119.5 109.7
2008 111.5 108.3 95.6 113.4 114.2 116.8 104.0 104.4 114.4 128.8 124.5 104.5
2009 94.3 108.2 90.6 93.7 93.3 92.0 87.6 100.6 87.5 100.9 92.2 82.0
2010 103.9 108.5 93.6 104.6 107.1 103.7 95.7 102.4 101.7 117.5 101.5 102.3
2011 x,p 112.0 123.0 e 87.0 113.9 116.1 116.5 100.3 104.4 112.6 134.1 115.1 116.3
 
2010          June 106.5 127.7 81.5 107.6 110.7 108.1 96.4 100.6 105.8 120.0 104.8 108.8
         July 105.2 132.3 86.5 105.4 111.2 101.7 90.0 103.5 105.1 119.7 100.0 97.8
         Aug 98.7 124.6 82.0 98.8 106.5 91.4 84.4 101.9 99.0 115.6 95.2 78.5
         Sep 111.8 133.6 83.8 113.2 114.4 114.7 107.2 107.5 108.9 127.4 110.8 119.1
         Oct 114.7 135.2 94.4 115.5 117.7 115.6 110.0 110.7 112.7 132.2 110.2 121.0
         Nov 115.4 127.7 98.3 116.4 115.9 119.7 109.2 110.8 111.8 134.2 116.6 119.4
         Dec 101.8 64.6 108.6 103.5 93.2 116.6 88.8 98.1 89.9 118.8 129.3 95.8
2011          Jan 100.8 75.7 105.5 102.0 108.4 97.7 94.0 99.1 103.5 120.6 92.2 101.2
         Feb 105.2 86.5 95.2 107.4 110.4 108.3 99.5 99.0 106.8 126.1 101.5 117.0
         Mar 118.7 123.4 98.6 120.4 122.2 124.0 109.8 109.0 118.5 136.8 123.2 128.6
         Apr 111.0 132.0 84.4 112.4 116.3 112.7 99.8 104.1 112.0 126.1 110.3 116.9
         May 111.2 133.6 78.9 113.1 117.0 114.3 97.2 103.4 114.0 127.6 110.3 119.3
         June 114.1 134.1 77.4 116.5 120.0 119.6 94.8 104.3 116.7 137.0 120.9 117.1
         July 116.0 142.9 78.9 118.0 122.5 119.6 101.2 106.2 117.9 142.0 119.0 119.5
         Aug 107.0 133.1 77.4 108.4 115.5 106.4 84.5 101.0 108.3 135.1 109.1 98.1
         Sep 117.8 140.6 76.1 120.6 122.1 124.8 110.7 107.8 117.0 146.3 123.1 127.2
         Oct  x 119.5 141.4 87.0 121.4 122.7 125.1 112.0 110.5 120.8 143.0 118.6 129.7
         Nov  x 120.5 139.9 90.9 122.3 120.9 129.2 110.5 110.3 119.9 146.0 126.1 127.7
         Dec  x,p 102.7 93.2 e 93.2 104.3 95.2 116.7 89.1 97.6 95.4 122.5 127.2 93.8
 
Annual percentage change  
 
2007 5.9 2.9 − 2.8 6.9 6.9 8.4 1.0 4.0 + 6.2 + 10.3 + 11.2 + 6.9
2008 − 0.1 − 0.5 − 2.6 0.3 − 0.3 1.7 − 4.1 − 1.3 + 0.4 + 3.5 + 4.2 − 4.7
2009 − 15.4 − 0.1 − 5.2 − 17.4 − 18.3 − 21.2 − 15.8 − 3.6 − 23.5 − 21.7 − 25.9 − 21.5
2010 10.2 0.3 3.3 11.6 14.8 12.7 9.2 1.8 + 16.2 + 16.5 + 10.1 + 24.8
2011 x,p 7.8 13.4 e − 7.1 8.9 8.4 12.3 4.8 2.0 + 10.7 + 14.1 + 13.4 + 13.7
 
2010          June 10.5 3.1 − 3.1 12.2 16.9 11.4 14.9 2.3 + 19.4 + 21.7 + 10.1 + 19.3
         July 11.2 4.8 0.5 12.8 16.3 13.3 12.4 3.8 + 19.7 + 20.5 + 16.3 + 17.0
         Aug 11.0 2.0 − 2.8 13.3 15.4 15.5 14.1 4.0 + 17.0 + 20.5 + 21.3 + 20.4
         Sep 8.2 3.5 − 2.4 9.5 12.2 10.1 7.8 1.7 + 13.4 + 16.6 + 8.1 + 15.5
         Oct 12.5 7.3 1.0 14.0 13.7 18.6 11.7 3.8 + 16.1 + 18.1 + 22.6 + 23.7
         Nov 11.3 5.4 2.7 12.6 12.1 17.6 6.3 2.8 + 12.6 + 17.8 + 25.4 + 19.6
         Dec 11.7 − 23.3 4.8 14.6 11.9 23.3 7.1 0.1 + 12.9 + 19.2 + 25.4 + 34.6
2011          Jan 12.4 52.6 − 3.7 13.0 13.4 18.4 6.1 1.4 + 17.2 + 21.0 + 19.4 + 22.4
         Feb 15.0 56.1 − 3.1 15.4 14.9 20.5 8.9 5.0 + 17.2 + 22.1 + 22.9 + 27.2
         Mar 11.7 17.7 0.0 12.3 11.7 16.7 10.6 3.1 + 12.4 + 18.1 + 19.8 + 18.7
         Apr 9.7 7.1 − 6.8 11.4 9.6 15.6 9.9 5.3 + 11.7 + 14.8 + 18.3 + 17.4
         May 7.5 8.8 − 13.5 9.4 7.4 13.6 5.5 3.9 + 11.1 + 13.0 + 15.1 + 13.9
         June 7.1 5.0 − 5.0 8.3 8.4 10.6 − 1.7 3.7 + 10.3 + 14.2 + 15.4 + 7.6
         July 10.3 8.0 − 8.8 12.0 10.2 17.6 12.4 2.6 + 12.2 + 18.6 + 19.0 + 22.2
         Aug 8.4 6.8 − 5.6 9.7 8.5 16.4 0.1 − 0.9 + 9.4 + 16.9 + 14.6 + 25.0
         Sep 5.4 5.2 − 9.2 6.5 6.7 8.8 3.3 0.3 + 7.4 + 14.8 + 11.1 + 6.8
         Oct  x 4.2 4.6 − 7.8 5.1 4.2 8.2 1.8 − 0.2 + 7.2 + 8.2 + 7.6 + 7.2
         Nov  x 4.4 9.6 − 7.5 5.1 4.3 7.9 1.2 − 0.5 + 7.2 + 8.8 + 8.1 + 7.0
         Dec  x,p 0.9 44.3 e − 14.2 0.8 2.1 0.1 0.3 − 0.5 + 6.1 + 3.1 − 1.6 − 2.1
Source of the unadjusted figures: Federal Statistical Office. *For explanatory notes, al; adjusted in advance by the Federal Statistical Office, by way of estimates, to the re-
see Statistical Supplement Seasonally adjusted business statistics, Tables II.10 to sults of the Quarterly Production Survey. eUnadjusted figures estimated by the
II.12. oUsing the Census X-12-ARIMA method, version 0.2.8. 1Share of gross value Federal Statistical Office. 
added at factor cost of the production sector in the base year 2005. xProvision-

Deutsche Bundesbank
63  Monthly Report
February 2012
 X Economic conditions in Germany
 
3 Orders received by industry *
 
 
Adjusted for working-day variations  o 
Industry Intermediate goods Capital goods Consumer goods Durable goods Non-durable goods
Annual Annual Annual Annual Annual Annual
percent- percent- percent- percent- percent- percent-age age age age age age
Period 2005=100 change 2005=100 change 2005=100 change 2005=100 change 2005=100 change 2005=100 change
Total  
  
2007 123.0 + 11.1 125.2 + 9.8 123.2 + 12.6 111.9 + 6.3 110.3 + 1.8 112.5 + 7.9
2008 115.5 − 6.1 121.2 − 3.2 112.9 − 8.4 108.1 − 3.4 103.6 − 6.1 109.7 − 2.5
2009 87.5 − 24.2 89.3 − 26.3 85.2 − 24.5 94.8 − 12.3 88.5 − 14.6 96.9 − 11.7
2010 109.0 + 24.6 114.3 + 28.0 106.8 + 25.4 99.8 + 5.3 101.4 + 14.6 99.2 + 2.4
2011 p 120.3 + 10.4 124.9 + 9.3 119.5 + 11.9 104.3 + 4.5 107.2 + 5.7 103.3 + 4.1
 
2010          Dec 111.3 + 24.4 107.9 + 23.6 116.6 + 27.6 89.3 + 2.6 87.7 + 0.8 89.9 + 3.3
2011          Jan 118.1 + 21.3 128.5 + 22.3 113.5 + 23.2 102.4 + 3.6 105.2 + 13.6 101.5 + 0.6
         Feb 122.1 + 25.0 126.2 + 21.0 121.0 + 30.2 110.9 + 10.7 104.8 + 12.7 113.0 + 10.0
         Mar 129.5 + 14.8 139.8 + 17.7 125.6 + 14.6 110.0 + 3.1 114.3 + 6.8 108.5 + 1.7
         Apr 120.3 + 13.7 127.7 + 10.4 118.2 + 17.0 100.8 + 8.4 108.0 + 9.5 98.3 + 8.0
         May 122.8 + 15.4 128.9 + 13.1 122.2 + 18.8 99.6 + 3.8 103.5 + 0.6 98.2 + 4.8
         June 129.1 + 11.7 128.3 + 7.8 133.8 + 15.6 100.6 + 1.1 106.9 + 0.8 98.4 + 1.1
         July 122.3 + 11.0 129.6 + 8.8 119.0 + 13.1 112.3 + 7.6 111.9 + 10.5 112.4 + 6.6
         Aug 110.7 + 6.0 118.3 + 8.6 106.9 + 4.7 102.6 + 2.8 95.8 + 6.6 105.0 + 1.8
         Sep 117.0 + 3.6 121.5 + 3.4 115.3 + 3.5 108.2 + 4.4 120.9 + 8.2 103.9 + 3.1
         Oct 120.7 + 7.2 122.9 + 3.0 121.1 + 10.7 107.3 + 3.2 115.6 − 0.2 104.4 + 4.4
         Nov 117.5 − 2.9 119.5 − 1.9 118.1 − 4.1 104.3 + 2.1 108.7 − 1.8 102.8 + 3.5
         Dec  p 113.2 + 1.7 107.9 + 0.0 119.7 + 2.7 92.5 + 3.6 91.1 + 3.9 93.0 + 3.4
From the domestic market  
  
2007 118.7 + 8.9 124.7 + 10.1 115.8 + 8.8 107.0 + 3.5 109.6 − 1.3 106.1 + 5.2
2008 113.1 − 4.7 121.8 − 2.3 107.5 − 7.2 103.9 − 2.9 107.1 − 2.3 102.9 − 3.0
2009 88.0 − 22.2 89.9 − 26.2 86.5 − 19.5 87.4 − 15.9 89.9 − 16.1 86.6 − 15.8
2010 104.5 + 18.8 115.9 + 28.9 97.8 + 13.1 88.6 + 1.4 93.9 + 4.4 86.9 + 0.3
2011 p 115.1 + 10.1 127.2 + 9.7 109.0 + 11.5 92.4 + 4.3 104.3 + 11.1 88.6 + 2.0
 
2010          Dec 99.5 + 17.8 104.9 + 19.9 99.0 + 19.6 76.9 − 3.1 78.3 − 5.3 76.4 − 2.4
2011          Jan 112.4 + 17.3 128.2 + 22.2 103.4 + 15.7 88.3 − 0.7 95.7 + 10.5 85.9 − 4.1
         Feb 115.2 + 21.4 127.1 + 22.0 108.6 + 23.5 96.3 + 7.4 99.5 + 16.2 95.3 + 4.6
         Mar 123.3 + 12.6 138.8 + 16.6 115.1 + 10.7 96.5 + 1.3 107.1 + 7.0 93.0 − 0.7
         Apr 114.9 + 10.4 131.0 + 10.1 106.1 + 11.1 88.1 + 7.3 102.1 + 16.3 83.5 + 4.0
         May 126.8 + 23.2 135.2 + 16.9 126.6 + 32.4 88.5 + 5.7 101.2 + 7.7 84.4 + 5.0
         June 116.6 + 8.0 128.4 + 6.0 111.8 + 10.7 88.7 + 4.0 98.4 + 8.6 85.5 + 2.3
         July 120.3 + 12.1 135.7 + 10.9 111.4 + 14.5 97.8 + 6.7 108.1 + 20.5 94.4 + 2.3
         Aug 108.5 + 8.5 123.3 + 9.7 98.7 + 8.0 93.5 + 3.8 99.2 + 13.2 91.7 + 0.9
         Sep 113.2 + 4.3 123.3 + 3.5 106.7 + 4.6 101.8 + 6.9 125.6 + 14.6 94.0 + 3.9
         Oct 113.7 + 3.2 126.6 + 2.9 105.7 + 2.9 97.8 + 5.7 117.6 + 5.0 91.4 + 6.2
         Nov 114.4 + 0.8 124.7 − 0.3 109.5 + 1.8 93.6 + 1.7 111.1 + 5.4 87.9 + 0.3
         Dec  p 101.5 + 2.0 103.8 − 1.0 103.8 + 4.8 78.3 + 1.8 85.9 + 9.7 75.8 − 0.8
From abroad  
  
2007 126.8 + 13.0 125.7 + 9.7 128.5 + 15.2 117.3 + 9.1 111.0 + 5.0 119.5 + 10.5
2008 117.6 − 7.3 120.6 − 4.1 116.7 − 9.2 112.6 − 4.0 99.9 − 10.0 117.1 − 2.0
2009 87.0 − 26.0 88.6 − 26.5 84.3 − 27.8 102.8 − 8.7 87.1 − 12.8 108.4 − 7.4
2010 112.9 + 29.8 112.5 + 27.0 113.2 + 34.3 111.9 + 8.9 109.0 + 25.1 112.9 + 4.2
2011 p 124.8 + 10.5 122.4 + 8.8 127.0 + 12.2 117.1 + 4.6 110.2 + 1.1 119.5 + 5.8
 
2010          Dec 121.5 + 29.4 111.3 + 27.9 129.0 + 32.4 102.7 + 7.9 97.1 + 6.2 104.7 + 8.4
2011          Jan 123.1 + 24.7 128.9 + 22.4 120.6 + 28.3 117.6 + 7.4 114.7 + 16.3 118.7 + 4.7
         Feb 128.1 + 28.0 125.2 + 19.8 129.7 + 34.5 126.7 + 13.6 110.2 + 9.7 132.6 + 14.9
         Mar 134.9 + 16.7 141.0 + 18.9 133.0 + 17.1 124.6 + 4.6 121.6 + 6.8 125.6 + 3.8
         Apr 125.0 + 16.6 123.9 + 10.7 126.8 + 20.9 114.5 + 9.4 114.0 + 4.0 114.7 + 11.5
         May 119.4 + 9.1 121.8 + 8.8 119.1 + 10.3 111.5 + 2.0 105.9 − 5.3 113.5 + 4.7
         June 140.0 + 14.6 128.2 + 9.9 149.3 + 18.5 113.4 − 1.3 115.5 − 5.1 112.6 + 0.2
         July 124.1 + 10.1 122.7 + 6.3 124.4 + 12.4 127.9 + 8.3 115.7 + 2.3 132.2 + 10.4
         Aug 112.6 + 4.0 112.7 + 7.3 112.6 + 2.6 112.5 + 2.0 92.4 + 0.1 119.7 + 2.7
         Sep 120.3 + 3.0 119.5 + 3.4 121.3 + 2.8 115.2 + 2.3 116.1 + 1.9 114.8 + 2.3
         Oct 126.7 + 10.6 118.7 + 3.2 131.9 + 15.6 117.5 + 0.9 113.6 − 5.1 118.8 + 2.9
         Nov 120.2 − 5.7 113.5 − 3.9 124.1 − 7.5 115.8 + 2.3 106.2 − 8.5 119.2 + 6.2
         Dec  p 123.4 + 1.6 112.6 + 1.2 130.9 + 1.5 107.9 + 5.1 96.4 − 0.7 112.0 + 7.0
Source of the unadjusted figures: Federal Statistical Office. *For explanatory notes,   
see Statistical Supplement Seasonally adjusted business statistics, Tables II.14 to   II.16. o Using the Census X-12-ARIMA method, version 0.2.8.  

Deutsche Bundesbank
64  Monthly Report
February 2012
 X Economic conditions in Germany
 
4 Orders received by construction *   
 
 
Adjusted for working-day variations  o 
Breakdown by type of construction Breakdown by client  1 
 Building    
Housing Industrial Public sector Civil Public
Total Total construction construction construction engineering Industry sector
Annual Annual Annual Annual Annual Annual Annual Annual
percent- percent- percent- percent- percent- percent- percent- percent-
age age age age age age age age
Period change change change change change change change change 2005 = 100 2005 = 100 2005 = 100 2005 = 100 2005 = 100 2005 = 100 2005 = 100 2005 = 100
2007 114.0 + 8.5 112.5 + 5.5 98.5 − 5.6 123.2 + 12.4 108.5 + 6.7 115.4 + 11.4 120.7 + 10.7 113.7 + 11.9
2008 113.4 − 0.5 114.7 + 2.0 94.4 − 4.2 127.9 + 3.8 116.7 + 7.6 112.0 − 2.9 123.3 + 2.2 111.5 − 1.9
2009 107.4 − 5.3 100.7 − 12.2 94.1 − 0.3 100.7 − 21.3 115.5 − 1.0 114.4 + 2.1 104.9 − 14.9 115.6 + 3.7
2010 109.0 + 1.5 106.7 + 6.0 103.3 + 9.8 105.4 + 4.7 118.9 + 2.9 111.3 − 2.7 111.0 + 5.8 109.4 − 5.4
 
2010          Nov 92.1 + 1.7 93.8 + 0.8 96.0 + 7.1 92.8 + 0.0 92.0 − 10.1 90.4 + 2.7 97.2 + 0.5 85.3 + 0.4
         Dec 90.3 − 8.8 96.0 − 3.2 101.3 + 13.7 92.3 − 5.1 96.5 − 24.7 84.2 − 14.8 95.1 − 6.6 80.7 − 19.5
2011          Jan 76.9 + 8.2 84.5 + 21.2 77.6 + 37.8 94.0 + 25.5 68.1 − 17.5 69.1 − 4.8 94.2 + 19.7 59.2 − 15.1
         Feb 94.1 + 3.6 102.3 + 17.0 97.7 + 28.0 114.3 + 29.9 72.5 − 34.2 85.6 − 9.4 114.5 + 26.5 72.0 − 26.1
         Mar 134.3 + 5.7 133.7 + 9.9 142.3 + 24.7 130.6 + 6.0 124.3 − 7.4 135.1 + 2.0 147.4 + 13.0 117.8 − 8.7
         Apr 122.8 + 7.6 118.7 + 6.6 136.1 + 20.2 111.6 + 7.5 102.9 − 22.4 127.2 + 8.7 124.9 + 16.0 115.2 − 4.8
         May 127.6 + 10.1 135.4 + 25.0 147.7 + 35.5 127.4 + 23.6 134.1 + 7.9 119.6 − 3.5 126.2 + 12.7 120.6 − 1.8         June 136.2 + 6.2 137.9 + 10.3 129.6 + 17.7 136.6 + 7.3 160.7 + 6.3 134.4 + 2.2 140.4 + 4.2 134.7 + 4.1
         July 137.0 + 11.1 124.3 + 5.5 134.3 + 17.9 115.2 − 0.9 132.0 − 0.1 150.2 + 16.4 129.6 + 5.0 145.6 + 14.5
         Aug 123.6 + 5.0 125.3 + 4.6 129.9 + 15.3 129.2 + 3.6 102.1 − 14.8 121.9 + 5.6 132.6 + 10.2 111.9 − 4.4         Sep 127.9 + 3.8 127.7 + 7.6 127.7 − 1.7 130.7 + 23.0 117.6 − 12.8 128.1 + 0.2 134.2 + 15.7 121.7 − 4.6
         Oct 112.7 − 1.1 122.2 + 10.3 126.8 + 18.5 128.0 + 14.7 92.3 − 21.1 102.9 − 12.1 128.2 + 2.2 91.3 − 13.3
         Nov 106.3 + 15.4 114.6 + 22.2 122.9 + 28.0 112.6 + 21.3 102.7 + 11.6 97.6 + 8.0 117.1 + 20.5 88.3 + 3.5
Source of the unadjusted figures: Federal Statistical Office. *Values exclusive of adjusted business statistics, Tables II.21. oUsing the Census X-12-ARIMA method,
value-added tax; for explanatory notes, see Statistical Supplement Seasonally version 0.2.8. 1 Excluding housing construction orders. 
 
 
5 Retail trade turnover, sales of motor vehicles *
  
Adjusted for calendar variations o 
Retail trade
of which: by enterprises’ main product range  1 
Construction Retail sale of
and flooring pharmaceutical Wholesale
Textiles, Information materials, and medical and retail trade
clothing and household goods, cosmetic and repair of
Food, beverages, foodwear and communications appliances, and toilet motor vehicles
Total tobacco 2 leather goods equipment furniture articles and motorcycles
At current At prices in
prices year 2005 At current prices
Annual Annual Annual Annual Annual Annual Annual Annual
percent- percent- percent- percent- percent- percent- percent- percent-
age age age age age age age age
Period change change change change change change change change 2005 = 100 2005 = 100 2005 = 100 2005 = 100 2005 = 100 2005 = 100 2005 = 100 2005 = 100
2008 101.5 + 2.1 98.9 − 0.1 100.8 + 1.3 104.8 + 1.1 116.4 + 5.6 99.7 + 1.1 107.1 + 2.8 95.8 − 4.8
2009 3 98.1 − 3.3 96.2 − 2.7 98.8 − 2.0 101.5 − 3.1 117.0 + 0.5 97.1 − 2.6 110.0 + 2.7 96.8 + 1.0
2010 4 100.4 + 2.3 97.3 + 1.1 99.6 + 0.8 105.9 + 4.3 118.8 + 1.5 99.5 + 2.5 114.2 + 3.8 92.3 − 4.6
2011 e 102.9 + 2.5 98.1 + 0.8 101.8 + 2.2 107.8 + 1.8 117.3 − 1.3 103.0 + 3.5 114.4 + 0.2 99.3 + 7.6
 
2010          Dec  4 120.6 + 1.9 117.0 + 0.4 118.6 + 1.6 130.1 + 0.9 180.9 − 0.5 105.2 + 0.3 130.7 + 1.6 89.3 + 8.5
2011          Jan 93.4 + 4.1 90.7 + 2.8 92.8 + 0.2 89.4 + 4.0 132.2 + 9.2 87.5 + 9.1 110.3 + 4.6 83.6 + 19.8
         Feb 90.7 + 4.3 87.1 + 2.5 91.0 + 2.2 83.3 + 5.7 105.4 − 0.5 88.9 + 7.1 106.3 + 1.2 91.1 + 22.8
         Mar 103.6 + 2.2 98.6 + 0.5 103.6 + 1.4 108.4 + 2.1 110.2 − 0.8 107.7 + 1.3 114.2 − 2.3 110.3 + 11.5
         Apr 103.7 + 3.5 98.1 + 1.9 103.4 + 4.6 116.5 + 7.9 100.2 − 0.4 109.1 + 5.4 112.5 + 0.2 105.3 + 8.8
         May 100.6 − 0.4 95.3 − 2.1 100.8 − 0.5 102.6 + 0.7 102.2 − 5.8 102.2 − 2.6 112.6 + 0.0 102.8 + 8.9
         June 100.1 + 2.7 95.1 + 1.0 102.7 + 4.6 101.8 + 1.2 103.6 − 5.0 100.0 + 0.9 111.9 + 0.4 102.7 + 2.8
         July 103.8 + 2.5 99.3 + 1.2 102.7 + 1.0 109.0 + 4.7 111.8 + 1.1 103.8 + 4.5 116.3 + 0.0 102.3 + 6.2
         Aug 99.9 + 1.8 95.5 + 0.2 100.3 + 3.4 97.1 − 4.4 109.6 − 4.4 100.1 + 1.0 112.0 − 0.8 91.9 + 4.9
         Sep 101.8 + 3.2 96.7 + 1.3 98.0 + 3.7 109.4 − 6.5 111.1 − 1.5 102.3 + 3.8 113.9 + 1.2 99.1 + 3.6
         Oct 108.4 + 3.4 102.9 + 1.4 104.1 + 3.0 131.8 + 5.1 119.2 − 0.5 111.9 + 4.1 116.6 − 0.8 108.7 + 5.4
         Nov 107.0 + 2.7 101.7 + 0.9 103.3 + 3.1 112.1 + 0.7 128.4 − 1.6 111.3 + 3.9 117.1 + 0.2 104.4 + 3.0         Dec  
e 121.2 + 0.5 115.9 − 0.9 119.0 + 0.3 131.9 + 1.4 173.8 − 3.9 110.6 + 5.1 128.7 − 1.5 89.9 + 0.7
Source of the unadjusted figures: Federal Statistical Office. *Excluding value-added cluding new entities; statistical breaks in the reporting sample eliminated by
tax;  For explanatory notes, see Statistical Supplement Seasonally adjusted business chain-linking. 4Figures from January 2010 are provisional, and particularly uncertain
statistics, Tables II.24. oUsing the Census X-12-ARIMA method, version 0.2.8. 1In in recent months owing to estimates for missing reports. 
stores. 2Including stalls and markets. 3In January 2009 new reporting sample in-

Deutsche Bundesbank
65  Monthly Report
February 2012
 X Economic conditions in Germany
 
6 Labour market * 
 
 
 
Employment 1 Employment subject to social security contributions  2 Short time workers 3 Unemployment 4 
Total of which: of which: of which:
Solely
jobs
Services exempt Recipients
excluding from of insured
Produc- temporary social unem- Unem- Temporary
tion employ- employ- contri- Cyclically ployment ploy- Vacan-
 Annual Annual sector ment ment butions 2 Total induced 5 Total benefits ment cies, 4,7 
Thou- percentage Thou- rate 4,6 thou- percentage
sands change sands change Thousands in % sands
2007 39,857 + 1.7 26,942 + 2.2 8,533 . . 4,861 68 26 3,760 1,245 9.0 423
2008 40,344 + 1.2 27,510 + 2.1 8,659 17,958 679 4,866 102 58 3,258 1,006 7.8 3892009 40,362 +
 0.0 27,493 − 0.1 8,521 18,210 549 4,904 1,144 1,078 8 3,415 8 1,190 8 8.1 301
2010 40,553 + 0.5 27,757 + 1.0 8,426 18,438 679 4,883 503 429 3,238 1,075 7.7 3592011
9 41,100 9 + 1.3 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 2,976 892 7.1 466
2008          Q4 40,724 + 0.9 27,916 + 1.8 8,771 18,259 674 4,885 157 128 3,021 926 7.2 362
2009          Q1 40,120 + 0.5 27,390 + 0.9 8,563 18,083 550 4,864 999 855 3,533 1,284 8.4 312
         Q2 40,305 + 0.2 27,379 + 0.1 8,515 18,133 512 4,906 1,436 1,411 8 3,475 8 1,207 8 8.3 300
         Q3 40,418 − 0.2 27,482 − 0.5 8,500 18,204 557 4,913 1,136 1,103 3,418 1,186 8.1 300         Q4 40,606 − 0.3 27,720 − 0.7 8,504 18,423 579 4,934 1,007 944 3,232 1,083 7.7 290
2010          Q1 39,993 − 0.3 27,307 − 0.3 8,308 18,244 561 4,854 987 804 3,601 1,327 8.6 296
         Q2 40,460 + 0.4 27,592 + 0.8 8,377 18,346 648 4,885 517 485 3,261 1,053 7.8 353         Q3 40,740 + 0.8 27,886 + 1.5 8,469 18,454 740 4,889 265 239 3,132 1,003 7.5 395         Q4 41,019 + 1.0 28,242 + 1.9 8,548 18,710 767 4,905 242 188 2,959 920 7.0 392
2011          Q1
r 40,538 r + 1.4 27,944 + 2.3 8,428 18,578 740 4,852 291 158 3,290 1,088 7.8 411
         Q2 r 41,006 r + 1.3 28,266 + 2.4 8,535 18,721 786 4,867 121 107 2,977 850 10 7.1 470
         Q3 r 41,276 r + 1.3 11 28,565 11 + 2.4 11 8,639 11 18,863 11 836 11 4,856 ... 11 64 2,893 843 6.9 497
         Q4 9 41,579 9 + 1.4 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 2,743 787 6.5 486
2008          Sep 40,693 + 1.2 27,996 + 2.1 8,810 18,243 718 4,829 50 39 3,073 917 7.3 409
         Oct 40,825 + 1.0 28,020 + 1.8 8,802 18,299 699 4,868 71 61 2,989 883 7.1 393         Nov 40,789 + 1.0 27,914 + 1.6 8,773 18,269 663 4,913 130 120 2,980 902 7.1 367         Dec 40,557 + 0.8 27,632 + 1.5 8,662 18,178 598 4,920 270 201 3,094 994 7.4 327
2009          Jan 40,116 + 0.7 27,379 + 1.1 8,565 18,063 561 4,848 594 452 3,480 1,263 8.3 302
         Feb 40,103 + 0.6 27,307 + 0.7 8,529 18,052 533 4,848 1,079 919 3,542 1,293 8.5 318         Mar 40,140 + 0.4 27,337 + 0.4 8,530 18,088 513 4,872 1,325 1,194 3,576 1,296 8.5 317         Apr 40,262 + 0.3 27,383 + 0.2 8,524 18,132 507 4,901 1,446 1,426 3,575 1,270 8.5 305         May 40,324 + 0.1 27,395 − 0.1 8,509 18,154 508 4,914 1,469 1,443
8 3,449 8 1,192 8 8.2 299
         June 40,330 + 0.0 27,380 − 0.3 8,493 18,135 531 4,932 1,394 1,365 3,401 1,159 8.1 297
         July
40,317 − 0.2 27,314 − 0.5 8,464 18,080 551 4,935 1,248 1,215 3,454 1,210 8.2 298
         Aug 40,357 − 0.2 27,542 − 0.5 8,507 18,249 565 4,891 1,055 1,022 3,463 1,211 8.2 300         Sep 40,581 − 0.3 27,800 − 0.7 8,564 18,430 578 4,893 1,104 1,072 3,338 1,137 7.9 302         Oct 40,684 − 0.3 27,786 − 0.8 8,534 18,449 581 4,909 1,109 1,076 3,221 1,071 7.7 298         Nov 40,675 − 0.3 27,731 − 0.7 8,497 18,434 589 4,961 982 947 3,208 1,069 7.6 291         Dec 40,460 − 0.2 27,488 − 0.5 8,400 18,341 553 4,971 929 809 3,268 1,107 7.8 281
2010          Jan 39,965 − 0.4 27,249 − 0.5 8,295 18,214 550 4,840 1,057 874 3,610 1,339 8.6 271
         Feb 39,933 − 0.4 27,230 − 0.3 8,269 18,210 560 4,814 1,031 829 3,635 1,356 8.6 298         Mar 40,082 − 0.1 27,398 + 0.2 8,318 18,277 596 4,846 874 709 3,560 1,285 8.5 320         Apr 40,310 + 0.1 27,553 + 0.6 8,371 18,335 627 4,875 632 599 3,399 1,140 8.1 335         May 40,485 + 0.4 27,667 + 1.0 8,395 18,382 665 4,898 499 467 3,236 1,036 7.7 355         June 40,585 + 0.6 27,710 + 1.2 8,414 18,365 707 4,916 420 390 3,148 983 7.5 370         July 40,606 + 0.7 27,691 + 1.4 8,419 18,320 732 4,915 313 286 3,186 1,029 7.6 391         Aug 40,688 + 0.8 27,976 + 1.6 8,493 18,508 752 4,864 244 219 3,183 1,030 7.6 396         Sep 40,926 + 0.9 28,269 + 1.7 8,573 18,700 766 4,859 237 214 3,026 948 7.2 398         Oct 41,072 + 1.0 28,296 + 1.8 8,566 18,738 769 4,886 231 209 2,941 907 7.0 401         Nov 41,088 + 1.0 28,277 + 2.0 8,562 18,723 779 4,932 215 194 2,927 903 6.9 394         Dec 40,897 + 1.1 28,033 + 2.0 8,460 18,635 743 4,931 279 162 3,011 949 7.1 380
2011          Jan 
r 40,479 r + 1.3 27,863 + 2.3 8,399 18,540 732 4,842 322 177 3,346 1,146 7.9 375
         Feb r 40,510 r + 1.4 27,912 + 2.5 8,416 18,560 738 4,831 305 155 3,313 1,107 7.9 417
         Mar r 40,625 r + 1.4 28,080 + 2.5 8,477 18,632 759 4,836 246 143 3,210 1,010 7.6 442
         Apr r 40,856 r + 1.4 28,214 + 2.4 8,518 18,703 771 4,857 133 117 3,078 907 7.3 461
         May r 41,031 r + 1.3 28,354 + 2.5 8,559 18,768 798 4,880 122 107 2,960 839 10 7.0 470
         June r 41,130 r + 1.3 28,381 + 2.4 8,580 18,753 821 4,894 110 96 2,893 804 6.9 480
         July r 41,143 r + 1.3 28,356 + 2.4 8,591 18,712 831 4,890 81 68 2,939 859 7.0 492
         Aug r 41,214 r + 1.3 11 28,661 11 + 2.4 11 8,661 11 18,928 11 844 11 4,824 ... 11 59 2,945 867 7.0 497
         Sep r 41,470 r + 1.3 11 28,974 11 + 2.5 11 8,747 11 19,147 11 847 11 4,816 ... 11 65 2,796 802 6.6 501
         Oct r 41,620 r + 1.3 11 29,012 11 + 2.5 11 8,749 11 19,198 11 839 11 4,834 ... 11 69 2,737 778 6.5 500
         Nov r 41,647 r + 1.4 11 28,998 11 + 2.5 11 8,745 11 19,199 11 836 11 4,880 ... 11 81 2,713 769 6.4 492
         Dec 9 41,469 9 + 1.4 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 2,780 813 6.6 467
2012          Jan ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 3,082 1,011 7.3 452
Sources: Federal Statistical Office; Federal Employment Agency. *Annual and on the books of private employment agencies. 9Initial preliminary estimate by the
quarterly figures: averages; calculated by the Bundesbank; deviations from the offi- Federal Statistical Office. 10From May 2011, calculated on the basis of new labour
cial figures are due to rounding. 1Workplace concept; averages. 2Monthly figures: force figures. 11Unadjusted data estimated by the Federal Employment Agency.
end of month. 3Number within a given month. 4Mid-month level. 5Until the end The estimates for Germany in 2008 and 2009 deviated from the final data by a maxi-
of 2006, short-time work excluding construction and agriculture; from 2007, in accor- mum of 0.2 % for employees subject to social contributions, by a maximum of
dance with section 170 of the third Book of the Social Security Code. 6Relative to 2.0 % for persons solely in jobs exempt from social contributions, and, in 2009, by a
the total civilian labour force. 7Excluding government-assisted forms of employ- maximum of 14 % for cyclically induced short-time work. 
ment and seasonal jobs. 8From May 2009, unemployed excluding persons formally

Deutsche Bundesbank
66  Monthly Report
February 2012
 X Economic conditions in Germany
 
7 Prices
 
 
 
Consumer price index HWWI
Indices of Index of World Market
of which foreign trade prices Prices of Raw Materials 5 
Other Index of
durable producer
and non- prices of
durable industrial Index of
consumer Services Con- products producer
goods excluding prices of sold on the struction
excluding house House price domestic agricultural Other raw
Total Food Energy 1 rents 3 rents 3 index 2 market 4 products 4 Exports Imports Energy 6 materials  7 energy 1,2 
Period 2005 = 100 2010 = 100
Index level  
  
2007 8,9 103.9 105.9 101.7 112.8 103.9 102.2 109.3 106.8 119.9 103.0 105.1 86.0 87.5
2008 106.6 112.7 102.5 123.6 105.8 103.5 113.0 112.7 124.3 104.8 109.9 109.7 92.0
2009 107.0 111.2 103.9 116.9 107.4 104.6 114.4 108.0 100.6 102.5 100.5 72.8 74.5
2010 108.2 113.0 104.4 121.5 108.0 105.8 115.4 109.7 114.0 106.0 108.3 100.0 100.0
2011 10 110.7 115.8 105.7 133.7 109.3 107.1 118.7 115.9 p 128.5 109.9 117.0 132.2 113.5
 
2010          Mar 108.0 113.1 104.5 120.6 107.9 105.5 108.0 105.2 104.5 105.7 96.5 89.5
         Apr 107.9 114.0 104.5 122.2 106.7 105.6 108.9 106.3 105.5 107.8 105.1 97.2
         May 108.0 113.2 104.4 122.5 107.2 105.7 115.2 109.2 108.2 106.0 108.4 100.6 98.9
         June 108.1 113.4 104.2 122.4 107.5 105.8 109.9 110.4 106.4 109.4 102.6 100.4
         July 108.4 113.6 103.6 121.4 109.2 105.9 110.4 111.3 106.4 109.2 98.8 101.2
         Aug 108.4 112.6 104.0 121.2 109.4 106.0 115.8 110.4 117.7 106.8 109.4 99.3 104.8
         Sep 108.3 112.5 104.7 121.7 108.0 106.0 110.7 119.3 107.1 109.7 99.0 106.6
         Oct 108.4 112.2 105.1 122.1 107.9 106.1 111.1 119.8 106.8 109.5 98.9 104.1
         Nov 108.5 113.2 105.3 122.8 107.3 106.3 116.1 111.3 122.5 107.1 110.8 104.3 108.1
         Dec 109.6 114.4 105.1 125.4 110.0 106.4 112.1 126.9 108.0 113.3 115.7 116.1
2011          Jan 109.2 114.7 104.5 128.7 107.9 106.5 113.4 127.7 108.9 115.0 121.1 121.4
         Feb 109.8 115.8 104.8 129.5 108.8 106.7 117.4 114.2 131.2 109.3 116.3 126.5 122.8
         Mar 110.3 115.6 105.4 133.3 108.7 106.8 114.7 131.1 109.6 117.6 135.5 117.7
         Apr 110.5 115.6 105.6 135.0 108.9 106.9 115.9 133.5 109.9 117.9 141.0 117.8
         May 10 110.5 116.3 105.7 134.1 108.4 107.0 118.5 115.9 134.3 110.0 117.2 132.5 115.7
         June 110.6 116.3 105.5 133.5 109.3 107.1 116.0 133.2 110.0 116.5 130.5 114.0
         July 111.0 116.0 105.0 134.3 111.0 107.2 116.8 130.3 110.3 117.4 135.1 115.0
         Aug 111.0 115.4 105.4 133.2 110.8 107.3 119.3 116.5 129.1 110.2 116.6 127.5 112.9
         Sep 111.1 115.3 106.3 135.3 109.5 107.4 116.8 129.1 110.2 117.3 135.7 114.1
         Oct 111.1 115.4 106.8 135.7 109.0 107.5 117.0 r 128.0 110.0 116.9 132.0 105.1
         Nov 111.1 116.0 106.8 136.4 108.5 107.6 119.7 117.1 r 129.0 110.2 117.4 134.5 103.0
         Dec 111.9 116.7 106.6 135.4 111.3 107.7 116.6 p 127.3 110.3 117.7 134.9 103.7
2012          Jan 10 111.5 117.8 106.3 138.0 109.0 107.9 ... ... ... ... 141.2 109.4
Annual percentage change  
  
2007 8,9 + 2.3 + 3.9 + 1.4 + 4.0 + 2.9 + 1.1 + 6.7 + 1.3 + 11.7 + 1.2 + 0.7 + 1.9 + 8.4
2008 + 2.6 + 6.4 + 0.8 + 9.6 + 1.8 + 1.3 + 3.4 + 5.5 + 3.7 + 1.7 + 4.6 + 27.6 + 5.1
2009 + 0.4 − 1.3 + 1.4 − 5.4 + 1.5 + 1.1 + 1.2 − 4.2 − 19.1 − 2.2 − 8.6 − 33.6 − 19.0
2010 + 1.1 + 1.6 + 0.5 + 3.9 + 0.6 + 1.1 + 0.9 + 1.6 + 13.3 + 3.4 + 7.8 + 37.4 + 34.2
2011 10 + 2.3 + 2.5 + 1.2 + 10.0 + 1.2 + 1.2 + 2.9 + 5.7 p + 12.7 + 3.7 + 8.0 + 32.2 + 13.5
 
2010          Mar + 1.1 + 0.3 + 0.8 + 4.0 + 1.1 + 1.1 − 1.5 + 0.4 + 2.0 + 5.0 + 61.9 + 30.8
         Apr + 1.0 + 1.5 + 0.6 + 5.2 − 0.1 + 1.1 + 0.6 + 3.3 + 3.0 + 7.9 + 65.0 + 34.4
         May + 1.2 + 1.3 + 0.7 + 4.9 + 0.5 + 1.1 + 0.9 + 0.9 + 6.1 + 3.6 + 8.5 + 44.3 + 32.6
         June + 0.9 + 1.2 + 0.3 + 2.8 + 0.6 + 1.1 + 1.7 + 8.0 + 3.9 + 9.1 + 27.5 + 31.8
         July + 1.2 + 2.6 + 0.3 + 4.7 + 0.4 + 1.1 + 3.7 + 10.2 + 4.1 + 9.9 + 30.3 + 36.6
         Aug + 1.0 + 2.8 + 0.2 + 2.5 + 0.6 + 1.1 + 1.2 + 3.2 + 17.5 + 4.2 + 8.6 + 18.9 + 33.3
         Sep + 1.3 + 3.0 + 0.3 + 4.6 + 0.7 + 1.1 + 3.9 + 21.5 + 4.6 + 9.9 + 30.1 + 42.3
         Oct + 1.3 + 2.9 + 0.4 + 5.1 + 0.6 + 1.1 + 4.3 + 21.7 + 4.3 + 9.2 + 22.6 + 37.3
         Nov + 1.5 + 3.4 + 1.1 + 5.0 + 0.4 + 1.2 + 1.5 + 4.4 + 20.7 + 4.5 + 10.0 + 23.6 + 38.8
         Dec + 1.7 + 3.6 + 0.6 + 8.2 + 0.5 + 1.2 + 5.3 + 23.8 + 5.2 + 12.0 + 38.1 + 40.2
2011          Jan + 2.0 + 2.7 + 0.8 + 8.6 + 0.9 + 1.2 + 5.7 + 23.7 + 5.4 + 11.8 + 36.1 + 41.7
         Feb + 2.1 + 3.4 + 0.7 + 10.2 + 1.0 + 1.3 + 2.5 + 6.4 + 25.3 + 5.4 + 11.9 + 41.2 + 43.3
         Mar + 2.1 + 2.2 + 0.9 + 10.5 + 0.7 + 1.2 + 6.2 + 24.6 + 4.9 + 11.3 + 40.4 + 31.5
         Apr + 2.4 + 1.4 + 1.1 + 10.5 + 2.1 + 1.2 + 6.4 + 25.6 + 4.2 + 9.4 + 34.2 + 21.2
         May 10 + 2.3 + 2.7 + 1.2 + 9.5 + 1.1 + 1.2 + 2.9 + 6.1 + 24.1 + 3.8 + 8.1 + 31.7 + 17.0
         June + 2.3 + 2.6 + 1.2 + 9.1 + 1.7 + 1.2 + 5.6 + 20.7 + 3.4 + 6.5 + 27.2 + 13.5
         July + 2.4 + 2.1 + 1.4 + 10.6 + 1.6 + 1.2 + 5.8 + 17.1 + 3.7 + 7.5 + 36.7 + 13.6
         Aug + 2.4 + 2.5 + 1.3 + 9.9 + 1.3 + 1.2 + 3.0 + 5.5 + 9.7 + 3.2 + 6.6 + 28.4 + 7.7
         Sep + 2.6 + 2.5 + 1.5 + 11.2 + 1.4 + 1.3 + 5.5 + 8.2 + 2.9 + 6.9 + 37.1 + 7.0
         Oct + 2.5 + 2.9 + 1.6 + 11.1 + 1.0 + 1.3 + 5.3 r + 6.8 + 3.0 + 6.8 + 33.5 + 1.0
         Nov + 2.4 + 2.5 + 1.4 + 11.1 + 1.1 + 1.2 + 3.1 + 5.2 r + 5.3 + 2.9 + 6.0 + 29.0 − 4.7
         Dec + 2.1 + 2.0 + 1.4 + 8.0 + 1.2 + 1.2 + 4.0 p + 0.3 + 2.1 + 3.9 + 16.6 − 10.7
2012          Jan 10 + 2.1 + 2.7 + 1.7 + 7.2 + 1.0 + 1.3 ... ... ... ... + 16.6 − 9.9
Source: Federal Statistical Office; HWWI Index of World Market Prices. 1Electricity, materials. 8From January 2007, increase in the standard rate of value-added tax and
gas and other fuels. 2Bundesbank calculation based on data provided by the Federal in insurance tax from 16% to 19%. 9Introduction of university tuition fees in some
Statistical Office. 3Net rents. 4Excluding value-added tax. 5For the euro area, in federal states. 10 From May 2011 and from January 2012, increase in tobacco tax. 
euro. 6Coal and crude oil. 7Food, beverages and tobacco as well as industrial raw

Deutsche Bundesbank
67  Monthly Report
February 2012
X Economic conditions in Germany
  
8 Households’ income *
  
  
  
Gross wages and Net wages and Monetary social Saving
salaries 1 salaries 2 Mass income 4 Saving 6 ratio 7 benefits received 3 Disposable income 5 
Annual Annual Annual Annual Annual Annual
percent- percent- percent- percent- percent- percent- Asage age age age age age percent-
Period change change change change change change age € billion € billion € billion € billion € billion € billion
2003
920.2 − 0.0 615.6 − 0.8 358.4 3.0 974.0 0.6 1,411.8 2.3 147.3 6.1 10.4
2004 924.7 0.5 627.9 2.0 359.5 0.3 987.3 1.4 1,435.4 1.7 151.8 3.1 10.6
2005 922.1 − 0.3 625.5 − 0.4 359.8 0.1 985.3 − 0.2 1,463.9 2.0 156.9 3.3 10.7
2006 935.0 1.4 627.8 0.4 358.5 − 0.4 986.3 0.1 1,502.0 2.6 162.5 3.6 10.8
2007 965.9 3.3 646.2 2.9 353.6 − 1.4 999.8 1.4 1,524.8 1.5 168.1 3.4 11.0
2008 1,002.3 3.8 664.0 2.8 355.4 0.5 1,019.4 2.0 1,571.2 3.0 183.5 9.2 11.7
2009 1,000.1 − 0.2 661.5 − 0.4 386.8 8.8 1,048.3 2.8 1,560.5 − 0.7 173.1 − 5.7 11.1
2010 1,026.7 2.7 688.5 4.1 391.6 1.2 1,080.1 3.0 1,603.8 2.8 180.8 4.5 11.3
2010          Q2 249.1 2.9 164.2 4.4 98.0 1.4 262.2 3.3 397.4 2.1 43.3 5.3 10.9
         Q3 254.2 2.9 174.3 3.6 97.3 − 0.6 271.6 2.0 405.1 3.1 38.8 4.6 9.6
         Q4 285.2 3.2 190.4 4.6 96.1 − 0.3 286.5 2.9 405.8 3.8 39.1 4.3 9.6
2011          Q1 249.5 4.8 165.4 3.6 98.1 − 2.1 263.5 1.4 409.1 3.4 58.9 − 1.2 14.4
         Q2 262.0 5.2 170.0 3.6 96.0 − 2.1 266.0 1.5 411.0 3.4 43.5 0.4 10.6
         Q3 264.7 4.1 179.9 3.2 96.2 − 1.2 276.0 1.6 417.6 3.1 39.4 1.5 9.4
Source: Federal Statistical Office; figures computed in November 2011. *Households salaries plus monetary social benefits received. 5Mass income plus operating surplus,
including non-profit institutions serving households. 1Residence concept. 2After mixed income, property income (net), other current transfers received, income of
deducting the wage tax payable on gross wages and salaries and employees’ non-profit institutions serving households, less taxes (excluding wage tax andcontributions to the social security funds. 3Social security benefits in cash from the consumption-related taxes) and other current transfers paid. Including the increase in
social security funds, central, state and local government and foreign countries, claims on company pension funds. 6Including the increase in claims on company pen-
pension payments (net), private funded social benefits, less social contributions on sion funds. 7 Saving as a percentage of disposable income. 
social benefits, consumption-related taxes and public charges. 4Net wages and
  
  
  
9 Negotiated pay rates (overall economy)
    
  
Index of negotiated wages 1 
On a monthly basis
Memo item:
Total excluding Wages and salaries
On an hourly basis Total one-off payments Basic pay rates  2 per employee 3 
Annual Annual Annual Annual Annual
Period percentage percentage percentage percentage percentage
2005=100 change 2005=100 change 2005=100 change 2005=100 change 2005=100 change
2004 99.1 0.8 98.9 0.8 99.1 0.8 99.0 1.2 99.7 0.5
2005 100.0 0.9 100.0 1.1 100.0 0.9 100.0 1.1 100.0 0.3
2006 100.9 0.9 101.1 1.1 100.7 0.7 100.8 0.8 100.8 0.82007 102.1 1.2 102.5 1.3 102.2 1.5 102.2 1.4 102.2 1.42008 105.0 2.8 105.4 2.9 105.3 3.0 105.6 3.2 104.5 2.32009 107.1 2.0 107.6 2.0 107.7 2.2 108.1 2.4 104.2 − 0.3
2010 108.8 1.6 109.3 1.6 109.4 1.6 109.9 1.7 106.4 2.1
2011 110.6 1.7 111.1 1.7 111.3 1.7 111.8 1.7 . .
2010          Q3 110.6 1.1 111.2 1.1 111.5 1.3 110.2 1.5 105.0 2.0
         Q4 121.2 1.5 121.8 1.5 121.9 1.3 110.3 1.4 116.6 2.1
2011          Q1 102.7 1.7 103.2 1.7 103.0 1.3 110.7 1.1 103.3 3.3
         Q2 103.7 1.3 104.2 1.3 104.3 1.7 111.7 1.6 107.5 3.7         Q3 112.7 1.9 113.3 1.9 113.5 1.9 112.3 2.0 108.0 2.8         Q4 123.3 1.7 123.9 1.7 124.3 2.0 112.6 2.1 . .
2011          June 103.2 1.0 103.7 1.0 104.0 1.7 112.0 1.8 . .
         July 130.7 1.6 131.4 1.6 131.8 1.7 112.2 1.9 . .
         Aug 103.8 2.1 104.3 2.2 104.3 2.0 112.3 2.0 . .
         Sep 103.7 2.0 104.2 2.1 104.4 2.0 112.4 2.0 . .
         Oct 103.6 1.8 104.2 1.9 104.5 2.0 112.5 2.0 . .
         Nov 160.0 1.9 160.8 1.9 161.4 1.9 112.7 2.1 . .
         Dec 106.2 1.3 106.7 1.3 107.0 2.2 112.7 2.1 . .
1Current data are normally revised on account of additional reports. 2Excluding and retirement provisions). 3Source: Federal Statistical Office; figures computed in
one-off payments and covenants (capital formation benefits, special payments, such November 2011. 
as annual bonuses, holiday pay, Christmas bonuses (13
thmonthly salary payment)

Deutsche Bundesbank
68  Monthly Report
February 2012
XI External sector
 
1 Major items of the balance of payments of the euro area *
 
 
€ million
2011
Item 2008 2009 2010 Q1 Q2 Q3 Sep Oct Nov
Current account − 143,536 − 25,902 − 42,161 − 30,217 − 20,950 − 1,153 + 1,009 + 2,608 + 985 A
1 Goods
Exports (fob) 1,588,541 1,302,519 1,560,030 423,350 438,744 444,512 155,208 152,409 159,800
Imports (fob) 1,610,358 1,266,490 1,547,089 436,362 441,768 441,376 151,656 150,664 153,369
Balance − 21,814 + 36,029 + 12,940 − 13,012 − 3,024 + 3,136 + 3,551 + 1,745 + 6,431
2 Services
Receipts 513,253 473,914 518,804 122,984 134,074 146,086 48,906 46,636 43,158
Expenditure 471,192 438,828 472,871 115,977 116,188 125,110 40,843 41,362 40,584
Balance + 42,061 + 35,087 + 45,934 + 7,006 + 17,886 + 20,977 + 8,063 + 5,273 + 2,575
3 Income − 66,789 − 5,833 + 2,253 + 10,247 − 14,032 + 4,222 − 324 + 3,224 + 1,522
4 Current transfers
Transfers from non-residents 91,839 94,472 87,597 24,660 18,933 16,649 5,443 7,591 5,768
Transfers to non-residents 188,834 185,658 190,889 59,119 40,713 46,137 15,724 15,225 15,310
Balance − 96,994 − 91,186 − 103,288 − 34,459 − 21,781 − 29,488 − 10,281 − 7,634 − 9,541
Capital account + 9,991 + 7,274 + 5,495 + 2,403 + 588 + 1,799 − 113 + 1,470 + 2,193 B
Financial account (net capital exports: − + 121,338 + 14,005 + 44,064 + 15,745 + 18,390 + 9,798 + 12,164 − 5,025 − 3,569 C)
1 Direct investment − 231,147 − 102,822 − 49,916 − 9,867 − 28,961 − 16,533 − 6,991 − 7,643 − 6,815
By resident units abroad − 336,609 − 334,698 − 174,868 − 89,347 − 55,900 − 40,673 − 21,509 − 18,273 − 12,909
By non-resident units in the euro area + 105,461 + 231,875 + 124,955 + 79,478 + 26,938 + 24,139 + 14,517 + 10,630 + 6,094
2 Portfolio investment + 261,411 + 261,374 + 148,031 + 128,531 + 150,201 + 37,653 + 36,701 − 26,431 + 2,358
By resident units abroad − 4,992 − 93,955 − 145,578 − 27,116 − 33,044 + 64,619 + 9,781 + 36,034 + 22,869
Equity + 93,692 − 53,446 − 76,509 + 1,023 − 17,984 + 53,292 + 11,913 + 6,451 + 14,170
Bonds and notes − 72,141 − 45,690 − 109,328 − 5,302 − 27,956 + 19,949 + 14,946 + 12,565 + 11,606
Money market instruments − 26,543 + 5,179 + 40,259 − 22,836 + 12,895 − 8,621 − 17,077 + 17,018 − 2,907
By non-resident units in the euro area + 266,402 + 355,327 + 293,614 + 155,647 + 183,245 − 26,966 + 26,920 − 62,465 − 20,511
Equity − 108,578 + 121,603 + 128,883 + 88,223 − 20,069 − 31,275 − 18,213 − 10,021 − 3,038
Bonds and notes + 175,450 + 143,195 + 174,246 + 22,073 + 175,153 + 10,953 + 34,562 − 39,163 − 3,828
Money market instruments + 199,528 + 90,529 − 9,519 + 45,351 + 28,161 − 6,643 + 10,571 − 13,281 − 13,645
3 Financial derivatives − 84,453 + 21,081 + 17,414 − 2,247 + 1,566 − 15,429 − 8,110 − 875 + 823
4 Other investment + 178,885 − 170,182 − 61,178 − 89,099 − 108,905 + 324 − 11,029 + 31,005 + 298
Eurosystem + 290,439 − 233,295 + 11,839 + 5,982 + 2,619 + 32,637 + 11,926 − 4,056 + 580
General government + 15,182 + 7,136 + 24,595 + 34,913 + 11,737 + 30,016 + 16,205 − 3,897 − 9,758
MFIs (excluding the Eurosystem) − 132,076 + 67,795 − 19,251 − 126,173 − 78,698 − 61,360 − 21,448 + 38,674 + 8,779
Long-term − 226,162 − 21,385 + 35,013 + 35,609 − 18,895 + 787 + 174 − 16,253 + 2,103
Short-term + 94,087 + 89,182 − 54,269 − 161,782 − 59,802 − 62,146 − 21,622 + 54,927 + 6,676
Other sectors + 5,340 − 11,817 − 78,359 − 3,822 − 44,563 − 967 − 17,713 + 283 + 697
5 Reserve assets (Increase: −) − 3,358 + 4,558 − 10,290 − 11,572 + 4,488 + 3,783 + 1,594 − 1,082 − 232
Errors and omissions + 12,207 + 4,624 − 7,396 + 12,068 + 1,971 − 10,443 − 13,060 + 948 + 391 D
* Source: European Central Bank. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
69  Monthly Report
February 2012
XI External sector
 
2 Major items of the balance of payments of the Federal Republic of Germany
(balances)
 
 
Current account Capital trans- Financial account
fers andacquisition/ of whichdisposal of Change in
Supple- non- reserve assets
Balance mentary produced at trans- Errorson current Foreign trade Current non-financial action and
Period account trade 
1 items 2 Services 3 Income transfers assets Total 4 value 5 omissions
DM million
1998 − 28,696 + 126,970 − 8,917 − 75,053 − 18,635 − 53,061 + 1,289 + 25,683 − 7,128 + 1,724
1999 − 49,241 + 127,542 − 15,947 − 90,036 − 22,325 − 48,475 − 301 − 20,332 + 24,517 + 69,874
2000 − 68,913 + 115,645 − 17,742 − 95,848 − 16,302 − 54,666 + 13,345 + 66,863 + 11,429 − 11,2952001 + 830 + 186,771 − 14,512 − 97,521 − 21,382 − 52,526 − 756 − 23,068 + 11,797 + 22,994
€ million
1999
− 25,177 + 65,211 − 8,153 − 46,035 − 11,415 − 24,785 − 154 − 10,396 + 12,535 + 35,726
2000 − 35,235 + 59,128 − 9,071 − 49,006 − 8,335 − 27,950 + 6,823 + 34,187 + 5,844 − 5,7752001 + 424 + 95,495 − 7,420 − 49,862 − 10,932 − 26,856 − 387 − 11,794 + 6,032 + 11,7572002 + 42,973 + 132,788 − 8,552 − 35,728 − 18,019 − 27,517 − 212 − 38,448 + 2,065 − 4,3132003 + 40,917 + 129,921 − 11,148 − 34,506 − 15,067 − 28,283 + 311 − 61,758 + 445 + 20,529
2004 + 102,833 + 156,096 − 16,470 − 29,375 + 20,431 − 27,849 + 435 − 122,984 + 1,470 + 19,717
2005 + 112,906 + 158,179 − 14,057 − 27,401 + 24,896 − 28,712 − 1,369 − 129,635 + 2,182 + 18,0982006 + 144,999 + 159,048 − 12,888 − 17,346 + 44,893 − 28,708 − 258 − 175,474 + 2,934 + 30,7322007 + 181,150 + 195,348 − 9,816 − 14,852 + 43,310 − 32,841 + 104 − 210,151 − 953 + 28,8972008 + 154,833 + 178,297 − 14,058 − 11,585 + 35,565 − 33,386 − 215 − 160,196 − 2,008 + 5,577
2009 + 133,744 + 138,697 − 11,604 − 10,437 + 50,105 − 33,017 + 74 − 145,427 + 3,200 + 11,609
2010 + 141,495 + 154,863 − 11,415 − 8,349 + 44,483 − 38,086 − 637 − 140,301 − 1,613 − 557
2011 
p + 135,898 + 158,122 − 19,728 − 7,761 + 40,859 − 35,594 + 625 − 139,346 − 2,836 + 2,823
2009          Q1 + 24,869 + 27,576 − 3,657 − 1,984 + 14,543 − 11,609 + 22 − 3,419 + 321 − 21,471         Q2 + 26,201 + 34,119 − 2,666 − 2,973 + 3,742 − 6,021 + 291 − 49,965 + 41 + 23,473         Q3 + 32,190 + 36,092 − 2,679 − 8,269 + 15,210 − 8,164 + 37 − 22,056 + 2,269 − 10,171         Q4 + 50,485 + 40,910 − 2,603 + 2,789 + 16,610 − 7,222 − 276 − 69,987 + 569 + 19,778
2010          Q1 + 34,435 + 37,736 − 2,535 − 965 + 14,296 − 14,098 + 271 − 32,811 − 651 − 1,896
         Q2 + 28,375 + 37,249 − 2,835 − 2,596 + 3,131 − 6,573 − 443 − 31,734 − 801 + 3,802         Q3 + 30,808 + 38,895 − 2,973 − 7,127 + 12,900 − 10,886 + 6 − 25,709 + 344 − 5,105         Q4 + 47,877 + 40,982 − 3,072 + 2,339 + 14,156 − 6,529 − 472 − 50,046 − 506 + 2,641
2011          Q1 + 35,336 + 40,808 − 4,402 − 217 + 13,293 − 14,146 + 912 − 54,840 − 1,393 + 18,592
         Q2 
r + 26,879 + 37,984 − 3,805 − 2,381 + 686 − 5,606 − 251 − 29,207 − 438 + 2,578
         Q3 r + 29,827 + 39,178 − 6,138 − 6,398 + 13,462 − 10,277 + 104 − 18,872 − 639 − 11,059
         Q4 p + 43,855 + 40,152 − 5,384 + 1,234 + 13,418 − 5,565 − 140 − 36,427 − 366 − 7,288
2009          July + 12,894 + 15,592 − 978 − 3,813 + 4,661 − 2,568 + 24 − 3,788 − 92 − 9,130         Aug + 7,503 + 8,999 − 959 − 2,985 + 5,433 − 2,985 − 10 − 8,514 + 743 + 1,021         Sep + 11,792 + 11,501 − 743 − 1,471 + 5,116 − 2,611 + 23 − 9,753 + 1,618 − 2,062
         Oct + 11,383 + 12,466 − 591 − 1,195 + 5,619 − 4,916 − 249 − 23,201 − 651 + 12,067
         Nov + 16,586 + 15,962 − 1,485 + 379 + 5,525 − 3,794 + 91 − 22,777 + 1,522 + 6,100         Dec + 22,516 + 12,482 − 526 + 3,605 + 5,466 + 1,488 − 117 − 24,010 − 302 + 1,611
2010          Jan + 5,738 + 8,277 − 1,038 − 1,499 + 4,526 − 4,528 + 64 + 13,557 − 55 − 19,359
         Feb + 10,667 + 13,215 − 286 − 17 + 4,637 − 6,882 + 430 − 17,923 − 782 + 6,826         Mar + 18,031 + 16,244 − 1,210 + 551 + 5,133 − 2,687 − 223 − 28,445 + 187 + 10,637
         Apr + 11,810 + 12,995 − 816 + 390 + 1,479 − 2,239 − 200 − 9,518 − 116 − 2,092
         May + 3,350 + 10,143 − 1,289 − 1,166 − 2,827 − 1,510 − 53 − 8,748 − 671 + 5,451         June + 13,215 + 14,111 − 730 − 1,820 + 4,478 − 2,824 − 190 − 13,468 − 14 + 444
         July + 9,708 + 12,967 − 1,263 − 2,721 + 4,435 − 3,710 + 420 + 19,207 + 20 − 29,335
         Aug + 6,007 + 9,456 − 955 − 3,158 + 4,229 − 3,566 − 112 − 18,532 + 119 + 12,637         Sep + 15,094 + 16,473 − 756 − 1,249 + 4,236 − 3,610 − 302 − 26,385 + 205 + 11,593
         Oct + 14,204 + 14,518 − 644 − 826 + 4,734 − 3,577 − 221 + 557 + 234 − 14,539
         Nov + 14,370 + 13,884 − 1,051 + 892 + 4,699 − 4,053 − 169 − 21,728 + 81 + 7,527         Dec + 19,303 + 12,580 − 1,376 + 2,273 + 4,723 + 1,102 − 81 − 28,875 − 820 + 9,654
2011          Jan + 7,040 + 10,108 − 1,356 − 1,191 + 3,543 − 4,065 + 542 − 6,102 − 182 − 1,480
         Feb + 8,702 + 11,928 − 1,088 + 350 + 4,623 − 7,111 + 528 − 20,372 − 23 + 11,141         Mar + 19,594 + 18,772 − 1,958 + 624 + 5,126 − 2,971 − 158 − 28,367 − 1,188 + 8,931
         Apr + 8,992 + 10,821 − 1,186 − 729 + 1,805 − 1,720 − 177 − 15,203 − 563 + 6,388
         May 
r + 6,496 + 14,626 − 904 − 449 − 5,763 − 1,015 − 65 − 13,540 + 24 + 7,109
         June r + 11,391 + 12,537 − 1,715 − 1,203 + 4,643 − 2,871 − 10 − 463 + 101 − 10,919
         July r + 7,639 + 10,414 − 1,432 − 2,137 + 4,465 − 3,672 − 141 + 5,117 − 428 − 12,614
         Aug  r + 6,341 + 11,645 − 2,207 − 4,296 + 4,465 − 3,266 + 375 − 15,912 + 109 + 9,196
         Sep  r + 15,848 + 17,119 − 2,499 + 35 + 4,531 − 3,338 − 129 − 8,078 − 320 − 7,640
         Oct  r + 9,813 + 11,303 − 1,930 − 520 + 4,578 − 3,617 − 176 − 11,773 + 55 + 2,135
         Nov + 14,707 + 15,917 − 1,800 − 41 + 4,326 − 3,696 + 122 − 10,316 + 263 − 4,512         Dec  
p + 19,335 + 12,932 − 1,654 + 1,795 + 4,514 + 1,748 − 86 − 14,338 − 684 − 4,911
1Special trade according to the official foreign trade statistics: imports cif, exports deduction of goods returned. 3Excluding the expenditure on freight and insurance
fob. From January 2007 onwards, excluding supplies of goods for/after included in the cif import figure. 4Financial account balance including change in
repair/maintenance, which, up to December 2006, were deducted via supplementary reserve assets. Capital exports: − . 5 Increase: − . 
trade items. 2Inter alia warehouse transactions for the account of residents and

Deutsche Bundesbank
70  Monthly Report
February 2012
 XI External sector
 
 3 Foreign trade (special trade) of the Federal Republic of Germany,
 by country and group of countries *
 
 € million
 2011
Country / group of countries  2008  2009  2010 Jan / Nov Aug  r Sep r Oct r Nov r Dec p 
All countries 1 Exports 984,140 803,312 951,959 975,023 85,138 94,960 89,170 94,802 85,081
Imports 805,842 664,615 797,097 829,832 73,493 77,841 77,867 78,885 72,149Balance + 178,297 + 138,697 + 154,863 + 145,190 + 11,645 + 17,119 + 11,303 + 15,917 + 12,932
I Exports 733,092 585,826 675,024 695,417 59,638 68,125 63,023 67,259 ... European countries
Imports 567,062 463,721 541,720 574,163 49,248 54,424 53,838 55,095 ...
Balance + 166,031 + 122,105 + 133,305 + 121,254 + 10,389 + 13,701 + 9,185 + 12,164 ...
Exports 622,637 500,654 570,879 580,948 48,654 56,692 52,521 56,045 ... 1 EU member states (27)
Imports 460,887 380,323 444,375 467,779 39,727 44,788 43,930 44,894 ...
Balance + 161,750 + 120,331 + 126,504 + 113,168 + 8,927 + 11,904 + 8,590 + 11,151 ...
Euro-area (17) Exports 421,120 343,701 388,103 389,661 31,509 38,072 34,841 37,745 ...
countries Imports 315,410 258,729 300,135 313,461 26,171 29,570 28,985 29,800 ...
Balance + 105,710 + 84,972 + 87,968 + 76,200 + 5,337 + 8,502 + 5,856 + 7,945 ...
of which
Austria Exports 54,689 46,093 52,156 53,756 4,767 5,308 4,926 5,302 ...
Imports 33,180 27,565 33,013 34,770 2,938 3,409 3,273 3,451 ...
Balance + 21,509 + 18,528 + 19,144 + 18,986 + 1,829 + 1,899 + 1,653 + 1,851 ...
Belgium and Exports 55,230 46,262 50,545 49,373 4,402 4,698 4,434 4,563 ...
Luxembourg Imports 39,959 30,694 36,026 38,092 3,426 3,625 3,524 3,571 ...
Balance + 15,271 + 15,568 + 14,519 + 11,281 + 976 + 1,073 + 910 + 992 ...
France Exports 93,718 81,304 89,582 93,579 7,278 9,438 8,159 9,640 ...
Imports 63,369 53,338 60,673 61,287 4,934 5,936 5,947 5,654 ...
Balance + 30,349 + 27,966 + 28,909 + 32,293 + 2,344 + 3,502 + 2,213 + 3,986 ...
Italy Exports 62,015 50,620 58,589 57,833 3,981 5,587 5,205 5,471 ...
Imports 46,842 37,197 41,977 44,481 3,492 4,068 4,210 4,125 ...
Balance + 15,173 + 13,423 + 16,611 + 13,352 + 488 + 1,518 + 996 + 1,346 ...
Netherlands Exports 65,799 53,195 62,978 63,741 5,425 6,267 5,669 6,091 ...
Imports 67,971 55,583 67,205 74,946 6,658 7,020 6,427 7,168 ...
Balance − 2,172 − 2,388 − 4,227 − 11,205 − 1,233 − 753 − 758 − 1,078 ...
Spain Exports 42,676 31,281 34,222 32,517 2,360 3,081 2,928 3,107 ...
Imports 20,701 18,959 21,955 20,814 1,360 1,966 1,826 1,914 ...
Balance + 21,975 + 12,322 + 12,267 + 11,703 + 999 + 1,115 + 1,102 + 1,193 ...
Other EU member Exports 201,517 156,953 182,775 191,286 17,145 18,620 17,680 18,300 ...
states Imports 145,478 121,594 144,240 154,318 13,556 15,218 14,945 15,094 ...
Balance + 56,039 + 35,359 + 38,536 + 36,968 + 3,589 + 3,402 + 2,734 + 3,205 ...
of which
United Exports 64,175 53,240 58,666 60,456 5,224 5,849 5,603 5,790 ...
Kingdom Imports 41,646 32,452 37,923 40,975 3,556 4,239 3,976 4,004 ...
Balance + 22,529 + 20,787 + 20,743 + 19,481 + 1,668 + 1,610 + 1,627 + 1,786 ...
Exports 110,455 85,172 104,145 114,469 10,984 11,433 10,503 11,215 ... 2 Other European
Imports 106,174 83,398 97,345 106,384 9,521 9,636 9,908 10,201 ... countries
Balance + 4,281 + 1,774 + 6,800 + 8,086 + 1,463 + 1,797 + 595 + 1,014 ...
of which
Switzerland Exports 39,027 35,510 41,659 43,946 4,256 4,459 3,985 4,359 ...
Imports 31,299 28,096 32,507 33,931 3,236 3,250 3,368 3,280 ...
Balance + 7,728 + 7,414 + 9,152 + 10,015 + 1,020 + 1,209 + 617 + 1,079 ...
II Exports 249,199 216,466 276,635 280,007 25,615 26,975 26,215 27,658 ... Non-European
Imports 238,050 200,303 255,377 255,652 24,244 23,417 24,004 23,798 ... countries
Balance + 11,150 + 16,163 + 21,258 + 24,355 + 1,370 + 3,558 + 2,211 + 3,860 ...
Exports 19,636 17,412 19,968 18,785 1,707 1,823 1,669 1,705 ... 1 Africa
Imports 20,661 14,235 17,040 20,389 2,046 1,720 1,638 1,625 ...
Balance − 1,024 + 3,177 + 2,929 − 1,604 − 339 + 103 + 31 + 79 ...
Exports 101,866 78,727 99,464 100,867 9,257 9,721 9,567 9,988 ... 2 America
Imports 73,884 60,498 71,680 73,520 6,691 6,587 6,877 7,116 ...
Balance + 27,982 + 18,229 + 27,784 + 27,347 + 2,566 + 3,134 + 2,691 + 2,872 ...
of which
Exports 71,428 54,356 65,574 67,251 6,085 6,518 6,541 6,770 ... United States
Imports 46,464 39,283 45,241 44,259 3,968 3,774 4,303 4,254 ...
Balance + 24,965 + 15,074 + 20,333 + 22,992 + 2,117 + 2,744 + 2,238 + 2,516 ...
Exports 120,102 113,179 148,231 151,693 13,906 14,572 14,209 15,200 ... 3 Asia
Imports 140,585 122,823 163,523 158,017 15,106 14,717 15,162 14,740 ...
Balance − 20,483 − 9,644 − 15,293 − 6,323 − 1,199 − 145 − 953 + 460 ...
of which
Middle East Exports 27,498 23,598 28,138 25,134 2,255 2,360 2,618 2,897 ...
Imports 7,943 5,506 6,878 7,348 747 701 863 725 ...
Balance + 19,555 + 18,092 + 21,260 + 17,786 + 1,508 + 1,659 + 1,755 + 2,172 ...
Japan Exports 12,732 10,875 13,149 13,819 1,258 1,500 1,446 1,357 ...
Imports 23,130 18,946 22,475 21,682 1,967 1,971 2,067 2,071 ...
Balance − 10,398 − 8,071 − 9,326 − 7,863 − 709 − 471 − 622 − 714 ...
Exports 34,065 37,273 53,791 59,324 5,446 5,592 5,406 5,860 ... People‘s Republic
Imports 60,825 56,706 77,270 72,784 7,108 7,136 7,163 7,053 ... of China 
2 
Balance − 26,760 − 19,434 − 23,479 − 13,459 − 1,662 − 1,544 − 1,758 − 1,192 ...
Exports 32,572 28,606 38,183 37,905 3,440 3,626 3,362 3,551 ... Emerging markets
Imports 33,152 28,338 39,562 36,227 3,398 3,157 3,041 3,048 ... in South-East Asia 3 
Balance − 580 + 268 − 1,379 + 1,678 + 42 + 469 + 321 + 503 ...
Exports 7,595 7,147 8,972 8,662 744 859 769 766 ... 4 Oceania and
Imports 2,920 2,747 3,134 3,727 401 393 327 317 ... polar regions
Balance + 4,674 + 4,401 + 5,838 + 4,935 + 343 + 465 + 442 + 449 ...
 
*Source: Federal Statistical Office. Exports (fob) by country of destination, imports other data not classifiable by region. 2Excluding Hong Kong. 3Brunei Darussalam,
(cif) by country of origin. Individual countries and groups of countries according to Hong Kong, Indonesia, Malaysia, Philippines, Republic of Korea, Singapore, Taiwan
the current position. 1Including fuel and other supplies for ships and aircraft and and Thailand. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
71  Monthly Report
February 2012
XI External sector
 
4 Services and income of the Federal Republic of Germany
(balances)
 
€ million
Services
Other services
of which
 
Patents
Compen- Services  of Construction
Trans- Financial and sation of Investment Government self-employed and  assembly
Period Total Travel 1 services licences Total income portation 2 services  3 persons  4 work,  repairs employees 5 
2007 − 14,852 − 34,324 + 6,756 + 2,801 − 2,016 + 3,309 + 8,622 − 1,964 + 3,197 + 252 + 43,058
2008 − 11,585 − 34,718 + 8,300 + 4,106 − 1,337 + 2,372 + 9,691 − 1,648 + 3,145 + 463 + 35,1032009 − 10,437 − 33,341 + 6,873 + 3,848 + 804 + 2,369 + 9,011 − 1,256 + 2,563 − 126 + 50,2312010 − 8,349 − 32,778 + 7,056 + 3,709 + 992 + 2,470 + 10,202 − 1,155 + 2,887 − 269 + 44,7512011 − 7,761 − 33,018 + 7,416 + 4,171 + 463 + 2,509 + 10,698 − 1,218 + 2,780 − 295 + 41,155
2010          Q2 − 2,596 − 8,514 + 2,038 + 663 + 438 + 595 + 2,184 − 267 + 716 + 294 + 2,837
         Q3 − 7,127 − 13,252 + 1,910 + 1,033 − 289 + 596 + 2,875 − 329 + 649 − 584 + 13,484         Q4 + 2,339 − 5,841 + 1,611 + 1,093 + 731 + 671 + 4,075 − 313 + 938 − 423 + 14,578
2011          Q1 − 217 − 5,563 + 1,402 + 709 − 141 + 596 + 2,781 − 248 + 618 + 410 + 12,883
         Q2 − 2,381 − 8,180 + 2,153 + 805 + 400 + 675 + 1,767 − 248 + 669 + 287 + 399         Q3 − 6,398 − 13,656 + 1,879 + 1,024 − 154 + 655 + 3,854 − 322 + 595 − 562 + 14,024         Q4 + 1,234 − 5,619 + 1,983 + 1,634 + 358 + 583 + 2,296 − 400 + 897 − 431 + 13,849
2011          Feb + 350 − 1,486 + 489 + 64 + 244 + 194 + 845 − 64 + 264 + 130 + 4,494
         Mar + 624 − 2,083 + 502 + 253 − 187 + 215 + 1,924 − 97 + 204 + 150 + 4,977
         Apr − 729 − 1,830 + 645 + 301 + 86 + 229 − 160 − 47 + 235 + 94 + 1,711
         May − 449 − 2,576 + 783 + 291 + 313 + 234 + 506 − 117 + 196 + 102 − 5,864         June − 1,203 − 3,774 + 724 + 213 + 1 + 212 + 1,421 − 84 + 238 + 92 + 4,552
         July − 2,137 − 4,238 + 727 + 434 − 90 + 223 + 808 − 108 + 116 − 185 + 4,650
         Aug − 4,296 − 5,479 + 609 + 224 + 35 + 224 + 90 − 125 + 205 − 185 + 4,650         Sep + 35 − 3,940 + 543 + 366 − 99 + 208 + 2,955 − 89 + 274 − 193 + 4,724
         Oct − 520 − 3,431 + 722 + 963 + 198 + 207 + 821 − 142 + 230 − 170 + 4,748
         Nov − 41 − 1,477 + 568 + 233 + 293 + 221 + 122 − 124 + 310 − 171 + 4,498         Dec + 1,795 − 711 + 694 + 438 − 134 + 155 + 1,353 − 134 + 357 − 89 + 4,603
1From January 2001, figures subject to significant uncertainty. 2Excluding the other technical services, research and development, commercial services, etc.
expenditure on freight included in the cif import figure. 3Including the receipts 5 Wages and salaries. 
from foreign military agencies for goods and services supplied. 4Engineering and
5 Current transfers of the Federal Republic of Germany 6 Capital transfers
(balances) (balances)
€ million € million
Public 1 Private 1 
International
organisations 2 
 
of which Other Other
European current Workers’ current
Period Total Total Total Communities Total remittances transfers Total  4 Public 1 Private 1 transfers 3 
2007 − 32,841 − 17,393 − 19,331 − 17,548 + 1,939 − 15,448 − 2,997 − 12,451 + 104 − 2,034 + 2,138
2008 − 33,386 − 17,003 − 18,741 − 16,645 + 1,738 − 16,384 − 3,079 − 13,304 − 215 − 1,857 + 1,6422009 − 33,017 − 18,830 − 19,044 − 16,603 + 214 − 14,187 − 2,995 − 11,192 + 74 − 1,704 + 1,7782010 − 38,086 − 22,960 − 22,607 − 19,542 − 353 − 15,126 − 3,035 − 12,092 − 637 − 2,044 + 1,4072011 − 35,594 − 20,286 − 22,028 − 19,162 + 1,742 − 15,308 − 2,977 − 12,332 + 625 − 2,270 + 2,895
2010          Q2 − 6,573 − 2,298 − 4,393 − 3,771 + 2,095 − 4,275 − 759 − 3,516 − 443 − 403 − 40
         Q3 − 10,886 − 7,168 − 6,457 − 5,662 − 711 − 3,718 − 759 − 2,960 + 6 − 425 + 431         Q4 − 6,529 − 2,573 − 1,670 − 1,123 − 903 − 3,956 − 759 − 3,197 − 472 − 815 + 343
2011          Q1 − 14,146 − 10,553 − 9,872 − 8,949 − 682 − 3,593 − 744 − 2,849 + 912 − 405 + 1,317
         Q2 − 5,606 − 1,061 − 4,865 − 4,255 + 3,804 − 4,545 − 744 − 3,801 − 251 − 429 + 178         Q3 − 10,277 − 6,764 − 6,121 − 5,455 − 642 − 3,513 − 744 − 2,769 + 104 − 484 + 588         Q4 − 5,565 − 1,908 − 1,170 − 503 − 738 − 3,657 − 744 − 2,913 − 140 − 952 + 812
2011          Feb − 7,111 − 5,882 − 5,439 − 5,128 − 443 − 1,229 − 248 − 981 + 528 − 108 + 636
         Mar − 2,971 − 1,729 − 1,529 − 1,406 − 200 − 1,242 − 248 − 994 − 158 − 175 + 17
         Apr − 1,720 − 590 − 1,637 − 1,272 + 1,046 − 1,130 − 248 − 882 − 177 − 128 − 49
         May − 1,015 + 1,061 − 1,666 − 1,562 + 2,727 − 2,076 − 248 − 1,828 − 65 − 141 + 76         June − 2,871 − 1,532 − 1,562 − 1,421 + 30 − 1,339 − 248 − 1,091 − 10 − 160 + 150
         July − 3,672 − 2,479 − 2,107 − 1,932 − 373 − 1,193 − 248 − 945 − 141 − 161 + 20
         Aug − 3,266 − 2,099 − 1,826 − 1,484 − 273 − 1,167 − 248 − 919 + 375 − 150 + 525         Sep − 3,338 − 2,185 − 2,189 − 2,039 + 4 − 1,153 − 248 − 905 − 129 − 172 + 43
         Oct − 3,617 − 2,461 − 2,086 − 1,966 − 375 − 1,156 − 248 − 908 − 176 − 224 + 48
         Nov − 3,696 − 2,497 − 2,145 − 1,913 − 352 − 1,198 − 248 − 950 + 122 − 204 + 326         Dec + 1,748 + 3,051 + 3,061 + 3,375 − 11 − 1,303 − 248 − 1,055 − 86 − 524 + 438
1The classification of “public” and “private” transfers depends on the sector to transfers). 3Payments to developing countries, pension payments, tax revenue and
which the participating domestic body belongs. 2Current contributions to the refunds, etc. 4 Where identifiable; in particular, debt forgiveness. 
budgets of international organisations and to the EU budget (excluding capital

Deutsche Bundesbank
72  Monthly Report
February 2012
XI External sector
 
7 Financial account of the Federal Republic of Germany
 
 
€ million
2011
Item 2009 2010 2011 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 Oct Nov Dec
I Net German investment abroad
(Increase/capital exports: −) − 10,911 − 399,139 − 232,829 − 51,097 − 71,793 − 165,778 + 55,839 − 16,584 − 29,263 + 101,685
1 Direct investment 1 − 56,292 − 80,756 − 36,936 − 26,355 + 889 − 5,616 − 5,853 − 9,394 + 1,833 + 1,708
Equity capital − 51,427 − 43,540 − 16,274 − 6,874 − 8,469 − 2,433 + 1,502 + 1,744 − 2,165 + 1,923
Reinvested earnings 2 − 22,735 − 23,470 − 31,557 − 9,236 − 6,461 − 8,571 − 7,289 − 3,726 − 3,838 + 275
Other capital transactions
of German direct investors + 17,871 − 13,745 + 10,895 − 10,245 + 15,819 + 5,387 − 66 − 7,411 + 7,835 − 490
2 Portfolio investment − 69,144 − 171,328 − 27,782 − 20,714 − 16,302 + 12,254 − 3,020 − 1,139 + 137 − 2,018
Shares 3 − 2,821 + 173 + 2,167 + 4,793 − 8,418 + 11,473 − 5,680 − 760 + 2,064 − 6,984
Mutual fund shares 4 + 1,775 − 21,753 − 149 − 2,916 − 2,299 + 3,376 + 1,690 − 254 − 582 + 2,526
Bonds and notes 5 − 81,203 − 156,134 − 25,013 − 19,965 + 2,491 + 1,774 − 9,313 + 2,036 − 7,762 − 3,587
Money market instruments + 13,105 + 6,387 − 4,787 − 2,626 − 8,075 − 4,369 + 10,282 − 2,160 + 6,416 + 6,027
3 Financial derivatives 6 + 12,368 − 17,608 − 29,357 − 11,474 − 5,292 − 7,240 − 5,352 − 5,234 + 1,220 − 1,338
4 Other investment + 98,957 − 127,834 − 135,918 + 8,838 − 50,650 − 164,536 + 70,430 − 872 − 32,715 + 104,017
MFIs 7,8 + 176,553 + 138,535 + 45,164 + 34,446 − 21,915 − 28,087 + 60,721 + 26,947 + 704 + 33,069
Long-term + 25,779 + 77,701 − 11,863 + 5,073 + 2,120 − 9,916 − 9,139 − 2,315 + 1,301 − 8,125
Short-term + 150,774 + 60,833 + 57,027 + 29,373 − 24,035 − 18,171 + 69,860 + 29,263 − 597 + 41,194
Enterprises and households − 18,390 − 57,669 − 25,487 − 27,258 − 8,652 − 35,441 + 45,865 + 212 + 2,574 + 43,078
Long-term − 22,263 − 39,834 + 9,917 − 9,599 − 1,200 + 2,655 + 18,060 + 8,795 + 1,633 + 7,633
Short-term 7 + 3,872 − 17,835 − 35,404 − 17,660 − 7,452 − 38,096 + 27,804 − 8,583 + 941 + 35,446
General government + 2,061 − 61,067 − 17,522 − 675 − 6,772 + 12,065 − 22,140 − 12,127 − 6,345 − 3,668
Long-term − 596 − 52,757 + 3,207 + 1,777 − 377 + 363 + 1,443 + 2,035 − 863 + 272
Short-term 7 + 2,657 − 8,309 − 20,729 − 2,452 − 6,395 + 11,702 − 23,584 − 14,162 − 5,481 − 3,940
Bundesbank − 61,267 − 147,633 − 138,073 + 2,325 − 13,311 − 113,073 − 14,015 − 15,903 − 29,649 + 31,538
5 Change in reserve assets at
transaction values (Increase: −) + 3,200 − 1,613 − 2,836 − 1,393 − 438 − 639 − 366 + 55 + 263 − 684
II Net foreign investment in Germany
(Increase/capital imports: +) − 134,516 + 258,838 + 93,483 − 3,743 + 42,586 + 146,906 − 92,266 + 4,810 + 18,947 − 116,023
1 Direct investment 1 + 27,085 + 34,833 + 22,186 + 856 + 2,774 + 7,619 + 10,937 + 4,473 + 6,444 + 20
Equity capital + 8,528 + 7,955 + 2,369 − 1,513 + 757 + 1,825 + 1,299 + 204 + 109 + 987
Reinvested earnings 2 + 1,389 + 5,303 + 6,181 + 3,911 − 438 + 1,599 + 1,108 + 1,517 − 19 − 390
Other capital transactionsof foreign direct investors + 17,168 + 21,575 + 13,637 − 1,542 + 2,455 + 4,195 + 8,529 + 2,753 + 6,354 − 577
2 Portfolio investment − 13,571 + 46,408 + 97,408 + 47,794 + 71,478 + 18,328 − 40,192 − 16,549 + 5,212 − 28,855
Shares 
3 + 2,334 − 4,073 − 3,113 − 4,920 + 11,748 − 4,518 − 5,423 + 1,185 − 4,984 − 1,625
Mutual fund shares + 5,406 + 2,408 + 8,048 + 2,399 + 864 + 3,909 + 875 + 1,070 − 1,133 + 938
Bonds and notes 5 − 71,690 + 48,308 + 53,471 + 32,448 + 37,583 + 5,321 − 21,881 − 14,984 + 11,598 − 18,495
Money market instruments + 50,379 − 235 + 39,002 + 17,866 + 21,283 + 13,616 − 13,763 − 3,820 − 270 − 9,674
3 Other investment − 148,031 + 177,597 − 26,111 − 52,393 − 31,666 + 120,958 − 63,010 + 16,887 + 7,291 − 87,188
MFIs 7,8 − 114,873 + 76,198 − 96,971 − 39,262 − 30,470 + 84,255 − 111,492 + 13,422 + 1,824 − 126,738
Long-term − 23,849 − 5,855 − 18,630 − 3,597 − 6,879 − 536 − 7,618 − 5,193 − 73 − 2,352
Short-term − 91,024 + 82,052 − 78,341 − 35,666 − 23,592 + 84,791 − 103,874 + 18,615 + 1,897 − 124,386
Enterprises and households − 6,087 + 2,683 + 21,697 − 3,420 + 2,064 + 27,815 − 4,763 − 10,002 + 2,385 + 2,854
Long-term + 1,773 − 5,173 − 15,894 − 5,685 − 6,183 − 3,438 − 589 − 690 + 1,384 − 1,282
Short-term 7 − 7,860 + 7,856 + 37,591 + 2,265 + 8,247 + 31,254 − 4,174 − 9,312 + 1,001 + 4,136
General government − 5,290 + 93,198 + 17,210 − 8,670 − 406 + 5,786 + 20,499 + 14,117 + 2,720 + 3,662
Long-term − 2,013 − 232 + 3,791 + 243 + 1,755 + 2,088 − 295 − 261 + 832 − 865
Short-term 7 − 3,276 + 93,430 + 13,419 − 8,913 − 2,161 + 3,699 + 20,794 + 14,378 + 1,889 + 4,527
Bundesbank − 21,782 + 5,518 + 31,952 − 1,042 − 2,854 + 3,102 + 32,746 − 650 + 362 + 33,034
III Financial account balance 9 
(Net capital exports: −) − 145,427 − 140,301 − 139,346 − 54,840 − 29,207 − 18,872 − 36,427 − 11,773 − 10,316 − 14,338
1From 1996, new definition for direct investment. 2Estimated. 3Including from changes in stocks. Purely statistical changes have been eliminated as far as
participation rights. 4From 1991, including retained earnings. 5From 1975, possible. 8Excluding the Deutsche Bundesbank. 9Financial account balance
excluding accrued interest. 6Options, whether evidenced by securities or not, and including change in reserve assets. 
financial futures contracts. 7The transaction values shown here are mostly derived

Deutsche Bundesbank
73  Monthly Report
February 2012
XI External sector
 
8 External position of the Bundesbank up to end-1998 *
 
 
DM million
Reserve assets and other claims on non-residents Liabilities vis-à-vis non-residents
Reserve assets
Reserve
positionin theInter- Liabilitiesnational arising Net Liabilities
Monetary arising from externalFund and Claims Loans and from Treasury position
Foreign special on the external discount (col 1 other claims
End of year currency drawing ECB 
2 on non- trans- liquidity less
or month Total Total Gold rights (net) Total paper col 8) balances 1 residents 3 actions 4 
1234567891 0 1 1
1997 127,849 126,884 13,688 76,673 13,874 22,649 966 16,931 16,931 − 110,918
1998 135,085 134,005 17,109 100,363 16,533 − 1,079 15,978 15,978 − 119,107
*Valuation of the gold holdings and the claims on non-residents in accordance with claims on the European Monetary Cooperation Fund (EMCF)). 3Including loans to
section 26 (2) of the Bundesbank Act and the provisions of the Commercial Code, the World Bank. 4Including liquidity paper sold to non-residents by the Bundesbank;
especially section 253. In the course of the year, valuation at the preceding year’s excluding the Treasury discount liquidity paper sold to non-residents between March
balance sheet rates. 1Mainly US dollar assets. 2European Central Bank (up to 1993, 1993 and March 1995, as shown in column 10. 
  
 
9 External position of the Bundesbank in European monetary union o
€ million
Reserve assets and other claims on non-residents
Reserve assets
Reserveposition
Other in the Inter-national
claims on Net
Monetary Other residents external
Fund and claims on Claims in other position
Gold special Foreign non-euro- within the euro-area (col 1 Liabilities
End of year and gold drawing currency area Eurosystem member less vis-à-vis non-
or month Total Total rights reserves (net) 2 states col 9) receivables residents 1,3 residents 3,4 
1234567891 0
1999          Jan  5 95,316 93,940 29,312 8,461 56,167 140 1,225 11 8,169 87,146
1999 141,958 93,039 32,287 8,332 52,420 9,162 39,746 11 6,179 135,779
2000 100,762 93,815 32,676 7,762 53,377 313 6,620 14 6,592 94,1702001 76,147 93,215 35,005 8,721 49,489 312 − 17,385 5 8,752 67,3962002 103,948 85,002 36,208 8,272 40,522 312 18,466 167 9,005 94,9422003 95,394 76,680 36,533 7,609 32,538 312 17,945 456 10,443 84,951
2004 93,110 71,335 35,495 6,548 29,292 312 20,796 667 7,935 85,175
2005 130,268 86,181 47,924 4,549 33,708 350 42,830 906 6,285 123,9832006 104,389 84,765 53,114 3,011 28,640 350 18,344 931 4,819 99,5702007 179,492 92,545 62,433 2,418 27,694 350 84,064 2,534 16,005 163,4882008 230,775 99,185 68,194 3,285 27,705 350 128,668 2,573 30,169 200,607
2009 323,286 125,541 83,939 15,969 25,634 350 189,936 7,460 9,126 314,160
2010 524,695 162,100 115,403 18,740 27,957 50 337,869 24,676 14,620 510,0752011 714,662 184,603 132,874 22,296 29,433 50 475,942 54,067 46,557 668,106
2010          Oct 472,762 150,481 105,507 17,972 27,002 50 298,661 23,569 12,729 460,032
         Nov 497,807 162,835 115,698 18,397 28,740 50 311,444 23,479 11,281 486,526         Dec 524,695 162,100 115,403 18,740 27,957 50 337,869 24,676 14,620 510,075
2011          Jan 492,995 152,428 106,493 18,667 27,268 50 314,944 25,574 13,719 479,276
         Feb 515,777 156,964 111,426 18,532 27,005 50 333,010 25,754 12,100 503,677         Mar 516,360 155,718 110,136 19,253 26,329 50 335,543 25,049 13,569 502,791
         Apr 502,690 157,344 112,655 18,818 25,871 50 321,422 23,875 12,011 490,679
         May 522,887 162,854 116,831 19,202 26,821 50 335,955 24,028 11,566 511,322         June 531,716 159,745 114,087 19,098 26,560 50 348,854 23,067 10,700 521,016
         July 549,738 170,639 123,740 19,901 26,998 50 355,977 23,072 12,077 537,661
         Aug 622,802 184,687 138,174 19,774 26,739 50 402,739 35,327 15,380 607,422         Sep 686,659 181,430 131,912 20,862 28,655 50 461,927 43,253 13,809 672,850
         Oct 704,976 181,946 133,987 20,434 27,525 50 477,830 45,150 13,147 691,829
         Nov 746,357 187,984 138,669 20,850 28,465 50 507,480 50,843 13,517 732,840         Dec 714,662 184,603 132,874 22,296 29,433 50 475,942 54,067 46,557 668,106
2012          Jan 763,406 195,056 144,034 22,115 28,907 50 510,763 57,539 11,941 751,466
oClaims and liabilities vis-à-vis all countries within and outside the euro area. Up to From November 2000, including the TARGET positions which were previously shown
December 2000, the levels at the end of each quarter are shown, owing to (in columns 6 and 9) as bilateral assets and liabilities vis-à-vis national central banks
revaluations, at market prices; within each quarter, however, the levels are computed outside the Eurosystem. 3See footnote 2. 4Excluding allocations of special drawing
on the basis of cumulative transaction values. From January 2001, all end-of-month rights (SDR) by the International Monetary Fund (IMF) for an amount of SDR 12,059levels are valued at market prices. 1Including loans to the World Bank. 2Including million. 5 Euro opening balance sheet of the Bundesbank as at 1 January 1999. 
the balances in the Bundesbank’s cross-border payments within the Eurosystem.

Deutsche Bundesbank
74  Monthly Report
February 2012
XI External sector
 
10 Assets and liabilities of enterprises in Germany (other than banks)
vis-à-vis non-residents *
 
€ million
Claims on non-residents Liabilities vis-à-vis non-residents
Claims on foreign non-banks Liabilities  vis-à-vis foreign non-banks
from trade credits from trade credits
Balances Loans
with from Credit Advance from from Credit Advance
End of year foreign financial terms payments foreign financial terms payments
or month Total banks Total Total granted effected Total banks Total Total used received operations operations
All countries
 
2008 553,465 173,255 380,210 227,055 153,155 140,520 12,635 707,704 147,242 560,462 424,211 136,251 79,980 56,271
2009 593,591 209,729 383,862 240,727 143,135 130,605 12,530 754,355 159,667 594,688 457,468 137,220 80,759 56,461
2010 670,695 242,028 428,667 272,426 156,241 143,032 13,209 806,295 161,201 645,094 498,310 146,784 88,288 58,496
2011 698,599 242,387 456,212 285,123 171,089 155,392 15,697 871,795 172,099 699,696 538,839 160,857 95,131 65,726
2011          July r 720,659 267,205 453,454 286,033 167,421 151,778 15,643 843,802 164,298 679,504 527,336 152,168 86,505 65,663
         Aug  r 735,308 283,424 451,884 288,335 163,549 147,577 15,972 849,097 170,558 678,539 531,181 147,358 80,839 66,519
         Sep 747,446 281,374 466,072 294,213 171,859 156,096 15,763 874,588 178,393 696,195 540,214 155,981 89,610 66,371
         Oct 739,224 280,779 458,445 285,063 173,382 157,245 16,137 856,672 170,420 686,252 530,194 156,058 89,188 66,870
         Nov 737,575 278,648 458,927 283,861 175,066 159,064 16,002 867,226 171,758 695,468 538,918 156,550 90,016 66,534         Dec 698,599 242,387 456,212 285,123 171,089 155,392 15,697 871,795 172,099 699,696 538,839 160,857 95,131 65,726
Industrial countries
 
2008 489,430 171,387 318,043 207,807 110,236 101,002 9,234 643,652 145,045 498,607 402,020 96,587 68,148 28,439
2009 531,796 208,571 323,225 220,778 102,447 93,566 8,881 684,984 157,343 527,641 431,525 96,116 68,912 27,204
2010 598,167 240,915 357,252 249,497 107,755 98,428 9,327 724,754 158,632 566,122 464,105 102,017 73,987 28,030
2011 615,925 240,265 375,660 258,453 117,207 104,915 12,292 785,925 169,535 616,390 502,139 114,251 80,491 33,760
2011          July r 641,251 265,862 375,389 260,378 115,011 102,822 12,189 760,856 161,866 598,990 492,998 105,992 72,618 33,374
         Aug  r 655,871 282,043 373,828 262,698 111,130 98,702 12,428 766,205 168,121 598,084 496,803 101,281 67,216 34,065
         Sep 666,757 280,155 386,602 268,204 118,398 106,016 12,382 790,566 175,900 614,666 505,351 109,315 75,202 34,113
         Oct 657,906 279,444 378,462 259,393 119,069 106,367 12,702 773,897 167,982 605,915 495,642 110,273 75,572 34,701
         Nov 654,279 276,711 377,568 257,447 120,121 107,574 12,547 782,802 169,165 613,637 502,800 110,837 76,618 34,219         Dec 615,925 240,265 375,660 258,453 117,207 104,915 12,292 785,925 169,535 616,390 502,139 114,251 80,491 33,760
EU member states
 
2008 398,833 164,762 234,071 151,391 82,680 75,192 7,488 536,351 137,208 399,143 331,498 67,645 46,188 21,457
2009 443,431 200,400 243,031 165,986 77,045 70,051 6,994 579,596 141,633 437,963 367,980 69,983 48,977 21,006
2010 494,360 230,746 263,614 184,862 78,752 71,525 7,227 617,255 149,927 467,328 395,566 71,762 50,035 21,727
2011 508,071 225,583 282,488 196,132 86,356 76,472 9,884 660,137 157,465 502,672 421,679 80,993 54,370 26,623
2011          July r 539,518 255,413 284,105 198,908 85,197 75,431 9,766 651,116 154,060 497,056 420,869 76,187 49,502 26,685
         Aug  r 549,770 267,045 282,725 201,265 81,460 71,490 9,970 654,524 158,524 496,000 423,301 72,699 45,530 27,169
         Sep 556,220 263,070 293,150 206,207 86,943 77,057 9,886 672,648 164,861 507,787 429,045 78,742 51,498 27,244
         Oct 549,059 261,023 288,036 201,259 86,777 76,790 9,987 654,562 157,748 496,814 418,032 78,782 51,470 27,312
         Nov 545,953 258,615 287,338 198,897 88,441 78,531 9,910 660,468 157,980 502,488 422,705 79,783 52,673 27,110         Dec 508,071 225,583 282,488 196,132 86,356 76,472 9,884 660,137 157,465 502,672 421,679 80,993 54,370 26,623
of which: Euro-area member states 1
 
2008 281,518 130,226 151,292 96,968 54,324 49,408 4,916 415,221 81,703 333,518 290,093 43,425 29,768 13,657
2009 321,991 159,740 162,251 114,378 47,873 43,179 4,694 466,064 91,792 374,272 332,280 41,992 28,397 13,595
2010 366,774 184,299 182,475 130,430 52,045 47,239 4,806 496,543 97,287 399,256 351,352 47,904 33,444 14,460
2011 372,493 171,907 200,586 142,530 58,056 52,125 5,931 529,244 103,827 425,417 370,898 54,519 37,188 17,331
2011          July r 408,372 204,629 203,743 145,691 58,052 52,067 5,985 532,695 105,614 427,081 375,510 51,571 34,587 16,984
         Aug  r 413,495 210,079 203,416 148,459 54,957 48,930 6,027 531,441 105,236 426,205 376,883 49,322 31,959 17,363
         Sep 421,901 210,456 211,445 152,804 58,641 52,617 6,024 545,823 110,643 435,180 382,194 52,986 35,514 17,472
         Oct 408,070 201,586 206,484 147,971 58,513 52,445 6,068 530,982 108,197 422,785 369,501 53,284 35,600 17,684
         Nov 409,213 201,376 207,837 148,467 59,370 53,549 5,821 534,797 105,771 429,026 375,803 53,223 35,705 17,518         Dec 372,493 171,907 200,586 142,530 58,056 52,125 5,931 529,244 103,827 425,417 370,898 54,519 37,188 17,331
Emerging economies and developing countries 2
 
2008 64,035 1,868 62,167 19,248 42,919 39,518 3,401 64,052 2,197 61,855 22,191 39,664 11,832 27,832
2009 61,795 1,158 60,637 19,949 40,688 37,039 3,649 69,371 2,324 67,047 25,943 41,104 11,847 29,257
2010 72,528 1,113 71,415 22,929 48,486 44,604 3,882 81,541 2,569 78,972 34,205 44,767 14,301 30,466
2011 82,674 2,122 80,552 26,670 53,882 50,477 3,405 85,870 2,564 83,306 36,700 46,606 14,640 31,966
2011          July 79,408 1,343 78,065 25,655 52,410 48,956 3,454 82,946 2,432 80,514 34,338 46,176 13,887 32,289         Aug 79,437 1,381 78,056 25,637 52,419 48,875 3,544 82,892 2,437 80,455 34,378 46,077 13,623 32,454         Sep 80,689 1,219 79,470 26,009 53,461 50,080 3,381 84,022 2,493 81,529 34,863 46,666 14,408 32,258
         Oct 81,318 1,335 79,983 25,670 54,313 50,878 3,435 82,775 2,438 80,337 34,552 45,785 13,616 32,169
         Nov 83,296 1,937 81,359 26,414 54,945 51,490 3,455 84,424 2,593 81,831 36,118 45,713 13,398 32,315         Dec 82,674 2,122 80,552 26,670 53,882 50,477 3,405 85,870 2,564 83,306 36,700 46,606 14,640 31,966
* Up to and including November 2009 the assets and liabilities vis-à-vis non-residents Cyprus and Malta; from January 2009, including Slovakia; from January 2011
of households in Germany. The assets and liabilities vis-à-vis non-residents of banks including Estonia. 2All countries that are not regarded as industrial countries. Up to
(MFIs) in Germany are shown in Table 4 of Section IV, “Banks”. Statistical increases December 2010 including Niederländische Antillen; from January 2011 includingand decreases have not been eliminated; to this extent, the changes in totals are not Bonaire, St.Eustatius, Saba and Curacao and St.Martin (Dutch part). comparable with the figures shown in Table XI.7. 1From January 2008, includingXI External sector

Deutsche Bundesbank
75  Monthly Report
February 2012
XI External sector
 
11 ECB euro reference exchange rates of selected currencies *
 
 
EUR 1 = currency units ...
Yearly Australia Canada China Denmark Japan Norway Sweden Switzerland United States United Kingdom
or monthly       
average AUD CAD CNY 1 DKK JPY NOK SEK CHF GBP USD
1999 1.6523 1.5840 . 7.4355 121.32 8.3104 8.8075 1.6003 0.65874 1.0658
2000 1.5889 1.3706 2 7.6168 7.4538 99.47 8.1129 8.4452 1.5579 0.60948 0.9236
2001 1.7319 1.3864 7.4131 7.4521 108.68 8.0484 9.2551 1.5105 0.62187 0.8956
2002 1.7376 1.4838 7.8265 7.4305 118.06 7.5086 9.1611 1.4670 0.62883 0.94562003 1.7379 1.5817 9.3626 7.4307 130.97 8.0033 9.1242 1.5212 0.69199 1.13122004 1.6905 1.6167 10.2967 7.4399 134.44 8.3697 9.1243 1.5438 0.67866 1.2439
2005 1.6320 1.5087 10.1955 7.4518 136.85 8.0092 9.2822 1.5483 0.68380 1.2441
2006 1.6668 1.4237 10.0096 7.4591 146.02 8.0472 9.2544 1.5729 0.68173 1.25562007 1.6348 1.4678 10.4178 7.4506 161.25 8.0165 9.2501 1.6427 0.68434 1.37052008 1.7416 1.5594 10.2236 7.4560 152.45 8.2237 9.6152 1.5874 0.79628 1.47082009 1.7727 1.5850 9.5277 7.4462 130.34 8.7278 10.6191 1.5100 0.89094 1.3948
2010 1.4423 1.3651 8.9712 7.4473 116.24 8.0043 9.5373 1.3803 0.85784 1.3257
2011 1.3484 1.3761 8.9960 7.4506 110.96 7.7934 9.0298 1.2326 0.86788 1.3920
2010          Sep 1.3943 1.3515 8.8104 7.4476 110.26 7.9156 9.2241 1.3089 0.83987 1.3067
         Oct 1.4164 1.4152 9.2665 7.4567 113.67 8.1110 9.2794 1.3452 0.87638 1.3898
         Nov 1.3813 1.3831 9.0895 7.4547 112.69 8.1463 9.3166 1.3442 0.85510 1.3661
         Dec 1.3304 1.3327 8.7873 7.4528 110.11 7.9020 9.0559 1.2811 0.84813 1.3220
2011          Jan 1.3417 1.3277 8.8154 7.4518 110.38 7.8199 8.9122 1.2779 0.84712 1.3360
         Feb 1.3543 1.3484 8.9842 7.4555 112.77 7.8206 8.7882 1.2974 0.84635 1.3649
         Mar 1.3854 1.3672 9.1902 7.4574 114.40 7.8295 8.8864 1.2867 0.86653 1.3999
         Apr 1.3662 1.3834 9.4274 7.4574 120.42 7.8065 8.9702 1.2977 0.88291 1.4442
         May 1.3437 1.3885 9.3198 7.4566 116.47 7.8384 8.9571 1.2537 0.87788 1.4349
         June 1.3567 1.4063 9.3161 7.4579 115.75 7.8302 9.1125 1.2092 0.88745 1.4388
         July 1.3249 1.3638 9.2121 7.4560 113.26 7.7829 9.1340 1.1766 0.88476 1.4264
         Aug 1.3651 1.4071 9.1857 7.4498 110.43 7.7882 9.1655 1.1203 0.87668 1.4343
         Sep 1.3458 1.3794 8.7994 7.4462 105.75 7.7243 9.1343 1.2005 0.87172 1.3770
         Oct 1.3525 1.3981 8.7308 7.4442 105.06 7.7474 9.1138 1.2295 0.87036 1.3706
         Nov 1.3414 1.3897 8.6154 7.4412 105.02 7.7868 9.1387 1.2307 0.85740 1.3556
         Dec 1.3003 1.3481 8.3563 7.4341 102.55 7.7451 9.0184 1.2276 0.84405 1.3179
2012          Jan 1.2405 1.3073 8.1465 7.4353 99.33 7.6752 8.8503 1.2108 0.83210 1.2905
*Averages: Bundesbank calculations based on the daily euro reference exchange Statistical Supplement 5, Exchange rate statistics. 1Up to March 2005, ECB indicative
rates published by the ECB; for additional euro reference exchange rates, see rates. 2 Average from 13 January to 29 December 2000. 
12 Euro member countries and irrevocable euro conversion rates in the third stage
of European Economic and Monetary Union
From Country Currency ISO currency code EUR 1 = currency units ...
1999  January 1 Austria Austrian schilling ATS 13.7603
Belgium Belgian franc BEF 40.3399
Finland Finnish markka FIM 5.94573
France French franc FRF 6.55957
Germany Deutsche Mark DEM 1.95583
Ireland Irish pound IEP 0.787564
Italy Italian lira ITL 1,936.27
Luxembourg Luxembourg franc LUF 40.3399
Netherlands Dutch guilder NLG 2.20371
Portugal Portuguese escudo PTE 200.482
Spain Spanish peseta ESP 166.386
2001  January 1 Greece Greek drachma GRD 340.750
2007  January 1 Slovenia Slovenian tolar SIT 239.640
2008  January 1 Cyprus Cyprus pound CYP 0.585274
Malta Maltese lira MTL 0.429300
2009  January 1 Slovakia Slovak koruna SKK 30.1260
2011  January 1 Estonia Estonian kroon EEK 15.6466

Deutsche Bundesbank
76  Monthly Report
February 2012
XI  External sector
 
13  Effective exchange rates of the Euro and indicators of the German economy’s price competitiveness *
 
 
1999 Q1=100
Effective exchange rate of the Euro Indicators of the German economy’s price competitiveness
EER-20  1 EER-40  2 Based on the deflators of total sales  3 Based on consumer price indices
24 selected industrial countries  4 In real terms
In real terms based on
In real based on unit In real
24 terms the deflators labour terms
based on of gross costs of based on Non- selected
36 36 56 consumer domestic national consumer Euro-area euro-area industrial
Period Nominal price indices product  3 economy  3 Nominal price indices Total countries countries countries  5 6 countries  4 countries  5 countries  7 
1999 96.2 96.0 95.9 96.4 96.5 95.8 97.7 99.4 95.6 97.6 98.2 98.0 97.7
2000 87.0 86.5 86.1 85.7 87.9 85.8 91.5 97.0 85.0 91.0 92.9 91.9 90.9
2001 87.6 87.2 86.9 84.8 90.4 87.1 91.0 95.8 85.4 90.1 92.9 91.4 90.8
2002 90.0 90.3 89.9 87.9 94.8 90.7 91.7 94.9 87.9 90.5 93.5 91.9 91.8
2003 100.6 101.5 100.9 98.4 106.8 101.6 95.0 93.9 96.9 94.2 97.0 96.5 96.7
2004 104.4 105.3 103.7 102.1 111.3 105.2 95.2 92.7 99.2 94.3 98.4 98.0 98.2
2005 102.9 103.8 101.7 99.8 109.3 102.7 94.0 91.3 98.2 92.2 98.5 96.9 96.5
2006 102.8 103.8 100.8 98.7 109.3 102.0 92.7 89.9 97.2 90.6 98.6 96.4 95.8
2007 106.2 106.5 102.7 100.2 112.8 104.0 93.6 89.1 101.0 91.0 100.8 97.8 96.9
2008 109.4 108.5 103.9 102.8 116.8 105.9 93.8 87.6 104.2 90.5 102.2 97.8 97.0
2009 110.6 109.2 104.8 104.8 119.7 106.8 93.4 87.7 102.9 91.3 101.7 97.9 97.4
2010 103.6 101.6 96.7 p 97.2 111.4 98.1 90.9 87.2 96.6 p 88.2 98.8 93.9 92.2
2011 103.4 p 100.7 ... ... 112.1 p 97.6 ... ... ... ... 98.2 p 93.1 p 91.7
2008          July 111.7 110.8 119.2 108.0 103.5 98.6 97.9
         Aug 109.5 108.4 103.9 103.1 116.4 105.2 94.0 87.3 105.5 90.2 102.5 97.5 96.4
         Sep 107.8 106.7 115.1 103.9 101.7 96.7 95.8
         Oct 104.5 103.6 112.7 101.6 99.8 95.1 94.5
         Nov 103.6 102.8 100.2 99.3 111.8 100.8 92.0 87.5 99.3 89.3 99.8 94.9 94.3
         Dec 108.8 108.0 117.5 105.9 101.6 97.3 96.9
2009          Jan 108.6 107.7 117.7 105.9 101.3 97.3 96.9
         Feb 107.7 106.9 103.7 103.1 117.0 105.2 92.3 87.4 100.5 90.6 100.6 97.2 96.9
         Mar 110.0 108.7 119.5 107.0 101.4 97.7 97.5
         Apr 109.1 108.0 118.2 105.8 101.4 97.3 96.8
         May 109.8 108.5 104.6 104.3 118.7 106.1 93.2 87.7 102.5 91.2 101.5 97.5 96.9
         June 111.0 109.8 120.0 107.3 101.9 98.3 97.7
         July 110.6 109.1 119.7 106.7 101.8 97.8 97.2
         Aug 110.6 109.1 105.0 105.0 119.8 106.8 93.8 87.9 103.6 91.4 101.9 97.9 97.4
         Sep 111.8 110.0 121.1 107.6 102.1 98.2 97.6
         Oct 113.1 111.2 122.0 108.3 102.6 98.8 98.1
         Nov 113.0 111.0 106.0 106.8 122.0 108.1 94.2 87.8 105.1 91.7 102.4 98.6 97.9
         Dec 111.9 109.8 120.7 106.9 102.2 98.3 97.4
2010          Jan 109.7 107.6 118.2 104.4 101.2 97.0 95.9
         Feb 107.0 104.7 101.0 101.4 115.3 101.6 92.5 87.6 100.5 89.8 100.2 95.6 94.4
         Mar 106.2 104.3 114.2 100.8 100.2 95.2 93.8
         Apr 105.0 103.0 112.5 99.3 99.5 94.4 92.7
         May 101.8 100.0 95.6 96.1 109.0 96.3 90.4 87.1 95.5 87.8 98.3 93.1 91.2
         June 99.8 98.1 106.9 94.5 97.2 92.2 90.3
         July 101.6 99.8 109.2 96.4 97.8 92.9 91.2
         Aug 101.2 99.3 94.6 94.6 108.8 95.9 90.0 87.3 94.2 p 87.5 97.6 92.7 91.0
         Sep 101.5 99.5 109.2 96.1 97.7 92.7 91.0
         Oct 105.0 102.6 112.9 99.0 99.1 94.2 92.6
         Nov 103.7 101.2 95.8 p 96.8 111.6 97.7 90.5 87.0 96.1 p 87.8 98.8 93.7 92.0
         Dec 101.7 99.2 109.3 95.6 97.8 92.8 91.0
2011          Jan 101.4 98.9 109.3 95.4 97.7 92.4 90.7
         Feb 102.4 99.7 94.7 p 95.4 110.6 96.4 90.1 86.8 95.3 p 87.3 98.1 92.9 91.2
         Mar 104.1 101.6 112.3 98.1 98.6 93.5 91.9
         Apr 105.9 103.3 114.0 99.6 99.5 94.3 92.7
         May 104.9 102.2 97.0 p 97.8 113.2 98.6 p 91.0 p 86.7 98.0 p 88.1 98.9 93.7 92.1
         June 105.0 102.3 113.4 98.9 99.0 93.7 92.2
         July 104.0 101.0 112.4 97.7 98.7 93.4 91.8
         Aug 103.9 100.8 95.0 p 95.5 112.9 98.0 p 89.9 p 86.4 95.4 p 87.3 98.2 93.2 91.9
         Sep 102.8 99.9 112.0 97.4 97.7 92.7 91.5
         Oct 103.0 p 100.3 112.6 p 97.8 97.8 p 92.9 p 91.8
         Nov 102.6 p 99.9 ... ... 112.1 p 97.4 ... ... ... ... 97.6 p 92.8 p 91.6
         Dec 100.8 p 98.2 110.3 p 95.7 96.8 p 91.8 p 90.5
2012          Jan 98.9 p 96.4 108.0 p 93.7 p 96.2 p 90.9 p 89.4
*The effective exchange rate corresponds to the weighted external value of the calculations. Includes countries belonging to the EER-20 group (see footnote 1) and
currency concerned. The method of calculating the indicators of the German additional Algeria, Argentina, Brazil, Chile, Croatia, Iceland, India, Indonesia, Israel,
economy’s price competitiveness is consistent with the procedure used by the ECB to Malaysia, Mexico, Morocco, New Zealand, Philippines, Russian Federation, Southcompute the effective exchange rates of the euro (see Monthly Report, November Africa, Taiwan, Thailand, Turkey and Venezuela. 3Annual and quarterly averages.
2001, pp  50-53, May 2007, pp  31-35 and February 2012, p  39). For details of the 4Euro-area countries (from 2001 including Greece, from 2007 including Slovenia,
methodology see the ECB’s Occasional Paper No  2 (www.ecb.int). A decline in the from 2008 including Cyprus and Malta, from 2009 including Slovakia, from 2011figures implies an increase in competitiveness. 1ECB calculations are based on the including Estonia) as well as Canada, Denmark, Japan, Norway, Sweden, Switzerland,
weighted averages of the changes in the bilateral exchange rates of the euro against United Kingdom and United States. 5Euro-area countries and countries belonging to
the currencies of the following countries: Australia, Bulgaria, Canada, China, Czech the EER-20 group. 6Owing to missing data for the deflator of total sales, China is
Republic, Denmark, Hong Kong, Hungary, Japan, Latvia, Lithuania, Norway, Poland, not included in this calculation. 7Euro-area countries and countries belonging to the
Romania, Singapore, South Korea, Sweden, Switzerland, United Kingdom and United EER-40 group (see footnote 2). States. Where price and wage indices were not available, estimates were used. 2ECB

Overview of publications by the  
Deutsche Bundesbank
This overview provides information about selected recent economic and statistical publica-
tions by the Deutsche Bundesbank. Unless otherwise indicated, these publications are avail-able in both English and German, in printed form and on the Bundesbank’s website.
The publications are available free of charge from the Communication Division. For a small 
fee to cover costs, a file which is updated monthly and contains approximately 40,000 time series published by the Bundesbank can be obtained on CD-ROM from the Division Statis-tical data processing, mathematical methods or downloaded from the Bundesbank-ExtraNet site. Orders should be sent, in writing, to one of the addresses listed on the reverse of the title page. Selected time series can also be downloaded from the internet.
Annual Report
Financial Stability ReviewMonthly Report
For information on the articles published be-
tween 2000 and 2011 see the index attached 
to the January 2012 Monthly Report.
Monthly Report articles
March 2011
–
 German 
balance of payments in 2010
–
 Approaches to the measurement and mac-
roprudential treatment of systemic risk
–
 The 
implications of the financial crisis for 
monetary policy
April 2011–
 Effective 
exchange rates from financial mar-
ket data
–
 The 
US labour market in the current cycle–
 European Council decisions on the preven-
tion and resolution of future sovereign debt crises
May 2011–
 The 
current economic situation in Germany
June 2011–
 Outlook 
for the German economy – macro-
economic projections for 2011 and 2012
–
 Sover
eign yield spreads in the euro area
–
 Extended 
MFI interest rate statistics: meth-
odology and first results
–
 Fundamental features of the German Bank 
Restructuring Act
July 2011–
  Developments in the exports of the four largest euro-area member states since the 
launch of monetary union
–
 Leasing 
financing in Germany
–
 Reliability and revision profile of selected 
German economic indicators
–
 Deutsche Bundesbank Spring Conference 
2011 – fiscal and monetary policy challenges in the short and long runDeutsche Bundesbank 
Monthly Report 
February 2012 
77•

August 2011
–
 The 
current economic situation in Germany
September 2011–
 The performance of German credit institu-
tions in 2010
–
 German 
banks’ lending to the domestic pri-
vate sector since summer 2009
–
 International 
cooperation in banking regula-
tion: past and present
October 2011–
 The debt brake in Germany – key aspects 
and implementation
–
 Germany’s external position against the background of increasing economic policy 
surveillance
November 2011–
 The 
current economic situation in Germany
December 2011–
 Outlook 
for the German economy – macro-
economic projections for 2012 and 2013
–
 German enterprises’ profitability and finan-
cing in 2010
–
 Direct investment and financial constraints 
before and during the financial crisis
January 2012–
 L
ong-term developments in corporate finan-
cing in Germany – evidence based on the 
financial accounts
–
 The 
PHF: a survey of household wealth and 
finances in Germany
–
 The European single market in payments 
nearing completion
February 2012–
 The 
current economic situation in Germany
Statistical Supplements to the 
Monthly Report
 1 Banking statistics 1 , 2
 2 C apital market statistics 1 , 2
 3 Balance of payments statistics 1 , 2 4 Seasonal ly adjusted business statistics 1 , 2
 5 Exchange rate statistics 2
Special Publications
Makro-ökonometrisches Mehr-Länder-Modell, 
November 1996 3
Europäische Organisationen und Gremien im Bereich von Währung und Wirtschaft, May 
1997 3
Die Zahlungsbilanz der ehemaligen DDR 1975 
bis 1989, August 1999 3
The market for German Federal securities, 
May 2000
Macro-Econometric Multi-Country Model: MEM-
MOD, June 2000
Bundesbank Act, September 2002Weltweite Organisationen und Gremien im Be-
reich von Währung und Wirtschaft, March 
2003 3
Die Europäische Union: Grundlagen und Politik-
bereiche außerhalb der Wirtschafts-und Wäh-
rungsunion, April 2005 3
Die Deutsche Bundesbank – Aufgabenfelder, 
rechtlicher Rahmen, Geschichte, April 2006 3
European economic and monetary union, April 
2008
Special Statistical Publications*
 1 B anking statistics guidelines and customer 
classification, January 20122
For footnotes, see p 80•.Deutsche Bundesbank 
Monthly Report February 2012 78•

 2 B ankenstatistik Kundensystematik Firmen-
verzeichnisse, December 20112, 3
 3 A ufbau der bankstatistischen Tabellen, 
June 20112, 3
 4 F inancial accounts for Germany 2005 to 
2010, September 20112
 5 E xtrapolated results from financial state-
ments of German enterprises 1994 to 
2003, March 2006 2
 6 V erhältniszahlen aus Jahresabschlüssen 
deutscher Unternehmen von 2007 bis 
2008, March 20112, 3
 7 Notes on the coding list for the balance of 
payments statistics, March 2009 2
 8 T he balance of payments statistics of the 
Federal Republic of Germany, 2nd edition, 
February 1991o
 9 Securities deposits, August 2005
 1 0 F oreign direct investment stock statistics, 
April 20111, 2
 1 1 B alance of payments by region, August 
20112, 3
 1 2 T echnologische Dienstleistungen in der 
Zahlungsbilanz, June 20113
Discussion Papers*
Series 1 
Economic Studies
26/2011 
Detecting multiple breaks in long memory: the case of U.S. inflation
27/2011 
How do credit supply shocks propagate inter-
nationally? A GVAR approach28/2011 
Reforming the labor market and improving 
competitiveness: an analysis for Spain using 
 FiMod
29/2011 
Cross-border bank lending, risk aversion and 
the financial crisis30/2011 
The use of tax havens in exemption regimes
31/2011 
Bank-related loan supply factors during the 
 c
risis: an analysis based on the German bank 
lending survey32/2011 
Evaluating the calibration of multi-step-ahead 
density forecasts using raw moments33/2011 
Optimal savings for retirement: the role of indi-vidual accounts and disaster expectations 
34/2011 
Transitions in the German labor market: struc-
ture and crisis35/2011 
U-MIDAS: MIDAS regressions with unrestricted lag polynomials
Series 2 
Banking and Financial Studies
13/2011 
Banks’ management of the net interest margin: evidence from Germany
* Unless stated otherwise, these publications are available 
on the Bundesbank’s website in German and English.o Not available on the website.For footnotes, see p 80•.Deutsche Bundesbank 
Monthly Report 
February 2012 
79•

14/2011 
A hierarchical Archimedean copula for portfolio credit risk modelling
15/2011 
Credit contagion between financial systems
16/2011 
A hierarchical model of tail dependent asset 
 returns for assessing portfolio credit risk17/2011 
Contagion in the interbank market and its 
 determinants18/2011 
Does it pay to have friends? Social ties and 
 executive appointments in bankingBanking legislation
 1 B undesbank Act and Statute of the Euro-
pean System of Central Banks and of the 
European Central Bank, June 1998
 2 G esetz über das Kreditwesen, February 
20093
 2 a S olvabilitäts- und Liquiditätsverordnung, 
February 20083
1 Only the headings and explanatory notes to the data con-
tained in the German originals are available in English.2 Available on the website only.3 Available in German only.Deutsche Bundesbank 
Monthly Report February 2012 80•

