Monthly Report
November 2012
Vol 64  
No 11

Deutsche Bundesbank  
Wilhelm-Epstein-Strasse 14  
60431 Frankfurt am Main  
Germany
Postal address  
Postfach 10 06 02  
60006 Frankfurt am Main  
Germany
Tel +49 69 9566-0
Fax +49 69 9566 3077
http://www.bundesbank.de
Reproduction permitted only if source is stated.
ISSN 0418-8292 (print edition)  
ISSN 1862-1325 (online edition)
The German original of this Monthly Report  
went to press at 11 am on 16 November 2012.Annual and weekly publishing schedules for 
 selected statistics of the Deutsche Bundes-  
bank can be downloaded from our website. 
The statistical data are also published on the 
website.
The Monthly Report  is published by the 
 Deutsche Bundesbank, Frankfurt am Main,  
by virtue of section  18 of the Bundesbank  
Act. It is available to interested parties free of 
charge.
This is a translation of the original German-
language version, which is the sole authorita -
tive text.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2012  
2

Contents
The current economic situation in Germany  ................................................  5
Overview  ........................................................................................................................  6
Global and European setting  ..................................................................................  10
Impact of weak euro-area demand on the global economy  ...............................................  11
The reduction of current account deficits in the euro-area peripheral countries  ..................  20
Monetary policy and banking business  ..............................................................  28
Money market management and liquidity needs  ................................................................  29
Financial markets  ........................................................................................................  41
Recent developments with regard to TARGET2 balances  .....................................................  49
Economic conditions in Germany  .........................................................................  50
Public finances  .............................................................................................................  61
The conclusions of the European Council at its meeting on 18-19 October 2012  ................  63Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2012  
3

Statistical Section ....................................................................................................  1 •
Key economic data for the euro area  ..................................................................................  5 •
Overall monetary survey in the euro area  ............................................................................  8 •
Consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem  ............................................................  16 •
Banks  ..................................................................................................................................  20 •
Minimum reserves  ...............................................................................................................  42 •
Interest rates  .......................................................................................................................  43 •
Capital market  ....................................................................................................................  48 •
Financial accounts  ...............................................................................................................  52 •
Public finances in Germany  .................................................................................................  54 •
Economic conditions in Germany  ........................................................................................  61 •
External sector  ....................................................................................................................  68 •
Overview of publications by the Deutsche Bundesbank  ..........................  77 •
Abbreviations and symbols
e Estimated
p Provisional
pe Partly estimated
r Revised
… Data available at a later date
. Data unknown, not to be published or not meaningful
0 Less than 0.5 but more than nil
– Nil
Discrepancies in the totals are due to rounding.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2012  
4

The current economic situation  
in GermanyDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2012  
5

Overview
Marked loss in Germany’s 
economic momentum
The global economy remained weak in the 
third quarter of 2012. Although the focal point 
of this weakness is the crisis in the euro area, 
macroeconomic growth also continued at its 
subdued rate over the summer months in the 
major emerging economies, including China. 
The sluggish growth in this group of countries 
compared with earlier expansion rates can be 
attributed only in part to the crisis in the euro 
area, and relates to a considerable extent to in -
ternal factors. The Japanese economy even 
contracted sharply in the third quarter. In this 
highly unfavourable environment, the United 
States once again proved a bulwark to the 
world economy, with continuing moderate 
growth in gross domestic product (GDP). The 
UK economy has come out of recession, even 
though its latest increase in growth is largely 
the result of one-off effects. For the last quarter 
of 2012 and the first quarter of 2013 only slight 
improvement in the global economy is ex -
pected. Growth is likely to be bolstered mainly 
by significantly looser monetary policy, which 
the emerging economies have now also 
adopted. However, a cyclical upturn in the 
world economy is dependent on the swift 
achievement of clarity in the United States with 
regard to the country’s future path of consoli -
dation.
Since the middle of the year, the international 
financial markets have been torn between con -
cerns about the economy and the sovereign 
debt crisis, on the one hand, and the an -
nouncement of further monetary policy meas -
ures, on the other. On the bond markets yields 
on government bonds largely fell overall. This is 
likely to be attributable mainly to the expect -
ation of continuing low central bank interest 
rates and to the willingness of several central 
banks to purchase bonds. The Federal Reserve, 
with its quantitative easing programme (QE3), and the Bank of Japan, with a further expan -
sion of its bond purchase programme, seek to 
provide expansionary monetary policy im -
petus – in the USA through portfolio adjust -
ment effects via purchases of mortgage-backed 
securities, and in Japan through the acquisition 
of government and corporate bonds. The Euro -
system bond purchase programme (OMTs) has 
not yet been activated, but has already elicited 
expectation effects from the markets. Market 
participants became less concerned about the 
sustainability of government finances in some 
countries and about the nexus between sover -
eign and bank risks, although urgent problems, 
such as the “fiscal cliff” in the United States 
and Greece’s acute financial distress, are still to 
be resolved. Trading on the international equity 
markets was mixed from the middle of the 
year, under the influence of unfavourable cor -
porate reports and gloomy prospects for eco -
nomic growth – despite monetary policy im -
petus. While share prices in Japan and the 
United States declined somewhat, there were 
rising prices on European equity markets. Des -
pite some fluctuation, the euro’s effective ex -
change rate hardly changed in the period under 
review from its level at the end of June. In this 
financial market environment, the balances 
within the European large-value payment sys -
tem TARGET2 stabilised in recent months, after 
expanding significantly in the first half of 2012. 
The Bundesbank’s  TARGET2 balance hovered 
around a value of about €740 billion from mid-
year; at the end of October 2012 it totalled 
€719 billion. However, the overall stabilisation 
observed was accompanied by, at times, con -
siderable fluctuations.
Following the interest rate cut at the beginning 
of July, the ECB Governing Council left key 
interest rates at the historically low level 
reached in July. Although, at the current end, 
HICP inflation remains significantly above 2%, 
the ECB Governing Council expects inflation to 
return to a level compatible with stability over World economy 
so far treading water; only slight improve-ment expected in the last quar-ter of 2012 and first quarter of 2013
Financial 
 markets
Monetary policyDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2012  
6

the policy-relevant horizon. This was also indi -
cated by underlying monetary growth, which 
remains subdued, and by continued weak lend -
ing to the domestic private sector in the euro 
area. The latter has resulted in particular from 
the ongoing reduction in lending to non-  
financial corporations in the countries espe -
cially affected by the sovereign debt crisis, 
caused both by the weakness of their econ -
omies and by the major structural adjustment 
processes taking place. Before the crisis, these 
countries had seen particularly strong credit 
growth.
After ECB President Mario Draghi announced a 
new bond purchase programme following the 
ECB Governing Council meeting on 2 August 
2012, the ECB Governing Council decided in -
principle at its meeting on 6 September on the 
implementation of such a programme (outright 
monetary transactions, or OMTs). According to 
the Governing Council’s decision, the new pro -
gramme will serve to ensure an orderly trans -
mission of monetary policy to the real economy 
as well as the singleness of monetary policy in 
the Eurosystem. The Bundesbank still remains 
critical of Eurosystem government bond pur -
chases and the stability risks these may entail, 
in particular if they are used to resolve govern -
ment financial difficulties through monetary 
policy. Against this backdrop, it is essential to 
maintain a strict separation of fiscal and mon -
etary policy and to avoid the impression of 
monetary policy being co-opted by fiscal policy 
interests. It is clearly the responsibility of fiscal 
policymakers to decide on further help for 
Greece, as well as to provide the financing and 
assume the risks involved. This is not the re -
sponsibility of monetary policy.
Economic growth in Germany weakened fur -
ther in the summer. The Federal Statistical Of -
fice’s flash estimate recorded quarter-on-
quarter real gross domestic product (GDP) 
growth of 0.2% in the third quarter of 2012 
(after seasonal and calendar adjustment), com -
pared with 0.3% in the second quarter and 
0.5% in the first quarter. In the period under review, the German economy made only isol -
ated show of the strength which characterised 
the robust recovery phase of 2010 and 2011. 
These bright spots of expansion have so far en -
abled overall economic output to remain within 
the range of normal capacity utilisation.
All in all, foreign trade in the second half has 
continued to follow the pattern prevailing in 
the first half of 2012, with export growth 
largely driven by non-euro-area countries, 
whilst in the case of imports, which are ex -
panding somewhat moderately overall, those 
from euro-area countries grew comparatively 
sharply. However, the growth in exports in the 
quarter under review was generated not by 
broad-based expansion across categories of 
goods, but by the extraordinary export success 
enjoyed by German car manufacturers in the 
summer months. In this context, there has 
been a further considerable increase in the 
overall German trade surplus. The reduction in 
the trade surplus with euro-area partner coun -
tries came to a halt, despite higher imports, be -
cause German firms sold significantly more 
goods in the euro area in July and August after 
a lean period of nine months.
Capital investment by enterprises is likely to 
have remained weak over the summer. Among 
broad segments of the business sector, there is 
a lack of confidence about new macroeco -
nomic stimulus appearing in the short term. 
Thus, after a recovery phase in which capital 
investment began in impressive fashion in 2010 
and continued at a slower pace in 2011, it has 
now not only become stuck half way, but has 
actually suffered a considerable setback of late. 
The current hesitancy amongst enterprises 
makes clear that there is no reason to expect 
an expansionary impetus from favourable fi -
nancing terms if the investment climate is im -
paired by confidence effects resulting from a 
dimming in fragile expectations and from a 
continued high level of uncertainty. By con -
trast, highly favourable interest rate conditions 
and an uncertain financial market climate are 
giving a clear boost to residential construction. German 
 economyDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2012  
7

The continued robust demand for residential 
property for both owner occupation and in -
vestment purposes is not only driving up resi -
dential property prices but also lending further 
momentum to the construction sector. Public-
sector construction, on the other hand, is ex -
periencing weak growth, now that the effects 
of the stimulus programmes launched follow -
ing the crisis have dissipated.
Private consumption rose in the summer of 
2012 in seasonally-adjusted terms. Supporting 
factors continued to include a healthy labour 
market situation and substantial wage growth. 
Even though somewhat sharper price increases 
curtailed households’ real spending power per 
se, consumer purchasing remained high. Con -
sumers’ propensity to save declined, not least 
because of very low interest on deposits.
Lending by German banks to domestic non-
banks maintained the trend it has been follow -
ing since the beginning of the year, and gained 
noticeable further momentum in the quarter 
under review. Support for this positive trend 
came mainly from ongoing expansion in (unse -
curitised) lending to households and 
non-financial corporations. Given the weakness 
in capital investment, the explanation for in -
creased borrowing is likely to lie in a further 
improvement in financing terms, which may 
have prompted enterprises to substitute bank 
loans for other sources of financing or to in -
crease their acquisition of financial assets.
It remains to be seen to what extent consumer 
sentiment will be affected by possible changes 
to the labour market outlook, where the 
gloomy economic picture is now having a vis -
ible impact. Over the course of the summer, 
the expansion in employment came to a stand -
still, and seasonally adjusted unemployment re -
corded a marked increase. This is being driven 
by cyclical effects. These developments cur -
rently outweigh the fact that spare capacity on 
the domestic labour market remains markedly 
high. It may also be noted that the substantial 
percentage increases in wages in this year’s wage-bargaining round are now being re -
flected noticeably in the overall level of wages 
in the economy.
In the third quarter, price increases in upstream 
branches of economic activity tended to be 
modest. However, short-term volatility was 
considerable, driven by oil prices and exchange 
rates. Global economic weakness has so far 
made itself felt in the reduction in intermediate 
input prices from foreign and domestic produc -
tion. End-product prices, on the other hand, 
continued to rise, with those for consumer 
goods outstripping those for capital goods, 
whether produced domestically or imported. 
The acceleration of consumer price inflation 
was attributable to the energy component. 
Both the depreciating euro and climbing crude 
oil prices played their part in this.
Ever more areas of business are losing hope 
that the economy will brighten in the near fu -
ture. Uncertainty as to the extent to which for -
eign demand will decline in view of slowing 
global growth and severe adjustment crises in 
parts of the euro area has so far primarily ham -
pered the export-based industries. However, it 
is now obvious that the economy at large may 
also suffer. According to an economic survey 
produced by the Association of German Cham -
bers of Industry and Commerce (DIHK), the 
business and export expectations of enterprises 
have dropped steeply. This provides confirm -
ation of trends which have been discernible for 
some time from Ifo Institute surveys. Currently, 
only residential construction and consumer 
spending have been able to counteract the 
marked dampening effect.
Public finances in Germany have presented a 
mixed picture in the current year. On the one 
hand, the deficit ratio will fall further, and it 
may be possible to balance the general govern -
ment budget. On the other hand, a further ap -
preciable increase in the debt ratio can be ex -
pected owing to the assistance provided to 
stem the debt crisis in the euro area and in con -
nection with the liquidation of WestLB. The Lending in 
 Germany
Public financesDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2012  
8

slowdown in the economy will not yet affect 
public finances in the current year. In fact, the 
favourable average annual labour market fig -
ures and the stable rise in incomes will contrib -
ute to a large surplus in social security funds. 
The improvement in the budget will be based 
above all on strong growth in profit-related 
taxes, reduced charges because of low interest 
rates and a moderate general expenditure 
trend.
In 2013, however, the general government def -
icit is likely to rise as a result of the economic 
slowdown currently expected. In addition, vari -
ous opposing trends are likely to more or less 
balance each other out. On the one hand, the 
pension contribution rate will be lowered sig -
nificantly. In addition, a degree of fiscal policy 
loosening will continue to be provided by 
budgetary burdens which are not counterfi -
nanced. On the other hand, the continuation 
of subdued growth in social welfare and inter -
est expenditure is likely to relieve the budget. 
The debt ratio could fall. Overall, however, 
there are considerable risks with regard to the 
macroeconomic trend and the European debt 
crisis.
The government deficit in Germany has re -
cently been very much a positive surprise, and 
is low by international standards. However, 
despite favourable underlying conditions, the 
structural general government budget deficit is 
unlikely to have been closed fully. Furthermore, 
the high temporary surpluses in social security 
funds, amongst other things, conceal the, at 
times, considerable deficits being run by central 
government as well as many state and local 
governments. In its budget and financial plan -
ning, central government is again making ad 
hoc use of the social security budgets, and 
budgetary burdens are being approved, the 
scope of which will not be fully visible until 
some time in the future.Particularly in view of the high debt ratio and 
foreseeable adjustment burdens resulting from 
demographic trends, government finances 
should be consolidated swiftly and comprehen -
sively. There is a danger that the favourable 
underlying conditions which have prevailed 
hitherto have not been, and will not be, utilised 
sufficiently to this end. The positive surprises in 
terms of tax receipts and interest expenditure 
have been used in part to water down the 
moderate consolidation course originally an -
nounced, which has prevented swifter reduc -
tion of central and state government deficits.
Because of the troubled economic situation in 
the euro area, there are demands in some 
quarters for Germany to pursue a more expan -
sionary fiscal policy. However, in the context of 
current forecasts, this does not appear justified, 
particularly as macroeconomic fluctuations are 
quickly cushioned by the automatic stabilisers. 
Nor can it be assumed that a more expansion -
ary German fiscal policy would provide a dis -
tinct direct economic boost to the European 
countries particularly affected by the debt cri -
sis. Consolidation of budgets should have pri -
ority for all levels of government, so that Ger -
many can continue to be an anchor of stability 
in the European debt crisis.
The permanent deficit limits set by the national 
debt brakes for central and state government 
should be complied with swiftly. Within the 
context of the new, stricter constitutional rules, 
it would also be advisable as a general principle 
to stipulate clear and binding safety margins 
below the borrowing limits, thereby taking ac -
count of the high degree of uncertainty in esti -
mating the structural deficit situation. Given 
the experience gained during the present debt 
crisis, it would be very advantageous if, through 
more ambitious policies, the debt ratio could 
be successfully brought down more rapidly 
from its currently very high level.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2012  
9

Global and European setting
World economic activity
The global economic slowdown, which had 
begun in 2011 and was interrupted in the first 
quarter of 2012 only by a brief revival, con -
tinued in the third quarter. It remains regionally 
broad based. Although the focal point of the 
current economic weakness is still the crisis in 
the euro area, aggregate growth also remained 
subdued in the major emerging economies, in -
cluding China, during the summer months. The 
slow growth in this group of countries com -
pared to earlier expansion rates can be attrib -
uted only in part to specific causes in the euro 
area; rather, it is connected to internal factors 
to a considerable extent (see the box on 
pages 11 to 14). The Japanese economy, which 
after a powerful start to the year lost a consid -
erable amount of steam in the spring, even 
contracted sharply in the third quarter. In this 
highly unfavourable environment, the United 
States once again proved to be a bulwark for 
the world economy, with continuing moderate 
growth in gross domestic product (GDP). The 
UK economy has managed to come out of re -
cession, even though its latest growth spurt is 
probably largely the result of one-off effects. 
On the whole, seasonally adjusted real GDP in 
the United States, Japan, the United Kingdom 
and the euro area has gone up only slightly 
compared with the previous period, according 
to calculations based on initial preliminary data, 
and was a mere ¾% up on the year.
Global GDP growth, too, is likely to have per -
sisted throughout the summer, though still 
throttled. One indication of this is that, in July-
August, seasonally adjusted global industrial 
output rose by ½% compared with the spring 
quarter. At the same time, however, the vol -
ume of real world trade fell by ½%. All in all, 
for several quarters now, global growth does 
not appear to have been keeping pace with 
potential output any longer; utilisation is there -
fore likely to have already fallen distinctly.For the last quarter of 2012 and the first quar -
ter of 2013, the global economy is expected to 
improve only slightly. Growth is likely to be bol -
stered mainly by considerably looser monetary 
policy, which the emerging economies have 
now also adopted. In line with a gradual im -
provement of the global cyclical outlook, the 
Purchasing Managers’ Index (PMI) for the 
manufacturing industry went up markedly 
again in September and October, distinctly ap -
proaching the expansion threshold. Moreover, 
the oil markets do not appear to be imposing 
any additional burdens, at least. However, a 
cyclical upturn in the world economy is de -
pendent on the swift achievement of clarity in 
the United States with regard to the country’s 
future path of consolidation.
Given the stubbornness of the global economic 
slowdown and the unclear nature of the signs 
of recovery, in October the International Mon -
etary Fund (IMF) once again revised down -
wards its global growth forecast for 2012 and 
2013, by ¼ percentage point to 3¼% and 
3½% respectively compared with its last fore -
cast of early July; the first preliminary estimate 
for 2012 in the spring of last year had still been 
+4½%. According to the new forecast by the 
IMF, the advanced economies’ real GDP will 
rise in 2013 by 1½%, only a slight improvement 
on this year (+1¼%). This is predicated on the 
expectation that US GDP will continue to grow 
by just over 2% whereas the euro area, after a 
nearly ½% decline, will see GDP grow by only 
¼% and the Japanese growth rate will shrink 
by nearly one-half to 1¼%. The forecast states 
that the emerging economies’ growth in 2013, 
at 5½%, will likewise not be much stronger 
than in the current year. The forecast for global 
trade growth was also revised downwards by 
more than one-half percentage point for each 
year to 3¼% this year and 4½% next year. The 
price forecast for the industrial countries was 
virtually confirmed, at 2% and 1½% respect -
ively.World economy 
still treading water in  summerProbably only 
slight improve-
ment in 2012 
Q4-2013 Q1  
period
IMF autumn 
forecast ad-justed down-wards furtherDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2012  
10

Impact of weak euro-area demand on the global economy
The macroeconomic problems in the euro 
area are usually seen as the major driving force behind the current lull in the global economy in general and the economic slowdown in the emerging market econ-omies (EMEs) in particular. Weak demand 
from the euro area is said to be having a 
dampening effect on output elsewhere, es-
pecially via the direct foreign trade channel. 
In actual fact, one aspect or refl  ection of the necessary adjustment processes in the 
European peripheral countries is the reduc-
tion of their domestic demand from past levels which, owing to unsustainable 
macroeconomic developments, were exces-
sive.1 A contraction in domestic demand 
also results in a decline in imports. On the 
one hand, this cushions the fall in domestic GDP as imports represent an outfl  ow of in-
come. At the same time, however, the negative growth momentum spills over to 
the foreign trading partners in the form of 
dwindling exports. An important part of 
these adjustments occurs in intra-euro-area 
trade without directly affecting non-euro-area countries. The German export sector, 
in particular, has already suffered markedly, however.
2 In the remainder of this box, we 
will investigate the quantitative importance of weak export demand in the euro area for 
the global economy and economic activity 
in the EMEs.
The analysis is based on the IMF’s Direction 
of Trade Statistics (DOTS). These statistics 
can be used to trace the nominal trade fl  ows of goods (on a US dollar basis) be-
tween the individual countries and regions. 
Given that the fi  gures are quoted in nom-inal terms, fl  uctuations in the data should be interpreted with caution as they may also refl  ect shifts in prices and exchange rates. A comparison with nominal GDP in US dollar terms, however, which can be 
found in the IMF’s current World Economic Outlook (WEO) database, makes the size of the relevant trade fl  ows clear. According to 
data from the DOTS database, the euro area imported US$2,340 billion worth of goods from non-euro-area countries last 
year (calculated on the basis of the exports 
from these countries), which is equivalent to around 18% of euro-area GDP . In the period from January to June 2012 – more 
recent DOTS data were not available as this report went to press – the value of imports decreased by 4% on the previous year. This decline is still likely to have made an implied contribution to nominal GDP growth in the 
euro area of ¾ percentage point over the 
year as a whole. A further factor to be con-
sidered is that the economic momentum 
stems not so much from the contribution of nominal imports to growth itself but rather from its development over time. Given that the growth contribution of nominal imports 
has gone from being strongly negative to being slightly positive, nominal imports of goods are likely to soften the economic 
downturn in the euro area perceptibly.
Conversely, the lower income outfl  ows 
from the euro area mean lower income in-fl  ows to the rest of the world. Nevertheless, a shift in the trade fl  ows is occurring as the 
economic output of non-euro-area coun-
tries is several times greater than that of the euro area. For example, nominal exports of 
goods to the euro area accounted for just 
4% of GDP of the rest of the world in 2011, 
1 See Deutsche Bundesbank, On the problems of 
macroeconomic imbalances in the euro area, Monthly 
Report, July 2010, pp 17-38.2 See Deutsche Bundesbank, The pronounced rise and 
fall in Germany’s current account surplus vis-à-vis its 
euro-area partner countries between 1999 and 2011, 
Monthly Report, March 2012, pp 18-20.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2012  
11

and thus their muted decline this year had 
virtually no effect on the nominal growth in 
activity in the supplier countries. It should 
be noted, however, that the importance of 
goods exports to the euro area is likely to 
vary quite a bit among individual exporting 
countries and regions. In the case of EMEs 
and developing countries, their share of 
GDP , at 5%, is signifi  cantly higher than in the advanced economies outside the euro area (3½%). Nevertheless, the metric for the industrial countries is being depressed by the USA, whose goods exports to the 
euro area account for no more than 1¼% 
of GDP .3 Moreover, given that US exports 
have remained relatively stable in 2012, too, 
their contribution to the nominal income 
growth of the US economy is virtually zero. Against this backdrop, the often-cited claim 
that weak demand in the euro area is weighing heavily on the US economy, at least via the direct foreign trade channel, 
does not appear to hold water. By contrast, according to national data, the value of oil imports for the US economy is twice as sig-nifi  cant as that of goods exports to the euro area. Moreover, given that the value of im-ports is subject to the sharp fl  uctuations in the price of crude oil, it is more likely to be a driving force behind a sudden change of economic pace than exports, which are 
comparatively steady.4
Exports of goods from emerging and de-veloping economies to the euro area are not particularly signifi  cant, accounting for just 5% of nominal GDP . However, given that these goods exports made positive contributions to growth of around 1 per-
centage point in the preceding years, the 
removal of this stimulus would, in and of itself, give rise to a marked slowdown in 
economic activity. Compared with the IMF 
estimate of a deceleration of over 10 per-centage points this year in nominal GDP 
growth in emerging and developing econ-
omies, the effect is small, however, which means that, taken in isolation, it does not provide an adequate explanation.
5 Never-
theless, the heterogeneity within the group of countries should also be borne in mind in this context. The weak euro-area demand is 
likely to have primarily hit central and east 
European countries, whose exports of 
goods to the euro area accounted for 15% 
of GDP last year. On the other hand, the 
external trade links between the euro area 
and the major emerging market economies 
(Brazil, India and China) play only a minor role: in Brazil and India, the share of GDP 
accounted for by goods exports to the euro area stood at 1¾% and 2¼% respectively in 2011 and was thus far below the average of 
the entire emerging and developing world 
3 Excluding the USA, nominal exports of goods to the 
euro area by the other advanced economies accounted for 5¼% of GDP in 2011.4 See Deutsche Bundesbank, The price of crude oil and its impact on economic activity in the industrial coun-tries, Monthly Report, June 2012, pp 27-49.5 Nominal GDP growth in the emerging and develop-ing world (in US dollar terms) is largely determined on the basis of price and exchange rate fl  uctuations. The only relevant factor here is the computed nominal con-
tribution to growth made by exports of goods to the 
euro area, compared with exports to non-euro-area countries, imports and domestic demand. Owing to the low weight of nominal exports of goods to the 
euro area, their contribution to growth must also be 
comparatively limited.Factors weighing on the US economy
Source: Global Insight.
Deutsche Bundesbank1999 00 01020304 0506 0708 0910 111201020304050US$ billion, seasonally adjusted, monthly
Nominal
oil imports
Nominal exports of goods
to the euro areaDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2012  
12

put together. Even for China, itself a com-
paratively open economy, these exports 
made up just 3¾% of GDP . The current lull 
in economic growth in Brazil and India is 
particularly pronounced: according to the 
recent IMF forecasts, real GDP growth this 
year is expected to be 6 percentage points 
lower in Brazil and 5¼ percentage points 
lower in India than in 2010, a year of very 
dynamic growth. The average annual rate in the period from 2004 to 2007 will also be undershot by 3¼ and 4¼ percentage 
points respectively. As for China, the decel-eration compared with 2010 is expected to be somewhat more moderate (2½ percent-
age points), although of a similar magni-tude (4¼ percentage points) when com-pared with the trend rate in the previous 
period of expansion. Given the sizes of the 
economies involved, economic slowdowns 
of this magnitude are likely to be due less to the limited dampening impulses from trade with the euro area than to specifi  c domestic factors.
Furthermore, the current thinking has im-
plied that the cause of the downturn in ex-ports to the euro area lies in Europe alone. However, the export slump is probably also 
due, at least in part, to a global economic 
slowdown. This is supported by the fact 
that the DOTS data also indicate a marked 
downturn in nominal goods exports by 
emerging markets to other advanced econ-omies as well as in exports within their own group of countries. Generally speaking, de-velopments in the growth rates of nominal goods exports to various regions are largely 
synchronous. The same fi  ndings are also obtained if data on the total exports of goods are considered in real terms on the 
basis of the region of origin, as they are es-
timated in the statistics of the Dutch Cen-
traal Planbureau (CPB).6 Thus, it is not just 
the growth in the overall exports of goods 
in emerging and developing economies (measured in terms of volume) that has re-cently ground to a virtual halt, but also the 
growth in exports of industrial countries in 
general and of the euro area in particular.
In actual fact, the underlying trend in world 
trade does not seem to be overly depend-
ent on the fortunes of individual regions. 
Rather, it moves in line – albeit with some-
what stronger cyclical fl  uctuations  – with 
the ups and downs in the global industrial 
sector, where tradable goods are produced. 
The current slowdown in the international 
goods trade therefore refl  ects the down-
turn in the global manufacturing industry, where the economic cycles are generally 
much more pronounced and frequent than 
in the economy as a whole. Owing to the 
international foreign trade interlinkages, it 
is hardly surprising that industrial activity in 
emerging markets and advanced econ-
omies also develops largely in sync. What is 
striking, however, is that the current slow-
down in the catching-up economies is more 
pronounced. Despite the fact that output 
growth in industrial countries stagnated 
6 It should be noted that the CPB’s defi  nition of the 
groups of countries is not entirely consistent with the 
IMF’s defi  nitions.Importance of exports of goods to the euro area for emerging anddeveloping economies
Source:  IMF and Bundesbank  calculations.  1 IMF  forecast 
(WEO October 2012).
Deutsche Bundesbank1999 00 01020304050607080910 111250510152025
–+++++Annual averages, US dollar basis
Computed contribution of
nominal exports of goods
to the euro area (in percentage points)Nominal GDP of emerging and
developing economies
(year-on-year percentage
change)
Jan-
June1Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2012  
13

completely of late, whereas it rose by 5¼% 
in August in the emerging markets com-
pared with the same month last year, the 
gap between the current rate and the aver-
age rates in the previous period of expan-
sion –  2¾% annually and 9¾% in the 
period from 2003 to 2007 – is now signifi  -
cantly greater in the case of the emerging 
market economies. A more pertinent ques-
tion would be to what extent this slow-down could also refl  ect a deceleration of 
trend growth in these countries.
All in all, the contraction in goods imports is 
likely to have made a distinct contribution to stabilising the euro-area economy as a 
whole. Trade with the euro area plays only 
a minor role for the rest of the world, how-ever, which means that the global economy 
is unlikely to have been signifi  cantly af-fected by developments in the euro area. The slowdown in growth in the inter-
national fl  ows of goods is closely related to a pronounced slump in the global manufac-
turing sector and not so much to the spe-
cifi  c problems in the euro area. Admittedly, 
it is possible that these problems did not 
spill over to non-euro-area countries solely 
via direct foreign trade, but also via other 
channels. In this case, though, positive re-
percussions would also have to be taken 
into account, such as those caused by cap-
ital infl  ows to “safe havens” outside the euro area. Finally, with regard to the eco-nomic signifi  cance of uncertainty, which 
has frequently been emphasised recently, it should be stressed that this is by no means 
stemming from European sources alone. The dispute regarding fi  scal policy in the 
USA and Japan, along with the geopolitical confl  icts in the Middle and Far East, are also 
giving rise to considerable uncertainty for 
the world economy at present.Volume of world trade and global 
industrial output
Source: Centraal Planbureau (CPB).
Deutsche Bundesbank1999 0001020304050607080910112012–20–15–10–50+5+10+15+20Monthly, year-on-year percentage change
Industrial countriesEMEs201510505101520
––––++++
Industrial outputVolume of world trade (goods)
Industrial output by groups of countries
Average
2003 - 2007Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2012  
14

In the summer months, the international com -
modity markets went along diverging paths. 
Given the global economic slump, average in -
dustrial raw materials prices for the quarter 
were much cheaper than in the spring. By con -
trast, the prices for food, beverages and to -
bacco rose sharply due to a considerable de -
terioration in the crop prospects owing, not 
least, to a severe drought in the United States. 
In contrast to this, the average spot price for a 
barrel of Brent crude oil was nearly unchanged 
from the preceding three-month period. How -
ever, the quarterly view obscures a sudden re -
versal at the start of summer of the calming on 
the oil market which had been becoming ap -
parent during the spring months. In particular, 
the entry into force of the EU embargo against 
Iran pushed the geopolitical conflicts in the 
Middle East more under the spotlight. In add -
ition, global demand for oil continued to in -
crease despite concerns about the economy. 
The considerable markdowns at which oil fu -
tures are currently still being traded could be an 
indicator of the current scarcity of oil. As this 
report went to press, Brent was trading at 
US$108¼ per barrel, still considerably higher 
than in June.
Higher oil prices were passed through to con -
sumer prices in the industrial countries with a 
slight time-lag. In August and September, con -
sumer prices, after elimination of seasonal in -
fluences, rose month-on-month, in some cases 
very strongly. In conjunction with the preced -
ing period of calm, however, average consumer 
prices for the third quarter were up only slightly 
from a quarter earlier. Owing to unfavourable 
developments a year earlier, year-on-year con -
sumer price inflation even fell slightly to 1.8%. 
Excluding energy and food, consumer prices 
were up by 1.5% from their level of summer 
2011.Selected emerging market 
economies
In China, year-on-year growth of real GDP 
slackened in the third quarter of 2012 to just 
under 7½%. The decline in year-on-year rates 
–  for the seventh consecutive quarter  – was 
only slight, however. According to the official 
seasonally adjusted figures, the statistical qual -
ity of which, however, is difficult to assess, 
quarter-on-quarter GDP growth has even ac -
celerated slightly to +2¼%. A major factor in 
the year-on-year slowdown is that, in the third 
quarter, exports lost considerable momentum; 
their nominal and US dollar-denominated 
growth rate fell from 10½% to 4½%. Nonethe -
less, there are signs that the upswing in China 
has revived in the past few months. Since the 
spring, the Chinese authorities have taken a 
series of monetary and fiscal policy measures to 
stimulate domestic demand forces; these meas -
ures might now be showing initial positive ef -Diverging com-
modity prices
Higher fuel 
prices causing renewed accel-
eration of con-
sumer pricesModerate 
growth in China continues in summer, but once again posi-tive signals at 
last reportWorld market prices for crude oil,
industrial commodities and food,beverages and tobacco
Sources:  Thomson  Reuters  and HWWI.  • Average  of 1 to 
9 November or 1 to 14 November 2012 (crude oil).
Deutsche Bundesbank2008 2009 2010 2011 20125060708090100120140160180US dollar basis, 2010 = 100, monthly averages, log scale
Crude oil (Brent)
Industrial
commoditiesFood, beveragesand tobaccoDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2012  
15

fects. In September and October, exports were 
also signalling a distinct recovery, the sustain -
ability of which, however, is not yet clear. As 
there were no major fluctuations in food prices, 
which are generally volatile, consumer prices 
were calm during the reporting period; head -
line inflation hovered around the 2% mark.
Real year-on-year GDP growth in India slowed 
down distinctly once again in the second quar -
ter, up to which national accounts data are 
available, from 5½% to 4%. Although the lat -
est data could well understate the actual 
growth rate,1 there is no denying that the In -
dian economy is currently in the doldrums. The 
data on industrial output do not indicate any 
distinct acceleration of growth in the third 
quarter, either. After a relatively long period 
without any meaningful gains made with re -
gard to reform, in the past few months the In -
dian government has once again undertaken 
major efforts to strengthen the supply-side 
forces of growth. The federal government is 
planning to open retail trade to foreign direct 
investment alongside air transport. However, it 
remains to be seen what is actually imple -
mented at state level. In addition, the govern -
ment-controlled price for diesel fuel was raised 
markedly in order to reduce the large govern -
ment budget deficit. However, this measure is 
likely to have contributed to keeping consumer 
price inflation high in October as well (+9.8%).
Following anaemic growth in the preceding 
quarters, the Brazilian economy appears to 
have picked up a higher pace again in the sum -
mer. One sign is that industrial output, after 
trending downwards since mid-2011, went up 
by a seasonally adjusted 1% on the quarter. 
This recovery, however, was, above all, sup -
ported by motor vehicle manufacturing, which 
benefited from government fiscal incentives to 
purchase cars. From mid-2011 to October 
2012, the Brazilian central bank cut its policy 
rate by a total of 525 basis points to 7.25%, 
marking an all-time low; this could have also 
had a positive impact. Whether or not this is 
consistent with stability remains to be seen. Lastly, consumer price inflation has surged in 
the past few months. The inflation rate stood 
at 5.4% in October, as against 4.9% in June.
The Russian economy continued to lose steam 
in the last few months. According to initial in -
formation from the Russian federal statistics 
service, year-on-year real GDP growth in the 
third quarter slowed to 3% after previously 
having stood at 4%. Although the manufactur -
ing industry was able to maintain its modest 
growth rate, construction activity and also agri -
cultural output fell considerably short of their 
previous year’s levels. In addition, a significant 
surge in inflation has been weighing on the 
short-term economic outlook, causing the Rus -
sian central bank to increase its policy rate in 
September. In October, consumer price infla -
tion stood at 6.5%, and thus outside the Rus -
sian central bank’s target corridor of 5% to 6% 
at the end of the year.
USA
In summer, the US economy remained on its 
path of moderate expansion. Quarter-on-
quarter growth of overall output, at ½% after 
seasonal adjustment, was even distinctly 
stronger than in the spring, despite the fact 
that growth had been hampered slightly by ac -
celerated inventory depletion in agriculture 
owing to the severe drought. Households 
proved to be a particular bulwark for the econ -
omy; their real consumer spending continued 
to climb considerably despite higher fuel prices. 
Although average year-on-year headline infla -
tion, as measured by the Consumer Price Index, 
fell to +1.7% for the quarter, or +2.0% exclud -
ing energy and food, the index was up by 0.6% 
from the previous three-month period after ad -
justment for seasonal variations, however. On 
balance, households were able to post only a 
moderate rise in real disposable incomes, which India’s economy 
growing at slower pace
Brazilian eco-
nomic recovery 
not broad basedFurther slow-down in eco-
nomic growth in 
Russia
Household de-
mand robust, …
1 Real gross value added, the measure of aggregate output 
preferred by the Indian Ministry of Statistics and the Re -
serve Bank of India, rose by 5½% year-on-year in the 
second quarter, as against +5¼% a quarter previously.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2012  
16

meant that they had to find ways of funding 
their increased spending, such as scaling back 
their saving. Housing construction represents a 
glimmer of hope for the economy. However, it 
is starting from such a low level that even the 
recent strong increase in activity provided only 
a modest contribution to aggregate growth.
Whereas consumer demand generally grew 
healthily, corporate gross fixed capital forma -
tion began to sputter. Firms’ reluctance to in -
vest could be, at least in part, a reflection of 
uncertainty about the course of US fiscal policy. 
In this context, the substantial increase in real 
defence spending in the third quarter may be 
classified as only a temporary blip. The fact that 
the global weakness in manufacturing im -
pacted on the US economy in the summer 
months, however, probably outweighed the ef -
fects of the fiscal outlook. The decline in real 
exports in the national accounts is consistent 
with this picture. Industrial output stagnated at 
the same time, and new orders of non-aircraft 
civilian capital goods slumped sharply in terms 
of value. These dampening factors also had an 
effect on the labour market. Although in the 
first quarter the production sector (including 
construction) had created, on balance, as many 
as 155,000 new jobs compared with the previ -
ous period, job creation in this sector ground 
to a virtual halt in summer. All in all, net cre -
ation of new non-farm jobs was higher than in 
spring but still considerably lower than at the 
start of the year. All the same, the jobless rate 
slid from 8.3% in July to 7.9% in October.
Japan
In Japan, the cyclical recovery encountered a 
renewed set-back in the third quarter. After ad -
justment for seasonal influences, aggregate 
economic output contracted by 1% compared 
with the spring. Strongly retarding forces in for -
eign trade were the main reason for this devel -
opment; in the summer period, a total of 5% 
fewer goods and services were exported, in 
terms of volume, than a quarter earlier. Falling euro-area demand played only a relatively 
minor role in this context. China is a much 
more significant recipient of Japanese exports, 
which, however, in nominal terms, were latterly 
contracting at similar rates. The boycott by Chi -
nese consumers over the island dispute be -
tween the two nations has not yet had any 
impact on the figures. The situation was ex -
acerbated by the robustness of Japanese im -
ports, to which anticipatory effects in the 
run-up to an increase in the tax on imports of 
crude oil and other fuels are likely to have con -
tributed. Lastly, domestic demand also weak -
ened, not least because real household con -
sumption expenditure flagged in connection 
with the expiry of government incentives for 
purchasing cars. However, at 4.2% in Septem -
ber, the unemployment rate was even margin -
ally lower than just three months earlier. At the 
same time, year-on-year consumer price infla -
tion, on average over the third quarter, slid 
back into negative territory (-0.4%); core infla -
tion, however, barely budged (-0.6%).… but corporate 
investment sput -
tering
Renewed cyc-
lical set-backEmployment growth in the USA
Source:  Bureau  of Labor  Statistics.  1 Including  construction. 
2 Excluding  census  workers.  3 Non-self-employed  non-farm 
employees excluding census workers.
Deutsche Bundesbank2010 2011 20122001000100200300400500600700
––+++++++Quarterly change in number of employed persons
Thou-
sandPrivate service sector
Government 2Production sector 1
Total 3
OctDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2012  
17

United Kingdom
In contrast to developments in Japan, in the 
summer the UK economy was able to over -
come the recessionary tendencies of the three 
preceding quarters. Real GDP was up by a sea -
sonally adjusted 1% on the quarter, its strong -
est growth in five years, and thus returning to 
its level of the comparable period of 2011. Con -
struction output, which was hit particularly 
hard by the government’s efforts at fiscal con -
solidation but is still only a small segment of 
the economy, continued to be clearly on the 
decline; services, broad based across their indi -
vidual segments, saw activity rise by 1¼%, and 
manufacturing output was likewise stepped up 
substantially. However, various one-off factors 
contributed to the good result, particularly the 
return to the usual number of working days fol -
lowing an additional holiday in the spring. In 
addition, according to official data, sales of ad -
mission tickets for the Olympic and Paralympic 
Games boosted real GDP growth in the third 
quarter, to which these transactions are as -
signed merely for accounting purposes, by 
one-quarter percentage point.2 These events 
could also have affected economic output 
through other channels, although the signifi -
cance of the effects is difficult to quantify. 
Owing to the importance of the one-off factors in July-August, a set-back in the current quarter 
cannot be ruled out. Nonetheless, activity in 
the services sector in September, according to 
current estimates by the UK Office for National 
Statistics, surpassed its level of April 2012, prior 
to the deviations from the usual calendar, by 
1½%. The decline in the number of recipients 
of unemployment benefits over the summer 
months is consistent with the strong third-
quarter growth. At 7.8% in August, the na -
tional unemployment rate fell to its lowest level 
since April 2011. At the same time, the price 
climate calmed down again, at least on an an -
nual basis. The Harmonised Index of Consumer 
Prices (HICP), at 2.4% in the third quarter, 
showed the lowest rate of year-on-year infla -
tion since autumn 2009 and thus continued 
converging to the core inflation rate (+2.2%), 
which excludes energy and unprocessed food.
New EU member states
In the entire group of new EU member states 
(EU-7),3 economic output, after rising in the 
second quarter by ¼% on the period in season -
ally adjusted terms, is likely to have expanded 
only sluggishly once again. The result for the 
region as a whole, however, still masks hetero -
geneity among the various countries. Whereas 
the cyclical recovery continued to make good 
progress in Lithuania and Latvia, the recession 
persisted in Hungary and the Czech Republic 
(each -¼%). In Poland, for which no national 
accounts figures are available as yet, economic 
growth seems to have been only moderate 
throughout the reporting period, according to 
the indicators. In the summer, seasonally ad -
justed industrial output failed to surpass its de -
pressed level of a quarter ear lier; in addition to Revival of 
macroeconomic recovery process
Moderate ex-pansion of eco-nomic output in new EU member statesJapanese nominal goods exportsto various economic areas
Source: national data and Bundesbank calculations. 1 Belgium,  
France, Germany, Italy, the Netherlands and Spain.
Deutsche Bundesbank2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 20124,0006,0008,00010,00012,00014,00016,00018,000Sum of preceding 12 months; in ¥ billion
USA
China
Selected
euro-area countries 1
2 Revenue from the sale of TV rights and sponsors’ pay -
ments for advertising rights flow to the International Olym -
pic Committee (IOC). Payments from UK firms were posted 
as imports of services, which, in and of themselves, reduce 
UK GDP . Out of this revenue, the IOC pays a contribution 
to the national host; however, this is a transfer and, unlike 
the proceeds from ticket sales, does not increase UK GDP .
3 This group comprises the non-euro-area countries that 
joined the EU in 2004 and 2007.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2012  
18

this, construction once again weakened signifi -
cantly. For the EU-7 group, consumer price in -
flation accelerated by 0.4 percentage points 
to 3.9% in the third quarter. It ranged from 
1.9% in Latvia to 6.0% in Hungary, where an 
increase in turnover tax from 25% to 27% 
came into effect at the beginning of the year.
Macroeconomic trends  
in the euro area
The euro-area economic slowdown which fol -
lowed a brief phase of recovery in autumn 
2011 continued in the third quarter. Seasonally 
adjusted aggregate output fell slightly below 
the depressed level of the preceding period, in 
which it had fallen by ¼%, and thus stood ½% 
below its level of a year earlier. The continued 
gloom in the economy was caused mainly by 
contracting domestic demand in the southern 
peripheral countries; this was connected with 
the consolidation of public sector budgets, un -
favourable corporate financing conditions and 
the general crisis-related uncertainty among 
consumers and investors. Added to this was 
the loss in purchasing power, which, given con -
tinued high US dollar prices in the crude oil 
markets, were due mainly to a general increase 
in import prices caused by the euro’s depreci -
ation over the past year. This also weighed on 
the economies of the euro-area countries that 
are not at the centre of the crisis. Moreover, 
negative confidence effects radiated to these 
economies from the peripheral countries as 
well.
On the whole, however, it may be stated that 
the pace of the economic downswing has de -
celerated, sometimes considerably, in the 
southern crisis countries, whereas the moder -
ate growth continued in some of the northern 
countries. Of the 13 member states for which 
data on GDP growth for the third quarter are 
available, Estonia leads the pack with a season -
ally adjusted rate of 1¾%, followed by Slovakia 
(+½%) and then Finland, France and Germany 
(each +¼%). Aggregate economic production stagnated in Belgium and pretty much treaded 
water in Austria, too. Countries recording de -
clines were Italy and Spain (each -¼%), Cyprus 
(-½%), Portugal (-¾%) and the Netherlands 
(-1%). For Greece, currently no official season -
ally adjusted quarterly data are available; its 
output was down by 7¼% on the year. Exclud -
ing Germany, euro-area real GDP was down in 
the third quarter after seasonal adjustment by 
¼% on the period; all in all, this caused the 
growth gap between Germany and the rest of 
the euro area, which has developed since the 
beginning of the global financial and economic 
crisis, to open up even further. The continued 
parlous state of the peripheral countries’ econ -
omies, however, should not be permitted to 
obscure the fact that considerable progress has 
been made in reducing those countries’ exter -
nal imbalances and that a large percentage of 
these reductions may be regarded as long-term 
(see the box on pages 20 to 25).Sustained eco-
nomic slow-down in the euro area …
… and growth 
still extremely divergentReal GDP in the euro area
Deutsche Bundesbank2008 2009 2010 2011 201293949596979899100101102
–5–4–3–2–10+1+2+3+4+52008 Q1 = 100, seasonally adjusted,
log scale
Annual averages, lin scale
Year-on-year percentage changeEuro area (17)Germany
Euro area (17)
excluding
Germany
Euro area (17) excluding 
GermanyGermany
Euro area (17)Q1 to Q3Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2012  
19

The reduction of current account defi  cits in the euro-area 
peripheral countries
In the years preceding the global fi  nancial 
and economic crisis, a combination of partly 
excessive growth in demand, relatively 
sharp infl  ation and a signifi  cant deterior-ation in price competitiveness led to the 
 accumulation of high current account def-
icits in a number of member states located 
on the geographical periphery of the euro 
area. This was ultimately due to unsustain-
able domestic economic developments, 
which varied in form from country to coun-
try.1 Owing in part to the related steep in-
crease in net external liabilities, these def-
icits are one of the main causes of the cur-
rent euro-area crisis. The necessary correc-
tion of the unsound macroeconomic 
developments therefore also involves redu-
cing the external imbalances.This adjustment process is now underway and has made good progress, especially over the last two years. The peripheral countries have narrowed their current ac-count defi  cits distinctly since the outbreak 
of the global fi  nancial and economic crisis. Ireland’s negative balance, which amounted 
to 5¾% of GDP in 2008, had already 
moved back into positive territory by 2010. According to the IMF’s latest forecast, Por-
tugal and Spain, whose current account shortfalls peaked at 12½% and 10% in 2007-2008, will record only comparatively 
small defi  cits for 2012, and further improve-
1 Deutsche Bundesbank, On the problems of macro-
economic imbalances in the euro area, Monthly 
 Report, July 2010, pp 17-38.
Current account balances
151050
–––as % of GDP
2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013
Source: IMF. 2012 and 2013 forecast figures from the World Economic Outlook, October 2012.
Deutsche Bundesbank2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013–15–10–50
1510505
–––+
1050
–––15–10–50+5
–10–50SpainIreland PortugalGreece Italy
Memo item:
Euro areaDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2012  
20

ments are expected for 2013. Although 
Greece’s 2012 defi  cit, which is expected to 
be 5¾% of GDP , is quite large, this is nearly 
10 percentage points lower than in 2008. The sharp decrease in nominal GDP in re-
cent years, and hence in the ratio’s denom-
inator, must also be taken into account.  Italy’s external defi  cit, which was a less 
 serious problem from the outset, is likely to have fallen by 2 percentage points from its last high in 2010 to 1½% in 2012.
In most of these states, the reduction of the 
current account imbalance is chiefl  y due to an improved net balance of exported goods 
and services, although a signifi  cant contri-
bution has also been made in Greece’s case by lower interest payments stemming from 
the haircut in spring 2012, which are re-
corded as a sub-balance in the income ac-
count. At the same time, not only have the current account defi  cits in peripheral coun-tries become smaller but also the surpluses in other euro-area countries, including Ger-
many, whose positive current account bal-
ance vis-a-vis its euro-area partner countries has fallen to less than half its pre-crisis level (and in trade in goods and services to one-sixth).
These developments, although positive in 
themselves, also raise the issue of to what 
extent the changes are cyclical (and there-
fore temporary) or represent sustainable ad-
justments to the economies’ demand and supply structure, and thus imply a correc-tion of the underlying internal imbalances 
and are likely to persist in the longer term. The sharp contraction in domestic demand 
in the peripheral countries was accompan-
ied by a fall in imports. In spring 2012, real 
domestic demand was down on the pre-
crisis level in the second quarter of 2008 by 
25¾% in Greece, 21¾% in Ireland, 14¼% 
in Portugal, 12¾% in Spain and 8½% in Italy. At the same time, real imports of Real exports and imports*
* As defined in the national accounts. Chain-linked volumes, reference year 2005.
Deutsche Bundesbank2008 2009 2010 2011 2012111214161820222426€ billion, seasonally adjusted, log scale
2832364044Italy
PortugalGreece
Ireland
2008 2009 2010 2011 20128090100110120
101214161820
7008009001,0001,100
5560708090 Memo item:
Euro areaSpainExports
ImportsDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2012  
21

goods and services showed decreases ran-
ging from 8½% in Ireland to 42% in Greece. 
Fears have therefore been expressed that a 
future cyclical recovery in the peripheral 
countries could cause imports to rise sharply and current account defi  cits to increase rap-
idly once more.2 In this case, the adjust-
ment achieved thus far would only be short-lived. These fears are supported by relatively high fi  gures for the aggregate 
output gap, which is calculated using inter-
national institutions’ estimates of potential 
output. For example, in its current Autumn 
Economic Forecast, the European Commis-
sion reports aggregate capacity underutil-isation fi  gures for 2012 that range from 
1½% of GDP in Ireland, 3½% in Italy, 4½% 
in Portugal and 4¾% in Spain to 13% in Greece. However, the actual amount of 
spare capacity available is likely to be con-
siderably smaller at present.3 Furthermore, a 
number of structural adjustments have 
been initiated that are intended to lead to a further improvement of the current account and prevent new imbalances from building 
up too quickly, which are discussed in 
greater detail below.
On the one hand, structural improvements 
occur if the supply side is permanently strengthened by increasing the economy’s 
price and non-price competitiveness. Enter-
prises are then able to consolidate their 
position on the domestic market by squeez-ing out foreign competitors and on the for-
eign market by increasing their market share. On the other hand, positive struc-tural change can take the form of a per-
manent decline in unsustainable drivers of 
domestic demand (such as excessive bor-rowing). However, it is not enough to re-duce domestic demand by the amount by 
which it exceeded GDP in the boom phase 
– which corresponds to the negative bal-ance of goods and services  – because in 
such a cyclical setting, aggregate output is usually signifi  cantly higher than potential 
output. Domestic demand therefore needs 
to be reduced to the level of potential out-put. However, given the mostly negative in-come sub-accounts in the peripheral coun-
tries’ current account, this will not on its own achieve a fully balanced current ac-
count and so stop the build-up of net exter-nal liabilities. If these states wish to reduce 
their accumulated external liabilities, they 
must generate distinct current account sur-pluses over a prolonged period. This implies 
that domestic demand must be clearly below GDP and that a permanent export 
surplus must be generated.
That a major part of the fall in domestic de-
mand in the peripheral countries in recent 
years is permanent is supported by the fact 
that reforms of the statutory pension sys-
tem and of unemployment benefi  ts have 
been initiated in several states owing to the urgent need to consolidate public fi  nances, 
resulting in a reduction in government 
transfers. In addition, taxes on income and 
wealth as well as indirect taxes have been 
2 See Eurokrise dämpft Konjunktur (Joint Economic 
Forecast, Autumn 2012, Euro Crisis Curbs Economic 
Activity – Risks to Stability Remain High), October 
2012, p 17.
3 Based on current estimation procedures, potential 
output is often overstated following a cyclical boom 
entailing severe sectoral distortions because incorrect 
market signals previously encouraged the creation of 
production capacities that cannot be used profi  tably in 
a normal economic setting. The misallocation of re-
sources is revealed particularly clearly once a housing 
bubble bursts, as has occurred in Ireland and Spain in 
recent years, in the form of a large stock of unsold 
housing which is also unmarketable in the long term 
and a sharp rise in the number of bankrupt construc-
tion companies. However, excessive borrowing by households and governments for pure consumption purposes can also lead to similar misallocations. Ex-
perience has shown that after a credit boom has dried up, a signifi  cant part of the new capital stock created 
in the most overheated sectors becomes obsolete, while structural unemployment increases owing, among other factors, to limited intersectoral labour mobility coupled with falling demand. In practice, 
however, it is somewhat diffi   cult to reliably identify the volume of capital stock that has become obsolete for 
individual countries, not least because the detailed 
data required are not available.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2012  
22

raised, which will also compress house-
holds’ purchasing power in the long term. 
Households’ real disposable income in the 
crisis countries has concurrently been re-
duced since the credit bubbles burst as the 
result of income losses caused by higher 
structural unemployment, in individual 
cases even by a decrease in nominal wages 
accompanied by fairly high levels of infl  a-
tion. This is likely to continue in the medium to long term, at least in some cases. Public 
consumption and investment expenditures 
have likewise been reduced. Credit-fi  nanced 
housing bubbles, which have occurred in some countries, or excessive government 
borrowing are unlikely to recur on the scale seen in the past, not least thanks to stricter supervisory rules for the banking sector and the new EU macroeconomic imbalance sur-veillance procedure.
Robust export performances in some per-
ipheral countries also support the diagnosis 
that the observed current account adjust-ment is partly structural (see chart on page  24). In spring 2012, real exports of goods and services exceeded their peak levels reached prior to the global fi  nancial 
and economic crisis by 9½% in Ireland, 7% 
in Spain and 6¼% in Portugal. In these three countries, exports grew only slightly more slowly than in Germany (+10%), 
which has an above-average export record 
among industrial nations. By contrast, ex-
ports were 4½% lower than pre-crisis levels in Italy, and 19¾% lower in Greece, where 
public unrest and strikes temporarily in-
fl  icted heavy damage on the tourist industry 
and where domestic banks were reluctant 
to provide enterprises with export fi  nance.
The strong lift in exports in the three coun-
tries mentioned above is all the more re-
markable given that the global economic 
environment has ceased to provide strong 
stimuli, particularly in 2012. On the one hand, there is reason to believe that many 
fi  rms in the three states have stepped up 
their export efforts in the face of weak do-
mestic demand in order to stabilise or in-crease their capacity utilisation. On the other hand, exporters’ price competitive-ness has improved slightly following the 
euro’s depreciation. However, because the 
euro-area partner countries’ share of ex-
ports of the peripheral states remains large, 
their relative price development in relation 
to these countries is at least as important. 
The assessment as to whether and to what 
extent a lasting adjustment has already 
taken place depends on which of the rele-
vant indicators is used as the gauge. While 
price competitiveness indicators based on 
consumer prices and GDP defl  ators do not 
point to a substantial improvement,4 the in-
dicator based on unit labour costs shows a more favourable picture.
Although indicators based on consumer 
prices and GDP defl  ators generally provide 
a fairly reliable picture of changes in price competitiveness, they are of limited in-formative value in the specifi  c case of the peripheral countries. The main reason for this is that numerous increases in indirect taxes and administrative prices introduced 
for fi  scal consolidation purposes have been driving up consumer prices and the defl  ator 
of domestic demand for quite some time, 
whereas export prices have hardly been af-
fected.5 It is therefore more appropriate to 
use the competitiveness indicator based on 
unit labour costs in this specifi  c situation 
4 However, if only those HICP components that are 
under the strongest international pressure are ob-
served, ie the prices of industrial goods excluding en-
ergy, Ireland, Spain, Portugal and, recently, also Greece 
display signifi  cantly weaker price dynamics than the 
euro area as a whole.5 It is not always possible to compare export defl  ators, 
which could also be used to calculate price competi-
tiveness, across euro-area states, because in some 
countries they are based on export price indices and in others, such as Italy, on unit values.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2012  
23

even if, unlike the GDP defl  ator, it disre-
gards important aspects such as changes in 
enterprises’ profi  t margins, which have a 
major indirect impact on companies’ export 
potential.
In the peripheral countries (except Ireland), 
the year-on-year changes in the GDP defl  a-tors have remained stable or have increased slightly on average over the last two-and-a-half years, while unit labour costs have de-
creased in all the countries, in part consid-
erably. This is further supported by the fact 
that labour shares have also fallen across 
the board. All in all, the price competitive-
ness indicator based on unit labour costs 
confi  rms that the fi  rst steps towards creat-
ing more competitive cost structures have 
been taken. Since the fi  rst quarter of 2008, it shows improvements of 17½% in Ireland, 11½% in Spain, 10½% in Greece and 8¼% 
in Portugal. However, no appreciable change is evident for Italy. Italy is conse-quently also clearly further below the long-
run average of the indicator for the period 
1999-2011 than the other peripheral coun-tries.
In three out of the four peripheral countries 
in which unit labour costs have fallen in re-cent years, a decrease in compensation per employee has played at least a contributory role. In Portugal, the compensation level in the fi  rst half of 2012 was almost 3% lower than the peak level in the fi  rst half of 2010 
in seasonally adjusted terms. In Ireland, al-
though another slight increase was ob-
served in the fi  rst half of 2012, the level of 
compensation was still 4½% lower than in 
the second half of 2008. The greatest ad-
justment occurred in Greece, where per 
capita employee compensation in the fi  rst 
half of 2012 was as much as a tenth lower Unit labour costs in the economy as a whole
129630369
––––+++Nominal, year-on-year percentage change
2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012
Deutsche Bundesbank2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012–12–9–6–30+3+6+9
63036
––++
30369
–+++–6–30+3+6
–30+3+6+9
SpainIreland
PortugalGreece
Italy
Memo item:
Euro area
H1 H1Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2012  
24

than in the fi  rst half of 2009.6 In Spain, 
compensation per employee has continued 
to rise until recently, albeit at a considerably slower pace than in the boom years. There, 
marked wage moderation, in combination 
with much stronger productivity growth, has helped to bring about the aforemen-
tioned signifi  cant contraction in unit labour costs. Distinct increases in productivity were 
also observed in Portugal and Ireland, al-though similar developments did not take 
place in Greece until 2012.7
On the one hand, the increased productivity 
gains in Ireland, Portugal and Spain owe something to a rise in the number of un-
profi  table companies being squeezed out of the market across all sectors during the cri-
sis, as often happens in such an economic 
setting. On the other hand, the majority of 
job cuts have taken place in sectors in which the recruitment of workers with comparatively low labour productivity had previously been worthwhile owing to cyc-
lical exaggerations. This being so, the con-
traction of these economic sectors in recent 
years and the accompanying productivity 
gains are per se a necessary and economic-
ally meaningful correction. Hence it is not fair to present this redundancy-related productivity improvement as a sort of second-class contribution to the reduction 
in unit labour costs, which has periodically 
happened in the public debate.8
All in all, a number of factors indicate that 
the reduction in the current account defi  cits 
of the euro-area crisis countries is not pre-
dominantly of a cyclical nature, but instead is based strongly on lasting changes. How-
ever, even though international institutions 
predict that most of these countries will reach a balanced or positive current ac-count in the near future, they must con-
tinue to systematically pursue structural re-
forms. Above all, wage moderation needs to be continued over a prolonged period. This lowers the employment threshold, ie the rate of macroeconomic growth at 
which the number of employees or the 
total hours worked begin to increase. With-
out a lowering of the employment thresh-
old it is likely to be extremely diffi   cult to re-
duce the generally high level of structural 
unemployment. Furthermore, continued 
wage moderation generally also has a posi-
tive impact on fi  rms’ profi  t margins, which 
helps to restore their sometimes severely 
impaired ability to innovate and invest. In 
some peripheral countries, over the past 
decade, the manufacturing sector, in par-
ticular, has suffered a considerable decline 
owing to excessive wage growth not sup-
ported by corresponding productivity gains. It will be almost impossible to establish the requisite sustainable economic model with-out creating new, more competitive capaci-ties in both industry and the service sectors.
6 Because there are no seasonally adjusted data on 
compensation per employee for Greece, comparisons 
can only be made based on values for the fi  rst half of 
the previous years.7 In Italy, however, the unfavourable productivity trend 
that had prevailed for some time continued after the 
global recession.8 Euro-Sorgenländer erholen sich langsam. Frankfurter Allgemeine Zeitung, 17 September 2012, p 13.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2012  
25

Current survey-based leading indicators do not 
appear to be pointing to any thoroughgoing 
improvement in the fourth quarter of 2012 and 
first quarter of 2013. The Purchasing Managers’ 
Index (PMI) for manufacturing fell once again 
in October after having risen slightly in each of 
the two previous months and remains consid -
erably below the expansion threshold. Consist -
ent with this picture, industrial confidence once 
again took a substantial hit in October and has 
become even further removed from its 
long-term average. The assessment of order 
books has become especially gloomy. The PMI 
for services had stabilised at quite a low level as 
this report went to press. A renewed slight de -
cline in GDP growth is expected for the last 
quarter of the year. Average GDP growth for 
2012 as a whole will probably settle some -
where between -¼% and -½%.
Looking at the individual sectors, the produc -
tion sector held up relatively well in the sum -
mer quarter. Industrial output (excluding con -
struction) in the third quarter was ¼% up on 
the spring after eliminating seasonal influences, 
yet down by 2¼% on the year. The pick-up in 
seasonally adjusted output of capital goods 
(+1½%) and consumer durables (+1%) was par -
ticularly significant. The production of non-
durables stagnated, whereas the manufacture 
of intermediate goods and energy contracted 
by ½% and 1¼% respectively. Industrial cap -
acity underutilisation intensified in the July to 
October period, according to surveys. Con -
struction output stabilised, at least temporarily, 
following mid-year. It was up by a seasonally 
adjusted ¼% in July-August yet down by 6% 
on the year.
On the demand side, positive impulses from 
household consumption have been minimal at 
best. Although real retail sales (excluding cars) 
in the euro area rose by ½% between the 
second and third quarters, over the same 
period new car registrations fell by a seasonally 
adjusted 6½%, though these data also include 
commercial vehicle registrations. The demand 
for new cars, which has been trending down -No end to reces-
sion in sight
Production 
 sector held up 
relatively well  
in summer
Weak domestic 
demand;  exports up once 
againNew passenger car registrationsin the euro area
Source: ECB.
Deutsche Bundesbank2008 2009 2010 2011 201270801002008 Q1 = 100, seasonally adjusted, quarterly, log scale
80100120140of which
Germany
GreecePortugalSpainItalyEuro area
80100120France
20304050607080100607080100
40506070801001204050607080100Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2012  
26

wards since the government stimulus pro -
grammes for the car industry expired, was even 
12½% below its cyclical low in the period span -
ning the fourth quarter of 2008 and the first 
quarter of 2009. For 2012 as a whole, the 
number of car registrations could reach its low -
est level since 1993. The main reason for this 
drastic drop is that demand for cars has col -
lapsed in the euro-area crisis countries. The 
downward slide in gross fixed capital forma -
tion, which has been ongoing since the second 
quarter of 2011, may have slowed down some -
what in the summer. A sign of this is that cap -
ital goods production has been pointing up -
wards, in conjunction with a slight increase in 
construction output in the July-August period. 
Exports are likely to have once again promoted 
growth in the third quarter; nominal exports of 
goods to non-euro-area countries are up by 
¾%, after seasonal adjustment, from the quite 
good second-quarter result. Simultaneously, 
however, imports rose by a very substantial 
2¾%; considerable increases in the price of im -
ported goods may have also played a part here.
The downturn in the euro-area labour market 
was not as strong in summer as in the preced -
ing quarters. Between June and September, the 
number of unemployed persons rose by around 
360,000 after seasonal adjustment, and thus 
considerably more moderately than in the 
spring (+660,000). On the year, it picked up by 
2.3 million to 18.2 million. The standardised 
unemployment rate rose to 11.6% in seasonally 
adjusted terms. After mid-year, the number of 
unemployed persons trended upwards in most 
euro-area countries, with the situation being 
exacerbated particularly in Spain, France and 
Cyprus. In the second quarter of 2012, the 
number of employed persons in the euro area 
hovered near its level of the winter months. It would be premature, however, to interpret 
from this figure and from the weaker rise in un -
employment in the summer that the labour 
market is about to stabilise anytime soon. If 
anything, because employment usually lags be -
hind output developments, up until and into 
the year 2013 the labour market situation is 
more likely to deteriorate than to improve.
In the third quarter of 2012, euro-area con -
sumer prices were up by 0.5% on the quarter 
after seasonal adjustment. This represents a 
continuation of the relatively more moderate 
price trend compared with the period spanning 
the fourth quarter of 2011 and first quarter of 
2012. Once again, it was energy and unpro -
cessed food prices which developed particu -
larly unfavourably. At 0.5% after seasonal ad -
justment, the prices of services rose at a pace 
similar in strength to the previous quarter, 
whereas rises in the prices of processed food 
and other goods (excluding energy and food) 
weakened distinctly. As in the spring, annual 
HICP inflation stood at 2.5% on average for the 
third quarter and for October. The constant 
price trend has been making itself apparent in 
most euro-area countries, too. On average over 
the July to October four-month span, annual 
inflation in Germany remained unchanged at 
2.1% and declined only slightly in France 
to 2.2%. In Italy, however, it fell from a high 
level of 3.6% in the second quarter to 3.4% in 
the third quarter and then to 2.8% in October, 
especially because past fiscal measures no 
longer affect the index directly. The increase in 
inflation in Spain from 1.9% in the second 
quarter to 2.8% in the third quarter and 3.5% 
in October is linked to tax hikes. By contrast, 
inflation in Greece has continued to decelerate; 
at 0.8% (October: 0.9%), it was well below the 
euro-area average.Labour market 
downturn  continuing at slower paceSteady rise in 
consumer pricesDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2012  
27

Monetary policy and banking business
Monetary policy and money 
market developments
The economic outlook for the euro area has 
once again deteriorated over the past few 
months. At the same time, inflation forecasts 
for 2012 and 2013 again had to be revised up -
wards due to the stronger than expected in -
creases in energy prices and the weaker ex -
change rate. It is now anticipated that the infla -
tion rate will not decline to values under 2% 
until sometime next year. Against this back -
drop, the ECB Governing Council has not taken 
any further interest rate policy measures since 
lowering interest rates at the start of July. This 
means that the main refinancing rate remains 
unchanged at the record low of 0.75% set in 
July. Banks’ balances in the deposit facility – as 
well as their excess reserves on current ac -
counts held at central banks – continue to earn 
0% interest. Eurosystem counterparties can ob -
tain overnight credit at 1.5% through the mar -
ginal lending facility.
After ECB President Draghi raised the prospect 
of a new government bond purchase pro -
gramme following the ECB Governing Council 
meeting on 2 August 2012, the ECB Governing 
Council decided at its meeting on 6 September 
2012 to implement such a programme (Out -
right Monetary Transactions –  OMTs) and to 
terminate the previous Securities Market Pro -
gramme  – SMP . According to the Governing 
Council’s decision, the new programme will 
serve to ensure an orderly transmission of mon -
etary policy (transfer of the policy stance to the 
real economy) and preserve the singleness of 
monetary policy in the Eurosystem. OMTs 
would be used to address severe distortions in 
government bond markets, which originated, 
in particular, from investors’ unfounded fears 
regarding the reversibility of the euro.
The new bond purchase programme differs in 
several aspects from the SMP . Whereas the SMP purchases were not subject to condition -
ality, the purchase of government bonds from 
euro-area countries as part of the OMT pro -
gramme requires that the country in question 
commits itself to a full EFSF/ESM macroeco -
nomic adjustment programme or to a precau -
tionary programme (Enhanced Conditions 
Credit Line) and that it complies fully with the 
respective programme conditionality. The gov -
ernment bond purchases will focus on matur -
ities of between one and three years, and there 
are no ex ante quantitative limits on the size of 
OMTs. Furthermore, the programme stipulates 
that the Eurosystem must accept pari passu  
treatment for its bond purchases compared 
with other creditors (ie it must waive preferred 
creditor status), and that the liquidity associ -
ated with the purchases must be absorbed 
through monetary policy operations (sterilisa -
tion), as was previously the case with the SMP .
The Bundesbank remains critical of Eurosystem 
government bond purchases because of the 
risks they entail, in particular when they are 
conducted against the backdrop of high or 
even increasing sovereign financial require -
ments. It remains particularly important to 
maintain a strict separation of fiscal and mon -
etary policy and to avoid the impression of 
monetary policy being misused for fiscal policy 
interests. The independence of monetary policy 
in the euro area ultimately serves to ensure that 
the Eurosystem can achieve its primary goal of 
safeguarding price stability in an effective and 
credible manner.
In addition, the ECB Governing Council decided 
on 6  September 2012 to further expand the 
collateral framework for monetary policy credit 
operations in the Eurosystem. Amongst other 
things, the use of the respective Eurosystem 
rating threshold – currently a rating of BBB- or 
comparable ratings  – for liabilities of central 
governments (or for debt instruments or credit 
claims guaranteed by the central governments) Key interest 
rates still at  record low
ECB Governing 
Council decides on new govern-ment bond  purchase pro-grammeOMT framework subject to condi-
tionality
ECB Governing 
Council reaches further decisions on the collateral frameworkDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2012  
28

Money market management and liquidity needs
During the three reserve maintenance 
periods from 11  July to 9  October 2012, 
euro-area credit institutions’ need for cen-
tral bank liquidity determined by autono-
mous liquidity factors fell by €16.6 billion in 
net terms. This decline was due to a de-
crease in general government deposits with 
the Eurosystem, which fell by a total of €37.4 billion compared with period aver-ages. The sum of changes in net foreign 
assets and other factors had a counterbal-
ancing liquidity-absorbing effect. Taken to-
gether, ie adjusted for valuation effects with 
no impact on liquidity, these fell by €20.6 billion net, thus reducing the liquidity-
providing effect generated by general gov-
ernment deposits. The volume of banknotes 
in circulation remained virtually unchanged 
over the three maintenance periods, in-
creasing by only €0.2 billion. The minimum 
reserve requirement also remained virtually 
unchanged in the review period, increasing by only €0.1 billion net.
The allotment policy employed by the Euro-
system since 2008, under which liquidity-
providing open market operations are con-
ducted as fi  xed-rate tenders with full allot-
ment of the submitted bids, continued to 
apply in the review period (see table on 
page 33). Therefore, credit institutions’ de-
mand for central bank liquidity was met in 
full. As was the case in the previous periods, 
central bank liquidity was signifi  cantly higher than the needs resulting from au-
tonomous factors and minimum reserve re-
quirements. The ECB Governing Council’s 
decision taken at its monetary policy meet-ing on 5 July 2012 to reduce the key inter-est rates by 0.25% in each case had a par-
ticular impact in the period under review. This caused the deposit facility rate to fall 
to 0.00%, with the standing facility corridor 
unchanged, which means that for the fi  rst 
time the Eurosystem’s deposit facility bore no interest. However, as this zero interest rate has also always applied to excess  liquidity, which is not necessary for meeting 
the reserve requirements, on credit institu-
tions’ current accounts, Eurosystem banks no longer had a yield-driven incentive to 
hold end-of-day surplus liquidity in the de-
posit facility since the interest rate cut. This 
was very evident in the period under re-view, as recourse to the deposit facility 
dropped sharply by around €465 billion. At 
the same time, credit institutions’ current account holdings rose by almost €427 bil-
lion (comparing the period averages in each case, see table on page 31). The increase in 
current account holdings was lower by 
comparison due to reduced demand in the main refi  nancing operations (on balance by €43 billion in total) and in longer-term refi  -nancing operations (on balance by €12 bil-lion in total), even though this was partially 
compensated by the above-mentioned changes in autonomous factors. At the same time, use of the marginal lending 
 facility was rather low in the period under 
review (period averages from €0.8 billion to 
€1.1 billion), although there was a certain 
daily base amount.
Moreover, as had been announced at the 
beginning of August 2012, the ECB Govern-
ing Council decided on 6 September 2012 
on a framework for conducting the Euro-system’s Outright Monetary Transactions (OMTs) in secondary sovereign bond mar-
kets. Potential purchases, which are essen-
tially unrestricted in volume, are concen-trated at the shorter end of the maturity scale. The objective was that the resulting liquidity-providing effect would be com-
pletely neutralised, as was the case with the 
Securities Markets Programme (SMP). At the same time as these decisions were made, the SMP was terminated; however, the securities in the SMP portfolio will be held to maturity and the liquidity made 
available through these purchases will con-tinue to be absorbed.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2012  
29

On account of securities reaching maturity 
and the regular quarterly revaluation, the 
volume of SMP holdings fell by €1.9 billion 
in total to €209.5 billion in the period under review. There were no further purchases in 
this period. Moreover, the weekly tenders to absorb liquidity from SMP purchases 
continued to soak up the desired volume of  liquidity from the market. Furthermore, the 
holdings from the fi  rst Covered Bond Pur-chase Programme (CBPP), which ended as 
scheduled at the end of June 2010, fell by 
€1.7 billion to €54.2 billion in the review period. In contrast, securities holdings under the second Covered Bond Purchase Programme (CBPP2) increased by €2.2 bil-
lion to €16.3 billion in total over the same 
period.
The key interest rate cut adopted at the be-
ginning of July was implemented for the 
fi  rst time in the July-August 2012 mainten-
ance period. The resulting zero percentage 
rate on the deposit facility caused the use 
of the facility to fall to €343 billion on aver-
age over the period – after €771 billion in 
the previous period. On the other hand, 
credit institutions’ current account holdings 
with the Eurosystem rose to €510 billion on average (compared with €112 billion in the 
previous period), although the aggregate 
minimum reserve requirement stood at only €107 billion. Excess liquidity – calculated as 
the sum of the deposit facility and current 
account holdings less reserve requirement – stood at €746 billion on average (€775 bil-
lion in the previous period). Additionally, 
there was a certain decline in the volume of the main refi  nancing operations during the 
reserve maintenance period, after market-
able debt instruments issued or guaranteed by the Greek government were temporarily made ineligible for use as collateral in Euro-system monetary policy operations from the end of July. Overall, the outstanding tender 
volume (excluding liquidity-absorbing 
fi  ne-tuning operations) decreased slightly to 
€1,226 billion on average over the period 
(compared with €1,236 billion in the previ-
ous period). As expected, the key interest rate cut had a considerable effect on over-night rates. EONIA remained fairly constant 
at 0.115% on average over the mainten-ance period, just over 63 basis points less 
than the new main refi  nancing rate (0.75%). 
In the previous period, EONIA averaged 
around 0.33%, ie the difference to the key interest rate was greater at 67 basis points. 
Secured overnight money on Eurex Repo’s 
Euro GC Pooling (ECB basket) likewise fell 
short of the rate change by 25 basis points, 
compared with the previous period. How-
ever, the average rate of 0.020% (0.246% 
in the previous period) remained consider-
ably lower than the EONIA rate. Averaging 
€22.6 billion, EONIA turnover was down somewhat on the previous period (€24.7 billion), while GC Pooling overnight turn-
over (ECB basket) rose on average over the 
period to €7.7 billion, compared with €5.2 
billion in the previous period.
In the August-September 2012 reserve 
maintenance period, demand for liquidity in 
open market operations remained broadly 
unchanged. The overall tender volume aver-aged €1,207 billion, compared with €1,226 
billion in the previous period. This meant 
that there were no changes to the maturity structure, with weekly main refi  nancing op-erations accounting for 11% of central bank fi  nancing and longer-term refi  nancing oper-
ations for 89%, and with both three-year tenders predominating. As liquidity needs 
resulting from average autonomous factors 
receded by around €34 billion compared 
with the previous period, average excess li-quidity increased by €13.4 billion to €759.7 
billion. On average, 57% of this amount 
was channelled into current account hold-
ings and 43% into the deposit facility. There was a slight tendency towards frontloading in this longer 35-day period compared with the previous period, in which an average of 54% of excess liquidity was booked as cur-
rent account holdings and 46% was put into the deposit facility. EONIA remained 
virtually unchanged at 0.108% on average, 
although the EONIA fi  xing was somewhat 
higher at around 0.12% at the beginning of Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2012  
30

the maintenance period, in keeping with 
the frontloading, falling to 0.10% at the 
end of the period. At €21.9 billion, average 
EONIA turnover remained low. The GC 
Pooling weighted overnight rate (ECB bas-
ket) also dropped at the end of the period, 
and on the last day of the maintenance period stood at 0.014%; the underlying turnover averaged €8.0 billion for the 
period.
The September-October 2012 maintenance period was characterised by a continued 
 decline in demand for central bank liquidity. The decline primarily concerned the main re-
fi  nancing operations, which averaged €118 billion over the period (€131 billion in the previous period). Overall, the outstanding 
tender volume (excluding liquidity-absorbing 
fi  ne-tuning operations) fell to €1,180 billion 
on average over the period (compared with 
€1,207  billion in July to August). As need for 
 liquidity resulting from autonomous factors remained virtually unchanged compared with the previous period (€409 billion on 
average), excess liquidity fell by €23 billion to €736 billion on average compared with the 
previous period. At the same time, the ten-
dency to hold increasingly more excess  liquidity as current account holdings con-tinued (58.5%), although considerable use 
was still made of the deposit facility (41.5%). Banks identifi  ed, inter alia, internal manage-
ment mechanisms as the reason for this.  EONIA fell slightly to 0.095% on average over the period (compared with 0.108% in 
the previous period); at the end of the quar-
ter (end of September) the rate rose only 
marginally to 0.107%, the highest value for 
that period. EONIA turnover increased to 
€25.4 billion (compared with €21.9 billion in 
the previous period), which may have re-sulted from the slight decrease in excess 
 liquidity. Secured overnight money, which is 
traded at a considerably lower rate, also fell. The rate for the GC Pooling ECB basket aver-
aged 0.014% over the period, indicating a 
drop compared with the previous period of 
around 1 basis point. The corresponding turnover at GC Pooling increased again to approximately €8.5 billion on average over 
the period.Factors determining bank liquidity1
€ billion; changes in the daily averages of the reserve maintenance periods vis-à-vis the previous period
Item2012
11 July to 
7 Aug8 Aug to 11 Sep12 Sep to 9 Oct
I Provision (+) or  absorption (–) of  
central bank balances due to changes 
in autonomous factors1 Banknotes in  circulation (increase: –) –   5.2 +  0.1 +  4.9
2 Government  deposits with the Eurosystem ( increase: –) +   8.1 + 23.7 +  5.6
3 Net foreign assets
2 +  12.2 –  2.1 +  4.7
4 Other factors 2 –  32.9 + 12.5 – 15.0
Total –  17.8 + 34.2 +  0.2
II Monetary policy  operations of the Eurosystem
1 Open market  operations
(a) Main refi  nancing operations –  14.7 – 15.4 – 13.0
(b) Longer-term refi  nancing  operations +   5.0 –  3.1 – 14.0
(c) Other operations –   0.3 –  0.3 +  1.4
2 Standing facilities
(a) Marginal lending facility –   1.0 +  0.0 +  0.3
(b) Deposit facility (increase: –) + 427.5 + 14.5 + 23.2
Total + 416.5 –  4.3 –  2.1
III Change in credit  institutions’  current accounts (I + II) + 398.7 + 29.8 –  1.9
IV Change in the  minimum reserve requirement ( increase: –) –   0.1 –  0.1 +  0.1
1 For longer-term trends and the Deutsche Bundesbank’s contribution, see pages 14 • and 15 • of the Statistical Section of this 
Monthly Report. 2 Including end-of- quarter valuation adjustments with no impact on liquidity.
Deutsche BundesbankDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2012  
31

has been suspended on the condition that the 
countries are eligible for OMTs or commit to an 
EU/IMF programme and that, in the Governing 
Council’s estimation, they comply with the at -
tached conditionality.
In the past, sovereign bonds were not pur -
chased as part of OMTs. Securities held under 
the Eurosystem Securities Market Programme 
(now discontinued) decreased to €208.5 billion 
due, in particular, to a redemption in August. 
Under the second Covered Bond Purchase Pro -
gramme (CBPP2), on 31 October 2012, the Eu -
rosystem had accumulated a total securities 
volume of just over €16.4 billion. The initially 
targeted total nominal amount of €40 billion 
was therefore not fully exhausted. At the same 
time, securities from the first Covered Bond 
Purchase Programme (CBPP) reached maturity. 
Thus, on balance, the total amount of secur -
ities held as part of monetary policy pro -
grammes decreased slightly from the beginning 
of the third quarter.After being almost on par with previous record 
levels, at around €1.2 billion in the summer 
months, the monetary policy refinancing vol -
ume provided by the Eurosystem decreased 
somewhat of late. On the one hand, this can 
be traced back to certain improvements in the 
financial situation of banks in euro-area coun -
tries that are particularly affected by the finan -
cial and sovereign debt crisis. This was reflected 
temporarily in a slight decline in the still very 
high level of TARGET claims and liabilities of 
some national central banks. On the other 
hand, other euro-denominated Eurosystem 
claims on credit institutions in the euro area 
– which are not counted as monetary policy 
operations and also comprise Emergency Li -
quidity Assistance (ELA) – increased in part, so 
that the decrease in the monetary policy refi -
nancing volume is likely to overstate the im -
provement in the financing situation of the 
banking system in the euro area.
Overall, the banking system’s surplus liquidity 
– measured in terms of average recourse to the 
deposit facility plus average excess reserves on 
current accounts held at central banks, most 
recently standing at around €678 billion –, also 
decreased somewhat on average over the 
maintenance period from 10 October to 13 No -
vember 2012, compared with previous peak 
levels.
The unsecured overnight rate EONIA, which is 
calculated on the basis of actual transactions 
carried out by a panel of banks, stood at ap -
proximately 0.13% directly after the key interest 
rate decision came into effect at mid-July and 
decreased to the rate of 0.8% of late. The 
spread between EONIA and the rate on the de -
posit facility is now almost the same as the 
spread observed immediately after the key 
interest rate cut. The survey-based (Euribor) 
rate for unsecured three-month money fell 
sharply at first in July after the key interest rate 
reduction, followed by a noticeably more sub -
dued drop to 0.19% of late. Compared with 
the start of the third quarter, the rate decreased 
by around 46 basis points. Since the key inter -Securities hold-
ings from mon-etary policy  purchase pro-grammes down slightlyOverall, slight decrease in monetary policy refinancing  volume after previous peaks
Banks report 
 significantly lower rates for unsecured three-month moneyMoney market interest ratesin the euro area
1 Monthly  averages.  2 Three-month  Euribor  less three-month 
Eurepo. • Average 1 to 15 November 2012.
Deutsche Bundesbank2009 2010 2011 201200.51.01.52.02.53.03.5
050100150Difference between unsecured and secured
three-month interbank lending rates 1, 2Basis
points%
Marginal lending rate
Three-month Euribor 1
EONIA 1
Minimum bid rate or
fixed interest rate for
main refinancing operations
Deposit rateDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2012  
32

est rate decision was made in July, banks par -
ticipating in the Eurepo panel have quoted, on 
average, rates of around -0.01% for money 
market transactions backed by the best collat -
eral. Overall, the spread between unsecured 
and secured, survey-based money market rates 
has continued to narrow considerably com -
pared with the previous quarter. However, in 
light of the still heterogeneous and segmented 
nature of the interbank money markets, the in -
terpretation of this spread as being a represen -
tative risk premium remains subject to consid -
erable reservations.Monetary developments  
in the euro area
On balance, the broad monetary aggregate 
(M3) experienced continued moderate growth 
in the third quarter of 2012, with monthly flows 
still characterised by increased volatility. Monet -
ary expansion was supported in the months 
July to September by further portfolio shifts by 
the money-holding sector in favour of sight de -
posits and short-term savings deposits. On the 
counterparts’ side, the continued rise in bank 
lending to domestic general government bol -
stered monetary growth. In contrast, lending 
to the domestic private sector in the euro area Monetary 
 dynamics  remain  moderateOpen market operations of the Eurosystem*
 
Value 
dateType of transaction
1Maturity in daysActual  allotment in € billionDeviation 
from the 
benchmark in € billion
2Marginal rate/fi  xed 
rate
%Allotment 
ratio
%Weighted 
rate
%Cover ratio
 3Numberof bidders
11.07.2012 MRO (FRT) 7 163.7 763.2 0.75 100.00 – 1.00 90
11.07.2012 FTO (–) 7 – 211.5 – 0.03 66.36 0.02 2.01 95
11.07.2012 S-LTRO (FRT) 28 24.4 – 0.75 100.00 – 1.00 27
18.07.2012 MRO (FRT) 7 156.8 1171.3 0.75 100.00 – 1.00 98
18.07.2012 FTO (–) 7 – 211.5 – 0.02 54.62 0.02 2.08 78
25.07.2012 MRO (FRT) 7 130.7 1545.7 0.75 100.00 – 1.00 98
25.07.2012 FTO (–) 7 – 211.5 – 0.02 45.30 0.01 1.88 69
26.07.2012 LTRO (FRT) 98 8.5 –
4 0.75 100.00 – 1.00 36
01.08.2012 MRO (FRT) 7 132.8 979.8 0.75 100.00 – 1.00 97
01.08.2012 FTO (–) 7 – 211.5 – 0.02 15.04 0.01 2.19 72
08.08.2012 MRO (FRT) 7 133.4 327.4 0.75 100.00 – 1.00 87
08.08.2012 FTO (–) 7 – 211.5 – 0.01 73.61 0.01 1.99 67
08.08.2012 S-LTRO (FRT) 35 25.2 – 0.75 100.00 – 1.00 28
15.08.2012 MRO (FRT) 7 130.6 456.6 0.75 100.00 – 1.00 86
15.08.2012 FTO (–) 7 – 211.5 – 0.01 55.97 0.01 1.98 58
22.08.2012 MRO (FRT) 7 131.2 483.6 0.75 100.00 – 1.00 91
22.08.2012 FTO (–) 7 – 211.5 – 0.01 51.04 0.01 2.11 57
29.08.2012 MRO (FRT) 7 131.5 495.0 0.75 100.00 – 1.00 92
29.08.2012 FTO (–) 7 – 209.0 – 0.01 53.21 0.01 2.17 56
30.08.2012 LTRO (FRT) 91 9.7 –4 … 100.00 – 1.00 36
05.09.2012 MRO (FRT) 7 126.3 338.3 0.75 100.00 – 1.00 84
05.09.2012 FTO (–) 7 – 209.0 – 0.01 51.04 0.01 2.21 57
12.09.2012 MRO (FRT) 7 130.3 303.8 0.75 100.00 – 1.00 80
12.09.2012 FTO (–) 7 – 209.0 – 0.01 48.91 0.01 2.07 58
12.09.2012 S-LTRO (FRT) 28 13.8 – 0.75 100.00 – 1.00 26
19.09.2012 MRO (FRT) 7 119.8 344.8 0.75 100.00 – 1.00 84
19.09.2012 FTO (–) 7 – 209.0 – 0.01 49.84 0.01 2.24 59
26.09.2012 MRO (FRT) 7 117.4 315.4 0.75 100.00 – 1.00 85
26.09.2012 FTO (–) 7 – 209.0 – 0.01 62.98 0.01 1.85 49
27.09.2012 LTRO (FRT) 84 18.7 –4 … 100.00 – 1.00 55
03.10.2012 MRO (FRT) 7 102.9 271.4 0.75 100.00 – 1.00 84
03.10.2012 FTO (–) 7 – 209.0 – 0.01 56.14 0.01 2.01 56
* For more information on the Eurosystem’s operations from 11 April 2012 to 10 July 2012, see Deutsche Bundesbank, Monthly  Report, 
August 2012, p 27. 1  MRO: main refi  nancing operation, LTRO: longer-term refi  nancing operation, S-LTRO: supplementary longer-term 
refi  nancing operation, FTO: fi  ne-tuning operation (+: liquidity providing operation, –: liquidity absorbing operation), FRT: fi  xed-rate tender. 
2 Calculation according to publication after MRO allotment. 3 Ratio of total bids to the allotment amount. 4 The interest rate corresponds 
to the average minimum bid rate or main refi  nancing rate of the MROs conducted over the life of this operation (may be rounded to two 
decimal places in the table).
Deutsche BundesbankDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2012  
33

remained weak for the fourth consecutive 
quarter. This decoupling is likewise reflected in 
the annual growth rates. While growth in M3 
sank from just over 3.0% in the second quarter 
to 2.7% in the third quarter owing to a base 
effect, the annual interest rate for lending 
( adjusted for loan sales and securitisation) to 
the domestic private sector fell in this period 
from 0.1% to -0.4%.
With regard to the individual components, the 
increase in the M3 aggregate in the third quar -
ter is solely attributable to the narrow money 
aggregate (M1). The seasonally adjusted and 
annualised three-month rate saw a dramatic in -
crease from just over 3% at the end of July 
to 11% at the end of September. This was due 
to a pronounced increase in sight deposits 
across almost all sectors. This can be traced 
back in part to portfolio shifts, which – against 
the backdrop of high uncertainty and low inter -
est rates  – highlight the money-holding sec -
tor’s preference for highly liquid deposits. In -
flows to sight deposits in the quarter under re -
view reached a level comparable to the period 
that followed the collapse of Lehman Brothers.
In contrast, the reduction in other short-term 
bank deposits (M2-M1) curbed monetary de -
velopments in the third quarter. The consider -
able outflows out of (M2-M1) can be attributed to shifts from short-term time deposits to sight 
deposits, which were made in particular by fi -
nancial and non-financial corporations. On the 
other hand, it was predominately households 
that continued to build up short-term savings 
deposits. This behaviour was most prevalent in 
countries where this form of investment bene -
fitted from tax incentives or comparatively at -
tractive interest rates.
Furthermore, the substantial drop in market -
able financial instruments (M3-M2) dampened 
monetary developments in the third quarter. 
Against the backdrop of a low interest rate en -
vironment, the money-holding sector sold 
money market fund shares. Moreover, 
short-term bank debt securities decreased no -
ticeably. In contrast, the decline in repurchase 
agreements (repos) that was observed in the 
previous quarters, particularly with other finan -
cial intermediaries, came to a standstill in the 
months from July to September.
With regard to the development of marketable 
instruments, it should be noted that repos (and 
reverse repos) which are concluded between 
MFIs and central counterparties have been ex -
cluded from the calculation of M3 and its 
counterparts since August 2012. The reason for 
this is that these agreements usually concern 
secured money market transactions between Pronounced 
 increase in sight 
deposits owing to portfolio shifts
In contrast,  
a reduction in 
other short-term deposits …… and in mar-ketable financial instrumentsConsolidated balance sheet of the MFI sector in the euro area*
Changes in € billion, seasonally adjusted
Liabilities 2012 Q3 2012 Q2
Central government deposits 15.1 – 24.5
Monetary aggregate M3 59.4 31.4
of which: Components
Currency in circulation and 
overnight deposits (M1) 129.7 38.7
Other shorter-term bank deposits 
(M2-M1) – 38.8 1.1
Marketable instruments (M3-M2) – 31.5 –  8.4
Monetary capital – 23.1 – 68.4Assets 2012 Q3 2012 Q2
Loans to non-MFIs in the euro area –  7.4 5.0
of which
General government –  5.6 26.4
Private non-MFIs 1 –  1.8 – 21.4
Lending in the form of securities to 
non-MFIs in the euro area – 11.9 – 35.0
of which
General government 45.2 19.5
Private non-MFIs – 57.1 – 54.5
Net external assets 24.5 – 25.3
Other counterparts of M3 46.2 –  6.2
* Changes for statistical reasons eliminated. 1 Adjusted for loan sales and securitisation.
Deutsche BundesbankDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2012  
34

banks, ie the central counterparty merely acts 
as an intermediary. Thus, these transactions, 
for the most part, do not involve an inflow to 
the money-holding sector and are therefore ir -
relevant for the monetary analysis. It was ne -
cessary to adjust the M3 data for such repos as 
they latterly had a substantial impact on 
short-term monetary and credit developments. 
The affected time series were revised back to 
June 2010.1
MFI credit to domestic general government 
made the most significant contribution to 
growth in M3 in the months from July to Sep -
tember. Their seasonally adjusted and annual -
ised three-month rate, which stood at 5% at 
the end of the third quarter, after reaching al -
most 6% at the end of the previous quarter, 
continued its strong growth, which has been 
evident for some time now. Securities of sover -
eign issuers were the main drivers of monetary 
growth in the reporting quarter; German banks 
in particular and, to a lesser extent, Greek 
banks increased their holdings of domestic se -
curities. In contrast, loans to the public sector 
experienced a slight decrease.
MFIs’ longer-term financial liabilities towards 
other domestic sectors (monetary capital) also 
had a notably positive effect on monetary 
growth. As already observed in the previous 
three quarters, holdings of monetary capital fell 
despite MFIs’ continued expansion of capital 
and reserves. This was driven by the reduction 
in long-term time deposits, which, alongside 
shifts in institutional investors’ portfolios, was 
linked to the unwinding of previous securitisa -
tion deals. In contrast, the decline in long-term 
bank debt securities in the euro area, observed 
since autumn 2011, came to a complete stand -
still in the third quarter. Despite this, there was 
a continued net redemption of debt securities 
in those countries that have been particularly 
affected by the crisis.M3 growth bol-
stered by con-siderable rise in credit to general government, …
… perceptible 
outflow of mon-
etary capital …Components and counterparts of the money stock in the euro area
1 Year-on-year  change  in per cent.  2 In percentage  points. 
3 Adjusted  for loan  sales  and securitisation.  4 Taken  in isol-
ation,  an increase  curbs  M3 growth.  5 Adjusted  for loan  sales 
and securitisation  from  2010  Q1. 6 Non-monetary  financial 
corporations.
Deutsche Bundesbank2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012505101520
–++++
–10–50+5+10+15+20+25
505101520
–++++Seasonally adjusted, end-of-quarter data
... components of the money stock
... counterparts
Sectoral growth contributions 2of which
Loans to the private sector 5Growth rate 1 of M3 and the
contributions to growth 2 of the ...
M3
M3-M2M2-M1
M1
M3
Remaining balance
sheet items
Longer-term financial
liabilities to other non-MFIs 4Net external
asset positionCredit to theprivate sector 3
Growth rate 1
Financialcorporations 6
Non-financialcorporations Households
1 For details, see The adjustment of monetary statistics for 
repurchase agreement transactions with central counter -
parties, Monthly Bulletin, ECB, September 2012, pp 28-31.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2012  
35

Monetary development was also strengthened 
by a moderate increase in the net external asset 
position of the MFI sector vis-à-vis non-residents. 
This development was driven by a clear de -
crease in external liabilities, which was counter -
balanced by a smaller decline in external claims.
As in the previous quarter, MFI credit to the do -
mestic private sector was the M3 counterpart 
position that had the strongest dampening ef -
fect on monetary growth in the summer 
months. This was caused by the unusually 
strong decline in privately-issued securities, in 
particular by other financial corporations. This 
decline resulted mainly from banks’ unwinding 
of previous securitisation deals and therefore 
does not entirely reflect a lower level of com -
mercial banks’ lending to the domestic private 
sector.
MFI loans to the domestic private sector, which 
experienced a marked decline in the second 
quarter, stagnated in the months July to Sep -
tember. Nonetheless, lending patterns con -
tinued to vary greatly within the euro area, 
with a rise recorded for member states which 
had retained their high credit rating and further 
net redemptions for the countries which have 
been hit hardest by the debt crisis. Loan devel -
opments in these countries are not only being 
dampened by the weak economy but also by 
major structural adjustment processes.
The effects of the economic slowdown, of in -
creased uncertainty among borrowers and of 
balance sheet consolidation in several euro-
area countries were evident in the third quar -
ter, particularly in loans to non-financial corpor -
ations. Their seasonally adjusted and annual -
ised three-month rate (adjusted for loan sales 
and securitisation) fell from 0% at the end of 
June to -1½% at the end of September. All ma -
turity ranges were affected by the decline; 
loans with medium-term maturities experi -
enced a particularly sharp drop.
Loans to euro-area households increased only 
moderately in the third quarter. The seasonally adjusted and annualised three-month rate (ad -
justed for loan sales and securitisation) rose 
slightly from just over 0% at the end of June to 
just under ½% at the end of September. As in 
the previous two quarters, the increase was at -
tributable to loans for house purchase, which is 
most likely due to the still favourable financing 
conditions. In contrast, consumer borrowing 
continued its downward trend. Thus, lending 
to the domestic private sector in the quarter 
under review was substantially bolstered only 
by loans to financial corporations (since August 
2012 adjusted for MFI reverse repos with cen -
tral counterparties, see footnote on page 35).
Inflation forecasts based on various monetary 
indicators (monetary aggregates, short-term 
deposits, loans) currently signal no particular 
risk to price stability for the next three years, on 
average. However, the uncertainty associated 
with these forecasts remains high.
German banks’ deposit and 
lending business with 
 domestic customers
Although deposits continued to increase in net 
terms across all categories, German banks’ de -
posit business lost considerable momentum in 
the third quarter after strong growth in the first 
six months of the year. The reduced momen -
tum in deposit growth was largely attributable 
to a strong decline in short-term time deposits, 
which had recorded substantial inflows in the 
first half of the year. Although short-term time 
deposits fell across all sectors, this decline was 
most pronounced for households. In contrast, 
sight deposits continued to grow unabated in 
the quarter under review. As longer-term de -
posits at the same time experienced another 
distinct decline, portfolio shifts from long-term 
to shorter term deposits continued on balance 
during the third quarter.
In the case of longer-term deposits, time de -
posits with a maturity of over two years fell sig -
nificantly once again. This decline was partly … and moder-
ate rise in the net external asset position
Strong decline in 
securitised lend-ing to private sector, …
… loans to the 
private sector stagnant; how-ever, develop-ment is very  varied.
Marked decline 
in loans to non-financial corporations, …… moderate  increase in loans 
to households
Forecasts based on monetary  indicators signal no particular risks to price stability
Growth in 
 deposit business slows consider-ablyDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2012  
36

due to continued shifts in households’ and 
non-financial corporations’ portfolios in favour 
of overnight deposits. Insurance companies 
and other financial institutions also withdrew 
time deposits, however, without at the same 
time increasing their sight deposits. Savings de -
posits with longer periods of notice also fell 
significantly in the third quarter of the year. 
Movements in this market segment are usually 
almost exclusively attributable to households’ 
portfolio decisions.
Lending by German banks to domestic non-
banks maintained the trend it has pursued 
since the beginning of the year, and noticeably 
gained momentum in the quarter under re -
view. The (seasonally adjusted and annualised) 
growth of almost 2½% compared with the pre -
vious quarter was primarily attributable to a re -
newed considerable increase in loans to the 
private sector. In addition, banks increased 
their holdings of privately-issued securities, 
which they had scaled back in the previous five 
quarters. Lending to domestic general govern -
ment returned to normal after a substantial rise 
in the previous quarter and increased notice -
ably in net terms. The decrease in loans con -
trasted with substantial growth in lending to 
general government in the form of securities.
The considerable expansion in lending to the 
private sector was largely driven by an increase 
in loans to non-financial corporations and 
households. By comparison, loans to financial 
corporations only went up marginally on bal -
ance in the third quarter.2 In contrast to the 
strong outflows in the euro area, Germany 
once again saw a noticeable expansion in loans 
to non-financial corporations in the quarter 
under review. Given the low level of investment 
in equipment, this indicates modified financing 
behaviour, or an increased acquisition of finan -
cial assets by corporations, which could be 
linked to the even more favourable interest 
rates on lending. The increase was primarily 
concentrated on short and long-term matur -
ities; loans with medium-term maturities fell 
slightly. This renewed growth was driven by co -operative banks and savings banks in particular; 
the contribution of Landesbanken decreased 
somewhat compared with the previous quar -
ter. While the seasonally adjusted and annual -
ised three-month rate for loans to non-financial 
corporations rose by 50 basis points in the re -
porting quarter to 3% at the end of September, 
the annual growth rate moved up only slightly 
to 2.2%, compared with 1.9% at the end of 
June.
In addition to their loans to non-financial cor -
porations, German banks also increased their 
loans to domestic households on balance in 
the reporting quarter. However, at 1%, the sea -
sonally adjusted and annualised growth was 
once again very low. As for the euro-area ag -
gregate, growth in lending was solely driven by 
a renewed increase in loans for house pur -Renewed  decline 
in longer-term 
deposits, pri-marily in favour of sight deposits
Strong growth  
in banks’ lend-
ing to domestic non-banks
Marked increase 
in loans to non-financial corporations
Discernible growth in loans to households, solely driven by lending for house purchase.Lending and deposits of monetary  fi  nancial institutions (MFIs) in Germany 
*
Changes in € billion, seasonally adjusted
Item2012
Q2 Q3
Deposits of domestic non-MFIs 1
Overnight 42.9 42.0
With agreed maturities
of up to 2 years 11.5 – 19.8
of over 2 years – 7.0 –  8.8
Redeemable at notice
of up to 3 months 3.7 4.7
of over 3 months – 0.8 –  3.3
Lending
to domestic general government
Loans 10.4 –  9.8
Securitised lending 1.0 14.0
to domestic enterprises and 
households
Loans 9.4 10.0
of which to households 2 4.0 3.9
to non-fi  nancial  corporations 
3 5.1 6.0
Securitised lending – 5.1 4.0
* As well as banks (including building and loan associations, but 
excluding the Bundesbank), monetary fi  nancial institutions 
(MFIs) here also include money market funds. End-of-quarter 
data, adjusted for statistical changes. 1 Enterprises, households 
and general government excluding central government. 2  In-
cluding non-profi  t institutions serving households. 3  Corpor-
ations and quasi-corporations.
Deutsche Bundesbank
2 As is the case for the euro area as a whole, bank loans to 
financial corporations in Germany for the period from June 
2010 onwards are adjusted for reverse repo transactions 
with central counterparties. For details, see pp 34-35.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2012  
37

chase, which rose slightly to a seasonally ad -
justed and annualised rate of 2%. In contrast, 
consumer credit saw a distinct decline, which 
was primarily due to a drop in longer-term 
loans. The rise in lending to households was 
attributable, for the most part, to savings 
banks, regional and cooperative banks as well 
as commercial banks, while big banks again 
scaled back business slightly in this area. The 
12-month rate for loans to households edged 
up marginally from 1.1% in the previous quarter 
to 1.2%.
According to the latest findings of the Bank 
Lending Survey (BLS), lending by German banks 
in the third quarter of 2012 was characterised 
by restrictive adjustments. Overall, this led to a 
slight tightening of credit standards for transac -
tions with non-financial corporations and to a 
marked tightening of credit standards for lend -
ing to large corporations. According to the in -
stitutions surveyed, the restrictive adjustments 
resulted from higher capital costs, a deterior -ation in the general economic outlook as well 
as sector and company-specific factors. In add -
ition, banks’ credit conditions were more re -
strictive on the whole. For this reason, institu -
tions widened their margins significantly for 
riskier loans and to a lesser degree for loans to 
borrowers of average creditworthiness, thus 
continuing the ongoing trend of intensified dif -
ferentiation in risk pricing, which has been 
noted since the third quarter in 2009. More -
over, banks tightened conditions for loan cov -
enants as well as for credit accounts and credit 
collateral. Only non-interest charges and re -
quirements regarding loan maturities remained 
largely unchanged on balance.
In lending to households, the institutions par -
ticipating in the survey tightened their credit 
standards somewhat for housing loans. Ac -
cording to the information they provided, the 
positive outlook in the housing market on its 
own had little expansionary effect. In contrast, 
the more stringent requirements for repayment 
rates, designed to limit loan maturities and 
contain interest rate risk, had a restrictive effect 
on credit standards. On the other hand, they 
saw no need to adjust customer credit stand -
ards. Nevertheless, the margins in both credit 
categories and in the riskier segment in particu -
lar were widened noticeably.
Different developments in demand for credit 
were observed in the individual business areas. 
While demand for corporate loans at the sur -
veyed banks decreased marginally – contrast -
ing with lending reported by all banks as part 
of the banking statistics  – demand for con -
sumer loans increased slightly, again in contrast 
with the banking statistics as a whole. Further -
more, survey participants reported that the sus -
tained trend towards growth in demand for 
housing loans since the beginning of the sover -
eign debt crisis continued in the third quarter 
of 2012. Banks attributed this primarily to the 
continued highly optimistic outlook on the 
housing market, persistently strong consumer 
confidence as well as low interest rates.German banks’ 
credit standards vis-à-vis busi-nesses tightened slightlyNoticeable stiff-ening in stand-ards for private housing loans
Trend increase  
in demand for 
private housing loans continuesLoans of German banks toselected sectors
1 Year-on-year  rate of change.  2 Non-financial  corporations 
and quasi-corporations.
Deutsche Bundesbank2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 201221012345
––+++++Growth contributions in percentage pointsSeasonally adjusted, end-of-quarter data
HouseholdsFinancial corporations
Non-financial corporations 2Growth rate 1 in %Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2012  
38

Banking conditions in Germany
1 New  business.  According  to harmonised  MFI interest  rate statistics.  2 According  to the Bank  Lending  Survey,  difference  between  the 
number  of respondents  reporting  “tightened  considerably”  and “tightened  somewhat”  and the number  of respondents  reporting 
“eased somewhat” and “eased considerably” as a percentage of the responses given. 3 Expectations for 2012 Q4.
Deutsche Bundesbank04 05 06 07 08 09 10 11 20123.03.54.04.55.05.56.06.57.07.58.08.59.0
–300+30
–300+30
–60–300+30+60
–60–300+30
2004 05 06 07 08 09 10 11 122.02.53.03.54.04.55.05.56.06.5
3003060
–++
9060300306090
–––+++Credit to non-financial corporations
%pa
%%% pa
%%
Riskier loans
Average loansAverage loansRiskier loans
%%
Average loansChange in loan margins 2 for loans for ...
Change in loan margins 2
for loans to enterprises... with an initial rate fixation of
    over 1 year and up to 5 yearsBank interest rate for consumer credit1...
... with an initial rate fixation of
    over 5 years
... consumer credit... up to    €1 million
3
Riskier loansBank interest rates for loans to enterprises1...
... with an initial rate
    fixation of up
    to 1 year ...
... consumer credit3.03.54.04.55.05.5
... house purchase... up to €1 million
... over €1 million
3... over €1 million
... house purchaseBank interest rates
on loans for house purchase1
with an initial rate fixation ofover 10 years
Change in credit standards 2
for loans to enterprisesChange in credit standards 2 for loans for ...
3... with an initial rate fixation
    of over 5 years ...Credit to householdsDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2012  
39

The Bank Lending Survey contained two add -
itional questions regarding the impact of the 
financial and sovereign debt crisis on the banks’ 
funding conditions and credit standards. The 
institutions participating in the survey reported 
that their funding situation showed a distinct 
improvement overall in the third quarter. This 
was attributed primarily to the favourable de -
velopment in short-term deposits as well as in 
medium to long-term debt securities. Further -
more, banks active in this area reported a con -
siderable recovery in the securitisation market 
for corporate and housing loans. According to 
the survey participants, only refinancing using 
longer-term customer deposits was more diffi -
cult than in the previous quarter. By contrast, 
the sovereign debt crisis had no impact on the 
German banks’ funding situation or credit 
standards in the previous quarter.
The euro area, too, saw an overall tightening of 
credit standards in the third quarter. This was 
due both to restrictive bank-related factors and 
to a deterioration in the institutions’ perception 
of risk. At the same time, demand as reported 
by the institutions participating in the October 
survey fell once again across all surveyed sec -
tors, although official statistics indicated a 
slight rise in loans for house purchase in the euro area. In addition, European institutions re -
ported an overall improvement in their funding 
situation, which was clearly noticeable in me -
dium to long-term bank debt securities. In con -
trast, the sovereign debt crisis only had a 
slightly negative effect on funding conditions, 
which, however, moderated slightly compared 
with the previous quarter. By and large, the cri -
sis had no impact on credit standards.
The third quarter saw a renewed decline in 
bank lending rates across almost all business 
areas, maturities and volumes, thus reflecting 
the general downward trend in interest rates 
on the money and capital markets. Interest 
rates for long-term loans to corporations stood 
at 3.0% for small-scale loans and at 2.9% for 
large-scale loans; this was roughly 20 basis 
points lower than at the end of June. In add -
ition, conditions for private loans for house 
purchase with an initial rate fixation period of 
over ten years fell once again by 14 basis 
points, reaching a new record low of 3.0% 
since the statistics were introduced in 2003. 
Long-term consumer loans were also more fa -
vourably priced: the interest rate fell by 8 basis 
points to 7.6% compared with the previous 
quarter.Special ques-
tions on the funding  situation 
and  effects of 
the sovereign 
debt crisis
Lending policies 
in the euro area tightenedBank interest 
rates in Ger-
many down 
againDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2012  
40

Financial markets
Financial market setting
Since the middle of the year, the international 
financial markets have been torn between eco -
nomic concerns and the sovereign debt crisis 
on the one hand and the announcement of 
further monetary policy measures on the other. 
On the bond markets, yields of government 
bonds mostly declined overall, a trend that was 
driven, not least, by expectations that central 
bank interest rates would remain persistently 
low and by the bond purchase programmes 
run by several central banks. By contrast, mar -
ket participants’ concerns about the sustain -
ability of government finances in some coun -
tries and about the nexus between government 
and bank risks receded, although urgent prob -
lems, such as the “fiscal cliff” in the United 
States and Greece’s acute financial needs, still 
need to be resolved. Against the backdrop of 
unfavourable company reports and growth 
prospects that remain gloomy in spite of the 
monetary stimuli, the international equity mar -
kets have moved unevenly since the middle of 
the year. While share prices lost a little ground 
in Japan and the United States, they increased 
on the European equity markets. The effective 
euro exchange rate experienced some fluctu -
ation during the period under review but re -
mained largely unchanged against its rate at 
the end of June.
Exchange rates
The euro’s bilateral performance against other 
key currencies was somewhat mixed in the 
summer months. At the beginning of the third 
quarter, the single currency initially continued 
the downward path it had followed in the pre -
ceding months; during July, the euro dropped 
to just under US$1.21, its lowest level against 
the dollar since June 2010. During this period, 
the smouldering sovereign debt crisis in the 
euro area and the closely related strong aver -sion to risk among market participants put 
pressure on the euro, benefiting the dollar as a 
widely respected investment currency.
Added to this, the reduction in the main finan -
cing rate to a record low made the euro area 
less attractive than other international markets 
in the eyes of foreign investors. Furthermore, 
the announcement, expected among market 
players, that the US Federal Reserve would 
launch further expansionary measures initially 
failed to materialise, thereby placing further 
pressure on the euro.
At the end of July, however, the euro embarked 
on a clear upward trend, prompted by ECB 
President Mario Draghi’s remarks that the ECB 
would do whatever it takes to preserve the 
euro. Furthermore, Italy’s Prime Minister Mario 
Monti won another confidence vote in the Ital -
ian parliament. This alleviated the acute con -
cerns evident in the financial markets. The re -
sulting drop in risk aversion boosted the price 
of the single currency. Weaker-than-expected 
economic data for the euro area only briefly 
interrupted the upswing. The decision by the 
Governing Council of the ECB to engage in 
bond purchases that are, in principle, unlimited 
(outright monetary transactions, or OMTs) gave 
the euro further impetus. Moreover, following 
the publication of the minutes of a US Federal 
Reserve meeting, the number of market partici -
pants who anticipated a further easing in US 
monetary policy increased again. The US cen -
tral bank indeed decided to launch a third bond 
purchase programme (QE3) in mid-September; 
it also extended its pledge to keep interest 
rates at a record low until the middle of 2015. 
By this time, the euro had appreciated by al -
most 8½% compared to the two-year low re -
corded in July. The euro-dollar rate then moved 
sideways initially, hovering around the 
US$1.30 per euro mark. Uncertainty as to 
whether, and if so, in what form, Spain would 
seek assistance from the ESM impacted on the Financial mar-
kets influenced by announce-ment of monet -
ary policy meas-ures
Euro rises 
against the US dollar on balance …… but first hits a two-year 
low …
… before appre-
ciating signifi-cantly thanks to easing tensions and monetary policy measuresDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2012  
41

value of the euro, but this was counteracted by 
growing concerns over the fallout of the “fiscal 
cliff” looming in the United States. The debate 
over further austerity measures in Greece re -
cently caused the markets to again focus more 
strongly on the sovereign debt crisis in the euro 
area, and thus renewed the pressure on the 
single currency. As this report went to press, 
the euro stood at US$1.28, 1½% up on its level 
at the end of the second quarter.
The euro’s gains against the yen during the 
summer months were slightly more pro -
nounced. As a “safe haven” currency, the yen 
had presumably previously benefited from the sovereign debt crisis in the euro area to an 
even greater extent than the dollar. The euro 
received a boost against the yen from growing 
signs of an economic slowdown in Japan, 
greater market expectations of monetary policy 
easing and of further interventions on the for -
eign exchange markets by the Bank of Japan to 
temper the value of the yen. In addition, the 
conflict between Japan and China that had 
begun as a dispute over a group of islands 
came to a head and risked becoming a trade 
war. At the end of the period under review, the 
euro stood at ¥104, which was around 3½% 
up on its level at the end of June.
As this report went to press, the euro was vir -
tually unchanged against the pound sterling 
compared with the end of the second quarter. 
Countervailing factors balanced each other 
out: the British currency, too, was hit by dwin -
dling “safe haven” inflows but it was buoyed 
by the announcement of better-than-expected 
growth figures for the UK. The pound is also 
likely to have benefited from shifts in the Swiss 
National Bank’s foreign reserve asset portfolio. 
Latterly, the euro was trading at £0.81 against 
the pound.
Despite marked fluctuation during the summer 
months, the euro’s effective external value 
against the currencies of the euro area’s 20 
largest trading partners is virtually unchanged, 
on balance, compared with the end of June. At 
last count, the single currency was around 
2½% down on the beginning of the year and 
6% below its level at the launch of monetary 
union. In real terms, ie taking account of the 
simultaneous inflation differentials between 
the euro area and its major trading partners, 
the effective euro exchange rate was roughly 
at its long-term average when this report went 
to press. This indicates that the price competi -
tiveness of euro-area exporters is broadly neu -
tral in historical terms.Euro also appre-
ciated against the yen, which came under additional pres-sure from the conflict between Japan and China …
… but remained 
virtually un-changed against the pound …
… and in 
 effective termsExchange rate of the euro
1 Exchange  rate at the start  of monetary  union  on 4 Janu-
ary 1999.  2 As  calculated  by the ECB against  the currencies  of 
20 countries.
Deutsche BundesbankJASONDJFMAMJJASOND
2011 20121.201.301.401.50
95100110120130140
0.700.750.800.850.900.95
95100105110115Daily data; log scale
US$
¥
£against the ...
... US dollar
US$1.1789 1
... yen
¥133.73 1
... pound sterling
£0.7111 1
Nominal effective exchange rate 2
1999 Q1 = 100
103.11 1Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2012  
42

Securities markets and 
 portfolio transactions
Sandwiched between economic risks, the ten -
sion emanating from the sovereign debt crisis 
and supportive monetary policy, the yields of 
US, German and Japanese ten-year govern -
ment bonds have been rather volatile since 
mid-year. The US Federal Reserve, with its third 
round of quantitative easing (QE3), and the 
Bank of Japan, which expanded its bond pur -
chase programme yet again, sought to stimu -
late the economy – in the US through portfolio 
balance effects based on purchases of 
 mortgage-backed securities, and in Japan 
through the acquisition of government and 
corporate bonds. By contrast, the Eurosystem’s 
outright monetary transactions, which have 
not yet been put to use, aim to combat disrup -
tions in the monetary transmission mechanism 
caused by divergent yield trends in the euro 
area.
While uncertainty over economic and financial 
market developments in the summer drove in -
vestors into what was regarded as the “safe 
haven” of liquid US and German government 
bonds, thus diminishing their yields, fears about 
the sustainability of government finances in 
some euro-area countries caused yields on 
these countries’ sovereign debt to jump signifi -
cantly. The monetary policy measures taken 
kept “safe haven” inflows in check and, for a 
period, sent long-term interest rates higher for 
core euro-area debt and US Treasuries alike. On 
balance, yields of US, German and Japanese 
ten-year government bonds in mid-November 
were between five (United States) and 20 basis 
points (Germany) lower than at the end of 
June.
Spreads between ten-year government bonds 
within the euro area narrowed considerably 
compared to the end of the second quarter of 
2012. Both the interest rate dispersion of 
longer-dated government bonds in the euro 
area and the GDP-weighted yield spread of 
government bonds of other euro-area coun -tries over German Bunds with matched matur -
ities were down by 226 and 87 basis points 
respectively on mid-2012. However, at 485 and 
285 basis points respectively, they were still sig -
nificantly above their five-year average. Once 
OMTs were announced, capital market partici -
pants accepted lower yields for bonds of per -
ipheral countries, much as they had in the 
wake of the long-term refinancing operations 
(LTROs) with a maturity of 36 months. Ultim -
ately, however, the significant spreads that still 
exist between countries such as Germany, the 
Netherlands and Finland on the one hand and 
Greece, Portugal and Spain on the other not 
only indicate a structural divergence in terms of 
competitiveness but doubtless also reflect the 
markets’ perception of each country’s willing -
ness to enforce a prudent revenue and expend -
iture policy.
The German yield curve, which is estimated 
using Federal securities, flattened slightly in the 
fourth quarter and shifted downwards again. International 
bond markets
Monetary policy 
measures con-
tain flight to 
safety …
… and narrow 
yield spreads in the euro area
German yield curve flatterInvestment activity in the German securities markets
€ billion
Item2011 2012
Q3 Q2 Q3
Debt securities
Residents –  4.6 – 19.5 13.5
Credit institutions – 34.0 – 21.6 –  4.9
of which
Foreign debt securities – 18.3 – 14.8 –  5.7
Deutsche Bundesbank 21.5 –  1.2 –  0.6
Other sectors 7.9 3.3 19.0
of which
Domestic debt securities 10.2 – 14.5 –  4.7
Non-residents 18.0 18.9 –  2.8
Shares
Residents –  7.9 – 14.2 5.0
Credit institutions – 12.0 – 11.4 7.9
of which
Domestic shares –  7.1 – 11.9 5.0
Non-banks 4.1 –  2.9 –  2.9
of which
Domestic shares 12.2 4.2 –  4.0
Non-residents –  4.7 9.2 0.6
Mutual fund sharesInvestment in specialised funds 5.6 15.8 21.1
Investment in funds open to the general public 0.2 –  0.4 0.0
of which
Share-based funds 0.7 –  1.4 –  0.5
Deutsche BundesbankDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2012  
43

In the near money market one-year segment, 
yields on German sovereign debt were back in 
negative territory recently (-4 basis points). At 
their current level of 1.3%, long-term yields on 
German government bonds are also slightly 
down on the end of the first half of the year. 
Inflation expectations for the European Har -
monised Index of Consumer Prices excluding 
tobacco, which are derived from a comparison 
of inflation-linked and nominal bonds, rose 
sharply in July and August before falling back 
again. As this report went to press, the break-
even forward inflation rate from five years to 
ten years stood at 2.1%, which is slightly down 
on its level at the end of June. The forward in -
flation rate extracted from inflation swaps for 
five to ten years on the same price index 
showed a similar trend.
Forward and break-even inflation rates reflect 
the inflation expectations of players on the 
bond and swap markets overall. They also 
show changes in the liquidity and risk pre -
miums contained in financial market instru -
ments. Breaking down the aggregate expect -
ations, ie the mean value, by way of a probabil -
ity distribution across various expected inflation 
rates allows conclusions to be drawn about 
how uncertain market participants are about 
future inflation rate outturns. The probability 
distribution is derived from market-traded infla -
tion options with different strike prices, assum -
ing risk neutrality.1 For the time horizon of the 
next five years, the probability mass was seen 
to shift into expected inflation outturns of more 
than 1% in the reporting period. Added to this, 
expectations of deflation scenarios materialis -
ing in this period declined sharply. Increased 
expectations that inflation rates would exceed 
2% per year were also observed, although at a 
probability level of a third, they were not dom -
inant; moreover, they were concentrated just 
above the 2% mark. When interpreting the 
changes, account should be taken of the fact Probability 
 distribution of  expected infla-tion ratesYield spreads in the euro area
Sources:  Thomson  Reuters  and  Bundesbank  calculations. 
1 Greek  bond  exchange  (PSI)  on 9 March  2012.  2 Standard 
deviation of yield spreads of euro-area government bonds.
Deutsche Bundesbank2009 2010 2011 201202004006008001,0001,2001,4001,600
02004006008001,0001,200Basis points, daily data
Spread of ten-year
government bondsagainst Bunds
Dispersion of yield spreads
 2
GDP weightedUnweightedItaly
SpainIrelandPortugalGreece
(Scale reduced)
1
05001,0001,5002,0002,5003,0003,5004,000
1 See D Breeden and R Litzenberger (1978), Prices of state-
contingent claims implicit in option prices, Journal of Busi -
ness, Vol 51, p 621ff.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2012  
44

that inflation option prices are subject to the 
same fluctuations that financial market prices 
generally show. Nonetheless, it would appear 
to be useful and necessary to continue to care -
fully observe measures that offer an insight into 
market participants’ inflation expectations on a 
disaggregated level as well, since the discerned 
shift in probability distribution occurred during 
a period in which growth expectations tended 
to diminish somewhat.
Yields on investment-grade European corpor -
ate bonds were down on the end of the second 
quarter of 2012. At last count, corporate bonds 
with a residual maturity of seven to ten years 
and a BBB rating were yielding 5.2% for finan -
cial corporations and 3.1% for industrial enter -
prises, and were thus well below their respect -
ive five-year averages.2 The corporate bond 
spread over German Bunds narrowed, as did 
credit default swap premiums (iTraxx). In this 
setting, larger European enterprises, in particu -
lar, raised funding on the capital markets via 
new issues. Commercial data providers re -
ported that the gross issuance volume in the 
euro area between August and October was 
more than twice as high as in the prior-year 
period.3
Despite declining yields, capital-raising on the 
German bond market remained subdued in the 
third quarter, however. The gross issuance vol -
ume amounted to €343½ billion, which was 
slightly up on the figure for the previous quar -
ter. After deducting the higher redemptions 
and taking account of changes in issuers’ hold -
ings of their own bonds, however, net redemp -
tions of debt securities came to €7 billion. For -
eign borrowers, meanwhile, placed debt secur -
ities worth €17½ billion on the German mar -
ket. Thus, funds totalling €10½ billion were 
raised on the German bond market in the re -
porting period.Financing condi-
tions for enter-prises improvedInflation expectations based onfinancial market prices
Sources:  BGC  Partners,  Bloomberg,  EuroMTS  and Bundesbank 
calculations.  1 Excluding  tobacco.  2 Derived  from  the fixed  in-
terest  rate of inflation  swaps  that is exchanged  for the annual 
realised  inflation  rates  of the next  five or ten years.  3 Derived 
from  separately  estimated  yield  curves  of German  and French 
inflation-linked  and maturity-matched  nominal  bonds  which 
are subsequently  aggregated  using  GDP  weights.  4 The  meth-
od used  to extract  and interpret  the probability  distribution  is 
discussed  in D Breeden  and R Litzenberger  (1978),  Prices  of 
state-contingent  claims  implicit  in option  prices,  Journal  of 
Business,  Vol 51,  p 621  ff, and in T Smith  (2012),  Option-im-
plied  probability  distributions  for future  inflation,  Bank  of Eng-
land,  Quarterly  Bulletin  2012Q3,  p 224 ff.  No data  are avail-
able for strike rates above or below the values shown here.
Deutsche BundesbankASOND JFMAM JJASOND
2011 20121.51.82.12.42.73.0% pa
051015202530Five to ten-year forward
break-even inflation rates
for the HICP 1 derived from ...
Daily data
... inflation swaps 2
... bonds 3
+5 to
+5,5%+4 to<+5%+3 to<+4%+2 to<+3%+1 to<+2%0 to<+1%-1 to<0%-2 to<-1%Probability distribution 4 for an
expected inflation outturn (HICP 1 )
on average over the next five years%
14 November 201229 June 2012
Inflation option strike rates
2 This is based on yields on corporate bonds included in 
the different rating grades of the iBoxx bond indices.
3 Analysis of Bloomberg and Dealogic issuance data.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2012  
45

The public sector raised €14½ billion on the 
bond market in the third quarter of 2012, com -
pared with €23 billion in the preceding three-
month period. Central government (including 
the resolution agency ascribed to it for statis -
tical purposes) issued debt securities worth 
€13½ billion in net terms. Central government 
itself issued mainly five-year Federal notes 
(Bobls) (€13½ billion), and to a lesser extent 
30-year Federal bonds (Bunds) (€3 billion). This 
contrasted with net redemptions of ten-year 
Bunds totalling €14 billion. On a smaller scale, 
two-year Federal Treasury notes ( Schätze ) as 
well as Federal Treasury discount paper (Bubills) 
were redeemed in the amount of €4 billion and €3 billion respectively. The German state gov -
ernments tapped the capital market for €1 bil -
lion net in the quarter under review.
Domestic enterprises redeemed domestically is -
sued debt securities for €2 billion net between 
July and September. The net redemptions were 
attributable exclusively to non-monetary finan -
cial intermediaries while non-financial corpor -
ations capitalised on the favourable financial 
market conditions by selling debt securities (€7 
billion net).
Domestic credit institutions likewise took ad -
vantage of their positive financial situation and 
further curtailed their capital market debt in the 
third quarter of 2012, paying down €19½ bil -
lion. Above all, they redeemed “other bank 
bonds” (€14 billion) as well as public Pfand -
briefe  (€5 billion) and debt securities of special -
ised credit institutions (€2 billion). These re -
demptions were partly offset by net issuance of 
mortgage Pfandbriefe amounting to €2 billion.
Only domestic non-banks were active as buyers 
between July and September, adding debt in -
struments totalling €19 billion to their port -
folios. These were exclusively foreign debt se -
curities on balance. By contrast, domestic credit 
institutions and foreign investors disposed of 
debt securities amounting to €5 billion and €3 
billion respectively.
The international equity markets have seen 
mixed developments since the middle of the 
year. Shares initially benefited from the an -
nouncement of further monetary easing by a 
number of central banks. Combined with the ex -
pected portfolio effects of the central banks’ ac -
tual securities purchases, the Fed’s monetary 
policy signal that it would keep key interest rates 
low over the medium term might well have 
played a significant role here. However, un -
favourable company reports and gloomy growth 
expectations for 2013 increasingly placed a 
strain on the equity markets. On balance, since 
the end of June the CDAX has risen by 9.5% and 
the Euro Stoxx by 7.4%. By contrast, the Nikkei Public sector 
borrowingNet redemptions 
of corporate 
bonds
Net redemptions 
by credit institu-tions
Purchase of debt 
securities
Developments in 
equity markets mixedFinancing conditions for euro-area enterprises
Sources:  Bloomberg  and Thomson  Reuters.  1 BBB-rated  bonds 
with a residual maturity of seven to ten years.
Deutsche Bundesbank2008 2009 2010 2011 201236912151821242730
50100150200250300350Weekly averages
%
Basis pointsYields 1
Credit default swap premiums
iTraxx Europe
Financials
iTraxx Europe 125iTraxx Europe
Non-FinancialsiBoxx Non-FinancialsiBoxx Financials
iBoxxCorporatesDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2012  
46

and the S&P 500 had lost 2.0% and 0.6% re -
spectively by the time this report went to press.
Share prices in Europe were once again driven 
by bank shares, which have gained by 16% since 
the end of June, thus performing more than 
twice as well as the market as a whole (7.4%). 
This most likely reflects market players’ expect -
ations that the decline in yields on sovereign 
bonds issued by peripheral countries will ultim -
ately provide balance sheet relief for banks with 
extensive investments in this kind of paper. A 
glance at bank share prices shows that investors 
nonetheless made a distinction between the in -
dividual countries: shares of Spanish banks, 
some of which had been downgraded and hit 
hard by the recessionary backdrop, recovered 
less strongly than the euro-area average.
Risk aversion among investors declined, mirror -
ing the price gains on the European equity mar -
kets and the increased price-earnings ratio. Be -
tween June and October, the implied equity risk 
premium for investments in European shares 
dropped by around one percentage point; as 
this report went to press, it thus stood at its low -
est level since April of this year. Price uncertainty 
on the equity market – measured in terms of the 
implied volatility of stock options – also headed 
downwards, returning to its level in the second 
quarter. However, implied equity risk premiums 
are still relatively high from a longer-term per -
spective, indicating that equity market partici -
pants are continuing to exercise caution.
Issuing activity on the German equity market 
was once again rather muted in the third quar -
ter. Domestic enterprises issued €1½ billion 
worth of new shares, the majority of which 
were listed equities. The volume of foreign 
shares on the German market rose by €4 billion 
in the same period. Equities were bought al -
most entirely by domestic credit institutions (€8 
billion), which were primarily net buyers of do -
mestic stocks. Foreign portfolio investors pur -
chased domestic equities worth €½ billion 
while resident non-banks offloaded shares in 
the amount of €3 billion.During the reporting period, domestic mutual 
funds recorded net inflows of €21 billion, as 
against €15½ billion in the previous three 
months. On balance, the inflows were chan -
nelled exclusively to specialised funds reserved 
for institutional investors (€21 billion). Among 
funds open to the general public, only open-
end real estate funds were able to attract new 
subscriptions to the value of €1 billion. Con -
versely, fund units were mostly redeemed by 
equity and money market funds (€½ billion in 
each case). Mutual funds distributed by foreign 
companies on the German market recorded 
net inflows totalling €6½ billion. Domestic 
non-banks proved to be the main net buyers, Euro-area share 
prices deter-mined by bank shares
Risk aversion 
and price uncer-tainty on down-ward path in the euro area
Low level of 
stock market fundingSales and  purchases of mutual fund sharesEquity market
Sources:  Thomson  Reuters  and Bundesbank  calculations. 
1 End-of-month  levels;  measure  of the risk premium  deman-
ded by investors.  Calculated  from  three-stage  dividend  dis-
count  model  using  three  to five-year  IBES expectations  of profit 
growth  and long-term  GDP  growth  expectations  (consensus 
forecast).  2 Expected  future  volatility,  calculated  from  prices  of 
options on the Euro Stoxx.
Deutsche BundesbankEuro Stoxx
banks
Lin scale
Equity risk premiums 1
Euro StoxxEuro Stoxx
Euro Stoxx
banks%31 December 2007 = 100, log scale
Stock price indicesWeekly averages
% Implied volatility of the Euro Stoxx 220305075100
0510152025
10203040506070
2008 2009 2010 2011 2012Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2012  
47

adding €27½ billion worth of mutual fund 
shares to their portfolios. Domestic credit insti -
tutions acquired fund units worth €1½ billion 
net. Both groups were interested primarily in 
German mutual fund shares. Foreign investors, 
meanwhile, shed German fund units amount -
ing to €1 billion.
Direct investment
As with cross-border portfolio investment, 
which saw net outflows amounting to €29½ 
billion in the third quarter of 2012, there were 
also net capital exports in the direct investment 
account. At €10½ billion, they were roughly 
double the size of prior-quarter net capital ex -
ports (€5½ billion).
The capital outflows can be attributed mainly 
to domestic enterprises which made direct in -
vestments worth €7 billion outside Germany. 
They provided their foreign affiliates with con -
siderably more equity capital (€11 billion com -
pared with €1 billion in the second quarter) 
and reinvested earnings (€4½ billion). By con -
trast, there were capital inflows worth €9 bil -
lion in the form of intra-group credit transac -
tions which related primarily to capital raised 
via foreign affiliates. Holding companies were 
particularly active abroad during the reporting 
period.
Foreign direct investors withdrew a net €3 bil -
lion in funds from Germany. The redemption of 
long-term financial loans which domestic affili -
ates had previously received from their parent 
companies was a contributory factor here. By 
contrast, foreign proprietors provided their 
subsidiaries in Germany with additional equity 
capital and reinvested a limited volume of earn -
ings (€1 billion together). All in all, the direct 
investment account recorded outflows worth 
€9½ billion from Germany to Belgium, while 
enterprises from the UK and France, in particu -
lar, provided funding for their German affiliates 
in the amount of €2½ billion and €2 billion re -
spectively.Direct invest -
ment records 
outflows
Increased 
 German direct investment abroad
Foreign investors 
withdraw capital from GermanyMajor items of the balance of payments
€ billion
Item2011 2012
Q3 Q2 Q3
I Current account 1, 2 + 33.4 + 37.6 + 40.5
Foreign trade 1, 3 r + 39.6 r + 48.0 + 50.0
Services 1 –  6.8 –  0.1 –  6.9
Income 1 + 16.4 +  5.5 + 14.9
Current transfers 1 –  9.6 –  6.7 –  9.4
II Capital transfers 1, 4 +  0.1 +  0.4 +  0.1
III Financial account 1
(Net capital exports: –) – 16.2 – 58.3 – 56.7
1 Direct investment +  3.7 –  5.4 – 10.3
German investment 
abroad –  6.1 –  9.4 –  7.0
Foreign investment
in Germany +  9.7 +  4.0 –  3.2
2 Portfolio investment + 32.0 + 26.2 – 29.7
German investment abroad + 14.3 +  0.4 – 26.4
Shares + 11.5 –  1.4 –  2.4
Mutual fund shares +  3.9 +  3.4 –  6.4
Debt securities –  1.1 –  1.6 – 17.6
Bonds and notes
5 +  3.0 –  3.3 – 17.4
of which
Euro-denominated 
bonds and notes +  4.3 –  4.1 – 15.6
Money market  instruments –  4.1 +  1.7 –  0.2
Foreign investmentin Germany + 17.7 + 25.8 –  3.3
Shares –  4.2 +  9.3 +  0.6
Mutual fund shares +  3.9 –  2.4 –  1.1
Debt securities + 18.0 + 18.9 –  2.8
Bonds and notes
5 +  4.7 + 12.0 + 11.9
of which
Public bonds and 
notes +  9.1 + 23.1 + 12.3
Money market  instruments + 13.2 +  6.9 – 14.7
3 Financial derivatives
6 –  7.7 –  7.6 –  3.5
4 Other investment 7 – 43.5 – 70.8 – 13.2
Monetary fi  nancial
institutions 8 + 56.2 – 12.7 – 36.4
of which short-term + 66.6 – 16.7 – 43.2
Enterprises and
households –  6.4 –  1.3 –  8.2
of which short-term –  5.8 –  2.4 –  3.3
General government + 16.7 – 11.0 – 12.6
of which short-term + 15.4 – 11.9 – 14.1
Bundesbank – 110.0 – 45.7 + 44.0
5 Change in reserve assets 
at transaction values ( increase: –)
9 –  0.6 –  0.8 –  0.1
IV Errors and omissions – 17.3 + 20.3 + 16.2
1  Balance. 2  Including supplementary trade items. 3  Special 
trade according to the offi   cial foreign trade statistics (source: 
Federal Statistical Offi   ce). 4 Including the acquisition/disposal of non-produced non-fi  nancial assets. 5 Original maturity of more 
than one year. 6 Securitised and non-securitised options as well 
as fi  nancial futures contracts. 7  Includes fi  nancial and trade credits, bank deposits and other assets. 8 Excluding the Bundes-bank. 9 Excluding allocation of SDRs and excluding changes due 
to value adjustments.
Deutsche BundesbankDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2012  
48

Recent developments with regard to TARGET2 balances
Balances within the European large-value 
payment system TARGET2 have stabilised in 
the past few months, after expanding sig-
nifi  cantly in the fi  rst half of 2012 when they 
rose by more than €200 billion. Since June 
they have averaged slightly above the 
amount of €1,000 billion.1 During the same 
period, the Bundesbank’s claims under the 
TARGET2 payment system have hovered in 
the region of approximately €740 billion; at the end of October 2012 they amounted to 
€719 billion. However, the overall stabilisa-
tion observed has, at times, been accom-
panied by considerable daily fl  uctuations.
In the course of the fi  nancial and sovereign 
debt crisis there have been several phases 
when TARGET2 balances temporarily 
stopped growing or even decreased, for ex-
ample in 2009 and during the fi  rst half of 
2011. However, these periods were each followed by a phase of renewed growth. For this reason, not too much importance 
should be assigned to the sideways motion 
which has persisted since the middle of 
2012. Nevertheless, this development high-
lights the fact that the additional external funding requirements of peripheral coun-tries, in particular, are no longer primarily being covered by national central banks. Countries receiving fi  nancial aid from the 
assistance programmes, above all, have not recorded any noticeable rises in their (nega-tive) TARGET2 balances for some time now. In fact, the Irish central bank has consider-
ably reduced its liabilities to the ECB since 
these peaked at the end of 2010. A similar 
picture holds for other euro-area countries 
which attracted the attention of the fi  nan-
cial markets in the fi  rst half of 2012 and greatly contributed to the expanding TARGET2 balances witnessed during this 
period, but which have seen a contraction 
of their TARGET2 liabilities of late.
1 This represents the sum of all national central banks’ 
TARGET2 claims on the ECB. These claims correspond 
to the amount arising from the sum of all TARGET2 
 liabilities.Deutsche Bundesbank2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 20121000100200300400500600700800
–++++++++Bundesbank's TARGET2 balance
Size of balance
Month-on-month
change€ billionDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2012  
49

Economic conditions in Germany
Macroeconomic situation
Economic growth weakened further in the 
summer. According to the Federal Statistical Of -
fice’s flash estimate, quarter-on-quarter growth 
in real gross domestic product (GDP) was 0.2% 
in the third quarter of 2012 after seasonal and 
calendar adjustment, compared with increases 
of 0.3% in the second quarter and 0.5% in the 
first quarter. In the period under review, the 
German economy made no more than an isol -
ated showing of the strengths which had 
broadly characterised it in the strong recovery 
period of 2010 and 2011. Exports, for instance, 
expanded perceptibly despite the cooling in the 
world economy, principally on account of a 
strong pick-up in foreign demand for motor ve -
hicles. Domestic demand continued to receive 
stimuli from residential construction and house -
hold consumer spending. This partial impetus has been enough so far to keep overall eco -
nomic output within the range of normal cap -
acity utilisation.
The economy currently presents a mixed pic -
ture overall, which is very likely to become even 
gloomier towards the end of the year. The un -
certainties emanating from the smouldering 
sovereign debt crisis in the euro area are just as 
important in this context as the mixed eco -
nomic signals from other regions of the world. 
Although households are still benefiting from 
the favourable labour market situation and 
considerable increases in income, the economic 
uncertainties are also clearly reflected in the 
outlook.
All in all, foreign trade in the second half of 
2012 has been marked by the pattern that pre -
vailed in the first half of the year, with export 
growth largely reliant on non-euro-area coun -
tries, whereas the euro-area countries are 
showing a growth lead in imports, which are 
expanding rather moderately overall. More -
over, there has been a further considerable in -
crease in the overall German trade surplus. 
Even so, the reduction in the trade surplus with 
euro-area partner countries came to a halt, be -
cause German firms were selling perceptibly 
more goods in the euro area again in July and 
August following a lean period of nine months. 
Significant growth in exports was again 
achieved in traditional sales markets such as 
the USA, Japan and the United Kingdom. By 
contrast, performance in exports to central and 
eastern European countries and Russia was ra -
ther weak. This was also true of the new indus -
trial economies in Asia and, in particular, China.
However, growth in exports in the quarter 
under review was generated not by a broad ex -
pansion in foreign demand across various cat -
egories of goods, but by the extraordinary ex -
port success enjoyed by German car manufac -
turers in the summer months. They achieved Further slow-
down in  economic growth … … and gloomier outlook
Impetus from 
foreign trade
Exports sus-
tained by motor vehicle salesOverall output
Deutsche Bundesbank2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012102104106108110112
–8–6–4–20+2+4+62005 = 100, price and seasonally adjusted
Log scale
GDP
%
Lin scale
Year-on-year changeDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2012  
50

this solely outside the euro area, with automo -
tive exports to the USA playing a prominent 
role. While producers of information and com -
munication technology (ICT) products and elec -
trical equipment recorded a small increase in 
exports in July and August, manufacturers of 
machinery and equipment were already suffer -
ing a slight decline in export sales. In the inter -
mediate goods industries there is likely to have 
been, at most, a small increase in the third 
quarter. Manufacturers of consumer goods 
may have performed somewhat better.
In terms of imports, capital goods stood out 
during the reporting period. Apart from the 
fact that there were significantly more imports 
of motor vehicles and motor vehicle parts in 
July and August, a role was also played by the 
delivery of ships as well as aircraft and space -
craft to German customers. By contrast, con -
siderably less machinery was sourced from 
abroad. There was a somewhat stronger de -
mand for intermediate goods in the summer 
months, following the decline in the previous 
quarter. Whilst imports of consumer goods re -
mained unchanged, energy imports showed a 
sharp decline.
The trend weakness in corporate investment is 
likely to have continued in the third quarter. 
Firms’ investment plans were already becoming 
more cautious one year previously, when the 
economic upturn slowed down considerably in 
the wake of the escalating sovereign debt cri -
sis, and industry, in particular, had to accept 
cuts in the utilisation of production capacity. 
There is, at present, a lack of optimism about 
the likelihood of new economic impulses in the 
short term. In addition to the investment 
budgets, staffing levels are therefore also in -
creasingly undergoing a rethink. Thus, the re -
covery in capital investment, which began in 
impressive fashion in 2010 and continued in an 
attenuated form in 2011, was now not only 
halted in midstream but also suffered a consid -
erable setback at the end of the period under 
review. The investment ratio, which shows 
business investment in commercial machinery and equipment and construction in relation to 
enterprises’ value added and which serves as a 
measure for the cyclical component, fell back 
down to the longer-term average figure in the 
first half of 2012, after being clearly above it at 
the end of 2011. Up to that point, just under 
half of the decline due to the deep recession in 
late 2008 and early 2009 had been recovered. 
Enterprises’ current hesitancy to invest high -
lights the fact that favourable financing condi -
tions do not necessarily generate an expansion -
ary impulse if the investment climate is im -
paired by confidence effects caused by appre -
ciably gloomier expectations and a continuing 
high level of uncertainty.Imports charac-
terised by  large-volume deliveries
Corporate 
 investment still weak90100110120Underlying trends in foreign trade
1 Adjusted for the price indices for foreign trade.
Deutsche Bundesbank2008 2009 2010 2011 2012Jul-
Aug95100110120130140
Jul-
Aug
100110120130Seasonally adjusted, quarterly
To non-euro-area countries
To euro-area countries2005 = 100, log scale
Exports of goods
price-adjusted 1
Total
0204060Lin scaleForeign trade balanceImports of goodsprice-adjusted
 1100110120130140150
€ bnDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2012  
51

By contrast, decidedly favourable interest rate 
conditions and the uncertain financial market 
climate are giving a clear boost to housing con -
struction. The continued robust demand for 
residential property for both owner occupation 
and investment purposes is not only driving up 
housing prices but also providing further im -
petus to the construction sector. Public sector 
construction, on the other hand, has fallen far 
behind. In the first half of 2012, government 
infrastructure measures were one-seventh 
below the previous year’s figure in seasonally 
adjusted terms. As this mainly reflects the fact 
that lagged effects of the fiscal stimulus pack -
age at the turn of 2008-09 are petering out, it 
may be assumed that the reduced level shaped 
public sector construction investment in the re -
porting period, too.
According to a press release by the Federal 
Statistical Office, there was a seasonally ad -
justed increase in private consumption in the 
third quarter of 2012. As before, supporting 
factors included the positive labour market 
situation and sharp wage increases. Even 
though price increases have curtailed house -
holds’ real spending power per se , consumer 
expenditure has remained high. Consumers’ 
propensity to save declined, not least because 
of very low interest on credit balances. This is 
also shown by the survey findings of the con -
sumer research institution, Gesellschaft für 
Konsumforschung  (GfK). Nevertheless, retail 
sales declined somewhat in the third quarter in 
seasonally adjusted terms. The fact that there 
was no more than a slight decline in the num -
ber of new private passenger car registrations 
points to a continuing high level of consumer 
spending on the purchase of cars.
Sectoral trends
Seasonally adjusted industrial output rose only 
moderately by ½% in the third quarter com -
pared with spring. However, capital goods 
manufacturers sharply expanded their output 
again (+2¼%) on a quarterly average. A major Housing con-
struction still in forward gear, but public sector construction very depressed
Renewed 
growth in  private con-sumption
Moderate rise in 
industrial outputIndicators of industrial investment
1 2005  ratio  (at current  prices),  extrapolated  in line with  the 
change  factors  of the price-adjusted  ratio  (= ratio  of change 
factors  of private  gross  fixed  capital  formation  excluding  resid-
ential  buildings  and the real gross  value  added  of the business 
sector  excluding  real estate  activities,  all at previous  year’s 
prices).  2 As  a percentage  of normal  full capacity.  Quarterly  av-
erages.  3 Calculated  using  bearer  debt  securities  with  a matur-
ity of nine  to ten years  and survey-based  consumer  price  infla-
tion expectations  calculated  by Consensus  Forecasts.  4 Balance 
of “higher”  and “lower”  reports  as a percentage  of the sur-
veyed  enterprises.  Two  surveys  per year  until  2001,  sub-
sequently three surveys per year.
Deutsche Bundesbank1995 00 05 10 201217.017.518.018.519.019.520.020.5Quarterly
7073767982858891
20246
–
–30–20–100+10+20DIHK investment intentions 4Ex ante real interest rates 3ifo capacity utilisation rate
in manufacturing 2
AverageAverageIndustrial investment ratio1
(adjusted for seasonal and
calendar effects)
% p aDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2012  
52

part in this was played by production in the 
automotive industry, which rose by 6½%. This 
was assisted by the fact that some automotive 
plants did not interrupt production in the sum -
mer given the continuing high level of demand, 
particularly from abroad. If the automotive sec -
tor is excluded, output of capital goods re -
mained at the same level as in the previous 
quarter in seasonally adjusted terms. Whilst 
manufacturing in the mechanical engineering 
sector showed only a marginal decline, manu -
facturers of computers, electronic and optical 
products as well as electrical equipment re -
corded a distinct decrease of 1¾%. In the 
intermediate goods sector, output was a sea -
sonally adjusted 1¼% down on the quarter. 
Production of consumer goods, which had 
been in decline since the previous summer, 
went up by 1%, however.
The considerable decline in industrial output in 
September indicates that the fairly large vol -
ume of production in July and August, which 
was shaped by special factors, will not be 
matched in the short term. The prospect that 
neither domestic nor external demand will pick 
up dramatically in the coming months is likely 
to lead to further adjustments in industrial 
firms’ output. This is also borne out by the con -
siderable decline in manufacturing capacity 
utilisation, which, according to the Ifo surveys, 
enterprises expect for the final quarter of 2012. 
At 82% of full operational capacity utilisation, 
industry is clearly falling short of the longer-
term average, which can be interpreted as a 
measure of normal capacity utilisation. In terms 
of the reported decline and failing to match the 
longer-term sectoral average, the shortfall 
among producers of capital goods was larger 
than in the intermediate goods sector.
In the third quarter of 2012, seasonally ad -
justed construction output was ½% up on the 
second quarter, which was affected by 
weather-related catch-up effects. Civil engin -
eering activities showed a somewhat stronger 
increase than those in building construction. 
Construction activity remained decidedly buoy -ant overall and this is also reflected by the fact 
that, according to the Ifo Institute, capacity 
utilisation in construction machinery in the 
third quarter held up at the high level of the 
previous three-month period and there was an 
increase in the backlog of orders. After sea -
sonal adjustment, energy output increased 
markedly (+1¾%) in the summer compared 
with the second quarter.
The pace of economic activity in the services 
sector was more subdued in the third quarter. 
This is suggested by the business situation as -
sessments of service providers surveyed by the 
Ifo Institute and the Centre for European Eco -Industrial cap-
acity well below normal utilisa-tion
Construction 
 activity still strong, energy output higher Activity in the services sector somewhat more subduedOutput in industry andin construction
Deutsche Bundesbank2008 2009 2010 2011 2012Log scale
Industry
92100108116124
Lin scale
Year-on-year change–25–20–15–10–50+5+10+15
Lin scale
Year-on-year
change
94100108116124 Log scale
Construction
%
–15–10–50+5+10+15+20+25+30+35%2005 = 100, seasonally adjusted, quarterlyDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2012  
53

nomic Research (ZEW), which became some -
what less positive in the third quarter of 2012. 
The dampening of industrial activity may have 
affected the activities of service providers, 
which are closely interlinked with output in 
manufacturing. This is borne out, for example, 
by the fact that there was a slight seasonally 
adjusted decrease in the mileage of domestic 
heavy goods vehicles subject to tolls on motor -
ways.1 There were also slight decreases in the 
sales of the wholesale trade. Automotive trade 
sales remained at the level of the previous 
quarter. Consumption-related service providers 
were likewise not entirely immune to the gen -
eral deceleration either. Retail sales deterior -
ated somewhat. Hotels’ and restaurants’ turn -
over was up on the second-quarter level, how -
ever. Although construction-related service 
providers continued to benefit from the posi -
tive situation in the construction sector, there 
are no signs of positive stimuli either.
Employment  
and labour  market
The economic slowdown is increasingly leaving 
its mark in the labour market. During the sum -
mer, the expansion in employment came to a 
standstill,2 and there was a marked seasonally 
adjusted increase in unemployment. The cyc -
lical effect was the decisive factor in this. This is 
currently masking the fact that the German la -
bour market still has an exceptionally large ab -
sorption capacity given an ongoing high level 
of immigration, a trend rise in labour force par -
ticipation and marked caution with regard to 
the deployment of labour market measures.
On an average of the summer months, the sea -
sonally adjusted employment level in Germany 
was slightly up on the second quarter by 
39,000 persons, or 0.1%. This growth was due 
solely to the positive development in employ -
ment subject to social security contributions, 
whilst other forms of employment were declin -
ing. Taking July and August together, after sea -
sonal adjustment, around 65,000 additional jobs subject to social security contributions 
were filled. This corresponds to an increase of 
¼%. Further new jobs were created in the 
manufacturing and logistics sectors. The fact 
that the effective demand for labour is tending 
to stagnate in these sectors becomes clear, 
however, if the gain in permanent jobs subject 
to social security contributions is offset against 
the decline in the temporary employment sec -
tor, often in the cyclically sensitive sectors. The 
largest increase in employment was in some 
service sectors, including business-related ser -
vices, (excluding temporary agency employ -
ment), information and communication as well 
as healthcare with growth of more than ½% 
on the quarter. According to estimates by the 
Federal Statistical Office, total employment in 
September was down on the month in season -
ally adjusted terms.
In addition to the stronger activation of un -
employed persons and persons outside the la -
bour force, enterprises’ demand for labour to 
date has been covered mainly by the inflow of 
labour from abroad. In the current year, the mi -
gration surplus may considerably exceed the 
previous year’s figure of 279,000 persons. The 
figure for immigration was 135,000 higher Economic head-
wind reaches  labour market
Growth in em-
ployment grinds to a haltHigh immigra-tion this year  
to date
1 Since 1 August 2012, the motorway toll for heavy goods 
vehicles is generally also imposed on longer sections of 
road with at least four lanes and unidirectional traffic, dir -
ect motorway connection and without thoroughfares 
through towns and cities. Previously, only a few sections of 
trunk roads were subject to tolls. The data published by the 
Federal Office for Goods Transport make it possible to seg -
ment routes, covered on motorways or trunk roads by 
heavy goods vehicles subject to tolls. Using these allows 
the time series for mileage on motorways, which have 
been available since 2007, to be projected without a statis -
tical break. In addition, total mileage data on motorways 
and trunks roads are available from the reporting month of 
August 2012. The percentage of the route travelled on 
trunks roads is quite small; on an average of August and 
September, it was merely 2½%. The use of toll statistics in 
the economic analysis is addressed, for example, in Deut-
sche Bundesbank , Information content of toll statistics for 
economic analysis, Monthly Report, May 2010, pp 64-65, 
and R Döhrn (2011), Die Mautstatistik: Keine ‘Wunder -
waffe’ für die Konjunkturanalyse, Wirtschaftsdienst  91, 12, 
p 863ff (in German only).
2 Moreover, in its latest published data, the Federal Statis -
tical Office has revised downwards employment growth 
since the beginning of the year. According to new data, 
the increase in employment was a seasonally adjusted 
0.1% in the second quarter (previously 0.2%) compared 
with the preceding period.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2012  
54

than for emigration in the first half of 2011, 
with the provisional data of the Federal Statis -
tical Office showing the comparable balance 
this year at 182,000. With a share of roughly 
one-third, the eight central and east European 
EU member states (EU 8) are still the most sig -
nificant region of origin. In comparison with 
the period immediately after 1 May 2011, when 
nationals of these countries were granted com -
plete freedom of movement, immigration has 
receded only slightly. The influx of Romanian 
and Bulgarian citizens is substantial despite the 
fact that they have not been granted complete 
freedom of movement. The migration move -
ments between Germany and the south Euro -
pean peripheral euro-area countries are still 
such that they are tending to alleviate the 
sometimes very difficult labour markets in those 
countries. The migration surplus with regard to 
Greece, Italy, Spain and Portugal was 30,000 in 
the first half of 2012, which was more than 
twice as high as in the comparable period of 
2011.
There was an accelerated rise in unemploy -
ment in the third quarter of 2012, following 
only a slight increase in spring. After seasonal 
adjustment, the unemployment figure went up 
by 26,000 to 2.9 million. The unemployment 
rate remained unchanged at 6.8% during the 
reporting period. Here, it was evident that the 
high level of immigration and higher labour 
force participation led to an increase in the 
number of persons in work. The rise in official 
unemployment can be explained in mathemat -
ical terms by the seasonally adjusted 35,000 
increase in the number of unemployed persons 
claiming insurance benefits (SGB III) to 915,000. 
On account of the economic situation, not only 
was there a somewhat higher number of newly 
registered unemployed, the probability of find -
ing a new job also decreased. By contrast, up 
to September, there was a fall in the number of 
unemployed persons receiving the basic wel -
fare allowance. October 2012 saw a further 
marked rise in the overall official unemploy -
ment figure. The unemployment rate was 
6.9%.Marked increase 
in registered  unemploymentLabour market
1 Excluding  seasonal  jobs  and jobs  located  abroad.  2 From 
May  2009,  unemployed  excluding  persons  newly  registered  on 
the books of private employment agencies.
Deutsche Bundesbank2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012Oct39.540.040.541.041.5
26.527.027.528.028.529.0–5000+500+1,000
2.53.03.54.04.5
–1,000–5000+500OctSeasonally adjusted, quarterly
OctMillion
Jul-
AugMillion
Million200300400500Thou-
sand
Thou-
sand
Thou-
sand Year-on-year changeOfficially unemployed 2UnemployedTotalEmployed
Unsubsidised vacancies 1
(scale enlarged)Occupied positionsJobs subject to social security
contributionsYear-on-year changeDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2012  
55

The cyclical headwind will also shape the final 
quarter of 2012 and first three months of 2013. 
The Ifo employment barometer, which provides 
information on planned staffing levels in the 
business sector over the coming three months, 
fell sharply again in the third quarter of 2012. 
The Ifo Institute’s manager survey of August 
2012 indicates that it is mainly industrial enter -
prises which have a need to adjust.3 What is 
striking, moreover, is that it is larger enterprises 
(with more than 500 employees) which are 
thinking more of reducing the number of 
 temporary workers and allowing limited-term 
contracts to expire, whereas smaller and 
medium-sized firms want to make provision for 
the foreseeable smaller amount of work by 
working less overtime and running down work -
ing time accounts. The instrument of short-
time working will still be used only to a small 
extent in the immediate future. The number of 
applications for short-time work is still at an in -
significant level in macroeconomic terms, even 
though there was a clear rise in August and 
September. According to the autumn survey of 
the Association of German Chambers of Com -
merce and Industry (DIHK), companies’ hiring 
intentions for the next 12 months have slipped 
into neutral territory.
The survey results are consistent with the fact 
that there has been a marked seasonally ad -justed decline in both the level of vacancies 
and the number of newly registered vacancies. 
The number of vacancies for jobs subject to so -
cial security contributions fell by 15,000 on the 
quarter, although other business-related ser -
vices account for two-thirds of this decline. Va -
cancies of temporary employment agencies are 
recorded in this category. There were also 
fewer vacancies in manufacturing, construction 
and trade.
Wages and prices
In the second half of 2012, pay settlements at 
the cooperative banks and in the textile and 
clothing industry saw two agreements in small 
branches. This is striking mainly because, in 
both cases, the total volume involved was dis -
tinctly lower than in the settlements in the first 
half of the year.4 The overall substantial per -
centage pay increases in this year’s wage-
bargaining round are now being clearly re -
flected in the overall level of wages in the 
economy. According to the Bundesbank’s ne -
gotiated pay rate statistics, the year-on-year 
rate in negotiated rates of basic pay showed a 
further rise of 2.9% in the third quarter of 
2012, following 2.7% in the second quarter.5 
Negotiated rates of pay including all ancillary 
agreements, at +2.7% on the year, were also 
higher than in the second quarter (+2.6%). The 
upward trend in negotiated pay was more 
marked in the production sector than in the 
services sector. In the reporting period, actual Mainly larger 
 industrial enter-prises see need for adjustment
Fewer vacanciesContinued up-
ward movement in negotiated 
wagesNegotiated rates of pay
1 Excluding additional benefits and lump-sum payments.
Deutsche Bundesbank2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 201200.51.01.52.02.53.03.5Year-on-year percentage change, on monthly basis
Negotiated rates of pay,
total
Basic pay 1
Q1-Q3
3 Ifo Institute’s telephone survey covered 630 managers 
from the sectors of manufacturing, construction, the 
wholesale and retail trade, and services.
4 When interpreting the agreement for the textile and 
clothing industry, it should be borne in mind that major 
parts of this sector, such as the manufacture of technical 
textiles, have indeed benefited from the economic tailwind 
as a supplier, for example, of the automotive industry. The 
collective labour agreement takes account of the consider -
able heterogeneity within the industrial sector through nu -
merous elements of flexibility.
5 The Federal Statistical Office reports an increase of 3.2% 
in the summer for negotiated rates of basic pay, following 
2.2% in spring. Differences compared with the Bundes -
bank’s pay index also result from the fact that the Federal 
Statistical Office does not include civil servants in its index 
and reports only the first month of each quarter.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2012  
56

earnings are likely to have risen at the same 
pace as negotiated rates of pay.
Temporary employment agencies have to face 
an added double strain in terms of their costs. 
First, on 1 November 2012, the generally bind -
ing lower thresholds for the hourly wage in 
temporary employment were raised to €8.19 in 
western Germany (+3.8%) and €7.50 in eastern 
Germany including Berlin (+7%). Secondly, the 
collective settlement agreed in spring in the 
metal-working and electrical engineering in -
dustries as well as in the chemicals sector 
entered into force at the same time. This stipu -
lates that rising wage add-ons are to be paid in 
line with the length of contract.6 It remains to 
be seen to what extent the agencies manage 
to pass on the additional costs to the hiring 
firms in an increasingly bleak economic envir -
onment, especially for the temporary employ -
ees. In the long term, this measure is likely to 
increase the cost of using temporary employ -
ment as an instrument for making the deploy -
ment of labour input more flexible.
Whilst consumer price inflation accelerated in 
the third quarter, price increases were tending 
to remain moderate at the upstream stages of 
the economy. However, short-term volatility 
was considerable, with oil prices and exchange 
rates both playing a part. Seasonally adjusted 
import prices increased only marginally overall 
(0.1%) on an average of the quarter in spite of 
the further perceptible depreciation of the euro 
in July. The same is true of domestic producer 
prices, which are closely linked to the global 
market and, thus, to import prices. The global 
economic lull has made itself felt so far in the 
decline in intermediate input prices from for -
eign and domestic production. The prices of 
finished goods, on the other hand, continued 
to rise, with a larger increase in consumer 
goods than in capital goods at both domestic Higher wage 
costs in tempor-ary employment
Only very 
 moderate rise  
in import and 
producer pricesExport pricesImport, export, producer and
consumer prices
1 Producer  price  index  for industrial  products  in domestic  sales. 
2 Not  seasonally  adjusted,  quarterly.  3 National  consumer 
price index.
Deutsche Bundesbank2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012100105110115120125
105110115120
105110115 115120125
100105110115
10123
–+++2005 = 100, seasonally adjusted, monthly
Lin scale
Year-on-year change 2Consumer prices3Construction
prices2Producer prices1Import pricesLog scale
%
Oct100105110115
6 A similar arrangement for the incremental payment of 
wage add-ons to temporary workers has since been agreed 
by both sides of the textile and clothing industry and the 
wood and plastics processing industry and will come into 
effect on 1 April 2013.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2012  
57

producer and import levels. The upward trend 
in food prices played a part here. There was 
little change in energy prices despite crude oil 
becoming more expensive, mainly for exchange 
rate reasons. This was due to sharp cuts in gas 
prices, which are becoming more and more de -
coupled from crude oil prices. As domestic ex -
porters were able to impose somewhat higher 
price increases overall, the terms of trade im -
proved slightly, but were still below their level 
of 12 months earlier. There were year-on-year 
increases of 2% for import prices and 1.4% for 
domestic producer prices.
The rise in housing construction prices con -
tinued to ease, so that the year-on-year rate fell 
to 2.5%. Lower prices for intermediate goods 
might possibly have had an alleviating effect. 
Nevertheless, an easing on the demand side 
does not seem imminent. There is still a major 
need for residential property, which is also driv -
ing up house prices. According to the Associ -
ation of German Pfandbrief Banks (Verband 
deutscher Pfandbriefbanken),  the price index 
for owner-occupied housing went up by 0.4% 
compared with the second quarter. The annual 
rate was 2.7%.
The increase in upward pressure on consumer 
prices in the third quarter to a seasonally ad -
justed 0.4% on the quarter (following a rise of 
0.2% in the spring) was due to the energy 
component. Both the depreciation of the euro 
and the rise in crude oil prices played a part in 
this. The increase in food prices, in turn, was 
quite strong, and was probably due not only to 
weather effects but also a rise in transport 
costs and a weaker euro. By contrast, the price 
trend for other goods (excluding energy and 
food) became perceptibly calmer. Rises in the 
prices of services and in housing rents remained 
within narrow bounds. Annual Consumer Price 
Index (CPI) inflation went up slightly from 1.9% 
to 2.0%. According to the Harmonised Index of 
Consumer Prices (HICP), the rate was un -
changed at 2.1%.After seasonal adjustment, consumer prices in -
creased only moderately (+0.1%) in October, 
despite a further rise in food prices. However, 
this was offset by falling fuel prices. The year-
on-year increase remained unchanged in both 
the CPI and the HICP at 2.0% and 2.1% re -
spectively.
Orders received and outlook
Confidence that the economy will pick up in 
the near future is fading in ever more areas of 
the economy. Uncertainty about the extent of 
losses in external demand in view of the slower 
pace of global economic growth and the se -
vere adjustment crises in parts of the euro area 
has so far primarily hampered the export-based 
industries. However, it has now become obvi -
ous that these interfering external factors are 
having such a strong impact on the willingness 
to invest and on employment planning that the 
economy at large might suffer. Following on 
from investment activity losing all momentum a 
year ago, the upward trend on the labour mar -
ket has now also come to a halt. Service pro -
viders geared predominantly to the domestic 
economy are currently downgrading their busi -
ness expectations considerably and thus fol -
lowing a general tendency that took hold in 
the manufacturing industry some time ago. 
Currently, only residential construction and 
consumer spending are able to withstand the 
marked dampening factors.
The risk that the mixed economic outlook may 
become entrenched is documented in the find -
ings of the most recent DIHK economic survey. 
There has been a steep drop in enterprises’ 
business and export expectations. The results 
confirm the trend discernible from Ifo Institute 
surveys for the past six months. The fact that as 
many as two-fifths of the surveyed enterprises 
cite the underlying economic policy conditions 
as a major risk for business development in the 
coming year can be interpreted as an indication 
of deep-seated uncertainty. This is also sug -
gested by the fact that the calming in the fi -Construction 
and property prices still rising
Increase in con-
sumer prices stronger ini-tially …… but weak-
ened of late
Gloomier eco-
nomic picture 
spreads …
… and major 
uncertainty 
 persistsDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2012  
58

nancial markets since the summer has raised 
the economic expectations of the financial 
market players, but has not so far been re -
flected positively among the enterprises them -
selves.
In summer 2012, industrial new orders fell con -
siderably by a seasonally adjusted 2¼% on the 
second quarter. This decrease in orders was 
broadly based across regions. Whilst demand 
from non-euro-area countries did not decline 
quite so sharply (-1¼%), not least owing to 
large orders, demand for industrial goods made 
in Germany was weak at home (-2¾%) and in 
the rest of the euro area (-3%). Orders for cap -
ital goods saw a particularly sharp downturn in 
the reporting period. Somewhat more orders 
were received in the second quarter for the first 
time since the previous summer, but this was 
followed by a decline of 2¾% suffered in the 
third quarter of 2012. Export customers also 
ordered fewer motor vehicles as well as less 
machinery and equipment (-2¼%). However, 
the downward pressure caused by the German 
economy’s current low propensity to invest 
was considerably greater (-3½%). This is re -
vealed, for example, by domestic mechanical 
engineering orders declining by 4¼% in sea -
sonally adjusted terms. There were consider -
able falls in both domestic and export demand 
in the automotive industry. Even bearing in 
mind the fact that export orders attained a very 
high level again in the second quarter, this find -
ing should be regarded as a cause for concern 
in view of the scale of the correction during the 
third quarter. Given the current mixed eco -
nomic picture, enterprises distinctly cut back 
their orders of intermediate goods, too, in the 
reporting period (-2% after seasonal adjust -
ment). By contrast, orders of consumer goods 
fell only slightly (-¼%) in the third quarter.
The construction industry is still enjoying a fairly 
constant flow of orders at a high level. The vol -
ume of construction orders in July and August 
– more recent statistical data are unavailable – 
was a seasonally adjusted 1¼% up on the pre -
ceding three-month period. New building con -Orders in reverse 
gear
Construction 
 activity still on 
upward trendDemand for industrial goods and construction work
Deutsche Bundesbank2008 2009 2010 2011 20128090100110120130
–40–30–20–1000+10+20+30
100110120130
758090100
100110120
8090100
Jul-
Aug
Jul-
Aug90100110120
–20–100+10+20Volume, 2005 = 100, seasonally adjusted, quarterly
Log scale
DomesticForeign
Lin scale
Year-on-year changeTotal construction orders
%Total industrial ordersLog scale
%
Lin scale
Year-on-year
changeDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2012  
59

struction permits in this period were not 
granted to quite the same extent as on an aver -
age of the spring months. This was because 
commercial construction had to cope with a 
reduction from the elevated level of the previ -
ous quarter. There was little change in housing 
construction, as in public sector projects. This 
means that, although homes and apartments 
are likely to go on being constructed in large 
numbers, it will not be possible to overcome 
the slowdown in public sector construction in 
the near term.
The basic prerequisites for private consumption 
supporting the economy are still in place. This is indicated by the fact that consumer senti -
ment has improved from a high level since the 
summer. Much as in the case of the financial 
markets, consumers have obviously drawn 
fresh hope. According to the GfK surveys, their 
expectations have therefore recently risen 
somewhat from their earlier depressed level. In 
this context, income expectations and the pro -
pensity to purchase remained stable, especially 
as the effects of possible changes in the assess -
ment of the labour market outlook will only be -
come visible in the coming months.Robust growth 
in private  consumptionDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2012  
60

Public finances*
General government budget
Public finances in Germany present a mixed 
picture in 2012. On the one hand, the deficit 
ratio will fall further (from 0.8% in 2011), and it 
may be possible to balance the general govern -
ment budget. On the other hand, the debt 
ratio is expected to once again rise perceptibly 
from its already very high level of 80.5% in 
2011. The cyclical situation has had no major 
impact on the decline in the deficit, but rather 
has provided relief for government budgets on 
a similar scale to 2011. Although growth in 
gross domestic product (GDP) will probably be 
below its trend, on an annual average the eco -
nomic slowdown is not reflected in the macro -
economic aggregates that are especially rele -
vant for public finances. The favourable labour 
market figures and the stable rise in wages will, 
in particular, also contribute to a large surplus 
in the social security funds. The improvement in 
the budgetary position in structural terms is pri -
marily due to strong growth in profit-related 
taxes above and beyond the calculated impact 
of the business cycle and legislative changes, 
the expiry of the stimulus programmes intro -
duced during the 2008-09 crisis, relief provided 
by low interest rates and a moderate overall ex -
penditure trend. The rebound in the debt ratio 
stems from the increasing assistance provided 
to contain the euro-area debt crisis and from 
the liquidation of the public regional bank 
WestLB.1 According to the Maastricht report 
submitted in the autumn, the Federal Govern -
ment expects the debt ratio to stand at around 
82% at the end of 2012.
A distinct rise in the revenue ratio is likely for 
2012. This is due, first, to the dynamic growth 
in profit-related taxes mentioned above. 
Second, the rise reflects the favourable growth 
structure for government revenue. In particular, 
gross wages and salaries are still increasing at a 
faster pace than GDP . The expenditure ratio 
could virtually stagnate. Low interest costs, the fact that pension increases are still muted over -
all, the further fall in labour market expenditure 
and the decline in government investment fol -
lowing the expiry of the 2008-09 economic 
stimulus packages could compensate for bur -
dens elsewhere (eg transfers following the li -
quidation of WestLB).
In 2013, the general government deficit is likely 
to rise again as a result of the economic slow -
down currently expected; the cyclical compon -
ent, which was still favourable in 2012, could 
be eroded.2 In addition, various opposing 
trends are likely to more or less balance each 
other out. On the one hand, the statutory pen -
sion contribution rate will be lowered signifi -
cantly in light of the considerable overshooting 
of the pension reserve ceiling. Furthermore, a 
degree of fiscal policy loosening will continue 
to be provided by new budgetary burdens 
which are not counterfinanced – in particular 
the abolition of the surgery visit charge. On the 
other hand, the ongoing subdued growth in 
social welfare and interest expenditure is likely 
to relieve the budget, and no new capital trans -
fers to support the financial market are cur -
rently planned. The debt ratio could fall if no 
new measures which push up the debt level are Clear fall in 
 deficit in 2012, 
but …
… debt ratio 
will probably rise again
Revenue ratio 
rising, expend-iture ratio virtu-ally stagnating2013: deficit set to worsen, debt ratio to improve
* The analysis in the “General government budget” section 
is based on data contained in the national accounts and on 
the Maastricht ratios. The subsequent reporting on the 
budgets of the various levels of government and social se -
curity schemes is based on the figures as defined in the 
government’s financial statistics (which are generally in line 
with the budget accounts).
1 Unlike the EFSF liabilities, the liabilities of the ESM, which 
was set up in October 2012, are not assigned to the coun -
tries providing assistance. Provided the assistance loans are 
settled via the ESM and any debts due are serviced, the 
loans are therefore not reflected in the German debt level. 
By contrast, capital transfers to the ESM increase the re -
spective national debt level. Following the liquidation of 
WestLB, debts and risky assets were transferred to an en -
terprise attributable to the government sector, thereby 
pushing up the level of general government gross debt.
2 There are considerable risks with regard to macroeco -
nomic developments and the European debt crisis. The 
comments are based on the assumption that the macro -
economic slowdown will be only temporary.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2012  
61

taken to support German financial institutions 
or to contain the European debt crisis.
Of late the government deficit in Germany has 
unexpectedly developed very positively, and is 
low by international standards. However, des -
pite favourable underlying conditions,3 the 
structural general government budget gap is 
unlikely to have been closed fully. Furthermore, 
the high temporary surpluses of the social se -
curity funds, inter alia,  conceal – in some cases 
sizeable – deficits at central government level 
as well as within many state4 and local govern -
ments. The cut in transfers to the social security 
funds provides relief for the central govern -
ment budget, but means per se  that the social 
security funds will have to increase their contri -
bution rates or reduce benefits in the medium 
term. From a regulatory perspective, it would 
be better to generally link central government 
grants to clearly defined non-insurance-related 
expenditure.5 Such a transparent linkage would 
place the finances of the social security funds 
on a more solid footing. Furthermore, it would 
put an end to fiscal policymakers’ habit of 
using the social security funds as a budgetary 
stopgap. It would also create a clearer relation -
ship between social contributions and social 
benefits.
Particularly in view of the high debt ratio and 
foreseeable demographic adjustment burdens, 
government finances should be consolidated 
swiftly and comprehensively. There is a danger 
that the favourable underlying conditions 
which have prevailed hitherto have not been, 
and will not be, utilised sufficiently to this end. 
Although Germany has complied with the pro -
visions of the national debt brake and the ex -
cessive deficit procedure (which has now been 
terminated), these were set on the basis of 
considerably more pessimistic expectations. 
The positive shocks, especially with regard to 
tax receipts and interest expenditure, have 
been used in part to dilute the moderate con -
solidation course originally announced, which 
has prevented swifter reduction of central and 
state government deficits.The gloomier economic situation in the euro 
area has led to demands in some quarters for 
Germany to pursue a more expansionary fiscal 
policy. However, in the context of current fore -
casts, this does not appear justified, particularly 
as normal macroeconomic fluctuations are 
cushioned at the time they occur by the auto -
matic stabilisers. By contrast, an asymmetric 
policy approach has often been pursued in the 
past. Consolidation was postponed in favour -
able economic constellations, but fiscal policy 
was rapidly loosened whenever a downturn 
loomed. Consequently, consolidation targets 
were regularly met in the medium-term plans, 
but more rarely achieved in reality, and ultim -
ately the rise in the debt ratio was not pre -
vented. Furthermore, it cannot be assumed 
that a more expansionary German fiscal policy 
would provide a distinct economic boost to the 
European countries most affected by the debt 
crisis. Budgetary consolidation should have pri -
ority for all levels of government, so that Ger -
many can remain an anchor of stability in the 
European debt crisis.
The permanent deficit limits for central and 
state government set by the national debt 
brakes should be complied with swiftly. To en -
sure that the new, stricter constitutional rules 
are adhered to, it would also be advisable as a 
general principle to stipulate clear and binding Government 
 entities need  
to consolidate  further
Use favourable 
conditions for more rapid  consolidationPolicy loosening inappropriate
Advisable to 
rapidly lower 
high debt ratio
3 Using its cyclical adjustment method, the Federal Gov -
ernment –  like the European Commission  – forecasts a 
slight cyclically induced deficit for 2012. However, this cor -
responds to a marginal position within the spectrum of cur -
rent estimation results, as the IMF, the Joint Economic Fore -
cast and the German Council of Economic Experts, based 
on current estimates of potential output, all project cyclic -
ally induced surpluses. The method applied here, which, in 
contrast to the procedure used by the Federal Government, 
is based on the key macroeconomic budget variables, like -
wise shows a cyclically induced surplus for 2012. Given the 
stable development of the key budget variables, this also 
seems more plausible.
4 See also Deutsche Bundesbank, The development of 
state government finances in Germany since 2005, 
Monthly Report, October 2012, p 29ff.
5 Although no clear-cut dividing line can be drawn be -
tween insurance-related and non-insurance-related bene -
fits, clearly defining which benefits are to be financed out 
of general tax revenue would mean that financial transac -
tions between central government and the social security 
funds could be more transparently structured and better 
protected from ad hoc intervention.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2012  
62

The conclusions of the European Council at its meeting
on 18-19 October 2012
At its meeting on 18-19 October 2012, the 
European Council discussed changes to the 
framework of the European monetary 
union, focusing mainly on the plans to cre-ate a banking union. The council concluded that the EU’s legislative bodies should agree 
on a legal framework for the single super-
visory mechanism for euro-area banks by the end of 2012. However, it will take 
longer to decide on the details of the frame-
work and implement it in practice. Some 
matters remained undecided, including the 
question of when to allow the European 
Stability Mechanism (ESM) to recapitalise fi  -nancial institutions directly.
All in all, a banking union may be a useful 
addition to the existing framework of the 
monetary union, particularly if it includes a 
single supervisory mechanism, a single re-
covery and resolution mechanism and a re-
covery fund which is essentially funded by 
the banks themselves but can be topped up 
by the ESM if urgently required. It could provide a more harmonised structure for 
the supervision of banks – and, where ne-
cessary, their recovery or resolution – and these new mechanisms could reduce the 
tendency towards overly tentative fi  nancial 
regulation and supervision at national level. 
One of the aims of the new framework under discussion is to create a more level 
playing fi  eld for credit institutions and allow 
better control of cross-border contagion, 
thus counteracting uncertainty and nascent crises at an early stage. A banking union in 
this form could also help to stave off un-
healthy developments in national fi  scal and economic policy, notably overindebted pub-lic or private sector entities.Yet it is important to strike a balance be-tween liability and control. Above all, it is 
crucial to make sure that mutualised liability for sovereign debt is not brought in through 
the back door by providing European-level 
fi  scal protection against risks stemming from the banking sector, thus circumvent-ing the no-bailout clause. To prevent this from occurring, several prerequisites need 
to be fulfi  lled.
First, the reforms must fundamentally en-
sure that, if a bank runs into serious diffi   cul-ties, its owners and creditors are the fi  rst to 
foot the bill. In addition to minimum re-quirements for capital and hybrid capital 
which ensure that banks are suffi   ciently re-
silient, an effective resolution regime is 
needed in order to reduce the likelihood of tax funds being used for bank bailouts.
Second, the risks to fi  nancial stability which 
may arise from unsound public fi  nances 
have to be curtailed. To achieve this, there 
need to be regulatory measures in place to 
reduce the concentration of risk exposures 
to individual governments on bank balance 
sheets, eg via appropriate risk weighting 
and by preventing excessive credit concen-
tration. This will give banks a stronger in-
centive, right from the outset, both to en-
sure that interest rates – including those on 
government debt – adequately refl  ect the 
risks involved and to avoid taking on exces-
sive risk, as they would otherwise face 
higher funding costs.
However, the ongoing fi  nancial and sover-
eign debt crisis has shown that these two 
lines of attack will not suffi   ce on their own. 
It is therefore important to ensure that the 
banking union confers powers of interven-Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2012  
63

tion on the central level which can override 
some of the budgetary sovereignty of any 
member state committing sustained and serious violations of the fi  scal rules (or of the conditions attached to assistance pro-grammes), making it less likely that sover-
eign debt will reach dangerous levels.
Yet unsound public fi  nances are not the only potential risk to banks’ solvency; sig-
nifi  cant growth in loans that are vulnerable 
to default would also pose a threat. This 
kind of increase can occur, for example, 
when real estate bubbles burst or reces-
sions hit – events which may partly be due 
to misguided national economic policies. It 
would therefore make sense, particularly if 
some of the associated costs are mutual-ised, to ensure that the work of national 
and European authorities is adequately co-
ordinated, including in the fi  eld of macro-
prudential supervision.
It currently seems likely that the ECB will be 
assigned responsibility for the single super-visory mechanism for euro-area banks. The 
possibility of confl  icts of interest with the ECB’s primary objective of safeguarding price stability must be permanently ruled 
out, and it is therefore imperative to main-
tain a strict separation between monetary 
policy and banking supervision. If the bank-ing union is to succeed in easing the burden 
on the single monetary policy, the new framework must ensure that problems re-
lating to excessive debt are solved by polit-
icians; they are not the central bank’s re-
sponsibility.
A banking union, if designed in the right 
way, may play an important part in achiev-
ing a stability-oriented monetary union. As 
a means of overcoming the current crisis, 
however, it is wholly insuffi   cient, as the 
control elements at the European level need 
to be strengthened before liability is ex-panded. In particular, the member states 
themselves should bear any losses arising 
from past risks which arose on their watch.
In addition to achieving a political consen-
sus on the timeframe for introducing bank-ing supervision at European level, the Euro-pean Council also called upon legislators to 
adopt the “two-pack” proposals on meas-
ures to improve budgetary surveillance in 
the euro-area countries by the end of 2012. This matter is still under negotiation.
The European Council acknowledged the 
interim report presented by its president on 
changes to the framework of European 
economic and monetary union, which pro-
poses an increase in economic and fi  scal 
policy integration. Among other measures, 
it suggests creating a separate euro-area 
budget, primarily as a means of strengthen-ing the countercyclical effect of fi  scal policy. 
However, it is not immediately apparent whether this step is actually necessary in view of the regulations that are already in place. The existing budgetary rules essen-
tially envisage that the automatic stabilisers 
should be allowed to take effect, and this 
should be easily possible in future provided 
that the sound budgetary and economic policies aspired to at present are imple-mented. At all events, decision makers would need to ensure that this does not 
create a window for incurring debt at euro-area level, thus circumventing national def-
icit limits and ultimately causing a build-up 
of structural debt by introducing, in es-
sence, a kind of Eurobond.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2012  
64

safety margins below the borrowing limits, 
thereby taking account of the high degree of 
uncertainty involved in estimating the structural 
budget position. Given the experience gained 
during the present debt crisis and the looming 
demographic burdens, it would make sound 
sense to adopt a more ambitious policy with a 
view to reducing the debt ratio faster from its 
current very high level.
Budgetary development  
of central, state and local 
government
Tax revenue
Tax revenue6 was up by 8% on the year in the 
third quarter of 2012 (see chart and table on 
pages 65 and 66). This was a faster rate of rev -
enue growth than in the first half of 2012, 
though it was due in part to temporary excep -
tional factors. In the first three quarters taken 
together, revenue rose by 5½%. Receipts from 
income-related taxes, in particular, developed 
dynamically in the third quarter, jumping by 
just under 15½%. The sharp rise in wage tax 
receipts was primarily due to the favourable 
developments in pay and employment trends, 
which were amplified by back payments in 
connection with public-sector wage increases. 
But net revenue was additionally boosted by 
lower deduction amounts (child benefit and 
subsidies for supplementary private pension 
plans). Receipts from profit-related taxes ex -
panded robustly. However, this partly reflects 
special developments such as an offset of the 
corresponding revenue shortfalls from the pre -
vious quarter caused by a change in the pro -
cedure for deducting withholding tax on divi -
dends. Receipts from consumption-related 
taxes increased by just under 3%, with turn -
over tax revenue recording somewhat stronger 
growth (just over 4%).
According to the latest official tax estimate, tax 
receipts for 2012 as a whole are expected to 
rise by 5% (including local government taxes).7 The macroeconomic variables that are particu -
larly relevant to revenue (gross wages and sal -
aries, private consumption) have recorded 
stable growth to date, and both fiscal drag8 
and legislative changes9 have also produced 
additional revenue. However, as a result of fa -
vourable intra-year cash developments, rev -
enue is expected to record significantly higher 
growth than would be expected based on the 
above factors alone.
Weaker growth is forecast for 2013 (+2½%). 
Although the increase in the macroeconomic 
assessment bases is expected to be more fa -
vourable than in 2012, the currently high rev -
enue level has not been carried forward in full, 
and perceptible tax refunds are expected in 
connection with the ruling of the European Sharp rise in tax 
revenue in Q3
Clear revenue 
growth for year as a wholeWeaker growth in 2013,  followed by sig-
nificant rise in 
medium termTax revenue*
* Including  EU shares  in German  tax revenue,  excluding 
receipts from local government taxes.
Deutsche Bundesbank2010 2011 2012642024681012
–––++++++Year-on-year percentage change, quarterly
6 Including EU shares in German tax revenue but excluding 
receipts from local government taxes, which are not yet 
known for the quarter under review.
7 This estimate is based on the Federal Government’s cur -
rent macroeconomic projection. For 2012, real GDP growth 
is expected to be 0.8% and nominal growth 2.4% (May: 
+0.7% and +2.3%, respectively). Growth for 2013 is fore -
cast to be 1.0% and 2.8%, respectively (May: +1.6% and 
+3.2%, respectively). In the medium term, nominal annual 
growth of around 3% is still forecast.
8 In this context, this term comprises the (positive) revenue 
effect of the progressive structure of the income tax sched -
ule as well as the (negative) impact of the extensive price 
inelasticity of specific excise duties.
9 In particular, the phasing out of depreciation allowances 
under the first economic stimulus package and of grants to 
homebuyers.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2012  
65

Court of Justice on the taxation of dividends 
paid to foreign corporates. In the medium term 
(between 2014 and 2017), the forecast average 
growth of 3½% per year primarily reflects the 
underlying macroeconomic assumptions. The 
tax ratio (as defined in the government’s finan -
cial statistics) is projected to increase to 23.1% 
by the end of the forecast period (2011: 22.1%). 
Fiscal drag accounts for approximately ½ per -
centage point, or around €16 billion, of this 
rise. Furthermore, the growth profile will boost 
the ratio slightly.
When interpreting the figures, it should be 
borne in mind that the estimate is based on the 
legislative status quo  and that (albeit limited) 
tax cuts are planned on balance ( inter alia  the 
lowering of income tax rates in 2013-14). Fur -
thermore, the Federal Government’s macro -
economic projection and, consequently, the 
official tax estimate assume only a slight weak -
ening of economic momentum at the current end. There is a great deal of uncertainty in this 
respect, particularly because of the debt crisis.
The estimates for intra-year cash developments 
in 2012 were revised upwards again vis-à-vis 
previous forecasts. Subsequently, the overall 
less favourable macroeconomic assumptions 
are given increasing weight, and the high level 
of revenue recorded in 2012 is not carried over 
in full to 2013. Compared with the May 2012 
estimate, which was used as a basis for central 
government’s budgetary and financial planning 
of summer 2012, legislative changes are now 
forecast to depress revenue in 2013, though 
this is chiefly attributable to a revaluation of the 
financial impact of the aforementioned court 
ruling.10 After adjustment for legislative 
changes made in the intervening period, the 
revision to the estimate for 2012 amounts to 
+€5½ billion. For the planning period 2013 Forecast risks: 
tax cuts and economic  developmentsUpward revision in 2012, but slight reduction in medium termTax revenue
 
Type of taxQ1 to Q3 Estimate 
for 
2012 1, 2Q3
2011 2012 2011 2012
Year-on-year changeYear-
on-year change Year-on-year change
€ billion € billion as % as % € billion € billion as %
Tax revenue, total
2 381.9 403.4 + 21.5 +  5.6 +  5.0 125.0 135.2 + 10.1 +  8.1
of which
Wage tax 100.2 106.8 +  6.6 +  6.6 +  6.5 33.6 36.6 +  3.0 +  8.9
Profi  t-related taxes 3 55.2 64.4 +  9.2 + 16.8 + 12.8 13.8 18.3 +  4.4 + 32.0
Assessed income tax 23.2 27.3 +  4.1 + 17.7 + 15.0 7.1 8.9 +  1.8 + 24.8
Corporation tax 9.7 13.0 +  3.3 + 33.6 + 17.9 3.0 2.5 –  0.5 – 16.4
Investment income tax
4 22.2 24.1 +  1.9 +  8.4 +  7.0 3.7 6.9 +  3.2 + 85.6
Turnover taxes 5 140.6 144.7 +  4.1 +  2.9 +  2.9 47.2 49.1 +  2.0 +  4.2
Energy tax 24.5 24.1 –  0.4 –  1.6 –  0.3 10.1 10.0 –  0.0 –  0.4
Tobacco tax 9.6 9.5 –  0.1 –  1.5 –  0.6 3.4 3.6 +  0.2 +  5.6
1 According to offi   cial tax estimate of October 2012. 2 Including EU shares in German tax revenue, but excluding receipts from local government taxes. 3 Employee refunds, homebuyers’ grant and investment grant deducted from revenue. 4 Withholding tax on interest income and capital gains, non-assessed taxes on earnings. 5 Turnover tax and import turnover tax.
Deutsche Bundesbank
10 The expected financial impact has since been further 
adjusted.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2012  
66

to 2016, the adjustments fall to +€1½ billion 
and then -€1 billion.
Central government budget
The improvement in central government’s fi -
nances continued in the third quarter. The def -
icit fell significantly on the year (by €4 billion to 
€8 billion). This was mainly attributable to 
strong growth in revenue (6%, or €4½ billion) 
as a result of the very positive developments in 
tax receipts (+7½%, or €5 billion). At the same 
time, expenditure went up only moderately 
(½%, or €½ billion). The decline in interest ex -
penditure (–€½ billion) continued and transfers 
to the social security funds (especially to the 
Federal Employment Agency and the health in -
surance fund), spending on the long-term un -
employed and investment expenditure were 
also down by similar amounts on the year. 
However, these developments were offset, 
above all, by significantly higher personnel 
costs (+6½%, or €½ billion) – primarily due to 
the retroactive adoption of the pay increase ne -
gotiated in March for employees with civil ser -
vant status and retired civil servants  – and 
transfers to the east German states (€1 billion). 
In the first three quarters taken together, the 
deficit fell by just over €8 billion to €20 billion.
At the end of September, the Federal Govern -
ment presented a draft second supplementary 
budget for 2012, which has since been revised 
in the Budget Committee’s adjustment meet -
ing. The supplementary budget enables the ob -
ligations contained in the European growth 
package regarding the capital increase for the 
European Investment Bank (German share: 
€1½ billion) to be met and also contains spend -
ing authorisations to permit the implementa -
tion of the agreements reached by central and 
state government at the end of June 2012 in 
connection with the European Fiscal Compact. 
In particular, the special fund for the expansion 
of childcare facilities is to be topped up by €½ 
billion. Furthermore, a commitment appropri -
ation is envisaged to ensure that central gov -ernment’s planned assumption of a share in 
the forthcoming transfer of funds to the Berlin-
Brandenburg Airport (€½ billion) complies with 
the budgetary rules. Finally, the additional rev -
enue forecast in the latest tax estimate (€4 bil -
lion vis-à-vis the May estimate, of which €1 bil -
lion is attributable to lower transfers to the EU) 
and interest savings were taken into account at 
the adjustment meeting. Overall, this should 
reduce net borrowing in 2012 from €32 billion 
under the first supplementary budget to €28 
billion. In 2011, net borrowing totalled €17½ 
billion.
The supplementary budget also records a more 
favourable figure for the structural deficit, 
which is the key benchmark for the debt brake. 
The structural deficit came to €20½ billion in 
2011, and a figure of €15½ billion is estimated 
for 2012. Given the favourable development 
during the first three quarters of 2012, from the 
current perspective the deficit could turn out to 
be somewhat lower still. The underlying struc -Improvement 
continued in Q3
Second 2012 
supplementary budget reduces net borrowing and …
… structural deficitCentral government fiscal deficit/surplus
Deutsche BundesbankQ1 Q2 Q3 Q42520151050510
–––––++
–45–40–35–30–25–20–15–10
20102010Quarterly results
Cumulated from start of year
20122012
20112011€ billionDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2012  
67

tural deficit ceiling (€39½ billion, or 1.6% of 
GDP) would then be even more clearly under -
shot.
A notable feature of the budgetary and finan -
cial planning for the coming years is that, while 
the May tax estimate for 2013 to 2015 has 
largely been confirmed, central government’s 
tax receipts at the end of the financial planning 
period are estimated to be €2½ billion lower 
(as a result of higher transfers to the EU). 
Second, at the start of November, the coalition 
committee approved new budgetary burdens 
(in particular, additional investment in transport 
infrastructure and tax-funded pension top-ups 
for low earners). However, the consequent 
need to adjust central government’s plans to 
take account of this has been reduced in the 
short term, not least as a result of a decrease in 
transfers to the statutory health insurance 
scheme.
Following the adjustment meeting, the current 
budget plans for 2013 forecast net borrowing 
of €17 billion, which is €1½ billion lower than 
the figure recorded in the draft budget. The 
Budget Committee revised the estimates for 
privatisation proceeds (€1 billion), tax revenue 
(€1 billion) and investment (€½ billion) up -
wards slightly vis-à-vis the Federal Govern -
ment’s draft figures. Even taking into account 
the latest coalition agreements, with a struc -
tural deficit of €9 billion, the plans foresee that 
the permanent upper limit for structural net 
borrowing of 0.35% of GDP from 2016 will 
 already be met in 2013.
At the coalition meeting, it was also agreed to 
balance central government’s budget (in struc -
tural terms) in 2014 – two years earlier than 
envisaged in the current plans. The very posi -
tive development of central government’s fi -
nances in recent years has stemmed primarily 
from sizeable and unexpected additional tax 
revenue and lower interest expenditure. These 
positive influences have more than offset the 
continuous weakening of the originally planned 
consolidation path. In order to meet the new target, despite the additional expenditure re -
sulting from the coalition agreements, the re -
duction in the central government grant to the 
health insurance fund – which was originally 
only intended for 2013 and was increased by 
€½ billion to €2½ billion at the adjustment 
meeting – is to be repeated at least in 2014. 
Furthermore, it appears that regular transfers 
from the German development bank KfW are 
envisaged from 2014 onwards, although the 
details remain unclear. Finally, the full impact of 
the budgetary burden caused by the new child -
care supplement will not be felt until 2015 
owing to the postponement of its introduction. 
On the basis of the underlying assumptions, 
the goal of achieving a structurally balanced 
budget in 2014 appears feasible in principle. 
However, over and above the danger of a de -
liberate further relaxation of the consolidation 
path, the objective is additionally subject to 
substantial risks in connection with macroeco -
nomic developments and the debt crisis.
The first definitive booking to the debt brake’s 
control account was made on 1  September 
2012. Any overshooting or undershooting of 
the constitutional borrowing limit incurred 
when implementing the budget for the individ -
ual years has to be recorded via the control ac -
count.11 Net borrowing in 2011 (€17.3 billion) 
undershot the maximum level permitted (€42.5 
billion) by €25.2 billion. Although the structural 
trend was indeed favourable, this large under -
shoot was primarily due to the inflated figure 
chosen as the 2010 starting value from which 
the borrowing limit is to be progressively 
lowered.12 A similarly sized positive difference 
is expected for 2012. According to the Federal Current plans 
contain limited need for adjust -
ment
Permanent 
 deficit ceiling  already attain-
able in 2013
Balanced struc-
tural budget  announced for 2014 feasibleGrowing “credit balance” on debt brake’s control account foreseeable
11 In the year following the budgetary year in question, a 
provisional figure for the deviation from the borrowing 
limit is calculated on 1 March and a final figure is deter -
mined on 1 September. The maximum permissible level of 
borrowing is ascertained by multiplying the maximum per -
missible percentage of GDP (from 2016: 0.35%) by the 
GDP for the year preceding the year in which the budget 
was drawn up. Financial transactions and a cyclical com -
ponent are then added to this figure.
12 See Deutsche Bundesbank, The debt brake in Ger -
many – key aspects and implementation, Monthly Report, 
October 2011, p 26ff.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2012  
68

Government, these “credit balances” are merely 
virtual and will not be used to create additional 
scope for borrowing in future years.13 The 
credit on the control account may indeed not 
be used ex ante  in a draft budget to allow the 
borrowing limit to be exceeded. However, a 
large buffer is currently being created for devi -
ations at the budget implementation stage 
which could ultimately give rise to optimistic 
budget estimates. Given that special provisions 
apply to bookings to the control account dur -
ing the transitional period, it would make sense 
to delete the credit balance accumulated dur -
ing this time in 2016. Such a proposal is cur -
rently under consideration in the parliamentary 
consultation process and is worth adopting.
Central government’s off-budget entities 
posted a surplus of €1½ billion in the third 
quarter of 2012. Their finances thus improved 
significantly, increasing by €5½ billion on the 
year. This is attributable, first, to the €1 billion 
surplus recorded by SoFFin as a result of the 
state of North Rhine-Westphalia (as co-owner) 
repaying a silent participation in WestLB. In 
2011, SoFFin had posted a deficit owing to a 
capital injection (€2 billion) into HRE’s reso -
lution agency. In light of the continued uncer -
tainty, it was recently agreed, as a precaution, 
to extend SoFFin’s temporary authorisation to 
implement new stabilisation measures to the 
end of 2014. Second, as in the final quarter of 
2011, the restructuring fund received €½ billion 
from the bank levy. Other central government 
off-budget entities, such as the civil servants’ 
pension reserve, generally also recorded slight 
surpluses. The Investment and Repayment 
Fund – whose financing measures expired at 
the end of 2011 – finished the quarter with a 
virtually balanced budget, having recorded net 
outflows of €1½ billion one year previously. For 
the year as a whole, the surplus posted by cen -
tral government’s off-budget entities is likely to 
be around half as high as in 2011 (€6 billion). 
Excluding financial transactions, which notably 
included a sizeable repayment to SoFFin in 
2011, the off-budget entities would record a 
significant improvement in their finances.State government14
State government’s core budget deficit fell to 
€1½ billion in the third quarter of 2012 (com -
pared with €3 billion one year earlier). Revenue 
rose by 6% (€4 billion) overall, chiefly as a re -
sult of stronger growth in tax receipts (+9%). 
Expenditure increased perceptibly (by 3½%, or 
€2½ billion). In addition to the state of North 
Rhine-Westphalia’s capital repayment to SoFFin 
in connection with the resolution of WestLB, 
higher personnel costs and general grants to 
local government also contributed to this in -
crease. By contrast, real investment and inter -
est expenditure decreased.
Following the relatively favourable interim re -
sult, a deficit of €9½ billion is expected for 
2012 as a whole, which is lower than the figure 
recorded for 2011. The target figure of €15½ 
billion would thus be considerably undershot. 
By the end of September, half of the federal 
states – including all the east German states 
and Berlin – had posted a surplus. By contrast, 
particularly high per capita  deficits were re -
corded by the states of Saarland and Bremen, 
which are receiving consolidation assistance, as 
well as Rhineland-Palatinate, North Rhine-
Westphalia (also owing to the special factor 
mentioned above), Hamburg and Hesse. Com -
pared with the May tax estimate, the latest es -
timate envisages additional state government 
tax revenue of €2½ billion in 2012. By contrast, 
the new estimate envisages extra receipts of 
only €½ billion in 2013. The welcome decline 
in the deficit to date has largely been achieved 
through the unexpected positive developments 
in tax revenue. However, from 2013 onwards, 
growth in tax receipts is forecast to be mark -
edly lower than in 2011 and 2012. Despite the 
marked fall in the deficit, state government as 
a whole still has a long way to go to achieve a Off-budget 
 entities record marked im-provement in Q3, and surplus likely for 2012Lower deficit  
in Q3 due  
to stronger tax  revenue growth
Smaller deficit 
expected for 2012 as a whole, but big consolidation need in some states
13 For further information and for details on the calcula -
tion, see Federal Ministry of Finance, Monatsbericht, Octo -
ber 2012.
14 The development of local government finances in the 
second quarter of 2012 was analysed in greater detail in 
the short articles in the Bundesbank’s October 2012 
Monthly Report. These are the most recent data available.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2012  
69

structurally balanced budget. Individual states 
still need to achieve sizeable consolidation be -
fore 2020.15
Given the positive developments, at its sixth 
meeting on 24 October 2012, in the context of 
its regular ratio-based budgetary surveillance 
using the stability reports from central and 
state government, the Stability Council found 
no indications of further looming budgetary 
emergencies – over and above those federal 
states that are already subject to a restructuring 
procedure. The restructuring reports submitted 
by Berlin, Bremen, Saarland and Schleswig-
Holstein were given a largely positive assess -
ment, although the improvement was chiefly 
attributed to the unexpected favourable devel -
opments in tax receipts. In the case of Bremen 
and Saarland, it was found that further struc -
tural measures are required and the potential 
for consolidation has not yet been exhausted. 
Yet no specific provisions are attached to these 
findings, and no sanctions are envisaged even 
if the federal states do deviate from the agreed 
consolidation paths.
Social security funds16
Statutory pension insurance 
scheme
In the third quarter of 2012, the deficit of the 
statutory pension insurance scheme, at just 
over €½ billion, was somewhat higher than the 
figure recorded one year previously. Contribu -
tion receipts rose by only 2½% as a result of 
the contribution rate being cut from 19.9% 
to 19.6% at the beginning of 2012 (+4% after 
adjustment). Central government transfers also 
recorded relatively weak growth, as they are 
linked in part to the current contribution rate. 
Consequently, overall revenue rose by just over 
2%. At almost 2½%, expenditure rose at a 
faster pace than revenue for the first time since 
mid-2010. Growth in expenditure mirrored the 
stronger mid-2012 pension increase (+2.18% in western Germany and +2.26% in eastern Ger -
many).
During the first three quarters of 2012, the fi -
nances of the statutory pension insurance 
scheme developed more favourably overall 
than in the corresponding period of 2011. The 
surplus for 2012 as a whole is also expected to 
be somewhat higher than the figure posted for 
2011 (just over €4½ billion). By the end of 
2012, the accumulated reserves will thus clearly 
exceed the threshold of 1.5 times the scheme’s 
monthly expenditure. In line with the statutory 
provisions, the 2013 contribution rate must 
thus be lowered to a level (18.9%) that ensures 
that – taking into account the forecast financial 
developments – the reserves are scaled back 
and no longer overshoot the ceiling. A sharp 
turnaround in the finances of the statutory 
pension insurance scheme is thus expected and 
a marked deficit is on the cards. The potential 
for lowering the contribution rate is limited by 
the fact that the general central government 
grant for 2013 will be reduced on an ad hoc 
basis by €1 billion, which is roughly equivalent 
to 0.1 percentage point of the contribution 
rate. Furthermore, central government trans -
fers will be lower as they will be automatically 
adjusted in line with the fall in the contribution 
rate. Expenditure is expected to continue to re -
cord rather moderate growth because the mid-
2013 pension increase is likely to be relatively 
low, especially in western Germany, owing to Stability Council 
finds no new budgetary emer-gencies and calls for further restructuring measures
Slight deterior-
ation owing  
to accelerated  expenditure growthContribution rate cut to  reduce reserves
15 See also Deutsche Bundesbank (2012), op cit, p 36ff.
16 The financial development of the statutory health and 
public long-term care insurance schemes in the second 
quarter of 2012 was discussed in the short article in the 
September 2012 Monthly Report. These are the most re -
cent data available.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2012  
70

particularities in the pension adjustment for -
mula.17
The recent decisions of the governing coalition 
still envisage topping up the pensions of low 
earners so that they exceed the basic allow -
ance. Furthermore, it is planned to no longer 
fully offset supplementary private pension pro -
vision against the transfer entitlement. The 
higher pensions are to be financed out of tax 
revenue. In contrast to previous proposals for 
pension top-ups, this would not impair the in -
surance equivalence principle of pension en -
titlements being linked to contributions paid. It 
is not yet clear which of the various forms of 
supplementary private pension plans will no 
longer be included in the calculation of basic 
allowance claims. Whereas the basic allowance 
for the elderly was specifically set up to prevent 
poverty in old age, the granting of pension 
top-ups for low earners is intended to make 
employment subject to social security contribu -
tions and private pension plans more attractive. 
However, the advantages should be weighed 
up against the negative impact of the financing 
burden, particularly given the demographic 
burdens that already exist.
Federal Employment Agency
In the third quarter of 2012, the Federal Em -
ployment Agency recorded an almost balanced 
budget. Its finances thus deteriorated slightly 
vis-à-vis the figure posted one year previously. 
However, the year-on-year comparison is dis -
torted by sharp intra-year fluctuations in the fi -
nancial transactions with the central govern -
ment budget. Central government provided 
less liquidity assistance and the Federal Employ -
ment Agency’s reintegration payment to cen -
tral government was higher than in 2011. After 
adjustment for these effects, the Federal Em -
ployment Agency’s finances improved by just 
over €½ billion in year-on-year terms. Overall, 
after adjustment, revenue rose by almost 4%, 
while expenditure decreased by 4½%. Contri -
bution receipts were up by almost 5% on the year, although the growth rates are gradually 
declining. By contrast, central government’s 
administration cost reimbursements for un -
employment welfare benefit (II) recipients Recent coalition 
decisions on tax-funded pen-sion top-ups
More favourable 
result masked  
by financial transactions with central governmentFinances of the German statutory pension insurance scheme
Deutsche Bundesbank2010 2011 2012586062646668
–20+2+4+6€ billion, quarterly
Lin scale
Surplus (+) or deficit (–)ExpenditureLog scale
Revenue
17 The sustainability factor, which enables the change in 
the ratio of standard pensioners to average contribution 
payers (pensioner ratio) to be taken into account when cal -
culating the pension increase, is likely to have a particularly 
strong dampening effect on the pension increase in 2013 
because the number of contribution payers was much 
higher in 2011 than in 2012. This is due to the fact that the 
number of average contribution payers is calculated by div -
iding the actual contribution receipts by the pension contri -
butions payable on the provisional level of average income. 
The provisional level of average income in a given year is, 
in turn, calculated by carrying forward the value for the 
year preceding the previous year on the basis of the growth 
rate for the year preceding the previous year multiplied by 
two. Because average income actually fell in 2009, the 
above calculations result in very low average income for 
2011, but a very high number of contribution payers. Con -
sequently, the sustainability factor inflated the 2012 pen -
sion increase. These excessive increases will largely be 
counterbalanced by the sizeable dampening effect ex -
pected in 2013. The fact that the adjustments are also in -
fluenced by other factors, such as clawback decreases to 
compensate for cuts waived in previous years or deviations 
between total gross wages and salaries and income subject 
to compulsory contributions, makes it more difficult to in -
terpret the findings.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2012  
71

– who are steadily declining in number – were 
lower. The further sharp decline in expenditure 
(in adjusted terms) is due almost entirely to the 
cuts in spending on active labour market policy. 
By contrast, expenditure on unemployment in -
surance benefit (I) in the third quarter of 2012 was up on the year for the first time since the 
start of 2010.
For 2012 as a whole, a marked surplus of 
around €2 billion is forecast. The figure re -
corded in the Federal Employment Agency’s 
budget plan, which envisaged a surplus of only 
€½ billion, will thus be exceeded. However, a 
significant deterioration in the financial situ -
ation is likely in 2013, as considerably more is 
expected to be spent on unemployment insur -
ance benefit and it is unlikely that further sig -
nificant cuts in spending on active labour mar -
ket policy will be made. Furthermore, the Fed -
eral Employment Agency loses out overall from 
the abolition of the turnover tax-financed cen -
tral government grant18 and the simultaneous 
discontinuation of the reintegration payment 
to central government. All in all, with a contri -
bution rate of 3.0%, in the long run the Federal 
Employment Agency’s receipts are likely to 
barely cover its expenditure over the economic 
cycle. Central government loans to offset the 
Federal Employment Agency’s deficit are re -
corded as financial transactions in central gov -
ernment’s budget and are therefore not 
counted towards the constitutional borrowing 
limit. In the absence of clear repayment rules, 
the Federal Employment Agency could poten -
tially accumulate liabilities over and above the 
limit imposed by the debt brake without need -
ing to raise its contribution rate or directly cut 
benefits.Surplus for year 
as a whole, but gloomy outlookFinances of theFederal Employment Agency
1 Including  transfers  to the civil servants'  pension  fund.  2 Ex-
cluding central government liquidity assistance.
Deutsche Bundesbank2010 2011 20127810121416
1.41.72.02.53.03.54.04.55.06.07.0–6–4–20+2+4€ billion, quarterly
Log scale
Expenditure,
total 1
Revenue 2
Log scale
Expenditure on ...
... vocational training... unemployment benefits
    and short-time
    working benefitsLin scale
Surplus (+) or deficit (–)
18 The abolition of the central government grant means 
that all remaining “non-insurance-related benefits” of the 
Federal Employment Agency (eg the children’s allowance 
as part of the unemployment benefit replacement rate or 
the age-determined maximum period of entitlement to un -
employment benefit) will be financed by wage-related con -
tributions.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2012  
72

Statistical 
SectionDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report 
November 2012  
1•

Contents
I Key economic data for the euro area
 1 Monetary developments and interest rates  ..................................................................  5•
 2 External transactions and positions  ..............................................................................  5•
 3 Gener al economic indicators  .......................................................................................  6•
II Overall monetary survey in the euro area
 1 The money stock and its counterparts  .........................................................................  8•
 2 Consolidated balance sheet of monetary financial institutions (MFIs)  ...........................  10•
 3 Banking system’s liquidity position  ...............................................................................  14•
III Consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem
 1 Assets  ..........................................................................................................................  16•
 2 Liabilities  .....................................................................................................................  18•
IV Banks
 1 A ssets and liabilities of monetary financial institutions (excluding the Bundesbank)  
in Germany  .................................................................................................................  20•
 2 Principal assets and liabilities of banks (MFIs) in Germany, by category of banks  ..........  24•
 3 A ssets and liabilities of banks (MFIs) in Germany vis-à-vis residents  ..............................  26•
 4 A ssets and liabilities of banks (MFIs) in Germany vis-à-vis non-residents  .......................  28•
 5 Lending by banks (MFIs) in Germany to domestic non-banks (non-MFIs)  .....................  30•
 6 Lending by banks (MFIs) in Germany to domestic enterprises and households, 
 housing loans, sectors of economic activity  .................................................................  32•
 7 Deposits of domestic non-banks (non-MFIs) at banks (MFIs) in Germany  .....................  34•
 8 Deposits of domestic households and non-profit institutions at banks (MFIs) in 
 Germany  .....................................................................................................................  36•
 9 Deposits of domestic government at banks (MFIs) in Germany, by creditor group ........  36•
 1 0 Savings deposits and bank savings bonds of banks (MFIs) in Germany sold to  
non-banks (non-MFIs) ..................................................................................................  38•
 1 1 Debt securities and money market paper outstanding of banks (MFIs) in Germany  ...... 38•
 1 2 Building and loan associations (MFIs) in Germany  ........................................................  39•
 1 3 A ssets and liabilities of the foreign branches and foreign subsidiaries of  
German banks (MFIs)  ...................................................................................................  40•Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report 
November 2012  
2•

V Minimum reserves
 1 Reserve ratios  ..............................................................................................................  42•
 2 Reserve maintenance in Germany up to the end of 1998  ............................................  42•
 3 Reserve maintenance in the euro area  .........................................................................  42•
VI Interest rates
 1 ECB interest rates  ........................................................................................................  43•
 2 Base rates  ....................................................................................................................  43•
 3 Eur osystem monetary policy operations allotted through tenders  ................................  43•
 4 Money market rates, by month  ...................................................................................  43•
 5 Inter est rates and volumes for outstanding amounts and new business of  
German banks (MFIs)  ...................................................................................................  44•
VII Capital market
 1 Sales and purchases of debt securities and shares in Germany  .....................................  48•
 2 Sales of debt securities issued by residents  ..................................................................  49•
 3 Amounts outstanding of debt securities issued by residents .........................................  50•
 4 Shar es in circulation issued by residents  .......................................................................  50•
 5 Y ields and indices on German securities  ......................................................................  51•
 6 Sales and purchases of mutual fund shares in Germany  ...............................................  51•
VIII Financial accounts
 1 A cquisition of financial assets and financing of private non-financial sectors  ................  52•
 2 Financial assets and liabilities of private non-financial sectors  ......................................  53•
IX Public finances in Germany
 1 Gener al government: deficit and debt level as defined in the Maastricht Treaty  ..................  54•
 2 Gener al government: revenue, expenditure and fiscal deficit/surplus as shown in  
the national accounts  ..................................................................................................  54•
 3 Gener al government: budgetary development (as per government’s financial 
 statistics)  .....................................................................................................................  55•
 4 Centr al, state and local government: budgetary development (as per government’s 
 financial statistics)  ........................................................................................................  55•
 5 Centr al, state and local government: tax revenue  ........................................................  56•
 6 Centr al and state government and European Union: tax revenue, by type  .......................  56•
 7 Centr al, state and local government: individual taxes  ..................................................  57•Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report 
November 2012  
3•

 8 German pension insurance scheme: budgetary development and assets  ......................  57•
 9 F ederal Employment Agency: budgetary development  .................................................  58•
 1 0 S tatutory health insurance scheme: budgetary development  .......................................  58•
 1 1 S tatutory long-term care insurance scheme: budgetary development  ..........................  59•
 1 2 Centr al government: borrowing in the market  .............................................................  59•
 1 3 Centr al, state and local government: debt by creditor  .................................................  59•
 1 4 Centr al, state and local government: debt by category  ................................................  60•
X Economic conditions in Germany
 1 Origin and use of domestic product, distribution of national income  ...........................  61•
 2 Output in the production sector  ..................................................................................  62•
 3 Or ders received by industry  .........................................................................................  63•
 4 Or ders received by construction  ..................................................................................  64•
 5 Retail trade turnover, sales of motor vehicles  ...............................................................  64•
 6 Labour market  .............................................................................................................  65•
 7 Prices  ..........................................................................................................................  66•
 8 Households’ income  ....................................................................................................  67•
 9 Negotiated pay rates (overall economy)  .......................................................................  67•
XI External sector
 1 Major items of the balance of payments of the euro area  ...........................................  68•
 2 Major items of the balance of payments of the Federal Republic of Germany  ..............  69•
 3 F oreign trade (special trade) of the Federal Republic of Germany, by country and 
group of countries  .......................................................................................................  70•
 4 Services and income of the Federal Republic of Germany  ............................................  71•
 5 C urrent transfers of the Federal Republic of Germany  ..................................................  71•
 6 C apital transfers  ..........................................................................................................  71•
 7 Financial account of the Federal Republic of Germany  .................................................  72•
 8 External position of the Bundesbank up to end-1998  ..................................................  73•
 9 External position of the Bundesbank since the beginning of the  
European monetary union  ...........................................................................................  73•
 1 0 A ssets and liabilities of enterprises in Germany (other than banks) vis-à-vis  
non-residents  ..............................................................................................................  74•
 1 1 ECB euro reference exchange rates of selected currencies  ...........................................  75•
 1 2 Eur o-area member states and irrevocable euro conversion rates in the third stage  
of European Economic and Monetary Union  ...............................................................  75•
 1 3 Effective exchange rates of the euro and indicators of the German economy’s price 
competitiveness  ...........................................................................................................  76•Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report 
November 2012  
4•

Deutsche Bundesbank
5  Monthly Report
November 2012
I Key economic data for the euro area 
 
1 Monetary developments and interest rates
 
 
 
 
 Money stock in various definitions 1,2 Determinants of the money stock 1 Interest rates
 M 3 3 
MFI lending to Yield on Euro-
 3-month enterprises Monetary pean govern-
MFI lending, and capital 3-month ment bonds moving  average
M1 M2 (centred) total households formation 4 Eonia 5,7 Euribor 6,7 outstanding 8 
Period Annual percentage change % Annual percentage as a monthly average
2011          Jan 3.2 2.3 1.4 1.4 3.8 2.1 3.3 0.66 1.02 4.2
         Feb 2.9 2.4 1.6 1.6 3.8 2.3 3.8 0.71 1.09 4.3         Mar 3.0 2.7 1.8 1.7 3.2 2.2 3.7 0.66 1.18 4.4
         Apr 1.7 2.4 1.5 1.6 3.2 2.3 3.8 0.97 1.32 4.5
         May 1.2 2.4 1.5 1.4 3.1 2.5 4.1 1.03 1.43 4.4
         June 1.3 2.4 1.3 1.3 2.6 2.1 4.3 1.12 1.49 4.4
         July 1.0 2.1 1.2 1.4 2.4 1.8 4.4 1.01 1.60 4.6
         Aug 1.8 2.4 1.8 1.6 2.4 1.7 4.3 0.91 1.55 4.1
         Sep 2.2 2.5 1.7 1.6 2.3 1.6 4.3 1.01 1.54 4.0
         Oct 1.8 1.9 1.4 1.5 1.6 2.1 4.2 0.96 1.58 4.3
         Nov 2.3 2.1 1.5 1.5 0.8 1.0 3.3 0.79 1.48 4.8
         Dec 1.8 1.8 1.5 1.7 0.9 0.5 2.8 0.63 1.43 4.8
2012          Jan 2.2 2.3 2.0 2.0 1.4 0.7 2.7 0.38 1.22 4.7
         Feb 2.7 2.8 2.5 2.4 1.4 0.4 2.0 0.37 1.05 4.5
         Mar 2.9 2.9 2.9 2.6 1.8 0.5 1.3 0.36 0.86 4.0
         Apr 1.9 2.4 2.3 2.7 1.3 − 0.1 0.7 0.35 0.74 4.1
         May 3.5 2.9 2.9 2.8 1.4 − 0.3 − 0.2 0.34 0.68 4.1
         June 3.7 3.0 3.0 3.2 1.4 − 0.4 − 0.4 0.33 0.66 4.2
         July 4.7 3.5 3.6 3.1 1.2 − 0.6 − 1.3 0.18 0.50 4.0
         Aug 5.2 3.2 2.8 3.0 0.7 − 1.0 − 1.5 0.11 0.33 3.9
         Sep 5.0 3.1 2.7 ... 0.8 − 0.9 − 1.7 0.10 0.25 3.6
         Oct ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 0.09 0.21 3.4
1 Source: ECB. 2 Seasonally adjusted. 3 Excluding money market fund shares/units, OverNight Index Average. 6 Euro Interbank Offered Rate. 7 See also footnotes to
money market paper and debt securities with a maturity of up to two years held by Table VI.4, p 43  8 GDP-weighted yield on ten-year government bonds. Countries
non-euro-area residents. 4 Longer-term liabilities to euro-area non-MFIs. 5 Euro include:DE,FR,NL,BE,AT,FI,IE,PT,ES,IT,GR,SK. 
 
 
2 External transactions and positions  * 
  
 
Selected items of the euro-area balance of payments Euro exchange rates  1 
Current account Capital account Effective exchange rate 3 
of which Direct Securities Other Reserve
Balance Trade balance Balance investment investment assets Dollar rate Nominal Real  4 transactions 2 
Period € million Euro/US-$ Q1 1999 = 100
2011
         Jan − 16,778 − 14,241 + 6,408 + 4,282 − 30,171 + 38,221 − 5,924 1.3360 101.4 99.0
         Feb − 5,521 + 752 − 3,577 − 36,706 + 94,356 − 62,353 + 1,126 1.3649 102.4 99.8
         Mar + 1,040 + 3,367 − 8,108 − 10,401 + 71,409 − 62,256 − 6,860 1.3999 104.1 101.6
         Apr − 4,988 − 3,624 − 4,657 − 31,176 + 8,621 + 11,872 + 6,026 1.4442 105.9 103.4
         May − 13,949 + 471 + 18,894 − 4,247 + 42,910 − 16,645 − 3,124 1.4349 104.9 102.2         June + 322 + 797 + 6,964 + 3,592 + 91,099 − 89,308 + 1,582 1.4388 105.0 102.2
         July + 3,360 + 4,156 − 6,208 − 17,336 − 23,660 + 36,022 − 1,234 1.4264 104.0 101.1
         Aug − 1,416 − 4,309 − 580 + 7,194 + 18,195 − 29,352 + 3,383 1.4343 103.9 101.0         Sep + 780 + 2,991 + 10,292 − 9,031 + 25,642 − 7,908 + 1,589 1.3770 102.8 99.9
         Oct + 3,742 + 616 + 1,404 − 5,555 − 4,274 + 12,321 − 1,089 1.3706 103.0 100.2         Nov + 9,058 + 5,534 − 19,565 − 44,999 + 33,885 − 8,212 − 238 1.3556 102.6 99.9
         Dec + 22,059 + 8,419 − 22,028 − 4,340 − 43,945 + 31,691 − 5,435 1.3179 100.8 98.1
2012          Jan − 11,655 − 7,593 + 19,216 + 282 − 45,530 + 65,612 − 1,149 1.2905 98.9 96.3
         Feb − 3,548 + 3,163 + 6,455 + 5,672 + 16,477 − 14,080 − 1,614 1.3224 99.6 97.2
         Mar + 10,580 + 10,717 − 22,069 − 9,432 − 48,653 + 35,361 + 655 1.3201 99.8 97.3
         Apr + 2,862 + 5,268 − 4,123 − 771 + 590 − 960 − 2,982 1.3162 99.5 97.2
         May − 4,635 + 6,104 + 1,175 + 10,142 + 16,721 − 24,227 − 1,461 1.2789 98.0 95.7
         June + 18,235 + 14,299 − 21,335 − 19,084 + 58,766 − 56,508 − 4,510 1.2526 97.2 94.9
         July + 14,257 + 11,110 − 7,344 − 7,170 + 23,077 − 23,745 + 495 1.2288 95.3 93.2
         Aug + 7,159 + 4,444 − 12,074 − 11,155 + 7,430 − 6,786 − 1,564 1.2400 95.2 93.2
         Sep ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 1.2856 97.2 95.0
         Oct ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 1.2974 97.8 95.5
*  Source: ECB. 1  See also Tables XI.12 and 13, pp 75−76
  2  Including
financial derivatives. 3  Vis-à-vis the currencies of The-EER-20 group. 4  Based on
consumer prices. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
6  Monthly Report
November 2012
I. Key economic data for the euro area 
 
3  General economic indicators
 
 
                   
 
Period Euro area Belgium Germany Estonia Finland France Greece Ireland Italy
 
Real gross domestic product 1,2
 
2009 − 4.4 − 2.8 − 5.1 − 14.1 − 8.5 − 3.1 − 3.2 − 5.5 − 5.5
2010 2.0 2.4 4.2 3.3 3.3 1.7 − 3.5 − 0.8 1.8
2011 1.4 1.8 3.0 8.3 2.7 1.7 − 6.9 1.4 0.4
2011          Q2 1.6 2.0 3.1 8.2 1.7 1.9 − 7.9 2.9 1.1
         Q3 1.3 1.5 2.6 9.3 4.0 1.3 − 4.0 1.0 0.4
         Q4 0.6 0.8 1.4 5.9 0.8 1.0 − 7.9 2.8 − 0.9
2012          Q1 0.0 0.4 1.7 3.4 2.2 0.7 − 6.7 2.1 − 1.2
         Q2 − 0.4 − 0.4 0.5 2.2 − 0.1 − 0.3 − 6.2 − 1.1 − 2.9
         Q3 − 0.6 ... 0.4 ... ... ... − 7.2 ... ...
 
Industrial production 1,3
 
2009 − 14.9 − 11.9 − 16.3 − 23.9 − 18.1 − 12.8 − 9.2 − 4.5 − 18.8
2010 7.3 8.4 10.9 22.8 5.1 4.7 − 6.6 7.6 6.8
2011 3.4 4.2 7.6 16.7 1.3 1.8 − 8.0 0.0 0.1
2011          Q2 3.9 4.0 8.0 23.4 2.9 1.6 − 10.9 − 0.1 2.1
         Q3 3.8 4.1 8.1 16.1 0.2 2.2 − 4.8 1.0 − 0.4
         Q4 − 0.3 1.1 2.8 1.6 − 2.0 − 0.6 − 11.1 0.7 − 3.3
2012          Q1 − 1.8 − 3.7 4 0.8 − 1.8 − 3.1 − 2.2 − 8.4 0.5 − 5.8
         Q2 − 2.4 − 6.0 − 0.3 − 2.5 − 1.2 − 2.0 − 2.3 3.0 − 7.9
         Q3 − 2.2 ... 5p − 1.5 − 0.7 − 0.4 − 1.9 p − 3.5 p − 3.1 − 5.9
 
Capacity utilisation in industry 6
 
2010 75.8 77.9 79.7 67.1 75.6 77.2 68.1 − 68.3
2011 80.5 80.5 86.1 73.3 80.5 83.0 67.9 − 72.6
2012 78.6 77.7 83.5 70.2 78.8 81.2 64.9 − 70.1
2011          Q3 80.5 80.1 86.7 73.0 78.3 83.0 67.5 − 72.1
         Q4 79.7 78.0 85.1 73.2 78.8 82.8 65.8 − 71.6
2012          Q1 79.8 79.0 85.3 70.5 77.7 82.4 65.5 − 70.7
         Q2 79.7 78.4 85.2 69.0 79.9 81.8 64.9 − 71.0
         Q3 77.9 76.9 82.6 71.3 80.1 81.4 63.9 − 69.7
         Q4 76.8 76.6 80.7 70.1 77.4 79.0 65.1 − 69.0
 
Standardised unemployment rate 7,8
 
2009 9.6 7.9 7.8 13.8 8.3 9.5 9.5 11.9 7.8
2010 10.1 8.3 7.1 16.9 8.4 9.7 12.6 13.7 8.4
2011 10.1 7.2 6.0 12.5 7.8 9.6 17.7 14.4 8.4
2012          Apr 11.2 7.3 5.4 7.6 10.1 23.1 14.7 10.5
         May 11.3 7.4 5.6 7.6 10.3 23.9 14.7 10.5
         June 11.4 7.4 5.4 10.0 7.6 10.4 24.7 14.7 10.6
         July 11.5 7.5 5.6 7.6 10.6 24.8 14.9 10.6
         Aug 11.5 7.4 5.4 7.9 10.7 25.4 15.0 10.6
         Sep 11.6 7.4 5.5 ... 7.9 10.8 ... 15.1 10.8
 
Harmonised Index of Consumer Prices 1
 
2009 9 0.3 0.0 0.2 0.2 1.6 0.1 1.3 − 1.7 0.8
2010 1.6 2.3 1.2 2.7 1.7 1.7 4.7 − 1.6 1.6
2011 10 2.7 3.5 2.5 5.1 3.3 2.3 3.1 1.2 2.9
2012          May 2.4 2.6 2.2 4.1 3.1 2.3 0.9 1.9 3.5
         June 2.4 2.2 2.0 4.4 2.9 2.3 1.0 1.9 3.6
         July 2.4 2.0 1.9 4.1 3.1 2.2 0.9 2.0 3.6
         Aug 2.6 2.6 2.2 4.2 3.3 2.4 1.2 2.6 3.3
         Sep 2.6 2.6 2.1 4.1 3.4 2.2 0.3 2.4 3.4
         Oct p 2.5 2.6 2.1 4.2 3.5 2.1 0.9 2.1 e 2.8
 
General government financial balance 11
 
2009 − 6.3 − 5.5 − 3.1 − 2.0 − 2.5 − 7.5 − 15.6 − 13.9 − 5.4
2010 − 6.2 − 3.8 − 4.1 0.2 − 2.5 − 7.1 − 10.7 − 30.9 − 4.5
2011 − 4.1 − 3.7 − 0.8 1.1 − 0.6 − 5.2 − 9.4 − 13.4 − 3.9
 
General government debt 11
 
2009 80.0 95.7 74.5 7.2 43.5 79.2 129.7 64.9 116.4
2010 85.4 95.5 82.5 6.7 48.6 82.3 148.3 92.2 119.2
2011 87.3 97.8 80.5 6.1 49.0 86.0 170.6 106.4 120.7
Sources: National data, European Commission, Eurostat, European Central Bank. 4  Positivly influenced by late reports. 5  Provisional; adjusted in advance by the
Latest data are partly based on press reports and are provisional. 1  Annual percen- Federal Statistical Office by way of estimates to the results of the Quarterly
tage change. 2  GDP of the euro area calculated from seasonally adjusted data. Production Survey. 6  Manufacturing, in %; seasonally adjusted; data are collected in
3  Manufacturing, mining and energy; adjusted for working-day variations.

Deutsche Bundesbank
7  Monthly Report
November 2012
I.  Key economic data for the euro area  
 
   
                   
 
Luxembourg Malta Netherlands Austria Portugal Slovakia Slovenia Spain Cyprus   Period
 
Real gross domestic product 1,2
 
− 4.1 − 2.4 − 3.7 − 3.8 − 2.9 − 4.9 − 7.8 − 3.7 − 1.9 2009
2.9 3.4 1.6 2.0 1.4 4.4 1.2 − 0.3 1.3 2010
1.7 1.9 1.0 2.7 − 1.7 3.2 0.6 0.4 0.5 2011
1.7 2.7 1.4 4.1 − 1.2 3.5 1.6 0.7 1.5 2011          Q2
1.5 2.5 0.9 1.8 − 1.9 3.0 0.8 0.9 − 0.3          Q3
0.2 − 0.5 − 0.8 0.4 − 2.7 3.4 − 2.4 − 0.4 − 0.8          Q4
0.1 − 1.3 − 0.8 2.1 − 2.3 3.0 0.2 − 0.7 − 1.5 2012          Q1
0.7 0.9 − 0.4 0.1 − 3.3 2.8 − 3.2 − 1.6 − 2.3          Q2
... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ...          Q3
 
Industrial production1,3
 
− 16.1 − − 7.7 − 11.3 − 8.6 − 14.1 − 17.7 − 15.8 − 9.0 2009
9.4 − 7.8 6.7 1.7 18.3 6.0 0.8 − 2.1 2010
− 2.5 − − 0.8 6.7 − 2.0 7.1 2.8 − 1.4 − 7.7 2011
− 4.5 − − 1.4 8.7 − 1.5 8.7 3.6 − 1.1 − 4.1 2011          Q2
− 1.6 − 2.6 5.7 − 2.3 5.0 0.8 − 1.4 − 12.5          Q3
− 6.4 − − 4.3 2.1 − 4.4 3.6 − 0.7 − 5.0 − 11.1          Q4
− 7.0 − − 1.2 0.9 − 5.5 9.3 0.4 − 5.8 − 13.2 2012          Q1
− 5.5 − 1.8 2.0 − 6.4 12.8 1.0 − 7.1 − 11.1          Q2
p − 6.3 − p − 2.1 ... − 4.0 p 15.9 p 1.8 − 5.3 ...          Q3
 
Capacity utilisation in industry 6
 
78.5 77.7 78.9 81.9 75.0 58.0 76.0 71.1 62.6 201083.2 78.7 80.3 85.4 74.4 61.6 80.4 73.3 61.4 201176.4 75.2 78.4 84.6 73.8 69.6 79.1 72.1 56.7 2012
82.7 76.9 80.6 85.8 74.3 60.6 80.1 72.6 61.2 2011          Q3
79.8 76.0 78.9 85.0 73.5 62.3 79.5 72.2 58.1          Q4
79.2 74.2 79.8 85.1 74.1 67.5 79.7 72.5 56.9 2012          Q1
82.7 75.9 78.6 84.7 74.2 71.1 80.6 72.7 56.9          Q2
78.1 76.2 78.3 84.9 74.2 71.2 79.4 70.7 59.1          Q3
65.7 74.3 77.0 83.6 72.6 68.4 76.6 72.5 53.7          Q4
 
Standardised unemployment rate 7,8
 
5.1 6.9 3.7 4.8 10.6 12.1 5.9 18.0 5.5 20094.6 6.9 4.5 4.4 12.0 14.5 7.3 20.1 6.4 20104.8 6.5 4.4 4.2 12.9 13.6 8.2 21.7 7.9 2011
5.0 6.2 5.2 4.1 15.4 13.7 8.3 24.4 11.2 2012          Apr 
5.1 6.5 5.1 4.3 15.5 13.8 8.5 24.8 11.6          May
5.1 6.7 5.1 4.5 15.7 13.9 8.5 25.0 11.5          June
5.2 6.6 5.3 4.6 15.7 14.0 8.4 25.3 11.9          July
5.2 6.6 5.3 4.5 15.8 14.1 8.4 25.5 11.8          Aug 
5.2 6.4 5.4 4.4 15.7 13.9 8.4 25.8 12.2          Sep 
 
Harmonised Index of Consumer Prices 1
 
0.0 1.8 1.0 0.4 − 0.9 0.9 0.9 − 0.2 0.2 20092.8 2.0 0.9 1.7 1.4 0.7 2.1 2.0 2.6 20103.7 2.5 2.5 3.6 3.6 4.1 2.1 3.1 3.5 2011
2.7 3.7 2.5 2.2 2.7 3.4 2.4 1.9 3.7 2012          May
2.6 4.4 2.5 2.2 2.7 3.7 2.4 1.8 2.9          June
2.7 4.2 2.6 2.1 2.8 3.8 2.6 2.2 3.8          July
2.8 3.2 2.5 2.3 3.2 3.8 3.1 2.7 4.5          Aug 
3.2 2.9 2.5 2.8 2.9 3.8 3.7 3.5 3.6          Sep 
3.2 3.2 3.3
p 2.9 2.1 3.9 3.2 3.5 2.6          Oct 
 
General government financial balance 11
 
− 0.8 − 3.9 − 5.6 − 4.1 − 10.2 − 8.0 − 6.0 − 11.2 − 6.1 2009− 0.8 − 3.6 − 5.1 − 4.5 − 9.8 − 7.7 − 5.7 − 9.7 − 5.3 2010− 0.3 − 2.7 − 4.5 − 2.5 − 4.4 − 4.9 − 6.4 − 9.4 − 6.3 2011
 
General government debt 11
 
15.3 67.6 60.8 69.2 83.2 35.6 35.0 53.9 58.5 200919.2 68.3 63.1 72.0 93.5 41.0 38.6 61.5 61.3 201018.3 70.9 65.5 72.4 108.1 43.3 46.9 69.3 71.1 2011
January, April, July and October. 7  As a percentage of the civilian labour force; sea- 2009 onwards. 10  Including Estonia from 2011 onwards. 11  As a percentage of
sonally adjusted. 8  Standardised unemployment rate of Germany: calculation based GDP; euro-area aggregate: European Central Bank (ESA 1995), member states:
on unadjusted data from the Federal Statistical Office. 9  Including Slovakia from European Commission (Maastricht Treaty definition). 

Deutsche Bundesbank
8  Monthly Report
November 2012
II Overall monetary survey in the euro area 
 
1 The money stock and its counterparts *
(a) Euro area 
  
€ billion
I Lending to non-banks (non-MFIs) II Net claims on III Monetary capital formation at monetary
in the euro area non-euro-area residents financial institutions (MFIs) in the euro area
Enterprises General
and households government Debt
Deposits securities
Liabil- with an Deposits with
Claims ities to agreed at agreed maturities
on non- non-euro- maturity notice of of over Capital
of which of which euro-area area of over over 2 years and
Period Total Total Total Total residents residents Total 2 years 3 months (net)  2 Securities Securities reserves 3 
2011          Feb 17.6 23.8 − 0.5 − 6.2 7.9 21.0 31.6 10.6 33.3 − 4.7 0.5 22.9 14.6
         Mar − 31.3 − 8.0 − 27.0 − 23.3 − 12.1 100.8 − 32.2 − 133.0 23.6 7.5 0.0 14.2 1.9
         Apr 81.7 79.8 44.7 1.8 11.6 − 22.2 83.9 106.2 31.4 13.9 − 1.1 19.4 − 0.7
         May 5.4 18.9 − 21.6 − 13.5 9.8 8.2 82.3 74.1 25.7 1.4 − 0.5 11.4 13.4
         June 9.6 − 16.0 − 50.6 25.6 29.1 65.8 − 134.5 − 200.3 24.5 4.2 − 0.3 2.6 18.0
         July − 5.6 5.1 2.5 − 10.7 − 14.8 − 18.0 − 38.0 − 20.0 33.4 − 6.0 0.0 2.0 37.3
         Aug 8.2 − 10.0 − 12.6 18.2 32.2 28.3 72.8 44.5 9.3 1.5 − 0.4 − 1.8 9.9
         Sep 51.3 27.0 − 20.0 24.3 20.9 23.3 − 14.2 − 37.6 9.8 12.9 − 0.7 − 4.8 2.5
         Oct 36.1 37.4 36.2 − 1.2 − 0.5 − 50.9 − 88.8 − 37.9 9.5 24.2 0.0 − 18.5 3.7
         Nov 27.4 − 12.0 8.3 39.4 40.3 − 24.4 − 65.0 − 40.5 − 4.4 − 11.2 − 0.9 − 10.5 18.2
         Dec − 95.6 −112.0 − 15.9 16.4 1.5 17.2 − 21.1 − 38.3 − 4.4 13.9 − 0.7 − 42.7 25.1
2012          Jan 123.6 58.2 17.7 65.4 67.6 − 44.5 17.9 62.4 4.8 0.5 0.6 − 4.6 8.3
         Feb 15.2 − 15.4 4.5 30.6 46.9 21.5 19.1 − 2.4 − 11.9 − 3.4 − 1.4 − 6.8 − 0.2
         Mar 34.7 2.1 1.1 32.6 35.4 − 25.5 32.9 58.4 − 35.6 − 26.5 − 0.8 − 17.5 9.2
         Apr 11.2 7.5 15.7 3.6 − 3.4 − 26.7 − 13.8 12.9 − 9.8 − 6.3 − 0.3 − 7.3 4.1
         May 22.0 − 7.0 − 10.5 29.1 27.4 15.2 27.8 12.6 − 41.6 − 31.9 − 1.1 − 22.8 14.2
         June 7.1 − 35.5 − 59.6 42.6 17.4 18.2 − 85.2 − 103.4 8.7 − 13.0 − 1.1 − 13.0 35.8
         July − 38.2 − 20.2 − 48.8 − 17.9 − 17.3 10.9 7.6 − 3.3 − 36.1 − 53.2 − 1.2 6.4 11.9
         Aug − 79.8 − 61.1 − 15.4 − 18.8 − 9.5 22.0 − 23.6 − 45.7 − 1.1 0.6 − 1.4 − 0.9 0.6         Sep 65.5 33.2 − 6.3 32.3 29.1 − 0.7 − 36.4 − 35.6 − 11.9 − 8.4 − 1.5 − 9.4 7.4
  
  
(b) German contribution
 
I Lending to non-banks (non-MFIs) II Net claims on III Monetary capital formation at monetary
in the euro area non-euro-area residents financial institutions (MFIs) in the euro area
Enterprises General
and households government Debt
Deposits securities
Liabil- with an Deposits with
Claims ities to agreed at agreed maturities
on non- non-euro- maturity notice of of over Capital
of which of which euro-area area of over over 2 years and
Period Total Total Total Total residents residents Total 2 years 3 months (net)  2 Securities Securities reserves 3 
2011          Feb − 0.8 13.5 − 7.2 − 14.3 − 2.4 − 4.0 3.6 7.6 2.2 − 1.8 0.0 0.1 3.9         Mar − 29.5 − 17.0 − 0.5 − 12.5 − 2.2 26.5 − 26.8 − 53.2 − 3.7 − 1.7 0.2 − 4.6 2.5
         Apr 29.1 36.8 22.4 − 7.7 3.2 19.0 50.0 31.0 2.3 − 1.3 − 0.8 2.9 1.4
         May − 26.0 − 16.3 − 24.7 − 9.7 1.3 5.3 1.4 − 3.9 − 10.3 − 0.3 − 0.1 − 3.5 − 6.4
         June − 23.3 − 13.4 − 12.4 − 10.0 − 6.4 17.2 − 41.3 − 58.5 4.8 0.2 − 0.2 2.0 2.8
         July − 1.0 − 2.2 − 4.2 1.3 − 3.9 − 9.9 − 5.4 4.5 − 4.6 − 0.3 0.0 − 5.9 1.5
         Aug 15.3 12.7 − 6.1 2.6 12.0 − 31.2 24.0 55.1 0.1 − 0.1 − 0.1 − 1.2 1.5
         Sep 12.7 9.6 − 5.5 3.1 3.6 − 41.6 − 15.9 25.7 − 8.2 − 3.8 − 0.5 − 2.4 − 1.5
         Oct 29.3 25.9 − 2.1 3.4 7.6 − 39.2 − 23.4 15.8 2.4 − 2.0 − 0.2 2.7 2.0
         Nov 3.7 4.2 1.7 − 0.5 2.1 − 13.7 − 0.1 13.6 − 7.3 − 1.4 − 0.9 − 3.8 − 1.3
         Dec − 54.4 − 48.0 − 4.8 − 6.4 − 9.5 72.3 − 9.7 − 82.0 − 8.0 − 0.3 − 0.8 − 4.3 − 2.6
2012          Jan 36.8 25.6 4.3 11.2 7.7 − 79.5 29.1 108.7 − 26.2 − 3.4 − 0.9 − 22.7 0.9
         Feb − 3.1 − 2.8 − 5.8 − 0.3 1.9 − 30.3 − 10.6 19.7 9.1 − 2.8 − 1.2 8.2 4.9
         Mar 2.1 1.2 8.4 0.9 3.2 − 51.5 5.1 56.6 − 6.8 − 4.9 − 0.8 − 6.2 5.1
         Apr 18.0 16.0 12.9 2.0 − 3.2 − 12.4 − 0.5 11.9 1.4 − 1.4 − 0.3 2.3 0.8
         May − 33.7 − 25.5 − 20.6 − 8.2 − 2.7 − 21.2 − 5.0 16.2 − 12.6 − 3.0 − 0.8 − 6.0 − 2.7         June 10.1 − 7.5 − 9.2 17.6 7.0 − 27.1 − 28.9 − 1.8 1.7 − 3.0 − 1.0 − 1.3 7.0
         July 29.8 34.2 − 0.6 − 4.5 − 0.4 − 16.1 1.5 17.6 − 5.5 − 4.9 − 0.8 − 2.2 2.5
         Aug − 4.0 0.6 1.6 − 4.7 2.1 − 6.7 13.4 20.1 − 5.1 − 1.9 − 1.4 − 2.4 0.7         Sep 8.0 2.4 5.1 5.6 6.1 52.9 7.1 − 45.7 − 5.7 − 3.2 − 1.6 − 1.4 0.6
*The data in this table are based on the consolidated balance sheet of monetary MFIs’ portfolios. 3After deduction of inter-MFI participations. 4Including the counter-
financial institutions (MFIs) (Table II.2); statistical breaks have been eliminated from parts of monetary liabilities of central governments. 5Including the monetary
the flow figures (see also the “Notes on the figures“ in the “Explanatory notes“ in the liabilities of central governments (Post Office, Treasury). 6In Germany, only savings
Statistical Supplement to the Monthly Report 1, p 30
  ).1Source: ECB. 2Excluding deposits. 7Paper held by residents outside the euro area has been eliminated.

Deutsche Bundesbank
9  Monthly Report
November 2012
II Overall monetary survey in the euro area
 
 
 
(a) Euro area 
 
V Other factors VI Money stock M3 (balance I plus II less III less IV less V)
Money stock M2 Debt secur-
of which ities with
Intra- Money stock M1 maturities
Eurosystem Deposits of up to
liability/ with an Deposits Money 2 years
IV De- claim agreed at agreed market (incl money
posits of related to Currency maturity notice of Repo fund market    
banknote in circu- Overnight of up to up to 3 transac- shares paper)    central  gov-
ernments Total 4 issue Total Total Total lation deposits 5 2 years 5 tions (net) 2,7  Period (net) 2,7,8 months  5,6 
13.5 5.7 − − 13.9 − 20.5 − 33.6 − 0.0 − 33.6 11.9 1.2 39.6 3.0 − 2.5 2011          Feb 
− 37.3 45.5 − 37.7 26.6 16.8 2.5 14.3 7.0 2.8 − 14.9 − 2.1 16.6          Mar 
16.2 − 51.4 − 63.2 50.6 39.9 7.1 32.8 7.7 3.0 22.7 2.2 − 5.7          Apr 
− 17.0 26.7 − − 21.9 − 8.0 − 15.9 5.0 − 20.9 7.3 0.6 38.7 − 3.5 − 7.9          May
51.6 − 10.3 − 9.6 30.6 55.2 9.2 46.0 − 22.6 − 2.0 − 11.4 − 20.6 13.5          June
− 22.0 − 34.1 − − 0.9 0.1 − 20.8 8.5 − 29.3 18.8 2.1 − 1.1 − 7.1 − 1.3          July
− 60.4 45.6 − 42.0 10.2 − 17.5 − 4.7 − 12.7 22.3 5.4 45.8 22.0 − 3.3          Aug 
4.9 49.1 − 10.9 26.7 19.2 7.7 11.4 13.2 − 5.6 25.0 − 11.0 − 4.8          Sep 
0.5 − 4.0 − − 20.7 − 4.4 11.2 6.3 4.9 − 13.3 − 2.3 − 22.3 − 8.4 0.6          Oct 
4.2 − 0.1 − 3.3 1.4 15.1 3.9 11.3 − 15.0 1.2 − 28.4 6.5 2.1          Nov 
− 6.9 − 157.2 − 90.1 98.6 79.5 16.2 63.3 6.4 12.8 − 67.2 − 4.7 19.1          Dec 
59.9 37.8 − − 23.5 − 27.7 − 49.1 − 14.4 − 34.7 4.6 16.8 17.5 6.8 − 9.9 2012          Jan 23.2 0.1 − 25.3 11.5 − 27.8 − 0.4 − 27.4 31.6 7.7 13.8 2.2 13.5          Feb 
− 13.8 − 41.5 − 100.1 68.7 48.6 2.4 46.2 10.0 10.1 − 14.5 10.7 24.9          Mar 
− 36.3 25.0 − 5.6 0.9 3.7 2.7 1.1 − 7.3 4.5 3.4 9.7 − 6.3          Apr 
27.4 26.4 − 25.0 19.9 39.1 8.7 30.4 − 25.8 6.6 27.3 12.3 − 6.7          May
17.1 − 37.3 − 36.7 59.2 73.4 11.4 62.0 − 20.7 6.6 − 0.0 − 22.8 6.8          June
− 31.9 15.8 − 24.9 18.9 22.9 3.7 19.2 − 9.7 5.7 4.7 − 1.5 2.4          July− 37.7 − 7.8 − − 11.2 − 3.1 2.1 − 1.1 3.2 − 13.5 8.3 − 13.5 4.2 − 10.7          Aug 
33.5 21.4 − 21.7 45.8 49.4 − 3.5 52.9 − 5.3 1.7 14.0 − 19.5 − 3.9          Sep 
 
 
 (b) German contribution 
 
V Other factors VI Money stock M3 (balance I plus II less III less IV less V)  10 
of which Components of the money stock
Intra- Debt securities
Eurosystem Deposits with
liability/ with an Deposits Money maturities
IV De- claim agreed at agreed market of up to 2 yearsposits of related to Currency maturity notice of Repo fund (incl money    
banknote in circu- Overnight of up to up to 3 transac-
shares market    central  gov-
ernments Total issue 9,11 lation Total deposits 2 years months  6 tions (net) 7,8 paper)(net) 7  Period
1.9 49.9 1.1 − 0.2 8.8 − 15.5 5.2 2.1 18.8 − 0.1 − 1.6 2011          Feb 
− 8.2 − 6.0 0.6 0.6 − 7.6 3.3 3.8 0.8 − 14.3 0.1 − 1.3          Mar 
− 4.5 38.5 0.7 1.5 23.5 7.3 10.2 − 1.3 10.4 − 0.2 − 3.0          Apr 
3.4 44.0 1.5 1.4 25.0 1.1 10.9 − 2.3 15.9 − 0.3 − 0.3          May
3.0 − 14.3 1.5 2.5 5.2 8.2 − 0.4 − 1.9 − 0.3 − 0.2 − 0.2          June
− 1.2 − 16.7 1.8 2.0 − 5.5 − 4.8 13.5 − 1.2 − 13.4 − 2.5 3.0          July− 0.1 17.5 2.6 − 1.0 30.8 12.3 6.6 − 1.4 10.3 0.4 2.7          Aug 
3.4 7.4 3.2 1.3 17.9 7.2 12.3 − 1.0 4.9 0.1 − 5.6          Sep 
− 2.7 − 39.3 0.1 1.8 2.4 10.0 − 2.7 − 0.2 − 1.2 − 0.0 − 3.5          Oct − 0.2 − 76.4 0.1 1.5 30.2 20.4 1.7 − 0.1 5.3 − 0.9 3.9          Nov 
0.2 − 56.2 − 0.4 3.5 − 6.2 − 1.8 6.2 5.5 − 14.1 − 0.1 − 2.0          Dec 
4.0 12.7 0.5 − 3.1 − 11.7 0.8 − 1.0 2.1 − 10.8 − 0.3 − 2.4 2012          Jan 
3.5 − 36.6 1.2 − 0.1 21.7 9.8 − 3.6 3.9 10.0 − 0.2 1.8          Feb 
− 10.7 − 52.9 3.2 − 0.2 2.7 8.7 − 0.8 0.4 − 3.6 − 0.2 − 1.9          Mar 
1.9 − 11.4 2.1 1.0 17.9 10.4 3.1 − 1.2 7.2 0.0 − 1.7          Apr 
− 0.0 − 7.0 1.7 2.1 20.3 17.2 2.9 0.1 5.3 0.0 − 5.1          May
1.7 − 21.7 1.7 2.8 16.5 18.0 6.6 0.1 − 9.4 0.2 1.0          June
− 5.2 − 6.3 3.5 1.7 30.3 20.4 − 0.8 0.8 7.6 0.0 2.3          July− 1.1 − 26.3 3.9 − 0.9 10.6 12.4 − 2.3 0.9 1.7 − 0.4 − 1.6          Aug 
1.0 77.5 3.4 − 1.2 2.3 23.9 − 13.3 0.3 − 10.1 − 0.2 1.7          Sep 
8Less German MFIs’ holdings of paper issued by euro-area MFIs. 9Including money stocks M1, M2 or M3. 11The difference between the volume of euro
national banknotes still in circulation. 10The German contributions to the Euro- banknotes actually issued by the Bundesbank and the amount disclosed in
system’s monetary aggregates should on no account be interpreted as national accordance with the accounting regime chosen by the Eurosystem (see also footnote
monetary aggregates and are therefore not comparable with the erstwhile German 2 on banknote circulation in Table III.2). 

Deutsche Bundesbank
10  Monthly Report
November 2012
II Overall monetary survey in the euro area
 
2 Consolidated balance sheet of monetary financial institutions (MFIs) *
 
 
 
Assets
Lending to non-banks (non-MFIs) in the euro area
Enterprises and households General government
Claims
Total Shares and on non-
End of assets or Debt other Debt euro-area Other
year/month liabilities Total Total Loans securities  2 equities Total Loans securities 3 residents assets
 Euro area (€ billion) 1
 
2010          Aug 25,533.3 16,377.4 13,323.8 10,978.8 1,549.4 795.6 3,053.6 1,087.9 1,965.7 5,236.5 3,919.3
         Sep 25,128.1 16,396.1 13,331.0 10,981.4 1,552.1 797.6 3,065.0 1,094.1 1,970.9 5,032.5 3,699.5
         Oct 25,096.7 16,540.3 13,287.4 10,958.0 1,524.3 805.0 3,252.9 1,173.7 2,079.1 4,974.4 3,582.1
         Nov 25,404.2 16,696.9 13,441.2 11,067.6 1,556.9 816.7 3,255.6 1,229.3 2,026.4 5,146.8 3,560.6
         Dec 25,762.1 16,561.5 13,375.4 11,027.1 1,547.7 800.6 3,186.2 1,236.5 1,949.7 5,005.0 4,195.6
2011          Jan 25,642.0 16,627.2 13,416.6 11,065.0 1,535.7 815.9 3,210.6 1,236.0 1,974.7 5,016.7 3,998.1
         Feb 25,682.6 16,661.0 13,464.9 11,112.5 1,544.3 808.1 3,196.1 1,215.8 1,980.4 5,053.4 3,968.2
         Mar 25,258.5 16,455.5 13,406.1 11,116.5 1,510.0 779.6 3,049.4 1,205.9 1,843.5 4,945.7 3,857.3
         Apr 25,395.8 16,521.8 13,474.9 11,139.7 1,512.2 823.0 3,046.9 1,196.3 1,850.6 4,965.4 3,908.7
         May 25,734.9 16,548.6 13,510.3 11,200.0 1,510.2 800.1 3,038.3 1,173.4 1,865.0 5,130.9 4,055.4
         June 25,430.0 16,555.7 13,497.3 11,224.1 1,483.8 789.5 3,058.4 1,169.7 1,888.7 4,981.9 3,892.4
         July 25,796.4 16,548.5 13,508.8 11,238.0 1,488.2 782.6 3,039.8 1,174.2 1,865.6 5,027.8 4,220.1
         Aug 26,376.7 16,555.4 13,485.3 11,238.8 1,480.7 765.7 3,070.2 1,161.9 1,908.3 5,116.8 4,704.5
         Sep 26,971.6 16,607.4 13,520.1 11,296.6 1,470.6 752.8 3,087.4 1,163.4 1,924.0 5,189.7 5,174.5
         Oct 26,617.6 16,621.0 13,549.1 11,267.1 1,529.9 752.1 3,071.9 1,162.6 1,909.3 5,027.6 4,969.0
         Nov 26,618.0 16,625.4 13,540.3 11,252.0 1,533.8 754.5 3,085.1 1,162.1 1,923.0 5,062.8 4,929.7
         Dec 26,715.5 16,560.1 13,429.7 11,162.5 1,527.5 739.7 3,130.4 1,177.6 1,952.7 5,032.2 5,123.2
2012          Jan 26,894.7 16,673.5 13,476.0 11,194.8 1,533.3 747.9 3,197.5 1,174.8 2,022.6 5,045.0 5,176.2
         Feb 26,832.9 16,687.0 13,449.7 11,164.1 1,540.1 745.6 3,237.3 1,158.9 2,078.4 5,014.9 5,130.9
         Mar 26,690.5 16,707.0 13,445.3 11,161.7 1,527.7 755.9 3,261.7 1,155.5 2,106.2 5,032.9 4,950.6
         Apr 26,834.1 16,703.2 13,444.1 11,155.4 1,521.7 767.0 3,259.1 1,159.5 2,099.6 5,055.5 5,075.4
         May 27,789.2 16,720.5 13,445.8 11,174.1 1,521.2 750.6 3,274.6 1,161.2 2,113.4 5,205.2 5,863.5
         June 27,001.8 16,551.9 13,206.8 11,011.9 1,463.6 731.3 3,345.1 1,186.8 2,158.3 5,086.4 5,363.6
         July 27,309.6 16,488.8 13,158.2 11,005.9 1,416.8 735.5 3,330.6 1,186.3 2,144.3 5,180.4 5,640.3
         Aug 27,101.6 16,425.7 13,101.9 10,962.5 1,401.3 738.1 3,323.9 1,176.9 2,146.9 5,101.6 5,574.3
         Sep 26,927.7 16,472.8 13,100.8 10,967.5 1,382.9 750.4 3,372.0 1,180.4 2,191.6 5,047.5 5,407.4
 German contribution (€ billion) 
2010          Aug 5,201.0 3,683.3 2,991.4 2,546.6 199.6 245.1 691.9 373.2 318.7 1,228.9 288.8
         Sep 5,107.4 3,659.4 2,960.3 2,520.3 198.8 241.2 699.1 376.7 322.3 1,172.2 275.8
         Oct 5,210.5 3,775.7 2,964.7 2,523.0 197.8 243.9 811.0 381.2 429.8 1,162.4 272.4
         Nov 5,311.7 3,822.0 3,004.1 2,557.1 195.3 251.8 817.8 457.5 360.3 1,207.0 282.8
         Dec 6,121.9 3,742.7 2,958.4 2,518.9 192.6 246.9 784.3 447.6 336.7 1,183.6 1,195.6
2011          Jan 6,033.2 3,767.9 2,972.6 2,516.5 194.1 262.0 795.3 452.3 342.9 1,170.1 1,095.2
         Feb 5,986.9 3,764.4 2,983.4 2,535.7 193.4 254.3 781.0 440.8 340.2 1,175.3 1,047.2
         Mar 5,835.3 3,730.5 2,962.9 2,515.9 190.2 256.8 767.6 430.3 337.3 1,134.9 970.0
         Apr 5,901.3 3,753.8 2,995.6 2,526.0 189.8 279.8 758.2 419.3 339.0 1,171.1 976.3
         May 5,944.1 3,731.5 2,982.7 2,537.9 189.2 255.6 748.8 408.5 340.3 1,192.1 1,020.6
         June 5,793.3 3,706.7 2,968.3 2,536.0 187.5 244.9 738.4 404.9 333.4 1,145.1 941.6
         July 5,929.3 3,709.0 2,969.1 2,540.8 185.6 242.7 739.9 410.3 329.6 1,158.0 1,062.2
         Aug 6,140.9 3,729.5 2,988.1 2,565.9 183.4 238.8 741.4 400.7 340.8 1,190.0 1,221.3
         Sep 6,294.6 3,744.9 3,001.5 2,584.8 181.4 235.4 743.4 400.3 343.1 1,193.9 1,355.7
         Oct 6,167.9 3,767.6 3,022.8 2,609.4 179.0 234.4 744.8 396.1 348.7 1,157.5 1,242.8
         Nov 6,189.0 3,771.3 3,030.2 2,615.1 181.7 233.3 741.1 393.6 347.5 1,179.7 1,238.0
         Dec 6,229.9 3,720.7 2,986.3 2,576.3 183.2 226.8 734.4 396.9 337.5 1,180.4 1,328.9
2012          Jan 6,292.8 3,751.9 3,007.6 2,594.7 182.4 230.4 744.4 400.3 344.0 1,212.0 1,328.9
         Feb 6,239.0 3,746.7 3,001.7 2,595.0 179.9 226.8 745.0 398.1 346.9 1,193.1 1,299.2
         Mar 6,185.1 3,751.3 3,002.6 2,587.7 182.1 232.9 748.7 395.8 352.9 1,191.6 1,242.1
         Apr 6,250.5 3,775.2 3,022.0 2,594.1 179.8 248.0 753.3 401.1 352.2 1,198.9 1,276.4
         May 6,499.3 3,745.2 3,001.6 2,594.7 178.2 228.7 743.5 395.8 347.7 1,221.4 1,532.7
         June 6,313.4 3,752.8 2,970.9 2,592.7 156.5 221.7 781.8 406.4 375.4 1,183.7 1,377.0
         July 6,448.1 3,784.2 3,006.9 2,629.3 154.0 223.6 777.3 402.5 374.8 1,205.4 1,458.5
         Aug 6,408.2 3,779.1 3,005.1 2,625.9 153.0 226.2 774.0 395.7 378.2 1,206.3 1,422.8
         Sep 6,361.1 3,785.2 3,004.1 2,620.0 153.3 230.8 781.0 395.6 385.5 1,209.7 1,366.1
*Monetary financial institutions (MFIs) comprise banks (including building and loan enterprises. 3Including Treasury bills and other money market paper issued by
associations), money market funds, and the European Central Bank and national general government. 4Euro currency in circulation (see also footnote 8 on p 12  )
central banks (the Eurosystem). 1Source: ECB. 2Including money market paper of Excluding MFIs‘ cash in hand (in euro). The German contribution includes the volume

Deutsche Bundesbank
11  Monthly Report
November 2012
II Overall monetary survey in the euro area
 
   
 
Liabilities
Deposits of non-banks (non-MFIs) in the euro area
Enterprises and households
With agreed At agreed
maturities of notice of 6 
over
Currency 1 year and
in of which up to up to over up to over  End of
Total in euro 5 Total Overnight 1 year 2 years 2 years 3 months 3 months year/month circulation 4 
Euro area (€ billion) 1
 
788.0 10,206.4 9,631.4 9,698.6 3,656.5 1,457.3 272.6 2,350.3 1,845.7 116.1 2010          Aug 
786.8 10,205.5 9,644.5 9,689.0 3,660.5 1,458.3 263.9 2,344.0 1,848.5 113.8          Sep 
789.0 10,308.3 9,671.7 9,717.5 3,666.5 1,476.6 273.7 2,336.0 1,852.2 112.4          Oct 
790.2 10,390.5 9,719.2 9,777.1 3,670.5 1,465.7 277.9 2,393.8 1,856.3 112.9          Nov 808.6 10,387.3 9,824.2 9,888.6 3,726.6 1,469.0 272.6 2,430.2 1,877.7 112.5          Dec 
796.2 10,422.7 9,807.9 9,865.4 3,702.9 1,449.0 276.1 2,427.0 1,898.3 112.2 2011          Jan 
796.2 10,431.9 9,805.9 9,859.3 3,671.2 1,457.7 278.7 2,439.5 1,899.3 112.9          Feb 798.3 10,430.6 9,848.9 9,898.8 3,684.8 1,452.8 287.2 2,456.5 1,904.4 113.1          Mar 
805.5 10,491.9 9,896.4 9,946.3 3,712.5 1,455.7 286.4 2,470.1 1,909.4 112.2          Apr 
810.4 10,479.6 9,894.2 9,940.7 3,691.2 1,454.8 298.8 2,473.4 1,910.6 111.9          May819.7 10,554.2 9,916.5 9,954.3 3,729.3 1,426.5 300.7 2,477.1 1,908.8 111.9          June
828.2 10,522.3 9,911.9 9,955.5 3,712.6 1,440.1 306.9 2,472.7 1,911.2 112.0          July
823.4 10,481.1 9,930.0 9,969.4 3,698.0 1,451.4 313.0 2,478.6 1,916.6 111.9          Aug 831.2 10,533.2 9,961.9 10,017.7 3,719.6 1,467.2 312.8 2,495.3 1,911.6 111.3          Sep 
837.5 10,538.9 9,973.1 10,027.1 3,718.7 1,461.5 308.5 2,517.6 1,909.4 111.5          Oct 
841.4 10,535.5 9,960.4 10,006.8 3,718.3 1,441.2 312.5 2,509.9 1,915.2 109.8          Nov 857.5 10,625.2 10,051.6 10,118.7 3,795.2 1,451.1 310.5 2,524.5 1,928.1 109.4          Dec 
843.0 10,677.5 10,050.4 10,102.1 3,760.8 1,449.5 315.4 2,523.6 1,944.5 108.5 2012          Jan 
842.5 10,703.5 10,054.2 10,100.9 3,733.9 1,465.0 325.6 2,517.3 1,950.8 108.3          Feb 844.9 10,729.5 10,101.8 10,126.2 3,773.3 1,470.2 323.2 2,491.2 1,960.7 107.6          Mar 
847.6 10,688.0 10,092.6 10,125.1 3,781.4 1,474.4 310.9 2,485.8 1,965.0 107.5          Apr 
856.3 10,707.0 10,078.2 10,100.7 3,809.1 1,445.8 310.8 2,456.9 1,971.6 106.6          May867.7 10,754.1 10,111.6 10,102.0 3,867.1 1,418.4 302.8 2,430.1 1,977.9 105.6          June
871.3 10,685.4 10,065.9 10,061.8 3,883.6 1,410.5 301.7 2,378.2 1,983.3 104.5          July
870.2 10,641.7 10,059.1 10,065.8 3,893.4 1,397.0 300.3 2,378.6 1,993.4 103.2          Aug 866.7 10,716.6 10,106.3 10,107.1 3,939.4 1,396.9 299.6 2,374.7 1,994.7 101.8          Sep 
 German contribution (€ billion) 
195.8 2,857.1 2,794.5 2,709.4 1,046.2 230.2 37.5 789.7 496.9 108.8 2010          Aug 
195.4 2,850.6 2,797.8 2,708.1 1,046.7 229.1 37.5 788.8 499.4 106.6          Sep 
195.5 2,873.7 2,798.5 2,717.1 1,052.7 232.4 37.9 786.8 502.1 105.2          Oct 
196.6 2,925.7 2,845.2 2,764.3 1,074.9 231.1 38.2 810.2 504.1 105.7          Nov 
200.4 2,926.8 2,855.0 2,772.1 1,066.1 238.5 38.1 811.1 512.4 105.7          Dec 
197.6 2,939.7 2,862.6 2,782.4 1,081.9 233.7 38.0 808.5 515.1 105.3 2011          Jan 
197.4 2,931.4 2,853.1 2,769.4 1,066.1 236.0 38.2 806.5 517.1 105.4          Feb 
198.0 2,928.9 2,858.5 2,771.7 1,066.6 238.1 38.7 804.8 517.9 105.6          Mar 
199.5 2,937.5 2,871.5 2,786.1 1,074.5 246.3 39.5 803.5 517.6 104.8          Apr 
200.9 2,951.3 2,881.4 2,787.4 1,071.8 252.3 40.0 803.2 515.4 104.7          May
203.5 2,960.1 2,884.6 2,787.0 1,078.0 247.9 39.6 803.5 513.6 104.5          June
205.5 2,966.7 2,893.1 2,798.5 1,078.4 259.7 40.1 803.3 512.4 104.5          July
204.5 2,989.1 2,916.1 2,816.9 1,090.2 260.9 41.9 808.3 511.0 104.4          Aug 
205.8 3,008.4 2,930.1 2,832.6 1,099.5 271.9 42.5 804.8 510.1 103.9          Sep 
207.6 3,009.6 2,934.1 2,844.1 1,109.9 274.3 43.5 802.7 509.9 103.8          Oct 
209.1 3,030.2 2,954.6 2,858.9 1,128.2 272.4 44.5 801.4 510.4 102.0          Nov 
212.6 3,038.9 2,962.5 2,867.9 1,130.2 276.1 44.9 799.8 515.8 101.2          Dec 
209.6 3,040.0 2,961.3 2,864.8 1,130.9 274.7 44.8 796.2 518.1 100.3 2012          Jan 
209.4 3,049.0 2,965.8 2,864.0 1,138.8 265.6 45.4 793.2 521.0 100.0          Feb 
209.3 3,041.1 2,968.3 2,857.2 1,143.7 259.8 44.8 788.4 521.4 99.2          Mar 
210.3 3,054.1 2,981.2 2,867.5 1,156.8 260.2 44.1 787.2 520.2 98.9          Apr 
212.3 3,072.2 2,998.5 2,874.4 1,170.8 257.5 43.8 784.0 520.2 98.1          May
215.2 3,094.3 3,019.5 2,863.0 1,182.2 252.1 43.4 768.1 520.1 97.1          June
216.9 3,104.4 3,034.0 2,878.4 1,205.8 249.6 43.0 763.1 520.7 96.2          July
215.9 3,110.2 3,040.9 2,887.5 1,220.9 246.6 42.4 761.2 521.5 94.8          Aug 
214.7 3,116.5 3,045.7 2,890.9 1,237.8 238.4 41.8 757.8 521.9 93.3          Sep 
of euro banknotes put into circulation by the Bundesbank in accordance with the Bundesbank can be calculated by adding to this total the item “Intra-Eurosystem
accounting regime chosen by the Eurosystem (see also footnote 2 on banknote liability/claim related to banknote issue“ (see “Other liability items“). 5Excluding
circulation in Table III.2). The volume of currency actually put into circulation by the central governments’ deposits. 6 In Germany, only savings deposits. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
12  Monthly Report
November 2012
II Overall monetary survey in the euro area
 
2 Consolidated balance sheet of monetary financial institutions (MFIs) (cont’d) *
 
 
 
Liabilities (cont’d)
Deposits of non-banks (non-MFIs) in the euro area (cont’d)  
 
General government Repo transactions Debt securities
with non-banks
Other general government in the euro area
With agreed At agreed
maturities of notice of 2 
Money
over of which market of which
Central 1 year and Enterprises fund denom-
End of govern- up to up to over up to over and shares inated
year/month ments Total Overnight 1 year 2 years 2 years 3 months 3 months Total households (net)  3 Total in euro
 Euro area (€ billion) 1
 
2010          Aug 262.1 245.7 131.4 67.0 3.3 30.8 5.9 7.4 387.2 385.8 608.1 2,813.4 2,133.6
         Sep 265.5 251.0 132.0 72.2 3.3 30.1 6.4 7.0 409.3 407.8 589.4 2,796.1 2,143.3
         Oct 343.7 247.0 133.2 66.9 3.4 30.3 6.5 6.8 385.0 383.5 574.3 2,796.1 2,144.2
         Nov 360.8 252.5 141.4 64.3 3.4 30.4 6.6 6.5 433.4 431.8 586.5 2,832.1 2,155.2
         Dec 264.2 234.5 125.6 63.5 3.4 29.2 6.5 6.3 428.1 426.1 552.4 2,823.0 2,152.9
2011          Jan 316.5 240.8 128.2 64.8 3.4 29.2 6.9 8.2 392.0 390.6 570.2 2,849.0 2,187.0
         Feb 330.0 242.6 127.1 67.1 3.4 29.7 7.4 8.0 431.5 430.0 575.7 2,865.3 2,201.4
         Mar 288.4 243.4 126.4 68.7 3.4 29.8 7.4 7.8 405.2 403.8 568.3 2,937.1 2,284.7
         Apr 304.4 241.3 124.1 68.8 3.6 29.8 7.5 7.5 427.7 426.3 570.3 2,942.9 2,292.4
         May 287.4 251.5 128.6 74.6 3.7 29.9 7.3 7.3 466.5 464.8 566.8 2,972.2 2,303.1
         June 339.0 260.9 135.0 77.7 3.8 29.9 7.3 7.1 455.0 453.4 546.0 2,991.3 2,315.6
         July 317.0 249.8 123.9 77.6 4.6 29.6 7.2 7.0 449.2 447.8 538.8 3,009.2 2,314.5
         Aug 256.6 255.2 125.1 82.1 4.6 29.3 7.3 6.8 494.8 492.7 560.5 2,995.8 2,304.3
         Sep 261.5 254.0 122.6 83.8 4.7 29.2 7.1 6.6 517.7 515.1 549.2 3,014.9 2,314.2
         Oct 261.9 249.9 125.9 76.5 4.8 29.3 7.0 6.4 495.1 492.4 540.8 2,979.5 2,301.8
         Nov 266.1 262.5 135.1 79.8 4.9 29.3 7.2 6.2 467.0 464.2 547.0 2,999.0 2,312.1
         Dec 259.3 247.2 117.7 81.6 5.2 29.5 7.4 5.9 397.1 394.4 520.4 3,006.1 2,296.9
2012          Jan 319.2 256.2 124.5 81.8 5.3 29.7 7.5 7.4 414.5 411.7 496.8 2,993.5 2,301.3
         Feb 342.2 260.4 122.1 87.9 5.5 29.8 8.0 7.1 428.1 425.7 487.4 2,985.9 2,306.8
         Mar 328.5 274.9 129.3 94.8 5.7 29.8 8.3 6.9 413.6 410.9 498.0 2,991.6 2,316.2
         Apr 289.9 273.1 123.0 99.4 5.6 29.6 8.7 6.8 419.8 417.3 507.6 2,985.0 2,292.5
         May 317.2 289.1 131.2 106.4 5.9 30.0 9.0 6.6 428.4 422.5 519.7 2,987.3 2,275.0
         June 334.4 317.8 134.7 117.9 6.6 42.8 9.3 6.5 428.9 425.1 496.8 2,978.7 2,278.3
         July 302.5 321.1 136.0 119.9 6.2 43.0 9.5 6.4 434.1 428.2 495.3 3,000.2 2,278.6
         Aug 265.0 310.8 124.6 120.9 6.3 42.9 9.9 6.3 418.2 412.9 499.6 2,969.2 2,267.8
         Sep 298.3 311.2 127.9 117.7 6.2 43.0 10.3 6.2 427.9 423.8 480.1 2,935.6 2,248.4
 German contribution (€ billion) 
2010          Aug 30.9 116.8 41.0 45.7 2.0 25.4 2.1 0.7 104.7 104.7 8.3 720.7 436.1
         Sep 22.4 120.1 41.2 48.9 2.1 25.1 2.2 0.6 96.8 96.8 8.1 710.8 437.1
         Oct 43.2 113.3 37.6 45.6 2.1 25.2 2.2 0.6 85.0 85.0 8.0 700.8 427.5
         Nov 46.5 114.9 41.9 43.0 2.1 25.2 2.2 0.6 109.0 109.0 8.3 716.8 433.9
         Dec 39.8 114.9 40.6 44.6 2.0 25.0 2.2 0.5 86.7 86.7 8.4 708.5 425.8
2011          Jan 45.2 112.1 39.6 42.7 1.9 25.0 2.3 0.5 74.5 74.5 8.4 703.2 426.8
         Feb 47.1 114.9 39.7 45.6 1.7 25.2 2.3 0.5 93.2 93.2 8.4 698.6 424.5
         Mar 38.9 118.3 42.0 46.6 1.8 25.2 2.3 0.5 78.9 78.9 8.5 686.0 426.2
         Apr 34.3 117.2 39.8 47.6 1.8 25.2 2.3 0.5 89.2 89.2 8.4 678.5 420.6
         May 37.7 126.3 44.2 52.1 1.9 25.2 2.3 0.5 105.2 105.2 8.0 681.7 417.9
         June 40.7 132.3 46.1 56.4 2.1 25.2 2.2 0.5 104.8 104.8 7.8 682.3 415.4
         July 39.5 128.7 41.3 57.0 2.8 25.1 2.1 0.5 91.8 91.8 5.3 684.4 410.9
         Aug 39.4 132.8 41.6 61.1 2.8 24.8 2.1 0.4 101.9 101.9 5.7 682.6 412.4
         Sep 42.9 132.9 41.1 61.8 3.0 24.7 2.0 0.4 107.0 107.0 5.8 687.1 406.9
         Oct 40.1 125.3 39.9 55.3 3.1 24.6 2.0 0.4 105.7 105.7 5.8 678.9 407.9
         Nov 39.9 131.4 43.3 57.9 3.2 24.6 2.0 0.4 111.1 111.1 4.9 689.5 411.6
         Dec 40.1 130.8 40.2 60.3 3.3 24.6 2.0 0.4 97.1 97.1 4.8 691.1 404.5
2012          Jan 44.1 131.1 40.0 60.6 3.4 24.8 1.8 0.4 86.7 86.2 4.5 663.1 384.3
         Feb 47.6 137.4 41.5 65.1 3.6 24.9 1.9 0.4 96.6 96.5 4.4 667.4 389.9
         Mar 36.9 147.0 45.4 70.6 3.7 24.9 1.9 0.4 93.1 93.0 4.1 660.3 379.3
         Apr 36.4 150.2 42.9 76.6 3.7 24.8 1.9 0.4 102.9 102.9 4.2 664.4 380.6
         May 36.4 161.4 47.2 82.8 3.9 25.1 2.0 0.4 108.3 105.0 4.2 666.3 373.8
         June 38.1 193.1 53.6 94.5 4.6 37.9 2.1 0.4 98.9 97.7 4.4 662.6 374.1
         July 32.9 193.1 50.9 97.0 4.3 38.1 2.3 0.5 106.6 103.2 4.4 668.8 371.1
         Aug 31.9 190.9 47.6 98.0 4.4 38.0 2.4 0.5 108.1 105.4 4.0 658.6 366.5
         Sep 32.6 193.0 53.8 93.9 4.4 38.1 2.4 0.5 98.0 97.3 3.8 654.0 367.7
*Monetary financial institutions (MFIs) comprise banks (including building and loan paper. 5Excluding liabilities arising from securities issued. 6After deduction of
associations), money market funds, and the European Central Bank and national inter-MFI participations. 7The German contributions to the Eurosystem’s monetary
central banks (the Eurosystem). 1Source: ECB. 2In Germany, only savings aggregates should on no account be interpreted as national monetary aggregates
deposits. 3Excluding holdings of MFIs; for the German contribution, excluding and are therefore not comparable with the erstwhile German money stocks M1, M2
German MFIs’ portfolios of securities issued by MFIs in the euro area. 4In Germany, or M3. 8including DM banknotes still in circulation (see also footnote 4 on
bank debt securities with maturities of up to one year are classed as money market p 10    )9For the German contribution, the difference between the volume of

Deutsche Bundesbank
13  Monthly Report
November 2012
II Overall monetary survey in the euro area
 
   
 
 Memo item
 Other liability items Monetary aggregates 7 
 (From 2002, German contribution
issued (net) 3 excludes currency in circulation)
With maturities of
of which Monetary
Intra- liabilities
Eurosystem- of centralliability/ govern-
over Liabilities Excess claim Monetary ments1 year and to non- Capital of related to capital (Post
up to up to over euro-area and inter-MFI banknote forma- Office, End of1 year 
4 2 years 2 years residents 5 reserves 6 liabilities Total 8 issue 9 M1 10 M2 11 M3 12 tion 13 year/month Treasury)  14 
Euro area (€ billion) 1
 
29.1 100.3 2,684.0 4,633.7 1,978.2 − 3.6 4,121.8 − 4,659.9 8,341.4 9,250.5 7,166.8 113.7 2010          Aug 
33.9 96.7 2,665.5 4,438.2 1,956.1 − 3.4 3,950.1 − 4,661.8 8,343.7 9,247.4 7,116.5 111.9          Sep 
26.9 97.9 2,671.2 4,455.1 1,967.7 12.5 3,808.9 − 4,669.2 8,377.8 9,256.6 7,124.3 109.8          Oct 
24.6 97.2 2,710.3 4,582.7 2,004.6 9.3 3,775.1 − 4,684.9 8,387.7 9,269.3 7,258.5 111.4          Nov 
30.9 92.3 2,699.8 4,367.5 2,022.9 28.2 4,344.2 − 4,750.8 8,471.3 9,319.7 7,300.9 117.9          Dec 
35.6 94.6 2,718.9 4,376.8 2,003.6 27.7 4,203.8 − 4,708.7 8,434.8 9,308.1 7,299.1 109.0 2011          Jan 
38.9 89.2 2,737.2 4,372.6 2,033.3 32.8 4,143.2 − 4,674.3 8,414.9 9,297.7 7,360.6 106.8          Feb 
68.9 86.4 2,781.8 4,163.2 2,038.8 47.3 3,869.6 − 4,689.3 8,439.8 9,327.4 7,427.8 106.3          Mar 
71.2 87.7 2,784.0 4,203.1 2,043.2 5.2 3,906.1 − 4,723.0 8,480.7 9,390.1 7,446.9 107.4          Apr 
74.4 84.8 2,813.0 4,339.2 2,070.9 − 22.5 4,051.7 − 4,710.8 8,486.8 9,390.6 7,506.7 106.8          May
95.9 80.4 2,814.9 4,120.1 2,086.2 − 5.2 3,862.8 − 4,765.2 8,516.3 9,402.5 7,527.2 107.4          June
95.0 83.1 2,831.1 4,139.6 2,151.0 − 7.4 4,165.5 − 4,747.0 8,520.5 9,404.0 7,603.5 108.3          July
97.3 77.7 2,820.8 4,159.4 2,205.1 − 4.9 4,661.3 − 4,728.0 8,529.0 9,444.2 7,652.4 107.4          Aug 
94.8 75.7 2,844.4 4,216.7 2,183.9 − 15.7 5,140.6 − 4,754.0 8,567.1 9,465.0 7,670.7 106.6          Sep 
95.5 75.3 2,808.7 4,124.2 2,186.8 − 34.5 4,949.4 − 4,761.4 8,554.9 9,435.9 7,660.2 105.2          Oct 
90.9 82.3 2,825.8 4,148.3 2,200.5 − 25.4 4,904.7 − 4,778.0 8,564.3 9,447.4 7,681.6 108.8          Nov 
122.9 83.8 2,799.5 4,088.2 2,219.9 − 18.5 5,019.5 − 4,861.6 8,670.2 9,534.3 7,688.6 116.0          Dec 
111.6 92.3 2,789.6 4,114.2 2,274.0 − 64.7 5,145.9 − 4,810.7 8,639.9 9,484.4 7,732.7 107.7 2012          Jan 
118.1 99.4 2,768.4 4,077.8 2,291.5 − 39.0 5,055.1 − 4,780.4 8,647.9 9,494.6 7,722.4 106.5          Feb 
136.7 104.2 2,750.8 4,147.5 2,271.8 − 57.4 4,850.9 − 4,829.7 8,717.5 9,593.7 7,658.1 107.0          Mar 
121.2 108.3 2,755.4 4,186.5 2,269.4 − 55.8 4,985.9 − 4,835.1 8,723.9 9,599.8 7,654.6 107.8          Apr 
116.4 107.2 2,763.6 4,293.0 2,276.7 − 54.2 5,774.9 − 4,881.0 8,755.1 9,637.1 7,640.4 109.1          May
130.4 102.6 2,745.7 4,164.9 2,313.5 − 56.9 5,231.2 − 4,955.3 8,813.5 9,675.2 7,644.3 111.0          June
138.1 96.9 2,765.3 4,208.0 2,354.3 − 58.1 5,528.8 − 4,979.8 8,835.6 9,703.2 7,651.6 113.5          July
124.3 97.1 2,747.8 4,122.3 2,362.5 − 42.3 5,459.6 − 4,976.3 8,828.8 9,679.0 7,641.3 113.0          Aug 
121.1 93.8 2,720.7 4,053.3 2,403.7 − 55.3 5,320.9 − 5,022.4 8,872.3 9,695.9 7,650.1 113.0          Sep 
 German contribution (€ billion) 
33.6 13.9 673.3 797.3 433.5 − 496.8 776.1 153.2 1,087.2 1,901.6 2,062.0 2,031.3 − 2010          Aug 
35.2 14.8 660.8 757.5 430.4 − 517.7 770.9 155.8 1,087.9 1,907.1 2,061.9 2,012.4 −          Sep 
31.8 15.2 653.9 745.2 440.6 − 414.3 771.5 156.7 1,090.3 1,912.7 2,052.6 2,012.2 −          Oct 
28.0 18.4 670.4 772.9 451.7 − 439.4 766.9 156.6 1,116.8 1,937.4 2,101.1 2,063.8 −          Nov 
27.4 15.4 665.7 736.6 450.9 − 456.6 1,660.7 157.1 1,106.7 1,944.6 2,082.5 2,058.9 −          Dec 
24.2 15.5 663.5 727.0 447.6 − 421.8 1,554.6 157.8 1,121.5 1,955.2 2,077.8 2,050.4 − 2011          Jan 
26.1 11.8 660.6 732.7 455.8 − 446.9 1,513.6 158.9 1,105.8 1,946.8 2,086.4 2,054.0 −          Feb 
23.7 12.9 649.4 672.7 455.5 − 438.1 1,442.9 159.5 1,108.6 1,954.0 2,078.0 2,040.9 −          Mar 
19.8 13.6 645.1 694.9 457.3 − 413.4 1,448.8 160.1 1,114.2 1,969.4 2,100.4 2,036.3 −          Apr 
19.3 14.0 648.4 698.7 456.2 − 455.5 1,498.4 161.6 1,116.0 1,980.1 2,126.5 2,038.2 −          May
18.7 14.3 649.2 638.7 455.5 − 480.5 1,424.7 163.1 1,124.1 1,985.8 2,131.5 2,038.3 −          June
22.2 14.0 648.2 647.7 467.3 − 484.9 1,550.9 164.9 1,119.7 1,993.8 2,127.1 2,048.9 −          July
25.2 13.6 643.8 699.8 483.8 − 542.9 1,720.9 167.5 1,131.9 2,011.7 2,158.1 2,065.6 −          Aug 
21.8 11.9 653.4 738.9 476.2 − 600.2 1,871.4 170.7 1,140.5 2,031.7 2,178.3 2,063.4 −          Sep 
18.8 11.2 648.9 746.8 478.0 − 608.3 1,751.4 170.7 1,149.9 2,037.9 2,179.4 2,058.5 −          Oct 
22.5 11.7 655.3 769.8 478.8 − 639.8 1,744.5 170.9 1,171.5 2,061.9 2,212.1 2,062.5 −          Nov 
22.8 9.7 658.6 696.1 473.6 − 607.5 1,835.9 170.5 1,170.4 2,072.8 2,207.2 2,058.1 −          Dec 
19.7 10.3 633.1 801.2 486.8 − 614.9 1,825.4 171.0 1,170.9 2,074.3 2,195.5 2,041.5 − 2012          Jan 
20.2 11.4 635.8 815.9 493.4 − 670.9 1,783.3 172.2 1,180.3 2,082.8 2,215.4 2,047.8 −          Feb 
19.9 9.8 630.5 873.9 492.0 − 710.2 1,730.8 175.5 1,189.1 2,091.3 2,218.3 2,035.5 −          Mar 
16.6 11.5 636.3 889.0 497.3 − 733.8 1,772.5 177.6 1,199.7 2,106.4 2,241.6 2,044.8 −          Apr 
13.4 9.9 643.0 919.2 495.5 − 796.5 2,029.9 179.3 1,218.0 2,128.2 2,264.1 2,046.1 −          May
13.8 10.5 638.3 913.8 501.1 − 829.7 1,868.1 181.0 1,235.7 2,152.5 2,280.1 2,042.9 −          June
15.5 11.2 642.1 937.5 512.6 − 840.9 1,954.6 184.5 1,256.7 2,173.6 2,311.3 2,052.6 −          July
14.6 10.3 633.7 951.4 513.4 − 857.1 1,919.5 188.5 1,268.5 2,183.8 2,320.9 2,041.6 −          Aug 
16.1 10.4 627.5 900.1 521.5 − 806.5 1,873.7 191.9 1,291.6 2,194.3 2,322.5 2,038.7 −          Sep 
euro banknotes actually issued by the Bundesbank and the amount disclosed in years and at agreed notice of up to 3 months (excluding central governments’
accordance with the accounting regime chosen by the Eurosystem (see also footnote deposits) and (for the euro area) central governments’ monetary liabilities with such2 on banknote circulation in Table III.2). 10Overnight deposits (excluding central maturities. 12M2 plus repo transactions, money market fund shares, money market
governments’ deposits), and (for the euro area) currency in circulation, central paper and debt securities up to 2 years. 13Deposits with agreed maturities of over 2
governments’ overnight monetary liabilities, which are not included in the years and at agreed notice of over 3 months, debt securities with maturities of over 2consolidated balance sheet. 11M1 plus deposits with agreed maturities of up to 2 years, capital and reserves. 14 Non-existent in Germany. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
14  Monthly Report
November 2012
II  Overall monetary survey in the euro area
  
3  Banking system’s liquidity position  * 
Stocks
  
€ billion; period averages of daily positions
Liquidity-providing factors Liquidity-absorbing factors
Monetary policy operations of the Eurosystem
Credit
institutions‘
currentaccount
Net assets Longer- Other Other balances
Reserve in gold Main term Marginal liquidity- liquidity- Banknotes Central Other (including
maintenance and foreign refinancing refinancing lending providing Deposit absorbing in government factors minimum Base
period currency operations operations facility facility deposits (net)  
6 reserves) 7 money 8 operations 3 operations 4 circulation 5 
ending in 1 
Eurosystem  2  
  
2010          Apr 439.8 77.7 650.5 0.4 43.6 200.7 8.4 792.9 113.6 − 116.1 212.5 1 206.1
         May 457.0 76.7 666.4 0.9 49.4 218.2 11.4 796.6 112.1 − 100.3 212.4 1 227.2
         June 462.4 110.0 706.7 0.3 86.9 288.8 34.1 806.2 123.1 − 98.4 212.5 1 307.5
         July 500.9 167.5 573.2 0.3 140.2 230.4 54.4 813.0 126.5 − 56.5 214.4 1 257.8
         Aug 543.4 185.4 432.2 0.1 121.4 96.7 67.5 819.3 95.2 − 11.8 215.7 1 131.7
         Sep 543.2 153.1 435.0 0.6 121.8 83.7 66.9 816.0 86.8 − 15.0 215.3 1 115.0
         Oct 531.3 164.5 392.6 0.7 128.3 68.8 64.8 814.1 96.4 − 39.8 213.1 1 096.1
         Nov 511.3 183.0 340.0 0.8 124.5 41.9 68.8 813.5 92.1 − 72.0 215.2 1 070.7
         Dec 511.1 179.5 336.3 1.9 130.4 44.7 70.8 815.9 94.4 − 79.1 212.5 1 073.1
2011          Jan 527.5 197.0 316.6 0.5 140.9 66.5 73.5 833.9 81.3 − 85.1 212.4 1 112.8
         Feb 549.7 185.4 318.2 0.1 137.2 39.2 81.3 822.0 101.2 − 66.7 213.6 1 074.8
         Mar 550.0 134.4 321.0 7.6 137.9 26.9 80.3 820.9 89.8 − 79.9 212.9 1 060.7
         Apr 544.1 97.3 335.4 0.8 137.6 23.0 79.5 824.4 73.1 − 95.2 210.5 1 057.9
         May 525.9 109.2 320.5 0.4 136.6 22.8 76.8 833.9 61.3 − 111.6 209.5 1 066.1
         June 526.8 114.7 317.9 0.0 135.5 18.4 76.2 836.6 62.6 − 107.9 209.0 1 064.0
         July 533.6 146.0 311.6 0.2 134.2 29.5 76.9 846.2 73.4 − 111.2 210.9 1 086.6
         Aug 541.3 171.7 321.5 0.1 133.9 56.7 79.2 854.2 71.4 − 104.5 211.5 1 122.4
         Sep 540.3 135.1 389.8 0.3 178.0 121.8 109.8 853.2 52.3 − 103.0 209.5 1 184.5
         Oct 571.0 193.0 373.6 1.5 217.4 168.7 162.9 854.9 50.0 − 88.5 208.7 1 232.2
         Nov 612.1 196.1 387.1 2.8 231.9 204.6 178.0 861.4 57.9 − 80.8 208.9 1 274.8
         Dec 622.1 238.0 389.0 4.4 260.3 253.7 200.5 869.4 63.8 − 85.9 212.2 1 335.3
2012          Jan 683.9 169.4 627.3 6.0 278.6 399.3 210.8 883.7 67.7 − 8.7 212.3 1 495.3
         Feb 698.3 120.6 683.6 2.3 282.4 489.0 218.5 870.1 100.1 1.6 108.1 1 467.1
         Mar 688.2 89.1 860.1 2.2 288.1 621.0 219.5 868.8 129.0 − 19.4 108.9 1 598.6
         Apr 667.6 56.4 1 093.4 3.0 280.6 771.3 215.8 871.2 146.3 − 13.3 109.6 1 752.1
         May 659.3 47.0 1 088.7 1.0 281.3 771.4 214.0 872.7 137.1 − 28.5 110.5 1 754.6
         June 656.8 58.1 1 071.0 1.6 281.1 770.8 212.8 880.8 117.8 − 24.2 110.8 1 762.3
         July 666.7 160.7 1 074.9 1.8 280.7 770.6 210.9 892.5 138.8 60.6 111.5 1 774.6
         Aug 678.9 146.0 1 079.9 0.8 281.0 343.1 211.5 897.7 130.7 93.5 510.2 1 751.0
         Sep 676.8 130.6 1 076.8 0.8 279.7 328.6 210.5 897.6 107.0 81.0 540.0 1 766.2
         Oct 681.5 117.6 1 062.8 1.1 279.6 305.4 209.0 892.7 101.4 96.0 538.1 1 736.2
Deutsche Bundesbank
2010          Apr 116.2 40.9 164.9 0.2 11.5 69.8 3.4 198.0 0.3 11.9 50.3 318.2
         May 121.1 40.5 164.7 0.1 12.8 74.9 4.2 199.0 0.7 10.2 50.2 324.1
         June 122.2 43.0 166.4 0.0 22.1 113.1 17.1 201.5 0.8 − 29.2 50.5 365.0
         July 133.9 55.2 112.8 0.1 32.7 81.0 22.3 202.5 0.4 − 22.7 51.2 334.7
         Aug 145.8 61.7 52.8 0.1 28.4 32.7 20.7 204.2 0.5 − 21.6 52.3 289.2
         Sep 145.5 52.6 50.3 0.2 28.4 24.8 26.5 204.2 0.5 − 30.9 52.0 280.9
         Oct 142.2 54.4 40.5 0.1 29.3 27.0 32.4 204.0 0.5 − 48.3 51.0 281.9
         Nov 136.7 63.7 28.9 0.0 28.8 21.2 35.7 202.9 0.4 − 53.6 51.5 275.5
         Dec 136.5 60.5 32.5 0.1 29.3 21.2 41.0 203.3 0.2 − 57.7 51.0 275.5
2011          Jan 141.9 55.2 34.1 0.1 31.2 28.2 42.0 207.7 0.3 − 66.9 51.3 287.2
         Feb 148.1 44.6 44.0 0.0 31.6 19.8 43.0 204.6 0.2 − 51.0 51.8 276.2
         Mar 148.4 31.3 44.7 0.0 31.7 14.6 48.4 204.8 0.2 − 63.7 51.8 271.2
         Apr 146.6 24.1 45.5 0.0 31.9 13.6 38.9 205.2 0.2 − 61.5 51.7 270.4
         May 142.4 17.9 47.7 0.2 31.9 10.8 38.2 207.6 0.4 − 68.2 51.4 269.8
         June 142.5 10.6 41.5 0.0 31.7 8.1 33.4 208.7 0.3 − 75.8 51.7 268.4
         July 144.3 22.8 35.8 0.0 31.4 11.1 36.4 211.1 0.3 − 77.3 52.6 274.8
         Aug 146.7 13.6 36.5 0.0 31.3 15.4 35.2 213.0 0.2 − 88.4 52.7 281.1
         Sep 146.7 6.6 33.6 0.0 42.3 27.8 60.2 213.4 0.3 − 124.3 51.8 293.0
         Oct 155.5 10.7 20.8 0.0 52.3 41.5 86.8 213.5 0.3 − 155.0 52.2 307.2
         Nov 167.5 4.0 18.0 0.1 55.7 55.0 87.9 213.8 0.2 − 164.5 53.0 321.8
         Dec 168.7 3.0 17.6 0.1 63.2 60.4 126.2 216.3 0.7 − 205.5 54.4 331.2
2012          Jan 182.3 4.4 40.3 0.1 67.2 101.7 117.0 219.8 0.8 − 199.6 54.5 376.0
         Feb 183.2 1.8 46.7 0.0 69.2 141.9 130.5 216.9 0.8 − 217.6 28.3 387.1
         Mar 183.6 1.2 59.4 0.0 69.2 192.6 142.2 217.0 0.8 − 266.8 27.7 437.3
         Apr 182.0 1.2 73.8 0.1 68.8 257.2 142.7 218.1 0.7 − 321.6 28.8 504.1
         May 181.3 1.3 73.4 0.1 68.8 260.5 144.6 217.8 0.7 − 327.5 28.9 507.2
         June 180.4 3.8 74.6 0.5 68.7 276.9 150.3 219.8 0.8 − 349.1 29.3 526.0
         July 180.3 3.1 76.5 0.1 68.6 293.3 152.1 222.3 1.0 − 369.8 29.6 545.2
         Aug 179.6 2.5 76.3 0.2 68.8 102.0 162.9 225.1 4.2 − 351.5 184.8 511.9
         Sep 177.7 1.6 75.4 0.0 68.6 112.1 134.6 224.6 6.0 − 349.1 195.2 531.9
         Oct 181.8 1.7 74.5 0.2 68.7 108.2 124.0 223.4 6.8 − 325.3 189.9 521.4
Discrepancies may arise from rounding. *The banking system’s liquidity position is includes liquidity absorbed as a result of the Eurosystem’s foreign exchange swap
defined as the current account holdings in euro of euro-area credit institutions with operations. 5From 2002, euro banknotes and other banknotes which have been
the Eurosystem. Amounts are derived from the consolidated financial statement of issued by the national central banks of the Eurosystem and which are still in cir-the Eurosystem and the financial statement of the Bundesbank. 1Figures are daily av- culation. In accordance with the accounting procedure chosen by the Eurosystem for
erages for the reserve maintenance period ending in the month indicated. 2Source: the issue of euro banknotes, 8% of the total value of the euro banknotes in cir-
ECB. 3Includes liquidity provided under the Eurosystem’s covered bond purchase culation are allocated on a monthly basis to the ECB. The counterpart of this
programme and the Eurosystem’s securities markets programme. 4From Aug. 2009,

Deutsche Bundesbank
15  Monthly Report
November 2012
II  Overall monetary survey in the euro area
  
  
Flows
  
Liquidity-providing factors Liquidity-absorbing factors
Monetary policy operations of the Eurosystem
Credit
institutions‘
currentaccount
Net assets Longer- Other Other balances
in gold Main term Marginal liquidity- liquidity- Banknotes Central Other (including Reserve
and foreign refinancing refinancing lending providing Deposit absorbing in government factors minimum Base maintenance
currency operations operations facility facility deposits (net)  
6 reserves) 7 money 8 period operations 3 operations 4 circulation 5 
ending in 1 
Eurosystem  2  
  
+ 12.9 − 2.8 + 9.4 − 0.5 + 5.6 + 14.3 − 2.1 + 8.3 + 0.4 + 3.2 + 0.7 + 23.2 2010          Apr 
+ 17.2 − 1.0 + 15.9 + 0.5 + 5.8 + 17.5 + 3.0 + 3.7 − 1.5 + 15.8 − 0.1 + 21.1          May+ 5.4 + 33.3 + 40.3 − 0.6 + 37.5 + 70.6 + 22.7 + 9.6 + 11.0 + 1.9 + 0.1 + 80.3          June
+ 38.5 + 57.5 − 133.5 − 0.0 + 53.3 − 58.4 + 20.3 + 6.8 + 3.4 + 41.9 + 1.9 − 49.7          July
+ 42.5 + 17.9 − 141.0 − 0.2 − 18.8 −133.7 + 13.1 + 6.3 − 31.3 + 44.7 + 1.3 − 126.1          Aug − 0.2 − 32.3 + 2.8 + 0.5 + 0.4 − 13.0 − 0.6 − 3.3 − 8.4 − 3.2 − 0.4 − 16.7          Sep 
− 11.9 + 11.4 − 42.4 + 0.1 + 6.5 − 14.9 − 2.1 − 1.9 + 9.6 − 24.8 − 2.2 − 18.9          Oct 
− 20.0 + 18.5 − 52.6 + 0.1 − 3.8 − 26.9 + 4.0 − 0.6 − 4.3 − 32.2 + 2.1 − 25.4          Nov − 0.2 − 3.5 − 3.7 + 1.1 + 5.9 + 2.8 + 2.0 + 2.4 + 2.3 − 7.1 − 2.7 + 2.4          Dec 
+ 16.4 + 17.5 − 19.7 − 1.4 + 10.5 + 21.8 + 2.7 + 18.0 − 13.1 − 6.0 − 0.1 + 39.7 2011          Jan 
+ 22.2 − 11.6 + 1.6 − 0.4 − 3.7 − 27.3 + 7.8 − 11.9 + 19.9 + 18.4 + 1.2 − 38.0          Feb + 0.3 − 51.0 + 2.8 + 7.5 + 0.7 − 12.3 − 1.0 − 1.1 − 11.4 − 13.2 − 0.7 − 14.1          Mar 
− 5.9 − 37.1 + 14.4 − 6.8 − 0.3 − 3.9 − 0.8 + 3.5 − 16.7 − 15.3 − 2.4 − 2.8          Apr 
− 18.2 + 11.9 − 14.9 − 0.4 − 1.0 − 0.2 − 2.7 + 9.5 − 11.8 − 16.4 − 1.0 + 8.2          May+ 0.9 + 5.5 − 2.6 − 0.4 − 1.1 − 4.4 − 0.6 + 2.7 + 1.3 + 3.7 − 0.5 − 2.1          June
+ 6.8 + 31.3 − 6.3 + 0.2 − 1.3 + 11.1 + 0.7 + 9.6 + 10.8 − 3.3 + 1.9 + 22.6          July
+ 7.7 + 25.7 + 9.9 − 0.1 − 0.3 + 27.2 + 2.3 + 8.0 − 2.0 + 6.7 + 0.6 + 35.8          Aug − 1.0 − 36.6 + 68.3 + 0.2 + 44.1 + 65.1 + 30.6 − 1.0 − 19.1 + 1.5 − 2.0 + 62.1          Sep 
+ 30.7 + 57.9 − 16.2 + 1.2 + 39.4 + 46.9 + 53.1 + 1.7 − 2.3 + 14.5 − 0.8 + 47.7          Oct 
+ 41.1 + 3.1 + 13.5 + 1.3 + 14.5 + 35.9 + 15.1 + 6.5 + 7.9 + 7.7 + 0.2 + 42.6          Nov + 10.0 + 41.9 + 1.9 + 1.6 + 28.4 + 49.1 + 22.5 + 8.0 + 5.9 − 5.1 + 3.3 + 60.5          Dec 
+ 61.8 − 68.6 + 238.3 + 1.6 + 18.3 +145.6 + 10.3 + 14.3 + 3.9 + 77.2 + 0.1 + 160.0 2012          Jan 
+ 14.4 − 48.8 + 56.3 − 3.7 + 3.8 + 89.7 + 7.7 − 13.6 + 32.4 + 10.3 − 104.2 − 28.2          Feb − 10.1 − 31.5 + 176.5 − 0.1 + 5.7 +132.0 + 1.0 − 1.3 + 28.9 − 21.0 + 0.8 + 131.5          Mar 
− 20.6 − 32.7 + 233.3 + 0.8 − 7.5 +150.3 − 3.7 + 2.4 + 17.3 + 6.1 + 0.7 + 153.5          Apr 
− 8.3 − 9.4 − 4.7 − 2.0 + 0.7 + 0.1 − 1.8 + 1.5 − 9.2 − 15.2 + 0.9 + 2.5          May− 2.5 + 11.1 − 17.7 + 0.6 − 0.2 − 0.6 − 1.2 + 8.1 − 19.3 + 4.3 + 0.3 + 7.7          June
+ 9.9 + 102.6 + 3.9 + 0.2 − 0.4 − 0.2 − 1.9 + 11.7 + 21.0 + 84.8 + 0.7 + 12.3          July
+ 12.2 − 14.7 + 5.0 − 1.0 + 0.3 −427.5 + 0.6 + 5.2 − 8.1 + 32.9 + 398.7 − 23.6          Aug − 2.1 − 15.4 − 3.1 + 0.0 − 1.3 − 14.5 − 1.0 − 0.1 − 23.7 − 12.5 + 29.8 + 15.2          Sep 
+ 4.7 − 13.0 − 14.0 + 0.3 − 0.1 − 23.2 − 1.5 − 4.9 − 5.6 + 15.0 − 1.9 − 30.0          Oct 
Deutsche Bundesbank
+ 3.6 − 10.8 + 7.0 − 0.7 + 1.5 + 2.0 − 1.6 + 1.6 − 1.8 + 0.1 + 0.3 + 3.9 2010          Apr 
+ 4.9 − 0.4 − 0.2 − 0.1 + 1.3 + 5.0 + 0.8 + 1.0 + 0.5 − 1.7 − 0.1 + 5.9          May+ 1.1 + 2.5 + 1.7 − 0.0 + 9.3 + 38.2 + 12.9 + 2.5 + 0.1 − 39.4 + 0.3 + 40.9          June
+ 11.7 + 12.2 − 53.6 + 0.0 + 10.7 − 32.1 + 5.1 + 1.0 − 0.4 + 6.5 + 0.8 − 30.3          July
+ 11.9 + 6.6 − 60.0 + 0.0 − 4.3 − 48.3 − 1.5 + 1.7 + 0.1 + 1.1 + 1.0 − 45.6          Aug − 0.3 − 9.1 − 2.5 + 0.1 + 0.0 − 7.9 + 5.8 + 0.0 − 0.1 − 9.3 − 0.3 − 8.3          Sep 
− 3.3 + 1.8 − 9.8 − 0.1 + 0.9 + 2.2 + 5.9 − 0.2 − 0.0 − 17.4 − 1.0 + 1.0          Oct 
− 5.6 + 9.3 − 11.6 − 0.1 − 0.5 − 5.8 + 3.3 − 1.1 − 0.1 − 5.3 + 0.5 − 6.4          Nov − 0.2 − 3.1 + 3.6 + 0.1 + 0.6 + 0.0 + 5.3 + 0.5 − 0.2 − 4.1 − 0.5 − 0.0          Dec 
+ 5.5 − 5.4 + 1.5 − 0.0 + 1.9 + 7.0 + 1.1 + 4.3 + 0.0 − 9.2 + 0.4 + 11.6 2011          Jan 
+ 6.2 − 10.6 + 9.9 − 0.1 + 0.3 − 8.4 + 0.9 − 3.1 − 0.0 + 15.9 + 0.5 − 11.0          Feb + 0.3 − 13.3 + 0.7 − 0.0 + 0.2 − 5.2 + 5.5 + 0.3 − 0.0 − 12.7 − 0.1 − 5.0          Mar 
− 1.8 − 7.2 + 0.9 + 0.0 + 0.1 − 1.0 − 9.5 + 0.3 + 0.0 + 2.2 − 0.0 − 0.7          Apr 
− 4.2 − 6.2 + 2.2 + 0.2 + 0.0 − 2.8 − 0.7 + 2.4 + 0.1 − 6.7 − 0.3 − 0.7          May+ 0.2 − 7.3 − 6.3 − 0.2 − 0.2 − 2.7 − 4.7 + 1.1 − 0.1 − 7.6 + 0.2 − 1.4          June
+ 1.7 + 12.2 − 5.7 + 0.0 − 0.3 + 3.0 + 3.0 + 2.4 + 0.0 − 1.5 + 0.9 + 6.4          July
+ 2.4 − 9.2 + 0.7 − 0.0 − 0.0 + 4.3 − 1.2 + 1.9 − 0.1 − 11.1 + 0.1 + 6.3          Aug + 0.0 − 6.9 − 2.9 + 0.0 + 11.0 + 12.4 + 25.0 + 0.4 + 0.1 − 35.9 − 0.9 + 12.0          Sep 
+ 8.8 + 4.1 − 12.8 + 0.0 + 9.9 + 13.7 + 26.6 + 0.1 − 0.0 − 30.7 + 0.3 + 14.2          Oct 
+ 12.0 − 6.7 − 2.8 + 0.1 + 3.5 + 13.5 + 1.1 + 0.3 − 0.0 − 9.5 + 0.9 + 14.6          Nov + 1.2 − 1.0 − 0.4 + 0.0 + 7.5 + 5.5 + 38.4 + 2.5 + 0.5 − 41.0 + 1.4 + 9.4          Dec 
+ 13.6 + 1.4 + 22.7 − 0.0 + 4.0 + 41.3 − 9.2 + 3.5 + 0.1 + 5.9 + 0.1 + 44.8 2012          Jan 
+ 0.9 − 2.6 + 6.4 − 0.1 + 2.0 + 40.2 + 13.5 − 2.9 − 0.1 − 18.0 − 26.2 + 11.1          Feb + 0.4 − 0.6 + 12.7 + 0.0 +
 0.0 + 50.7 + 11.7 + 0.1 + 0.0 − 49.3 − 0.6 + 50.2          Mar 
− 1.6
+ 0.0 + 14.4 + 0.1 − 0.4 + 64.7 + 0.5 + 1.1 − 0.0 − 54.7 + 1.1 + 66.8          Apr 
− 0.7 + 0.1 − 0.4 − 0.0 − 0.0 + 3.3 + 1.8 − 0.3 − 0.0 − 5.9 + 0.1 + 3.1          May− 0.9 + 2.5 + 1.1 + 0.4 − 0.1 + 16.4 + 5.7 + 2.0 + 0.1 − 21.6 + 0.4 + 18.8          June
− 0.1 − 0.7 + 1.9 − 0.4 − 0.1 + 16.4 + 1.8 + 2.5 + 0.3 − 20.7 + 0.3 + 19.2          July
− 0.6 − 0.5 − 0.2 + 0.2 + 0.2 −191.3 + 10.9 + 2.8 + 3.1 + 18.3 + 155.2 − 33.2          Aug − 1.9 − 0.9 − 0.9 − 0.2 − 0.2 + 10.0 − 28.3 − 0.4 + 1.8 + 2.4 + 10.4 + 20.0          Sep 
+ 4.1 + 0.1 − 0.9 + 0.1 + 0.1 − 3.9 − 10.6 − 1.3 + 0.8 + 23.8 − 5.3 − 10.5          Oct 
adjustment is shown under “Other factors”. The remaining 92% of the value of the “Other factors”. From 2003 euro banknotes only. 6Remaining items in the
euro banknotes in circulation is allocated, likewise on a monthly basis, to the NCBs, consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem and the financial statement of
with each NCB showing in its balance sheet the percentage of the euro banknotes in the Bundesbank. 7Equal to the difference between the sum of liquidity-providing
circulation that corresponds to its paid-up share in the ECB’s capital. The difference factors and the sum of liquidity-absorbing factors. 8Calculated as the sum of the
between the value of the euro banknotes allocated to an NCB and the value of the “deposit facility”, “banknotes in circulation” and “credit institutions’ current accounteuro banknotes which that NCB has put into circulation is likewise shown under holdings”. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
16  Monthly Report
November 2012
III Consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem
 
1 Assets *
 
 
€ billion
Claims on non-euro area Claims on non-euro area residents denominated
in foreign currency residents denominated in euro
Balances with
Claims on banks, security
On investments, euro area Balances Claims
reporting external loans residents with banks, arising from
date/ Gold and other denominated security the credit
End of Total and gold Receivables external in foreign investments facility under
month 1 assets receivables Total from the IMF assets currency Total and loans ERM II
 Eurosystem 2
 
2012 Mar                  2 3,023.2 423.4 247.0 86.8 160.1 72.1 23.3 23.3 −
                                9 3,005.8 423.4 247.0 86.9 160.1 70.4 20.4 20.4 −
                              16 2,986.3 423.4 246.6 86.8 159.7 71.4 18.0 18.0 −
                              23 2,982.8 423.5 247.5 87.1 160.4 70.8 18.6 18.6 −
                              30 2,964.4 432.7 238.5 85.2 153.3 55.2 18.4 18.4 −
         Apr                  6 2,965.3 432.7 240.3 85.3 155.0 53.8 19.9 19.9 −
                              13 2,974.9 432.7 239.7 86.1 153.6 54.5 20.1 20.1 −
                              20 2,967.1 432.7 240.4 86.1 154.3 54.6 19.3 19.3 −
                              27 2,962.1 432.7 241.2 86.2 155.1 52.4 20.3 20.3 −
         May                  4 2,960.3 432.7 242.0 86.0 156.0 52.0 20.1 20.1 −
                              11 2,971.5 432.7 242.1 86.0 156.1 51.5 19.5 19.5 −
                              18 2,975.3 432.7 242.2 86.1 156.2 51.0 19.0 19.0 −
                              25 2,980.3 432.7 242.9 86.0 156.8 48.2 17.5 17.5 −
         June                  1 3,002.6 432.7 243.6 86.1 157.5 49.1 17.6 17.6 −
                                8 3,009.7 432.7 244.5 86.1 158.4 49.1 16.6 16.6 −
                              15 3,027.3 432.7 246.5 86.6 159.9 48.2 17.6 17.6 −
                              22 3,057.9 432.7 247.0 86.5 160.5 48.9 18.3 18.3 −
                              29 3,102.2 433.8 260.9 89.8 171.1 51.9 17.5 17.5 −
         July                  6 3,085.0 433.8 261.0 90.0 171.0 54.2 16.9 16.9 −
                              13 3,099.6 433.8 261.4 90.1 171.3 55.5 17.2 17.2 −
                              20 3,079.7 433.8 261.4 90.1 171.3 52.7 15.7 15.7 −
                              27 3,094.1 433.8 260.4 90.2 170.2 57.5 15.9 15.9 −
2012 Aug                  3 3,085.2 433.8 260.8 90.2 170.5 56.4 15.8 15.8 −
                              10 3,086.8 433.8 260.4 90.2 170.2 55.6 16.8 16.8 −
                              17 3,085.8 433.8 261.4 90.2 171.3 51.1 16.5 16.5 −
                              24 3,080.5 433.8 262.4 91.1 171.3 50.6 18.0 18.0 −
                              31 3,084.8 433.8 262.9 91.1 171.9 49.0 19.2 19.2 −
         Sep                  7 3,073.5 433.8 262.9 91.1 171.8 46.3 18.7 18.7 −
                              14 3,061.0 433.8 262.6 90.9 171.7 42.7 19.3 19.3 −
                              21 3,049.5 433.8 261.5 90.8 170.6 42.0 17.9 17.9 −
                              28 3,082.4 479.3 256.4 90.1 166.3 39.9 16.5 16.5 −
         Oct                  5 3,062.6 479.1 257.8 90.1 167.7 39.7 17.2 17.2 −
                              12 3,053.6 479.1 258.4 90.1 168.4 39.1 16.9 16.9 −
                              19 3,046.6 479.1 258.9 90.1 168.8 38.0 17.1 17.1 −
                              26 3,046.5 479.1 260.1 90.3 169.8 38.3 17.3 17.3 −
         Nov                  2 3,040.7 479.1 258.4 90.3 168.1 37.3 16.6 16.6 −
 Deutsche Bundesbank
2010          Dec 671.2 115.4 46.7 18.7 28.0 −−−−
2011          Jan 628.7 115.4 46.9 18.9 27.9 −−−−
         Feb 639.5 115.4 46.9 18.9 28.0 −−−−
         Mar 632.2 110.1 45.6 19.3 26.3 −−−−
         Apr 610.1 110.1 46.1 19.3 26.9 −−−−
         May 611.3 110.1 46.1 19.3 26.9 −−−−
         June 632.3 114.1 45.7 19.1 26.6 −−−−
         July 629.0 114.1 46.1 19.7 26.4 −−−−
         Aug 679.1 114.1 46.0 19.7 26.3 −−−−
         Sep 764.6 131.9 49.5 20.9 28.7 −−−−
         Oct 772.8 131.7 49.5 20.9 28.6 0.5−−−
         Nov 812.7 131.7 49.2 20.9 28.3 0.5−−−
         Dec 837.6 132.9 51.7 22.3 29.4 18.1−−−
2012          Jan 860.1 132.9 51.9 22.3 29.6 11.6−−−
         Feb 910.9 132.9 52.4 22.6 29.8 14.3−−−
         Mar 1 002.8 135.8 50.9 22.2 28.7 8.9−−−
         Apr 1 031.3 135.8 51.4 22.4 29.1 8.3−−−
         May 1 087.0 135.8 51.6 22.3 29.3 6.9−−−
         June 1 119.4 136.1 54.2 23.3 30.8 6.2−−−
         July 1 112.9 136.1 54.1 23.3 30.8 3.2−−−
         Aug 1 135.4 136.1 54.5 23.5 31.0 1.7−−−
         Sep 1 090.9 150.4 53.0 23.3 29.7 1.5−−−
         Oct 1 110.0 150.2 53.1 23.3 29.8 1.8−−−
 
*The consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem comprises the financial national central banks of the euro area member states (NCBs). The balance sheet
statement of the European Central Bank (ECB) and the financial statements of the items for foreign currency, securities, gold and financial instruments are valued at the

Deutsche Bundesbank
17  Monthly Report
November 2012
III Consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem
 
   
 
Lending to euro area credit institutions related to monetary policy operations Securities of euro area residents
denominated in euro in euro
 Other claims on euro area
Longer- Fine-  credit Securities General    On
Main re- term re- tuning Structural Credits institutions held for government    reportingfinancing financing reverse reverse Marginal related denomi- monetary debt deno-    date/opera- opera- opera- opera- lending to margin nated in policy Other minated in Other    End of
Total tions tions tions tions facility calls euro Total purposes securities euro assets    month  
1 
Eurosystem 2
 
1 130.4 29.5 1 100.1 − − 0.8 0.0 59.3 631.7 284.1 347.6 31.2 404.9 2012 Mar                  2
1 118.3 17.5 1 100.1 − − 0.6 0.0 57.9 631.1 283.0 348.1 31.2 406.2                                 91 149.5 42.2 1 095.5 − − 11.8 0.0 55.3 630.4 283.4 347.0 31.2 360.5                               161 155.9 59.5 1 095.5 − − 0.8 0.0 57.7 626.3 279.3 346.9 31.2 351.5                               231 153.6 61.1 1 090.9 − − 1.6 − 59.6 627.5 280.2 347.3 31.1 348.0                               30
1 154.5 62.6 1 090.9 − − 1.0 − 60.8 628.0 280.4 347.5 31.1 344.3          Apr                  61 148.0 55.4 1 090.6 − − 2.0 − 62.5 627.7 280.7 347.0 31.1 358.5                               131 142.7 51.8 1 090.6 − − 0.3 0.0 183.7 609.7 281.1 328.5 31.1 252.9                               201 139.4 46.4 1 092.4 − − 0.6 0.0 184.7 608.3 281.6 326.7 31.1 251.9                               27
1 117.1 34.4 1 081.6 − − 1.1 − 204.7 607.2 281.7 325.5 30.6 254.0          May                  4
1 124.1 39.3 1 083.2 − − 1.6 − 208.4 607.6 282.0 325.6 30.6 255.0                               111 127.0 43.0 1 083.2 − − 0.8 0.0 212.5 604.7 280.2 324.5 30.6 255.6                               181 101.7 37.9 1 061.8 − − 2.1 0.0 246.6 605.1 280.6 324.5 30.6 255.0                               25
1 115.5 51.2 1 063.6 − − 0.7 0.0 250.6 605.1 280.8 324.3 30.6 257.8          June                  1
1 185.1 119.4 1 063.6 − − 1.9 0.1 189.5 605.7 281.2 324.4 30.6 255.9                                 81 206.3 131.7 1 071.5 − − 3.0 0.0 191.7 603.3 280.2 323.1 30.6 250.4                               151 240.5 167.3 1 071.5 − − 1.5 0.3 186.4 602.4 280.3 322.1 30.6 251.0                               221 260.9 180.4 1 079.7 − − 0.7 0.0 186.4 602.3 281.0 321.3 30.1 258.6                               29
1 243.5 163.6 1 078.3 − − 1.3 0.3 184.2 601.8 281.3 320.5 30.0 259.5          July                  6
1 248.5 163.7 1 083.7 − − 0.7 0.4 187.0 602.5 281.5 321.0 30.0 263.8                               131 241.3 156.8 1 083.7 − − 0.7 0.0 179.2 602.1 280.9 321.2 30.0 263.5                               201 207.6 130.7 1 075.5 − − 1.2 0.2 225.9 601.8 280.8 321.0 30.0 261.1                               27
1 209.4 132.8 1 075.5 − − 1.0 0.1 215.4 602.5 280.9 321.6 30.0 261.1 2012 Aug                  3
1 210.7 133.4 1 076.3 − − 0.9 0.1 214.1 602.7 281.0 321.7 30.0 262.8                               101 208.3 130.6 1 076.3 − − 0.9 0.5 218.2 602.8 281.2 321.6 30.0 263.7                               171 208.2 131.2 1 076.3 − − 0.7 0.0 215.0 599.6 278.9 320.7 30.0 262.7                               241 209.8 131.5 1 077.7 − − 0.6 0.0 218.8 599.3 279.0 320.3 30.0 261.9                               31
1 205.3 126.3 1 077.7 − − 0.9 0.3 216.3 598.7 278.9 319.8 30.0 261.5          Sep                  7
1 197.8 130.3 1 066.4 − − 1.0 0.1 214.5 598.4 279.2 319.3 30.0 261.8                               141 187.2 119.8 1 066.3 − − 1.0 0.1 213.4 597.6 279.4 318.3 30.0 266.1                               211 178.2 117.4 1 058.8 − − 2.0 0.0 212.7 597.7 280.2 317.4 30.0 271.9                               28
1 162.3 102.9 1 058.8 − − 0.7 0.0 211.2 596.9 280.0 316.9 30.0 268.4          Oct                  5
1 148.6 89.8 1 057.5 − − 1.3 0.0 220.6 596.5 279.7 316.7 30.0 264.4                               121 150.5 91.8 1 057.5 − − 1.0 0.1 214.6 594.1 279.3 314.8 30.0 264.4                               191 135.1 77.3 1 057.5 − − 0.3 0.0 230.7 591.7 279.0 312.7 30.0 264.1                               26
1 131.7 83.7 1 047.5 − − 0.5 0.0 232.2 590.2 278.3 311.9 30.0 265.2          Nov                  2
 Deutsche Bundesbank
103.1 68.4 33.5 1.2 − − − 9.6 36.1 30.9 5.2 4.4 355.9 2010          Dec 
82.5 37.8 44.4 − − 0.3 − 10.0 36.8 31.6 5.2 4.4 332.7 2011          Jan 
74.9 29.8 45.1 − − 0.0 − 10.0 37.1 31.8 5.2 4.4 350.9          Feb 
71.7 25.5 46.1 − − 0.1 − 9.6 37.2 31.9 5.2 4.4 353.5          Mar 
64.8 18.7 46.1 − − 0.0 − 8.3 37.0 31.9 5.1 4.4 339.3          Apr 
52.1 10.9 41.3 − − 0.0 − 7.7 36.8 31.7 5.1 4.4 353.9          May
57.8 21.8 35.9 − − 0.2 − 6.7 36.5 31.4 5.1 4.4 366.9          June
45.8 9.8 36.0 − − 0.0 − 8.1 36.4 31.3 5.1 4.4 374.0          July
37.6 3.5 34.0 − − 0.0 − 7.8 48.4 43.5 4.9 4.4 420.9          Aug 
31.1 12.6 18.4 − − 0.0 − 9.7 57.8 52.9 4.9 4.4 480.2          Sep 
21.3 3.5 17.7 − − 0.1 − 8.5 60.8 55.9 4.9 4.4 496.1          Oct 
21.6 3.8 17.7 − − 0.1 − 9.2 70.1 65.2 4.9 4.4 525.9          Nov 
55.8 8.6 47.1 − − 0.0 − 8.5 71.9 67.0 4.9 4.4 494.3          Dec 
48.6 2.0 46.6 − − 0.0 − 8.4 74.1 69.2 4.9 4.4 528.2 2012          Jan 
48.0 0.9 46.6 0.5 − 0.0 − 8.5 73.9 69.1 4.8 4.4 576.4          Feb 
74.6 1.2 73.2 − − 0.1 − 9.4 73.5 68.7 4.8 4.4 645.3          Mar 
74.9 1.2 73.7 − − 0.0 − 10.1 73.5 68.7 4.8 4.4 672.8          Apr 
79.7 3.6 76.1 − − 0.0 − 8.0 73.4 68.6 4.8 4.4 727.0          May
79.5 2.5 77.0 − − 0.1 − 8.8 73.1 68.7 4.3 4.4 757.2          June
78.6 2.9 75.7 − − 0.0 − 7.6 73.2 68.8 4.3 4.4 755.7          July
76.8 1.7 75.1 − − 0.0 − 9.4 72.8 68.4 4.3 4.4 779.6          Aug 
76.1 1.7 73.9 − − 0.5 − 8.9 68.8 68.8 − 4.4 727.8          Sep 
76.6 1.6 73.9 − − 1.1 − 5.0 67.9 67.9 − 4.4 751.0          Oct 
 
end of the quarter. 1For the Eurosystem: financial statements for specific weekly  
dates; for the Bundesbank: end of month financial statement. 2 Source: ECB. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
18  Monthly Report
November 2012
III Consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem
 
2 Liabilities *
 
 
€ billion
Liabilities to euro area credit institutions related to Liabilities to
monetary policy operations denominated in euro other euro area residents
denominated in euro
 
Other
Current liabilities
accounts to euro-
On (covering Fine- area credit
reporting the tuning Deposits institutions Debt
date/ Banknotes minimum Fixed- reverse deno- certifi- General related to
End of Total in circu- reserve Deposit term opera- margin minated cates govern- Other
month 1 liabilities lation 2 Total system) facility deposits tions calls in euro issued Total ment liabilities
 Eurosystem 4
 
2012 Mar                  2 3,023.2 870.6 1,148.9 91.4 820.8 219.5 − 17.1 7.4 − 147.1 135.4 11.8
                                9 3,005.8 870.6 1,132.7 97.9 798.0 219.5 − 17.3 7.4 − 146.0 134.3 11.7
                              16 2,986.3 869.1 1,109.1 132.2 758.8 218.0 − 0.2 1.5 − 153.0 138.9 14.0
                              23 2,982.8 867.1 1,092.9 89.3 785.4 218.0 − 0.2 1.6 − 167.9 156.5 11.4
                              30 2,964.4 869.9 1,101.2 108.7 778.7 213.5 − 0.3 2.1 − 149.6 137.5 12.1
         Apr                  6 2,965.3 880.9 1,085.0 86.0 784.8 213.5 − 0.7 2.3 − 157.6 146.0 11.6
                              13 2,974.9 874.3 1,086.2 129.0 742.8 214.0 − 0.4 2.4 − 169.8 158.8 11.0
                              20 2,967.1 869.7 1,084.2 93.5 775.7 214.0 − 1.0 2.4 − 166.6 155.3 11.3
                              27 2,962.1 872.7 1,099.5 91.3 794.0 214.0 − 0.3 2.4 − 140.6 129.9 10.7
         May                  4 2,960.3 876.1 1,112.8 96.9 801.5 214.0 − 0.5 2.3 − 119.9 108.5 11.4
                              11 2,971.5 875.2 1,125.0 146.8 763.1 214.0 − 1.1 7.6 − 110.6 99.7 10.9
                              18 2,975.3 878.3 1,107.2 102.5 789.7 214.0 − 1.0 8.5 − 125.1 114.0 11.1
                              25 2,980.3 879.7 1,062.8 90.0 760.1 212.0 − 0.6 3.3 − 153.9 143.0 11.0
         June                  1 3,002.6 884.9 1,091.7 94.0 785.0 212.0 − 0.7 3.4 − 129.0 118.1 10.9
                                8 3,009.7 888.6 1,088.3 87.1 788.2 212.0 − 1.0 3.9 − 124.7 113.8 10.9
                              15 3,027.3 891.5 1,105.2 150.9 741.2 212.0 − 1.1 3.9 − 119.1 107.7 11.4
                              22 3,057.9 890.3 1,084.1 97.0 775.3 210.5 − 1.3 3.8 − 161.4 150.6 10.8
                              29 3,102.2 893.7 1,105.5 116.7 772.9 210.5 − 5.5 3.7 − 158.5 146.3 12.1
         July                  6 3,085.0 897.5 1,100.6 91.8 795.2 210.5 − 3.1 6.6 − 147.3 134.9 12.4
                              13 3,099.6 897.7 1,082.0 479.7 386.8 211.5 − 3.9 6.6 − 145.8 131.9 13.9
                              20 3,079.7 896.4 1,056.7 493.0 349.4 211.5 − 2.8 3.7 − 158.0 137.3 20.8
                              27 3,094.1 897.3 1,066.9 515.7 337.0 211.5 − 2.6 3.8 − 152.1 130.3 21.9
2012 Aug                  3 3,085.2 902.2 1,063.8 549.7 300.4 211.5 − 2.3 4.3 − 144.2 120.5 23.7
                              10 3,086.8 901.3 1,076.4 551.8 310.8 211.5 − 2.2 4.3 − 142.9 119.8 23.1
                              17 3,085.8 900.9 1,082.7 542.1 326.9 211.5 − 2.2 4.6 − 131.6 108.4 23.1
                              24 3,080.5 895.9 1,068.8 525.5 329.3 211.5 − 2.5 4.5 − 146.3 124.2 22.1
                              31 3,084.8 896.4 1,098.6 541.0 346.0 209.0 − 2.6 4.5 − 110.4 88.3 22.1
         Sep                  7 3,073.5 896.6 1,088.0 549.3 326.8 209.0 − 2.9 4.7 − 113.7 87.4 26.4
                              14 3,061.0 894.5 1,073.1 526.4 335.0 209.0 − 2.7 5.5 − 121.1 100.8 20.3
                              21 3,049.5 892.2 1,067.6 550.5 305.6 209.0 − 2.5 5.8 − 115.8 94.1 21.7
                              28 3,082.4 892.5 1,052.5 525.8 315.8 209.0 − 1.9 5.2 − 119.4 99.0 20.5
         Oct                  5 3,062.6 894.4 1,028.2 521.3 296.5 209.0 − 1.4 6.1 − 128.7 105.9 22.8
                              12 3,053.6 892.2 998.9 527.5 260.5 209.5 − 1.4 6.1 − 154.7 100.7 54.0
                              19 3,046.6 889.1 993.7 533.7 248.7 209.5 − 1.8 6.2 − 156.9 100.9 56.0
                              26 3,046.5 888.1 993.4 515.3 267.0 209.5 − 1.7 6.4 − 151.2 92.6 58.6
         Nov                  2 3,040.7 893.2 988.0 515.4 261.4 209.5 − 1.7 6.1 − 151.8 96.6 55.1
 Deutsche Bundesbank
2010          Dec 671.2 209.6 146.4 71.4 38.5 36.5 − − − − 0.9 0.2 0.8
2011          Jan 628.7 204.5 109.4 50.5 16.6 42.3 − − − − 2.0 0.2 1.8
         Feb 639.5 204.2 120.7 58.2 13.0 49.5 − − − − 0.6 0.2 0.5
         Mar 632.2 205.2 119.9 63.9 17.1 38.9 − − − − 0.6 0.2 0.5
         Apr 610.1 207.8 95.9 47.9 11.7 36.3 − − − − 0.8 0.4 0.4
         May 611.3 208.6 95.0 54.3 7.7 32.9 − − − − 0.6 0.2 0.4
         June 632.3 210.9 108.5 63.3 8.7 36.5 − − − − 1.1 0.2 0.9
         July 629.0 213.1 100.3 52.5 13.2 34.6 − − − − 0.6 0.2 0.4
         Aug 679.1 211.6 145.5 60.5 16.0 68.9 − − − − 0.7 0.2 0.4
         Sep 764.6 213.5 205.5 69.8 56.8 78.8 − − − − 0.9 0.3 0.6
         Oct 772.8 215.2 212.1 59.9 58.4 93.9 − − − − 1.1 0.4 0.7
         Nov 812.7 216.1 249.8 49.6 58.2 142.0 − − − − 1.5 0.8 0.7
         Dec 837.6 221.3 228.9 76.4 66.1 86.4 − − − − 5.5 0.7 4.8
2012          Jan 860.1 216.3 294.1 34.6 119.7 139.7 − − − − 1.4 0.7 0.7
         Feb 910.9 216.0 342.5 29.9 166.4 146.2 − − − − 2.8 0.8 2.0
         Mar 1 002.8 216.6 424.5 30.9 248.2 145.4 − − − − 3.4 0.8 2.6
         Apr 1 031.3 217.6 452.3 33.0 276.9 142.4 − − 0.0 − 2.0 0.7 1.3
         May 1 087.0 219.9 464.8 33.4 275.0 156.3 − − 0.0 − 2.6 0.6 2.0
         June 1 119.4 222.5 457.1 33.3 262.9 160.9 − − − − 3.2 1.2 2.0
         July 1 112.9 223.6 421.7 178.3 88.1 155.2 − − − − 19.5 7.3 12.2
         Aug 1 135.4 223.2 442.5 201.4 111.4 129.7 − − − − 17.6 5.5 12.1
         Sep 1 090.9 222.2 385.8 173.1 78.4 134.2 − − − − 17.3 7.0 10.2
         Oct 1 110.0 222.0 372.3 177.9 59.0 135.5 − − − − 50.7 5.1 45.7
 
*The consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem comprises the financial specific weekly dates; for the Bundesbank: end-of-month financial statements.
statement of the European Central Bank (ECB) and the financial statements of the 2According to the accounting regime chosen by the Eurosystem on the issue of euro
national central banks of the euro area member states (NCBs). The balance sheet banknotes, a share of 8% of the total value of the euro banknotes in circulation is
items for foreign currency, securities, gold and financial instruments are valued at allocated to the ECB on a monthly basis. The counterpart of this adjustment ismarket rates at the end of the quarter. 1For Eurosystem: financial statements for disclosed as an “Intra-Eurosystem liability related to euro banknote issue". The

Deutsche Bundesbank
19  Monthly Report
November 2012
III Consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem
 
   
 
Liabilities to non-euro area
residents denominated inforeign currency
Intra-  Eurosystem  
Liabilities Liabilities Liabilities Counterpart liability     Onto non-euro to euro area Deposits, arising of special related to     reportingarea residents residents balances from the drawing euro  Capital    date/denominated in foreign and other rights allocated Other banknote Revaluation and    End of credit facility
in euro currency Total liabilities under ERM II by the IMF issue  
2 accounts reserves    month 1 liabilities 3 
Eurosystem 4
 
90.9 4.4 7.9 7.9 − 55.9 213.1 − 394.0 83.0 2012 Mar                  2
92.3 3.9 7.8 7.8 − 55.9 212.2 − 394.0 83.0                                 9
93.4 3.9 7.4 7.4 − 55.9 216.0 − 394.0 83.0                               16
90.7 3.1 8.7 8.7 − 55.9 217.9 − 394.0 83.0                               23
79.8 3.0 7.8 7.8 − 54.7 212.8 − 399.4 83.9                               30
74.1 4.7 7.6 7.6 − 54.7 215.2 − 399.4 83.9          Apr                  6
76.8 3.6 7.8 7.8 − 54.7 214.2 − 399.4 85.5                               13
76.5 3.8 8.6 8.6 − 54.7 215.7 − 399.4 85.5                               20
76.4 5.2 8.7 8.7 − 54.7 217.0 − 399.4 85.5                               27
77.5 4.6 10.0 10.0 − 54.7 217.2 − 399.4 85.5          May                  4
82.1 4.1 10.1 10.1 − 54.7 217.1 − 399.4 85.5                               11
85.0 4.5 9.1 9.1 − 54.7 217.9 − 399.4 85.5                               18
107.2 6.7 7.1 7.1 − 54.7 219.8 − 399.4 85.5                               25
116.4 5.5 9.3 9.3 − 54.7 222.9 − 399.4 85.4          June                  1
129.6 4.0 9.9 9.9 − 54.7 220.7 − 399.4 85.7                                 8
138.8 2.9 10.1 10.1 − 54.7 215.8 − 399.4 85.7                               15
149.7 2.9 8.8 8.8 − 54.7 217.0 − 399.4 85.7                               22
149.9 3.3 9.6 9.6 − 56.9 225.5 − 409.8 85.7                               29
139.7 4.0 9.7 9.7 − 56.9 227.1 − 409.8 85.7          July                  6
172.2 4.9 10.0 10.0 − 56.9 228.0 − 409.8 85.7                               13
173.2 5.9 8.4 8.4 − 56.9 225.0 − 409.8 85.7                               20
185.0 5.4 9.0 9.0 − 56.9 222.1 − 409.8 85.7                               27
179.7 6.2 8.2 8.2 − 56.9 224.1 − 409.8 85.7 2012 Aug                  3
170.3 6.0 7.5 7.5 − 56.9 225.7 − 409.8 85.7                               10
172.0 3.6 8.4 8.4 − 56.9 229.6 − 409.8 85.7                               17
171.3 4.2 7.9 7.9 − 56.9 229.0 − 409.8 85.8                               24
177.9 6.2 7.0 7.0 − 56.9 231.2 − 409.8 85.8                               31
174.2 6.4 7.0 7.0 − 56.9 230.4 − 409.8 85.8          Sep                  7
170.2 5.6 7.9 7.9 − 56.9 230.6 − 409.8 85.8                               14
170.6 3.6 8.0 8.0 − 56.9 233.4 − 409.8 85.7                               21
171.7 4.2 6.6 6.6 − 56.2 235.6 − 452.8 85.6                               28
164.6 4.8 7.1 7.1 − 56.2 234.1 − 452.8 85.6          Oct                  5
164.5 4.7 7.1 7.1 − 56.2 230.6 − 452.8 85.6                               12
163.4 5.8 5.6 5.6 − 56.2 231.4 − 452.8 85.6                               19
168.9 6.4 5.9 5.9 − 56.2 231.5 − 452.8 85.6                               26
164.9 4.1 5.5 5.5 − 56.2 232.5 − 452.8 85.6          Nov                  2
 Deutsche Bundesbank
14.5 0.0 0.2 0.2 − 14.0 13.1 157.1 110.5 5.0 2010          Dec 
12.2 0.0 0.2 0.2 − 14.0 13.1 157.8 110.5 5.0 2011          Jan 
12.0 0.0 0.1 0.1 − 14.0 13.5 158.9 110.5 5.0          Feb 
13.4 0.0 0.2 0.2 − 13.5 11.7 159.5 103.3 5.0          Mar 
11.7 0.0 0.3 0.3 − 13.5 11.7 160.1 103.3 5.0          Apr 
11.3 0.0 0.3 0.3 − 13.5 12.1 161.6 103.3 5.0          May
10.5 0.0 0.1 0.1 − 13.3 12.7 163.1 107.0 5.0          June
11.9 0.0 0.1 0.1 − 13.3 12.7 164.9 107.0 5.0          July
15.3 0.0 0.1 0.1 − 13.3 13.2 167.5 107.0 5.0          Aug 
13.6 0.0 0.2 0.2 − 13.9 14.3 170.7 127.1 5.0          Sep 
12.9 0.0 0.2 0.2 − 13.9 14.4 170.7 127.1 5.0          Oct 
13.5 0.0 0.0 0.0 − 13.9 14.9 170.9 127.1 5.0          Nov 
46.6 0.0 − − − 14.3 16.2 170.5 129.4 5.0          Dec 
11.9 0.0 0.0 0.0 − 14.3 16.5 171.0 129.4 5.0 2012          Jan 
11.7 0.0 0.3 0.3 − 14.3 16.7 172.2 129.4 5.0          Feb 
15.9 0.0 0.2 0.2 − 14.0 16.9 175.5 130.8 5.0          Mar 
14.2 0.0 0.4 0.4 − 14.0 17.5 177.6 130.8 5.0          Apr 
52.0 0.0 0.4 0.4 − 14.0 18.2 179.3 130.8 5.0          May
83.2 0.0 0.2 0.2 − 14.5 19.5 181.0 133.3 5.0          June
90.9 0.0 0.0 0.0 − 14.5 19.9 184.5 133.3 5.0          July
89.9 0.0 0.3 0.3 − 14.5 20.6 188.5 133.3 5.0          Aug 
86.3 0.0 − − − 14.4 21.6 191.9 146.5 5.0          Sep 
82.1 0.0 0.2 0.2 − 14.4 22.3 194.7 146.5 5.0          Oct 
 
remaining 92 % of the value of the euro banknote in circulation is also allocated to according to the aforementioned accounting regime and the value of euro bank-
the NCBs on a monthly basis, and each NCB shows in its balance sheet the share of notes put into circulation is also disclosed as an “Intra-Eurosystem claim/ liabilitythe euro banknotes issued which corresponds to its paid-up share in the ECB’s related to banknote issue“. 3For the Deutsche Bundesbank: including DM banknotes
capital. The difference between the value of the euro banknotes allocated to the NCB still in circulation. 4 Source: ECB. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
20  Monthly Report
November 2012
IV Banks
 
1 Assets and liabilities of monetary financial institutions (excluding the Bundesbank) in Germany *
  Assets
 
€ billion
Lending to banks (MFIs) in the euro area Lending to non-banks (non-MFIs) in the
to banks in the home country to banks in other member states to non-banks in the home country
Enterprises and house-
holds
Secur- Secur-
Balance ities ities
sheet Cash issued issued
Period total 1 in hand Total Total Loans by banks Total Loans by banks Total Total Total Loans
 End of year or month
 
2003 6,432.0 17.3 2,111.5 1,732.0 1,116.8 615.3 379.5 287.7 91.8 3,333.2 3,083.1 2,497.4 2,241.2
2004 6,617.4 15.1 2,174.3 1,750.2 1,122.9 627.3 424.2 306.3 117.9 3,358.7 3,083.4 2,479.7 2,223.8
2005 6,859.4 15.3 2,276.0 1,762.5 1,148.4 614.1 513.5 356.3 157.2 3,407.6 3,085.2 2,504.6 2,226.3
2006 7,154.4 16.4 2,314.4 1,718.6 1,138.6 580.0 595.8 376.8 219.0 3,462.1 3,085.5 2,536.1 2,241.9
2007 7,592.4 17.8 2,523.4 1,847.9 1,290.4 557.5 675.4 421.6 253.8 3,487.3 3,061.8 2,556.0 2,288.8
2008 7,892.7 17.8 2,681.8 1,990.2 1,404.3 585.8 691.6 452.9 238.8 3,638.2 3,163.0 2,686.9 2,357.3
2009 7,436.1 17.2 2,480.5 1,813.2 1,218.4 594.8 667.3 449.5 217.8 3,638.3 3,187.9 2,692.9 2,357.5
2010 8,304.8 16.5 2,361.6 1,787.8 1,276.9 510.9 573.9 372.8 201.0 3,724.5 3,303.0 2,669.2 2,354.7
2011 8,393.3 16.4 2,394.4 1,844.5 1,362.2 482.2 550.0 362.3 187.7 3,673.5 3,270.5 2,709.4 2,415.1
2010          Dec 8,304.8 16.5 2,361.6 1,787.8 1,276.9 510.9 573.9 372.8 201.0 3,724.5 3,303.0 2,669.2 2,354.7
2011          Jan 8,183.8 14.1 2,322.8 1,748.8 1,239.7 509.1 573.9 374.7 199.2 3,748.8 3,322.9 2,684.7 2,356.7
         Feb 8,142.3 14.5 2,332.2 1,751.5 1,243.1 508.4 580.6 380.6 200.1 3,745.3 3,322.0 2,697.7 2,377.4         Mar 7,955.1 14.5 2,294.6 1,735.4 1,233.8 501.6 559.2 363.4 195.8 3,711.8 3,293.5 2,680.7 2,358.7
         Apr 7,997.9 15.6 2,270.7 1,702.2 1,203.3 498.8 568.6 371.7 196.9 3,736.5 3,307.8 2,703.7 2,360.9
         May 8,045.9 15.5 2,281.5 1,702.0 1,201.3 500.7 579.5 377.0 202.5 3,714.4 3,289.2 2,694.7 2,376.5         June 7,885.8 15.2 2,268.6 1,696.4 1,206.0 490.5 572.2 372.2 200.0 3,690.4 3,269.3 2,681.2 2,374.9
         July 8,001.0 15.2 2,258.5 1,688.2 1,202.0 486.2 570.2 372.7 197.6 3,692.8 3,270.6 2,685.7 2,379.2
         Aug 8,263.5 14.7 2,337.8 1,750.1 1,265.2 484.9 587.7 390.3 197.4 3,699.5 3,279.0 2,706.1 2,403.3
         Sep 8,489.4 15.4 2,412.6 1,831.2 1,349.4 481.8 581.4 385.6 195.7 3,708.6 3,285.3 2,713.5 2,413.7
         Oct 8,353.9 15.4 2,407.5 1,830.0 1,347.6 482.3 577.5 385.1 192.4 3,728.0 3,311.1 2,742.8 2,445.3
         Nov 8,406.6 14.8 2,450.5 1,876.1 1,396.6 479.5 574.4 382.6 191.8 3,727.2 3,315.3 2,747.9 2,450.0         Dec 8,393.3 16.4 2,394.4 1,844.5 1,362.2 482.2 550.0 362.3 187.7 3,673.5 3,270.5 2,709.4 2,415.1
2012          Jan 8,517.7 14.5 2,470.6 1,921.9 1,444.6 477.3 548.7 362.6 186.1 3,702.0 3,298.2 2,729.8 2,437.1
         Feb 8,526.0 14.4 2,534.4 1,981.0 1,499.7 481.3 553.4 369.7 183.7 3,695.5 3,291.4 2,723.7 2,437.0         Mar 8,522.7 15.4 2,577.6 2,037.3 1,559.1 478.2 540.3 358.1 182.2 3,698.3 3,292.5 2,722.7 2,427.8
         Apr 8,599.6 15.3 2,593.3 2,049.9 1,574.4 475.5 543.4 365.1 178.2 3,719.9 3,314.2 2,739.4 2,430.9
         May 8,859.6 15.5 2,605.1 2,060.4 1,585.9 474.5 544.7 365.3 179.4 3,692.5 3,288.7 2,722.4 2,434.0         June 8,636.4 15.5 2,566.1 2,041.1 1,571.3 469.8 525.0 351.0 174.1 3,699.4 3,297.2 2,692.7 2,432.4
         July 8,726.8 14.8 2,531.1 2,000.3 1,530.8 469.5 530.8 359.0 171.8 3,731.2 3,327.5 2,724.4 2,467.2
         Aug 8,695.6 15.7 2,538.3 2,016.4 1,547.5 468.9 522.0 349.7 172.2 3,725.2 3,321.8 2,723.8 2,464.9
         Sep 8,567.6 16.0 2,464.0 1,947.5 1,481.5 466.0 516.4 346.1 170.3 3,730.1 3,322.3 2,720.6 2,458.6
 Changes 3
2004 212.0 − 2.1 73.7 24.0 10.9 13.1 49.7 19.2 30.5 44.0 17.4 − 0.4 − 1.3
2005 187.9 0.1 93.0 10.4 22.8 − 12.5 82.6 44.6 38.1 59.7 14.2 37.2 15.5
2006 356.8 1.1 84.2 0.5 28.0 − 27.6 83.7 22.4 61.3 56.0 1.5 32.5 13.3
2007 518.3 1.5 218.9 135.5 156.3 − 20.8 83.4 47.4 36.0 54.1 − 1.0 38.7 53.2
2008 313.3 − 0.1 183.6 164.3 127.5 36.9 19.3 33.7 − 14.4 140.4 102.6 130.9 65.5
2009 −454.5 − 0.5 −189.0 −166.4 −182.2 15.8 − 22.5 − 1.8 − 20.7 17.4 38.3 17.0 6.6
2010 −136.3 − 0.7 −111.6 − 15.6 58.5 − 74.1 − 95.9 − 80.9 − 15.1 96.4 126.0 − 13.7 0.7
2011 54.1 − 0.1 32.6 58.7 91.7 − 33.0 − 26.0 − 12.1 − 13.9 − 51.8 − 35.3 38.7 56.7
2011          Jan −109.5 − 2.4 − 35.8 − 37.2 − 36.0 − 1.2 1.4 2.8 − 1.4 29.3 24.2 19.5 5.7
         Feb − 39.5 0.3 10.1 3.2 3.7 − 0.5 6.9 6.1 0.9 − 1.1 0.4 14.6 22.0
         Mar −167.5 0.0 − 31.8 − 10.8 − 8.2 − 2.6 − 20.9 − 16.2 − 4.8 − 29.7 − 25.8 − 14.5 − 16.4
         Apr 63.2 1.2 − 21.0 − 31.7 − 29.2 − 2.5 10.7 9.6 1.2 29.1 17.1 25.7 5.1
         May 27.4 − 0.1 7.4 − 1.9 − 3.5 1.6 9.3 3.9 5.4 − 25.8 − 21.2 − 11.3 13.1
         June −165.7 − 0.2 − 21.0 − 14.0 4.8 − 18.7 − 7.1 − 4.6 − 2.4 − 23.0 − 19.3 − 12.9 − 1.0
         July 102.3 − 0.0 − 12.4 − 9.5 − 5.1 − 4.4 − 2.9 − 0.5 − 2.5 − 0.9 − 1.3 2.2 2.0
         Aug 263.0 − 0.5 80.7 69.9 71.0 − 1.1 10.8 10.9 − 0.0 1.0 1.9 14.0 17.7
         Sep 193.7 0.7 70.4 78.9 82.5 − 3.6 − 8.5 − 6.4 − 2.1 4.7 3.7 5.2 8.2
         Oct −116.4 − 0.0 − 1.4 1.1 0.2 0.9 − 2.4 0.7 − 3.2 24.7 29.5 32.9 34.1
         Nov 31.1 − 0.6 39.9 44.3 47.5 − 3.2 − 4.5 − 3.7 − 0.8 − 4.4 2.1 3.1 2.7
         Dec − 27.9 1.6 − 52.5 − 33.6 − 36.0 2.4 − 18.9 − 14.8 − 4.1 − 55.7 − 46.7 − 39.8 − 36.42012          Jan 132.8 − 1.9 78.4 78.4 83.0 − 4.7 0.1 0.8 − 0.8 34.8 31.1 23.8 24.2
         Feb 20.7 − 0.1 65.8 60.4 56.0 4.4 5.5 7.8 − 2.3 − 3.2 − 4.6 − 4.1 1.7
         Mar − 7.0 0.9 42.3 55.8 59.1 − 3.3 − 13.5 − 11.8 − 1.6 3.0 1.5 − 0.5 − 8.9
         Apr 68.9 − 0.1 17.5 15.1 17.9 − 2.7 2.4 6.5 − 4.2 18.0 18.8 13.9 0.1
         May 226.6 0.2 6.4 7.4 9.1 − 1.7 − 1.0 − 1.8 0.9 − 33.0 − 29.2 − 20.4 − 0.4
         June −214.5 0.0 − 37.7 − 18.6 − 14.0 − 4.6 − 19.2 − 13.9 − 5.3 10.7 11.6 − 6.6 1.4
         July 85.2 − 0.7 − 37.3 − 42.0 − 41.4 − 0.6 4.7 7.1 − 2.4 29.8 29.3 30.9 33.9
         Aug − 16.8 0.9 9.4 17.2 17.5 − 0.4 − 7.8 − 8.5 0.7 − 3.5 − 3.9 1.2 − 0.7
         Sep −128.1 0.3 − 74.3 − 68.9 − 66.0 − 2.9 − 5.4 − 3.6 − 1.8 5.7 1.3 − 2.1 − 5.4
*This table serves to supplement the “Overall monetary survey“ in section II. Unlike by banks (including building and loan associations) − data from money market
the other tables in section IV, this table includes − in addition to the figures reported funds. 1See footnote 1 in Table IV.2. 2Including debt securities arising from the

Deutsche Bundesbank
21  Monthly Report
November 2012
IV Banks
 
   
 
euro area Claims on
non-euro-area
to non-banks in other member states residents
 General Enterprises and General government households government
Secur- Secur- of which Secur- of which Other
ities Total Loans ities 
2 Total Total Loans Total Loans ities Total Loans assets  1   Period
End of year or month
 
256.2 585.6 439.6 146.1 250.2 133.5 62.7 116.6 25.9 90.7 806.4 645.6 163.6 2003
255.9 603.8 423.0 180.8 275.3 140.6 61.9 134.7 25.7 109.0 897.8 730.4 171.4 2004
278.2 580.7 408.7 171.9 322.4 169.1 65.0 153.3 30.7 122.6 993.8 796.8 166.7 2005
294.1 549.5 390.2 159.2 376.6 228.1 85.2 148.5 26.1 122.4 1,172.7 936.2 188.8 2006267.3 505.8 360.7 145.0 425.5 294.6 124.9 130.9 26.0 104.9 1,339.5 1,026.9 224.4 2007329.6 476.1 342.8 133.4 475.1 348.1 172.1 127.0 27.6 99.4 1,279.2 1,008.6 275.7 2008335.4 495.0 335.1 160.0 450.4 322.2 162.9 128.2 23.5 104.7 1,062.6 821.1 237.5 2009
314.5 633.8 418.4 215.3 421.6 289.2 164.2 132.4 24.8 107.6 1,021.0 792.7 1,181.1 2010
294.3 561.1 359.8 201.2 403.1 276.9 161.2 126.2 32.6 93.6 995.1 770.9 1,313.8 2011
314.5 633.8 418.4 215.3 421.6 289.2 164.2 132.4 24.8 107.6 1,021.0 792.7 1,181.1 2010          Dec 
328.0 638.2 421.7 216.5 425.9 287.9 159.8 138.0 26.2 111.8 1,017.1 786.3 1,081.0 2011          Jan 
320.2 624.3 410.1 214.2 423.3 285.7 158.2 137.6 26.3 111.3 1,017.4 790.0 1,033.0          Feb 322.1 612.8 399.4 213.4 418.3 282.2 157.2 136.2 26.4 109.7 978.6 748.1 955.6          Mar 
342.8 604.1 388.4 215.7 428.7 291.9 165.1 136.8 26.4 110.4 1,013.2 787.6 961.8          Apr 
318.2 594.5 377.9 216.6 425.2 288.0 161.4 137.2 26.2 111.0 1,028.3 796.9 1,006.2          May306.3 588.2 374.6 213.6 421.1 287.2 161.2 133.9 25.9 108.0 984.4 753.6 927.1          June
306.5 584.9 374.5 210.4 422.3 283.5 161.6 138.8 31.3 107.5 986.6 757.8 1,047.9          July
302.8 572.9 365.2 207.7 420.5 281.9 162.6 138.5 31.0 107.5 1,004.6 779.9 1,206.8          Aug 299.9 571.8 365.2 206.6 423.3 288.0 171.2 135.3 30.7 104.6 1,011.7 786.7 1,341.1          Sep 
297.4 568.3 361.3 207.0 417.0 280.0 164.0 137.0 30.3 106.6 974.8 754.2 1,228.2          Oct 
297.8 567.5 358.2 209.3 411.9 282.3 165.1 129.6 31.0 98.5 991.0 770.1 1,223.1          Nov 294.3 561.1 359.8 201.2 403.1 276.9 161.2 126.2 32.6 93.6 995.1 770.9 1,313.8          Dec 
292.8 568.3 363.6 204.8 403.8 277.7 157.6 126.1 32.3 93.8 1,016.2 794.5 1,314.3 2012          Jan 
286.7 567.7 361.3 206.4 404.1 278.1 158.1 126.1 32.4 93.7 996.6 778.9 1,285.0          Feb 295.0 569.8 359.9 209.9 405.8 279.9 159.9 125.9 31.5 94.3 1,004.1 782.1 1,227.4          Mar 
308.5 574.8 365.3 209.6 405.7 282.6 163.2 123.1 31.4 91.7 1,008.5 786.8 1,262.6          Apr 
288.3 566.3 359.8 206.5 403.8 279.3 160.7 124.6 31.5 93.0 1,027.6 804.5 1,518.8          May260.4 604.5 370.2 234.3 402.2 278.2 160.3 124.0 31.8 92.2 992.6 772.1 1,362.8          June
257.2 603.1 367.0 236.1 403.7 282.5 162.1 121.2 31.1 90.1 1,005.2 786.0 1,444.5          July
258.9 598.1 359.6 238.4 403.4 281.3 161.0 122.1 31.7 90.4 1,007.4 787.3 1,408.9          Aug 262.1 601.7 359.8 241.9 407.8 283.5 161.4 124.3 31.4 92.9 1,005.3 788.1 1,352.2          Sep 
Changes 3
0.9 17.8 − 17.0 34.9 26.6 8.2 3.1 18.4 0.0 18.4 111.1 100.3 − 14.7 2004
21.7 − 23.0 − 14.3 − 8.6 45.5 27.4 2.2 18.2 4.7 13.5 57.1 31.2 − 22.2 200519.3 − 31.0 − 18.6 − 12.4 54.5 59.6 20.9 − 5.1 − 1.3 − 3.8 205.7 165.7 9.8 2006
− 14.6 − 39.6 − 29.3 − 10.3 55.1 73.6 41.5 − 18.6 0.0 − 18.6 222.7 136.5 21.1 2007
65.4 − 28.4 − 16.9 − 11.5 37.8 42.3 40.4 − 4.5 1.6 − 6.1 − 40.3 − 7.6 29.7 200810.5 21.3 − 5.1 26.4 − 20.9 − 20.9 − 7.1 0.0 − 3.9 3.9 −182.5 −162.3 − 99.8 2009
− 14.3 139.7 83.4 56.3 − 29.6 − 36.4 0.2 6.8 3.1 3.7 − 74.1 − 61.9 − 46.3 2010− 18.0 − 74.0 − 59.1 − 14.9 − 16.6 − 13.8 − 5.5 − 2.7 8.0 − 10.7 − 39.5 − 34.9 112.9 2011
13.8 4.7 3.5 1.2 5.1 − 0.4 − 3.6 5.5 1.4 4.0 5.1 2.3 −105.7 2011          Jan 
− 7.4 − 14.2 − 12.0 − 2.2 − 1.5 − 1.1 − 1.3 − 0.4 0.1 − 0.5 3.0 6.1 − 51.9          Feb 
1.9 − 11.3 − 10.5 − 0.8 − 3.9 − 2.6 − 0.1 − 1.3 0.2 − 1.5 − 27.9 − 32.2 − 78.2          Mar 
20.6 − 8.5 − 10.9 2.4 11.9 11.1 9.3 0.8 0.0 0.7 48.6 52.4 5.4          Apr 
− 24.4 − 9.9 − 10.7 0.8 − 4.6 − 5.0 − 4.6 0.4 − 0.3 0.6 1.7 − 2.8 44.1          May− 11.9 − 6.3 − 3.2 − 3.1 − 3.8 − 0.4 0.0 − 3.3 − 0.3 − 3.0 − 41.4 − 41.2 − 80.0          June
0.2 − 3.5 − 0.2 − 3.3 0.4 − 4.5 − 0.0 4.9 5.4 − 0.6 − 5.5 − 2.9 121.1          July
− 3.7 − 12.2 − 9.3 − 2.9 − 0.9 − 1.3 1.1 0.5 − 0.1 0.5 23.8 27.0 158.0          Aug − 3.0 − 1.5 − 0.2 − 1.3 1.0 4.4 6.8 − 3.4 − 0.3 − 3.0 − 14.7 − 13.4 132.6          Sep 
− 1.2 − 3.4 − 3.8 0.4 − 4.8 − 7.0 − 6.1 2.2 − 0.4 2.6 − 24.0 − 20.8 −115.8          Oct 
0.4 − 1.0 − 3.3 2.3 − 6.5 1.2 − 0.2 − 7.7 0.6 − 8.3 1.2 2.3 − 4.9          Nov 
− 3.4 − 6.9 1.6 − 8.5 − 9.0 − 8.2 − 6.7 − 0.8 1.5 − 2.4 − 9.5 − 11.7 88.2          Dec 
− 0.3 7.3 3.8 3.5 3.7 1.7 − 2.9 2.0 − 0.2 2.2 28.7 29.3 − 7.3 2012          Jan 
− 5.8 − 0.5 − 2.2 1.7 1.5 1.3 1.3 0.2 0.1 0.2 − 12.0 − 8.4 − 30.0          Feb 
8.4 2.0 − 1.4 3.4 1.5 1.7 1.7 − 0.2 − 0.9 0.6 4.9 0.8 − 58.2          Mar 
13.8 4.8 5.3 − 0.5 − 0.8 2.0 2.9 − 2.8 − 0.1 − 2.7 − 0.6 0.3 34.1          Apr 
− 19.9 − 8.8 − 5.6 − 3.2 − 3.9 − 5.1 − 4.4 1.2 0.1 1.1 − 2.6 − 2.5 255.6          May− 8.0 18.2 10.4 7.8 − 0.9 − 0.9 0.2 − 0.0 0.2 − 0.3 − 29.4 − 27.1 −158.0          June
− 3.0 − 1.6 − 3.3 1.8 0.5 3.4 0.9 − 2.9 − 0.7 − 2.2 2.6 5.2 90.7          July
1.9 − 5.1 − 7.4 2.3 0.4 − 0.5 − 0.2 1.0 0.6 0.3 12.0 10.2 − 35.6          Aug 
3.3 3.4 − 0.0 3.4 4.5 2.3 0.6 2.1 − 0.5 2.6 − 1.8 1.2 − 57.9          Sep 
exchange of equalisation claims. 3Statistical breaks have been eliminated from
the flow figures (see also footnote * in Table II.1). 

Deutsche Bundesbank
22  Monthly Report
November 2012
IV Banks
 
1 Assets and liabilities of monetary financial institutions (excluding the Bundesbank) in Germany *
  Liabilities
 
€ billion
Deposits of banks (MFIs) Deposits of non-banks (non-MFIs) in the euro area
in the euro area
Deposits of non-banks in the home country Deposits of non-banks
With agreed At agreed
of banks maturities notice
Balance in the in other of which of which
sheet home member Over- up to up to Over-
Period total 1 Total country states Total Total night Total 2 years Total 3 months Total night
 End of year or month
 
2003 6,432.0 1,471.0 1,229.4 241.6 2,214.6 2,086.9 622.1 874.5 248.0 590.3 500.8 81.8 9.3
2004 6,617.4 1,528.4 1,270.8 257.6 2,264.2 2,148.5 646.2 898.9 239.9 603.5 515.5 71.9 8.8
2005 6,859.4 1,569.6 1,300.8 268.8 2,329.1 2,225.4 715.8 906.2 233.4 603.4 519.1 62.2 9.6
2006 7,154.4 1,637.7 1,348.6 289.0 2,449.2 2,341.6 745.8 1,009.3 310.1 586.5 487.4 62.0 13.9
2007 7,592.4 1,778.6 1,479.0 299.6 2,633.6 2,518.3 769.6 1,193.3 477.9 555.4 446.0 75.1 19.6
2008 7,892.7 1,827.7 1,583.0 244.7 2,798.2 2,687.3 809.5 1,342.7 598.7 535.2 424.8 74.2 22.4
2009 7,436.1 1,589.7 1,355.6 234.0 2,818.0 2,731.3 997.8 1,139.1 356.4 594.4 474.4 63.9 17.7
2010 8,304.8 1,495.8 1,240.1 255.7 2,925.8 2,817.6 1,086.5 1,112.9 307.2 618.2 512.5 68.4 19.3
2011 8,393.3 1,444.8 1,210.3 234.5 3,033.4 2,915.1 1,139.6 1,159.4 366.2 616.1 515.3 78.8 25.9
2010          Dec 8,304.8 1,495.8 1,240.1 255.7 2,925.8 2,817.6 1,086.5 1,112.9 307.2 618.2 512.5 68.4 19.3
2011          Jan 8,183.8 1,489.1 1,221.1 268.0 2,937.6 2,823.6 1,096.9 1,106.3 302.6 620.4 515.1 69.0 22.7
         Feb 8,142.3 1,472.6 1,208.0 264.6 2,930.8 2,817.3 1,083.9 1,110.9 307.2 622.5 517.2 66.5 21.4         Mar 7,955.1 1,454.6 1,191.7 262.9 2,928.3 2,820.7 1,085.9 1,111.3 308.8 623.5 518.0 68.7 22.1
         Apr 7,997.9 1,458.9 1,183.6 275.3 2,936.7 2,830.9 1,088.0 1,120.7 319.2 622.3 517.6 71.9 25.7
         May 8,045.9 1,422.2 1,163.9 258.3 2,950.7 2,841.8 1,090.4 1,131.5 330.2 619.9 515.3 71.3 25.1         June 7,885.8 1,401.2 1,158.5 242.6 2,959.0 2,844.9 1,096.5 1,130.7 330.2 617.7 513.4 73.4 26.6
         July 8,001.0 1,398.0 1,154.4 243.6 2,966.1 2,853.8 1,094.1 1,143.1 342.8 616.5 512.2 72.9 25.0
         Aug 8,263.5 1,413.8 1,163.7 250.1 2,988.4 2,873.6 1,105.9 1,152.7 351.5 615.0 510.8 75.6 25.5         Sep 8,489.4 1,430.6 1,176.1 254.6 3,007.5 2,884.0 1,111.5 1,159.1 361.4 613.4 509.7 80.7 28.3
         Oct 8,353.9 1,419.0 1,162.8 256.2 3,008.5 2,888.5 1,120.4 1,155.0 359.1 613.0 509.5 80.0 28.4
         Nov 8,406.6 1,427.1 1,177.3 249.8 3,028.6 2,912.1 1,145.2 1,155.4 360.5 611.5 509.8 77.3 25.3         Dec 8,393.3 1,444.8 1,210.3 234.5 3,033.4 2,915.1 1,139.6 1,159.4 366.2 616.1 515.3 78.8 25.9
2012          Jan 8,517.7 1,475.9 1,221.1 254.8 3,038.6 2,912.4 1,140.8 1,154.3 364.5 617.2 517.4 82.8 29.3
         Feb 8,526.0 1,484.7 1,232.3 252.4 3,046.2 2,915.6 1,147.2 1,148.6 361.0 619.8 520.2 83.7 31.0         Mar 8,522.7 1,501.9 1,232.1 269.8 3,037.7 2,924.1 1,157.4 1,147.3 363.0 619.4 520.6 77.3 28.9
         Apr 8,599.6 1,501.9 1,222.4 279.5 3,052.2 2,938.9 1,170.0 1,151.0 368.0 617.9 519.4 77.4 28.3
         May 8,859.6 1,494.1 1,219.3 274.8 3,069.6 2,955.6 1,185.8 1,152.7 372.2 617.1 519.5 78.2 30.1         June 8,636.4 1,469.5 1,207.6 262.0 3,091.1 2,975.0 1,203.3 1,155.7 378.1 616.0 519.4 78.9 30.3
         July 8,726.8 1,454.7 1,190.5 264.1 3,084.9 2,974.1 1,207.7 1,150.5 377.8 615.9 520.1 78.5 30.1
         Aug 8,695.6 1,447.9 1,185.3 262.6 3,092.7 2,985.4 1,221.5 1,148.5 377.1 615.3 521.0 76.3 30.3         Sep 8,567.6 1,428.2 1,175.5 252.8 3,099.3 2,990.3 1,241.8 1,134.4 365.9 614.1 521.3 77.5 33.6
 Changes 4
2004 212.0 62.5 42.8 19.7 53.5 64.9 26.3 25.5 − 8.3 13.1 14.7 − 9.3 − 0.4
2005 187.9 32.8 27.0 5.9 65.0 75.5 69.4 7.3 − 6.9 − 1.2 2.9 − 8.0 0.5
2006 356.8 105.6 81.5 24.1 122.9 118.6 30.4 105.0 77.1 − 16.8 − 31.7 0.4 4.4
2007 518.3 148.4 134.8 13.6 185.1 177.3 24.5 183.9 167.8 − 31.1 − 41.4 13.6 5.6
2008 313.3 65.8 121.7 − 55.8 162.3 173.1 38.7 154.6 123.5 − 20.2 − 21.2 − 7.5 − 0.1
2009 −454.5 −235.4 −224.6 − 10.8 31.9 43.9 205.0 −220.4 −259.3 59.3 50.3 − 9.6 − 4.1
2010 −136.3 − 75.2 − 99.4 24.2 72.3 59.7 88.7 − 53.0 − 52.2 24.0 38.3 − 4.4 2.2
2011 54.1 − 48.4 − 28.8 − 19.6 102.1 97.4 52.4 47.6 58.8 − 2.6 1.3 4.8 6.5
2011          Jan −109.5 − 4.9 − 17.9 13.0 12.4 6.5 10.7 − 6.5 − 4.4 2.2 2.7 0.7 3.5         Feb − 39.5 − 16.2 − 13.1 − 3.0 − 6.7 − 6.1 − 12.8 4.6 4.6 2.1 2.1 − 2.5 − 1.4         Mar −167.5 − 16.1 − 15.2 − 0.9 − 1.8 4.0 2.5 0.6 1.7 1.0 0.8 2.4 0.8
         Apr 63.2 6.6 − 6.9 13.4 9.5 10.8 3.6 9.3 10.4 − 2.1 − 1.3 3.4 3.7
         May 27.4 − 39.2 − 21.2 − 18.1 13.1 10.1 1.9 10.7 10.8 − 2.4 − 2.3 − 0.7 − 0.7
         June −165.7 − 20.9 − 5.3 − 15.6 8.5 3.3 6.2 − 0.7 − 0.0 − 2.1 − 1.9 2.1 1.5         July 102.3 − 4.5 − 5.0 0.4 6.5 8.3 − 2.8 12.3 12.5 − 1.2 − 1.2 − 0.6 − 1.6
         Aug 263.0 16.8 12.6 4.1 17.1 19.9 11.8 9.6 8.8 − 1.6 − 1.4 − 2.7 0.4
         Sep 193.7 13.8 10.6 3.2 17.4 9.1 4.3 6.4 9.9 − 1.5 − 1.0 4.9 2.7
         Oct −116.4 − 9.6 − 12.0 2.4 2.0 5.2 9.6 − 3.9 − 2.2 − 0.4 − 0.3 − 0.5 0.2
         Nov 31.1 5.7 13.1 − 7.4 19.0 22.7 23.7 0.1 1.2 − 1.1 − 0.2 − 2.9 − 3.2
         Dec − 27.9 20.1 31.4 − 11.2 5.1 3.5 − 6.3 5.2 5.5 4.6 5.4 1.3 0.5
2012          Jan 132.8 32.1 11.5 20.7 5.7 − 2.4 1.5 − 5.0 − 1.7 1.1 2.1 4.1 3.5
         Feb 20.7 10.2 12.2 − 2.0 8.2 3.7 6.7 − 5.6 − 3.3 2.6 3.8 1.0 1.7
         Mar − 7.0 16.7 − 0.6 17.3 − 8.6 8.4 10.1 − 1.3 1.9 − 0.4 0.4 − 6.4 − 2.1         Apr 68.9 1.8 − 7.6 9.4 14.0 12.1 12.5 1.1 2.4 − 1.5 − 1.2 0.0 − 0.6
         May 226.6 − 11.5 − 5.4 − 6.1 15.7 15.2 14.8 1.2 3.8 − 0.8 0.0 0.5 1.7
         June −214.5 − 23.7 − 11.2 − 12.5 21.9 19.8 17.7 3.2 6.0 − 1.1 − 0.1 0.8 0.2         July 85.2 − 16.3 − 17.9 1.7 − 7.0 − 1.6 4.0 − 5.4 − 0.4 − 0.2 0.7 − 0.5 − 0.2
         Aug − 16.8 − 5.4 − 4.4 − 1.0 8.5 11.9 14.3 − 1.8 − 0.5 − 0.5 0.9 − 2.1 0.3
         Sep −128.1 − 19.7 − 9.9 − 9.8 6.8 4.8 20.6 − 14.6 − 11.6 − 1.2 0.3 1.2 3.3
*This table serves to supplement the “Overall monetary survey“ in section II. Unlike by banks (including building and loan associations) − data from money market
the other tables in section IV, this table includes − in addition to the figures reported funds. 1See footnote 1 in Table IV.2. 2Excluding deposits of central

Deutsche Bundesbank
23  Monthly Report
November 2012
IV Banks
 
   
 
 Debt securities
issued 3 
in other member states 2 Deposits ofcentral governments
With agreed At agreed Liabilitiesmaturities notice arising
of which from Money of which Liabilities
domestic market with to non- repos with
of which of which central non-banks fund euro- Capital maturities
up to up to govern- in the shares of up to area and Other
Total 2 years Total 3 months Total ments euro area issued  
3 Total reserves   Period 2 years 3 residents Liabilities 1 
End of year or month
 
68.6 11.4 3.9 3.1 45.9 44.2 14.1 36.8 1,486.9 131.3 567.8 340.1 300.8 200359.8 9.8 3.3 2.7 43.8 41.4 14.8 31.5 1,554.8 116.9 577.1 329.3 317.2 2004
50.2 9.8 2.4 2.0 41.6 38.8 19.5 31.7 1,611.9 113.8 626.2 346.9 324.5 2005
45.9 9.3 2.3 1.9 45.5 41.9 17.1 32.0 1,636.7 136.4 638.5 389.6 353.7 200653.2 22.0 2.3 1.8 40.1 38.3 26.6 28.6 1,637.6 182.3 661.0 428.2 398.2 200749.5 24.9 2.4 1.8 36.6 34.8 61.1 16.4 1,609.9 233.3 666.3 461.7 451.5 200843.7 17.0 2.5 2.0 22.8 22.2 80.5 11.4 1,500.5 146.3 565.6 454.8 415.6 2009
46.4 16.1 2.8 2.2 39.8 38.7 86.7 9.8 1,407.8 82.3 636.0 452.6 1,290.2 2010
49.6 18.4 3.3 2.5 39.5 37.9 97.1 6.2 1,345.7 75.7 561.5 468.1 1,436.6 2011
46.4 16.1 2.8 2.2 39.8 38.7 86.7 9.8 1,407.8 82.3 636.0 452.6 1,290.2 2010          Dec 43.5 13.7 2.8 2.2 45.0 37.1 74.5 9.9 1,400.8 80.6 631.5 454.3 1,186.1 2011          Jan 
42.3 14.3 2.8 2.2 47.0 37.8 93.2 9.8 1,396.0 83.0 634.1 460.2 1,145.7          Feb 43.8 16.3 2.9 2.3 38.9 36.2 78.9 10.0 1,373.4 78.2 575.5 460.7 1,073.7          Mar 
43.3 16.0 2.9 2.3 34.0 33.8 89.2 9.7 1,364.1 76.2 605.0 456.8 1,077.5          Apr 
43.3 16.2 2.9 2.3 37.6 34.8 105.2 9.5 1,368.4 77.2 605.4 460.7 1,123.8          May43.9 15.8 2.9 2.3 40.6 38.3 104.8 9.4 1,360.1 74.2 556.5 449.5 1,045.4          June
44.9 16.9 3.0 2.3 39.4 35.6 91.8 6.8 1,357.0 77.3 560.3 453.2 1,167.9          July
47.1 15.2 3.0 2.3 39.3 36.8 101.9 7.2 1,352.8 79.4 604.9 458.7 1,335.7          Aug 49.4 17.7 3.0 2.3 42.7 40.8 107.0 7.2 1,352.4 76.1 644.6 459.4 1,480.7          Sep 
48.5 17.1 3.1 2.4 40.0 37.9 105.7 7.2 1,341.7 74.0 650.4 462.7 1,358.7          Oct 
48.8 17.6 3.2 2.5 39.2 35.8 111.1 6.3 1,348.4 79.7 668.9 466.6 1,349.6          Nov 49.6 18.4 3.3 2.5 39.5 37.9 97.1 6.2 1,345.7 75.7 561.5 468.1 1,436.6          Dec 
50.1 19.0 3.4 2.6 43.4 40.9 86.7 5.9 1,311.1 74.3 702.3 468.9 1,428.2 2012          Jan 
49.2 18.6 3.4 2.6 46.9 45.2 96.6 5.7 1,316.9 75.6 719.2 471.8 1,384.9          Feb 44.9 16.0 3.5 2.6 36.3 35.6 93.1 5.5 1,305.7 72.7 772.9 476.9 1,329.2          Mar 
45.6 16.7 3.5 2.6 35.8 33.4 102.9 5.5 1,303.7 68.5 788.9 477.2 1,367.2          Apr 
44.5 15.9 3.6 2.7 35.8 31.5 108.3 5.5 1,304.1 63.6 775.2 482.5 1,620.2          May44.9 16.5 3.8 2.8 37.2 33.8 98.9 5.7 1,291.7 62.9 737.8 489.4 1,452.5          June
44.6 16.1 3.8 2.9 32.3 30.0 106.6 5.7 1,296.0 65.5 748.5 497.0 1,533.4          July
42.1 14.3 3.9 2.9 31.0 27.7 108.1 5.3 1,285.6 62.8 769.0 492.5 1,494.5          Aug 40.0 12.5 3.9 2.9 31.5 26.7 98.0 5.0 1,277.1 60.9 726.4 487.9 1,445.6          Sep 
Changes 4
− 8.3 − 1.4 − 0.6 − 0.4 − 2.1 − 2.8 0.8 − 5.3 73.6 − 14.6 21.7 − 10.5 15.8 2004
− 7.7 − 0.3 − 0.9 − 0.7 − 2.5 − 3.0 4.7 0.2 38.7 − 9.9 22.0 14.8 9.7 2005
− 3.9 − 0.3 − 0.1 − 0.2 3.9 3.1 − 3.3 0.3 34.8 22.1 32.4 27.5 36.6 2006
8.0 12.9 0.0 − 0.1 − 5.8 − 4.3 8.1 − 3.4 20.9 49.3 48.7 42.3 68.3 2007
− 7.5 0.6 0.1 − 0.0 − 3.3 − 3.2 36.1 − 12.2 − 33.9 50.2 − 0.1 39.3 56.1 2008− 5.7 − 7.7 0.1 0.2 − 2.4 − 0.8 19.4 − 5.0 −104.6 − 87.1 − 95.3 − 0.3 − 65.0 2009
− 6.8 − 5.8 0.3 0.3 17.0 16.5 6.2 − 1.6 −106.7 − 63.2 54.4 − 7.1 − 78.6 2010
− 2.2 1.7 0.5 0.3 − 0.1 − 0.7 10.0 − 3.7 − 76.9 − 6.6 − 80.5 13.7 137.8 2011
− 2.8 − 2.3 0.0 0.0 5.2 − 1.6 − 12.2 0.0 − 1.1 − 1.5 0.0 2.8 −106.6 2011          Jan 
− 1.1 0.6 0.0 0.0 1.9 0.7 18.8 − 0.1 − 1.5 2.4 4.1 6.2 − 44.1          Feb 
1.6 2.1 0.0 0.0 − 8.1 − 1.6 − 14.3 0.2 − 12.2 − 3.5 − 53.4 2.1 − 72.1          Mar 
− 0.4 − 0.1 0.0 0.0 − 4.7 − 2.3 10.4 − 0.3 − 1.4 − 1.8 36.6 − 2.5 4.3          Apr − 0.0 0.1 0.0 0.0 3.6 1.0 15.9 − 0.2 − 3.5 0.8 − 5.8 2.6 44.7          May
0.6 − 0.4 0.0 0.0 3.0 3.5 − 0.3 − 0.1 − 15.4 − 3.7 − 47.8 − 11.0 − 78.6          June
0.9 1.0 0.0 0.0 − 1.2 − 2.7 − 13.4 − 2.6 − 8.7 2.9 0.6 2.8 121.6          July
− 3.1 − 2.2 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.1 1.1 10.3 0.4 − 1.0 2.3 47.0 5.3 167.2          Aug 
2.2 2.4 0.0 0.0 3.4 4.0 4.9 0.1 − 13.7 − 3.8 29.1 − 1.6 143.8          Sep 
− 0.8 − 0.5 0.1 0.0 − 2.7 − 2.9 − 1.2 − 0.0 − 2.8 − 1.8 12.0 4.7 −121.4          Oct 
0.2 0.4 0.1 0.1 − 0.7 − 2.1 5.3 − 0.9 − 4.2 5.3 11.0 2.3 − 7.2          Nov 
0.7 0.7 0.1 0.1 0.3 2.0 − 14.1 − 0.1 − 11.3 − 4.2 −113.8 − 0.0 86.1          Dec 
0.6 0.7 0.1 0.0 3.9 3.0 − 10.8 − 0.3 − 31.4 − 1.3 143.6 1.4 − 7.9 2012          Jan 
− 0.8 − 0.3 0.1 0.0 3.5 4.4 10.0 − 0.2 11.6 1.4 20.7 3.9 − 43.7          Feb 
− 4.3 − 2.7 0.0 0.0 − 10.6 − 9.7 − 3.6 − 0.2 − 12.5 − 3.0 52.5 4.9 − 56.2          Mar 
0.7 0.7 − 0.0 − 0.0 1.9 0.2 7.2 − 0.0 − 5.8 − 4.3 13.8 − 0.3 38.3          Apr 
− 1.3 − 0.9 0.1 0.1 0.0 − 1.9 5.3 0.0 − 13.8 − 5.4 − 24.4 2.8 252.6          May
0.4 0.7 0.2 0.1 1.3 2.3 − 9.4 0.2 − 8.7 − 0.6 − 34.7 7.6 −167.7          June
− 0.3 − 0.4 0.1 0.0 − 4.9 − 3.8 7.6 0.1 − 2.7 2.4 6.3 6.3 90.8          July− 2.4 − 1.8 0.0 0.0 − 1.3 − 2.3 1.7 − 0.4 − 4.1 − 2.5 25.2 − 3.3 − 39.0          Aug − 2.1 − 1.8 0.0 0.0 0.8 − 0.8 − 10.2 − 0.2 − 9.5 − 2.9 − 42.6 − 3.6 − 49.2          Sep 
governments. 3In Germany, debt securities with maturities of up to one year are published together with money market fund shares. 4Statistical breaks have been
classed as money market paper; up to the January 2002 Monthly Report they were eliminated from the flow figures (see also footnote * in Table II.1). 

Deutsche Bundesbank
24  Monthly Report
November 2012
IV Banks
 
2 Principal assets and liabilities of banks (MFIs) in Germany, by category of banks*
 
 
€ billion
  Lending to banks (MFIs)  Lending to non-banks (non-MFIs)
 
 of which of which
 
Loans
 Cash in
 hand and
 credit
Number of balances for
reporting Balance with Balances up to and for Partici- Securities Securities
End of institu- sheet central and issued by including more than issued by pating Other
month tions total 1 banks Total loans banks Total 1 year 1 year Bills non-banks interests assets  1 
All categories of banks
 
2012          Apr 1,902 8,671.4 70.7 3,088.4 2,395.1 680.4 3,994.8 519.1 2,746.4 0.7 713.9 138.4 1,379.1
         May 1,900 8,932.2 92.0 3,088.9 2,395.9 679.6 3,976.1 508.2 2,760.2 0.6 693.3 138.8 1,636.4
         June 1,897 8,708.2 104.7 3,017.2 2,335.4 668.7 3,967.8 507.9 2,755.5 0.6 690.3 139.1 1,479.3
         July 1,889 8,798.7 200.3 2,892.7 2,215.1 664.5 4,004.6 537.2 2,764.4 0.6 690.3 139.4 1,561.6
         Aug 1,889 8,768.1 219.1 2,884.3 2,206.8 665.2 3,998.0 526.5 2,764.1 0.6 693.8 140.7 1,525.9
         Sep 1,883 8,639.6 191.1 2,844.0 2,170.7 662.8 3,996.6 524.2 2,755.8 0.6 701.8 139.5 1,468.4
Commercial banks 6
2012          Aug 279 3,467.4 159.7 1,079.2 988.8 89.5 1,094.5 251.9 658.0 0.2 177.4 70.8 1,063.2
         Sep 277 3,361.3 130.6 1,049.7 959.5 89.5 1,088.2 242.1 656.0 0.2 182.0 70.4 1,022.4
   Big banks 7
2012          Aug 4 2,253.2 63.5 575.9 530.7 45.0 516.1 167.2 256.1 0.2 86.4 62.6 1,035.1
         Sep 4 2,173.1 52.6 552.2 507.1 45.0 510.3 159.6 254.9 0.2 88.4 62.3 995.7
   Regional banks and other commercial banks
2012          Aug 164 829.6 56.9 224.6 181.0 42.8 517.9 66.8 362.7 0.0 87.7 7.5 22.7
         Sep 163 817.9 46.5 224.9 181.4 42.9 517.6 64.4 362.6 0.0 89.9 7.4 21.5
   Branches of foreign banks
2012          Aug 111 384.5 39.3 278.7 277.1 1.7 60.5 17.9 39.1 0.0 3.3 0.6 5.4
         Sep 110 370.3 31.5 272.7 271.1 1.6 60.3 18.0 38.4 0.0 3.7 0.6 5.2
Landesbanken
2012          Aug 10 1,427.7 20.5 472.0 352.1 115.8 663.8 123.6 410.5 0.1 124.3 17.7 253.8
         Sep 10 1,420.5 17.8 474.5 355.9 115.4 665.4 128.7 405.9 0.1 125.3 17.1 245.7
Savings banks
2012          Aug 423 1,097.7 14.4 250.9 96.8 152.0 798.2 57.2 630.6 0.1 110.3 16.5 17.7
         Sep 423 1,097.4 15.5 246.0 93.1 151.3 801.8 59.2 631.4 0.1 111.0 16.4 17.7
 
Regional institutions of credit cooperatives  
 
2012          Aug 2 294.4 0.5 164.6 129.1 35.4 64.2 13.6 21.7 0.0 28.5 14.8 50.3
         Sep 2 291.6 1.9 163.0 127.6 35.4 63.8 12.9 21.6 0.0 28.9 14.8 48.0
Credit cooperatives
2012          Aug 1,116 743.4 10.0 193.6 70.1 121.8 507.9 32.2 403.4 0.1 72.1 11.7 20.2
         Sep 1,112 743.5 10.4 190.6 67.3 121.9 510.5 33.7 404.3 0.1 72.4 11.7 20.2
Mortgage banks
2012          Aug 18 545.0 3.3 158.5 96.0 59.4 365.5 6.9 276.3 − 82.2 0.8 16.8
         Sep 18 540.0 2.6 155.3 93.3 58.7 364.1 7.1 274.3 − 82.6 0.8 17.2
Building and loan associations
2012          Aug 23 199.5 0.6 59.1 41.7 17.4 132.0 1.5 116.3 . 14.1 0.4 7.5
         Sep 23 200.0 0.3 59.3 41.8 17.5 132.4 1.6 116.6 . 14.3 0.4 7.5
Special purpose banks
2012          Aug 18 993.0 10.1 506.5 432.1 73.8 372.0 39.5 247.2 − 84.8 8.0 96.5
         Sep 18 985.4 11.8 505.7 432.2 73.1 370.3 38.9 245.8 − 85.2 8.0 89.6
Memo item: Foreign banks 8
2012          Aug 151 1,132.1 103.5 465.1 417.0 45.1 433.3 74.7 266.2 0.1 90.3 5.7 124.4
         Sep 150 1,108.0 89.5 459.2 410.4 45.8 434.7 76.0 264.5 0.1 91.9 5.5 119.1
  of which:  Banks majority-owned by foreign banks 9
2012          Aug 40 747.6 64.3 186.4 139.9 43.5 372.8 56.7 227.1 0.0 87.0 5.1 119.0
         Sep 40 737.7 58.0 186.6 139.3 44.2 374.4 58.0 226.1 0.1 88.3 4.8 113.9
*Assets and liabilities of monetary financial institutions (MFIs) in Germany. The assets meaning of section 340e (3) sentence 1 of the German Commercial Code (Handels-
and liabilities of foreign branches, of money market funds (which are also classified gesetzbuch) read in conjunction with section 35 (1) No 1a of the Credit Institutionas MFIs) and of the Bundesbank are not included. For the definitions of the respective Accounting Regulation (Verordnung über die Rechnungslegung der Kreditinstitute)items, see the footnotes to Table IV.3. 1Owing to the Act Modernising Accounting are classified under "Other assets and liabilities" as of the December 2010 reporting
Law (Gesetz zur Modernisierung des Bilanzrechts) of 25 May 2009, derivative date. Trading portfolio derivatives are listed separately in the Statistical Supplementfinancial instruments in the trading portfolio (trading portfolio derivatives) within the to the Monthly Report 1, Banking statistics, in Tables I.1 to I.3. 2For building and

Deutsche Bundesbank
25  Monthly Report
November 2012
IV Banks
 
   
 
Deposits of banks (MFIs) Deposits of non-banks (non-MFIs) Capital
 including  
of which of which published
reserves,
Time deposits 2 Savings deposits 4 partici-pation
Memo rights
item Bearer capital,
for for of which debt Liabilities
funds for
up to and more arising At three Bank general Other securities
Sight Time Sight including than from savings out- banking liabi-   End of months’
Total deposits deposits Total deposits 1 year 1 year 2 repos 3 Total notice bonds risks lities 1   month standing 5 
All categories of banks
 
2,128.3 499.8 1,628.5 3,317.7 1,313.0 452.5 803.9 166.9 628.3 527.4 119.9 1,374.4 406.0 1,445.0 2012          Apr 
2,109.4 548.1 1,561.3 3,337.9 1,332.0 456.6 802.0 175.0 627.6 527.5 119.7 1,380.5 405.5 1,698.8          May2,054.7 493.4 1,561.2 3,342.7 1,343.3 454.2 799.6 156.7 626.7 527.5 118.8 1,369.3 411.2 1,530.4          June
2,042.2 530.5 1,511.6 3,353.4 1,350.8 463.2 794.9 169.5 626.6 528.3 117.9 1,378.8 413.7 1,610.7          July
2,054.8 513.7 1,541.0 3,364.2 1,365.7 463.2 792.6 176.6 626.0 529.2 116.6 1,362.7 414.9 1,571.6          Aug 1,991.1 498.5 1,492.7 3,361.6 1,385.7 446.6 789.3 170.9 624.8 529.5 115.3 1,349.6 414.9 1,522.4          Sep 
Commercial banks 6
916.8 383.2 533.6 1,206.4 623.6 212.5 208.7 110.7 128.7 104.3 32.9 169.4 131.9 1,042.9 2012          Aug 871.0 362.8 508.2 1,193.7 626.6 199.4 207.2 94.6 127.6 104.3 32.9 164.0 132.0 1,000.7          Sep 
Big banks 7
468.1 205.2 262.9 587.7 288.0 121.1 89.7 105.7 77.8 73.8 11.1 129.4 77.9 990.2 2012          Aug 448.4 211.6 236.8 573.1 283.9 111.7 88.9 91.1 77.5 73.7 11.0 125.2 77.9 948.5          Sep 
Regional banks and other commercial banks
170.3 63.8 106.5 529.3 278.3 79.3 100.2 5.0 50.9 30.5 20.7 39.4 46.5 44.1 2012          Aug 159.8 54.8 105.0 529.5 284.1 75.3 99.5 3.5 50.0 30.5 20.7 38.1 46.5 43.9          Sep 
Branches of foreign banks
278.5 114.2 164.3 89.4 57.3 12.2 18.8 − 0.1 0.1 1.1 0.6 7.5 8.6 2012          Aug 262.8 96.4 166.4 91.1 58.6 12.4 18.9 − 0.1 0.1 1.1 0.7 7.5 8.3          Sep 
Landesbanken
363.4 38.6 324.8 394.7 98.7 129.0 152.3 51.0 14.0 9.9 0.7 337.6 65.9 266.1 2012          Aug 357.9 39.3 318.5 402.1 108.2 128.1 151.2 59.9 14.0 9.8 0.6 336.5 65.6 258.4          Sep 
Savings banks
175.0 18.3 156.7 778.1 364.2 40.2 15.2 0.3 297.4 250.2 61.2 18.8 77.7 48.0 2012          Aug 172.8 18.6 154.2 779.1 367.8 38.5 15.1 0.8 297.4 250.7 60.3 18.3 77.9 49.4          Sep 
 
Regional institutions of credit cooperatives
 
137.7 27.0 110.7 36.3 7.9 13.8 12.4 5.5 − − 2.3 58.0 12.9 49.5 2012          Aug 136.2 30.3 105.9 37.1 8.5 13.9 12.5 6.4 − − 2.3 58.3 12.9 47.1          Sep 
Credit cooperatives
111.4 5.2 106.2 532.5 256.0 44.7 28.0 0.0 185.2 164.1 18.6 16.7 49.2 33.5 2012          Aug 110.6 5.8 104.8 532.3 257.5 43.9 27.6 0.0 185.2 164.1 18.2 16.5 49.3 34.7          Sep 
Mortgage banks
145.5 8.5 137.1 179.8 8.6 12.3 158.5 4.5 0.3 0.3 . 179.7 17.3 22.7 2012          Aug 142.3 9.4 132.8 179.1 8.6 12.2 158.0 4.3 0.3 0.3 . 178.2 17.3 23.1          Sep 
Building and loan associations
22.8 1.5 21.3 145.3 0.4 0.8 142.7 − 0.4 0.3 1.0 5.4 8.6 17.5 2012          Aug 22.5 1.6 20.9 145.6 0.4 0.8 143.1 − 0.4 0.3 1.0 5.3 8.6 17.9          Sep 
Special purpose banks
182.2 31.4 150.8 90.9 6.3 9.8 74.8 4.5 − − . 577.1 51.4 91.5 2012          Aug 177.9 30.6 147.3 92.5 8.2 9.8 74.5 5.0 − − . 572.5 51.4 91.2          Sep 
Memo item:   Foreign banks 8
430.6 189.1 241.5 466.2 252.9 86.1 91.2 33.1 19.8 19.6 16.2 53.7 46.1 135.6 2012          Aug 403.7 165.0 238.7 474.3 258.2 88.9 91.0 36.1 19.9 19.7 16.2 53.4 46.1 130.4          Sep 
of which:   Banks majority-owned by foreign banks 9
152.1 74.9 77.2 376.7 195.7 73.9 72.4 33.1 19.7 19.6 15.0 53.1 38.6 127.0 2012          Aug 140.9 68.7 72.3 383.2 199.6 76.5 72.1 36.1 19.9 19.7 15.1 52.8 38.6 122.2          Sep 
loan associations: Including deposits under savings and loan contracts (see Table Nov. 2009), Commerzbank AG, UniCredit Bank AG (formerly Bayerische Hypo- und
IV.12). 3Included in time deposits. 4Excluding deposits under savings and loan Vereinsbank AG) and Deutsche Postbank AG. 8Sum of the banks majority-owned by
contracts (see also footnote 2). 5Including subordinated negotiable bearer debt foreign banks and included in other categories of banks and the category ”Branches
securities; excluding non-negotiable bearer debt securities. 6Commercial banks (with dependent legal status) of foreign banks”. 9Separate presentation of the banks
comprise the sub-groups ”Big banks”, ”Regional banks and other commercial banks” majority-owned by foreign banks included in other banking categories. and ”Branches of foreign banks”. 7Deutsche Bank AG, Dresdner Bank AG (up to

Deutsche Bundesbank
26  Monthly Report
November 2012
IV Banks
 
3 Assets and liabilities of banks (MFIs) in Germany vis-à-vis residents *
 
 
€ billion
Lending to domestic banks (MFIs) Lending to domestic non-banks (non-MFIs)
Treasury
Cash in Negotiable bills and
hand Credit money negotiable
balances market Memo money mar- (euro-area Securities
banknotes with the Credit paper item ket paper issued Securities
and Bundes- balances issued by issued by Fiduciary issued by by non-
Period coins) bank Total and loans Bills banks banks loans Total Loans Bills non-banks banks  1 
End of year or month *
 
2002 17.5 45.6 1,691.3 1,112.3 0.0 7.8 571.2 2.7 2,997.2 2,685.0 4.1 3.3 301.9
2003 17.0 46.7 1,643.9 1,064.0 0.0 8.8 571.0 2.3 2,995.6 2,677.0 3.7 3.4 309.6
2004 14.9 41.2 1,676.3 1,075.8 0.0 7.4 592.9 2.1 3,001.3 2,644.0 2.7 2.6 351.0
2005 15.1 47.9 1,684.5 1,096.8 0.0 6.7 580.9 2.1 2,995.1 2,632.7 2.4 2.4 357.6
2006 16.0 49.4 1,637.8 1,086.3 − 9.3 542.2 1.9 3,000.7 2,630.3 1.9 2.0 366.5
2007 17.5 64.6 1,751.8 1,222.5 0.0 25.3 504.0 2.3 2,975.7 2,647.9 1.6 1.5 324.7
2008 17.4 102.6 1,861.7 1,298.1 0.0 55.7 507.8 2.0 3,071.1 2,698.9 1.2 3.1 367.9
2009 16.9 78.9 1,711.5 1,138.0 − 31.6 541.9 2.2 3,100.1 2,691.8 0.8 4.0 403.5
2010 16.0 79.6 1,686.3 1,195.4 − 7.5 483.5 1.8 3,220.9 2,770.4 0.8 27.9 421.8
2011 15.8 93.8 1,725.6 1,267.9 − 7.1 450.7 2.1 3,197.8 2,774.6 0.8 6.4 415.9
2011          Apr 15.1 49.1 1,630.9 1,152.3 − 5.4 473.2 1.7 3,226.5 2,748.7 0.6 25.6 451.6
         May 14.6 56.4 1,623.7 1,143.2 − 5.7 474.8 1.7 3,209.4 2,753.8 0.5 23.7 431.3
         June 14.4 66.6 1,607.5 1,137.4 − 5.2 465.0 1.7 3,191.7 2,748.9 0.5 21.6 420.7
         July 14.5 57.5 1,610.1 1,144.0 − 5.1 460.9 1.6 3,193.1 2,753.1 0.5 18.7 420.7
         Aug 14.0 64.1 1,665.1 1,200.6 − 5.3 459.2 1.7 3,201.3 2,768.0 0.5 16.7 416.2
         Sep 14.7 78.8 1,731.5 1,270.1 − 6.0 455.4 1.7 3,207.6 2,778.3 0.6 14.5 414.2
         Oct 14.7 72.6 1,736.2 1,274.4 − 6.5 455.3 1.7 3,233.3 2,806.1 0.6 15.7 411.0
         Nov 14.1 57.6 1,797.7 1,338.5 − 7.4 451.9 1.7 3,237.6 2,807.6 0.5 14.4 415.0
         Dec 15.8 93.8 1,725.6 1,267.9 − 7.1 450.7 2.1 3,197.8 2,774.6 0.8 6.4 415.9
2012          Jan 13.8 49.8 1,846.4 1,394.4 − 7.3 444.6 2.1 3,226.6 2,800.0 0.7 4.9 421.1
         Feb 13.6 50.8 1,904.6 1,448.5 − 6.8 449.4 2.1 3,220.3 2,797.7 0.5 5.6 416.4
         Mar 14.5 75.8 1,936.0 1,482.9 − 6.8 446.2 2.1 3,222.9 2,787.1 0.5 4.9 430.4
         Apr 14.5 55.4 1,968.9 1,518.5 − 6.6 443.8 2.0 3,244.7 2,795.6 0.5 5.7 442.8
         May 14.8 76.4 1,959.2 1,509.0 − 5.9 444.3 2.0 3,219.1 2,793.4 0.5 4.5 420.7
         June 14.7 89.2 1,927.0 1,481.6 − 6.1 439.3 2.1 3,227.6 2,802.1 0.5 6.1 418.9
         July 14.0 185.5 1,789.7 1,344.8 − 6.3 438.6 2.1 3,257.8 2,833.8 0.5 5.2 418.3
         Aug 14.6 203.4 1,788.0 1,343.7 − 5.4 438.8 2.1 3,252.3 2,824.1 0.5 5.1 422.7
         Sep 14.9 175.1 1,748.0 1,306.1 − 4.1 437.8 2.1 3,253.3 2,817.9 0.5 5.6 429.3
Changes *
2003 − 0.5 + 1.1 − 47.2 − 48.2 + 0.0 + 1.0 + 0.1 − 0.3 + 0.1 − 8.0 − 0.4 + 0.3 + 9.3
2004 − 2.1 − 5.5 + 35.9 + 15.1 + 0.0 − 1.4 + 22.1 − 0.2 + 3.3 − 35.0 − 1.0 + 1.1 + 39.2
2005 + 0.2 + 6.7 + 8.4 + 21.0 − 0.0 − 0.8 − 11.9 − 0.0 − 6.7 − 11.8 − 0.3 − 0.2 + 6.6
2006 + 0.9 + 1.5 − 3.6 + 24.5 − 0.0 + 2.6 − 30.6 − 0.2 − 12.4 − 20.3 − 0.5 − 0.4 + 8.8
2007 + 1.5 + 15.2 + 114.8 + 137.6 + 0.0 + 17.0 − 39.8 + 0.4 − 15.9 + 12.1 − 0.3 − 0.5 − 27.2
2008 − 0.1 + 39.4 + 125.9 + 90.1 + 0.0 + 30.6 + 5.2 − 0.8 + 92.0 + 47.3 − 0.4 + 1.8 + 43.3
2009 − 0.5 − 23.6 − 147.2 − 157.3 − 0.0 − 24.1 + 34.3 + 0.2 + 25.7 − 11.2 − 0.4 + 1.4 + 35.9
2010 − 0.9 + 0.6 − 19.3 + 61.5 + 0.0 − 24.0 − 56.8 − 0.3 + 130.5 + 78.7 + 0.0 + 23.8 + 28.0
2011 − 0.2 + 14.2 + 47.3 + 80.5 − − 0.4 − 32.8 − 0.1 − 30.6 − 3.2 + 0.0 − 21.5 − 5.9
2011          Apr + 1.1 − 17.8 − 15.7 − 12.4 − − 2.3 − 0.9 + 0.0 + 14.8 − 8.8 + 0.0 + 0.9 + 22.7
         May − 0.5 + 7.2 − 7.3 − 9.1 − + 0.3 + 1.6 − 0.0 − 17.1 + 5.1 − 0.1 − 1.9 − 20.3
         June − 0.3 + 10.3 − 16.2 − 5.8 − − 0.5 − 9.8 + 0.0 − 17.5 − 4.7 − 0.0 − 2.1 − 10.7
         July + 0.2 − 9.1 + 2.6 + 6.6 − − 0.0 − 4.0 − 0.0 + 1.4 + 4.2 + 0.0 − 2.8 + 0.0
         Aug − 0.5 + 6.6 + 62.3 + 63.8 − + 0.2 − 1.7 + 0.0 + 0.7 + 7.3 − 0.0 − 2.1 − 4.6
         Sep + 0.6 + 14.7 + 66.3 + 69.5 − + 0.7 − 3.8 − 0.0 + 6.3 + 10.3 + 0.1 − 2.2 − 1.9
         Oct + 0.0 − 6.1 + 5.5 + 5.1 − + 0.5 − 0.1 + 0.0 + 25.7 + 27.8 − 0.0 + 1.2 − 3.3
         Nov − 0.6 − 15.1 + 61.5 + 64.1 − + 0.8 − 3.5 + 0.0 + 4.3 + 1.6 − 0.0 − 1.3 + 4.1
         Dec + 1.7 + 36.2 − 72.0 − 70.6 − − 0.3 − 1.2 + 0.0 − 39.9 − 33.0 + 0.3 − 8.0 + 0.9
2012          Jan − 2.0 − 44.0 + 120.7 + 126.5 − + 0.2 − 6.1 − 0.1 + 29.0 + 25.3 − 0.1 − 1.5 + 5.3
         Feb − 0.2 + 1.0 + 58.3 + 54.1 − − 0.5 + 4.7 + 0.0 − 6.4 − 2.3 − 0.1 + 0.7 − 4.7
         Mar + 0.9 + 25.1 + 31.3 + 34.4 − + 0.1 − 3.2 − 0.0 + 2.7 − 10.6 − 0.0 − 0.7 + 14.0
         Apr + 0.0 − 20.4 + 36.1 + 38.8 − − 0.3 − 2.4 − 0.0 + 18.6 + 5.4 − 0.0 + 0.8 + 12.5
         May + 0.3 + 21.0 − 9.7 − 9.5 − − 0.7 + 0.5 + 0.0 − 25.6 − 2.2 − 0.0 − 1.1 − 22.2
         June − 0.1 + 12.8 − 32.2 − 27.4 − + 0.2 − 5.1 + 0.1 + 10.2 + 10.4 − 0.0 + 1.6 − 1.8
         July − 0.6 + 96.3 − 137.2 − 136.8 − + 0.3 − 0.7 − 0.0 + 30.5 + 32.0 + 0.0 − 0.9 − 0.6
         Aug + 0.6 + 17.9 − 1.7 − 1.1 − − 0.9 + 0.2 + 0.1 − 5.5 − 9.7 − 0.0 − 0.2 + 4.4
         Sep + 0.3 − 28.3 − 40.0 − 37.7 − − 1.3 − 1.0 − 0.1 + 0.8 − 6.4 + 0.0 + 0.5 + 6.6
*See Table IV.2, footnote*; statistical breaks have been eliminated from the changes. (see also footnote 2). 2Including debt securities arising from the exchange of
The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as provisional. Subsequent equalisation claims. 3Including liabilities arising from registered debt securities,
revisions which appear in the following Monthly Report, are not specially registered money market paper and non-negotiable bearer debt securities; including
marked. 1Excluding debt securities arising from the exchange of equalisation claims subordinated liabilities. 4Including liabilities arising from monetary policy operations

Deutsche Bundesbank
27  Monthly Report
November 2012
IV Banks
 
   
 
 Deposits of domestic banks (MFIs) 3 Deposits of domestic non-banks (non-MFIs)
Partici-
patinginterestsin
Memo domestic Memo Memo
item banks Sight Time Redis- item Sight Time Savings Bank item Equalisa-tion Fiduciary and deposits deposits counted Fiduciary de- deposits de- savings Fiduciaryclaims 
2 loans Total 4 4 bills 5 loans Total posits 6 posits 7 bonds 8 loans   Period enterprises
End of year or month *
 
3.0 54.8 119.0 1,244.0 127.6 1,116.2 0.2 25.6 2,085.9 575.6 830.6 575.3 104.4 42.1 2002
2.0 56.8 109.2 1,229.6 116.8 1,112.6 0.2 27.8 2,140.3 624.0 825.7 590.3 100.3 40.5 20031.0 61.8 99.6 1,271.2 119.7 1,151.4 0.1 30.3 2,200.0 646.9 851.2 603.5 98.4 43.7 2004
− 56.6 108.5 1,300.0 120.5 1,179.4 0.1 26.5 2,276.6 717.0 864.4 603.4 91.9 42.4 2005− 53.0 106.3 1,348.2 125.4 1,222.7 0.0 22.3 2,394.6 747.7 962.8 586.5 97.5 37.8 2006− 51.1 109.4 1,478.6 122.1 1,356.5 0.0 20.0 2,579.1 779.9 1,125.4 555.4 118.4 36.4 2007− 47.2 111.2 1,582.5 138.5 1,444.0 0.0 41.6 2,781.4 834.6 1,276.1 535.2 135.4 32.3 2008− 43.9 106.1 1,355.1 128.9 1,226.2 0.0 35.7 2,829.7 1,029.5 1,102.6 594.5 103.2 43.4 2009
− 33.7 96.8 1,238.3 135.3 1,102.6 0.0 13.8 2,935.2 1,104.4 1,117.1 618.2 95.4 37.5 2010
− 36.3 94.6 1,210.5 114.8 1,095.3 0.0 36.1 3,045.5 1,168.3 1,156.2 616.1 104.8 36.5 2011
− 33.1 98.2 1,183.9 132.1 1,051.5 0.0 13.5 2,946.9 1,127.1 1,099.2 622.3 98.3 37.0 2011          Apr 
− 33.0 96.7 1,164.3 119.8 1,044.1 0.0 13.6 2,975.2 1,125.7 1,129.3 619.9 100.2 37.0          May− 33.0 94.7 1,158.8 120.1 1,038.4 0.0 13.6 2,979.2 1,123.7 1,136.4 617.8 101.3 36.7          June
− 32.7 94.8 1,154.7 122.4 1,031.9 0.0 13.3 2,975.0 1,130.6 1,125.8 616.6 102.1 36.6          July
− 32.7 94.9 1,163.4 123.3 1,039.7 0.0 13.5 3,006.1 1,139.2 1,149.1 615.0 102.8 36.7          Aug − 32.7 94.9 1,176.0 133.0 1,042.6 0.0 13.5 3,024.8 1,151.3 1,157.3 613.5 102.8 36.7          Sep 
− 32.5 95.0 1,163.0 132.5 1,030.2 0.0 13.4 3,025.6 1,160.9 1,148.1 613.1 103.6 36.7          Oct 
− 32.5 94.9 1,177.5 136.1 1,041.0 0.0 13.7 3,053.1 1,188.0 1,149.2 611.5 104.3 36.7          Nov − 36.3 94.6 1,210.5 114.8 1,095.3 0.0 36.1 3,045.5 1,168.3 1,156.2 616.1 104.8 36.5          Dec 
− 35.3 93.8 1,221.4 137.1 1,083.9 0.0 35.4 3,035.3 1,181.1 1,133.1 617.2 103.8 35.8 2012          Jan 
− 35.1 93.4 1,232.3 141.0 1,091.2 0.0 35.2 3,053.7 1,187.1 1,143.5 619.8 103.3 35.6          Feb − 34.8 91.8 1,232.1 135.9 1,096.1 0.0 35.3 3,048.3 1,188.9 1,136.9 619.4 103.0 35.3          Mar 
− 35.3 91.7 1,222.4 135.0 1,087.2 0.0 35.7 3,071.3 1,197.7 1,153.2 617.9 102.5 35.5          Apr 
− 35.3 90.9 1,219.1 137.8 1,081.1 0.0 36.4 3,091.6 1,216.8 1,155.6 617.1 102.0 35.5          May− 35.2 91.1 1,207.3 134.1 1,073.0 0.0 36.3 3,104.7 1,233.8 1,153.5 616.1 101.3 35.2          June
− 34.9 91.4 1,190.1 128.0 1,062.0 0.0 36.4 3,105.8 1,235.4 1,154.2 615.9 100.3 35.1          July
− 35.2 91.5 1,184.9 124.8 1,059.9 0.0 36.5 3,118.3 1,247.0 1,156.8 615.4 99.1 35.1          Aug − 35.0 90.6 1,175.0 129.2 1,045.5 0.0 36.1 3,112.2 1,262.9 1,137.3 614.1 97.9 35.0          Sep 
Changes *
− 1.0 + 2.1 − 9.8 − 5.6 − 9.5 + 3.9 + 0.0 + 2.4 + 54.0 + 48.4 − 4.8 + 15.1 − 4.8 − 1.2 2003− 1.1 + 3.0 − 9.6 + 41.3 + 2.9 + 38.5 − 0.1 + 2.4 + 62.0 + 24.4 + 25.9 + 13.1 − 1.5 + 1.2 2004
− 1.0 − 4.9 + 8.9 + 28.9 + 0.8 + 28.0 + 0.0 − 3.5 + 76.6 + 70.7 + 12.4 − 1.2 − 5.4 − 1.2 2005
− − 3.7 − 2.2 + 79.0 + 8.6 + 70.5 − 0.1 − 4.5 + 118.0 + 30.0 + 97.7 − 16.8 + 7.2 − 4.1 2006
− − 2.3 + 3.1 + 132.0 − 3.3 + 135.3 − 0.0 − 2.3 + 181.1 + 31.6 + 160.5 − 31.1 + 20.1 − 2.0 2007− − 5.4 + 7.8 + 124.3 + 23.0 + 101.3 − 0.0 − 3.6 + 207.6 + 54.3 + 156.6 − 20.2 + 17.0 − 1.3 2008− − 4.2 + 0.7 − 225.4 − 9.7 − 215.7 − 0.0 − 5.7 + 59.7 + 211.4 − 179.3 + 59.3 − 31.6 − 0.9 2009
− − 2.1 − 9.2 − 96.5 + 22.3 − 119.1 − 0.0 − 0.2 + 77.8 + 76.0 − 18.9 + 24.0 − 3.3 − 1.7 2010
− − 1.1 − 2.2 − 25.0 − 20.0 − 5.1 − 0.0 + 0.1 + 111.2 + 63.7 + 40.9 − 2.6 + 9.3 − 1.1 2011
− − 0.2 − 0.1 − 7.9 + 5.4 − 13.3 − 0.0 − 0.1 + 17.9 + 15.9 + 3.0 − 2.1 + 1.1 − 0.1 2011          Apr 
− − 0.0 − 1.5 − 19.6 − 12.2 − 7.4 + 0.0 + 0.1 + 28.3 − 1.4 + 30.1 − 2.4 + 1.9 − 0.1          May− − 0.1 − 2.0 − 5.5 + 0.3 − 5.7 + 0.0 + 0.0 + 4.0 − 2.0 + 7.0 − 2.1 + 1.0 − 0.3          June
− − 0.3 + 0.1 − 3.8 + 2.6 − 6.4 + 0.0 − 0.3 − 4.4 + 6.6 − 10.6 − 1.2 + 0.8 − 0.1          July
− + 0.0 + 0.2 + 11.4 + 1.1 + 10.3 − + 0.1 + 31.0 + 8.5 + 23.4 − 1.6 + 0.7 + 0.1          Aug − − − 0.0 + 12.6 + 9.7 + 2.8 − 0.0 + 0.1 + 18.7 + 11.8 + 8.4 − 1.5 + 0.0 − 0.1          Sep 
− − 0.2 + 0.1 − 12.9 − 0.5 − 12.4 − 0.0 − 0.1 + 0.7 + 9.6 − 9.2 − 0.4 + 0.8 + 0.0          Oct 
− + 0.0 − 0.2 + 14.5 + 3.6 + 10.8 − 0.0 + 0.3 + 27.5 + 26.8 + 1.1 − 1.1 + 0.7 − 0.0          Nov − + 0.1 − 0.3 + 33.0 − 21.3 + 54.3 − 0.0 + 0.2 − 6.2 − 19.8 + 8.4 + 4.6 + 0.5 − 0.2          Dec 
− − 1.0 − 0.8 + 10.9 + 22.3 − 11.3 + 0.0 − 0.7 − 10.4 + 12.9 − 23.4 + 1.1 − 1.0 − 0.7 2012          Jan 
− − 0.3 − 0.5 + 10.9 + 3.9 + 7.3 − 0.0 − 0.2 + 18.3 + 5.9 + 10.3 + 2.6 − 0.5 − 0.2          Feb − − 0.3 − 1.6 − 0.2 − 5.1 + 4.9 − 0.0 + 0.1 − 5.4 + 1.9 − 6.5 − 0.4 − 0.3 − 0.2          Mar 
− + 0.5 − 0.2 − 7.1 + 0.2 − 7.3 + 0.0 + 0.4 + 20.4 + 9.0 + 13.5 − 1.5 − 0.5 + 0.2          Apr 
− + 0.0 − 0.8 − 3.3 + 2.8 − 6.1 + 0.0 + 0.8 + 20.2 + 19.2 + 2.4 − 0.8 − 0.5 − 0.0          May− − 0.2 + 0.2 − 11.8 − 3.7 − 8.1 − − 0.1 + 13.1 + 16.9 − 2.0 − 1.1 − 0.7 − 0.3          June
− − 0.2 + 0.3 − 17.2 − 6.1 − 11.0 − 0.0 + 0.1 + 1.1 + 1.6 + 0.7 − 0.2 − 1.1 − 0.1          July
− + 0.3 + 0.1 − 5.2 − 3.2 − 2.0 − + 0.1 + 12.5 + 11.5 + 2.6 − 0.5 − 1.1 − 0.0          Aug − − 0.2 − 0.3 − 9.9 + 5.3 − 15.2 + 0.0 − 0.4 − 5.8 + 16.2 − 19.6 − 1.2 − 1.2 − 0.1          Sep 
with the Bundesbank. 5Own acceptances and promissory notes outstanding. 6Since savings and loan contracts (see also footnote 8). 8Including liabilities arising from
the inclusion of building and loan associations in January 1999, including deposits non-negotiable bearer debt securities. 
under savings and loan contracts (see Table IV.12). 7Excluding deposits under

Deutsche Bundesbank
28  Monthly Report
November 2012
IV Banks
 
4 Assets and liabilities of banks (MFIs) in Germany vis-à-vis non-residents *
 
 
€ billion
Lending to foreign banks (MFIs) Lending to foreign non-banks (non-MFIs)
Treasury
Cash in bills and
hand Loans and bills negotiable Credit balances and loans, bills Negotiable
(non- money money
euro-area Medium market Memo Medium market
banknotes and paper item and paper Securities Securities
and Short- long- issued by issued by Fiduciary Short- long- issued by issued by
Period coins) Total Total term term banks banks loans Total Total term term non-banks non-banks
End of year or month *
 
2002 0.3 690.6 615.3 468.0 147.2 0.9 74.4 2.7 558.8 332.6 92.6 240.0 9.3 216.9
2003 0.3 769.6 675.8 515.7 160.1 1.5 92.3 1.6 576.3 344.8 110.9 233.9 6.0 225.4
2004 0.2 889.4 760.2 606.5 153.7 2.8 126.3 1.5 629.5 362.5 136.6 225.9 10.9 256.1
2005 0.2 1,038.8 860.0 648.5 211.5 5.8 173.0 1.5 712.0 387.9 132.8 255.1 9.3 314.8
2006 0.4 1,266.9 1,003.2 744.5 258.7 13.3 250.4 0.8 777.0 421.0 156.0 264.9 7.2 348.9
2007 0.3 1,433.5 1,105.9 803.6 302.4 13.4 314.2 0.5 908.3 492.9 197.5 295.4 27.5 387.9
2008 0.3 1,446.6 1,131.6 767.2 364.3 15.6 299.5 1.9 908.4 528.9 151.4 377.5 12.9 366.6
2009 0.3 1,277.4 986.1 643.5 342.6 6.2 285.0 2.9 815.7 469.6 116.9 352.7 9.8 336.3
2010 0.5 1,154.1 892.7 607.7 285.1 2.1 259.3 1.8 773.8 461.4 112.6 348.8 10.1 302.3
2011 0.6 1,117.6 871.0 566.3 304.8 4.6 241.9 2.6 744.4 455.8 102.0 353.8 8.5 280.1
2011          Apr 0.5 1,150.6 890.7 615.6 275.1 4.5 255.3 1.8 770.2 459.8 129.8 330.1 15.2 295.1
         May 0.8 1,161.7 895.0 618.3 276.8 6.0 260.7 1.8 779.4 466.3 132.2 334.0 17.5 295.7
         June 0.9 1,121.8 858.3 581.3 277.0 5.8 257.6 1.8 764.6 454.2 122.1 332.1 15.2 295.1
         July 0.7 1,119.9 860.5 578.8 281.7 6.5 252.9 1.8 769.4 463.0 122.5 340.5 17.1 289.4
         Aug 0.7 1,154.4 895.5 608.5 287.0 5.4 253.5 1.8 768.4 468.0 130.3 337.7 19.9 280.4
         Sep 0.8 1,158.8 901.8 608.3 293.5 5.8 251.1 1.8 767.1 472.2 127.5 344.8 17.5 277.4
         Oct 0.7 1,132.7 880.4 587.7 292.7 6.5 245.8 1.8 746.0 453.2 113.3 339.9 19.9 272.9
         Nov 0.7 1,139.9 888.9 593.7 295.2 7.0 244.1 1.8 746.2 459.9 114.6 345.3 10.9 275.4
         Dec 0.6 1,117.6 871.0 566.3 304.8 4.6 241.9 2.6 744.4 455.8 102.0 353.8 8.5 280.1
2012          Jan 0.7 1,141.0 892.7 595.1 297.6 5.9 242.3 2.6 739.1 454.4 101.4 353.0 11.2 273.5
         Feb 0.8 1,136.0 890.0 599.6 290.4 6.3 239.8 2.6 729.2 449.1 99.6 349.5 10.0 270.1
         Mar 0.9 1,114.2 867.7 579.8 287.9 6.4 240.0 2.6 747.1 463.8 116.4 347.4 10.6 272.8
         Apr 0.7 1,119.5 876.5 588.8 287.8 6.4 236.6 2.6 750.1 470.0 122.6 347.4 9.0 271.1
         May 0.7 1,129.6 886.9 596.5 290.4 7.5 235.3 2.6 757.0 475.2 119.8 355.4 9.3 272.6
         June 0.8 1,090.3 853.7 566.5 287.2 7.1 229.5 2.6 740.2 461.4 109.7 351.7 7.5 271.4
         July 0.8 1,103.0 870.2 583.3 286.9 6.8 226.0 2.6 746.8 467.9 113.7 354.2 6.9 272.0
         Aug 1.1 1,096.3 863.0 580.5 282.5 6.9 226.4 2.6 745.7 466.6 116.2 350.3 8.0 271.1
         Sep 1.1 1,096.0 864.6 583.8 280.8 6.4 225.0 2.6 743.3 462.3 116.5 345.8 8.6 272.4
Changes *
2003 − 0.1 + 103.8 + 84.6 + 65.2 + 19.3 + 0.6 + 18.7 − 0.4 + 46.3 + 35.1 + 24.0 + 11.0 − 2.7 + 13.9
2004 − 0.1 + 128.3 + 89.4 + 95.3 − 5.9 + 1.3 + 37.6 − 0.1 + 65.8 + 29.5 + 31.7 − 2.2 + 5.1 + 31.1
2005 + 0.0 + 127.3 + 78.9 + 26.3 + 52.6 + 2.9 + 45.4 − 0.0 + 59.4 + 7.3 − 9.4 + 16.7 − 1.8 + 54.0
2006 + 0.1 + 238.3 + 153.5 + 109.7 + 43.8 + 7.5 + 77.2 − 0.7 + 81.4 + 51.6 + 25.9 + 25.8 − 1.8 + 31.5
2007 − 0.0 + 190.3 + 123.7 + 72.9 + 50.8 + 7.5 + 59.1 − 0.4 + 167.7 + 94.3 + 50.1 + 44.2 + 20.1 + 53.3
2008 + 0.0 + 8.5 + 20.2 − 43.0 + 63.2 + 2.1 − 13.7 − 0.0 + 4.3 + 45.1 − 31.9 + 77.0 − 14.5 − 26.3
2009 − 0.0 − 170.0 − 141.3 − 122.5 − 18.8 − 10.3 − 18.4 − 0.2 − 72.8 − 43.8 − 31.7 − 12.1 − 3.3 − 25.7
2010 + 0.1 − 141.5 − 116.2 − 47.3 − 68.9 − 4.8 − 20.4 − 0.2 − 62.0 − 24.5 − 12.6 − 11.9 + 0.4 − 38.0
2011 + 0.1 − 48.4 − 32.6 − 45.3 + 12.7 + 2.5 − 18.4 + 0.0 − 38.9 − 13.6 − 12.8 − 0.9 − 1.6 − 23.6
2011          Apr + 0.0 + 50.1 + 50.6 + 48.9 + 1.7 + 2.5 − 3.0 − 0.0 + 20.8 + 19.7 + 21.2 − 1.5 + 1.5 − 0.4
         May + 0.4 + 2.8 − 3.7 − 1.7 − 2.0 + 1.5 + 5.0 − 0.0 + 2.0 + 0.4 + 0.9 − 0.5 + 2.3 − 0.7         June + 0.0 − 38.4 − 35.2 − 36.2 + 0.9 − 0.2 − 3.0 + 0.0 − 13.2 − 10.8 − 9.8 − 1.0 − 2.2 − 0.2
         July − 0.1 − 7.3 − 3.0 − 5.1 + 2.1 + 0.7 − 5.0 + 0.0 + 0.4 + 5.3 − 0.4 + 5.6 + 1.9 − 6.8
         Aug − 0.1 + 30.7 + 31.1 + 28.5 + 2.7 − 1.1 + 0.7 + 0.0 + 1.8 + 7.4 + 8.2 − 0.8 + 2.8 − 8.4
         Sep + 0.1 − 9.8 − 7.3 − 8.0 + 0.7 + 0.5 − 3.0 − − 13.3 − 5.7 − 5.1 − 0.6 − 2.5 − 5.1
         Oct − 0.1 − 17.9 − 13.5 − 16.1 + 2.6 + 0.7 − 5.1 − 0.0 − 14.3 − 13.5 − 13.1 − 0.5 + 2.4 − 3.2
         Nov + 0.0 − 2.5 − 0.9 + 0.8 − 1.7 + 0.4 − 2.1 + 0.0 − 8.0 − 0.1 − 0.3 + 0.2 − 9.0 + 1.1
         Dec − 0.1 − 24.5 − 19.8 − 27.1 + 7.2 − 2.4 − 2.3 + 0.0 − 11.5 − 12.3 − 14.1 + 1.8 − 2.4 + 3.2
2012          Jan + 0.1 + 27.0 + 25.1 + 29.4 − 4.3 + 1.3 + 0.5 − 0.0 − 2.2 + 1.2 + 0.6 + 0.6 + 2.8 − 6.1
         Feb + 0.1 + 0.1 + 2.1 + 7.1 − 5.0 + 0.3 − 2.4 − 0.0 − 5.6 − 1.8 − 1.0 − 0.8 − 1.2 − 2.6
         Mar + 0.1 − 23.0 − 23.6 − 20.4 − 3.2 + 0.2 + 0.5 − 0.0 + 16.2 + 13.5 + 16.4 − 2.9 + 0.5 + 2.1
         Apr − 0.1 + 2.2 + 5.6 + 7.2 − 1.7 − 0.0 − 3.4 − 0.0 − 0.0 + 3.9 + 6.1 − 2.2 − 1.5 − 2.4
         May − 0.0 − 3.6 − 3.0 + 0.7 − 3.7 + 1.1 − 1.7 + 0.0 − 6.1 − 5.8 − 5.7 − 0.1 + 0.2 − 0.6         June + 0.1 − 39.5 − 33.6 − 32.1 − 1.6 − 0.4 − 5.5 + 0.0 − 9.9 − 7.2 − 5.4 − 1.8 − 1.8 − 0.9
         July − 0.0 + 6.2 + 10.2 + 13.4 − 3.2 − 0.3 − 3.7 + 0.0 + 0.6 + 1.5 + 3.0 − 1.5 − 0.6 − 0.3
         Aug + 0.3 − 0.7 − 1.4 + 0.3 − 1.7 + 0.1 + 0.6 − 0.0 + 4.2 + 3.1 + 3.5 − 0.4 + 1.1 − 0.0
         Sep − 0.0 + 5.4 + 7.1 + 6.4 + 0.7 − 0.5 − 1.2 + 0.0 + 2.6 + 0.1 + 1.3 − 1.3 + 0.6 + 1.9
*See Table IV.2, footnote*; statistical breaks have been eliminated from the changes.   
The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as provisional. Subsequent   
revisions, which appear in the following Monthly Report, are not specially marked.      
  

Deutsche Bundesbank
29  Monthly Report
November 2012
IV Banks
 
   
 
 Deposits of foreign banks (MFIs) Deposits of foreign non-banks (non-MFIs) Partici- Time deposits (including
pating Time deposits (including bank savings deposits and bank
interests savings bonds) savings bonds)in foreign
Memo banks Medium Memo Medium Memo
item and and item and item
Fiduciary enter- Sight Short- long- Fiduciary Sight Short- long- Fiduciaryloans prises Total deposits Total term term loans Total deposits Total term term loans   Period
End of year or month *
 
15.6 44.8 614.2 101.6 512.7 410.4 102.3 1.1 319.2 33.5 285.7 87.0 198.7 4.5 2002
11.6 41.4 590.7 95.1 495.6 387.7 107.9 0.4 307.3 32.2 275.1 102.4 172.7 3.6 2003
9.8 39.3 603.3 87.0 516.2 403.2 113.0 0.5 311.2 36.6 274.7 123.4 151.2 0.8 2004
10.6 37.2 651.7 102.9 548.8 420.4 128.4 0.6 316.4 62.0 254.4 119.4 135.0 1.2 2005
5.8 50.4 689.7 168.1 521.6 397.3 124.3 0.4 310.1 82.1 228.0 111.5 116.5 1.5 20065.7 48.3 738.9 164.7 574.1 461.2 113.0 0.2 303.1 76.0 227.1 122.3 104.8 3.1 2007
25.5 45.1 703.3 218.1 485.1 362.3 122.9 0.3 286.1 92.2 193.9 95.1 98.8 2.5 200832.1 45.4 652.6 213.6 439.0 307.4 131.6 0.2 216.3 78.1 138.2 73.7 64.5 1.9 2009
15.6 48.8 741.7 258.7 483.0 349.3 133.6 0.1 227.6 84.8 142.7 76.7 66.0 1.5 2010
32.9 45.0 655.7 242.6 413.1 289.4 123.7 0.1 225.9 92.3 133.6 66.9 66.6 1.3 2011
15.5 50.2 725.6 265.7 459.8 329.8 130.0 0.1 233.7 105.7 128.0 68.0 60.0 1.5 2011          Apr 
15.5 50.2 707.7 273.4 434.3 303.4 130.9 0.1 236.5 109.8 126.7 66.2 60.5 1.4          May15.4 49.7 653.1 253.2 399.9 274.1 125.8 0.1 230.6 102.4 128.1 66.5 61.6 1.5          June
15.3 49.0 656.1 248.3 407.8 279.8 128.0 0.1 230.6 102.8 127.8 66.2 61.6 1.5          July
15.4 48.8 705.7 256.5 449.2 321.1 128.1 0.1 234.0 101.9 132.1 66.0 66.1 1.4          Aug 15.5 48.9 745.9 304.7 441.1 312.8 128.4 0.1 243.1 110.6 132.5 65.9 66.6 1.4          Sep 
15.5 48.9 745.5 303.7 441.8 319.3 122.5 0.1 249.7 116.6 133.1 67.4 65.8 1.4          Oct 
15.7 49.8 762.5 330.3 432.2 308.3 124.0 0.1 242.8 111.1 131.7 65.7 66.0 1.3          Nov 32.9 45.0 655.7 242.6 413.1 289.4 123.7 0.1 225.9 92.3 133.6 66.9 66.6 1.3          Dec 
32.6 47.6 813.6 327.1 486.5 363.7 122.8 0.1 233.8 103.1 130.7 64.7 66.0 1.3 2012          Jan 
32.3 47.4 828.4 357.6 470.8 348.3 122.5 0.1 233.4 106.2 127.2 62.1 65.1 1.3          Feb 32.3 47.5 884.3 368.3 516.0 388.5 127.6 0.1 240.9 114.6 126.3 63.1 63.2 1.2          Mar 
32.4 46.7 905.9 364.8 541.1 416.2 125.0 0.1 246.4 115.3 131.1 67.9 63.2 1.2          Apr 
33.1 47.9 890.3 410.3 480.0 353.8 126.2 0.1 246.3 115.1 131.2 67.6 63.6 1.2          May32.7 48.0 847.4 359.3 488.0 364.5 123.5 0.1 238.0 109.6 128.4 65.1 63.3 1.1          June
33.1 48.1 852.0 402.5 449.5 325.8 123.7 0.1 247.6 115.4 132.2 68.9 63.3 1.3          July
33.0 49.2 869.9 389.0 480.9 359.2 121.7 0.1 245.9 118.7 127.2 65.0 62.2 1.3          Aug 32.7 48.9 816.2 369.2 446.9 323.2 123.8 0.1 249.4 122.8 126.6 64.9 61.7 1.3          Sep 
Changes *
− 0.7 − 1.9 + 5.7 − 2.0 + 7.7 − 2.4 + 10.0 − 0.0 + 4.5 + 0.4 + 4.1 + 20.6 − 16.5 + 1.9 2003+ 0.7 − 1.5 + 19.8 − 6.1 + 25.9 + 21.1 + 4.8 + 0.1 + 13.0 + 5.4 + 7.6 + 22.8 − 15.2 − 0.3 2004
+ 0.8 − 3.5 + 28.6 + 12.6 + 16.0 + 4.9 + 11.1 + 0.1 − 4.9 + 23.9 − 28.8 − 7.7 − 21.1 + 0.4 2005
− 5.1 + 13.8 + 56.2 + 68.3 − 12.1 − 13.7 + 1.6 − 0.2 − 0.8 + 21.2 − 22.0 − 5.1 − 17.0 − 0.2 2006− 0.1 − 0.8 + 67.3 + 1.5 + 65.8 + 74.0 − 8.3 − 0.1 + 4.6 − 5.5 + 10.2 + 16.6 − 6.4 + 1.6 2007+ 0.7 − 3.1 − 50.1 + 52.2 − 102.3 − 120.7 + 18.5 + 0.1 − 12.4 + 16.1 − 28.5 − 19.4 − 9.1 − 0.6 2008− 3.2 + 0.1 − 81.4 − 2.1 − 79.3 − 57.5 − 21.7 − 0.2 − 33.5 − 13.3 − 20.1 − 17.0 − 3.1 − 0.6 2009
+ 0.2 + 1.4 + 895.4 + 42.0 + 542.4 + 38.1 +136.8 − 0.1 − 1.6 + 6.0 − 7.6 − 3.3 − 4.4 − 0.4 2010
− 0.1 − 3.9 − 88.8 − 13.8 − 75.0 − 61.8 − 13.1 − 0.0 − 9.3 + 6.4 − 15.7 − 10.4 − 5.3 − 0.2 2011
− 0.0 + 0.1 + 35.9 + 14.0 + 21.8 + 23.5 − 1.7 − + 14.6 + 16.1 − 1.5 − 0.0 − 1.4 + 0.0 2011          Apr 
+ 0.0 − 0.1 − 23.3 + 5.8 − 29.0 − 28.9 − 0.1 − 0.0 + 1.1 + 3.3 − 2.3 − 2.4 + 0.1 − 0.0          May− 0.1 − 0.4 − 53.5 − 19.8 − 33.7 − 28.9 − 4.8 − 0.0 − 5.7 − 7.2 + 1.5 + 0.4 + 1.2 + 0.1          June
− 0.1 − 0.8 − 0.1 − 5.9 + 5.9 + 4.3 + 1.6 + 0.0 − 0.9 + 0.0 − 0.9 − 0.7 − 0.3 − 0.1          July
+ 0.1 − 0.1 + 49.0 + 8.7 + 40.3 + 39.8 + 0.6 − 0.0 − 1.4 − 0.7 − 0.7 − 0.0 − 0.7 − 0.1          Aug + 0.1 − 0.1 + 30.9 + 45.0 − 14.0 − 12.4 − 1.6 − 0.0 + 6.2 + 7.5 − 1.3 − 1.0 − 0.3 + 0.0          Sep 
+ 0.0 + 0.1 + 4.8 + 0.8 + 4.0 + 8.8 − 4.9 − + 8.3 + 6.7 + 1.6 + 1.9 − 0.3 − 0.1          Oct 
+ 0.2 + 0.7 + 10.7 + 24.3 − 13.6 − 13.7 + 0.2 − − 8.9 − 6.4 − 2.6 − 2.3 − 0.3 − 0.0          Nov − 0.2 − 4.9 − 107.6 − 85.1 − 22.6 − 20.6 − 1.9 − 0.0 − 18.7 − 19.5 + 0.8 + 0.6 + 0.1 − 0.0          Dec 
− 0.3 + 2.6 + 159.9 + 87.4 + 72.6 + 73.0 − 0.4 − + 8.7 + 11.1 − 2.4 − 2.0 − 0.4 + 0.0 2012          Jan 
− 0.2 − 0.0 + 17.9 + 31.6 − 13.7 − 14.1 + 0.4 − 0.0 + 0.5 + 3.4 − 2.9 − 2.3 − 0.6 − 0.0          Feb + 0.0 + 0.0 + 55.6 + 10.3 + 45.3 + 40.5 + 4.8 − 0.0 + 7.3 + 8.3 − 1.0 + 0.9 − 1.9 − 0.1          Mar 
+ 0.1 − 0.8 + 19.5 − 3.9 + 23.4 + 26.6 − 3.1 − + 4.8 + 0.4 + 4.4 + 4.6 − 0.2 − 0.0          Apr 
+ 0.7 + 1.0 − 25.4 + 42.3 − 67.7 − 67.1 − 0.6 − 0.0 − 3.4 − 1.7 − 1.7 − 1.2 − 0.4 + 0.0          May− 0.4 + 0.2 − 40.6 − 49.3 + 8.8 + 11.0 − 2.3 − 0.0 − 7.6 − 5.2 − 2.3 − 2.3 − 0.0 − 0.1          June
+ 0.4 − 0.0 + 0.6 + 41.9 − 41.3 − 40.5 − 0.8 − + 8.3 + 5.2 + 3.0 + 3.4 − 0.4 + 0.2          July
− 0.2 + 1.2 + 21.8 − 12.2 + 33.9 + 35.1 − 1.2 − 0.0 − 0.3 + 4.0 − 4.3 − 3.5 − 0.8 + 0.0          Aug − 0.3 − 0.2 − 50.1 − 17.8 − 32.4 − 35.1 + 2.8 − 0.0 + 4.8 + 4.7 + 0.1 + 0.3 − 0.2 − 0.1          Sep 

Deutsche Bundesbank
30  Monthly Report
November 2012
IV Banks
 
5 Lending by banks (MFIs) in Germany to domestic non-banks (non-MFIs) *
 
 
€ billion
Lending to domestic Short-term lending Medium and long-term
non-banks, total
      to enterprises and households to general government to enter-
 
including excluding Negoti-
negotiable money able
market paper, Loans money
Period securities, and market Treasury
equalisation claims Total Total bills paper Total Loans bills Total Total
End of year or month *
 
2002 2,997.2 2,689.1 365.4 331.9 331.0 1.0 33.5 31.1 2.4 2,631.8 2,079.7
2003 2,995.6 2,680.6 355.2 315.0 313.4 1.6 40.2 38.4 1.8 2,640.4 2,096.1
2004 3,001.3 2,646.7 320.9 283.8 283.0 0.8 37.1 35.3 1.8 2,680.4 2,114.2
2005 2,995.1 2,635.1 309.7 273.5 272.9 0.6 36.2 34.4 1.8 2,685.4 2,141.3
2006 3,000.7 2,632.2 303.1 269.8 269.3 0.6 33.3 31.9 1.4 2,697.6 2,181.8
2007 2,975.7 2,649.5 331.2 301.8 301.5 0.3 29.4 28.2 1.2 2,644.6 2,168.3
2008 3,071.1 2,700.1 373.0 337.5 335.3 2.2 35.5 34.5 1.0 2,698.1 2,257.8
2009 3,100.1 2,692.6 347.3 306.3 306.2 0.1 41.0 37.1 3.9 2,752.8 2,299.7
2010 3,220.9 2,771.3 428.0 283.0 282.8 0.2 145.0 117.2 27.7 2,793.0 2,305.6
2011 3,197.8 2,775.4 383.3 316.5 316.1 0.4 66.8 60.7 6.0 2,814.5 2,321.9
2011          Apr 3,226.5 2,749.3 409.8 295.8 295.5 0.4 114.0 88.8 25.2 2,816.7 2,328.1
         May 3,209.4 2,754.3 405.8 305.2 304.8 0.4 100.6 77.2 23.3 2,803.6 2,311.3
         June 3,191.7 2,749.4 404.1 307.1 306.6 0.5 97.0 75.9 21.1 2,787.6 2,298.0
         July 3,193.1 2,753.6 399.4 305.8 305.4 0.4 93.6 75.3 18.4 2,793.7 2,303.9
         Aug 3,201.3 2,768.5 399.9 318.2 317.8 0.5 81.7 65.5 16.2 2,801.4 2,311.9
         Sep 3,207.6 2,778.8 406.2 326.3 325.8 0.5 79.9 65.9 14.0 2,801.4 2,311.2
         Oct 3,233.3 2,806.6 433.2 355.4 354.7 0.7 77.8 62.8 15.0 2,800.1 2,311.3
         Nov 3,237.6 2,808.2 424.2 352.0 351.4 0.6 72.2 58.4 13.8 2,813.4 2,319.9
         Dec 3,197.8 2,775.4 383.3 316.5 316.1 0.4 66.8 60.7 6.0 2,814.5 2,321.9
2012          Jan 3,226.6 2,800.6 409.1 339.2 338.7 0.6 69.8 65.5 4.4 2,817.6 2,320.7
         Feb 3,220.3 2,798.2 406.9 338.2 337.4 0.8 68.7 63.8 4.9 2,813.4 2,315.9
         Mar 3,222.9 2,787.6 396.8 329.5 328.6 0.9 67.3 63.3 4.0 2,826.1 2,325.3
         Apr 3,244.7 2,796.1 402.9 329.6 328.7 0.9 73.3 68.5 4.8 2,841.8 2,341.9
         May 3,219.1 2,793.9 393.6 325.6 324.4 1.2 68.0 64.6 3.3 2,825.5 2,328.8
         June 3,227.6 2,802.6 404.9 324.4 323.9 0.5 80.5 74.9 5.6 2,822.6 2,300.2
         July 3,257.8 2,834.2 429.4 351.6 351.2 0.4 77.8 72.9 4.8 2,828.4 2,304.6
         Aug 3,252.3 2,824.5 415.9 344.6 344.2 0.4 71.3 66.6 4.7 2,836.4 2,310.8
         Sep 3,253.3 2,818.4 413.9 340.9 340.4 0.4 73.1 67.9 5.2 2,839.4 2,311.8
Changes *
2003 + 0.1 − 8.4 − 10.0 − 16.7 − 17.5 + 0.9 + 6.7 + 7.3 − 0.6 + 10.1 + 16.0
2004 + 3.3 − 36.0 − 31.7 − 30.5 − 29.7 − 0.8 − 1.2 − 3.2 + 1.9 + 35.0 + 15.6
2005 − 6.7 − 12.1 − 11.5 − 10.6 − 10.4 − 0.2 − 0.9 − 0.9 + 0.0 + 4.8 + 26.8
2006 − 12.4 − 20.8 − 7.1 − 4.5 − 4.4 − 0.0 − 2.7 − 2.3 − 0.4 − 5.2 + 23.6
2007 − 15.9 + 11.8 + 27.6 + 31.5 + 31.7 − 0.2 − 3.9 − 3.7 − 0.3 − 43.5 − 7.1
2008 + 92.0 + 46.9 + 43.1 + 36.8 + 34.9 + 1.8 + 6.3 + 6.3 − 0.0 + 48.9 + 83.4
2009 + 25.7 − 11.6 − 26.1 − 31.5 − 30.0 − 1.5 + 5.5 + 2.5 + 2.9 + 51.8 + 36.6
2010 + 130.5 + 78.7 + 80.4 − 23.4 − 23.5 + 0.1 + 103.8 + 80.1 + 23.7 + 50.1 + 14.9
2011 − 30.6 − 3.2 − 45.2 + 33.6 + 33.3 + 0.2 − 78.7 − 57.0 − 21.7 + 14.6 + 9.4
2011          Apr + 14.8 − 8.8 − 5.9 + 3.2 + 3.1 + 0.1 − 9.1 − 9.9 + 0.8 + 20.7 + 20.3
         May − 17.1 + 5.0 − 4.1 + 9.3 + 9.3 − − 13.4 − 11.6 − 1.9 − 13.1 − 16.8
         June − 17.5 − 4.7 − 1.4 + 2.1 + 2.0 + 0.1 − 3.6 − 1.3 − 2.3 − 16.1 − 13.3
         July + 1.4 + 4.2 − 4.7 − 1.3 − 1.2 − 0.1 − 3.4 − 0.6 − 2.7 + 6.1 + 5.9
         Aug + 0.7 + 7.3 + 0.3 + 12.4 + 12.3 + 0.1 − 12.0 − 9.8 − 2.2 + 0.3 + 0.5
         Sep + 6.3 + 10.3 + 6.3 + 8.0 + 8.0 + 0.0 − 1.7 + 0.5 − 2.2 − 0.0 − 0.7
         Oct + 25.7 + 27.8 + 26.6 + 28.7 + 28.5 + 0.2 − 2.1 − 3.1 + 1.0 − 0.9 + 0.5
         Nov + 4.3 + 1.5 − 9.0 − 3.4 − 3.3 − 0.1 − 5.6 − 4.4 − 1.2 + 13.3 + 8.6
         Dec − 39.9 − 32.7 − 41.0 − 35.6 − 35.4 − 0.2 − 5.4 + 2.4 − 7.8 + 1.2 + 2.1
2012          Jan + 29.0 + 25.2 + 25.8 + 22.7 + 22.6 + 0.2 + 3.1 + 4.7 − 1.7 + 3.2 − 1.1
         Feb − 6.4 − 2.4 − 2.2 − 1.1 − 1.2 + 0.2 − 1.1 − 1.7 + 0.5 − 4.2 − 4.8
         Mar + 2.7 − 10.6 − 10.1 − 8.7 − 8.8 + 0.1 − 1.4 − 0.6 − 0.9 + 12.8 + 9.4
         Apr + 18.6 + 5.3 + 3.4 − 2.6 − 2.6 − 0.0 + 6.0 + 5.2 + 0.8 + 15.2 + 16.3
         May − 25.6 − 2.3 − 8.9 − 3.6 − 3.9 + 0.3 − 5.3 − 3.8 − 1.5 − 16.7 − 13.5
         June + 10.2 + 10.4 + 11.4 − 1.1 − 0.5 − 0.7 + 12.5 + 10.3 + 2.2 − 1.2 − 6.9
         July + 30.5 + 32.0 + 24.5 + 27.3 + 27.4 − 0.1 − 2.7 − 2.0 − 0.7 + 6.0 + 4.7
         Aug − 5.5 − 9.7 − 13.5 − 6.9 − 7.0 + 0.0 − 6.5 − 6.3 − 0.2 + 8.0 + 6.2         Sep + 0.8 − 6.4 − 2.4 − 3.5 − 3.5 − 0.0 + 1.2 + 0.6 + 0.5 + 3.1 + 1.4
*See Table IV.2, footnote*; statistical breaks have been eliminated from the changes. marked. 1Excluding debt securities arising from the exchange of equalisation claims
The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as provisional. Subsequent (see also footnote 2). 2Including debt securities arising from the exchange of
revisions, which appear in the following Monthly Report, are not specially equalisation claims. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
31  Monthly Report
November 2012
IV Banks
 
   
 
lending
prises and households to general governmentLoans Loans
Memo Memo
item Equal- item
Medium- Long- Fiduciary Medium- Long- Secur- isation Fiduciary
Total term term loans Total Total term term ities 
1 claims 2 loans   Period Securities
End of year or month *
 
1,909.8 193.5 1,716.3 169.9 47.3 552.1 417.1 27.4 389.7 132.0 3.0 7.5 2002
1,927.7 195.0 1,732.8 168.3 49.9 544.3 401.0 34.6 366.4 141.3 2.0 7.0 20031,940.8 194.3 1,746.5 173.5 55.3 566.1 387.7 32.9 354.8 177.5 1.0 6.5 2004
1,953.4 194.7 1,758.8 187.9 52.1 544.1 374.4 32.9 341.4 169.7 − 4.5 2005
1,972.7 194.5 1,778.1 209.1 48.2 515.8 358.4 31.7 326.6 157.4 − 4.8 2006
1,987.3 207.7 1,779.6 181.1 46.5 476.2 332.5 31.9 300.6 143.7 − 4.7 2007
2,022.0 222.0 1,800.0 235.8 42.8 440.3 308.2 29.7 278.5 132.1 − 4.5 2008
2,051.3 242.7 1,808.6 248.4 39.6 453.1 298.0 32.2 265.8 155.1 − 4.3 2009
2,070.0 238.1 1,831.8 235.7 30.7 487.3 301.2 36.1 265.1 186.1 − 3.1 2010
2,099.5 247.9 1,851.7 222.4 32.7 492.6 299.1 41.1 258.0 193.5 − 3.6 2011
2,065.4 236.2 1,829.2 262.7 30.1 488.6 299.6 38.6 261.1 189.0 − 3.0 2011          Apr 
2,071.7 237.7 1,833.9 239.6 30.1 492.3 300.6 38.8 261.8 191.7 − 3.0          May
2,068.2 234.6 1,833.6 229.8 30.0 489.5 298.7 39.0 259.7 190.9 − 2.9          June
2,073.7 235.8 1,838.0 230.2 29.7 489.7 299.2 39.7 259.5 190.5 − 2.9          July
2,085.5 244.8 1,840.8 226.4 29.8 489.5 299.7 40.0 259.8 189.8 − 2.9          Aug 
2,087.9 245.2 1,842.7 223.3 29.8 490.1 299.2 39.8 259.4 190.9 − 2.9          Sep 
2,090.6 245.9 1,844.8 220.7 29.6 488.8 298.5 40.6 257.9 190.3 − 2.9          Oct 
2,098.6 246.8 1,851.9 221.2 29.6 493.6 299.8 40.7 259.1 193.8 − 2.9          Nov 
2,099.5 247.9 1,851.7 222.4 32.7 492.6 299.1 41.1 258.0 193.5 − 3.6          Dec 
2,098.4 246.8 1,851.6 222.3 31.8 496.9 298.1 40.9 257.2 198.8 − 3.5 2012          Jan 
2,099.5 245.9 1,853.7 216.4 31.6 497.4 297.5 41.1 256.4 200.0 − 3.5          Feb 
2,099.2 246.4 1,852.7 226.1 31.3 500.9 296.6 40.9 255.8 204.2 − 3.5          Mar 
2,102.2 247.1 1,855.1 239.7 31.7 499.9 296.8 40.6 256.2 203.1 − 3.6          Apr 
2,109.6 248.6 1,861.1 219.2 31.7 496.7 295.2 40.1 255.1 201.5 − 3.6          May
2,108.5 248.3 1,860.1 191.8 31.5 522.4 295.3 39.8 255.5 227.1 − 3.6          June
2,116.0 249.7 1,866.3 188.6 31.4 523.8 294.1 39.7 254.4 229.7 − 3.6          July
2,120.7 249.6 1,871.1 190.1 31.6 525.6 293.0 39.3 253.7 232.6 − 3.5          Aug 
2,118.1 249.0 1,869.1 193.7 31.5 527.6 291.9 39.1 252.8 235.7 − 3.5          Sep 
Changes *
+ 17.9 + 0.2 + 17.8 − 1.9 + 2.6 − 5.9 − 16.1 + 4.9 − 21.0 + 11.2 − 1.0 − 0.5 2003
+ 10.7 + 0.2 + 10.5 + 4.9 + 3.6 + 19.4 − 13.8 − 0.9 − 12.9 + 34.3 − 1.1 − 0.6 2004
+ 12.5 + 1.7 + 10.8 + 14.3 − 3.0 − 22.1 − 13.4 + 0.9 − 14.2 − 7.7 − 1.0 − 2.0 2005
+ 2.3 + 0.2 + 2.2 + 21.2 − 3.9 − 28.8 − 16.4 − 1.4 − 15.0 − 12.4 − + 0.3 2006
+ 9.6 + 10.1 − 0.6 − 16.7 − 2.2 − 36.3 − 25.8 + 0.1 − 26.0 − 10.5 − − 0.1 2007
+ 28.8 + 12.0 + 16.8 + 54.7 − 5.3 − 34.5 − 23.2 − 2.3 − 20.8 − 11.4 − − 0.1 2008
+ 23.5 + 17.3 + 6.3 + 13.1 − 3.9 + 15.2 − 7.6 + 2.5 − 10.2 + 22.8 − − 0.2 2009
+ 18.6 − 4.0 + 22.6 − 3.8 − 1.7 + 35.2 + 3.5 + 3.5 − 0.0 + 31.7 − − 0.3 2010
+ 22.6 + 2.2 + 20.4 − 13.2 − 1.0 + 5.2 − 2.1 + 4.9 − 7.0 + 7.3 − − 0.2 2011
− 0.9 − 2.4 + 1.5 + 21.2 − 0.2 + 0.4 − 1.1 + 0.3 − 1.5 + 1.5 − − 0.0 2011          Apr 
+ 6.3 + 1.6 + 4.6 − 23.0 − 0.0 + 3.7 + 1.0 + 0.2 + 0.8 + 2.7 − + 0.0          May
− 3.4 − 3.1 − 0.3 − 9.8 − 0.1 − 2.8 − 2.0 + 0.2 − 2.1 − 0.8 − − 0.0          June
+ 5.5 + 1.1 + 4.4 + 0.4 − 0.3 + 0.2 + 0.5 + 0.7 − 0.2 − 0.4 − − 0.0          July
+ 4.3 + 1.6 + 2.8 − 3.8 + 0.1 − 0.2 + 0.5 + 0.2 + 0.3 − 0.7 − − 0.0          Aug 
+ 2.4 + 0.4 + 1.9 − 3.0 + 0.0 + 0.6 − 0.5 − 0.2 − 0.3 + 1.1 − − 0.0          Sep 
+ 3.1 + 1.1 + 2.1 − 2.7 − 0.2 − 1.3 − 0.7 + 0.7 − 1.5 − 0.6 − + 0.0          Oct 
+ 8.0 + 0.9 + 7.1 + 0.6 + 0.0 + 4.8 + 1.3 + 0.1 + 1.2 + 3.5 − − 0.0          Nov 
+ 1.0 + 1.1 − 0.1 + 1.2 + 0.1 − 1.0 − 0.7 + 0.4 − 1.1 − 0.3 − − 0.0          Dec 
− 1.1 − 1.1 − 0.0 + 0.1 − 0.9 + 4.3 − 1.0 − 0.2 − 0.8 + 5.3 − − 0.1 2012          Jan 
+ 1.1 − 0.9 + 2.0 − 5.9 − 0.2 + 0.6 − 0.6 + 0.2 − 0.8 + 1.2 − − 0.0          Feb 
− 0.4 + 0.6 − 0.9 + 9.7 − 0.2 + 3.4 − 0.8 − 0.2 − 0.6 + 4.3 − − 0.0          Mar 
+ 2.6 + 0.7 + 1.9 + 13.7 + 0.3 − 1.1 + 0.2 − 0.3 + 0.5 − 1.2 − + 0.2          Apr 
+ 7.1 + 1.2 + 5.9 − 20.6 + 0.0 − 3.2 − 1.6 − 0.4 − 1.2 − 1.6 − − 0.0          May
+ 0.5 − 0.1 + 0.6 − 7.4 − 0.2 + 5.7 + 0.1 − 0.4 + 0.5 + 5.6 − − 0.0          June
+ 7.8 + 1.5 + 6.3 − 3.2 − 0.2 + 1.4 − 1.2 − 0.1 − 1.1 + 2.6 − − 0.1          July
+ 4.7 − 0.1 + 4.8 + 1.5 + 0.3 + 1.8 − 1.1 − 0.4 − 0.7 + 2.9 − − 0.0          Aug 
− 2.2 − 0.9 − 1.3 + 3.6 − 0.2 + 1.8 − 1.3 − 0.4 − 0.9 + 3.1 − − 0.0          Sep 

Deutsche Bundesbank
32  Monthly Report
November 2012
IV Banks
 
6 Lending by banks (MFIs) in Germany to domestic enterprises and households, housing loans,
sectors of economic activity *
 
€ billion
Lending to domestic enterprises and households (excluding holdings of negotiable money market paper and excluding securities portfolios) 1 
of which  
 
Housing loans Lending to enterprises and self-employed persons
 
Whole-sale and Electricity,gas and retail Financial
Mortgage water trade; Agri- Transport- intermedi-
loans supply; repair of culture, ation and ation
secured refuse motor forestry, storage; (excluding
by disposal, vehicles fishing post and MFIs) and
Mortgage residen- Other of which mining and and telecom- insurance
loans, tial real housing Housing Manufac- and Construc- motor- aqua- munica- com-
Period Total total Total estate loans Total loans turing quarrying tion cycles culture tions panies
Lending, total End of year or quarter *
 
2010 2,352.9 1,153.8 1,101.6 907.8 193.8 1,317.2 302.4 134.1 75.5 61.7 120.3 40.3 78.8 157.5
2011          Sep 2,413.7 1,166.3 1,108.3 911.8 196.5 1,367.3 302.1 134.7 81.3 60.9 125.6 42.6 79.2 196.6
         Dec 2,415.7 1,167.3 1,114.0 914.0 200.0 1,368.0 305.0 134.6 84.4 59.6 124.0 42.7 80.1 196.4
2012          Mar 2,427.8 1,164.1 1,114.9 912.6 202.2 1,380.7 305.6 137.0 86.3 60.2 125.6 43.1 78.4 202.7
         June 2,432.4 1,164.7 1,118.0 912.4 205.6 1,385.2 307.6 136.8 88.6 60.6 125.4 44.2 80.3 196.1         Sep 2,458.6 1,167.3 1,126.6 917.8 208.8 1,404.2 309.8 133.9 90.8 60.3 127.4 44.8 78.4 213.9
 Short-term lending
2010 282.9 − 7.7 − 7.7 243.2 3.8 32.2 5.2 13.2 39.4 3.0 6.6 78.9
2011          Sep 325.8 − 7.9 − 7.9 286.0 4.1 36.6 6.3 13.2 43.8 3.8 7.0 112.8
         Dec 316.2 − 7.7 − 7.7 276.7 3.9 33.8 6.0 11.9 41.8 3.3 7.0 111.0
2012          Mar 328.7 − 7.5 − 7.5 289.7 3.8 36.8 6.7 12.7 43.1 3.5 7.1 117.2
         June 324.0 − 7.6 − 7.6 285.0 3.8 37.5 6.8 13.3 42.8 4.0 7.4 110.4
         Sep 340.5 − 7.8 − 7.8 301.5 3.9 36.4 6.8 12.9 44.7 3.9 7.4 127.8
 Medium-term lending
2010 238.1 − 32.8 − 32.8 169.1 11.4 27.5 5.2 9.2 13.4 3.9 12.9 29.0
2011          Sep 245.2 − 33.6 − 33.6 173.4 11.2 26.6 5.6 9.2 15.2 4.1 11.9 34.1
         Dec 247.9 − 34.5 − 34.5 176.7 11.8 28.2 6.0 9.4 15.5 4.0 11.8 35.4
2012          Mar 246.4 − 34.8 − 34.8 175.4 11.9 27.3 6.0 9.4 15.6 4.0 11.4 35.9
         June 248.4 − 34.9 − 34.9 176.7 11.7 26.9 6.3 9.3 15.8 4.0 11.6 36.2
         Sep 249.0 − 35.3 − 35.3 176.3 11.9 25.9 6.8 9.3 16.0 4.1 11.1 36.2
 Long-term lending
2010 1,831.8 1,153.8 1,061.1 907.8 153.4 904.9 287.1 74.5 65.1 39.3 67.6 33.4 59.3 49.6
2011          Sep 1,842.7 1,166.3 1,066.9 911.8 155.1 907.9 286.9 71.5 69.4 38.5 66.6 34.7 60.3 49.7         Dec 1,851.7 1,167.3 1,071.8 914.0 157.8 914.6 289.3 72.6 72.4 38.3 66.7 35.4 61.2 49.9
2012          Mar 1,852.7 1,164.1 1,072.6 912.6 159.9 915.6 289.9 73.0 73.6 38.1 66.9 35.6 59.9 49.6
         June 1,860.1 1,164.7 1,075.5 912.4 163.1 923.5 292.0 72.4 75.5 38.0 66.8 36.2 61.3 49.5         Sep 1,869.1 1,167.3 1,083.5 917.8 165.7 926.5 294.0 71.6 77.3 38.1 66.7 36.8 59.9 49.9
 
Lending, total Change during quarter *
 
2011          Q3 + 31.3 + 4.0 + 5.4 + 2.9 + 2.5 + 24.6 + 0.7 − 3.0 + 2.3 − 0.2 + 2.8 + 0.9 + 2.0 + 21.0         Q4 + 1.9 + 1.8 + 5.1 + 2.0 + 3.1 + 0.4 + 2.1 − 1.1 + 3.0 − 1.3 − 1.6 + 0.1 + 1.9 − 0.2
2012          Q1 + 12.1 − 1.3 + 1.1 + 0.5 + 0.6 + 11.9 + 0.9 + 2.3 + 1.9 + 0.5 + 1.6 + 0.4 − 1.6 + 6.3
         Q2 + 3.2 + 3.2 + 4.5 + 1.1 + 3.4 − 1.5 + 1.9 − 0.2 + 2.3 + 0.5 − 0.5 + 1.0 + 2.6 − 9.8         Q3 + 27.2 + 3.3 + 8.9 + 5.2 + 3.6 + 20.1 + 2.6 − 2.7 + 2.1 − 0.3 + 2.0 + 0.7 − 1.7 + 17.1
 Short-term lending
2011          Q3 + 19.1 − + 0.2 − + 0.2 + 18.9 + 0.1 − 1.3 + 0.5 − 0.3 + 2.3 + 0.1 − 0.1 + 18.7         Q4 − 10.2 − + 0.1 − + 0.1 − 9.3 + 0.0 − 2.8 − 0.2 − 1.3 − 2.0 − 0.5 + 0.0 − 1.8
2012          Q1 + 12.5 − − 0.2 − − 0.2 + 13.0 − 0.0 + 3.0 + 0.7 + 0.8 + 1.3 + 0.2 + 0.1 + 6.2
         Q2 − 7.0 − + 0.1 − + 0.1 − 7.2 − 0.0 + 0.9 + 0.1 + 0.7 − 0.2 + 0.5 + 0.3 − 9.9         Q3 + 16.9 − + 0.2 − + 0.2 + 16.6 + 0.1 − 0.9 − 0.1 − 0.4 + 1.9 − 0.1 − 0.0 + 16.8
 Medium-term lending
2011          Q3 + 3.1 − + 0.3 − + 0.3 + 2.1 − 0.2 − 0.6 + 0.3 + 0.1 + 0.4 + 0.2 − 0.0 + 1.7         Q4 + 3.1 − + 0.9 − + 0.9 + 3.3 + 0.6 + 1.6 + 0.3 + 0.2 + 0.3 − 0.1 − 0.1 + 1.4
2012          Q1 − 1.4 − + 0.3 − + 0.3 − 1.8 + 0.1 − 1.0 + 0.0 − 0.1 + 0.1 + 0.0 − 0.5 + 0.5
         Q2 + 1.8 − + 0.3 − + 0.3 + 0.7 − 0.1 − 0.6 + 0.3 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.0 + 0.1 + 0.3         Q3 + 0.5 − + 0.5 − + 0.5 − 0.3 + 0.3 − 1.0 + 0.5 + 0.0 + 0.1 + 0.1 − 0.4 − 0.2
 Long-term lending
2011          Q3 + 9.1 + 4.0 + 4.9 + 2.9 + 2.0 + 3.6 + 0.8 − 1.1 + 1.6 + 0.0 + 0.2 + 0.7 + 2.2 + 0.5         Q4 + 9.0 + 1.8 + 4.1 + 2.0 + 2.1 + 6.3 + 1.4 + 0.1 + 2.9 − 0.2 + 0.1 + 0.7 + 1.9 + 0.2
2012          Q1 + 1.1 − 1.3 + 1.1 + 0.5 + 0.5 + 0.8 + 0.9 + 0.3 + 1.2 − 0.2 + 0.2 + 0.2 − 1.3 − 0.3
         Q2 + 8.3 + 3.2 + 4.2 + 1.1 + 3.0 + 5.0 + 2.0 − 0.6 + 1.9 − 0.2 − 0.3 + 0.6 + 2.1 − 0.2         Q3 + 9.9 + 3.3 + 8.1 + 5.2 + 2.9 + 3.8 + 2.2 − 0.8 + 1.8 + 0.0 − 0.0 + 0.6 − 1.2 + 0.5
*Excluding lending by foreign
branches. Breakdown of lending by building and loan from the changes. The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as pro-
associations by areas and sectors estimated. Statistical alterations have been eliminated visional; subsequent alterations, which will appear in the following Monthly Report,

Deutsche Bundesbank
33  Monthly Report
November 2012
IV Banks
 
   
 
 
 
 Lending to
 Lending to employees and other individuals non-profit institutions
Memo items Other lending Services sector (including the professions)
of which of which
Debitbalanceson wage,
Other Lending salaryreal to self- Lending and of which
Housing Holding estate employed to craft Housing pension Housing Instalment
Total companies Total loans Total loans 
3 accounts Total loans   Period enterprises activities persons 2 enterprises
End of year or quarter * Lending, total 
 
649.0 178.5 46.8 175.8 380.4 53.5 1,022.4 795.7 226.7 155.0 13.9 13.3 3.5 2010
646.5 177.9 44.5 178.4 381.8 52.8 1,033.1 802.7 230.3 149.0 14.0 13.4 3.5 2011          Sep 
646.3 180.0 42.9 177.9 382.9 51.7 1,034.3 805.6 228.7 147.8 13.5 13.4 3.5          Dec 
647.4 180.5 42.9 178.4 381.9 52.0 1,033.5 805.8 227.7 147.7 13.3 13.6 3.5 2012          Mar 
653.3 181.6 43.3 178.8 387.9 51.9 1,033.6 806.9 226.8 147.3 13.3 13.6 3.5          June654.7 182.8 42.4 179.3 388.0 51.8 1,040.8 813.3 227.5 148.5 13.4 13.6 3.5          Sep 
Short-term lending
64.7 9.6 11.7 13.9 32.2 7.7 38.9 3.9 35.1 2.6 13.9 0.9 0.0 2010
62.4 9.5 11.6 13.4 31.1 8.0 38.9 3.8 35.1 2.6 14.0 1.0 0.0 2011          Sep 
61.9 9.6 11.1 13.2 30.4 7.2 38.5 3.9 34.7 2.5 13.5 0.9 0.0          Dec 
62.6 9.1 11.9 13.3 30.5 7.9 37.9 3.7 34.3 2.5 13.3 1.0 0.0 2012          Mar 
62.8 9.4 11.8 13.1 30.9 7.9 38.0 3.8 34.2 2.2 13.3 1.0 0.0          June61.7 9.5 10.9 13.0 30.0 7.7 37.8 3.9 33.9 1.9 13.4 1.2 0.0          Sep 
Medium-term lending
68.1 8.8 10.1 21.3 28.1 3.8 68.5 21.3 47.1 42.0 − 0.5 0.0 2010
66.7 8.2 8.5 21.2 30.8 3.6 71.3 22.4 48.9 43.7 − 0.5 0.0 2011          Sep 
66.3 8.1 8.4 20.4 31.2 3.6 70.6 22.7 47.9 42.8 − 0.6 0.0          Dec 
65.8 8.1 7.8 20.0 31.3 3.6 70.4 22.9 47.5 42.3 − 0.6 0.0 2012          Mar 
66.6 8.1 8.1 20.0 31.9 3.6 71.0 23.1 47.9 42.9 − 0.6 0.0          June
66.9 8.4 8.2 19.9 32.0 3.6 72.2 23.4 48.8 43.9 − 0.5 0.0          Sep 
Long-term lending
516.2 160.2 25.0 140.6 320.1 42.0 915.0 770.5 144.5 110.4 − 11.9 3.5 2010
517.3 160.3 24.4 143.8 319.8 41.2 922.9 776.6 146.3 102.7 − 11.9 3.4 2011          Sep 
518.1 162.4 23.4 144.3 321.3 40.9 925.2 779.1 146.1 102.5 − 11.9 3.4          Dec 
519.0 163.3 23.2 145.2 320.0 40.5 925.2 779.2 145.9 102.9 − 12.0 3.5 2012          Mar 
523.9 164.1 23.4 145.7 325.0 40.5 924.6 779.9 144.7 102.2 − 12.0 3.5          June
526.1 164.9 23.4 146.4 326.0 40.5 930.8 786.0 144.8 102.7 − 11.8 3.5          Sep 
 
Change during quarter * Lending, total 
 
− 1.3 − 0.5 − 0.2 + 0.3 − 0.1 − 0.8 + 6.8 + 4.7 + 2.1 + 1.3 + 0.2 − 0.1 − 0.0 2011          Q3− 0.3 + 1.3 − 0.9 − 0.3 + 1.0 − 1.1 + 1.6 + 3.1 − 1.5 − 0.7 − 0.6 − 0.1 + 0.0          Q4
+ 0.5 + 0.5 − 0.0 + 0.5 − 1.0 + 0.3 − 0.0 + 0.2 − 0.2 + 0.7 − 0.1 + 0.3 + 0.1 2012          Q1
+ 2.6 + 1.1 + 0.3 − 0.0 + 1.9 − 0.1 + 4.7 + 2.7 + 2.0 + 1.5 − 0.1 − 0.0 − 0.0          Q2+ 2.9 + 1.6 − 0.8 + 1.2 + 0.2 − 0.1 + 7.2 + 6.3 + 0.8 + 1.1 + 0.1 − 0.0 − 0.0          Q3
Short-term lending
− 0.9 − 0.1 − 0.2 + 0.1 − 1.0 − 0.4 + 0.2 + 0.1 + 0.1 + 0.1 + 0.2 − 0.1 − 0.0 2011          Q3− 0.6 + 0.1 − 0.6 − 0.1 − 0.7 − 0.8 − 0.9 + 0.1 − 0.9 − 0.2 − 0.6 − 0.1 −          Q4
+ 0.7 − 0.5 + 0.8 + 0.0 + 0.1 + 0.6 − 0.6 − 0.2 − 0.4 − 0.0 − 0.1 + 0.1 − 0.0 2012          Q1
+ 0.4 + 0.3 − 0.1 − 0.2 + 0.4 − 0.0 + 0.3 + 0.1 + 0.1 − 0.0 − 0.1 − 0.0 −          Q2− 0.6 + 0.1 − 0.9 + 0.2 − 0.9 − 0.1 + 0.1 + 0.1 − 0.1 − 0.2 + 0.1 + 0.2 + 0.0          Q3
Medium-term lending
+ 0.1 − 0.3 + 0.1 − 0.6 + 0.3 − 0.1 + 1.0 + 0.6 + 0.4 + 0.2 − + 0.0 − 0.0 2011          Q3− 0.4 − 0.1 − 0.1 − 0.6 + 0.3 + 0.0 − 0.2 + 0.3 − 0.5 − 0.5 − + 0.0 −          Q4
− 0.9 + 0.1 − 0.6 − 0.4 + 0.2 − 0.0 + 0.4 + 0.2 + 0.1 + 0.1 − + 0.1 + 0.0 2012          Q1
+ 0.6 − 0.0 + 0.2 + 0.0 + 0.4 − + 1.1 + 0.4 + 0.7 + 0.9 − + 0.0 − 0.0          Q2
+ 0.6 + 0.3 + 0.1 + 0.0 + 0.1 − 0.0 + 0.9 + 0.2 + 0.6 + 0.7 − − 0.1 −          Q3
Long-term lending
− 0.5 − 0.1 − 0.2 + 0.8 + 0.6 − 0.3 + 5.6 + 4.1 + 1.6 + 1.0 − − 0.1 − 0.0 2011          Q3
+ 0.6 + 1.3 − 0.3 + 0.5 + 1.4 − 0.3 + 2.7 + 2.7 + 0.0 − 0.0 − − 0.0 + 0.0          Q4
+ 0.7 + 0.9 − 0.2 + 0.8 − 1.3 − 0.3 + 0.2 + 0.1 + 0.1 + 0.6 − + 0.1 + 0.1 2012          Q1
+ 1.6 + 0.8 + 0.1 + 0.1 + 1.1 − 0.1 + 3.3 + 2.1 + 1.2 + 0.6 − − 0.0 − 0.0          Q2
+ 2.9 + 1.2 − 0.0 + 0.9 + 1.0 + 0.1 + 6.2 + 5.9 + 0.3 + 0.5 − − 0.2 − 0.0          Q3
are not specially marked. 1 Excluding fiduciary loans. 2 Including sole proprietors. 
3 Excluding mortgage loans and housing loans, even in the form of instalment credit. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
34  Monthly Report
November 2012
IV Banks
 
7 Deposits of domestic non-banks (non-MFIs) at banks (MFIs) in Germany*
 
 
€ billion
Time deposits 1,2   Memo item
  
 for more than 1 year 2 Subordinated
 liabilities
for up for up (excluding
to and to and for more Bank negotiable Liabilities
Deposits, Sight including including than Savings savings Fiduciary debt arising
Period total deposits Total 1 year Total 2 years 2 years bonds 4 loans securities) from repos deposits 3 
Domestic non-banks, total End of year or month*
 
2009 2,829.7 1,029.5 1,102.6 339.5 763.1 32.1 731.0 594.5 103.2 43.4 35.6 76.8
2010 2,935.2 1,104.4 1,117.1 329.3 787.8 25.1 762.7 618.2 95.4 37.5 35.7 80.9
2011 3,045.5 1,168.3 1,156.2 386.1 770.2 31.5 738.7 616.1 104.8 36.5 34.3 97.1
2011          Oct 3,025.6 1,160.9 1,148.1 376.8 771.3 30.2 741.1 613.1 103.6 36.7 34.6 104.2
         Nov 3,053.1 1,188.0 1,149.2 377.8 771.4 31.0 740.5 611.5 104.3 36.7 34.5 109.5
         Dec 3,045.5 1,168.3 1,156.2 386.1 770.2 31.5 738.7 616.1 104.8 36.5 34.3 97.1
2012          Jan 3,035.3 1,181.1 1,133.1 366.8 766.3 31.4 734.9 617.2 103.8 35.8 33.8 85.8
         Feb 3,053.7 1,187.1 1,143.5 378.3 765.1 32.5 732.6 619.8 103.3 35.6 33.6 97.0
         Mar 3,048.3 1,188.9 1,136.9 374.4 762.5 33.1 729.4 619.4 103.0 35.3 33.5 91.7
         Apr 3,071.3 1,197.7 1,153.2 392.8 760.4 32.9 727.5 617.9 102.5 35.5 33.4 100.8
         May 3,091.6 1,216.8 1,155.6 397.2 758.4 33.2 725.2 617.1 102.0 35.5 33.4 106.3
         June 3,104.7 1,233.8 1,153.5 397.4 756.1 33.7 722.4 616.1 101.3 35.2 33.2 97.5
         July 3,105.8 1,235.4 1,154.2 402.7 751.6 33.5 718.1 615.9 100.3 35.1 32.9 102.3
         Aug 3,118.3 1,247.0 1,156.8 406.6 750.2 33.4 716.8 615.4 99.1 35.1 32.7 105.7
         Sep 3,112.2 1,262.9 1,137.3 390.1 747.2 33.0 714.2 614.1 97.9 35.0 32.3 95.9
Changes*
2010 + 77.8 + 76.0 − 18.9 − 12.6 − 6.3 − 7.0 + 0.7 + 24.0 − 3.3 − 1.7 + 2.0 + 4.1
2011 + 111.2 + 63.7 + 40.9 + 57.0 − 16.1 + 6.5 − 22.6 − 2.6 + 9.3 − 1.1 − 1.4 + 16.0
2011          Oct + 0.7 + 9.6 − 9.2 − 8.3 − 0.9 + 1.1 − 2.0 − 0.4 + 0.8 + 0.0 − 0.1 − 1.8
         Nov + 27.5 + 26.8 + 1.1 + 1.0 + 0.1 + 0.8 − 0.7 − 1.1 + 0.7 − 0.0 − 0.1 + 5.3         Dec − 6.2 − 19.8 + 8.4 + 8.3 + 0.1 + 0.5 − 0.4 + 4.6 + 0.5 − 0.2 − 0.2 − 12.4
2012          Jan − 10.4 + 12.9 − 23.4 − 19.2 − 4.2 − 0.1 − 4.1 + 1.1 − 1.0 − 0.7 − 0.5 − 11.3
         Feb + 18.3 + 5.9 + 10.3 + 11.5 − 1.1 + 1.1 − 2.3 + 2.6 − 0.5 − 0.2 − 0.1 + 11.2         Mar − 5.4 + 1.9 − 6.5 − 3.9 − 2.6 + 0.6 − 3.2 − 0.4 − 0.3 − 0.2 − 0.2 − 5.2
         Apr + 20.4 + 9.0 + 13.5 + 15.5 − 2.1 − 0.1 − 1.9 − 1.5 − 0.5 + 0.2 − 0.1 + 6.5
         May + 20.2 + 19.2 + 2.4 + 4.4 − 2.0 + 0.3 − 2.3 − 0.8 − 0.5 − 0.0 + 0.0 + 5.5         June + 13.1 + 16.9 − 2.0 + 0.2 − 2.3 + 0.5 − 2.7 − 1.1 − 0.7 − 0.3 − 0.2 − 8.8
         July + 1.1 + 1.6 + 0.7 + 5.2 − 4.6 − 0.2 − 4.4 − 0.2 − 1.1 − 0.1 − 0.3 + 4.8
         Aug + 12.5 + 11.5 + 2.6 + 4.0 − 1.4 − 0.1 − 1.3 − 0.5 − 1.1 − 0.0 − 0.2 + 3.5         Sep − 5.8 + 16.2 − 19.6 − 16.6 − 3.0 − 0.4 − 2.6 − 1.2 − 1.2 − 0.1 − 0.4 − 9.8
Domestic government End of year or month*
2009 129.3 41.8 83.4 43.0 40.4 3.6 36.8 2.6 1.5 35.7 3.9 0.5
2010 153.4 46.1 103.0 47.7 55.3 2.6 52.7 2.8 1.5 34.7 6.2 0.4
2011 168.5 46.2 118.4 69.5 48.8 3.8 45.0 2.4 1.5 34.0 5.9 3.1
2011          Oct 162.9 49.2 109.8 61.2 48.5 3.6 45.0 2.4 1.5 34.1 6.0 3.5
         Nov 167.0 49.5 113.7 64.9 48.8 3.7 45.1 2.4 1.4 34.1 5.9 2.9
         Dec 168.5 46.2 118.4 69.5 48.8 3.8 45.0 2.4 1.5 34.0 5.9 3.1
2012          Jan 171.8 49.1 119.0 71.3 47.7 3.3 44.4 2.3 1.4 33.4 6.0 2.2
         Feb 182.4 55.8 123.0 75.4 47.6 3.5 44.1 2.3 1.4 33.3 6.0 2.8
         Mar 182.4 51.9 126.8 79.0 47.8 3.8 44.0 2.3 1.4 33.2 5.9 1.8
         Apr 183.5 52.8 127.0 80.2 46.8 3.8 43.0 2.3 1.4 33.4 5.9 0.5
         May 196.1 57.5 134.8 87.5 47.3 4.0 43.3 2.4 1.3 33.4 5.9 3.8
         June 227.7 64.3 159.5 98.9 60.6 4.7 55.9 2.6 1.3 33.1 5.9 1.5
         July 218.3 53.6 160.6 100.1 60.5 4.4 56.1 2.8 1.3 33.0 5.9 2.1
         Aug 216.6 51.2 161.2 101.1 60.1 4.5 55.6 2.9 1.3 33.0 5.9 3.0
         Sep 214.3 53.5 156.5 96.6 60.0 4.5 55.5 2.9 1.3 33.0 5.9 0.8
Changes*
2010 + 23.9 + 4.1 + 19.7 + 4.7 + 14.9 − 1.0 + 16.0 + 0.3 − 0.1 − 1.0 + 2.3 − 0.1
2011 + 14.6 + 0.1 + 15.0 + 21.4 − 6.5 + 1.2 − 7.7 − 0.4 + 0.0 − 0.7 − 0.2 + 2.7
2011          Oct − 10.6 − 3.2 − 7.3 − 7.2 − 0.1 + 0.1 − 0.2 − 0.1 − 0.0 + 0.0 − 0.0 − 1.0         Nov + 4.1 + 0.3 + 3.9 + 3.7 + 0.2 + 0.1 + 0.1 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.6         Dec + 1.5 − 3.3 + 4.7 + 4.7 + 0.1 + 0.1 − 0.1 − 0.0 + 0.1 − 0.1 + 0.0 + 0.2
2012          Jan + 3.3 + 2.9 + 0.6 + 1.8 − 1.1 − 0.5 − 0.6 − 0.1 − 0.1 − 0.7 + 0.0 − 0.9
         Feb + 10.6 + 6.7 + 4.0 + 4.1 − 0.1 + 0.2 − 0.3 + 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.0 + 0.0 + 0.7         Mar − 0.1 − 3.8 + 3.8 + 3.6 + 0.2 + 0.3 − 0.1 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.1 − 0.1 − 1.0
         Apr + 0.6 + 0.9 − 0.2 + 1.0 − 1.2 + 0.0 − 1.2 − 0.0 − 0.0 + 0.2 + 0.0 − 1.3
         May + 12.6 + 4.7 + 7.8 + 7.3 + 0.5 + 0.2 + 0.3 + 0.1 − 0.0 − 0.0 − + 3.4
         June + 16.7 + 5.2 + 11.3 + 10.9 + 0.4 + 0.7 − 0.3 + 0.2 − 0.0 − 0.3 − 0.0 − 2.4
         July − 9.4 − 10.7 + 1.1 + 1.2 − 0.1 − 0.3 + 0.2 + 0.2 − 0.0 − 0.1 − 0.0 + 0.6
         Aug − 1.6 − 2.4 + 0.6 + 1.0 − 0.4 + 0.1 − 0.5 + 0.1 + 0.0 − 0.0 + 0.0 + 1.0         Sep − 2.3 + 2.3 − 4.6 − 4.5 − 0.1 − 0.0 − 0.1 + 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 2.3
*See Table IV.2, footnote *; statistical breaks have been eliminated from the specially marked. 1Including subordinated liabilities and liabilities arising from
changes. The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as provisional. registered debt securities. 2Including deposits under savings and loan contracts (see
Subsequent revisions, which appear in the following Monthly Report, are not

Deutsche Bundesbank
35  Monthly Report
November 2012
IV Banks
 
7 Deposits of domestic non-banks (non-MFIs) at banks (MFIs) in Germany * (cont’d)
 
 
€ billion
Time deposits 1,2   Memo item
  
 for more than 1 year 2 Subordinated
 liabilities
for up for up (excluding
to and to and for more Bank negotiable Liabilities
Deposits, Sight including including than Savings savings Fiduciary debt arising
Period total deposits Total 1 year Total 2 years 2 years bonds  4 loans securities) from repos deposits 3 
Domestic enterprises and households End of year or month*
 
2009 2,700.4 987.6 1,019.2 296.5 722.7 28.5 694.2 591.9 101.6 7.7 31.7 76.3
2010 2,781.8 1,058.3 1,014.1 281.6 732.5 22.5 710.0 615.4 93.9 2.9 29.5 80.52011 2,877.0 1,122.0 1,037.9 316.5 721.3 27.7 693.7 613.8 103.3 2.5 28.4 94.0
2011          Oct 2,862.7 1,111.6 1,038.3 315.5 722.8 26.6 696.2 610.6 102.1 2.5 28.6 100.7
         Nov 2,886.1 1,138.5 1,035.5 312.9 722.7 27.3 695.4 609.1 102.9 2.6 28.5 106.6         Dec 2,877.0 1,122.0 1,037.9 316.5 721.3 27.7 693.7 613.8 103.3 2.5 28.4 94.0
2012          Jan 2,863.5 1,132.0 1,014.1 295.5 718.6 28.1 690.5 615.0 102.4 2.5 27.8 83.6
         Feb 2,871.2 1,131.3 1,020.5 303.0 717.5 29.0 688.5 617.5 101.9 2.3 27.6 94.1         Mar 2,865.9 1,137.0 1,010.2 295.4 714.7 29.3 685.4 617.1 101.6 2.1 27.6 89.9
         Apr 2,887.9 1,144.9 1,026.1 312.5 713.6 29.1 684.5 615.6 101.2 2.1 27.5 100.4
         May 2,895.5 1,159.4 1,020.8 309.7 711.1 29.2 681.9 614.7 100.7 2.1 27.5 102.5         June 2,877.0 1,169.5 994.0 298.5 695.5 29.0 666.6 613.5 100.0 2.1 27.3 96.0
         July 2,887.5 1,181.8 993.6 302.6 691.1 29.1 662.0 613.1 98.9 2.1 27.0 100.2
         Aug 2,901.6 1,195.8 995.6 305.5 690.1 28.9 661.2 612.5 97.8 2.1 26.8 102.7         Sep 2,897.9 1,209.4 980.8 293.5 687.2 28.5 658.7 611.3 96.6 2.1 26.4 95.1
Changes*
2010 + 53.9 + 71.9 − 38.6 − 17.3 − 21.3 − 6.0 − 15.3 + 23.8 − 3.2 − 0.7 − 0.3 + 4.2
2011 + 96.6 + 63.6 + 25.9 + 35.5 − 9.6 + 5.2 − 14.9 − 2.2 + 9.3 − 0.3 − 1.2 + 13.3
2011          Oct + 11.3 + 12.8 − 1.9 − 1.1 − 0.8 + 1.0 − 1.8 − 0.4 + 0.8 − 0.0 − 0.1 − 0.8
         Nov + 23.4 + 26.5 − 2.8 − 2.7 − 0.1 + 0.7 − 0.8 − 1.1 + 0.8 + 0.0 − 0.1 + 5.9         Dec − 7.7 − 16.5 + 3.7 + 3.7 + 0.1 + 0.4 − 0.3 + 4.6 + 0.5 − 0.0 − 0.2 − 12.6
2012          Jan − 13.8 + 10.0 − 24.0 − 21.0 − 3.1 + 0.4 − 3.5 + 1.2 − 0.9 − 0.0 − 0.6 − 10.4
         Feb + 7.7 − 0.7 + 6.4 + 7.4 − 1.0 + 0.9 − 2.0 + 2.5 − 0.5 − 0.2 − 0.2 + 10.5         Mar − 5.3 + 5.7 − 10.3 − 7.5 − 2.8 + 0.3 − 3.1 − 0.4 − 0.3 − 0.1 − 0.1 − 4.2
         Apr + 19.8 + 8.1 + 13.7 + 14.6 − 0.9 − 0.2 − 0.7 − 1.5 − 0.5 + 0.0 − 0.1 + 7.8
         May + 7.6 + 14.5 − 5.4 − 2.9 − 2.5 + 0.1 − 2.6 − 0.9 − 0.5 − 0.0 + 0.0 + 2.1         June − 3.6 + 11.7 − 13.4 − 10.7 − 2.7 − 0.2 − 2.5 − 1.2 − 0.7 − 0.0 − 0.2 − 6.5
         July + 10.5 + 12.3 − 0.4 + 4.1 − 4.5 + 0.1 − 4.6 − 0.3 − 1.1 − 0.0 − 0.3 + 4.2
         Aug + 14.1 + 13.9 + 2.0 + 3.0 − 1.0 − 0.2 − 0.8 − 0.6 − 1.2 + 0.0 − 0.2 + 2.5         Sep − 3.5 + 13.9 − 15.0 − 12.1 − 2.9 − 0.4 − 2.5 − 1.2 − 1.2 − 0.1 − 0.4 − 7.5
of which:  Domestic enterprises End of year or month*
2009 1,105.6 336.4 743.6 187.5 556.1 9.1 547.0 5.5 20.2 7.6 21.8 76.3
2010 1,124.4 344.6 755.5 196.0 559.5 7.5 552.0 6.3 17.9 2.8 21.4 80.5
2011 1,156.5 374.8 758.9 222.9 536.0 9.4 526.7 5.6 17.3 2.5 20.3 94.0
2011          Oct 1,168.5 376.9 767.7 224.8 543.0 9.8 533.1 6.2 17.6 2.5 20.5 100.7
         Nov 1,175.4 390.6 761.7 220.2 541.6 9.9 531.7 5.7 17.3 2.5 20.4 106.6
         Dec 1,156.5 374.8 758.9 222.9 536.0 9.4 526.7 5.6 17.3 2.5 20.3 94.0
2012          Jan 1,137.0 381.2 733.2 201.4 531.9 9.3 522.5 5.6 17.0 2.4 19.8 83.6
         Feb 1,134.0 373.1 738.3 209.1 529.2 9.7 519.5 5.7 16.9 2.2 19.7 94.1
         Mar 1,125.8 376.3 727.0 201.1 525.9 9.8 516.1 5.8 16.7 2.1 19.7 89.9
         Apr 1,140.8 374.7 743.6 218.7 524.9 9.7 515.2 5.8 16.6 2.1 19.6 100.4
         May 1,144.2 384.2 737.6 215.6 522.0 9.8 512.1 5.9 16.5 2.1 19.5 102.5
         June 1,118.8 384.8 711.5 205.3 506.2 9.8 496.4 6.1 16.4 2.1 19.4 96.0
         July 1,125.0 390.5 712.0 210.2 501.8 10.2 491.6 6.2 16.3 2.0 19.2 100.2
         Aug 1,132.6 394.5 715.6 214.8 500.7 10.2 490.5 6.4 16.2 2.1 19.0 102.7
         Sep 1,124.2 399.0 702.6 204.6 497.9 10.3 487.6 6.5 16.1 2.0 18.7 95.1
Changes*
2010 − 10.5 + 9.8 − 21.6 + 6.1 − 27.6 − 1.6 − 26.0 + 0.9 + 0.3 − 0.7 − 0.5 + 4.2
2011 + 33.6 + 29.1 + 5.1 + 27.6 − 22.5 + 1.9 − 24.4 − 0.3 − 0.3 − 0.3 − 1.1 + 13.3
2011          Oct + 5.5 + 6.8 − 1.5 + 0.4 − 1.9 + 0.3 − 2.2 − 0.0 + 0.1 − 0.0 − 0.1 − 0.8
         Nov + 6.9 + 13.3 − 6.0 − 4.6 − 1.4 + 0.1 − 1.5 − 0.1 − 0.3 − − 0.1 + 5.9         Dec − 17.4 − 15.9 − 1.4 + 2.7 − 4.1 − 0.5 − 3.6 − 0.1 − 0.1 − 0.0 − 0.1 − 12.6
2012          Jan − 19.8 + 6.4 − 26.0 − 21.5 − 4.5 − 0.1 − 4.4 + 0.0 − 0.3 − 0.0 − 0.5 − 10.4
         Feb − 3.0 − 8.1 + 5.1 + 7.7 − 2.6 + 0.4 − 3.0 + 0.1 − 0.1 − 0.2 − 0.1 + 10.5         Mar − 8.2 + 3.2 − 11.4 − 8.0 − 3.3 + 0.1 − 3.4 + 0.1 − 0.2 − 0.1 − 0.1 − 4.2
         Apr + 13.6 − 0.4 + 14.1 + 14.9 − 0.8 − 0.1 − 0.7 − 0.0 − 0.1 + 0.0 − 0.1 + 7.8
         May + 3.4 + 9.5 − 6.1 − 3.2 − 2.9 + 0.1 − 3.1 + 0.1 − 0.1 − 0.0 − 0.0 + 2.1         June − 10.4 + 2.3 − 12.7 − 9.8 − 2.9 − 0.0 − 2.9 + 0.1 − 0.1 − 0.0 − 0.1 − 6.5
         July + 6.2 + 5.7 + 0.5 + 4.9 − 4.4 + 0.4 − 4.8 + 0.1 − 0.1 − 0.0 − 0.2 + 4.2
         Aug + 7.6 + 4.0 + 3.6 + 4.7 − 1.1 + 0.1 − 1.2 + 0.2 − 0.1 + 0.0 − 0.2 + 2.5         Sep − 8.2 + 4.9 − 13.1 − 10.3 − 2.8 + 0.1 − 2.9 + 0.1 − 0.1 − 0.1 − 0.3 − 7.5
Table IV.12). 3Excluding deposits under savings and loan contracts (see also foot-   
note 2). 4 Including liabilities arising from non-negotiable bearer debt securities.   
   
  

Deutsche Bundesbank
36  Monthly Report
November 2012
IV Banks
 
8 Deposits of domestic households and non-profit institutions at banks (MFIs) in Germany*
 
 
€ billion
Sight deposits Time deposits 1,2 
by creditor group by creditor group
Deposits of Domestic households Domestic households
domestic
householdsand Domestic
non-profit Self- non-profit Self-
employed Other institu- employed Other institutions,
Period total Total Total persons Employees tions Total Total persons Employees individuals individuals
End of year or month*
 
2009 1,594.9 651.3 631.3 112.5 424.6 94.3 19.9 275.6 258.5 24.5 213.2 20.7
2010 1,657.4 713.7 692.4 123.8 471.2 97.4 21.3 258.6 241.4 21.2 203.7 16.4
2011 1,720.4 747.3 724.9 131.5 490.4 103.0 22.4 278.9 261.1 23.3 218.5 19.3
2012          Apr 1,747.1 770.2 744.3 136.5 499.7 108.1 25.9 282.5 264.9 22.4 222.1 20.4
         May 1,751.3 775.2 750.7 137.4 503.5 109.8 24.5 283.2 265.8 22.8 222.3 20.7
         June 1,758.2 784.7 759.2 135.8 513.3 110.2 25.5 282.5 265.2 22.3 223.2 19.7
         July 1,762.5 791.3 766.2 140.4 515.0 110.8 25.1 281.6 264.3 21.9 222.6 19.8
         Aug 1,769.0 801.3 775.1 143.3 518.9 112.9 26.2 280.0 262.7 21.4 221.7 19.7
         Sep 1,773.8 810.3 784.7 141.4 528.0 115.3 25.7 278.2 261.0 20.7 220.4 19.9
Changes*
2010 + 64.4 + 62.1 + 60.8 + 11.3 + 40.4 + 9.1 + 1.4 − 17.0 − 17.1 − 3.3 − 9.7 − 4.1
2011 + 63.0 + 34.5 + 33.5 + 7.8 + 19.7 + 6.0 + 1.1 + 20.8 + 20.3 + 2.1 + 15.2 + 3.0
2012          Apr + 6.3 + 8.5 + 7.7 + 2.6 + 3.7 + 1.4 + 0.8 − 0.4 + 0.2 − 0.3 + 0.3 + 0.3
         May + 4.2 + 5.0 + 6.3 + 0.8 + 3.9 + 1.7 − 1.4 + 0.7 + 0.9 + 0.4 + 0.2 + 0.3
         June + 6.9 + 9.5 + 8.6 − 1.6 + 8.4 + 1.8 + 0.9 − 0.7 − 0.6 − 0.5 − 0.1 − 0.1
         July + 4.3 + 6.6 + 7.0 + 4.6 + 1.8 + 0.6 − 0.3 − 0.9 − 0.9 − 0.4 − 0.6 + 0.1
         Aug + 6.5 + 9.9 + 8.9 + 2.9 + 3.8 + 2.2 + 1.0 − 1.5 − 1.6 − 0.5 − 0.9 − 0.2
         Sep + 4.7 + 9.1 + 9.6 − 2.0 + 9.1 + 2.4 − 0.5 − 1.8 − 1.7 − 0.6 − 1.3 + 0.2
*See Table IV.2, footnote*; statistical breaks have been eliminated from the changes. revisions, which appear in the following Monthly Report, are not specially
The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as provisional. Subsequent marked. 1Including subordinated liabilities and liabilities arising from registered debt
 
  
9 Deposits of domestic government at banks (MFIs) in Germany, by creditor group
*
 
€ billion
Deposits
   
Federal Government and its special funds  1 State governments
Time deposits Time deposits
Savings Savings
for up deposits Memo for up deposits Memo
Domestic to and for more and bank item to and for more and bank item
government, Sight including than savings Fiduciary Sight including than savings Fiduciary
Period total Total deposits 1 year 1 year bonds 2 loans Total deposits 1 year 1 year bonds 2 loans
End of year or month*
 
2009 129.3 22.2 1.3 3.7 17.1 0.1 17.3 23.1 7.1 5.8 10.1 0.1 18.0
2010 153.4 38.7 5.7 3.3 29.6 0.1 17.0 28.2 8.5 6.7 12.9 0.2 17.2
2011 168.5 37.9 6.2 9.4 22.2 0.1 16.9 34.8 11.4 10.7 12.5 0.2 16.8
2012          Apr 183.5 33.4 10.0 3.8 19.5 0.0 16.9 48.2 11.9 23.9 12.3 0.2 16.1
         May 196.1 31.5 7.0 4.9 19.5 0.1 16.9 54.1 14.9 26.8 12.3 0.2 16.1
         June 227.7 33.8 9.9 4.7 19.2 0.1 16.7 84.5 19.4 40.1 24.8 0.2 16.0
         July 218.3 30.0 7.4 3.3 19.3 0.1 16.7 83.9 13.5 46.0 24.3 0.2 15.9
         Aug 216.6 27.7 5.5 3.3 18.9 0.1 16.7 81.2 9.6 47.2 24.2 0.2 15.9
         Sep 214.3 26.7 5.0 2.9 18.7 0.1 16.6 80.0 12.2 43.4 24.2 0.2 15.9
Changes*
2010 + 23.9 + 16.5 + 4.4 − 0.4 + 12.5 + 0.0 − 0.2 + 5.2 + 1.5 + 0.9 + 2.8 + 0.0 − 0.7
2011 + 14.6 − 0.7 + 0.5 + 6.3 − 7.5 + 0.0 − 0.2 + 6.6 + 2.9 + 4.0 − 0.4 + 0.0 − 0.5
2012          Apr + 0.6 + 0.2 + 3.4 − 2.3 − 0.9 − 0.0 + 0.0 − 1.1 − 3.0 + 2.1 − 0.2 + 0.0 + 0.1
         May + 12.6 − 1.9 − 3.0 + 1.1 − 0.0 + 0.0 + 0.0 + 5.9 + 3.0 + 2.9 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.0
         June + 16.7 + 2.3 + 2.9 − 0.3 − 0.3 + 0.0 − 0.2 + 16.2 + 3.0 + 13.4 − 0.2 + 0.0 − 0.1
         July − 9.4 − 3.8 − 2.5 − 1.4 + 0.1 − − 0.0 − 0.6 − 5.9 + 5.8 − 0.5 + 0.0 − 0.1
         Aug − 1.6 − 2.3 − 1.8 − 0.0 − 0.4 + 0.0 − 0.0 − 2.7 − 3.9 + 1.2 − 0.1 + 0.0 − 0.0
         Sep − 2.3 − 0.8 − 0.5 − 0.1 − 0.2 − − 0.0 − 1.5 + 2.6 − 4.1 − 0.0 − − 0.0
*See Table IV.2, footnote *; excluding deposits of the Treuhand agency and its Telekom AG, and of publicly owned enterprises, which are included in ”Enterprises”.
successor organisations, of the Federal Railways, east German Railways and Federal Statistical breaks have been eliminated from the changes. The figures for the latest
Post Office, and, from 1995, of Deutsche Bahn AG, Deutsche Post AG and Deutsche date are always to be regarded as provisional. Subsequent revisions, which appear in

Deutsche Bundesbank
37  Monthly Report
November 2012
IV Banks
 
   
 
 Savings deposits 3  Memo item
 
 by maturity
 more than 1 year 2 
Subordinated
of which liabilities
Domestic Domestic (excluding
up to and up to and Bank negotiable Liabilities non-profit non-profit
institu- including including more than Domestic institu- savings Fiduciary debt arising
tions 1 year Total 2 years 2 years Total tions bonds  4 loans from repos   Period households securities) 5 
End of year or month*
 
17.2 109.0 166.6 19.4 147.2 586.5 577.5 9.0 81.5 0.1 9.8 − 2009
17.3 85.7 173.0 15.0 158.0 609.1 599.2 9.9 76.0 0.1 8.2 − 201017.8 93.6 185.3 18.3 167.0 608.2 599.0 9.2 86.1 0.1 8.1 − 2011
17.6 93.8 188.7 19.4 169.3 609.8 600.2 9.6 84.6 0.0 7.9 − 2012          Apr 
17.4 94.1 189.1 19.3 169.8 608.8 599.2 9.6 84.2 0.0 7.9 −          May17.3 93.2 189.3 19.2 170.1 607.4 597.8 9.6 83.6 0.0 7.9 −          June
17.2 92.3 189.2 18.9 170.3 607.0 597.1 9.9 82.6 0.0 7.8 −          July
17.3 90.7 189.4 18.7 170.7 606.1 596.1 10.0 81.6 0.0 7.8 −          Aug 
17.2 88.9 189.3 18.2 171.1 604.8 594.7 10.1 80.5 0.0 7.7 −          Sep 
Changes*
+ 0.1 − 23.3 + 6.4 − 4.4 + 10.8 + 22.8 + 22.0 + 0.9 − 3.6 − 0.0 + 0.2 + 0.0 2010
+ 0.5
+ 8.0 + 12.9 + 3.3 + 9.5 − 1.8 − 1.1 − 0.7 + 9.5 − 0.0 − 0.1 − 2011
− 0.6 − 0.3 − 0.1 − 0.1 + 0.0 − 1.5 − 1.6 + 0.1 − 0.4 − 0.0 + 0.0 − 2012          Apr 
− 0.2 + 0.3 + 0.4 − 0.0 + 0.4 − 1.1 − 1.1 + 0.0 − 0.4 − 0.0 + 0.0 −          May
− 0.1 − 0.9 + 0.2 − 0.2 + 0.4 − 1.4 − 1.3 − 0.0 − 0.6 − 0.0 − 0.0 −          June
− 0.1 − 0.8 − 0.1 − 0.3 + 0.2 − 0.5 − 0.8 + 0.3 − 0.9 − 0.0 − 0.0 −          July
+ 0.1 − 1.7 + 0.1 − 0.2 + 0.4 − 0.8 − 1.0 + 0.1 − 1.1 + 0.0 − 0.1 −          Aug 
− 0.1 − 1.8 − 0.1 − 0.4 + 0.4 − 1.4 − 1.5 + 0.1 − 1.1 − 0.0 − 0.1 −          Sep 
securities. 2Including deposits under savings and loan contracts (see Table 2). 4Including liabilities arising from non-negotiable bearer debt
IV.12). 3Excluding deposits under savings and loan contracts (see also foot-note securities. 5 Included in time deposits. 
 
     
 
Local government and local government associations
(including municipal special-purpose associations) Social security funds
Time deposits 3 Time deposits
Savings Savings
for up deposits Memo for up deposits Memo
to and for more and bank item to and for more and bank item
Sight including than savings Fiduciary Sight including than savings Fiduciary
Total deposits 1 year 1 year bonds 2,4 loans Total deposits 1 year 1 year bonds 2 loans   Period
End of year or month*
 
38.0 20.2 10.3 4.2 3.3 0.4 46.0 13.3 23.1 8.9 0.6 0.0 2009
37.4 19.5 9.9 4.5 3.5 0.4 49.1 12.3 27.9 8.3 0.6 0.0 201039.3 18.1 13.0 5.0 3.2 0.4 56.5 10.5 36.4 9.1 0.4 0.0 2011
37.8 16.6 12.6 5.5 3.1 0.4 64.1 14.4 39.9 9.4 0.3 0.0 2012          Apr 
41.6 19.5 13.2 5.6 3.2 0.4 68.9 16.1 42.6 9.9 0.3 0.0          May40.2 18.2 12.8 5.8 3.4 0.4 69.1 16.7 41.3 10.8 0.4 0.0          June
38.9 17.0 12.6 5.8 3.5 0.4 65.5 15.8 38.3 11.1 0.4 0.0          July
43.5 21.2 12.9 5.9 3.6 0.4 64.2 14.9 37.7 11.0 0.4 0.0          Aug 
41.6 19.6 12.6 5.8 3.6 0.4 66.0 16.7 37.7 11.2 0.4 0.0          Sep 
Changes*
− 0.6 − 0.6 − 0.5 + 0.2 + 0.2 − 0.0 + 2.9 − 1.2 + 4.7 − 0.6 − 0.1 − 0.0 2010
+ 1.8 − 1.4 + 2.9 + 0.5 − 0.2 − 0.0 + 7.0 − 1.9 + 8.2 + 0.9 − 0.2 − 0.0 2011
− 0.0 + 0.2 − 0.2 + 0.1 − 0.0 − 0.0 + 1.6 + 0.4 + 1.5 − 0.2 + 0.0 − 2012          Apr 
+ 3.8 + 3.0 + 0.6 + 0.1 + 0.1 − + 4.8 + 1.7 + 2.7 + 0.5 + 0.0 −          May− 1.4 − 1.3 − 0.4 + 0.2 + 0.1 − − 0.4 + 0.6 − 1.8 + 0.7 + 0.0 −          June
− 1.4 − 1.3 − 0.2 + 0.0 + 0.1 − 0.0 − 3.6 − 0.9 − 3.0 + 0.3 + 0.0 −          July
+ 4.7 + 4.2 + 0.3 + 0.1 + 0.1 − − 1.3 − 0.8 − 0.5 − 0.0 + 0.0 −          Aug − 1.9 − 1.5 − 0.3 − 0.1 + 0.0 − 0.0 + 1.9 + 1.8 − 0.1 + 0.2 − 0.0 −          Sep 
the following Monthly Report, are not specially marked. 1Federal Railways Fund, non-negotiable bearer debt securities. 3Including deposits under savings and loan
Indemnification Fund, Redemption Fund for Inherited Liabilities, ERP Special Fund, contracts. 4 Excluding deposits under savings and loan contracts (see also footnote 3). 
German Unity Fund, Equalisation of Burdens Fund. 2Including liabilities arising from

Deutsche Bundesbank
38  Monthly Report
November 2012
IV Banks
 
10 Savings deposits and bank savings bonds of banks (MFIs) in Germany sold to non-banks (non-MFIs)*
 
 
€ billion
Savings deposits 1 Bank savings bonds 3  , sold to
of residents of non-residents domestic non-banks
at three months’ at more than three Memo
notice months’ notice item of which
Interest With
of which of which of which credited maturities
Special Special At three on of more
savings savings savings non-banks, than foreign months’
Period Total Total Total Total Total notice deposits total Total 2 years facilities 2 facilities 2 non-banks
End of year or month*
 
2009 604.1 594.5 474.5 379.4 120.0 112.1 9.6 7.0 13.8 118.8 103.2 68.3 15.6
2010 628.2 618.2 512.5 412.3 105.7 96.6 9.9 7.7 10.9 113.1 95.4 70.5 17.7
2011 626.3 616.1 515.3 413.7 100.8 91.3 10.2 7.8 10.0 122.5 104.8 74.6 17.7
2012          May 627.6 617.1 519.5 415.3 97.6 87.1 10.5 8.0 0.3 119.7 102.0 73.3 17.7
         June 626.7 616.1 519.4 414.6 96.6 86.1 10.6 8.1 0.3 118.8 101.3 73.0 17.5
         July 626.6 615.9 520.2 414.4 95.7 85.1 10.7 8.1 0.4 117.9 100.3 72.5 17.6
         Aug 626.0 615.4 521.0 414.7 94.3 83.6 10.7 8.1 0.4 116.6 99.1 72.0 17.5
         Sep 624.8 614.1 521.4 414.1 92.8 81.8 10.6 8.1 0.3 115.3 97.9 71.5 17.4
Changes*
2010 + 24.3 + 24.0 + 38.3 + 33.1 − 14.3 − 15.5 + 0.3 + 0.6 . − 1.2 − 3.3 + 6.7 + 2.1
2011 − 2.4 − 2.6 + 1.3 + 0.2 − 3.9 − 4.3 + 0.2 + 0.1 . + 9.4 + 9.3 + 4.0 + 0.2
2012          May − 0.7 − 0.8 + 0.0 − 0.2 − 0.8 − 1.2 + 0.1 + 0.1 . − 0.2 − 0.5 − 0.2 + 0.3
         June − 0.9 − 1.1 − 0.1 − 0.7 − 1.0 − 1.0 + 0.1 + 0.1 . − 0.9 − 0.7 − 0.3 − 0.2
         July − 0.1 − 0.2 + 0.7 − 0.1 − 0.9 − 1.0 + 0.0 + 0.0 . − 0.9 − 1.1 − 0.5 + 0.1
         Aug − 0.5 − 0.5 + 0.9 + 0.2 − 1.4 − 1.6 − 0.0 + 0.0 . − 1.3 − 1.1 − 0.5 − 0.2
         Sep − 1.3 − 1.2 + 0.3 − 0.6 − 1.6 − 1.7 − 0.0 − 0.0 . − 1.3 − 1.2 − 0.5 − 0.1
*See Table IV.2, footnote*; statistical breaks have been eliminated from the changes. as time deposits. 2Savings deposits bearing interest at a rate which exceeds the
The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as provisional. Subsequent minimum or basic rate of interest. 3Including liabilities arising from non-negotiable
revisions, which appear in the following Monthly Report, are not specially bearer debt securities. 
marked. 1Excluding deposits under savings and loan contracts, which are classified
 
  
11 Debt securities and money market paper outstanding of banks (MFIs) in Germany
*
 
€ billion
Negotiable bearer debt securities and money market paper Non-negotiable
bearer debt
of which securities and
money market
with maturities of paper 6 Subordinated
up to more than 1 year up to
and including 1 year of which and including 2 years
with
Certifi- of which of which non- maturities
Floating Zero Foreign cates without without more of more negotiable negotiable
rate coupon currency of a nominal a nominal than than debt debt
Total bonds 1 deposit Total Total 2 years Total 2 years securities securities bonds 1,2 bonds 3,4 guarantee 5 guarantee 5 
Period
End of year or month*
 
2009 1,529.8 380.6 43.9 317.4 70.4 115.9 . 105.8 . 1,308.2 0.9 0.6 46.1 1.8
2010 1,435.1 342.0 40.7 366.5 82.8 97.0 4.6 56.8 6.5 1,281.4 0.7 0.6 43.9 1.5
2011 1,375.4 352.6 37.2 373.9 75.3 95.2 3.0 53.6 4.5 1,226.6 0.6 0.4 43.2 1.5
2012          May 1,340.8 357.5 35.8 384.5 67.4 87.2 3.4 52.9 5.1 1,200.7 0.3 0.3 39.8 1.3
         June 1,329.9 355.0 36.4 380.5 68.5 89.2 3.2 51.5 4.8 1,189.2 0.3 0.3 39.4 1.3
         July 1,339.7 358.7 35.8 395.5 73.0 94.2 3.3 54.2 5.0 1,191.2 0.3 0.3 39.1 1.3
         Aug 1,323.7 356.9 33.5 384.0 68.6 86.3 3.3 53.7 4.7 1,183.7 0.3 0.3 38.9 1.3
         Sep 1,310.8 357.9 32.5 376.0 63.8 81.6 3.1 52.0 4.6 1,177.2 0.3 0.3 38.8 1.3
Changes*
2010 − 94.2 − 37.5 + 3.2 + 49.1 + 12.4 − 18.8 . − 48.9 . − 26.4 − 0.2 − 0.0 − 2.1 − 0.3
2011 − 59.0 + 10.6 − 5.2 + 8.4 − 7.5 − 2.1 − 1.6 − 2.9 − 2.0 − 54.0 − 0.0 − 0.2 − 0.8 − 0.0
2012          May + 6.1 + 0.8 + 2.0 + 15.3 + 0.0 + 1.7 + 0.1 − 0.9 + 0.1 + 5.4 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.0 + 0.0
         June − 10.9 − 2.5 + 0.6 − 4.0 + 1.1 + 2.0 − 0.2 − 1.4 − 0.3 − 11.5 + 0.0 + 0.0 − 0.3 − 0.0
         July + 9.8 + 3.7 − 0.6 + 15.0 + 4.4 + 5.1 + 0.2 + 2.7 + 0.2 + 2.0 + 0.0 + 0.0 − 0.3 + 0.0
         Aug − 16.0 − 1.8 − 2.4 − 11.5 − 4.4 − 7.9 − 0.1 − 0.5 − 0.3 − 7.5 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.2 − 0.0         Sep − 12.9 − 0.6 − 1.0 − 7.8 − 4.8 − 4.8 − 0.2 − 1.8 − 0.3 − 6.4 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.1 − 0.0
*See Table IV.2, footnote*; statistical breaks have been eliminated from the coupon bonds denominated in foreign currencies. 4Bonds denominated in
changes. The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as provisional. non-euro-area currencies. 5Negotiable bearer debt securities respectively money
Subsequent revisions, which appear in the following Monthly Report, are not market paper with a nominal guarantee of less than 100%. 6Non-negotiable
specially marked. 1Including debt securities denominated in foreign bearer debt securities are classified among bank savings bonds (see also Table IV.10,
currencies. 2Issue value when floated. 3Including floating rate notes and zero footnote 2). 

Deutsche Bundesbank
39  Monthly Report
November 2012
IV  Banks
  
12 Building  and  loan  associations (MFIs) in Germany *)
Interim statements
  
€ billion
Lending to banks (MFIs) Lending to non-banks (non-MFIs)
Deposits of banks Deposits of non-
(MFIs) 5 banks (non-MFIs)
Credit Building loans Secur- Memo
bal- item ities (in-
ances cluding Bearer New
and Loans Treasury Deposits Deposits debt Capital con-
Num- loans under bills under under secur- (includ- tractsber (ex- Bank savings Interim and savings savings ities ing pub- enteredof Balance cluding debt and loan and Other Treasury and loan Sight and loan Sight and out- lished into in
End of sheet building Building secur- con- bridging building discount con- and time con- time de- stand- re- year or associ-
year/month ations loans 
2 ities 3 tracts loans loans tracts deposits tracts posits 6 ing month 8 total 13 loans) 1 paper) 4 serves) 7 
All  building  and  loan  associations
2011 23 197.5 41.4 0.0 17.6 27.1 74.2 15.9 13.0 0.7 22.8 136.7 6.9 5.4 8.3 99.2
2012          July 23 199.2 42.1 0.0 17.3 25.6 76.3 15.9 14.1 0.8 22.1 138.7 6.4 5.4 8.6 9.1
         Aug 23 199.5 42.3 0.0 17.4 25.3 76.7 15.9 14.1 0.8 22.0 138.9 6.4 5.4 8.6 8.5
         Sep 23 200.0 42.1 0.0 17.5 25.0 77.2 15.9 14.3 0.9 21.7 139.3 6.4 5.3 8.6 7.9
Private  building  and  Ioan  associations
  
2012          July 13 142.6 24.7 0.0 11.8 17.0 60.7 14.0 7.5 0.5 19.1 91.7 6.3 5.4 5.7 5.8
         Aug 13 142.8 24.8 0.0 11.8 16.8 61.0 14.0 7.5 0.5 19.1 91.8 6.3 5.4 5.7 5.5         Sep 13 143.0 24.7 0.0 11.8 16.6 61.3 14.0 7.6 0.6 18.7 92.1 6.3 5.3 5.7 5.0
Public  building  and  Ioan  associations
  
2012          July 10 56.6 17.5 0.0 5.5 8.7 15.6 1.9 6.6 0.3 2.9 47.0 0.1 − 2.9 3.3
         Aug 10 56.7 17.5 0.0 5.6 8.5 15.7 1.9 6.6 0.3 2.9 47.1 0.1 − 2.9 3.1         Sep 10 57.0 17.5 0.0 5.7 8.4 15.9 1.9 6.7 0.3 2.9 47.2 0.1 − 2.9 2.9
Trends in building and loan association business
  
€ billion
Changes in deposits Capital promised
Capital disbursed Disbursement Interest and
under savings and commitments repayments
loan contracts Allocations outstanding at received on
end of period building loans 10 
Deposits under Loans under
Repay- savings and savings andments loan contracts loan contracts 
9 Newly
Interest of granted
credited interim deposits of which of which
on under Applied Applied and ofwhich of Memo Amounts deposits
cancelled to settle- to settle- bridging
under savings of ment of ment of loans Under which item paid intosavings savings and which interim interim and alloc- Repay- Housing
and and loan loan Net and and other ated ments bonuses
loan ac- con- con- alloca- bridging bridging building con- during re-
Period tracts tracts Total Total Total loans Total loans loans Total tracts Total quarter counts 
9 tions 11 ceived 12 
All  building  and  loan  associations
2011 27.6 2.5 6.1 46.2 31.0 40.9 18.1 4.4 8.2 4.1 14.6 12.1 7.5 11.0 9.3 0.5
2012          July 2.3 0.0 0.6 4.6 2.7 3.8 1.6 0.4 0.6 0.3 1.5 13.4 7.7 1.1 0.0
         Aug 2.4 0.0 0.5 4.2 2.6 3.6 1.6 0.4 0.6 0.3 1.5 13.4 7.7 1.0 0.0
         Sep 2.3 0.0 0.5 3.7 2.4 3.2 1.4 0.3 0.5 0.3 1.3 13.4 7.7 1.0 ... 0.0
Private  building  and  Ioan  associations
  
2012          July 1.5 0.0 0.3 3.4 1.9 2.8 1.2 0.3 0.4 0.2 1.2 8.8 4.2 0.7 0.0
         Aug 1.5 0.0 0.3 3.0 1.7 2.7 1.1 0.3 0.4 0.3 1.1 8.8 4.2 0.7 0.0
         Sep 1.5 0.0 0.2 2.6 1.5 2.3 1.0 0.2 0.4 0.2 1.0 8.8 4.2 0.7 ... 0.0
Public  building  and  Ioan  associations
  
2012          July 0.8 0.0 0.3 1.2 0.9 1.0 0.5 0.1 0.2 0.1 0.3 4.6 3.5 0.3 0.0
         Aug 0.8 0.0 0.3 1.2 0.8 0.9 0.4 0.1 0.2 0.1 0.3 4.6 3.5 0.3 0.0
         Sep 0.8 0.0 0.3 1.1 0.8 0.9 0.4 0.1 0.2 0.1 0.3 4.6 3.5 0.3 ... 0.0
*Excluding assets and liabilities and/or transactions of foreign branches. The figures general banking risks. 8Total amount covered by the contracts; only contracts newly
for the latest date are always to be regarded as provisional. Subsequent revisions, entered into, for which the contract fee has been fully paid. Increases in the sumwhich appear in the following Monthly Report, are not specially marked. 1Including contracted count as new contracts. 9For disbursements of deposits under savings
postal giro account balances, claims on building and loan associations, claims arising and loan contracts arising from the allocation of contracts see “Capitalfrom registered debt securities and central bank credit balances. 2Loans under disbursed“. 10Including housing bonuses credited. 11Only allocations accepted by
savings and loan contracts and interim and bridging loans. 3Including money market the beneficiaries; including allocations applied to settlement of interim and bridging
paper and small amounts of other securities issued by banks. 4Including equalisation loans. 12The amounts already credited to the accounts of savers or borrowers are
claims. 5Including liabilities to building and loan associations. 6Including small also included in “Amounts paid into savings and loan accounts“ and “Interest and
amounts of savings deposits. 7Including participation rights capital and fund for repayments received on building loans“. 13 See Table IV.2, footnote 1. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
40  Monthly Report
November 2012
IV  Banks
  
13 Assets and liabilities of the foreign branches and foreign subsidiaries of German banks (MFIs) *
  
  
€ billion
Number of Lending to banks (MFIs) Lending to non-banks (non-MFIs) Other  assets 7 
Loans Credit  balances and loans
German   
banks(MFIs)   with of which
foreign foreign Derivative
branches Money Money financial
branches  1 
and/or and/or market to to market instruments
foreign foreign Balance paper, German foreign paper, in the
subsi- subsi- sheet German Foreign secur- non- non- secur- trading
Period diaries diaries total 7 Total Total banks banks Total Total banks banks ities  2 Total portfolio ities 2,3 
Foreign  branches End of year or month *
  
2009 51 211 1,461.6 579.2 539.1 210.1 328.9 40.2 691.5 534.7 20.7 514.0 156.7 190.9 −
2010 55 212 2,226.3 591.4 564.8 232.0 332.8 26.6 696.7 532.5 27.5 505.0 164.2 938.2 633.9
2011 56 209 2,316.6 603.9 584.9 199.1 385.8 19.0 642.5 504.3 23.2 481.0 138.2 1,070.2 885.0
2011          Nov 56 210 2,291.2 576.4 555.1 181.5 373.6 21.4 683.5 541.5 23.8 517.7 142.0 1,031.3 853.4
         Dec 56 209 2,316.6 603.9 584.9 199.1 385.8 19.0 642.5 504.3 23.2 481.0 138.2 1,070.2 885.0
2012          Jan 56 211 2,336.3 632.7 614.4 223.4 391.0 18.3 668.0 529.0 22.9 506.1 139.0 1,035.7 836.8
         Feb 56 211 2,328.3 653.0 634.6 212.3 422.4 18.4 655.2 518.8 21.9 496.8 136.4 1,020.1 797.4
         Mar 56 210 2,136.4 599.7 582.5 228.0 354.4 17.2 634.4 499.0 21.4 477.6 135.4 902.3 735.2
         Apr 56 210 2,196.8 620.2 603.7 226.4 377.2 16.6 635.4 502.9 21.8 481.1 132.4 941.2 756.9
         May 57 211 2,428.5 641.2 625.1 214.9 410.2 16.0 663.7 529.8 22.0 507.8 133.9 1,123.6 937.5
         June 57 209 2,203.8 576.6 561.4 199.1 362.3 15.2 623.2 490.3 21.0 469.3 132.9 1,004.0 829.9
         July 57 211 2,271.3 542.7 527.5 194.1 333.4 15.3 638.6 505.2 21.2 484.0 133.4 1,089.9 883.1
         Aug 57 210 2,206.0 539.7 524.2 192.0 332.2 15.5 614.0 483.8 19.8 464.1 130.2 1,052.3 811.7
Changes *
2010 + 4 + 1 + 695.5 − 8.7 + 5.5 + 21.9 − 16.4 − 14.2 − 36.3 − 35.6 + 6.8 − 42.4 − 0.7 + 740.6 −
2011 + 1 − 3 + 56.9 − 4.6 + 3.2 − 32.9 + 36.2 − 7.9 − 68.9 − 40.9 − 4.3 − 36.7 − 28.0 + 130.4 + 251.0
2011          Dec − − 1 − 0.9 + 16.0 + 18.6 + 17.6 + 0.9 − 2.6 − 54.6 − 48.4 − 0.6 − 47.8 − 6.2 + 37.6 + 31.6
2012          Jan − + 2 + 30.1 + 33.9 + 34.5 + 24.3 + 10.2 − 0.6 + 30.3 + 28.6 − 0.3 + 28.9 + 1.7 − 34.1 − 48.2
         Feb − − + 8.7 + 27.5 + 27.4 − 11.1 + 38.5 + 0.1 − 4.3 − 3.3 − 1.0 − 2.3 − 1.0 − 14.5 − 39.3
         Mar − − 1 − 196.1 − 55.0 − 53.8 + 15.8 − 69.6 − 1.2 − 23.0 − 21.7 − 0.5 − 21.2 − 1.3 − 118.1 − 62.2
         Apr − − + 50.3 + 16.9 + 17.6 − 1.6 + 19.2 − 0.7 − 4.8 − 0.8 + 0.4 − 1.2 − 4.0 + 38.2 + 21.7
         May − + 1 + 188.8 + 1.8 + 2.6 − 11.5 + 14.1 − 0.8 + 7.7 + 10.1 + 0.2 + 9.9 − 2.4 + 179.2 + 180.6
         June − − 2 − 213.5 − 59.5 − 58.7 − 15.8 − 42.9 − 0.8 − 35.1 − 35.1 − 1.0 − 34.1 + 0.0 − 118.9 − 107.6
         July − + 2 + 48.4 − 41.8 − 41.7 − 5.0 − 36.7 − 0.1 + 5.6 + 6.9 + 0.2 + 6.6 − 1.3 + 84.6 + 53.2
         Aug − − 1 − 48.4 + 3.9 + 3.6 − 2.1 + 5.7 + 0.3 − 15.9 − 14.3 − 1.4 − 12.8 − 1.6 − 36.4 − 71.5
    
Foreign  subsidiaries End of year or month *
  
2009 36 97 474.1 205.4 157.0 87.4 69.6 48.4 217.0 154.7 38.7 115.9 62.4 51.7 −
2010 37 93 495.1 220.9 178.7 98.8 79.9 42.1 218.3 168.8 37.7 131.2 49.5 55.9 −
2011 35 87 478.6 210.3 172.8 95.3 77.5 37.5 210.5 165.1 35.6 129.5 45.5 57.7 −
2011          Nov 35 88 491.6 225.4 188.8 107.2 81.6 36.6 212.1 167.0 36.6 130.3 45.1 54.1 −
         Dec 35 87 478.6 210.3 172.8 95.3 77.5 37.5 210.5 165.1 35.6 129.5 45.5 57.7 −
2012          Jan 35 86 472.7 208.2 171.5 92.6 78.9 36.7 212.0 165.8 35.0 130.8 46.2 52.4 −
         Feb 35 86 470.0 209.8 174.1 93.7 80.4 35.7 210.1 164.2 34.3 129.8 45.9 50.1 −
         Mar 35 86 464.5 208.7 175.0 95.9 79.1 33.7 210.5 165.3 34.1 131.1 45.2 45.3 −
         Apr 35 86 471.1 210.1 176.6 96.7 79.9 33.5 210.0 164.8 33.9 130.9 45.2 51.0 −
         May 35 85 473.4 209.0 178.3 96.3 82.0 30.7 213.7 168.2 34.3 133.9 45.5 50.7 −
         June 35 85 468.8 208.6 177.6 97.4 80.2 31.0 209.5 165.3 33.7 131.7 44.2 50.7 −
         July 35 85 475.8 210.8 179.1 98.3 80.9 31.6 212.5 167.7 33.3 134.3 44.8 52.5 −
         Aug 35 86 468.1 207.2 175.3 97.7 77.6 32.0 207.6 163.7 32.8 130.9 43.9 53.2 −
Changes *
2010 + 1 − 4 + 9.2 + 9.0 + 17.8 + 11.4 + 6.4 − 8.8 − 3.8 + 9.2 − 1.1 + 10.3 − 12.9 + 3.9 −
2011 − 2 − 6 − 20.1 − 12.2 − 7.2 − 3.5 − 3.7 − 5.0 − 9.6 − 5.5 − 2.1 − 3.4 − 4.0 + 1.6 −
2011          Dec − − 1 − 16.2 − 16.6 − 17.1 − 11.9 − 5.2 + 0.5 − 3.1 − 3.3 − 1.1 − 2.3 + 0.3 + 3.4 −
2012          Jan − − 1 − 4.7 − 1.4 − 0.8 − 2.7 + 1.9 − 0.6 + 1.9 + 1.2 − 0.6 + 1.8 + 0.7 − 5.2 −
         Feb − − − 0.8 + 2.5 + 3.2 + 1.1 + 2.1 − 0.7 − 1.1 − 0.8 − 0.7 − 0.2 − 0.3 − 2.2 −
         Mar − − − 6.0 − 1.4 + 0.6 + 2.2 − 1.5 − 2.1 + 0.2 + 0.9 − 0.2 + 1.1 − 0.7 − 4.8 −
         Apr − − + 5.5 + 0.9 + 1.3 + 0.9 + 0.4 − 0.4 − 1.0 − 1.0 − 0.2 − 0.8 + 0.0 + 5.6 −
         May − − 1 − 2.9 − 3.8 − 0.2 − 0.5 + 0.2 − 3.6 + 1.4 + 1.1 + 0.5 + 0.7 + 0.2 − 0.5 −
         June − − − 3.2 + 0.2 − 0.2 + 1.1 − 1.4 + 0.5 − 3.5 − 2.2 − 0.7 − 1.6 − 1.2 + 0.0 −
         July − − + 4.6 + 1.0 + 0.7 + 0.9 − 0.2 + 0.3 + 1.9 + 1.3 − 0.3 + 1.6 + 0.6 + 1.8 −
         Aug − + 1 − 5.5 − 2.4 − 3.0 − 0.6 − 2.5 + 0.6 − 3.9 − 3.0 − 0.5 − 2.5 − 0.9 + 0.8 −
*In this table “foreign“ also includes the country of domicile of the foreign branches the flow figures for the foreign subsidiaries.) The figures for the latest date are
and foreign subsidiaries. Statistical revisions have been eliminated from the changes. always to be regarded as provisional; subsequent revisions, which appear in the(Breaks owing to changes in the reporting population have not been eliminated from following Monthly Report, are not specially marked. 1Several branches in a given

Deutsche Bundesbank
41  Monthly Report
November 2012
IV  Banks
  
      
  
Deposits Other  liabilities 6,7 
of banks (MFIs) of non-banks (non-MFIs)
German non-banks 4 
Money
market of whichpaper Derivativeand debt financial
Medium Working instruments
securities
and out- capital in the
German Foreign Short- long- Foreign stand- and own trading
Total Total banks Total Total term term ing 5 funds Total portfolio   Period banks non-banks
End of year or month * Foreign  branches
  
1,125.9 798.0 449.6 348.4 327.9 37.4 33.8 3.5 290.5 157.5 33.9 144.4 − 2009
1,131.3 751.9 398.2 353.7 379.4 44.9 39.2 5.7 334.5 187.1 34.7 873.3 648.7 20101,179.6 814.0 406.6 407.4 365.6 35.9 30.3 5.6 329.7 141.2 38.6 957.2 880.2 2011
1,172.8 782.0 403.3 378.7 390.8 36.9 31.3 5.6 353.9 141.3 38.3 938.8 843.1 2011          Nov 
1,179.6 814.0 406.6 407.4 365.6 35.9 30.3 5.6 329.7 141.2 38.6 957.2 880.2          Dec 
1,247.4 873.2 439.0 434.2 374.1 35.1 29.3 5.8 339.0 140.8 38.5 909.7 828.8 2012          Jan 
1,265.7 870.1 413.4 456.7 395.6 32.7 25.9 6.9 362.9 140.2 38.8 883.6 792.4          Feb 1,142.3 796.3 397.5 398.8 345.9 31.0 24.2 6.8 314.9 146.3 38.9 809.0 730.4          Mar 
1,180.1 803.8 384.7 419.1 376.4 31.1 24.3 6.8 345.3 147.6 38.9 830.1 753.1          Apr 
1,224.1 837.7 384.0 453.8 386.4 30.3 23.5 6.8 356.1 151.8 39.3 1,013.3 937.1          May1,114.9 762.5 366.5 395.9 352.5 30.3 23.5 6.8 322.1 141.3 38.9 908.7 829.5          June
1,124.7 752.0 375.1 376.9 372.7 29.3 22.0 7.3 343.4 146.6 39.3 960.8 880.1          July
1,112.1 765.5 373.3 392.2 346.6 26.8 19.6 7.3 319.8 143.0 39.1 911.8 813.1          Aug 
Changes *
− 34.9 − 65.3 − 50.8 − 14.5 + 30.3 + 7.5 + 5.4 + 2.2 + 22.8 + 29.7 + 0.8 + 700.0 − 2010
+ 27.0 + 50.1 + 8.4 + 41.7 − 23.1 − 9.0 − 8.9 − 0.0 − 14.2 − 45.8 + 3.9 + 71.9 + 231.5 2011
− 11.3 + 22.6 + 3.3 + 19.3 − 33.8 − 0.9 − 1.0 + 0.0 − 32.9 − 0.1 + 0.2 + 10.2 + 37.1 2011          Dec 
+ 75.5 + 63.7 + 32.5 + 31.2 + 11.8 − 0.8 − 1.0 + 0.2 + 12.6 − 0.4 − 0.1 − 44.9 − 51.4 2012          Jan 
+ 30.7 + 4.3 − 25.6 + 29.9 + 26.4 − 2.4 − 3.5 + 1.1 + 28.8 − 0.6 + 0.3 − 21.6 − 36.4          Feb − 126.6 − 75.6 − 15.9 − 59.8 − 51.0 − 1.8 − 1.7 − 0.1 − 49.2 + 6.1 + 0.1 − 75.7 − 62.0          Mar 
+ 30.6 + 3.4 − 12.8 + 16.2 + 27.2 + 0.1 + 0.1 + 0.0 + 27.1 + 1.3 + 0.1 + 18.3 + 22.7          Apr 
+ 12.2 + 15.5 − 0.8 + 16.2 − 3.3 − 0.8 − 0.8 + 0.0 − 2.5 + 4.2 + 0.3 + 172.0 + 184.0          May− 101.0 − 70.4 − 17.4 − 53.0 − 30.6 + 0.1 + 0.0 + 0.0 − 30.6 − 10.5 − 0.4 − 101.6 − 107.6          June
− 3.6 − 17.9 + 8.5 − 26.4 + 14.3 − 1.0 − 1.5 + 0.5 + 15.3 + 5.3 + 0.4 + 46.4 + 50.6          July
− 0.5 + 20.0 − 1.8 + 21.8 − 20.5 − 2.5 − 2.5 − 0.0 − 18.0 − 3.5 − 0.1 − 44.2 − 67.0          Aug 
  
  
End of year or month * Foreign  subsidiaries
  
377.6 218.5 125.4 93.1 159.1 37.0 29.6 7.4 122.1 33.3 24.3 38.9 − 2009
387.4 221.1 136.4 84.7 166.3 31.0 23.6 7.3 135.3 28.9 31.8 46.9 − 2010377.5 229.6 142.4 87.2 147.9 26.7 19.8 6.9 121.2 25.1 30.8 45.2 − 2011
388.1 227.8 136.5 91.3 160.3 29.5 22.5 7.0 130.8 25.3 31.2 47.0 − 2011          Nov 
377.5 229.6 142.4 87.2 147.9 26.7 19.8 6.9 121.2 25.1 30.8 45.2 −          Dec 
371.2 219.7 131.9 87.8 151.5 29.0 22.1 6.9 122.4 25.0 30.1 46.4 − 2012          Jan 
368.2 215.8 129.6 86.2 152.4 28.9 22.1 6.9 123.4 24.9 30.6 46.4 −          Feb 
364.3 215.9 130.0 85.9 148.4 27.7 20.9 6.8 120.7 24.6 29.6 46.0 −          Mar 
370.6 222.9 129.2 93.8 147.7 26.8 19.9 6.8 121.0 24.5 29.3 46.6 −          Apr 
369.0 224.5 128.9 95.6 144.6 26.0 19.0 7.0 118.5 25.2 31.3 47.8 −          May
366.0 218.3 126.8 91.5 147.7 27.5 20.5 6.9 120.2 24.1 31.8 47.0 −          June
368.7 218.3 125.1 93.2 150.4 26.0 19.0 7.0 124.4 24.7 32.1 50.3 −          July
358.9 211.6 124.4 87.1 147.3 24.7 17.7 7.0 122.6 24.8 33.5 50.9 −          Aug 
Changes *
+ 1.5 − 1.7 + 11.0 − 12.7 + 3.2 − 6.0 − 5.9 − 0.1 + 9.2 − 4.4 + 7.5 + 4.6 − 2010
− 12.5 + 7.1 + 6.0 + 1.1 − 19.6 − 4.2 − 3.8 − 0.4 − 15.3 − 3.8 − 1.0 − 2.8 − 2011
− 13.1 + 0.6 + 5.9 − 5.4 − 13.6 − 2.7 − 2.6 − 0.1 − 10.9 − 0.2 − 0.4 − 2.6 − 2011          Dec 
− 5.2 − 9.3 − 10.5 + 1.2 + 4.2 + 2.3 + 2.3 + 0.0 + 1.9 − 0.1 − 0.8 + 1.4 − 2012          Jan 
− 1.7 − 3.2 − 2.3 − 0.9 + 1.5 − 0.1 − 0.0 − 0.1 + 1.6 − 0.1 + 0.5 + 0.5 −          Feb 
− 4.2 − 0.1 + 0.4 − 0.5 − 4.2 − 1.2 − 1.2 − 0.0 − 2.9 − 0.2 − 1.1 − 0.5 −          Mar 
+ 5.6 + 6.6 − 0.8 + 7.4 − 1.0 − 0.9 − 1.0 + 0.0 − 0.1 − 0.1 − 0.3 + 0.3 −          Apr 
− 5.9 − 0.8 − 0.3 − 0.4 − 5.1 − 0.7 − 0.9 + 0.1 − 4.4 + 0.7 + 2.1 + 0.3 −          May
− 2.0 − 5.6 − 2.1 − 3.5 + 3.5 + 1.5 + 1.5 − 0.0 + 2.1 − 1.1 + 0.5 − 0.5 −          June
+ 0.9 − 1.0 − 1.7 + 0.7 + 1.9 − 1.4 − 1.5 + 0.1 + 3.3 + 0.7 + 0.3 + 2.8 −          July
− 8.1 − 5.8 − 0.7 − 5.1 − 2.3 − 1.3 − 1.3 − 0.0 − 1.0 + 0.1 + 1.4 + 1.1 −          Aug 
country of domicile are regarded as a single branch. 2Treasury bills, Treasury securities. 5Issues of negotiable and non-negotiable debt securities and money
discount paper and other money market paper, debt securities. 3Including own debt market paper. 6 Including subordinated liabilities. 7 See also Table IV.2, footnote  1. 
securities. 4Excluding subordinated liabilities and non-negotiable debt

Deutsche Bundesbank
42  Monthly Report
November 2012
V  Minimum reserves
 
1  Reserve ratios
Germany Euro area
 
% of liabilities subject to reserve requirements % of reserve base  1 
Sight Time
Applicable from liabilities liabilities Savings deposits Applicable from Ratio
1995  Aug 1 2    2    1.5    1999  Jan 1 2    
 2012  Jan 18 1    
 
  
1Article 3 of the Regulation of the European Central Bank on the application of
minimum reserves (excluding liabilities to which a reserve ratio of 0% applies pur-
suant to Article 4 (1)). 
 
  
2  Reserve maintenance in Germany up to the end of 1998
− pursuant to the Minimum Reserves Order of the Bundesbank 
 
DM million
Liabilities subject to reserve requirements Excess reserves 4 
Monthly Required % of the
average 1 Total Sight liabilities Time liabilities Savings deposits reserves  2 Level Deficiencies Actual reserves 3 required  reserves
1995          Dec 2,066,565 579,337 519,456 967,772 36,492 37,337 845 2.3 3.1
1996          Dec 2,201,464 655,483 474,342 1,071,639 38,671 39,522 851 2.2 4.3
1997          Dec 2,327,879 734,986 476,417 1,116,477 40,975 41,721 745 1.8 3.3
1998          Dec 2,576,889 865,444 564,878 1,146,567 45,805 46,432 627 1.4 3.8
1Pursuant to sections 5 to 7 of the Minimum Reserves Order. 2Amount after tutions subject to reserve requirements on their giro accounts at the Bundesbank.
applying the reserve ratios to the liabilities subject to reserve requirements (section 5 4 Actual reserves less required reserves. 
(1) of the Minimum Reserves Order). 3Average credit balances of the credit insti-
  
3  Reserve maintenance in the euro area
− from 1999, pursuant to the ECB Regulation on the application of minimum reserves in accordance with
Article 19.1 of the Statute of the ESCB 
 
Maintenance Required reserves
period before deduction Required reserves
beginning in 1 of lump-sum Lump-sum after deduction of
Reserve base 2 allowance 3 allowance 4 lump-sum allowance Current account 5 Excess reserves 6 Deficiencies 7 
Euro area (€ billion)
 
2012          Mar 10,585.8 105.9 0.5 105.4 109.6 4.3 0.0
         Apr 10,571.3 105.7 0.5 105.2 110.5 5.3 0.0
         May 10,707.2 107.1 0.5 106.6 110.8 4.2 0.0
         June 10,739.9 107.4 0.5 106.9 111.5 4.6 0.0
         July 10,747.7 107.5 0.5 107.0 510.2 403.2 0.0
         Aug 10,761.1 107.6 0.5 107.1 540.0 432.9 0.0
         Sep  p 10,750.6 107.5 0.5 107.0 538.1 431.1 0.0
         Oct  p 10,691.7 106.9 0.5 106.4 ... ... ...
         Nov ... ... ... ... ... ... ...
Of which:  Germany (€ million)
2012          Mar 2,771,416 27,714 183 27,531 28,782 1,251 1
         Apr 2,792,741 27,927 183 27,745 28,917 1,172 0
         May 2,830,635 28,306 183 28,124 29,330 1,206 4
         June 2,854,770 28,548 183 28,365 29,610 1,245 1
         July 2,861,640 28,616 182 28,434 184,846 156,412 1
         Aug 2,876,772 28,768 182 28,586 195,203 166,617 1
         Sep 2,881,887 28,819 181 28,638 189,857 161,219 0
         Oct  p 2,903,312 29,033 181 28,852 ... ... ...
         Nov  p 2,873,537 28,735 181 28,555 ... ... ...
1From March 2004, the reserve maintenance period will start on the settlement day to the reserve base. 4Article 5 (2) of the Regulation of the European Central Bank on
of the main refinancing operation immediately following the meeting of the the application of minimum reserves. 5Average credit balances of the credit insti-
Governing Council of the ECB for which the monthly discussion of the monetary tutions at the national central banks. 6Average credit balances less required reserves
policy stance is scheduled. 2Article 3 of the Regulation of the European Central Bank after deduction of the lump-sum allowance. 7Required reserves after deduction of
on the application of minimum reserves (excluding liabilities to which a reserve ratio the lump-sum allowance. 
of 0% applies, pursuant to Article 4 (1)). 3Amount after applying the reserve ratios

Deutsche Bundesbank
43  Monthly Report
November 2012
VI Interest rates
 
1 ECB interest rates 2 Base rates
 
 
% per annum % per annum
Main refinancing Main refinancing
operations operations Base Base
Mar- Mar- rate rate
ginal ginal as per as per Minimum Minimum
Applicable Deposit Fixed bid lending Applicable Deposit Fixed bid lending Applicable Civil Applicable Civil
from facility rate rate facility from facility rate rate facility from Code  1 from Code 1 
2005 Dec                  6 1.25 − 2.25 3.25 2009 Jan                21 1.00 2.00 − 3.00 2002 Jan                1 2.57 2007 Jan                1 2.70
         Mar                11 0.50 1.50 − 2.50          July                1 2.47          July                1 3.19
2006 Mar                  8 1.50 − 2.50 3.50          Apr                  8 0.25 1.25 − 2.25         June                15 1.75 − 2.75 3.75          May                13 0.25 1.00 − 1.75 2003 Jan                1 1.97 2008 Jan                1 3.32         Aug                  9 2.00 − 3.00 4.00          July                1 1.22          July                1 3.19
         Oct                11 2.25 − 3.25 4.25 2011 Apr                13 0.50 1.25 − 2.00         Dec                13 2.50 − 3.50 4.50          July                13 0.75 1.50 − 2.25 2004 Jan                1 1.14 2009 Jan                1 1.62
         Nov                  9 0.50 1.25 − 2.00          July                1 1.13          July                1 0.12
2007 Mar                14 2.75 − 3.75 4.75          Dez                14 0.25 1.00 − 1.75         June                13 3.00 − 4.00 5.00 2005 Jan                1 1.21 2011 July                1 0.37
2012 July                11 0.00 0.75 − 1.50          July                1 1.17
2008 July                  9 3.25 − 4.25 5.25 2012 Jan                1 0.12
         Oct                  8 2.75 − 3.75 4.75 2006 Jan                1 1.37
         Oct                  9 3.25 3.75 − 4.25          July                1 1.95
         Nov                12 2.75 3.25 − 3.75         Dec                10 2.00 2.50 − 3.00
1 Pursuant to section 247 of the Civil Code.  
 
  
3 Eurosystem monetary policy operations allotted through tenders 
*
 
 
Fixed rate tenders Variable rate tenders
Bid Allotment Minimum Weighted
amount amount Fixed rate bid rate Marginal rate  1 average rate
Date of Running for
settlement € million % per annum ...days
Main refinancing operations
2012 Oct                10 89,783 89,783 0.75−−−7
         Oct                17 91,813 91,813 0.75−−−7
         Oct                24 77,293 77,293 0.75−−−7
         Oct                31 83,730 83,730 0.75−−−7
         Nov                 7 79,474 79,474 0.75−−−7
         Nov                14 75,214 75,214 0.75−−−7
Longer-term refinancing operations
2012 Sep                27 18,709 18,709 2 ... − − − 84
         Oct                10 12,829 12,829 0.75−−− 3 5
         Nov                 1 6,156 6,156 2 ... − − − 91
         Nov                14 15,926 15,926 0.75−−− 2 8
*Source: ECB. 1Lowest or highest interest rate at which funds were allotted or average minimum bid rate of the main refinancing operations over the life of this
collected. 2Interest payment on the maturity date; the rate will be fixed at the operation. 
 
  
4 Money market rates, by month 
*
 
 
% per annum
EONIA Swap Index 2 EURIBOR 3 
Monthly One-week One-month Three-month Six-month One-week One-month Three-month Six-month Twelve-month Twelve-month
average EONIA 1 funds funds funds funds funds funds funds funds funds funds
2012          Apr 0.35 0.35 0.35 0.34 0.34 0.34 0.32 0.41 0.74 1.04 1.37
         May 0.34 0.34 0.33 0.30 0.28 0.27 0.32 0.39 0.68 0.97 1.27         June 0.33 0.33 0.30 0.25 0.23 0.22 0.32 0.38 0.66 0.93 1.22
         July 0.18 0.15 0.14 0.12 0.11 0.11 0.16 0.22 0.50 0.78 1.06
         Aug 0.11 0.11 0.10 0.07 0.05 0.05 0.09 0.13 0.33 0.61 0.88         Sep 0.10 0.10 0.10 0.08 0.06 0.07 0.09 0.12 0.25 0.48 0.74
         Oct 0.09 0.09 0.09 0.09 0.08 0.08 0.08 0.11 0.21 0.41 0.65
*Averages are Bundesbank calculations. Neither the Deutsche Bundesbank nor act/360 method and published via Reuters. 2EONIA Swap Index: published rate
anyone else can be held liable for any irregularity or inaccuracy of the EONIA rate, since 20 June 2005 by Reuters as a reference rate for euro-money market-derivatives.
the EURIBOR rate and the EONIA Swap rate. 1Euro OverNight Index Average: As a Spot-figure (T+2) it is calculated according to the act/360 method. 3Euro Inter-
weighted average overnight rate for interbank operations calculated by the European bank Offered Rate: unweighted average rate calculated by Reuters sinceCentral Bank since 4 January 1999 on the basis of real turnover according to the 30 December 1998 according to the act/360 method. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
44  Monthly Report
November 2012
VI Interest rates
 
5 Interest rates and volumes for outstanding amounts and new business of German banks (MFIs) *
(a) Outstanding amounts o
 
 
Households’ deposits Non-financial corporations’ deposits
with an agreed maturity of
up to 2 years over 2 years up to 2 years over 2 years
Effective Effective Effective Effective
End of interest rate 1 Volume 2 interest rate 1 Volume 2 interest rate 1 Volume 2 interest rate 1 Volume 2 
month % pa € million % pa € million % pa € million % pa € million
2011          Sep 1.81 134,117 2.34 222,719 1.52 109,607 3.68 24,053
         Oct 1.84 134,147 2.34 222,983 1.55 110,904 3.67 23,951
         Nov 1.87 137,615 2.33 223,747 1.53 108,388 3.64 23,470
         Dec 1.87 139,689 2.32 227,255 1.50 104,838 3.60 23,384
2012          Jan 1.86 140,362 2.32 227,974 1.43 107,611 3.59 22,576
         Feb 1.86 140,215 2.32 228,654 1.39 102,697 3.58 22,973
         Mar 1.86 140,842 2.31 229,012 1.30 99,012 3.56 22,835
         Apr 1.85 139,793 2.30 228,848 1.24 98,127 3.53 22,741
         May 1.83 139,697 2.29 229,121 1.19 96,040 3.51 22,861
         June 1.82 138,295 2.29 229,269 1.16 92,613 3.48 22,722
         July 1.79 136,532 2.28 229,047 1.09 93,203 3.46 22,303
         Aug 1.76 133,856 2.28 229,010 1.01 93,589 3.43 22,163
         Sep 1.72 131,058 2.27 228,970 0.95 90,793 3.41 21,373
 
 
Housing loans to households 3 Loans for consumption and other purposes to households  4, 5 
with a maturity of
over 1 year and over 1 year and
up to 1 year 6 up to 5 years over 5 years up to 1 year 6 up to 5 years over 5 years
Effective Effective Effective Effective Effective Effective
interest interest interest interest interest interest
End of rate 1 Volume 2 rate 1 Volume 2 rate 1 Volume 2 rate 1 Volume 2 rate 1 Volume 2 rate 1 Volume 2 
month % pa % pa % pa % pa % pa % pa € million € million € million € million € million € million
2011          Sep 4.23 5,284 3.85 27,817 4.55 934,054 8.56 65,653 5.66 74,384 5.68 313,747
         Oct 4.21 5,240 3.83 27,897 4.54 935,360 8.59 64,981 5.59 73,804 5.68 313,742
         Nov 4.22 5,165 3.81 28,069 4.53 937,366 8.52 63,648 5.56 73,789 5.66 315,187
         Dec 4.15 5,300 3.78 28,122 4.51 937,763 8.52 64,522 5.53 73,322 5.65 313,944
2012          Jan 4.09 5,137 3.75 28,154 4.49 936,543 8.48 63,374 5.52 73,596 5.62 313,820
         Feb 4.06 5,054 3.73 28,188 4.47 936,749 8.37 63,122 5.49 73,581 5.61 313,827
         Mar 4.03 5,100 3.70 28,402 4.46 937,726 8.34 64,286 5.45 73,527 5.59 313,149
         Apr 3.91 5,069 3.65 28,290 4.43 936,775 8.21 63,838 5.41 73,758 5.50 316,663
         May 3.85 5,187 3.62 28,501 4.41 938,392 8.17 63,708 5.36 74,466 5.48 317,022
         June 3.80 5,206 3.61 28,620 4.39 940,699 8.19 64,670 5.30 74,576 5.41 314,970
         July 3.70 5,302 3.57 28,775 4.37 942,529 7.99 63,767 5.28 75,103 5.39 315,554
         Aug 3.64 5,278 3.54 28,844 4.34 945,754 8.00 62,298 5.24 75,464 5.36 316,273
         Sep 3.59 5,351 3.52 28,910 4.33 948,590 7.98 63,666 5.22 75,456 5.34 314,885
  
Loans to non-financial corporations with a maturity of
up to 1 year 6 over 1 year and up to 5 years over 5 years
End of Volume 2 Volume 2 Volume 2 Effective interest rate 1 Effective interest rate 1 Effective interest rate 1 
month % pa € million % pa € million % pa € million
2011          Sep 4.16 139,120 4.03 129,919 3.98 561,294
         Oct 4.11 137,986 4.02 128,882 3.97 565,182
         Nov 4.02 139,610 3.97 128,882 3.96 566,756
         Dec 4.00 133,627 3.93 128,385 3.93 567,781
2012          Jan 3.84 136,423 3.83 127,581 3.88 569,546
         Feb 3.69 139,689 3.72 126,323 3.86 571,604
         Mar 3.64 141,139 3.61 126,677 3.79 571,433
         Apr 3.50 140,151 3.51 125,928 3.73 569,972
         May 3.46 140,062 3.46 126,583 3.70 572,592
         June 3.48 141,449 3.41 126,567 3.66 573,352
         July 3.35 140,569 3.32 126,973 3.60 576,961
         Aug 3.26 138,764 3.29 126,115 3.56 578,675
         Sep 3.26 142,542 3.21 125,674 3.51 577,371
*The MFI interest rate statistics are based on the interest rates applied by MFIs and interest rates or as narrowly defined effective rates. Both calculation methods cover
the related volumes of euro-denominated deposits and loans to households and non- all interest payments on deposits and loans but not any other related charges which
financial corporations domiciled in the euro area. The household sector comprises may occur for enquiries, administration, preparation of the documents, guaranteesindividuals (including sole proprietors) and non-profit institutions serving households. and credit insurance. 2Data based on monthly balance sheet statistics. 3Secured
Non-financial corporations include all enterprises other than insurance companies, and unsecured loans for home purchase, including building and home improvements;banks and other financial institutions. The interest rate statistics gathered on a including loans granted by building and loan associations and interim credits as wellharmonised basis in the euro area from January 2003 are collected in Germany on a as transmitted loans granted by the reporting agents in their own name and for theirsample basis. The most recent figures are in all cases to be regarded as provisional. own account. 4Loans for consumption are defined as loans granted for the purpose
Subsequent revisions appearing in the following Monthly Report are not specially of personal use in the consumption of goods and services. 5For the purpose of these
marked. Further information on the MFI interest rate statistics can be found on the statistics, other loans are loans granted for other purposes such as business, debtBundesbank’s website (Statistics / Reporting system / Banking statistics / MFI interest consolidation, education etc. 6Including overdrafts (see also footnotes 13 to 15
rate statistics). oThe statistics on outstanding amounts are collected at the end of p 47
   ). 
the month. 1The effective interest rates are calculated either as annualised agreed

Deutsche Bundesbank
45  Monthly Report
November 2012
VI Interest rates
 
5 Interest rates and volumes for outstanding amounts and new business of German banks (MFIs) *  (cont’d)
(b) New business +
 
 
Households’ deposits
with an agreed maturity of redeemable at notice of  8 
Overnight up to 1 year over 2 years up to 3 months over 3 months over 1 year and up to 2 years
Effective Effective Effective Effective Effective Effective
interest interest interest interest interest interest
Reporting rate 1 Volume 2 rate 1 Volume 7 rate 1 Volume 7 rate 1 Volume 7 rate 1 Volume 2 rate 1 Volume 2 
period % pa % pa % pa % pa % pa % pa € million € million € million € million € million € million
2011          Sep 0.91
729,249 1.53 18,506 2.46 1,244 2.70 1,530 1.47 509,809 1.92 103,815
         Oct 0.92 735,055 1.60 17,069 2.28 1,938 2.73 1,711 1.48 509,641 1.94 103,670
         Nov 0.91 748,146 1.57 16,851 2.17 2,261 2.83 1,934 1.43 510,106 1.94 101,829
         Dec 0.91 747,612 1.38 17,013 2.23 1,980 2.77 2,049 1.45 515,587 1.94 101,085
2012          Jan 0.89 751,235 1.50 18,304 2.30 1,724 3.03 2,422 1.43 517,814 1.94 100,172
         Feb 0.88 758,730 1.42 13,756 2.33 1,677 2.96 2,354 1.40 520,675 1.93 99,932
         Mar 0.84 761,183 1.35 14,308 2.27 1,148 2.81 2,252 1.34 521,107 1.93 99,132
         Apr 0.81 770,703 1.37 12,402 2.13 870 2.46 1,672 1.28 520,039 1.92 98,812
         May 0.79 775,639 1.26 14,178 1.99 828 2.33 1,487 1.27 519,995 1.89 98,036
         June 0.77 785,236 1.25 10,609 1.74 573 2.11 1,349 1.24 519,919 1.85 97,049
         July 0.71 791,644 1.38 13,617 2.07 1,261 2.20 1,636 1.21 520,534 1.81 96,163
         Aug 0.68 801,510 1.28 10,091 2.09 1,261 2.08 1,426 1.16 521,324 1.77 94,750
         Sep 0.64 810,476 1.29 9,216 1.98 935 2.16 1,305 1.14 521,677 1.72 93,164
 
 
Non-financial corporations’ deposits
with an agreed maturity of
Overnight up to 1 year over 1 year and up to 2 years over 2 years
Effective Effective Effective Effective
Reporting interest rate 1 Volume 2 interest rate 1 Volume 7 interest rate 1 Volume 7 interest rate 1 Volume 7 
period % pa € million % pa € million % pa € million % pa € million
2011          Sep 0.66 252,851 1.24 34,917 2.09 411 2.11 415
         Oct 0.64 257,807 1.24 36,857 2.08 621 2.31 1,363
         Nov 0.60 260,684 1.04 40,868 2.09 576 2.21 494
         Dec 0.55 267,881 1.01 41,975 2.10 766 2.36 841
2012
         Jan 0.52 255,889 0.72 39,165 2.16 520 2.29 842
         Feb 0.48 256,443 0.60 34,105 2.04 594 2.28 543
         Mar 0.46 261,558 0.63 28,015 1.94 528 2.32 531
         Apr 0.43 264,667 0.55 23,820 1.68 392 2.53 470
         May 0.42 267,293 0.48 23,443 1.59 326 1.86 512
         June 0.40 270,503 0.45 22,861 1.54 312 1.58 382
         July 0.34 280,460 0.37 21,829 1.31 638 1.70 596
         Aug 0.30 288,016 0.33 17,086 1.43 405 1.58 413
         Sep 0.29 289,877 0.27 15,215 0.85 505 2.00 225
 
 
Loans to households
Loans for other purposes to households with an initial rate fxation of  5 
of which loans to sole proprietors 10 
floating rate or over 1 year and floating rate or over 1 year and
up to 1 year 9 up to 5 years over 5 years up to 1 year  9 up to 5 years over 5 years
Effective Effective Effective Effective Effective Effectiveinterest interest interest interest interest interest
Reporting rate 
1 Volume 7 rate 1 Volume 7 rate 1 Volume 7 rate 1 Volume 7 rate 1 Volume 7 rate 1 Volume 7 
period % pa % pa % pa % pa % pa % pa € million € million € million € million € million € million
2011          Sep 3.05
4,332 4.69 1,122 4.09 2,576 3.17 2,638 4.80 854 4.07 1,556
         Oct 3.06 5,025 4.54 1,044 4.03 2,524 3.17 2,978 4.65 813 4.00 1,372
         Nov 3.04 3,631 4.59 992 3.82 2,109 3.16 2,318 4.78 785 3.76 1,336
         Dec 2.78 4,968 4.51 1,233 3.77 3,272 3.08 2,987 4.69 948 3.74 1,878
2012          Jan 2.62 5,028 4.42 1,148 3.77 2,326 2.94 2,812 4.60 886 3.71 1,482
         Feb 2.48 3,938 4.17 988 3.72 1,987 2.70 2,277 4.34 736 3.68 1,038
         Mar 2.41 4,329 4.35 1,107 3.64 2,677 2.57 2,714 4.46 877 3.59 1,531
         Apr 2.31 4,441 4.31 1,294 3.68 2,095 2.57 2,463 4.52 937 3.61 1,222
         May 2.24 3,716 4.26 1,184 3.54 2,171 2.53 2,142 4.57 798 3.48 1,178
         June 2.25 4,835 4.32 1,213 3.33 2,603 2.50 2,768 4.54 794 3.28 1,577
         July 1.97 5,557 4.07 1,450 3.27 2,930 2.56 2,929 4.21 910 3.20 1,682
         Aug 1.99 4,414 3.97 966 3.16 2,588 2.20 2,297 4.22 677 3.08 1,599
         Sep 1.94 4,454 4.19 860 3.07 2,252 2.14 2,565 4.35 589 3.02 1,399
For footnotes * and 1 to 6, see p 44  .+In the case of deposits with an agreed for the sake of simplicity. This means that all outstanding deposit and lending
maturity and all loans excluding revolving loans and overdrafts, credit card debt, new business at the end of the month has to be incorporated in the calculation of averagebusiness covers all new agreements between households or non-financial corpor- rates of interest. 7Estimated. The volume of new business is extrapolated to form
ations and the bank. The interest rates are calculated as volume-weighted average the underlying total using the Horvitz-Thompson estimator. 8Including non-financial
rates of all new agreements concluded during the reporting month. In the case of corporations’ deposits; including fidelity and growth premia. 9Excluding over-
overnight deposits, deposits redeemable at notice, revolving loans and overdrafts, drafts. 10 Collected from June 2010. 
credit card debt, new business is collected in the same way as outstanding amounts

Deutsche Bundesbank
46  Monthly Report
November 2012
VI Interest rates
 
5 Interest rates and volumes for outstanding amounts and new business of German banks (MFIs) *  (cont’d)
(b) New business +
 
 
Loans to households (cont’d)
Loans for consumption with an initial rate fixation of  4 
Total floating rate or over 1 year and
Total up to 1 year 9 up to 5 years over 5 years (including charges)
Effective Effective Effective Effective Annual percentage
Reporting Volume 7 Volume 7 Volume 7 Volume 7 rate of charge  11 interest rate 1 interest rate 1 interest rate 1 interest rate 1 
period % pa % pa € million % pa € million % pa € million % pa € million
Total loans
2011          Sep 7.11 6.45 5,323 3.63 826 5.69 2,243 8.24 2,254
         Oct 6.93 6.35 5,498 3.36 1,042 5.80 2,189 8.27 2,267
         Nov 6.63 6.12 5,317 3.68 1,000 5.63 2,293 7.87 2,024
         Dec 6.23 5.77 4,659 3.08 970 5.59 2,086 7.64 1,603
2012          Jan 6.78 6.28 5,308 3.25 1,009 5.65 2,083 8.25 2,216
         Feb 6.74 6.19 5,116 3.20 943 5.58 2,062 8.12 2,111
         Mar 6.47 6.04 6,100 3.00 883 5.35 2,649 7.80 2,568
         Apr 6.47 6.01 5,641 3.10 874 5.25 2,459 7.93 2,308
         May 6.48 6.03 5,660 3.30 869 5.29 2,491 7.86 2,300
         June 6.48 6.08 5,408 3.64 672 5.30 2,488 7.68 2,248
         July 6.81 6.38 5,868 4.45 654 5.35 2,570 7.85 2,644
         Aug 6.65 6.20 5,348 4.51 683 5.23 2,334 7.65 2,331
         Sep 6.46 6.11 4,599 4.37 525 5.12 2,091 7.60 1,983
of which: collateralised loans 12
2011          Sep . 4.63 417 2.88 111 5.81 191 4.35 115
         Oct . 4.41 422 2.91 117 5.61 181 4.09 124
         Nov . 4.22 434 2.84 112 5.30 187 3.85 135
         Dec . 4.19 454 2.93 161 5.55 172 3.92 121
2012          Jan . 4.16 419 2.70 138 5.61 159 3.93 122
         Feb . 4.16 471 2.76 145 5.39 196 3.86 130
         Mar . 4.10 494 2.22 135 5.70 193 3.76 166
         Apr . 4.10 443 2.14 123 5.59 189 3.79 131
         May . 4.21 404 2.17 110 5.70 186 3.69 108
         June . 4.16 439 2.62 105 5.56 185 3.52 149
         July . 4.50 387 3.70 57 5.39 196 3.54 134
         Aug . 3.95 450 3.34 152 5.12 155 3.32 143
         Sep . 3.90 361 2.99 114 5.15 129 3.42 118
 
 
Loans to households (cont’d)
Housing loans with an initial rate fixation of  3 
Total floating rate or over 1 year and over 5 years and
Total up to 1 year 9 up to 5 years up to 10 years over 10 years (including charges)
Effective Effective Effective Effective Effective Annual percentage
Reporting Volume 7 Volume 7 Volume 7 Volume 7 Volume 7 rate of charge  11 interest rate  1 interest rate  1 interest rate  1 interest rate  1 interest rate  1 
period % pa % pa % pa % pa % pa % pa € million € million € million € million € million
Total loans
2011          Sep 3.85 3.75 15,331 3.77 2,112 3.52 2,146 3.80 5,951 3.80 5,122
         Oct 3.70 3.61 16,291 3.68 2,782 3.39 2,329 3.61 6,261 3.67 4,919
         Nov 3.65 3.56 16,139 3.74 1,960 3.31 2,371 3.58 6,429 3.58 5,379
         Dec 3.61 3.51 16,758 3.67 2,283 3.24 2,450 3.54 6,571 3.54 5,454
2012          Jan 3.59 3.50 15,645 3.60 2,614 3.21 2,417 3.48 6,480 3.64 4,134
         Feb 3.52 3.40 14,182 3.55 2,330 3.05 2,069 3.37 5,408 3.53 4,375
         Mar 3.37 3.29 16,280 3.29 1,982 2.92 2,433 3.29 6,512 3.45 5,353
         Apr 3.46 3.34 15,748 3.28 2,429 2.98 2,390 3.28 6,398 3.65 4,531
         May 3.30 3.21 15,197 3.24 2,246 2.90 2,116 3.17 6,267 3.39 4,568
         June 3.15 3.06 16,401 3.08 2,175 2.80 2,079 3.04 6,297 3.17 5,850
         July 3.10 3.02 18,647 3.17 2,644 2.81 2,468 2.98 7,782 3.09 5,753
         Aug 3.03 2.95 17,424 3.07 2,332 2.68 2,117 2.88 7,073 3.08 5,902
         Sep 2.97 2.89 15,109 2.85 1,971 2.63 2,013 2.85 5,885 3.03 5,240
of which: collateralised loans 12
2011          Sep . 3.68 7,509 3.63 900 3.40 1,116 3.73 3,015 3.77 2,478
         Oct . 3.56 8,089 3.58 1,143 3.33 1,208 3.54 3,318 3.69 2,420
         Nov . 3.47 8,174 3.49 893 3.24 1,194 3.51 3,334 3.54 2,753
         Dec . 3.43 8,248 3.52 999 3.19 1,267 3.45 3,377 3.48 2,605
2012          Jan . 3.45 7,647 3.52 1,181 3.17 1,241 3.43 3,214 3.62 2,011
         Feb . 3.32 6,776 3.42 1,040 2.94 1,011 3.30 2,586 3.47 2,139
         Mar . 3.19 7,577 3.07 863 2.82 1,220 3.22 3,001 3.38 2,493
         Apr . 3.31 7,614 3.12 1,006 2.91 1,181 3.20 3,090 3.74 2,337
         May . 3.11 7,262 2.96 970 2.76 1,060 3.11 3,084 3.33 2,148
         June . 2.97 7,321 2.91 862 2.67 1,011 2.97 2,982 3.13 2,466
         July . 2.92 8,668 2.99 1,104 2.69 1,218 2.91 3,673 3.01 2,673
         Aug . 2.88 8,296 2.96 981 2.56 1,080 2.82 3,388 3.03 2,847
         Sep . 2.83 7,092 2.70 845 2.54 965 2.83 2,811 2.99 2,471
For footnotes * and 1 to 6, see p 44  . For footnotes +, 7 to 10, see p 45  . For related charges which may occur for enquiries, administration, preparation of the
footnote 12, see p 47  .11Annual percentage rate of charge, which contains other documents, guarantees and credit insurance. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
47  Monthly Report
November 2012
VI Interest rates
 
5 Interest rates and volumes for outstanding amounts and new business of German banks (MFIs) *  (cont’d)
(b) New business +
 
 
Loans to households (cont’d) Loans to non-financial corporations
of which of which
Revolving loans 13 Revolving loans 13 
and overdrafts 14 Revolving loans 13 Extended and overdrafts 14 Revolving loans 13 
credit card debt 15 and overdrafts 14 credit card debt credit card debt 15 and overdrafts 14 
Effective Effective Effective Effective Effective
Reporting Volume 16 Volume 16 Volume 2 Volume 16 Volume 16 interest rate 1 interest rate 1 interest rate 1 interest rate 1 interest rate 1 
period % pa € million % pa € million % pa € million % pa € million % pa € million
2011          Sep 10.30
45,279 10.37 39,701 15.17 3,506 5.09 71,055 5.11 70,844
         Oct 10.35 44,961 10.43 38,918 14.72 3,974 5.05 67,933 5.07 67,720
         Nov 10.31 43,494 10.31 37,586 14.71 3,957 4.90 68,235 4.92 68,016
         Dec 10.29 44,555 10.32 38,538 14.71 4,004 4.88 64,672 4.89 64,484
2012          Jan 10.31 45,884 10.34 39,955 14.63 3,956 4.66 68,909 4.68 68,690
         Feb 10.24 45,809 10.27 39,877 14.67 3,919 4.56 70,840 4.57 70,603
         Mar 10.21 46,976 10.23 40,976 14.47 3,998 4.59 72,216 4.61 71,960
         Apr 10.05 47,352 10.12 41,135 14.51 4,000 4.43 70,726 4.45 70,471
         May 10.08 47,292 10.06 40,840 14.83 4,275 4.43 70,720 4.45 70,470
         June 10.07 48,231 10.02 41,837 14.82 4,305 4.53 72,118 4.54 71,876
         July 9.94 46,964 9.94 40,326 14.80 4,349 4.41 69,679 4.42 69,432
         Aug 9.95 46,374 9.89 39,796 14.78 4,392 4.32 68,627 4.33 68,387
         Sep 9.89 47,853 9.86 41,115 14.81 4,422 4.38 71,170 4.40 70,889
 
 
Loans to non-financial corporations (cont’d)
Loans up to €1 million with an initial rate fixation of  17 Loans over €1 million with an initial rate fixation of  17 
floating rate or over 1 year and floating rate or over 1 year and
up to 1 year 9 up to 5 years over 5 years up to 1 year  9 up to 5 years over 5 years
Effective Effective Effective Effective Effective Effectiveinterest interest interest interest interest interest
Reporting rate 
1 Volume 7 rate 1 Volume 7 rate 1 Volume 7 rate 1 Volume 7 rate 1 Volume 7 rate 1 Volume 7 
period % pa % pa % pa % pa % pa % pa € million € million € million € million € million € million
Total loans
2011          Sep 3.99 6,991 4.60 1,459 3.87 1,244 2.96 44,993 3.61 3,111 3.69 4,992
         Oct 3.91 7,207 4.62 1,344 3.82 1,141 3.16 47,753 3.91 1,777 3.54 4,837
         Nov 3.92 6,655 4.69 1,407 3.68 1,320 2.89 38,491 3.67 1,894 3.61 5,240
         Dec 3.92 7,289 4.61 1,726 3.58 1,695 2.93 49,228 3.71 2,955 3.59 7,554
2012          Jan 3.60 7,211 4.49 1,460 3.62 1,209 2.64 43,437 3.37 1,916 3.39 4,357
         Feb 3.56 6,539 4.41 1,323 3.45 1,076 2.58 37,564 3.47 1,352 3.51 3,243
         Mar 3.51 7,654 4.31 1,751 3.41 1,346 2.44 44,212 2.85 1,893 3.33 4,674
         Apr 3.34 7,349 4.21 1,537 3.50 1,172 2.37 41,491 3.04 2,187 3.42 4,166
         May 3.33 6,895 4.20 1,461 3.30 1,176 2.32 36,079 2.98 1,547 3.39 3,893
         June 3.37 7,267 4.14 1,469 3.16 1,357 2.39 43,154 2.89 2,333 3.07 5,764
         July 3.11 7,597 4.04 1,548 3.15 1,441 2.25 45,910 2.96 2,641 3.09 5,868
         Aug 2.97 6,767 3.82 1,380 3.01 1,448 2.14 37,722 2.82 1,375 2.77 4,616
         Sep 3.07 7,039 3.76 1,282 2.99 1,248 2.12 42,287 2.81 1,324 2.87 4,367
of which: collateralised loans 12
2011          Sep 4.06 1,346 4.09 139 3.61 333 3.16 9,236 3.62 1,071 3.71 1,056
         Oct 3.93 1,454 3.82 160 3.57 360 3.15 10,313 4.37 551 3.51 1,452
         Nov 4.05 1,171 3.92 142 3.41 406 3.02 6,850 3.97 767 3.45 1,365
         Dec 3.97 1,374 3.69 229 3.15 464 3.16 9,859 3.44 1,035 3.41 1,878
2012          Jan 3.73 1,520 3.74 169 3.56 380 2.78 9,986 3.43 749 3.37 975
         Feb 3.67 988 3.78 120 3.26 345 2.42 6,229 3.88 536 3.20 891
         Mar 3.41 1,210 3.62 164 3.14 360 2.58 8,860 3.12 550 3.27 1,466
         Apr 3.27 1,319 3.42 156 3.24 363 2.44 9,134 3.22 922 3.27 1,159
         May 3.29 1,132 3.43 138 3.02 306 2.35 6,868 3.81 375 3.17 786
         June 3.19 1,142 3.29 133 3.05 385 2.33 7,835 2.27 936 3.03 1,848
         July 2.99 1,343 3.31 157 3.01 424 2.33 9,627 2.86 1,097 3.15 1,896
         Aug 2.88 1,141 3.26 127 2.86 398 2.15 6,985 3.09 526 2.97 1,064
         Sep 2.86 1,151 2.92 150 2.76 330 2.12 8,536 2.84 441 3.07 932
For footnotes * and 1 to 6, see p 44  . For footnotes + and 7 to 10, see p 45  . For they are within or beyond the limits agreed between customers and the
footnote 11, see p 46  .12Collected from June 2010. For the purposes of the bank. 15From June 2010 including convenience and extended credit card debt.
interest rate statistis, a loan is considered to be secured if collateral (among others Convenience credit is defined as the credit granted at an interest rate of 0% in thefinancial collateral, real estate collateral, debt securities) in at leat the same value as period between payment transactions effectuated with the card during one billingthe loan amount has been posted, pledged or assigned. 13From June 2010 cycle and the date at which the debt balances from this specific billing cycle become
including revolving loans which have all the following features: (a) the borrower may due. 16From January 2003 up to May 2010 estimated. The volume of outstanding
use or withdraw the funds to a pre-approved credit limit without giving prior notice amounts reported was extrapolated to form the underlying total using theto the lender; (b) the amount of available credit can increase and decrease as funds Horvitz-Thompson estimator. From June 2010 the data are based on monthlyare borrowed and repaid; (c) the loan may be used repeatedly; (d) there is no balance sheet statistics. 17The amount refers to the single loan transaction
obligation of regular repayment of funds. 14Overdrafts are defined as debit considered as new business. 
balances on current accounts. They include all bank overdrafts regardless of whether

Deutsche Bundesbank
48  Monthly Report
November 2012
VII Capital market
 
1 Sales and purchases of debt securities and shares in Germany
 
 
€ million
Debt securities
Sales Purchases
Domestic debt securities 1 Residents
Credit in-
Sales stitutions
= Public Foreign including
total Bank Corporate debt debt building
pur- debt bonds secur- secur- and loan Deutsche Other Non-
Period chases Total securities ities 3 ities 4 Total 5 Bundesbank sectors 7 residents 8 (non-MFIs) 2 associations 6 
2000 226,393 157,994 120,154 12,605 25,234 68,399 151,568 91,447 . 60,121 74,825
2001 180,227 86,656 55,918 14,473 16,262 93,571 111,281 35,848 . 75,433 68,946
2002 175,396 124,035 47,296 14,506 62,235 51,361 60,476 13,536 . 46,940 114,920
2003 184,679 134,455 31,404 30,262 72,788 50,224 105,557 35,748 . 69,809 79,122
2004 233,890 133,711 64,231 10,778 58,703 100,179 108,119 121,841 . − 13,723 125,772
2005 252,658 110,542 39,898 2,682 67,965 142,116 94,718 61,740 . 32,978 157,940
2006 242,006 102,379 40,995 8,943 52,446 139,627 125,423 68,893 . 56,530 116,583
2007 217,798 90,270 42,034 20,123 28,111 127,528 − 26,762 96,476 . − 123,238 244,560
2008 76,490 66,139 − 45,712 86,527 25,322 10,351 18,236 68,049 . − 49,813 58,254
2009 69,549 − 538 − 114,902 22,709 91,655 70,087 89,169 12,973 8,645 67,550 − 19,620
2010 148,944 − 1,212 − 7,621 24,044 − 17,635 150,156 100,647 − 103,271 22,967 180,952 48,297
2011 40,799 13,575 − 46,796 850 59,521 27,224 − 16,574 − 94,793 36,805 41,413 57,373
2011          Nov 22,841 21,495 8,326 − 2,825 15,994 1,346 11,512 − 8,744 9,305 10,951 11,329
         Dec − 46,609 − 44,168 − 15,514 − 9,196 − 19,458 − 2,441 − 18,440 − 18,677 1,538 − 1,301 − 28,169
2012          Jan − 5,244 − 28,450 − 31,833 − 6,174 9,557 23,206 10,955 − 1,929 1,652 11,232 − 16,199
         Feb 44,827 38,149 8,709 − 2,597 32,037 6,678 8,230 1,270 − 397 7,357 36,597
         Mar 21,280 12,235 − 12,463 2,730 21,968 9,045 28,119 2,516 − 741 26,344 − 6,839
         Apr − 4,122 − 1,076 − 5,709 517 4,116 − 3,046 − 3,191 − 11,066 − 281 8,156 − 931         May 17,028 7,358 − 9,884 − 852 18,094 9,670 − 10,259 − 6,457 − 305 − 3,497 27,287
         June − 13,502 − 8,432 − 4,207 − 5,111 886 − 5,070 − 6,051 − 4,104 − 565 − 1,382 − 7,451
         July 21,433 15,298 − 910 3,230 12,978 6,135 19,712 − 9,002 101 28,613 1,721
         Aug 4,786 2,245 − 5,350 − 3,685 11,280 2,541 − 1,091 2,868 − 589 − 3,370 5,877
         Sep − 15,576 − 24,453 − 13,112 − 1,342 − 9,999 8,877 − 5,141 1,205 − 78 − 6,268 − 10,434
 
 
€ million
Shares
Sales Purchases
Sales Residents
=
total Domestic Foreign Credit insti- Non-
Period purchases shares 9 shares 10 Total 11 tutions 6,12 Other sectors 13 residents 14 
2000 140,461 22,733 117,729 164,654 23,293 141,361 − 24,194
2001 82,665 17,575 65,091 − 2,252 − 14,714 12,462 84,918
2002 39,338 9,232 30,106 18,398 − 23,236 41,634 20,941
2003 11,896 16,838 − 4,946 − 15,121 7,056 − 22,177 27,016
2004 − 3,317 10,157 − 13,474 7,432 5,045 2,387 − 10,748
2005 32,364 13,766 18,597 1,036 10,208 − 9,172 31,329
2006 26,276 9,061 17,214 7,528 11,323 − 3,795 18,748
2007 − 5,009 10,053 − 15,062 − 62,308 − 6,702 − 55,606 57,299
2008 − 29,452 11,326 − 40,778 2,743 − 23,079 25,822 − 32,194
2009 38,164 23,962 14,200 30,357 − 8,335 38,692 7,809
2010 37,211 20,049 17,162 38,973 7,340 31,633 − 1,761
2011 24,779 21,713 3,066 30,880 670 30,210 − 6,102
2011          Nov − 1,579 303 − 1,882 3,390 − 575 3,965 − 4,969
         Dec 9,457 1,643 7,814 11,070 9,865 1,205 − 1,613
2012          Jan − 1,385 262 − 1,647 2,020 − 106 2,126 − 3,405
         Feb − 2,026 730 − 2,756 − 5,771 − 5,696 − 75 3,745
         Mar 1,828 380 1,448 10,849 11,295 − 446 − 9,021
         Apr − 1,149 66 − 1,215 11,115 10,558 557 − 12,264
         May 4,239 687 3,552 − 6,632 − 13,638 7,006 10,871
         June − 8,091 725 − 8,816 − 18,718 − 8,303 − 10,415 10,627
         July 6,183 968 5,215 4,233 1,611 2,622 1,950
         Aug − 2,516 101 − 2,617 − 2,225 2,109 − 4,334 − 290
         Sep 1,993 549 1,444 3,013 4,196 − 1,183 − 1,020
1Net sales at market values plus/minus changes in issuers’ portfolios of their own values. 9Excluding shares of public limited investment companies; at issue prices.
debt securities. 2Including cross-border financing within groups from January 2011. 10Net purchases or net sales (−) of foreign shares (including direct investment)  by  
3Including Federal Railways Fund, Federal Post Office and Treuhand agency. 4Net residents;  transaction  values. 11Domestic and foreign shares. 12Up to end-1998,
purchases or net sales (−) of foreign debt securities by residents; transaction excluding syndicated shares. 13Residual; also including purchases of domestic and
values. 5Domestic and foreign debt securities. 6Book values; statistically adjusted. foreign securities by domestic mutual funds. 14Net purchases or net sales (−) of
7Residual; also including purchases of domestic and foreign securities by domestic domestic shares (including direct investment) by non-residents; transaction values. —
mutual funds. Up to end-2008, data comprise Deutsche Bundesbank. 8Net pur- The figures for the most recent date are provisional; revisions are not specially
chases or net sales (−) of domestic debt securities by non-residents; transaction marked. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
49  Monthly Report
November 2012
 VII Capital market
 
2 Sales of debt securities issued by residents *  
 
 
€ million nominal value
Bank debt securities 1 Memo item
 Foreign  DM/euro
bonds issued Debt securities
Corporate by German- issued by special
Mortgage Public purpose credit Other bank bonds Public managed
Period Total Total Pfandbriefe Pfandbriefe institutions (non-MFIs)  2 syndicates debt securities debt securities 3 
Gross sales  4 
2000 659,148 500,895 34,528 143,107 94,556 228,703 8,114 150,137 31,597
2001 687,988 505,646 34,782 112,594 106,166 252,103 11,328 171,012 10,605
2002 818,725 569,232 41,496 119,880 117,506 290,353 17,574 231,923 10,313
2003 958,917 668,002 47,828 107,918 140,398 371,858 22,510 268,406 2,850
2004 990,399 688,844 33,774 90,815 162,353 401,904 31,517 270,040 12,344
2005 988,911 692,182 28,217 103,984 160,010 399,969 24,352 272,380 600
2006 925,863 622,055 24,483 99,628 139,193 358,750 29,975 273,834 69
2007 1,021,533 743,616 19,211 82,720 195,722 445,963 15,043 262,872 −
2008 1,337,337 961,271 51,259 70,520 382,814 456,676 95,093 280,974 −
2009 1,533,616 1,058,815 40,421 37,615 331,566 649,215 76,379 398,423 −
2010 1,375,138 757,754 36,226 33,539 363,828 324,160 53,654 563,731 −
2011 1,337,772 658,781 31,431 24,295 376,876 226,180 86,615 592,376 −
2012          Feb 126,002 68,028 5,349 494 39,974 22,211 3,594 54,380 −
         Mar 118,097 61,583 5,423 1,650 37,126 17,383 8,203 48,311 −
         Apr 93,894 43,152 1,167 1,290 28,607 12,089 4,346 46,396 −
         May 111,973 56,156 3,547 399 34,929 17,281 3,191 52,626 −
         June 112,303 55,433 6,671 396 34,322 14,045 4,982 51,888 −
         July 133,156 70,294 3,382 1,452 47,992 17,467 5,644 57,218 −
         Aug 92,682 49,173 2,121 672 29,884 16,496 2,051 41,459 −
         Sep 100,827 54,642 2,267 763 35,582 16,030 6,331 39,854 −
of which: Debt securities with maturities of more than four years  5 
2000 319,330 209,187 20,724 102,664 25,753 60,049 6,727 103,418 27,008
2001 299,751 202,337 16,619 76,341 42,277 67,099 7,479 89,933 6,4802002 309,157 176,486 16,338 59,459 34,795 65,892 12,149 120,527 9,2132003 369,336 220,103 23,210 55,165 49,518 92,209 10,977 138,256 2,8502004 424,769 275,808 20,060 48,249 54,075 153,423 20,286 128,676 4,320
2005 425,523 277,686 20,862 63,851 49,842 143,129 16,360 131,479 400
2006 337,969 190,836 17,267 47,814 47,000 78,756 14,422 132,711 692007 315,418 183,660 10,183 31,331 50,563 91,586 13,100 118,659 −2008 387,516 190,698 13,186 31,393 54,834 91,289 84,410 112,407 −2009 361,999 185,575 20,235 20,490 59,809 85,043 55,240 121,185 −
2010 381,687 169,174 15,469 15,139 72,796 65,769 34,649 177,863 −
2011 368,039 153,309 13,142 8,500 72,985 58,684 41,299 173,431 −
2012          Feb 44,069 23,168 3,479 85 12,714 6,889 1,889 19,012 −
         Mar 38,456 17,308 2,892 732 7,621 6,064 7,096 14,051 −
         Apr 25,903 9,656 1,137 1,093 3,310 4,117 3,513 12,734 −
         May 31,194 10,197 2,152 154 3,815 4,076 1,804 19,193 −         June 29,740 12,223 4,734 271 2,883 4,335 2,435 15,081 −
         July 36,353 12,257 2,034 1,267 4,662 4,295 3,842 20,254 −
         Aug 28,570 11,479 1,338 172 3,467 6,502 1,076 16,015 −         Sep 43,339 16,619 1,787 733 10,160 3,939 4,884 21,837 −
Net sales  6 
2000 155,615 122,774 5,937 29,999 30,089 56,751 7,320 25,522 − 16,7052001 84,122 60,905 6,932 − 9,254 28,808 34,416 8,739 14,479 − 30,6572002 131,976 56,393 7,936 − 26,806 20,707 54,561 14,306 61,277 − 44,5462003 124,556 40,873 2,700 − 42,521 44,173 36,519 18,431 65,253 − 54,9902004 167,233 81,860 1,039 − 52,615 50,142 83,293 18,768 66,605 − 22,124
2005 141,715 65,798 − 2,151 − 34,255 37,242 64,962 10,099 65,819 − 35,963
2006 129,423 58,336 − 12,811 − 20,150 44,890 46,410 15,605 55,482 − 19,2082007 86,579 58,168 − 10,896 − 46,629 42,567 73,127 − 3,683 32,093 − 29,7502008 119,472 8,517 15,052 − 65,773 25,165 34,074 82,653 28,302 − 31,6072009 76,441 − 75,554 858 − 80,646 25,579 − 21,345 48,508 103,482 − 21,037
2010 21,566 − 87,646 − 3,754 − 63,368 28,296 − 48,822 23,748 85,464 − 10,904
2011 22,518 − 54,582 1,657 − 44,290 32,904 − 44,852 − 3,189 80,289 − 5,989
2012          Feb 32,588 13,452 2,934 − 2,054 10,606 1,966 − 1,278 20,414 −
         Mar − 4,544 − 9,811 − 3,048 − 2,598 2,319 − 6,484 2,459 2,808 − 23
         Apr − 7,571 − 6,146 − 638 − 380 − 304 − 4,824 − 2,325 900 − 31
         May 4,558 − 8,704 917 − 6,057 − 566 − 2,998 − 2,777 16,039 −         June − 3,812 − 8,094 4,534 − 5,786 3,009 − 9,851 − 3,589 7,871 − 33
         July 7,457 − 2,138 − 604 − 943 1,448 − 2,038 1,782 7,813 − 118
         Aug − 1,815 − 5,603 850 − 2,466 − 4,329 343 − 2,584 6,372 − 7         Sep − 31,382 − 13,373 8 − 2,348 613 − 11,646 − 64 − 17,946 − 87
*For definitions, see the explanatory notes in the Statistical Supplement 2 Capital Railways Fund, Federal Post Office and Treuhand agency. 4Gross sales means only
market statistics on p 21 ff. 1Excluding registered bank debt securities. 2Including initial sales of newly issued securities. 5Maximum maturity according to the terms of
cross-border financing within groups from January 2011. 3Including Federal issue. 6 Gross sales less redemptions. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
50  Monthly Report
November 2012
VII Capital market
 
3 Amounts outstanding of debt securities issued by residents  * 
 
 
€ million nominal value
Bank debt securities 1 Memo item
 Foreign  DM/euro
End of year Debt securities bonds issued
or month/ issued by Corporate by German-
Maturity Mortgage Public special purpose Other bank bonds Public managed
in years Total Total Pfandbriefe Pfandbriefe credit institutions debt securities (non-MFIs) debt securities syndicates
2000 2,265,121 1,445,736 140,751 685,122 157,374 462,488 13,599 805,786 322,856
2001 2,349,243 1,506,640 147,684 675,868 201,721 481,366 22,339 820,264 292,199
2002 2,481,220 1,563,034 155,620 649,061 222,427 535,925 36,646 881,541 247,655
2003 2,605,775 1,603,906 158,321 606,541 266,602 572,442 55,076 946,793 192,666
2004 2,773,007 1,685,766 159,360 553,927 316,745 655,734 73,844 1,013,397 170,543
2005 2,914,723 1,751,563 157,209 519,674 323,587 751,093 83,942 1,079,218 134,580
2006 3,044,145 1,809,899 144,397 499,525 368,476 797,502 99,545 1,134,701 115,373
2007 3,130,723 1,868,066 133,501 452,896 411,041 870,629 95,863 1,166,794 85,623
2008 3,250,195 1,876,583 150,302 377,091 490,641 858,550 178,515 1,195,097 54,015
2009 3,326,635 1,801,029 151,160 296,445 516,221 837,203 227,024 1,298,581 32,978
2010 3,348,201 2 1,570,490 147,529 232,954 544,517 2 645,491 250,774 2 1,526,937 22,074
2011 3,370,721 1,515,911 149,185 188,663 577,423 600,640 247,585 1,607,226 16,085
2012          Mar 3,359,200 1,487,756 146,255 176,047 581,679 583,775 245,091 1,626,354 16,062
         Apr 3,351,629 1,481,610 145,617 175,668 581,375 578,951 242,766 1,627,253 16,031
         May 3,356,187 1,472,906 146,534 169,611 580,809 575,953 239,989 1,643,292 16,031
         June 3,352,375 1,464,811 151,068 163,825 583,818 566,101 2 215,673 2 1,671,891 15,998
         July 3,359,832 1,462,674 150,464 162,881 585,266 564,063 217,454 1,679,704 15,881
         Aug 3,358,017 1,457,071 151,313 160,415 580,936 564,406 214,870 1,686,076 15,874
         Sep 3,326,635 1,443,698 151,321 158,067 581,549 552,760 214,806 1,668,131 15,787
Breakdown by remaining period to maturity  3 Position at end-September 2012 
1,271,958 613,087 66,544 86,269 236,873 223,398 47,347 611,524 7,570    less than 2
845,877 424,462 52,174 37,776 139,331 195,181 40,697 380,718 2,746 2 to less than 4
431,580 193,402 19,168 19,989 91,996 62,248 32,762 205,417 1,876 4 to less than 6
227,022 74,891 7,080 7,115 42,480 18,216 11,440 140,690 204 6 to less than 8
210,248 55,080 5,202 3,748 33,209 12,920 8,054 147,114 380 8 to less than 10
57,904 18,155 1,040 1,953 11,174 3,990 9,528 30,220 1,912 10 to less than 15
69,909 15,039 11 283 8,837 5,909 887 53,983 132 15 to less than 20
212,137 49,581 100 934 17,650 30,899 64,090 98,465 967 20 and more
*Including debt securities temporarily held in the issuers’ portfolios. 1Excluding maturity for debt securities falling due en bloc and until mean maturity of the
debt securities handed to the trustee for temporary safe custody. 2Sectoral residual amount outstanding for debt securities not falling due en bloc. 
reclassification of debt securities. 3Calculated from month under review until final
  
4 Shares in circulation issued by residents
 * 
  
€ million nominal value
Change in domestic public limited companies’ capital due to
Memo item
Share circulationat market values
contribution (market capita- cash 
payments
Share capital = Net increase or and ex- contribution of shares, merger reduction lisation)
circulation at net decrease (−) change of of claims mining shares, and of capital level at end
end of period during period convertible issue of and other GmbH shares, transfer change of and of period
Period under review under review bonds 1 bonus shares real assets etc of assets legal form liquidation under review  2 
2000 147,629 14,115 3,620 3,694 618 8,089 − 1,986 1,827 − 1,745 1,353,000
2001 166,187 18,561 7,987 4,057 1,106 8,448 1,018 − 905 − 3,152 1,205,613
2002 168,716 2,528 4,307 1,291 486 1,690 − 868 − 2,152 − 2,224 647,492
2003 162,131 − 6,585 4,482 923 211 513 − 322 − 10,806 − 1,584 851,001
2004 164,802 2,669 3,960 1,566 276 696 220 − 1,760 − 2,286 887,217
2005 163,071 − 1,733 2,470 1,040 694 268 − 1,443 − 3,060 − 1,703 1,058,532
2006 163,764 695 2,670 3,347 604 954 − 1,868 − 1,256 − 3,761 1,279,638
2007 164,560 799 3,164 1,322 200 269 − 682 − 1,847 − 1,636 1,481,930
2008 168,701 4,142 5,006 1,319 152 0 − 428 − 608 − 1,306 830,622
2009 175,691 6,989 12,476 398 97 − − 3,741 − 1,269 − 974 927,256
2010 174,596 − 1,096 3,265 497 178 10 − 486 − 993 − 3,569 1,091,220
2011 177,167 2,570 6,390 552 462 9 − 552 − 762 − 3,532 924,214
2012          Mar 177,902 303 119 3 376 − − 25 − 88 − 83 1,075,219
         Apr 177,912 10 57 −1−− − 9 − 4 0 1,053,431
         May 178,231 319 654 0−−0 − 2 − 3 33 971,168
         June 178,528 297 265 1 177 − − 2 − 51 − 93 969,686
         July 178,699 171 213 34 − − − 18 − 13 − 46 1,033,905
         Aug 178,713 14 96 33 8 − − 33 − 30 − 60 1,048,119
         Sep 177,895 − 818 546 35 − − − 325 − 60 − 1,014 1,076,643
*Excluding shares of public limited investment companies. 1Including shares issued ket segment was closed down on 24 March 2003) are included as well as enterprises
out of company profits. 2Enterprises listed on the Regulated Market (the introduc- listed on the Open Market. Source: Bundesbank calculations based on data of the
tion of which marked the end of the division of organised trading segments into an Herausgebergemeinschaft Wertpapier-Mitteilungen and the Deutsche Börse AG. official and a regulated market on 1 November 2007) or the Neuer Markt (stock mar-

Deutsche Bundesbank
51  Monthly Report
November 2012
 VII Capital market
 
5 Yields and indices on German securities
 
 
               
Yields on debt securities outstanding issued by residents  1 Price indices 2,3 
Public debt securities Bank debt securities Debt securities Shares
Listed
Federal securities
With a residual With a residual
maturity of maturity of Corporate German German
9 and more than 9 bonds bond iBoxx CDAX share
including and including (non- index share price index € Germany
Total Total Total 10 years 4 Total 10 years MFIs) (REX) price index index (DAX)
Average End-1998 End-1987 End-1987
Period % per annum daily rate = 100 = 100 = 1000
2000 5.4 5.3 5.2 5.3 5.6 5.8 6.2 112.48 94.11 396.59 6,433.61
2001 4.8 4.7 4.7 4.8 4.9 5.3 5.9 113.12 94.16 319.38 5,160.102002 4.7 4.6 4.6 4.8 4.7 5.1 6.0 117.56 97.80 188.46 2,892.632003 3.7 3.8 3.8 4.1 3.7 4.3 5.0 117.36 97.09 252.48 3,965.162004 3.7 3.7 3.7 4.0 3.6 4.2 4.0 120.19 99.89 268.32 4,256.08
2005 3.1 3.2 3.2 3.4 3.1 3.5 3.7 120.92 101.09 335.59 5,408.26
2006 3.8 3.7 3.7 3.8 3.8 4.0 4.2 116.78 96.69 407.16 6,596.922007 4.3 4.3 4.2 4.2 4.4 4.5 5.0 114.85 94.62 478.65 8,067.322008 4.2 4.0 4.0 4.0 4.5 4.7 6.3 121.68 102.06 266.33 4,810.202009 3.2 3.1 3.0 3.2 3.5 4.0 5.5 123.62 100.12 320.32 5,957.43
2010 2.5 2.4 2.4 2.7 2.7 3.3 4.0 124.96 102.95 368.72 6,914.19
2011 2.6 2.4 2.4 2.6 2.9 3.5 4.3 131.48 109.53 304.60 5,898.35
2012          May 1.4 1.2 1.2 1.3 1.7 2.1 3.8 134.80 113.33 315.64 6,264.38
         June 1.3 1.2 1.2 1.3 1.6 1.9 3.5 132.79 110.09 321.27 6,416.28
         July 1.2 1.1 1.1 1.2 1.4 2.0 3.0 134.55 112.15 338.31 6,772.26
         Aug 1.2 1.1 1.1 1.3 1.3 2.0 3.6 134.78 111.68 347.17 6,970.79         Sep 1.3 1.2 1.2 1.5 1.3 2.0 3.9 134.28 110.85 358.75 7,216.15
         Oct 1.3 1.2 1.2 1.5 1.3 2.0 3.8 134.23 110.42 362.60 7,260.63
1Bearer debt securities with maximum maturities according to the terms of issue of ding of the debt securities included in the calculation. Monthly figures are calculated
over 4 years if their mean residual maturities exceed 3 years. Convertible debt on the basis of the yields on all the business days in a month. The annual figures are
securities, etc. debt securities with unscheduled redemption, zero-coupon bonds, the unweighted means of the monthly figures. 2End of year or month. 3Source:
floating-rate notes and bonds not denominated in euro are not included. Group Deutsche Börse AG. 4Only debt securities eligible as underlying instruments for
yields for the various categories of securities are weighted by the amounts outstan- futures contracts; calculated as unweighted averages. 
 
 
6 Sales and purchases of mutual fund shares in Germany
  
€ million
Sales Purchases
Domestic mutual funds 1  (sales receipts) Residents
Mutual funds open to the Credit institutions
general public including building
Other sectors 3 and loan associations 2 
of which
Sales Open- of which of which
= Secur- end Foreign Foreign
total Money ities- real Special- mutual mutualpur- market based estate ised Foreign fund fund Non-resi-
Period chases Total Total funds funds funds funds funds  
4 Total Total shares Total shares dents 5 
2000 118,021 85,160 39,712 − 2,188 36,818 − 2,824 45,448 32,861 107,019 14,454 92 92,565 32,769 11,002
2001 97,077 76,811 35,522 12,410 9,195 10,159 41,289 20,266 96,127 10,251 2,703 85,876 17,563 9512002 66,571 59,482 25,907 3,682 7,247 14,916 33,575 7,089 67,251 2,100 3,007 65,151 4,082 − 6802003 47,754 43,943 20,079 − 924 7,408 14,166 23,864 3,811 49,547 − 2,658 734 52,205 3,077 − 1,7932004 14,435 1,453 − 3,978 − 6,160 − 1,246 3,245 5,431 12,982 10,267 8,446 3,796 1,821 9,186 4,168
2005 85,268 41,718 6,400 − 124 7,001 − 3,186 35,317 43,550 79,252 21,290 7,761 57,962 35,789 6,016
2006 47,264 19,535 − 14,257 490 − 9,362 − 8,814 33,791 27,729 39,006 14,676 5,221 24,330 22,508 8,2582007 55,778 13,436 − 7,872 − 4,839 − 12,848 6,840 21,307 42,342 51,309 − 229 4,240 51,538 38,102 4,4692008 2,598 − 7,911 − 14,409 − 12,171 − 11,149 799 6,498 10,509 11,315 − 16,625 − 9,252 27,940 19,761 − 8,717
2009 48,081 43,747 10,966 − 5,047 11,749 2,686 32,780 4,333 36,339 − 14,995 − 8,178 51,334 12,511 11,742
2010 107,350 84,906 13,381 − 148 8,683 1,897 71,525 22,443 104,778 3,873 6,290 100,905 16,153 2,5722011 45,362 45,221 − 1,340 − 379 − 2,037 1,562 46,561 142 37,651 − 7,576 − 694 45,227 836 7,711
2012          Mar 6,558 3,595 − 668 − 145 − 859 396 4,263 2,963 7,011 − 284 642 7,295 2,321 − 453         Apr − 1,329 283 − 3,367 − 7 − 4,322 107 3,650 − 1,612 5,572 3,745 − 218 1,827 − 1,394 − 6,901
         May 4,296 4,946 3,420 3 3,403 − 171 1,526 − 650 − 730 − 4,374 − 947 3,644 297 5,026         June 9,026 10,145 − 429 129 − 338 517 10,575 − 1,119 9,539 − 1,263 − 1,451 10,802 332 − 513
         July 17,785 15,025 1,132 − 94 578 741 13,893 2,760 17,820 577 163 17,243 2,597 − 35
         Aug 6,029 3,054 − 906 − 154 − 193 109 3,959 2,976 6,843 395 120 6,448 2,856 − 813         Sep 3,689 3,023 − 258 − 116 − 563 335 3,280 666 3,929 280 197 3,649 469 − 240
1Including public limited investment companies. 2Book values. 3Residual. 4Net transaction values. — The figures for the most recent date are provisional; revisions
purchases or net sales (−) of foreign fund shares by residents; transaction values. are not specially marked. 
5Net purchases or net sales (−) of domestic fund shares by non-residents;

Deutsche Bundesbank
52  Monthly Report
November 2012
VIII  Financial accounts
  
1  Acquisition of financial assets and financing of private non-financial sectors
(non-consolidated)
  
  € billion
2010 2011 2012 
Item 2009 2010 2011 Q3 Q4 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 Q1 Q2
Households  1 
  I  Acquisition of financial assets
Currency and deposits 49.9 72.7 66.7 5.3 33.6 6.4 17.4 15.6 27.3 21.1 22.2
Debt securities 2 − 12.5 − 11.4 − 1.9 0.9 − 3.8 2.5 1.8 − 4.0 − 2.2 − 2.8 − 2.4
Shares 16.3 13.4 16.1 − 1.6 7.2 3.3 0.5 6.1 6.2 − 1.0 0.6
Other equity 3.0 3.0 3.0 0.7 0.8 0.7 0.7 0.8 0.7 0.8 0.7
Mutual funds shares − 1.1 10.0 − 14.5 0.5 − 0.5 − 3.5 − 0.1 − 7.0 − 4.0 − 1.6 − 2.4
Claims on insurance
corporations 3 62.5 60.5 48.1 10.6 16.2 16.9 10.5 8.4 12.3 17.1 12.4
short-term claims 0.3 − 0.7 0.7 − 0.1 − 0.4 0.1 0.2 0.2 0.2 0.2 0.2
longer-term claims 62.2 61.2 47.4 10.7 16.6 16.7 10.2 8.2 12.2 16.9 12.2
Claims from companypension commitments 10.0 7.8 11.1 1.9 2.0 2.7 2.8 2.8 2.8 2.8 2.9
Other claims 
4 16.7 − 1.0 18.1 13.2 − 22.3 18.2 1.7 7.9 − 9.6 14.0 5.2
Total 144.8 155.0 146.8 31.6 33.2 47.2 35.4 30.6 33.6 50.4 39.1
  II Financing
Loans − 7.6 5.0 10.4 5.6 0.8 − 3.9 4.9 6.7 2.7 − 1.0 6.7
short-term loans − 4.3 − 2.3 − 2.1 − 0.8 − 2.1 − 0.6 1.0 − 0.9 − 1.6 − 0.1 0.8
longer-term loans − 3.4 7.2 12.5 6.4 2.9 − 3.3 3.9 7.6 4.3 − 0.9 5.9
Other liabilities 1.0 0.1 0.4 − 0.0 − 0.3 0.3 0.1 0.0 − 0.0 0.2 0.1
Total − 6.6 5.1 10.8 5.6 0.4 − 3.5 4.9 6.8 2.6 − 0.8 6.8
Corporations
I   Acquisition of financial assets
Currency and deposits 24.8 7.3 13.5 20.0 5.9 5.4 − 17.1 1.6 23.6 − 8.6 2.1
Debt securities 2 4.8 − 0.1 4.9 1.7 − 1.6 3.5 − 0.7 0.9 1.2 0.2 − 0.0
Financial derivatives − 5.5 26.8 14.9 4.0 17.3 5.1 2.0 4.3 3.5 0.1 2.1
Shares 22.6 21.5 20.8 8.3 13.5 2.1 5.4 6.6 6.7 8.4 − 9.4
Other equity 29.6 49.0 32.1 6.1 3.1 − 0.4 25.3 − 1.3 8.5 11.2 11.3
Mutual funds shares − 2.6 8.8 8.2 7.6 − 0.7 0.9 1.7 1.5 4.1 − 5.2 1.2
Loans 60.6 53.8 48.5 10.5 5.7 19.5 11.0 13.8 4.2 6.9 7.9
short-term loans 33.4 36.8 39.4 8.8 2.7 15.5 11.0 10.0 3.0 5.3 5.8
longer-term loans 27.2 16.9 9.1 1.7 3.0 4.0 0.0 3.8 1.2 1.5 2.1
Claims on insurancecorporations 
3 0.8 − 0.7 − 0.6 − 0.2 − 0.2 − 0.2 − 0.2 − 0.2 − 0.2 − 0.2 − 0.2
short-term claims 0.8 − 0.7 − 0.6 − 0.2 − 0.2 − 0.2 − 0.2 − 0.2 − 0.2 − 0.2 − 0.2
longer-term claims . . . . . . . . . . .
Other claims − 30.6 − 44.0 13.6 − 24.2 − 10.5 22.8 18.9 − 5.9 − 22.1 24.4 − 1.1
Total 104.6 122.3 156.0 33.8 32.4 58.7 46.4 21.5 29.5 37.2 14.0
  II Financing
Debt securities 2 − 4.1 4.2 7.6 − 4.5 2.6 4.5 − 2.9 7.0 − 1.0 3.1 3.9
Financial derivatives . . . . . . . . . . .
Shares 5.5 7.2 7.4 0.2 0.8 0.3 5.5 − 0.3 1.9 0.6 1.0
Other equity 10.3 5.7 11.9 1.5 − 0.9 5.3 1.5 1.7 3.4 2.4 1.4
Loans 32.2 20.1 79.8 9.4 − 13.3 4.0 23.2 32.0 20.5 − 2.7 10.1
short-term loans − 10.9 20.6 41.0 0.7 − 16.6 − 1.0 15.7 23.3 3.0 5.8 11.7
longer-term loans 43.0 − 0.5 38.8 8.6 3.3 5.0 7.5 8.7 17.6 − 8.4 − 1.7
Claims from companypension commitments 5.2 2.6 5.8 0.7 0.7 1.5 1.5 1.5 1.5 1.5 1.5
Other liabilities − 5.8 49.0 59.1 − 17.0 51.6 23.6 8.3 15.7 11.6 20.5 9.7
Total 43.4 88.9 171.6 − 9.8 41.5 39.1 37.1 57.5 37.9 25.4 27.4
1Including non-profit institutions serving households. 2Including money market and supplementary pension funds. 4Including accumulated interest-bearing surplus
paper. 3Including private pension funds, burial funds, occupational pension schemes shares with insurance corporations. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
53  Monthly Report
November 2012
VIII  Financial accounts
  
2  Financial assets and liabilities of private non-financial sectors
(non-consolidated)
  
  End-of-year level, end-of-quarter level; € billion
2010 2011 2012 
Item 2009 2010 2011 Q3
Q4 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 Q1 Q2
Households  1 
  I  Financial assets
Currency and deposits 1,788.1 1,860.8 1,927.5 1,827.2 1,860.8 1,867.2 1,884.6 1,900.2 1,927.5 1,948.6 1,971.4
Debt securities 2 265.5 254.1 247.1 259.6 254.1 254.8 258.3 247.8 247.1 249.6 245.4
Shares 201.7 243.5 221.5 215.0 243.5 257.2 260.1 206.3 221.5 252.4 229.9
Other equity 202.5 182.3 188.5 185.8 182.3 178.5 179.3 182.7 188.5 189.5 196.3
Mutual funds shares 416.2 435.4 394.9 426.5 435.4 426.2 421.1 389.2 394.9 410.9 401.5
Claims on insurance
corporations 3 1,286.4 1,350.9 1,396.8 1,330.7 1,350.9 1,367.0 1,377.0 1,385.0 1,396.8 1,413.9 1,426.4
short-term claims 74.4 73.8 74.5 74.1 73.8 73.9 74.1 74.3 74.5 74.7 75.0
longer-term claims 1,212.0 1,277.2 1,322.3 1,256.6 1,277.2 1,293.1 1,302.9 1,310.7 1,322.3 1,339.2 1,351.4
Claims from companypension commitments 276.5 284.3 295.4 282.3 284.3 287.0 289.9 292.6 295.4 298.2 301.0
Other claims 
4 38.7 39.0 38.9 38.1 39.0 39.1 39.2 39.0 38.9 39.0 39.1
Total 4,475.6 4,650.4 4,710.6 4,565.2 4,650.4 4,677.0 4,709.5 4,642.8 4,710.6 4,802.0 4,811.0
  II Liabilities
Loans 1,518.0 1,523.0 1,537.4 1,522.7 1,523.0 1,519.1 1,523.8 1,535.0 1,537.4 1,535.6 1,541.9
short-term loans 75.7 75.6 73.9 77.6 75.6 75.0 75.8 75.0 73.9 73.8 74.4
longer-term loans 1,442.3 1,447.4 1,463.6 1,445.1 1,447.4 1,444.1 1,448.0 1,460.0 1,463.6 1,461.8 1,467.5
Other liabilities 11.7 11.6 12.2 12.9 11.6 13.4 13.0 13.4 12.2 14.0 13.4
Total 1,529.7 1,534.6 1,549.6 1,535.6 1,534.6 1,532.5 1,536.8 1,548.4 1,549.6 1,549.6 1,555.3
Corporations
I   Financial assets
Currency and deposits 457.1 450.1 460.5 449.9 450.1 440.4 425.5 429.9 460.5 452.6 453.0
Debt securities 2 48.4 48.1 52.6 50.0 48.1 51.6 51.1 51.6 52.6 53.9 53.6
Financial derivatives . . . . . . . . . . .
Shares 816.7 901.0 797.4 842.8 901.0 913.2 926.2 765.8 797.4 891.1 826.2
Other equity 360.0 364.6 403.8 369.9 364.6 355.0 380.5 384.6 403.8 415.5 440.0
Mutual funds shares 108.8 119.3 123.1 118.8 119.3 119.9 120.0 117.6 123.1 120.5 119.8
Loans 383.2 437.0 485.4 431.3 437.0 456.5 467.5 481.3 485.4 492.3 500.2
short-term loans 256.8 293.6 333.1 291.0 293.6 309.1 320.1 330.1 333.1 338.4 344.2
longer-term loans 126.4 143.3 152.4 140.3 143.3 147.3 147.4 151.2 152.4 153.9 156.0
Claims on insurance
corporations 3 40.2 39.6 38.9 39.8 39.6 39.4 39.2 39.1 38.9 38.8 38.6
short-term claims 40.2 39.6 38.9 39.8 39.6 39.4 39.2 39.1 38.9 38.8 38.6
longer-term claims . . . . . . . . . . .
Other claims 868.7 703.2 768.5 886.7 703.2 730.6 747.4 719.0 768.5 794.8 802.9
Total 3,083.1 3,062.7 3,130.3 3,189.2 3,062.7 3,106.5 3,157.5 2,988.7 3,130.3 3,259.5 3,234.3
  II Liabilities
Debt securities 2 129.0 134.8 110.7 137.5 134.8 100.7 98.9 111.9 110.7 115.6 117.2
Financial derivatives . . . . . . . . . . .
Shares 1,081.3 1,301.8 1,110.5 1,159.5 1,301.8 1,322.3 1,357.5 1,046.6 1,110.5 1,282.5 1,166.3Other equity 702.3 708.0 719.9 708.9 708.0 713.3 714.8 716.5 719.9 722.3 723.6
Loans 1,375.9 1,396.1 1,485.9 1,400.5 1,396.1 1,398.5 1,429.5 1,461.6 1,485.9 1,485.8 1,493.2
short-term loans 439.8 462.2 499.4 471.1 462.2 457.7 473.4 496.4 499.4 504.7 515.7
longer-term loans 936.2 933.9 986.4 929.3 933.9 940.7 956.0 965.3 986.4 981.1 977.4
Claims from companypension commitments 226.5 229.2 235.0 228.5 229.2 230.6 232.1 233.5 235.0 236.5 237.9
Other liabilities 816.3 807.8 834.4 817.9 807.8 804.9 822.1 810.9 834.4 852.1 884.7
Total 4,331.4 4,577.7 4,496.4 4,452.7 4,577.7 4,570.3 4,654.8 4,381.0 4,496.4 4,694.7 4,622.9
1Including non-profit institutions serving households. 2Including money market and supplementary pension funds. 4Including accumulated interest-bearing surplus
paper. 3Including private pension funds, burial funds, occupational pension schemes shares with insurance corporations. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
54  Monthly Report
November 2012
IX Public finances in Germany
 
1 General government: deficit and debt level as defined in the Maastricht Treaty
 
 
 
Social Social
General Central State Local security General Central State Local security
government government government government funds government government government government funds
Period € billion as a percentage of GDP
Deficit/surplus1
2006 − 37.9 − 34.4 − 11.8 + 3.3 + 5.0 − 1.6 − 1.5 − 0.5 + 0.1 + 0.2
2007 + 5.8 − 18.6 + 2.5 + 11.1 + 10.8 + 0.2 − 0.8 + 0.1 + 0.5 + 0.4
2008 − 1.9 − 16.6 − 1.2 + 9.0 + 6.9 − 0.1 − 0.7 − 0.0 + 0.4 + 0.3
2009 p − 73.2 − 38.4 − 18.4 − 2.2 − 14.2 − 3.1 − 1.6 − 0.8 − 0.1 − 0.6
2010 2, p − 103.4 − 82.6 − 19.8 − 5.3 + 4.3 − 4.1 − 3.3 − 0.8 − 0.2 + 0.2
2011 p − 20.2 − 26.7 − 11.3 + 1.9 + 15.9 − 0.8 − 1.0 − 0.4 + 0.1 + 0.6
2010          H1  2, p − 36.4 − 27.4 − 8.5 − 4.1 + 3.5 − 3.0 − 2.3 − 0.7 − 0.3 + 0.3
         H2  p − 67.2 − 55.6 − 11.2 − 1.3 + 0.8 − 5.2 − 4.3 − 0.9 − 0.1 + 0.1
2011          H1  p − 3.9 − 15.2 − 1.4 + 1.9 + 10.8 − 0.3 − 1.2 − 0.1 + 0.1 + 0.9
         H2  p − 15.8 − 11.2 − 9.7 + 0.0 + 5.1 − 1.2 − 0.8 − 0.7 + 0.0 + 0.4
2012          H1  pe + 8.4 − 6.9 − 0.8 + 4.4 + 11.6 + 0.6 − 0.5 − 0.1 + 0.3 + 0.9
Debt level3 End of year or quarter
2006 1,573.8 970.7 493.7 124.9 1.7 68.0 42.0 21.3 5.4 0.1
2007 1,583.7 978.0 497.8 123.2 1.6 65.2 40.3 20.5 5.1 0.1
2008 1,652.3 1,007.6 536.7 123.1 1.5 66.8 40.7 21.7 5.0 0.1
2009 1,768.6 1,075.7 577.8 129.5 1.3 74.5 45.3 24.3 5.5 0.1
2010 pe 2,059.0 1,316.6 624.1 134.7 1.3 82.5 52.7 25.0 5.4 0.1
2011 pe 2,088.0 1,326.9 638.4 139.3 1.3 80.5 51.2 24.6 5.4 0.1
2010          Q1 pe 1,787.9 1,088.5 583.0 130.7 1.3 74.5 45.4 24.3 5.4 0.1
         Q2 pe 1,829.3 1,099.1 611.7 133.1 1.3 75.2 45.2 25.1 5.5 0.1
         Q3 pe 1,853.5 1,116.5 617.6 135.0 1.6 75.2 45.3 25.0 5.5 0.1
         Q4 pe 2,059.0 1,316.6 624.1 134.7 1.3 82.5 52.7 25.0 5.4 0.1
2011          Q1 pe 2,058.7 1,318.1 620.3 136.6 1.7 81.3 52.1 24.5 5.4 0.1
         Q2 pe 2,073.2 1,324.0 627.2 137.7 2.7 81.1 51.8 24.5 5.4 0.1
         Q3 pe 2,086.7 1,334.0 631.8 137.9 1.3 80.9 51.7 24.5 5.3 0.0
         Q4 pe 2,088.0 1,326.9 638.4 139.3 1.3 80.5 51.2 24.6 5.4 0.1
2012          Q1 pe 2,116.2 1,344.5 647.6 142.1 1.3 81.1 51.5 24.8 5.4 0.1
         Q2 pe 2,169.4 1,373.4 674.3 141.3 1.3 82.8 52.4 25.7 5.4 0.0
Sources: Federal Statistical Office and Bundesbank calculations. 1Unlike the fiscal bal- counts. 2Including the €4.4 billion proceeds received from the 2010 frequency auc-
ance as shown in the national accounts, the deficit as defined in the Maastricht tion. 3Quarterly GDP ratios are based on the national output of the four preceding
Treaty includes interest flows from swaps and forward rate agreements. The quarters. 
half-year figures correspond to the deficit/surplus according to the national ac-
 
 
2 General government: revenue, expenditure and fiscal deficit/surplus as shown in the national accounts*
  
 
Revenue Expenditure
of which of which
Compen- Gross Memo item
Social con- Social sation of capital Deficit/ Total tax
Period Total Taxes tributions Other Total benefits employees Interest formation Other surplus burden  1 
€ billion
2006 1,011.1 512.7 400.7 97.7 1,049.3 580.6 177.2 66.1 33.7 191.6 − 38.2 924.7
2007 1,062.3 558.4 400.9 103.0 1,056.8 579.4 178.2 68.5 36.0 194.6 + 5.5 971.3
2008 1,088.6 572.6 408.3 107.7 1,090.5 590.3 182.6 68.3 38.9 210.5 − 1.8 993.8
2009 p 1,071.7 547.5 410.8 113.5 1,144.7 622.9 191.0 63.6 41.6 225.8 − 73.0 968.4
2010 p 1,087.4 548.8 421.1 117.5 2 1,191.0 633.0 195.3 63.4 41.9 2 257.4 2 − 103.6 980.1
2011 p 1,154.9 589.5 436.9 128.5 1,174.5 633.3 199.7 65.9 42.7 233.0 − 19.7 1,037.0
as a percentage of GDP
2006 43.7 22.2 17.3 4.2 45.3 25.1 7.7 2.9 1.5 8.3 − 1.7 40.0
2007 43.7 23.0 16.5 4.2 43.5 23.9 7.3 2.8 1.5 8.0 + 0.2 40.0
2008 44.0 23.1 16.5 4.4 44.1 23.9 7.4 2.8 1.6 8.5 − 0.1 40.2
2009 p 45.1 23.1 17.3 4.8 48.2 26.2 8.0 2.7 1.7 9.5 − 3.1 40.8
2010 p 43.6 22.0 16.9 4.7 2 47.7 25.4 7.8 2.5 1.7 2 10.3 2 − 4.1 39.3
2011 p 44.5 22.7 16.9 5.0 45.3 24.4 7.7 2.5 1.6 9.0 − 0.8 40.0
Percentage growth rates
2006 + 4.3 + 7.8 + 0.9 + 1.2 + 0.6 + 0.2 + 0.3 + 4.6 + 7.4 − 0.4 . + 4.6
2007 + 5.1 + 8.9 + 0.1 + 5.4 + 0.7 − 0.2 + 0.6 + 3.6 + 6.7 + 1.5 . + 5.0
2008 + 2.5 + 2.5 + 1.8 + 4.6 + 3.2 + 1.9 + 2.5 − 0.4 + 7.9 + 8.2 . + 2.3
2009 p − 1.6 − 4.4 + 0.6 + 5.4 + 5.0 + 5.5 + 4.6 − 6.9 + 6.9 + 7.3 . − 2.6
2010 p + 1.5 + 0.2 + 2.5 + 3.5 + 4.0 + 1.6 + 2.3 − 0.3 + 0.8 + 14.0 . + 1.2
2011 p + 6.2 + 7.4 + 3.7 + 9.4 − 1.4 + 0.0 + 2.3 + 3.9 + 2.0 − 9.5 . + 5.8
Source: Federal Statistical Office. *Figures in accordance with ESA 1995. In the website. 1Taxes and social contributions plus customs duties and the EU share in
Monthly Reports up to December 2006, customs duties, the EU share in VAT revenue VAT revenue. 2Including the €4.4 billion proceeds received from the 2010 frequency
andEU subsidies were included in the national accounts’ data (without affecting the auction, which are deducted from other expenditure in the national accounts. 
fiscal deficit/surplus). This information can still be found on the Bundesbank’s

Deutsche Bundesbank
55  Monthly Report
November 2012
IX Public finances in Germany
 
3 General government: budgetary development (as per government’s financial statistics)
 
 
€ billion
Central, state and local government  1 Social security funds 2 General government, total
Revenue Expenditure
of which of which 3 
Finan- Person- Fixed Finan-
cial nel asset cialtransac- expend- Current forma- transac- Deficit / Rev- Expend- Deficit / Rev- Expend- Deficit /
Period Total 
4 Taxes tions 5 Total 4 iture grants Interest tion tions 5 surplus enue 6 iture surplus enue iture surplus
2004 pe 545.8 442.8 24.1 610.4 173.4 236.9 64.8 34.3 9.6 − 64.5 469.7 468.6 + 1.1 926.8 990.2 − 63.4
2005 pe 568.9 452.1 31.3 620.6 172.1 245.3 64.0 33.0 14.3 − 51.7 467.8 471.3 − 3.4 947.4 1,002.5 − 55.1
2006 pe 590.9 488.4 18.8 626.2 169.7 252.1 64.4 33.7 11.6 − 35.3 486.3 466.6 + 19.7 988.2 1,003.8 − 15.6
2007 pe 644.8 538.2 17.7 644.2 182.2 250.0 66.2 34.6 9.5 + 0.6 475.3 466.4 + 8.9 1,025.6 1,016.1 + 9.5
2008 pe 668.9 561.2 13.4 677.4 187.3 259.9 67.3 36.4 18.6 − 8.5 485.5 478.9 + 6.6 1,058.5 1,060.5 − 1.9
2009 pe 631.4 524.0 9.2 720.9 194.9 271.1 63.7 40.4 38.0 − 89.5 492.0 505.9 − 13.9 1,021.4 1,124.9 − 103.4
2010 pe 650.5 530.6 12.7 732.7 199.8 293.9 60.1 40.1 19.4 − 82.2 516.9 512.9 + 4.0 1,049.7 1,128.0 − 78.2
2011 pe 712.5 573.4 30.6 737.3 208.3 283.6 60.0 42.4 22.9 − 24.8 526.6 511.6 + 15.0 1,127.2 1,137.1 − 9.8
2010          Q1 p 147.9 121.6 2.6 180.4 47.6 74.8 21.2 5.5 4.9 − 32.5 123.6 127.6 − 4.0 242.2 278.7 − 36.5
         Q2 p 7 163.6 134.9 3.7 173.6 48.1 71.2 13.2 8.1 6.2 − 10.0 128.2 127.3 + 0.9 7 262.3 271.5 − 9.2
         Q3 p 153.8 127.6 3.0 177.3 48.3 69.8 16.1 10.5 3.4 − 23.6 124.7 125.6 − 1.0 251.5 276.0 − 24.5
         Q4 p 183.4 147.6 3.2 199.5 54.0 76.1 9.2 14.7 4.8 − 16.2 133.3 131.8 + 1.5 290.4 305.1 − 14.7
2011          Q1 p 162.9 134.9 4.1 183.6 49.7 73.8 21.2 6.3 4.6 − 20.7 127.3 127.2 + 0.1 261.0 281.5 − 20.5
         Q2 p 189.6 145.6 18.6 172.7 50.0 68.0 10.9 8.7 8.7 + 16.9 130.3 126.2 + 4.1 292.5 271.5 + 21.0
         Q3 p 162.6 136.6 2.7 182.6 50.9 67.2 18.8 10.8 4.5 − 20.0 127.9 125.8 + 2.0 264.3 282.2 − 17.9
         Q4 p 195.7 156.3 5.0 196.5 55.9 72.8 8.9 15.3 5.0 − 0.8 140.1 132.0 + 8.1 307.3 300.0 + 7.3
Source: Bundesbank calculations based on the data from the Federal Statistical mated. 3The development of the types of expenditure recorded here is influenced in
Office. 1Including subsidiary budgets, from 2007 also including the post office pen- part by statistical changeovers. 4Including discrepancies in clearing transactions be-
sion fund; excluding the special fund ”Provision for final payments for inflation-in- tween central, state and local government. 5On the revenue side, this contains pro-
dexed Federal securities”, which was set up in 2009. Unlike the annual figures based ceeds booked as disposals of equity interests and as loan repayments. On the expend-on the annual calculations of the Federal Statistical Office, the quarterly figures do iture side, this contains the acquisition of equity interests and loans granted. 6In-
not include municipal special purpose associations and various special ac- cluding Federal Government liquidity assistance to the Federal Labour Office. 7In-
counts. 2The annual figures do not tally with the sum of the quarterly figures, as the cluding the €4.4 billion proceeds received from the 2010 frequency auction. 
latter are 
all provisional. The quarterly figures for some insurance sectors are esti-
4 Central, state and local government: budgetary development (as per government’s financial statistics)
 
 
€ billion
Central government State government  2,3 Local government 3,4 
Period Revenue 1 Expenditure Deficit / surplus Revenue Expenditure Deficit / surplus Revenue Expenditure Deficit / surplus
2004 233.9 273.6 − 39.7 233.5 257.1 − 23.6 147.0 150.1 − 3.1
2005 250.0 281.5 − 31.5 237.4 259.6 − 22.2 151.3 153.2 − 1.9
2006 254.6 282.8 − 28.2 250.3 260.1 − 9.8 161.1 157.4 + 3.72007 
pe 277.4 292.1 − 14.7 275.9 267.5 + 8.4 171.3 162.4 + 8.9
2008 pe 292.0 303.8 − 11.8 279.3 278.1 + 1.2 176.9 169.0 + 7.9
2009 pe 282.6 317.1 − 34.5 265.9 293.4 − 27.5 172.0 178.9 − 6.9
2010 pe 288.0 332.4 − 44.4 278.5 302.1 − 23.6 176.5 183.9 − 7.4
2011 pe 307.1 324.8 − 17.7 304.0 315.4 − 11.4 185.6 187.0 − 1.4
2010          Q1 p 61.1 82.6 − 21.5 65.0 73.5 − 8.5 34.6 41.2 − 6.6
         Q2 p 5 75.6 80.6 − 5.0 68.3 69.1 − 0.8 42.2 43.5 − 1.3
         Q3 p 66.2 82.7 − 16.6 68.5 73.3 − 4.8 43.8 45.2 − 1.4
         Q4 p 85.2 86.5 − 1.3 75.8 85.0 − 9.2 53.8 52.3 + 1.5
2011          Q1 p 65.4 84.5 − 19.1 74.1 75.6 − 1.5 37.1 42.5 − 5.3
         Q2 p 76.6 73.5 + 3.1 76.0 75.8 + 0.2 45.4 44.3 + 1.1
         Q3 p 72.6 84.8 − 12.2 71.9 75.1 − 3.2 46.4 46.6 − 0.2
         Q4 p 92.5 82.0 + 10.5 81.1 87.7 − 6.6 54.7 51.9 + 2.8
2012          Q1 p 65.4 83.1 − 17.7 74.6 76.3 − 1.7 39.9 44.8 − 4.9
Source: Bundesbank calculations based on the data from the Federal Statistical lations of the Federal Statistical Office, the quarterly figures do not include various
Office. 1Any amounts of the Bundesbank’s profit distribution exceeding the refer- special accounts and municipal special purpose associations. 4From 2012 core
ence value that were used to repay parts of the debt of central government’s special budgets and off-budget entities; previously, only core budgets. 5Including the
funds are not included here. 2Including the local authority level of the city-states €4.4 billion proceeds received from the 2010 frequency auction. 
Berlin, Bremen
and Hamburg. 3Unlike the annual figure based on the annual calcu-

Deutsche Bundesbank
56  Monthly Report
November 2012
IX Public finances in Germany
 
5 Central, state and local government: tax revenue
 
 
€ million
Central and state government and European Union
Memo item
Balance of Amounts deducted
Central State Local untransferred in the federal
Period Total Total government 1 government European Union 2 government 3 tax shares 4 budget 5 
2005 452,078 392,313 211,779 158,823 21,711 59,750 + 16 21,634
2006 488,444 421,151 225,634 173,374 22,142 67,316 − 22 21,742
2007 538,243 465,554 251,747 191,558 22,249 72,551 + 138 21,643
2008 561,182 484,182 260,690 200,411 23,081 77,190 − 190 21,510
2009 524,000 455,615 252,842 182,273 20,501 68,419 − 34 24,846
2010 530,587 460,230 254,537 181,326 24,367 70,385 − 28 28,726
2011 573,352 496,739 276,599 195,676 24,464 76,570 + 43 28,615
2010          Q1 121,321 104,370 54,316 41,777 8,278 11,299 + 5,652 7,133
         Q2 134,843 116,767 66,331 46,516 3,919 18,270 − 194 7,127
         Q3 127,311 109,956 61,146 43,102 5,709 17,564 − 209 7,329
         Q4 147,112 129,137 72,744 49,932 6,462 23,253 − 5,278 7,137
2011          Q1 135,590 115,878 60,579 46,582 8,717 13,640 + 6,071 6,989
         Q2 145,636 126,086 71,530 50,289 4,266 19,544 + 6 7,102
         Q3 136,382 117,812 66,277 45,938 5,598 18,916 − 346 7,662
         Q4 155,744 136,963 78,213 52,866 5,883 24,469 − 5,688 6,863
2012          Q1 143,343 122,846 62,467 50,558 9,821 13,964 + 6,533 6,831
         Q2 150,393 129,545 72,573 51,679 5,293 20,978 − 131 6,878
         Q3 ... 127,189 70,803 50,981 5,404 ... ... 7,643
2011          Sep . 45,565 25,278 18,137 2,150 . . 2,376
2012          Sep . 47,271 25,963 19,120 2,188 . . 2,281
Sources: Federal Ministry of Finance, Federal Statistical Office and Bundesbank calcu- from central government tax revenue. 3Including local government taxes in the
lations. 1Before deducting supplementary central government grants, shares in city-states Berlin, Bremen and Hamburg. 4Difference between local government’s
energy tax revenue, compensation for the transfer of motor vehicle tax to central share in the joint taxes received by the state government cash offices in the period in
government, which are remitted to state government and consolidation question (see Table IX. 6) and the amounts passed on to local government in theaid.2Custom duties and shares in VAT and gross national income accruing to the EU same period. 5 Volume of the positions mentioned under footnote 1. 
 
 
6 Central and state government and European Union: tax revenue, by type
  
€ million
Joint taxes
Memo
Income taxes 2 Turnover taxes 5 item
Local
Local govern-
Invest- business Central State ment
Assessed ment Turnover tax govern- govern- EU share in
Wage income Corpora- income Turnover tax on trans- ment ment customs joint
Period Total 1 Total tax 3 tax tion tax tax 4 Total tax imports fers 6 taxes 7 taxes 7 duties taxes
2005 415,355 161,960 118,919 9,766 16,333 16,943 139,713 108,440 31,273 6,218 83,508 20,579 3,378 23,042
2006 446,139 182,614 122,612 17,567 22,898 19,537 146,688 111,318 35,370 7,013 84,215 21,729 3,880 24,988
2007 493,817 204,698 131,774 25,027 22,929 24,969 169,636 127,522 42,114 6,975 85,690 22,836 3,983 28,263
2008 515,498 220,483 141,895 32,685 15,868 30,035 175,989 130,789 45,200 6,784 86,302 21,937 4,002 31,316
2009 484,880 193,684 135,165 26,430 7,173 24,916 176,991 141,907 35,084 4,908 89,318 16,375 3,604 29,265
2010 488,731 192,816 127,904 31,179 12,041 21,691 180,042 136,459 43,582 5,925 93,426 12,146 4,378 28,501
2011 527,256 213,534 139,749 31,996 15,634 26,155 190,033 138,957 51,076 6,888 99,134 13,095 4,571 30,517
2010          Q1 111,163 45,127 30,255 6,155 1,951 6,766 42,891 34,054 8,837 215 19,001 2,814 1,115 6,793
         Q2 123,859 51,667 30,447 9,681 3,830 7,710 44,343 33,779 10,564 1,311 22,682 2,914 943 7,092
         Q3 116,691 42,813 30,445 7,320 1,588 3,460 44,997 33,258 11,740 1,574 22,922 3,242 1,143 6,734
         Q4 137,019 53,209 36,757 8,023 4,672 3,756 47,810 35,369 12,441 2,825 28,821 3,177 1,177 7,882
2011          Q1 123,131 50,328 32,478 6,755 2,485 8,611 47,389 35,528 11,861 366 20,515 3,408 1,124 7,253
         Q2 133,727 57,624 34,144 9,366 4,215 9,900 46,091 33,082 13,010 1,692 24,026 3,207 1,087 7,641
         Q3 125,021 47,420 33,590 7,111 3,028 3,691 47,161 34,232 12,929 1,735 24,309 3,229 1,169 7,209
         Q4 145,377 58,162 39,538 8,764 5,907 3,954 49,392 36,115 13,276 3,096 30,285 3,251 1,191 8,414
2012          Q1 130,623 56,569 34,106 8,456 5,471 8,537 48,966 36,340 12,626 275 20,059 3,629 1,126 7,777
         Q2 137,597 59,832 36,148 10,010 4,995 8,679 46,600 32,871 13,730 1,661 25,235 3,255 1,013 8,052
         Q3 135,170 54,841 36,582 8,877 2,532 6,850 49,147 36,232 12,915 1,841 24,423 3,718 1,200 7,981
2011          Sep 48,750 23,255 10,400 8,567 3,345 943 15,605 11,142 4,463 2 8,359 1,068 461 3,185
2012          Sep 50,779 24,278 11,187 9,665 2,026 1,399 16,694 12,247 4,448 1 8,251 1,124 431 3,508
Source: Federal Ministry of Finance and Bundesbank calculations. 1This total, unlike deducting child benefit and subsidies for supplementary private pension
that in Table IX. 5, does not include the receipts from the equalisation of burdens plans. 4Final withholding tax on interest income and capital gains, non-assessed
levies, local business tax (less local business tax transfers to central and state govern- taxes on earnings. 5The allocation of revenue to central, state and local govern-
ment), real property taxes and other local government taxes, or the balance of un- ment, which is adjusted at more regular intervals, is regulated in section 1 of the Rev-transferred tax shares. 2Respective percentage share of central, state and local enue Adjustment Act. Respective percentage share of central, state and local govern-
government in revenue: wage tax and assessed income tax 42.5:42.5:15, corpor- ment in revenue for 2011: 53.9:44.1:2.0. The EU share is deducted from centralation tax and non-assessed taxes on earnings 50:50:-, final withholding tax on inter- government’s share. 6Respective percentage share of central and state government
est income and capital gains, non-assessed taxes on earnings 44:44:12. 3After for 2011: 22.1:77.9. 7 For the breakdown, see Table IX. 7. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
57  Monthly Report
November 2012
IX Public finances in Germany
 
7 Central, state and local government: individual taxes  
 
 
€ million
Central government taxes 1 State government taxes 1 Local government taxes
Tax on of which
the acqui-
Soli- Motor Motor sition of Inherit- Local Real
Period Energy Tobacco darity Insurance vehicle Electri- Spirits vehicle land and ance business property
tax tax surcharge tax tax 2 city tax tax Other tax 2 buildings tax Other 3 Total tax taxes
2005 40,101 14,273 10,315 8,750 . 6,462 2,142 1,465 8,674 4,791 4,097 3,018 42,941 32,129 10,247
2006 39,916 14,387 11,277 8,775 . 6,273 2,160 1,428 8,937 6,125 3,763 2,904 49,319 38,370 10,3992007 38,955 14,254 12,349 10,331 . 6,355 1,959 1,488 8,898 6,952 4,203 2,783 51,401 40,116 10,7132008 39,248 13,574 13,146 10,478 . 6,261 2,126 1,470 8,842 5,728 4,771 2,596 52,468 41,037 10,8072009 39,822 13,366 11,927 10,548 3,803 6,278 2,101 1,473 4,398 4,857 4,550 2,571 44,028 32,421 10,936
2010 39,838 13,492 11,713 10,284 8,488 6,171 1,990 1,449 − 5,290 4,404 2,452 47,780 35,712 11,315
2011 40,036 14,414 12,781 10,755 8,422 7,247 2,149 3,330 − 6,366 4,246 2,484 52,984 40,424 11,674
2010          Q1 4,446 2,462 2,856 4,496 2,345 1,498 526 372 − 1,229 918 667 10,374 7,641 2,518
         Q2 9,596 3,327 3,100 2,060 2,235 1,570 437 357 − 1,207 1,115 591 12,295 9,201 2,915
         Q3 10,172 3,608 2,615 2,110 2,012 1,563 489 354 − 1,430 1,216 597 12,194 8,618 3,373         Q4 15,625 4,096 3,142 1,619 1,895 1,540 538 366 − 1,425 1,156 597 12,918 10,252 2,508
2011          Q1 4,457 2,893 3,072 4,869 2,349 1,785 574 516 − 1,555 1,170 683 12,825 9,948 2,631
         Q2 10,002 3,300 3,450 2,017 2,215 1,960 482 599 − 1,464 1,129 614 13,601 10,366 3,031         Q3 10,058 3,418 2,879 2,145 2,006 1,763 541 1,499 − 1,581 1,039 609 13,095 9,386 3,473         Q4 15,519 4,803 3,379 1,723 1,852 1,739 553 716 − 1,766 907 578 13,463 10,724 2,540
2012          Q1 4,406 2,305 3,308 5,180 2,328 1,714 576 241 − 1,876 1,057 696 12,995 9,990 2,717
         Q2 9,707 3,550 3,644 2,011 2,258 1,966 490 1,610 − 1,683 972 601 14,457 11,166 3,048         Q3 10,015 3,610 3,183 2,161 2,005 1,567 506 1,376 − 1,913 1,210 594 ... ... ...
2011          Sep 3,309 1,181 1,388 507 657 576 203 538 − 543 332 192 . . .2012          Sep 3,431 1,097 1,439 459 588 574 168 496 − 616 301 207 . . .
Sources: Federal Ministry of Finance, Federal Statistical Office and Bundesbank calcu- enue is attributable to central government. Postings to state government shown there-
lations. 1For the sum total, see Table IX. 6. 2As of 1 July 2009, motor vehicle tax rev- after relate to the booking of cash flows. 3 Notably betting, lottery and beer tax.   
 
 
8 German pension insurance scheme: budgetary development and assets*
  
€ million
Revenue 1,2 Expenditure 1,2 Assets 1,5 
of which of which
Equity
Payments interests, Memo
from Pen- mort- item
central sioners’ gages Adminis-
Contri- govern- Pension health Deficit/ and other Real trative
Period Total butions 3 ment Total payments insurance 4 surplus Total Deposits 6 Securities loans 7 estate assets
2005 229,428 156,264 71,917 233,357 199,873 13,437 − 3,929 1,976 1,794 16 42 123 4,888
2006 241,231 168,083 71,773 233,668 200,459 13,053 + 7,563 10,047 9,777 115 46 109 4,9122007 236,642 162,225 72,928 235,459 201,642 13,665 + 1,183 12,196 11,270 765 46 115 4,8192008 242,770 167,611 73,381 238,995 204,071 14,051 + 3,775 16,531 16,313 36 56 126 4,6452009 244,689 169,183 74,313 244,478 208,475 14,431 + 211 16,821 16,614 23 64 120 4,525
2010 250,133 172,767 76,173 248,076 211,852 14,343 + 2,057 19,375 18,077 1,120 73 105 4,464
2011 254,968 177,424 76,200 250,241 212,602 15,015 + 4,727 24,965 22,241 2,519 88 117 4,379
2010          Q1 59,761 40,601 18,917 61,861 53,059 3,582 − 2,100 14,922 14,717 20 64 120 4,490
         Q2 62,249 43,054 18,923 61,999 53,006 3,585 + 250 15,254 15,053 20 69 112 4,478
         Q3 61,237 42,048 18,912 62,091 53,102 3,589 − 854 14,853 14,656 20 68 109 4,474
         Q4 66,317 47,060 18,933 61,887 52,966 3,579 + 4,430 19,274 17,978 1,120 68 108 4,476
2011          Q1 60,804 41,608 18,902 62,188 53,176 3,742 − 1,384 18,063 17,069 819 74 101 4,482
         Q2 63,452 44,307 18,855 62,058 52,920 3,731 + 1,394 19,704 18,507 1,019 78 100 4,475         Q3 62,354 43,109 18,902 62,844 53,341 3,761 − 490 19,959 19,266 519 79 94 4,445         Q4 67,748 48,391 19,030 62,823 53,371 3,774 + 4,925 25,339 22,226 2,919 79 114 4,410
2012          Q1 62,038 42,411 19,318 62,883 53,747 3,779 − 845 24,261 21,839 2,219 88 116 4,366
         Q2 64,721 45,318 19,086 62,885 53,532 3,772 + 1,836 26,026 23,950 1,869 92 115 4,356         Q3 63,669 44,188 19,193 64,275 54,788 3,866 − 606 25,968 23,265 2,509 94 100 4,328
Sources: Federal Ministry of Labour and Social Affairs and German pension insurance cluding investment spending and proceeds. 3Including contributions for recipients
scheme. *Excluding the German pension insurance scheme for the mining, railway of government cash benefits. 4Including long-term care insurance for pensioners
and maritime industries. 1The final annual figures do not tally with the quarterly fig- until 2004 Q1. 5Largely corresponds to the sustainability reserves. End of year or
ures, as the latter are all provisional. 2Including financial compensation payments. Ex- quarter. 6 Including cash. 7 Excluding loans to other social security funds. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
58  Monthly Report
November 2012
IX Public finances in Germany
 
9 Federal Employment Agency: budgetary development*
 
 
€ million
Revenue Expenditure
of which of which Deficit
offsetting
Unemployment support 1,2 Job promotion 2,3 grant orloan from
Measures central
Contri- Western Eastern Western Eastern financed Deficit/ govern-
Period Total 
4 butions Levies 5 Total 6 Total Germany Germany Total Germany Germany by levies  7 surplus ment
2005 52,692 46,989 1,436 53,089 27,654 20,332 7,322 11,590 7,421 4,169 1,450 − 397 397
2006 55,384 51,176 1,123 44,162 23,249 17,348 5,901 9,259 6,185 3,074 1,089 + 11,221 0
2007 42,838 32,264 971 36,196 17,356 13,075 4,282 8,370 5,748 2,623 949 + 6,643 −
2008 38,289 26,452 974 39,407 14,283 10,652 3,631 8,712 6,222 2,490 920 − 1,118 −
2009 34,254 22,046 1,000 48,057 20,866 16,534 4,332 11,595 8,794 2,801 1,946 − 13,803 −
2010 37,070 22,614 3,222 45,213 19,456 15,629 3,827 10,791 8,287 2,504 740 − 8,143 5,200
2011 pe 37,564 25,434 351 37,524 14,661 11,918 2,744 9,004 6,925 2,079 683 + 41 −
2010          Q1 10,020 5,196 714 11,681 6,475 5,112 1,362 2,957 2,263 694 208 − 1,661 −
         Q2 10,649 5,601 784 10,501 5,264 4,148 1,116 2,872 2,204 668 184 + 148 −
         Q3 8,109 5,527 808 8,887 4,082 3,353 729 2,431 1,863 567 193 − 778 −
         Q4 8,291 6,290 916 14,144 3,635 3,016 619 2,531 1,957 575 154 − 5,853 5,200
2011          Q1 10,259 5,853 123 9,583 4,602 3,701 901 2,660 2,048 612 186 + 676 −
         Q2 8,802 6,358 60 8,246 3,710 3,007 703 2,285 1,753 532 175 + 556 −
         Q3 7,467 6,205 76 7,450 3,293 2,707 586 1,910 1,464 446 187 + 17 −
         Q4 pe 11,037 7,017 92 12,245 3,056 2,502 554 2,149 1,660 489 134 − 1,209 −
2012          Q1 9,709 6,175 131 8,452 4,319 3,587 732 1,946 1,580 366 211 + 1,257 −
         Q2 8,331 6,620 142 7,816 3,707 3,105 601 1,765 1,429 336 329 + 515 −
         Q3 7,502 6,508 165 7,539 3,389 2,907 482 1,462 1,177 285 218 − 37 −
Source: Federal Employment Agency. *Excluding pension fund. 1Unemployment icit offsetting grant or loan. 5Levies to promote winter construction and to pay insolv-
benefit and short-time working benefit. 2Including contributions to the statutory ency compensation to employees. 6From 2005, including a compensatory amount
health, pension and long-term care insurance schemes. 3Vocational training, meas- or a reintegration payment to central government. 7Promotion of winter con-
ures to encourage job take-up, rehabilitation, job creation measures, compensation struction and insolvency compensation for employees. top-up payments and business start-up grants. 4Excluding central government def-
 
 
10 Statutory health insurance scheme: budgetary development
  
€ million
Revenue 1 Expenditure 1 
of which of which
Central Thera- Adminis-
govern- peutical trative
Contri- ment Hospital Pharma- Medical Dental treatment Sickness expend- Deficit/
Period Total butions 2 funds 3 Total treatment ceuticals treatment treatment  4 and aids benefits iture 5 surplus
2005 145,742 140,250 2,500 144,071 48,959 25,358 23,096 9,928 8,284 5,868 8,303 + 1,671
2006 149,929 142,183 4,200 148,297 50,327 25,835 23,896 10,364 8,303 5,708 8,319 + 1,632
2007 156,058 149,964 2,500 154,314 50,850 27,791 24,788 10,687 8,692 6,017 8,472 + 1,744
2008 162,516 155,883 2,500 161,334 52,623 29,145 25,887 10,926 9,095 6,583 8,680 + 1,182
2009 169,758 158,594 7,200 170,823 55,977 30,696 27,635 11,219 9,578 7,258 8,947 − 1,065
2010 179,524 160,792 15,700 175,803 56,697 30,147 28,432 11,419 10,609 7,797 9,553 + 3,721
2011 189,034 170,860 15,300 179,597 58,501 28,939 29,056 11,651 11,193 8,529 9,486 + 9,437
2010          Q1 6 43,093 38,542 3,919 43,274 14,419 7,549 7,255 2,871 2,368 1,996 2,130 − 182
         Q2 44,440 39,826 3,931 43,999 14,037 7,870 7,128 2,882 2,669 1,955 2,261 + 441
         Q3 44,457 39,808 3,925 43,662 14,122 7,592 7,007 2,786 2,676 1,903 2,255 + 795
         Q4 47,580 42,600 3,925 44,842 14,144 7,307 7,107 2,952 2,853 1,943 2,876 + 2,738
2011          Q1 45,339 40,871 3,825 44,392 15,075 7,158 7,361 2,893 2,528 2,210 2,173 + 947
         Q2 46,887 42,370 3,825 44,955 14,601 7,239 7,372 3,001 2,834 2,106 2,263 + 1,931
         Q3 46,865 42,298 3,825 44,432 14,594 7,236 7,160 2,768 2,762 2,069 2,292 + 2,433
         Q4 49,866 45,291 3,825 45,878 14,418 7,382 7,161 2,997 3,117 2,125 2,682 + 3,988
2012          Q1 46,433 42,249 3,500 45,971 15,579 7,424 7,502 2,971 2,664 2,336 2,195 + 462
         Q2 47,942 43,739 3,500 46,178 15,115 7,419 7,515 3,015 2,874 2,281 2,244 + 1,764
Source: Federal Ministry of Health. 1The final annual figures do not tally with the penses for levying contributions incurred by other social insurance funds. Including ad-
sum of the quarterly figures, as the latter are all provisional. Excluding revenue and ministrative expenditure on disease management programmes. 6Data on individual
expenditure as part of the risk structure compensation scheme. 2Including contri- expenditure categories for 2010 only partly comparable with prior-year figures owing
butions from subsidised low-paid part-time employment. 3Federal grant and liquid- to a change in the statistical definition. 
ity assistance. 4Including dentures. 5Net, ie after deducting reimbursements for ex-

Deutsche Bundesbank
59  Monthly Report
November 2012
IX Public finances in Germany
 
11 Statutory long-term care insurance scheme: budgetary development
 
 
€ million
Revenue 1 Expenditure 1 
of which
Contributions to
of which Non-cash In-patient Nursing pension insur- Administrative Deficit/
Period Total Contributions 2 Total care benefits care benefit ance scheme 3 expenditure surplus
2005 17,526 17,385 17,891 2,409 8,516 4,050 890 875 − 366
2006 17,749 17,611 18,064 2,437 8,671 4,017 862 886 − 3152007 18,036 17,858 18,385 2,475 8,831 4,050 861 896 − 3502008 19,785 19,608 19,163 2,605 9,054 4,225 868 941 + 6222009 21,300 21,137 20,314 2,742 9,274 4,443 878 984 + 986
2010 21,864 21,659 21,539 2,933 9,567 4,673 869 1,028 + 325
2011 22,294 22,145 21,962 3,002 9,700 4,735 881 1,034 + 331
2010          Q1 5,241 5,175 5,298 722 2,362 1,151 217 264 − 56
         Q2 5,398 5,369 5,302 707 2,378 1,167 219 258 + 95         Q3 5,385 5,358 5,416 735 2,398 1,160 220 266 − 31         Q4 5,760 5,739 5,432 743 2,417 1,195 225 229 + 328
2011          Q1 5,306 5,269 5,457 750 2,408 1,165 216 277 − 150
         Q2 5,519 5,496 5,396 713 2,417 1,173 210 263 + 123         Q3 5,513 5,486 5,551 774 2,442 1,191 221 255 − 38         Q4 5,904 5,877 5,526 742 2,442 1,216 223 240 + 378
2012          Q1 5,493 5,450 5,700 774 2,469 1,248 223 283 − 207
         Q2 5,713 5,686 5,656 758 2,478 1,254 217 276 + 57
Source: Federal Ministry of Health. 1The final annual figures do not tally with the special contributions for childless persons (0.25% of income subject to insurance
sum of the quarterly figures, as the latter are all provisional. 2Since 2005 including contributions). 3 For non-professional carers. 
 
 
12 Central government: borrowing in the 13 Central, state and local government: debt by creditor*
market
 
€ million € million
Total new borrowing
 1 of which of which Banking system Domestic non-banks
Change Change
in money in money Period Socialmarket market (End of year Bundes- Credit security Foreign
Period Gross 
2 Net loans deposits or quarter) Total bank institutions funds Other  1 creditors pe 
2005 + 224,922 + 35,479 + 4,511 + 6,041 2005 1,489,029 4,440 518,400 80 312,609 653,500
2006 + 221,873 + 32,656 + 3,258 + 6,308 2006 1,533,697 4,440 496,800 72 329,585 702,8002007 + 214,995 + 6,996 + 1,086 − 4,900 2007 1,540,381 4,440 456,900 68 317,473 761,5002008 + 233,356 + 26,208 + 6,888 + 9,036 2008 1,564,590 4,440 435,600 62 314,588 809,9002009 + 312,729 + 66,821 − 8,184 + 106 2009 1,657,842 4,440 438,700 59 321,943 892,700
2010 + 302,694 + 42,397 − 5,041 + 1,607 2010 1,732,530 4,440 400,100 21 389,469 938,500
2011 + 264,572 + 5,890 − 4,876 − 9,036 2011 
p 1,752,313 4,440 356,300 102 413,471 978,000
2010          Q1 + 74,369 + 12,637 − 5,322 − 1,520 2010          Q1 1,678,191 4,440 450,100 60 327,691 895,900
         Q2 + 83,082 + 3,666 − 4,143 + 1,950          Q2 1,687,957 4,440 469,600 60 310,857 903,000
         Q3 + 79,589 + 14,791 + 250 − 4,625          Q3 1,712,685 4,440 470,200 65 306,680 931,300
         Q4 + 65,655 + 11,304 + 4,174 + 5,803          Q4 1,732,530 4,440 400,100 21 389,469 938,500
2011          Q1 + 76,394 + 15,958 − 607 − 5,206 2011          Q1 p 1,749,605 4,440 412,000 87 374,578 958,500
         Q2 + 77,158 + 10,392 − 49 + 26,625          Q2 p 1,762,399 4,440 404,100 82 360,277 993,500
         Q3 + 59,256 − 8,152 − 4,177 − 22,608          Q3 p 1,758,910 4,440 387,900 82 379,188 987,300
         Q4 + 51,764 − 12,308 − 42 − 7,847          Q4 p 1,752,313 4,440 356,300 102 413,471 978,000
2012          Q1 + 72,603 + 12,524 + 8,251 − 2,380 2012          Q1 p 1,765,603 4,440 398,000 91 355,472 1,007,600
         Q2 + 68,851 + 13,623 + 2,836 + 19,969          Q2 p 1,779,730 4,440 409,700 92 326,398 1,039,100
Source:  Federal  Republic  of  Germany − Finance Agency. Source:  Bundesbank  calculations  based  on  data   from  the  Federal  Statistical 
1 Including  the  Financial  Market  Stabilisation Fund,  the In- Office. * Excluding direct intergovernmental borrowing. 1 Calculated as a residual. 
vestment and  Repayment Fund  and  the  Restructuring Fund 
for Credit Institutions. 2 After deducting repurchases. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
60  Monthly Report
November 2012
IX Public finances in Germany
 
14 Central, state and local government: debt by category*
 
 
€ million
Loans from non-banks Old debt
Direct
Treasury Five-year lending
Period discount Federal Federal Federal by credit Social Equal-
(End of year paper Treasury notes savings bonds institu- security isation
or quarter) Total (Bubills) 1 notes 2,3 (Bobls) 2 notes (Bunds) 2 Day-bond tions 4 funds Other 4 claims 5 Other 5,6 
Central, state and local government
2006 1,533,697 37,834 320,288 179,940 10,199 552,028 . 356,514 72 72,297 4,443 82
2007 1,540,381 39,510 329,108 177,394 10,287 574,512 . 329,588 68 75,396 4,443 76
2008 1,564,590 44,620 337,511 172,037 9,649 584,144 3,174 325,648 62 83,229 4,443 73
2009 1,657,842 105,970 361,727 174,219 9,471 594,999 2,495 300,927 59 103,462 4,442 71
2010 1,732,530 87,042 391,851 195,534 8,704 628,757 1,975 302,595 21 111,609 4,440 2
2011          Q1 p 1,749,605 84,961 391,885 211,821 8,500 629,716 1,845 304,152 87 112,196 4,440 2
         Q2 p 1,762,399 80,998 402,903 208,669 8,497 644,844 1,819 295,945 82 114,200 4,440 2
         Q3 p 1,758,910 74,764 410,222 219,785 8,349 634,402 1,970 292,102 82 112,792 4,440 2
         Q4 p 1,752,313 60,272 414,250 214,211 8,208 644,701 2,154 291,858 102 112,116 4,440 2
2012          Q1 p 1,765,603 54,592 410,685 226,486 7,869 646,884 2,134 302,310 91 110,109 4,440 2
         Q2 p 1,779,730 55,292 410,286 224,607 7,518 663,502 2,137 295,075 92 116,781 4,440 2
Central government7,8,9,10,11
2006 918,911 37,798 103,624 179,889 10,199 541,404 . 30,030 − 11,444 4,443 82
2007 939,988 37,385 102,083 177,394 10,287 574,156 . 22,829 − 11,336 4,443 75
2008 966,197 40,795 105,684 172,037 9,649 583,930 3,174 35,291 − 11,122 4,443 72
2009 1,033,017 104,409 113,637 174,219 9,471 594,780 2,495 18,347 − 11,148 4,442 70
2010 1,075,415 85,867 126,220 195,534 8,704 628,582 1,975 13,349 − 10,743 4,440 2
2011          Q1 1,091,373 82,607 129,208 211,821 8,500 629,541 1,845 13,056 − 10,353 4,440 2
         Q2 1,101,764 78,961 131,348 208,669 8,497 644,668 1,819 13,002 − 10,359 4,440 2
         Q3 1,093,612 73,277 132,428 219,785 8,349 634,226 1,970 9,091 − 10,045 4,440 2
         Q4 1,081,304 58,297 130,648 214,211 8,208 644,513 2,154 9,382 − 9,450 4,440 2
2012          Q1 1,093,828 52,161 126,956 226,486 7,869 646,696 2,134 17,894 − 9,190 4,440 2
         Q2 1,107,451 52,578 122,937 224,607 7,518 663,314 2,137 20,827 − 9,092 4,440 2
State government
2006 481,850 36 216,665 .... 209,270 2 55,876 . 1
2007 484,373 2,125 227,025 .... 194,956 2 60,264 . 1
2008 483,875 3,825 231,827 .... 179,978 3 68,241 . 1
2009 505,359 1,561 248,091 .... 167,310 8 88,389 . 1
2010 528,618 1,176 265,631 .... 167,351 1 94,459 . 1
2011          Q1 p 527,590 2,354 262,677 .... 167,058 67 95,433 . 1
         Q2 p 528,859 2,037 271,555 .... 157,773 62 97,431 . 1
         Q3 p 533,117 1,487 277,794 .... 157,436 62 96,338 . 1
         Q4 p 537,318 1,975 283,601 .... 154,292 62 97,387 . 1
2012          Q1 p 535,157 2,431 283,729 .... 153,307 51 95,639 . 1
         Q2 p 536,421 2,714 287,349 .... 143,897 52 102,409 . 1
Local government12
2006 118,380 . − . . 256 . 113,265 70 4,789 . .
2007 115,920 . − . . 256 . 111,803 66 3,796 . .
2008 114,518 . − . . 214 . 110,379 60 3,866 . .
2009 119,466 . − . . 219 . 115,270 52 3,925 . .
2010 128,497 . − . . 175 . 121,895 20 6,407 . .
2011          Q1 p 130,642 . − . . 175 . 124,037 20 6,410 . .
         Q2 p 131,776 . − . . 175 . 125,170 20 6,410 . .
         Q3 p 132,180 . − . . 175 . 125,575 20 6,410 . .
         Q4 p 133,691 . − . . 188 . 128,183 40 5,280 . .
2012          Q1 p 136,617 . − . . 188 . 131,110 40 5,280 . .
         Q2 p 135,859 . − . . 188 . 130,351 40 5,280 . .
Special funds7,8,13
2006 14,556 . − 51 . 10,368 . 3,950 − 188 . .
2007 100 . − − . 100 . − − − . .
2008 − . − − . − . − − − . .
2009 − . − − . − . − − − . .
2010 − . − − . − . − − − . .
2011          Q1 − . − − . − . − − − . .
         Q2 − . − − . − . − − − . .
         Q3 − . − − . − . − − − . .
         Q4 − . − − . − . − − − . .
2012         Q 1 −−−− .− . −−− . .
         Q 2 −−−− .− . −−− . .
Source: Bundesbank calculations based on data from the Federal Statistical portfolios. 7In contrast to the capital market statistics, the debt incurred through the
Office. *Excluding direct intergovernmental borrowing. 1Including Treasury finan- joint issuance of Federal securities is recorded here under central government and its
cing paper. 2Excluding issuers’ holdings of their own securities. 3Treasury notes special funds in accordance with the agreed allocation ratios. 8On 1 July 2007 cen-
issued by state government include long-term notes. 4Mainly loans against bor- tral government assumed joint responsibility for the debts of the ERP Special Fund.
rowers’ notes and cash advances. Including loans raised abroad. Other loans from From that date on, the aforementioned special fund is recorded under central govern-
non-banks, including loans from public supplementary pension funds and liabilities ment. 9From December 2008, including debt of the Financial Market Stabilisation
arising from the investment assistance levy. 5Excluding offsets against outstanding Fund. 10From March 2009, including debt of the Investment and Repayment
claims. 6Old debt mainly denominated in foreign currency, in accordance with the Fund. 11From January 2011, including debt of the Restructuring Fund for Credit Insti-
London Debts Agreement, old liabilities arising from housing construction and liabil- tutions. 12Including debt of municipal special purpose associations. Data other than
ities arising from housing construction by the former GDR’s armed forces and from year-end figures have been estimated. 13ERP Special Fund (up to the end of June
housing construction in connection with the return of the troops of the former USSR 2007), German Unity Fund (up to the end of 2004) and Indemnification Fund. stationed in eastern Germany to their home country; excluding debt securities in own

Deutsche Bundesbank
61  Monthly Report
November 2012
X Economic conditions in Germany
  
1 Origin and use of domestic product, distribution of national income
  
  
  
  2010   2011   2012
  2009   2010   2011   2009   2010   2011   Q4   Q1   Q2   Q3   Q4   Q1   Q2
Item Index 2005=100 Annual percentage change
At  constant  prices,  chained
  I Origin of domestic product
Production sector
(excluding construction) 90.6 104.9 111.4 − 17.7 15.8 6.2 16.3 11.5 7.2 6.1 0.7 1.1 − 1.4
Construction 92.7 99.0 103.6 − 6.5 6.9 4.6 3.7 10.5 1.4 1.4 6.7 1.0 − 1.6
Wholesale/retail trade, transportand storage, hotel and restaurantservices 108.8 110.6 114.0 − 0.4 1.7 3.1 2.8 5.3 3.0 2.4 1.8 2.6 1.0
Information and communication 135.9 135.7 138.2 9.9 − 0.2 1.9 − 0.9 1.7 1.8 2.1 1.9 3.4 3.2Financial and insuranceactivities 113.9 115.5 117.1 − 1.7 1.4 1.4 2.3 0.9 − 0.0 3.4 1.4 2.2 5.2
Real estate activities 107.0 105.3 105.9 1.6 − 1.7 0.6 − 3.0 − 0.1 0.8 0.5 1.1 1.8 1.5
Business services 
1 98.2 100.8 105.0 − 12.3 2.6 4.2 2.9 5.1 4.6 3.7 3.4 4.2 3.1
Public services, education andhealth 106.7 108.5 109.5 1.4 1.7 0.9 0.6 0.7 1.0 0.8 1.1 0.8 1.1Other services 104.5 104.0 103.5 − 1.5 − 0.5 − 0.5 − 1.4 − 0.8 − 0.9 − 0.7 0.3 1.2 0.7
Gross value added 103.0 107.7 110.9 − 5.6 4.6 3.0 4.5 4.7 3.1 2.7 1.4 1.8 0.8Gross domestic product 
2 102.7 107.0 110.2 − 5.1 4.2 3.0 4.2 5.2 3.1 2.6 1.4 1.7 0.5
 II Use of domestic product
Private consumption 3 102.2 103.2 104.9 0.1 0.9 1.7 2.0 2.1 1.8 2.1 0.9 1.7 0.8
Government consumption 108.8 110.6 111.7 3.0 1.7 1.0 1.2 − 0.1 1.8 0.9 1.3 1.5 1.1
Machinery and equipment 98.4 108.5 116.1 − 22.5 10.3 7.0 16.5 14.1 8.0 5.6 2.3 2.4 − 3.1Premises 100.9 104.2 110.3 − 3.2 3.2 5.8 1.0 13.6 3.0 2.5 6.5 0.1 − 1.2Other investment 
4 120.5 124.6 129.5 − 2.9 3.3 3.9 3.0 3.8 3.5 3.6 4.7 2.6 3.7
Changes in inventories 5, 6 . . . − 0.7 0.6 0.2 0.6 0.0 0.3 0.4 0.1 − 0.1 − 0.9
Domestic use 103.3 106.0 108.8 − 2.5 2.6 2.6 3.6 3.2 2.7 2.6 1.7 1.4 − 0.6Net exports 
6 . . . − 2.9 1.7 0.6 0.9 2.1 0.5 0.1 − 0.3 0.4 1.1
Exports 109.5 124.5 134.2 − 12.8 13.7 7.8 13.4 13.9 6.7 7.3 3.9 4.1 4.7Imports 112.2 124.6 133.8 − 8.0 11.1 7.4 13.3 10.6 6.5 7.9 5.1 3.8 2.9
Gross domestic product 
2 102.7 107.0 110.2 − 5.1 4.2 3.0 4.2 5.2 3.1 2.6 1.4 1.7 0.5
At  current  prices  (€ billion)
III Use of domestic product
Private consumption 3 1,391.6 1,433.2 1,487.7 0.1 3.0 3.8 4.0 4.3 4.0 4.0 2.9 3.5 2.2
Government consumption 475.3 487.6 499.8 5.2 2.6 2.5 2.1 1.4 3.5 2.3 2.7 2.8 2.8
Machinery and equipment 154.9 170.8 183.2 − 22.6 10.3 7.3 16.6 14.3 8.1 5.9 2.6 2.8 − 2.7
Premises 226.9 236.8 258.1 − 2.0 4.4 9.0 2.2 16.8 5.9 5.6 10.1 2.9 1.4
Other investment 4 26.9 27.6 28.5 − 3.4 2.8 3.3 3.2 3.1 3.3 3.1 3.6 2.4 2.5
Changes in inventories 5 − 17.9 1.3 3.7 . . . . . . . . . .
Domestic use 2,257.6 2,357.3 2,460.9 − 2.6 4.4 4.4 5.4 5.2 4.7 4.3 3.5 3.0 0.6Net exports 116.9 138.9 131.7 . . . . . . . . . .
Exports 1,006.5 1,173.3 1,300.8 − 15.5 16.6 10.9 17.4 19.2 10.1 9.5 5.7 5.3 6.0Imports 889.6 1,034.4 1,169.2 − 14.1 16.3 13.0 20.9 19.8 12.4 11.9 8.9 6.1 4.2
Gross domestic product 
2 2,374.5 2,496.2 2,592.6 − 4.0 5.1 3.9 4.9 5.8 4.1 3.5 2.2 2.8 1.7
IV Prices (2005=100)
Private consumption 104.2 106.3 108.5 0.0 2.0 2.1 2.0 2.2 2.2 1.9 2.0 1.8 1.4
Gross domestic product 103.9 104.9 105.8 1.2 0.9 0.8 0.7 0.6 0.9 0.9 0.8 1.1 1.2
Terms of trade 101.3 99.2 97.0 3.8 − 2.1 − 2.2 − 2.9 − 3.4 − 2.3 − 1.6 − 1.9 − 1.1 − 0.0
V  Distribution of national income
Compensation of employees 1,233.4 1,271.0 1,328.0 0.3 3.0 4.5 3.9 4.7 5.1 4.3 3.9 3.8 3.7
Entrepreneurial and propertyincome 578.8 648.3 656.7 − 12.4 12.0 1.3 10.9 6.6 − 0.7 2.3 − 3.4 2.0 0.3
National income 1,812.3 1,919.3 1,984.6 − 4.1 5.9 3.4 6.0 5.3 3.2 3.6 1.7 3.1 2.6
Memo item: Gross nationalincome 2,432.5 2,546.7 2,640.9 − 2.8 4.7 3.7 5.1 5.7 3.5 3.7 2.1 3.1 2.4
Source: Federal Statistical Office; figures computed in August 2012. 1Professional, sci- stitutions serving households. 4Intangible fixed asset formation (inter alia, computer
entific, technical, administration and support service activities. 2Gross value added software and entertainment, literary or artistic originals) and cultivated assets. 5In-
plus taxes on products (netted with subsidies on products). 3Including non-profit in- cluding net increase in valuables. 6 Contribution of growth to GDP. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
62  Monthly Report
November 2012
 X Economic conditions in Germany
 
2 Output in the production sector*
 
 
Adjusted for working-day variations  o 
Industry
by main industrial grouping of which: by economic sector
Manu-
Manu- facture of
facture of computers,basic metals Motor
electronic
and vehicles, and optical
Production Inter- Non- fabricated products Machinery trailers
sector, Construc- mediate Capital Durable durable metal and and semi- and electrical
total tion Energy Total goods goods goods goods products equipment equipment trailers
2005=100  
  
% of total 1 100.00 5.56 8.76 85.69 33.96 35.37 2.78 13.58 12.15 10.82 12.48 12.34
Period
2007 111.5 108.7 98.2 113.1 114.5 114.9 108.4 105.8 114.0 124.4 119.4 109.7
2008 111.5 108.4 95.5 113.3 114.1 116.8 104.0 104.4 114.4 128.8 124.5 104.5
2009 94.3 108.3 90.7 93.7 93.3 92.0 87.6 100.6 87.5 100.9 92.2 82.0
2010 103.9 108.5 93.6 104.6 107.1 103.8 95.7 102.4 101.7 117.5 101.6 102.3
2011 112.1 123.1 87.7 113.9 115.8 116.7 100.5 104.5 111.5 134.6 115.4 116.3
 
2011          May 111.2 133.6 78.7 113.1 116.7 114.5 97.2 103.6 113.1 127.4 110.4 119.2
         June 113.9 134.1 76.4 116.4 119.7 119.6 94.9 104.3 115.8 137.2 120.9 117.3
         July 116.0 142.8 80.0 117.9 122.2 119.7 101.7 105.9 117.0 142.4 119.2 119.6
         Aug 107.1 133.0 78.7 108.3 115.1 106.4 84.9 100.8 107.5 135.2 109.2 98.1
         Sep 117.9 140.6 78.6 120.5 121.7 124.9 111.1 107.7 116.2 146.3 123.2 127.1
         Oct 119.6 141.4 88.1 121.4 122.3 125.2 112.8 110.9 119.2 144.5 118.5 129.8
         Nov 120.7 139.8 94.5 122.2 120.4 129.2 111.2 110.8 118.4 147.0 126.0 127.7
         Dec 103.2 94.2 90.8 105.0 95.5 118.0 88.6 98.3 93.3 125.4 129.8 93.6
2012          Jan 102.0 80.9 93.4 104.2 109.2 102.8 93.4 97.2 103.6 124.3 98.4 108.8
         Feb 104.7 68.1 92.7 108.4 109.7 113.2 96.0 95.2 106.7 128.3 108.6 121.8
         Mar 2,3 120.2 2 126.8 94.2 3 122.4 121.3 3 130.6 105.6 107.4 117.0 141.0 3 134.5 132.9
         Apr 2 109.9 2 132.0 84.2 111.1 114.7 114.0 93.9 97.8 109.3 128.0 112.7 117.6
         May 2 111.1 2 135.9 79.6 112.7 115.9 115.5 95.2 100.7 111.9 130.2 114.2 116.6
         June 2 114.3 2 138.9 80.0 116.3 118.3 121.6 96.8 101.4 114.8 138.8 123.0 119.3
         July x 2 114.5 2 145.3 81.9 115.9 118.9 120.0 93.8 102.4 113.4 139.8 119.9 119.1
         Aug x 2 105.7 2 134.0 79.8 106.5 110.9 106.1 84.6 100.9 103.7 128.8 105.5 99.8
         Sep  x,p 2 116.5 2 146.2 e 81.1 118.1 115.9 125.0 108.4 107.8 114.8 134.0 123.1 124.8
 
Annual percentage change  
 
2007 + 5.8 + 2.8 − 2.8 + 6.9 + 6.9 + 8.4 + 1.0 + 4.0 + 6.2 + 10.2 + 11.1 + 6.9
2008 + 0.0 − 0.3 − 2.7 + 0.2 − 0.3 + 1.7 − 4.1 − 1.3 + 0.4 + 3.5 + 4.3 − 4.7
2009 − 15.4 − 0.1 − 5.0 − 17.3 − 18.2 − 21.2 − 15.8 − 3.6 − 23.5 − 21.7 − 25.9 − 21.5
2010 + 10.2 + 0.2 + 3.2 + 11.6 + 14.8 + 12.8 + 9.2 + 1.8 + 16.2 + 16.5 + 10.2 + 24.8
2011 + 7.9 + 13.5 − 6.3 + 8.9 + 8.1 + 12.4 + 5.0 + 2.1 + 9.6 + 14.6 + 13.6 + 13.7
 
2011          May + 7.4 + 8.8 − 13.7 + 9.3 + 7.2 + 13.8 + 5.4 + 4.1 + 10.2 + 12.8 + 15.2 + 13.8
         June + 6.9 + 5.0 − 6.3 + 8.2 + 8.1 + 10.5 − 1.6 + 3.6 + 9.5 + 14.4 + 15.4 + 7.9
         July + 10.3 + 7.9 − 7.5 + 11.9 + 9.9 + 17.7 + 13.0 + 2.3 + 11.3 + 18.9 + 19.2 + 22.3
         Aug + 8.5 + 6.7 − 4.0 + 9.6 + 8.1 + 16.4 + 0.6 − 1.1 + 8.6 + 17.0 + 14.7 + 25.0
         Sep + 5.5 + 5.2 − 6.3 + 6.4 + 6.4 + 8.9 + 3.6 + 0.2 + 6.7 + 14.9 + 11.2 + 6.7
         Oct + 4.3 + 4.6 − 6.6 + 5.1 + 3.9 + 8.3 + 2.5 + 0.3 + 5.8 + 9.3 + 7.5 + 7.3
         Nov + 4.6 + 9.6 − 4.0 + 5.0 + 3.9 + 7.9 + 1.9 + 0.0 + 5.9 + 9.5 + 8.1 + 7.0
         Dec + 1.3 + 44.0 − 16.4 + 1.4 + 2.5 + 0.9 − 0.4 + 0.2 + 3.8 + 5.5 + 0.1 − 2.7
2012          Jan + 1.1 + 6.6 − 12.6 + 2.3 + 1.0 + 5.2 − 0.6 − 1.7 + 0.9 + 3.2 + 6.7 + 7.5
         Feb − 0.5 − 21.3 − 3.5 + 1.0 − 0.5 + 4.5 − 3.5 − 3.8 + 0.7 + 1.8 + 7.0 + 4.1
         Mar 2,3 + 1.2 2 + 3.1 − 6.0 3 + 1.7 − 0.5 3 + 5.2 − 3.8 − 1.6 − 0.6 + 3.2 3 + 9.2 + 3.4
         Apr 2 − 0.8 2 + 0.0 + 0.6 − 1.1 − 1.1 + 1.1 − 6.0 − 6.0 − 1.7 + 1.4 + 2.2 + 0.5
         May 2 − 0.1 2 + 1.7 + 1.1 − 0.4 − 0.7 + 0.9 − 2.1 − 2.8 − 1.1 + 2.2 + 3.4 − 2.2
         June 2 + 0.4 2 + 3.6 + 4.7 − 0.1 − 1.2 + 1.7 + 2.0 − 2.8 − 0.9 + 1.2 + 1.7 + 1.7
         July x 2 − 1.3 2 + 1.8 + 2.4 − 1.7 − 2.7 + 0.3 − 7.8 − 3.3 − 3.1 − 1.8 + 0.6 − 0.4
         Aug x 2 − 1.3 2 + 0.8 + 1.4 − 1.7 − 3.6 − 0.3 − 0.4 + 0.1 − 3.5 − 4.7 − 3.4 + 1.7
         Sep  x,p 2 − 1.2 2 + 4.0 e + 3.2 − 2.0 − 4.8 + 0.1 − 2.4 + 0.1 − 1.2 − 8.4 − 0.1 − 1.8
Source of the unadjusted figures: Federal Statistical Office. *For explanatory notes, annual overall survey in the construction sector (average + 4%). 3Positively in-
see Statistical Supplement Seasonally adjusted business statistics, Tables II.10 to fluenced by late reports. xProvisional; adjusted in advance by the Federal Statistical
II.12. oUsing the Census X-12-ARIMA method, version 0.2.8. 1Share of gross value Office, by way of estimates, to the results of the Quarterly Production
added at factor cost of the production sector in the base year 2005. 2Adjusted in ad- Survey. e Unadjusted figure estimated by the Federal Statistical Office. 
vance by the Federal Statistical Office, by way of estimates, to the results of the

Deutsche Bundesbank
63  Monthly Report
November 2012
X Economic conditions in Germany
 
3 Orders received by industry *
 
 
Adjusted for working-day variations  o 
Industry Intermediate goods Capital goods Consumer goods Durable goods Non-durable goods
Annual Annual Annual Annual Annual Annual
percent- percent- percent- percent- percent- percent-age age age age age age
Period 2005=100 change 2005=100 change 2005=100 change 2005=100 change 2005=100 change 2005=100 change
Total
2007 123.0 + 11.1 125.2 + 9.9 123.2 + 12.6 111.9 + 6.3 110.3 + 1.8 112.5 + 7.9
2008 115.6 − 6.0 121.2 − 3.2 112.9 − 8.4 108.1 − 3.4 103.5 − 6.2 109.7 − 2.5
2009 87.5 − 24.3 89.3 − 26.3 85.2 − 24.5 94.8 − 12.3 88.5 − 14.5 96.9 − 11.7
2010 109.0 + 24.6 114.3 + 28.0 106.9 + 25.5 99.8 + 5.3 101.5 + 14.7 99.3 + 2.5
2011 120.5 + 10.6 125.3 + 9.6 119.7 + 12.0 104.1 + 4.3 107.4 + 5.8 103.0 + 3.7
2011          Sep 117.4 + 3.9 122.0 + 3.8 115.6 + 3.7 107.9 + 4.2 122.2 + 9.3 103.1 + 2.3
         Oct 118.9 + 5.6 121.7 + 2.0 118.8 + 8.6 106.4 + 2.3 115.4 − 0.3 103.4 + 3.4
         Nov 117.6 − 2.8 119.8 − 1.6 118.1 − 4.2 104.2 + 2.0 108.7 − 1.9 102.7 + 3.4
         Dec 113.1 + 1.5 106.7 − 1.1 120.4 + 3.1 92.0 + 2.9 89.5 + 1.9 92.9 + 3.3
2012          Jan 114.7 − 4.9 125.2 − 5.7 109.7 − 4.9 101.6 − 0.9 101.8 − 4.0 101.5 + 0.2
         Feb 116.0 − 5.4 122.1 − 3.6 113.5 − 6.5 105.4 − 5.0 96.5 − 8.0 108.5 − 4.1
         Mar 130.3 + 0.3 131.0 − 6.6 132.2 + 5.0 114.0 + 3.4 113.5 − 1.6 114.2 + 5.1
         Apr 117.0 − 2.3 122.5 − 4.0 116.4 − 0.9 96.2 − 3.5 100.5 − 6.7 94.7 − 2.5
         May 117.9 − 4.2 123.0 − 4.7 117.1 − 4.5 100.6 + 1.2 99.9 − 3.8 100.8 + 3.0
         June 121.2 − 6.8 122.0 − 4.5 123.5 − 9.1 102.2 + 2.3 102.4 − 3.9 102.2 + 4.7
         July 117.8 − 3.4 121.2 − 6.8 116.6 − 1.2 110.4 − 2.0 101.5 − 9.5 113.4 + 0.4
         Aug 107.4 − 3.3 112.6 − 5.2 104.3 − 2.8 106.0 + 3.3 94.1 − 2.1 110.1 + 5.0
         Sep  p 113.6 − 3.2 116.5 − 4.5 112.7 − 2.5 107.9 + 0.0 114.2 − 6.5 105.7 + 2.5
From the domestic market
2007 118.7 + 8.9 124.7 + 10.1 115.8 + 8.8 107.0 + 3.5 109.6 − 1.3 106.1 + 5.2
2008 113.1 − 4.7 121.8 − 2.3 107.5 − 7.2 103.9 − 2.9 107.1 − 2.3 102.9 − 3.0
2009 88.0 − 22.2 89.9 − 26.2 86.5 − 19.5 87.4 − 15.9 89.9 − 16.1 86.6 − 15.8
2010 104.5 + 18.8 115.9 + 28.9 97.8 + 13.1 88.6 + 1.4 93.9 + 4.4 86.9 + 0.3
2011 115.3 + 10.3 127.8 + 10.3 109.0 + 11.5 92.1 + 4.0 104.1 + 10.9 88.2 + 1.5
2011          Sep 113.5 + 4.6 123.7 + 3.9 107.1 + 5.0 101.4 + 6.5 126.7 + 15.6 93.2 + 3.0
         Oct 113.4 + 2.9 126.5 + 2.8 105.2 + 2.4 97.2 + 5.1 117.5 + 4.9 90.6 + 5.2
         Nov 114.6 + 1.0 125.2 + 0.1 109.5 + 1.8 93.7 + 1.8 110.8 + 5.1 88.1 + 0.6
         Dec 101.0 + 1.5 103.0 − 1.8 103.5 + 4.5 77.7 + 1.0 84.0 + 7.3 75.6 − 1.0
2012          Jan 110.7 − 3.3 126.7 − 5.3 100.9 − 1.9 90.2 + 2.3 101.3 + 5.9 86.6 + 0.9
         Feb 109.6 − 5.7 120.7 − 6.2 102.9 − 5.9 94.4 − 2.1 97.6 − 2.0 93.4 − 2.0
         Mar 120.8 − 2.3 131.7 − 5.4 116.0 + 0.4 97.0 + 0.9 108.7 + 1.8 93.2 + 0.6
         Apr 112.2 − 2.3 125.8 − 4.2 105.7 − 0.4 84.9 − 2.2 95.1 − 6.7 81.6 − 0.4
         May 109.9 − 13.1 123.2 − 8.6 103.3 − 18.3 84.6 − 4.1 90.9 − 9.6 82.5 − 1.9
         June 110.6 − 4.8 121.3 − 5.0 106.3 − 4.7 84.0 − 4.5 89.7 − 9.0 82.1 − 3.0
         July 111.4 − 7.2 122.3 − 9.9 105.6 − 4.7 92.7 − 5.1 92.5 − 14.0 92.7 − 1.9
         Aug 101.4 − 7.0 114.2 − 7.6 92.6 − 6.8 90.8 − 3.7 91.5 − 8.2 90.6 − 2.2
         Sep  p 107.5 − 5.3 117.9 − 4.7 101.5 − 5.2 92.5 − 8.8 109.5 − 13.6 86.9 − 6.8
From abroad
2007 126.8 + 13.0 125.7 + 9.7 128.4 + 15.2 117.3 + 9.1 111.0 + 5.0 119.5 + 10.5
2008 117.6 − 7.3 120.6 − 4.1 116.7 − 9.1 112.6 − 4.0 99.9 − 10.0 117.1 − 2.0
2009 87.0 − 26.0 88.6 − 26.5 84.3 − 27.8 102.8 − 8.7 87.1 − 12.8 108.4 − 7.4
2010 112.9 + 29.8 112.5 + 27.0 113.3 + 34.4 111.9 + 8.9 109.1 + 25.3 112.9 + 4.2
2011 125.0 + 10.7 122.4 + 8.8 127.3 + 12.4 116.9 + 4.5 110.7 + 1.5 119.2 + 5.6
2011          Sep 120.7 + 3.2 120.0 + 3.8 121.6 + 2.9 115.0 + 2.0 117.7 + 3.2 114.1 + 1.7
         Oct 123.7 + 7.9 116.3 + 1.1 128.4 + 12.5 116.4 − 0.1 113.3 − 5.3 117.5 + 1.8
         Nov 120.2 − 5.8 113.7 − 3.7 124.1 − 7.6 115.6 + 2.1 106.6 − 8.3 118.8 + 5.9
         Dec 123.7 + 1.6 111.0 − 0.3 132.3 + 2.2 107.5 + 4.6 95.1 − 2.3 111.9 + 6.8
2012          Jan 118.2 − 6.2 123.5 − 6.0 115.9 − 6.6 113.9 − 3.4 102.4 − 12.1 118.0 − 0.3
         Feb 121.5 − 5.2 123.7 − 0.6 120.9 − 7.0 117.3 − 7.5 95.3 − 13.5 125.1 − 5.7
         Mar 138.5 + 2.4 130.2 − 7.9 143.6 + 7.7 132.3 + 5.3 118.4 − 4.4 137.3 + 8.6
         Apr 121.1 − 2.3 118.7 − 3.7 123.9 − 1.4 108.3 − 4.7 106.0 − 6.6 109.1 − 4.1
         May 124.9 + 4.0 122.7 + 0.3 126.8 + 5.8 117.8 + 5.7 109.0 + 1.9 120.9 + 6.9
         June 130.5 − 8.2 122.8 − 3.9 135.7 − 11.3 121.9 + 8.2 115.2 + 0.4 124.3 + 11.0
         July 123.3 − 0.2 119.9 − 2.9 124.4 + 1.1 129.4 + 0.4 110.6 − 5.4 136.2 + 2.3
         Aug 112.6 − 0.3 110.7 − 2.3 112.5 − 0.3 122.4 + 9.7 96.7 + 4.5 131.6 + 11.1
         Sep  p 119.0 − 1.4 114.8 − 4.3 120.6 − 0.8 124.5 + 8.3 119.0 + 1.1 126.5 + 10.9
Source of the unadjusted figures: Federal Statistical Office. *For explanatory notes, II.16. o Using the Census X-12-ARIMA method, version 0.2.8. 
see Statistical Supplement Seasonally adjusted business statistics, Tables II.14 to

Deutsche Bundesbank
64  Monthly Report
November 2012
 X Economic conditions in Germany
 
4 Orders received by construction *   
 
 
Adjusted for working-day variations  o 
Breakdown by type of construction Breakdown by client  1 
 Building    
Housing Industrial Public sector Civil Public
Total Total construction construction construction engineering Industry sector
Annual Annual Annual Annual Annual Annual Annual Annual
percent- percent- percent- percent- percent- percent- percent- percent-
age age age age age age age age
Period change change change change change change change change 2005 = 100 2005 = 100 2005 = 100 2005 = 100 2005 = 100 2005 = 100 2005 = 100 2005 = 100
2008 113.4 − 0.5 114.7 + 1.9 94.4 − 4.6 127.9 + 3.8 116.7 + 7.7 112.0 − 2.9 123.3 + 2.2 111.5 − 1.9
2009 107.4 − 5.3 100.6 − 12.3 94.1 − 0.3 100.7 − 21.3 115.5 − 1.0 114.4 + 2.1 104.9 − 14.9 115.6 + 3.7
2010 108.9 + 1.4 106.6 + 6.0 103.1 + 9.6 105.3 + 4.6 118.9 + 2.9 111.3 − 2.7 111.0 + 5.8 109.4 − 5.4
2011 117.1 + 7.5 120.0 + 12.6 124.7 + 21.0 120.0 + 14.0 109.2 − 8.2 114.0 + 2.4 125.6 + 13.2 105.2 − 3.8
 
2011          Aug 123.6 + 5.0 125.2 + 4.5 129.8 + 15.2 129.1 + 3.5 102.0 − 14.9 121.9 + 5.6 132.6 + 10.2 112.0 − 4.4
         Sep 127.9 + 3.9 127.6 + 7.6 127.7 − 1.6 130.6 + 23.0 117.5 − 12.8 128.1 + 0.2 134.1 + 15.7 121.7 − 4.5
         Oct 112.8 − 1.0 122.3 + 10.3 126.9 + 18.5 128.1 + 14.8 92.6 − 20.9 102.9 − 12.1 128.2 + 2.2 91.3 − 13.3
         Nov 106.3 + 15.4 114.6 + 22.3 122.9 + 28.2 112.6 + 21.5 102.6 + 11.5 97.6 + 8.0 117.1 + 20.5 88.3 + 3.5         Dec 105.2 + 17.3 113.2 + 19.2 124.0 + 26.0 109.4 + 18.5 101.3 + 5.0 96.8 + 15.0 117.8 + 23.9 84.5 + 4.7
2012          Jan 89.4 + 16.3 96.9 + 14.7 103.1 + 32.9 96.6 + 2.8 84.2 + 23.5 81.6 + 18.1 103.3 + 9.7 69.7 + 17.5
         Feb 105.2 + 11.8 109.3 + 6.8 116.4 + 19.1 106.9 − 6.5 101.1 + 39.4 101.0 + 18.0 110.4 − 3.6 95.3 + 32.4
         Mar 148.3 + 10.4 157.7 + 18.1 152.6 + 7.3 168.5 + 29.1 133.2 + 7.3 138.5 + 2.5 157.4 + 6.9 137.4 + 16.6
         Apr 135.5 + 10.3 135.2 + 13.9 146.9 + 7.9 138.1 + 23.7 99.1 − 3.9 135.8 + 6.8 136.0 + 8.9 130.2 + 13.0
         May 129.9 + 1.9 127.0 − 6.0 134.3 − 8.9 127.2 +
 0.0 109.6 − 18.0 133.0 + 11.2 133.1 + 5.6 124.8 + 3.6
         June 142.6 + 4.7 146.1 + 5.9 168.1 + 29.6 136.8 + 0.1 127.4 − 20.9 138.9 + 3.4 142.0 + 1.1 132.3 − 1.8
         July 135.9 − 0.9 132.3 + 6.4 143.3 + 6.6 133.8 + 16.0 102.2 − 22.8 139.7 − 7.0 135.2 + 4.2 133.4 − 8.4
         Aug 137.0 + 10.8 150.7 + 20.4 141.7 + 9.2 158.7 + 22.9 144.0 + 41.2 122.8 + 0.7 149.0 + 12.4 122.9 + 9.7
Source of the unadjusted figures: Federal Statistical Office. *Values exclusive of adjusted business statistics, Tables II.21. oUsing the Census X-12-ARIMA method,
value-added tax; for explanatory notes, see Statistical Supplement Seasonally version 0.2.8. 1 Excluding housing construction orders. 
 
 
5 Retail trade turnover, sales of motor vehicles *
  
Adjusted for calendar variations o 
Retail trade
of which: by enterprises main product range  1 
Construction Retail sale of
and flooring pharmaceutical Wholesale
Textiles, Information materials, and medical and retail trade
clothing and household goods, cosmetic and repair of
Food, beverages, foodwear and communications appliances, and toilet motor vehicles
Total tobacco 2 leather goods equipment furniture articles and motorcycles
At current At prices in
prices year 2005 At current prices
Annual Annual Annual Annual Annual Annual Annual Annual
percent- percent- percent- percent- percent- percent- percent- percent-
age age age age age age age age
Period change change change change change change change change 2005 = 100 2005 = 100 2005 = 100 2005 = 100 2005 = 100 2005 = 100 2005 = 100 2005 = 100
2008 101.5 + 2.1 98.9 − 0.1 100.7 + 1.2 104.6 + 0.9 116.3 + 5.5 99.7 + 1.1 107.2 + 2.9 95.8 − 4.8
2009 3 98.1 − 3.3 96.2 − 2.7 98.8 − 1.9 101.5 − 3.0 117.0 + 0.6 97.0 − 2.7 110.0 + 2.6 96.8 + 1.0
2010 3 100.4 + 2.3 97.4 + 1.2 99.6 + 0.8 106.1 + 4.5 120.5 + 3.0 99.4 + 2.5 114.2 + 3.8 92.3 − 4.6
2011 3,4 103.1 + 2.7 98.4 + 1.0 102.0 + 2.4 108.4 + 2.2 121.1 + 0.5 102.9 + 3.5 114.9 + 0.6 99.3 + 7.6
 
2011          Sep 102.0 + 3.4 97.0 + 1.5 97.8 + 3.5 110.7 − 5.5 113.7 − 0.8 102.0 + 3.7 114.4 + 1.7 99.0 + 3.4
         Oct 108.6 + 3.3 103.2 + 1.4 104.3 + 3.4 132.0 + 4.7 124.7 + 2.5 111.8 + 3.8 117.3 − 0.1 109.3 + 6.0
         Nov 106.9 + 2.6 101.8 + 0.9 103.3 + 3.1 112.2 + 0.8 134.0 + 1.4 110.0 + 2.7 118.2 + 1.2 104.3 + 3.0         Dec 122.6 + 1.6 117.9 + 0.6 120.4 + 1.5 132.4 + 1.6 188.8 + 3.3 111.5 + 6.0 131.7 + 0.8 91.5 + 2.5
2012          Jan 93.8 + 0.2 89.4 − 1.7 94.0 + 1.3 90.5 +
 0.0 122.7 − 8.0 88.4 + 0.6 110.4 + 0.3 83.2 + 0.0
         Feb 91.4 − 0.1 85.8 − 2.4 93.6 + 2.2 79.4 − 5.3 104.4 − 3.8 87.4 − 2.0 107.0 + 0.9 90.4 − 0.3
         Mar 107.2 + 3.6 100.1 + 1.6 106.1 + 2.3 115.1 + 6.9 115.4 + 4.2 113.8 + 5.3 118.3 + 3.3 115.1 + 5.3         Apr 105.4 + 1.8 98.0 +
 0.0 106.1 + 2.3 111.1 − 5.1 108.5 + 6.3 108.5 − 0.7 115.5 + 2.9 105.3 + 0.4
         May 104.9 + 4.2 97.3 + 1.9 106.3 + 5.6 107.8 + 4.1 103.8 + 0.2 105.5 + 2.6 114.9 + 1.9 102.9 + 0.3
         June 103.0 + 2.6 95.9 + 0.3 104.5 + 1.8 100.2 − 2.6 117.3 + 9.4 99.6 + 0.0 112.0 + 0.2 103.1 + 1.4
         July 103.9 + 0.3 97.5 − 1.7 104.3 + 1.5 106.7 − 2.6 113.2 − 0.5 102.4 + 0.1 116.8 − 0.3 101.4 − 0.9
         Aug 101.2 + 1.2 94.7 − 1.1 102.5 + 2.4 97.6 − 1.3 112.5 − 0.6 100.8 + 1.0 110.3 − 1.7 91.6 − 0.9
         Sep  5 104.5 + 2.5 97.0 + 0.0 102.2 + 4.5 119.0 + 7.5 113.1 − 0.5 104.3 + 2.3 112.6 − 1.6 ... ...
Source of the unadjusted figures: Federal Statistical Office. *Excluding value-added entities; statistical breaks in the reporting sample eliminated by chain-linking. 4Figu-
tax;  For explanatory notes, see Statistical Supplement Seasonally adjusted business res from January 2011 are provisional, and particularly uncertain in recent months ow-
statistics, Tables II.24. oUsing the Census X-12-ARIMA method, version 0.2.8. 1In ing to estimates for missing reports. 5Unadjusted figures partially estimated by the
stores. 2Including stalls and markets. 3New reporting sample including new Federal Statistical Office. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
65  Monthly Report
November 2012
 X Economic conditions in Germany
 
6 Labour market * 
 
 
 
Employment 1 Employment subject to social security contributions  2 Short time workers 3 Unemployment 4 
Total of which: of which: of which:
Solely
jobs
Services exempt Recipients
excluding from of insured
Produc- temporary social unem- Unem- Temporary
tion employ- employ- contri- Cyclically ployment ploy- Vacan-
 Annual Annual sector ment ment butions 2 Total induced Total benefits ment cies, 4,6 
Thou- percentage Thou- rate 4,5 thou- percentage
sands change sands change Thousands in % sands
2007 39,857 + 1.7 26,942 + 2.2 8,533 . . 4,861 68 26 3,760 1,245 9.0 423
2008 40,348 + 1.2 27,510 + 2.1 8,659 17,958 679 4,866 102 58 3,258 1,006 7.8 3892009 40,370 + 0.1 27,493 − 0.1 8,521 18,210 549 4,904 1,144 1,078
7 3,415 7 1,190 7 8.1 301
2010 40,603 + 0.6 27,757 + 1.0 8,426 18,438 679 4,883 503 429 3,238 1,075 7.7 3592011 41,164 + 1.4 28,440 + 2.5 8,583 18,836 798 4,865 148 100 2,976 892 7.1 466
2009          Q3 40,431 − 0.2 27,482 − 0.5 8,500 18,204 557 4,913 1,136 1,103 3,418 1,186 8.1 300
         Q4 40,621 − 0.2 27,720 − 0.7 8,504 18,423 579 4,934 1,007 944 3,232 1,083 7.7 290
2010          Q1 40,026 − 0.2 27,307 − 0.3 8,308 18,244 561 4,854 987 804 3,601 1,327 8.6 297
         Q2 40,513 + 0.5 27,592 + 0.8 8,377 18,346 648 4,885 517 485 3,261 1,053 7.8 354         Q3 40,799 + 0.9 27,886 + 1.5 8,469 18,454 740 4,889 265 239 3,132 1,003 7.5 395         Q4 41,074 + 1.1 28,242 + 1.9 8,548 18,710 767 4,905 242 188 2,959 920 7.0 392
2011          Q1 40,613 + 1.5 27,944 + 2.3 8,428 18,578 740 4,852 291 158 3,290 1,088 7.8 412
         Q2 41,073 + 1.4 28,266 + 2.4 8,535 18,721 786 4,867 121 107 2,977 850 7.1 470         Q3 41,347 + 1.3 28,566 + 2.4 8,638 18,862 836 4,865 76 64 2,893 843 6.9 497         Q4 41,624 + 1.3 28,983 + 2.6 8,732 19,184 830 4,874 102 72 2,743 787 6.5 486
2012          Q1
r 41,164 r + 1.4 8 28,638 8 + 2.5 8 8,623 8 19,036 8 760 4,797 201 82 3,074 998 7.3 472
         Q2 r 41,521 r + 1.1 9 28,853 9 + 2.1 9 8,696 9 19,142 9 773 9 4,785 ... 9 65 2,876 847 10 6.8 499
         Q3 11 41,706 11 + 0.9 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 2,856 885 6.7 493
2009          June 40,345 + 0.0 27,380 − 0.3 8,493 18,135 531 4,932 1,394 1,365 3,401 1,159 8.1 297
         July 40,327
− 0.2 27,314 − 0.5 8,464 18,080 551 4,935 1,248 1,215 3,454 1,210 8.2 298
         Aug 40,370 − 0.2 27,542 − 0.5 8,507 18,249 565 4,891 1,055 1,022 3,463 1,211 8.2 300
         Sep 40,596 − 0.3 27,800 − 0.7 8,564 18,430 578 4,893 1,104 1,072 3,338 1,137 7.9 302         Oct 40,699 − 0.3 27,786 − 0.8 8,534 18,449 581 4,909 1,109 1,076 3,221 1,071 7.7 298         Nov 40,691 − 0.3 27,731 − 0.7 8,497 18,434 589 4,961 982 947 3,208 1,069 7.6 291         Dec 40,474 − 0.2 27,488 − 0.5 8,400 18,341 553 4,971 929 809 3,268 1,107 7.8 281
2010          Jan 39,987 − 0.3 27,249 − 0.5 8,295 18,214 550 4,840 1,057 874 3,610 1,339 8.6 271
         Feb 39,969 − 0.3 27,230 − 0.3 8,269 18,210 560 4,814 1,031 829 3,635 1,356 8.6 298         Mar 40,121 +
 0.0 27,398 + 0.2 8,318 18,277 596 4,846 874 709 3,560 1,285 8.5 320
         Apr 40,357
+ 0.2 27,553 + 0.6 8,371 18,335 627 4,875 632 599 3,399 1,140 8.1 335
         May 40,538 + 0.5 27,667 + 1.0 8,395 18,382 665 4,898 499 467 3,236 1,036 7.7 356         June 40,645 + 0.7 27,710 + 1.2 8,414 18,365 707 4,916 420 390 3,148 983 7.5 370         July 40,663 + 0.8 27,691 + 1.4 8,419 18,320 732 4,915 313 286 3,186 1,029 7.6 391         Aug 40,750 + 0.9 27,976 + 1.6 8,493 18,508 752 4,864 244 219 3,183 1,030 7.6 397         Sep 40,984 + 1.0 28,269 + 1.7 8,573 18,700 766 4,859 237 214 3,026 948 7.2 398         Oct 41,128 + 1.1 28,296 + 1.8 8,566 18,738 769 4,886 231 209 2,941 907 7.0 401         Nov 41,142 + 1.1 28,277 + 2.0 8,562 18,723 779 4,932 215 194 2,927 903 6.9 395         Dec 40,951 + 1.2 28,033 + 2.0 8,460 18,635 743 4,931 279 162 3,011 949 7.1 380
2011          Jan 40,556 + 1.4 27,863 + 2.3 8,399 18,540 732 4,842 322 177 3,346 1,146 7.9 375
         Feb 40,584 + 1.5 27,912 + 2.5 8,416 18,560 738 4,831 305 155 3,313 1,107 7.9 418         Mar 40,698 + 1.4 28,080 + 2.5 8,477 18,632 759 4,836 246 143 3,210 1,010 7.6 442         Apr 40,921 + 1.4 28,214 + 2.4 8,518 18,703 771 4,857 133 117 3,078 907 7.3 461         May 41,098 + 1.4 28,354 + 2.5 8,559 18,768 798 4,880 122 107 2,960 839 7.0 470         June 41,199 + 1.4 28,381 + 2.4 8,580 18,753 821 4,894 110 96 2,893 804 6.9 480         July 41,212 + 1.4 28,357 + 2.4 8,591 18,712 831 4,890 81 68 2,939 859 7.0 492         Aug 41,304 + 1.4 28,658 + 2.4 8,660 18,922 843 4,840 71 59 2,945 867 7.0 497         Sep 41,524 + 1.3 28,984 + 2.5 8,746 19,149 845 4,833 76 65 2,796 802 6.6 502         Oct 41,664 + 1.3 29,039 + 2.6 8,750 19,206 839 4,851 81 70 2,737 778 6.5 500         Nov 41,691 + 1.3 29,024 + 2.6 8,744 19,207 835 4,901 85 76 2,713 769 6.4 492         Dec 41,517 + 1.4 28,787 + 2.7 8,655 19,128 784 4,909 140 72 2,780 813 6.6 467
2012          Jan 
r 41,157 r + 1.5 8 28,580 8 + 2.6 8 8,613 8 18,995 8 758 4,813 206 82 3,084 1,011 7.3 452
         Feb r 41,113 r + 1.3 28,580 + 2.4 8,601 19,012 752 4,743 230 87 3,110 1,028 7.4 473
         Mar r 41,222 r + 1.3 28,719 + 2.3 8,653 19,077 758 4,763 167 78 3,028 955 7.2 491
         Apr r 41,408 r + 1.2 28,836 + 2.2 8,687 19,144 765 4,784 83 71 2,963 893 7.0 499
         May r 41,550 r + 1.1 9 28,911 9 + 2.0 9 8,712 9 19,174 9 780 9 4,789 ... 9 65 2,855 831 10 6.7 499
         June r 41,604 r + 1.0 9 28,906 9 + 1.8 9 8,722 9 19,150 9 792 9 4,800 ... 9 59 2,809 817 6.6 499
         July r 41,598 r + 0.9 9 28,898 9 + 1.9 9 8,729 9 19,126 9 805 9 4,794 ... 9 44 2,876 885 6.8 500
         Aug r 41,673 r + 0.9 9 29,130 9 + 1.6 9 8,786 9 19,303 9 801 9 4,751 ... 9 39 2,905 910 6.8 493
         Sep 11 41,846 11 + 0.8 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 2,788 862 6.5 485
         Oct ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 2,753 846 6.5 468
Sources: Federal Statistical Office; Federal Employment Agency. *Annual and social or ecological work. 9Unadjusted data estimated by the Federal Employment
quarterly figures: averages; calculated by the Bundesbank; deviations from the offi- Agency. The estimates for Germany in 2010 and 2011 deviated from the final data
cial figures are due to rounding. 1Workplace concept; averages. 2Monthly figures: by a maximum of 0.2 % for employees subject to social contributions, by a
end of month. 3Number within a given month. 4Mid-month level. 5Relative to the maximum of 1.6 % for persons solely in jobs exempt from social contributions, and,
total civilian labour force. 6Excluding government-assisted forms of employment in 2009, by a maximum of 18.8 % for cyclically induced short-time work. 10From
and seasonal jobs, including jobs located abroad. 7From May 2009, unemployed May 2012, calculated on the basis of new labour force figures. 11Initial preliminary
excluding persons formally on the books of private employment agencies. 8From estimate by the Federal Statistical Office. 
January 2012, excluding all persons taking up federal voluntary service or a year of

Deutsche Bundesbank
66  Monthly Report
November 2012
 X Economic conditions in Germany
 
7 Prices
 
 
 
Consumer price index HWWI
Indices of Index of World Market
of which foreign trade prices Prices of Raw Materials 5 
Other Index of
durable producer
and non- prices of
durable industrial Index of
consumer Services Con- products producer
goods excluding prices of sold on the struction
excluding house House price domestic agricultural Other raw
Total Food Energy 1 rents 3 rents 3 index 2 market 4 products 4 Exports Imports Energy 6 materials  7 energy 1,2 
Period 2005 = 100 2010 = 100
Index level  
  
2007 8,9 103.9 105.9 101.7 112.8 103.9 102.2 109.3 106.8 119.9 103.0 105.1 86.0 87.5
2008 106.6 112.7 102.5 123.6 105.8 103.5 113.0 112.7 124.3 104.8 109.9 109.7 92.0
2009 107.0 111.2 103.9 116.9 107.4 104.6 114.4 108.0 100.7 102.5 100.5 72.8 74.5
2010 108.2 113.0 104.4 121.5 108.0 105.8 115.4 109.7 114.9 106.0 108.3 100.0 100.0
2011 10 110.7 115.8 105.7 133.7 109.3 107.1 118.7 115.9 r 129.7 109.9 117.0 132.2 113.5
 
2010          Dec 109.6 114.4 105.1 125.4 110.0 106.4 112.1 127.9 108.0 113.3 115.7 116.1
2011          Jan 109.2 114.7 104.5 128.7 107.9 106.5 113.4 128.7 108.9 115.0 121.1 121.4
         Feb 109.8 115.8 104.8 129.5 108.8 106.7 117.4 114.2 132.3 109.3 116.3 126.5 122.8
         Mar 110.3 115.6 105.4 133.3 108.7 106.8 114.7 132.2 109.6 117.6 135.5 117.7
         Apr 110.5 115.6 105.6 135.0 108.9 106.9 115.9 134.5 109.9 117.9 141.0 117.8
         May 10 110.5 116.3 105.7 134.1 108.4 107.0 118.5 115.9 135.2 110.0 117.2 132.5 115.7
         June 110.6 116.3 105.5 133.5 109.3 107.1 116.0 134.1 110.0 116.5 130.5 114.0
         July 111.0 116.0 105.0 134.3 111.0 107.2 116.8 131.3 110.3 117.4 135.1 115.0
         Aug 111.0 115.4 105.4 133.2 110.8 107.3 119.3 116.5 130.1 110.2 116.6 127.5 112.9
         Sep 111.1 115.3 106.3 135.3 109.5 107.4 116.8 r 130.4 110.2 117.3 135.7 114.1
         Oct 111.1 115.4 106.8 135.7 109.0 107.5 117.0 r 129.3 110.0 116.9 132.0 105.1
         Nov 111.1 116.0 106.8 136.4 108.5 107.6 119.7 117.1 r 130.4 110.2 117.4 134.5 103.0
         Dec 111.9 116.7 106.6 135.4 111.3 107.7 116.6 r 128.8 110.3 117.7 134.9 103.7
2012          Jan 10 111.5 117.8 106.3 138.0 109.0 107.9 117.3 r 128.1 111.2 119.2 141.2 109.4
         Feb 112.3 118.9 106.9 139.9 110.2 108.0 121.1 117.8 r 130.8 111.5 120.4 148.4 109.3
         Mar 112.6 119.2 107.4 142.2 109.8 108.0 118.5 133.1 111.7 121.2 155.0 110.5
         Apr 112.8 119.1 107.6 142.8 109.9 108.1 118.7 134.2 111.9 120.6 148.6 110.2
         May 112.6 119.1 107.6 140.7 109.8 108.2 121.8 118.3 r 132.4 111.8 119.8 140.5 110.1
         June 112.5 120.5 107.3 138.8 110.0 108.3 117.8 r 130.3 111.5 118.0 124.5 108.9
         July 112.9 119.5 106.7 140.2 111.9 108.4 117.8 r 131.1 111.8 118.8 136.5 116.8
         Aug 113.3 119.2 106.9 143.3 111.8 108.5 122.4 118.4 133.6 112.2 120.3 149.1 114.2
         Sep 113.3 118.6 107.9 144.8 110.5 108.6 118.8 138.5 112.1 119.4 143.2 111.9
         Oct 113.3 119.2 108.5 143.2 110.2 108.7 ... ... ... ... 139.9 108.7
Annual percentage change  
  
2007 8,9 + 2.3 + 3.9 + 1.4 + 4.0 + 2.9 + 1.1 + 6.7 + 1.3 + 11.7 + 1.2 + 0.7 + 1.9 + 8.4
2008 + 2.6 + 6.4 + 0.8 + 9.6 + 1.8 + 1.3 + 3.4 + 5.5 + 3.7 + 1.7 + 4.6 + 27.6 + 5.1
2009 + 0.4 − 1.3 + 1.4 − 5.4 + 1.5 + 1.1 + 1.2 − 4.2 − 19.0 − 2.2 − 8.6 − 33.6 − 19.0
2010 + 1.1 + 1.6 + 0.5 + 3.9 + 0.6 + 1.1 + 0.9 + 1.6 + 14.1 + 3.4 + 7.8 + 37.4 + 34.2
2011 10 + 2.3 + 2.5 + 1.2 + 10.0 + 1.2 + 1.2 + 2.9 + 5.7 r + 12.9 + 3.7 + 8.0 + 32.2 + 13.5
 
2010          Dec + 1.7 + 3.6 + 0.6 + 8.2 + 0.5 + 1.2 + 5.3 + 24.5 + 5.2 + 12.0 + 38.1 + 40.2
2011          Jan + 2.0 + 2.7 + 0.8 + 8.6 + 0.9 + 1.2 + 5.7 + 24.5 + 5.4 + 11.8 + 36.1 + 41.7
         Feb + 2.1 + 3.4 + 0.7 + 10.2 + 1.0 + 1.3 + 2.5 + 6.4 + 26.1 + 5.4 + 11.9 + 41.2 + 43.3
         Mar + 2.1 + 2.2 + 0.9 + 10.5 + 0.7 + 1.2 + 6.2 + 25.4 + 4.9 + 11.3 + 40.4 + 31.5
         Apr + 2.4 + 1.4 + 1.1 + 10.5 + 2.1 + 1.2 + 6.4 + 26.3 + 4.2 + 9.4 + 34.2 + 21.2
         May 10 + 2.3 + 2.7 + 1.2 + 9.5 + 1.1 + 1.2 + 2.9 + 6.1 + 24.8 + 3.8 + 8.1 + 31.7 + 17.0
         June + 2.3 + 2.6 + 1.2 + 9.1 + 1.7 + 1.2 + 5.6 + 21.4 + 3.4 + 6.5 + 27.2 + 13.5
         July + 2.4 + 2.1 + 1.4 + 10.6 + 1.6 + 1.2 + 5.8 + 17.9 + 3.7 + 7.5 + 36.7 + 13.6
         Aug + 2.4 + 2.5 + 1.3 + 9.9 + 1.3 + 1.2 + 3.0 + 5.5 + 10.4 + 3.2 + 6.6 + 28.4 + 7.7
         Sep + 2.6 + 2.5 + 1.5 + 11.2 + 1.4 + 1.3 + 5.5 r + 8.5 + 2.9 + 6.9 + 37.1 + 7.0
         Oct + 2.5 + 2.9 + 1.6 + 11.1 + 1.0 + 1.3 + 5.3 r + 6.9 + 3.0 + 6.8 + 33.5 + 1.0
         Nov + 2.4 + 2.5 + 1.4 + 11.1 + 1.1 + 1.2 + 3.1 + 5.2 r + 5.5 + 2.9 + 6.0 + 29.0 − 4.7
         Dec + 2.1 + 2.0 + 1.4 + 8.0 + 1.2 + 1.2 + 4.0 r + 0.7 + 2.1 + 3.9 + 16.6 − 10.7
2012          Jan 10 + 2.1 + 2.7 + 1.7 + 7.2 + 1.0 + 1.3 + 3.4 r − 0.5 + 2.1 + 3.7 + 16.6 − 9.9
         Feb + 2.3 + 2.7 + 2.0 + 8.0 + 1.3 + 1.2 + 3.2 + 3.2 r − 1.1 + 2.0 + 3.5 + 17.3 − 11.0
         Mar + 2.1 + 3.1 + 1.9 + 6.7 + 1.0 + 1.1 + 3.3 + 0.7 + 1.9 + 3.1 + 14.4 − 6.1
         Apr + 2.1 + 3.0 + 1.9 + 5.8 + 0.9 + 1.1 + 2.4 − 0.2 + 1.8 + 2.3 + 5.4 − 6.5
         May + 1.9 + 2.4 + 1.8 + 4.9 + 1.3 + 1.1 + 2.8 + 2.1 r − 2.1 + 1.6 + 2.2 + 6.0 − 4.8
         June + 1.7 + 3.6 + 1.7 + 4.0 + 0.6 + 1.1 + 1.6 r − 2.8 + 1.4 + 1.3 − 4.6 − 4.5
         July + 1.7 + 3.0 + 1.6 + 4.4 + 0.8 + 1.1 + 0.9 r − 0.2 + 1.4 + 1.2 + 1.0 + 1.6
         Aug + 2.1 + 3.3 + 1.4 + 7.6 + 0.9 + 1.1 + 2.6 + 1.6 + 2.7 + 1.8 + 3.2 + 16.9 + 1.2
         Sep + 2.0 + 2.9 + 1.5 + 7.0 + 0.9 + 1.1 + 1.7 + 6.2 + 1.7 + 1.8 + 5.5 − 1.9
         Oct + 2.0 + 3.3 + 1.6 + 5.5 + 1.1 + 1.1 ... ... ... ... + 6.0 + 3.4
Source: Federal Statistical Office; for the Index of World Market Prices of Raw beverages and tobacco as well as industrial raw materials. 8From January 2007,
Materials: HWWI. 1Electricity, gas and other fuels. 2Bundesbank calculation based increase in the standard rate of value-added tax and in insurance tax from 16% to
on data provided by the Federal Statistical Office. 3Net rents. 4Excluding 19%. 9Introduction of university tuition fees in some federal states. 10From May
value-added tax. 5For the euro area, in euro. 6Coal and crude oil (Brent). 7Food, 2011 and from January 2012, increase in tobacco tax. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
67  Monthly Report
November 2012
X Economic conditions in Germany
  
8 Households’ income *
  
  
  
Gross wages and Net wages and Monetary social Saving
salaries 1 salaries 2 Mass income 4 Saving 6 ratio 7 benefits received 3 Disposable income 5 
Annual Annual Annual Annual Annual Annual
percent- percent- percent- percent- percent- percent- Asage age age age age age percent-
Period change change change change change change age € billion € billion € billion € billion € billion € billion
2004 924.7
0.5 627.9 2.0 359.5 0.3 987.3 1.4 1,435.4 1.7 151.8 3.1 10.6
2005 922.1 − 0.3 625.5 − 0.4 359.8 0.1 985.3 − 0.2 1,463.9 2.0 156.9 3.3 10.7
2006 935.0 1.4 627.8 0.4 358.5 − 0.4 986.3 0.1 1,502.0 2.6 162.5 3.6 10.8
2007 965.9 3.3 646.2 2.9 353.6 − 1.4 999.8 1.4 1,524.8 1.5 168.1 3.4 11.0
2008 1,002.6 3.8 664.0 2.7 356.2 0.7 1,020.1 2.0 1,569.9 3.0 180.3 7.3 11.5
2009 1,004.0 0.1 668.0 0.6 383.4 7.7 1,051.4 3.1 1,561.7 − 0.5 170.1 − 5.6 10.9
2010 1,034.1 3.0 697.7 4.4 387.1 1.0 1,084.8 3.2 1,607.9 3.0 174.7 2.7 10.9
2011 1,083.9 4.8 725.8 4.0 384.0 − 0.8 1,109.8 2.3 1,660.2 3.3 172.6 − 1.2 10.4
2011          Q1 251.7 5.0 168.7 4.2 97.4 − 1.8 266.1 2.0 408.4 3.2 56.0 − 3.1 13.7
         Q2 264.7 5.5 173.5 4.1 95.3 − 1.5 268.7 2.1 412.2 3.5 41.3 − 1.0 10.0
         Q3 267.6 4.6 182.9 3.7 95.8 − 0.3 278.7 2.3 421.7 3.5 37.2 − 1.2 8.8
         Q4 299.8 4.3 200.8 4.0 95.6 0.4 296.3 2.8 418.0 2.8 38.2 1.2 9.1
2012          Q1 261.9 4.0 175.1 3.8 97.8 0.4 272.9 2.6 422.6 3.5 57.9 3.4 13.7
         Q2 275.3 4.0 180.4 4.0 96.2 1.0 276.6 2.9 420.9 2.1 41.8 1.2 9.9
Source: Federal Statistical Office; figures computed in August 2012. *Households in- salaries plus monetary social benefits received. 5Mass income plus operating surplus,
cluding non-profit institutions serving households. 1Residence concept. 2After mixed income, property income (net), other current transfers received, income of
deducting the wage tax payable on gross wages and salaries and employees’ non-profit institutions serving households, less taxes (excluding wage tax andcontributions to the social security funds. 3Social security benefits in cash from the consumption-related taxes) and other current transfers paid. Including the increase in
social security funds, central, state and local government and foreign countries, claims on company pension funds. 6Including the increase in claims on company pen-
pension payments (net), private funded social benefits, less social contributions on sion funds. 7 Saving as a percentage of disposable income. 
social benefits, consumption-related taxes and public charges. 4Net wages and
  
  
  
9 Negotiated pay rates (overall economy)
    
  
Index of negotiated wages 1 
On a monthly basis
Memo item:
Total excluding Wages and salaries
On an hourly basis Total one-off payments Basic pay rates  2 per employee 3 
Annual Annual Annual Annual Annual
Period percentage percentage percentage percentage percentage
2005=100 change 2005=100 change 2005=100 change 2005=100 change 2005=100 change
2004 99.1 0.8 98.9 0.8 99.1 0.8 99.0 1.1 99.7 0.5
2005 100.0 0.9 100.0 1.1 100.0 0.9 100.0 1.1 100.0 0.3
2006 100.9 0.9 101.1 1.1 100.8 0.8 100.8 0.8 100.8 0.82007 102.1 1.2 102.5 1.3 102.2 1.5 102.2 1.4 102.2 1.42008 104.9 2.7 105.4 2.8 105.3 3.0 105.5 3.2 104.6 2.32009 107.0 2.0 107.5 2.0 107.6 2.2 108.0 2.4 104.6 − 0.0
2010 108.7 1.6 109.2 1.6 109.3 1.6 109.9 1.7 107.0 2.3
2011 110.6 1.7 111.1 1.7 111.3 1.8 111.8 1.7 110.6 3.3
2011          Q2 103.7 1.4 104.3 1.4 104.4 1.8 111.6 1.7 108.4 4.0
         Q3 112.7 1.9 113.3 2.0 113.5 1.9 112.3 2.0 108.9 3.2         Q4 123.1 1.7 123.8 1.8 124.2 2.1 112.6 2.1 120.8 2.9
2012          Q1 104.6 1.9 105.1 1.9 105.4 2.4 113.4 2.6 106.7 2.6
         Q2 106.5 2.7 107.0 2.6 107.4 2.9 114.6 2.7 111.2 2.6         Q3 115.9 2.8 116.4 2.7 116.8 2.8 115.5 2.9 . .
2012          Apr 106.2 1.8 106.7 1.7 107.1 2.4 114.0 2.4 . .
         May 107.2 3.4 107.7 3.3 108.0 3.4 114.7 2.8 . .         June 106.1 2.9 106.6 2.8 107.0 2.8 115.2 2.9 . .
         July 134.6 3.1 135.2 3.0 135.5 2.9 115.5 2.9 . .
         Aug 106.5 2.6 107.0 2.5 107.4 2.9 115.6 2.9 . .
         Sep 106.5 2.7 107.0 2.6 107.4 2.8 115.6 2.8 . .
1Current data are normally revised on account of additional reports. 2Excluding and retirement provisions). 3Source: Federal Statistical Office; figures computed in Au-
one-off payments and covenants (capital formation benefits, special payments, such gust 2012. 
as annual bonuses, holiday pay, Christmas bonuses (13
thmonthly salary payment)

Deutsche Bundesbank
68  Monthly Report
November 2012
XI External sector
 
1 Major items of the balance of payments of the euro area *
 
 
€ million
2011 r 2012
Item 2009 r 2010 r 2011 r Q4 Q1 r Q2 r June r July r Aug
Current account − 13,279 + 3,113 + 12,477 + 36,639 − 4,623 + 16,462 + 18,235 + 14,257 + 7,159 A
1 Goods
Exports (fob) 1,302,619 1,566,821 1,775,459 463,569 464,026 478,543 165,520 163,549 154,916
Imports (fob) 1,271,954 1,548,575 1,766,240 447,767 457,739 452,872 151,221 152,439 150,472
Balance + 30,664 + 18,249 + 9,216 + 15,801 + 6,287 + 25,671 + 14,299 + 11,110 + 4,444
2 Services
Receipts 499,878 541,708 576,638 151,644 137,146 154,768 55,696 55,113 54,504
Expenditure 454,982 487,402 509,421 132,966 121,869 130,093 45,922 46,975 47,056
Balance + 44,896 + 54,309 + 67,215 + 18,677 + 15,277 + 24,674 + 9,773 + 8,138 + 7,448
3 Income + 8,959 + 40,368 + 42,963 + 22,150 + 12,993 − 8,757 + 1,860 + 2,405 + 5,937
4 Current transfers
Transfers from non-residents 93,314 86,982 94,506 32,381 25,789 21,127 6,489 6,044 5,401
Transfers to non-residents 191,111 196,788 201,426 52,371 64,968 46,253 14,186 13,440 16,071
Balance − 97,796 − 109,809 − 106,920 − 19,990 − 39,180 − 25,125 − 7,697 − 7,396 − 10,670
Capital account + 8,286 + 7,819 + 11,468 + 6,097 + 1,976 + 831 − 492 + 246 + 1,312 B
Financial account (net capital exports: − + 15,140 + 5,501 − 45,346 − 42,231 + 3,602 − 24,283 − 21,335 − 7,344 − 12,074 C)
1 Direct investment − 67,043 − 95,045 − 154,850 − 35,698 − 3,478 − 9,713 − 19,084 − 7,170 − 11,155
By resident units abroad − 352,907 − 356,732 − 407,975 − 123,084 − 75,563 − 62,103 − 22,591 − 6,530 − 24,181
By non-resident units in the euro area + 285,862 + 261,685 + 253,131 + 87,387 + 72,085 + 52,389 + 3,507 − 640 + 13,027
2 Portfolio investment + 247,306 + 124,127 + 274,005 − 33,964 − 71,028 + 85,673 + 61,641 + 25,395 + 7,778
By resident units abroad − 96,046 − 135,931 + 51,899 + 45,675 − 125,601 + 59,964 + 38,531 + 13,669 − 19,247
Equity − 50,960 − 77,473 + 70,995 + 37,408 − 21,163 + 26,078 + 17,374 + 3,594 − 2,599
Bonds and notes − 38,362 − 104,518 + 11,531 + 27,965 − 58,997 + 7,255 + 3,422 + 1,552 − 15,214
Money market instruments − 6,723 + 46,062 − 30,629 − 19,699 − 45,439 + 26,629 + 17,734 + 8,523 − 1,434
By non-resident units in the euro area + 343,351 + 260,057 + 222,105 − 79,639 + 54,572 + 25,709 + 23,111 + 11,725 + 27,025
Equity + 87,570 + 125,875 + 99,741 + 12,377 + 39,753 + 2,216 + 7,479 − 8,158 + 15,483
Bonds and notes + 142,974 + 177,799 + 166,187 − 29,422 + 5,228 + 35,609 + 30,007 + 2,008 + 43,217
Money market instruments + 112,808 − 43,620 − 43,824 − 62,594 + 9,592 − 12,117 − 14,376 + 17,875 − 31,674
3 Financial derivatives + 19,034 + 17,764 − 4,860 − 10,920 − 6,678 − 9,596 − 2,875 − 2,318 − 348
4 Other investment − 188,749 − 30,827 − 149,463 + 45,073 + 86,893 − 81,695 − 56,508 − 23,745 − 6,786
Eurosystem − 232,898 + 11,817 + 137,307 + 96,131 − 72,768 + 76,062 + 37,355 + 22,587 + 915
General government + 5,413 + 23,941 + 72,896 − 7,233 + 17,589 + 383 − 2,851 + 1,468 − 1,026
MFIs (excluding the Eurosystem) + 67,603 − 19,006 − 338,625 − 74,857 + 153,651 − 120,997 − 65,328 − 47,075 − 9,602
Long-term − 21,558 + 47,237 − 17,185 − 30,779 + 12,919 − 18,355 − 9,881 + 1,571 + 3,362
Short-term + 89,165 − 66,246 − 321,439 − 44,079 + 140,731 − 102,642 − 55,446 − 48,648 − 12,964
Other sectors − 28,869 − 47,577 − 21,043 + 31,032 − 11,580 − 37,145 − 25,685 − 725 + 2,926
5 Reserve assets (Increase: −) + 4,595 − 10,516 − 10,177 − 6,722 − 2,108 − 8,953 − 4,510 + 495 − 1,564
Errors and omissions − 10,146 − 16,435 + 21,401 − 504 − 955 + 6,991 + 3,593 − 7,159 + 3,604 D
* Source: European Central Bank. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
69  Monthly Report
November 2012
XI External sector
 
2 Major items of the balance of payments of the Federal Republic of Germany
(balances)
 
 
Current account Capital trans- Financial account
fers andacquisition/ of whichdisposal of Change in
Supple- non- reserve assets
Balance mentary produced at trans- Errorson current Foreign trade Current non-financial action and
Period account trade 
1 items 2 Services 3 Income transfers assets Total 4 value 5 omissions
DM million
1998 − 28,696 + 126,970 − 8,917 − 75,053 − 18,635 − 53,061 + 1,289 + 25,683 − 7,128 + 1,724
1999 − 50,528 + 127,542 − 15,947 − 90,036 − 24,363 − 47,724 − 301 − 20,332 + 24,517 + 71,161
2000 − 69,351 + 115,645 − 17,742 − 95,848 − 16,956 − 54,450 + 13,345 + 66,863 + 11,429 − 10,8572001 − 23 + 186,771 − 14,512 − 97,521 − 22,557 − 52,204 − 756 − 23,068 + 11,797 + 23,847
€ million
1999 −
25,834 + 65,211 − 8,153 − 46,035 − 12,457 − 24,401 − 154 − 10,396 + 12,535 + 36,384
2000 − 35,459 + 59,128 − 9,071 − 49,006 − 8,670 − 27,840 + 6,823 + 34,187 + 5,844 − 5,551
2001 − 12 + 95,495 − 7,420 − 49,862 − 11,533 − 26,692 − 387 − 11,794 + 6,032 + 12,1932002 + 42,669 + 132,788 − 8,552 − 35,728 − 18,888 − 26,951 − 212 − 38,448 + 2,065 − 4,0102003 + 40,525 + 129,921 − 11,148 − 34,506 − 15,677 − 28,064 + 311 − 61,758 + 445 + 20,921
2004 + 102,368 + 156,096 − 16,470 − 29,375 + 19,681 − 27,564 + 435 − 122,984 + 1,470 + 20,181
2005 + 112,591 + 158,179 − 14,057 − 27,401 + 24,391 − 28,522 − 1,369 − 129,635 + 2,182 + 18,4132006 + 144,739 + 159,048 − 12,888 − 17,346 + 44,460 − 28,536 − 258 − 175,474 + 2,934 + 30,9922007 + 180,914 + 195,348 − 9,816 − 14,852 + 42,918 − 32,685 + 104 − 210,151 − 953 + 29,1332008 + 153,633 + 178,297 − 13,628 − 10,258 + 32,379 − 33,157 − 210 − 173,910 − 2,008 + 20,487
2009 + 140,558 + 138,697 − 15,052 − 8,049 + 58,120 − 33,158 + 29 − 155,440 + 3,200 + 14,853
2010 + 150,668 + 154,863 − 11,613 − 4,258 + 49,864 − 38,187 − 586 − 147,439 − 1,613 − 2,6432011 
r + 147,181 + 158,702 − 18,852 − 7,584 + 48,415 − 33,501 + 641 − 154,487 − 2,836 + 6,665
2009          Q4 + 51,139 + 40,910 − 3,414 + 4,356 + 16,817 − 7,531 − 276 − 68,715 + 569 + 17,853
2010          Q1 + 34,259 + 37,736 − 2,522 − 22 + 13,233 − 14,165 + 262 − 28,714 − 651 − 5,807
         Q2 + 29,466 + 37,249 − 2,885 − 1,708 + 3,198 − 6,388 − 434 − 29,669 − 801 + 638         Q3 + 33,665 + 38,895 − 2,953 − 6,174 + 14,666 − 10,770 + 9 − 28,646 + 344 − 5,028         Q4 + 53,278 + 40,982 − 3,254 + 3,646 + 18,767 − 6,864 − 423 − 60,410 − 506 + 7,555
2011          Q1 
r + 40,534 + 40,902 − 1,811 + 1,792 + 13,169 − 13,518 + 958 − 63,197 − 1,393 + 21,705
         Q2 r + 26,326 + 38,562 − 4,637 − 3,022 + 100 − 4,677 − 278 − 46,097 − 438 + 20,050
         Q3 r + 33,407 + 39,609 − 6,161 − 6,836 + 16,414 − 9,619 + 115 − 16,218 − 639 − 17,303
         Q4 r + 46,915 + 39,630 − 6,243 + 483 + 18,732 − 5,688 − 153 − 28,974 − 366 − 17,787
2012          Q1 r + 41,067 + 45,418 − 4,498 − 423 + 15,677 − 15,107 + 222 − 61,391 − 963 + 20,102
         Q2 r + 37,622 + 47,996 − 9,048 − 149 + 5,533 − 6,711 + 394 − 58,332 − 769 + 20,316
         Q3 p + 40,502 + 50,033 − 8,127 − 6,916 + 14,865 − 9,352 + 77 − 56,743 − 59 + 16,163
2010          Apr + 11,779 + 12,995 − 732 + 798 + 914 − 2,196 − 199 − 7,750 − 116 − 3,830
         May + 4,669 + 10,143 − 1,346 − 830 − 1,842 − 1,455 − 49 − 7,771 − 671 + 3,151         June + 13,017 + 14,111 − 806 − 1,677 + 4,126 − 2,737 − 185 − 14,148 − 14 + 1,317
         July + 10,363 + 12,967 − 1,096 − 2,392 + 4,604 − 3,720 + 423 + 19,095 + 20 − 29,880
         Aug + 6,641 + 9,456 − 1,091 − 3,085 + 4,797 − 3,436 − 112 − 19,738 + 119 + 13,209         Sep + 16,661 + 16,473 − 765 − 697 + 5,264 − 3,613 − 302 − 28,002 + 205 + 11,643
         Oct + 15,025 + 14,518 − 782 − 591 + 5,582 − 3,701 − 220 − 96 + 234 − 14,708
         Nov + 15,965 + 13,884 − 1,110 + 1,104 + 6,096 − 4,008 − 169 − 29,202 + 81 + 13,406         Dec + 22,288 + 12,580 − 1,361 + 3,133 + 7,090 + 846 − 34 − 31,112 − 820 + 8,858
2011          Jan  
r + 8,427 + 9,926 − 1,024 + 149 + 3,417 − 4,042 + 541 − 11,110 − 182 + 2,142
         Feb  r + 10,761 + 12,090 + 254 + 417 + 4,568 − 6,568 + 528 − 20,926 − 23 + 9,636
         Mar  r + 21,346 + 18,886 − 1,042 + 1,226 + 5,184 − 2,908 − 110 − 31,161 − 1,188 + 9,926
         Apr  r + 7,409 + 10,835 − 1,811 − 850 + 771 − 1,536 − 198 − 21,317 − 563 + 14,106
         May r + 7,607 + 14,833 − 1,034 + 159 − 5,779 − 574 − 65 − 17,656 + 24 + 10,115
         June r + 11,310 + 12,893 − 1,793 − 2,331 + 5,108 − 2,567 − 16 − 7,124 + 101 − 4,170
         July r + 8,428 + 10,555 − 1,420 − 2,461 + 5,216 − 3,462 − 139 + 7,188 − 428 − 15,476
         Aug  r + 8,024 + 11,740 − 2,228 − 4,159 + 5,712 − 3,042 + 383 − 15,547 + 109 + 7,140
         Sep  r + 16,955 + 17,314 − 2,512 − 217 + 5,485 − 3,115 − 129 − 7,859 − 320 − 8,967
         Oct  r + 9,947 + 11,000 − 1,945 − 1,425 + 5,781 − 3,465 − 178 − 10,260 + 55 + 491
         Nov  r + 16,062 + 16,110 − 1,802 − 46 + 5,404 − 3,603 + 119 − 7,577 + 263 − 8,604
         Dec  r + 20,906 + 12,520 − 2,496 + 1,954 + 7,547 + 1,380 − 94 − 11,137 − 684 − 9,674
2012          Jan  r + 9,482 + 13,188 − 1,384 − 2,205 + 4,169 − 4,287 − 27 − 14,628 − 140 + 5,173
         Feb  r + 11,690 + 14,864 − 1,925 + 402 + 5,632 − 7,283 + 240 − 12,706 − 547 + 776
         Mar  r + 19,896 + 17,366 − 1,188 + 1,380 + 5,875 − 3,537 + 9 − 34,056 − 276 + 14,152
         Apr  r + 11,021 + 14,470 − 2,280 + 629 + 922 − 2,720 + 310 − 21,193 − 581 + 9,862
         May r + 8,093 + 15,559 − 4,075 − 1,019 − 726 − 1,646 + 239 − 19,978 − 207 + 11,647
         June r + 18,508 + 17,967 − 2,693 + 241 + 5,337 − 2,345 − 155 − 17,160 + 19 − 1,193
         July r + 11,686 + 16,888 − 2,866 − 4,937 + 5,114 − 2,513 − 224 − 4,600 + 48 − 6,862
         Aug + 12,524 + 16,290 − 2,552 − 2,439 + 4,852 − 3,627 + 179 − 20,566 − 389 + 7,863
         Sep  p + 16,293 + 16,855 − 2,708 + 460 + 4,898 − 3,212 + 122 − 31,576 + 281 + 15,162
1Special trade according to the official foreign trade statistics: imports cif, exports deduction of goods returned. 3Excluding the expenditure on freight and insurance
fob. From January 2007 onwards, excluding supplies of goods for/after included in the cif import figure. 4Financial account balance including change in
repair/maintenance, which, up to December 2006, were deducted via supplementary reserve assets. Capital exports: − . 5 Increase: − . 
trade items. 2Inter alia warehouse transactions for the account of residents and

Deutsche Bundesbank
70  Monthly Report
November 2012
 XI External sector
 
 3 Foreign trade (special trade) of the Federal Republic of Germany,
 by country and group of countries *
 
 € million
 2012
Country / group of countries  2009  2010  2011 r Jan / Aug May r Jun r Jul r Aug r Sep p 
All countries 1 Exports 803,312 951,959 1,061,225 734,168 92,710 94,731 93,471 90,153 91,709
Imports 664,615 797,097 902,523 607,576 77,151 76,764 76,583 73,863 74,854Balance + 138,697 + 154,863 + 158,702 + 126,592 + 15,559 + 17,967 + 16,888 + 16,290 + 16,855
I Exports 585,826 675,024 752,295 506,607 64,952 65,079 62,994 59,981 ... European countries
Imports 463,721 541,720 622,870 424,215 54,575 53,697 53,692 49,272 ...
Balance + 122,105 + 133,305 + 129,425 + 82,392 + 10,376 + 11,383 + 9,303 + 10,709 ...
Exports 500,654 570,879 627,698 419,598 53,831 53,665 51,674 48,794 ... 1 EU member states (27)
Imports 380,323 444,375 505,363 341,190 44,046 43,487 43,390 39,755 ...
Balance + 120,331 + 126,504 + 122,335 + 78,407 + 9,785 + 10,178 + 8,284 + 9,039 ...
Euro-area (17) Exports 343,701 388,103 420,522 276,069 35,635 35,504 34,024 30,569 ...
countries Imports 258,729 300,135 338,330 229,085 29,651 29,362 29,237 26,694 ...
Balance + 84,972 + 87,968 + 82,192 + 46,984 + 5,984 + 6,143 + 4,788 + 3,875 ...
of which
Austria Exports 46,093 52,156 57,671 38,780 4,824 4,885 4,838 4,689 ...
Imports 27,565 33,013 37,028 24,919 3,226 3,248 3,216 2,905 ...
Balance + 18,528 + 19,144 + 20,643 + 13,861 + 1,598 + 1,637 + 1,622 + 1,784 ...
Belgium and Exports 46,262 50,545 53,161 33,276 4,271 4,320 3,826 4,021 ...
Luxembourg Imports 30,694 36,026 41,302 27,629 3,334 3,632 3,451 3,214 ...
Balance + 15,568 + 14,519 + 11,859 + 5,647 + 937 + 687 + 374 + 807 ...
France Exports 81,304 89,582 101,444 69,928 9,062 9,307 9,145 7,137 ...
Imports 53,338 60,673 65,948 43,765 5,667 5,358 5,662 5,178 ...
Balance + 27,966 + 28,909 + 35,496 + 26,163 + 3,395 + 3,949 + 3,484 + 1,959 ...
Italy Exports 50,620 58,589 62,044 37,887 5,197 4,822 4,724 3,548 ...
Imports 37,197 41,977 47,844 33,346 4,410 4,377 4,532 3,522 ...
Balance + 13,423 + 16,611 + 14,200 + 4,541 + 787 + 446 + 192 + 26 ...
Netherlands Exports 53,195 62,978 69,423 47,725 6,029 5,972 5,585 5,764 ...
Imports 55,583 67,205 81,804 57,274 7,537 7,268 7,069 7,205 ...
Balance − 2,388 − 4,227 − 12,382 − 9,549 − 1,509 − 1,295 − 1,484 − 1,440 ...
Spain Exports 31,281 34,222 34,811 21,152 2,752 2,720 2,564 2,109 ...
Imports 18,959 21,955 22,491 15,003 2,035 1,961 1,847 1,443 ...
Balance + 12,322 + 12,267 + 12,320 + 6,149 + 717 + 759 + 717 + 666 ...
Other EU member Exports 156,953 182,775 207,176 143,528 18,196 18,160 17,650 18,225 ...
states Imports 121,594 144,240 167,033 112,105 14,395 14,125 14,153 13,061 ...
Balance + 35,359 + 38,536 + 40,143 + 31,423 + 3,801 + 4,036 + 3,496 + 5,164 ...
of which
United Exports 53,240 58,666 65,570 48,667 5,961 5,944 6,307 6,371 ...
Kingdom Imports 32,452 37,923 44,741 29,410 3,638 3,495 4,005 3,155 ...
Balance + 20,787 + 20,743 + 20,829 + 19,257 + 2,323 + 2,448 + 2,302 + 3,215 ...
Exports 85,172 104,145 124,597 87,010 11,121 11,414 11,321 11,187 ... 2 Other European
Imports 83,398 97,345 117,507 83,025 10,529 10,210 10,302 9,517 ... countries
Balance + 1,774 + 6,800 + 7,090 + 3,984 + 591 + 1,205 + 1,019 + 1,670 ...
of which
Switzerland Exports 35,510 41,659 47,875 32,860 4,050 4,208 4,039 3,982 ...
Imports 28,096 32,507 36,996 25,097 3,205 3,218 3,421 3,099 ...
Balance + 7,414 + 9,152 + 10,879 + 7,763 + 845 + 990 + 617 + 883 ...
II Exports 216,466 276,635 308,193 226,830 27,721 29,590 30,439 29,769 ... Non-European
Imports 200,303 255,377 279,653 183,362 22,576 23,068 22,891 24,591 ... countries
Balance + 16,163 + 21,258 + 28,541 + 43,468 + 5,145 + 6,522 + 7,548 + 5,178 ...
Exports 17,412 19,968 20,717 14,373 1,757 1,898 1,917 1,898 ... 1 Africa
Imports 14,235 17,040 21,944 15,253 1,932 1,879 1,664 1,948 ...
Balance + 3,177 + 2,929 − 1,227 − 880 − 174 + 19 + 253 − 49 ...
Exports 78,727 99,464 110,424 85,700 10,156 10,915 11,908 11,397 ... 2 America
Imports 60,498 71,680 80,568 54,294 6,912 6,986 7,163 7,104 ...
Balance + 18,229 + 27,784 + 29,856 + 31,407 + 3,244 + 3,928 + 4,744 + 4,293 ...
of which
Exports 54,356 65,574 73,776 57,335 6,832 7,050 7,977 7,623 ... United States
Imports 39,283 45,241 48,531 34,150 4,346 4,526 4,408 4,382 ...
Balance + 15,074 + 20,333 + 25,244 + 23,185 + 2,486 + 2,523 + 3,570 + 3,241 ...
Exports 113,179 148,231 167,574 119,402 14,927 15,847 15,654 15,484 ... 3 Asia
Imports 122,823 163,523 173,115 110,938 13,351 13,794 13,677 15,215 ...
Balance − 9,644 − 15,293 − 5,541 + 8,464 + 1,576 + 2,053 + 1,977 + 269 ...
of which
Middle East Exports 23,598 28,138 28,711 20,806 2,558 2,735 2,551 2,934 ...
Imports 5,506 6,878 8,874 4,943 542 591 496 911 ...
Balance + 18,092 + 21,260 + 19,837 + 15,863 + 2,016 + 2,144 + 2,055 + 2,024 ...
Japan Exports 10,875 13,149 15,115 11,422 1,332 1,468 1,626 1,431 ...
Imports 18,946 22,475 23,595 14,750 1,922 1,806 1,824 1,736 ...
Balance − 8,071 − 9,326 − 8,480 − 3,329 − 591 − 338 − 198 − 305 ...
Exports 37,273 53,791 64,863 45,767 5,961 6,327 5,937 5,501 ... People‘s Republic
Imports 56,706 77,270 79,528 51,184 6,162 6,413 6,605 7,195 ... of China 
2 
Balance − 19,434 − 23,479 − 14,665 − 5,416 − 201 − 86 − 668 − 1,694 ...
Exports 28,606 38,183 41,569 30,023 3,705 3,901 4,076 3,951 ... Emerging markets
Imports 28,338 39,562 39,546 25,306 3,142 3,128 3,029 3,311 ... in South-East Asia 3 
Balance + 268 − 1,379 + 2,023 + 4,717 + 563 + 774 + 1,046 + 640 ...
Exports 7,147 8,972 9,479 7,354 881 931 961 989 ... 4 Oceania and
Imports 2,747 3,134 4,026 2,877 381 409 387 324 ... polar regions
Balance + 4,401 + 5,838 + 5,453 + 4,477 + 499 + 522 + 573 + 665 ...
 
*Source: Federal Statistical Office. Exports (fob) by country of destination, imports other data not classifiable by region. 2Excluding Hong Kong. 3Brunei Darussalam,
(cif) by country of origin. Individual countries and groups of countries according to Hong Kong, Indonesia, Malaysia, Philippines, Republic of Korea, Singapore, Taiwan
the current position. 1Including fuel and other supplies for ships and aircraft and and Thailand. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
71  Monthly Report
November 2012
XI External sector
 
4 Services and income of the Federal Republic of Germany
(balances)
 
€ million
Services
Other services
of which
 
Patents Compen- Services  of Construction
Trans- Financial and sation of Investment Government self-employed and  assembly
Period Total Travel 1 services licences Total income portation 2 services  3 persons  4 work,  repairs employees 5 
2007 − 14,852 − 34,324 + 6,756 + 2,801 − 2,016 + 3,309 + 8,622 − 1,964 + 3,197 − 140 + 43,058
2008 − 10,258 − 34,718 + 8,319 + 3,936 − 1,313 + 2,376 + 11,142 − 1,641 + 3,229 + 216 + 32,1642009 − 8,049 − 33,341 + 6,940 + 4,276 + 136 + 2,370 + 11,570 − 1,266 + 2,966 + 764 + 57,3562010 − 4,258 − 32,778 + 7,359 + 4,175 + 1,153 + 2,456 + 13,376 − 1,152 + 3,405 + 1,392 + 48,4722011 − 7,584 − 33,782 + 7,475 + 3,702 + 843 + 2,546 + 11,632 − 1,221 + 3,212 + 1,596 + 46,820
2011          Q1 + 1,792 − 4,983 + 1,540 + 724 + 350 + 579 + 3,583 − 246 + 795 + 995 + 12,174
         Q2 − 3,022 − 8,234 + 2,199 + 485 + 264 + 679 + 1,585 − 264 + 735 + 310 − 210         Q3 − 6,836 − 14,629 + 1,807 + 942 − 172 + 691 + 4,525 − 325 + 730 − 212 + 16,626         Q4 + 483 − 5,936 + 1,929 + 1,552 + 402 + 597 + 1,940 − 386 + 952 + 503 + 18,229
2012          Q1 − 423 − 5,344 + 1,725 + 1,163 − 503 + 632 + 1,904 − 357 + 540 + 1,032 + 14,646
         Q2 − 149 − 8,228 + 2,476 + 1,054 + 144 + 674 + 3,731 − 341 + 446 + 310 + 5,223         Q3 − 6,916 − 14,557 + 2,495 + 1,982 + 724 + 677 + 1,762 − 536 + 445 − 219 + 15,083
2011          Nov − 46 − 1,393 + 533 + 236 + 339 + 225 + 13 − 118 + 308 + 143 + 5,260
         Dec + 1,954 − 658 + 720 + 353 − 148 + 162 + 1,524 − 126 + 396 + 216 + 7,332
2012          Jan − 2,205 − 1,626 + 512 + 464 − 643 + 197 − 1,109 − 127 + 82 + 335 + 3,834
         Feb + 402 − 1,804 + 566 + 311 + 146 + 198 + 985 − 94 + 133 + 335 + 5,298         Mar + 1,380 − 1,914 + 647 + 388 − 6 + 237 + 2,028 − 136 + 324 + 361 + 5,514
         Apr + 629 − 1,887 + 764 + 481 + 66 + 204 + 1,002 − 110 + 147 + 91 + 831
         May − 1,019 − 2,349 + 842 + 335 + 104 + 231 − 181 − 157 + 82 + 108 − 834         June + 241 − 3,992 + 870 + 238 − 26 + 240 + 2,911 − 74 + 216 + 111 + 5,226
         July − 4,937 − 5,175 + 948 + 290 + 134 + 238 − 1,372 − 224 + 72 − 61 + 5,175
         Aug − 2,439 − 5,512 + 806 + 1,405 + 363 + 227 + 272 − 241 + 134 − 73 + 4,926         Sep + 460 − 3,870 + 740 + 288 + 227 + 212 + 2,863 − 71 + 239 − 85 + 4,983
1From 2001 expenditure is based on household samples. 2Excluding the other technical services, research and development, commercial services, etc.
expenditure on freight included in the cif import figure. 3Including the receipts 5 Wages and salaries. 
from foreign military agencies for goods and services supplied. 4Engineering and
5 Current transfers of the Federal Republic of Germany 6 Capital transfers
(balances) (balances)
€ million € million
Public 1 Private 1 
International
organisations 2 
 
of which Other Other
European current Workers’ current
Period Total Total Total Communities Total remittances transfers Total  4 Public 1 Private 1 transfers 3 
2007 − 32,685 − 17,237 − 19,331 − 17,548 + 2,094 − 15,448 − 2,997 − 12,451 + 104 − 2,034 + 2,138
2008 − 33,157 − 16,834 − 18,746 − 16,644 + 1,911 − 16,322 − 3,079 − 13,243 − 210 − 1,853 + 1,6422009 − 33,158 − 19,041 − 19,041 − 16,578 + 0 − 14,116 − 2,995 − 11,122 + 29 − 1,704 + 1,7332010 − 38,187 − 23,514 − 22,844 − 19,474 − 670 − 14,673 − 3,035 − 11,638 − 586 − 2,039 + 1,4532011 − 33,501 − 20,173 − 22,158 − 19,105 + 1,985 − 13,328 − 2,977 − 10,351 + 641 − 2,323 + 2,964
2011          Q1 − 13,518 − 10,302 − 9,594 − 8,571 − 708 − 3,215 − 744 − 2,471 + 958 − 406 + 1,364
         Q2 − 4,677 − 754 − 4,833 − 4,210 + 4,079 − 3,922 − 744 − 3,178 − 278 − 475 + 197         Q3 − 9,619 − 6,730 − 6,145 − 5,458 − 585 − 2,889 − 744 − 2,145 + 115 − 484 + 599         Q4 − 5,688 − 2,387 − 1,586 − 867 − 801 − 3,300 − 744 − 2,556 − 153 − 958 + 804
2012          Q1 − 15,107 − 11,976 − 11,245 − 10,137 − 731 − 3,131 − 770 − 2,361 + 222 − 401 + 623
         Q2 − 6,711 − 3,416 − 6,102 − 5,129 + 2,686 − 3,295 − 770 − 2,525 + 394 − 375 + 769         Q3 − 9,352 − 6,118 − 5,522 − 5,035 − 597 − 3,234 − 770 − 2,464 + 77 − 556 + 633
2011          Nov − 3,603 − 2,602 − 2,163 − 1,920 − 439 − 1,000 − 248 − 752 + 119 − 207 + 326
         Dec + 1,380 + 2,717 + 2,632 + 2,988 + 84 − 1,337 − 248 − 1,089 − 94 − 524 + 430
2012          Jan − 4,287 − 3,163 − 2,980 − 2,398 − 182 − 1,124 − 257 − 868 − 27 − 99 + 72
         Feb − 7,283 − 6,287 − 5,903 − 5,584 − 385 − 996 − 257 − 739 + 240 − 116 + 356         Mar − 3,537 − 2,526 − 2,362 − 2,155 − 164 − 1,011 − 257 − 755 + 9 − 186 + 195
         Apr − 2,720 − 1,707 − 2,662 − 2,157 + 955 − 1,013 − 257 − 757 + 310 − 119 + 429
         May − 1,646 − 431 − 2,057 − 1,906 + 1,626 − 1,215 − 257 − 958 + 239 − 113 + 351         June − 2,345 − 1,278 − 1,383 − 1,067 + 105 − 1,066 − 257 − 810 − 155 − 144 − 11
         July − 2,513 − 1,402 − 1,115 − 956 − 287 − 1,111 − 257 − 854 − 224 − 158 − 65
         Aug − 3,627 − 2,484 − 2,160 − 1,956 − 324 − 1,144 − 257 − 887 + 179 − 228 + 407         Sep − 3,212 − 2,233 − 2,247 − 2,123 + 14 − 979 − 257 − 723 + 122 − 169 + 291
1The classification of “public” and “private” transfers depends on the sector to transfers). 3Payments to developing countries, pension payments, tax revenue and
which the participating domestic body belongs. 2Current contributions to the refunds, etc. 4 Where identifiable; in particular, debt forgiveness. 
budgets of international organisations and to the EU budget (excluding capital

Deutsche Bundesbank
72  Monthly Report
November 2012
XI External sector
 
7 Financial account of the Federal Republic of Germany
 
 
€ million
2011 2012
Item 2009 2010 2011 Q4 Q1 Q2 Q3 July Aug Sep
I Net German investment abroad
(Increase/capital exports: −) − 21,427 − 408,695 − 223,211 + 61,733 − 269,909 − 119,680 − 19,192 − 25,909 − 14,279 + 20,997
1 Direct investment 1 − 54,269 − 82,543 − 39,110 − 6,269 − 27,025 − 9,445 − 7,026 − 3,211 + 2,360 − 6,174
Equity capital − 52,154 − 49,646 − 19,830 + 852 − 12,576 − 807 − 11,075 − 5,231 − 3,681 − 2,164
Reinvested earnings 2 − 19,895 − 19,287 − 30,162 − 7,060 − 9,032 − 2,790 − 4,727 − 2,054 − 1,093 − 1,580
Other capital transactions
of German direct investors + 17,780 − 13,609 + 10,882 − 60 − 5,417 − 5,848 + 8,777 + 4,074 + 7,133 − 2,431
2 Portfolio investment − 76,809 − 173,826 − 25,215 − 3,333 − 39,361 + 392 − 26,373 − 10,909 − 5,459 − 10,005
Shares 3 − 2,388 − 1,227 + 2,151 − 5,697 + 5,897 − 1,434 − 2,418 − 2,014 + 57 − 461
Mutual fund shares 4 − 4,332 − 22,444 − 142 + 1,692 − 6,329 + 3,380 − 6,403 − 2,760 − 2,976 − 666
Bonds and notes 5 − 83,438 − 156,239 − 22,285 − 9,368 − 36,364 − 3,273 − 17,368 − 6,154 − 1,682 − 9,532
Money market instruments + 13,349 + 6,084 − 4,939 + 10,040 − 2,565 + 1,720 − 185 + 19 − 859 + 654
3 Financial derivatives 6 + 11,337 − 17,935 − 28,740 − 5,109 − 3,487 − 7,583 − 3,550 − 4,008 − 787 + 1,245
4 Other investment + 95,114 − 132,778 − 127,311 + 76,809 − 199,073 − 102,276 + 17,816 − 7,830 − 10,004 + 35,650
MFIs 7,8 + 176,551 + 138,533 + 45,158 + 60,719 − 17,305 + 39,870 − 21,322 − 11,269 − 2,657 − 7,397
Long-term + 25,777 + 77,699 − 11,869 − 9,141 + 15,179 + 10,580 + 7,110 + 4,695 + 1,917 + 497
Short-term + 150,774 + 60,833 + 57,027 + 69,860 − 32,484 + 29,290 − 28,432 − 15,964 − 4,574 − 7,894
Enterprises and households − 20,175 − 60,136 − 17,791 + 52,828 − 27,047 − 14,633 + 1,032 + 1,687 + 15,682 − 16,336
Long-term − 24,046 − 42,172 + 7,269 + 17,413 + 1,201 + 3,041 − 3,208 − 1,912 − 1,345 + 49
Short-term 7 + 3,871 − 17,964 − 25,060 + 35,415 − 28,248 − 17,674 + 4,240 + 3,599 + 17,027 − 16,385
General government + 5 − 63,542 − 16,605 − 22,723 − 2,439 − 14,538 + 4,998 + 391 + 1,215 + 3,392
Long-term − 2,652 − 53,332 + 2,224 + 861 − 10,708 − 9,400 + 811 − 176 + 480 + 507
Short-term 7 + 2,657 − 10,209 − 18,829 − 23,584 + 8,269 − 5,138 + 4,186 + 567 + 735 + 2,885
Bundesbank − 61,267 − 147,633 − 138,073 − 14,015 − 152,281 − 112,975 + 33,108 + 1,361 − 24,243 + 55,991
5 Change in reserve assets at
transaction values (Increase: −) + 3,200 − 1,613 − 2,836 − 366 − 963 − 769 − 59 + 48 − 389 + 281
II Net foreign investment in Germany
(Increase/capital imports: +) − 134,013 + 261,256 + 68,725 − 90,707 + 208,518 + 61,348 − 37,551 + 21,309 − 6,287 − 52,573
1 Direct investment 1 + 17,389 + 35,382 + 29,063 + 11,471 + 3,698 + 4,046 − 3,230 + 268 − 10,698 + 7,200
Equity capital + 9,094 + 9,574 + 4,990 + 1,982 + 349 − 1,348 + 492 + 273 + 94 + 125
Reinvested earnings 2 − 8,437 + 1,883 + 5,752 + 1,069 + 3,652 − 499 + 644 − 137 + 813 − 32
Other capital transactionsof foreign direct investors + 16,732 + 23,924 + 18,321 + 8,421 − 303 + 5,893 − 4,366 + 132 − 11,605 + 7,106
2 Portfolio investment − 4,246 + 46,134 + 62,264 − 40,407 + 3,987 + 25,803 − 3,347 + 3,608 + 4,716 − 11,671
Shares 
3 + 3,630 − 4,736 − 2,820 − 5,486 − 8,550 + 9,286 + 578 + 1,922 − 348 − 996
Mutual fund shares + 11,744 + 2,572 + 7,711 + 875 − 1,021 − 2,388 − 1,088 − 35 − 813 − 240
Bonds and notes 5 − 70,113 + 57,767 + 48,711 − 22,081 + 14,070 + 12,021 + 11,858 − 3,866 + 13,098 + 2,626
Money market instruments + 50,493 − 9,470 + 8,662 − 13,715 − 512 + 6,884 − 14,695 + 5,588 − 7,221 − 13,061
3 Other investment − 147,155 + 179,741 − 22,603 − 61,771 + 200,833 + 31,499 − 30,974 + 17,433 − 305 − 48,102
MFIs 7,8 − 115,025 + 76,346 − 96,666 − 111,131 + 250,167 − 52,616 − 15,088 + 8,381 + 21,847 − 45,316
Long-term − 24,001 − 5,706 − 18,326 − 7,257 + 2,164 − 6,616 − 318 − 1,102 − 1,816 + 2,600
Short-term − 91,024 + 82,052 − 78,340 − 103,874 + 248,003 − 46,000 − 14,770 + 9,483 + 23,663 − 47,917
Enterprises and households − 5,059 + 3,835 + 24,275 − 4,452 + 1,861 + 13,312 − 9,191 − 8,159 − 11,068 + 10,037
Long-term + 2,804 − 4,587 − 13,946 − 659 − 3,974 − 1,930 − 1,632 − 675 + 1,166 − 2,123
Short-term 7 − 7,863 + 8,423 + 38,221 − 3,793 + 5,835 + 15,243 − 7,558 − 7,484 − 12,234 + 12,160
General government − 5,290 + 94,041 + 17,836 + 21,066 − 22,211 + 3,502 − 17,572 + 419 − 10,905 − 7,086
Long-term − 2,013 + 611 + 4,417 + 272 + 11,811 + 10,297 + 733 + 687 + 57 − 12
Short-term 7 − 3,276 + 93,430 + 13,419 + 20,794 − 34,022 − 6,795 − 18,305 − 268 − 10,962 − 7,074
Bundesbank − 21,782 + 5,518 + 31,952 + 32,746 − 28,984 + 67,301 + 10,877 + 16,792 − 178 − 5,736
III Financial account balance 9 
(Net capital exports: −) − 155,440 − 147,439 − 154,487 − 28,974 − 61,391 − 58,332 − 56,743 − 4,600 − 20,566 − 31,576
1From 1996, new definition for direct investment. 2Estimated. 3Including from changes in stocks. Purely statistical changes have been eliminated as far as
participation rights. 4From 1991, including retained earnings. 5From 1975, possible. 8Excluding the Deutsche Bundesbank. 9Financial account balance
excluding accrued interest. 6Options, whether evidenced by securities or not, and including change in reserve assets. 
financial futures contracts. 7The transaction values shown here are mostly derived

Deutsche Bundesbank
73  Monthly Report
November 2012
XI External sector
 
8 External position of the Bundesbank up to end-1998 *
 
 
DM million
Reserve assets and other claims on non-residents Liabilities vis-à-vis non-residents
Reserve assets
Reserve
positionin theInter- Liabilitiesnational arising Net Liabilities
Monetary arising from externalFund and Claims Loans and from Treasury position
Foreign special on the external discount (col 1 other claims
End of year currency drawing ECB 
2 on non- trans- liquidity less
or month Total Total Gold rights (net) Total paper col 8) balances 1 residents 3 actions 4 
1234567891 0 1 1
1997 127,849 126,884 13,688 76,673 13,874 22,649 966 16,931 16,931 − 110,918
1998 135,085 134,005 17,109 100,363 16,533 − 1,079 15,978 15,978 − 119,107
*Valuation of the gold holdings and the claims on non-residents in accordance with claims on the European Monetary Cooperation Fund (EMCF)). 3Including loans to
section 26 (2) of the Bundesbank Act and the provisions of the Commercial Code, the World Bank. 4Including liquidity paper sold to non-residents by the Bundesbank;
especially section 253. In the course of the year, valuation at the preceding year’s excluding the Treasury discount liquidity paper sold to non-residents between March
balance sheet rates. 1Mainly US dollar assets. 2European Central Bank (up to 1993, 1993 and March 1995, as shown in column 10. 
  
 
9 External position of the Bundesbank since the beginning of European monetary union o
€ million
Reserve assets and other claims on non-residents
Reserve assets
Reserve
position
Other in the Inter-national claims on Net
Monetary Other residents external
Fund and claims on
Claims in other position
Gold special Foreign non-euro- within the euro-area (col 1 Liabilities
End of year and gold drawing currency area Eurosystem member less vis-à-vis non-
or month Total Total rights reserves (net) 2 states col 9) receivables residents 1,3 residents 3,4 
1234567891 0
1999          Jan  5 95,316 93,940 29,312 8,461 56,167 140 1,225 11 8,169 87,146
1999 141,958 93,039 32,287 8,332 52,420 9,162 39,746 11 6,179 135,779
2000 100,762 93,815 32,676 7,762 53,377 313 6,620 14 6,592 94,170
2001 76,147 93,215 35,005 8,721 49,489 312 − 17,385 5 8,752 67,396
2002 103,948 85,002 36,208 8,272 40,522 312 18,466 167 9,005 94,942
2003 95,394 76,680 36,533 7,609 32,538 312 17,945 456 10,443 84,951
2004 93,110 71,335 35,495 6,548 29,292 312 20,796 667 7,935 85,175
2005 130,268 86,181 47,924 4,549 33,708 350 42,830 906 6,285 123,983
2006 104,389 84,765 53,114 3,011 28,640 350 18,344 931 4,819 99,570
2007 179,492 92,545 62,433 2,418 27,694 350 84,064 2,534 16,005 163,488
2008 230,775 99,185 68,194 3,285 27,705 350 128,668 2,573 30,169 200,607
2009 323,286 125,541 83,939 15,969 25,634 350 189,936 7,460 9,126 314,160
2010 524,695 162,100 115,403 18,740 27,957 50 337,869 24,676 14,620 510,075
2011 714,662 184,603 132,874 22,296 29,433 50 475,942 54,067 46,557 668,106
2011          July 549,738 170,639 123,740 19,901 26,998 50 355,977 23,072 12,077 537,661
         Aug 622,802 184,687 138,174 19,774 26,739 50 402,739 35,327 15,380 607,422
         Sep 686,659 181,430 131,912 20,862 28,655 50 461,927 43,253 13,809 672,850
         Oct 704,976 181,946 133,987 20,434 27,525 50 477,830 45,150 13,147 691,829
         Nov 746,357 187,984 138,669 20,850 28,465 50 507,480 50,843 13,517 732,840
         Dec 714,662 184,603 132,874 22,296 29,433 50 475,942 54,067 46,557 668,106
2012          Jan 763,406 195,056 144,034 22,115 28,907 50 510,763 57,539 11,941 751,466
         Feb 814,053 195,654 145,234 22,073 28,346 50 559,678 58,672 13,460 800,593
         Mar 875,780 186,628 135,777 22,177 28,674 50 628,223 60,880 17,564 858,215
         Apr 909,192 189,556 137,380 22,624 29,551 50 656,813 62,773 15,312 893,879
         May 964,557 193,057 138,000 23,400 31,658 50 711,198 60,252 53,949 910,608
         June 992,341 190,248 136,094 23,320 30,834 50 741,198 60,845 84,880 907,461
         July 1,000,019 199,419 144,217 23,769 31,434 50 739,837 60,713 101,674 898,345
         Aug 1,023,617 197,776 143,507 23,520 30,749 50 764,080 61,711 101,494 922,123
         Sep 974,478 203,337 150,373 23,295 29,669 50 708,090 63,002 95,757 878,721
         Oct 991,439 196,910 144,172 23,154 29,585 50 731,983 62,496 123,787 867,652
oClaims and liabilities vis-à-vis all countries within and outside the euro area. Up to From November 2000, including the TARGET positions which were previously shown
December 2000, the levels at the end of each quarter are shown, owing to (in columns 6 and 9) as bilateral assets and liabilities vis-à-vis national central banksrevaluations, at market prices; within each quarter, however, the levels are computed outside the Eurosystem. 3See footnote 2. 4Excluding allocations of special drawing
on the basis of cumulative transaction values. From January 2001, all end-of-month rights (SDR) by the International Monetary Fund (IMF) for an amount of SDR 12,059levels are valued at market prices. 1Including loans to the World Bank. 2Including million. 5 Euro opening balance sheet of the Bundesbank as at 1 January 1999. 
the balances in the Bundesbank’s cross-border payments within the Eurosystem.

Deutsche Bundesbank
74  Monthly Report
November 2012
XI External sector
 
10 Assets and liabilities of enterprises in Germany (other than banks)
vis-à-vis non-residents *
 
€ million
Claims on non-residents Liabilities vis-à-vis non-residents
Claims on foreign non-banks Liabilities  vis-à-vis foreign non-banks
from trade credits from trade credits
Balances Loans
with from Credit Advance from from Credit Advance
End of year foreign financial terms payments foreign financial terms payments
or month Total banks Total Total granted effected Total banks Total Total used received operations operations
All countries
 
2008 553,465 173,255 380,210 227,055 153,155 140,520 12,635 707,704 147,242 560,462 424,211 136,251 79,980 56,271
2009 593,591 209,729 383,862 240,727 143,135 130,605 12,530 754,355 159,667 594,688 457,468 137,220 80,759 56,461
2010 670,695 242,028 428,667 272,426 156,241 143,032 13,209 807,185 162,091 645,094 498,310 146,784 88,288 58,496
2011 698,599 242,387 456,212 285,123 171,089 155,392 15,697 871,795 172,099 699,696 538,839 160,857 95,131 65,726
2012          Apr 731,179 273,685 457,494 282,296 175,198 159,782 15,416 893,108 186,805 706,303 550,833 155,470 87,799 67,671
         May 743,829 284,290 459,539 284,039 175,500 159,925 15,575 900,866 190,453 710,413 554,919 155,494 87,470 68,024         June 767,110 292,965 474,145 290,977 183,168 167,572 15,596 914,110 187,148 726,962 569,191 157,771 90,635 67,136
         July 763,693 292,818 470,875 290,040 180,835 164,845 15,990 909,401 182,901 726,500 571,458 155,042 87,239 67,803
         Aug 745,790 281,302 464,488 288,855 175,633 158,872 16,761 895,349 173,779 721,570 570,866 150,704 82,229 68,475         Sep 765,487 294,561 470,926 290,239 180,687 163,837 16,850 912,170 175,791 736,379 576,562 159,817 89,422 70,395
Industrial countries
 
2008 489,430 171,387 318,043 207,807 110,236 101,002 9,234 643,652 145,045 498,607 402,020 96,587 68,148 28,439
2009 531,796 208,571 323,225 220,778 102,447 93,566 8,881 684,984 157,343 527,641 431,525 96,116 68,912 27,204
2010 598,167 240,915 357,252 249,497 107,755 98,428 9,327 725,644 159,522 566,122 464,105 102,017 73,987 28,030
2011 615,925 240,265 375,660 258,453 117,207 104,915 12,292 785,925 169,535 616,390 502,139 114,251 80,491 33,760
2012          Apr 643,529 271,449 372,080 253,287 118,793 106,302 12,491 808,481 184,813 623,668 514,832 108,836 74,415 34,421         May 655,424 282,054 373,370 255,106 118,264 105,634 12,630 815,924 188,450 627,474 519,538 107,936 73,404 34,532         June 674,725 290,650 384,075 261,513 122,562 109,841 12,721 828,820 185,152 643,668 534,165 109,503 75,167 34,336
         July 670,077 289,747 380,330 260,126 120,204 107,013 13,191 824,756 180,798 643,958 535,952 108,006 73,275 34,731
         Aug 655,741 278,468 377,273 259,846 117,427 103,505 13,922 809,830 171,797 638,033 535,260 102,773 68,118 34,655         Sep 674,946 291,934 383,012 261,035 121,977 107,958 14,019 824,230 173,804 650,426 540,380 110,046 74,255 35,791
EU member states
 
2008 398,833 164,762 234,071 151,391 82,680 75,192 7,488 536,351 137,208 399,143 331,498 67,645 46,188 21,457
2009 443,431 200,400 243,031 165,986 77,045 70,051 6,994 579,596 141,633 437,963 367,980 69,983 48,977 21,006
2010 494,360 230,746 263,614 184,862 78,752 71,525 7,227 618,145 150,817 467,328 395,566 71,762 50,035 21,727
2011 508,071 225,583 282,488 196,132 86,356 76,472 9,884 660,137 157,465 502,672 421,679 80,993 54,370 26,623
2012          Apr 534,545 252,580 281,965 194,862 87,103 77,367 9,736 683,609 174,691 508,918 431,356 77,562 50,301 27,261         May 544,438 261,908 282,530 196,179 86,351 76,598 9,753 689,122 177,406 511,716 433,963 77,753 50,274 27,479         June 556,095 267,744 288,351 199,927 88,424 78,574 9,850 700,142 173,731 526,411 448,196 78,215 51,043 27,172
         July 553,477 266,383 287,094 200,294 86,800 76,587 10,213 695,308 170,245 525,063 448,081 76,982 49,626 27,356
         Aug 539,764 254,437 285,327 201,077 84,250 73,299 10,951 683,741 161,790 521,951 449,005 72,946 45,795 27,151         Sep 556,602 267,225 289,377 201,152 88,225 77,127 11,098 695,140 163,841 531,299 453,225 78,074 50,005 28,069
of which: Euro-area member states 1
 
2008 281,518 130,226 151,292 96,968 54,324 49,408 4,916 415,221 81,703 333,518 290,093 43,425 29,768 13,657
2009 321,991 159,740 162,251 114,378 47,873 43,179 4,694 466,064 91,792 374,272 332,280 41,992 28,397 13,595
2010 366,774 184,299 182,475 130,430 52,045 47,239 4,806 497,433 98,177 399,256 351,352 47,904 33,444 14,460
2011 372,493 171,907 200,586 142,530 58,056 52,125 5,931 529,244 103,827 425,417 370,898 54,519 37,188 17,331
2012          Apr 391,908 194,031 197,877 139,817 58,060 52,236 5,824 546,009 111,013 434,996 383,387 51,609 34,347 17,262         May 400,992 202,648 198,344 140,607 57,737 51,831 5,906 555,783 119,752 436,031 384,114 51,917 34,499 17,418         June 401,177 197,988 203,189 144,038 59,151 53,095 6,056 560,861 115,028 445,833 393,811 52,022 34,726 17,296
         July 395,816 195,217 200,599 143,095 57,504 51,411 6,093 554,467 110,167 444,300 392,826 51,474 34,017 17,457
         Aug 390,172 191,998 198,174 143,224 54,950 48,780 6,170 549,339 106,763 442,576 393,458 49,118 31,401 17,717         Sep 400,298 200,586 199,712 142,197 57,515 51,279 6,236 563,817 114,567 449,250 397,242 52,008 33,735 18,273
Emerging economies and developing countries 2
 
2008 64,035 1,868 62,167 19,248 42,919 39,518 3,401 64,052 2,197 61,855 22,191 39,664 11,832 27,832
2009 61,795 1,158 60,637 19,949 40,688 37,039 3,649 69,371 2,324 67,047 25,943 41,104 11,847 29,257
2010 72,528 1,113 71,415 22,929 48,486 44,604 3,882 81,541 2,569 78,972 34,205 44,767 14,301 30,466
2011 82,674 2,122 80,552 26,670 53,882 50,477 3,405 85,870 2,564 83,306 36,700 46,606 14,640 31,966
2012          Apr 87,650 2,236 85,414 29,009 56,405 53,480 2,925 84,627 1,992 82,635 36,001 46,634 13,384 33,250         May 88,405 2,236 86,169 28,933 57,236 54,291 2,945 84,942 2,003 82,939 35,381 47,558 14,066 33,492         June 92,385 2,315 90,070 29,464 60,606 57,731 2,875 85,290 1,996 83,294 35,026 48,268 15,468 32,800
         July 93,616 3,071 90,545 29,914 60,631 57,832 2,799 84,645 2,103 82,542 35,506 47,036 13,964 33,072
         Aug 90,049 2,834 87,215 29,009 58,206 55,367 2,839 85,519 1,982 83,537 35,606 47,931 14,111 33,820         Sep 90,541 2,627 87,914 29,204 58,710 55,879 2,831 87,940 1,987 85,953 36,182 49,771 15,167 34,604
* Up to and including November 2009 the assets and liabilities vis-à-vis non-residents Cyprus and Malta; from January 2009, including Slovakia; from January 2011
of households in Germany. The assets and liabilities vis-à-vis non-residents of banks including Estonia. 2All countries that are not regarded as industrial countries. Up to
(MFIs) in Germany are shown in Table 4 of Section IV, “Banks”. Statistical increases December 2010 including Niederländische Antillen; from January 2011 includingand decreases have not been eliminated; to this extent, the changes in totals are not Bonaire, St.Eustatius, Saba and Curacao and St.Martin (Dutch part). comparable with the figures shown in Table XI.7. 1From January 2008, including

Deutsche Bundesbank
75  Monthly Report
November 2012
XI External sector
 
11 ECB euro reference exchange rates of selected currencies *
 
 
EUR 1 = currency units ...
Yearly Australia Canada China Denmark Japan Norway Sweden Switzerland United States United Kingdom
or monthly       
average AUD CAD CNY 1 DKK JPY NOK SEK CHF GBP USD
1999 1.6523 1.5840 . 7.4355 121.32 8.3104 8.8075 1.6003 0.65874 1.0658
2000 1.5889 1.3706 2 7.6168 7.4538 99.47 8.1129 8.4452 1.5579 0.60948 0.9236
2001 1.7319 1.3864 7.4131 7.4521 108.68 8.0484 9.2551 1.5105 0.62187 0.8956
2002 1.7376 1.4838 7.8265 7.4305 118.06 7.5086 9.1611 1.4670 0.62883 0.94562003 1.7379 1.5817 9.3626 7.4307 130.97 8.0033 9.1242 1.5212 0.69199 1.13122004 1.6905 1.6167 10.2967 7.4399 134.44 8.3697 9.1243 1.5438 0.67866 1.2439
2005 1.6320 1.5087 10.1955 7.4518 136.85 8.0092 9.2822 1.5483 0.68380 1.2441
2006 1.6668 1.4237 10.0096 7.4591 146.02 8.0472 9.2544 1.5729 0.68173 1.25562007 1.6348 1.4678 10.4178 7.4506 161.25 8.0165 9.2501 1.6427 0.68434 1.37052008 1.7416 1.5594 10.2236 7.4560 152.45 8.2237 9.6152 1.5874 0.79628 1.47082009 1.7727 1.5850 9.5277 7.4462 130.34 8.7278 10.6191 1.5100 0.89094 1.3948
2010 1.4423 1.3651 8.9712 7.4473 116.24 8.0043 9.5373 1.3803 0.85784 1.3257
2011 1.3484 1.3761 8.9960 7.4506 110.96 7.7934 9.0298 1.2326 0.86788 1.3920
2011          June 1.3567 1.4063 9.3161 7.4579 115.75 7.8302 9.1125 1.2092 0.88745 1.4388
         July 1.3249 1.3638 9.2121 7.4560 113.26 7.7829 9.1340 1.1766 0.88476 1.4264
         Aug 1.3651 1.4071 9.1857 7.4498 110.43 7.7882 9.1655 1.1203 0.87668 1.4343         Sep 1.3458 1.3794 8.7994 7.4462 105.75 7.7243 9.1343 1.2005 0.87172 1.3770
         Oct 1.3525 1.3981 8.7308 7.4442 105.06 7.7474 9.1138 1.2295 0.87036 1.3706
         Nov 1.3414 1.3897 8.6154 7.4412 105.02 7.7868 9.1387 1.2307 0.85740 1.3556         Dec 1.3003 1.3481 8.3563 7.4341 102.55 7.7451 9.0184 1.2276 0.84405 1.3179
2012          Jan 1.2405 1.3073 8.1465 7.4353 99.33 7.6752 8.8503 1.2108 0.83210 1.2905
         Feb 1.2327 1.3193 8.3314 7.4341 103.77 7.5522 8.8196 1.2071 0.83696 1.3224         Mar 1.2538 1.3121 8.3326 7.4354 108.88 7.5315 8.8873 1.2061 0.83448 1.3201
         Apr 1.2718 1.3068 8.2921 7.4393 107.00 7.5698 8.8650 1.2023 0.82188 1.3162
         May 1.2825 1.2916 8.0806 7.4335 101.97 7.5655 8.9924 1.2012 0.80371 1.2789         June 1.2550 1.2874 7.9676 7.4325 99.26 7.5401 8.8743 1.2011 0.80579 1.2526
         July 1.1931 1.2461 7.8288 7.4384 97.07 7.4579 8.5451 1.2011 0.78827 1.2288
         Aug 1.1841 1.2315 7.8864 7.4454 97.58 7.3239 8.2805 1.2011 0.78884 1.2400         Sep 1.2372 1.2583 8.1273 7.4539 100.49 7.3945 8.4929 1.2089 0.79821 1.2856
         Oct 1.2596 1.2801 8.1390 7.4582 102.47 7.4076 8.6145 1.2098 0.80665 1.2974
*Averages: Bundesbank calculations based on the daily euro reference exchange Statistical Supplement 5, Exchange rate statistics. 1Up to March 2005, ECB indicative
rates published by the ECB; for additional euro reference exchange rates, see rates. 2 Average from 13 January to 29 December 2000. 
12 Euro-area member states and irrevocable euro conversion rates in the third stage
of European Economic and Monetary Union
From Country Currency ISO currency code EUR 1 = currency units ...
1999  January 1 Austria Austrian schilling ATS 13.7603
Belgium Belgian franc BEF 40.3399
Finland Finnish markka FIM 5.94573
France French franc FRF 6.55957
Germany Deutsche Mark DEM 1.95583
Ireland Irish pound IEP 0.787564
Italy Italian lira ITL 1,936.27
Luxembourg Luxembourg franc LUF 40.3399
Netherlands Dutch guilder NLG 2.20371
Portugal Portuguese escudo PTE 200.482
Spain Spanish peseta ESP 166.386
2001  January 1 Greece Greek drachma GRD 340.750
2007  January 1 Slovenia Slovenian tolar SIT 239.640
2008  January 1 Cyprus Cyprus pound CYP 0.585274
Malta Maltese lira MTL 0.429300
2009  January 1 Slovakia Slovak koruna SKK 30.1260
2011  January 1 Estonia Estonian kroon EEK 15.6466

Deutsche Bundesbank
76  Monthly Report
November 2012
XI  External sector
 
13  Effective exchange rates of the Euro and indicators of the German economy’s price competitiveness *
 
 
1999 Q1=100
Effective exchange rate of the Euro Indicators of the German economy’s price competitiveness
EER-20  1 EER-40  2 Based on the deflators of total sales  3 Based on consumer price indices
24 selected industrial countries  4 In real terms
In real terms based on
In real based on unit In real
24 terms the deflators labour terms
based on of gross costs of based on Non- selected
36 36 56 consumer domestic national consumer Euro-area euro-area industrial
Period Nominal price indices product  3 economy  3 Nominal price indices Total countries countries countries  5 6 countries  4 countries  5 countries  7 
1999 96.2 96.0 96.0 96.4 96.5 95.8 97.8 99.5 95.7 97.7 98.2 98.0 97.7
2000 87.0 86.5 86.1 85.7 87.9 85.8 91.5 97.1 85.0 91.0 92.9 91.9 90.9
2001 87.6 87.2 86.8 84.9 90.4 87.1 91.0 95.9 85.4 90.1 92.9 91.4 90.8
2002 90.0 90.3 89.8 88.0 94.8 90.7 91.7 95.0 87.9 90.5 93.5 91.9 91.7
2003 100.6 101.5 100.9 98.5 106.8 101.6 95.0 93.9 96.9 94.2 97.0 96.5 96.7
2004 104.4 105.3 103.6 102.1 111.3 105.2 95.2 92.7 99.1 94.2 98.4 98.0 98.2
2005 102.9 103.8 101.6 99.8 109.3 102.7 94.0 91.4 98.1 92.2 98.4 96.9 96.5
2006 102.8 103.8 100.8 98.8 109.3 102.0 92.7 89.9 97.2 90.6 98.5 96.4 95.7
2007 106.2 106.5 102.7 100.3 112.8 104.0 93.6 89.1 101.0 90.9 100.8 97.8 96.9
2008 109.4 108.6 103.9 102.8 116.9 105.9 93.8 87.7 104.2 90.5 102.2 97.8 97.0
2009 110.6 109.2 105.0 105.0 119.7 106.8 93.5 87.8 103.0 91.3 101.7 97.9 97.3
2010 103.6 101.6 96.9 97.3 111.4 98.1 91.1 87.5 96.9 88.5 98.8 93.9 92.2
2011 103.4 100.7 p 95.1 p 95.9 112.1 97.6 90.5 87.1 95.9 87.7 98.2 93.1 91.7
2009          Apr 109.1 108.0 118.2 105.9 101.4 97.3 96.8
         May 109.8 108.5 104.8 104.4 118.7 106.2 93.3 87.7 102.6 91.3 101.5 97.5 96.9
         June 111.0 109.8 120.0 107.3 101.9 98.3 97.7
         July 110.6 109.1 119.7 106.7 101.8 97.8 97.2
         Aug 110.6 109.1 105.2 105.2 119.8 106.8 93.8 88.0 103.7 91.4 101.9 97.9 97.4
         Sep 111.8 110.0 121.1 107.6 102.1 98.2 97.6
         Oct 113.1 111.2 122.0 108.3 102.6 98.8 98.1
         Nov 113.0 111.0 106.1 107.2 122.0 108.1 94.3 88.0 105.1 91.8 102.3 98.6 97.9
         Dec 111.9 109.8 120.8 106.8 102.2 98.2 97.4
2010          Jan 109.7 107.6 118.3 104.4 101.2 97.0 95.9
         Feb 107.0 104.8 101.3 101.6 115.3 101.6 92.6 87.7 100.8 89.9 100.2 95.6 94.3
         Mar 106.2 104.3 114.2 100.8 100.1 95.2 93.8
         Apr 105.0 103.1 112.5 99.3 99.5 94.4 92.7
         May 101.8 100.0 95.8 96.2 109.0 96.3 90.7 87.4 95.7 88.0 98.2 93.1 91.2
         June 99.8 98.1 106.9 94.5 97.2 92.2 90.3
         July 101.6 99.8 109.2 96.4 97.8 92.9 91.2
         Aug 101.2 99.4 94.7 94.6 108.8 96.0 90.3 87.6 94.5 87.7 97.7 92.7 91.0
         Sep 101.5 99.4 109.2 96.0 97.7 92.7 91.0
         Oct 105.0 102.6 112.9 99.0 99.1 94.1 92.6
         Nov 103.7 101.2 95.9 96.7 111.7 97.7 91.0 87.4 96.5 88.2 98.7 93.6 92.0
         Dec 101.7 99.2 109.3 95.6 97.8 92.7 90.9
2011          Jan 101.4 99.0 109.3 95.5 97.8 92.4 90.7
         Feb 102.4 99.8 94.9 p 95.4 110.6 96.5 90.6 87.3 95.6 87.7 98.1 92.8 91.2
         Mar 104.1 101.6 112.3 98.1 98.6 93.5 91.9
         Apr 105.9 103.4 114.0 99.7 99.5 94.3 92.7
         May 104.9 102.2 97.1 p 97.8 113.2 98.6 91.5 87.2 98.3 88.4 98.9 93.7 92.1
         June 105.0 102.2 113.4 98.8 99.0 93.7 92.2
         July 104.0 101.1 112.4 97.7 98.6 93.3 91.8
         Aug 103.9 101.0 95.1 p 95.8 112.9 98.2 90.4 86.9 95.8 87.6 98.2 93.2 91.9
         Sep 102.8 99.9 112.0 97.4 97.7 92.7 91.5
         Oct 103.0 100.2 112.6 97.8 97.8 92.8 91.8
         Nov 102.6 99.9 p 93.3 p 94.7 112.1 97.3 89.6 86.8 93.8 87.2 97.6 92.8 91.6
         Dec 100.8 98.1 110.3 95.7 96.8 91.8 90.6
2012          Jan 98.9 96.3 108.0 p 93.7 96.2 90.8 p 89.4
         Feb 99.6 97.2 p 90.5 p 91.7 108.4 p 94.1 89.0 86.9 91.9 86.4 96.8 91.3 p 89.7
         Mar 99.8 97.3 108.6 p 94.3 96.8 91.1 p 89.6
         Apr 99.5 97.2 108.4 p 94.2 96.7 91.1 p 89.5
         May 98.0 95.7 p 89.0 p 90.5 107.2 p 93.1 88.5 86.9 90.5 86.0 95.9 90.4 p 88.9
         June 97.2 94.9 106.6 p 92.5 95.5 90.0 p 88.6
         July 95.3 p 93.2 104.4 p 90.7 94.9 p 89.1 p 87.6
         Aug 95.2 p 93.2 ... ... 104.3 p 90.7 ... ... ... ... 95.0 p 89.1 p 87.6
         Sep 97.2 p 95.0 106.6 p 92.5 p 95.7 p 89.9 p 88.5
         Oct 97.8 p 95.5 107.2 p 92.9 p 96.0 p 90.2 p 88.7
*The effective exchange rate corresponds to the weighted external value of the not available, estimates were used. 2ECB calculations. Includes countries belonging
currency concerned. The method of calculating the indicators of the German to the EER-20 group (see footnote 1) and additional Algeria, Argentina, Brazil, Chile,
economy’s price competitiveness is consistent with the procedure used by the ECB to Croatia, Iceland, India, Indonesia, Israel, Malaysia, Mexico, Morocco, New Zealand,compute the effective exchange rates of the euro (see Monthly Report, November Philippines, Russian Federation, South Africa, Taiwan, Thailand, Turkey and2001, pp  50-53, May 2007, pp  31-35 and February 2012, pp  34-35). For more Venezuela. 3Annual and quarterly averages. 4Euro-area countries (from 2001
detailed information on methodology see the ECB’s Occasional Paper No  134 including Greece, from 2007 including Slovenia, from 2008 including Cyprus and(www.ecb.int). A decline in the figures implies an increase in competitiveness. 1ECB Malta, from 2009 including Slovakia, from 2011 including Estonia) as well as Canada,
calculations are based on the weighted averages of the changes in the bilateral Denmark, Japan, Norway, Sweden, Switzerland, United Kingdom and United States.exchange rates of the euro against the currencies of the following countries: Austra- 5Euro-area countries and countries belonging to the EER-20 group. 6Owing to
lia, Bulgaria, Canada, China, Czech Republic, Denmark, Hong Kong, Hungary, Japan, missing data for the deflator of total sales, China is not included in this calculation.Latvia, Lithuania, Norway, Poland, Romania, Singapore, South Korea, Sweden, 7 Euro-area countries and countries belonging to the EER-40 group (see footnote 2). 
Switzerland, United Kingdom and United States. Where price and wage indices were

Overview of publications by the  
Deutsche Bundesbank
This overview provides information about selected recent economic and statistical publica -
tions by the Deutsche Bundesbank. Unless otherwise indicated, these publications are avail -
able in both English and German, in printed form and on the Bundesbank’s website.
The publications are available free of charge from the Communication Division. For a small 
fee to cover costs, a file which is updated monthly and contains approximately 40,000 time series published by the Bundesbank can be obtained on CD-ROM from the Division Statis -
tical data processing, mathematical methods or downloaded from the Bundesbank-ExtraNet site. Orders should be sent, in writing, to one of the addresses listed on the reverse of the title page. Selected time series can also be downloaded from the internet.
Annual Report
Financial Stability ReviewMonthly Report
For information on the articles published be -
tween 2000 and 2011 see the index attached 
to the January 2012 Monthly Report.
Monthly Report articles
December 2011
– Outlook for the German economy – macro -
economic projections for 2012 and 2013
– German enterprises’ profitability and finan -
cing in 2010
– Direct investment and financial constraints 
before and during the financial crisis
January 2012
– Long-term developments in corporate finan -
cing in Germany – evidence based on the 
financial accounts– The PHF: a survey of household wealth and 
finances in Germany
– The European single market in payments 
nearing completion
February 2012
– The current economic situation in Germany
March 2012
– Germany’s balance of payments in 2011
– National and international financial market 
shocks and the real economy – an empirical view
April 2012
– Potential growth of the German economy – medium-term outlook against the backdrop of demographic strains
– The European Systemic Risk Board: from 
 institutional foundation to credible macro -
prudential oversight
May 2012
– The current economic situation in GermanyDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report 
November 2012  
77•

June 2012
– Outlook for the German economy – macro -
economic projections for 2012 and 2013
– The price of crude oil and its impact on eco -
nomic activity in the industrial countries
– The role of the “Basel interest rate shock” in 
the supervisory assessment of interest rate 
risks in the banking book
July 2012
– The euro as an anchor currency and core of 
a currency bloc
– Deutsche Bundesbank Spring Conference 
2012 – monetary policy, inflation and inter -
national linkages
– The new CPSS-IOSCO Principles for financial market infrastructures
August 2012
– The current economic situation in Germany
September 2012
– The performance of German credit institu -
tions in 2011
– Innovations in payment systems
– The International Monetary Fund in a 
changed global environment
October 2012
– The financial crisis and balance of payments 
developments within the euro area
– The development of state government 
 finances in Germany since 2005
– The importance of trade credit for  corpor ate 
financing in Germany – evidence from finan -
cial statements statistics
– The use of cash and cashless payment 
 instruments: a microeconomic analysis
November 2012
– The current economic situation in GermanyStatistical Supplements to the 
Monthly Report
 1 Banking statistics 1, 2
 2 C apital market statistics 1, 2
 3 Balance of payments statistics 1, 2
 4 Seasonal ly adjusted business statistics 1, 2
 5 Exchange rate statistics 2
Special Publications
Makro-ökonometrisches Mehr-Länder-Modell, 
November 1996 3
Europäische Organisationen und Gremien im Bereich von Währung und Wirtschaft, May 
1997 3
Die Zahlungsbilanz der ehemaligen DDR 1975 
bis 1989, August 1999 3
The market for German Federal securities, 
May 2000
Macro-Econometric Multi-Country Model: MEM -
MOD, June 2000
Bundesbank Act, September 2002
Weltweite Organisationen und Gremien im Be -
reich von Währung und Wirtschaft, March 
2003 3
Die Europäische Union: Grundlagen und Politik-
bereiche außerhalb der Wirtschafts-und Wäh-
rungsunion, April 2005 3
Die Deutsche Bundesbank – Aufgabenfelder, 
rechtlicher Rahmen, Geschichte, April 2006 3
European economic and monetary union, April 
2008
For footnotes, see p 80•.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report 
November 2012  
78•

Special Statistical Publications*
 1 Banking statistics guidelines and customer  
classification, July 20122, 4
 2 Bankenstatistik Kundensystematik Firmen-
verzeichnisse, September 20122, 3
 3 Aufbau der bankstatistischen T abellen, 
June 20112, 3
 4 Financial accounts for Germany 2006 to 
2011, June 20122
 5 E xtrapolated results from financial state -
ments of German enterprises 1994 to 
2003, March 2006 2
 6 V erhältniszahlen aus Jahresabschlüssen 
deutscher Unternehmen von 2008 bis 
2009, May 20122, 3
 7 Notes on the coding list for the balance of 
payments statistics, March 2009 2
 8 The balance of payments statistics of the  
Federal Republic of Germany, 2nd edition, 
February 1991o
 9 Securities deposits, August 2005
 1 0 F oreign direct investment stock statistics, 
April 20121, 2
 1 1 Balance of payments by region,  
July 2012
 1 2 T echnologische Dienstleistungen in der 
Zahlungsbilanz, June 20113Discussion Papers*
20/2012  
Fiscal deficits, financial fragility, and the effect -
iveness of government policies
21/2012  
Saving and learning: theory and evidence from 
saving for child’s college
22/2012  
Relationship lending in the interbank market 
and the price of liquidity23/2012  
Estimating dynamic tax revenue elasticities for 
Germany
24/2012  
Identifying time variability in stock and interest 
rate dependence
25/2012  
An affine multifactor model with macro factors 
for the German term structure: changing re -
sults during the recent crises
26/2012  
Determinants of the interest rate pass-through 
of banks – evidence from German loan prod -
ucts
27/2012  
Early warning indicators for the German bank -
ing system: a macroprudential analysis
28/2012  
Diversification and determinants of inter -
national credit portfolios: evidence from Ger -
man banks
* Unless stated otherwise, as of 2000 these publications 
have been made available on the Bundesbank’s website in 
German and English. Since the beginning of 2012, no 
longer subdivided into series 1 and series 2.
o Not available on the website.For footnotes, see p 80•.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report 
November 2012  
79•

Banking legislation
 1 Bundesbank A ct and Statute of the Euro -
pean System of Central Banks and of the 
European Central Bank, June 1998
 2 Gesetz über das Kreditwesen, February 
20093 2a Solvabilitäts- und Liquiditätsverordnung, 
February 20083
1 Only the headings and explanatory notes to the data con -
tained in the German originals are available in English.
2 Available on the website only.3 Available in German only.
4 Only some parts of the Special Statistical Publications are 
provided in English. The date refers to the German issue, 
which may be of a more recent date than the English one.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report 
November 2012  
80•

