Monthly Report
February 2013
Vol 65  
No 2

Deutsche Bundesbank 
Wilhelm-Epstein-Strasse 14 60431 Frankfurt am Main Germany
Postal address 
Postfach 10 06 02 60006 Frankfurt am Main Germany
Tel +49 69 9566-0
Fax +49 69 9566 3077
http://www.bundesbank.deReproduction permitted only if source is stated.ISSN 0418-8292 (print edition) 
ISSN 1862-1325 (online edition)
The German original of this Monthly Report  
went to press at 11 am on 15 February 2013.Annual and weekly publishing schedules for  selected statistics of the Deutsche Bundes-
 
bank can be downloaded from our website. 
The statistical data are also published on the 
website.
The Monthly Report is published by the 
 Deutsche Bundesbank, Frankfurt am Main,  
by virtue of section  18 of the Bundesbank  
Act. It is available to interested parties free of 
charge.
This is a translation of the original German-
language version, which is the sole authorita -
tive text.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report 
February 2013  
2

Contents
The current economic situation in Germany  ................................................  5
Overview  ....................................................................................................................  6
Global and European setting  ..............................................................................  11
The macroeconomic impact of an increase in wages in NiGEM simulations .......................  18
Monetary policy and banking business  ..........................................................  22
Money market management and liquidity needs ................................................................  23
Financial markets  ....................................................................................................  35
The introduction of collective action clauses in the terms and conditions  
of public sector bonds ........................................................................................................  42
Economic conditions in Germany  .....................................................................  46
House prices in 2012 in Germany .......................................................................................  53
Public finances  .........................................................................................................  59
The structural development of public finances in Germany –  
results of the disaggregated framework for 2012 ...............................................................  60
Decisions of the Ecofin Council and the European Council on 13-14 December 2012 ..........  63Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report 
February 2013  
3

Statistical Section ....................................................................................................  1 •
Key economic data for the euro area ..................................................................................  5 •
Overall monetary survey in the euro area ............................................................................  8 •
Consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem ............................................................  16 •
Banks ..................................................................................................................................  20 •
Minimum reserves ...............................................................................................................  42 •
Interest rates .......................................................................................................................  43 •
Capital market ....................................................................................................................  48 •
Financial accounts ...............................................................................................................  52 •
Public finances in Germany .................................................................................................  54 •
Economic conditions in Germany ........................................................................................  61 •
External sector ....................................................................................................................  68 •
Overview of publications by the Deutsche Bundesbank  ..........................  77 •
Abbreviations and symbols
e Estimated
p Provisionalpe Partly estimated
r Revised… Data available at a later date
. Data unknown, not to be published or not meaningful
0 Less than 0.5 but more than nil
– Nil
Discrepancies in the totals are due to rounding.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report 
February 2013  
4

The current economic situation 
in GermanyDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report 
February 2013  
5

Overview
German economy sees 
growth dip in fourth quarter of 2012
Global economic growth remained subdued in 
the fourth quarter of 2012. In regional terms, 
the group of emerging market economies ap -
pear to have stepped up the pace of their eco-
nomic activity to a marked degree, while the 
already weak growth in the industrial countries 
gave way to a significant decline in output. The worsening contraction in the euro area played a part in this. At the same time, real gross do-mestic product (GDP) in the United Kingdom in the last three months of 2012 fell short of the noticeably higher level posted in the prior quar -
ter. Overall economic output in Japan shrank 
again, though only slightly. In the United States, 
temporary negative influences on certain ex -
penditure components caused fourth-quarter 
real GDP to hover at the level seen in the previ-ous quarter, in which it had expanded at quite a strong pace. However, private domestic final 
demand grew at a faster rate, thereby under -
pinning expectations that overall economic 
growth in the United States will return to posi-tive territory in the first quarter of 2013.
All in all, there have been increasing signs in recent months that the global economy is 
gradually picking up momentum. The signs of 
an upswing are particularly clear in the manu -
facturing sector of the Asian emerging market economies, but leading indicators in the indus-trial countries indicate that things are gradually improving there as well. The global Purchasing 
Managers’ Index (PMI) for manufacturing 
climbed back above the expansion threshold in December for the first time since May 2012 and continued to gain ground in January, while the 
index for the services sector indicates that 
growth in this segment is still sound. Moreover, 
the upbeat trend on the equity markets sug -
gests that confidence is on the increase.Market participants in the international finan -
cial markets had a perceptibly stronger appetite 
for risk in the autumn and winter months of 
2012-13, their sentiment being buoyed chiefly 
by the slightly brighter economic outlook for 
the current year and by the crisis management 
measures taken by the central banks in the 
major currency areas. In the euro area, the po-
tentially unlimited bond purchase programme 
referred to as Outright Monetary Transactions 
(OMTs), which has not yet been activated, 
boosted financial market prices. The Ecofin 
agreement to establish the Single Supervisory 
Mechanism (SSM) for banks at the European Central Bank, and the conclusion of a debt 
buy-back operation which cleared the way for further financial assistance for Greece also bol-stered the markets. Investors likewise breathed a sigh of relief when policymakers in the United 
States reached a partial agreement in their budget dispute. Meanwhile, negative factors 
such as the political difficulties that some euro-
area countries are experiencing in implement -
ing the necessary reform and consolidation measures receded somewhat in importance. 
The increased optimism among financial mar -
ket participants primarily benefited risky assets, 
with sovereign bonds of peripheral countries and equities alike posting notable gains. On 
the forex markets, the euro appreciated sharply during the period under review, particularly so against the yen. However, the current easing of 
tensions in the financial markets should not 
conceal the fact that substantial structural ad -
justments are still needed in many countries.
In the quarter under review, the ECB Governing 
Council left its key interest rates unchanged at 
the historically low level reached in July 2012. 
The downward revisions to the growth fore -
casts for the euro area in autumn had virtually 
no impact on the medium-term inflation out -
look. The ECB Governing Council continues to 
believe that inflation will fall below the 2% 
mark in the next few months and will stay at a Global economyFinancial 
 markets
Monetary policyDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report 
February 2013  
6

level compatible with price stability over the 
policy-relevant horizon. This view is also sup -
ported by the fact that underlying monetary growth remains subdued and that lending to 
the domestic private sector in the euro area is 
still weak, both due in particular to the on -
going reduction in lending to non-financial cor -
porations in the countries especially affected by 
the sovereign debt crisis, which played out 
against a backdrop of a weak economic envir -
onment and the major structural adjustment 
processes associated with these countries’ ef -
forts to tackle their persistently very high debt 
levels.
Following the slight decline in the monetary 
policy funding volume provided by the Eurosys-tem in the fourth quarter of 2012, banks were 
given the first opportunity at the end of Janu-
ary 2013 to prematurely repay liquidity which 
the Eurosystem had provided in the first three-year refinancing operation settled in December 2011. A volume of around €137 billion was re-turned on the first repayment date. Since banks did not switch instead to shorter-term refinan-
cing operations, the early repayment distinctly 
reduced both the monetary policy funding vol-ume and the excess liquidity. The broadly based 
increase particularly shown by longer-term 
money market rates in January should be seen 
in conjunction with expectations among mar -
ket participants that excess liquidity will con -
tinue to recede on account of further early re-payments of liquidity provided in the three-year refinancing operations.
At its latest meeting, the ECB Governing Coun-
cil took note of the remarks by the Governor of the Central Bank of Ireland regarding the treat-ment of the state-owned Irish Bank Resolution Corporation (IBRC), which the Irish government 
had liquidated shortly beforehand. The Irish central bank had granted emergency liquidity assistance to IBRC and, following its liquid
-
ation, assumed full ownership of the relevant collateral. Among other things, the Irish gov
-
ernment and central bank subsequently agreed 
that the Irish government’s promissory notes which formed part of the collateral would be exchanged for longer-term Irish government bonds with lower coupons. The Irish central 
bank ultimately pays interest on the new bonds to the rest of the Eurosystem at the main refi-
nancing rate, while the Irish government’s 
interest payments are collected as net income 
by the Irish central bank and can be used for 
distributions to the government at a later date. 
This approach underlines the increasingly close 
and problematic ties between monetary and 
fiscal policy in the European monetary union. Responsibility for providing any assistance to individual member states in servicing their  sovereign debts should lie with the European 
Stability Mechanism (ESM), which was estab
-
lished for this purpose.
The growth in overall German economic out -
put was interrupted at the end of 2012. Ac -
cording to the Federal Statistical Office’s flash 
estimate, real GDP growth in the fourth quarter of 2012 diminished by 0.6% quarter on quarter following adjustment for seasonal and calendar 
factors. The slowdown in demand that had 
begun to unfold over a year ago on the back of 
flattening global growth, recessionary tenden -
cies in the euro area, and considerable uncer -
tainties associated with the resolution of the 
debt crises together ended up putting a notice-
able damper on German economic activity. Nonetheless, aggregate capacity utilisation in 
Germany remained just about within the range of normal.
Foreign business among enterprises saw a 
broadly based decline in autumn 2012. Exports 
of cars to countries outside Europe, the key 
component driving momentum, and one that 
had been highly effective until well into the 
summer, dropped into negative territory. Ex -
ports of goods to the euro area did not dimin-
ish quite as strongly as goods shipments to 
non-euro-area countries in the quarter under review. Here, though, the cyclical setback did 
not interrupt what had previously been a clearly 
positive underlying trend; rather, it shunted an 
already listless movement downwards. Imports German 
 economyDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report 
February 2013  
7

performed better than exports in autumn 2012. 
The foreign trade surplus, which had widened 
sharply in the second and third quarters of 
2012, diminished again noticeably.
Purchases of moveable fixed assets receded 
further in the fourth quarter of 2012. Invest -
ment in machinery and equipment has thus 
been plotting a downward trend for more than 
a year now. In light of the moderate utilisation 
of fixed assets, it was only natural that capacity 
extensions were not on the agenda. Reticence 
appears to have affected enterprises’ invest -
ments in upgrading their machinery and equip-
ment and vehicle fleets as well. Given the frail 
investment activity, the commercial construc -
tion industry is likewise lacking impetus. The 
environment for housing investment remained 
exceptionally favourable in autumn, but as in 
the previous quarters, the rate of growth is likely to have fallen short of the strong pace 
seen in 2010 and 2011. This is due, to a consid-
erable extent, to the bias of new construction 
activity shifting away from owner-occupied houses towards apartment blocks, but it can 
also be attributed to the elevated level that has already been reached.
Lending by German banks to domestic non-
banks was unable to maintain the growth trend it had begun at the start of the year and dimin-
ished perceptibly in the quarter under review. 
This decline was caused primarily by a distinct 
drop in loans to general government, in which 
one-off effects associated with restructuring 
measures in the banking sector played a role. 
Lending to the domestic private sector, on the 
other hand, posted a further increase, though 
this was driven solely by a rise in loans to finan-
cial corporations and households. Lending to 
non-financial corporations, meanwhile, fell ap-
preciably after having expanded distinctly in the first three quarters of 2012. Besides the persistently subdued investment in machinery 
and equipment by domestic firms, net redemp-tions in this credit segment are also likely to be 
attributable, in part, to non-financial corpor -ations cleansing their balance sheets at 
year-end.
Consumer demand continued to provide only 
muted stimulus, to be sure. However, the sur -
veys of the consumer research institution Ge -
sellschaft für Konsumforschung (GfK) indicate 
that the consumer climate is highly optimistic, 
chiefly because the weak economy has so far 
left barely any dent on the labour market. In fact, the seasonally adjusted number of per
-
sons in work rose again slightly in the fourth quarter of 2012. Although more people were registered as unemployed between October 
and December than in the summer, increasing the unemployment rate to 6.9%, this figure fell back to 6.8% in January 2013 because the sea-
sonally adjusted number of persons registered 
as unemployed declined again noticeably for 
the first time since the beginning of 2012.
Despite the sideways movement of crude oil prices and the recovery in the euro exchange 
rate, the fourth quarter of 2012 saw prices at 
all stages of the economy rising distinctly in seasonally adjusted terms compared with the previous quarter. However, the year-on-year 
rate of increase in import prices narrowed fur -
ther to 1.0% while that of domestic producer 
prices widened again slightly to 1.5% after hit-ting a low in the third quarter. In seasonally ad-
justed terms, the increase in consumer prices 
matched that of the prior quarter. Prices for oil products diminished while those for food rose 
again sharply. Prices for other goods and for services (excluding rents) likewise showed a greater upward tendency. Year on year, con
-
sumer prices in autumn rose by 2.0% overall 
according to both the national Consumer Price Index (CPI) and the Harmonised Index of Con-sumer Prices (HICP).
Economic expectations in Germany have re -
covered at quite a rapid pace and to a remark-
able degree over the past three months. The 
reduced uncertainty in the euro area played a 
part in this marked turnaround in sentiment. 
There is thus a greater chance that the discern-Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report 
February 2013  
8

ible “wait and see” attitude to investment, 
which was difficult to reconcile with the 
medium-term growth outlook, might gradually 
be easing. From today’s perspective, an in -
crease in overall economic output can be ex -
pected in the first quarter of 2013. This view is supported by the prospect of the industrial sec-
tor, in particular, exhibiting a countermove -
ment in response to the considerable adjust -
ments made to output at the end of 2012. 
There are signs that economic activity will grad-ually pick up pace in the remainder of the year, 
although the external environment should not 
be expected to kick-start a very strong surge in 
demand.
The conditions for public finances in Germany 
remained favourable in the past year. The gen-
eral government budget recorded a narrow 
surplus of +0.1% of GDP (2011: -0.8%), the still-
perceptible deficit posted by central, state and 
local government being more than offset by 
the surplus run up by the social security funds. According to Bundesbank calculations, the cyc-
lical influence on the general government 
budget remained positive year on year, which 
meant that a (limited) deficit remained in struc-
tural terms. Compared with the previous year, 
there was a structural improvement of around 
1% of GDP particularly on account of the on -
going rapid growth of profit-related tax rev -
enue, the curtailed rise in social payments, the expiry of the 2009 investment programme and 
the exceptionally favourable financing condi -
tions. The debt ratio rose to 81.7% at the end of the third quarter and is expected to be at a similar level at year-end (2011: 80.5%). The in-
crease is attributable to the support measures 
in the euro area as well as the transfer of fur -
ther liabilities (and claims) to the government 
sector as part of the liquidation of the public 
regional bank WestLB.
As things stand at the moment, the general 
government fiscal balance will drop back into 
negative territory in the current year and might reach a level somewhere around -½% of GDP . 
The slowdown in economic activity can be ex-pected to reduce the cyclical influence, which 
had been positive in 2012, thereby revealing 
the existing structural deficit. The structural def-
icit remains largely unchanged year on year. 
The debt ratio, on the other hand, should de -
cline if – as expected – the redemption of liabil-
ities at the government-owned “bad banks” 
outweighs new burdens associated with stabil-
ising the euro area and supporting German fi -
nancial institutions.
In 2012, central government’s structural deficit 
– when calculated in accordance with the debt 
brake provisions – already formally undershot 
the permanent constitutional ceiling for struc -
tural borrowing of 0.35% of GDP that will 
apply from 2016. This is to be welcomed even 
if it is based on the simplified cyclical adjust -
ment procedure for the budget outturn. By 
contrast, if a fully updated cyclical adjustment 
is carried out, the structural deficit in 2012 is still clearly above the ceiling. In the current year, it can be expected – not least owing to cuts in the transfers to the social security 
funds – that the structural deficit will fall below 0.35% of GDP in de facto terms, and the struc-
turally balanced budget targeted for 2014 like-wise appears to be within reach. Budgetary de-
velopments at central government level have 
been better than planned since 2010. For this, 
higher tax revenue and favourable financing 
conditions were crucial, while fiscal policy has 
been gradually eased compared with the con -
solidation package from June 2010. Although 
interest expenditure looks set to provide further 
relief in the short term, a renewed increase in 
interest rates from their exceptionally low level might place a perceptible additional burden on 
public finances. Additionally, the considerable uncertainties involved in measuring the struc
-
tural deficit would suggest that maintaining a 
clear safety margin from the borrowing limit would be highly advisable. Overall, therefore, general government still needs to make pro
-
gress in consolidation. With regard to the 
 financing of the social security funds, it would 
be desirable to transparently define the non-
insurance-related benefits and to then ensure Public financesDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report 
February 2013  
9

that they are reliably financed via the central 
government budget. It regularly appears as though transfers here are made on a rather 
 arbitrary basis depending on the cash resources 
available at a given time, which runs counter to 
a rules-based funding model that is geared to 
the principle of equivalence and which also im-pairs planning certainty.
Germany’s budget situation is favourable by international standards. In light of the high 
debt ratio and demographic trends, however, it is nonetheless essential for Germany to swiftly 
plug the remaining structural gaps in central, 
state and local government budgets  – espe -
cially considering the temporary nature of so -
cial security fund surpluses. Against this back -
drop, the fiscal expansion that some parties are 
asking of Germany does not appear to be ap -
propriate. The automatic stabilisers cushion the 
cyclical fluctuations in the German economy to 
a sufficient degree; moreover, the impact of any additional stimulus for domestic demand 
on the European countries affected by the ad-
justment recessions would be limited at most. 
All levels of government should therefore rigor -
ously focus their efforts on achieving sound 
public finances.Furthermore, clear safety margins with respect 
to the permanent constitutional borrowing 
limits should be established for central govern-ment and the 16 Federal states so that negative 
surprises do not require a pro-cyclical budget -
ary policy at a later date. The Federal states should make full use of the long transitional 
periods for the reformed national budget rules 
only in those cases where it is virtually impos -
sible to rectify extraordinary budgetary imbal -
ances in the short term, and in these instances 
ambitious minimum steps for deficit reduction 
should be stipulated.
The reformed national and European budget rules provide a more robust foundation for 
achieving sound public finances. Under the fa-
vourable current conditions, Germany com -
plied with these rules, and the underlying ob-
jective of achieving a structurally balanced gen-
eral government budget is increasingly being 
used in the public debate as a benchmark for 
evaluating budgetary policy. However, the touchstone for fiscal policy will ultimately be 
whether the upward trend shown by the debt ratio is reversed on a lasting basis and the rules are rigorously implemented even when general conditions are less favourable.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report 
February 2013  
10

Global and European setting
World economic activity
There have been growing signs over the past 
few months that the global economy has been 
gradually picking up momentum. The revival is particularly evident in the manufacturing sector 
of the Asian emerging economies, but the 
leading indicators suggest that things are grad-
ually improving in the industrial countries as 
well. However, the figures on global industrial 
output, available up until November, appear to 
show only a slight uptick in growth. This is a 
sign that global gross domestic product (GDP) 
in the fourth quarter was not yet able to per -
ceptibly break free from the flat growth path of 
Q2-Q3. According to the IMF’s current esti -
mate, aggregate output growth in 2012, at 
3¼%, is likely to have been significantly weaker than in the two preceding years and also more sluggish than its average of the past decade. In 
regional terms, the emerging markets appear 
to have stepped up a gear in the fourth quar -
ter, while the previously meagre growth in the industrial countries has given way to a percep-tible decline in output.
The acceleration of the euro area’s contraction 
contributed to the industrial countries’ sluggish performance. In addition, real GDP in the UK in 
the fourth quarter was unable to match the significantly elevated level seen in the prior 
quarter. In Japan, aggregate output contracted 
once again, albeit only slightly. In the United 
States, although private domestic final demand 
remained on a sound upward trajectory, tem -
porary negative influences on other expend -
iture aggregates meant that real GDP in the 
fourth quarter hovered at the level of the previ-ous quarter, in which it had risen quite strongly. The fiscal policy debate at the end of the year 
did not appear to have had any negative im -
pact on economic activity. Real GDP in the 
United States, Japan, the United Kingdom and 
the euro area taken together, for which initial 
provisional data are available, was ¼% below its level of the preceding period, in which it had 
still seen slight growth. Year-on-year growth 
was a mere ½%. Average GDP growth for 2012 as a whole stood at 1%, as against 1¼% a year earlier.
One indication that, as mentioned earlier, the 
economic outlook has been gradually brighten-ing up in the past few months is that the global 
Purchasing Managers’ Index (PMI) for the manufacturing industry went back across the expansion threshold in December for the first 
time since May 2012 and that its upward trend 
continued in January, while the index for the services sector continued to show robust 
growth. The other is that the business climate 
has recently improved, especially in the indus -
trial countries, and the favourable price trend in the equity markets is likewise a sign of increas-ing optimism.
All in all, the global economy currently appears 
to be on a moderate recovery path, as pre -
dicted by international institutions’ autumn 
forecasts. In its January update, the Inter -
national Monetary Fund (IMF) virtually con -
firmed its October global growth forecast. The 
IMF staff expect growth of 3.5% in 2013 and 
4.1% in 2014. Within the group of advanced economies, however, the forecasts for the newly industrialised countries in Asia and the euro area in 2013 were, respectively, lowered somewhat more strongly to +3.2% and to 
-0.2%. The revised forecast for the euro area, 
however, implies an increase in aggregate out-put over the year of 0.5%. Growth in the USA 
is projected to remain relatively unchanged at 
2.0%. This forecast continues to assume that a 
constructive solution will be found to the ne -
gotiations in Congress on the path of fiscal 
consolidation and that the fiscal damper effect 
will not exceed 1¼% of GDP in the current 
year. Of the emerging market economies, the 
estimate for China (+8.2%) was retained, yet 
the forecast for Brazil was reduced distinctly to Mounting signs 
of global eco-nomic revival but global growth still dampened  
in Q4
GDP down  
in  industrial 
 countries  
in  autumnKey indicators 
pointing back 
upwards in past 
few months
IMF autumn 
forecast largely confirmedDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report 
February 2013  
11

+3.5%. The outlook for real world trade was 
once again given a markedly cautious assess -
ment; its expected growth rate for 2013 and 
2014 was reduced by 0.7 and 0.3 percentage 
points, respectively, to 3.8% and 5.5%.
The price tendencies previously observed in the 
international commodity markets reversed 
themselves in autumn. Measured in terms of 
the HWWI index for industrial countries, food, 
beverages and tobacco became considerably 
cheaper because weather-related crop failures, which in summer had given rise to sharp price hikes, did not materialise to the extent feared. On the other hand, given the pick-up in activity in the global manufacturing sector, the quoted prices for industrial commodities recouped part 
of the substantial losses they had sustained 
previously. By contrast, the price for a barrel of 
Brent crude oil fluctuated around a level of roughly US$110 in the autumn months; its average level for the year of US$111½ repre
-
sented a new all-time high. The fact that Saudi Arabia cut back its production in the past few months is probably one of the main reasons for 
the oil price moving sideways at quite a high level. Moreover, demand-side developments and geopolitical factors seem to have largely cancelled each other out. Prices picked up 
markedly in the last few weeks again, however, owing to a resurgence of tensions in the Mid-dle East and North Africa and to increased de-mand from China. As this report went to press, 
therefore, the price of a barrel of Brent was 
US$118; futures were trading at significant dis-counts, as before.
The basket of consumer goods in the industrial 
countries became considerably more expensive in the final quarter of 2012 compared with the 
previous period (+0.6%) after elimination of 
seasonal factors. However, this is the purely im-puted outcome of a high overhang at the end 
of the third quarter caused by preceding oil price surges. By contrast, upward price pres
-
sure obtained only modest support over the course of the autumn quarter, not least be
-
cause fuels tended to become cheaper. In the 
final quarter, year-on-year inflation was just as 
moderate as in the preceding three-month 
period (+1.8%). Core inflation, which excludes 
energy and food prices, came out somewhat 
lower still (+1.4%).
Selected emerging market 
economies
Officially reported real GDP growth in China in 
the fourth quarter of 2012 stood at 8% year-
on-year following a pick-up of 7½% in the 
third quarter of the year. The pace of aggregate 
growth therefore increased again for the first 
time after six consecutive quarters of decline. 
One of the reasons for the acceleration appears 
to be that during the summer months the Chi-nese authorities launched a series of economic 
stimulus measures which seem to have begun 
to have an impact in the past quarter. Chief 
among these stimulus measures is additional 
expenditure on investment in rail transport and Tendencies in 
international commodity  market prices  reverse courseModerate  consumer price  inflation  
in  industrial 
 countries
Slightly stronger 
growth in China World market prices for crude oil,industrial commodities and food,beverages and tobacco
Sources:  Thomson  Reuters  and HWWI.  • Average  of 1 to 
8 February or 1 to 13 February 2013 (crude oil).
Deutsche Bundesbank2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 20135060708090100120140160180US dollar basis, 2010 = 100, monthly averages, log scale
Crude oil (Brent)
Industrial
commoditiesFood, beveragesand tobaccoDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report 
February 2013  
12

other areas of infrastructure. The acceleration 
in Chinese economic activity was additionally 
boosted by housing construction, which re -
vived following a marked recovery in real estate 
purchases. In the past quarter, however, for -
eign demand still is likely to have provided only 
meagre stimulus. Consumer price inflation picked up towards the end of the year. Food price increases and higher accommodation 
costs are the particular factors behind the rise 
in year-on-year inflation from 1.9% in Septem-ber to 2.5% in December.
Real year-on-year GDP growth in India slowed 
down distinctly once again in the third quarter, 
up to which national accounts data are avail -
able, from 4% to 2¾%. At +5¼%, the growth rate of real gross value added, the measure of aggregate output preferred by the Indian Min-istry of Statistics and the Reserve Bank of India, 
was somewhat lower than before. According 
to the indicators currently available, growth in 
India is not likely to have accelerated substan -
tially in the autumn, either. On the bright side, however, sentiment has brightened perceptibly in some sectors of the economy. One contribu-
tory factor may be that, in September, the In -
dian government opened the retail trade sector to foreign investors, the largest reform step to have been taken in years. In order to stimulate 
the economy, the Reserve Bank of India cut interest rates at the end of January. All the same, inflation as measured by the national consumer price index remained very high in 
January, at 10.8%.
Brazil’s economic output, which had risen in the third quarter by ½% after elimination of 
seasonal influences, is likely to have seen only 
muted growth in the final quarter as well. The 
pronounced sluggishness of gross fixed capital 
formation, which had fallen in the summer for 
the fifth consecutive period, seems to have per -
sisted according to the available data on capital 
goods production. Not even the sharp cuts in 
policy rates over the past one-and-a-half years 
were able to overcome enterprises’ entrenched 
reluctance to invest, which is associated with, among other factors, uncertainty about the 
government’s fiscal and economic policy course. Given that inflation has recently gone 
back up – at year’s end, consumer price infla -
tion rose to 5.8% – the central bank recently signalled that it would discontinue further 
monetary policy loosening.
According to an initial estimate by the Russian 
Federal State Statistics Service, Russian eco -
nomic output increased by an average of 3½% 
in 2012. These results suggest that the eco -
nomic upturn in the final quarter of 2012 – for 
which no published data are yet available – is 
faltering. Another indication of this is that in -
dustrial output stagnated at the previous quar -
ter’s level. Over the year as a whole, industrial 
output was increased by only 2½%. Many ser -
vices sectors, however, saw considerably 
stronger growth, particularly financial services 
(+15%). This is a reflection of, in particular, the strong expansion of lending by Russian banks. 
Inflation showed sideways tendencies in the autumn months and stood at 6.6% at year’s 
end.
USA
In the United States, the stagnation of season-
ally adjusted real GDP in the final quarter of 
2012 has to be seen against the background of the good result in the summer quarter, in which 
aggregate output had risen by ¾%. The key factors at the time were temporary stimuli in 
restocking and in government demand, espe -
cially defence spending, the expiry of which 
put a brake on growth in the fourth quarter. In 
addition, the global economic slump weighed 
on macroeconomic developments by means of 
a decline in exports. On average over the 
second half of the year, GDP rose by ½% per 
quarter, thus continuing to follow a path of 
moderate expansion. Private domestic final de-
mand – the actual engine of growth – even accelerated significantly in autumn. The fiscal policy debate thus did not leave any visible “brake marks” as had been feared previously. India still on flat 
expansion path
Economic 
 activity in  
Brazil lacking momentumEconomic  upturn in Russia 
is faltering
Moderate 
 aggregate  recovery  tendency  obscuredDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report 
February 2013  
13

Instead, firms overcame their caution of the 
summer and stepped up their gross fixed cap-
ital formation strongly, while the upswing in 
residential construction continued apace. Lastly, household consumption gained some 
strength as the effects of higher oil prices ex -
pired and real incomes accelerated. Although the seasonally adjusted consumer price index still rose considerably quarter-on-quarter, in 
December it was still lower than three months 
previously. The entire consumer goods basket 
was 1.9% more expensive in the final quarter 
than in the same period a year earlier. In add-
ition, the continuing recovery of the labour market is likely to have supported household spending. The unemployment rate stood at 
7.8%, nearly one percentage point lower than in the last three months of the preceding year. 
Nonetheless, in December, the US Federal 
Open Market Committee voiced its assumption 
that the unemployment rate would not fall 
below the 6.5% threshold for an interest rate 
move, announced as part of a shift in its com-munication strategy, until the second half of 
2015.
Japan
After adjustment for seasonal influences, Ja -
pan’s real GDP in autumn was marginally down 
from the previous quarter, in which it had 
dropped by 1%. One of the factors mitigating 
the downturn was that foreign trade weighed 
less on aggregate economic developments 
than previously. Although exports of goods and services fell sharply once again in terms of vol-ume, real imports were reduced to a similar ex-
tent. This was a reflection not only of an in -
crease in the energy import tax, which had led to frontloading effects in the summer, but also of the persistent slump in business investment. Another  factor was that household consump-tion largely recouped its losses of the previous quarter, even though its growth was held back 
by a sharp decline in new car sales following 
the expiry of government incentives. Such tem-porary public sector measures have contributed 
repeatedly to cyclical ups and downs in the past few years. At last report, however, there 
was a tendency towards an increase in new car 
registrations. The latest decline in real GDP is, 
in purely imputed terms from a monthly per -
spective, due most likely to the negative 
carry-over from the end of the third quarter. By contrast, the economy seems to have stabilised over the course of the final quarter. This is con-sistent with an unchanged unemployment rate. Nonetheless, the new government announced additional spending to stimulate the economy. 
In addition, after already having expanded its ongoing bond purchase programme multiple 
times last year, the Bank of Japan announced 
that it would move to open-ended purchases in 2014 and, under severe political pressure, postulated a concrete inflation target of 2%. The consumer price index fell in the fourth quarter by 0.2% year-on-year; the Bank of 
Japan is therefore quite far removed from this 
aim. Excluding energy and food, the basket of consumer goods was as much as 0.5% cheaper.Stabilisation 
 following  cyclical setbackContributions to quarter-on-quarter growth in real US GDP
Source:  Global  Insight.  1 Public  demand,  inventory  changes 
and net exports.  2 Private  consumption  and private  fixed  in-
vestment.
Deutsche Bundesbank2008 2009 2010 2011 20121086420246
–––––+++In percentage points, seasonally adjusted, in annualised terms
GDP (in per cent)Residual
demand 1
Private domestic
final demand 2Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report 
February 2013  
14

United Kingdom
Aggregate output in the United Kingdom in 
the fourth quarter was unable to maintain its 
elevated level of the summer period. According 
to a provisional estimate, real GDP fell by ¼% 
from the previous period after seasonal adjust-ment. On the output side, the fall was attribut-able solely to the production sector (excluding construction). One crucial factor was the inter -
ruption of oil and gas production owing to 
maintenance work. In addition, real gross value 
added in the manufacturing industry was 
curbed sharply, and in the services sector – the 
backbone of the UK economy – it stagnated. 
By contrast, the steep slide in production in the 
construction industry came to an end. To be sure, an overall setback of sorts in real GDP 
could have been expected owing to the expiry of special factors which had raised the level of 
activity in the third quarter. However, the monthly indicators seem to suggest that the UK economy was treading water over the 
course of the autumn quarter as well. The la -
bour market, though, continues to appear rela-
tively favourable. In October, the standardised 
unemployment rate held steady at its level of July (7.8%), and the number of recipients of unemployment benefits fell perceptibly in  November and again in December. Inflation 
 according to the Harmonised Index of Con
-
sumer Prices (HICP) averaged 2.7% over the 
 autumn months – still in excess of the Bank of 
England’s inflation target. It is not least with 
this in mind that the central bank refrained 
from applying additional monetary policy stim-uli in the past few months.
New EU member states
Economic output in the new EU member states (EU-7)
1 as a whole is likely to have fallen again 
in the last quarter of 2012 for the first time since spring 2009. Whereas real GDP fell in 
Hungary (-1%) and the Czech Republic (-¼%), it 
stagnated in Bulgaria and grew in Romania 
(+¼%), Lithuania (+1%) and Latvia (+1¼%). In Poland, for which no national accounts data for the final quarter of the year are available, the indicators are likewise pointing to a con
-
traction of aggregate output. As a result of the rather distinct cyclical weakening, the situation in the national labour markets has deteriorated 
for the most part. The aggregate unemploy -
ment rate, at a seasonally adjusted 9.5%, was 
only slightly below its cyclical high of the 2010 winter quarter. In many places, consumer price 
inflation has fallen perceptibly; headline HICP inflation in the fourth quarter stood at 3.3%. Some central banks in the region used the monetary policy latitude gained as a result to 
reduce their policy rates.
Macroeconomic trends  
in the euro area
The euro-area recession, which has been on -
going since autumn 2011, intensified signifi -
cantly in the last quarter of 2012. Real GDP fell 
by a seasonally adjusted ½% from the preced-
ing quarter, in which its decline had been min-
imal. Aggregate output in autumn contracted 
by 1% year-on-year. According to provisional 
data for 13 of the 17 member states, the un -Economy still 
mired in slump
Distinct cyclical 
weakeningCyclical down-ward movement accelerated at year’s endSales of new cars in Japan andthe United States
Sources:  Haver  Analytics  and Bundesbank  calculations.  1 Num-
ber of first-time  car registrations.  2 Unit  sales  of light  motor 
vehicles.
Deutsche Bundesbank2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013607080901001101202007 = 100, quarterly, seasonally adjusted, log scale
Japan1
USA2Jan
1 This group comprises the non-euro-area countries that 
joined the EU in 2004 and 2007.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report 
February 2013  
15

favourable economic developments in the euro 
area continued to expand in many regions. 
Alongside the southern peripheral countries, in 
which the economic slump even accelerated 
further in most cases, Germany and Finland were forced to cope with perceptible output losses, whereas France, the Netherlands and 
Austria saw only moderate declines in produc-
tion, and in Belgium output remained virtually 
unchanged. Only in Slovakia and Estonia did 
output actually grow. The poor fourth-quarter 
result is due, for one thing, to the euro-area’s 
home-grown problems, with the intensification 
of the crisis in the summer most likely having 
caused a further significant decline in consumer 
and investor confidence. For another, non-
euro-area countries provided less expansionary 
stimuli than before. Euro-area real GDP fell by 
½% on average for 2012 as a whole. Around 
one-third of the 13 member states for which annual results can already be calculated re
-
ported positive growth rates; however, these 
rates were mostly quite low and unable to off-set the, in some cases, powerful contractions in the other member states. GDP growth rates in 
the euro area in 2012 ranged from approxi -
mately -6½% in Greece to +3½% in Estonia.
According to survey-based indicators, the euro 
area as a whole is expected to be slightly 
calmer in the winter months of 2013, but no dramatic economic upswing is on the cards 
yet. Although the Purchasing Managers’ Index 
for manufacturing has been tending slightly 
upwards again since August, in January it was 
still well below the expansion threshold. Ac -
cording to surveys conducted on behalf of the 
European Commission, industrial confidence has likewise improved markedly in the past three months yet was still quite far removed 
from its long-term average. A positive develop-
ment in this context is that the indicator has 
recently gone back up in some crisis countries 
as well. Increased output expectations deserve 
a large portion of credit for the strengthening 
of sentiment in the euro area. In addition, as -
sessments of inventory pressure are no longer 
as unfavourable as previously. The positive de-Retarding effects 
waning but still no recovery in sightAggregate output in the euro area
Source: Eurostat.
Deutsche Bundesbank2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 20121021041061082005 = 100, seasonally adjusted, quarterly, log scale
102104106108110112
9698100102104
102104106108110100102104106
Italy
SpainFranceof which
GermanyEuro areaDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report 
February 2013  
16

velopment of export orders received according 
to the PMI also invites the conclusion that ex -
port business could be heading for a revival in 
the coming months. Consumer confidence has 
likewise improved. According to current fore -
casts, the euro area will return to a moderate 
growth path as the year progresses.
The contraction in aggregate output in the last 
quarter of 2012 is due predominantly to a de-
cline in activity in the production sector. Sea -
sonally adjusted construction output in the 
October-November period shrank by 1% from 
the third quarter, in which it had still managed 
slight growth. It was down by 4% on the year. 
Not only cutbacks in residential construction in 
the peripheral countries but also reductions in 
public and commercial construction investment 
in large swathes of the euro area are behind 
these developments. Output in the production 
sector (excluding construction) fell in the fourth quarter by a seasonally adjusted 2½% from the 
summer months and by 3¼% on the year. 
Manufacturers of consumer durables and cap-ital goods were forced to scale back their out-put (by -4¾% and -3¾% respectively) particu-
larly sharply from the previous period. Output 
of intermediate goods was down by 2½% and 
of non-durable goods by ¼%. Energy output 
was cut back by 1½%. The surveyed increase in capacity utilisation in the manufacturing indus-
try in the October-January period could be a 
sign that industrial output recovered somewhat 
at the turn of 2012-13 following its slump in 
October-November.
With regard to the demand side, the decline in 
GDP is attributable first and foremost to weak domestic demand. According to the indicators for construction output and the production of 
capital goods, gross fixed capital formation is likely to have declined sharply once again. In addition, households’ propensity to purchase remained restrained in the light of rising tax 
and levy burdens, shrinking real wages, rapidly 
rising unemployment and a generally pro -
nounced feeling of uncertainty. Real retail sales (excluding motor vehicles and fuel) accordingly fell in the last quarter by 1½% on the period. 
Moreover, the propensity to purchase automo-biles sagged as well. Motor vehicle sales, meas-ured by new registrations, were likewise down by 1½% from their level in the summer months 
after seasonal adjustment. On average for 
2012, they were down by 11¼% from 2011 to levels last seen in 1990. In the public discussion in the euro area, for some time now there have been calls for a significant acceleration of wage growth in Germany; by strengthening domestic growth forces, this would then also ripple over 
to Germany’s partner countries in Europe. 
However, simulations using the NiGEM model 
show that such a change of direction in wage 
policy would not hold much promise of success 
for either Germany or its partner countries (see 
box on pages 18 to 20).
Exports to non-euro-area countries in autumn 
2012 are not likely to have provided any further 
growth stimuli, unlike in the summer; in any 
event, nominal exports of goods and services in All parts of 
 production  sector affected by downswing
Domestic 
 demand  persistently weakLabour market in the euro area
146147148149150
2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012Seasonally adjusted
789101112
Deutsche BundesbankEmployed
persons
Unemployment rate (standardised)
0%MillionDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report 
February 2013  
17

The macroeconomic impact of an increase in wages 
in NiGEM simulations
There have recently been growing calls for 
a signifi  cant increase in wages in Germany 
in the public debate. Its proponents believe 
that such a measure will strengthen private 
consumption and therefore domestic growth forces, which, by accelerating 
growth in imports, could also impact posi-
tively on Germany’s partner countries, espe-
cially those in Europe. They suggest that 
this would also help to reduce imbalances 
in the euro area because an increase in do-
mestic demand for foreign goods would 
decrease the trade surplus in Germany and defi  cits elsewhere.
Although this line of argument appears plausible on the surface, it is not certain whether this limited perspective takes ac-
count of important mechanisms and feed-
back effects both inside and outside such a 
complex and internationally interlinked economy. We investigate this using the global economic model NiGEM developed by the National Institute of Economic and 
Social Research (NIESR).1 In the short to me-
dium term, the model has Keynesian char-
acteristics. In particular, aggregate output is 
determined by demand, which means that 
the cause-and-effect mechanism put for-
ward by the proponents of a wage increase 
is incorporated in any case. In the long 
term, however, output is determined by the 
underlying production function. Further-more, the trade relationships between 40 
economies and six regions are modelled ex-plicitly. As a specifi  c experiment, we assume 
an exogenous and permanent increase of 
2% in the average nominal hourly wage in 
Germany compared to the baseline, with 
key interest rates initially held fi  xed.
An exogenous wage increase of this kind, 
which is not caused by an increase in prod-uctivity, for example, represents a rise in the 
cost of labour as a factor of production. 
The fi  rms in the model react directly to this 
pure cost shock by using less labour. This means cutting jobs, which leads to a de-
crease in potential output. In addition, fi  rms adjust their capital stock to the lower levels of employment, giving rise to an immediate and considerable cutback in commercial in-
vestment. In the short term, reduced ex-
penditure by fi  rms also prevents a potential 
pick-up in household demand. However, even this expansionary effect is by no means clear-cut. Higher wages for house-holds in employment are counterbalanced 
by reductions in income for those who have 
lost their jobs. Overall real disposable in-come and household consumption there-
fore only increase temporarily compared to 
the baseline. In the long term, they even sink markedly under the weight of job 
losses. Domestic demand and GDP , on the 
1 The key interdependencies have already been ex-
plained in an earlier issue of the Monthly Report. See 
Deutsche Bundesbank, On the problems of macroeco-
nomic imbalances in the euro area, Monthly Report, 
July 2010, pp 17-38.Responses of important macroeconomic variables in Germany to a wage shock
*
* Exogenous  and permanent  increase  of 2% in the nominal  av-
erage  hourly  wage  compared  to the baseline  at fixed  key in-
terest  rates.  1 As a percentage  of GDP  (percentage  point  devi-
ation).
Deutsche Bundesbank1.81.51.20.90.60.300.30.60.91.2
––––––++++Percentage or percentage point deviation from the baseline
Consumer prices
Current account balance1
Real private consumption
Employment
9 1 10 2 11 3 12 4 13 5 14 6 15 7 16 8
YearDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report 
February 2013  
18

other hand, decrease in comparison to the 
baseline from the outset.2
Due to the contractionary effect on the do-
mestic economy, the hoped-for expansion-
ary effects on the partner countries also fail 
to materialise. In the simulation, real GDP , especially for the peripheral countries of Spain, Greece, Portugal and Ireland, re-
mains practically on the baseline, while the 
decrease for the euro area on average mainly refl  ects the contraction in German output. Weaker domestic demand causes 
the German economy’s real imports to fall 
in the short term. However, as costs rise, so do the prices of domestic products. As a re-
sult, domestic demand for goods shifts to-
wards imported products and foreign de-mand is redirected towards suppliers out-
side Germany. This substitution effect ultim-
ately compensates for the impact of the 
reduced domestic demand on the German 
volume of imports, causing real imports to 
return to the baseline in the long term.3 By 
contrast, the volume of exports contracts 
slightly due to the deterioration in the Ger-
man economy’s price competitiveness. 
However, the desired decrease in the (nom-inal) current account surplus does not take place. The marked increase in export prices 
more than compensates for the limited 
losses in volume with regard to the value of the exports overall; the current account bal-ance therefore even improves further.
Finally, the role of monetary policy should 
be examined. Until now, nominal key inter-
est rates have been fi  xed at the baseline. However, in a second scenario, central 
banks are permitted to respond to the wage 
shock. Due to the additional upward pres-
sure on costs and prices in Germany, mon-
etary policy needs to be tightened slightly according to the rule implemented in the model. This causes both short-term and 
long-term interest rates to rise throughout 
the euro area in comparison to the base-line. As a result, output losses are some-what higher than in the previous simula-
tion. This is not confi  ned to Germany; real 
GDP also slips slightly below the baseline in 
the euro-area partner countries.4 Further-2 Because private consumption does not fall as sharply 
as domestic demand or GDP overall, its share of these fi  gures rises. The wage increase is therefore successful 
inasmuch as the “pile of goods” produced by the economy has been shifted to households. Nonethe-less, in absolute terms, households are also in a less 
favourable position.
3 It should be noted that even a marked increase in 
the German volume of imports would not lead to a correspondingly large improvement in the external 
positions of the peripheral countries because an econ-
omy’s trade activities are divided into numerous 
smaller fl  ows to many different countries. Each meas-ure taken by a surplus country with the aim of trigger-
ing an external impact therefore only has a relatively 
small impact on individual defi  cit countries. Further-
more, higher demand for imports in Germany would 
also benefi  t those economies that have a trade surplus 
themselves, as well as economies outside the euro 
area. The problem of large current account defi  cits can 
therefore only be solved by the affected countries 
themselves.
4 Within the framework of the model, the economic 
agents expect higher nominal key interest rates in the event of a positive wage shock. However, if these rates are fi  xed, as in the fi  rst simulation, the entities are sur-prised. The result is therefore actually a combination of a positive wage shock and an expansionary monetary policy shock, and it is this monetary policy shock that leads to the comparatively favourable changes in out-put if key interest rates are fi  xed.Response of real GDP in selected economic areas to a wage shock
 *
in Germany
* Exogenous  and permanent  increase  of 2% in the nominal  av-
erage  hourly  wage  compared  to the baseline.  1 Spain,  Greece, 
Portugal and Ireland.
Deutsche Bundesbank1.11.00.90.80.70.60.50.40.30.20.100.1
–––––––––––+Percentage deviation from the baseline
Year13 5 14 6 16 8 15 9 7 12 4 11 3 10 21at fixed key
interest ratesGermanyEuro areaPeripheral countries 1
with endogenous
monetary policy responseDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report 
February 2013  
19

October-November were 1% down from their 
third-quarter level. Since, however, imports fell 
even more sharply, this could result in a purely imputed positive contribution to growth by net exports.
The recession in the euro area continued to 
weigh heavily on the labour market in autumn. Employment, for which no fourth-quarter data are available, will probably have fallen percep-
tibly once again after having previously con -
tracted by ¼%. In the September-December period, the jobless numbers climbed by 280,000 to 18.7 million. This meant that, at 
end-2012, 1.9 million more people were out of 
work than a year previously and 7.4 million 
more than when unemployment hit its cyclical 
low in March 2008. In December 2012, the standardised unemployment rate in the euro 
area, at a seasonally adjusted 11.7%, remained at its all-time high.Consumer price inflation in the euro area con-
tinued to diminish in the fourth quarter of 2012. It stood at a seasonally adjusted 0.4% period-on-period following 0.5% in the third 
quarter and 0.6% in the second. This was due 
in large part to subsiding upward pressure on 
energy prices, whereas the unfavourable price 
tendency for foods persisted. Year-on-year 
HICP inflation fell from 2.5% to 2.3%, but was 
still perceptibly higher than the seasonally ad -
justed annualised quarterly rate of 1.6%. This 
rather large gap and the muted economic out-look make a further decline in annual HICP in-flation in the euro area likely. It averaged 2.5% for 2012 following 2.7% in 2011.
In 2012, inflation in Germany was 2.1%; despite 
relatively favourable economic developments, 
this rate was still somewhat further behind the 
euro-area average than a year earlier. However, 
in several countries consumer prices were 
driven upward mainly by increases in indirect 
taxes and other administrative measures, Positive 
 contribution to growth by net exports due only to sharp drop  
in imports
Situation in 
 labour market deteriorated  furtherDecelerating rise in consumer 
prices
Differences 
 between euro-area member statesmore, an appreciating euro transmits the 
shock to the rest of the world. Central 
banks in non-euro-area countries also react to the depreciation of their own currencies 
and the resulting increase in consumer 
prices by raising interest rates slightly, which causes overall output to suffer there, too.
All in all, the conclusion of the NiGEM simu-
lations is that an exogenous increase in 
wages represents a rise in the cost of labour 
as a factor of production, which primarily 
leads to a fall in employment. As a result, domestic growth forces are not strength-ened but weakened, the current account surplus continues to rise and the central 
banks’ task of safeguarding price stability is made more diffi   cult.
Of course, the results of such model calcu-
lations should be treated with the necessary 
caution, not least because other models may generate different results. However, they at least highlight the possibility that 
higher wages may not necessarily be linked to the macroeconomic effects hoped for by 
their proponents, but may even be counter-
productive to their proponents’ aims. Ex-
perience in recent years in Germany has also underlined the importance of moder-ate wage increases for employment. It should be emphasised that this type of wage moderation primarily has an impact 
on the domestic economy, especially the la-bour market, and not on foreign trade. For this reason, wage moderation is also an im-
portant part of the adjustment process in 
the peripheral countries; it is less about se-curing a competitive edge in terms of prices 
on the international markets and much more about lowering the employment threshold of macroeconomic growth and bringing rampant unemployment under 
control.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report 
February 2013  
20

thereby overstating the price tendency that 
would be suggested by economic activity 
alone. Of the major economies, this is particu-larly the case for Italy, with an inflation rate of 
3.3%, and Spain, at 2.4%. At 2.2%, average 
annual inflation in France was close to Germa-ny’s level. Greece, where HICP inflation stood 
at a mere 1.0%, was a downward outlier. With-
out government measures, consumer prices 
there would probably have declined amidst the severe economic crisis.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report 
February 2013  
21

Monetary policy and banking business
Monetary policy and money 
market developments
Although the Eurosystem was again faced with 
having to considerably revise downwards it 
growth forecasts for 2013 and 2014 in the au-
tumn quarter, this hardly affected the longer-
term outlook on inflation. The Governing 
Council of the ECB remains confident that the 
inflation rate will decline to values below 2% in the current year and stay at a level compatible 
with stability over the policy-relevant horizon. 
No further interest rate policy measures were 
therefore taken by the ECB Governing Council 
since the interest rate was lowered at the start of July 2012. This means that the main refinan-cing rate remains unchanged at the record low of 0.75% set in July. Banks’ balances in the de-
posit facility – as well as their excess reserves on current accounts  – continue to earn 0% interest. Eurosystem counterparties can obtain 
overnight credit at 1.5% through the marginal lending facility.
At the beginning of December 2012, the Gov-
erning Council of the ECB decided to continue to conduct its regular monetary policy refinan-
cing operations as fixed-rate tenders with full 
allotment until at least mid-2013. Full allotment was first introduced with effect from 15 Octo-ber 2008 – at the height of the financial crisis – 
as a temporary non-standard monetary policy 
measure. In spring 2010, the Governing Coun-cil initiated the discontinuation of the full allot-
ment policy for refinancing operations, but 
shelved this goal again when the crisis intensi-
fied in May 2010. In addition, following the suspension of July 2012, the ECB Governing 
Council agreed, until further notice, to restore 
the eligibility of debt instruments issued or fully guaranteed by the Hellenic Republic for use as 
collateral in Eurosystem monetary policy oper -
ations with effect from 21  December 2012. 
They are, however, subject to special haircuts.
The scheduled ending on 31 October 2012 of 
the second covered bond purchase programme 
(CBPP2) implied the discontinuation, until fur -
ther notice, of purchases by the Eurosystem as 
part of monetary policy-based bond purchase 
programmes. Since then, Eurosystem central 
banks’ holdings of securities “for monetary pol-
icy purposes” have gradually declined as a re -
sult of maturing securities being redeemed. Se-curities holdings recorded as part of the Secur -
ities Market Programme (SMP) stood at €205.4 
billion of late. A total of €65.1 billion was ac -
counted for by the two covered bond purchase 
programmes. Until now, no purchases have 
been made in the form of Outright Monetary 
Transactions, the technical modalities of which were established by the ECB Governing Council in the third quarter of 2012.Key interest 
rates remain  unchanged at record lowECB Governing Council decides to again extend full allotment for refinancing  operations
Securities 
 holdings of monetary 
policy-motivated 
bond purchase 
 programmes  decliningMoney market interest ratesin the euro area
1 Monthly  averages.  2 Three-month  Euribor  less three-month 
Eurepo. • Average 1 to 13 February 2013.
Deutsche Bundesbank2009 2010 2011 2012 201300.51.01.52.02.53.0
050100150Difference between unsecured and secured
three-month interbank lending rates 1, 2Basis
points% Marginal lending rate
Three-month Euribor 1
EONIA 1
Minimum bid rate or fixed interest rate
for main refinancing operations
Deposit rateDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report 
February 2013  
22

Money market management and liquidity needs
During the three reserve maintenance 
periods from 10 October 2012 to 15 January 
2013, euro-area credit institutions’ need for central bank liquidity determined by autono-mous liquidity factors rose by €52.8 billion in net terms. This higher need for liquidity was due, on the one hand, to the increased vol-
ume of banknotes in circulation, which ac-
celerated signifi  cantly in line with the usual 
seasonal pattern for the Christmas period and reached an all-time high of just under €914 billion on 28 December 2012. Com-
pared with period averages, the volume of 
banknotes in circulation augmented in the 
period under review by €10.8 billion in total. 
On the other hand, the sum of changes in 
net foreign assets and other factors induced a liquidity-absorbing effect. Taken together, ie adjusted for liquidity-neutral valuation ef-
fects, the resulting liquidity needs showed 
an increase of €43.3 billion in net terms. By 
contrast, general government deposits de-
celerated by €1.3 billion in net terms, which signifi  ed a slight reduction in liquidity needs. 
The minimum reserve requirement receded 
in the period under review, falling by a total of €1.0 billion.
During the three reserve maintenance periods under review, the Eurosystem also 
conducted liquidity-providing open market 
operations as fi  xed-rate tenders with full  allotment of the submitted bids (see table 
on page 27). Therefore, credit institutions’ 
demand for central bank liquidity was met 
in full, even though the overall liquidity sup-
plied was still considerably higher than the 
needs resulting from autonomous factors 
and minimum reserve requirements. Credit 
institutions placed the existing excess li-quidity –  essentially an ongoing conse-quence of the high demand for liquidity during both three-year long-term refi  nan-cing operations (LTROs) at the end of Decem ber 2011 and the end of February 2012  – in the deposit facility on a daily basis, albeit only on a smaller scale. As in the preceding months, the banks left the 
larger part of excess liquidity in their current 
accounts, since they did not incur any op-
portunity costs due to the zero interest rate on the deposit facility that has been in place since mid-July 2012.
The amount of liquidity supplied via tender 
operations declined in the period under 
 review. Consequently, there was a fall in 
credit institutions’ demand in the main refi  -
nancing operations (MROs) (by €39 billion 
overall compared with period averages) as 
well as in their interest in the LTROs (a cor-responding reduction of €26 billion in total). 
Together with the higher liquidity needs 
from autonomous factors, this resulted in a 
drop in excess liquidity, which was evident 
both in the perceptible decline in recourse 
to the deposit facility (-€67 billion) and in diminished credit institutions’ current ac-count holdings (-€49 billion). During the 
three periods under review, recourse to the 
marginal lending facility averaged €1.0 bil-
lion, €1.6 billion and €3.7 billion respect-ively, thus exceeding the averages of the preceding periods. In December, recourse 
to the marginal lending facility in the Euro-
system rose for a time to as high as €16 
billion, but this was the result of short-term special effects.
On account of securities reaching maturity 
and the regular quarterly revaluation at the end of the quarter, the total balance sheet 
holdings of securities that had been pur-chased under the Securities Markets Pro-
gramme (SMP) fell by just over €0.7 billion 
to €208.7 billion in the period under review. The SMP had been offi   cially discontinued in 
September 2012. As securities in the SMP Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report 
February 2013  
23

portfolio are held to maturity, however, the 
liquidity-providing effect resulting from this purchase programme continued to be neu-tralised – as decided by the ECB Governing 
Council when the SMP was introduced  – through weekly liquidity-absorbing fi  ne- tuning operations. It was only during the last SMP absorption tender of 2012 that 
slight underbidding occurred in the context 
that its maturity included the turn of the 
year. The holdings of the fi  rst Covered Bond Purchase Programme (CBPP), which had al-
ready ended as scheduled at the end of June 2010, decreased by around €2.8 bil-
lion to €51.4 billion in the period under re-
view. By contrast, the balance sheet value 
of the second Covered Bond Purchase Pro-
gramme (CBPP2) increased marginally by 
€37 million to €16.4 billion over the same 
period owing to fact that securities were 
bought under this programme until the end of October 2012, before it was likewise dis-continued as planned.
In the October-November 2012 reserve 
maintenance period, demand in the MROs 
fell below the threshold of €100 billion for 
the fi  rst time since June 2012. However, 
there had already been evidence of a grad-
ual decline in the course of the preceding 
months. The volume of the MROs averaged 
€84.4 billion over the period compared with €117.6 billion in the previous period. 
The outstanding volume from tender oper-
ations (excluding liquidity-absorbing fi  ne- 
tuning operations) diminished in this period – strengthened through an equally low de-
mand in the LTROs – to €1,138 billion on average (compared with €1,180 billion in 
the previous period). The share of the MROs 
in this total fi  gure, which was further shaped by the liquidity arising from both 
three-year LTROs, thus dropped from 10.0% in the previous period to 7.4%. Contrary to 
the somewhat reduced demand for liquid-
ity, autonomous factors accelerated to an 
average of €424 billion (€409 billion in the previous period). Compared with the previ-ous period, average recourse to the deposit 
facility subsequently decreased by €49 bil-
lion to €256 billion, while excess reserves, ie 
current account holdings that exceed the 
reserve requirement, also receded to €423 
billion an average (compared with €431 bil-
lion in the previous period). Credit institu-
tions thus remained in favour of keeping a large part of the excess liquidity (62%), cal-culated from current account holdings plus 
the deposit facility minus the reserve re-
quirement, in their current accounts as op-
posed to using the equally non-interest-
bearing deposit facility. The EONIA, the ref-erence rate for unsecured overnight money, showed a reduction over this reserve main-tenance period and was fi  xed at an average of 0.088% (0.095% in the previous period), 
just over 66 basis points lower than the 
main refi  nancing rate. The underlying 
 EONIA turnover was also down, averaging 
a volume of €22.3 billion compared with 
€25.4 billion in the previous period. Secured overnight money continued to be traded at a rate that was considerably lower than the 
EONIA. The corresponding average rate of 
Euro Repo’s GC Pooling (ECB basket) over this reserve maintenance period stood at 0.015% (0.014% in the previous period) and was thus marginally higher than the deposit facility rate. GC Pooling overnight turnover accelerated to €11.6 billion on average compared with €8.5 billion in the 
previous period.
In the November-December 2012 reserve maintenance period, demand for liquidity was again down somewhat – both in the 
MROs and the LTROs. The overall tender vol-
ume from liquidity-providing open market operations averaged €1,118 billion. More-over, autonomous factors showed a con-trary development over this reserve main-tenance period, growing by €23 billion on 
average to €447 billion. The average excess liquidity of €635 billion was spread over the Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report 
February 2013  
24

deposit facility (36%) and the excess re-
serves held in current accounts (64%). It 
was striking that the credit institutions’ cur-
rent account holdings were above average 
at the start of the period, only to then de-
cline throughout most of the reserve main-
tenance period; a comparable trend was 
also observed in the previous period. There-
fore, the banks continued to engage in a 
kind of frontloading, although this fulfi  lment 
behaviour had not necessarily been ex-
pected due to the consistently high current 
account holdings. The EONIA remained fairly constant at 0.073% on average over 
the reserve maintenance period, indicating a drop of 1.5 basis points compared with the 
corresponding rate of the previous period. At the same time, unsecured EONIA turn-
over also dropped to €19.4 billion on aver-
age and thus fell below the period-average 
€20 billion mark for the fi  rst time. Compared 
with the previous period, GC Pooling se-
cured overnight rates remained virtually un-
changed at 0.013% on average over this period, although the weighted overnight 
rate reached a new all-time low of 0.004% 
on 19  November 2012. The GC Pooling 
overnight turnover (ECB basket) was consist-ent with the level of the previous period at a daily average of €11.8 billion.
The developments observed in the preced-
ing periods continued in the December 2012-January 2013 reserve maintenance 
period. First, the outstanding volume from 
tender operations (excluding liquidity-absorbing fi  ne-tuning operations) declined 
again – albeit very slightly – to €1,115 billion 
on average, whereas autonomous factors rose to €461 billion on average. A period average of 38% of excess liquidity was spread over the deposit facility (€238 bil-lion), while 62% thereof on average was 
distributed to excess reserves (€383 billion). 
It was notable, however, that current  account holdings showed higher-than-average levels particularly at the start and 
end of the reserve maintenance period, and Factors determining bank liquidity1
€ billion; changes in the daily averages of the reserve maintenance periods vis-à-vis the previous period
Item2012/2013
10 Oct to 
13 Nov14 Nov to 11 Dec12 Dec to 15 Jan
I Provision (+) or  absorption (–) of  
central bank balances due to changes 
in autonomous factors1 Banknotes in  circulation (increase: –) +  2.7 +  0.7 – 14.2
2 Government  deposits with the Eurosystem ( increase: –) +  5.7 – 25.4 + 21.0
3 Net foreign assets
2 + 27.0 –  0.5 – 24.1
4 Other factors 2 – 50.4 +  1.9 +  2.8
Total – 15.0 – 23.3 – 14.5
II Monetary policy  operations of the Eurosystem
1 Open market  operations
(a) Main refi  nancing operations – 33.2 – 10.4 +  4.2
(b) Longer-term refi  nancing  operations –  9.0 –  9.7 –  7.3
(c) Other operations –  1.0 –  0.8 +  1.4
2 Standing facilities
(a) Marginal lending facility –  0.1 +  0.6 +  2.1
(b) Deposit facility (increase: –) + 49.3 + 24.3 –  6.6
Total +  6.0 +  4.0 –  6.2
III Change in credit  institutions’  current accounts (I + II) –  8.9 – 19.3 – 20.9
IV Change in the  minimum reserve requirement ( increase: –) +  0.6 +  0.1 +  0.3
1 For longer-term trends and the Deutsche Bundesbank’s contribution, see pp 14 • and 15 • of the Statistical Section of this 
Monthly Report. 2 Including end-of- quarter liquidity-neutral valuation adjustments.
Deutsche BundesbankDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report 
February 2013  
25

After reaching record highs in summer 2012, 
the monetary policy refinancing volume pro -
vided by the Eurosystem went down slightly in 
the fourth quarter. By 30 January 2013, banks 
were able for the first time to prematurely repay the liquidity received in the first three-year refinancing operation settled on 22 De
-
cember 2011. Around €137 billion was returned 
on the first repayment date. No more than 
€3.5 billion and €5.0 billion were scheduled to be repaid early on the second and third repay-ment dates on 6 February and 13 February re-
spectively. In particular institutions with excess 
central bank liquidity and more favourable al -
ternative financing sources are likely to have 
made use of the early repayment opportunity. 
As expected, the use of refinancing operations with shorter maturities did not intensify in con-nection with early repayment.
The above reasons also caused excess liquidity 
– measured as deposit facility plus excess re -
serves – to fall by €135 billion after the repay-ment date to €487 billion compared with the 
average of the preceding maintenance period. 
Further repayments of still outstanding amounts 
from the first three-year refinancing operation 
may be made every week until final maturity. In future, the same will apply to the second three-year tender settled on 1 March 2012, for which early repayment will be possible from 27 Febru-ary 2013.
On the one hand, the development of money 
market rates in the fourth quarter of 2012 was characterised by the high level of excess liquid-ity which continued to contribute to an – albeit slower – decline in unsecured Euribor rates. On the other hand, market participants’ risk aware-ness appears to have diminished on the whole 
– which must also be seen against the back -
drop of the announcement and implementa -
tion of supporting measures by governments and the Eurosystem designed to contain the 
sovereign debt crisis. This is likely to have bene-
fited the stabilisation at a comparatively low Monetary policy 
refinancing  volume down: early redemp-tions in first three-year  tender
Money market rates decline  
in 2012 Q4 …yet, at the turn of the year, reached record 
lows within the same period, whereas the 
deposit facility achieved a new period high 
at the end of 2012. In the last week before the turn of the year, there was – aside from 
the previously mentioned minor underbid-
ding in connection with the SMP absorption 
tender  – greater demand in the MROs (+€17 billion) compared with the previous 
week. Besides the period occurring around the turn of the year, another reason for this increase might have been the ECB Govern-ing Council’s decision to restore marketable debt instruments issued or fully guaranteed by the Greek government and fulfi  lling cer-tain criteria as eligible collateral for the pur-poses of Eurosystem credit operations with effect from 21 December 2012. The turn of the year was likewise refl  ected in the over-night rates. Despite the high level of excess 
liquidity (€621 billion on average over the period), these rates rose perceptibly on 31 December 2012 in connection with the 
very low turnover: the EONIA was fi  xed at 
0.131% (+5 basis points) at the end of the 
year and the GC Pooling weighted over-night rate (ECB basket) was also up by 5  basis points to 0.073%. However, the 
EONIA fi  xing at 0.071% was still lower than 
the rate of the previous period, while the overnight rate at GC Pooling averaged 
higher than the rate of the previous period at 0.020%. Overnight turnover went down, as usual for this time of year. Consequently, 
EONIA turnover only reached a daily aver-age volume of €16.3 billion over this re-serve maintenance period, while secured overnight turnover with GC Pooling (ECB basket) dropped to a period average of 
€8.3 billion. By comparison, these turnover fi  gures were substantially greater in the cor-
responding reserve maintenance period of the previous year at €30.4 billion (EONIA) 
and €11.1 billion (GC Pooling) respectively.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report 
February 2013  
26

level of interest rate spreads between un -
secured and secured money market rates 
(depo-repo spreads) in the fourth quarter.
Given the decision of the ECB Governing Coun-
cil to keep key interest rates at the current 
levels and in the light of market participants’ expectations regarding a further reduction in 
excess liquidity – probably also in view of the 
opportunity to make further early repayments 
of the three-year refinancing operations  – a more broad-based increase in money market 
rates could be observed for the first time in a 
while across all market segments and matur -
ities in January 2013. This increase occurred against the backdrop of largely constant depo-repo spreads. The Eurepo rates reported by the surveyed institutions for interbank money mar -
ket operations backed by the best collateral are now back in positive territory again across the entire maturity spectrum.
At its last meeting, the ECB Governing Council 
took note of the remarks by the Governor of 
the Central Bank of Ireland regarding the treat-
ment of state-owned Irish Bank Resolution Cor -
poration (IBRC), which the Irish government 
had liquidated shortly before. The Irish central 
bank had granted emergency liquidity assis -
tance to IBRC, as a result of the liquidation of … and broad-
based increase at the start of 2013 for the first time in a whileECB Governing Council notes Central Bank  
of Ireland’s  approach to IBRC liquidationOpen market operations of the Eurosystem*
 
Value 
dateType of transaction
1Maturity in daysActual  allotment in € billionDeviation 
from the 
benchmark in € billion
2Marginal rate/fi  xed 
rate
%Allotment 
ratio
%Weighted 
rate
%Cover ratio
 3Numberof bidders
10.10.2012 MRO (FRT) 7 89.8 225.8 0.75 100.00 – 1.00 86
10.10.2012 FTO (–) 7 – 209.5 – 0.01 52.24 0.01 2.12 55
10.10.2012 S-LTRO (FRT) 35 12.6 – 0.75 100.00 – 1.00 27
17.10.2012 MRO (FRT) 7 91.8 301.3 0.75 100.00 – 1.00 96
17.10.2012 FTO (–) 7 – 209.5 – 0.01 51.27 0.01 2.00 60
24.10.2012 MRO (FRT) 7 77.3 286.3 0.75 100.00 – 1.00 93
24.10.2012 FTO (–) 7 – 209.5 – 0.01 50.60 0.01 2.03 60
31.10.2012 MRO (FRT) 7 83.7 261.7 0.75 100.00 – 1.00 87
31.10.2012 FTO (–) 7 – 209.5 – 0.01 58.46 0.01 1.93 56
01.11.2012 LTRO (FRT) 91 6.2 –
4 0.75 100.00 – 1.00 52
07.11.2012 MRO (FRT) 7 79.5 246.0 0.75 100.00 – 1.00 81
07.11.2012 FTO (–) 7 – 208.5 – 0.01 50.40 0.01 2.20 62
14.11.2012 MRO (FRT) 7 75.2 238.2 0.75 100.00 – 1.00 84
14.11.2012 FTO (–) 7 – 208.5 – 0.01 49.76 0.01 2.23 63
14.11.2012 S-LTRO (FRT) 28 15.9 – 0.75 100.00 – 1.00 30
21.11.2012 MRO (FRT) 7 75.4 268.4 0.75 100.00 – 1.00 85
21.11.2012 FTO (–) 7 – 208.5 – 0.01 51.39 0.01 2.16 63
28.11.2012 MRO (FRT) 7 74.6 207.1 0.75 100.00 – 1.00 79
28.11.2012 FTO (–) 7 – 208.5 – 0.01 58.34 0.01 1.92 60
29.11.2012 LTRO (FRT) 91 7.4 –4 … 100.00 – 1.00 37
05.12.2012 MRO (FRT) 7 70.8 265.8 0.75 100.00 – 1.00 74
05.12.2012 FTO (–) 7 – 208.5 – 0.01 56.50 0.01 2.00 53
12.12.2012 MRO (FRT) 7 73.2 219.2 0.75 100.00 – 1.00 82
12.12.2012 FTO (–) 7 – 208.5 – 0.01 57.90 0.01 1.94 57
12.12.2012 S-LTRO (FRT) 35 15.3 – 0.75 100.00 – 1.00 26
19.12.2012 MRO (FRT) 9 72.7 266.7 0.75 100.00 – 1.00 79
19.12.2012 FTO (–) 9 – 208.5 – 0.01 71.18 0.01 1.70 52
20.12.2012 LTRO (FRT) 98 15.0 –4 … 100.00 – 1.00 50
28.12.2012 MRO (FRT) 6 89.7 220.7 0.75 100.00 – 1.00 86
28.12.2012 FTO (–) 6 – 197.6 – 0.75 100.00 0.03 1.00 43
03.01.2013 MRO (FRT) 6 81.1 146.1 0.75 100.00 – 1.00 69
03.01.2013 FTO (–) 6 – 208.5 – 0.01 95.40 0.01 1.55 61
09.01.2013 MRO (FRT) 7 77.7 168.7 0.75 100.00 – 1.00 75
09.01.2013 FTO (–) 7 – 208.5 – 0.01 74.58 0.01 1.65 64
* For more information on the Eurosystem’s operations from 11 July 2012 to 9 October 2012, see Deutsche Bundesbank, Monthly  Report, November 2012, p 33. 1
 MRO: main refi  nancing operation, LTRO: longer-term refi  nancing operation, S-LTRO: supplementary longer-term 
refi  nancing operation, FTO: fi  ne-tuning operation (+: liquidity providing operation, –: liquidity absorbing operation), FRT: fi  xed-rate tender. 
2 Calculation according to publication after MRO allotment. 3 Ratio of total bids to the allotment amount. 4 The interest rate corresponds to the average minimum bid rate or main refi  nancing rate of the MROs conducted over the life of this operation (may be rounded to two 
decimal places in the table).
Deutsche BundesbankDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report 
February 2013  
27

which the central bank assumed full ownership 
of the relevant collateral. The Irish government 
and the country’s central bank subsequently agreed, among others, that the Irish govern
-
ment’s promissory notes which formed part of 
the collateral would be swapped for longer-
term Irish government bonds with a lower cou-
pon. The Irish central bank ultimately pays interest on the new bonds to the rest of the 
Eurosystem at the main refinancing rate, while 
the Irish government’s interest payments are collected as net income and can be used for distributions to the government afterwards. This approach confirms the increasingly close and problematic ties between monetary and fiscal policy in the European monetary union. Responsibility for providing any assistance to 
individual member states in servicing their sov-ereign debts should lie with the European Sta-bility Mechanism (ESM), which was established for that purpose.
Monetary developments 
in the euro area
On balance, the broad monetary aggregate M3 
continued its moderate growth of the two pre-
vious quarters in the autumn quarter of 2012. 
This monetary expansion was driven by con -
tinued portfolio shifts by the money-holding sector away from longer-term and securitised investments in favour of short-term bank de
-
posits. Decisive factors are likely to have been 
the overall low interest rate level and the flat -
tening of the yield curve. In contrast, lending to 
the private sector in the euro area remained weak for the fifth consecutive quarter. This meant that the annual growth rates of the monetary aggregate and loans remained de
-
coupled: whilst M3 increased from 2.6% in the third quarter to 3.3% in the fourth, the annual-ised growth rate for loans to the domestic pri-vate sector (adjusted for loan sales and securi-
tisation) remained in negative territory at 
-0.2%.
Given the general calming in the financial mar -
kets, sight deposits became less relevant for 
M3 growth in the reporting quarter. Although 
overnight deposits contained in M1 still grew 
by just under €66 billion in the reporting quar -
ter, almost one-half of this increase was due to 
the ESM investing member states’ paid-up 
common shares in the MFI sector. The decreas-
ing relevance of sight deposits was compen -
sated for by significant inflows to the other 
short-term bank deposits (M2-M1). Not only 
short-term savings deposits but also short-term time deposits – which had decreased substan-tially in spring and summer – were built up dur -
ing the autumn months. The rising demand for Moderate 
 monetary growth  continuesStrong build-up of short-term depositsConsolidated balance sheet of the MFI sector in the euro area*
Changes in € billion, seasonally adjusted
Liabilities 2012 Q4 2012 Q3
Central government deposits –  3.1 14.1
Monetary aggregate M3 65.6 57.5
of which: Components
Currency in circulation and 
overnight deposits (M1) 63.1 127.1
Other shorter-term bank deposits 
(M2-M1) 45.8 – 37.4
Marketable instruments (M3-M2) – 43.3 – 32.1
Monetary capital – 29.1 –  5.9Assets 2012 Q4 2012 Q3
Loans to non-MFIs in the euro area –  21.1 –  7.8
of which
General government –  16.2 –  6.7
Private non-MFIs 1 –   4.9 –  1.2
Lending in the form of securities to 
non-MFIs in the euro area 36.4 1.8
of which
General government 2.2 49.4
Private non-MFIs 34.2 – 47.6
Net external assets 124.9 18.4
Other counterparts of M3 – 106.9 53.4
* Changes for statistical reasons eliminated. 1 Adjusted for loan sales and securitisation.
Deutsche BundesbankDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report 
February 2013  
28

short-term time deposits was driven by the cor -
porate sector and households alike. The inflows 
to short-term time deposits and savings de -
posits were promoted by relatively favourable 
interest rate developments compared with 
longer-term investments. A contributory factor was that banks in the peripheral countries, es-
pecially in Spain, were advertising attractive 
interest rates for short-term time deposits.
The money-holding sector’s portfolio shifts also 
affected the bank debt securities contained in 
M3-M2 with a maturity of up to two years, the 
cutback of which was accelerated again in the autumn months. Larger-scale redemption activ-
ities in individual euro-area countries played a 
role, too. The increase in M3 was dampened, 
moreover, by further declines in money market 
fund shares, which became a great deal less attractive given the low-interest rate environ
-
ment.
The increase in M3 in the autumn quarter was 
supported by the continued reduction in 
longer-term financial liabilities of the MFIs vis-
à-vis other sectors in the euro area. An import-
ant contribution to this was made by net re -
demptions of long-term bank debt securities in 
peripheral and core countries of the euro area 
alike. Furthermore, savings deposits with an agreed notice period of over three months, 
too, recorded outflows, which are likely to be 
connected to the flattening yield curve.
The strongest expansionary effect on monetary 
developments in the euro area in the reporting quarter was, however, exerted by a rise in the banking sector’s net external asset position vis-
à-vis non-residents. Besides the continued ex -
cess in current account balances, this rise re -
flected, above all, international investors’ port-
folio shifts in favour of the euro area. It was non-resident investors, in particular, who ac
-
quired securities issued by domestic non-banks; this was also reflected in the decline in securi-tised lending by German banks to the domestic private sector that occurred in October and No-vember.In contrast, 
 renewed  acceleration  
in cutback of marketable  financial  instruments
Increase in M3 
supported  
by  reduction  
in monetary  capital
Substantial rise 
in net external assetsComponents and counterparts of the money stock in the euro area
1 Year-on-year  change  in per cent.  2 In percentage  points. 
3 Adjusted  for loan  sales  and securitisation.  4 Taken  in isol-
ation,  an increase  curbs  M3 growth.  5 Adjusted  for loan  sales 
and securitisation  from  2010  Q1. 6 Non-monetary  financial 
corporations.
Deutsche Bundesbank2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012505101520
–++++
–10–50+5+10+15+20+25
505101520
–++++Seasonally adjusted, end-of-quarter data
... components of the money stock
... counterparts
Sectoral growth contributions 2of which
Loans to the private sector 5Growth rate 1 of M3 and the
contributions to growth 2 of the ...
M3
M3-M2M2-M1
M1
M3
Remaining balance
sheet items
Longer-term financial
liabilities to other non-MFIs 4Net external
asset positionCredit to the
private sector 3
Growth rate 1
Financialcorporations 6
Non-financialcorporations HouseholdsDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report 
February 2013  
29

Although monetary statistics for the reporting 
quarter indicate an overall expansion in securi-
tised lending by the MFI sector to the private 
sector, this expansion is solely attributable to the high inflows of December 2012, which 
were directly linked to the orderly restructuring 
of the Spanish banking sector. Spanish banks 
transferred a relatively large amount of loans to 
the Spanish resolution unit Sareb – which is, 
statistically speaking, part of the financial cor -
porations sector – and in return received secur -
ities issued by that unit. Moreover, the rise in 
securitised lending can be explained by inflows 
to the Spanish banking sector in connection 
with the recapitalisation of ESM bonds in the 
amount of €40 billion.
In contrast to the previous quarters, lending by 
the MFI sector to general government had a 
dampening effect on monetary growth in the 
reporting quarter. Whereas MFIs had increas -
ingly acquired securities of sovereign issuers in 
the preceding quarters, this form of lending 
stagnated on balance in the autumn quarter of 
2012. This was essentially due to the sale of 
government securities in December 2012 and affected banks throughout the euro area, which potentially also implies effects of bal
-
ance sheet cleansing.
Loans to private non-banks in the euro area – adjusted for loan sales and securitisation – trod water again in the final quarter of 2012. 
However, this was attributable to various sec -
toral developments. In addition, the provision of loans in the individual euro-area member states continued to be very heterogeneous, 
which was mostly due to weakening economic 
activity, increased uncertainty among borrow -
ers, and balance sheet consolidations in some 
euro-area countries.
There was a reduction – which was most pro-
nounced in December – in loans to non-financial 
corporations in the euro area throughout the reporting period; loans with medium and 
long-term maturities were particularly affected. 
The seasonally adjusted and annualised three-month rate of loans to non-financial corpor -
ations in the euro area went down from just over -1½% in the previous quarter to -3% in 
the reporting quarter. The decline in this subag-gregate was, however, overshadowed by nega-tive effects from the orderly restructuring of the 
Spanish banking sector. Balance sheet cleans -
ing effects in the financial statements are also 
likely to have played a role. With the exception 
of Spain, no further decrease was recorded in 
year-on-year rates of loans to non-financial corporations in countries particularly affected 
by the sovereign debt crisis.
The clear reduction in loans to non-financial 
corporations was balanced out in the reporting 
quarter by a marked expansion in loans to fi -
nancial corporations along with a moderate build-up of loans (adjusted for loan sales and securitisation) to households. In the case of households, on balance, inflows –  as in the previous quarters  – stemmed from loans for house purchase, which make up the lion’s 
share of household borrowing. Continued out-
flows in this credit segment in the peripheral countries (excluding Ireland) were once again more than offset by considerable inflows in other countries, notably in Germany and France. However, the reduction in consumer 
credit continued, which meant that the season-
ally adjusted and annualised three-month rate 
of loans to households remained subdued at 
just under 1%.
Inflation forecasts on the basis of various mon-
etary indicators (monetary aggregates, 
short-term deposits, loans) currently signal bal-
anced risks for price stability for the next three years on average. However, the uncertainty as-sociated with these forecasts remains high.
German banks’ deposit and 
lending business with  domestic customers
German banks’ deposit business – which had 
already lost considerable momentum in the Securitised lend-
ing to private sector strongly influenced by special factors
Decline in lend-
ing to general government has dampening  effect
Loans to private 
sector treading water again
Renewed reduc-
tion in loans to non-financial corporationsFurther expan-sion in loans to financial corpor-ations and households, however
Money-based 
forecasts with balanced  inflation risksDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report 
February 2013  
30

previous quarter – posted a sharp decline in the 
final quarter of 2012. However, the bulk of this 
decline was due to a resolution agency as -
signed to the general government sector liquid-
ating sight deposits and short-term time de -
posits in the overall amount of around €28 bil-
lion in December 2012. This was linked to bal-ance sheet restructuring measures being carried 
out. But the private non-banks that had been 
building up deposits in the previous quarter also withdrew funds from the MFI sector on 
balance in the reporting quarter.
Unlike in the rest of the euro area, corporations 
and households in Germany once again re -
duced short-term time deposits in the autumn 
months. Above all, this was probably due to 
the relatively unattractive rate of interest on 
this form of investment in Germany. However, 
given that, at the same time, sight deposits of 
corporations and households were clearly up 
again, the private sector on balance continued 
its portfolio shifts away from long-term into 
shorter-term types of deposits.
These portfolio shifts caused longer-term time 
deposits with a maturity of over two years to 
fall substantially once again. Above all, insurers and other financial intermediaries were respon-
sible for this decline, while their demand for 
sight deposits increased at the same time – al-
beit to a lesser extent. Savings deposits with 
longer periods of notice, too, declined again in 
the reporting quarter against the backdrop of 
the even lower interest rate spread between longer-term investments and sight deposits. 
Movements in this market segment are usually almost exclusively attributable to portfolio deci-
sions of households, which again favoured 
sight deposits on a larger scale.
Lending by German banks to domestic non-
banks failed to sustain the growth trend it had embarked upon at the start of last year, dimin-
ishing perceptibly in the quarter under review. 
The (seasonally adjusted and annualised) de -
crease of just over -½% on the quarter was pri-
marily due to a distinct reduction in loans to general government, which could not be offset 
by the only moderate increase in holdings of securities issued by domestic general govern
-
ment. In addition, credit institutions also re -
duced their securitised lending to the private 
sector perceptibly.
Loans to the domestic private sector posted a 
slight increase that was driven solely by a rise in loans to financial corporations and households. 
Meanwhile, loans to non-financial corpor -
ations, which had expanded distinctly in the first three quarters, fell discernibly in the final 
quarter of 2012, regardless of the still low lend-
ing rates. While the seasonally adjusted and 
annualised three-month rate for loans to 
non-financial corporations fell substantially in 
the reporting quarter to just over -1% from 
+3% in the previous quarter, the annual growth 
rate went down only moderately to 1.7%, 
compared with 2.2% at the end of September. 
In particular short-term loans declined in the reporting quarter, whereas loans with longer-Decline in 
 deposit business essentially caused by  special factor
Renewed  decline 
in longer-term 
deposits, only partly in favour of sight deposits
Perceptible de-
crease in banks’ lending to  domestic  
non-banksDiscernible  reduction  
in loans to non-financial corporationsLending and deposits of monetary  fi  nancial institutions (MFIs) in Germany 
*
Changes in € billion, seasonally adjusted
Item2012
Q3 Q4
Deposits of domestic non-MFIs 1
Overnight 42.4 32.0
With agreed maturities
of up to 2 years – 20.0 – 48.2
of over 2 years –  8.7 – 15.6
Redeemable at notice
of up to 3 months 4.7 2.0
of over 3 months –  3.3 –  5.2
Lending
to domestic general government
Loans – 10.5 – 10.0
Securitised lending 14.0 4.4
to domestic enterprises and 
households
Loans 10.0 5.9
of which to households 2 3.9 5.9
to non-fi  nancial  corporations 
3 6.0 –  2.5
Securitised lending 4.1 –  5.7
* As well as banks (including building and loan associations, but 
excluding the Bundesbank), monetary fi  nancial institutions 
(MFIs) here also include money market funds. End-of-quarter 
data, adjusted for statistical changes. 1 Enterprises, households 
and general government excluding central government. 2  In-
cluding non-profi  t institutions serving households. 3  Corpor-
ations and quasi-corporations.
Deutsche BundesbankDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report 
February 2013  
31

term maturities stagnated. Besides the persist -
ent weakness of investment in machinery and 
equipment, net redemptions in this credit seg-
ment are also likely to be partly attributable to 
non-financial corporations cleansing their bal -
ance sheets at year-end.
Unlike loans to non-financial corporations, 
loans to domestic households went up on bal-
ance in the final quarter of 2012, although 
lending markedly lost momentum in December. 
Hence, at just over 1½%, seasonally adjusted 
and annualised growth remained moderate on 
the whole. The 12-month rate for loans to households, too, edged up only slightly from 
+1.2% in the previous quarter to +1.4%. As for the euro-area aggregate, this increase in lend-
ing was solely driven by a renewed expansion 
in loans for house purchase, which climbed to 
a seasonally adjusted and annualised rate of 
2½% in the reporting quarter. Consumer credit 
and other lending stalled, however. On the 
whole, the increase in loans to households was primarily driven by savings banks, credit co -
operatives and regional banks.
The German banks participating in the Bank Lending Survey slightly tightened their credit standards for business with non-financial cor
-
porations in the last quarter of 2012. This par -
ticularly affected lending to large enterprises. 
The surveyed institutions indicated that the re-
strictive adjustments were owed to a deterior -
ation in the general economic outlook as well 
as sector and company-specific factors. Unlike 
in the previous quarter, higher capital costs vir -
tually no longer played a role. Furthermore, 
survey participants widened their margins dis -
tinctly vis-à-vis both average and risky borrow-
ers.
At the same time, bank managers applied somewhat stricter standards for private hous
-
ing loans, while slightly loosening their stand -
ards for consumer credit and other lending to 
households. In addition, bank managers 
widened the margins for riskier housing loans 
as well as for consumer credit in both credit 
rating categories.
Furthermore, survey participants reported that 
the sustained trend towards a growing de -
mand for housing loans since the beginning of 
the sovereign debt crisis continued in the last 
quarter of 2012. The surveyed banks attributed this, above all, to the still highly optimistic out-look on the housing market, persistently strong 
consumer confidence and low interest rates. Demand for consumer credit, too, increased slightly, while non-financial corporations’ de
-
mand for funds was largely stagnant.
The Bank Lending Survey contained two add -
itional questions on the impact of the financial and sovereign debt crisis on the banks’ funding 
conditions and credit standards as well as on 
the measures taken and envisaged to meet the 
stricter regulatory requirements under the 
European Capital Requirements Directive (CRD) 
IV. According to the information provided by 
the participating institutions, their funding situ-Moderate 
growth in loans to households solely driven by loans for house purchaseGerman banks’ credit standards vis-à-vis corpor-ations some-
what tighter
Slight stream-
lining in stand-ards for private loans for house purchase
Trend increase  
in demand for 
 private loans for 
house purchase continues
Improvement in 
German banks’ funding  situation 
in the final  quarterLoans of German banks toselected sectors
1 Year-on-year  rate of change.  2 Non-financial  corporations 
and quasi-corporations.
Deutsche Bundesbank2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 201221012345
––+++++Growth contributions in percentage pointsSeasonally adjusted, end-of-quarter data
HouseholdsFinancial corporations
Non-financial corporations 2Growth rate 1 in %Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report 
February 2013  
32

Banking conditions in Germany
1 New  business.  According  to harmonised  MFI interest  rate statistics.  2 According  to the Bank  Lending  Survey,  difference  between  the 
number  of respondents  reporting  “tightened  considerably”  and “tightened  slightly”  and the number  of respondents  reporting  “eased 
somewhat” and “eased considerably” as a percentage of the responses given. 3 Expectations for 2013 Q1.
Deutsche Bundesbank05 06 07 08 09 10 11 12 20133.03.54.04.55.05.56.06.57.07.58.08.59.0
–300+30
–300+30
–60–300+30+60
–60–300+30
2005 06 07 08 09 10 11 12 132.02.53.03.54.04.55.05.56.06.5
3003060
–++
9060300306090
–––+++Credit to non-financial corporations
%pa
%%% pa
%%
Riskier loans
Average loansAverage loansRiskier loans
%%
Average loansChange in margins 2 for loans for ...
Change in margins 2
for loans to enterprises... with an initial rate fixation of
    over 1 year and up to 5 yearsBank interest rates for consumer credit1...
... with an initial
    rate fixation of over 5 years
... consumer credit... up to €1 million
3
Riskier loansBank interest rates for loans to enterprises1...
... with an initial rate fixation of up to
    1 year ...
... consumer credit2.53.03.54.04.55.05.56.0
... house purchase... up to €1 million
... over €1 million3... over €1 million
... house purchaseBank interest rates on
loans for house purchase1
with an initial rate fixation ofover 10 years
Change in credit standards 2
for loans to enterprisesChange in credit standards 2 for loans for ...
3... with an initial rate fixation of over
    5 years ...Credit to householdsDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report 
February 2013  
33

ation improved markedly overall in the fourth 
quarter of 2012. Individual survey participants 
indicated that this was also due to easing ten-
sions in sovereign debt markets. This, however, did not influence their lending policy.
In addition, the surveyed banks stated that risk-
weighted assets were reduced markedly in the 
second half of 2012 as a result of stricter cap-
ital requirements. In the credit book, this mainly 
affected riskier borrowers. Moreover, survey 
participants strengthened their capital position 
and intend to continue on this path in the first 
half of 2013, above all by retaining profits. 
Given the tightened regulation, the surveyed 
institutions applied stricter standards to loans 
to large enterprises in particular and distinctly 
widened their margins in this line of business. 
The surveyed institutions expect this develop -
ment to intensify once again in the first half of 
2013.
The euro area, too, saw an overall tightening of 
credit standards in the fourth quarter of 2012. 
This was due both to the somewhat more re -
strictive bank-related factors and, above all, to a deterioration in the institutions’ perception of risk. At the same time, demand fell again con-siderably in all surveyed business lines. By con-
trast, according to data provided by the Euro -
pean survey participants, their funding situation improved in the final quarter. Taken in isolation, 
the sovereign debt crisis now produced only marginally negative effects which, on the whole, did not influence the setting of credit standards and margins. Preparations for the 
stricter capital requirements were largely in line with those of the German subsample.
The final quarter of 2012 saw a renewed de -
cline in bank lending rates across almost all business areas, maturities and volumes, thus 
reflecting the general downward trend in inter -
est rates on the money and capital markets. 
Interest rates for long-term fixed-interest loans 
to enterprises stood at 2.7% for small-scale 
loans and at 2.6% for large-scale loans in the 
same category, ie once again more than 20 
basis points lower than at the end of Septem-
ber 2012. In addition, conditions for private loans for house purchase with an initial rate 
 fixation of over ten years fell by 9 basis points, 
reaching a new record low of 2.9% since the 
statistics were introduced in 2003. Long-term 
consumer credit, too, was more favourably 
priced. In this case, quarter-on-quarter interest rates declined by 12 basis points to 7.5%. Con-
sumer credit with an initial rate fixation of up 
to one year became cheaper by as much as 
50 basis points compared with the end of Sep-
tember 2012, not least as a result of seasonal 
effects, and reached 3.9%. Moreover, deposits 
of households and non-financial corporations also consistently earned clearly less interest 
than just a quarter earlier.Capital position 
strengthened and risk-weighted assets reduced in run-up to CRD IV
Lending policies in the euro area tightenedBank interest rates in  Germany  
down againDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report 
February 2013  
34

Financial markets
Financial market setting
Market participants in the international finan -
cial markets had a perceptibly stronger appetite 
for risk in the autumn and winter of months 
2012-13, their sentiment being buoyed chiefly 
by the somewhat brighter economic outlook 
for the current year and by the crisis manage -
ment measures taken by the central banks in 
the major currency areas. In the euro area, the 
potentially unlimited bond purchase pro -
gramme referred to as Outright Monetary 
Transactions (OMT) – so far unused – gave a 
particular boost to financial market prices. The 
ECOFIN agreement to establish the Single 
Supervisory Mechanism (SSM) for banks under the aegis of the European Central Bank and the conclusion of a debt buy-back operation which cleared the way for further financial assistance for Greece also bolstered the markets. Investors 
likewise were relieved when policymakers in 
the United States reached a partial agreement 
in their budget dispute. Meanwhile, negative factors, such as the political difficulties that some euro-area countries are experiencing in implementing the necessary reform and con
-
solidation measures, faded into the background 
somewhat. The increased optimism among 
 financial market participants primarily benefited 
risky assets, with sovereign bonds of peripheral 
countries and equities alike posting notable gains. On the foreign exchange markets, the 
euro appreciated significantly during the period under review, particularly so against the yen.
Balances in the TARGET2 payments system 
contracted markedly in recent months. At €617 
billion, the Bundesbank’s TARGET2 claims at the end of January 2013 stood €134½ billion 
below the corresponding figure at the end of 
August 2012. Countries particularly hard hit by 
the financial crisis have likewise all recorded a 
decline in their TARGET2 liabilities since autumn 
2012. For one thing, this development is attrib-
utable to the general easing of tensions in the financial markets. For another, it is linked to 
 assistance measures provided by partner coun-
tries as well as the early repayment of funds 
obtained from the first three-year tender. The 
current relaxation in the financial markets and 
reduced TARGET2 balances should not, how -
ever, serve to conceal the fact that substantial 
structural adjustments are still needed in many countries.
Exchange rates
Since the beginning of the fourth quarter of 2012, the euro has appreciated on a broad basis, including against the US dollar. Up to mid-November, however, it had remained 
under pressure owing to the uncertainty as to 
whether Greece would persevere with its re -
form agenda, although, following the US elec-
tions, market participants were more focused 
on the political wrangle in Washington about 
appropriate measures to forestall the drastic cuts to the US government budget (“fiscal 
cliff”) that would automatically be triggered by the end of the year. This gave the euro a boost against the US dollar, as did the publication of the minutes of a Federal Open Market Commit-
tee meeting which signalled imminent deci -
sions concerning further quantitative monetary policy easing. The euro’s appreciation was bol-
stered by a gradual easing of tensions in the 
euro-area financial markets, reflected in declin-ing risk premiums on government bonds issued by peripheral euro-area countries.
At year-end 2012, the euro posted an exchange 
rate of US$1.32, immediately after which poli-
cymakers in the United States agreed on a short-term compromise in their budget dis
-
pute. In a further development, the minutes of 
another Federal Reserve meeting revealed the 
wish of several committee members to slacken 
or even terminate the US bond purchase pro -
gramme in the course of 2013. Both events Financial mar-
kets influenced by announce-ment of monet -
ary policy meas-ures
TARGET2 
 balances 
 contract …… but still con-
siderable need 
for adjustment
Euro appreciates 
against the  
US dollarDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report 
February 2013  
35

contributed to a temporary partial erosion of 
the euro’s gain in value. The currency neverthe-
less continued its upward trajectory. This fol -
lowed a decision by the Governing Council of 
the ECB in its January meeting against add -
itional monetary policy easing measures due to 
its very confident assessment of economic pro-
spects in the euro area, thus confounding the 
expectations of a number of market partici -
pants. Latterly, the euro was trading at US$1.33, which is 3% above its level at the end of Sep-tember 2012.
The euro has been gaining considerably against 
the yen since the middle of November, largely 
driven by developments in Japan itself. In the 
same month, a sharp decline in Japan’s GDP was recorded for the third quarter of 2012, 
coupled with an unexpectedly high trade def-
icit. Also in November, the Japanese prime min-ister dissolved parliament, setting the stage for a general election. The opposition, which came 
to power in mid-December with a sweeping majority, put great pressure on the Bank of 
Japan to further ease its monetary policy in an 
aggressive fashion. In so doing, the newly elected government also openly brought into 
question the central bank’s independence. The 
central bank refrained from undertaking any further immediately effective direct easing measures in January, having topped up its  securities purchase programme one month 
earlier. However, a dramatic 24% gain in value 
from the end of September 2012 onwards 
 ultimately led to a euro rate of ¥124 as this 
 report went to press.
On balance, in the final quarter of 2012, the 
exchange rate of the euro against the pound sterling remained virtually unchanged. In the 
new year, however, this currency pair also saw 
an appreciation of the euro, thanks to the 
somewhat more optimistic frame of mind con-cerning the economic outlook in the euro area. The pound sterling was subsequently put under additional pressure by the discussion surround-
ing the present government’s plans to hold a 
referendum in 2017 on the United Kingdom’s Dramatic appre-
ciation of euro against yen
Euro posts gains 
against pound sterling, too …Exchange rate of the euro
1 Exchange  rate at the start  of monetary  union  on 4 Janu-
ary 1999.  2 As  calculated  by the ECB against  the currencies  of 
20 countries.
Deutsche BundesbankONDJFMAMJJASONDJFM
2011 2012 20131.101.201.301.401.50
95100110120130140
0.700.750.800.850.90
95100105110Daily data; log scale
US$
¥
£against the ...
... US dollar
US$1.1789 1
... yen
¥133.73 1
... Swiss franc... pound sterling
Sfr1.6168 1£0.7111 1
Nominal effective exchange rate 2
1999Q1 = 100
103.11 11.201.301.401.501.601.70sfrDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report 
February 2013  
36

continued membership of the European Union 
as well as by an array of unfavourable eco -
nomic reports which culminated in news of an 
unexpectedly sharp fall in UK GDP in the final 
quarter of 2012. Most recently, the euro stood 
at £0.86, which was 7½% higher than at the 
end of September 2012.
In effective terms, the euro has appreciated by 
4% against the currencies of 20 major trading 
partners since the beginning of the fourth 
quarter of 2012. This was not just attributable 
to the euro’s previously mentioned gains 
against the US dollar, yen and pound sterling. 
Rather, the upward trend was very broadly based, as demonstrated by the euro’s rise 
against the Swiss franc, on balance, to tempor -
arily trade at CHF1.25, after hovering slightly 
above the minimum exchange rate CHF1.20 set by the Swiss National Bank throughout 2012.
The finance ministers and central bank govern-
ors of the seven leading industrial economies 
(G7) reaffirmed their shared concern that marked exchange rate fluctuations could en
-
danger economic and financial stability in the 
countries concerned. Moreover, they reiterated 
their belief that exchange rates should evolve on a market-driven basis, along with their in
-
tention only to intervene in the foreign ex -
change markets following close consultation.
Securities markets and 
 portfolio transactions
The increased risk appetite evident among mar -
ket participants has also left an impact on the 
international bond markets. For instance, the 
waning uncertainty about the future develop -
ment of market prices assessed on the basis of 
implied volatility suggests an easing of tensions 
on the debt securities markets. In addition to 
the broadly positive flow of daily news, meas -
ures taken by a number of key central banks 
had a decisive impact. With effect from the be-
ginning of the year the US Federal Reserve undertook to purchase government bonds amounting – for the time being – to a value of 
US$45 billion monthly until further notice – in 
addition to its existing monthly commitment to 
purchase mortgage-backed securities to the 
tune of US$40 billion, as decided in September. 
At the same time, the Federal Open Market 
Committee announced that it would leave the Fed’s policy rate at 0.25% for as long as the US unemployment rate remained above 6.5% and the country’s expected inflation rate did not ex-
ceed 2.5%. On this side of the Atlantic, the Euro system’s operational but yet to be acti
-
vated programme for Outright Monetary Trans-
actions (OMTs) served to calm the debt mar -
kets. This positive climate was reinforced by the 
successful efforts of the US Congress at the 
turn of the year to ward off an automatic tight-
ening of fiscal policy which was broadly con -
sidered to be too abrupt. Against this back -
drop, investors evidently opted to unwind safe 
benchmark positions and focus more heavily on riskier, somewhat higher-yielding invest
-
ments. As a consequence, yields on paper con-
sidered to be particularly liquid and safe, such 
as US, UK and German government bonds, rose significantly. Moreover, the global eco
-
nomic outlook has brightened up a little of 
late, which in itself would also point to a rise in 
yields. Overall, since the end of September 2012, yields on German public debt securities with a ten-year maturity have climbed by 20  basis points to 1.6% at last count, while those on US and UK bonds of the same kind have increased by over 30 and over 50 basis 
points to 2.0% and 2.2% respectively. Only in 
Japan did ten-year government bonds remain 
virtually unchanged at 0.8%.
Portfolio shifts into riskier bonds were also dis-
cernible in the euro area. Compared with the 
end of the third quarter of 2012, both the inter -
est rate dispersion of long-dated government 
bonds in the euro area and the GDP-weighted 
yield spread of government bonds of other 
euro-area countries over German Bunds with matched maturities were down. At 270 and 
205 basis points respectively, they stood signifi-cantly below their level at the end of Septem-… as well as in 
effective terms
Joint statement 
by G7 finance ministers and central bank governors
International 
bond markets
Measures taken 
by the central banks …… narrow yield spreads in the euro areaDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report 
February 2013  
37

ber. Given the aforementioned support meas -
ures taken by central banks and the inter -
national community, for example the transfer 
of ESM paper to the Spanish Fund for Orderly 
Bank  Restructuring (Fondo de Reestructuración 
Ordenada Bancaria – FROB) and the disburse-
ment of further instalments of financial assis -
tance to Greece – France’s downgrading by a 
rating agency made few waves, not least be -
cause the move had already been broadly an-
ticipated. Despite the generally positive senti -
ment prevailing in the euro-area bond markets, 
investors continued to discriminate between 
issuers, as evidenced by their need for a higher 
yield on Spanish bonds than for Italian ones. 
Indeed, for a time, the yield spread between these two countries during the period under 
review exceeded 100 basis points, largely in re-
flection of the fundamentals underlying the 
tenser situation in Spain. Such yield differentials 
send an important signal to decision-makers not to ease up in their efforts to institute re
-
forms.
The factors described above impacted on the entire maturity spectrum of the German yield curve, as estimated on the basis of Federal  securities. Amid fluctuations, this yield curve 
has, on balance, been trending upwards since 
the end of September 2012. Here, a notable 
development was the upturn in the near money 
market segment of the curve which returned to 
being clearly positive. Latterly, investments with, for example, a two-year maturity had a yield of more than 15 basis points, prior to 
which investors had still been paying premiums 
of up to 10 basis points to invest funds in 
short-term Federal bonds. The increase in ques-
tion was also fostered by a readiness on the 
part of banks to repay a larger amount of funds 
obtained from the first three-year tender than 
had originally been expected, thus fuelling ex -
pectations that excess liquidity would continue 
to decline and in so doing possibly lead to an 
improvement in the functioning of the inter -
bank money market. As a result, the antici -
pated money market rates rose.German yield 
curve sees shift upwardsYield spreads in the euro area
Sources:  Thomson  Reuters  and Bundesbank  calculations. 
1 Haircut  of 9 March  2012.  2 Announcement  of conditions  for 
the Greek  debt  buyback  programme  on 11 December  2012. 
3 Standard  deviation  of yield  spreads  of euro-area  government 
bonds.
Deutsche Bundesbank2009 2010 2011 2012 201302004006008001,0001,2001,400
02004006008001,0001,200Basis points, daily data
Spread of ten-year
government bonds
against Bunds
Dispersion of yield spreads 3
GDP weightedUnweightedItaly
SpainIrelandPortugalGreece
(Scale reduced)
2
05001,0001,5002,0002,5003,0003,5004,000
1Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report 
February 2013  
38

Five-to-ten year break-even inflation rate (BEIR) 
expectations, derived from financial market 
prices, for the European Harmonised Index of 
Consumer Prices excluding tobacco, stood at 
slightly above 2%. While the BEIR, which is de-
rived from a comparison of German and French 
inflation-linked and nominal government 
bonds, fell slightly to 2.2% in the period under 
review, the break-even inflation rate for infla -
tion swaps – which is less sensitive to technical market movements – went up to 2.4%.
Financing conditions for European enterprises active in the capital market have likewise im
-
proved since the end of the third quarter of 
2012. At last count, BBB-rated corporate bonds 
with a residual maturity of seven to ten years 
issued by European financial enterprises and by enterprises which are part of the real economy 
were yielding 5.0% and 3.2% respectively,1 
thus trading well below their respective five-
year averages. Financial enterprises recorded a 
particularly marked decline of 80 basis points. 
With yields on German government bonds 
picking up at the same time, this meant a sig-
nificant narrowing of yield spreads over gov -
ernment bonds. This contraction in spreads, which mirrors a reduction in investors’ risk 
aversion, was consistent with the parallel nar -
rowing of credit default swap premiums (iTraxx) 
and reduced stock market uncertainty. Enter -
prises took advantage of the favourable finan-
cing conditions to substantially step up their 
issuance activity. Indeed, according to commer -
cial data providers’ figures, gross issuance in the euro area between October and January 
was considerably higher than in the prior-year 
period.2
By contrast, gross issuance figures in the Ger -
man bond market fell slightly in the final quar -
ter of 2012. Overall, German borrowers issued 
paper worth €329 billion, compared with 
€343½ billion in the previous three months. If the extremely high redemptions and changes in 
issuers’ holdings are taken into account, do -
mestic issuers reduced their capital market bor -
rowing, however, by €34½ billion. In the fourth quarter, foreign debt instruments totalling a 
net €20 billion were sold in the German bond market. On balance, the total outstanding vol-Break-even 
 inflation rates slightly above 2%
Improvement  
in financing 
 conditions for enterprises
High level of 
 issuance activity in the bond marketYield curve on the Germanbond market
 *
* Interest  rates  for (hypothetical)  zero-coupon  bonds  (Svensson 
method), based on listed Federal securities.
Deutsche Bundesbank0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 1000.51.01.52.0
Residual maturity in years28 December 201214 February 201328 September 2012in %
Inflation expectations based onfinancial market prices
Sources:  BGC  Partners,  Bloomberg,  EuroMTS  and Bundesbank 
calculations.  1 Excluding  tobacco.  2 Derived  from  the fixed  leg 
of inflation  swaps  that is exchanged  for the annual  realised  in-
flation  rates  of the next five or ten years.  3 Derived  from  separ-
ately  estimated  yield  curves  of German  and French  inflation-
linked  and maturity-matched  nominal  bonds  which  are sub-
sequently aggregated using GDP weights.
Deutsche BundesbankASONDJFMAMJJASONDJFM
2011 2012 20131.61.82.02.22.42.62.8% pa, daily data
Five to ten-year forward break-even
inflation rates for the HICP 1 derived from ...
... inflation swaps 2
... bonds 3
1 This is based on yields on corporate bonds included in 
the iBoxx bond indices.2 Analysis of Bloomberg and Dealogic issuance data.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report 
February 2013  
39

ume of bonds in Germany thus shrank by 
€14½ billion in the quarter under review.
In the final quarter of 2012, domestic credit in-
stitutions – which had gone back to experien-
cing outflows abroad and declining deposits 
due not least to the increase in investor confi-dence in banks in the peripheral countries gen-
erated by European EFSF/ESM support meas -
ures – reduced their capital market debt by €24 billion. In the main, public Pfandbriefe – which German institutions have been issuing fewer of 
for years, for structural reasons  – were re -
deemed (€10 billion). The outstanding volume 
of debt securities issued by specialised credit institutions (€6 billion), mortgage Pfandbriefe (€5 billion) and other bank debt securities 
which can be structured flexibly (€3 billion) also fell.
Public sector capital market debt was reduced 
by €15 billion in the final quarter of 2012.3 Cen-
tral government’s positive cash balance allowed it to contain its financing needs. It issued Treas-ury discount paper (Bubills) worth €7 billion as 
well as 10-year and 30-year Federal bonds (Bunds) worth €6½ billion and €2 billion re
-
spectively. In parallel with this, it redeemed five-year Bobls (€3½ billion) and two-year 
Schätze (€2 billion). The Federal states tapped 
the bond market for €5½ billion net in the 
months October to December 2012.
With effect from January 2013, all bonds issued 
by Germany’s Federal Government have in -
cluded a collective action clause (CAC) which 
allows attendees at a meeting of bondholders 
to approve by majority decision changes to the 
terms of a bond which are then binding for all 
bondholders. Since the beginning of the year, 
the clause in question has applied to all euro-
area debt instruments with a maturity of more 
than 12 months (see explanatory notes on 
pages 42 and 43).Reduction in 
credit institu-tions’ capital market debt
Redemption of 
public sector debt securities
Collective action 
clause included in all debt  securities as  
of January 2013Corporate bond yields in the euro area*
Source:  Markit.  * BBB-rated  bonds  with  a residual  maturity  of 
seven to ten years.
Deutsche Bundesbank2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013036912151821242730%, weekly averages
iBoxx Non-FinancialsiBoxx Financials
iBoxx
Corporates
Investment activity in the German securities markets
€ billion
Item2011 2012
Q4 Q3 Q4
Debt securities
Residents –  9.4 9.2 – 26.1
Credit institutions – 31.9 – 4.9 – 17.3
of which
Foreign debt securities – 22.7 – 5.7 0.3
Deutsche Bundesbank 13.8 – 0.6 –  2.4
Other sectors 8.6 14.7 –  6.4
of which
Domestic debt securities –  0.2 – 9.3 – 27.6
Non-residents – 35.8 1.8 11.9
Shares
Residents 15.2 5.0 20.2
Credit institutions 7.2 7.9 8.3
of which
Domestic shares 2.5 4.7 0.4
Non-banks 8.0 – 2.9 11.9
of which
Domestic shares 5.2 – 3.9 0.6
Non-residents –  5.6 0.8 –  0.3
Mutual fund sharesInvestment in specialised funds 22.6 21.1 29.4
Investment in retail funds –  2.7 0.0 3.0
of which
Equity funds 0.8 – 0.5 0.7
Deutsche Bundesbank3 This was due primarily to the content of a late report de-
tailing redemptions by the resolution agency classified as 
part of central government.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report 
February 2013  
40

Domestic enterprises issued debt securities dur -
ing the reporting period worth €4½ billion, 
which on balance consisted solely of bonds 
with a maturity of more than one year. This fig-
ure excludes any net sales of bonds issued via 
foreign financing subsidiaries.
During the final quarter of 2012, debt securities 
were purchased exclusively by foreign investors 
who added bonds worth €12 billion net to 
their portfolios. By contrast, domestic credit in-stitutions and domestic non-banks disposed of fixed-income securities worth €17½ billion and 
€6½ billion respectively. In both cases, they 
mainly parted with domestic bonds.
Around the beginning of the fourth quarter of 
2012, international equity markets initially con-
tinued to feel some strain before going on to 
benefit from the considerably improved senti -
ment which occurred in mid-November. The 
sense of relief about the partial compromise in 
the US budget dispute coupled with the add -
itional expansionary measures being taken by the US and Japanese central banks undoubt
-
edly played a part in this development, as did 
the moderately improved economic outlook. 
Added to this, the agreement reached on set -
ting up a single supervisory mechanism for banks in the euro area is likely to have had a 
stabilising effect on the European banking sec-
tor. The successful bond issues of European credit institutions also led to positive confi
-
dence effects. Toward the end of the reporting period, surprisingly favourable quarterly results 
reported by US enterprises helped to fuel in -
vestor optimism. On balance, since the end of 
September the CDAX has risen by 7.2%, with 
the Euro Stoxx and the S&P500 up by 8.6% and 5.6% respectively. Meanwhile, Japanese shares have gained 27.5% in value based on the Nikkei index. At 18.3%, European bank 
stocks posted a much more substantial rise in 
value than that for the market as whole, which 
was largely attributable to Irish and Italian 
credit institutions.In tandem with these gains, uncertainty about 
future price developments on the equity mar -
ket receded significantly and –  measured in terms of the implied volatility of equity op
-
tions – was well below its five-year average as this report went to press. At the same time, the 
price-earnings ratio rose amid dissipating risk 
aversion on the part of investors. The implied 
equity risk premium demanded by investors, 
which can be calculated using a dividend dis -
count model and analysts’ (IBES) earnings esti-mates, fell by just over ½ percentage point for 
the European market as a whole (Euro Stoxx), 
with the premium for European bank stocks 
declining by around 1 percentage point. Not -Net sales of 
 corporate bonds
Debt securities 
purchased  exclusively by foreign investors
Appreciable 
price gains since mid-November
Risk aversion 
and price uncer-
tainty reducedEquity market
Sources:  Thomson  Reuters  and Bundesbank  calculations. 
1 End-of-month  levels;  derived  from  a three-stage  dividend  dis-
count  model  using  three  to five-year  IBES  earnings  growth  ex-
pectations.  2 Expected  future  volatility,  calculated  from  prices 
of options on the Euro Stoxx.
Deutsche BundesbankEuro Stoxx
Banks
Lin scale
Implied return on equity 1
Euro StoxxEuro Stoxx
Euro Stoxx
Banks%31 December 2007 = 100, log scale
Stock price indicesWeekly averages
%
Implied volatility of the Euro Stoxx 21520305075100150
510152025
020406080
2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report 
February 2013  
41

The introduction of collective action clauses in the terms 
and conditions of public sector bonds
At the beginning of February 2012, the 
member states of the Economic and Mon-
etary Union signed the intergovernmental 
Treaty Establishing the European Stability Mechanism (ESM). This treaty states inter 
alia that collective action clauses (CACs) are to be included in all euro-area government securities with a maturity of more than one year issued on or after 1 January 2013. The 
contents of the CACs, which have been  coordinated and agreed upon with the 
 respective national debt management insti-
tutions, have a standardised form. In the case of Germany, these CACs were trans-posed into national law by amending the 
Federal Government Debt Management Act (Bundesschuldenwesengesetz).
The CACs govern how the terms and condi-
tions of euro-area government securities 
can be modifi  ed in the event of payment diffi   culties. A key role in this respect is 
played by what are known as modifi  cations 
of “reserved matters”, which are amend-
ments to bond conditions that might place 
bondholders in a less favourable position. These include inter alia changes to the dates on which amounts are payable, the 
reduction of interest payments, or changes 
to certain core legal terms of the bond in 
question (eg termination rights or the place 
of jurisdiction). Any modifi  cations to terms 
and conditions require the approval of the 
issuer as well as a majority of bondholders. A meeting of bondholders held to approve reserved matter modifi  cations constitutes a 
quorum if at least 66⅔% of the outstand-
ing principal amount in an issue is repre-sented. Resolutions are legally binding for all bondholders if an affi   rmative vote is given by at least 75% of the principal amount represented at the meeting of bondholders. In the most extreme case, therefore, bondholders representing 50% 
of the aggregate principal amount can pass 
a resolution. Resolutions concerning re-
served matter modifi  cations for more than 
one series of bonds (“cross-series modifi  ca-
tions”) require the affi   rmative vote of 75% 
of the outstanding principal amounts of all the debt securities represented at the bond-
holder meeting and, additionally, the af-
fi  rmative vote of 66⅔% of the outstanding 
principal amounts in each series of debt 
 securities represented at separate duly 
called meetings of the respective bondhold-ers that would be affected by the proposed 
modifi  cation. Reserved matter modifi  ca-
tions can also be approved by an action in 
writing. Generally speaking, the CACs set out the provisions under which debtor 
countries and creditors negotiate the condi-tions of a debt restructuring agreement.
From the perspective of sovereign issuers, CACs are a means of modifying the pay-
ment conditions of their bonds by way of a 
contractual provision enabling a majority vote by creditors without the need for a statutory or judicial instrument. This can 
help to overrule efforts by individual bond-holders who may have bought the issue at 
a discount and now try to maximise their 
profi  t by enforcing full payment under the 
original, unaltered payment conditions and 
hence refuse their consent to any change 
thereto (“hold out”). CACs may also include 
elements of collective enforcement pro-ceedings, thereby preventing individual bondholders from taking legal action in 
order to secure preferential, and potentially full satisfaction of their particular claims and thus setting off a “rush to the courthouse”.
In essence, CACs therefore help to mitigate 
coordination problems among bondhold-Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report 
February 2013  
42

ers, thus reducing the costs involved in a 
default.
The theory is unclear on how CACs affect 
public sector borrowing costs. On the one 
hand, CACs might drive borrowing costs 
higher if investors fear that a government that has the option of gaining debt relief 
more easily might be less ambitious in con-solidating its budget. Bondholders also face the risk of being outvoted in the event of a default and of thus being placed at a disad-
vantage to holders of traditional bonds. 
This risk might be particularly relevant dur-
ing the introduction of CACs when only a small number of bonds will include CACs, possibly sending premiums for the new issues higher. On the other hand, the re-duced risk of a default being postponed and the simplifi  ed debt restructuring pro-
cess suggest that borrowing costs would be lower. Recent empirical studies indicate that 
the overall impact could tend to diminish 
yields, which would suggest that the costs 
involved in the collective coordination prob-
lems mentioned above are not insignifi  -
cant.1
From an investor’s perspective, the intro-
duction of CACs in the prevailing fi  nancing environment does not appear to be having 
any substantial effect on the potential  returns on an investment in euro-area 
 government bonds. At least that is what the rather muted development shown by sover-eign bond yields in the year to date would 
suggest. However, following the introduc-
tion of the new CACs, sovereigns might 
conceivably choose to issue some of their 
debt as money market paper with matur-
ities of up to one year, a segment which is 
not affected by the CAC regulations. In 
addition, euro-area member states are also 
allowed in principle to reopen (“tap”) debt 
issuances without CACs up to certain pre-
defi  ned thresholds.Regardless of such responses, CACs can 
help to ensure that the “no bail out” prin-
ciple is complied with, since CACs send out 
a signal to investors ex ante that a sover-eign default is possible and that any such 
default will be settled within an orderly, pre-
defi  ned framework. Inasmuch as market 
participants expect yields to be both appro-
priate and commensurate with risk, the introduction of CACs would play a role in disciplining government spending, which would also mitigate the risk of systemic contagion effects. Additionally, the inter-national community will come under less 
pressure to intervene and take the burdens of a default off the original investors’ shoul-
ders and redistribute them among other 
countries and sectors. However, since debt restructuring is still a last resort, implement-ing structural reforms and restoring the bal-
ance between the revenue that a country 
generates itself and its expenditure remain 
key elements in resolving a crisis.
A critical view would have to be taken of the Eurosystem’s bond holdings in a pos-
sible debt restructuring arrangement. If the Eurosystem central banks exercise their vot-ing rights, they might exceed a critical share 
of voting rights and thereby acquire a de facto power of veto. Under these circum-stances, efforts to restructure debt volun-
tarily might be impeded.
1 See A Bardozzetti and D Dottori, 2013, Collective 
Action Clauses: How Do They Weigh On Sovereigns?, 
Banca d’Italia Working Paper 897, and M Bradley and G M Gulati, 2012, Collective Action Clauses for the Eu-rozone: An Empirical Analysis, Duke Law Faculty Schol-arship Working Paper.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report 
February 2013  
43

withstanding this circumstance, the implied 
equity risk premiums were still well above their 
low recorded at the beginning of 2010.
On balance, despite the positive stock market 
environment, funding via the German stock 
market totalled just €½ billion in the reporting 
quarter. This would indicate that German cor -
porations have limited equity capital require -
ments. The volume of foreign shares on the 
German market rose by €19 billion in the same 
period. Shares were acquired exclusively by do-
mestic investors on balance. Domestic non-
banks, which also encompass investment com-
panies and insurance enterprises, added shares 
worth €12 billion to their portfolios; mean -
while, domestic credit institutions increased 
their exposure to equities by €8½ billion. In both instances, these investors’ interest was  focused on foreign stocks. Meanwhile, non-  
resident investors sold German shares to the 
value of €½ billion.
In the final quarter of 2012, domestic invest -
ment companies recorded a net inflow of 
€32½ billion, compared with €21 billion in the 
previous quarter. On balance, the new funds 
went very largely to the specialised funds re -
served for institutional investors (€29½ billion). Of the various retail funds, bond funds, in par -
ticular, achieved net inflows of capital (€1 bil -
lion), as did, albeit to a lesser extent, equity funds, mixed security-based funds, open-end 
real estate funds and mixed funds (€½ billion 
each). The outstanding volume of foreign mu-tual fund shares in Germany rose by €12½ bil-lion in the reporting period. Mutual fund shares 
were bought almost exclusively by domestic 
non-banks, which added €44 billion worth of 
fund shares to their portfolios. For the most 
part, this related to domestic mutual funds. 
Non-resident investors and domestic credit 
 institutions acquired mutual fund shares worth 
€½ billion in each case.Almost no funds 
raised on the equity market
Sales and 
 purchases of 
mutual fund 
sharesMajor items of the balance of payments
€ billion
Item2011 2012
Q4 Q3 Q4
I Current account 1, 2 + 46.9 + 41.5 + 46.7 
Foreign trade 1, 3 + 39.6 + 50.1 + 44.6 
Services 1 +  0.5 –  7.1 +  0.9 
Income 1 + 18.7 + 15.6 + 15.0 
Current transfers 1 –  5.7 –  9.4 –  5.9 
II Capital transfers 1, 4 –  0.2 +  0.1 –  0.6 
III Financial account 1
(Net capital exports: –) – 29.0 – 56.4 – 84.0 
1 Direct investment +  5.2 – 14.9 –  5.4 
German investment 
abroad –  6.3 –  5.8 –  4.3 
Foreign investment
in Germany + 11.5 –  9.1 –  1.1 
2 Portfolio investment – 43.7 – 25.6 – 33.6 
German investment abroad –  3.3 – 26.8 – 45.9 
Shares –  5.7 –  2.4 – 13.3 
Mutual fund shares +  1.7 –  6.5 – 12.6 
Debt securities +  0.7 – 17.8 – 20.0 
Bonds and notes
5 –  9.4 – 17.3 – 23.8 
of which
Euro-denominated 
bonds and notes – 11.5 – 15.5 – 16.6 
Money market  instruments + 10.0 –  0.6 +  3.7 
Foreign investmentin Germany – 40.4 +  1.2 + 12.3 
Shares –  5.5 +  0.5 –  0.2 
Mutual fund shares +  0.9 –  1.1 +  0.6 
Debt securities – 35.8 +  1.8 + 11.9 
Bonds and notes
5 – 22.1 + 16.3 + 10.9 
of which
Public bonds and 
notes +  5.2 + 12.4 + 14.2 
Money market  instruments – 13.7 – 14.5 +  1.0 
3 Financial derivatives
6 –  5.1 –  3.6 –  4.3 
4 Other investment 7 + 15.0 – 12.3 – 41.3 
Monetary fi  nancial
institutions 8 – 50.4 – 36.4 – 69.9 
of which short-term – 34.0 – 43.2 – 79.5 
Enterprises and
households + 48.4 –  7.7 + 10.8 
of which short-term + 31.6 –  2.9 + 11.0 
General government –  1.7 – 12.2 – 32.4 
of which short-term –  2.8 – 14.1 – 15.1 
Bundesbank + 18.7 + 44.0 + 50.2 
5 Change in reserve assets 
at transaction values ( increase: –)
9 –  0.4 –  0.1 +  0.5 
IV Errors and omissions – 17.8 + 14.7 + 37.9 
1  Balance. 2  Including supplementary trade items. 3  Special 
trade according to the offi   cial foreign trade statistics (source: 
Federal Statistical Offi   ce). 4 Including the acquisition/disposal of non-produced non-fi  nancial assets. 5 Original maturity of more 
than one year. 6 Securitised and non-securitised options as well 
as fi  nancial futures contracts. 7  Includes fi  nancial and trade credits, bank deposits and other assets. 8 Excluding the Bundes-bank. 9 Excluding allocation of SDRs and excluding changes due 
to value adjustments.
Deutsche BundesbankDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report 
February 2013  
44

Direct investment
As with cross-border portfolio investment, 
which saw net outflows amounting to €33½ 
billion in the final quarter of 2012, there were 
also net capital exports in the direct investment account. On balance, at a value of €5½ billion, these were well below the prior-quarter figure (€15 billion).
Cross-border direct investment by German pro-
prietors was of significant importance (€4½ bil-lion). On the one hand, they provided their for -
eign affiliates with considerably more equity 
capital (€14½ billion). On the other, they saw 
capital inflows worth €11 billion in the form of intra-group credit transactions. These were due 
largely to German enterprises obtaining funds 
from their foreign subsidiaries (€8 billion). Dur -
ing the reporting period, Luxembourg (€9 bil -
lion) and the United States (€8 billion) were the 
prime target countries of German foreign in -
vestment.
Foreign investors withdrew a modest volume 
of capital (€1 billion) from their German affili -
ates. On balance, this occurred exclusively in the form of intra-group credit transactions. Here again, transactions with Luxembourg  accounted for the lion’s share (€6½ billion), 
while there were net inflows of funds from the 
United States and the Netherlands.Capital exports 
in direct invest -
ment
German direct 
investment abroad subdued on balanceForeign direct investors with-draw capital from GermanyDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report 
February 2013  
45

Economic conditions in Germany
Macroeconomic situation
The upturn in overall German economic output 
was interrupted at the end of 2012. According to the Federal Statistical Office’s flash estimate, 
quarter-on-quarter real GDP growth fell by 
0.6% in the fourth quarter of 2012 after adjust-ment for seasonal and calendar variations. Eco-nomic activity in Germany suffered a noticeable 
dampener caused by the ongoing weakening 
of demand. This had set in over one year earlier 
owing to the slower pace of global economic 
growth, recessionary tendencies in the euro area and considerable uncertainty associated 
with the resolution of the debt crises. Normal 
capacity utilisation was only just maintained in 
the autumn after capacity utilisation waned in 
the preceding quarters as a result of economic 
growth falling below the potential rate. After adjustment for calendar effects, GDP showed 
an increase of no more than 0.4% on the year.
Declining exports were one factor behind eco-
nomic output falling into negative territory in 
the reporting period. Another was the persist -
ent underlying negative movement in invest -
ment. The components displaying a more up -
ward development did very little overall to 
counteract these strongly dampening effects. Once again, no more than subdued stimuli came from private consumption. Apart from the effects of the weather at the end of the 
year, a further increase in the existing height -
ened level of activity in housing construction 
was restricted by the shift in the focus of de -
mand from owner-occupied houses to apart -
ments. Given the usual time lags, it is not sur -
prising that the calming of the situation in the 
euro-area financial markets during the fourth 
quarter has not yet had any stimulative effects, especially on firms’ propensity to invest.
Enterprises’ export business saw a broadly based decline in the fourth quarter of 2012, 
with real exports of goods likely to have been 
around 2¼% down on the quarter in season -
ally adjusted terms. Above all, export sales of 
capital goods were down. Besides hitting auto-
motive firms, this affected manufacturers of computer, electronic and optical products. Mechanical engineering underwent a marked 
decline for the second quarter in succession. By 
contrast, exporters of intermediate and con -
sumer goods suffered hardly any export losses.
Automotive exports to countries outside Eur -
ope, which were the main factor providing 
strong momentum well into the third quarter, 
moved into negative territory. This marked re -
versal in motor vehicle sales is consistent with 
the fact that exports to the United States, 
which increased significantly in the third quar -
ter, were not so high this time in seasonally ad-
justed terms. The same effect is likely to have Marked decline 
in economic output in  
2012 Q4Contractionary effects from  exporting and investment in machinery and equipment were the main factors
Significant fall  
in exports of 
capital goods
Marked reversal 
in automotive business with non-euro-area countriesOverall output
Deutsche Bundesbank2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012102104106108110112
–8–6–4–20+2+4+62005 = 100, price and seasonally adjusted
Log scale
GDP
%
Lin scale
Year-on-year changeDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report 
February 2013  
46

also placed a strain on exports to the OPEC 
countries. Negative results were likewise in the 
majority in trade with Asia, with fewer motor 
vehicles being exported, first and foremost, to 
China. The new industrial countries of this re -
gion were the sole exception, following a stag-
nating development in the second and third 
quarters of the year. Furthermore, there was a 
slackening of exports to central and eastern 
European countries and Russia.
In the reporting period, the fall in exports of 
goods to the rest of the euro area was not 
quite as sharp as that in exports to non-euro-
area countries. Here, though, the dampener did not disrupt an underlying upward move
-
ment but instead gave a downward push to a 
development that was already feeble. Once again, business not only with Italian but also 
Spanish customers proved to be a straining fac-
tor. Furthermore, negative figures have also 
been posted in other major euro-area markets, 
such as the Netherlands and Austria. The fact 
that exports to France held up in the fourth 
quarter was due solely to the strong deliveries of goods for joint aircraft production.
Imports performed better than exports in the final quarter of 2012. Seasonally adjusted real 
imports to Germany fell by roughly 1¼% in the reporting period. There was a marked reduction 
in the foreign trade surplus, which increased 
sharply in the second and third quarters of the 
year. There was a pronounced large expansion 
in energy imports at the end of the year. On an 
average of October and November, they were 
around one-tenth higher in real terms than in 
the third quarter. Even so, this did not offset the 
decline in imports of intermediate and capital goods. While imports of machinery and com
-
puters, electronic and optical products as well 
as electrical equipment were clearly less in de -
mand than in the preceding quarter, imports of motor vehicles and motor vehicle parts declined only slightly. Also of relevance was the consider -
able fall in imports of other transport equip -
ment; these often fluctuate heavily from quarter to quarter and showed high growth in the pre-vious quarter. Imports of consumer goods were slightly up on the quarter, however.
The acquisition of moveable fixed assets eased 
off further in the fourth quarter of 2012. This 
means that investment in machinery and equip-
ment has been on a downward path for more than a year now. Given the moderate utilisation of fixed assets, capacity extensions were under -
standably not on the agenda. Such caution 
seems to have spread to modernisation of ma-chinery and equipment as well as vehicle fleets. This is suggested by the fact that spending on 
new machinery and equipment in the period 
under review was only slightly higher than writ-Exports to other 
euro-area  countries still  
in negative  territory
Smaller decline 
in volume of 
i mports
Further  weakening  
of investment  
in machinery and equipment90100110120Underlying trends in foreign trade
1 Adjusted for the price indices for foreign trade.
Deutsche Bundesbank2008 2009 2010 2011 2012Oct-
Nov95100110120130140
Oct-
Nov
100110120130Seasonally adjusted, quarterly
To non-euro-area countries
To euro-area countries2005 = 100, log scale
Exports of goods
price-adjusted 1
Total
0204060Lin scale
Foreign trade balanceImports of goodsprice-adjusted
 1100110120130140150
€ bnDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report 
February 2013  
47

edowns on assets owing to technical wear and 
tear and economic obsolescence. Given frail in-
vestment activity, commercial construction is 
likewise lacking impetus. The fact that the ten-dency towards weakness in this sector was not 
quite as strong as it was in  investment in ma -
chinery and equipment may have been due to 
the extremely favourable  financing conditions. 
These are of key importance for construction 
projects because they have a relatively large 
share of outside financing. Moreover, the long 
amortisation period for construction projects 
means that the current weakening of demand 
and uncertainty have less of an influence on 
considerations of profitability than they have in 
the case of fixed assets with a shorter period of use.
The underlying conditions for investment in housing construction remained decidedly ad
-
vantageous in the fourth quarter. As in the pre-ceding quarters, however, the expansion is un-likely to have matched the strong pace of 2010 and 2011. To a considerable extent, this is due to the focus of new construction activity shift-
ing away from owner-occupied housing to -
wards apartment blocks; the elevated level that has already been achieved is an additional fac-
tor, however. The demographic benchmark 
data limit demand for new single-family hous-
ing more than demand for apartments. Espe -
cially if capital investment decisions are a major 
factor, demand for apartments can react rela -
tively strongly to low interest rates. In public sector construction, the stabilisation at a low 
level may have been tending to continue.
Consumer demand continues to provide no 
more than subdued stimulus. Private consump-tion in the fourth quarter was again slightly up on the preceding three-month period after sea-sonal adjustment. Retail sales were down in the 
final quarter of the year. In the same period, 
however, there were more new private passen-ger car registrations again in seasonally adjusted terms, and supplies of heating oil were replen-ished. The surveys of the consumer research in-
stitution, Gesellschaft für Konsumforschung (GfK), indicate that the consumer climate con -
tinued to be highly optimistic. The main reasons 
for this were the positive labour market situ -
ation and strong growth in earnings.
Sectoral trends
Industrial output in the fourth quarter of 2012 
was 3¼% down on the preceding quarter in 
seasonally adjusted terms. At 4¼%, there was 
a larger-than-average decline in the case of 
capital goods. This was due mainly to the fact 
that automotive production was cut back by 
8% following an exceptionally high level 
achieved in the third quarter owing to shorter 
holiday-related plant shutdowns. Furthermore, 
manufacturers of machinery and equipment as 
well as manufacturers of computers, electronic and optical products and electrical equipment, at 3¼% and 5% respectively, reined back their output on a considerable scale. This contrasted with the manufacture of other transport equip-ment, where there was a marked expansion in 
output in order to quickly satisfy the relatively 
buoyant demand of more recent months. In the 
intermediate goods sector, the fourth quarter 
saw a seasonally adjusted 2¾% fall in output, following on from what was already a distinct decline in the summer months. Output of con-sumer goods in the reporting period showed a relatively minor fall on the quarter (-¾%).
The decline in output in the fourth quarter is 
consistent with the data collected by the Ifo In-
stitute on manufacturing capacity utilisation, 
which showed a marked reduction at the be -
ginning of the reporting quarter compared with the middle of the year. In January 2013, 
enterprises reported a slight increase in utilisa-
tion for the current quarter. Nevertheless, at 
just over 82% of full operational capacity util -
isation, it was still distinctly below its long-term 
average. The improvement in capacity utilisa -
tion is due mainly to producers of intermediate goods. Utilisation in the capital goods sector at the current end, however, is still well below its long-term average.Housing 
 construction tending to be no longer quite so expansionary
Further subdued 
increase  
in private  consumptionVery steep drop in industrial  output
Industrial 
 capacity below normal  utilisationDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report 
February 2013  
48

Seasonally adjusted construction output in the 
fourth quarter of 2012, at 2¾%, was well 
down on the summer months. This was due 
chiefly to a sharp fall in construction activity in 
December. This could be explained by the fact that, following the interruption due to ice and 
snow in the first half of the month, construc -
tion firms did not resume production until after the end of the year.
1 The decline in civil engin-
eering, at 4¼%, was significantly sharper than 
in building construction (-2%). Seasonally ad -
justed energy production in the fourth quarter 
failed to match the heightened level of the 
summer months (-1¾%).
Business activity in the services sector may have 
eased somewhat in the final quarter of 2012 as a result of weak output in the production sec-tor. One indication of this is provided by assess-
ments of the business situation, which were 
scaled back moderately according to Ifo Insti -
tute and Centre for European Economic Re -
search (ZEW) data. Mainly industry-related ser -
vices are likely to have been impeded. For ex-
ample, the seasonally adjusted mileage of heavy goods vehicles on roads subject to toll 
charges suggests that the transport sector was 
also affected. Information on sales currently available only for October and November shows that the motor vehicle trade also suf
-
fered losses. Wholesale turnover remained at 
the considerably lower level of the third quar -
ter. Business also declined in some consump -
tion-related service sectors, however. There was a moderate fall in retail sales. Moreover, 
the turnover of hotels and restaurants failed to 
hold up at the level of the third quarter. Con -
struction-related service providers continued to 
benefit from the high level of activity in the 
construction sector.
Employment  
and labour  market
The cyclical slowdown has hardly left any mark 
on the labour market so far. The data, which have been revised several times over the past few months,2 now show that the level of em-
ployment in the final quarter of 2012 was 24,000, or 0.1%, higher than the average of 
the third quarter. It was mainly jobs subject to High year-end 
level of con-struction output not maintained, energy produc-tion also down
Activity in the 
services sector  
in the wake of weak industrial output
Sideways move-
ment in the  labour marketOutput in industry andin construction
Deutsche Bundesbank2008 2009 2010 2011 2012Log scale
Industry
92100108116124
Lin scale
Year-on-year change–25–20–15–10–50+5+10+15
Lin scale
Year-on-year
change
94100108116124 Log scale
Construction
%
–15–10–50+5+10+15+20+25+30+35%2005 = 100, seasonally adjusted, quarterly
1 Measured by the Ifo Institute’s survey findings on the 
scale of production stoppages due to weather-related fac-tors, the outcome for December 2012 is not above average on a seasonal comparison. The same applies on a monthly analysis to the number of ice days. However, this time they were all in the first half of December. Furthermore, the Ifo 
Institute also conducts a monthly survey of the utilisation 
of construction equipment in this sector; in December, it 
was well down in seasonally adjusted terms on the cyclic-ally high level of the second and third quarters.2 Following a downward revision in November, the Federal 
Statistical Office has revised the data on employment 
 upwards considerably twice in quick succession, especially 
for the second half of the year.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report 
February 2013  
49

social security contributions that were filled. By 
contrast, there was a decline in self-employment 
and in “one euro” jobs owing to reduced la -
bour market policy assistance. The level of per -
sons solely in marginal employment has not 
been showing a clear trend for some while.
There was a seasonally adjusted 49,000, or 
0.2%, increase in employment subject to social 
security contributions in the fourth quarter. This 
was due chiefly to the business services sectors 
(excluding temporary agency employment), 
which grew by 1¼%. Health and education services were still making a positive contribu
-
tion, at +¼%, although there will be no further strong surges in employment in this sector for 
the time being. There was a slight increase in 
manufacturing despite the setback in this sec -
tor’s activity. The effects of weak industrial out-put on the labour markets are reflected, above 
all, by the fact that temporary employment 
went down by a further 2¾% in October and 
November after declining by a total of 5% in 
the second and third quarters.
In the reporting period, the seasonally adjusted 
official unemployment figure was 27,000 
higher than in the third quarter. This meant that the number of persons out of work rose to 2.93 million, with the unemployment rate 
going up by 0.1 percentage point to 6.9%. In 
mathematical terms, the increase was due en-
tirely to a rise in the number of unemployed persons claiming insurance benefits, where 
cyclical factors, as a rule, first make themselves noticeable. Considering the fact that aggregate 
capacity utilisation, given the considerable losses in the final quarter of the year, has, at 
best, just about held up in its normal range, the still low level of 951,000 persons is remarkable. There was a slight decline in the number of un-
employed persons receiving the basic welfare 
allowance. This means that adverse cyclical ef-fects have not yet made themselves felt in the subsequent transfer system.
Total underemployment, which also includes persons involved in labour market policy Employment 
subject to  
social security contributions  
on the up
Further rise  
in registered 
 unemployment between  October and  DecemberLabour market
1 Excluding  seasonal  jobs  and jobs  located  abroad.  2 From 
May  2009,  unemployed  excluding  persons  newly  registered  on 
the books of private employment agencies.
Deutsche Bundesbank2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013Jan39.540.040.541.041.542.0
26.527.027.528.028.529.0–5000+500+1,000
2.53.03.54.04.5
–1,000–5000+500JanSeasonally adjusted, quarterly
JanMillion
Oct-
NovMillion
Million200300400500Thou-
sand
Thou-
sand
Thou-
sand Year-on-year changeOfficially unemployed 2UnemployedTotalEmployed
Unsubsidised vacancies 1
(scale enlarged)Occupied positionsJobs subject to social security
contributionsYear-on-year changeDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report 
February 2013  
50

 measures, showed no further fall during the 
fourth quarter. This meant that there was a 
break in the sustained decline in underemploy-
ment; to a large extent, this was due to a re -
duction in employment agency measures – es-
pecially work opportunities and promoting 
self-employment – in the context of the favour -
able situation on the labour market. In the 
 reporting period, there was a moderate expan-
sion of instruments to get unemployed persons 
(back) into work. Somewhat greater use was 
also made of short-time working. Even so, 70,000 persons working short time for eco
-
nomic reasons in November points to a low 
takeup from a macroeconomic perspective, 
 especially as there has been no further increase 
in registrations since September.
January 2013 saw a marked decline in the sea-
sonally adjusted official unemployment figure 
for the first time since the beginning of 2012, 
and the unemployment rate fell to 6.8%. One 
factor in this may be that the figures were col-lected before the cold spell in the middle of the 
month and that weather-related dampening effects were therefore not as strong as they 
usually are in January otherwise. However, it is also possible that firms have been guided over 
the past few months more by their medium-
term recruiting needs.
The leading labour market indicators are pro -
viding further evidence that there has been an 
increase in firms’ willingness to recruit new staff since the autumn. The Ifo employment barometer has been pointing upwards since November, for example, after going down slowly from an all-time high for almost two years.
3 By contrast, the Federal Employment 
Agency’s BA-X job index was still showing a 
slight decline in the final quarter of 2012. This was probably due mainly to the fall in demand 
in temporary employment, since this sector generally accounts for many of the jobs on offer. Apart from temporary employment, va
-
cancies are largely stable; even so, the number 
of vacancies in manufacturing was somewhat 
lower than in the preceding quarter.Wages and prices
Growth in negotiated rates of pay in the final 
quarter of 2012, at 2.8%, were just as high as in the third quarter. The annual increase in the agreed basic rates of pay fell slightly from 2.9% 
to 2.8%, however.4 In the forthcoming major 
pay round, the trade unions will evidently be attaching importance again to large pay in
-
creases. The wage and salary claims published so far are no lower than those last year.
Developments in earnings in the past year were 
shaped by the overall positive situation in the 
economy and on the labour market. In 2012, 
actual earnings rose only slightly more strongly, 
at 2.6%, than did negotiated rates of pay at 
2.5%. The total amount of bonus payments 
was thus probably at much the same level as in 2011. For some time now, overall growth in ne-
gotiated rates of pay has not differed signifi -
cantly from the rise in basic rates of pay. This is 
due to the fact that pay rounds over the past 
two years have, for the most part, seen per -
manent increases in wages and salaries with one-off payments being a factor only in isol
-
ated cases.
Despite the sideways movement of crude oil prices and the recovery in the euro exchange 
rate, there was a marked quarter-on-quarter in-crease in prices at all stages of the economy in 
the final three months of 2012. Import prices for energy showed quite a sharp increase on Interruption of 
the sustained decline in under-employment
Further fall in 
registered un-employment in January 2013
Labour market 
outlook less  encumberedContinuing strong growth in 
negotiated pay
Actual earnings 
and negotiated pay almost in step in 2012
Rise in import 
prices and pro-ducer prices
3 In December 2012, the Ifo employment barometer was 
published for the first time based on an extended reporting 
population. Besides trade and industry (ie manufacturing, 
construction, as well as the wholesale and retail trades), data on the short-term employment plans of business-related services are now incorporated when the index is 
calculated. The new index goes back to the year 2002. The 
fact that the time series of the new index is less volatile 
than that of the old one can be explained by the generally 
lower susceptibility to fluctuations of employment move -
ments in the services sector. At the current end, the index curves in the new and old definitions are very similar apart from a difference in level.
4 The Federal Statistical Office reports a 3.1% increase in 
negotiated basic rates of pay in the fourth quarter, com -
pared with 3.2% in the third quarter. Differences compared with the Bundesbank’s pay index result from the fact that the Federal Statistical Office does not include civil servants in its index and reports only the first month of each quarter.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report 
February 2013  
51

the quarter in seasonally adjusted terms, as the 
temporary weakness in the crude oil markets in 
June was still being reflected in the import prices for July. In the case of intermediate goods, the improved outlook for global eco
-
nomic activity was countering the appreciation of the euro. The prices of imported capital and 
consumer goods fell, however, owing to the 
exchange rate. At the domestic producer level, 
the lower percentage of crude oil meant that 
the rise in energy prices was much more sub -
dued than in the case of imports. Otherwise, the underlying producer price movements 
showed themselves to be less favourable than 
at the import level. Overall, seasonally adjusted 
import prices were 0.4% up on the quarter, 
with a corresponding rise of 0.5% in producer 
prices. The increase in export sales prices was 
smaller, at 0.2%. The terms of trade eased only 
slightly. They were slightly up on the previous 
year’s level, however. The annual rate of in -
crease for import prices fell further to 1.0%, 
while the year-on-year figure for domestic pro-
ducer prices went up again slightly to 1.5% fol-
lowing a low in the third quarter.
Although demand on the housing markets re -
mained quite buoyant, the rise in housing con-
struction prices, at 0.3%, was moderate like in 
the previous quarter. The annual rate was un-
changed at 2.5%. This may reflect the fact that the rise in material costs eased off during the 
year. According to the Association of German 
Pfandbrief Banks (Verband deutscher Pfand -
briefbanken), the price index for owner-occupied 
housing went up by 1% compared with the third quarter. The annual rate was 3½%. The 
sharp price increase that began in the previous 
year thus persisted in 2012 (more information 
on developments in the real estate markets 
and, in particular, house prices in 2012 may be found on pages 53 to 55).
In seasonally adjusted terms, the increase in consumer prices in the final quarter, at 0.5%, was just as sharp as in the previous quarter. 
Falling prices for refined oil products contrasted with considerable price rises for food. This un-
favourable price development was due mainly 
to the world markets, although domestic distri-bution costs are likely to have risen as well. On an average of 2012, food prices went up by no less than 3.2%. In the case of other goods, the seasonally adjusted rate of price increase in the reporting period was 0.6% on the quarter. Al-
though price rises for semi-durable consumer 
goods were very subdued in the third quarter, 
this was more than offset afterwards. Prices for services (excluding rents) increased only slightly to 0.4%. Despite reports of sharp rent increases 
in some towns and cities, the increase in the 
official rent index remained moderate. One fac-tor in this is that existing rents play a dominant 
role in movements of the rent index; existing 
rents follow rents for new lettings with a major 
time lag and a lower amplitude. Consumer prices showed an overall annual increase of 
2.0% according to both the national Consumer 
Price Index (CPI) and the Harmonised Index of 
Consumer Prices (HICP). The annual average rate of CPI inflation was also 2.0%. The HICP 
figure was somewhat higher at 2.1% Excluding 
energy and food –  on which price increases were concentrated  – the rate was no more 
than 1.3%.
As the consumer price index has been rebased 
on a new basket of goods for 2010, more pre-
cise information on price developments in Construction 
and property prices still risingContinuing rise 
in consumer 
pricesNegotiated rates of pay
1 Excluding additional benefits and lump-sum payments.
Deutsche Bundesbank2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 201200.51.01.52.02.53.03.5Year-on-year percentage change, on monthly basis
Negotiated
rates of pay,total
Basic pay
 1Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report 
February 2013  
52

House prices in 2012 in Germany
The strong upward movement in house 
prices in Germany continued in 2012. Al-
though the rise in house prices slowed down 
somewhat in major cities and urban centres 
compared with 2011, it became conspicu-ously more broadly based. The price stimuli spread from towns and cities to their sur-rounding areas, from new dwellings to second-hand residential property and from apartments to single-family houses. There 
was also a discernible pick-up in momentum in the housing rental market. The underlying evasive movements, along with the still sub-
stantial growth in the housing stock, are counteracting the strained situation in the booming submarkets. However, the macro-economic risks potentially linked with strongly rising house prices continue un-diminished owing not least to the upward 
pressure on prices being spread more broadly.
Calculations based on data provided by Bul-
wienGesa AG for 125 towns and cities 
show that house prices in 2012 rose 5¼% 
on the year. House price infl  ation was there-
fore virtually just as strong as in 2011 
(+5½%). The price rises reported for the 
125 towns and cities are likely to have still 
exceeded the average for Germany as a 
whole. In 2012, owing to the regional spill-
over effects, the differential was probably 
no longer as large as in 2011 when it stood 
at 2¾ percentage points, as measured by the rate of change in the overall index (413  towns and municipalities), which is available only at a later date. With this 
qualifi  cation, the picture is consistent with 
the trend acceleration that can be seen in 
other price indicators which are fairly repre-
sentative of the market as a whole.1 Ac-
cording to data provided by the Association of German Pfandbrief Banks (Verband deut-scher Pfandbriefbanken, vdp), the prices for 
owner-occupied housing rose by 3% in 2012, compared with 2½% in the previous year.
2 The Hypoport composite index shows 
that house prices rose by 5% in 2012, com-pared with 3½% in 2011.
The regional profi  le and a look at the differ-
ent market segments clearly show that in 
2012 the distribution of property price in-creases displayed less of a peak than in 
2011. The sharpest price increases are still in 
owner-occupied apartments in large cities of over 500,000 inhabitants. The price 
 acceleration of newly constructed housing 
in 2012, at 7%, was still perceptibly lower 
than the 10% leap in prices in 2011. By con-
trast, not only existing owner-occupied apartments, but also terraced housing 
showed a signifi  cant increase in 2011. The 
largest price rises for owner-occupied apart-ments occurred in towns and cities of fewer than 250,000 inhabitants, even though up-
ward price pressure there was still discern-
ibly weaker than in larger urban centres.3 
1 The indicators differ from one another mainly in their 
regional coverage and in the way they record the dif-
ferent types of dwelling. They also display differences 
in the way in which the data are compiled. See the information on house prices in the Bundesbank’s 
Monthly Reports of February 2009 (pp 52-53) and Feb-ruary 2010 (pp 58-59).2 The broadly based house price index of the Federal 
Statistical Offi   ce, which at present does not provide 
data beyond the reporting year 2011, reveals a slower pace for Germany as a whole compared with the data 
for 125 towns and cities. See J Dechent, Preisindizes 
für Wohnimmobilien, Wirtschaft und Statistik, October 2012, p 891ff.3 In the price data for medium-sized university towns and cities, in which students make up at least 15% of 
the resident population, the special effect due to the 
temporary sharp rise in demand for housing brought 
about by the double intake of fi  nal-year secondary 
school pupils and the suspension of compulsory mili-
tary service is clearly visible. Prices of owner-occupied 
apartments in these towns and cities have risen by a 
total of roughly 10% over the past two years, for ex-
ample. In all the recorded towns and cities of fewer 
than 250,000 inhabitants, which includes the univer-
sity towns under consideration with the exception of 
Münster, price increases were signifi  cantly lower at 
just under 8%.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report 
February 2013  
53

With regard to the 125 towns and cities, 
the dispersion of the house price rises was 
somewhat lower than in the previous year. 
Furthermore, there was also a smaller num-
ber of towns and cities with declining or 
unchanged property prices.
In the reporting year, the acceleration in the 
prices of new residential property largely 
converged with the price trend for pre-owned property (around 5% again), 
after being noticeably higher, at more than 
6%, in the previous year. Given the uniform 
price developments in the construction sec-
tor over the past two years, the easing of 
the exceptional upward price pressure in the case of newly constructed housing may have 
been linked to the fact that property devel-
opers as well as general contractors active in 
apartment construction, which is booming at present, have no longer been able to 
maintain profi  t margins at the same level as 
when housing construction was just begin-
ning to pick up. At that time, after years of 
market consolidation, there was a favour-able opportunity to increase the depressed 
profi  t margins by raising prices sharply.
The upturn in the housing market affected 
not only owner-occupied housing, but also 
the rental sector. Rents for new lettings of 
existing housing showed a further marked 
rise in 2012. According to data provided by 
BulwienGesa AG for 125 towns and cities, 
the increase stood at 4¾% on average in 
the case of new dwellings and at 3½% for re-rentals. Since 2010, the increase in rents has been roughly four times higher for new 
dwellings, and roughly three times higher 
for existing dwellings than on an average of the preceding decade. So far, however, the increase falls a long way short of matching 
the price rises of the early 1990s.4 Rental 
property prices in large towns and cities 
rose particularly sharply. Rents for new let-
tings have a major signalling function for investors as they play a key part in deter-
mining the expected return on investment 
and, thus, the future housing supply. The 
regulation of rents distorts the price-setting 
process and should be considered only if 
there are good reasons for doing so.5 Limit-
ing the amount by which rents can be in-
4 According to the price index of the Association of 
German Pfandbrief Banks (Verband deutscher Pfand-
briefbanken, vdp), which was published for the fi  rst 
time in October 2012, rental increases for new lettings 
of apartments in multiple-family dwellings, at 2¾%, 
were much steeper than the average at any other time since the start of the time series in 2003.5 In the case of existing rental contracts, rents can be increased only to a limited extent so as not to override 
regulations for the protection of tenants. Rents for 
new lettings, on the other hand, can largely be nego-tiated freely.Selected house price indices
1 Bundesbank  calculations  for terraced  houses  and 
owner-occupied  apartments  based  on data  provided  by 
BulwienGesa AG.
Deutsche Bundesbank2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 20122010 = 100, annual values, log scale
9296100104108112116
96100104 104108
96100104 104108112
96100104108
Federal Statistical Office (Destatis)
house price indexHypoport composite indexvdp price index for
owner-occupied housingDeutsche Bundesbank 1
7 major cities413 towns and
municipalities
125 towns
and cities
quarterlyDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report 
February 2013  
54

creased harbours considerable risks in terms 
of distorting market incentives for the cre-
ation of new residential property, which is 
still necessary given the widespread excess 
demand.
The expansion of the housing supply is 
making headway in response to the some-
times marked rises in rent and property 
prices. Construction of apartment blocks 
has increased signifi  cantly in importance of 
late compared with the construction of 
new owner-occupied housing. Building per-
mits for three-family and multiple-family 
dwellings with a total of just under 100,000 living units were granted in 2012, compared with 85,000 in 2011. By contrast, the num-
ber of new permits for single-family and 
two-family houses remained unchanged at 
around 110,000 units per year.
Even so, taking into account departures from the housing stock owing to demoli-tion and conversion, the provision of new residential property is hardly likely to have 
been suffi   cient to bring about a perceptible easing of the situation on the housing mar-kets. A further surge in demand was gener-
ated by the fact that the resident popula-tion in Germany grew by an estimated 
200,000 persons in 2012 due to strong im-
migration, which probably led to the cre-
ation of a large number of new households. 
Germany’s attractiveness for non-residents 
is relevant for the German property market, 
but not just in terms of migration effects. Investors with a positive equity-to-debt 
ratio still seem to be fi  nding suitable prop-
erty for investment in Germany. Moreover, 
both effects are concentrated on the major 
urban centres. Immigrants are primarily  attracted to economically prosperous re-gions with good employment opportun-ities. Furthermore, foreign investors are 
likely to prefer the relatively transparent and 
liquid housing markets of large towns and 
cities in order to minimise the costs of gath-ering information on the market environ-
ment.
Furthermore, the exceptionally favourable fi  nancing conditions are stimulating hous-
ing demand to a considerable extent. On an annual average, banks were granting loans 
for house purchase at an interest rate of 3¼% in 2012, with the average rate for mortgage loans with a fi  ve to ten-year 
interest rate fi  xation even falling below 3% 
in the second half of the year. The initial interest and redemption burden declined again considerably, however, despite the 
generally greater volume of borrowing due to higher house prices. Property ownership 
is therefore becoming increasingly attract-
ive not only as an alternative to renting, but 
also – based on standard calculation prin-ciples – as an affordable option for more 
and more households with limited income 
opportunities and heightened employment 
risks.
A watch therefore needs to be kept on this 
specifi  c set of circumstances so as to pre-
vent a major misallocation of resources, which could place a future strain on the housing markets and the economy as a 
whole. If the exceptionally favourable inter-est rate conditions persist, the risk of a lack 
of long-term debt sustainability could be counteracted by requiring stricter loan-to-
value ratios. The practice of some banks to demand higher repayments from the outset is also proving helpful in this context. In the fi  ndings of the Bank Lending Survey, this is 
refl  ected in a perceptible tightening of credit standards for loans for house pur-
chase over the past year.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report 
February 2013  
55

January 2013 will not be available until the end 
of February. According to provisional data, 
there was a 1.7% annual increase in consumer 
prices. The corresponding HICP figure was 
1.9%.
Orders received and outlook
Business expectations in the German economy 
have recovered quite rapidly and to a remark -
able extent in the past three months. One key 
factor in the turnaround in sentiment is that 
fears of extreme scenarios for future develop -
ments in the euro area are fading. This means 
that there is a greater prospect of gradually 
overcoming the distinctly tentative attitude to 
investment, which is difficult to reconcile with 
the medium-term outlook for growth. Never -
theless, major dampening factors persist in the 
external environment, particularly the severe 
adjustment recessions in parts of the euro area. 
Under these circumstances, the glimmer of 
hope afforded by the gradual firming of the global economy cannot, by itself, be seen as 
having the force to provide an initial spark for a far-reaching upturn in demand.
As things stand, overall economic output can 
nevertheless be expected to increase in the first quarter of 2013. This view is supported by the 
probability of a countermovement, particularly 
in industry, in response to the considerable ad-
justments in production towards the end of 
2012. This is supported by the brighter business outlook and the fact that orders from markets 
outside Europe are tending to improve. Hous -
ing construction and private consumption are 
components of domestic d  emand which are 
still expansionary. Although they cannot bring 
the economy back onto a path of growth on 
their own, they can do so together with stimuli 
to the export sector gradually becoming 
stronger.
According to the Ifo surveys, the business out-
look for trade and industry has shown a marked 
improvement since November 2012. In manu -Improved out -
look, but no 
far-reaching  revival in sight
Countermove-
ment in GDP likely in 2013 Q1
Marked 
 improvement  
in business  expectationsExport pricesImport, export, producer, construction and consumer prices
1 Producer  price  index  for industrial  products  in domestic  sales. 
2 Not  seasonally  adjusted,  quarterly.  3 National  consumer 
price index.
Deutsche Bundesbank2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012100105110115120125
105110115120
105110115 115120125
100105110115
10123
–+++2005 = 100, seasonally adjusted, monthly
Lin scale
Year-on-year change 2Consumer prices3Construction
prices2Producer prices1Import pricesLog scale
%100105110115Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report 
February 2013  
56

facturing, this was associated with a more op-
timistic outlook for exports again. The improve-ment is not yet broadly based in industry, how-
ever. This is shown by negative reports to the 
Ifo Institute still being in the majority on bal -
ance and by roughly two-thirds of the surveyed 
firms reporting an unchanged outlook. Inter -
estingly, the expectation component in the sur -
vey findings for the construction sector, the 
wholesale and retail trades and the surveyed 
services subsectors is displaying a quite syn -
chronous upward movement starting from 
completely different positions. This suggests 
that the movement is due more to the general 
underlying economic conditions rather than 
sector-specific factors.
The latest DIHK survey, too, shows that the 
brighter economic outlook is due essentially to 
assessments of export prospects being more optimistic again. The major uncertainty that 
characterised corporate sentiment in the fourth 
quarter of last year has not entirely receded. The easing of the situation has nevertheless meant that there have been no further revi
-
sions to investment and employment plans.
Current developments in industrial orders con-
firm that it is largely only firms exporting to 
countries outside Europe which have felt the 
effects of the upturn so far. In the final quarter of 2012, there was a sharp seasonally adjusted 
increase in orders from outside the euro area 
(+3%). This was due partly to a higher demand 
for intermediate goods (+1¾%). Nevertheless, 
the capital goods sector had a larger share in 
growth with a substantial number of major 
orders. Added to this was the fact that, follow-ing a dip in the third quarter, demand for motor 
vehicles returned almost to the very high level 
of the second quarter of 2012. Given the con-tinuing gloomy situation in the economy, which is now increasingly taking hold in France, Ger -
many’s main trading partner, the volume of orders from the euro area persisted at a very 
low level, as it had done in the three preceding 
quarters. The fact that there was a pick-up in 
demand for capital goods in the euro area as a New DIHK 
 survey
Increase in 
 export orders 
confined to  
non-euro-area  marketsDemand for industrial goods and construction work
Deutsche Bundesbank2008 2009 2010 2011 20128090100110120130
–40–30–20–1000+10+20+30
100110120130
758090100
100110120
8090100
Oct-
Nov
Oct-
Nov90100110120
–20–100+10+20Volume, 2005 = 100, seasonally adjusted, quarterly
Log scale
DomesticForeign
Lin scale
Year-on-year changeTotal construction orders
%Total industrial ordersLog scale
%
Lin scale
Year-on-year
changeDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report 
February 2013  
57

whole, was due essentially to a large number 
of orders being placed again in the context of 
combined European production of aircraft and 
spacecraft, while orders of motor vehicles, ma-
chinery and other equipment showed a further 
decline. Moreover, orders of intermediate 
goods from the euro area were only marginally up on the quarter.
The fourth quarter of 2012 saw the inflow of 
domestic orders continuing its downward trend of one-and-a-half years with a figure that was 
almost 1% down on the preceding three-month period. Weak domestic investment made itself felt mainly in the order books of 
automotive manufacturers with a further sharp 
fall in the intake (-4¼%), while things were somewhat better in mechanical engineering 
owing to a number of large-scale orders at the end of the year (+2¼%). Domestic demand for intermediate goods in the period from October 
to December was not as high as in the third 
quarter owing to a smaller intake of orders in 
the chemicals industry and by manufacturers of electrical equipment. The decline in the case of consumer goods was considerable at 3¼%.
The construction sector continues to enjoy fa -
vourable conditions for demand. This is due, first, to the large need for housing construc -
tion. Second, October saw more orders being 
placed for large-scale private and public civil 
engineering projects. This is helping to improve 
capacity utilisation for some time precisely in 
those construction subsectors that are tending 
to be less favoured by the current economic 
environment. In housing construction, the shift in focus from owner-occupied homes to build-ing new multi-family dwellings became notice-ably more accentuated towards the end of last 
year. The number of approved apartments in October and November was 3% up on the 
average of the third quarter, whereas the num-
ber of approved single-family and two-family 
houses fell by one-eighth.
It can be assumed that private consumption is 
continuing to support economic activity. This is 
suggested by the decidedly favourable con -
sumer climate and the high propensity to pur -
chase. Owing to the positive labour market 
situation and considerable growth in earnings, 
consumers remain very optimistic about their 
income expectations despite negative reporting 
on the economy. They now appear to be as -
sessing the economic setting with more confi-dence, too, however.Continuing 
downward trend in domestic ordersConstruction  demand remains buoyant
Private con-sumption still a mainstay of eco-nomic activityDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report 
February 2013  
58

Public Finances*
General government budget
The underyling situation for public finances in 
Germany remained favourable in 2012. The 
particularly good financing conditions were complemented by relatively high employment and low unemployment as well as ongoing strong momentum in profit-related taxes. 
Against this background, general government 
posted a small budget surplus for the first time 
since 2007. A breakdown of the overall result 
shows that a still marked deficit run up by cen-
tral and state governments was eclipsed by a 
surplus generated by the social security funds. 
Overall, the fiscal balance stood at +0.1% of 
gross domestic product (GDP), compared with 
-0.8% in 2011. The cyclical impact on the fiscal 
balance in 2012 remained roughly as positive 
as in 2011 because key macroeconomic aggre-gates for public finances (gross wages and sal-
aries, unemployment) were barely affected by 
the considerable slowdown in GDP growth.1 
The structural balance thus improved by around 1% of GDP compared with 2011 (for more de-tailed information see the box on pages 60 and 
61). Nonetheless, a structural deficit – albeit a 
small one – remains in terms of the level.2
The revenue ratio rose distinctly from 44.5% in 2011 to 45.1% in 2012. This was primarily due to the favourable growth structure and the mo-
mentum in profit-related taxes. The expend -
iture ratio fell from 45.3% to 45.0%. This de -
cline was primarily attributable to the moderate annualised pension increase, lower labour mar -
ket spending, the phasing-out of the 2009 stimulus programme and low interest rates. 
Conversely, the relatively moderate GDP growth in the denominator tended to lessen the reduc-tion of the debt ratio.
The final debt ratio figure for 2012 is not yet 
available. At the end of the third quarter, it had 
risen to 81.7% and is likely to have remained at 
around that level at year-end (2011: 80.5%). The increase can be attributed to the support 
measures in the euro area (EFSF loans, ESM 
capital injections), which totalled around €45 billion.
3 In general, the measures taken since 
2008 to stabilise the euro area and to support German financial institutions have considerably 
inflated the general government debt ratio. 
 Although these support measures were accom-
panied in most cases by the acquisition of 
 financial assets, their intrinsic value is subject to 
considerable uncertainty.
As things stand at the moment, the general 
government surplus looks set to revert to a def-
icit in the current year that could amount to 
½% of GDP . The slowdown in economic activ-
ity can be expected to erode the positive cyc -
lical influence from 2012, thereby revealing the existing structural deficit. No major changes in the structural deficit are apparent in 2013 vis-à-vis 2012. On the one hand, the pension contri-bution rate has been lowered in order to bring 
the reserves back down below the maximum permissible level. Additionally, the moderate 
loosening of fiscal policy is being continued by 
way of new budgetary burdens that are not Small surplus  
in 2012 amid 
 favourable  conditions
Rising revenue 
ratio, falling  expenditure ratio
Support meas-
ures probably pushed up debt ratio in 20122013: fiscal  balance set to 
worsen, debt ratio to improve
* The analysis in the “General government budget” section is based on data contained in the national accounts and on 
the Maastricht ratios. The subsequent reporting on the 
budgets of the various levels of government and social se-
curity schemes is based on the figures as defined in the 
government’s financial statistics (which are generally in line with the budget accounts).
1 For the cyclical adjustment method, see Deutsche Bun -
desbank, A disaggregated framework for analysing public 
finances: Germany’s fiscal track record between 2000 and 2005, Monthly Report, March 2006, pp 61-76.2 By contrast, the Federal Government perceives a slightly negative cyclical influence for 2012. But in view of the de-
velopment of the relevant macroeconomic aggregates, in 
particular, it seems more plausible to assume that cyclical 
factors provided marked relief for the central government 
budget.3 By contrast, the rise in the debt ratio was slowed by the 
small budget surplus and nominal GDP growth of 2% (in 
the ratio’s denominator). Furthermore, various financial 
transactions occurred last year concerning, inter alia, reso-lution agencies assigned to the general government sector (accelerated portfolio reduction, on the one hand, and the 
further assumption of liabilities and claims in the wake of 
resolving the public regional bank WestLB, on the other). 
However, the overall results are not yet available.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report 
February 2013  
59

The structural development of public fi  nances in Germany – 
results of the disaggregated framework for 2012
According to provisional data from the Fed-
eral Statistical Offi   ce, Germany’s general 
government defi  cit (as defi  ned in the na-
tional accounts) was completely eliminated in 2012. Following a defi  cit in 2011 of 0.8% 
of gross domestic product (GDP), a slight 
surplus of 0.1% of GDP was achieved. Using 
the “disaggregated framework” for analys-
ing public fi  nances,1 it is possible, fi  rst, to 
estimate the role played by cyclical and  specifi  c temporary effects. Second, other changes, referred to here as structural, in the revenue and expenditure ratios and 
their major determinants can be identifi  ed. 
The main results of this analysis for 2012 are presented below.
2
The results show that cyclical developments 
played no role in the decline in the defi  cit 
ratio. At fi  rst glance, the relatively weak rate 
of GDP growth suggests a negative infl  u-ence; however, key macroeconomic refer-ence variables for revenue (primarily gross wages and salaries) developed far more  stably. Clearly identifi  able specifi  c tempor-ary effects were also insignifi  cant.
3 As a 
 result, the structural defi  cit ratio, adjusted for both cyclical effects and specifi  c tem-
porary  effects and set in relation to nominal 
trend GDP , decreased by 0.9 percentage point in 2012. However, it was not com-pletely eliminated and still stood at just 
under ½%.
The unadjusted revenue ratio climbed by 0.5 percentage point, whereas the struc-tural ratio rose only slightly, by 0.2 per-centage point. Non-tax revenue caused a 0.2 percentage point decline in the struc-tural ratio – owing in part to the Bundes-
bank’s lower profi  t distribution. The trends 
of the macroeconomic categories particu-larly relevant to government revenue virtu-
ally tracked trend growth of nominal GDP , 
and the middle-term growth structure was 
thus neutral in terms of the structural ratio. 
Legislative changes reduced the ratio 
slightly (-0.1 percentage point), primarily 
due to the lowering of the pension contri-
bution rate. By contrast, fi  scal drag in-
creased the ratio by around the same amount. Leaving aside the factors men-
tioned, the structural revenue ratio grew by 
0.4 percentage point (residual). This is largely attributable to the fact that, as in 
2011, revenue from profi  t-related taxes 
grew faster than can be explained by the development of entrepreneurial and prop-erty income (which serves as the macro-economic reference variable) and the esti-
mated impact of legislative changes. Conse-quently, the plunge in revenue from profi  t-related taxes ascribed to this residual in the 
recession year of 2009 was more than made good in the following years up 
to 2012. Fluctuating residuals such as these have also been observed in the past and are particularly related to the fact that the mod-
elled lag structures do not fully refl  ect the complex pattern of advance tax payments 
and net backpayments, while the reference 
variable does not adequately capture the 
volatility of the actual tax base.
1 For a more detailed description of the framework, 
including the standardised method of determining the 
cyclical component used in the European System of 
Central Banks, see Deutsche Bundesbank, A disaggre-
gated framework for analysing public fi  nances: Ger-
many’s fi  scal track record between 2000 and 2005, 
Monthly Report, March 2006, pp 61-76.
2 These results are subject to amendments arising 
from revisions to the national account fi  gures or to 
 estimates of the macroeconomic outlook.3 In this analysis, the impact of support measures for 
fi  nancial institutions on the defi  cit is not included 
among the specifi  c temporary effects.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report 
February 2013  
60

The unadjusted expenditure ratio dropped 
by 0.3 percentage point in 2012, while the 
structural ratio showed an even stronger 
decrease of 0.6 percentage point. The inter-
est expenditure ratio declined given the 
 favourable fi  nancing conditions.4 The struc-
tural ratio of primary expenditure fell by 
0.5 percentage point. Social spending made 
a noticeable contribution to the decline 
owing to a continuing structural drop in 
 labour market-related spending and moder-ately increasing pension payments. Another 
factor pushing down expenditure was the 
phasing-out of economic stimulus measures 
related to the fi  nancial and economic crisis 
of 2008-09. These factors therefore consid-
erably outweighed the capital transfers from the government to the banking sector 
posted in connection with the liquidation of the public regional bank WestLB.
Overall, the analysis reveals that the further 
reduction of the defi  cit in the past year 
owes much to the surge in profi  t-related taxes. Other major factors were the sub-
dued rise in social spending and the expiry 
of temporary economic stimulus measures. 
By contrast, cyclical developments, which had a largely neutral impact on public 
 fi  nances, did not play a role.
4 The determinants of the change in the interest ex-
penditure ratio are not shown because the debt ratio 
for 2012 is not yet available.Structural development*
Year-on-year change in percentage points
Item 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012
Unadjusted fi  scal balance 1 1.7 1.9 – 0.3 – 3.0 – 1.1 3.4 0.9
Cyclical component 1 0.7 0.5 0.3 – 1.5 0.3 0.9 0.0
Temporary effects 1 – 0.1 0.0 – 0.2 0.2 0.2 – 0.2 0.0
Fiscal balance 1.1 1.4 – 0.5 – 1.5 – 1.6 2.6 0.9
Interest payable 0.1 0.0 – 0.1 – 0.2 – 0.1 0.1 – 0.1
Owing to change in average interest rate 0.0 0.1 – 0.1 – 0.3 – 0.3 – 0.1
Owing to change in debt level 0.1 0.0 0.0 0.1 0.2 0.2
Primary balance 1.2 1.4 – 0.5 – 1.8 – 1.7 2.7 0.7
Revenue 0.8 0.8 0.3 – 0.8 – 0.5 1.2 0.2
Taxes and social contributions 0.7 0.7 0.2 – 0.9 – 0.5 0.9 0.4
Fiscal drag 0.0 0.1 0.0 0.1 0.0 0.0 0.1
Decoupling of base from GDP – 0.1 – 0.3 0.2 – 0.1 0.2 0.3 0.0
Legislative changes 0.2 0.7 – 0.6 – 0.3 – 0.7 0.2 – 0.1
Residual 0.5 0.2 0.6 – 0.6 – 0.1 0.3 0.4
of which: profi  t-related taxes 2 0.4 0.2 0.5 – 0.6 0.2 0.3 0.3
Non-tax revenue 3 0.1 0.1 0.1 0.1 0.1 0.3 – 0.2
Primary expenditure – 0.4 – 0.6 0.8 1.0 1.2 – 1.5 – 0.5
Social payments 4 – 0.2 – 0.4 0.3 0.6 – 0.1 – 0.2 – 0.2
Subsidies 0.0 – 0.1 0.0 0.1 0.0 – 0.1 – 0.1
Compensation of employees – 0.1 – 0.2 0.0 0.2 0.0 0.0 – 0.1
Intermediate consumption 0.1 0.0 0.3 0.2 0.1 0.1 0.0
Gross fi  xed capital formation 0.1 0.1 0.1 0.1 0.0 0.0 – 0.2
Other expenditure 5 – 0.3 – 0.1 0.2 – 0.1 1.3 – 1.4 0.1
Memo item
Pension expenditure 6 – 0.1 – 0.3 0.0 0.0 0.0 – 0.1 – 0.2
Healthcare expenditure 7 0.1 0.1 0.2 0.3 0.0 0.1 0.1
Labour-market expenditure 8 – 0.1 – 0.2 0.1 0.0 – 0.2 – 0.3 – 0.2
* Adjusted for cyclical infl  uences and specifi  c temporary effects. Year-on-year change in the ratio to nominal trend GDP . 
 Maastricht defi  nition, ie including swaps and forward rate agreements in interest expenditure and the fi  scal balance. 1 Year-on-year change in the ratio to nominal GDP . 2 Assessed income tax, corporation tax, local business tax, investment income 
tax. 3 Other current transfers receivable, sales and total capital revenue. 4 Including other current transfers to households. 
5 Other current transfers payable to corporations and the rest of the world, other net acquisitions of non-fi  nancial assets and capital transfers payable. 6 Spending by the statutory pension insurance scheme, on civil servants’ pensions as well as pay-
ments by the Post Offi   ce Pension Fund and the Federal Railways Fund. 7 Spending by the statutory health insurance scheme 
and assistance towards civil servants’ healthcare costs. 8 Spending by the Federal Employment Agency (excluding the com-pensatory amount (up to 2007)/reintegration payment (from 2008) paid to central government) and central government ex-penditure on unemployment benefi  t II and on labour market reintegration measures.
Deutsche BundesbankDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report 
February 2013  
61

counterfinanced (such as the abolition of the 
surgery visit charge). On the other hand, there 
are various alleviating factors, such as the con-
tinuing beneficial financing conditions, which 
facilitate a favourable rollover of longer-dated 
debt instruments, in particular. By contrast, the debt ratio is likely to decline if – as expected – 
the budget deficit turns out to be small com -
pared with nominal GDP growth and, in con-
trast to last year, the redemption of liabilities at 
public resolution agencies outweighs any new 
burdens associated with stabilising the euro area and supporting German financial institu
-
tions.4Thanks to the unexpectedly buoyant under -
lying conditions for public finances in Germany, 
the government deficit has been eliminated 
much sooner than was initially expected in the 
light of the financial and economic crisis in 2008-09. Consequently, Germany’s budget situation is favourable by international stand
-
ards. Given Germany’s high debt ratio and 
foreseeable demographic burdens, however, it 
is nonetheless important for it to swiftly plug the remaining structural gaps in its central, 
state and local government budgets, especially 
as the present surpluses of the social security 
funds will not last. In particular, the long transi-
tional periods until Germany’s reformed budget 
rules kick in should be taken advantage of, at 
most, only by those state governments that 
face extraordinary budgetary imbalances which 
it is virtually impossible to rectify in the short 
term.5 In these instances, ambitious binding 
minimum steps for deficit reduction should be stipulated. The fiscal expansion that some com-
mentators are demanding of Germany does not appear to be appropriate. The automatic stabilisers already cushion the cyclical fluctu
-
ations in the German economy to a sufficient 
degree; moreover, any additional measures to 
stimulate domestic demand would have only a 
very limited impact on the European countries 
affected by adjustment recessions. All levels of 
government should therefore rigorously focus 
their efforts on achieving sound public fi -
nances. Furthermore, clear safety margins 
below the permanent constitutional borrowing limits should be factored in to account for the high degree of uncertainty involved in estimat-ing the structural budget position and to avoid the danger of subsequently having to pursue a procyclical budgetary policy.Government 
budgets should be consolidated quickly and safety margins built inGeneral government fiscal ratios *
* As defined  in the national  accounts.  1 Taxes  and social  con-
tributions  plus customs  duties  and the EU share  in VAT rev-
enue.
Deutsche Bundesbank39404142434445464748
–10+1+2+3+4As a percentage of GDP
Expenditure ratio
Revenue ratio
Taxes and social contributions
ratio 1
2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012Deficit ratio
4 This assessment is based, in particular, on the fundamen-tal assumptions that the slowdown in macroeconomic mo-
mentum will be short-lived and that the euro-area debt 
crisis will not escalate further.
5 For a differentiated analysis, see also Deutsche Bundes -
bank, The development of state government finances in Germany since 2005, Monthly Report, October 2012, 
p 29ff.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report 
February 2013  
62

Decisions of the Ecofi  n Council and the European Council 
on 13-14 December 2012
In the run-up to the European Council 
meeting on 13-14 December 2012, expect-
ations were raised of far-reaching decisions aimed at advancing towards a more closely integrated European Economic and Monet-
ary Union. In preparation for the summit, the President of the European Council, in collaboration with the Presidents of the 
European Commission, the Eurogroup and 
the European Central Bank, submitted a re-
port setting out a draft timetable of pro-gressive steps towards deeper integration 
of the Economic and Monetary Union in the areas of banking, budgetary policy and eco-
nomic policy as well as in terms of demo-
cratic legitimacy and accountability.1 The 
European Commission and the European 
Parliament also set down their ideas on the 
way forward.2 Prior to all this, some calm 
had been restored to the capital markets – 
in particular following the announcement that the Eurosystem was prepared to take sweeping measures if necessary, measures which implied not least a redistribution of private and sovereign solvency risk. In this context, the agreements presented by the European Council were very vague and more specifi  c details are required. At the 
end of the day, apart from the plans for a 
banking union, no other steps towards 
more far-reaching integration were agreed. 
This means there is currently only partial clarity as to how the various ad hoc crisis management measures are to be brought together into a consistent framework of  liability and control in the Economic and 
Monetary Union.
The day before the European Council meet-
ing, the Economic and Financial Affairs 
Council (Ecofi  n) agreed on the principal fea-
tures of the banking union. The main focus was on the Single Supervisory Mechanism. 
Under this mechanism, the ECB will be re-
sponsible in principle for the supervision of all credit institutions, though, notwithstand-
ing the ECB’s authority to set guidelines, 
certain supervisory powers for institutions 
of lesser size will fall to participating mem-
ber states.3 The national supervisory author-
ities will retain their original competencies 
only on the margins. Furthermore, the ECB’s supervisory function and its monetary policy 
mandate are to be separated. This will 
mean that the members of the Supervisory 
Board appointed by the ECB can have no responsibilities directly connected with monetary policy. In addition, a mediation 
panel is to be established to resolve differ-
ences of opinion between the Supervisory Board and the ECB Governing Council. 
However, EU legal requirements mean that 
the ECB Governing Council would have to 
have the last word on banking supervisory 
decisions as a matter of principle. Thus, 
under prevailing EU primary law, a system-
atic separation of monetary policy and 
banking supervision is not possible.
1 See Herman Van Rompuy, Towards a genuine Eco-
nomic and Monetary Union, 5 December 2012. This 
report was the product of a lengthy process of discus-
sion and negotiation. See also, inter alia, Deutsche 
Bundesbank, The European Council and Euro Area 
Summit statements of 28 and 29 June 2012 regarding 
the stabilisation of the euro area, Monthly Report,  August 2012, pp 59-61, and Deutsche Bundesbank, 
The conclusions of the European Council at its meeting 
on 18-19 October 2012, Monthly Report, November 
2012, pp 63-64.
2 See European Commission, A blueprint for a deep 
and genuine economic and monetary union: Launch-
ing a European Debate, 30 November 2012, and Euro-
pean Parliament, Towards a genuine Economic and 
Monetary Union, 20 November 2012.
3 See Article 5 (5) (a) and (c) of the Proposal for a 
Council Regulation conferring specifi  c tasks on the 
European Central Bank concerning policies relating to 
the prudential supervision of credit institutions of 
14 December 2012.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report 
February 2013  
63

The ECB is to assume its supervisory role on 
1 March 2014 (or 12 months after the regu-
lation comes into force, if this does not happen by 1  March 2013 as intended). However, the ECB is to have immediate supervisory powers over credit institutions for which this is deemed by the European 
Stability Mechanism (ESM) to be a condition 
of direct recapitalisation. The operational 
framework for this kind of direct recapital-
isation of banks by the ESM is to be put in place in the fi  rst half of 2013 – also involv-
ing a defi  nition of what constitute dis-tressed legacy assets on a bank’s balance 
sheet. This is another condition, in addition 
to the Single Supervisory Mechanism, for 
direct recapitalisation of banks by the ESM.
The European Council stressed the import-
ance, too, of new European bank capital 
requirements (Capital Requirements Direct-
ive IV and Capital Requirements Regulation) in the creation of a single rule book for the 
regulation of banks, and called for swift 
agreement on these rules. Furthermore, the 
proposals for the Recovery and Resolution 
Directive and the Deposit Guarantee 
Schemes Directive are to be passed by June 
2013 and then rapidly transposed into 
 national law.
With regard to public fi  nances and eco-nomic policy, prospective measures and a 
timetable covering a number of aspects are scheduled to be submitted to the European 
Council in June 2013: between now and 
then, major economic policy reforms are to 
be discussed and, where necessary, coord-
inated among the member states. This period is also to be used to examine the feasibility and operation of contracts for 
competitiveness and growth agreed mutu-
ally between member states and the rele-
vant EU bodies. These contracts would be a 
binding requirement for all member states 
in the monetary union, while other member states could also opt to enter into such con-
tracts. More work is required on the ques-
tion of providing support through “solidar-
ity mechanisms” for the efforts of member 
states that have signed such legal agree-
ments for competitiveness and growth.
In addition, the European Council set out a 
general objective of ensuring democratic 
 legitimacy and accountability at the level at 
which decisions are made and imple-
mented. According to the Council, each 
new step in the direction of increased con-trol of economic policy needs to go hand in 
hand with moves towards enhanced legit-
imacy and accountability. In the Council’s view, steps towards further integration of 
budgetary and economic policy mean that 
member states have to ensure their parlia-
ments are properly involved, while deeper 
integration of policymaking and increasing 
concentration of powers also need to be matched by an appropriate role for the European Parliament. Furthermore, the Council wishes to see closer collaboration 
between national chambers and the Euro-
pean Parliament.
Overall, the plans put forward leave many questions unanswered, and in many re-
spects the practical details remain unclear. 
More far-reaching steps towards closer 
 integration of fi  scal and economic policy, 
and in particular, a partial relocation of budgetary sovereignty from national to 
European level, which were initially on the 
table, now appear unlikely.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report 
February 2013  
64

The reformed national and European budget -
ary rules provide a more robust foundation for 
achieving sound public finances. The fact that 
Germany has managed to comply with these 
rules so far is to be welcomed. The ultimate objective of achieving a structurally balanced general government budget is increasingly being used in the public debate as a bench
-
mark for evaluating budgetary policy. However, 
the favourable figures and the positive shocks 
have been used as an opportunity to relax the 
policy course, which in turn has delayed the 
consolidation of public finances. In view of the 
rules’ binding effect, it is crucial that in future 
these are not open to arbitrary interpretation 
for the purpose of creating short-term budget-
ary leeway at the expense of later budgets.6 
The draft law on implementing the Fiscal Com-
pact envisages the Stability Council as the na -
tional overseer for ensuring compliance with European and national rules. The Council, which predominantly comprises the finance 
ministers of central government and the state 
governments, should critically appraise on -
going developments with a view to protecting the goals of the debt break from any attempts to veer off course.
7 The real test for fiscal policy 
will ultimately be whether the rising trend shown by the debt ratio is lastingly reversed and whether the rules are rigorously imple
-
mented also in less favourable circumstances.
Budgetary development  
of central, state and local  government
Tax revenue
Although tax revenue8 rose considerably by 
4½% in 2012 (see the chart on this page and 
the table on page  66), it was still €2 billion 
below the October forecast of the Working Party on Tax Revenue Forecasting. Receipts from income-related taxes climbed by an above-average 8½%. Although the consider
-
able increase in wage tax receipts (+6½%) was 
bolstered by stagnating deductions for child benefit, it was mainly attributable to the buoy-ant wage trend. It was additionally boosted by 
the progressive taxation schedule. Revenue from profit-related taxes continued to rise 
sharply (+12%). Despite slower growth in cor -
poration tax receipts, following a strong in -
crease in 2011, the associated rise remained high. By contrast, revenue from assessed in
-
come tax rose more sharply last year following 
low growth in 2011. The development in as -
sessed income tax is also being boosted by cur -
rently declining net deductions (due primarily to the phasing-out of the homebuyer’s grant and barely rising employee refunds). Income 
from non-assessed taxes on earnings (particu -
larly withholding tax on dividends) increased 
considerably again, not least owing to special 
factors. In view of the low interest rates, re -
ceipts from withholding tax on interest income 
and capital gains increased only moderately. 
Revenue from consumption-related taxes rose Sustainable re-
duction of debt ratio is key
Clear rise in tax 
revenue in 2012
Above-average 
growth in  income-related taxesModerate rise in receipts from consumption-related taxesTax revenue*
* Including  EU shares  in German  tax revenue,  excluding 
receipts from local government taxes.
Deutsche Bundesbank2010 2011 2012642024681012
–––++++++Year-on-year percentage change, quarterly
6 See also Deutsche Bundesbank, The debt brake in Ger -
many – key aspects and implementation, Monthly Report, October 2011, pp 15-39.
7 Up to now, the Council has focused on identifying im -
pending budgetary emergencies. However, the indicators 
and thresholds chosen are ultimately only partially suitable for this purpose, thus raising doubts as to the suitability of this committee of ministers for taking early warning meas-ures. See Deutsche Bundesbank (2011), op cit, pp 20-23.8 Including EU shares in German tax revenue but excluding 
receipts from local government taxes, which are not yet 
known for the last quarter recorded.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report 
February 2013  
65

by 1½% overall. The stronger increase in turn-
over tax receipts is broadly in line with the de-velopment in private consumption.
According to the latest official tax estimate, 
revenue (including receipts from local govern -
ment taxes) is expected to rise by 2½% this year, as robust growth is forecast for those macroeconomic reference variables that are particularly relevant for government revenue. The updated macroeconomic forecast pub
-
lished by the Federal Government in January 
paints a somewhat less favourable picture over -
all. Over and above the negative baseline ef -
fect, this would result per se in a slight down-
ward revision.9 On the other hand, the tax re-
funds due in connection with the European 
Court of Justice’s ruling on the taxation of divi-
dends paid to foreign corporates are now not 
expected to be disbursed in part until 2014. On 
balance, legislative changes, including new regulations which have been passed in the 
meantime, are likely to have a mostly neutral impact on the development of tax revenue in 
2013.
Central government budget
In particular, large payments to the European 
Stability Mechanism (ESM) and the European Investment Bank (EIB) totalling €10½ billion 
contributed to central government’s €3 billion 
budget deficit in the fourth quarter of 2012, following a surplus of €10½ billion twelve months earlier. According to the preliminary outturn, the deficit for 2012 as a whole amounted to almost €23 billion. This equates Further marked 
revenue growth expected  
in 2013 Deficit increased again by ESM and EIB capital contributions  
in 2012 Q4Tax revenue
 
Type of taxYear as a whole Estimate 
for 2012 
as a 
whole 1,2,3Q4
2011 2012 2011 2012
Year-on-year changeYear-on-year 
change Year-on-year change
€ billion € billion as % as % € billion € billion as %
Tax revenue, total
2 527.3 551.8 + 24.5 +  4.7 +  5.0 145.4 148.4 + 3.0 +  2.1
of which
Wage tax 139.7 149.1 +  9.3 +  6.7 +  6.5 39.5 42.2 + 2.7 +  6.8
Profi  t-related taxes 4 73.8 82.5 +  8.7 + 11.8 + 12.8 18.6 18.1 – 0.5 –  2.9
Assessed income tax 32.0 37.3 +  5.3 + 16.5 + 15.0 8.8 9.9 + 1.2 + 13.2
Corporation tax 15.6 16.9 +  1.3 +  8.3 + 17.9 5.9 3.9 – 2.0 – 33.4
Investment income 
tax5 26.2 28.3 +  2.1 +  8.2 +  7.0 4.0 4.2 + 0.3 +  6.9
Turnover taxes 6 190.0 194.6 +  4.6 +  2.4 +  2.9 49.4 49.9 + 0.5 +  1.1
Energy tax 40.0 39.3 –  0.7 –  1.8 –  0.3 15.5 15.2 – 0.3 –  2.2
Tobacco tax 14.4 14.1 –  0.3 –  1.9 –  0.6 4.8 4.7 – 0.1 –  2.6
1 According to offi   cial tax estimate of October 2012. 2 Including EU shares in German tax revenue, but excluding receipts from local 
government taxes. 3 Including (estimated) local government taxes, tax revenue was €8.3 billion above the November 2011 estimate, which was used as a basis for the 2012 Federal budget at the end of 2011. According to government estimates, had legislative changes 
not been made in the meantime, the upward revision would have been €10.2 billion. 4 Employee refunds, homebuyers’ grant and invest-
ment grant deducted from revenue. 5 Withholding tax on interest income and capital gains, non-assessed taxes on earnings. 6 Turnover 
tax and import turnover tax.
Deutsche Bundesbank
9 In its 2013 Annual Economic Report, the Federal Govern-
ment expects nominal GDP in the current year to increase 
by 2.3% (October 2012: 2.8%). However, the growth 
structure – in particular, the development of gross wages 
and salaries and nominal private consumption – is also sig-
nificant for the tax forecast. Gross wages and salaries are 
now expected to rise by 2.7% (October 2012: 2.8%) while nominal private consumption is now estimated to grow at a rate of 2.3% (previously 3.0%).Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report 
February 2013  
66

to an increase of €5 billion compared with 
2011. Although tax receipts were up by 3% (€8 
billion),10 other income fell by €3 billion overall 
– not least due to the Bundesbank’s lower 
profit distribution. Expenditure rose by €10 bil-lion in the wake of the capital contributions to 
the ESM and the EIB. The renewed significant 
decline in interest costs (€2½ billion) was offset 
not least by higher transfers to state govern -
ment and to the Fund for the Expansion of 
Childcare Facilities, which was set up in 2007.
The deficit was €5½ billion lower than in the second supplementary budget of November 
2012. This was primarily due to the €2½ billion reduction in transfers and grants (half of which 
was attributable to long-term unemployment benefits). Additionally, interest expenses, per
-
sonnel costs and calls on guarantees undershot 
the budget estimates by a total of €2 billion. Supplementary budgetary relief was provided on the income side by higher-than-estimated 
EU payments.
At €8 billion (0.3% of GDP), structural net bor -
rowing in the core budget, as calculated in ac-
cordance with the provisions of the debt brake, 
likewise fell considerably short of the most re -
cent forecast of €15½ billion.11 In formal terms, 
central government is thus already adhering to 
the permanent constitutional ceiling for struc -
tural borrowing (0.35% of GDP), which is not 
due to come into effect until 2016. Yet this is 
based on the simplified cyclical adjustment pro-cedure for the budget outturn envisaged in the 
debt brake provisions, under which estimated 
potential output is not updated. Whereas a considerable negative cyclical effect was thus 
calculated, a comprehensive re-estimate on the 
basis of the Annual Economic Report 2013 
would probably indicate a cyclically induced 
burden of only €½ billion. This would make the 
structural deficit €6½ billion (0.3% of GDP) 
higher.
The results of the simplified cyclical adjustment 
will be used as the basis for calculating the pro-
visional booking to the control account on 1 March 2013. This means that in view of the 
high permissible borrowing limit during the transitional period, which central government 
continues to use, another extremely large credit 
balance of €31½ billion will be recorded in addition to the existing accounting surplus of 
€25 billion for 2011.12 The announced cancella-
tion by the end of 2015 of these large virtual 
credit balances on the control account, which 
have largely arisen from a very lax interpret -
ation of the rules for calculating the deficit 
 reduction path, is a welcome move.
With a target deficit of €17½ billion, the 2013 
central government budget points to a consid-erable reduction of €5½ billion compared with the actual figure for 2012. On the revenue side, tax receipts are projected to grow by €4½ bil-
lion. On the expenditure side, the budget en -
visages net relief amounting to €4 billion from cutting grants to the social insurance schemes (in particular to the health insurance fund and the Federal Employment Agency).
13 Savings to-
talling €2 billion are to be yielded by the invest-ment plan through the dropout of the one-off capital increases to the EIB and the top-up con-
tribution to the Fund for the Expansion of 
Childcare Facilities. However, a further transfer 
of €8½ billion to the ESM is envisaged. On the other hand, the budget appropriations of central government contain additional costs  related to debt incurrence (including calls on 
guarantees).Marked relief 
vis-à-vis supple-mentary budget from November
Structural deficit 
also much lower than expectedEnvisaged  cancellation of large credit  balances on control account welcome
2013 budget 
shows fall in deficit …
10 In spite of a rise of €2 billion in transfers to the EU 
budget, which are deducted from tax revenue.
11 Net borrowing of €22½ billion was adjusted by €7½ 
billion for burdens arising from financial transactions (in -
cluding the payments to the ESM and the EIB) and by €7 
billion for a negative cyclical effect.
12 For a critical assessment, see Deutsche Bundesbank 
(2011), op cit, p 28. In the case of a target-oriented inter -
pretation of the provisions, the limit would still have been undershot significantly by over €10 billion in 2012.
13 Alongside cuts in payments to the health insurance 
fund and the statutory pension insurance scheme, central 
government’s financial relations with the Federal Employ -
ment Agency have also been altered. The planned abolition of the turnover tax-financed grant to the Agency has been 
adjusted for the elimination of the Agency’s reintegration 
payment to central government.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report 
February 2013  
67

At the moment it seems likely that some im -
provements from the 2012 budget outturn may 
continue and so have an alleviating effect on 
the 2013 draft budget. Thus, interest payments, 
which notably contain a budgeted net increase 
of €2½ billion from premium charges, could turn out to be lower than planned given on
-
going favourable funding conditions. Personnel costs and calls on guarantees might likewise be 
lower than expected. However, the Bundes -
bank’s projected profit distribution of €1½ bil-lion is subject to uncertainty, and the additional aid to Greece of just over €½ billion agreed at the end of November is also not included in the budget. But all in all, there could be a marginal improvement compared with the budget plan.
The central government deficit could fall again 
significantly in 2013 on the year. Moreover, 
given the expected deterioration in the overall 
economic setting, the structural deficit might 
improve even more, irrespective of the some -
what reduced burden from financial transac -tions.14 A major consideration, however, is the 
considerable uncertainty surrounding the fur -
ther evolution of the euro-area crisis, which 
arises from potential burdens in the wake of 
new assistance measures and from the oppor -
tunities and risks concerning the macroeco -
nomic environment. Moreover, a distinct in -
crease in expenditure could ensue if central 
government’s exceptionally favourable refinan-
cing conditions cease. Overall, therefore, the 
Federal Government would be well advised to 
step up its fiscal consolidation efforts going forward. Ultimately, the establishment of a 
broad safety margin below the permanent ceil-
ing for structural borrowing of 0.35% of GDP is 
the best assurance that, in future, short-term 
consolidation measures that have a procyclical 
effect will not have to be taken in the event 
that the hitherto favourable budgetary devel -
opment suddenly worsens.
In this context, the decision taken by the coali-
tion committee in November 2012 to bring for -
ward the planned achievement of a structurally 
balanced budget at central government level 
from 2016 to 2014 is to be welcomed. Based 
on the fiscal plan drawn up in summer 2012, 
this means that €5½ billion would have to be 
consolidated in the upcoming fiscal benchmark figures. If the revenue planned at that time for 2014 from the financial transaction tax (€2 bil-lion) – which is to be introduced as a concerted 
measure within the European Union – is de -
ferred anew, this shortfall will have to be add-
itionally offset. Although further savings on interest expenditure seem likely in the short 
term, the government would be ill advised to 
waive genuine consolidation measures and to 
rely on the hope that the currently extremely … and outturn 
may be slightly better than planned, …
… but further 
consolidation strongly  recommendedFiscal bench-mark figures for structurally  balanced budget should be underpinned by consolidation measuresCentral government fiscal deficit/surplus
Deutsche BundesbankQ1 Q2 Q3 Q42520151050510
–––––++
–45–40–35–30–25–20–15–10
20102010Quarterly results
Cumulated from start of year
20122012
20112011€ billion
14 This is suggested by an updated complete cyclical ad -
justment based on the most recent data available. How -
ever, if the simplified cyclical adjustment procedure (pursu-
ant to the provisions of the debt brake) is used for 2012 
and a detailed calculation procedure for 2013 at the time 
the budget was drafted, the 2013 central government budget shows no reduction in the structural deficit since the cyclical burden, despite the anticipated subdued growth of GDP , is estimated to be lower than the figure 
calculated for 2012 using the simplified procedure owing 
to the revision of potential output.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report 
February 2013  
68

favourable financing conditions will continue 
indefinitely. With regard to funding the social 
security schemes, it would be better to clearly 
and openly define which are non-insurance-
related benefits and to then ensure that these 
are dependably financed out of the central government budget. It routinely appears as if such transfers are made on a rather arbitrary basis depending on the government’s cash flow situation at a given time, thus infringing 
the insurance principle of equivalence between contributions and benefits.
According to information from the Federal 
Ministry of Finance, central government’s off-
budget entities (ie specifically excluding reso -
lution agencies, for which no information is available) show a deficit of €1 billion for the 
fourth quarter of 2012 compared with €2 bil -
lion in 2011. This improvement is primarily due to the cessation of funding measures by the In-vestment and Repayment Fund and to the €½ billion top-up transfer from central government 
resources to the Fund for the Expansion of 
Childcare Facilities set up in 2007. On the other 
hand, the Financial Market Stabilisation Fund (SoFFin) had to transfer €2 billion to offset losses of the resolution agency dealing with 
Hypo Real Estate’s legacy debt. Overall, a sur -
plus of € 2½ billion was recorded in 2012, 
compared with €6 billion one year previously. 
The decline is largely attributable to the large capital repayment made by Commerzbank to 
SoFFin in 2011, which outweighed the (invest -
ment) funding measures of the Investment and Repayment Fund at the time.
15 Another surplus 
can be expected in 2013, predominantly owing 
to the ongoing accumulation of provisions for 
future civil servant pension payments. SoFFin’s 
financial market stabilisation measures have 
been further extended beyond 2012 and will 
now be available until the end of 2014, but 
there are currently no signs of banks seeking recourse to them. A definite burden, by con
-
trast, will ensue from the forthcoming repay -
ment of an inflation-linked five-year Federal 
note (Bobl), for which reserves will be released.State government budgets16
The positive trend in the state government 
budgets did not continue into the fourth quar -
ter of 2012. Nonetheless, the core budget def-icit for the year as a whole fell to €5½ billion, 
compared with €9½ billion in 2011, and was considerably lower than the planned shortfall 
(€15 billion). Revenue rose by 2½%, mainly as a 
result of sharply rising tax receipts (+6% or 
€12½ billion). This was partly offset by a fall in 
transfers received (just over €3 billion) follow -
ing the phasing-out of the Investment and Re-
payment Fund. Overall expenditure increased 
by just over 1%. Higher payments, in particular for personnel (+2½% or €2½ billion) and oper -
ating expenditure (+2% or €½ billion), out -
weighed the sharp decline in investment (-9% 
or €3 billion) as the Investment and Repayment Fund was phased out.
Irrespective of the deficit reduction for state 
government as a whole, there are still big dif -
ferences in the budgetary position of individual states. While surpluses were posted once again 
by Bavaria, Mecklenburg-West Pomerania and 
Saxony and now additionally by Berlin, Thurin-gia and, to a lesser extent, Baden-  Württemberg 
and Saxony-Anhalt, not only Bremen and Saar -
land, which are receiving consolidation assis -
tance, but also Hamburg, Rhineland-Palatinate, 
Hesse and North Rhine-Westphalia are still 
showing large per capita  deficits, despite the 
favourable macroeconomic setting. A com -
bined deficit of just over €12 billion is budgeted 
for the current year, with those states that al -
ready posted large deficits last year planning to 
expand their new borrowing considerably. In 
view of the expected slower growth of tax rev-Overall surplus 
in off-budget entities despite slight deficit at year-end2012: fall in  deficit on back 
of strong tax 
revenue growth
Big differences 
between states, and gloomier outlook for 2013
15 The national accounts figures indicate a considerable 
improvement in the fiscal balance of the off-budget entities 
for 2012. The difference between this result and the out -
turn shown in the financial statistics is largely due to the 
fact that Commerzbank’s repayment was booked as a fi -
nancial transaction in the national accounts with no impact on the deficit.
16 The development of local government finances in the 
third quarter of 2012 was analysed in the short articles in 
the Bundesbank’s January 2013 Monthly Report. These are the most recent data available.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report 
February 2013  
69

enue and rise in personnel costs, operating ex-
penditure and transfers to local government, 
the budgetary situation of state government 
might deteriorate somewhat on the year.
To underpin the general prohibition of new borrowing from 2020, as now enshrined in 
Germany’s Basic Law, it is essential that this is 
also implemented in each federal state’s legis -
lation. The focus should be on swiftly reducing 
existing structural deficits and building up 
safety margins. It would, however, be problem-atic if – as was often the case in the past – the 
necessary consolidation measures were de -
ferred and then declared to be non-attainable 
at the end of the transitional period. It is thus, 
for example, a worrying sign that Baden-  
Württemberg has recently relaxed its debt 
brake provisions, which to date are merely con-tained in the state budget law, and has signifi-
cantly protracted its consolidation timeline. 
North Rhine-Westphalia, being the most popu-
lous German state, is of critical importance in 
this regard. It has so far made no adjustments to the state budgetary rules and has announced only very limited steps towards reducing its def-icit. The state is even having problems meeting 
the old, comparatively lax constitutional provi -
sions that are currently still in place. For ex -
ample, the 2011 budget – despite including ex-tensive additional tax revenue – contained net 
borrowing appropriations totalling €5 billion, thus exceeding the constitutional borrowing 
ceiling (capped at the amount of self-financed 
investment) by €1½ billion.17 This budget is 
currently being examined by the state’s consti-tutional court. While new borrowing under the 
2013 budget, according to the current draft 
from autumn 2012, will be slightly (€½ billion) 
below the constitutional ceiling, this includes 
not only asset realisations but also unspecified 
general revenue and saving appropriations 
amounting to €1 billion which still have to be 
generated. As before, the borrowing limit has 
been artificially raised by €½ billion by includ -
ing investment projects that are financed out of 
central government grants. In its ruling on the 
2010 supplementary budget, the constitutional court stipulated that debt growth, in line with 
the requirements of macroeconomic equilib -
rium, should be held sufficiently below the de-
fined borrowing ceiling to allow policymakers a certain amount of operational flexibility. Equally, 
the extremely strained financial situation of many local governments in North Rhine-
Westphalia indicates a substantial need for cor -
rection.
In addition to the implementation of the new 
debt rules, a reform of the Federal financial 
equalisation scheme is assuming increasing im-
portance, also – but not solely – because the 
existing arrangements will expire at the end of 
2019. The volume of the financial equalisation 
scheme among the federal states (narrowly de-fined) rose by €½ billion to €8 billion in 2012, 
with only three states being net contributors. The financial positions of the individual states 
still vary greatly and are equalised up front to a 
certain extent through a similarly extensive ex 
ante redistribution of turnover tax receipts. 
Bearing in mind that a fundamental disparity in tax revenue collection across the federal states 
reflects not only comparative differences in 
each region’s economic strength but also asso-
ciated differences in regional price levels, cap -
ping the extent of the equalisation of financial 
capacities would appear warranted. New 
revenue- sharing arrangements should also take 
account not least of the economic disincentives 
of such transfers; they could also introduce 
greater legislative autonomy for the individual 
states to define regional tax rates.18Debt rules need 
to be quickly tightened to  ensure balanced budget plus risk buffer
Rising transfers 
under state gov-
ernment finan-
cial equalisation 
scheme
17 See Deutsche Bundesbank, Implications of the ruling on 
the supplementary budget of North Rhine-Westphalia for 
2010, Monthly Report, April 2011, pp 10-11.
18 See also Deutsche Bundesbank (2012), op cit, p 49Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report 
February 2013  
70

Social security funds19
Statutory pension insurance 
scheme
The statutory pension insurance scheme, as 
usual, posted a surplus in the fourth quarter of 
2012 which, at almost €4½ billion, was a little 
lower than in the same period of 2011. The 
overall surplus for 2012 of nearly €5 billion was 
nonetheless slightly greater than the 2011 fig -
ure owing to the better performance in the first 
half of the year. The reserves exceeded the threshold of 1.5 times the scheme’s monthly 
expenditure by almost €3½ billion, which was 
largely attributable to contribution receipts being higher than had been expected when the contribution rate for 2012 was set. Al
-
though the contribution rate was lowered from 
19.9% to 19.6% as of 1 January 2012, contri -
bution receipts rose by just over 2% (by 3½% 
when adjusted for the contribution rate cut.) Total revenue went up by just under 2%. 
Spending on pensions, too, rose by almost 2%, with the annualised pension increase averaging 
just over 1½%.20 The number of current pen -
sions also increased slightly.
The contribution rate for the current year has 
been lowered to 18.9%, and the Federal Gov-
ernment forecasts a deficit of just over €2 bil -
lion in its annual pension insurance report. This 
will reduce reserves to around 1.5 times the (rising) average monthly expenditure incurred by the statutory pension insurance scheme. 
The low contribution rate means that the statu-tory pension insurance scheme is likely to post deficits for the next few years. The contribution rate will have to be raised again if there is a risk that the reserve floor of 0.2 times the scheme’s monthly expenditure may be undershot, which 
is likely to happen in the second half of this 
decade. Thus, the low contribution rate is only temporary and should not be seen as a sign of 
permanent easing in the financial situation. This also means that there is no structural fi
-
nancial leeway for increasing benefits. On the 
contrary, that would necessitate raising the contribution rate or introducing savings in gen-
eral pension benefits or in other areas in the 
foreseeable future.
Federal Employment Agency
The Federal Employment Agency recorded a surplus of just under €1 billion in the fourth quarter of 2012. This implies that the Agency 
will post a surplus of €2½ billion for 2012 as a 
whole, compared with a virtually balanced re-
sult one year previously. The financial improve-
ment is largely attributable to lower spending 
on active labour market policy measures and Higher-than-
expected surplus in 2012 owing to robust contri-bution receipts
Reserves to  
be depleted 
through contri-bution rate cut in 2013
Improvement in 2012 largely due to savings in  active labour market policy measuresFinances of the German statutory pension insurance scheme
Deutsche Bundesbank2010 2011 2012606264666870
–20+2+4+6€ billion, quarterly
Lin scale
Surplus (+) or deficit (–)ExpenditureLog scale
Revenue
19 The financial development of the statutory health and 
public long-term care insurance schemes in the third quar -
ter of 2012 was discussed in the short article in the Decem-ber 2012 Monthly Report. These are the most recent data available.20 Although the pension adjustment in mid-2012 was rela-
tively substantial (2.18% in western Germany and 2.26% in 
eastern Germany), the smaller increase in mid-2011 (0.99%) had a dampening effect in a year-on-year com
-
parison.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report 
February 2013  
71

on the short-time working allowance as well 
as, but to a lesser extent, to higher contribu -tion receipts owing to the favourable employ -
ment and wage trends over the course of the 
year. At the same time, expenditure on un -
employment benefits remained virtually un -
changed compared with 2011. The decline in the (incoming) central government grant and 
(outgoing) reintegration payment had practic -
ally no impact on the outturn on balance.
In its budget plan, the Federal Employment 
Agency projects a deficit of just over €1 billion 
for 2013.21 This financial deterioration is pri -
marily attributable to the abolition of the cen-
tral government grant, which was introduced 
in 2007 and updated in line with the growth of turnover tax revenue. The concurrent cessation of the Federal Employment Agency’s reintegra-
tion payment to central government does not 
fully offset this financial shortfall. Moreover, 
when the budget is implemented, spending on active labour market policy measures might rise significantly by just over €1½ billion compared 
with the outturn for 2012. However, this neg -
ates the experience of the past few years, so 
that the expenditure appropriations might ac -
tually be undershot. All in all, the actual out -
turn could turn out to be better than the target 
figures, as was the case over the past few 
years.Financial 
 deterioration budgeted for 2013Finances of theFederal Employment Agency
1 Including  transfers  to the civil servants'  pension  fund.  2 Ex-
cluding central government liquidity assistance.
Deutsche Bundesbank2010 2011 20127810121416
1.41.72.02.53.03.54.04.55.06.07.0–6–4–20+2+4€ billion, quarterly
Log scale
Expenditure,
total 1
Revenue 2
Log scale
Expenditure on ...
... vocational training... unemployment benefits
    and short-time
    working benefitsLin scale
Surplus (+) or deficit (–)
21 Including transfers to the insolvency benefit reserves 
(€¼ billion). Revenue (insolvency benefit contributions) and 
expenditure related to insolvency benefits are recorded separately from the general reserve and the Federal Em
-
ployment Agency’s budget to ensure that cumulated sur -
pluses or deficits from previous years are taken into ac -
count when calculating the contribution rate.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report 
February 2013  
72

Statistical 
SectionDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report 
February 2013  
1•

Contents
I Key economic data for the euro area
 1 Monetary developments and interest rates  ..................................................................  5•
 2
 External 
transactions and positions
 ..............................................................................  
5•
 3
 Gener
al economic indicators
 
.......................................................................................  
6•
II Overall monetary survey in the euro area
 1 The money stock and its counterparts  .........................................................................  8•
 2
 Consolidated 
balance sheet of monetary financial institutions (MFIs)
 
...........................  
10•
 3
 Banking 
system’s liquidity position
 ...............................................................................  
14•
III Consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem
 1 Assets  ..........................................................................................................................  16•
 2
 
Liabilities
 
.....................................................................................................................  
18•
IV Banks
 1 A ssets and liabilities of monetary financial institutions (excluding the Bundesbank)  
in Germany
 
.................................................................................................................  
20•
 2
 Principal 
assets and liabilities of banks (MFIs) in Germany, by category of banks
 
..........  
24•
 3
 A
ssets and liabilities of banks (MFIs) in Germany vis-à-vis residents
 
..............................  
26•
 4
 A
ssets and liabilities of banks (MFIs) in Germany vis-à-vis non-residents
 
.......................  
28•
 5
 Lending 
by banks (MFIs) in Germany to domestic non-banks (non-MFIs)
 
.....................  
30•
 6
 Lending 
by banks (MFIs) in Germany to domestic enterprises and households, 
 housing 
loans, sectors of economic activity
 .................................................................  
32•
 7
 Deposits 
of domestic non-banks (non-MFIs) at banks (MFIs) in Germany
 
.....................  
34•
 8
 Deposits 
of domestic households and non-profit institutions at banks (MFIs) in 
 
Germany
 
.....................................................................................................................  
36•
 9
 Deposits 
of domestic government at banks (MFIs) in Germany, by creditor group ........  
36•
 1
0
 Savings 
deposits and bank savings bonds of banks (MFIs) in Germany sold to  
non-banks (non-MFIs) ..................................................................................................  
38•
 1
1
 Debt 
securities and money market paper outstanding of banks (MFIs) in Germany
 
...... 
38•
 1
2
 Building 
and loan associations (MFIs) in Germany
 
........................................................  
39•
 1
3
 A
ssets and liabilities of the foreign branches and foreign subsidiaries of  
German banks (MFIs)
 
...................................................................................................  
40•Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report 
February 2013  
2•

V Minimum reserves
 1 Reserve ratios  ..............................................................................................................  42•
 2
 Reserve 
maintenance in Germany up to the end of 1998
 
............................................  
42•
 3
 Reserve 
maintenance in the euro area
 .........................................................................  
42•
VI Interest rates
 1 ECB interest rates  ........................................................................................................  43•
 2
 Base 
rates
 
....................................................................................................................  
43•
 3
 Eur
osystem monetary policy operations allotted through tenders
 
................................  
43•
 4
 Money 
market rates, by month
 
...................................................................................  
43•
 5
 Inter
est rates and volumes for outstanding amounts and new business of  
German banks (MFIs)
 
...................................................................................................  
44•
VII Capital market
 1 Sales and purchases of debt securities and shares in Germany  .....................................  48•
 2
 Sales 
of debt securities issued by residents
 
..................................................................  
49•
 3
 Amounts 
outstanding of debt securities issued by residents .........................................  
50•
 4
 Shar
es in circulation issued by residents
 
.......................................................................  
50•
 5
 Y
ields and indices on German securities
 
......................................................................  
51•
 6
 Sales 
and purchases of mutual fund shares in Germany
 
...............................................  
51•
VIII Financial accounts
 1 A cquisition of financial assets and financing of private non-financial sectors  ................  52•
 2
 Financial 
assets and liabilities of private non-financial sectors
 
......................................  
53•
IX Public finances in Germany
 1 Gener al government: deficit and debt level as defined in the Maastricht Treaty  ..................  54•
 2
 Gener
al government: revenue, expenditure and fiscal deficit/surplus as shown in  
the national accounts
 
..................................................................................................  
54•
 3
 Gener
al government: budgetary development (as per government’s financial 
 
statistics)
 
.....................................................................................................................  
55•
 4
 Centr
al, state and local government: budgetary development (as per government’s 
 
financial statistics)
 
........................................................................................................  
55•
 5
 Centr
al, state and local government: tax revenue
 
........................................................  
56•
 6 Centr
al and state government and European Union: tax revenue, by type
 
.......................  
56•
 7
 Centr
al, state and local government: individual taxes
 
..................................................  
57•Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report 
February 2013  
3•

 8 German pension insurance scheme: budgetary development and assets  ......................  57•
 9
 F
ederal Employment Agency: budgetary development
 
.................................................  
58•
 1
0
 S
tatutory health insurance scheme: budgetary development
 
.......................................  
58•
 1
1
 S
tatutory long-term care insurance scheme: budgetary development
 
..........................  
59•
 1
2
 Centr
al government: borrowing in the market
 .............................................................  
59•
 1
3
 Centr
al, state and local government: debt by creditor
 .................................................  
59•
 1
4
 Centr
al, state and local government: debt by category
 ................................................  
60•
X Economic conditions in Germany
 1 Origin and use of domestic product, distribution of national income  ...........................  61•
 2
 Output 
in the production sector
 
..................................................................................  
62•
 3
 Or
ders received by industry
 
.........................................................................................  
63•
 4
 Or
ders received by construction
 ..................................................................................  
64•
 5
 Retail 
trade turnover, sales of motor vehicles
 
...............................................................  
64•
 6
 Labour 
market
 
.............................................................................................................  
65•
 7
 
Prices
 
..........................................................................................................................  
66•
 8
 Households’ 
income
 
....................................................................................................  
67•
 9
 Negotiated 
pay rates (overall economy)
 
.......................................................................  
67•
XI External sector
 1 Major items of the balance of payments of the euro area  ...........................................  68•
 2
 Major 
items of the balance of payments of the Federal Republic of Germany
 
..............  
69•
 3
 F
oreign trade (special trade) of the Federal Republic of Germany, by country and 
group of countries
 
.......................................................................................................  
70•
 4
 Services 
and income of the Federal Republic of Germany
 
............................................  
71•
 5
 C
urrent transfers of the Federal Republic of Germany
 ..................................................  
71•
 6
 C
apital transfers
 
..........................................................................................................  
71•
 7
 Financial 
account of the Federal Republic of Germany
 .................................................  
72•
 8
 External 
position of the Bundesbank up to end-1998
 
..................................................  
73•
 9
 External 
position of the Bundesbank since the beginning of the  
European monetary union
 
...........................................................................................  
73•
 1
0
 A
ssets and liabilities of enterprises in Germany (other than banks) vis-à-vis  
non-residents
 
..............................................................................................................  
74•
 1
1
 ECB 
euro reference exchange rates of selected currencies
 
...........................................  
75•
 1
2
 Eur
o-area member states and irrevocable euro conversion rates in the third stage  
of European Economic and Monetary Union
 ...............................................................  
75•
 1
3
 Effective 
exchange rates of the euro and indicators of the German economy’s price 
competitiveness
 
...........................................................................................................  
76•Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report 
February 2013  
4•

Deutsche Bundesbank
5  Monthly Report
February 2013
I Key economic data for the euro area 
 
1 Monetary developments and interest rates
 
 
 
 
 Money stock in various definitions 1,2 Determinants of the money stock 1 Interest rates
 M 3 3 
MFI lending to Yield on Euro-
 3-month enterprises Monetary pean govern-
MFI lending, and capital 3-month ment bonds moving  average
M1 M2 (centred) total households formation  4 Eonia 5,7 Euribor 6,7 outstanding 8 
Period Annual percentage change % Annual percentage as a monthly average
2011          Apr 1.7 2.4 1.5 1.6 3.2 2.3 3.8 0.97 1.32 4.5
         May 1.2 2.4 1.4 1.4 3.1 2.5 4.1 1.03 1.43 4.4         June 1.3 2.4 1.3 1.3 2.7 2.1 4.3 1.12 1.49 4.4
         July 1.0 2.1 1.3 1.4 2.4 1.8 4.4 1.01 1.60 4.6
         Aug 1.8 2.4 1.8 1.6 2.4 1.7 4.3 0.91 1.55 4.1
         Sep 2.2 2.5 1.7 1.6 2.4 1.6 4.3 1.01 1.54 4.0
         Oct 1.9 1.9 1.4 1.5 1.6 2.2 4.3 0.96 1.58 4.3
         Nov 2.3 2.1 1.5 1.5 0.8 1.0 3.4 0.79 1.48 4.8
         Dec 1.8 1.8 1.5 1.7 1.0 0.5 2.9 0.63 1.43 4.8
2012          Jan 2.2 2.3 2.0 2.0 1.4 0.7 2.7 0.38 1.22 4.7
         Feb 2.7 2.8 2.5 2.4 1.4 0.4 2.1 0.37 1.05 4.5
         Mar 2.9 3.0 2.9 2.6 1.8 0.5 1.3 0.36 0.86 4.0
         Apr 1.9 2.5 2.3 2.7 1.4 − 0.1 0.8 0.35 0.74 4.1
         May 3.5 2.9 2.9 2.8 1.5 − 0.3 − 0.1 0.34 0.68 4.1
         June 3.7 3.0 3.0 3.2 1.5 − 0.4 − 0.3 0.33 0.66 4.2
         July 4.7 3.5 3.6 3.2 1.3 − 0.6 − 1.1 0.18 0.50 4.0
         Aug 5.2 3.2 2.9 3.0 0.8 − 1.0 − 1.2 0.11 0.33 3.9
         Sep 5.0 3.1 2.6 3.1 0.9 − 0.9 − 1.4 0.10 0.25 3.6
         Oct 6.5 4.3 3.9 3.4 0.6 − 1.4 − 1.8 0.09 0.21 3.4
         Nov 6.7 4.5 3.8 3.7 0.5 − 1.3 − 1.8 0.08 0.19 3.3
         Dec 6.2 4.4 3.3 ... 0.6 − 0.6 − 1.6 0.07 0.19 3.1
2013          Jan ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 0.07 0.20 3.0
1 Source: ECB. 2 Seasonally adjusted. 3 Excluding money market fund shares/units, OverNight Index Average. 6 Euro Interbank Offered Rate. 7 See also footnotes to
money market paper and debt securities with a maturity of up to two years held by Table VI.4, p 43  8 GDP-weighted yield on ten-year government bonds. Countries
non-euro-area residents. 4 Longer-term liabilities to euro-area non-MFIs. 5 Euro include:DE,FR,NL,BE,AT,FI,IE,PT,ES,IT,GR,SK. 
 
 
2 External transactions and positions  * 
  
 
Selected items of the euro-area balance of payments Euro exchange rates  1 
Current account Capital account Effective exchange rate 3 
of which Direct Securities Other Reserve
Balance Trade balance Balance investment investment assets Dollar rate Nominal Real  4 transactions 2 
Period € million Euro/US-$ Q1 1999 = 100
2011          Apr − 3,564 − 2,844 − 8,590 − 36,094 + 11,463 + 10,014 + 6,027 1.4442 105.9 103.4
         May − 11,848 + 889 + 18,777 − 8,746 + 41,498 − 10,849 − 3,126 1.4349 104.9 102.2         June + 2,479 + 1,106 + 4,567 − 1,538 + 93,024 − 88,500 + 1,582 1.4388 105.0 102.2
         July + 4,402 + 4,422 − 3,890 − 18,518 − 15,850 + 31,720 − 1,243 1.4264 104.0 101.1
         Aug − 206 − 4,128 − 9,632 − 10,859 + 25,849 − 28,002 + 3,380 1.4343 103.9 101.0         Sep + 2,343 + 3,311 + 2,430 − 9,548 + 18,911 − 8,519 + 1,587 1.3770 102.8 99.9
         Oct + 3,957 + 895 + 1,244 + 3,941 − 17,257 + 15,648 − 1,088 1.3706 103.0 100.2         Nov + 9,305 + 5,898 − 21,849 − 50,516 + 29,198 − 293 − 238 1.3556 102.6 99.9
         Dec + 23,377 + 9,008 − 21,626 + 10,877 − 56,825 + 29,718 − 5,396 1.3179 100.8 98.1
2012          Jan − 11,655 − 7,593 + 19,216 + 282 − 45,530 + 65,612 − 1,149 1.2905 98.9 96.3
         Feb − 3,548 + 3,163 + 6,455 + 5,672 + 16,477 − 14,080 − 1,614 1.3224 99.6 97.2
         Mar + 10,580 + 10,717 − 22,069 − 9,432 − 48,653 + 35,361 + 655 1.3201 99.8 97.3
         Apr + 2,324 + 5,255 − 3,816 − 3,476 + 3,975 − 1,333 − 2,982 1.3162 99.5 97.2
         May − 4,797 + 6,233 + 1,907 + 8,191 + 18,531 − 23,354 − 1,461 1.2789 98.0 95.7
         June + 17,403 + 13,679 − 18,514 − 21,020 + 62,599 − 55,583 − 4,510 1.2526 97.2 94.9
         July + 20,814 + 14,477 − 21,007 − 5,759 + 6,869 − 22,604 + 487 1.2288 95.3 93.2
         Aug + 8,454 + 5,629 − 9,217 + 14,664 − 15,056 − 7,252 − 1,573 1.2400 95.2 93.2
         Sep + 11,766 + 10,442 − 24,824 − 34,582 − 1,673 + 10,462 + 968 1.2856 97.2 94.9
         Oct + 11,635 + 12,509 − 11,957 − 10,587 + 49,801 − 48,728 − 2,441 1.2974 97.8 95.5
         Nov + 19,800 + 16,281 − 26,127 + 14,108 + 22,267 − 61,465 − 1,037 1.2828 97.2 95.3
         Dec ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 1.3119 98.7 96.6
2013          Jan ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 1.3288 100.4 98.2
*  Source: ECB. 1  See also Tables XI.12 and 13, pp 75−76
  2  Including
financial derivatives. 3  Vis-à-vis the currencies of The-EER-20 group. 4  Based on
consumer prices. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
6  Monthly Report
February 2013
I. Key economic data for the euro area 
 
3  General economic indicators
 
 
                   
 
Period Euro area Belgium Germany Estonia Finland France Greece Ireland Italy
 
Real gross domestic product 1,2
 
2010 2.0 2.4 4.2 3.3 3.3 1.7 − 4.9 − 0.8 1.8
2011 1.5 1.8 3.0 8.3 2.8 1.7 − 7.1 1.4 0.4
2012 ... ... 0.7 ... ... ... ... ... ...
2011          Q3 1.3 1.5 2.6 9.3 3.1 1.3 − 4.0 1.0 0.4
         Q4 0.6 0.8 1.4 5.9 1.1 1.0 − 7.9 2.8 − 0.9
2012          Q1 − 0.1 0.5 1.7 3.4 1.8 0.6 − 6.7 2.3 − 1.1
         Q2 − 0.5 − 0.5 0.5 2.2 − 0.3 − 0.4 − 6.3 − 0.5 − 2.7
         Q3 − 0.6 − 0.4 0.4 3.5 − 1.2 − 0.1 − 6.9 0.8 − 2.5
         Q4 − 0.9 ... 0.1 ... ... ... ... ... ...
 
Industrial production 1,3
 
2010 7.3 8.4 10.9 22.9 5.1 4.8 − 6.6 7.5 6.7
2011 3.4 3.8 7.6 16.6 1.3 1.7 − 8.0 0.0 0.1
2012 e − 2.4 ... 4,5,p − 0.8 − 0.0 − 1.6 − 2.3 p − 3.6 p − 1.6 − 6.6
2011          Q3 3.8 3.7 8.1 16.1 0.3 2.2 − 4.8 1.0 − 0.4
         Q4 − 0.3 0.7 2.8 1.6 − 2.0 − 0.7 − 11.1 0.7 − 3.3
2012          Q1 − 1.7 − 2.6 4 0.9 − 1.8 − 3.1 − 2.2 − 8.4 0.5 − 5.7
         Q2 − 2.2 − 4.4 − 0.3 − 2.4 − 1.3 − 1.9 − 2.3 3.0 − 7.9
         Q3 − 2.3 − 2.7 − 1.2 − 0.4 − 0.7 − 1.9 − 3.3 − 3.0 − 5.9
         Q4 e − 3.3 ... 5,p − 2.5 4.6 − 1.2 − 3.0 p 0.0 p − 7.2 − 6.8
 
Capacity utilisation in industry 6
 
2010 75.9 77.9 79.7 67.1 75.6 77.2 68.1 − 68.3
2011 80.6 80.5 86.1 73.3 80.5 83.0 67.9 − 72.6
2012 78.7 77.7 83.5 70.2 78.8 81.1 64.9 − 70.1
2011          Q4 79.8 78.0 85.1 73.2 78.8 82.8 65.8 − 71.6
2012          Q1 79.9 79.0 85.3 70.5 77.7 82.4 65.5 − 70.7
         Q2 79.8 78.4 85.2 69.0 79.9 81.8 64.9 − 71.0
         Q3 78.0 76.9 82.6 71.3 80.1 81.4 63.9 − 69.7
         Q4 76.9 76.6 80.7 70.1 77.4 78.8 65.1 − 69.0
2013          Q1 77.2 75.5 82.2 70.5 78.3 79.9 65.3 − 68.5
 
Standardised unemployment rate 7,8
 
2010 10.1 8.3 7.1 16.9 8.4 9.7 12.6 13.9 8.4
2011 10.2 7.2 6.0 12.5 7.8 9.6 17.7 14.7 8.4
2012 11.4 7.3 5.5 ... 7.7 10.3 ... 14.8 ...
2012          July 11.4 7.4 5.6 10.1 7.7 10.3 25.0 14.8 10.6
         Aug 11.5 7.4 5.4 10.1 7.8 10.3 25.5 14.8 10.6
         Sep 11.6 7.4 5.4 9.7 7.8 10.3 26.2 14.8 10.9
         Oct 11.7 7.4 5.5 9.7 7.7 10.4 26.8 14.7 11.2
         Nov 11.7 7.5 5.4 9.9 7.7 10.5 ... 14.7 11.2
         Dec 11.7 7.5 5.3 ... 7.7 10.6 ... 14.7 11.2
 
Harmonised Index of Consumer Prices 1
 
2010 1.6 2.3 1.2 2.7 1.7 1.7 4.7 − 1.6 1.6
2011 9 2.7 3.5 2.5 5.1 3.3 2.3 3.1 1.2 2.9
2012 2.5 2.6 2.1 4.2 3.2 2.2 1.0 1.9 3.3
2012          Aug 2.6 2.6 2.2 4.2 3.3 2.4 1.2 2.6 3.3
         Sep 2.6 2.6 2.1 4.1 3.4 2.2 0.3 2.4 3.4
         Oct 2.5 2.6 2.1 4.2 3.5 2.1 0.9 2.1 2.8
         Nov 2.2 2.2 1.9 3.8 3.2 1.6 0.4 1.6 2.6
         Dec 2.2 2.1 2.0 3.6 3.5 1.5 0.3 1.7 2.6
2013          Jan e 2.0 ... e 1.9 ... ... ... ... ... e 2.4
 
General government financial balance 10
 
2009 − 6.3 − 5.5 − 3.1 − 2.0 − 2.5 − 7.5 − 15.6 − 13.9 − 5.4
2010 − 6.2 − 3.8 − 4.1 0.2 − 2.5 − 7.1 − 10.7 − 30.9 − 4.5
2011 − 4.1 − 3.7 − 0.8 1.1 − 0.6 − 5.2 − 9.4 − 13.4 − 3.9
 
General government debt 10
 
2009 80.0 95.7 74.5 7.2 43.5 79.2 129.7 64.9 116.4
2010 85.4 95.5 82.5 6.7 48.6 82.3 148.3 92.2 119.2
2011 87.3 97.8 80.5 6.1 49.0 86.0 170.6 106.4 120.7
Sources: National data, European Commission, Eurostat, European Central Bank. 4  Positivly influenced by late reports. 5  Provisional; adjusted in advance by the
Latest data are partly based on press reports and are provisional. 1  Annual percen- Federal Statistical Office by way of estimates to the results of the Quarterly
tage change. 2  GDP of the euro area calculated from seasonally adjusted data. Production Survey. 6  Manufacturing, in %; seasonally adjusted; data are collected in
3  Manufacturing, mining and energy; adjusted for working-day variations.

Deutsche Bundesbank
7  Monthly Report
February 2013
I.  Key economic data for the euro area  
 
   
                   
 
Luxembourg Malta Netherlands Austria Portugal Slovakia Slovenia Spain Cyprus   Period
 
Real gross domestic product 1,2
 
2.9 2.7 1.6 2.0 1.9 4.4 1.2 − 0.3 1.3 2010
1.7 1.6 1.0 2.7 − 1.5 3.2 0.6 0.4 0.5 2011
... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 2012
1.1 1.8 0.9 1.8 − 2.0 2.6 0.8 0.9 − 0.4 2011          Q3
− 0.4 − 0.7 − 0.8 0.4 − 2.9 3.7 − 2.4 − 0.4 − 0.8          Q4
− 0.4 − 0.9 − 0.8 1.7 − 0.8 2.9 0.1 − 0.8 − 1.6 2012          Q1
0.9 1.3 − 0.4 0.1 − 4.2 2.6 − 3.2 − 1.5 − 2.6          Q2
0.0 1.9 − 1.5 0.7 − 2.7 2.1 − 3.3 − 1.5 − 2.0          Q3
... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ...          Q4
 
Industrial production1,3
 
9.4 − 7.8 6.7 1.6 18.3 5.9 0.8 − 1.1 2010
− 2.5 − − 0.7 6.7 − 2.0 7.2 2.8 − 1.4 − 7.4 2011
p − 5.6 − p − 0.5 ... − 4.9 p 10.3 p 0.4 − 6.0 ... 2012
− 1.6 − 2.6 5.7 − 2.3 5.0 0.8 − 1.4 − 12.3 2011          Q3− 6.4 − − 4.3 2.1 − 4.4 3.6 − 0.7 − 5.0 − 10.7          Q4
− 7.0 − − 1.7 0.9 − 5.5 9.5 0.4 − 5.8 − 12.7 2012          Q1
− 5.5 − 1.7 2.0 − 6.4 12.8 0.9 − 7.1 − 7.0          Q2− 6.1 − − 2.3 2.2 − 4.1 16.0 1.6 − 5.5 − 5.7          Q3
p − 3.6 − p 0.4 ... − 3.6 p 3.4 p − 1.0 − 5.6 ...          Q4
 
Capacity utilisation in industry 6
 
78.5 77.7 78.9 81.9 75.0 58.0 76.0 71.1 62.6 201083.2 78.7 80.3 85.4 74.4 61.6 80.4 73.3 61.4 201176.4 75.2 78.4 84.6 73.8 69.6 79.1 72.1 56.7 2012
79.8 76.0 78.9 85.0 73.5 62.3 79.5 72.2 58.1 2011          Q479.2 74.2 79.8 85.1 74.1 67.5 79.7 72.5 56.9 2012          Q1
82.7 75.9 78.6 84.7 74.2 71.1 80.6 72.7 56.9          Q2
78.1 76.2 78.3 84.9 74.2 71.2 79.4 70.7 59.1          Q3
65.7 74.3 77.0 83.6 72.6 68.4 76.6 72.5 53.7          Q4
66.9 78.6 77.0 84.9 73.5 60.7 77.8 68.7 52.4 2013          Q1
 
Standardised unemployment rate 7,8
 
4.6 6.9 4.5 4.4 12.0 14.5 7.3 20.1 6.5 2010
4.8 6.5 4.4 4.2 12.9 13.6 8.2 21.7 7.9 20115.0 6.5 5.3 ... 15.7 14.0 9.0 25.0 12.1 2012
5.1 6.6 5.3 4.5 16.0 14.1 9.2 25.3 12.2 2012          July
5.0 6.7 5.3 4.5 16.3 14.1 9.4 25.5 12.4          Aug 
5.1 6.7 5.4 4.3 16.2 14.1 9.6 25.7 13.0          Sep 
5.1 6.9 5.5 4.4 16.3 14.2 9.9 26.0 13.9          Oct 
5.2 6.9 5.6 4.4 16.3 14.5 9.8 26.2 14.2          Nov 
5.3 6.7 5.8 4.3 16.5 14.7 10.0 26.1 14.7          Dec 
 
Harmonised Index of Consumer Prices 1
 
2.8 2.0 0.9 1.7 1.4 0.7 2.1 2.0 2.6 20103.7 2.5 2.5 3.6 3.6 4.1 2.1 3.1 3.5 20112.9 3.2 2.8 2.6 2.8 3.7 2.8 2.4 3.1 2012
2.8 3.2 2.5 2.3 3.2 3.8 3.1 2.7 4.5 2012          Aug 
3.2 2.9 2.5 2.8 2.9 3.8 3.7 3.5 3.6          Sep 
3.2 3.2 3.3 2.9 2.1 3.9 3.2 3.5 2.6          Oct 
2.7 3.6 3.2 2.9 1.9 3.5 2.8 3.0 1.4          Nov 
2.5 2.8 3.4 2.9 2.1 3.4 3.1 3.0 1.5          Dec 
... ... 3.2 ... ... ... ... ... ... 2013          Jan 
 
General government financial balance 10
 
− 0.8 − 3.9 − 5.6 − 4.1 − 10.2 − 8.0 − 6.0 − 11.2 − 6.1 2009− 0.8 − 3.6 − 5.1 − 4.5 − 9.8 − 7.7 − 5.7 − 9.7 − 5.3 2010− 0.3 − 2.7 − 4.5 − 2.5 − 4.4 − 4.9 − 6.4 − 9.4 − 6.3 2011
 
General government debt 10
 
15.3 67.6 60.8 69.2 83.2 35.6 35.0 53.9 58.5 200919.2 68.3 63.1 72.0 93.5 41.0 38.6 61.5 61.3 201018.3 70.9 65.5 72.4 108.1 43.3 46.9 69.3 71.1 2011
January, April, July and October. 7  As a percentage of the civilian labour force; sea- 9  Including Estonia from 2011 onwards. 10  As a percentage of GDP; euro-area
sonally adjusted. 8  Standardised unemployment rate of Germany: calculation based aggregate: European Central Bank (ESA 1995), member states: European Commission
on unadjusted data from the Federal Statistical Office. (Maastricht Treaty definition). 

Deutsche Bundesbank
8  Monthly Report
February 2013
II Overall monetary survey in the euro area 
 
1 The money stock and its counterparts *
(a) Euro area 
  
€ billion
I Lending to non-banks (non-MFIs) II Net claims on III Monetary capital formation at monetary
in the euro area non-euro-area residents financial institutions (MFIs) in the euro area
Enterprises General
and households government Debt
Deposits securities
Liabil- with an Deposits with
Claims ities to agreed at agreed maturities
on non- non-euro- maturity notice of of over Capital
of which of which euro-area area of over over 2 years and
Period Total Total Total Total residents residents Total 2 years 3 months (net)  2 Securities Securities reserves 3 
2011          May 5.4 18.9 − 21.6 − 13.5 9.8 8.2 82.3 74.1 25.7 1.4 − 0.5 11.4 13.4
         June 10.1 − 15.6 − 50.6 25.6 29.1 65.9 − 134.4 − 200.3 24.5 4.2 − 0.3 2.5 18.1
         July − 5.6 5.1 2.5 − 10.7 − 14.8 − 18.0 − 38.0 − 20.0 33.3 − 6.0 0.0 2.0 37.3
         Aug 8.2 − 10.0 − 12.6 18.2 32.2 28.3 72.8 44.5 9.3 1.5 − 0.4 − 1.8 9.9
         Sep 50.5 26.2 − 20.0 24.3 20.9 23.4 − 14.2 − 37.6 9.9 12.9 − 0.7 − 4.8 2.5
         Oct 37.2 37.4 36.2 − 0.2 0.5 − 50.7 − 88.6 − 37.9 10.7 24.2 0.0 − 18.6 5.1
         Nov 28.3 − 12.0 8.3 40.3 41.2 − 24.3 − 64.8 − 40.5 − 3.3 − 11.2 − 0.9 − 10.6 19.5
         Dec − 94.3 −111.4 − 15.9 17.1 2.1 17.2 − 21.1 − 38.4 − 3.6 13.9 − 0.7 − 42.8 26.0
2012          Jan 124.5 58.1 17.6 66.4 68.6 − 43.9 18.5 62.4 5.9 0.5 0.6 − 4.7 9.5
         Feb 16.4 − 15.3 4.5 31.8 48.0 20.6 18.2 − 2.4 − 10.6 − 3.4 − 1.4 − 7.0 1.2
         Mar 36.4 2.7 1.1 33.7 36.5 − 27.0 33.1 60.1 − 34.3 − 26.5 − 0.8 − 17.7 10.7
         Apr 12.3 7.5 15.7 4.8 − 2.2 − 29.7 − 14.1 15.6 − 8.4 − 6.3 − 0.3 − 7.5 5.7
         May 23.3 − 7.0 − 10.5 30.3 28.6 13.8 27.9 14.2 − 40.3 − 31.9 − 1.1 − 23.1 15.8
         June 10.0 − 34.3 − 59.6 44.3 19.0 21.1 − 82.2 − 103.4 10.6 − 13.0 − 1.1 − 13.1 37.8
         July − 35.8 − 18.9 − 42.4 − 16.9 − 16.3 9.9 6.6 − 3.3 − 33.0 − 53.2 − 1.2 6.4 15.1
         Aug − 78.5 − 61.4 − 15.4 − 17.1 − 7.8 22.2 − 23.9 − 46.1 0.7 0.6 − 1.4 − 1.2 2.6         Sep 65.5 32.7 − 3.2 32.8 30.5 − 5.9 − 41.1 − 35.2 0.5 − 7.2 − 1.5 − 3.7 12.9
         Oct − 5.0 − 20.9 − 6.0 15.8 1.1 20.8 7.5 − 13.2 − 23.6 − 12.3 − 0.8 − 12.8 2.3         Nov 7.2 − 10.4 − 7.9 17.6 27.2 60.2 − 13.8 − 74.0 − 4.7 − 5.5 − 0.7 − 4.1 5.7
         Dec − 72.9 − 7.0 70.1 − 65.9 − 50.7 37.8 − 89.5 − 127.2 12.9 − 4.9 − 1.8 − 30.5 50.1
  
  
(b) German contribution
 
I Lending to non-banks (non-MFIs) II Net claims on III Monetary capital formation at monetary
in the euro area non-euro-area residents financial institutions (MFIs) in the euro area
Enterprises General
and households government Debt
Deposits securities
Liabil- with an Deposits with
Claims ities to agreed at agreed maturities
on non- non-euro- maturity notice of of over Capital
of which of which euro-area area of over over 2 years and
Period Total Total Total Total residents residents Total 2 years 3 months (net)  2 Securities Securities reserves 3 
2011          May − 26.0 − 16.3 − 24.7 − 9.7 1.3 5.3 1.4 − 3.9 − 10.3 − 0.3 − 0.1 − 3.5 − 6.4         June − 23.3 − 13.4 − 12.4 − 10.0 − 6.4 17.2 − 41.3 − 58.5 4.8 0.2 − 0.2 2.0 2.8
         July − 1.0 − 2.2 − 4.2 1.3 − 3.9 − 9.9 − 5.4 4.5 − 4.6 − 0.3 0.0 − 5.9 1.5
         Aug 15.3 12.7 − 6.1 2.6 12.0 − 31.2 24.0 55.1 0.1 − 0.1 − 0.1 − 1.2 1.5
         Sep 12.7 9.6 − 5.5 3.1 3.6 − 41.6 − 15.9 25.7 − 8.2 − 3.8 − 0.5 − 2.4 − 1.5
         Oct 29.3 25.9 − 2.1 3.4 7.6 − 39.2 − 23.4 15.8 2.4 − 2.0 − 0.2 2.7 2.0
         Nov 3.7 4.2 1.7 − 0.5 2.1 − 13.7 − 0.1 13.6 − 7.3 − 1.4 − 0.9 − 3.8 − 1.3
         Dec − 54.4 − 48.0 − 4.8 − 6.4 − 9.5 72.3 − 9.7 − 82.0 − 8.0 − 0.3 − 0.8 − 4.3 − 2.6
2012          Jan 36.8 25.6 4.3 11.2 7.7 − 79.5 29.1 108.7 − 26.2 − 3.4 − 0.9 − 22.7 0.9
         Feb − 3.1 − 2.8 − 5.8 − 0.3 1.9 − 30.3 − 10.6 19.7 9.1 − 2.8 − 1.2 8.2 4.9
         Mar 2.1 1.2 8.4 0.9 3.2 − 51.5 5.1 56.6 − 6.8 − 4.9 − 0.8 − 6.2 5.1
         Apr 18.0 16.0 12.9 2.0 − 3.2 − 12.4 − 0.5 11.9 1.4 − 1.4 − 0.3 2.3 0.8
         May − 33.7 − 25.5 − 20.6 − 8.2 − 2.7 − 21.2 − 5.0 16.2 − 12.6 − 3.0 − 0.8 − 6.0 − 2.7         June 10.1 − 7.5 − 9.2 17.6 7.0 − 27.1 − 28.9 − 1.8 1.7 − 3.0 − 1.0 − 1.3 7.0
         July 29.8 34.2 − 0.6 − 4.5 − 0.4 − 16.1 1.5 17.6 − 5.5 − 4.9 − 0.8 − 2.2 2.5
         Aug − 4.1 0.6 1.6 − 4.7 2.1 − 7.0 13.2 20.2 − 5.0 − 1.9 − 1.4 − 2.4 0.7         Sep 7.3 2.3 5.0 5.1 6.1 52.6 7.0 − 45.7 − 5.7 − 3.2 − 1.6 − 1.4 0.5
         Oct 18.7 8.2 − 5.0 10.5 3.2 10.1 0.9 − 9.2 − 14.0 − 8.9 − 0.7 − 3.8 − 0.6
         Nov − 5.2 − 4.1 0.8 − 1.2 5.0 23.7 − 7.2 − 30.9 − 12.4 − 5.4 − 1.3 − 5.4 − 0.4         Dec − 50.4 − 31.9 − 2.8 − 18.5 − 7.0 53.5 − 20.2 − 73.8 − 12.3 − 1.0 − 1.6 − 10.5 0.8
*The data in this table are based on the consolidated balance sheet of monetary MFIs’ portfolios. 3After deduction of inter-MFI participations. 4Including the counter-
financial institutions (MFIs) (Table II.2); statistical breaks have been eliminated from parts of monetary liabilities of central governments. 5Including the monetary
the flow figures (see also the “Notes on the figures“ in the “Explanatory notes“ in the liabilities of central governments (Post Office, Treasury). 6In Germany, only savings
Statistical Supplement to the Monthly Report 1, p 30
  ).1Source: ECB. 2Excluding deposits. 7Paper held by residents outside the euro area has been eliminated.

Deutsche Bundesbank
9  Monthly Report
February 2013
II Overall monetary survey in the euro area
 
 
 
(a) Euro area 
 
V Other factors VI Money stock M3 (balance I plus II less III less IV less V)
Money stock M2 Debt secur-
of which ities with
Intra- Money stock M1 maturities
Eurosystem Deposits of up to
liability/ with an Deposits Money 2 years
IV De- claim agreed at agreed market (incl money
posits of related to Currency maturity notice of Repo fund market    
banknote in circu- Overnight of up to up to 3 transac- shares paper)    central  gov-
ernments Total 4 issue Total Total Total lation deposits 5 2 years 5 tions (net) 2,7  Period (net) 2,7,8 months  5,6 
− 17.0 26.7 − − 21.9 − 8.1 − 15.9 5.0 − 20.9 7.3 0.6 38.7 − 3.5 − 7.9 2011          May
51.6 − 10.3 − 10.2 31.0 55.6 9.2 46.4 − 22.6 − 2.0 − 11.4 − 20.6 13.6          June
− 22.0 − 34.1 − − 0.9 0.1 − 20.8 8.5 − 29.3 18.8 2.1 − 1.1 − 7.1 − 1.3          July
− 60.4 45.6 − 42.0 10.2 − 17.5 − 4.7 − 12.7 22.3 5.4 45.8 22.0 − 3.3          Aug 
4.9 49.2 − 9.9 25.9 18.4 7.7 10.6 13.2 − 5.6 25.0 − 11.0 − 4.9          Sep 
0.5 − 4.0 − − 20.7 − 4.4 11.2 6.3 4.9 − 13.3 − 2.3 − 22.3 − 8.4 0.6          Oct 
4.2 − 0.1 − 3.2 1.4 15.1 3.9 11.3 − 15.0 1.2 − 28.4 6.5 2.0          Nov 
− 6.9 − 157.2 − 90.6 99.1 80.0 16.2 63.8 6.4 12.8 − 67.2 − 4.7 19.1          Dec 
59.9 38.4 − − 23.7 − 27.7 − 49.1 − 14.4 − 34.7 4.6 16.8 17.5 6.8 − 10.0 2012          Jan 23.2 − 0.8 − 25.2 11.5 − 27.8 − 0.4 − 27.4 31.6 7.7 13.8 2.2 13.4          Feb 
− 13.8 − 43.8 − 101.2 69.4 49.2 2.4 46.9 10.0 10.1 − 14.5 10.7 25.4          Mar 
− 36.3 22.0 − 5.3 0.9 3.7 2.7 1.1 − 7.3 4.5 3.4 9.7 − 6.6          Apr 
26.2 26.2 − 24.9 19.9 39.1 8.7 30.4 − 25.8 6.6 27.3 12.3 − 6.8          May
17.2 − 33.3 − 36.5 59.1 74.3 11.4 62.9 − 21.8 6.6 − 0.0 − 22.8 6.7          June
− 32.7 13.5 − 26.3 20.5 22.7 3.8 19.0 − 7.9 5.7 4.7 − 1.3 2.0          July− 37.6 − 8.5 − − 10.9 − 3.4 1.8 − 1.3 3.1 − 13.4 8.3 − 13.5 4.7 − 10.7          Aug 
33.5 7.5 − 18.1 43.1 47.1 − 3.5 50.7 − 6.3 2.2 14.2 − 20.4 − 4.2          Sep 
− 22.8 5.9 − 56.2 62.7 33.8 − 2.4 36.2 16.1 12.8 − 20.8 5.7 − 5.3          Oct 
39.4 28.2 − 4.4 29.3 35.5 − 0.2 35.7 − 14.3 8.1 7.6 − 1.1 − 22.2          Nov 
− 60.8 − 44.1 − 56.9 96.9 81.5 12.7 68.8 − 9.6 25.0 − 42.5 − 26.3 − 7.3          Dec 
 
 
 (b) German contribution 
 
V Other factors VI Money stock M3 (balance I plus II less III less IV less V)  10 
of which Components of the money stock
Intra- Debt securities
Eurosystem Deposits with
liability/ with an Deposits Money maturities
IV De- claim agreed at agreed market of up to 2 yearsposits of related to Currency maturity notice of Repo fund (incl money    
banknote in circu- Overnight of up to up to 3 transac-
shares market    central  gov-
ernments Total issue 9,11 lation Total deposits 2 years months  6 tions (net) 7,8 paper)(net) 7  Period
3.4 167.5 1.5 1.4 25.0 1.1 10.9 − 2.3 15.9 − 0.3 − 0.3 2011          May
3.0 − 6.9 1.5 2.5 5.2 8.2 − 0.4 − 1.9 − 0.3 − 0.2 − 0.2          June
− 1.2 − 42.4 1.8 2.0 − 5.5 − 4.8 13.5 − 1.2 − 13.4 − 2.5 3.0          July− 0.1 115.3 2.6 − 1.0 30.8 12.3 6.6 − 1.4 10.3 0.4 2.7          Aug 
3.4 82.4 3.2 1.3 17.9 7.2 12.3 − 1.0 4.9 0.1 − 5.6          Sep 
− 2.7 − 80.4 0.1 1.8 2.4 10.0 − 2.7 − 0.2 − 1.2 − 0.0 − 3.5          Oct − 0.2 − 141.9 0.1 1.5 30.2 20.4 1.7 − 0.1 5.3 − 0.9 3.9          Nov 
0.2 − 188.6 − 0.4 3.5 − 6.2 − 1.8 6.2 5.5 − 14.1 − 0.1 − 2.0          Dec 
4.0 43.1 0.5 − 3.1 − 11.7 0.8 − 1.0 2.1 − 10.8 − 0.3 − 2.4 2012          Jan 
3.5 10.2 1.2 − 0.1 21.7 9.8 − 3.6 3.9 10.0 − 0.2 1.8          Feb 
− 10.7 − 82.8 3.2 − 0.2 2.7 8.7 − 0.8 0.4 − 3.6 − 0.2 − 1.9          Mar 
1.9 − 5.1 2.1 1.0 17.9 10.4 3.1 − 1.2 7.2 0.0 − 1.7          Apr 
− 0.0 76.3 1.7 2.1 20.3 17.2 2.9 0.1 5.3 0.0 − 5.1          May
1.7 − 0.1 1.7 2.8 16.5 18.0 6.6 0.1 − 9.4 0.2 1.0          June
− 5.2 − 7.4 3.5 1.7 30.3 20.4 − 0.8 0.8 7.6 0.0 2.3          July− 1.1 − 49.1 3.9 − 0.9 10.8 12.4 − 2.1 0.9 1.7 − 0.4 − 1.6          Aug 
1.0 105.1 3.4 − 1.2 2.1 23.9 − 13.5 0.3 − 10.1 − 0.2 1.7          Sep 
− 2.1 − 25.3 2.8 − 0.3 56.1 55.8 − 11.1 0.2 9.9 0.4 1.1          Oct 
1.3 20.9 2.6 − 0.1 17.5 25.9 − 9.0 0.5 − 0.8 − 0.0 1.1          Nov 
− 2.6 35.6 3.0 2.0 − 53.6 − 7.0 − 24.2 6.3 − 26.5 0.2 − 2.4          Dec 
8Less German MFIs’ holdings of paper issued by euro-area MFIs. 9Including money stocks M1, M2 or M3. 11The difference between the volume of euro
national banknotes still in circulation. 10The German contributions to the Euro- banknotes actually issued by the Bundesbank and the amount disclosed in
system’s monetary aggregates should on no account be interpreted as national accordance with the accounting regime chosen by the Eurosystem (see also footnote
monetary aggregates and are therefore not comparable with the erstwhile German 2 on banknote circulation in Table III.2). 

Deutsche Bundesbank
10  Monthly Report
February 2013
II Overall monetary survey in the euro area
 
2 Consolidated balance sheet of monetary financial institutions (MFIs) *
 
 
 
Assets
Lending to non-banks (non-MFIs) in the euro area
Enterprises and households General government
Claims
Total Shares and on non-
End of assets or Debt other Debt euro-area Other
year/month liabilities Total Total Loans securities  2 equities Total Loans securities 3 residents assets
 Euro area (€ billion) 1
 
2010          Nov 25,233.6 16,525.9 13,270.2 10,896.5 1,557.0 816.7 3,255.7 1,229.3 2,026.4 5,147.1 3,560.5
         Dec 25,620.4 16,419.6 13,233.4 10,885.1 1,547.7 800.6 3,186.2 1,236.5 1,949.7 5,005.3 4,195.6
2011          Jan 25,500.8 16,485.7 13,275.0 10,923.5 1,535.7 815.9 3,210.6 1,236.0 1,974.7 5,016.9 3,998.1
         Feb 25,525.0 16,503.1 13,307.0 10,954.6 1,544.3 808.1 3,196.1 1,215.8 1,980.4 5,053.7 3,968.2
         Mar 25,122.9 16,319.3 13,269.9 10,980.2 1,510.0 779.6 3,049.4 1,205.9 1,843.5 4,946.3 3,857.3
         Apr 25,251.0 16,376.4 13,329.5 10,994.3 1,512.2 823.0 3,046.9 1,196.3 1,850.6 4,966.0 3,908.6
         May 25,574.0 16,387.1 13,348.7 11,038.5 1,510.2 800.1 3,038.3 1,173.4 1,865.0 5,131.5 4,055.4
         June 25,279.2 16,404.3 13,346.0 11,072.7 1,483.8 789.5 3,058.4 1,169.7 1,888.7 4,982.5 3,892.4
         July 25,639.6 16,391.1 13,351.3 11,080.5 1,488.2 782.6 3,039.8 1,174.2 1,865.6 5,028.4 4,220.1
         Aug 26,204.2 16,382.3 13,312.1 11,065.6 1,480.7 765.7 3,070.2 1,161.9 1,908.3 5,117.4 4,704.5
         Sep 26,794.9 16,430.2 13,342.8 11,119.3 1,470.6 752.8 3,087.4 1,163.4 1,924.0 5,190.3 5,174.5
         Oct 26,407.0 16,409.8 13,337.9 11,055.8 1,530.0 752.1 3,071.9 1,162.6 1,909.3 5,028.3 4,969.0
         Nov 26,432.7 16,439.6 13,354.5 11,066.2 1,533.8 754.5 3,085.2 1,162.1 1,923.0 5,063.5 4,929.6
         Dec 26,561.9 16,406.0 13,275.6 11,008.3 1,527.6 739.7 3,130.4 1,177.6 1,952.8 5,032.8 5,123.2
2012          Jan 26,718.2 16,495.9 13,298.3 11,018.0 1,532.5 747.9 3,197.5 1,174.8 2,022.7 5,046.1 5,176.2
         Feb 26,651.0 16,505.1 13,267.6 10,982.8 1,539.3 745.6 3,237.4 1,158.9 2,078.5 5,015.0 5,130.9
         Mar 26,510.3 16,523.6 13,261.8 10,979.1 1,526.9 755.9 3,261.8 1,155.5 2,106.3 5,033.0 4,953.7
         Apr 26,660.6 16,527.8 13,268.6 10,980.7 1,520.9 767.0 3,259.2 1,159.5 2,099.7 5,055.1 5,077.6
         May 27,612.2 16,541.0 13,266.2 10,995.2 1,520.4 750.6 3,274.8 1,161.2 2,113.6 5,204.8 5,866.4
         June 27,007.8 16,554.3 13,209.0 11,014.9 1,462.8 731.3 3,345.3 1,186.8 2,158.4 5,088.8 5,364.7
         July 27,315.3 16,490.7 13,159.9 11,008.4 1,415.9 735.6 3,330.8 1,186.4 2,144.4 5,182.6 5,642.0
         Aug 27,106.6 16,427.7 13,103.5 10,965.0 1,400.4 738.1 3,324.2 1,177.0 2,147.2 5,103.5 5,575.5
         Sep 26,938.7 16,473.8 13,101.8 10,966.1 1,386.5 749.2 3,372.0 1,180.1 2,191.9 5,045.3 5,419.5
         Oct 26,403.4 16,470.8 13,074.0 10,942.3 1,383.9 747.8 3,396.8 1,194.7 2,202.1 5,011.8 4,920.8
         Nov 26,471.0 16,495.8 13,068.7 10,944.7 1,363.5 760.5 3,427.1 1,185.1 2,242.0 4,993.6 4,981.6
         Dec 26,035.0 16,409.6 13,042.3 10,848.1 1,427.2 767.1 3,367.4 1,169.7 2,197.6 4,842.5 4,782.9
 German contribution (€ billion) 
2010          Nov 5,311.7 3,822.0 3,004.1 2,557.1 195.3 251.8 817.8 457.5 360.3 1,207.0 282.8
         Dec 6,121.9 3,742.7 2,958.4 2,518.9 192.6 246.9 784.3 447.6 336.7 1,183.6 1,195.6
2011          Jan 6,033.2 3,767.9 2,972.6 2,516.5 194.1 262.0 795.3 452.3 342.9 1,170.1 1,095.2
         Feb 5,986.9 3,764.4 2,983.4 2,535.7 193.4 254.3 781.0 440.8 340.2 1,175.3 1,047.2
         Mar 5,835.3 3,730.5 2,962.9 2,515.9 190.2 256.8 767.6 430.3 337.3 1,134.9 970.0
         Apr 5,901.3 3,753.8 2,995.6 2,526.0 189.8 279.8 758.2 419.3 339.0 1,171.1 976.3
         May 5,944.1 3,731.5 2,982.7 2,537.9 189.2 255.6 748.8 408.5 340.3 1,192.1 1,020.6
         June 5,793.3 3,706.7 2,968.3 2,536.0 187.5 244.9 738.4 404.9 333.4 1,145.1 941.6
         July 5,929.3 3,709.0 2,969.1 2,540.8 185.6 242.7 739.9 410.3 329.6 1,158.0 1,062.2
         Aug 6,140.9 3,729.5 2,988.1 2,565.9 183.4 238.8 741.4 400.7 340.8 1,190.0 1,221.3
         Sep 6,294.6 3,744.9 3,001.5 2,584.8 181.4 235.4 743.4 400.3 343.1 1,193.9 1,355.7
         Oct 6,167.9 3,767.6 3,022.8 2,609.4 179.0 234.4 744.8 396.1 348.7 1,157.5 1,242.8
         Nov 6,189.0 3,771.3 3,030.2 2,615.1 181.7 233.3 741.1 393.6 347.5 1,179.7 1,238.0
         Dec 6,229.9 3,720.7 2,986.3 2,576.3 183.2 226.8 734.4 396.9 337.5 1,180.4 1,328.9
2012          Jan 6,292.8 3,751.9 3,007.6 2,594.7 182.4 230.4 744.4 400.3 344.0 1,212.0 1,328.9
         Feb 6,239.0 3,746.7 3,001.7 2,595.0 179.9 226.8 745.0 398.1 346.9 1,193.1 1,299.2
         Mar 6,185.1 3,751.3 3,002.6 2,587.7 182.1 232.9 748.7 395.8 352.9 1,191.6 1,242.1
         Apr 6,250.5 3,775.2 3,022.0 2,594.1 179.8 248.0 753.3 401.1 352.2 1,198.9 1,276.4
         May 6,499.3 3,745.2 3,001.6 2,594.7 178.2 228.7 743.5 395.8 347.7 1,221.4 1,532.7
         June 6,313.4 3,752.8 2,970.9 2,592.7 156.5 221.7 781.8 406.4 375.4 1,183.7 1,377.0
         July 6,448.1 3,784.2 3,006.9 2,629.3 154.0 223.6 777.3 402.5 374.8 1,205.4 1,458.5
         Aug 6,408.2 3,779.1 3,005.1 2,625.9 153.0 226.2 774.0 395.7 378.2 1,206.3 1,422.8
         Sep 6,361.1 3,785.2 3,004.1 2,620.0 153.3 230.8 781.1 395.6 385.5 1,209.7 1,366.2
         Oct 6,314.2 3,803.4 3,010.6 2,631.5 147.6 231.5 792.8 402.8 390.0 1,201.4 1,309.5
         Nov 6,280.7 3,798.0 3,005.5 2,625.8 148.3 231.4 792.5 396.6 395.9 1,194.7 1,288.1
         Dec 6,157.4 3,745.1 2,970.5 2,593.8 147.9 228.9 774.6 385.1 389.5 1,159.7 1,252.6
*Monetary financial institutions (MFIs) comprise banks (including building and loan enterprises. 3Including Treasury bills and other money market paper issued by
associations), money market funds, and the European Central Bank and national general government. 4Euro currency in circulation (see also footnote 8 on p 12  )
central banks (the Eurosystem). 1Source: ECB. 2Including money market paper of Excluding MFIs‘ cash in hand (in euro). The German contribution includes the volume

Deutsche Bundesbank
11  Monthly Report
February 2013
II Overall monetary survey in the euro area
 
   
 
Liabilities
Deposits of non-banks (non-MFIs) in the euro area
Enterprises and households
With agreed At agreed
maturities of notice of 6 
over
Currency 1 year and
in of which up to up to over up to over  End of
Total in euro 5 Total Overnight 1 year 2 years 2 years 3 months 3 months year/month circulation 4 
Euro area (€ billion) 1
 
790.2 10,391.1 9,719.7 9,777.7 3,670.9 1,465.7 277.9 2,393.8 1,856.6 112.8 2010          Nov 
808.6 10,388.2 9,825.1 9,889.6 3,727.7 1,468.9 272.6 2,430.2 1,877.7 112.5          Dec 
796.2 10,423.7 9,808.8 9,866.3 3,703.9 1,448.9 276.1 2,427.0 1,898.3 112.2 2011          Jan 
796.2 10,432.9 9,806.8 9,860.3 3,672.2 1,457.6 278.7 2,439.5 1,899.3 112.9          Feb 798.3 10,440.1 9,850.1 9,900.1 3,686.2 1,452.8 287.2 2,456.5 1,904.4 113.1          Mar 
805.5 10,493.3 9,897.6 9,947.6 3,713.9 1,455.7 286.4 2,470.1 1,909.4 112.2          Apr 
810.4 10,480.9 9,895.4 9,942.1 3,692.6 1,454.8 298.8 2,473.4 1,910.6 111.9          May819.7 10,555.9 9,918.0 9,956.0 3,731.0 1,426.5 300.7 2,477.1 1,908.8 111.9          June
828.2 10,524.0 9,913.5 9,957.2 3,714.3 1,440.1 306.9 2,472.7 1,911.2 112.0          July
823.4 10,482.9 9,931.6 9,971.1 3,699.7 1,451.4 313.0 2,478.6 1,916.6 111.9          Aug 831.2 10,534.1 9,962.8 10,018.6 3,720.5 1,467.2 312.8 2,495.3 1,911.6 111.3          Sep 
837.5 10,539.9 9,973.9 10,028.0 3,719.6 1,461.5 308.5 2,517.6 1,909.4 111.5          Oct 
841.4 10,536.4 9,961.3 10,007.8 3,719.2 1,441.2 312.5 2,509.9 1,915.2 109.8          Nov 857.5 10,626.7 10,053.0 10,120.2 3,796.6 1,451.1 310.5 2,524.5 1,928.1 109.4          Dec 
843.0 10,678.9 10,051.7 10,103.6 3,762.2 1,449.5 315.4 2,523.6 1,944.5 108.5 2012          Jan 
842.5 10,705.0 10,055.5 10,102.4 3,735.4 1,465.0 325.6 2,517.3 1,950.8 108.3          Feb 844.9 10,731.7 10,103.7 10,128.3 3,775.4 1,470.2 323.2 2,491.2 1,960.7 107.6          Mar 
847.6 10,690.2 10,094.5 10,127.2 3,783.5 1,474.4 310.9 2,485.8 1,965.0 107.5          Apr 
856.3 10,708.0 10,080.1 10,102.8 3,811.2 1,445.8 310.8 2,456.9 1,971.6 106.6          May867.7 10,755.1 10,113.3 10,104.0 3,870.1 1,417.3 302.8 2,430.2 1,977.9 105.6          June
871.5 10,687.0 10,068.2 10,065.4 3,886.5 1,411.1 301.7 2,378.2 1,983.3 104.5          July
870.2 10,643.3 10,061.5 10,069.4 3,896.2 1,397.8 300.3 2,378.6 1,993.4 103.2          Aug 866.7 10,716.7 10,108.0 10,109.5 3,940.4 1,396.6 299.6 2,376.0 1,995.2 101.8          Sep 
864.3 10,745.2 10,153.4 10,151.8 3,965.0 1,409.5 305.5 2,363.3 2,007.3 101.1          Oct 
864.1 10,805.0 10,177.8 10,167.1 3,994.2 1,389.7 308.4 2,359.3 2,013.4 102.0          Nov 876.8 10,811.8 10,246.2 10,270.7 4,063.6 1,399.3 311.7 2,353.0 2,042.6 100.5          Dec 
 German contribution (€ billion) 
196.6 2,925.7 2,845.2 2,764.3 1,074.9 231.1 38.2 810.2 504.1 105.7 2010          Nov 
200.4 2,926.8 2,855.0 2,772.1 1,066.1 238.5 38.1 811.1 512.4 105.7          Dec 
197.6 2,939.7 2,862.6 2,782.4 1,081.9 233.7 38.0 808.5 515.1 105.3 2011          Jan 
197.4 2,931.4 2,853.1 2,769.4 1,066.1 236.0 38.2 806.5 517.1 105.4          Feb 
198.0 2,928.9 2,858.5 2,771.7 1,066.6 238.1 38.7 804.8 517.9 105.6          Mar 
199.5 2,937.5 2,871.5 2,786.1 1,074.5 246.3 39.5 803.5 517.6 104.8          Apr 
200.9 2,951.3 2,881.4 2,787.4 1,071.8 252.3 40.0 803.2 515.4 104.7          May
203.5 2,960.1 2,884.6 2,787.0 1,078.0 247.9 39.6 803.5 513.6 104.5          June
205.5 2,966.7 2,893.1 2,798.5 1,078.4 259.7 40.1 803.3 512.4 104.5          July
204.5 2,989.1 2,916.1 2,816.9 1,090.2 260.9 41.9 808.3 511.0 104.4          Aug 
205.8 3,008.4 2,930.1 2,832.6 1,099.5 271.9 42.5 804.8 510.1 103.9          Sep 
207.6 3,009.6 2,934.1 2,844.1 1,109.9 274.3 43.5 802.7 509.9 103.8          Oct 
209.1 3,030.2 2,954.6 2,858.9 1,128.2 272.4 44.5 801.4 510.4 102.0          Nov 
212.6 3,038.9 2,962.5 2,867.9 1,130.2 276.1 44.9 799.8 515.8 101.2          Dec 
209.6 3,040.0 2,961.3 2,864.8 1,130.9 274.7 44.8 796.2 518.1 100.3 2012          Jan 
209.4 3,049.0 2,965.8 2,864.0 1,138.8 265.6 45.4 793.2 521.0 100.0          Feb 
209.3 3,041.1 2,968.3 2,857.2 1,143.7 259.8 44.8 788.4 521.4 99.2          Mar 
210.3 3,054.1 2,981.2 2,867.5 1,156.8 260.2 44.1 787.2 520.2 98.9          Apr 
212.3 3,072.2 2,998.5 2,874.4 1,170.8 257.5 43.8 784.0 520.2 98.1          May
215.2 3,094.3 3,019.5 2,863.0 1,182.2 252.1 43.4 768.1 520.1 97.1          June
216.9 3,104.4 3,034.0 2,878.4 1,205.8 249.6 43.0 763.1 520.7 96.2          July
215.9 3,111.3 3,040.9 2,888.5 1,220.9 247.7 42.4 761.2 521.5 94.8          Aug 
214.7 3,117.3 3,045.7 2,891.7 1,237.8 239.2 41.8 757.8 521.9 93.3          Sep 
214.4 3,150.2 3,077.3 2,926.3 1,291.6 229.9 41.2 749.0 522.0 92.5          Oct 
214.2 3,162.1 3,088.7 2,929.4 1,311.1 220.5 40.6 743.5 522.4 91.2          Nov 
216.3 3,131.3 3,060.2 2,930.4 1,307.2 222.8 40.0 742.2 528.6 89.6          Dec 
of euro banknotes put into circulation by the Bundesbank in accordance with the Bundesbank can be calculated by adding to this total the item “Intra-Eurosystem
accounting regime chosen by the Eurosystem (see also footnote 2 on banknote liability/claim related to banknote issue“ (see “Other liability items“). 5Excluding
circulation in Table III.2). The volume of currency actually put into circulation by the central governments’ deposits. 6 In Germany, only savings deposits. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
12  Monthly Report
February 2013
II Overall monetary survey in the euro area
 
2 Consolidated balance sheet of monetary financial institutions (MFIs) (cont’d) *
 
 
 
Liabilities (cont’d)
Deposits of non-banks (non-MFIs) in the euro area (cont’d)  
 
General government Repo transactions Debt securities
with non-banks
Other general government in the euro area
With agreed At agreed
maturities of notice of 2 
Money
over of which market of which
Central 1 year and Enterprises fund denom-
End of govern- up to up to over up to over and shares inated
year/month ments Total Overnight 1 year 2 years 2 years 3 months 3 months Total households (net)  3 Total in euro
 Euro area (€ billion) 1
 
2010          Nov 360.8 252.5 141.4 64.3 3.4 30.4 6.6 6.5 433.4 431.8 586.5 2,832.2 2,155.3
         Dec 264.2 234.5 125.6 63.5 3.4 29.2 6.5 6.3 428.1 426.1 552.4 2,823.0 2,152.9
2011          Jan 316.5 240.8 128.2 64.8 3.4 29.2 6.9 8.2 392.0 390.6 570.2 2,849.0 2,187.0
         Feb 330.0 242.6 127.1 67.1 3.4 29.7 7.4 8.0 431.5 430.0 575.7 2,865.3 2,201.4
         Mar 296.6 243.4 126.4 68.7 3.4 29.8 7.4 7.8 405.2 403.8 568.3 2,937.1 2,284.7
         Apr 304.4 241.3 124.1 68.8 3.6 29.8 7.5 7.5 427.7 426.3 570.3 2,942.9 2,292.4
         May 287.4 251.5 128.6 74.6 3.7 29.9 7.3 7.3 466.5 464.8 566.8 2,972.2 2,303.1
         June 339.0 260.9 135.0 77.7 3.8 29.9 7.3 7.1 455.0 453.4 546.0 2,991.4 2,315.7
         July 317.0 249.8 123.9 77.6 4.6 29.6 7.2 7.0 449.2 447.8 538.8 3,009.3 2,314.6
         Aug 256.6 255.2 125.1 82.1 4.6 29.3 7.3 6.8 494.8 492.7 560.5 2,995.9 2,304.4
         Sep 261.5 254.0 122.6 83.8 4.7 29.2 7.1 6.6 517.7 515.1 549.2 3,014.9 2,314.2
         Oct 261.9 249.9 125.9 76.5 4.8 29.3 7.0 6.4 495.1 492.4 540.8 2,979.5 2,301.8
         Nov 266.1 262.5 135.1 79.8 4.9 29.3 7.2 6.2 467.0 464.2 547.0 2,999.0 2,312.1
         Dec 259.3 247.2 117.7 81.6 5.2 29.5 7.4 5.9 397.1 394.4 520.4 3,006.1 2,296.9
2012          Jan 319.2 256.2 124.5 81.8 5.3 29.7 7.5 7.4 414.5 411.7 496.8 2,992.7 2,300.6
         Feb 342.2 260.4 122.1 87.9 5.5 29.8 8.0 7.1 428.1 425.7 487.4 2,985.0 2,306.0
         Mar 328.5 274.9 129.3 94.8 5.7 29.8 8.3 6.9 413.6 410.9 498.0 2,991.2 2,315.4
         Apr 289.9 273.1 123.0 99.4 5.6 29.6 8.7 6.8 419.8 417.3 507.6 2,984.3 2,291.7
         May 316.1 289.1 131.2 106.4 5.9 30.0 9.0 6.6 428.4 422.5 519.7 2,986.5 2,274.2
         June 333.3 317.8 134.7 117.9 6.6 42.8 9.3 6.5 428.9 425.1 496.8 2,978.0 2,277.6
         July 300.6 321.1 136.0 119.9 6.2 43.0 9.5 6.4 434.0 428.2 495.5 2,999.2 2,277.7
         Aug 263.1 310.8 124.6 120.9 6.3 42.9 9.9 6.3 418.1 412.9 500.3 2,968.3 2,266.9
         Sep 296.4 310.8 127.4 117.8 6.2 43.0 10.3 6.2 428.1 424.0 479.9 2,940.8 2,253.5
         Oct 273.5 319.8 139.9 113.7 6.0 43.1 11.1 6.0 407.2 403.6 485.1 2,916.8 2,227.9
         Nov 313.0 325.0 143.6 114.0 6.1 43.5 11.9 5.9 414.7 411.0 483.4 2,886.2 2,203.1
         Dec 252.6 288.5 134.6 86.7 6.0 43.9 11.6 5.6 372.1 368.1 456.5 2,837.5 2,167.3
 German contribution (€ billion) 
2010          Nov 46.5 114.9 41.9 43.0 2.1 25.2 2.2 0.6 109.0 109.0 8.3 716.8 433.9
         Dec 39.8 114.9 40.6 44.6 2.0 25.0 2.2 0.5 86.7 86.7 8.4 708.5 425.8
2011          Jan 45.2 112.1 39.6 42.7 1.9 25.0 2.3 0.5 74.5 74.5 8.4 703.2 426.8
         Feb 47.1 114.9 39.7 45.6 1.7 25.2 2.3 0.5 93.2 93.2 8.4 698.6 424.5
         Mar 38.9 118.3 42.0 46.6 1.8 25.2 2.3 0.5 78.9 78.9 8.5 686.0 426.2
         Apr 34.3 117.2 39.8 47.6 1.8 25.2 2.3 0.5 89.2 89.2 8.4 678.5 420.6
         May 37.7 126.3 44.2 52.1 1.9 25.2 2.3 0.5 105.2 105.2 8.0 681.7 417.9
         June 40.7 132.3 46.1 56.4 2.1 25.2 2.2 0.5 104.8 104.8 7.8 682.3 415.4
         July 39.5 128.7 41.3 57.0 2.8 25.1 2.1 0.5 91.8 91.8 5.3 684.4 410.9
         Aug 39.4 132.8 41.6 61.1 2.8 24.8 2.1 0.4 101.9 101.9 5.7 682.6 412.4
         Sep 42.9 132.9 41.1 61.8 3.0 24.7 2.0 0.4 107.0 107.0 5.8 687.1 406.9
         Oct 40.1 125.3 39.9 55.3 3.1 24.6 2.0 0.4 105.7 105.7 5.8 678.9 407.9
         Nov 39.9 131.4 43.3 57.9 3.2 24.6 2.0 0.4 111.1 111.1 4.9 689.5 411.6
         Dec 40.1 130.8 40.2 60.3 3.3 24.6 2.0 0.4 97.1 97.1 4.8 691.1 404.5
2012          Jan 44.1 131.1 40.0 60.6 3.4 24.8 1.8 0.4 86.7 86.2 4.5 663.1 384.3
         Feb 47.6 137.4 41.5 65.1 3.6 24.9 1.9 0.4 96.6 96.5 4.4 667.4 389.9
         Mar 36.9 147.0 45.4 70.6 3.7 24.9 1.9 0.4 93.1 93.0 4.1 660.3 379.3
         Apr 36.4 150.2 42.9 76.6 3.7 24.8 1.9 0.4 102.9 102.9 4.2 664.4 380.6
         May 36.4 161.4 47.2 82.8 3.9 25.1 2.0 0.4 108.3 105.0 4.2 666.3 373.8
         June 38.1 193.1 53.6 94.5 4.6 37.9 2.1 0.4 98.9 97.7 4.4 662.6 374.1
         July 32.9 193.1 50.9 97.0 4.3 38.1 2.3 0.5 106.6 103.2 4.4 668.8 371.1
         Aug 31.9 190.9 47.6 98.0 4.4 38.0 2.4 0.5 108.1 105.4 4.0 658.6 366.5
         Sep 32.6 193.0 53.8 93.9 4.4 38.1 2.4 0.5 98.0 97.3 3.8 654.1 367.7
         Oct 30.5 193.4 55.6 92.6 4.3 38.0 2.4 0.5 107.8 107.3 4.2 649.9 362.0
         Nov 31.9 200.9 62.0 93.4 4.5 38.1 2.5 0.5 107.0 106.6 4.1 644.4 357.6
         Dec 29.2 171.7 58.5 67.5 4.4 38.2 2.5 0.5 80.4 80.1 4.3 626.8 350.3
*Monetary financial institutions (MFIs) comprise banks (including building and loan paper. 5Excluding liabilities arising from securities issued. 6After deduction of
associations), money market funds, and the European Central Bank and national inter-MFI participations. 7The German contributions to the Eurosystem’s monetary
central banks (the Eurosystem). 1Source: ECB. 2In Germany, only savings aggregates should on no account be interpreted as national monetary aggregates
deposits. 3Excluding holdings of MFIs; for the German contribution, excluding and are therefore not comparable with the erstwhile German money stocks M1, M2
German MFIs’ portfolios of securities issued by MFIs in the euro area. 4In Germany, or M3. 8including DM banknotes still in circulation (see also footnote 4 on
bank debt securities with maturities of up to one year are classed as money market p 10    )9For the German contribution, the difference between the volume of

Deutsche Bundesbank
13  Monthly Report
February 2013
II Overall monetary survey in the euro area
 
   
 
 Memo item
 Other liability items Monetary aggregates  7 
 (From 2002, German contribution
issued (net) 3 excludes currency in circulation)
With maturities of
of which Monetary
Intra- liabilities
Eurosystem- of centralliability/ govern-
over Liabilities Excess claim Monetary ments1 year and to non- Capital of related to capital (Post
up to up to over euro-area and inter-MFI banknote forma- Office, End of1 year 
4 2 years 2 years residents 5 reserves 6 liabilities Total 8 issue 9 M1 10 M2 11 M3 12 tion 13 year/month Treasury)  14 
Euro area (€ billion) 1
 
24.6 97.2 2,710.3 4,582.3 2,004.6 9.3 3,775.8 − 4,685.4 8,388.3 9,270.1 7,258.5 111.4 2010          Nov 
31.0 92.3 2,699.7 4,367.0 2,022.9 28.2 4,344.9 − 4,751.8 8,472.3 9,320.8 7,300.8 117.9          Dec 
35.6 94.6 2,718.8 4,376.3 2,003.6 27.7 4,204.6 − 4,709.7 8,435.8 9,309.2 7,299.0 109.0 2011          Jan 
39.0 89.2 2,737.2 4,372.1 2,033.3 32.8 4,143.9 − 4,675.4 8,415.9 9,298.7 7,360.5 106.8          Feb 
68.9 86.4 2,781.7 4,163.1 2,038.8 39.2 3,870.3 − 4,690.7 8,441.1 9,328.8 7,427.7 106.3          Mar 
71.2 87.7 2,783.9 4,202.7 2,043.2 5.2 3,907.1 − 4,724.3 8,482.0 9,391.5 7,446.8 107.4          Apr 
74.5 84.8 2,813.0 4,338.9 2,070.9 − 22.5 4,052.6 − 4,712.1 8,488.1 9,392.0 7,506.6 106.8          May
96.1 80.4 2,814.8 4,119.7 2,086.2 − 5.3 3,863.7 − 4,767.0 8,518.0 9,404.4 7,527.1 107.4          June
95.1 83.1 2,831.0 4,139.3 2,151.0 − 7.5 4,166.5 − 4,748.7 8,522.3 9,405.9 7,603.4 108.3          July
97.5 77.7 2,820.7 4,159.1 2,205.1 − 5.0 4,662.3 − 4,729.8 8,530.7 9,446.1 7,652.3 107.4          Aug 
94.8 75.8 2,844.3 4,216.3 2,183.9 − 15.7 5,141.6 − 4,755.0 8,568.0 9,466.0 7,670.6 106.6          Sep 
95.5 75.3 2,808.6 4,123.8 2,186.8 − 34.5 4,950.4 − 4,762.4 8,555.9 9,436.9 7,660.2 105.2          Oct 
90.9 82.3 2,825.8 4,147.9 2,200.5 − 25.4 4,905.7 − 4,778.9 8,565.2 9,448.4 7,681.6 108.8          Nov 
122.9 83.8 2,799.5 4,087.7 2,219.9 − 18.5 5,020.6 − 4,863.0 8,671.7 9,535.8 7,688.6 116.0          Dec 
111.5 92.3 2,788.9 4,113.7 2,274.0 − 64.1 5,146.9 − 4,812.2 8,641.3 9,485.8 7,732.0 107.7 2012          Jan 
118.0 99.4 2,767.6 4,077.4 2,291.5 − 39.3 5,056.1 − 4,781.9 8,649.3 9,496.0 7,721.6 106.5          Feb 
137.1 104.2 2,750.0 4,148.8 2,271.8 − 58.2 4,853.3 − 4,831.8 8,719.6 9,596.2 7,657.3 107.0          Mar 
121.4 108.3 2,754.6 4,187.8 2,269.4 − 56.7 4,987.3 − 4,837.2 8,726.0 9,602.1 7,653.8 107.8          Apr 
116.5 107.3 2,762.7 4,295.8 2,276.7 − 55.0 5,776.6 − 4,883.1 8,757.3 9,639.3 7,639.5 109.1          May
130.4 102.6 2,745.0 4,167.9 2,313.2 − 55.2 5,232.5 − 4,958.3 8,815.4 9,677.2 7,643.3 111.0          June
137.8 96.8 2,764.6 4,211.1 2,354.3 − 56.7 5,529.0 − 4,982.8 8,839.3 9,706.8 7,651.0 113.5          July
124.2 96.9 2,747.1 4,124.7 2,362.7 − 41.2 5,459.5 − 4,979.1 8,832.4 9,683.0 7,640.8 113.0          Aug 
121.3 93.2 2,726.2 4,056.0 2,406.6 − 61.2 5,326.9 − 5,022.9 8,873.1 9,696.5 7,659.8 113.1          Sep 
115.1 94.1 2,707.6 4,029.1 2,396.6 − 73.6 4,858.9 − 5,056.2 8,934.5 9,750.9 7,617.7 112.1          Oct 
97.2 89.5 2,699.6 3,950.9 2,410.9 − 75.1 4,947.9 − 5,091.5 8,960.0 9,750.8 7,621.2 114.6          Nov 
88.5 90.7 2,658.3 3,798.0 2,411.1 − 52.5 4,719.9 − 5,170.8 9,053.1 9,803.0 7,572.4 120.0          Dec 
 German contribution (€ billion) 
28.0 18.4 670.4 772.9 451.7 − 439.4 766.9 156.6 1,116.8 1,937.4 2,101.1 2,063.8 − 2010          Nov 
27.4 15.4 665.7 736.6 450.9 − 456.6 1,660.7 157.1 1,106.7 1,944.6 2,082.5 2,058.9 −          Dec 
24.2 15.5 663.5 727.0 447.6 − 421.8 1,554.6 157.8 1,121.5 1,955.2 2,077.8 2,050.4 − 2011          Jan 
26.1 11.8 660.6 732.7 455.8 − 446.9 1,513.6 158.9 1,105.8 1,946.8 2,086.4 2,054.0 −          Feb 
23.7 12.9 649.4 672.7 455.5 − 438.1 1,442.9 159.5 1,108.6 1,954.0 2,078.0 2,040.9 −          Mar 
19.8 13.6 645.1 694.9 457.3 − 413.4 1,448.8 160.1 1,114.2 1,969.4 2,100.4 2,036.3 −          Apr 
19.3 14.0 648.4 698.7 456.2 − 455.5 1,498.4 161.6 1,116.0 1,980.1 2,126.5 2,038.2 −          May
18.7 14.3 649.2 638.7 455.5 − 480.5 1,424.7 163.1 1,124.1 1,985.8 2,131.5 2,038.3 −          June
22.2 14.0 648.2 647.7 467.3 − 484.9 1,550.9 164.9 1,119.7 1,993.8 2,127.1 2,048.9 −          July
25.2 13.6 643.8 699.8 483.8 − 542.9 1,720.9 167.5 1,131.9 2,011.7 2,158.1 2,065.6 −          Aug 
21.8 11.9 653.4 738.9 476.2 − 600.2 1,871.4 170.7 1,140.5 2,031.7 2,178.3 2,063.4 −          Sep 
18.8 11.2 648.9 746.8 478.0 − 608.3 1,751.4 170.7 1,149.9 2,037.9 2,179.4 2,058.5 −          Oct 
22.5 11.7 655.3 769.8 478.8 − 639.8 1,744.5 170.9 1,171.5 2,061.9 2,212.1 2,062.5 −          Nov 
22.8 9.7 658.6 696.1 473.6 − 607.5 1,835.9 170.5 1,170.4 2,072.8 2,207.2 2,058.1 −          Dec 
19.7 10.3 633.1 801.2 486.8 − 614.9 1,825.4 171.0 1,170.9 2,074.3 2,195.5 2,041.5 − 2012          Jan 
20.2 11.4 635.8 815.9 493.4 − 670.9 1,783.3 172.2 1,180.3 2,082.8 2,215.4 2,047.8 −          Feb 
19.9 9.8 630.5 873.9 492.0 − 710.2 1,730.8 175.5 1,189.1 2,091.3 2,218.3 2,035.5 −          Mar 
16.6 11.5 636.3 889.0 497.3 − 733.8 1,772.5 177.6 1,199.7 2,106.4 2,241.6 2,044.8 −          Apr 
13.4 9.9 643.0 919.2 495.5 − 796.5 2,029.9 179.3 1,218.0 2,128.2 2,264.1 2,046.1 −          May
13.8 10.5 638.3 913.8 501.1 − 829.7 1,868.1 181.0 1,235.7 2,152.5 2,280.1 2,042.9 −          June
15.5 11.2 642.1 937.5 512.6 − 840.9 1,954.6 184.5 1,256.7 2,173.6 2,311.3 2,052.6 −          July
14.6 10.3 633.7 951.4 513.4 − 857.1 1,918.4 188.5 1,268.5 2,184.9 2,322.0 2,041.6 −          Aug 
16.2 10.4 627.5 900.0 521.5 − 806.5 1,872.9 191.9 1,291.6 2,195.0 2,323.4 2,038.7 −          Sep 
17.3 10.3 622.3 889.1 515.3 − 822.5 1,820.3 194.7 1,347.2 2,239.6 2,379.2 2,017.6 −          Oct 
17.8 10.8 615.8 857.9 516.9 − 813.3 1,801.6 197.3 1,373.1 2,257.0 2,396.7 2,005.9 −          Nov 
15.9 10.2 600.7 780.2 510.2 − 759.5 1,783.6 200.3 1,365.7 2,231.6 2,342.4 1,981.4 −          Dec 
euro banknotes actually issued by the Bundesbank and the amount disclosed in years and at agreed notice of up to 3 months (excluding central governments’
accordance with the accounting regime chosen by the Eurosystem (see also footnote deposits) and (for the euro area) central governments’ monetary liabilities with such2 on banknote circulation in Table III.2). 10Overnight deposits (excluding central maturities. 12M2 plus repo transactions, money market fund shares, money market
governments’ deposits), and (for the euro area) currency in circulation, central paper and debt securities up to 2 years. 13Deposits with agreed maturities of over 2
governments’ overnight monetary liabilities, which are not included in the years and at agreed notice of over 3 months, debt securities with maturities of over 2consolidated balance sheet. 11M1 plus deposits with agreed maturities of up to 2 years, capital and reserves. 14 Non-existent in Germany. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
14  Monthly Report
February 2013
II  Overall monetary survey in the euro area
  
3  Banking system’s liquidity position  * 
Stocks
  
€ billion; period averages of daily positions
Liquidity-providing factors Liquidity-absorbing factors
Monetary policy operations of the Eurosystem
Credit
institutions‘
currentaccount
Net assets Longer- Other Other balances
Reserve in gold Main term Marginal liquidity- liquidity- Banknotes Central Other (including
maintenance and foreign refinancing refinancing lending providing Deposit absorbing in government factors minimum Base
period currency operations operations facility facility deposits (net)  
6 reserves) 7 money 8 operations 3 operations 4 circulation 5 
ending in 1 
Eurosystem  2  
  
2010          July 500.9 167.5 573.2 0.3 140.2 230.4 54.4 813.0 126.5 − 56.5 214.4 1 257.8
         Aug 543.4 185.4 432.2 0.1 121.4 96.7 67.5 819.3 95.2 − 11.8 215.7 1 131.7
         Sep 543.2 153.1 435.0 0.6 121.8 83.7 66.9 816.0 86.8 − 15.0 215.3 1 115.0
         Oct 531.3 164.5 392.6 0.7 128.3 68.8 64.8 814.1 96.4 − 39.8 213.1 1 096.1
         Nov 511.3 183.0 340.0 0.8 124.5 41.9 68.8 813.5 92.1 − 72.0 215.2 1 070.7
         Dec 511.1 179.5 336.3 1.9 130.4 44.7 70.8 815.9 94.4 − 79.1 212.5 1 073.1
2011          Jan 527.5 197.0 316.6 0.5 140.9 66.5 73.5 833.9 81.3 − 85.1 212.4 1 112.8
         Feb 549.7 185.4 318.2 0.1 137.2 39.2 81.3 822.0 101.2 − 66.7 213.6 1 074.8
         Mar 550.0 134.4 321.0 7.6 137.9 26.9 80.3 820.9 89.8 − 79.9 212.9 1 060.7
         Apr 544.1 97.3 335.4 0.8 137.6 23.0 79.5 824.4 73.1 − 95.2 210.5 1 057.9
         May 525.9 109.2 320.5 0.4 136.6 22.8 76.8 833.9 61.3 − 111.6 209.5 1 066.1
         June 526.8 114.7 317.9 0.0 135.5 18.4 76.2 836.6 62.6 − 107.9 209.0 1 064.0
         July 533.6 146.0 311.6 0.2 134.2 29.5 76.9 846.2 73.4 − 111.2 210.9 1 086.6
         Aug 541.3 171.7 321.5 0.1 133.9 56.7 79.2 854.2 71.4 − 104.5 211.5 1 122.4
         Sep 540.3 135.1 389.8 0.3 178.0 121.8 109.8 853.2 52.3 − 103.0 209.5 1 184.5
         Oct 571.0 193.0 373.6 1.5 217.4 168.7 162.9 854.9 50.0 − 88.5 208.7 1 232.2
         Nov 612.1 196.1 387.1 2.8 231.9 204.6 178.0 861.4 57.9 − 80.8 208.9 1 274.8
         Dec 622.1 238.0 389.0 4.4 260.3 253.7 200.5 869.4 63.8 − 85.9 212.2 1 335.3
2012          Jan 683.9 169.4 627.3 6.0 278.6 399.3 210.8 883.7 67.7 − 8.7 212.3 1 495.3
         Feb 698.3 120.6 683.6 2.3 282.4 489.0 218.5 870.1 100.1 1.6 108.1 1 467.1
         Mar 688.2 89.1 860.1 2.2 288.1 621.0 219.5 868.8 129.0 − 19.4 108.9 1 598.6
         Apr 667.6 56.4 1 093.4 3.0 280.6 771.3 215.8 871.2 146.3 − 13.3 109.6 1 752.1
         May 659.3 47.0 1 088.7 1.0 281.3 771.4 214.0 872.7 137.1 − 28.5 110.5 1 754.6
         June 656.8 58.1 1 071.0 1.6 281.1 770.8 212.8 880.8 117.8 − 24.2 110.8 1 762.3
         July 666.7 160.7 1 074.9 1.8 280.7 770.6 210.9 892.5 138.8 60.6 111.5 1 774.6
         Aug 678.9 146.0 1 079.9 0.8 281.0 343.1 211.5 897.7 130.7 93.5 510.2 1 751.0
         Sep 676.8 130.6 1 076.8 0.8 279.7 328.6 210.5 897.6 107.0 81.0 540.0 1 766.2
         Oct 681.5 117.6 1 062.8 1.1 279.6 305.4 209.0 892.7 101.4 96.0 538.1 1 736.2
         Nov 708.5 84.4 1 053.8 1.0 278.9 256.1 209.3 890.0 95.7 146.4 529.2 1 675.3
         Dec 708.0 74.0 1 044.1 1.6 277.3 231.8 208.5 889.3 121.1 144.5 509.9 1 631.0
2013          Jan 683.9 78.2 1 036.8 3.7 276.8 238.4 206.6 903.5 100.1 141.7 489.0 1 630.9
Deutsche Bundesbank
2010          July 133.9 55.2 112.8 0.1 32.7 81.0 22.3 202.5 0.4 − 22.7 51.2 334.7
         Aug 145.8 61.7 52.8 0.1 28.4 32.7 20.7 204.2 0.5 − 21.6 52.3 289.2
         Sep 145.5 52.6 50.3 0.2 28.4 24.8 26.5 204.2 0.5 − 30.9 52.0 280.9
         Oct 142.2 54.4 40.5 0.1 29.3 27.0 32.4 204.0 0.5 − 48.3 51.0 281.9
         Nov 136.7 63.7 28.9 0.0 28.8 21.2 35.7 202.9 0.4 − 53.6 51.5 275.5
         Dec 136.5 60.5 32.5 0.1 29.3 21.2 41.0 203.3 0.2 − 57.7 51.0 275.5
2011          Jan 141.9 55.2 34.1 0.1 31.2 28.2 42.0 207.7 0.3 − 66.9 51.3 287.2
         Feb 148.1 44.6 44.0 0.0 31.6 19.8 43.0 204.6 0.2 − 51.0 51.8 276.2
         Mar 148.4 31.3 44.7 0.0 31.7 14.6 48.4 204.8 0.2 − 63.7 51.8 271.2
         Apr 146.6 24.1 45.5 0.0 31.9 13.6 38.9 205.2 0.2 − 61.5 51.7 270.4
         May 142.4 17.9 47.7 0.2 31.9 10.8 38.2 207.6 0.4 − 68.2 51.4 269.8
         June 142.5 10.6 41.5 0.0 31.7 8.1 33.4 208.7 0.3 − 75.8 51.7 268.4
         July 144.3 22.8 35.8 0.0 31.4 11.1 36.4 211.1 0.3 − 77.3 52.6 274.8
         Aug 146.7 13.6 36.5 0.0 31.3 15.4 35.2 213.0 0.2 − 88.4 52.7 281.1
         Sep 146.7 6.6 33.6 0.0 42.3 27.8 60.2 213.4 0.3 − 124.3 51.8 293.0
         Oct 155.5 10.7 20.8 0.0 52.3 41.5 86.8 213.5 0.3 − 155.0 52.2 307.2
         Nov 167.5 4.0 18.0 0.1 55.7 55.0 87.9 213.8 0.2 − 164.5 53.0 321.8
         Dec 168.7 3.0 17.6 0.1 63.2 60.4 126.2 216.3 0.7 − 205.5 54.4 331.2
2012          Jan 182.3 4.4 40.3 0.1 67.2 101.7 117.0 219.8 0.8 − 199.6 54.5 376.0
         Feb 183.2 1.8 46.7 0.0 69.2 141.9 130.5 216.9 0.8 − 217.6 28.3 387.1
         Mar 183.6 1.2 59.4 0.0 69.2 192.6 142.2 217.0 0.8 − 266.8 27.7 437.3
         Apr 182.0 1.2 73.8 0.1 68.8 257.2 142.7 218.1 0.7 − 321.6 28.8 504.1
         May 181.3 1.3 73.4 0.1 68.8 260.5 144.6 217.8 0.7 − 327.5 28.9 507.2
         June 180.4 3.8 74.6 0.5 68.7 276.9 150.3 219.8 0.8 − 349.1 29.3 526.0
         July 180.3 3.1 76.5 0.1 68.6 293.3 152.1 222.3 1.0 − 369.8 29.6 545.2
         Aug 179.6 2.5 76.3 0.2 68.8 102.0 162.9 225.1 4.2 − 351.5 184.8 511.9
         Sep 177.7 1.6 75.4 0.0 68.6 112.1 134.6 224.6 6.0 − 349.1 195.2 531.9
         Oct 181.8 1.7 74.5 0.2 68.7 108.2 124.0 223.4 6.8 − 325.3 189.9 521.4
         Nov 190.7 1.9 72.9 0.1 68.2 76.7 126.2 222.4 7.1 − 291.0 192.5 491.5
         Dec 190.8 1.8 70.5 0.2 67.5 61.3 124.6 222.0 8.9 − 277.5 191.5 474.8
2013          Jan 185.1 2.1 69.7 0.1 67.4 56.1 117.2 225.3 10.0 − 242.5 158.2 439.6
Discrepancies may arise from rounding. *The banking system’s liquidity position is includes liquidity absorbed as a result of the Eurosystem’s foreign exchange swap
defined as the current account holdings in euro of euro-area credit institutions with operations. 5From 2002, euro banknotes and other banknotes which have been
the Eurosystem. Amounts are derived from the consolidated financial statement of issued by the national central banks of the Eurosystem and which are still in cir-the Eurosystem and the financial statement of the Bundesbank. 1Figures are daily av- culation. In accordance with the accounting procedure chosen by the Eurosystem for
erages for the reserve maintenance period ending in the month indicated. 2Source: the issue of euro banknotes, 8% of the total value of the euro banknotes in cir-
ECB. 3Includes liquidity provided under the Eurosystem’s covered bond purchase culation are allocated on a monthly basis to the ECB. The counterpart of this
programme and the Eurosystem’s securities markets programme. 4From Aug. 2009,

Deutsche Bundesbank
15  Monthly Report
February 2013
II  Overall monetary survey in the euro area
  
  
Flows
  
Liquidity-providing factors Liquidity-absorbing factors
Monetary policy operations of the Eurosystem
Credit
institutions‘
currentaccount
Net assets Longer- Other Other balances
in gold Main term Marginal liquidity- liquidity- Banknotes Central Other (including Reserve
and foreign refinancing refinancing lending providing Deposit absorbing in government factors minimum Base maintenance
currency operations operations facility facility deposits (net)  
6 reserves) 7 money 8 period operations 3 operations 4 circulation 5 
ending in 1 
Eurosystem  2  
  
+ 38.5 + 57.5 − 133.5 − 0.0 + 53.3 − 58.4 + 20.3 + 6.8 + 3.4 + 41.9 + 1.9 − 49.7 2010          July
+ 42.5 + 17.9 − 141.0 − 0.2 − 18.8 −133.7 + 13.1 + 6.3 − 31.3 + 44.7 + 1.3 − 126.1          Aug 
− 0.2 − 32.3 + 2.8 + 0.5 + 0.4 − 13.0 − 0.6 − 3.3 − 8.4 − 3.2 − 0.4 − 16.7          Sep 
− 11.9 + 11.4 − 42.4 + 0.1 + 6.5 − 14.9 − 2.1 − 1.9 + 9.6 − 24.8 − 2.2 − 18.9          Oct 
− 20.0 + 18.5 − 52.6 + 0.1 − 3.8 − 26.9 + 4.0 − 0.6 − 4.3 − 32.2 + 2.1 − 25.4          Nov − 0.2 − 3.5 − 3.7 + 1.1 + 5.9 + 2.8 + 2.0 + 2.4 + 2.3 − 7.1 − 2.7 + 2.4          Dec 
+ 16.4 + 17.5 − 19.7 − 1.4 + 10.5 + 21.8 + 2.7 + 18.0 − 13.1 − 6.0 − 0.1 + 39.7 2011          Jan 
+ 22.2 − 11.6 + 1.6 − 0.4 − 3.7 − 27.3 + 7.8 − 11.9 + 19.9 + 18.4 + 1.2 − 38.0          Feb + 0.3 − 51.0 + 2.8 + 7.5 + 0.7 − 12.3 − 1.0 − 1.1 − 11.4 − 13.2 − 0.7 − 14.1          Mar 
− 5.9 − 37.1 + 14.4 − 6.8 − 0.3 − 3.9 − 0.8 + 3.5 − 16.7 − 15.3 − 2.4 − 2.8          Apr 
− 18.2 + 11.9 − 14.9 − 0.4 − 1.0 − 0.2 − 2.7 + 9.5 − 11.8 − 16.4 − 1.0 + 8.2          May+ 0.9 + 5.5 − 2.6 − 0.4 − 1.1 − 4.4 − 0.6 + 2.7 + 1.3 + 3.7 − 0.5 − 2.1          June
+ 6.8 + 31.3 − 6.3 + 0.2 − 1.3 + 11.1 + 0.7 + 9.6 + 10.8 − 3.3 + 1.9 + 22.6          July
+ 7.7 + 25.7 + 9.9 − 0.1 − 0.3 + 27.2 + 2.3 + 8.0 − 2.0 + 6.7 + 0.6 + 35.8          Aug 
− 1.0 − 36.6 + 68.3 + 0.2 + 44.1 + 65.1 + 30.6 − 1.0 − 19.1 + 1.5 − 2.0 + 62.1          Sep 
+ 30.7 + 57.9 − 16.2 + 1.2 + 39.4 + 46.9 + 53.1 + 1.7 − 2.3 + 14.5 − 0.8 + 47.7          Oct 
+ 41.1 + 3.1 + 13.5 + 1.3 + 14.5 + 35.9 + 15.1 + 6.5 + 7.9 + 7.7 + 0.2 + 42.6          Nov 
+ 10.0 + 41.9 + 1.9 + 1.6 + 28.4 + 49.1 + 22.5 + 8.0 + 5.9 − 5.1 + 3.3 + 60.5          Dec 
+ 61.8 − 68.6 + 238.3 + 1.6 + 18.3 +145.6 + 10.3 + 14.3 + 3.9 + 77.2 + 0.1 + 160.0 2012          Jan 
+ 14.4 − 48.8 + 56.3 − 3.7 + 3.8 + 89.7 + 7.7 − 13.6 + 32.4 + 10.3 − 104.2 − 28.2          Feb − 10.1 − 31.5 + 176.5 − 0.1 + 5.7 +132.0 + 1.0 − 1.3 + 28.9 − 21.0 + 0.8 + 131.5          Mar 
− 20.6 − 32.7 + 233.3 + 0.8 − 7.5 +150.3 − 3.7 + 2.4 + 17.3 + 6.1 + 0.7 + 153.5          Apr 
− 8.3 − 9.4 − 4.7 − 2.0 + 0.7 + 0.1 − 1.8 + 1.5 − 9.2 − 15.2 + 0.9 + 2.5          May− 2.5 + 11.1 − 17.7 + 0.6 − 0.2 − 0.6 − 1.2 + 8.1 − 19.3 + 4.3 + 0.3 + 7.7          June
+ 9.9 + 102.6 + 3.9 + 0.2 − 0.4 − 0.2 − 1.9 + 11.7 + 21.0 + 84.8 + 0.7 + 12.3          July
+ 12.2 − 14.7 + 5.0 − 1.0 + 0.3 −427.5 + 0.6 + 5.2 − 8.1 + 32.9 + 398.7 − 23.6          Aug − 2.1 − 15.4 − 3.1 + 0.0 − 1.3 − 14.5 − 1.0 − 0.1 − 23.7 − 12.5 + 29.8 + 15.2          Sep 
+ 4.7 − 13.0 − 14.0 + 0.3 − 0.1 − 23.2 − 1.5 − 4.9 − 5.6 + 15.0 − 1.9 − 30.0          Oct 
+ 27.0 − 33.2 − 9.0 − 0.1 − 0.7 − 49.3 + 0.3 − 2.7 − 5.7 + 50.4 − 8.9 − 60.9          Nov 
− 0.5 − 10.4 − 9.7 + 0.6 − 1.6 − 24.3 − 0.8 − 0.7 + 25.4 − 1.9 − 19.3 − 44.3          Dec 
− 24.1 + 4.2 − 7.3 + 2.1 − 0.5 + 6.6 − 1.9 + 14.2 − 21.0 − 2.8 − 20.9 − 0.1 2013          Jan 
Deutsche Bundesbank
+ 11.7 + 12.2 − 53.6 + 0.0 + 10.7 − 32.1 + 5.1 + 1.0 − 0.4 + 6.5 + 0.8 − 30.3 2010          July
+ 11.9 + 6.6 − 60.0 + 0.0 − 4.3 − 48.3 − 1.5 + 1.7 + 0.1 + 1.1 + 1.0 − 45.6          Aug − 0.3 − 9.1 − 2.5 + 0.1 + 0.0 − 7.9 + 5.8 + 0.0 − 0.1 − 9.3 − 0.3 − 8.3          Sep 
− 3.3 + 1.8 − 9.8 − 0.1 + 0.9 + 2.2 + 5.9 − 0.2 − 0.0 − 17.4 − 1.0 + 1.0          Oct 
− 5.6 + 9.3 − 11.6 − 0.1 − 0.5 − 5.8 + 3.3 − 1.1 − 0.1 − 5.3 + 0.5 − 6.4          Nov − 0.2 − 3.1 + 3.6 + 0.1 + 0.6 + 0.0 + 5.3 + 0.5 − 0.2 − 4.1 − 0.5 − 0.0          Dec 
+ 5.5 − 5.4 + 1.5 − 0.0 + 1.9 + 7.0 + 1.1 + 4.3 + 0.0 − 9.2 + 0.4 + 11.6 2011          Jan 
+ 6.2 − 10.6 + 9.9 − 0.1 + 0.3 − 8.4 + 0.9 − 3.1 − 0.0 + 15.9 + 0.5 − 11.0          Feb + 0.3 − 13.3 + 0.7 − 0.0 + 0.2 − 5.2 + 5.5 + 0.3 − 0.0 − 12.7 − 0.1 − 5.0          Mar 
− 1.8 − 7.2 + 0.9 + 0.0 + 0.1 − 1.0 − 9.5 + 0.3 + 0.0 + 2.2 − 0.0 − 0.7          Apr 
− 4.2 − 6.2 + 2.2 + 0.2 + 0.0 − 2.8 − 0.7 + 2.4 + 0.1 − 6.7 − 0.3 − 0.7          May
+ 0.2 − 7.3 − 6.3 − 0.2 − 0.2 − 2.7 − 4.7 + 1.1 − 0.1 − 7.6 + 0.2 − 1.4          June
+ 1.7 + 12.2 − 5.7 + 0.0 − 0.3 + 3.0 + 3.0 + 2.4 + 0.0 − 1.5 + 0.9 + 6.4          July
+ 2.4 − 9.2 + 0.7 − 0.0 − 0.0 + 4.3 − 1.2 + 1.9 − 0.1 − 11.1 + 0.1 + 6.3          Aug 
+ 0.0 − 6.9 − 2.9 + 0.0 + 11.0 + 12.4 + 25.0 + 0.4 + 0.1 − 35.9 − 0.9 + 12.0          Sep 
+ 8.8 + 4.1 − 12.8 + 0.0 + 9.9 + 13.7 + 26.6 + 0.1 − 0.0 − 30.7 + 0.3 + 14.2          Oct 
+ 12.0 − 6.7 − 2.8 + 0.1 + 3.5 + 13.5 + 1.1 + 0.3 − 0.0 − 9.5 + 0.9 + 14.6          Nov + 1.2 − 1.0 − 0.4 + 0.0 + 7.5 + 5.5 + 38.4 + 2.5 + 0.5 − 41.0 + 1.4 + 9.4          Dec 
+ 13.6 + 1.4 + 22.7 − 0.0 + 4.0 + 41.3 − 9.2 + 3.5 + 0.1 + 5.9 + 0.1 + 44.8 2012          Jan 
+ 0.9 − 2.6 + 6.4 − 0.1 + 2.0 + 40.2 + 13.5 − 2.9 − 0.1 − 18.0 − 26.2 + 11.1          Feb + 0.4 − 0.6 + 12.7 + 0.0 +
 0.0 + 50.7 + 11.7 + 0.1 + 0.0 − 49.3 − 0.6 + 50.2          Mar 
−
1.6 + 0.0 + 14.4 + 0.1 − 0.4 + 64.7 + 0.5 + 1.1 − 0.0 − 54.7 + 1.1 + 66.8          Apr 
− 0.7 + 0.1 − 0.4 − 0.0 − 0.0 + 3.3 + 1.8 − 0.3 − 0.0 − 5.9 + 0.1 + 3.1          May− 0.9 + 2.5 + 1.1 + 0.4 − 0.1 + 16.4 + 5.7 + 2.0 + 0.1 − 21.6 + 0.4 + 18.8          June
− 0.1 − 0.7 + 1.9 − 0.4 − 0.1 + 16.4 + 1.8 + 2.5 + 0.3 − 20.7 + 0.3 + 19.2          July
− 0.6 − 0.5 − 0.2 + 0.2 + 0.2 −191.3 + 10.9 + 2.8 + 3.1 + 18.3 + 155.2 − 33.2          Aug 
− 1.9 − 0.9 − 0.9 − 0.2 − 0.2 + 10.0 − 28.3 − 0.4 + 1.8 + 2.4 + 10.4 + 20.0          Sep 
+ 4.1 + 0.1 − 0.9 + 0.1 + 0.1 − 3.9 − 10.6 − 1.3 + 0.8 + 23.8 − 5.3 − 10.5          Oct 
+ 8.9 + 0.2 − 1.6 − 0.1 − 0.5 − 31.5 + 2.2 − 1.0 + 0.3 + 34.4 + 2.6 − 29.9          Nov 
+ 0.2 − 0.1 − 2.4 + 0.1 − 0.7 − 15.3 − 1.6 − 0.4 + 1.8 + 13.5 − 1.0 − 16.7          Dec 
− 5.8 + 0.3 − 0.8 − 0.1 − 0.1 − 5.2 − 7.4 + 3.3 + 1.1 + 35.0 − 33.3 − 35.2 2013          Jan 
adjustment is shown under “Other factors”. The remaining 92% of the value of the “Other factors”. From 2003 euro banknotes only. 6Remaining items in the
euro banknotes in circulation is allocated, likewise on a monthly basis, to the NCBs, consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem and the financial statement of
with each NCB showing in its balance sheet the percentage of the euro banknotes in the Bundesbank. 7Equal to the difference between the sum of liquidity-providing
circulation that corresponds to its paid-up share in the ECB’s capital. The difference factors and the sum of liquidity-absorbing factors. 8Calculated as the sum of the
between the value of the euro banknotes allocated to an NCB and the value of the “deposit facility”, “banknotes in circulation” and “credit institutions’ current accounteuro banknotes which that NCB has put into circulation is likewise shown under holdings”. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
16  Monthly Report
February 2013
III Consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem
 
1 Assets *
 
 
€ billion
Claims on non-euro area Claims on non-euro area residents denominated
in foreign currency residents denominated in euro
Balances with
Claims on banks, security
On investments, euro area Balances Claims
reporting external loans residents with banks, arising from
date/ Gold and other denominated security the credit
End of Total and gold Receivables external in foreign investments facility under
month 1 assets receivables Total from the IMF assets currency Total and loans ERM II
 Eurosystem 2
 
2012 June                  1 3,002.6 432.7 243.6 86.1 157.5 49.1 17.6 17.6 −
                                8 3,009.7 432.7 244.5 86.1 158.4 49.1 16.6 16.6 −
                              15 3,027.3 432.7 246.5 86.6 159.9 48.2 17.6 17.6 −
                              22 3,057.9 432.7 247.0 86.5 160.5 48.9 18.3 18.3 −
                              29 3,102.2 433.8 260.9 89.8 171.1 51.9 17.5 17.5 −
         July                  6 3,085.0 433.8 261.0 90.0 171.0 54.2 16.9 16.9 −
                              13 3,099.6 433.8 261.4 90.1 171.3 55.5 17.2 17.2 −
                              20 3,079.7 433.8 261.4 90.1 171.3 52.7 15.7 15.7 −
                              27 3,094.1 433.8 260.4 90.2 170.2 57.5 15.9 15.9 −
         Aug                  3 3,085.2 433.8 260.8 90.2 170.5 56.4 15.8 15.8 −
                              10 3,086.8 433.8 260.4 90.2 170.2 55.6 16.8 16.8 −
                              17 3,085.8 433.8 261.4 90.2 171.3 51.1 16.5 16.5 −
                              24 3,080.5 433.8 262.4 91.1 171.3 50.6 18.0 18.0 −
                              31 3,084.8 433.8 262.9 91.1 171.9 49.0 19.2 19.2 −
         Sep                  7 3,073.5 433.8 262.9 91.1 171.8 46.3 18.7 18.7 −
                              14 3,061.0 433.8 262.6 90.9 171.7 42.7 19.3 19.3 −
                              21 3,049.5 433.8 261.5 90.8 170.6 42.0 17.9 17.9 −
                              28 3,082.4 479.3 256.4 90.1 166.3 39.9 16.5 16.5 −
         Oct                  5 3,062.6 479.1 257.8 90.1 167.7 39.7 17.2 17.2 −
                              12 3,053.6 479.1 258.4 90.1 168.4 39.1 16.9 16.9 −
                              19 3,046.6 479.1 258.9 90.1 168.8 38.0 17.1 17.1 −
                              26 3,046.5 479.1 260.1 90.3 169.8 38.3 17.3 17.3 −
2012 Nov                  2 3,040.7 479.1 258.4 90.3 168.1 37.3 16.6 16.6 −
                                9 3,038.9 479.1 256.9 89.8 167.0 37.3 15.3 15.3 −
                              16 3,041.3 479.1 259.0 89.6 169.4 37.2 15.8 15.8 −
                              23 3,035.3 479.1 258.9 89.5 169.4 36.0 16.8 16.8 −
                              30 3,033.3 479.1 259.5 89.5 170.0 36.8 16.6 16.6 −
         Dec                  7 3,030.4 479.1 259.6 89.5 170.1 36.9 17.7 17.7 −
                              14 3,024.8 479.1 259.5 89.5 170.1 35.1 17.4 17.4 −
                              21 3,011.2 479.1 258.0 89.0 169.0 33.7 19.1 19.1 −
                              28 3,018.2 479.1 258.8 89.0 169.8 33.6 19.2 19.2 −
2013 Jan                  4 2,956.2 438.7 250.7 87.0 163.7 32.3 19.0 19.0 −
                              11 2,952.5 438.7 251.3 87.0 164.3 31.4 21.7 21.7 −
                              18 2,942.2 438.7 256.4 87.7 168.7 31.5 22.4 22.4 −
                              25 2,928.8 438.7 253.9 87.4 166.5 31.2 22.0 22.0 −
         Feb                  1 2,769.7 438.7 255.1 87.3 167.7 28.7 22.0 22.0 −
 Deutsche Bundesbank
2011          Mar 632.2 110.1 45.6 19.3 26.3 −−−−
         Apr 610.1 110.1 46.1 19.3 26.9 −−−−
         May 611.3 110.1 46.1 19.3 26.9 −−−−
         June 632.3 114.1 45.7 19.1 26.6 −−−−
         July 629.0 114.1 46.1 19.7 26.4 −−−−
         Aug 679.1 114.1 46.0 19.7 26.3 −−−−
         Sep 764.6 131.9 49.5 20.9 28.7 −−−−
         Oct 772.8 131.7 49.5 20.9 28.6 0.5−−−
         Nov 812.7 131.7 49.2 20.9 28.3 0.5−−−
         Dec 837.6 132.9 51.7 22.3 29.4 18.1−−−
2012          Jan 860.1 132.9 51.9 22.3 29.6 11.6−−−
         Feb 910.9 132.9 52.4 22.6 29.8 14.3−−−
         Mar 1 002.8 135.8 50.9 22.2 28.7 8.9−−−
         Apr 1 031.3 135.8 51.4 22.4 29.1 8.3−−−
         May 1 087.0 135.8 51.6 22.3 29.3 6.9−−−
         June 1 119.4 136.1 54.2 23.3 30.8 6.2−−−
         July 1 112.9 136.1 54.1 23.3 30.8 3.2−−−
         Aug 1 135.4 136.1 54.5 23.5 31.0 1.7−−−
         Sep 1 090.9 150.4 53.0 23.3 29.7 1.5−−−
         Oct 1 110.0 150.2 53.1 23.3 29.8 1.8−−−
         Nov 1 098.6 150.2 52.8 23.0 29.8 2.3−−−
         Dec 1 026.0 137.5 51.1 22.3 28.8 3.3−−−
2013          Jan 964.1 137.5 51.6 22.5 29.1 1.6−−−
 
*The consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem comprises the financial national central banks of the euro area member states (NCBs). The balance sheet
statement of the European Central Bank (ECB) and the financial statements of the items for foreign currency, securities, gold and financial instruments are valued at the

Deutsche Bundesbank
17  Monthly Report
February 2013
III Consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem
 
   
 
Lending to euro area credit institutions related to monetary policy operations Securities of euro area residents
denominated in euro in euro
 Other claims on euro area
Longer- Fine-  credit Securities General    On
Main re- term re- tuning Structural Credits institutions held for government    reportingfinancing financing reverse reverse Marginal related denomi- monetary debt deno-    date/opera- opera- opera- opera- lending to margin nated in policy Other minated in Other    End of
Total tions tions tions tions facility calls euro Total purposes securities euro assets    month  
1 
Eurosystem 2
 
1 115.5 51.2 1 063.6 − − 0.7 0.0 250.6 605.1 280.8 324.3 30.6 257.8 2012 June                  1
1 185.1 119.4 1 063.6 − − 1.9 0.1 189.5 605.7 281.2 324.4 30.6 255.9                                 81 206.3 131.7 1 071.5 − − 3.0 0.0 191.7 603.3 280.2 323.1 30.6 250.4                               151 240.5 167.3 1 071.5 − − 1.5 0.3 186.4 602.4 280.3 322.1 30.6 251.0                               221 260.9 180.4 1 079.7 − − 0.7 0.0 186.4 602.3 281.0 321.3 30.1 258.6                               29
1 243.5 163.6 1 078.3 − − 1.3 0.3 184.2 601.8 281.3 320.5 30.0 259.5          July                  6
1 248.5 163.7 1 083.7 − − 0.7 0.4 187.0 602.5 281.5 321.0 30.0 263.8                               131 241.3 156.8 1 083.7 − − 0.7 0.0 179.2 602.1 280.9 321.2 30.0 263.5                               201 207.6 130.7 1 075.5 − − 1.2 0.2 225.9 601.8 280.8 321.0 30.0 261.1                               27
1 209.4 132.8 1 075.5 − − 1.0 0.1 215.4 602.5 280.9 321.6 30.0 261.1          Aug                  3
1 210.7 133.4 1 076.3 − − 0.9 0.1 214.1 602.7 281.0 321.7 30.0 262.8                               101 208.3 130.6 1 076.3 − − 0.9 0.5 218.2 602.8 281.2 321.6 30.0 263.7                               171 208.2 131.2 1 076.3 − − 0.7 0.0 215.0 599.6 278.9 320.7 30.0 262.7                               241 209.8 131.5 1 077.7 − − 0.6 0.0 218.8 599.3 279.0 320.3 30.0 261.9                               31
1 205.3 126.3 1 077.7 − − 0.9 0.3 216.3 598.7 278.9 319.8 30.0 261.5          Sep                  7
1 197.8 130.3 1 066.4 − − 1.0 0.1 214.5 598.4 279.2 319.3 30.0 261.8                               141 187.2 119.8 1 066.3 − − 1.0 0.1 213.4 597.6 279.4 318.3 30.0 266.1                               211 178.2 117.4 1 058.8 − − 2.0 0.0 212.7 597.7 280.2 317.4 30.0 271.9                               28
1 162.3 102.9 1 058.8 − − 0.7 0.0 211.2 596.9 280.0 316.9 30.0 268.4          Oct                  5
1 148.6 89.8 1 057.5 − − 1.3 0.0 220.6 596.5 279.7 316.7 30.0 264.4                               121 150.5 91.8 1 057.5 − − 1.0 0.1 214.6 594.1 279.3 314.8 30.0 264.4                               191 135.1 77.3 1 057.5 − − 0.3 0.0 230.7 591.7 279.0 312.7 30.0 264.1                               26
1 131.7 83.7 1 047.5 − − 0.5 0.0 232.2 590.2 278.3 311.9 30.0 265.2 2012 Nov                  2
1 127.9 79.5 1 047.5 − − 0.9 0.0 233.3 589.4 278.2 311.3 30.0 269.7                                 91 124.3 75.2 1 047.3 − − 1.8 0.0 235.5 587.1 278.0 309.2 30.0 273.3                               161 125.2 75.4 1 047.3 − − 2.4 0.1 229.5 586.2 277.3 309.0 30.0 273.6                               231 117.4 74.6 1 040.8 − − 1.9 0.1 233.7 586.1 277.1 309.0 30.0 274.1                               30
1 112.1 70.8 1 040.8 − − 0.6 − 229.5 585.9 277.1 308.9 30.0 279.6          Dec                  7
1 113.7 73.2 1 040.2 − − 0.3 0.0 229.0 585.6 277.0 308.6 30.0 275.4                               14
1 122.3 72.7 1 035.8 − − 13.9 0.0 208.3 585.2 276.8 308.4 30.0 275.4                               211 128.8 89.7 1 035.8 − − 3.4 − 206.3 585.1 276.8 308.3 30.0 277.2                               28
1 117.0 81.1 1 035.8 − − 0.1 − 203.8 584.9 276.9 308.0 30.0 279.7 2013 Jan                  4
1 113.6 77.7 1 035.8 − − 0.2 0.0 200.1 585.6 276.6 309.0 30.0 280.1                               111 163.2 131.2 1 030.9 − − 1.0 0.0 138.0 582.6 276.2 306.5 30.0 279.4                               181 156.2 125.3 1 030.9 − − 0.0 − 131.3 582.8 275.2 307.5 30.0 282.7                               25
1 015.5 124.1 891.3 − − 0.0 − 127.3 576.0 270.9 305.1 29.9 276.6          Feb                  1
 Deutsche Bundesbank
71.7 25.5 46.1 − − 0.1 − 9.6 37.2 31.9 5.2 4.4 353.5 2011          Mar 
64.8 18.7 46.1 − − 0.0 − 8.3 37.0 31.9 5.1 4.4 339.3          Apr 
52.1 10.9 41.3 − − 0.0 − 7.7 36.8 31.7 5.1 4.4 353.9          May
57.8 21.8 35.9 − − 0.2 − 6.7 36.5 31.4 5.1 4.4 366.9          June
45.8 9.8 36.0 − − 0.0 − 8.1 36.4 31.3 5.1 4.4 374.0          July
37.6 3.5 34.0 − − 0.0 − 7.8 48.4 43.5 4.9 4.4 420.9          Aug 31.1 12.6 18.4 − − 0.0 − 9.7 57.8 52.9 4.9 4.4 480.2          Sep 
21.3 3.5 17.7 − − 0.1 − 8.5 60.8 55.9 4.9 4.4 496.1          Oct 
21.6 3.8 17.7 − − 0.1 − 9.2 70.1 65.2 4.9 4.4 525.9          Nov 55.8 8.6 47.1 − − 0.0 − 8.5 71.9 67.0 4.9 4.4 494.3          Dec 
48.6 2.0 46.6 − − 0.0 − 8.4 74.1 69.2 4.9 4.4 528.2 2012          Jan 
48.0 0.9 46.6 0.5 − 0.0 − 8.5 73.9 69.1 4.8 4.4 576.4          Feb 74.6 1.2 73.2 − − 0.1 − 9.4 73.5 68.7 4.8 4.4 645.3          Mar 
74.9 1.2 73.7 − − 0.0 − 10.1 73.5 68.7 4.8 4.4 672.8          Apr 
79.7 3.6 76.1 − − 0.0 − 8.0 73.4 68.6 4.8 4.4 727.0          May79.5 2.5 77.0 − − 0.1 − 8.8 73.1 68.7 4.3 4.4 757.2          June
78.6 2.9 75.7 − − 0.0 − 7.6 73.2 68.8 4.3 4.4 755.7          July
76.8 1.7 75.1 − − 0.0 − 9.4 72.8 68.4 4.3 4.4 779.6          Aug 76.1 1.7 73.9 − − 0.5 − 8.9 68.8 68.8 − 4.4 727.8          Sep 
76.6 1.6 73.9 − − 1.1 − 5.0 67.9 67.9 − 4.4 751.0          Oct 
72.4 1.9 69.7 − − 0.8 − 2.5 67.4 67.4 − 4.4 746.6          Nov 73.1 2.9 69.7 − − 0.6 − 1.4 67.5 67.5 − 4.4 687.5          Dec 
49.5 0.3 49.1 − − 0.0 − 4.9 66.2 66.2 − 4.4 648.3 2013          Jan 
 
end of the quarter. 1For the Eurosystem: financial statements for specific weekly  
dates; for the Bundesbank: end of month financial statement. 2 Source: ECB. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
18  Monthly Report
February 2013
III Consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem
 
2 Liabilities *
 
 
€ billion
Liabilities to euro area credit institutions related to Liabilities to
monetary policy operations denominated in euro other euro area residents
denominated in euro
 
Other
Current liabilities
accounts to euro-
On (covering Fine- area credit
reporting the tuning Deposits institutions Debt
date/ Banknotes minimum Fixed- reverse deno- certifi- General related to
End of Total in circu- reserve Deposit term opera- margin minated cates govern- Other
month 1 liabilities lation 2 Total system) facility deposits tions calls in euro issued Total ment liabilities
 Eurosystem 4
 
2012 June                  1 3,002.6 884.9 1,091.7 94.0 785.0 212.0 − 0.7 3.4 − 129.0 118.1 10.9
                                8 3,009.7 888.6 1,088.3 87.1 788.2 212.0 − 1.0 3.9 − 124.7 113.8 10.9
                              15 3,027.3 891.5 1,105.2 150.9 741.2 212.0 − 1.1 3.9 − 119.1 107.7 11.4
                              22 3,057.9 890.3 1,084.1 97.0 775.3 210.5 − 1.3 3.8 − 161.4 150.6 10.8
                              29 3,102.2 893.7 1,105.5 116.7 772.9 210.5 − 5.5 3.7 − 158.5 146.3 12.1
         July                  6 3,085.0 897.5 1,100.6 91.8 795.2 210.5 − 3.1 6.6 − 147.3 134.9 12.4
                              13 3,099.6 897.7 1,082.0 479.7 386.8 211.5 − 3.9 6.6 − 145.8 131.9 13.9
                              20 3,079.7 896.4 1,056.7 493.0 349.4 211.5 − 2.8 3.7 − 158.0 137.3 20.8
                              27 3,094.1 897.3 1,066.9 515.7 337.0 211.5 − 2.6 3.8 − 152.1 130.3 21.9
         Aug                  3 3,085.2 902.2 1,063.8 549.7 300.4 211.5 − 2.3 4.3 − 144.2 120.5 23.7
                              10 3,086.8 901.3 1,076.4 551.8 310.8 211.5 − 2.2 4.3 − 142.9 119.8 23.1
                              17 3,085.8 900.9 1,082.7 542.1 326.9 211.5 − 2.2 4.6 − 131.6 108.4 23.1
                              24 3,080.5 895.9 1,068.8 525.5 329.3 211.5 − 2.5 4.5 − 146.3 124.2 22.1
                              31 3,084.8 896.4 1,098.6 541.0 346.0 209.0 − 2.6 4.5 − 110.4 88.3 22.1
         Sep                  7 3,073.5 896.6 1,088.0 549.3 326.8 209.0 − 2.9 4.7 − 113.7 87.4 26.4
                              14 3,061.0 894.5 1,073.1 526.4 335.0 209.0 − 2.7 5.5 − 121.1 100.8 20.3
                              21 3,049.5 892.2 1,067.6 550.5 305.6 209.0 − 2.5 5.8 − 115.8 94.1 21.7
                              28 3,082.4 892.5 1,052.5 525.8 315.8 209.0 − 1.9 5.2 − 119.4 99.0 20.5
         Oct                  5 3,062.6 894.4 1,028.2 521.3 296.5 209.0 − 1.4 6.1 − 128.7 105.9 22.8
                              12 3,053.6 892.2 998.9 527.5 260.5 209.5 − 1.4 6.1 − 154.7 100.7 54.0
                              19 3,046.6 889.1 993.7 533.7 248.7 209.5 − 1.8 6.2 − 156.9 100.9 56.0
                              26 3,046.5 888.1 993.4 515.3 267.0 209.5 − 1.7 6.4 − 151.2 92.6 58.6
2012 Nov                  2 3,040.7 893.2 988.0 515.4 261.4 209.5 − 1.7 6.1 − 151.8 96.6 55.1
                                9 3,038.9 890.3 994.0 534.0 248.5 208.5 − 3.0 6.8 − 139.6 86.8 52.8
                              16 3,041.3 888.3 984.6 558.5 215.9 208.5 − 1.7 6.8 − 148.2 97.6 50.6
                              23 3,035.3 885.8 950.8 506.9 233.6 208.5 − 1.9 6.3 − 178.8 130.8 48.0
                              30 3,033.3 889.7 937.7 489.9 237.8 208.5 − 1.5 7.1 − 180.2 133.2 47.0
         Dec                  7 3,030.4 895.8 932.2 486.9 235.3 208.5 − 1.5 7.4 − 173.1 122.7 50.4
                              14 3,024.8 898.8 939.6 504.9 225.1 208.5 − 1.1 6.7 − 163.9 115.6 48.3
                              21 3,011.2 910.8 928.0 489.7 229.4 208.5 − 0.5 7.2 − 145.7 105.9 39.7
                              28 3,018.2 913.7 915.8 456.1 261.7 197.6 − 0.5 6.8 − 150.6 108.2 42.4
2013 Jan                  4 2,956.2 904.4 924.0 462.3 252.6 208.5 − 0.6 6.5 − 137.2 96.9 40.4
                              11 2,952.5 893.6 939.5 507.7 222.6 208.5 − 0.7 6.5 − 134.9 97.1 37.7
                              18 2,942.2 887.0 945.3 540.0 196.4 208.5 − 0.4 6.1 − 117.2 83.9 33.4
                              25 2,928.8 881.9 895.6 479.5 207.2 208.5 − 0.4 6.6 − 162.5 126.1 36.4
         Feb                  1 2,769.7 883.9 797.9 408.2 181.0 208.5 − 0.3 6.8 − 107.6 72.5 35.0
 Deutsche Bundesbank
2011          Mar 632.2 205.2 119.9 63.9 17.1 38.9 − − − − 0.6 0.2 0.5
         Apr 610.1 207.8 95.9 47.9 11.7 36.3 − − − − 0.8 0.4 0.4
         May 611.3 208.6 95.0 54.3 7.7 32.9 − − − − 0.6 0.2 0.4
         June 632.3 210.9 108.5 63.3 8.7 36.5 − − − − 1.1 0.2 0.9
         July 629.0 213.1 100.3 52.5 13.2 34.6 − − − − 0.6 0.2 0.4
         Aug 679.1 211.6 145.5 60.5 16.0 68.9 − − − − 0.7 0.2 0.4
         Sep 764.6 213.5 205.5 69.8 56.8 78.8 − − − − 0.9 0.3 0.6
         Oct 772.8 215.2 212.1 59.9 58.4 93.9 − − − − 1.1 0.4 0.7
         Nov 812.7 216.1 249.8 49.6 58.2 142.0 − − − − 1.5 0.8 0.7
         Dec 837.6 221.3 228.9 76.4 66.1 86.4 − − − − 5.5 0.7 4.8
2012          Jan 860.1 216.3 294.1 34.6 119.7 139.7 − − − − 1.4 0.7 0.7
         Feb 910.9 216.0 342.5 29.9 166.4 146.2 − − − − 2.8 0.8 2.0
         Mar 1 002.8 216.6 424.5 30.9 248.2 145.4 − − − − 3.4 0.8 2.6
         Apr 1 031.3 217.6 452.3 33.0 276.9 142.4 − − 0.0 − 2.0 0.7 1.3
         May 1 087.0 219.9 464.8 33.4 275.0 156.3 − − 0.0 − 2.6 0.6 2.0
         June 1 119.4 222.5 457.1 33.3 262.9 160.9 − − − − 3.2 1.2 2.0
         July 1 112.9 223.6 421.7 178.3 88.1 155.2 − − − − 19.5 7.3 12.2
         Aug 1 135.4 223.2 442.5 201.4 111.4 129.7 − − − − 17.6 5.5 12.1
         Sep 1 090.9 222.2 385.8 173.1 78.4 134.2 − − − − 17.3 7.0 10.2
         Oct 1 110.0 222.0 372.3 177.9 59.0 135.5 − − − − 50.7 5.1 45.7
         Nov 1 098.6 221.5 361.9 184.1 51.9 125.9 − − − − 47.2 11.4 35.9
         Dec 1 026.0 227.2 300.0 129.6 40.5 129.9 − − 0.0 − 39.9 11.9 28.1
2013          Jan 964.1 219.7 260.4 128.3 39.1 93.0 − − − − 25.9 2.3 23.6
 
*The consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem comprises the financial specific weekly dates; for the Bundesbank: end-of-month financial statements.
statement of the European Central Bank (ECB) and the financial statements of the 2According to the accounting regime chosen by the Eurosystem on the issue of euro
national central banks of the euro area member states (NCBs). The balance sheet banknotes, a share of 8% of the total value of the euro banknotes in circulation is
items for foreign currency, securities, gold and financial instruments are valued at allocated to the ECB on a monthly basis. The counterpart of this adjustment ismarket rates at the end of the quarter. 1For Eurosystem: financial statements for disclosed as an “Intra-Eurosystem liability related to euro banknote issue". The

Deutsche Bundesbank
19  Monthly Report
February 2013
III Consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem
 
   
 
Liabilities to non-euro area
residents denominated inforeign currency
Intra-  Eurosystem  
Liabilities Liabilities Liabilities Counterpart liability     Onto non-euro to euro area Deposits, arising of special related to     reportingarea residents residents balances from the drawing euro  Capital    date/denominated in foreign and other rights allocated Other banknote Revaluation and    End of credit facility
in euro currency Total liabilities under ERM II by the IMF issue  
2 accounts reserves    month 1 liabilities 3 
Eurosystem 4
 
116.4 5.5 9.3 9.3 − 54.7 222.9 − 399.4 85.4 2012 June                  1
129.6 4.0 9.9 9.9 − 54.7 220.7 − 399.4 85.7                                 8
138.8 2.9 10.1 10.1 − 54.7 215.8 − 399.4 85.7                               15
149.7 2.9 8.8 8.8 − 54.7 217.0 − 399.4 85.7                               22
149.9 3.3 9.6 9.6 − 56.9 225.5 − 409.8 85.7                               29
139.7 4.0 9.7 9.7 − 56.9 227.1 − 409.8 85.7          July                  6
172.2 4.9 10.0 10.0 − 56.9 228.0 − 409.8 85.7                               13
173.2 5.9 8.4 8.4 − 56.9 225.0 − 409.8 85.7                               20
185.0 5.4 9.0 9.0 − 56.9 222.1 − 409.8 85.7                               27
179.7 6.2 8.2 8.2 − 56.9 224.1 − 409.8 85.7          Aug                  3
170.3 6.0 7.5 7.5 − 56.9 225.7 − 409.8 85.7                               10
172.0 3.6 8.4 8.4 − 56.9 229.6 − 409.8 85.7                               17
171.3 4.2 7.9 7.9 − 56.9 229.0 − 409.8 85.8                               24
177.9 6.2 7.0 7.0 − 56.9 231.2 − 409.8 85.8                               31
174.2 6.4 7.0 7.0 − 56.9 230.4 − 409.8 85.8          Sep                  7
170.2 5.6 7.9 7.9 − 56.9 230.6 − 409.8 85.8                               14
170.6 3.6 8.0 8.0 − 56.9 233.4 − 409.8 85.7                               21
171.7 4.2 6.6 6.6 − 56.2 235.6 − 452.8 85.6                               28
164.6 4.8 7.1 7.1 − 56.2 234.1 − 452.8 85.6          Oct                  5
164.5 4.7 7.1 7.1 − 56.2 230.6 − 452.8 85.6                               12
163.4 5.8 5.6 5.6 − 56.2 231.4 − 452.8 85.6                               19
168.9 6.4 5.9 5.9 − 56.2 231.5 − 452.8 85.6                               26
164.9 4.1 5.5 5.5 − 56.2 232.5 − 452.8 85.6 2012 Nov                  2
170.2 2.1 6.9 6.9 − 56.2 234.4 − 452.8 85.6                                 9
172.7 5.2 5.8 5.8 − 56.2 235.1 − 452.8 85.6                               16
174.3 2.6 7.2 7.2 − 56.2 234.9 − 452.8 85.6                               23
176.8 4.5 6.5 6.5 − 56.2 236.0 − 452.8 85.6                               30
176.6 4.8 6.4 6.4 − 56.2 239.4 − 452.8 85.6          Dec                  7
174.9 4.0 5.8 5.8 − 56.2 236.4 − 452.8 85.6                               14
178.5 2.5 6.9 6.9 − 56.2 237.1 − 452.8 85.6                               21
186.3 3.5 6.4 6.4 − 56.2 240.5 − 452.8 85.6                               28
185.5 3.4 5.8 5.8 − 55.0 241.4 − 407.4 85.6 2013 Jan                  4
180.3 3.6 5.7 5.7 − 55.0 240.3 − 407.4 85.7                               11
186.4 8.8 5.0 5.0 − 55.0 238.4 − 407.4 85.6                               18
185.1 4.9 6.5 6.5 − 55.0 237.8 − 407.4 85.6                               25
179.1 4.5 7.5 7.5 − 55.0 234.4 − 407.4 85.6          Feb                  1
 Deutsche Bundesbank
13.4 0.0 0.2 0.2 − 13.5 11.7 159.5 103.3 5.0 2011          Mar 
11.7 0.0 0.3 0.3 − 13.5 11.7 160.1 103.3 5.0          Apr 
11.3 0.0 0.3 0.3 − 13.5 12.1 161.6 103.3 5.0          May
10.5 0.0 0.1 0.1 − 13.3 12.7 163.1 107.0 5.0          June
11.9 0.0 0.1 0.1 − 13.3 12.7 164.9 107.0 5.0          July
15.3 0.0 0.1 0.1 − 13.3 13.2 167.5 107.0 5.0          Aug 
13.6 0.0 0.2 0.2 − 13.9 14.3 170.7 127.1 5.0          Sep 
12.9 0.0 0.2 0.2 − 13.9 14.4 170.7 127.1 5.0          Oct 
13.5 0.0 0.0 0.0 − 13.9 14.9 170.9 127.1 5.0          Nov 
46.6 0.0 − − − 14.3 16.2 170.5 129.4 5.0          Dec 
11.9 0.0 0.0 0.0 − 14.3 16.5 171.0 129.4 5.0 2012          Jan 
11.7 0.0 0.3 0.3 − 14.3 16.7 172.2 129.4 5.0          Feb 
15.9 0.0 0.2 0.2 − 14.0 16.9 175.5 130.8 5.0          Mar 
14.2 0.0 0.4 0.4 − 14.0 17.5 177.6 130.8 5.0          Apr 
52.0 0.0 0.4 0.4 − 14.0 18.2 179.3 130.8 5.0          May
83.2 0.0 0.2 0.2 − 14.5 19.5 181.0 133.3 5.0          June
90.9 0.0 0.0 0.0 − 14.5 19.9 184.5 133.3 5.0          July
89.9 0.0 0.3 0.3 − 14.5 20.6 188.5 133.3 5.0          Aug 
86.3 0.0 − − − 14.4 21.6 191.9 146.5 5.0          Sep 
82.1 0.0 0.2 0.2 − 14.4 22.3 194.7 146.5 5.0          Oct 
81.8 0.0 0.3 0.3 − 14.4 22.8 197.3 146.5 5.0          Nov 
83.3 0.0 0.1 0.1 − 14.1 23.6 200.3 132.6 5.0          Dec 
83.0 0.0 0.5 0.5 − 14.1 23.5 199.4 132.6 5.0 2013          Jan 
 
remaining 92 % of the value of the euro banknote in circulation is also allocated to according to the aforementioned accounting regime and the value of euro bank-
the NCBs on a monthly basis, and each NCB shows in its balance sheet the share of notes put into circulation is also disclosed as an “Intra-Eurosystem claim/ liabilitythe euro banknotes issued which corresponds to its paid-up share in the ECB’s related to banknote issue“. 3For the Deutsche Bundesbank: including DM banknotes
capital. The difference between the value of the euro banknotes allocated to the NCB still in circulation. 4 Source: ECB. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
20  Monthly Report
February 2013
IV Banks
 
1 Assets and liabilities of monetary financial institutions (excluding the Bundesbank) in Germany *
  Assets
 
€ billion
Lending to banks (MFIs) in the euro area Lending to non-banks (non-MFIs) in the
to banks in the home country to banks in other member states to non-banks in the home country
Enterprises and house-
holds
Secur- Secur-
Balance ities ities
sheet Cash issued issued
Period total 1 in hand Total Total Loans by banks Total Loans by banks Total Total Total Loans
 End of year or month
 
2004 6,617.4 15.1 2,174.3 1,750.2 1,122.9 627.3 424.2 306.3 117.9 3,358.7 3,083.4 2,479.7 2,223.8
2005 6,859.4 15.3 2,276.0 1,762.5 1,148.4 614.1 513.5 356.3 157.2 3,407.6 3,085.2 2,504.6 2,226.3
2006 7,154.4 16.4 2,314.4 1,718.6 1,138.6 580.0 595.8 376.8 219.0 3,462.1 3,085.5 2,536.1 2,241.9
2007 7,592.4 17.8 2,523.4 1,847.9 1,290.4 557.5 675.4 421.6 253.8 3,487.3 3,061.8 2,556.0 2,288.8
2008 7,892.7 17.8 2,681.8 1,990.2 1,404.3 585.8 691.6 452.9 238.8 3,638.2 3,163.0 2,686.9 2,357.3
2009 7,436.1 17.2 2,480.5 1,813.2 1,218.4 594.8 667.3 449.5 217.8 3,638.3 3,187.9 2,692.9 2,357.5
2010 8,304.8 16.5 2,361.6 1,787.8 1,276.9 510.9 573.9 372.8 201.0 3,724.5 3,303.0 2,669.2 2,354.7
2011 8,393.3 16.4 2,394.4 1,844.5 1,362.2 482.2 550.0 362.3 187.7 3,673.5 3,270.5 2,709.4 2,415.1
2012 8,225.5 19.2 2,309.0 1,813.2 1,363.8 449.4 495.9 322.2 173.7 3,688.6 3,289.4 2,695.5 2,435.7
2011          Mar 7,955.1 14.5 2,294.6 1,735.4 1,233.8 501.6 559.2 363.4 195.8 3,711.8 3,293.5 2,680.7 2,358.7
         Apr 7,997.9 15.6 2,270.7 1,702.2 1,203.3 498.8 568.6 371.7 196.9 3,736.5 3,307.8 2,703.7 2,360.9
         May 8,045.9 15.5 2,281.5 1,702.0 1,201.3 500.7 579.5 377.0 202.5 3,714.4 3,289.2 2,694.7 2,376.5         June 7,885.8 15.2 2,268.6 1,696.4 1,206.0 490.5 572.2 372.2 200.0 3,690.4 3,269.3 2,681.2 2,374.9
         July 8,001.0 15.2 2,258.5 1,688.2 1,202.0 486.2 570.2 372.7 197.6 3,692.8 3,270.6 2,685.7 2,379.2
         Aug 8,263.5 14.7 2,337.8 1,750.1 1,265.2 484.9 587.7 390.3 197.4 3,699.5 3,279.0 2,706.1 2,403.3
         Sep 8,489.4 15.4 2,412.6 1,831.2 1,349.4 481.8 581.4 385.6 195.7 3,708.6 3,285.3 2,713.5 2,413.7
         Oct 8,353.9 15.4 2,407.5 1,830.0 1,347.6 482.3 577.5 385.1 192.4 3,728.0 3,311.1 2,742.8 2,445.3
         Nov 8,406.6 14.8 2,450.5 1,876.1 1,396.6 479.5 574.4 382.6 191.8 3,727.2 3,315.3 2,747.9 2,450.0         Dec 8,393.3 16.4 2,394.4 1,844.5 1,362.2 482.2 550.0 362.3 187.7 3,673.5 3,270.5 2,709.4 2,415.1
2012          Jan 8,517.7 14.5 2,470.6 1,921.9 1,444.6 477.3 548.7 362.6 186.1 3,702.0 3,298.2 2,729.8 2,437.1
         Feb 8,526.0 14.4 2,534.4 1,981.0 1,499.7 481.3 553.4 369.7 183.7 3,695.5 3,291.4 2,723.7 2,437.0         Mar 8,522.7 15.4 2,577.6 2,037.3 1,559.1 478.2 540.3 358.1 182.2 3,698.3 3,292.5 2,722.7 2,427.8
         Apr 8,599.6 15.3 2,593.3 2,049.9 1,574.4 475.5 543.4 365.1 178.2 3,719.9 3,314.2 2,739.4 2,430.9
         May 8,859.6 15.5 2,605.1 2,060.4 1,585.9 474.5 544.7 365.3 179.4 3,692.5 3,288.7 2,722.4 2,434.0         June 8,636.4 15.5 2,566.1 2,041.1 1,571.3 469.8 525.0 351.0 174.1 3,699.4 3,297.2 2,692.7 2,432.4
         July 8,726.8 14.8 2,531.1 2,000.3 1,530.8 469.5 530.8 359.0 171.8 3,731.2 3,327.5 2,724.4 2,467.2
         Aug 8,695.6 15.7 2,538.3 2,016.4 1,547.5 468.9 522.0 349.7 172.2 3,725.2 3,321.8 2,723.8 2,464.9
         Sep 8,567.6 16.0 2,463.9 1,947.5 1,481.5 466.0 516.4 346.1 170.3 3,730.1 3,322.3 2,720.6 2,458.6
         Oct 8,489.2 15.9 2,426.0 1,916.6 1,456.5 460.1 509.4 340.1 169.3 3,748.2 3,340.1 2,728.3 2,471.5
         Nov 8,440.0 15.6 2,411.8 1,904.4 1,448.5 455.9 507.4 337.2 170.2 3,741.9 3,334.9 2,722.7 2,465.5         Dec 8,225.5 19.2 2,309.0 1,813.2 1,363.8 449.4 495.9 322.2 173.7 3,688.6 3,289.4 2,695.5 2,435.7
 Changes 3
2005 187.9 0.1 93.0 10.4 22.8 − 12.5 82.6 44.6 38.1 59.7 14.2 37.2 15.5
2006 356.8 1.1 84.2 0.5 28.0 − 27.6 83.7 22.4 61.3 56.0 1.5 32.5 13.3
2007 518.3 1.5 218.9 135.5 156.3 − 20.8 83.4 47.4 36.0 54.1 − 1.0 38.7 53.2
2008 313.3 − 0.1 183.6 164.3 127.5 36.9 19.3 33.7 − 14.4 140.4 102.6 130.9 65.5
2009 −454.5 − 0.5 −189.0 −166.4 −182.2 15.8 − 22.5 − 1.8 − 20.7 17.4 38.3 17.0 6.6
2010 −136.3 − 0.7 −111.6 − 15.6 58.5 − 74.1 − 95.9 − 80.9 − 15.1 96.4 126.0 − 13.7 0.7
2011 54.1 − 0.1 32.6 58.7 91.7 − 33.0 − 26.0 − 12.1 − 13.9 − 51.8 − 35.3 38.7 56.7
2012 −138.5 2.9 − 83.1 − 29.1 2.5 − 31.6 − 54.1 − 40.2 − 13.9 25.7 26.4 15.8 27.6
2011          Apr 63.2 1.2 − 21.0 − 31.7 − 29.2 − 2.5 10.7 9.6 1.2 29.1 17.1 25.7 5.1
         May 27.4 − 0.1 7.4 − 1.9 − 3.5 1.6 9.3 3.9 5.4 − 25.8 − 21.2 − 11.3 13.1
         June −165.7 − 0.2 − 21.0 − 14.0 4.8 − 18.7 − 7.1 − 4.6 − 2.4 − 23.0 − 19.3 − 12.9 − 1.0
         July 102.3 − 0.0 − 12.4 − 9.5 − 5.1 − 4.4 − 2.9 − 0.5 − 2.5 − 0.9 − 1.3 2.2 2.0
         Aug 263.0 − 0.5 80.7 69.9 71.0 − 1.1 10.8 10.9 − 0.0 1.0 1.9 14.0 17.7
         Sep 193.7 0.7 70.4 78.9 82.5 − 3.6 − 8.5 − 6.4 − 2.1 4.7 3.7 5.2 8.2
         Oct −116.4 − 0.0 − 1.4 1.1 0.2 0.9 − 2.4 0.7 − 3.2 24.7 29.5 32.9 34.1
         Nov 31.1 − 0.6 39.9 44.3 47.5 − 3.2 − 4.5 − 3.7 − 0.8 − 4.4 2.1 3.1 2.7
         Dec − 27.9 1.6 − 52.5 − 33.6 − 36.0 2.4 − 18.9 − 14.8 − 4.1 − 55.7 − 46.7 − 39.8 − 36.42012          Jan 132.8 − 1.9 78.4 78.4 83.0 − 4.7 0.1 0.8 − 0.8 34.8 31.1 23.8 24.2
         Feb 20.7 − 0.1 65.8 60.4 56.0 4.4 5.5 7.8 − 2.3 − 3.2 − 4.6 − 4.1 1.7
         Mar − 7.0 0.9 42.3 55.8 59.1 − 3.3 − 13.5 − 11.8 − 1.6 3.0 1.5 − 0.5 − 8.9         Apr 68.9 − 0.1 17.5 15.1 17.9 − 2.7 2.4 6.5 − 4.2 18.0 18.8 13.9 0.1
         May 226.6 0.2 6.4 7.4 9.1 − 1.7 − 1.0 − 1.8 0.9 − 33.0 − 29.2 − 20.4 − 0.4
         June −214.5 0.0 − 37.7 − 18.6 − 14.0 − 4.6 − 19.2 − 13.9 − 5.3 10.7 11.6 − 6.6 1.4         July 85.2 − 0.7 − 37.3 − 42.0 − 41.4 − 0.6 4.7 7.1 − 2.4 29.8 29.3 30.9 33.9
         Aug − 16.8 0.9 9.4 17.2 17.5 − 0.4 − 7.8 − 8.5 0.7 − 3.5 − 3.9 1.2 − 0.7
         Sep −115.5 0.3 − 72.0 − 67.4 − 65.3 − 2.1 − 4.7 − 2.9 − 1.8 7.3 2.2 − 0.6 − 4.0
         Oct − 75.9 − 0.1 − 38.7 − 31.8 − 26.6 − 5.3 − 6.8 − 5.8 − 1.0 19.2 18.6 9.1 14.3         Nov − 29.4 − 0.3 − 14.3 − 12.3 − 8.0 − 4.3 − 1.9 − 2.8 0.8 − 5.2 − 4.6 − 4.9 − 5.3         Dec −213.6 3.6 −103.1 − 91.2 − 84.7 − 6.5 − 11.9 − 15.0 3.1 − 52.3 − 44.4 − 26.0 − 28.7
*This table serves to supplement the “Overall monetary survey“ in section II. Unlike by banks (including building and loan associations) − data from money market
the other tables in section IV, this table includes − in addition to the figures reported funds. 1See footnote 1 in Table IV.2. 2Including debt securities arising from the

Deutsche Bundesbank
21  Monthly Report
February 2013
IV Banks
 
   
 
euro area Claims on
non-euro-area
to non-banks in other member states residents
 General Enterprises and General government households government
Secur- Secur- of which Secur- of which Other
ities Total Loans ities 
2 Total Total Loans Total Loans ities Total Loans assets  1   Period
End of year or month
 
255.9 603.8 423.0 180.8 275.3 140.6 61.9 134.7 25.7 109.0 897.8 730.4 171.4 2004
278.2 580.7 408.7 171.9 322.4 169.1 65.0 153.3 30.7 122.6 993.8 796.8 166.7 2005
294.1 549.5 390.2 159.2 376.6 228.1 85.2 148.5 26.1 122.4 1,172.7 936.2 188.8 2006267.3 505.8 360.7 145.0 425.5 294.6 124.9 130.9 26.0 104.9 1,339.5 1,026.9 224.4 2007329.6 476.1 342.8 133.4 475.1 348.1 172.1 127.0 27.6 99.4 1,279.2 1,008.6 275.7 2008335.4 495.0 335.1 160.0 450.4 322.2 162.9 128.2 23.5 104.7 1,062.6 821.1 237.5 2009
314.5 633.8 418.4 215.3 421.6 289.2 164.2 132.4 24.8 107.6 1,021.0 792.7 1,181.1 2010
294.3 561.1 359.8 201.2 403.1 276.9 161.2 126.2 32.6 93.6 995.1 770.9 1,313.8 2011259.8 594.0 350.3 243.7 399.2 275.1 158.1 124.1 30.4 93.7 970.3 744.9 1,238.3 2012
322.1 612.8 399.4 213.4 418.3 282.2 157.2 136.2 26.4 109.7 978.6 748.1 955.6 2011          Mar 342.8 604.1 388.4 215.7 428.7 291.9 165.1 136.8 26.4 110.4 1,013.2 787.6 961.8          Apr 
318.2 594.5 377.9 216.6 425.2 288.0 161.4 137.2 26.2 111.0 1,028.3 796.9 1,006.2          May306.3 588.2 374.6 213.6 421.1 287.2 161.2 133.9 25.9 108.0 984.4 753.6 927.1          June
306.5 584.9 374.5 210.4 422.3 283.5 161.6 138.8 31.3 107.5 986.6 757.8 1,047.9          July
302.8 572.9 365.2 207.7 420.5 281.9 162.6 138.5 31.0 107.5 1,004.6 779.9 1,206.8          Aug 299.9 571.8 365.2 206.6 423.3 288.0 171.2 135.3 30.7 104.6 1,011.7 786.7 1,341.1          Sep 
297.4 568.3 361.3 207.0 417.0 280.0 164.0 137.0 30.3 106.6 974.8 754.2 1,228.2          Oct 
297.8 567.5 358.2 209.3 411.9 282.3 165.1 129.6 31.0 98.5 991.0 770.1 1,223.1          Nov 294.3 561.1 359.8 201.2 403.1 276.9 161.2 126.2 32.6 93.6 995.1 770.9 1,313.8          Dec 
292.8 568.3 363.6 204.8 403.8 277.7 157.6 126.1 32.3 93.8 1,016.2 794.5 1,314.3 2012          Jan 
286.7 567.7 361.3 206.4 404.1 278.1 158.1 126.1 32.4 93.7 996.6 778.9 1,285.0          Feb 295.0 569.8 359.9 209.9 405.8 279.9 159.9 125.9 31.5 94.3 1,004.1 782.1 1,227.4          Mar 
308.5 574.8 365.3 209.6 405.7 282.6 163.2 123.1 31.4 91.7 1,008.5 786.8 1,262.6          Apr 
288.3 566.3 359.8 206.5 403.8 279.3 160.7 124.6 31.5 93.0 1,027.6 804.5 1,518.8          May260.4 604.5 370.2 234.3 402.2 278.2 160.3 124.0 31.8 92.2 992.6 772.1 1,362.8          June
257.2 603.1 367.0 236.1 403.7 282.5 162.1 121.2 31.1 90.1 1,005.2 786.0 1,444.5          July
258.9 598.1 359.6 238.4 403.4 281.3 161.0 122.1 31.7 90.4 1,007.4 787.3 1,408.9          Aug 262.1 601.7 359.8 241.9 407.8 283.5 161.4 124.3 31.4 92.9 1,005.3 788.1 1,352.2          Sep 
256.9 611.8 366.5 245.3 408.0 282.2 160.0 125.8 31.9 93.9 1,003.5 784.8 1,295.6          Oct 
257.2 612.2 360.2 252.0 407.1 282.8 160.3 124.3 32.0 92.3 996.2 778.1 1,274.5          Nov 259.8 594.0 350.3 243.7 399.2 275.1 158.1 124.1 30.4 93.7 970.3 744.9 1,238.3          Dec 
Changes 3
21.7 − 23.0 − 14.3 − 8.6 45.5 27.4 2.2 18.2 4.7 13.5 57.1 31.2 − 22.2 200519.3 − 31.0 − 18.6 − 12.4 54.5 59.6 20.9 − 5.1 − 1.3 − 3.8 205.7 165.7 9.8 2006
− 14.6 − 39.6 − 29.3 − 10.3 55.1 73.6 41.5 − 18.6 0.0 − 18.6 222.7 136.5 21.1 2007
65.4 − 28.4 − 16.9 − 11.5 37.8 42.3 40.4 − 4.5 1.6 − 6.1 − 40.3 − 7.6 29.7 200810.5 21.3 − 5.1 26.4 − 20.9 − 20.9 − 7.1 0.0 − 3.9 3.9 −182.5 −162.3 − 99.8 2009
− 14.3 139.7 83.4 56.3 − 29.6 − 36.4 0.2 6.8 3.1 3.7 − 74.1 − 61.9 − 46.3 2010− 18.0 − 74.0 − 59.1 − 14.9 − 16.6 − 13.8 − 5.5 − 2.7 8.0 − 10.7 − 39.5 − 34.9 112.9 2011− 11.8 10.6 − 10.5 21.2 − 0.7 − 1.2 − 1.9 0.5 − 2.2 2.7 − 21.6 − 23.3 − 62.3 2012
20.6 − 8.5 − 10.9 2.4 11.9 11.1 9.3 0.8 0.0 0.7 48.6 52.4 5.4 2011          Apr 
− 24.4 − 9.9 − 10.7 0.8 − 4.6 − 5.0 − 4.6 0.4 − 0.3 0.6 1.7 − 2.8 44.1          May− 11.9 − 6.3 − 3.2 − 3.1 − 3.8 − 0.4 0.0 − 3.3 − 0.3 − 3.0 − 41.4 − 41.2 − 80.0          June
0.2 − 3.5 − 0.2 − 3.3 0.4 − 4.5 − 0.0 4.9 5.4 − 0.6 − 5.5 − 2.9 121.1          July
− 3.7 − 12.2 − 9.3 − 2.9 − 0.9 − 1.3 1.1 0.5 − 0.1 0.5 23.8 27.0 158.0          Aug − 3.0 − 1.5 − 0.2 − 1.3 1.0 4.4 6.8 − 3.4 − 0.3 − 3.0 − 14.7 − 13.4 132.6          Sep 
− 1.2 − 3.4 − 3.8 0.4 − 4.8 − 7.0 − 6.1 2.2 − 0.4 2.6 − 24.0 − 20.8 −115.8          Oct 
0.4 − 1.0 − 3.3 2.3 − 6.5 1.2 − 0.2 − 7.7 0.6 − 8.3 1.2 2.3 − 4.9          Nov 
− 3.4 − 6.9 1.6 − 8.5 − 9.0 − 8.2 − 6.7 − 0.8 1.5 − 2.4 − 9.5 − 11.7 88.2          Dec − 0.3 7.3 3.8 3.5 3.7 1.7 − 2.9 2.0 − 0.2 2.2 28.7 29.3 − 7.3 2012          Jan 
− 5.8 − 0.5 − 2.2 1.7 1.5 1.3 1.3 0.2 0.1 0.2 − 12.0 − 8.4 − 30.0          Feb 
8.4 2.0 − 1.4 3.4 1.5 1.7 1.7 − 0.2 − 0.9 0.6 4.9 0.8 − 58.2          Mar 
13.8 4.8 5.3 − 0.5 − 0.8 2.0 2.9 − 2.8 − 0.1 − 2.7 − 0.6 0.3 34.1          Apr 
− 19.9 − 8.8 − 5.6 − 3.2 − 3.9 − 5.1 − 4.4 1.2 0.1 1.1 − 2.6 − 2.5 255.6          May− 8.0 18.2 10.4 7.8 − 0.9 − 0.9 0.2 − 0.0 0.2 − 0.3 − 29.4 − 27.1 −158.0          June
− 3.0 − 1.6 − 3.3 1.8 0.5 3.4 0.9 − 2.9 − 0.7 − 2.2 2.6 5.2 90.7          July
1.9 − 5.1 − 7.4 2.3 0.4 − 0.5 − 0.2 1.0 0.6 0.3 12.0 10.2 − 35.6          Aug 
3.4 2.8 − 0.6 3.4 5.1 2.9 1.3 2.2 − 0.4 2.6 6.7 9.1 − 57.7          Sep 
− 5.2 9.5 6.7 2.8 0.7 − 0.9 − 1.1 1.6 0.6 1.0 0.9 − 0.8 − 57.3          Oct 
0.4 0.3 − 6.3 6.6 − 0.7 0.8 0.4 − 1.5 0.1 − 1.6 − 6.8 − 6.3 − 2.8          Nov 2.7 − 18.4 − 9.9 − 8.5 − 7.8 − 7.6 − 2.1 − 0.2 − 1.6 1.4 − 25.9 − 33.0 − 35.9          Dec 
exchange of equalisation claims. 3Statistical breaks have been eliminated from
the flow figures (see also footnote * in Table II.1). 

Deutsche Bundesbank
22  Monthly Report
February 2013
IV Banks
 
1 Assets and liabilities of monetary financial institutions (excluding the Bundesbank) in Germany *
  Liabilities
 
€ billion
Deposits of banks (MFIs) Deposits of non-banks (non-MFIs) in the euro area
in the euro area
Deposits of non-banks in the home country Deposits of non-banks
With agreed At agreed
of banks maturities notice
Balance in the in other of which of which
sheet home member Over- up to up to Over-
Period total 1 Total country states Total Total night Total 2 years Total 3 months Total night
 End of year or month
 
2004 6,617.4 1,528.4 1,270.8 257.6 2,264.2 2,148.5 646.2 898.9 239.9 603.5 515.5 71.9 8.8
2005 6,859.4 1,569.6 1,300.8 268.8 2,329.1 2,225.4 715.8 906.2 233.4 603.4 519.1 62.2 9.6
2006 7,154.4 1,637.7 1,348.6 289.0 2,449.2 2,341.6 745.8 1,009.3 310.1 586.5 487.4 62.0 13.9
2007 7,592.4 1,778.6 1,479.0 299.6 2,633.6 2,518.3 769.6 1,193.3 477.9 555.4 446.0 75.1 19.6
2008 7,892.7 1,827.7 1,583.0 244.7 2,798.2 2,687.3 809.5 1,342.7 598.7 535.2 424.8 74.2 22.4
2009 7,436.1 1,589.7 1,355.6 234.0 2,818.0 2,731.3 997.8 1,139.1 356.4 594.4 474.4 63.9 17.7
2010 8,304.8 1,495.8 1,240.1 255.7 2,925.8 2,817.6 1,086.5 1,112.9 307.2 618.2 512.5 68.4 19.3
2011 8,393.3 1,444.8 1,210.3 234.5 3,033.4 2,915.1 1,139.6 1,159.4 366.2 616.1 515.3 78.8 25.9
2012 8,225.5 1,370.9 1,135.8 235.1 3,091.4 2,985.2 1,294.9 1,072.8 320.0 617.6 528.4 77.3 31.2
2011          Mar 7,955.1 1,454.6 1,191.7 262.9 2,928.3 2,820.7 1,085.9 1,111.3 308.8 623.5 518.0 68.7 22.1
         Apr 7,997.9 1,458.9 1,183.6 275.3 2,936.7 2,830.9 1,088.0 1,120.7 319.2 622.3 517.6 71.9 25.7
         May 8,045.9 1,422.2 1,163.9 258.3 2,950.7 2,841.8 1,090.4 1,131.5 330.2 619.9 515.3 71.3 25.1         June 7,885.8 1,401.2 1,158.5 242.6 2,959.0 2,844.9 1,096.5 1,130.7 330.2 617.7 513.4 73.4 26.6
         July 8,001.0 1,398.0 1,154.4 243.6 2,966.1 2,853.8 1,094.1 1,143.1 342.8 616.5 512.2 72.9 25.0
         Aug 8,263.5 1,413.8 1,163.7 250.1 2,988.4 2,873.6 1,105.9 1,152.7 351.5 615.0 510.8 75.6 25.5         Sep 8,489.4 1,430.6 1,176.1 254.6 3,007.5 2,884.0 1,111.5 1,159.1 361.4 613.4 509.7 80.7 28.3
         Oct 8,353.9 1,419.0 1,162.8 256.2 3,008.5 2,888.5 1,120.4 1,155.0 359.1 613.0 509.5 80.0 28.4
         Nov 8,406.6 1,427.1 1,177.3 249.8 3,028.6 2,912.1 1,145.2 1,155.4 360.5 611.5 509.8 77.3 25.3         Dec 8,393.3 1,444.8 1,210.3 234.5 3,033.4 2,915.1 1,139.6 1,159.4 366.2 616.1 515.3 78.8 25.9
2012          Jan 8,517.7 1,475.9 1,221.1 254.8 3,038.6 2,912.4 1,140.8 1,154.3 364.5 617.2 517.4 82.8 29.3
         Feb 8,526.0 1,484.7 1,232.3 252.4 3,046.2 2,915.6 1,147.2 1,148.6 361.0 619.8 520.2 83.7 31.0         Mar 8,522.7 1,501.9 1,232.1 269.8 3,037.7 2,924.1 1,157.4 1,147.3 363.0 619.4 520.6 77.3 28.9
         Apr 8,599.6 1,501.9 1,222.4 279.5 3,052.2 2,938.9 1,170.0 1,151.0 368.0 617.9 519.4 77.4 28.3
         May 8,859.6 1,494.1 1,219.3 274.8 3,069.6 2,955.6 1,185.8 1,152.7 372.2 617.1 519.5 78.2 30.1         June 8,636.4 1,469.5 1,207.6 262.0 3,091.1 2,975.0 1,203.3 1,155.7 378.1 616.0 519.4 78.9 30.3
         July 8,726.8 1,454.7 1,190.5 264.1 3,084.9 2,974.1 1,207.7 1,150.5 377.8 615.9 520.1 78.5 30.1
         Aug 8,695.6 1,447.9 1,185.3 262.6 3,092.7 2,985.4 1,221.5 1,148.5 377.1 615.3 521.0 76.3 30.3         Sep 8,567.6 1,428.2 1,175.5 252.8 3,100.1 2,991.1 1,241.8 1,135.2 366.7 614.1 521.3 77.5 33.6
         Oct 8,489.2 1,415.4 1,161.0 254.4 3,099.5 2,993.8 1,265.7 1,114.7 355.4 613.5 521.5 76.3 32.1
         Nov 8,440.0 1,413.7 1,160.3 253.5 3,114.9 3,006.6 1,293.1 1,100.7 346.7 612.8 522.0 76.8 33.1         Dec 8,225.5 1,370.9 1,135.8 235.1 3,091.4 2,985.2 1,294.9 1,072.8 320.0 617.6 528.4 77.3 31.2
 Changes 4
2005 187.9 32.8 27.0 5.9 65.0 75.5 69.4 7.3 − 6.9 − 1.2 2.9 − 8.0 0.5
2006 356.8 105.6 81.5 24.1 122.9 118.6 30.4 105.0 77.1 − 16.8 − 31.7 0.4 4.4
2007 518.3 148.4 134.8 13.6 185.1 177.3 24.5 183.9 167.8 − 31.1 − 41.4 13.6 5.6
2008 313.3 65.8 121.7 − 55.8 162.3 173.1 38.7 154.6 123.5 − 20.2 − 21.2 − 7.5 − 0.1
2009 −454.5 −235.4 −224.6 − 10.8 31.9 43.9 205.0 −220.4 −259.3 59.3 50.3 − 9.6 − 4.1
2010 −136.3 − 75.2 − 99.4 24.2 72.3 59.7 88.7 − 53.0 − 52.2 24.0 38.3 − 4.4 2.2
2011 54.1 − 48.4 − 28.8 − 19.6 102.1 97.4 52.4 47.6 58.8 − 2.6 1.3 4.8 6.5
2012 −138.5 − 69.6 − 70.6 0.9 57.4 66.8 155.8 − 90.5 − 50.3 1.5 14.1 − 1.5 5.3
2011          Apr 63.2 6.6 − 6.9 13.4 9.5 10.8 3.6 9.3 10.4 − 2.1 − 1.3 3.4 3.7
         May 27.4 − 39.2 − 21.2 − 18.1 13.1 10.1 1.9 10.7 10.8 − 2.4 − 2.3 − 0.7 − 0.7
         June −165.7 − 20.9 − 5.3 − 15.6 8.5 3.3 6.2 − 0.7 − 0.0 − 2.1 − 1.9 2.1 1.5
         July 102.3 − 4.5 − 5.0 0.4 6.5 8.3 − 2.8 12.3 12.5 − 1.2 − 1.2 − 0.6 − 1.6
         Aug 263.0 16.8 12.6 4.1 17.1 19.9 11.8 9.6 8.8 − 1.6 − 1.4 − 2.7 0.4
         Sep 193.7 13.8 10.6 3.2 17.4 9.1 4.3 6.4 9.9 − 1.5 − 1.0 4.9 2.7
         Oct −116.4 − 9.6 − 12.0 2.4 2.0 5.2 9.6 − 3.9 − 2.2 − 0.4 − 0.3 − 0.5 0.2
         Nov 31.1 5.7 13.1 − 7.4 19.0 22.7 23.7 0.1 1.2 − 1.1 − 0.2 − 2.9 − 3.2
         Dec − 27.9 20.1 31.4 − 11.2 5.1 3.5 − 6.3 5.2 5.5 4.6 5.4 1.3 0.5
2012          Jan 132.8 32.1 11.5 20.7 5.7 − 2.4 1.5 − 5.0 − 1.7 1.1 2.1 4.1 3.5
         Feb 20.7 10.2 12.2 − 2.0 8.2 3.7 6.7 − 5.6 − 3.3 2.6 3.8 1.0 1.7
         Mar − 7.0 16.7 − 0.6 17.3 − 8.6 8.4 10.1 − 1.3 1.9 − 0.4 0.4 − 6.4 − 2.1         Apr 68.9 1.8 − 7.6 9.4 14.0 12.1 12.5 1.1 2.4 − 1.5 − 1.2 0.0 − 0.6
         May 226.6 − 11.5 − 5.4 − 6.1 15.7 15.2 14.8 1.2 3.8 − 0.8 0.0 0.5 1.7
         June −214.5 − 23.7 − 11.2 − 12.5 21.9 19.8 17.7 3.2 6.0 − 1.1 − 0.1 0.8 0.2         July 85.2 − 16.3 − 17.9 1.7 − 7.0 − 1.6 4.0 − 5.4 − 0.4 − 0.2 0.7 − 0.5 − 0.2
         Aug − 16.8 − 5.4 − 4.4 − 1.0 8.5 11.9 14.3 − 1.8 − 0.5 − 0.5 0.9 − 2.1 0.3
         Sep −115.5 − 18.4 − 9.1 − 9.3 7.2 5.1 21.0 − 14.7 − 11.8 − 1.2 0.3 1.3 3.4
         Oct − 75.9 − 15.5 − 17.2 1.7 − 0.4 3.0 24.0 − 20.5 − 11.3 − 0.6 0.2 − 1.1 − 1.5
         Nov − 29.4 − 1.3 − 0.7 − 0.6 15.5 12.8 27.5 − 13.9 − 8.7 − 0.7 0.6 0.4 1.0         Dec −213.6 − 38.2 − 19.9 − 18.3 − 23.2 − 21.2 1.8 − 27.7 − 26.7 4.8 6.3 0.5 − 1.9
*This table serves to supplement the “Overall monetary survey“ in section II. Unlike by banks (including building and loan associations) − data from money market
the other tables in section IV, this table includes − in addition to the figures reported funds. 1See footnote 1 in Table IV.2. 2Excluding deposits of central

Deutsche Bundesbank
23  Monthly Report
February 2013
IV Banks
 
   
 
 Debt securities
issued 3 
in other member states 2 Deposits ofcentral governments
With agreed At agreed Liabilitiesmaturities notice arising
of which from Money of which Liabilities
domestic market with to non- repos with
of which of which central non-banks fund euro- Capital maturities
up to up to govern- in the shares of up to area and Other
Total 2 years Total 3 months Total ments euro area issued  
3 Total reserves   Period 2 years 3 residents Liabilities 1 
End of year or month
 
59.8 9.8 3.3 2.7 43.8 41.4 14.8 31.5 1,554.8 116.9 577.1 329.3 317.2 2004
50.2 9.8 2.4 2.0 41.6 38.8 19.5 31.7 1,611.9 113.8 626.2 346.9 324.5 2005
45.9 9.3 2.3 1.9 45.5 41.9 17.1 32.0 1,636.7 136.4 638.5 389.6 353.7 200653.2 22.0 2.3 1.8 40.1 38.3 26.6 28.6 1,637.6 182.3 661.0 428.2 398.2 200749.5 24.9 2.4 1.8 36.6 34.8 61.1 16.4 1,609.9 233.3 666.3 461.7 451.5 200843.7 17.0 2.5 2.0 22.8 22.2 80.5 11.4 1,500.5 146.3 565.6 454.8 415.6 2009
46.4 16.1 2.8 2.2 39.8 38.7 86.7 9.8 1,407.8 82.3 636.0 452.6 1,290.2 2010
49.6 18.4 3.3 2.5 39.5 37.9 97.1 6.2 1,345.7 75.7 561.5 468.1 1,436.6 201142.3 14.7 3.8 2.8 28.9 25.9 80.4 7.3 1,232.9 56.7 611.4 487.5 1,343.6 2012
43.8 16.3 2.9 2.3 38.9 36.2 78.9 10.0 1,373.4 78.2 575.5 460.7 1,073.7 2011          Mar 43.3 16.0 2.9 2.3 34.0 33.8 89.2 9.7 1,364.1 76.2 605.0 456.8 1,077.5          Apr 
43.3 16.2 2.9 2.3 37.6 34.8 105.2 9.5 1,368.4 77.2 605.4 460.7 1,123.8          May43.9 15.8 2.9 2.3 40.6 38.3 104.8 9.4 1,360.1 74.2 556.5 449.5 1,045.4          June
44.9 16.9 3.0 2.3 39.4 35.6 91.8 6.8 1,357.0 77.3 560.3 453.2 1,167.9          July
47.1 15.2 3.0 2.3 39.3 36.8 101.9 7.2 1,352.8 79.4 604.9 458.7 1,335.7          Aug 49.4 17.7 3.0 2.3 42.7 40.8 107.0 7.2 1,352.4 76.1 644.6 459.4 1,480.7          Sep 
48.5 17.1 3.1 2.4 40.0 37.9 105.7 7.2 1,341.7 74.0 650.4 462.7 1,358.7          Oct 
48.8 17.6 3.2 2.5 39.2 35.8 111.1 6.3 1,348.4 79.7 668.9 466.6 1,349.6          Nov 49.6 18.4 3.3 2.5 39.5 37.9 97.1 6.2 1,345.7 75.7 561.5 468.1 1,436.6          Dec 
50.1 19.0 3.4 2.6 43.4 40.9 86.7 5.9 1,311.1 74.3 702.3 468.9 1,428.2 2012          Jan 
49.2 18.6 3.4 2.6 46.9 45.2 96.6 5.7 1,316.9 75.6 719.2 471.8 1,384.9          Feb 44.9 16.0 3.5 2.6 36.3 35.6 93.1 5.5 1,305.7 72.7 772.9 476.9 1,329.2          Mar 
45.6 16.7 3.5 2.6 35.8 33.4 102.9 5.5 1,303.7 68.5 788.9 477.2 1,367.2          Apr 
44.5 15.9 3.6 2.7 35.8 31.5 108.3 5.5 1,304.1 63.6 775.2 482.5 1,620.2          May44.9 16.5 3.8 2.8 37.2 33.8 98.9 5.7 1,291.7 62.9 737.8 489.4 1,452.5          June
44.6 16.1 3.8 2.9 32.3 30.0 106.6 5.7 1,296.0 65.5 748.5 497.0 1,533.4          July
42.1 14.3 3.9 2.9 31.0 27.7 108.1 5.3 1,285.6 62.8 769.0 492.5 1,494.5          Aug 40.0 12.5 3.9 2.9 31.5 26.7 98.0 5.1 1,277.2 61.0 726.4 487.8 1,444.8          Sep 
40.4 12.6 3.9 2.9 29.3 26.6 107.8 5.4 1,264.6 60.7 719.3 488.1 1,389.0          Oct 
39.9 12.3 3.8 2.9 31.5 26.6 107.0 5.4 1,255.2 60.8 685.8 490.6 1,367.4          Nov 42.3 14.7 3.8 2.8 28.9 25.9 80.4 7.3 1,232.9 56.7 611.4 487.5 1,343.6          Dec 
Changes 4
− 7.7 − 0.3 − 0.9 − 0.7 − 2.5 − 3.0 4.7 0.2 38.7 − 9.9 22.0 14.8 9.7 2005− 3.9 − 0.3 − 0.1 − 0.2 3.9 3.1 − 3.3 0.3 34.8 22.1 32.4 27.5 36.6 2006
8.0 12.9 0.0 − 0.1 − 5.8 − 4.3 8.1 − 3.4 20.9 49.3 48.7 42.3 68.3 2007
− 7.5 0.6 0.1 − 0.0 − 3.3 − 3.2 36.1 − 12.2 − 33.9 50.2 − 0.1 39.3 56.1 2008− 5.7 − 7.7 0.1 0.2 − 2.4 − 0.8 19.4 − 5.0 −104.6 − 87.1 − 95.3 − 0.3 − 65.0 2009
− 6.8 − 5.8 0.3 0.3 17.0 16.5 6.2 − 1.6 −106.7 − 63.2 54.4 − 7.1 − 78.6 2010
− 2.2 1.7 0.5 0.3 − 0.1 − 0.7 10.0 − 3.7 − 76.9 − 6.6 − 80.5 13.7 137.8 2011− 7.2 − 3.6 0.5 0.3 − 7.9 − 9.2 − 19.6 1.1 −112.6 − 19.9 51.2 21.3 − 68.0 2012
− 0.4 − 0.1 0.0 0.0 − 4.7 − 2.3 10.4 − 0.3 − 1.4 − 1.8 36.6 − 2.5 4.3 2011          Apr 
− 0.0 0.1 0.0 0.0 3.6 1.0 15.9 − 0.2 − 3.5 0.8 − 5.8 2.6 44.7          May
0.6 − 0.4 0.0 0.0 3.0 3.5 − 0.3 − 0.1 − 15.4 − 3.7 − 47.8 − 11.0 − 78.6          June
0.9 1.0 0.0 0.0 − 1.2 − 2.7 − 13.4 − 2.6 − 8.7 2.9 0.6 2.8 121.6          July
− 3.1 − 2.2 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.1 1.1 10.3 0.4 − 1.0 2.3 47.0 5.3 167.2          Aug 
2.2 2.4 0.0 0.0 3.4 4.0 4.9 0.1 − 13.7 − 3.8 29.1 − 1.6 143.8          Sep 
− 0.8 − 0.5 0.1 0.0 − 2.7 − 2.9 − 1.2 − 0.0 − 2.8 − 1.8 12.0 4.7 −121.4          Oct 
0.2 0.4 0.1 0.1 − 0.7 − 2.1 5.3 − 0.9 − 4.2 5.3 11.0 2.3 − 7.2          Nov 
0.7 0.7 0.1 0.1 0.3 2.0 − 14.1 − 0.1 − 11.3 − 4.2 −113.8 − 0.0 86.1          Dec 
0.6 0.7 0.1 0.0 3.9 3.0 − 10.8 − 0.3 − 31.4 − 1.3 143.6 1.4 − 7.9 2012          Jan 
− 0.8 − 0.3 0.1 0.0 3.5 4.4 10.0 − 0.2 11.6 1.4 20.7 3.9 − 43.7          Feb 
− 4.3 − 2.7 0.0 0.0 − 10.6 − 9.7 − 3.6 − 0.2 − 12.5 − 3.0 52.5 4.9 − 56.2          Mar 
0.7 0.7 − 0.0 − 0.0 1.9 0.2 7.2 − 0.0 − 5.8 − 4.3 13.8 − 0.3 38.3          Apr 
− 1.3 − 0.9 0.1 0.1 0.0 − 1.9 5.3 0.0 − 13.8 − 5.4 − 24.4 2.8 252.6          May
0.4 0.7 0.2 0.1 1.3 2.3 − 9.4 0.2 − 8.7 − 0.6 − 34.7 7.6 −167.7          June
− 0.3 − 0.4 0.1 0.0 − 4.9 − 3.8 7.6 0.1 − 2.7 2.4 6.3 6.3 90.8          July− 2.4 − 1.8 0.0 0.0 − 1.3 − 2.3 1.7 − 0.4 − 4.1 − 2.5 25.2 − 3.3 − 39.0          Aug − 2.1 − 1.8 0.0 0.0 0.8 − 0.8 − 10.1 − 0.2 − 3.2 − 1.7 − 38.1 − 3.2 − 49.4          Sep 
0.4 0.1 0.0 0.0 − 2.3 − 0.0 9.9 0.4 − 10.5 − 0.2 − 5.8 0.7 − 54.6          Oct 
− 0.5 − 0.4 − 0.0 − 0.0 2.2 0.0 − 0.8 − 0.0 − 8.4 0.2 − 33.4 2.7 − 3.6          Nov 
2.4 2.4 − 0.1 − 0.1 − 2.6 − 0.7 − 26.6 1.9 − 23.2 − 5.0 − 74.4 − 2.2 − 27.6          Dec 
governments. 3In Germany, debt securities with maturities of up to one year are published together with money market fund shares. 4Statistical breaks have been
classed as money market paper; up to the January 2002 Monthly Report they were eliminated from the flow figures (see also footnote * in Table II.1). 

Deutsche Bundesbank
24  Monthly Report
February 2013
IV Banks
 
2 Principal assets and liabilities of banks (MFIs) in Germany, by category of banks*
 
 
€ billion
  Lending to banks (MFIs)  Lending to non-banks (non-MFIs)
 
 of which of which
 
Loans
 Cash in
 hand and
 credit
Number of balances for
reporting Balance with Balances up to and for Partici- Securities Securities
End of institu- sheet central and issued by including more than issued by pating Other
month tions total 1 banks Total loans banks Total 1 year 1 year Bills non-banks interests assets  1 
All categories of banks
 
2012          July 1,889 8,798.7 200.3 2,892.7 2,215.1 664.5 4,004.6 537.2 2,764.4 0.6 690.3 139.4 1,561.6
         Aug 1,889 8,768.1 219.1 2,884.3 2,206.8 665.2 3,998.0 526.5 2,764.1 0.6 693.8 140.7 1,525.9
         Sep 1,883 8,639.6 191.1 2,844.0 2,170.7 662.9 3,996.6 524.2 2,755.8 0.6 701.7 139.5 1,468.4
         Oct 1,877 8,561.0 194.6 2,801.3 2,135.2 656.1 4,014.0 540.3 2,756.2 0.6 701.3 139.3 1,411.8
         Nov 1,870 8,530.2 201.0 2,763.0 2,099.9 654.3 4,018.7 531.8 2,763.7 0.6 709.3 139.2 1,408.4
         Dec 1,869 8,314.6 153.5 2,701.0 2,042.6 650.5 3,949.1 478.2 2,749.1 0.8 709.8 136.4 1,374.6
Commercial banks 6
2012          Nov 275 3,293.3 131.0 1,000.4 911.1 88.7 1,117.4 259.6 659.4 0.2 191.1 69.9 974.6
         Dec 275 3,220.8 91.0 999.6 909.4 89.8 1,084.9 227.2 655.6 0.4 194.6 67.8 977.4
   Big banks 7
2012          Nov 4 2,145.7 53.3 547.8 502.2 45.4 534.1 174.1 255.5 0.2 98.4 62.2 948.2
         Dec 4 2,062.0 25.3 542.9 497.6 45.2 503.8 142.4 253.4 0.3 101.1 59.6 930.4
   Regional banks and other commercial banks
2012          Nov 162 826.3 50.2 224.1 182.0 41.8 524.0 67.0 366.6 0.0 89.5 7.0 21.0
         Dec 163 847.9 42.2 229.1 185.6 43.3 527.6 66.8 369.2 0.0 91.1 7.5 41.5
   Branches of foreign banks
2012          Nov 109 321.2 27.5 228.5 227.0 1.5 59.2 18.5 37.3 0.0 3.2 0.6 5.3
         Dec 108 310.9 23.6 227.6 226.2 1.4 53.6 18.0 33.0 0.0 2.4 0.6 5.6
Landesbanken
2012          Nov 10 1,378.8 30.2 453.5 339.1 111.6 644.0 117.9 401.3 0.1 119.1 17.1 234.1
         Dec 9 1,263.8 21.4 413.9 300.6 110.8 612.0 97.0 396.9 0.2 115.2 16.3 200.2
Savings banks
2012          Nov 423 1,103.5 15.6 244.1 93.4 149.7 809.4 57.7 637.0 0.1 114.6 16.5 17.8
         Dec 423 1,105.0 18.5 238.6 90.3 147.5 811.5 59.0 637.0 0.1 115.3 17.1 19.4
 
Regional institutions of credit cooperatives  
 
2012          Nov 2 292.5 2.8 159.2 125.2 34.0 68.5 16.2 22.1 0.0 30.1 14.8 47.1
         Dec 2 288.7 0.6 159.9 125.6 34.0 66.9 14.2 22.0 0.0 30.1 14.9 46.6
Credit cooperatives
2012          Nov 1,102 750.2 10.0 192.4 68.9 122.6 516.0 32.1 409.2 0.1 74.5 11.7 20.1
         Dec 1,102 748.8 11.8 187.6 65.8 121.4 517.4 33.1 409.2 0.1 74.9 11.8 20.2
Mortgage banks
2012          Nov 18 528.2 3.0 147.5 87.4 56.9 358.8 6.5 271.0 − 81.2 0.8 18.2
         Dec 18 522.9 2.6 147.2 87.2 56.6 354.0 6.8 266.9 − 80.3 0.7 18.5
Building and loan associations
2012          Nov 22 200.2 0.2 59.4 41.7 17.7 132.6 1.6 116.8 . 14.2 0.4 7.6
         Dec 22 200.7 0.2 59.5 42.0 17.5 132.9 1.6 116.8 . 14.5 0.4 7.7
Special purpose banks
2012          Nov 18 983.6 8.1 506.6 433.1 73.1 372.0 40.2 246.8 − 84.6 8.0 88.9
         Dec 18 963.9 7.5 494.8 421.7 72.9 369.6 39.3 244.7 − 84.8 7.4 84.6
Memo item: Foreign banks 8
2012          Nov 148 1,048.9 87.4 411.1 363.5 44.6 436.2 78.4 263.7 0.0 91.8 5.5 108.8
         Dec 147 990.6 57.0 401.3 351.9 46.4 422.0 70.2 259.2 0.1 90.2 5.5 104.8
  of which:  Banks majority-owned by foreign banks 9
2012          Nov 39 727.7 59.8 182.6 136.6 43.1 377.0 59.9 226.4 0.0 88.6 4.8 103.5
         Dec 39 679.7 33.4 173.7 125.6 45.0 368.5 52.2 226.3 0.1 87.8 4.8 99.3
*Assets and liabilities of monetary financial institutions (MFIs) in Germany. The assets meaning of section 340e (3) sentence 1 of the German Commercial Code (Handels-
and liabilities of foreign branches, of money market funds (which are also classified gesetzbuch) read in conjunction with section 35 (1) No 1a of the Credit Institutionas MFIs) and of the Bundesbank are not included. For the definitions of the respective Accounting Regulation (Verordnung über die Rechnungslegung der Kreditinstitute)items, see the footnotes to Table IV.3. 1Owing to the Act Modernising Accounting are classified under "Other assets and liabilities" as of the December 2010 reporting
Law (Gesetz zur Modernisierung des Bilanzrechts) of 25 May 2009, derivative date. Trading portfolio derivatives are listed separately in the Statistical Supplementfinancial instruments in the trading portfolio (trading portfolio derivatives) within the to the Monthly Report 1, Banking statistics, in Tables I.1 to I.3. 2For building and

Deutsche Bundesbank
25  Monthly Report
February 2013
IV Banks
 
   
 
Deposits of banks (MFIs) Deposits of non-banks (non-MFIs) Capital
 including  
of which of which published
reserves,
Time deposits 2 Savings deposits 4 partici-pation
Memo rights
item Bearer capital,
for for of which debt Liabilities
funds for
up to and more arising At three Bank general Other securities
Sight Time Sight including than from savings out- banking liabi-   End of months’
Total deposits deposits Total deposits 1 year 1 year 2 repos 3 Total notice bonds risks lities 1   month standing 5 
All categories of banks
 
2,042.2 530.5 1,511.6 3,353.4 1,350.8 463.2 794.9 169.5 626.6 528.3 117.9 1,378.8 413.7 1,610.7 2012          July
2,054.8 513.7 1,541.0 3,364.2 1,365.7 463.2 792.6 176.6 626.0 529.2 116.6 1,362.7 414.9 1,571.6          Aug 1,991.1 498.5 1,492.7 3,361.6 1,385.7 446.6 789.3 170.9 624.8 529.5 115.3 1,349.6 414.9 1,522.4          Sep 
1,973.4 496.5 1,476.9 3,368.7 1,411.4 438.9 780.4 176.5 624.2 529.6 113.8 1,337.3 414.8 1,466.8          Oct 
1,940.0 489.6 1,450.5 3,381.5 1,437.9 432.4 776.0 176.3 623.4 530.2 111.7 1,330.4 414.9 1,463.5          Nov 1,826.6 422.4 1,404.3 3,327.7 1,413.8 402.1 773.1 143.7 628.2 536.5 110.5 1,303.7 416.2 1,440.5          Dec 
Commercial banks 6
829.3 346.9 482.4 1,215.0 648.7 201.0 206.3 106.6 126.8 105.1 32.2 161.0 131.6 956.4 2012          Nov 767.7 291.7 476.0 1,191.8 640.6 184.8 207.9 67.8 126.7 106.7 31.8 158.4 135.5 967.3          Dec 
Big banks 7
452.7 216.2 236.5 589.3 299.9 114.1 86.8 101.4 77.8 74.2 10.7 122.7 77.9 903.1 2012          Nov 423.8 201.4 222.3 553.8 285.9 92.8 85.9 62.5 78.6 75.3 10.6 120.0 77.9 886.5          Dec 
Regional banks and other commercial banks
165.6 60.9 104.7 531.9 288.1 75.2 99.4 5.2 48.9 30.8 20.3 37.7 46.0 45.2 2012          Nov 143.6 36.4 107.2 543.5 293.9 80.0 101.5 5.3 48.1 31.4 20.0 38.0 49.8 72.9          Dec 
Branches of foreign banks
211.0 69.8 141.3 93.8 60.7 11.8 20.1 0.0 0.1 0.1 1.1 0.6 7.7 8.2 2012          Nov 200.3 53.8 146.5 94.5 60.8 11.9 20.5 − 0.1 0.1 1.2 0.5 7.8 7.9          Dec 
Landesbanken
356.7 47.0 309.8 388.2 111.7 118.9 143.1 56.3 14.0 9.8 0.4 325.5 65.7 242.7 2012          Nov 317.6 37.4 280.2 355.1 99.4 102.3 138.9 63.0 14.1 9.8 0.4 319.3 62.5 209.2          Dec 
Savings banks
168.6 14.9 153.8 788.6 381.9 36.1 15.1 0.4 297.1 250.8 58.4 18.2 77.9 50.2 2012          Nov 171.8 19.8 152.0 788.2 380.7 34.8 15.1 0.0 299.6 253.4 57.9 17.9 77.9 49.2          Dec 
 
Regional institutions of credit cooperatives
 
138.7 36.9 101.7 35.6 9.4 11.8 12.2 5.1 − − 2.2 59.1 12.9 46.2 2012          Nov 132.8 33.9 98.9 36.0 9.7 12.0 12.1 3.8 − − 2.2 58.3 12.9 48.7          Dec 
Credit cooperatives
108.8 4.7 104.1 541.1 269.5 42.8 26.5 0.0 184.9 164.0 17.5 15.7 49.4 35.1 2012          Nov 106.7 4.6 102.0 542.4 268.6 43.5 26.0 0.0 187.1 166.1 17.2 15.7 49.6 34.5          Dec 
Mortgage banks
138.2 9.1 129.1 178.0 8.8 12.4 156.5 4.4 0.2 0.2 . 171.5 17.3 23.1 2012          Nov 134.8 8.6 126.2 177.9 7.4 14.0 156.2 5.1 0.2 0.2 . 169.1 17.4 23.8          Dec 
Building and loan associations
22.5 1.6 20.9 145.6 0.4 0.8 143.0 − 0.4 0.3 0.9 5.3 8.6 18.2 2012          Nov 22.3 1.0 21.3 148.3 0.6 0.8 145.6 − 0.4 0.4 0.9 4.9 8.7 16.5          Dec 
Special purpose banks
177.2 28.6 148.6 89.4 7.4 8.7 73.4 3.6 − − . 574.0 51.4 91.6 2012          Nov 173.0 25.4 147.6 88.0 6.9 9.8 71.4 4.1 − − . 559.9 51.7 91.3          Dec 
Memo item:   Foreign banks 8
355.8 141.9 213.9 473.8 263.2 82.9 91.1 31.5 20.4 20.2 16.1 51.4 46.2 121.8 2012          Nov 317.6 101.8 215.8 459.5 258.4 73.5 90.9 19.9 20.8 20.6 15.9 50.5 46.5 116.6          Dec 
of which:   Banks majority-owned by foreign banks 9
144.8 72.1 72.7 380.0 202.5 71.2 71.0 31.5 20.3 20.1 15.0 50.8 38.6 113.6 2012          Nov 117.2 48.0 69.3 365.0 197.6 61.5 70.4 19.9 20.8 20.6 14.7 50.0 38.7 108.7          Dec 
loan associations: Including deposits under savings and loan contracts (see Table Nov. 2009), Commerzbank AG, UniCredit Bank AG (formerly Bayerische Hypo- und
IV.12). 3Included in time deposits. 4Excluding deposits under savings and loan Vereinsbank AG) and Deutsche Postbank AG. 8Sum of the banks majority-owned by
contracts (see also footnote 2). 5Including subordinated negotiable bearer debt foreign banks and included in other categories of banks and the category ”Branches
securities; excluding non-negotiable bearer debt securities. 6Commercial banks (with dependent legal status) of foreign banks”. 9Separate presentation of the banks
comprise the sub-groups ”Big banks”, ”Regional banks and other commercial banks” majority-owned by foreign banks included in other banking categories. and ”Branches of foreign banks”. 7Deutsche Bank AG, Dresdner Bank AG (up to

Deutsche Bundesbank
26  Monthly Report
February 2013
IV Banks
 
3 Assets and liabilities of banks (MFIs) in Germany vis-à-vis residents *
 
 
€ billion
Lending to domestic banks (MFIs) Lending to domestic non-banks (non-MFIs)
Treasury
Cash in Negotiable bills and
hand Credit money negotiable
balances market Memo money mar- (euro-area Securities
banknotes with the Credit paper item ket paper issued Securities
and Bundes- balances issued by issued by Fiduciary issued by by non-
Period coins) bank Total and loans Bills banks banks loans Total Loans Bills non-banks banks  1 
End of year or month *
 
2003 17.0 46.7 1,643.9 1,064.0 0.0 8.8 571.0 2.3 2,995.6 2,677.0 3.7 3.4 309.6
2004 14.9 41.2 1,676.3 1,075.8 0.0 7.4 592.9 2.1 3,001.3 2,644.0 2.7 2.6 351.0
2005 15.1 47.9 1,684.5 1,096.8 0.0 6.7 580.9 2.1 2,995.1 2,632.7 2.4 2.4 357.6
2006 16.0 49.4 1,637.8 1,086.3 − 9.3 542.2 1.9 3,000.7 2,630.3 1.9 2.0 366.5
2007 17.5 64.6 1,751.8 1,222.5 0.0 25.3 504.0 2.3 2,975.7 2,647.9 1.6 1.5 324.7
2008 17.4 102.6 1,861.7 1,298.1 0.0 55.7 507.8 2.0 3,071.1 2,698.9 1.2 3.1 367.9
2009 16.9 78.9 1,711.5 1,138.0 − 31.6 541.9 2.2 3,100.1 2,691.8 0.8 4.0 403.5
2010 16.0 79.6 1,686.3 1,195.4 − 7.5 483.5 1.8 3,220.9 2,770.4 0.8 27.9 421.8
2011 15.8 93.8 1,725.6 1,267.9 − 7.1 450.7 2.1 3,197.8 2,774.6 0.8 6.4 415.9
2012 18.5 134.3 1,655.1 1,229.1 − 2.4 423.5 2.4 3,220.2 2,785.4 0.6 2.2 432.1
2011          July 14.5 57.5 1,610.1 1,144.0 − 5.1 460.9 1.6 3,193.1 2,753.1 0.5 18.7 420.7
         Aug 14.0 64.1 1,665.1 1,200.6 − 5.3 459.2 1.7 3,201.3 2,768.0 0.5 16.7 416.2
         Sep 14.7 78.8 1,731.5 1,270.1 − 6.0 455.4 1.7 3,207.6 2,778.3 0.6 14.5 414.2
         Oct 14.7 72.6 1,736.2 1,274.4 − 6.5 455.3 1.7 3,233.3 2,806.1 0.6 15.7 411.0
         Nov 14.1 57.6 1,797.7 1,338.5 − 7.4 451.9 1.7 3,237.6 2,807.6 0.5 14.4 415.0
         Dec 15.8 93.8 1,725.6 1,267.9 − 7.1 450.7 2.1 3,197.8 2,774.6 0.8 6.4 415.9
2012          Jan 13.8 49.8 1,846.4 1,394.4 − 7.3 444.6 2.1 3,226.6 2,800.0 0.7 4.9 421.1
         Feb 13.6 50.8 1,904.6 1,448.5 − 6.8 449.4 2.1 3,220.3 2,797.7 0.5 5.6 416.4
         Mar 14.5 75.8 1,936.0 1,482.9 − 6.8 446.2 2.1 3,222.9 2,787.1 0.5 4.9 430.4
         Apr 14.5 55.4 1,968.9 1,518.5 − 6.6 443.8 2.0 3,244.7 2,795.6 0.5 5.7 442.8
         May 14.8 76.4 1,959.2 1,509.0 − 5.9 444.3 2.0 3,219.1 2,793.4 0.5 4.5 420.7
         June 14.7 89.2 1,927.0 1,481.6 − 6.1 439.3 2.1 3,227.6 2,802.1 0.5 6.1 418.9
         July 14.0 185.5 1,789.7 1,344.8 − 6.3 438.6 2.1 3,257.8 2,833.8 0.5 5.2 418.3
         Aug 14.6 203.4 1,788.0 1,343.7 − 5.4 438.8 2.1 3,252.3 2,824.1 0.5 5.1 422.7
         Sep 14.9 175.1 1,748.0 1,306.1 − 4.1 437.8 2.1 3,253.0 2,817.9 0.5 5.6 429.0
         Oct 15.0 178.6 1,713.5 1,277.5 − 3.6 432.3 2.1 3,271.1 2,837.5 0.5 6.5 426.7
         Nov 14.7 185.4 1,695.0 1,262.7 − 2.8 429.5 2.1 3,265.5 2,825.2 0.5 5.8 433.9
         Dec 18.5 134.3 1,655.1 1,229.1 − 2.4 423.5 2.4 3,220.2 2,785.4 0.6 2.2 432.1
Changes *
2004 − 2.1 − 5.5 + 35.9 + 15.1 + 0.0 − 1.4 + 22.1 − 0.2 + 3.3 − 35.0 − 1.0 + 1.1 + 39.2
2005 + 0.2 + 6.7 + 8.4 + 21.0 − 0.0 − 0.8 − 11.9 − 0.0 − 6.7 − 11.8 − 0.3 − 0.2 + 6.6
2006 + 0.9 + 1.5 − 3.6 + 24.5 − 0.0 + 2.6 − 30.6 − 0.2 − 12.4 − 20.3 − 0.5 − 0.4 + 8.8
2007 + 1.5 + 15.2 + 114.8 + 137.6 + 0.0 + 17.0 − 39.8 + 0.4 − 15.9 + 12.1 − 0.3 − 0.5 − 27.2
2008 − 0.1 + 39.4 + 125.9 + 90.1 + 0.0 + 30.6 + 5.2 − 0.8 + 92.0 + 47.3 − 0.4 + 1.8 + 43.3
2009 − 0.5 − 23.6 − 147.2 − 157.3 − 0.0 − 24.1 + 34.3 + 0.2 + 25.7 − 11.2 − 0.4 + 1.4 + 35.9
2010 − 0.9 + 0.6 − 19.3 + 61.5 + 0.0 − 24.0 − 56.8 − 0.3 + 130.5 + 78.7 + 0.0 + 23.8 + 28.0
2011 − 0.2 + 14.2 + 47.3 + 80.5 − − 0.4 − 32.8 − 0.1 − 30.6 − 3.2 + 0.0 − 21.5 − 5.9
2012 + 2.7 + 40.5 − 68.5 − 37.4 − − 4.6 − 26.5 + 0.1 + 20.8 + 9.6 − 0.2 − 4.3 + 15.7
2011          July + 0.2 − 9.1 + 2.6 + 6.6 − − 0.0 − 4.0 − 0.0 + 1.4 + 4.2 + 0.0 − 2.8 + 0.0
         Aug − 0.5 + 6.6 + 62.3 + 63.8 − + 0.2 − 1.7 + 0.0 + 0.7 + 7.3 − 0.0 − 2.1 − 4.6
         Sep + 0.6 + 14.7 + 66.3 + 69.5 − + 0.7 − 3.8 − 0.0 + 6.3 + 10.3 + 0.1 − 2.2 − 1.9
         Oct + 0.0 − 6.1 + 5.5 + 5.1 − + 0.5 − 0.1 + 0.0 + 25.7 + 27.8 − 0.0 + 1.2 − 3.3
         Nov − 0.6 − 15.1 + 61.5 + 64.1 − + 0.8 − 3.5 + 0.0 + 4.3 + 1.6 − 0.0 − 1.3 + 4.1
         Dec + 1.7 + 36.2 − 72.0 − 70.6 − − 0.3 − 1.2 + 0.0 − 39.9 − 33.0 + 0.3 − 8.0 + 0.9
2012          Jan − 2.0 − 44.0 + 120.7 + 126.5 − + 0.2 − 6.1 − 0.1 + 29.0 + 25.3 − 0.1 − 1.5 + 5.3
         Feb − 0.2 + 1.0 + 58.3 + 54.1 − − 0.5 + 4.7 + 0.0 − 6.4 − 2.3 − 0.1 + 0.7 − 4.7
         Mar + 0.9 + 25.1 + 31.3 + 34.4 − + 0.1 − 3.2 − 0.0 + 2.7 − 10.6 − 0.0 − 0.7 + 14.0
         Apr + 0.0 − 20.4 + 36.1 + 38.8 − − 0.3 − 2.4 − 0.0 + 18.6 + 5.4 − 0.0 + 0.8 + 12.5
         May + 0.3 + 21.0 − 9.7 − 9.5 − − 0.7 + 0.5 + 0.0 − 25.6 − 2.2 − 0.0 − 1.1 − 22.2
         June − 0.1 + 12.8 − 32.2 − 27.4 − + 0.2 − 5.1 + 0.1 + 10.2 + 10.4 − 0.0 + 1.6 − 1.8
         July − 0.6 + 96.3 − 137.2 − 136.8 − + 0.3 − 0.7 − 0.0 + 30.5 + 32.0 + 0.0 − 0.9 − 0.6
         Aug + 0.6 + 17.9 − 1.7 − 1.1 − − 0.9 + 0.2 + 0.1 − 5.5 − 9.7 − 0.0 − 0.2 + 4.4
         Sep + 0.3 − 28.3 − 40.0 − 37.7 − − 1.3 − 1.0 − 0.1 + 0.5 − 6.4 + 0.0 + 0.5 + 6.3
         Oct + 0.1 + 3.6 − 35.7 − 30.3 − − 0.5 − 4.9 + 0.0 + 17.4 + 19.6 + 0.0 + 0.9 − 3.0
         Nov − 0.3 + 6.8 − 18.4 − 14.8 − − 0.8 − 2.8 + 0.0 − 5.5 − 12.0 − 0.0 − 0.7 + 7.3
         Dec + 3.8 − 51.2 − 40.0 − 33.6 − − 0.4 − 6.0 + 0.1 − 45.2 − 39.9 + 0.2 − 3.7 − 1.8
*See Table IV.2, footnote*; statistical breaks have been eliminated from the changes. (see also footnote 2). 2Including debt securities arising from the exchange of
The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as provisional. Subsequent equalisation claims. 3Including liabilities arising from registered debt securities,
revisions which appear in the following Monthly Report, are not specially registered money market paper and non-negotiable bearer debt securities; including
marked. 1Excluding debt securities arising from the exchange of equalisation claims subordinated liabilities. 4Including liabilities arising from monetary policy operations

Deutsche Bundesbank
27  Monthly Report
February 2013
IV Banks
 
   
 
 Deposits of domestic banks (MFIs)  3 Deposits of domestic non-banks (non-MFIs)
Partici-
patinginterestsin
Memo domestic Memo Memo
item banks Sight Time Redis- item Sight Time Savings Bank item Equalisa-tion Fiduciary and deposits deposits counted Fiduciary de- deposits de- savings Fiduciaryclaims 
2 loans Total 4 4 bills 5 loans Total posits 6 posits 7 bonds 8 loans   Period enterprises
End of year or month *
 
2.0 56.8 109.2 1,229.6 116.8 1,112.6 0.2 27.8 2,140.3 624.0 825.7 590.3 100.3 40.5 2003
1.0 61.8 99.6 1,271.2 119.7 1,151.4 0.1 30.3 2,200.0 646.9 851.2 603.5 98.4 43.7 2004
− 56.6 108.5 1,300.0 120.5 1,179.4 0.1 26.5 2,276.6 717.0 864.4 603.4 91.9 42.4 2005− 53.0 106.3 1,348.2 125.4 1,222.7 0.0 22.3 2,394.6 747.7 962.8 586.5 97.5 37.8 2006− 51.1 109.4 1,478.6 122.1 1,356.5 0.0 20.0 2,579.1 779.9 1,125.4 555.4 118.4 36.4 2007− 47.2 111.2 1,582.5 138.5 1,444.0 0.0 41.6 2,781.4 834.6 1,276.1 535.2 135.4 32.3 2008− 43.9 106.1 1,355.1 128.9 1,226.2 0.0 35.7 2,829.7 1,029.5 1,102.6 594.5 103.2 43.4 2009
− 33.7 96.8 1,238.3 135.3 1,102.6 0.0 13.8 2,935.2 1,104.4 1,117.1 618.2 95.4 37.5 2010
− 36.3 94.6 1,210.5 114.8 1,095.3 0.0 36.1 3,045.5 1,168.3 1,156.2 616.1 104.8 36.5 2011− 34.8 90.0 1,135.5 132.9 1,002.6 0.0 36.3 3,090.2 1,306.5 1,072.5 617.6 93.6 34.9 2012
− 32.7 94.8 1,154.7 122.4 1,031.9 0.0 13.3 2,975.0 1,130.6 1,125.8 616.6 102.1 36.6 2011          July
− 32.7 94.9 1,163.4 123.3 1,039.7 0.0 13.5 3,006.1 1,139.2 1,149.1 615.0 102.8 36.7          Aug − 32.7 94.9 1,176.0 133.0 1,042.6 0.0 13.5 3,024.8 1,151.3 1,157.3 613.5 102.8 36.7          Sep 
− 32.5 95.0 1,163.0 132.5 1,030.2 0.0 13.4 3,025.6 1,160.9 1,148.1 613.1 103.6 36.7          Oct 
− 32.5 94.9 1,177.5 136.1 1,041.0 0.0 13.7 3,053.1 1,188.0 1,149.2 611.5 104.3 36.7          Nov − 36.3 94.6 1,210.5 114.8 1,095.3 0.0 36.1 3,045.5 1,168.3 1,156.2 616.1 104.8 36.5          Dec 
− 35.3 93.8 1,221.4 137.1 1,083.9 0.0 35.4 3,035.3 1,181.1 1,133.1 617.2 103.8 35.8 2012          Jan 
− 35.1 93.4 1,232.3 141.0 1,091.2 0.0 35.2 3,053.7 1,187.1 1,143.5 619.8 103.3 35.6          Feb − 34.8 91.8 1,232.1 135.9 1,096.1 0.0 35.3 3,048.3 1,188.9 1,136.9 619.4 103.0 35.3          Mar 
− 35.3 91.7 1,222.4 135.0 1,087.2 0.0 35.7 3,071.3 1,197.7 1,153.2 617.9 102.5 35.5          Apr 
− 35.3 90.9 1,219.1 137.8 1,081.1 0.0 36.4 3,091.6 1,216.8 1,155.6 617.1 102.0 35.5          May− 35.2 91.1 1,207.3 134.1 1,073.0 0.0 36.3 3,104.7 1,233.8 1,153.5 616.1 101.3 35.2          June
− 34.9 91.4 1,190.1 128.0 1,062.0 0.0 36.4 3,105.8 1,235.4 1,154.2 615.9 100.3 35.1          July
− 35.2 91.5 1,184.9 124.8 1,059.9 0.0 36.5 3,118.3 1,247.0 1,156.8 615.4 99.1 35.1          Aug − 35.0 90.6 1,175.0 129.2 1,045.5 0.0 36.1 3,112.2 1,262.9 1,137.3 614.1 97.9 35.0          Sep 
− 34.7 90.3 1,160.8 124.6 1,035.9 0.0 36.3 3,124.7 1,292.7 1,121.9 613.6 96.6 34.9          Oct 
− 35.0 90.2 1,160.0 136.1 1,023.7 0.0 36.4 3,137.0 1,317.7 1,111.8 612.8 94.6 35.2          Nov − 34.8 90.0 1,135.5 132.9 1,002.6 0.0 36.3 3,090.2 1,306.5 1,072.5 617.6 93.6 34.9          Dec 
Changes *
− 1.1 + 3.0 − 9.6 + 41.3 + 2.9 + 38.5 − 0.1 + 2.4 + 62.0 + 24.4 + 25.9 + 13.1 − 1.5 + 1.2 2004
− 1.0 − 4.9 + 8.9 + 28.9 + 0.8 + 28.0 + 0.0 − 3.5 + 76.6 + 70.7 + 12.4 − 1.2 − 5.4 − 1.2 2005
− − 3.7 − 2.2 + 79.0 + 8.6 + 70.5 − 0.1 − 4.5 + 118.0 + 30.0 + 97.7 − 16.8 + 7.2 − 4.1 2006
− − 2.3 + 3.1 + 132.0 − 3.3 + 135.3 − 0.0 − 2.3 + 181.1 + 31.6 + 160.5 − 31.1 + 20.1 − 2.0 2007− − 5.4 + 7.8 + 124.3 + 23.0 + 101.3 − 0.0 − 3.6 + 207.6 + 54.3 + 156.6 − 20.2 + 17.0 − 1.3 2008− − 4.2 + 0.7 − 225.4 − 9.7 − 215.7 − 0.0 − 5.7 + 59.7 + 211.4 − 179.3 + 59.3 − 31.6 − 0.9 2009
− − 2.1 − 9.2 − 96.5 + 22.3 − 119.1 − 0.0 − 0.2 + 77.8 + 76.0 − 18.9 + 24.0 − 3.3 − 1.7 2010
− − 1.1 − 2.2 − 25.0 − 20.0 − 5.1 − 0.0 + 0.1 + 111.2 + 63.7 + 40.9 − 2.6 + 9.3 − 1.1 2011− − 1.3 − 4.1 − 70.8 + 21.5 − 91.9 − 0.0 + 0.2 + 42.3 + 138.7 − 86.7 + 1.5 − 11.2 − 1.6 2012
− − 0.3 + 0.1 − 3.8 + 2.6 − 6.4 + 0.0 − 0.3 − 4.4 + 6.6 − 10.6 − 1.2 + 0.8 − 0.1 2011          July
− + 0.0 + 0.2 + 11.4 + 1.1 + 10.3 − + 0.1 + 31.0 + 8.5 + 23.4 − 1.6 + 0.7 + 0.1          Aug − − − 0.0 + 12.6 + 9.7 + 2.8 − 0.0 + 0.1 + 18.7 + 11.8 + 8.4 − 1.5 + 0.0 − 0.1          Sep 
− − 0.2 + 0.1 − 12.9 − 0.5 − 12.4 − 0.0 − 0.1 + 0.7 + 9.6 − 9.2 − 0.4 + 0.8 + 0.0          Oct 
− + 0.0 − 0.2 + 14.5 + 3.6 + 10.8 − 0.0 + 0.3 + 27.5 + 26.8 + 1.1 − 1.1 + 0.7 − 0.0          Nov − + 0.1 − 0.3 + 33.0 − 21.3 + 54.3 − 0.0 + 0.2 − 6.2 − 19.8 + 8.4 + 4.6 + 0.5 − 0.2          Dec 
− − 1.0 − 0.8 + 10.9 + 22.3 − 11.3 + 0.0 − 0.7 − 10.4 + 12.9 − 23.4 + 1.1 − 1.0 − 0.7 2012          Jan 
− − 0.3 − 0.5 + 10.9 + 3.9 + 7.3 − 0.0 − 0.2 + 18.3 + 5.9 + 10.3 + 2.6 − 0.5 − 0.2          Feb − − 0.3 − 1.6 − 0.2 − 5.1 + 4.9 − 0.0 + 0.1 − 5.4 + 1.9 − 6.5 − 0.4 − 0.3 − 0.2          Mar 
− + 0.5 − 0.2 − 7.1 + 0.2 − 7.3 + 0.0 + 0.4 + 20.4 + 9.0 + 13.5 − 1.5 − 0.5 + 0.2          Apr 
− + 0.0 − 0.8 − 3.3 + 2.8 − 6.1 + 0.0 + 0.8 + 20.2 + 19.2 + 2.4 − 0.8 − 0.5 − 0.0          May− − 0.2 + 0.2 − 11.8 − 3.7 − 8.1 − − 0.1 + 13.1 + 16.9 − 2.0 − 1.1 − 0.7 − 0.3          June
− − 0.2 + 0.3 − 17.2 − 6.1 − 11.0 − 0.0 + 0.1 + 1.1 + 1.6 + 0.7 − 0.2 − 1.1 − 0.1          July
− + 0.3 + 0.1 − 5.2 − 3.2 − 2.0 − + 0.1 + 12.5 + 11.5 + 2.6 − 0.5 − 1.1 − 0.0          Aug − − 0.2 − 0.3 − 9.9 + 5.3 − 15.2 + 0.0 − 0.4 − 5.8 + 16.2 − 19.6 − 1.2 − 1.2 − 0.1          Sep 
− − 0.3 − 0.4 − 17.2 − 7.6 − 9.6 − 0.0 + 0.2 + 12.5 + 29.8 − 15.4 − 0.6 − 1.3 − 0.2          Oct 
− + 0.3 − 0.1 − 0.8 + 11.4 − 12.2 − + 0.1 + 12.2 + 25.0 − 10.0 − 0.7 − 2.0 + 0.3          Nov − + 0.0 − 0.2 − 19.9 + 1.4 − 21.1 − − 0.1 − 46.5 − 11.2 − 39.1 + 4.8 − 1.0 − 0.3          Dec 
with the Bundesbank. 5Own acceptances and promissory notes outstanding. 6Since savings and loan contracts (see also footnote 8). 8Including liabilities arising from
the inclusion of building and loan associations in January 1999, including deposits non-negotiable bearer debt securities. 
under savings and loan contracts (see Table IV.12). 7Excluding deposits under

Deutsche Bundesbank
28  Monthly Report
February 2013
IV Banks
 
4 Assets and liabilities of banks (MFIs) in Germany vis-à-vis non-residents *
 
 
€ billion
Lending to foreign banks (MFIs) Lending to foreign non-banks (non-MFIs)
Treasury
Cash in bills and
hand Loans and bills negotiable Credit balances and loans, bills Negotiable
(non- money money
euro-area Medium market Memo Medium market
banknotes and paper item and paper Securities Securities
and Short- long- issued by issued by Fiduciary Short- long- issued by issued by
Period coins) Total Total term term banks banks loans Total Total term term non-banks non-banks
End of year or month *
 
2003 0.3 769.6 675.8 515.7 160.1 1.5 92.3 1.6 576.3 344.8 110.9 233.9 6.0 225.4
2004 0.2 889.4 760.2 606.5 153.7 2.8 126.3 1.5 629.5 362.5 136.6 225.9 10.9 256.1
2005 0.2 1,038.8 860.0 648.5 211.5 5.8 173.0 1.5 712.0 387.9 132.8 255.1 9.3 314.8
2006 0.4 1,266.9 1,003.2 744.5 258.7 13.3 250.4 0.8 777.0 421.0 156.0 264.9 7.2 348.9
2007 0.3 1,433.5 1,105.9 803.6 302.4 13.4 314.2 0.5 908.3 492.9 197.5 295.4 27.5 387.9
2008 0.3 1,446.6 1,131.6 767.2 364.3 15.6 299.5 1.9 908.4 528.9 151.4 377.5 12.9 366.6
2009 0.3 1,277.4 986.1 643.5 342.6 6.2 285.0 2.9 815.7 469.6 116.9 352.7 9.8 336.3
2010 0.5 1,154.1 892.7 607.7 285.1 2.1 259.3 1.8 773.8 461.4 112.6 348.8 10.1 302.3
2011 0.6 1,117.6 871.0 566.3 304.8 4.6 241.9 2.6 744.4 455.8 102.0 353.8 8.5 280.1
2012 0.8 1,046.0 813.5 545.5 268.1 5.4 227.0 2.6 728.9 442.1 105.1 337.0 9.0 277.8
2011          July 0.7 1,119.9 860.5 578.8 281.7 6.5 252.9 1.8 769.4 463.0 122.5 340.5 17.1 289.4
         Aug 0.7 1,154.4 895.5 608.5 287.0 5.4 253.5 1.8 768.4 468.0 130.3 337.7 19.9 280.4
         Sep 0.8 1,158.8 901.8 608.3 293.5 5.8 251.1 1.8 767.1 472.2 127.5 344.8 17.5 277.4
         Oct 0.7 1,132.7 880.4 587.7 292.7 6.5 245.8 1.8 746.0 453.2 113.3 339.9 19.9 272.9
         Nov 0.7 1,139.9 888.9 593.7 295.2 7.0 244.1 1.8 746.2 459.9 114.6 345.3 10.9 275.4
         Dec 0.6 1,117.6 871.0 566.3 304.8 4.6 241.9 2.6 744.4 455.8 102.0 353.8 8.5 280.1
2012          Jan 0.7 1,141.0 892.7 595.1 297.6 5.9 242.3 2.6 739.1 454.4 101.4 353.0 11.2 273.5
         Feb 0.8 1,136.0 890.0 599.6 290.4 6.3 239.8 2.6 729.2 449.1 99.6 349.5 10.0 270.1
         Mar 0.9 1,114.2 867.7 579.8 287.9 6.4 240.0 2.6 747.1 463.8 116.4 347.4 10.6 272.8
         Apr 0.7 1,119.5 876.5 588.8 287.8 6.4 236.6 2.6 750.1 470.0 122.6 347.4 9.0 271.1
         May 0.7 1,129.6 886.9 596.5 290.4 7.5 235.3 2.6 757.0 475.2 119.8 355.4 9.3 272.6
         June 0.8 1,090.3 853.7 566.5 287.2 7.1 229.5 2.6 740.2 461.4 109.7 351.7 7.5 271.4
         July 0.8 1,103.0 870.2 583.3 286.9 6.8 226.0 2.6 746.8 467.9 113.7 354.2 6.9 272.0
         Aug 1.1 1,096.3 863.0 580.5 282.5 6.9 226.4 2.6 745.7 466.6 116.2 350.3 8.0 271.1
         Sep 1.1 1,096.0 864.6 583.8 280.8 6.4 225.0 2.6 743.6 462.3 116.5 345.8 8.6 272.7
         Oct 0.9 1,087.8 857.6 579.4 278.2 6.4 223.8 2.6 742.9 459.1 116.8 342.4 9.2 274.6
         Nov 0.9 1,067.9 837.2 561.9 275.3 5.9 224.8 2.6 753.2 470.4 127.9 342.5 7.5 275.4
         Dec 0.8 1,046.0 813.5 545.5 268.1 5.4 227.0 2.6 728.9 442.1 105.1 337.0 9.0 277.8
Changes *
2004 − 0.1 + 128.3 + 89.4 + 95.3 − 5.9 + 1.3 + 37.6 − 0.1 + 65.8 + 29.5 + 31.7 − 2.2 + 5.1 + 31.1
2005 + 0.0 + 127.3 + 78.9 + 26.3 + 52.6 + 2.9 + 45.4 − 0.0 + 59.4 + 7.3 − 9.4 + 16.7 − 1.8 + 54.0
2006 + 0.1 + 238.3 + 153.5 + 109.7 + 43.8 + 7.5 + 77.2 − 0.7 + 81.4 + 51.6 + 25.9 + 25.8 − 1.8 + 31.5
2007 − 0.0 + 190.3 + 123.7 + 72.9 + 50.8 + 7.5 + 59.1 − 0.4 + 167.7 + 94.3 + 50.1 + 44.2 + 20.1 + 53.3
2008 + 0.0 + 8.5 + 20.2 − 43.0 + 63.2 + 2.1 − 13.7 − 0.0 + 4.3 + 45.1 − 31.9 + 77.0 − 14.5 − 26.3
2009 − 0.0 − 170.0 − 141.3 − 122.5 − 18.8 − 10.3 − 18.4 − 0.2 − 72.8 − 43.8 − 31.7 − 12.1 − 3.3 − 25.7
2010 + 0.1 − 141.5 − 116.2 − 47.3 − 68.9 − 4.8 − 20.4 − 0.2 − 62.0 − 24.5 − 12.6 − 11.9 + 0.4 − 38.0
2011 + 0.1 − 48.4 − 32.6 − 45.3 + 12.7 + 2.5 − 18.4 + 0.0 − 38.9 − 13.6 − 12.8 − 0.9 − 1.6 − 23.6
2012 + 0.1 − 70.1 − 56.8 − 23.1 − 33.7 + 0.9 − 14.1 − 0.1 − 9.5 − 7.6 + 8.3 − 15.9 + 0.6 − 2.5
2011          July − 0.1 − 7.3 − 3.0 − 5.1 + 2.1 + 0.7 − 5.0 + 0.0 + 0.4 + 5.3 − 0.4 + 5.6 + 1.9 − 6.8
         Aug − 0.1 + 30.7 + 31.1 + 28.5 + 2.7 − 1.1 + 0.7 + 0.0 + 1.8 + 7.4 + 8.2 − 0.8 + 2.8 − 8.4
         Sep + 0.1 − 9.8 − 7.3 − 8.0 + 0.7 + 0.5 − 3.0 − − 13.3 − 5.7 − 5.1 − 0.6 − 2.5 − 5.1
         Oct − 0.1 − 17.9 − 13.5 − 16.1 + 2.6 + 0.7 − 5.1 − 0.0 − 14.3 − 13.5 − 13.1 − 0.5 + 2.4 − 3.2
         Nov + 0.0 − 2.5 − 0.9 + 0.8 − 1.7 + 0.4 − 2.1 + 0.0 − 8.0 − 0.1 − 0.3 + 0.2 − 9.0 + 1.1
         Dec − 0.1 − 24.5 − 19.8 − 27.1 + 7.2 − 2.4 − 2.3 + 0.0 − 11.5 − 12.3 − 14.1 + 1.8 − 2.4 + 3.2
2012          Jan + 0.1 + 27.0 + 25.1 + 29.4 − 4.3 + 1.3 + 0.5 − 0.0 − 2.2 + 1.2 + 0.6 + 0.6 + 2.8 − 6.1
         Feb + 0.1 + 0.1 + 2.1 + 7.1 − 5.0 + 0.3 − 2.4 − 0.0 − 5.6 − 1.8 − 1.0 − 0.8 − 1.2 − 2.6
         Mar + 0.1 − 23.0 − 23.6 − 20.4 − 3.2 + 0.2 + 0.5 − 0.0 + 16.2 + 13.5 + 16.4 − 2.9 + 0.5 + 2.1
         Apr − 0.1 + 2.2 + 5.6 + 7.2 − 1.7 − 0.0 − 3.4 − 0.0 − 0.0 + 3.9 + 6.1 − 2.2 − 1.5 − 2.4
         May − 0.0 − 3.6 − 3.0 + 0.7 − 3.7 + 1.1 − 1.7 + 0.0 − 6.1 − 5.8 − 5.7 − 0.1 + 0.2 − 0.6         June + 0.1 − 39.5 − 33.6 − 32.1 − 1.6 − 0.4 − 5.5 + 0.0 − 9.9 − 7.2 − 5.4 − 1.8 − 1.8 − 0.9
         July − 0.0 + 6.2 + 10.2 + 13.4 − 3.2 − 0.3 − 3.7 + 0.0 + 0.6 + 1.5 + 3.0 − 1.5 − 0.6 − 0.3
         Aug + 0.3 − 0.7 − 1.4 + 0.3 − 1.7 + 0.1 + 0.6 − 0.0 + 4.2 + 3.1 + 3.5 − 0.4 + 1.1 − 0.0
         Sep − 0.0 + 5.4 + 7.1 + 6.4 + 0.7 − 0.5 − 1.2 + 0.0 + 2.9 + 0.1 + 1.3 − 1.3 + 0.6 + 2.2
         Oct − 0.2 − 6.5 − 5.3 − 3.5 − 1.9 − 0.0 − 1.2 − 0.0 + 0.8 − 2.0 + 0.5 − 2.5 + 0.6 + 2.2
         Nov − 0.0 − 19.5 − 20.1 − 17.4 − 2.7 − 0.4 + 1.0 + 0.0 + 10.7 + 11.4 + 11.1 + 0.3 − 1.8 + 1.0
         Dec − 0.1 − 18.0 − 19.8 − 14.3 − 5.5 − 0.5 + 2.3 − 0.0 − 21.1 − 25.7 − 22.2 − 3.5 + 1.6 + 3.0
*See Table IV.2, footnote*; statistical breaks have been eliminated from the changes.   
The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as provisional. Subsequent   
revisions, which appear in the following Monthly Report, are not specially marked.      
  

Deutsche Bundesbank
29  Monthly Report
February 2013
IV Banks
 
   
 
 Deposits of foreign banks (MFIs) Deposits of foreign non-banks (non-MFIs) Partici- Time deposits (including
pating Time deposits (including bank savings deposits and bank
interests savings bonds) savings bonds)in foreign
Memo banks Medium Memo Medium Memo
item and and item and item
Fiduciary enter- Sight Short- long- Fiduciary Sight Short- long- Fiduciaryloans prises Total deposits Total term term loans Total deposits Total term term loans   Period
End of year or month *
 
11.6 41.4 590.7 95.1 495.6 387.7 107.9 0.4 307.3 32.2 275.1 102.4 172.7 3.6 2003
9.8 39.3 603.3 87.0 516.2 403.2 113.0 0.5 311.2 36.6 274.7 123.4 151.2 0.8 2004
10.6 37.2 651.7 102.9 548.8 420.4 128.4 0.6 316.4 62.0 254.4 119.4 135.0 1.2 2005
5.8 50.4 689.7 168.1 521.6 397.3 124.3 0.4 310.1 82.1 228.0 111.5 116.5 1.5 2006
5.7 48.3 738.9 164.7 574.1 461.2 113.0 0.2 303.1 76.0 227.1 122.3 104.8 3.1 2007
25.5 45.1 703.3 218.1 485.1 362.3 122.9 0.3 286.1 92.2 193.9 95.1 98.8 2.5 200832.1 45.4 652.6 213.6 439.0 307.4 131.6 0.2 216.3 78.1 138.2 73.7 64.5 1.9 2009
15.6 48.8 741.7 258.7 483.0 349.3 133.6 0.1 227.6 84.8 142.7 76.7 66.0 1.5 2010
32.9 45.0 655.7 242.6 413.1 289.4 123.7 0.1 225.9 92.3 133.6 66.9 66.6 1.3 201132.6 46.4 691.1 289.4 401.7 284.6 117.0 0.1 237.6 107.2 130.3 69.1 61.2 1.2 2012
15.3 49.0 656.1 248.3 407.8 279.8 128.0 0.1 230.6 102.8 127.8 66.2 61.6 1.5 2011          July
15.4 48.8 705.7 256.5 449.2 321.1 128.1 0.1 234.0 101.9 132.1 66.0 66.1 1.4          Aug 15.5 48.9 745.9 304.7 441.1 312.8 128.4 0.1 243.1 110.6 132.5 65.9 66.6 1.4          Sep 
15.5 48.9 745.5 303.7 441.8 319.3 122.5 0.1 249.7 116.6 133.1 67.4 65.8 1.4          Oct 
15.7 49.8 762.5 330.3 432.2 308.3 124.0 0.1 242.8 111.1 131.7 65.7 66.0 1.3          Nov 32.9 45.0 655.7 242.6 413.1 289.4 123.7 0.1 225.9 92.3 133.6 66.9 66.6 1.3          Dec 
32.6 47.6 813.6 327.1 486.5 363.7 122.8 0.1 233.8 103.1 130.7 64.7 66.0 1.3 2012          Jan 
32.3 47.4 828.4 357.6 470.8 348.3 122.5 0.1 233.4 106.2 127.2 62.1 65.1 1.3          Feb 32.3 47.5 884.3 368.3 516.0 388.5 127.6 0.1 240.9 114.6 126.3 63.1 63.2 1.2          Mar 
32.4 46.7 905.9 364.8 541.1 416.2 125.0 0.1 246.4 115.3 131.1 67.9 63.2 1.2          Apr 
33.1 47.9 890.3 410.3 480.0 353.8 126.2 0.1 246.3 115.1 131.2 67.6 63.6 1.2          May32.7 48.0 847.4 359.3 488.0 364.5 123.5 0.1 238.0 109.6 128.4 65.1 63.3 1.1          June
33.1 48.1 852.0 402.5 449.5 325.8 123.7 0.1 247.6 115.4 132.2 68.9 63.3 1.3          July
33.0 49.2 869.9 389.0 480.9 359.2 121.7 0.1 245.9 118.7 127.2 65.0 62.2 1.3          Aug 32.7 48.9 816.2 369.2 446.9 323.2 123.8 0.1 249.4 122.8 126.6 64.9 61.7 1.3          Sep 
33.1 49.0 812.6 371.9 440.7 320.6 120.2 0.1 244.0 118.7 125.2 63.2 62.0 1.4          Oct 
33.1 49.0 780.0 353.5 426.5 307.5 119.0 0.1 244.5 120.2 124.3 62.7 61.6 1.3          Nov 32.6 46.4 691.1 289.4 401.7 284.6 117.0 0.1 237.6 107.2 130.3 69.1 61.2 1.2          Dec 
Changes *
+ 0.7 − 1.5 + 19.8 − 6.1 + 25.9 + 21.1 + 4.8 + 0.1 + 13.0 + 5.4 + 7.6 + 22.8 − 15.2 − 0.3 2004
+ 0.8 − 3.5 + 28.6 + 12.6 + 16.0 + 4.9 + 11.1 + 0.1 − 4.9 + 23.9 − 28.8 − 7.7 − 21.1 + 0.4 2005
− 5.1 + 13.8 + 56.2 + 68.3 − 12.1 − 13.7 + 1.6 − 0.2 − 0.8 + 21.2 − 22.0 − 5.1 − 17.0 − 0.2 2006− 0.1 − 0.8 + 67.3 + 1.5 + 65.8 + 74.0 − 8.3 − 0.1 + 4.6 − 5.5 + 10.2 + 16.6 − 6.4 + 1.6 2007+ 0.7 − 3.1 − 50.1 + 52.2 − 102.3 − 120.7 + 18.5 + 0.1 − 12.4 + 16.1 − 28.5 − 19.4 − 9.1 − 0.6 2008− 3.2 + 0.1 − 81.4 − 2.1 − 79.3 − 57.5 − 21.7 − 0.2 − 33.5 − 13.3 − 20.1 − 17.0 − 3.1 − 0.6 2009
+ 0.2 + 1.4 + 895.4 + 42.0 + 542.4 + 38.1 + 136.8 − 0.1 − 1.6 + 6.0 − 7.6 − 3.3 − 4.4 − 0.4 2010
− 0.1 − 3.9 − 88.8 − 13.8 − 75.0 − 61.8 − 13.1 − 0.0 − 9.3 + 6.4 − 15.7 − 10.4 − 5.3 − 0.2 2011− 0.3 + 1.5 + 38.2 + 51.7 − 13.5 − 7.5 − 6.0 − 0.0 + 12.6 + 15.2 − 2.6 + 2.5 − 5.1 − 0.1 2012
− 0.1 − 0.8 − 0.1 − 5.9 + 5.9 + 4.3 + 1.6 + 0.0 − 0.9 + 0.0 − 0.9 − 0.7 − 0.3 − 0.1 2011          July
+ 0.1 − 0.1 + 49.0 + 8.7 + 40.3 + 39.8 + 0.6 − 0.0 − 1.4 − 0.7 − 0.7 − 0.0 − 0.7 − 0.1          Aug + 0.1 − 0.1 + 30.9 + 45.0 − 14.0 − 12.4 − 1.6 − 0.0 + 6.2 + 7.5 − 1.3 − 1.0 − 0.3 + 0.0          Sep 
+ 0.0 + 0.1 + 4.8 + 0.8 + 4.0 + 8.8 − 4.9 − + 8.3 + 6.7 + 1.6 + 1.9 − 0.3 − 0.1          Oct 
+ 0.2 + 0.7 + 10.7 + 24.3 − 13.6 − 13.7 + 0.2 − − 8.9 − 6.4 − 2.6 − 2.3 − 0.3 − 0.0          Nov − 0.2 − 4.9 − 107.6 − 85.1 − 22.6 − 20.6 − 1.9 − 0.0 − 18.7 − 19.5 + 0.8 + 0.6 + 0.1 − 0.0          Dec 
− 0.3 + 2.6 + 159.9 + 87.4 + 72.6 + 73.0 − 0.4 − + 8.7 + 11.1 − 2.4 − 2.0 − 0.4 + 0.0 2012          Jan 
− 0.2 − 0.0 + 17.9 + 31.6 − 13.7 − 14.1 + 0.4 − 0.0 + 0.5 + 3.4 − 2.9 − 2.3 − 0.6 − 0.0          Feb + 0.0 + 0.0 + 55.6 + 10.3 + 45.3 + 40.5 + 4.8 − 0.0 + 7.3 + 8.3 − 1.0 + 0.9 − 1.9 − 0.1          Mar 
+ 0.1 − 0.8 + 19.5 − 3.9 + 23.4 + 26.6 − 3.1 − + 4.8 + 0.4 + 4.4 + 4.6 − 0.2 − 0.0          Apr 
+ 0.7 + 1.0 − 25.4 + 42.3 − 67.7 − 67.1 − 0.6 − 0.0 − 3.4 − 1.7 − 1.7 − 1.2 − 0.4 + 0.0          May− 0.4 + 0.2 − 40.6 − 49.3 + 8.8 + 11.0 − 2.3 − 0.0 − 7.6 − 5.2 − 2.3 − 2.3 − 0.0 − 0.1          June
+ 0.4 − 0.0 + 0.6 + 41.9 − 41.3 − 40.5 − 0.8 − + 8.3 + 5.2 + 3.0 + 3.4 − 0.4 + 0.2          July
− 0.2 + 1.2 + 21.8 − 12.2 + 33.9 + 35.1 − 1.2 − 0.0 − 0.3 + 4.0 − 4.3 − 3.5 − 0.8 + 0.0          Aug − 0.3 − 0.2 − 50.1 − 17.8 − 32.4 − 35.1 + 2.8 − 0.0 + 4.8 + 4.7 + 0.1 + 0.3 − 0.2 − 0.1          Sep 
+ 0.4 + 0.1 − 2.5 + 3.0 − 5.5 − 2.1 − 3.3 − 0.0 − 5.0 − 3.9 − 1.1 − 1.5 + 0.4 + 0.1          Oct 
+ 0.1 − 0.0 − 32.1 − 18.3 − 13.8 − 13.0 − 0.8 − 0.0 + 0.6 + 1.4 − 0.8 − 0.5 − 0.3 − 0.1          Nov − 0.5 − 2.5 − 86.4 − 63.2 − 23.2 − 21.8 − 1.4 − 0.0 − 6.1 − 12.5 + 6.4 + 6.6 − 0.2 − 0.1          Dec 

Deutsche Bundesbank
30  Monthly Report
February 2013
IV Banks
 
5 Lending by banks (MFIs) in Germany to domestic non-banks (non-MFIs) *
 
 
€ billion
Lending to domestic Short-term lending Medium and long-term
non-banks, total
      to enterprises and households to general government to enter-
 
including excluding Negoti-
negotiable money able
market paper, Loans money
Period securities, and market Treasury
equalisation claims Total Total bills paper Total Loans bills Total Total
End of year or month *
 
2003 2,995.6 2,680.6 355.2 315.0 313.4 1.6 40.2 38.4 1.8 2,640.4 2,096.1
2004 3,001.3 2,646.7 320.9 283.8 283.0 0.8 37.1 35.3 1.8 2,680.4 2,114.2
2005 2,995.1 2,635.1 309.7 273.5 272.9 0.6 36.2 34.4 1.8 2,685.4 2,141.3
2006 3,000.7 2,632.2 303.1 269.8 269.3 0.6 33.3 31.9 1.4 2,697.6 2,181.8
2007 2,975.7 2,649.5 331.2 301.8 301.5 0.3 29.4 28.2 1.2 2,644.6 2,168.3
2008 3,071.1 2,700.1 373.0 337.5 335.3 2.2 35.5 34.5 1.0 2,698.1 2,257.8
2009 3,100.1 2,692.6 347.3 306.3 306.2 0.1 41.0 37.1 3.9 2,752.8 2,299.7
2010 3,220.9 2,771.3 428.0 283.0 282.8 0.2 145.0 117.2 27.7 2,793.0 2,305.6
2011 3,197.8 2,775.4 383.3 316.5 316.1 0.4 66.8 60.7 6.0 2,814.5 2,321.9
2012 3,220.2 2,786.0 376.0 316.8 316.3 0.5 59.3 57.6 1.7 2,844.2 2,310.8
2011          July 3,193.1 2,753.6 399.4 305.8 305.4 0.4 93.6 75.3 18.4 2,793.7 2,303.9
         Aug 3,201.3 2,768.5 399.9 318.2 317.8 0.5 81.7 65.5 16.2 2,801.4 2,311.9
         Sep 3,207.6 2,778.8 406.2 326.3 325.8 0.5 79.9 65.9 14.0 2,801.4 2,311.2
         Oct 3,233.3 2,806.6 433.2 355.4 354.7 0.7 77.8 62.8 15.0 2,800.1 2,311.3
         Nov 3,237.6 2,808.2 424.2 352.0 351.4 0.6 72.2 58.4 13.8 2,813.4 2,319.9
         Dec 3,197.8 2,775.4 383.3 316.5 316.1 0.4 66.8 60.7 6.0 2,814.5 2,321.9
2012          Jan 3,226.6 2,800.6 409.1 339.2 338.7 0.6 69.8 65.5 4.4 2,817.6 2,320.7
         Feb 3,220.3 2,798.2 406.9 338.2 337.4 0.8 68.7 63.8 4.9 2,813.4 2,315.9
         Mar 3,222.9 2,787.6 396.8 329.5 328.6 0.9 67.3 63.3 4.0 2,826.1 2,325.3
         Apr 3,244.7 2,796.1 402.9 329.6 328.7 0.9 73.3 68.5 4.8 2,841.8 2,341.9
         May 3,219.1 2,793.9 393.6 325.6 324.4 1.2 68.0 64.6 3.3 2,825.5 2,328.8
         June 3,227.6 2,802.6 404.9 324.4 323.9 0.5 80.5 74.9 5.6 2,822.6 2,300.2
         July 3,257.8 2,834.2 429.4 351.6 351.2 0.4 77.8 72.9 4.8 2,828.4 2,304.6
         Aug 3,252.3 2,824.5 415.9 344.6 344.2 0.4 71.3 66.6 4.7 2,836.4 2,310.8
         Sep 3,253.0 2,818.4 413.9 340.9 340.4 0.4 73.1 67.9 5.2 2,839.1 2,311.5
         Oct 3,271.1 2,838.0 430.6 351.1 350.6 0.5 79.6 73.6 6.0 2,840.5 2,309.7
         Nov 3,265.5 2,825.7 410.4 338.2 337.8 0.4 72.1 66.8 5.4 2,855.1 2,316.4
         Dec 3,220.2 2,786.0 376.0 316.8 316.3 0.5 59.3 57.6 1.7 2,844.2 2,310.8
Changes *
2004 + 3.3 − 36.0 − 31.7 − 30.5 − 29.7 − 0.8 − 1.2 − 3.2 + 1.9 + 35.0 + 15.6
2005 − 6.7 − 12.1 − 11.5 − 10.6 − 10.4 − 0.2 − 0.9 − 0.9 + 0.0 + 4.8 + 26.8
2006 − 12.4 − 20.8 − 7.1 − 4.5 − 4.4 − 0.0 − 2.7 − 2.3 − 0.4 − 5.2 + 23.6
2007 − 15.9 + 11.8 + 27.6 + 31.5 + 31.7 − 0.2 − 3.9 − 3.7 − 0.3 − 43.5 − 7.1
2008 + 92.0 + 46.9 + 43.1 + 36.8 + 34.9 + 1.8 + 6.3 + 6.3 − 0.0 + 48.9 + 83.4
2009 + 25.7 − 11.6 − 26.1 − 31.5 − 30.0 − 1.5 + 5.5 + 2.5 + 2.9 + 51.8 + 36.6
2010 + 130.5 + 78.7 + 80.4 − 23.4 − 23.5 + 0.1 + 103.8 + 80.1 + 23.7 + 50.1 + 14.9
2011 − 30.6 − 3.2 − 45.2 + 33.6 + 33.3 + 0.2 − 78.7 − 57.0 − 21.7 + 14.6 + 9.4
2012 + 20.8 + 9.4 − 9.8 − 1.6 − 1.7 + 0.1 − 8.2 − 3.8 − 4.3 + 30.6 + 10.8
2011          July + 1.4 + 4.2 − 4.7 − 1.3 − 1.2 − 0.1 − 3.4 − 0.6 − 2.7 + 6.1 + 5.9
         Aug + 0.7 + 7.3 + 0.3 + 12.4 + 12.3 + 0.1 − 12.0 − 9.8 − 2.2 + 0.3 + 0.5
         Sep + 6.3 + 10.3 + 6.3 + 8.0 + 8.0 + 0.0 − 1.7 + 0.5 − 2.2 − 0.0 − 0.7
         Oct + 25.7 + 27.8 + 26.6 + 28.7 + 28.5 + 0.2 − 2.1 − 3.1 + 1.0 − 0.9 + 0.5
         Nov + 4.3 + 1.5 − 9.0 − 3.4 − 3.3 − 0.1 − 5.6 − 4.4 − 1.2 + 13.3 + 8.6
         Dec − 39.9 − 32.7 − 41.0 − 35.6 − 35.4 − 0.2 − 5.4 + 2.4 − 7.8 + 1.2 + 2.1
2012          Jan + 29.0 + 25.2 + 25.8 + 22.7 + 22.6 + 0.2 + 3.1 + 4.7 − 1.7 + 3.2 − 1.1
         Feb − 6.4 − 2.4 − 2.2 − 1.1 − 1.2 + 0.2 − 1.1 − 1.7 + 0.5 − 4.2 − 4.8
         Mar + 2.7 − 10.6 − 10.1 − 8.7 − 8.8 + 0.1 − 1.4 − 0.6 − 0.9 + 12.8 + 9.4
         Apr + 18.6 + 5.3 + 3.4 − 2.6 − 2.6 − 0.0 + 6.0 + 5.2 + 0.8 + 15.2 + 16.3
         May − 25.6 − 2.3 − 8.9 − 3.6 − 3.9 + 0.3 − 5.3 − 3.8 − 1.5 − 16.7 − 13.5
         June + 10.2 + 10.4 + 11.4 − 1.1 − 0.5 − 0.7 + 12.5 + 10.3 + 2.2 − 1.2 − 6.9
         July + 30.5 + 32.0 + 24.5 + 27.3 + 27.4 − 0.1 − 2.7 − 2.0 − 0.7 + 6.0 + 4.7
         Aug − 5.5 − 9.7 − 13.5 − 6.9 − 7.0 + 0.0 − 6.5 − 6.3 − 0.2 + 8.0 + 6.2         Sep + 0.5 − 6.4 − 2.4 − 3.5 − 3.5 − 0.0 + 1.2 + 0.6 + 0.5 + 2.8 + 1.1
         Oct + 17.4 + 19.6 + 16.7 + 10.2 + 10.2 + 0.0 + 6.5 + 5.7 + 0.8 + 0.7 − 1.9
         Nov − 5.5 − 12.1 − 20.3 − 12.8 − 12.8 − 0.0 − 7.4 − 6.8 − 0.6 + 14.8 + 6.9
         Dec − 45.2 − 39.7 − 34.3 − 21.5 − 21.5 + 0.0 − 12.9 − 9.2 − 3.7 − 10.9 − 5.6
*See Table IV.2, footnote*; statistical breaks have been eliminated from the changes. marked. 1Excluding debt securities arising from the exchange of equalisation claims
The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as provisional. Subsequent (see also footnote 2). 2Including debt securities arising from the exchange of
revisions, which appear in the following Monthly Report, are not specially equalisation claims. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
31  Monthly Report
February 2013
IV Banks
 
   
 
lending
prises and households to general governmentLoans Loans
Memo Memo
item Equal- item
Medium- Long- Fiduciary Medium- Long- Secur- isation Fiduciary
Total term term loans Total Total term term ities 
1 claims 2 loans   Period Securities
End of year or month *
 
1,927.7 195.0 1,732.8 168.3 49.9 544.3 401.0 34.6 366.4 141.3 2.0 7.0 2003
1,940.8 194.3 1,746.5 173.5 55.3 566.1 387.7 32.9 354.8 177.5 1.0 6.5 2004
1,953.4 194.7 1,758.8 187.9 52.1 544.1 374.4 32.9 341.4 169.7 − 4.5 2005
1,972.7 194.5 1,778.1 209.1 48.2 515.8 358.4 31.7 326.6 157.4 − 4.8 2006
1,987.3 207.7 1,779.6 181.1 46.5 476.2 332.5 31.9 300.6 143.7 − 4.7 2007
2,022.0 222.0 1,800.0 235.8 42.8 440.3 308.2 29.7 278.5 132.1 − 4.5 2008
2,051.3 242.7 1,808.6 248.4 39.6 453.1 298.0 32.2 265.8 155.1 − 4.3 2009
2,070.0 238.1 1,831.8 235.7 30.7 487.3 301.2 36.1 265.1 186.1 − 3.1 2010
2,099.5 247.9 1,851.7 222.4 32.7 492.6 299.1 41.1 258.0 193.5 − 3.6 2011
2,119.4 249.7 1,869.7 191.4 31.4 533.4 292.7 39.4 253.3 240.7 − 3.5 2012
2,073.7 235.8 1,838.0 230.2 29.7 489.7 299.2 39.7 259.5 190.5 − 2.9 2011          July
2,085.5 244.8 1,840.8 226.4 29.8 489.5 299.7 40.0 259.8 189.8 − 2.9          Aug 
2,087.9 245.2 1,842.7 223.3 29.8 490.1 299.2 39.8 259.4 190.9 − 2.9          Sep 
2,090.6 245.9 1,844.8 220.7 29.6 488.8 298.5 40.6 257.9 190.3 − 2.9          Oct 
2,098.6 246.8 1,851.9 221.2 29.6 493.6 299.8 40.7 259.1 193.8 − 2.9          Nov 2,099.5 247.9 1,851.7 222.4 32.7 492.6 299.1 41.1 258.0 193.5 − 3.6          Dec 
2,098.4 246.8 1,851.6 222.3 31.8 496.9 298.1 40.9 257.2 198.8 − 3.5 2012          Jan 
2,099.5 245.9 1,853.7 216.4 31.6 497.4 297.5 41.1 256.4 200.0 − 3.5          Feb 2,099.2 246.4 1,852.7 226.1 31.3 500.9 296.6 40.9 255.8 204.2 − 3.5          Mar 
2,102.2 247.1 1,855.1 239.7 31.7 499.9 296.8 40.6 256.2 203.1 − 3.6          Apr 
2,109.6 248.6 1,861.1 219.2 31.7 496.7 295.2 40.1 255.1 201.5 − 3.6          May2,108.5 248.3 1,860.1 191.8 31.5 522.4 295.3 39.8 255.5 227.1 − 3.6          June
2,116.0 249.7 1,866.3 188.6 31.4 523.8 294.1 39.7 254.4 229.7 − 3.6          July
2,120.7 249.6 1,871.1 190.1 31.6 525.6 293.0 39.3 253.7 232.6 − 3.5          Aug 2,118.1 249.0 1,869.1 193.4 31.5 527.6 291.9 39.1 252.8 235.7 − 3.5          Sep 
2,120.9 249.8 1,871.1 188.7 31.2 530.8 292.9 39.9 253.0 237.9 − 3.5          Oct 
2,127.7 251.3 1,876.4 188.7 31.5 538.7 293.4 40.1 253.4 245.2 − 3.5          Nov 2,119.4 249.7 1,869.7 191.4 31.4 533.4 292.7 39.4 253.3 240.7 − 3.5          Dec 
Changes *
+ 10.7 + 0.2 + 10.5 + 4.9 + 3.6 + 19.4 − 13.8 − 0.9 − 12.9 + 34.3 − 1.1 − 0.6 2004
+ 12.5 + 1.7 + 10.8 + 14.3 − 3.0 − 22.1 − 13.4 + 0.9 − 14.2 − 7.7 − 1.0 − 2.0 2005
+ 2.3 + 0.2 + 2.2 + 21.2 − 3.9 − 28.8 − 16.4 − 1.4 − 15.0 − 12.4 − + 0.3 2006
+ 9.6 + 10.1 − 0.6 − 16.7 − 2.2 − 36.3 − 25.8 + 0.1 − 26.0 − 10.5 − − 0.1 2007
+ 28.8 + 12.0 + 16.8 + 54.7 − 5.3 − 34.5 − 23.2 − 2.3 − 20.8 − 11.4 − − 0.1 2008
+ 23.5 + 17.3 + 6.3 + 13.1 − 3.9 + 15.2 − 7.6 + 2.5 − 10.2 + 22.8 − − 0.2 2009
+ 18.6 − 4.0 + 22.6 − 3.8 − 1.7 + 35.2 + 3.5 + 3.5 − 0.0 + 31.7 − − 0.3 2010
+ 22.6 + 2.2 + 20.4 − 13.2 − 1.0 + 5.2 − 2.1 + 4.9 − 7.0 + 7.3 − − 0.2 2011
+ 21.5 + 1.5 + 20.0 − 10.7 − 1.1 + 19.8 − 6.6 − 1.9 − 4.7 + 26.4 − − 0.2 2012
+ 5.5 + 1.1 + 4.4 + 0.4 − 0.3 + 0.2 + 0.5 + 0.7 − 0.2 − 0.4 − − 0.0 2011          July
+ 4.3 + 1.6 + 2.8 − 3.8 + 0.1 − 0.2 + 0.5 + 0.2 + 0.3 − 0.7 − − 0.0          Aug 
+ 2.4 + 0.4 + 1.9 − 3.0 + 0.0 + 0.6 − 0.5 − 0.2 − 0.3 + 1.1 − − 0.0          Sep 
+ 3.1 + 1.1 + 2.1 − 2.7 − 0.2 − 1.3 − 0.7 + 0.7 − 1.5 − 0.6 − + 0.0          Oct 
+ 8.0 + 0.9 + 7.1 + 0.6 + 0.0 + 4.8 + 1.3 + 0.1 + 1.2 + 3.5 − − 0.0          Nov 
+ 1.0 + 1.1 − 0.1 + 1.2 + 0.1 − 1.0 − 0.7 + 0.4 − 1.1 − 0.3 − − 0.0          Dec 
− 1.1 − 1.1 − 0.0 + 0.1 − 0.9 + 4.3 − 1.0 − 0.2 − 0.8 + 5.3 − − 0.1 2012          Jan 
+ 1.1 − 0.9 + 2.0 − 5.9 − 0.2 + 0.6 − 0.6 + 0.2 − 0.8 + 1.2 − − 0.0          Feb 
− 0.4 + 0.6 − 0.9 + 9.7 − 0.2 + 3.4 − 0.8 − 0.2 − 0.6 + 4.3 − − 0.0          Mar 
+ 2.6 + 0.7 + 1.9 + 13.7 + 0.3 − 1.1 + 0.2 − 0.3 + 0.5 − 1.2 − + 0.2          Apr 
+ 7.1 + 1.2 + 5.9 − 20.6 + 0.0 − 3.2 − 1.6 − 0.4 − 1.2 − 1.6 − − 0.0          May
+ 0.5 − 0.1 + 0.6 − 7.4 − 0.2 + 5.7 + 0.1 − 0.4 + 0.5 + 5.6 − − 0.0          June
+ 7.8 + 1.5 + 6.3 − 3.2 − 0.2 + 1.4 − 1.2 − 0.1 − 1.1 + 2.6 − − 0.1          July
+ 4.7 − 0.1 + 4.8 + 1.5 + 0.3 + 1.8 − 1.1 − 0.4 − 0.7 + 2.9 − − 0.0          Aug 
− 2.2 − 0.9 − 1.3 + 3.3 − 0.2 + 1.8 − 1.3 − 0.4 − 0.9 + 3.0 − − 0.0          Sep 
+ 2.8 + 0.8 + 2.0 − 4.6 − 0.2 + 2.6 + 1.0 + 0.8 + 0.2 + 1.6 − − 0.0          Oct 
+ 7.0 + 1.5 + 5.5 − 0.0 + 0.3 + 7.9 + 0.6 + 0.2 + 0.4 + 7.3 − −          Nov 
− 8.3 − 1.6 − 6.7 + 2.7 + 0.0 − 5.3 − 0.7 − 0.6 − 0.1 − 4.6 − − 0.0          Dec 

Deutsche Bundesbank
32  Monthly Report
February 2013
IV Banks
 
6 Lending by banks (MFIs) in Germany to domestic enterprises and households, housing loans,
sectors of economic activity *
 
€ billion
Lending to domestic enterprises and households (excluding holdings of negotiable money market paper and excluding securities portfolios) 1 
of which  
 
Housing loans Lending to enterprises and self-employed persons
 
Whole-sale and Electricity,gas and retail Financial
Mortgage water trade; Agri- Transport- intermedi-
loans supply; repair of culture, ation and ation
secured refuse motor forestry, storage; (excluding
by disposal, vehicles fishing post and MFIs) and
Mortgage residen- Other of which mining and and telecom- insurance
loans, tial real housing Housing Manufac- and Construc- motor- aqua- munica- com-
Period Total total Total estate loans Total loans turing quarrying tion cycles culture tions panies
Lending, total End of year or quarter *
 
2010 2,352.9 1,153.8 1,101.6 907.8 193.8 1,317.2 302.4 134.1 75.5 61.7 120.3 40.3 78.8 157.5
2011          Dec 2,415.7 1,167.3 1,114.0 914.0 200.0 1,368.0 305.0 134.6 84.4 59.6 124.0 42.7 80.1 196.4
2012          Mar 2,427.8 1,164.1 1,114.9 912.6 202.2 1,380.7 305.6 137.0 86.3 60.2 125.6 43.1 78.4 202.7
         June 2,432.4 1,164.7 1,118.0 912.4 205.6 1,385.2 307.6 136.8 88.6 60.6 125.4 44.2 80.3 196.1         Sep 2,458.6 1,167.3 1,126.6 917.8 208.8 1,404.2 309.8 133.9 90.8 60.3 127.4 44.8 78.4 213.9         Dec 2,435.8 1,170.5 1,135.0 922.4 212.6 1,377.5 311.2 131.1 92.7 59.6 126.1 44.5 76.7 195.4
 Short-term lending
2010 282.9 − 7.7 − 7.7 243.2 3.8 32.2 5.2 13.2 39.4 3.0 6.6 78.9
2011          Dec 316.2 − 7.7 − 7.7 276.7 3.9 33.8 6.0 11.9 41.8 3.3 7.0 111.0
2012          Mar 328.7 − 7.5 − 7.5 289.7 3.8 36.8 6.7 12.7 43.1 3.5 7.1 117.2
         June 324.0 − 7.6 − 7.6 285.0 3.8 37.5 6.8 13.3 42.8 4.0 7.4 110.4
         Sep 340.5 − 7.8 − 7.8 301.5 3.9 36.4 6.8 12.9 44.7 3.9 7.4 127.8
         Dec 316.4 − 7.9 − 7.9 277.6 3.8 34.8 6.9 12.0 43.0 3.3 6.8 112.7
 Medium-term lending
2010 238.1 − 32.8 − 32.8 169.1 11.4 27.5 5.2 9.2 13.4 3.9 12.9 29.0
2011          Dec 247.9 − 34.5 − 34.5 176.7 11.8 28.2 6.0 9.4 15.5 4.0 11.8 35.4
2012          Mar 246.4 − 34.8 − 34.8 175.4 11.9 27.3 6.0 9.4 15.6 4.0 11.4 35.9
         June 248.4 − 34.9 − 34.9 176.7 11.7 26.9 6.3 9.3 15.8 4.0 11.6 36.2
         Sep 249.0 − 35.3 − 35.3 176.3 11.9 25.9 6.8 9.3 16.0 4.1 11.1 36.2
         Dec 249.7 − 35.3 − 35.3 176.7 11.8 25.6 7.0 9.3 16.5 4.0 11.0 35.9
 Long-term lending
2010 1,831.8 1,153.8 1,061.1 907.8 153.4 904.9 287.1 74.5 65.1 39.3 67.6 33.4 59.3 49.6
2011          Dec 1,851.7 1,167.3 1,071.8 914.0 157.8 914.6 289.3 72.6 72.4 38.3 66.7 35.4 61.2 49.9
2012          Mar 1,852.7 1,164.1 1,072.6 912.6 159.9 915.6 289.9 73.0 73.6 38.1 66.9 35.6 59.9 49.6
         June 1,860.1 1,164.7 1,075.5 912.4 163.1 923.5 292.0 72.4 75.5 38.0 66.8 36.2 61.3 49.5         Sep 1,869.1 1,167.3 1,083.5 917.8 165.7 926.5 294.0 71.6 77.3 38.1 66.7 36.8 59.9 49.9         Dec 1,869.7 1,170.5 1,091.8 922.4 169.4 923.2 295.6 70.7 78.8 38.3 66.6 37.2 58.9 46.7
 
Lending, total Change during quarter *
 
2011          Q4 + 1.9 + 1.8 + 5.1 + 2.0 + 3.1 + 0.4 + 2.1 − 1.1 + 3.0 − 1.3 − 1.6 + 0.1 + 1.9 − 0.2
2012          Q1 + 12.1 − 1.3 + 1.1 + 0.5 + 0.6 + 11.9 + 0.9 + 2.3 + 1.9 + 0.5 + 1.6 + 0.4 − 1.6 + 6.3
         Q2 + 3.2 + 3.2 + 4.5 + 1.1 + 3.4 − 1.5 + 1.9 − 0.2 + 2.3 + 0.5 − 0.5 + 1.0 + 2.6 − 9.8         Q3 + 27.2 + 3.3 + 8.9 + 5.2 + 3.6 + 20.1 + 2.6 − 2.7 + 2.1 − 0.3 + 2.0 + 0.7 − 1.7 + 17.1         Q4 − 22.7 + 2.9 + 6.2 + 3.5 + 2.7 − 26.3 + 1.4 − 2.8 + 1.8 − 0.7 − 1.2 − 0.3 − 1.8 − 18.5
 Short-term lending
2011          Q4 − 10.2 − + 0.1 − + 0.1 − 9.3 + 0.0 − 2.8 − 0.2 − 1.3 − 2.0 − 0.5 + 0.0 − 1.8
2012          Q1 + 12.5 − − 0.2 − − 0.2 + 13.0 − 0.0 + 3.0 + 0.7 + 0.8 + 1.3 + 0.2 + 0.1 + 6.2
         Q2 − 7.0 − + 0.1 − + 0.1 − 7.2 − 0.0 + 0.9 + 0.1 + 0.7 − 0.2 + 0.5 + 0.3 − 9.9         Q3 + 16.9 − + 0.2 − + 0.2 + 16.6 + 0.1 − 0.9 − 0.1 − 0.4 + 1.9 − 0.1 − 0.0 + 16.8         Q4 − 24.1 − + 0.0 − + 0.0 − 23.6 − 0.1 − 1.6 + 0.0 − 0.9 − 1.5 − 0.6 − 0.5 − 15.0
 Medium-term lending
2011          Q4 + 3.1 − + 0.9 − + 0.9 + 3.3 + 0.6 + 1.6 + 0.3 + 0.2 + 0.3 − 0.1 − 0.1 + 1.4
2012          Q1 − 1.4 − + 0.3 − + 0.3 − 1.8 + 0.1 − 1.0 + 0.0 − 0.1 + 0.1 + 0.0 − 0.5 + 0.5
         Q2 + 1.8 − + 0.3 − + 0.3 + 0.7 − 0.1 − 0.6 + 0.3 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.0 + 0.1 + 0.3         Q3 + 0.5 − + 0.5 − + 0.5 − 0.3 + 0.3 − 1.0 + 0.5 + 0.0 + 0.1 + 0.1 − 0.4 − 0.2         Q4 + 0.7 − + 0.0 − + 0.0 + 0.4 − 0.1 − 0.4 + 0.2 − 0.0 + 0.5 − 0.1 − 0.1 − 0.3
 Long-term lending
2011          Q4 + 9.0 + 1.8 + 4.1 + 2.0 + 2.1 + 6.3 + 1.4 + 0.1 + 2.9 − 0.2 + 0.1 + 0.7 + 1.9 + 0.2
2012          Q1 + 1.1 − 1.3 + 1.1 + 0.5 + 0.5 + 0.8 + 0.9 + 0.3 + 1.2 − 0.2 + 0.2 + 0.2 − 1.3 − 0.3
         Q2 + 8.3 + 3.2 + 4.2 + 1.1 + 3.0 + 5.0 + 2.0 − 0.6 + 1.9 − 0.2 − 0.3 + 0.6 + 2.1 − 0.2         Q3 + 9.9 + 3.3 + 8.1 + 5.2 + 2.9 + 3.8 + 2.2 − 0.8 + 1.8 + 0.0 − 0.0 + 0.6 − 1.2 + 0.5         Q4 + 0.8 + 2.9 + 6.1 + 3.5 + 2.6 − 3.1 + 1.6 − 0.8 + 1.5 + 0.2 − 0.2 + 0.4 − 1.1 − 3.2
*Excluding lending by foreign
branches. Breakdown of lending by building and loan from the changes. The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as pro-
associations by areas and sectors estimated. Statistical alterations have been eliminated visional; subsequent alterations, which will appear in the following Monthly Report,

Deutsche Bundesbank
33  Monthly Report
February 2013
IV Banks
 
   
 
 
 
 Lending to
 Lending to employees and other individuals non-profit institutions
Memo items Other lending Services sector (including the professions)
of which of which
Debitbalanceson wage,
Other Lending salaryreal to self- Lending and of which
Housing Holding estate employed to craft Housing pension Housing Instalment
Total companies Total loans Total loans 
3 accounts Total loans   Period enterprises activities persons 2 enterprises
End of year or quarter * Lending, total 
 
649.0 178.5 46.8 175.8 380.4 53.5 1,022.4 795.7 226.7 155.0 13.9 13.3 3.5 2010
646.3 180.0 42.9 177.9 382.9 51.7 1,034.3 805.6 228.7 147.8 13.5 13.4 3.5 2011          Dec 
647.4 180.5 42.9 178.4 381.9 52.0 1,033.5 805.8 227.7 147.7 13.3 13.6 3.5 2012          Mar 
653.3 181.6 43.3 178.8 387.9 51.9 1,033.6 806.9 226.8 147.3 13.3 13.6 3.5          June654.7 182.8 42.4 179.3 388.0 51.8 1,040.8 813.3 227.5 148.5 13.4 13.6 3.5          Sep 651.5 184.6 39.0 178.5 388.4 51.0 1,044.9 820.3 224.6 147.2 13.0 13.4 3.5          Dec 
Short-term lending
64.7 9.6 11.7 13.9 32.2 7.7 38.9 3.9 35.1 2.6 13.9 0.9 0.0 2010
61.9 9.6 11.1 13.2 30.4 7.2 38.5 3.9 34.7 2.5 13.5 0.9 0.0 2011          Dec 
62.6 9.1 11.9 13.3 30.5 7.9 37.9 3.7 34.3 2.5 13.3 1.0 0.0 2012          Mar 
62.8 9.4 11.8 13.1 30.9 7.9 38.0 3.8 34.2 2.2 13.3 1.0 0.0          June61.7 9.5 10.9 13.0 30.0 7.7 37.8 3.9 33.9 1.9 13.4 1.2 0.0          Sep 57.9 9.3 7.9 12.9 30.0 7.2 37.7 4.0 33.7 2.1 13.0 1.1 0.0          Dec 
Medium-term lending
68.1 8.8 10.1 21.3 28.1 3.8 68.5 21.3 47.1 42.0 − 0.5 0.0 2010
66.3 8.1 8.4 20.4 31.2 3.6 70.6 22.7 47.9 42.8 − 0.6 0.0 2011          Dec 
65.8 8.1 7.8 20.0 31.3 3.6 70.4 22.9 47.5 42.3 − 0.6 0.0 2012          Mar 
66.6 8.1 8.1 20.0 31.9 3.6 71.0 23.1 47.9 42.9 − 0.6 0.0          June
66.9 8.4 8.2 19.9 32.0 3.6 72.2 23.4 48.8 43.9 − 0.5 0.0          Sep 
67.5 8.9 7.9 20.2 32.2 3.5 72.5 23.5 49.0 44.1 − 0.5 0.0          Dec 
Long-term lending
516.2 160.2 25.0 140.6 320.1 42.0 915.0 770.5 144.5 110.4 − 11.9 3.5 2010
518.1 162.4 23.4 144.3 321.3 40.9 925.2 779.1 146.1 102.5 − 11.9 3.4 2011          Dec 
519.0 163.3 23.2 145.2 320.0 40.5 925.2 779.2 145.9 102.9 − 12.0 3.5 2012          Mar 
523.9 164.1 23.4 145.7 325.0 40.5 924.6 779.9 144.7 102.2 − 12.0 3.5          June
526.1 164.9 23.4 146.4 326.0 40.5 930.8 786.0 144.8 102.7 − 11.8 3.5          Sep 
526.1 166.4 23.2 145.5 326.2 40.3 934.7 792.7 142.0 100.9 − 11.8 3.5          Dec 
 
Change during quarter * Lending, total 
 
− 0.3 + 1.3 − 0.9 − 0.3 + 1.0 − 1.1 + 1.6 + 3.1 − 1.5 − 0.7 − 0.6 − 0.1 + 0.0 2011          Q4+ 0.5 + 0.5 − 0.0 + 0.5 − 1.0 + 0.3 − 0.0 + 0.2 − 0.2 + 0.7 − 0.1 + 0.3 + 0.1 2012          Q1
+ 2.6 + 1.1 + 0.3 − 0.0 + 1.9 − 0.1 + 4.7 + 2.7 + 2.0 + 1.5 − 0.1 − 0.0 − 0.0          Q2+ 2.9 + 1.6 − 0.8 + 1.2 + 0.2 − 0.1 + 7.2 + 6.3 + 0.8 + 1.1 + 0.1 − 0.0 − 0.0          Q3− 2.9 + 1.8 − 3.3 − 0.7 + 0.3 − 0.8 + 3.8 + 4.8 − 1.0 − 0.3 − 0.4 − 0.2 − 0.0          Q4
Short-term lending
− 0.6 + 0.1 − 0.6 − 0.1 − 0.7 − 0.8 − 0.9 + 0.1 − 0.9 − 0.2 − 0.6 − 0.1 − 2011          Q4
+ 0.7 − 0.5 + 0.8 + 0.0 + 0.1 + 0.6 − 0.6 − 0.2 − 0.4 − 0.0 − 0.1 + 0.1 − 0.0 2012          Q1
+ 0.4 + 0.3 − 0.1 − 0.2 + 0.4 − 0.0 + 0.3 + 0.1 + 0.1 − 0.0 − 0.1 − 0.0 −          Q2− 0.6 + 0.1 − 0.9 + 0.2 − 0.9 − 0.1 + 0.1 + 0.1 − 0.1 − 0.2 + 0.1 + 0.2 + 0.0          Q3− 3.5 − 0.2 − 3.0 − 0.1 + 0.0 − 0.5 − 0.4 + 0.1 − 0.5 − 0.0 − 0.4 − 0.2 + 0.0          Q4
Medium-term lending
− 0.4 − 0.1 − 0.1 − 0.6 + 0.3 + 0.0 − 0.2 + 0.3 − 0.5 − 0.5 − + 0.0 − 2011          Q4
− 0.9 + 0.1 − 0.6 − 0.4 + 0.2 − 0.0 + 0.4 + 0.2 + 0.1 + 0.1 − + 0.1 + 0.0 2012          Q1
+ 0.6 − 0.0 + 0.2 + 0.0 + 0.4 − + 1.1 + 0.4 + 0.7 + 0.9 − + 0.0 − 0.0          Q2
+ 0.6 + 0.3 + 0.1 + 0.0 + 0.1 − 0.0 + 0.9 + 0.2 + 0.6 + 0.7 − − 0.1 −          Q3
+ 0.6 + 0.5 − 0.3 + 0.3 + 0.2 − 0.1 + 0.3 + 0.1 + 0.2 + 0.2 − − 0.0 − 0.0          Q4
Long-term lending
+ 0.6 + 1.3 − 0.3 + 0.5 + 1.4 − 0.3 + 2.7 + 2.7 + 0.0 − 0.0 − − 0.0 + 0.0 2011          Q4
+ 0.7 + 0.9 − 0.2 + 0.8 − 1.3 − 0.3 + 0.2 + 0.1 + 0.1 + 0.6 − + 0.1 + 0.1 2012          Q1
+ 1.6 + 0.8 + 0.1 + 0.1 + 1.1 − 0.1 + 3.3 + 2.1 + 1.2 + 0.6 − − 0.0 − 0.0          Q2
+ 2.9 + 1.2 − 0.0 + 0.9 + 1.0 + 0.1 + 6.2 + 5.9 + 0.3 + 0.5 − − 0.2 − 0.0          Q3
− 0.0 + 1.5 − 0.1 − 0.9 + 0.2 − 0.2 + 3.9 + 4.6 − 0.7 − 0.5 − + 0.0 − 0.0          Q4
are not specially marked. 1 Excluding fiduciary loans. 2 Including sole proprietors. 
3 Excluding mortgage loans and housing loans, even in the form of instalment credit. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
34  Monthly Report
February 2013
IV Banks
 
7 Deposits of domestic non-banks (non-MFIs) at banks (MFIs) in Germany*
 
 
€ billion
Time deposits 1,2   Memo item
  
 for more than 1 year 2 Subordinated
 liabilities
for up for up (excluding
to and to and for more Bank negotiable Liabilities
Deposits, Sight including including than Savings savings Fiduciary debt arising
Period total deposits Total 1 year Total 2 years 2 years bonds  4 loans securities) from repos deposits 3 
Domestic non-banks, total End of year or month*
 
2010 2,935.2 1,104.4 1,117.1 329.3 787.8 25.1 762.7 618.2 95.4 37.5 35.7 80.9
2011 3,045.5 1,168.3 1,156.2 386.1 770.2 31.5 738.7 616.1 104.8 36.5 34.3 97.1
2012 3,090.2 1,306.5 1,072.5 341.3 731.2 32.0 699.2 617.6 93.6 34.9 31.7 82.9
2012          Jan 3,035.3 1,181.1 1,133.1 366.8 766.3 31.4 734.9 617.2 103.8 35.8 33.8 85.8
         Feb 3,053.7 1,187.1 1,143.5 378.3 765.1 32.5 732.6 619.8 103.3 35.6 33.6 97.0
         Mar 3,048.3 1,188.9 1,136.9 374.4 762.5 33.1 729.4 619.4 103.0 35.3 33.5 91.7
         Apr 3,071.3 1,197.7 1,153.2 392.8 760.4 32.9 727.5 617.9 102.5 35.5 33.4 100.8
         May 3,091.6 1,216.8 1,155.6 397.2 758.4 33.2 725.2 617.1 102.0 35.5 33.4 106.3
         June 3,104.7 1,233.8 1,153.5 397.4 756.1 33.7 722.4 616.1 101.3 35.2 33.2 97.5
         July 3,105.8 1,235.4 1,154.2 402.7 751.6 33.5 718.1 615.9 100.3 35.1 32.9 102.3
         Aug 3,118.3 1,247.0 1,156.8 406.6 750.2 33.4 716.8 615.4 99.1 35.1 32.7 105.7
         Sep 3,112.2 1,262.9 1,137.3 390.1 747.2 33.0 714.2 614.1 97.9 35.0 32.3 95.9
         Oct 3,124.7 1,292.7 1,121.9 384.0 737.9 32.5 705.4 613.6 96.6 34.9 32.1 106.0
         Nov 3,137.0 1,317.7 1,111.8 378.1 733.8 32.3 701.4 612.8 94.6 35.2 31.8 105.4
         Dec 3,090.2 1,306.5 1,072.5 341.3 731.2 32.0 699.2 617.6 93.6 34.9 31.7 82.9
Changes*
2011 + 111.2 + 63.7 + 40.9 + 57.0 − 16.1 + 6.5 − 22.6 − 2.6 + 9.3 − 1.1 − 1.4 + 16.0
2012 + 42.3 + 138.7 − 86.7 − 47.7 − 39.0 + 0.6 − 39.6 + 1.5 − 11.2 − 1.6 − 2.6 − 16.8
2012          Jan − 10.4 + 12.9 − 23.4 − 19.2 − 4.2 − 0.1 − 4.1 + 1.1 − 1.0 − 0.7 − 0.5 − 11.3
         Feb + 18.3 + 5.9 + 10.3 + 11.5 − 1.1 + 1.1 − 2.3 + 2.6 − 0.5 − 0.2 − 0.1 + 11.2         Mar − 5.4 + 1.9 − 6.5 − 3.9 − 2.6 + 0.6 − 3.2 − 0.4 − 0.3 − 0.2 − 0.2 − 5.2
         Apr + 20.4 + 9.0 + 13.5 + 15.5 − 2.1 − 0.1 − 1.9 − 1.5 − 0.5 + 0.2 − 0.1 + 6.5
         May + 20.2 + 19.2 + 2.4 + 4.4 − 2.0 + 0.3 − 2.3 − 0.8 − 0.5 − 0.0 + 0.0 + 5.5         June + 13.1 + 16.9 − 2.0 + 0.2 − 2.3 + 0.5 − 2.7 − 1.1 − 0.7 − 0.3 − 0.2 − 8.8
         July + 1.1 + 1.6 + 0.7 + 5.2 − 4.6 − 0.2 − 4.4 − 0.2 − 1.1 − 0.1 − 0.3 + 4.8
         Aug + 12.5 + 11.5 + 2.6 + 4.0 − 1.4 − 0.1 − 1.3 − 0.5 − 1.1 − 0.0 − 0.2 + 3.5         Sep − 5.8 + 16.2 − 19.6 − 16.6 − 3.0 − 0.4 − 2.6 − 1.2 − 1.2 − 0.1 − 0.4 − 9.8
         Oct + 12.5 + 29.8 − 15.4 − 6.1 − 9.3 − 0.6 − 8.7 − 0.6 − 1.3 − 0.2 − 0.2 + 10.0
         Nov + 12.2 + 25.0 − 10.0 − 5.9 − 4.1 − 0.1 − 4.0 − 0.7 − 2.0 + 0.3 − 0.3 − 0.6         Dec − 46.5 − 11.2 − 39.1 − 36.8 − 2.4 − 0.3 − 2.0 + 4.8 − 1.0 − 0.3 − 0.2 − 22.4
Domestic government End of year or month*
2010 153.4 46.1 103.0 47.7 55.3 2.6 52.7 2.8 1.5 34.7 6.2 0.4
2011 168.5 46.2 118.4 69.5 48.8 3.8 45.0 2.4 1.5 34.0 5.9 3.1
2012 186.2 50.8 130.7 73.0 57.7 4.5 53.1 3.1 1.6 32.7 5.9 3.1
2012          Jan 171.8 49.1 119.0 71.3 47.7 3.3 44.4 2.3 1.4 33.4 6.0 2.2
         Feb 182.4 55.8 123.0 75.4 47.6 3.5 44.1 2.3 1.4 33.3 6.0 2.8
         Mar 182.4 51.9 126.8 79.0 47.8 3.8 44.0 2.3 1.4 33.2 5.9 1.8
         Apr 183.5 52.8 127.0 80.2 46.8 3.8 43.0 2.3 1.4 33.4 5.9 0.5
         May 196.1 57.5 134.8 87.5 47.3 4.0 43.3 2.4 1.3 33.4 5.9 3.8
         June 227.7 64.3 159.5 98.9 60.6 4.7 55.9 2.6 1.3 33.1 5.9 1.5
         July 218.3 53.6 160.6 100.1 60.5 4.4 56.1 2.8 1.3 33.0 5.9 2.1
         Aug 216.6 51.2 161.2 101.1 60.1 4.5 55.6 2.9 1.3 33.0 5.9 3.0
         Sep 214.3 53.5 156.5 96.6 60.0 4.5 55.5 2.9 1.3 33.0 5.9 0.8
         Oct 216.6 57.4 154.9 95.6 59.4 4.4 54.9 2.9 1.3 32.8 5.9 0.9
         Nov 216.8 56.6 155.8 96.3 59.5 4.6 55.0 3.0 1.4 32.8 5.9 0.8
         Dec 186.2 50.8 130.7 73.0 57.7 4.5 53.1 3.1 1.6 32.7 5.9 3.1
Changes*
2011 + 14.6 + 0.1 + 15.0 + 21.4 − 6.5 + 1.2 − 7.7 − 0.4 + 0.0 − 0.7 − 0.2 + 2.7
2012 + 2.2 + 2.9 − 1.6 + 2.7 − 4.3 + 0.7 − 5.0 + 0.7 + 0.1 − 1.4 − 0.1 + 0.1
2012          Jan + 3.3 + 2.9 + 0.6 + 1.8 − 1.1 − 0.5 − 0.6 − 0.1 − 0.1 − 0.7 + 0.0 − 0.9         Feb + 10.6 + 6.7 + 4.0 + 4.1 − 0.1 + 0.2 − 0.3 + 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.0 + 0.0 + 0.7         Mar − 0.1 − 3.8 + 3.8 + 3.6 + 0.2 + 0.3 − 0.1 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.1 − 0.1 − 1.0
         Apr + 0.6 + 0.9 − 0.2 + 1.0 − 1.2 + 0.0 − 1.2 − 0.0 − 0.0 + 0.2 + 0.0 − 1.3
         May + 12.6 + 4.7 + 7.8 + 7.3 + 0.5 + 0.2 + 0.3 + 0.1 − 0.0 − 0.0 − + 3.4
         June + 16.7 + 5.2 + 11.3 + 10.9 + 0.4 + 0.7 − 0.3 + 0.2 − 0.0 − 0.3 − 0.0 − 2.4
         July − 9.4 − 10.7 + 1.1 + 1.2 − 0.1 − 0.3 + 0.2 + 0.2 − 0.0 − 0.1 − 0.0 + 0.6
         Aug − 1.6 − 2.4 + 0.6 + 1.0 − 0.4 + 0.1 − 0.5 + 0.1 + 0.0 − 0.0 + 0.0 + 1.0         Sep − 2.3 + 2.3 − 4.6 − 4.5 − 0.1 − 0.0 − 0.1 + 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 2.3
         Oct + 2.2 + 3.9 − 1.7 − 1.0 − 0.7 − 0.0 − 0.6 + 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.1 + 0.0 + 0.1
         Nov + 0.2 − 0.8 + 0.8 + 0.7 + 0.1 + 0.1 + 0.0 + 0.1 + 0.0 + 0.0 + 0.0 − 0.1         Dec − 30.6 − 5.9 − 25.0 − 23.2 − 1.8 − 0.0 − 1.8 + 0.1 + 0.2 − 0.2 − 0.0 + 2.3
*See Table IV.2, footnote *; statistical breaks have been eliminated from the specially marked. 1Including subordinated liabilities and liabilities arising from
changes. The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as provisional. registered debt securities. 2Including deposits under savings and loan contracts (see
Subsequent revisions, which appear in the following Monthly Report, are not

Deutsche Bundesbank
35  Monthly Report
February 2013
IV Banks
 
7 Deposits of domestic non-banks (non-MFIs) at banks (MFIs) in Germany * (cont’d)
 
 
€ billion
Time deposits 1,2   Memo item
  
 for more than 1 year 2 Subordinated
 liabilities
for up for up (excluding
to and to and for more Bank negotiable Liabilities
Deposits, Sight including including than Savings savings Fiduciary debt arising
Period total deposits Total 1 year Total 2 years 2 years bonds  4 loans securities) from repos deposits 3 
Domestic enterprises and households End of year or month*
 
2010 2,781.8 1,058.3 1,014.1 281.6 732.5 22.5 710.0 615.4 93.9 2.9 29.5 80.5
2011 2,877.0 1,122.0 1,037.9 316.5 721.3 27.7 693.7 613.8 103.3 2.5 28.4 94.02012 2,904.0 1,255.8 941.7 268.3 673.5 27.5 646.0 614.5 92.0 2.2 25.8 79.8
2012          Jan 2,863.5 1,132.0 1,014.1 295.5 718.6 28.1 690.5 615.0 102.4 2.5 27.8 83.6
         Feb 2,871.2 1,131.3 1,020.5 303.0 717.5 29.0 688.5 617.5 101.9 2.3 27.6 94.1         Mar 2,865.9 1,137.0 1,010.2 295.4 714.7 29.3 685.4 617.1 101.6 2.1 27.6 89.9
         Apr 2,887.9 1,144.9 1,026.1 312.5 713.6 29.1 684.5 615.6 101.2 2.1 27.5 100.4
         May 2,895.5 1,159.4 1,020.8 309.7 711.1 29.2 681.9 614.7 100.7 2.1 27.5 102.5         June 2,877.0 1,169.5 994.0 298.5 695.5 29.0 666.6 613.5 100.0 2.1 27.3 96.0
         July 2,887.5 1,181.8 993.6 302.6 691.1 29.1 662.0 613.1 98.9 2.1 27.0 100.2
         Aug 2,901.6 1,195.8 995.6 305.5 690.1 28.9 661.2 612.5 97.8 2.1 26.8 102.7         Sep 2,897.9 1,209.4 980.8 293.5 687.2 28.5 658.7 611.3 96.6 2.1 26.4 95.1
         Oct 2,908.1 1,235.2 966.9 288.4 678.5 28.0 650.5 610.7 95.3 2.0 26.2 105.0
         Nov 2,920.2 1,261.1 956.1 281.8 674.3 27.8 646.5 609.8 93.3 2.3 25.9 104.6         Dec 2,904.0 1,255.8 941.7 268.3 673.5 27.5 646.0 614.5 92.0 2.2 25.8 79.8
Changes*
2011 + 96.6 + 63.6 + 25.9 + 35.5 − 9.6 + 5.2 − 14.9 − 2.2 + 9.3 − 0.3 − 1.2 + 13.3
2012 + 40.1 + 135.8 − 85.1 − 50.4 − 34.7 − 0.1 − 34.6 + 0.8 − 11.3 − 0.3 − 2.6 − 16.8
2012          Jan − 13.8 + 10.0 − 24.0 − 21.0 − 3.1 + 0.4 − 3.5 + 1.2 − 0.9 − 0.0 − 0.6 − 10.4
         Feb + 7.7 − 0.7 + 6.4 + 7.4 − 1.0 + 0.9 − 2.0 + 2.5 − 0.5 − 0.2 − 0.2 + 10.5         Mar − 5.3 + 5.7 − 10.3 − 7.5 − 2.8 + 0.3 − 3.1 − 0.4 − 0.3 − 0.1 − 0.1 − 4.2
         Apr + 19.8 + 8.1 + 13.7 + 14.6 − 0.9 − 0.2 − 0.7 − 1.5 − 0.5 + 0.0 − 0.1 + 7.8
         May + 7.6 + 14.5 − 5.4 − 2.9 − 2.5 + 0.1 − 2.6 − 0.9 − 0.5 − 0.0 + 0.0 + 2.1         June − 3.6 + 11.7 − 13.4 − 10.7 − 2.7 − 0.2 − 2.5 − 1.2 − 0.7 − 0.0 − 0.2 − 6.5
         July + 10.5 + 12.3 − 0.4 + 4.1 − 4.5 + 0.1 − 4.6 − 0.3 − 1.1 − 0.0 − 0.3 + 4.2
         Aug + 14.1 + 13.9 + 2.0 + 3.0 − 1.0 − 0.2 − 0.8 − 0.6 − 1.2 + 0.0 − 0.2 + 2.5         Sep − 3.5 + 13.9 − 15.0 − 12.1 − 2.9 − 0.4 − 2.5 − 1.2 − 1.2 − 0.1 − 0.4 − 7.5
         Oct + 10.3 + 25.9 − 13.7 − 5.1 − 8.6 − 0.5 − 8.1 − 0.6 − 1.3 − 0.0 − 0.2 + 9.9
         Nov + 12.0 + 25.8 − 10.9 − 6.6 − 4.3 − 0.2 − 4.0 − 0.8 − 2.1 + 0.3 − 0.3 − 0.5         Dec − 15.9 − 5.3 − 14.1 − 13.5 − 0.5 − 0.3 − 0.2 + 4.7 − 1.2 − 0.1 − 0.1 − 24.8
of which:  Domestic enterprises End of year or month*
2010 1,124.4 344.6 755.5 196.0 559.5 7.5 552.0 6.3 17.9 2.8 21.4 80.5
2011 1,156.5 374.8 758.9 222.9 536.0 9.4 526.7 5.6 17.3 2.5 20.3 94.0
2012 1,105.3 414.2 668.5 185.9 482.5 10.4 472.2 6.5 16.1 2.2 18.2 79.8
2012          Jan 1,137.0 381.2 733.2 201.4 531.9 9.3 522.5 5.6 17.0 2.4 19.8 83.6
         Feb 1,134.0 373.1 738.3 209.1 529.2 9.7 519.5 5.7 16.9 2.2 19.7 94.1
         Mar 1,125.8 376.3 727.0 201.1 525.9 9.8 516.1 5.8 16.7 2.1 19.7 89.9
         Apr 1,140.8 374.7 743.6 218.7 524.9 9.7 515.2 5.8 16.6 2.1 19.6 100.4
         May 1,144.2 384.2 737.6 215.6 522.0 9.8 512.1 5.9 16.5 2.1 19.5 102.5
         June 1,118.8 384.8 711.5 205.3 506.2 9.8 496.4 6.1 16.4 2.1 19.4 96.0
         July 1,125.0 390.5 712.0 210.2 501.8 10.2 491.6 6.2 16.3 2.0 19.2 100.2
         Aug 1,132.6 394.5 715.6 214.8 500.7 10.2 490.5 6.4 16.2 2.1 19.0 102.7
         Sep 1,124.2 399.0 702.6 204.6 497.9 10.3 487.6 6.5 16.1 2.0 18.7 95.1
         Oct 1,134.2 419.7 692.0 202.3 489.7 10.3 479.4 6.6 15.9 2.0 18.6 105.0
         Nov 1,131.1 425.2 683.6 198.0 485.6 10.3 475.4 6.5 15.8 2.3 18.3 104.6
         Dec 1,105.3 414.2 668.5 185.9 482.5 10.4 472.2 6.5 16.1 2.2 18.2 79.8
Changes*
2011 + 33.6 + 29.1 + 5.1 + 27.6 − 22.5 + 1.9 − 24.4 − 0.3 − 0.3 − 0.3 − 1.1 + 13.3
2012 − 37.3 + 42.6 − 79.6 − 39.2 − 40.4 + 1.1 − 41.5 + 0.9 − 1.2 − 0.2 − 2.1 − 16.8
2012          Jan − 19.8 + 6.4 − 26.0 − 21.5 − 4.5 − 0.1 − 4.4 + 0.0 − 0.3 − 0.0 − 0.5 − 10.4
         Feb − 3.0 − 8.1 + 5.1 + 7.7 − 2.6 + 0.4 − 3.0 + 0.1 − 0.1 − 0.2 − 0.1 + 10.5         Mar − 8.2 + 3.2 − 11.4 − 8.0 − 3.3 + 0.1 − 3.4 + 0.1 − 0.2 − 0.1 − 0.1 − 4.2
         Apr + 13.6 − 0.4 + 14.1 + 14.9 − 0.8 − 0.1 − 0.7 − 0.0 − 0.1 + 0.0 − 0.1 + 7.8
         May + 3.4 + 9.5 − 6.1 − 3.2 − 2.9 + 0.1 − 3.1 + 0.1 − 0.1 − 0.0 − 0.0 + 2.1         June − 10.4 + 2.3 − 12.7 − 9.8 − 2.9 − 0.0 − 2.9 + 0.1 − 0.1 − 0.0 − 0.1 − 6.5
         July + 6.2 + 5.7 + 0.5 + 4.9 − 4.4 + 0.4 − 4.8 + 0.1 − 0.1 − 0.0 − 0.2 + 4.2
         Aug + 7.6 + 4.0 + 3.6 + 4.7 − 1.1 + 0.1 − 1.2 + 0.2 − 0.1 + 0.0 − 0.2 + 2.5         Sep − 8.2 + 4.9 − 13.1 − 10.3 − 2.8 + 0.1 − 2.9 + 0.1 − 0.1 − 0.1 − 0.3 − 7.5
         Oct + 10.0 + 20.7 − 10.5 − 2.3 − 8.2 + 0.0 − 8.2 + 0.1 − 0.2 − 0.0 − 0.1 + 9.9
         Nov − 2.8 + 5.5 − 8.1 − 4.2 − 3.9 + 0.1 − 4.0 − 0.1 − 0.1 + 0.3 − 0.2 − 0.5         Dec − 25.6 − 11.0 − 14.9 − 12.1 − 2.9 + 0.1 − 3.0 − 0.0 + 0.3 − 0.1 − 0.1 − 24.8
Table IV.12). 3Excluding deposits under savings and loan contracts (see also foot-   
note 2). 4 Including liabilities arising from non-negotiable bearer debt securities.   
   
  

Deutsche Bundesbank
36  Monthly Report
February 2013
IV Banks
 
8 Deposits of domestic households and non-profit institutions at banks (MFIs) in Germany*
 
 
€ billion
Sight deposits Time deposits 1,2 
by creditor group by creditor group
Deposits of Domestic households Domestic households
domestic
householdsand Domestic
non-profit Self- non-profit Self-
employed Other institu- employed Other institutions,
Period total Total Total persons Employees tions Total Total persons Employees individuals individuals
End of year or month*
 
2010 1,657.4 713.7 692.4 123.8 471.2 97.4 21.3 258.6 241.4 21.2 203.7 16.4
2011 1,720.4 747.3 724.9 131.5 490.4 103.0 22.4 278.9 261.1 23.3 218.5 19.3
2012 1,798.7 841.5 816.5 147.1 548.6 120.8 25.0 273.3 256.6 18.8 219.3 18.6
2012          July 1,762.5 791.3 766.2 140.4 515.0 110.8 25.1 281.6 264.3 21.9 222.6 19.8
         Aug 1,769.0 801.3 775.1 143.3 518.9 112.9 26.2 280.0 262.7 21.4 221.7 19.7
         Sep 1,773.8 810.3 784.7 141.4 528.0 115.3 25.7 278.2 261.0 20.7 220.4 19.9
         Oct 1,773.9 815.6 789.9 146.2 527.9 115.8 25.7 274.9 258.2 19.9 219.4 18.9
         Nov 1,789.0 835.8 810.3 147.3 544.1 118.9 25.5 272.4 255.8 19.3 218.0 18.5
         Dec 1,798.7 841.5 816.5 147.1 548.6 120.8 25.0 273.3 256.6 18.8 219.3 18.6
Changes*
2011 + 63.0 + 34.5 + 33.5 + 7.8 + 19.7 + 6.0 + 1.1 + 20.8 + 20.3 + 2.1 + 15.2 + 3.0
2012 + 77.3 + 93.2 + 90.5 + 14.0 + 57.2 + 19.3 + 2.7 − 5.6 − 4.4 − 4.5 − 0.4 + 0.5
2012          July + 4.3 + 6.6 + 7.0 + 4.6 + 1.8 + 0.6 − 0.3 − 0.9 − 0.9 − 0.4 − 0.6 + 0.1
         Aug + 6.5 + 9.9 + 8.9 + 2.9 + 3.8 + 2.2 + 1.0 − 1.5 − 1.6 − 0.5 − 0.9 − 0.2
         Sep + 4.7 + 9.1 + 9.6 − 2.0 + 9.1 + 2.4 − 0.5 − 1.8 − 1.7 − 0.6 − 1.3 + 0.2
         Oct + 0.2 + 5.2 + 5.2 + 4.8 − 0.7 + 1.2 + 0.0 − 3.2 − 2.7 − 0.9 − 1.3 − 0.6
         Nov + 14.8 + 20.3 + 20.5 + 1.1 + 16.2 + 3.2 − 0.2 − 2.8 − 2.4 − 0.5 − 1.5 − 0.4
         Dec + 9.7 + 5.7 + 6.2 − 0.2 + 4.5 + 1.9 − 0.5 + 0.8 + 0.8 − 0.5 + 1.3 + 0.0
*See Table IV.2, footnote*; statistical breaks have been eliminated from the changes. revisions, which appear in the following Monthly Report, are not specially
The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as provisional. Subsequent marked. 1Including subordinated liabilities and liabilities arising from registered debt
 
  
9 Deposits of domestic government at banks (MFIs) in Germany, by creditor group
*
 
€ billion
Deposits
   
Federal Government and its special funds  1 State governments
Time deposits Time deposits
Savings Savings
for up deposits Memo for up deposits Memo
Domestic to and for more and bank item to and for more and bank item
government, Sight including than savings Fiduciary Sight including than savings Fiduciary
Period total Total deposits 1 year 1 year bonds 2 loans Total deposits 1 year 1 year bonds 2 loans
End of year or month*
 
2010 153.4 38.7 5.7 3.3 29.6 0.1 17.0 28.2 8.5 6.7 12.9 0.2 17.2
2011 168.5 37.9 6.2 9.4 22.2 0.1 16.9 34.8 11.4 10.7 12.5 0.2 16.8
2012 186.2 25.9 3.7 6.0 16.2 0.1 16.4 47.2 9.1 13.7 24.2 0.2 15.9
2012          July 218.3 30.0 7.4 3.3 19.3 0.1 16.7 83.9 13.5 46.0 24.3 0.2 15.9
         Aug 216.6 27.7 5.5 3.3 18.9 0.1 16.7 81.2 9.6 47.2 24.2 0.2 15.9
         Sep 214.3 26.7 5.0 2.9 18.7 0.1 16.6 80.0 12.2 43.4 24.2 0.2 15.9
         Oct 216.6 26.6 5.2 3.2 18.2 0.1 16.5 84.8 18.1 42.6 24.0 0.2 15.9
         Nov 216.8 26.6 5.3 3.1 18.2 0.1 16.5 77.7 13.1 40.5 24.0 0.2 15.9
         Dec 186.2 25.9 3.7 6.0 16.2 0.1 16.4 47.2 9.1 13.7 24.2 0.2 15.9
Changes*
2011 + 14.6 − 0.7 + 0.5 + 6.3 − 7.5 + 0.0 − 0.2 + 6.6 + 2.9 + 4.0 − 0.4 + 0.0 − 0.5
2012 + 2.2 − 9.2 − 2.5 − 0.7 − 6.0 + 0.0 − 0.5 − 2.3 − 3.9 + 2.7 − 1.1 − 0.0 − 0.9
2012          July − 9.4 − 3.8 − 2.5 − 1.4 + 0.1 − − 0.0 − 0.6 − 5.9 + 5.8 − 0.5 + 0.0 − 0.1
         Aug − 1.6 − 2.3 − 1.8 − 0.0 − 0.4 + 0.0 − 0.0 − 2.7 − 3.9 + 1.2 − 0.1 + 0.0 − 0.0
         Sep − 2.3 − 0.8 − 0.5 − 0.1 − 0.2 − − 0.0 − 1.5 + 2.6 − 4.1 − 0.0 − − 0.0
         Oct + 2.2 − 0.0 + 0.2 + 0.3 − 0.4 + 0.0 − 0.1 + 4.8 + 5.8 − 0.7 − 0.3 − 0.0 − 0.0
         Nov + 0.2 + 0.0 + 0.1 − 0.0 − 0.1 − 0.0 + 0.0 − 7.1 − 5.0 − 2.1 + 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.0
         Dec − 30.6 − 0.7 − 1.6 + 2.9 − 2.0 + 0.0 − 0.1 − 30.6 − 4.0 − 26.9 + 0.2 + 0.0 − 0.0
*See Table IV.2, footnote *; excluding deposits of the Treuhand agency and its Telekom AG, and of publicly owned enterprises, which are included in ”Enterprises”.
successor organisations, of the Federal Railways, east German Railways and Federal Statistical breaks have been eliminated from the changes. The figures for the latest
Post Office, and, from 1995, of Deutsche Bahn AG, Deutsche Post AG and Deutsche date are always to be regarded as provisional. Subsequent revisions, which appear in

Deutsche Bundesbank
37  Monthly Report
February 2013
IV Banks
 
   
 
 Savings deposits 3  Memo item
 
 by maturity
 more than 1 year 2 
Subordinated
of which liabilities
Domestic Domestic (excluding
up to and up to and Bank negotiable Liabilities non-profit non-profit
institu- including including more than Domestic institu- savings Fiduciary debt arising
tions 1 year Total 2 years 2 years Total tions bonds  4 loans from repos   Period households securities) 5 
End of year or month*
 
17.3 85.7 173.0 15.0 158.0 609.1 599.2 9.9 76.0 0.1 8.2 − 2010
17.8 93.6 185.3 18.3 167.0 608.2 599.0 9.2 86.1 0.1 8.1 − 201116.7 82.3 190.9 17.1 173.8 608.0 597.8 10.2 76.0 0.0 7.6 − 2012
17.2 92.3 189.2 18.9 170.3 607.0 597.1 9.9 82.6 0.0 7.8 − 2012          July
17.3 90.7 189.4 18.7 170.7 606.1 596.1 10.0 81.6 0.0 7.8 −          Aug 17.2 88.9 189.3 18.2 171.1 604.8 594.7 10.1 80.5 0.0 7.7 −          Sep 
16.7 86.1 188.8 17.7 171.1 604.1 593.8 10.2 79.4 0.0 7.7 −          Oct 
16.6 83.8 188.6 17.5 171.1 603.3 593.3 10.0 77.5 0.0 7.6 −          Nov 16.7 82.3 190.9 17.1 173.8 608.0 597.8 10.2 76.0 0.0 7.6 −          Dec 
Changes*
+ 0.5 + 8.0 + 12.9 + 3.3 + 9.5 − 1.8 − 1.1 − 0.7 + 9.5 − 0.0 − 0.1 − 2011
− 1.1 − 11.2 + 5.6 − 1.3 + 6.9 − 0.2 − 1.1 + 1.0 − 10.1 − 0.0 − 0.5 − 2012
− 0.1 − 0.8 − 0.1 − 0.3 + 0.2 − 0.5 − 0.8 + 0.3 − 0.9 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 2012          July
+ 0.1 − 1.7 + 0.1 − 0.2 + 0.4 − 0.8 − 1.0 + 0.1 − 1.1 + 0.0 − 0.1 −          Aug 
− 0.1 − 1.8 − 0.1 − 0.4 + 0.4 − 1.4 − 1.5 + 0.1 − 1.1 − 0.0 − 0.1 −          Sep 
− 0.5 − 2.8 − 0.4 − 0.5 + 0.1 − 0.7 − 0.8 + 0.1 − 1.1 − 0.0 − 0.1 −          Oct 
− 0.4 − 2.4 − 0.3 − 0.3 − 0.0 − 0.8 − 0.6 − 0.2 − 1.9 − 0.0 − 0.1 −          Nov 
+ 0.1 − 1.5 + 2.3 − 0.4 + 2.7 + 4.7 + 4.6 + 0.1 − 1.5 − 0.0 − 0.0 −          Dec 
securities. 2Including deposits under savings and loan contracts (see Table 2). 4Including liabilities arising from non-negotiable bearer debt
IV.12). 3Excluding deposits under savings and loan contracts (see also foot-note securities. 5 Included in time deposits. 
 
     
 
Local government and local government associations
(including municipal special-purpose associations) Social security funds
Time deposits 3 Time deposits
Savings Savings
for up deposits Memo for up deposits Memo
to and for more and bank item to and for more and bank item
Sight including than savings Fiduciary Sight including than savings Fiduciary
Total deposits 1 year 1 year bonds 2,4 loans Total deposits 1 year 1 year bonds 2 loans   Period
End of year or month*
 
37.4 19.5 9.9 4.5 3.5 0.4 49.1 12.3 27.9 8.3 0.6 0.0 2010
39.3 18.1 13.0 5.0 3.2 0.4 56.5 10.5 36.4 9.1 0.4 0.0 201143.8 23.0 11.3 5.9 3.6 0.4 69.3 15.0 42.0 11.4 0.8 0.0 2012
38.9 17.0 12.6 5.8 3.5 0.4 65.5 15.8 38.3 11.1 0.4 0.0 2012          July
43.5 21.2 12.9 5.9 3.6 0.4 64.2 14.9 37.7 11.0 0.4 0.0          Aug 41.6 19.6 12.6 5.8 3.6 0.4 66.0 16.7 37.7 11.2 0.4 0.0          Sep 
39.6 18.3 11.9 5.8 3.6 0.4 65.6 15.9 37.9 11.3 0.5 0.0          Oct 
42.4 20.8 12.0 6.0 3.6 0.4 70.0 17.4 40.6 11.4 0.6 0.0          Nov 43.8 23.0 11.3 5.9 3.6 0.4 69.3 15.0 42.0 11.4 0.8 0.0          Dec 
Changes*
+ 1.8 − 1.4 + 2.9 + 0.5 − 0.2 − 0.0 + 7.0 − 1.9 + 8.2 + 0.9 − 0.2 − 0.0 2011+ 4.3 + 4.8 − 1.7 + 0.7 + 0.4 − 0.0 + 9.4 + 4.5 + 2.4 + 2.1 + 0.4 − 0.0 2012
− 1.4 − 1.3 − 0.2 + 0.0 + 0.1 − 0.0 − 3.6 − 0.9 − 3.0 + 0.3 + 0.0 − 2012          July
+ 4.7 + 4.2 + 0.3 + 0.1 + 0.1 − − 1.3 − 0.8 − 0.5 − 0.0 + 0.0 −          Aug 
− 1.9 − 1.5 − 0.3 − 0.1 + 0.0 − 0.0 + 1.9 + 1.8 − 0.1 + 0.2 − 0.0 −          Sep 
− 2.0 − 1.3 − 0.7 − − − − 0.6 − 0.8 + 0.2 + 0.0 + 0.0 −          Oct 
+ 2.8 + 2.5 + 0.1 + 0.1 + 0.0 − + 4.5 + 1.6 + 2.7 + 0.1 + 0.1 −          Nov 
+ 1.4 + 2.2 − 0.7 − 0.1 − 0.0 − − 0.7 − 2.4 + 1.4 + 0.0 + 0.2 − 0.0          Dec 
the following Monthly Report, are not specially marked. 1Federal Railways Fund, non-negotiable bearer debt securities. 3Including deposits under savings and loan
Indemnification Fund, Redemption Fund for Inherited Liabilities, ERP Special Fund, contracts. 4 Excluding deposits under savings and loan contracts (see also footnote 3). 
German Unity Fund, Equalisation of Burdens Fund. 2Including liabilities arising from

Deutsche Bundesbank
38  Monthly Report
February 2013
IV Banks
 
10 Savings deposits and bank savings bonds of banks (MFIs) in Germany sold to non-banks (non-MFIs)*
 
 
€ billion
Savings deposits 1 Bank savings bonds 3  , sold to
of residents of non-residents domestic non-banks
at three months’ at more than three Memo
notice months’ notice item of which
Interest With
of which of which of which credited maturities
Special Special At three on of more
savings savings savings non-banks, than foreign months’
Period Total Total Total Total Total notice deposits total Total 2 years facilities 2 facilities 2 non-banks
End of year or month*
 
2010 628.2 618.2 512.5 412.3 105.7 96.6 9.9 7.7 10.9 113.1 95.4 70.5 17.7
2011 626.3 616.1 515.3 413.7 100.8 91.3 10.2 7.8 10.0 122.5 104.8 74.6 17.7
2012 628.2 617.6 528.4 418.1 89.2 77.7 10.6 8.1 9.8 110.5 93.6 68.6 16.9
2012          Aug 626.0 615.4 521.0 414.7 94.3 83.6 10.7 8.1 0.4 116.6 99.1 72.0 17.5
         Sep 624.8 614.1 521.4 414.1 92.8 81.8 10.6 8.1 0.3 115.3 97.9 71.5 17.4
         Oct 624.2 613.6 521.5 413.3 92.0 80.8 10.6 8.1 0.5 113.8 96.6 70.6 17.2
         Nov 623.4 612.8 522.1 413.8 90.8 79.5 10.6 8.1 0.5 111.7 94.6 69.3 17.1
         Dec 628.2 617.6 528.4 418.1 89.2 77.7 10.6 8.1 5.9 110.5 93.6 68.6 16.9
Changes*
2011 − 2.4 − 2.6 + 1.3 + 0.2 − 3.9 − 4.3 + 0.2 + 0.1 . + 9.4 + 9.3 + 4.0 + 0.2
2012 + 1.9 + 1.5 + 14.1 + 5.6 − 12.6 − 14.6 + 0.4 + 0.3 . − 12.0 − 11.2 − 6.1 − 0.7
2012          Aug − 0.5 − 0.5 + 0.9 + 0.2 − 1.4 − 1.6 − 0.0 + 0.0 . − 1.3 − 1.1 − 0.5 − 0.2
         Sep − 1.3 − 1.2 + 0.3 − 0.6 − 1.6 − 1.7 − 0.0 − 0.0 . − 1.3 − 1.2 − 0.5 − 0.1
         Oct − 0.6 − 0.6 + 0.2 − 0.8 − 0.7 − 1.0 − 0.0 − 0.0 . − 1.4 − 1.3 − 0.9 − 0.1
         Nov − 0.7 − 0.7 + 0.6 + 0.7 − 1.3 − 1.4 − 0.0 + 0.0 . − 2.1 − 2.0 − 1.4 − 0.1
         Dec + 4.7 + 4.8 + 6.3 + 4.3 − 1.5 − 1.8 − 0.0 + 0.0 . − 1.2 − 1.0 − 0.7 − 0.1
*See Table IV.2, footnote*; statistical breaks have been eliminated from the changes. as time deposits. 2Savings deposits bearing interest at a rate which exceeds the
The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as provisional. Subsequent minimum or basic rate of interest. 3Including liabilities arising from non-negotiable
revisions, which appear in the following Monthly Report, are not specially bearer debt securities. 
marked. 1Excluding deposits under savings and loan contracts, which are classified
 
  
11 Debt securities and money market paper outstanding of banks (MFIs) in Germany
*
 
€ billion
Negotiable bearer debt securities and money market paper Non-negotiable
bearer debt
of which securities and
money market
with maturities of paper 6 Subordinated
up to more than 1 year up to
and including 1 year of which and including 2 years
with
Certifi- of which of which non- maturities
Floating Zero Foreign cates without without more of more negotiable negotiable
rate coupon currency of a nominal a nominal than than debt debt
Total bonds 1 deposit Total Total 2 years Total 2 years securities securities bonds 1,2 bonds 3,4 guarantee 5 guarantee 5 
Period
End of year or month*
 
2010 1,435.1 342.0 40.7 366.5 82.8 97.0 4.6 56.8 6.5 1,281.4 0.7 0.6 43.9 1.5
2011 1,375.4 352.6 37.2 373.9 75.3 95.2 3.0 53.6 4.5 1,226.6 0.6 0.4 43.2 1.5
2012 1,265.1 346.8 31.6 362.3 58.9 76.4 3.0 51.3 4.4 1,137.4 0.3 0.3 38.6 1.1
2012          Aug 1,323.7 356.9 33.5 384.0 68.6 86.3 3.3 53.7 4.7 1,183.7 0.3 0.3 38.9 1.3
         Sep 1,310.8 357.9 32.5 376.0 63.8 81.6 3.1 52.0 4.6 1,177.2 0.3 0.3 38.8 1.3
         Oct 1,298.5 353.2 32.7 375.4 63.5 82.1 3.2 51.5 4.6 1,164.9 0.3 0.3 38.8 1.3
         Nov 1,291.7 351.1 32.5 377.1 65.4 83.3 3.3 52.9 5.2 1,155.5 0.3 0.3 38.7 1.3
         Dec 1,265.1 346.8 31.6 362.3 58.9 76.4 3.0 51.3 4.4 1,137.4 0.3 0.3 38.6 1.1
Changes*
2011 − 59.0 + 10.6 − 5.2 + 8.4 − 7.5 − 2.1 − 1.6 − 2.9 − 2.0 − 54.0 − 0.0 − 0.2 − 0.8 − 0.0
2012 − 111.0 − 7.4 − 6.3 − 12.0 − 16.4 − 19.5 − 0.0 − 2.3 − 0.3 − 89.2 + 0.3 − 0.1 − 4.6 − 0.5
2012          Aug − 16.0 − 1.8 − 2.4 − 11.5 − 4.4 − 7.9 − 0.1 − 0.5 − 0.3 − 7.5 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.2 − 0.0
         Sep − 12.9 − 0.6 − 1.0 − 7.8 − 4.8 − 4.8 − 0.2 − 1.8 − 0.3 − 6.4 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.1 − 0.0
         Oct − 12.3 − 4.6 + 0.3 − 0.7 − 0.3 + 0.6 + 0.1 − 0.5 + 0.0 − 12.3 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.0
         Nov − 6.9 − 2.1 − 0.3 + 1.8 + 1.9 + 1.1 + 0.1 + 1.5 + 0.6 − 9.4 + 0.0 + 0.0 − 0.1 − 0.0         Dec − 26.6 − 4.3 − 0.9 − 14.8 − 6.5 − 6.9 − 0.4 − 1.6 − 0.9 − 18.1 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.1 − 0.2
*See Table IV.2, footnote*; statistical breaks have been eliminated from the coupon bonds denominated in foreign currencies. 4Bonds denominated in
changes. The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as provisional. non-euro-area currencies. 5Negotiable bearer debt securities respectively money
Subsequent revisions, which appear in the following Monthly Report, are not market paper with a nominal guarantee of less than 100%. 6Non-negotiable
specially marked. 1Including debt securities denominated in foreign bearer debt securities are classified among bank savings bonds (see also Table IV.10,
currencies. 2Issue value when floated. 3Including floating rate notes and zero footnote 2). 

Deutsche Bundesbank
39  Monthly Report
February 2013
IV  Banks
  
12 Building  and  loan  associations (MFIs) in Germany *)
Interim statements
  
€ billion
Lending to banks (MFIs)
Lending to non-banks (non-MFIs) Deposits of banks Deposits of non-
(MFIs) 5 banks (non-MFIs)
Credit Building loans Secur- Memo
bal- item ities (in-
ances cluding Bearer New
and Loans Treasury Deposits Deposits debt Capital con-
Num- loans under bills under under secur- (includ- tractsber (ex- Bank savings Interim and savings savings ities ing pub- enteredof Balance cluding debt and loan and Other Treasury and loan Sight and loan Sight and out- lished into in
End of sheet building Building secur- con- bridging building discount con- and time con- time de- stand- re- year or associ-
year/month ations loans 
2 ities 3 tracts loans loans tracts deposits tracts posits  6 ing month 8 total 13 loans) 1 paper) 4 serves) 7 
All  building  and  loan  associations
2011 23 197.5 41.4 0.0 17.6 27.1 74.2 15.9 13.0 0.7 22.8 136.7 6.9 5.4 8.3 99.2
2012          Oct 22 199.5 41.9 0.0 17.6 24.7 77.6 16.0 14.0 0.9 21.1 139.5 6.3 5.3 8.6 8.4
         Nov 22 200.2 42.0 0.0 17.7 24.3 78.0 16.1 14.2 1.1 21.4 139.3 6.3 5.3 8.6 8.7         Dec 22 200.6 42.2 0.0 17.5 24.0 78.3 16.0 14.5 1.3 21.0 141.9 6.4 4.9 8.7 9.9
Private  building  and  Ioan  associations
  
2012          Oct 12 142.4 24.5 0.0 11.8 16.4 61.6 14.0 7.3 0.6 18.2 92.2 6.2 5.3 5.7 5.5         Nov 12 143.0 24.5 0.0 11.8 16.2 61.9 14.1 7.4 0.7 18.6 91.9 6.1 5.3 5.7 5.7         Dec 12 143.1 24.5 0.0 11.6 16.0 62.2 14.0 7.7 0.9 18.1 93.7 6.3 4.9 5.8 6.6
Public  building  and  Ioan  associations
  
2012          Oct 10 57.1 17.5 0.0 5.7 8.3 16.0 2.0 6.8 0.3 2.9 47.3 0.1 − 2.9 3.0         Nov 10 57.2 17.5 0.0 5.8 8.1 16.1 2.0 6.8 0.3 2.8 47.4 0.1 − 2.9 3.0         Dec 10 57.5 17.7 0.0 5.9 8.0 16.2 2.0 6.8 0.4 2.9 48.2 0.1 − 2.9 3.3
Trends in building and loan association business
  
€ billion
Changes in deposits
Capital promised Capital disbursed Disbursement Interest and
under savings and commitments repayments
loan contracts Allocations outstanding at received on
end of period building loans 10 
Deposits under Loans under
Repay- savings and savings and
ments loan contracts loan contracts 9 Newly
Interest of granted
credited interim deposits of which of which
on under Applied Applied and ofwhich of Memo Amounts deposits
cancelled to settle- to settle- bridging
under savings of ment of ment of loans Under which item paid intosavings savings and which interim interim and alloc- Repay- Housing
and and loan loan Net and and other ated ments bonuses
loan ac- con- con- alloca- bridging bridging building con- during re-
Period tracts tracts Total Total Total loans Total loans loans Total tracts Total quarter counts 
9 tions 11 ceived 12 
All  building  and  loan  associations
2011 27.6 2.5 6.1 46.2 31.0 40.9 18.1 4.4 8.2 4.1 14.6 12.1 7.5 11.0 9.3 0.5
2012          Oct 2.3 0.0 0.6 4.0 2.5 3.5 1.5 0.3 0.5 0.3 1.5 13.4 7.7 1.1 0.0
         Nov 2.4 0.1 0.7 4.3 2.8 3.7 1.9 0.3 0.5 0.3 1.4 13.4 7.7 1.0 0.0
         Dec 2.7 2.2 0.6 3.5 2.4 3.2 1.5 0.3 0.5 0.3 1.2 13.2 7.7 1.0 ... 0.0
Private  building  and  Ioan  associations
  
2012          Oct 1.5 0.0 0.3 2.9 1.7 2.6 1.1 0.3 0.4 0.2 1.2 8.9 4.2 0.8 0.0
         Nov 1.6 0.1 0.4 3.1 2.0 2.8 1.5 0.2 0.3 0.2 1.1 8.8 4.2 0.7 0.0
         Dec 1.9 1.4 0.3 2.4 1.6 2.3 1.0 0.3 0.4 0.2 1.0 8.6 4.2 0.7 ... 0.0
Public  building  and  Ioan  associations
  
2012          Oct 0.8 0.0 0.3 1.1 0.8 0.9 0.4 0.1 0.2 0.1 0.3 4.5 3.5 0.3 0.0
         Nov 0.8 0.0 0.3 1.2 0.9 0.9 0.4 0.1 0.1 0.1 0.3 4.6 3.6 0.3 0.0
         Dec 0.8 0.8 0.3 1.1 0.8 0.9 0.4 0.1 0.2 0.1 0.3 4.5 3.5 0.3 ... 0.0
*Excluding assets and liabilities and/or transactions of foreign branches. The figures 8Total amount covered by the contracts; only contracts newly entered into, for
for the latest date are always to be regarded as provisional. Subsequent revisions, which the contract fee has been fully paid. Increases in the sum contracted count aswhich appear in the following Monthly Report, are not specially marked. 1Including new contracts. 9For disbursements of deposits under savings and loan contracts
claims on building and loan associations, claims arising from registered debt arising from the allocation of contracts see “Capital disbursed“. 10Including housing
securities and central bank credit balances. 2Loans under savings and loan contracts bonuses credited. 11Only allocations accepted by the beneficiaries; including
and interim and bridging loans. 3Including money market paper and small amounts allocations applied to settlement of interim and bridging loans. 12The amounts
of other securities issued by banks. 4Including equalisation claims. 5Including already credited to the accounts of savers or borrowers are also included in
liabilities to building and loan associations. 6Including small amounts of savings “Amounts paid into savings and loan accounts“ and “Interest and repayments
deposits. 7Including participation rights capital and fund for general banking risks. received on building loans“. 13 See Table IV.2, footnote 1. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
40  Monthly Report
February 2013
IV  Banks
  
13 Assets and liabilities of the foreign branches and foreign subsidiaries of German banks (MFIs) *
  
  
€ billion
Number of Lending to banks (MFIs) Lending to non-banks (non-MFIs) Other  assets 7 
Loans Credit  balances and loans
German   
banks(MFIs)   with of which
foreign foreign Derivative
branches Money Money financial
branches  1 
and/or and/or market to to market instruments
foreign foreign Balance paper, German foreign paper, in the
subsi- subsi- sheet German Foreign secur- non- non- secur- trading
Period diaries diaries total 7 Total Total banks banks Total Total banks banks ities  2 Total portfolio ities 2,3 
Foreign  branches End of year or month *
  
2009 51 211 1,461.6 579.2 539.1 210.1 328.9 40.2 691.5 534.7 20.7 514.0 156.7 190.9 −
2010 55 212 2,226.3 591.4 564.8 232.0 332.8 26.6 696.7 532.5 27.5 505.0 164.2 938.2 633.9
2011 56 209 2,316.6 603.9 584.9 199.1 385.8 19.0 642.5 504.3 23.2 481.0 138.2 1,070.2 885.0
2012          Feb 56 211 2,328.3 653.0 634.6 212.3 422.4 18.4 655.2 518.8 21.9 496.8 136.4 1,020.1 797.4
         Mar 56 210 2,136.4 599.7 582.5 228.0 354.4 17.2 634.4 499.0 21.4 477.6 135.4 902.3 735.2
         Apr 56 210 2,196.8 620.2 603.7 226.4 377.2 16.6 635.4 502.9 21.8 481.1 132.4 941.2 756.9
         May 57 211 2,428.5 641.2 625.1 214.9 410.2 16.0 663.7 529.8 22.0 507.8 133.9 1,123.6 937.5
         June 57 209 2,203.8 576.6 561.4 199.1 362.3 15.2 623.2 490.3 21.0 469.3 132.9 1,004.0 829.9
         July 57 211 2,271.3 542.7 527.5 194.1 333.4 15.3 638.6 505.2 21.2 484.0 133.4 1,089.9 883.1
         Aug 57 210 2,206.0 539.7 524.2 192.0 332.2 15.5 614.0 483.8 19.8 464.1 130.2 1,052.3 811.7
         Sep 57 211 2,178.7 559.0 544.6 183.7 360.8 14.4 625.1 496.7 19.0 477.8 128.3 994.6 776.3
         Oct 56 210 2,137.1 555.9 541.3 188.8 352.5 14.6 581.1 457.8 18.1 439.8 123.2 1,000.0 744.6
         Nov 55 208 2,145.2 554.5 539.7 180.3 359.4 14.9 587.2 461.7 22.1 439.6 125.5 1,003.4 709.5
Changes *
2010 + 4 + 1 + 695.5 − 8.7 + 5.5 + 21.9 − 16.4 − 14.2 − 36.3 − 35.6 + 6.8 − 42.4 − 0.7 + 740.6 −
2011 + 1 − 3 + 56.9 − 4.6 + 3.2 − 32.9 + 36.2 − 7.9 − 68.9 − 40.9 − 4.3 − 36.7 − 28.0 + 130.4 + 251.0
2012          Mar − − 1 − 196.1 − 55.0 − 53.8 + 15.8 − 69.6 − 1.2 − 23.0 − 21.7 − 0.5 − 21.2 − 1.3 − 118.1 − 62.2
         Apr − − + 50.3 + 16.9 + 17.6 − 1.6 + 19.2 − 0.7 − 4.8 − 0.8 + 0.4 − 1.2 − 4.0 + 38.2 + 21.7
         May − + 1 + 188.8 + 1.8 + 2.6 − 11.5 + 14.1 − 0.8 + 7.7 + 10.1 + 0.2 + 9.9 − 2.4 + 179.2 + 180.6
         June − − 2 − 213.5 − 59.5 − 58.7 − 15.8 − 42.9 − 0.8 − 35.1 − 35.1 − 1.0 − 34.1 + 0.0 − 118.9 − 107.6
         July − + 2 + 48.4 − 41.8 − 41.7 − 5.0 − 36.7 − 0.1 + 5.6 + 6.9 + 0.2 + 6.6 − 1.3 + 84.6 + 53.2
         Aug − − 1 − 48.4 + 3.9 + 3.6 − 2.1 + 5.7 + 0.3 − 15.9 − 14.3 − 1.4 − 12.8 − 1.6 − 36.4 − 71.5
         Sep − + 1 − 13.6 + 25.1 + 26.1 − 8.3 + 34.4 − 1.0 + 18.0 + 18.6 − 0.8 + 19.4 − 0.5 − 56.7 − 35.4
         Oct − 1 − 1 − 35.9 − 0.8 − 1.0 + 5.1 − 6.1 + 0.2 − 40.9 − 36.3 − 0.9 − 35.4 − 4.5 + 5.8 − 31.6
         Nov − 1 − 2 + 9.6 − 0.9 − 1.2 − 8.5 + 7.4 + 0.3 + 6.9 + 4.5 + 4.0 + 0.5 + 2.5 + 3.6 − 35.1
    
Foreign  subsidiaries End of year or month *
  
2009 36 97 474.1 205.4 157.0 87.4 69.6 48.4 217.0 154.7 38.7 115.9 62.4 51.7 −
2010 37 93 495.1 220.9 178.7 98.8 79.9 42.1 218.3 168.8 37.7 131.2 49.5 55.9 −
2011 35 87 478.6 210.3 172.8 95.3 77.5 37.5 210.5 165.1 35.6 129.5 45.5 57.7 −
2012          Feb 35 86 470.0 209.8 174.1 93.7 80.4 35.7 210.1 164.2 34.3 129.8 45.9 50.1 −
         Mar 35 86 464.5 208.7 175.0 95.9 79.1 33.7 210.5 165.3 34.1 131.1 45.2 45.3 −
         Apr 35 86 471.1 210.1 176.6 96.7 79.9 33.5 210.0 164.8 33.9 130.9 45.2 51.0 −
         May 35 85 473.4 209.0 178.3 96.3 82.0 30.7 213.7 168.2 34.3 133.9 45.5 50.7 −
         June 35 85 468.8 208.6 177.6 97.4 80.2 31.0 209.5 165.3 33.7 131.7 44.2 50.7 −
         July 35 85 475.8 210.8 179.1 98.3 80.9 31.6 212.5 167.7 33.3 134.3 44.8 52.5 −
         Aug 35 86 468.1 207.2 175.3 97.7 77.6 32.0 207.6 163.7 32.8 130.9 43.9 53.2 −
         Sep 35 86 479.8 215.6 183.5 101.1 82.4 32.2 207.0 163.7 31.7 131.9 43.3 57.2 −
         Oct 35 84 468.5 209.0 176.5 99.6 76.9 32.5 204.9 161.7 32.0 129.7 43.3 54.6 −
         Nov 35 83 467.5 211.3 178.7 101.8 76.9 32.6 201.5 158.1 31.6 126.4 43.4 54.7 −
Changes *
2010 + 1 − 4 + 9.2 + 9.0 + 17.8 + 11.4 + 6.4 − 8.8 − 3.8 + 9.2 − 1.1 + 10.3 − 12.9 + 3.9 −
2011 − 2 − 6 − 20.1 − 12.2 − 7.2 − 3.5 − 3.7 − 5.0 − 9.6 − 5.5 − 2.1 − 3.4 − 4.0 + 1.6 −
2012          Mar − − − 6.0 − 1.4 + 0.6 + 2.2 − 1.5 − 2.1 + 0.2 + 0.9 − 0.2 + 1.1 − 0.7 − 4.8 −
         Apr − − + 5.5 + 0.9 + 1.3 + 0.9 + 0.4 − 0.4 − 1.0 − 1.0 − 0.2 − 0.8 + 0.0 + 5.6 −
         May − − 1 − 2.9 − 3.8 − 0.2 − 0.5 + 0.2 − 3.6 + 1.4 + 1.1 + 0.5 + 0.7 + 0.2 − 0.5 −
         June − − − 3.2 + 0.2 − 0.2 + 1.1 − 1.4 + 0.5 − 3.5 − 2.2 − 0.7 − 1.6 − 1.2 + 0.0 −
         July − − + 4.6 + 1.0 + 0.7 + 0.9 − 0.2 + 0.3 + 1.9 + 1.3 − 0.3 + 1.6 + 0.6 + 1.8 −
         Aug − + 1 − 5.5 − 2.4 − 3.0 − 0.6 − 2.5 + 0.6 − 3.9 − 3.0 − 0.5 − 2.5 − 0.9 + 0.8 −
         Sep − − + 13.7 + 9.4 + 8.9 + 3.4 + 5.5 + 0.5 + 0.3 + 0.8 − 1.1 + 1.9 − 0.5 + 4.0 −
         Oct − − 2 − 10.7 − 6.4 − 6.8 − 1.5 − 5.2 + 0.4 − 1.8 − 1.7 + 0.3 − 2.0 − 0.0 − 2.6 −
         Nov − − 1 − 0.9 + 2.3 + 2.2 + 2.2 − 0.0 + 0.2 − 3.4 − 3.5 − 0.3 − 3.2 + 0.1 + 0.2 −
*In this table “foreign“ also includes the country of domicile of the foreign branches the flow figures for the foreign subsidiaries.) The figures for the latest date are
and foreign subsidiaries. Statistical revisions have been eliminated from the changes. always to be regarded as provisional; subsequent revisions, which appear in the(Breaks owing to changes in the reporting population have not been eliminated from following Monthly Report, are not specially marked. 1Several branches in a given

Deutsche Bundesbank
41  Monthly Report
February 2013
IV  Banks
  
      
  
Deposits Other  liabilities 6,7 
of banks (MFIs) of non-banks (non-MFIs)
German non-banks 4 
Money
market of whichpaper Derivativeand debt financial
Medium Working instruments
securities
and out- capital in the
German Foreign Short- long- Foreign stand- and own trading
Total Total banks Total Total term term ing 5 funds Total portfolio   Period banks non-banks
End of year or month * Foreign  branches
  
1,125.9 798.0 449.6 348.4 327.9 37.4 33.8 3.5 290.5 157.5 33.9 144.4 − 2009
1,131.3 751.9 398.2 353.7 379.4 44.9 39.2 5.7 334.5 187.1 34.7 873.3 648.7 20101,179.6 814.0 406.6 407.4 365.6 35.9 30.3 5.6 329.7 141.2 38.6 957.2 880.2 2011
1,265.7 870.1 413.4 456.7 395.6 32.7 25.9 6.9 362.9 140.2 38.8 883.6 792.4 2012          Feb 
1,142.3 796.3 397.5 398.8 345.9 31.0 24.2 6.8 314.9 146.3 38.9 809.0 730.4          Mar 
1,180.1 803.8 384.7 419.1 376.4 31.1 24.3 6.8 345.3 147.6 38.9 830.1 753.1          Apr 
1,224.1 837.7 384.0 453.8 386.4 30.3 23.5 6.8 356.1 151.8 39.3 1,013.3 937.1          May1,114.9 762.5 366.5 395.9 352.5 30.3 23.5 6.8 322.1 141.3 38.9 908.7 829.5          June
1,124.7 752.0 375.1 376.9 372.7 29.3 22.0 7.3 343.4 146.6 39.3 960.8 880.1          July
1,112.1 765.5 373.3 392.2 346.6 26.8 19.6 7.3 319.8 143.0 39.1 911.8 813.1          Aug 1,128.3 768.0 382.4 385.7 360.2 27.8 20.6 7.1 332.4 138.4 38.9 873.2 774.2          Sep 
1,121.3 779.2 379.9 399.4 342.1 28.0 20.9 7.1 314.0 130.0 38.8 847.0 745.5          Oct 
1,122.7 757.9 364.3 393.6 364.7 34.3 27.1 7.2 330.4 128.4 38.2 855.9 706.9          Nov 
Changes *
− 34.9 − 65.3 − 50.8 − 14.5 + 30.3 + 7.5 + 5.4 + 2.2 + 22.8 + 29.7 + 0.8 + 700.0 − 2010
+ 27.0 + 50.1 + 8.4 + 41.7 − 23.1 − 9.0 − 8.9 − 0.0 − 14.2 − 45.8 + 3.9 + 71.9 + 231.5 2011
− 126.6 − 75.6 − 15.9 − 59.8 − 51.0 − 1.8 − 1.7 − 0.1 − 49.2 + 6.1 + 0.1 − 75.7 − 62.0 2012          Mar 
+ 30.6 + 3.4 − 12.8 + 16.2 + 27.2 + 0.1 + 0.1 + 0.0 + 27.1 + 1.3 + 0.1 + 18.3 + 22.7          Apr 
+ 12.2 + 15.5 − 0.8 + 16.2 − 3.3 − 0.8 − 0.8 + 0.0 − 2.5 + 4.2 + 0.3 + 172.0 + 184.0          May− 101.0 − 70.4 − 17.4 − 53.0 − 30.6 + 0.1 + 0.0 + 0.0 − 30.6 − 10.5 − 0.4 − 101.6 − 107.6          June
− 3.6 − 17.9 + 8.5 − 26.4 + 14.3 − 1.0 − 1.5 + 0.5 + 15.3 + 5.3 + 0.4 + 46.4 + 50.6          July
− 0.5 + 20.0 − 1.8 + 21.8 − 20.5 − 2.5 − 2.5 − 0.0 − 18.0 − 3.5 − 0.1 − 44.2 − 67.0          Aug + 26.8 + 8.6 + 9.1 − 0.4 + 18.2 + 1.0 + 1.1 − 0.1 + 17.2 − 4.7 − 0.2 − 35.5 − 38.9          Sep 
− 2.7 + 13.6 − 2.5 + 16.0 − 16.2 + 0.3 + 0.3 − 0.0 − 16.5 − 8.3 − 0.1 − 24.7 − 28.7          Oct 
+ 2.7 − 20.5 − 15.5 − 4.9 + 23.1 + 6.3 + 6.2 + 0.1 + 16.9 − 1.6 − 0.6 + 9.1 − 38.6          Nov 
  
  
End of year or month * Foreign  subsidiaries
  
377.6 218.5 125.4 93.1 159.1 37.0 29.6 7.4 122.1 33.3 24.3 38.9 − 2009
387.4 221.1 136.4 84.7 166.3 31.0 23.6 7.3 135.3 28.9 31.8 46.9 − 2010377.5 229.6 142.4 87.2 147.9 26.7 19.8 6.9 121.2 25.1 30.8 45.2 − 2011
368.2 215.8 129.6 86.2 152.4 28.9 22.1 6.9 123.4 24.9 30.6 46.4 − 2012          Feb 
364.3 215.9 130.0 85.9 148.4 27.7 20.9 6.8 120.7 24.6 29.6 46.0 −          Mar 
370.6 222.9 129.2 93.8 147.7 26.8 19.9 6.8 121.0 24.5 29.3 46.6 −          Apr 
369.0 224.5 128.9 95.6 144.6 26.0 19.0 7.0 118.5 25.2 31.3 47.8 −          May
366.0 218.3 126.8 91.5 147.7 27.5 20.5 6.9 120.2 24.1 31.8 47.0 −          June
368.7 218.3 125.1 93.2 150.4 26.0 19.0 7.0 124.4 24.7 32.1 50.3 −          July
358.9 211.6 124.4 87.1 147.3 24.7 17.7 7.0 122.6 24.8 33.5 50.9 −          Aug 
371.3 214.4 122.2 92.2 156.9 25.2 18.2 7.0 131.7 24.5 32.3 51.7 −          Sep 
364.1 211.0 120.8 90.2 153.1 25.2 20.8 4.4 128.0 24.0 32.1 48.3 −          Oct 
362.6 210.5 122.6 87.9 152.0 24.7 20.3 4.3 127.4 25.5 32.2 47.3 −          Nov 
Changes *
+ 1.5 − 1.7 + 11.0 − 12.7 + 3.2 − 6.0 − 5.9 − 0.1 + 9.2 − 4.4 + 7.5 + 4.6 − 2010
− 12.5 + 7.1 + 6.0 + 1.1 − 19.6 − 4.2 − 3.8 − 0.4 − 15.3 − 3.8 − 1.0 − 2.8 − 2011
− 4.2 − 0.1 + 0.4 − 0.5 − 4.2 − 1.2 − 1.2 − 0.0 − 2.9 − 0.2 − 1.1 − 0.5 − 2012          Mar 
+ 5.6 + 6.6 − 0.8 + 7.4 − 1.0 − 0.9 − 1.0 + 0.0 − 0.1 − 0.1 − 0.3 + 0.3 −          Apr 
− 5.9 − 0.8 − 0.3 − 0.4 − 5.1 − 0.7 − 0.9 + 0.1 − 4.4 + 0.7 + 2.1 + 0.3 −          May
− 2.0 − 5.6 − 2.1 − 3.5 + 3.5 + 1.5 + 1.5 − 0.0 + 2.1 − 1.1 + 0.5 − 0.5 −          June
+ 0.9 − 1.0 − 1.7 + 0.7 + 1.9 − 1.4 − 1.5 + 0.1 + 3.3 + 0.7 + 0.3 + 2.8 −          July
− 8.1 − 5.8 − 0.7 − 5.1 − 2.3 − 1.3 − 1.3 − 0.0 − 1.0 + 0.1 + 1.4 + 1.1 −          Aug 
+ 13.9 + 3.6 − 2.3 + 5.9 + 10.3 + 0.5 + 0.5 − 0.0 + 9.8 − 0.3 − 1.3 + 1.4 −          Sep 
− 6.8 − 3.1 − 1.4 − 1.8 − 3.6 − 0.0 + 2.6 − 2.6 − 3.6 − 0.5 − 0.2 − 3.3 −          Oct 
− 1.5 − 0.4 + 1.8 − 2.3 − 1.1 − 0.5 − 0.5 − 0.0 − 0.6 + 1.4 + 0.1 − 0.9 −          Nov 
country of domicile are regarded as a single branch. 2Treasury bills, Treasury securities. 5Issues of negotiable and non-negotiable debt securities and money
discount paper and other money market paper, debt securities. 3Including own debt market paper. 6 Including subordinated liabilities. 7 See also Table IV.2, footnote  1. 
securities. 4Excluding subordinated liabilities and non-negotiable debt

Deutsche Bundesbank
42  Monthly Report
February 2013
V  Minimum reserves
 
1  Reserve ratios
Germany Euro area
 
% of liabilities subject to reserve requirements % of reserve base  1 
Sight Time
Applicable from liabilities liabilities Savings deposits Applicable from Ratio
1995  Aug 1 2    2    1.5    1999  Jan 1 2    
 2012  Jan 18 1    
 
  
1Article 3 of the Regulation of the European Central Bank on the application of
minimum reserves (excluding liabilities to which a reserve ratio of 0% applies pur-
suant to Article 4 (1)). 
 
  
2  Reserve maintenance in Germany up to the end of 1998
− pursuant to the Minimum Reserves Order of the Bundesbank 
 
DM million
Liabilities subject to reserve requirements Excess reserves 4 
Monthly Required % of the
average 1 Total Sight liabilities Time liabilities Savings deposits reserves  2 Level Deficiencies Actual reserves 3 required  reserves
1995          Dec 2,066,565 579,337 519,456 967,772 36,492 37,337 845 2.3 3.1
1996          Dec 2,201,464 655,483 474,342 1,071,639 38,671 39,522 851 2.2 4.3
1997          Dec 2,327,879 734,986 476,417 1,116,477 40,975 41,721 745 1.8 3.3
1998          Dec 2,576,889 865,444 564,878 1,146,567 45,805 46,432 627 1.4 3.8
1Pursuant to sections 5 to 7 of the Minimum Reserves Order. 2Amount after tutions subject to reserve requirements on their giro accounts at the Bundesbank.
applying the reserve ratios to the liabilities subject to reserve requirements (section 5 4 Actual reserves less required reserves. 
(1) of the Minimum Reserves Order). 3Average credit balances of the credit insti-
  
3  Reserve maintenance in the euro area
− from 1999, pursuant to the ECB Regulation on the application of minimum reserves in accordance with
Article 19.1 of the Statute of the ESCB 
 
Maintenance Required reserves
period before deduction Required reserves
beginning in 1 of lump-sum Lump-sum after deduction of
Reserve base 2 allowance 3 allowance 4 lump-sum allowance Current account 5 Excess reserves 6 Deficiencies 7 
Euro area (€ billion)
 
2012          June 10,739.9 107.4 0.5 106.9 111.5 4.6 0.0
         July 10,747.7 107.5 0.5 107.0 510.2 403.2 0.0
         Aug 10,761.1 107.6 0.5 107.1 540.0 432.9 0.0
         Sep 10,750.5 107.5 0.5 107.0 538.1 431.1 0.0
         Oct 10,691.7 106.9 0.5 106.4 529.2 422.7 0.0
         Nov 10,683.2 106.8 0.5 106.4 509.9 403.5 0.0
         Dec  p 10,648.6 106.5 0.5 106.0 489.0 383.0 0.0
2013          Jan  p 10,591.4 105.9 0.5 105.4 ... ... ...
         Feb ... ... ... ... ... ... ...
Of which:  Germany (€ million)
2012          June 2,854,770 28,548 183 28,365 29,610 1,245 1
         July 2,861,640 28,616 182 28,434 184,846 156,412 1
         Aug 2,876,772 28,768 182 28,586 195,203 166,617 1
         Sep 2,881,887 28,819 181 28,638 189,857 161,219 0
         Oct 2,903,312 29,033 181 28,852 192,470 163,618 0
         Nov 2,873,537 28,735 181 28,555 191,465 162,910 0
         Dec 2,874,716 28,747 180 28,567 158,174 129,607 1
2013          Jan  p 2,864,858 28,649 180 28,468 ... ... ...
         Feb  p 2,801,456 28,015 180 27,834 ... ... ...
1From March 2004, the reserve maintenance period will start on the settlement day to the reserve base. 4Article 5 (2) of the Regulation of the European Central Bank on
of the main refinancing operation immediately following the meeting of the the application of minimum reserves. 5Average credit balances of the credit insti-
Governing Council of the ECB for which the monthly discussion of the monetary tutions at the national central banks. 6Average credit balances less required reserves
policy stance is scheduled. 2Article 3 of the Regulation of the European Central Bank after deduction of the lump-sum allowance. 7Required reserves after deduction of
on the application of minimum reserves (excluding liabilities to which a reserve ratio the lump-sum allowance. 
of 0% applies, pursuant to Article 4 (1)). 3Amount after applying the reserve ratios

Deutsche Bundesbank
43  Monthly Report
February 2013
VI Interest rates
 
1 ECB interest rates 2 Base rates
 
 
% per annum % per annum
Main refinancing Main refinancing
operations operations Base Base
Mar- Mar- rate rateginal ginal as per as per
Minimum Minimum
Applicable Deposit Fixed bid lending Applicable Deposit Fixed bid lending Applicable Civil Applicable Civilfrom facility rate rate facility from facility rate rate facility from Code  
1 from Code 1 
2005 Dec                  6 1.25 − 2.25 3.25 2009 Jan                21 1.00 2.00 − 3.00 2002 Jan                1 2.57 2007 Jan                1 2.70
         Mar                11 0.50 1.50 − 2.50          July                1 2.47          July                1 3.19
2006 Mar                  8 1.50 − 2.50 3.50          Apr                  8 0.25 1.25 − 2.25         June                15 1.75 − 2.75 3.75          May                13 0.25 1.00 − 1.75 2003 Jan                1 1.97 2008 Jan                1 3.32         Aug                  9 2.00 − 3.00 4.00          July                1 1.22          July                1 3.19
         Oct                11 2.25 − 3.25 4.25 2011 Apr                13 0.50 1.25 − 2.00
         Dec                13 2.50 − 3.50 4.50          July                13 0.75 1.50 − 2.25 2004 Jan                1 1.14 2009 Jan                1 1.62
         Nov                  9 0.50 1.25 − 2.00          July                1 1.13          July                1 0.12
2007 Mar                14 2.75 − 3.75 4.75          Dez                14 0.25 1.00 − 1.75
         June                13 3.00 − 4.00 5.00 2005 Jan                1 1.21 2011 July                1 0.37
2012 July                11 0.00 0.75 − 1.50          July                1 1.17
2008 July                  9 3.25 − 4.25 5.25 2012 Jan                1 0.12
         Oct                  8 2.75 − 3.75 4.75 2006 Jan                1 1.37
         Oct                  9 3.25 3.75 − 4.25          July                1 1.95 2013 Jan                1 −0.13
         Nov                12 2.75 3.25 − 3.75         Dec                10 2.00 2.50 − 3.00
1 Pursuant to section 247 of the Civil Code.  
 
  
3 Eurosystem monetary policy operations allotted through tenders 
*
 
 
Fixed rate tenders Variable rate tenders
Bid Allotment Minimum Weighted
amount amount Fixed rate bid rate Marginal rate  1 average rate
Date of Running for
settlement € million % per annum ... days
Main refinancing operations
2013 Jan                  9 77,725 77,725 0.75−−−7
         Jan                16 131,242 131,242 0.75−−−7
         Jan                23 125,302 125,302 0.75−−−7
         Jan                30 124,149 124,149 0,75−−−7
         Feb                  6 129,308 129,308 0.75−−−7
         Feb                13 128,680 128,680 0.75−−−7
Longer-term refinancing operations
2012 Dec                12 15,296 15,296 0.75−−− 3 5
         Dec                20 14,962 14,962 2 ... − − − 98
2013 Jan                16 10,455 10,455 0.75−−− 2 8
         Jan                31 3,713 3,713 2 ... − − − 84
         Feb                13 7,759 7,759 0.75−−− 2 8
*Source: ECB. 1Lowest or highest interest rate at which funds were allotted or average minimum bid rate of the main refinancing operations over the life of this
collected. 2Interest payment on the maturity date; the rate will be fixed at the operation. 
 
  
4 Money market rates, by month 
*
 
 
% per annum
EONIA Swap Index 2 EURIBOR 3 
Monthly One-week One-month Three-month Six-month One-week One-month Three-month Six-month Twelve-month Twelve-month
average EONIA 1 funds funds funds funds funds funds funds funds funds funds
2012          July 0.18 0.15 0.14 0.12 0.11 0.11 0.16 0.22 0.50 0.78 1.06
         Aug 0.11 0.11 0.10 0.07 0.05 0.05 0.09 0.13 0.33 0.61 0.88         Sep 0.10 0.10 0.10 0.08 0.06 0.07 0.09 0.12 0.25 0.48 0.74
         Oct 0.09 0.09 0.09 0.09 0.08 0.08 0.08 0.11 0.21 0.41 0.65
         Nov 0.08 0.08 0.08 0.07 0.06 0.05 0.08 0.11 0.19 0.36 0.59         Dec 0.07 0.07 0.07 0.06 0.04 0.03 0.08 0.11 0.19 0.32 0.55
2013          Jan 0.07 0.07 0.08 0.09 0.10 0.14 0.08 0.11 0.20 0.34 0.58
*Averages are Bundesbank calculations. Neither the Deutsche Bundesbank nor act/360 method and published via Reuters. 2EONIA Swap Index: published rate
anyone else can be held liable for any irregularity or inaccuracy of the EONIA rate, since 20 June 2005 by Reuters as a reference rate for euro-money market-derivatives.
the EURIBOR rate and the EONIA Swap rate. 1Euro OverNight Index Average: As a Spot-figure (T+2) it is calculated according to the act/360 method. 3Euro Inter-
weighted average overnight rate for interbank operations calculated by the European bank Offered Rate: unweighted average rate calculated by Reuters sinceCentral Bank since 4 January 1999 on the basis of real turnover according to the 30 December 1998 according to the act/360 method. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
44  Monthly Report
February 2013
VI Interest rates
 
5 Interest rates and volumes for outstanding amounts and new business of German banks (MFIs) *
(a) Outstanding amounts o
 
 
Households’ deposits Non-financial corporations’ deposits
with an agreed maturity of
up to 2 years over 2 years up to 2 years over 2 years
Effective Effective Effective Effective
End of interest rate 1 Volume 2 interest rate 1 Volume 2 interest rate 1 Volume 2 interest rate 1 Volume 2 
month % pa € million % pa € million % pa € million % pa € million
2011          Dec 1.87 139,689 2.32 227,255 1.50 104,838 3.60 23,384
2012          Jan 1.86 140,362 2.32 227,974 1.43 107,611 3.59 22,576
         Feb 1.86 140,215 2.32 228,654 1.39 102,697 3.58 22,973
         Mar 1.86 140,842 2.31 229,012 1.30 99,012 3.56 22,835
         Apr 1.85 139,793 2.30 228,848 1.24 98,127 3.53 22,741
         May 1.83 139,697 2.29 229,121 1.19 96,040 3.51 22,861
         June 1.82 138,295 2.29 229,269 1.16 92,613 3.48 22,722
         July 1.79 136,532 2.28 229,047 1.09 93,203 3.46 22,303
         Aug 1.76 133,856 2.28 229,010 1.01 93,589 3.43 22,163
         Sep 1.72 131,046 2.27 228,970 0.95 90,793 3.41 21,373
         Oct 1.66 127,314 2.20 228,315 0.91 87,278 3.38 21,082
         Nov 1.61 124,114 2.18 227,048 0.86 84,081 3.36 21,367
         Dec 1.57 121,482 2.16 228,742 0.78 81,845 3.31 21,402
 
 
Housing loans to households 3 Loans for consumption and other purposes to households  4, 5 
with a maturity of
over 1 year and over 1 year and
up to 1 year 6 up to 5 years over 5 years up to 1 year 6 up to 5 years over 5 years
Effective Effective Effective Effective Effective Effective
interest interest interest interest interest interest
End of rate 1 Volume 2 rate 1 Volume 2 rate 1 Volume 2 rate 1 Volume 2 rate 1 Volume 2 rate 1 Volume 2 
month % pa % pa % pa % pa % pa % pa € million € million € million € million € million € million
2011          Dec 4.15 5,300 3.78 28,122 4.51 937,763 8.52 64,522 5.53 73,322 5.65 313,944
2012          Jan 4.09 5,137 3.75 28,154 4.49 936,543 8.48 63,374 5.52 73,596 5.62 313,820
         Feb 4.06 5,054 3.73 28,188 4.47 936,749 8.37 63,122 5.49 73,581 5.61 313,827
         Mar 4.03 5,100 3.70 28,402 4.46 937,726 8.34 64,286 5.45 73,527 5.59 313,149
         Apr 3.91 5,069 3.65 28,290 4.43 936,775 8.21 63,838 5.41 73,758 5.50 316,663
         May 3.85 5,187 3.62 28,501 4.41 938,392 8.17 63,708 5.36 74,466 5.48 317,022
         June 3.80 5,206 3.61 28,620 4.39 940,699 8.19 64,670 5.30 74,576 5.41 314,970
         July 3.70 5,302 3.57 28,775 4.37 942,529 7.99 63,767 5.28 75,103 5.39 315,554
         Aug 3.64 5,278 3.54 28,844 4.34 945,754 8.00 62,298 5.24 75,464 5.36 316,273
         Sep 3.59 5,351 3.52 28,910 4.33 948,590 7.98 63,666 5.22 75,456 5.34 314,885
         Oct 3.50 5,351 3.47 29,062 4.30 951,931 7.88 62,816 5.19 75,715 5.29 314,779
         Nov 3.48 5,334 3.44 29,210 4.28 955,995 7.60 61,696 5.16 75,919 5.27 313,967
         Dec 3.44 5,411 3.41 29,152 4.26 957,120 7.77 63,468 5.13 75,717 5.25 310,995
  
Loans to non-financial corporations with a maturity of
up to 1 year 6 over 1 year and up to 5 years over 5 years
End of Volume 2 Volume 2 Volume 2 Effective interest rate 1 Effective interest rate 1 Effective interest rate 1 
month % pa € million % pa € million % pa € million
2011          Dec 4.00 133,627 3.93 128,385 3.93 567,781
2012          Jan 3.84 136,423 3.83 127,581 3.88 569,546
         Feb 3.69 139,689 3.72 126,323 3.86 571,604
         Mar 3.64 141,139 3.61 126,677 3.79 571,433
         Apr 3.50 140,151 3.51 125,928 3.73 569,972
         May 3.46 140,062 3.46 126,583 3.70 572,592
         June 3.48 141,449 3.41 126,567 3.66 573,352
         July 3.35 140,569 3.32 126,973 3.60 576,961
         Aug 3.26 138,764 3.29 126,115 3.56 578,675
         Sep 3.26 142,543 3.21 125,674 3.51 577,371
         Oct 3.19 137,982 3.13 125,803 3.46 577,814
         Nov 3.16 138,994 3.10 126,756 3.44 580,329
         Dec 3.17 134,186 3.04 126,720 3.41 579,208
*The MFI interest rate statistics are based on the interest rates applied by MFIs and interest rates or as narrowly defined effective rates. Both calculation methods cover
the related volumes of euro-denominated deposits and loans to households and non- all interest payments on deposits and loans but not any other related charges which
financial corporations domiciled in the euro area. The household sector comprises may occur for enquiries, administration, preparation of the documents, guaranteesindividuals (including sole proprietors) and non-profit institutions serving households. and credit insurance. 2Data based on monthly balance sheet statistics. 3Secured
Non-financial corporations include all enterprises other than insurance companies, and unsecured loans for home purchase, including building and home improvements;banks and other financial institutions. The interest rate statistics gathered on a including loans granted by building and loan associations and interim credits as wellharmonised basis in the euro area from January 2003 are collected in Germany on a as transmitted loans granted by the reporting agents in their own name and for theirsample basis. The most recent figures are in all cases to be regarded as provisional. own account. 4Loans for consumption are defined as loans granted for the purpose
Subsequent revisions appearing in the following Monthly Report are not specially of personal use in the consumption of goods and services. 5For the purpose of these
marked. Further information on the MFI interest rate statistics can be found on the statistics, other loans are loans granted for other purposes such as business, debtBundesbank’s website (Statistics / Reporting system / Banking statistics / MFI interest consolidation, education etc. 6Including overdrafts (see also footnotes 13 to 15
rate statistics). oThe statistics on outstanding amounts are collected at the end of p 47
   ). 
the month. 1The effective interest rates are calculated either as annualised agreed

Deutsche Bundesbank
45  Monthly Report
February 2013
VI Interest rates
 
5 Interest rates and volumes for outstanding amounts and new business of German banks (MFIs) *  (cont’d)
(b) New business +
 
 
Households’ deposits
with an agreed maturity of redeemable at notice of  8 
Overnight up to 1 year over 2 years up to 3 months over 3 months over 1 year and up to 2 years
Effective Effective Effective Effective Effective Effective
interest interest interest interest interest interest
Reporting rate 1 Volume 2 rate 1 Volume 7 rate 1 Volume 7 rate 1 Volume 7 rate 1 Volume 2 rate 1 Volume 2 
period % pa % pa % pa % pa % pa % pa € million € million € million € million € million € million
2011          Dec 
0.91 747,612 1.38 17,013 2.23 1,980 2.77 2,049 1.45 515,587 1.94 101,085
2012          Jan 0.89 751,235 1.50 18,304 2.30 1,724 3.03 2,422 1.43 517,814 1.94 100,172
         Feb 0.88 758,730 1.42 13,756 2.33 1,677 2.96 2,354 1.40 520,675 1.93 99,932
         Mar 0.84 761,183 1.35 14,308 2.27 1,148 2.81 2,252 1.34 521,107 1.93 99,132
         Apr 0.81 770,703 1.37 12,402 2.13 870 2.46 1,672 1.28 520,039 1.92 98,812
         May 0.79 775,639 1.26 14,178 1.99 828 2.33 1,487 1.27 519,995 1.89 98,036
         June 0.77 785,236 1.25 10,609 1.74 573 2.11 1,349 1.24 519,919 1.85 97,049
         July 0.71 791,644 1.38 13,617 2.07 1,261 2.20 1,636 1.21 520,534 1.81 96,163
         Aug 0.68 801,510 1.28 10,091 2.09 1,261 2.08 1,426 1.16 521,324 1.77 94,750
         Sep 0.64 810,487 1.29 9,216 1.98 934 2.16 1,305 1.14 521,677 1.72 93,164
         Oct 0.61 815,493 1.07 10,129 1.92 1,090 1.93 1,483 1.09 521,818 1.66 92,409
         Nov 0.59 836,097 1.06 8,513 1.95 1,670 1.83 1,721 1.07 522,244 1.57 91,114
         Dec 0.57 841,703 0.79 8,549 1.74 1,207 1.67 1,463 1.03 528,458 1.50 89,519
 
 
Non-financial corporations’ deposits
with an agreed maturity of
Overnight up to 1 year over 1 year and up to 2 years over 2 years
Effective Effective Effective Effective
Reporting interest rate 1 Volume 2 interest rate 1 Volume 7 interest rate 1 Volume 7 interest rate 1 Volume 7 
period % pa € million % pa € million % pa € million % pa € million
2011          Dec 
0.55 267,881 1.01 41,975 2.10 766 2.36 841
2012          Jan 0.52 255,889 0.72 39,165 2.16 520 2.29 842
         Feb 0.48 256,443 0.60 34,105 2.04 594 2.28 543
         Mar 0.46 261,558 0.63 28,015 1.94 528 2.32 531
         Apr 0.43 264,667 0.55 23,820 1.68 392 2.53 470
         May 0.42 267,293 0.48 23,443 1.59 326 1.86 512
         June 0.40 270,503 0.45 22,861 1.54 312 1.58 382
         July 0.34 280,460 0.37 21,829 1.31 638 1.70 596
         Aug 0.30 288,016 0.33 17,086 1.43 405 1.58 413
         Sep 0.29 289,877 0.27 15,215 0.85 505 2.00 225
         Oct 0.26 300,920 0.19 22,907 1.04 523 1.53 410
         Nov 0.24 305,458 0.20 15,992 1.09 490 1.87 483
         Dec 0.22 311,043 0.15 20,218 0.74 545 1.74 396
 
 
Loans to households
Loans for other purposes to households with an initial rate fxation of  5 
of which loans to sole proprietors 10 
floating rate or over 1 year and floating rate or over 1 year and
up to 1 year 9 up to 5 years over 5 years up to 1 year  9 up to 5 years over 5 years
Effective Effective Effective Effective Effective Effectiveinterest interest interest interest interest interest
Reporting rate 
1 Volume 7 rate 1 Volume 7 rate 1 Volume 7 rate 1 Volume 7 rate 1 Volume 7 rate 1 Volume 7 
period % pa % pa % pa % pa % pa % pa € million € million € million € million € million € million
2011          Dec 
2.78 4,968 4.51 1,233 3.77 3,272 3.08 2,987 4.69 948 3.74 1,878
2012          Jan 2.62 5,028 4.42 1,148 3.77 2,326 2.94 2,812 4.60 886 3.71 1,482
         Feb 2.48 3,938 4.17 988 3.72 1,987 2.70 2,277 4.34 736 3.68 1,038
         Mar 2.41 4,329 4.35 1,107 3.64 2,677 2.57 2,714 4.46 877 3.59 1,531
         Apr 2.31 4,441 4.31 1,294 3.68 2,095 2.57 2,463 4.52 937 3.61 1,222
         May 2.24 3,716 4.26 1,184 3.54 2,171 2.53 2,142 4.57 798 3.48 1,178
         June 2.25 4,835 4.32 1,213 3.33 2,603 2.50 2,768 4.54 794 3.28 1,577
         July 1.97 5,557 4.07 1,450 3.27 2,930 2.56 2,929 4.21 910 3.20 1,682
         Aug 1.99 4,414 3.97 966 3.16 2,588 2.20 2,297 4.22 677 3.08 1,599
         Sep 1.94 4,454 4.19 860 3.07 2,252 2.14 2,565 4.35 589 3.02 1,399
         Oct 1.82 5,535 3.69 1,122 3.04 2,634 2.18 3,011 4.09 780 3.03 1,420
         Nov 1.75 4,142 3.86 966 2.98 2,443 2.09 2,229 3.99 736 2.96 1,452
         Dec 1.84 4,698 3.78 916 2.77 2,376 2.03 2,888 3.98 676 2.71 1,530
For footnotes * and 1 to 6, see p 44  .+In the case of deposits with an agreed for the sake of simplicity. This means that all outstanding deposit and lending
maturity and all loans excluding revolving loans and overdrafts, credit card debt, new business at the end of the month has to be incorporated in the calculation of averagebusiness covers all new agreements between households or non-financial corpor- rates of interest. 7Estimated. The volume of new business is extrapolated to form
ations and the bank. The interest rates are calculated as volume-weighted average the underlying total using the Horvitz-Thompson estimator. 8Including non-financial
rates of all new agreements concluded during the reporting month. In the case of corporations’ deposits; including fidelity and growth premia. 9Excluding over-
overnight deposits, deposits redeemable at notice, revolving loans and overdrafts, drafts. 10 Collected from June 2010. 
credit card debt, new business is collected in the same way as outstanding amounts

Deutsche Bundesbank
46  Monthly Report
February 2013
VI Interest rates
 
5 Interest rates and volumes for outstanding amounts and new business of German banks (MFIs) *  (cont’d)
(b) New business +
 
 
Loans to households (cont’d)
Loans for consumption with an initial rate fixation of  4 
Total floating rate or over 1 year and
Total up to 1 year 9 up to 5 years over 5 years (including charges)
Effective Effective Effective Effective Annual percentage
Reporting Volume 7 Volume 7 Volume 7 Volume 7 rate of charge  11 interest rate 1 interest rate 1 interest rate 1 interest rate 1 
period % pa % pa € million % pa € million % pa € million % pa € million
Total loans
2011          Dec 6.23 5.77 4,659 3.08 970 5.59 2,086 7.64 1,603
2012          Jan 6.78 6.28 5,308 3.25 1,009 5.65 2,083 8.25 2,216
         Feb 6.74 6.19 5,116 3.20 943 5.58 2,062 8.12 2,111
         Mar 6.47 6.04 6,100 3.00 883 5.35 2,649 7.80 2,568
         Apr 6.47 6.01 5,641 3.10 874 5.25 2,459 7.93 2,308
         May 6.48 6.03 5,660 3.30 869 5.29 2,491 7.86 2,300
         June 6.48 6.08 5,408 3.64 672 5.30 2,488 7.68 2,248
         July 6.81 6.38 5,868 4.45 654 5.35 2,570 7.85 2,644
         Aug 6.65 6.20 5,348 4.51 683 5.23 2,334 7.65 2,331
         Sep 6.46 6.11 4,599 4.37 525 5.12 2,091 7.60 1,983
         Oct 6.37 6.10 5,362 4.13 707 5.10 2,374 7.74 2,281
         Nov 6.30 5.98 4,977 4.63 744 4.98 2,229 7.61 2,004
         Dec 5.99 5.73 3,747 3.88 556 4.90 1,766 7.48 1,425
of which: collateralised loans 12
2011          Dec . 4.19 454 2.93 161 5.55 172 3.92 121
2012          Jan . 4.16 419 2.70 138 5.61 159 3.93 122
         Feb . 4.16 471 2.76 145 5.39 196 3.86 130
         Mar . 4.10 494 2.22 135 5.70 193 3.76 166
         Apr . 4.10 443 2.14 123 5.59 189 3.79 131
         May . 4.21 404 2.17 110 5.70 186 3.69 108
         June . 4.16 439 2.62 105 5.56 185 3.52 149
         July . 4.50 387 3.70 57 5.39 196 3.54 134
         Aug . 3.95 450 3.34 152 5.12 155 3.32 143
         Sep . 3.90 361 2.99 114 5.15 129 3.42 118
         Oct . 3.75 409 2.57 152 5.25 139 3.51 118
         Nov . 3.88 358 2.98 140 5.28 114 3.56 104
         Dec . 3.81 294 2.92 100 5.01 103 3.40 91
 
 
Loans to households (cont’d)
Housing loans with an initial rate fixation of  3 
Total floating rate or over 1 year and over 5 years and
Total up to 1 year 9 up to 5 years up to 10 years over 10 years (including charges)
Effective Effective Effective Effective Effective Annual percentage
Reporting Volume 7 Volume 7 Volume 7 Volume 7 Volume 7 rate of charge  11 interest rate  1 interest rate  1 interest rate  1 interest rate  1 interest rate  1 
period % pa % pa % pa % pa % pa % pa € million € million € million € million € million
Total loans
2011          Dec 3.61 3.51 16,758 3.67 2,283 3.24 2,450 3.54 6,571 3.54 5,454
2012          Jan 3.59 3.50 15,645 3.60 2,614 3.21 2,417 3.48 6,480 3.64 4,134
         Feb 3.52 3.40 14,182 3.55 2,330 3.05 2,069 3.37 5,408 3.53 4,375
         Mar 3.37 3.29 16,280 3.29 1,982 2.92 2,433 3.29 6,512 3.45 5,353
         Apr 3.46 3.34 15,748 3.28 2,429 2.98 2,390 3.28 6,398 3.65 4,531
         May 3.30 3.21 15,197 3.24 2,246 2.90 2,116 3.17 6,267 3.39 4,568
         June 3.15 3.06 16,401 3.08 2,175 2.80 2,079 3.04 6,297 3.17 5,850
         July 3.10 3.02 18,647 3.17 2,644 2.81 2,468 2.98 7,782 3.09 5,753
         Aug 3.03 2.95 17,424 3.07 2,332 2.68 2,117 2.88 7,073 3.08 5,902
         Sep 2.97 2.89 15,109 2.85 1,971 2.63 2,013 2.85 5,885 3.03 5,240
         Oct 2.96 2.88 17,328 2.87 2,600 2.62 2,243 2.84 7,027 3.06 5,458
         Nov 2.92 2.84 16,415 2.86 2,122 2.54 2,415 2.82 6,400 2.99 5,478
         Dec 2.91 2.82 14,190 2.88 2,222 2.55 1,747 2.78 5,776 2.94 4,445
of which: collateralised loans 12
2011          Dec . 3.43 8,248 3.52 999 3.19 1,267 3.45 3,377 3.48 2,605
2012          Jan . 3.45 7,647 3.52 1,181 3.17 1,241 3.43 3,214 3.62 2,011
         Feb . 3.32 6,776 3.42 1,040 2.94 1,011 3.30 2,586 3.47 2,139
         Mar . 3.19 7,577 3.07 863 2.82 1,220 3.22 3,001 3.38 2,493
         Apr . 3.31 7,614 3.12 1,006 2.91 1,181 3.20 3,090 3.74 2,337
         May . 3.11 7,262 2.96 970 2.76 1,060 3.11 3,084 3.33 2,148
         June . 2.97 7,321 2.91 862 2.67 1,011 2.97 2,982 3.13 2,466
         July . 2.92 8,668 2.99 1,104 2.69 1,218 2.91 3,673 3.01 2,673
         Aug . 2.88 8,296 2.96 981 2.56 1,080 2.82 3,388 3.03 2,847
         Sep . 2.83 7,092 2.70 845 2.54 965 2.83 2,811 2.99 2,471
         Oct . 2.82 8,239 2.67 1,071 2.54 1,132 2.80 3,420 3.03 2,616
         Nov . 2.77 7,508 2.80 834 2.46 1,055 2.75 3,049 2.92 2,570
         Dec . 2.72 6,729 2.65 976 2.40 888 2.71 2,777 2.90 2,088
For footnotes * and 1 to 6, see p 44  . For footnotes +, 7 to 10, see p 45  . For related charges which may occur for enquiries, administration, preparation of the
footnote 12, see p 47  .11Annual percentage rate of charge, which contains other documents, guarantees and credit insurance. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
47  Monthly Report
February 2013
VI Interest rates
 
5 Interest rates and volumes for outstanding amounts and new business of German banks (MFIs) *  (cont’d)
(b) New business +
 
 
Loans to households (cont’d) Loans to non-financial corporations
of which of which
Revolving loans 13 Revolving loans 13 
and overdrafts 14 Revolving loans 13 Extended and overdrafts 14 Revolving loans 13 
credit card debt 15 and overdrafts 14 credit card debt credit card debt 15 and overdrafts 14 
Effective Effective Effective Effective Effective
Reporting Volume 16 Volume 16 Volume 2 Volume 16 Volume 16 interest rate 1 interest rate 1 interest rate 1 interest rate 1 interest rate 1 
period % pa € million % pa € million % pa € million % pa € million % pa € million
2011          Dec 
10.29 44,555 10.32 38,538 14.71 4,004 4.88 64,672 4.89 64,484
2012          Jan 10.31 45,884 10.34 39,955 14.63 3,956 4.66 68,909 4.68 68,690
         Feb 10.24 45,809 10.27 39,877 14.67 3,919 4.56 70,840 4.57 70,603
         Mar 10.21 46,976 10.23 40,976 14.47 3,998 4.59 72,216 4.61 71,960
         Apr 10.05 47,352 10.12 41,135 14.51 4,000 4.43 70,726 4.45 70,471
         May 10.08 47,292 10.06 40,840 14.83 4,275 4.43 70,720 4.45 70,470
         June 10.07 48,231 10.02 41,837 14.82 4,305 4.53 72,118 4.54 71,876
         July 9.94 46,964 9.94 40,326 14.80 4,349 4.41 69,679 4.42 69,432
         Aug 9.95 46,374 9.89 39,796 14.78 4,392 4.32 68,627 4.33 68,387
         Sep 9.89 47,852 9.86 41,116 14.81 4,422 4.37 71,170 4.39 70,889
         Oct 9.83 46,695 9.75 39,918 14.69 4,531 4.29 68,054 4.31 67,784
         Nov 9.70 45,120 9.56 38,345 14.67 4,581 4.19 69,241 4.21 68,968
         Dec 9.73 47,253 9.62 40,409 14.62 4,615 4.35 69,303 4.36 69,044
 
 
Loans to non-financial corporations (cont’d)
Loans up to €1 million with an initial rate fixation of  17 Loans over €1 million with an initial rate fixation of  17 
floating rate or over 1 year and floating rate or over 1 year and
up to 1 year 9 up to 5 years over 5 years up to 1 year  9 up to 5 years over 5 years
Effective Effective Effective Effective Effective Effectiveinterest interest interest interest interest interest
Reporting rate 
1 Volume 7 rate 1 Volume 7 rate 1 Volume 7 rate 1 Volume 7 rate 1 Volume 7 rate 1 Volume 7 
period % pa % pa % pa % pa % pa % pa € million € million € million € million € million € million
Total loans
2011          Dec 3.92 7,289 4.61 1,726 3.58 1,695 2.93 49,228 3.71 2,955 3.59 7,554
2012          Jan 3.60 7,211 4.49 1,460 3.62 1,209 2.64 43,437 3.37 1,916 3.39 4,357
         Feb 3.56 6,539 4.41 1,323 3.45 1,076 2.58 37,564 3.47 1,352 3.51 3,243
         Mar 3.51 7,654 4.31 1,751 3.41 1,346 2.44 44,212 2.85 1,893 3.33 4,674
         Apr 3.34 7,349 4.21 1,537 3.50 1,172 2.37 41,491 3.04 2,187 3.42 4,166
         May 3.33 6,895 4.20 1,461 3.30 1,176 2.32 36,079 2.98 1,547 3.39 3,893
         June 3.37 7,267 4.14 1,469 3.16 1,357 2.39 43,154 2.89 2,333 3.07 5,764
         July 3.11 7,597 4.04 1,548 3.15 1,441 2.25 45,910 2.96 2,641 3.09 5,868
         Aug 2.97 6,767 3.82 1,380 3.01 1,448 2.14 37,722 2.82 1,375 2.77 4,616
         Sep 3.07 7,039 3.76 1,282 2.99 1,248 2.12 42,277 2.81 1,324 2.87 4,367
         Oct 2.96 7,708 3.70 1,489 2.85 1,311 1.98 47,072 2.84 1,676 2.81 4,416
         Nov 2.90 6,646 3.67 1,495 2.78 1,258 2.00 37,601 3.25 2,080 2.71 4,791
         Dec 2.94 6,942 3.56 1,665 2.75 1,361 1.89 43,931 2.22 4,465 2.64 7,200
of which: collateralised loans 12
2011          Dec 3.97 1,374 3.69 229 3.15 464 3.16 9,859 3.44 1,035 3.41 1,878
2012          Jan 3.73 1,520 3.74 169 3.56 380 2.78 9,986 3.43 749 3.37 975
         Feb 3.67 988 3.78 120 3.26 345 2.42 6,229 3.88 536 3.20 891
         Mar 3.41 1,210 3.62 164 3.14 360 2.58 8,860 3.12 550 3.27 1,466
         Apr 3.27 1,319 3.42 156 3.24 363 2.44 9,134 3.22 922 3.27 1,159
         May 3.29 1,132 3.43 138 3.02 306 2.35 6,868 3.81 375 3.17 786
         June 3.19 1,142 3.29 133 3.05 385 2.33 7,835 2.27 936 3.03 1,848
         July 2.99 1,343 3.31 157 3.01 424 2.33 9,627 2.86 1,097 3.15 1,896
         Aug 2.88 1,141 3.26 127 2.86 398 2.15 6,985 3.09 526 2.97 1,064
         Sep 2.86 1,151 2.92 150 2.76 330 2.13 8,526 2.84 441 3.07 932
         Oct 2.77 1,288 3.12 156 2.70 351 2.05 9,007 2.97 669 2.74 1,261
         Nov 2.82 998 3.17 127 2.62 325 1.95 6,715 3.42 1,066 2.48 1,015
         Dec 2.79 1,062 2.88 189 2.54 346 2.12 8,820 2.20 2,043 2.82 1,959
For footnotes * and 1 to 6, see p 44  . For footnotes + and 7 to 10, see p 45  . For they are within or beyond the limits agreed between customers and the
footnote 11, see p 46  .12Collected from June 2010. For the purposes of the bank. 15From June 2010 including convenience and extended credit card debt.
interest rate statistis, a loan is considered to be secured if collateral (among others Convenience credit is defined as the credit granted at an interest rate of 0% in thefinancial collateral, real estate collateral, debt securities) in at leat the same value as period between payment transactions effectuated with the card during one billingthe loan amount has been posted, pledged or assigned. 13From June 2010 cycle and the date at which the debt balances from this specific billing cycle become
including revolving loans which have all the following features: (a) the borrower may due. 16From January 2003 up to May 2010 estimated. The volume of outstanding
use or withdraw the funds to a pre-approved credit limit without giving prior notice amounts reported was extrapolated to form the underlying total using theto the lender; (b) the amount of available credit can increase and decrease as funds Horvitz-Thompson estimator. From June 2010 the data are based on monthlyare borrowed and repaid; (c) the loan may be used repeatedly; (d) there is no balance sheet statistics. 17The amount refers to the single loan transaction
obligation of regular repayment of funds. 14Overdrafts are defined as debit considered as new business. 
balances on current accounts. They include all bank overdrafts regardless of whether

Deutsche Bundesbank
48  Monthly Report
February 2013
VII Capital market
 
1 Sales and purchases of debt securities and shares in Germany
 
 
€ million
Debt securities
Sales Purchases
Domestic debt securities 1 Residents
Credit in-
Sales stitutions
= Public Foreign including
total Bank Corporate debt debt building
pur- debt bonds secur- secur- and loan Deutsche Other Non-
Period chases Total securities ities 3 ities 4 Total 5 Bundesbank sectors 7 residents 8 (non-MFIs) 2 associations 6 
2001 180,227 86,656 55,918 14,473 16,262 93,571 111,281 35,848 . 75,433 68,946
2002 175,396 124,035 47,296 14,506 62,235 51,361 60,476 13,536 . 46,940 114,920
2003 184,679 134,455 31,404 30,262 72,788 50,224 105,557 35,748 . 69,809 79,122
2004 233,890 133,711 64,231 10,778 58,703 100,179 108,119 121,841 . − 13,723 125,772
2005 252,658 110,542 39,898 2,682 67,965 142,116 94,718 61,740 . 32,978 157,940
2006 242,006 102,379 40,995 8,943 52,446 139,627 125,423 68,893 . 56,530 116,583
2007 217,798 90,270 42,034 20,123 28,111 127,528 − 26,762 96,476 . − 123,238 244,560
2008 76,490 66,139 − 45,712 86,527 25,322 10,351 18,236 68,049 . − 49,813 58,254
2009 69,549 − 538 − 114,902 22,709 91,655 70,087 89,169 12,973 8,645 67,550 − 19,620
2010 148,944 − 1,212 − 7,621 24,044 − 17,635 150,156 100,647 − 103,271 22,967 180,952 48,297
2011 40,799 13,575 − 46,796 850 59,521 27,224 − 16,574 − 94,793 36,805 41,413 57,373
2012 56,953 − 21,419 − 98,820 − 8,701 86,103 78,370 10,841 − 42,017 − 3,573 56,430 46,112
2012          Feb 44,827 38,149 8,709 − 2,597 32,037 6,678 8,230 1,270 − 397 7,357 36,597
         Mar 21,280 12,235 − 12,463 2,730 21,968 9,045 28,119 2,516 − 741 26,344 − 6,839
         Apr − 4,122 − 1,076 − 5,709 517 4,116 − 3,046 − 3,191 − 11,066 − 281 8,156 − 931
         May 17,028 7,358 − 9,884 − 852 18,094 9,670 − 10,259 − 6,457 − 305 − 3,497 27,287
         June − 13,502 − 8,432 − 4,207 − 5,111 886 − 5,070 − 6,051 − 4,104 − 565 − 1,382 − 7,451
         July 21,433 15,298 − 910 3,230 12,978 6,135 19,712 − 9,002 101 28,613 1,721
         Aug 4,786 2,245 − 5,350 − 3,685 11,280 2,541 − 1,091 2,868 − 589 − 3,370 5,877
         Sep − 15,283 − 24,453 − 13,112 − 1,342 − 9,999 9,170 − 9,461 1,204 − 78 − 10,587 − 5,822         Oct 8,983 2,879 − 3,950 − 5,702 12,532 6,104 4,656 − 8,766 − 1,512 14,934 4,327
         Nov 9,989 2,214 14 4,790 − 2,590 7,775 − 15,749 3,024 − 858 − 17,915 25,738
         Dec − 33,222 − 39,386 − 20,125 5,495 − 24,756 6,163 − 15,030 − 11,575 − − 3,455 − 18,192
 
 
€ million
Shares
Sales Purchases
Sales Residents
=
total Domestic Foreign Credit insti- Non-
Period purchases shares 9 shares 10 Total 11 tutions 6,12 Other sectors 13 residents 14 
2001 82,665 17,575 65,091 − 2,252 − 14,714 12,462 84,918
2002 39,338 9,232 30,106 18,398 − 23,236 41,634 20,941
2003 11,896 16,838 − 4,946 − 15,121 7,056 − 22,177 27,016
2004 − 3,317 10,157 − 13,474 7,432 5,045 2,387 − 10,748
2005 32,364 13,766 18,597 1,036 10,208 − 9,172 31,329
2006 26,276 9,061 17,214 7,528 11,323 − 3,795 18,748
2007 − 5,009 10,053 − 15,062 − 62,308 − 6,702 − 55,606 57,299
2008 − 29,452 11,326 − 40,778 2,743 − 23,079 25,822 − 32,194
2009 38,164 23,962 14,200 30,357 − 8,335 38,692 7,809
2010 37,211 20,049 17,162 38,973 7,340 31,633 − 1,761
2011 24,779 21,713 3,066 30,880 670 30,210 − 6,102
2012 19,028 5,120 13,908 17,991 10,302 7,689 1,038
2012          Feb − 2,026 730 − 2,756 − 5,771 − 5,696 − 75 3,745
         Mar 1,828 380 1,448 10,849 11,295 − 446 − 9,021
         Apr − 1,149 66 − 1,215 11,115 10,558 557 − 12,264
         May 4,239 687 3,552 − 6,632 − 13,638 7,006 10,871
         June − 8,091 725 − 8,816 − 18,718 − 8,303 − 10,415 10,627
         July 6,183 968 5,215 4,233 1,611 2,622 1,950
         Aug − 2,516 101 − 2,617 − 2,225 2,109 − 4,334 − 290
         Sep 2,134 549 1,585 2,966 4,196 − 1,230 − 831
         Oct 7,928 131 7,797 7,407 3,024 4,383 522
         Nov 1,755 134 1,621 1,866 − 843 2,709 − 111
         Dec 10,128 387 9,741 10,881 6,095 4,786 − 753
1Net sales at market values plus/minus changes in issuers’ portfolios of their own values. 9Excluding shares of public limited investment companies; at issue prices.
debt securities. 2Including cross-border financing within groups from January 2011. 10Net purchases or net sales (−) of foreign shares (including direct investment)  by  
3Including Federal Railways Fund, Federal Post Office and Treuhand agency. 4Net residents;  transaction  values. 11Domestic and foreign shares. 12Up to end-1998,
purchases or net sales (−) of foreign debt securities by residents; transaction excluding syndicated shares. 13Residual; also including purchases of domestic and
values. 5Domestic and foreign debt securities. 6Book values; statistically adjusted. foreign securities by domestic mutual funds. 14Net purchases or net sales (−) of
7Residual; also including purchases of domestic and foreign securities by domestic domestic shares (including direct investment) by non-residents; transaction values. —
mutual funds. Up to end-2008, data comprise Deutsche Bundesbank. 8Net pur- The figures for the most recent date are provisional; revisions are not specially
chases or net sales (−) of domestic debt securities by non-residents; transaction marked. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
49  Monthly Report
February 2013
 VII Capital market
 
2 Sales of debt securities issued by residents *  
 
 
€ million nominal value
Bank debt securities 1 Memo item
 Foreign  DM/euro
bonds issued Debt securities
Corporate by German- issued by special
Mortgage Public purpose credit Other bank bonds Public managed
Period Total Total Pfandbriefe Pfandbriefe institutions (non-MFIs)  2 syndicates debt securities debt securities 3 
Gross sales  4 
2001 687,988 505,646 34,782 112,594 106,166 252,103 11,328 171,012 10,605
2002 818,725 569,232 41,496 119,880 117,506 290,353 17,574 231,923 10,313
2003 958,917 668,002 47,828 107,918 140,398 371,858 22,510 268,406 2,850
2004 990,399 688,844 33,774 90,815 162,353 401,904 31,517 270,040 12,344
2005 988,911 692,182 28,217 103,984 160,010 399,969 24,352 272,380 600
2006 925,863 622,055 24,483 99,628 139,193 358,750 29,975 273,834 69
2007 1,021,533 743,616 19,211 82,720 195,722 445,963 15,043 262,872 −
2008 1,337,337 961,271 51,259 70,520 382,814 456,676 95,093 280,974 −
2009 1,533,616 1,058,815 40,421 37,615 331,566 649,215 76,379 398,423 −
2010 1,375,138 757,754 36,226 33,539 363,828 324,160 53,654 563,731 −
2011 1,337,772 658,781 31,431 24,295 376,876 226,180 86,615 592,376 −
2012 1,340,568 702,781 36,593 11,413 446,153 208,623 63,259 574,529 −
2012          May 111,973 56,156 3,547 399 34,929 17,281 3,191 52,626 −
         June 112,303 55,433 6,671 396 34,322 14,045 4,982 51,888 −
         July 133,156 70,294 3,382 1,452 47,992 17,467 5,644 57,218 −
         Aug 92,682 49,173 2,121 672 29,884 16,496 2,051 41,459 −
         Sep 100,827 54,642 2,267 763 35,582 16,030 6,331 39,854 −
         Oct 117,694 72,145 1,425 1,013 47,279 22,429 5,617 39,932 −
         Nov 129,112 65,796 1,587 167 38,536 25,505 9,741 53,576 −
         Dec 69,448 44,404 1,223 699 31,232 11,250 8,186 16,858 −
of which: Debt securities with maturities of more than four years  5 
2001 299,751 202,337 16,619 76,341 42,277 67,099 7,479 89,933 6,480
2002 309,157 176,486 16,338 59,459 34,795 65,892 12,149 120,527 9,2132003 369,336 220,103 23,210 55,165 49,518 92,209 10,977 138,256 2,8502004 424,769 275,808 20,060 48,249 54,075 153,423 20,286 128,676 4,320
2005 425,523 277,686 20,862 63,851 49,842 143,129 16,360 131,479 400
2006 337,969 190,836 17,267 47,814 47,000 78,756 14,422 132,711 692007 315,418 183,660 10,183 31,331 50,563 91,586 13,100 118,659 −2008 387,516 190,698 13,186 31,393 54,834 91,289 84,410 112,407 −2009 361,999 185,575 20,235 20,490 59,809 85,043 55,240 121,185 −
2010 381,687 169,174 15,469 15,139 72,796 65,769 34,649 177,863 −
2011 368,039 153,309 13,142 8,500 72,985 58,684 41,299 173,431 −2012 421,018 177,086 23,374 6,482 74,386 72,845 44,042 199,888 −
2012          May 31,194 10,197 2,152 154 3,815 4,076 1,804 19,193 −
         June 29,740 12,223 4,734 271 2,883 4,335 2,435 15,081 −
         July 36,353 12,257 2,034 1,267 4,662 4,295 3,842 20,254 −
         Aug 28,570 11,479 1,338 172 3,467 6,502 1,076 16,015 −         Sep 43,339 16,619 1,787 733 10,160 3,939 4,884 21,837 −
         Oct 40,495 22,460 940 121 10,751 10,647 4,096 13,939 −
         Nov 45,295 16,232 1,167 48 1,047 13,969 7,044 22,018 −         Dec 21,311 8,884 782 189 3,672 4,242 6,122 6,305 −
Net sales  6 
2001 84,122 60,905 6,932 − 9,254 28,808 34,416 8,739 14,479 − 30,6572002 131,976 56,393 7,936 − 26,806 20,707 54,561 14,306 61,277 − 44,5462003 124,556 40,873 2,700 − 42,521 44,173 36,519 18,431 65,253 − 54,9902004 167,233 81,860 1,039 − 52,615 50,142 83,293 18,768 66,605 − 22,124
2005 141,715 65,798 − 2,151 − 34,255 37,242 64,962 10,099 65,819 − 35,963
2006 129,423 58,336 − 12,811 − 20,150 44,890 46,410 15,605 55,482 − 19,2082007 86,579 58,168 − 10,896 − 46,629 42,567 73,127 − 3,683 32,093 − 29,7502008 119,472 8,517 15,052 − 65,773 25,165 34,074 82,653 28,302 − 31,6072009 76,441 − 75,554 858 − 80,646 25,579 − 21,345 48,508 103,482 − 21,037
2010 21,566 − 87,646 − 3,754 − 63,368 28,296 − 48,822 23,748 85,464 − 10,904
2011 22,518 − 54,582 1,657 − 44,290 32,904 − 44,852 − 3,189 80,289 − 5,9892012 − 85,298 − 100,198 − 4,177 − 41,660 − 3,259 − 51,099 − 6,401 21,298 − 2,605
2012          May 4,558 − 8,704 917 − 6,057 − 566 − 2,998 − 2,777 16,039 −
         June − 3,812 − 8,094 4,534 − 5,786 3,009 − 9,851 − 3,589 7,871 − 33
         July 7,457 − 2,138 − 604 − 943 1,448 − 2,038 1,782 7,813 − 118
         Aug − 1,815 − 5,603 850 − 2,466 − 4,329 343 − 2,584 6,372 − 7         Sep − 31,382 − 13,373 8 − 2,348 613 − 11,646 − 64 − 17,946 − 87
         Oct − 4,979 − 3,330 − 1,803 − 6,033 3,134 1,372 − 3,349 1,700 − 2,306
         Nov 3,189 240 − 4,129 − 2,724 596 6,497 5,836 − 2,888 −         Dec − 39,422 − 24,895 − 382 − 2,308 − 11,116 − 11,088 3,163 − 17,691 −
*For definitions, see the explanatory notes in the Statistical Supplement 2 Capital Railways Fund, Federal Post Office and Treuhand agency. 4Gross sales means only
market statistics on p 21 ff. 1Excluding registered bank debt securities. 2Including initial sales of newly issued securities. 5Maximum maturity according to the terms of
cross-border financing within groups from January 2011. 3Including Federal issue. 6 Gross sales less redemptions. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
50  Monthly Report
February 2013
VII Capital market
 
3 Amounts outstanding of debt securities issued by residents  * 
 
 
€ million nominal value
Bank debt securities 1 Memo item
 Foreign  DM/euro
End of year Debt securities bonds issued
or month/ issued by Corporate by German-
Maturity Mortgage Public special purpose Other bank bonds Public managed
in years Total Total Pfandbriefe Pfandbriefe credit institutions debt securities (non-MFIs) debt securities syndicates
2001 2,349,243 1,506,640 147,684 675,868 201,721 481,366 22,339 820,264 292,199
2002 2,481,220 1,563,034 155,620 649,061 222,427 535,925 36,646 881,541 247,655
2003 2,605,775 1,603,906 158,321 606,541 266,602 572,442 55,076 946,793 192,666
2004 2,773,007 1,685,766 159,360 553,927 316,745 655,734 73,844 1,013,397 170,543
2005 2,914,723 1,751,563 157,209 519,674 323,587 751,093 83,942 1,079,218 134,580
2006 3,044,145 1,809,899 144,397 499,525 368,476 797,502 99,545 1,134,701 115,373
2007 3,130,723 1,868,066 133,501 452,896 411,041 870,629 95,863 1,166,794 85,623
2008 3,250,195 1,876,583 150,302 377,091 490,641 858,550 178,515 1,195,097 54,015
2009 3,326,635 1,801,029 151,160 296,445 516,221 837,203 227,024 1,298,581 32,978
2010 3,348,201 2 1,570,490 147,529 232,954 544,517 2 645,491 250,774 2 1,526,937 22,074
2011 3,370,721 1,515,911 149,185 188,663 577,423 600,640 247,585 1,607,226 16,085
2012 3,285,422 1,414,349 145,007 147,070 574,163 548,109 220,456 1,650,617 13,481
2012          June 3,352,375 1,464,811 151,068 163,825 583,818 566,101 2 215,673 2 1,671,891 15,998
         July 3,359,832 1,462,674 150,464 162,881 585,266 564,063 217,454 1,679,704 15,881
         Aug 3,358,017 1,457,071 151,313 160,415 580,936 564,406 214,870 1,686,076 15,874
         Sep 3,326,635 1,443,698 151,321 158,067 581,549 552,760 214,806 1,668,131 15,787
         Oct 3,321,656 2 1,439,003 149,518 152,035 584,683 2 552,768 211,457 2 1,671,196 13,481
         Nov 3,324,845 1,439,244 145,389 149,379 585,279 559,196 217,293 1,668,308 13,481
         Dec 3,285,422 1,414,349 145,007 147,070 574,163 548,109 220,456 1,650,617 13,481
Breakdown by remaining period to maturity  3 Position at end-December 2012 
1,231,477 592,171 63,521 81,785 230,572 216,294 53,857 585,449 5,302    less than 2
825,385 416,881 48,248 37,750 140,987 189,897 33,181 375,324 3,270 2 to less than 4
419,419 180,713 18,674 14,104 82,469 65,466 33,355 205,353 1,362 4 to less than 6
264,057 85,970 8,795 6,853 50,227 20,095 17,384 160,703 289 6 to less than 8
203,243 54,498 5,113 3,427 32,715 13,243 9,318 139,426 266 8 to less than 10
56,698 18,917 525 2,007 10,867 5,519 7,381 30,400 1,891 10 to less than 15
70,445 15,536 31 213 9,018 6,274 1,041 53,868 132 15 to less than 20
214,700 49,663 100 932 17,307 31,323 64,940 100,096 967 20 and more
*Including debt securities temporarily held in the issuers’ portfolios. 1Excluding maturity for debt securities falling due en bloc and until mean maturity of the
debt securities handed to the trustee for temporary safe custody. 2Sectoral residual amount outstanding for debt securities not falling due en bloc. 
reclassification of debt securities. 3Calculated from month under review until final
  
4 Shares in circulation issued by residents
 * 
  
€ million nominal value
Change in domestic public limited companies’ capital due to
Memo item
Share circulationat market values
contribution (market capita- cash 
payments
Share capital = Net increase or and ex- contribution of shares, merger reduction lisation)
circulation at net decrease (−) change of of claims mining shares, and of capital level at end
end of period during period convertible issue of and other GmbH shares, transfer change of and of period
Period under review under review bonds 1 bonus shares real assets etc of assets legal form liquidation under review  2 
2001 166,187 18,561 7,987 4,057 1,106 8,448 1,018 − 905 − 3,152 1,205,613
2002 168,716 2,528 4,307 1,291 486 1,690 − 868 − 2,152 − 2,224 647,492
2003 162,131 − 6,585 4,482 923 211 513 − 322 − 10,806 − 1,584 851,001
2004 164,802 2,669 3,960 1,566 276 696 220 − 1,760 − 2,286 887,217
2005 163,071 − 1,733 2,470 1,040 694 268 − 1,443 − 3,060 − 1,703 1,058,532
2006 163,764 695 2,670 3,347 604 954 − 1,868 − 1,256 − 3,761 1,279,638
2007 164,560 799 3,164 1,322 200 269 − 682 − 1,847 − 1,636 1,481,930
2008 168,701 4,142 5,006 1,319 152 0 − 428 − 608 − 1,306 830,622
2009 175,691 6,989 12,476 398 97 − − 3,741 − 1,269 − 974 927,256
2010 174,596 − 1,096 3,265 497 178 10 − 486 − 993 − 3,569 1,091,220
2011 177,167 2,570 6,390 552 462 9 − 552 − 762 − 3,532 924,214
2012 178,617 1,449 3,046 129 570 − − 478 594 − 2,411 1,150,188
2012          June 178,528 297 265 1 177 − − 2 − 51 − 93 969,686
         July 178,699 171 213 34 − − − 18 − 13 − 46 1,033,905
         Aug 178,713 14 96 33 8 − − 33 − 30 − 60 1,048,119
         Sep 177,895 − 818 546 35 − − − 325 − 60 − 1,014 1,076,643
         Oct 179,015 1,120 128 20 5 − − 26 1,093 − 98 1,105,328
         Nov 178,922 − 93 130 1 − − − 2 − 16 − 204 1,125,392
         Dec 178,617 − 305 130 1 0 − − 31 − 164 − 242 1,150,188
*Excluding shares of public limited investment companies. 1Including shares issued ket segment was closed down on 24 March 2003) are included as well as enterprises
out of company profits. 2Enterprises listed on the Regulated Market (the introduc- listed on the Open Market. Source: Bundesbank calculations based on data of the
tion of which marked the end of the division of organised trading segments into an Herausgebergemeinschaft Wertpapier-Mitteilungen and the Deutsche Börse AG. official and a regulated market on 1 November 2007) or the Neuer Markt (stock mar-

Deutsche Bundesbank
51  Monthly Report
February 2013
 VII Capital market
 
5 Yields and indices on German securities
 
 
               
Yields on debt securities outstanding issued by residents  1 Price indices 2,3 
Public debt securities Bank debt securities Debt securities Shares
Listed
Federal securities
With a residual With a residual
maturity of maturity of Corporate German German
9 and more than 9 bonds bond iBoxx CDAX share
including and including (non- index share price index € Germany
Total Total Total 10 years 4 Total 10 years MFIs) (REX) price index index (DAX)
Average End-1998 End-1987 End-1987
Period % per annum daily rate = 100 = 100 = 1000
2001 4.8 4.7 4.7 4.8 4.9 5.3 5.9 113.12 94.16 319.38 5,160.10
2002 4.7 4.6 4.6 4.8 4.7 5.1 6.0 117.56 97.80 188.46 2,892.632003 3.7 3.8 3.8 4.1 3.7 4.3 5.0 117.36 97.09 252.48 3,965.162004 3.7 3.7 3.7 4.0 3.6 4.2 4.0 120.19 99.89 268.32 4,256.08
2005 3.1 3.2 3.2 3.4 3.1 3.5 3.7 120.92 101.09 335.59 5,408.26
2006 3.8 3.7 3.7 3.8 3.8 4.0 4.2 116.78 96.69 407.16 6,596.922007 4.3 4.3 4.2 4.2 4.4 4.5 5.0 114.85 94.62 478.65 8,067.322008 4.2 4.0 4.0 4.0 4.5 4.7 6.3 121.68 102.06 266.33 4,810.202009 3.2 3.1 3.0 3.2 3.5 4.0 5.5 123.62 100.12 320.32 5,957.43
2010 2.5 2.4 2.4 2.7 2.7 3.3 4.0 124.96 102.95 368.72 6,914.19
2011 2.6 2.4 2.4 2.6 2.9 3.5 4.3 131.48 109.53 304.60 5,898.352012 1.4 1.3 1.3 1.5 1.6 2.1 3.7 135.11 111.18 380.03 7,612.39
2012          Aug 1.2 1.1 1.1 1.3 1.3 2.0 3.6 134.78 111.68 347.17 6,970.79
         Sep 1.3 1.2 1.2 1.5 1.3 2.0 3.9 134.28 110.85 358.75 7,216.15
         Oct 1.3 1.2 1.2 1.5 1.3 2.0 3.8 134.23 110.42 362.60 7,260.63
         Nov 1.1 1.1 1.1 1.3 1.2 1.9 3.6 134.96 110.68 370.32 7,405.50         Dec 1.1 1.1 1.1 1.3 1.1 1.8 3.3 135.11 111.18 380.03 7,612.39
2013          Jan 1.3 1.3 1.3 1.5 1.2 2.0 3.4 133.12 108.99 388.70 7,776.05
1Bearer debt securities with maximum maturities according to the terms of issue of ding of the debt securities included in the calculation. Monthly figures are calculated
over 4 years if their mean residual maturities exceed 3 years. Convertible debt on the basis of the yields on all the business days in a month. The annual figures are
securities, etc. debt securities with unscheduled redemption, zero-coupon bonds, the unweighted means of the monthly figures. 2End of year or month. 3Source:
floating-rate notes and bonds not denominated in euro are not included. Group Deutsche Börse AG. 4Only debt securities eligible as underlying instruments for
yields for the various categories of securities are weighted by the amounts outstan- futures contracts; calculated as unweighted averages. 
 
 
6 Sales and purchases of mutual fund shares in Germany
  
€ million
Sales Purchases
Domestic mutual funds 1  (sales receipts) Residents
Mutual funds open to the Credit institutions
general public including building
Other sectors 3 and loan associations 2 
of which
Sales Open- of which of which
= Secur- end Foreign Foreign
total Money ities- real Special- mutual mutualpur- market based estate ised Foreign fund fund Non-resi-
Period chases Total Total funds funds funds funds funds  
4 Total Total shares Total shares dents 5 
2001 97,077 76,811 35,522 12,410 9,195 10,159 41,289 20,266 96,127 10,251 2,703 85,876 17,563 951
2002 66,571 59,482 25,907 3,682 7,247 14,916 33,575 7,089 67,251 2,100 3,007 65,151 4,082 − 6802003 47,754 43,943 20,079 − 924 7,408 14,166 23,864 3,811 49,547 − 2,658 734 52,205 3,077 − 1,7932004 14,435 1,453 − 3,978 − 6,160 − 1,246 3,245 5,431 12,982 10,267 8,446 3,796 1,821 9,186 4,168
2005 85,268 41,718 6,400 − 124 7,001 − 3,186 35,317 43,550 79,252 21,290 7,761 57,962 35,789 6,016
2006 47,264 19,535 − 14,257 490 − 9,362 − 8,814 33,791 27,729 39,006 14,676 5,221 24,330 22,508 8,2582007 55,778 13,436 − 7,872 − 4,839 − 12,848 6,840 21,307 42,342 51,309 − 229 4,240 51,538 38,102 4,4692008 2,598 − 7,911 − 14,409 − 12,171 − 11,149 799 6,498 10,509 11,315 − 16,625 − 9,252 27,940 19,761 − 8,717
2009 48,081 43,747 10,966 − 5,047 11,749 2,686 32,780 4,333 36,339 − 14,995 − 8,178 51,334 12,511 11,742
2010 107,350 84,906 13,381 − 148 8,683 1,897 71,525 22,443 104,778 3,873 6,290 100,905 16,153 2,5722011 45,362 45,221 − 1,340 − 379 − 2,037 1,562 46,561 142 37,651 − 7,576 − 694 45,227 836 7,7112012 111,947 89,942 2,084 − 1,036 97 3,450 87,859 22,007 115,803 − 3,105 − 1,562 118,908 23,568 − 3,856
2012          June 9,026 10,145 − 429 129 − 338 517 10,575 − 1,119 9,539 − 1,263 − 1,451 10,802 332 − 513         July 17,785 15,025 1,132 − 94 578 741 13,893 2,760 17,820 577 163 17,243 2,597 − 35
         Aug 6,029 3,054 − 906 − 154 − 193 109 3,959 2,976 6,843 395 120 6,448 2,856 − 813         Sep 3,789 3,023 − 258 − 116 − 563 335 3,280 767 4,032 280 198 3,752 569 − 243
         Oct 10,168 6,508 370 − 13 99 225 6,138 3,660 10,465 − 124 − 74 10,589 3,734 − 297
         Nov 10,655 6,833 2,025 − 86 1,134 78 4,808 3,822 10,217 556 564 9,661 3,258 437         Dec 24,134 19,061 624 − 51 1,393 68 18,437 5,074 23,630 − 1 − 864 23,631 5,938 504
1Including public limited investment companies. 2Book values. 3Residual. 4Net transaction values. — The figures for the most recent date are provisional; revisions
purchases or net sales (−) of foreign fund shares by residents; transaction values. are not specially marked. 
5Net purchases or net sales (−) of domestic fund shares by non-residents;

Deutsche Bundesbank
52  Monthly Report
February 2013
VIII  Financial accounts
  
1  Acquisition of financial assets and financing of private non-financial sectors
(non-consolidated)
  
  € billion
2011 2012 
Item 2009 2010 2011 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 Q1 Q2 Q3
Households  1 
  I  Acquisition of financial assets
Currency and deposits 49.9 72.7 66.7 6.4 17.4 15.6 27.3 21.1 22.2 19.9
Debt securities 2 − 12.5 − 11.4 − 1.9 2.5 1.8 − 4.0 − 2.2 − 2.8 − 2.4 − 4.6
Shares 16.3 13.4 16.1 3.3 0.5 6.1 6.2 − 1.0 0.5 − 0.5
Other equity 3.0 3.0 3.0 0.7 0.7 0.8 0.7 0.8 0.7 0.8
Mutual funds shares − 1.1 10.0 − 14.5 − 3.5 − 0.1 − 7.0 − 4.0 − 1.6 − 2.1 − 1.0
Claims on insurance
corporations 3 62.5 60.5 48.1 16.9 10.5 8.4 12.3 17.1 12.4 9.3
short-term claims 0.3 − 0.7 0.7 0.1 0.2 0.2 0.2 0.2 0.2 0.2
longer-term claims 62.2 61.2 47.4 16.7 10.2 8.2 12.2 16.9 12.2 9.1
Claims from companypension commitments 10.0 7.8 11.1 2.7 2.8 2.8 2.8 2.8 2.9 2.8
Other claims 
4 16.7 − 1.0 18.1 18.2 1.7 7.9 − 9.6 13.8 5.5 4.2
Total 144.8 155.0 146.8 47.2 35.4 30.6 33.6 50.2 39.7 30.8
  II Financing
Loans − 7.6 5.0 10.4 − 3.9 4.9 6.7 2.7 − 1.0 6.7 6.1
short-term loans − 4.3 − 2.3 − 2.1 − 0.6 1.0 − 0.9 − 1.6 − 0.1 0.8 − 0.9
longer-term loans − 3.4 7.2 12.5 − 3.3 3.9 7.6 4.3 − 0.9 5.9 7.1
Other liabilities 1.0 0.1 0.4 0.3 0.1 0.0 − 0.0 0.2 0.1 0.1
Total − 6.6 5.1 10.8 − 3.5 4.9 6.8 2.6 − 0.8 6.8 6.2
Corporations
I   Acquisition of financial assets
Currency and deposits 24.8 7.3 13.5 5.4 − 17.1 1.6 23.6 − 8.6 2.1 13.4
Debt securities 2 4.8 − 0.1 4.9 3.5 − 0.7 0.9 1.2 0.2 − 0.0 − 0.3
Financial derivatives − 5.5 26.8 14.9 5.1 2.0 4.3 3.5 0.1 2.1 1.7
Shares 22.6 21.5 20.8 2.1 5.4 6.6 6.7 8.4 − 10.0 2.2
Other equity 29.6 49.0 32.1 − 1.1 24.7 0.6 7.9 11.2 11.3 10.2
Mutual funds shares − 2.6 8.8 8.2 0.9 1.7 1.5 4.1 − 5.2 1.0 0.7
Loans 60.6 53.8 48.5 19.5 11.0 13.8 4.2 6.9 7.9 − 1.7
short-term loans 33.4 36.9 39.4 15.5 11.0 10.0 3.0 5.3 5.8 − 4.0
longer-term loans 27.2 16.9 9.0 4.0 0.0 3.8 1.2 1.5 2.1 2.4
Claims on insurancecorporations 
3 0.8 − 0.7 − 0.6 − 0.2 − 0.2 − 0.2 − 0.2 − 0.2 − 0.2 − 0.2
short-term claims 0.8 − 0.7 − 0.6 − 0.2 − 0.2 − 0.2 − 0.2 − 0.2 − 0.2 − 0.2
longer-term claims . . . . . . . . . .
Other claims − 30.6 − 44.0 13.6 22.8 18.9 − 5.9 − 22.1 24.2 − 1.3 73.3
Total 104.6 122.3 156.0 58.0 45.7 23.4 28.9 37.0 12.9 99.3
  II Financing
Debt securities 2 − 4.1 4.2 7.6 4.5 − 2.9 7.0 − 1.0 3.1 3.9 7.1
Financial derivatives . . . . . . . . . .
Shares 5.5 7.2 7.4 0.3 5.5 − 0.3 1.9 0.6 1.0 0.4
Other equity 10.3 5.7 11.9 5.3 1.5 1.7 3.4 2.4 1.4 − 5.3
Loans 32.1 20.1 79.8 4.1 23.2 31.9 20.6 − 2.7 18.8 27.7
short-term loans − 10.9 20.6 41.0 − 1.0 15.7 23.3 3.0 5.8 11.5 3.7
longer-term loans 43.0 − 0.5 38.8 5.1 7.5 8.6 17.6 − 8.4 7.4 24.1
Claims from companypension commitments 5.2 2.6 5.8 1.5 1.5 1.5 1.5 1.5 1.5 1.5
Other liabilities − 5.8 49.0 59.1 22.9 7.6 17.7 10.9 20.9 6.2 24.8
Total 43.3 88.9 171.6 38.5 36.4 59.4 37.2 25.7 32.7 56.2
1Including non-profit institutions serving households. 2Including money market and supplementary pension funds. 4Including accumulated interest-bearing surplus
paper. 3Including private pension funds, burial funds, occupational pension schemes shares with insurance corporations. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
53  Monthly Report
February 2013
VIII  Financial accounts
  
2  Financial assets and liabilities of private non-financial sectors
(non-consolidated)
  
  End-of-year level, end-of-quarter level; € billion
2011 2012 
Item
2009 2010 2011 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 Q1 Q2 Q3
Households  1 
  I  Financial assets
Currency and deposits 1,788.1 1,860.8 1,927.5 1,867.2 1,884.6 1,900.2 1,927.5 1,948.6 1,971.4 1,991.4
Debt securities 2 265.5 254.1 247.1 254.8 258.3 247.8 247.1 249.6 245.4 244.8
Shares 201.7 243.5 221.5 257.2 260.1 206.3 221.5 252.4 229.9 250.0
Other equity 201.0 179.5 184.7 175.4 176.0 179.1 184.7 185.7 192.3 191.9
Mutual funds shares 416.2 435.4 394.9 426.2 421.1 389.2 394.9 410.9 401.7 414.8
Claims on insurance
corporations 3 1,286.4 1,350.9 1,396.8 1,367.0 1,377.0 1,385.0 1,396.8 1,413.9 1,426.4 1,435.7
short-term claims 74.4 73.8 74.5 73.9 74.1 74.3 74.5 74.7 75.0 75.1
longer-term claims 1,212.0 1,277.2 1,322.3 1,293.1 1,302.9 1,310.7 1,322.3 1,339.2 1,351.4 1,360.5
Claims from company
pension commitments 276.5 284.3 295.4 287.0 289.9 292.6 295.4 298.2 301.0 303.8
Other claims 4 38.7 39.0 38.9 39.1 39.2 39.0 38.9 39.0 39.1 39.0
Total 4,474.1 4,647.6 4,706.7 4,674.0 4,706.2 4,639.3 4,706.7 4,798.2 4,807.3 4,871.4
  II Liabilities
Loans 1,518.0 1,523.0 1,537.4 1,519.1 1,523.8 1,535.0 1,537.4 1,535.6 1,541.9 1,547.9
short-term loans 75.7 75.6 73.9 75.0 75.8 75.0 73.9 73.8 74.4 73.1
longer-term loans 1,442.3 1,447.4 1,463.6 1,444.1 1,448.0 1,460.0 1,463.6 1,461.8 1,467.5 1,474.7
Other liabilities 11.7 11.6 12.2 13.4 13.0 13.4 12.2 14.0 13.5 14.5
Total 1,529.7 1,534.6 1,549.6 1,532.5 1,536.8 1,548.4 1,549.6 1,549.6 1,555.3 1,562.4
Corporations
I   Financial assets
Currency and deposits 457.1 450.1 460.5 440.4 425.5 429.9 460.5 452.6 453.0 468.3
Debt securities 2 48.4 48.1 52.6 51.6 51.1 51.6 52.6 53.9 53.6 54.2
Financial derivatives . . . . . . . . . .
Shares 816.7 898.0 795.3 910.4 923.7 763.4 795.3 889.0 824.1 878.7
Other equity 361.5 363.0 400.1 352.2 376.6 382.0 400.1 411.8 436.3 443.8
Mutual funds shares 108.8 119.3 123.1 119.9 120.0 117.6 123.1 120.5 119.6 123.9
Loans 383.2 436.9 485.4 456.4 467.5 481.3 485.4 492.3 500.2 498.6
short-term loans 256.8 293.6 333.1 309.1 320.1 330.1 333.1 338.4 344.2 340.2
longer-term loans 126.4 143.3 152.3 147.3 147.3 151.1 152.3 153.9 156.0 158.4
Claims on insurance
corporations 3 40.2 39.6 38.9 39.4 39.2 39.1 38.9 38.8 38.6 38.5
short-term claims 40.2 39.6 38.9 39.4 39.2 39.1 38.9 38.8 38.6 38.5longer-term claims . . . . . . . . . .
Other claims 868.7 703.2 768.5 730.6 747.4 719.0 768.5 794.8 802.9 823.4
Total 3,084.6 3,058.1 3,124.5 3,101.0 3,151.0 2,983.8 3,124.5 3,253.7 3,228.3 3,329.4
  II Liabilities
Debt securities 
2 129.0 134.8 110.7 100.7 98.9 111.9 110.7 115.6 117.2 124.6
Financial derivatives . . . . . . . . . .
Shares 1,081.3 1,301.8 1,110.5 1,322.3 1,357.5 1,046.6 1,110.5 1,282.5 1,166.3 1,294.9
Other equity 702.3 708.0 719.9 713.3 714.8 716.5 719.9 722.3 723.6 718.3
Loans 1,375.9 1,396.1 1,485.9 1,398.5 1,429.5 1,461.6 1,485.9 1,485.8 1,501.9 1,524.9
short-term loans 439.7 462.2 499.4 457.7 473.4 496.4 499.4 504.8 515.5 519.1
longer-term loans 936.2 933.9 986.4 940.8 956.1 965.2 986.4 981.0 986.4 1,005.9
Claims from companypension commitments 226.5 229.2 235.0 230.6 232.1 233.5 235.0 236.5 237.9 239.4
Other liabilities 816.3 807.8 834.4 804.2 820.8 811.5 834.4 852.4 879.5 886.9
Total 4,331.4 4,577.7 4,496.4 4,569.6 4,653.5 4,381.6 4,496.4 4,695.0 4,626.4 4,789.0
1Including non-profit institutions serving households. 2Including money market and supplementary pension funds. 4Including accumulated interest-bearing surplus
paper. 3Including private pension funds, burial funds, occupational pension schemes shares with insurance corporations. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
54  Monthly Report
February 2013
IX Public finances in Germany
 
1 General government: deficit and debt level as defined in the Maastricht Treaty
 
 
 
Social Social
General Central State Local security General Central State Local security
government government government government funds government government government government funds
Period € billion as a percentage of GDP
Deficit/surplus1
2006 − 37.9 − 34.4 − 11.8 + 3.3 + 5.0 − 1.6 − 1.5 − 0.5 + 0.1 + 0.2
2007 + 5.8 − 18.6 + 2.5 + 11.1 + 10.8 + 0.2 − 0.8 + 0.1 + 0.5 + 0.4
2008 − 1.9 − 16.6 − 1.2 + 9.0 + 6.9 − 0.1 − 0.7 − 0.0 + 0.4 + 0.3
2009 p − 73.2 − 38.4 − 18.4 − 2.2 − 14.2 − 3.1 − 1.6 − 0.8 − 0.1 − 0.6
2010 2, p − 103.4 − 82.6 − 19.8 − 5.3 + 4.3 − 4.1 − 3.3 − 0.8 − 0.2 + 0.2
2011 p − 20.2 − 26.7 − 11.3 + 1.9 + 15.9 − 0.8 − 1.0 − 0.4 + 0.1 + 0.6
2012 pe + 2.2 − 12.5 − 9.1 + 6.0 + 17.8 + 0.1 − 0.5 − 0.3 + 0.2 + 0.7
2010          H2  p − 67.2 − 55.6 − 11.2 − 1.3 + 0.8 − 5.2 − 4.3 − 0.9 − 0.1 + 0.1
2011          H1  p − 3.9 − 15.2 − 1.4 + 1.9 + 10.8 − 0.3 − 1.2 − 0.1 + 0.1 + 0.9
         H2  p − 15.8 − 11.2 − 9.7 + 0.0 + 5.1 − 1.2 − 0.8 − 0.7 + 0.0 + 0.4
2012          H1  pe + 8.0 − 7.4 − 1.0 + 4.4 + 11.9 + 0.6 − 0.6 − 0.1 + 0.3 + 0.9
Debt level3 End of year or quarter
2006 1,573.8 970.7 493.7 124.9 1.7 68.0 42.0 21.3 5.4 0.1
2007 1,583.7 978.0 497.8 123.2 1.6 65.2 40.3 20.5 5.1 0.1
2008 1,652.3 1,007.6 536.7 123.1 1.5 66.8 40.7 21.7 5.0 0.1
2009 1,768.6 1,075.7 577.8 129.5 1.3 74.5 45.3 24.3 5.5 0.1
2010 pe 2,059.0 1,316.6 624.1 134.7 1.3 82.5 52.7 25.0 5.4 0.1
2011 pe 2,088.0 1,326.9 638.4 139.3 1.3 80.5 51.2 24.6 5.4 0.1
2011          Q1 pe 2,058.7 1,318.1 620.3 136.6 1.7 81.3 52.1 24.5 5.4 0.1
         Q2 pe 2,073.2 1,324.0 627.2 137.7 2.7 81.1 51.8 24.5 5.4 0.1
         Q3 pe 2,086.7 1,334.0 631.8 137.9 1.3 80.9 51.7 24.5 5.3 0.0
         Q4 pe 2,088.0 1,326.9 638.4 139.3 1.3 80.5 51.2 24.6 5.4 0.1
2012          Q1 pe 2,116.2 1,344.5 647.6 142.1 1.3 81.1 51.5 24.8 5.4 0.1
         Q2 pe 2,160.7 1,373.4 665.6 141.3 1.3 82.4 52.4 25.4 5.4 0.0
         Q3 pe 2,150.5 1,356.7 669.6 141.3 1.3 81.7 51.5 25.4 5.4 0.1
Sources: Federal Statistical Office and Bundesbank calculations. 1Unlike the fiscal bal- ures were released for the first half of the year. Therefore, the 2012 half-year figures
ance as shown in the national accounts, the deficit as defined in the Maastricht are not directly comparable with the annual figures. 2Including the €4.4 billion pro-
Treaty includes interest flows from swaps and forward rate agreements. The ceeds received from the 2010 frequency auction. 3Quarterly GDP ratios are based
half-year figures correspond to the deficit/surplus according to the national ac- on the national output of the four preceding quarters. 
counts. In connection with the publication of the 2012 annual figures, no revised fig-
 
 
2 General government: revenue, expenditure and fiscal deficit/surplus as shown in the national accounts*
  
 
Revenue Expenditure
of which of which
Compen- Gross Memo item
Social con- Social sation of capital Deficit/ Total tax
Period Total Taxes tributions Other Total benefits employees Interest formation Other surplus burden  1 
€ billion
2006 1,011.1 512.7 400.7 97.7 1,049.3 580.6 177.2 66.1 33.7 191.6 − 38.2 924.7
2007 1,062.3 558.4 400.9 103.0 1,056.8 579.4 178.2 68.5 36.0 194.6 + 5.5 971.3
2008 1,088.6 572.6 408.3 107.7 1,090.5 590.3 182.6 68.3 38.9 210.5 − 1.8 993.8
2009 p 1,071.7 547.5 410.8 113.5 1,144.7 622.9 191.0 63.6 41.6 225.8 − 73.0 968.4
2010 p 1,087.4 548.8 421.1 117.5 2 1,191.0 633.0 195.3 63.4 41.9 2 257.4 2 − 103.6 980.1
2011 p 1,154.9 589.5 436.9 128.5 1,174.5 633.3 199.7 65.9 42.7 233.0 − 19.7 1,037.0
2012 pe 1,192.7 617.8 449.0 125.9 1,190.5 644.9 203.3 64.9 39.8 237.7 + 2.2 1,077.5
as a percentage of GDP
2006 43.7 22.2 17.3 4.2 45.3 25.1 7.7 2.9 1.5 8.3 − 1.7 40.0
2007 43.7 23.0 16.5 4.2 43.5 23.9 7.3 2.8 1.5 8.0 + 0.2 40.0
2008 44.0 23.1 16.5 4.4 44.1 23.9 7.4 2.8 1.6 8.5 − 0.1 40.2
2009 p 45.1 23.1 17.3 4.8 48.2 26.2 8.0 2.7 1.7 9.5 − 3.1 40.8
2010 p 43.6 22.0 16.9 4.7 2 47.7 25.4 7.8 2.5 1.7 2 10.3 2 − 4.1 39.3
2011 p 44.5 22.7 16.9 5.0 45.3 24.4 7.7 2.5 1.6 9.0 − 0.8 40.0
2012 pe 45.1 23.4 17.0 4.8 45.0 24.4 7.7 2.5 1.5 9.0 + 0.1 40.7
Percentage growth rates
2006 + 4.3 + 7.8 + 0.9 + 1.2 + 0.6 + 0.2 + 0.3 + 4.6 + 7.4 − 0.4 . + 4.6
2007 + 5.1 + 8.9 + 0.1 + 5.4 + 0.7 − 0.2 + 0.6 + 3.6 + 6.7 + 1.5 . + 5.0
2008 + 2.5 + 2.5 + 1.8 + 4.6 + 3.2 + 1.9 + 2.5 − 0.4 + 7.9 + 8.2 . + 2.3
2009 p − 1.6 − 4.4 + 0.6 + 5.4 + 5.0 + 5.5 + 4.6 − 6.9 + 6.9 + 7.3 . − 2.6
2010 p + 1.5 + 0.2 + 2.5 + 3.5 + 4.0 + 1.6 + 2.3 − 0.3 + 0.8 + 14.0 . + 1.2
2011 p + 6.2 + 7.4 + 3.7 + 9.4 − 1.4 + 0.0 + 2.3 + 3.9 + 2.0 − 9.5 . + 5.8
2012 pe + 3.3 + 4.8 + 2.8 − 2.0 + 1.4 + 1.8 + 1.8 − 1.5 − 7.0 + 2.0 . + 3.9
Source: Federal Statistical Office. *Figures in accordance with ESA 1995. In the website. 1Taxes and social contributions plus customs duties and the EU share in
Monthly Reports up to December 2006, customs duties, the EU share in VAT revenue VAT revenue. 2Including the €4.4 billion proceeds received from the 2010 frequency
and EU subsidies were included in the national accounts’ data (without affecting the auction, which are deducted from other expenditure in the national accounts. 
fiscal deficit/surplus). This information can still be found on the Bundesbank’s

Deutsche Bundesbank
55  Monthly Report
February 2013
IX Public finances in Germany
 
3 General government: budgetary development (as per government’s financial statistics)
 
 
€ billion
Central, state and local government  1 Social security funds 2 General government, total
Revenue Expenditure
of which of which 3 
Finan- Person- Fixed Finan-
cial nel asset cialtransac- expend- Current forma- transac- Deficit / Rev- Expend- Deficit / Rev- Expend- Deficit /
Period Total 
4 Taxes tions 5 Total 4 iture grants Interest tion tions 5 surplus enue 6 iture surplus enue iture surplus
2005 pe 568.9 452.1 31.3 620.6 172.1 245.3 64.0 33.0 14.3 − 51.7 467.8 471.3 − 3.4 947.4 1,002.5 − 55.1
2006 pe 590.9 488.4 18.8 626.2 169.7 252.1 64.4 33.7 11.6 − 35.3 486.3 466.6 + 19.7 988.2 1,003.8 − 15.6
2007 pe 644.8 538.2 17.7 644.2 182.2 250.0 66.2 34.6 9.5 + 0.6 475.3 466.4 + 8.9 1,025.6 1,016.1 + 9.5
2008 pe 668.9 561.2 13.4 677.4 187.3 259.9 67.3 36.4 18.6 − 8.5 485.5 478.9 + 6.6 1,058.5 1,060.5 − 1.9
2009 pe 631.4 524.0 9.2 720.9 194.9 271.1 63.7 40.4 38.0 − 89.5 492.0 505.9 − 13.9 1,021.4 1,124.9 − 103.4
2010 pe 650.5 530.6 12.7 732.7 199.8 293.9 60.1 40.1 19.4 − 82.2 516.9 512.9 + 4.0 1,049.7 1,127.9 − 78.2
2011 pe 712.5 573.4 30.6 737.3 208.3 283.6 60.0 42.4 22.9 − 24.8 526.6 511.6 + 15.0 1,127.2 1,137.0 − 9.8
2010          Q1 p 147.9 121.6 2.6 180.4 47.6 74.8 21.2 5.5 4.9 − 32.5 123.6 127.6 − 4.0 242.2 278.7 − 36.5
         Q2 p 7 163.6 134.9 3.7 173.6 48.1 71.2 13.2 8.1 6.2 − 10.0 128.2 127.3 + 0.9 7 262.3 271.5 − 9.2
         Q3 p 153.8 127.6 3.0 177.3 48.3 69.8 16.1 10.5 3.4 − 23.6 124.7 125.6 − 1.0 251.5 276.0 − 24.5
         Q4 p 183.4 147.6 3.2 199.5 54.0 76.1 9.2 14.7 4.8 − 16.2 133.3 131.8 + 1.5 290.4 305.1 − 14.7
2011          Q1 p 162.4 134.9 4.1 183.1 49.7 73.8 21.2 6.3 4.6 − 20.7 127.3 127.2 + 0.1 260.5 281.0 − 20.5
         Q2 p 189.5 145.6 18.6 172.6 50.0 68.0 10.9 8.7 8.7 + 16.9 130.3 126.2 + 4.1 292.4 271.4 + 21.0
         Q3 p 162.6 136.6 2.7 182.6 50.9 67.2 18.8 10.8 4.5 − 20.0 127.9 125.8 + 2.0 264.3 282.2 − 17.9
         Q4 p 196.2 156.3 5.0 197.0 55.9 72.8 8.9 15.3 5.0 − 0.8 140.1 132.0 + 8.1 307.8 300.4 + 7.3
2012          Q1 p 168.3 142.9 2.5 185.5 51.7 75.5 21.0 6.9 3.4 − 17.2 129.1 128.5 + 0.7 269.0 285.6 − 16.6
         Q2 p 182.9 150.4 2.7 172.6 52.8 68.0 10.1 8.2 3.2 + 10.3 132.2 128.0 + 4.2 288.7 274.2 + 14.4
Source: Bundesbank calculations based on the data from the Federal Statistical mated. 3The development of the types of expenditure recorded here is influenced in
Office. 1Including subsidiary budgets, from 2007 also including the post office pen- part by statistical changeovers. 4Including discrepancies in clearing transactions be-
sion fund; excluding the special fund ”Provision for final payments for inflation-in- tween central, state and local government. 5On the revenue side, this contains pro-
dexed Federal securities”, which was set up in 2009. Unlike the annual figures based ceeds booked as disposals of equity interests and as loan repayments. On the expend-on the annual calculations of the Federal Statistical Office, the quarterly figures do iture side, this contains the acquisition of equity interests and loans granted. 6In-
not include municipal special purpose associations and various special ac- cluding Federal Government liquidity assistance to the Federal Labour Office. 7In-
counts. 2The annual figures do not tally with the sum of the quarterly figures, as the cluding the €4.4 billion proceeds received from the 2010 frequency auction. 
latter 
are all provisional. The quarterly figures for some insurance sectors are esti-
4 Central, state and local government: budgetary development (as per government’s financial statistics)
 
 
€ billion
Central government
State government  2,3 Local government 3,4 
Period Revenue 1 Expenditure Deficit / surplus Revenue Expenditure Deficit / surplus Revenue Expenditure Deficit / surplus
2005 250.0 281.5 − 31.5 237.4 259.6 − 22.2 151.3 153.2 − 1.9
2006 254.6 282.8 − 28.2 250.3 260.1 − 9.8 161.1 157.4 + 3.72007 
pe 277.4 292.1 − 14.7 275.9 267.5 + 8.4 171.3 162.4 + 8.9
2008 pe 292.0 303.8 − 11.8 279.3 278.1 + 1.2 176.9 169.0 + 7.9
2009 pe 282.6 317.1 − 34.5 265.9 293.4 − 27.5 172.0 178.9 − 6.9
2010 pe 288.0 332.4 − 44.4 278.5 302.1 − 23.6 176.5 183.9 − 7.4
2011 pe 307.1 324.8 − 17.7 304.0 315.4 − 11.4 185.6 187.0 − 1.4
2010          Q1 p 61.1 82.6 − 21.5 65.0 73.5 − 8.5 34.6 41.2 − 6.6
         Q2 p 5 75.6 80.6 − 5.0 68.3 69.1 − 0.8 42.2 43.5 − 1.3
         Q3 p 66.2 82.7 − 16.6 68.5 73.3 − 4.8 43.8 45.2 − 1.4
         Q4 p 85.2 86.5 − 1.3 75.8 85.0 − 9.2 53.8 52.3 + 1.5
2011          Q1 p 65.4 84.5 − 19.1 74.1 75.6 − 1.5 37.1 42.5 − 5.3
         Q2 p 76.6 73.5 + 3.1 76.0 75.8 + 0.2 45.4 44.3 + 1.1
         Q3 p 72.6 84.8 − 12.2 71.9 75.1 − 3.2 46.4 46.6 − 0.2
         Q4 p 92.5 82.0 + 10.5 81.1 87.7 − 6.6 54.7 51.9 + 2.8
2012          Q1 p 65.4 83.1 − 17.7 74.6 76.2 − 1.7 39.6 44.6 − 4.9
         Q2 p 78.0 72.2 + 5.8 75.8 74.4 + 1.4 48.8 47.0 + 1.8
         Q3 p 77.1 85.0 − 8.0 77.5 78.7 − 1.2 50.7 48.9 + 1.8
Source: Bundesbank calculations based on the data from the Federal Statistical lations of the Federal Statistical Office, the quarterly figures do not include various
Office. 1Any amounts of the Bundesbank’s profit distribution exceeding the refer- special accounts and municipal special purpose associations. 4From 2012 core
ence value that were used to repay parts of the debt of central government’s special budgets and off-budget entities; previously, only core budgets. 5Including the
funds are not included here. 2Including the local authority level of the city-states €4.4 billion proceeds received from the 2010 frequency auction. 
Berlin,
Bremen and Hamburg. 3Unlike the annual figure based on the annual calcu-

Deutsche Bundesbank
56  Monthly Report
February 2013
IX Public finances in Germany
 
5 Central, state and local government: tax revenue
 
 
€ million
Central and state government and European Union
Memo item
Balance of Amounts deducted
Central State Local untransferred in the federal
Period Total Total government 1 government 1 European Union 2 government 3 tax shares 4 budget 5 
2006 488,444 421,151 225,634 173,374 22,142 67,316 − 22 21,742
2007 538,243 465,554 251,747 191,558 22,249 72,551 + 138 21,643
2008 561,182 484,182 260,690 200,411 23,081 77,190 − 190 21,510
2009 524,000 455,615 252,842 182,273 20,501 68,419 − 34 24,846
2010 530,587 460,230 254,537 181,326 24,367 70,385 − 28 28,726
2011 573,352 496,738 276,598 195,676 24,464 76,570 + 43 28,615
2012 ... 518,963 284,801 207,846 26,316 ... ... 28,498
2011          Q1 135,590 115,878 60,579 46,582 8,717 13,640 + 6,071 6,989
         Q2 145,636 126,086 71,530 50,289 4,266 19,544 + 6 7,102
         Q3 136,382 117,812 66,277 45,938 5,598 18,916 − 346 7,662
         Q4 155,744 136,962 78,212 52,866 5,883 24,469 − 5,688 6,863
2012          Q1 143,343 122,846 62,467 50,558 9,821 13,964 + 6,533 6,831
         Q2 150,393 129,545 72,573 51,679 5,293 20,978 − 131 6,878
         Q3 147,755 127,189 70,803 50,981 5,404 20,522 + 44 7,643
         Q4 ... 139,383 78,958 54,628 5,798 ... ... 7,145
2011          Dec . 66,184 38,820 25,694 1,670 . . 2,288
2012          Dec . 67,793 38,437 26,796 2,560 . . 2,382
Sources: Federal Ministry of Finance, Federal Statistical Office and Bundesbank calcu- and gross national income accruing to the EU from central government tax rev-
lations. 1Before deducting or adding supplementary central government grants, enue. 3Including local government taxes in the city-states Berlin, Bremen and Ham-
shares in energy tax revenue, compensation for the transfer of motor vehicle tax to burg. 4Difference between local government’s share in the joint taxes received by
central government and consolidation aid, which central government remits to state the state government cash offices in the period in question (see Table IX. 6) and thegovernment. See the last column for the volume of these amounts which are amounts passed on to local government in the same period. 5Volume of the pos-
deducted from tax revenue in the federal budget. 2Custom duties and shares in VAT itions mentioned under footnote 1. 
 
 
6 Central and state government and European Union: tax revenue, by type
  
€ million
Joint taxes
Memo
Income taxes 2 Turnover taxes 5 item
Local
Local govern-
Invest- business Central State ment
Assessed ment Turnover tax govern- govern- EU share in
Wage income Corpora- income Turnover tax on trans- ment ment customs joint
Period Total 1 Total tax 3 tax tion tax tax 4 Total tax imports fers 6 taxes 7 taxes 7 duties taxes
2006 446,139 182,614 122,612 17,567 22,898 19,537 146,688 111,318 35,370 7,013 84,215 21,729 3,880 24,988
2007 493,817 204,698 131,774 25,027 22,929 24,969 169,636 127,522 42,114 6,975 85,690 22,836 3,983 28,263
2008 515,498 220,483 141,895 32,685 15,868 30,035 175,989 130,789 45,200 6,784 86,302 21,937 4,002 31,316
2009 484,880 193,684 135,165 26,430 7,173 24,916 176,991 141,907 35,084 4,908 89,318 16,375 3,604 29,265
2010 488,731 192,816 127,904 31,179 12,041 21,691 180,042 136,459 43,582 5,925 93,426 12,146 4,378 28,501
2011 527,255 213,534 139,749 31,996 15,634 26,155 190,033 138,957 51,076 6,888 99,133 13,095 4,571 30,517
2012 551,785 231,555 149,065 37,262 16,934 28,294 194,635 142,439 52,196 7,137 99,794 14,201 4,462 32,822
2011          Q1 123,131 50,328 32,478 6,755 2,485 8,611 47,389 35,528 11,861 366 20,515 3,408 1,124 7,253
         Q2 133,727 57,624 34,144 9,366 4,215 9,900 46,091 33,082 13,010 1,692 24,026 3,207 1,087 7,641
         Q3 125,021 47,420 33,590 7,111 3,028 3,691 47,161 34,232 12,929 1,735 24,309 3,229 1,169 7,209
         Q4 145,376 58,162 39,538 8,764 5,907 3,954 49,392 36,115 13,276 3,096 30,284 3,251 1,191 8,414
2012          Q1 130,623 56,569 34,106 8,456 5,471 8,537 48,966 36,340 12,626 275 20,059 3,629 1,126 7,777
         Q2 137,597 59,832 36,148 10,010 4,995 8,679 46,600 32,871 13,730 1,661 25,235 3,255 1,013 8,052
         Q3 135,170 54,841 36,582 8,877 2,532 6,850 49,147 36,232 12,915 1,841 24,423 3,718 1,200 7,981
         Q4 148,394 60,313 42,230 9,919 3,936 4,228 49,922 36,995 12,926 3,360 30,077 3,600 1,123 9,011
2011          Dec 70,816 36,741 18,406 9,917 6,304 2,113 16,190 11,891 4,298 1,507 14,912 1,097 369 4,632
2012          Dec 72,749 38,150 19,572 10,735 5,706 2,137 17,130 12,886 4,243 1,609 14,387 1,127 346 4,955
Source: Federal Ministry of Finance and Bundesbank calculations. 1This total, unlike deducting child benefit and subsidies for supplementary private pension
that in Table IX. 5, does not include the receipts from the equalisation of burdens plans. 4Final withholding tax on interest income and capital gains, non-assessed
levies, local business tax (less local business tax transfers to central and state govern- taxes on earnings. 5The allocation of revenue to central, state and local govern-
ment), real property taxes and other local government taxes, or the balance of un- ment, which is adjusted at more regular intervals, is regulated in section 1 of the Rev-transferred tax shares. 2Respective percentage share of central, state and local enue Adjustment Act. Respective percentage share of central, state and local govern-
government in revenue: wage tax and assessed income tax 42.5:42.5:15, corpor- ment in revenue for 2012: 53.4:44.6:2.0. The EU share is deducted from centralation tax and non-assessed taxes on earnings 50:50:-, final withholding tax on inter- government’s share. 6Respective percentage share of central and state government
est income and capital gains, non-assessed taxes on earnings 44:44:12. 3After for 2012: 22.2:77.8. 7 For the breakdown, see Table IX. 7. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
57  Monthly Report
February 2013
IX Public finances in Germany
 
7 Central, state and local government: individual taxes  
 
 
€ million
Central government taxes 1 State government taxes 1 Local government taxes
Tax on of which
the acqui-
Soli- Motor Motor sition of Inherit- Local Real
Period Energy Tobacco darity Insurance vehicle Electri- Spirits vehicle land and ance business property
tax tax surcharge tax tax 2 city tax tax Other tax 2 buildings tax Other 3 Total tax taxes
2006 39,916 14,387 11,277 8,775 . 6,273 2,160 1,428 8,937 6,125 3,763 2,904 49,319 38,370 10,399
2007 38,955 14,254 12,349 10,331 . 6,355 1,959 1,488 8,898 6,952 4,203 2,783 51,401 40,116 10,7132008 39,248 13,574 13,146 10,478 . 6,261 2,126 1,470 8,842 5,728 4,771 2,596 52,468 41,037 10,8072009 39,822 13,366 11,927 10,548 3,803 6,278 2,101 1,473 4,398 4,857 4,550 2,571 44,028 32,421 10,936
2010 39,838 13,492 11,713 10,284 8,488 6,171 1,990 1,449 − 5,290 4,404 2,452 47,780 35,712 11,315
2011 40,036 14,414 12,781 10,755 8,422 7,247 2,149 3,329 − 6,366 4,246 2,484 52,984 40,424 11,6742012 39,305 14,143 13,624 11,138 8,443 6,973 2,121 4,047 − 7,389 4,305 2,508 ... ... ...
2011          Q1 4,457 2,893 3,072 4,869 2,349 1,785 574 516 − 1,555 1,170 683 12,825 9,948 2,631
         Q2 10,002 3,300 3,450 2,017 2,215 1,960 482 599 − 1,464 1,129 614 13,601 10,366 3,031         Q3 10,058 3,418 2,879 2,145 2,006 1,763 541 1,499 − 1,581 1,039 609 13,095 9,386 3,473         Q4 15,519 4,803 3,379 1,723 1,852 1,739 553 715 − 1,766 907 578 13,463 10,724 2,540
2012          Q1 4,406 2,305 3,308 5,180 2,328 1,714 576 241 − 1,876 1,057 696 12,995 9,990 2,717
         Q2 9,707 3,550 3,644 2,011 2,258 1,966 490 1,610 − 1,683 972 601 14,457 11,166 3,048         Q3 10,015 3,610 3,183 2,161 2,005 1,567 506 1,376 − 1,913 1,210 594 14,426 10,545 3,604         Q4 15,177 4,678 3,489 1,785 1,852 1,727 549 820 − 1,917 1,066 617 ... ... ...
2011          Dec 8,409 2,134 2,046 490 612 565 203 453 − 623 278 196 . . .2012          Dec 8,381 1,839 2,111 499 540 574 219 224 − 605 315 207 . . .
Sources: Federal Ministry of Finance, Federal Statistical Office and Bundesbank calcu- enue is attributable to central government. Postings to state government shown there-
lations. 1For the sum total, see Table IX. 6. 2As of 1 July 2009, motor vehicle tax rev- after relate to the booking of cash flows. 3 Notably betting, lottery and beer tax.   
 
 
8 German pension insurance scheme: budgetary development and assets*
  
€ million
Revenue 1,2 Expenditure 1,2 Assets 1,5 
of which of which
Equity
Payments interests, Memo
from Pen- mort- item
central sioners’ gages Adminis-
Contri- govern- Pension health Deficit/ and other Real trative
Period Total butions 3 ment Total payments insurance 4 surplus Total Deposits 6 Securities loans 7 estate assets
2006 241,231 168,083 71,773 233,668 200,459 13,053 + 7,563 10,047 9,777 115 46 109 4,912
2007 236,642 162,225 72,928 235,459 201,642 13,665 + 1,183 12,196 11,270 765 46 115 4,8192008 242,770 167,611 73,381 238,995 204,071 14,051 + 3,775 16,531 16,313 36 56 126 4,6452009 244,689 169,183 74,313 244,478 208,475 14,431 + 211 16,821 16,614 23 64 120 4,525
2010 250,133 172,767 76,173 248,076 211,852 14,343 + 2,057 19,375 18,077 1,120 73 105 4,464
2011 254,968 177,424 76,200 250,241 212,602 15,015 + 4,727 24,965 22,241 2,519 88 117 4,3792012 
p 259,083 181,255 76,656 254,305 216,750 15,275 + 4,778 30,935 28,483 2,256 95 101 4,336
2010          Q1 59,761 40,601 18,917 61,861 53,059 3,582 − 2,100 14,922 14,717 20 64 120 4,490         Q2 62,249 43,054 18,923 61,999 53,006 3,585 + 250 15,254 15,053 20 69 112 4,478         Q3 61,237 42,048 18,912 62,091 53,102 3,589 − 854 14,853 14,656 20 68 109 4,474         Q4 66,317 47,060 18,933 61,887 52,966 3,579 + 4,430 19,274 17,978 1,120 68 108 4,476
2011          Q1 60,804 41,608 18,902 62,188 53,176 3,742 − 1,384 18,063 17,069 819 74 101 4,482
         Q2 63,452 44,307 18,855 62,058 52,920 3,731 + 1,394 19,704 18,507 1,019 78 100 4,475         Q3 62,354 43,109 18,902 62,844 53,341 3,761 − 490 19,959 19,266 519 79 94 4,445         Q4 67,748 48,391 19,030 62,823 53,371 3,774 + 4,925 25,339 22,226 2,919 79 114 4,410
2012          Q1 62,038 42,411 19,318 62,883 53,747 3,779 − 845 24,261 21,839 2,219 88 116 4,366
         Q2 64,721 45,318 19,086 62,885 53,532 3,772 + 1,836 26,026 23,950 1,869 92 115 4,356         Q3 63,669 44,188 19,193 64,275 54,788 3,866 − 606 25,968 23,265 2,509 94 100 4,328         Q4 68,656 49,337 19,059 64,262 54,683 3,858 + 4,394 30,935 28,483 2,256 95 101 4,336
Sources: Federal Ministry of Labour and Social Affairs and German pension insurance cluding investment spending and proceeds. 3Including contributions for recipients
scheme. *Excluding the German pension insurance scheme for the mining, railway of government cash benefits. 4Including long-term care insurance for pensioners
and maritime industries. 1The final annual figures do not tally with the quarterly fig- until 2004 Q1. 5Largely corresponds to the sustainability reserves. End of year or
ures, as the latter are all provisional. 2Including financial compensation payments. Ex- quarter. 6 Including cash. 7 Excluding loans to other social security funds. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
58  Monthly Report
February 2013
IX Public finances in Germany
 
9 Federal Employment Agency: budgetary development*
 
 
€ million
Revenue Expenditure
of which of which Deficit
offsetting
Unemployment support 1,2 Job promotion 2,3 grant orloan from
Measures central
Contri- Western Eastern Western Eastern financed Deficit/ govern-
Period Total 
4 butions Levies 5 Total 6 Total Germany Germany Total Germany Germany by levies  7 surplus ment
2006 55,384 51,176 1,123 44,162 23,249 17,348 5,901 9,259 6,185 3,074 1,089 + 11,221 0
2007 42,838 32,264 971 36,196 17,356 13,075 4,282 8,370 5,748 2,623 949 + 6,643 −
2008 38,289 26,452 974 39,407 14,283 10,652 3,631 8,712 6,222 2,490 920 − 1,118 −
2009 34,254 22,046 1,000 48,057 20,866 16,534 4,332 11,595 8,794 2,801 1,946 − 13,803 −
2010 37,070 22,614 3,222 45,213 19,456 15,629 3,827 10,791 8,287 2,504 740 − 8,143 5,200
2011 pe 37,564 25,434 351 37,524 14,661 11,918 2,744 9,004 6,925 2,079 683 + 41 −
2012 37,430 26,570 642 34,842 14,769 12,469 2,300 6,723 5,443 1,281 982 + 2,587 −
2010          Q1 10,020 5,196 714 11,681 6,475 5,112 1,362 2,957 2,263 694 208 − 1,661 −
         Q2 10,649 5,601 784 10,501 5,264 4,148 1,116 2,872 2,204 668 184 + 148 −
         Q3 8,109 5,527 808 8,887 4,082 3,353 729 2,431 1,863 567 193 − 778 −
         Q4 8,291 6,290 916 14,144 3,635 3,016 619 2,531 1,957 575 154 − 5,853 5,200
2011          Q1 10,259 5,853 123 9,583 4,602 3,701 901 2,660 2,048 612 186 + 676 −
         Q2 8,802 6,358 60 8,246 3,710 3,007 703 2,285 1,753 532 175 + 556 −
         Q3 7,467 6,205 76 7,450 3,293 2,707 586 1,910 1,464 446 187 + 17 −
         Q4 pe 11,037 7,017 92 12,245 3,056 2,502 554 2,149 1,660 489 134 − 1,209 −
2012          Q1 9,709 6,175 131 8,452 4,319 3,587 732 1,946 1,580 366 211 + 1,257 −
         Q2 8,331 6,620 142 7,816 3,707 3,105 601 1,765 1,429 336 329 + 515 −
         Q3 7,502 6,508 165 7,539 3,389 2,907 482 1,462 1,177 285 218 − 37 −
         Q4 11,889 7,267 204 11,035 3,355 2,869 485 1,551 1,256 294 223 + 853 −
Source: Federal Employment Agency. *Excluding pension fund. 1Unemployment icit offsetting grant or loan. 5Levies to promote winter construction and to pay insolv-
benefit and short-time working benefit. 2Including contributions to the statutory ency compensation to employees. 6From 2005, including a compensatory amount
health, pension and long-term care insurance schemes. 3Vocational training, meas- or a reintegration payment to central government. 7Promotion of winter con-
ures to encourage job take-up, rehabilitation, job creation measures, compensation struction and insolvency compensation for employees. top-up payments and business start-up grants. 4Excluding central government def-
 
 
10 Statutory health insurance scheme: budgetary development
  
€ million
Revenue 1 Expenditure 1 
of which of which
Central Thera- Adminis-
govern- peutical trative
Contri- ment Hospital Pharma- Medical Dental treatment Sickness expend- Deficit/
Period Total butions 2 funds 3 Total treatment ceuticals treatment treatment  4 and aids benefits iture 5 surplus
2006 149,929 142,183 4,200 148,297 50,327 25,835 23,896 10,364 8,303 5,708 8,319 + 1,632
2007 156,058 149,964 2,500 154,314 50,850 27,791 24,788 10,687 8,692 6,017 8,472 + 1,744
2008 162,516 155,883 2,500 161,334 52,623 29,145 25,887 10,926 9,095 6,583 8,680 + 1,182
2009 169,758 158,594 7,200 170,823 55,977 30,696 27,635 11,219 9,578 7,258 8,947 − 1,065
2010 179,524 160,792 15,700 175,803 56,697 30,147 28,432 11,419 10,609 7,797 9,553 + 3,721
2011 189,034 170,860 15,300 179,597 58,501 28,939 29,056 11,651 11,193 8,529 9,486 + 9,437
2010          Q1 6 43,093 38,542 3,919 43,274 14,419 7,549 7,255 2,871 2,368 1,996 2,130 − 182
         Q2 44,440 39,826 3,931 43,999 14,037 7,870 7,128 2,882 2,669 1,955 2,261 + 441
         Q3 44,457 39,808 3,925 43,662 14,122 7,592 7,007 2,786 2,676 1,903 2,255 + 795
         Q4 47,580 42,600 3,925 44,842 14,144 7,307 7,107 2,952 2,853 1,943 2,876 + 2,738
2011          Q1 45,339 40,871 3,825 44,392 15,075 7,158 7,361 2,893 2,528 2,210 2,173 + 947
         Q2 46,887 42,370 3,825 44,955 14,601 7,239 7,372 3,001 2,834 2,106 2,263 + 1,931
         Q3 46,865 42,298 3,825 44,432 14,594 7,236 7,160 2,768 2,762 2,069 2,292 + 2,433
         Q4 49,866 45,291 3,825 45,878 14,418 7,382 7,161 2,997 3,117 2,125 2,682 + 3,988
2012          Q1 46,433 42,249 3,500 45,971 15,579 7,424 7,502 2,971 2,664 2,336 2,195 + 462
         Q2 47,942 43,739 3,500 46,178 15,115 7,419 7,515 3,015 2,874 2,281 2,244 + 1,764
         Q3 47,832 43,648 3,499 45,842 15,049 7,221 7,342 2,843 2,872 2,220 2,283 + 1,990
Source: Federal Ministry of Health. 1The final annual figures do not tally with the penses for levying contributions incurred by other social insurance funds. Including ad-
sum of the quarterly figures, as the latter are all provisional. Excluding revenue and ministrative expenditure on disease management programmes. 6Data on individual
expenditure as part of the risk structure compensation scheme. 2Including contri- expenditure categories for 2010 only partly comparable with prior-year figures owing
butions from subsidised low-paid part-time employment. 3Federal grant and liquid- to a change in the statistical definition. 
ity assistance. 4Including dentures. 5Net, ie after deducting reimbursements for ex-

Deutsche Bundesbank
59  Monthly Report
February 2013
IX Public finances in Germany
 
11 Statutory long-term care insurance scheme: budgetary development
 
 
€ million
Revenue 1 Expenditure 1 
of which
Contributions to
of which Non-cash In-patient Nursing pension insur- Administrative Deficit/
Period Total Contributions 2 Total care benefits care benefit ance scheme 3 expenditure surplus
2006 17,749 17,611 18,064 2,437 8,671 4,017 862 886 − 315
2007 18,036 17,858 18,385 2,475 8,831 4,050 861 896 − 3502008 19,785 19,608 19,163 2,605 9,054 4,225 868 941 + 6222009 21,300 21,137 20,314 2,742 9,274 4,443 878 984 + 986
2010 21,864 21,659 21,539 2,933 9,567 4,673 869 1,028 + 325
2011 22,294 22,145 21,962 3,002 9,700 4,735 881 1,034 + 331
2010          Q1 5,241 5,175 5,298 722 2,362 1,151 217 264 − 56
         Q2 5,398 5,369 5,302 707 2,378 1,167 219 258 + 95         Q3 5,385 5,358 5,416 735 2,398 1,160 220 266 − 31         Q4 5,760 5,739 5,432 743 2,417 1,195 225 229 + 328
2011          Q1 5,306 5,269 5,457 750 2,408 1,165 216 277 − 150
         Q2 5,519 5,496 5,396 713 2,417 1,173 210 263 + 123         Q3 5,513 5,486 5,551 774 2,442 1,191 221 255 − 38         Q4 5,904 5,877 5,526 742 2,442 1,216 223 240 + 378
2012          Q1 5,493 5,450 5,700 774 2,469 1,248 223 283 − 207
         Q2 5,713 5,686 5,656 758 2,478 1,254 217 276 + 57         Q3 5,726 5,694 5,774 783 2,507 1,269 219 262 − 49
Source: Federal Ministry of Health. 1The final annual figures do not tally with the special contributions for childless persons (0.25% of income subject to insurance
sum of the quarterly figures, as the latter are all provisional. 2Since 2005 including contributions). 3 For non-professional carers. 
 
 
12 Central government: borrowing in the 13 Central, state and local government: debt by creditor*
market
 
€ million € million
T
otal new borrowing 1 of which of which Banking system Domestic non-banks
Change Change
in money in money Period Socialmarket market (End of year Bundes- Credit security Foreign
Period Gross 
2 Net loans deposits or quarter) Total bank institutions funds Other  1 creditors pe 
2006 + 221,873 + 32,656 + 3,258 + 6,308 2006 1,533,697 4,440 496,800 72 329,585 702,800
2007 + 214,995 + 6,996 + 1,086 − 4,900 2007 1,540,381 4,440 456,900 68 317,473 761,5002008 + 233,356 + 26,208 + 6,888 + 9,036 2008 1,564,590 4,440 435,600 62 314,588 809,9002009 + 312,729 + 66,821 − 8,184 + 106 2009 1,657,842 4,440 438,700 59 321,943 892,700
2010 + 302,694 + 42,397 − 5,041 + 1,607 2010 1,732,530 4,440 400,100 21 389,469 938,500
2011 + 264,572 + 5,890 − 4,876 − 9,036 2011 
p 1,752,313 4,440 356,300 102 413,471 978,000
2012 + 263,334 + 31,728 + 6,183 + 13,375
2010          Q1 + 74,369 + 12,637 − 5,322 − 1,520 2010          Q1 1,678,191 4,440 450,100 60 327,691 895,900
         Q2 + 83,082 + 3,666 − 4,143 + 1,950          Q2 1,687,957 4,440 469,600 60 310,857 903,000
         Q3 + 79,589 + 14,791 + 250 − 4,625          Q3 1,712,685 4,440 470,200 65 306,680 931,300
         Q4 + 65,655 + 11,304 + 4,174 + 5,803          Q4 1,732,530 4,440 400,100 21 389,469 938,500
2011          Q1 + 76,394 + 15,958 − 607 − 5,206 2011          Q1 p 1,749,605 4,440 412,000 87 374,578 958,500
         Q2 + 77,158 + 10,392 − 49 + 26,625          Q2 p 1,762,399 4,440 404,100 82 360,277 993,500
         Q3 + 59,256 − 8,152 − 4,177 − 22,608          Q3 p 1,758,910 4,440 387,900 82 379,188 987,300
         Q4 + 51,764 − 12,308 − 42 − 7,847          Q4 p 1,752,313 4,440 356,300 102 413,471 978,000
2012          Q1 + 72,603 + 12,524 + 8,251 − 2,380 2012          Q1 p 1,765,603 4,440 398,000 91 355,472 1,007,600
         Q2 + 68,851 + 13,623 + 2,836 + 19,969          Q2 p 1,779,730 4,440 409,800 92 326,298 1,039,100
         Q3 + 60,504 − 8,627 − 8,281 − 14,911          Q3 p 1,773,276 4,440 430,700 92 286,344 1,051,700
         Q4 + 61,376 + 14,208 + 3,376 + 10,697
Source:  Federal  Republic  of  Germany − Finance Agency. Source:  Bundesbank  calculations  based  on  data   from  the  Federal  Statistical 
1 Including  the  Financial  Market  Stabilisation Fund,  the In- Office. * Excluding direct intergovernmental borrowing. 1 Calculated as a residual. 
vestment and  Repayment Fund  and  the  Restructuring Fund for Credit Institutions. 2 After deducting repurchases. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
60  Monthly Report
February 2013
IX Public finances in Germany
 
14 Central, state and local government: debt by category*
 
 
€ million
Loans from non-banks Old debt
Direct
Treasury Five-year lending
Period discount Federal Federal Federal by credit Social Equal-
(End of year paper Treasury notes savings bonds institu- security isation
or quarter) Total (Bubills) 1 notes 2,3 (Bobls) 2 notes (Bunds) 2 Day-bond tions 4 funds Other 4 claims 5 Other 5,6 
Central, state and local government
2006 1,533,697 37,834 320,288 179,940 10,199 552,028 . 356,514 72 72,297 4,443 82
2007 1,540,381 39,510 329,108 177,394 10,287 574,512 . 329,588 68 75,396 4,443 76
2008 1,564,590 44,620 337,511 172,037 9,649 584,144 3,174 325,648 62 83,229 4,443 73
2009 1,657,842 105,970 361,727 174,219 9,471 594,999 2,495 300,927 59 103,462 4,442 71
2010 1,732,530 87,042 391,851 195,534 8,704 628,757 1,975 302,595 21 111,609 4,440 2
2011          Q3 p 1,758,910 74,764 410,222 219,785 8,349 634,402 1,970 292,102 82 112,792 4,440 2
         Q4 p 1,752,313 60,272 414,250 214,211 8,208 644,701 2,154 291,858 102 112,116 4,440 2
2012          Q1 p 1,765,603 54,692 410,585 226,486 7,869 646,884 2,134 302,310 91 110,109 4,440 2
         Q2 p 1,779,730 55,392 410,186 224,607 7,518 663,502 2,137 295,075 92 116,781 4,440 2
         Q3 p 1,773,276 53,325 409,957 237,746 7,110 654,320 1,893 287,370 92 117,023 4,440 2
Central government7,8,9,10,11
2006 918,911 37,798 103,624 179,889 10,199 541,404 . 30,030 − 11,444 4,443 82
2007 939,988 37,385 102,083 177,394 10,287 574,156 . 22,829 − 11,336 4,443 75
2008 966,197 40,795 105,684 172,037 9,649 583,930 3,174 35,291 − 11,122 4,443 72
2009 1,033,017 104,409 113,637 174,219 9,471 594,780 2,495 18,347 − 11,148 4,442 70
2010 1,075,415 85,867 126,220 195,534 8,704 628,582 1,975 13,349 − 10,743 4,440 2
2011          Q3 1,093,612 73,277 132,428 219,785 8,349 634,226 1,970 9,091 − 10,045 4,440 2
         Q4 1,081,304 58,297 130,648 214,211 8,208 644,513 2,154 9,382 − 9,450 4,440 2
2012          Q1 1,093,828 52,161 126,956 226,486 7,869 646,696 2,134 17,894 − 9,190 4,440 2
         Q2 1,107,451 52,578 122,937 224,607 7,518 663,314 2,137 20,827 − 9,092 4,440 2
         Q3 1,098,824 51,638 120,240 237,746 7,110 654,132 1,893 12,646 − 8,979 4,440 2
         Q4 1,113,032 56,222 117,719 234,355 6,818 666,775 1,725 16,193 − 8,784 4,440 2
State government
2006 481,850 36 216,665 .... 209,270 2 55,876 . 1
2007 484,373 2,125 227,025 .... 194,956 2 60,264 . 1
2008 483,875 3,825 231,827 .... 179,978 3 68,241 . 1
2009 505,359 1,561 248,091 .... 167,310 8 88,389 . 1
2010 528,618 1,176 265,631 .... 167,351 1 94,459 . 1
2011          Q3 p 533,117 1,487 277,794 .... 157,436 62 96,338 . 1
         Q4 p 537,318 1,975 283,601 .... 154,292 62 97,387 . 1
2012          Q1 p 535,157 2,531 283,629 .... 153,307 51 95,639 . 1
         Q2 p 536,421 2,814 287,249 .... 143,897 52 102,409 . 1
         Q3 p 538,296 1,687 289,717 .... 144,075 52 102,764 . 1
Local government12
2006 118,380 . − . . 256 . 113,265 70 4,789 . .
2007 115,920 . − . . 256 . 111,803 66 3,796 . .
2008 114,518 . − . . 214 . 110,379 60 3,866 . .
2009 119,466 . − . . 219 . 115,270 52 3,925 . .
2010 128,497 . − . . 175 . 121,895 20 6,407 . .
2011          Q3 p 132,180 . − . . 175 . 125,575 20 6,410 . .
         Q4 p 133,691 . − . . 188 . 128,183 40 5,280 . .
2012          Q1 p 136,617 . − . . 188 . 131,110 40 5,280 . .
         Q2 p 135,859 . − . . 188 . 130,351 40 5,280 . .
         Q3 p 136,156 . − . . 188 . 130,648 40 5,280 . .
Special funds7,8,13
2006 14,556 . − 51 . 10,368 . 3,950 − 188 . .
2007 100 . − − . 100 . − − − . .
2008 − . − − . − . − − − . .
2009 − . − − . − . − − − . .
2010 − . − − . − . − − − . .
2011          Q3 − . − − . − . − − − . .
         Q4 − . − − . − . − − − . .
2012         Q 1 −−−− .− . −−− . .
         Q 2 −−−− .− . −−− . .
         Q 3 −−−− .− . −−− . .
Source: Bundesbank calculations based on data from the Federal Statistical portfolios. 7In contrast to the capital market statistics, the debt incurred through the
Office. *Excluding direct intergovernmental borrowing. 1Including Treasury finan- joint issuance of Federal securities is recorded here under central government and its
cing paper. 2Excluding issuers’ holdings of their own securities. 3Treasury notes special funds in accordance with the agreed allocation ratios. 8On 1 July 2007 cen-
issued by state government include long-term notes. 4Mainly loans against bor- tral government assumed joint responsibility for the debts of the ERP Special Fund.
rowers’ notes and cash advances. Including loans raised abroad. Other loans from From that date on, the aforementioned special fund is recorded under central govern-
non-banks, including loans from public supplementary pension funds and liabilities ment. 9From December 2008, including debt of the Financial Market Stabilisation
arising from the investment assistance levy. 5Excluding offsets against outstanding Fund. 10From March 2009, including debt of the Investment and Repayment
claims. 6Old debt mainly denominated in foreign currency, in accordance with the Fund. 11From January 2011, including debt of the Restructuring Fund for Credit Insti-
London Debts Agreement, old liabilities arising from housing construction and liabil- tutions. 12Including debt of municipal special purpose associations. Data other than
ities arising from housing construction by the former GDR’s armed forces and from year-end figures have been estimated. 13ERP Special Fund (up to the end of June
housing construction in connection with the return of the troops of the former USSR 2007), German Unity Fund (up to the end of 2004) and Indemnification Fund. stationed in eastern Germany to their home country; excluding debt securities in own

Deutsche Bundesbank
61  Monthly Report
February 2013
X Economic conditions in Germany
  
1 Origin and use of domestic product, distribution of national income
  
  
  
  2011   2012
  2010   2011   2012   2010   2011   2012   Q1   Q2   Q3   Q4   Q1   Q2   Q3
Item Index 2005=100 Annual percentage change
At  constant  prices,  chained
  I Origin of domestic product
Production sector
(excluding construction) 104.9 111.4 110.5 15.8 6.2 − 0.8 11.5 7.2 6.1 0.7 1.2 − 0.9 − 2.2Construction 99.0 103.6 101.9 6.9 4.6 − 1.7 10.5 1.4 1.4 6.7 1.1 − 2.4 − 0.5Wholesale/retail trade, transportand storage, hotel and restaurantservices 110.6 114.0 114.8 1.7 3.1 0.7 5.3 3.0 2.4 1.8 2.5 1.0 0.7Information and communication 135.7 138.2 142.9 − 0.2 1.9 3.4 1.7 1.8 2.1 1.9 3.5 2.6 3.2Financial and insuranceactivities 115.5 117.1 119.1 1.4 1.4 1.7 0.9 − 0.0 3.4 1.4 1.8 2.2 1.8Real estate activities 105.3 105.9 107.7 − 1.7 0.6 1.7 − 0.1 0.8 0.5 1.1 1.7 1.6 1.5Business services 
1 100.8 105.0 107.9 2.6 4.2 2.7 5.1 4.6 3.7 3.4 4.1 3.0 2.4
Public services, education and
health 108.5 109.5 110.4 1.7 0.9 0.8 0.7 1.0 0.8 1.1 0.9 1.0 0.7Other services 104.0 103.5 104.3 − 0.5 − 0.5 0.8 − 0.8 − 0.9 − 0.7 0.3 1.2 0.8 0.6
Gross value added 107.7 110.9 111.7 4.6 3.0 0.7 4.7 3.1 2.7 1.4 1.8 0.7 0.3Gross domestic product 
2 107.0 110.2 111.0 4.2 3.0 0.7 5.2 3.1 2.6 1.4 1.7 0.5 0.4
 II Use of domestic product
Private consumption 3 103.2 104.9 105.7 0.9 1.7 0.8 2.1 1.8 2.1 0.9 1.5 0.4 − 0.2
Government consumption 110.6 111.7 112.8 1.7 1.0 1.0 − 0.1 1.8 0.9 1.3 1.7 0.8 1.0
Machinery and equipment 108.5 116.1 111.0 10.3 7.0 − 4.4 14.1 8.0 5.6 2.3 2.4 − 4.8 − 8.0Premises 104.2 110.3 109.0 3.2 5.8 − 1.1 13.6 3.0 2.5 6.5 0.2 − 1.8 0.1Other investment 
4 124.6 129.5 133.6 3.3 3.9 3.2 3.8 3.5 3.6 4.7 2.6 3.7 3.5
Changes in inventories 5, 6 . . . 0.6 0.2 − 0.5 0.0 0.3 0.4 0.1 − 0.1 − 0.8 − 0.5
Domestic use 106.0 108.8 108.4 2.6 2.6 − 0.3 3.2 2.7 2.6 1.7 1.4 − 0.9 − 1.0Net exports 
6 . . . 1.7 0.6 1.1 2.1 0.5 0.1 − 0.3 0.4 1.4 1.4
Exports 124.5 134.2 139.7 13.7 7.8 4.1 13.9 6.7 7.3 3.9 3.5 5.0 4.2Imports 124.6 133.8 136.9 11.1 7.4 2.3 10.6 6.5 7.9 5.1 3.2 2.4 1.6
Gross domestic product 
2 107.0 110.2 111.0 4.2 3.0 0.7 5.2 3.1 2.6 1.4 1.7 0.5 0.4
At  current  prices  (€ billion)
III Use of domestic product
Private consumption 3 1,433.2 1,487.7 1,523.4 3.0 3.8 2.4 4.3 4.0 4.0 2.9 3.4 1.9 1.3
Government consumption 487.6 499.8 513.4 2.6 2.5 2.7 1.4 3.5 2.3 2.7 3.2 2.5 2.9Machinery and equipment 170.8 183.2 175.8 10.3 7.3 − 4.1 14.3 8.1 5.9 2.6 2.8 − 4.7 − 7.8Premises 236.8 258.1 261.3 4.4 9.0 1.3 16.8 5.9 5.6 10.1 3.0 0.6 2.4Other investment 
4 27.6 28.5 29.3 2.8 3.3 2.5 3.1 3.3 3.1 3.6 2.4 2.5 2.5
Changes in inventories 5 1.3 3.7 − 10.1 . . . . . . . . . .
Domestic use 2,357.3 2,460.9 2,493.1 4.4 4.4 1.3 5.2 4.7 4.3 3.5 3.1 0.5 0.6Net exports 138.9 131.7 151.9 . . . . . . . . . .
Exports 1,173.3 1,300.8 1,368.1 16.6 10.9 5.2 19.2 10.1 9.5 5.7 4.8 6.2 5.3Imports 1,034.4 1,169.2 1,216.2 16.3 13.0 4.0 19.8 12.4 11.9 8.9 5.6 4.2 3.0
Gross domestic product 
2 2,496.2 2,592.6 2,645.0 5.1 3.9 2.0 5.8 4.1 3.5 2.2 2.9 1.7 1.8
IV Prices (2005=100)
Private consumption 106.3 108.5 110.3 2.0 2.1 1.6 2.2 2.2 1.9 2.0 1.8 1.5 1.5Gross domestic product 104.9 105.8 107.2 0.9 0.8 1.3 0.6 0.9 0.9 0.8 1.2 1.2 1.4Terms of trade 99.2 97.0 96.3 − 2.1 − 2.2 − 0.6 − 3.4 − 2.3 − 1.6 − 1.9 − 1.0 − 0.5 − 0.4
V  Distribution of national income
Compensation of employees 1,271.0 1,328.0 1,375.6 3.0 4.5 3.6 4.7 5.1 4.3 3.9 3.7 3.8 3.5Entrepreneurial and propertyincome 648.3 656.7 647.4 12.0 1.3 − 1.4 6.6 − 0.7 2.3 − 3.4 2.3 0.4 − 3.5
National income 1,919.3 1,984.6 2,023.0 5.9 3.4 1.9 5.3 3.2 3.6 1.7 3.2 2.7 1.0
Memo item: Gross national
income 2,546.7 2,640.9 2,698.4 4.7 3.7 2.2 5.7 3.5 3.7 2.1 3.1 2.6 1.5
Source: Federal Statistical Office; figures computed in November 2012. Initial annual ing households. 4Intangible fixed asset formation (inter alia, computer software and
results for 2012: figures computed in January 2013. 1Professional, scientific, techni- entertainment, literary or artistic originals) and cultivated assets. 5Including net in-
cal, administration and support service activities. 2Gross value added plus taxes on crease in valuables. 6 Contribution of growth to GDP. 
products (netted with subsidies on products). 3Including non-profit institutions serv-

Deutsche Bundesbank
62  Monthly Report
February 2013
 X Economic conditions in Germany
 
2 Output in the production sector*
 
 
Adjusted for working-day variations  o 
Industry
by main industrial grouping of which: by economic sector
Manu-
Manu- facture of
facture of computers,basic metals Motor
electronic
and vehicles, and optical
Production Inter- Non- fabricated products Machinery trailers
sector, Construc- mediate Capital Durable durable metal and and semi- and electrical
total tion Energy Total goods goods goods goods products equipment equipment trailers
2005=100  
  
% of total 1 100.00 5.56 8.76 85.69 33.96 35.37 2.78 13.58 12.15 10.82 12.48 12.34
Period
2008 111.5 108.4 95.5 113.3 114.1 116.8 104.0 104.4 114.4 128.8 124.5 104.5
2009 94.3 108.3 90.7 93.7 93.3 92.0 87.6 100.6 87.5 100.9 92.2 82.0
2010 103.9 108.5 93.6 104.6 107.1 103.8 95.7 102.4 101.7 117.5 101.6 102.3
2011 112.1 123.1 87.7 113.9 115.8 116.7 100.5 104.5 111.5 134.6 115.4 116.3
2012 111.2 121.5 88.2 112.9 113.2 117.8 96.2 102.6 109.5 131.8 117.3 116.9
 
2011          July 116.0 142.8 80.0 117.9 122.2 119.7 101.7 105.9 117.0 142.3 119.2 119.6
         Aug 107.1 133.0 78.7 108.3 115.1 106.4 84.9 100.8 107.5 135.2 109.2 98.1
         Sep 117.9 140.6 78.6 120.5 121.7 124.9 111.1 107.7 116.2 146.4 123.2 127.1
         Oct 119.6 141.4 88.1 121.4 122.3 125.2 112.8 110.9 119.2 144.4 118.5 129.8
         Nov 120.7 139.8 94.5 122.2 120.4 129.2 111.2 110.8 118.4 147.0 126.0 127.7
         Dec 103.2 94.2 90.8 105.0 95.5 118.0 88.6 98.3 93.3 125.7 129.8 93.6
2012          Jan 102.0 80.9 93.5 104.2 109.2 102.8 93.4 97.2 103.6 124.3 98.4 108.8
         Feb 104.8 68.1 92.9 108.4 109.7 113.2 96.0 95.2 106.7 128.3 108.6 121.8
         Mar 2 120.0 124.0 94.3 2 122.4 121.3 2 130.6 105.6 107.4 117.0 141.0 2 134.5 132.9
         Apr 109.7 129.2 84.5 111.1 114.7 114.0 93.9 97.8 109.3 128.0 112.7 117.6
         May 110.9 133.4 79.7 112.7 115.9 115.5 95.2 100.7 111.9 130.2 114.2 116.6
         June 114.4 136.4 82.2 116.3 118.3 121.6 96.8 101.4 114.8 138.8 123.0 119.3
         July 114.6 142.9 82.1 116.1 118.9 120.4 93.5 102.4 113.5 139.4 120.3 119.4
         Aug 105.7 132.2 80.1 106.5 110.8 106.3 84.3 100.8 103.8 128.5 105.8 100.0
         Sep 117.0 144.0 85.7 118.4 116.2 125.5 109.1 107.5 114.5 134.7 123.0 128.0
         Oct x 116.0 141.5 93.1 116.7 117.5 119.3 102.5 111.0 114.6 135.1 114.9 119.7
         Nov x 116.9 137.7 95.1 117.8 114.8 125.5 101.2 108.4 112.9 136.1 120.7 124.6
         Dec  x,p 102.1 87.2 e 94.8 103.8 91.6 118.4 83.3 100.8 91.1 117.3 131.1 94.0
 
Annual percentage change  
 
2008 + 0.0 − 0.3 − 2.7 + 0.2 − 0.3 + 1.7 − 4.1 − 1.3 + 0.4 + 3.5 + 4.3 − 4.7
2009 − 15.4 − 0.1 − 5.0 − 17.3 − 18.2 − 21.2 − 15.8 − 3.6 − 23.5 − 21.7 − 25.9 − 21.5
2010 + 10.2 + 0.2 + 3.2 + 11.6 + 14.8 + 12.8 + 9.2 + 1.8 + 16.2 + 16.5 + 10.2 + 24.8
2011 + 7.9 + 13.5 − 6.3 + 8.9 + 8.1 + 12.4 + 5.0 + 2.1 + 9.6 + 14.6 + 13.6 + 13.7
2012 − 0.8 − 1.3 + 0.6 − 0.9 − 2.2 + 0.9 − 4.3 − 1.8 − 1.8 − 2.1 + 1.6 + 0.5
 
2011          July + 10.3 + 7.9 − 7.5 + 11.9 + 9.9 + 17.7 + 13.0 + 2.3 + 11.3 + 18.8 + 19.2 + 22.3
         Aug + 8.5 + 6.7 − 4.0 + 9.6 + 8.1 + 16.4 + 0.6 − 1.1 + 8.6 + 17.0 + 14.7 + 25.0
         Sep + 5.5 + 5.2 − 6.3 + 6.4 + 6.4 + 8.9 + 3.6 + 0.2 + 6.7 + 14.9 + 11.2 + 6.7
         Oct + 4.3 + 4.6 − 6.6 + 5.1 + 3.9 + 8.3 + 2.5 + 0.3 + 5.8 + 9.2 + 7.5 + 7.3
         Nov + 4.6 + 9.6 − 4.0 + 5.0 + 3.9 + 7.9 + 1.9 + 0.0 + 5.9 + 9.5 + 8.1 + 7.0
         Dec + 1.3 + 44.0 − 16.4 + 1.4 + 2.5 + 0.9 − 0.4 + 0.2 + 3.8 + 5.5 + 0.1 − 2.7
2012          Jan + 1.1 + 6.6 − 12.5 + 2.3 + 1.0 + 5.2 − 0.6 − 1.7 + 0.9 + 3.2 + 6.7 + 7.5
         Feb − 0.4 − 21.3 − 3.3 + 1.0 − 0.5 + 4.5 − 3.5 − 3.8 + 0.7 + 1.8 + 7.0 + 4.1
         Mar 2 + 1.0 + 0.8 − 5.9 2 + 1.7 − 0.5 2 + 5.2 − 3.8 − 1.6 − 0.6 + 3.1 2 + 9.2 + 3.4
         Apr − 1.0 − 2.1 + 1.0 − 1.1 − 1.1 + 1.1 − 6.0 − 6.0 − 1.7 + 1.5 + 2.2 + 0.5
         May − 0.3 − 0.1 + 1.3 − 0.4 − 0.7 + 0.9 − 2.1 − 2.8 − 1.1 + 2.1 + 3.4 − 2.2
         June + 0.4 + 1.7 + 7.6 − 0.1 − 1.2 + 1.7 + 2.0 − 2.8 − 0.9 + 1.2 + 1.7 + 1.7
         July − 1.2 + 0.1 + 2.6 − 1.5 − 2.7 + 0.6 − 8.1 − 3.3 − 3.0 − 2.0 + 0.9 − 0.2
         Aug − 1.3 − 0.6 + 1.8 − 1.7 − 3.7 − 0.1 − 0.7 + 0.0 − 3.4 − 5.0 − 3.1 + 1.9
         Sep − 0.8 + 2.4 + 9.0 − 1.7 − 4.5 + 0.5 − 1.8 − 0.2 − 1.5 − 8.0 − 0.2 + 0.7
         Oct x − 3.0 + 0.1 + 5.7 − 3.9 − 3.9 − 4.7 − 9.1 + 0.1 − 3.9 − 6.4 − 3.0 − 7.8
         Nov x − 3.1 − 1.5 + 0.6 − 3.6 − 4.7 − 2.9 − 9.0 − 2.2 − 4.6 − 7.4 − 4.2 − 2.4
         Dec  x,p − 1.1 − 7.4 e + 4.4 − 1.1 − 4.1 + 0.3 − 6.0 + 2.5 − 2.4 − 6.7 + 1.0 + 0.4
Source of the unadjusted figures: Federal Statistical Office. *For explanatory notes, fluenced by late reports. xProvisional; adjusted in advance by the Federal Statistical
see Statistical Supplement Seasonally adjusted business statistics, Tables II.10 to Office, by way of estimates, to the results of the Quarterly Production
II.12. oUsing the Census X-12-ARIMA method, version 0.2.8. 1Share of gross value Survey. e Unadjusted figure estimated by the Federal Statistical Office. 
added at factor cost of the production sector in the base year 2005. 2Positively in-

Deutsche Bundesbank
63  Monthly Report
February 2013
X Economic conditions in Germany
 
3 Orders received by industry *
 
 
Adjusted for working-day variations  o 
Industry Intermediate goods Capital goods Consumer goods Durable goods Non-durable goods
Annual Annual Annual Annual Annual Annual
percent- percent- percent- percent- percent- percent-age age age age age age
Period 2005=100 change 2005=100 change 2005=100 change 2005=100 change 2005=100 change 2005=100 change
Total
2008 115.5 − 6.1 121.2 − 3.2 112.9 − 8.4 108.1 − 3.4 103.5 − 6.2 109.7 − 2.5
2009 87.5 − 24.2 89.3 − 26.3 85.2 − 24.5 94.8 − 12.3 88.5 − 14.5 96.9 − 11.7
2010 109.0 + 24.6 114.3 + 28.0 106.9 + 25.5 99.8 + 5.3 101.5 + 14.7 99.3 + 2.5
2011 120.5 + 10.6 125.2 + 9.5 119.7 + 12.0 104.1 + 4.3 107.4 + 5.8 103.0 + 3.7
2012 p 117.1 − 2.8 119.6 − 4.5 117.3 − 2.0 104.2 + 0.1 101.0 − 6.0 105.2 + 2.1
2011          Dec 113.0 + 1.5 106.5 − 1.1 120.4 + 3.1 92.0 + 2.9 89.5 + 1.9 92.9 + 3.3
2012          Jan 114.7 − 4.9 125.1 − 5.7 109.7 − 4.9 101.6 − 0.8 101.8 − 4.0 101.5 + 0.2
         Feb 115.9 − 5.5 122.0 − 3.7 113.5 − 6.5 105.5 − 5.0 96.5 − 8.0 108.5 − 4.1
         Mar 130.3 + 0.3 131.0 − 6.5 132.2 + 5.0 114.0 + 3.4 113.5 − 1.6 114.2 + 5.2
         Apr 117.1 − 2.3 122.6 − 4.0 116.4 − 0.9 96.2 − 3.6 100.5 − 6.7 94.7 − 2.5
         May 117.9 − 4.1 122.9 − 4.5 117.1 − 4.5 100.6 + 1.2 99.9 − 3.8 100.8 + 3.0
         June 121.2 − 6.8 122.0 − 4.6 123.5 − 9.1 102.2 + 2.3 102.4 − 3.9 102.2 + 4.7
         July 117.8 − 3.4 121.2 − 6.9 116.6 − 1.2 110.4 − 2.0 101.5 − 9.5 113.4 + 0.4
         Aug 107.4 − 3.2 112.4 − 5.3 104.3 − 2.8 106.0 + 3.3 94.1 − 2.1 110.1 + 5.0
         Sep 114.9 − 2.0 116.2 − 4.7 115.0 − 0.5 108.3 + 0.4 114.3 − 6.5 106.2 + 3.0
         Oct 117.8 − 1.0 119.2 − 2.2 118.3 − 0.4 108.2 + 1.7 104.0 − 9.9 109.6 + 6.1
         Nov 117.6 + 0.0 118.1 − 1.3 119.1 + 0.8 104.4 + 0.2 99.2 − 8.7 106.2 + 3.4
         Dec  p 112.4 − 0.5 102.7 − 3.6 121.7 + 1.1 92.6 + 0.7 84.7 − 5.4 95.2 + 2.5
From the domestic market
2008 113.1 − 4.7 121.8 − 2.3 107.5 − 7.2 103.9 − 2.9 107.1 − 2.3 102.9 − 3.0
2009 88.0 − 22.2 89.9 − 26.2 86.5 − 19.5 87.4 − 15.9 89.9 − 16.1 86.6 − 15.8
2010 104.5 + 18.8 115.9 + 28.9 97.8 + 13.1 88.6 + 1.4 93.9 + 4.4 86.9 + 0.3
2011 115.3 + 10.3 127.8 + 10.3 109.0 + 11.5 92.1 + 4.0 104.1 + 10.9 88.2 + 1.5
2012 p 109.1 − 5.4 120.3 − 5.9 103.2 − 5.3 88.7 − 3.7 96.1 − 7.7 86.2 − 2.3
2011          Dec 100.9 + 1.5 102.9 − 1.8 103.5 + 4.5 77.7 + 1.0 84.0 + 7.3 75.6 − 1.02012          Jan 110.7 − 3.3 126.6 − 5.4 100.9 − 1.9 90.2 + 2.3 101.3 + 5.9 86.6 + 0.9
         Feb 109.5 − 5.8 120.6 − 6.3 102.9 − 5.9 94.4 − 2.1 97.6 − 2.0 93.4 − 2.0
         Mar 120.8 − 2.3 131.7 − 5.4 116.0 + 0.4 97.0 + 0.9 108.7 + 1.8 93.2 + 0.6
         Apr 112.3 − 2.3 125.9 − 4.2 105.7 − 0.4 84.9 − 2.2 95.1 − 6.7 81.6 − 0.4
         May 109.9 − 13.1 123.2 − 8.5 103.3 − 18.3 84.6 − 4.1 90.9 − 9.6 82.5 − 1.9
         June 110.6 − 4.8 121.3 − 5.1 106.3 − 4.7 84.0 − 4.5 89.7 − 9.0 82.1 − 3.0
         July 111.4 − 7.2 122.3 − 10.0 105.6 − 4.7 92.7 − 5.1 92.5 − 14.0 92.7 − 1.9
         Aug 101.4 − 7.0 114.1 − 7.7 92.6 − 6.8 90.8 − 3.7 91.5 − 8.2 90.6 − 2.2
         Sep 107.6 − 5.2 117.7 − 4.8 101.8 − 4.9 92.6 − 8.7 109.4 − 13.7 87.1 − 6.5
         Oct 107.9 − 4.9 119.6 − 5.5 100.7 − 4.3 93.1 − 4.2 105.8 − 10.0 88.9 − 1.9
         Nov 109.5 − 4.5 120.9 − 3.4 103.7 − 5.3 87.9 − 6.2 97.5 − 12.0 84.8 − 3.7
         Dec  
p 97.0 − 3.9 99.8 − 3.0 99.3 − 4.1 71.7 − 7.7 73.2 − 12.9 71.2 − 5.8
From abroad
2008 117.6 − 7.3 120.6 − 4.1 116.7 − 9.1 112.6 − 4.0 99.9 − 10.0 117.1 − 2.0
2009 87.0 − 26.0 88.6 − 26.5 84.3 − 27.8 102.8 − 8.7 87.1 − 12.8 108.3 − 7.5
2010 112.9 + 29.8 112.4 + 26.9 113.3 + 34.4 111.9 + 8.9 109.1 + 25.3 112.9 + 4.2
2011 125.0 + 10.7 122.4 + 8.9 127.3 + 12.4 116.9 + 4.5 110.7 + 1.5 119.2 + 5.6
2012 p 124.1 − 0.7 118.8 − 2.9 127.2 − 0.1 120.9 + 3.4 106.0 − 4.2 126.2 + 5.9
2011          Dec 123.6 + 1.6 110.7 − 0.4 132.3 + 2.2 107.5 + 4.6 95.1 − 2.3 111.9 + 6.82012          Jan 118.2 − 6.2 123.4 − 6.2 115.9 − 6.6 113.9 − 3.3 102.4 − 12.1 118.0 − 0.3
         Feb 121.5 − 5.2 123.6 − 0.7 120.9 − 7.0 117.4 − 7.4 95.3 − 13.5 125.2 − 5.7
         Mar 138.5 + 2.4 130.1 − 7.9 143.6 + 7.7 132.4 + 5.3 118.4 − 4.4 137.3 + 8.7
         Apr 121.2 − 2.3 118.9 − 3.7 123.9 − 1.4 108.4 − 4.7 106.0 − 6.6 109.2 − 4.0
         May 124.9 + 4.2 122.6 + 0.7 126.8 + 5.8 117.8 + 5.7 109.0 + 1.9 120.9 + 6.8
         June 130.5 − 8.2 122.8 − 4.1 135.7 − 11.3 121.9 + 8.2 115.2 + 0.4 124.3 + 11.0
         July 123.3 − 0.3 120.0 − 3.0 124.4 + 1.1 129.4 + 0.4 110.6 − 5.4 136.2 + 2.3
         Aug 112.6 − 0.2 110.5 − 2.3 112.5 − 0.3 122.4 + 9.7 96.7 + 4.5 131.6 + 11.1
         Sep 121.3 + 0.6 114.4 − 4.6 124.3 + 2.2 125.2 + 8.9 119.3 + 1.4 127.3 + 11.7
         Oct 126.5 + 2.2 118.8 + 1.9 130.7 + 1.8 124.5 + 7.1 102.2 − 9.8 132.5 + 12.9
         Nov 124.6 + 3.7 115.0 + 1.2 129.9 + 4.7 122.3 + 5.8 101.0 − 5.3 129.8 + 9.3
         Dec  
p 125.8 + 1.8 105.9 − 4.3 137.5 + 3.9 115.1 + 7.1 96.4 + 1.4 121.6 + 8.7
Source of the unadjusted figures: Federal Statistical Office. *For explanatory notes, II.16. o Using the Census X-12-ARIMA method, version 0.2.8. 
see Statistical Supplement Seasonally adjusted business statistics, Tables II.14 to

Deutsche Bundesbank
64  Monthly Report
February 2013
 X Economic conditions in Germany
 
4 Orders received by construction *   
 
 
Adjusted for working-day variations  o 
Breakdown by type of construction Breakdown by client  1 
 Building    
Housing Industrial Public sector Civil Public
Total Total construction construction construction engineering Industry sector
Annual Annual Annual Annual Annual Annual Annual Annual
percent- percent- percent- percent- percent- percent- percent- percent-
age age age age age age age age
Period change change change change change change change change 2005 = 100 2005 = 100 2005 = 100 2005 = 100 2005 = 100 2005 = 100 2005 = 100 2005 = 100
2008 113.4 − 0.5 114.7 + 1.9 94.4 − 4.5 127.9 + 3.8 116.7 + 7.7 111.9 − 3.0 123.3 + 2.2 111.4 − 2.0
2009 107.4 − 5.3 100.6 − 12.3 94.1 − 0.3 100.6 − 21.3 115.4 − 1.1 114.4 + 2.2 104.9 − 14.9 115.5 + 3.7
2010 108.9 + 1.4 106.6 + 6.0 103.1 + 9.6 105.3 + 4.7 118.9 + 3.0 111.3 − 2.7 111.0 + 5.8 109.3 − 5.4
2011 117.1 + 7.5 119.9 + 12.5 124.7 + 21.0 119.9 + 13.9 109.2 − 8.2 114.0 + 2.4 125.6 + 13.2 105.3 − 3.7
 
2011          Nov 106.2 + 15.4 114.5 + 22.2 122.8 + 28.1 112.5 + 21.4 102.5 + 11.7 97.5 + 8.0 117.0 + 20.5 88.2 + 3.5
         Dec 105.2 + 17.3 113.2 + 19.2 124.0 + 26.0 109.4 + 18.5 101.3 + 5.0 96.8 + 15.0 117.8 + 23.9 84.5 + 4.7
2012          Jan 89.4 + 16.1 96.9 + 14.7 103.1 + 32.9 96.5 + 2.6 84.1 + 23.1 81.6 + 18.1 103.2 + 9.4 69.6 + 17.4
         Feb 105.1 + 11.7 109.2 + 6.7 116.3 + 19.0 106.8 − 6.6 100.9 + 39.2 100.8 + 17.8 110.3 − 3.7 95.1 + 32.1
         Mar 148.2 + 10.5 157.6 + 18.2 152.6 + 7.4 168.4 + 29.2 133.1 + 7.6 138.4 + 2.6 157.3 + 6.9 137.3 + 16.7
         Apr 135.7 + 10.3 135.3 + 13.8 147.0 + 7.9 138.2 + 23.7 99.4 − 3.8 136.0 + 6.8 136.2 + 9.0 130.4 + 13.0
         May 129.9 + 2.2 126.9 − 5.8 134.3 − 8.9 127.1 + 0.2 109.5 − 17.5 132.9 + 11.5 133.1 + 6.0 124.7 + 3.8         June 142.6 + 4.5 146.1 + 5.7 168.1 + 29.5 136.8 − 0.1 127.4 − 21.1 139.0 + 3.3 142.0 + 0.9 132.4 − 1.9
         July 135.9 − 1.0 132.3 + 6.2 143.3 + 6.5 133.8 + 15.9 102.2 − 23.0 139.7 − 7.2 135.2 + 4.2 133.5 − 8.5
         Aug 136.9 + 10.9 150.5 + 20.3 141.6 + 9.1 158.5 + 22.9 143.7 + 41.3 122.6 + 0.7 148.8 + 12.4 122.8 + 9.8         Sep 131.0 + 2.5 138.2 + 8.4 143.3 + 12.3 138.4 + 6.1 125.8 + 7.2 123.4 − 3.6 141.1 + 5.3 115.5 − 5.0
         Oct 144.3 + 27.7 140.9 + 15.0 140.9 + 10.9 145.3 + 13.3 126.1 + 35.6 147.9 + 43.5 153.6 + 19.5 136.4 + 49.1
         Nov 99.8 − 6.0 108.0 − 5.7 126.3 + 2.9 104.2 − 7.4 79.4 − 22.5 91.3 − 6.4 104.7 − 10.5 83.7 − 5.1
Source of the unadjusted figures: Federal Statistical Office. *Values exclusive of adjusted business statistics, Tables II.21. oUsing the Census X-12-ARIMA method,
value-added tax; for explanatory notes, see Statistical Supplement Seasonally version 0.2.8. 1 Excluding housing construction orders. 
 
 
5 Retail trade turnover, sales of motor vehicles *
  
Adjusted for calendar variations o 
Retail trade
of which: by enterprises main product range  1 
Construction Retail sale of
and flooring pharmaceutical Wholesale
Textiles, Information materials, and medical and retail trade
clothing and household goods, cosmetic and repair of
Food, beverages, foodwear and communications appliances, and toilet motor vehicles
Total tobacco 2 leather goods equipment furniture articles and motorcycles  3 
At current At prices in
prices year 2005 At current prices
Annual Annual Annual Annual Annual Annual Annual Annual
percent- percent- percent- percent- percent- percent- percent- percent-
age age age age age age age age
Period change change change change change change change change 2005 = 100 2005 = 100 2005 = 100 2005 = 100 2005 = 100 2005 = 100 2005 = 100 2005 = 100
2009 98.1 − 3.3 96.2 − 2.7 98.8 − 1.9 101.5 − 3.0 117.0 + 0.6 97.0 − 2.7 109.9 + 2.5 96.8 + 1.0
2010 100.4 + 2.3 97.4 + 1.2 99.6 + 0.8 106.1 + 4.5 120.5 + 3.0 99.4 + 2.5 114.2 + 3.9 92.3 − 4.6
2011 4 103.0 + 2.6 98.4 + 1.0 102.0 + 2.4 108.4 + 2.2 121.0 + 0.4 102.8 + 3.4 114.9 + 0.6 99.2 + 7.5
2012 5 104.7 + 1.7 97.7 − 0.7 104.5 + 2.5 108.6 + 0.2 119.8 − 1.0 103.7 + 0.9 114.6 − 0.3 ... ...
 
2011          Dec 123.1 + 2.0 118.2 + 0.9 120.7 + 1.8 133.3 + 2.3 188.0 + 2.9 112.3 + 6.7 132.0 + 1.0 91.6 + 2.6
2012          Jan 94.1 + 0.6 89.7 − 1.2 94.1 + 1.4 91.2 + 1.3 123.5 − 8.0 88.8 + 1.1 110.6 + 0.5 83.3 + 2.3
         Feb 91.6 + 0.2 86.0 − 2.1 93.8 + 2.4 79.8 − 4.4 104.7 − 3.6 87.9 − 0.9 107.2 + 1.1 89.8 + 0.6
         Mar 107.7 + 4.2 100.5 + 2.1 106.4 + 2.6 116.3 + 8.2 114.4 + 3.0 114.5 + 6.3 118.4 + 3.5 116.6 + 7.6
         Apr 105.9 + 2.5 98.5 + 0.6 106.5 + 2.7 112.2 − 4.2 108.8 + 6.4 109.2 + 0.0 115.9 + 3.3 105.2 + 0.9
         May 105.4 + 5.0 97.8 + 2.6 106.6 + 5.9 109.1 + 5.6 104.0 − 0.5 106.2 + 3.6 115.2 + 2.1 103.0 − 0.1
         June 103.6 + 3.3 96.4 + 0.9 104.9 + 2.1 101.5 − 1.0 116.1 + 7.6 100.5 + 1.2 112.3 + 0.4 103.8 + 2.0
         July 104.5 + 0.9 98.0 − 1.2 104.6 + 1.8 108.4 − 1.3 112.8 − 1.2 103.2 + 1.1 117.4 + 0.3 101.0 − 1.3
         Aug 101.7 + 1.6 95.0 − 0.9 103.1 + 3.1 98.5 − 0.5 110.6 − 2.4 102.0 + 2.3 110.3 − 1.7 91.1 − 0.5         Sep 103.6 + 1.7 96.2 − 0.7 101.7 + 4.0 120.0 + 8.6 113.9 +
 0.0 103.7 + 1.8 109.6 − 4.0 99.1 − 1.4
         Oct 108.8 + 0.4 100.7 − 2.1 106.1 + 1.8 125.7 − 4.6 120.0 − 1.4 110.2 − 1.3 116.7 − 0.4 105.5 − 3.9         Nov 109.2 + 2.0 101.4 − 0.5 106.0 + 2.4 110.3 − 2.2 130.4 − 1.0 110.8 + 0.2 117.2 − 1.0 101.7 − 4.2         Dec  
5 120.7 − 1.9 112.7 − 4.7 120.2 − 0.4 130.4 − 2.2 178.5 − 5.1 107.5 − 4.3 124.4 − 5.8 ... ...
Source of the unadjusted figures: Federal Statistical Office. *Excluding value-added advance returns for turnover tax (Umsatzsteuervoranmeldung) and primary data
tax;  For explanatory notes, see Statistical Supplement Seasonally adjusted business collection, before based on sample survey. 4Figures from January 2011 are provision-
statistics, Tables II.24. oUsing the Census X-12-ARIMA method, version 0.2.8. 1In al, and particularly uncertain in recent months owing to estimates for missing re-
stores. 2Including stalls and markets. 3From January 2011 based on data from ports. 5 Unadjusted figures partially estimated by the Federal Statistical Office. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
65  Monthly Report
February 2013
 X Economic conditions in Germany
 
6 Labour market * 
 
 
 
Employment 1 Employment subject to social security contributions  2 Short time workers 3 Unemployment 4 
Total of which: of which: of which:
Solely
jobs
Services exempt Recipients
excluding from of insured
Produc- temporary social unem- Unem- Temporary
tion employ- employ- contri- Cyclically ployment ploy- Vacan-
 Annual Annual sector ment ment butions 2 Total induced Total benefits ment cies, 4,6 
Thou- percentage Thou- rate 4,5 thou- percentage
sands change sands change Thousands in % sands
2008 40,348 + 1.2 27,510 + 2.1 8,659 17,958 679 4,866 102 58 3,258 1,006 7.8 389
2009 40,370 + 0.1 27,493 − 0.1 8,521 18,210 549 4,904 1,144 1,078 7 3,415 7 1,190 7 8.1 301
2010 40,603 + 0.6 27,757 + 1.0 8,426 18,438 679 4,883 503 429 3,238 1,075 7.7 3592011 41,164 + 1.4 28,440 + 2.5 8,583 18,836 798 4,865 148 100 2,976 892 7.1 4662012
8 41,613 8 + 1.1 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 2,897 902 6.8 478
2009          Q4 40,621 − 0.2 27,720 − 0.7 8,504 18,423 579 4,934 1,007 944 3,232 1,083 7.7 290
2010          Q1 40,026 − 0.2 27,307 − 0.3 8,308 18,244 561 4,854 987 804 3,601 1,327 8.6 297
         Q2 40,513 + 0.5 27,592 + 0.8 8,377 18,346 648 4,885 517 485 3,261 1,053 7.8 354         Q3 40,799 + 0.9 27,886 + 1.5 8,469 18,454 740 4,889 265 239 3,132 1,003 7.5 395         Q4 41,074 + 1.1 28,242 + 1.9 8,548 18,710 767 4,905 242 188 2,959 920 7.0 392
2011          Q1 40,613 + 1.5 27,944 + 2.3 8,428 18,578 740 4,852 291 158 3,290 1,088 7.8 412
         Q2 41,073 + 1.4 28,266 + 2.4 8,535 18,721 786 4,867 121 107 2,977 850 7.1 470         Q3 41,347 + 1.3 28,566 + 2.4 8,638 18,862 836 4,865 76 64 2,893 843 6.9 497         Q4 41,624 + 1.3 28,983 + 2.6 8,732 19,184 830 4,874 102 72 2,743 787 6.5 486
2012          Q1 41,168 + 1.4
9 28,638 9 + 2.5 9 8,623 9 19,036 9 760 4,797 201 82 3,074 998 7.3 472
         Q2 r 41,555 r + 1.2 28,860 + 2.1 8,696 19,149 773 4,798 77 65 2,876 847 10 6.8 499
         Q3 r 41,785 r + 1.1 11 29,072 11 + 1.8 11 8,768 11 19,261 11 799 11 4,813 ... 11 42 2,856 885 6.7 493
         Q4 8 41,943 8 + 0.8 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 2,782 878 6.6 446
2009          Sep 40,596 − 0.3 27,800 − 0.7 8,564 18,430 578 4,893 1,104 1,072 3,338 1,137 7.9 302
         Oct 40,699 − 0.3 27,786 − 0.8 8,534 18,449 581 4,909 1,109 1,076 3,221 1,071 7.7 298         Nov 40,691 − 0.3 27,731 − 0.7 8,497 18,434 589 4,961 982 947 3,208 1,069 7.6 291         Dec 40,474 − 0.2 27,488 − 0.5 8,400 18,341 553 4,971 929 809 3,268 1,107 7.8 281
2010          Jan 39,987 − 0.3 27,249 − 0.5 8,295 18,214 550 4,840 1,057 874 3,610 1,339 8.6 271
         Feb 39,969 − 0.3 27,230 − 0.3 8,269 18,210 560 4,814 1,031 829 3,635 1,356 8.6 298         Mar 40,121 +
 0.0 27,398 + 0.2 8,318 18,277 596 4,846 874 709 3,560 1,285 8.5 320
         Apr 
40,357 + 0.2 27,553 + 0.6 8,371 18,335 627 4,875 632 599 3,399 1,140 8.1 335
         May 40,538 + 0.5 27,667 + 1.0 8,395 18,382 665 4,898 499 467 3,236 1,036 7.7 356         June 40,645 + 0.7 27,710 + 1.2 8,414 18,365 707 4,916 420 390 3,148 983 7.5 370         July 40,663 + 0.8 27,691 + 1.4 8,419 18,320 732 4,915 313 286 3,186 1,029 7.6 391         Aug 40,750 + 0.9 27,976 + 1.6 8,493 18,508 752 4,864 244 219 3,183 1,030 7.6 397         Sep 40,984 + 1.0 28,269 + 1.7 8,573 18,700 766 4,859 237 214 3,026 948 7.2 398         Oct 41,128 + 1.1 28,296 + 1.8 8,566 18,738 769 4,886 231 209 2,941 907 7.0 401         Nov 41,142 + 1.1 28,277 + 2.0 8,562 18,723 779 4,932 215 194 2,927 903 6.9 395         Dec 40,951 + 1.2 28,033 + 2.0 8,460 18,635 743 4,931 279 162 3,011 949 7.1 380
2011          Jan 40,556 + 1.4 27,863 + 2.3 8,399 18,540 732 4,842 322 177 3,346 1,146 7.9 375
         Feb 40,584 + 1.5 27,912 + 2.5 8,416 18,560 738 4,831 305 155 3,313 1,107 7.9 418         Mar 40,698 + 1.4 28,080 + 2.5 8,477 18,632 759 4,836 246 143 3,210 1,010 7.6 442         Apr 40,921 + 1.4 28,214 + 2.4 8,518 18,703 771 4,857 133 117 3,078 907 7.3 461         May 41,098 + 1.4 28,354 + 2.5 8,559 18,768 798 4,880 122 107 2,960 839 7.0 470         June 41,199 + 1.4 28,381 + 2.4 8,580 18,753 821 4,894 110 96 2,893 804 6.9 480         July 41,212 + 1.4 28,357 + 2.4 8,591 18,712 831 4,890 81 68 2,939 859 7.0 492         Aug 41,304 + 1.4 28,658 + 2.4 8,660 18,922 843 4,840 71 59 2,945 867 7.0 497         Sep 41,524 + 1.3 28,984 + 2.5 8,746 19,149 845 4,833 76 65 2,796 802 6.6 502         Oct 41,664 + 1.3 29,039 + 2.6 8,750 19,206 839 4,851 81 70 2,737 778 6.5 500         Nov 41,691 + 1.3 29,024 + 2.6 8,744 19,207 835 4,901 85 76 2,713 769 6.4 492         Dec 41,517 + 1.4 28,787 + 2.7 8,655 19,128 784 4,909 140 72 2,780 813 6.6 467
2012          Jan 41,160 + 1.5
9 28,580 9 + 2.6 9 8,613 9 18,995 9 758 4,813 206 82 3,084 1,011 7.3 452
         Feb 41,117 + 1.3 28,580 + 2.4 8,601 19,012 752 4,743 230 87 3,110 1,028 7.4 473
         Mar 41,227 + 1.3 28,719 + 2.3 8,653 19,077 758 4,763 167 78 3,028 955 7.2 491         Apr 41,412 + 1.2 28,836 + 2.2 8,687 19,144 765 4,784 83 71 2,963 893 7.0 499         May 41,594 + 1.2 28,924 + 2.0 8,713 19,185 780 4,812 77 65 2,855 831
10 6.7 499
         June r 41,658 r + 1.1 28,921 + 1.9 8,723 19,163 792 4,834 71 58 2,809 817 6.6 499
         July r 41,686 r + 1.2 28,910 + 2.0 8,730 19,137 806 4,829 54 42 2,876 885 6.8 500
         Aug r 41,753 r + 1.1 11 29,146 11 + 1.7 11 8,786 11 19,317 11 801 11 4,795 ... 11 35 2,905 910 6.8 493
         Sep r 41,916 r + 0.9 11 29,399 11 + 1.4 11 8,858 11 19,503 11 788 11 4,795 ... 11 51 2,788 862 6.5 485
         Oct r 42,012 r + 0.8 11 29,447 11 + 1.4 11 8,855 11 19,565 11 781 11 4,828 ... 11 65 2,753 846 6.5 468
         Nov r 42,012 r + 0.8 11 29,389 11 + 1.3 11 8,828 11 19,560 11 764 11 4,866 ... 11 70 2,751 864 6.5 451
         Dec 8 41,806 8 + 0.7 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 2,840 924 6.7 421
2013          Jan ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 3,138 1,121 7.4 405
Sources: Federal Statistical Office; Federal Employment Agency. *Annual and excluding all persons taking up federal voluntary service or a year of social or
quarterly figures: averages; calculated by the Bundesbank; deviations from the offi- ecological work. 10From May 2012, calculated on the basis of new labour force fig-
cial figures are due to rounding. 1Workplace concept; averages. 2Monthly figures: ures. 11Unadjusted data estimated by the Federal Employment Agency. The esti-
end of month. 3Number within a given month. 4Mid-month level. 5Relative to the mates for Germany in 2010 and 2011 deviated from the final data by a maximum of
total civilian labour force. 6Excluding government-assisted forms of employment 0.2 % for employees subject to social contributions, by a maximum of 1.6 % for per-
and seasonal jobs, including jobs located abroad. 7From May 2009, unemployed sons solely in jobs exempt from social contributions, and, in 2011, by a maximum of
excluding persons formally on the books of private employment agencies. 8Initial 18.8 % for cyclically induced short-time work. 
preliminary estimate by the Federal Statistical Office. 9From January 2012,

Deutsche Bundesbank
66  Monthly Report
February 2013
 X Economic conditions in Germany
 
7 Prices
 
 
 
Consumer price index HWWI
Indices of Index of World Market
of which foreign trade prices Prices of Raw Materials 5 
Other Index of
durable producer
and non- prices of
durable industrial Index of
consumer Services Con- products producer
goods excluding prices of sold on the struction
excluding house House price domestic agricultural Other raw
Total Food Energy 1 rents 3 rents 3 index 2 market 4 products 4 Exports Imports Energy 6 materials  7 energy 1,2 
Period 2005 = 100 2010 = 100
Index level  
  
2008 106.6 112.7 102.5 123.6 105.8 103.5 113.0 112.7 124.3 104.8 109.9 109.7 92.0
2009 107.0 111.2 103.9 116.9 107.4 104.6 114.4 108.0 100.7 102.5 100.5 72.8 74.5
2010 108.2 113.0 104.4 121.5 108.0 105.8 115.4 109.7 114.9 106.0 108.3 100.0 100.0
2011 8 110.7 115.8 105.7 133.7 109.3 107.1 118.7 115.9 129.7 109.9 117.0 132.2 113.5
2012 8 112.9 119.5 107.5 141.3 110.5 108.4 122.0 118.3 p 135.9 111.8 119.4 141.9 110.4
 
2011          Mar 110.3 115.6 105.4 133.3 108.7 106.8 114.7 132.2 109.6 117.6 135.5 117.7
         Apr 110.5 115.6 105.6 135.0 108.9 106.9 115.9 134.5 109.9 117.9 141.0 117.8
         May 8 110.5 116.3 105.7 134.1 108.4 107.0 118.5 115.9 135.2 110.0 117.2 132.5 115.7
         June 110.6 116.3 105.5 133.5 109.3 107.1 116.0 134.1 110.0 116.5 130.5 114.0
         July 111.0 116.0 105.0 134.3 111.0 107.2 116.8 131.4 110.3 117.4 135.1 115.0
         Aug 111.0 115.4 105.4 133.2 110.8 107.3 119.3 116.5 130.2 110.2 116.6 127.5 112.9
         Sep 111.1 115.3 106.3 135.3 109.5 107.4 116.8 130.4 110.2 117.3 135.7 114.1
         Oct 111.1 115.4 106.8 135.7 109.0 107.5 117.0 129.2 110.0 116.9 132.0 105.1
         Nov 111.1 116.0 106.8 136.4 108.5 107.6 119.7 117.1 130.3 110.2 117.4 134.5 103.0
         Dec 111.9 116.7 106.6 135.4 111.3 107.7 116.6 128.7 110.3 117.7 134.9 103.7
2012          Jan 8 111.5 117.8 106.3 138.0 109.0 107.9 117.3 128.0 111.2 119.2 141.2 109.4
         Feb 112.3 118.9 106.9 139.9 110.2 108.0 121.1 117.8 130.7 111.5 120.4 148.4 109.3
         Mar 112.6 119.2 107.4 142.2 109.8 108.0 118.5 133.1 111.7 121.2 155.0 110.5
         Apr 112.8 119.1 107.6 142.8 109.9 108.1 118.7 134.1 111.9 120.6 148.6 110.2
         May 112.6 119.1 107.6 140.7 109.8 108.2 121.8 118.3 132.3 111.8 119.8 140.5 110.1
         June 112.5 120.5 107.3 138.8 110.0 108.3 117.8 130.2 111.5 118.0 124.5 108.9
         July 112.9 119.5 106.7 140.2 111.9 108.4 117.8 131.0 111.8 118.8 136.5 116.8
         Aug 113.3 119.2 106.9 143.3 111.8 108.5 122.4 118.4 134.5 112.2 120.3 149.1 114.2
         Sep 113.3 118.6 107.9 144.8 110.5 108.6 118.8 138.3 112.1 119.4 143.2 111.9
         Oct 113.3 119.2 108.5 143.2 110.2 108.7 118.8 r 140.0 111.9 118.7 139.9 108.7
         Nov 113.2 120.9 108.5 141.6 109.8 108.8 122.7 118.7 r 142.6 111.9 118.7 138.5 107.0
         Dec 114.2 122.3 108.5 140.1 113.0 108.9 118.4 p 141.6 111.5 118.1 136.2 106.5
2013          Jan ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 138.6 106.2
Annual percentage change  
  
2008 + 2.6 + 6.4 + 0.8 + 9.6 + 1.8 + 1.3 + 3.4 + 5.5 + 3.7 + 1.7 + 4.6 + 27.6 + 5.1
2009 + 0.4 − 1.3 + 1.4 − 5.4 + 1.5 + 1.1 + 1.2 − 4.2 − 19.0 − 2.2 − 8.6 − 33.6 − 19.0
2010 + 1.1 + 1.6 + 0.5 + 3.9 + 0.6 + 1.1 + 0.9 + 1.6 + 14.1 + 3.4 + 7.8 + 37.4 + 34.2
2011 8 + 2.3 + 2.5 + 1.2 + 10.0 + 1.2 + 1.2 + 2.9 + 5.7 + 12.9 + 3.7 + 8.0 + 32.2 + 13.5
2012 8 + 2.0 + 3.2 + 1.7 + 5.7 + 1.1 + 1.2 + 2.8 + 2.1 p + 4.8 + 1.7 + 2.1 + 7.3 − 2.7
 
2011          Mar + 2.1 + 2.2 + 0.9 + 10.5 + 0.7 + 1.2 + 6.2 + 25.4 + 4.9 + 11.3 + 40.4 + 31.5
         Apr + 2.4 + 1.4 + 1.1 + 10.5 + 2.1 + 1.2 + 6.4 + 26.3 + 4.2 + 9.4 + 34.2 + 21.2
         May 8 + 2.3 + 2.7 + 1.2 + 9.5 + 1.1 + 1.2 + 2.9 + 6.1 + 24.8 + 3.8 + 8.1 + 31.7 + 17.0
         June + 2.3 + 2.6 + 1.2 + 9.1 + 1.7 + 1.2 + 5.6 + 21.4 + 3.4 + 6.5 + 27.2 + 13.5
         July + 2.4 + 2.1 + 1.4 + 10.6 + 1.6 + 1.2 + 5.8 + 18.0 + 3.7 + 7.5 + 36.7 + 13.6
         Aug + 2.4 + 2.5 + 1.3 + 9.9 + 1.3 + 1.2 + 3.0 + 5.5 + 10.5 + 3.2 + 6.6 + 28.4 + 7.7
         Sep + 2.6 + 2.5 + 1.5 + 11.2 + 1.4 + 1.3 + 5.5 + 8.5 + 2.9 + 6.9 + 37.1 + 7.0
         Oct + 2.5 + 2.9 + 1.6 + 11.1 + 1.0 + 1.3 + 5.3 + 6.9 + 3.0 + 6.8 + 33.5 + 1.0
         Nov + 2.4 + 2.5 + 1.4 + 11.1 + 1.1 + 1.2 + 3.1 + 5.2 + 5.4 + 2.9 + 6.0 + 29.0 − 4.7
         Dec + 2.1 + 2.0 + 1.4 + 8.0 + 1.2 + 1.2 + 4.0 + 0.6 + 2.1 + 3.9 + 16.6 − 10.7
2012          Jan 8 + 2.1 + 2.7 + 1.7 + 7.2 + 1.0 + 1.3 + 3.4 − 0.5 + 2.1 + 3.7 + 16.6 − 9.9
         Feb + 2.3 + 2.7 + 2.0 + 8.0 + 1.3 + 1.2 + 3.2 + 3.2 − 1.2 + 2.0 + 3.5 + 17.3 − 11.0
         Mar + 2.1 + 3.1 + 1.9 + 6.7 + 1.0 + 1.1 + 3.3 + 0.7 + 1.9 + 3.1 + 14.4 − 6.1
         Apr + 2.1 + 3.0 + 1.9 + 5.8 + 0.9 + 1.1 + 2.4 − 0.3 + 1.8 + 2.3 + 5.4 − 6.5
         May + 1.9 + 2.4 + 1.8 + 4.9 + 1.3 + 1.1 + 2.8 + 2.1 − 2.1 + 1.6 + 2.2 + 6.0 − 4.8
         June + 1.7 + 3.6 + 1.7 + 4.0 + 0.6 + 1.1 + 1.6 − 2.9 + 1.4 + 1.3 − 4.6 − 4.5
         July + 1.7 + 3.0 + 1.6 + 4.4 + 0.8 + 1.1 + 0.9 − 0.3 + 1.4 + 1.2 + 1.0 + 1.6
         Aug + 2.1 + 3.3 + 1.4 + 7.6 + 0.9 + 1.1 + 2.6 + 1.6 + 3.3 + 1.8 + 3.2 + 16.9 + 1.2
         Sep + 2.0 + 2.9 + 1.5 + 7.0 + 0.9 + 1.1 + 1.7 + 6.1 + 1.7 + 1.8 + 5.5 − 1.9
         Oct + 2.0 + 3.3 + 1.6 + 5.5 + 1.1 + 1.1 + 1.5 r + 8.4 + 1.7 + 1.5 + 6.0 + 3.4
         Nov + 1.9 + 4.2 + 1.6 + 3.8 + 1.2 + 1.1 + 2.5 + 1.4 r + 9.4 + 1.5 + 1.1 + 3.0 + 3.9
         Dec + 2.1 + 4.8 + 1.8 + 3.5 + 1.5 + 1.1 + 1.5 p + 10.0 + 1.1 + 0.3 + 1.0 + 2.7
2013          Jan ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... − 1.8 − 2.9
Source: Federal Statistical Office; for the Index of World Market Prices of Raw value-added tax. 5For the euro area, in euro. 6Coal and crude oil (Brent). 7Food,
Materials: HWWI. 1Electricity, gas and other fuels. 2Bundesbank calculation based beverages and tobacco as well as industrial raw materials. 8From May 2011 and
on data provided by the Federal Statistical Office. 3Net rents. 4Excluding from January 2012, increase in tobacco tax. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
67  Monthly Report
February 2013
X Economic conditions in Germany
  
8 Households’ income *
  
  
  
Gross wages and Net wages and Monetary social Saving
salaries 1 salaries 2 Mass income 4 Saving 6 ratio 7 benefits received 3 Disposable income 5 
Annual Annual Annual Annual Annual Annual
percent- percent- percent- percent- percent- percent- Asage age age age age age percent-
Period change change change change change change age € billion € billion € billion € billion € billion € billion
2004
924.7 0.5 627.9 2.0 359.5 0.3 987.3 1.4 1,435.4 1.7 151.8 3.1 10.6
2005 922.1 − 0.3 625.5 − 0.4 359.8 0.1 985.3 − 0.2 1,463.9 2.0 156.9 3.3 10.7
2006 935.0 1.4 627.8 0.4 358.5 − 0.4 986.3 0.1 1,502.0 2.6 162.5 3.6 10.8
2007 965.9 3.3 646.2 2.9 353.6 − 1.4 999.8 1.4 1,524.8 1.5 168.1 3.4 11.0
2008 1,002.6 3.8 664.0 2.7 356.2 0.7 1,020.1 2.0 1,569.9 3.0 180.3 7.3 11.5
2009 1,004.0 0.1 668.0 0.6 383.4 7.7 1,051.4 3.1 1,561.7 − 0.5 170.1 − 5.6 10.9
2010 1,034.1 3.0 697.7 4.4 387.1 1.0 1,084.8 3.2 1,607.9 3.0 174.7 2.7 10.9
2011 1,083.9 4.8 725.8 4.0 384.0 − 0.8 1,109.8 2.3 1,660.2 3.3 172.6 − 1.2 10.4
2011          Q2 264.7 5.5 173.5 4.1 95.3 − 1.5 268.7 2.1 412.2 3.5 41.3 − 1.0 10.0
         Q3 267.6 4.6 182.9 3.7 95.8 − 0.3 278.7 2.3 421.7 3.5 37.2 − 1.2 8.8
         Q4 299.8 4.3 200.8 4.0 95.6 0.4 296.3 2.8 418.0 2.8 38.2 1.2 9.1
2012          Q1 261.9 4.0 175.1 3.8 97.8 0.4 272.9 2.6 422.0 3.3 57.8 3.2 13.7
         Q2 275.3 4.0 179.7 3.6 96.7 1.4 276.3 2.8 420.0 1.9 42.2 2.2 10.0
         Q3 277.5 3.7 188.5 3.1 97.8 2.1 286.3 2.7 427.2 1.3 37.7 1.3 8.8
Source: Federal Statistical Office; figures computed in November 2012. *Households salaries plus monetary social benefits received. 5Mass income plus operating surplus,
including non-profit institutions serving households. 1Residence concept. 2After mixed income, property income (net), other current transfers received, income of
deducting the wage tax payable on gross wages and salaries and employees’ non-profit institutions serving households, less taxes (excluding wage tax andcontributions to the social security funds. 3Social security benefits in cash from the consumption-related taxes) and other current transfers paid. Including the increase in
social security funds, central, state and local government and foreign countries, claims on company pension funds. 6Including the increase in claims on company pen-
pension payments (net), private funded social benefits, less social contributions on sion funds. 7 Saving as a percentage of disposable income. 
social benefits, consumption-related taxes and public charges. 4Net wages and
  
  
  
9 Negotiated pay rates (overall economy)
    
  
Index of negotiated wages 1 
On a monthly basis
Memo item:
Total excluding Wages and salaries
On an hourly basis Total one-off payments Basic pay rates  2 per employee 3 
Annual Annual Annual Annual Annual
Period percentage percentage percentage percentage percentage
2005=100 change 2005=100 change 2005=100 change 2005=100 change 2005=100 change
2005 100.0 0.9 100.0 1.1 100.0 0.9 100.0 1.1 100.0 0.3
2006 100.9 0.9 101.1 1.1 100.8 0.8 100.8 0.8 100.8 0.82007 102.1 1.2 102.5 1.3 102.2 1.5 102.2 1.4 102.2 1.42008 104.9 2.7 105.4 2.8 105.3 3.0 105.5 3.2 104.6 2.32009 107.0 2.0 107.5 2.0 107.6 2.2 108.0 2.4 104.6 − 0.0
2010 108.7 1.6 109.2 1.6 109.3 1.6 109.9 1.7 107.0 2.3
2011 110.5 1.7 111.1 1.7 111.3 1.8 111.8 1.7 110.6 3.32012 113.5 2.6 114.0 2.5 114.3 2.8 114.8 2.7 . .
2011          Q3 112.7 1.9 113.3 2.0 113.5 1.9 112.3 2.0 108.9 3.2
         Q4 123.1 1.8 123.8 1.8 124.2 2.1 112.6 2.1 120.8 2.9
2012          Q1 104.6 1.9 105.1 1.9 105.4 2.4 113.4 2.6 106.7 2.6
         Q2 106.5 2.7 107.0 2.6 107.4 2.9 114.6 2.7 111.3 2.8         Q3 115.9 2.9 116.4 2.8 116.8 2.9 115.5 2.9 111.8 2.7         Q4 126.7 2.9 127.3 2.8 127.7 2.8 115.8 2.8 . .
2012          June 106.2 2.9 106.6 2.8 107.0 2.9 115.2 2.9 . .
         July 134.7 3.1 135.2 3.0 135.5 2.9 115.4 2.9 . .
         Aug 106.5 2.6 107.0 2.5 107.4 2.9 115.6 2.9 . .
         Sep 106.6 2.8 107.1 2.7 107.5 2.9 115.6 2.9 . .
         Oct 106.7 2.9 107.1 2.8 107.5 2.8 115.7 2.8 . .
         Nov 164.1 2.8 164.8 2.7 165.4 2.7 115.8 2.8 . .
         Dec 109.5 3.1 110.0 3.0 110.2 2.9 115.9 2.8 . .
1Current data are normally revised on account of additional reports. 2Excluding and retirement provisions). 3Source: Federal Statistical Office; figures computed in
one-off payments and covenants (capital formation benefits, special payments, such November 2012. 
as annual bonuses, holiday pay, Christmas bonuses (13
thmonthly salary payment)

Deutsche Bundesbank
68  Monthly Report
February 2013
XI External sector
 
1 Major items of the balance of payments of the euro area *
 
 
€ million
2012
Item 2009 2010 2011 Q1 Q2 Q3 Sep Oct Nov
Current account − 13,279 + 3,113 + 12,477 − 4,623 + 14,930 + 41,034 + 11,766 + 11,635 + 19,800 A
1 Goods
Exports (fob) 1,302,619 1,566,821 1,775,459 464,026 478,957 479,058 158,472 173,638 167,694
Imports (fob) 1,271,954 1,548,575 1,766,240 457,739 453,790 448,510 148,029 161,129 151,413
Balance + 30,664 + 18,249 + 9,216 + 6,287 + 25,167 + 30,548 + 10,442 + 12,509 + 16,281
2 Services
Receipts 499,878 541,708 576,638 137,146 154,741 164,616 53,565 52,944 49,529
Expenditure 454,982 487,402 509,421 121,869 129,338 137,796 44,569 46,008 43,947
Balance + 44,896 + 54,309 + 67,215 + 15,277 + 25,403 + 26,821 + 8,997 + 6,936 + 5,582
3 Income + 8,959 + 40,368 + 42,963 + 12,993 − 10,171 + 13,152 + 3,382 + 1,965 + 4,011
4 Current transfers
Transfers from non-residents 93,314 86,982 94,506 25,789 20,874 16,849 5,610 6,163 8,645
Transfers to non-residents 191,111 196,788 201,426 64,968 46,343 46,335 16,665 15,938 14,720
Balance − 97,796 − 109,809 − 106,920 − 39,180 − 25,469 − 29,486 − 11,055 − 9,776 − 6,075
Capital account + 8,286 + 7,819 + 11,468 + 1,976 + 1,092 + 3,475 + 1,524 + 1,814 + 1,642 B
Financial account (net capital exports: − + 15,140 + 5,501 − 45,346 + 3,602 − 20,423 − 55,048 − 24,824 − 11,957 − 26,127 C)
1 Direct investment − 67,043 − 95,045 − 154,850 − 3,478 − 16,305 − 25,677 − 34,582 − 10,587 + 14,108
By resident units abroad − 352,907 − 356,732 − 407,975 − 75,563 − 65,692 − 61,257 − 22,754 − 20,707 + 6,214
By non-resident units in the euro area + 285,862 + 261,685 + 253,131 + 72,085 + 49,387 + 35,580 − 11,828 + 10,120 + 7,894
2 Portfolio investment + 247,306 + 124,127 + 274,005 − 71,028 + 94,166 − 9,257 + 130 + 45,846 + 12,108
By resident units abroad − 96,046 − 135,931 + 51,899 − 125,601 + 58,912 − 41,312 − 27,110 + 240 − 36,679
Equity − 50,960 − 77,473 + 70,995 − 21,163 + 25,906 − 5,606 − 8,480 − 6,523 + 82
Bonds and notes − 38,362 − 104,518 + 11,531 − 58,997 + 7,133 − 35,309 − 11,003 − 1,523 − 17,512
Money market instruments − 6,723 + 46,062 − 30,629 − 45,439 + 25,873 − 398 − 7,627 + 8,286 − 19,249
By non-resident units in the euro area + 343,351 + 260,057 + 222,105 + 54,572 + 35,253 + 32,055 + 27,240 + 45,606 + 48,787
Equity + 87,570 + 125,875 + 99,741 + 39,753 − 969 + 19,796 + 20,948 + 28,387 + 11,789
Bonds and notes + 142,974 + 177,799 + 166,187 + 5,228 + 28,560 + 47,918 + 29,455 + 11,405 + 41,387
Money market instruments + 112,808 − 43,620 − 43,824 + 9,592 + 7,662 − 35,658 − 23,163 + 5,815 − 4,389
3 Financial derivatives + 19,034 + 17,764 − 4,860 − 6,678 − 9,061 − 603 − 1,803 + 3,955 + 10,159
4 Other investment − 188,749 − 30,827 − 149,463 + 86,893 − 80,270 − 19,394 + 10,462 − 48,728 − 61,465
Eurosystem − 232,898 + 11,817 + 137,307 − 72,768 + 75,794 + 14,840 − 7,694 − 17,146 + 4,062
General government + 5,413 + 23,941 + 72,896 + 17,589 + 767 + 4,764 + 3,120 − 5,304 − 2,767
MFIs (excluding the Eurosystem) + 67,603 − 19,006 − 338,625 + 153,651 − 117,282 − 48,299 + 8,836 − 16,727 − 51,539
Long-term − 21,558 + 47,237 − 17,185 + 12,919 − 18,511 − 4,337 − 7,839 + 10,115 + 1,811
Short-term + 89,165 − 66,246 − 321,439 + 140,731 − 98,770 − 43,964 + 16,675 − 26,841 − 53,350
Other sectors − 28,869 − 47,577 − 21,043 − 11,580 − 39,552 + 9,301 + 6,199 − 9,551 − 11,221
5 Reserve assets (Increase: −) + 4,595 − 10,516 − 10,177 − 2,108 − 8,953 − 118 + 968 − 2,441 − 1,037
Errors and omissions − 10,146 − 16,435 + 21,401 − 955 + 4,401 + 10,540 + 11,534 − 1,492 + 4,686 D
* Source: European Central Bank. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
69  Monthly Report
February 2013
XI External sector
 
2 Major items of the balance of payments of the Federal Republic of Germany
(balances)
 
 
Current account Capital trans- Financial account
fers andacquisition/ of whichdisposal of Change in
Supple- non- reserve assets
Balance mentary produced at trans- Errorson current Foreign trade Current non-financial action and
Period account trade 
1 items 2 Services 3 Income transfers assets Total 4 value 5 omissions
DM million
1999 − 50,528 + 127,542 − 15,947 − 90,036 − 24,363 − 47,724 − 301 − 20,332 + 24,517 + 71,161
2000 − 69,351 + 115,645 − 17,742 − 95,848 − 16,956 − 54,450 + 13,345 + 66,863 + 11,429 − 10,8572001 − 23 + 186,771 − 14,512 − 97,521 − 22,557 − 52,204 − 756 − 23,068 + 11,797 + 23,847
€ million
1999
− 25,834 + 65,211 − 8,153 − 46,035 − 12,457 − 24,401 − 154 − 10,396 + 12,535 + 36,384
2000 − 35,459 + 59,128 − 9,071 − 49,006 − 8,670 − 27,840 + 6,823 + 34,187 + 5,844 − 5,5512001 − 12 + 95,495 − 7,420 − 49,862 − 11,533 − 26,692 − 387 − 11,794 + 6,032 + 12,1932002 + 42,669 + 132,788 − 8,552 − 35,728 − 18,888 − 26,951 − 212 − 38,448 + 2,065 − 4,0102003 + 40,525 + 129,921 − 11,148 − 34,506 − 15,677 − 28,064 + 311 − 61,758 + 445 + 20,921
2004 + 102,368 + 156,096 − 16,470 − 29,375 + 19,681 − 27,564 + 435 − 122,984 + 1,470 + 20,181
2005 + 112,591 + 158,179 − 14,057 − 27,401 + 24,391 − 28,522 − 1,369 − 129,635 + 2,182 + 18,4132006 + 144,739 + 159,048 − 12,888 − 17,346 + 44,460 − 28,536 − 258 − 175,474 + 2,934 + 30,9922007 + 180,914 + 195,348 − 9,816 − 14,852 + 42,918 − 32,685 + 104 − 210,151 − 953 + 29,1332008 + 153,633 + 178,297 − 13,628 − 10,258 + 32,379 − 33,157 − 210 − 173,910 − 2,008 + 20,487
2009 + 140,558 + 138,697 − 15,052 − 8,049 + 58,120 − 33,158 + 29 − 155,440 + 3,200 + 14,853
2010 + 150,668 + 154,863 − 11,613 − 4,258 + 49,864 − 38,187 − 586 − 147,439 − 1,613 − 2,6432011 + 147,181 + 158,702 − 18,852 − 7,584 + 48,415 − 33,501 + 641 − 154,487 − 2,836 + 6,6652012 
p + 166,950 + 188,114 − 29,181 − 6,709 + 51,795 − 37,069 + 80 − 260,068 − 1,297 + 93,038
2010          Q1 + 34,259 + 37,736 − 2,522 − 22 + 13,233 − 14,165 + 262 − 28,714 − 651 − 5,807         Q2 + 29,466 + 37,249 − 2,885 − 1,708 + 3,198 − 6,388 − 434 − 29,669 − 801 + 638         Q3 + 33,665 + 38,895 − 2,953 − 6,174 + 14,666 − 10,770 + 9 − 28,646 + 344 − 5,028         Q4 + 53,278 + 40,982 − 3,254 + 3,646 + 18,767 − 6,864 − 423 − 60,410 − 506 + 7,555
2011          Q1 + 40,534 + 40,902 − 1,811 + 1,792 + 13,169 − 13,518 + 958 − 63,197 − 1,393 + 21,705
         Q2 + 26,326 + 38,562 − 4,637 − 3,022 + 100 − 4,677 − 278 − 46,097 − 438 + 20,050         Q3 + 33,407 + 39,609 − 6,161 − 6,836 + 16,414 − 9,619 + 115 − 16,218 − 639 − 17,303         Q4 + 46,915 + 39,630 − 6,243 + 483 + 18,732 − 5,688 − 153 − 28,974 − 366 − 17,787
2012          Q1 + 41,067 + 45,418 − 4,498 − 423 + 15,677 − 15,107 + 222 − 61,391 − 963 + 20,103
         Q2 
r + 37,620 + 47,994 − 9,048 − 149 + 5,533 − 6,711 + 394 − 58,332 − 769 + 20,318
         Q3 r + 41,549 + 50,078 − 7,704 − 7,086 + 15,626 − 9,365 + 78 − 56,377 − 59 + 14,749
         Q4 p + 46,714 + 44,624 − 7,931 + 949 + 14,959 − 5,886 − 614 − 83,969 + 494 + 37,869
2010          July + 10,363 + 12,967 − 1,096 − 2,392 + 4,604 − 3,720 + 423 + 19,095 + 20 − 29,880         Aug + 6,641 + 9,456 − 1,091 − 3,085 + 4,797 − 3,436 − 112 − 19,738 + 119 + 13,209         Sep + 16,661 + 16,473 − 765 − 697 + 5,264 − 3,613 − 302 − 28,002 + 205 + 11,643
         Oct + 15,025 + 14,518 − 782 − 591 + 5,582 − 3,701 − 220 − 96 + 234 − 14,708
         Nov + 15,965 + 13,884 − 1,110 + 1,104 + 6,096 − 4,008 − 169 − 29,202 + 81 + 13,406         Dec + 22,288 + 12,580 − 1,361 + 3,133 + 7,090 + 846 − 34 − 31,112 − 820 + 8,858
2011          Jan + 8,427 + 9,926 − 1,024 + 149 + 3,417 − 4,042 + 541 − 11,110 − 182 + 2,142
         Feb + 10,761 + 12,090 + 254 + 417 + 4,568 − 6,568 + 528 − 20,926 − 23 + 9,636         Mar + 21,346 + 18,886 − 1,042 + 1,226 + 5,184 − 2,908 − 110 − 31,161 − 1,188 + 9,926
         Apr + 7,409 + 10,835 − 1,811 − 850 + 771 − 1,536 − 198 − 21,317 − 563 + 14,106
         May + 7,607 + 14,833 − 1,034 + 159 − 5,779 − 574 − 65 − 17,656 + 24 + 10,115         June + 11,310 + 12,893 − 1,793 − 2,331 + 5,108 − 2,567 − 16 − 7,124 + 101 − 4,170
         July + 8,428 + 10,555 − 1,420 − 2,461 + 5,216 − 3,462 − 139 + 7,188 − 428 − 15,476
         Aug + 8,024 + 11,740 − 2,228 − 4,159 + 5,712 − 3,042 + 383 − 15,547 + 109 + 7,140         Sep + 16,955 + 17,314 − 2,512 − 217 + 5,485 − 3,115 − 129 − 7,859 − 320 − 8,967
         Oct + 9,947 + 11,000 − 1,945 − 1,425 + 5,781 − 3,465 − 178 − 10,260 + 55 + 491
         Nov + 16,062 + 16,110 − 1,802 − 46 + 5,404 − 3,603 + 119 − 7,577 + 263 − 8,604         Dec + 20,906 + 12,520 − 2,496 + 1,954 + 7,547 + 1,380 − 94 − 11,137 − 684 − 9,674
2012          Jan + 9,482 + 13,188 − 1,384 − 2,205 + 4,169 − 4,287 − 27 − 14,628 − 140 + 5,173
         Feb + 11,691 + 14,864 − 1,925 + 402 + 5,632 − 7,283 + 240 − 12,706 − 547 + 776         Mar + 19,894 + 17,365 − 1,188 + 1,380 + 5,875 − 3,537 + 9 − 34,056 − 276 + 14,153
         Apr  
r + 11,019 + 14,468 − 2,280 + 629 + 922 − 2,720 + 310 − 21,193 − 581 + 9,864
         May r + 8,093 + 15,559 − 4,075 − 1,019 − 726 − 1,646 + 239 − 19,978 − 207 + 11,647
         June r + 18,508 + 17,967 − 2,693 + 241 + 5,337 − 2,345 − 155 − 17,160 + 19 − 1,193
         July r + 11,685 + 16,887 − 2,866 − 4,937 + 5,114 − 2,513 − 224 − 4,600 + 48 − 6,861
         Aug  r + 12,525 + 16,291 − 2,552 − 2,439 + 4,852 − 3,627 + 179 − 20,566 − 389 + 7,862
         Sep  r + 17,340 + 16,900 − 2,285 + 290 + 5,660 − 3,225 + 123 − 31,211 + 281 + 13,748
         Oct  r + 13,162 + 15,711 − 2,606 − 1,873 + 5,230 − 3,301 − 196 − 21,426 − 176 + 8,460
         Nov + 16,210 + 16,940 − 2,672 + 182 + 4,968 − 3,207 + 165 − 26,779 + 308 + 10,404
         Dec  p + 17,342 + 11,973 − 2,654 + 2,640 + 4,761 + 622 − 583 − 35,764 + 362 + 19,005
1Special trade according to the official foreign trade statistics: imports cif, exports deduction of goods returned. 3Excluding the expenditure on freight and insurance
fob. From January 2007 onwards, excluding supplies of goods for/after included in the cif import figure. 4Financial account balance including change in
repair/maintenance, which, up to December 2006, were deducted via supplementary reserve assets. Capital exports: − . 5 Increase: − . 
trade items. 2Inter alia warehouse transactions for the account of residents and

Deutsche Bundesbank
70  Monthly Report
February 2013
 XI External sector
 
 3 Foreign trade (special trade) of the Federal Republic of Germany,
 by country and group of countries *
 
 € million
 2012
Country / group of countries  2009  2010  2011 Jan / Nov Aug  r Sep r Oct r Nov r Dec p 
All countries 1 Exports 803,312 951,959 1,061,225 1,018,369 90,154 91,737 98,426 94,039 78,981
Imports 664,615 797,097 902,523 842,228 73,863 74,837 82,715 77,099 67,008Balance + 138,697 + 154,863 + 158,702 + 176,141 + 16,291 + 16,900 + 15,711 + 16,940 + 11,973
I Exports 585,826 675,024 752,295 702,790 59,981 63,317 68,032 64,833 ... European countries
Imports 463,721 541,720 622,870 588,602 49,262 52,459 58,291 54,152 ...
Balance + 122,105 + 133,305 + 129,425 + 114,188 + 10,719 + 10,858 + 9,741 + 10,681 ...
Exports 500,654 570,879 627,698 581,445 48,794 52,569 56,321 52,957 ... 1 EU member states (27)
Imports 380,323 444,375 505,363 472,484 39,728 41,985 45,685 44,226 ...
Balance + 120,331 + 126,504 + 122,335 + 108,961 + 9,066 + 10,584 + 10,636 + 8,731 ...
Euro-area (17) Exports 343,701 388,103 420,522 382,259 30,544 34,491 36,991 34,903 ...
countries Imports 258,729 300,135 338,330 316,600 26,632 27,708 30,345 29,678 ...
Balance + 84,972 + 87,968 + 82,192 + 65,659 + 3,912 + 6,783 + 6,646 + 5,225 ...
of which
Austria Exports 46,093 52,156 57,671 53,818 4,634 4,976 5,386 4,961 ...
Imports 27,565 33,013 37,028 34,553 2,877 3,165 3,441 3,140 ...
Balance + 18,528 + 19,144 + 20,643 + 19,265 + 1,757 + 1,811 + 1,946 + 1,821 ...
Belgium and Exports 46,262 50,545 53,161 46,380 4,016 4,115 4,476 4,527 ...
Luxembourg Imports 30,694 36,026 41,302 38,225 3,239 3,409 3,676 3,465 ...
Balance + 15,568 + 14,519 + 11,859 + 8,155 + 776 + 706 + 800 + 1,062 ...
France Exports 81,304 89,582 101,444 97,478 7,186 8,982 9,616 8,944 ...
Imports 53,338 60,673 65,948 60,226 5,146 5,207 5,558 5,826 ...
Balance + 27,966 + 28,909 + 35,496 + 37,253 + 2,040 + 3,776 + 4,058 + 3,118 ...
Italy Exports 50,620 58,589 62,044 52,079 3,570 4,594 4,883 4,603 ...
Imports 37,197 41,977 47,844 45,682 3,473 3,897 4,390 4,090 ...
Balance + 13,423 + 16,611 + 14,200 + 6,397 + 97 + 696 + 493 + 513 ...
Netherlands Exports 53,195 62,978 69,423 65,757 5,752 6,005 6,325 5,732 ...
Imports 55,583 67,205 81,804 79,482 7,210 6,808 7,850 7,500 ...
Balance − 2,388 − 4,227 − 12,382 − 13,725 − 1,458 − 804 − 1,525 − 1,767 ...
Spain Exports 31,281 34,222 34,811 29,014 2,101 2,480 2,713 2,670 ...
Imports 18,959 21,955 22,491 20,681 1,435 1,741 1,865 2,040 ...
Balance + 12,322 + 12,267 + 12,320 + 8,332 + 666 + 739 + 848 + 630 ...
Other EU member Exports 156,953 182,775 207,176 199,186 18,250 18,079 19,330 18,055 ...
states Imports 121,594 144,240 167,033 155,884 13,096 14,277 15,340 14,548 ...
Balance + 35,359 + 38,536 + 40,143 + 43,302 + 5,154 + 3,801 + 3,990 + 3,506 ...
of which
United Exports 53,240 58,666 65,570 67,041 6,372 6,075 6,269 6,017 ...
Kingdom Imports 32,452 37,923 44,741 40,321 3,146 3,830 3,688 3,875 ...
Balance + 20,787 + 20,743 + 20,829 + 26,720 + 3,226 + 2,245 + 2,581 + 2,142 ...
Exports 85,172 104,145 124,597 121,344 11,187 10,748 11,711 11,876 ... 2 Other European
Imports 83,398 97,345 117,507 116,118 9,534 10,474 12,606 9,925 ... countries
Balance + 1,774 + 6,800 + 7,090 + 5,226 + 1,653 + 274 − 895 + 1,950 ...
of which
Switzerland Exports 35,510 41,659 47,875 45,463 3,982 3,979 4,362 4,263 ...
Imports 28,096 32,507 36,996 35,273 3,105 3,205 3,577 3,361 ...
Balance + 7,414 + 9,152 + 10,879 + 10,191 + 877 + 775 + 784 + 902 ...
II Exports 216,466 276,635 308,193 314,455 29,769 28,342 30,185 29,098 ... Non-European
Imports 200,303 255,377 279,653 253,626 24,601 22,378 24,424 22,948 ... countries
Balance + 16,163 + 21,258 + 28,541 + 60,829 + 5,168 + 5,964 + 5,761 + 6,150 ...
Exports 17,412 19,968 20,717 19,904 1,898 1,799 1,900 1,832 ... 1 Africa
Imports 14,235 17,040 21,944 21,569 1,945 1,983 2,159 2,165 ...
Balance + 3,177 + 2,929 − 1,227 − 1,665 − 46 − 184 − 259 − 333 ...
Exports 78,727 99,464 110,424 119,667 11,397 11,160 11,694 11,113 ... 2 America
Imports 60,498 71,680 80,568 74,005 7,085 6,159 7,156 6,472 ...
Balance + 18,229 + 27,784 + 29,856 + 45,662 + 4,313 + 5,001 + 4,538 + 4,641 ...
of which
Exports 54,356 65,574 73,776 80,905 7,623 7,975 8,032 7,563 ... United States
Imports 39,283 45,241 48,531 46,919 4,370 3,996 4,659 4,165 ...
Balance + 15,074 + 20,333 + 25,244 + 33,986 + 3,253 + 3,979 + 3,373 + 3,399 ...
Exports 113,179 148,231 167,574 164,883 15,484 14,532 15,627 15,322 ... 3 Asia
Imports 122,823 163,523 173,115 154,227 15,246 13,876 14,840 13,992 ...
Balance − 9,644 − 15,293 − 5,541 + 10,657 + 238 + 656 + 787 + 1,330 ...
of which
Middle East Exports 23,598 28,138 28,711 29,438 2,934 2,910 2,799 2,922 ...
Imports 5,506 6,878 8,874 7,183 914 624 673 566 ...
Balance + 18,092 + 21,260 + 19,837 + 22,255 + 2,021 + 2,286 + 2,127 + 2,356 ...
Japan Exports 10,875 13,149 15,115 15,906 1,431 1,499 1,565 1,421 ...
Imports 18,946 22,475 23,595 20,385 1,738 1,882 1,824 1,916 ...
Balance − 8,071 − 9,326 − 8,480 − 4,478 − 307 − 382 − 259 − 495 ...
Exports 37,273 53,791 64,863 61,999 5,501 5,174 5,607 5,451 ... People‘s Republic
Imports 56,706 77,270 79,528 71,584 7,206 6,738 7,024 6,537 ... of China 
2 
Balance − 19,434 − 23,479 − 14,665 − 9,585 − 1,705 − 1,564 − 1,418 − 1,086 ...
Exports 28,606 38,183 41,569 41,741 3,951 3,631 4,073 4,015 ... Emerging markets
Imports 28,338 39,562 39,546 35,106 3,323 2,968 3,489 3,266 ... in South-East Asia 3 
Balance + 268 − 1,379 + 2,023 + 6,635 + 628 + 662 + 584 + 749 ...
Exports 7,147 8,972 9,479 10,000 989 851 964 831 ... 4 Oceania and
Imports 2,747 3,134 4,026 3,825 325 360 269 319 ... polar regions
Balance + 4,401 + 5,838 + 5,453 + 6,175 + 665 + 491 + 695 + 513 ...
 
*Source: Federal Statistical Office. Exports (fob) by country of destination, imports other data not classifiable by region. 2Excluding Hong Kong. 3Brunei Darussalam,
(cif) by country of origin. Individual countries and groups of countries according to Hong Kong, Indonesia, Malaysia, Philippines, Republic of Korea, Singapore, Taiwan
the current position. 1Including fuel and other supplies for ships and aircraft and and Thailand. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
71  Monthly Report
February 2013
XI External sector
 
4 Services and income of the Federal Republic of Germany
(balances)
 
€ million
Services
Other services
of which
 
Patents
Compen- Services  of Construction
Trans- Financial and sation of Investment Government self-employed and  assembly
Period Total Travel 1 services licences Total income portation 2 services  3 persons  4 work,  repairs employees 5 
2008 − 10,258 − 34,718 + 8,319 + 3,936 − 1,313 + 2,376 + 11,142 − 1,641 + 3,229 + 216 + 32,164
2009 − 8,049 − 33,341 + 6,940 + 4,276 + 136 + 2,370 + 11,570 − 1,266 + 2,966 + 764 + 57,3562010 − 4,258 − 32,778 + 7,359 + 4,175 + 1,153 + 2,456 + 13,376 − 1,152 + 3,405 + 1,392 + 48,4722011 − 7,584 − 33,782 + 7,475 + 3,702 + 843 + 2,546 + 11,632 − 1,221 + 3,212 + 1,596 + 46,8202012 − 6,709 − 34,484 + 8,659 + 5,270 + 1,107 + 2,555 + 10,184 − 1,541 + 1,887 + 1,614 + 50,181
2011          Q2 − 3,022 − 8,234 + 2,199 + 485 + 264 + 679 + 1,585 − 264 + 735 + 310 − 210
         Q3 − 6,836 − 14,629 + 1,807 + 942 − 172 + 691 + 4,525 − 325 + 730 − 212 + 16,626         Q4 + 483 − 5,936 + 1,929 + 1,552 + 402 + 597 + 1,940 − 386 + 952 + 503 + 18,229
2012          Q1 − 423 − 5,344 + 1,725 + 1,163 − 503 + 632 + 1,904 − 357 + 540 + 1,032 + 14,646
         Q2 − 149 − 8,228 + 2,476 + 1,054 + 144 + 674 + 3,731 − 341 + 446 + 310 + 5,223         Q3 − 7,086 − 14,557 + 2,436 + 1,986 + 724 + 680 + 1,645 − 525 + 444 − 219 + 15,845         Q4 + 949 − 6,356 + 2,022 + 1,067 + 742 + 569 + 2,905 − 319 + 457 + 491 + 14,468
2012          Feb + 402 − 1,804 + 566 + 311 + 146 + 198 + 985 − 94 + 133 + 335 + 5,298
         Mar + 1,380 − 1,914 + 647 + 388 − 6 + 237 + 2,028 − 136 + 324 + 361 + 5,514
         Apr + 629 − 1,887 + 764 + 481 + 66 + 204 + 1,002 − 110 + 147 + 91 + 831
         May − 1,019 − 2,349 + 842 + 335 + 104 + 231 − 181 − 157 + 82 + 108 − 834         June + 241 − 3,992 + 870 + 238 − 26 + 240 + 2,911 − 74 + 216 + 111 + 5,226
         July − 4,937 − 5,175 + 948 + 290 + 134 + 238 − 1,372 − 224 + 72 − 61 + 5,175
         Aug − 2,439 − 5,512 + 806 + 1,405 + 363 + 227 + 272 − 241 + 134 − 73 + 4,926         Sep + 290 − 3,870 + 682 + 292 + 226 + 215 + 2,745 − 59 + 238 − 85 + 5,745
         Oct − 1,873 − 4,059 + 678 + 280 + 277 + 210 + 740 − 104 + 68 + 130 + 5,101
         Nov + 182 − 1,547 + 728 + 309 + 276 + 175 + 242 − 96 + 96 + 144 + 4,823         Dec + 2,640 − 750 + 616 + 479 + 189 + 184 + 1,923 − 118 + 293 + 217 + 4,544
1From 2001 expenditure is based on household samples. 2Excluding the other technical services, research and development, commercial services, etc.
expenditure on freight included in the cif import figure. 3Including the receipts 5 Wages and salaries. 
from foreign military agencies for goods and services supplied. 4Engineering and
5 Current transfers of the Federal Republic of Germany 6 Capital transfers
(balances) (balances)
€ million € million
Public 1 Private 1 
International
organisations 2 
 
of which Other Other
European current Workers’ current
Period Total Total Total Communities Total remittances transfers Total  4 Public 1 Private 1 transfers 3 
2008 − 33,157 − 16,834 − 18,746 − 16,644 + 1,911 − 16,322 − 3,079 − 13,243 − 210 − 1,853 + 1,642
2009 − 33,158 − 19,041 − 19,041 − 16,578 + 0 − 14,116 − 2,995 − 11,122 + 29 − 1,704 + 1,7332010 − 38,187 − 23,514 − 22,844 − 19,474 − 670 − 14,673 − 3,035 − 11,638 − 586 − 2,039 + 1,4532011 − 33,501 − 20,173 − 22,158 − 19,105 + 1,985 − 13,328 − 2,977 − 10,351 + 641 − 2,323 + 2,9642012 − 37,069 − 24,306 − 24,273 − 21,112 − 33 − 12,763 − 3,080 − 9,683 + 80 − 2,651 + 2,731
2011          Q2 − 4,677 − 754 − 4,833 − 4,210 + 4,079 − 3,922 − 744 − 3,178 − 278 − 475 + 197
         Q3 − 9,619 − 6,730 − 6,145 − 5,458 − 585 − 2,889 − 744 − 2,145 + 115 − 484 + 599         Q4 − 5,688 − 2,387 − 1,586 − 867 − 801 − 3,300 − 744 − 2,556 − 153 − 958 + 804
2012          Q1 − 15,107 − 11,976 − 11,245 − 10,137 − 731 − 3,131 − 770 − 2,361 + 222 − 401 + 623
         Q2 − 6,711 − 3,416 − 6,102 − 5,129 + 2,686 − 3,295 − 770 − 2,525 + 394 − 375 + 769         Q3 − 9,365 − 6,115 − 5,520 − 5,034 − 595 − 3,250 − 770 − 2,480 + 78 − 556 + 634         Q4 − 5,886 − 2,799 − 1,407 − 812 − 1,393 − 3,087 − 770 − 2,317 − 614 − 1,320 + 705
2012          Feb − 7,283 − 6,287 − 5,903 − 5,584 − 385 − 996 − 257 − 739 + 240 − 116 + 356
         Mar − 3,537 − 2,526 − 2,362 − 2,155 − 164 − 1,011 − 257 − 755 + 9 − 186 + 195
         Apr − 2,720 − 1,707 − 2,662 − 2,157 + 955 − 1,013 − 257 − 757 + 310 − 119 + 429
         May − 1,646 − 431 − 2,057 − 1,906 + 1,626 − 1,215 − 257 − 958 + 239 − 113 + 351         June − 2,345 − 1,278 − 1,383 − 1,067 + 105 − 1,066 − 257 − 810 − 155 − 144 − 11
         July − 2,513 − 1,402 − 1,115 − 956 − 287 − 1,111 − 257 − 854 − 224 − 158 − 65
         Aug − 3,627 − 2,484 − 2,160 − 1,956 − 324 − 1,144 − 257 − 887 + 179 − 228 + 407         Sep − 3,225 − 2,229 − 2,245 − 2,121 + 16 − 996 − 257 − 739 + 123 − 169 + 292
         Oct − 3,301 − 2,418 − 1,990 − 1,811 − 428 − 882 − 257 − 626 − 196 − 413 + 217
         Nov − 3,207 − 2,193 − 1,547 − 1,456 − 646 − 1,014 − 257 − 758 + 165 − 259 + 424         Dec + 622 + 1,812 + 2,130 + 2,455 − 318 − 1,190 − 257 − 933 − 583 − 648 + 64
1The classification of “public” and “private” transfers depends on the sector to transfers). 3Payments to developing countries, pension payments, tax revenue and
which the participating domestic body belongs. 2Current contributions to the refunds, etc. 4 Where identifiable; in particular, debt forgiveness. 
budgets of international organisations and to the EU budget (excluding capital

Deutsche Bundesbank
72  Monthly Report
February 2013
XI External sector
 
7 Financial account of the Federal Republic of Germany
 
 
€ million
2012
Item 2010 2011 2012 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 Oct Nov Dec
I Net German investment abroad
(Increase/capital exports: −) − 408,695 − 223,211 − 365,586 − 269,909 − 119,680 − 18,382 + 42,385 − 54,417 − 5,973 + 102,775
1 Direct investment 1 − 82,543 − 39,110 − 46,555 − 27,025 − 9,445 − 5,788 − 4,297 − 7,715 + 5,102 − 1,683
Equity capital − 49,646 − 19,830 − 38,447 − 12,576 − 807 − 10,651 − 14,414 − 4,840 − 1,181 − 8,393
Reinvested earnings 2 − 19,287 − 30,162 − 17,470 − 9,032 − 2,790 − 4,723 − 925 − 2,587 + 589 + 1,072
Other capital transactions
of German direct investors − 13,609 + 10,882 + 9,363 − 5,417 − 5,848 + 9,586 + 11,042 − 288 + 5,694 + 5,637
2 Portfolio investment − 173,826 − 25,215 − 111,593 − 39,361 + 392 − 26,770 − 45,854 − 14,376 − 13,089 − 18,389
Shares 3 − 1,227 + 2,151 − 11,215 + 5,897 − 1,434 − 2,421 − 13,257 − 4,612 − 1,493 − 7,152
Mutual fund shares 4 − 22,444 − 142 − 22,007 − 6,329 + 3,380 − 6,503 − 12,555 − 3,660 − 3,822 − 5,074
Bonds and notes 5 − 156,239 − 22,285 − 80,677 − 36,364 − 3,273 − 17,252 − 23,787 − 5,354 − 11,251 − 7,182
Money market instruments + 6,084 − 4,939 + 2,306 − 2,565 + 1,720 − 594 + 3,745 − 749 + 3,476 + 1,018
3 Financial derivatives 6 − 17,935 − 28,740 − 18,922 − 3,487 − 7,583 − 3,586 − 4,266 − 2,270 − 1,219 − 778
4 Other investment − 132,778 − 127,311 − 187,221 − 199,073 − 102,276 + 17,820 + 96,308 − 29,880 + 2,925 + 123,264
MFIs 7,8 + 138,533 + 45,158 + 62,299 − 17,305 + 39,870 − 21,324 + 61,057 + 6,997 + 8,787 + 45,274
Long-term + 77,699 − 11,869 + 47,947 + 15,179 + 10,580 + 7,108 + 15,080 + 3,969 + 2,268 + 8,844
Short-term + 60,833 + 57,027 + 14,352 − 32,484 + 29,290 − 28,432 + 45,977 + 3,028 + 6,519 + 36,430
Enterprises and households − 60,136 − 17,791 − 20,097 − 27,047 − 14,633 + 1,181 + 20,402 + 6,736 − 6,326 + 19,993
Long-term − 42,172 + 7,269 + 683 + 1,201 + 3,041 − 3,170 − 389 − 838 − 1,124 + 1,572
Short-term 7 − 17,964 − 25,060 − 20,780 − 28,248 − 17,674 + 4,351 + 20,792 + 7,574 − 5,203 + 18,421
General government − 63,542 − 16,605 − 36,744 − 2,439 − 14,538 + 4,855 − 24,621 − 19,720 − 3,764 − 1,137
Long-term − 53,332 + 2,224 − 36,754 − 10,708 − 9,400 + 668 − 17,314 − 18,030 − 944 + 1,660
Short-term 7 − 10,209 − 18,829 + 10 + 8,269 − 5,138 + 4,186 − 7,307 − 1,689 − 2,820 − 2,797
Bundesbank − 147,633 − 138,073 − 192,679 − 152,281 − 112,975 + 33,108 + 39,469 − 23,894 + 4,228 + 59,135
5 Change in reserve assets at
transaction values (Increase: −) − 1,613 − 2,836 − 1,297 − 963 − 769 − 59 + 494 − 176 + 308 + 362
II Net foreign investment in Germany
(Increase/capital imports: +) + 261,256 + 68,725 + 105,518 + 208,518 + 61,348 − 37,995 − 126,354 + 32,991 − 20,806 − 138,538
1 Direct investment 1 + 35,382 + 29,063 − 2,406 + 3,698 + 4,046 − 9,077 − 1,073 + 4,562 − 5,710 + 75
Equity capital + 9,574 + 4,990 − 6,061 + 349 − 1,348 − 6,290 + 1,227 − 254 + 231 + 1,249
Reinvested earnings 2 + 1,883 + 5,752 + 5,236 + 3,652 − 499 + 644 + 1,439 + 324 + 471 + 643
Other capital transactionsof foreign direct investors + 23,924 + 18,321 − 1,580 − 303 + 5,893 − 3,432 − 3,738 + 4,491 − 6,413 − 1,817
2 Portfolio investment + 46,134 + 62,264 + 43,273 + 3,987 + 25,803 + 1,192 + 12,291 + 4,808 + 25,961 − 18,477
Shares 
3 − 4,736 − 2,820 + 1,017 − 8,550 + 9,286 + 507 − 226 + 777 − 214 − 789
Mutual fund shares + 2,572 + 7,711 − 3,856 − 1,021 − 2,388 − 1,091 + 644 − 297 + 437 + 504
Bonds and notes 5 + 57,767 + 48,711 + 53,335 + 14,070 + 12,021 + 16,325 + 10,919 + 2,990 + 18,083 − 10,154
Money market instruments − 9,470 + 8,662 − 7,223 − 512 + 6,884 − 14,550 + 954 + 1,338 + 7,655 − 8,039
3 Other investment + 179,741 − 22,603 + 64,651 + 200,833 + 31,499 − 30,110 − 137,572 + 23,621 − 41,057 − 120,136
MFIs 7,8 + 76,346 − 96,666 + 51,511 + 250,167 − 52,616 − 15,088 − 130,952 − 7,219 − 31,376 − 92,357
Long-term − 5,706 − 18,326 − 10,249 + 2,164 − 6,616 − 318 − 5,479 − 2,957 − 913 − 1,610
Short-term + 82,052 − 78,340 + 61,761 + 248,003 − 46,000 − 14,770 − 125,473 − 4,262 − 30,463 − 90,747
Enterprises and households + 3,835 + 24,275 − 3,271 + 1,861 + 13,312 − 8,866 − 9,579 + 1,418 − 1,751 − 9,246
Long-term − 4,587 − 13,946 − 7,331 − 3,974 − 1,930 − 1,601 + 175 + 1,324 + 492 − 1,641
Short-term 7 + 8,423 + 38,221 + 4,060 + 5,835 + 15,243 − 7,265 − 9,753 + 95 − 2,243 − 7,605
General government + 94,041 + 17,836 − 43,526 − 22,211 + 3,502 − 17,033 − 7,784 + 1,391 + 3,668 − 12,843
Long-term + 611 + 4,417 + 23,396 + 11,811 + 10,297 + 1,272 + 16 + 1,477 − 680 − 781
Short-term 7 + 93,430 + 13,419 − 66,922 − 34,022 − 6,795 − 18,305 − 7,799 − 87 + 4,349 − 12,061
Bundesbank + 5,518 + 31,952 + 59,936 − 28,984 + 67,301 + 10,877 + 10,742 + 28,031 − 11,598 − 5,691
III Financial account balance 9 
(Net capital exports: −) − 147,439 − 154,487 − 260,068 − 61,391 − 58,332 − 56,377 − 83,969 − 21,426 − 26,779 − 35,764
1From 1996, new definition for direct investment. 2Estimated. 3Including from changes in stocks. Purely statistical changes have been eliminated as far as
participation rights. 4From 1991, including retained earnings. 5From 1975, possible. 8Excluding the Deutsche Bundesbank. 9Financial account balance
excluding accrued interest. 6Options, whether evidenced by securities or not, and including change in reserve assets. 
financial futures contracts. 7The transaction values shown here are mostly derived

Deutsche Bundesbank
73  Monthly Report
February 2013
XI External sector
 
8 External position of the Bundesbank up to end-1998 *
 
 
DM million
Reserve assets and other claims on non-residents Liabilities vis-à-vis non-residents
Reserve assets
Reserve
positionin theInter- Liabilitiesnational arising Net Liabilities
Monetary arising from externalFund and Claims Loans and from Treasury position
Foreign special on the external discount (col 1 other claims
End of year currency drawing ECB 
2 on non- trans- liquidity less
or month Total Total Gold rights (net) Total paper col 8) balances 1 residents 3 actions 4 
1234567891 0 1 1
1997 127,849 126,884 13,688 76,673 13,874 22,649 966 16,931 16,931 − 110,918
1998 135,085 134,005 17,109 100,363 16,533 − 1,079 15,978 15,978 − 119,107
*Valuation of the gold holdings and the claims on non-residents in accordance with claims on the European Monetary Cooperation Fund (EMCF)). 3Including loans to
section 26 (2) of the Bundesbank Act and the provisions of the Commercial Code, the World Bank. 4Including liquidity paper sold to non-residents by the Bundesbank;
especially section 253. In the course of the year, valuation at the preceding year’s excluding the Treasury discount liquidity paper sold to non-residents between Marchbalance sheet rates. 1Mainly US dollar assets. 2European Central Bank (up to 1993, 1993 and March 1995, as shown in column 10. 
  
 
9 External position of the Bundesbank since the beginning of European monetary union o
€ million
Reserve assets and other claims on non-residents
Reserve assets
Reserveposition
Other in the Inter-national
claims on Net
Monetary Other residents external
Fund and claims on Claims in other position
Gold special Foreign non-euro- within the euro-area (col 1 Liabilities
End of year and gold drawing currency area Eurosystem member less vis-à-vis non-
or month Total Total rights reserves (net) 2 states col 9) receivables residents 1,3 residents 3,4 
1234567891 0
1999          Jan  5 95,316 93,940 29,312 8,461 56,167 140 1,225 11 8,169 87,146
1999 141,958 93,039 32,287 8,332 52,420 9,162 39,746 11 6,179 135,779
2000 100,762 93,815 32,676 7,762 53,377 313 6,620 14 6,592 94,1702001 76,147 93,215 35,005 8,721 49,489 312 − 17,385 5 8,752 67,3962002 103,948 85,002 36,208 8,272 40,522 312 18,466 167 9,005 94,9422003 95,394 76,680 36,533 7,609 32,538 312 17,945 456 10,443 84,951
2004 93,110 71,335 35,495 6,548 29,292 312 20,796 667 7,935 85,175
2005 130,268 86,181 47,924 4,549 33,708 350 42,830 906 6,285 123,9832006 104,389 84,765 53,114 3,011 28,640 350 18,344 931 4,819 99,5702007 179,492 92,545 62,433 2,418 27,694 350 84,064 2,534 16,005 163,4882008 230,775 99,185 68,194 3,285 27,705 350 128,668 2,573 30,169 200,607
2009 323,286 125,541 83,939 15,969 25,634 350 189,936 7,460 9,126 314,160
2010 524,695 162,100 115,403 18,740 27,957 50 337,869 24,676 14,620 510,0752011 714,662 184,603 132,874 22,296 29,433 50 475,942 54,067 46,557 668,1062012 921,002 188,630 137,513 22,344 28,774 50 668,617 63,706 106,496 814,506
2011          Oct 704,976 181,946 133,987 20,434 27,525 50 477,830 45,150 13,147 691,829
         Nov 746,357 187,984 138,669 20,850 28,465 50 507,480 50,843 13,517 732,840         Dec 714,662 184,603 132,874 22,296 29,433 50 475,942 54,067 46,557 668,106
2012          Jan 763,406 195,056 144,034 22,115 28,907 50 510,763 57,539 11,941 751,466
         Feb 814,053 195,654 145,234 22,073 28,346 50 559,678 58,672 13,460 800,593         Mar 875,780 186,628 135,777 22,177 28,674 50 628,223 60,880 17,564 858,215
         Apr 909,192 189,556 137,380 22,624 29,551 50 656,813 62,773 15,312 893,879
         May 964,557 193,057 138,000 23,400 31,658 50 711,198 60,252 53,949 910,608         June 992,341 190,248 136,094 23,320 30,834 50 741,198 60,845 84,880 907,461
         July 1,000,019 199,419 144,217 23,769 31,434 50 739,837 60,713 101,674 898,345
         Aug 1,023,617 197,776 143,507 23,520 30,749 50 764,080 61,711 101,494 922,123         Sep 974,478 203,337 150,373 23,295 29,669 50 708,090 63,002 95,757 878,721
         Oct 991,439 196,910 144,172 23,154 29,585 50 731,983 62,496 123,787 867,652
         Nov 988,534 197,486 145,110 22,771 29,606 50 727,755 63,242 112,190 876,344         Dec 921,002 188,630 137,513 22,344 28,774 50 668,617 63,706 106,496 814,506
2013          Jan 878,587 184,947 134,745 21,953 28,249 50 629,884 63,707 103,899 774,688
oClaims and liabilities vis-à-vis all countries within and outside the euro area. Up to From November 2000, including the TARGET positions which were previously shown
December 2000, the levels at the end of each quarter are shown, owing to (in columns 6 and 9) as bilateral assets and liabilities vis-à-vis national central banks
revaluations, at market prices; within each quarter, however, the levels are computed outside the Eurosystem. 3See footnote 2. 4Excluding allocations of special drawing
on the basis of cumulative transaction values. From January 2001, all end-of-month rights (SDR) by the International Monetary Fund (IMF) for an amount of SDR 12,059levels are valued at market prices. 1Including loans to the World Bank. 2Including million. 5 Euro opening balance sheet of the Bundesbank as at 1 January 1999. 
the balances in the Bundesbank’s cross-border payments within the Eurosystem.

Deutsche Bundesbank
74  Monthly Report
February 2013
XI External sector
 
10 Assets and liabilities of enterprises in Germany (other than banks)
vis-à-vis non-residents *
 
€ million
Claims on non-residents Liabilities vis-à-vis non-residents
Claims on foreign non-banks Liabilities  vis-à-vis foreign non-banks
from trade credits from trade credits
Balances Loans
with from Credit Advance from from Credit Advance
End of year foreign financial terms payments foreign financial terms payments
or month Total banks Total Total granted effected Total banks Total Total used received operations operations
All countries
 
2009 593,591 209,729 383,862 240,727 143,135 130,605 12,530 754,355 159,667 594,688 457,468 137,220 80,759 56,461
2010 670,695 242,028 428,667 272,426 156,241 143,032 13,209 807,185 162,091 645,094 498,310 146,784 88,288 58,496
2011 698,599 242,387 456,212 285,123 171,089 155,392 15,697 871,795 172,099 699,696 538,839 160,857 95,131 65,726
2012 747,469 274,802 472,667 298,059 174,608 158,836 15,772 910,840 170,265 740,575 578,392 162,183 94,291 67,892
2012          July 763,693 292,818 470,875 290,040 180,835 164,845 15,990 909,401 182,901 726,500 571,458 155,042 87,239 67,803
         Aug 745,790 281,302 464,488 288,855 175,633 158,872 16,761 895,349 173,779 721,570 570,866 150,704 82,229 68,475         Sep 765,487 294,561 470,926 290,239 180,687 163,837 16,850 912,170 175,791 736,379 576,562 159,817 89,422 70,395
         Oct 753,254 285,724 467,530 287,364 180,166 163,677 16,489 911,579 176,995 734,584 573,687 160,897 91,058 69,839
         Nov 766,658 290,747 475,911 291,788 184,123 167,817 16,306 918,753 173,966 744,787 581,351 163,436 93,697 69,739         Dec 747,469 274,802 472,667 298,059 174,608 158,836 15,772 910,840 170,265 740,575 578,392 162,183 94,291 67,892
Industrial countries
 
2009 531,796 208,571 323,225 220,778 102,447 93,566 8,881 684,984 157,343 527,641 431,525 96,116 68,912 27,204
2010 598,167 240,915 357,252 249,497 107,755 98,428 9,327 725,644 159,522 566,122 464,105 102,017 73,987 28,030
2011 615,925 240,265 375,660 258,453 117,207 104,915 12,292 785,925 169,535 616,390 502,139 114,251 80,491 33,760
2012 659,800 272,400 387,400 269,072 118,328 104,985 13,343 824,182 167,856 656,326 542,994 113,332 79,123 34,209
2012          July 670,077 289,747 380,330 260,126 120,204 107,013 13,191 824,756 180,798 643,958 535,952 108,006 73,275 34,731         Aug 655,741 278,468 377,273 259,846 117,427 103,505 13,922 809,830 171,797 638,033 535,260 102,773 68,118 34,655         Sep 674,946 291,934 383,012 261,035 121,977 107,958 14,019 824,230 173,804 650,426 540,380 110,046 74,255 35,791
         Oct 663,527 282,739 380,788 258,385 122,403 108,780 13,623 824,673 175,011 649,662 538,302 111,360 76,042 35,318
         Nov 676,087 287,935 388,152 262,525 125,627 111,993 13,634 830,805 171,996 658,809 545,820 112,989 77,975 35,014         Dec 659,800 272,400 387,400 269,072 118,328 104,985 13,343 824,182 167,856 656,326 542,994 113,332 79,123 34,209
EU member states
 
2009 443,431 200,400 243,031 165,986 77,045 70,051 6,994 579,596 141,633 437,963 367,980 69,983 48,977 21,006
2010 494,360 230,746 263,614 184,862 78,752 71,525 7,227 618,145 150,817 467,328 395,566 71,762 50,035 21,727
2011 508,071 225,583 282,488 196,132 86,356 76,472 9,884 660,137 157,465 502,672 421,679 80,993 54,370 26,623
2012 547,557 250,191 297,366 212,698 84,668 74,190 10,478 695,214 156,552 538,662 458,505 80,157 53,623 26,534
2012          July 553,477 266,383 287,094 200,294 86,800 76,587 10,213 695,308 170,245 525,063 448,081 76,982 49,626 27,356         Aug 539,764 254,437 285,327 201,077 84,250 73,299 10,951 683,741 161,790 521,951 449,005 72,946 45,795 27,151         Sep 556,602 267,225 289,377 201,152 88,225 77,127 11,098 695,140 163,841 531,299 453,225 78,074 50,005 28,069
         Oct 546,842 258,046 288,796 200,279 88,517 77,708 10,809 695,844 165,201 530,643 451,583 79,060 51,412 27,648
         Nov 557,997 263,962 294,035 203,046 90,989 80,241 10,748 702,814 161,641 541,173 461,248 79,925 52,647 27,278         Dec 547,557 250,191 297,366 212,698 84,668 74,190 10,478 695,214 156,552 538,662 458,505 80,157 53,623 26,534
of which: Euro-area member states 1
 
2009 321,991 159,740 162,251 114,378 47,873 43,179 4,694 466,064 91,792 374,272 332,280 41,992 28,397 13,595
2010 366,774 184,299 182,475 130,430 52,045 47,239 4,806 497,433 98,177 399,256 351,352 47,904 33,444 14,460
2011 372,493 171,907 200,586 142,530 58,056 52,125 5,931 529,244 103,827 425,417 370,898 54,519 37,188 17,331
2012 396,816 189,865 206,951 152,060 54,891 48,992 5,899 572,523 110,052 462,471 408,502 53,969 36,754 17,215
2012          July 395,816 195,217 200,599 143,095 57,504 51,411 6,093 554,467 110,167 444,300 392,826 51,474 34,017 17,457         Aug 390,172 191,998 198,174 143,224 54,950 48,780 6,170 549,339 106,763 442,576 393,458 49,118 31,401 17,717         Sep 400,298 200,586 199,712 142,197 57,515 51,279 6,236 563,817 114,567 449,250 397,242 52,008 33,735 18,273
         Oct 393,639 192,574 201,065 142,975 58,090 51,900 6,190 567,327 116,020 451,307 398,640 52,667 34,813 17,854
         Nov 402,862 197,450 205,412 145,670 59,742 53,569 6,173 574,047 113,554 460,493 407,201 53,292 35,526 17,766         Dec 396,816 189,865 206,951 152,060 54,891 48,992 5,899 572,523 110,052 462,471 408,502 53,969 36,754 17,215
Emerging economies and developing countries 2
 
2009 61,795 1,158 60,637 19,949 40,688 37,039 3,649 69,371 2,324 67,047 25,943 41,104 11,847 29,257
2010 72,528 1,113 71,415 22,929 48,486 44,604 3,882 81,541 2,569 78,972 34,205 44,767 14,301 30,466
2011 82,674 2,122 80,552 26,670 53,882 50,477 3,405 85,870 2,564 83,306 36,700 46,606 14,640 31,966
2012 87,669 2,402 85,267 28,987 56,280 53,851 2,429 86,658 2,409 84,249 35,398 48,851 15,168 33,683
2012          July 93,616 3,071 90,545 29,914 60,631 57,832 2,799 84,645 2,103 82,542 35,506 47,036 13,964 33,072         Aug 90,049 2,834 87,215 29,009 58,206 55,367 2,839 85,519 1,982 83,537 35,606 47,931 14,111 33,820         Sep 90,541 2,627 87,914 29,204 58,710 55,879 2,831 87,940 1,987 85,953 36,182 49,771 15,167 34,604
         Oct 89,727 2,985 86,742 28,979 57,763 54,897 2,866 86,906 1,984 84,922 35,385 49,537 15,016 34,521
         Nov 90,571 2,812 87,759 29,263 58,496 55,824 2,672 87,948 1,970 85,978 35,531 50,447 15,722 34,725         Dec 87,669 2,402 85,267 28,987 56,280 53,851 2,429 86,658 2,409 84,249 35,398 48,851 15,168 33,683
* Up to and including November 2009 the assets and liabilities vis-à-vis non-residents Cyprus and Malta; from January 2009, including Slovakia; from January 2011
of households in Germany. The assets and liabilities vis-à-vis non-residents of banks including Estonia. 2All countries that are not regarded as industrial countries. Up to
(MFIs) in Germany are shown in Table 4 of Section IV, “Banks”. Statistical increases December 2010 including Niederländische Antillen; from January 2011 includingand decreases have not been eliminated; to this extent, the changes in totals are not Bonaire, St.Eustatius, Saba and Curacao and St.Martin (Dutch part). comparable with the figures shown in Table XI.7. 1From January 2008, including

Deutsche Bundesbank
75  Monthly Report
February 2013
XI External sector
 
11 ECB euro reference exchange rates of selected currencies *
 
 
EUR 1 = currency units ...
Yearly Australia Canada China Denmark Japan Norway Sweden Switzerland United States United Kingdom
or monthly       
average AUD CAD CNY 1 DKK JPY NOK SEK CHF GBP USD
1999 1.6523 1.5840 . 7.4355 121.32 8.3104 8.8075 1.6003 0.65874 1.0658
2000 1.5889 1.3706 2 7.6168 7.4538 99.47 8.1129 8.4452 1.5579 0.60948 0.9236
2001 1.7319 1.3864 7.4131 7.4521 108.68 8.0484 9.2551 1.5105 0.62187 0.8956
2002 1.7376 1.4838 7.8265 7.4305 118.06 7.5086 9.1611 1.4670 0.62883 0.94562003 1.7379 1.5817 9.3626 7.4307 130.97 8.0033 9.1242 1.5212 0.69199 1.13122004 1.6905 1.6167 10.2967 7.4399 134.44 8.3697 9.1243 1.5438 0.67866 1.2439
2005 1.6320 1.5087 10.1955 7.4518 136.85 8.0092 9.2822 1.5483 0.68380 1.2441
2006 1.6668 1.4237 10.0096 7.4591 146.02 8.0472 9.2544 1.5729 0.68173 1.25562007 1.6348 1.4678 10.4178 7.4506 161.25 8.0165 9.2501 1.6427 0.68434 1.37052008 1.7416 1.5594 10.2236 7.4560 152.45 8.2237 9.6152 1.5874 0.79628 1.47082009 1.7727 1.5850 9.5277 7.4462 130.34 8.7278 10.6191 1.5100 0.89094 1.3948
2010 1.4423 1.3651 8.9712 7.4473 116.24 8.0043 9.5373 1.3803 0.85784 1.3257
2011 1.3484 1.3761 8.9960 7.4506 110.96 7.7934 9.0298 1.2326 0.86788 1.39202012 1.2407 1.2842 8.1052 7.4437 102.49 7.4751 8.7041 1.2053 0.81087 1.2848
2011          Sep 1.3458 1.3794 8.7994 7.4462 105.75 7.7243 9.1343 1.2005 0.87172 1.3770         Oct 1.3525 1.3981 8.7308 7.4442 105.06 7.7474 9.1138 1.2295 0.87036 1.3706
         Nov 1.3414 1.3897 8.6154 7.4412 105.02 7.7868 9.1387 1.2307 0.85740 1.3556         Dec 1.3003 1.3481 8.3563 7.4341 102.55 7.7451 9.0184 1.2276 0.84405 1.3179
2012          Jan 1.2405 1.3073 8.1465 7.4353 99.33 7.6752 8.8503 1.2108 0.83210 1.2905
         Feb 1.2327 1.3193 8.3314 7.4341 103.77 7.5522 8.8196 1.2071 0.83696 1.3224         Mar 1.2538 1.3121 8.3326 7.4354 108.88 7.5315 8.8873 1.2061 0.83448 1.3201
         Apr 1.2718 1.3068 8.2921 7.4393 107.00 7.5698 8.8650 1.2023 0.82188 1.3162
         May 1.2825 1.2916 8.0806 7.4335 101.97 7.5655 8.9924 1.2012 0.80371 1.2789         June 1.2550 1.2874 7.9676 7.4325 99.26 7.5401 8.8743 1.2011 0.80579 1.2526
         July 1.1931 1.2461 7.8288 7.4384 97.07 7.4579 8.5451 1.2011 0.78827 1.2288
         Aug 1.1841 1.2315 7.8864 7.4454 97.58 7.3239 8.2805 1.2011 0.78884 1.2400         Sep 1.2372 1.2583 8.1273 7.4539 100.49 7.3945 8.4929 1.2089 0.79821 1.2856
         Oct 1.2596 1.2801 8.1390 7.4582 102.47 7.4076 8.6145 1.2098 0.80665 1.2974
         Nov 1.2331 1.2787 7.9998 7.4587 103.94 7.3371 8.6076 1.2052 0.80389 1.2828         Dec 1.2527 1.2984 8.1809 7.4604 109.71 7.3503 8.6512 1.2091 0.81237 1.3119
2013          Jan 1.2658 1.3189 8.2698 7.4614 118.34 7.3821 8.6217 1.2288 0.83271 1.3288
*Averages: Bundesbank calculations based on the daily euro reference exchange Statistical Supplement 5, Exchange rate statistics. 1Up to March 2005, ECB indicative
rates published by the ECB; for additional euro reference exchange rates, see rates. 2 Average from 13 January to 29 December 2000. 
12 Euro-area member states and irrevocable euro conversion rates in the third stage
of European Economic and Monetary Union
From Country Currency ISO currency code EUR 1 = currency units ...
1999  January 1 Austria Austrian schilling ATS 13.7603
Belgium Belgian franc BEF 40.3399
Finland Finnish markka FIM 5.94573
France French franc FRF 6.55957
Germany Deutsche Mark DEM 1.95583
Ireland Irish pound IEP 0.787564
Italy Italian lira ITL 1,936.27
Luxembourg Luxembourg franc LUF 40.3399
Netherlands Dutch guilder NLG 2.20371
Portugal Portuguese escudo PTE 200.482
Spain Spanish peseta ESP 166.386
2001  January 1 Greece Greek drachma GRD 340.750
2007  January 1 Slovenia Slovenian tolar SIT 239.640
2008  January 1 Cyprus Cyprus pound CYP 0.585274
Malta Maltese lira MTL 0.429300
2009  January 1 Slovakia Slovak koruna SKK 30.1260
2011  January 1 Estonia Estonian kroon EEK 15.6466

Deutsche Bundesbank
76  Monthly Report
February 2013
XI  External sector
 
13  Effective exchange rates of the Euro and indicators of the German economy’s price competitiveness *
 
 
1999 Q1=100
Effective exchange rate of the Euro Indicators of the German economy’s price competitiveness
EER-20  1 EER-40  2 Based on the deflators of total sales  3 Based on consumer price indices
24 selected industrial countries  4 In real terms
In real terms based on
In real based on unit In real
24 terms the deflators labour terms
based on of gross costs of based on Non- selected
36 36 56 consumer domestic national consumer Euro-area euro-area industrial
Period Nominal price indices product  3 economy  3 Nominal price indices Total countries countries countries  5 6 countries  4 countries  5 countries  7 
1999 96.2 96.0 96.0 96.3 96.5 95.8 97.8 99.5 95.7 97.7 98.2 98.0 97.7
2000 87.0 86.5 86.1 85.6 87.9 85.8 91.5 97.1 85.0 91.0 92.9 91.9 90.9
2001 87.6 87.2 86.8 84.9 90.4 87.1 91.0 95.9 85.4 90.1 92.9 91.4 90.8
2002 90.0 90.3 89.8 88.2 94.8 90.7 91.7 95.0 87.9 90.5 93.5 91.9 91.7
2003 100.6 101.5 100.9 99.0 106.8 101.6 95.0 93.9 96.9 94.2 97.0 96.5 96.7
2004 104.4 105.3 103.6 102.6 111.3 105.2 95.2 92.7 99.1 94.2 98.4 98.0 98.2
2005 102.9 103.8 101.6 100.4 109.3 102.7 94.0 91.4 98.1 92.2 98.4 96.9 96.5
2006 102.8 103.8 100.8 99.3 109.3 102.0 92.7 89.9 97.2 90.6 98.5 96.4 95.8
2007 106.2 106.5 102.7 100.9 112.8 104.0 93.6 89.1 101.0 91.0 100.8 97.8 96.9
2008 109.4 108.6 103.8 103.3 116.9 105.9 93.8 87.7 104.2 90.5 102.2 97.8 97.0
2009 110.6 109.2 104.9 105.6 119.7 106.8 93.5 87.8 103.0 91.3 101.7 97.9 97.3
2010 103.6 101.6 96.9 98.2 111.4 98.1 91.1 87.5 96.8 88.5 98.8 93.8 92.2
2011 103.4 100.7 p 95.1 p 96.3 112.1 97.6 90.5 87.1 95.9 87.8 98.2 93.1 91.7
2012 97.8 p 95.6 ... ... 107.0 p 92.9 ... ... ... ... p 96.0 p 90.3 p 88.8
2009          Aug 110.6 109.1 105.2 105.9 119.8 106.8 93.8 88.0 103.7 91.4 101.9 97.9 97.4
         Sep 111.8 110.0 121.1 107.6 102.1 98.2 97.6
         Oct 113.1 111.2 122.0 108.3 102.6 98.8 98.1
         Nov 113.0 111.0 106.1 107.6 122.0 108.1 94.3 88.0 105.1 91.8 102.3 98.6 97.9
         Dec 111.9 109.8 120.8 106.8 102.2 98.2 97.4
2010          Jan 109.7 107.6 118.3 104.4 101.2 97.0 95.9
         Feb 107.0 104.8 101.2 102.5 115.3 101.6 92.6 87.7 100.8 89.9 100.2 95.6 94.3
         Mar 106.2 104.3 114.2 100.8 100.2 95.2 93.8
         Apr 105.0 103.1 112.5 99.3 99.5 94.4 92.7
         May 101.8 100.0 95.7 96.9 109.0 96.3 90.7 87.4 95.7 88.0 98.2 93.1 91.2
         June 99.8 98.1 106.9 94.4 97.2 92.2 90.3
         July 101.6 99.8 109.2 96.4 97.8 92.9 91.2
         Aug 101.2 99.4 94.7 95.3 108.8 96.0 90.3 87.6 94.5 87.7 97.6 92.7 91.0
         Sep 101.5 99.5 109.2 96.0 97.7 92.7 91.0
         Oct 105.0 102.6 112.9 99.0 99.1 94.2 92.6
         Nov 103.7 101.2 96.0 98.0 111.7 97.7 90.9 87.5 96.4 88.2 98.8 93.7 92.0
         Dec 101.7 99.2 109.3 95.6 97.8 92.7 91.0
2011          Jan 101.4 99.0 109.3 95.5 97.8 92.4 90.7
         Feb 102.4 99.8 94.8 p 96.6 110.6 96.5 90.6 87.3 95.7 87.7 98.1 92.8 91.2
         Mar 104.1 101.6 112.3 98.1 98.6 93.5 91.9
         Apr 105.9 103.4 114.0 99.7 99.5 94.3 92.7
         May 104.9 102.2 96.9 p 98.8 113.2 98.6 91.5 87.2 98.4 88.5 98.9 93.7 92.1
         June 105.0 102.2 113.4 98.8 99.0 93.7 92.2
         July 104.0 101.1 112.4 97.8 98.6 93.3 91.8
         Aug 103.9 101.0 95.0 p 96.8 112.9 98.2 90.4 86.9 95.8 87.6 98.1 93.1 91.8
         Sep 102.8 99.9 112.0 97.4 97.7 92.7 91.5
         Oct 103.0 100.2 112.6 97.8 97.8 92.9 91.8
         Nov 102.6 99.9 p 93.5 p 93.0 112.1 97.3 89.6 86.8 93.9 87.2 97.6 92.8 91.6
         Dec 100.8 98.1 110.3 95.7 96.8 91.8 90.6
2012          Jan 98.9 96.3 108.0 93.7 96.2 90.8 89.4
         Feb 99.6 97.2 p 91.4 p 90.3 108.4 94.1 89.0 86.9 91.9 86.4 96.8 91.3 89.7
         Mar 99.8 97.3 108.6 94.3 96.8 91.2 89.6
         Apr 99.5 97.2 108.4 94.2 96.7 91.1 89.5
         May 98.0 95.7 p 90.2 p 88.7 107.2 93.1 88.7 87.1 90.8 86.2 95.9 90.4 88.9
         June 97.2 94.9 106.6 92.5 95.5 89.9 88.6
         July 95.3 93.2 104.4 90.7 94.9 89.1 87.5
         Aug 95.2 93.2 p 87.8 p 86.3 104.3 90.7 87.7 86.8 88.6 85.1 94.9 89.1 87.5
         Sep 97.2 94.9 106.6 92.5 95.6 89.9 88.5
         Oct 97.8 p 95.5 107.2 p 92.8 95.9 p 90.1 p 88.6
         Nov 97.2 p 95.3 ... ... 106.7 p 92.6 ... ... ... ... 95.9 p 90.0 p 88.5
         Dec 98.7 p 96.6 108.2 p 93.8 p 96.5 p 90.6 p 89.1
2013          Jan 100.4 p 98.2 109.8 p 95.1 p 97.3 p 91.4 p 89.9
*The effective exchange rate corresponds to the weighted external value of the not available, estimates were used. 2ECB calculations. Includes countries belonging
currency concerned. The method of calculating the indicators of the German to the EER-20 group (see footnote 1) and additional Algeria, Argentina, Brazil, Chile,
economy’s price competitiveness is consistent with the procedure used by the ECB to Croatia, Iceland, India, Indonesia, Israel, Malaysia, Mexico, Morocco, New Zealand,compute the effective exchange rates of the euro (see Monthly Report, November Philippines, Russian Federation, South Africa, Taiwan, Thailand, Turkey and2001, pp  50-53, May 2007, pp  31-35 and February 2012, pp  34-35). For more Venezuela. 3Annual and quarterly averages. 4Euro-area countries (from 2001
detailed information on methodology see the ECB’s Occasional Paper No  134 including Greece, from 2007 including Slovenia, from 2008 including Cyprus and(www.ecb.int). A decline in the figures implies an increase in competitiveness. 1ECB Malta, from 2009 including Slovakia, from 2011 including Estonia) as well as Canada,
calculations are based on the weighted averages of the changes in the bilateral Denmark, Japan, Norway, Sweden, Switzerland, United Kingdom and United States.exchange rates of the euro against the currencies of the following countries: Austra- 5Euro-area countries and countries belonging to the EER-20 group. 6Owing to
lia, Bulgaria, Canada, China, Czech Republic, Denmark, Hong Kong, Hungary, Japan, missing data for the deflator of total sales, China is not included in this calculation.Latvia, Lithuania, Norway, Poland, Romania, Singapore, South Korea, Sweden, 7 Euro-area countries and countries belonging to the EER-40 group (see footnote 2). 
Switzerland, United Kingdom and United States. Where price and wage indices were

Overview of publications by the  
Deutsche Bundesbank
This overview provides information about selected recent economic and statistical publica-
tions by the Deutsche Bundesbank. Unless otherwise indicated, these publications are avail-able in both English and German, in printed form and on the Bundesbank’s website.
The publications are available free of charge from the Communication Division. For a small 
fee to cover costs, a file which is updated monthly and contains approximately 40,000 time series published by the Bundesbank can be obtained on CD-ROM from the Division Statis-tical data processing, mathematical methods or downloaded from the Bundesbank-ExtraNet site. Orders should be sent, in writing, to one of the addresses listed on the reverse of the title page. Selected time series can also be downloaded from the internet.
Annual Report
Financial Stability ReviewMonthly Report
For information on the articles published be -
tween 2000 and 2012 see the index attached 
to the January 2013 Monthly Report.
Monthly Report articles
March 2012
–
 Germany’
s balance of payments in 2011
–
 National and international financial market 
shocks and the real economy – an empirical view
April 2012–
 P
otential growth of the German economy – 
medium-term outlook against the backdrop of demographic strains–
 The European Systemic Risk Board: from 
 institutional foundation to cr
edible macro -
prudential oversight
May 2012–
 The 
current economic situation in Germany
June 2012–
 Outlook for the German economy – macr
o-
economic projections for 2012 and 2013
–
 The price of crude oil and its impact on eco
-
nomic activity in the industrial countries
–
 The r
ole of the “Basel interest rate shock” in 
the supervisory assessment of interest rate 
risks in the banking book
July 2012–
 The eur
o as an anchor currency and core of 
a currency bloc
–
 Deutsche Bundesbank Spring Conference 
2012 – monetary policy, inflation and inter -
national linkages
–
 The new CPSS-IOSC
O Principles for financial 
market infrastructures
August 2012–
 The 
current economic situation in GermanyDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report 
February 2013  
77•

September 2012
–
 The performance of German credit institu -
tions in 2011
–
 Innovations 
in payment systems
–
 The 
International Monetary Fund in a 
changed global environment
October 2012–
 The financial crisis and balance of payments developments 
within the euro area
–
 The development of state government 
 finances in Germany since 2005
–
 The importance of tr
ade credit for 
 corpor
ate 
financing in Germany – evidence from finan-cial statements statistics
–
 The use of cash and cashless payment 
 instruments: a microeconomic analysis
November 2012–
 The 
current economic situation in Germany
December 2012–
 Outlook for the German economy – macr
o-
economic projections for 2013 and 2014
–
 German enterprises’ profitability and finan -
cing in 2011
–
 C
alendar effects on economic activity
January 2013–
 Current developments in the mutual funds market: demand, structural changes and 
 investor behaviour
–
 Current and projected development of coin 
circulation in Germany
February 2013–
 The 
current economic situation in GermanyStatistical Supplements to the 
Monthly Report
 1 Banking statistics 1, 2
 2 C apital market statistics 1, 2
 3 Balance of payments statistics 1, 2
 4 Seasonal ly adjusted business statistics 1, 2
 5 Exchange rate statistics 2
Special Publications
Makro-ökonometrisches Mehr-Länder-Modell, 
November 1996 3
Europäische Organisationen und Gremien im Bereich von Währung und Wirtschaft, May 
1997 3
Die Zahlungsbilanz der ehemaligen DDR 1975 
bis 1989, August 1999 3
The market for German Federal securities, 
May 2000
Macro-Econometric Multi-Country Model: MEM -
MOD, June 2000
Bundesbank Act, September 2002Weltweite Organisationen und Gremien im Be-
reich von Währung und Wirtschaft, March 
2003 3
Die Europäische Union: Grundlagen und Politik-
bereiche außerhalb der Wirtschafts-und Wäh-
rungsunion, April 2005 3
Die Deutsche Bundesbank – Aufgabenfelder, 
rechtlicher Rahmen, Geschichte, April 2006 3
European economic and monetary union, April 
2008
For footnotes, see p 80•.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report 
February 2013  
78•

Special Statistical Publications*
 1 Banking statistics guidelines and customer  
classification, January 20132, 4
 2 Bankenstatistik Kundensystematik,  
January 20132, 3
 3 Aufbau der bankstatistischen T abellen, 
June 20112, 3
 4 Financial accounts for Germany 2006 to 
2011, June 20122
 5 E xtrapolated results from financial state -
ments of German enterprises 1994 to 
2003, March 2006 2
 6 V erhältniszahlen aus Jahresabschlüssen 
deutscher Unternehmen von 2008 bis 
2009, May 20122, 3
 7 Notes on the coding list for the balance of 
payments 
statistics, March 2009 2
 8 The balance of payments statistics of the  
Federal Republic of Germany, 2nd edition, 
February 1991o
 9 Securities deposits, August 2005
 1 0 F oreign direct investment stock statistics, 
April 20121, 2
 1 1 Balance of payments by region,  
July 2012
 1 2 T echnologische Dienstleistungen in der 
Zahlungsbilanz, June 20113Discussion Papers*
29/2012  
Finding relevant variables in sparse Bayesian factor models: economic applications and 
simulation results
30/2012  
Measuring option implied degree of distress in 
the US financial sector using the entropy prin-
ciple31/2012  
The determinants of service imports: the role of 
cost pressure and financial constraints
32/2012  
Persuasion by stress testing – optimal disclosure 
of supervisory information in the banking sec -
tor33/2012  
Which banks are more risky? The impact of 
loan growth and business model on bank 
risk-taking
34/2012  
Estimating endogenous liquidity using transac-
tion and order book information
35/2012  
Monetary policy and the oil futures market36/2012  
The common drivers of default risk01/2013  
CDS spreads and systemic risk – a spatial 
econometric approach02/2013  
A distribution-free test for outliers
* Unless stated otherwise, as of 2000 these publications 
have been made available on the Bundesbank’s website in 
German and English. Since the beginning of 2012, no 
longer subdivided into series 1 and series 2.
o Not available on the website.For footnotes, see p 80•.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report 
February 2013  
79•

Banking legislation
 1 Bundesbank A ct and Statute of the Euro -
pean System of Central Banks and of the 
European Central Bank, June 1998
 2 Gesetz über das Kr editwesen, February 
20093 2 a Solvabilitäts- und Liquiditätsver ordnung, 
February 20083
1 Only the headings and explanatory notes to the data con-
tained in the German originals are available in English.2 Available on the website only.3 Available in German only.4 Only some parts of the Special Statistical Publications are 
provided in English. The date refers to the German issue, 
which may be of a more recent date than the English one.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report 
February 2013  
80•

