Monthly Report
May 2013
Vol 65  
No 5

Deutsche Bundesbank 
Wilhelm-Epstein-Strasse 14 60431 Frankfurt am Main Germany
Postal address 
Postfach 10 06 02 60006 Frankfurt am Main Germany
Tel +49 69 9566-0
Fax +49 69 9566 3077
http://www.bundesbank.deReproduction permitted only if source is stated.ISSN 0418-8292 (print edition) 
ISSN 1862-1325 (online edition)
The German original of this Monthly Report  
went to press at 11 am on 17 May 2013.Annual and weekly publishing schedules for  selected statistics of the Deutsche Bundes-
 
bank can be downloaded from our website. 
The statistical data are also published on the 
website.
The Monthly Report is published by the 
 Deutsche Bundesbank, Frankfurt am Main,  
by virtue of section  18 of the Bundesbank  
Act. It is available to interested parties free of 
charge.
This is a translation of the original German-
language version, which is the sole authorita -
tive text.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report 
May 2013  
2

Contents
The current economic situation in Germany  ................................................  5
Overview  ....................................................................................................................  6
Global and European setting  ..............................................................................  11
The development of labour costs in China and their impact on consumer prices  
in the industrial countries ...................................................................................................  13
Monetary policy and banking business  ..........................................................  21
Money market management and liquidity needs ................................................................  22
Financial markets  ....................................................................................................  33
European share price movements in relation to dividends paid ..........................................  40
Economic conditions in Germany  .....................................................................  44
Commercial property prices in Germany:  
conceptual considerations and statistical status quo ..........................................................  53
Public finances  .........................................................................................................  58
Fiscal developments in the euro area ..................................................................................  60Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report 
May 2013  
3

Statistical Section ....................................................................................................  1 •
Key economic data for the euro area ..................................................................................  5 •
Overall monetary survey in the euro area ............................................................................  8 •
Consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem ............................................................  16 •
Banks ..................................................................................................................................  20 •
Minimum reserves ...............................................................................................................  42 •
Interest rates .......................................................................................................................  43 •
Capital market ....................................................................................................................  48 •
Financial accounts ...............................................................................................................  52 •
Public finances in Germany .................................................................................................  54 •
Economic conditions in Germany ........................................................................................  61 •
External sector ....................................................................................................................  68 •
Overview of publications by the Deutsche Bundesbank  ..........................  77 •
Abbreviations and symbols
e Estimated
p Provisionalpe Partly estimated
r Revised… Data available at a later date
. Data unknown, not to be published or not meaningful
0 Less than 0.5 but more than nil
– Nil
Discrepancies in the totals are due to rounding.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report 
May 2013  
4

The current economic situation 
in GermanyDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report 
May 2013  
5

Overview
Weather conditions delay 
cyclical recovery in Germany
In the first three months of 2013, real global 
gross domestic product (GDP) is likely to have 
expanded at a somewhat faster pace than in 
previous quarters, although the underlying cyc-
lical trend shown by the global economy re -
mained rather subdued. The upturn in growth 
was notably fuelled by the industrial countries 
distinctly stepping up their overall economic 
output, which had practically stagnated in the 
last quarter of 2012. The USA and Japan, in 
particular, increased their growth rates. Eco -
nomic output in the UK likewise had an up -
ward tendency, after having posted negative growth. The euro area saw its cyclical down
-
turn continue, but the contraction was signifi -
cantly less pronounced than it had been in the 
last quarter of 2012. Conversely, China and 
other major emerging market economies were unable to maintain the strong momentum they had built up in autumn.
However, the available leading indicators signal 
that the economy is unlikely to gain additional 
traction during the current quarter. Having risen perceptibly at the start of the year, the 
global Purchasing Managers’ Index for manu -
facturing even declined again in April, meaning 
that it is only barely above the expansion 
threshold. The index for the services sector sig-
nals that growth remains sound but suggests that momentum looks set to wane slightly. 
Global economic growth is thus likely to be ra-ther muted in the second quarter, even though 
the sharp drop in crude oil prices is boosting 
purchasing power in consumer countries.
The international financial markets proved to 
be relatively robust in the first few months of 
2013 despite the rather troubled political and economic setting. The highly accommodative 
monetary policy measures taken by key central banks, most of which were directly targeted at the capital markets, counteracted the impact 
that the political uncertainty in connection with 
the elections in Italy and the aid package for Cyprus as well as some negative economic  reports were having on the bond and equity 
markets. In May, some economic data that met 
with a positive reception among market partici-
pants helped to buoy sentiment, clearly lifting 
the yields on long- term government bonds 
from their depressed levels. As this report went 
to press, yields on this paper in the major cur -
rency areas were, for the most part, slightly up on their levels at the beginning of the year on balance. In the year to date, Germany likewise 
has seen yields on its ten- year public debt 
 securities increase slightly, though with consid-
erable fluctuation, to a level of 1.3% most 
 recently. Equity prices have been climbing 
strongly of late, with only the European ex -
changes repeatedly being hit by short- lived set-
backs in the face of the economic and political 
uncertainties mentioned above. Bank stocks were mainly affected by this. The Japanese 
equity market posted particularly strong gains 
(+44.7%); at the same time, the yen depreci -
ated significantly against most other curren -
cies, including the euro, chiefly on account of 
the highly expansionary new stance adopted 
by Japanese monetary policymakers.
At its monetary policy meeting in early May 2013, the ECB Governing Council decided to 
lower the interest rate on the main refinancing operations of the Eurosystem by 25 basis points to 0.50%. The cut in interest rates is intended to contribute to supporting economic recovery 
prospects later in the year. The decision was 
based on the assessment that price pressure in 
the euro area is low over the medium term. 
Two factors support this view. First, the neces-
sary balance sheet adjustments in both the public and private sectors are continuing to 
place a burden on the frail economy. Second, 
the moderate underlying monetary dynamics 
and the persistently weak lending to the euro- Global economy
Financial 
 marketsMonetary policyDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report 
May 2013  
6

area private sector also indicate that price pres-
sure is low.
The interest rate cut on 2 May 2013 narrowed 
the  interest corridor formed by the Euro -
system’s standing facilities. Banks’ balances in 
the  deposit facility – as well as their excess 
 reserves on current accounts – are still being 
remunerated at 0%. Meanwhile, the Euro-system’s counterparties can now obtain over
-
night loans through the marginal lending facil-ity for as little as 1.00%, ie for 50 basis points less than before.
Besides cutting its key interest rate, the ECB 
Governing Council decided to continue to con-
duct the regular monetary policy refinancing 
operations as fixed- rate tenders with full allot -
ment at least until the end of the second quar -
ter of 2014.
The quarter under review saw German banks’ 
lending business with domestic non- banks de-
teriorating again appreciably owing to another distinct drop in lending to general government. By contrast, there was a slight increase in lend-
ing to the domestic private sector, which was 
once again mostly driven by lending to house-
holds, notably for housing construction pur -
poses. Despite the persistently low lending 
rates, loans extended to the non- financial cor -
porate sector rose only marginally on balance 
owing to the ongoing subdued investment in 
machinery and equipment by domestic enter -
prises and also, in part, to firms making greater 
use of internal funding as well as alternative 
forms of external financing.
The German economy grew only moderately at 
the beginning of 2013. According to the Fed -
eral Statistical Office’s flash estimate, real first- 
quarter GDP increased in seasonally and calen-
dar- adjusted terms, as expected, by 0.1% on 
the previous quarter, which had seen a decline 
of 0.7%. The countermovement was no more 
than subdued because the long winter had 
mainly impeded the construction industry but 
also affected the transport sector. Disregarding weather- related factors, economic output ex -
panded roughly in line with the rate of poten-
tial growth so that macroeconomic capacity 
utilisation did not decline further in terms of 
the underlying cyclical trend. This is consistent 
with the further positive development observed in the labour market.
The export motor, though, has not yet come 
back to life. Following the sharp reduction be-
tween October and December last year, ex -
ports saw a further seasonally adjusted decline 
in the first quarter of 2013. The fact that ex -
ports of goods to the euro area at least partly 
compensated for the steep drop at the end of 
2012 should be regarded as a glimmer of hope. 
The situation outside the euro area, however, 
was mostly bleak, even though the overall 
 decrease in the period under review was prob-
ably less pronounced than it had been in the 
final quarter of 2012. Seasonally adjusted im -
ports were once again down in the first quarter of 2013, mostly on account of the drop in en-
ergy imports, which had expanded strongly in 
autumn. By contrast, imports of intermediate goods as well as machinery, motor vehicles, computers and electrical equipment showed 
an upward tendency.
Investment in the corporate sector continued to be restrained, primarily on account of  demand conditions, which industry widely 
 believes to be inadequate for lifting capacity 
utilisation above normal levels in the foresee
-
able future. Restrictions on the financing side, 
on the other hand, do not play a perceptible role here. In many cases, enterprises’ current 
revenues give them sufficient scope for funding 
their operations internally. Added to this, debt 
financing conditions are exceptionally favour -
able, and there are no signs that large firms or 
small and medium- sized enterprises in Ger -
many are finding it noticeably more difficult to access credit. Construction investment suffered 
from the bad weather conditions in the first quarter of 2013. With ice, snow and persist
-
ently low temperatures afflicting many parts of Germany until the beginning of April, the usual Lending  
in Germany
German 
 economyDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report 
May 2013  
7

seasonal upturn in construction activity was 
delayed until well into spring this year.
Private consumption made a good start to the 
new year. The beginning of spring also saw 
consumer sentiment rising to an unpreced -
ented level in the current business cycle. Not 
only do consumers continue to have very opti-
mistic income expectations; they are demon -
strating a strong willingness to make major purchases, mirroring their reduced propensity 
to save.
Enterprises continued to hire significant num -
bers of additional employees throughout the 
winter. Additional regular jobs subject to social security contributions were entirely responsible 
for the increase in the number of persons in work. The reduction in labour market policy measures is a notable factor driving the on
-
going decline in the number of self- employed 
positions and one- euro jobs alike. Seasonally 
adjusted unemployment dipped slightly in win-
ter following the muted increase seen in the 
nine months previous to that. The reserve pool of unemployed, which has shrunk dramatically 
in recent years, can now only cover a small 
share of the additional demand for labour from the corporate sector. Instead, persons close to the labour market are being activated from the 
latent labour force, and Germany is experien -
cing a significant influx of labour from abroad 
on a scale not seen for quite some time.
Negotiated rates of pay rose by 2.9% on the 
previous year in the first quarter of 2013. In this 
year’s pay round, the social partners have 
agreed on increases in scheduled rates of pay 
– so far without any major disputes – amount-
ing to a volume of between 2½% and 3% in 
annualised terms. Recent minimum wage 
agreements in the construction and hairdress -
ing sectors could potentially give rise to cost 
pressure.
In the first quarter of 2013, the appreciation of 
the euro drove down import prices in season -
ally adjusted terms while domestic producer prices continued their upward trend. The dis -
tinct reduction in export prices is likely to have 
gone hand in hand with margin compression. 
Prices of owner- occupied housing saw another 
considerable increase. There was only a muted 
rise in seasonally adjusted consumer prices in 
the first three months of 2013 owing to the 
appreciation of the euro and a number of spe-
cial effects. The increase in the renewable en -
ergy (EEG) levy drove energy prices sharply 
higher despite the decline in prices for refined 
petroleum products on the back of the stronger euro. World market factors might have played 
a role in the perceptibly slower increase in 
prices for food and other goods. The abolition 
of the surgery visit charge contributed to the increase in the price of services coming to a halt. The increase in existing rents which are mostly  reflected in the consumer price index 
picked up pace slightly. There was a 1.5% year- 
on- year rise in the national consumer price 
index in the first quarter.
Overall economic activity is expected to im -
prove markedly in the second quarter of 2013, 
a view that is supported not only by the likely 
catching- up effects in response to the weather- 
related downturn in construction activity dur -
ing last winter. With industrial new orders pick-
ing up appreciably after a poor start to the 
year, there is reason to hope that exports and 
investment in machinery and equipment – the demand components that can usually be relied 
upon most to set the pace for the German 
economy – will recover as well. However, the 
poor economic conditions prevailing in many parts of the euro area and the current prob
-
lems associated with the sovereign debt crisis 
mean that macroeconomic risks remain high.
The general government budget recorded a narrow surplus in 2012 – the first time it has 
done so since 2007 – and looks set to post a 
slight deficit this year, chiefly because the posi-
tive cyclical impact last year is now beginning 
to fade. The structural deficit, meanwhile, will 
remain largely unchanged. While the reduction 
in the pension contribution rate will result in Public financesDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report 
May 2013  
8

noticeable revenue shortfalls, government 
budgets will be eased particularly by the con -
tinued decrease in interest spending owing to 
the lower interest rates. Differences in the dis-
tribution of burdens and relief, and the shift in burdens from central government to the social 
security funds, will play a role in the diverging 
development of central, state and local govern-
ment budgets. The social security funds are 
likely to scale back almost all their high sur -
pluses while central government, in particular, 
will see its budget situation improve. The debt 
ratio rose again in 2012 to around 82%. How-ever, as things stand, this ratio will recede dis-
tinctly during the course of this year. In add -
ition to a very small deficit ratio relative to 
nominal GDP growth, it is likely that the public 
resolution agencies will redeem liabilities on 
balance. These factors are much more signifi -
cant than the debt- increasing impact of the 
stabilisation measures currently  envisaged for 
the euro area.
In April, the German government presented its 
updated stability programme. Given the as -
sumed slightly negative cyclical impact, general 
government ran a structural surplus of just 
under ½% of GDP last year, surpassing the medium- term budget target. A structural 
budget surplus in this range should ordinarily be achieved in subsequent years as well. The 
fiscal policy orientation would thus be more or less neutral in the next few years. According to the March benchmark figures, a further gradual improvement in the central government budget is envisaged, thereby achieving a marked struc-
tural surplus by 2017. The fiscal situation is therefore more favourable than in last year’s  financial plan. Interest expenditure was once 
again the decisive factor. The improvement in 
the fiscal balance will be smaller than interest 
cost savings, which had thus previously been 
used in part to finance fiscal policy loosening 
elsewhere.
The envisaged structural general government 
surpluses are appropriate owing to the high 
debt ratio and the foreseeable burdens caused by demographic developments, and continu -
ous overachievement of the self- imposed 
 medium- term budget target is welcome. In 
addition, in connection with national budget 
rules, it is advisable for central and regional governments to leave a considerable safety margin below the future upper limits when 
preparing budgets. The currently exceptionally 
good underlying conditions in Germany char -
acterised by relatively moderate unemployment figures, a growth structure that is beneficial to 
government revenue and low interest rates present a very favourable opportunity. Thus 
they should be used in full, not least given the 
fiscal risks in connection with the euro- area cri-
sis, macroeconomic developments in Germany 
and a return to normal levels of interest rates 
which are, particularly for central government, 
currently exceptionally low. In order to ensure 
the long- term success of the national rules, it 
would be worth considering setting ambitious 
minimum milestones for improving states’ 
structural budgets, which are not taking full ad-
vantage of the very long- term (from today’s 
vantage point) transitional periods before the 
national budget rules take effect. Central and 
regional governments could also enshrine 
marked binding safety margins that generally 
have to be observed when preparing budgets.
At the European level, it appears important that German fiscal policy support European budget rules by adhering to these rigorously and also by advocating strict implementation of the reformed budget rules, which contain 
numerous exceptions. After all, these rules are 
intended to preserve the euro area’s standing 
as a community of stability; inadequate imple-
mentation of the old fiscal rules was a key 
cause of the current crisis of confidence. How 
they are applied specifically is currently of par -
ticular importance in the wake of the adjust -
ment processes in individual member states. During the current European Semester, the 
Ecofin council, upon a recommendation by the 
European Commission, will also decide on 
deadlines by which member states under an 
excessive deficit procedure can make correc -Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report 
May 2013  
9

tions. In many cases, it looks like the deadlines 
may be moved back one or two years. There is 
generally a certain discretionary scope, and 
macroeconomic developments, which are very 
unfavourable in some quarters, surely need to 
be taken into account. However, in many cases the problem is not merely one of cyclical weak-ness; in addition, structural adjustments are on-
going following earlier excesses and undesir -
able developments.
Great caution is advised when considering how 
to use any available discretionary scope, with 
debt ratios now up to very high levels, among 
other factors. The main objectives of budgetary 
reform include establishing the reliable pro -
spect of consolidation, and thereby winning back public confidence in the sustainability of 
euro- area public finances. However, the bind -
ing effect could be undermined from the very 
outset if the impression is created that a neces-
sary deficit reduction can be put off repeatedly 
– through political pressure or negative “sur -
prises” following overly optimistic plans – or 
that the European Commission is exercising the stronger overall role assigned to it less in order to enforce stricter implementation and more to enable recourse to the numerous exceptions. It is precisely the unadjusted upper deficit limit of 3% but also the 60% deficit, which is floating 
further and further out of reach – not least 
given delays in consolidation efforts – which 
represent a key anchor, for the public debate 
and elsewhere.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report 
May 2013  
10

Global and European setting
World economic activity
In the first quarter of 2013, real global gross 
domestic product (GDP) is likely to have ex -
panded at a somewhat faster pace than in the previous quarters. This was chiefly because the 
industrial countries distinctly stepped up their 
aggregate output, which had practically stag -
nated in the last quarter of 2012. However, 
China and other major emerging market econ-omies were unable to maintain the strong mo-mentum they had built up in autumn. All in all, 
the underlying cyclical trend shown by the global economy last quarter remained rather 
subdued.
Among the major industrial countries, the USA 
and Japan, in particular, significantly increased 
their growth rates. Economic output in the UK 
likewise had an upward tendency following a 
period of negative growth. The more favour -
able economic developments in these three 
countries were due, for example, to a decrease 
in the importance of special factors which had constrained growth during the autumn quarter. 
The euro area saw its cyclical downturn con -
tinue, but the quarter- on- quarter contraction 
was significantly less pronounced than in the 
last quarter of 2012. This was largely due to the 
fact that the German economy grew slightly 
after contracting considerably. Real GDP in the United States, Japan, the United Kingdom and 
the euro area taken together, for which initial 
provisional data are available, was just under 
½% higher than its level of the autumn quarter after seasonal adjustment and ½% higher year- on- year.
The available leading indicators signal that the 
economy is unlikely to gain additional traction 
during the current quarter. The perceptible in -
crease in the global Purchasing Managers’ 
Index for manufacturing at the start of the year 
gave way to a significant decline in April, putt-
ing the index only barely above the expansion threshold. The index for the services sector re-
veals that growth remains sound but is less dy-
namic. This is borne out by the fact that, fol -
lowing a distinct improvement in January and 
February, survey indicators for business senti -
ment in Europe’s industrial countries have 
mostly fallen again. Global economic growth is likely to be rather muted in the second quarter despite the fact that the sharp drop in crude oil 
prices is boosting purchasing power in con -
sumer countries.
In light of the fairly subdued global economic 
trend, in its April spring forecast, the IMF once 
again revised the global growth estimate for 
2013 downwards somewhat from the January 
forecast by -0.2 percentage point to 3.3%. An 
increase of 4.0% is still expected in 2014. 
Among the advanced economies, the outlook 
for the euro area and the USA was assessed 
somewhat less favourably. The downward revi-
sion for the USA was justified on the grounds 
of the automatic spending cuts which started 
on 1 March 2013. By contrast, the forecasts for 
both years were revised upwards slightly to 1.6% and 1.4% respectively for Japan; this 
was mainly due to Japan’s more expansionary 
economic policy. Growth expectations for the 
group of emerging market economies were 
also scaled back slightly for 2013. The outlook 
for real global trade was assessed somewhat 
more cautiously again this year; an increase of 
3.6% is now expected, to be followed, how -
ever, by growth of 5.3% in 2014.
The change in the velocity of the cycle in the 
global economy has also affected prices in the 
international commodity markets. The consid -
erable increase in the price of industrial com -
modities on average over the winter months 
compared to the previous quarter is therefore 
likely to have been due to the initially elevated 
levels of demand; the price of Brent crude oil 
also rose perceptibly. By contrast, the tensions 
on the food, beverages and tobacco markets Slight increase in 
global growth in the first quarter
Industrial 
 countries back on growth track overall
No further 
 cyclical improve-ment likely in springFurther slight downward  revision of IMF 
forecast
Commodity 
prices reflect cyclical  fluctuationsDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report 
May 2013  
11

eased further as crop prospects improved. 
However, in light of fresh concerns about the 
economy, prices for industrial commodities and 
crude oil have fallen markedly again since mid- February. As this report went to press, the price of a barrel of Brent stood at US$101½, at times 
having even slipped below the US$100 mark, 
compared with US$117 three months previ -
ously. Prices on the futures market did not fall 
as sharply as the spot price, causing the dis -
counts on Brent futures to shrink noticeably.
The further decrease in consumer price infla -
tion in the industrial countries is due not least 
to the recent decline in the price of crude oil. 
At 1.4% in March, the Consumer Price Index 
for this group of countries recorded its smallest 
year- on- year increase since November 2010, 
while energy prices were barely any higher than twelve months previously. In a compari
-
son of quarterly averages, the year- on- year rate 
of inflation for the entire basket of consumer 
goods fell from 1.8% in autumn 2012 to 1.5% in winter 2013. The corresponding rate for the basket of goods excluding energy and food re-mained unchanged at +1.4%, however.
Selected emerging market 
economies
According to a preliminary estimate by the Na-
tional Bureau of Statistics, real GDP growth in 
China weakened slightly in the first quarter of 
2013. The year- on- year figure rose by 7¾% 
compared with +8% in the final quarter of 
2012, spelling an end to the faster growth rates 
observed in the autumn following a period of 
moderate growth lasting just under two years. 
Because exports appear to have picked up in 
recent months, the decreasing pace of aggre -
gate growth may be attributable to a slow -
down in domestic demand.1 Fixed investment 
may have expanded somewhat more slowly. In 
addition, there are signs of a flatter upward 
trend in consumption; this is the result of re -
duced expenditure on luxury items as a result 
of the new government’s anti- corruption cam-
paign. Another factor to consider is that wage 
growth, which has been exceptionally strong for the last few years (see box on pages  13 to 15), has recently eased slightly. Although consumer price inflation rose to 2.4% in the first quarter, this still represented a fairly low 
level.
In India, real gross value added, which the In -
dian authorities use as the most important 
measure of aggregate output, expanded in the 
fourth quarter of 2012 by 4½% year- on- year. 
Once again, the growth rate was lower than in the previous quarter. Although no national ac-
counts data are available so far, the indicators 
appear to point to a certain pick- up in growth. 
However, the production of capital goods has Consumer price 
inflation down furtherSlightly slower 
growth in China
India on flat 
 expansion pathWorld market prices for crude oil,industrial commodities and food,beverages and tobacco
Sources:  Thomson  Reuters  and  HWWI.  • Average  of  1  to 
10 May or 1 to 15 May 2013 (crude oil).
Deutsche Bundesbank2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 201360708090100120140160US dollar basis, 2010 = 100,
monthly averages, log scale
Crude oil (Brent)
Industrial
commoditiesFood, beverages
and tobacco
1 However, when interpreting the latest Chinese foreign 
trade data, it must be considered that the strong increases in exports to Hong Kong and Taiwan cannot be confirmed 
by these countries’ import statistics. The Chinese customs 
authorities have announced an investigation of allegations of fraudulent declarations.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report 
May 2013  
12

The development of labour costs in China and their impact 
on consumer prices in the industrial countries
According to various empirical studies, the 
availability of cheap imports of fi  nished 
products from the emerging market econ-
omies brought about by their increasing in-
tegration into the international division of 
labour has dampened infl  ation rates in the 
advanced economies, seen in isolation.1 
However, the wage cost advantage of many 
emerging market economies appears to 
have shrunk recently. In China, in particular, 
there is mounting evidence that labour 
costs in the manufacturing sector have been rising considerably for some years now. One major pillar of China’s export- oriented industrial sector, which is located predominantly in coastal regions, is made up by the army of migrant workers from rural regions, estimated to number over 
200 million. They are often low- skilled and 
occupy the lower rungs of China’s wage scale. Surveys of migrant labourers show that, between 2008 and 2012, their monthly earnings have gone up by a little 
more than 50% in real terms.
The strong wage growth in China, espe-
cially in the low- wage sector, is possibly due to a structural shift in the balance of power on the Chinese labour market. The last few years have seen mounting complaints from enterprises about a dearth of labour, some-thing which appears to be borne out by the 
relevant offi   cial statistics. One explanation 
for the shortage could be that the rural la-bour reserve, from which the rising demand 
for labour in Chinese cities had been covered in the past, has now been largely absorbed.
2 According to the offi   cial statis-
tics, millions of people are still employed in agriculture in China but are often assumed to be in “hidden” unemployment and thus, in principle, available to other sectors of the 
economy. However, it must be borne in mind that a large percentage of labourers still living in rural areas are already older 
and therefore not entirely willing or able to make a living far from home as, say, an in-
dustrial worker.3 Moreover, the offi   cial 
household registration system (hukou) also 
restricts rural dwellers’ mobility by prevent-ing migrants from offi   cially relocating to cit-ies and thus obtaining access to social wel-fare benefi  ts and education services.
The wages of Chinese industrial labourers occasionally rose markedly in the past. However, for a long time, these wage in-creases, taking into account unit wage costs, were offset or even overcompen-
sated for by a sharp rise in labour product-ivity. Given the accelerated wage growth in the past few years – possibly in conjunction 
with diminishing productivity gains – unit 
wage costs in China are likely to be on the 
rise now. Consistent with this picture, Chi-
nese exports have become more expensive in the past few years. The price index for US 
imports from China calculated by the US 
Bureau of Labor Statistics (BLS) is often used to analyse Chinese export prices since China 
1 An OECD study estimates that the direct effect of 
cheap imports from China and other Asian emerging 
market economies has been to reduce infl  ation in the 
euro area by an average of 0.3 percentage point per 
year from 2000 to 2005 and 0.1 percentage point per 
year in the United States (1996 to 2005). See N Pain, I Koske and M Sollie (2006), Globalisation and infl  ation in the OECD economies, OECD Working Paper 524.
2 The argument that a labour surplus is a drag on 
wage growth until the surplus has been completely absorbed is based on the “Lewis model”. See W A 
Lewis (1954), Economic Development with Unlimited 
Supplies of Labour, The Manchester School 22(2), 
pp 139-191. The point at which a labour- rich economy becomes a labour- shortage economy is also known as 
the Lewis Turning Point. Examples of such a develop-
mental process are Japan (which reached the Lewis Turning Point in the 1950s and 1960s) and South 
Korea (which got there in the 1980s).3 See H Li, L Li, B Wu and Y Xiong (2012), The End of 
Cheap Chinese Labor, Journal of Economic Perspec-
tives 26(4), pp 57-74.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report 
May 2013  
13

only reports a defl  ator based on unit values 
which, however, fails to take quality im-
provements into account.4 According to the 
BLS indicator, published monthly since the 
end of 2003, Chinese export prices (de-
nominated in US dollars) turned around and 
were rising after having fallen slightly up 
until early 2007. At a rate amounting to 7% 
in the past six years, prices for Chinese 
goods have not risen very much at all; 
moreover, this increase was lower than the increase in the prices of imports from other 
countries. It must also be borne in mind 
that not only labour costs but probably also higher commodity prices and the nominal 
appreciation of the renminbi against the US 
dollar have contributed to an increase in 
the price of imports from China.5
The impact of the price of Chinese imported 
goods on infl  ation in the industrial coun-
tries is affected not only by the price effect in the narrower sense but also by whether, 
and how, the share of Chinese goods in 
total imports changes over time. Under the 
premise that Chinese goods, on average, 
are still much cheaper than those from 
other countries, a rising share of these 
goods in total imports – as has been seen in 
many advanced economies in the past  – 
would, in and of itself, cause import prices 
to decline. However, the trend increase in 
the Chinese share of imports seems to have 
diminished, at least, with China’s share of 
total European Union and US industrial 
goods imports more or less treading water 
in the past two years. This share has even 
been falling slightly for labour- intensive 
products, such as clothing, in particular. The 
“import share” effect therefore no longer appears to have been acting as a percep-tible drag on import prices in Europe and 
the United States.
For the coming years, wage growth in China may be expected to remain high given the tight Chinese labour market, 
which will probably tend to be made worse 
by unfavourable demographic develop-
ments. Against this backdrop, the trend rise 
in the export prices of Chinese goods will 
probably continue. To what extent the 
higher prices of imported goods from China 
will pass through to consumer prices in the 
4 Unit values show the price of exports as measured 
per weight unit or item.
5 See M Amiti and M Choi, Consumer Goods from 
China Are Getting More Expensive, September 2011, 
available online at http://libertystreeteconomics.new-
yorkfed.org/ 2011/ 09/consumer- goods- from- china- are- getting- more- expensive.html.Price index for US imports of goodsfrom China
Source: Bureau of Labor Statistics.
Deutsche Bundesbank2004 05 06 07 08 09 10 11 12 13949698100102104106108110112January 2007 = 100, monthly, log scale
Memo item
Total US imports of goods
(excluding fuels)
China's share of total imports of manufactured goods
*
Sources:  UN  Comtrade,  Eurostat  (Comext)  and  Bundesbank 
calculations.  *  Sections  5  to  8  of  the  Standard  International 
Trade Classification (SITC). For the EU-27, excluding intra-EU 
trade.
Deutsche Bundesbank2001 02 03 04 05 06 07 08 09 10 11 20121015202530%
EU-27
United StatesDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report 
May 2013  
14

risen again of late. Over the next few months, 
investment demand is likely to gather more 
pace because the Indian central bank has cut 
its policy rate in three stages since the begin -
ning of the year. The improved outlook for in-flation was cited as the reason for the monet-
ary easing. Although consumer price inflation has slowed down somewhat at the current 
end, it was nonetheless still very high in April at 9.4%.
Real GDP in Brazil, which had expanded in the 
fourth quarter by a seasonally adjusted ½% 
quarter- on- quarter, is likely to have once again 
shown only relatively subdued growth in the 
past quarter. This estimate is based on the 
available monthly economic indicators, which 
point to slower private consumption growth and a reduction in real exports. The Brazilian 
central bank raised its policy rate slightly after 
taking a very loose monetary policy stance, es-
pecially last year. This step had become neces-
sary because the inflation rate had risen to 6.6% in March, exceeding the upper end of 
the central bank’s target corridor of 6.5%.
In Russia, real GDP growth decelerated again year- on- year in the first quarter of 2013. Ac
-
cording to an advance estimate by Russia’s 
economic ministry, production expanded by 1% on the year, compared with +2% in the fourth 
quarter of 2012. The economic slump, which 
has already lasted a year and a half, is primarily 
due to a levelling- out in investment growth. 
This appears to be particularly pronounced in 
the commodity sector, which is facing greater 
competition in the international natural gas 
market as a result of rapidly growing shale gas 
production in other areas of the world. Further -
more, private consumption in Russia is also 
likely to have lost momentum at the beginning 
of the year. One reason for this may have been 
that higher levels of inflation curtailed house -
holds’ real spending power. The rate of infla -
tion rose from 6.6% in the fourth quarter of 
2012 to 7.2% in the first quarter of 2013.Economic activ-
ity in Brazil also lacking momen-tum at begin-ning of yearRussia still in midst of eco-nomic slumpindustrial nations will depend in key meas-
ure on the Chinese import content of pri-
vate consumption. For the United States, at 
least, this share is apparently relatively 
small; a study put it at only 2% in 2010.6 No 
data on the corresponding share for the 
euro area are available.
There are also potential indirect effects on 
consumer prices in industrial countries 
which need to be taken into account along-
side those effects which pass through dir-
ectly via the import price channel. There is 
evidence that growing competitive pressure 
from low- wage countries such as China 
acted in the past as a drag on the prices of 
domestically produced goods or imports 
from third countries as, for example, fi  rms 
felt forced to offset higher costs by redu-
cing their profi  t margins.7 This price- 
stabilising effect could diminish in the fu-
ture as Chinese export prices rise. Irrespect-ive of this, continued robust economic 
growth in China could continue to drive up commodity prices, thereby causing infl  ation in the industrial countries to accelerate.
6 Although goods originating in China made up 2¾% 
of total consumer spending in 2010, a large share of 
value added for these goods – more than one- half – 
was produced in the United States, such as transporta-
tion or retail activities. The study also takes account of 
the fact that some products labelled “Made in USA” contain Chinese intermediate goods. However, Chi-nese intermediate inputs that go into imports from other countries are apparently not included. See G Hale and B Hobijn (2011), The U. S. Content of “Made in China”, Federal Reserve Bank of San Fran-
cisco Economic Letter, No 25.
7 For more see S Eickmeier and M Kühnlenz (2013), 
China’s Role in Global Infl  ation Dynamics, Deutsche Bundesbank Discussion Paper No 07, and B Mandel 
(2013), Chinese Exports and U. S. Import Prices, Federal Reserve Bank of New York Staff Reports No 591.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report 
May 2013  
15

USA
After virtually stagnating in the final quarter of 
2012, the US economy resumed its path of 
moderate growth in the winter months. Not 
taking into account seasonal and calendar ef -
fects, real GDP rose considerably on the period in the first quarter (+½%). This was chiefly due to the fact that inventory investment no longer significantly slowed aggregate growth, but en-couraged it instead. As in the previous quarter – but in reverse – the economic momentum re-sulting from inventory changes was somewhat diminished by the calculated impact of foreign 
trade. While these rather technical counter -
movements were to be expected, it is remark-able that public sector demand once more sig-
nificantly curbed the increase in real GDP . Be -
cause this effect can be broadly attributed to 
defence spending, it is not clear to what extent 
it is already a consequence of the automatic 
spending cuts (known as “sequestration”), half of which also affect other discretionary federal 
spending, and which only came into force at the beginning of March. The ongoing reduc
-
tion in the country’s overseas military presence may also have played a role.
On the other hand, the robustness of private 
domestic final demand, which expanded almost 
as strongly as in autumn in real terms (+¾%), 
should be highlighted. Although neither indus-
trial gross fixed capital formation nor spending 
on residential construction could maintain their 
pace of the previous quarter, household con -
sumption grew at its strongest rate in two years. 
Given the extensive increases in social security 
contributions and taxes at the beginning of the year, this may seem surprising at first. However, the preceding cut in contribution rates was de-
signed to be temporary right from the start. 
With households behaving in a forward- looking 
manner, this cut is therefore likely to have had 
only a moderate impact on consumption. In addition, the tax increases especially affected those on higher incomes whose consumption 
does not vary in close relation to their current 
earnings. On balance, the extensive fiscal meas-Moderate 
growth rate  resumed
Households 
bucking higher taxes and dutiesAggregate output in industrial countries*
Sources: National statistics, Eurostat and Bundesbank calcula-
tions. * The United States, euro area, United Kingdom and Ja-
pan.
Deutsche Bundesbank2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013100102104106
100102104106108110
102104106108
100102104106108
96981001021041062005 = 100, seasonally adjusted, quarterly, log scale
United States
Euro area
United Kingdom
JapanIndustrial countriesDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report 
May 2013  
16

ures reduced the household saving rate to its 
lowest level since the end of 2007. In the previ-
ous quarter, extraordinary dividends paid out in 
anticipation of the changes in tax legislation 
had significantly increased the saving rate. Households’ propensity to consume was sup
-
ported by the continued improvement in the labour market. The unemployment rate de
-
creased slightly to 7.7% on average over the 
winter months. Furthermore, consumer price 
inflation fell. As measured by the consumer 
price index, headline inflation fell from 1.9% in 
autumn to 1.7% in winter. Excluding food and 
energy from the basket of goods, core inflation 
remained at 1.9%.
Japan
In Japan, real GDP was up by a seasonally ad-
justed +1% in the first quarter, its strongest 
quarter- on- quarter growth in a year. It was pri-
vate households, whose consumption showed 
strong growth, which were particularly instru -
mental in overcoming the economic slump. 
Sales of motor vehicles, in particular, were driven not only by consumers’ increased pro
-
pensity to spend but also by the introduction of 
new models and the subsiding of dampening effects following the discontinuation of gov
-
ernment incentives to buy cars. In addition, both private residential construction expend
-
iture and public gross fixed capital formation continued to trend upwards, the latter driven by a variety of economic policy measures. By 
contrast, enterprises remained reluctant to in-
vest, even though export- oriented firms were 
apparently already benefiting from the revival of key sales markets and the yen’s depreci
-
ation. Real exports of goods and services sky -
rocketed; on the other hand, import growth was relatively sluggish given the dynamics of 
domestic demand and the low level of the pre-
vious quarter following the introduction of a 
tax on energy commodities. The labour market 
likewise swung onto a path of recovery. Al -
though the unemployment rate was still un -
changed on average over the winter months, there was distinct growth in employment. By contrast, the fight against the mild deflation has not yet seen any progress. The negative year- on- year consumer price index rate ex
-
panded in the first quarter to -0.6%, and core 
inflation, too, slid further into negative terri -
tory, at -0.8%.
United Kingdom
Over the winter months, the UK economy re -
couped the distinct decline in its output over the last quarter of 2012. The rise in real GDP of ¼% 
on the period after seasonal adjustment was 
supported nearly entirely by services; the gross 
value added of this sector, which now makes up 
nearly three-  quarters of aggregate output, rose 
by just over ½%. This sector thus surpassed its 
cyclical peak of the beginning of 2008 by ¾%; 
however, aggregate output was 2½% below 
pre- crisis levels. Whereas manufacturing output 
fell slightly once again, value added in mining Cyclical weak-
ness overcome
Return to rather flat growth pathHousehold income, consumption and saving in the USA
Source:  Bureau  of  Economic  Analysis.  1 At  previous-year 
prices, reference year 2005. 2 Adjusted using the PCE deflator. 
3 Saving as a percentage of disposable income.
Deutsche Bundesbank2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 139,0009,2009,4009,6009,80010,00010,20010,400Seasonally adjusted, quarterly
02468Real consumption 2Log scaleReal disposable income
 2
Lin scale
Saving rate 3%US$ bn1
NBER recession Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report 
May 2013  
17

surged in the winter months, owing mainly to a 
return to normalcy of oil and gas production fol-
lowing cutbacks in the previous quarter due to 
unscheduled maintenance works. The long- run 
trend in energy commodity production, how -
ever, is pointing downwards. By contrast, al -
though the strong decline in construction out -
put may well also reflect the impact of inclement 
weather, the UK Office for National Statistics, 
however, has determined that the impairment 
to GDP growth caused by the cold winter wea-
ther was probably only minimal. Consumers 
continued to face a bleak price climate. Inflation 
as measured by the Harmonised Index of Con -
sumer Prices (HICP) averaged 2.8% over the 
winter months, and was thus even slightly higher than a quarter previously. The harmon
-
ised unemployment rate held firm at 7.7%.
New EU member states
Business activity in the new EU member states 
(EU-7)2 was listless in the first quarter. Although 
real GDP in Hungary grew again markedly on 
the period following a relatively long slide, the 
Polish economy continued to tread water while, in the Czech Republic, the recession intensified. The weak performance of construction output is 
likely to have been one of the key factors de -
pressing aggregate output in the latter two 
economies. Given listless business activity in the 
region, the labour market situation has grown even worse in many places. In the reporting 
quarter, the aggregate unemployment rate, at a 
seasonally adjusted 9.7%, stood slightly above 
its previous peak of the winter of 2010. Inflation in the EU-7, as measured by the HICP , continued to trend downwards in the past few months and 
averaged 2.0% in the first quarter, its lowest 
level since the start of the time series in 1998.
Macroeconomic trends  
in the euro area
The recessionary trend in the euro area, which 
had accelerated significantly in the last quarter of 2012, diminished markedly in the first quarter of 
2013. Aggregate output fell by a seasonally ad -
justed ¼% from the autumn quarter, in which it 
had dropped by just over ½%. Account also 
needs to be taken of the effects of the inclement 
weather in the northern part of the euro area, 
which prevented a better performance. Aggre -
gate output in the euro area was 1% below its 
level of a year earlier. The slowdown of the slide 
was regionally quite broadly based, judging by 
provisional data for 13 of the 17 member states. 
An important contribution was made by the 
turnaround in Germany from a perceptible con -
traction to a slight growth of real GDP . Belgium 
likewise reported marginal GDP growth, whereas 
Slovakia posted a perceptible increase of +¼% after seasonal adjustment. Austria’s output re
-
mained unchanged. GDP contracted moderately in the Netherlands, Finland, France and Portugal, and more strongly in Italy and Spain (each -½%), Estonia (-1%) and Cyprus (-1¼%). Greece’s econ
-
omy, for which no more seasonally adjusted data 
are being published until further notice, saw a 
contraction in output of 5¼% on the year, fol -
lowing -5¾% in autumn 2012. The renewed 
poor performance of the peripheral countries in the first quarter is due, for one thing, to the con
-
tinuing adjustment processes; however, the eas -
ing of tensions in the financial markets following 
their intensification in the summer months has 
only just begun to be reflected in improved con -
sumer and investor confidence. Another reason 
is that, in the first quarter, non- euro- area coun-
tries did not generate any meaningful expansion -
ary stimuli which could have contributed to an 
improvement in business activity.
Following a promising start to the year, the 
survey- based economic indicators for the euro 
area slumped again, indicating that the euro 
area was entering the second quarter on more 
of a rocky note. The Purchasing Managers’ Index (PMI) for manufacturing remained per
-
ceptibly below the expansion threshold in April, 
especially the output component. Moreover, Listless business 
activityEuro- area eco-
nomic slide 
slowed down
No cyclical 
 turnaround in sight for spring quarter
2 This group comprises the non- euro- area countries that 
joined the EU in 2004 and 2007.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report 
May 2013  
18

industrial confidence, as measured by a survey 
commissioned by the European Commission, 
sagged yet again, becoming further removed 
from its long- term average. Against this back -
ground, a major cyclical recovery should not be 
expected in the spring, even though the elimin-ation of the adverse effects of inclement wea-
ther and possible catching- up effects will pos -
sibly have a slight positive effect on GDP .
In the first quarter, it was once again a sharp de -
cline in construction output which acted as a drag on real GDP; contributory factors include not only the continuing adjustment process in 
this sector, too, but also – as mentioned earlier 
– the unusually long and severe winter north of the Alps. Construction output, averaged over the 
January to March period, dropped by no less 
than 3¼% from the autumn quarter, after sea-
sonal adjustment. By contrast, industrial output 
in the first quarter of 2013 rose slightly on the period (+¼%) but was off its previous year’s mark by 2½%. Broken down by category of goods, the euro area’s production of durable 
goods and capital goods in the first quarter, after seasonal adjustment, was roughly on a par with the preceding three- month period, whereas that 
of non- durables and intermediate goods each 
fell by ¼%. By contrast, energy production rose by 1½% over the same period, owing above all to the extended period of frost; it was therefore 
the sole factor behind the rise in industrial out -
put. Following a slight increase from October to January, capacity utilisation in the manufacturing industry remained unchanged in April, thus stay
-
ing well below its long- term average.
On the demand side, it was particularly weaker 
contraction of domestic demand which was 
probably responsible for the slide abating in the 
first quarter. Private consumption was marked 
anew by a drop in new car registrations – 
which fell by a seasonally adjusted 3% on the 
period and 11¼% on the year. On the other hand, real retail sales (excluding cars) rose moderately from their depressed level in the 
autumn period. Given that the output of cap -
ital goods remained unchanged, investment in new machinery and equipment could have sta-bilised. The structural and cyclical slide in con-struction investment is likely to have been over -
stated somewhat by the adverse impact of the 
inclement weather. Nominal goods exports to 
non- euro- area countries rose by a seasonally 
adjusted ½% in January- February compared 
with the fourth quarter, whereas imports fell by 
¼%. This indicates that net exports made a 
marginal positive contribution to growth.
The euro- area labour market continued to be af-
fected by the recession in the 2012 Q4 and 2013 
Q1 period, with employment in the euro area 
falling in the fourth quarter of 2012 by around 
1.1 million persons on the year, implying a sea -
sonally adjusted decline of 0.3% compared with 
the summer period. Euro- area employment fell 
by 0.6% on average for 2012, and was even 
3.1% below its pre- crisis level of late. Although 
employment rose, in some cases quite strongly, in 
Germany, Belgium and Austria, there were con-
siderable job losses in the peripheral countries Construction 
output falling sharply but  industrial output up slightly
Contraction 
of domestic  demand abatedLabour market situation deteri-orated furtherReal GDP in the euro area
1 Year-on-year rate calculated using seasonally adjusted data.
Deutsche Bundesbank2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 201393949596979899100101102
–5–4–3–2–10+1+2+3+4+5Annual averages, lin scale
Year-on-year percentage changeEuro area (17)Germany
Euro area (17)
excluding
Germany
Germany
Euro area (17) excluding 
GermanyEuro area (17)Q112008 Q1 = 100, seasonally adjusted,
quarterly, log scaleDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report 
May 2013  
19

and France. Downsizing was particularly severe 
in Spain, which has seen net job losses of 3.5 
million since the outbreak of the crisis in 2008, 
compared with 4.7 million jobs lost in the entire 
euro area. It must be noted in this context, how-
ever, that the euro- area aggregate includes the 
1.7 million new jobs added in Austria, Belgium 
and Germany. The standardised unemployment 
figure rose to 19.2 million people by March 2013, after seasonal adjustment; this was 1.8 
million more than a year earlier. The seasonally 
adjusted unemployment rate stood at 12.1%. 
Relatively few members of the labour force were 
affected by unemployment in Austria and Ger -
many, where the rates were 4.7% and 5.4% re-
spectively. In Ireland and Cyprus, by contrast, 
somewhat more than 14% of the labour force 
were without work; the figure was 17.5% in Por -
tugal, and more than one- quarter of the labour 
force in Greece and Spain were unemployed.
Euro- area consumer price inflation did not di -
minish any further in the first quarter of 2013. As in autumn 2012, it was a seasonally adjusted 
0.4% quarter- on- quarter. Whereas energy 
prices rose quite considerably, unprocessed 
food price inflation diminished. The prices of 
(non- energy) industrial goods and services con-
tinued to rise at a moderate pace. Annual HICP 
inflation fell once again, from 2.3% to 1.9%, 
and thus approached the annualised quarterly 
rate of 1.6%. In April, annual HICP inflation fell 
distinctly from 1.7% to 1.2%. Factors included 
a sharp drop in energy prices – as a result of 
low crude oil prices – and the early Easter holi-
day. For those reasons, the prices of services, in particular, were raised in March already, unlike 
a year earlier. This increased the year- on- year 
inflation rate in March and reduced it in April.
Government measures are currently having a 
considerable impact on consumer price devel -
opments. Given distressed public budgets, the 
rates of indirect taxes and the prices of govern-ment services in the crisis countries, in particu-lar, were increased, in some cases considerably. In the euro area as a whole, such measures are 
likely to have contributed more than ½ per -
centage point to the annual inflation rate in the 
first quarter. Since they are not of any major 
relevance in Germany, and also because meas-
ures which accelerate upward price pressures 
were countered by dampening measures such 
as the abolition of the surgery visit charge, this 
also affects euro- area inflation differentials. 
Whereas German headline inflation, at 1.8%, 
was even slightly lower than in the euro area as a whole, a different picture emerges if govern-ment involvement is factored out of the equa-
tion. Market- driven inflation in Germany – 
which also takes into account the bias caused 
by the hotel services sub- index3 – is likely to 
have been stronger than in most other coun -
tries in the first quarter of 2013. The macroeco-
nomic adjustments currently under way in the 
euro area would therefore increasingly show 
up in consumer prices, too.
Moderate rise in 
consumer pricesGovernment  involvement  currently quite 
substantialEuro-area employment by sector
Change in the number of persons in work compared 
to 2008 Q1 in millions; seasonally adjusted
Source: ECB. 1 NACE Rev 2, sections O-U, of which public ad-
ministration and defence, education, human health and social 
work  activities,  and  arts,  entertainment  and  recreation. 
2 NACE Rev 2, sections G-N, of which trade, transportation and storage, accomodation and food service activities, inform-ation  and  communication,  financial  and  insurance  activities, real estate activities, and professional, scientific and technical 
activities.
Deutsche BundesbankTotal
654321012
––––––++
2008 2009 2010 2011 2012Industry excluding constructionConstructionMarket services 2AgricultureNon-market services1
3 See Deutsche Bundesbank, The contribution of the ac -
commodation services sub- index to explaining the current 
deviations between CPI and HICP inflation rates, Monthly 
Report, April 2013, p 7.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report 
May 2013  
20

Monetary policy and banking business
Monetary policy and money 
market developments
At its monetary policy meeting at the begin -
ning of May 2013, the ECB Governing Council 
decided to lower the interest rate on the Euro-
system’s main refinancing operations by 25 basis points to 0.50% to help support pro
-
spects for an economic recovery later in the year. The decision was based on the assess
-
ment that price pressure in the euro area is low 
over the medium term. This is indicated, first, 
by the weakness of economic growth, which 
remains burdened by necessary balance sheet 
adjustments in the public and private sectors. 
Second, the subdued money and credit growth also points to low pressure on prices.
Simultaneously with the interest rate cut of 
2 May 2013, the interest rate corridor formed 
by the Eurosystem’s standing facilities was nar -
rowed from +/-75 basis points to +/-50 basis points. Banks’ balances in the deposit facility 
– as well as their excess reserves on current ac-
counts – continue to earn 0% interest. Mean -
while, Eurosystem counterparties can now ob-
tain overnight credit through the marginal 
lending facility for as little as 1.00%, ie for 50 
basis points less than before.
Coinciding with the interest rate cut, the ECB Governing Council decided to continue con
-
ducting its regular monetary policy refinancing 
operations as fixed-  rate tenders with full allot -
ment until at least the end of the second quar -
ter of 2014. Furthermore, the ECB Governing Council announced in early May that, for the 
time being, marketable debt instruments issued or guaranteed by the Republic of Cyprus would 
again constitute eligible collateral for Eurosys -
tem credit operations. This decision was based 
on the Governing Council’s assessment of the 
appropriateness of the economic and financial 
adjustment programme for Cyprus. Moreover, 
the ECB Governing Council had previously an-nounced on 22 March that, from 1 March 2015 onwards, banks would no longer be permitted to use government-  guaranteed bank bonds is-
sued by themselves or by affiliated institutions 
as collateral in monetary policy refinancing op-erations.
In the quarter under review and up to the cur -
rent end, the Eurosystem did not make any 
purchases as part of monetary policy-  based 
bond purchase programmes. In particular, pur -
chases were still not being made in the form of 
Outright Monetary Transactions (OMT). The Euro system’s holdings of securities acquired 
under the Securities Markets Programme (SMP), which was discontinued in 2012, amounted to 
€201.0 billion of late. Holdings totalling €62.2 
billion were accounted for by the two covered 
bond purchase programmes, which have like -
wise been discontinued in the meantime.Main refinan-
cing rate at new all-time low
ECB Governing 
Council decides 
to again extend 
full allotment for 
refinancing 
 operationsStill no bond purchases in the 
form of Outright 
Monetary Trans-
actions
Money market interest rates
in the euro area
1 Monthly averages. 2 Three-month Euribor less three-month 
Eurepo. • Average 1 to 15 May 2013.
Deutsche Bundesbank2009 2010 2011 2012 201300.51.01.52.02.53.0
050100150Difference between unsecured and secured
three-month interbank lending rates 1 ,  2Basis
points% Marginal lending rate
Three-month Euribor 1
EONIA 1
Minimum bid rate or fixed interest rate
for main refinancing operations
Deposit rateDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report 
May 2013  
21

Money market management and liquidity needs
During the three reserve maintenance 
periods from 16  January to 9  April 2013, 
euro- area credit institutions’ need for cen-
tral bank liquidity determined by autono-
mous liquidity factors rose by €29.4 billion 
in net terms. This greater need for liquidity 
resulted from the sum of changes in net 
foreign assets and other factors (€54.1 bil-
lion in total) which, taken together, elimin-
ate valuation effects with no impact on li-
quidity. The crucial factor in this increase was the liquidity- absorbing reduction of Emergency Liquidity Assistance (ELA). By contrast, the decreased volume of bank-notes in circulation and the reduction in 
general government deposits with the Euro-system had the effect of providing liquidity and compensating partly for the additional 
need. Banknote circulation contracted by 
€14.3 billion in net terms during the period under review; this was induced by the typ-
ical seasonal countermovement to the higher demand for banknotes in the pre- Christmas period. Comparing the period 
averages, general government deposits de-
celerated by a total of €10.4 billion during 
the three reserve maintenance periods 
under review. The minimum reserve require-ment declined in all three reserve mainten-
ance periods and fell by €1.5 billion in net 
terms, which had an additional –  albeit 
minimal – effect on liquidity provision.
In the period under review, liquidity- providing open market operations con-tinued to be carried out as fi  xed- rate ten-ders with full allotment of the submitted 
bids (see table on page 23). The ECB Gov-
erning Council decided at its meeting on 
6 December 2012 to continue this full allot-
ment policy until at least the start of July 
2013. Central bank liquidity provided by the 
Eurosystem was still considerably higher than the benchmark amount of liquidity 
needs arising from autonomous factors and 
the minimum reserve requirement; the re-sulting excess liquidity declined sharply, 
however, in the period under review. This 
decline was mainly due to the early repay-
ments from both three- year tenders, which 
resulted in a signifi  cant reduction of the 
outstanding refi  nancing volume. During the 
period under review, credit institutions re-
paid €162 billion (fi  rst three- year tender) 
and €82 billion (second three- year tender) 
in total respectively to the Eurosystem, so that the still outstanding volumes of both 
these refi  nancing operations were reduced 
to €305 billion and €441 billion respectively 
by the end of the three reserve mainten-
ance periods under review.
The total volume of longer- term refi  nancing 
operations (LTROs) –  which include the 
three- year tenders as well as refi  nancing 
operations with a three- month maturity 
and with the duration of a reserve mainten-
ance period – showed a total decrease of 
€254 billion in the period under review 
(comparing the period averages). Notwith-
standing the early repayments of liquidity 
provided in the three- year tenders, demand for the main refi  nancing operations (MROs) accelerated by almost €46 billion during the 
same period. Overall, there was a substan-
tial drop in excess liquidity, which led, on 
the one hand, to reduced recourses to the 
deposit facility (down by €105 billion in net 
terms) and, on the other hand, to dimin-
ished current account holdings (€143 billion in net terms). Thus, credit institutions scaled 
back their excess reserves – ie current ac-count holdings that exceed the minimum reserve requirement – to a greater extent 
than their recourses to the deposit facility. 
This decision had a negligible effect on 
interest paid, however, because both excess reserves and recourses to the deposit facility 
continued to bear no interest under the given key interest rates. Recourses to the 
marginal lending facility were lower in the 
three reserve maintenance periods under Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report 
May 2013  
22

review than in the previous periods; its 
period averages were each under the €1 
billion mark.
After taking into consideration the regular 
quarterly revaluations at the end of each 
quarter, the total central bank liquidity pro-
vided under the securities purchase pro-grammes set up for monetary policy pur-
poses declined again on account of secur-
ities reaching maturity. Purchases did not occur as existing programmes were dis-
continued (Securities Market Programme – 
SMP) or expired as planned (Covered Bond 
Purchase Programme –  CBPP , Second Covered Bond Purchase Programme  – CBPP2) or indeed were not yet activated (Outright Monetary Transactions  – OMT). As a result, the balance sheet holdings of 
securities purchased under the SMP fell by 
€2.9 billion in total to €205.9 billion. Weekly 
fi  ne- tuning operations continued to neu-tralise the liquidity effect induced by the SMP portfolio. CBPP holdings dropped by 
€4.4 billion to €47.0 billion, while the bal-
ance sheet value of securities held under the CBPP2 diminished by €0.2 billion to 
€16.1 billion.
The January- February 2013 reserve main-tenance period was characterised in par-ticular by the new opportunities for early 
repayment of the fi  rst three- year tender. It 
was mainly due to this, especially on ac-
count of the fi  rst repayment to the sum of 
€137 billion, that the outstanding refi  nan-Open market operations of the Eurosystem*
 
Value 
dateType of transaction
1Maturity in daysActual 
 allotment 
in € bil-lionDeviation from the 
bench-
mark in € billion
2Marginal rate/fi  xed 
rate
%Allot-ment 
ratio
%Weighted 
rate
%Cover ratio
3Numberof bid-
ders
16.01.2013 MRO (FRT) 7 131.2 240.2 0.75 100.00 –  1.00 72
16.01.2013 FTO (–) 7 – 208.5 –  0.01 73.33 0.01 1.71 61
16.01.2013 S-LTRO (FRT) 28 10.5 –  0.75 100.00 –  1.00 19
23.01.2013 MRO (FRT) 7 125.3 290.8 0.75 100.00 –  1.00 71
23.01.2013 FTO (–) 7 – 208.5 –  0.01 81.73 0.01 1.55 60
30.01.2013 MRO (FRT) 7 124.1 160.6 0.75 100.00 –  1.00 74
30.01.2013 FTO (–) 7 – 208.5 –  0.20 17.12 0.04 1.36 66
31.01.2013 LTRO (FRT) 84 3.7 –  
4 0.75 100.00 –  1.00 46
06.02.2013 MRO (FRT) 7 129.3 95.3 0.75 100.00 –  1.00 73
06.02.2013 FTO (–) 7 – 205.5 –  0.10 32.86 0.04 1.63 91
13.02.2013 MRO (FRT) 7 128.7 129.7 0.75 100.00 –  1.00 73
13.02.2013 FTO (–) 7 – 205.5 –  0.06 26.21 0.04 1.70 93
13.02.2013 S-LTRO (FRT) 28 7.8 –  0.75 100.00 –  1.00 16
20.02.2013 MRO (FRT) 7 132.2 142.7 0.75 100.00 –  1.00 75
20.02.2013 FTO (–) 7 – 205.5 –  0.04 54.57 0.03 1.70 90
27.02.2013 MRO (FRT) 7 131.1 12.1 0.75 100.00 –  1.00 79
27.02.2013 FTO (–) 7 – 205.5 –  0.04 56.28 0.03 1.52 89
28.02.2013 LTRO (FRT) 91 8.3 –  4  … 100.00 –  1.00 36
06.03.2013 MRO (FRT) 7 129.8 – 91.7 0.75 100.00 –  1.00 80
06.03.2013 FTO (–) 7 – 205.5 –  0.04 30.21 0.03 1.52 91
13.03.2013 MRO (FRT) 7 127.3 87.3 0.75 100.00 –  1.00 78
13.03.2013 FTO (–) 7 – 205.5 –  0.04 39.08 0.03 1.39 78
13.03.2013 S-LTRO (FRT) 28 4.2 –  0.75 100.00 –  1.00 19
20.03.2013 MRO (FRT) 7 119.4 54.9 0.75 100.00 –  1.00 76
20.03.2013 FTO (–) 7 – 205.5 –  0.04 62.84 0.03 1.33 72
27.03.2013 MRO (FRT) 7 123.2 – 11.8 0.75 100.00 –  1.00 75
27.03.2013 FTO (–) 7 – 205.5 –  0.24 99.54 0.06 1.10 64
28.03.2013 LTRO (FRT) 91 9.1 –  4 … 100.00 –  1.00 46
03.04.2013 MRO (FRT) 7 124.9 – 85.1 0.75 100.00 –  1.00 74
03.04.2013 FTO (–) 7 – 205.5 –  0.07 30.19 0.04 1.32 72
* For more information on the Eurosystem’s operations from 10 October 2012 to 15 January 2013, see Deutsche Bundesbank, Monthly  Report, February 2013, p 27. 1 MRO: main refi  nancing operation, LTRO: longer-term refi  nancing operation, S-LTRO: 
supplementary longer-term refi  nancing operation, FTO: fi  ne-tuning operation (+: liquidity providing operation, –: liquidity ab-sorbing operation), FRT: fi  xed-rate tender. 2 Calculation according to publication after MRO allotment. 3 Ratio of total bids to 
the allotment amount. 4 The interest rate corresponds to the average minimum bid rate or main refi  nancing rate of the MROs 
conducted over the life of this operation (may be rounded to two decimal places in the table).
Deutsche BundesbankDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report 
May 2013  
23

cing volume from LTROs fell from €1,031 
billion at the start of the period to €888 bil-
lion at the end of the period. At the same 
time, there was a signifi  cant rise in interest 
in the MROs. After averaging €78 billion in the previous period, demand for the MROs grew to just under €128 billion on average in the January- February 2013 reserve main-
tenance period. The higher demand was 
predominantly a result of the fact that some larger Greek banks, following their success-
ful recapitalisation, regained access to the 
regular open market operations of the Eu-
rosystem. Against the backdrop of these 
two countervailing developments, the out-
standing volume from tender operations (excluding fi  ne- tuning operations) fell to €1,088 billion on average, compared with 
€1,115 billion in the previous period. Given 
that autonomous factors additionally rose by €42 billion on average to €503 billion compared with the previous period, the average excess liquidity – calculated from 
current account holdings plus deposit facil-
ity minus the minimum reserve require-ment – contracted by €76 billion to €545 
billion. This contraction was especially evi-
dent in the lower recourses to the deposit 
facility (down €54 billion on average to 
€184 billion); excess reserves held in current accounts, by contrast, receded by only €22 
billion on average to €361 billion with the 
result that its share of total excess liquidity 
rose to 66% (62% in the previous period). 
Average overnight rates remained virtually unchanged from the previous period. The EONIA, the reference rate for unsecured overnight money, was fi  xed at 0.072% on average (0.071% in the previous period), while the secured overnight rate on Eurex Repo’s GC Pooling (ECB basket) stood at 
0.021% and was almost identical to the rate 
of the previous period (0.020%). Secured 
overnight money continued to be traded at a rate that was signifi  cantly lower than the EONIA and only marginally higher than the rate on the deposit facility. Overnight turn-
over likewise showed little change: EONIA 
turnover remained low at €17.2 billion 
(€16.3 billion in the previous period), while Factors determining bank liquidity1
€ billion; changes in the daily averages of the reserve maintenance periods vis-à-vis the previous period
Item2013
16 Jan to 
12 Feb13 Feb to 12 Mar13 Mar to 9 Apr
I Provision (+) or  absorption (–) of  
central bank balances due to changes 
in autonomous factors1 Banknotes in  circulation (increase: –) + 20.1 +   2.9 –  8.7
2 Government  deposits with the Eurosystem ( increase: –) +  9.3 +  12.0 – 10.9
3 Net foreign assets
2 – 27.4 –   0.8 +  1.1
4 Other factors 2 – 43.9 –   1.5 + 18.4
Total – 41.9 +  12.6 –  0.1
II Monetary policy  operations of the Eurosystem
1 Open market  operations
(a) Main refi  nancing operations + 49.3 +   3.0 –  6.8
(b) Longer-term refi  nancing  operations – 76.5 – 117.1 – 60.3
(c) Other operations –  4.6 –   1.2 –  0.8
2 Standing facilities
(a) Marginal lending facility –  3.4 +   0.6 –  0.4
(b) Deposit facility (increase: –) + 54.1 +  39.0 + 11.5
Total + 18.9 –  75.7 – 56.8
III Change in credit  institutions’  current accounts (I + II) – 22.7 –  63.3 – 57.0
IV Change in the  minimum reserve requirement ( increase: –) +  0.6 +   0.2 +  0.7
1 For longer-term trends and the Deutsche Bundesbank’s contribution, see pp 14 • and 15 • of the Statistical Section of this 
Monthly Report. 2 Including end-of- quarter liquidity-neutral valuation adjustments.
Deutsche BundesbankDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report 
May 2013  
24

at the same time the underlying GC Pooling 
overnight turnover averaged €8.2 billion 
(€8.3 billion in the previous period).
In the February- March 2013 reserve main-
tenance period, credit institutions were 
offered the opportunity to repay the liquid-ity received in the second three- year tender to the Eurosystem early. Participating credit institutions used the fi  rst repayment oppor-tunity of this kind to the tune of €61 billion, 
ie to a much lower amount than the fi  rst repayment opportunity for the fi  rst three- year tender in January. The second repay-
ment opportunity a week later only gener-
ated a sum of around €8 billion. During this 
reserve maintenance period, repayments 
for the fi  rst three- year tender came to ap-
proximately €15 billion in total. The out-standing tender volume (excluding fi  ne- 
tuning operations) declined – with the vol-ume of MROs at a fairly constant €130 bil-lion on average – to €974 billion on average 
over the period, thereby falling below the 
€1 trillion mark for the fi  rst time since the 
February- March 2012 reserve maintenance 
period. The liquidity needs stemming from 
autonomous factors likewise abated by just 
under €13 billion on average to €491 bil-
lion; this fi  gure was only slightly weakened, however, by the fall in excess liquidity. Aver-age excess liquidity receded to €443 billion, 
of which approximately two- thirds (€297 billion) was accounted for by excess re-serves on current accounts and one- third 
(€145 billion) by the deposit facility. The EO-
NIA averaged 0.064% over this reserve maintenance period and thus was down somewhat on the previous period. At the 
same time,  EONIA turnover increased mark-
edly to €21.5 billion. The GC Pooling se-cured overnight rates (ECB basket) again remained broadly unchanged compared with the previous period at a period aver-
age of 0.020%; the corresponding turnover rose distinctly, however, to €10.6 billion.As observed in the preceding periods, the 
March- April 2013 reserve maintenance 
period was similarly marked by a reduction 
in the volume of LTROs. However, interest in the weekly repayment opportunities for 
both three- year tenders was fairly low. Total 
early repayments in this period amounted to approximately €20 billion. Since, more-
over, the average volume of the MROs con-
tracted by just under €7 billion to around €124 billion and liquidity needs resulting 
from autonomous factors remained virtually 
unchanged at an average of €491 billion, 
excess liquidity was down on average over 
the period to €375 billion, of which €134 
billion (36%) was directed to the deposit fa-
cility, whereas the majority at €241 billion (64%) continued to be held as excess re-
serves. The outstanding tender volume (ex-
cluding fi  ne- tuning operations) dropped to 
€907 billion on average. With regard to overnight money, the EONIA was fi  xed at 0.071% on average over this period and 
was thus somewhat higher than the rate of 
the previous period. This rise was also at-tributable to the higher quotation at the end of the quarter, which featured a de 
facto fi  ve- day life in connection with the subsequent Easter public holidays. On 
28 March 2013, the last trading day of the fi  rst quarter, the EONIA rose to 0.112%, in-
dicating an increase of 4.5 basis points on 
the previous day (compared with +3.9 basis 
points at the end of the quarter in March 2012). The GC Pooling secured overnight rate (ECB basket) also augmented at the end of the quarter, climbing by 2.7 basis 
points to 0.058%. This period- average rate 
accelerated markedly to 0.038%, which was also caused by the higher overnight 
rates towards the end of this reserve main-
tenance period. The underlying overnight 
turnover in this reserve maintenance period grew somewhat once again and stood at a period average of €22.8 billion (EONIA) and 
€11.6 billion (GC Pooling, ECB basket) re-
spectively.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report 
May 2013  
25

Recourse to monetary policy refinancing oper -
ations by euro-  area banks declined consider -
ably on the whole from the beginning of this 
year. This was due mainly to early repayments 
of the liquidity provided in the two outstanding 
three-  year refinancing operations; early repay -
ments were not possible until the first quarter 
of 2013. By 15 May 2013, the monetary policy 
counterparties to the two operations had vol-
untarily repaid to the Eurosystem just over 
€284 billion of the total amount of roughly €1,019 billion originally provided through the three-  year tenders. In particular, institutions 
and banking groups with excess central bank liquidity and/or more favourable alternative 
 financing sources are again likely to have made 
use of the early repayment opportunity. There 
is still no sign of increased recourse to the 
regular refinancing operations with maturities 
of up to three months in connection with these 
repayments. As a result, excess liquidity de -
creased to around €320 billion of late, which is 
almost half the total amount recorded at the beginning of the year. Given that the interest rate corridor has been narrowed from +/-75 
basis points to +/-50 basis points, the incentive for the banking sector to return excess liquidity 
to the Eurosystem is likely to have diminished 
on the whole. Compared with previous months, 
this may be reflected in a further decline in 
 repayment amounts.
At the end of January 2013, when expectations 
among market participants of a more rapid re-
payment of excess liquidity contributed tem -
porarily to a broader-  based increase in money 
market rates, in particular short-  term money 
market rates and money market risk indicators 
(depo-  repo spread, Euribor-  OIS spread) have 
been almost unchanged at a comparatively low 
level during the second quarter. So far, money 
market rates have shown only a fairly limited 
response to the cut in the main refinancing rate 
decided on 2  May 2013. In the case of the 
short-  term money market rates this is probably 
due primarily to the fact that, owing to the still 
high levels of excess liquidity, they are particu-larly dependent on the interest paid on the de-posit facility, which was not changed as part of the ECB Governing Council’s latest interest-  rate 
policy decisions.
Monetary developments  
in the euro area
Growth of the broad monetary aggregate M3, 
which has persisted since the second quarter of 
2010, continued in the quarter under review. 
However, expansion declined perceptibly com-
pared with the previous two quarters. Once 
again, monetary growth was fuelled by the 
overall low level of interest rates and a renewed 
flattening of the yield curve, which led to fur -
ther portfolio shifts by the money-  holding sec-
tor away from longer-  term and securitised in -
vestments to short-  term bank deposits. The 
underlying trend of M3 growth is still to be re-
garded as moderate, with an annual growth rate of 2.6% at the end of the quarter under 
review. By contrast, the annual growth rate of 
loans (adjusted for loan sales and securitisa -
tion) to the euro-  area private sector remained 
in negative territory at -0.3%. Thus, monetary 
growth and growth of loans remain decoupled from one another.
As in the previous quarters, monetary growth 
was due to strong inflows to overnight and short-   term savings deposits. The growth was 
supported by all private sectors, notably house-
holds. Besides the interest rate differential –  which again declined slightly  – between short-  term and longer-  term investments, in
-
vestors’ persistently high preference for liquid -
ity in view of the heightened real economic un-certainty is also likely to have played a part. At the same time, the rise in deposits of domestic 
non-  banks in the euro-  area peripheral coun -
tries indicates that confidence in the respective 
banking sector has risen again. By contrast, 
short-  term time deposits were reduced on bal-
ance, as in the previous quarters. This was 
probably due to the relatively unattractive inter -
est rate environment.Monetary policy 
refinancing vol-ume and excess liquidity down
Euro-  area mon-etary develop-ments muted
Strong inflows 
to overnight and 
short-  term sav-
ings depositsDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report 
May 2013  
26

In addition, monetary growth in the first three 
months of 2013 was dampened primarily by a 
sharp decline in marketable financial instru -
ments (M3-M2), which accelerated even more 
compared with the previous quarters and was 
mainly attributable to considerable net re -
demptions of short-  term bank bonds. The re -
demptions were of bonds of credit institutions 
throughout the euro area and may be ex -
plained, inter alia, by the ongoing deleveraging 
by banks, strong inflows to deposits and 
changes to regulatory requirements.
On the counterparts’ side, monetary develop -
ments in the euro area were supported by a 
renewed rise in the banking sector’s net exter -
nal asset position. This reflected further port -
folio shifts by international investors in favour 
of profitable investment opportunities in the euro area. However, non-  resident investors’ 
interest in buying securities of domestic issuers was dampened by at times heightened political 
uncertainty. The increase in the net external 
asset position was thus considerably weaker on balance in the quarter under review than in the fourth quarter of 2012.
Moreover, monetary growth was supported in 
the winter months by a further expansion of 
credit to the general government sector. Com-
pared with the first quarter of 2012, when much of the large amount of liquidity provided 
through the three-  year tenders flowed into 
government bonds, the rise in government credit slowed down markedly. Nevertheless, 
German MFIs seeking profitable investment op-
portunities again stepped up their holdings of 
government securities significantly in the quar -
ter under review. Additionally, a sizeable shift was observed between MFI loans and securi
-
tised lending to general government. This re -
sulted from the orderly restructuring of the Irish 
banking sector in February, in the course of which loans to the Irish government were re
-
placed by corresponding government bonds.
Lending to the euro-  area private sector had a 
further, albeit slight, expansionary effect on 
money supply in the quarter under review, after 
the outflows previously observed had slowed 
down perceptibly at the end of 2012. Against 
the backdrop of rising bond and equity prices, the growth in credit volume was fuelled by an 
increase in German MFIs’ securities holdings. 
By contrast, only slight inflows to loans to pri-vate non-  banks were observed. These were at-
tributable to various sectoral developments, 
however.
Loans to non-  financial corporations, the drop 
in which had accelerated markedly in the au -
tumn months, declined only slightly in the Accelerated 
 decline in mar-
ketable financial instruments
Further rise in 
net external position
Discernible 
 increase in credit to general governmentSlight rise in lending to the private sector
Loans to non-  
financial corpor-ations decline only slightlyConsolidated balance sheet of the MFI sector in the euro area*
Changes in € billion, seasonally adjusted
Liabilities 2013 Q1 2012 Q4
Central government deposits –  6.5 –  0.4
Monetary aggregate M3 50.5 86.1
of which: Components
Currency in circulation and 
overnight deposits (M1) 94.8 84.4
Other shorter-term bank deposits 
(M2-M1) 0.1 36.4
Marketable instruments (M3-M2) – 44.4 – 34.6
Monetary capital 0.9 – 13.2
of which
Capital and reserves 54.7 39.2
Other longer-term fi  nancial  liabilities – 53.8 – 52.4Assets 2013 Q1 2012 Q4
Credit to private non-MFIs in the euro area
Loans
1 0.7 –  8.7
Securities 17.2 37.6
Credit to general government in the euro area
Loans – 20.0 – 11.4
Securities 45.8 11.0
Net external assets 57.8 108.9
Other counterparts of M3 – 56.6 – 64.7
* Changes for statistical reasons eliminated. 1 Adjusted for loan sales and securitisation.
Deutsche BundesbankDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report 
May 2013  
27

quarter under review. Net redemptions of loans 
with medium and long-  term maturities con -
tinued against the background of gloomier 
economic prospects. However, these outflows 
contrasted with a marked increase in short-   
term loans, which are generally more volatile. 
As a result, annual growth of loans to non-   
financial corporations (adjusted for loan sales 
and securitisation) stabilised at -1.3%. In par -
ticular, negative annual growth rates were seen 
in the euro-  area peripheral states affected by 
the sovereign debt crisis. In these countries, 
there were not yet any signs of a broad-  based 
stabilisation.
Unlike in the corporate sector, distinct growth 
was again recorded in loans to households dur -
ing the winter months. As in the previous quar -
ters, growth was driven by the rise in loans for house purchase in a number of euro-  area core 
countries; this was probably due, not least, to 
the low interest rates. Consumer credit, on the other hand, was reduced further. Given a nega-
tive base effect, the annual growth rate of loans to households (adjusted for sales and 
 securitisation) fell to 0.4% at the end of March 
2013, from 0.7% at the end of December 2012. 
The annual growth rates in the euro-area 
 peripheral countries remained in negative terri-
tory.
A high degree of heterogeneity is to be seen in 
the overall weak growth in loans to the euro-   
area non-  financial private sector. First, demand 
for credit has been dampened by unfavourable 
economic prospects, heightened uncertainty 
and the associated low level of propensity to 
invest as well as by the necessary balance sheet consolidations in the household and corporate 
sectors of some euro-area countries. What is 
more, non-  financial corporations in a number 
of euro-  area countries have replaced loans 
with market financing or by making greater use 
of internal funding. Second, supply-  side con -
straints as a result of banks’ weak balance 
sheets, regulatory changes and higher lending 
risks cannot be ruled out in a number of euro-  
area countries.By contrast, 
 distinct growth in loans to householdsComponents and counterparts of the money stock in the euro area
1 Year-on-year  change  in  per  cent.  2 In  percentage  points. 
3 Adjusted for loan sales and securitisation. 4 Taken in isol-
ation, an increase curbs M3 growth. 5 Adjusted for loan sales 
and  securitisation  from  2010  Q1.  6 Non-monetary  financial 
corporations.
Deutsche Bundesbank2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013505101520
–++++
–10–50+5+10+15+20+25
505101520
–++++Seasonally adjusted, end-of-quarter data
... components of the money stock
... counterparts
Sectoral growth contributions 2of which
Loans to the private sector 5Growth rate 1 of M3 and the
contributions to growth 2 of the ...
M3–M2
M2–M1
M1
Remaining balance
sheet items
Longer-term financial
liabilities to other non-MFIs 4
Net external
asset position
Credit to theprivate sector 3
Financialcorporations 6
Non-financialcorporations 
HouseholdsM3 
M3
Growth rate1Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report 
May 2013  
28

The MFIs’ longer-  term financial liabilities vis-  à-  
vis other sectors in the euro area, which had 
played a considerable part in monetary expan-
sion in 2012, stagnated in the first quarter of 
2013. Essentially, this was the outcome of two 
divergent developments. First, for the reasons 
mentioned above, extensive net redemptions 
of bank debt securities were made – also in the 
long-  term maturity range – both by the periph-
eral countries and by the core countries of the euro area in the quarter under review. Second, these net redemptions coincided with a further sharp strengthening of the capital base of MFIs 
due, on the one hand, to higher provisioning 
as a result of the financial and sovereign debt 
crisis and, on the other hand, to changed regu-latory requirements. For the first time in a year, long-  term time deposits, too, rose in the winter 
quarter, following a recovery in loan securitisa-tion activity.
On average, inflation forecasts based on vari -
ous monetary indicators (monetary aggregates, short-  term deposits, loans) currently signal bal-
anced risks for price stability over the next three 
years. However, the uncertainty associated 
with these forecasts remains high.
German banks’ deposit and 
lending business with  domestic customers
German banks’ deposit business – which had 
lost considerable momentum in the previous 
year – again posted a marked increase on bal-ance in the first quarter of 2013. In this context there were – as in the euro area as a whole – 
further portfolio shifts from long-  term to 
shorter-  term deposits given the low interest 
rates and the flat yield curve. The growth in de-
posit business was driven solely by a further considerable rise in overnight deposits, whilst 
all other types of deposit experienced outflows.
However, investment behaviour in the individ -
ual sectors was not homogeneous in the quar -
ter under review. The portfolio shifts observed on the whole resulted, above all, from invest -
ment decisions by households as well as, to a 
lesser extent, by financial corporations. On the 
other hand, non-   financial corporations scaled 
back their longer-  term deposits to a far greater 
extent than they increased overnight deposits 
and deposits with an agreed maturity of up to two years.
In the case of longer-  term deposits, deposits 
with a maturity of over two years fell, as in the preceding eight quarters. However, the decline 
in the quarter under review was somewhat 
more subdued than in the final quarter of 2012. Insurance companies and pension funds as well as non-  financial corporations played the great-
est part in this connection. Savings deposits 
with longer periods of notice likewise fell again in the quarter under review. Movements in this market segment are usually attributable almost 
exclusively to portfolio decisions by house -
holds, which again built up overnight deposits on a large scale.Monetary cap-
ital stagnating
Money-  based 
forecasts with balanced infla-tion risks
Increase in 
 deposits driven solely by over-night depositsFurther decline in longer-  term depositsLending and deposits of monetary  fi  nancial institutions (MFIs) in Germany
*
Changes in € billion, seasonally adjusted
Item2012 2013
Q4 Q1
Deposits of domestic non-MFIs 1
Overnight 33.8 35.6
With agreed maturities
of up to 2 years – 47.6 –  0.8
of over 2 years – 14.7 –  5.6
Redeemable at notice
of up to 3 months 1.9 –  1.3
of over 3 months –  4.8 –  3.9
Lending
to domestic general government
Loans –  9.2 –  3.8
Securitised lending 2.5 –  5.7
to domestic enterprises and 
households
Loans 2 5.3 2.8
of which to households 3 4.7 4.3
to non-fi  nancial  corporations
4 –  1.6 0.7
Securitised lending –  5.1 –  2.0
* As well as banks (including building and loan associations, but 
excluding the Bundesbank), monetary fi  nancial institutions 
(MFIs) here also include money market funds. End-of-quarter 
data, adjusted for statistical changes. 1 Enterprises, households 
and general government excluding central government. 
2  Adjusted for loan sales and securitisation. 3 Including non-profi  t institutions serving households. 4 Corporations and quasi- 
corporations.
Deutsche BundesbankDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report 
May 2013  
29

As in the final quarter of 2012, lending by Ger -
man banks to domestic non-  banks receded ap-
preciably in the quarter under review. Once 
again, this was due primarily to a marked drop 
in loans and securitised lending to general gov-
ernment, which stood in contrast to the net 
growth in lending to general government in a 
number of other euro-  area countries. In the 
case of loans to the private sector, the slight 
growth in loans contrasted with a modest de-cline in securitised lending.
The slight increase in loans to the German pri-
vate sector was attributable solely to growth in 
lending to households and non-  financial cor -
porations, as lending to financial corporations 
contracted slightly. Despite the fact that lend -
ing rates remained low, growth in credit to the non-  financial corporation sector was only mar -
ginal on balance. As in the previous three-   
month period, this was due to a decline in the 
short-  term maturity segment, which was more 
than offset by an appreciable increase in loans with longer-  term maturities. The net redemp -
tions in the short-  term maturity segment can 
probably be attributed to the persistently sub -
dued investment in machinery and equipment 
by domestic enterprises as well as, in part, to 
firms making greater use of internal financing 
and alternative external resources such as the 
issuance of debt securities.
Unlike loans to non-  financial corporations, 
loans to domestic households went up mark -
edly in the first quarter of 2013. As in the pre-
ceding quarters, this growth was driven by 
loans for house purchase. By contrast, con -
sumer credit and other lending receded slightly. 
On the whole, however, the annual growth 
rate of loans to domestic households remained 
low, at 1.2%. The same may be said of loans 
for house purchase, the 12-month growth rate 
of which stood at 2.1% at the end of March, 
rising once again on the quarter.
The German banks questioned for the Bank Lending Survey stated that they had moder
-
ately relaxed credit standards vis-  à-  vis non-   
financial corporations in the first quarter of 
2013. Enterprises of all sizes benefited from this easing, which affected all maturities. Amongst 
other things, the reasons given by the banks 
included stronger competition by other institu-tions. Contrary to the general trend towards an easing of credit standards, a marked widening of margins was observed on both average and riskier loans to enterprises.
The banks made no notable alterations to the 
standards vis-  à-  vis households for housing 
loans or consumer credit. Margins for average 
loans narrowed moderately in both segments. 
In the case of riskier housing loans, margins 
widened to a lesser extent than in preceding 
quarters; margins for riskier consumer credit 
were unchanged, after expanding markedly in 
the quarters before.
According to the banks surveyed, the consider -
able rise in demand for private loans for house 
purchase observed since the spring of 2010 Perceptible de-
crease in banks’ lending to  domestic  
non-  banks
Only weak rise 
in loans to  non-  financial corporationsModerate growth in loans to households again driven 
solely by loans 
for house 
 purchase
German banks’ 
credit standards vis-  à-  vis non-  
financial corpor-
ations relaxed 
moderately
Credit standards 
vis-  à-  vis  
households  unchanged
Considerable 
rise in demand for housing loans continuesLoans of German banks toselected sectors
1 Year-on-year  rate  of  change.  2 Non-financial  corporations 
and quasi-corporations.
Deutsche Bundesbank2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 201321012345
––+++++Growth contributions in percentage pointsSeasonally adjusted and adjusted for loan sales and securitisation, end-of-quarter data
HouseholdsFinancial corporations
Non-financial corporations 2Growth rate 1 in %Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report 
May 2013  
30

Banking conditions in Germany
1 New business. According to harmonised MFI interest rate statistics. 2 According to the Bank Lending Survey, difference between the 
number of respondents reporting “tightened considerably” and “tightened slightly” and the number of respondents reporting “eased 
somewhat” and “eased considerably” as a percentage of the responses given. 3 Expectations for 2013 Q2.
Deutsche Bundesbank05 06 07 08 09 10 11 12 20133.03.54.04.55.05.56.06.57.07.58.08.59.0
–300+30–300+30
–60–300+30+60–60–300+30+60
2005 06 07 08 09 10 11 12 131.52.02.53.03.54.04.55.05.56.06.5
3003060
–++
9060300306090
–––+++Credit to non-financial corporations
% pa
%
%% pa
%
%
Riskier loans
Average loans
Average loansRiskier loans%%
Average loansChange in margins 2
for loans to enterprises... with an initial rate fixation of
    over 1 year and up to 5 yearsBank interest rates for consumer credit1...
... with an initial
    rate fixation of over 5 years
... consumer credit... up to €1 million
3
Riskier loansBank interest rates for loans to enterprises1...
... with an initial rate fixation of up to
    1 year ...
... consumer credit
2.53.03.54.04.55.05.5
... house purchase... up to €1 million
... over €1 million
3... house purchaseBank interest rates on
loans for house purchase1
with an initial rate fixation of
over 10 years
Change in credit standards 2
for loans to enterprises
3... with an initial rate fixation of over
    5 years ...Credit to households
Change in credit standards 2  for loans for ...
Change in margins 2 for loans for ...Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report 
May 2013  
31

continued unabated in the first quarter of 2013. 
As in the preceding quarters, banks cited the 
positive outlook in the housing market as the 
main factor behind this development. Con -
sumer confidence, too, contributed to the 
growing demand for housing loans, whereas the possibility to borrow from other banks in itself had a dampening effect on demand. By 
contrast, consumer credit demand was almost 
unchanged.
The survey for the first quarter again contained 
ad hoc questions on the impact of the financial 
and sovereign debt crisis on banks’ funding 
conditions and credit standards. As in the pre-
vious two quarters, the surveyed banks re -
ported an, on the whole, distinct improvement 
in funding conditions. According to the infor -
mation provided by the institutions, the sover -
eign debt crisis had no effect whatsoever on 
lending policies in the first quarter.
Overall, credit standards in the euro area were 
tightened moderately in the first quarter. The 
main reason for this development, according to 
the institutions surveyed, were economic risks, 
whereas bank-  related factors played only a 
subordinate role. Demand for credit in the euro area contracted significantly, with non-  financial 
corporations and households equally respon -
sible for this decline. The surveyed banks mainly 
attributed this to lower financing needs for 
fixed asset investment on the business side and to the marked decline in consumer confidence 
where households were concerned. What is also striking is that the credit standards and de-
mand for credit experienced a very heteroge -
neous development across all countries of the 
euro area. At the euro-  area level, the banks re-
ported marked improvements in funding condi-
tions and stated that the sovereign debt crisis 
had had only a marginal effect on banks’ fund-ing conditions and lending policies.
The first quarter of 2013 saw bank lending 
rates in Germany stagnate or rise across all the 
relevant business areas, maturities and vol -
umes, thus reflecting, in part, interest rate de -
velopments on the money and capital markets, 
which –  after a fairly prolonged downward trend – did not fall further. Interest rates for 
long-  term loans to corporations stood at 2.9% 
for small-  scale loans and at 2.8% for large-   
scale loans; this was just over 10 basis points higher than at the end of December 2012. 
Interest rates on loans to households for house 
purchase with an initial rate fixation period of 
more than ten years likewise rose slightly, to 3.0%. Consumer credit was priced signifi
-
cantly higher, amongst other things because 
the typical seasonal effect of the final quarter 
was reversed. Interest rates on long-  term con-
sumer credit increased by 33 basis points 
to 7.8%, while rates on short-  term loans with 
initial rate fixation period variable or up to one 
year went up by as much as 68 basis points to 4.6%. Moreover, once again, deposits of 
households and non-  financial corporations al -
most consistently earned less interest than just a quarter earlier.Further distinct 
improvement in German banks’ funding condi-tions
Euro area sees 
slight tightening of credit 
 standards and 
significant drop 
in demandMixed develop-
ments in bank 
lending rates in 
GermanyDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report 
May 2013  
32

Financial markets
Financial market setting
The international financial markets proved to 
be relatively robust in the first few months of 
2013 despite a troubled political and economic 
setting in part. The highly accommodative 
monetary policy measures taken by key central 
banks, most of which were directly targeted at 
the capital markets, counteracted the impact 
that the political uncertainty in connection with 
the elections in Italy and the aid package for 
Cyprus as well as some negative economic re-ports were having on the bond and equity mar -
kets. In May, some economic data that met 
with a positive reception among market partici-
pants helped to buoy sentiment, clearly lifting 
yields from their depressed levels. As this report 
went to press, yields in the major currency 
areas were slightly up on their levels at the be-
ginning of the year on balance. Equity prices have been climbing strongly. The Japanese 
equity market posted particularly strong gains 
(+44.7%); at the same time, the yen depreci -
ated significantly against most other curren -
cies, including the euro, chiefly on account of 
the highly expansionary new stance adopted 
by Japanese monetary policymakers.
Exchange rates
In recent months, heightened political uncer -
tainty in the euro area and shifting assessments of monetary policy measures in the various cur -
rency areas have been the focus of attention 
on the foreign exchange markets. After trading 
at US$1.36 at the beginning of February, with 
support from measures to alleviate the sover -
eign debt crisis, the euro had dropped back to 
US$1.28 by the end of March. This decline 
came as a consequence of the general election 
result in Italy and the associated difficulties in 
forming a stable government, as well as the es-
calating financial crisis in Cyprus. Speculation 
about the US central bank calling an early end to its asset purchases, triggered by the minutes 
of its meeting on 30 January this year, placed 
the euro- dollar exchange rate under additional 
pressure.
In the first half of April, the euro made good 
some of its previous losses following agree -
ment on an aid package for Cyprus and after it 
had become clear that there had been no sig-
nificant contagion effects in other euro-  area 
countries. Around the same period, worse-  
than- expected US labour market data reduced 
the likelihood of an early end to the Fed’s asset 
purchase programme, also underpinning the euro- dollar rate. In the second half of the 
month, the euro showed no clear direction. 
Whilst the publication of an unexpectedly sharp drop in the ifo Business Climate Index for Ger -
many and surprisingly low inflation in the euro area fuelled speculation of an interest rate cut 
for the Eurosystem, at the same time the an -
nouncement of disappointing economic data in the United States and the formation of a government in Italy lent support to the euro-  
dollar exchange rate. Following the ECB Gov
-
erning Council meeting at the beginning of 
May, at which an interest rate cut was indeed 
agreed, the euro declined in value somewhat. 
As this report went to press, the euro was trad-ing at US$1.29, which was 2½% below its level at the beginning of the year.
The euro gained further substantial value against the yen in the period under review, owing principally to the announcement and implementation of various measures by the Japanese central bank to loosen its monetary 
policy. After Japan’s finance minister had stated that there would be no controversial buying of 
foreign government bonds, the euro- yen rate 
eased somewhat for a time at the end of Feb-
ruary; however, the losses were recouped in the first half of March. The discussion sur
-
rounding the Cyprus aid programme put the 
euro under temporary selling pressure, includ -Financial 
 markets robust despite political and economic uncertainty
Euro exchange 
rate develop-ments against the US dollar, …… the yen …Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report 
May 2013  
33

ing against the yen. Following the Japanese 
central bank’s announcement that it would 
henceforth manage the monetary base directly and double its size over the next two years, the euro- yen rate climbed 7% within a few days in 
the first half of April, trading at ¥130. The euro subsequently posted further gains, amid fluctu-ations. Latterly, the euro stood at ¥132, which 
was 16% above its value at the start of the 
year.
Against the pound sterling too, the euro ini -
tially gained in value until the end of February, 
but later surrendered some of its gains in the 
face of growing uncertainty in connection with the Cyprus aid programme. The announcement of an unexpected rise in the UK’s gross domes-
tic product for the first quarter of 2013 also 
weighed on the euro- pound rate. As this report 
went to press, the euro stood at £0.85, which 
was 3½% above its value at the beginning of 
the year.
Since the beginning of 2013, the euro’s aver -
age value vis- à- vis the currencies of 20 major 
trading partners has risen by 1%. The signifi -
cant gains against the yen and the pound ster -
ling mentioned above contrast with losses against the US dollar and a slight decline 
against the currencies of China, Romania, Hong Kong and Sweden. Against the Swiss franc, the 
euro most recently stood at CHF 1.24, after 
hovering just above the Swiss National Bank’s 
minimum rate of CHF 1.20 throughout 2012. 
The price competitiveness of euro- area sup -
pliers compared with important trading part -
ners has deteriorated somewhat as a result of 
the euro appreciation and – measured by the 
long- term average – is trending at an unfavour -
able level.
Securities markets and 
 portfolio transactions
In the period under review, the international 
bond markets benefited from steps taken by 
the central banks to loosen monetary policy, … and against 
the pound  sterling
Effective euro 
exchange rate
International 
bond marketsExchange rate of the euro
1 Exchange  rate  at  the  start  of  monetary  union  on  4 Janu-
ary 1999. 2 As calculated by the ECB against the currencies of 
20 countries.
Deutsche BundesbankJ FMAM J J A S OND J FMAM J
2012 20131.101.201.301.401.50
95100110120130140
0.700.750.800.850.90
95100105110Daily data; log scale
US$
¥
£against the ...
... US dollar
US$1.1789 1
... yen
¥133.73 1
... Swiss franc... pound sterling
Sfr1.6168 1£0.7111 1
Nominal effective exchange rate 2
1999Q1 = 100
103.11 11.201.301.401.501.601.70SfrDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report 
May 2013  
34

mostly aimed explicitly at yields on government 
bonds. As a result, the major currency areas ex-
perienced rising bond prices until well into 
April. This was true not just of safe haven coun-tries like the United States, Japan and Germany, 
but also of smaller or peripheral economies with lower credit ratings. The US Federal Re
-
serve continued with its purchases of govern -
ment bonds to the value of US$45 billion a 
month as decided at the beginning of the year and its buying of mortgage- backed securities in 
the amount of US$40 billion a month as de -
cided in September 2012. In the euro area, the 
Eurosystem’s operational but as yet inactive 
Outright Monetary Transactions (OMT) pro -
gramme served to calm the markets for debt 
securities. The interest rate reduction at the be-
ginning of May also put downward pressure on 
yields. Across the Pacific, the Japanese central 
bank increased its inflation target for the next 
two years in two steps, whilst announcing, amongst other things, a programme to buy 
substantial quantities of Japanese government 
bonds, particularly at the long end. On the eco-nomic front there were some disappointing sig-
nals at first, leading to the downward revision 
of growth projections for some countries, 
which in turn was also reflected to an extent in 
lower yields on medium to long- dated bonds. 
In May, however, news of surprisingly positive 
earnings for the government- backed mortgage 
lenders and the prospect of higher future tax 
receipts in the United States, as well as positive 
economic indicators in Germany and the euro 
area, helped to shift yields well off their low 
points.
In the United States, yields on ten- year Treasur -
ies stood at close to 2% as this report went to 
press, which is almost a quarter percentage 
point higher than at the end of 2012. In Ger -
many, meanwhile, the yield on public- sector 
debt securities with a ten- year maturity has 
risen by five basis points overall since the start 
of the year, and latterly stood at 1.3%; during this period it has sunk to 1.1%, close to its low 
point of mid-2012 when yields on Federal 
bonds were driven down by major safe haven Central bank 
measures bol-ster government bond pricesYield spreads in the euro area
Sources:  Thomson  Reuters  and  Bundesbank  calculations. 
1 Haircut of 9 March 2012. 2 Announcement of conditions for 
the Greek debt buyback programme on 11 December 2012. 3 Standard deviation of yields of euro-area government bonds.
Deutsche Bundesbank2009 2010 2011 2012 201302004006008001,0001,2001,400
02004006008001,0001,200Basis points, daily data
Spread of ten-year
government bondsagainst Bunds
Dispersion of yields
 3
GDP weightedUnweightedItaly
SpainIrelandPortugalGreece
(Scale reduced)
2
05001,0001,5002,0002,5003,0003,5004,000
1Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report 
May 2013  
35

inflows. Yields also rose a little in the United 
Kingdom, with ten- year gilts trading at 1.9%, 
whilst in Japan yields on ten- year government 
bonds stood at a record low of 0.6% in April before rising significantly at the end of the 
period under review to a level five basis points above their 2012 year- end position.
Following tensions on the bond markets of some euro- area countries in February and 
March caused by the stalemate between the 
major parties arising from the general election result in Italy and the bail- in of bank depositors 
in the rescue of over- indebted Cypriot banks, in 
April there was a return to the trend towards a 
narrower euro- area yield spread evident since 
mid-2012. Compared with the end of 2012, the 
interest rate dispersion of long- dated govern -
ment bonds in the euro area has fallen to 220 
basis points, and the GDP-  weighted yield 
spread of government bonds of other euro-  
area countries over German Federal bonds with matched maturities has narrowed to 180 basis 
points. Falling yields in euro- area peripheral 
countries (with the exception of Slovenia) over this period reflect not least the expectation of a 
key interest rate reduction, an expectation 
which was fulfilled at the beginning of May. In 
addition, some of the programme countries 
succeeded in obtaining repayment extensions 
for the EFSF funds they have received. The overall easing of tension was also demon -
strated by more favourable issuing conditions 
for peripheral countries’ sovereign debt secur -
ities on the capital market. Nonetheless, infor -
mation from some commercial banks and 
changes in holdings recorded in MFI balance sheet statistics indicate that these countries’ government bonds were bought to an in
-
creased extent by domestic banks and that 
non- European investors were generally net sell-
ers. This would run counter to the desire to 
separate bank and sovereign risks.
At the beginning of 2013, yields on German 
Federal securities initially followed an upward 
trend in line with declining safe haven inflows 
and hopes of an economic recovery. In March, 
however, with the political imponderables re -
sulting from the general election in Italy and 
the debt crisis in Cyprus, the falling nominal 
yield trend observed over more than five years 
resumed, before another steep upward move -
ment in May. Overall, the German yield curve 
has shifted upwards almost in parallel since the 
end of 2012. The difference between ten- year 
and two- year bonds currently remains below 
its five- year average, at 145 basis points. Just 
prior to the interest rate cut on 2 May 2013, the yield curve was still significantly flatter. 
Slightly higher nominal interest rates contrasted 
with much sharper increases in the yields on inflation- linked bonds, particularly at the 
shorter end, which led to reduced break- even 
inflation rates (BEIR) and forward inflation ex -
pectations for the European Harmonised Index of Consumer Prices excluding tobacco. The five to ten- year forward BEIR fell to 2.1%. However, 
inflation swaps traded between banks – instru-ments which are less affected by safe haven in-flows into nominal bonds – point to a slight rise 
in the five to ten-  year forward inflation rate 
(2.3%).
Financing conditions for enterprises on the 
capital market have improved since the end of 
the year in terms of yields. Latterly, BBB- rated 
corporate bonds with a residual maturity of 
seven to ten years issued by European financial Yield spreads in 
the euro area narrowerGerman yield curve shifts  upwards
Improvement  
in financing 
 conditions for enterprisesYield curve on the Germanbond market
 *
* Interest rates for (hypothetical) zero-coupon bonds (Svensson 
method), based on listed Federal securities.
Deutsche Bundesbank0123456789 1 000.51.01.5
Residual maturity in years16 May 201328 December 2012
2 May 2013in %Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report 
May 2013  
36

enterprises and by enterprises in the real econ-
omy were yielding 4.3% and 2.7% respect -
ively,1 thus trading below their respective five-  
year averages and below pre- crisis yield levels. 
Premiums against yields on German Federal se-
curities with the same maturity, the risk- free 
yardstick, have also narrowed since the begin-
ning of the year; however, at 300 and 130 
basis points for BBB- rated financial- sector and 
non- financial- sector corporate bonds respect -
ively, these premiums are still considerably 
higher than at the beginning of the crisis in mid-2007. The recent contraction in spreads, which indicates a reduction in market partici
-
pants’ risk aversion, is consistent with the par -
allel narrowing of credit default swap premiums 
(iTraxx) and reduced stock market uncertainty. 
In view of the downward revision of growth projections for some European countries –  a significant revision in some cases  – and the slight drop in earnings expectations for listed 
European enterprises, the low corporate bond 
yields reflect an increased reach for yield on the 
part of investors in a global low interest rate 
environment.
The gross issuance volume on the German 
bond market amounted to €379½ billion in the first quarter of 2013, which was above the fig-ure for the previous quarter (€329 billion). After deducting significantly higher redemptions and 
taking account of changes in issuers’ holdings 
of their own bonds, on balance there were net redemptions of domestic debt securities to the value of €12½ billion. In addition, foreign bor -
rowers placed debt securities worth €24 billion 
on the German market. Thus, funds totalling €11 billion were raised on the German bond 
market in the period under review.
In the first three months of 2013, the public sector raised €7 billion on the bond market, 
compared with net redemptions of €15 billion 
in the previous quarter. The figures include issues from resolution agencies of German 
banks – these issues are ascribed to the public 
sector for statistical purposes. Central govern -
ment itself issued mainly five- year Federal notes (€14 billion), and to a lesser extent 30-year Fed-
eral bonds (€2½ billion). Meanwhile, there were net redemptions of two- year Federal 
Treasury notes totalling €3½ billion. In the quarter under review, state governments re
-
deemed their own bonds to the value of €5½ billion in net terms.
German enterprises took advantage of favour -
able financing conditions and undertook net 
issuance of debt securities on the German cap-
ital market to the value of €7½ billion in the Net sales in the 
bond market up
Public sector 
borrowingHigh level of  issuance in cor-
porate bondsFinancing conditions for euro-area enterprises
1 Euro-denominated BBB-rated bonds with a residual maturity 
of  seven  to  ten  years,  included  in  the  bond  market  indices 
(iBoxx) of the International Index Company. Source: Thomson 
Reuters. 2 Spreads on five-year credit default swap (CDS) con-
tracts, reflected in the indices (iTraxx) of the International Index Company. Source: Bloomberg.
Deutsche Bundesbank2009 2010 2011 2012 2013036912151821242730
50100150200250300350Weekly averages
%
Basis pointsYields 1
Credit default swap spreads 2
iTraxx Europe
Financials
iTraxx Europe 125iTraxx EuropeNon-FinancialsiBoxx Non-FinancialsiBoxx Financials
iBoxxCorporates
1 This is based on yields on corporate bonds included in 
the different rating grades of the iBoxx bond indices.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report 
May 2013  
37

first quarter of 2013; this was considerably 
more than in the first quarter of 2012 and the 
previous quarter. For the most part, these en -
terprises issued securities with maturities of 
under one year.
Domestic credit institutions, which have posted 
strong growth in deposits and inflows of funds from abroad during the financial crisis, reduced 
their capital market debt further – by €27 bil -
lion – in the first quarter of 2013. In particular, they redeemed public Pfandbriefe (€22 billion), which have had declining amounts outstanding for years, as well as other bank debt securities, 
which can be structured flexibly, (€15 billion) 
and mortgage Pfandbriefe (€5 billion). Special-ised credit institutions, meanwhile, issued debt securities totalling €15 billion net.
In the first quarter of 2013, German non- banks 
were the main buyers on the domestic bond 
market; they added paper worth €19 billion to 
their portfolios. The focus of investor interest here was on foreign securities. Non- resident in-
vestors bought German debt securities for €11 
billion. On balance, these were mainly secur -
ities issued by the public sector. By contrast, 
German credit institutions and the Deutsche 
Bundesbank disposed of interest- bearing paper 
for €15 billion and €4 billion respectively. In both cases, it was mainly domestic securities 
which were sold.
Sentiment on the international equity markets 
has been predominantly positive since the be -
ginning of the year. For instance, the broad 
S&P 500 index in the United States has risen by 
15.7%, while the Nikkei in Japan has gone up 
by as much as 44.7%. In both countries, this 
trend has to be seen against the backdrop of 
additional expansionary measures undertaken by their central banks amongst other things. Towards the end of the period under review, surprisingly favourable US labour market data 
also spurred investor optimism and lent further impetus to the international equity markets.
The European exchanges were alone in repeat-
edly experiencing short- lived but appreciable 
setbacks in the face of the economic and polit-
ical uncertainties mentioned above. Bank 
stocks were particularly affected by this. It was 
not least the formation of a new government 
in Italy and agreement on an aid package for 
Cyprus which enabled upward momentum to 
win through on the European equity markets. 
An expansionary monetary policy in the Euro -
system also gave support to prices, with the 
markets already anticipating an interest rate cut 
before the ECB Governing Council decided to 
make such a cut at the beginning of May 2013. 
Consequently, as this report went to press the broad Euro Stoxx and CDAX share price indices 
were up by 8.3% and 8.0% respectively on 
their levels at the beginning of the year. Euro -
pean bank stocks did not perform as well as 
the market as a whole, rising 4.3% overall since the beginning of the year. Price falls for Spanish institutions, in particular, weighed on the valu-ations of bank stocks.Net redemptions 
by credit institu-tions
Purchase of debt 
securitiesPositive senti-
ment on the 
equity markets 
overall
Easing of polit -
ical tensions and 
expansionary monetary policy bolster share prices in EuropeInvestment activity in the German securities markets
€ billion
Item2012 2013
Q1 Q4 Q1
Debt securities
Residents 40.7 – 26.2 0.2
Credit institutions 1.9 – 17.3 – 14.9
of which
Foreign debt securities – 0.2 0.3 –  2.7
Deutsche Bundesbank 0.5 –  2.4 –  4.1
Other sectors 38.3 –  6.5 19.2
of which
Domestic debt securities 6.2 – 27.6 –  8.9
Non-residents 14.5 11.9 11.0
Shares
Residents 7.5 20.2 14.5
Credit institutions 5.5 8.2 8.3
of which
Domestic shares 10.2 0.4 4.4
Non-banks 2.0 11.9 6.2
of which
Domestic shares 0.3 0.6 2.1
Non-residents – 9.1 –  0.3 –  5.4
Mutual fund shares
Investment in specialised funds 21.6 29.4 24.5
Investment in retail funds – 0.5 3.0 5.0
of which
Equity funds – 0.9 0.7 0.0
Deutsche BundesbankDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report 
May 2013  
38

Despite the noticeable recovery in the labour 
market – which, depending on one’s point of 
view, began in spring 2012 or autumn 2011 – 
most European share price indices remain a 
long way off their previous highs. The CDAX stands 23% short of its high, while the Euro 
Stoxx is 39% off. The picture looks different for performance indices, which include cumulative dividend payments and assume these dividends are reinvested in shares. For instance, the DAX 
performance index, which measures the per -
formance of a portfolio of 30 major German corporations, reached a “historical” high of 
8,369 index points in mid-  May (closing prices 
on 16  May 2013, see chart opposite). The 
CDAX performance index has also exceeded its 
previous high of July 2007, unlike the Euro 
Stoxx performance index which has fared less 
well.
The implied cost of equity for European enter -
prises, derived from a dividend discount model, 
remained at 8.0% for the Euro Stoxx. This 
means that the return on equity required by in-
vestors remains well above its low point re -
corded at the beginning of 2010, which sug -
gests a degree of caution on the part of invest-
ors. Nonetheless, the price- earnings ratio cal -
culated on the basis of earnings expectations 
was 11.6 in the spring, a level last observed around three years ago. Hence, the ratio is 
somewhat above its five- year average. How
-
ever, for the Euro Stoxx 50 benchmark index, a comparison with dividend trends over the me-dium to long term points to a moderate share 
price move overall (for details, see pages 40 and 41). At the same time, uncertainty about 
prospects for the equity market was at a com-
paratively low level in the spring months, des -
pite the heightened tensions in March. Meas -
ured according to the implied volatility of DAX 
options, it moved in a range of between 15% 
and 20%, well below its five- year average 
(27%).
Issuing activity on the German equity market 
remained relatively muted in the first quarter of 
2013. Domestic enterprises issued €1 billion worth of new shares, the majority of which 
were listed equities. The volume of foreign 
equities outstanding on the German market 
rose by €8 billion. Equities were purchased pri-
marily by German credit institutions (€8½ bil -
lion), which invested mainly in domestic secur -
ities on balance (€4½ billion). Resident non-  DAX perform-
ance index at a high – price in-dices still signifi-cantly lower
Little change in 
return expected from European stocks
Price- earnings 
ratio higher with a low level of price uncertainty
Stock market 
funding and stock purchasesPrices on major equity markets*
Sources: Deutsche Börse AG, Thomson Reuters and Bundes-
bank calculations. * Price indices (without inclusion or reinvest-
ment of dividends). 1 Expected volatility in the next 30 days, 
calculated from prices of options on the DAX.
Deutsche Bundesbank2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013405060708090100110Weekly averages
%
020406080
Memo item, lin scale
Implied volatility of DAX
(VDAX NEW) 1S&P 500
Nikkei 225
Dow JonesEuro StoxxCDAX
price indexEnd of 2007 = 100, log scale
DAX price and performance indices
Source: Deutsche Börse AG and Bundesbank calculations.
Deutsche Bundesbank1999 00 01 02 03 04 05 06 07 08 09 10 11 12 134060801001201401604 January 1999 = 100, weekly averages, log scale
DAX price indexDAX performance indexDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report 
May 2013  
39

European share price movements in relation to 
dividends paid
European shares, the prices of which in-
creased signifi  cantly during the second half 
of 2012, have continued to gain in value 
since the beginning of 2013. Shares have undoubtedly been bolstered by a number of factors which gave rise to an improve-
ment in market sentiment, including the ex-
pansionary monetary policy being pursued 
across the world, the prospective assistance measures from the Eurosystem and the ex-pectation that European banks will be suc-cessfully recapitalised. In order to assess the extent to which these price increases are in line with the fundamentals, this box exam-
ines their long- term relationship with divi-
dend payments.
According to the dividend discount model, 
the price of a share (P) is equivalent to the 
present value of all future expected divi-dend payments 
(D) which are discounted 
using the cost of equity (CE). Assuming 
constant cost of equity and a constant divi-dend growth rate 
(g), the following applies 
to the price of a share at time t: Pt = 
Dt(1+g)/(CE–g) .1 Experience has shown 
that, in the short term, share prices fl  uctu-
ate more sharply than do dividend pay-ments, which enterprises are inclined to 
keep as stable as possible; in the long run, however, the formula suggests that there is 
identical growth in both variables. The 
 literature argues that this is to be expected 
for observation periods exceeding 25 
years.2
To make an assessment of the relationship 
between share prices and dividends paid it 
is fi  rst necessary to select an appropriate 
base year. In the case of European stocks, 
as measured by the Euro Stoxx 50, data have been available since 1999. However, 
as stock markets were already being infl  u-
enced by the new economy bubble at the 
time in question, we have taken early 2003 as the base year for the following analysis. 
Compared with 1999, equities are likely to 
have been priced more appropriately at the 
beginning of 2003, as evidenced by the price- earnings ratio which, at 12.2, stood 
considerably closer to the historical average in 2003.
Since 2003, dividends and earnings have 
risen at a rate of about 50% and 40% re-
spectively, outstripping increases in share 
prices which have only seen moderate over-all growth. This is principally attributable to 
the fi  nancial and sovereign debt crisis dur-
ing which prices either fell or tended to stagnate amid an environment of height-
ened risk aversion while dividend payments 
and earnings fi  gures were blunted to a 
much less signifi  cant degree. Subject to the caveat that the ten- year observation period 
used is of limited informative value, Euro-
pean shares therefore appear to be priced 
fairly favourably given the relatively strong 
dividend growth which has been evident in 
the past. However, any comprehensive as-
sessment needs to take particular account of expected future dividends. To this end, 
we make use of two sources of information 
below, namely dividend futures and 
Bloomberg analyst estimates.
Dividend futures on the Euro Stoxx 50 index 
have been traded on Eurex since mid-2008. The underlying of a future is the sum, con-verted to index points, of the dividends paid 
out by all those companies listed on the 
Euro Stoxx 50 in the respective year when 
the future reaches delivery date.3 Hence, fu-
tures prices are partly infl  uenced by market 
participants’ expectations regarding the dividends that are to be distributed in the 
1 See Deutsche Bundesbank, Monthly Report, March 
2003, p 35.
2 See K Cuthbertson, D Nitzsch (2004), Quantitative 
Financial Economics, p 249.
3 The dividends under observation (excluding special 
dividend pay- outs, eg following the sale of individual 
business units) are gross dividends before tax. As a 
rule, the contract falls due for delivery on the third 
 Friday of the month of December, with the fi  nal price 
corresponding to the dividend total, converted into 
index points. If the third Friday in December is not a 
trading day, the contract falls due for delivery on the 
trading day immediately preceding this date.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report 
May 2013  
40

year concerned. A separate future is traded 
for delivery in each of the next ten years, in 
other words until 2022. These futures prices, which show a slightly downward 
trend, fall below the level of dividends real-ised in 2012 both for 2013 and for the years 
which follow. When interpreting this infor-
mation, however, it is necessary to bear in 
mind that the futures prices in question 
understate the dividend payments expected by market participants due to the fact that 
these participants demand a markdown 
(dividend risk premium) to compensate for 
the uncertainty attached to future divi-
dends. As a rule, the longer the period until dividends are distributed, the higher the de-gree of uncertainty and the higher the asso-
ciated dividend risk premium, the level of which can only be estimated by making additional assumptions regarding dividend 
expectations.4 That said, even disregarding 
the dividend risk premium, the trend in fu-
tures prices is only falling a little, which at 
least indicates that market participants do 
not anticipate a sharp decline in dividends. 
This conclusion is consistent with the divi-dend trend estimated by analysts (source: Bloomberg). Their forecasts, which are 
available for the period up to and including 2016, fall slightly below the 2012 value for 
the current year, but they point to increas-
ing dividends in the years which follow.
All in all, dividend risk premiums complicate 
the task of interpreting dividend futures and analysts’ estimates should be regarded with 
caution as they may be distorted.5 More-
over, analysis of the long- term relationship 
between the Euro Stoxx 50 and dividends is limited by the data history that is available. 
Giving due consideration to these con-
straints, however, neither the dividends dis-tributed in recent years nor the measures of 
expected future dividends provide any evi-
dence to suggest that Euro Stoxx 50 share 
prices are following an unsustainable path.
In the case of the German equity market, 
an absence of dividend futures makes it im-possible to conduct a corresponding analy-
sis. However, if we look at past dividend payments, the picture presented by DAX companies is similar to that of the Euro Stoxx 50, inasmuch as the dividends paid 
out by German enterprises since 2003 have 
likewise risen considerably more sharply than the relevant share prices during the 
same period.
4 Taking the Euro Stoxx 50 as an example, Manley and 
Mueller- Glissmann showed that the implicit dividend 
risk premium they had calculated gradually decreases 
as the time until the delivery date of the futures con-
tract lessens and as the amount of available informa-
tion grows. See R Manley and C Mueller- Glissmann 
(2008), The Market for Dividends and Related Invest-
ment Strategies, Financial Analysts Journal, Volume 
64, No 3.
5 For information on the forecast accuracy of analysts’ estimates, see Deutsche Bundesbank, Monthly Report, July 2009, pp 26-28.Measurement of expected dividends on the Euro Stoxx 50
Deutsche Bundesbank2012 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 2022020406080100120140Index points
Current Bloomberg estimates
Current
dividend futures pricesRealised
dividendsShare prices, dividend payments and realised earnings
Sources: I/B/E/S and Bundesbank calculations. 1 Over the last 
12 months. 2 Annual dividends.
Deutsche Bundesbank2003 04 05 06 07 08 09 10 11 12 20136080100120140160180200220January 2003 = 100, end-of-month levels, log scale
Dividend payments 2
Realised
earningsper share
1
Euro Stoxx 50Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report 
May 2013  
41

banks bought shares for €6 billion, with a par -
ticular focus on foreign securities. By contrast, 
foreign investors sold German shares in the 
amount of €5½ billion.
During the period under review, German in -
vestment companies recorded inflows of €29½ 
billion, after raising funds totalling €32½ billion in the previous three months. The new money mainly benefited specialised funds reserved for 
institutional investors (€24½ billion). Amongst 
retail funds, mixed security- based funds (€2 bil-
lion) as well as open-  end real estate funds 
(€1½ billion) and bond funds (€1 billion) were 
the main issuers of new shares. Foreign funds 
distributed in the German market acquired new resources totalling €10½ billion net in the first quarter of 2013. Domestic non- banks were the 
main buyers, adding €38½ billion worth of 
mutual fund shares to their portfolios. This was 
domestic paper for the most part. Domestic 
credit institutions acquired mutual fund shares 
to the value of €1½ billion, which were almost 
exclusively foreign securities overall. On bal -
ance, foreign investors had only a marginal in-volvement in the German mutual fund market.
Direct investment
As with cross- border portfolio investment, 
which experienced net outflows amounting to 
€39 billion in the first quarter of 2013, there were also net capital exports in the direct in
-
vestment account. On balance, at a value of €13 billion, these were well above the prior-  
quarter figure (€1½ billion).
Cross- border direct investment by German pro-
prietors was of key importance (€20½ billion). 
They increased their foreign investment activity 
both by expanding their capital interests (€6 billion) and by reinvesting earnings generated abroad (€10 billion). They also furnished their non- resident business establishments with 
funds through intra- group loans (€4½ billion). 
By far the most significant destination for Ger -
man investment abroad in the period under re-Sales and 
 purchases of mutual fund shares
Capital exports 
in direct invest -
ment
German direct 
investment abroadMajor items of the balance of payments
€ billion
Item2012 2013
Q1 Q4 Q1
I Current account 1, 2 +  45.7 + 53.5 + 44.9 
Foreign trade 1, 3 +  45.4 + 44.8 + 49.3 
Services 1 +   0.9 +  1.8 –  0.4 
Income 1 +  18.0 + 20.1 + 18.6 
Current transfers 1 –  15.0 –  5.9 – 15.8 
II Capital transfers 1, 4 +   0.2 –  0.6 +  0.3 
III Financial account 1
(Net capital exports: –) –  42.8 – 80.9 – 40.0 
1 Direct investment –  23.8 –  1.4 – 12.8 
German investment 
abroad –  26.5 –  4.5 – 20.3 
Foreign investment
in Germany +   2.7 +  3.1 +  7.4 
2 Portfolio investment –  29.0 – 33.5 – 38.8 
German investment abroad –  33.7 – 45.8 – 44.5 
Shares +   5.9 – 13.3 – 10.0 
Mutual fund shares –   6.3 – 12.6 – 10.7 
Debt securities –  33.3 – 20.0 – 23.8 
Bonds and notes
5 –  30.8 – 23.8 – 19.0 
of which
Euro-denominated 
bonds and notes –  32.8 – 16.6 – 18.9 
Money market  instruments –   2.5 +  3.7 –  4.8 
Foreign investmentin Germany +   4.7 + 12.4 +  5.7 
Shares –   8.8 –  0.2 –  5.4 
Mutual fund shares –   1.0 +  0.6 +  0.1 
Debt securities +  14.5 + 11.9 + 11.0 
Bonds and notes
5 +  15.2 + 11.0 –  1.3 
of which
Public bonds and 
notes +  29.2 + 14.2 +  6.9 
Money market  instruments –   0.7 +  1.0 + 12.3 
3 Financial derivatives
6 –   2.4 –  4.2 –  4.0 
4 Other investment 7 +  13.4 – 42.3 + 15.7 
Monetary fi  nancial
institutions 8 + 232.8 – 70.0 –  8.8 
of which short-term + 215.5 – 79.5 – 10.2 
Enterprises and
households –  15.0 + 10.2 – 20.4 
of which short-term –   9.4 + 11.0 – 16.5 
General government –  23.1 – 32.7 +  4.2 
of which short-term –  25.8 – 15.1 +  3.9 
Bundesbank – 181.3 + 50.2 + 40.8 
5 Change in reserve assets 
at transaction values ( increase: –)
9 –   1.0 +  0.5 –  0.1 
IV Errors and omissions –   3.2 + 27.9 –  5.3 
1  Balance. 2  Including supplementary trade items. 3  Special 
trade according to the offi   cial foreign trade statistics (source: 
Federal Statistical Offi   ce). 4 Including the acquisition/disposal of non-produced non-fi  nancial assets. 5 Original maturity of more 
than one year. 6 Securitised and non-securitised options as well 
as fi  nancial futures contracts. 7  Includes fi  nancial and trade credits, bank deposits and other assets. 8 Excluding the Bundes-bank. 9 Excluding allocation of SDRs and excluding changes due 
to value adjustments.
Deutsche BundesbankDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report 
May 2013  
42

view was the Netherlands (€11 billion). How -
ever, this figure was greatly boosted by a Ger -
man service provider’s decision to refocus its 
cross- border credit portfolio; the shift was mir -
rored in an equivalent change in the figure for 
Luxembourg, and thus had a neutral effect on German direct investment overall.
Foreign investors increased the funding of their 
German business establishments in the first quarter of 2013 by €7½ billion. Principally, they 
reinvested the profits of their German subsid -
iaries (€5 billion) and granted them loans (€3½ 
billion). In the main, these investors came from 
European countries, among them Belgium 
(€5½ billion) and Sweden (€2 billion).Foreign direct 
investment in GermanyDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report 
May 2013  
43

Economic conditions in Germany
Underlying trends
The German economy grew only moderately at 
the beginning of 2013. The Federal Statistical 
Office’s flash estimate shows quarter- on- 
quarter real GDP growth of 0.1% in the first quarter (after seasonal and calendar adjust
-
ment), compared with a decrease of 0.7% in 
the previous quarter. The fact that the expected 
countermovement was only subdued was due 
to the long winter, which mainly hampered the 
construction industry, although it also affected 
the transport sector. Leaving aside weather-  
related factors, economic output expanded 
roughly in line with potential growth, which meant that there was no further decline in 
macroeconomic capacity utilisation in terms of 
the underlying cyclical trend. This is consistent 
with the ongoing positive development in the 
labour market.Even so, the engine of exports has not yet 
started up again and, in view of sufficient cap-acity, the propensity for industrial investment is still weak. Private consumption provided some-what more robust stimulus at the turn of 2012-
13, although there was a marked decline in 
households’ demand for cars. Construction in-
vestment was hampered by adverse weather conditions in the period under review, but 
given the increasing demand for housing and a 
greater number of public contracts being 
awarded again recently, it is likely to return to a higher level of activity in the short term.
Exports declined further in seasonally adjusted 
terms in the first quarter of 2013, after a 2% decline in the final quarter of last year com
-
pared with the summer level. A ray of hope can be seen in the fact that exports of goods to the euro area were able at least partly to offset the 
steep decline at the end of 2012. There were 
more exports to Italy and Spain again following an 18-month decline. After a lean period, Ger -
man enterprises increased their exports to the 
Netherlands, whereas exports to France were tending to be weak, as they were in autumn 
2012. Negative figures were predominant out-side the euro area, even though the overall de-
crease in the period under review is not likely 
to be as strong as in the final quarter of 2012. 
There were fewer exports to Asian industrial countries and emerging market economies at 
the beginning of the year. One exception was 
China with somewhat more German-  made 
goods being exported to that country again 
after a weak second half of 2012. In the case of 
exports to the USA, the adjustment following 
the exceptionally strong performance in sum -
mer last year does not appear to have been 
completed yet. Exports to OPEC countries also 
saw a sharp fall recently. The central and east 
European EU countries do not represent a dy -
namic sales market for German exporters at 
present, whereas exports to Russia picked up GDP rose slightly 
in 2013 Q1Exports and in-
vestments lack-
ing momentum
Euro- area 
 exports provide ray of hope, but 
lull in non- euro- 
area exports
Overall output
Deutsche Bundesbank2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013102104106108110112
–8–6–4–20+2+4+62005 = 100, price and seasonally adjusted
Log scale
GDP
%
Lin scaleYear-on-year changeDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report 
May 2013  
44

again recently. Much the same applies to the 
United Kingdom.
In the period under review, it was primarily 
intermediate goods, such as chemical prod -
ucts, that were exported in larger quantities 
along with metals and metal products. Exports 
of capital goods were still in decline after the 
turn of the year, although the reduction was 
not on the same scale as in the final quarter of last year. In January and February 2013, exports 
of machinery were only slightly down on the quarter in seasonally adjusted terms. Export 
business with motor vehicles and motor vehicle 
parts was still having a strong dampening ef -
fect; sales of aircraft and railway vehicles were 
also declining towards the end of the period 
under review, however. By contrast, there was robust growth in exports of consumer goods.
Seasonally adjusted imports were down again 
in the first quarter of 2013. This was due essen-
tially to the considerable reduction in energy imports, which expanded strongly in the pre
-
ceding quarter. By contrast, imports of inter -
mediate goods as well as machinery, motor ve-
hicles, computers and electrical equipment were pointing upwards. Nevertheless, the re
-
covery was weaker in these categories of cap-
ital goods groups than it was in primary and 
intermediate goods. Likewise, more consumer 
goods were imported in the period under re -
view than in the previous quarter.
Enterprises are still exercising caution with re-
gard to investments. This is due mainly to the 
demand conditions, which broad sections of industry feel to be inadequate for lifting cap
-
acity utilisation above its normal level in the foreseeable future. Financing restrictions, on the other hand, are not playing a perceptible 
role. In many cases, enterprises’ current earn -
ings are giving them sufficient scope to fund themselves internally. Added to this, debt fi
-
nancing conditions are exceptionally favour -
able and there are no signs either that large 
firms or small and medium- sized enterprises in Germany are finding it noticeably more difficult to gain access to credit.
Although deliveries of machinery, computers 
and electrical equipment to domestic custom -
ers stabilised at a low level recently, automotive 
fleet business underwent a further fall. In the 
first three months of 2013, the number of new 
registrations for commercial vehicles was around one- tenth lower than in the previous 
quarter in seasonally adjusted terms. Registra -
tions of commercially used cars fell by 1¼% lat-terly.Again less de-
mand for capital goods exports, but somewhat more for inter-mediate goods
Imports de-
pressed by low energy deliveries
Business invest -
ment still weak90100110120Underlying trends in foreign trade
1 Adjusted for the price indices for foreign trade.
Deutsche Bundesbank2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013Jan-
Feb95100110120130140
Jan-
Feb
100110120130Seasonally adjusted, quarterly
To euro-area countries2005 = 100, log scale
Exports of goods
price-adjusted 1
Total
0204060Lin scale
Foreign trade balanceImports of goods
price-adjusted 1100110120130140150
€ bnTo non-euro area countriesDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report 
May 2013  
45

Construction investment suffered from the ad-
verse weather conditions in the first quarter of 
2013. With persistently low temperatures as well as snow and ice afflicting many parts of 
Germany up to early April, the usual seasonal 
upturn in construction activity did not take place this year until well into spring. In the period from January to March there were 
22 ice days1 on the national average, which is 
just under twice as many as the long- term 
average. The weak construction output in March is largely due to this extended forced break. Even though, according to the Ifo sur
-
veys, almost three- quarters of enterprises were 
still reporting weather- induced hold- ups in April,2 they were starting to catch up on the 
backlog from the middle of the month, if not 
earlier.
Private consumption made a good start to the 
year, after only minimal progress in 2012. The 
statistics show that consumers provided the re-
tail trade with a marked increase in sales after 
the turn of the year.3 Households were reluc -
tant to purchase cars. In seasonally adjusted 
terms, private passenger car registrations in the 
first quarter of 2013 were one-  tenth below 
their level in the final quarter of 2012. Sales of light heating oil were also clearly down in spite 
of the long winter, as households had already 
built up their supplies strongly in autumn.
Sectoral trends
Industrial activity was still feeble after the turn of 2012-13. With a seasonally adjusted increase 
of ½% in the first quarter of 2013, industrial output recovered only a little of the decline 
(-2½%) in the final quarter of 2012. An under -
lying tendency towards stagnation prevailed in the case of intermediate goods producers and 
in major branches of the capital goods sector, 
such as mechanical engineering and the pro -
duction of IT equipment. The automotive sec -
tor and other transport equipment managed to perform better, however.
With only a moderate increase in output, there 
were further losses in industrial capacity utilisa-
tion. According to the Ifo surveys, the utilisa -
tion of tangible fixed assets in manufacturing declined to 81¾% of normal full capacity in 
April, compared with 82¼% in January. A com-Long winter 
hampers con-struction activityMarked pick- up in private  consumption
Industrial activ-ity still lacking momentum
Capacity utilisa-
tion in manu-facturing down againImpact of weather conditions on construction: long winters in comparison
1 In western Germany.  2 Main construction industry. 3 Source: 
Ifo business survey. 4 Seasonally adjusted. Level in preceding 
Q3 = 100.
Deutsche BundesbankOct Nov Dec Jan Feb Mar Apr May Jun024681012
%Days
020406080
808590951001051102004-05 2005-06 2012-13
Ice days1
Multi-year monthly 
average
Construction output 2, 4Prevention of construction activity 2, 3
1 An “ice day” is defined as a day on which the highest 
temperature does not go above freezing point. The indica-tor used here weights the results of various monitoring sta-
tions in accordance with the regional employment struc -
ture in the main construction sector.
2 The large percentage is due to the fact that enterprises 
are surveyed in the first half of the month.
3 However, it should be noted that new methods have 
been applied to deal with reporting gaps since the begin-ning of the year and it is unclear at the moment how this will affect the need to revise provisional data.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report 
May 2013  
46

parison of these reported figures with the 
multi- year average of around 84% reveals that 
industry, unlike the economy as a whole, has 
been experiencing a noticeable underutilisation 
of capacities for some time now. The situation in the capital goods sector is particularly unsat-
isfactory; for nine months, utilisation was per -
sisting at a level of 84¼% and was thus nearly 
3 percentage points below the longer- term 
average. The decline in intermediate goods is 
1¾ percentage points at present.
Construction output decreased by a seasonally 
adjusted ½% in the first quarter of 2013. The 
decline was due to the main construction in -
dustry, where the considerable weather- related 
hold- ups in production led to a 6¼% drop in 
output towards the end of the winter. The dis-
ruptions caused by frost, snow and ice affected 
civil engineering (-8½%) more severely than building construction (-5%). Since the begin
-
ning of 2013, the Federal Statistical Office has 
also been providing up-  to- date reporting on 
output in the finishing trades. The new indica-
tor records the volume of (mainly) craft activ -
ities in and on buildings,4 the value added of 
which is, in fact, slightly greater than that of 
the main construction sector; it showed a con-
siderable increase of 5¼% after seasonal ad -
justment in the first quarter of 2013 following a significant decline in autumn. This might reflect 
the fact that construction sector output at -
tained a very high level in the third quarter of 
last year. It is obvious that the finishing trades 
follow shell construction work with a time lag. However, the available time series data are still too short at present to allow a reliable estima-
tion of the extent of this relationship and the 
time lag involved.
Energy production declined by a seasonally ad-
justed 2% after the turn of 2012-13, following 
a perceptible dampener of -4¼% in the au -
tumn. The publication of the January results also introduced a methodological change in these statistics. Electricity generation from re
-
newable energies is now captured in a better way by incorporating wind and solar electricity into the monthly extrapolation.
At the beginning of 2013, the economic situ -
ation in the services sectors was more favour -
able than in the production sector. Even so, these sectors were not generating any strong impulses for overall economic activity, espe
-
cially as weather effects were having a notice-able impact in the transport sector. This is evi-
dent, for instance, in the seasonally adjusted 1¾% decrease in the mileage of domestic 
heavy goods vehicles on motorways in the first quarter of 2013 compared with autumn 2012. The retail and wholesale trade are likely to have 
started the year well, whereas the motor ve -
hicle trade was feeling the effect of weak de -
mand for cars. According to the Ifo surveys, the Steep weather- 
related decline in outdoor con-struction, but clear growth in finishing trades
Further fall in 
energy outputSituation for ser-
vice providers 
better overall 
than for produc-
tion sectorOutput in industry andin construction
Deutsche Bundesbank2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013Industry
859095100105110115
9095100105110115
ConstructionMain construction2010 = 100, seasonally adjusted, quarterly, log scale
4 These are construction installation activities, which are 
fitted by electricians and plumbers. Added to these are 
trades such as painting and plastering, installation of doors, windows and kitchens as well as floor coverings.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report 
May 2013  
47

business situation assessments of service pro -
viders were, on average, better in the period 
from January to March than they were before 
the start of the new year.
Employment and labour 
 market
Enterprises continued to hire significant num -
bers of additional employees in the winter in 
spite of the subdued economic activity. Accord-
ing to estimates by the Federal Statistical Of -
fice, the seasonally adjusted number of persons 
in work in the first quarter of 2013 went up by 
90,000 on the quarter to 41.81 million, which 
corresponds to an increase of 0.2%. The in -
crease in employment was due solely to add -
itional regular jobs subject to social security 
contributions. Self- employment and one- euro 
jobs are both still on the decline with, not least, the reduction in labour market policy measures being a contributory factor. According to initial 
estimates by the Federal Employment Agency, 
the raising of the ceiling for mini- job earnings 
from €400 to €450 per month at the begin -
ning of the year has not led to a marked in -
crease in this form of employment.
In the case of regular jobs subject to social se-
curity contributions, there was a seasonally ad-
justed increase of 116,000 in the first two 
months of 2013 compared with the final quar -
ter of last year. This corresponds to an increase of 0.4%. The expansion was due chiefly to add-itional jobs in business- related services (exclud-
ing temporary employment), which increased by almost 1¼%.
5 Moreover, there was also a 
significant increase in jobs in health and social services as well as – despite the cyclical weak-
ness – manufacturing. By contrast, employ -
ment in the domestic trade sector remained 
unchanged. The decline in the number of tem-porary employees, which persisted throughout last year, did not continue at the beginning of 2013. In this sector, there are around 8% fewer 
employees subject to social security contribu -
tions at the current end than there were at the end of 2011, which saw temporary employ -
ment reaching its highest level to date.
Seasonally adjusted unemployment dipped 
slightly in winter following the muted increase in the previous nine months. After seasonal ad-
justment, an average of 8,000 fewer persons 
were registered as unemployed during the re -
porting period than in the fourth quarter of 
2012. The unemployment figure was 2.93 mil-
lion; the unemployment rate remained un -
changed at 6.9%. The cold and snowy winter 
weather weighed on the labour market, espe-
cially at the end of the reporting period. This 
also applied to the first half of April, which 
probably also contributed to the fact that there 
was no seasonally adjusted fall in registered 
unemployment in that month.
The fact that the sharp rise in the number of 
employees was not accompanied by a marked 
decline in unemployment is a phenomenon 
that has been characteristic of the German la -
bour market for some time now. The reserve 
pool of unemployed persons, which has shrunk 
sharply in recent years, can now cover only a 
small part of the corporate sector’s additional 
demand for labour. Instead, persons close to 
the labour market are being activated from the 
latent labour force, which is being reflected in 
increasing participation in the labour force. 
Additionally, Germany is experiencing consider -
able labour market-  oriented immigration on a 
scale not seen for quite a long time. According 
to provisional data of the Federal Statistical  Office, there was a migration surplus of 
369,000 persons in 2012, which clearly ex
-
ceeded the high net immigration in the previ -
ous year (+279,000). The influx was concen -
trated on three regions of origin. In 2011, 
117,000 persons immigrated on balance from 
the EU member states of central and eastern 
Europe, which were granted freedom of move-Labour market 
defies economic weakness
More jobs sub-
ject to social  security contri-butionsSlight fall in registered un-employment
Immigration 
rose further  
in 2012
5 With regard to the year-  on- year comparison, which 
allows a more disaggregated analysis, professional and 
technical services as well as the property and cleaning in -
dustries contributed to the expansion of employment in 
this area.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report 
May 2013  
48

ment more than two years ago (EU-8). At 
around 70,000 persons, just as many persons 
from the four south European euro- area coun-
tries of Italy, Spain, Portugal and Greece moved 
to Germany as they did from Romania and Bul-garia, although restrictions still apply to the re-cruitment of their citizens.
Employment services registered a year-  on- year 
increase of 87,000 employees from EU-8 coun-tries on average in 2012, with more than 90% of them in regular jobs subject to social security 
contributions.6 The fact that the increase is so 
high in relation to the migration surplus is be -
cause the figure includes not only persons who 
immigrated in 2012 for the purpose of taking 
up work, but also those who were already liv-
ing in Germany and who have now entered employment. Effects of this kind were irrele
-
vant to the increase of paid employment of persons from the four south European coun
-
tries (+29,000). In view of the restrictions on the free movement of labour that are still in place, it is striking that there was a relatively 
steep growth in employees from Romania and 
Bulgaria (+25,000), of whom 85% are in em -
ployment subject to social security contribu -
tions. In these cases, use was obviously made 
of the exemption clause which applies to sea -
sonal workers, applicants in shortage occupa -
tions and highly qualified individuals.
The Ifo employment barometer, which provides 
information on the employment plans of trade and industry and business- related services over 
the coming three months, showed a significant fall in early spring. As with expectations for the 
economy, however, this was merely a correc -
tion of the upward movement since the fourth quarter of last year. On balance, the indicator is 
in line with the outlook of a moderate expan -
sion in employment. The Federal Employment 
Agency’s BA-  X job index recorded a marked Migrants fre-
quently take up work
Stable outlook 
for labour  marketLabour market
1 Excluding  seasonal  jobs  and  jobs  located  abroad.  2 From 
May 2009, unemployed excluding persons newly registered on 
the books of private employment agencies.
Deutsche Bundesbank2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013April40.040.541.041.542.0
27.027.528.028.529.029.5–5000+500+1,000
2.53.03.54.0
–1,000–5000+500AprilSeasonally adjusted, quarterly
AprilMillion
Jan-
FebMillion
Million200300400500Thou-
sand
Thou-
sand
Thou-
sand Year-on-year changeOfficially unemployed 2UnemployedTotalEmployed
Unsubsidised vacancies 1
(scale enlarged)Occupied positionsJobs subject to social security
contributionsYear-on-year change
6 See Bundesagentur für Arbeit (2013), Auswirkungen der 
Arbeitnehmerfreizügigkeit und der EU-Schuldenkrise auf 
den deutschen Arbeitsmarkt, Berichtsmonat Februar 2013, 
Hintergrundinformationen, Nuremberg, April 2013 (avail -
able only in German).Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report 
May 2013  
49

decline last month. Both the inventory and the 
access components played a part in this re -
spect. The decline in the reported number of 
vacancies subject to social services contribu -
tions was very largely attributable to the “other 
business- related services” sector, which in -
cludes temporary agency employment. In the 
first quarter of 2013, the IAB Job Vacancy Sur -
vey showed a smaller decline in job vacancies 
in the economy on the whole than in the num-ber of reported vacancies.
Wages and prices
As in the last quarter of 2012, negotiated rates 
of pay rose by 2.9% on the year in the first quarter of 2013. This corresponded to the in
-
crease in the basic rates of pay. This co-  
movement reflects the fact that one-  off pay -
ments, as a negotiated wage component, have not been a factor in the collective agreements of most sectors for some time now.
This year’s pay round has thus so far continued 
the pattern of primarily agreeing increases in 
scheduled rates of pay. The negotiations con -
cluded since March are also characterised by 
the fact that the social partners have reached 
agreement quickly and without major disputes 
on quite balanced increases, amounting to a volume of between 2½% and 3% in annualised 
terms. There were larger differences in terms of their duration, however. In the public sectors of 
federal state government, postal services and 
hotels and catering, the collective wage agree-ments are to run for a minimum of two years. 
In the production sector, there were initially 
two settlements of relatively short duration (15 months in the steel industry, 13 months in con-struction). The metal- working and electrical en-
gineering industries recently concluded a wage agreement for 20 months.
With regard to minimum wages, there were re-
cently agreements that could give rise to cost 
pressure in the sectors affected. The minimum 
wage levels for skilled and unskilled labourers 
in the west German construction industry, 
which are already fairly high, will have been in-
creased to €14.70 and €11.30 per hour respect-ively by 1 January 2017. In addition, the existing minimum wage for unskilled labourers in east-
ern Germany will be brought completely into 
line with the west German level by that date. In 
the hairdressing sector, the social partners agreed to a phased increase in the regional minimum hourly rates to a uniform €8.50 by 
1 August 2015.7 The aim is to reach a generally 
binding collective agreement. Particularly in the 
east German federal states, where earnings 
have sometimes been less than €4 an hour in 
the lowest pay categories up to now, the wage increase would be extremely high.
After going up sharply in the fourth quarter of 
2012, import prices showed a seasonally ad -
justed fall of 0.8% on the quarter in the first 
three months of 2013 owing to the appreci -
ation of the euro, while domestic producer prices continued their upward trend with an 
increase of 0.3%. The appreciation had the ef-
fect of lowering prices in all the import com -
ponents. By contrast, it was only the increase in Growth in basic 
rates of pay drives wage  increases
Balanced ap-
proach main-tained so far in this year’s pay roundMinimum wages 
in construction 
and hairdressing 
set at fairly high 
level
Diverging price 
trends at the up-stream stagesNegotiated rates of pay
1 Excluding additional benefits and lump-sum payments.
Deutsche Bundesbank2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 201300.51.01.52.02.53.03.5Year-on-year percentage change, on monthly basis
Negotiated
rates of pay,
total
Basic pay 1Q1
7 The responsible regional associations must agree to the 
outcome of the negotiations by the end of June for the pay 
agreement to enter into force. The guild associations of some of the federal states have already announced that 
they do not wish to join the minimum wage agreement.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report 
May 2013  
50

the prices of intermediate goods that came to 
a halt at the domestic producer level. Domestic sales prices of capital and consumer goods rose quite considerably in some cases, with the ten-dency towards an accelerated increase in wage 
costs likely to make itself felt over time. The sharp increase in the renewable energy (EEG) 
levy played a key role in the substantial rise in 
producer prices for energy. The euro’s appreci-
ation caused domestic export prices to decline 
distinctly by 0.4%, which is likely to have been 
accompanied by a compression of margins. As 
the decline in export prices was somewhat lower than that of import prices, there was a 
slight improvement in the Terms of Trade.
The marked differential between short-term changes in foreign trade prices, on the one 
hand, and domestic sales prices, on the other, 
was also reflected in the year- on- year rates of 
change. A decline of 1.6% was recorded in the case of import prices, while producer prices re-
vealed an average rise of 1.1%, and export prices remained almost unchanged. Accord
-
ingly, the terms of trade showed a distinct im-provement on the year, although they were still a long way from matching the levels of earlier years.
Residential construction prices continued to 
climb in the first quarter of 2013, although the increase for structural work slowed to 1.8% on the year owing to lower prices for intermediate 
goods, while the rate for completion work re -
mained almost unchanged at 2.4%. According 
to data of the Association of German Pfand -
brief Banks (Verband deutscher Pfandbriefban-ken, vdp), the increase in the prices of owner- 
occupied housing, at 3.4% year- on- year, was 
again stronger than the rise in construction prices. The cost of apartment buildings has gone up by 3.7% since the first quarter of 2012. The vdp’s quarterly price reporting for 
commercial property at present covers this type 
of use as well as office buildings, for which 
prices have increased by 5.2%. (An overview of 
the currently available price indices for com -
mercial property including conceptual consider -Further rise in 
property pricesExport pricesImport, export, producer, construction and consumer prices
1 Producer price index for industrial products in domestic sales. 
2 Not seasonally adjusted, quarterly. 3 National consumer pri-
ce index.
Deutsche Bundesbank2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013100105110115120125
105110115120
110115 115120125
95100105
10123
–+++Seasonally adjusted, monthly
Lin scale
Consumer prices
Year-on-year change 22010 = 100Consumer prices
 3Constructionprices
2Producer prices1Import prices2005 = 100, log scale
%
April100105110115Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report 
May 2013  
51

ations with regard to their definition and clas-
sificiation may be found on pages 53 to 55).
There was no more than a muted rise in sea -
sonally adjusted consumer prices in the first 
three months of 2013, with a quarterly rate of 
only 0.3%. In the two preceding quarters, the 
figure was as much as 0.5% in both cases. 
Alongside the appreciation of the euro, a num-
ber of special effects played a part. Despite the 
decline in prices for refined petroleum products 
on the back of the stronger euro, the increase 
in the renewable energy (EEG) levy made en -
ergy significantly more expensive. The rate of 
price increase for food and other goods be -
came perceptibly slower, a development in 
which world market factors may  also have 
played a part. The ceasing of upward price pressure in the case of services was linked to 
the abolition of the surgery visit charge. There 
was a slightly stronger increase in the rent 
index; this includes mainly existing rents, which follow rents for new lettings with a significant lag and modest fluctuations.
In the first quarter, the annual rate of inflation 
as measured by the national Consumer Price 
Index CPI went up by 1.5%, while the Harmon-
ised Index of Consumer Prices (HICP) indicated 
a rise of 1.8%. The exceptionally large differ -
ence between the annual CPI and HICP rates 
derives mainly from a particular feature of the 
hotel services sub- index.8 The annual CPI rate 
fell to 1.2% in April, while the HICP rate went down to 1.1%. This was due mainly to the early 
date of Easter, which resulted in the typically 
high prices in the Easter holidays, such as those for travel and holiday services, already being re-corded in March. By contrast, the year- on- year 
comparison in April is based on lower prices in 
the reporting period and high prices in the 
same period last year. Somewhat higher rates 
of inflation can be expected from May on -
wards.Orders received and outlook
On an average of the first quarter of 2013, sea-
sonally adjusted industrial orders rose by only ½% on the final quarter of 2012. However, after a decidedly poor start to the year, the situation picked up markedly in the course of 
the reporting period. The new momentum was 
not confined only to intermediate goods; the 
order books of capital goods manufacturers 
also improved. Orders for motor vehicles, trail-
ers and semi- trailers had recovered significantly 
by March, following a relatively small intake of 
orders in January. A number of large- scale 
orders were behind the favourable March result 
in the mechanical engineering sector. By con -
trast, seasonally adjusted orders of consumer 
goods were weaker after the turn of the year 
than before.
The improvement in short- term production ex-
pectations is consistent with the appreciably 
higher number of intermediate goods ordered 
by German industry. The seasonally adjusted 
volume of orders not only surpassed the weak 
result of the final quarter of 2012 by 2¼%, but 
also the volume of new orders placed in the summer months. The rise in orders of capital goods, which was likewise 2¼% quarter- on- 
quarter, was primarily driven by the fact that more orders for motor vehicles and IT equip
-
ment were being placed than in the final quar -
ter of 2012. In mechanical engineering, how -
ever, the reporting period did not see any sea-
sonally adjusted increase in domestic orders 
compared with the fourth quarter of 2012.
After seasonal adjustment, foreign demand for 
industrial goods in the first three months of 
2013 was 1% down on the quarter, which had 
admittedly shown a distinct increase on the 
summer quarter of last year due to a relatively 
high level of orders from outside the euro area. 
The economic slowdown in countries outside Consumer price 
rises very  subduedDistinct improve-
ment in indus-
trial orders dur-
ing the quarter
Significant im-
provement in domestic orders recently …
… but decline in 
foreign orders
8 See Deutsche Bundesbank, The contribution of the hotel services sub- index to explaining the current deviations be-
tween CPI and HICP inflation measures, Monthly Report, 
April 2013, p 7.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report 
May 2013  
52

Commercial property prices in Germany: 
conceptual  considerations and statistical status quo
Information on commercial property prices 
is as relevant for macroeconomic analyses 
as it is for questions of fi  nancial stability. In 
one major point such information aug-
ments reporting on stocks and construction 
activities on the markets for, say, offi   ce 
property, retail property and logistics build-
ings. The prevailing conditions of supply 
and demand on those markets as well as potential risks can thus be investigated 
more comprehensively.
How properties are categorised generally 
depends on whether the perspective of the owner or the user is taken. The broad defi  n-
ition of commercial property is based on the owner concept, with the designation 
“commercial” being applied to those prop-
erties which the owner has acquired pri-
marily with the intention of making a profi  t. 
This includes properties on which produc-tion and trading activities take place or 
which serve as offi   ce or storage space (re-
ferred to below as commercial buildings). From the owner’s vantage point, rented residential property also falls into this cat-
egory. In terms of its actual use, however, it 
belongs –  together with owner- occupied 
residential property – to the housing market stock. Depending on the perspective, apart-ments and houses which are rented out are capital or consumer goods. They cannot be 
classifi  ed generally, but only in relation to 
the concrete objective of the study.
From an economic perspective, there are a 
number of reasons for classifying proper-
ties, fi  rst and foremost, according to the cri-
terion of use. This is suggested by consider-
ations of economic theory and empirical fi  ndings alike. Price movements on the 
property markets are connected with imbal-ances between supply and demand. In cyc-
lical terms, these correspond to the con-struction activities that usually also help to 
create market equilibrium. Differences in 
the speeds of adjustment along with differ-
ences in interest sensitivity lie behind the 
fact that housing market cycles may show 
considerable divergence from the fl  uctu-
ations in the commercial investment sector. Added to this is the fact that stocks of resi-
dential property and commercial buildings are shaped in the long term by different 
factors. For example, the demand for apart-
ments and houses over this time horizon 
depends mainly on socio- demographic fac-tors (such as resident population, age struc-
ture, household sizes) as well as house-holds’ income prospects and living prefer-
ences. By contrast, enterprises plan to buy 
or rent properties used in the value added 
process over the medium to long term de-
pending on the conditions of production and the sales outlook for their goods and 
services.
The national accounts likewise break down 
construction investment and fi  xed assets 
according to their predominant use into residential and non- residential property. In surveys on construction permits and com-pletions a distinction between residential 
and commercial property is made in a simi-lar fashion. Within the category of “multiple family dwellings”, the number of authorised 
and/or completed owner- occupied and 
rented apartments is reported separately at 
a subordinate level. However, this consists 
of forecasts by property developers, which 
may differ from (subsequent) actual use.
The statistical recording of commercial property prices, unlike owner- occupied 
housing, is much less satisfactory. Owing to the lack of offi   cial fi  gures, price analysis has to rely on data from private information ser-
vices. These mostly provide profi  tability Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report 
May 2013  
53

ratios for potential investors. Only in a few 
cases are the data detailed enough to allow 
suffi   ciently representative indicators for 
pure price changes (ie ones adjusted for 
quality effects) to be derived from them. In 
this connection, the annual German Prop-
erty Index (GPI) for commercial property in 
127 towns and cities published by Bul-
wienGesa AG should be mentioned as one 
source of data. Second, the Association of 
German Pfandbrief Banks (Verband deut-scher Pfandbriefbanken, vdp) recently 
began to publish a quarterly price index for offi   ce buildings.
1
From a statistical point of view, the price data of BulwienGesa und vdp differ in a number of key features. In particular, this 
includes, along with frequency and regional 
coverage, the type of quality adjustment, the underlying price concept and the 
method of aggregation. Quality adjustment 
in the BulwienGesa indices is performed using the method of typical cases, while vdp applies hedonic regression methods. Eliminating price- determining factors such 
as location, size, age and fi  ttings poses an 
even greater challenge in the case of com-
mercial property than it does for private apartments and houses, however, since 
these types of use are generally character-
ised by relatively small numbers of observa-
tions and a high degree of heterogeneity.2 
The Association of German Pfandbrief Banks (vdp) bases its calculations on data 
obtained in the context of mortgage collat-
eralisation. They are therefore transaction- 
based, whereas BulwienGesa also uses in-
formation from surveyors’ appraisals, expert 
1 In conceptual terms, the aggregated data on offi   ce, 
retail, industrial and residential buildings provided by 
the Investment Property Databank (IPD) are capital 
value indices. They do not measure pure price changes since they are, among other things, not subject to any quality adjustment.2 This is due to the fact that such properties are often individually adapted to the needs of the current owner 
and may therefore display a large number of special 
features.Commercial property prices in Germany
Source:  Association  of  German  Pfandbrief  Banks  (Verband 
deutscher Pfandbriefbanken, vdp) and Bundesbank calculations based on BulwienGesa AG data.  1 Logistics buildings, office 
property and retail property.
Deutsche Bundesbank2000 01 02 03 04 05 06 07 08 09 10 11 20128590951001051102010 = 100, annual, log scale
95100105110115
859095100105110115120
80859095 95100105110Commercial
buildings and
residential propertyCommercial buildings1
859095100105110115BulwienGesa AG vdp
Office propertyof which
Logistics buildings
Residential propertyRetail propertyDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report 
May 2013  
54

assessments and target group surveys. Even 
though this does not refl  ect just purchase 
prices, it is consistent with internationally widespread practice. Nevertheless, valu-ation- based indices tend to show a smoother progression than transaction- 
based data.
3 Furthermore, they may also 
show something of a time lag.4
Commercial property prices have been on a 
steady upward path since 2005 following a substantial decline during the period of per-sistent economic stagnation in the fi  rst half of the last decade. While prices have since 
been trending clearly upwards in the case of retail property, both BulwienGesa data 
and the vdp indicator show prices for offi   ce property falling for a time following the se-
vere recession in the fi  nal quarter of 2008 
and fi  rst quarter of 2009. Since the middle of the last decade, no more than a moder-
ate increase in prices is shown for logistics 
buildings. In 2012, the prices of properties 
used for the distribution of goods were still 
just under one- tenth lower than in 2000, 
whereas the prices of commercial buildings 
were roughly one- eighth higher overall 
than they were at that time.
Especially for questions of fi  nancial stability, 
it is advisable to analyse commercial prop-
erty from the owner perspective – ie includ-
ing residential property,5 which accounts for 
somewhat more than half of the market 
value of this broadly defi  ned stock of prop-
erty.6 According to the BulwienGesa data, 
the price increase for residential property 
since 2005, at an average of 3¾% per year, has been more than twice as high as shown 
in the vdp capital value index for rented 
properties (1¼%). This discrepancy is due in part to the fact that the BulwienGesa price 
data refer solely to 127 towns and cities, 
while the vdp index also contains informa-
tion from rural areas. As is well documented for owner- occupied housing in comparable 
defi  nitions,7 the price increase in urban 
areas is likely, for some years now, to have been higher than average in the case of 
multi- family dwellings, too.
The index series of BulwienGesa und vdp display some shortcomings as well, how-ever. The BulwienGesa information, which 
is confi  ned to 127 towns and cities, is not 
representative regionally. Furthermore, data 
on prices for production facilities are not available. In the vdp data, too, there are gaps with regard to the coverage of all 
types of use. The fact that this family of in-dices is soon to be extended by a price indi-
cator for retail property is therefore to be 
welcomed. Nevertheless, this will still omit 
the important subsector of industrial and 
logistics buildings.
Information on commercial property prices 
is among the data required for the Financial 
Soundness Indicator of the International 
Monetary Fund (IMF).8 As a contribution to 
closing the existing information gap con-
cerning commercial property prices in Ger-
many, the annual data of BulwienGesa will 
be posted on the Bundesbank’s website 
with immediate effect.9
3 In the results available for Germany so far, this is 
shown in the prices for offi   ce properties.
4 This is likely to be due to the fact that surveyors are guided strongly by the average of past successful sales. See inter alia D Geltner (1991), Smoothing in appraisal- based returns, The Journal of Real Estate Finance and Economics 4, 3, pp 327-345.
5 Although a comparatively large percentage of resi-
dential property in Germany is owned by private indi-viduals, it is quite similar to commercial property inso-
far as it forms part of sole proprietors’ private assets 
and is used as loan collateral.
6 Residential property is included with a signifi  cantly 
lower weight in the overall index of BulwienGesa. This 
takes account of the fact that residential property is obviously tradeable to a lesser extent, especially in 
comparison with retail property.
7 See Deutsche Bundesbank, House prices in 2012 in 
Germany, Monthly Report, February 2013, pp 53-55.
8 See IMF (2006), Financial Soundness Indicators: 
Compilation Guide, p 101ff.
9 Deutsche Bundesbank, Financial Soundness Indica-
tors, Indicators 2010-2012, http://www.bundesbank.de/Navigation/EN/Statistics/IMF_related_data/FSI/Indicators_ 2010_2011/indicators_2010_2012.html?nsc=trueDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report 
May 2013  
55

Europe was reflected in orders received by the 
manufacturers of intermediate goods, which 
were weaker than any time during the last 
three years. The decline in the capital goods 
sector is put into perspective by the fact that many of the sizeable orders of aircraft and spacecraft from non- euro- area countries are 
not assigned in the statistics to their region of 
origin; instead, they are classified as subse -
quent orders in the context of combined Euro-pean production, and thus boost the figure for 
euro- area orders. This was the key reason for 
the slight increase in demand for industrial goods from the euro area. Excluding aircraft 
and spacecraft, orders from the euro area have continued their decline. Only IT equipment ex-
perienced a sharp increase, albeit after a de -
cidedly weak performance in the second half of 
2012. By contrast, euro- area orders for the 
automotive and mechanical engineering indus-tries fell further in seasonally adjusted terms.
Demand for construction work received new 
impetus at the turn of 2012-13 after slackening 
somewhat in the autumn. Housing construc -
tion was given an added boost by more single- 
family and two- family houses being approved 
in January and February in seasonally adjusted 
terms than on an average of the preceding three- month period. The large volume of ap
-
provals in the construction of apartment blocks from autumn was almost maintained at the be-ginning of the year. Indicators for public sector 
construction suggest that the phase of sub -
dued awarding of contracts is over for the time being. Over the past two years, only large- scale 
projects succeeded in raising the volume of 
orders in the short term, but there appears to 
have been a more broadly based pick- up of 
late. The commercial sector has not provided any expansionary stimuli for construction de
-
mand recently. However, in comparison with 
the pronounced weakness in investment in ma-
chinery and equipment, construction activities 
planned by enterprises have held up well.
Households remain willing to consume. In early 
spring, the consumer climate reached a figure New impetus  
in construction 
demandDemand for industrial goods and construction work
Deutsche Bundesbank2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013758090100110120
–40–30–20–1000+10+20+30
708090100110120
8090100110
Jan-
Feb
Jan-
Feb90100110120
–20–100+10+20Volume, seasonally adjusted, quarterly
DomesticForeignof whichLog scaleMain industrial orders2010 = 100, log scale
Lin scale
Year-on-year
change
2005 = 100
Main construction orders
Lin scale
Year-on-year change%
%Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report 
May 2013  
56

that was unprecedented in the current business 
cycle. This was partly due to still very optimistic 
income expectations, which are wholly justified 
in view of the robust labour market situation 
and continuing marked growth in earnings. On 
the other hand, the strong willingness of 
households to make major purchases also mir -
rors their reduced propensity to save.
An increase in economic growth is expected for the second quarter of 2013. This is indi
-
cated not only by the likely catching- up effects 
in response to the weather- related downturn in construction activity during the past winter. With industrial new orders picking up appre
-
ciably after a poor start to the year, there is 
reason to hope that exports and investment in machinery and equipment – the demand com-
ponents that can usually be relied on most to 
set the pace for the German economy – will recover as well. Nevertheless, given the poor 
economic conditions in many parts of the euro 
area and the existing problems in connection with the sovereign debt crisis, the macroeco
-
nomic risks remain high.Pronounced 
consumer  sentiment
Economic recov-
ery expected in second quarterDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report 
May 2013  
57

Public finances*
General government budget
Having posted a small surplus in 2012, general 
government is likely to record a slight deficit 
this year. This deterioration is mainly due to cyclical effects; their positive influence – now fading – was what generated last year’s sur
-
plus. The structural deficit will therefore remain virtually unchanged. However, as things stand, 
the debt ratio is set to decline distinctly. The combined deficit of central, state and local government will probably be very low com
-
pared with nominal growth in gross domestic 
product (GDP), and Germany’s state- owned 
bad banks can be expected to reduce their 
 liabilities on balance. These factors will signifi -
cantly outweigh the debt- raising impact of the 
stabilisation measures currently planned for the 
euro area.1
The revenue ratio could decline slightly this year (2012: 45.2%) because of the significant 
cut in the pension contribution rate to 18.9%; other measures affecting tax and social contri-bution rates will have almost no net impact. By 
contrast, both fiscal drag2 and the growth 
structure –  which remains favourable  – are likely to have a slightly positive effect on the 
revenue ratio. Meanwhile, lower interest rates 
mean that interest expenses can be expected 
to continue on their downward path, whereas the other categories of spending will probably 
increase roughly in line with the nominal GDP 
trend. Nonetheless, the expenditure ratio is 
likely to rise somewhat (2012: 45.0%) as a re -
sult of weak GDP growth in the denominator.
As things stand, the general government fiscal 
balance should start to improve again in 2014, and the debt ratio should continue its decline. 
While various expansionary fiscal policy meas -
ures are currently planned for 2014, such as the second- phase increase in the basic income tax 
allowance or the rise in outlays on the childcare 
subsidy, they will probably be outweighed by the expected budget- easing effects – which in-
clude a further fall in interest expenses and fis-
cal drag. If, unlike in the preceding years, the 
Bundesbank no longer had to put aside add -
itional funds to increase its buffers against bal-
ance sheet risks and thus reduce the profits it 
transfers to central government, this would 
likewise have a positive impact on the 2014 fis-cal balance.
The general government fiscal balances for 
2013 and 2014 will mask opposing develop -
ments at the various levels of government and 
the social security funds. Nearly all of the large 
surplus posted by the social security funds in 
2012 will already evaporate this year; the main 
factors in this deterioration are the consider -
able cut in the pension contribution rate, vari-
ous spending increases and burdens shifted 
from central government to the social security 
funds. By contrast, central government in par -
ticular is likely to see a gradual improvement in 
its budget situation, aided by lower grants to the social security funds, falling interest ex
-
penses and fiscal drag. This relatively favour -
able picture is tempered somewhat by the con-
tinuing high level of uncertainty surrounding the euro- area debt crisis and macroeconomic 
developments.
Central government presented its updated sta-
bility programme for the 2013-2017 period on 2013: budget to 
edge back into deficit but debt ratio falling
Slight decline in 
revenue ratio due to reduced pension contri-bution rate, and …
… expenditure 
ratio somewhat higher
Fiscal balance 
set to improve in 2014 if policy stance remains unchangedOpposing devel-opments at vari-ous levels of government and social security funds
* The analysis in the “General government budget” section is based on data contained in the national accounts and on 
the Maastricht ratios. The subsequent reporting on the 
budgets of the various levels of government and the social security funds is based on the figures as defined in the gov-
ernment’s financial statistics (which are generally in line 
with the budget accounts).1 In this section of the article, the forecast developments in 2013 and 2014 are based on the assumption that the euro- area debt crisis will not escalate again.
2 In this context, the term “fiscal drag” encompasses the 
(positive) revenue effect of bracket creep in income tax -
ation and the (negative) impact stemming from the fact 
that specific excise duties are largely independent of prices.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report 
May 2013  
58

17 April 2013.3 The programme’s objectives ap-
pear attainable from the current perspective, 
and general government’s aspiration to achieve 
structural surpluses is welcome progress. Ger -
many’s fiscal policy stance would then be more 
or less neutral between 2013 and 2017.
The updated stability programme envisages 
that general government will record a deficit in 
2013, before balancing its budget again in 2014 and 2015 and going into surplus from 
2016 onwards. Germany consolidated beyond 
its medium- term objective (MTO; a structural 
deficit ratio of no more than 0.5%)4 last year, 
recording a structural surplus of just under ½% of GDP .
5 The programme expects general gov-
ernment to generally maintain this safety mar -
gin vis- à- vis the medium- term budget object -
ive, and envisages a gradual reduction in the 
debt ratio to 80½% in 2013 and 69% in 2017. The programme stresses the importance of sus-
tainable public finances and binding budget rules, as well as outlining aspirations to im
-
prove the quality of public finances – notably 
by channelling expenditure towards education, research and infrastructure.
In view of Germany’s high debt ratio and the 
burdens the country is likely to face as a result 
of its changing demographics, it would be ap-
propriate for general government to post struc-tural surpluses; improvements beyond the 
medium- term budget objective would there -
fore be a welcome target. In addition, it would 
be advisable to generally aim for clear safety margins with respect to the future national budget ceilings –  including in the federal 
states – when preparing budgets. The currently 
very good underlying conditions in Germany 
– relatively moderate unemployment figures, a 
favourable growth structure for government revenues and low interest rates – provide an Objectives  
of stability 
 programme  attainable and welcome
General govern-
ment plans to consistently  exceed its medium- term budget objective
Structural 
 surpluses  appropriateKey data of the Federal Government’s updated stability programme
 
Item 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017
Real GDP growth (as %)
Stability programme April 2013 0.7 0.4 1.6 1.4 1.4 1.4
Stability programme April 2012 0.7 1.6 1.6 1.6 1.6 –
General government fi  scal balance (as % of GDP)
Stability programme April 2013 0.2 – ½ 0 0 ½ ½
Stability programme April 2012 – 1 – ½ – 0 0 0 –
Structural fi  scal balance (as % of GDP)
Stability programme April 2013 0.4 0 ½ ½ ½ ½
Stability programme April 2012 –  ½ – ½ 0 0 0 –
Debt-to-GDP ratio
Stability programme April 2013 81.9 80½ 77½ 75 71½ 69
Stability programme April 2012 82 80 78 76 73 –
Source: Federal Ministry of Finance.
Deutsche Bundesbank
3 This programme is based on the January 2013 macroeco-
nomic forecast, as well as central government tax revenue estimates adjusted in line with this forecast. The latest offi-cial tax estimate, published in May 2013, does not change the picture significantly. See also pp 66-67.4 Under the Stability and Growth Pact, member states set 
an MTO for their general government fiscal balance (after 
cyclical adjustment and net of temporary measures). This 
MTO is country-  specific, although target deficits must not 
exceed 1% of GDP . The fiscal compact sets a general limit of 0.5% of GDP for the structural deficit of the participat-ing countries. However, a structural deficit of up to 1% of GDP is permissible under the fiscal compact if the country’s 
debt ratio is significantly below 60% and if risks to the 
long- term sustainability of public finances are deemed to 
be low.
5 According to the EU estimation approach as part of its 
budgetary surveillance procedure, Germany’s structural fis-cal balance stood at +0.3% of GDP in 2012, while the ESCB 
estimation yielded a small structural deficit for the same 
period. This disparity is due, in particular, to the fact that 
the EU’s aggregated cyclical adjustment procedure does 
not take account of the positive impact caused by the fa-vourable growth structure. For more detailed information, see Deutsche Bundesbank, A disaggregated framework for analysing public finances: Germany’s fiscal track record be-
tween 2000 and 2005, Monthly Report, March 2006, 
pp 61-76.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report 
May 2013  
59

Fiscal developments in the euro area
Aggregate euro- area government 
 defi  cits down in 2012 but debt ratio continued to rise
At the end of April, Eurostat published the 
government defi  cits and debt levels of the 
EU member states as part of the European 
budgetary surveillance procedure. These fi  gures revealed that the aggregate euro- 
area defi  cit ratio declined from 4.2% 
to 3.7% last year, improving against an un-
favourable economic backdrop overall. The 
European Commission thus found that the 
cyclically adjusted defi  cit ratio had fallen by 
just under one percentage point. This im-provement was driven chiefl  y by the rev-enue side, while the adjusted expenditure 
ratio remained almost unchanged, notably 
on account of spending to support the 
 fi  nancial sector. The debt ratio saw another 
clear rise in 2012, increasing from 88% 
to 92.7%.1
Development could continue, though at a slower pace
The European Commission’s spring forecast 
expects the euro- area defi  cit ratio to dwin-dle further to 2.9% of GDP this year, with a negative cyclical impact continuing to place 
a drag on developments. The Commission 
forecasts that the defi  cit ratio in 2014 will 
generally remain unchanged at 2.8% even 
though the cyclical effect is then expected 
to be positive, suggesting a degree of struc-tural easing. This fi  gure does not yet incorp-
orate all the measures envisaged in the  national stability programmes, however. The debt ratio is expected to increase fur-
ther to 95½% in 2013 and edge higher still in 2014.Deadlines for correcting excessive 
 defi  cits likely to be extended
The situation varies greatly across the indi-
vidual countries. Only a few euro- area 
member states (Germany, Estonia, Finland, 
Luxembourg and Malta) are not currently 
undergoing an excessive defi  cit procedure.
Both Austria and Italy might be released 
from the procedure in the near future as 
their defi  cit ratios once again complied with the reference value in 2012. However, this is predicated on these countries bringing their 
defi  cit below the 3% threshold not just 
once but for a sustained period of time, and 
on them not reversing their fi  scal policy stance. Now that Italy appears to have 
plans to backpedal on some of the sched-
uled consolidation measures, specifi  c steps 
should be taken to ensure compliance with the EU requirements.
Belgium missed the deadline for corrective 
action in 2012 while Malta, whose proced-
ure had only been closed at the end of 2012, reported that its 2012 defi  cit ratio 
was back above the defi  cit threshold. The-
oretically speaking, the next move would be to step up the procedure for Belgium, 
including fi  nancial sanctions, while the pro-
cedure for Malta would be reopened, 
 although the Commission has not yet pre-
sented its proposals on the matter. Cyprus 
likewise failed to meet its deadline for cor-
rective action in 2012. New budgetary  targets were set in the country’s fi  nancial 
 assistance programme.
In addition, the EU forecast indicates that 
six countries will fail to correct their exces-
1 Unlike Eurostat (2012: 90.6% of GDP), the European 
Commission also includes lending between euro- area 
countries in its debt level fi  gures.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report 
May 2013  
60

sive defi  cits within the set timeframe 
(France, the Netherlands, Slovenia and Slo-
vakia in 2013; Spain and Portugal in 2014). 
However, the Commission has already in-
formally held out the prospect of extending these deadlines.
The regulations generally allow the set timeframe to be extended in cases where the country delivers on the structural im-provement called for at the beginning of 
the procedure (taking account of any miti-
gating circumstances relating to revised 
trend growth rates and additional revenue 
shortfalls) but where economic develop-ments have been unexpectedly unfavour-able. Extensions are not mandatory, how-ever. Even in cases like this, the member state concerned can be required to make additional improvements in order to meet the initial deadline. The regulations thus 
permit a certain degree of discretion in such 
decisions, and it is down to the European Commission, whose overall powers have 
notably been strengthened by the reformed regulations, to apply them strictly. In its de-cisions, the Commission undoubtedly needs 
to consider the very unfavourable macro-
economic developments that some of these 
countries have experienced at times, and 
additional consolidation can usually be ex-
pected to dampen economic activity further still. On the other hand, cyclical weakness is 
often not the only factor at play; in many instances, the countries are undergoing a process of structural adjustment following on from earlier excesses. In addition, the 
regulations encourage over- optimistic fore-
casts regarding macroeconomic perform-ance or the effect of consolidation meas-ures, which make it easier to justify non- compliance further along the line. Great 
caution is advised when considering how to use any available discretionary scope, given 
that many countries now have very high 
debt ratios. This is what has shaken confi  -
dence in sound fi  scal policies, and the new 
regulations should help to rebuild this lost trust, particularly concerning reliable pro-spects for consolidation. However, their binding effect could be undermined from 
the very outset if the impression is created 
that suffi   cient political pressure is all it takes 
to postpone the necessary defi  cit reduc-
tions time and again. The unadjusted defi  cit 
threshold of 3% represents a key anchor, for the public debate and elsewhere, and inadequate implementation of the fi  scal 
rules before the crisis was regarded as one 
of the main problems. During the current 
European Semester, the Ecofi  n Council will 
take a decision on deadline extensions based on a recommendation by the Euro-
pean Commission.
In a number of the recently updated stabil-
ity programmes, some member states – an-
ticipating an extension of the deadline – only plan to comply with the defi  cit limit within a longer timeframe. France, for in-
stance, is only intending to (barely) comply 
with the 3% threshold again in 2014, and 
this is based on rather optimistic macroeco-
nomic assumptions. Against this backdrop, 
the Commission has signalled that it would recommend extending the deadline by two years rather than requiring more ambitious fi  scal consolidation, for instance.
The reformed Stability and Growth Pact is also directly targeted at cutting very high debt ratios. It generally requires govern-
ments with excessive debt ratios to reduce 
the differential to the 60% mark by an aver-
age of one- twentieth per year until the  reference value has been reached. How-ever, this provision, which was introduced in 2011, will only come into force after a 
transitional period following termination of 
the ongoing excessive defi  cit procedures. Consequently, extending the deadlines for correcting defi  cits additionally delays the 
rules- based reduction of debt. In 2013, only 
 Estonia, Luxembourg, Slovakia and Finland 
are likely to comply with the 60% debt ratio 
while Slovenia will just miss the threshold. Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report 
May 2013  
61

The Commission’s forecast suggests that 
the debt ratios of most countries will rise in 
both 2013 and 2014.
Programme countries making mixed 
progress
The fi  nancial assistance programme for Greece was launched in May 2010; since 
then, the expected consolidation, the def-
icit reduction path and the size of the as-sistance loans have all been adjusted. By 
the end of 2012, funds (bilateral loans, EFSF 
and IMF) totalling almost €183 billion had been disbursed, and the amount pledged 
until the end of 2016 now stands at €225 
billion. Very low interest rates were set for 
the assistance loans, and it was agreed that 
the other euro- area countries would add-
itionally pass on the assumed profi  ts made 
by their central banks from the purchase of 
Greek government bonds. Private sector 
creditors also made a substantial contribu-
tion to the assistance provided for Greece by taking a haircut on their holdings of Greek government debt. The current pro-gramme for Greece, agreed in December 2012, nonetheless reveals a considerable 
funding gap of €7.1 billion and €2.5 billion 
respectively in 2015 and 2016, a period 
which is not yet covered by any assistance 
loans. Furthermore, the euro- area countries have signalled that they would, in principle, 
be willing to provide additional support if 
Greece were fully compliant with the policy 
conditionality of the programme but re-quired further assistance to restore fi  scal 
sustainability. Greece has implemented sub-
stantial consolidation measures since 2010 
and cut its defi  cit ratio despite the very  unfavourable economic backdrop. Greece achieved the defi  cit of 6½% of GDP (ex-
cluding bank support) expected for 2012 in 
December of the same year, which had 
been revised upwards when the assistance 
programme was updated; the reported def-icit ratio of 10% includes measures amount-ing to 4% of GDP designed to prop up the country’s fi  nancial sector. Added to this, the 
Troika considers the recently adopted meas-
ures to be suitable for ensuring compliance with the targets for 2013, provided they are 
actually implemented in full. Opinions re-garding Greek compliance have often proved to be over- optimistic in the past, 
however. All in all, it is by no means assured at this juncture that the revised programme for Greece will be a success. In the past, the 
inadequate implementation of measures such as agreed structural reforms has 
 repeatedly led to instalments of fi  nancial 
 assistance being delayed – but ultimately disbursed. Greece’s debt ratio of 156.9% was by far the highest in the euro area in 
2012, and it is forecast to rise to 175% this year.
The fi  nancial assistance programme for Ire-
land was formally agreed at the end of 
2010. By the end of 2012, €53 billion of the 
committed €67½ billion had been dis-
bursed. The defi  cit reduction was on track, 
and the 2012 defi  cit ratio of 7.6% was even 
one percentage point below the target set 
out in the adjustment programme. Accord-ing to the Commission’s estimate, this ratio 
will remain largely stable this year at the level envisaged in the adjustment pro-
gramme, before dropping to 4.3% in 2014 
(excluding measures designed to support the country’s fi  nancial sector). The un-changed ratio for 2013 conceals an im-
provement in the primary balance, which is masked by the sharp increase in interest ex-
penditure and by one- off guarantee pay-
ments to private creditors of the liquidated 
Irish Bank Resolution Corporation (IBRC). Nevertheless, Ireland still needs to fl  esh out its consolidation measures in order to 
achieve the defi  cit reduction forecast by the 
Commission for 2014. The programme ap-
pears to be successful on the whole, and Ireland might be able to regain full and stable market access as scheduled when the assistance programme expires at the end of 2013. However, a critical issue in Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report 
May 2013  
62

terms of the separation of monetary and 
fi  scal policy is the fact that the Central Bank 
of Ireland took on long- dated and low- 
yielding Irish government bonds as part of 
the liquidation of IBRC and is holding this 
paper over the longer term, thus easing the 
burden on fi  scal policy substantially.
The assistance programme for Portugal, meanwhile, was launched in May 2011. Here too, the defi  cit reduction path has since been adjusted, though this did not 
 affect the total volume of assistance loans 
pledged to the country. By the end of 2012, 
€61½ billion of the agreed €78 billion had 
been disbursed. Portugal plans to make a 
full return to the capital markets in Septem-
ber 2013, having recently already issued a ten- year bond. The defi  cit ratio rose by 2 percentage points in 2012 to 6.4%, meaning that Portugal missed the budget 
target of 5% of GDP by a signifi  cant margin in spite of its consolidation measures, which 
were also designed to compensate for the 
expiry of one- off measures. However, the very unfavourable macroeconomic back-
drop – alongside one- off effects caused by 
statistical revisions and accounting deci-
sions – is considered a mitigating factor. For this reason, it was proposed in March 2013 to extend Portugal’s deadline again to 2015 (having been prolonged once already in Oc-
tober 2012) and raise the country’s defi  cit target for 2013 to 5.5%, which the Com-mission’s current forecast indicates will be 
met. In April, the Portuguese constitutional 
court ruled that some of the planned con-
solidation measures were unconstitutional, 
opening up a new budget gap of almost 1% of GDP . Additional measures were promptly announced to plug this gap; 
doing so is a precondition for the next pro-
gramme disbursement and the earlier 
agreement to extend the maturities of the 
EFSF and EFSM assistance loans to around 
20 years on average. Overall, Portugal is making considerable efforts to improve its fi  scal situation but, as things stand, the  success of the programme is not yet as-
sured.
While Spain is not subject to a full adjust-
ment programme, it was pledged fi  nancial 
assistance of up to €100 billion to prop up its fi  nancial sector in July 2012. Only an ag-gregate €41½ billion, ie less than half of the 
volume of the aid package, has been dis-
bursed to date. Besides agreements regard-
ing the fi  nancial sector, Spain will be ex-pected to honour its commitments under the excessive defi  cit procedure that has 
been ongoing since 2009 in return for the 
fi  nancial assistance it has received. As early 
as the end of 2009, Spain’s deadline for 
correcting its excessive defi  cit was put back 
from 2012 to 2013 on account of the se-
vere slump in the Spanish economy. A fur-
ther one- year extension was granted to-gether with the fi  nancial sector assistance in mid-2012 owing to the renewed reces-
sion. However, Spain’s defi  cit ratio of 10.6% 
last year missed the only recently adjusted 
target of 6.3% despite extensive measures 
and even after deducting the fi  nancial sec-
tor assistance totalling 3.6% of GDP . The 
Commission’s forecast indicates that Spain 
will miss the current defi  cit target for 2013 (4.5% of GDP) by a considerable margin. In view of the clear deterioration in the macro-
economic outlook, the Commission advo-cates extending the deadline by another two years in return for more extensive structural reforms. The Spanish govern-
ment’s stability programme has already set 
out a looser consolidation path, projecting 
that the defi  cit ratio will not drop below the 
reference value before 2016. While a con-
siderable structural improvement is still lined up for 2013, the objectives for 2014 
to 2016 are no more than modest and the 
measures required to achieve them have 
not yet been agreed. By contrast, the Com-
mission’s forecast suggests that the struc-
tural improvement in 2013 will be much less 
pronounced and even expects a deterior-ation in 2014 without the envisaged add-Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report 
May 2013  
63

itional measures. Much like the situation in 
Portugal, it is crucial that the  repeated ad-
justments made to the defi  cit reduction 
path within a short space of time do not 
jeopardise the binding effect of the agree-
ments as a whole. It is unclear whether a very protracted consolidation process will ultimately improve either acceptance or 
credibility.
In Cyprus, the debt ratio has climbed 
strongly since the country’s economic out-
put slumped in 2009. This is partly due to 
the country’s high defi  cit levels, but a cru-
cial role was also played by the exception-
ally large size of Cyprus’s fi  nancial sector relative to GDP and its close ties with Greece. The Greek haircut therefore trig-gered heavy losses in the Cypriot fi  nancial 
sector, forcing the government to take sub-
stantial measures to support credit institu-tions. This backdrop, combined with the likely need for further measures and the 
fact that Cyprus was cut off from the capital markets, prompted the country to apply for an assistance programme in June 2012. The 
negotiations took quite some time, not reaching a conclusion until April 2013. An initial disbursement of assistance loans  totalling €10 billion (ie around 60% of  Cyprus’s GDP) was made under the pro-
gramme at the beginning of May. The pro-
gramme envisages consolidation measures 
as well as the privatisation of state- owned 
enterprises. The country’s two biggest banks are to be restructured and wound down respectively. Sustainable public fi  -
nances – a precondition for the granting of assistance loans – would have been utterly 
inconceivable without the involvement of 
these banks’ shareholders and creditors. As in some other quarters, the case of Cyprus 
blurs the boundaries between monetary and fi  scal policy. The success of the assis-tance programme hinges not just on the  fi  scal consolidation measures being imple-mented but also on the macroeconomic 
outlook and expectations regarding banks’ 
additional capital needs not being over- optimistic. The considerable challenges in-volved in rebalancing Cyprus’s national economy mean that this endeavour is 
fraught with substantial risks.Forecast and plans for the public fi  nances of the euro-area countries
 
CountryEuropean Commission spring forecast, May 2013Stability programmes, 
April/May 2013
Deadline to correct 
excessive 
defi  cit Budget balance as a percentage of GDPGovernment debt as a percentage of GDPBudget balance as a percentage of GDP
2012 2013 2014 2012 2013 2014 2013 2014 2015
Austria –  2.5 – 2.2 – 1.8 73.4 73.8 73.7 – 2.3 – 1.5 – 0.6 2013
Belgium –  3.9 – 2.9 – 3.1 99.6 101.5 102.1 – 2.5 – 2.0 – 0.5 2012
Cyprus –  6.3 – 6.5 – 8.4 85.8 109.5 124.0 2012
Estonia –  0.3 – 0.3 0.2 10.1 10.2 9.6 – 0.5 0 0.2 –
Finland –  1.9 – 1.8 – 1.5 53.0 56.2 57.7 – 1.9 – 1.3 – 0.9 –
France –  4.8 – 3.9 – 4.2 90.2 94.0 96.2 – 3.7 – 2.9 – 2.0 2013
Germany 0.2 – 0.2 0.0 81.9 81.1 78.6 – ½ 0 0 –
Greece – 10.0 – 3.8 – 2.6 156.9 175.2 175.1 2016
Ireland –  7.6 – 7.5 – 4.4 117.6 123.3 119.5 – 7.4 – 4.3 – 2.2 2015
Italy –  3.0 – 2.9 – 2.5 127.0 131.4 132.2 – 2.9 – 1.8 – 1.5 2012
Luxembourg –  0.8 – 0.2 – 0.4 20.8 23.4 25.2 – 0.7 – 0.6 – 1.3 –
Malta –  3.3 – 3.7 – 3.6 72.1 73.9 74.9 – 2.7 – 2.1 – 1.6 –
Netherlands –  4.1 – 3.6 – 3.6 71.2 74.6 75.8 – 3.4 – 3.0 – 2.0 2013
Portugal –  6.4 – 5.5 – 4.0 123.6 123.0 124.3 – 4.0 – 2.5 – 1.2 2014
Slovakia –  4.4 – 3.0 – 3.1 52.1 54.6 56.7 – 2.9 – 3.3 – 3.2 2013
Slovenia –  4.0 – 5.3 – 4.9 54.1 61.0 66.5 – 7.9 – 2.6 – 2.1 2013
Spain – 10.6 – 6.5 – 7.0 84.2 91.3 96.8 – 6.3 – 5.5 – 4.1 2014
Euro area –  3.7 – 2.9 – 2.8 92.7 95.5 96.0 . . . –
Source: European Commission.
Deutsche BundesbankDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report 
May 2013  
64

exceptional opportunity to achieve these aims. 
To ensure successful consolidation over the 
long term, one option worth considering would 
be to use the transitional periods established in the national budget rules – which now appear 
long – to steer a much more ambitious min -
imum course for structural improvements in 
the budgets of states which are not generally 
entitled to consolidation assistance. Moreover, 
central government and the federal states could legislate for significant, binding safety margins that would be generally applicable 
when preparing budgets.
Generally speaking, it is important for Germa -
ny’s fiscal policymakers to back the European 
budget rules – which ultimately safeguard the 
stability of Europe’s monetary union – by ap -
plying them consistently at home. To ensure that the newly reformed rules are effective, however, it is also vital that the participating 
countries do not cast doubt over their validity 
by loosely interpreting their numerous exemp -
tions. It is therefore particularly crucial for Ger -
many to work towards a strict implementation 
of the rules at EU level. At national level, Ger -
many’s Stability Council is tasked with monitor -
ing budgetary developments and compliance 
with national and, in future, European budget 
rules. To strengthen the Stability Council’s inde-pendence – a factor specified by the fiscal com-
pact as obligatory for all national institutions which monitor compliance with the budget 
rules – it will be assisted by an independent ex-
pert advisory board. The planned legal provi -
sions to this effect have yet to pass the legisla-
tive process, and they still leave important 
questions unanswered.6
Budgetary development  
of central, state and local government
Tax revenue
Year- on- year growth in tax revenue7 came 
to 3½% in the first quarter of 2013 (see the chart above and the table on page 66). This 
rise was largely due to the ongoing favourable 
developments in gross wages and salaries, 
which have a key influence on tax receipts. Combined with progressive taxation, this was 
the main factor behind the dynamic growth in wage tax, although child benefit – which is de-
ducted from revenue and remained virtually stagnant in the first quarter  – also played a 
role. Growth in profit- related taxes was robust, 
at 4%. Falling deductions (homebuyers grant, investment grant, employee refunds) largely offset the sharp decline in receipts from non-  
assessed taxes on earnings caused by the ab -
sence of last year’s one- off revenue- boosting 
effects.8 Receipts from consumption- related 
taxes rose by a mere 1% in total. At ½%, first- quarter growth in turnover tax was even more 
subdued, although intra- year developments in 
this item tend to be rather volatile. By contrast, Strict application 
of budget rules is key
Robust tax  revenue growth 
in Q1Tax revenue*
* Including  EU  shares  in  German  tax  revenue,  excluding 
receipts from local government taxes.
Deutsche Bundesbank2011 2012 2013024681012
++++++Year-on-year percentage change, quarterly
6 See Deutsche Bundesbank, Statement on the Draft Act 
concerning the implementation of the fiscal compact 
within Germany (Stellungnahme zum Entwurf eines Geset-
zes zur innerstaatlichen Umsetzung des Fiskalvertrags), 
Bundestags- Drucksache 17/ 10976, including the accom -
panying amendment requests from the Budget Committee of 16 November 2012.7 Including EU shares in German tax revenue but excluding 
receipts from local government taxes, which are not yet 
known for the quarter under review.8 These effects were caused by tax payments on dividends 
within groups of companies. They were mainly offset by deductions from corporation tax receipts, but most of 
these were made in the second half of the year.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report 
May 2013  
65

growth in receipts from other excise duties 
picked up again to 2½%, particularly as a result 
of the clear rebound in energy tax revenue fol-lowing a weak final- quarter outcome in 2012.
According to the latest official tax estimate, tax receipts are expected to rise by 2½% (including 
local government taxes) in 2013 as a whole. Developments in the most important macro
-
economic indicators for the generation of pub-
lic revenues (wages and employment, private 
consumption) are somewhat more stable than 
GDP growth.9 Fiscal drag is giving tax receipts 
an added boost, while legislative changes are 
not having any notable net impact. Although 
the basic income tax allowance has been raised 
somewhat and the gradual changeover to 
downstream taxation of pensions is resulting in 
growing shortfalls, various other measures are 
bringing in additional revenue, notably the ex-piry of both the homebuyers grant and the in-vestment grant (which are deducted from cash revenue) and increases in real property transfer tax and tobacco tax. Nonetheless, revenue growth is being held back somewhat by vari
-
ous negative one- off effects (above all, the tax 
refunds due under the ruling by the European 
Court of Justice on the taxation of dividends 
paid to EU/EEA companies10).
After this year, the official tax estimate initially expects revenue growth to accelerate to 4% in 2014 and average at 3½% per year in the 2015-
2017 period, with developments mainly being 
determined by growth assumptions and fiscal drag. Legislative changes which have already been approved are expected to curb this ex
-
pansion slightly on balance. The tax ratio (as 
defined in the government’s financial statistics) is projected to rise to 23.1% by the end of the 
forecast period (2012: 22.7%). Taken in isol -
ation, fiscal drag is expected to raise the tax ratio by roughly ½ percentage point, or €14 
billion, with the growth structure also boosting the ratio slightly.
The latest official tax estimate foresees moder -
ately lower revenue than was projected last 
year. This is due to less favourable macroeco -
nomic assumptions and revenue shortfalls 
caused by legislative changes approved since 
the previous estimate (notably the higher basic 
income tax allowance). Compared with the May 2012 estimate, the figures were revised downwards by €3 billion for 2013 and by a 
similar amount (between €2½ billion and €3½ 
billion) for the subsequent years. Vis- à- vis the 
October 2012 estimate, there were downward 
revisions of €3 billion for 2013, €4 billion for 2014 and around €2 billion for the 2015-
2017 period.Subdued 
 revenue growth expected for year as a wholeGrowth to  accelerate again 
after 2013
Revenue expect -
ations lowered 
moderatelyTax revenue
 
Type of taxQ1 Estimate 
for 
2013 1,2 2012 2013
€ billionYear-on-year 
percent-
age 
changeYear-
on-year 
percent-
age 
change
Total tax revenue
2 130.6 135.1 +  3.4 +  2.5
of which
Wage tax 34.1 36.5 +  6.9 +  5.4
Profi  t-related taxes
3 22.5 23.4 +  4.0 +  1.2
Assessed  income tax 8.5 10.7 + 27.1 +  8.4
Corporation tax 5.5 6.0 +  9.9 + 11.4
Investment  income tax
4 8.5 6.6 – 22.7 – 14.5
Turnover taxes 5 49.0 49.2 +  0.4 +  1.8
Energy tax 4.4 4.7 +  6.0 +  0.5
Tobacco tax 2.3 2.1 –  7.1 –  1.4
1 According to offi   cial tax estimate of May 2013. 2 Including EU 
shares in German tax revenue, excluding receipts from local gov-
ernment taxes. 3 Employee refunds, homebuyers grant and in-
vestment grant deducted from revenue. 4 Withholding tax on 
interest income and capital gains, non-assessed taxes on earn-
ings. 5 Turnover tax and import turnover tax.
Deutsche Bundesbank
9 This estimate is based on central government’s current 
macroeconomic projection; for 2013, real GDP growth is 
expected to be 0.5% and nominal growth 2.2% (October 
2012: 1.0% and 2.8%, respectively). GDP growth for 2014 
is forecast to be 1.6% in real terms and 3.3% in nominal 
terms. In the medium term, nominal growth of around 3% per year is still forecast.10 Ruling of 20 October 2011 on case C-284/ 09.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report 
May 2013  
66

Central government budget
In the first quarter of 2013, the central govern-
ment deficit fell significantly on the year, declin-ing by €4½ billion to €13 billion. Total revenue 
rose by 3% (€2 billion). Tax receipts increased 
by 2% (€1½ billion), their growth dampened, 
not least, by the rise of €1½ billion in transfers 
to the EU budget. Non- tax revenue climbed 
€½ billion on balance as a result of higher pro-
ceeds from asset realisation. Spending was down by a total of 3½% (€3 billion) on the 
year. Ultimately, this decline was mainly due to the cut of €3½ billion in transfers to the social security funds. The termination of turnover tax- 
funded payments to the Federal Employment 
Agency already cut the spending burden by €3 billion at the beginning of 2013, and the reduc-
tion in the grant to the health insurance fund 
lowered first- quarter expenditure by a further 
€½ billion.
The deficit will probably decline much more slowly over the rest of this year. Most of the 
planned cuts affecting payments to the social 
security funds have already taken effect, and the rise in proceeds from asset realisation is 
also unlikely to continue. The budget plan en-
visages that the deficit will be reduced by a total of €5½ billion vis- à- vis the actual out
-
come for 2012. However, the profits transferred 
by the Bundesbank to central government 
were almost €1 billion lower than projected in 
the budget plan, and the €½ billion financial assistance for Greece (equivalent to the as
-
sumed central bank profits from Greek govern-
ment bonds), which was not included in the estimates, has to come from the central gov
-
ernment budget. In addition, the latest official tax estimate foresees a tax revenue shortfall of 
€2 billion. Interest payments are likely to be 
lower than budgeted, however. Following their 
slight first- quarter decline, the estimated in -
crease of €1 billion in interest payments (partly resulting from an assumed rise of €2½ billion in 
the cost of discounts on new bond issues) 
seems cautious given the current interest rate level. All in all, the planned deficit of €17½ bil-lion still appears realistically attainable.
The rules of the debt brake stipulate that, when 
implementing the budget, changes in growth 
expectations for the current year are to be at-
tributed entirely to cyclical developments. The 
aim of this simplified procedure is to ensure 
greater planning certainty regarding structural 
developments in the fiscal year. Central govern-
ment has lowered its forecast for nominal GDP 
growth by ½ percentage point from the level 
projected when the budget was approved, re-sulting in an increase of €3 billion in the calcu-
lated cyclical burden affecting central govern -
ment in 2013.11 All in all, structural borrowing 
as defined in the debt brake rules, having stood 
at €8 billion in 2012, could consequently be lower than planned this year (target: €9 bil
-
lion).12
If, instead of applying this simplified procedure, 
we base our figures on a completely recalcu -
lated current estimate of potential – thus allow-
ing better economic interpretation of the data – this results in a similar figure for 2013 
but a cyclical burden that is €6½ billion lower for 2012, leaving a structural balance of €14½ 
billion. Based on these calculations, the bal -
ance therefore looks likely to improve signifi -
cantly in structural terms. This is primarily due 
to the cuts of €5 billion in transfers to the social security funds which are shifting burdens away 
from central government –  a fact which will not affect the general government deficit  – Marked decline 
in deficit at start of year
Improvement 
fading over rest of 2013, but projected out -
come attainableStructural bor-rowing lower than planned
Considerable 
structural 
 improvement 
due mainly to burden- shifting but also to lower interest rate level
11 The revision of -€2 billion to tax projections in the offi-
cial tax estimate can thus largely be explained by the 
changed macroeconomic assumptions.12 Based on the ceiling of €39½ billion set by the Federal 
Ministry of Finance for 2012, €31½ billion was credited to the control account, increasing the positive balance to €57 
billion. Draft legislation already passed by the Bundestag 
stipulates that the existing balance on the control account (which has been inflated by the high starting value for the deficit reduction path) should be wiped out at the end of 
2015. However, the Bundesrat wishes to make amend -
ments to the legislative package for the Act concerning the implementation of the fiscal compact within Germany and has therefore requested that the mediation committee step in to find a compromise on the matter.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report 
May 2013  
67

and, not least, extremely favourable interest 
rates.
The fiscal benchmark figures adopted in March 
2013 envisage even better target fiscal bal -
ances than those projected in the summer 
2012 fiscal plan. As agreed by the coalition 
committee in November 2012, central govern-
ment is aiming to achieve a structurally bal -
anced budget as soon as 2014 and then run 
growing structural surpluses in the subsequent 
years, reaching 0.3% of GDP (€9 billion) in 
2017.13 These improvements are to be achieved 
by lowering expenditure appropriations overall. 
The downward revisions for debt servicing 
alone rise over the forecast period from €4 bil-
lion in 2014 to €8½ billion in 2016. However, 
the fiscal balance for 2016 is only €4 billion 
better than projected in the summer 2012 fiscal plan (with the calculated cyclical burdens rising 
only moderately), which means that some of 
the savings made through lower interest ex -
penses will be used for looser policy elsewhere. Although the macroeconomic and fiscal as -
sumptions suggest that the central government 
budget will be in good shape overall over the 
next few years, there are substantial fiscal pol-
icy risks associated with the euro- area sover -
eign debt crisis, macroeconomic developments 
in Germany and a normalisation of interest 
rates, which are currently exceptionally low for 
central government. It would therefore be in -
advisable to loosen the fiscal policy stance any 
further. Indeed, given these favourable under -
lying conditions, it would even make sense to 
bring forward compliance with the significant 
safety margin ultimately envisaged vis- à- vis the 
ceiling imposed by the debt brake rules from 
2016 onwards.
Central government’s off- budget entities (ex -
cluding the bad banks, for which data are not 
yet available) recorded a deficit of €6½ billion 
in the first quarter of 2013, compared with a 
surplus of €½ billion in the same period last year. This was mainly due to a sharp rise in 
spending by the Financial Market Stabilisation 
Fund (SoFFin), which had to cover losses of 
€7½ billion incurred in 2010 and 2011 by the 
state- owned bad bank set up for Hypo Real Es-
tate.14 There were still no new claims for assis-
tance, however. By contrast, the post office 
pension fund and the civil servants’ pension re-serve both remained in surplus. As things stand, 
the off- budget entities (excluding the bad 
banks) are expected to record a deficit for 2013 as a whole, partly as a result of the aforemen-
tioned loss compensation paid by SoFFin but also because an inflation- linked five- year Fed
-Benchmark 
 figures for  
2014-2017  
period show growing struc-tural surplusesOff- budget  entities to record 
large deficit owing to loss compensation for state- owned bad bankCentral government fiscal balance
Deutsche BundesbankQ1 Q2 Q3 Q420151050510
––––++
–30–25–20–15–1020132011Quarterly results
Cumulated from start of year
20122013
20112012€ billion
13 The latest tax estimate only shows a deterioration in 
2014 (€½ billion). The outcomes for the subsequent years 
are now expected to be up to €5½ billion better, mainly because transfers to the EU budget are estimated to be lower. It remains to be seen in the course of the budget 
preparations how much these adjustments will affect the 
fiscal balance. The government will have to restart this pro-cess after the general election anyway.14 These payments do not affect the general government 
deficit, as the bad bank also belongs to the government 
sector. In the national accounts, losses in connection with 
asset transfers from Hypo Real Estate to the government 
sector were already accounted for in the 2010 deficit.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report 
May 2013  
68

eral note (Bobl) was redeemed in mid-  April.15 
As prices for CO2 emission permits are very low, 
the Energy and Climate Fund looks set to ac -
crue significantly less revenue than planned. 
However, this will be partly offset by an injec -
tion of just under €½ billion this year from 
KfW, which made large profits in 2012, and by 
the fact that the fund’s outflows remain rather sluggish. Including the state- owned bad banks, 
the combined budget for the off- budget en -
tities could be at least balanced in 2013.
State government budgets16
The deficit in the federal states’ core budgets declined year on year in the first quarter of 
2013, falling by €1½ billion to €1 billion. In line 
with tax receipts, total revenue grew signifi -
cantly overall, increasing by 3½% (or €2½ bil -
lion). Growth in expenditure was more sub -
dued (just over 1%, or €1 billion). Ultimately, 
this was mainly due to the increase of almost 
6% in current transfers, particularly those to 
local government. In net terms, the moderate 
rise of 1½% (or €½ billion) in personnel ex -
penditure, which was not yet affected by the 
latest pay settlement for salaried workers and 
the associated adjustment to civil servant salar -
ies, was offset by a distinct decline in interest 
expenses.
The federal states’ budget plans for 2013 envis-
age a total deficit of €12½ billion. However, 
the deficit of €6 billion ultimately recorded for 
2012 –  a major improvement on the esti -
mates – was not known when most of these 
budgets were adopted. According to the latest 
tax estimate, however, revenue expectations 
are unlikely to be revised substantially overall 
vis- à- vis the budget plans. Budget relief is more 
likely to come from the expenditure side, not least from interest rates. Despite a good start 
to the year (notably the growth in tax revenue, 
which was stronger than is now expected for 
2013 as a whole), a further significant year-on-
year reduction in the overall deficit appears un-
likely as things stand. In view of the favourable underlying conditions, particularly those states 
which concluded 2012 with distinct excess ex-
penditure need to take prompt, specific meas-
ures which are substantial enough to achieve 
the necessary consolidation. According to the 
reports which have to be compiled for the Sta-bility Council at the end of May, the structural 
deficits of at least those five states which are 
receiving consolidation assistance were consid-
erably below the ceilings for 2012 specified in 
the administrative agreements. However, the figures in these reports still do not reveal 
whether these states are progressing in the ul-timately necessary process of bringing their per 
capita fiscal balances closer to those of the other federal states. Another option worth considering would be to closely monitor the gap between the structural balances of these 
five states and a comparable ratio to be derived for the other federal states and take this figure 
into account when evaluating the advances 
achieved in consolidating the budgets.
Progress in introducing constitutional debt 
brakes at state government level remains rather 
slow. A broad consensus in favour of this 
course of action was recently achieved in Sax-ony, and prior to that in Bavaria, but parliamen-tary deliberations on the matter have yet to be 
concluded. By contrast, the state of Hesse al -
ready passed legislation at the beginning of 
2011 to enshrine a debt brake (applicable from 
2020) in its constitution, and the state’s gov -
erning parties recently put forward a draft Act 
on the implementation of these provisions. 
One welcome aspect of this legislation is that 
progressively lower ceilings on the structural 
deficit are to be set for the transitional period, even though these limits are based on the 2014 Deficit fell in Q1 
amid moderate expenditure growth
Subdued out -
look for deficit 
reduction in 2013Mostly only slow progress made in intro-ducing debt brakes
15 Given the Bobl’s nominal value of €11 billion, a pay -
ment of €1½ billion was due (at redemption) from the off- budget entity to compensate for the inflation which arose 
during the lifetime of the security (“final payment” within 
the meaning of the Act on the establishment of a special 
fund “Provision for final payments for inflation-  indexed 
Federal securities”).
16 The development of local government finances in the 
final quarter of 2012 was analysed in greater detail in the short articles of the Bundesbank’s April 2013 Monthly Re-port. These are the most recent data available.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report 
May 2013  
69

budget target (which has already been adopted) 
and the reductions from this starting value 
planned for the period up to 2019 are rather 
small.17 In addition, there is a control account 
not only for the differences registered when implementing the budget between actual structural borrowing and its ceiling according 
to the debt brake rules but also for the cyclical 
components used as the basis for calculating 
the final annual figures. This makes it possible 
to establish whether the positive and negative cyclical effects on the budget really do more or less balance each other out over time, as is re-
quired by the rules. This method will clearly 
identify any overestimations of cyclical burdens 
(which often occur in real- time cyclical adjust -
ment), thus allowing targeted elimination of 
any ensuing debt which contravenes the spirit 
of the legislation. However, the draft Act does not legislate for this course of action – at least 
not explicitly. The chosen method of cyclical 
adjustment is closely modelled on the approach 
specified in the administrative agreements for the states receiving consolidation assistance. 
All in all, it would seem advisable to achieve at least some degree of uniformity in the individ-
ual states’ cyclical adjustment procedures in 
order to facilitate, where necessary, fiscal policy coordination within Germany and comparative analyses.
Social security funds18
Statutory pension insurance 
scheme
The statutory pension insurance scheme re -
corded a deficit of €2 billion in the first quarter 
of 2013, which was more than double the def-
icit recorded at the same time last year. While 
revenue grew by only around ½%, expenditure rose by just over 2%. The main reason for this 
deterioration was the considerable cut in the contribution rate from 19.6% to 18.9% with 
effect from 1 January 2013, aimed at bringing 
reserves back down to the regular upper threshold of 1.5 times the scheme’s monthly 
expenditure. Nonetheless, contribution receipts still rose by nearly 1%, although this expansion 
shows signs of slowing down following Janu -
ary’s particularly strong growth. After adjust -
ment for the contribution rate cut, employees’ 
compulsory contributions increased by just 
under 4½%. Growth in contributions made on behalf of recipients of unemployment benefit I 
was stronger, at an adjusted figure of 15%. 
Revenue developments reflect both clear wage 
growth amid a continued increase in employ -
ment and rising unemployment figures. The cut 
of €1 billion in the grant from central govern -
ment will reduce revenue noticeably across the year. Meanwhile, spending on pensions rose by just over 2% in the first quarter in line with the pension increase introduced on 1 July 2012. By Marked financial 
deterioration  
in Q1Finances of the German statutory pension insurance scheme
Deutsche Bundesbank2010 2011 2012 2013606264666870
–20+2+4+6€ billion, quarterly
Lin scale
Surplus (+) or deficit (–)ExpenditureLog scale
Revenue
17 It would seem advisable to enshrine this rule in Hesse’s 
constitution to make it more binding.18 The financial development of the statutory health insur -
ance scheme and the public long-  term care insurance 
scheme in the fourth quarter of 2012 was discussed in the short article of the March 2013 Monthly Report. These are the most recent data available.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report 
May 2013  
70

contrast, the number of current pensions re -
mained almost stagnant as a result of the 
“demographic lull” which will extend to the 
middle of this decade.
When the current contribution rate was set, 
the relevant projections foresaw a deficit of just over €2 billion for 2013. As things stand, how-ever, it seems that the actual deficit may ultim-ately be lower. At 0.25%, the mid- year pension 
increase for western Germany will be consider -
ably below the figure forecast in last year’s pension insurance report (+1%). As expected, 
pensions will be raised sharply in eastern Ger -
many (+3.29%), but this will have less of an 
impact because the volume of pensions there is lower. In addition, growth in employment looks likely to intensify. However, if the reserves have 
not been brought down to 1.5 times the scheme’s monthly expenditure by the end of 2013, this will not necessarily mean that the 
contribution rate has to be lowered again. That 
decision will depend on how the scheme’s fi -
nances are expected to develop in 2014. As 
things stand, it is likely to be generally in deficit if the contribution rate remains unchanged. At 
the same time, this shows that the scheme’s 
current large reserves do not provide any scope 
for lasting rises in expenditure unless the con -
tribution rate is increased beyond current pro -
jections or cost savings are made elsewhere.
Federal Employment Agency
The Federal Employment Agency posted a def-
icit of almost €1 billion in the first quarter of 
2013, a clear deterioration on the surplus of al-
most €1½ billion recorded a year earlier. The 
key factor in this development was the termin-
ation of the rule- based grant from central gov-
ernment to the agency. Revenue was thus 
down by a fifth on the year in total, whilst ex-
penditure was up by just under 2%. Contribu-
tion receipts continued to rise sharply (by just 
over 4%), albeit less buoyantly towards the end 
of the quarter. In addition, inflows from insolv-
ency benefit contributions expanded very clearly after the contribution rate was increased 
from 0.04% to 0.15%. Spending on unemploy-
ment benefit I grew by 14%. However, this 
contrasted with a renewed fall of more than a fifth in outlays on active labour market policy.
Based on central government’s new macroeco-
nomic assumptions and actual developments 
to date, the Federal Employment Agency is 
now expecting to record a deficit of just under €1 billion for 2013 as a whole. This would be a 
slightly better outcome than expected in the 
budget plan, and appears more realistic given 
that the expenditure appropriations for active 
labour market policy – which have often proven Financial devel-
opments in 2013 possibly better than projected
Termination of 
central govern-ment grant worsens  finances …
… but balance for 2013 as a whole probably better than plannedFinances of theFederal Employment Agency
1 Including transfers to the civil servants' pension fund. 2 Ex-
cluding central government liquidity assistance.
Deutsche Bundesbank2010 2011 2012 20137810121416
1.41.72.02.53.03.54.04.55.06.07.0–6–4–20+2+4€ billion, quarterly
Log scale
Total expenditure 1
Revenue 2
Log scale
Expenditure on ...
... vocational training... unemployment benefits
    and short-time    working benefitsLin scale
Surplus (+) or deficit (–)Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report 
May 2013  
71

too high in the past – have been markedly re-
duced. Even though the agency’s reintegration 
payment to central government was scrapped 
at the same time, the termination of the grant from central government, which was linked to turnover tax revenue, has resulted in a substan-
tial net financial loss for the Federal Employ -
ment Agency.19 Non- insurance- related benefits 
(eg mandatory services for occupational re -
habilitation or measures to promote vocational training for trainees from disadvantaged back-
grounds), estimated by the Federal Employ -
ment Agency itself to reach nearly €4 billion in 2013, will thus be funded entirely through con-tributions (0.4 contribution rate point). In some 
cases, the classification of non- insurance-  
related benefits is open to dispute, and it is im-
possible to find a universally valid definition. Nonetheless, it would make sense to link cen -
tral government transfers to the financing of 
specific services provided by the various social 
security funds, and justify them accordingly. This would help to achieve more transparent 
financial relations between central government and the social security funds, make it easier to 
plan ahead and avoid creating the impression 
that transfers are dictated by the cash flow 
situation.
19 In 2012, the Federal Employment Agency received a 
central government grant of just over €7 billion and made 
a reintegration payment of €3½ billion. However, it had 
already been decided that the central government grant would be cut in stages to around €5 billion. This means that the termination of the grant has permanently 
worsened the Federal Employment Agency’s financial situ-
ation by around €1½ billion per year if the reintegration 
payment is extrapolated permanently at its final level.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report 
May 2013  
72

Statistical 
SectionDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report 
May 2013  
1•

Contents
I Key economic data for the euro area
 1 Monetary developments and interest rates  ..................................................................  5•
 2
 External 
transactions and positions
 ..............................................................................  
5•
 3
 Gener
al economic indicators
 
.......................................................................................  
6•
II Overall monetary survey in the euro area
 1 The money stock and its counterparts  .........................................................................  8•
 2
 Consolidated 
balance sheet of monetary financial institutions (MFIs)
 
...........................  
10•
 3
 Banking 
system’s liquidity position
 ...............................................................................  
14•
III Consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem
 1 Assets  ..........................................................................................................................  16•
 2
 
Liabilities
 
.....................................................................................................................  
18•
IV Banks
 1 A ssets and liabilities of monetary financial institutions (excluding the Bundesbank)  
in Germany
 
.................................................................................................................  
20•
 2
 Principal 
assets and liabilities of banks (MFIs) in Germany, by category of banks
 
..........  
24•
 3
 A
ssets and liabilities of banks (MFIs) in Germany vis-à-vis residents
 
..............................  
26•
 4
 A
ssets and liabilities of banks (MFIs) in Germany vis-à-vis non-residents
 
.......................  
28•
 5
 Lending 
by banks (MFIs) in Germany to domestic non-banks (non-MFIs)
 
.....................  
30•
 6
 Lending 
by banks (MFIs) in Germany to domestic enterprises and households, 
 housing 
loans, sectors of economic activity
 .................................................................  
32•
 7
 Deposits 
of domestic non-banks (non-MFIs) at banks (MFIs) in Germany
 
.....................  
34•
 8
 Deposits 
of domestic households and non-profit institutions at banks (MFIs) in 
 
Germany
 
.....................................................................................................................  
36•
 9
 Deposits 
of domestic government at banks (MFIs) in Germany, by creditor group ........  
36•
 1
0
 Savings 
deposits and bank savings bonds of banks (MFIs) in Germany sold to  
non-banks (non-MFIs) ..................................................................................................  
38•
 1
1
 Debt 
securities and money market paper outstanding of banks (MFIs) in Germany
 
...... 
38•
 1
2
 Building 
and loan associations (MFIs) in Germany
 
........................................................  
39•
 1
3
 A
ssets and liabilities of the foreign branches and foreign subsidiaries of  
German banks (MFIs)
 
...................................................................................................  
40•Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report 
May 2013  
2•

V Minimum reserves
 1 Reserve ratios  ..............................................................................................................  42•
 2
 Reserve 
maintenance in Germany up to the end of 1998
 
............................................  
42•
 3
 Reserve 
maintenance in the euro area
 .........................................................................  
42•
VI Interest rates
 1 ECB interest rates  ........................................................................................................  43•
 2
 Base 
rates
 
....................................................................................................................  
43•
 3
 Eur
osystem monetary policy operations allotted through tenders
 
................................  
43•
 4
 Money 
market rates, by month
 
...................................................................................  
43•
 5
 Inter
est rates and volumes for outstanding amounts and new business of  
German banks (MFIs)
 
...................................................................................................  
44•
VII Capital market
 1 Sales and purchases of debt securities and shares in Germany  .....................................  48•
 2
 Sales 
of debt securities issued by residents
 
..................................................................  
49•
 3
 Amounts 
outstanding of debt securities issued by residents .........................................  
50•
 4
 Shar
es in circulation issued by residents
 
.......................................................................  
50•
 5
 Y
ields and indices on German securities
 
......................................................................  
51•
 6
 Sales 
and purchases of mutual fund shares in Germany
 
...............................................  
51•
VIII Financial accounts
 1 A cquisition of financial assets and financing of private non-financial sectors  ................  52•
 2
 Financial 
assets and liabilities of private non-financial sectors
 
......................................  
53•
IX Public finances in Germany
 1 Gener al government: deficit and debt level as defined in the Maastricht Treaty  ..................  54•
 2
 Gener
al government: revenue, expenditure and fiscal deficit/surplus as shown in  
the national accounts
 
..................................................................................................  
54•
 3
 Gener
al government: budgetary development (as per government’s financial 
 
statistics)
 
.....................................................................................................................  
55•
 4
 Centr
al, state and local government: budgetary development (as per government’s 
 
financial statistics)
 
........................................................................................................  
55•
 5
 Centr
al, state and local government: tax revenue
 
........................................................  
56•
 6 Centr
al and state government and European Union: tax revenue, by type
 
.......................  
56•
 7
 Centr
al, state and local government: individual taxes
 
..................................................  
57•Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report 
May 2013  
3•

 8 German pension insurance scheme: budgetary development and assets  ......................  57•
 9
 F
ederal Employment Agency: budgetary development
 
.................................................  
58•
 1
0
 S
tatutory health insurance scheme: budgetary development
 
.......................................  
58•
 1
1
 S
tatutory long-term care insurance scheme: budgetary development
 
..........................  
59•
 1
2
 Centr
al government: borrowing in the market
 .............................................................  
59•
 1
3
 Centr
al, state and local government: debt by creditor
 .................................................  
59•
 1
4
 Centr
al, state and local government: debt by category
 ................................................  
60•
X Economic conditions in Germany
 1 Origin and use of domestic product, distribution of national income  ...........................  61•
 2
 Output 
in the production sector
 
..................................................................................  
62•
 3
 Or
ders received by industry
 
.........................................................................................  
63•
 4
 Or
ders received by construction
 ..................................................................................  
64•
 5
 Retail 
trade turnover, sales of motor vehicles
 
...............................................................  
64•
 6
 Labour 
market
 
.............................................................................................................  
65•
 7
 
Prices
 
..........................................................................................................................  
66•
 8
 Households’ 
income
 
....................................................................................................  
67•
 9
 Negotiated 
pay rates (overall economy)
 
.......................................................................  
67•
XI External sector
 1 Major items of the balance of payments of the euro area  ...........................................  68•
 2
 Major 
items of the balance of payments of the Federal Republic of Germany
 
..............  
69•
 3
 F
oreign trade (special trade) of the Federal Republic of Germany, by country and 
group of countries
 
.......................................................................................................  
70•
 4
 Services 
and income of the Federal Republic of Germany
 
............................................  
71•
 5
 C
urrent transfers of the Federal Republic of Germany
 ..................................................  
71•
 6
 C
apital transfers
 
..........................................................................................................  
71•
 7
 Financial 
account of the Federal Republic of Germany
 .................................................  
72•
 8
 External 
position of the Bundesbank up to end-1998
 
..................................................  
73•
 9
 External 
position of the Bundesbank since the beginning of the  
European monetary union
 
...........................................................................................  
73•
 1
0
 A
ssets and liabilities of enterprises in Germany (other than banks) vis-à-vis  
non-residents
 
..............................................................................................................  
74•
 1
1
 ECB 
euro reference exchange rates of selected currencies
 
...........................................  
75•
 1
2
 Eur
o-area member states and irrevocable euro conversion rates in the third stage  
of European Economic and Monetary Union
 ...............................................................  
75•
 1
3
 Effective 
exchange rates of the euro and indicators of the German economy’s price 
competitiveness
 
...........................................................................................................  
76•Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report 
May 2013  
4•

Deutsche Bundesbank
5  Monthly Report
May 2013
I Key economic data for the euro area 
 
1 Monetary developments and interest rates
 
 
 
 
 Money stock in various definitions 1,2 Determinants of the money stock 1 Interest rates
 M 3 3 
MFI lending to Yield on Euro-
 3-month enterprises Monetary pean govern-
MFI lending, and capital 3-month ment bonds moving  average
M1 M2 (centred) total households formation  4 Eonia 5,7 Euribor 6,7 outstanding 8 
Period Annual percentage change % Annual percentage as a monthly average
2011          July 1.2 2.2 1.3 1.4 2.4 1.8 4.4 1.01 1.60 4.6
         Aug 1.8 2.4 1.7 1.6 2.4 1.7 4.3 0.91 1.55 4.1         Sep 2.0 2.4 1.7 1.6 2.3 1.6 4.3 1.01 1.54 4.0
         Oct 1.7 1.9 1.3 1.5 1.6 2.1 4.3 0.96 1.58 4.3
         Nov 2.2 2.1 1.5 1.5 0.8 1.0 3.4 0.79 1.48 4.8
         Dec 1.9 1.9 1.6 1.7 1.0 0.5 2.9 0.63 1.43 4.8
2012          Jan 2.3 2.3 2.0 2.0 1.4 0.7 2.7 0.38 1.22 4.7
         Feb 2.7 2.8 2.5 2.4 1.4 0.4 2.1 0.37 1.05 4.5
         Mar 2.8 2.9 2.8 2.5 1.8 0.5 1.3 0.36 0.86 4.0
         Apr 2.1 2.5 2.3 2.7 1.4 − 0.1 0.8 0.35 0.74 4.1
         May 3.4 2.8 2.9 2.7 1.5 − 0.3 − 0.0 0.34 0.68 4.1
         June 3.6 2.9 2.9 3.1 1.5 − 0.4 − 0.2 0.33 0.66 4.2
         July 4.7 3.5 3.5 3.1 1.3 − 0.6 − 1.1 0.18 0.50 4.0
         Aug 5.0 3.1 2.7 3.0 0.8 − 1.0 − 1.2 0.11 0.33 3.9
         Sep 5.2 3.1 2.7 3.1 0.9 − 0.9 − 1.3 0.10 0.25 3.6
         Oct 6.5 4.3 3.9 3.4 0.6 − 1.3 − 1.8 0.09 0.21 3.4
         Nov 6.5 4.4 3.7 3.7 0.5 − 1.3 − 1.7 0.08 0.19 3.3
         Dec 6.5 4.5 3.5 3.6 0.7 − 0.5 − 1.4 0.07 0.19 3.1
2013          Jan 6.6 4.4 3.5 3.4 0.2 − 0.8 − 1.6 0.07 0.20 3.0
         Feb 7.0 4.3 3.1 3.0 0.1 − 0.7 − 1.5 0.07 0.22 3.1
         Mar 7.1 4.2 2.6 ... 0.3 − 0.5 − 1.1 0.07 0.21 3.0
         Apr ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 0.08 0.21 2.8
1 Source: ECB. 2 Seasonally adjusted. 3 Excluding money market fund shares/units, OverNight Index Average. 6 Euro Interbank Offered Rate. 7 See also footnotes to
money market paper and debt securities with a maturity of up to two years held by Table VI.4, p 43  8 GDP-weighted yield on ten-year government bonds. Countries
non-euro-area residents. 4 Longer-term liabilities to euro-area non-MFIs. 5 Euro include:DE,FR,NL,BE,AT,FI,IE,PT,ES,IT,GR,SK. 
 
 
2 External transactions and positions  * 
  
 
Selected items of the euro-area balance of payments Euro exchange rates  1 
Current account Capital account Effective exchange rate 3 
of which Direct Securities Other Reserve
Balance Trade balance Balance investment investment assets Dollar rate Nominal Real  4 transactions 2 
Period € million Euro/US-$ Q1 1999 = 100
2011          July + 3,938 + 3,932 − 7,045 − 17,886 − 17,993 + 30,077 − 1,243 1.4264 104.0 101.1
         Aug − 952 − 4,246 − 6,753 − 10,242 + 26,292 − 26,182 + 3,380 1.4343 103.9 100.9         Sep + 2,736 + 3,197 + 4,590 − 11,661 + 20,605 − 5,940 + 1,587 1.3770 102.8 99.9
         Oct + 3,786 + 380 − 3,895 − 233 − 11,658 + 9,084 − 1,088 1.3706 103.0 100.2         Nov + 9,570 + 5,589 − 15,300 − 30,458 + 14,072 + 1,319 − 233 1.3556 102.6 99.9
         Dec + 22,540 + 8,507 − 23,034 + 15,967 − 59,684 + 26,097 − 5,414 1.3179 100.8 98.1
2012          Jan − 10,300 − 7,727 + 11,877 + 789 − 48,889 + 61,126 − 1,149 1.2905 98.9 96.3
         Feb − 2,557 + 3,229 + 9,327 + 8,249 + 16,999 − 14,308 − 1,614 1.3224 99.6 97.2
         Mar + 10,015 + 11,274 − 19,169 − 12,614 − 50,231 + 43,022 + 655 1.3201 99.8 97.3
         Apr + 2,936 + 4,423 − 2,441 − 2,559 + 5,075 − 1,975 − 2,982 1.3162 99.5 97.1
         May − 2,759 + 7,360 − 359 + 3,505 + 22,611 − 25,014 − 1,461 1.2789 98.0 95.7
         June + 18,167 + 13,896 − 16,657 − 16,124 + 60,986 − 57,009 − 4,510 1.2526 97.2 94.8
         July + 21,787 + 14,543 − 17,466 + 2,541 + 3,097 − 23,591 + 487 1.2288 95.3 93.2
         Aug + 8,843 + 5,588 − 7,736 + 12,582 − 12,829 − 5,917 − 1,573 1.2400 95.2 93.1
         Sep + 10,218 + 10,158 − 16,419 − 20,012 − 2,243 + 4,870 + 967 1.2856 97.2 95.0
         Oct + 12,814 + 10,638 − 15,587 − 15,058 + 50,688 − 48,573 − 2,644 1.2974 97.8 95.5
         Nov + 20,303 + 15,063 − 28,907 + 21,436 + 30,884 − 80,183 − 1,044 1.2828 97.2 94.9
         Dec + 26,513 + 12,193 − 29,699 − 27,559 − 18,323 + 15,466 + 718 1.3119 98.7 96.2
2013          Jan − 5,601 − 2,692 + 1,466 − 8,278 + 35,745 − 21,339 − 4,660 1.3288 100.4 98.0
         Feb + 12,085 + 11,966 − 18,146 − 1,661 − 3,015 − 16,031 + 2,561 1.3359 101.6 99.0
         Mar ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 1.2964 100.2 97.7
         Apr ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 1.3026 100.4 98.0
*  Source: ECB. 1  See also Tables XI.12 and 13, pp 75−76
  2  Including
financial derivatives. 3  Vis-à-vis the currencies of The-EER-20 group. 4  Based on
consumer prices. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
6  Monthly Report
May 2013
I. Key economic data for the euro area 
 
3  General economic indicators
 
 
                   
 
Period Euro area Belgium Germany Estonia Finland France Greece Ireland Italy
 
Real gross domestic product 1,2
 
2010 2.0 2.4 4.2 3.3 3.3 1.7 − 4.9 − 0.8 1.7
2011 1.4 1.8 3.0 8.3 2.8 2.0 − 7.1 1.4 0.4
2012 − 0.6 − 0.3 0.7 ... − 0.2 0.0 − 6.4 0.9 − 2.4
2011          Q4 0.6 0.9 1.4 5.9 1.3 1.3 − 7.9 2.8 − 0.9
2012          Q1 − 0.1 0.2 1.8 3.4 1.8 0.6 − 6.7 2.7 − 1.3
         Q2 − 0.5 − 0.4 0.5 2.2 − 0.3 − 0.3 − 6.4 0.2 − 2.9
         Q3 − 0.7 − 0.5 0.4 3.5 − 0.8 − 0.1 − 6.7 0.9 − 2.8
         Q4 − 0.9 − 0.5 0.0 3.8 − 1.5 − 0.1 − 5.7 0.0 − 2.5
2013          Q1 − 1.0 ... − 1.4 ... ... − 0.9 − 5.3 ... ...
 
Industrial production 1,3
 
2010 7.3 8.4 10.9 22.9 5.1 4.8 − 6.6 7.5 6.7
2011 3.2 3.8 6.6 19.7 2.1 2.1 − 8.0 0.0 1.1
2012 − 2.4 − 3.0 4 − 0.3 0.3 − 1.5 − 2.5 − 3.5 − 1.7 − 6.5
2011          Q4 − 0.7 0.7 1.9 7.4 0.5 − 0.9 − 11.1 0.7 − 3.2
2012          Q1 − 1.9 − 2.6 4 1.3 0.0 − 2.6 − 2.5 − 8.4 0.5 − 6.4
         Q2 − 2.2 − 4.4 0.3 − 0.7 − 2.4 − 2.4 − 2.3 3.0 − 7.3
         Q3 − 2.2 − 2.8 − 0.8 0.1 − 1.1 − 1.9 − 3.0 − 3.0 − 5.1
         Q4 − 3.1 − 2.4 − 2.1 1.6 − 0.2 − 3.0 − 0.2 − 7.8 − 7.0
2013          Q1 − 2.4 ... 5,p − 2.1 4.9 − 3.2 − 2.7 p − 3.0 p − 2.5 − 4.2
 
Capacity utilisation in industry 6
 
2010 76.0 77.9 79.7 67.1 75.6 77.9 68.1 − 68.3
2011 80.6 80.5 86.1 73.3 80.5 83.4 67.9 − 72.6
2012 78.8 77.7 83.5 70.2 78.8 82.2 64.9 − 70.1
2012          Q1 80.0 79.0 85.3 70.5 77.7 83.0 65.5 − 70.7
         Q2 80.0 78.4 85.2 69.0 79.9 83.4 64.9 − 71.0
         Q3 78.1 76.9 82.6 71.3 80.1 82.0 63.9 − 69.7
         Q4 77.2 76.6 80.7 70.1 77.4 80.4 65.1 − 69.0
2013          Q1 77.5 75.5 82.2 70.5 78.3 82.3 65.3 − 68.5
         Q2 77.5 76.4 81.5 70.8 77.4 80.9 64.0 − 68.4
 
Standardised unemployment rate 7,8
 
2010 10.1 8.3 7.1 16.9 8.4 9.7 12.6 13.9 8.4
2011 10.2 7.2 6.0 12.5 7.8 9.6 17.7 14.7 8.4
2012 11.4 7.6 5.5 ... 7.7 10.2 24.3 14.7 10.7
2012          Oct 11.7 7.9 5.5 9.7 7.9 10.4 26.1 14.5 11.2
         Nov 11.8 8.0 5.4 9.9 7.9 10.5 26.3 14.3 11.2
         Dec 11.8 8.1 5.4 9.9 8.0 10.6 25.9 14.1 11.2
2013          Jan 12.0 8.1 5.3 9.9 8.1 10.8 26.7 14.1 11.7
         Feb 12.0 8.2 5.5 9.4 8.1 10.9 27.0 14.1 11.5
         Mar 12.1 8.2 5.5 ... 8.2 11.0 ... 14.1 11.5
 
Harmonised Index of Consumer Prices 1
 
2010 1.6 2.3 1.2 2.7 1.7 1.7 4.7 − 1.6 1.6
2011 9 2.7 3.4 2.5 5.1 3.3 2.3 3.1 1.2 2.9
2012 2.5 2.6 2.1 4.2 3.2 2.2 1.0 1.9 3.3
2012          Nov 2.2 2.2 1.9 3.8 3.2 1.6 0.4 1.6 2.6
         Dec 2.2 2.1 2.0 3.6 3.5 1.5 0.3 1.7 2.6
2013          Jan 2.0 1.5 1.9 3.7 2.6 1.4 0.0 1.5 2.4
         Feb 1.8 1.4 1.8 4.0 2.5 1.2 0.1 1.2 2.0
         Mar 1.7 1.3 1.8 3.8 2.5 1.1 − 0.2 0.6 1.8
         Apr e 1.2 1.1 1.1 3.4 2.4 0.8 − 0.6 0.5 e 1.3
 
General government financial balance 10
 
2010 − 6.2 − 3.8 − 4.1 0.2 − 2.5 − 7.1 − 10.7 − 30.8 − 4.5
2011 − 4.1 − 3.7 − 0.8 1.2 − 0.8 − 5.3 − 9.5 − 13.4 − 3.8
2012 − 3.7 − 3.9 0.2 − 0.3 − 1.9 − 4.8 − 10.0 − 7.6 − 3.0
 
General government debt 10
 
2010 85.4 95.5 82.4 6.7 48.6 82.4 148.3 92.1 119.3
2011 87.3 97.8 80.4 6.2 49.0 85.8 170.3 106.4 120.8
2012 90.6 99.6 81.9 10.1 53.0 90.2 156.9 117.6 127.0
Sources: National data, European Commission, Eurostat, European Central Bank. 3  Manufacturing, mining and energy; adjusted for working-day variations.
Latest data are partly based on press reports and are provisional. 1  Annual percen- 4  Positively influenced by late reports. 5  Positively influenced by changes in the
tage change. 2  GDP of the euro area calculated from seasonally adjusted data. reporting population. 6  Manufacturing, in %; seasonally adjusted; data are collected

Deutsche Bundesbank
7  Monthly Report
May 2013
I.  Key economic data for the euro area  
 
   
                   
 
Luxembourg Malta Netherlands Austria Portugal Slovakia Slovenia Spain Cyprus   Period
 
Real gross domestic product 1,2
 
2.9 2.9 1.6 2.0 1.9 4.4 1.2 − 0.3 1.3 2010
1.7 1.7 1.0 2.7 − 1.6 3.2 0.6 0.4 0.5 20110.3 0.8 − 1.0 0.8 − 3.2 2.0 − 2.3 − 1.4 − 2.4 2012
0.1 − 0.4 − 0.8 0.4 − 2.9 3.7 − 2.4 − 0.4 − 0.8 2011          Q4
− 0.5 − 1.0 − 0.8 2.2 − 0.7 2.9 0.0 − 0.8 − 1.6 2012          Q1
0.6 1.2 − 0.4 0.1 − 4.1 2.6 − 3.2 − 1.4 − 2.7          Q2
− 0.5 1.7 − 1.4 0.4 − 2.4 2.1 − 3.1 − 1.5 − 2.0          Q3
1.6 1.1 − 1.2 0.7 − 5.4 0.7 − 3.0 − 1.9 − 3.4          Q4
... ... − 1.7 − 0.6 ... ... ... ... ... 2013          Q1
 
Industrial production1,3
 
9.4 − 7.8 6.7 1.6 8.1 7.0 0.8 − 1.1 2010
− 2.5 − − 0.7 6.6 − 2.0 5.3 1.9 − 1.4 − 7.4 2011
− 5.3 − − 0.5 0.3 − 5.0 8.1 − 0.7 − 6.0 − 8.7 2012
− 6.6 − − 4.3 3.3 − 4.4 2.1 − 1.7 − 5.0 − 10.7 2011          Q4− 7.1 − − 1.7 − 0.8 − 5.5 6.8 − 0.7 − 5.8 − 12.5 2012          Q1
− 5.4 − 1.6 0.8 − 6.4 9.8 0.0 − 7.1 − 5.9          Q2
− 6.1 − − 2.3 1.1 − 4.1 11.4 0.4 − 5.5 − 5.7          Q3
− 2.4 − 0.4 0.1 − 3.7 4.7 − 2.3 − 5.7 − 11.0          Q4
− 6.4 −
p 3.6 ... − 0.5 p 2.0 p − 0.8 − 4.1 ... 2013          Q1
 
Capacity utilisation in industry 6
 
78.5 77.7 78.9 81.9 75.0 58.0 76.0 71.1 62.6 2010
83.2 78.7 80.3 85.4 74.4 61.6 80.4 73.3 61.4 201176.4 75.2 78.4 84.6 73.8 69.6 79.1 72.1 56.7 2012
79.2 74.2 79.8 85.1 74.1 67.5 79.7 72.5 56.9 2012          Q1
82.7 75.9 78.6 84.7 74.2 71.1 80.6 72.7 56.9          Q2
78.1 76.2 78.3 84.9 74.2 71.2 79.4 70.7 59.1          Q3
65.7 74.3 77.0 83.6 72.6 68.4 76.6 72.5 53.7          Q4
66.9 77.2 77.0 84.9 73.5 60.7 77.8 68.7 52.4 2013          Q1
62.3 76.2 75.9 83.5 73.9 72.3 78.4 74.6 43.5          Q2
 
Standardised unemployment rate 7,8
 
4.6 6.9 4.5 4.4 12.0 14.5 7.3 20.1 6.3 20104.8 6.5 4.4 4.2 12.9 13.6 8.2 21.7 7.9 20115.1 6.4 5.3 4.3 15.9 14.0 8.9 25.0 11.9 2012
5.2 6.5 5.5 4.5 16.8 14.3 9.5 26.0 13.1 2012          Oct 
5.3 6.6 5.6 4.5 17.0 14.4 9.3 26.2 13.2          Nov 
5.4 6.6 5.8 4.7 17.3 14.4 9.4 26.2 13.5          Dec 
5.4 6.7 6.0 4.8 17.5 14.5 9.6 26.4 13.6 2013          Jan 
5.5 6.6 6.2 4.8 17.5 14.6 9.7 26.5 13.9          Feb 
5.7 6.5 6.4 4.7 17.5 14.5 9.9 26.7 14.2          Mar 
 
Harmonised Index of Consumer Prices 1
 
2.8 2.0 0.9 1.7 1.4 0.7 2.1 2.0 2.6 20103.7 2.5 2.5 3.6 3.6 4.1 2.1 3.1 3.5 20112.9 3.2 2.8 2.6 2.8 3.7 2.8 2.4 3.1 2012
2.7 3.6 3.2 2.9 1.9 3.5 2.8 3.0 1.4 2012          Nov 
2.5 2.8 3.4 2.9 2.1 3.4 3.1 3.0 1.5          Dec 
2.1 2.4 3.2 2.8 0.4 2.5 2.8 2.8 2.0 2013          Jan 
2.4 1.8 3.2 2.6 0.2 2.2 2.9 2.9 1.8          Feb 
2.0 1.4 3.2 2.4 0.7 1.9 2.2 2.6 1.3          Mar 
1.7 0.9 2.8
p 2.1 0.4 1.7 1.6 1.5 0.1          Apr 
 
General government financial balance 10
 
− 0.9 − 3.6 − 5.1 − 4.5 − 9.8 − 7.7 − 5.9 − 9.7 − 5.3 2010− 0.2 − 2.8 − 4.5 − 2.5 − 4.4 − 5.1 − 6.4 − 9.4 − 6.3 2011− 0.8 − 3.3 − 4.1 − 2.5 − 6.4 − 4.3 − 4.0 − 10.6 − 6.3 2012
 
General government debt 10
 
19.2 67.4 63.1 72.0 94.0 41.0 38.6 61.5 61.3 201018.3 70.3 65.5 72.5 108.3 43.3 46.9 69.3 71.1 201120.8 72.1 71.2 73.4 123.6 52.1 54.1 84.2 85.8 2012
in January, April, July and October. 7  As a percentage of the civilian labour force; sea- onwards. 10  As a percentage of GDP; euro-area aggregate: European Central Bank
sonally adjusted. 8  Standardised unemployment rate of Germany: calculation based (ESA 1995), member states: European Commission (Maastricht Treaty definition). 
on unadjusted data from the Federal Statistical Office. 9  Including Estonia from 2011

Deutsche Bundesbank
8  Monthly Report
May 2013
II Overall monetary survey in the euro area 
 
1 The money stock and its counterparts *
(a) Euro area 
  
€ billion
I Lending to non-banks (non-MFIs) II Net claims on III Monetary capital formation at monetary
in the euro area non-euro-area residents financial institutions (MFIs) in the euro area
Enterprises General
and households government Debt
Deposits securities
Liabil- with an Deposits with
Claims ities to agreed at agreed maturities
on non- non-euro- maturity notice of of over Capital
of which of which euro-area area of over over 2 years and
Period Total Total Total Total residents residents Total 2 years 3 months (net)  2 Securities Securities reserves  3 
2011          Aug 8.2 − 10.0 − 12.6 18.2 32.2 28.3 72.8 44.5 9.3 1.5 − 0.4 − 1.8 9.9
         Sep 50.5 26.2 − 20.0 24.3 20.9 23.3 − 14.3 − 37.6 9.9 12.9 − 0.7 − 4.8 2.5
         Oct 37.2 37.4 36.2 − 0.2 0.5 − 50.7 − 88.6 − 37.9 10.7 24.2 0.0 − 18.6 5.1
         Nov 28.3 − 12.0 8.2 40.3 41.2 − 24.2 − 64.7 − 40.5 − 3.3 − 11.2 − 0.9 − 10.6 19.5
         Dec − 94.3 −111.4 − 15.9 17.1 2.1 17.2 − 21.2 − 38.4 − 3.6 13.9 − 0.7 − 42.8 26.0
2012          Jan 124.5 58.1 17.6 66.4 68.6 − 43.6 18.6 62.2 5.9 0.5 0.6 − 4.7 9.5
         Feb 16.4 − 15.3 4.5 31.8 48.0 20.8 18.4 − 2.4 − 10.6 − 3.4 − 1.4 − 7.0 1.2
         Mar 36.4 2.7 1.1 33.7 36.5 − 27.0 33.1 60.1 − 34.3 − 26.5 − 0.8 − 17.7 10.7
         Apr 12.3 7.5 15.7 4.8 − 2.2 − 29.7 − 14.1 15.6 − 6.0 − 3.9 − 0.3 − 7.5 5.7
         May 23.3 − 7.0 − 10.5 30.3 28.6 13.8 27.9 14.2 − 40.3 − 31.9 − 1.1 − 23.1 15.8
         June 9.8 − 34.4 − 59.6 44.3 19.0 21.1 − 82.2 − 103.4 10.5 − 13.0 − 1.1 − 13.1 37.6
         July − 35.8 − 18.9 − 42.4 − 16.9 − 16.3 9.8 6.6 − 3.2 − 33.1 − 53.2 − 1.2 6.4 15.1
         Aug − 78.6 − 61.4 − 15.4 − 17.1 − 7.8 22.1 − 23.9 − 46.0 0.8 0.6 − 1.4 − 1.2 2.7
         Sep 65.6 32.8 − 3.2 32.8 30.5 − 5.9 − 41.1 − 35.2 0.5 − 7.2 − 1.5 − 3.7 12.9
         Oct − 5.4 − 21.3 − 7.8 15.9 1.2 22.2 8.9 − 13.3 − 23.2 − 12.5 − 0.8 − 12.1 2.2
         Nov 13.5 − 4.4 − 1.6 17.9 27.5 64.6 − 12.0 − 76.6 − 0.9 − 4.7 − 0.7 − 1.4 5.9
         Dec − 70.2 − 4.2 70.6 − 66.0 − 50.8 34.7 − 90.8 − 125.6 20.5 − 4.6 − 1.8 − 18.8 45.8
2013          Jan 48.6 18.2 − 2.1 30.4 26.3 29.3 59.8 30.5 − 7.7 − 4.1 − 0.9 − 7.2 4.6
         Feb − 0.9 − 7.4 − 3.0 6.5 45.4 − 0.3 − 8.6 − 8.3 − 2.4 − 8.5 − 2.0 − 2.3 10.4
         Mar 62.2 27.5 21.0 34.7 29.5 − 1.4 − 40.2 − 38.8 − 3.5 14.8 − 1.5 − 34.7 18.0
  
  
(b) German contribution
 
I Lending to non-banks (non-MFIs) II Net claims on III Monetary capital formation at monetary
in the euro area non-euro-area residents financial institutions (MFIs) in the euro area
Enterprises General
and households government Debt
Deposits securities
Liabil- with an Deposits with
Claims ities to agreed at agreed maturities
on non- non-euro- maturity notice of of over Capital
of which of which euro-area area of over over 2 years and
Period Total Total Total Total residents residents Total 2 years 3 months (net)  2 Securities Securities reserves  3 
2011          Aug 15.3 12.7 − 6.1 2.6 12.0 − 31.2 24.0 55.1 0.1 − 0.1 − 0.1 − 1.2 1.5
         Sep 12.7 9.6 − 5.5 3.1 3.6 − 41.6 − 15.9 25.7 − 8.2 − 3.8 − 0.5 − 2.4 − 1.5
         Oct 29.3 25.9 − 2.1 3.4 7.6 − 39.2 − 23.4 15.8 2.4 − 2.0 − 0.2 2.7 2.0
         Nov 3.7 4.2 1.7 − 0.5 2.1 − 13.7 − 0.1 13.6 − 7.3 − 1.4 − 0.9 − 3.8 − 1.3
         Dec − 54.4 − 48.0 − 4.8 − 6.4 − 9.5 72.3 − 9.7 − 82.0 − 8.0 − 0.3 − 0.8 − 4.3 − 2.6
2012          Jan 36.8 25.6 4.3 11.2 7.7 − 79.5 29.1 108.7 − 26.2 − 3.4 − 0.9 − 22.7 0.9
         Feb − 3.1 − 2.8 − 5.8 − 0.3 1.9 − 30.3 − 10.6 19.7 9.1 − 2.8 − 1.2 8.2 4.9
         Mar 2.1 1.2 8.4 0.9 3.2 − 51.5 5.1 56.6 − 6.8 − 4.9 − 0.8 − 6.2 5.1
         Apr 18.0 16.0 12.9 2.0 − 3.2 − 12.4 − 0.5 11.9 1.4 − 1.4 − 0.3 2.3 0.8
         May − 33.7 − 25.5 − 20.6 − 8.2 − 2.7 − 21.2 − 5.0 16.2 − 12.6 − 3.0 − 0.8 − 6.0 − 2.7
         June 10.1 − 7.5 − 9.2 17.6 7.0 − 27.1 − 28.9 − 1.8 1.7 − 3.0 − 1.0 − 1.3 7.0
         July 29.8 34.2 − 0.6 − 4.5 − 0.4 − 16.1 1.5 17.6 − 5.5 − 4.9 − 0.8 − 2.2 2.5
         Aug − 4.1 0.6 1.6 − 4.7 2.1 − 7.0 13.2 20.2 − 5.0 − 1.9 − 1.4 − 2.4 0.7
         Sep 7.3 2.3 5.0 5.1 6.1 52.6 7.0 − 45.7 − 5.7 − 3.2 − 1.6 − 1.4 0.5
         Oct 18.7 8.2 − 5.0 10.5 3.2 10.1 0.9 − 9.2 − 14.0 − 8.9 − 0.7 − 3.8 − 0.6
         Nov − 5.2 − 4.1 0.8 − 1.2 5.0 23.7 − 7.2 − 30.9 − 12.5 − 5.4 − 1.3 − 5.4 − 0.4
         Dec − 50.5 − 32.0 − 2.8 − 18.5 − 7.0 53.7 − 20.2 − 73.9 − 12.5 − 1.0 − 1.6 − 10.6 0.8
2013          Jan 34.9 34.0 10.6 0.9 − 1.0 − 13.5 − 2.1 11.4 − 8.0 − 2.0 − 1.8 − 4.9 0.8
         Feb − 8.7 − 2.0 − 3.5 − 6.7 − 1.8 4.0 − 3.1 − 7.1 − 2.6 − 4.4 − 1.5 1.5 1.8
         Mar − 2.0 1.1 7.9 − 3.0 − 0.7 16.3 − 3.4 − 19.6 − 7.1 − 0.9 − 0.8 − 10.7 5.3
*The data in this table are based on the consolidated balance sheet of monetary MFIs’ portfolios. 3After deduction of inter-MFI participations. 4Including the counter-
financial institutions (MFIs) (Table II.2); statistical breaks have been eliminated from parts of monetary liabilities of central governments. 5Including the monetary
the flow figures (see also the “Notes on the figures“ in the “Explanatory notes“ in the liabilities of central governments (Post Office, Treasury). 6In Germany, only savings
Statistical Supplement to the Monthly Report 1, p 30  ).1Source: ECB. 2Excluding deposits. 7Paper held by residents outside the euro area has been eliminated.

Deutsche Bundesbank
9  Monthly Report
May 2013
II Overall monetary survey in the euro area
 
 
 
(a) Euro area 
 
V Other factors VI Money stock M3 (balance I plus II less III less IV less V)
Money stock M2 Debt secur-
of which ities with
Intra- Money stock M1 maturities
Eurosystem Deposits of up to
liability/ with an Deposits Money 2 years
IV De- claim agreed at agreed market (incl money
posits of related to Currency maturity notice of Repo fund market    
banknote in circu- Overnight of up to up to 3 transac- shares paper)    central  gov-
ernments Total 4 issue Total Total Total lation deposits 5 2 years 5 tions (net) 2,7  Period (net) 2,7,8 months  5,6 
− 60.4 45.6 − 42.0 10.2 − 17.5 − 4.7 − 12.7 22.3 5.4 45.8 22.0 − 3.3 2011          Aug 
4.9 49.1 − 9.9 25.9 18.4 7.7 10.6 13.2 − 5.6 25.0 − 11.0 − 4.9          Sep 
0.5 − 4.0 − − 20.7 − 4.4 11.2 6.3 4.9 − 13.3 − 2.3 − 22.3 − 8.4 0.6          Oct 
4.2 − 0.1 − 3.2 1.4 15.1 3.9 11.3 − 10.8 − 3.0 − 28.4 6.5 2.0          Nov 
− 6.9 − 157.3 − 90.6 99.1 80.0 16.2 63.8 6.4 12.8 − 67.2 − 4.7 19.1          Dec 
59.9 38.5 − − 23.5 − 27.7 − 49.1 − 14.4 − 34.7 4.6 16.8 17.5 6.9 − 10.0 2012          Jan 23.2 − 0.6 − 25.2 11.5 − 27.8 − 0.4 − 27.4 31.6 7.7 13.8 2.2 13.4          Feb 
− 13.8 − 43.8 − 101.2 69.4 49.2 2.4 46.9 10.0 10.1 − 14.5 10.7 25.4          Mar 
− 36.3 22.0 − 2.9 − 1.5 3.7 2.7 1.0 − 9.8 4.5 3.4 9.7 − 6.6          Apr 
26.2 26.2 − 25.0 20.0 39.1 8.7 30.4 − 25.8 6.6 27.3 12.3 − 6.8          May
17.2 − 33.3 − 36.5 59.1 74.3 11.4 62.9 − 21.8 6.6 − 0.0 − 22.8 6.7          June
− 32.7 13.5 − 26.3 20.5 22.7 3.8 19.0 − 7.9 5.7 4.7 − 1.3 2.0          July− 37.6 − 8.7 − − 10.9 − 3.3 1.8 − 1.3 3.2 − 13.4 8.3 − 13.5 4.7 − 10.7          Aug 
33.5 7.5 − 18.1 43.2 47.2 − 3.5 50.7 − 6.2 2.2 14.2 − 20.4 − 4.2          Sep 
− 22.8 6.1 − 56.7 63.2 34.1 − 2.4 36.4 16.3 12.8 − 20.7 5.6 − 5.2          Oct 
39.6 31.9 − 7.5 29.6 35.4 − 0.2 35.6 − 13.9 8.1 7.6 − 1.1 − 19.5          Nov 
− 60.6 − 54.8 − 59.4 98.5 85.5 12.7 72.8 − 12.2 25.2 − 42.3 − 26.6 − 6.2          Dec 
33.9 73.8 − − 22.2 − 34.8 − 53.5 − 19.8 − 33.7 − 5.3 24.1 11.7 7.3 − 6.4 2013          Jan 
5.6 − 2.8 − − 1.6 9.0 4.7 − 1.2 5.9 − 3.9 8.2 28.1 6.3 − 13.7          Feb 
10.8 7.3 − 46.2 59.0 48.1 11.7 36.4 5.3 5.6 24.4 − 5.9 − 5.2          Mar 
 
 
 (b) German contribution 
 
V Other factors VI Money stock M3 (balance I plus II less III less IV less V)  10 
of which Components of the money stock
Intra- Debt securities
Eurosystem Deposits with
liability/ with an Deposits Money maturities
IV De- claim agreed at agreed market of up to 2 yearsposits of related to Currency maturity notice of Repo fund (incl money    
banknote in circu- Overnight of up to up to 3 transac-
shares market    central  gov-
ernments Total issue 9,11 lation Total deposits 2 years months  6 tions (net) 7,8 paper)(net) 7  Period
− 0.1 − 46.6 2.6 − 1.0 30.8 12.3 6.6 − 1.4 10.3 0.4 2.7 2011          Aug 
3.4 − 42.1 3.2 1.3 17.9 7.2 12.3 − 1.0 4.9 0.1 − 5.6          Sep 
− 2.7 − 11.9 0.1 1.8 2.4 10.0 − 2.7 − 0.2 − 1.2 − 0.0 − 3.5          Oct 
− 0.2 − 32.7 0.1 1.5 30.2 20.4 1.7 − 0.1 5.3 − 0.9 3.9          Nov 
0.2 31.9 − 0.4 3.5 − 6.2 − 1.8 6.2 5.5 − 14.1 − 0.1 − 2.0          Dec 
4.0 − 8.9 0.5 − 3.1 − 11.7 0.8 − 1.0 2.1 − 10.8 − 0.3 − 2.4 2012          Jan 
3.5 − 67.7 1.2 − 0.1 21.7 9.8 − 3.6 3.9 10.0 − 0.2 1.8          Feb 
− 10.7 − 34.6 3.2 − 0.2 2.7 8.7 − 0.8 0.4 − 3.6 − 0.2 − 1.9          Mar 
1.9 − 15.6 2.1 1.0 17.9 10.4 3.1 − 1.2 7.2 0.0 − 1.7          Apr 
− 0.0 − 62.6 1.7 2.1 20.3 17.2 2.9 0.1 5.3 0.0 − 5.1          May
1.7 − 36.9 1.7 2.8 16.5 18.0 6.6 0.1 − 9.4 0.2 1.0          June
− 5.2 − 5.9 3.5 1.7 30.3 20.4 − 0.8 0.8 7.6 0.0 2.3          July− 1.1 − 15.8 3.9 − 0.9 10.8 12.4 − 2.1 0.9 1.7 − 0.4 − 1.6          Aug 
1.0 62.5 3.4 − 1.2 2.1 23.9 − 13.5 0.3 − 10.1 − 0.2 1.7          Sep 
− 2.1 − 11.2 2.8 − 0.3 56.1 55.8 − 11.1 0.2 9.9 0.4 1.1          Oct 
1.3 12.0 2.6 − 0.1 17.5 25.9 − 9.0 0.5 − 0.8 − 0.0 1.1          Nov 
− 2.6 71.8 3.0 2.0 − 53.4 − 7.0 − 24.2 6.3 − 26.5 0.2 − 2.2          Dec 
0.9 40.6 − 0.9 − 3.6 − 12.1 − 1.9 − 10.2 0.9 2.7 0.1 − 3.6 2013          Jan 
− 2.9 − 12.9 2.0 − 0.6 13.8 2.5 − 8.3 1.4 16.6 0.3 1.5          Feb − 1.7 35.0 2.4 2.5 − 11.9 − 10.3 3.6 − 1.4 − 2.7 0.1 − 1.1          Mar 
8Less German MFIs’ holdings of paper issued by euro-area MFIs. 9Including money stocks M1, M2 or M3. 11The difference between the volume of euro
national banknotes still in circulation. 10The German contributions to the Euro- banknotes actually issued by the Bundesbank and the amount disclosed in
system’s monetary aggregates should on no account be interpreted as national accordance with the accounting regime chosen by the Eurosystem (see also footnote
monetary aggregates and are therefore not comparable with the erstwhile German 2 on banknote circulation in Table III.2). 

Deutsche Bundesbank
10  Monthly Report
May 2013
II Overall monetary survey in the euro area
 
2 Consolidated balance sheet of monetary financial institutions (MFIs) *
 
 
 
Assets
Lending to non-banks (non-MFIs) in the euro area
Enterprises and households General government
Claims
Total Shares and on non-
End of assets or Debt other Debt euro-area Other
year/month liabilities Total Total Loans securities  2 equities Total Loans securities  3 residents assets
 Euro area ( € billion) 1
 
2011          Feb 25,683.8 16,661.9 13,465.8 11,113.4 1,544.3 808.1 3,196.1 1,215.8 1,980.4 5,053.3 3,968.5
         Mar 25,260.4 16,456.8 13,407.4 11,117.8 1,510.0 779.6 3,049.4 1,205.9 1,843.5 4,946.0 3,857.6
         Apr 25,397.8 16,523.1 13,476.2 11,141.0 1,512.2 823.0 3,046.9 1,196.3 1,850.6 4,965.8 3,908.8
         May 25,736.9 16,550.0 13,511.6 11,201.4 1,510.2 800.1 3,038.3 1,173.4 1,865.0 5,131.3 4,055.6
         June 25,432.4 16,557.5 13,499.1 11,225.8 1,483.8 789.5 3,058.4 1,169.7 1,888.7 4,982.2 3,892.7
         July 25,798.8 16,550.3 13,510.5 11,239.7 1,488.2 782.6 3,039.8 1,174.2 1,865.6 5,028.2 4,220.3
         Aug 26,379.1 16,557.2 13,487.0 11,240.5 1,480.7 765.7 3,070.2 1,161.9 1,908.3 5,117.2 4,704.7
         Sep 26,973.2 16,608.4 13,521.0 11,297.5 1,470.6 752.8 3,087.4 1,163.4 1,924.0 5,190.1 5,174.7
         Oct 26,619.2 16,622.0 13,550.1 11,268.0 1,530.0 752.1 3,071.9 1,162.6 1,909.3 5,028.0 4,969.2
         Nov 26,619.5 16,626.4 13,541.3 11,253.0 1,533.8 754.5 3,085.2 1,162.1 1,923.0 5,063.3 4,929.9
         Dec 26,717.5 16,561.6 13,431.2 11,163.9 1,527.6 739.7 3,130.4 1,177.6 1,952.8 5,032.5 5,123.4
2012          Jan 26,896.5 16,674.1 13,476.6 11,196.2 1,532.5 747.9 3,197.5 1,174.8 2,022.7 5,046.0 5,176.4
         Feb 26,833.7 16,687.8 13,450.4 11,165.5 1,539.3 745.6 3,237.4 1,158.9 2,078.5 5,015.0 5,130.9
         Mar 26,695.1 16,708.4 13,446.6 11,163.8 1,526.9 755.9 3,261.8 1,155.5 2,106.3 5,033.0 4,953.7
         Apr 26,863.4 16,704.6 13,445.4 11,157.4 1,520.9 767.0 3,259.2 1,159.5 2,099.7 5,055.1 5,103.7
         May 27,826.6 16,721.9 13,447.1 11,176.1 1,520.4 750.6 3,274.8 1,161.2 2,113.6 5,204.8 5,899.9
         June 27,214.5 16,731.4 13,386.1 11,192.0 1,462.8 731.3 3,345.3 1,186.8 2,158.4 5,088.9 5,394.2
         July 27,535.0 16,700.3 13,369.5 11,218.0 1,415.9 735.6 3,330.8 1,186.4 2,144.4 5,182.6 5,652.1
         Aug 27,306.0 16,627.0 13,302.8 11,164.3 1,400.4 738.1 3,324.2 1,177.0 2,147.2 5,103.5 5,575.5
         Sep 27,160.7 16,695.5 13,323.5 11,187.8 1,386.5 749.2 3,372.0 1,180.1 2,191.9 5,045.3 5,419.9
         Oct 26,629.4 16,696.6 13,299.7 11,168.1 1,383.9 747.8 3,396.9 1,194.7 2,202.2 5,012.9 4,919.9
         Nov 26,697.5 16,718.9 13,291.4 11,161.0 1,369.9 760.5 3,427.5 1,185.1 2,242.4 4,996.8 4,981.8
         Dec 26,245.5 16,612.0 13,244.9 11,044.2 1,433.6 767.1 3,367.1 1,169.9 2,197.2 4,845.1 4,788.4
2013          Jan 26,381.2 16,641.5 13,243.1 11,046.2 1,415.9 781.0 3,398.5 1,173.8 2,224.7 4,799.2 4,940.4
         Feb 26,495.1 16,631.0 13,232.1 11,037.7 1,418.5 775.9 3,398.9 1,135.6 2,263.3 4,825.2 5,039.0
         Mar 26,563.7 16,698.5 13,261.4 11,045.7 1,430.9 784.7 3,437.1 1,140.8 2,296.2 4,844.6 5,020.6
 German contribution ( € billion) 
2011          Feb 5,986.9 3,764.4 2,983.4 2,535.7 193.4 254.3 781.0 440.8 340.2 1,175.3 1,047.2
         Mar 5,835.3 3,730.5 2,962.9 2,515.9 190.2 256.8 767.6 430.3 337.3 1,134.9 970.0
         Apr 5,901.3 3,753.8 2,995.6 2,526.0 189.8 279.8 758.2 419.3 339.0 1,171.1 976.3
         May 5,944.1 3,731.5 2,982.7 2,537.9 189.2 255.6 748.8 408.5 340.3 1,192.1 1,020.6
         June 5,793.3 3,706.7 2,968.3 2,536.0 187.5 244.9 738.4 404.9 333.4 1,145.1 941.6
         July 5,929.3 3,709.0 2,969.1 2,540.8 185.6 242.7 739.9 410.3 329.6 1,158.0 1,062.2
         Aug 6,140.9 3,729.5 2,988.1 2,565.9 183.4 238.8 741.4 400.7 340.8 1,190.0 1,221.3
         Sep 6,294.6 3,744.9 3,001.5 2,584.8 181.4 235.4 743.4 400.3 343.1 1,193.9 1,355.7
         Oct 6,167.9 3,767.6 3,022.8 2,609.4 179.0 234.4 744.8 396.1 348.7 1,157.5 1,242.8
         Nov 6,189.0 3,771.3 3,030.2 2,615.1 181.7 233.3 741.1 393.6 347.5 1,179.7 1,238.0
         Dec 6,229.9 3,720.7 2,986.3 2,576.3 183.2 226.8 734.4 396.9 337.5 1,180.4 1,328.9
2012          Jan 6,292.8 3,751.9 3,007.6 2,594.7 182.4 230.4 744.4 400.3 344.0 1,212.0 1,328.9
         Feb 6,239.0 3,746.7 3,001.7 2,595.0 179.9 226.8 745.0 398.1 346.9 1,193.1 1,299.2
         Mar 6,185.1 3,751.3 3,002.6 2,587.7 182.1 232.9 748.7 395.8 352.9 1,191.6 1,242.1
         Apr 6,250.5 3,775.2 3,022.0 2,594.1 179.8 248.0 753.3 401.1 352.2 1,198.9 1,276.4
         May 6,499.3 3,745.2 3,001.6 2,594.7 178.2 228.7 743.5 395.8 347.7 1,221.4 1,532.7
         June 6,313.4 3,752.8 2,970.9 2,592.7 156.5 221.7 781.8 406.4 375.4 1,183.7 1,377.0
         July 6,448.1 3,784.2 3,006.9 2,629.3 154.0 223.6 777.3 402.5 374.8 1,205.4 1,458.5
         Aug 6,408.2 3,779.1 3,005.1 2,625.9 153.0 226.2 774.0 395.7 378.2 1,206.3 1,422.8
         Sep 6,361.1 3,785.2 3,004.1 2,620.0 153.3 230.8 781.1 395.6 385.5 1,209.7 1,366.2
         Oct 6,314.2 3,803.4 3,010.6 2,631.5 147.6 231.5 792.8 402.8 390.0 1,201.4 1,309.5
         Nov 6,280.7 3,798.0 3,005.5 2,625.8 148.3 231.4 792.5 396.6 395.9 1,194.7 1,288.1
         Dec 6,158.5 3,745.1 2,970.5 2,593.8 147.9 228.9 774.6 385.1 389.5 1,159.8 1,253.7
2013          Jan 6,067.4 3,774.6 2,998.7 2,611.3 146.5 240.9 775.9 386.9 389.0 1,140.9 1,151.9
         Feb 6,062.6 3,765.7 2,998.6 2,614.6 148.2 235.8 767.1 382.0 385.1 1,143.4 1,153.5
         Mar 6,073.6 3,766.7 3,000.8 2,608.8 150.0 242.0 765.9 379.8 386.2 1,154.8 1,152.1
*Monetary financial institutions (MFIs) comprise banks (including building and loan enterprises. 3Including Treasury bills and other money market paper issued by
associations), money market funds, and the European Central Bank and national general government. 4Euro currency in circulation (see also footnote 8 on p 12  )
central banks (the Eurosystem). 1Source: ECB. 2Including money market paper of Excluding MFIs‘ cash in hand (in euro). The German contribution includes the volume

Deutsche Bundesbank
11  Monthly Report
May 2013
II Overall monetary survey in the euro area
 
   
 
Liabilities
Deposits of non-banks (non-MFIs) in the euro area
Enterprises and households
With agreed At agreed
maturities of notice of 6 
over
Currency 1 year and
in of which up to up to over up to over  End of
Total in euro 5 Total Overnight 1 year 2 years 2 years 3 months 3 months year/month circulation 4 
Euro area (€ billion) 1
 
796.2 10,432.9 9,806.8 9,860.3 3,672.2 1,457.6 278.7 2,439.5 1,899.3 112.9 2011          Feb 
798.3 10,440.1 9,850.1 9,900.1 3,686.2 1,452.8 287.2 2,456.5 1,904.4 113.1          Mar 
805.5 10,493.3 9,897.6 9,947.6 3,713.9 1,455.7 286.4 2,470.1 1,909.4 112.2          Apr 
810.4 10,480.9 9,895.4 9,942.1 3,692.6 1,454.8 298.8 2,473.4 1,910.6 111.9          May819.7 10,555.9 9,918.0 9,956.0 3,731.0 1,426.5 300.7 2,477.1 1,908.8 111.9          June
828.2 10,524.0 9,913.5 9,957.2 3,714.3 1,440.1 306.9 2,472.7 1,911.2 112.0          July
823.4 10,482.9 9,931.6 9,971.1 3,699.7 1,451.4 313.0 2,478.6 1,916.6 111.9          Aug 831.2 10,534.1 9,962.8 10,018.6 3,720.5 1,467.2 312.8 2,495.3 1,911.6 111.3          Sep 
837.5 10,539.9 9,973.9 10,028.0 3,719.6 1,461.5 308.5 2,517.6 1,909.4 111.5          Oct 
841.4 10,536.4 9,961.3 10,007.8 3,719.2 1,441.2 312.5 2,509.9 1,915.2 109.8          Nov 857.5 10,626.7 10,053.0 10,120.2 3,796.6 1,451.1 310.5 2,524.5 1,928.1 109.4          Dec 
843.0 10,678.9 10,051.7 10,103.6 3,762.2 1,449.5 315.4 2,523.6 1,944.5 108.5 2012          Jan 
842.5 10,705.0 10,055.5 10,102.4 3,735.4 1,465.0 325.6 2,517.3 1,950.8 108.3          Feb 844.9 10,731.7 10,103.7 10,128.3 3,775.4 1,470.2 323.2 2,491.2 1,960.7 107.6          Mar 
847.6 10,690.2 10,094.5 10,127.2 3,783.5 1,470.8 312.1 2,488.3 1,965.0 107.5          Apr 
856.3 10,708.0 10,080.1 10,102.8 3,811.2 1,442.2 312.0 2,459.3 1,971.6 106.6          May867.7 10,755.1 10,113.3 10,104.0 3,870.1 1,413.7 304.0 2,432.6 1,977.9 105.6          June
871.5 10,687.0 10,068.2 10,065.4 3,886.5 1,407.6 302.9 2,380.6 1,983.3 104.5          July
870.2 10,643.3 10,061.5 10,069.4 3,896.2 1,394.2 301.5 2,381.0 1,993.4 103.2          Aug 866.7 10,716.7 10,108.0 10,109.6 3,940.4 1,393.1 300.7 2,378.3 1,995.2 101.8          Sep 
864.3 10,745.4 10,153.6 10,152.0 3,965.3 1,406.3 306.6 2,365.4 2,007.3 101.1          Oct 
864.1 10,806.5 10,179.1 10,168.3 3,994.3 1,387.0 309.5 2,362.2 2,013.4 101.9          Nov 876.8 10,814.4 10,249.1 10,272.7 4,066.6 1,394.0 312.5 2,356.4 2,042.8 100.5          Dec 
857.0 10,827.0 10,227.8 10,259.0 4,041.7 1,381.9 319.1 2,353.5 2,064.1 98.6 2013          Jan 
855.8 10,841.8 10,224.6 10,266.9 4,053.0 1,368.1 330.4 2,346.3 2,072.3 96.8          Feb 
867.5 10,920.0 10,291.0 10,329.4 4,095.6 1,358.4 339.2 2,361.9 2,079.1 95.3          Mar 
 German contribution (€ billion) 
197.4 2,931.4 2,853.1 2,769.4 1,066.1 236.0 38.2 806.5 517.1 105.4 2011          Feb 
198.0 2,928.9 2,858.5 2,771.7 1,066.6 238.1 38.7 804.8 517.9 105.6          Mar 
199.5 2,937.5 2,871.5 2,786.1 1,074.5 246.3 39.5 803.5 517.6 104.8          Apr 
200.9 2,951.3 2,881.4 2,787.4 1,071.8 252.3 40.0 803.2 515.4 104.7          May
203.5 2,960.1 2,884.6 2,787.0 1,078.0 247.9 39.6 803.5 513.6 104.5          June
205.5 2,966.7 2,893.1 2,798.5 1,078.4 259.7 40.1 803.3 512.4 104.5          July
204.5 2,989.1 2,916.1 2,816.9 1,090.2 260.9 41.9 808.3 511.0 104.4          Aug 
205.8 3,008.4 2,930.1 2,832.6 1,099.5 271.9 42.5 804.8 510.1 103.9          Sep 
207.6 3,009.6 2,934.1 2,844.1 1,109.9 274.3 43.5 802.7 509.9 103.8          Oct 
209.1 3,030.2 2,954.6 2,858.9 1,128.2 272.4 44.5 801.4 510.4 102.0          Nov 
212.6 3,038.9 2,962.5 2,867.9 1,130.2 276.1 44.9 799.8 515.8 101.2          Dec 
209.6 3,040.0 2,961.3 2,864.8 1,130.9 274.7 44.8 796.2 518.1 100.3 2012          Jan 
209.4 3,049.0 2,965.8 2,864.0 1,138.8 265.6 45.4 793.2 521.0 100.0          Feb 
209.3 3,041.1 2,968.3 2,857.2 1,143.7 259.8 44.8 788.4 521.4 99.2          Mar 
210.3 3,054.1 2,981.2 2,867.5 1,156.8 260.2 44.1 787.2 520.2 98.9          Apr 
212.3 3,072.2 2,998.5 2,874.4 1,170.8 257.5 43.8 784.0 520.2 98.1          May
215.2 3,094.3 3,019.5 2,863.0 1,182.2 252.1 43.4 768.1 520.1 97.1          June
216.9 3,104.4 3,034.0 2,878.4 1,205.8 249.6 43.0 763.1 520.7 96.2          July
215.9 3,111.3 3,040.9 2,888.5 1,220.9 247.7 42.4 761.2 521.5 94.8          Aug 
214.7 3,117.3 3,045.7 2,891.7 1,237.8 239.2 41.8 757.8 521.9 93.3          Sep 
214.4 3,150.2 3,077.3 2,926.3 1,291.6 229.9 41.2 749.0 522.0 92.5          Oct 
214.2 3,162.1 3,088.7 2,929.4 1,311.1 220.5 40.6 743.5 522.4 91.2          Nov 
216.3 3,131.3 3,060.2 2,930.4 1,307.2 222.8 40.0 742.2 528.6 89.6          Dec 
212.7 3,116.1 3,045.2 2,928.9 1,315.4 216.1 39.6 740.4 529.6 87.8 2013          Jan 
212.1 3,103.6 3,034.1 2,921.3 1,320.1 209.7 38.4 736.0 530.9 86.2          Feb 
214.7 3,093.1 3,026.7 2,905.9 1,311.8 207.3 37.1 734.8 529.5 85.4          Mar 
of euro banknotes put into circulation by the Bundesbank in accordance with the Bundesbank can be calculated by adding to this total the item “Intra-Eurosystem
accounting regime chosen by the Eurosystem (see also footnote 2 on banknote liability/claim related to banknote issue“ (see “Other liability items“). 5Excluding
circulation in Table III.2). The volume of currency actually put into circulation by the central governments’ deposits. 6 In Germany, only savings deposits. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
12  Monthly Report
May 2013
II Overall monetary survey in the euro area
 
2 Consolidated balance sheet of monetary financial institutions (MFIs) (cont’d) *
 
 
 
Liabilities (cont’d)
Deposits of non-banks (non-MFIs) in the euro area (cont’d)  
 
General government Repo transactions Debt securities
with non-banks
Other general government in the euro area
With agreed At agreed
maturities of notice of  2 
Money
over of which market of which
Central 1 year and Enterprises fund denom-
End of govern- up to up to over up to over and shares inated
year/month ments Total Overnight 1 year 2 years 2 years 3 months 3 months Total households (net)  3 Total in euro
 Euro area ( € billion) 1
 
2011          Feb 330.0 242.6 127.1 67.1 3.4 29.7 7.4 8.0 431.5 430.0 575.7 2,865.3 2,201.4
         Mar 296.6 243.4 126.4 68.7 3.4 29.8 7.4 7.8 405.2 403.8 568.3 2,937.1 2,284.7
         Apr 304.4 241.3 124.1 68.8 3.6 29.8 7.5 7.5 427.7 426.3 570.3 2,942.9 2,292.4
         May 287.4 251.5 128.6 74.6 3.7 29.9 7.3 7.3 466.5 464.8 566.8 2,972.2 2,303.1
         June 339.0 260.9 135.0 77.7 3.8 29.9 7.3 7.1 455.0 453.4 546.0 2,991.4 2,315.7
         July 317.0 249.8 123.9 77.6 4.6 29.6 7.2 7.0 449.2 447.8 538.8 3,009.3 2,314.6
         Aug 256.6 255.2 125.1 82.1 4.6 29.3 7.3 6.8 494.8 492.7 560.6 2,995.9 2,304.4
         Sep 261.5 254.0 122.6 83.8 4.7 29.2 7.1 6.6 517.7 515.1 549.2 3,014.9 2,314.2
         Oct 261.9 249.9 125.9 76.5 4.8 29.3 7.0 6.4 495.1 492.4 540.8 2,979.5 2,301.8
         Nov 266.1 262.5 135.1 79.8 4.9 29.3 7.2 6.2 467.0 464.2 547.0 2,999.0 2,312.1
         Dec 259.3 247.2 117.7 81.6 5.2 29.5 7.4 5.9 397.1 394.4 520.4 3,006.1 2,296.9
2012          Jan 319.2 256.2 124.5 81.8 5.3 29.7 7.5 7.4 414.5 411.7 496.8 2,992.7 2,300.6
         Feb 342.2 260.4 122.1 87.9 5.5 29.8 8.0 7.1 428.1 425.7 487.4 2,985.0 2,306.0
         Mar 328.5 274.9 129.3 94.8 5.7 29.8 8.3 6.9 413.6 410.9 498.0 2,991.2 2,315.4
         Apr 289.9 273.1 123.0 99.4 5.6 29.6 8.7 6.8 419.8 417.3 507.6 2,984.3 2,291.7
         May 316.1 289.1 131.2 106.4 5.9 30.0 9.0 6.6 428.4 422.5 519.7 2,986.5 2,274.2
         June 333.3 317.8 134.7 117.9 6.6 42.8 9.3 6.5 428.9 425.1 496.8 2,978.0 2,277.7
         July 300.6 321.1 136.0 119.9 6.2 43.0 9.5 6.4 434.0 428.2 495.5 2,999.2 2,277.7
         Aug 263.1 310.8 124.6 120.9 6.3 42.9 9.9 6.3 418.1 412.9 500.3 2,968.3 2,266.9
         Sep 296.4 310.8 127.4 117.8 6.2 43.0 10.3 6.2 428.1 424.0 479.9 2,940.8 2,253.4
         Oct 273.5 319.8 140.0 113.7 6.0 43.1 11.1 6.0 407.3 403.6 485.0 2,916.8 2,228.2
         Nov 313.1 325.1 143.7 114.0 6.1 43.5 11.9 5.9 414.9 411.1 483.2 2,891.7 2,208.5
         Dec 253.0 288.7 134.8 86.7 6.0 43.9 11.6 5.6 372.4 368.4 456.0 2,856.1 2,185.7
2013          Jan 285.1 282.9 129.2 83.5 6.0 43.4 14.4 6.4 383.7 379.9 458.4 2,810.6 2,162.3
         Feb 291.6 283.3 129.3 83.6 6.0 43.5 14.6 6.3 412.1 406.8 464.7 2,809.8 2,141.4
         Mar 302.4 288.3 126.1 91.0 6.6 44.0 14.3 6.2 436.8 430.6 458.7 2,777.2 2,111.9
 German contribution ( € billion) 
2011          Feb 47.1 114.9 39.7 45.6 1.7 25.2 2.3 0.5 93.2 93.2 8.4 698.6 424.5
         Mar 38.9 118.3 42.0 46.6 1.8 25.2 2.3 0.5 78.9 78.9 8.5 686.0 426.2
         Apr 34.3 117.2 39.8 47.6 1.8 25.2 2.3 0.5 89.2 89.2 8.4 678.5 420.6
         May 37.7 126.3 44.2 52.1 1.9 25.2 2.3 0.5 105.2 105.2 8.0 681.7 417.9
         June 40.7 132.3 46.1 56.4 2.1 25.2 2.2 0.5 104.8 104.8 7.8 682.3 415.4
         July 39.5 128.7 41.3 57.0 2.8 25.1 2.1 0.5 91.8 91.8 5.3 684.4 410.9
         Aug 39.4 132.8 41.6 61.1 2.8 24.8 2.1 0.4 101.9 101.9 5.7 682.6 412.4
         Sep 42.9 132.9 41.1 61.8 3.0 24.7 2.0 0.4 107.0 107.0 5.8 687.1 406.9
         Oct 40.1 125.3 39.9 55.3 3.1 24.6 2.0 0.4 105.7 105.7 5.8 678.9 407.9
         Nov 39.9 131.4 43.3 57.9 3.2 24.6 2.0 0.4 111.1 111.1 4.9 689.5 411.6
         Dec 40.1 130.8 40.2 60.3 3.3 24.6 2.0 0.4 97.1 97.1 4.8 691.1 404.5
2012          Jan 44.1 131.1 40.0 60.6 3.4 24.8 1.8 0.4 86.7 86.2 4.5 663.1 384.3
         Feb 47.6 137.4 41.5 65.1 3.6 24.9 1.9 0.4 96.6 96.5 4.4 667.4 389.9
         Mar 36.9 147.0 45.4 70.6 3.7 24.9 1.9 0.4 93.1 93.0 4.1 660.3 379.3
         Apr 36.4 150.2 42.9 76.6 3.7 24.8 1.9 0.4 102.9 102.9 4.2 664.4 380.6
         May 36.4 161.4 47.2 82.8 3.9 25.1 2.0 0.4 108.3 105.0 4.2 666.3 373.8
         June 38.1 193.1 53.6 94.5 4.6 37.9 2.1 0.4 98.9 97.7 4.4 662.6 374.1
         July 32.9 193.1 50.9 97.0 4.3 38.1 2.3 0.5 106.6 103.2 4.4 668.8 371.1
         Aug 31.9 190.9 47.6 98.0 4.4 38.0 2.4 0.5 108.1 105.4 4.0 658.6 366.5
         Sep 32.6 193.0 53.8 93.9 4.4 38.1 2.4 0.5 98.0 97.3 3.8 654.1 367.7
         Oct 30.5 193.4 55.6 92.6 4.3 38.0 2.4 0.5 107.8 107.3 4.2 649.9 362.0
         Nov 31.9 200.9 62.0 93.4 4.5 38.1 2.5 0.5 107.0 106.6 4.1 644.4 357.6
         Dec 29.2 171.7 58.5 67.5 4.4 38.2 2.5 0.5 80.4 80.1 4.3 627.0 350.3
2013          Jan 30.1 157.0 47.6 64.2 4.4 37.7 2.5 0.6 83.1 82.6 4.4 610.1 345.1
         Feb 27.2 155.1 46.0 63.8 4.4 37.7 2.6 0.6 99.7 98.7 4.6 620.0 346.1
         Mar 25.4 161.9 44.8 70.8 4.9 38.1 2.6 0.6 97.0 95.8 4.7 610.4 338.4
*Monetary financial institutions (MFIs) comprise banks (including building and loan paper. 5Excluding liabilities arising from securities issued. 6After deduction of
associations), money market funds, and the European Central Bank and national inter-MFI participations. 7The German contributions to the Eurosystem’s monetary
central banks (the Eurosystem). 1Source: ECB. 2In Germany, only savings aggregates should on no account be interpreted as national monetary aggregates
deposits. 3Excluding holdings of MFIs; for the German contribution, excluding and are therefore not comparable with the erstwhile German money stocks M1, M2
German MFIs’ portfolios of securities issued by MFIs in the euro area. 4In Germany, or M3. 8including DM banknotes still in circulation (see also footnote 4 on
bank debt securities with maturities of up to one year are classed as money market p 10    )9For the German contribution, the difference between the volume of

Deutsche Bundesbank
13  Monthly Report
May 2013
II Overall monetary survey in the euro area
 
   
 
 Memo item
 Other liability items Monetary aggregates  7 
 (From 2002, German contribution
issued (net) 3 excludes currency in circulation)
With maturities of
of which Monetary
Intra- liabilities
Eurosystem- of centralliability/ govern-
over Liabilities Excess claim Monetary ments1 year and to non- Capital of related to capital (Post
up to up to over euro-area and inter-MFI banknote forma- Office, End of1 year 
4 2 years 2 years residents 5 reserves 6 liabilities Total 8 issue 9 M1 10 M2 11 M3 12 tion 13 year/month Treasury)  14 
Euro area (€ billion) 1
 
39.0 89.2 2,737.2 4,372.1 2,033.3 32.8 4,143.9 − 4,675.4 8,415.9 9,298.7 7,360.5 106.8 2011          Feb 
68.9 86.4 2,781.7 4,163.1 2,038.8 39.2 3,870.3 − 4,690.7 8,441.1 9,328.8 7,427.7 106.3          Mar 
71.2 87.7 2,783.9 4,202.7 2,043.2 5.2 3,907.1 − 4,724.3 8,482.0 9,391.5 7,446.8 107.4          Apr 
74.5 84.8 2,813.0 4,338.9 2,070.9 − 22.5 4,052.6 − 4,712.1 8,488.1 9,392.0 7,506.6 106.8          May
96.1 80.4 2,814.8 4,119.7 2,086.2 − 5.3 3,863.7 − 4,767.0 8,518.0 9,404.4 7,527.1 107.4          June
95.1 83.1 2,831.0 4,139.3 2,151.0 − 7.5 4,166.5 − 4,748.7 8,522.3 9,405.9 7,603.4 108.3          July
97.5 77.7 2,820.7 4,159.0 2,205.1 − 5.0 4,662.3 − 4,729.8 8,530.7 9,446.1 7,652.3 107.4          Aug 
94.8 75.8 2,844.3 4,216.3 2,183.9 − 15.7 5,141.6 − 4,755.0 8,568.0 9,466.0 7,670.6 106.6          Sep 
95.5 75.3 2,808.6 4,123.8 2,186.8 − 34.5 4,950.4 − 4,762.4 8,555.9 9,436.9 7,660.2 105.2          Oct 
90.9 82.3 2,825.8 4,147.9 2,200.5 − 25.4 4,905.7 − 4,778.9 8,565.2 9,448.4 7,681.6 108.8          Nov 
122.9 83.8 2,799.5 4,087.7 2,219.9 − 18.5 5,020.6 − 4,863.0 8,671.7 9,535.8 7,688.6 116.0          Dec 
111.5 92.3 2,788.9 4,113.7 2,274.0 − 64.1 5,146.9 − 4,812.2 8,641.3 9,485.8 7,732.0 107.7 2012          Jan 
118.0 99.4 2,767.6 4,077.4 2,291.5 − 39.3 5,056.1 − 4,781.9 8,649.3 9,496.0 7,721.6 106.5          Feb 
137.1 104.2 2,750.0 4,148.8 2,271.8 − 58.2 4,853.3 − 4,831.8 8,719.6 9,596.2 7,657.3 107.0          Mar 
121.4 108.3 2,754.6 4,187.8 2,269.4 − 56.7 5,013.5 − 4,837.2 8,723.6 9,599.6 7,656.2 107.8          Apr 
116.5 107.3 2,762.7 4,295.8 2,276.7 − 55.0 5,810.2 − 4,883.1 8,754.9 9,636.9 7,641.9 109.1          May
130.4 102.6 2,745.0 4,167.9 2,313.2 − 55.2 5,262.1 − 4,958.3 8,813.0 9,674.9 7,645.7 111.0          June
137.8 96.8 2,764.6 4,211.1 2,354.3 − 56.7 5,539.0 − 4,982.8 8,836.9 9,704.4 7,653.4 113.5          July
124.3 96.9 2,747.1 4,124.8 2,362.8 − 41.2 5,459.4 − 4,979.1 8,830.0 9,680.7 7,643.3 113.0          Aug 
121.3 93.2 2,726.2 4,056.1 2,406.6 − 61.2 5,327.1 − 5,022.9 8,870.8 9,694.2 7,662.1 113.1          Sep 
115.0 94.2 2,707.6 4,029.1 2,396.1 − 72.8 4,858.3 − 5,056.5 8,932.7 9,749.0 7,619.3 112.1          Oct 
97.5 91.9 2,702.3 3,948.5 2,410.6 − 68.7 4,946.7 − 5,091.7 8,958.4 9,752.0 7,626.5 114.6          Nov 
88.5 94.5 2,673.0 3,797.2 2,400.5 − 51.5 4,723.8 − 5,174.0 9,051.8 9,805.4 7,579.8 120.0          Dec 
71.3 93.1 2,646.2 3,770.7 2,390.1 − 38.6 4,922.3 − 5,115.3 9,008.8 9,758.0 7,538.3 112.0 2013          Jan 
62.9 89.0 2,657.9 3,799.4 2,379.1 − 40.2 4,972.7 − 5,124.7 9,024.1 9,763.6 7,530.0 111.1          Feb 
60.1 85.6 2,631.6 3,799.5 2,414.4 − 63.4 4,952.8 − 5,175.7 9,088.6 9,814.3 7,553.5 110.9          Mar 
 German contribution (€ billion) 
26.1 11.8 660.6 732.7 455.8 − 446.9 1,513.6 158.9 1,105.8 1,946.8 2,086.4 2,054.0 − 2011          Feb 
23.7 12.9 649.4 672.7 455.5 − 438.1 1,442.9 159.5 1,108.6 1,954.0 2,078.0 2,040.9 −          Mar 
19.8 13.6 645.1 694.9 457.3 − 413.4 1,448.8 160.1 1,114.2 1,969.4 2,100.4 2,036.3 −          Apr 
19.3 14.0 648.4 698.7 456.2 − 455.5 1,498.4 161.6 1,116.0 1,980.1 2,126.5 2,038.2 −          May
18.7 14.3 649.2 638.7 455.5 − 480.5 1,424.7 163.1 1,124.1 1,985.8 2,131.5 2,038.3 −          June
22.2 14.0 648.2 647.7 467.3 − 484.9 1,550.9 164.9 1,119.7 1,993.8 2,127.1 2,048.9 −          July
25.2 13.6 643.8 699.8 483.8 − 542.9 1,720.9 167.5 1,131.9 2,011.7 2,158.1 2,065.6 −          Aug 
21.8 11.9 653.4 738.9 476.2 − 600.2 1,871.4 170.7 1,140.5 2,031.7 2,178.3 2,063.4 −          Sep 
18.8 11.2 648.9 746.8 478.0 − 608.3 1,751.4 170.7 1,149.9 2,037.9 2,179.4 2,058.5 −          Oct 
22.5 11.7 655.3 769.8 478.8 − 639.8 1,744.5 170.9 1,171.5 2,061.9 2,212.1 2,062.5 −          Nov 
22.8 9.7 658.6 696.1 473.6 − 607.5 1,835.9 170.5 1,170.4 2,072.8 2,207.2 2,058.1 −          Dec 
19.7 10.3 633.1 801.2 486.8 − 614.9 1,825.4 171.0 1,170.9 2,074.3 2,195.5 2,041.5 − 2012          Jan 
20.2 11.4 635.8 815.9 493.4 − 670.9 1,783.3 172.2 1,180.3 2,082.8 2,215.4 2,047.8 −          Feb 
19.9 9.8 630.5 873.9 492.0 − 710.2 1,730.8 175.5 1,189.1 2,091.3 2,218.3 2,035.5 −          Mar 
16.6 11.5 636.3 889.0 497.3 − 733.8 1,772.5 177.6 1,199.7 2,106.4 2,241.6 2,044.8 −          Apr 
13.4 9.9 643.0 919.2 495.5 − 796.5 2,029.9 179.3 1,218.0 2,128.2 2,264.1 2,046.1 −          May
13.8 10.5 638.3 913.8 501.1 − 829.7 1,868.1 181.0 1,235.7 2,152.5 2,280.1 2,042.9 −          June
15.5 11.2 642.1 937.5 512.6 − 840.9 1,954.6 184.5 1,256.7 2,173.6 2,311.3 2,052.6 −          July
14.6 10.3 633.7 951.4 513.4 − 857.1 1,918.4 188.5 1,268.5 2,184.9 2,322.0 2,041.6 −          Aug 
16.2 10.4 627.5 900.0 521.5 − 806.5 1,872.9 191.9 1,291.6 2,195.0 2,323.4 2,038.7 −          Sep 
17.3 10.3 622.3 889.1 515.3 − 822.5 1,820.3 194.7 1,347.2 2,239.6 2,379.2 2,017.6 −          Oct 
17.8 10.8 615.8 857.9 516.9 − 813.3 1,801.6 197.3 1,373.1 2,257.0 2,396.7 2,005.9 −          Nov 
16.0 10.3 600.7 780.0 510.2 − 759.5 1,784.7 200.3 1,365.7 2,231.6 2,342.6 1,981.4 −          Dec 
13.5 8.9 587.7 783.8 507.3 − 715.8 1,678.5 199.4 1,363.0 2,219.5 2,329.4 1,961.3 − 2013          Jan 
14.1 10.0 595.9 782.3 503.7 − 719.8 1,668.6 201.4 1,366.1 2,215.9 2,344.3 1,960.1 −          Feb 
13.4 8.9 588.1 768.2 517.6 − 696.6 1,679.2 203.8 1,356.6 2,208.9 2,332.9 1,964.6 −          Mar 
euro banknotes actually issued by the Bundesbank and the amount disclosed in years and at agreed notice of up to 3 months (excluding central governments’
accordance with the accounting regime chosen by the Eurosystem (see also footnote deposits) and (for the euro area) central governments’ monetary liabilities with such2 on banknote circulation in Table III.2). 10Overnight deposits (excluding central maturities. 12M2 plus repo transactions, money market fund shares, money market
governments’ deposits), and (for the euro area) currency in circulation, central paper and debt securities up to 2 years. 13Deposits with agreed maturities of over 2
governments’ overnight monetary liabilities, which are not included in the years and at agreed notice of over 3 months, debt securities with maturities of over 2consolidated balance sheet. 11M1 plus deposits with agreed maturities of up to 2 years, capital and reserves. 14 Non-existent in Germany. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
14  Monthly Report
May 2013
II  Overall monetary survey in the euro area
  
3  Banking system’s liquidity position  * 
Stocks
  
€ billion; period averages of daily positions
Liquidity-providing factors Liquidity-absorbing factors
Monetary policy operations of the Eurosystem
Credit
institutions‘
current
account
Net assets Longer- Other Other balances
Reserve in gold Main term Marginal liquidity- liquidity- Banknotes Central Other (including
maintenance and foreign refinancing refinancing lending providing Deposit absorbing in government factors minimum Base
period currency operations operations facility facility deposits (net)  6 reserves)  7 money  8 operations  3 operations  4 circulation  5 
ending in  1 
Eurosystem  2  
  
2010          Oct 531.3 164.5 392.6 0.7 128.3 68.8 64.8 814.1 96.4 − 39.8 213.1 1 096.1
         Nov 511.3 183.0 340.0 0.8 124.5 41.9 68.8 813.5 92.1 − 72.0 215.2 1 070.7
         Dec 511.1 179.5 336.3 1.9 130.4 44.7 70.8 815.9 94.4 − 79.1 212.5 1 073.1
2011          Jan 527.5 197.0 316.6 0.5 140.9 66.5 73.5 833.9 81.3 − 85.1 212.4 1 112.8
         Feb 549.7 185.4 318.2 0.1 137.2 39.2 81.3 822.0 101.2 − 66.7 213.6 1 074.8
         Mar 550.0 134.4 321.0 7.6 137.9 26.9 80.3 820.9 89.8 − 79.9 212.9 1 060.7
         Apr 544.1 97.3 335.4 0.8 137.6 23.0 79.5 824.4 73.1 − 95.2 210.5 1 057.9
         May 525.9 109.2 320.5 0.4 136.6 22.8 76.8 833.9 61.3 − 111.6 209.5 1 066.1
         June 526.8 114.7 317.9 0.0 135.5 18.4 76.2 836.6 62.6 − 107.9 209.0 1 064.0
         July 533.6 146.0 311.6 0.2 134.2 29.5 76.9 846.2 73.4 − 111.2 210.9 1 086.6
         Aug 541.3 171.7 321.5 0.1 133.9 56.7 79.2 854.2 71.4 − 104.5 211.5 1 122.4
         Sep 540.3 135.1 389.8 0.3 178.0 121.8 109.8 853.2 52.3 − 103.0 209.5 1 184.5
         Oct 571.0 193.0 373.6 1.5 217.4 168.7 162.9 854.9 50.0 − 88.5 208.7 1 232.2
         Nov 612.1 196.1 387.1 2.8 231.9 204.6 178.0 861.4 57.9 − 80.8 208.9 1 274.8
         Dec 622.1 238.0 389.0 4.4 260.3 253.7 200.5 869.4 63.8 − 85.9 212.2 1 335.3
2012          Jan 683.9 169.4 627.3 6.0 278.6 399.3 210.8 883.7 67.7 − 8.7 212.3 1 495.3
         Feb 698.3 120.6 683.6 2.3 282.4 489.0 218.5 870.1 100.1 1.6 108.1 1 467.1
         Mar 688.2 89.1 860.1 2.2 288.1 621.0 219.5 868.8 129.0 − 19.4 108.9 1 598.6
         Apr 667.6 56.4 1 093.4 3.0 280.6 771.3 215.8 871.2 146.3 − 13.3 109.6 1 752.1
         May 659.3 47.0 1 088.7 1.0 281.3 771.4 214.0 872.7 137.1 − 28.5 110.5 1 754.6
         June 656.8 58.1 1 071.0 1.6 281.1 770.8 212.8 880.8 117.8 − 24.2 110.8 1 762.3
         July 666.7 160.7 1 074.9 1.8 280.7 770.6 210.9 892.5 138.8 60.6 111.5 1 774.6
         Aug 678.9 146.0 1 079.9 0.8 281.0 343.1 211.5 897.7 130.7 93.5 510.2 1 751.0
         Sep 676.8 130.6 1 076.8 0.8 279.7 328.6 210.5 897.6 107.0 81.0 540.0 1 766.2
         Oct 681.5 117.6 1 062.8 1.1 279.6 305.4 209.0 892.7 101.4 96.0 538.1 1 736.2
         Nov 708.5 84.4 1 053.8 1.0 278.9 256.1 209.3 890.0 95.7 146.4 529.2 1 675.3
         Dec 708.0 74.0 1 044.1 1.6 277.3 231.8 208.5 889.3 121.1 144.5 509.9 1 631.0
2013          Jan 683.9 78.2 1 036.8 3.7 276.8 238.4 206.6 903.5 100.1 141.7 489.0 1 630.9
         Feb 656.5 127.5 960.3 0.3 273.4 184.3 207.8 883.4 90.8 185.6 466.3 1 534.0
         Mar 655.7 130.5 843.2 0.9 269.9 145.3 205.5 880.5 78.8 187.1 403.0 1 428.8
         Apr 656.8 123.7 782.9 0.5 269.1 133.8 205.5 889.2 89.7 168.7 346.0 1 369.0
Deutsche Bundesbank
2010          Oct 142.2 54.4 40.5 0.1 29.3 27.0 32.4 204.0 0.5 − 48.3 51.0 281.9
         Nov 136.7 63.7 28.9 0.0 28.8 21.2 35.7 202.9 0.4 − 53.6 51.5 275.5
         Dec 136.5 60.5 32.5 0.1 29.3 21.2 41.0 203.3 0.2 − 57.7 51.0 275.5
2011          Jan 141.9 55.2 34.1 0.1 31.2 28.2 42.0 207.7 0.3 − 66.9 51.3 287.2
         Feb 148.1 44.6 44.0 0.0 31.6 19.8 43.0 204.6 0.2 − 51.0 51.8 276.2
         Mar 148.4 31.3 44.7 0.0 31.7 14.6 48.4 204.8 0.2 − 63.7 51.8 271.2
         Apr 146.6 24.1 45.5 0.0 31.9 13.6 38.9 205.2 0.2 − 61.5 51.7 270.4
         May 142.4 17.9 47.7 0.2 31.9 10.8 38.2 207.6 0.4 − 68.2 51.4 269.8
         June 142.5 10.6 41.5 0.0 31.7 8.1 33.4 208.7 0.3 − 75.8 51.7 268.4
         July 144.3 22.8 35.8 0.0 31.4 11.1 36.4 211.1 0.3 − 77.3 52.6 274.8
         Aug 146.7 13.6 36.5 0.0 31.3 15.4 35.2 213.0 0.2 − 88.4 52.7 281.1
         Sep 146.7 6.6 33.6 0.0 42.3 27.8 60.2 213.4 0.3 − 124.3 51.8 293.0
         Oct 155.5 10.7 20.8 0.0 52.3 41.5 86.8 213.5 0.3 − 155.0 52.2 307.2
         Nov 167.5 4.0 18.0 0.1 55.7 55.0 87.9 213.8 0.2 − 164.5 53.0 321.8
         Dec 168.7 3.0 17.6 0.1 63.2 60.4 126.2 216.3 0.7 − 205.5 54.4 331.2
2012          Jan 182.3 4.4 40.3 0.1 67.2 101.7 117.0 219.8 0.8 − 199.6 54.5 376.0
         Feb 183.2 1.8 46.7 0.0 69.2 141.9 130.5 216.9 0.8 − 217.6 28.3 387.1
         Mar 183.6 1.2 59.4 0.0 69.2 192.6 142.2 217.0 0.8 − 266.8 27.7 437.3
         Apr 182.0 1.2 73.8 0.1 68.8 257.2 142.7 218.1 0.7 − 321.6 28.8 504.1
         May 181.3 1.3 73.4 0.1 68.8 260.5 144.6 217.8 0.7 − 327.5 28.9 507.2
         June 180.4 3.8 74.6 0.5 68.7 276.9 150.3 219.8 0.8 − 349.1 29.3 526.0
         July 180.3 3.1 76.5 0.1 68.6 293.3 152.1 222.3 1.0 − 369.8 29.6 545.2
         Aug 179.6 2.5 76.3 0.2 68.8 102.0 162.9 225.1 4.2 − 351.5 184.8 511.9
         Sep 177.7 1.6 75.4 0.0 68.6 112.1 134.6 224.6 6.0 − 349.1 195.2 531.9
         Oct 181.8 1.7 74.5 0.2 68.7 108.2 124.0 223.4 6.8 − 325.3 189.9 521.4
         Nov 190.7 1.9 72.9 0.1 68.2 76.7 126.2 222.4 7.1 − 291.0 192.5 491.5
         Dec 190.8 1.8 70.5 0.2 67.5 61.3 124.6 222.0 8.9 − 277.5 191.5 474.8
2013          Jan 185.1 2.1 69.7 0.1 67.4 56.1 117.2 225.3 10.0 − 242.5 158.2 439.6
         Feb 176.8 0.7 58.9 0.0 66.3 34.2 109.9 219.2 2.5 − 207.3 144.2 397.5
         Mar 176.4 0.7 34.9 0.0 65.3 30.4 107.3 219.7 2.1 − 203.2 121.0 371.1
         Apr 177.1 0.1 21.8 0.0 65.0 24.4 95.7 221.6 1.9 − 189.2 109.7 355.8
Discrepancies may arise from rounding. *The banking system’s liquidity position is includes liquidity absorbed as a result of the Eurosystem’s foreign exchange swap
defined as the current account holdings in euro of euro-area credit institutions with operations. 5From 2002, euro banknotes and other banknotes which have been
the Eurosystem. Amounts are derived from the consolidated financial statement of issued by the national central banks of the Eurosystem and which are still in cir-
the Eurosystem and the financial statement of the Bundesbank. 1Figures are daily av- culation. In accordance with the accounting procedure chosen by the Eurosystem for
erages for the reserve maintenance period ending in the month indicated. 2Source: the issue of euro banknotes, 8% of the total value of the euro banknotes in cir-
ECB. 3Includes liquidity provided under the Eurosystem’s covered bond purchase culation are allocated on a monthly basis to the ECB. The counterpart of this
programme and the Eurosystem’s securities markets programme. 4From Aug. 2009,

Deutsche Bundesbank
15  Monthly Report
May 2013
II  Overall monetary survey in the euro area
  
  
Flows
  
Liquidity-providing factors Liquidity-absorbing factors
Monetary policy operations of the Eurosystem
Credit
institutions‘
currentaccount
Net assets Longer- Other Other balances
in gold Main term Marginal liquidity- liquidity- Banknotes Central Other (including Reserve
and foreign refinancing refinancing lending providing Deposit absorbing in government factors minimum Base maintenance
currency operations operations facility facility deposits (net)  
6 reserves) 7 money 8 period operations 3 operations 4 circulation 5 
ending in 1 
Eurosystem  2  
  
− 11.9 + 11.4 − 42.4 + 0.1 + 6.5 − 14.9 − 2.1 − 1.9 + 9.6 − 24.8 − 2.2 − 18.9 2010          Oct 
− 20.0 + 18.5 − 52.6 + 0.1 − 3.8 − 26.9 + 4.0 − 0.6 − 4.3 − 32.2 + 2.1 − 25.4          Nov 
− 0.2 − 3.5 − 3.7 + 1.1 + 5.9 + 2.8 + 2.0 + 2.4 + 2.3 − 7.1 − 2.7 + 2.4          Dec 
+ 16.4 + 17.5 − 19.7 − 1.4 + 10.5 + 21.8 + 2.7 + 18.0 − 13.1 − 6.0 − 0.1 + 39.7 2011          Jan 
+ 22.2 − 11.6 + 1.6 − 0.4 − 3.7 − 27.3 + 7.8 − 11.9 + 19.9 + 18.4 + 1.2 − 38.0          Feb 
+ 0.3 − 51.0 + 2.8 + 7.5 + 0.7 − 12.3 − 1.0 − 1.1 − 11.4 − 13.2 − 0.7 − 14.1          Mar 
− 5.9 − 37.1 + 14.4 − 6.8 − 0.3 − 3.9 − 0.8 + 3.5 − 16.7 − 15.3 − 2.4 − 2.8          Apr 
− 18.2 + 11.9 − 14.9 − 0.4 − 1.0 − 0.2 − 2.7 + 9.5 − 11.8 − 16.4 − 1.0 + 8.2          May
+ 0.9 + 5.5 − 2.6 − 0.4 − 1.1 − 4.4 − 0.6 + 2.7 + 1.3 + 3.7 − 0.5 − 2.1          June
+ 6.8 + 31.3 − 6.3 + 0.2 − 1.3 + 11.1 + 0.7 + 9.6 + 10.8 − 3.3 + 1.9 + 22.6          July
+ 7.7 + 25.7 + 9.9 − 0.1 − 0.3 + 27.2 + 2.3 + 8.0 − 2.0 + 6.7 + 0.6 + 35.8          Aug 
− 1.0 − 36.6 + 68.3 + 0.2 + 44.1 + 65.1 + 30.6 − 1.0 − 19.1 + 1.5 − 2.0 + 62.1          Sep 
+ 30.7 + 57.9 − 16.2 + 1.2 + 39.4 + 46.9 + 53.1 + 1.7 − 2.3 + 14.5 − 0.8 + 47.7          Oct 
+ 41.1 + 3.1 + 13.5 + 1.3 + 14.5 + 35.9 + 15.1 + 6.5 + 7.9 + 7.7 + 0.2 + 42.6          Nov + 10.0 + 41.9 + 1.9 + 1.6 + 28.4 + 49.1 + 22.5 + 8.0 + 5.9 − 5.1 + 3.3 + 60.5          Dec 
+ 61.8 − 68.6 + 238.3 + 1.6 + 18.3 +145.6 + 10.3 + 14.3 + 3.9 + 77.2 + 0.1 + 160.0 2012          Jan 
+ 14.4 − 48.8 + 56.3 − 3.7 + 3.8 + 89.7 + 7.7 − 13.6 + 32.4 + 10.3 − 104.2 − 28.2          Feb 
− 10.1 − 31.5 + 176.5 − 0.1 + 5.7 +132.0 + 1.0 − 1.3 + 28.9 − 21.0 + 0.8 + 131.5          Mar 
− 20.6 − 32.7 + 233.3 + 0.8 − 7.5 +150.3 − 3.7 + 2.4 + 17.3 + 6.1 + 0.7 + 153.5          Apr 
− 8.3 − 9.4 − 4.7 − 2.0 + 0.7 + 0.1 − 1.8 + 1.5 − 9.2 − 15.2 + 0.9 + 2.5          May
− 2.5 + 11.1 − 17.7 + 0.6 − 0.2 − 0.6 − 1.2 + 8.1 − 19.3 + 4.3 + 0.3 + 7.7          June
+ 9.9 + 102.6 + 3.9 + 0.2 − 0.4 − 0.2 − 1.9 + 11.7 + 21.0 + 84.8 + 0.7 + 12.3          July
+ 12.2 − 14.7 + 5.0 − 1.0 + 0.3 −427.5 + 0.6 + 5.2 − 8.1 + 32.9 + 398.7 − 23.6          Aug 
− 2.1 − 15.4 − 3.1 + 0.0 − 1.3 − 14.5 − 1.0 − 0.1 − 23.7 − 12.5 + 29.8 + 15.2          Sep 
+ 4.7 − 13.0 − 14.0 + 0.3 − 0.1 − 23.2 − 1.5 − 4.9 − 5.6 + 15.0 − 1.9 − 30.0          Oct 
+ 27.0 − 33.2 − 9.0 − 0.1 − 0.7 − 49.3 + 0.3 − 2.7 − 5.7 + 50.4 − 8.9 − 60.9          Nov 
− 0.5 − 10.4 − 9.7 + 0.6 − 1.6 − 24.3 − 0.8 − 0.7 + 25.4 − 1.9 − 19.3 − 44.3          Dec 
− 24.1 + 4.2 − 7.3 + 2.1 − 0.5 + 6.6 − 1.9 + 14.2 − 21.0 − 2.8 − 20.9 − 0.1 2013          Jan 
− 27.4 + 49.3 − 76.5 − 3.4 − 3.4 − 54.1 + 1.2 − 20.1 − 9.3 + 43.9 − 22.7 − 96.9          Feb − 0.8 + 3.0 − 117.1 + 0.6 − 3.5 − 39.0 − 2.3 − 2.9 − 12.0 + 1.5 − 63.3 − 105.2          Mar 
+ 1.1 − 6.8 − 60.3 − 0.4 − 0.8 − 11.5 +
 0.0 + 8.7 + 10.9 − 18.4 − 57.0 − 59.8          Apr 
Deutsche Bundesbank
− 3.3 + 1.8 − 9.8 − 0.1 + 0.9 + 2.2 + 5.9 − 0.2 − 0.0 − 17.4 − 1.0 + 1.0 2010          Oct 
− 5.6 + 9.3 − 11.6 − 0.1 − 0.5 − 5.8 + 3.3 − 1.1 − 0.1 − 5.3 + 0.5 − 6.4          Nov 
− 0.2 − 3.1 + 3.6 + 0.1 + 0.6 + 0.0 + 5.3 + 0.5 − 0.2 − 4.1 − 0.5 − 0.0          Dec 
+ 5.5 − 5.4 + 1.5 − 0.0 + 1.9 + 7.0 + 1.1 + 4.3 + 0.0 − 9.2 + 0.4 + 11.6 2011          Jan 
+ 6.2 − 10.6 + 9.9 − 0.1 + 0.3 − 8.4 + 0.9 − 3.1 − 0.0 + 15.9 + 0.5 − 11.0          Feb 
+ 0.3 − 13.3 + 0.7 − 0.0 + 0.2 − 5.2 + 5.5 + 0.3 − 0.0 − 12.7 − 0.1 − 5.0          Mar 
− 1.8 − 7.2 + 0.9 + 0.0 + 0.1 − 1.0 − 9.5 + 0.3 + 0.0 + 2.2 − 0.0 − 0.7          Apr 
− 4.2 − 6.2 + 2.2 + 0.2 + 0.0 − 2.8 − 0.7 + 2.4 + 0.1 − 6.7 − 0.3 − 0.7          May
+ 0.2 − 7.3 − 6.3 − 0.2 − 0.2 − 2.7 − 4.7 + 1.1 − 0.1 − 7.6 + 0.2 − 1.4          June
+ 1.7 + 12.2 − 5.7 + 0.0 − 0.3 + 3.0 + 3.0 + 2.4 + 0.0 − 1.5 + 0.9 + 6.4          July
+ 2.4 − 9.2 + 0.7 − 0.0 − 0.0 + 4.3 − 1.2 + 1.9 − 0.1 − 11.1 + 0.1 + 6.3          Aug + 0.0 − 6.9 − 2.9 + 0.0 + 11.0 + 12.4 + 25.0 + 0.4 + 0.1 − 35.9 − 0.9 + 12.0          Sep 
+ 8.8 + 4.1 − 12.8 + 0.0 + 9.9 + 13.7 + 26.6 + 0.1 − 0.0 − 30.7 + 0.3 + 14.2          Oct 
+ 12.0 − 6.7 − 2.8 + 0.1 + 3.5 + 13.5 + 1.1 + 0.3 − 0.0 − 9.5 + 0.9 + 14.6          Nov 
+ 1.2 − 1.0 − 0.4 + 0.0 + 7.5 + 5.5 + 38.4 + 2.5 + 0.5 − 41.0 + 1.4 + 9.4          Dec 
+ 13.6 + 1.4 + 22.7 − 0.0 + 4.0 + 41.3 − 9.2 + 3.5 + 0.1 + 5.9 + 0.1 + 44.8 2012          Jan 
+ 0.9 − 2.6 + 6.4 − 0.1 + 2.0 + 40.2 + 13.5 − 2.9 − 0.1 − 18.0 − 26.2 + 11.1          Feb 
+ 0.4 − 0.6 + 12.7 + 0.0 +
 0.0 + 50.7 + 11.7 + 0.1 + 0.0 − 49.3 − 0.6 + 50.2          Mar 
−
1.6 + 0.0 + 14.4 + 0.1 − 0.4 + 64.7 + 0.5 + 1.1 − 0.0 − 54.7 + 1.1 + 66.8          Apr 
− 0.7 + 0.1 − 0.4 − 0.0 − 0.0 + 3.3 + 1.8 − 0.3 − 0.0 − 5.9 + 0.1 + 3.1          May
− 0.9 + 2.5 + 1.1 + 0.4 − 0.1 + 16.4 + 5.7 + 2.0 + 0.1 − 21.6 + 0.4 + 18.8          June
− 0.1 − 0.7 + 1.9 − 0.4 − 0.1 + 16.4 + 1.8 + 2.5 + 0.3 − 20.7 + 0.3 + 19.2          July
− 0.6 − 0.5 − 0.2 + 0.2 + 0.2 −191.3 + 10.9 + 2.8 + 3.1 + 18.3 + 155.2 − 33.2          Aug 
− 1.9 − 0.9 − 0.9 − 0.2 − 0.2 + 10.0 − 28.3 − 0.4 + 1.8 + 2.4 + 10.4 + 20.0          Sep 
+ 4.1 + 0.1 − 0.9 + 0.1 + 0.1 − 3.9 − 10.6 − 1.3 + 0.8 + 23.8 − 5.3 − 10.5          Oct 
+ 8.9 + 0.2 − 1.6 − 0.1 − 0.5 − 31.5 + 2.2 − 1.0 + 0.3 + 34.4 + 2.6 − 29.9          Nov + 0.2 − 0.1 − 2.4 + 0.1 − 0.7 − 15.3 − 1.6 − 0.4 + 1.8 + 13.5 − 1.0 − 16.7          Dec 
− 5.8 + 0.3 − 0.8 − 0.1 − 0.1 − 5.2 − 7.4 + 3.3 + 1.1 + 35.0 − 33.3 − 35.2 2013          Jan 
− 8.3 − 1.3 − 10.8 − 0.1 − 1.0 − 21.9 − 7.3 − 6.1 − 7.5 + 35.3 − 14.0 − 42.1          Feb 
− 0.3 − 0.1 − 23.9 − 0.0 − 1.0 − 3.8 − 2.6 + 0.6 − 0.4 + 4.1 − 23.2 − 26.4          Mar 
+ 0.7 − 0.5 − 13.1 + 0.0 − 0.3 − 6.0 − 11.6 + 1.9 − 0.3 + 14.0 − 11.2 − 15.4          Apr 
adjustment is shown under “Other factors”. The remaining 92% of the value of the “Other factors”. From 2003 euro banknotes only. 6Remaining items in the
euro banknotes in circulation is allocated, likewise on a monthly basis, to the NCBs, consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem and the financial statement of
with each NCB showing in its balance sheet the percentage of the euro banknotes in the Bundesbank. 7Equal to the difference between the sum of liquidity-providing
circulation that corresponds to its paid-up share in the ECB’s capital. The difference factors and the sum of liquidity-absorbing factors. 8Calculated as the sum of the
between the value of the euro banknotes allocated to an NCB and the value of the “deposit facility”, “banknotes in circulation” and “credit institutions’ current accounteuro banknotes which that NCB has put into circulation is likewise shown under holdings”. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
16  Monthly Report
May 2013
III Consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem
 
1 Assets *
 
 
€ billion
Claims on non-euro area Claims on non-euro area residents denominated
in foreign currency residents denominated in euro
Balances with
Claims on banks, security
On investments, euro area Balances Claims
reporting external loans residents with banks, arising from
date/ Gold and other denominated security the credit
End of Total and gold Receivables external in foreign investments facility under
month  1 assets receivables Total from the IMF assets currency Total and loans ERM II
 Eurosystem 2
 
2012 Aug                31 3,084.8 433.8 262.9 91.1 171.9 49.0 19.2 19.2 −
         Sep                  7 3,073.5 433.8 262.9 91.1 171.8 46.3 18.7 18.7 −
                              14 3,061.0 433.8 262.6 90.9 171.7 42.7 19.3 19.3 −
                              21 3,049.5 433.8 261.5 90.8 170.6 42.0 17.9 17.9 −
                              28 3,082.4 479.3 256.4 90.1 166.3 39.9 16.5 16.5 −
         Oct                  5 3,062.6 479.1 257.8 90.1 167.7 39.7 17.2 17.2 −
                              12 3,053.6 479.1 258.4 90.1 168.4 39.1 16.9 16.9 −
                              19 3,046.6 479.1 258.9 90.1 168.8 38.0 17.1 17.1 −
                              26 3,046.5 479.1 260.1 90.3 169.8 38.3 17.3 17.3 −
         Nov                  2 3,040.7 479.1 258.4 90.3 168.1 37.3 16.6 16.6 −
                                9 3,038.9 479.1 256.9 89.8 167.0 37.3 15.3 15.3 −
                              16 3,041.3 479.1 259.0 89.6 169.4 37.2 15.8 15.8 −
                              23 3,035.3 479.1 258.9 89.5 169.4 36.0 16.8 16.8 −
                              30 3,033.3 479.1 259.5 89.5 170.0 36.8 16.6 16.6 −
         Dec                  7 3,030.4 479.1 259.6 89.5 170.1 36.9 17.7 17.7 −
                              14 3,024.8 479.1 259.5 89.5 170.1 35.1 17.4 17.4 −
                              21 3,011.2 479.1 258.0 89.0 169.0 33.7 19.1 19.1 −
                              28 3,018.2 479.1 258.8 89.0 169.8 33.6 19.2 19.2 −
2013 Jan                  4 2,956.2 438.7 250.7 87.0 163.7 32.3 19.0 19.0 −
                              11 2,952.5 438.7 251.3 87.0 164.3 31.4 21.7 21.7 −
                              18 2,942.2 438.7 256.4 87.7 168.7 31.5 22.4 22.4 −
                              25 2,928.8 438.7 253.9 87.4 166.5 31.2 22.0 22.0 −
2013 Feb                  1 2,769.7 438.7 255.1 87.3 167.7 28.7 22.0 22.0 −
                                8 2,767.6 438.7 253.3 87.0 166.3 28.2 21.3 21.3 −
                              15 2,755.7 438.7 254.0 86.7 167.4 28.5 19.9 19.9 −
                              22 2,748.8 438.7 253.1 86.7 166.4 28.1 20.5 20.5 −
         Mar                  1 2,680.6 438.7 252.9 86.6 166.3 30.8 21.5 21.5 −
                                8 2,665.9 438.7 252.6 86.6 166.0 30.0 22.3 22.3 −
                              15 2,647.8 438.7 251.4 86.5 164.9 28.7 22.1 22.1 −
                              22 2,642.7 438.7 251.6 86.5 165.1 30.0 23.0 23.0 −
                              29 2,648.1 435.3 254.4 87.1 167.2 31.6 22.1 22.1 −
         Apr                  5 2,647.1 435.3 254.6 87.1 167.5 34.3 21.8 21.8 −
                              12 2,634.5 435.3 254.6 87.0 167.6 34.5 22.2 22.2 −
                              19 2,617.3 435.3 253.7 86.9 166.7 34.9 21.2 21.2 −
                              26 2,611.3 435.3 253.1 86.9 166.2 35.6 21.7 21.7 −
         May                  3 2,608.1 435.3 254.5 86.9 167.6 35.4 22.5 22.5 −
 Deutsche Bundesbank
2011          June 632.3 114.1 45.7 19.1 26.6 −−−−
         July 629.0 114.1 46.1 19.7 26.4 −−−−
         Aug 679.1 114.1 46.0 19.7 26.3 −−−−
         Sep 764.6 131.9 49.5 20.9 28.7 −−−−
         Oct 772.8 131.7 49.5 20.9 28.6 0.5−−−
         Nov 812.7 131.7 49.2 20.9 28.3 0.5−−−
         Dec 837.6 132.9 51.7 22.3 29.4 18.1−−−
2012          Jan 860.1 132.9 51.9 22.3 29.6 11.6−−−
         Feb 910.9 132.9 52.4 22.6 29.8 14.3−−−
         Mar 1 002.8 135.8 50.9 22.2 28.7 8.9−−−
         Apr 1 031.3 135.8 51.4 22.4 29.1 8.3−−−
         May 1 087.0 135.8 51.6 22.3 29.3 6.9−−−
         June 1 119.4 136.1 54.2 23.3 30.8 6.2−−−
         July 1 112.9 136.1 54.1 23.3 30.8 3.2−−−
         Aug 1 135.4 136.1 54.5 23.5 31.0 1.7−−−
         Sep 1 090.9 150.4 53.0 23.3 29.7 1.5−−−
         Oct 1 110.0 150.2 53.1 23.3 29.8 1.8−−−
         Nov 1 098.6 150.2 52.8 23.0 29.8 2.3−−−
         Dec 1 026.0 137.5 51.1 22.3 28.8 3.3−−−
2013          Jan 964.1 137.5 51.6 22.5 29.1 1.6−−−
         Feb 934.9 137.5 51.3 22.2 29.0 3.2−−−
         Mar 906.7 136.5 52.0 22.4 29.6 3.4−−−
         Apr 916.9 136.5 52.0 22.4 29.7 2.8−−−
 
*The consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem comprises the financial national central banks of the euro area member states (NCBs). The balance sheet
statement of the European Central Bank (ECB) and the financial statements of the items for foreign currency, securities, gold and financial instruments are valued at the

Deutsche Bundesbank
17  Monthly Report
May 2013
III Consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem
 
   
 
Lending to euro area credit institutions related to monetary policy operations Securities of euro area residents
denominated in euro in euro
 Other claims on euro area
Longer- Fine-  credit Securities General    On
Main re- term re- tuning Structural Credits institutions held for government    reportingfinancing financing reverse reverse Marginal related denomi- monetary debt deno-    date/opera- opera- opera- opera- lending to margin nated in policy Other minated in Other    End of
Total tions tions tions tions facility calls euro Total purposes securities euro assets    month  
1 
Eurosystem 2
 
1 209.8 131.5 1 077.7 − − 0.6 0.0 218.8 599.3 279.0 320.3 30.0 261.9 2012 Aug                31
1 205.3 126.3 1 077.7 − − 0.9 0.3 216.3 598.7 278.9 319.8 30.0 261.5          Sep                  7
1 197.8 130.3 1 066.4 − − 1.0 0.1 214.5 598.4 279.2 319.3 30.0 261.8                               141 187.2 119.8 1 066.3 − − 1.0 0.1 213.4 597.6 279.4 318.3 30.0 266.1                               211 178.2 117.4 1 058.8 − − 2.0 0.0 212.7 597.7 280.2 317.4 30.0 271.9                               28
1 162.3 102.9 1 058.8 − − 0.7 0.0 211.2 596.9 280.0 316.9 30.0 268.4          Oct                  5
1 148.6 89.8 1 057.5 − − 1.3 0.0 220.6 596.5 279.7 316.7 30.0 264.4                               121 150.5 91.8 1 057.5 − − 1.0 0.1 214.6 594.1 279.3 314.8 30.0 264.4                               191 135.1 77.3 1 057.5 − − 0.3 0.0 230.7 591.7 279.0 312.7 30.0 264.1                               26
1 131.7 83.7 1 047.5 − − 0.5 0.0 232.2 590.2 278.3 311.9 30.0 265.2          Nov                  2
1 127.9 79.5 1 047.5 − − 0.9 0.0 233.3 589.4 278.2 311.3 30.0 269.7                                 91 124.3 75.2 1 047.3 − − 1.8 0.0 235.5 587.1 278.0 309.2 30.0 273.3                               161 125.2 75.4 1 047.3 − − 2.4 0.1 229.5 586.2 277.3 309.0 30.0 273.6                               231 117.4 74.6 1 040.8 − − 1.9 0.1 233.7 586.1 277.1 309.0 30.0 274.1                               30
1 112.1 70.8 1 040.8 − − 0.6 − 229.5 585.9 277.1 308.9 30.0 279.6          Dec                  7
1 113.7 73.2 1 040.2 − − 0.3 0.0 229.0 585.6 277.0 308.6 30.0 275.4                               14
1 122.3 72.7 1 035.8 − − 13.9 0.0 208.3 585.2 276.8 308.4 30.0 275.4                               211 128.8 89.7 1 035.8 − − 3.4 − 206.3 585.1 276.8 308.3 30.0 277.2                               28
1 117.0 81.1 1 035.8 − − 0.1 − 203.8 584.9 276.9 308.0 30.0 279.7 2013 Jan                  4
1 113.6 77.7 1 035.8 − − 0.2 0.0 200.1 585.6 276.6 309.0 30.0 280.1                               111 163.2 131.2 1 030.9 − − 1.0 0.0 138.0 582.6 276.2 306.5 30.0 279.4                               181 156.2 125.3 1 030.9 − − 0.0 − 131.3 582.8 275.2 307.5 30.0 282.7                               25
1 015.5 124.1 891.3 − − 0.0 − 127.3 576.0 270.9 305.1 29.9 276.6 2013 Feb                  1
1 017.2 129.3 887.8 − − − − 87.2 576.8 270.6 306.2 29.9 315.1                                 81 010.6 128.7 880.2 − − 1.8 − 83.7 607.1 270.5 336.5 29.9 283.3                               151 008.5 132.2 876.4 − − 0.0 − 80.1 607.5 269.9 337.6 29.9 282.4                               22
946.1 131.1 814.5 − − 0.5 − 73.6 608.0 269.6 338.5 29.9 279.2          Mar                  1
931.8 129.8 802.0 − − 0.0 − 73.4 607.9 269.5 338.4 29.9 279.3                                 8920.8 127.3 793.5 − − 0.0 − 70.2 605.9 269.2 336.7 29.9 280.2                               15906.2 119.4 786.7 − − 0.2 − 80.0 606.4 269.1 337.3 29.9 276.9                               22903.6 123.2 778.9 − − 1.5 − 88.5 618.1 269.3 348.7 29.9 264.7                               29
896.8 124.9 771.9 − − 0.0 − 90.1 619.0 269.3 349.6 29.9 265.4          Apr                  5
884.2 119.3 764.3 − − 0.6 − 93.3 618.0 269.0 348.9 29.9 262.5                               12869.9 116.4 753.5 − − 0.1 − 97.7 613.1 265.6 347.5 29.9 261.5                               19852.2 110.4 741.8 − − 0.0 − 107.3 611.6 265.6 346.0 29.9 264.5                               26
846.4 105.0 739.5 − − 1.9 − 111.8 608.6 263.4 345.2 29.0 264.6          May                  3
 Deutsche Bundesbank
57.8 21.8 35.9 − − 0.2 − 6.7 36.5 31.4 5.1 4.4 366.9 2011          June
45.8 9.8 36.0 − − 0.0 − 8.1 36.4 31.3 5.1 4.4 374.0          July
37.6 3.5 34.0 − − 0.0 − 7.8 48.4 43.5 4.9 4.4 420.9          Aug 31.1 12.6 18.4 − − 0.0 − 9.7 57.8 52.9 4.9 4.4 480.2          Sep 
21.3 3.5 17.7 − − 0.1 − 8.5 60.8 55.9 4.9 4.4 496.1          Oct 
21.6 3.8 17.7 − − 0.1 − 9.2 70.1 65.2 4.9 4.4 525.9          Nov 55.8 8.6 47.1 − − 0.0 − 8.5 71.9 67.0 4.9 4.4 494.3          Dec 
48.6 2.0 46.6 − − 0.0 − 8.4 74.1 69.2 4.9 4.4 528.2 2012          Jan 
48.0 0.9 46.6 0.5 − 0.0 − 8.5 73.9 69.1 4.8 4.4 576.4          Feb 74.6 1.2 73.2 − − 0.1 − 9.4 73.5 68.7 4.8 4.4 645.3          Mar 
74.9 1.2 73.7 − − 0.0 − 10.1 73.5 68.7 4.8 4.4 672.8          Apr 
79.7 3.6 76.1 − − 0.0 − 8.0 73.4 68.6 4.8 4.4 727.0          May79.5 2.5 77.0 − − 0.1 − 8.8 73.1 68.7 4.3 4.4 757.2          June
78.6 2.9 75.7 − − 0.0 − 7.6 73.2 68.8 4.3 4.4 755.7          July
76.8 1.7 75.1 − − 0.0 − 9.4 72.8 68.4 4.3 4.4 779.6          Aug 76.1 1.7 73.9 − − 0.5 − 8.9 68.8 68.8 − 4.4 727.8          Sep 
76.6 1.6 73.9 − − 1.1 − 5.0 67.9 67.9 − 4.4 751.0          Oct 
72.4 1.9 69.7 − − 0.8 − 2.5 67.4 67.4 − 4.4 746.6          Nov 73.1 2.9 69.7 − − 0.6 − 1.4 67.5 67.5 − 4.4 687.5          Dec 
49.5 0.3 49.1 − − 0.0 − 4.9 66.2 66.2 − 4.4 648.3 2013          Jan 
25.8 0.8 24.9 − − 0.0 − 5.0 65.2 65.2 − 4.4 642.5          Feb 21.8 0.1 21.6 − − 0.2 − 5.7 65.0 65.0 − 4.4 617.9          Mar 
14.8 0.5 14.3 − − 0.0 − 5.8 63.8 63.8 − 4.4 636.7          Apr 
 
end of the quarter. 1For the Eurosystem: financial statements for specific weekly  
dates; for the Bundesbank: end of month financial statement. 2 Source: ECB. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
18  Monthly Report
May 2013
III Consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem
 
2 Liabilities *
 
 
€ billion
Liabilities to euro area credit institutions related to Liabilities to
monetary policy operations denominated in euro other euro area residents
denominated in euro
 
Other
Current liabilities
accounts to euro-
On (covering Fine- area credit
reporting the tuning Deposits institutions Debt
date/ Banknotes minimum Fixed- reverse deno- certifi- General related to
End of Total in circu- reserve Deposit term opera- margin minated cates govern- Other
month  1 liabilities lation  2 Total system) facility deposits tions calls in euro issued Total ment liabilities
 Eurosystem 4
 
2012 Aug                31 3,084.8 896.4 1,098.6 541.0 346.0 209.0 − 2.6 4.5 − 110.4 88.3 22.1
         Sep                  7 3,073.5 896.6 1,088.0 549.3 326.8 209.0 − 2.9 4.7 − 113.7 87.4 26.4
                              14 3,061.0 894.5 1,073.1 526.4 335.0 209.0 − 2.7 5.5 − 121.1 100.8 20.3
                              21 3,049.5 892.2 1,067.6 550.5 305.6 209.0 − 2.5 5.8 − 115.8 94.1 21.7
                              28 3,082.4 892.5 1,052.5 525.8 315.8 209.0 − 1.9 5.2 − 119.4 99.0 20.5
         Oct                  5 3,062.6 894.4 1,028.2 521.3 296.5 209.0 − 1.4 6.1 − 128.7 105.9 22.8
                              12 3,053.6 892.2 998.9 527.5 260.5 209.5 − 1.4 6.1 − 154.7 100.7 54.0
                              19 3,046.6 889.1 993.7 533.7 248.7 209.5 − 1.8 6.2 − 156.9 100.9 56.0
                              26 3,046.5 888.1 993.4 515.3 267.0 209.5 − 1.7 6.4 − 151.2 92.6 58.6
         Nov                  2 3,040.7 893.2 988.0 515.4 261.4 209.5 − 1.7 6.1 − 151.8 96.6 55.1
                                9 3,038.9 890.3 994.0 534.0 248.5 208.5 − 3.0 6.8 − 139.6 86.8 52.8
                              16 3,041.3 888.3 984.6 558.5 215.9 208.5 − 1.7 6.8 − 148.2 97.6 50.6
                              23 3,035.3 885.8 950.8 506.9 233.6 208.5 − 1.9 6.3 − 178.8 130.8 48.0
                              30 3,033.3 889.7 937.7 489.9 237.8 208.5 − 1.5 7.1 − 180.2 133.2 47.0
         Dec                  7 3,030.4 895.8 932.2 486.9 235.3 208.5 − 1.5 7.4 − 173.1 122.7 50.4
                              14 3,024.8 898.8 939.6 504.9 225.1 208.5 − 1.1 6.7 − 163.9 115.6 48.3
                              21 3,011.2 910.8 928.0 489.7 229.4 208.5 − 0.5 7.2 − 145.7 105.9 39.7
                              28 3,018.2 913.7 915.8 456.1 261.7 197.6 − 0.5 6.8 − 150.6 108.2 42.4
2013 Jan                  4 2,956.2 904.4 924.0 462.3 252.6 208.5 − 0.6 6.5 − 137.2 96.9 40.4
                              11 2,952.5 893.6 939.5 507.7 222.6 208.5 − 0.7 6.5 − 134.9 97.1 37.7
                              18 2,942.2 887.0 945.3 540.0 196.4 208.5 − 0.4 6.1 − 117.2 83.9 33.4
                              25 2,928.8 881.9 895.6 479.5 207.2 208.5 − 0.4 6.6 − 162.5 126.1 36.4
2013 Feb                  1 2,769.7 883.9 797.9 408.2 181.0 208.5 − 0.3 6.8 − 107.6 72.5 35.0
                                8 2,767.6 883.4 806.3 443.1 157.2 205.5 − 0.5 6.7 − 104.0 66.6 37.4
                              15 2,755.7 881.1 803.9 466.5 131.9 205.5 − 0.0 6.8 − 103.0 67.9 35.1
                              22 2,748.8 878.3 788.0 416.0 166.4 205.5 − 0.1 6.4 − 118.9 82.5 36.4
         Mar                  1 2,680.6 881.9 724.5 374.2 144.7 205.5 − 0.1 6.8 − 115.4 80.4 35.0
                                8 2,665.9 883.0 695.3 354.8 134.1 205.5 − 0.9 6.3 − 123.0 82.9 40.2
                              15 2,647.8 882.8 705.8 366.5 132.6 205.5 − 1.1 6.6 − 108.4 81.5 26.9
                              22 2,642.7 884.5 684.8 351.7 126.8 205.5 − 0.9 5.9 − 114.2 91.9 22.3
                              29 2,648.1 896.4 669.9 319.3 144.6 205.5 − 0.4 6.5 − 120.6 96.3 24.3
         Apr                  5 2,647.1 895.2 677.4 336.9 134.9 205.5 − 0.1 6.3 − 110.7 88.6 22.2
                              12 2,634.5 894.5 669.1 343.1 119.9 206.0 − 0.1 6.1 − 110.2 87.7 22.5
                              19 2,617.3 894.1 641.6 329.8 105.6 206.0 − 0.2 5.8 − 120.7 90.1 30.6
                              26 2,611.3 897.0 628.1 316.0 109.7 202.5 − 0.0 6.1 − 116.5 83.3 33.3
         May                  3 2,608.1 904.6 623.1 296.2 124.1 202.5 − 0.3 6.1 − 104.9 72.3 32.5
 Deutsche Bundesbank
2011          June 632.3 210.9 108.5 63.3 8.7 36.5 − − − − 1.1 0.2 0.9
         July 629.0 213.1 100.3 52.5 13.2 34.6 − − − − 0.6 0.2 0.4
         Aug 679.1 211.6 145.5 60.5 16.0 68.9 − − − − 0.7 0.2 0.4
         Sep 764.6 213.5 205.5 69.8 56.8 78.8 − − − − 0.9 0.3 0.6
         Oct 772.8 215.2 212.1 59.9 58.4 93.9 − − − − 1.1 0.4 0.7
         Nov 812.7 216.1 249.8 49.6 58.2 142.0 − − − − 1.5 0.8 0.7
         Dec 837.6 221.3 228.9 76.4 66.1 86.4 − − − − 5.5 0.7 4.8
2012          Jan 860.1 216.3 294.1 34.6 119.7 139.7 − − − − 1.4 0.7 0.7
         Feb 910.9 216.0 342.5 29.9 166.4 146.2 − − − − 2.8 0.8 2.0
         Mar 1 002.8 216.6 424.5 30.9 248.2 145.4 − − − − 3.4 0.8 2.6
         Apr 1 031.3 217.6 452.3 33.0 276.9 142.4 − − 0.0 − 2.0 0.7 1.3
         May 1 087.0 219.9 464.8 33.4 275.0 156.3 − − 0.0 − 2.6 0.6 2.0
         June 1 119.4 222.5 457.1 33.3 262.9 160.9 − − − − 3.2 1.2 2.0
         July 1 112.9 223.6 421.7 178.3 88.1 155.2 − − − − 19.5 7.3 12.2
         Aug 1 135.4 223.2 442.5 201.4 111.4 129.7 − − − − 17.6 5.5 12.1
         Sep 1 090.9 222.2 385.8 173.1 78.4 134.2 − − − − 17.3 7.0 10.2
         Oct 1 110.0 222.0 372.3 177.9 59.0 135.5 − − − − 50.7 5.1 45.7
         Nov 1 098.6 221.5 361.9 184.1 51.9 125.9 − − − − 47.2 11.4 35.9
         Dec 1 026.0 227.2 300.0 129.6 40.5 129.9 − − 0.0 − 39.9 11.9 28.1
2013          Jan 964.1 219.7 260.4 128.3 39.1 93.0 − − − − 25.9 2.3 23.6
         Feb 934.9 219.1 240.8 100.8 23.9 116.0 − − − − 22.4 0.5 21.8
         Mar 906.7 223.1 222.9 108.7 20.8 93.3 − − − − 10.9 0.5 10.4
         Apr 916.9 224.5 215.5 102.9 30.8 81.8 − − − − 28.7 0.9 27.7
 
*The consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem comprises the financial specific weekly dates; for the Bundesbank: end-of-month financial statements.
statement of the European Central Bank (ECB) and the financial statements of the 2According to the accounting regime chosen by the Eurosystem on the issue of euro
national central banks of the euro area member states (NCBs). The balance sheet banknotes, a share of 8% of the total value of the euro banknotes in circulation is
items for foreign currency, securities, gold and financial instruments are valued at allocated to the ECB on a monthly basis. The counterpart of this adjustment is
market rates at the end of the quarter. 1For Eurosystem: financial statements for disclosed as an “Intra-Eurosystem liability related to euro banknote issue". The

Deutsche Bundesbank
19  Monthly Report
May 2013
III Consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem
 
   
 
Liabilities to non-euro area
residents denominated inforeign currency
Intra-  Eurosystem  
Liabilities Liabilities Liabilities Counterpart liability     Onto non-euro to euro area Deposits, arising of special related to     reportingarea residents residents balances from the drawing euro  Capital    date/denominated in foreign and other rights allocated Other banknote Revaluation and    End of credit facility
in euro currency Total liabilities under ERM II by the IMF issue  
2 accounts reserves    month 1 liabilities 3 
Eurosystem 4
 
177.9 6.2 7.0 7.0 − 56.9 231.2 − 409.8 85.8 2012 Aug                31
174.2 6.4 7.0 7.0 − 56.9 230.4 − 409.8 85.8          Sep                  7
170.2 5.6 7.9 7.9 − 56.9 230.6 − 409.8 85.8                               14
170.6 3.6 8.0 8.0 − 56.9 233.4 − 409.8 85.7                               21
171.7 4.2 6.6 6.6 − 56.2 235.6 − 452.8 85.6                               28
164.6 4.8 7.1 7.1 − 56.2 234.1 − 452.8 85.6          Oct                  5
164.5 4.7 7.1 7.1 − 56.2 230.6 − 452.8 85.6                               12
163.4 5.8 5.6 5.6 − 56.2 231.4 − 452.8 85.6                               19
168.9 6.4 5.9 5.9 − 56.2 231.5 − 452.8 85.6                               26
164.9 4.1 5.5 5.5 − 56.2 232.5 − 452.8 85.6          Nov                  2
170.2 2.1 6.9 6.9 − 56.2 234.4 − 452.8 85.6                                 9
172.7 5.2 5.8 5.8 − 56.2 235.1 − 452.8 85.6                               16
174.3 2.6 7.2 7.2 − 56.2 234.9 − 452.8 85.6                               23
176.8 4.5 6.5 6.5 − 56.2 236.0 − 452.8 85.6                               30
176.6 4.8 6.4 6.4 − 56.2 239.4 − 452.8 85.6          Dec                  7
174.9 4.0 5.8 5.8 − 56.2 236.4 − 452.8 85.6                               14
178.5 2.5 6.9 6.9 − 56.2 237.1 − 452.8 85.6                               21
186.3 3.5 6.4 6.4 − 56.2 240.5 − 452.8 85.6                               28
185.5 3.4 5.8 5.8 − 55.0 241.4 − 407.4 85.6 2013 Jan                  4
180.3 3.6 5.7 5.7 − 55.0 240.3 − 407.4 85.7                               11
186.4 8.8 5.0 5.0 − 55.0 238.4 − 407.4 85.6                               18
185.1 4.9 6.5 6.5 − 55.0 237.8 − 407.4 85.6                               25
179.1 4.5 7.5 7.5 − 55.0 234.4 − 407.4 85.6 2013 Feb                  1
174.3 3.4 6.6 6.6 − 55.0 235.1 − 407.4 85.6                                 8
170.8 3.5 7.7 7.7 − 55.0 230.6 − 407.4 86.0                               15
166.0 3.2 7.7 7.7 − 55.0 232.0 − 407.4 86.0                               22
165.5 2.6 7.5 7.5 − 55.0 226.2 − 407.4 87.9          Mar                  1
168.1 2.4 7.0 7.0 − 55.0 230.4 − 407.4 88.1                                 8
157.7 1.6 5.8 5.8 − 55.0 228.6 − 407.4 88.2                               15
162.0 2.8 6.2 6.2 − 55.0 231.7 − 407.4 88.2                               22
157.7 4.1 5.3 5.3 − 55.1 237.1 − 406.6 88.9                               29
158.7 4.5 7.0 7.0 − 55.1 236.4 − 406.6 88.9          Apr                  5
155.0 6.5 6.2 6.2 − 55.1 236.2 − 406.6 88.9                               12
153.9 5.6 6.5 6.5 − 55.1 238.5 − 406.6 88.9                               19
163.0 5.4 5.5 5.5 − 55.1 239.0 − 406.6 88.9                               26
166.8 5.6 6.4 6.4 − 55.1 239.9 − 406.6 88.9          May                  3
 Deutsche Bundesbank
10.5 0.0 0.1 0.1 − 13.3 12.7 163.1 107.0 5.0 2011          June
11.9 0.0 0.1 0.1 − 13.3 12.7 164.9 107.0 5.0          July
15.3 0.0 0.1 0.1 − 13.3 13.2 167.5 107.0 5.0          Aug 
13.6 0.0 0.2 0.2 − 13.9 14.3 170.7 127.1 5.0          Sep 
12.9 0.0 0.2 0.2 − 13.9 14.4 170.7 127.1 5.0          Oct 
13.5 0.0 0.0 0.0 − 13.9 14.9 170.9 127.1 5.0          Nov 
46.6 0.0 − − − 14.3 16.2 170.5 129.4 5.0          Dec 
11.9 0.0 0.0 0.0 − 14.3 16.5 171.0 129.4 5.0 2012          Jan 
11.7 0.0 0.3 0.3 − 14.3 16.7 172.2 129.4 5.0          Feb 
15.9 0.0 0.2 0.2 − 14.0 16.9 175.5 130.8 5.0          Mar 
14.2 0.0 0.4 0.4 − 14.0 17.5 177.6 130.8 5.0          Apr 
52.0 0.0 0.4 0.4 − 14.0 18.2 179.3 130.8 5.0          May
83.2 0.0 0.2 0.2 − 14.5 19.5 181.0 133.3 5.0          June
90.9 0.0 0.0 0.0 − 14.5 19.9 184.5 133.3 5.0          July
89.9 0.0 0.3 0.3 − 14.5 20.6 188.5 133.3 5.0          Aug 
86.3 0.0 − − − 14.4 21.6 191.9 146.5 5.0          Sep 
82.1 0.0 0.2 0.2 − 14.4 22.3 194.7 146.5 5.0          Oct 
81.8 0.0 0.3 0.3 − 14.4 22.8 197.3 146.5 5.0          Nov 
83.3 0.0 0.1 0.1 − 14.1 23.6 200.3 132.6 5.0          Dec 
83.0 0.0 0.5 0.5 − 14.1 23.5 199.4 132.6 5.0 2013          Jan 
74.4 0.0 0.7 0.7 − 14.1 24.5 201.4 132.6 5.0          Feb 
70.2 0.0 0.6 0.6 − 14.1 24.0 203.8 132.1 5.0          Mar 
67.9 0.0 0.6 0.6 − 14.1 24.4 204.1 132.1 5.0          Apr 
 
remaining 92 % of the value of the euro banknote in circulation is also allocated to according to the aforementioned accounting regime and the value of euro bank-
the NCBs on a monthly basis, and each NCB shows in its balance sheet the share of notes put into circulation is also disclosed as an “Intra-Eurosystem claim/ liabilitythe euro banknotes issued which corresponds to its paid-up share in the ECB’s related to banknote issue“. 3For the Deutsche Bundesbank: including DM banknotes
capital. The difference between the value of the euro banknotes allocated to the NCB still in circulation. 4 Source: ECB. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
20  Monthly Report
May 2013
IV Banks
 
1 Assets and liabilities of monetary financial institutions (excluding the Bundesbank) in Germany *
  Assets
 
€ billion
Lending to banks (MFIs) in the euro area Lending to non-banks (non-MFIs) in the
to banks in the home country to banks in other member states to non-banks in the home country
Enterprises and house-
holds
Secur- Secur-
Balance ities ities
sheet Cash issued issued
Period total  1 in hand Total Total Loans by banks Total Loans by banks Total Total Total Loans
 End of year or month
 
2004 6,617.4 15.1 2,174.3 1,750.2 1,122.9 627.3 424.2 306.3 117.9 3,358.7 3,083.4 2,479.7 2,223.8
2005 6,859.4 15.3 2,276.0 1,762.5 1,148.4 614.1 513.5 356.3 157.2 3,407.6 3,085.2 2,504.6 2,226.3
2006 7,154.4 16.4 2,314.4 1,718.6 1,138.6 580.0 595.8 376.8 219.0 3,462.1 3,085.5 2,536.1 2,241.9
2007 7,592.4 17.8 2,523.4 1,847.9 1,290.4 557.5 675.4 421.6 253.8 3,487.3 3,061.8 2,556.0 2,288.8
2008 7,892.7 17.8 2,681.8 1,990.2 1,404.3 585.8 691.6 452.9 238.8 3,638.2 3,163.0 2,686.9 2,357.3
2009 7,436.1 17.2 2,480.5 1,813.2 1,218.4 594.8 667.3 449.5 217.8 3,638.3 3,187.9 2,692.9 2,357.5
2010 8,304.8 16.5 2,361.6 1,787.8 1,276.9 510.9 573.9 372.8 201.0 3,724.5 3,303.0 2,669.2 2,354.7
2011 8,393.3 16.4 2,394.4 1,844.5 1,362.2 482.2 550.0 362.3 187.7 3,673.5 3,270.5 2,709.4 2,415.1
2012 8,226.6 19.2 2,309.0 1,813.2 1,363.8 449.4 495.9 322.2 173.7 3,688.6 3,289.4 2,695.5 2,435.7
2011          June 7,885.8 15.2 2,268.6 1,696.4 1,206.0 490.5 572.2 372.2 200.0 3,690.4 3,269.3 2,681.2 2,374.9
         July 8,001.0 15.2 2,258.5 1,688.2 1,202.0 486.2 570.2 372.7 197.6 3,692.8 3,270.6 2,685.7 2,379.2
         Aug 8,263.5 14.7 2,337.8 1,750.1 1,265.2 484.9 587.7 390.3 197.4 3,699.5 3,279.0 2,706.1 2,403.3
         Sep 8,489.4 15.4 2,412.6 1,831.2 1,349.4 481.8 581.4 385.6 195.7 3,708.6 3,285.3 2,713.5 2,413.7
         Oct 8,353.9 15.4 2,407.5 1,830.0 1,347.6 482.3 577.5 385.1 192.4 3,728.0 3,311.1 2,742.8 2,445.3
         Nov 8,406.6 14.8 2,450.5 1,876.1 1,396.6 479.5 574.4 382.6 191.8 3,727.2 3,315.3 2,747.9 2,450.0
         Dec 8,393.3 16.4 2,394.4 1,844.5 1,362.2 482.2 550.0 362.3 187.7 3,673.5 3,270.5 2,709.4 2,415.1
2012          Jan 8,517.7 14.5 2,470.6 1,921.9 1,444.6 477.3 548.7 362.6 186.1 3,702.0 3,298.2 2,729.8 2,437.1
         Feb 8,526.0 14.4 2,534.4 1,981.0 1,499.7 481.3 553.4 369.7 183.7 3,695.5 3,291.4 2,723.7 2,437.0
         Mar 8,522.7 15.4 2,577.6 2,037.3 1,559.1 478.2 540.3 358.1 182.2 3,698.3 3,292.5 2,722.7 2,427.8
         Apr 8,599.6 15.3 2,593.3 2,049.9 1,574.4 475.5 543.4 365.1 178.2 3,719.9 3,314.2 2,739.4 2,430.9
         May 8,859.6 15.5 2,605.1 2,060.4 1,585.9 474.5 544.7 365.3 179.4 3,692.5 3,288.7 2,722.4 2,434.0
         June 8,636.4 15.5 2,566.1 2,041.1 1,571.3 469.8 525.0 351.0 174.1 3,699.4 3,297.2 2,692.7 2,432.4
         July 8,726.8 14.8 2,531.1 2,000.3 1,530.8 469.5 530.8 359.0 171.8 3,731.2 3,327.5 2,724.4 2,467.2
         Aug 8,695.6 15.7 2,538.3 2,016.4 1,547.5 468.9 522.0 349.7 172.2 3,725.2 3,321.8 2,723.8 2,464.9
         Sep 8,567.6 16.0 2,463.9 1,947.5 1,481.5 466.0 516.4 346.1 170.3 3,730.1 3,322.3 2,720.6 2,458.6
         Oct 8,489.2 15.9 2,426.0 1,916.6 1,456.5 460.1 509.4 340.1 169.3 3,748.2 3,340.1 2,728.3 2,471.5
         Nov 8,440.0 15.6 2,411.8 1,904.4 1,448.5 455.9 507.4 337.2 170.2 3,741.9 3,334.9 2,722.7 2,465.5
         Dec 8,226.6 19.2 2,309.0 1,813.2 1,363.8 449.4 495.9 322.2 173.7 3,688.6 3,289.4 2,695.5 2,435.7
2013          Jan 8,110.4 15.0 2,284.4 1,784.1 1,337.9 446.2 500.3 325.9 174.4 3,717.9 3,313.3 2,721.2 2,454.3
         Feb 8,094.4 15.0 2,268.2 1,755.8 1,312.0 443.8 512.4 339.6 172.8 3,711.7 3,307.1 2,718.4 2,457.6
         Mar 8,061.1 16.9 2,228.8 1,727.6 1,290.0 437.6 501.2 332.8 168.3 3,710.8 3,302.6 2,715.8 2,451.0
 Changes 3
2005 187.9 0.1 93.0 10.4 22.8 − 12.5 82.6 44.6 38.1 59.7 14.2 37.2 15.5
2006 356.8 1.1 84.2 0.5 28.0 − 27.6 83.7 22.4 61.3 56.0 1.5 32.5 13.3
2007 518.3 1.5 218.9 135.5 156.3 − 20.8 83.4 47.4 36.0 54.1 − 1.0 38.7 53.2
2008 313.3 − 0.1 183.6 164.3 127.5 36.9 19.3 33.7 − 14.4 140.4 102.6 130.9 65.5
2009 −454.5 − 0.5 −189.0 −166.4 −182.2 15.8 − 22.5 − 1.8 − 20.7 17.4 38.3 17.0 6.6
2010 −136.3 − 0.7 −111.6 − 15.6 58.5 − 74.1 − 95.9 − 80.9 − 15.1 96.4 126.0 − 13.7 0.7
2011 54.1 − 0.1 32.6 58.7 91.7 − 33.0 − 26.0 − 12.1 − 13.9 − 51.8 − 35.3 38.7 56.7
2012 −129.2 2.9 − 81.9 − 28.4 3.0 − 31.4 − 53.5 − 39.7 − 13.8 27.5 27.7 17.0 28.8
2011          July 102.3 − 0.0 − 12.4 − 9.5 − 5.1 − 4.4 − 2.9 − 0.5 − 2.5 − 0.9 − 1.3 2.2 2.0
         Aug 263.0 − 0.5 80.7 69.9 71.0 − 1.1 10.8 10.9 − 0.0 1.0 1.9 14.0 17.7
         Sep 193.7 0.7 70.4 78.9 82.5 − 3.6 − 8.5 − 6.4 − 2.1 4.7 3.7 5.2 8.2
         Oct −116.4 − 0.0 − 1.4 1.1 0.2 0.9 − 2.4 0.7 − 3.2 24.7 29.5 32.9 34.1
         Nov 31.1 − 0.6 39.9 44.3 47.5 − 3.2 − 4.5 − 3.7 − 0.8 − 4.4 2.1 3.1 2.7
         Dec − 27.9 1.6 − 52.5 − 33.6 − 36.0 2.4 − 18.9 − 14.8 − 4.1 − 55.7 − 46.7 − 39.8 − 36.4
2012          Jan 132.8 − 1.9 78.4 78.4 83.0 − 4.7 0.1 0.8 − 0.8 34.8 31.1 23.8 24.2
         Feb 20.7 − 0.1 65.8 60.4 56.0 4.4 5.5 7.8 − 2.3 − 3.2 − 4.6 − 4.1 1.7
         Mar − 7.0 0.9 42.3 55.8 59.1 − 3.3 − 13.5 − 11.8 − 1.6 3.0 1.5 − 0.5 − 8.9
         Apr 68.9 − 0.1 17.5 15.1 17.9 − 2.7 2.4 6.5 − 4.2 18.0 18.8 13.9 0.1
         May 226.6 0.2 6.4 7.4 9.1 − 1.7 − 1.0 − 1.8 0.9 − 33.0 − 29.2 − 20.4 − 0.4
         June −214.5 0.0 − 37.7 − 18.6 − 14.0 − 4.6 − 19.2 − 13.9 − 5.3 10.7 11.6 − 6.6 1.4
         July 85.2 − 0.7 − 37.3 − 42.0 − 41.4 − 0.6 4.7 7.1 − 2.4 29.8 29.3 30.9 33.9
         Aug − 16.8 0.9 9.4 17.2 17.5 − 0.4 − 7.8 − 8.5 0.7 − 3.5 − 3.9 1.2 − 0.7
         Sep −115.5 0.3 − 72.0 − 67.4 − 65.3 − 2.1 − 4.7 − 2.9 − 1.8 7.3 2.2 − 0.6 − 4.0
         Oct − 75.9 − 0.1 − 38.7 − 31.8 − 26.6 − 5.3 − 6.8 − 5.8 − 1.0 19.2 18.6 9.1 14.3
         Nov − 29.4 − 0.3 − 14.3 − 12.3 − 8.0 − 4.3 − 1.9 − 2.8 0.8 − 5.2 − 4.6 − 4.9 − 5.3
         Dec −204.3 3.6 −101.8 − 90.5 − 84.2 − 6.3 − 11.3 − 14.5 3.2 − 50.5 − 43.1 − 24.8 − 27.5
2013          Jan − 97.7 − 4.2 − 21.9 − 27.6 − 24.8 − 2.8 5.7 5.0 0.7 35.4 28.8 30.4 23.3
         Feb − 27.1 0.0 − 15.6 − 26.4 − 23.7 − 2.7 10.8 12.6 − 1.8 − 8.1 − 7.4 − 4.0 2.0
         Mar − 33.3 1.9 − 39.3 − 28.1 − 21.9 − 6.2 − 11.2 − 6.0 − 5.3 − 0.2 − 3.7 − 1.8 − 5.9
*This table serves to supplement the “Overall monetary survey“ in section II. Unlike by banks (including building and loan associations) − data from money market
the other tables in section IV, this table includes − in addition to the figures reported funds. 1See footnote 1 in Table IV.2. 2Including debt securities arising from the

Deutsche Bundesbank
21  Monthly Report
May 2013
IV Banks
 
   
 
euro area Claims on
non-euro-area
to non-banks in other member states residents
 General Enterprises and General government households government
Secur- Secur- of which Secur- of which Other
ities Total Loans ities 
2 Total Total Loans Total Loans ities Total Loans assets  1   Period
End of year or month
 
255.9 603.8 423.0 180.8 275.3 140.6 61.9 134.7 25.7 109.0 897.8 730.4 171.4 2004
278.2 580.7 408.7 171.9 322.4 169.1 65.0 153.3 30.7 122.6 993.8 796.8 166.7 2005
294.1 549.5 390.2 159.2 376.6 228.1 85.2 148.5 26.1 122.4 1,172.7 936.2 188.8 2006267.3 505.8 360.7 145.0 425.5 294.6 124.9 130.9 26.0 104.9 1,339.5 1,026.9 224.4 2007329.6 476.1 342.8 133.4 475.1 348.1 172.1 127.0 27.6 99.4 1,279.2 1,008.6 275.7 2008335.4 495.0 335.1 160.0 450.4 322.2 162.9 128.2 23.5 104.7 1,062.6 821.1 237.5 2009
314.5 633.8 418.4 215.3 421.6 289.2 164.2 132.4 24.8 107.6 1,021.0 792.7 1,181.1 2010
294.3 561.1 359.8 201.2 403.1 276.9 161.2 126.2 32.6 93.6 995.1 770.9 1,313.8 2011259.8 594.0 350.3 243.7 399.2 275.1 158.1 124.1 30.4 93.7 970.3 745.0 1,239.4 2012
306.3 588.2 374.6 213.6 421.1 287.2 161.2 133.9 25.9 108.0 984.4 753.6 927.1 2011          June306.5 584.9 374.5 210.4 422.3 283.5 161.6 138.8 31.3 107.5 986.6 757.8 1,047.9          July
302.8 572.9 365.2 207.7 420.5 281.9 162.6 138.5 31.0 107.5 1,004.6 779.9 1,206.8          Aug 299.9 571.8 365.2 206.6 423.3 288.0 171.2 135.3 30.7 104.6 1,011.7 786.7 1,341.1          Sep 
297.4 568.3 361.3 207.0 417.0 280.0 164.0 137.0 30.3 106.6 974.8 754.2 1,228.2          Oct 
297.8 567.5 358.2 209.3 411.9 282.3 165.1 129.6 31.0 98.5 991.0 770.1 1,223.1          Nov 294.3 561.1 359.8 201.2 403.1 276.9 161.2 126.2 32.6 93.6 995.1 770.9 1,313.8          Dec 
292.8 568.3 363.6 204.8 403.8 277.7 157.6 126.1 32.3 93.8 1,016.2 794.5 1,314.3 2012          Jan 
286.7 567.7 361.3 206.4 404.1 278.1 158.1 126.1 32.4 93.7 996.6 778.9 1,285.0          Feb 295.0 569.8 359.9 209.9 405.8 279.9 159.9 125.9 31.5 94.3 1,004.1 782.1 1,227.4          Mar 
308.5 574.8 365.3 209.6 405.7 282.6 163.2 123.1 31.4 91.7 1,008.5 786.8 1,262.6          Apr 
288.3 566.3 359.8 206.5 403.8 279.3 160.7 124.6 31.5 93.0 1,027.6 804.5 1,518.8          May260.4 604.5 370.2 234.3 402.2 278.2 160.3 124.0 31.8 92.2 992.6 772.1 1,362.8          June
257.2 603.1 367.0 236.1 403.7 282.5 162.1 121.2 31.1 90.1 1,005.2 786.0 1,444.5          July
258.9 598.1 359.6 238.4 403.4 281.3 161.0 122.1 31.7 90.4 1,007.4 787.3 1,408.9          Aug 262.1 601.7 359.8 241.9 407.8 283.5 161.4 124.3 31.4 92.9 1,005.3 788.1 1,352.2          Sep 
256.9 611.8 366.5 245.3 408.0 282.2 160.0 125.8 31.9 93.9 1,003.5 784.8 1,295.6          Oct 
257.2 612.2 360.2 252.0 407.1 282.8 160.3 124.3 32.0 92.3 996.2 778.1 1,274.5          Nov 259.8 594.0 350.3 243.7 399.2 275.1 158.1 124.1 30.4 93.7 970.3 745.0 1,239.4          Dec 
266.8 592.1 352.2 239.9 404.6 277.6 157.0 127.0 30.3 96.8 955.4 728.8 1,137.7 2013          Jan 
260.8 588.7 347.3 241.4 404.6 280.2 157.0 124.4 30.3 94.1 959.5 739.4 1,140.0          Feb 264.8 586.8 345.2 241.6 408.1 284.8 157.6 123.4 30.1 93.2 965.3 740.5 1,139.3          Mar 
Changes 3
21.7 − 23.0 − 14.3 − 8.6 45.5 27.4 2.2 18.2 4.7 13.5 57.1 31.2 − 22.2 200519.3 − 31.0 − 18.6 − 12.4 54.5 59.6 20.9 − 5.1 − 1.3 − 3.8 205.7 165.7 9.8 2006
− 14.6 − 39.6 − 29.3 − 10.3 55.1 73.6 41.5 − 18.6 0.0 − 18.6 222.7 136.5 21.1 2007
65.4 − 28.4 − 16.9 − 11.5 37.8 42.3 40.4 − 4.5 1.6 − 6.1 − 40.3 − 7.6 29.7 200810.5 21.3 − 5.1 26.4 − 20.9 − 20.9 − 7.1 0.0 − 3.9 3.9 −182.5 −162.3 − 99.8 2009
− 14.3 139.7 83.4 56.3 − 29.6 − 36.4 0.2 6.8 3.1 3.7 − 74.1 − 61.9 − 46.3 2010− 18.0 − 74.0 − 59.1 − 14.9 − 16.6 − 13.8 − 5.5 − 2.7 8.0 − 10.7 − 39.5 − 34.9 112.9 2011− 11.8 10.7 − 10.5 21.2 − 0.2 − 0.7 − 1.5 0.5 − 2.2 2.7 − 15.5 − 17.7 − 62.2 2012
0.2 − 3.5 − 0.2 − 3.3 0.4 − 4.5 − 0.0 4.9 5.4 − 0.6 − 5.5 − 2.9 121.1 2011          July
− 3.7 − 12.2 − 9.3 − 2.9 − 0.9 − 1.3 1.1 0.5 − 0.1 0.5 23.8 27.0 158.0          Aug − 3.0 − 1.5 − 0.2 − 1.3 1.0 4.4 6.8 − 3.4 − 0.3 − 3.0 − 14.7 − 13.4 132.6          Sep 
− 1.2 − 3.4 − 3.8 0.4 − 4.8 − 7.0 − 6.1 2.2 − 0.4 2.6 − 24.0 − 20.8 −115.8          Oct 
0.4 − 1.0 − 3.3 2.3 − 6.5 1.2 − 0.2 − 7.7 0.6 − 8.3 1.2 2.3 − 4.9          Nov 
− 3.4 − 6.9 1.6 − 8.5 − 9.0 − 8.2 − 6.7 − 0.8 1.5 − 2.4 − 9.5 − 11.7 88.2          Dec − 0.3 7.3 3.8 3.5 3.7 1.7 − 2.9 2.0 − 0.2 2.2 28.7 29.3 − 7.3 2012          Jan 
− 5.8 − 0.5 − 2.2 1.7 1.5 1.3 1.3 0.2 0.1 0.2 − 12.0 − 8.4 − 30.0          Feb 
8.4 2.0 − 1.4 3.4 1.5 1.7 1.7 − 0.2 − 0.9 0.6 4.9 0.8 − 58.2          Mar 
13.8 4.8 5.3 − 0.5 − 0.8 2.0 2.9 − 2.8 − 0.1 − 2.7 − 0.6 0.3 34.1          Apr 
− 19.9 − 8.8 − 5.6 − 3.2 − 3.9 − 5.1 − 4.4 1.2 0.1 1.1 − 2.6 − 2.5 255.6          May− 8.0 18.2 10.4 7.8 − 0.9 − 0.9 0.2 − 0.0 0.2 − 0.3 − 29.4 − 27.1 −158.0          June
− 3.0 − 1.6 − 3.3 1.8 0.5 3.4 0.9 − 2.9 − 0.7 − 2.2 2.6 5.2 90.7          July
1.9 − 5.1 − 7.4 2.3 0.4 − 0.5 − 0.2 1.0 0.6 0.3 12.0 10.2 − 35.6          Aug 
3.4 2.8 − 0.6 3.4 5.1 2.9 1.3 2.2 − 0.4 2.6 6.7 9.1 − 57.7          Sep 
− 5.2 9.5 6.7 2.8 0.7 − 0.9 − 1.1 1.6 0.6 1.0 0.9 − 0.8 − 57.3          Oct 
0.4 0.3 − 6.3 6.6 − 0.7 0.8 0.4 − 1.5 0.1 − 1.6 − 6.8 − 6.3 − 2.8          Nov 2.7 − 18.3 − 9.9 − 8.5 − 7.3 − 7.2 − 1.6 − 0.2 − 1.6 1.4 − 19.8 − 27.4 − 35.8          Dec 
7.1 − 1.6 2.0 − 3.5 6.6 3.6 0.1 3.0 − 0.1 3.1 − 3.1 − 4.8 −103.9 2013          Jan 
− 6.0 − 3.4 − 4.9 1.5 − 0.7 2.0 − 0.5 − 2.7 0.0 − 2.7 − 2.4 1.6 − 1.1          Feb 
4.1 − 1.9 − 2.1 0.2 3.6 4.6 0.8 − 1.0 − 0.2 − 0.9 5.7 1.1 − 1.5          Mar 
exchange of equalisation claims. 3Statistical breaks have been eliminated from
the flow figures (see also footnote * in Table II.1). 

Deutsche Bundesbank
22  Monthly Report
May 2013
IV Banks
 
1 Assets and liabilities of monetary financial institutions (excluding the Bundesbank) in Germany *
  Liabilities
 
€ billion
Deposits of banks (MFIs) Deposits of non-banks (non-MFIs) in the euro area
in the euro area
Deposits of non-banks in the home country Deposits of non-banks
With agreed At agreed
of banks maturities notice
Balance in the in other of which of which
sheet home member Over- up to up to Over-
Period total  1 Total country states Total Total night Total 2 years Total 3 months Total night
 End of year or month
 
2004 6,617.4 1,528.4 1,270.8 257.6 2,264.2 2,148.5 646.2 898.9 239.9 603.5 515.5 71.9 8.8
2005 6,859.4 1,569.6 1,300.8 268.8 2,329.1 2,225.4 715.8 906.2 233.4 603.4 519.1 62.2 9.6
2006 7,154.4 1,637.7 1,348.6 289.0 2,449.2 2,341.6 745.8 1,009.3 310.1 586.5 487.4 62.0 13.9
2007 7,592.4 1,778.6 1,479.0 299.6 2,633.6 2,518.3 769.6 1,193.3 477.9 555.4 446.0 75.1 19.6
2008 7,892.7 1,827.7 1,583.0 244.7 2,798.2 2,687.3 809.5 1,342.7 598.7 535.2 424.8 74.2 22.4
2009 7,436.1 1,589.7 1,355.6 234.0 2,818.0 2,731.3 997.8 1,139.1 356.4 594.4 474.4 63.9 17.7
2010 8,304.8 1,495.8 1,240.1 255.7 2,925.8 2,817.6 1,086.5 1,112.9 307.2 618.2 512.5 68.4 19.3
2011 8,393.3 1,444.8 1,210.3 234.5 3,033.4 2,915.1 1,139.6 1,159.4 366.2 616.1 515.3 78.8 25.9
2012 8,226.6 1,371.0 1,135.9 235.1 3,091.4 2,985.2 1,294.9 1,072.8 320.0 617.6 528.4 77.3 31.2
2011          June 7,885.8 1,401.2 1,158.5 242.6 2,959.0 2,844.9 1,096.5 1,130.7 330.2 617.7 513.4 73.4 26.6
         July 8,001.0 1,398.0 1,154.4 243.6 2,966.1 2,853.8 1,094.1 1,143.1 342.8 616.5 512.2 72.9 25.0
         Aug 8,263.5 1,413.8 1,163.7 250.1 2,988.4 2,873.6 1,105.9 1,152.7 351.5 615.0 510.8 75.6 25.5
         Sep 8,489.4 1,430.6 1,176.1 254.6 3,007.5 2,884.0 1,111.5 1,159.1 361.4 613.4 509.7 80.7 28.3
         Oct 8,353.9 1,419.0 1,162.8 256.2 3,008.5 2,888.5 1,120.4 1,155.0 359.1 613.0 509.5 80.0 28.4
         Nov 8,406.6 1,427.1 1,177.3 249.8 3,028.6 2,912.1 1,145.2 1,155.4 360.5 611.5 509.8 77.3 25.3
         Dec 8,393.3 1,444.8 1,210.3 234.5 3,033.4 2,915.1 1,139.6 1,159.4 366.2 616.1 515.3 78.8 25.9
2012          Jan 8,517.7 1,475.9 1,221.1 254.8 3,038.6 2,912.4 1,140.8 1,154.3 364.5 617.2 517.4 82.8 29.3
         Feb 8,526.0 1,484.7 1,232.3 252.4 3,046.2 2,915.6 1,147.2 1,148.6 361.0 619.8 520.2 83.7 31.0
         Mar 8,522.7 1,501.9 1,232.1 269.8 3,037.7 2,924.1 1,157.4 1,147.3 363.0 619.4 520.6 77.3 28.9
         Apr 8,599.6 1,501.9 1,222.4 279.5 3,052.2 2,938.9 1,170.0 1,151.0 368.0 617.9 519.4 77.4 28.3
         May 8,859.6 1,494.1 1,219.3 274.8 3,069.6 2,955.6 1,185.8 1,152.7 372.2 617.1 519.5 78.2 30.1
         June 8,636.4 1,469.5 1,207.6 262.0 3,091.1 2,975.0 1,203.3 1,155.7 378.1 616.0 519.4 78.9 30.3
         July 8,726.8 1,454.7 1,190.5 264.1 3,084.9 2,974.1 1,207.7 1,150.5 377.8 615.9 520.1 78.5 30.1
         Aug 8,695.6 1,447.9 1,185.3 262.6 3,092.7 2,985.4 1,221.5 1,148.5 377.1 615.3 521.0 76.3 30.3
         Sep 8,567.6 1,428.2 1,175.5 252.8 3,100.1 2,991.1 1,241.8 1,135.2 366.7 614.1 521.3 77.5 33.6
         Oct 8,489.2 1,415.4 1,161.0 254.4 3,099.5 2,993.8 1,265.7 1,114.7 355.4 613.5 521.5 76.3 32.1
         Nov 8,440.0 1,413.7 1,160.3 253.5 3,114.9 3,006.6 1,293.1 1,100.7 346.7 612.8 522.0 76.8 33.1
         Dec 8,226.6 1,371.0 1,135.9 235.1 3,091.4 2,985.2 1,294.9 1,072.8 320.0 617.6 528.4 77.3 31.2
2013          Jan 8,110.4 1,371.5 1,127.0 244.6 3,090.1 2,983.1 1,305.1 1,061.3 310.2 616.7 529.3 77.0 32.1
         Feb 8,094.4 1,348.4 1,103.4 245.0 3,081.2 2,977.9 1,310.2 1,051.2 303.2 616.6 530.7 76.3 33.7
         Mar 8,061.1 1,333.9 1,093.6 240.4 3,082.3 2,979.7 1,310.5 1,054.7 307.1 614.4 529.3 77.2 35.3
 Changes 4
2005 187.9 32.8 27.0 5.9 65.0 75.5 69.4 7.3 − 6.9 − 1.2 2.9 − 8.0 0.5
2006 356.8 105.6 81.5 24.1 122.9 118.6 30.4 105.0 77.1 − 16.8 − 31.7 0.4 4.4
2007 518.3 148.4 134.8 13.6 185.1 177.3 24.5 183.9 167.8 − 31.1 − 41.4 13.6 5.6
2008 313.3 65.8 121.7 − 55.8 162.3 173.1 38.7 154.6 123.5 − 20.2 − 21.2 − 7.5 − 0.1
2009 −454.5 −235.4 −224.6 − 10.8 31.9 43.9 205.0 −220.4 −259.3 59.3 50.3 − 9.6 − 4.1
2010 −136.3 − 75.2 − 99.4 24.2 72.3 59.7 88.7 − 53.0 − 52.2 24.0 38.3 − 4.4 2.2
2011 54.1 − 48.4 − 28.8 − 19.6 102.1 97.4 52.4 47.6 58.8 − 2.6 1.3 4.8 6.5
2012 −129.2 − 68.7 − 70.0 1.3 57.8 67.1 156.1 − 90.4 − 50.2 1.5 14.1 − 1.4 5.4
2011          July 102.3 − 4.5 − 5.0 0.4 6.5 8.3 − 2.8 12.3 12.5 − 1.2 − 1.2 − 0.6 − 1.6
         Aug 263.0 16.8 12.6 4.1 17.1 19.9 11.8 9.6 8.8 − 1.6 − 1.4 − 2.7 0.4
         Sep 193.7 13.8 10.6 3.2 17.4 9.1 4.3 6.4 9.9 − 1.5 − 1.0 4.9 2.7
         Oct −116.4 − 9.6 − 12.0 2.4 2.0 5.2 9.6 − 3.9 − 2.2 − 0.4 − 0.3 − 0.5 0.2
         Nov 31.1 5.7 13.1 − 7.4 19.0 22.7 23.7 0.1 1.2 − 1.1 − 0.2 − 2.9 − 3.2
         Dec − 27.9 20.1 31.4 − 11.2 5.1 3.5 − 6.3 5.2 5.5 4.6 5.4 1.3 0.5
2012          Jan 132.8 32.1 11.5 20.7 5.7 − 2.4 1.5 − 5.0 − 1.7 1.1 2.1 4.1 3.5
         Feb 20.7 10.2 12.2 − 2.0 8.2 3.7 6.7 − 5.6 − 3.3 2.6 3.8 1.0 1.7
         Mar − 7.0 16.7 − 0.6 17.3 − 8.6 8.4 10.1 − 1.3 1.9 − 0.4 0.4 − 6.4 − 2.1
         Apr 68.9 1.8 − 7.6 9.4 14.0 12.1 12.5 1.1 2.4 − 1.5 − 1.2 0.0 − 0.6
         May 226.6 − 11.5 − 5.4 − 6.1 15.7 15.2 14.8 1.2 3.8 − 0.8 0.0 0.5 1.7
         June −214.5 − 23.7 − 11.2 − 12.5 21.9 19.8 17.7 3.2 6.0 − 1.1 − 0.1 0.8 0.2
         July 85.2 − 16.3 − 17.9 1.7 − 7.0 − 1.6 4.0 − 5.4 − 0.4 − 0.2 0.7 − 0.5 − 0.2
         Aug − 16.8 − 5.4 − 4.4 − 1.0 8.5 11.9 14.3 − 1.8 − 0.5 − 0.5 0.9 − 2.1 0.3
         Sep −115.5 − 18.4 − 9.1 − 9.3 7.2 5.1 21.0 − 14.7 − 11.8 − 1.2 0.3 1.3 3.4
         Oct − 75.9 − 15.5 − 17.2 1.7 − 0.4 3.0 24.0 − 20.5 − 11.3 − 0.6 0.2 − 1.1 − 1.5
         Nov − 29.4 − 1.3 − 0.7 − 0.6 15.5 12.8 27.5 − 13.9 − 8.7 − 0.7 0.6 0.4 1.0
         Dec −204.3 − 37.3 − 19.4 − 17.9 − 22.8 − 20.8 2.1 − 27.7 − 26.6 4.8 6.3 0.6 − 1.8
2013          Jan − 97.7 2.3 − 7.4 9.8 − 0.2 − 1.2 10.9 − 11.2 − 9.7 − 0.8 1.0 − 0.1 1.0
         Feb − 27.1 − 24.8 − 24.6 − 0.2 − 9.8 − 5.9 4.5 − 10.3 − 7.2 − 0.1 1.4 − 0.9 1.5
         Mar − 33.3 − 14.2 − 9.5 − 4.6 0.7 1.5 0.0 3.6 3.9 − 2.2 − 1.4 1.0 1.6
*This table serves to supplement the “Overall monetary survey“ in section II. Unlike by banks (including building and loan associations) − data from money market
the other tables in section IV, this table includes − in addition to the figures reported funds. 1See footnote 1 in Table IV.2. 2Excluding deposits of central

Deutsche Bundesbank
23  Monthly Report
May 2013
IV Banks
 
   
 
 Debt securities
issued 3 
in other member states 2 Deposits ofcentral governments
With agreed At agreed Liabilitiesmaturities notice arising
of which from Money of which Liabilities
domestic market with to non- repos with
of which of which central non-banks fund euro- Capital maturities
up to up to govern- in the shares of up to area and Other
Total 2 years Total 3 months Total ments euro area issued  
3 Total reserves   Period 2 years 3 residents Liabilities 1 
End of year or month
 
59.8 9.8 3.3 2.7 43.8 41.4 14.8 31.5 1,554.8 116.9 577.1 329.3 317.2 2004
50.2 9.8 2.4 2.0 41.6 38.8 19.5 31.7 1,611.9 113.8 626.2 346.9 324.5 2005
45.9 9.3 2.3 1.9 45.5 41.9 17.1 32.0 1,636.7 136.4 638.5 389.6 353.7 200653.2 22.0 2.3 1.8 40.1 38.3 26.6 28.6 1,637.6 182.3 661.0 428.2 398.2 200749.5 24.9 2.4 1.8 36.6 34.8 61.1 16.4 1,609.9 233.3 666.3 461.7 451.5 200843.7 17.0 2.5 2.0 22.8 22.2 80.5 11.4 1,500.5 146.3 565.6 454.8 415.6 2009
46.4 16.1 2.8 2.2 39.8 38.7 86.7 9.8 1,407.8 82.3 636.0 452.6 1,290.2 2010
49.6 18.4 3.3 2.5 39.5 37.9 97.1 6.2 1,345.7 75.7 561.5 468.1 1,436.6 201142.3 14.7 3.8 2.8 28.9 25.9 80.4 7.3 1,233.1 56.9 611.4 487.3 1,344.7 2012
43.9 15.8 2.9 2.3 40.6 38.3 104.8 9.4 1,360.1 74.2 556.5 449.5 1,045.4 2011          June44.9 16.9 3.0 2.3 39.4 35.6 91.8 6.8 1,357.0 77.3 560.3 453.2 1,167.9          July
47.1 15.2 3.0 2.3 39.3 36.8 101.9 7.2 1,352.8 79.4 604.9 458.7 1,335.7          Aug 49.4 17.7 3.0 2.3 42.7 40.8 107.0 7.2 1,352.4 76.1 644.6 459.4 1,480.7          Sep 
48.5 17.1 3.1 2.4 40.0 37.9 105.7 7.2 1,341.7 74.0 650.4 462.7 1,358.7          Oct 
48.8 17.6 3.2 2.5 39.2 35.8 111.1 6.3 1,348.4 79.7 668.9 466.6 1,349.6          Nov 49.6 18.4 3.3 2.5 39.5 37.9 97.1 6.2 1,345.7 75.7 561.5 468.1 1,436.6          Dec 
50.1 19.0 3.4 2.6 43.4 40.9 86.7 5.9 1,311.1 74.3 702.3 468.9 1,428.2 2012          Jan 
49.2 18.6 3.4 2.6 46.9 45.2 96.6 5.7 1,316.9 75.6 719.2 471.8 1,384.9          Feb 44.9 16.0 3.5 2.6 36.3 35.6 93.1 5.5 1,305.7 72.7 772.9 476.9 1,329.2          Mar 
45.6 16.7 3.5 2.6 35.8 33.4 102.9 5.5 1,303.7 68.5 788.9 477.2 1,367.2          Apr 
44.5 15.9 3.6 2.7 35.8 31.5 108.3 5.5 1,304.1 63.6 775.2 482.5 1,620.2          May44.9 16.5 3.8 2.8 37.2 33.8 98.9 5.7 1,291.7 62.9 737.8 489.4 1,452.5          June
44.6 16.1 3.8 2.9 32.3 30.0 106.6 5.7 1,296.0 65.5 748.5 497.0 1,533.4          July
42.1 14.3 3.9 2.9 31.0 27.7 108.1 5.3 1,285.6 62.8 769.0 492.5 1,494.5          Aug 40.0 12.5 3.9 2.9 31.5 26.7 98.0 5.1 1,277.2 61.0 726.4 487.8 1,444.8          Sep 
40.4 12.6 3.9 2.9 29.3 26.6 107.8 5.4 1,264.6 60.7 719.3 488.1 1,389.0          Oct 
39.9 12.3 3.8 2.9 31.5 26.6 107.0 5.4 1,255.2 60.8 685.8 490.6 1,367.4          Nov 42.3 14.7 3.8 2.8 28.9 25.9 80.4 7.3 1,233.1 56.9 611.4 487.3 1,344.7          Dec 
41.2 14.2 3.7 2.8 30.0 24.0 83.1 7.4 1,212.4 52.0 613.2 489.8 1,242.9 2013          Jan 
38.9 13.1 3.7 2.8 27.1 23.6 99.7 6.8 1,215.9 51.7 612.0 499.8 1,230.6          Feb 38.3 13.0 3.6 2.8 25.4 23.4 97.0 6.8 1,201.4 49.5 600.0 503.0 1,236.7          Mar 
Changes 4
− 7.7 − 0.3 − 0.9 − 0.7 − 2.5 − 3.0 4.7 0.2 38.7 − 9.9 22.0 14.8 9.7 2005− 3.9 − 0.3 − 0.1 − 0.2 3.9 3.1 − 3.3 0.3 34.8 22.1 32.4 27.5 36.6 2006
8.0 12.9 0.0 − 0.1 − 5.8 − 4.3 8.1 − 3.4 20.9 49.3 48.7 42.3 68.3 2007
− 7.5 0.6 0.1 − 0.0 − 3.3 − 3.2 36.1 − 12.2 − 33.9 50.2 − 0.1 39.3 56.1 2008− 5.7 − 7.7 0.1 0.2 − 2.4 − 0.8 19.4 − 5.0 −104.6 − 87.1 − 95.3 − 0.3 − 65.0 2009
− 6.8 − 5.8 0.3 0.3 17.0 16.5 6.2 − 1.6 −106.7 − 63.2 54.4 − 7.1 − 78.6 2010
− 2.2 1.7 0.5 0.3 − 0.1 − 0.7 10.0 − 3.7 − 76.9 − 6.6 − 80.5 13.7 137.8 2011− 7.2 − 3.6 0.5 0.3 − 7.9 − 9.2 − 19.6 1.2 −107.0 − 18.6 54.2 21.0 − 68.5 2012
0.9 1.0 0.0 0.0 − 1.2 − 2.7 − 13.4 − 2.6 − 8.7 2.9 0.6 2.8 121.6 2011          July
− 3.1 − 2.2 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.1 1.1 10.3 0.4 − 1.0 2.3 47.0 5.3 167.2          Aug 
2.2 2.4 0.0 0.0 3.4 4.0 4.9 0.1 − 13.7 − 3.8 29.1 − 1.6 143.8          Sep 
− 0.8 − 0.5 0.1 0.0 − 2.7 − 2.9 − 1.2 − 0.0 − 2.8 − 1.8 12.0 4.7 −121.4          Oct 
0.2 0.4 0.1 0.1 − 0.7 − 2.1 5.3 − 0.9 − 4.2 5.3 11.0 2.3 − 7.2          Nov 0.7 0.7 0.1 0.1 0.3 2.0 − 14.1 − 0.1 − 11.3 − 4.2 −113.8 − 0.0 86.1          Dec 
0.6 0.7 0.1 0.0 3.9 3.0 − 10.8 − 0.3 − 31.4 − 1.3 143.6 1.4 − 7.9 2012          Jan 
− 0.8 − 0.3 0.1 0.0 3.5 4.4 10.0 − 0.2 11.6 1.4 20.7 3.9 − 43.7          Feb 
− 4.3 − 2.7 0.0 0.0 − 10.6 − 9.7 − 3.6 − 0.2 − 12.5 − 3.0 52.5 4.9 − 56.2          Mar 
0.7 0.7 − 0.0 − 0.0 1.9 0.2 7.2 − 0.0 − 5.8 − 4.3 13.8 − 0.3 38.3          Apr 
− 1.3 − 0.9 0.1 0.1 0.0 − 1.9 5.3 0.0 − 13.8 − 5.4 − 24.4 2.8 252.6          May
0.4 0.7 0.2 0.1 1.3 2.3 − 9.4 0.2 − 8.7 − 0.6 − 34.7 7.6 −167.7          June
− 0.3 − 0.4 0.1 0.0 − 4.9 − 3.8 7.6 0.1 − 2.7 2.4 6.3 6.3 90.8          July− 2.4 − 1.8 0.0 0.0 − 1.3 − 2.3 1.7 − 0.4 − 4.1 − 2.5 25.2 − 3.3 − 39.0          Aug − 2.1 − 1.8 0.0 0.0 0.8 − 0.8 − 10.1 − 0.2 − 3.2 − 1.7 − 38.1 − 3.2 − 49.4          Sep 
0.4 0.1 0.0 0.0 − 2.3 − 0.0 9.9 0.4 − 10.5 − 0.2 − 5.8 0.7 − 54.6          Oct 
− 0.5 − 0.4 − 0.0 − 0.0 2.2 0.0 − 0.8 − 0.0 − 8.4 0.2 − 33.4 2.7 − 3.6          Nov 
2.5 2.5 − 0.1 − 0.1 − 2.6 − 0.7 − 26.5 1.9 − 17.6 − 3.7 − 71.5 − 2.5 − 28.1          Dec 
− 1.0 − 0.5 − 0.1 − 0.0 1.1 − 2.0 2.7 0.1 − 12.0 − 4.6 7.3 5.0 −102.9 2013          Jan − 2.4 − 1.1 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 2.9 − 0.4 16.6 − 0.5 − 2.2 − 0.5 − 5.5 8.4 − 9.4          Feb − 0.6 − 0.1 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 1.7 − 0.2 − 2.7 − 0.1 − 13.3 − 1.0 − 11.9 1.9 6.1          Mar 
governments. 3In Germany, debt securities with maturities of up to one year are published together with money market fund shares. 4Statistical breaks have been
classed as money market paper; up to the January 2002 Monthly Report they were eliminated from the flow figures (see also footnote * in Table II.1). 

Deutsche Bundesbank
24  Monthly Report
May 2013
IV Banks
 
2 Principal assets and liabilities of banks (MFIs) in Germany, by category of banks*
 
 
€ billion
  Lending to banks (MFIs)  Lending to non-banks (non-MFIs)
 
 of which of which
 
Loans
 Cash in
 hand and
 credit
Number of balances for
reporting Balance with Balances up to and for Partici- Securities Securities
End of institu- sheet central and issued by including more than issued by pating Other
month tions total  1 banks Total loans banks Total 1 year 1 year Bills non-banks interests assets  1 
All categories of banks
 
2012          Oct 1,877 8,561.0 194.6 2,801.3 2,135.2 656.1 4,014.0 540.3 2,756.2 0.6 701.3 139.3 1,411.8
         Nov 1,870 8,530.2 201.0 2,763.0 2,099.9 654.3 4,018.7 531.8 2,763.7 0.6 709.3 139.2 1,408.4
         Dec 1,867 8,314.6 153.5 2,701.0 2,042.6 650.5 3,949.3 478.3 2,749.3 0.8 709.8 136.4 1,374.3
2013          Jan 1,867 8,194.1 148.4 2,662.1 2,004.8 649.0 3,974.5 507.3 2,739.9 0.7 714.5 140.4 1,268.7
         Feb 1,868 8,179.7 118.7 2,684.4 2,030.6 645.9 3,967.1 504.1 2,743.6 0.6 707.4 137.2 1,272.3
         Mar 1,867 8,149.3 129.8 2,636.3 1,987.1 641.6 3,973.2 501.6 2,744.5 0.6 716.0 135.1 1,274.9
Commercial banks 6
2013          Feb 274 3,142.2 73.9 986.2 895.9 89.9 1,112.5 254.4 657.0 0.3 193.7 70.3 899.3
         Mar 274 3,120.3 79.8 952.5 860.7 91.5 1,114.4 249.7 656.7 0.2 201.5 68.2 905.4
   Big banks 7
2013          Feb 4 2,024.2 22.2 557.2 510.8 46.3 526.8 167.1 254.1 0.2 99.0 63.0 855.0
         Mar 4 2,005.8 26.8 534.1 486.9 47.0 522.5 159.5 253.8 0.2 103.5 60.9 861.5
   Regional banks and other commercial banks
2013          Feb 163 847.1 35.1 235.8 193.1 42.5 530.3 68.2 370.0 0.0 91.4 6.6 39.3
         Mar 163 849.0 34.8 234.4 192.0 42.3 534.6 70.9 369.7 0.0 93.4 6.6 38.6
   Branches of foreign banks
2013          Feb 107 270.9 16.6 193.1 192.0 1.2 55.4 19.0 32.9 0.0 3.3 0.7 5.1
         Mar 107 265.5 18.2 184.0 181.7 2.3 57.3 19.2 33.2 0.0 4.7 0.7 5.3
Landesbanken
2013          Feb 9 1,235.0 12.4 417.6 303.8 111.2 607.0 97.3 393.3 0.1 113.2 15.8 182.3
         Mar 9 1,224.4 10.5 416.5 303.1 110.7 605.1 93.2 393.3 0.1 115.4 15.8 176.5
Savings banks
2013          Feb 423 1,092.5 14.5 227.7 82.5 144.5 815.9 59.1 638.5 0.1 118.1 16.3 18.1
         Mar 423 1,091.5 14.7 224.3 81.1 142.5 818.1 60.9 638.4 0.1 118.6 16.2 18.2
 
Regional institutions of credit cooperatives  
 
2013          Feb 2 285.4 0.1 162.1 127.9 34.2 64.7 13.2 22.0 0.0 29.3 14.5 44.0
         Mar 2 289.8 0.4 162.2 127.8 34.4 66.8 15.8 22.2 0.0 28.5 14.5 45.8
Credit cooperatives
2013          Feb 1,102 743.7 10.8 180.8 59.0 121.4 520.7 32.9 411.1 0.1 76.5 11.8 19.6
         Mar 1,101 742.3 10.8 177.8 57.3 120.3 522.4 34.0 411.7 0.1 76.5 11.9 19.4
Mortgage banks
2013          Feb 18 503.1 1.1 139.3 81.4 54.4 344.9 6.0 261.8 − 76.9 0.7 17.2
         Mar 18 499.9 2.6 138.3 81.9 53.3 341.8 6.3 260.0 − 75.5 0.7 16.5
Building and loan associations
2013          Feb 22 201.6 0.2 60.4 42.9 17.6 133.4 1.6 116.6 . 15.2 0.4 7.2
         Mar 22 202.2 0.3 60.5 42.8 17.6 134.0 1.6 117.0 . 15.5 0.4 7.1
Special purpose banks
2013          Feb 18 976.2 5.6 510.3 437.3 72.8 368.1 39.6 243.3 − 84.6 7.4 84.7
         Mar 18 978.9 10.7 504.2 432.4 71.5 370.6 40.1 245.3 − 84.6 7.4 86.0
Memo item: Foreign banks 8
2013          Feb 144 959.8 48.2 374.4 325.5 46.0 433.7 82.3 259.8 0.1 89.6 5.7 97.8
         Mar 144 960.4 54.0 364.9 315.1 46.8 433.0 78.9 257.8 0.1 94.0 5.7 102.9
  of which:  Banks majority-owned by foreign banks 9
2013          Feb 37 688.9 31.6 181.3 133.5 44.8 378.3 63.2 226.9 0.0 86.3 5.0 92.8
         Mar 37 695.0 35.8 180.9 133.4 44.5 375.7 59.7 224.6 0.1 89.4 5.0 97.6
*Assets and liabilities of monetary financial institutions (MFIs) in Germany. The assets meaning of section 340e (3) sentence 1 of the German Commercial Code (Handels-
and liabilities of foreign branches, of money market funds (which are also classified gesetzbuch) read in conjunction with section 35 (1) No 1a of the Credit Institution
as MFIs) and of the Bundesbank are not included. For the definitions of the respective Accounting Regulation (Verordnung über die Rechnungslegung der Kreditinstitute)
items, see the footnotes to Table IV.3. 1Owing to the Act Modernising Accounting are classified under "Other assets and liabilities" as of the December 2010 reporting
Law (Gesetz zur Modernisierung des Bilanzrechts) of 25 May 2009, derivative date. Trading portfolio derivatives are listed separately in the Statistical Supplement
financial instruments in the trading portfolio (trading portfolio derivatives) within the to the Monthly Report 1, Banking statistics, in Tables I.1 to I.3. 2For building and

Deutsche Bundesbank
25  Monthly Report
May 2013
IV Banks
 
   
 
Deposits of banks (MFIs) Deposits of non-banks (non-MFIs) Capital
 including  
of which of which published
reserves,
Time deposits 2 Savings deposits 4 partici-pation
Memo rights
item Bearer capital,
for for of which debt Liabilities
funds for
up to and more arising At three Bank general Other securities
Sight Time Sight including than from savings out- banking liabi-   End of months’
Total deposits deposits Total deposits 1 year 1 year 2 repos 3 Total notice bonds risks lities 1   month standing 5 
All categories of banks
 
1,973.4 496.5 1,476.9 3,368.7 1,411.4 438.9 780.4 176.5 624.2 529.6 113.8 1,337.3 414.8 1,466.8 2012          Oct 
1,940.0 489.6 1,450.5 3,381.5 1,437.9 432.4 776.0 176.3 623.4 530.2 111.7 1,330.4 414.9 1,463.5          Nov 1,826.6 422.4 1,404.3 3,327.7 1,413.8 402.1 773.1 143.7 628.2 536.5 110.5 1,303.7 416.2 1,440.4          Dec 
1,828.9 443.9 1,384.9 3,329.2 1,442.5 379.7 772.3 152.5 627.2 537.4 107.4 1,285.2 416.4 1,334.4 2013          Jan 
1,797.6 435.8 1,361.8 3,343.8 1,459.1 383.0 769.5 171.7 627.0 538.7 105.3 1,296.6 418.6 1,323.2          Feb 1,773.5 409.6 1,363.9 3,339.8 1,446.4 392.5 772.8 159.0 624.7 537.4 103.5 1,284.1 419.7 1,332.1          Mar 
Commercial banks 6
748.3 305.0 443.3 1,225.2 673.4 190.3 207.0 101.8 124.1 106.5 30.3 154.0 137.6 877.1 2013          Feb 739.2 279.8 459.3 1,208.9 651.6 194.0 211.5 85.8 121.8 104.9 30.1 152.0 136.8 883.4          Mar 
Big banks 7
442.8 219.5 223.4 582.8 305.6 103.2 85.6 95.9 77.8 74.9 10.6 114.5 78.2 805.9 2013          Feb 440.3 206.6 233.7 560.9 283.2 102.7 88.1 77.4 76.1 73.4 10.7 113.5 77.4 813.8          Mar 
Regional banks and other commercial banks
149.1 49.3 99.7 544.1 304.2 74.5 100.6 5.9 46.3 31.5 18.5 39.1 50.9 64.0 2013          Feb 149.3 47.8 101.4 548.4 303.9 78.1 102.5 8.4 45.6 31.4 18.3 38.2 51.0 62.3          Mar 
Branches of foreign banks
156.4 36.2 120.2 98.3 63.6 12.6 20.8 − 0.1 0.1 1.1 0.4 8.5 7.2 2013          Feb 149.6 25.5 124.2 99.7 64.5 13.2 20.8 − 0.1 0.1 1.1 0.4 8.4 7.3          Mar 
Landesbanken
332.1 42.5 289.6 339.5 106.6 80.7 137.2 52.5 14.6 10.3 0.3 309.9 61.2 192.4 2013          Feb 321.6 39.7 281.9 347.1 111.6 84.1 136.5 53.5 14.6 10.4 0.3 303.4 61.3 190.9          Mar 
Savings banks
165.9 19.0 146.8 783.9 380.5 32.7 15.5 0.1 300.1 255.0 55.2 17.3 77.9 47.5 2013          Feb 
164.2 20.1 144.1 784.0 381.0 33.3 15.7 0.5 300.1 255.2 54.0 16.7 78.0 48.6          Mar 
 
Regional institutions of credit cooperatives
 
131.7 32.3 99.3 38.6 11.3 13.0 12.0 6.4 − − 2.2 59.2 12.9 43.1 2013          Feb 
132.0 31.4 100.7 40.4 11.8 14.5 11.9 7.2 − − 2.2 59.2 13.7 44.5          Mar 
Credit cooperatives
102.0 5.6 96.4 542.3 272.1 41.4 24.9 0.1 187.6 166.3 16.3 14.7 49.7 35.0 2013          Feb 100.7 5.6 95.0 542.3 273.3 41.1 24.5 0.3 187.6 166.3 15.9 13.5 50.0 35.8          Mar 
Mortgage banks
127.1 7.1 120.0 178.9 8.2 15.7 154.8 6.5 0.2 0.2 . 158.0 17.1 22.1 2013          Feb 124.9 6.7 118.1 180.8 10.6 15.7 154.3 7.3 0.2 0.2 . 154.9 17.2 22.1          Mar 
Building and loan associations
22.4 1.4 21.0 149.5 0.5 0.7 147.0 − 0.4 0.4 0.9 4.9 8.8 16.0 2013          Feb 22.0 1.5 20.5 150.1 0.5 0.7 147.6 − 0.4 0.4 0.9 4.9 8.9 16.3          Mar 
Special purpose banks
168.3 22.9 145.4 86.0 6.4 8.5 71.1 4.2 − − . 578.6 53.3 90.1 2013          Feb 169.0 24.8 144.2 86.1 6.1 9.2 70.8 4.3 − − . 579.4 53.9 90.5          Mar 
Memo item:   Foreign banks 8
282.3 93.6 188.6 475.7 272.4 76.7 90.9 28.0 21.0 20.8 14.6 46.0 47.3 108.6 2013          Feb 275.6 81.6 194.0 481.1 271.8 80.9 92.8 26.9 21.1 20.8 14.5 43.9 46.2 113.7          Mar 
of which:   Banks majority-owned by foreign banks 9
125.8 57.4 68.4 377.4 208.8 64.2 70.0 28.0 20.9 20.7 13.5 45.6 38.8 101.3 2013          Feb 126.0 56.2 69.9 381.4 207.3 67.7 72.0 26.9 21.0 20.8 13.4 43.4 37.8 106.4          Mar 
loan associations: Including deposits under savings and loan contracts (see Table Nov. 2009), Commerzbank AG, UniCredit Bank AG (formerly Bayerische Hypo- und
IV.12). 3Included in time deposits. 4Excluding deposits under savings and loan Vereinsbank AG) and Deutsche Postbank AG. 8Sum of the banks majority-owned by
contracts (see also footnote 2). 5Including subordinated negotiable bearer debt foreign banks and included in other categories of banks and the category ”Branches
securities; excluding non-negotiable bearer debt securities. 6Commercial banks (with dependent legal status) of foreign banks”. 9Separate presentation of the banks
comprise the sub-groups ”Big banks”, ”Regional banks and other commercial banks” majority-owned by foreign banks included in other banking categories. and ”Branches of foreign banks”. 7Deutsche Bank AG, Dresdner Bank AG (up to

Deutsche Bundesbank
26  Monthly Report
May 2013
IV Banks
 
3 Assets and liabilities of banks (MFIs) in Germany vis-à-vis residents *
 
 
€ billion
Lending to domestic banks (MFIs) Lending to domestic non-banks (non-MFIs)
Treasury
Cash in Negotiable bills and
hand Credit money negotiable
balances market Memo money mar- (euro-area Securities
banknotes with the Credit paper item ket paper issued Securities
and Bundes- balances issued by issued by Fiduciary issued by by non-
Period coins) bank Total and loans Bills banks banks loans Total Loans Bills non-banks banks  1 
End of year or month *
 
2003 17.0 46.7 1,643.9 1,064.0 0.0 8.8 571.0 2.3 2,995.6 2,677.0 3.7 3.4 309.6
2004 14.9 41.2 1,676.3 1,075.8 0.0 7.4 592.9 2.1 3,001.3 2,644.0 2.7 2.6 351.0
2005 15.1 47.9 1,684.5 1,096.8 0.0 6.7 580.9 2.1 2,995.1 2,632.7 2.4 2.4 357.6
2006 16.0 49.4 1,637.8 1,086.3 − 9.3 542.2 1.9 3,000.7 2,630.3 1.9 2.0 366.5
2007 17.5 64.6 1,751.8 1,222.5 0.0 25.3 504.0 2.3 2,975.7 2,647.9 1.6 1.5 324.7
2008 17.4 102.6 1,861.7 1,298.1 0.0 55.7 507.8 2.0 3,071.1 2,698.9 1.2 3.1 367.9
2009 16.9 78.9 1,711.5 1,138.0 − 31.6 541.9 2.2 3,100.1 2,691.8 0.8 4.0 403.5
2010 16.0 79.6 1,686.3 1,195.4 − 7.5 483.5 1.8 3,220.9 2,770.4 0.8 27.9 421.8
2011 15.8 93.8 1,725.6 1,267.9 − 7.1 450.7 2.1 3,197.8 2,774.6 0.8 6.4 415.9
2012 18.5 134.3 1,655.0 1,229.1 − 2.4 423.5 2.4 3,220.4 2,785.5 0.6 2.2 432.1
2011          Oct 14.7 72.6 1,736.2 1,274.4 − 6.5 455.3 1.7 3,233.3 2,806.1 0.6 15.7 411.0
         Nov 14.1 57.6 1,797.7 1,338.5 − 7.4 451.9 1.7 3,237.6 2,807.6 0.5 14.4 415.0
         Dec 15.8 93.8 1,725.6 1,267.9 − 7.1 450.7 2.1 3,197.8 2,774.6 0.8 6.4 415.9
2012          Jan 13.8 49.8 1,846.4 1,394.4 − 7.3 444.6 2.1 3,226.6 2,800.0 0.7 4.9 421.1
         Feb 13.6 50.8 1,904.6 1,448.5 − 6.8 449.4 2.1 3,220.3 2,797.7 0.5 5.6 416.4
         Mar 14.5 75.8 1,936.0 1,482.9 − 6.8 446.2 2.1 3,222.9 2,787.1 0.5 4.9 430.4
         Apr 14.5 55.4 1,968.9 1,518.5 − 6.6 443.8 2.0 3,244.7 2,795.6 0.5 5.7 442.8
         May 14.8 76.4 1,959.2 1,509.0 − 5.9 444.3 2.0 3,219.1 2,793.4 0.5 4.5 420.7
         June 14.7 89.2 1,927.0 1,481.6 − 6.1 439.3 2.1 3,227.6 2,802.1 0.5 6.1 418.9
         July 14.0 185.5 1,789.7 1,344.8 − 6.3 438.6 2.1 3,257.8 2,833.8 0.5 5.2 418.3
         Aug 14.6 203.4 1,788.0 1,343.7 − 5.4 438.8 2.1 3,252.3 2,824.1 0.5 5.1 422.7
         Sep 14.9 175.1 1,748.0 1,306.1 − 4.1 437.8 2.1 3,253.0 2,817.9 0.5 5.6 429.0
         Oct 15.0 178.6 1,713.5 1,277.5 − 3.6 432.3 2.1 3,271.1 2,837.5 0.5 6.5 426.7
         Nov 14.7 185.4 1,695.0 1,262.7 − 2.8 429.5 2.1 3,265.5 2,825.2 0.5 5.8 433.9
         Dec 18.5 134.3 1,655.0 1,229.1 − 2.4 423.5 2.4 3,220.4 2,785.5 0.6 2.2 432.1
2013          Jan 14.4 131.5 1,629.0 1,206.0 − 2.0 421.0 2.4 3,243.1 2,806.0 0.5 2.1 434.4
         Feb 14.4 103.5 1,628.4 1,207.8 − 2.2 418.5 2.3 3,237.4 2,804.4 0.5 2.0 430.6
         Mar 16.0 112.8 1,591.0 1,176.5 − 2.0 412.5 2.3 3,234.0 2,795.7 0.5 1.9 435.9
Changes *
2004 − 2.1 − 5.5 + 35.9 + 15.1 + 0.0 − 1.4 + 22.1 − 0.2 + 3.3 − 35.0 − 1.0 + 1.1 + 39.2
2005 + 0.2 + 6.7 + 8.4 + 21.0 − 0.0 − 0.8 − 11.9 − 0.0 − 6.7 − 11.8 − 0.3 − 0.2 + 6.6
2006 + 0.9 + 1.5 − 3.6 + 24.5 − 0.0 + 2.6 − 30.6 − 0.2 − 12.4 − 20.3 − 0.5 − 0.4 + 8.8
2007 + 1.5 + 15.2 + 114.8 + 137.6 + 0.0 + 17.0 − 39.8 + 0.4 − 15.9 + 12.1 − 0.3 − 0.5 − 27.2
2008 − 0.1 + 39.4 + 125.9 + 90.1 + 0.0 + 30.6 + 5.2 − 0.8 + 92.0 + 47.3 − 0.4 + 1.8 + 43.3
2009 − 0.5 − 23.6 − 147.2 − 157.3 − 0.0 − 24.1 + 34.3 + 0.2 + 25.7 − 11.2 − 0.4 + 1.4 + 35.9
2010 − 0.9 + 0.6 − 19.3 + 61.5 + 0.0 − 24.0 − 56.8 − 0.3 + 130.5 + 78.7 + 0.0 + 23.8 + 28.0
2011 − 0.2 + 14.2 + 47.3 + 80.5 − − 0.4 − 32.8 − 0.1 − 30.6 − 3.2 + 0.0 − 21.5 − 5.9
2012 + 2.7 + 40.5 − 68.6 − 37.5 − − 4.6 − 26.5 + 0.1 + 21.0 + 9.8 − 0.2 − 4.3 + 15.7
2011          Oct + 0.0 − 6.1 + 5.5 + 5.1 − + 0.5 − 0.1 + 0.0 + 25.7 + 27.8 − 0.0 + 1.2 − 3.3
         Nov − 0.6 − 15.1 + 61.5 + 64.1 − + 0.8 − 3.5 + 0.0 + 4.3 + 1.6 − 0.0 − 1.3 + 4.1
         Dec + 1.7 + 36.2 − 72.0 − 70.6 − − 0.3 − 1.2 + 0.0 − 39.9 − 33.0 + 0.3 − 8.0 + 0.9
2012          Jan − 2.0 − 44.0 + 120.7 + 126.5 − + 0.2 − 6.1 − 0.1 + 29.0 + 25.3 − 0.1 − 1.5 + 5.3
         Feb − 0.2 + 1.0 + 58.3 + 54.1 − − 0.5 + 4.7 + 0.0 − 6.4 − 2.3 − 0.1 + 0.7 − 4.7
         Mar + 0.9 + 25.1 + 31.3 + 34.4 − + 0.1 − 3.2 − 0.0 + 2.7 − 10.6 − 0.0 − 0.7 + 14.0
         Apr + 0.0 − 20.4 + 36.1 + 38.8 − − 0.3 − 2.4 − 0.0 + 18.6 + 5.4 − 0.0 + 0.8 + 12.5
         May + 0.3 + 21.0 − 9.7 − 9.5 − − 0.7 + 0.5 + 0.0 − 25.6 − 2.2 − 0.0 − 1.1 − 22.2
         June − 0.1 + 12.8 − 32.2 − 27.4 − + 0.2 − 5.1 + 0.1 + 10.2 + 10.4 − 0.0 + 1.6 − 1.8
         July − 0.6 + 96.3 − 137.2 − 136.8 − + 0.3 − 0.7 − 0.0 + 30.5 + 32.0 + 0.0 − 0.9 − 0.6
         Aug + 0.6 + 17.9 − 1.7 − 1.1 − − 0.9 + 0.2 + 0.1 − 5.5 − 9.7 − 0.0 − 0.2 + 4.4
         Sep + 0.3 − 28.3 − 40.0 − 37.7 − − 1.3 − 1.0 − 0.1 + 0.5 − 6.4 + 0.0 + 0.5 + 6.3
         Oct + 0.1 + 3.6 − 35.7 − 30.3 − − 0.5 − 4.9 + 0.0 + 17.4 + 19.6 + 0.0 + 0.9 − 3.0
         Nov − 0.3 + 6.8 − 18.4 − 14.8 − − 0.8 − 2.8 + 0.0 − 5.5 − 12.0 − 0.0 − 0.7 + 7.3
         Dec + 3.8 − 51.2 − 40.0 − 33.7 − − 0.4 − 6.0 + 0.1 − 45.1 − 39.8 + 0.2 − 3.7 − 1.8
2013          Jan − 4.0 − 2.8 − 26.1 − 23.1 − − 0.4 − 2.6 − 0.0 + 22.7 + 20.5 − 0.1 − 0.0 + 2.4
         Feb − 0.0 − 27.9 + 2.5 + 4.8 − + 0.1 − 2.5 − 0.0 − 5.7 − 1.6 − 0.1 − 0.2 − 3.9
         Mar + 1.6 + 9.3 − 37.4 − 31.3 − − 0.2 − 5.9 − 0.0 − 3.4 − 8.7 − 0.0 − 0.0 + 5.4
*See Table IV.2, footnote*; statistical breaks have been eliminated from the changes. (see also footnote 2). 2Including debt securities arising from the exchange of
The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as provisional. Subsequent equalisation claims. 3Including liabilities arising from registered debt securities,
revisions which appear in the following Monthly Report, are not specially registered money market paper and non-negotiable bearer debt securities; including
marked. 1Excluding debt securities arising from the exchange of equalisation claims subordinated liabilities. 4Including liabilities arising from monetary policy operations

Deutsche Bundesbank
27  Monthly Report
May 2013
IV Banks
 
   
 
 Deposits of domestic banks (MFIs)  3 Deposits of domestic non-banks (non-MFIs)
Partici-
patinginterestsin
Memo domestic Memo Memo
item banks Sight Time Redis- item Sight Time Savings Bank item Equalisa-tion Fiduciary and deposits deposits counted Fiduciary de- deposits de- savings Fiduciaryclaims 
2 loans Total 4 4 bills 5 loans Total posits 6 posits 7 bonds 8 loans   Period enterprises
End of year or month *
 
2.0 56.8 109.2 1,229.6 116.8 1,112.6 0.2 27.8 2,140.3 624.0 825.7 590.3 100.3 40.5 2003
1.0 61.8 99.6 1,271.2 119.7 1,151.4 0.1 30.3 2,200.0 646.9 851.2 603.5 98.4 43.7 2004
− 56.6 108.5 1,300.0 120.5 1,179.4 0.1 26.5 2,276.6 717.0 864.4 603.4 91.9 42.4 2005− 53.0 106.3 1,348.2 125.4 1,222.7 0.0 22.3 2,394.6 747.7 962.8 586.5 97.5 37.8 2006− 51.1 109.4 1,478.6 122.1 1,356.5 0.0 20.0 2,579.1 779.9 1,125.4 555.4 118.4 36.4 2007− 47.2 111.2 1,582.5 138.5 1,444.0 0.0 41.6 2,781.4 834.6 1,276.1 535.2 135.4 32.3 2008− 43.9 106.1 1,355.1 128.9 1,226.2 0.0 35.7 2,829.7 1,029.5 1,102.6 594.5 103.2 43.4 2009
− 33.7 96.8 1,238.3 135.3 1,102.6 0.0 13.8 2,935.2 1,104.4 1,117.1 618.2 95.4 37.5 2010
− 36.3 94.6 1,210.5 114.8 1,095.3 0.0 36.1 3,045.5 1,168.3 1,156.2 616.1 104.8 36.5 2011− 34.8 90.0 1,135.5 132.9 1,002.6 0.0 36.3 3,090.2 1,306.5 1,072.5 617.6 93.6 34.9 2012
− 32.5 95.0 1,163.0 132.5 1,030.2 0.0 13.4 3,025.6 1,160.9 1,148.1 613.1 103.6 36.7 2011          Oct 
− 32.5 94.9 1,177.5 136.1 1,041.0 0.0 13.7 3,053.1 1,188.0 1,149.2 611.5 104.3 36.7          Nov − 36.3 94.6 1,210.5 114.8 1,095.3 0.0 36.1 3,045.5 1,168.3 1,156.2 616.1 104.8 36.5          Dec 
− 35.3 93.8 1,221.4 137.1 1,083.9 0.0 35.4 3,035.3 1,181.1 1,133.1 617.2 103.8 35.8 2012          Jan 
− 35.1 93.4 1,232.3 141.0 1,091.2 0.0 35.2 3,053.7 1,187.1 1,143.5 619.8 103.3 35.6          Feb − 34.8 91.8 1,232.1 135.9 1,096.1 0.0 35.3 3,048.3 1,188.9 1,136.9 619.4 103.0 35.3          Mar 
− 35.3 91.7 1,222.4 135.0 1,087.2 0.0 35.7 3,071.3 1,197.7 1,153.2 617.9 102.5 35.5          Apr 
− 35.3 90.9 1,219.1 137.8 1,081.1 0.0 36.4 3,091.6 1,216.8 1,155.6 617.1 102.0 35.5          May− 35.2 91.1 1,207.3 134.1 1,073.0 0.0 36.3 3,104.7 1,233.8 1,153.5 616.1 101.3 35.2          June
− 34.9 91.4 1,190.1 128.0 1,062.0 0.0 36.4 3,105.8 1,235.4 1,154.2 615.9 100.3 35.1          July
− 35.2 91.5 1,184.9 124.8 1,059.9 0.0 36.5 3,118.3 1,247.0 1,156.8 615.4 99.1 35.1          Aug − 35.0 90.6 1,175.0 129.2 1,045.5 0.0 36.1 3,112.2 1,262.9 1,137.3 614.1 97.9 35.0          Sep 
− 34.7 90.3 1,160.8 124.6 1,035.9 0.0 36.3 3,124.7 1,292.7 1,121.9 613.6 96.6 34.9          Oct 
− 35.0 90.2 1,160.0 136.1 1,023.7 0.0 36.4 3,137.0 1,317.7 1,111.8 612.8 94.6 35.2          Nov − 34.8 90.0 1,135.5 132.9 1,002.6 0.0 36.3 3,090.2 1,306.5 1,072.5 617.6 93.6 34.9          Dec 
− 34.5 90.8 1,126.1 125.9 1,000.2 0.0 35.4 3,087.3 1,326.2 1,053.6 616.8 90.7 35.0 2013          Jan 
− 34.5 90.5 1,102.3 129.5 972.8 0.0 35.6 3,097.1 1,336.2 1,055.8 616.6 88.5 34.9          Feb − 34.2 89.3 1,092.4 130.8 961.5 0.0 35.8 3,096.3 1,330.3 1,064.7 614.5 86.8 34.8          Mar 
Changes *
− 1.1 + 3.0 − 9.6 + 41.3 + 2.9 + 38.5 − 0.1 + 2.4 + 62.0 + 24.4 + 25.9 + 13.1 − 1.5 + 1.2 2004
− 1.0 − 4.9 + 8.9 + 28.9 + 0.8 + 28.0 + 0.0 − 3.5 + 76.6 + 70.7 + 12.4 − 1.2 − 5.4 − 1.2 2005
− − 3.7 − 2.2 + 79.0 + 8.6 + 70.5 − 0.1 − 4.5 + 118.0 + 30.0 + 97.7 − 16.8 + 7.2 − 4.1 2006
− − 2.3 + 3.1 + 132.0 − 3.3 + 135.3 − 0.0 − 2.3 + 181.1 + 31.6 + 160.5 − 31.1 + 20.1 − 2.0 2007− − 5.4 + 7.8 + 124.3 + 23.0 + 101.3 − 0.0 − 3.6 + 207.6 + 54.3 + 156.6 − 20.2 + 17.0 − 1.3 2008− − 4.2 + 0.7 − 225.4 − 9.7 − 215.7 − 0.0 − 5.7 + 59.7 + 211.4 − 179.3 + 59.3 − 31.6 − 0.9 2009
− − 2.1 − 9.2 − 96.5 + 22.3 − 119.1 − 0.0 − 0.2 + 77.8 + 76.0 − 18.9 + 24.0 − 3.3 − 1.7 2010
− − 1.1 − 2.2 − 25.0 − 20.0 − 5.1 − 0.0 + 0.1 + 111.2 + 63.7 + 40.9 − 2.6 + 9.3 − 1.1 2011− − 1.3 − 4.1 − 70.8 + 21.5 − 91.9 − 0.0 + 0.2 + 42.2 + 138.7 − 86.7 + 1.5 − 11.2 − 1.6 2012
− − 0.2 + 0.1 − 12.9 − 0.5 − 12.4 − 0.0 − 0.1 + 0.7 + 9.6 − 9.2 − 0.4 + 0.8 + 0.0 2011          Oct 
− + 0.0 − 0.2 + 14.5 + 3.6 + 10.8 − 0.0 + 0.3 + 27.5 + 26.8 + 1.1 − 1.1 + 0.7 − 0.0          Nov − + 0.1 − 0.3 + 33.0 − 21.3 + 54.3 − 0.0 + 0.2 − 6.2 − 19.8 + 8.4 + 4.6 + 0.5 − 0.2          Dec 
− − 1.0 − 0.8 + 10.9 + 22.3 − 11.3 + 0.0 − 0.7 − 10.4 + 12.9 − 23.4 + 1.1 − 1.0 − 0.7 2012          Jan 
− − 0.3 − 0.5 + 10.9 + 3.9 + 7.3 − 0.0 − 0.2 + 18.3 + 5.9 + 10.3 + 2.6 − 0.5 − 0.2          Feb − − 0.3 − 1.6 − 0.2 − 5.1 + 4.9 − 0.0 + 0.1 − 5.4 + 1.9 − 6.5 − 0.4 − 0.3 − 0.2          Mar 
− + 0.5 − 0.2 − 7.1 + 0.2 − 7.3 + 0.0 + 0.4 + 20.4 + 9.0 + 13.5 − 1.5 − 0.5 + 0.2          Apr 
− + 0.0 − 0.8 − 3.3 + 2.8 − 6.1 + 0.0 + 0.8 + 20.2 + 19.2 + 2.4 − 0.8 − 0.5 − 0.0          May− − 0.2 + 0.2 − 11.8 − 3.7 − 8.1 − − 0.1 + 13.1 + 16.9 − 2.0 − 1.1 − 0.7 − 0.3          June
− − 0.2 + 0.3 − 17.2 − 6.1 − 11.0 − 0.0 + 0.1 + 1.1 + 1.6 + 0.7 − 0.2 − 1.1 − 0.1          July
− + 0.3 + 0.1 − 5.2 − 3.2 − 2.0 − + 0.1 + 12.5 + 11.5 + 2.6 − 0.5 − 1.1 − 0.0          Aug − − 0.2 − 0.3 − 9.9 + 5.3 − 15.2 + 0.0 − 0.4 − 5.8 + 16.2 − 19.6 − 1.2 − 1.2 − 0.1          Sep 
− − 0.3 − 0.4 − 17.2 − 7.6 − 9.6 − 0.0 + 0.2 + 12.5 + 29.8 − 15.4 − 0.6 − 1.3 − 0.2          Oct 
− + 0.3 − 0.1 − 0.8 + 11.4 − 12.2 − + 0.1 + 12.2 + 25.0 − 10.0 − 0.7 − 2.0 + 0.3          Nov − + 0.0 − 0.2 − 19.9 + 1.4 − 21.1 − − 0.1 − 46.5 − 11.2 − 39.1 + 4.8 − 1.0 − 0.3          Dec 
− − 0.3 + 0.9 − 9.0 − 6.8 − 2.2 − − 0.8 − 2.9 + 19.7 − 18.8 − 0.8 − 2.9 − 0.0 2013          Jan 
− − 0.0 − 0.4 − 23.9 + 3.5 − 27.4 − + 0.2 + 9.8 + 10.0 + 2.2 − 0.1 − 2.2 − 0.0          Feb − − 0.3 − 1.2 − 9.6 + 1.6 − 11.3 − 0.0 + 0.2 − 1.2 − 6.2 + 8.9 − 2.2 − 1.8 − 0.1          Mar 
with the Bundesbank. 5Own acceptances and promissory notes outstanding. 6Since savings and loan contracts (see also footnote 8). 8Including liabilities arising from
the inclusion of building and loan associations in January 1999, including deposits non-negotiable bearer debt securities. 
under savings and loan contracts (see Table IV.12). 7Excluding deposits under

Deutsche Bundesbank
28  Monthly Report
May 2013
IV Banks
 
4 Assets and liabilities of banks (MFIs) in Germany vis-à-vis non-residents *
 
 
€ billion
Lending to foreign banks (MFIs) Lending to foreign non-banks (non-MFIs)
Treasury
Cash in bills and
hand Loans and bills negotiable Credit balances and loans, bills Negotiable
(non- money money
euro-area Medium market Memo Medium market
banknotes and paper item and paper Securities Securities
and Short- long- issued by issued by Fiduciary Short- long- issued by issued by
Period coins) Total Total term term banks banks loans Total Total term term non-banks non-banks
End of year or month *
 
2003 0.3 769.6 675.8 515.7 160.1 1.5 92.3 1.6 576.3 344.8 110.9 233.9 6.0 225.4
2004 0.2 889.4 760.2 606.5 153.7 2.8 126.3 1.5 629.5 362.5 136.6 225.9 10.9 256.1
2005 0.2 1,038.8 860.0 648.5 211.5 5.8 173.0 1.5 712.0 387.9 132.8 255.1 9.3 314.8
2006 0.4 1,266.9 1,003.2 744.5 258.7 13.3 250.4 0.8 777.0 421.0 156.0 264.9 7.2 348.9
2007 0.3 1,433.5 1,105.9 803.6 302.4 13.4 314.2 0.5 908.3 492.9 197.5 295.4 27.5 387.9
2008 0.3 1,446.6 1,131.6 767.2 364.3 15.6 299.5 1.9 908.4 528.9 151.4 377.5 12.9 366.6
2009 0.3 1,277.4 986.1 643.5 342.6 6.2 285.0 2.9 815.7 469.6 116.9 352.7 9.8 336.3
2010 0.5 1,154.1 892.7 607.7 285.1 2.1 259.3 1.8 773.8 461.4 112.6 348.8 10.1 302.3
2011 0.6 1,117.6 871.0 566.3 304.8 4.6 241.9 2.6 744.4 455.8 102.0 353.8 8.5 280.1
2012 0.8 1,046.0 813.5 545.5 268.1 5.4 227.0 2.6 729.0 442.2 105.1 337.1 9.0 277.8
2011          Oct 0.7 1,132.7 880.4 587.7 292.7 6.5 245.8 1.8 746.0 453.2 113.3 339.9 19.9 272.9
         Nov 0.7 1,139.9 888.9 593.7 295.2 7.0 244.1 1.8 746.2 459.9 114.6 345.3 10.9 275.4
         Dec 0.6 1,117.6 871.0 566.3 304.8 4.6 241.9 2.6 744.4 455.8 102.0 353.8 8.5 280.1
2012          Jan 0.7 1,141.0 892.7 595.1 297.6 5.9 242.3 2.6 739.1 454.4 101.4 353.0 11.2 273.5
         Feb 0.8 1,136.0 890.0 599.6 290.4 6.3 239.8 2.6 729.2 449.1 99.6 349.5 10.0 270.1
         Mar 0.9 1,114.2 867.7 579.8 287.9 6.4 240.0 2.6 747.1 463.8 116.4 347.4 10.6 272.8
         Apr 0.7 1,119.5 876.5 588.8 287.8 6.4 236.6 2.6 750.1 470.0 122.6 347.4 9.0 271.1
         May 0.7 1,129.6 886.9 596.5 290.4 7.5 235.3 2.6 757.0 475.2 119.8 355.4 9.3 272.6
         June 0.8 1,090.3 853.7 566.5 287.2 7.1 229.5 2.6 740.2 461.4 109.7 351.7 7.5 271.4
         July 0.8 1,103.0 870.2 583.3 286.9 6.8 226.0 2.6 746.8 467.9 113.7 354.2 6.9 272.0
         Aug 1.1 1,096.3 863.0 580.5 282.5 6.9 226.4 2.6 745.7 466.6 116.2 350.3 8.0 271.1
         Sep 1.1 1,096.0 864.6 583.8 280.8 6.4 225.0 2.6 743.6 462.3 116.5 345.8 8.6 272.7
         Oct 0.9 1,087.8 857.6 579.4 278.2 6.4 223.8 2.6 742.9 459.1 116.8 342.4 9.2 274.6
         Nov 0.9 1,067.9 837.2 561.9 275.3 5.9 224.8 2.6 753.2 470.4 127.9 342.5 7.5 275.4
         Dec 0.8 1,046.0 813.5 545.5 268.1 5.4 227.0 2.6 729.0 442.2 105.1 337.1 9.0 277.8
2013          Jan 0.6 1,033.1 798.8 535.3 263.5 6.3 228.0 2.5 731.5 441.4 110.5 330.9 10.0 280.0
         Feb 0.6 1,056.0 822.8 562.2 260.6 5.7 227.5 2.5 729.7 443.5 110.6 332.9 9.4 276.9
         Mar 1.0 1,045.3 810.6 548.3 262.3 5.6 229.1 2.5 739.2 450.5 116.6 333.9 8.6 280.1
Changes *
2004 − 0.1 + 128.3 + 89.4 + 95.3 − 5.9 + 1.3 + 37.6 − 0.1 + 65.8 + 29.5 + 31.7 − 2.2 + 5.1 + 31.1
2005 + 0.0 + 127.3 + 78.9 + 26.3 + 52.6 + 2.9 + 45.4 − 0.0 + 59.4 + 7.3 − 9.4 + 16.7 − 1.8 + 54.0
2006 + 0.1 + 238.3 + 153.5 + 109.7 + 43.8 + 7.5 + 77.2 − 0.7 + 81.4 + 51.6 + 25.9 + 25.8 − 1.8 + 31.5
2007 − 0.0 + 190.3 + 123.7 + 72.9 + 50.8 + 7.5 + 59.1 − 0.4 + 167.7 + 94.3 + 50.1 + 44.2 + 20.1 + 53.3
2008 + 0.0 + 8.5 + 20.2 − 43.0 + 63.2 + 2.1 − 13.7 − 0.0 + 4.3 + 45.1 − 31.9 + 77.0 − 14.5 − 26.3
2009 − 0.0 − 170.0 − 141.3 − 122.5 − 18.8 − 10.3 − 18.4 − 0.2 − 72.8 − 43.8 − 31.7 − 12.1 − 3.3 − 25.7
2010 + 0.1 − 141.5 − 116.2 − 47.3 − 68.9 − 4.8 − 20.4 − 0.2 − 62.0 − 24.5 − 12.6 − 11.9 + 0.4 − 38.0
2011 + 0.1 − 48.4 − 32.6 − 45.3 + 12.7 + 2.5 − 18.4 + 0.0 − 38.9 − 13.6 − 12.8 − 0.9 − 1.6 − 23.6
2012 + 0.1 − 70.1 − 56.8 − 23.1 − 33.7 + 0.9 − 14.1 − 0.1 − 9.4 − 7.5 + 8.3 − 15.9 + 0.6 − 2.5
2011          Oct − 0.1 − 17.9 − 13.5 − 16.1 + 2.6 + 0.7 − 5.1 − 0.0 − 14.3 − 13.5 − 13.1 − 0.5 + 2.4 − 3.2
         Nov + 0.0 − 2.5 − 0.9 + 0.8 − 1.7 + 0.4 − 2.1 + 0.0 − 8.0 − 0.1 − 0.3 + 0.2 − 9.0 + 1.1
         Dec − 0.1 − 24.5 − 19.8 − 27.1 + 7.2 − 2.4 − 2.3 + 0.0 − 11.5 − 12.3 − 14.1 + 1.8 − 2.4 + 3.2
2012          Jan + 0.1 + 27.0 + 25.1 + 29.4 − 4.3 + 1.3 + 0.5 − 0.0 − 2.2 + 1.2 + 0.6 + 0.6 + 2.8 − 6.1
         Feb + 0.1 + 0.1 + 2.1 + 7.1 − 5.0 + 0.3 − 2.4 − 0.0 − 5.6 − 1.8 − 1.0 − 0.8 − 1.2 − 2.6
         Mar + 0.1 − 23.0 − 23.6 − 20.4 − 3.2 + 0.2 + 0.5 − 0.0 + 16.2 + 13.5 + 16.4 − 2.9 + 0.5 + 2.1
         Apr − 0.1 + 2.2 + 5.6 + 7.2 − 1.7 − 0.0 − 3.4 − 0.0 − 0.0 + 3.9 + 6.1 − 2.2 − 1.5 − 2.4
         May − 0.0 − 3.6 − 3.0 + 0.7 − 3.7 + 1.1 − 1.7 + 0.0 − 6.1 − 5.8 − 5.7 − 0.1 + 0.2 − 0.6
         June + 0.1 − 39.5 − 33.6 − 32.1 − 1.6 − 0.4 − 5.5 + 0.0 − 9.9 − 7.2 − 5.4 − 1.8 − 1.8 − 0.9
         July − 0.0 + 6.2 + 10.2 + 13.4 − 3.2 − 0.3 − 3.7 + 0.0 + 0.6 + 1.5 + 3.0 − 1.5 − 0.6 − 0.3
         Aug + 0.3 − 0.7 − 1.4 + 0.3 − 1.7 + 0.1 + 0.6 − 0.0 + 4.2 + 3.1 + 3.5 − 0.4 + 1.1 − 0.0
         Sep − 0.0 + 5.4 + 7.1 + 6.4 + 0.7 − 0.5 − 1.2 + 0.0 + 2.9 + 0.1 + 1.3 − 1.3 + 0.6 + 2.2
         Oct − 0.2 − 6.5 − 5.3 − 3.5 − 1.9 − 0.0 − 1.2 − 0.0 + 0.8 − 2.0 + 0.5 − 2.5 + 0.6 + 2.2
         Nov − 0.0 − 19.5 − 20.1 − 17.4 − 2.7 − 0.4 + 1.0 + 0.0 + 10.7 + 11.4 + 11.1 + 0.3 − 1.8 + 1.0
         Dec − 0.1 − 18.0 − 19.8 − 14.3 − 5.5 − 0.5 + 2.3 − 0.0 − 21.0 − 25.6 − 22.2 − 3.4 + 1.6 + 3.0
2013          Jan − 0.2 − 4.6 − 6.7 − 5.8 − 0.9 + 0.8 + 1.2 − 0.0 + 9.1 + 4.5 + 6.5 − 2.0 + 1.0 + 3.6
         Feb + 0.1 + 16.5 + 17.8 + 23.4 − 5.6 − 0.6 − 0.7 + 0.0 − 6.8 − 2.1 − 0.6 − 1.5 − 0.7 − 4.0
         Mar + 0.3 − 15.9 − 16.6 − 16.6 − 0.0 − 0.1 + 0.7 + 0.0 + 4.1 + 2.5 + 4.7 − 2.2 − 0.7 + 2.3
*See Table IV.2, footnote*; statistical breaks have been eliminated from the changes.   
The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as provisional. Subsequent   
revisions, which appear in the following Monthly Report, are not specially marked.   
   
  

Deutsche Bundesbank
29  Monthly Report
May 2013
IV Banks
 
   
 
 Deposits of foreign banks (MFIs) Deposits of foreign non-banks (non-MFIs) Partici- Time deposits (including
pating Time deposits (including bank savings deposits and bank
interests savings bonds) savings bonds)in foreign
Memo banks Medium Memo Medium Memo
item and and item and item
Fiduciary enter- Sight Short- long- Fiduciary Sight Short- long- Fiduciaryloans prises Total deposits Total term term loans Total deposits Total term term loans   Period
End of year or month *
 
11.6 41.4 590.7 95.1 495.6 387.7 107.9 0.4 307.3 32.2 275.1 102.4 172.7 3.6 2003
9.8 39.3 603.3 87.0 516.2 403.2 113.0 0.5 311.2 36.6 274.7 123.4 151.2 0.8 2004
10.6 37.2 651.7 102.9 548.8 420.4 128.4 0.6 316.4 62.0 254.4 119.4 135.0 1.2 2005
5.8 50.4 689.7 168.1 521.6 397.3 124.3 0.4 310.1 82.1 228.0 111.5 116.5 1.5 2006
5.7 48.3 738.9 164.7 574.1 461.2 113.0 0.2 303.1 76.0 227.1 122.3 104.8 3.1 2007
25.5 45.1 703.3 218.1 485.1 362.3 122.9 0.3 286.1 92.2 193.9 95.1 98.8 2.5 200832.1 45.4 652.6 213.6 439.0 307.4 131.6 0.2 216.3 78.1 138.2 73.7 64.5 1.9 2009
15.6 48.8 741.7 258.7 483.0 349.3 133.6 0.1 227.6 84.8 142.7 76.7 66.0 1.5 2010
32.9 45.0 655.7 242.6 413.1 289.4 123.7 0.1 225.9 92.3 133.6 66.9 66.6 1.3 201132.6 46.4 691.1 289.4 401.7 284.6 117.0 0.1 237.6 107.2 130.3 69.1 61.2 1.2 2012
15.5 48.9 745.5 303.7 441.8 319.3 122.5 0.1 249.7 116.6 133.1 67.4 65.8 1.4 2011          Oct 
15.7 49.8 762.5 330.3 432.2 308.3 124.0 0.1 242.8 111.1 131.7 65.7 66.0 1.3          Nov 32.9 45.0 655.7 242.6 413.1 289.4 123.7 0.1 225.9 92.3 133.6 66.9 66.6 1.3          Dec 
32.6 47.6 813.6 327.1 486.5 363.7 122.8 0.1 233.8 103.1 130.7 64.7 66.0 1.3 2012          Jan 
32.3 47.4 828.4 357.6 470.8 348.3 122.5 0.1 233.4 106.2 127.2 62.1 65.1 1.3          Feb 32.3 47.5 884.3 368.3 516.0 388.5 127.6 0.1 240.9 114.6 126.3 63.1 63.2 1.2          Mar 
32.4 46.7 905.9 364.8 541.1 416.2 125.0 0.1 246.4 115.3 131.1 67.9 63.2 1.2          Apr 
33.1 47.9 890.3 410.3 480.0 353.8 126.2 0.1 246.3 115.1 131.2 67.6 63.6 1.2          May32.7 48.0 847.4 359.3 488.0 364.5 123.5 0.1 238.0 109.6 128.4 65.1 63.3 1.1          June
33.1 48.1 852.0 402.5 449.5 325.8 123.7 0.1 247.6 115.4 132.2 68.9 63.3 1.3          July
33.0 49.2 869.9 389.0 480.9 359.2 121.7 0.1 245.9 118.7 127.2 65.0 62.2 1.3          Aug 32.7 48.9 816.2 369.2 446.9 323.2 123.8 0.1 249.4 122.8 126.6 64.9 61.7 1.3          Sep 
33.1 49.0 812.6 371.9 440.7 320.6 120.2 0.1 244.0 118.7 125.2 63.2 62.0 1.4          Oct 
33.1 49.0 780.0 353.5 426.5 307.5 119.0 0.1 244.5 120.2 124.3 62.7 61.6 1.3          Nov 32.6 46.4 691.1 289.4 401.7 284.6 117.0 0.1 237.6 107.2 130.3 69.1 61.2 1.2          Dec 
32.1 49.6 702.8 318.1 384.7 268.8 115.9 0.1 241.9 116.4 125.5 65.5 60.0 1.2 2013          Jan 
32.3 46.7 695.3 306.3 389.0 280.1 109.0 0.1 246.6 122.9 123.8 64.4 59.3 1.2          Feb 32.6 45.8 681.2 278.8 402.4 296.2 106.2 0.1 243.6 116.1 127.5 65.2 62.3 1.1          Mar 
Changes *
+ 0.7 − 1.5 + 19.8 − 6.1 + 25.9 + 21.1 + 4.8 + 0.1 + 13.0 + 5.4 + 7.6 + 22.8 − 15.2 − 0.3 2004
+ 0.8 − 3.5 + 28.6 + 12.6 + 16.0 + 4.9 + 11.1 + 0.1 − 4.9 + 23.9 − 28.8 − 7.7 − 21.1 + 0.4 2005
− 5.1 + 13.8 + 56.2 + 68.3 − 12.1 − 13.7 + 1.6 − 0.2 − 0.8 + 21.2 − 22.0 − 5.1 − 17.0 − 0.2 2006− 0.1 − 0.8 + 67.3 + 1.5 + 65.8 + 74.0 − 8.3 − 0.1 + 4.6 − 5.5 + 10.2 + 16.6 − 6.4 + 1.6 2007+ 0.7 − 3.1 − 50.1 + 52.2 − 102.3 − 120.7 + 18.5 + 0.1 − 12.4 + 16.1 − 28.5 − 19.4 − 9.1 − 0.6 2008− 3.2 + 0.1 − 81.4 − 2.1 − 79.3 − 57.5 − 21.7 − 0.2 − 33.5 − 13.3 − 20.1 − 17.0 − 3.1 − 0.6 2009
+ 0.2 + 1.4 + 895.4 + 42.0 + 542.4 + 38.1 + 136.8 − 0.1 − 1.6 + 6.0 − 7.6 − 3.3 − 4.4 − 0.4 2010
− 0.1 − 3.9 − 88.8 − 13.8 − 75.0 − 61.8 − 13.1 − 0.0 − 9.3 + 6.4 − 15.7 − 10.4 − 5.3 − 0.2 2011− 0.3 + 1.5 + 38.2 + 51.7 − 13.5 − 7.5 − 6.0 − 0.0 + 12.6 + 15.2 − 2.6 + 2.5 − 5.1 − 0.1 2012
+ 0.0 + 0.1 + 4.8 + 0.8 + 4.0 + 8.8 − 4.9 − + 8.3 + 6.7 + 1.6 + 1.9 − 0.3 − 0.1 2011          Oct 
+ 0.2 + 0.7 + 10.7 + 24.3 − 13.6 − 13.7 + 0.2 − − 8.9 − 6.4 − 2.6 − 2.3 − 0.3 − 0.0          Nov − 0.2 − 4.9 − 107.6 − 85.1 − 22.6 − 20.6 − 1.9 − 0.0 − 18.7 − 19.5 + 0.8 + 0.6 + 0.1 − 0.0          Dec 
− 0.3 + 2.6 + 159.9 + 87.4 + 72.6 + 73.0 − 0.4 − + 8.7 + 11.1 − 2.4 − 2.0 − 0.4 + 0.0 2012          Jan 
− 0.2 − 0.0 + 17.9 + 31.6 − 13.7 − 14.1 + 0.4 − 0.0 + 0.5 + 3.4 − 2.9 − 2.3 − 0.6 − 0.0          Feb + 0.0 + 0.0 + 55.6 + 10.3 + 45.3 + 40.5 + 4.8 − 0.0 + 7.3 + 8.3 − 1.0 + 0.9 − 1.9 − 0.1          Mar 
+ 0.1 − 0.8 + 19.5 − 3.9 + 23.4 + 26.6 − 3.1 − + 4.8 + 0.4 + 4.4 + 4.6 − 0.2 − 0.0          Apr 
+ 0.7 + 1.0 − 25.4 + 42.3 − 67.7 − 67.1 − 0.6 − 0.0 − 3.4 − 1.7 − 1.7 − 1.2 − 0.4 + 0.0          May− 0.4 + 0.2 − 40.6 − 49.3 + 8.8 + 11.0 − 2.3 − 0.0 − 7.6 − 5.2 − 2.3 − 2.3 − 0.0 − 0.1          June
+ 0.4 − 0.0 + 0.6 + 41.9 − 41.3 − 40.5 − 0.8 − + 8.3 + 5.2 + 3.0 + 3.4 − 0.4 + 0.2          July
− 0.2 + 1.2 + 21.8 − 12.2 + 33.9 + 35.1 − 1.2 − 0.0 − 0.3 + 4.0 − 4.3 − 3.5 − 0.8 + 0.0          Aug − 0.3 − 0.2 − 50.1 − 17.8 − 32.4 − 35.1 + 2.8 − 0.0 + 4.8 + 4.7 + 0.1 + 0.3 − 0.2 − 0.1          Sep 
+ 0.4 + 0.1 − 2.5 + 3.0 − 5.5 − 2.1 − 3.3 − 0.0 − 5.0 − 3.9 − 1.1 − 1.5 + 0.4 + 0.1          Oct 
+ 0.1 − 0.0 − 32.1 − 18.3 − 13.8 − 13.0 − 0.8 − 0.0 + 0.6 + 1.4 − 0.8 − 0.5 − 0.3 − 0.1          Nov − 0.5 − 2.5 − 86.4 − 63.2 − 23.2 − 21.8 − 1.4 − 0.0 − 6.1 − 12.5 + 6.4 + 6.6 − 0.2 − 0.1          Dec 
− 0.5 + 3.2 + 16.2 + 30.1 − 13.9 − 14.1 + 0.1 − + 5.9 + 9.8 − 3.9 − 3.2 − 0.7 − 0.0 2013          Jan 
+ 0.1 − 2.9 − 11.5 − 13.4 + 2.0 + 9.9 − 7.9 − + 3.4 + 5.9 − 2.5 − 1.5 − 1.0 − 0.0          Feb + 0.4 − 1.0 − 14.6 − 29.0 + 14.4 + 14.5 − 0.1 − 0.0 − 7.8 − 7.4 − 0.4 + 0.4 − 0.8 − 0.0          Mar 

Deutsche Bundesbank
30  Monthly Report
May 2013
IV Banks
 
5 Lending by banks (MFIs) in Germany to domestic non-banks (non-MFIs) *
 
 
€ billion
Lending to domestic Short-term lending Medium and long-term
non-banks, total
      to enterprises and households to general government to enter-
 
including excluding Negoti-
negotiable money able
market paper, Loans money
Period securities, and market Treasury
equalisation claims Total Total bills paper Total Loans bills Total Total
End of year or month *
 
2003 2,995.6 2,680.6 355.2 315.0 313.4 1.6 40.2 38.4 1.8 2,640.4 2,096.1
2004 3,001.3 2,646.7 320.9 283.8 283.0 0.8 37.1 35.3 1.8 2,680.4 2,114.2
2005 2,995.1 2,635.1 309.7 273.5 272.9 0.6 36.2 34.4 1.8 2,685.4 2,141.3
2006 3,000.7 2,632.2 303.1 269.8 269.3 0.6 33.3 31.9 1.4 2,697.6 2,181.8
2007 2,975.7 2,649.5 331.2 301.8 301.5 0.3 29.4 28.2 1.2 2,644.6 2,168.3
2008 3,071.1 2,700.1 373.0 337.5 335.3 2.2 35.5 34.5 1.0 2,698.1 2,257.8
2009 3,100.1 2,692.6 347.3 306.3 306.2 0.1 41.0 37.1 3.9 2,752.8 2,299.7
2010 3,220.9 2,771.3 428.0 283.0 282.8 0.2 145.0 117.2 27.7 2,793.0 2,305.6
2011 3,197.8 2,775.4 383.3 316.5 316.1 0.4 66.8 60.7 6.0 2,814.5 2,321.9
2012 3,220.4 2,786.1 376.1 316.8 316.3 0.5 59.3 57.6 1.7 2,844.3 2,310.9
2011          Oct 3,233.3 2,806.6 433.2 355.4 354.7 0.7 77.8 62.8 15.0 2,800.1 2,311.3
         Nov 3,237.6 2,808.2 424.2 352.0 351.4 0.6 72.2 58.4 13.8 2,813.4 2,319.9
         Dec 3,197.8 2,775.4 383.3 316.5 316.1 0.4 66.8 60.7 6.0 2,814.5 2,321.9
2012          Jan 3,226.6 2,800.6 409.1 339.2 338.7 0.6 69.8 65.5 4.4 2,817.6 2,320.7
         Feb 3,220.3 2,798.2 406.9 338.2 337.4 0.8 68.7 63.8 4.9 2,813.4 2,315.9
         Mar 3,222.9 2,787.6 396.8 329.5 328.6 0.9 67.3 63.3 4.0 2,826.1 2,325.3
         Apr 3,244.7 2,796.1 402.9 329.6 328.7 0.9 73.3 68.5 4.8 2,841.8 2,341.9
         May 3,219.1 2,793.9 393.6 325.6 324.4 1.2 68.0 64.6 3.3 2,825.5 2,328.8
         June 3,227.6 2,802.6 404.9 324.4 323.9 0.5 80.5 74.9 5.6 2,822.6 2,300.2
         July 3,257.8 2,834.2 429.4 351.6 351.2 0.4 77.8 72.9 4.8 2,828.4 2,304.6
         Aug 3,252.3 2,824.5 415.9 344.6 344.2 0.4 71.3 66.6 4.7 2,836.4 2,310.8
         Sep 3,253.0 2,818.4 413.9 340.9 340.4 0.4 73.1 67.9 5.2 2,839.1 2,311.5
         Oct 3,271.1 2,838.0 430.6 351.1 350.6 0.5 79.6 73.6 6.0 2,840.5 2,309.7
         Nov 3,265.5 2,825.7 410.4 338.2 337.8 0.4 72.1 66.8 5.4 2,855.1 2,316.4
         Dec 3,220.4 2,786.1 376.1 316.8 316.3 0.5 59.3 57.6 1.7 2,844.3 2,310.9
2013          Jan 3,243.1 2,806.5 399.6 338.2 337.4 0.8 61.4 60.1 1.4 2,843.4 2,314.1
         Feb 3,237.4 2,804.9 396.1 338.4 337.5 0.9 57.7 56.6 1.1 2,841.3 2,311.6
         Mar 3,234.0 2,796.2 387.5 332.7 331.7 1.0 54.8 53.9 0.9 2,846.6 2,315.9
Changes *
2004 + 3.3 − 36.0 − 31.7 − 30.5 − 29.7 − 0.8 − 1.2 − 3.2 + 1.9 + 35.0 + 15.6
2005 − 6.7 − 12.1 − 11.5 − 10.6 − 10.4 − 0.2 − 0.9 − 0.9 + 0.0 + 4.8 + 26.8
2006 − 12.4 − 20.8 − 7.1 − 4.5 − 4.4 − 0.0 − 2.7 − 2.3 − 0.4 − 5.2 + 23.6
2007 − 15.9 + 11.8 + 27.6 + 31.5 + 31.7 − 0.2 − 3.9 − 3.7 − 0.3 − 43.5 − 7.1
2008 + 92.0 + 46.9 + 43.1 + 36.8 + 34.9 + 1.8 + 6.3 + 6.3 − 0.0 + 48.9 + 83.4
2009 + 25.7 − 11.6 − 26.1 − 31.5 − 30.0 − 1.5 + 5.5 + 2.5 + 2.9 + 51.8 + 36.6
2010 + 130.5 + 78.7 + 80.4 − 23.4 − 23.5 + 0.1 + 103.8 + 80.1 + 23.7 + 50.1 + 14.9
2011 − 30.6 − 3.2 − 45.2 + 33.6 + 33.3 + 0.2 − 78.7 − 57.0 − 21.7 + 14.6 + 9.4
2012 + 21.0 + 9.6 − 9.7 − 1.6 − 1.7 + 0.1 − 8.2 − 3.8 − 4.3 + 30.7 + 10.9
2011          Oct + 25.7 + 27.8 + 26.6 + 28.7 + 28.5 + 0.2 − 2.1 − 3.1 + 1.0 − 0.9 + 0.5
         Nov + 4.3 + 1.5 − 9.0 − 3.4 − 3.3 − 0.1 − 5.6 − 4.4 − 1.2 + 13.3 + 8.6
         Dec − 39.9 − 32.7 − 41.0 − 35.6 − 35.4 − 0.2 − 5.4 + 2.4 − 7.8 + 1.2 + 2.1
2012          Jan + 29.0 + 25.2 + 25.8 + 22.7 + 22.6 + 0.2 + 3.1 + 4.7 − 1.7 + 3.2 − 1.1
         Feb − 6.4 − 2.4 − 2.2 − 1.1 − 1.2 + 0.2 − 1.1 − 1.7 + 0.5 − 4.2 − 4.8
         Mar + 2.7 − 10.6 − 10.1 − 8.7 − 8.8 + 0.1 − 1.4 − 0.6 − 0.9 + 12.8 + 9.4
         Apr + 18.6 + 5.3 + 3.4 − 2.6 − 2.6 − 0.0 + 6.0 + 5.2 + 0.8 + 15.2 + 16.3
         May − 25.6 − 2.3 − 8.9 − 3.6 − 3.9 + 0.3 − 5.3 − 3.8 − 1.5 − 16.7 − 13.5
         June + 10.2 + 10.4 + 11.4 − 1.1 − 0.5 − 0.7 + 12.5 + 10.3 + 2.2 − 1.2 − 6.9
         July + 30.5 + 32.0 + 24.5 + 27.3 + 27.4 − 0.1 − 2.7 − 2.0 − 0.7 + 6.0 + 4.7
         Aug − 5.5 − 9.7 − 13.5 − 6.9 − 7.0 + 0.0 − 6.5 − 6.3 − 0.2 + 8.0 + 6.2
         Sep + 0.5 − 6.4 − 2.4 − 3.5 − 3.5 − 0.0 + 1.2 + 0.6 + 0.5 + 2.8 + 1.1
         Oct + 17.4 + 19.6 + 16.7 + 10.2 + 10.2 + 0.0 + 6.5 + 5.7 + 0.8 + 0.7 − 1.9
         Nov − 5.5 − 12.1 − 20.3 − 12.8 − 12.8 − 0.0 − 7.4 − 6.8 − 0.6 + 14.8 + 6.9
         Dec − 45.1 − 39.6 − 34.3 − 21.4 − 21.4 + 0.0 − 12.9 − 9.2 − 3.7 − 10.8 − 5.5
2013          Jan + 22.7 + 20.4 + 24.4 + 22.3 + 22.0 + 0.3 + 2.2 + 2.5 − 0.3 − 1.7 + 2.3
         Feb − 5.7 − 1.7 − 3.6 + 0.1 + 0.0 + 0.1 − 3.7 − 3.4 − 0.3 − 2.2 − 2.5
         Mar − 3.4 − 8.7 − 8.6 − 5.7 − 5.8 + 0.1 − 2.9 − 2.8 − 0.1 + 5.3 + 4.4
*See Table IV.2, footnote*; statistical breaks have been eliminated from the changes. marked. 1Excluding debt securities arising from the exchange of equalisation claims
The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as provisional. Subsequent (see also footnote 2). 2Including debt securities arising from the exchange of
revisions, which appear in the following Monthly Report, are not specially equalisation claims. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
31  Monthly Report
May 2013
IV Banks
 
   
 
lending
prises and households to general governmentLoans Loans
Memo Memo
item Equal- item
Medium- Long- Fiduciary Medium- Long- Secur- isation Fiduciary
Total term term loans Total Total term term ities 
1 claims 2 loans   Period Securities
End of year or month *
 
1,927.7 195.0 1,732.8 168.3 49.9 544.3 401.0 34.6 366.4 141.3 2.0 7.0 2003
1,940.8 194.3 1,746.5 173.5 55.3 566.1 387.7 32.9 354.8 177.5 1.0 6.5 2004
1,953.4 194.7 1,758.8 187.9 52.1 544.1 374.4 32.9 341.4 169.7 − 4.5 2005
1,972.7 194.5 1,778.1 209.1 48.2 515.8 358.4 31.7 326.6 157.4 − 4.8 2006
1,987.3 207.7 1,779.6 181.1 46.5 476.2 332.5 31.9 300.6 143.7 − 4.7 2007
2,022.0 222.0 1,800.0 235.8 42.8 440.3 308.2 29.7 278.5 132.1 − 4.5 2008
2,051.3 242.7 1,808.6 248.4 39.6 453.1 298.0 32.2 265.8 155.1 − 4.3 2009
2,070.0 238.1 1,831.8 235.7 30.7 487.3 301.2 36.1 265.1 186.1 − 3.1 2010
2,099.5 247.9 1,851.7 222.4 32.7 492.6 299.1 41.1 258.0 193.5 − 3.6 2011
2,119.5 249.7 1,869.8 191.4 31.4 533.4 292.7 39.4 253.3 240.7 − 3.5 2012
2,090.6 245.9 1,844.8 220.7 29.6 488.8 298.5 40.6 257.9 190.3 − 2.9 2011          Oct 
2,098.6 246.8 1,851.9 221.2 29.6 493.6 299.8 40.7 259.1 193.8 − 2.9          Nov 
2,099.5 247.9 1,851.7 222.4 32.7 492.6 299.1 41.1 258.0 193.5 − 3.6          Dec 
2,098.4 246.8 1,851.6 222.3 31.8 496.9 298.1 40.9 257.2 198.8 − 3.5 2012          Jan 
2,099.5 245.9 1,853.7 216.4 31.6 497.4 297.5 41.1 256.4 200.0 − 3.5          Feb 2,099.2 246.4 1,852.7 226.1 31.3 500.9 296.6 40.9 255.8 204.2 − 3.5          Mar 
2,102.2 247.1 1,855.1 239.7 31.7 499.9 296.8 40.6 256.2 203.1 − 3.6          Apr 
2,109.6 248.6 1,861.1 219.2 31.7 496.7 295.2 40.1 255.1 201.5 − 3.6          May2,108.5 248.3 1,860.1 191.8 31.5 522.4 295.3 39.8 255.5 227.1 − 3.6          June
2,116.0 249.7 1,866.3 188.6 31.4 523.8 294.1 39.7 254.4 229.7 − 3.6          July
2,120.7 249.6 1,871.1 190.1 31.6 525.6 293.0 39.3 253.7 232.6 − 3.5          Aug 2,118.1 249.0 1,869.1 193.4 31.5 527.6 291.9 39.1 252.8 235.7 − 3.5          Sep 
2,120.9 249.8 1,871.1 188.7 31.2 530.8 292.9 39.9 253.0 237.9 − 3.5          Oct 
2,127.7 251.3 1,876.4 188.7 31.5 538.7 293.4 40.1 253.4 245.2 − 3.5          Nov 2,119.5 249.7 1,869.8 191.4 31.4 533.4 292.7 39.4 253.3 240.7 − 3.5          Dec 
2,116.9 249.6 1,867.3 197.2 31.0 529.4 292.1 39.7 252.4 237.3 − 3.5 2013          Jan 
2,120.1 249.3 1,870.8 191.5 31.0 529.7 290.6 39.3 251.4 239.1 − 3.4          Feb 2,119.3 249.6 1,869.7 196.6 30.8 530.6 291.3 40.5 250.8 239.3 − 3.4          Mar 
Changes *
+ 10.7 + 0.2 + 10.5 + 4.9 + 3.6 + 19.4 − 13.8 − 0.9 − 12.9 + 34.3 − 1.1 − 0.6 2004
+ 12.5 + 1.7 + 10.8 + 14.3 − 3.0 − 22.1 − 13.4 + 0.9 − 14.2 − 7.7 − 1.0 − 2.0 2005
+ 2.3 + 0.2 + 2.2 + 21.2 − 3.9 − 28.8 − 16.4 − 1.4 − 15.0 − 12.4 − + 0.3 2006
+ 9.6 + 10.1 − 0.6 − 16.7 − 2.2 − 36.3 − 25.8 + 0.1 − 26.0 − 10.5 − − 0.1 2007
+ 28.8 + 12.0 + 16.8 + 54.7 − 5.3 − 34.5 − 23.2 − 2.3 − 20.8 − 11.4 − − 0.1 2008
+ 23.5 + 17.3 + 6.3 + 13.1 − 3.9 + 15.2 − 7.6 + 2.5 − 10.2 + 22.8 − − 0.2 2009
+ 18.6 − 4.0 + 22.6 − 3.8 − 1.7 + 35.2 + 3.5 + 3.5 − 0.0 + 31.7 − − 0.3 2010
+ 22.6 + 2.2 + 20.4 − 13.2 − 1.0 + 5.2 − 2.1 + 4.9 − 7.0 + 7.3 − − 0.2 2011
+ 21.6 + 1.5 + 20.1 − 10.7 − 1.1 + 19.8 − 6.6 − 1.9 − 4.7 + 26.4 − − 0.2 2012
+ 3.1 + 1.1 + 2.1 − 2.7 − 0.2 − 1.3 − 0.7 + 0.7 − 1.5 − 0.6 − + 0.0 2011          Oct 
+ 8.0 + 0.9 + 7.1 + 0.6 + 0.0 + 4.8 + 1.3 + 0.1 + 1.2 + 3.5 − − 0.0          Nov 
+ 1.0 + 1.1 − 0.1 + 1.2 + 0.1 − 1.0 − 0.7 + 0.4 − 1.1 − 0.3 − − 0.0          Dec 
− 1.1 − 1.1 − 0.0 + 0.1 − 0.9 + 4.3 − 1.0 − 0.2 − 0.8 + 5.3 − − 0.1 2012          Jan 
+ 1.1 − 0.9 + 2.0 − 5.9 − 0.2 + 0.6 − 0.6 + 0.2 − 0.8 + 1.2 − − 0.0          Feb 
− 0.4 + 0.6 − 0.9 + 9.7 − 0.2 + 3.4 − 0.8 − 0.2 − 0.6 + 4.3 − − 0.0          Mar 
+ 2.6 + 0.7 + 1.9 + 13.7 + 0.3 − 1.1 + 0.2 − 0.3 + 0.5 − 1.2 − + 0.2          Apr 
+ 7.1 + 1.2 + 5.9 − 20.6 + 0.0 − 3.2 − 1.6 − 0.4 − 1.2 − 1.6 − − 0.0          May
+ 0.5 − 0.1 + 0.6 − 7.4 − 0.2 + 5.7 + 0.1 − 0.4 + 0.5 + 5.6 − − 0.0          June
+ 7.8 + 1.5 + 6.3 − 3.2 − 0.2 + 1.4 − 1.2 − 0.1 − 1.1 + 2.6 − − 0.1          July
+ 4.7 − 0.1 + 4.8 + 1.5 + 0.3 + 1.8 − 1.1 − 0.4 − 0.7 + 2.9 − − 0.0          Aug 
− 2.2 − 0.9 − 1.3 + 3.3 − 0.2 + 1.8 − 1.3 − 0.4 − 0.9 + 3.0 − − 0.0          Sep 
+ 2.8 + 0.8 + 2.0 − 4.6 − 0.2 + 2.6 + 1.0 + 0.8 + 0.2 + 1.6 − − 0.0          Oct 
+ 7.0 + 1.5 + 5.5 − 0.0 + 0.3 + 7.9 + 0.6 + 0.2 + 0.4 + 7.3 − −          Nov 
− 8.2 − 1.6 − 6.6 + 2.7 + 0.0 − 5.3 − 0.7 − 0.6 − 0.1 − 4.6 − − 0.0          Dec 
− 3.5 − 0.9 − 2.5 + 5.7 − 0.3 − 4.0 − 0.6 + 0.2 − 0.9 − 3.4 − − 0.0 2013          Jan 
+ 3.2 − 0.3 + 3.5 − 5.7 − 0.0 + 0.4 − 1.5 − 0.4 − 1.0 + 1.8 − − 0.0          Feb 
− 0.8 + 0.3 − 1.0 + 5.1 − 0.2 + 0.9 + 0.7 + 1.3 − 0.6 + 0.3 − − 0.0          Mar 

Deutsche Bundesbank
32  Monthly Report
May 2013
IV Banks
 
6 Lending by banks (MFIs) in Germany to domestic enterprises and households, housing loans,
sectors of economic activity *
 
€ billion
Lending to domestic enterprises and households (excluding holdings of negotiable money market paper and excluding securities portfolios)  1 
of which  
 
Housing loans Lending to enterprises and self-employed persons
 
Whole-
sale and Electricity,
gas and retail Financial
Mortgage water trade; Agri- Transport- intermedi-
loans supply; repair of culture, ation and ation
secured refuse motor forestry, storage; (excluding
by disposal, vehicles fishing post and MFIs) and
Mortgage residen- Other of which mining and and telecom- insurance
loans, tial real housing Housing Manufac- and Construc- motor- aqua- munica- com-
Period Total total Total estate loans Total loans turing quarrying tion cycles culture tions panies
Lending, total End of year or quarter *
 
2011 2,415.7 1,167.3 1,114.0 914.0 200.0 1,368.0 305.0 134.6 84.4 59.6 124.0 42.7 80.1 196.4
2012          Mar 2,427.8 1,164.1 1,114.9 912.6 202.2 1,380.7 305.6 137.0 86.3 60.2 125.6 43.1 78.4 202.7
         June 2,432.4 1,164.7 1,118.0 912.4 205.6 1,385.2 307.6 136.8 88.6 60.6 125.4 44.2 80.3 196.1
         Sep 2,458.6 1,167.3 1,126.6 917.8 208.8 1,404.2 309.8 133.9 90.8 60.3 127.4 44.8 78.4 213.9
         Dec 2,435.9 1,170.6 1,135.0 922.4 212.6 1,377.6 311.2 131.1 92.7 59.6 126.1 44.5 76.7 195.4
2013          Mar 2,451.1 1,173.5 1,136.8 926.0 210.8 1,394.1 311.9 133.2 94.6 60.3 126.9 44.7 76.2 208.8
 Short-term lending
2011 316.2 − 7.7 − 7.7 276.7 3.9 33.8 6.0 11.9 41.8 3.3 7.0 111.0
2012          Mar 328.7 − 7.5 − 7.5 289.7 3.8 36.8 6.7 12.7 43.1 3.5 7.1 117.2
         June 324.0 − 7.6 − 7.6 285.0 3.8 37.5 6.8 13.3 42.8 4.0 7.4 110.4
         Sep 340.5 − 7.8 − 7.8 301.5 3.9 36.4 6.8 12.9 44.7 3.9 7.4 127.8
         Dec 316.4 − 7.9 − 7.9 277.7 3.8 34.8 6.9 12.0 43.0 3.3 6.8 112.8
2013          Mar 331.7 − 7.8 − 7.8 294.9 3.9 37.5 7.5 13.1 43.6 3.6 7.0 125.4
 Medium-term lending
2011 247.9 − 34.5 − 34.5 176.7 11.8 28.2 6.0 9.4 15.5 4.0 11.8 35.4
2012          Mar 246.4 − 34.8 − 34.8 175.4 11.9 27.3 6.0 9.4 15.6 4.0 11.4 35.9
         June 248.4 − 34.9 − 34.9 176.7 11.7 26.9 6.3 9.3 15.8 4.0 11.6 36.2
         Sep 249.0 − 35.3 − 35.3 176.3 11.9 25.9 6.8 9.3 16.0 4.1 11.1 36.2
         Dec 249.7 − 35.3 − 35.3 176.7 11.8 25.6 7.0 9.3 16.5 4.0 11.0 35.9
2013          Mar 249.6 − 34.9 − 34.9 176.5 11.6 25.8 6.8 9.2 16.6 3.9 11.3 37.0
 Long-term lending
2011 1,851.7 1,167.3 1,071.8 914.0 157.8 914.6 289.3 72.6 72.4 38.3 66.7 35.4 61.2 49.9
2012          Mar 1,852.7 1,164.1 1,072.6 912.6 159.9 915.6 289.9 73.0 73.6 38.1 66.9 35.6 59.9 49.6
         June 1,860.1 1,164.7 1,075.5 912.4 163.1 923.5 292.0 72.4 75.5 38.0 66.8 36.2 61.3 49.5
         Sep 1,869.1 1,167.3 1,083.5 917.8 165.7 926.5 294.0 71.6 77.3 38.1 66.7 36.8 59.9 49.9
         Dec 1,869.8 1,170.6 1,091.8 922.4 169.4 923.2 295.6 70.7 78.8 38.3 66.6 37.2 58.9 46.7
2013          Mar 1,869.7 1,173.5 1,094.0 926.0 168.0 922.7 296.5 69.8 80.4 38.1 66.7 37.2 58.0 46.4
 
Lending, total Change during quarter *
 
2012          Q1 + 12.1 − 1.3 + 1.1 + 0.5 + 0.6 + 11.9 + 0.9 + 2.3 + 1.9 + 0.5 + 1.6 + 0.4 − 1.6 + 6.3
         Q2 + 3.2 + 3.2 + 4.5 + 1.1 + 3.4 − 1.5 + 1.9 − 0.2 + 2.3 + 0.5 − 0.5 + 1.0 + 2.6 − 9.8
         Q3 + 27.2 + 3.3 + 8.9 + 5.2 + 3.6 + 20.1 + 2.6 − 2.7 + 2.1 − 0.3 + 2.0 + 0.7 − 1.7 + 17.1
         Q4 − 22.5 + 2.9 + 6.2 + 3.5 + 2.7 − 26.2 + 1.4 − 2.8 + 1.8 − 0.7 − 1.2 − 0.3 − 1.8 − 18.5
2013          Q1 + 15.1 − 0.2 + 1.7 + 0.9 + 0.7 + 16.4 + 0.9 + 2.1 + 1.8 + 0.7 + 0.8 + 0.2 − 0.4 + 13.4
 Short-term lending
2012          Q1 + 12.5 − − 0.2 − − 0.2 + 13.0 − 0.0 + 3.0 + 0.7 + 0.8 + 1.3 + 0.2 + 0.1 + 6.2
         Q2 − 7.0 − + 0.1 − + 0.1 − 7.2 − 0.0 + 0.9 + 0.1 + 0.7 − 0.2 + 0.5 + 0.3 − 9.9
         Q3 + 16.9 − + 0.2 − + 0.2 + 16.6 + 0.1 − 0.9 − 0.1 − 0.4 + 1.9 − 0.1 − 0.0 + 16.8
         Q4 − 24.1 − + 0.0 − + 0.0 − 23.5 − 0.1 − 1.6 + 0.0 − 0.9 − 1.5 − 0.6 − 0.5 − 15.0
2013          Q1 + 16.1 − − 0.1 − − 0.1 + 17.2 + 0.0 + 2.8 + 0.5 + 1.0 + 0.6 + 0.3 + 0.2 + 12.6
 Medium-term lending
2012          Q1 − 1.4 − + 0.3 − + 0.3 − 1.8 + 0.1 − 1.0 + 0.0 − 0.1 + 0.1 + 0.0 − 0.5 + 0.5
         Q2 + 1.8 − + 0.3 − + 0.3 + 0.7 − 0.1 − 0.6 + 0.3 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.0 + 0.1 + 0.3
         Q3 + 0.5 − + 0.5 − + 0.5 − 0.3 + 0.3 − 1.0 + 0.5 + 0.0 + 0.1 + 0.1 − 0.4 − 0.2
         Q4 + 0.7 − + 0.0 − + 0.0 + 0.4 − 0.1 − 0.4 + 0.2 − 0.0 + 0.5 − 0.1 − 0.1 − 0.3
2013          Q1 − 1.0 − − 0.4 − − 0.4 − 0.3 − 0.2 + 0.2 − 0.3 − 0.1 + 0.2 − 0.1 + 0.3 + 1.1
 Long-term lending
2012          Q1 + 1.1 − 1.3 + 1.1 + 0.5 + 0.5 + 0.8 + 0.9 + 0.3 + 1.2 − 0.2 + 0.2 + 0.2 − 1.3 − 0.3
         Q2 + 8.3 + 3.2 + 4.2 + 1.1 + 3.0 + 5.0 + 2.0 − 0.6 + 1.9 − 0.2 − 0.3 + 0.6 + 2.1 − 0.2
         Q3 + 9.9 + 3.3 + 8.1 + 5.2 + 2.9 + 3.8 + 2.2 − 0.8 + 1.8 + 0.0 − 0.0 + 0.6 − 1.2 + 0.5
         Q4 + 0.8 + 2.9 + 6.1 + 3.5 + 2.6 − 3.1 + 1.6 − 0.8 + 1.5 + 0.2 − 0.2 + 0.4 − 1.1 − 3.2
2013          Q1 − 0.1 − 0.2 + 2.1 + 0.9 + 1.2 − 0.5 + 1.0 − 0.9 + 1.6 − 0.2 + 0.1 − 0.0 − 0.9 − 0.3
*Excluding lending by foreign branches. Breakdown of lending by building and loan from the changes. The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as pro-
associations by areas and sectors estimated. Statistical alterations have been eliminated visional; subsequent alterations, which will appear in the following Monthly Report,

Deutsche Bundesbank
33  Monthly Report
May 2013
IV Banks
 
   
 
 
 
 Lending to
 Lending to employees and other individuals non-profit institutions
Memo items Other lending Services sector (including the professions)
of which of which
Debitbalanceson wage,
Other Lending salaryreal to self- Lending and of which
Housing Holding estate employed to craft Housing pension Housing Instalment
Total companies Total loans Total loans 
3 accounts Total loans   Period enterprises activities persons 2 enterprises
End of year or quarter * Lending, total 
 
646.3 180.0 42.9 177.9 382.9 51.7 1,034.3 805.6 228.7 147.8 13.5 13.4 3.5 2011
647.4 180.5 42.9 178.4 381.9 52.0 1,033.5 805.8 227.7 147.7 13.3 13.6 3.5 2012          Mar 
653.3 181.6 43.3 178.8 387.9 51.9 1,033.6 806.9 226.8 147.3 13.3 13.6 3.5          June654.7 182.8 42.4 179.3 388.0 51.8 1,040.8 813.3 227.5 148.5 13.4 13.6 3.5          Sep 651.6 184.6 39.0 178.5 388.4 51.0 1,044.9 820.3 224.6 147.2 13.0 13.4 3.5          Dec 
649.4 184.6 38.5 178.7 387.3 51.3 1,043.6 821.3 222.3 146.5 12.6 13.3 3.5 2013          Mar 
Short-term lending
61.9 9.6 11.1 13.2 30.4 7.2 38.5 3.9 34.7 2.5 13.5 0.9 0.0 2011
62.6 9.1 11.9 13.3 30.5 7.9 37.9 3.7 34.3 2.5 13.3 1.0 0.0 2012          Mar 
62.8 9.4 11.8 13.1 30.9 7.9 38.0 3.8 34.2 2.2 13.3 1.0 0.0          June61.7 9.5 10.9 13.0 30.0 7.7 37.8 3.9 33.9 1.9 13.4 1.2 0.0          Sep 58.0 9.3 7.9 12.9 30.0 7.2 37.7 4.0 33.7 2.1 13.0 1.1 0.0          Dec 
57.3 9.0 8.2 12.8 30.1 7.8 35.9 3.9 32.0 2.0 12.6 1.0 0.0 2013          Mar 
Medium-term lending
66.3 8.1 8.4 20.4 31.2 3.6 70.6 22.7 47.9 42.8 − 0.6 0.0 2011
65.8 8.1 7.8 20.0 31.3 3.6 70.4 22.9 47.5 42.3 − 0.6 0.0 2012          Mar 
66.6 8.1 8.1 20.0 31.9 3.6 71.0 23.1 47.9 42.9 − 0.6 0.0          June
66.9 8.4 8.2 19.9 32.0 3.6 72.2 23.4 48.8 43.9 − 0.5 0.0          Sep 
67.5 8.9 7.9 20.2 32.2 3.5 72.5 23.5 49.0 44.1 − 0.5 0.0          Dec 
65.9 8.6 7.2 19.9 31.9 3.6 72.6 23.3 49.3 43.8 − 0.5 0.0 2013          Mar 
Long-term lending
518.1 162.4 23.4 144.3 321.3 40.9 925.2 779.1 146.1 102.5 − 11.9 3.4 2011
519.0 163.3 23.2 145.2 320.0 40.5 925.2 779.2 145.9 102.9 − 12.0 3.5 2012          Mar 
523.9 164.1 23.4 145.7 325.0 40.5 924.6 779.9 144.7 102.2 − 12.0 3.5          June
526.1 164.9 23.4 146.4 326.0 40.5 930.8 786.0 144.8 102.7 − 11.8 3.5          Sep 
526.1 166.4 23.2 145.5 326.2 40.3 934.7 792.8 142.0 100.9 − 11.8 3.5          Dec 
526.3 167.0 23.1 146.0 325.3 39.9 935.1 794.1 141.0 100.7 − 11.9 3.5 2013          Mar 
 
Change during quarter * Lending, total 
 
+ 0.5 + 0.5 − 0.0 + 0.5 − 1.0 + 0.3 − 0.0 + 0.2 − 0.2 + 0.7 − 0.1 + 0.3 + 0.1 2012          Q1
+ 2.6 + 1.1 + 0.3 − 0.0 + 1.9 − 0.1 + 4.7 + 2.7 + 2.0 + 1.5 − 0.1 − 0.0 − 0.0          Q2+ 2.9 + 1.6 − 0.8 + 1.2 + 0.2 − 0.1 + 7.2 + 6.3 + 0.8 + 1.1 + 0.1 − 0.0 − 0.0          Q3− 2.8 + 1.8 − 3.3 − 0.7 + 0.3 − 0.8 + 3.8 + 4.8 − 1.0 − 0.3 − 0.4 − 0.2 − 0.0          Q4
− 2.2 − 0.0 − 0.6 + 0.0 − 1.2 + 0.3 − 1.3 + 0.8 − 2.1 − 0.7 − 0.4 − 0.1 + 0.0 2013          Q1
Short-term lending
+ 0.7 − 0.5 + 0.8 + 0.0 + 0.1 + 0.6 − 0.6 − 0.2 − 0.4 − 0.0 − 0.1 + 0.1 − 0.0 2012          Q1
+ 0.4 + 0.3 − 0.1 − 0.2 + 0.4 − 0.0 + 0.3 + 0.1 + 0.1 − 0.0 − 0.1 − 0.0 −          Q2− 0.6 + 0.1 − 0.9 + 0.2 − 0.9 − 0.1 + 0.1 + 0.1 − 0.1 − 0.2 + 0.1 + 0.2 + 0.0          Q3− 3.4 − 0.2 − 3.0 − 0.1 + 0.0 − 0.5 − 0.4 + 0.1 − 0.5 − 0.0 − 0.4 − 0.2 + 0.0          Q4
− 0.7 − 0.4 + 0.3 − 0.0 + 0.1 + 0.6 − 1.0 − 0.1 − 0.9 − 0.1 − 0.4 − 0.1 − 2013          Q1
Medium-term lending
− 0.9 + 0.1 − 0.6 − 0.4 + 0.2 − 0.0 + 0.4 + 0.2 + 0.1 + 0.1 − + 0.1 + 0.0 2012          Q1
+ 0.6 − 0.0 + 0.2 + 0.0 + 0.4 − + 1.1 + 0.4 + 0.7 + 0.9 − + 0.0 − 0.0          Q2
+ 0.6 + 0.3 + 0.1 + 0.0 + 0.1 − 0.0 + 0.9 + 0.2 + 0.6 + 0.7 − − 0.1 −          Q3
+ 0.6 + 0.5 − 0.3 + 0.3 + 0.2 − 0.1 + 0.3 + 0.1 + 0.2 + 0.2 − − 0.0 − 0.0          Q4
− 1.7 − 0.3 − 0.7 − 0.3 − 0.4 + 0.1 − 0.7 − 0.2 − 0.5 − 0.3 − + 0.0 − 2013          Q1
Long-term lending
+ 0.7 + 0.9 − 0.2 + 0.8 − 1.3 − 0.3 + 0.2 + 0.1 + 0.1 + 0.6 − + 0.1 + 0.1 2012          Q1
+ 1.6 + 0.8 + 0.1 + 0.1 + 1.1 − 0.1 + 3.3 + 2.1 + 1.2 + 0.6 − − 0.0 − 0.0          Q2
+ 2.9 + 1.2 − 0.0 + 0.9 + 1.0 + 0.1 + 6.2 + 5.9 + 0.3 + 0.5 − − 0.2 − 0.0          Q3
+ 0.1 + 1.5 − 0.1 − 0.9 + 0.2 − 0.2 + 3.9 + 4.6 − 0.7 − 0.5 − + 0.0 − 0.0          Q4
+ 0.2 + 0.7 − 0.1 + 0.3 − 0.9 − 0.4 + 0.4 + 1.1 − 0.6 − 0.2 − + 0.0 + 0.0 2013          Q1
are not specially marked. 1 Excluding fiduciary loans. 2 Including sole proprietors. 
3 Excluding mortgage loans and housing loans, even in the form of instalment credit. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
34  Monthly Report
May 2013
IV Banks
 
7 Deposits of domestic non-banks (non-MFIs) at banks (MFIs) in Germany*
 
 
€ billion
Time deposits  1,2   Memo item
  
 for more than 1 year  2 Subordinated
 liabilities
for up for up (excluding
to and to and for more Bank negotiable Liabilities
Deposits, Sight including including than Savings savings Fiduciary debt arising
Period total deposits Total 1 year Total 2 years 2 years bonds  4 loans securities) from repos deposits  3 
Domestic non-banks, total End of year or month*
 
2010 2,935.2 1,104.4 1,117.1 329.3 787.8 25.1 762.7 618.2 95.4 37.5 35.7 80.9
2011 3,045.5 1,168.3 1,156.2 386.1 770.2 31.5 738.7 616.1 104.8 36.5 34.3 97.1
2012 3,090.2 1,306.5 1,072.5 341.3 731.2 32.0 699.2 617.6 93.6 34.9 31.7 82.9
2012          Apr 3,071.3 1,197.7 1,153.2 392.8 760.4 32.9 727.5 617.9 102.5 35.5 33.4 100.8
         May 3,091.6 1,216.8 1,155.6 397.2 758.4 33.2 725.2 617.1 102.0 35.5 33.4 106.3
         June 3,104.7 1,233.8 1,153.5 397.4 756.1 33.7 722.4 616.1 101.3 35.2 33.2 97.5
         July 3,105.8 1,235.4 1,154.2 402.7 751.6 33.5 718.1 615.9 100.3 35.1 32.9 102.3
         Aug 3,118.3 1,247.0 1,156.8 406.6 750.2 33.4 716.8 615.4 99.1 35.1 32.7 105.7
         Sep 3,112.2 1,262.9 1,137.3 390.1 747.2 33.0 714.2 614.1 97.9 35.0 32.3 95.9
         Oct 3,124.7 1,292.7 1,121.9 384.0 737.9 32.5 705.4 613.6 96.6 34.9 32.1 106.0
         Nov 3,137.0 1,317.7 1,111.8 378.1 733.8 32.3 701.4 612.8 94.6 35.2 31.8 105.4
         Dec 3,090.2 1,306.5 1,072.5 341.3 731.2 32.0 699.2 617.6 93.6 34.9 31.7 82.9
2013          Jan 3,087.3 1,326.2 1,053.6 322.4 731.2 32.5 698.7 616.8 90.7 35.0 31.2 81.9
         Feb 3,097.1 1,336.2 1,055.8 326.7 729.1 32.2 696.9 616.6 88.5 34.9 30.7 98.0
         Mar 3,096.3 1,330.3 1,064.7 335.4 729.3 32.2 697.2 614.5 86.8 34.8 30.4 94.3
Changes*
2011 + 111.2 + 63.7 + 40.9 + 57.0 − 16.1 + 6.5 − 22.6 − 2.6 + 9.3 − 1.1 − 1.4 + 16.0
2012 + 42.2 + 138.7 − 86.7 − 47.7 − 39.0 + 0.6 − 39.6 + 1.5 − 11.2 − 1.6 − 2.6 − 16.8
2012          Apr + 20.4 + 9.0 + 13.5 + 15.5 − 2.1 − 0.1 − 1.9 − 1.5 − 0.5 + 0.2 − 0.1 + 6.5
         May + 20.2 + 19.2 + 2.4 + 4.4 − 2.0 + 0.3 − 2.3 − 0.8 − 0.5 − 0.0 + 0.0 + 5.5
         June + 13.1 + 16.9 − 2.0 + 0.2 − 2.3 + 0.5 − 2.7 − 1.1 − 0.7 − 0.3 − 0.2 − 8.8
         July + 1.1 + 1.6 + 0.7 + 5.2 − 4.6 − 0.2 − 4.4 − 0.2 − 1.1 − 0.1 − 0.3 + 4.8
         Aug + 12.5 + 11.5 + 2.6 + 4.0 − 1.4 − 0.1 − 1.3 − 0.5 − 1.1 − 0.0 − 0.2 + 3.5
         Sep − 5.8 + 16.2 − 19.6 − 16.6 − 3.0 − 0.4 − 2.6 − 1.2 − 1.2 − 0.1 − 0.4 − 9.8
         Oct + 12.5 + 29.8 − 15.4 − 6.1 − 9.3 − 0.6 − 8.7 − 0.6 − 1.3 − 0.2 − 0.2 + 10.0
         Nov + 12.2 + 25.0 − 10.0 − 5.9 − 4.1 − 0.1 − 4.0 − 0.7 − 2.0 + 0.3 − 0.3 − 0.6
         Dec − 46.5 − 11.2 − 39.1 − 36.8 − 2.4 − 0.3 − 2.0 + 4.8 − 1.0 − 0.3 − 0.2 − 22.4
2013          Jan − 2.9 + 19.7 − 18.8 − 19.0 + 0.2 + 0.5 − 0.2 − 0.8 − 2.9 − 0.0 − 0.5 − 1.0
         Feb + 9.8 + 10.0 + 2.2 + 4.3 − 2.1 − 0.3 − 1.8 − 0.1 − 2.2 − 0.0 − 0.5 + 16.1
         Mar − 1.2 − 6.2 + 8.9 + 8.7 + 0.2 − 0.0 + 0.3 − 2.2 − 1.8 − 0.1 − 0.3 − 3.7
Domestic government End of year or month*
2010 153.4 46.1 103.0 47.7 55.3 2.6 52.7 2.8 1.5 34.7 6.2 0.4
2011 168.5 46.2 118.4 69.5 48.8 3.8 45.0 2.4 1.5 34.0 5.9 3.1
2012 186.2 50.8 130.7 73.0 57.7 4.5 53.1 3.1 1.6 32.7 5.9 3.1
2012          Apr 183.5 52.8 127.0 80.2 46.8 3.8 43.0 2.3 1.4 33.4 5.9 0.5
         May 196.1 57.5 134.8 87.5 47.3 4.0 43.3 2.4 1.3 33.4 5.9 3.8
         June 227.7 64.3 159.5 98.9 60.6 4.7 55.9 2.6 1.3 33.1 5.9 1.5
         July 218.3 53.6 160.6 100.1 60.5 4.4 56.1 2.8 1.3 33.0 5.9 2.1
         Aug 216.6 51.2 161.2 101.1 60.1 4.5 55.6 2.9 1.3 33.0 5.9 3.0
         Sep 214.3 53.5 156.5 96.6 60.0 4.5 55.5 2.9 1.3 33.0 5.9 0.8
         Oct 216.6 57.4 154.9 95.6 59.4 4.4 54.9 2.9 1.3 32.8 5.9 0.9
         Nov 216.8 56.6 155.8 96.3 59.5 4.6 55.0 3.0 1.4 32.8 5.9 0.8
         Dec 186.2 50.8 130.7 73.0 57.7 4.5 53.1 3.1 1.6 32.7 5.9 3.1
2013          Jan 179.1 50.6 124.0 67.1 56.9 4.6 52.3 3.1 1.3 32.7 5.9 1.1
         Feb 179.0 50.6 124.0 67.0 57.0 4.5 52.4 3.2 1.3 32.6 5.9 2.2
         Mar 185.9 49.5 131.9 74.1 57.8 5.0 52.8 3.3 1.2 32.6 5.8 1.3
Changes*
2011 + 14.6 + 0.1 + 15.0 + 21.4 − 6.5 + 1.2 − 7.7 − 0.4 + 0.0 − 0.7 − 0.2 + 2.7
2012 + 2.2 + 2.9 − 1.6 + 2.7 − 4.3 + 0.7 − 5.0 + 0.7 + 0.1 − 1.4 − 0.1 + 0.1
2012          Apr + 0.6 + 0.9 − 0.2 + 1.0 − 1.2 + 0.0 − 1.2 − 0.0 − 0.0 + 0.2 + 0.0 − 1.3
         May + 12.6 + 4.7 + 7.8 + 7.3 + 0.5 + 0.2 + 0.3 + 0.1 − 0.0 − 0.0 − + 3.4
         June + 16.7 + 5.2 + 11.3 + 10.9 + 0.4 + 0.7 − 0.3 + 0.2 − 0.0 − 0.3 − 0.0 − 2.4
         July − 9.4 − 10.7 + 1.1 + 1.2 − 0.1 − 0.3 + 0.2 + 0.2 − 0.0 − 0.1 − 0.0 + 0.6
         Aug − 1.6 − 2.4 + 0.6 + 1.0 − 0.4 + 0.1 − 0.5 + 0.1 + 0.0 − 0.0 + 0.0 + 1.0
         Sep − 2.3 + 2.3 − 4.6 − 4.5 − 0.1 − 0.0 − 0.1 + 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 2.3
         Oct + 2.2 + 3.9 − 1.7 − 1.0 − 0.7 − 0.0 − 0.6 + 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.1 + 0.0 + 0.1
         Nov + 0.2 − 0.8 + 0.8 + 0.7 + 0.1 + 0.1 + 0.0 + 0.1 + 0.0 + 0.0 + 0.0 − 0.1
         Dec − 30.6 − 5.9 − 25.0 − 23.2 − 1.8 − 0.0 − 1.8 + 0.1 + 0.2 − 0.2 − 0.0 + 2.3
2013          Jan − 7.1 − 0.1 − 6.7 − 6.1 − 0.6 + 0.0 − 0.6 + 0.0 − 0.3 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 2.0
         Feb − 0.1 − 0.1 − 0.1 − 0.1 + 0.1 − 0.0 + 0.1 + 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.0 + 1.1
         Mar + 5.6 − 1.5 + 7.0 + 6.9 + 0.2 + 0.2 − 0.0 + 0.1 − 0.0 − 0.1 − 0.1 − 0.9
*See Table IV.2, footnote *; statistical breaks have been eliminated from the specially marked. 1Including subordinated liabilities and liabilities arising from
changes. The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as provisional. registered debt securities. 2Including deposits under savings and loan contracts (see
Subsequent revisions, which appear in the following Monthly Report, are not

Deutsche Bundesbank
35  Monthly Report
May 2013
IV Banks
 
7 Deposits of domestic non-banks (non-MFIs) at banks (MFIs) in Germany * (cont’d)
 
 
€ billion
Time deposits 1,2   Memo item
  
 for more than 1 year 2 Subordinated
 liabilities
for up for up (excluding
to and to and for more Bank negotiable Liabilities
Deposits, Sight including including than Savings savings Fiduciary debt arising
Period total deposits Total 1 year Total 2 years 2 years bonds  4 loans securities) from repos deposits 3 
Domestic enterprises and households End of year or month*
 
2010 2,781.8 1,058.3 1,014.1 281.6 732.5 22.5 710.0 615.4 93.9 2.9 29.5 80.5
2011 2,877.0 1,122.0 1,037.9 316.5 721.3 27.7 693.7 613.8 103.3 2.5 28.4 94.02012 2,904.0 1,255.7 941.7 268.3 673.5 27.5 646.0 614.5 92.0 2.2 25.8 79.8
2012          Apr 2,887.9 1,144.9 1,026.1 312.5 713.6 29.1 684.5 615.6 101.2 2.1 27.5 100.4
         May 2,895.5 1,159.4 1,020.8 309.7 711.1 29.2 681.9 614.7 100.7 2.1 27.5 102.5         June 2,877.0 1,169.5 994.0 298.5 695.5 29.0 666.6 613.5 100.0 2.1 27.3 96.0
         July 2,887.5 1,181.8 993.6 302.6 691.1 29.1 662.0 613.1 98.9 2.1 27.0 100.2
         Aug 2,901.6 1,195.8 995.6 305.5 690.1 28.9 661.2 612.5 97.8 2.1 26.8 102.7         Sep 2,897.9 1,209.4 980.8 293.5 687.2 28.5 658.7 611.3 96.6 2.1 26.4 95.1
         Oct 2,908.1 1,235.2 966.9 288.4 678.5 28.0 650.5 610.7 95.3 2.0 26.2 105.0
         Nov 2,920.2 1,261.1 956.1 281.8 674.3 27.8 646.5 609.8 93.3 2.3 25.9 104.6         Dec 2,904.0 1,255.7 941.7 268.3 673.5 27.5 646.0 614.5 92.0 2.2 25.8 79.8
2013          Jan 2,908.2 1,275.5 929.6 255.3 674.3 27.9 646.4 613.6 89.5 2.3 25.3 80.9
         Feb 2,918.2 1,285.6 931.9 259.7 672.1 27.7 644.5 613.4 87.3 2.3 24.8 95.8         Mar 2,910.4 1,280.8 932.9 261.3 671.5 27.2 644.4 611.2 85.5 2.3 24.6 93.0
Changes*
2011 + 96.6 + 63.6 + 25.9 + 35.5 − 9.6 + 5.2 − 14.9 − 2.2 + 9.3 − 0.3 − 1.2 + 13.3
2012 + 40.1 + 135.8 − 85.1 − 50.4 − 34.7 − 0.1 − 34.6 + 0.8 − 11.3 − 0.3 − 2.6 − 16.8
2012          Apr + 19.8 + 8.1 + 13.7 + 14.6 − 0.9 − 0.2 − 0.7 − 1.5 − 0.5 + 0.0 − 0.1 + 7.8
         May + 7.6 + 14.5 − 5.4 − 2.9 − 2.5 + 0.1 − 2.6 − 0.9 − 0.5 − 0.0 + 0.0 + 2.1         June − 3.6 + 11.7 − 13.4 − 10.7 − 2.7 − 0.2 − 2.5 − 1.2 − 0.7 − 0.0 − 0.2 − 6.5
         July + 10.5 + 12.3 − 0.4 + 4.1 − 4.5 + 0.1 − 4.6 − 0.3 − 1.1 − 0.0 − 0.3 + 4.2
         Aug + 14.1 + 13.9 + 2.0 + 3.0 − 1.0 − 0.2 − 0.8 − 0.6 − 1.2 + 0.0 − 0.2 + 2.5         Sep − 3.5 + 13.9 − 15.0 − 12.1 − 2.9 − 0.4 − 2.5 − 1.2 − 1.2 − 0.1 − 0.4 − 7.5
         Oct + 10.3 + 25.9 − 13.7 − 5.1 − 8.6 − 0.5 − 8.1 − 0.6 − 1.3 − 0.0 − 0.2 + 9.9
         Nov + 12.0 + 25.8 − 10.9 − 6.6 − 4.3 − 0.2 − 4.0 − 0.8 − 2.1 + 0.3 − 0.3 − 0.5         Dec − 15.9 − 5.3 − 14.1 − 13.5 − 0.5 − 0.3 − 0.2 + 4.7 − 1.2 − 0.1 − 0.1 − 24.8
2013          Jan + 4.2 + 19.8 − 12.1 − 12.9 + 0.8 + 0.5 + 0.4 − 0.9 − 2.6 − 0.0 − 0.5 + 1.0
         Feb + 9.9 + 10.1 + 2.2 + 4.4 − 2.2 − 0.3 − 1.9 − 0.2 − 2.2 − 0.0 − 0.5 + 15.0         Mar − 6.8 − 4.7 + 1.9 + 1.8 + 0.1 − 0.2 + 0.3 − 2.3 − 1.7 − 0.0 − 0.2 − 2.8
of which:  Domestic enterprises End of year or month*
2010 1,124.4 344.6 755.5 196.0 559.5 7.5 552.0 6.3 17.9 2.8 21.4 80.5
2011 1,156.5 374.8 758.9 222.9 536.0 9.4 526.7 5.6 17.3 2.5 20.3 94.0
2012 1,105.3 414.2 668.5 185.9 482.5 10.4 472.2 6.5 16.1 2.2 18.2 79.8
2012          Apr 1,140.8 374.7 743.6 218.7 524.9 9.7 515.2 5.8 16.6 2.1 19.6 100.4
         May 1,144.2 384.2 737.6 215.6 522.0 9.8 512.1 5.9 16.5 2.1 19.5 102.5
         June 1,118.8 384.8 711.5 205.3 506.2 9.8 496.4 6.1 16.4 2.1 19.4 96.0
         July 1,125.0 390.5 712.0 210.2 501.8 10.2 491.6 6.2 16.3 2.0 19.2 100.2
         Aug 1,132.6 394.5 715.6 214.8 500.7 10.2 490.5 6.4 16.2 2.1 19.0 102.7
         Sep 1,124.2 399.0 702.6 204.6 497.9 10.3 487.6 6.5 16.1 2.0 18.7 95.1
         Oct 1,134.2 419.7 692.0 202.3 489.7 10.3 479.4 6.6 15.9 2.0 18.6 105.0
         Nov 1,131.1 425.2 683.6 198.0 485.6 10.3 475.4 6.5 15.8 2.3 18.3 104.6
         Dec 1,105.3 414.2 668.5 185.9 482.5 10.4 472.2 6.5 16.1 2.2 18.2 79.8
2013          Jan 1,109.2 428.0 658.5 175.7 482.8 10.7 472.2 6.6 16.0 2.3 17.8 80.9
         Feb 1,112.0 427.9 661.5 181.0 480.5 10.9 469.6 6.8 15.9 2.3 17.3 95.8
         Mar 1,104.5 418.0 664.0 184.3 479.7 10.7 469.0 6.8 15.7 2.3 17.2 93.0
Changes*
2011 + 33.6 + 29.1 + 5.1 + 27.6 − 22.5 + 1.9 − 24.4 − 0.3 − 0.3 − 0.3 − 1.1 + 13.3
2012 − 37.3 + 42.6 − 79.6 − 39.2 − 40.4 + 1.1 − 41.5 + 0.9 − 1.2 − 0.2 − 2.1 − 16.8
2012          Apr + 13.6 − 0.4 + 14.1 + 14.9 − 0.8 − 0.1 − 0.7 − 0.0 − 0.1 + 0.0 − 0.1 + 7.8
         May + 3.4 + 9.5 − 6.1 − 3.2 − 2.9 + 0.1 − 3.1 + 0.1 − 0.1 − 0.0 − 0.0 + 2.1         June − 10.4 + 2.3 − 12.7 − 9.8 − 2.9 − 0.0 − 2.9 + 0.1 − 0.1 − 0.0 − 0.1 − 6.5
         July + 6.2 + 5.7 + 0.5 + 4.9 − 4.4 + 0.4 − 4.8 + 0.1 − 0.1 − 0.0 − 0.2 + 4.2
         Aug + 7.6 + 4.0 + 3.6 + 4.7 − 1.1 + 0.1 − 1.2 + 0.2 − 0.1 + 0.0 − 0.2 + 2.5         Sep − 8.2 + 4.9 − 13.1 − 10.3 − 2.8 + 0.1 − 2.9 + 0.1 − 0.1 − 0.1 − 0.3 − 7.5
         Oct + 10.0 + 20.7 − 10.5 − 2.3 − 8.2 + 0.0 − 8.2 + 0.1 − 0.2 − 0.0 − 0.1 + 9.9
         Nov − 2.8 + 5.5 − 8.1 − 4.2 − 3.9 + 0.1 − 4.0 − 0.1 − 0.1 + 0.3 − 0.2 − 0.5         Dec − 25.6 − 11.0 − 14.9 − 12.1 − 2.9 + 0.1 − 3.0 − 0.0 + 0.3 − 0.1 − 0.1 − 24.8
2013          Jan + 3.7 + 13.8 − 10.1 − 10.3 + 0.1 + 0.3 − 0.2 + 0.1 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.4 + 1.0
         Feb + 2.8 − 0.1 + 3.0 + 5.3 − 2.3 + 0.2 − 2.5 + 0.1 − 0.2 − 0.0 − 0.4 + 15.0         Mar − 6.5 − 9.9 + 3.4 + 3.6 − 0.1 + 0.2 − 0.3 + 0.1 − 0.2 − 0.0 − 0.1 − 2.8
Table IV.12). 3Excluding deposits under savings and loan contracts (see also foot-   
note 2). 4 Including liabilities arising from non-negotiable bearer debt securities.   
   
  

Deutsche Bundesbank
36  Monthly Report
May 2013
IV Banks
 
8 Deposits of domestic households and non-profit institutions at banks (MFIs) in Germany*
 
 
€ billion
Sight deposits Time deposits  1,2 
by creditor group by creditor group
Deposits of Domestic households Domestic households
domestic
households
and Domestic
non-profit Self- non-profit Self-
employed Other institu- employed Other institutions,
Period total Total Total persons Employees tions Total Total persons Employees individuals individuals
End of year or month*
 
2010 1,657.4 713.7 692.4 123.8 471.2 97.4 21.3 258.6 241.4 21.2 203.7 16.4
2011 1,720.4 747.3 724.9 131.5 490.4 103.0 22.4 278.9 261.1 23.3 218.5 19.3
2012 1,798.7 841.5 816.5 147.1 548.6 120.8 25.0 273.3 256.6 18.8 219.3 18.6
2012          Oct 1,773.9 815.6 789.9 146.2 527.9 115.8 25.7 274.9 258.2 19.9 219.4 18.9
         Nov 1,789.0 835.8 810.3 147.3 544.1 118.9 25.5 272.4 255.8 19.3 218.0 18.5
         Dec 1,798.7 841.5 816.5 147.1 548.6 120.8 25.0 273.3 256.6 18.8 219.3 18.6
2013          Jan 1,799.0 847.5 820.5 149.3 547.8 123.4 27.0 271.1 255.1 18.4 218.5 18.2
         Feb 1,806.1 857.7 830.4 149.9 555.1 125.4 27.3 270.4 254.7 18.0 218.4 18.3
         Mar 1,805.9 862.9 835.2 147.0 562.5 125.7 27.7 268.8 253.3 17.8 217.4 18.1
Changes*
2011 + 63.0 + 34.5 + 33.5 + 7.8 + 19.7 + 6.0 + 1.1 + 20.8 + 20.3 + 2.1 + 15.2 + 3.0
2012 + 77.3 + 93.2 + 90.5 + 14.0 + 57.2 + 19.3 + 2.7 − 5.6 − 4.4 − 4.5 − 0.4 + 0.5
2012          Oct + 0.2 + 5.2 + 5.2 + 4.8 − 0.7 + 1.2 + 0.0 − 3.2 − 2.7 − 0.9 − 1.3 − 0.6
         Nov + 14.8 + 20.3 + 20.5 + 1.1 + 16.2 + 3.2 − 0.2 − 2.8 − 2.4 − 0.5 − 1.5 − 0.4
         Dec + 9.7 + 5.7 + 6.2 − 0.2 + 4.5 + 1.9 − 0.5 + 0.8 + 0.8 − 0.5 + 1.3 + 0.0
2013          Jan + 0.5 + 6.0 + 4.0 + 2.1 − 0.7 + 2.5 + 2.0 − 2.0 − 1.5 − 0.4 − 0.8 − 0.3
         Feb + 7.1 + 10.2 + 9.9 + 0.7 + 7.1 + 2.1 + 0.3 − 0.8 − 0.4 − 0.4 − 0.1 + 0.1
         Mar − 0.3 + 5.2 + 4.8 − 2.9 + 7.4 + 0.3 + 0.4 − 1.5 − 1.4 − 0.3 − 0.8 − 0.3
*See Table IV.2, footnote*; statistical breaks have been eliminated from the changes. revisions, which appear in the following Monthly Report, are not specially
The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as provisional. Subsequent marked. 1Including subordinated liabilities and liabilities arising from registered debt
 
 
 
9 Deposits of domestic government at banks (MFIs) in Germany, by creditor group*
 
€ billion
Deposits
   
Federal Government and its special funds  1 State governments
Time deposits Time deposits
Savings Savings
for up deposits Memo for up deposits Memo
Domestic to and for more and bank item to and for more and bank item
government, Sight including than savings Fiduciary Sight including than savings Fiduciary
Period total Total deposits 1 year 1 year bonds  2 loans Total deposits 1 year 1 year bonds  2 loans
End of year or month*
 
2010 153.4 38.7 5.7 3.3 29.6 0.1 17.0 28.2 8.5 6.7 12.9 0.2 17.2
2011 168.5 37.9 6.2 9.4 22.2 0.1 16.9 34.8 11.4 10.7 12.5 0.2 16.8
2012 186.2 25.9 3.7 6.0 16.2 0.1 16.4 47.2 9.1 13.7 24.2 0.2 15.9
2012          Oct 216.6 26.6 5.2 3.2 18.2 0.1 16.5 84.8 18.1 42.6 24.0 0.2 15.9
         Nov 216.8 26.6 5.3 3.1 18.2 0.1 16.5 77.7 13.1 40.5 24.0 0.2 15.9
         Dec 186.2 25.9 3.7 6.0 16.2 0.1 16.4 47.2 9.1 13.7 24.2 0.2 15.9
2013          Jan 179.1 24.0 4.9 3.1 15.9 0.1 16.4 47.2 11.3 11.9 23.8 0.2 15.9
         Feb 179.0 23.6 4.2 3.4 15.9 0.1 16.4 44.8 8.5 12.4 23.7 0.2 15.8
         Mar 185.9 23.4 4.0 3.5 15.9 0.1 16.4 49.6 9.8 15.8 23.8 0.2 15.8
Changes*
2011 + 14.6 − 0.7 + 0.5 + 6.3 − 7.5 + 0.0 − 0.2 + 6.6 + 2.9 + 4.0 − 0.4 + 0.0 − 0.5
2012 + 2.2 − 9.2 − 2.5 − 0.7 − 6.0 + 0.0 − 0.5 − 2.3 − 3.9 + 2.7 − 1.1 − 0.0 − 0.9
2012          Oct + 2.2 − 0.0 + 0.2 + 0.3 − 0.4 + 0.0 − 0.1 + 4.8 + 5.8 − 0.7 − 0.3 − 0.0 − 0.0
         Nov + 0.2 + 0.0 + 0.1 − 0.0 − 0.1 − 0.0 + 0.0 − 7.1 − 5.0 − 2.1 + 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.0
         Dec − 30.6 − 0.7 − 1.6 + 2.9 − 2.0 + 0.0 − 0.1 − 30.6 − 4.0 − 26.9 + 0.2 + 0.0 − 0.0
2013          Jan − 7.1 − 2.0 + 1.3 − 2.9 − 0.3 − 0.0 − 0.0 + 0.0 + 2.2 − 1.8 − 0.4 − 0.0 − 0.0
         Feb − 0.1 − 0.4 − 0.7 + 0.3 + 0.1 + 0.0 − 0.0 − 2.4 − 2.8 + 0.5 − 0.1 − 0.0 − 0.0
         Mar + 5.6 − 0.2 − 0.2 + 0.1 − 0.1 + 0.0 − 0.0 + 4.5 + 1.0 + 3.5 + 0.0 + 0.0 − 0.1
*See Table IV.2, footnote *; excluding deposits of the Treuhand agency and its Telekom AG, and of publicly owned enterprises, which are included in ”Enterprises”.
successor organisations, of the Federal Railways, east German Railways and Federal Statistical breaks have been eliminated from the changes. The figures for the latest
Post Office, and, from 1995, of Deutsche Bahn AG, Deutsche Post AG and Deutsche date are always to be regarded as provisional. Subsequent revisions, which appear in

Deutsche Bundesbank
37  Monthly Report
May 2013
IV Banks
 
   
 
 Savings deposits 3  Memo item
 
 by maturity
 more than 1 year 2 
Subordinated
of which liabilities
Domestic Domestic (excluding
up to and up to and Bank negotiable Liabilities non-profit non-profit
institu- including including more than Domestic institu- savings Fiduciary debt arising
tions 1 year Total 2 years 2 years Total tions bonds  4 loans from repos   Period households securities) 5 
End of year or month*
 
17.3 85.7 173.0 15.0 158.0 609.1 599.2 9.9 76.0 0.1 8.2 − 2010
17.8 93.6 185.3 18.3 167.0 608.2 599.0 9.2 86.1 0.1 8.1 − 201116.7 82.3 190.9 17.1 173.8 608.0 597.8 10.2 76.0 0.0 7.6 − 2012
16.7 86.1 188.8 17.7 171.1 604.1 593.8 10.2 79.4 0.0 7.7 − 2012          Oct 
16.6 83.8 188.6 17.5 171.1 603.3 593.3 10.0 77.5 0.0 7.6 −          Nov 16.7 82.3 190.9 17.1 173.8 608.0 597.8 10.2 76.0 0.0 7.6 −          Dec 
16.0 79.7 191.5 17.3 174.2 607.0 596.8 10.2 73.4 0.0 7.5 − 2013          Jan 
15.7 78.8 191.6 16.8 174.8 606.7 596.3 10.4 71.4 0.0 7.4 −          Feb 15.5 77.0 191.8 16.4 175.4 604.3 593.9 10.4 69.8 0.0 7.4 −          Mar 
Changes*
+ 0.5 + 8.0 + 12.9 + 3.3 + 9.5 − 1.8 − 1.1 − 0.7 + 9.5 − 0.0 − 0.1 − 2011
− 1.1 − 11.2 + 5.6 − 1.3 + 6.9 − 0.2 − 1.1 + 1.0 − 10.1 − 0.0 − 0.5 − 2012
− 0.5 − 2.8 − 0.4 − 0.5 + 0.1 − 0.7 − 0.8 + 0.1 − 1.1 − 0.0 − 0.1 − 2012          Oct 
− 0.4 − 2.4 − 0.3 − 0.3 − 0.0 − 0.8 − 0.6 − 0.2 − 1.9 − 0.0 − 0.1 −          Nov 
+ 0.1 − 1.5 + 2.3 − 0.4 + 2.7 + 4.7 + 4.6 + 0.1 − 1.5 − 0.0 − 0.0 −          Dec 
− 0.4 − 2.7 + 0.7 + 0.2 + 0.6 − 1.0 − 1.0 + 0.1 − 2.5 + 0.0 − 0.1 − 2013          Jan 
− 0.4 − 0.9 + 0.2 − 0.5 + 0.6 − 0.3 − 0.5 + 0.2 − 2.1 − 0.0 − 0.1 −          Feb 
− 0.2 − 1.7 + 0.2 − 0.4 + 0.6 − 2.3 − 2.3 − 0.0 − 1.6 + 0.0 − 0.1 −          Mar 
securities. 2Including deposits under savings and loan contracts (see Table 2). 4Including liabilities arising from non-negotiable bearer debt
IV.12). 3Excluding deposits under savings and loan contracts (see also foot-note securities. 5 Included in time deposits. 
 
     
 
Local government and local government associations
(including municipal special-purpose associations) Social security funds
Time deposits 3 Time deposits
Savings Savings
for up deposits Memo for up deposits Memo
to and for more and bank item to and for more and bank item
Sight including than savings Fiduciary Sight including than savings Fiduciary
Total deposits 1 year 1 year bonds 2,4 loans Total deposits 1 year 1 year bonds 2 loans   Period
End of year or month*
 
37.4 19.5 9.9 4.5 3.5 0.4 49.1 12.3 27.9 8.3 0.6 0.0 2010
39.3 18.1 13.0 5.0 3.2 0.4 56.5 10.5 36.4 9.1 0.4 0.0 201143.8 23.0 11.3 5.9 3.6 0.4 69.3 15.0 42.0 11.4 0.8 0.0 2012
39.6 18.3 11.9 5.8 3.6 0.4 65.6 15.9 37.9 11.3 0.5 0.0 2012          Oct 
42.4 20.8 12.0 6.0 3.6 0.4 70.0 17.4 40.6 11.4 0.6 0.0          Nov 43.8 23.0 11.3 5.9 3.6 0.4 69.3 15.0 42.0 11.4 0.8 0.0          Dec 
38.7 17.9 11.2 5.9 3.6 0.4 69.2 16.5 40.8 11.3 0.6 0.0 2013          Jan 
41.7 20.4 11.6 6.0 3.7 0.4 68.9 17.4 39.6 11.3 0.6 0.0          Feb 41.3 20.0 11.4 6.2 3.7 0.4 71.6 15.6 43.4 12.0 0.6 0.0          Mar 
Changes*
+ 1.8 − 1.4 + 2.9 + 0.5 − 0.2 − 0.0 + 7.0 − 1.9 + 8.2 + 0.9 − 0.2 − 0.0 2011+ 4.3 + 4.8 − 1.7 + 0.7 + 0.4 − 0.0 + 9.4 + 4.5 + 2.4 + 2.1 + 0.4 − 0.0 2012
− 2.0 − 1.3 − 0.7 − − − − 0.6 − 0.8 + 0.2 + 0.0 + 0.0 − 2012          Oct 
+ 2.8 + 2.5 + 0.1 + 0.1 + 0.0 − + 4.5 + 1.6 + 2.7 + 0.1 + 0.1 −          Nov 
+ 1.4 + 2.2 − 0.7 − 0.1 − 0.0 − − 0.7 − 2.4 + 1.4 + 0.0 + 0.2 − 0.0          Dec 
− 5.1 − 5.1 − 0.1 + 0.0 + 0.0 − − 0.1 + 1.5 − 1.4 + 0.1 − 0.3 − 2013          Jan 
+ 3.0 + 2.5 + 0.4 + 0.0 + 0.0 − − 0.3 + 0.9 − 1.3 + 0.0 + 0.0 −          Feb 
− 0.4 − 0.5 − 0.2 + 0.2 + 0.0 − 0.0 + 1.8 − 1.8 + 3.5 − 0.0 + 0.0 −          Mar 
the following Monthly Report, are not specially marked. 1Federal Railways Fund, non-negotiable bearer debt securities. 3Including deposits under savings and loan
Indemnification Fund, Redemption Fund for Inherited Liabilities, ERP Special Fund, contracts. 4 Excluding deposits under savings and loan contracts (see also footnote 3). 
German Unity Fund, Equalisation of Burdens Fund. 2Including liabilities arising from

Deutsche Bundesbank
38  Monthly Report
May 2013
IV Banks
 
10 Savings deposits and bank savings bonds of banks (MFIs) in Germany sold to non-banks (non-MFIs)*
 
 
€ billion
Savings deposits  1 Bank savings bonds  3  , sold to
of residents of non-residents domestic non-banks
at three months’ at more than three Memo
notice months’ notice item of which
Interest With
of which of which of which credited maturities
Special Special At three on of more
savings savings savings non-banks, than foreign months’
Period Total Total Total Total Total notice deposits total Total 2 years facilities  2 facilities  2 non-banks
End of year or month*
 
2010 628.2 618.2 512.5 412.3 105.7 96.6 9.9 7.7 10.9 113.1 95.4 70.5 17.7
2011 626.3 616.1 515.3 413.7 100.8 91.3 10.2 7.8 10.0 122.5 104.8 74.6 17.7
2012 628.2 617.6 528.4 418.1 89.2 77.7 10.6 8.1 9.8 110.5 93.6 68.6 16.9
2012          Nov 623.4 612.8 522.1 413.8 90.8 79.5 10.6 8.1 0.5 111.7 94.6 69.3 17.1
         Dec 628.2 617.6 528.4 418.1 89.2 77.7 10.6 8.1 5.9 110.5 93.6 68.6 16.9
2013          Jan 627.2 616.8 529.4 417.0 87.4 76.0 10.4 8.0 0.4 107.4 90.7 67.0 16.7
         Feb 627.0 616.6 530.7 416.6 85.9 74.4 10.4 8.0 0.3 105.3 88.5 65.8 16.8
         Mar 624.7 614.5 529.4 415.2 85.1 73.4 10.3 8.0 0.3 103.5 86.8 65.1 16.7
Changes*
2011 − 2.4 − 2.6 + 1.3 + 0.2 − 3.9 − 4.3 + 0.2 + 0.1 . + 9.4 + 9.3 + 4.0 + 0.2
2012 + 1.9 + 1.5 + 14.1 + 5.6 − 12.6 − 14.6 + 0.4 + 0.3 . − 12.0 − 11.2 − 6.1 − 0.7
2012          Nov − 0.7 − 0.7 + 0.6 + 0.7 − 1.3 − 1.4 − 0.0 + 0.0 . − 2.1 − 2.0 − 1.4 − 0.1
         Dec + 4.7 + 4.8 + 6.3 + 4.3 − 1.5 − 1.8 − 0.0 + 0.0 . − 1.2 − 1.0 − 0.7 − 0.1
2013          Jan − 1.0 − 0.8 + 1.0 − 1.1 − 1.8 − 1.7 − 0.1 − 0.1 . − 3.1 − 2.9 − 1.6 − 0.3
         Feb − 0.2 − 0.1 + 1.4 − 0.4 − 1.5 − 1.6 − 0.1 − 0.0 . − 2.1 − 2.2 − 1.2 + 0.1
         Mar − 2.2 − 2.2 − 1.4 − 1.4 − 0.8 − 0.9 − 0.1 − 0.0 . − 1.8 − 1.8 − 0.7 − 0.1
*See Table IV.2, footnote*; statistical breaks have been eliminated from the changes. as time deposits. 2Savings deposits bearing interest at a rate which exceeds the
The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as provisional. Subsequent minimum or basic rate of interest. 3Including liabilities arising from non-negotiable
revisions, which appear in the following Monthly Report, are not specially bearer debt securities. 
marked. 1Excluding deposits under savings and loan contracts, which are classified
 
 
 
11 Debt securities and money market paper outstanding of banks (MFIs) in Germany*
 
€ billion
Negotiable bearer debt securities and money market paper Non-negotiable
bearer debt
of which securities and
money market
with maturities of paper  6 Subordinated
up to more than 1 year up to
and including 1 year of which and including 2 years
with
Certifi- of which of which non- maturities
Floating Zero Foreign cates without without more of more negotiable negotiable
rate coupon currency of a nominal a nominal than than debt debt
Total bonds  1 deposit Total Total 2 years Total 2 years securities securities bonds  1,2 bonds  3,4 guarantee  5 guarantee  5 
Period
End of year or month*
 
2010 1,435.1 342.0 40.7 366.5 82.8 97.0 4.6 56.8 6.5 1,281.4 0.7 0.6 43.9 1.5
2011 1,375.4 352.6 37.2 373.9 75.3 95.2 3.0 53.6 4.5 1,226.6 0.6 0.4 43.2 1.5
2012 1,265.1 346.8 31.6 362.3 58.9 76.4 3.0 51.3 4.4 1,137.4 0.3 0.3 38.6 1.1
2012          Nov 1,291.7 351.1 32.5 377.1 65.4 83.3 3.3 52.9 5.2 1,155.5 0.3 0.3 38.7 1.3
         Dec 1,265.1 346.8 31.6 362.3 58.9 76.4 3.0 51.3 4.4 1,137.4 0.3 0.3 38.6 1.1
2013          Jan 1,248.0 343.9 30.4 352.4 61.7 76.9 2.9 48.1 4.4 1,123.0 0.3 0.3 37.2 1.1
         Feb 1,259.4 341.6 31.5 369.8 69.6 85.8 3.0 46.8 4.4 1,126.8 0.3 0.3 37.2 1.1
         Mar 1,247.0 338.5 30.3 370.6 72.5 86.8 2.9 45.6 4.5 1,114.6 0.3 0.3 37.2 1.1
Changes*
2011 − 59.0 + 10.6 − 5.2 + 8.4 − 7.5 − 2.1 − 1.6 − 2.9 − 2.0 − 54.0 − 0.0 − 0.2 − 0.8 − 0.0
2012 − 111.0 − 7.4 − 6.3 − 12.0 − 16.4 − 19.5 − 0.0 − 2.3 − 0.3 − 89.2 + 0.3 − 0.1 − 4.6 − 0.5
2012          Nov − 6.9 − 2.1 − 0.3 + 1.8 + 1.9 + 1.1 + 0.1 + 1.5 + 0.6 − 9.4 + 0.0 + 0.0 − 0.1 − 0.0
         Dec − 26.6 − 4.3 − 0.9 − 14.8 − 6.5 − 6.9 − 0.4 − 1.6 − 0.9 − 18.1 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.1 − 0.2
2013          Jan − 17.1 − 2.9 − 1.2 − 9.9 + 2.8 + 0.5 − 0.1 − 3.2 + 0.0 − 14.4 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 1.4 − 0.0
         Feb + 11.4 − 2.3 + 1.1 + 17.3 + 7.9 + 8.9 + 0.1 − 1.3 + 0.0 + 3.8 − 0.0 − 0.0 + 0.0 −
         Mar − 12.4 − 3.1 − 1.3 + 0.8 + 3.0 + 1.0 − 0.0 − 1.2 + 0.1 − 12.2 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.0
*See Table IV.2, footnote*; statistical breaks have been eliminated from the coupon bonds denominated in foreign currencies. 4Bonds denominated in
changes. The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as provisional. non-euro-area currencies. 5Negotiable bearer debt securities respectively money
Subsequent revisions, which appear in the following Monthly Report, are not market paper with a nominal guarantee of less than 100%. 6Non-negotiable
specially marked. 1Including debt securities denominated in foreign bearer debt securities are classified among bank savings bonds (see also Table IV.10,
currencies. 2Issue value when floated. 3Including floating rate notes and zero footnote 2). 

Deutsche Bundesbank
39  Monthly Report
May 2013
IV  Banks
  
12 Building  and  loan  associations (MFIs) in Germany *)
Interim statements
  
€ billion
Lending to banks (MFIs)
Lending to non-banks (non-MFIs) Deposits of banks Deposits of non-
(MFIs) 5 banks (non-MFIs)
Credit Building loans Secur- Memo
bal- item ities (in-
ances cluding Bearer New
and Loans Treasury Deposits Deposits debt Capital con-
Num- loans under bills under under secur- (includ- tractsber (ex- Bank savings Interim and savings savings ities ing pub- enteredof Balance cluding debt and loan and Other Treasury and loan Sight and loan Sight and out- lished into in
End of sheet building Building secur- con- bridging building discount con- and time con- time de- stand- re- year or associ-
year/month ations loans 
2 ities 3 tracts loans loans tracts deposits tracts posits  6 ing month 8 total 13 loans) 1 paper) 4 serves) 7 
All  building  and  loan  associations
2011 23 197.5 41.4 0.0 17.6 27.1 74.2 15.9 13.0 0.7 22.8 136.7 6.9 5.4 8.3 99.2
2012 22 200.6 42.2 0.0 17.5 24.0 78.3 16.0 14.5 1.3 21.0 141.9 6.4 4.9 8.7 101.8
2013          Jan 22 201.1 42.7 0.0 17.6 23.7 78.5 16.1 14.9 1.3 21.4 142.6 6.3 4.9 8.8 8.4
         Feb 22 201.6 43.1 0.0 17.6 23.3 78.6 16.3 15.2 1.4 21.0 143.3 6.2 4.9 8.8 8.5
         Mar 22 202.2 43.1 0.0 17.6 23.1 78.9 16.5 15.5 1.4 20.6 144.0 6.1 4.9 8.9 9.9
Private  building  and  Ioan  associations
  
2013          Jan 12 143.4 25.1 0.0 11.7 15.9 62.3 14.1 7.7 1.0 18.6 94.1 6.1 4.9 5.9 5.5
         Feb 12 143.7 25.4 0.0 11.6 15.7 62.3 14.2 7.9 1.0 18.3 94.7 6.0 4.9 5.9 5.7         Mar 12 144.2 25.5 0.0 11.6 15.5 62.6 14.3 8.0 1.0 17.8 95.2 6.0 4.9 6.0 6.9
Public  building  and  Ioan  associations
  
2013          Jan 10 57.7 17.7 0.0 5.9 7.8 16.2 2.0 7.2 0.4 2.8 48.5 0.2 − 2.9 2.8
         Feb 10 57.9 17.7 0.0 6.0 7.7 16.3 2.1 7.3 0.4 2.7 48.7 0.2 − 2.9 2.7         Mar 10 58.1 17.6 0.0 6.0 7.5 16.4 2.2 7.4 0.4 2.8 48.8 0.1 − 2.9 3.0
Trends in building and loan association business
  
€ billion
Changes in deposits
Capital promised Capital disbursed Disbursement Interest and
under savings and commitments repayments
loan contracts Allocations outstanding at received on
end of period building loans 10 
Deposits under Loans under
Repay- savings and savings and
ments loan contracts loan contracts 9 Newly
Interest of granted
credited interim deposits of which of which
on under Applied Applied and ofwhich of Memo Amounts deposits
cancelled to settle- to settle- bridging
under savings of ment of ment of loans Under which item paid intosavings savings and which interim interim and alloc- Repay- Housing
and and loan loan Net and and other ated ments bonuses
loan ac- con- con- alloca- bridging bridging building con- during re-
Period tracts tracts Total Total Total loans Total loans loans Total tracts Total quarter counts 
9 tions 11 ceived 12 
All  building  and  loan  associations
2011 27.6 2.5 6.1 46.2 31.0 40.9 18.1 4.4 8.2 4.1 14.6 12.1 7.5 11.0 9.3 0.5
2012 28.5 2.6 6.8 48.3 31.0 40.8 18.3 4.1 6.8 3.7 15.7 13.2 7.7 12.1 10.1 0.4
2013          Jan 2.7 0.0 0.5 3.5 2.3 3.1 1.4 0.3 0.5 0.3 1.2 13.0 7.7 1.0 0.0
         Feb 2.6 0.0 0.5 3.8 2.5 2.8 1.3 0.3 0.5 0.3 1.1 13.5 8.0 0.9 0.0
         Mar 2.8 0.0 0.5 3.9 2.5 3.4 1.6 0.4 0.5 0.3 1.3 13.5 7.9 1.0 ... 0.1
Private  building  and  Ioan  associations
  
2013          Jan 1.7 0.0 0.3 2.5 1.6 2.3 1.0 0.3 0.4 0.2 0.9 8.5 4.2 0.7 0.0
         Feb 1.7 0.0 0.3 2.5 1.5 2.0 0.9 0.3 0.3 0.2 0.8 8.7 4.2 0.6 0.0
         Mar 1.9 0.0 0.3 2.8 1.7 2.4 1.1 0.3 0.4 0.3 0.9 8.8 4.2 0.6 ... 0.0
Public  building  and  Ioan  associations
  
2013          Jan 1.0 0.0 0.2 1.0 0.7 0.8 0.4 0.1 0.2 0.1 0.3 4.5 3.5 0.3 0.0
         Feb 0.9 0.0 0.2 1.3 1.0 0.8 0.4 0.1 0.1 0.1 0.2 4.8 3.7 0.3 0.0
         Mar 0.9 0.0 0.3 1.2 0.8 0.9 0.5 0.1 0.2 0.1 0.3 4.7 3.7 0.3 ... 0.0
*Excluding assets and liabilities and/or transactions of foreign branches. The figures 8Total amount covered by the contracts; only contracts newly entered into, for
for the latest date are always to be regarded as provisional. Subsequent revisions, which the contract fee has been fully paid. Increases in the sum contracted count aswhich appear in the following Monthly Report, are not specially marked. 1Including new contracts. 9For disbursements of deposits under savings and loan contracts
claims on building and loan associations, claims arising from registered debt arising from the allocation of contracts see “Capital disbursed“. 10Including housing
securities and central bank credit balances. 2Loans under savings and loan contracts bonuses credited. 11Only allocations accepted by the beneficiaries; including
and interim and bridging loans. 3Including money market paper and small amounts allocations applied to settlement of interim and bridging loans. 12The amounts
of other securities issued by banks. 4Including equalisation claims. 5Including already credited to the accounts of savers or borrowers are also included in
liabilities to building and loan associations. 6Including small amounts of savings “Amounts paid into savings and loan accounts“ and “Interest and repayments
deposits. 7Including participation rights capital and fund for general banking risks. received on building loans“. 13 See Table IV.2, footnote 1. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
40  Monthly Report
May 2013
IV  Banks
  
13 Assets and liabilities of the foreign branches and foreign subsidiaries of German banks (MFIs) *
  
  
€ billion
Number of Lending to banks (MFIs) Lending to non-banks (non-MFIs) Other  assets  7 
Loans Credit  balances and loans
German   
banks
(MFIs)   
with of which
foreign foreign Derivative
branches Money Money financial branches  1 
and/or and/or market to to market instruments
foreign foreign Balance paper, German foreign paper, in the
subsi- subsi- sheet German Foreign secur- non- non- secur- trading
Period diaries diaries total  7 Total Total banks banks Total Total banks banks ities  2 Total portfolio ities 2,3 
Foreign  branches End of year or month *
  
2010 55 212 2,226.3 591.4 564.8 232.0 332.8 26.6 696.7 532.5 27.5 505.0 164.2 938.2 633.9
2011 56 209 2,316.6 603.9 584.9 199.1 385.8 19.0 642.5 504.3 23.2 481.0 138.2 1,070.2 885.0
2012 55 210 2,042.7 552.1 537.9 179.5 358.4 14.2 550.2 427.1 16.9 410.2 123.1 940.4 671.8
2012          May 57 211 2,428.5 641.2 625.1 214.9 410.2 16.0 663.7 529.8 22.0 507.8 133.9 1,123.6 937.5
         June 57 209 2,203.8 576.6 561.4 199.1 362.3 15.2 623.2 490.3 21.0 469.3 132.9 1,004.0 829.9
         July 57 211 2,271.3 542.7 527.5 194.1 333.4 15.3 638.6 505.2 21.2 484.0 133.4 1,089.9 883.1
         Aug 57 210 2,206.0 539.7 524.2 192.0 332.2 15.5 614.0 483.8 19.8 464.1 130.2 1,052.3 811.7
         Sep 57 211 2,178.7 559.0 544.6 183.7 360.8 14.4 625.1 496.7 19.0 477.8 128.3 994.6 776.3
         Oct 56 210 2,137.1 555.9 541.3 188.8 352.5 14.6 581.1 457.8 18.1 439.8 123.2 1,000.0 744.6
         Nov 55 208 2,145.2 554.5 539.7 180.3 359.4 14.9 587.2 461.7 22.1 439.6 125.5 1,003.4 709.5
         Dec 55 210 2,042.7 552.1 537.9 179.5 358.4 14.2 550.2 427.1 16.9 410.2 123.1 940.4 671.8
2013          Jan 55 209 2,048.5 554.7 539.9 182.7 357.2 14.8 560.1 436.2 15.6 420.6 123.8 933.8 633.7
         Feb 55 209 2,052.3 547.0 531.9 165.9 366.0 15.1 578.8 456.2 14.6 441.7 122.5 926.5 650.9
Changes *
2011 + 1 − 3 + 56.9 − 4.6 + 3.2 − 32.9 + 36.2 − 7.9 − 68.9 − 40.9 − 4.3 − 36.7 − 28.0 + 130.4 + 251.0
2012 − 2 + 1 − 261.8 − 45.7 − 41.0 − 19.6 − 21.4 − 4.7 − 86.9 − 73.0 − 6.4 − 66.7 − 13.9 − 129.3 − 213.2
2012          June − − 2 − 213.5 − 59.5 − 58.7 − 15.8 − 42.9 − 0.8 − 35.1 − 35.1 − 1.0 − 34.1 + 0.0 − 118.9 − 107.6
         July − + 2 + 48.4 − 41.8 − 41.7 − 5.0 − 36.7 − 0.1 + 5.6 + 6.9 + 0.2 + 6.6 − 1.3 + 84.6 + 53.2
         Aug − − 1 − 48.4 + 3.9 + 3.6 − 2.1 + 5.7 + 0.3 − 15.9 − 14.3 − 1.4 − 12.8 − 1.6 − 36.4 − 71.5
         Sep − + 1 − 13.6 + 25.1 + 26.1 − 8.3 + 34.4 − 1.0 + 18.0 + 18.6 − 0.8 + 19.4 − 0.5 − 56.7 − 35.4
         Oct − 1 − 1 − 35.9 − 0.8 − 1.0 + 5.1 − 6.1 + 0.2 − 40.9 − 36.3 − 0.9 − 35.4 − 4.5 + 5.8 − 31.6
         Nov − 1 − 2 + 9.6 − 0.9 − 1.2 − 8.5 + 7.4 + 0.3 + 6.9 + 4.5 + 4.0 + 0.5 + 2.5 + 3.6 − 35.1
         Dec − + 2 − 90.2 + 3.2 + 3.7 − 0.7 + 4.5 − 0.6 − 31.4 − 30.1 − 5.2 − 24.9 − 1.3 − 62.0 − 37.7
2013          Jan − − 1 + 27.9 + 12.4 + 11.7 + 3.1 + 8.6 + 0.7 + 20.9 + 18.2 − 1.3 + 19.5 + 2.7 − 5.4 − 38.1
         Feb − − − 14.1 − 16.9 − 17.1 − 16.8 − 0.3 + 0.2 + 11.5 + 14.2 − 1.0 + 15.3 − 2.8 − 8.7 + 17.2
  
  
Foreign  subsidiaries End of year or month *
  
2010 37 93 495.1 220.9 178.7 98.8 79.9 42.1 218.3 168.8 37.7 131.2 49.5 55.9 −
2011 35 87 478.6 210.3 172.8 95.3 77.5 37.5 210.5 165.1 35.6 129.5 45.5 57.7 −
2012 35 83 458.7 199.5 166.3 94.5 71.8 33.2 204.7 162.1 30.6 131.5 42.5 54.6 −
2012          May 35 85 473.4 209.0 178.3 96.3 82.0 30.7 213.7 168.2 34.3 133.9 45.5 50.7 −
         June 35 85 468.8 208.6 177.6 97.4 80.2 31.0 209.5 165.3 33.7 131.7 44.2 50.7 −
         July 35 85 475.8 210.8 179.1 98.3 80.9 31.6 212.5 167.7 33.3 134.3 44.8 52.5 −
         Aug 35 86 468.1 207.2 175.3 97.7 77.6 32.0 207.6 163.7 32.8 130.9 43.9 53.2 −
         Sep 35 86 479.8 215.6 183.5 101.1 82.4 32.2 207.0 163.7 31.7 131.9 43.3 57.2 −
         Oct 35 84 468.5 209.0 176.5 99.6 76.9 32.5 204.9 161.7 32.0 129.7 43.3 54.6 −
         Nov 35 83 467.5 211.3 178.7 101.8 76.9 32.6 201.5 158.1 31.6 126.4 43.4 54.7 −
         Dec 35 83 458.7 199.5 166.3 94.5 71.8 33.2 204.7 162.1 30.6 131.5 42.5 54.6 −
2013          Jan 35 83 443.3 194.6 161.1 92.8 68.3 33.6 195.8 153.4 29.9 123.5 42.4 52.9 −
         Feb 35 83 444.4 194.1 161.2 93.6 67.7 32.9 197.3 154.2 29.7 124.5 43.1 53.0 −
Changes *
2011 − 2 − 6 − 20.1 − 12.2 − 7.2 − 3.5 − 3.7 − 5.0 − 9.6 − 5.5 − 2.1 − 3.4 − 4.0 + 1.6 −
2012 − − 4 − 18.2 − 9.9 − 5.9 − 0.8 − 5.1 − 4.1 − 5.2 − 2.3 − 5.0 + 2.7 − 2.9 − 3.1 −
2012          June − − − 3.2 + 0.2 − 0.2 + 1.1 − 1.4 + 0.5 − 3.5 − 2.2 − 0.7 − 1.6 − 1.2 + 0.0 −
         July − − + 4.6 + 1.0 + 0.7 + 0.9 − 0.2 + 0.3 + 1.9 + 1.3 − 0.3 + 1.6 + 0.6 + 1.8 −
         Aug − + 1 − 5.5 − 2.4 − 3.0 − 0.6 − 2.5 + 0.6 − 3.9 − 3.0 − 0.5 − 2.5 − 0.9 + 0.8 −
         Sep − − + 13.7 + 9.4 + 8.9 + 3.4 + 5.5 + 0.5 + 0.3 + 0.8 − 1.1 + 1.9 − 0.5 + 4.0 −
         Oct − − 2 − 10.7 − 6.4 − 6.8 − 1.5 − 5.2 + 0.4 − 1.8 − 1.7 + 0.3 − 2.0 − 0.0 − 2.6 −
         Nov − − 1 − 0.9 + 2.3 + 2.2 + 2.2 − 0.0 + 0.2 − 3.4 − 3.5 − 0.3 − 3.2 + 0.1 + 0.2 −
         Dec − − − 7.3 − 11.0 − 11.8 − 7.3 − 4.5 + 0.8 + 3.8 + 4.6 − 1.0 + 5.7 − 0.8 − 0.1 −
2013          Jan − − − 12.4 − 3.4 − 4.1 − 1.8 − 2.4 + 0.7 − 7.4 − 7.2 − 0.7 − 6.5 − 0.2 − 1.6 −
         Feb − − − 1.3 − 1.8 − 0.8 + 0.8 − 1.7 − 1.0 + 0.6 − 0.1 − 0.2 + 0.1 + 0.7 + 0.0 −
*In this table “foreign“ also includes the country of domicile of the foreign branches the flow figures for the foreign subsidiaries.) The figures for the latest date are
and foreign subsidiaries. Statistical revisions have been eliminated from the changes. always to be regarded as provisional; subsequent revisions, which appear in the
(Breaks owing to changes in the reporting population have not been eliminated from following Monthly Report, are not specially marked. 1Several branches in a given

Deutsche Bundesbank
41  Monthly Report
May 2013
IV  Banks
  
      
  
Deposits Other  liabilities 6,7 
of banks (MFIs) of non-banks (non-MFIs)
German non-banks 4 
Money
market of whichpaper Derivativeand debt financial
Medium Working instruments
securities
and out- capital in the
German Foreign Short- long- Foreign stand- and own trading
Total Total banks Total Total term term ing 5 funds Total portfolio   Period banks non-banks
End of year or month * Foreign  branches
  
1,131.3 751.9 398.2 353.7 379.4 44.9 39.2 5.7 334.5 187.1 34.7 873.3 648.7 2010
1,179.6 814.0 406.6 407.4 365.6 35.9 30.3 5.6 329.7 141.2 38.6 957.2 880.2 20111,054.8 727.7 371.2 356.5 327.1 34.7 26.9 7.8 292.4 127.0 39.9 821.1 670.8 2012
1,224.1 837.7 384.0 453.8 386.4 30.3 23.5 6.8 356.1 151.8 39.3 1,013.3 937.1 2012          May
1,114.9 762.5 366.5 395.9 352.5 30.3 23.5 6.8 322.1 141.3 38.9 908.7 829.5          June
1,124.7 752.0 375.1 376.9 372.7 29.3 22.0 7.3 343.4 146.6 39.3 960.8 880.1          July
1,112.1 765.5 373.3 392.2 346.6 26.8 19.6 7.3 319.8 143.0 39.1 911.8 813.1          Aug 1,128.3 768.0 382.4 385.7 360.2 27.8 20.6 7.1 332.4 138.4 38.9 873.2 774.2          Sep 
1,121.3 779.2 379.9 399.4 342.1 28.0 20.9 7.1 314.0 130.0 38.8 847.0 745.5          Oct 
1,122.7 757.9 364.3 393.6 364.7 34.3 27.1 7.2 330.4 128.4 38.2 855.9 706.9          Nov 1,054.8 727.7 371.2 356.5 327.1 34.7 26.9 7.8 292.4 127.0 39.9 821.1 670.8          Dec 
1,086.1 722.9 351.6 371.3 363.2 35.4 27.8 7.5 327.8 128.2 40.1 794.1 637.8 2013          Jan 
1,081.6 706.5 347.4 359.1 375.1 29.4 21.7 7.8 345.7 140.1 40.9 789.7 657.4          Feb 
Changes *
+ 27.0 + 50.1 + 8.4 + 41.7 − 23.1 − 9.0 − 8.9 − 0.0 − 14.2 − 45.8 + 3.9 + 71.9 + 231.5 2011− 114.6 − 80.1 − 35.3 − 44.8 − 34.5 − 1.3 − 3.4 + 2.1 − 33.2 − 14.3 + 1.4 − 134.3 − 209.4 2012
− 101.0 − 70.4 − 17.4 − 53.0 − 30.6 + 0.1 + 0.0 + 0.0 − 30.6 − 10.5 − 0.4 − 101.6 − 107.6 2012          June
− 3.6 − 17.9 + 8.5 − 26.4 + 14.3 − 1.0 − 1.5 + 0.5 + 15.3 + 5.3 + 0.4 + 46.4 + 50.6          July
− 0.5 + 20.0 − 1.8 + 21.8 − 20.5 − 2.5 − 2.5 − 0.0 − 18.0 − 3.5 − 0.1 − 44.2 − 67.0          Aug + 26.8 + 8.6 + 9.1 − 0.4 + 18.2 + 1.0 + 1.1 − 0.1 + 17.2 − 4.7 − 0.2 − 35.5 − 38.9          Sep 
− 2.7 + 13.6 − 2.5 + 16.0 − 16.2 + 0.3 + 0.3 − 0.0 − 16.5 − 8.3 − 0.1 − 24.7 − 28.7          Oct 
+ 2.7 − 20.5 − 15.5 − 4.9 + 23.1 + 6.3 + 6.2 + 0.1 + 16.9 − 1.6 − 0.6 + 9.1 − 38.6          Nov − 58.7 − 24.8 + 6.9 − 31.7 − 34.0 + 0.4 − 0.2 + 0.6 − 34.3 − 1.5 + 1.7 − 31.8 − 36.0          Dec 
+ 45.7 + 3.2 − 19.6 + 22.8 + 42.5 + 0.7 + 1.0 − 0.2 + 41.8 + 1.3 + 0.2 − 19.2 − 33.0 2013          Jan 
− 17.7 − 24.0 − 4.3 − 19.7 + 6.3 − 6.0 − 6.2 + 0.2 + 12.2 + 11.9 + 0.8 − 9.1 + 19.6          Feb 
  
  
End of year or month * Foreign  subsidiaries
  
387.4 221.1 136.4 84.7 166.3 31.0 23.6 7.3 135.3 28.9 31.8 46.9 − 2010
377.5 229.6 142.4 87.2 147.9 26.7 19.8 6.9 121.2 25.1 30.8 45.2 − 2011356.8 207.7 120.4 87.2 149.2 22.0 17.8 4.2 127.1 24.9 32.1 44.9 − 2012
369.0 224.5 128.9 95.6 144.6 26.0 19.0 7.0 118.5 25.2 31.3 47.8 − 2012          May
366.0 218.3 126.8 91.5 147.7 27.5 20.5 6.9 120.2 24.1 31.8 47.0 −          June
368.7 218.3 125.1 93.2 150.4 26.0 19.0 7.0 124.4 24.7 32.1 50.3 −          July
358.9 211.6 124.4 87.1 147.3 24.7 17.7 7.0 122.6 24.8 33.5 50.9 −          Aug 
371.3 214.4 122.2 92.2 156.9 25.2 18.2 7.0 131.7 24.5 32.3 51.7 −          Sep 
364.1 211.0 120.8 90.2 153.1 25.2 20.8 4.4 128.0 24.0 32.1 48.3 −          Oct 
362.6 210.5 122.6 87.9 152.0 24.7 20.3 4.3 127.4 25.5 32.2 47.3 −          Nov 
356.8 207.7 120.4 87.2 149.2 22.0 17.8 4.2 127.1 24.9 32.1 44.9 −          Dec 
344.2 195.6 115.6 80.0 148.7 22.2 18.1 4.1 126.4 24.3 32.3 42.5 − 2013          Jan 
345.1 194.6 113.1 81.5 150.4 22.3 18.2 4.1 128.1 24.6 32.9 41.9 −          Feb 
Changes *
− 12.5 + 7.1 + 6.0 + 1.1 − 19.6 − 4.2 − 3.8 − 0.4 − 15.3 − 3.8 − 1.0 − 2.8 − 2011
− 19.6 − 21.3 − 22.0 + 0.7 + 1.7 − 4.7 − 2.0 − 2.7 + 6.4 − 0.2 + 1.3 + 0.3 − 2012
− 2.0 − 5.6 − 2.1 − 3.5 + 3.5 + 1.5 + 1.5 − 0.0 + 2.1 − 1.1 + 0.5 − 0.5 − 2012          June
+ 0.9 − 1.0 − 1.7 + 0.7 + 1.9 − 1.4 − 1.5 + 0.1 + 3.3 + 0.7 + 0.3 + 2.8 −          July
− 8.1 − 5.8 − 0.7 − 5.1 − 2.3 − 1.3 − 1.3 − 0.0 − 1.0 + 0.1 + 1.4 + 1.1 −          Aug 
+ 13.9 + 3.6 − 2.3 + 5.9 + 10.3 + 0.5 + 0.5 − 0.0 + 9.8 − 0.3 − 1.3 + 1.4 −          Sep 
− 6.8 − 3.1 − 1.4 − 1.8 − 3.6 − 0.0 + 2.6 − 2.6 − 3.6 − 0.5 − 0.2 − 3.3 −          Oct 
− 1.5 − 0.4 + 1.8 − 2.3 − 1.1 − 0.5 − 0.5 − 0.0 − 0.6 + 1.4 + 0.1 − 0.9 −          Nov 
− 4.6 − 2.2 − 2.2 − 0.0 − 2.4 − 2.6 − 2.5 − 0.1 + 0.2 − 0.6 − 0.1 − 2.1 −          Dec 
− 10.4 − 11.0 − 4.8 − 6.2 + 0.6 + 0.2 + 0.3 − 0.1 + 0.4 − 0.6 + 0.2 − 1.6 − 2013          Jan 
− 1.0 − 1.8 − 2.5 + 0.6 + 0.9 + 0.1 + 0.1 + 0.0 + 0.8 + 0.2 + 0.6 − 1.1 −          Feb 
country of domicile are regarded as a single branch. 2Treasury bills, Treasury securities. 5Issues of negotiable and non-negotiable debt securities and money
discount paper and other money market paper, debt securities. 3Including own debt market paper. 6 Including subordinated liabilities. 7 See also Table IV.2, footnote  1. 
securities. 4Excluding subordinated liabilities and non-negotiable debt

Deutsche Bundesbank
42  Monthly Report
May 2013
V  Minimum reserves
 
1  Reserve ratios
Germany Euro area
 
% of liabilities subject to reserve requirements % of reserve base  1 
Sight Time
Applicable from liabilities liabilities Savings deposits Applicable from Ratio
1995  Aug 1 2    2    1.5    1999  Jan 1 2    
 2012  Jan 18 1    
 
 
 
1Article 3 of the Regulation of the European Central Bank on the application of
minimum reserves (excluding liabilities to which a reserve ratio of 0% applies pur-
suant to Article 4 (1)). 
 
 
 
2  Reserve maintenance in Germany up to the end of 1998
− pursuant to the Minimum Reserves Order of the Bundesbank 
 
DM million
Liabilities subject to reserve requirements Excess reserves  4 
Monthly Required % of the
average  1 Total Sight liabilities Time liabilities Savings deposits reserves  2 Level Deficiencies Actual reserves  3 required  reserves
1995          Dec 2,066,565 579,337 519,456 967,772 36,492 37,337 845 2.3 3.1
1996          Dec 2,201,464 655,483 474,342 1,071,639 38,671 39,522 851 2.2 4.3
1997          Dec 2,327,879 734,986 476,417 1,116,477 40,975 41,721 745 1.8 3.3
1998          Dec 2,576,889 865,444 564,878 1,146,567 45,805 46,432 627 1.4 3.8
1Pursuant to sections 5 to 7 of the Minimum Reserves Order. 2Amount after tutions subject to reserve requirements on their giro accounts at the Bundesbank.
applying the reserve ratios to the liabilities subject to reserve requirements (section 5 4 Actual reserves less required reserves. 
(1) of the Minimum Reserves Order). 3Average credit balances of the credit insti-
 
 
3  Reserve maintenance in the euro area
− from 1999, pursuant to the ECB Regulation on the application of minimum reserves in accordance with
Article 19.1 of the Statute of the ESCB 
 
Maintenance Required reserves
period before deduction Required reserves
beginning in  1 of lump-sum Lump-sum after deduction of
Reserve base  2 allowance  3 allowance  4 lump-sum allowance Current account  5 Excess reserves  6 Deficiencies  7 
Euro area ( € billion)
 
2012          Sep 10,750.5 107.5 0.5 107.0 538.1 431.1 0.0
         Oct 10,691.7 106.9 0.5 106.4 529.2 422.7 0.0
         Nov 10,683.2 106.8 0.5 106.4 509.9 403.5 0.0
         Dec 10,648.6 106.5 0.5 106.0 489.0 383.0 0.0
2013          Jan 10,591.4 105.9 0.5 105.4 466.3 360.9 0.0
         Feb 10,609.2 106.1 0.5 105.6 403.0 297.4 0.0
         Mar  p 10,537.0 105.4 0.5 104.9 346.0 241.1 0.0
         Apr  p,8 10,535.0 105.4 0.5 104.9 322.2 217.3 ...
         May  p ... ... ... 105.3 ... ... ...
Of which:  Germany ( € million)
2012          Sep 2,881,887 28,819 181 28,638 189,857 161,219 0
         Oct 2,903,312 29,033 181 28,852 192,470 163,618 0
         Nov 2,873,537 28,735 181 28,555 191,465 162,910 0
         Dec 2,874,716 28,747 180 28,567 158,174 129,607 1
2013          Jan 2,864,858 28,649 180 28,468 144,153 115,685 1
         Feb 2,801,456 28,015 180 27,834 120,988 93,154 0
         Mar 2,775,049 27,750 180 27,570 109,742 82,172 1
         Apr  p 2,767,454 27,675 180 27,494 100,324 72,830 0
         May  p 2,770,161 27,702 180 27,521 ... ... ...
1From March 2004, the reserve maintenance period will start on the settlement day to the reserve base. 4Article 5 (2) of the Regulation of the European Central Bank on
of the main refinancing operation immediately following the meeting of the the application of minimum reserves. 5Average credit balances of the credit insti-
Governing Council of the ECB for which the monthly discussion of the monetary tutions at the national central banks. 6Average credit balances less required reserves
policy stance is scheduled. 2Article 3 of the Regulation of the European Central Bank after deduction of the lump-sum allowance. 7Required reserves after deduction of
on the application of minimum reserves (excluding liabilities to which a reserve ratio the lump-sum allowance. 8The total number of deficiencies was not available when
of 0% applies, pursuant to Article 4 (1)). 3Amount after applying the reserve ratios this report went to press. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
43  Monthly Report
May 2013
VI Interest rates
 
1 ECB interest rates 2 Base rates
 
 
% per annum % per annum
Main refinancing Main refinancing
operations operations Base Base
Mar- Mar- rate rateginal ginal as per as per
Minimum Minimum
Applicable Deposit Fixed bid lending Applicable Deposit Fixed bid lending Applicable Civil Applicable Civilfrom facility rate rate facility from facility rate rate facility from Code  
1 from Code 1 
2005 Dec                  6 1.25 − 2.25 3.25 2009 Jan                21 1.00 2.00 − 3.00 2002 Jan                1 2.57 2007 Jan                1 2.70
         Mar                11 0.50 1.50 − 2.50          July                1 2.47          July                1 3.19
2006 Mar                  8 1.50 − 2.50 3.50          Apr                  8 0.25 1.25 − 2.25         June                15 1.75 − 2.75 3.75          May                13 0.25 1.00 − 1.75 2003 Jan                1 1.97 2008 Jan                1 3.32         Aug                  9 2.00 − 3.00 4.00          July                1 1.22          July                1 3.19
         Oct                11 2.25 − 3.25 4.25 2011 Apr                13 0.50 1.25 − 2.00
         Dec                13 2.50 − 3.50 4.50          July                13 0.75 1.50 − 2.25 2004 Jan                1 1.14 2009 Jan                1 1.62
         Nov                  9 0.50 1.25 − 2.00          July                1 1.13          July                1 0.12
2007 Mar                14 2.75 − 3.75 4.75          Dez                14 0.25 1.00 − 1.75
         June                13 3.00 − 4.00 5.00 2005 Jan                1 1.21 2011 July                1 0.37
2012 July                11 0.00 0.75 − 1.50          July                1 1.17
2008 July                  9 3.25 − 4.25 5.25 2012 Jan                1 0.12
         Oct                  8 2.75 − 3.75 4.75 2013 May                  8 0.00 0.50 1.00 2006 Jan                1 1.37
         Oct                  9 3.25 3.75 − 4.25          July                1 1.95 2013 Jan                1 −0.13
         Nov                12 2.75 3.25 − 3.75         Dec                10 2.00 2.50 − 3.00
1 Pursuant to section 247 of the Civil Code.  
 
  
3 Eurosystem monetary policy operations allotted through tenders 
*
 
 
Fixed rate tenders Variable rate tenders
Bid Allotment Minimum Weighted
amount amount Fixed rate bid rate Marginal rate  1 average rate
Date of Running for
settlement € million % per annum ... days
Main refinancing operations
2013 Apr                10 119,347 119,347 0.75−−−7
         Apr                17 116,368 116,368 0.75−−−7
         Apr                24 110,407 110,407 0.75−−−8
         May                  2 105,011 105,011 0.75−−−6
         May                  8 110,290 110,290 0.50−−−7
         May                15 103,844 103,844 0.50−−−7
Longer-term refinancing operations
2013 Mar                13 4,208 4,208 0.75−−− 2 8
         Mar                28 9,113 9,113 2 ... − − − 91
         Apr                10 5,159 5,159 0.75−−− 2 8
         Apr                25 2,977 2,977 2 ... − − − 98
         May                  8 5,230 5,230 0.50−−− 3 5
*Source: ECB. 1Lowest or highest interest rate at which funds were allotted or average minimum bid rate of the main refinancing operations over the life of this
collected. 2Interest payment on the maturity date; the rate will be fixed at the operation. 
 
  
4 Money market rates, by month 
*
 
 
% per annum
EONIA Swap Index 2 EURIBOR 3 
Monthly One-week One-month Three-month Six-month One-week One-month Three-month Six-month Twelve-month Twelve-month
average EONIA 1 funds funds funds funds funds funds funds funds funds funds
2012          Oct 0.09 0.09 0.09 0.09 0.08 0.08 0.08 0.11 0.21 0.41 0.65
         Nov 0.08 0.08 0.08 0.07 0.06 0.05 0.08 0.11 0.19 0.36 0.59         Dec 0.07 0.07 0.07 0.06 0.04 0.03 0.08 0.11 0.19 0.32 0.55
2013          Jan 0.07 0.07 0.08 0.09 0.10 0.14 0.08 0.11 0.20 0.34 0.58
         Feb 0.07 0.08 0.08 0.10 0.12 0.16 0.08 0.12 0.22 0.36 0.59         Mar 0.07 0.07 0.08 0.08 0.08 0.09 0.08 0.12 0.21 0.33 0.54
         Apr 0.08 0.08 0.08 0.08 0.08 0.09 0.08 0.12 0.21 0.32 0.53
*Averages are Bundesbank calculations. Neither the Deutsche Bundesbank nor act/360 method and published via Reuters. 2EONIA Swap Index: published rate
anyone else can be held liable for any irregularity or inaccuracy of the EONIA rate, since 20 June 2005 by Reuters as a reference rate for euro-money market-derivatives.
the EURIBOR rate and the EONIA Swap rate. 1Euro OverNight Index Average: As a Spot-figure (T+2) it is calculated according to the act/360 method. 3Euro Inter-
weighted average overnight rate for interbank operations calculated by the European bank Offered Rate: unweighted average rate calculated by Reuters sinceCentral Bank since 4 January 1999 on the basis of real turnover according to the 30 December 1998 according to the act/360 method. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
44  Monthly Report
May 2013
VI Interest rates
 
5 Interest rates and volumes for outstanding amounts and new business of German banks (MFIs) *
(a) Outstanding amounts o
 
 
Households’ deposits Non-financial corporations’ deposits
with an agreed maturity of
up to 2 years over 2 years up to 2 years over 2 years
Effective Effective Effective Effective
End of interest rate  1 Volume  2 interest rate  1 Volume  2 interest rate  1 Volume  2 interest rate  1 Volume  2 
month % pa € million % pa € million % pa € million % pa € million
2012          Mar 1.86 140,842 2.31 229,012 1.30 99,012 3.56 22,835
         Apr 1.85 139,793 2.30 228,848 1.24 98,127 3.53 22,741
         May 1.83 139,697 2.29 229,121 1.19 96,040 3.51 22,861
         June 1.82 138,295 2.29 229,269 1.16 92,613 3.48 22,722
         July 1.79 136,532 2.28 229,047 1.09 93,203 3.46 22,303
         Aug 1.76 133,856 2.28 229,010 1.01 93,589 3.43 22,163
         Sep 1.72 131,046 2.27 228,970 0.95 90,793 3.41 21,373
         Oct 1.66 127,314 2.20 228,315 0.91 87,278 3.38 21,082
         Nov 1.61 124,114 2.18 227,048 0.86 84,081 3.36 21,367
         Dec 1.57 121,482 2.16 228,742 0.78 81,845 3.33 21,289
2013          Jan 1.51 118,094 2.13 227,465 0.72 79,925 3.31 21,296
         Feb 1.47 115,772 2.11 226,984 0.69 79,483 3.30 21,367
         Mar 1.43 112,731 2.10 226,940 0.63 79,303 3.30 21,000
 
 
Housing loans to households  3 Loans for consumption and other purposes to households  4, 5 
with a maturity of
over 1 year and over 1 year and
up to 1 year  6 up to 5 years over 5 years up to 1 year  6 up to 5 years over 5 years
Effective Effective Effective Effective Effective Effective
interest interest interest interest interest interest
End of rate  1 Volume  2 rate 1 Volume  2 rate 1 Volume  2 rate 1 Volume  2 rate 1 Volume  2 rate 1 Volume  2 
month % pa % pa % pa % pa % pa % pa € million € million € million € million € million € million
2012          Mar 4.03 5,100 3.70 28,402 4.46 937,726 8.34 64,286 5.45 73,527 5.59 313,149
         Apr 3.91 5,069 3.65 28,290 4.43 936,775 8.21 63,838 5.41 73,758 5.50 316,663
         May 3.85 5,187 3.62 28,501 4.41 938,392 8.17 63,708 5.36 74,466 5.48 317,022
         June 3.80 5,206 3.61 28,620 4.39 940,699 8.19 64,670 5.30 74,576 5.41 314,970
         July 3.70 5,302 3.57 28,775 4.37 942,529 7.99 63,767 5.28 75,103 5.39 315,554
         Aug 3.64 5,278 3.54 28,844 4.34 945,754 8.00 62,298 5.24 75,464 5.36 316,273
         Sep 3.59 5,351 3.52 28,910 4.33 948,590 7.98 63,666 5.22 75,456 5.34 314,885
         Oct 3.50 5,351 3.47 29,062 4.30 951,931 7.88 62,816 5.19 75,715 5.29 314,779
         Nov 3.48 5,334 3.44 29,210 4.28 955,995 7.60 61,696 5.16 75,919 5.27 313,967
         Dec 3.43 5,411 3.41 29,153 4.26 957,142 7.77 63,468 5.13 75,716 5.25 310,974
2013          Jan 3.35 5,441 3.39 29,130 4.23 956,829 7.64 60,580 5.22 76,521 5.22 310,092
         Feb 3.32 5,358 3.37 28,985 4.21 957,811 7.56 60,776 5.22 75,576 5.21 310,001
         Mar 3.32 5,380 3.34 28,892 4.19 959,296 7.59 61,732 5.19 75,792 5.19 308,862
 
 
Loans to non-financial corporations with a maturity of
up to 1 year  6 over 1 year and up to 5 years over 5 years
End of Volume  2 Volume  2 Volume  2 Effective interest rate  1 Effective interest rate  1 Effective interest rate  1 
month % pa € million % pa € million % pa € million
2012          Mar 3.64 141,139 3.61 126,677 3.79 571,433
         Apr 3.50 140,151 3.51 125,928 3.73 569,972
         May 3.46 140,062 3.46 126,583 3.70 572,592
         June 3.48 141,449 3.41 126,567 3.66 573,352
         July 3.35 140,569 3.32 126,973 3.60 576,961
         Aug 3.26 138,764 3.29 126,115 3.56 578,675
         Sep 3.26 142,543 3.21 125,674 3.51 577,371
         Oct 3.19 137,982 3.13 125,803 3.46 577,814
         Nov 3.16 138,994 3.10 126,756 3.44 580,329
         Dec 3.17 134,186 3.03 126,718 3.41 579,210
2013          Jan 3.10 133,611 3.02 126,056 3.36 579,904
         Feb 3.11 136,265 3.01 125,664 3.34 581,316
         Mar 3.14 138,467 3.00 125,754 3.33 580,544
*The MFI interest rate statistics are based on the interest rates applied by MFIs and interest rates or as narrowly defined effective rates. Both calculation methods cover
the related volumes of euro-denominated deposits and loans to households and non- all interest payments on deposits and loans but not any other related charges which
financial corporations domiciled in the euro area. The household sector comprises may occur for enquiries, administration, preparation of the documents, guarantees
individuals (including sole proprietors) and non-profit institutions serving households. and credit insurance. 2Data based on monthly balance sheet statistics. 3Secured
Non-financial corporations include all enterprises other than insurance companies, and unsecured loans for home purchase, including building and home improvements;
banks and other financial institutions. The interest rate statistics gathered on a including loans granted by building and loan associations and interim credits as well
harmonised basis in the euro area from January 2003 are collected in Germany on a as transmitted loans granted by the reporting agents in their own name and for their
sample basis. The most recent figures are in all cases to be regarded as provisional. own account. 4Loans for consumption are defined as loans granted for the purpose
Subsequent revisions appearing in the following Monthly Report are not specially of personal use in the consumption of goods and services. 5For the purpose of these
marked. Further information on the MFI interest rate statistics can be found on the statistics, other loans are loans granted for other purposes such as business, debt
Bundesbank’s website (Statistics / Reporting system / Banking statistics / MFI interest consolidation, education etc. 6Including overdrafts (see also footnotes 13 to 15
rate statistics). oThe statistics on outstanding amounts are collected at the end of p 47   ). 
themonth. 1The effective interest rates are calculated either as annualised agreed

Deutsche Bundesbank
45  Monthly Report
May 2013
VI Interest rates
 
5 Interest rates and volumes for outstanding amounts and new business of German banks (MFIs) *  (cont’d)
(b) New business +
 
 
Households’ deposits
with an agreed maturity of redeemable at notice of  8 
Overnight up to 1 year over 2 years up to 3 months over 3 months over 1 year and up to 2 years
Effective Effective Effective Effective Effective Effective
interest interest interest interest interest interest
Reporting rate 1 Volume 2 rate 1 Volume 7 rate 1 Volume 7 rate 1 Volume 7 rate 1 Volume 2 rate 1 Volume 2 
period % pa % pa % pa % pa % pa % pa € million € million € million € million € million € million
2012          Mar 
0.84 761,183 1.35 14,308 2.27 1,148 2.81 2,252 1.34 521,107 1.93 99,132
         Apr 0.81 770,703 1.37 12,402 2.13 870 2.46 1,672 1.28 520,039 1.92 98,812
         May 0.79 775,639 1.26 14,178 1.99 828 2.33 1,487 1.27 519,995 1.89 98,036
         June 0.77 785,236 1.25 10,609 1.74 573 2.11 1,349 1.24 519,919 1.85 97,049
         July 0.71 791,644 1.38 13,617 2.07 1,261 2.20 1,636 1.21 520,534 1.81 96,163
         Aug 0.68 801,510 1.28 10,091 2.09 1,261 2.08 1,426 1.16 521,324 1.77 94,750
         Sep 0.64 810,487 1.29 9,216 1.98 934 2.16 1,305 1.14 521,677 1.72 93,164
         Oct 0.61 815,493 1.07 10,129 1.92 1,090 1.93 1,483 1.09 521,818 1.66 92,409
         Nov 0.59 836,097 1.06 8,513 1.95 1,670 1.83 1,721 1.07 522,244 1.57 91,114
         Dec 0.57 841,703 0.79 8,557 1.74 1,212 1.67 1,463 1.03 528,458 1.50 89,519
2013          Jan 0.54 847,786 0.92 8,877 1.80 1,616 1.77 1,715 0.96 529,365 1.43 87,663
         Feb 0.51 857,813 0.94 7,887 1.45 745 1.68 1,605 0.93 530,687 1.38 86,114
         Mar 0.50 862,901 0.79 7,753 1.37 620 1.52 1,501 0.96 529,260 1.33 85,257
 
 
Non-financial corporations’ deposits
with an agreed maturity of
Overnight up to 1 year over 1 year and up to 2 years over 2 years
Effective Effective Effective Effective
Reporting interest rate 1 Volume 2 interest rate 1 Volume 7 interest rate 1 Volume 7 interest rate 1 Volume 7 
period % pa € million % pa € million % pa € million % pa € million
2012          Mar 
0.46 261,558 0.63 28,015 1.94 528 2.32 531
         Apr 0.43 264,667 0.55 23,820 1.68 392 2.53 470
         May 0.42 267,293 0.48 23,443 1.59 326 1.86 512
         June 0.40 270,503 0.45 22,861 1.54 312 1.58 382
         July 0.34 280,460 0.37 21,829 1.31 638 1.70 596
         Aug 0.30 288,016 0.33 17,086 1.43 405 1.58 413
         Sep 0.29 289,877 0.27 15,215 0.85 505 2.00 225
         Oct 0.26 300,920 0.19 22,907 1.04 523 1.53 410
         Nov 0.24 305,458 0.20 15,992 1.09 490 1.87 483
         Dec 0.22 311,043 0.15 20,225 0.74 546 1.74 381
2013          Jan 0.22 306,757 0.20 22,534 0.95 364 1.09 315
         Feb 0.21 301,494 0.21 16,085 0.97 413 1.65 218
         Mar 0.20 298,710 0.19 19,875 0.77 507 1.30 266
 
 
Loans to households
Loans for other purposes to households with an initial rate fxation of  5 
of which loans to sole proprietors 10 
floating rate or over 1 year and floating rate or over 1 year and
up to 1 year 9 up to 5 years over 5 years up to 1 year  9 up to 5 years over 5 years
Effective Effective Effective Effective Effective Effectiveinterest interest interest interest interest interest
Reporting rate 
1 Volume 7 rate 1 Volume 7 rate 1 Volume 7 rate 1 Volume 7 rate 1 Volume 7 rate 1 Volume 7 
period % pa % pa % pa % pa % pa % pa € million € million € million € million € million € million
2012          Mar 
2.41 4,329 4.35 1,107 3.64 2,677 2.57 2,714 4.46 877 3.59 1,531
         Apr 2.31 4,441 4.31 1,294 3.68 2,095 2.57 2,463 4.52 937 3.61 1,222
         May 2.24 3,716 4.26 1,184 3.54 2,171 2.53 2,142 4.57 798 3.48 1,178
         June 2.25 4,835 4.32 1,213 3.33 2,603 2.50 2,768 4.54 794 3.28 1,577
         July 1.97 5,557 4.07 1,450 3.27 2,930 2.56 2,929 4.21 910 3.20 1,682
         Aug 1.99 4,414 3.97 966 3.16 2,588 2.20 2,297 4.22 677 3.08 1,599
         Sep 1.94 4,454 4.19 860 3.07 2,252 2.14 2,565 4.35 589 3.02 1,399
         Oct 1.82 5,535 3.69 1,122 3.04 2,634 2.18 3,011 4.09 780 3.03 1,420
         Nov 1.75 4,142 3.86 966 2.98 2,443 2.09 2,229 3.99 736 2.96 1,452
         Dec 1.84 4,698 3.78 916 2.77 2,376 2.03 2,888 3.98 676 2.71 1,530
2013          Jan 1.97 5,099 3.77 1,171 2.96 2,735 2.27 2,973 3.87 818 2.87 1,602
         Feb 1.84 4,102 3.54 920 2.96 2,125 2.05 2,452 3.73 657 2.91 1,248
         Mar 1.90 4,698 3.80 900 2.88 2,574 2.10 2,636 3.95 717 2.88 1,432
For footnotes * and 1 to 6, see p 44  .+In the case of deposits with an agreed for the sake of simplicity. This means that all outstanding deposit and lending
maturity and all loans excluding revolving loans and overdrafts, credit card debt, new business at the end of the month has to be incorporated in the calculation of averagebusiness covers all new agreements between households or non-financial corpor- rates of interest. 7Estimated. The volume of new business is extrapolated to form
ations and the bank. The interest rates are calculated as volume-weighted average the underlying total using the Horvitz-Thompson estimator. 8Including non-financial
rates of all new agreements concluded during the reporting month. In the case of corporations’ deposits; including fidelity and growth premia. 9Excluding over-
overnight deposits, deposits redeemable at notice, revolving loans and overdrafts, drafts. 10 Collected from June 2010. 
credit card debt, new business is collected in the same way as outstanding amounts

Deutsche Bundesbank
46  Monthly Report
May 2013
VI Interest rates
 
5 Interest rates and volumes for outstanding amounts and new business of German banks (MFIs) *  (cont’d)
(b) New business +
 
 
Loans to households (cont’d)
Loans for consumption with an initial rate fixation of  4 
Total floating rate or over 1 year and
Total up to 1 year  9 up to 5 years over 5 years (including charges)
Effective Effective Effective Effective Annual percentage
Reporting Volume  7 Volume  7 Volume  7 Volume  7 rate of charge  11 interest rate  1 interest rate  1 interest rate  1 interest rate  1 
period % pa % pa € million % pa € million % pa € million % pa € million
Total loans
2012          Mar 6.47 6.04 6,100 3.00 883 5.35 2,649 7.80 2,568
         Apr 6.47 6.01 5,641 3.10 874 5.25 2,459 7.93 2,308
         May 6.48 6.03 5,660 3.30 869 5.29 2,491 7.86 2,300
         June 6.48 6.08 5,408 3.64 672 5.30 2,488 7.68 2,248
         July 6.81 6.38 5,868 4.45 654 5.35 2,570 7.85 2,644
         Aug 6.65 6.20 5,348 4.51 683 5.23 2,334 7.65 2,331
         Sep 6.46 6.11 4,599 4.37 525 5.12 2,091 7.60 1,983
         Oct 6.37 6.10 5,362 4.13 707 5.10 2,374 7.74 2,281
         Nov 6.30 5.98 4,977 4.63 744 4.98 2,229 7.61 2,004
         Dec 5.99 5.73 3,747 3.88 556 4.90 1,766 7.48 1,425
2013          Jan 6.72 6.47 5,140 4.85 508 5.22 2,314 8.08 2,318
         Feb 6.54 6.23 4,781 4.61 620 5.10 2,161 7.95 2,000
         Mar 6.33 6.15 5,186 4.56 488 5.00 2,503 7.81 2,195
of which: collateralised loans 12
2012          Mar . 4.10 494 2.22 135 5.70 193 3.76 166
         Apr . 4.10 443 2.14 123 5.59 189 3.79 131
         May . 4.21 404 2.17 110 5.70 186 3.69 108
         June . 4.16 439 2.62 105 5.56 185 3.52 149
         July . 4.50 387 3.70 57 5.39 196 3.54 134
         Aug . 3.95 450 3.34 152 5.12 155 3.32 143
         Sep . 3.90 361 2.99 114 5.15 129 3.42 118
         Oct . 3.75 409 2.57 152 5.25 139 3.51 118
         Nov . 3.88 358 2.98 140 5.28 114 3.56 104
         Dec . 3.81 294 2.92 100 5.01 103 3.40 91
2013          Jan . 4.00 271 3.06 57 5.01 111 3.42 103
         Feb . 3.56 426 2.90 239 4.93 116 3.56 71
         Mar . 4.10 278 3.43 49 4.70 140 3.52 89
 
 
Loans to households (cont’d)
Housing loans with an initial rate fixation of  3 
Total floating rate or over 1 year and over 5 years and
Total up to 1 year  9 up to 5 years up to 10 years over 10 years (including charges)
Effective Effective Effective Effective Effective Annual percentage
Reporting Volume  7 Volume  7 Volume  7 Volume  7 Volume  7 rate of charge  11 interest rate  1 interest rate  1 interest rate  1 interest rate  1 interest rate  1 
period % pa % pa % pa % pa % pa % pa € million € million € million € million € million
Total loans
2012          Mar 3.37 3.29 16,280 3.29 1,982 2.92 2,433 3.29 6,512 3.45 5,353
         Apr 3.46 3.34 15,748 3.28 2,429 2.98 2,390 3.28 6,398 3.65 4,531
         May 3.30 3.21 15,197 3.24 2,246 2.90 2,116 3.17 6,267 3.39 4,568
         June 3.15 3.06 16,401 3.08 2,175 2.80 2,079 3.04 6,297 3.17 5,850
         July 3.10 3.02 18,647 3.17 2,644 2.81 2,468 2.98 7,782 3.09 5,753
         Aug 3.03 2.95 17,424 3.07 2,332 2.68 2,117 2.88 7,073 3.08 5,902
         Sep 2.97 2.89 15,109 2.85 1,971 2.63 2,013 2.85 5,885 3.03 5,240
         Oct 2.96 2.88 17,328 2.87 2,600 2.62 2,243 2.84 7,027 3.06 5,458
         Nov 2.92 2.84 16,415 2.86 2,122 2.54 2,415 2.82 6,400 2.99 5,478
         Dec 2.91 2.82 14,190 2.88 2,222 2.55 1,747 2.78 5,776 2.94 4,445
2013          Jan 2.86 2.79 17,268 2.79 3,178 2.51 2,236 2.75 7,138 3.00 4,716
         Feb 2.86 2.79 14,470 2.80 2,124 2.44 1,802 2.74 6,100 3.00 4,444
         Mar 2.87 2.81 15,660 2.75 2,292 2.54 2,045 2.77 6,235 2.99 5,088
of which: collateralised loans 12
2012          Mar . 3.19 7,577 3.07 863 2.82 1,220 3.22 3,001 3.38 2,493
         Apr . 3.31 7,614 3.12 1,006 2.91 1,181 3.20 3,090 3.74 2,337
         May . 3.11 7,262 2.96 970 2.76 1,060 3.11 3,084 3.33 2,148
         June . 2.97 7,321 2.91 862 2.67 1,011 2.97 2,982 3.13 2,466
         July . 2.92 8,668 2.99 1,104 2.69 1,218 2.91 3,673 3.01 2,673
         Aug . 2.88 8,296 2.96 981 2.56 1,080 2.82 3,388 3.03 2,847
         Sep . 2.83 7,092 2.70 845 2.54 965 2.83 2,811 2.99 2,471
         Oct . 2.82 8,239 2.67 1,071 2.54 1,132 2.80 3,420 3.03 2,616
         Nov . 2.77 7,508 2.80 834 2.46 1,055 2.75 3,049 2.92 2,570
         Dec . 2.72 6,729 2.65 976 2.40 888 2.71 2,777 2.90 2,088
2013          Jan . 2.71 7,856 2.63 1,244 2.44 1,153 2.68 3,320 2.97 2,139
         Feb . 2.73 6,711 2.58 824 2.34 919 2.71 2,873 2.98 2,095
         Mar . 2.71 7,343 2.56 929 2.34 1,012 2.70 2,980 2.95 2,422
For footnotes * and 1 to 6, see p 44  . For footnotes +, 7 to 10, see p 45  . For related charges which may occur for enquiries, administration, preparation of the
footnote 12, see p 47  .11Annual percentage rate of charge, which contains other documents, guarantees and credit insurance. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
47  Monthly Report
May 2013
VI Interest rates
 
5 Interest rates and volumes for outstanding amounts and new business of German banks (MFIs) *  (cont’d)
(b) New business +
 
 
Loans to households (cont’d) Loans to non-financial corporations
of which of which
Revolving loans 13 Revolving loans 13 
and overdrafts 14 Revolving loans 13 Extended and overdrafts 14 Revolving loans 13 
credit card debt 15 and overdrafts 14 credit card debt credit card debt 15 and overdrafts 14 
Effective Effective Effective Effective Effective
Reporting Volume 16 Volume 16 Volume 2 Volume 16 Volume 16 interest rate 1 interest rate 1 interest rate 1 interest rate 1 interest rate 1 
period % pa € million % pa € million % pa € million % pa € million % pa € million
2012          Mar 
10.21 46,976 10.23 40,976 14.47 3,998 4.59 72,216 4.61 71,960
         Apr 10.05 47,352 10.12 41,135 14.51 4,000 4.43 70,726 4.45 70,471
         May 10.08 47,292 10.06 40,840 14.83 4,275 4.43 70,720 4.45 70,470
         June 10.07 48,231 10.02 41,837 14.82 4,305 4.53 72,118 4.54 71,876
         July 9.94 46,964 9.94 40,326 14.80 4,349 4.41 69,679 4.42 69,432
         Aug 9.95 46,374 9.89 39,796 14.78 4,392 4.32 68,627 4.33 68,387
         Sep 9.89 47,852 9.86 41,116 14.81 4,422 4.37 71,170 4.39 70,889
         Oct 9.83 46,695 9.75 39,918 14.69 4,531 4.29 68,054 4.31 67,784
         Nov 9.70 45,120 9.56 38,345 14.67 4,581 4.19 69,241 4.21 68,968
         Dec 9.73 47,253 9.62 40,409 14.62 4,615 4.35 69,303 4.36 69,044
2013          Jan 9.62 44,805 9.60 39,081 14.64 3,708 4.19 68,528 4.21 68,280
         Feb 9.54 44,964 9.61 38,999 14.68 3,698 4.22 70,639 4.24 70,383
         Mar 9.55 45,947 9.60 39,872 14.69 3,774 4.24 72,271 4.26 72,031
 
 
Loans to non-financial corporations (cont’d)
Loans up to €1 million with an initial rate fixation of  17 Loans over €1 million with an initial rate fixation of  17 
floating rate or over 1 year and floating rate or over 1 year and
up to 1 year 9 up to 5 years over 5 years up to 1 year  9 up to 5 years over 5 years
Effective Effective Effective Effective Effective Effectiveinterest interest interest interest interest interest
Reporting rate 
1 Volume 7 rate 1 Volume 7 rate 1 Volume 7 rate 1 Volume 7 rate 1 Volume 7 rate 1 Volume 7 
period % pa % pa % pa % pa % pa % pa € million € million € million € million € million € million
Total loans
2012          Mar 3.51 7,654 4.31 1,751 3.41 1,346 2.44 44,212 2.85 1,893 3.33 4,674
         Apr 3.34 7,349 4.21 1,537 3.50 1,172 2.37 41,491 3.04 2,187 3.42 4,166
         May 3.33 6,895 4.20 1,461 3.30 1,176 2.32 36,079 2.98 1,547 3.39 3,893
         June 3.37 7,267 4.14 1,469 3.16 1,357 2.39 43,154 2.89 2,333 3.07 5,764
         July 3.11 7,597 4.04 1,548 3.15 1,441 2.25 45,910 2.96 2,641 3.09 5,868
         Aug 2.97 6,767 3.82 1,380 3.01 1,448 2.14 37,722 2.82 1,375 2.77 4,616
         Sep 3.07 7,039 3.76 1,282 2.99 1,248 2.12 42,277 2.81 1,324 2.87 4,367
         Oct 2.96 7,708 3.70 1,489 2.85 1,311 1.98 47,072 2.84 1,676 2.81 4,416
         Nov 2.90 6,646 3.67 1,495 2.78 1,258 2.00 37,601 3.25 2,080 2.71 4,791
         Dec 2.94 6,940 3.56 1,665 2.75 1,361 1.89 43,968 2.54 4,465 2.70 7,203
2013          Jan 2.84 7,381 3.50 1,484 2.83 1,177 1.88 43,240 2.94 1,212 2.76 4,860
         Feb 2.92 6,264 3.58 1,204 2.87 926 1.72 32,114 3.16 1,111 2.89 4,347
         Mar 2.92 7,360 3.58 1,322 2.88 1,144 1.83 38,944 2.63 2,000 2.81 4,220
of which: collateralised loans 12
2012          Mar 3.41 1,210 3.62 164 3.14 360 2.58 8,860 3.12 550 3.27 1,466
         Apr 3.27 1,319 3.42 156 3.24 363 2.44 9,134 3.22 922 3.27 1,159
         May 3.29 1,132 3.43 138 3.02 306 2.35 6,868 3.81 375 3.17 786
         June 3.19 1,142 3.29 133 3.05 385 2.33 7,835 2.27 936 3.03 1,848
         July 2.99 1,343 3.31 157 3.01 424 2.33 9,627 2.86 1,097 3.15 1,896
         Aug 2.88 1,141 3.26 127 2.86 398 2.15 6,985 3.09 526 2.97 1,064
         Sep 2.86 1,151 2.92 150 2.76 330 2.13 8,526 2.84 441 3.07 932
         Oct 2.77 1,288 3.12 156 2.70 351 2.05 9,007 2.97 669 2.74 1,261
         Nov 2.82 998 3.17 127 2.62 325 1.95 6,715 3.42 1,066 2.48 1,015
         Dec 2.79 1,060 2.88 189 2.54 346 2.12 8,861 2.20 2,043 2.82 1,963
2013          Jan 2.68 1,329 2.93 157 2.68 351 2.01 9,850 2.91 334 2.98 1,146
         Feb 2.81 960 3.08 128 2.83 245 2.07 5,702 3.63 362 2.86 1,752
         Mar 2.86 1,027 3.04 127 2.78 319 2.04 7,793 2.45 861 2.70 1,161
For footnotes * and 1 to 6, see p 44  . For footnotes + and 7 to 10, see p 45  . For they are within or beyond the limits agreed between customers and the
footnote 11, see p 46  .12Collected from June 2010. For the purposes of the bank. 15From June 2010 including convenience and extended credit card debt.
interest rate statistis, a loan is considered to be secured if collateral (among others Convenience credit is defined as the credit granted at an interest rate of 0% in thefinancial collateral, real estate collateral, debt securities) in at leat the same value as period between payment transactions effectuated with the card during one billingthe loan amount has been posted, pledged or assigned. 13From June 2010 cycle and the date at which the debt balances from this specific billing cycle become
including revolving loans which have all the following features: (a) the borrower may due. 16From January 2003 up to May 2010 estimated. The volume of outstanding
use or withdraw the funds to a pre-approved credit limit without giving prior notice amounts reported was extrapolated to form the underlying total using theto the lender; (b) the amount of available credit can increase and decrease as funds Horvitz-Thompson estimator. From June 2010 the data are based on monthlyare borrowed and repaid; (c) the loan may be used repeatedly; (d) there is no balance sheet statistics. 17The amount refers to the single loan transaction
obligation of regular repayment of funds. 14Overdrafts are defined as debit considered as new business. 
balances on current accounts. They include all bank overdrafts regardless of whether

Deutsche Bundesbank
48  Monthly Report
May 2013
VII Capital market
 
1 Sales and purchases of debt securities and shares in Germany
 
 
€ million
Debt securities
Sales Purchases
Domestic debt securities  1 Residents
Credit in-
Sales stitutions
= Public Foreign including
total Bank Corporate debt debt building
pur- debt bonds secur- secur- and loan Deutsche Other Non-
Period chases Total securities ities  3 ities 4 Total 5 Bundesbank sectors  7 residents  8 (non-MFIs)  2 associations  6 
2001 180,227 86,656 55,918 14,473 16,262 93,571 111,281 35,848 . 75,433 68,946
2002 175,396 124,035 47,296 14,506 62,235 51,361 60,476 13,536 . 46,940 114,920
2003 184,679 134,455 31,404 30,262 72,788 50,224 105,557 35,748 . 69,809 79,122
2004 233,890 133,711 64,231 10,778 58,703 100,179 108,119 121,841 . − 13,723 125,772
2005 252,658 110,542 39,898 2,682 67,965 142,116 94,718 61,740 . 32,978 157,940
2006 242,006 102,379 40,995 8,943 52,446 139,627 125,423 68,893 . 56,530 116,583
2007 217,798 90,270 42,034 20,123 28,111 127,528 − 26,762 96,476 . − 123,238 244,560
2008 76,490 66,139 − 45,712 86,527 25,322 10,351 18,236 68,049 . − 49,813 58,254
2009 71,224 − 538 − 114,902 22,709 91,655 71,763 91,170 12,973 8,645 69,552 − 19,945
2010 147,209 − 1,212 − 7,621 24,044 − 17,635 148,420 97,342 − 103,271 22,967 177,646 49,867
2011 36,526 13,575 − 46,796 850 59,521 22,952 − 17,872 − 94,793 36,805 40,117 54,398
2012 53,791 − 21,419 − 98,820 − 8,701 86,103 75,208 8,821 − 42,017 − 3,573 54,409 44,970
2012          May 17,283 7,358 − 9,884 − 852 18,094 9,924 − 8,783 − 6,457 − 305 − 2,021 26,066
         June − 13,109 − 8,432 − 4,207 − 5,111 886 − 4,677 − 5,006 − 4,104 − 565 − 337 − 8,103
         July 22,620 15,298 − 910 3,230 12,978 7,322 20,735 − 9,002 101 29,636 1,884
         Aug 5,161 2,245 − 5,350 − 3,685 11,280 2,915 − 799 2,868 − 589 − 3,078 5,959
         Sep − 15,540 − 24,453 − 13,112 − 1,342 − 9,999 8,913 − 9,575 1,204 − 78 − 10,701 − 5,964
         Oct 8,950 2,879 − 3,950 − 5,702 12,532 6,070 4,577 − 8,766 − 1,512 14,855 4,373
         Nov 9,989 2,214 14 4,790 − 2,590 7,775 − 15,749 3,024 − 858 − 17,915 25,738
         Dec − 33,222 − 39,386 − 20,125 5,495 − 24,756 6,163 − 15,056 − 11,575 − − 3,481 − 18,167
2013          Jan 1,151 − 14,311 − 8,884 − 5,543 115 15,462 3,366 − 2,621 − 1,846 7,833 − 2,214
         Feb 22,401 17,420 869 7,068 9,483 4,981 866 − 5,501 − 1,773 8,140 21,535
         Mar − 12,413 − 15,782 − 19,212 5,979 − 2,549 3,369 − 4,066 − 6,735 − 511 3,180 − 8,347
 
 
€ million
Shares
Sales Purchases
Sales Residents
=
total Domestic Foreign Credit insti- Non-
Period purchases shares  9 shares  10 Total 11 tutions  6,12 Other sectors  13 residents  14 
2001 82,665 17,575 65,091 − 2,252 − 14,714 12,462 84,918
2002 39,338 9,232 30,106 18,398 − 23,236 41,634 20,941
2003 11,896 16,838 − 4,946 − 15,121 7,056 − 22,177 27,016
2004 − 3,317 10,157 − 13,474 7,432 5,045 2,387 − 10,748
2005 32,364 13,766 18,597 1,036 10,208 − 9,172 31,329
2006 26,276 9,061 17,214 7,528 11,323 − 3,795 18,748
2007 − 5,009 10,053 − 15,062 − 62,308 − 6,702 − 55,606 57,299
2008 − 29,452 11,326 − 40,778 2,743 − 23,079 25,822 − 32,194
2009 35,980 23,962 12,018 30,496 − 8,335 38,831 5,484
2010 36,448 20,049 16,398 41,347 7,340 34,007 − 4,900
2011 25,549 21,713 3,835 39,081 670 38,411 − 13,533
2012 18,808 5,120 13,688 17,663 10,259 7,404 1,144
2012          May 3,909 687 3,222 − 6,964 − 13,638 6,674 10,873
         June − 8,100 725 − 8,825 − 18,743 − 8,303 − 10,440 10,643
         July 6,158 968 5,190 4,124 1,611 2,513 2,034
         Aug − 2,393 101 − 2,494 − 2,103 2,109 − 4,212 − 290
         Sep 2,136 549 1,587 2,990 4,196 − 1,206 − 854
         Oct 7,928 131 7,797 7,406 3,024 4,382 522
         Nov 1,759 134 1,625 1,870 − 843 2,713 − 111
         Dec 10,124 387 9,737 10,879 6,052 4,827 − 755
2013          Jan 4,679 732 3,947 10,340 5,842 4,498 − 5,661
         Feb − 1,675 306 − 1,981 − 5,405 − 5,352 − 53 3,730
         Mar 6,075 40 6,035 9,579 7,851 1,728 − 3,504
1Net sales at market values plus/minus changes in issuers’ portfolios of their own values. 9Excluding shares of public limited investment companies; at issue prices.
debt securities. 2Including cross-border financing within groups from January 2011. 10Net purchases or net sales (−) of foreign shares (including direct investment)  by  
3Including Federal Railways Fund, Federal Post Office and Treuhand agency. 4Net residents;  transaction  values. 11Domestic and foreign shares. 12Up to end-1998,
purchases or net sales (−) of foreign debt securities by residents; transaction excluding syndicated shares. 13Residual; also including purchases of domestic and
values. 5Domestic and foreign debt securities. 6Book values; statistically adjusted. foreign securities by domestic mutual funds. 14Net purchases or net sales (−) of
7Residual; also including purchases of domestic and foreign securities by domestic domestic shares (including direct investment) by non-residents; transaction values. —
mutual funds. Up to end-2008, data comprise Deutsche Bundesbank. 8Net pur- The figures for the most recent date are provisional; revisions are not specially
chases or net sales (−) of domestic debt securities by non-residents; transaction marked. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
49  Monthly Report
May 2013
 VII Capital market
 
2 Sales of debt securities issued by residents *  
 
 
€ million nominal value
Bank debt securities 1 Memo item
 Foreign  DM/euro
bonds issued Debt securities
Corporate by German- issued by special
Mortgage Public purpose credit Other bank bonds Public managed
Period Total Total Pfandbriefe Pfandbriefe institutions (non-MFIs)  2 syndicates debt securities debt securities 3 
Gross sales  4 
2001 687,988 505,646 34,782 112,594 106,166 252,103 11,328 171,012 10,605
2002 818,725 569,232 41,496 119,880 117,506 290,353 17,574 231,923 10,313
2003 958,917 668,002 47,828 107,918 140,398 371,858 22,510 268,406 2,850
2004 990,399 688,844 33,774 90,815 162,353 401,904 31,517 270,040 12,344
2005 988,911 692,182 28,217 103,984 160,010 399,969 24,352 272,380 600
2006 925,863 622,055 24,483 99,628 139,193 358,750 29,975 273,834 69
2007 1,021,533 743,616 19,211 82,720 195,722 445,963 15,043 262,872 −
2008 1,337,337 961,271 51,259 70,520 382,814 456,676 95,093 280,974 −
2009 1,533,616 1,058,815 40,421 37,615 331,566 649,215 76,379 398,423 −
2010 1,375,138 757,754 36,226 33,539 363,828 324,160 53,654 563,731 −
2011 1,337,772 658,781 31,431 24,295 376,876 226,180 86,615 592,376 −
2012 1,340,568 702,781 36,593 11,413 446,153 208,623 63,259 574,529 −
2012          Aug 92,682 49,173 2,121 672 29,884 16,496 2,051 41,459 −
         Sep 100,827 54,642 2,267 763 35,582 16,030 6,331 39,854 −
         Oct 117,694 72,145 1,425 1,013 47,279 22,429 5,617 39,932 −
         Nov 129,112 65,796 1,587 167 38,536 25,505 9,741 53,576 −
         Dec 69,448 44,404 1,223 699 31,232 11,250 8,186 16,858 −
2013          Jan 120,536 79,518 3,050 783 59,173 16,512 3,081 37,937 −
         Feb 118,387 77,846 2,008 460 60,566 14,812 5,392 35,149 −
         Mar 117,189 63,353 1,361 663 47,045 14,284 8,041 45,795 −
of which: Debt securities with maturities of more than four years  5 
2001 299,751 202,337 16,619 76,341 42,277 67,099 7,479 89,933 6,480
2002 309,157 176,486 16,338 59,459 34,795 65,892 12,149 120,527 9,2132003 369,336 220,103 23,210 55,165 49,518 92,209 10,977 138,256 2,8502004 424,769 275,808 20,060 48,249 54,075 153,423 20,286 128,676 4,320
2005 425,523 277,686 20,862 63,851 49,842 143,129 16,360 131,479 400
2006 337,969 190,836 17,267 47,814 47,000 78,756 14,422 132,711 692007 315,418 183,660 10,183 31,331 50,563 91,586 13,100 118,659 −2008 387,516 190,698 13,186 31,393 54,834 91,289 84,410 112,407 −2009 361,999 185,575 20,235 20,490 59,809 85,043 55,240 121,185 −
2010 381,687 169,174 15,469 15,139 72,796 65,769 34,649 177,863 −
2011 368,039 153,309 13,142 8,500 72,985 58,684 41,299 173,431 −2012 421,018 177,086 23,374 6,482 74,386 72,845 44,042 199,888 −
2012          Aug 28,570 11,479 1,338 172 3,467 6,502 1,076 16,015 −
         Sep 43,339 16,619 1,787 733 10,160 3,939 4,884 21,837 −
         Oct 40,495 22,460 940 121 10,751 10,647 4,096 13,939 −
         Nov 45,295 16,232 1,167 48 1,047 13,969 7,044 22,018 −         Dec 21,311 8,884 782 189 3,672 4,242 6,122 6,305 −
2013          Jan 41,288 21,439 2,120 558 12,205 6,556 1,734 18,116 −
         Feb 27,437 8,802 1,237 151 2,554 4,860 4,175 14,459 −         Mar 25,973 8,027 744 115 2,094 5,074 5,527 12,419 −
Net sales  6 
2001 84,122 60,905 6,932 − 9,254 28,808 34,416 8,739 14,479 − 30,6572002 131,976 56,393 7,936 − 26,806 20,707 54,561 14,306 61,277 − 44,5462003 124,556 40,873 2,700 − 42,521 44,173 36,519 18,431 65,253 − 54,9902004 167,233 81,860 1,039 − 52,615 50,142 83,293 18,768 66,605 − 22,124
2005 141,715 65,798 − 2,151 − 34,255 37,242 64,962 10,099 65,819 − 35,963
2006 129,423 58,336 − 12,811 − 20,150 44,890 46,410 15,605 55,482 − 19,2082007 86,579 58,168 − 10,896 − 46,629 42,567 73,127 − 3,683 32,093 − 29,7502008 119,472 8,517 15,052 − 65,773 25,165 34,074 82,653 28,302 − 31,6072009 76,441 − 75,554 858 − 80,646 25,579 − 21,345 48,508 103,482 − 21,037
2010 21,566 − 87,646 − 3,754 − 63,368 28,296 − 48,822 23,748 85,464 − 10,904
2011 22,518 − 54,582 1,657 − 44,290 32,904 − 44,852 − 3,189 80,289 − 5,9892012 − 85,298 − 100,198 − 4,177 − 41,660 − 3,259 − 51,099 − 6,401 21,298 − 2,605
2012          Aug − 1,815 − 5,603 850 − 2,466 − 4,329 343 − 2,584 6,372 − 7
         Sep − 31,382 − 13,373 8 − 2,348 613 − 11,646 − 64 − 17,946 − 87
         Oct − 4,979 − 3,330 − 1,803 − 6,033 3,134 1,372 − 3,349 1,700 − 2,306
         Nov 3,189 240 − 4,129 − 2,724 596 6,497 5,836 − 2,888 −         Dec − 39,422 − 24,895 − 382 − 2,308 − 11,116 − 11,088 3,163 − 17,691 −
2013          Jan − 38,802 − 11,677 − 1,883 − 13,543 6,687 − 2,938 − 4,793 − 22,331 −
         Feb 8,971 162 − 5,231 − 4,895 14,206 − 3,918 3,656 5,153 − 1,165         Mar − 21,212 − 21,021 − 1,130 − 3,626 − 5,449 − 10,816 4,029 − 4,220 − 358
*For definitions, see the explanatory notes in the Statistical Supplement 2 Capital Railways Fund, Federal Post Office and Treuhand agency. 4Gross sales means only
market statistics on p 21 ff. 1Excluding registered bank debt securities. 2Including initial sales of newly issued securities. 5Maximum maturity according to the terms of
cross-border financing within groups from January 2011. 3Including Federal issue. 6 Gross sales less redemptions. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
50  Monthly Report
May 2013
VII Capital market
 
3 Amounts outstanding of debt securities issued by residents  * 
 
 
€ million nominal value
Bank debt securities  1 Memo item
 Foreign  DM/euro
End of year Debt securities bonds issued
or month/ issued by Corporate by German-
Maturity Mortgage Public special purpose Other bank bonds Public managed
in years Total Total Pfandbriefe Pfandbriefe credit institutions debt securities (non-MFIs) debt securities syndicates
2001 2,349,243 1,506,640 147,684 675,868 201,721 481,366 22,339 820,264 292,199
2002 2,481,220 1,563,034 155,620 649,061 222,427 535,925 36,646 881,541 247,655
2003 2,605,775 1,603,906 158,321 606,541 266,602 572,442 55,076 946,793 192,666
2004 2,773,007 1,685,766 159,360 553,927 316,745 655,734 73,844 1,013,397 170,543
2005 2,914,723 1,751,563 157,209 519,674 323,587 751,093 83,942 1,079,218 134,580
2006 3,044,145 1,809,899 144,397 499,525 368,476 797,502 99,545 1,134,701 115,373
2007 3,130,723 1,868,066 133,501 452,896 411,041 870,629 95,863 1,166,794 85,623
2008 3,250,195 1,876,583 150,302 377,091 490,641 858,550 178,515 1,195,097 54,015
2009 3,326,635 1,801,029 151,160 296,445 516,221 837,203 227,024 1,298,581 32,978
2010 3,348,201 2 1,570,490 147,529 232,954 544,517 2 645,491 250,774 2 1,526,937 22,074
2011 3,370,721 1,515,911 149,185 188,663 577,423 600,640 247,585 1,607,226 16,085
2012 3,285,422 2 1,414,349 145,007 147,070 574,163 2 548,109 2 220,456 2 1,650,617 13,481
2012          Sep 3,326,635 1,443,698 151,321 158,067 581,549 552,760 214,806 1,668,131 15,787
         Oct 3,321,656 2 1,439,003 149,518 152,035 584,683 2 552,768 211,457 2 1,671,196 13,481
         Nov 3,324,845 1,439,244 145,389 149,379 585,279 559,196 217,293 1,668,308 13,481
         Dec 3,285,422 1,414,349 145,007 147,070 574,163 548,109 220,456 1,650,617 13,481
2013          Jan 3,246,621 1,402,672 143,124 133,527 580,850 545,171 215,663 1,628,286 13,481
         Feb 3,255,592 1,402,833 137,892 128,633 595,056 541,253 219,319 1,633,439 12,316
         Mar 3,234,379 1,381,812 136,763 125,006 589,606 530,437 223,348 1,629,219 11,958
Breakdown by remaining period to maturity  3 Position at end-March 2013 
1,214,468 565,044 59,791 63,827 229,914 211,512 52,549 596,874 5,260    less than 2
798,192 412,558 42,154 36,111 159,213 175,080 35,353 350,280 2,104 2 to less than 4
403,725 172,799 19,681 12,308 78,272 62,536 32,014 198,912 1,292 4 to less than 6
268,288 94,145 10,644 7,731 55,149 20,621 18,033 156,111 146 6 to less than 8
207,363 55,733 3,991 2,079 33,333 16,331 13,050 138,581 266 8 to less than 10
69,449 14,247 390 1,893 7,127 4,838 7,457 47,745 1,891 10 to less than 15
56,507 15,618 11 205 9,373 6,029 2,119 38,770 30 15 to less than 20
216,388 51,668 100 852 17,226 33,490 62,773 101,947 967 20 and more
*Including debt securities temporarily held in the issuers’ portfolios. 1Excluding maturity for debt securities falling due en bloc and until mean maturity of the
debt securities handed to the trustee for temporary safe custody. 2Sectoral residual amount outstanding for debt securities not falling due en bloc. 
reclassification of debt securities. 3Calculated from month under review until final
 
 
4 Shares in circulation issued by residents  * 
 
 
€ million nominal value
Change in domestic public limited companies’ capital due to
Memo item
Share circulation
at market values
contribution (market capita- cash payments
Share capital = Net increase or and ex- contribution of shares, merger reduction lisation)
circulation at net decrease (−) change of of claims mining shares, and of capital level at end
end of period during period convertible issue of and other GmbH shares, transfer change of and of period
Period under review under review bonds  1 bonus shares real assets etc of assets legal form liquidation under review  2 
2001 166,187 18,561 7,987 4,057 1,106 8,448 1,018 − 905 − 3,152 1,205,613
2002 168,716 2,528 4,307 1,291 486 1,690 − 868 − 2,152 − 2,224 647,492
2003 162,131 − 6,585 4,482 923 211 513 − 322 − 10,806 − 1,584 851,001
2004 164,802 2,669 3,960 1,566 276 696 220 − 1,760 − 2,286 887,217
2005 163,071 − 1,733 2,470 1,040 694 268 − 1,443 − 3,060 − 1,703 1,058,532
2006 163,764 695 2,670 3,347 604 954 − 1,868 − 1,256 − 3,761 1,279,638
2007 164,560 799 3,164 1,322 200 269 − 682 − 1,847 − 1,636 1,481,930
2008 168,701 4,142 5,006 1,319 152 0 − 428 − 608 − 1,306 830,622
2009 175,691 6,989 12,476 398 97 − − 3,741 − 1,269 − 974 927,256
2010 174,596 − 1,096 3,265 497 178 10 − 486 − 993 − 3,569 1,091,220
2011 177,167 2,570 6,390 552 462 9 − 552 − 762 − 3,532 924,214
2012 178,617 1,449 3,046 129 570 − − 478 594 − 2,411 1,150,188
2012          Sep 177,895 − 818 546 35 − − − 325 − 60 − 1,014 1,076,643
         Oct 179,015 1,120 128 20 5 − − 26 1,093 − 98 1,105,328
         Nov 178,922 − 93 130 1 − − − 2 − 16 − 204 1,125,392
         Dec 178,617 − 305 130 1 0 − − 31 − 164 − 242 1,150,188
2013          Jan 178,836 219 278 3 − − − 30 23 − 55 1,183,779
         Feb 178,967 131 199 4−−− − 2 8 − 4 5 1,181,378
         Mar 178,805 − 162 33 − 5 − − 81 − 2 − 117 1,185,828
*Excluding shares of public limited investment companies. 1Including shares issued ket segment was closed down on 24 March 2003) are included as well as enterprises
out of company profits. 2Enterprises listed on the Regulated Market (the introduc- listed on the Open Market. Source: Bundesbank calculations based on data of the
tion of which marked the end of the division of organised trading segments into an Herausgebergemeinschaft Wertpapier-Mitteilungen and the Deutsche Börse AG. 
official and a regulated market on 1 November 2007) or the Neuer Markt (stock mar-

Deutsche Bundesbank
51  Monthly Report
May 2013
 VII Capital market
 
5 Yields and indices on German securities
 
 
               
Yields on debt securities outstanding issued by residents  1 Price indices 2,3 
Public debt securities Bank debt securities Debt securities Shares
Listed
Federal securities
With a residual With a residual
maturity of maturity of Corporate German German
9 and more than 9 bonds bond iBoxx CDAX share
including and including (non- index share price index € Germany
Total Total Total 10 years 4 Total 10 years MFIs) (REX) price index index (DAX)
Average End-1998 End-1987 End-1987
Period % per annum daily rate = 100 = 100 = 1000
2001 4.8 4.7 4.7 4.8 4.9 5.3 5.9 113.12 94.16 319.38 5,160.10
2002 4.7 4.6 4.6 4.8 4.7 5.1 6.0 117.56 97.80 188.46 2,892.632003 3.7 3.8 3.8 4.1 3.7 4.3 5.0 117.36 97.09 252.48 3,965.162004 3.7 3.7 3.7 4.0 3.6 4.2 4.0 120.19 99.89 268.32 4,256.08
2005 3.1 3.2 3.2 3.4 3.1 3.5 3.7 120.92 101.09 335.59 5,408.26
2006 3.8 3.7 3.7 3.8 3.8 4.0 4.2 116.78 96.69 407.16 6,596.922007 4.3 4.3 4.2 4.2 4.4 4.5 5.0 114.85 94.62 478.65 8,067.322008 4.2 4.0 4.0 4.0 4.5 4.7 6.3 121.68 102.06 266.33 4,810.202009 3.2 3.1 3.0 3.2 3.5 4.0 5.5 123.62 100.12 320.32 5,957.43
2010 2.5 2.4 2.4 2.7 2.7 3.3 4.0 124.96 102.95 368.72 6,914.19
2011 2.6 2.4 2.4 2.6 2.9 3.5 4.3 131.48 109.53 304.60 5,898.352012 1.4 1.3 1.3 1.5 1.6 2.1 3.7 135.11 111.18 380.03 7,612.39
2012          Nov 1.1 1.1 1.1 1.3 1.2 1.9 3.6 134.96 110.68 370.32 7,405.50
         Dec 1.1 1.1 1.1 1.3 1.1 1.8 3.3 135.11 111.18 380.03 7,612.39
2013          Jan 1.3 1.3 1.3 1.5 1.2 2.0 3.4 133.12 108.99 388.70 7,776.05
         Feb 1.3 1.3 1.3 1.5 1.3 2.0 3.3 134.63 110.15 389.64 7,741.70         Mar 1.2 1.1 1.1 1.4 1.1 1.9 3.1 135.85 110.99 391.56 7,795.31
         Apr 1.1 1.0 1.0 1.2 1.0 1.8 3.0 135.75 111.36 392.40 7,913.71
1Bearer debt securities with maximum maturities according to the terms of issue of ding of the debt securities included in the calculation. Monthly figures are calculated
over 4 years if their mean residual maturities exceed 3 years. Convertible debt on the basis of the yields on all the business days in a month. The annual figures are
securities, etc. debt securities with unscheduled redemption, zero-coupon bonds, the unweighted means of the monthly figures. 2End of year or month. 3Source:
floating-rate notes and bonds not denominated in euro are not included. Group Deutsche Börse AG. 4Only debt securities eligible as underlying instruments for
yields for the various categories of securities are weighted by the amounts outstan- futures contracts; calculated as unweighted averages. 
 
 
6 Sales and purchases of mutual fund shares in Germany
  
€ million
Sales Purchases
Domestic mutual funds 1  (sales receipts) Residents
Mutual funds open to the Credit institutions
general public including building
Other sectors 3 and loan associations 2 
of which
Sales Open- of which of which
= Secur- end Foreign Foreign
total Money ities- real Special- mutual mutualpur- market based estate ised Foreign fund fund Non-resi-
Period chases Total Total funds funds funds funds funds  
4 Total Total shares Total shares dents 5 
2001 97,077 76,811 35,522 12,410 9,195 10,159 41,289 20,266 96,127 10,251 2,703 85,876 17,563 951
2002 66,571 59,482 25,907 3,682 7,247 14,916 33,575 7,089 67,251 2,100 3,007 65,151 4,082 − 6802003 47,754 43,943 20,079 − 924 7,408 14,166 23,864 3,811 49,547 − 2,658 734 52,205 3,077 − 1,7932004 14,435 1,453 − 3,978 − 6,160 − 1,246 3,245 5,431 12,982 10,267 8,446 3,796 1,821 9,186 4,168
2005 85,268 41,718 6,400 − 124 7,001 − 3,186 35,317 43,550 79,252 21,290 7,761 57,962 35,789 6,016
2006 47,264 19,535 − 14,257 490 − 9,362 − 8,814 33,791 27,729 39,006 14,676 5,221 24,330 22,508 8,2582007 55,778 13,436 − 7,872 − 4,839 − 12,848 6,840 21,307 42,342 51,309 − 229 4,240 51,538 38,102 4,4692008 2,598 − 7,911 − 14,409 − 12,171 − 11,149 799 6,498 10,509 11,315 − 16,625 − 9,252 27,940 19,761 − 8,717
2009 49,929 43,747 10,966 − 5,047 11,749 2,686 32,780 6,182 38,132 − 14,995 − 8,178 53,127 14,361 11,796
2010 106,464 84,906 13,381 − 148 8,683 1,897 71,345 21,558 102,867 3,873 6,290 98,994 15,270 3,5982011 47,064 45,221 − 1,340 − 379 − 2,037 1,562 46,561 1,843 40,416 − 7,576 − 694 47,992 2,538 6,6472012 111,502 89,942 2,084 − 1,036 97 3,450 87,859 21,560 115,372 − 3,062 − 1,562 118,434 23,122 − 3,869
2012          Sep 3,776 3,023 − 258 − 116 − 563 335 3,280 754 4,012 280 198 3,732 556 − 236         Oct 10,170 6,508 370 − 13 99 225 6,138 3,662 10,467 − 124 − 74 10,591 3,736 − 297
         Nov 10,655 6,833 2,025 − 86 1,134 78 4,808 3,822 10,217 556 564 9,661 3,258 437         Dec 24,135 19,061 624 − 51 1,393 68 18,437 5,074 23,631 42 − 864 23,589 5,938 504
2013          Jan 15,323 11,875 1,355 − 145 739 738 10,519 3,449 15,436 2,901 886 12,535 2,563 − 113
         Feb 12,296 8,539 2,933 − 148 2,435 393 5,606 3,757 11,916 − 1,527 159 13,443 3,598 380         Mar 12,600 9,075 676 − 103 100 469 8,399 3,525 12,760 343 710 12,417 2,815 − 159
1Including public limited investment companies. 2Book values. 3Residual. 4Net transaction values. — The figures for the most recent date are provisional; revisions
purchases or net sales (−) of foreign fund shares by residents; transaction values. are not specially marked. 
5Net purchases or net sales (−) of domestic fund shares by non-residents;

Deutsche Bundesbank
52  Monthly Report
May 2013
VIII  Financial accounts
  
1  Acquisition of financial assets and financing of private non-financial sectors
(non-consolidated)
  
  € billion
2011 2012 
Item 2010 2011 2012 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4
Households  1 
  I  Acquisition of financial assets
Currency and deposits 72.7 66.7 86.4 6.4 17.4 15.6 27.3 21.1 22.2 19.9 23.3
Debt securities  2 − 11.4 − 1.9 − 17.0 2.5 1.8 − 4.0 − 2.2 − 2.8 − 2.4 − 4.7 − 7.2
Shares 13.4 16.1 − 3.6 3.3 0.5 6.1 6.2 − 1.0 0.5 − 0.5 − 2.6
Other equity 3.0 3.0 3.1 0.7 0.7 0.8 0.7 0.8 0.7 0.8 0.8
Mutual funds shares 10.0 − 14.5 0.1 − 3.5 − 0.1 − 7.0 − 4.0 − 1.6 − 2.1 − 1.1 4.9
Claims on insurance
corporations  3 71.4 44.3 65.1 15.8 9.8 7.8 11.0 21.7 15.7 11.5 16.3
short-term claims − 1.3 1.2 − 0.1 0.5 0.4 0.4 − 0.1 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.1 − 0.1
longer-term claims 72.7 43.2 65.3 15.3 9.4 7.4 11.0 21.6 15.7 11.6 16.4
Claims from company
pension commitments 7.8 11.1 11.2 2.7 2.8 2.8 2.8 2.8 2.9 2.8 2.8
Other claims  4 − 11.7 23.3 11.7 19.3 2.3 8.5 − 6.8 9.6 2.5 2.5 − 2.9
Total 155.2 148.2 157.0 47.2 35.4 30.6 35.0 50.5 40.0 31.2 35.3
  II Financing
Loans 5.1 10.6 15.1 − 3.9 4.9 6.7 2.8 − 1.0 6.7 6.1 3.3
short-term loans − 2.3 − 2.1 − 1.0 − 0.6 1.0 − 0.9 − 1.6 − 0.1 0.8 − 0.9 − 0.8
longer-term loans 7.3 12.7 16.1 − 3.3 3.9 7.6 4.4 − 0.9 5.9 7.1 4.1
Other liabilities 0.2 1.6 0.7 0.3 0.1 0.0 1.2 0.4 0.1 0.1 0.1
Total 5.3 12.2 15.8 − 3.5 4.9 6.8 4.0 − 0.6 6.8 6.2 3.4
Corporations
I   Acquisition of financial assets
Currency and deposits 7.3 14.0 18.9 8.4 − 16.0 − 3.3 24.9 − 21.6 − 10.0 15.2 35.4
Debt securities  2 − 0.1 4.9 − 2.6 3.5 − 0.7 0.9 1.2 0.2 − 0.0 − 0.6 − 2.2
Financial derivatives 27.8 14.7 9.8 4.0 2.1 4.2 4.4 − 1.1 2.4 2.2 6.3
Shares 24.9 17.0 19.5 − 0.6 12.8 − 2.0 6.9 4.9 − 7.1 6.6 15.1
Other equity 53.9 28.8 23.6 − 1.9 24.9 − 2.3 8.1 7.2 11.0 9.5 − 4.1
Mutual funds shares 8.8 8.2 − 0.2 0.9 1.7 1.5 4.1 − 5.2 1.0 0.7 3.3
Loans 32.4 11.0 − 8.2 9.7 − 7.0 − 0.4 8.7 3.2 − 0.3 − 9.4 − 1.7
short-term loans 12.2 9.1 − 9.6 10.6 − 4.0 − 1.9 4.3 1.6 1.6 − 9.8 − 3.0
longer-term loans 20.2 1.9 1.4 − 1.0 − 3.0 1.5 4.4 1.7 − 1.9 0.4 1.3
Claims on insurance
corporations  3 − 0.6 0.6 − 0.7 0.2 0.2 0.2 − 0.0 − 0.2 − 0.2 − 0.2 − 0.2
short-term claims − 0.6 0.6 − 0.7 0.2 0.2 0.2 − 0.0 − 0.2 − 0.2 − 0.2 − 0.2
longer-term claims . . . . . . . . . . .
Other claims 33.5 − 11.7 24.1 64.1 − 4.7 − 35.6 − 35.5 − 9.5 − 23.5 38.9 18.3
Total 187.8 87.6 84.2 88.1 13.4 − 36.7 22.8 − 22.2 − 26.8 62.9 70.2
  II Financing
Debt securities  2 4.2 7.6 18.7 4.5 − 2.9 7.0 − 1.0 3.1 3.9 7.1 4.7
Financial derivatives . . . . . . . . . . .
Shares 7.2 7.4 2.9 0.3 5.5 − 0.3 1.9 0.6 1.0 0.4 1.0
Other equity 13.1 13.8 2.2 4.4 3.3 2.1 4.0 2.1 1.3 − 5.1 3.9
Loans 7.3 36.0 − 4.8 − 9.7 6.1 17.7 21.8 − 6.6 3.8 30.1 − 32.1
short-term loans − 10.1 19.0 − 7.4 − 6.1 3.1 11.5 10.5 − 4.0 − 2.1 6.0 − 7.3
longer-term loans 17.4 16.9 2.6 − 3.6 3.0 6.2 11.4 − 2.6 5.8 24.1 − 24.7
Claims from company
pension commitments 2.6 5.8 5.8 1.5 1.5 1.5 1.5 1.5 1.5 1.5 1.5
Other liabilities 66.4 45.2 32.2 14.1 9.3 12.4 9.5 3.7 7.9 10.1 10.5
Total 100.8 115.8 57.0 15.1 22.8 40.3 37.7 4.3 19.2 44.0 − 10.5
1Including non-profit institutions serving households. 2Including money market and supplementary pension funds. 4Including accumulated interest-bearing surplus
paper. 3Including private pension funds, burial funds, occupational pension schemes shares with insurance corporations. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
53  Monthly Report
May 2013
VIII  Financial accounts
  
2  Financial assets and liabilities of private non-financial sectors
(non-consolidated)
  
  End-of-year level, end-of-quarter level; € billion
2011 2012 
Item
2010 2011 2012 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4
Households  1 
  I  Financial assets
Currency and deposits 1,860.8 1,927.5 2,014.9 1,867.2 1,884.6 1,900.2 1,927.5 1,948.6 1,971.4 1,991.4 2,014.9
Debt securities 2 254.1 247.1 238.2 254.8 258.3 247.8 247.1 249.6 245.4 244.8 238.2
Shares 243.5 221.5 259.1 257.2 260.1 206.3 221.5 252.4 229.9 250.0 259.1
Other equity 179.1 185.2 193.4 174.7 175.6 179.8 185.2 186.6 193.3 194.1 193.4
Mutual funds shares 435.4 394.9 420.1 426.2 421.1 389.2 394.9 410.9 401.7 414.8 420.1
Claims on insurance
corporations 3 1,358.1 1,400.2 1,468.9 1,368.6 1,379.3 1,389.4 1,400.2 1,423.1 1,439.6 1,451.7 1,468.9
short-term claims 70.8 72.0 71.9 71.3 71.7 72.1 72.0 72.0 72.0 71.9 71.9
longer-term claims 1,287.3 1,328.2 1,397.0 1,297.3 1,307.6 1,317.3 1,328.2 1,351.0 1,367.6 1,379.8 1,397.0
Claims from company
pension commitments 284.3 295.4 306.6 287.0 289.9 292.6 295.4 298.2 301.0 303.8 306.6
Other claims 4 39.0 38.4 37.9 39.0 38.9 38.6 38.4 38.3 38.3 38.1 37.9
Total 4,654.4 4,710.2 4,939.0 4,674.8 4,707.9 4,643.9 4,710.2 4,807.6 4,820.7 4,888.6 4,939.0
  II Liabilities
Loans 1,523.1 1,537.7 1,551.7 1,519.2 1,523.9 1,535.1 1,537.7 1,535.8 1,542.1 1,548.1 1,551.7
short-term loans 75.6 73.9 72.6 75.0 75.8 75.0 73.9 73.8 74.4 73.1 72.6
longer-term loans 1,447.5 1,463.8 1,479.1 1,444.2 1,448.1 1,460.1 1,463.8 1,462.1 1,467.8 1,475.0 1,479.1
Other liabilities 11.8 13.6 14.5 13.6 13.1 13.6 13.6 15.5 15.3 15.2 14.5
Total 1,534.8 1,551.2 1,566.2 1,532.8 1,537.0 1,548.6 1,551.2 1,551.3 1,557.4 1,563.4 1,566.2
Corporations
I   Financial assets
Currency and deposits 450.1 460.5 506.5 440.4 425.5 429.9 460.5 452.6 453.1 468.3 506.5
Debt securities 2 48.1 52.6 51.9 51.6 51.1 51.6 52.6 53.9 53.6 53.9 51.9
Financial derivatives . . . . . . . . . . .
Shares 919.9 817.0 963.5 932.3 945.5 785.2 817.0 911.6 846.8 903.7 963.5
Other equity 346.7 382.2 418.9 334.9 360.2 364.6 382.2 390.8 414.3 423.8 418.9
Mutual funds shares 119.3 123.1 129.0 119.9 120.0 117.6 123.1 120.5 119.6 123.9 129.0
Loans 376.6 387.6 379.4 386.3 379.3 379.0 387.6 390.9 390.6 381.2 379.4
short-term loans 255.6 264.6 255.0 266.2 262.2 260.3 264.6 266.2 267.8 258.0 255.0
longer-term loans 121.0 123.0 124.4 120.1 117.1 118.6 123.0 124.7 122.8 123.2 124.4
Claims on insurance
corporations 3 41.3 41.9 41.2 41.5 41.7 41.9 41.9 41.7 41.6 41.4 41.2
short-term claims 41.3 41.9 41.2 41.5 41.7 41.9 41.9 41.7 41.6 41.4 41.2longer-term claims . . . . . . . . . . .
Other claims 766.1 814.6 857.8 790.2 805.7 774.9 814.6 835.6 837.9 856.0 857.8
Total 3,068.0 3,079.6 3,348.2 3,097.0 3,129.0 2,944.6 3,079.6 3,197.7 3,157.4 3,252.2 3,348.2
  II Liabilities
Debt securities 
2 134.8 110.7 130.9 100.7 98.9 111.9 110.7 115.6 117.2 124.6 130.9
Financial derivatives . . . . . . . . . . .
Shares 1,301.8 1,110.5 1,373.6 1,322.3 1,357.5 1,046.6 1,110.5 1,282.5 1,166.3 1,294.9 1,373.6
Other equity 716.9 730.7 732.9 721.3 724.6 726.7 730.7 732.8 734.1 729.0 732.9
Loans 1,337.3 1,387.0 1,391.8 1,326.0 1,339.9 1,357.8 1,387.0 1,381.0 1,384.1 1,407.8 1,391.8
short-term loans 419.4 434.6 426.2 409.8 412.9 424.0 434.6 430.2 427.4 433.3 426.2
longer-term loans 918.0 952.4 965.7 916.2 927.0 933.8 952.4 950.8 956.6 974.5 965.7
Claims from companypension commitments 229.2 235.0 240.8 230.6 232.1 233.5 235.0 236.5 237.9 239.4 240.8
Other liabilities 872.7 880.4 917.0 866.8 883.0 870.6 880.4 892.2 911.9 905.2 917.0
Total 4,592.7 4,454.3 4,787.1 4,567.8 4,635.9 4,347.1 4,454.3 4,640.6 4,551.5 4,700.9 4,787.1
1Including non-profit institutions serving households. 2Including money market and supplementary pension funds. 4Including accumulated interest-bearing surplus
paper. 3Including private pension funds, burial funds, occupational pension schemes shares with insurance corporations. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
54  Monthly Report
May 2013
IX Public finances in Germany
 
1 General government: deficit and debt level as defined in the Maastricht Treaty
 
 
 
Social Social
General Central State Local security General Central State Local security
government government government government funds government government government government funds
Period € billion as a percentage of GDP
Deficit/surplus1
2007 + 5.8 − 18.6 + 2.5 + 11.1 + 10.8 + 0.2 − 0.8 + 0.1 + 0.5 + 0.4
2008 − 1.9 − 16.6 − 1.2 + 9.0 + 6.9 − 0.1 − 0.7 − 0.0 + 0.4 + 0.3
2009 p − 73.2 − 38.4 − 18.4 − 2.2 − 14.2 − 3.1 − 1.6 − 0.8 − 0.1 − 0.6
2010 2, p − 103.4 − 82.6 − 19.8 − 5.3 + 4.3 − 4.1 − 3.3 − 0.8 − 0.2 + 0.2
2011 p − 20.2 − 26.7 − 11.3 + 1.9 + 15.9 − 0.8 − 1.0 − 0.4 + 0.1 + 0.6
2012 pe + 4.1 − 12.2 − 6.8 + 6.1 + 17.0 + 0.2 − 0.5 − 0.3 + 0.2 + 0.6
2011          H1  p − 3.9 − 15.2 − 1.4 + 1.9 + 10.8 − 0.3 − 1.2 − 0.1 + 0.1 + 0.9
         H2  p − 15.8 − 11.2 − 9.7 + 0.0 + 5.1 − 1.2 − 0.8 − 0.7 + 0.0 + 0.4
2012          H1  pe + 8.0 − 7.7 − 0.4 + 4.3 + 11.8 + 0.6 − 0.6 − 0.0 + 0.3 + 0.9
         H2  pe − 3.8 − 4.5 − 6.3 + 1.8 + 5.2 − 0.3 − 0.3 − 0.5 + 0.1 + 0.4
Debt level3 End of year or quarter
2007 1,583.7 978.0 497.8 123.4 1.6 65.2 40.3 20.5 5.1 0.1
2008 1,652.6 1,007.6 536.7 123.6 1.5 66.8 40.7 21.7 5.0 0.1
2009 p 1,768.9 1,075.7 577.8 130.0 1.3 74.5 45.3 24.3 5.5 0.1
2010 p 2,056.1 1,313.4 624.1 135.1 1.3 82.4 52.6 25.0 5.4 0.1
2011 p 2,085.2 1,323.5 638.6 139.3 1.3 80.4 51.0 24.6 5.4 0.1
2012 pe 2,166.3 1,370.9 669.6 143.4 1.2 81.9 51.9 25.3 5.4 0.0
2011          Q1  p 2,060.3 1,318.1 620.6 137.9 1.7 81.4 52.1 24.5 5.5 0.1
         Q2  p 2,075.4 1,324.5 627.5 139.0 2.7 81.2 51.8 24.6 5.4 0.1
         Q3  p 2,088.5 1,334.4 631.7 139.3 1.3 81.0 51.8 24.5 5.4 0.0
         Q4  p 2,085.2 1,323.5 638.6 139.3 1.3 80.4 51.0 24.6 5.4 0.1
2012          Q1  pe 2,118.4 1,344.5 648.3 143.3 1.3 81.1 51.5 24.8 5.5 0.1
         Q2  pe 2,163.2 1,373.5 666.0 142.9 1.3 82.5 52.4 25.4 5.4 0.0
         Q3  pe 2,152.8 1,356.9 670.3 142.5 1.3 81.7 51.5 25.5 5.4 0.1
         Q4  pe 2,166.3 1,370.9 669.6 143.4 1.2 81.9 51.9 25.3 5.4 0.0
Sources: Federal Statistical Office and Bundesbank calculations. 1Unlike the fiscal bal- counts. 2Including the €4.4 billion proceeds received from the 2010 frequency auc-
ance as shown in the national accounts, the deficit as defined in the Maastricht tion. 3Quarterly GDP ratios are based on the national output of the four preceding
Treaty includes interest flows from swaps and forward rate agreements. The quarters. 
half-year figures correspond to the deficit/surplus according to the national ac-
 
 
2 General government: revenue, expenditure and fiscal deficit/surplus as shown in the national accounts*
 
 
 
Revenue Expenditure
of which of which
Compen- Gross Memo item
Social con- Social sation of capital Deficit/ Total tax
Period Total Taxes tributions Other Total benefits employees Interest formation Other surplus burden  1 
€ billion
2007 1,062.3 558.4 400.9 103.0 1,056.8 579.4 178.2 68.5 36.0 194.6 + 5.5 971.3
2008 1,088.6 572.6 408.3 107.7 1,090.5 590.3 182.6 68.3 38.9 210.5 − 1.8 993.8
2009 p 1,071.7 547.5 410.8 113.5 1,144.7 622.9 191.0 63.6 41.6 225.8 − 73.0 968.4
2010 p 1,087.4 548.8 421.1 117.5 2 1,191.0 633.0 195.3 63.4 41.9 2 257.4 2 − 103.6 980.1
2011 p 1,154.9 589.5 436.9 128.5 1,174.5 633.3 199.7 65.9 42.7 233.0 − 19.7 1,037.0
2012 pe 1,194.1 618.7 448.7 126.7 1,189.9 644.9 203.2 65.0 39.5 237.3 + 4.2 1,078.1
as a percentage of GDP
2007 43.7 23.0 16.5 4.2 43.5 23.9 7.3 2.8 1.5 8.0 + 0.2 40.0
2008 44.0 23.1 16.5 4.4 44.1 23.9 7.4 2.8 1.6 8.5 − 0.1 40.2
2009 p 45.1 23.1 17.3 4.8 48.2 26.2 8.0 2.7 1.7 9.5 − 3.1 40.8
2010 p 43.6 22.0 16.9 4.7 2 47.7 25.4 7.8 2.5 1.7 2 10.3 2 − 4.1 39.3
2011 p 44.5 22.7 16.9 5.0 45.3 24.4 7.7 2.5 1.6 9.0 − 0.8 40.0
2012 pe 45.2 23.4 17.0 4.8 45.0 24.4 7.7 2.5 1.5 9.0 + 0.2 40.8
Percentage growth rates
2007 + 5.1 + 8.9 + 0.1 + 5.4 + 0.7 − 0.2 + 0.6 + 3.6 + 6.7 + 1.5 . + 5.0
2008 + 2.5 + 2.5 + 1.8 + 4.6 + 3.2 + 1.9 + 2.5 − 0.4 + 7.9 + 8.2 . + 2.3
2009 p − 1.6 − 4.4 + 0.6 + 5.4 + 5.0 + 5.5 + 4.6 − 6.9 + 6.9 + 7.3 . − 2.6
2010 p + 1.5 + 0.2 + 2.5 + 3.5 + 4.0 + 1.6 + 2.3 − 0.3 + 0.8 + 14.0 . + 1.2
2011 p + 6.2 + 7.4 + 3.7 + 9.4 − 1.4 + 0.0 + 2.3 + 3.9 + 2.0 − 9.5 . + 5.8
2012 pe + 3.4 + 4.9 + 2.7 − 1.4 + 1.3 + 1.8 + 1.8 − 1.3 − 7.5 + 1.8 . + 4.0
Source: Federal Statistical Office. *Figures in accordance with ESA 1995. In the website. 1Taxes and social contributions plus customs duties and the EU share in
Monthly Reports up to December 2006, customs duties, the EU share in VAT revenue VAT revenue. 2Including the €4.4 billion proceeds received from the 2010 frequency
andEU subsidies were included in the national accounts’ data (without affecting the auction, which are deducted from other expenditure in the national accounts. 
fiscal deficit/surplus). This information can still be found on the Bundesbank’s

Deutsche Bundesbank
55  Monthly Report
May 2013
IX Public finances in Germany
 
3 General government: budgetary development (as per government’s financial statistics)
 
 
€ billion
Central, state and local government  1 Social security funds 2 General government, total
Revenue Expenditure
of which of which 3 
Finan- Person- Fixed Finan-
cial nel asset cialtransac- expend- Current forma- transac- Deficit / Rev- Expend- Deficit / Rev- Expend- Deficit /
Period Total 
4 Taxes tions 5 Total 4 iture grants Interest tion tions 5 surplus enue 6 iture surplus enue iture surplus
2005 pe 568.9 452.1 31.3 620.6 172.1 245.3 64.0 33.0 14.3 − 51.7 467.8 471.3 − 3.4 947.4 1,002.5 − 55.1
2006 pe 590.9 488.4 18.8 626.2 169.7 252.1 64.4 33.7 11.6 − 35.3 486.3 466.6 + 19.7 988.2 1,003.8 − 15.6
2007 pe 644.8 538.2 17.7 644.2 182.2 250.0 66.2 34.6 9.5 + 0.6 475.3 466.4 + 8.9 1,025.6 1,016.1 + 9.5
2008 pe 668.9 561.2 13.4 677.4 187.3 259.9 67.3 36.4 18.6 − 8.5 485.5 478.9 + 6.6 1,058.5 1,060.5 − 1.9
2009 pe 631.4 524.0 9.2 720.9 194.9 271.1 63.7 40.4 38.0 − 89.5 492.0 505.9 − 13.9 1,021.4 1,124.9 − 103.4
2010 pe 650.5 530.6 12.7 732.7 199.8 293.9 60.1 40.1 19.4 − 82.2 516.9 512.9 + 4.0 1,049.7 1,127.9 − 78.2
2011 pe 712.5 573.4 30.6 737.3 208.3 283.6 60.0 42.4 22.9 − 24.8 526.6 511.6 + 15.0 1,127.2 1,137.0 − 9.8
2010          Q1 p 147.9 121.6 2.6 180.4 47.6 74.8 21.2 5.5 4.9 − 32.5 123.6 127.6 − 4.0 242.2 278.7 − 36.5
         Q2 p 7 163.6 134.9 3.7 173.6 48.1 71.2 13.2 8.1 6.2 − 10.0 128.2 127.3 + 0.9 7 262.3 271.5 − 9.2
         Q3 p 153.8 127.6 3.0 177.3 48.3 69.8 16.1 10.5 3.4 − 23.6 124.7 125.6 − 1.0 251.5 276.0 − 24.5
         Q4 p 183.4 147.6 3.2 199.5 54.0 76.1 9.2 14.7 4.8 − 16.2 133.3 131.8 + 1.5 290.4 305.1 − 14.7
2011          Q1 p 162.4 134.9 4.1 183.1 49.7 73.8 21.2 6.3 4.6 − 20.7 127.3 127.2 + 0.1 260.5 281.0 − 20.5
         Q2 p 189.5 145.6 18.6 172.6 50.0 68.0 10.9 8.7 8.7 + 16.9 130.3 126.2 + 4.1 292.4 271.4 + 21.0
         Q3 p 162.6 136.6 2.7 182.6 50.9 67.2 18.8 10.8 4.5 − 20.0 127.9 125.8 + 2.0 264.3 282.2 − 17.9
         Q4 p 196.1 156.3 5.0 196.9 55.9 72.8 8.9 15.3 5.0 − 0.8 140.1 132.0 + 8.1 307.6 300.3 + 7.3
2012          Q1 p 168.2 142.9 2.5 185.5 51.7 75.5 21.0 6.9 3.4 − 17.2 129.1 128.5 + 0.7 269.0 285.6 − 16.6
         Q2 p 182.8 150.4 2.7 172.6 52.8 68.0 10.1 8.2 3.2 + 10.3 132.2 128.0 + 4.2 288.6 274.2 + 14.4
         Q3 p 176.8 147.5 4.3 182.6 53.7 63.6 18.0 10.4 3.9 − 5.8 130.2 128.9 + 1.3 281.2 285.8 − 4.6
Source: Bundesbank calculations based on the data from the Federal Statistical mated. 3The development of the types of expenditure recorded here is influenced in
Office. 1Including subsidiary budgets, from 2007 also including the post office pen- part by statistical changeovers. 4Including discrepancies in clearing transactions be-
sion fund; excluding the special fund ”Provision for final payments for inflation-in- tween central, state and local government. 5On the revenue side, this contains pro-
dexed Federal securities”, which was set up in 2009. Unlike the annual figures based ceeds booked as disposals of equity interests and as loan repayments. On the expend-on the annual calculations of the Federal Statistical Office, the quarterly figures do iture side, this contains the acquisition of equity interests and loans granted. 6In-
not include municipal special purpose associations and various special ac- cluding Federal Government liquidity assistance to the Federal Labour Office. 7In-
counts. 2The annual figures do not tally with the sum of the quarterly figures, as the cluding the €4.4 billion proceeds received from the 2010 frequency auction. 
latter 
are all provisional. The quarterly figures for some insurance sectors are esti-
4 Central, state and local government: budgetary development (as per government’s financial statistics)
 
 
€ billion
Central government
State government  2,3 Local government 3,4 
Period Revenue 1 Expenditure Deficit / surplus Revenue Expenditure Deficit / surplus Revenue Expenditure Deficit / surplus
2005 250.0 281.5 − 31.5 237.4 259.6 − 22.2 151.3 153.2 − 1.9
2006 254.6 282.8 − 28.2 250.3 260.1 − 9.8 161.1 157.4 + 3.72007 
pe 277.4 292.1 − 14.7 275.9 267.5 + 8.4 171.3 162.4 + 8.9
2008 pe 292.0 303.8 − 11.8 279.3 278.1 + 1.2 176.9 169.0 + 7.9
2009 pe 282.6 317.1 − 34.5 265.9 293.4 − 27.5 172.0 178.9 − 6.9
2010 pe 288.0 332.4 − 44.4 278.5 302.1 − 23.6 176.5 183.9 − 7.4
2011 pe 307.1 324.8 − 17.7 304.0 315.4 − 11.4 185.6 187.0 − 1.4
2012 pe 312.5 335.3 − 22.8 312.0 321.2 − 9.2 199.8 198.6 + 1.2
2010          Q1 p 61.1 82.6 − 21.5 65.0 73.5 − 8.5 34.6 41.2 − 6.6
         Q2 p 5 75.6 80.6 − 5.0 68.3 69.1 − 0.8 42.2 43.5 − 1.3
         Q3 p 66.2 82.7 − 16.6 68.5 73.3 − 4.8 43.8 45.2 − 1.4
         Q4 p 85.2 86.5 − 1.3 75.8 85.0 − 9.2 53.8 52.3 + 1.5
2011          Q1 p 65.4 84.5 − 19.1 74.1 75.6 − 1.5 37.1 42.5 − 5.3
         Q2 p 76.6 73.5 + 3.1 76.0 75.8 + 0.2 45.4 44.3 + 1.1
         Q3 p 72.6 84.8 − 12.2 71.9 75.1 − 3.2 46.4 46.6 − 0.2
         Q4 p 92.5 82.0 + 10.5 81.1 87.7 − 6.6 54.7 51.9 + 2.8
2012          Q1 p 65.4 83.1 − 17.7 74.6 76.2 − 1.7 39.6 44.6 − 4.9
         Q2 p 78.0 72.2 + 5.8 75.8 74.4 + 1.4 48.8 47.0 + 1.8
         Q3 p 77.1 85.0 − 8.0 77.5 78.7 − 1.2 50.7 48.9 + 1.8
         Q4 p 91.9 94.9 − 2.9 83.2 90.7 − 7.5 58.7 56.5 + 2.3
Source: Bundesbank calculations based on the data from the Federal Statistical lations of the Federal Statistical Office, the quarterly figures do not include various
Office. 1Any amounts of the Bundesbank’s profit distribution exceeding the refer- special accounts and municipal special purpose associations. 4From 2012 core
ence value that were used to repay parts of the debt of central government’s special budgets and off-budget entities; previously, only core budgets. 5Including the
funds are not included here. 2Including the local authority level of the city-states €4.4 billion proceeds received from the 2010 frequency auction. 
Berlin,
Bremen and Hamburg. 3Unlike the annual figure based on the annual calcu-

Deutsche Bundesbank
56  Monthly Report
May 2013
IX Public finances in Germany
 
5 Central, state and local government: tax revenue
 
 
€ million
Central and state government and European Union
Memo item
Balance of Amounts deducted
Central State Local untransferred in the federal
Period Total Total government  1 government  1 European Union  2 government  3 tax shares  4 budget  5 
2006 488,444 421,151 225,634 173,374 22,142 67,316 − 22 21,742
2007 538,243 465,554 251,747 191,558 22,249 72,551 + 138 21,643
2008 561,182 484,182 260,690 200,411 23,081 77,190 − 190 21,510
2009 524,000 455,615 252,842 182,273 20,501 68,419 − 34 24,846
2010 530,587 460,230 254,537 181,326 24,367 70,385 − 28 28,726
2011 573,352 496,738 276,598 195,676 24,464 76,570 + 43 28,615
2012 600,046 518,963 284,801 207,846 26,316 81,184 − 101 28,498
2011          Q1 135,590 115,878 60,579 46,582 8,717 13,640 + 6,071 6,989
         Q2 145,636 126,086 71,530 50,289 4,266 19,544 + 6 7,102
         Q3 136,382 117,812 66,277 45,938 5,598 18,916 − 346 7,662
         Q4 155,744 136,962 78,212 52,866 5,883 24,469 − 5,688 6,863
2012          Q1 143,334 122,846 62,467 50,558 9,821 13,945 + 6,543 6,831
         Q2 150,393 129,545 72,573 51,679 5,293 20,978 − 131 6,878
         Q3 147,755 127,189 70,803 50,981 5,404 20,522 + 44 7,643
         Q4 158,564 139,383 78,958 54,628 5,798 25,739 − 6,558 7,145
2013          Q1 ... 126,567 63,356 52,108 11,103 ... ... 6,494
2012          Mar . 45,740 24,655 18,903 2,182 . . 2,277
2013          Mar . 48,126 25,800 20,121 2,204 . . 2,165
Sources: Federal Ministry of Finance, Federal Statistical Office and Bundesbank calcu- and gross national income accruing to the EU from central government tax rev-
lations. 1Before deducting or adding supplementary central government grants, enue. 3Including local government taxes in the city-states Berlin, Bremen and Ham-
shares in energy tax revenue, compensation for the transfer of motor vehicle tax to burg. 4Difference between local government’s share in the joint taxes received by
central government and consolidation aid, which central government remits to state the state government cash offices in the period in question (see Table IX. 6) and the
government. See the last column for the volume of these amounts which are amounts passed on to local government in the same period. 5Volume of the pos-
deducted from tax revenue in the federal budget. 2Custom duties and shares in VAT itions mentioned under footnote 1. 
 
 
6 Central and state government and European Union: tax revenue, by type
 
 
€ million
Joint taxes
Memo
Income taxes  2 Turnover taxes  5 item
Local
Local govern-
Invest- business Central State ment
Assessed ment Turnover tax govern- govern- EU share in
Wage income Corpora- income Turnover tax on trans- ment ment customs joint
Period Total  1 Total tax  3 tax tion tax tax  4 Total tax imports fers  6 taxes 7 taxes 7 duties taxes
2006 446,139 182,614 122,612 17,567 22,898 19,537 146,688 111,318 35,370 7,013 84,215 21,729 3,880 24,988
2007 493,817 204,698 131,774 25,027 22,929 24,969 169,636 127,522 42,114 6,975 85,690 22,836 3,983 28,263
2008 515,498 220,483 141,895 32,685 15,868 30,035 175,989 130,789 45,200 6,784 86,302 21,937 4,002 31,316
2009 484,880 193,684 135,165 26,430 7,173 24,916 176,991 141,907 35,084 4,908 89,318 16,375 3,604 29,265
2010 488,731 192,816 127,904 31,179 12,041 21,691 180,042 136,459 43,582 5,925 93,426 12,146 4,378 28,501
2011 527,255 213,534 139,749 31,996 15,634 26,155 190,033 138,957 51,076 6,888 99,133 13,095 4,571 30,517
2012 551,785 231,555 149,065 37,262 16,934 28,294 194,635 142,439 52,196 7,137 99,794 14,201 4,462 32,822
2011          Q1 123,131 50,328 32,478 6,755 2,485 8,611 47,389 35,528 11,861 366 20,515 3,408 1,124 7,253
         Q2 133,727 57,624 34,144 9,366 4,215 9,900 46,091 33,082 13,010 1,692 24,026 3,207 1,087 7,641
         Q3 125,021 47,420 33,590 7,111 3,028 3,691 47,161 34,232 12,929 1,735 24,309 3,229 1,169 7,209
         Q4 145,376 58,162 39,538 8,764 5,907 3,954 49,392 36,115 13,276 3,096 30,284 3,251 1,191 8,414
2012          Q1 130,623 56,569 34,106 8,456 5,471 8,537 48,966 36,340 12,626 275 20,059 3,629 1,126 7,777
         Q2 137,597 59,832 36,148 10,010 4,995 8,679 46,600 32,871 13,730 1,661 25,235 3,255 1,013 8,052
         Q3 135,170 54,841 36,582 8,877 2,532 6,850 49,147 36,232 12,915 1,841 24,423 3,718 1,200 7,981
         Q4 148,394 60,313 42,230 9,919 3,936 4,228 49,922 36,995 12,926 3,360 30,077 3,600 1,123 9,011
2013          Q1 135,061 59,835 36,468 10,750 6,014 6,603 49,167 37,466 11,701 125 20,971 3,924 1,039 8,493
2012          Mar 48,867 26,212 10,699 8,024 5,171 2,318 13,305 8,996 4,309 11 7,620 1,321 398 3,127
2013          Mar 51,669 28,202 11,312 10,115 5,334 1,440 14,002 10,238 3,764 6 7,720 1,398 340 3,543
Source: Federal Ministry of Finance and Bundesbank calculations. 1This total, unlike deducting child benefit and subsidies for supplementary private pension
that in Table IX. 5, does not include the receipts from the equalisation of burdens plans. 4Final withholding tax on interest income and capital gains, non-assessed
levies, local business tax (less local business tax transfers to central and state govern- taxes on earnings. 5The allocation of revenue to central, state and local govern-
ment), real property taxes and other local government taxes, or the balance of un- ment, which is adjusted at more regular intervals, is regulated in section 1 of the Rev-
transferred tax shares. 2Respective percentage share of central, state and local enue Adjustment Act. Respective percentage share of central, state and local govern-
government in revenue: wage tax and assessed income tax 42.5:42.5:15, corpor- ment in revenue for 2012: 53.4:44.6:2.0. The EU share is deducted from central
ation tax and non-assessed taxes on earnings 50:50:-, final withholding tax on inter- government’s share. 6Respective percentage share of central and state government
est income and capital gains, non-assessed taxes on earnings 44:44:12. 3After for 2012: 22.2:77.8. 7 For the breakdown, see Table IX. 7. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
57  Monthly Report
May 2013
IX Public finances in Germany
 
7 Central, state and local government: individual taxes  
 
 
€ million
Central government taxes 1 State government taxes 1 Local government taxes
Tax on of which
the acqui-
Soli- Motor Motor sition of Inherit- Local Real
Period Energy Tobacco darity Insurance vehicle Electri- Spirits vehicle land and ance business property
tax tax surcharge tax tax 2 city tax tax Other tax 2 buildings tax Other 3 Total tax taxes
2006 39,916 14,387 11,277 8,775 . 6,273 2,160 1,428 8,937 6,125 3,763 2,904 49,319 38,370 10,399
2007 38,955 14,254 12,349 10,331 . 6,355 1,959 1,488 8,898 6,952 4,203 2,783 51,401 40,116 10,7132008 39,248 13,574 13,146 10,478 . 6,261 2,126 1,470 8,842 5,728 4,771 2,596 52,468 41,037 10,8072009 39,822 13,366 11,927 10,548 3,803 6,278 2,101 1,473 4,398 4,857 4,550 2,571 44,028 32,421 10,936
2010 39,838 13,492 11,713 10,284 8,488 6,171 1,990 1,449 . 5,290 4,404 2,452 47,780 35,712 11,315
2011 40,036 14,414 12,781 10,755 8,422 7,247 2,149 3,329 . 6,366 4,246 2,484 52,984 40,424 11,6742012 39,305 14,143 13,624 11,138 8,443 6,973 2,121 4,047 . 7,389 4,305 2,508 55,398 42,345 12,017
2011          Q1 4,457 2,893 3,072 4,869 2,349 1,785 574 516 . 1,555 1,170 683 12,825 9,948 2,631
         Q2 10,002 3,300 3,450 2,017 2,215 1,960 482 599 . 1,464 1,129 614 13,601 10,366 3,031         Q3 10,058 3,418 2,879 2,145 2,006 1,763 541 1,499 . 1,581 1,039 609 13,095 9,386 3,473         Q4 15,519 4,803 3,379 1,723 1,852 1,739 553 715 . 1,766 907 578 13,463 10,724 2,540
2012          Q1 4,406 2,305 3,308 5,180 2,328 1,714 576 241 . 1,876 1,057 696 12,986 9,981 2,717
         Q2 9,707 3,550 3,644 2,011 2,258 1,966 490 1,610 . 1,683 972 601 14,457 11,166 3,048         Q3 10,015 3,610 3,183 2,161 2,005 1,567 506 1,376 . 1,913 1,210 594 14,426 10,545 3,604         Q4 15,177 4,678 3,489 1,785 1,852 1,727 549 820 . 1,917 1,066 617 13,529 10,652 2,648
2013          Q1 4,672 2,141 3,473 5,429 2,304 1,797 580 575 . 2,144 1,007 773 ... ... ...
2012          Mar 2,734 946 1,535 623 759 566 127 331 . 631 387 304 . . .2013          Mar 2,954 840 1,625 637 727 616 155 166 . 686 368 343 . . .
Sources: Federal Ministry of Finance, Federal Statistical Office and Bundesbank calcu- enue is attributable to central government. Postings to state government shown there-
lations. 1For the sum total, see Table IX. 6. 2As of 1 July 2009, motor vehicle tax rev- after relate to the booking of cash flows. 3 Notably betting, lottery and beer tax.   
 
 
8 German pension insurance scheme: budgetary development and assets*
  
€ million
Revenue 1,2 Expenditure 1,2 Assets 1,5 
of which of which
Equity
Payments interests, Memo
from Pen- mort- item
central sioners’ gages Adminis-
Contri- govern- Pension health Deficit/ and other Real trative
Period Total butions 3 ment Total payments insurance 4 surplus Total Deposits 6 Securities loans 7 estate assets
2006 241,231 168,083 71,773 233,668 200,459 13,053 + 7,563 10,047 9,777 115 46 109 4,912
2007 236,642 162,225 72,928 235,459 201,642 13,665 + 1,183 12,196 11,270 765 46 115 4,8192008 242,770 167,611 73,381 238,995 204,071 14,051 + 3,775 16,531 16,313 36 56 126 4,6452009 244,689 169,183 74,313 244,478 208,475 14,431 + 211 16,821 16,614 23 64 120 4,525
2010 250,133 172,767 76,173 248,076 211,852 14,343 + 2,057 19,375 18,077 1,120 73 105 4,464
2011 254,968 177,424 76,200 250,241 212,602 15,015 + 4,727 24,965 22,241 2,519 88 117 4,3792012 
p 259,083 181,255 76,656 254,305 216,750 15,275 + 4,778 30,935 28,483 2,256 95 101 4,336
2010          Q1 59,761 40,601 18,917 61,861 53,059 3,582 − 2,100 14,922 14,717 20 64 120 4,490         Q2 62,249 43,054 18,923 61,999 53,006 3,585 + 250 15,254 15,053 20 69 112 4,478         Q3 61,237 42,048 18,912 62,091 53,102 3,589 − 854 14,853 14,656 20 68 109 4,474         Q4 66,317 47,060 18,933 61,887 52,966 3,579 + 4,430 19,274 17,978 1,120 68 108 4,476
2011          Q1 60,804 41,608 18,902 62,188 53,176 3,742 − 1,384 18,063 17,069 819 74 101 4,482
         Q2 63,452 44,307 18,855 62,058 52,920 3,731 + 1,394 19,704 18,507 1,019 78 100 4,475         Q3 62,354 43,109 18,902 62,844 53,341 3,761 − 490 19,959 19,266 519 79 94 4,445         Q4 67,748 48,391 19,030 62,823 53,371 3,774 + 4,925 25,339 22,226 2,919 79 114 4,410
2012          Q1 62,038 42,411 19,318 62,883 53,747 3,779 − 845 24,261 21,839 2,219 88 116 4,366
         Q2 64,721 45,318 19,086 62,885 53,532 3,772 + 1,836 26,026 23,950 1,869 92 115 4,356         Q3 63,669 44,188 19,193 64,275 54,788 3,866 − 606 25,968 23,265 2,509 94 100 4,328         Q4 68,656 49,337 19,059 64,262 54,683 3,858 + 4,394 30,935 28,483 2,256 95 101 4,336
2013          Q1 62,211 42,779 19,173 64,193 54,940 3,871 − 1,982 28,616 26,044 2,356 106 110 4,292
Sources: Federal Ministry of Labour and Social Affairs and German pension insurance cluding investment spending and proceeds. 3Including contributions for recipients
scheme. *Excluding the German pension insurance scheme for the mining, railway of government cash benefits. 4Including long-term care insurance for pensioners
and maritime industries. 1The final annual figures do not tally with the quarterly fig- until 2004 Q1. 5Largely corresponds to the sustainability reserves. End of year or
ures, as the latter are all provisional. 2Including financial compensation payments. Ex- quarter. 6 Including cash. 7 Excluding loans to other social security funds. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
58  Monthly Report
May 2013
IX Public finances in Germany
 
9 Federal Employment Agency: budgetary development*
 
 
€ million
Revenue Expenditure
Deficit
of which of which offsetting
grant or
Adminis- loan from
Insolvency Central Unemploy- Short-time Re- Insolvency trative central
Contri- compen- government ment working Job integration benefit expend- Deficit/ govern-
Period Total  1 butions sation levy subscriptions Total benefit  2 benefits  3 promotion  4 payment  5 payment iture  6 surplus ment
2006 55,384 51,176 920 . 44,169 22,899 350 9,258 3,282 836 3,740 + 11,215 0
2007 42,838 32,264 674 6,468 36,196 16,934 533 8,259 1,945 696 3,896 + 6,642 −
2008 38,289 26,452 673 7,583 39,407 13,864 544 8,586 5,000 654 4,495 − 1,118 −
2009 34,254 22,046 711 7,777 48,057 17,291 5,322 9,849 4,866 1,617 5,398 − 13,804 −
2010 37,070 22,614 2,929 7,927 45,213 16,602 4,125 9,297 5,256 740 5,322 − 8,143 5,207
2011 37,563 25,433 37 8,046 37,524 13,776 1,324 8,369 4,510 683 5,090 + 40 −
2012 37,429 26,570 314 7,238 34,842 13,823 828 6,699 3,822 982 5,117 + 2,587 −
2010          Q1 10,020 5,196 656 3,525 11,681 5,131 1,803 2,318 − 208 1,195 − 1,661 −
         Q2 10,649 5,601 735 3,460 10,501 4,409 1,276 2,407 − 184 1,274 + 148 −
         Q3 8,109 5,527 727 942 8,886 3,700 618 2,195 − 193 1,282 − 777 200
         Q4 8,291 6,290 811 − 14,144 3,362 428 2,376 5,256 154 1,572 − 5,853 5,007
2011          Q1 10,259 5,853 46 3,666 9,583 4,157 685 2,255 − 186 1,205 + 676 −
         Q2 8,802 6,358 − 5 1,605 8,246 3,477 353 2,134 − 175 1,213 + 556 −
         Q3 7,467 6,205 − 4 305 7,450 3,177 168 1,857 26 187 1,229 + 17 −
         Q4 11,036 7,017 − 1 2,470 12,245 2,965 119 2,122 4,484 134 1,443 − 1,210 −
2012          Q1 9,709 6,175 69 2,693 8,452 3,773 449 1,924 − 0 211 1,185 + 1,257 −
         Q2 8,331 6,620 78 872 7,816 3,457 229 1,762 0 329 1,191 + 515 −
         Q3 7,501 6,508 80 70 7,539 3,307 82 1,462 368 218 1,249 − 37 −
         Q4 11,888 7,267 86 3,603 11,035 3,286 68 1,551 3,454 223 1,493 + 853 −
2013          Q1 7,762 6,429 276 245 8,612 4,301 494 1,493 . 194 1,193 − 850 −
Source: Federal Employment Agency. *Excluding pension fund. 1Excluding central compensation top-up payments and promotion of business start-ups. 5From 2005
government deficit offsetting grant or loan. 2Unemployment benefit in case of un- to 2007: compensatory amount. 6Including collection charges to other statutory
employment. 3Including seasonal short-time working benefits and restructuring social security funds, excluding administrative expenditure within the framework of
short-time working benefits, restructuring measures and refunds of social security con- the basic allowance for job seekers. 
tributions. 4Vocational training, measures to encourage job take-up, rehabilitation,
 
 
10 Statutory health insurance scheme: budgetary development
 
 
€ million
Revenue  1 Expenditure  1 
of which of which
Central Thera- Adminis-
govern- peutical trative
Contri- ment Hospital Pharma- Medical Dental treatment Sickness expend- Deficit/
Period Total butions  2 funds  3 Total treatment ceuticals treatment treatment  4 and aids benefits iture  5 surplus
2006 149,929 142,183 4,200 148,297 50,327 25,835 23,896 10,364 8,303 5,708 8,319 + 1,632
2007 156,058 149,964 2,500 154,314 50,850 27,791 24,788 10,687 8,692 6,017 8,472 + 1,744
2008 162,516 155,883 2,500 161,334 52,623 29,145 25,887 10,926 9,095 6,583 8,680 + 1,182
2009 169,758 158,594 7,200 170,823 55,977 30,696 27,635 11,219 9,578 7,258 8,947 − 1,065
2010 6 179,524 160,792 15,700 175,803 56,697 30,147 28,432 11,419 10,609 7,797 9,553 + 3,721
2011 189,034 170,860 15,300 179,597 58,501 28,939 29,056 11,651 11,193 8,529 9,486 + 9,437
2012 p 193,190 176,363 14,000 184,568 60,290 29,370 29,824 11,818 11,475 9,169 9,659 + 8,622
2010          Q1  6 43,093 38,542 3,919 43,274 14,419 7,549 7,255 2,871 2,368 1,996 2,130 − 182
         Q2 44,440 39,826 3,931 43,999 14,037 7,870 7,128 2,882 2,669 1,955 2,261 + 441
         Q3 44,457 39,808 3,925 43,662 14,122 7,592 7,007 2,786 2,676 1,903 2,255 + 795
         Q4 47,580 42,600 3,925 44,842 14,144 7,307 7,107 2,952 2,853 1,943 2,876 + 2,738
2011          Q1 45,339 40,871 3,825 44,392 15,075 7,158 7,361 2,893 2,528 2,210 2,173 + 947
         Q2 46,887 42,370 3,825 44,955 14,601 7,239 7,372 3,001 2,834 2,106 2,263 + 1,931
         Q3 46,865 42,298 3,825 44,432 14,594 7,236 7,160 2,768 2,762 2,069 2,292 + 2,433
         Q4 49,866 45,291 3,825 45,878 14,418 7,382 7,161 2,997 3,117 2,125 2,682 + 3,988
2012          Q1 46,433 42,249 3,500 45,971 15,579 7,424 7,502 2,971 2,664 2,336 2,195 + 462
         Q2 47,942 43,739 3,500 46,178 15,115 7,419 7,515 3,015 2,874 2,281 2,244 + 1,764
         Q3 47,653 43,648 3,499 45,842 15,049 7,221 7,342 2,843 2,872 2,220 2,283 + 1,811
         Q4 51,162 46,727 3,501 46,576 14,548 7,305 7,465 2,989 3,065 2,333 2,936 + 4,586
Source: Federal Ministry of Health. 1The final annual figures do not tally with the penses for levying contributions incurred by other social insurance funds. Including ad-
sum of the quarterly figures, as the latter are all provisional. Excluding revenue and ministrative expenditure on disease management programmes. 6Data on individual
expenditure as part of the risk structure compensation scheme. 2Including contri- expenditure categories for 2010 only partly comparable with prior-year figures owing
butions from subsidised low-paid part-time employment. 3Federal grant and liquid- to a change in the statistical definition. 
ity assistance. 4Including dentures. 5Net, ie after deducting reimbursements for ex-

Deutsche Bundesbank
59  Monthly Report
May 2013
IX Public finances in Germany
 
11 Statutory long-term care insurance scheme: budgetary development
 
 
€ million
Revenue 1 Expenditure 1 
of which
Contributions to
of which Non-cash In-patient Nursing pension insur- Administrative Deficit/
Period Total Contributions 2 Total care benefits care benefit ance scheme 3 expenditure surplus
2006 17,749 17,611 18,064 2,437 8,671 4,017 862 886 − 315
2007 18,036 17,858 18,385 2,475 8,831 4,050 861 896 − 3502008 19,785 19,608 19,163 2,605 9,054 4,225 868 941 + 6222009 21,300 21,137 20,314 2,742 9,274 4,443 878 984 + 986
2010 21,864 21,659 21,539 2,933 9,567 4,673 869 1,028 + 325
2011 22,294 22,145 21,962 3,002 9,700 4,735 881 1,034 + 3312012 
p 23,044 22,918 22,941 3,106 9,965 5,081 885 1,085 + 103
2010          Q1 5,241 5,175 5,298 722 2,362 1,151 217 264 − 56         Q2 5,398 5,369 5,302 707 2,378 1,167 219 258 + 95         Q3 5,385 5,358 5,416 735 2,398 1,160 220 266 − 31         Q4 5,760 5,739 5,432 743 2,417 1,195 225 229 + 328
2011          Q1 5,306 5,269 5,457 750 2,408 1,165 216 277 − 150
         Q2 5,519 5,496 5,396 713 2,417 1,173 210 263 + 123         Q3 5,513 5,486 5,551 774 2,442 1,191 221 255 − 38         Q4 5,904 5,877 5,526 742 2,442 1,216 223 240 + 378
2012          Q1 5,493 5,450 5,700 774 2,469 1,248 223 283 − 207
         Q2 5,713 5,686 5,656 758 2,478 1,254 217 276 + 57         Q3 5,726 5,694 5,774 783 2,507 1,269 219 262 − 49         Q4 6,113 6,087 5,811 791 2,511 1,310 225 265 + 302
Source: Federal Ministry of Health. 1The final annual figures do not tally with the special contributions for childless persons (0.25% of income subject to insurance
sum of the quarterly figures, as the latter are all provisional. 2Since 2005 including contributions). 3 For non-professional carers. 
 
 
12 Central government: borrowing in the 13 Central, state and local government: debt by creditor*
market
 
€ million € million
T
otal new borrowing 1 of which of which Banking system Domestic non-banks
Change Change
in money in money Period Socialmarket market (End of year Bundes- Credit security Foreign
Period Gross 
2 Net loans deposits or quarter) Total bank institutions funds Other  1 creditors pe 
2006 + 221,873 + 32,656 + 3,258 + 6,308 2006 1,533,697 4,440 496,800 72 329,585 702,800
2007 + 214,995 + 6,996 + 1,086 − 4,900 2007 1,540,381 4,440 456,900 68 317,473 761,5002008 + 233,356 + 26,208 + 6,888 + 9,036 2008 1,564,590 4,440 435,600 62 314,588 809,9002009 + 312,729 + 66,821 − 8,184 + 106 2009 1,657,842 4,440 438,700 59 321,943 892,700
2010 + 302,694 + 42,397 − 5,041 + 1,607 2010 1,732,531 4,440 400,100 21 389,470 938,500
2011 + 264,572 + 5,890 − 4,876 − 9,036 2011 1,752,546 4,440 356,600 102 413,404 978,0002012 + 263,334 + 31,728 + 6,183 + 13,375 2012 
pe 1,798,639 4,440 432,100 92 293,708 1,068,300
2010          Q1 + 74,369 + 12,637 − 5,322 − 1,520 2010          Q1 1,678,191 4,440 450,100 60 327,691 895,900
         Q2 + 83,082 + 3,666 − 4,143 + 1,950          Q2 1,687,957 4,440 469,600 60 310,857 903,000
         Q3 + 79,589 + 14,791 + 250 − 4,625          Q3 1,712,685 4,440 470,200 65 306,680 931,300
         Q4 + 65,655 + 11,304 + 4,174 + 5,803          Q4 1,732,531 4,440 400,100 21 389,470 938,500
2011          Q1 + 76,394 + 15,958 − 607 − 5,206 2011          Q1 1,750,918 4,440 413,300 87 374,591 958,500
         Q2 + 77,158 + 10,392 − 49 + 26,625          Q2 1,763,754 4,440 405,400 82 360,332 993,500
         Q3 + 59,256 − 8,152 − 4,177 − 22,608          Q3 1,759,983 4,440 388,900 82 379,261 987,300
         Q4 + 51,764 − 12,308 − 42 − 7,847          Q4 1,752,546 4,440 356,600 102 413,404 978,000
2012          Q1 + 72,603 + 12,524 + 8,251 − 2,380 2012          Q1 p 1,767,428 4,440 399,800 91 355,198 1,007,900
         Q2 + 68,851 + 13,623 + 2,836 + 19,969          Q2 p 1,782,227 4,440 412,300 92 325,595 1,039,800
         Q3 + 60,504 − 8,627 − 8,281 − 14,911          Q3 p 1,775,104 4,440 432,500 92 285,672 1,052,400
         Q4 + 61,376 + 14,208 + 3,376 + 10,697          Q4 pe 1,798,639 4,440 432,100 92 293,708 1,068,300
Source:  Federal  Republic  of  Germany − Finance Agency. Source:  Bundesbank  calculations  based  on  data   from  the  Federal  Statistical 
1 Including  the  Financial  Market  Stabilisation Fund,  the In- Office. * Excluding direct intergovernmental borrowing. 1 Calculated as a residual. 
vestment and  Repayment Fund  and  the  Restructuring Fund for Credit Institutions. 2 After deducting repurchases. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
60  Monthly Report
May 2013
IX Public finances in Germany
 
14 Central, state and local government: debt by category*
 
 
€ million
Loans from non-banks Old debt
Direct
Treasury Five-year lending
Period discount Federal Federal Federal by credit Social Equal-
(End of year paper Treasury notes savings bonds institu- security isation
or quarter) Total (Bubills)  1 notes  2,3 (Bobls)  2 notes (Bunds)  2 Day-bond tions  4 funds Other  4 claims  5 Other  5,6 
Central, state and local government
2006 1,533,697 37,834 320,288 179,940 10,199 552,028 . 356,514 72 72,297 4,443 82
2007 1,540,381 39,510 329,108 177,394 10,287 574,512 . 329,588 68 75,396 4,443 76
2008 1,564,590 44,620 337,511 172,037 9,649 584,144 3,174 325,648 62 83,229 4,443 73
2009 1,657,842 105,970 361,727 174,219 9,471 594,999 2,495 300,927 59 103,462 4,442 71
2010 1,732,531 87,042 391,851 195,534 8,704 628,757 1,975 302,596 21 111,609 4,440 2
2011          Q3 1,759,983 74,764 410,222 219,785 8,349 634,402 1,970 293,175 82 112,792 4,440 2
         Q4 1,752,546 60,272 414,250 214,211 8,208 644,701 2,154 292,091 102 112,116 4,440 2
2012          Q1  p 1,767,428 54,692 410,585 226,486 7,869 646,884 2,134 304,136 91 110,109 4,440 2
         Q2  p 1,782,227 55,392 410,186 224,607 7,518 663,502 2,137 297,572 92 116,781 4,440 2
         Q3  p 1,775,104 53,325 409,957 237,746 7,110 654,320 1,893 289,197 92 117,023 4,440 2
         Q4  pe 1,798,639 57,172 417,469 234,355 6,818 666,963 1,725 294,155 92 115,449 4,440 2
Central government7,8,9,10,11
2006 918,911 37,798 103,624 179,889 10,199 541,404 . 30,030 − 11,444 4,443 82
2007 939,988 37,385 102,083 177,394 10,287 574,156 . 22,829 − 11,336 4,443 75
2008 966,197 40,795 105,684 172,037 9,649 583,930 3,174 35,291 − 11,122 4,443 72
2009 1,033,017 104,409 113,637 174,219 9,471 594,780 2,495 18,347 − 11,148 4,442 70
2010 1,075,415 85,867 126,220 195,534 8,704 628,582 1,975 13,349 − 10,743 4,440 2
2011          Q3 1,093,612 73,277 132,428 219,785 8,349 634,226 1,970 9,091 − 10,045 4,440 2
         Q4 1,081,304 58,297 130,648 214,211 8,208 644,513 2,154 9,382 − 9,450 4,440 2
2012          Q1 1,093,828 52,161 126,956 226,486 7,869 646,696 2,134 17,894 − 9,190 4,440 2
         Q2 1,107,451 52,578 122,937 224,607 7,518 663,314 2,137 20,827 − 9,092 4,440 2
         Q3 1,098,824 51,638 120,240 237,746 7,110 654,132 1,893 12,646 − 8,979 4,440 2
         Q4 1,113,032 56,222 117,719 234,355 6,818 666,775 1,725 16,193 − 8,784 4,440 2
State government
2006 481,850 36 216,665 .... 209,270 2 55,876 . 1
2007 484,373 2,125 227,025 .... 194,956 2 60,264 . 1
2008 483,875 3,825 231,827 .... 179,978 3 68,241 . 1
2009 505,359 1,561 248,091 .... 167,310 8 88,389 . 1
2010 528,619 1,176 265,631 .... 167,353 1 94,459 . 1
2011          Q3 533,149 1,487 277,794 .... 157,467 62 96,338 . 1
         Q4 537,551 1,975 283,601 .... 154,526 62 97,387 . 1
2012          Q1  p 535,898 2,531 283,629 .... 154,047 51 95,639 . 1
         Q2  p 537,161 2,814 287,249 .... 144,637 52 102,409 . 1
         Q3  p 539,038 1,687 289,717 .... 144,817 52 102,764 . 1
         Q4  p 547,464 950 299,750 .... 145,327 52 101,386 . 1
Local government12
2006 118,380 . − . . 256 . 113,265 70 4,789 . .
2007 115,920 . − . . 256 . 111,803 66 3,796 . .
2008 114,518 . − . . 214 . 110,379 60 3,866 . .
2009 119,466 . − . . 219 . 115,270 52 3,925 . .
2010 128,497 . − . . 175 . 121,895 20 6,407 . .
2011          Q3 133,222 . − . . 175 . 126,616 20 6,410 . .
         Q4 133,691 . − . . 188 . 128,183 40 5,280 . .
2012          Q1  p 137,703 . − . . 188 . 132,195 40 5,280 . .
         Q2  p 137,615 . − . . 188 . 132,108 40 5,280 . .
         Q3  p 137,241 . − . . 188 . 131,734 40 5,280 . .
         Q4  pe 138,143 . − . . 188 . 132,635 40 5,280 . .
Special funds7,8,13
2006 14,556 . − 51 . 10,368 . 3,950 − 188 . .
2007 100 . − − . 100 . − − − . .
2008 − . − − . − . − − − . .
2009 − . − − . − . − − − . .
2010 − . − − . − . − − − . .
2011          Q3 − . − − . − . − − − . .
         Q4 − . − − . − . − − − . .
2012          Q1 − . − − . − . − − − . .
         Q2 − . − − . − . − − − . .
         Q3 − . − − . − . − − − . .
         Q4 − . − − . − . − − − . .
Source: Bundesbank calculations based on data from the Federal Statistical portfolios. 7In contrast to the capital market statistics, the debt incurred through the
Office. *Excluding direct intergovernmental borrowing. 1Including Treasury finan- joint issuance of Federal securities is recorded here under central government and its
cing paper. 2Excluding issuers’ holdings of their own securities. 3Treasury notes special funds in accordance with the agreed allocation ratios. 8On 1 July 2007 cen-
issued by state government include long-term notes. 4Mainly loans against bor- tral government assumed joint responsibility for the debts of the ERP Special Fund.
rowers’ notes and cash advances. Including loans raised abroad. Other loans from From that date on, the aforementioned special fund is recorded under central govern-
non-banks, including loans from public supplementary pension funds and liabilities ment. 9From December 2008, including debt of the Financial Market Stabilisation
arising from the investment assistance levy. 5Excluding offsets against outstanding Fund. 10From March 2009, including debt of the Investment and Repayment
claims. 6Old debt mainly denominated in foreign currency, in accordance with the Fund. 11From January 2011, including debt of the Restructuring Fund for Credit Insti-
London Debts Agreement, old liabilities arising from housing construction and liabil- tutions. 12Including debt of municipal special purpose associations. Data other than
ities arising from housing construction by the former GDR’s armed forces and from year-end figures have been estimated. 13ERP Special Fund (up to the end of June
housing construction in connection with the return of the troops of the former USSR 2007), German Unity Fund (up to the end of 2004) and Indemnification Fund. 
stationed in eastern Germany to their home country; excluding debt securities in own

Deutsche Bundesbank
61  Monthly Report
May 2013
X Economic conditions in Germany
  
1 Origin and use of domestic product, distribution of national income
  
  
  
  2011   2012
  2010   2011   2012   2010   2011   2012   Q2   Q3   Q4   Q1   Q2   Q3   Q4
Item Index 2005=100 Annual percentage change
At  constant  prices,  chained
  I Origin of domestic product
Production sector
(excluding construction) 104.9 111.4 110.6 15.8 6.2 − 0.7 7.2 6.1 0.7 1.1 − 0.8 − 1.6 − 1.5Construction 99.0 103.6 101.1 6.9 4.6 − 2.5 1.4 1.4 6.7 0.8 − 3.0 − 2.4 − 5.1Wholesale/retail trade, transportand storage, hotel and restaurantservices 110.6 114.0 114.9 1.7 3.1 0.8 3.0 2.4 1.8 2.7 1.0 − 0.4 − 0.0Information and communication 135.7 138.2 143.1 − 0.2 1.9 3.5 1.8 2.1 1.9 3.4 2.7 3.8 4.2Financial and insuranceactivities 115.5 117.1 119.1 1.4 1.4 1.7 − 0.0 3.4 1.4 2.0 2.1 1.9 0.8Real estate activities 105.3 105.9 107.8 − 1.7 0.6 1.8 0.8 0.5 1.1 1.7 1.7 1.9 2.0Business services 
1 100.8 105.0 108.1 2.6 4.2 2.9 4.6 3.7 3.4 4.1 3.1 2.8 1.7
Public services, education and
health 108.5 109.5 110.4 1.7 0.9 0.8 1.0 0.8 1.1 0.9 0.9 1.0 0.5Other services 104.0 103.5 104.3 − 0.5 − 0.5 0.8 − 0.9 − 0.7 0.3 1.1 0.9 1.2 0.0
Gross value added 107.7 110.9 111.7 4.6 3.0 0.7 3.1 2.7 1.4 1.8 0.7 0.4 0.1Gross domestic product 
2 107.0 110.2 110.9 4.2 3.0 0.7 3.1 2.6 1.4 1.7 0.5 0.4 0.1
 II Use of domestic product
Private consumption 3 103.2 104.9 105.6 0.9 1.7 0.6 1.8 2.1 0.9 1.7 0.6 − 0.3 0.6
Government consumption 110.6 111.7 113.3 1.7 1.0 1.4 1.8 0.9 1.3 1.9 0.9 1.4 1.4
Machinery and equipment 108.5 116.1 110.5 10.3 7.0 − 4.8 8.0 5.6 2.3 2.4 − 3.8 − 7.2 − 9.3Premises 104.2 110.3 108.6 3.2 5.8 − 1.5 3.0 2.5 6.5 0.1 − 2.2 − 1.0 − 2.6Other investment 
4 124.6 129.5 133.5 3.3 3.9 3.2 3.5 3.6 4.7 2.6 3.6 3.5 2.9
Changes in inventories 5, 6 . . . 0.6 0.2 − 0.5 0.3 0.4 0.1 − 0.2 − 0.9 − 0.6 − 0.3
Domestic use 106.0 108.8 108.4 2.6 2.6 − 0.4 2.7 2.6 1.7 1.4 − 0.9 − 1.2 − 0.7Net exports 
6 . . . 1.7 0.6 1.0 0.5 0.1 − 0.3 0.4 1.4 1.6 0.8
Exports 124.5 134.2 139.1 13.7 7.8 3.7 6.7 7.3 3.9 3.5 5.0 4.2 2.0Imports 124.6 133.8 136.3 11.1 7.4 1.8 6.5 7.9 5.1 3.2 2.5 1.2 0.5
Gross domestic product 
2 107.0 110.2 110.9 4.2 3.0 0.7 3.1 2.6 1.4 1.7 0.5 0.4 0.1
At  current  prices  (€ billion)
III Use of domestic product
Private consumption 3 1,433.2 1,487.7 1,521.6 3.0 3.8 2.3 4.0 4.0 2.9 3.6 2.0 1.4 2.2
Government consumption 487.6 499.8 515.4 2.6 2.5 3.1 3.5 2.3 2.7 3.3 2.5 3.2 3.5Machinery and equipment 170.8 183.2 175.0 10.3 7.3 − 4.5 8.1 5.9 2.6 2.8 − 3.8 − 6.9 − 9.0Premises 236.8 258.1 260.5 4.4 9.0 0.9 5.9 5.6 10.1 2.9 0.2 1.3 − 0.3Other investment 
4 27.6 28.5 29.2 2.8 3.3 2.4 3.3 3.1 3.6 2.4 2.5 2.5 2.3
Changes in inventories 5 1.3 3.7 − 9.4 . . . . . . . . . .
Domestic use 2,357.3 2,460.9 2,492.3 4.4 4.4 1.3 4.7 4.3 3.5 3.1 0.5 0.5 1.0Net exports 138.9 131.7 151.6 . . . . . . . . . .
Exports 1,173.3 1,300.8 1,362.6 16.6 10.9 4.7 10.1 9.5 5.7 4.8 6.2 5.3 2.8Imports 1,034.4 1,169.2 1,211.0 16.3 13.0 3.6 12.4 11.9 8.9 5.6 4.2 2.9 1.8
Gross domestic product 
2 2,496.2 2,592.6 2,643.9 5.1 3.9 2.0 4.1 3.5 2.2 2.9 1.7 1.8 1.6
IV Prices (2005=100)
Private consumption 106.3 108.5 110.3 2.0 2.1 1.6 2.2 1.9 2.0 1.8 1.4 1.7 1.6Gross domestic product 104.9 105.8 107.1 0.9 0.8 1.3 0.9 0.9 0.8 1.2 1.2 1.4 1.5Terms of trade 99.2 97.0 96.3 − 2.1 − 2.2 − 0.7 − 2.3 − 1.6 − 1.9 − 1.0 − 0.5 − 0.7 − 0.5
V  Distribution of national income
Compensation of employees 1,271.0 1,328.0 1,377.3 3.0 4.5 3.7 5.1 4.3 3.9 3.7 3.8 3.8 3.5Entrepreneurial and propertyincome 648.3 656.7 644.0 12.0 1.3 − 1.9 − 0.7 2.3 − 3.4 2.3 0.4 − 3.2 − 7.4
National income 1,919.3 1,984.6 2,021.3 5.9 3.4 1.8 3.2 3.6 1.7 3.2 2.7 1.3 0.3
Memo item: Gross national
income 2,546.7 2,640.9 2,695.3 4.7 3.7 2.1 3.5 3.7 2.1 3.1 2.6 1.6 1.0
Source: Federal Statistical Office; figures computed in February 2013. 1Professional, stitutions serving households. 4Intangible fixed asset formation (inter alia, computer
scientific, technical, administration and support service activities. 2Gross value added software and entertainment, literary or artistic originals) and cultivated assets. 5In-
plus taxes on products (netted with subsidies on products). 3Including non-profit in- cluding net increase in valuables. 6 Contribution of growth to GDP. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
62  Monthly Report
May 2013
 X Economic conditions in Germany
 
2 Output in the production sector*
 
 
Adjusted for working-day variations  o 
Industry
by main industrial grouping of which: by economic sector
Manu-
Manu- facture of
facture of computers,
basic metals Motor electronic
and vehicles, and optical
Production Inter- Non- fabricated products Machinery trailers
sector, Construc- mediate Capital Durable durable metal and and semi- and electrical
total 1 tion 2 Energy  3 Total goods goods goods goods products equipment equipment trailers
2010=100  
  
% of total  4 100.00 11.24 10.14 78.62 31.02 33.31 2.49 11.80 10.41 10.37 12.17 11.62
Period
2008 106.8 . 102.1 107.7 106.0 111.8 108.0 101.3 111.8 109.0 121.7 101.3
2009 90.2 . 96.9 89.0 86.7 88.0 91.0 97.7 85.5 85.3 90.1 79.5
2010 99.5 99.2 100.1 99.4 99.5 99.3 99.4 99.5 99.4 99.3 99.3 99.2
2011 106.2 107.0 95.4 107.5 106.1 111.4 104.0 100.7 107.9 111.0 112.7 112.1
2012 105.8 105.9 97.2 106.8 103.8 112.8 100.3 99.2 106.1 108.6 114.7 112.2
 
2011          Oct 113.4 122.6 97.5 114.1 111.6 119.0 117.2 106.3 115.7 118.0 115.1 125.1
         Nov 114.8 124.9 99.5 115.3 109.8 123.6 115.5 106.2 115.6 120.3 122.6 123.3
         Dec 101.6 115.4 103.0 99.4 87.7 112.4 91.5 95.2 90.9 102.5 127.3 89.6
2012          Jan 95.6 68.9 106.0 98.1 99.6 98.4 97.5 93.3 100.1 101.1 96.3 104.3
         Feb 99.0 69.0 105.4 102.5 100.5 108.3 99.9 92.0 103.0 104.8 106.0 117.2
         Mar 5 113.9 106.9 104.9 5 116.1 111.5 5 125.2 110.1 104.0 113.1 116.5 5 130.7 127.9
         Apr 104.1 104.8 95.1 105.2 105.0 109.7 98.0 94.3 105.5 105.1 110.4 113.2
         May 105.4 108.6 91.7 106.7 106.0 111.4 98.7 97.0 108.2 106.9 112.2 112.3
         June 108.4 114.3 88.9 110.0 107.9 116.9 100.5 98.1 111.0 113.3 120.6 114.9
         July 108.7 118.6 90.8 109.5 108.4 115.2 97.6 99.1 109.8 113.5 117.6 114.9
         Aug 100.7 110.8 91.3 100.5 101.4 101.6 87.9 98.0 100.5 105.9 103.5 95.7
         Sep 111.1 119.0 92.5 112.4 107.2 120.1 112.8 104.0 110.9 114.0 119.8 123.4
         Oct 110.4 119.9 99.3 110.5 107.9 114.2 107.3 107.4 110.8 111.6 112.3 115.3
         Nov 111.4 119.4 100.2 111.7 105.5 120.2 106.8 104.8 109.6 113.0 117.9 120.3
         Dec 100.4 110.4 100.6 98.9 85.2 112.8 86.9 98.1 90.2 97.9 129.3 86.9
2013          Jan x 93.1 66.3 100.6 96.0 96.9 95.0 93.8 96.9 98.5 97.6 91.7 96.2
         Feb x 97.3 74.4 95.4 100.8 97.6 107.0 98.2 92.4 101.6 99.6 104.0 113.1
         Mar  x,p 6 111.1 6 95.4 e 102.9 114.4 108.9 124.5 109.9 101.4 113.1 114.1 121.2 132.3
 
Annual percentage change  
 
2008 + 0.0 . − 2.8 + 0.2 − 0.4 + 1.6 − 4.1 − 1.4 + 0.4 + 3.6 + 4.3 − 4.8
2009 − 15.5 . − 5.1 − 17.4 − 18.2 − 21.3 − 15.7 − 3.6 − 23.5 − 21.7 − 26.0 − 21.5
2010 + 10.3 . + 3.3 + 11.7 + 14.8 + 12.8 + 9.2 + 1.8 + 16.3 + 16.4 + 10.2 + 24.8
2011 + 6.7 + 7.9 − 4.7 + 8.1 + 6.6 + 12.2 + 4.6 + 1.2 + 8.6 + 11.8 + 13.5 + 13.0
2012 − 0.4 − 1.0 + 1.9 − 0.7 − 2.2 + 1.3 − 3.6 − 1.5 − 1.7 − 2.2 + 1.8 + 0.1
 
2011          Oct + 3.4 + 5.8 − 5.4 + 4.0 + 2.4 + 7.3 + 2.7 − 0.7 + 4.8 + 5.2 + 7.5 + 6.7
         Nov + 3.5 + 8.0 − 5.9 + 4.0 + 2.1 + 7.6 + 2.0 − 1.4 + 5.4 + 6.0 + 7.4 + 6.6
         Dec + 1.6 + 17.4 − 9.3 + 0.9 + 1.0 + 0.8 + 0.1 + 1.0 + 2.4 + 3.3 + 0.2 − 3.7
2012          Jan + 1.6 + 5.0 − 3.9 + 2.1 − 0.1 + 6.0 + 0.1 − 2.6 + 1.4 + 1.2 + 7.0 + 7.5
         Feb + 0.2 − 10.9 + 2.7 + 1.1 − 0.8 + 4.8 − 2.8 − 4.0 + 1.0 + 1.0 + 6.6 + 3.8
         Mar 5 + 1.9 + 5.7 − 0.5 5 + 1.7 − 1.2 5 + 5.3 − 3.3 − 0.5 − 0.4 + 1.3 5 + 8.4 + 3.0
         Apr − 0.4 − 0.9 + 3.9 − 0.8 − 1.9 + 2.0 − 5.3 − 5.7 − 1.6 − 0.6 + 3.1 + 0.4
         May + 0.4 − 1.0 + 5.4 + 0.0 − 1.1 + 1.9 − 1.7 − 2.3 − 0.7 + 0.1 + 4.0 − 2.5
         June + 0.9 + 1.1 + 6.1 + 0.3 − 1.1 + 2.3 + 2.4 − 2.4 − 0.6 + 0.7 + 1.9 + 1.9
         July − 1.0 + 0.1 + 1.5 − 1.5 − 2.8 + 0.6 − 6.9 − 3.5 − 3.1 − 2.7 + 0.9 − 0.4
         Aug − 0.7 − 0.8 + 4.5 − 1.2 − 3.3 + 0.3 + 0.6 + 0.4 − 3.3 − 4.6 − 3.0 + 1.9
         Sep − 0.4 + 0.6 + 5.4 − 1.0 − 3.1 + 0.6 − 2.3 + 0.1 − 1.7 − 4.5 − 0.3 + 0.4
         Oct − 2.6 − 2.2 + 1.8 − 3.2 − 3.3 − 4.0 − 8.4 + 1.0 − 4.2 − 5.4 − 2.4 − 7.8
         Nov − 3.0 − 4.4 + 0.7 − 3.1 − 3.9 − 2.8 − 7.5 − 1.3 − 5.2 − 6.1 − 3.8 − 2.4
         Dec − 1.2 − 4.3 − 2.3 − 0.5 − 2.9 + 0.4 − 5.0 + 3.0 − 0.8 − 4.5 + 1.6 − 3.0
2013          Jan x − 2.6 − 3.8 − 5.1 − 2.1 − 2.7 − 3.5 − 3.8 + 3.9 − 1.6 − 3.5 − 4.8 − 7.8
         Feb x − 1.7 + 7.8 − 9.5 − 1.7 − 2.9 − 1.2 − 1.7 + 0.4 − 1.4 − 5.0 − 1.9 − 3.5
         Mar  x,p 6 − 2.5 6 − 10.8 e − 1.9 − 1.5 − 2.3 − 0.6 − 0.2 − 2.5 + 0.0 − 2.1 − 7.3 + 3.4
Source of the unadjusted figures: Federal Statistical Office. *For explanatory notes, sector in the base year 2010. 5Positively influenced by late reports. 6Preliminary;
see Statistical Supplement Seasonally adjusted business statistics, Tables II.10 to preadjusted on the basis of estimations to the results of the total annual survey in the
II.12. oUsing the Census X-12-ARIMA method, version 0.2.8. 1Until December construction sector by the Federal Statistical Office (on average +3%). xProvision-
2009 excluding, from January 2010 including specialised construction activi- al; adjusted in advance by the Federal Statistical Office, by way of estimates, to the re-
ties.2Data available from 2010. 3From January 2010 including electric power gene- sults of the Quarterly Production Survey and the Quarterly Survey in the specialised
ration from renewable resources (wind- and solar power stations). 4Weights from construction industry. e Unadjusted figure estimated by the Federal Statistical Office. 
January 2010 onwards: Share of gross value added at factor cost of the production

Deutsche Bundesbank
63  Monthly Report
May 2013
X Economic conditions in Germany
 
3 Orders received by industry *
 
 
Adjusted for working-day variations  o 
Industry Intermediate goods Capital goods Consumer goods Durable goods Non-durable goods
Annual Annual Annual Annual Annual Annual
percent- percent- percent- percent- percent- percent-age age age age age age
Period 2010=100 change 2010=100 change 2010=100 change 2010=100 change 2010=100 change 2010=100 change
Total
2008 105.5 − 6.1 105.6 − 3.2 105.1 − 8.4 107.8 − 3.4 101.5 − 6.2 110.1 − 2.5
2009 79.8 − 24.4 77.8 − 26.3 79.4 − 24.5 94.6 − 12.2 86.8 − 14.5 97.2 − 11.7
2010 99.5 + 24.7 99.5 + 27.9 99.5 + 25.3 99.6 + 5.3 99.5 + 14.6 99.6 + 2.5
2011 109.9 + 10.5 109.1 + 9.6 111.2 + 11.8 103.9 + 4.3 105.3 + 5.8 103.4 + 3.8
2012 106.9 − 2.7 104.2 − 4.5 109.2 − 1.8 103.8 − 0.1 99.4 − 5.6 105.3 + 1.8
2012          Mar 119.5 + 0.6 114.0 − 6.6 124.3 + 5.7 113.1 + 2.7 112.1 − 0.9 113.5 + 4.1
         Apr 106.5 − 2.7 106.5 − 4.2 108.1 − 1.3 95.5 − 4.0 98.9 − 6.3 94.3 − 3.3
         May 107.4 − 4.5 107.1 − 4.5 108.7 − 5.2 100.5 + 1.3 99.0 − 2.8 101.1 + 2.8
         June 110.3 − 6.0 106.0 − 4.8 114.4 − 7.9 102.2 + 2.5 100.7 − 3.6 102.7 + 4.7
         July 107.2 − 3.6 105.5 − 7.0 108.2 − 1.1 109.7 − 2.5 100.1 − 9.0 113.0 − 0.3
         Aug 97.7 − 3.4 97.7 − 5.6 96.8 − 2.4 105.2 + 2.7 92.6 − 1.8 109.6 + 4.2
         Sep 104.7 − 2.4 100.5 − 5.4 107.3 − 0.6 106.9 − 0.8 111.6 − 6.9 105.4 + 1.7
         Oct 108.1 − 0.3 103.9 − 2.3 111.0 + 0.6 107.9 + 1.6 102.4 − 9.5 109.8 + 5.8
         Nov 107.2 + 0.1 103.1 − 1.2 110.6 + 1.0 104.0 + 0.0 97.8 − 8.3 106.2 + 3.0
         Dec 
102.1 − 0.9 89.7 − 3.3 112.2 + 0.4 92.3 + 0.7 83.4 − 5.0 95.4 + 2.5
2013          Jan 103.3 − 1.9 103.9 − 5.6 103.2 + 0.8 100.9 − 1.3 95.9 − 3.8 102.7 − 0.4
         Feb 106.2 − 0.1 101.6 − 4.2 109.3 + 2.6 106.4 + 0.5 93.1 − 2.0 111.0 + 1.2
         Mar p 119.0 − 0.4 114.5 + 0.4 123.6 − 0.6 109.1 − 3.5 108.7 − 3.0 109.1 − 3.9
From the domestic market
2008 107.7 − 4.7 104.6 − 2.3 109.3 − 7.2 116.8 − 2.8 113.4 − 2.2 118.0 − 3.0
2009 83.8 − 22.2 77.2 − 26.2 88.0 − 19.5 98.2 − 15.9 95.1 − 16.1 99.2 − 15.9
2010 99.5 + 18.7 99.5 + 28.9 99.5 + 13.1 99.6 + 1.4 99.4 + 4.5 99.6 + 0.4
2011 109.7 + 10.3 109.7 + 10.3 110.8 + 11.4 103.5 + 3.9 110.2 + 10.9 101.1 + 1.5
2012 103.9 − 5.3 103.3 − 5.8 105.4 − 4.9 99.2 − 4.2 101.9 − 7.5 98.2 − 2.9
2012          Mar 116.4 − 1.1 112.9 − 5.5 121.3 + 3.2 108.4 + 0.6 116.4 + 3.0 105.6 − 0.4
         Apr 106.3 − 2.8 107.7 − 4.5 107.0 − 0.8 94.0 − 3.7 100.3 − 7.0 91.8 − 2.2
         May 104.8 − 13.0 106.2 − 8.2 105.1 − 18.3 95.1 − 3.8 96.4 − 9.4 94.7 − 1.6
         June 105.3 − 4.8 103.9 − 5.3 108.5 − 4.3 94.5 − 4.5 94.6 − 9.4 94.5 − 2.7
         July 105.7 − 7.5 105.0 − 10.0 107.0 − 5.1 102.6 − 6.6 98.4 − 13.7 104.1 − 4.0
         Aug 96.4 − 7.1 97.6 − 8.1 94.4 − 6.6 101.3 − 4.3 96.7 − 8.3 102.9 − 3.0
         Sep 102.3 − 5.3 100.9 − 5.0 103.7 − 4.8 102.9 − 9.7 114.7 − 14.5 98.7 − 7.6
         Oct 103.2 − 4.4 102.7 − 5.5 103.4 − 3.5 104.5 − 4.4 112.1 − 9.9 101.8 − 2.1
         Nov 104.1 − 4.6 103.9 − 3.3 105.1 − 5.7 98.7 − 6.2 103.6 − 11.7 97.0 − 3.9
         Dec 92.6 − 3.5 86.5 − 2.0 100.5 − 4.6 81.8 − 6.0 80.4 − 9.5 82.3 − 4.7
2013          Jan 101.8 − 3.7 103.9 − 4.8 100.5 − 2.8 97.1 − 2.3 97.6 − 8.1 96.9 − 0.1
         Feb 103.3 − 1.1 101.3 − 1.9 105.1 − 0.3 104.1 − 2.5 96.9 − 5.6 106.6 − 1.6
         Mar p 115.1 − 1.1 113.4 + 0.4 118.4 − 2.4 105.4 − 2.8 109.0 − 6.4 104.1 − 1.4
From abroad
2008 103.7 − 7.2 106.8 − 4.1 102.5 − 9.2 100.2 − 4.0 91.2 − 10.0 103.4 − 2.0
2009 76.7 − 26.0 78.5 − 26.5 74.1 − 27.7 91.5 − 8.7 79.5 − 12.8 95.6 − 7.5
2010 99.6 + 29.9 99.6 + 26.9 99.6 + 34.4 99.6 + 8.9 99.5 + 25.2 99.7 + 4.3
2011 110.0 + 10.4 108.4 + 8.8 111.5 + 11.9 104.1 + 4.5 101.0 + 1.5 105.2 + 5.5
2012 109.2 − 0.7 105.2 − 3.0 111.6 + 0.1 107.7 + 3.5 97.3 − 3.7 111.3 + 5.8
2012          Mar 122.0 + 1.9 115.2 − 7.9 126.2 + 7.2 117.2 + 4.6 108.3 − 4.2 120.2 + 7.7
         Apr 106.6 − 2.6 105.0 − 4.0 108.7 − 1.6 96.7 − 4.4 97.7 − 5.6 96.4 − 4.1
         May 109.6 + 3.3 108.1 + 0.2 110.9 + 4.6 105.1 + 5.6 101.2 + 3.4 106.5 + 6.4
         June 114.3 − 7.1 108.4 − 4.5 118.1 − 9.7 108.8 + 8.5 106.1 + 1.5 109.7 + 10.9
         July 108.5 − 0.1 106.1 − 3.3 108.9 + 1.5 115.8 + 1.0 101.6 − 4.7 120.6 + 2.6
         Aug 98.8 − 0.1 97.8 − 2.5 98.3 + 0.2 108.5 + 9.2 89.1 + 5.4 115.2 + 10.2
         Sep 106.6 − 0.1 100.1 − 5.7 109.6 + 2.0 110.4 + 7.7 108.9 + 1.3 111.0 + 10.1
         Oct 112.0 + 2.9 105.4 + 1.9 115.7 + 3.1 110.8 + 7.1 94.0 − 8.9 116.6 + 12.5
         Nov 109.8 + 4.1 102.2 + 1.5 114.0 + 5.3 108.6 + 5.5 92.8 − 4.6 114.0 + 8.7
         Dec 109.8 + 1.1 93.4 − 4.9 119.4 + 3.3 101.3 + 5.9 86.0 − 1.0 106.6 + 7.9
2013          Jan 104.6 − 0.4 104.0 − 6.5 104.9 + 3.0 104.2 − 0.4 94.5 + 0.4 107.6 − 0.6
         Feb 108.5 + 0.7 102.0 − 6.8 111.9 + 4.4 108.3 + 3.0 89.7 + 1.6 114.7 + 3.5
         Mar p 122.2 + 0.2 115.7 + 0.4 126.8 + 0.5 112.2 − 4.3 108.4 + 0.1 113.4 − 5.7
Source of the unadjusted figures: Federal Statistical Office. *For explanatory notes, II.16. o Using the Census X-12-ARIMA method, version 0.2.8. 
see Statistical Supplement Seasonally adjusted business statistics, Tables II.14 to

Deutsche Bundesbank
64  Monthly Report
May 2013
 X Economic conditions in Germany
 
4 Orders received by construction *   
 
 
Adjusted for working-day variations  o 
Breakdown by type of construction Breakdown by client  1 
 Building    
Housing Industrial Public sector Civil Public
Total Total construction construction construction engineering Industry sector
Annual Annual Annual Annual Annual Annual Annual Annual
percent- percent- percent- percent- percent- percent- percent- percent-
age age age age age age age age
Period change change change change change change change change 2005 = 100 2005 = 100 2005 = 100 2005 = 100 2005 = 100 2005 = 100 2005 = 100 2005 = 100
2009 107.4 − 5.3 100.6 − 12.3 94.1 − 0.3 100.6 − 21.3 115.4 − 1.1 114.4 + 2.1 104.9 − 14.9 115.5 + 3.7
2010 108.9 + 1.4 106.6 + 6.0 103.0 + 9.5 105.3 + 4.7 118.9 + 3.0 111.3 − 2.7 111.0 + 5.8 109.3 − 5.4
2011 117.0 + 7.4 119.9 + 12.5 124.7 + 21.1 119.9 + 13.9 109.2 − 8.2 114.0 + 2.4 125.6 + 13.2 105.2 − 3.8
2012 125.1 + 6.9 129.8 + 8.3 137.0 + 9.9 131.2 + 9.4 109.0 − 0.2 120.1 + 5.4 131.9 + 5.0 113.1 + 7.5
 
2012          Feb 105.1 + 11.7 109.2 + 6.7 116.3 + 19.0 106.8 − 6.6 100.9 + 39.2 100.8 + 17.8 110.3 − 3.7 95.1 + 32.1
         Mar 148.2 + 10.6 157.6 + 18.2 152.6 + 7.5 168.4 + 29.2 133.1 + 7.6 138.4 + 2.7 157.3 + 6.9 137.2 + 16.8
         Apr 135.7 + 10.3 135.4 + 13.9 147.1 + 7.9 138.2 + 23.7 99.4 − 3.8 136.1 + 6.8 136.2 + 9.0 130.5 + 13.1
         May 129.8 + 2.2 126.9 − 5.8 134.3 − 8.8 127.1 + 0.2 109.5 − 17.5 132.9 + 11.8 133.1 + 6.0 124.7 + 4.1
         June 142.6 + 4.5 146.1 + 5.7 168.1 + 29.4 136.8 − 0.1 127.4 − 21.1 139.0 + 3.1 142.0 + 0.9 132.4 − 2.1
         July 135.9 − 1.0 132.3 + 6.2 143.3 + 6.5 133.8 + 15.9 102.2 − 23.0 139.7 − 7.2 135.2 + 4.2 133.5 − 8.6
         Aug 136.8 + 10.9 150.5 + 20.3 141.6 + 9.2 158.5 + 22.9 143.7 + 41.3 122.6 + 0.8 148.8 + 12.4 122.7 + 9.8
         Sep 131.0 + 2.6 138.2 + 8.4 143.4 + 12.4 138.4 + 6.1 125.8 + 7.2 123.6 − 3.4 141.1 + 5.3 115.6 − 4.9
         Oct 144.3 + 27.6 140.9 + 15.0 140.9 + 10.9 145.3 + 13.3 126.1 + 35.6 147.9 + 43.2 153.6 + 19.5 136.4 + 48.7
         Nov 99.8 − 5.9 108.0 − 5.7 126.3 + 2.9 104.2 − 7.4 79.4 − 22.5 91.3 − 6.3 104.7 − 10.5 83.7 − 5.0
         Dec 102.1 − 2.9 115.7 + 2.4 127.1 + 2.9 119.9 + 9.6 76.0 − 25.0 87.8 − 9.3 117.1 − 0.6 76.3 − 9.7
2013          Jan 89.7 + 0.3 96.6 − 0.3 105.5 + 2.3 97.8 + 1.3 72.7 − 13.6 82.4 + 1.1 96.3 − 6.7 76.3 + 9.6
         Feb 107.3 + 2.1 107.7 − 1.4 112.0 − 3.7 110.1 + 3.1 89.9 − 10.9 106.8 + 6.0 116.1 + 5.3 96.4 + 1.4
Source of the unadjusted figures: Federal Statistical Office. *Values exclusive of adjusted business statistics, Tables II.21. oUsing the Census X-12-ARIMA method,
value-added tax; for explanatory notes, see Statistical Supplement Seasonally version 0.2.8. 1 Excluding housing construction orders. 
 
 
5 Retail trade turnover, sales of motor vehicles *
 
 
Adjusted for calendar variations  o 
Retail trade
of which:  by enterprises main product range  1 
Construction Retail sale of
and flooring pharmaceutical Wholesale
Textiles, Information materials, and medical and retail trade
clothing and household goods, cosmetic and repair of
Food, beverages, foodwear and communications appliances, and toilet motor vehicles
Total tobacco  2 leather goods equipment furniture articles and motorcycles  3 
At current At prices in
prices year 2010 At current prices
Annual Annual Annual Annual Annual Annual Annual Annual
percent- percent- percent- percent- percent- percent- percent- percent-
age age age age age age age age
Period change change change change change change change change 2010 = 100 2010 = 100 2010 = 100 2010 = 100 2010 = 100 2010 = 100 2010 = 100 2010 = 100
2009 97.8 − 3.3 98.8 − 2.8 99.4 − 1.9 95.6 − 3.0 97.0 + 0.6 97.6 − 2.7 96.5 + 2.7 104.2 + 1.1
2010 100.1 + 2.4 100.0 + 1.2 100.2 + 0.8 99.9 + 4.5 99.9 + 3.0 100.0 + 2.5 100.2 + 3.8 99.3 − 4.7
2011 102.6 + 2.5 101.1 + 1.1 102.5 + 2.3 101.6 + 1.7 99.4 − 0.5 103.7 + 3.7 100.5 + 0.3 107.0 + 7.8
2012 4 104.4 + 1.8 100.7 − 0.4 105.1 + 2.5 101.9 + 0.3 98.7 − 0.7 104.7 + 1.0 100.4 − 0.1 106.2 − 0.7
 
2012          Mar 107.2 + 4.2 103.4 + 2.2 106.8 + 2.6 109.6 + 8.9 94.1 + 3.0 115.5 + 6.4 103.7 + 3.6 125.0 + 6.8
         Apr 105.3 + 2.3 101.4 + 0.4 106.9 + 2.6 105.3 − 4.2 89.4 + 6.6 110.3 + 0.2 101.3 + 3.3 112.8 + 0.2
         May 104.8 + 4.7 100.9 + 2.6 107.1 + 5.9 102.4 + 5.8 85.5 − 0.5 107.2 + 3.7 100.8 + 2.2 110.5 − 0.5
         June 103.0 + 3.1 99.6 + 1.1 105.4 + 2.2 95.2 − 0.8 95.6 + 7.8 101.4 + 1.2 98.3 + 0.6 111.3 + 1.6
         July 104.0 + 0.8 101.0 − 1.2 105.1 + 1.6 101.6 − 1.4 93.0 − 0.7 104.2 + 1.1 102.7 + 0.3 108.3 − 1.8
         Aug 101.2 + 1.5 97.9 − 0.5 103.5 + 3.0 92.3 − 0.4 91.1 − 2.0 102.9 + 2.3 96.5 − 1.6 97.6 − 1.2
         Sep 103.0 + 1.5 99.0 − 0.4 102.2 + 4.1 112.6 + 8.8 93.3 − 0.2 104.6 + 1.8 95.8 − 4.2 106.3 − 2.0
         Oct 108.7 + 0.6 104.0 − 1.5 106.6 + 1.8 118.0 − 4.5 98.3 − 1.7 111.6 − 0.8 102.7 + 0.1 113.2 − 4.6
         Nov 109.3 + 2.4 104.8 + 0.5 106.6 + 2.6 103.0 − 2.6 108.6 + 0.4 112.3 + 0.6 103.6 + 0.0 109.4 − 4.8
         Dec 121.0 − 1.3 116.5 − 3.3 121.9 + 0.6 121.8 − 2.5 148.1 − 4.2 108.1 − 4.7 108.8 − 5.8 94.1 − 4.7
2013          Jan 97.7 + 4.4 94.3 + 2.7 99.3 + 5.1 85.9 − 0.1 101.2 − 0.4 90.9 + 1.5 101.3 + 4.6 85.6 − 4.1
         Feb 93.7 + 2.6 89.8 + 1.4 97.9 + 3.9 76.2 + 1.3 84.8 − 1.2 89.2 + 0.6 97.8 + 3.9 91.0 − 5.4
         Mar 108.6 + 1.3 103.4 + 0.0 112.4 + 5.2 97.3 − 11.2 98.1 + 4.3 108.0 − 6.5 106.6 + 2.8 . .
Source of the unadjusted figures: Federal Statistical Office. *Excluding value-added advance returns for turnover tax (Umsatzsteuervoranmeldung) and primary data
tax;  For explanatory notes, see Statistical Supplement Seasonally adjusted business collection, before based on sample survey. 4Figures from January 2012 are provision-
statistics, Tables II.24. oUsing the Census X-12-ARIMA method, version 0.2.8. 1In al, in some cases revised, and particularly uncertain in recent months owing to esti-
stores. 2Including stalls and markets. 3From January 2011 based on data from mates for missing reports. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
65  Monthly Report
May 2013
 X Economic conditions in Germany
 
6 Labour market * 
 
 
 
Employment 1 Employment subject to social security contributions  2,3 Short time workers 4 Unemployment 5 
Total of which: of which: of which:
Solely
jobs
Services exempt Recipients
excluding from of insured
Produc- temporary social unem- Unem- Temporary
tion employ- employ- contri- Cyclically ployment ploy- Vacan-
 Annual Annual sector ment ment butions 2 Total induced Total benefits ment cies, 5,7 
Thou- percentage Thou- rate 5,6 thou- percentage
sands change sands change Thousands in % sands
2008 40,348 + 1.2 27,510 + 2.1 8,659 17,958 679 4,866 102 58 3,258 1,006 7.8 389
2009 40,370 + 0.1 27,493 − 0.1 8,521 18,210 549 4,904 1,144 1,078 8 3,415 8 1,190 8 8.1 301
2010 40,603 + 0.6 27,757 + 1.0 8,426 18,438 679 4,883 503 429 3,238 1,075 7.7 3592011 41,164 + 1.4 28,440 + 2.5 8,583 18,836 798 4,865 148 100 2,976 892 7.1 4662012
r 41,619 r + 1.1 9 28,991 9 + 1.9 9 8,731 9 19,251 9 775 9 4,805 ... 9 67 2,897 902 6.8 478
2010          Q1 40,026 − 0.2 27,307 − 0.3 8,308 18,244 561 4,854 987 804 3,601 1,327 8.6 297         Q2 40,513 + 0.5 27,592 + 0.8 8,377 18,346 648 4,885 517 485 3,261 1,053 7.8 354         Q3 40,799 + 0.9 27,886 + 1.5 8,469 18,454 740 4,889 265 239 3,132 1,003 7.5 395         Q4 41,074 + 1.1 28,242 + 1.9 8,548 18,710 767 4,905 242 188 2,959 920 7.0 392
2011          Q1 40,613 + 1.5 27,944 + 2.3 8,428 18,578 740 4,852 291 158 3,290 1,088 7.8 412
         Q2 41,073 + 1.4 28,266 + 2.4 8,535 18,721 786 4,867 121 107 2,977 850 7.1 470         Q3 41,347 + 1.3 28,566 + 2.4 8,638 18,862 836 4,865 76 64 2,893 843 6.9 497         Q4 41,624 + 1.3 28,983 + 2.6 8,732 19,184 830 4,874 102 72 2,743 787 6.5 486
2012          Q1 41,168 + 1.4 28,638 + 2.5 8,623 19,036 760 4,797 201 82 3,074 998 7.3 472
         Q2
r 41,552 r + 1.2 28,860 + 2.1 8,696 19,149 773 4,798 77 65 2,876 847 10 6.8 499
         Q3 r 41,776 r + 1.0 29,077 + 1.8 8,770 19,265 799 4,803 56 43 2,856 885 6.7 493
         Q4 r 41,979 r + 0.9 9 29,391 9 + 1.4 9 8,833 9 19,552 9 767 9 4,820 ... 9 77 2,782 878 6.6 446
2013          Q1 11 41,461 11 + 0.7 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 3,131 1,109 7.4 427
2009          Dec 40,474 − 0.2 27,488 − 0.5 8,400 18,341 553 4,971 929 809 3,268 1,107 7.8 281
2010          Jan 39,987 − 0.3 27,249 − 0.5 8,295 18,214 550 4,840 1,057 874 3,610 1,339 8.6 271
         Feb 39,969 − 0.3 27,230 − 0.3 8,269 18,210 560 4,814 1,031 829 3,635 1,356 8.6 298         Mar 40,121 +
 0.0 27,398 + 0.2 8,318 18,277 596 4,846 874 709 3,560 1,285 8.5 320
         Apr 
40,357 + 0.2 27,553 + 0.6 8,371 18,335 627 4,875 632 599 3,399 1,140 8.1 335
         May 40,538 + 0.5 27,667 + 1.0 8,395 18,382 665 4,898 499 467 3,236 1,036 7.7 356         June 40,645 + 0.7 27,710 + 1.2 8,414 18,365 707 4,916 420 390 3,148 983 7.5 370         July 40,663 + 0.8 27,691 + 1.4 8,419 18,320 732 4,915 313 286 3,186 1,029 7.6 391         Aug 40,750 + 0.9 27,976 + 1.6 8,493 18,508 752 4,864 244 219 3,183 1,030 7.6 397         Sep 40,984 + 1.0 28,269 + 1.7 8,573 18,700 766 4,859 237 214 3,026 948 7.2 398         Oct 41,128 + 1.1 28,296 + 1.8 8,566 18,738 769 4,886 231 209 2,941 907 7.0 401         Nov 41,142 + 1.1 28,277 + 2.0 8,562 18,723 779 4,932 215 194 2,927 903 6.9 395         Dec 40,951 + 1.2 28,033 + 2.0 8,460 18,635 743 4,931 279 162 3,011 949 7.1 380
2011          Jan 40,556 + 1.4 27,863 + 2.3 8,399 18,540 732 4,842 322 177 3,345 1,146 7.9 375
         Feb 40,584 + 1.5 27,912 + 2.5 8,416 18,560 738 4,831 305 155 3,313 1,107 7.9 418         Mar 40,698 + 1.4 28,080 + 2.5 8,477 18,632 759 4,836 246 143 3,211 1,010 7.6 442         Apr 40,921 + 1.4 28,214 + 2.4 8,518 18,703 771 4,857 133 117 3,078 907 7.3 461         May 41,098 + 1.4 28,354 + 2.5 8,559 18,768 798 4,880 122 107 2,960 839 7.0 470         June 41,199 + 1.4 28,381 + 2.4 8,580 18,753 821 4,894 110 96 2,893 804 6.9 480         July 41,212 + 1.4 28,357 + 2.4 8,591 18,712 831 4,890 81 68 2,939 859 7.0 492         Aug 41,304 + 1.4 28,658 + 2.4 8,660 18,922 843 4,840 71 59 2,945 867 7.0 497         Sep 41,524 + 1.3 28,984 + 2.5 8,746 19,149 845 4,833 76 65 2,796 802 6.6 502         Oct 41,664 + 1.3 29,039 + 2.6 8,750 19,206 839 4,851 81 70 2,737 778 6.5 500         Nov 41,691 + 1.3 29,024 + 2.6 8,744 19,207 835 4,901 85 76 2,713 769 6.4 492         Dec 41,517 + 1.4 28,787 + 2.7 8,655 19,128 784 4,909 140 72 2,780 813 6.6 467
2012          Jan 
r 41,159 r + 1.5 28,580 + 2.6 8,613 18,995 758 4,813 206 82 3,084 1,011 7.3 452
         Feb 41,117 + 1.3 28,580 + 2.4 8,601 19,012 752 4,743 230 87 3,110 1,028 7.4 473
         Mar 41,227 + 1.3 28,719 + 2.3 8,653 19,077 758 4,763 167 78 3,028 955 7.2 491         Apr 
r 41,411 r + 1.2 28,836 + 2.2 8,687 19,144 765 4,784 83 71 2,963 893 7.0 499
         May r 41,591 r + 1.2 28,924 + 2.0 8,713 19,185 780 4,812 77 65 2,855 831 10 6.7 499
         June r 41,655 r + 1.1 28,921 + 1.9 8,723 19,163 792 4,834 71 58 2,809 817 6.6 499
         July r 41,684 r + 1.1 28,910 + 2.0 8,730 19,137 806 4,829 54 42 2,876 885 6.8 500
         Aug r 41,737 r + 1.0 29,154 + 1.7 8,789 19,321 802 4,777 47 34 2,905 910 6.8 493
         Sep r 41,906 r + 0.9 29,414 + 1.5 8,863 19,512 789 4,775 66 54 2,788 862 6.5 485
         Oct r 42,050 r + 0.9 29,470 + 1.5 8,863 19,579 782 4,803 85 70 2,753 846 6.5 468
         Nov r 42,051 r + 0.9 9 29,418 9 + 1.4 9 8,836 9 19,579 9 766 9 4,841 ... 9 85 2,751 864 6.5 451
         Dec r 41,836 r + 0.8 9 29,156 9 + 1.3 9 8,741 9 19,483 9 715 9 4,856 ... 9 74 2,840 924 6.7 421
2013          Jan r 41,429 r + 0.7 9 28,980 9 + 1.4 9 8,683 9 19,383 9 699 9 4,763 ... 9 106 3,138 1,121 7.4 405
         Feb r 41,428 r + 0.8 9 28,988 9 + 1.4 9 8,676 9 19,393 9 699 9 4,743 ... 9 103 3,156 1,132 7.4 431
         Mar 11 41,527 11 + 0.7 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 3,098 1,072 7.3 444
         Apr ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 3,020 1,001 7.1 441
Sources: Federal Statistical Office; Federal Employment Agency. *Annual and private employment agencies. 9Unadjusted data estimated by the Federal Employ-
quarterly figures: averages; calculated by the Bundesbank; deviations from the offi- ment Agency. The estimates for Germany in 2010 and 2011 deviated from the final
cial figures are due to rounding. 1Workplace concept; averages. 2Monthly figures: data by a maximum of 0.2 % for employees subject to social contributions, by a
end of month. 3From January 2012, excluding all persons taking up federal maximum of 1.6 % for persons solely in jobs exempt from social contributions, and,
voluntary service or a year of social or ecological work. 4Number within a given in 2011, by a maximum of 18.8 % for cyclically induced short-time work. 10From
month. 5Mid-month level. 6Relative to the total civilian labour force. 7Excluding May 2012, calculated on the basis of new labour force figures. 11Initial preliminary
government-assisted forms of employment and seasonal jobs, including jobs located estimate by the Federal Statistical Office. abroad. 8From May 2009, unemployed excluding persons formally on the books of

Deutsche Bundesbank
66  Monthly Report
May 2013
 X Economic conditions in Germany
 
7 Prices
 
 
 
Consumer price index HWWI
Indices of Index of World Market
of which foreign trade prices Prices of Raw Materials  4 
Other Index of
durable producer
and non- prices of
durable industrial Index of
consumer Services Con- products producer
goods excluding prices of sold on the struction
excluding house House price domestic agricultural Other raw
Total Food energy  1 Energy  1 rents 2 rents 2 index market  3 products  3 Exports Imports Energy  5 materials  6 
Period 2010 = 100 2005 = 100 2010 = 100
Index level  
  
2008 98.6 99.9 98.1 101.7 98.0 97.8 113.0 112.7 124.3 104.8 109.9 109.7 92.0
2009 98.9 98.6 99.4 96.2 99.5 98.8 114.4 108.0 100.7 102.5 100.5 72.8 74.5
2010 100.0 100.0 100.0 100.0 100.0 100.0 115.4 109.7 114.9 106.0 108.3 100.0 100.0
2011 7 102.1 102.2 100.8 110.1 101.0 101.3 118.7 115.9 129.7 109.9 117.0 132.2 113.5
2012 7 104.1 105.7 102.0 116.4 102.4 102.5 122.0 118.3 135.9 111.8 119.4 141.9 110.4
 
2011          June 102.0 102.2 100.5 109.9 101.0 101.2 116.0 134.1 110.0 116.5 130.5 114.0
         July 102.2 102.0 100.0 110.6 102.2 101.3 116.8 131.4 110.3 117.4 135.1 115.0
         Aug 102.3 101.8 100.5 109.7 102.2 101.4 119.3 116.5 130.2 110.2 116.6 127.5 112.9
         Sep 102.5 102.1 101.5 111.4 101.2 101.5 116.8 130.4 110.2 117.3 135.7 114.1
         Oct 102.5 102.3 101.6 111.8 100.9 101.6 117.0 129.2 110.0 116.9 132.0 105.1
         Nov 102.7 102.6 101.7 112.4 100.9 101.7 119.7 117.1 130.3 110.2 117.4 134.5 103.0
         Dec 102.9 103.2 101.3 111.5 102.1 101.8 116.6 128.7 110.3 117.7 134.9 103.7
2012          Jan 7 102.8 104.3 100.8 113.7 100.9 102.0 117.3 128.0 111.2 119.2 141.2 109.4
         Feb 103.5 105.6 101.2 115.4 101.9 102.1 121.1 117.8 130.7 111.5 120.4 148.4 109.3
         Mar 104.1 106.0 r 102.1 117.2 102.2 102.1 118.5 133.1 111.7 121.2 155.0 110.5
         Apr 103.9 105.7 r 102.1 117.7 101.3 102.2 118.7 134.1 111.9 120.6 148.6 110.2
         May 103.9 105.4 102.3 115.9 101.7 102.3 121.8 118.3 132.3 111.8 119.8 140.5 110.1
         June 103.7 105.8 101.9 114.2 102.0 102.4 117.8 130.2 111.5 118.0 124.5 108.9
         July 104.1 105.2 101.2 115.4 103.6 102.5 117.8 131.0 111.8 118.8 136.5 116.8
         Aug 104.5 105.1 101.6 118.0 103.5 102.6 122.4 118.4 134.5 112.2 120.3 149.1 114.2
         Sep 104.6 105.0 102.5 119.3 102.6 102.7 118.8 138.4 112.1 119.4 143.2 111.9
         Oct 104.6 105.7 103.0 118.1 102.4 102.8 118.8 140.1 111.9 118.7 139.9 108.7
         Nov 104.7 107.0 102.8 116.7 102.7 102.9 122.7 118.7 142.7 111.9 118.7 138.5 107.0
         Dec 105.0 108.0 102.7 115.5 104.0 102.9 118.4 141.7 111.5 118.1 136.2 106.5
2013          Jan 104.5 109.0 101.7 118.1 101.9 103.2 119.3 141.3 111.5 118.2 138.6 106.2
         Feb 105.1 108.9 102.2 119.5 103.0 103.3 123.5 119.2 141.6 111.6 118.5 141.7 106.9
         Mar 105.6 109.9 103.2 117.8 103.7 103.4 119.0 p 141.6 111.7 118.4 136.3 107.7
         Apr 105.1 110.0 103.3 118.2 101.8 103.5 ... ... ... ... 127.8 104.0
Annual percentage change  
  
2008 + 2.6 + 6.4 + 0.8 + 9.6 + 1.9 + 1.2 + 3.4 + 5.5 + 3.7 + 1.7 + 4.6 + 27.6 + 5.1
2009 + 0.3 − 1.3 + 1.3 − 5.4 + 1.5 + 1.0 + 1.2 − 4.2 − 19.0 − 2.2 − 8.6 − 33.6 − 19.0
2010 + 1.1 + 1.4 + 0.6 + 4.0 + 0.5 + 1.2 + 0.9 + 1.6 + 14.1 + 3.4 + 7.8 + 37.4 + 34.2
2011 7 + 2.1 + 2.2 + 0.8 + 10.1 + 1.0 + 1.3 + 2.9 + 5.7 + 12.9 + 3.7 + 8.0 + 32.2 + 13.5
2012 7 + 2.0 + 3.4 + 1.2 + 5.7 + 1.4 + 1.2 + 2.8 + 2.1 + 4.8 + 1.7 + 2.1 + 7.3 − 2.7
 
2011          June + 2.1 + 2.2 + 0.8 + 9.1 + 1.3 + 1.2 + 5.6 + 21.4 + 3.4 + 6.5 + 27.2 + 13.5
         July + 2.1 + 2.1 + 0.9 + 10.8 + 1.2 + 1.2 + 5.8 + 18.0 + 3.7 + 7.5 + 36.7 + 13.6
         Aug + 2.1 + 2.5 + 1.1 + 10.0 + 1.0 + 1.3 + 3.0 + 5.5 + 10.5 + 3.2 + 6.6 + 28.4 + 7.7
         Sep + 2.4 + 2.6 + 1.4 + 11.3 + 1.1 + 1.3 + 5.5 + 8.5 + 2.9 + 6.9 + 37.1 + 7.0
         Oct + 2.3 + 3.0 + 1.1 + 11.4 + 0.9 + 1.3 + 5.3 + 6.9 + 3.0 + 6.8 + 33.5 + 1.0
         Nov + 2.4 + 2.5 + 1.3 + 11.3 + 0.9 + 1.3 + 3.1 + 5.2 + 5.4 + 2.9 + 6.0 + 29.0 − 4.7
         Dec + 2.0 + 2.0 + 0.9 + 7.9 + 1.2 + 1.3 + 4.0 + 0.6 + 2.1 + 3.9 + 16.6 − 10.7
2012          Jan 7 + 2.1 + 2.9 + 1.1 + 7.3 + 1.2 + 1.3 + 3.4 − 0.5 + 2.1 + 3.7 + 16.6 − 9.9
         Feb + 2.2 + 3.3 + 1.2 + 8.3 + 1.3 + 1.3 + 3.2 + 3.2 − 1.2 + 2.0 + 3.5 + 17.3 − 11.0
         Mar + 2.2 + 3.7 r + 1.4 + 6.7 + 1.4 + 1.2 + 3.3 + 0.7 + 1.9 + 3.1 + 14.4 − 6.1
         Apr + 2.0 + 3.4 r + 1.2 + 5.8 + 1.0 + 1.2 + 2.4 − 0.3 + 1.8 + 2.3 + 5.4 − 6.5
         May + 2.0 + 2.6 + 1.5 + 5.1 + 1.4 + 1.2 + 2.8 + 2.1 − 2.1 + 1.6 + 2.2 + 6.0 − 4.8
         June + 1.7 + 3.5 + 1.4 + 3.9 + 1.0 + 1.2 + 1.6 − 2.9 + 1.4 + 1.3 − 4.6 − 4.5
         July + 1.9 + 3.1 + 1.2 + 4.3 + 1.4 + 1.2 + 0.9 − 0.3 + 1.4 + 1.2 + 1.0 + 1.6
         Aug + 2.2 + 3.2 + 1.1 + 7.6 + 1.3 + 1.2 + 2.6 + 1.6 + 3.3 + 1.8 + 3.2 + 16.9 + 1.2
         Sep + 2.0 + 2.8 + 1.0 + 7.1 + 1.4 + 1.2 + 1.7 + 6.1 + 1.7 + 1.8 + 5.5 − 1.9
         Oct + 2.0 + 3.3 + 1.4 + 5.6 + 1.5 + 1.2 + 1.5 + 8.4 + 1.7 + 1.5 + 6.0 + 3.4
         Nov + 1.9 + 4.3 + 1.1 + 3.8 + 1.8 + 1.2 + 2.5 + 1.4 + 9.5 + 1.5 + 1.1 + 3.0 + 3.9
         Dec + 2.0 + 4.7 + 1.4 + 3.6 + 1.9 + 1.1 + 1.5 + 10.1 + 1.1 + 0.3 + 1.0 + 2.7
2013          Jan + 1.7 + 4.5 + 0.9 + 3.9 + 1.0 + 1.2 + 1.7 + 10.4 + 0.3 − 0.8 − 1.8 − 2.9
         Feb + 1.5 + 3.1 + 1.0 + 3.6 + 1.1 + 1.2 + 2.0 + 1.2 + 8.3 + 0.1 − 1.6 − 4.5 − 2.2
         Mar + 1.4 + 3.7 + 1.1 + 0.5 + 1.5 + 1.3 + 0.4 p + 6.4 + 0.0 − 2.3 − 12.1 − 2.5
         Apr + 1.2 + 4.1 + 1.2 + 0.4 + 0.5 + 1.3 ... ... ... ... − 14.0 − 5.6
Source: Federal Statistical Office and Bundesbank calculation based on data provided value-added tax. 4For the euro area, in euro. 5Coal and crude oil (Brent). 6Food,
by the Federal Statistical Office; for the Index of World Market Prices of Raw beverages and tobacco as well as industrial raw materials. 7From May 2011 and
Materials: HWWI. 1Electricity, gas and other fuels. 2Net rents. 3Excluding from January 2012, increase in tobacco tax. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
67  Monthly Report
May 2013
X Economic conditions in Germany
  
8 Households’ income *
  
  
  
Gross wages and Net wages and Monetary social Saving
salaries 1 salaries 2 Mass income 4 Saving 6 ratio 7 benefits received 3 Disposable income 5 
Annual Annual Annual Annual Annual Annual
percent- percent- percent- percent- percent- percent- Asage age age age age age percent-
Period change change change change change change age € billion € billion € billion € billion € billion € billion
2005
922.1 − 0.3 625.5 − 0.4 359.8 0.1 985.3 − 0.2 1,463.9 2.0 156.9 3.3 10.7
2006 935.0 1.4 627.8 0.4 358.5 − 0.4 986.3 0.1 1,502.0 2.6 162.5 3.6 10.8
2007 965.9 3.3 646.2 2.9 353.6 − 1.4 999.8 1.4 1,524.8 1.5 168.1 3.4 11.0
2008 1,002.6 3.8 664.0 2.7 356.2 0.7 1,020.1 2.0 1,569.9 3.0 180.3 7.3 11.5
2009 1,004.0 0.1 668.0 0.6 383.4 7.7 1,051.4 3.1 1,561.7 − 0.5 170.1 − 5.6 10.9
2010 1,034.1 3.0 697.7 4.4 387.1 1.0 1,084.8 3.2 1,607.9 3.0 174.7 2.7 10.9
2011 1,083.9 4.8 725.8 4.0 384.0 − 0.8 1,109.8 2.3 1,660.2 3.3 172.6 − 1.2 10.4
2012 1,126.3 3.9 750.9 3.5 389.7 1.5 1,140.5 2.8 1,696.8 2.2 175.3 1.5 10.3
2011          Q3 267.6 4.6 182.9 3.7 95.8 − 0.3 278.7 2.3 421.7 3.5 37.2 − 1.2 8.8
         Q4 299.8 4.3 200.8 4.0 95.6 0.4 296.3 2.8 418.0 2.8 38.2 1.2 9.1
2012          Q1 261.8 4.0 175.1 3.8 97.8 0.4 272.9 2.6 422.7 3.5 57.7 3.2 13.7
         Q2 275.3 4.0 179.7 3.6 96.7 1.5 276.3 2.8 420.8 2.1 42.3 2.5 10.0
         Q3 278.1 3.9 189.1 3.4 97.7 2.0 286.7 2.9 427.5 1.4 37.6 1.2 8.8
         Q4 311.0 3.7 207.0 3.1 97.5 2.1 304.6 2.8 425.9 1.9 37.6 − 1.5 8.8
Source: Federal Statistical Office; figures computed in February 2013. *Households in- salaries plus monetary social benefits received. 5Mass income plus operating surplus,
cluding non-profit institutions serving households. 1Residence concept. 2After mixed income, property income (net), other current transfers received, income of
deducting the wage tax payable on gross wages and salaries and employees’ non-profit institutions serving households, less taxes (excluding wage tax andcontributions to the social security funds. 3Social security benefits in cash from the consumption-related taxes) and other current transfers paid. Including the increase in
social security funds, central, state and local government and foreign countries, claims on company pension funds. 6Including the increase in claims on company pen-
pension payments (net), private funded social benefits, less social contributions on sion funds. 7 Saving as a percentage of disposable income. 
social benefits, consumption-related taxes and public charges. 4Net wages and
  
  
  
9 Negotiated pay rates (overall economy)
    
  
Index of negotiated wages 1 
On a monthly basis
Memo item:
Total excluding Wages and salaries
On an hourly basis Total one-off payments Basic pay rates  2 per employee 3 
Annual Annual Annual Annual Annual
Period percentage percentage percentage percentage percentage
2005=100 change 2005=100 change 2005=100 change 2005=100 change 2005=100 change
2005 100.0 0.9 100.0 1.1 100.0 0.9 100.0 1.1 100.0 0.3
2006 100.9 0.9 101.2 1.2 100.8 0.8 100.8 0.8 100.8 0.82007 102.2 1.2 102.5 1.3 102.2 1.5 102.3 1.5 102.2 1.42008 105.0 2.7 105.4 2.8 105.3 3.0 105.5 3.2 104.6 2.32009 107.1 2.0 107.5 2.0 107.7 2.2 108.1 2.4 104.6 − 0.0
2010 108.8 1.6 109.3 1.7 109.4 1.6 109.9 1.7 107.0 2.3
2011 110.6 1.7 111.2 1.7 111.3 1.8 111.8 1.7 110.6 3.32012 113.5 2.7 114.0 2.5 114.4 2.8 114.9 2.8 113.5 2.7
2011          Q4 123.2 1.7 123.9 1.8 124.3 2.0 112.6 2.1 120.8 2.9
2012          Q1 104.6 1.9 105.1 1.8 105.4 2.4 113.5 2.5 106.7 2.6
         Q2 106.6 2.7 107.0 2.6 107.4 2.9 114.7 2.7 111.3 2.7         Q3 115.9 2.9 116.4 2.8 116.8 2.9 115.6 2.9 111.8 2.7         Q4 126.9 3.0 127.5 2.9 127.9 2.9 115.9 2.9 124.2 2.8
2013          Q1 107.7 2.9 108.1 2.9 108.5 2.9 116.8 2.9 . .
2012          Sep 106.7 2.8 107.1 2.7 107.5 2.9 115.7 2.9 . .
         Oct 106.7 2.9 107.2 2.8 107.6 2.9 115.8 2.9 . .
         Nov 164.5 2.9 165.2 2.8 165.9 2.8 115.9 2.9 . .
         Dec 109.6 3.2 110.0 3.0 110.2 3.0 115.9 2.9 . .
2013          Jan 107.6 3.0 108.1 3.0 108.5 3.1 116.8 3.1 . .
         Feb 107.6 3.0 108.1 3.0 108.5 3.1 116.8 3.1 . .
         Mar 107.8 2.6 108.2 2.6 108.6 2.5 116.9 2.6 . .
1Current data are normally revised on account of additional reports. 2Excluding and retirement provisions). 3Source: Federal Statistical Office; figures computed in
one-off payments and covenants (capital formation benefits, special payments, such February 2013. 
as annual bonuses, holiday pay, Christmas bonuses (13
thmonthly salary payment)

Deutsche Bundesbank
68  Monthly Report
May 2013
XI External sector
 
1 Major items of the balance of payments of the euro area *
 
 
€ million
2012 2013
Item 2010 2011 2012 Q2 Q3 Q4 Dec Jan Feb
Current account + 3,500 + 14,867 + 115,980 + 18,344 + 40,848 + 59,630 + 26,513 − 5,601 + 12,085 A
1 Goods
Exports (fob) 1,576,860 1,787,867 1,916,855 480,490 480,118 488,100 147,733 151,480 152,477
Imports (fob) 1,559,613 1,781,064 1,816,219 454,811 449,829 450,207 135,540 154,173 140,511
Balance + 17,246 + 6,803 + 100,638 + 25,679 + 30,289 + 37,894 + 12,193 − 2,692 + 11,966
2 Services
Receipts 543,943 581,520 624,644 156,768 167,187 160,071 56,179 47,870 46,004
Expenditure 487,483 508,357 533,703 130,435 140,176 139,064 47,211 42,661 40,144
Balance + 56,458 + 73,164 + 90,942 + 26,334 + 27,011 + 21,007 + 8,968 + 5,209 + 5,860
3 Income + 38,951 + 42,081 + 32,232 − 8,588 + 12,958 + 15,328 + 5,800 + 4,673 + 8,403
4 Current transfers
Transfers from non-residents 87,145 94,509 97,489 21,234 17,312 32,854 16,781 11,014 11,786
Transfers to non-residents 196,299 201,691 205,321 46,315 46,723 47,453 17,229 23,804 25,929
Balance − 109,156 − 107,179 − 107,832 − 25,081 − 29,412 − 14,598 − 447 − 12,790 − 14,144
Capital account + 5,663 + 11,181 + 15,131 + 1,438 + 4,024 + 6,464 + 1,793 + 694 + 1,596 B
Financial account (net capital exports: − + 9,088 − 42,661 − 133,236 − 19,457 − 41,621 − 74,193 − 29,699 + 1,466 − 18,146 C)
1 Direct investment − 88,763 − 118,657 − 44,824 − 15,178 − 4,889 − 21,181 − 27,559 − 8,278 − 1,661
By resident units abroad − 362,398 − 447,047 − 237,515 − 65,836 − 52,565 − 39,170 − 25,428 − 8,974 − 14,832
By non-resident units in the euro area + 273,636 + 328,390 + 192,692 + 50,658 + 47,678 + 17,989 − 2,131 + 695 + 13,171
2 Portfolio investment + 119,460 + 252,512 + 52,263 + 96,671 − 14,793 + 47,167 − 20,527 + 29,038 − 8,940
By resident units abroad − 134,204 + 55,887 − 184,557 + 60,118 − 39,955 − 80,143 − 43,739 − 27,422 − 38,995
Equity − 77,321 + 70,815 − 58,592 + 26,548 − 4,369 − 59,957 − 41,785 − 19,529 − 16,787
Bonds and notes − 102,979 + 15,713 − 123,873 + 7,963 − 34,441 − 39,038 − 11,662 − 5,961 − 11,870
Money market instruments + 46,097 − 30,641 − 2,097 + 25,606 − 1,148 + 18,851 + 9,708 − 1,932 − 10,338
By non-resident units in the euro area + 253,665 + 196,624 + 236,823 + 36,553 + 25,163 + 127,312 + 23,213 + 56,460 + 30,055
Equity + 123,074 + 78,665 + 116,250 − 2,122 + 21,844 + 57,519 + 14,147 + 28,886 + 8,804
Bonds and notes + 175,107 + 165,442 + 125,823 + 31,964 + 44,957 + 49,396 + 2,895 + 13,987 − 926
Money market instruments − 44,518 − 47,484 − 5,251 + 6,711 − 41,639 + 20,398 + 6,171 + 13,587 + 22,177
3 Financial derivatives + 18,375 − 5,306 + 5,562 − 7,999 + 2,818 + 16,082 + 2,204 + 6,707 + 5,925
4 Other investment − 29,468 − 161,017 − 132,086 − 83,998 − 24,638 − 113,290 + 15,466 − 21,339 − 16,031
Eurosystem + 12,297 + 137,729 + 8,293 + 75,794 + 14,840 − 5,940 + 7,133 − 20,684 − 11,840
General government + 23,625 + 69,671 − 394 + 1,164 + 4,512 − 24,142 − 14,296 + 11,089 − 1,009
MFIs (excluding the Eurosystem) − 18,793 − 339,470 − 103,055 − 120,832 − 48,974 − 87,446 − 13,467 − 24,335 + 13,936
Long-term + 47,197 − 17,168 + 12,685 − 17,945 − 3,882 + 22,016 + 12,434 − 3,896 + 6,180
Short-term − 65,993 − 322,304 − 115,737 − 102,886 − 45,089 − 109,463 − 25,901 − 20,439 + 7,756
Other sectors − 46,592 − 28,943 − 36,935 − 40,125 + 4,981 + 4,237 + 36,095 + 12,590 − 17,117
5 Reserve assets (Increase: −) − 10,516 − 10,190 − 14,150 − 8,953 − 119 − 2,970 + 718 − 4,660 + 2,561
Errors and omissions − 18,251 + 16,613 + 2,126 − 325 − 3,250 + 8,099 + 1,393 + 3,440 + 4,465 D
* Source: European Central Bank. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
69  Monthly Report
May 2013
XI External sector
 
2 Major items of the balance of payments of the Federal Republic of Germany
(balances)
 
 
Current account Capital trans- Financial account
fers andacquisition/ of whichdisposal of Change in
Supple- non- reserve assets
Balance mentary produced at trans- Errorson current Foreign trade Current non-financial action and
Period account trade 
1 items 2 Services 3 Income transfers assets Total 4 value 5 omissions
DM million
1999 − 50,528 + 127,542 − 15,947 − 90,036 − 24,363 − 47,724 − 301 − 20,332 + 24,517 + 71,161
2000 − 69,351 + 115,645 − 17,742 − 95,848 − 16,956 − 54,450 + 13,345 + 66,863 + 11,429 − 10,8572001 − 23 + 186,771 − 14,512 − 97,521 − 22,557 − 52,204 − 756 − 23,068 + 11,797 + 23,847
€ million
1999
− 25,834 + 65,211 − 8,153 − 46,035 − 12,457 − 24,401 − 154 − 10,396 + 12,535 + 36,384
2000 − 35,459 + 59,128 − 9,071 − 49,006 − 8,670 − 27,840 + 6,823 + 34,187 + 5,844 − 5,5512001 − 12 + 95,495 − 7,420 − 49,862 − 11,533 − 26,692 − 387 − 11,794 + 6,032 + 12,1932002 + 42,669 + 132,788 − 8,552 − 35,728 − 18,888 − 26,951 − 212 − 38,448 + 2,065 − 4,0102003 + 40,525 + 129,921 − 11,148 − 34,506 − 15,677 − 28,064 + 311 − 61,758 + 445 + 20,921
2004 + 102,368 + 156,096 − 16,470 − 29,375 + 19,681 − 27,564 + 435 − 122,984 + 1,470 + 20,181
2005 + 112,591 + 158,179 − 14,057 − 27,401 + 24,391 − 28,522 − 1,369 − 129,635 + 2,182 + 18,4132006 + 144,739 + 159,048 − 12,888 − 17,346 + 44,460 − 28,536 − 258 − 175,474 + 2,934 + 30,9922007 + 180,914 + 195,348 − 9,816 − 14,852 + 42,918 − 32,685 + 104 − 210,151 − 953 + 29,1332008 + 153,633 + 178,297 − 13,628 − 10,258 + 32,379 − 33,157 − 210 − 173,910 − 2,008 + 20,487
2009 + 141,537 + 138,697 − 16,020 − 7,220 + 59,025 − 32,944 + 28 − 158,391 + 3,200 + 16,826
2010 + 155,992 + 154,863 − 12,397 − 2,062 + 53,877 − 38,289 − 575 − 140,144 − 1,613 − 15,2732011 + 161,196 + 158,702 − 20,520 − 2,279 + 59,016 − 33,723 + 673 − 162,610 − 2,836 + 7402012 
r + 185,425 + 188,255 − 27,313 − 3,068 + 64,373 − 36,822 + 40 − 234,872 − 1,297 + 49,408
2010          Q2 + 31,934 + 37,249 − 3,058 − 1,119 + 5,274 − 6,411 − 434 − 33,120 − 801 + 1,620         Q3 + 34,610 + 38,895 − 3,160 − 5,752 + 15,402 − 10,775 + 9 − 27,401 + 344 − 7,218         Q4 + 51,979 + 40,982 − 3,486 + 4,327 + 17,099 − 6,943 − 413 − 52,524 − 506 + 958
2011          Q1 + 45,384 + 40,902 − 2,257 + 2,887 + 17,445 − 13,592 + 950 − 67,319 − 1,393 + 20,985
         Q2 + 32,308 + 38,562 − 4,927 − 1,372 + 4,755 − 4,710 − 282 − 50,687 − 438 + 18,660         Q3 + 35,723 + 39,609 − 6,551 − 5,658 + 17,960 − 9,637 + 103 − 13,513 − 639 − 22,313         Q4 + 47,781 + 39,630 − 6,784 + 1,864 + 18,856 − 5,784 − 98 − 31,091 − 366 − 16,592
2012          Q1 + 45,749 + 45,418 − 3,550 + 896 + 18,019 − 15,034 + 191 − 42,769 − 963 − 3,171
         Q2 + 41,278 + 47,994 − 8,897 + 1,302 + 7,301 − 6,422 + 394 − 49,203 − 769 + 7,531         Q3 
r + 44,856 + 50,076 − 7,710 − 7,056 + 18,983 − 9,437 + 67 − 62,045 − 59 + 17,121
         Q4 r + 53,542 + 44,767 − 7,155 + 1,790 + 20,069 − 5,929 − 613 − 80,856 + 494 + 27,927
2013          Q1 p + 44,886 + 49,250 − 6,774 − 434 + 18,646 − 15,802 + 347 − 39,953 − 86 − 5,281
2010          Oct + 14,951 + 14,518 − 855 − 453 + 5,456 − 3,715 − 220 + 7,060 + 234 − 21,791         Nov + 15,685 + 13,884 − 1,205 + 1,227 + 5,794 − 4,016 − 169 − 28,684 + 81 + 13,168         Dec + 21,344 + 12,580 − 1,426 + 3,553 + 5,849 + 788 − 24 − 30,900 − 820 + 9,580
2011          Jan + 9,711 + 9,926 − 1,226 + 344 + 4,730 − 4,063 + 536 − 10,406 − 182 + 159
         Feb + 12,655 + 12,090 + 241 + 809 + 6,124 − 6,610 + 527 − 23,783 − 23 + 10,602         Mar + 23,019 + 18,886 − 1,272 + 1,734 + 6,591 − 2,919 − 114 − 33,129 − 1,188 + 10,224
         Apr + 10,343 + 10,835 − 1,954 − 159 + 3,169 − 1,549 − 201 − 21,914 − 563 + 11,771
         May + 9,344 + 14,833 − 1,108 + 641 − 4,440 − 583 − 64 − 20,156 + 24 + 10,877         June + 12,621 + 12,893 − 1,866 − 1,854 + 6,026 − 2,578 − 17 − 8,617 + 101 − 3,987
         July + 9,447 + 10,555 − 1,541 − 1,997 + 5,900 − 3,470 − 144 + 4,546 − 428 − 13,850
         Aug + 8,404 + 11,740 − 2,347 − 3,923 + 5,982 − 3,049 + 380 − 13,078 + 109 + 4,294         Sep + 17,872 + 17,314 − 2,663 + 262 + 6,078 − 3,118 − 133 − 4,982 − 320 − 12,757
         Oct + 10,828 + 11,000 − 2,131 − 955 + 6,414 − 3,500 − 181 − 16,424 + 55 + 5,777
         Nov + 16,922 + 16,110 − 1,947 + 330 + 6,055 − 3,626 + 120 − 7,177 + 263 − 9,865         Dec + 20,031 + 12,520 − 2,706 + 2,489 + 6,387 + 1,342 − 37 − 7,490 − 684 − 12,504
2012          Jan + 10,994 + 13,188 − 1,346 − 1,634 + 5,039 − 4,254 − 32 − 12,275 − 140 + 1,314
         Feb + 13,526 + 14,864 − 1,736 + 1,181 + 6,503 − 7,286 + 211 − 7,423 − 547 − 6,314         Mar + 21,229 + 17,365 − 468 + 1,349 + 6,477 − 3,494 + 12 − 23,071 − 276 + 1,829
         Apr + 11,916 + 14,468 − 3,209 + 1,620 + 1,735 − 2,698 + 310 − 17,917 − 581 + 5,691
         May + 9,919 + 15,559 − 3,017 − 699 − 495 − 1,429 + 239 − 18,277 − 207 + 8,119         June + 19,442 + 17,966 − 2,672 + 381 + 6,062 − 2,295 − 155 − 13,009 + 19 − 6,279
         July 
r + 14,345 + 16,886 − 2,870 − 3,372 + 6,240 − 2,539 − 223 − 6,596 + 48 − 7,526
         Aug  r + 13,147 + 16,290 − 2,529 − 3,126 + 6,195 − 3,683 + 168 − 22,034 − 389 + 8,720
         Sep  r + 17,364 + 16,900 − 2,311 − 558 + 6,548 − 3,215 + 123 − 33,415 + 281 + 15,928
         Oct  r + 15,389 + 15,712 − 2,523 − 1,479 + 6,918 − 3,240 − 195 − 22,361 − 176 + 7,167
         Nov  r + 17,910 + 16,939 − 2,657 + 250 + 6,509 − 3,131 + 165 − 27,933 + 308 + 9,859
         Dec  r + 20,243 + 12,116 − 1,975 + 3,019 + 6,642 + 441 − 582 − 30,562 + 362 + 10,901
2013          Jan  r + 9,682 + 13,620 − 2,071 − 1,583 + 5,504 − 5,789 + 26 + 6,080 − 493 − 15,788
         Feb + 15,028 + 16,807 − 1,668 + 343 + 6,426 − 6,880 − 26 − 16,265 + 321 + 1,264
         Mar  p + 20,177 + 18,823 − 3,036 + 806 + 6,716 − 3,133 + 348 − 29,768 + 86 + 9,243
1Special trade according to the official foreign trade statistics: imports cif, exports deduction of goods returned. 3Excluding the expenditure on freight and insurance
fob. From January 2007 onwards, excluding supplies of goods for/after included in the cif import figure. 4Financial account balance including change in
repair/maintenance, which, up to December 2006, were deducted via supplementary reserve assets. Capital exports: − . 5 Increase: − . 
trade items. 2Inter alia warehouse transactions for the account of residents and

Deutsche Bundesbank
70  Monthly Report
May 2013
 XI External sector
 
 3 Foreign trade (special trade) of the Federal Republic of Germany,
 by country and group of countries *
 
 € million
 2012  2013
Country / group of countries  2010  2011  2012 r Oct r Nov r Dec r Jan r Feb r Mar p 
All countries  1 Exports 951,959 1,061,225 1,097,346 98,426 94,038 78,979 88,534 88,646 94,587
Imports 797,097 902,523 909,091 82,714 77,099 66,863 74,914 71,839 75,764
Balance + 154,863 + 158,702 + 188,255 + 15,712 + 16,939 + 12,116 + 13,620 + 16,807 + 18,823
I Exports 675,024 752,295 755,936 68,032 64,833 53,147 62,122 61,895 ...European countries
Imports 541,720 622,870 634,732 58,144 54,151 46,379 51,574 51,157 ...
Balance + 133,305 + 129,425 + 121,204 + 9,888 + 10,682 + 6,769 + 10,548 + 10,738 ...
Exports 570,879 627,698 625,620 56,321 52,957 44,176 51,954 51,490 ... 1 EU member states (27)
Imports 444,375 505,363 509,488 45,507 44,223 37,352 41,598 41,384 ...
Balance + 126,504 + 122,335 + 116,132 + 10,813 + 8,734 + 6,824 + 10,356 + 10,106 ...
Euro-area (17) Exports 388,103 420,522 410,609 36,903 34,696 29,115 34,238 33,852 ...
countries Imports 300,135 338,330 341,755 30,242 29,567 25,257 27,640 27,571 ...
Balance + 87,968 + 82,192 + 68,854 + 6,661 + 5,129 + 3,858 + 6,598 + 6,281 ...
of which
Austria Exports 52,156 57,671 57,589 5,292 4,878 4,105 4,489 4,492 ...
Imports 33,013 37,028 37,007 3,378 3,071 2,659 2,855 3,022 ...
Balance + 19,144 + 20,643 + 20,582 + 1,914 + 1,807 + 1,446 + 1,634 + 1,470 ...
Belgium and Exports 50,545 53,161 50,239 4,483 4,494 3,916 4,191 4,162 ...
Luxembourg Imports 36,026 41,302 41,207 3,682 3,454 2,969 3,315 3,394 ...
Balance + 14,519 + 11,859 + 9,032 + 802 + 1,039 + 947 + 876 + 768 ...
France Exports 89,582 101,444 104,332 9,578 8,912 7,039 8,598 8,822 ...
Imports 60,673 65,948 64,642 5,495 5,926 4,521 5,180 5,099 ...
Balance + 28,909 + 35,496 + 39,690 + 4,082 + 2,986 + 2,519 + 3,418 + 3,723 ...
Italy Exports 58,589 62,044 55,856 4,902 4,574 3,869 4,705 4,451 ...
Imports 41,977 47,844 48,926 4,350 4,029 3,491 3,775 3,914 ...
Balance + 16,611 + 14,200 + 6,930 + 552 + 545 + 378 + 930 + 536 ...
Netherlands Exports 62,978 69,423 70,847 6,329 5,691 5,214 6,029 5,905 ...
Imports 67,205 81,804 86,480 7,831 7,412 7,002 7,378 6,971 ...
Balance − 4,227 − 12,382 − 15,633 − 1,502 − 1,721 − 1,788 − 1,349 − 1,066 ...
Spain Exports 34,222 34,811 31,180 2,727 2,663 2,166 2,705 2,611 ...
Imports 21,955 22,491 22,860 1,976 2,116 1,622 2,014 2,021 ...
Balance + 12,267 + 12,320 + 8,319 + 751 + 547 + 544 + 691 + 590 ...
Other EU member Exports 182,775 207,176 215,012 19,417 18,261 15,061 17,716 17,637 ...
states Imports 144,240 167,033 167,734 15,265 14,656 12,095 13,958 13,813 ...
Balance + 38,536 + 40,143 + 47,278 + 4,152 + 3,605 + 2,966 + 3,758 + 3,825 ...
of which
United Exports 58,666 65,570 72,922 6,306 6,176 5,245 6,338 6,485 ...
Kingdom Imports 37,923 44,741 43,663 3,604 4,111 3,436 3,926 3,602 ...
Balance + 20,743 + 20,829 + 29,259 + 2,703 + 2,065 + 1,809 + 2,411 + 2,883 ...
Exports 104,145 124,597 130,316 11,711 11,876 8,971 10,168 10,406 ... 2 Other European
Imports 97,345 117,507 125,244 12,636 9,928 9,027 9,976 9,773 ... countries
Balance + 6,800 + 7,090 + 5,072 − 925 + 1,947 − 56 + 192 + 633 ...
of which
Switzerland Exports 41,659 47,875 48,830 4,362 4,263 3,366 4,067 3,813 ...
Imports 32,507 36,996 37,676 3,582 3,363 2,387 2,911 2,962 ...
Balance + 9,152 + 10,879 + 11,154 + 779 + 899 + 979 + 1,155 + 851 ...
II Exports 276,635 308,193 340,151 30,185 29,098 25,697 26,408 26,625 ...Non-European
Imports 255,377 279,653 274,359 24,571 22,947 20,484 23,340 20,683 ... countries
Balance + 21,258 + 28,541 + 65,792 + 5,614 + 6,150 + 5,212 + 3,068 + 5,942 ...
Exports 19,968 20,717 21,784 1,900 1,832 1,880 1,758 1,816 ... 1 Africa
Imports 17,040 21,944 23,934 2,188 2,159 2,330 1,934 2,233 ...
Balance + 2,929 − 1,227 − 2,150 − 288 − 327 − 450 − 176 − 417 ...
Exports 99,464 110,424 128,461 11,694 11,113 8,794 10,138 10,385 ... 2 America
Imports 71,680 80,568 79,958 7,224 6,452 5,912 6,438 5,599 ...
Balance + 27,784 + 29,856 + 48,504 + 4,470 + 4,661 + 2,882 + 3,700 + 4,786 ...
of which
Exports 65,574 73,776 86,831 8,032 7,563 5,926 6,913 6,939 ... United States
Imports 45,241 48,531 50,602 4,695 4,204 3,622 4,126 3,621 ...
Balance + 20,333 + 25,244 + 36,229 + 3,336 + 3,359 + 2,304 + 2,787 + 3,318 ...
Exports 148,231 167,574 179,183 15,627 15,322 14,300 13,756 13,643 ... 3 Asia
Imports 163,523 173,115 166,426 14,888 14,020 12,034 14,698 12,507 ...
Balance − 15,293 − 5,541 + 12,757 + 739 + 1,302 + 2,266 − 942 + 1,136 ...
of which
Middle East Exports 28,138 28,711 32,498 2,799 2,922 3,061 2,260 2,486 ...
Imports 6,878 8,874 7,953 681 582 738 526 650 ...
Balance + 21,260 + 19,837 + 24,545 + 2,119 + 2,341 + 2,322 + 1,734 + 1,836 ...
Japan Exports 13,149 15,115 17,101 1,565 1,421 1,195 1,425 1,282 ...
Imports 22,475 23,595 21,826 1,826 1,918 1,447 1,713 1,520 ...
Balance − 9,326 − 8,480 − 4,725 − 261 − 497 − 252 − 288 − 238 ...
Exports 53,791 64,863 66,629 5,607 5,451 4,629 5,089 4,959 ... People‘s Republic
Imports 77,270 79,528 77,556 7,086 6,588 5,686 7,020 5,906 ... of China  2 
Balance − 23,479 − 14,665 − 10,928 − 1,479 − 1,137 − 1,057 − 1,930 − 948 ...
Exports 38,183 41,569 45,460 4,073 4,015 3,719 3,628 3,562 ... Emerging markets
Imports 39,562 39,546 37,360 3,455 3,216 2,445 3,451 2,583 ... in South-East Asia  3 
Balance − 1,379 + 2,023 + 8,099 + 618 + 799 + 1,274 + 177 + 979 ...
Exports 8,972 9,479 10,723 964 831 722 756 781 ... 4 Oceania and
Imports 3,134 4,026 4,042 272 317 208 270 344 ... polar regions
Balance + 5,838 + 5,453 + 6,681 + 692 + 515 + 514 + 485 + 437 ...
 
*Source: Federal Statistical Office. Exports (fob) by country of destination, imports other data not classifiable by region. 2Excluding Hong Kong. 3Brunei Darussalam,
(cif) by country of origin. Individual countries and groups of countries according to Hong Kong, Indonesia, Malaysia, Philippines, Republic of Korea, Singapore, Taiwan
the current position. 1Including fuel and other supplies for ships and aircraft and and Thailand. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
71  Monthly Report
May 2013
XI External sector
 
4 Services and income of the Federal Republic of Germany
(balances)
 
€ million
Services
Other services
of which
 
Patents
Compen- Services  of Construction
Trans- Financial and sation of Investment Government self-employed and  assembly
Period Total Travel 1 services licences Total income portation 2 services  3 persons  4 work,  repairs employees 5 
2008 − 10,258 − 34,718 + 8,319 + 3,936 − 1,313 + 2,376 + 11,142 − 1,641 + 3,229 + 216 + 32,164
2009 − 7,220 − 33,341 + 7,048 + 4,320 + 154 + 2,644 + 11,955 − 1,261 + 3,062 + 541 + 58,4842010 − 2,062 − 32,775 + 8,092 + 4,281 + 1,225 + 2,863 + 14,252 − 1,154 + 3,500 + 1,564 + 52,3142011 − 2,279 − 33,762 + 8,562 + 3,891 + 1,189 + 2,939 + 14,903 − 1,201 + 3,413 + 1,885 + 57,1312012 − 3,068 − 35,573 + 8,733 + 5,096 + 1,290 + 3,098 + 14,289 − 1,350 + 2,015 + 1,940 + 62,433
2011          Q3 − 5,658 − 14,618 + 2,094 + 1,012 − 39 + 701 + 5,193 − 322 + 784 − 194 + 18,154
         Q4 + 1,864 − 5,931 + 2,127 + 1,581 + 465 + 704 + 2,919 − 379 + 1,070 + 584 + 18,271
2012          Q1 + 896 − 5,383 + 1,799 + 1,038 − 408 + 763 + 3,087 − 355 + 595 + 978 + 17,041
         Q2 + 1,302 − 8,452 + 2,572 + 1,042 + 177 + 828 + 5,136 − 256 + 472 + 401 + 6,901
         Q3 − 7,056 − 15,422 + 2,387 + 1,975 + 752 + 774 + 2,479 − 412 + 493 − 118 + 19,101
         Q4 + 1,790 − 6,315 + 1,975 + 1,041 + 768 + 733 + 3,587 − 326 + 455 + 678 + 19,391
2013          Q1 − 434 − 5,058 + 1,775 + 840 + 762 + 796 + 451 − 287 + 256 + 988 + 17,658
2012          May − 699 − 2,583 + 874 + 304 + 70 + 277 + 358 − 119 + 130 + 134 − 629
         June + 381 − 4,224 + 889 + 225 + 35 + 286 + 3,170 − 81 + 231 + 133 + 5,929
         July − 3,372 − 3,927 + 924 + 287 + 153 + 257 − 1,064 − 183 + 77 − 38 + 6,278
         Aug − 3,126 − 6,596 + 795 + 1,404 + 362 + 258 + 652 − 168 + 164 − 40 + 6,235         Sep − 558 − 4,899 + 669 + 284 + 238 + 259 + 2,891 − 61 + 252 − 39 + 6,587
         Oct − 1,479 − 4,053 + 655 + 269 + 299 + 276 + 1,076 − 103 + 69 + 197 + 6,722
         Nov + 250 − 1,512 + 711 + 308 + 270 + 223 + 250 − 97 + 99 + 192 + 6,317         Dec + 3,019 − 750 + 610 + 464 + 200 + 235 + 2,261 − 126 + 286 + 289 + 6,353
2013          Jan − 1,583 − 1,603 + 541 + 418 + 286 + 266 − 1,491 − 119 + 84 + 331 + 5,173
         Feb + 343 − 1,266 + 668 + 269 + 275 + 256 + 142 − 45 + 4 + 328 + 6,097         Mar + 806 − 2,189 + 566 + 153 + 202 + 273 + 1,801 − 124 + 168 + 329 + 6,387
1From 2001 expenditure is based on household samples. 2Excluding the other technical services, research and development, commercial services, etc.
expenditure on freight included in the cif import figure. 3Including the receipts 5 Wages and salaries. 
from foreign military agencies for goods and services supplied. 4Engineering and
5 Current transfers of the Federal Republic of Germany 6 Capital transfers
(balances) (balances)
€ million € million
Public 1 Private 1 
International
organisations 2 
 
of which Other Other
European current Workers’ current
Period Total Total Total Communities Total remittances transfers Total  4 Public 1 Private 1 transfers 3 
2008 − 33,157 − 16,834 − 18,746 − 16,644 + 1,911 − 16,322 − 3,079 − 13,243 − 210 − 1,853 + 1,642
2009 − 32,944 − 18,575 − 19,037 − 16,573 + 462 − 14,370 − 2,995 − 11,375 + 28 − 1,704 + 1,732
2010 − 38,289 − 23,369 − 22,899 − 19,473 − 471 − 14,919 − 3,035 − 11,885 − 575 − 2,039 + 1,464
2011 − 33,723 − 20,197 − 22,303 − 19,105 + 2,106 − 13,526 − 2,977 − 10,549 + 673 − 2,326 + 2,999
2012 − 36,822 − 23,826 − 24,367 − 21,098 + 541 − 12,997 − 3,080 − 9,917 + 40 − 2,648 + 2,687
2011          Q3 − 9,637 − 6,651 − 6,155 − 5,458 − 496 − 2,986 − 744 − 2,242 + 103 − 484 + 587
         Q4 − 5,784 − 2,567 − 1,681 − 867 − 886 − 3,216 − 744 − 2,472 − 98 − 961 + 863
2012          Q1 − 15,034 − 11,827 − 11,243 − 10,134 − 585 − 3,207 − 770 − 2,437 + 191 − 398 + 589
         Q2 − 6,422 − 3,125 − 6,101 − 5,128 + 2,975 − 3,297 − 770 − 2,527 + 394 − 375 + 769
         Q3 − 9,437 − 6,042 − 5,519 − 5,033 − 523 − 3,395 − 770 − 2,625 + 67 − 556 + 624
         Q4 − 5,929 − 2,831 − 1,504 − 803 − 1,327 − 3,098 − 770 − 2,328 − 613 − 1,318 + 706
2013          Q1 − 15,802 − 12,631 − 12,350 − 11,006 − 281 − 3,171 − 826 − 2,345 + 347 − 307 + 654
2012          May − 1,429 − 275 − 2,057 − 1,906 + 1,782 − 1,154 − 257 − 898 + 239 − 112 + 351         June − 2,295 − 1,181 − 1,383 − 1,067 + 202 − 1,114 − 257 − 857 − 155 − 144 − 11
         July − 2,539 − 1,379 − 1,115 − 956 − 265 − 1,160 − 257 − 903 − 223 − 158 − 65
         Aug − 3,683 − 2,463 − 2,159 − 1,956 − 304 − 1,220 − 257 − 963 + 168 − 229 + 396         Sep − 3,215 − 2,200 − 2,245 − 2,121 + 46 − 1,016 − 257 − 759 + 123 − 170 + 292
         Oct − 3,240 − 2,399 − 1,991 − 1,812 − 408 − 841 − 257 − 584 − 195 − 413 + 217
         Nov − 3,131 − 2,176 − 1,547 − 1,456 − 629 − 955 − 257 − 699 + 165 − 259 + 424         Dec + 441 + 1,743 + 2,033 + 2,465 − 290 − 1,302 − 257 − 1,045 − 582 − 647 + 64
2013          Jan − 5,789 − 4,649 − 4,543 − 3,734 − 106 − 1,140 − 275 − 865 + 26 − 87 + 113
         Feb − 6,880 − 5,801 − 5,551 − 5,055 − 250 − 1,079 − 275 − 804 − 26 − 103 + 77         Mar − 3,133 − 2,181 − 2,255 − 2,217 + 75 − 952 − 275 − 677 + 348 − 117 + 465
1The classification of “public” and “private” transfers depends on the sector to transfers). 3Payments to developing countries, pension payments, tax revenue and
which the participating domestic body belongs. 2Current contributions to the refunds, etc. 4 Where identifiable; in particular, debt forgiveness. 
budgets of international organisations and to the EU budget (excluding capital

Deutsche Bundesbank
72  Monthly Report
May 2013
XI External sector
 
7 Financial account of the Federal Republic of Germany
 
 
€ million
2012 2013
Item 2010 2011 2012 Q2 Q3 Q4 Q1 Jan Feb Mar
I Net German investment abroad
(Increase/capital exports: −) − 408,675 − 226,210 − 356,815 − 111,018 − 25,395 + 31,720 − 26,523 + 104 − 34,843 + 8,215
1 Direct investment  1 − 91,757 − 37,527 − 52,088 − 11,408 − 9,665 − 4,512 − 20,252 − 2,615 − 7,015 − 10,622
Equity capital − 55,147 − 21,739 − 34,637 − 1,314 − 10,812 − 9,864 − 5,994 − 6,439 + 2,000 − 1,555
Reinvested earnings  2 − 19,962 − 25,161 − 27,080 − 4,129 − 8,309 − 5,446 − 9,975 − 4,222 − 4,170 − 1,583
Other capital transactions
of German direct investors − 16,649 + 9,373 + 9,629 − 5,965 + 9,456 + 10,798 − 4,284 + 8,045 − 4,845 − 7,484
2 Portfolio investment − 171,333 − 22,665 − 107,955 − 422 − 28,031 − 45,825 − 44,509 − 22,219 − 9,351 − 12,940
Shares 3 − 1,355 + 2,130 − 11,186 − 1,393 − 2,415 − 13,259 − 9,966 − 3,308 − 612 − 6,045
Mutual fund shares  4 − 21,558 − 1,843 − 21,560 + 3,725 − 6,465 − 12,558 − 10,731 − 3,449 − 3,757 − 3,525
Bonds and notes  5 − 154,540 − 18,014 − 75,947 − 3,753 − 17,664 − 23,754 − 18,997 − 10,886 − 4,763 − 3,348
Money market instruments + 6,120 − 4,938 + 738 + 999 − 1,486 + 3,745 − 4,815 − 4,576 − 218 − 21
3 Financial derivatives  6 − 17,616 − 27,511 − 17,885 − 7,456 − 3,765 − 4,236 − 3,963 + 66 − 2,295 − 1,734
4 Other investment − 126,356 − 135,670 − 177,591 − 90,964 + 16,124 + 85,799 + 42,288 + 25,366 − 16,503 + 33,426
MFIs 7,8 + 138,406 + 44,070 + 62,184 + 39,870 − 21,323 + 60,942 + 15 − 154 − 13,645 + 13,814
Long-term + 77,572 − 12,957 + 47,870 + 10,580 + 7,109 + 15,002 + 11,538 + 2,316 + 7,170 + 2,052
Short-term + 60,833 + 57,027 + 14,315 + 29,290 − 28,432 + 45,940 − 11,523 − 2,470 − 20,815 + 11,762
Enterprises and households − 59,426 − 20,612 + 941 − 2,472 − 514 + 20,479 − 28,811 − 18,823 − 6,026 − 3,963
Long-term − 41,464 + 5,169 − 1,763 + 3,008 − 2,938 − 534 + 1,154 + 3,231 − 1,324 − 754
Short-term  7 − 17,962 − 25,780 + 2,704 − 5,480 + 2,423 + 21,013 − 29,965 − 22,054 − 4,702 − 3,209
General government − 57,702 − 21,056 − 48,038 − 15,388 + 4,853 − 35,092 + 4,132 + 5,606 − 1,197 − 277
Long-term − 47,492 − 2,226 − 48,048 − 10,250 + 667 − 27,785 − 406 + 637 − 574 − 470
Short-term  7 − 10,209 − 18,829 + 10 − 5,138 + 4,186 − 7,307 + 4,538 + 4,969 − 624 + 192
Bundesbank − 147,633 − 138,073 − 192,679 − 112,975 + 33,108 + 39,469 + 66,953 + 38,737 + 4,365 + 23,851
5 Change in reserve assets at
transaction values (Increase: −) − 1,613 − 2,836 − 1,297 − 769 − 59 + 494 − 86 − 493 + 321 + 86
II Net foreign investment in Germany
(Increase/capital imports: +) + 268,531 + 63,600 + 121,943 + 61,815 − 36,649 − 112,576 − 13,430 + 5,976 + 18,577 − 37,983
1 Direct investment  1 + 43,361 + 35,203 + 5,109 + 5,405 − 6,115 + 3,143 + 7,421 − 535 + 2,367 + 5,589
Equity capital + 14,009 + 10,856 − 1,971 − 1,308 − 6,147 + 4,994 − 918 + 92 − 214 − 795
Reinvested earnings  2 + 3,330 + 2,534 + 7,402 + 68 + 2,190 + 2,281 + 4,821 + 1,838 + 1,691 + 1,292
Other capital transactions
of foreign direct investors + 26,022 + 21,813 − 323 + 6,645 − 2,158 − 4,132 + 3,519 − 2,464 + 891 + 5,092
2 Portfolio investment + 47,318 + 49,627 + 42,250 + 23,913 + 1,286 + 12,362 + 5,709 − 8,020 + 25,593 − 11,864
Shares  3 − 6,147 − 11,418 + 1,148 + 9,677 + 506 − 227 − 5,371 − 5,692 + 3,678 − 3,357
Mutual fund shares + 3,598 + 6,647 − 3,869 − 2,385 − 1,100 + 644 + 107 − 113 + 380 − 159
Bonds and notes  5 + 59,620 + 50,314 + 52,925 + 10,478 + 16,255 + 10,966 − 1,313 − 2,785 + 15,862 − 14,390
Money market instruments − 9,753 + 4,084 − 7,954 + 6,143 − 14,375 + 978 + 12,286 + 571 + 5,672 + 6,042
3 Other investment + 177,852 − 21,231 + 74,584 + 32,497 − 31,819 − 128,081 − 26,561 + 14,530 − 9,383 − 31,708
MFIs 7,8 + 76,302 − 96,708 + 51,508 − 52,578 − 15,090 − 130,954 − 8,840 + 22,248 − 8,573 − 22,515
Long-term − 5,750 − 18,368 − 10,250 − 6,579 − 319 − 5,479 − 10,147 − 487 − 8,889 − 771
Short-term + 82,052 − 78,340 + 61,758 − 46,000 − 14,770 − 125,475 + 1,307 + 22,735 + 316 − 21,744
Enterprises and households + 1,992 + 25,006 − 6,034 + 13,303 − 10,574 − 10,279 + 8,396 − 794 + 2,784 + 6,406
Long-term − 6,261 − 11,899 − 9,633 − 1,753 − 3,268 − 281 − 5,074 − 2,744 − 1,581 − 749
Short-term  7 + 8,253 + 36,905 + 3,599 + 15,056 − 7,306 − 9,999 + 13,470 + 1,950 + 4,365 + 7,155
General government + 94,040 + 18,519 − 30,826 + 4,472 − 17,033 + 2,410 + 66 − 4,336 + 4,027 + 375
Long-term + 610 + 5,083 + 36,179 + 11,267 + 1,272 + 10,210 + 693 + 604 + 1,087 − 998
Short-term  7 + 93,430 + 13,436 − 67,005 − 6,795 − 18,305 − 7,799 − 627 − 4,939 + 2,940 + 1,373
Bundesbank + 5,518 + 31,952 + 59,936 + 67,301 + 10,877 + 10,742 − 26,183 − 2,588 − 7,621 − 15,974
III Financial account balance  9 
(Net capital exports: −) − 140,144 − 162,610 − 234,872 − 49,203 − 62,045 − 80,856 − 39,953 + 6,080 − 16,265 − 29,768
1From 1996, new definition for direct investment. 2Estimated. 3Including from changes in stocks. Purely statistical changes have been eliminated as far as
participation rights. 4From 1991, including retained earnings. 5From 1975, possible. 8Excluding the Deutsche Bundesbank. 9Financial account balance
excluding accrued interest. 6Options, whether evidenced by securities or not, and including change in reserve assets. 
financial futures contracts. 7The transaction values shown here are mostly derived

Deutsche Bundesbank
73  Monthly Report
May 2013
XI External sector
 
8 External position of the Bundesbank up to end-1998 *
 
 
DM million
Reserve assets and other claims on non-residents Liabilities vis-à-vis non-residents
Reserve assets
Reserve
positionin theInter- Liabilitiesnational arising Net Liabilities
Monetary arising from externalFund and Claims Loans and from Treasury position
Foreign special on the external discount (col 1 other claims
End of year currency drawing ECB 
2 on non- trans- liquidity less
or month Total Total Gold rights (net) Total paper col 8) balances 1 residents 3 actions 4 
1234567891 0 1 1
1997 127,849 126,884 13,688 76,673 13,874 22,649 966 16,931 16,931 − 110,918
1998 135,085 134,005 17,109 100,363 16,533 − 1,079 15,978 15,978 − 119,107
*Valuation of the gold holdings and the claims on non-residents in accordance with claims on the European Monetary Cooperation Fund (EMCF)). 3Including loans to
section 26 (2) of the Bundesbank Act and the provisions of the Commercial Code, the World Bank. 4Including liquidity paper sold to non-residents by the Bundesbank;
especially section 253. In the course of the year, valuation at the preceding year’s excluding the Treasury discount liquidity paper sold to non-residents between March
balance sheet rates. 1Mainly US dollar assets. 2European Central Bank (up to 1993, 1993 and March 1995, as shown in column 10. 
  
 
9 External position of the Bundesbank since the beginning of European monetary union o
€ million
Reserve assets and other claims on non-residents
Reserve assets
Reserveposition
Other in the Inter-national
claims on Net
Monetary Other residents external
Fund and claims on Claims in other position
Gold special Foreign non-euro- within the euro-area (col 1 Liabilities
End of year and gold drawing currency area Eurosystem member less vis-à-vis non-
or month Total Total rights reserves (net) 2 states col 9) receivables residents 1,3 residents 3,4 
1234567891 0
1999          Jan  5 95,316 93,940 29,312 8,461 56,167 140 1,225 11 8,169 87,146
1999 141,958 93,039 32,287 8,332 52,420 9,162 39,746 11 6,179 135,779
2000 100,762 93,815 32,676 7,762 53,377 313 6,620 14 6,592 94,170
2001 76,147 93,215 35,005 8,721 49,489 312 − 17,385 5 8,752 67,396
2002 103,948 85,002 36,208 8,272 40,522 312 18,466 167 9,005 94,942
2003 95,394 76,680 36,533 7,609 32,538 312 17,945 456 10,443 84,951
2004 93,110 71,335 35,495 6,548 29,292 312 20,796 667 7,935 85,175
2005 130,268 86,181 47,924 4,549 33,708 350 42,830 906 6,285 123,983
2006 104,389 84,765 53,114 3,011 28,640 350 18,344 931 4,819 99,570
2007 179,492 92,545 62,433 2,418 27,694 350 84,064 2,534 16,005 163,488
2008 230,775 99,185 68,194 3,285 27,705 350 128,668 2,573 30,169 200,607
2009 323,286 125,541 83,939 15,969 25,634 350 189,936 7,460 9,126 314,160
2010 524,695 162,100 115,403 18,740 27,957 50 337,869 24,676 14,620 510,075
2011 714,662 184,603 132,874 22,296 29,433 50 475,942 54,067 46,557 668,106
2012 921,002 188,630 137,513 22,344 28,774 50 668,617 63,706 106,496 814,506
2012          Jan 763,406 195,056 144,034 22,115 28,907 50 510,763 57,539 11,941 751,466
         Feb 814,053 195,654 145,234 22,073 28,346 50 559,678 58,672 13,460 800,593
         Mar 875,780 186,628 135,777 22,177 28,674 50 628,223 60,880 17,564 858,215
         Apr 909,192 189,556 137,380 22,624 29,551 50 656,813 62,773 15,312 893,879
         May 964,557 193,057 138,000 23,400 31,658 50 711,198 60,252 53,949 910,608
         June 992,341 190,248 136,094 23,320 30,834 50 741,198 60,845 84,880 907,461
         July 1,000,019 199,419 144,217 23,769 31,434 50 739,837 60,713 101,674 898,345
         Aug 1,023,617 197,776 143,507 23,520 30,749 50 764,080 61,711 101,494 922,123
         Sep 974,478 203,337 150,373 23,295 29,669 50 708,090 63,002 95,757 878,721
         Oct 991,439 196,910 144,172 23,154 29,585 50 731,983 62,496 123,787 867,652
         Nov 988,534 197,486 145,110 22,771 29,606 50 727,755 63,242 112,190 876,344
         Dec 921,002 188,630 137,513 22,344 28,774 50 668,617 63,706 106,496 814,506
2013          Jan 878,587 184,947 134,745 21,953 28,249 50 629,884 63,707 103,899 774,688
         Feb 871,508 183,222 132,131 22,011 29,079 50 625,519 62,717 96,300 775,208
         Mar 852,611 188,447 136,454 22,403 29,590 50 601,669 62,446 80,341 772,271
         Apr 857,433 173,980 122,844 22,096 29,040 50 620,813 62,590 94,482 762,951
oClaims and liabilities vis-à-vis all countries within and outside the euro area. Up to From November 2000, including the TARGET positions which were previously shown
December 2000, the levels at the end of each quarter are shown, owing to (in columns 6 and 9) as bilateral assets and liabilities vis-à-vis national central banksrevaluations, at market prices; within each quarter, however, the levels are computed outside the Eurosystem. 3See footnote 2. 4Excluding allocations of special drawing
on the basis of cumulative transaction values. From January 2001, all end-of-month rights (SDR) by the International Monetary Fund (IMF) for an amount of SDR 12,059levels are valued at market prices. 1Including loans to the World Bank. 2Including million. 5 Euro opening balance sheet of the Bundesbank as at 1 January 1999. 
the balances in the Bundesbank’s cross-border payments within the Eurosystem.

Deutsche Bundesbank
74  Monthly Report
May 2013
XI External sector
 
10 Assets and liabilities of enterprises in Germany (other than banks)
vis-à-vis non-residents *
 
€ million
Claims on non-residents Liabilities vis-à-vis non-residents
Claims on foreign non-banks Liabilities  vis-à-vis foreign non-banks
from trade credits from trade credits
Balances Loans
with from Credit Advance from from Credit Advance
End of year foreign financial terms payments foreign financial terms payments
or month Total banks Total Total granted effected Total banks Total Total used received operations operations
All countries
 
2009 593,591 209,729 383,862 240,727 143,135 130,605 12,530 754,355 159,667 594,688 457,468 137,220 80,759 56,461
2010 670,695 242,028 428,667 272,426 156,241 143,032 13,209 807,185 162,091 645,094 498,310 146,784 88,288 58,496
2011 698,599 242,387 456,212 285,123 171,089 155,392 15,697 871,795 172,099 699,696 538,839 160,857 95,131 65,726
2012 747,469 274,802 472,667 298,059 174,608 158,836 15,772 910,840 170,265 740,575 578,392 162,183 94,291 67,892
2012          Oct 753,254 285,724 467,530 287,364 180,166 163,677 16,489 911,579 176,995 734,584 573,687 160,897 91,058 69,839
         Nov 766,658 290,747 475,911 291,788 184,123 167,817 16,306 918,753 173,966 744,787 581,351 163,436 93,697 69,739
         Dec 747,469 274,802 472,667 298,059 174,608 158,836 15,772 910,840 170,265 740,575 578,392 162,183 94,291 67,892
2013          Jan 768,041 297,340 470,701 299,784 170,917 154,945 15,972 909,918 171,780 738,138 579,647 158,491 89,441 69,050
         Feb 775,347 302,209 473,138 298,999 174,139 158,126 16,013 909,930 173,705 736,225 576,365 159,860 90,904 68,956
         Mar 793,038 301,176 491,862 311,143 180,719 164,901 15,818 929,715 180,631 749,084 586,461 162,623 93,324 69,299
Industrial countries
 
2009 531,796 208,571 323,225 220,778 102,447 93,566 8,881 684,984 157,343 527,641 431,525 96,116 68,912 27,204
2010 598,167 240,915 357,252 249,497 107,755 98,428 9,327 725,644 159,522 566,122 464,105 102,017 73,987 28,030
2011 615,925 240,265 375,660 258,453 117,207 104,915 12,292 785,925 169,535 616,390 502,139 114,251 80,491 33,760
2012 659,800 272,400 387,400 269,072 118,328 104,985 13,343 824,182 167,856 656,326 542,994 113,332 79,123 34,209
2012          Oct 663,527 282,739 380,788 258,385 122,403 108,780 13,623 824,673 175,011 649,662 538,302 111,360 76,042 35,318
         Nov 676,087 287,935 388,152 262,525 125,627 111,993 13,634 830,805 171,996 658,809 545,820 112,989 77,975 35,014
         Dec 659,800 272,400 387,400 269,072 118,328 104,985 13,343 824,182 167,856 656,326 542,994 113,332 79,123 34,209
2013          Jan 682,191 295,304 386,887 270,983 115,904 102,411 13,493 822,737 169,868 652,869 543,379 109,490 74,875 34,615
         Feb 688,659 300,298 388,361 269,509 118,852 105,072 13,780 822,105 171,738 650,367 540,049 110,318 75,713 34,605
         Mar 703,958 299,246 404,712 280,670 124,042 110,343 13,699 840,868 178,808 662,060 549,632 112,428 77,776 34,652
EU member states
 
2009 443,431 200,400 243,031 165,986 77,045 70,051 6,994 579,596 141,633 437,963 367,980 69,983 48,977 21,006
2010 494,360 230,746 263,614 184,862 78,752 71,525 7,227 618,145 150,817 467,328 395,566 71,762 50,035 21,727
2011 508,071 225,583 282,488 196,132 86,356 76,472 9,884 660,137 157,465 502,672 421,679 80,993 54,370 26,623
2012 547,557 250,191 297,366 212,698 84,668 74,190 10,478 695,214 156,552 538,662 458,505 80,157 53,623 26,534
2012          Oct 546,842 258,046 288,796 200,279 88,517 77,708 10,809 695,844 165,201 530,643 451,583 79,060 51,412 27,648
         Nov 557,997 263,962 294,035 203,046 90,989 80,241 10,748 702,814 161,641 541,173 461,248 79,925 52,647 27,278
         Dec 547,557 250,191 297,366 212,698 84,668 74,190 10,478 695,214 156,552 538,662 458,505 80,157 53,623 26,534
2013          Jan 570,217 271,121 299,096 215,603 83,493 73,073 10,420 699,247 161,433 537,814 459,910 77,904 51,126 26,778
         Feb 575,337 275,347 299,990 214,551 85,439 74,851 10,588 697,060 162,294 534,766 456,096 78,670 51,959 26,711
         Mar 588,831 275,633 313,198 223,673 89,525 78,997 10,528 714,250 169,132 545,118 464,997 80,121 53,525 26,596
of which:  Euro-area member states 1
 
2009 321,991 159,740 162,251 114,378 47,873 43,179 4,694 466,064 91,792 374,272 332,280 41,992 28,397 13,595
2010 366,774 184,299 182,475 130,430 52,045 47,239 4,806 497,433 98,177 399,256 351,352 47,904 33,444 14,460
2011 372,493 171,907 200,586 142,530 58,056 52,125 5,931 529,244 103,827 425,417 370,898 54,519 37,188 17,331
2012 396,816 189,865 206,951 152,060 54,891 48,992 5,899 572,523 110,052 462,471 408,502 53,969 36,754 17,215
2012          Oct 393,639 192,574 201,065 142,975 58,090 51,900 6,190 567,327 116,020 451,307 398,640 52,667 34,813 17,854
         Nov 402,862 197,450 205,412 145,670 59,742 53,569 6,173 574,047 113,554 460,493 407,201 53,292 35,526 17,766
         Dec 396,816 189,865 206,951 152,060 54,891 48,992 5,899 572,523 110,052 462,471 408,502 53,969 36,754 17,215
2013          Jan 416,564 205,388 211,176 156,350 54,826 48,813 6,013 573,817 110,576 463,241 410,284 52,957 35,450 17,507
         Feb 420,134 208,941 211,193 155,468 55,725 49,672 6,053 570,230 115,053 455,177 401,658 53,519 35,813 17,706
         Mar 429,618 208,471 221,147 162,710 58,437 52,428 6,009 591,064 124,542 466,522 413,212 53,310 35,866 17,444
Emerging economies and developing countries 2
 
2009 61,795 1,158 60,637 19,949 40,688 37,039 3,649 69,371 2,324 67,047 25,943 41,104 11,847 29,257
2010 72,528 1,113 71,415 22,929 48,486 44,604 3,882 81,541 2,569 78,972 34,205 44,767 14,301 30,466
2011 82,674 2,122 80,552 26,670 53,882 50,477 3,405 85,870 2,564 83,306 36,700 46,606 14,640 31,966
2012 87,669 2,402 85,267 28,987 56,280 53,851 2,429 86,658 2,409 84,249 35,398 48,851 15,168 33,683
2012          Oct 89,727 2,985 86,742 28,979 57,763 54,897 2,866 86,906 1,984 84,922 35,385 49,537 15,016 34,521
         Nov 90,571 2,812 87,759 29,263 58,496 55,824 2,672 87,948 1,970 85,978 35,531 50,447 15,722 34,725
         Dec 87,669 2,402 85,267 28,987 56,280 53,851 2,429 86,658 2,409 84,249 35,398 48,851 15,168 33,683
2013          Jan 85,850 2,036 83,814 28,801 55,013 52,534 2,479 87,181 1,912 85,269 36,268 49,001 14,566 34,435
         Feb 86,688 1,911 84,777 29,490 55,287 53,054 2,233 87,825 1,967 85,858 36,316 49,542 15,191 34,351
         Mar 89,080 1,930 87,150 30,473 56,677 54,558 2,119 88,847 1,823 87,024 36,829 50,195 15,548 34,647
* Up to and including November 2009 the assets and liabilities vis-à-vis non-residents Slovakia; from January 2011 including Estonia. 2All countries that are not regarded
of households in Germany. The assets and liabilities vis-à-vis non-residents of banks as industrial countries. Up to December 2010 including Niederländische Antillen;
(MFIs) in Germany are shown in Table 4 of Section IV, “Banks”. Statistical increases from January 2011 including Bonaire, St.Eustatius, Saba and Curacao and St.Martin
and decreases have not been eliminated; to this extent, the changes in totals are not (Dutch part). 
comparable with the figures shown in Table XI.7. 1From January 2009 including

Deutsche Bundesbank
75  Monthly Report
May 2013
XI External sector
 
11 ECB euro reference exchange rates of selected currencies *
 
 
EUR 1 = currency units ...
Yearly Australia Canada China Denmark Japan Norway Sweden Switzerland United States United Kingdom
or monthly       
average AUD CAD CNY 1 DKK JPY NOK SEK CHF GBP USD
1999 1.6523 1.5840 . 7.4355 121.32 8.3104 8.8075 1.6003 0.65874 1.0658
2000 1.5889 1.3706 2 7.6168 7.4538 99.47 8.1129 8.4452 1.5579 0.60948 0.9236
2001 1.7319 1.3864 7.4131 7.4521 108.68 8.0484 9.2551 1.5105 0.62187 0.8956
2002 1.7376 1.4838 7.8265 7.4305 118.06 7.5086 9.1611 1.4670 0.62883 0.94562003 1.7379 1.5817 9.3626 7.4307 130.97 8.0033 9.1242 1.5212 0.69199 1.13122004 1.6905 1.6167 10.2967 7.4399 134.44 8.3697 9.1243 1.5438 0.67866 1.2439
2005 1.6320 1.5087 10.1955 7.4518 136.85 8.0092 9.2822 1.5483 0.68380 1.2441
2006 1.6668 1.4237 10.0096 7.4591 146.02 8.0472 9.2544 1.5729 0.68173 1.25562007 1.6348 1.4678 10.4178 7.4506 161.25 8.0165 9.2501 1.6427 0.68434 1.37052008 1.7416 1.5594 10.2236 7.4560 152.45 8.2237 9.6152 1.5874 0.79628 1.47082009 1.7727 1.5850 9.5277 7.4462 130.34 8.7278 10.6191 1.5100 0.89094 1.3948
2010 1.4423 1.3651 8.9712 7.4473 116.24 8.0043 9.5373 1.3803 0.85784 1.3257
2011 1.3484 1.3761 8.9960 7.4506 110.96 7.7934 9.0298 1.2326 0.86788 1.39202012 1.2407 1.2842 8.1052 7.4437 102.49 7.4751 8.7041 1.2053 0.81087 1.2848
2011          Dec 1.3003 1.3481 8.3563 7.4341 102.55 7.7451 9.0184 1.2276 0.84405 1.31792012          Jan 1.2405 1.3073 8.1465 7.4353 99.33 7.6752 8.8503 1.2108 0.83210 1.2905
         Feb 1.2327 1.3193 8.3314 7.4341 103.77 7.5522 8.8196 1.2071 0.83696 1.3224         Mar 1.2538 1.3121 8.3326 7.4354 108.88 7.5315 8.8873 1.2061 0.83448 1.3201
         Apr 1.2718 1.3068 8.2921 7.4393 107.00 7.5698 8.8650 1.2023 0.82188 1.3162
         May 1.2825 1.2916 8.0806 7.4335 101.97 7.5655 8.9924 1.2012 0.80371 1.2789         June 1.2550 1.2874 7.9676 7.4325 99.26 7.5401 8.8743 1.2011 0.80579 1.2526
         July 1.1931 1.2461 7.8288 7.4384 97.07 7.4579 8.5451 1.2011 0.78827 1.2288
         Aug 1.1841 1.2315 7.8864 7.4454 97.58 7.3239 8.2805 1.2011 0.78884 1.2400         Sep 1.2372 1.2583 8.1273 7.4539 100.49 7.3945 8.4929 1.2089 0.79821 1.2856
         Oct 1.2596 1.2801 8.1390 7.4582 102.47 7.4076 8.6145 1.2098 0.80665 1.2974
         Nov 1.2331 1.2787 7.9998 7.4587 103.94 7.3371 8.6076 1.2052 0.80389 1.2828         Dec 1.2527 1.2984 8.1809 7.4604 109.71 7.3503 8.6512 1.2091 0.81237 1.3119
2013          Jan 1.2658 1.3189 8.2698 7.4614 118.34 7.3821 8.6217 1.2288 0.83271 1.3288
         Feb 1.2951 1.3477 8.3282 7.4598 124.40 7.4232 8.5083 1.2298 0.86250 1.3359         Mar 1.2537 1.3285 8.0599 7.4553 122.99 7.4863 8.3470 1.2266 0.85996 1.2964
         Apr 1.2539 1.3268 8.0564 7.4553 127.54 7.5444 8.4449 1.2199 0.85076 1.3026
*Averages: Bundesbank calculations based on the daily euro reference exchange Statistical Supplement 5, Exchange rate statistics. 1Up to March 2005, ECB indicative
rates published by the ECB; for additional euro reference exchange rates, see rates. 2 Average from 13 January to 29 December 2000. 
12 Euro-area member states and irrevocable euro conversion rates in the third stage
of European Economic and Monetary Union
From Country Currency ISO currency code EUR 1 = currency units ...
1999  January 1 Austria Austrian schilling ATS 13.7603
Belgium Belgian franc BEF 40.3399
Finland Finnish markka FIM 5.94573
France French franc FRF 6.55957
Germany Deutsche Mark DEM 1.95583
Ireland Irish pound IEP 0.787564
Italy Italian lira ITL 1,936.27
Luxembourg Luxembourg franc LUF 40.3399
Netherlands Dutch guilder NLG 2.20371
Portugal Portuguese escudo PTE 200.482
Spain Spanish peseta ESP 166.386
2001  January 1 Greece Greek drachma GRD 340.750
2007  January 1 Slovenia Slovenian tolar SIT 239.640
2008  January 1 Cyprus Cyprus pound CYP 0.585274
Malta Maltese lira MTL 0.429300
2009  January 1 Slovakia Slovak koruna SKK 30.1260
2011  January 1 Estonia Estonian kroon EEK 15.6466

Deutsche Bundesbank
76  Monthly Report
May 2013
XI  External sector
 
13  Effective exchange rates of the Euro and indicators of the German economy’s price competitiveness *
 
 
1999 Q1=100
Effective exchange rate of the Euro Indicators of the German economy’s price competitiveness
EER-20  1 EER-40  2 Based on the deflators of total sales  3 Based on consumer price indices
24 selected industrial countries  4 In real terms
In real terms based on
In real based on unit In real
24 terms the deflators labour terms
based on of gross costs of based on Non- selected
36 36 56 consumer domestic national consumer Euro-area euro-area industrial
Period Nominal price indices product  3 economy  3 Nominal price indices Total countries countries countries  5 6 countries  4 countries  5 countries  7 
1999 96.2 96.0 96.0 96.2 96.5 95.8 97.8 99.5 95.7 97.7 98.2 98.0 97.7
2000 87.0 86.5 86.1 85.5 87.9 85.8 91.5 97.1 85.0 91.0 92.9 91.9 90.9
2001 87.6 87.2 86.8 84.8 90.4 87.1 91.0 95.9 85.4 90.1 92.9 91.4 90.8
2002 90.0 90.3 89.8 88.0 94.8 90.7 91.7 95.0 87.9 90.5 93.5 91.9 91.8
2003 100.6 101.5 100.9 98.8 106.8 101.6 95.0 93.9 96.9 94.2 97.0 96.5 96.7
2004 104.4 105.3 103.6 102.5 111.3 105.2 95.2 92.7 99.1 94.2 98.4 98.0 98.2
2005 102.9 103.8 101.6 100.3 109.3 102.7 94.0 91.4 98.1 92.2 98.4 96.9 96.5
2006 102.8 103.8 100.8 99.2 109.3 102.0 92.7 89.9 97.2 90.6 98.5 96.4 95.8
2007 106.2 106.5 102.7 100.8 112.8 104.0 93.6 89.1 101.0 91.0 100.8 97.8 96.9
2008 109.4 108.6 103.8 103.5 116.9 105.9 93.8 87.7 104.2 90.5 102.2 97.8 97.0
2009 110.6 109.2 104.9 105.7 119.7 106.8 93.5 87.8 103.0 91.3 101.7 97.9 97.4
2010 103.6 101.6 96.9 98.4 111.4 98.1 91.1 87.5 96.8 88.5 98.8 93.9 92.2
2011 103.4 100.7 p 95.1 p 96.2 112.1 97.6 90.5 87.1 95.9 87.8 98.2 93.1 91.7
2012 97.8 95.5 p 89.8 p 90.8 107.0 p 92.9 p 88.5 p 86.8 90.7 p 85.9 96.0 90.3 p 88.8
2009          Nov 113.0 111.0 106.0 107.7 122.0 108.1 94.3 88.0 105.1 91.8 102.3 98.6 97.9
         Dec 111.9 109.8 120.8 106.8 102.2 98.2 97.4
2010          Jan 109.7 107.6 118.3 104.4 101.2 97.0 95.9
         Feb 107.0 104.8 101.2 102.7 115.3 101.7 92.6 87.7 100.8 89.9 100.2 95.6 94.3
         Mar 106.2 104.3 114.2 100.9 100.2 95.2 93.8
         Apr 105.0 103.1 112.5 99.3 99.5 94.4 92.7
         May 101.8 100.0 95.7 97.2 109.0 96.3 90.7 87.4 95.7 88.0 98.2 93.0 91.2
         June 99.8 98.0 106.9 94.4 97.2 92.1 90.3
         July 101.6 99.8 109.2 96.4 97.8 92.9 91.2
         Aug 101.2 99.4 94.7 95.7 108.8 96.0 90.3 87.6 94.5 87.7 97.6 92.7 91.0
         Sep 101.5 99.5 109.2 96.0 97.7 92.7 91.0
         Oct 105.0 102.6 112.9 99.0 99.1 94.2 92.6
         Nov 103.7 101.2 96.0 98.2 111.7 97.7 90.9 87.4 96.4 88.2 98.8 93.7 92.0
         Dec 101.7 99.2 109.3 95.6 97.9 92.8 91.0
2011          Jan 101.4 99.0 109.3 95.5 97.8 92.5 90.7
         Feb 102.4 99.9 94.8 96.5 110.6 96.5 90.6 87.3 95.7 87.8 98.1 92.8 91.2
         Mar 104.1 101.6 112.3 98.1 98.6 93.5 91.9
         Apr 105.9 103.4 114.0 99.7 99.5 94.3 92.7
         May 104.9 102.2 97.0 98.7 113.2 98.6 91.5 87.2 98.5 88.5 99.0 93.7 92.1
         June 105.0 102.2 113.4 98.7 99.0 93.7 92.2
         July 104.0 101.1 112.4 97.7 98.6 93.3 91.8
         Aug 103.9 100.9 95.1 96.7 112.9 98.1 90.3 87.0 95.7 87.6 98.1 93.1 91.8
         Sep 102.8 99.9 112.0 97.4 97.7 92.7 91.6
         Oct 103.0 100.2 112.6 97.8 97.9 92.9 91.8
         Nov 102.6 99.9 p 93.6 p 93.0 112.1 97.3 89.6 86.8 93.8 87.2 97.7 92.8 91.6
         Dec 100.8 98.1 110.3 95.7 96.9 91.8 90.6
2012          Jan 98.9 96.3 108.0 93.7 96.2 90.8 89.4
         Feb 99.6 97.2 p 91.4 p 92.3 108.4 94.2 89.0 86.9 92.1 86.5 96.8 91.3 89.7
         Mar 99.8 97.3 108.6 94.3 96.8 91.2 89.6
         Apr 99.5 97.1 108.4 94.2 96.7 91.1 89.5
         May 98.0 95.7 p 90.3 p 91.2 107.2 93.1 88.7 87.0 90.9 86.2 95.9 90.4 88.9
         June 97.2 94.8 106.6 92.4 95.5 89.9 88.6
         July 95.3 93.2 104.4 90.7 94.9 89.1 87.5
         Aug 95.2 93.1 p 88.0 p 88.9 104.3 90.7 87.7 86.8 88.7 85.1 94.9 89.1 87.5
         Sep 97.2 95.0 106.6 92.5 95.6 89.9 88.5
         Oct 97.8 95.5 107.2 92.8 95.9 90.1 88.7
         Nov 97.2 94.9 p 89.6 p 90.7 106.7 p 92.2 p 88.5 p 86.7 91.2 p 85.9 95.9 90.0 p 88.5
         Dec 98.7 96.2 108.2 p 93.5 96.6 90.6 p 89.2
2013          Jan 100.4 p 98.0 109.8 p 94.8 97.5 p 91.5 p 89.9
         Feb 101.6 p 99.0 ... ... 111.1 p 95.7 ... ... ... ... 98.1 p 92.0 p 90.4
         Mar 100.2 p 97.7 109.4 p 94.3 p 97.7 p 91.4 p 89.6
         Apr 100.4 p 98.0 109.7 p 94.4 p 97.8 p 91.5 p 89.7
*The effective exchange rate corresponds to the weighted external value of the not available, estimates were used. 2ECB calculations. Includes countries belonging
currency concerned. The method of calculating the indicators of the German to the EER-20 group (see footnote 1) and additional Algeria, Argentina, Brazil, Chile,
economy’s price competitiveness is consistent with the procedure used by the ECB to Croatia, Iceland, India, Indonesia, Israel, Malaysia, Mexico, Morocco, New Zealand,
compute the effective exchange rates of the euro (see Monthly Report, November Philippines, Russian Federation, South Africa, Taiwan, Thailand, Turkey and
2001, pp  50-53, May 2007, pp  31-35 and February 2012, pp  34-35). For more Venezuela. 3Annual and quarterly averages. 4Euro-area countries (from 2001
detailed information on methodology see the ECB’s Occasional Paper No  134 including Greece, from 2007 including Slovenia, from 2008 including Cyprus and
(www.ecb.int). A decline in the figures implies an increase in competitiveness. 1ECB Malta, from 2009 including Slovakia, from 2011 including Estonia) as well as Canada,
calculations are based on the weighted averages of the changes in the bilateral Denmark, Japan, Norway, Sweden, Switzerland, United Kingdom and United States.
exchange rates of the euro against the currencies of the following countries: Austra- 5Euro-area countries and countries belonging to the EER-20 group. 6Owing to
lia, Bulgaria, Canada, China, Czech Republic, Denmark, Hong Kong, Hungary, Japan, missing data for the deflator of total sales, China is not included in this calculation.
Latvia, Lithuania, Norway, Poland, Romania, Singapore, South Korea, Sweden, 7 Euro-area countries and countries belonging to the EER-40 group (see footnote 2). 
Switzerland, United Kingdom and United States. Where price and wage indices were

Overview of publications by the  
Deutsche Bundesbank
This overview provides information about selected recent economic and statistical publica-
tions by the Deutsche Bundesbank. Unless otherwise indicated, these publications are avail-able in both English and German, in printed form and on the Bundesbank’s website.
The publications are available free of charge from the Communication Division. For a small 
fee to cover costs, a file which is updated monthly and contains approximately 40,000 time series published by the Bundesbank can be obtained on CD-ROM from the Division Statis-tical data processing, mathematical methods or downloaded from the Bundesbank-ExtraNet site. Orders should be sent, in writing, to one of the addresses listed on the reverse of the title page. Selected time series can also be downloaded from the internet.
Annual Report
Financial Stability ReviewMonthly Report
For information on the articles published be -
tween 2000 and 2012 see the index attached 
to the January 2013 Monthly Report.
Monthly Report articles
June 2012
–
 Outlook for the German economy – macr
o-
economic projections for 2012 and 2013
–
 The price of crude oil and its impact on eco
-
nomic activity in the industrial countries
–
 The r
ole of the “Basel interest rate shock” in 
the supervisory assessment of interest rate 
risks in the banking book
July 2012–
 The eur
o as an anchor currency and core of 
a currency bloc–
 Deutsche Bundesbank Spring Conference 
2012 – monetary policy, inflation and inter -
national linkages
–
 The new CPSS-IOSC
O Principles for financial 
market infrastructures
August 2012–
 The 
current economic situation in Germany
September 2012–
 The performance of German credit institu -
tions in 2011
–
 Innovations 
in payment systems
–
 The 
International Monetary Fund in a 
changed global environment
October 2012–
 The financial crisis and balance of payments developments 
within the euro area
–
 The development of state government 
 finances in Germany since 2005
–
 The importance of tr
ade credit for 
 corpor
ate 
financing in Germany – evidence from finan-cial statements statistics
–
 The use of cash and cashless payment 
 instruments: a microeconomic analysisDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report 
May 2013  
77•

November 2012
–
 The 
current economic situation in Germany
December 2012–
 Outlook for the German economy – macr
o-
economic projections for 2013 and 2014
–
 German enterprises’ profitability and finan -
cing in 2011
–
 C
alendar effects on economic activity
January 2013–
 Current developments in the mutual funds market: demand, structural changes and 
 investor behaviour
–
 Current and projected development of coin 
circulation in Germany
February 2013–
 The 
current economic situation in Germany
March 2013–
 Germany’
s balance of payments in 2012
–
 Banks’ internal methods for assessing and maintaining internal capital adequacy and 
their relevance to supervision
April 2013–
 The US economy in the current economic 
upturn
–
 Macroprudential oversight in Germany: 
framework, institutions and tools
May 2013–
 The 
current economic situation in GermanyStatistical Supplements to the 
Monthly Report
 1 Banking statistics 1, 2
 2 C apital market statistics 1, 2
 3 Balance of payments statistics 1, 2
 4 Seasonal ly adjusted business statistics 1, 2
 5 Exchange rate statistics 2
Special Publications
Makro-ökonometrisches Mehr-Länder-Modell, 
November 1996 3
Europäische Organisationen und Gremien im Bereich von Währung und Wirtschaft, May 
1997 3
Die Zahlungsbilanz der ehemaligen DDR 1975 
bis 1989, August 1999 3
The market for German Federal securities, 
May 2000
Macro-Econometric Multi-Country Model: MEM -
MOD, June 2000
Bundesbank Act, September 2002Weltweite Organisationen und Gremien im Be-
reich von Währung und Wirtschaft, March 
2003 3
Die Europäische Union: Grundlagen und Politik-
bereiche außerhalb der Wirtschafts-und Wäh-
rungsunion, April 2005 3
Die Deutsche Bundesbank – Aufgabenfelder, 
rechtlicher Rahmen, Geschichte, April 2006 3
European economic and monetary union, April 
2008
For footnotes, see p 80•.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report 
May 2013  
78•

Special Statistical Publications
 1 Banking statistics guidelines and customer  
classification, January 20132, 4
 2 Bankenstatistik Kundensystematik,  
January 20132, 3
 3 Aufbau der bankstatistischen T abellen, 
June 20112, 3
 4 Financial accounts for Germany 2006 to 
2011, June 20122
 5 E xtrapolated results from financial state -
ments of German enterprises 1994 to 
2003, March 2006 2
 6 V erhältniszahlen aus Jahresabschlüssen 
deutscher Unternehmen von 2008 bis 
2009, May 20122, 3
 7 Notes on the coding list for the balance of 
payments 
statistics, March 2009 2
 8 The balance of payments statistics of the  
Federal Republic of Germany, 2nd edition, 
February 1991o
 9 Securities deposits, August 2005
 1 0 F oreign direct investment stock statistics, 
April 20131, 2
 1 1 Balance of payments by region,  
July 2012
 1 2 T echnologische Dienstleistungen in der 
Zahlungsbilanz, June 20113Discussion Papers*
09/2013  
Optimal sovereign default
10/2013  
The expectations-driven U.S. current account11/2013  
The empirical (ir)relevance of the interest rate 
 assumption for central bank forecasts12/2013  
On the low-frequency relationship between 
public deficits and inflation13/2013  
Time variation in macro-financial linkages14/2013  
Restructuring counterparty credit risk15/2013  
Structural and cyclical effects of tax progression16/2013  
Repo funding and internal capital markets in 
the financial crisis17/2013  
Does non-interest income make banks more 
risky? Retail- versus investment-oriented banks18/2013  
Is local bias a cross-border phenomenon? Evi -
dence from individual investors’ international 
asset allocation19/2013  
Banking across borders
o Not available on the website.
* As of 2000 these publications have been made available on the Bundesbank’s website in German and English. Since the beginning of 2012, no longer subdivided into series 1 and series 2.For footnotes, see p 80•.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report 
May 2013  
79•

Banking legislation
 1 Bundesbank A ct and Statute of the Euro -
pean System of Central Banks and of the 
European Central Bank, June 1998
 2 Gesetz über das Kr editwesen, January 
20083 2 a Solvabilitäts- und Liquiditätsver ordnung, 
February 20083
1 Only the headings and explanatory notes to the data con-
tained in the German originals are available in English.2 Available on the website only.3 Available in German only.4 Only some parts of the Special Statistical Publications are 
provided in English. The date refers to the German issue, 
which may be of a more recent date than the English one.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report 
May 2013  
80•

