Monthly Report
November 2013
Vol 65  
No 11

Deutsche Bundesbank  
Wilhelm-Epstein-Strasse 14  
60431 Frankfurt am Main  
Germany
Postal address  
Postfach 10 06 02  
60006 Frankfurt am Main  
Germany
Tel +49 69 9566-0
Fax +49 69 9566 3077
http://www.bundesbank.de
Reproduction permitted only if source is stated.
ISSN 0418-8292 (print edition)  
ISSN 1862-1325 (online edition)
The German original of this Monthly Report  
went to press at 11 am on 15 November 2013.Annual and weekly publishing schedules for 
 selected statistics of the Deutsche Bundes-  
bank can be downloaded from our website. 
The statistical data are also published on the 
website.
The Monthly Report  is published by the 
 Deutsche Bundesbank, Frankfurt am Main,  
by virtue of section  18 of the Bundesbank  
Act. It is available to interested parties free of 
charge.
This is a translation of the original German-
language version, which is the sole authorita -
tive text.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2013  
2

Contents
The current economic situation in Germany  ................................................  5
Overview  ........................................................................................................................  6
Global and European setting  ..................................................................................  10
The empirical relationship between world trade and global economic output  ....................  13
Monetary policy and banking business  ..............................................................  23
Money market management and liquidity needs  ................................................................  24
Changes in bank holdings of domestic government bonds in the euro area  .......................  31
Financial markets  ........................................................................................................  37
Economic conditions in Germany  .........................................................................  45
Reasons for the recent slump in German goods exports to China  .......................................  47
Public finances  .............................................................................................................  57Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2013  
3

Statistical Section ....................................................................................................  1 •
Key economic data for the euro area  ..................................................................................  5 •
Overall monetary survey in the euro area  ............................................................................  8 •
Consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem  ............................................................  16 •
Banks  ..................................................................................................................................  20 •
Minimum reserves  ...............................................................................................................  42 •
Interest rates  .......................................................................................................................  43 •
Insurance corporations and pension funds  ..........................................................................  48 •
Capital market  ....................................................................................................................  50 •
Financial accounts  ...............................................................................................................  54 •
Public finances in Germany  .................................................................................................  56 •
Economic conditions in Germany  ........................................................................................  63 •
External sector  ....................................................................................................................  70 •
Overview of publications by the Deutsche Bundesbank  ..........................  79 •
Abbreviations and symbols
e Estimated
p Provisional
pe Partly estimated
r Revised
… Data available at a later date
. Data unknown, not to be published or not meaningful
0 Less than 0.5 but more than nil
– Nil
Discrepancies in the totals are due to rounding.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2013  
4

The current economic situation  
in GermanyDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2013  
5

Overview
Domestic economy  
supports German growth
The global economy is on a moderate and 
slightly accelerating growth path. In the emer -
ging economies in particular, the pace of 
growth appears to have picked up in the sum -
mer, with somewhat faster growth especially in 
China and some central and eastern European 
countries. In other emerging economies, how -
ever, the rate of growth remained modest, 
partly as a result of serious structural problems 
and turbulence on the financial markets in 
some emerging economies with high current 
account deficits. In the industrialised countries, 
the momentum which gave the economy a lift 
in the spring continued after mid-  year. For in -
stance, the United States and the United King -
dom almost maintained the same level of ex -
pansion. By contrast, the Japanese economy, 
which recorded robust growth in the first half 
of the year, and the euro area were unable fully 
to match their prior- quarter result.
In the current quarter, the upward movement 
in the global economy is likely to continue at 
more or less the same rate. The budget dispute 
in the United States, which was settled for the 
time being in mid- October, and which led to a 
two- week shutdown at government offices 
and other expenditure cuts, will place only a 
minor drag on the country’s economic output, 
judging from experience in the mid-1990s 
when a similar escalation occurred. It should 
also be borne in mind that the US central bank 
has so far maintained its highly expansionary 
monetary policy unchanged – despite discus -
sions in the spring – and that there has been 
no disturbance from the crude oil markets re -
cently.
Events on the international financial markets in 
the third quarter were considerably affected by 
factors connected with monetary policy and 
with macroeconomic developments. The finan -cial markets came fully under the influence of 
altered expectations about the future course of 
Federal Reserve monetary policy. Whilst most 
market participants had previously been ex -
pecting a gradual tapering of bond purchases 
by the US central bank along with rising yields 
in the near future, and had reduced their provi -
sion of capital to the emerging markets, the 
yield trend turned around in September on 
both sides of the Atlantic. This was prompted 
by the US central bank affirming that it would 
maintain its accommodative monetary policy 
and its asset purchases in their full extent 
against a backdrop of weak labour market fig -
ures and the then unresolved budget dispute. 
The continuation of monetary easing was also 
echoed in price gains on the equity markets, 
which received additional support from largely 
positive economic data in several countries.
On the currency markets, changing expect -
ations about US monetary policy exerted sig -
nificant pressure for a time on the currencies of 
a number of emerging economies with weak 
fundamentals in particular. Some countries 
reacted by tightening monetary policy or inter -
vening in the foreign exchange markets. By 
contrast, the euro gained slightly on balance 
on a weighted average against the currencies 
of 21 major trading partners. It will be crucial 
for the emerging economies affected to make 
use of the time they have gained from the 
postponement of the US central bank’s taper -
ing of its asset purchases in order to reduce 
their external vulnerability.
Declining price inflation prompted the ECB 
Governing Council to cut its main refinancing 
rate by another 25 basis points to 0.25% at its 
meeting on 7 November 2013. The interest rate 
on the marginal lending facility was also 
lowered by 25 basis points to 0.75%, while the 
rate on the deposit facility was left unchanged 
at 0.00%.Global economy
Financial 
 marketsMonetary policyDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2013  
6

The ECB Governing Council’s decision was 
based on the assessment that the surprisingly 
sharp drop in the HICP inflation rate to 0.7% in 
October signals modest price inflation in the 
euro area over the medium term. In addition, 
moderate growth in the stock of money and a 
continued weak lending trend point in the 
same direction. The accommodative monetary 
policy stance will also continue to provide sup -
port for the gradual recovery in economic ac -
tivity observed since the spring. Besides cutting 
its key interest rate, the ECB Governing Council 
decided to continue to conduct the regular 
monetary policy refinancing operations as 
fixed- rate tenders with full allotment at least 
until the end of the second quarter of 2015.
Given the low rates of inflation to be expected 
over the medium term and sluggish economic 
growth, an expansionary monetary policy 
stance in the euro area is justified at present. At 
the same time, however, a watch needs to be 
kept on the medium to long- term risks of an 
environment of very low interest rates, in keep -
ing with a forward- looking stability policy.
In the summer months, as in previous quarters, 
monetary trends in the euro area were driven 
mainly by weak lending, inflows from abroad 
and the interest rate constellation. For instance, 
sight deposits recorded further expansion 
owing to the low opportunity costs of liquid 
money holdings. Loans to the private sector, on 
the other hand, were still being held back by 
weak economic growth and balance sheet ad -
justment processes in the euro- area peripheral 
countries, though the outflows slowed in com -
parison to the previous quarter.
The German economy is on a healthy growth 
path. According to the flash estimate by the 
Federal Statistical Office, third- quarter real 
gross domestic product (GDP) was up 0.3% on 
the quarter after seasonal and calendar adjust -
ment. This is equal to the average quarterly 
growth rate in the first half of 2013, though 
growth in the first two quarters showed a high 
degree of fluctuation owing to weather- related factors. Thus, in its underlying cyclical trend, 
the German economy is expanding at about its 
potential growth rate, after recovering from 
the temporary phase of weakness three quar -
ters ago. The balanced nature of the overall 
economic picture is also reflected in the fact 
that production is in line with normal utilisation 
of overall economic capacity.
Economic growth is being borne up by a do -
mestic economy which is for the most part 
trending upwards, and is now also free from 
external disturbances. However, international 
trade for German exporters has so far remained 
lacklustre. Shipments of goods to the euro area 
rose slightly in the period under review. On the 
other hand, demand from countries outside 
the euro area in the third quarter failed to 
match the prior- quarter figure. Imports in the 
summer are likely to have just about main -
tained their elevated level recorded in the 
second quarter.
Private sector capital formation did not move 
onto a clear recovery path in the third quarter, 
either. However, there is reason to be confi -
dent: according to Ifo surveys, capacity utilisa -
tion in industry has recently returned almost to 
its longer- term average. This means that enter -
prises can be expected to increase their capital 
investment if the upward trend in demand con -
tinues to consolidate. Furthermore, the terms 
on loan capital remain very favourable, and 
many procurement items can also be financed 
out of enterprises’ own resources.
There was a further substantial expansion in 
housing construction in the period under re -
view. In addition, the upward trend in house -
hold consumption continued. Healthy con -
sumer spending is based on very optimistic in -
come expectations and a marked propensity on 
the part of households to make purchases.
Developments in lending were in line with the 
profile for demand. Loans to non- financial cor -
porations in Germany declined again in the 
third quarter of 2013, reflecting restrained cap -Monetary devel-
opments in the euro area
German 
 economyDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2013  
7

ital investment in the German economy and 
the increasing use of alternative sources of 
 finance. In contrast, loans to households main -
tained the moderate growth recorded in recent 
years. The main driver was sustained demand 
for loans for house purchase. The continued 
 favourable environment for household con -
sumption was also reflected in accelerated 
growth in consumer credit in the third quarter.
On the labour market, both employment and 
unemployment are still increasing moderately. 
The main reason for this atypical co- movement 
is the high level of labour- market- focused im -
migration. The increase in employment was still 
attributable primarily to growth in jobs subject 
to social security contributions. Over the sum -
mer months, the number of registered un -
employed was, on average, only slightly higher 
than during the second quarter. However, 
registered unemployment rose relatively sharply 
in September after a comparatively positive de -
velopment during the holiday months and re -
mained at this level in October. Unlike in the 
preceding quarters, the increase in unemploy -
ment over the summer did not result from un -
employment within the insurance system. With 
demand expected to pick up, recruitment could 
have been stepped up from among the ranks 
of the recently unemployed. By contrast, the 
number of those receiving the basic welfare 
a llowance has been rising for six months. Low 
barriers to employment are one of the factors 
needed to improve the labour market oppor -
tunities of the more than two million recipients 
of unemployment benefit II.
One- sixth of employees currently receive an 
hourly wage of less than €8.50. A relatively 
high general minimum wage would probably 
have an impact on the entire wage structure 
and could trigger further pay rises. With the 
 argument that the wages of the low paid, who 
currently work primarily in areas not governed 
by collective wage agreements, should be 
raised to a level where they would no longer 
require top- up benefits, socio- political object -
ives are entering into the determination of col -lective wages, which have previously been set 
by the social partners based primarily on quali -
fications and industry- specific aspects. Law -
makers, in dictating a general wage floor, 
would be interfering considerably in decades-  
old wage- setting structures, which could imply 
significant employment risks.
Growth in negotiated wages accelerated again 
in the third quarter of 2013, after temporarily 
weakening in the second quarter, in part be -
cause wage increases were delayed in large in -
dustries governed by collective wage agree -
ments.
In the upstream stages of the economy, the 
downward price tendency as a result of the ap -
preciation of the euro and still subdued global 
industrial activity continued over the summer. It 
was, however, masked by rising crude oil 
prices, which meant that import prices overall 
remained unchanged in the third quarter after 
seasonal adjustment, having dropped notice -
ably in the second quarter. By contrast, season -
ally adjusted domestic producer prices and ex -
port prices, which are little influenced by crude 
oil prices, fell slightly on the quarter. Consumer 
price inflation accelerated somewhat in the 
third quarter. The main reason was a slight 
quarter- on- quarter rise in oil prices in euro 
terms, which meant that prices for oil products 
picked up moderately. In the summer months, 
annual consumer price inflation worked out at 
1.6%. In October, the rate fell to 1.2%, be -
cause energy prices went down again and 
 tuition fees were abolished in Bavaria.
There is a good chance that the economic up -
ward movement in Germany will strengthen 
further over the next few months. There is 
nothing to suggest that the main pillars of do -
mestic demand will lose any of their stability. 
Meanwhile, industry should receive more sup -
port from the external sector again. This is 
underpinned by a perceptible rise in industrial 
orders in the third quarter – as in the second. 
Moreover, the outlook for large swathes of the 
business economy brightened further in the Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2013  
8

third quarter. The fact that demand is again ex -
pected to visibly outstrip normal capacity util -
isation could give enterprises’ investment activ -
ity the necessary boost. However, another im -
portant prerequisite for an investment- friendly 
climate is that the new German government 
adopts a forward- looking economic policy 
agenda.
Public finances in Germany last year achieved a 
slight surplus, and a close- to- balance budget is 
also likely for the current year. In structural 
terms, revenues and spending should also be 
roughly balanced. The debt ratio, which is still 
high, will probably fall significantly this year. A 
key factor are the portfolio sales at govern -
ment- owned bad banks, while the euro- area 
stabilisation measures are perceptibly slowing 
the reduction in the debt ratio. For the coming 
year, as for the current year, no major budget 
movements and a continued drop in the debt 
ratio are on the cards assuming no new meas -
ures or costs, in particular as a result of the 
euro- area debt crisis.
In terms of the central government budget, net 
borrowing looks likely to be roughly in line with 
guidance in the current year. The structural def -
icit (excluding advance payments made to the 
flood assistance fund) is likely to drop, which is 
made possible in part by the new cuts to the 
transfers to the social security funds of €5 bil -
lion net. For the subsequent years, the out -
going government’s financial plans mapped 
out a steady improvement in central govern -
ment’s structural budget situation, culminating 
in a surplus of €9 billion in 2017.
By contrast, the medium- term plans for general 
government included only limited consolida -tion. Improvements at the various levels of gov -
ernment, and central government in particular, 
will be offset by lower surpluses in the social 
security funds. Finally, a moderate structural 
surplus of ½% of GDP was expected. Even 
given the underlying favourable baseline scen -
ario accompanied by high uncertainty, the 
plans do not appear overly ambitious.
If the budget stance is maintained as planned 
and not relinquished in favour of more expan -
sionary policies, the high debt ratio could 
nonetheless be reduced comparatively rapidly. 
This would also help manage the foreseeable 
burdens as a result of demographic change. In 
view of the national budget rules, it would also 
be a good idea to make the most of the cur -
rently favourable conditions for Germany’s 
public finances and rapidly reduce the remain -
ing deficits at the various levels of government. 
In addition, central government and the Fed -
eral states would be well advised to plan to 
leave generally clear safety margins vis- à- vis the 
debt ceilings – which were very sensibly tight -
ened in 2009 – in order, if possible, to avoid 
the need for short- term and procyclical adjust -
ments should the assessment of the budget 
situation change. Given past developments, a 
structural surplus of roughly 1% of GDP for 
central government and the Federal states to -
gether does not appear exaggerated. There is 
also much to be said for not exploiting to the 
full the deadlines, which from today’s perspec -
tive look very long for most government levels, 
before the final limits of the debt brake enter 
into force. Overall, the budget surpluses out -
lined in some of the medium- term projections, 
characterised as they are by considerable un -
certainty, should not be seen as giving leeway 
for unfunded budget expenses.Public financesDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2013  
9

Global and European setting
World economic activity
In the third quarter of 2013, growth in the 
global economy looks set to have improved 
slightly on the moderate expansion rate re -
corded in the spring. In the emerging market 
economies (EMEs) in particular, the pace of 
growth appears to have picked up slightly in 
the summer owing, above all, to faster growth 
in China and some central and east European 
countries. In other EMEs, however, the rate of 
growth remained modest, partly as a result of 
serious structural problems and, in some cases, 
turbulence on the financial markets in some 
EMEs with high current account deficits. The 
catalyst for this turbulence was the US Federal 
Reserve’s announcement at the end of May 
that it would wind down, or “taper”, its strong 
monetary expansion.
In the industrial countries, the momentum 
which gave the economy a lift in the spring 
continued after mid-  year. The United States 
and the United Kingdom maintained virtually 
the same pace of expansion. By contrast, the 
Japanese economy, which had recorded  robust 
growth in the first half of the year – not least 
because of extensive monetary and fiscal stimu -
lus measures – and the euro area fell short of 
their prior- quarter results. Aggregated real 
gross domestic product (GDP) across the United 
States, Japan, the United Kingdom and the 
euro area rose by ½% after seasonal  adjustment 
and by just over 1% on the year.
Global industrial activity rose slightly over the 
summer, with seasonally- adjusted global indus -
trial output up by ¾% on average over the 
July- August period, compared with ½% period- 
on- period growth in the second quarter. Al -
though this is still a modest increase when 
measured against the average annual growth 
rate of just under 4½% during the 2003 
to 2007 recovery cycle, it should be noted that 
the trend growth rate appears to have slowed considerably since the beginning of the global 
financial and economic crisis. The world trade 
volume likewise grew by ¾% in the July-  August 
period compared with spring. Some observers 
have recently pointed out that the ratio of 
trade growth to global GDP growth is ex -
tremely low by historical standards. However, 
taking a closer look and accounting for con -
ceptual differences reveals that the decline in 
income elasticities in world trade over the last 
few years is significantly smaller than is some -
times argued (see the box on pages 13 to 17).
In the current quarter, global economic growth 
is likely to continue at more or less the same 
pace as in the second and third quarters of 
2013. The budget dispute in the United States, 
which was not settled until mid- October and 
which led to a two- week federal government 
shutdown and other expenditure cuts, will be 
only a minor drag on the country’s economic 
output and will have a negligible global impact, 
judging from experience of a similar escalation 
in the mid-1990s. It should also be noted that 
the US Federal Reserve has so far not altered its 
highly expansionary monetary policy course. 
Furthermore, there have been no disruptions 
emanating from the crude oil markets recently, 
which is, in part, attributable to the relatively 
mild hurricane season in the Gulf of Mexico.
The disappointing growth in the emerging 
markets since the beginning of the year, as well 
as the associated deterioration in the short-  
term economic outlook in these countries, 
have prompted the IMF to once again trim its 
global economic outlook vis- à- vis its interim 
forecast from early July by ¼ percentage point 
to 2.9% for 2013 and 3.6% for 2014. The revi -
sions were particularly pronounced for India, 
Mexico, Russia and (for 2014) Brazil. The fore -
cast for China was likewise revised downwards 
to 7.6% for 2013 and 7.3% for 2014. In add -
ition, the IMF has reduced distinctly its me -
dium- term growth projections for the EMEs. It Slight increase in 
global growth in the third quarter of 2013
Moderate  expansionary course probably maintained in 
last quarter
IMF revises 
global growth forecast further downwardsDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2013  
10

cut its forecast for 2018 to 5.5%, down from 
6.2% in its April 2013 estimate. The downward 
revision is due to a particularly significant cor -
rection of 1½ percentage points in the case of 
China, reducing its growth forecast to 7.0%. 
The projection for the group of industrial coun -
tries remains unchanged from the July interim 
forecast at 1.2% for this year and 2.0% for 
2014. The forecasts for global trade growth 
were revised downwards to 2.9% and 4.9% re -
spectively. Moreover, the IMF believes that 
downside risks to the growth outlook still dom -
inate.
Movements in the international commodity 
markets also mirrored the relatively modest 
pace of global growth which continued in the 
third quarter. Following a sharp fall in the 
spring, the price of industrial commodities did 
level off in the current quarter. Although aver -
age prices for food, beverages and tobacco 
once again fell substantially over the summer 
months compared with the previous period, 
the figures for this commodity class have 
budged downwards only slightly since August. 
By contrast, the price of Brent crude oil has 
largely recovered from its second- quarter de -
cline. This was driven to a large extent by the 
marked production shortages in some coun -
tries. At the same time, concerns over a poten -
tial escalation of military conflict in the Middle 
East have caused a temporary, yet consider -
able, increase in spot prices in particular, which, 
in turn, has led to forward discounts to rise 
perceptibly for a period of time. The most re -
cent price of a barrel of Brent crude oil on the 
spot market was US$107, compared with an 
average of US$109¼ over the summer months.
The increase in crude oil prices has temporarily 
pushed up consumer prices again in industrial 
countries. However, annual percentage growth 
of the relevant aggregate index already peaked 
in July at +1.7%. By September, year-  on- year 
inflation had fallen back to +1.2%, primarily 
because prices had risen so strongly over the 
same period in 2012. Excluding food and en -
ergy from the basket of consumer goods, con -sumer prices rose relatively steadily, albeit in a 
subdued manner. Core inflation likewise stood 
at +1.2% at the end of the third quarter, mar -
ginally lower than three months previously 
(+1.3% in June) or the September 2012 rate 
(+1.4%). Overall, there does not appear to be 
any immediate risk of deflation in the advanced 
economies.
Selected emerging market 
economies
According to data compiled by the National 
Bureau of Statistics of China, real GDP in China 
increased year- on- year by 7¾% in the third 
quarter of 2013, compared with +7½% in the 
second quarter. On the supply side, industrial 
output was the main factor behind the slight 
acceleration of aggregate economic activity. 
The muted pick- up in external demand in par -Stabilisation of 
commodity prices
Consumer price 
inflation remains subduedSlightly stronger growth in ChinaGlobal industrial output and world trade
Source:  Centraal  Planbureau.  1 OECD  excluding  Chile,  the 
Czech Republic, Hungary, Israel, Mexico, Poland, South Korea 
and Turkey but including Cyprus and Malta.
Deutsche Bundesbank2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 20138590951001051101151201251301352008 = 100, seasonally adjusted, quarterly, log scale
80859095100105110115Global industrial output
Industrial countries 1
World trade volumeEmerging markets
Total
July-
AugJuly-
AugDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2013  
11

ticular is likely to have contributed to this.1 
Moreover, state investment in infrastructure, 
which has underpinned GDP growth for some 
time now, gave a further boost to economic 
activity. In the medium term, however, the Chi -
nese government hopes that the focus of its 
growth model will shift to private consump -
tion. Although, at a recent economic confer -
ence, political leaders agreed that the market 
should play a more decisive role in allocating 
resources, they failed to announce any specific 
steps towards reform. Consumer price inflation 
picked up somewhat in recent months, with 
the annual Consumer Price Index (CPI) reaching 
3.1% in September, compared with 2.7% in 
June. Food prices, in particular, accelerated sig -
nificantly of late.
Next to Indonesia, India’s economy was hit the 
hardest in recent months by the turbulence 
which affected the financial markets of many 
EMEs following the US Federal Reserve’s mon -
etary policy announcement at the end of May. To ease the downward pressure on the rupee, 
the Reserve Bank of India initially reacted by 
introducing liquidity policy measures, only to 
retract some of them later, instead raising its 
policy rate. Although the situation on India’s fi -
nancial markets has since eased perceptibly, 
the real economy still shows visible scars left by 
the turbulence. GDP growth in India was al -
ready on a rather flat expansion path and may 
well have been dampened even further in the 
third quarter (national accounts data are not 
yet available for this period). Consumer price 
inflation rose slightly from 9.5% in the second 
quarter to 9.7% in the third, owing in part to 
the depreciation- related increase in import 
prices.
The most recent national accounts data avail -
able (up to and including the second quarter) 
suggest that the Brazilian economy has picked 
up pace again following a protracted lull. This 
is indicated by seasonally adjusted real GDP 
growth of 1½% on the quarter. However, it is 
likely that this is the result of an unusually large 
number of working days, with the actual pace 
of growth probably markedly lower. Indicators 
were mixed for the third quarter. Whilst indus -
trial output fell by a seasonally adjusted 1½% 
on the quarter, real retail turnover rose by 
3¼%. Inflationary pressures eased somewhat 
in recent months, with CPI inflation dropping 
from 6.7% in June to 5.9% in September. This 
was primarily the result of lower food price in -
flation, while many other components saw a 
more pronounced increase in prices. Against 
this background, the central bank continued to 
tighten monetary policy.
Aggregate output in Russia remained listless in 
the third quarter. According to an initial esti -
Turbulence on 
the financial markets is prob-able cause of real economic slowdown in India.Brazilian spring quarter growth rate probably overstatedWorld market prices for crude oil,industrial commodities and food,beverages and tobacco
Sources:  Thomson  Reuters  and  HWWI.  • Average  of  1  to 
8 November or 1 to 13 November 2013 (crude oil).
Deutsche Bundesbank2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 201360708090100120140160US dollar basis, 2010 = 100,
monthly averages, log scale
Crude oil (Brent)
Industrial
commoditiesFood, beveragesand tobacco
1 Although the Chinese export statistics initially do not ap -
pear to show an increase in growth, figures for overall ex -
ports for the last few months were not very reliable as 
some exporters had evidently submitted fraudulent cus -
toms declarations to the Chinese authorities. For the most 
part, the distorted data are mainly on exports to Hong 
Kong. If trade with Hong Kong is excluded, goods exports 
(calculated in US dollars) increased 4% year- on- year in the 
third quarter, compared with +1% in the previous quarter.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2013  
12

The empirical relationship between world trade and global 
economic output
Concerns about the current lull in the 
growth of world trade have recently been publicly raised.
1 According to the most 
 recent estimates by the International Mon-
etary Fund (IMF), price- adjusted trade in goods and services is likely to expand by 
just under 3% this year, thus matching the growth of global real gross domestic prod-
uct (GDP) weighted by purchasing power parities. Last year, according to the IMF, 
global trade (+2¾%) actually grew less than 
economic output (+3¼%).2 Given that the 
ratio of the two percentage changes, 
known as the income elasticity of trade, is 
usually around 2, many observers see this 
as an anomaly. Furthermore, an analysis of 
the world trade volume over time shows 
that recent values fall well short of the past trend path.
The empirical relationship between world trade and global economic output can be 
illustrated by a scatter graph that logs the 
variables along the axes. The observations 
for the period1980 to 2007 can be well ap-
proximated by a straight line whose slope corresponds to a simple estimate of the 
elasticity derived from the linear regression 
of logged world trade volume on logged economic output. Using the IMF’s preferred 
measure of output – global GDP based on 
purchasing power parities – the projected 
income elasticity of world trade from 1980 
to 2007 comes to 1.9. The observations 
from 2008 to 2013 then in fact deviate sig-nifi  cantly from the extrapolated trend path. A regression for this period shows an elasti-city of just 1.3.
However, it should be noted that global trade data are calculated by aggregating national variables using their prior- year 
share of global nominal exports or imports 
(in US dollars). By contrast, the IMF’s pre-
ferred measure of global GDP is calculated 
using weights based on individual econ-
omies’ contributions to global GDP valued 
at purchasing power parities.3 If this method 
is applied, the emerging market economies 
1 See S Donnan, Trade: Into Uncharted Waters, Finan-
cial Times, 25 October 2013, p 9.
2 See IMF, World Economic Outlook: Transitions and 
Tensions, October 2013, p 2. The data used in the rest of this box are also taken from the IMF’s current WEO database for October 2013.
3 See IMF, World Economic Outlook: Transitions and 
Tensions, October 2013, p 137. To aggregate nominal GDP variables in different currencies, they must fi  rst be 
converted into a common currency using exchange rates. As an alternative to using a market exchange 
rate, a purchasing power parity exchange rate is often used. This is the rate at which US$ 1 can buy the same 
basket of goods in another country as it can in the 
United States. In terms of purchasing power parities, 
the currencies of the emerging market economies gen-
erally appear to be undervalued at market exchange rates because non- tradable goods are often much 
cheaper there than in the advanced economies.World trade volume and global GDP *
Sources: IMF (WEO October 2013) and Bundesbank calcula-
tions. * Trade in goods and services. Data for 2013 are IMF 
projections.
Deutsche Bundesbank40 60 80 100 120204060801001201602005 = 100, log scale
1980 – 2007
2008 – 2013
20406080100120140
Global GDP at market exchange rates40 60 80 100 120Global real GDP at purchasing power paritiesWorld trade volume
World trade volumeTrend
(1980 – 2007, extrapolated
thereafter)Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2013  
13

account for a signifi  cantly higher share of 
global GDP than world trade.4 As inter-
national trade fl  ows are ultimately driven by 
the purchasing power that actually exists 
on the markets, and not by fi  ctitious poten-
tial consumption abroad as assumed by purchasing power parities, global GDP at market exchange rates is a conceptually 
better reference variable for world trade.5 In 
view of the large growth gap in recent 
years between the emerging market econ-
omies and the advanced economies, this conceptual difference also has a marked 
impact on the ratio of world trade to global 
output. Using GDP at market exchange 
rates as a reference, only a slight deviation 
from the relationship that existed from 
1980 to 2007 is evident at the current end. 
According to this calculation, the income elasticity of trade has only fallen from 2.1 
to 1.8.6
Based on the linear relationship between 
the log variables, it is also possible to esti-
mate the extent to which the deviation of 
world trade from its previous trend over 
time is solely attributable to the change in 
the pace of global GDP growth (at market 
exchange rates). To do this, we fi  rst calcu-
late the trade volume that would have been achieved had global economic output con-
tinued the expansion path that it followed 
from 1980 to 2007 and had the relation-ship between the two variables remained stable. This calculation shows that world 
trade would have undershot its earlier trend path by 15½% in the current year. If GDP is now assumed to follow its actual path while 
maintaining the historical relationship, the 
impact of the economic slowdown can be 
determined. This indicates that, at the cur-
rent end, almost three- quarters (just under 
11½ percentage points) of the total devi-ation from the previous trend path is due 
solely to the deceleration in global growth. 
Only the remaining gap of just over 4 per-
centage points may indicate a fall in the 
 dynamics of world trade itself.7
It should be borne in mind that the reces-
sionary tendencies seen in some European 
economies over the last few years probably 
had more of a dampening effect on world 
trade than on global GDP . Although the 
European Union and the United States each 
accounted for just over one- fi  fth of (nom-
inal) global GDP at market exchange rates 
last year, the European Union’s share of all 
4 According to IMF data, half of global GDP calculated 
at purchasing power parities in 2012 was attributable to the emerging market economies. By contrast, these 
countries’ share of world trade and global GDP is around 38% in each case when calculated from the 
IMF data at market exchange rates and on a US dollar basis.
5 See Kiel Institute for the World Economy, Zu den 
verschiedenen Methoden bei der Berechnung des Weltbruttoinlandsprodukts, Weltkonjunktur im Früh-
jahr 2013, p 25.
6 Owing to the small number of observations, the 
 estimated elasticity for the later sub- period depends 
heavily on the precise defi  nition of the period. If 2009 is chosen as the starting point, the elasticity falls to just 2.0. But starting with 2007 lowers the estimated coef-fi  cient to 1.7. The constant terms also shift in the esti-
mation. Cointegration tests indicate that the world 
trade volume and real global GDP at market exchange rates follow the same trend for the entire period (up to the current end). However, if GDP is valued at purchas-
ing power parities, such a trend can no longer be 
found for the entire period.7 This is less than one standard error of the underlying regression and also includes purely coincidental errors.Actual and estimated path of world trade volume
*
Sources: IMF (WEO October 2013) and Bundesbank calcula-
tions. * Estimate based on the linear relationship between the 
logarithms of the world trade volume (goods and services) and global real GDP at market exchange rates from 1980 to 2007. World trade volume for 2013 according to the IMF’s projec-
tion.
Deutsche Bundesbank2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013901001101201301401501601702005 = 100, log scale
Estimated for actual GDP pathEstimated for the GDP 
trend path(1980 – 2007, extrapolated thereafter)
ActualDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2013  
14

imports measured by value amounted to 
around one- third, while the United States’ 
share was just one- eighth. This is attribut-
able to the close ties between the European 
economies, due not least to the European 
single market.8 A large part of the statistic-
ally recorded foreign trade of the EU coun-
tries therefore represents transactions be-
tween EU countries (intra- EU trade), while 
the corresponding fl  ows within the United 
States are considered domestic trade and 
are not recorded in the statistics. If intra- EU 
trade were also considered domestic trade 
and the international trade weights were 
adjusted accordingly, a rough calculation of the volume of global imports of goods and 
services in 2012 and 2013 would result in 
respective growth rates of 3½% and 3¼% 
instead of 2½% and 2¾%.9
Over and above this purely statistical infl  u-
ence caused by recessions in some Euro-
pean economies, the global cyclical weak-
ness is likely to have strongly slowed world trade growth in recent years. A similar pat-
tern can at least be identifi  ed in past eco-nomic downturns. For instance, global trade contracted by 2¼% in 1982, while 
economic output calculated on the basis of 
market exchange rates still rose by ½%. In 
2001 world trade stagnated even though global output increased by 1½%. And in 
2009 the slump in the world trade volume 
(-10½%) exceeded the decline in real GDP 
(-2%) several times over. At the time, many observers underestimated the cyclical effect on world trade and predicted a merely ten-
tative recovery.10 In reality, international 
goods and services fl  ows rebounded to a 
normal level the very next year. This sensitiv-ity to the economic cycle is often  attributed 
to the fact that demand components with 
a very high import content, such as inven-
tory changes and investment in machinery 
and equipment, show sharp cyclical 
swings.11This is ultimately due to the fact that a sig-
nifi  cant part of the total output produced 
by the economy and recorded as GDP can-
not be traded internationally. This includes 
buildings, for example, but also many ser-
vices. It would therefore be more appropri-
ate to consider the volume of world trade 
in relation to the production of tradables 
rather than on the basis of aggregate out-
put. However, because such data are not available, an alternative approach is to 
 restrict the measure of world trade volume 
8 Conversely, it could also be argued that the plurality 
of European states infl  ates the statistically recorded 
volume of foreign trade fl  ows. For more information on the general impact of an increasing number of countries on the measurement of global trade fl  ows 
over time, see E Lavallée and V Vicard (2013), National 
Borders Matter … Where One Draws the Lines Too, 
Canadian Journal of Economics, Vol 46, No 1, pp 135-153.9 The adjusted shares of global imports attributable to 
the EU and the USA last year would then be roughly 
the same. The World Trade Organisation (WTO) comes 
to a similar conclusion. It estimates that if the Euro-
pean Union were to be treated as a single economic 
entity, world trade growth would be 3¼% in 2012  rather than 2%. See WTO, Trade Developments in 
2012 and Early 2013, World Trade Report 2013, p 21.
10 In spring 2009, the IMF expected the volume of 
world trade to increase by ½% in 2010 and global GDP 
at market exchange rates to concurrently expand by 
1%. The OECD assumed that trade would grow by 2%, 
and even under an optimistic scenario capped the forecast increase at just 5%. However, according to 
current data, the world trade volume soared by 12¾% in 2010. See IMF, World Economic Outlook: Crisis and Recovery, April 2009, p 10; OECD (2009), The Role of 
Financial Conditions in Driving Trade, Economic Out-
look, No. 85, pp 23-24.11 Alessandria et al (2010) focus on inventory adjust-
ments, whereas Bussière et al (2013) highlight the im-
portance of the import content of gross fi  xed capital 
formation and exports. However, it should be noted 
that gross fi  xed capital formation includes, in the form of construction investment, a demand component that 
has little relevance to foreign trade but which has  suffered a particularly pronounced slump in some 
economies in recent years. In 2012, the ECB likewise 
linked the slump in world trade to sluggish investment. See G Alessandria, J P Kaboski and V Midrigan (2010), 
The Great Trade Collapse of 2008-09: An Inventory Adjustment?, IMF Economic Review, Vol 58, No 2, 
pp 254-294; M Bussière, G Callegari, F Ghironi, G Ses-
tieri and N Yamano (2013), Estimating Trade Elastici-
ties: Demand Composition and the Trade Collapse of 
2008-2009, American Economic Journal: Macroeco-nomics, Vol 5, No 3, pp 118-151; and ECB, Global 
Trade:  Recent Developments and Short- Term Outlook, Monthly  Bulletin, December 2012, pp 11-12.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2013  
15

to goods and relate it to the global produc-
tion of goods.12 Corresponding time series 
produced by the WTO go back as far as 
1950, which makes it possible to assess 
whether and to what extent specifi  c infl  u-
ences affect other data releases from 1980 onwards.
13 For instance, a scatter graph of 
the log level of the global export volume and output of merchandise shows a fairly 
close linear relationship from 1993 to 2007, which implies an elasticity of 1.9. In the last 
few years, world trade appears to have  remained somewhat below this trend, 
 although the elasticity has only fallen to 1.8. 
Between 1950 and 1990, the elasticity of real goods fl  ows to merchandise output 
was just 1.4. It is striking that at the begin-
ning of the 1990s, however, not only did the elasticity increase, but the relationship between the levels also shifted overall. In mathematical terms, this is because world 
trade expanded signifi  cantly between 1991 
and 1993 while the pace of global output simultaneously faltered.14 This development 
might conceivably have been caused largely by the inclusion of transition countries and 
other emerging market economies in the global economy. However, due to this break, a simple linear regression for the period between 1980 and 2007 would in 
fact show an elasticity of 2.1.
On balance, after taking into account vari-
ous conceptual discrepancies, the decrease 
in the income elasticity of world trade in 
 recent years is considerably smaller than 
some analyses suggest. Global GDP at pur-
chasing power parities is not a suitable 
measure of economic activity in relation to 
foreign trade fl  ows. Even if global GDP at 
market exchange rates is used as a refer-
ence variable, the result at the current end 
is impaired. This is mainly due to the eco-
nomic problems that European countries, in particular, have experienced in recent years; 
because the EU accounts for a large share 
of world trade, the recent problems of the 
European countries are depressing world trade more than global output. Further-more, world trade is often disproportion-
ately weak during a global economic down-turn. Bearing all this in mind, it appears dif-
fi  cult to draw inferences about possible trend shifts from a snapshot dip in world 
12 The fi  gure given by the WTO for global goods ex-
ports in 2012 is US$ 17,930 billion, while exports of 
services only amounted to US$ 4,350 billion. See WTO, World Trade Developments in 2013, Inter-
national Trade Statistics 2013, p 22 and p 26.
13 The data are taken from Table A1a of the Inter-
national Trade Statistics 2013. The data still outstand-
ing for 2013 are extrapolated on the basis of the year- 
on- year rates of change of the world trade volume (goods) and global industrial output for the period 
January to August 2013 according to the CPB.14 According to WTO data, global goods exports rose 
by 4¼% on average between 1991 and 1993, while 
merchandise output actually fell slightly. CBP data on 
the level of the relevant variables only go back as far as 
1991 but paint a similar picture, according to which 
international goods trade increased by 4½% on aver-
age between 1992 and 1993. However, industrial out-
put only went up by just under 1%; in the advanced 
economies, it actually contracted by almost 1%.Volume of global goods exports and global goods production
*
Sources:  WTO  (International  Trade  Statistics  2013),  Centraal 
Planbureau  (CPB)  and  Bundesbank  calculations.  * Data  for 
2013 estimated on the basis of CPB data.
Deutsche Bundesbank10 20 30 40 50 6035102040601001402005 = 100, log scale
Global goods productionVolume of global goods exports
15 120 1002008 – 2013
801993 – 2007
1991 – 1992
1950 – 1990Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2013  
16

mate by the Russian Federal Statistics Service, 
real GDP grew once again by 1¼% on the year. 
Russia’s economy is mainly suffering from a 
pronounced investment slump, with gross fixed 
investment down by 2½% year- on- year in 
spring and apparently no fundamental im -
provement over the summer months. The IMF 
recently called on Russia to take steps to im -
prove its investment climate and encouraged 
the country to diversify its economic structure 
to reduce its commodity dependence. Con -
sumer price inflation decreased distinctly in the 
period under review, with annual inflation fall -
ing from 6.9% in June to 6.1% in September.
USA
The US economy picked up pace slightly in the 
third quarter. Adjusted for price and seasonal 
effects, GDP increased by ¾% on the quarter, 
compared with growth of just over ½% in the 
second quarter. However, in unadjusted terms, this rise is solely attributable to inventory 
changes and net exports, meaning that the 
underlying pace of economic growth was still 
moderate. The expansion in private consump -
tion, in particular, remained muted. Further -
more, growth in business gross fixed invest -
ment slowed significantly, with enterprises 
even distinctly cutting real spending on equip -
ment. Although private residential construction 
investment remained strong, leading indicators 
such as housing starts suggest that this pace is 
likely to abate in the fourth quarter of 2013 
and the first quarter of 2014. However, on an 
encouraging note, government demand was 
no longer a drag on aggregate growth. Further 
federal spending cuts were counterbalanced by 
an equivalent boost to expenditure at state and 
municipal level. When compared with experi -
ences from the 1990s, the temporary shut -
down of non- essential government services 
brought about by a budget impasse in October 
should have only a marginal impact on aggre -
gate growth in the current quarter.Sustained 
 economic lull in Russia
Aggregate 
growth up slightlytrade. Ultimately, the past two decades may 
represent an artifi  cially high benchmark ele-vated by one- off effects stemming from the integration of a number of transition coun-
tries and emerging market economies into 
the global economy.
In view of strengthening global economic 
activity, especially in industry, the ratio be-
tween the growth rates of world trade and global GDP (at market exchange rates) may 
well be higher in the next few years than 
during the past two years.15 Nonetheless, 
regarding its pattern over time, the world 
trade volume is unlikely to return to its pre-
vious trend path. However, this is due less 
to a fundamental impairment of the under-
lying relationship than to a fl  attening of the 
upward curve of global GDP at market 
 exchange rates. In particular, demographic 
infl  uences are likely to have persistently 
slowed the pace of expansion of output in major industrial countries.16 Recently, there 
has been growing evidence of a slowdown in potential growth in some emerging mar-ket economies, too.
15 However, the WTO considers it unlikely that this 
ratio will return to a value of around 2, because many 
of the forces that drove world trade over recent dec-
ades have already exhausted themselves. See WTO, 
Factors Shaping the Future of World Trade, World 
Trade  Report 2013, pp 55-57.
16 See, for example, Deutsche Bundesbank, The US 
economy in the current economic upturn, Monthly 
 Report, April 2013, pp 15-37.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2013  
17

Despite rather mixed signals from some eco -
nomic indicators, the labour market continued 
to recover in the third quarter. According to 
company data, only 163,000 new (non- farm) 
jobs were created on average each month dur -
ing the third quarter, compared with an aver -
age of 195,000 in the first two quarters.2 
Nonetheless, the unemployment rate, which is 
based on a separate household survey, de -
creased from 7.6% in June to 7.2% in Septem -
ber. These conflicting markers are probably one 
important reason why the Federal Reserve has 
not yet begun to “taper” its asset purchases. 
Although the unemployment rate rose slightly 
in October, this was most likely because federal 
employees who were temporarily furloughed 
on account of the budget impasse were thus 
considered unemployed during the reporting 
period. These figures, however, are not re -
flected in company data, which even indicate 
considerable growth in employment in October 
(+204,000 jobs), compared with September’s 
figures. Owing to the unfavourable price devel -opments during the same period in 2012, CPI 
inflation weakened by 0.6 percentage point to 
+1.2% over the summer months. By contrast, 
core inflation was slightly higher in September 
(+1.7%) than in June.
Japan
The Japanese economy, which underwent a 
strong upturn in the first two quarters of 2013, 
lost some steam in the summer months. In sea -
sonally adjusted terms, real GDP picked up by 
½% on the period, compared with growth of 
1% in each of the first two quarters. One rea -
son for the lower growth is a fall- off in house -
hold consumption following a surge in the first 
half of the year. Another is that exports fell 
slightly, while imports continued their sharp 
climb. Thus, net exports have gone from boost -
ing aggregate growth to dragging it. Although 
enterprises pushed up gross fixed investment 
only slightly, in unadjusted terms the slowdown 
in the pace of destocking boosted growth sig -
nificantly. This contrasted with an acceleration 
in government investment and investment in 
private housing construction. While govern -
ment investment is likely to be nearing its peak, 
front- loading of demand in the last quarter of 
2013 and the first quarter of 2014 is expected 
to lend a fresh boost to residential construction 
in particular. The background to this is the con -
sumption tax hike scheduled for April 2014, 
which will also apply to corporate property 
sales. In addition to construction orders, recent 
new passenger car registration figures indicate 
that this type of front- loading could be signifi -
cant over the autumn months. According to 
Japan’s national accounts, households’ nom -
inal income, which the government and central 
bank consider to play an important role in lead -
ing the economy out of its mild deflation over Mixed signals 
on strength of labour market recoveryUpturn no 
longer quite as 
strongContributions to quarter-on-quarter 
growth in real US GDP
Source: Bureau of Economic Analysis.
Deutsche Bundesbank2009 2010 2011 2012 20136543210123456
––––––++++++In percentage points, seasonally adjusted, in annualised terms
GDP (in %)Inventory changes and net exports
Public demand
Private consumption
Private gross fixed investment
2 Prior to the release of the latest figures, average growth 
in employment was estimated at just 143,000 jobs over 
the summer months. For more information on the suscep -
tibility to revision of employment figures in the United 
States, see Deutsche Bundesbank, Need for revision of 
monthly employment estimates in the US, Monthly Report, 
April 2011, p 42.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2013  
18

the medium term, trended slightly downwards 
in summer. The decline in income was more 
pronounced in price-  adjusted terms. Year-  on- 
year CPI inflation was significantly higher in 
September (+1.1%) than in June (+0.2%), with 
core inflation (0.0%) emerging from negative 
territory for the first time since the end of 
2008. At 4.0%, the unemployment rate in Sep -
tember was only marginally higher than June’s 
figures.
United Kingdom
The pace of economic recovery in the United 
Kingdom continued unabated in the summer 
months. According to initial estimates, season -
ally adjusted real GDP rose just as sharply 
period- on- period as in the spring (+¾%). 
Growth in the services sector was up margin -
ally and surveys conducted at the beginning of 
autumn indicated that this growth could con -
tinue to gain momentum. Gross value added of 
the services sector, which accounts for more 
than three- quarters of aggregate output, ex -
ceeded for the first time its previous peak of 
winter 2008. Construction sector growth was 
of a similarly high magnitude as in the second 
quarter. This is all the more remarkable given 
that the spring figures seemed to be overstated 
on account of the weather conditions. Energy 
production, on the other hand, plummeted 
during the warm and dry summer. However, a 
further sharp rise in manufacturing more than 
made up for this fall- off, which meant that the 
increase in gross value added in the entire pro -
duction sector (excluding construction) was 
only somewhat weaker than in spring. On the 
expenditure side of GDP , the increased upward 
momentum in real retail sales suggests an up -
turn in private consumption. The impact of the 
overall economic recovery, which was quite 
strong compared with the slow- paced growth 
in recent years, has spilled over onto the labour 
market. The standardised unemployment rate 
reported by the Office for National Statistics fell 
from 7.8% in the spring to 7.6% in the third 
quarter. A clearer improvement in the situation could be seen in the number of recipients of 
unemployment benefits, which trended down -
wards sharply up to October. After holding firm 
at 2.7% in the summer months, HICP inflation 
dropped to 2.2% in October.
New EU member states
The overall economic upturn in the new EU 
member states (EU-8),3 which began in spring, 
has strengthened in the past few months. In 
most of the countries which published flash 
 estimates, period- on- period real GDP growth 
ranged from marked to substantial; only in the 
Czech Republic did it fall. As before, economic 
activity in the EU-8 is likely to have received a 
positive impetus from the euro area. Further -
more, domestic demand also seems to have 
picked up in many countries. However, the la -
bour market situation has remained difficult. 
The overall unemployment rate in the new EU 
countries has been stuck at 9.8% since May. 
Aggregate HICP inflation, which had already 
reached a multi- year low in the first two quar -
ters of 2013, fell further in the third quarter. 
The figures ranged in September from - 1.3% in 
Bulgaria and +0.9% in Poland to +1.6% both in 
Hungary and Croatia. The central banks in Pol -
and, Hungary, Latvia and Romania have used 
the lower level of inflation to cut interest rates 
further in the period under review.
Macroeconomic trends  
in the euro area
The economic upturn in the euro area, which 
took root in the spring, continued into the 
second half of the year, albeit with little mo -
mentum. After seasonal adjustment, real GDP 
grew marginally in the summer compared with 
the second quarter, in which it had risen some -
what more strongly. Despite this, growth was Pace of growth 
unchangedEconomic recov-ery stabilised
Marginal GDP 
growth
3 This group comprises the non- euro- area countries that 
have joined the EU since 2004 (including the newest mem -
ber state, Croatia).Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2013  
19

still down by ½% on the year and fell 3% short 
of the level recorded before the financial and 
economic crisis struck at the beginning of 
2008. Broken down by region, growth figures 
in the third quarter were once again strongly 
boosted by the German economy, where pro -
duction expanded by a seasonally adjusted 
¼%. Of the remaining 12 countries which have 
released figures on economic growth in the 
summer months, Estonia and Finland reported 
the strongest growth (+½% compared with the 
second quarter), followed by Austria, Belgium 
and Slovakia (+¼% each). GDP in the Nether -
lands rose slightly. The French economy was 
not quite able to sustain the distinct rise in out -
put reported in the spring. By contrast, the sta -
bilisation tendencies which were already evi -
dent in the spring continued in the majority of 
peripheral countries. For instance, following 
nine quarters of recession, the Spanish econ -
omy grew again slightly in the quarter under 
review and real GDP in Portugal rose again, this 
time by ¼%. The downturn in Italy slowed fur -ther; only Cyprus recorded a notable decline 
(-¾%). In Greece, where the Statistical Author -
ity has ceased to publish seasonally adjusted 
figures until further notice, the economy con -
tracted at an annual rate of 3% after shrinking 
by 3¾% in spring. In its autumn economic 
forecast, the European Commission estimated 
a year- on- year decline of ½% in the economic 
output of the euro area for 2013 on the whole.
The available indicators suggest that the mod -
est upturn will continue in the final quarter. For 
instance, purchasing managers’ indices for 
manufacturing and services were again dis -
tinctly above the expansion threshold. Further -
more, according to survey results, confidence 
in the retail, services and industrial sectors has 
risen considerably in recent months. In Septem -
ber, the industrial indicator exceeded its long-  
term average for the first time since March of 
last year, rising further in October. This in -
cluded, in particular, a strong improvement in 
companies’ output expectations. The growing 
optimism was reflected in the seasonally ad -
justed 1% increase in the value of manufactur -
ing orders over the July-  August period com -
pared with the second quarter, with orders re -
ceived from countries outside of the euro area 
rising particularly sharply.
The industrial sector provided no positive im -
petus in the third quarter. Following consider -
able growth in spring, output was down ¼% in 
the summer quarter on the back of a distinct 
decline in energy production (-1½%). Excluding 
energy, output remained unchanged from the 
previous period. While the production of con -
sumer goods fell somewhat, the production of 
intermediate goods expanded by ¼% while 
that of capital goods remained unchanged. 
Capacity utilisation in manufacturing nonethe -
less continued to rise slightly from July to Octo -
ber, yet still fell short of its long- term average. 
In the summer months, economic activity was 
propped up by the construction sector, which 
had shrunk by 27½% overall between the first 
quarter of 2007 and the winter quarter of 
2013. Construction activity rose period-  on- Economic indi-
cators suggest slight growth in the last quarter
No impetus in 
the summer quarter from the industrial sector, but construction activity up sharply againReal GDP in selected euro-area countries
90929496981001021042008 Q1 = 100, seasonally adjusted, log scale
2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013
Deutsche BundesbankEuro area
Germany
France
Italy
Spain
Netherlands
PortugalDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2013  
20

period by a seasonally adjusted 2¼% in the 
July- August period following growth of 1¾% 
in the spring. It is striking that the rise in con -
struction activity after mid- year was broadly 
based throughout the euro area. However, it is 
not yet clear whether this indicates an end to 
the adjustment crisis in the construction sector 
in some of the peripheral countries.
Domestic demand is likely to have once again 
given a slight boost to the demand side of the 
economy. The ½% rise in real retail sales from 
the second to the third quarter points to a 
moderate increase in private consumption. Fur -
thermore, consumer optimism continued to 
grow in the summer months. However, the 
number of new passenger car registrations fell 
by ½% on the quarter and 2% on the year. 
Given that the output of machinery and equip -
ment remained unchanged, the strong growth 
in construction suggests a higher level of gross 
fixed investment. By contrast, exports are likely 
to have had a more dampening effect on activ -
ity in the third quarter. At all events, nominal 
exports of goods to non- euro-  area countries 
were down in July-  August by a seasonally ad -
justed 2½% from the second quarter. However, 
it is important to note that, in terms of the con -
tribution to growth by net exports, goods im -
ports also fell (-¾%).
Thanks to the economic upturn evident since 
spring, the increase in the unemployment rate 
was distinctly lower in the euro area in the 
second and third quarters of 2013. The season -
ally adjusted number of unemployed persons 
rose considerably more slowly on average over 
the second and third quarters taken together 
(+141,000) than in the previous seven quarters 
of recession (+495,000). The standardised un -
employment rate, which stood at 12.1% from 
April to July, increased to 12.2% in August and 
remained unchanged in September. In two per -
ipheral countries (Ireland and Portugal), the un -
employment rate fell slightly after mid- year. By 
contrast, unemployment went up slightly in 
Spain and Greece and considerably in Cyprus 
and Italy. The Benelux countries and France Slight increase 
in domestic  demand, but  exports weak
Situation on the 
labour market remains poorNew passenger car registrationsin the euro area
Source: ECB.
Deutsche Bundesbank2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 201370801002008 Q1 = 100, seasonally adjusted, quarterly, log scale
80100120140of which
Germany
GreecePortugalSpainItalyEuro area
80100120France
2030405060708010050607080100
40506070801001204050607080100Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2013  
21

also recorded an increase in unemployment in 
recent months. The rate also rose somewhat in 
Austria; however, at 4.9%, it remains the low -
est unemployment rate in the euro area. The 
number of those in work, which declined mar -
ginally in spring, is likely to have stabilised in 
summer.
After seasonal adjustment, euro- area consumer 
prices were up in the third quarter by 0.5% on 
the period. The very strong increase, which 
averaged at an annualised 2%, should be con -
sidered in relation to the very low quarterly rate 
of 0.1% (annualised 0.4%) in the second quar -
ter. Taken together, the two quarters suggest a 
subdued rise in consumer prices, which can 
also be seen in the annual HICP inflation rate of 
1.3% in the third quarter. The slowing rate of 
inflation (year- on- year HICP inflation had been 
as high as 2.5% in summer) is mostly evident in 
the energy component and in industrial goods. 
The sideways tendency in crude oil prices and 
the marked appreciation of the euro are im -portant factors here. The levelling- off in the 
trend in services prices, which are mainly deter -
mined by domestic economic factors, was less 
pronounced.
After seasonal adjustment, consumer prices fell 
unexpectedly sharply in October on the month 
(-0.2%); annual HICP inflation fell to 0.7% from 
a September figure of 1.1%. These movements 
were mainly attributable to a further fall in en -
ergy prices due to the euro’s appreciation and 
low crude oil prices as well as the continuing 
normalisation of food prices, which had risen 
quite sharply in the first two quarters. The sea -
sonally adjusted slight decline in services prices 
can be explained by one- off measures such as 
the abolition of tuition fees in Germany and 
cheaper telecommunication rates in Italy. On 
the other hand, the VAT increase in Italy does 
not yet appear to have fed through to prices. 
The subdued upward price trend and the cor -
respondingly low annual inflation rates are ex -
pected to continue over the next few months.Subdued 
 upward trend in 
consumer pricesSurprisingly sharp fall in 
HICP inflation 
rate in OctoberDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2013  
22

Monetary policy and banking business
Monetary policy and money 
market developments
While the Governing Council of the ECB left 
key interest rates unchanged in the third quar -
ter, declining price pressures and the subdued 
outlook for inflation prompted it to cut the 
main refinancing rate by another 25 basis 
points to 0.25% at its meeting on 7 November 
2013. The interest rate on the marginal lending 
facility was also lowered by 25 basis points 
to 0.75%, while the rate on the deposit facility 
remains unchanged at 0.00%. Thus, for the 
first time since spring 1999, the interest rate 
corridor around the main refinancing rate is 
asymmetrical.
The ECB Governing Council’s latest interest rate 
decision was based on the assessment that the 
surprisingly sharp drop in the Harmonised Index 
of Consumer Prices (HICP) inflation rate to 0.7% 
in October signalled declining price pressures in 
the euro area over the medium term. Moderate 
growth in the monetary aggregates and a con -
tinued weak lending trend also point in the 
same direction. At the same time, the inflation 
expectations for the private sector signalled by 
the available indicators reveal that economic 
agents expect the inflation rate to return to val -
ues of close to 2% in the medium to long term. 
The accommodative monetary policy stance 
will continue to support the gradual recovery in 
economic activity observed since the spring.
In addition, as in the preceding monetary pol -
icy meetings, the ECB Governing Council con -
firmed on 7 November its forward guidance on 
the future development of the ECB key interest 
rates, which was first communicated on 4 July. 
Accordingly, the ECB Governing Council still in -
tends to keep key interest rates at present or 
lower levels for an extended period of time. 
This statement is based on the assessment that 
the subdued outlook for inflation extends into 
the medium term, and is therefore entirely con -sistent with the Eurosystem’s monetary policy 
strategy.
Besides cutting its key interest rates, the ECB 
Governing Council decided to continue to con -
duct the Eurosystem refinancing operations 
which are currently offered on a regular basis 
as fixed- rate tenders with full allotment at least 
until the end of the second quarter of 2015 – ie 
one year longer than guaranteed previously.
In line with a decision by the ECB Governing 
Council, on 17 October 2013 the ECB published 
details on the procedure for the provision of 
emergency liquidity assistance (ELA) with the 
aim of providing the public with clearer infor -
mation on the role played by the ECB Govern -
ing Council in the provision of ELA by the Euro -
system national central banks (NCBs). ELA is 
defined as the provision of central bank money Main refinan-
cing rate  reduced to new 
all- time low
ECB Governing 
Council confirms forward guid-ance on its  future monetary policy stanceFull allotment for main  refinancing  operations  prolonged once again
ECB Governing 
Council pub-
lishes ELA pro-
cedural rules
Money market interest rates
in the euro area
Source: ECB. 1 Monthly averages. 2 Three-month Euribor less 
three-month Eurepo. • Average 1 to 13 November 2013.
Deutsche Bundesbank2010 2011 2012 201300.51.01.52.02.53.0
050100150Difference between unsecured and secured
three-month interbank lending rates 1 ,  2Basis
points% Marginal lending rate
Three-month Euribor 1
EONIA 1
Minimum bid rate or fixed interest rate
for main refinancing operations
Deposit rateDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2013  
23

Money market management and liquidity needs
Liquidity provision to credit institutions in the 
euro area was still well above the calculated liquidity needs during the three maintenance periods under review, from 10 July to 8 Oc-
tober 2013. However, excess liquidity (de-posit facility plus current account holdings 
minus the reserve requirement) fell markedly from an average of €274 billion in the period 
before the start of the period under review 
to €224 billion in the September- October period; in this context, the signifi  cance of 
the deposit facility for the holding of excess 
liquidity likewise decreased continuously, its 
share declining from one- third in the fi  rst 
maintenance period of the period under re-
view to around one- quarter in the last one. 
The share of excess reserves held in central 
bank current accounts rose at the same time 
as a result. The decline in excess liquidity 
stemmed mainly from early repayments of li-quidity provided in the three- year tenders to-talling €35.7 billion as well as from reduced 
demand in the main refi  nancing operations 
and maturities under the securities purchase 
programmes initiated as part of the ECB’s monetary policy. On the other hand, the average autonomous factors changed little by comparison, although there were, in some cases, strong fl  uctuations within the individual maintenance periods. Liquidity- 
providing open market operations continued 
to be carried out as fi  xed- rate tenders with 
full allotment of the submitted bids (see table on page 26). Secured overnight rates 
on GC Pooling (ECB basket) rose somewhat 
on average vis- à- vis the previous three main-
tenance periods (from 0.054% to 0.063%), 
approaching the more stable EONIA (which 
averaged 0.085%). Secured overnight 
money reacted more strongly than EONIA to 
the change in liquidity conditions, although 
both continued to take their bearings pri-marily from the deposit facility rate of 0% 
given the generous liquidity conditions.
Overall, liquidity needs stemming from au-
tonomous factors in the three maintenance periods were almost unchanged, rising only 
slightly by €1.1 billion in net terms. Al-
though general government deposits fell by 
€12.4 billion, leading to a decrease in de-mand for central bank liquidity, this effect 
was more than offset by the remaining au-
tonomous factors. Banknotes in circulation 
rose on balance by €9.0 billion, compared 
with a marginal increase of only €0.2 billion in the corresponding 2012 period. The sum 
of changes in net foreign assets and other 
factors, which are considered together in 
order to eliminate valuation effects with no 
impact on liquidity, also had a liquidity- absorbing effect: they declined by around 
€4.5 billion on balance in the period under 
review. Liquidity needs stemming from the 
minimum reserve requirements dropped by 
€1.3 billion in net terms during the three maintenance periods, and were therefore more than enough to offset the higher li-quidity needs resulting from autonomous 
factors.
In the period under review, maturities lowered balance sheet holdings under the Securities Markets Programme (SMP) by 
€7.3 billion to €188.2 billion – including re-valuations. As part of the customary weekly 
liquidity- absorbing fi  ne- tuning operations, the liquidity provided under the SMP was absorbed in each case, neutralising the li-
quidity- providing effect of the programme. 
The weighted allotment rate for the SMP 
liquidity- absorbing tenders rose on average to 0.10% in the period under review (com-
pared with an average of 0.07% in the three previous maintenance periods). This allotment rate had stood at 0.01% for al-
most all of January 2013. Maturities and re-
valuations also reduced balance sheet se-curities holdings under the Covered Bond Purchase Programmes (CBPP1 and CBPP2) over the same period. However, the de-
clines here were considerably lower, namely by €2.0 billion to €42.8 billion (CBPP1) and by €0.4 billion to €15.5 billion (CBPP2).Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2013  
24

In the July- August 2013 maintenance 
period, the outstanding tender volume (ex-
cluding liquidity- absorbing fi  ne- tuning op-
erations) amounted to €803 billion on aver-
age (previous period: €817 billion). Of this 
total volume, the greater part (€677 billion, 
84%) was again accounted for by the two 
three- year tenders, while only 13% (roughly 
€104 billion) came from the main refi  nan-
cing operation. Although repayments of li-
quidity provided in the three- year tenders 
were made in this maintenance period, too, 
they were not particularly high, totalling 
€7.2 billion. In addition to the decrease in 
tender volume, an increase in autonomous factors to €511 billion on average (previous period: €501 billion) led to a decline in ex-
cess liquidity compared with the previous period by around €26 billion to €248 bil-lion. In this maintenance period as well, 
a kind of frontloading was initially observed, ie current account holdings showed above- average levels at the start of the period. Fol-
lowing a temporary decline, however, they 
rose again towards the end of the period. 
The overnight rate remained oriented to the interest rate on the deposit facility, although 
the rates were somewhat higher on aver-age over this period than in the previous 
one. Thus, EONIA averaged 0.095% (previ-ous period: 0.088%) and the secured over-night rate on Eurex Repo’s GC Pooling (ECB 
basket) averaged 0.077% (previous period: 
0.066%). At €22.0 billion, average EONIA turnover was still low (previous period: €22.9 billion), while GC Pooling overnight 
turnover (ECB basket) came to €10.1 billion on average (previous period: €11.1 billion).
Demand in the main refi  nancing operations 
receded to €97 billion on average in the 
August- September 2013 maintenance 
period. Overall, the outstanding volume 
from liquidity- providing tender operations fell to €790 billion. However, because the need for liquidity resulting from autono-
mous factors dropped by around €15 billion compared with the previous period to €496 billion on average, excess liquidity remained virtually unchanged, averaging €249 billion. Overnight rates were down again slightly in 
this maintenance period, and fell as an Factors determining bank liquidity1
€ billion; changes in the daily averages of the reserve maintenance periods vis-à-vis the previous period
Item2013
10 July to
6 Aug7 Aug to10 Sep11 Sep to8 Oct
I Provision (+) or  absorption (–) of  
central bank balances due to changes 
in autonomous factors1 Banknotes in  circulation (increase: –) –  8.3 –  2.8 +  2.1
2 Government  deposits with the Eurosystem ( increase: –) –  4.6 + 24.5 –  7.5
3 Net foreign assets
2 – 83.6 –  0.5 +  6.4
4 Other factors 2 + 86.9 –  6.5 –  7.2
Total –  9.6 + 14.7 –  6.2
II Monetary policy  operations of the Eurosystem
1 Open market  operations
(a) Main refi  nancing operations –  4.3 –  7.0 –  1.3
(b) Longer-term refi  nancing  operations –  9.4 –  6.3 – 17.7
(c) Other operations –  1.9 –  0.1 –  1.0
2 Standing facilities
(a) Marginal lending facility –  1.1 +  0.2 –  0.2
(b) Deposit facility (increase: –) +  9.5 +  3.4 + 20.3
Total –  7.2 –  9.8 +  0.1
III Change in credit  institutions’  current accounts (I + II) – 16.9 +  4.9 –  6.1
IV Change in the  minimum reserve requirement ( increase: –) +  0.6 –  0.5 +  1.2
1 For longer-term trends and the Deutsche Bundesbank’s contribution, see pp 14 • and 15 • of the Statistical Section of this 
Monthly Report. 2 Including end-of- quarter liquidity-neutral valuation adjustments.
Deutsche BundesbankDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2013  
25

average over the period to 0.079% (EONIA) 
and 0.051% (Overnight GC Pooling, ECB 
basket) respectively. The underlying turn-over also contracted to total €19.1 billion (EONIA) and €9.6 billion (GC Pooling, ECB 
basket), however.
The outstanding volume from tender oper-
ations (excluding liquidity- absorbing fi  ne- 
tuning operations) diminished further in the 
September- October 2013 maintenance 
period to €771 billion on average. This de-
cline was due in particular to the early re-
payments of liquidity provided in the three- 
year tenders (totalling €20.1 billion, com-
pared with €8.5 billion in the previous 
period). In addition, a renewed increase in autonomous factors (to an average of €502 billion) contributed to excess liquidity falling 
to €224 billion. The end of the quarter (end- September) saw considerably higher overnight rates and reduced turnover on that day. EONIA rose to 0.18% (+9 basis 
points against the previous day) and the GC 
Pooling weighted overnight rate (ECB bas-
ket) to 0.16% (+9 basis points). At 0.083% on average over the period, EONIA was vir-
tually unchanged, and EONIA turnover re-
mained low despite advancing to €23.3 bil-
lion. The same was true of the secured overnight turnover with GC Pooling (ECB 
basket), which totalled only €7.6 billion on 
average, while the corresponding rate rose to 0 066% as an average.Open market operations of the Eurosystem*
 
Value 
dateType of transaction
1Maturity in daysActual 
 allotment 
in € bil-lionDeviation from the 
bench-
mark in € billion
2Marginal rate/fi  xed 
rate
%Allot-ment 
ratio
%Weighted 
rate
%Cover ratio
3Numberof bid-
ders
10.07.2013 MRO (FRT) 7 102.1 76.1 0.50 100.00 – 1.00 70
10.07.2013 S-LTRO (FRT) 28 3.5 – 0.50 100.00 – 1.00 21
10.07.2013 FTO (–) 7 – 195.5 – 0.13 33.12 0.09 1.28 105
17.07.2013 MRO (FRT) 7 104.4 74.4 0.50 100.00 – 1.00 73
17.07.2013 FTO (–) 7 – 195.5 – 0.12 70.53 0.10 1.22 102
24.07.2013 MRO (FRT) 7 102.3 29.3 0.50 100.00 – 1.00 76
24.07.2013 FTO (–) 7 – 195.5 – 0.14 25.32 0.11 1.18 106
31.07.2013 MRO (FRT) 7 109.2 29.2 0.50 100.00 – 1.00 78
31.07.2013 FTO (–) 7 – 195.5 – 0.20 34.75 0.13 1.18 112
01.08.2013 LTRO (FRT) 91 2.7 – 
4 0.53 100.00 – 1.00 43
07.08.2013 MRO (FRT) 7 99.4 89.9 0.50 100.00 – 1.00 73
07.08.2013 S-LTRO (FRT) 35 3.9 – 0.50 100.00 – 1.00 24
07.08.2013 FTO (–) 7 – 192.5 – 0.13 43.42 0.11 1.40 123
14.08.2013 MRO (FRT) 7 97.6 128.1 0.50 100.00 – 1.00 71
14.08.2013 FTO (–) 7 – 192.5 – 0.12 24.44 0.10 1.35 126
21.08.2013 MRO (FRT) 7 97.7 126.7 0.50 100.00 – 1.00 64
21.08.2013 FTO (–) 7 – 192.5 – 0.11 35.11 0.10 1.48 123
28.08.2013 MRO (FRT) 7 97.1 107.1 0.50 100.00 – 1.00 63
28.08.2013 FTO (–) 7 – 190.5 – 0.13 64.47 0.11 1.51 123
29.08.2013 LTRO (FRT) 91 6.8 – 4 … 100.00 – 1.00 38
04.09.2013 MRO (FRT) 7 95.6 117.1 0.50 100.00 – 1.00 66
04.09.2013 FTO (–) 7 – 190.5 – 0.10 79.93 0.09 1.65 133
11.09.2013 MRO (FRT) 7 97.2 69.7 0.50 100.00 – 1.00 70
11.09.2013 S-LTRO (FRT) 28 3.4 – 0.50 100.00 – 1.00 23
11.09.2013 FTO (–) 7 – 190.5 – 0.09 92.29 0.08 1.56 128
18.09.2013 MRO (FRT) 7 96.2 72.7 0.50 100.00 – 1.00 79
18.09.2013 FTO (–) 7 – 190.5 – 0.09 9.30 0.08 1.43 122
25.09.2013 MRO (FRT) 7 97.0 54.5 0.50 100.00 – 1.00 74
25.09.2013 FTO (–) 7 – 190.5 – 0.19 46.13 0.11 1.30 116
26.09.2013 LTRO (FRT) 84 8.6 – 4 … 100.00 – 1.00 51
02.10.2013 MRO (FRT) 7 94.5 83.5 0.50 100.00 – 1.00 73
02.10.2013 FTO (–) 7 – 187.5 – 0.09 79.35 0.08 1.41 117
* For more information on the Eurosystem’s operations from 10 April 2013 to 9 July 2013, see Deutsche Bundesbank, Monthly  Report, August 2013, p 35. 1 MRO: main refi  nancing operation, LTRO: longer-term refi  nancing operation, S-LTRO: supplemen-
tary longer-term refi  nancing operation, FTO: fi  ne-tuning operation (+: liquidity providing operation, –: liquidity absorbing op-eration), FRT: fi  xed-rate tender. 2 Calculation according to publication after MRO allotment. 3 Ratio of total bids to the allot-
ment amount. 4 The interest rate corresponds to the average minimum bid rate or main refi  nancing rate of the MROs con-
ducted over the life of this operation (may be rounded to two decimal places in the table).
Deutsche BundesbankDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2013  
26

or comparable assistance by a Eurosystem NCB 
to a solvent financial institution that is facing 
temporary liquidity problems. Such provision of 
liquidity does not form part of the Eurosystem’s 
single monetary policy: responsibility for pro -
viding ELA and the costs and risks associated 
with it lie with the individual NCB. In this 
 regard, the ECB already pointed out in 2008 
that ELA was only to be provided in exceptional 
circumstances and in line with the prohibition 
of monetary financing.1
The prevailing legal opinion is that Article 14.4 
of the Statute of the ESCB and of the ECB 
makes it possible for NCBs to provide such 
 liquidity assistance as part of their national 
functions. Accordingly, the ECB Governing 
Council may veto an NCB’s intention to provide 
ELA with a two- thirds majority if it considers 
that these operations interfere with the object -
ives and tasks of the Eurosystem, which in -
clude, above all, the objective of ensuring price 
stability and the implementation of monetary 
policy. To enable the ECB Governing Council to 
make a proper assessment, it must be given all 
the relevant information on the ELA operations 
at an early stage. A procedure to this end has 
been in place since 1999, and the key features 
of the current procedure were summarised in 
the document published by the ECB in October. 
Besides a list of all the information that is to be 
given to the ECB Governing Council, this docu -
ment states the deadlines to be met and the 
thresholds above which NCBs are required to 
make information available and the ECB Gov -
erning Council is obliged to examine the case.
The Eurosystem did not purchase any add -
itional securities as part of monetary policy-  
based purchase programmes in the period 
under review. In particular, it still did not con -
duct any outright monetary transactions (OMT). 
The Eurosystem’s holdings of securities ac -
quired under the Securities Markets Programme 
(SMP), which was discontinued in 2012, 
amounted to €184.1 billion at the beginning of 
November; the two covered bond purchase 
programmes, which had likewise been discon -tinued, accounted for holdings totalling €57.4 
billion.
Recourse by euro- area banks to monetary pol -
icy refinancing operations was still clearly on 
the decline. As in the previous review periods, 
the key factor behind this reduction was the 
early repayments in the two outstanding three- 
year longer- term refinancing operations 
(LTROs). The counterparties to these two oper -
ations voluntarily repaid €69.7 billion to the Eu -
rosystem from the beginning of July onwards. 
After decreasing initially in July and August, re -
payments started increasing again markedly in 
September, which points to a further reduction 
in market fragmentation and funding uncer -
tainty as well as a general improvement in the 
economic outlook for the euro area and greater 
confidence among financial market partici -
pants. The volume of liquidity outstanding from 
the two three- year LTROs currently still stands 
at €615 billion of an original €1,019 billion.
Excess liquidity dropped to €193 billion on 
average over the reserve maintenance period 
that ended on 12 November 2013. As part of 
an analysis based on historical data, the ECB 
identified a range for excess liquidity of be -
tween €100 billion and €200 billion within 
which very short- term money market rates 
would begin to be geared more strongly 
 towards the main refinancing rate again – 
 instead of being oriented towards the deposit 
rate, as is currently still the case.2 However, this 
estimate is inherently subject to uncertainty. 
For example, the link  between the amount of 
excess liquidity and the position of short- term 
money market rates within the interest rate 
corridor is likely to depend, among other 
things, on the degree of segmentation in the 
money markets: if segmentation in the money 
markets decreases,  excess liquidity may even 
fall below the ECB’s estimated values without Still no bond 
purchases in the form of outright monetary trans-actions (OMT)Downward trend in both 
 refinancing 
 volume and 
 excess liquidity 
continues
1 See European Central Bank, Monthly Bulletin, 10th Anni -
versary of the ECB, p 124.
2 See European Central Bank, Monthly Bulletin, February 
2013, pp 30-35.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2013  
27

causing a marked  increase in money market 
rates.
Despite the above- mentioned decline in excess 
liquidity, the short- term euro- area money mar -
ket rates have not, in fact, yet increased signifi -
cantly in response. In the third quarter, there 
was no clear trend in the unsecured interbank 
overnight rate EONIA. From mid- October, the 
EONIA increased slightly but this upward move -
ment was reversed again once the current esti -
mate for HICP inflation and, above all, the 
ECB’s policy rate decision were published.
Money market forward rates3 in the euro area 
increased again initially in July and August fol -
lowing a temporary decrease after the ECB 
Governing Council announced its forward 
guidance at the beginning of July, but declined 
again overall from September amid fewer fluc -
tuations. This development of forward rates 
was also influenced by changing expectations 
about the future money market and liquidity 
conditions in the euro area and other currency 
areas. Moreover, decreasing segmentation in 
the money markets and stable money market 
risk indicators are likely to have contributed to 
this development. Following publication of the 
current estimate for HICP inflation, money mar -
ket forward rates for 2014 fell considerably, 
which can be attributed to expectations of a 
decrease in the policy rate at the end of the 
year. The interest rate cut decided at the begin -
ning of November, which came earlier than 
market participants had expected, resulted in 
an additional decline in forward rates and led 
to a distinct flattening of the forward curve. 
Based on the money market forward rates for 
the coming weeks, it can be assumed that the 
lowering of the main refinancing rate – as was 
already the case in May 2013  – will be re -
flected, at most, in a rather marginal decline in 
short- term money market rates. Amid still high 
levels of excess liquidity, the latter are oriented 
towards the deposit facility rate, which was not 
changed as part of the ECB Governing Coun -
cil’s latest interest rate decisions.Monetary developments 
in the euro area
As in the previous quarters, monetary develop -
ments in the third quarter of 2013 were charac -
terised mainly by weak lending, inflows from 
abroad and the interest rate constellation. For 
instance, sight deposits recorded a further sig -
nificant expansion owing to the low opportun -
ity cost of holding liquid funds and the rela -
tively low interest rate on longer- term types of 
deposit. Once again, inflows from abroad, too, 
had a growth- inducing effect on the monetary 
aggregates. As before, the negative influences 
from the lending side were, above all, the re -
sult of sluggish aggregate economic growth 
and the balance sheet adjustment processes in 
the peripheral countries of the euro area. 
Meanwhile, there were signs of a slight recov -
ery in economic activity, and the decline in 
loans to the private sector for the euro area as 
a whole was somewhat slower than in the pre -
vious quarter.
Against this backdrop, the third quarter of 
2013, too, was characterised by a moderate 
 expansion of M3 alongside a decline in lend -
ing. M3 growth was driven mainly by a re -
newed substantial build-  up of sight deposits, 
which was stimulated by a further decline in 
interest rates for other deposits. Given that the 
non- overnight deposits included in M3 and the 
marketable instruments went down on bal -
ance, M3 growth was once again only moder -
ate. The annual growth rate fell slightly to 2.1%, 
continuing the downward trend observed since 
the beginning of the year.
At the same time, the annual growth rate for 
lending to the private sector (adjusted for loan 
sales and securitisation) slid even deeper into 
negative territory and stood at -1.4% at the 
end of the third quarter of 2013. This meant 
that, although the annual rates of monetary Money market 
rates show no strong reaction to reduction in excess liquidity and policy rate decision
Policy rate deci-
sion will prob-ably be reflected in only margin-ally declining short- term money market ratesMacroeconomic setting
Monetary 
 developments subdued
Lending to the 
private sector still declining
3 Implied forward rates (derived from swap rates) for the 
unsecured interbank overnight rate EONIA, and interest 
rates on exchange- traded three- month Euribor futures.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2013  
28

and credit growth were moving in the same 
 direction, the gap between them remained 
large.
The significant decline in loans to the euro- area 
private sector was, above all, a reflection of a 
still weak economic situation and the persist -
ently great need for deleveraging in the periph -
eral countries of the euro area. Spain in particu -
lar recorded another strong reduction in lend -
ing to the private sector, although loans were 
down in the other peripheral countries, too. 
Yet the banks from the four large euro- area 
member states recorded a net slowdown in 
outflows or even an expansion in lending busi -
ness with the non- financial private sector com -
pared with the previous quarter, which may be 
partly attributable to the gradual recovery in 
economic activity that began in spring.
Lending business with the non- financial private 
sector continued to feature a two- pronged de -
velopment. The perceptible increase in loans to 
households in the third quarter was met with 
another considerable decline in loans to non-  
financial corporations, which could be ob -
served in the peripheral countries in particular, 
but to a lesser extent also in Germany. To some 
extent, this was due to the fact that non-  
financial corporations in a number of euro- area 
countries partly replaced loans with market fi -nancing or by making greater use of internal 
funding. Furthermore, it should be noted that 
the change in loans to non- financial corpor -
ations typically lags behind both macroeco -
nomic developments and investment by around 
three quarters.
This is consistent with the fact that euro- area 
banks participating in the third- quarter Bank 
Lending Survey (BLS) reported a moderate 
 decline in demand from non- financial corpor -
ations for bank loans. According to the sur -
veyed bank managers, it was the deterioration 
in the perception of risk that prompted banks 
to once again slightly tighten the standards for 
loans to enterprises. However, in the vast ma -
jority of countries there was no adjustment of 
standards whatsoever in the third quarter and 
banks in almost all the remaining countries 
tightened them only moderately.
The standards for loans to households, too, 
 remained almost unchanged according to the 
surveyed banks. Moreover, for the first time 
since 2010, they reported no further decline in 
households’ funding requirements. In line with 
these survey results, there was a perceptible 
overall rise (adjusted for loan sales and securi -
tisation) in loans to households for the euro 
area, although the increase was again confined 
to the euro area’s core countries. The expan -Loan growth in 
the euro area still mixed
Significant net 
redemptions among non- financial  corporationsAccording to BLS, marginal tightening of standards and slight decline in demand
Perceptible 
 increase in  lending to householdsConsolidated balance sheet of the MFI sector in the euro area*
Changes in € billion, seasonally adjusted
Liabilities 2013 Q3 2013 Q2
Central government deposits – 29.3 9.8
Monetary aggregate M3 43.9 19.0
of which: Components
Currency in circulation and 
overnight deposits (M1) 81.6 67.0
Other shorter-term bank deposits 
(M2-M1) – 20.7 – 10.7
Marketable instruments (M3-M2) – 17.0 – 37.2
Monetary capital – 50.7 – 31.5
of which
Capital and reserves 10.2 36.2
Other longer-term fi  nancial  liabilities – 60.8 – 67.6Assets 2013 Q3 2013 Q2
Credit to private non-MFIs in the euro area – 60.5 – 91.4
Loans
1 – 50.5 – 99.6
Securities –  4.0 16.1
Credit to general government in the euro area – 26.8 25.5
Loans –  8.6 – 35.6
Securities – 18.2 61.1
Net external assets 50.5 82.6
Other counterparts of M3 –  5.3 – 27.2
* Adjusted for statistical changes. 1 Adjusted for loan sales and securitisation.
Deutsche BundesbankDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2013  
29

sion was supported above all by the positive 
development in housing loans in France and 
Germany. By contrast, against the backdrop of 
the current need for household deleveraging, 
loans for house purchase continued to decline 
in some of the euro area’s peripheral countries 
and in the Netherlands. Consumer credit and 
other lending saw slight net redemptions for 
the euro area as a whole and also for most of 
its member states, while in Germany consumer 
credit expanded.
As with credit to the private sector, credit to 
general government, too, dampened the ex -
pansion of the monetary aggregate M3 this 
time. This was due on the one hand to net re -
demptions of loans to general government and 
on the other to net sales of government bonds 
by monetary financial institutions (MFIs) in 
France in particular but also in other member 
states. This development was discernible even 
in Italy and Spain, where demand had still 
centred on securities of their domestic public 
sectors in the previous quarters.
As in the previous quarters, the banking sec -
tor’s net external asset position contributed 
substantially to monetary growth. As before, 
the inflows were driven above all by sustained 
current account surpluses. Unlike in the pre -
ceding quarters, however, there were hardly 
any expansionary influences from securities 
transactions with non- residents. Although non- 
residents continued to purchase resident- issued 
shares, there were perceptible capital outflows 
due to purchases of non-  resident securities by 
resident investors. In addition, trade in debt 
 securities issued by domestic non-  MFIs again 
 resulted in marked capital exports. This some -
what curbed the net capital inflows in Euro -
pean non- banks’ portfolio investment that had 
begun in mid-2012.
Monetary growth was also supported by the 
sustained decline in monetary capital, which 
accelerated once again compared with the pre -
vious quarter. Besides the continuing outflows 
from long- term time and savings deposits, this No further 
 increase in credit to general government
Another distinct 
rise in the net external asset position
Accelerated 
 decline in mon-
etary capitalMonetary aggregates andcounterparts in the euro area
Source: ECB. 1 Year-on-year change in per cent. 2 In percenta-
ge points. 3 Adjusted for loan sales and securitisation. 4 Taken 
in isolation, an increase curbs M3 growth. 5 Adjusted for loan 
sales and securitisation from 2010 Q1. 6 Non-monetary finan-
cial corporations.
Deutsche Bundesbank2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013505101520
–++++
–10–50+5+10+15+20+25
505101520
–++++Seasonally adjusted, end-of-quarter data
... monetary aggregates
... counterparts
Sectoral growth contributions 2of which
Loans to the private sector 5Growth rate 1 of M3 and the
contributions to growth 2 of the ...
M3–M2
M2–M1
M1
Remaining balance
sheet items
Longer-term financial
liabilities to other non-MFIs 4
Net external
asset position
Credit to theprivate sector 3
Financialcorporations 6
Non-financialcorporations
HouseholdsM3 
M3
Growth rate1Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2013  
30

Changes in bank holdings of domestic government bonds 
in the euro area
In many euro- area member states, balance 
sheet adjustments and the ongoing process 
of deleveraging are the defi  ning features of 
the current situation in the banking sector. 
With reference to balance sheet data ag-
gregated at national level, this has meant 
both shifts in banks’ funding structures and 
changes on the asset side. Whilst, for in-
stance, claims on non- residents and loans to the non- fi  nancial private sector in the euro area have shrunk, banks’ holdings of domestic government bonds have ex-
panded in most euro- area countries.
A large part of the additional purchases of 
government debt securities coincided with 
the three- year longer- term refi  nancing op-
erations (LTROs) at the end of 2011 and the 
beginning of 2012.1 However, banks in 
Spain and Italy in particular continued to buy government bonds on an ongoing basis thereafter. As a result, the domestic government bonds held by Italian banks rose from €240 billion at the end of No-
vember 2011 to €415 billion at the end of 
September 2013 (+73%); over the same 
period, Spanish banks expanded their hold-ings of Spanish government debt securities by 81%, from €165 billion to €299 billion.
2 
Irish banks (+60%) and Portuguese banks (+51%) also purchased greater volumes of 
domestic government bonds, whilst the in-
crease at credit institutions based in Ger-
many and France was considerably smaller (16% and 14% respectively). At the end of 
the period under review, Greek banks had 
signifi  cantly lower holdings than they did 
just under two years before, though this is 
largely attributable to extraordinary statis-
tical effects and valuation effects, such as 
the haircut in March 2012.
These expanded holdings have resulted in a 
closer interdependency between banks and governments, particularly in those countries 
where they were already bound by rela-tively close ties at the beginning of the period under consideration. For instance, 
even before the fi  rst three- year LTRO in No-
vember 2011, domestic government bonds 
accounted for 6% and 4.7% of aggregate 
bank balance sheets in Italy and Spain re-
spectively, levels well above the (weighted) 
average of 3.0% for the euro area. By Sep-
tember of this year, these ratios had risen 
to 10.1% and 9.1%. The 6.6% ratio at Portu-
guese banks at the current end is also sig-
1 See Deutsche Bundesbank, Substantial government 
bond purchases by Eurosystem and commercial banks, 
Monthly Report, May 2012, p 32.
2 Changes in holdings may also arise from valuation 
effects and from exceptional statistical effects, such as the reclassifi  cation of a bank as a result of a resolution process. However, the results are similar after adjusting for such effects.Holdings of domestic government bonds in the national MFI sector
*)
Source: ECB. * Excluding ESCB.
Deutsche Bundesbank050100150200250300350400450€ billion
PT IT IE GR FR ES30 June 2012
DE30 September 201330 November 2011Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2013  
31

nifi  cantly higher than the (weighted) aver-
age for the euro area (4.3%).3
As well as the attraction of being able to 
use government bonds as collateral in refi  -
nancing operations and for making interest 
rate gains through carry trades, general risk 
and return considerations are also likely to 
have prompted banks’ government bond purchases. The low risk weighting of gov-
ernment bonds within the context of more 
stringent capital requirements is likely to 
have played a part, too. Accordingly, in the fi  rst six months of this year banks based in Italy and Spain once again bought domestic 
government debt securities in large vol-umes, whilst at the same time Spanish 
banks in particular made greater use of the 
option to return liquidity obtained through 
the three- year LTROs to the Eurosystem be-
fore the due date. Furthermore, since the 
end of 2011 banks in Italy, Spain, Portugal, 
Ireland and Germany have substantially 
 reduced their funding through the issuance of bank debt securities.
Despite falling at the current end, since the 
beginning of the year banks’ holdings of 
government bonds in the countries under consideration have, overall, either risen or at least contracted to a lesser extent than 
their outstanding funds from the three- year LTROs. It follows from this that early repay-ment of these LTRO funds and net redemp-
tions of bank debt securities have, at least 
in part, been replaced by other funding 
sources or fi  nanced through a larger reduc-
tion of other positions on the asset side of 
banks’ balance sheets. Nationally aggre-
gated balance sheet data indicate that this 
has occurred through infl  ows of short- term 
deposits and a contraction in loans to the private sector. The latter applies mainly to 
the southern peripheral countries of Spain, 
Italy and Portugal, where the reduction in 
loans to the private sector was equal in vol-ume to around 90% of the reduction in  refi  nancing through LTROs and bank debt 
securities. By contrast, in the euro area as a whole the reduction in these forms of refi  -
nancing was offset more equally by asset 
and liability items, with deposit infl  ows and the fall in loans each making up a little over 
20%. In addition, loans to the domestic 
public sector contracted in all the countries under consideration, which means that part of the expansion in government bond hold-
ings is attributable to the replacement of 
loans by debt securities. For instance, do-
mestic government bonds purchased by 
Spanish banks since January,  totalling more 
than €45 billion, contrast at the same time with net redemptions of loans by the Span-
ish state, amounting to around €15 billion 
– which equates to a substitution rate of 
37%. For Italy and Portugal the ratio of net 
redemptions of loans to purchases of gov-
ernment debt securities was much lower at 
around 14%, whilst in Germany, Ireland, Greece and France both government debt 
securities and loans to government fell on 
balance from early 2013 onwards.
3 In the second quarter of 2013 Spanish credit institu-
tions thus held 41% of the total outstanding stock of 
Spanish government bonds, while Portuguese and Ital-
ian banks still held 27% and 24% respectively of do-
mestic government bonds (Ireland: 16%; Germany: 
15%).Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2013  
32

was attributable in particular to the further 
strong reduction in outstanding long- term 
bank debt securities, which have been declin -
ing almost without interruption since August 
2011. In addition to the weak demand for bank 
debt securities – most prominent in countries 
with problems in their banking sectors – bank- 
side factors are likely to have played a role, too. 
In view of the continuous rise in the deposits of 
euro- area institutions and the possibility to ob -
tain cheap funds from the Eurosystem (eg as 
part of the two three- year LTROs launched at 
the end of 2011 and the beginning of 2012), it 
is fair to assume that the waning importance of 
long- term bank debt securities is at least partly 
attributable to banks replacing them with alter -
native sources of funding. This is consistent 
with the fact that the banks questioned in the 
BLS reported further slight improvements in 
most surveyed sub- markets with regard to their 
funding options.
Overall, the analysis of the monetary aggre -
gates and their counterparts suggests that the 
underlying monetary dynamics that are rele -
vant to inflation remain subdued. On average, 
inflation forecasts based on various monetary 
indicators (monetary aggregates, short- term 
deposits, loans) are also currently signalling bal -
anced risks for price developments over the 
next three years; perceptible downward risks to 
price stability are not discernible either. How -
ever, the uncertainty associated with these 
forecasts remains high.
German banks’ deposit and 
lending business with 
 domestic customers4
Investment behaviour in Germany, too, was 
again characterised in the summer months by a 
continued increase in short-  term deposits and 
a simultaneous reduction in longer- term de -
posits. In connection with the historically low 
level of shorter- term interest rates, the marked 
preference for liquid investments has been re -
flected in a substantial increase in sight de -posits for the past one and a half years now. 
Mainly households, but also non- financial cor -
porations, shifted funds from short- term time 
deposits into overnight deposits. As in the euro 
area, this was partly because the interest rate 
spread between these two types of deposit 
continued to decline in the third quarter. It is 
likely that, in Germany, the high liquidity among 
non- financial corporations amplified the 
growth in sight deposits in the reporting quar -
ter.
However, unlike in the previous quarters, finan -
cial corporations, whose investment behaviour 
is often later imitated by the non- financial pri -
vate sector, shifted a distinct volume of liquid 
deposits to investment forms outside of M3. Money- based 
forecasts with balanced infla-tion risks
Deposit growth 
in low- interest- rate environ-ment still  dominated by increase in sight depositsInstitutional  investors’ risk aversion now  diminishedLending and deposits of monetary  fi  nancial institutions (MFIs) in Germany
*
Changes in € billion, seasonally adjusted
Item2013
Q2 Q3
Deposits of domestic non-MFIs 1
Overnight 33.3 35.9
With agreed maturities
of up to 2 years – 7.9 – 13.7
of over 2 years – 6.0 – 10.2
Redeemable at notice
of up to 3 months 3.9 1.6
of over 3 months – 3.6 –  2.2
Lending
to domestic general government
Loans – 3.7 –  3.0
Securitised lending – 4.2 7.1
to domestic enterprises and 
households
Loans 2 – 1.7 4.1
of which to households 3 3.7 6.7
to non-fi  nancial  corporations
4 – 5.0 –  3.4
Securitised lending 6.4 1.0
* As well as banks (including building and loan associations, but 
excluding the Bundesbank), monetary fi  nancial institutions 
(MFIs) here also include money market funds. End-of-quarter 
data, adjusted for statistical changes. 1 Enterprises, households 
and general government excluding central government. 
2  Adjusted for loan sales and securitisation. 3 Including non-profi  t institutions serving households. 4 Corporations and quasi- 
corporations.
Deutsche Bundesbank
4 Statistical Supplement 4 to the Monthly Report, Season -
ally adjusted business statistics, will, from now on, provide 
additional tables on outstanding amounts and transaction- 
related changes in the lending and deposit business of 
MFIs (excluding the Bundesbank) in Germany with domes -
tic customers. The range of time series available on the 
Bundesbank’s website has been expanded accordingly.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2013  
33

This may indicate that these investors’ risk aver -
sion, which resulted in strong growth in sight 
deposits in autumn 2008 and in the years 2011 
and 2012, has now diminished. This is more 
evident in the long- term maturity segment, 
where long-  term time deposits in particular, 
whose dynamics are mainly determined by in -
surance corporations and pension funds in Ger -
many, have been dissolved to a considerable 
extent over the past few quarters. These funds, 
too, are likely to have been channelled into 
assets outside M3 in the search for yield.
Following three weak quarters, lending busi -
ness in Germany witnessed a moderate in -
crease in summer, partly offsetting the consid -
erable reduction in lending in the euro area as 
a whole. First, banks resumed their increase in 
lending to domestic general government in the 
form of securities, which had been at a stand -
still since the beginning of the year; second, 
loans to the domestic private sector were fur -
ther expanded. This was essentially the result of a distinct rise in loans to households. Since 
the third quarter of 2010, these loans had been 
decisively influenced by the demand for hous -
ing loans, which was supported by the ex -
tremely low mortgage rates. Furthermore, the 
very low yields on financial assets and a finan -
cial market climate characterised by height -
ened uncertainty promoted portfolio shifts into 
tangible assets.5 At an annual growth rate of 
2.2%, the increase in mortgage loans granted 
to households nevertheless remained moder -
ate. The third- quarter BLS results confirm that 
the trend of rising demand for private housing 
loans continued in the third quarter of 2013, 
albeit – as in the previous quarter – at a weaker 
pace. According to the surveyed bank man -
agers, the main reason for this sustained de -
mand was that households were continuing to 
take a positive view of the outlook on the 
housing market.
With regard to consumer credit to households 
in Germany, the still favourable conditions for 
private consumption and, above all, the under -
lying trend of rising purchasing power were 
 reflected in accelerated but still moderate 
growth. The banks surveyed as part of the BLS 
likewise reported that the pick-up in demand 
for consumer credit had continued from the 
previous quarter.
On balance, loans to non- financial corporations 
in the third quarter were not only down in the 
euro area as a whole, but also in Germany – 
 albeit to a much lesser extent. Given that devel -
opments in loans to the corporate sector typic -
ally lag behind both macroeconomic develop -
ments and investment, the net redemptions of 
loans to enterprises over the last four quarters 
can best be explained by German enterprises’ 
very weak investment activity in 2012. In the 
coming quarters, too, a marked pick- up in loan 
growth may be delayed by the underlying trend 
of still- subdued investment activity in Germany. Increased lend-
ing to house-holds driven by loans for house purchase …… and con-sumer credit
Lending to non- financial corpor-ations sees  declineLoans of German banks toselected sectors
1 Year-on-year rate of change. 2  Non-monetary financial cor-
porations. 3 Corporations and quasi-corporations.
Deutsche Bundesbank2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 201321012345
––+++++Growth contributions in percentage pointsSeasonally adjusted and adjusted for loan sales and securitisation, end-of-quarter data
HouseholdsFinancial corporations 2
Non-financial corporations 3Growth rate 1 as %
5 For a current analysis of house prices in Germany, see 
Deutsche Bundesbank, The determinants and regional de -
pendencies of house price increases since 2010, Monthly 
Report, October 2013, pp 13-30.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2013  
34

Banking conditions in Germany
1 New business. According to harmonised MFI interest rate statistics. 2 According to the Bank Lending Survey, difference between the 
number of respondents reporting “tightened considerably” and “tightened slightly” and the number of respondents reporting “eased 
somewhat” and “eased considerably” as a percentage of the responses given. 3 Expectations for 2013 Q4.
Deutsche Bundesbank05 06 07 08 09 10 11 12 20132.53.03.54.04.55.05.56.06.57.07.58.08.59.0
–300+30–300+30
–60–300+30+60–60–300+30+60
2005 06 07 08 09 10 11 12 131.52.02.53.03.54.04.55.05.56.06.5
3003060
–++
9060300306090
–––+++Credit to non-financial corporations
% pa
%
%% pa
%
%
Riskier loans
Average loans
Average loansRiskier loans%%
Average loansChange in margins 2
for loans to enterprises... with an initial rate fixation of
    over 1 year and up to 5 yearsBank interest rates for consumer credit1...
... with an initial
    rate fixation of over 5 years
... consumer credit... up to €1 million
3Bank interest rates for loans to enterprises1...
... with an initial rate fixation of up to
    1 year ...
Riskier loans... consumer credit
2.53.03.54.04.55.05.56.0
... house purchase... up to €1 million
... over €1 million
3... house purchaseBank interest rates on
loans for house purchase1
with an initial rate fixation of
over 10 years
Change in credit standards 2
for loans to enterprises
3... with an initial rate fixation of over
    5 years ...Credit to households
Change in credit standards 2  for loans for ...
Change in margins 2 for loans for ...Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2013  
35

Added to this is the fact that corporate loan 
demand, when viewed in isolation, is being 
 reduced by greater recourse to alternative 
sources of financing. An increasing trend to -
wards debt financing on the capital market 
could already be observed in the previous quar -
ters, and this is likely to have continued over 
the summer months. In addition, it can be 
 assumed that a larger proportion of corporate 
investments were made using internal funds, as 
the BLS results confirm on the whole. The par -
ticipating German banks indicated that re -
course to other sources of funding, internal 
 financing in particular, had the effect of damp -
ening enterprises’ demand for bank loans, 
when viewed in isolation, in the reporting 
quarter. However, according to the bank man -
agers surveyed in the BLS, enterprises’ demand 
for loans remained largely unchanged in the 
third quarter of 2013.
On the supply side, the moderate pick- up in 
domestic lending to the private sector was 
 accompanied by merely a slight change in lend -
ing policies on the whole. According to the 
German BLS results, the surveyed institutions 
adjusted their standards for loans to enterprises 
only marginally on balance in the third quarter 
of 2013. Small and medium- sized enterprises 
nevertheless benefited from slightly eased 
standards. Thus, the period of little overall 
change in lending policies, which has already 
lasted for four years now, continued. None of 
the factors surveyed in the BLS that are relevant 
for credit standards on loans to enterprises dis -
played any noteworthy expansive or restrictive 
trends. Margins, too, were left broadly un -
changed by the surveyed banks.
Credit standards vis- à- vis households, too, 
changed only slightly. None of the surveyed 
factors relevant to the standards on housing 
loans and consumer credit had a noteworthy 
impact on lending policies in the third quarter. 
Whereas the institutions participating in the BLS made virtually no changes to the margins 
for consumer credit and riskier housing loans, 
they adjusted their margins somewhat for 
housing loans to borrowers with average 
creditworthiness.
The survey for the third quarter of 2013 again 
contained ad hoc  questions on the impact of 
the financial and sovereign debt crisis on banks’ 
funding conditions and credit standards. As in 
the previous two quarters, the surveyed banks 
reported a slight improvement on the whole in 
funding conditions. The surveyed institutions 
stated that the sovereign debt crisis continued 
not to have any impact whatsoever on their 
lending policies in the third quarter.
Owing to their still very low level, bank lending 
rates on new business probably tended to sup -
port domestic lending to the private sector. 
However, bank lending rates in the third quar -
ter of 2013 followed the moderate increase in 
capital market interest rates to some extent 
after having largely stagnated or declined in 
the preceding quarter. With regard to loans to 
enterprises the interest rate rise was, however, 
only very slight in the third quarter. For short-  
term funds, the reporting institutions were 
charging interest of 3.0% for small- scale and 
1.8% for large-  scale loans at the end of the 
period under  review. The interest rates on long- 
term loans to domestic non- financial corpor -
ations stood at 2.8% and 2.9% respectively at 
the end of September.
By contrast, housing loans of all maturities 
were more expensive than three months previ -
ously. Interest rates on long- term loans for 
house purchase went up by just under 30 basis 
points and stood at 3.1% at the end of Septem -
ber. While the remuneration of households’ 
 deposits stagnated or fell in the third quarter, 
reaching new historical lows in some cases, 
interest rates on longer- term deposits made by 
non- financial corporations rose somewhat.German banks’ 
credit standards for enterprises virtually  unchanged
Almost no 
changes to credit standards vis- à- vis house-holdsViewed in isol-ation, sovereign 
debt crisis hav-
ing no impact 
on lending 
 policies
Bank lending 
rates followed higher capital market interest ratesDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2013  
36

Financial markets
Financial market setting
Events on the international financial markets in 
the third quarter of 2013 were heavily influ -
enced by factors related to monetary policy 
and macroeconomic developments. The finan -
cial markets came entirely under the spell of 
altered expectations about the future course of 
Federal Reserve monetary policy. Whilst most 
market participants had previously been ex -
pecting an imminent gradual tapering of bond 
purchases by the US central bank along with 
rising yields, and had reduced their provision of 
capital to the emerging market economies, the 
yield trend then turned around on both sides of 
the Atlantic in September. This came about 
largely because the US central bank had re -
affirmed that it would maintain its accommo -
dative monetary policy stance and its asset pur -
chases in their full extent against a backdrop of 
weak labour market figures and, at that time, 
the unresolved budget dispute. The continu -
ation of monetary easing was also echoed in 
price gains on the equity markets, which re -
ceived additional support from predominantly 
positive economic data in a host of countries. 
On the foreign exchange markets, changing 
expectations about US monetary policy exerted 
significant pressure for a time on the currencies 
of a number of emerging market economies 
with weak fundamentals. By contrast, the euro 
gained slightly on balance as a weighted aver -
age against the currencies of 21 major trading 
partners.
Exchange rates
The euro appreciated against the US dollar by 
around 2½% on balance compared to the end 
of June. Standing at around US$1.38 at one 
point, the currency even reached its highest 
level for roughly two years. Changes in eco -
nomic sentiment and the resulting revisions to 
market participants’ expectations regarding the future monetary policy stance both in the 
United States and in the euro area played a key 
role in determining the exchange rate pattern. 
Moreover, events surrounding the US budget 
dispute impacted on exchange rate move -
ments.
At the beginning of the reporting period, the 
single currency initially came under downward 
pressure when the Governing Council of the 
ECB reaffirmed its intention to keep the euro-  
area policy rate low for an extended period of 
time. Remarks by the US central bank that the 
US economy would be in need of a highly ac -
commodative monetary policy for the foresee -
able future then triggered a clear countermove -
ment. On top of this, a successful auction of 
Spanish money market paper served to support 
the single currency. In mid-  August, stronger-  
than- expected US economic data fuelled 
speculation that the Federal Reserve would 
pare back its bond- buying programme sooner 
than expected, causing the euro to falter tem -
porarily. However, when the Fed indicated in 
mid- September that it would not cut back its 
bond purchases – much to the surprise of mar -
ket participants – the euro rebounded percep -
tibly.
In October, movements in the USD/EUR ex -
change rate mirrored the course of events in 
the United States budget dispute. Speculation 
that an agreement might be imminent led to 
periodic downward pressure on the euro, while 
growing scepticism on the part of market par -
ticipants as to whether a deal could be reached 
at all had the opposite effect. That the eventual 
agreement reached nonetheless drove the euro 
noticeably higher is due to the fact that it was 
merely possible to agree on a postponement. 
Latterly, the euro relinquished some of its gains 
on account of the lower-than- expected infla -
tion rate reported for the euro area at the end 
of October. This stoked speculation among 
market participants that a cut in interest rates Financial mar-
kets affected by expansionary monetary policy
Euro firmer 
against the US dollar on balanceExchange rate pattern largely attributable to changing  expectations concerning the monetary policy pursued in the United States and in the euro area
Postponement 
of a solution to the US budget dispute bolsters the euro, …
… but lower 
 inflation rate and a reduction in the ECB’s key interest rates weigh on single currencyDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2013  
37

might be around the corner, a move which 
then was indeed implemented by the ECB Gov -
erning Council at the beginning of  November. 
As this report went to press, the euro was trad -
ing at US$1.34.
The euro also made gains against the yen. 
It  benefited, in particular, from the debate 
about the Japanese government’s contem -
plated postponement of its planned VAT in -
crease, which gave market participants reason 
to doubt  Japan’s commitment to fiscal consoli -
dation. By contrast, Prime Minister Shinzo 
Abe’s subsequent announcement at the begin -
ning of  October confirming that the VAT rate would indeed be raised in April 2014 hardly im -
pacted on the EUR/JPY exchange rate, as it co -
incided with the presentation of a new eco -
nomic stimulus package. Of late, Japan’s 
weaker third- quarter growth figures have 
worked to the euro’s advantage. At the end of 
the reporting period, the single currency stood 
at ¥134, which was almost 4% up on its level 
at the end of June.
Conversely, the single currency made slight 
losses against the pound sterling. These were 
mainly due to better- than- expected sentiment 
indicators and growth figures for the United 
Kingdom which raised expectations among 
market participants that the Bank of England 
would step back from its expansionary path 
sooner than originally imagined. Most recently, 
the euro was trading at £0.84, down by around 
2½% on its value at the end of June.
The euro saw a slight gain in value compared 
with the end of the second quarter vis- à- vis the 
currencies of the 21 most important trading 
partners of the euro area. At last count, the sin -
gle currency was about 3½% up on the begin -
ning of the year and around ½% below its level 
at the launch of monetary union. In real terms, 
too, ie taking account of the inflation differen -
tials between the euro area and its major trad -
ing partners, the effective euro exchange rate 
rose somewhat on balance in the period under 
review. This diminished – albeit only margin -
ally  – the price competitiveness of euro- area 
exporters, which should be considered signifi -
cantly worse than the long- term average.
Securities markets and 
 portfolio transactions
The international bond markets saw mixed 
 developments in the third quarter. While yields 
on long-  term bonds in the euro area dipped, 
ignoring the slightly brighter economic out -
look, ten- year US Treasury yields at the end of 
the period under review were slightly up on 
balance compared with the end of the second Euro also appre-
ciates against the yen, …… but loses a little ground against the pound sterling
Effective 
 exchange rate of the euro like-
wise somewhat 
firmer
International 
bond markets exhibit mixed behaviourExchange rate of the euro
Source: ECB. 1 Exchange rate at the start of monetary union 
on 4 January 1999. 2 As calculated by the ECB against the cur-
rencies of 21 countries.
Deutsche BundesbankJ A SOND J FMAM J J A SOND
2012 20131.21.31.4
95100110120130140
0.700.750.800.850.90
95100105110115Daily data; log scale
US$
¥
£against the ...
... US dollar
US$1.1789 1
... yen
¥133.73 1
... pound sterling
£0.7111 1
Nominal effective exchange rate 2
1999 Q1 = 100
103.11 1Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2013  
38

quarter at around 2.7%. However, US yields did 
not follow an even path. Instead, they were in -
fluenced by shifting monetary and fiscal policy 
factors. By September, the upward tendency 
shown by yields since May initially continued its 
course to 3.0% amid market expectations of an 
imminent tapering- off of bond purchases by 
the Federal Reserve. However, in September 
the Fed announced that it would continue to 
buy US$85 billion in bonds each month until 
further notice as the labour market data still 
provided no clear- cut signs of a definite recov -
ery. This unexpected decision not to begin 
gradually tapering asset purchases initially cur -
tailed the upturn in US yields, broadly driving 
down yields. The US budget debate that un -
folded at the end of September, coupled with 
the temporary shutdown of some of the coun -
try’s public administration services, caused US 
yields to spike only for a time at the beginning 
of October. Nevertheless, the imponderables 
for the bond markets that were triggered by 
the government shutdown were reflected in a 
temporary widening of CDS spreads. Latterly, 
long- term US Treasury yields nonetheless 
picked up again slightly in view of the better-  
than- expected US labour market data.
Monetary and fiscal policy discussions in the 
United States also had a significant indirect im -
pact on the development of yields on long-  
term government bonds issued in the euro area 
and in Germany. In this context, yields on ten- 
year Bunds continued to rise into the month of 
September, briefly peaking at a level of 2% for 
the first time since March 2012. However, the 
decline in yields observed in the United States 
since mid-  September also caused German 
yields to fall once more; these stood at 1.7% at 
last count. Compared with the end of the 
second quarter, this nevertheless constitutes a 
modest increase of 11 basis points.
The yield curve for Federal securities with a ma -
turity of between two and ten years therefore 
remains fairly steep, which would suggest that 
market participants anticipate higher short-  
term interest rates over the next few years. Some of the yield differential between long 
and short maturities also remunerates 
long-term investors for assuming interest rate 
and inflation risk. Since the end of June, im -
plied inflation expectations (ie the break- even 
inflation rates) for paper with a ten- year matur -
ity, which are derived from the spread between 
nominal and real yields on Federal bonds, have 
fallen by 27 basis points to a level of 1.2%.
During the period under review, the GDP-  
weighted long- term yields on bonds issued by 
other euro-  area countries fell from 3.6% 
to 3.3% at last count. This was principally due 
to clearly declining yields in peripheral coun -
tries. Third- quarter macroeconomic data con -
firm signs of a degree of economic stability in 
the programme countries. As a result, periph -
eral countries benefited from reduced risk pre -
miums and narrowing CDS spreads.
Changing expectations in relation to US mon -
etary policy had a particularly major impact on German yield 
curve remains steepYields in other euro- area  countries downBond yields in Germany, Japanand the USA
1 Source: Thomson Reuters.
Deutsche BundesbankJ FMAM J J A S ON
20130.50.81.01.21.51.82.02.22.52.83.0Daily data
%Yield on ten-year
government bondsoutstanding
USA1
Germany
Japan1Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2013  
39

the financial markets of emerging market econ -
omies. The Fed’s announcement in May of its 
intention to taper off its bond purchases put 
particular pressure on the currencies and stock 
markets of EMEs with current account deficits. 
While the quantitative easing measures of the 
world’s key central banks generated capital 
flows to EMEs in recent years, disinvestment 
from EME investment funds indicated that cap -
ital was being drained from these countries. 
Some countries reacted by tightening monet -
ary policy or intervening in the foreign ex -
change markets. The Fed’s surprising decision 
in September not to proceed with its tapering 
plans initially put these trends into reverse: the 
bond, equity and exchange markets all rallied 
to a degree, and investment funds geared spe -
cifically to EMEs started to attract more capital 
again. It will be crucial for these countries to 
use the time available to reduce their external 
vulnerability.
For the most part, the path followed by yields 
on long-term Japanese government bonds 
 diverged from developments in other coun -
tries, with the  effect that it remains primarily 
influenced by the fiscal and monetary policy 
steps announced back in January and April of 
this year. These measures which are designed 
to overcome deflation while bolstering eco -
nomic growth and which encompass large-  
scale bond purchases by the Japanese central 
bank contributed to a decline in long- term 
bond yields in Japan from the end of the 
second quarter onwards, down by 25 basis 
points to 0.6%. During the same time period, 
Japan’s five- year inflation expectations, meas -
ured on the basis of break- even inflation rates, 
rose significantly by 44 basis points to stand at 
1.5% as this report went to press. This is con -
sistent with the results of the survey on long-  
term inflation expectations (consensus fore -
casts) published in October which, in the case 
of Japan, have climbed to 1.3% in the period 
since April. According to both these measures, 
however, inflation expectations remain well 
below the inflation target, which was raised 
to 2% in January.Tapering meas-
ures leave their mark on EME  financial  markets
Declining yields 
in JapanYield curve on theGerman bond market
*
* Interest rates for (hypothetical) zero-coupon bonds (Svensson 
method), based on listed Federal securities. 1 Before the meet-
ing of the Federal Open Market Committee.
Deutsche Bundesbank0123456789 1 000.51.01.52.0
Residual maturity in years30 June 201318 September 2013 1
14 November 2013%
Financing conditions for euro-area enterprises
1 Euro-denominated BBB-rated bonds with a residual maturity 
of  seven  to  ten  years,  included  in  the  bond  market  indices 
(iBoxx) of the International Index Company. Source: Thomson Reuters. 2 Spreads on five-year credit default swap (CDS) con-
tracts included in the indices (iTraxx) of the International Index Company. Source: Bloomberg.
Deutsche Bundesbank2009 2010 2011 2012 2013036912151821242730
50100150200250300350Weekly averages
%
Basis pointsYields 1
Credit default swap spreads 2
iTraxx Europe
Financials
iTraxx Europe 125iTraxx EuropeNon-FinancialsiBoxx Non-FinancialsiBoxx Financials
iBoxxCorporatesDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2013  
40

Funding terms for corporations on capital mar -
kets tended to improve further. European fi -
nancials saw their yields on corporate bonds 
with a residual maturity of seven to ten years 
and a BBB rating fall from a mid-  year level of 
5.1% to 4.5% latterly, while European enter -
prises forming part of the real economy re -
corded a yield dip of 0.3%, down to 3.0%.1 
As a result, corporate bonds were yielding con -
siderably less than the five- year average. More -
over, yields remained below the levels at which 
they had stood before the Lehman bankruptcy 
in September 2008. The yield spreads of Euro -
pean BBB- rated corporate bonds over Bunds 
with comparable maturities likewise narrowed 
during the summer months by 70 basis points 
for bonds issued by financial corporations and 
by 33 basis points for non- financial corporate 
debt to 2.8 and 1.4 percentage points respect -
ively at last count. This contraction in spreads 
reflects a further reduction in market partici -
pants’ risk aversion and mirrors the parallel nar -
rowing of credit default risk premiums (iTraxx) 
as well as reduced stock market uncertainty. In 
light of the continuing worldwide low- interest- 
rate environment, the low spreads are also 
likely to be indicative of an ongoing search for 
yield by investors.
In the third quarter of 2013, gross issue volume 
in the German bond market amounted to 
€380½ billion, which was below the level for 
the previous quarter. After deducting the 
higher redemptions and taking account of 
changes in issuers’ holdings of their own 
bonds, net redemptions of debt securities came 
to €39½ billion. In addition, foreign borrowers 
placed debt securities worth €20½ billion on 
the German market. The outstanding amount 
of debt securities in the German market there -
fore decreased by €19 billion in the period 
under review.
The public sector redeemed debt securities in 
the amount of €9 billion during the third quar -
ter of 2013, compared with net issuance of 
€8 billion one quarter earlier. Central govern -
ment principally redeemed ten- year bonds (€16½ billion), and, to a smaller extent, two-  
year Federal Treasury notes (Schätze) totalling 
€3½ billion as well as Treasury discount paper 
(Bubills) worth €2 billion. This contrasted with 
net issuance of Federal notes (Bobls) in the 
amount of €11½ billion and 30-year bonds 
worth €2 billion. On balance, the Federal states 
only tapped the capital market to a marginal 
extent in the reporting period.
Domestic credit institutions took advantage of 
their positive financial situation and attractive 
alternative forms of financing by further paring 
back their capital market debt in the third quar -
ter of 2013, paying down €26½ billion. They 
mainly focused on “other bank bonds” (€17 bil -
lion), but also redeemed public Pfandbriefe and 
mortgage Pfandbriefe (€4½ billion in each 
case).Further improve-
ment in finan-cing conditions for enterprises
Declining risk 
aversion and credit risk  premiums
Reduced debt 
outstanding in the German bond market
Net public 
 sector redemp-tions, …… net redemp-tions by credit institutions …Investment activity in the German securities markets
€ billion
Item2012 2013
Q3 Q2 Q3
Debt securities
Residents 10.4 24.9 –  7.1
Credit institutions – 4.9 –  2.5 –  7.7
of which
Foreign debt securities – 5.7 8.9 –  0.1
Deutsche Bundesbank – 0.6 –  3.7 –  2.7
Other sectors 15.9 31.2 3.3
of which
Domestic debt securities – 9.4 7.5 – 20.2
Non-residents 1.9 – 14.8 – 12.1
Shares
Residents 5.0 11.3 6.1
Credit institutions 7.9 –  1.1 6.9
of which
Domestic shares 4.7 –  1.3 3.2
Non-banks – 2.9 12.4 –  0.8
of which
Domestic shares – 4.0 6.7 –  6.6
Non-residents 0.9 1.8 3.9
Mutual fund sharesInvestment in specialised funds 21.1 13.0 15.6
Investment in retail funds 0.0 1.5 3.2
of which
Equity funds – 0.5 –  1.0 0.6
Deutsche Bundesbank
1 Based on corporate bond yields included in the various 
iBoxx bond indices for different rating grades.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2013  
41

While gross issuance of non- financial corporate 
bonds in Germany in the third quarter was 
 almost as high as in the second quarter, re -
demptions were significantly up as this report 
went to press. Between July and September, 
non- financial corporations thus reduced their 
capital market debt despite the improved finan -
cing conditions by just under €½ billion in net 
terms. Insurers and other German financial in -
stitutions redeemed as much as just under 
€4  billion worth of corporate bonds in net 
terms during the period under review. On bal -
ance, these were chiefly bonds running for 
terms of more than one year.Only domestic non- banks were active as buyers 
in the third quarter of 2013, adding debt instru -
ments totalling €3½ billion to their portfolios. 
These were exclusively foreign debt securities 
on balance. By contrast, foreign investors and 
domestic credit institutions disposed of debt 
securities amounting to €12 billion and €8 bil -
lion respectively.
On the whole, share prices in the world’s lead -
ing financial centres continued to rise as of the 
mid- year point. The sounder economic out -
look, especially for the euro area, along with 
enterprises’ improved quarterly earnings figures 
and the Fed’s unexpected decision to continue 
its bond purchase programme all played a role 
in this development. By contrast, the US budget 
dispute which dominated the first half of Octo -
ber unsettled the markets. However, despite 
the absence of any real solution to the US 
budget dispute, uncertainty over future share 
price developments continued to wane in mid- 
October on both sides of the Atlantic once a 
provisional agreement had been reached to 
raise the debt limit.
Given the persistent low- interest- rate environ -
ment and the search for yield, analysts’ corpor -
ate profit projections lagged behind the per -
formance of the broad- based market indices 
(see chart on this page), reflecting the higher 
price- earnings ratios prevailing in both the euro 
area and the United States. From the middle of 
the year onward, price rises of 11.5% for the 
S&P 500, 17.2% for the Euro Stoxx and 15.8% 
for the German Prime All Share Index, con -
trasted with only marginal increases in ex -
pected corporate earnings. On balance, the 
price- earnings ratios of the US and the euro 
area alike, both measured on the basis of ex -
pected profits, were thus noticeably above 
their respective five- year averages. This is also 
reflected in declining risk premiums demanded 
by investors for holding equities. With regard 
to the aforementioned indices, at the end of 
October these risk premiums stood more than 
half a percentage point below their mid- year 
level, thus likewise falling short of their five-  … and enter-
prises active in the bond marketPurchases of debt securities
Share prices 
buoyed by more stable economic conditions and continuation of bond purchases by Federal  Reserve
Higher price- 
earnings ratios, flanked by low price uncertainty
The return 
 expected from stocks tilted downwardsPrices and earnings expectations for German, European and US public limited companies
Sources: Deutsche Börse AG and Thomson Reuters. 1 Using 1-
year forward I/B/E/S estimates. In each case, status is the last 
week of the month.
Deutsche BundesbankJ FMAM J J A S ON
2013100105110115120125End 2012 = 100, log scale
95100105110115120
100105110115120125Price index 
(daily data)
Standard & Poor's 500 Index (USA)Euro Stoxx Index (EMU)Prime All Share Index (Germany)
Earnings 
expectations1
(monthly)Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2013  
42

year averages. While both the Euro Stoxx and 
the German Prime All Share Index, as measured 
by the price index,2 have failed to approach 
their all- time highs of late, this development 
nonetheless points to a reduced degree of risk 
aversion on the part of investors. European 
bank stock prices, not least in the peripheral 
countries of the euro area, clearly outper -
formed the market as a whole. European banks 
listed in the Euro Stoxx gained 34.1% in value 
as of the middle of the year, while the prices of 
US bank shares were just 5.1% up on their end- 
of- June level, which meant that they underper -
formed the US market as a whole.
Notwithstanding the positive trend shown by 
German equity prices, issuing activity remained 
comparatively subdued in the third quarter. 
 Domestic enterprises issued €½ billion worth 
of new shares, the majority of which were 
listed equities. The volume of foreign shares on 
the German market rose by €9½ billion in the 
same period. Equities were mainly bought by 
domestic credit institutions (€7 billion) who 
made net purchases of both foreign and do -
mestic stocks. Foreign investors, meanwhile, 
acquired German equities for €4 billion. By 
contrast, domestic non-  banks parted with 
shares in the amount of €1 billion.
During the reporting period, domestic invest -
ment companies recorded inflows of €19 bil -
lion, after raising funds totalling €14½ billion in 
the previous three months. On balance, the 
vast majority of new funds went to specialised 
funds reserved for institutional investors (€15½ 
billion). Among the asset classes, chiefly mixed 
funds (€7 billion) and mixed securities- based 
funds (€6½ billion), and to a lesser extent 
share- based funds and bond- based funds 
(€2  billion each), were able to attract new 
 subscriptions. Mutual funds distributed by 
 foreign companies on the German market 
 recorded net inflows totalling €7½ billion. European banks 
see particularly sharp price  increases
Low level of 
stock market funding
Sales and 
 purchases of mutual fund sharesMajor items of the balance of payments
€ billion
Item2012 2013
Q3 Q2 Q3
I Current account 1, 2 + 45.4 + 45.9 + 44.0
Foreign trade 1, 3 r  + 50.8r  + 48.6 + 49.9
Services 1 –  7.2 +  0.4 –  6.9
Income 1 + 19.0 +  8.3 + 18.3
Current transfers 1 –  9.4 –  7.6 – 10.3
II Capital transfers 1, 4 +  0.1 +  0.3 +  0.1
III Financial account 1
(Net capital exports: –) – 62.1 – 65.2 – 70.1
1 Direct investment – 15.8 – 12.0 –  3.5
German investment 
abroad –  9.7 –  5.0 –  8.1
Foreign investment
in Germany –  6.1 –  7.1 +  4.7
2 Portfolio investment – 26.7 – 49.6 – 43.8
German investment abroad – 28.0 – 36.8 – 36.8
Shares –  2.4 –  3.3 –  8.8
Mutual fund shares –  6.5 –  4.1 –  7.7
Debt securities – 19.2 – 29.5 – 20.4
Bonds and notes
5 – 17.7 – 30.1 – 19.9
of which
Euro-denominated 
bonds and notes – 15.7 – 23.1 – 10.9
Money market  instruments –  1.5 +  0.6 –  0.4
Foreign investmentin Germany +  1.3 – 12.8 –  7.0
Shares +  0.5 +  2.8 +  3.9
Mutual fund shares –  1.1 –  0.8 +  1.2
Debt securities +  1.9 – 14.8 – 12.1
Bonds and notes
5 + 16.3 – 20.7 –  5.5
of which
Public bonds and 
notes + 12.4 +  2.7 +  4.2
Money market  instruments – 14.4 +  5.9 –  6.6
3 Financial derivatives
6 –  3.8 –  6.1 –  2.3
4 Other investment 7 – 15.7 +  2.6 – 21.3
Monetary fi  nancial
institutions 8 – 36.4 – 13.7 – 15.5
of which short-term – 43.2 – 24.5 – 25.9
Enterprises and
households – 11.1 +  4.4 +  4.3
of which short-term –  4.9 +  7.5 + 10.5
General government – 12.2 +  9.8 – 12.2
of which short-term – 14.1 +  8.3 – 10.4
Bundesbank + 44.0 +  2.1 +  2.0
5 Change in reserve assets 
at transaction values ( increase: –)
9 –  0.1 –  0.1 +  0.8
IV Errors and omissions + 16.6 + 19.0 + 26.1
1  Balance. 2  Including supplementary trade items. 3  Special 
trade according to the offi   cial foreign trade statistics (source: 
Federal Statistical Offi   ce). 4 Including the acquisition/disposal of non-produced non-fi  nancial assets. 5 Original maturity of more 
than one year. 6 Securitised and non-securitised options as well 
as fi  nancial futures contracts. 7
  Includes fi  nancial and trade 
credits, bank deposits and other assets. 8 Excluding the Bundes-bank. 9 Excluding allocation of SDRs and excluding changes due 
to value adjustments.
Deutsche Bundesbank2 Unlike performance indices, price indices take no ac -
count of reinvested profit distributions by enterprises listed 
in the indices.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2013  
43

 Domestic non- banks were the main net buyers 
overall, adding €26½ billion worth of mutual 
fund shares to their portfolios. Foreign invest -
ors  acquired fund units worth €1 billion net. 
On the other hand, domestic credit institutions 
offloaded fund shares in the amount of €1½ 
billion.
Direct investment
As with cross- border portfolio investment, 
which experienced net outflows amounting to 
€44 billion in the third quarter of 2013, there 
were also net capital exports in the direct in -
vestment account. On balance – at a value of 
€3½ billion – these were, however, well below 
the prior- quarter figure (€12 billion).
The allocation of €8 billion worth of funds by 
German proprietors to their foreign subsidiaries proved a key factor during the reporting period. 
Here, capital accumulation was largely achieved 
by means of reinvested earnings (€10 billion). 
Parallel to this, direct capital interests were 
 expanded (€1½ billion). However, these 
amounts were offset by incoming cash flows 
arising from intra- group credit transactions 
(€3 billion). In the summer months, Malta and 
the United States were by far the most popular 
destinations for German direct investment 
(€3½ billion each).
Foreign investors supplied their subsidiaries in 
Germany with funds to the tune of €4½ billion 
in the third quarter. This was likewise achieved 
through the reinvestment of earnings gener -
ated by the branches as well as through intra- 
group loans. Most of the impulse to invest 
came from euro- area countries, notably Bel -
gium (€2 billion) and France (€1 billion).Capital exports 
in direct invest -
mentGerman direct investment 
abroad
Foreign direct 
investment in 
GermanyDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2013  
44

Economic conditions in Germany
Macroeconomic situation
The German economy is on a sound growth 
path. According to the flash estimate of the 
Federal Statistical Office, real gross domestic 
product (GDP) in the third quarter of 2013 was 
0.3% up on the previous three- month period 
after seasonal and calendar adjustment. This 
matches the average quarterly growth rate in 
the first half of the year, although growth in 
the first two quarters was marked by major 
fluctuations owing to the weather. Thus, in 
terms of the underlying cyclical trend, the Ger -
man economy has been expanding at about its 
potential growth rate since overcoming the 
temporary phase of weakness three quarters of 
a year ago. The balanced nature of the overall 
economic situation is also revealed by the fact 
that production is in line with normal utilisation 
of aggregate capacity.
Economic growth is being sustained by a 
broadly based upward movement in domestic 
economic activity, and is now also free of exter -
nal disturbances again. Nevertheless, the exter -
nal setting is still not generating any significant 
stimuli. This has had a dampening impact on 
corporate investment. By contrast, housing 
construction generated powerful stimuli again 
in the summer months and the upturn in pri -
vate consumption continued in a setting 
marked by the favourable situation on the la -
bour market and notable growth in earnings.
Given the cautious economic recovery in the 
euro area, still moderate growth in other major 
industrial countries and the continuing sub -
dued expansion in the emerging market econ -
omies, German export business still lacked mo -
mentum in the third quarter. Exports of goods 
were up ½% overall on the quarter in price and 
seasonally adjusted terms. Exports to other 
countries in the euro area showed a slight in -
crease in the period under review. By contrast, 
demand from countries outside the euro area in the summer months was down overall on 
the preceding quarter. This was due mainly to a 
clear decline in exports to the new industrial 
countries in Asia, south and east Asian emer -
ging markets (excluding China) as well as to the 
countries which are heavily dependent on ex -
ports of oil and gas. There was also a decline in 
US business following an increase in the second 
quarter. On the other hand, there was a steep 
expansion in exports to China again after a de -
cline in the previous quarter, and the central 
and east European EU countries also showed 
an increase following a one- year lull. (Details of 
the latest developments in German exports of 
goods to China may be found on pages  47 
to 49.) Moreover, the pull of demand from 
Japan strengthened again distinctly compared 
with the second quarter.Economy in 
2013 Q3  remains on growth path
Expansionary 
domestic  activity, external  setting neutral
Exports generat -
ing no stimuli on 
the wholeOverall output
Source of unadjusted figures: Federal Statistical Office.
Deutsche Bundesbank2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013102104106108110112
–8–6–4–20+2+4+62005 = 100, price and seasonally adjusted
Log scale
GDP
%
Lin scaleYear-on-year changeDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2013  
45

In the period under review, exports held up at 
the same level as in the previous quarter after 
seasonal adjustment, solely because of a fur -
ther substantial rise in motor vehicle exports. 
This almost entirely offset the decline suffered 
by German automotive manufacturers in the 
fourth quarter of 2012 and the first quarter of 
2013. Otherwise, negative figures predomin -
ated in other major branches of export industry 
following increases in the second quarter. In 
the chemicals and pharmaceutical industry, ex -
ports have been stagnating for roughly one 
year.Imports are unlikely to have expanded further 
in the summer in seasonally adjusted terms, 
following a marked increase in the second 
quarter. In real terms, seasonally adjusted ex -
ports of goods were, in fact, down by ¼% in 
the third quarter. This was due chiefly to fewer 
purchases in the other transport equipment 
sector, which often display sharp fluctuations. 
By contrast, German enterprises imported dis -
tinctly more motor vehicles as well as Informa-
tion and Communications Technology (ICT) 
products and electrical equipment. Imports of 
machinery and intermediate goods showed 
only a slight rise, however. Demand for foreign 
consumer goods was just as strong as in the 
previous quarter. There was a major increase in 
energy imports. Somewhat more goods were 
imported from non-  eur o-  ar ea countries than in 
the second quarter, while imports from other 
euro-  ar ea countries fell slightly from an ele -
vated level.
Industrial investment did not move to a clear 
path of recovery in the third quarter. Although the prospect of an improvement in business is 
becoming increasingly widespread in the cor -
porate sector, firms have been rather cautious 
so far in using this as a reason for stepping up 
investment. After seasonal adjustment, the do -
mestic sales of capital goods producers showed 
no more than a subdued rise in the third quar -
ter, and only slightly more machinery and 
equipment was imported for production sites 
in Germany at the end of the period under re -
view. Measured by the number of new registra -
tions, enterprises’ fleets of vehicles likewise 
showed hardly any growth. On the other hand, 
it is an encouraging sign that Ifo surveys show 
industrial capacity utilisation almost matching 
its longer-  term aver age again. This means that 
enterprises can be expected to increase their 
capital investment again if the upward ten -
dency in demand continues to strengthen. Fur -
thermore, conditions for borrowing are still 
very favourable, and many procurement items 
can also be financed from self-  gener ated re -
sources.Motor vehicle 
exports still on the upImports of goods virtually unchanged
Sc
arcely any 
 
revival in 
 
corporate 
 
investment90100110120Underlying trends in foreign trade
Source of unadjusted figures: Federal Statistical Office.  1 Ad-
justed for the price indices for foreign trade.
Deutsche Bundesbank2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013Jul-
Aug8090100110120
Jul-
Aug
8090100110Seasonally adjusted, quarterly
to euro-area countries2010 = 100, log scale 
Exports of goods
price-adjusted1 Total
0204060Lin scaleForeign trade balanceImports of goodsprice-adjusted
 18090100110120
€ bnto non-euro area countriesDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report 
November 2013  
46

Reasons for the recent slump in German goods exports 
to China
Foreign trade with China has become con-
siderably more important for the German 
economy over the past few years. In terms 
of value, China accounted for 6% of Ger-
many’s total goods exports in 2012; this fi  g-
ure was even as high as 10¼% for motor 
vehicles and 8¾% for capital goods (ex-cluding motor vehicles). After a period of rapid growth between 2009 and 2011, in 
which the value of  German goods exports 
to China rose from €37¼ billion to €64¾ billion, growth almost came to a halt in 
2012. The available data are even showing 
signs of a slight decline for the current year. 
Growth between January and August was down 3¾% on the year, even though the general tendency has been pointing up-wards again somewhat in the last few months. Breaking down exports by cat-
egory of goods shows that the recent slump 
in German exports to China was due pri-
marily to developments in the categories of 
goods “motor vehicles” and “other capital 
goods”. The demand determinants of these 
two categories will be analysed in greater 
detail below.
Motor vehicle exports to China grew ex-tremely strongly between 2009 and 2011. 
In terms of value, they went up from €6¾ 
billion to €17¾ billion and thus made up 
around two- fi  fths of the growth in total ex-ports to China. This was due chiefl  y to sub-
stantial growth in passenger car exports, which increased from 123,000 units in 
2009 to 309,000 in 2011. A number of fac-
tors were behind this steep rise. First, this 
period saw a sharp expansion in the market 
for new cars in China, and German auto-motive groups were largely able to boost 
their share of the Chinese market. A further 
signifi  cant factor was that German manu-
facturers did not expand their local produc-
tion in China on the scale needed to meet 
the rapid growth in demand, which meant 
that a larger percentage of their sales had 
to be covered through imports.
Since the second quarter of 2012, however, 
German motor vehicle exports have been showing a clear downward trend on a 
monthly basis, despite the fact that the Chi-
nese passenger car market has continued 
to grow – albeit at a less dynamic pace than 
before – and German manufacturers have 
gained additional shares of the market. The 
slump in German motor vehicle exports was due solely to a decline in exports of motor vehicles and motor vehicle engines, whereas 
exports of motor vehicle parts and acces-
sories continued to grow at a steady pace. One of the main reasons for this is likely to 
have been that, owing to capacity exten-sions, German manufacturers stepped up 
their output of passenger cars in China to a disproportionately large extent in relation to demand (by around 20% in 2012 to 2.9 mil-
lion units).1 This trend seems to have con-
tinued in the current year.
There are many different motives behind 
the increased build- up of production sites in China of late. These include, for one thing, 
cheaper staffi   ng costs at the new sites. An 
even more important factor would seem to be the advantage of being able to serve the market directly. In particular, close customer 
proximity brings down transport and logis-
tics costs. High customs duties and non- tariff trade barriers, such as local content 
requirements, may also have been a motiv-ation for German enterprises to generate at 
least a part of value added in China, while 
so far tending to leave value- added stages 
needing highly qualifi  ed professional skills, 
such as research and development, in Ger-
many. Even though the relocation of pas-senger car production sites has had a dampening impact on German exports, it 
should not be forgotten that German enter-prises are increasingly benefi  ting from their 
1 According to the raw data of the VDA, passenger car 
output of German manufacturers in China rose by as 
much as 36% in 2012. It should be borne in mind, 
however, that some models were still being classifi  ed 
as “Made in Germany” up to 2011 and were thus in-
cluded in the VDA export statistics; the share of local 
value added generated in China has increased, which 
means that they are now classifi  ed as overseas produc-
tion for statistical purposes.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2013  
47

direct investment in China and that this is 
being refl  ected in rising earnings from dir-
ect investment – in the form of dividends 
and reinvested profi  ts – in their investment 
income. In 2012, this item accounted for €5 
billion of Germany’s current account with 
China, compared with €1¾ billion in 2008.
The recent similarly sluggish growth in other 
German capital goods exports to China has another set of reasons, however. These ex-ports recorded exceptionally strong growth 
in 2010 and 2011; 2012 saw a slight de-
cline, however. This weaker growth primar-ily affected exports of machinery, which ac-
count for most of German capital goods exports (excluding motor vehicles) to China.
2 The dynamics of German capital 
goods exports to China is determined 
mainly by the pace of investment activity in that country. In the fi  rst few years after the 
global fi  nancial and economic crisis, pro-duction capacities in Chinese industry 
underwent a sharp expansion, which bene-
fi  ted German exporters of capital goods in 
particular. Subsequently, however, growth 
in business investment in China appears to 
have weakened considerably as a result of 
the prevailing cyclical factors.3 Against this 
backdrop, total Chinese imports of capital 
goods recorded only relatively weak growth overall in 2012.
4 Given that the correspond-
ing Chinese imports from Germany have ac-tually declined, the German market share of 
all Chinese capital goods imports, which had risen to 7¼% by 2011, fell again dis-tinctly in 2012 to 6½%. Project range and competition effects may have a negative 
impact in this context.
Over the next few years, German goods ex-
ports to China are likely to pick up again on 
2 By contrast, positive contributions to growth were 
generated by the manufacture of aircraft and space-
craft as well as information and communications tech-
nology (ICT) products.3 The Chinese statistics authority does not publish any comparable national accounts data. This assessment is therefore based on all the indicators that are currently available.4 Based on the Chinese import statistics, China’s total 
capital goods imports (as defi  ned in the Broad Eco-
nomics Categories) grew by 2¾% in 2012 on a US dol-lar basis.Germany’s nominal goods exports to China
Source: Bundesbank calculations based on data from the Fed-
eral Statistical Office. 1 Rates of change and growth contribu-
tions  for  2013  based  on  the  sum  of  exports  for  January  to August 2013 compared with January to August 2012.
Deutsche Bundesbank2010 2011 2012 20131001020304050
–+++++Contribution to growth in percentage points
1Total exports
(year-on-year percentage change)
Motor vehiclesCapital goods excluding motor vehiclesIntermediate goodsOther goods
German car manufacturers’ outputin China and Germany's car exportsto China
Sources: Federal Statistical Office, German Association of the 
Automotive  Industry  (VDA)  and  Bundesbank  calculations. 
1 Since 2012, a number of car models have been classified for 
statistical purposes as overseas production owing to the grow-
ing share of value added generated in China. The figures for 
the years 2009 to 2011 have therefore been adjusted accord-ingly by the VDA in order to improve comparability. 2 Extrapol-
ated on the basis of the data for the months from January to 
August.
Deutsche Bundesbank2009 2010 2011 2012 201305001,0001,5002,0002,5003,0003,500In thousands
0100200300400 Enlarged scale
Germany's car exports to ChinaGerman car manufacturers’
output in China1
2Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2013  
48

There was a further substantial expansion in 
housing construction in the period under re -
view. The orders situation improved further in 
the first half of 2013 and, given the high level 
of capacity utilisation in the second quarter, it 
was not possible to catch up on all the produc -
tion backlog that had built up during the long 
winter. Such effects may have also been a fac -
tor in public sector construction after the surge 
in orders at the beginning of the year, espe -
cially as public infrastructure construction pro -
jects extend over longer periods anyway.
Against a backdrop of optimistic income ex -
pectations and households’ high propensity to 
purchase, the upward trend in private con -
sumption continued in the third quarter of 
2013, albeit with less momentum than in the 
preceding three months. This is indicated by re -
tail sales, which, in the summer, did not quite 
match their second- quarter level in seasonally 
adjusted terms. Furthermore, new private pas -
senger car registrations were slightly down from their strongly heightened level in the pre -
ceding quarter.
Sectoral trends
Seasonally adjusted industrial output expanded 
only moderately by ¼% in the third quarter of 
2013 compared with the spring. Manufacturers 
of capital goods increased their output by 1%. 
This was due chiefly to the automotive sector: 
despite the holiday period, buoyant demand 
led to a steep (4%) expansion in its output in 
the third quarter. Excluding the automotive in -
dustry, capital goods production did not quite 
match the previous quarter’s figure. There was 
a marked cutback in the manufacture of ma -
chinery as well as of computers, electronic and 
optical products and electrical equipment. Sea -
sonally adjusted output of intermediate and 
consumer goods remained virtually unchanged 
in quarter- on- quarter terms.Strong expan-
sion in construc-tion investment
Continuing 
 upward trend 
in private 
 consumptionSubdued expan-sion in industrial outputthe whole. It does, however, seem unlikely 
that they will be able to match the rapid 
pace of growth in the past. One important 
factor in this context is the fact that the 
pace of growth of German capital goods 
exports is likely to be much weaker in future 
owing to the structural limitations of the current, decidedly investment- driven Chi-
nese growth model.5 If the Chinese govern-
ment succeeds in restructuring the growth 
model as it intends, Chinese import de-
mand is likely to shift more strongly towards consumer goods. Given that these products 
have, to date, accounted for only a small percentage of German exports to China, 
the contributions to growth generated as a 
result are unlikely to be enough to offset 
the slower growth in capital goods exports, 
however. The underlying trend in the 
growth of German motor vehicle exports to China is also likely to be more moderate in future than was the case prior to the recent 
consolidation. Given its persistent low de-
gree of market saturation and in view of its 
expected more strongly consumer- driven growth profi  le, the Chinese passenger car market still has a lot of upward potential. Nevertheless, the extensive plans of Ger-man automotive manufacturers to expand their capacities in China indicate that the anticipated rise in demand in the Chinese 
passenger car market is to be serviced pri-
marily by increased local production. A number of German car models, including 
those in the luxury segment, as well as cer-
tain car parts and accessories are likely to continue to be manufactured in Germany and thus benefi  t from the general growth 
of the market in China.
5 Furthermore, exports could also suffer if German 
manufacturers of machinery were to shift more of their 
production to China. It is, however, unlikely that this 
will occur on a scale similar to that of passenger cars. 
The fact that the German mechanical engineering sec-tor largely consists of medium- sized enterprises is also a factor in this context.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2013  
49

Ifo surveys show that, in the wake of expand -
ing production, the degree of utilisation in in -
dustry increased in seasonally adjusted terms 
to 83½% of full operational capacity in Octo -
ber compared with its July level. This means 
that, in the period under review, industrial cap -
acity utilisation nearly matched its long- term 
average, which can be interpreted as a normal 
degree of utilisation. The individual sectors dis -
play marked differences. In the intermediate 
goods sector, there was a considerable increase 
in the utilisation of tangible fixed assets, which 
meant that it was 1 percentage point above its 
multi-  year sectoral average. This contrasted 
with a fall in capacity utilisation in the case of 
capital goods producers, which resulted in a 
slight increase in the shortfall vis- à- vis the sec -
oral average. The temporary major expansion 
in output in the automotive industry during the 
third quarter may have played a part in this.
Seasonally adjusted output in the main con -
struction sector expanded again in the third quarter (+1½%) starting from a level in the pre -
ceding quarter that was considerably height -
ened due to weather- related catch- up effects. 
The increase in activity in civil engineering 
(+2¼%) was greater than that in building con -
struction (+1¼%). There was a somewhat 
larger increase in output in the finishing trades 
(+2¾%). This was probably due to the strong 
upturn in the main construction sector in the 
spring months. Nevertheless, the figures for the 
finishing trades are still provisional owing to 
the fact that the data are liable to revision. 
There was a seasonally adjusted 1½% increase 
in energy production in the summer.
The upward movement in the services sector is 
likely to have continued in the reporting period. 
One indication of this is that Ifo surveys show a 
clear improvement in the business situation in 
the most important sectors. Industry- related 
services benefited from the expansion in con -
struction and parts of industry. The slight in -
crease in the mileage of domestic heavy goods 
vehicles subject to tolls on motorways suggests 
that this is also likely to include the transport 
sector. Furthermore, there was a marked in -
crease in wholesale turnover after an extended 
lull. The motor vehicle trade suffered a slight 
fall overall, but this was due to declining sales 
to households after a heightened level in the 
preceding quarter. This contrasted with an ex -
pansion in sales to business customers. In line 
with the positive consumer climate, consump -
tion- related services also performed well. Retail 
sales were only marginally down from their 
high level in the previous quarter. Hotels and 
restaurants recorded a marked rise in turnover.
Employment and labour 
 market
The situation on the labour market continues 
to be characterised by a moderate increase in 
both employment and unemployment. This un -
typical parallel development can chiefly be ex -
plained by strong labour- market- oriented im -
migration. However, a part is also played by the Overall increase 
in capacity  utilisationConstruction  activity and  energy produc-tion significantly higher
Continued 
 upward trend in 
services sector activity
Calm labour 
market  developmentOutput in industry andin construction
Source of unadjusted figures: Federal Statistical Office. 1 Main 
construction and finishing trades.
Deutsche Bundesbank2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013Industry
859095100105110
9095100105110115120
Construction1Main construction2010 = 100, seasonally adjusted, quarterly, log scaleDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2013  
50

fact that labour force participation is tending to 
increase. On an average of the summer months, 
the seasonally adjusted employment figure in 
Germany was 70,000 higher than in the second 
quarter. This corresponds to an increase of 
0.2%. Most of this growth was in employment 
subject to social security contributions, while 
self- employment was stagnating and fewer 
persons were taking part in labour market pol -
icy measures, especially in terms of (re)integra -
tion into the job market, training and work op -
portunities. The number of persons solely in 
forms of marginal employment has not been 
following any clear trend for some time.
After seasonal adjustment, roughly 72,000 
additional jobs subject to social security contri -
butions were filled in July and August together; 
this corresponds to an increase of ¼% com -
pared with the second quarter. There was es -
sentially a continuation of the sectoral trends 
of the spring months. The main increases in 
employment were in the business- related ser -
vices (excluding temporary agency employ -
ment: +¾%), health and education (+½%), and 
the logistics sector (+½%). The construction 
sector was displaying a slight upward tendency 
again. In manufacturing, the level of employ -
ment remained unchanged. In temporary 
agency employment, which underwent a con -
siderable downward adjustment over the past 
few quarters and whose labour is often de -
ployed in industry, there was a stabilisation.
There continues to be a high level of labour 
force immigration to Germany. In the first five 
months of the current year, around 158,000 per -
sons, on balance, moved to Germany. That is 
14,000 more than in the same period of last 
year. Immigration has been increasing steeply 
for about three years now with roughly 75% 
originating from within the EU. The main coun -
tries of origin are, first, the 2004 central and 
east European EU8 accession countries as well 
the south- east European countries Romania 
and Bulgaria which joined the EU in 2007 (EU2) 
and, second, the four south European periph -
ery countries.1Immigration from the EU8 countries appears to 
have peaked. So far this year, there have been 
fewer immigrants from this region than in 
2012, with their share falling to 30%. On bal -
ance, there were also slightly fewer immigrants 
to Germany than one year ago from Romania 
and Bulgaria, which account for one- fifth of 
net immigration. They are currently still subject 
to restrictions of the freedom of movement for 
workers in Germany. The new members of the 
labour force who have immigrated from central 
and south- east European countries are most 
often employed in agriculture, hotels and res -
taurants, in construction and in other business- 
related services (including temporary agency 
employment). Immigration from the countries 
of southern Europe has increased rapidly in 
connection with the difficult economic situ -
ation and has now reached a share of one-
fifth. Even so, the increase has slowed down of 
late. The current immigration is chiefly a com -
pensatory reaction to varying income and 
 employment opportunities within the EU. The 
Federal Employment Agency data show that, in 
parallel with immigration, there has been a very 
substantial rise in the number of wage and sal -
ary earners among persons from the countries 
of the EU, while unemployment and drawing 
of social transfers has shown only a marginal to 
moderate increase.2 One new development is 
the higher level of immigration from Russia. 
This is also likely to be largely motivated by the 
aim of taking up work in Germany.
Over the summer months, the number of per -
sons registered as unemployed was, on aver -
age, only marginally up on its level in the 
second quarter. However, there was a relatively 
significant rise in seasonally adjusted official 
unemployment to 2.97 million in September 
after a comparatively positive development Jobs subject to 
social security contributions growing mainly in services sector
Continuing high 
level of labour- market- oriented immigration …… principally from central and eastern Europe as well as the southern periph-ery of the euro area
Slight rise in 
registered  unemployment
1 The EU8 countries are Poland, Czech Republic, Slovakia, 
Hungary, Slovenia, Lithuania, Latvia and Estonia. The four 
south European countries with sizeable migration move -
ments to Germany are Italy, Spain, Portugal and Greece.
2 See Bundesagentur für Arbeit (2013), Auswirkungen der 
Arbeitnehmerfreizügigkeit und der EU-  Schuldenkrise auf 
den deutschen Arbeitsmarkt, Berichtsmonat Februar 2013, 
Hintergrundinformationen, Nuremberg, April  2013.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2013  
51

during the holiday months; the unemployment 
rate stood at 6.9%. Unemployment remained 
at this heightened level in October. In contrast 
to the preceding quarters, the increase in the 
third quarter no longer came from unemployed 
persons claiming insurance benefits. With de -
mand expected to pick up, recruitment could 
have been stepped up from among the ranks 
of the short- term unemployed. Instead, for the 
past six months, the number of unemployed 
persons receiving the basic welfare allowance 
has been on the rise again. This is probably due 
to a higher number of persons moving out of 
the unemployment insurance system who be -
came unemployed one year ago in the wake of 
the economic slowdown.
Under the given conditions, there is unlikely to 
be very much change in the overall positive 
situation on the labour market in the next few 
months. The Ifo employment barometer, which 
provides information on the employment plans 
of trade and industry and business- related ser -
vices over the coming three months, points to 
a continued subdued increase in employment. 
The Federal Employment Agency’s BA-  X job 
index likewise stabilised in the third quarter, 
mainly because of an improvement again in the 
intake of vacancies. A continuing high number 
of vacancies is revealed by the Job Vacancy Sur -
vey of the Institute for Employment Research 
(IAB).
To supplement the existing leading labour mar -
ket indicators, which are geared mainly to em -
ployment trends, at the end of October the IAB 
published for the first time an indicator de -
signed to provide information on labour mar -
ket developments in Germany over the coming 
three months. The IAB labour market barom -
eter analyses monthly surveys of the managers 
of all the regional employment agencies. The 
qualitative results are condensed into an index 
value that can fluctuate on a scale between 90 
and 110, with a value of 100 indicating a neu -
tral development and higher values announ -
cing a decline in unemployment. The current 
figure of 99.6 therefore signals a largely un -Labour market 
situation still  favourable under the given conditions
IAB labour mar-
ket barometer 
published for 
the first timeLabour market
Source of unadjusted figures: Federal Statistical Office and Fed-
eral Employment Agency. 1 Not seasonally adjusted. 2 Exclud-
ing seasonal jobs and jobs located abroad.  3 From May 2009, 
unemployed excluding persons newly registered on the books of private employment agencies.
Deutsche Bundesbank2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013Oct40.040.541.041.542.0
27.027.528.028.529.029.5–5000+500+1,000
2.53.03.54.0
–1,000–5000+500OctSeasonally adjusted, quarterly
OctMillion
Jul-
AugMillion
Million200300400500Thou-
sand
Thou-
sand
Thou-
sand Year-on-year change1Officially unemployed 3UnemployedTotalEmployed
Unsubsidised vacancies 2
(scale enlarged)Occupied positionsJobs subject to social security
contributionsYear-on-year change1Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2013  
52

changed level of unemployment for the rest of 
the year.
Wages and prices
Growth in negotiated rates of pay accelerated 
again in the third quarter of 2013, after slowing 
temporarily in the second quarter, not least 
owing to agreements on staggered pay in -
creases in major industries governed by collect -
ive wage agreements. In the period under re -
view, basic negotiated rates of pay went up by 
2.4% on the year, compared with an increase 
of 2.1% in the second quarter. Also including all 
one- off payments and ancillary agreements, 
the increase of 2.3% in negotiated pay was 
higher than that in the preceding quarter 
(+2.1%). During the reporting period, actual 
earnings may have risen at the same pace as 
negotiated rates of pay.
In September, the social partners concluded a 
new pay agreement in temporary agency em -
ployment. This provides for annual pay in -
creases averaging 3½% in western Germany 
and just under 4½% in eastern Germany run -
ning for a total period of three years; these 
rates of increase are distinctly higher than those 
agreed recently in the other sectors. Along 
with the provisions on granting sectoral wage 
add- ons, this agreement is an additional factor 
making the use of temporary employment sig -
nificantly more expensive. Moreover, for agen -
cies the risks associated with the hiring of tem -
porary labour are increasing. For a sector that is 
especially susceptible to cyclical fluctuations, 
agreeing a binding timetable for wage in -
creases up to the end of 2016 means a consid -
erable restriction of flexibility. In the lowest 
wage category, temporary employees earning 
in line with the west German pay scale will re -
ceive hourly remuneration of €8.50 from the 
start of next year. In eastern Germany, this rate 
will be reached in June 2016.
The introduction of a general statutory min -
imum wage is under consideration in the nego -tiations on forming a new federal government 
in Germany. A key argument of its advocates is 
that the pay of employees currently working 
predominantly in areas not covered by collect -
ive pay agreements for low wages should be 
raised to a level at which there is no need to 
draw supplementary social benefits. This line of 
reasoning introduces socio-  political objectives 
into pay negotiations, which have hitherto 
been determined by the social partners primar -
ily on the basis of skills and industry- specific 
considerations. Setting a statutory minimum 
wage would represent a significant encroach -
ment on longstanding pay negotiation struc -
tures, which may harbour considerable em -
ployment risks.
One sixth of employees currently receive an 
hourly wage of less than €8.50.3 A general in -
crease of such low wages would give rise to 
considerable wage cost pressure, some of 
which would be reflected in higher consumer 
prices. Jobs would be directly affected if firms 
were unable to pass on or absorb the add -
itional strain. Employment prospects would 
also be reduced by a fall in demand resulting 
from any price increases. Furthermore, wages 
set at a high level at the lower end of the pay 
scale would make (re)integration into the la -
bour market more difficult precisely for low-  
skilled members of the workforce, who repre -
sent the problem group in the labour market. It 
should also be noted that a general minimum 
wage set at a fairly high level would probably 
have implications for the entire negotiated pay 
structure and may trigger further pay rises.
At the upstream stages of the economy, the 
third quarter saw a continuation of the under -
lying downward trend in prices due to the eu -
ro’s appreciation and still subdued global in -
dustrial activity. This was obscured, however, 
by rising crude oil prices, which meant that im -
port prices remained unchanged overall in sea -Negotiated rates 
of pay rising more strongly again
Recent pay 
settlements with marked increase in minimum wagesGeneral statu-
tory minimum 
wage an extra-
neous element in pay negoti-ations …
… and, at 
€8.50, too high
Underlying trend 
of prices con-tinuing to fall at the upstream stages of the economy
3 See K Brenke and K- U Müller, Gesetzlicher Mindestlohn – 
Kein verteilungspolitisches Allheilmittel, DIW-Wochenbericht  
39/ 2013, pp 3-17.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2013  
53

sonally adjusted terms in the third quarter after 
a marked decline in the second quarter. By con -
trast, domestic producer prices and export 
prices, which are affected only to a small de -
gree by crude oil prices, both showed a sea -
sonally adjusted 0.2% fall on the quarter. Prices 
of intermediate goods fell very sharply, while 
declining or stagnating prices for imported 
capital and consumer goods contrasted with 
price rises at the domestic producer level. This 
applies in particular to the prices for food, bev -
erages and tobacco. In year- on- year terms, 
there was a sharp fall of 2.9% in import prices, 
while domestic producer prices went down by 
no more than 0.4% and export prices declined 
by 0.9%. In line with this, there was a percep -
tible improvement in the terms of trade, al -
though they were still below their medium-  
term average.
Housing construction prices showed a moder -
ate rise again in the third quarter. Structural 
work was only 1.5% more expensive year on 
year, while there was a somewhat sharper rise 
of 2.3% in the finishing trades. There was a fur -
ther sharp increase in sales prices for owner-  
occupied housing. According to data of the 
Association of German Pfandbrief Banks (Ver -
band deutscher Pfandbriefbanken, vdp), the 
annual rate accelerated to 3.8%, with the rate 
of price increase slowing to 4.8% for freehold apartments and accelerating to 3.4% for sin -
gle- family houses.
Consumer price inflation in Germany acceler -
ated somewhat in the third quarter. The sea -
sonally adjusted quarterly rate went up from 
0.4% to 0.5% at the end of the period under 
review. In euro terms, oil prices were a little 
higher than in the previous quarter. This led to 
a further rise in energy prices, especially for re -
fined petroleum products, which was thus the 
main reason for the acceleration in consumer 
price inflation in the third quarter. Food prices 
also showed a further marked increase. It was 
only as the quarter progressed that the prices 
of fruit and vegetables eased after a steep rise 
due to the weather. The prices of other goods 
continued to go up moderately, with the rise 
being due almost exclusively to the lagged im -
pact of the increase in tobacco tax at the be -
ginning of the year. The prices of services con -
tinued their subdued upward trend. The rise in 
rents accelerated slightly. The annual rate of 
increase in the national consumer price index 
(CPI) was 1.6%. The corresponding figure for 
the Harmonised Index of Consumer Prices 
(HICP) was +1.7%.
In October, seasonally adjusted consumer 
prices went down by 0.1% owing, in particular, 
to energy prices easing again. The subindex for 
services also showed a decline due, not least, 
to the abolition of student tuition fees in Bav -
aria. Annual CPI and HICP inflation fell to 1.2%.
Orders received and outlook
There is a good chance that the economic up -
turn in Germany will strengthen further over 
the coming months. First, there are no indica -
tions whatsoever that the main pillars of do -
mestic demand might become less stable. 
Second, more tailwind for industry may be ex -
pected again from the external sector. In this 
setting, there is likely to be a growing expect -
ation that demand will again obviously outstrip 
normal capacity utilisation, which would give Further price 
rises in the housing marketModerate rise in consumer prices
Good prospects 
of a further strengthening  
of economic  activityNegotiated rates of pay
1 Excluding additional benefits and lump-sum payments.
Deutsche Bundesbank2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 201300.51.01.52.02.53.03.5Year-on-year percentage change, on monthly basis
Negotiated
rates of pay,
total
Basic pay 1Q1-3Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2013  
54

the necessary boost to corporate investment. 
However, an investment- friendly climate also 
depends crucially on the new German federal 
government having a forward-  looking eco -
nomic policy agenda.
In the third quarter of 2013, seasonally ad -
justed industrial orders were 1½% up on the 
previous three- month period, which had al -
ready shown a similar increase. The upturn in 
industrial orders began slowly more than one 
year earlier and has thus gradually strength -
ened. Measured by the order capacity index, 
demand was matching the production capacity 
of order- based industry for the first time since 
the turn of 2011-12. In the period under review, 
the strongest growth was in orders of capital 
goods (+2¾%), with a particularly large in -
crease in the case of machinery and equip -
ment. Orders of intermediate goods showed 
only moderate growth (+¾%), and consumer 
goods failed to match their heightened level in 
the summer (-1½%).
The largest contribution to the growth in orders 
came this time from domestic orders, which 
showed a seasonally adjusted increase of 2½% 
on the quarter, with a very sharp rise in domes -
tic demand for motor vehicles and motor ve -
hicle parts, as well as for new machinery. In the 
intermediate goods sector, the expansion was 
chiefly in the demand for chemical products. 
Above and beyond that, there was an increase 
again in orders for industrial goods from non-  
euro- area countries (1½%), while the level of 
orders from the euro area was no higher than 
in the preceding quarter. In this connection, it 
is nevertheless gratifying that euro-  area cus -
tomers ordered significantly more items of ma -
chinery again, as they did in the second quar -
ter. Furthermore, there was also an increase in 
motor vehicle orders from this group of coun -
tries.
In large swathes of industry, the business out -
look showed a further improvement in the 
third quarter. In manufacturing, this was linked 
to significantly better expectations for exports. Further marked 
rise in new orders
Mainly more 
 domestic orders
Broad- based 
 improvement in business  expectationsExport pricesImport, export, producer, construction and consumer prices
Source of unadjusted figures: Federal Statistical Office.  1 Pro-
ducer  price  index  for  industrial  products  in  domestic  sales. 
2 Not  seasonally  adjusted,  quarterly.  3 National  consumer 
price index.
Deutsche Bundesbank2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 20139095100105110
95100105110
95100 100105110
95100105110
10123
–+++2010 = 100, seasonally adjusted, monthly
Lin scale
Consumer prices
Year-on-year change 2Consumer prices 3Construction
prices2Producer prices1Import priceslog scale
%
Oct95100105Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2013  
55

According to the current DIHK survey, this opti -
mism has also led to somewhat more enter -
prises pursuing expansionary investment plans 
and assuming increases in staffing levels. The 
close link between growing export demand 
and the need to increase production capacity 
can be clearly seen from the current indicators. 
Optimism has also increased in the wholesale 
and retail trade, as well as in the case of 
business- related service providers.
In the summer months, as was already the case 
in the preceding quarters, there was a sharp 
increase in the number of building permits for 
apartments in three- family and multiple- family 
houses. Added to this is the fact that more 
orders for single- family and two- family housing 
were also approved again following stagnation 
in the previous year. Furthermore, there was a 
sharp surge in orders from the public sector. In 
this context, major public civil engineering pro -
jects are likely to have played the key role. 
Firms’ construction demand eased noticeably 
in August after three months in which a very 
large number of orders for commercial office 
buildings were placed.
Private consumption will go on showing itself 
to be a factor stimulating domestic economic 
activity in the immediate future. According to 
the survey results of the consumer research in -
stitution, Gesellschaft für Konsumforschung  
(GfK), consumer sentiment is holding up at a 
high level. Since the late summer, households’ 
expectations about the economy have also be -
come much more optimistic. Even though the 
outlook for incomes has become a little gloom -
ier of late, consumers still feel extremely posi -
tive about their scope for expenditure by his -
torical standards.New surge in 
construction  demand
Private 
 consumption still on the upDemand for industrial goods and construction work
Source of unadjusted figures: Federal Statistical Office.  1 Only 
calendar-adjusted.
Deutsche Bundesbank2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013758090100110120
–40–30–20–1000+10+20+30
708090100110120
8090100110
Jul-
Aug
Jul-
Aug90100110120
–20–100+10+20Volume, 2010 = 100, seasonally adjusted, quarterly
DomesticForeignof whichLog scalelog scale
Main industrial orders
Main construction ordersLin scale
Year-on-year
change 1
Lin scale
Year-on-year change 1%
%Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2013  
56

Public finances*
General government budget
The German general government budget re -
corded a small surplus of 0.1% of GDP for 2012, 
and it is also expected to post a broadly bal -
anced result for 2013. The cyclical component, 
which was still distinctly positive in 2012, is 
likely to decline owing to the economic slow -
down over the year as a whole.1 After adjust -
ment for cyclical influences, there will probably 
be a slight improvement in the fiscal balance, 
and the structural result is likely to be close to 
balance. Although fiscal policy measures – not 
least the lowering of the pension contribution 
rate – will place a burden on the general gov -
ernment budget overall, this will be slightly 
outweighed by the relief provided inter alia  by 
further moderate growth in social payments 
and the fall in interest expenditure.
The debt ratio, which is still high (as at end-
2012: 81.0%), is expected to decline consider -
ably in 2013. This fall is primarily due to nom -
inal GDP growth in the denominator and the 
continued portfolio reduction at “bad banks” in 
the government sector. By contrast, the deficits 
still being posted by some state and local gov -
ernments, as well as the euro- area stabilisation 
measures, are slowing down the reduction of 
the (gross) debt ratio. At the end of June 2013, 
the debt ratio stood at 79.8%.
The revenue ratio is not expected to change 
substantially in 2013. Although the social con -
tribution rates were lowered significantly on 
balance at the beginning of the year, fiscal 
drag2 and the continued revenue- rich GDP 
growth structure are raising the ratio on a simi -
lar scale. Expenditure might increase at a some -
what faster pace than nominal GDP , growth in 
which is moderate on an annual average due 
to cyclical reasons. However, the rise in the 
 expenditure ratio will be dampened by another 
moderate pension increase in 2013 and the  expected further slight decrease in interest 
 expenditure.
In the absence of new measures, no major 
budgetary movements and a continued decline 
in the debt ratio are likely for 2014, too. As 
things currently stand, cyclical factors are ex -
pected to have no significant impact on the 
general government budget. The decline in 
both the average interest rate and the debt 
ratio are presently expected to continue to pro -
vide relief for interest expenditure. With regard 
to the cyclically adjusted primary balance, posi -
tive and negative factors, such as the further 
rules- based cut in the pension contribution rate 
or fiscal drag, could more or less balance each 
other out.3
In the medium term, the structural budgetary 
situation could see a further moderate im -
provement and somewhat higher structural 
surpluses could thus be achieved, inter alia  if 
the relief provided by a falling debt ratio and 
favourable financing conditions is allowed to 
impact on the budgets and is not squandered 
by a more expansionary budgetary stance. This 
would ensure that the high debt ratio is re -
duced relatively quickly, which would provide a 
better basis for tackling the looming burdens General govern-
ment budget broadly bal-anced in 2013
Debt ratio high, 
but declining
Revenue and 
 expenditure ratios virtually unchangedWith no new measures, little change likely for 2014 either
Marked struc-
tural surpluses advisable
* The analysis in the “General government budget” section 
is based on data contained in the national accounts and on 
the Maastricht ratios. The subsequent reporting on the 
budgets of the various levels of government and the social 
security funds is based on the figures as defined in the gov -
ernment’s financial statistics (which are generally in line 
with the budget accounts).
1 The disaggregated ESCB cyclical adjustment procedure is 
used in this context, see Deutsche Bundesbank, A disag -
gregated framework for analysing public finances: Germa -
ny’s fiscal track record between 2000 and 2005, Monthly 
Report, March 2006, pp 61-76. The cyclical influences are 
calculated using the relevant budget variables, ie, in par -
ticular, developments in wages, on the labour market and 
in private consumption.
2 In this context, the term “fiscal drag” encompasses the 
(positive) revenue effect of bracket creep in income tax -
ation and the (negative) impact of the fact that specific 
excise duties are largely independent of prices.
3 The analysis is based on the assumption that the euro-  
area debt crisis will not escalate again.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2013  
57

arising from demographic change. In view of 
the national budget rules, too, it would be 
sensible to make the most of the currently 
 exceptionally favourable conditions for Germa -
ny’s public finances and reduce the remaining 
deficits at the various levels of government. In 
particular, the upper borrowing limits proved to 
be ineffective in the past and were rightly tight -
ened as part of the 2009 reform. Under the 
revised framework, it would be advisable for 
central and state government to generally fac -
tor in clear safety margins below the upper 
limits in order – as far as possible – to avoid the 
need for short-  term and pr ocyclical adjust -
ments should the assessment of the budgetary 
situation change. Given past developments, 
aiming to achieve a structural surplus of roughly 
1% of GDP for central and state government 
combined would not be an over-  ambitious ob -
jective. There is also much to be said for not fully exploiting the deadlines –  which from 
 today’s perspective look very long for most 
government levels  – for when the final debt brake ceilings are to enter into force (2016 
 onwards for central government and 2020 
 onwards for state government).
Overall, the budget surpluses partly envisaged 
in the medium-  t erm projections, which are 
subject to great uncertainty, should not be 
seen as providing scope for extra unfunded 
budgetary burdens. Policymakers should in -
stead focus on structural improvements when 
seeking, for example, to enhance education or 
infrastructure or modify the tax and transfer 
system.
Budgetary development 
of central, state and local government
Tax revenue
Tax revenue4 was up by just under 3% on the 
year in the third quarter (see chart on page 59  
and table on page 60). The increase was based 
on a broad range of taxes – wage tax, consumption-  r elated taxes and profit-  r elated 
taxes. At 4%, growth in wage tax was still somewhat above average, although this is 
solely due to the stagnation in child benefit, 
which is deducted from receipts. Revenue from 
profit-  r elated taxes rose by nearly 3%. Receipts 
from assessed income tax continued to record 
dynamic growth. The sharp decline in non-  
assessed taxes on earnings and the strong in -
crease in corporation tax are due to special fac -
tors in 2012. Revenue from consumption-  
related taxes increased at a below-  aver age 2%.
According to the latest official tax estimate, tax 
revenue (including local government taxes) is 
forecast to rise by 3½% for the year as a whole. 
This growth primarily reflects the macroeco -
nomic developments and, to a lesser extent, 
fiscal drag.5 The financial effects of various le -
gislative changes are expected to more or less 
balance each other out overall. On the one 
hand, shortfalls are envisaged, not least due to 
the basic income tax allowance being raised 
somewhat and the gradual changeover to 
downstream taxation of pensions. On the other 
hand, in particular the expiry of both the home -
buyers’ grant and the investment grant (which 
are deducted from cash revenue) as well as in -
creases in real property transfer tax and to -
bacco tax will bring in additional revenue.
Revenue is forecast to rise by just over 3% in 
2014. Although the macroeconomic reference 
indicators for tax revenue are expected to grow 
at a significantly faster pace, the volume of 
 receipts will be dented, in particular, by tax 
 refunds envisaged in the wake of court rul -Very uncertain 
forecast sur-pluses should not be seen as providing extra spending scope
Further robust 
growth in tax revenue in Q3Ful
l-
 
year 
 
revenue rise mainly reflects macroeconomic developments
Similar 
growth 
forecast for sub-sequent years
4 Including EU shares in German tax revenue but excluding 
receipts from local government taxes, which are not yet 
known for the quarter under review.
5 This estimate is based on central government’s current 
macroeconomic projection. For 2013, real GDP growth is 
expected to be 0.5% and nominal growth 2.6% (May: 
+0.5% and +2.2%, respectively). GDP growth for 2014 is 
forecast to be 1.7% in real terms and 3.3% in nominal 
terms (hardly any change compared with May). In the me -
dium term, nominal growth of around 3% per year is still 
forecast.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report 
November 2013  
58

ings.6 Furthermore, changes in tax legislation 
that have already been adopted will produce 
shortfalls on balance in 2014. For the years 
thereafter up to 2018, revenue is forecast to 
rise by 3½% per year on average. The pro -
jected developments largely reflect growth as -
sumptions, while fiscal drag will also cause a 
marked increase in revenue. The dropout of the 
special factors relating to court rulings will 
partly offset the slightly dampening effect of 
legislative changes. The tax ratio (as defined in 
the government’s financial statistics) is pro -
jected to rise to 23.0% by the end of the fore -
cast period (2012: 22.5%). Overall, the increase 
is largely attributable to fiscal drag (½ percent -
age point, or €16 billion).
Revenue expectations have been raised notice -
ably compared with the May 2013 forecast. 
This is above all due to the more favourable 
intra- year developments, which were in part 
also projected forward as a baseline effect for 
subsequent years. Furthermore, from 2014 on -
wards, the upward adjustments owe some -
thing to the slightly better macroeconomic set -
ting. The fact that the first revenue shortfalls in 
connection with the court rulings referred to 
above are no longer expected to occur in 2013 
but repayments are now envisaged for 2014 
and 2015 is also of relevance for the revisions. 
After adjustment for the financial impact of 
 legislative changes made in the intervening 
period and corrections caused by the court rul -
ings, revenue assumptions were revised up -
wards by €4 billion for 2013, €2½ billion for 
2014 and €2 billion to €2½ billion for the years 
2015 to 2017.
Central government budget
The central government budget posted a def -
icit of almost €8 billion in the third quarter, 
which was only marginally lower than the fig -
ure recorded one year previously. Revenue rose 
(by ½%, or €½ billion) on a par with tax re -
ceipts, while deductions for transfers to the EU 
budget once again increased sharply (by €1½ billion). Expenditure was virtually unchanged. 
Although payments to the social security funds 
decreased by almost €1 billion, not least owing 
to the cut in transfers to the health insurance 
fund, and payments to state government fell 
by the same amount, this was offset by higher 
interest expenditure, particularly owing to dis -
count burdens, and evidently the transfer to 
Greece7 (accounting for just over €½ billion 
each) as well as somewhat higher payments to 
households, not least for long- term unemploy -
ment welfare benefit. However, transfers to the 
new fund for tackling the damage caused by 
the flood in the spring of 2013 have not yet 
been made.
The supplementary budget that was passed in 
the summer envisages a deficit of €25½ billion 
for 2013 as a whole. Compared with the esti -
mates – which, with the exception of the trans -
fer to the flood assistance fund, are in line with 
those in the original budget plan – there are 
extra burdens arising from the assistance for 
Greece agreed at the end of 2012 and the Bun -Revenue 
 expectations up noticeably
Deficit virtually 
unchanged  
in Q3Deficit estimate 
in supplemen-
tary budget 
realistic in  principleTax revenue*
Source: Federal Ministry of Finance. * Including EU shares in 
German tax revenue but excluding receipts from local govern-
ment taxes.
Deutsche Bundesbank2011 2012 2013024681012
++++++Year-on-year percentage change, quarterly data
6 Above all the ruling by the European Court of Justice of 
20 October 2011 on the taxation of dividends paid to non- 
resident companies (case C-284/ 09).
7 In November 2012, the Eurogroup agreed inter alia to 
transfer to Greece the computed profits expected to be 
made by the respective national central banks on Greek 
sovereign bonds purchased under the SMP , regardless of 
the actual profit distributions.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2013  
59

desbank’s lower profit distribution. Further -
more, spending on long- term unemployment 
welfare benefit could also be somewhat higher 
than budgeted. Although the November tax 
estimate suggests that the 2013 central gov -
ernment budget will now record significantly 
higher revenue than had been forecast in the 
spring, this still leaves revenue shortfalls of 
€½  billion compared with the budgeted fig -
ures. By contrast, relief might be provided by 
interest expenditure. It also looks likely that 
payments for calls of guarantees will be lower 
than budgeted. Overall, the deficit estimated in 
the supplementary budget could be met from 
today’s perspective. However, some room for 
manoeuvre remains, particularly in the case of 
privatisation proceeds, which makes it difficult 
to forecast the budget outturn.
In the 2013 supplementary budget, structural 
net borrowing – which is the key benchmark 
for the debt brake – is estimated at €13½ bil -
lion, after deducting net expenditure on finan -cial transactions of €5 billion and calculated 
cyclical burdens of €6½ billion.8 This is thus still 
well below the ceiling of €33 billion postulated 
by the Federal Ministry of Finance.9 The trans -
fer to the flood assistance fund was still 
 included in the calculation as a structural bur -
den, whereas the Federal Ministry of Finance 
recently announced that it will use consoli -
dated data on the fund and the central govern -
ment budget when calculating the structural 
Structural deficit 
set to declineTax revenue
 
Type of taxQ1 to Q3Estimate 
for 2013 1,2Q3
2012 2013 2012 2013
Year-on-year changeYear-on-year change as %Year-on-year change
€ billion € billion % € billion € billion %
Tax revenue, total
2 403.4 416.4 + 13.0 +  3.2 +  3.4 135.2 139.0 + 3.8 +  2.8
of which
Wage tax 106.8 113.3 +  6.5 +  6.1 +  5.9 36.6 38.0 + 1.4 +  3.9
Profi  t-related taxes 3 64.4 67.8 +  3.4 +  5.2 +  5.9 18.3 18.8 + 0.5 +  2.9
Assessed income tax 27.3 31.6 +  4.3 + 15.7 + 12.0 8.9 9.8 + 0.9 + 10.6
Corporation tax 13.0 14.8 +  1.8 + 13.5 + 17.2 2.5 3.3 + 0.8 + 30.7
Investment income 
tax4 24.1 21.4 –  2.7 – 11.2 –  9.0 6.9 5.7 – 1.2 – 17.4
Turnover taxes 5 144.7 146.3 +  1.6 +  1.1 +  1.4 49.1 50.0 + 0.9 +  1.8
Energy tax 24.1 24.2 +  0.1 +  0.5 +  0.2 10.0 10.1 + 0.1 +  0.9
Tobacco tax 9.5 9.5 +  0.0 +  0.4 –  1.4 3.6 3.9 + 0.2 +  6.9
1 According to offi   cial tax estimate of November 2013. 2 Including EU shares in German tax revenue but excluding receipts from local 
government taxes. 3 Employee refunds, homebuyers’ grant and investment grant deducted from revenue. 4 Withholding tax on interest 
income and capital gains, non-assessed taxes on earnings. 5 Turnover tax and import turnover tax.
Deutsche Bundesbank
8 The revised macroeconomic assumptions in central gov -
ernment’s autumn forecast led to a €2 billion reduction, 
down to €4½ billion.
9 In the control account, any positive and negative devi -
ations of the structural deficits (albeit calculated using a 
simplified procedure) from the regular upper limit at the 
budget outturn are added together. The final calculation 
for 2012, made in September 2013, produced a positive 
cumulative balance of €56 billion. Under a recent change 
in the law, it was decided that the bonus accumulated up 
until the end of 2015 during the transitional period will be 
cancelled. This will prevent the amounts accrued under 
special circumstances being used in future years to offset 
growth in debt, which is actually at odds with the intention 
of the debt brake.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2013  
60

deficit.10 The financial linkage between the two 
accounting entities would thus be consolidated 
–  as is appropriate  – and only the outflows 
from the fund will have an impact on the struc -
tural deficit. The structural deficit is conse -
quently significantly lower than estimated in 
the 2013 supplementary budget, but in subse -
quent years the payments made from the fund 
will impede balance improvements. After cyc -
lical adjustment (using updated figures for both 
years), a year- on- year improvement in the 
structural deficit thus appears likely.11 A key fac -
tor behind this is the cut in net transfers to the 
social security funds of €5 billion, which was 
newly agreed for the 2013 budget.
The incoming Federal Government will have to 
present a new draft of the 2014 budget. The 
draft approved by the outgoing government at 
the end of June envisaged a significantly lower 
level of net borrowing (€6½ billion) than in the 
2013 supplementary budget. This is primarily 
due to temporary burdens no longer applying 
(2013: flood assistance fund payment of €8 bil -
lion and €4½ billion higher capital contribu -
tions to the ESM). On the revenue side, growth 
in tax revenue of €8 billion was set against 
lower estimates for privatisation proceeds 
(-€4  billion). In structural terms, a surplus of 
€2 billion was recorded. For the coming years, 
despite a considerable increase in interest ex -
penditure, the fiscal plan envisages a steady im -
provement culminating in a surplus of €9 bil -
lion in the final year, 2017. It should be noted 
that there are specific budgetary risks in this 
context, particularly with regard to the as -
sumed revenue from a financial transaction tax 
from 2015 onwards and the planned cutbacks 
in defence expenditure (which apparently do 
not take pay increases into account). Further -
more, there is still a great deal of uncertainty 
over future developments in the euro- area debt 
crisis, not least with regard to guarantees on 
assistance loans and repercussions for macro -
economic developments.
Given the combination of favourable economic 
conditions and great uncertainty, the summer plans were by no means ambitious. Instead, it 
is actually very advisable to factor in clear safety 
margins below the strict constitutional limits 
for structural borrowing. In light of the foresee -
able demographic burdens, it would also be 
desirable to already bring down the high levels 
of central government debt by achieving 
marked surpluses. Overall, experience to date 
shows that, with sizeable downward revisions 
vis- à- vis the plans in some cases, it is not advis -
able to see the surpluses envisaged in central 
government’s fiscal plan as providing scope for 
new budgetary burdens. Before, for example, Surpluses in cur-
rent fiscal plan up to 2017 amid continued great uncertainty
Favourable  financial situ-ation does not provide scope for extra budgetary  burdensCentral government fiscal balance
Source: Bundesbank calculations based on data from the Fed-
eral Ministry of Finance.
Deutsche BundesbankQ1 Q2 Q3 Q420151050510
––––++
–30–25–20–15–1020132011Quarterly results
Cumulated from start of year
20122013
20112012€ billion
10 For a recommendation in this regard, see also Deutsche 
Bundesbank, Public finances, Monthly Report, August 
2013, p 72.
11 According to the underlying Bundesbank estimate 
– which was updated for both years and takes into account 
the growth structure – the cyclical component for 2013 is 
somewhat less favourable than the figure for 2012 (in con -
trast to the central government procedure for the debt 
brake). For information on the procedure used, see 
Deutsche Bundesbank, Calculating structural deficits in the 
central government budget – some technical comments, 
Monthly Report, August 2012, pp 64-65.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2013  
61

increased spending on expanding or maintain -
ing infrastructure or on improving education 
and childcare is approved, existing efficiency 
reserves should be exploited. If further meas -
ures bringing about expenditure increases are 
considered necessary, it makes sense, for the 
reasons stated above, to counterfinance them.
Central government’s off- budget entities (ex -
cluding the bad bank FMS Wertmanagement , 
for which data are not yet available) recorded a 
surplus of €½ billion in the third quarter, com -
pared with a figure of €1½ billion in the same 
period last year. The positive result is largely at -
tributable to the civil servants’ pension reserve 
and the restructuring fund, even though rev -
enue from the bank levy (just under €½ billion) 
was only about half as high in year- on- year 
terms. The flood assistance fund recorded only 
minor outflows up until the end of September. 
For the year as a whole, the revenue surplus of 
the off- budget entities (excluding FMS Wert -
management  and loss compensation paid to 
this entity) is likely to be significantly higher 
than the figure of €2½ billion recorded one 
year previously. This is due to the planned ad -
vance payment from the central government 
budget to finance the flood assistance fund, 
which more than offsets, in particular, the bur -
den of €1½ billion arising from the first repay -
ment of an inflation- indexed five- year Federal 
note (Bobl) in the second quarter of 2013.
State government budgets12
The improvement in the fiscal balance of the 
state government core budgets continued in 
the third quarter, but was only moderate. The 
deficit fell only slightly in year- on- year terms by 
€½ billion to €1 billion. Revenue grew by 2½% 
(€2 billion). Although tax receipts went up by 
5% (€2½ billion), there was a significant drop 
in proceeds from asset sales (-€½ billion), for 
example. Expenditure rose at a somewhat 
slower pace (just over 1½%, or €1½ billion). 
Spending on personnel increased considerably 
(by +4%, or €1 billion) following the rise in  negotiated pay rates at the beginning of 2013 
and the – in some cases delayed and scaled-  
down – extension to public sector employees 
with civil servant status and retired civil ser -
vants. Other operating expenditure also in -
creased significantly (by +4½%, or €½ billion), 
as did transfers (by +6%, or €1 billion) – not 
least owing to higher payments to local gov -
ernment (including central government’s con -
tribution to the basic allowance for the elderly 
and extending day care for small children, 
which are both transferred to local government 
via state government). By contrast, following 
North Rhine-  Westphalia’s (one-  off) capital 
repay ment to SoFFin (€1 billion) in 2012, there 
was a marked drop in investment. Moreover, 
the sharp decline in interest expenditure con -
tinued.
Given that there has so far been an overall im -
provement of €3½ billion, the deficit for the 
year as a whole is also likely to be lower than 
the level of €5½ billion recorded one year pre -
viously. It will thus be well below the figure in 
the budget plans (€13 billion), although these 
are based in part on outdated assumptions 
 regarding tax developments. According to the 
latest tax estimate, in 2013 state government is 
once again expected to record considerable 
additional tax revenue (+€2½ billion compared 
with the May estimate), and revenue estimates 
for subsequent years have also been revised 
upwards somewhat. Overall, it is likely that, in 
2013 at least, this will more than compensate 
for the significant growth in personnel costs, 
other operating expenditure and, in particular, 
general state government grants to local gov -
ernment, which will increase in line with the 
favourable tax developments.
Following the positive outcome of the referen -
dum in Bavaria, seven federal states have now 
enshrined the debt brake in their constitutions, 
although –  with the exception of Saxony  – Central govern-
ment off- budget entities record smaller surplus in Q3
Only slight 
 decline in deficit 
in Q3Deficit for year as a whole probably down on year
12 The development of local government finances in the 
second quarter of 2013 was analysed in greater detail in 
the short articles in the Bundesbank’s October Monthly 
 Report. These are the most recent data available.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2013  
62

these provisions will not fully enter into force 
until 2020. While a few other federal states 
have adopted similar provisions in their state 
budgetary regulation laws, unlike constitutional 
provisions, these can easily be amended again 
and are therefore generally less effective, as is 
already apparent in individual cases. In Berlin, 
Brandenburg, North Rhine-  Westphalia and 
Saarland, new rules have yet to be adopted. In 
addition to a rapid, while at the same time rig -
orous, implementation of the debt brake by in -
dividual federal states, it also appears highly 
advisable to address the reform of federal 
 financial relationships – which must enter into 
force by 2020 at the latest – in a timely and 
comprehensive manner. In the wake of the 
forthcoming reform of the financial equalisa -
tion scheme among the federal states and the 
expiry of the infrastructure reconstruction 
scheme in the eastern states, a decision ultim -
ately needs to be made regarding the extent to 
which differences in financial capacity between 
the federal states are acceptable, also in view 
of regional price differences. Adverse incentives 
in the financial- capacity- oriented financial 
equalisation scheme could be reduced by a 
lower absorption of additional tax revenue and 
by shifting tax administration to central govern -
ment. Furthermore, the option of strengthen -
ing the tax autonomy of the individual federal 
states (giving them the right to introduce 
 surcharges or discounts – on income tax, for 
example) could be considered. This would 
 facilitate compliance with the strict debt brake 
against a backdrop of significant differences 
 regarding existing strains such as interest 
 expenditure and other ongoing differences in 
financial capacity, while at the same time main -
taining scope for flexibility where spending 
preferences differ.Social security funds13
Statutory pension insurance 
scheme
The statutory pension insurance scheme re -
corded a deficit of just over €1 billion in the 
third quarter of 2013, which was €½ billion 
higher than one year previously. Revenue hardly 
changed on the year. The cut in the contribu -
tion rate from 19.6% to 18.9% resulted in a 
slight drop in employees’ compulsory contribu -
tions. However, if the contribution rate had re -
mained unchanged, they would have gone up 
sharply by 3½%. Contributions made on behalf 
of recipients of unemployment insurance bene -
fit (I) also increased in unadjusted terms, 
 although at a significantly slower pace than in 
previous quarters. Central government grants 
also decreased, as the change in the contribu -
tion rate is taken into account in most cases 
when calculating the new levels of the grants. 
At only just under 1%, expenditure growth 
slowed significantly in the third quarter owing 
to a small pension increase of 0.25% in west -
ern Germany (eastern Germany: +3.29%). The 
subdued growth is also due to the current de -
cline in the number of pensions stemming from 
the “demographic lull” as a result of a low 
number of people reaching retirement age at 
the present time, the gradual increase in the 
normal age of retirement to 67 years and most 
likely the fact that since 2012 women have no 
longer been able to draw a pension earlier 
– upon reaching 60 years of age – without a 
particular reason (with the corresponding de -
ductions to their pension).
The cumulated deficit of the statutory pension 
insurance scheme for the first three quarters of 
2013 amounted to just over €2½ billion. One 
year previously it had recorded a surplus of just 
under €½ billion. A marked financial deterior -Rapid and rigor-
ous implementa-tion of debt brake and  fundamental  reform of  federal financial relationshipsRevenue losses from cut in con-tribution rate …
… and subdued 
expenditure growth due to low pension 
 increase
In the absence 
of benefit  increases, sharp cut in contribu-tion rate to  reduce excessive reserves
13 The financial development of the statutory health and 
public long- term care insurance schemes in the second 
quarter of 2013 was discussed in the short articles of the 
September Monthly Report. These are the most recent data 
available.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2013  
63

ation had been planned in order to bring the 
reserves back down to 1.5 times the scheme’s 
monthly expenditure. However, it now looks 
likely that the reserves will not be scaled back 
and that, instead, a surplus will actually be 
 recorded as contribution receipts are usually 
particularly strong in the final quarter of the 
year owing to bonuses. In 2014, the scheme 
will thus once again be legally required to bring 
the reserves back down to their upper limit by 
means of a further cut in the contribution rate. 
In the absence of benefit increases, a further 
reduction of 0.6 percentage point will probably 
be necessary.
As such a low pension increase, caused by spe -
cial factors, is hardly likely to reoccur in the 
coming years and the number of pensions will 
increase again, the statutory pension insurance 
scheme will inevitably record considerable def -
icits in the future. The reserves are being de -
pleted at an accelerated pace and as soon as 
there is a risk of the lower limit of 0.2 times the scheme’s monthly expenditure being under -
shot, the contribution rate will have to be put 
back up again in the second half of the current 
decade. Furthermore, the at present particu -
larly favourable financial situation will be of 
hardly any consequence with regard to improv -
ing the long- term prospects of the statutory 
pension insurance scheme, as the current 
promising employment situation is already 
taken into account to a large extent in the pro -
jections. The positive situation should therefore 
not divert attention from the more difficult 
times that lie ahead for the scheme. Additional 
permanent expenditure commitments cannot 
be financed without permanently higher taxes 
and social security contributions. Thus, for ex -
ample, the additional inclusion of a child- raising 
year for parents of children born before 1992 
would result in additional expenditure of 
around €6½ billion per year, which would need 
to be offset by increasing the contribution rate 
by about ½ percentage point over several dec -
ades.
Federal Employment Agency
The Federal Employment Agency posted a sur -
plus of just under €½ billion in the third quarter 
of 2013. While this is better than the slight def -
icit recorded one year previously, the improve -
ment is overstated as at that time the Federal 
Employment Agency still transferred a reinte -
gration payment instalment of just under €½ 
billion to central government. Revenue went 
up by almost 5½% overall. This is attributable, 
first, to the continued strong growth in contri -
bution receipts (just over 3%) and, second, to 
revenue from insolvency benefit contributions 
almost quadrupling following the marked rise 
in the contribution rate. On the  expenditure 
side, with an overall increase of only ½%, the 
reduced – although still very significant – rise in 
unemployment benefit payments (+10%) and 
the abolition of the reintegration payment (an 
instalment of which had still been paid one 
year previously) largely balanced each other 
out. No more savings of any note were made Current easing 
in financial situ-ation does not create scope for permanently higher expend-iture commit -
mentsImprovement in Q3 overstated owing to aboli-tion of reinte-gration paymentFinances of the German statutory pension insurance scheme
Source: German statutory pension insurance scheme (Deutsche 
Rentenversicherung Bund). 
Deutsche Bundesbank2011 2012 2013606264666870
–20+2+4+6€ billion, quarterly data
Lin scale
Surplus (+) or deficit (–)ExpenditureLog scale
RevenueDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2013  
64

in the area of active labour market policy meas -
ures. It appears that spending on this item has 
reached a trough.
The deficit of the Federal Employment Agency 
for the first nine months of 2013 came to just 
over €½ billion. One year previously, it had still 
recorded a surplus of more than €1½ billion at 
the end of September. However, after adjust -
ment for the abolition of the payments be -
tween the Federal Employment Agency and 
central government (reintegration payment 
and central government grant), rather than a 
financial deterioration of almost €2½ billion, 
there is an improvement of €½ billion. If the 
more favourable operational developments are 
carried forward, it looks like the Federal Em -
ployment Agency could well record a slight sur -
plus for 2013 as a whole, given that receipts 
are usually strong in the fourth quarter. A fur -
ther easing in the financial situation is on the 
horizon for 2014 owing to the forecast eco -
nomic revival.Surplus on hori-
zon for year as wholeFinances of theFederal Employment Agency
Source: Federal Employment Agency. 1 Including transfers to 
the  civil  servants'  pension  fund.  2 Excluding  central  govern-
ment liquidity assistance.
Deutsche Bundesbank2011 2012 201368101214
1.52.03.04.05.06.0–20+2+4€ billion, quarterly data
Log scale
Total expenditure 1
Revenue 2
Log scale
Expenditure on ...
... vocational training... unemployment benefits
    and short-time
    working benefitsLin scale
Surplus (+) or deficit (–)Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2013  
65

Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2013  
66

Statistical 
SectionDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report 
November 2013  
1•

Contents
I Key economic data for the euro area
 1 Monetary developments and interest rates  ..................................................................  5•
 2 External transactions and positions  ..............................................................................  5•
 3 Gener al economic indicators  .......................................................................................  6•
II Overall monetary survey in the euro area
 1 The money stock and its counterparts  .........................................................................  8•
 2 Consolidated balance sheet of monetary financial institutions (MFIs)  ...........................  10•
 3 Banking system’s liquidity position  ...............................................................................  14•
III Consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem
 1 Assets  ..........................................................................................................................  16•
 2 Liabilities  .....................................................................................................................  18•
IV Banks
 1 A ssets and liabilities of monetary financial institutions (excluding the Bundesbank)  
in Germany  .................................................................................................................  20•
 2 Principal assets and liabilities of banks (MFIs) in Germany, by category of banks  ..........  24•
 3 A ssets and liabilities of banks (MFIs) in Germany vis-à-vis residents  ..............................  26•
 4 A ssets and liabilities of banks (MFIs) in Germany vis-à-vis non-residents  .......................  28•
 5 Lending by banks (MFIs) in Germany to domestic non-banks (non-MFIs)  .....................  30•
 6 Lending by banks (MFIs) in Germany to domestic enterprises and households, 
 housing loans, sectors of economic activity  .................................................................  32•
 7 Deposits of domestic non-banks (non-MFIs) at banks (MFIs) in Germany  .....................  34•
 8 Deposits of domestic households and non-profit institutions at banks (MFIs) in 
 Germany  .....................................................................................................................  36•
 9 Deposits of domestic government at banks (MFIs) in Germany, by creditor group ........  36•
 1 0 Savings deposits and bank savings bonds of banks (MFIs) in Germany sold to  
non-banks (non-MFIs) ..................................................................................................  38•
 1 1 Debt securities and money market paper outstanding of banks (MFIs) in Germany  ...... 38•
 1 2 Building and loan associations (MFIs) in Germany  ........................................................  39•
 1 3 A ssets and liabilities of the foreign branches and foreign subsidiaries of  
German banks (MFIs)  ...................................................................................................  40•Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report 
November 2013  
2•

V Minimum reserves
 1 Reserve ratios  ..............................................................................................................  42•
 2 Reserve maintenance in Germany up to the end of 1998  ............................................  42•
 3 Reserve maintenance in the euro area  .........................................................................  42•
VI Interest rates
 1 ECB interest rates  ........................................................................................................  43•
 2 Base rates  ....................................................................................................................  43•
 3 Eur osystem monetary policy operations allotted through tenders  ................................  43•
 4 Money market rates, by month  ...................................................................................  43•
 5 Inter est rates and volumes for outstanding amounts and new business of  
German banks (MFIs)  ...................................................................................................  44•
VII Insurance corporations and pension funds
 1 Assets  ..........................................................................................................................  48•
 2 Liabilities  .....................................................................................................................  49•
VIII Capital market
 1 Sales and purchases of debt securities and shares in Germany  .....................................  50•
 2 Sales of debt securities issued by residents  ..................................................................  51•
 3 Amounts outstanding of debt securities issued by residents .........................................  52•
 4 Shar es in circulation issued by residents  .......................................................................  52•
 5 Y ields and indices on German securities  ......................................................................  53•
 6 Sales and purchases of mutual fund shares in Germany  ...............................................  53•
IX Financial accounts
 1 A cquisition of financial assets and financing of private non-financial sectors  ................  54•
 2 Financial assets and liabilities of private non-financial sectors  ......................................  55•
X Public finances in Germany
 1 Gener al government: deficit and debt level as defined in the Maastricht Treaty  ..................  56•
 2 Gener al government: revenue, expenditure and fiscal deficit/surplus as shown in  
the national accounts  ..................................................................................................  56•
 3 Gener al government: budgetary development (as per government’s financial 
 statistics)  .....................................................................................................................  57•
 4 Centr al, state and local government: budgetary development (as per government’s 
 financial statistics)  ........................................................................................................  57•Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report 
November 2013  
3•

 5 Centr al, state and local government: tax revenue  ........................................................  58•
 6 Centr al and state government and European Union: tax revenue, by type  .......................  58•
 7 Centr al, state and local government: individual taxes  ..................................................  59•
 8 German pension insurance scheme: budgetary development and assets  ......................  59•
 9 F ederal Employment Agency: budgetary development  .................................................  60•
 1 0 S tatutory health insurance scheme: budgetary development  .......................................  60•
 1 1 S tatutory long-term care insurance scheme: budgetary development  ..........................  61•
 1 2 Centr al government: borrowing in the market  .............................................................  61•
 1 3 Centr al, state and local government: debt by creditor  .................................................  61•
 1 4 Centr al, state and local government: debt by category  ................................................  62•
XI Economic conditions in Germany
 1 Origin and use of domestic product, distribution of national income  ...........................  63•
 2 Output in the production sector  ..................................................................................  64•
 3 Or ders received by industry  .........................................................................................  65•
 4 Or ders received by construction  ..................................................................................  66•
 5 Retail trade turnover, sales of motor vehicles  ...............................................................  66•
 6 Labour market  .............................................................................................................  67•
 7 Prices  ..........................................................................................................................  68•
 8 Households’ income  ....................................................................................................  69•
 9 Negotiated pay rates (overall economy)  .......................................................................  69•
XII External sector
 1 Major items of the balance of payments of the euro area  ...........................................  70•
 2 Major items of the balance of payments of the Federal Republic of Germany  ..............  71•
 3 F oreign trade (special trade) of the Federal Republic of Germany, by country and 
group of countries  .......................................................................................................  72•
 4 Services and income of the Federal Republic of Germany  ............................................  73•
 5 C urrent transfers of the Federal Republic of Germany  ..................................................  73•
 6 C apital transfers  ..........................................................................................................  73•
 7 Financial account of the Federal Republic of Germany  .................................................  74•
 8 External position of the Bundesbank up to end-1998  ..................................................  75•
 9 External position of the Bundesbank since the beginning of the  
European monetary union  ...........................................................................................  75•
 1 0 A ssets and liabilities of enterprises in Germany (other than banks) vis-à-vis  
non-residents  ..............................................................................................................  76•
 1 1 ECB euro reference exchange rates of selected currencies  ...........................................  77•
 1 2 Eur o-area member states and irrevocable euro conversion rates in the third stage  
of European Economic and Monetary Union  ...............................................................  77•
 1 3 Effective exchange rates of the euro and indicators of the German economy’s price 
competitiveness  ...........................................................................................................  78•Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report 
November 2013  
4•

Deutsche Bundesbank
5  Monthly Report
November 2013
I Key economic data for the euro area 
 
1 Monetary developments and interest rates
 
 
 
 
 Money stock in various definitions 1,2 Determinants of the money stock 1 Interest rates
 M 3 3 
MFI lending to Yield on Euro-
 3-month enterprises Monetary pean govern-
MFI lending, and capital 3-month ment bonds moving  average
M1 M2 (centred) total households formation  4 Eonia 5,7 Euribor 6,7 outstanding 8 
Period Annual percentage change % Annual percentage as a monthly average
2012          Jan 2.4 2.3 2.1 2.1 1.4 0.7 2.7 0.38 1.22 4.5
         Feb 2.6 2.8 2.5 2.5 1.4 0.4 2.1 0.37 1.05 4.3         Mar 2.7 2.8 2.8 2.6 1.8 0.5 1.3 0.36 0.86 3.9
         Apr 2.0 2.5 2.4 2.7 1.4 − 0.1 0.8 0.35 0.74 3.9
         May 3.3 2.8 2.9 2.7 1.5 − 0.3 − 0.1 0.34 0.68 4.0
         June 3.5 2.9 3.0 3.1 1.5 − 0.4 − 0.3 0.33 0.66 4.0
         July 4.6 3.4 3.5 3.1 1.3 − 0.6 − 1.1 0.18 0.50 3.8
         Aug 4.9 3.0 2.7 3.0 0.8 − 1.0 − 1.2 0.11 0.33 3.7
         Sep 5.2 3.1 2.8 3.1 0.9 − 0.9 − 1.3 0.10 0.25 3.5
         Oct 6.4 4.3 3.9 3.5 0.6 − 1.3 − 1.8 0.09 0.21 3.3
         Nov 6.4 4.4 3.7 3.7 0.5 − 1.3 − 1.8 0.08 0.19 3.2
         Dec 6.4 4.5 3.5 3.6 0.7 − 0.5 − 1.5 0.07 0.19 3.0
2013          Jan 6.5 4.4 3.5 3.4 0.2 − 0.8 − 1.7 0.07 0.20 2.9
         Feb 7.0 4.3 3.1 3.0 0.1 − 0.7 − 1.6 0.07 0.22 3.0
         Mar 7.1 4.2 2.6 3.0 0.3 − 0.5 − 1.2 0.07 0.21 2.9
         Apr 8.7 4.9 3.2 2.9 0.3 − 0.5 − 1.5 0.08 0.21 2.7
         May 8.3 4.7 2.9 2.8 0.2 − 0.6 − 1.0 0.08 0.20 2.6
         June 7.6 4.3 2.4 2.5 0.2 − 0.5 − 1.0 0.09 0.21 2.9
         July 7.1 4.1 2.2 2.3 − 0.4 − 1.0 − 1.0 0.09 0.22 3.0
         Aug 6.8 4.0 2.3 2.2 − 0.3 − 0.9 − 1.2 0.08 0.23 3.0
         Sep 6.6 3.8 2.1 ... − 0.6 − 1.0 − 1.4 0.08 0.22 3.1
         Oct ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 0.09 0.23 3.0
1 Source: ECB. 2 Seasonally adjusted. 3 Excluding money market fund shares/units, OverNight Index Average. 6 Euro Interbank Offered Rate. 7 See also footnotes to
money market paper and debt securities with a maturity of up to two years held by Table VI.4, p 43  8 GDP-weighted yield on ten-year government bonds. Countries
non-euro-area residents. 4 Longer-term liabilities to euro-area non-MFIs. 5 Euro include:DE,FR,NL,BE,AT,FI,IE,PT,ES,IT,GR,SK. 
 
 
2 External transactions and positions  * 
  
 
Selected items of the euro-area balance of payments Euro exchange rates  1 
Current account Capital account Effective exchange rate 3 
of which Direct Securities Other Reserve
Balance Trade balance Balance investment investment assets Dollar rate Nominal Real  4 transactions 2 
Period € million Euro/US-$ Q1 1999 = 100
2012          Jan − 10,250 − 8,005 + 20,160 + 15,075 − 57,515 + 63,735 − 1,135 1.2905 99.0 96.3
         Feb − 3,401 + 2,907 + 7,075 + 11,342 + 16,276 − 18,941 − 1,603 1.3224 99.7 97.2
         Mar + 8,313 + 10,495 − 12,660 − 8,599 − 36,871 + 32,144 + 665 1.3201 99.9 97.3
         Apr + 5,569 + 4,244 − 504 + 9,945 − 3,908 − 3,596 − 2,946 1.3162 99.5 97.1
         May − 1,912 + 6,743 + 3,701 + 15,372 + 12,736 − 22,952 − 1,456 1.2789 98.1 95.6
         June + 22,512 + 13,747 − 18,822 − 50,075 + 72,340 − 36,583 − 4,504 1.2526 97.2 94.8
         July + 21,529 + 14,356 − 12,546 + 15,659 − 9,596 − 19,106 + 496 1.2288 95.4 93.1
         Aug + 9,708 + 5,520 − 7,570 + 22,197 − 12,242 − 15,962 − 1,564 1.2400 95.3 93.1
         Sep + 12,254 + 9,945 − 19,623 − 6,910 − 3,794 − 9,895 + 976 1.2856 97.2 94.9
         Oct + 13,665 + 10,500 − 27,114 − 50,518 + 69,534 − 43,485 − 2,644 1.2974 97.8 95.5
         Nov + 20,899 + 13,415 − 34,527 + 19,156 + 23,613 − 76,312 − 985 1.2828 97.3 94.9
         Dec + 27,328 + 11,064 − 38,519 + 3,799 + 5,186 − 48,284 + 779 1.3119 98.7 96.2
2013          Jan − 6,820 − 2,695 + 4,699 − 10,901 + 31,457 − 11,058 − 4,799 1.3288 100.4 97.9
         Feb + 9,016 + 11,220 − 11,069 + 2,202 − 11,277 − 4,554 + 2,560 1.3359 101.7 99.0
         Mar + 22,401 + 22,167 − 18,759 − 15,284 + 4,712 − 10,437 + 2,251 1.2964 100.2 97.8
         Apr + 13,880 + 16,425 − 18,429 − 12,153 − 5,762 − 503 − 11 1.3026 100.5 97.8
         May + 9,873 + 17,216 − 11,914 − 15,851 + 31,358 − 26,858 − 564 1.2982 100.6 98.0
         June + 29,064 + 18,453 − 25,984 − 20,726 + 43,885 − 48,581 − 563 1.3189 101.6 98.8
         July + 26,116 + 19,688 − 29,642 − 2,899 − 42,122 + 15,125 + 255 1.3080 101.5 98.8
         Aug + 11,954 + 8,260 − 15,527 − 7,794 + 27,013 − 32,781 − 1,965 1.3310 102.2 99.5
         Sep ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 1.3348 102.0 99.1
         Oct ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 1.3635 102.9 99.9
*  Source: ECB. 1  See also Tables XI.12 and 13, pp 75−76   2  Including
financial derivatives. 3  Vis-à-vis the currencies of The-EER-21 group. 4  Based on
consumer prices. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
6  Monthly Report
November 2013
I  Key economic data for the euro area 
 
3  General economic indicators
 
 
                   
 
Period Euro area Belgium Germany Estonia Finland France Greece Ireland Italy
 
Real gross domestic product 1,2
 
2010 2.0 2.3 4.0 2.6 3.4 1.7 − 4.9 − 1.1 1.7
2011 1.6 1.8 3.3 9.6 2.7 2.0 − 7.1 2.2 0.5
2012 − 0.7 − 0.1 0.7 3.9 − 0.8 0.0 − 6.4 0.2 − 2.5
2012          Q2 − 0.5 − 0.1 0.6 2.5 − 0.7 − 0.3 − 6.4 0.4 − 3.0
         Q3 − 0.7 − 0.2 0.4 3.5 − 1.5 − 0.1 − 6.7 − 0.5 − 2.9
         Q4 − 1.0 − 0.6 0.0 4.9 − 2.4 − 0.2 − 5.7 − 1.0 − 2.8
2013          Q1 − 1.2 − 0.5 − 1.6 1.3 − 3.3 − 0.9 − 5.6 − 1.0 − 2.8
         Q2 − 0.6 0.1 0.9 1.1 − 0.7 0.4 − 3.8 − 1.2 − 2.6
         Q3 − 0.4 ... 1.1 ... ... ... ... ... ...
 
Industrial production 1,3
 
2010 7.3 11.2 10.9 22.9 5.1 5.0 − 6.6 7.5 6.7
2011 3.2 4.4 6.6 19.7 2.1 2.3 − 8.0 0.0 1.1
2012 − 2.4 − 3.3 4 − 0.3 0.3 − 1.5 − 2.7 − 3.7 − 1.3 − 6.5
2012          Q2 − 2.3 − 5.4 0.3 − 0.7 − 2.4 − 2.7 − 2.3 2.9 − 7.3
         Q3 − 2.3 − 3.4 − 0.8 0.0 − 1.1 − 2.1 − 3.2 − 3.3 − 5.1
         Q4 − 3.1 − 1.8 − 2.1 1.7 − 0.2 − 3.2 − 0.5 − 6.6 − 7.0
2013          Q1 − 2.3 − 3.2 5 − 2.0 5.1 − 3.8 − 1.9 − 3.2 − 2.9 − 4.3
         Q2 − 0.7 1.2 6 0.1 4.8 − 6.9 0.6 − 1.5 − 2.5 − 3.7
         Q3 − 0.6 ... 7p 0.3 2.5 − 1.9 − 1.3 p − 5.9 p − 0.2 − 3.8
 
Capacity utilisation in industry 8
 
2011 80.7 80.5 86.1 73.3 80.5 83.4 67.9 − 72.6
2012 78.9 77.7 83.5 70.2 78.8 82.2 64.9 − 70.1
2013 78.0 76.6 82.1 71.3 78.5 81.0 65.0 − 70.1
2012          Q3 78.2 76.9 82.6 71.3 80.1 82.0 63.9 − 69.7
         Q4 77.2 76.6 80.7 70.1 77.4 80.4 65.1 − 69.0
2013          Q1 77.6 75.5 82.2 70.5 78.3 82.3 65.3 − 68.5
         Q2 77.5 76.4 81.5 70.8 77.4 80.9 64.0 − 68.4
         Q3 78.3 76.4 82.5 71.5 80.3 80.8 64.9 − 71.3
         Q4 78.4 78.2 82.3 72.5 78.0 80.0 65.9 − 72.2
 
Standardised unemployment rate 9,10
 
2010 10.1 8.3 7.1 16.9 8.4 9.7 12.6 13.9 8.4
2011 10.1 7.2 6.0 12.5 7.8 9.6 17.7 14.7 8.4
2012 11.4 7.6 5.5 10.2 7.7 10.2 24.3 14.7 10.7
2013          Apr 12.1 8.5 5.4 8.3 8.1 10.8 27.2 13.6 12.0
         May 12.1 8.5 5.3 8.1 8.1 10.8 27.6 13.9 12.2
         June 12.1 8.6 5.4 8.0 8.1 10.9 27.5 13.8 12.1
         July 12.1 8.7 5.2 8.0 8.1 11.0 27.6 13.7 12.1
         Aug 12.2 8.8 5.1 8.3 8.1 11.0 ... 13.6 12.4
         Sep 12.2 8.9 5.4 ... 8.1 11.1 ... 13.6 12.5
 
Harmonised Index of Consumer Prices 1
 
2010 1.6 2.3 1.2 2.7 1.7 1.7 4.7 − 1.6 1.6
2011 11 2.7 3.4 2.5 5.1 3.3 2.3 3.1 1.2 2.9
2012 2.5 2.6 2.1 4.2 3.2 2.2 1.0 1.9 3.3
2013          May 1.4 1.1 1.6 3.6 2.5 0.9 − 0.3 0.5 1.3
         June 1.6 1.5 1.9 4.1 2.3 1.0 − 0.3 0.7 1.4
         July 1.6 1.6 1.9 3.9 2.5 1.2 − 0.5 0.7 1.2
         Aug 1.3 1.1 1.6 3.6 2.0 1.0 − 1.0 0.0 1.2
         Sep 1.1 1.0 1.6 2.6 1.8 1.0 − 1.0 0.0 0.9
         Oct e 0.7 0.7 1.2 2.2 ... 0.7 − 1.9 − 0.1 0.8
 
General government financial balance 12
 
2010 − 6.2 − 3.7 − 4.2 0.2 − 2.5 − 7.1 − 10.7 − 30.6 − 4.5
2011 − 4.1 − 3.7 − 0.8 1.1 − 0.7 − 5.3 − 9.5 − 13.1 − 3.8
2012 − 3.7 − 4.0 0.1 − 0.2 − 1.8 − 4.8 − 9.0 − 8.2 − 3.0
 
General government debt 12
 
2010 85.4 95.7 82.5 6.7 48.7 82.4 148.3 91.2 119.3
2011 87.3 98.0 80.0 6.1 49.2 85.8 170.3 104.1 120.7
2012 90.6 99.8 81.0 9.8 53.6 90.2 156.9 117.4 127.0
Sources: National data, European Commission, Eurostat, European Central Bank. 4  Positively influenced by late reports. 5  Positively influenced by changes in the
Latest data are partly based on press reports and are provisional. 1  Annual percen- reporting population. 6  From April 2013, the values submitted by the reporting enter-
tage change. 2  GDP of the euro area calculated from seasonally adjusted data. prises are deflated by industrial producer prices with 2010 as the base year.
3  Manufacturing, mining and energy; adjusted for working-day variations. Previously, with 2005 as the base year. 7  Provisional; adjusted in advance by the

Deutsche Bundesbank
7  Monthly Report
November 2013
I  Key economic data for the euro area  
 
   
                   
 
Luxembourg Malta Netherlands Austria Portugal Slovakia Slovenia Spain Cyprus   Period
 
Real gross domestic product 1,2
 
3.1 4.0 1.5 1.8 1.9 4.4 1.3 − 0.2 1.3 2010
1.9 1.6 0.9 2.8 − 1.2 3.0 0.7 0.1 0.4 2011
− 0.2 0.8 − 1.2 0.9 − 3.2 1.8 − 2.5 − 1.6 − 2.4 2012
0.2 1.0 − 0.7 − 0.3 − 4.0 2.6 − 3.5 − 1.7 − 2.6 2012          Q2
− 0.5 1.5 − 1.7 0.5 − 2.5 2.1 − 3.0 − 1.7 − 1.8          Q3
0.4 1.5 − 1.5 1.3 − 5.4 0.7 − 3.3 − 1.9 − 3.6          Q4
1.1 1.8 − 1.8 − 0.3 − 4.9 0.6 − 4.6 − 2.7 − 5.1 2013          Q1
2.4 3.6 − 1.7 0.0 − 2.5 0.9 − 1.7 − 1.7 − 5.9          Q2
... ... ... 0.7 ... ... ... ... ...          Q3
 
Industrial production1,3
 
8.7 − 7.8 6.7 1.6 8.3 7.0 0.8 − 1.7 2010
− 1.9 − − 0.7 6.8 − 2.0 5.4 1.9 − 1.4 − 7.7 2011− 5.4 − − 0.5 − 0.2 − 5.0 8.0 − 0.6 − 6.0 − 10.3 2012
− 5.4 − 1.6 0.4 − 6.4 9.6 0.0 − 7.1 − 11.2 2012          Q2
− 6.2 − − 2.3 0.0 − 4.1 11.5 0.4 − 5.5 − 5.7          Q3
− 2.8 − 0.4 − 0.9 − 3.7 4.4 − 2.3 − 5.7 − 12.4          Q4
− 7.1 − 2.6 0.5 − 1.3 2.7 − 1.2 − 4.1 − 14.2 2013          Q1
− 4.0 − 0.5 0.2 3.2 2.8 − 1.9 − 1.7 − 13.7          Q2
... −
p 0.0 ... 0.0 p 4.8 p − 1.4 − 0.5 ...          Q3
 
Capacity utilisation in industry 8
 
83.2 78.7 80.3 85.4 74.4 61.6 80.4 73.3 61.4 201176.4 75.2 78.4 84.6 73.8 69.6 79.1 72.1 56.5 201264.5 77.0 76.7 83.6 73.5 60.6 78.3 73.3 49.3 2013
78.1 76.2 78.3 84.9 74.2 71.2 79.4 70.7 58.2 2012          Q3
65.7 74.3 77.0 83.6 72.6 68.4 76.6 72.5 53.7          Q4
66.9 77.2 77.0 84.9 73.5 60.7 77.8 68.7 52.2 2013          Q1
62.3 76.2 75.9 83.5 73.9 72.3 78.4 74.6 43.7          Q2
63.1 76.1 76.6 83.5 73.2 55.2 78.2 76.2 50.5          Q3
65.8 78.4 77.4 82.6 73.2 54.0 78.6 73.5 50.8          Q4
 
Standardised unemployment rate 9,10
 
4.6 6.9 4.5 4.4 12.0 14.5 7.3 20.1 6.3 20104.8 6.5 4.4 4.2 12.9 13.7 8.2 21.7 7.9 20115.1 6.4 5.3 4.3 15.9 14.0 8.9 25.0 11.9 2012
5.6 6.5 6.5 4.8 17.3 14.1 10.8 26.5 15.5 2013          Apr 
5.8 6.6 6.6 4.6 17.0 14.2 10.7 26.4 15.8          May
5.8 6.6 6.8 4.7 16.7 14.2 10.5 26.4 16.2          June
5.9 6.5 7.0 4.8 16.5 14.1 10.3 26.5 16.3          July
5.8 6.4 7.0 4.9 16.5 14.0 10.3 26.6 16.9          Aug 
5.9 6.4 7.0 4.9 16.3 14.0 10.2 26.6 17.1          Sep 
 
Harmonised Index of Consumer Prices 1
 
2.8 2.0 0.9 1.7 1.4 0.7 2.1 2.0 2.6 20103.7 2.5 2.5 3.6 3.6 4.1 2.1 3.1 3.5 20112.9 3.2 2.8 2.6 2.8 3.7 2.8 2.4 3.1 2012
1.4 0.8 3.1 2.4 0.9 1.8 1.6 1.8 0.2 2013          May
2.0 0.6 3.2 2.2 1.2 1.7 2.2 2.2 0.8          June
1.8 0.9 3.1 2.1 0.8 1.6 2.8 1.9 0.7          July
1.7 0.7 2.8 2.0 0.2 1.4 2.2 1.6 0.1          Aug 
1.5 0.6 2.4
p 1.8 0.3 1.1 1.5 0.5 0.3          Sep 
1.0 0.5 1.3 ... 0.0 0.7 1.1 0.0 − 0.5          Oct 
 
General government financial balance 12
 
− 0.8 − 3.5 − 5.1 − 4.5 − 9.8 − 7.7 − 5.9 − 9.6 − 5.3 2010
0.1 − 2.8 − 4.3 − 2.5 − 4.3 − 5.1 − 6.3 − 9.6 − 6.3 2011
− 0.6 − 3.3 − 4.1 − 2.5 − 6.4 − 4.5 − 3.8 − 10.6 − 6.4 2012
 
General government debt 12
 
19.5 66.8 63.4 72.3 94.0 41.0 38.7 61.7 61.3 201018.7 69.5 65.7 72.8 108.2 43.4 47.1 70.5 71.5 201121.7 71.3 71.3 74.0 124.1 52.4 54.4 86.0 86.6 2012
Federal Statistical Office, by way of estimates, to the results of the quarterly of Germany: calculation based on unadjusted data from the Federal Statistical Office.production survey (from July onward). 8  Manufacturing, in %; seasonally adjusted; 11  Including Estonia from 2011 onwards. 12  As a percentage of GDP; euro-area
data are collected in January, April, July and October. 9  As a percentage of the aggregate: European Central Bank (ESA 1995), member states: European Commission
civilian labour force; seasonally adjusted. 10  Standardised unemployment rate (Maastricht Treaty definition). 

Deutsche Bundesbank
8  Monthly Report
November 2013
II Overall monetary survey in the euro area 
 
1 The money stock and its counterparts *
(a) Euro area 
  
€ billion
I Lending to non-banks (non-MFIs) II Net claims on III Monetary capital formation at monetary
in the euro area non-euro-area residents financial institutions (MFIs) in the euro area
Enterprises General
and households government Debt
Deposits securities
Liabil- with an Deposits with
Claims ities to agreed at agreed maturities
on non- non-euro- maturity notice of of over Capital
of which of which euro-area area of over over 2 years and
Period Total Total Total Total residents residents Total 2 years 3 months (net)  2 Securities Securities reserves 3 
2012          Feb 15.8 − 15.8 4.3 31.6 47.8 20.4 18.4 − 1.9 − 10.6 − 3.4 − 1.2 − 7.2 1.2
         Mar 36.6 2.8 1.2 33.8 36.5 − 26.2 33.5 59.7 − 35.1 − 26.4 − 0.6 − 18.9 10.7
         Apr 12.2 7.8 15.9 4.3 − 2.6 − 29.8 − 14.3 15.5 − 5.8 − 3.9 − 0.1 − 7.0 5.2
         May 23.3 − 7.4 − 10.2 30.7 29.0 14.1 27.6 13.5 − 41.8 − 32.5 − 0.9 − 23.2 14.8
         June 8.4 − 35.3 − 59.6 43.6 18.3 20.6 − 82.1 − 102.6 11.0 − 12.4 − 1.0 − 13.0 37.4
         July − 33.9 − 17.7 − 42.4 − 16.2 − 15.4 9.7 6.5 − 3.2 − 33.3 − 53.4 − 1.1 6.5 14.6
         Aug − 77.5 − 60.6 − 15.2 − 16.9 − 7.6 21.8 − 24.0 − 45.8 3.3 2.9 − 1.3 − 1.0 2.7         Sep 65.4 32.4 − 3.6 33.0 30.7 − 6.7 − 41.2 − 34.5 − 0.4 − 7.6 − 1.4 − 3.7 12.3
         Oct − 4.7 − 20.5 − 6.1 15.8 1.1 20.4 7.3 − 13.1 − 25.0 − 12.6 − 0.7 − 12.7 0.9         Nov 13.9 − 3.7 − 0.5 17.7 27.2 64.5 − 12.4 − 76.9 − 2.5 − 4.6 − 0.7 − 1.4 4.2
         Dec − 70.1 − 4.7 66.7 − 65.4 − 50.6 32.4 − 91.9 − 124.3 16.4 − 4.2 − 1.8 − 19.3 41.7
2013          Jan 48.0 17.4 − 2.4 30.6 26.5 32.2 60.1 27.9 − 6.1 − 4.3 − 1.0 − 7.1 6.3
         Feb − 5.0 − 9.7 − 3.4 4.6 43.8 − 10.4 − 10.5 − 0.1 − 4.6 − 8.4 − 2.0 − 1.0 6.9
         Mar 66.6 31.2 24.1 35.4 29.8 12.2 − 41.3 − 53.4 − 5.8 16.7 − 1.5 − 32.3 11.4
         Apr 10.5 9.3 33.9 1.2 − 8.8 − 6.0 58.8 64.8 − 25.3 − 7.6 − 1.9 − 15.8 0.0
         May 10.7 − 15.7 0.5 26.4 52.0 77.8 − 0.0 − 77.8 − 5.2 4.6 − 2.1 − 19.2 11.5
         June 0.1 − 28.3 − 25.1 28.4 36.4 34.8 − 57.8 − 92.6 14.2 − 0.8 − 1.3 − 22.4 38.6
         July − 123.5 − 86.0 − 12.4 − 37.5 − 39.8 − 3.4 − 30.0 − 26.6 − 34.9 − 4.4 − 1.0 − 27.0 − 2.5         Aug − 55.6 − 36.5 − 6.1 − 19.1 − 4.1 33.0 − 16.2 − 49.2 − 13.3 − 6.6 − 0.2 − 14.2 7.7         Sep 1.8 15.8 − 2.0 − 14.0 − 14.2 14.3 − 34.3 − 48.6 − 11.6 − 6.4 − 2.1 − 1.5 − 1.6
  
  
(b) German contribution
 
I Lending to non-banks (non-MFIs) II Net claims on III Monetary capital formation at monetary
in the euro area non-euro-area residents financial institutions (MFIs) in the euro area
Enterprises General
and households government Debt
Deposits securities
Liabil- with an Deposits with
Claims ities to agreed at agreed maturities
on non- non-euro- maturity notice of of over Capital
of which of which euro-area area of over over 2 years and
Period Total Total Total Total residents residents Total 2 years 3 months (net)  2 Securities Securities reserves 3 
2012          Feb − 3.1 − 2.8 − 5.8 − 0.3 1.9 − 30.3 − 10.6 19.7 9.1 − 2.8 − 1.2 8.2 4.9         Mar 2.1 1.2 8.4 0.9 3.2 − 51.5 5.1 56.6 − 6.8 − 4.9 − 0.8 − 6.2 5.1
         Apr 18.0 16.0 12.9 2.0 − 3.2 − 12.4 − 0.5 11.9 1.4 − 1.4 − 0.3 2.3 0.8
         May − 33.7 − 25.5 − 20.6 − 8.2 − 2.7 − 21.2 − 5.0 16.2 − 12.6 − 3.0 − 0.8 − 6.0 − 2.7         June 10.1 − 7.5 − 9.2 17.6 7.0 − 27.1 − 28.9 − 1.8 1.7 − 3.0 − 1.0 − 1.3 7.0
         July 29.8 34.2 − 0.6 − 4.5 − 0.4 − 16.1 1.5 17.6 − 5.5 − 4.9 − 0.8 − 2.2 2.5
         Aug − 4.1 0.6 1.6 − 4.7 2.1 − 7.0 13.2 20.2 − 5.0 − 1.9 − 1.4 − 2.4 0.7         Sep 7.3 2.3 5.0 5.1 6.1 52.6 7.0 − 45.7 − 5.7 − 3.2 − 1.6 − 1.4 0.5
         Oct 18.7 8.2 − 5.0 10.5 3.2 10.1 0.9 − 9.2 − 14.0 − 8.9 − 0.7 − 3.8 − 0.6
         Nov − 5.2 − 4.1 0.8 − 1.2 5.0 23.7 − 7.2 − 30.9 − 12.5 − 5.4 − 1.3 − 5.4 − 0.4         Dec − 50.5 − 32.0 − 2.8 − 18.5 − 7.0 53.7 − 20.2 − 73.9 − 12.5 − 1.0 − 1.6 − 10.6 0.8
2013          Jan 34.9 34.0 10.6 0.9 − 1.0 − 13.7 − 2.1 11.6 − 7.9 − 2.0 − 1.8 − 4.9 0.8
         Feb − 8.7 − 2.0 − 3.5 − 6.7 − 1.8 4.4 − 3.2 − 7.6 − 2.8 − 4.4 − 1.5 1.4 1.8
         Mar − 2.4 0.7 7.9 − 3.0 − 0.7 16.7 − 3.4 − 20.1 − 7.2 − 0.9 − 0.8 − 10.8 5.3
         Apr 26.3 16.3 17.2 10.0 − 0.7 5.0 6.1 1.2 − 5.2 − 4.4 − 1.5 − 2.6 3.3
         May − 22.9 − 11.7 − 14.2 − 11.2 − 0.5 21.9 − 2.0 − 23.9 − 11.0 − 0.9 − 2.0 − 11.5 3.4
         June 0.2 3.6 − 6.1 − 3.4 − 0.4 − 0.3 − 8.3 − 8.0 − 2.4 − 1.0 − 0.9 − 8.7 8.2
         July − 3.0 − 12.8 0.9 9.8 4.8 − 3.8 − 9.7 − 5.9 − 14.0 − 4.9 − 1.0 − 7.6 − 0.5         Aug − 13.5 − 9.5 − 2.0 − 4.1 1.9 1.1 − 13.5 − 14.6 − 10.1 − 4.3 − 0.9 − 5.1 0.2         Sep 0.9 7.0 1.3 − 6.1 − 5.1 22.7 − 17.0 − 39.7 − 1.1 − 3.9 − 0.8 3.4 0.2
*The data in this table are based on the consolidated balance sheet of monetary MFIs’ portfolios. 3After deduction of inter-MFI participations. 4Including the counter-
financial institutions (MFIs) (Table II.2); statistical breaks have been eliminated from parts of monetary liabilities of central governments. 5Including the monetary
the flow figures (see also the “Notes on the figures“ in the “Explanatory notes“ in the liabilities of central governments (Post Office, Treasury). 6In Germany, only savings
Statistical Supplement to the Monthly Report 1, p 30
  ).1Source: ECB. 2Excluding deposits. 7Paper held by residents outside the euro area has been eliminated.

Deutsche Bundesbank
9  Monthly Report
November 2013
II Overall monetary survey in the euro area
 
 
 
(a) Euro area 
 
V Other factors VI Money stock M3 (balance I plus II less III less IV less V)
Money stock M2 Debt secur-
of which ities with
Intra- Money stock M1 maturities
Eurosystem Deposits of up to
liability/ with an Deposits Money 2 years
IV De- claim agreed at agreed market (incl money
posits of related to Currency maturity notice of Repo fund market    
banknote in circu- Overnight of up to up to 3 transac- shares paper)    central  gov-
ernments Total 4 issue Total Total Total lation deposits 5 2 years 5 tions (net) 2,7  Period (net) 2,7,8 months  5,6 
23.2 − 1.4 − 25.1 11.3 − 31.4 − 0.4 − 31.0 35.0 7.7 13.8 2.0 13.6 2012          Feb 
− 13.8 − 42.2 − 101.4 69.1 49.3 2.4 46.9 9.8 10.0 − 14.5 10.6 25.9          Mar 
− 36.3 21.8 − 2.6 − 1.7 3.7 2.7 1.0 − 9.9 4.5 3.4 9.7 − 6.6          Apr 
26.2 27.5 − 25.5 19.8 39.1 8.7 30.4 − 25.9 6.6 27.3 12.6 − 6.4          May
17.2 − 35.3 − 36.0 59.0 74.3 11.4 62.9 − 21.9 6.6 − 0.0 − 23.3 6.7          June
− 32.6 15.8 − 26.0 20.3 22.7 3.8 19.0 − 8.0 5.6 4.6 − 1.3 2.0          July
− 39.6 − 8.2 − − 11.3 − 3.6 1.8 − 1.3 3.1 − 13.7 8.3 − 13.5 4.3 − 10.4          Aug 
33.5 7.7 − 17.8 43.1 47.2 − 3.5 50.7 − 6.3 2.2 14.2 − 20.7 − 4.2          Sep 
− 22.8 6.6 − 57.0 63.6 34.0 − 2.4 36.4 18.3 11.3 − 20.7 5.3 − 5.1          Oct 
40.5 33.0 − 7.3 29.6 35.4 − 0.2 35.6 − 13.9 8.1 7.6 − 1.2 − 19.6          Nov 
− 60.6 − 52.4 − 58.9 98.2 85.3 12.7 72.5 − 12.3 25.2 − 42.3 − 26.9 − 6.1          Dec 
33.9 76.9 − − 24.5 − 35.2 − 53.8 − 19.8 − 34.0 − 5.4 24.1 11.8 7.2 − 6.6 2013          Jan 
5.6 − 17.9 − 1.5 10.1 5.2 − 1.2 6.4 − 3.3 8.2 28.0 6.3 − 13.3          Feb 
10.7 28.3 − 45.5 58.8 48.1 11.7 36.3 5.1 5.6 24.2 − 5.9 − 5.4          Mar 
− 50.6 22.2 − 58.2 54.4 74.2 7.2 67.0 − 26.5 6.7 − 11.4 − 0.5 1.4          Apr 
62.6 29.5 − 1.7 11.9 26.2 4.9 21.3 − 17.3 3.0 10.9 − 3.4 − 7.3          May
30.3 − 2.4 − − 7.2 26.3 45.6 6.3 39.3 − 19.0 − 0.2 22.9 − 19.6 − 3.6          June
− 26.1 − 60.3 − − 5.5 − 6.9 − 8.4 6.9 − 15.3 − 1.9 3.4 − 47.5 − 0.8 − 6.2          July
− 55.7 16.1 − 30.3 23.6 22.1 1.4 20.7 − 0.1 1.6 4.9 9.3 2.5          Aug 
10.0 43.8 − − 26.1 − 1.4 20.5 − 0.2 20.7 − 16.2 − 5.6 − 7.8 − 25.9 5.1          Sep 
 
 
 (b) German contribution 
 
V Other factors VI Money stock M3 (balance I plus II less III less IV less V)  10 
of which Components of the money stock
Intra- Debt securities
Eurosystem Deposits with
liability/ with an Deposits Money maturities
IV De- claim agreed at agreed market of up to 2 yearsposits of related to Currency maturity notice of Repo fund (incl money    
banknote in circu- Overnight of up to up to 3 transac-
shares market    central  gov-
ernments Total issue 9,11 lation Total deposits 2 years months  6 tions (net) 7,8 paper)(net) 7  Period
3.5 − 67.7 1.2 − 0.1 21.7 9.8 − 3.6 3.9 10.0 − 0.2 1.8 2012          Feb 
− 10.7 − 34.6 3.2 − 0.2 2.7 8.7 − 0.8 0.4 − 3.6 − 0.2 − 1.9          Mar 
1.9 − 15.6 2.1 1.0 17.9 10.4 3.1 − 1.2 7.2 0.0 − 1.7          Apr 
− 0.0 − 62.6 1.7 2.1 20.3 17.2 2.9 0.1 5.3 0.0 − 5.1          May
1.7 − 36.9 1.7 2.8 16.5 18.0 6.6 0.1 − 9.4 0.2 1.0          June
− 5.2 − 5.9 3.5 1.7 30.3 20.4 − 0.8 0.8 7.6 0.0 2.3          July
− 1.1 − 15.8 3.9 − 0.9 10.8 12.4 − 2.1 0.9 1.7 − 0.4 − 1.6          Aug 
1.0 62.5 3.4 − 1.2 2.1 23.9 − 13.5 0.3 − 10.1 − 0.2 1.7          Sep 
− 2.1 − 11.2 2.8 − 0.3 56.1 55.8 − 11.1 0.2 9.9 0.4 1.1          Oct 
1.3 12.0 2.6 − 0.1 17.5 25.9 − 9.0 0.5 − 0.8 − 0.0 1.1          Nov 
− 2.6 71.8 3.0 2.0 − 53.4 − 7.0 − 24.2 6.3 − 26.5 0.2 − 2.2          Dec 
0.9 40.4 − 0.9 − 3.6 − 12.1 − 1.9 − 10.2 0.9 2.7 0.1 − 3.6 2013          Jan 
− 2.9 − 12.4 2.0 − 0.6 13.8 2.5 − 8.3 1.4 16.6 0.3 1.5          Feb 
− 1.7 35.1 2.4 2.5 − 11.8 − 10.3 3.6 − 1.4 − 2.7 0.1 − 1.1          Mar 
− 2.7 6.2 0.3 2.5 33.1 30.2 − 1.3 − 0.6 1.9 0.6 2.2          Apr 
5.0 1.0 2.9 0.7 4.0 5.4 0.1 0.4 − 0.9 − 0.0 − 0.9          May
1.1 − 4.6 1.3 1.7 5.7 − 0.6 − 5.7 − 0.2 15.4 − 0.5 − 2.7          June
− 1.8 23.1 3.3 1.4 − 14.1 9.1 − 3.0 − 0.6 − 23.5 − 0.0 3.9          July
− 8.9 3.4 3.4 − 0.4 3.2 13.0 2.4 0.2 − 9.4 0.0 − 3.0          Aug 
1.1 19.3 3.2 0.2 4.4 13.0 − 6.6 − 0.3 0.7 − 0.5 − 1.9          Sep 
8Less German MFIs’ holdings of paper issued by euro-area MFIs. 9Including money stocks M1, M2 or M3. 11The difference between the volume of euro
national banknotes still in circulation. 10The German contributions to the Euro- banknotes actually issued by the Bundesbank and the amount disclosed in
system’s monetary aggregates should on no account be interpreted as national accordance with the accounting regime chosen by the Eurosystem (see also footnotemonetary aggregates and are therefore not comparable with the erstwhile German 2 on banknote circulation in Table III.2). 

Deutsche Bundesbank
10  Monthly Report
November 2013
II Overall monetary survey in the euro area
 
2 Consolidated balance sheet of monetary financial institutions (MFIs) *
 
 
 
Assets
Lending to non-banks (non-MFIs) in the euro area
Enterprises and households General government
Claims
Total Shares and on non-
End of assets or Debt other Debt euro-area Other
year/month liabilities Total Total Loans securities  2 equities Total Loans securities 3 residents assets
 Euro area (€ billion) 1
 
2011          Aug 26,379.1 16,557.2 13,487.0 11,240.5 1,480.7 765.7 3,070.2 1,161.9 1,908.3 5,117.2 4,704.7
         Sep 26,973.2 16,608.4 13,521.0 11,297.5 1,470.6 752.8 3,087.4 1,163.4 1,924.0 5,190.1 5,174.7
         Oct 26,619.2 16,622.0 13,550.1 11,268.0 1,530.0 752.1 3,071.9 1,162.6 1,909.3 5,028.0 4,969.2
         Nov 26,619.5 16,626.4 13,541.3 11,253.0 1,533.8 754.5 3,085.2 1,162.1 1,923.0 5,063.3 4,929.9
         Dec 26,718.7 16,562.9 13,432.5 11,164.1 1,527.4 741.0 3,130.4 1,177.6 1,952.8 5,032.7 5,123.1
2012          Jan 26,895.4 16,673.6 13,478.2 11,196.6 1,532.2 749.3 3,195.5 1,174.8 2,020.6 5,046.6 5,175.2
         Feb 26,832.1 16,686.8 13,451.7 11,165.7 1,539.0 747.0 3,235.1 1,158.9 2,076.2 5,015.7 5,129.6
         Mar 26,693.7 16,707.5 13,447.9 11,163.9 1,526.6 757.3 3,259.7 1,155.6 2,104.0 5,034.1 4,952.1
         Apr 26,862.1 16,703.8 13,447.1 11,157.7 1,520.8 768.6 3,256.7 1,159.6 2,097.0 5,056.0 5,102.3
         May 27,825.3 16,721.1 13,448.4 11,175.7 1,520.6 752.1 3,272.7 1,161.3 2,111.3 5,205.5 5,898.6
         June 27,211.8 16,728.9 13,386.4 11,190.8 1,463.1 732.5 3,342.5 1,187.0 2,155.5 5,089.7 5,393.1
         July 27,534.0 16,699.7 13,371.0 11,218.1 1,416.1 736.8 3,328.7 1,186.4 2,142.3 5,183.4 5,651.0
         Aug 27,305.0 16,627.2 13,304.9 11,165.0 1,400.8 739.1 3,322.3 1,177.0 2,145.3 5,104.1 5,573.7
         Sep 27,159.9 16,695.6 13,325.3 11,188.4 1,386.6 750.3 3,370.3 1,180.1 2,190.2 5,045.6 5,418.6
         Oct 26,627.4 16,695.4 13,300.3 11,168.3 1,384.2 747.8 3,395.1 1,194.7 2,200.4 5,013.0 4,918.9
         Nov 26,695.0 16,718.2 13,292.7 11,161.0 1,370.3 761.5 3,425.5 1,185.1 2,240.3 4,996.6 4,980.2
         Dec 26,247.0 16,609.9 13,244.3 11,043.6 1,433.7 767.0 3,365.6 1,170.3 2,195.3 4,843.9 4,793.2
2013          Jan 26,387.4 16,638.7 13,241.5 11,045.0 1,415.9 780.7 3,397.2 1,174.2 2,223.0 4,797.9 4,950.8
         Feb 26,501.4 16,626.6 13,229.5 11,034.9 1,418.7 775.8 3,397.1 1,135.6 2,261.6 4,824.4 5,050.4
         Mar 26,566.0 16,698.1 13,262.2 11,044.2 1,433.3 784.7 3,435.8 1,141.2 2,294.7 4,843.3 5,024.6
         Apr 26,703.4 16,726.8 13,266.6 11,010.2 1,440.9 815.4 3,460.2 1,151.1 2,309.2 4,817.7 5,158.9
         May 26,368.4 16,727.1 13,248.2 10,991.2 1,446.8 810.2 3,478.9 1,125.4 2,353.5 4,797.3 4,844.0
         June 25,927.6 16,695.8 13,204.9 10,979.9 1,432.5 792.5 3,490.9 1,116.9 2,374.0 4,666.7 4,565.0
         July 25,678.3 16,576.1 13,116.2 10,898.8 1,431.7 785.6 3,459.9 1,120.3 2,339.6 4,636.1 4,466.2
         Aug 25,460.5 16,420.1 12,980.1 10,770.9 1,427.7 781.5 3,439.9 1,105.3 2,334.6 4,661.0 4,379.4
         Sep 25,407.4 16,418.8 12,991.7 10,778.4 1,420.3 793.0 3,427.1 1,105.6 2,321.5 4,582.1 4,406.6
 German contribution (€ billion) 
2011          Aug 6,140.9 3,729.5 2,988.1 2,565.9 183.4 238.8 741.4 400.7 340.8 1,190.0 1,221.3
         Sep 6,294.6 3,744.9 3,001.5 2,584.8 181.4 235.4 743.4 400.3 343.1 1,193.9 1,355.7
         Oct 6,167.9 3,767.6 3,022.8 2,609.4 179.0 234.4 744.8 396.1 348.7 1,157.5 1,242.8
         Nov 6,189.0 3,771.3 3,030.2 2,615.1 181.7 233.3 741.1 393.6 347.5 1,179.7 1,238.0
         Dec 6,229.9 3,720.7 2,986.3 2,576.3 183.2 226.8 734.4 396.9 337.5 1,180.4 1,328.9
2012          Jan 6,292.8 3,751.9 3,007.6 2,594.7 182.4 230.4 744.4 400.3 344.0 1,212.0 1,328.9
         Feb 6,239.0 3,746.7 3,001.7 2,595.0 179.9 226.8 745.0 398.1 346.9 1,193.1 1,299.2
         Mar 6,185.1 3,751.3 3,002.6 2,587.7 182.1 232.9 748.7 395.8 352.9 1,191.6 1,242.1
         Apr 6,250.5 3,775.2 3,022.0 2,594.1 179.8 248.0 753.3 401.1 352.2 1,198.9 1,276.4
         May 6,499.3 3,745.2 3,001.6 2,594.7 178.2 228.7 743.5 395.8 347.7 1,221.4 1,532.7
         June 6,313.4 3,752.8 2,970.9 2,592.7 156.5 221.7 781.8 406.4 375.4 1,183.7 1,377.0
         July 6,448.1 3,784.2 3,006.9 2,629.3 154.0 223.6 777.3 402.5 374.8 1,205.4 1,458.5
         Aug 6,408.2 3,779.1 3,005.1 2,625.9 153.0 226.2 774.0 395.7 378.2 1,206.3 1,422.8
         Sep 6,361.1 3,785.2 3,004.1 2,620.0 153.3 230.8 781.1 395.6 385.5 1,209.7 1,366.2
         Oct 6,314.2 3,803.4 3,010.6 2,631.5 147.6 231.5 792.8 402.8 390.0 1,201.4 1,309.5
         Nov 6,280.7 3,798.0 3,005.5 2,625.8 148.3 231.4 792.5 396.6 395.9 1,194.7 1,288.1
         Dec 6,158.5 3,745.1 2,970.5 2,593.8 147.9 228.9 774.6 385.1 389.5 1,159.8 1,253.7
2013          Jan 6,067.4 3,774.6 2,998.7 2,611.3 146.5 240.9 775.9 386.9 389.0 1,140.9 1,151.9
         Feb 6,062.6 3,765.7 2,998.6 2,614.6 148.2 235.8 767.1 382.0 385.1 1,143.4 1,153.5
         Mar 6,075.5 3,766.8 3,000.8 2,608.8 150.0 242.0 765.9 379.8 386.2 1,154.8 1,154.0
         Apr 6,087.6 3,792.2 3,014.9 2,605.5 148.6 260.7 777.3 390.5 386.9 1,139.0 1,156.4
         May 5,962.4 3,768.8 3,003.0 2,607.6 146.3 249.0 765.9 379.8 386.1 1,132.8 1,060.8
         June 5,846.2 3,766.9 3,005.4 2,616.6 148.4 240.3 761.6 376.7 384.9 1,103.7 975.6
         July 5,814.2 3,762.3 2,990.9 2,601.1 147.7 242.1 771.4 381.7 389.8 1,097.2 954.7
         Aug 5,642.3 3,656.3 2,889.1 2,501.7 145.7 241.7 767.2 375.7 391.5 1,100.0 886.0
         Sep 5,639.4 3,652.7 2,891.5 2,502.6 144.1 244.8 761.2 374.6 386.6 1,069.9 916.8
*Monetary financial institutions (MFIs) comprise banks (including building and loan enterprises. 3Including Treasury bills and other money market paper issued by
associations), money market funds, and the European Central Bank and national general government. 4Euro currency in circulation (see also footnote 8 on p 12  )
central banks (the Eurosystem). 1Source: ECB. 2Including money market paper of Excluding MFIs‘ cash in hand (in euro). The German contribution includes the volume

Deutsche Bundesbank
11  Monthly Report
November 2013
II Overall monetary survey in the euro area
 
   
 
Liabilities
Deposits of non-banks (non-MFIs) in the euro area
Enterprises and households
With agreed At agreed
maturities of notice of 6 
over
Currency 1 year and
in of which up to up to over up to over  End of
Total in euro 5 Total Overnight 1 year 2 years 2 years 3 months 3 months year/month circulation 4 
Euro area (€ billion) 1
 
823.4 10,482.9 9,931.6 9,971.1 3,702.8 1,448.4 313.0 2,478.6 1,916.6 111.9 2011          Aug 
831.2 10,534.1 9,962.8 10,018.6 3,724.1 1,463.7 312.8 2,495.3 1,911.6 111.3          Sep 
837.5 10,539.9 9,973.9 10,028.0 3,722.8 1,458.4 308.5 2,517.6 1,909.4 111.5          Oct 
841.4 10,536.4 9,961.3 10,007.8 3,722.8 1,437.6 312.5 2,509.9 1,915.2 109.8          Nov 857.5 10,626.2 10,052.5 10,119.6 3,800.1 1,446.8 310.5 2,524.5 1,928.2 109.4          Dec 
843.0 10,678.5 10,051.3 10,103.0 3,765.6 1,445.1 315.4 2,523.6 1,944.9 108.5 2012          Jan 
842.5 10,704.6 10,055.2 10,101.9 3,735.2 1,464.1 325.6 2,517.3 1,951.1 108.5          Feb 844.9 10,731.4 10,103.4 10,128.0 3,775.3 1,469.1 323.2 2,491.4 1,960.9 108.1          Mar 
847.6 10,689.9 10,094.3 10,126.9 3,783.4 1,468.8 312.1 2,489.2 1,965.2 108.2          Apr 
856.3 10,707.2 10,079.2 10,101.9 3,811.1 1,440.0 312.0 2,459.7 1,971.8 107.4          May867.7 10,754.9 10,113.1 10,103.7 3,870.0 1,411.5 304.0 2,433.6 1,978.1 106.6          June
871.5 10,686.8 10,067.9 10,065.0 3,886.5 1,405.2 302.9 2,381.5 1,983.4 105.5          July
870.2 10,643.2 10,063.3 10,071.2 3,896.2 1,391.5 301.5 2,384.1 1,993.5 104.4          Aug 866.7 10,716.3 10,109.4 10,110.9 3,940.4 1,390.3 300.8 2,381.1 1,995.3 103.1          Sep 
864.3 10,745.5 10,155.5 10,153.9 3,965.3 1,405.5 306.6 2,368.1 2,005.9 102.5          Oct 
864.1 10,807.7 10,183.5 10,170.3 3,994.3 1,386.1 309.5 2,365.1 2,013.4 101.9          Nov 876.8 10,813.6 10,249.9 10,272.8 4,064.4 1,392.7 312.8 2,359.7 2,042.8 100.5          Dec 
857.0 10,825.7 10,227.8 10,256.8 4,039.2 1,380.3 319.7 2,354.8 2,064.1 98.6 2013          Jan 
855.8 10,840.8 10,224.2 10,265.9 4,051.1 1,367.3 330.8 2,347.7 2,072.3 96.7          Feb 
867.5 10,920.7 10,292.0 10,330.2 4,094.4 1,357.1 339.8 2,365.2 2,078.3 95.3          Mar 
874.7 10,900.4 10,329.1 10,359.1 4,152.0 1,320.3 350.5 2,358.6 2,084.1 93.5          Apr 
879.6 10,972.5 10,336.6 10,356.2 4,165.1 1,285.2 363.8 2,363.4 2,087.1 91.5          May
885.9 11,017.0 10,344.2 10,361.8 4,196.7 1,256.2 371.2 2,360.0 2,087.3 90.4          June
892.8 10,964.5 10,326.0 10,347.0 4,186.8 1,243.7 382.9 2,354.0 2,090.1 89.4          July
894.2 10,925.8 10,337.7 10,364.2 4,210.3 1,241.8 385.2 2,346.3 2,091.3 89.3          Aug 
894.0 10,923.6 10,322.4 10,347.5 4,228.3 1,216.2 391.3 2,338.8 2,085.7 87.2          Sep 
 German contribution (€ billion) 
204.5 2,989.1 2,916.1 2,816.9 1,090.2 260.9 41.9 808.3 511.0 104.4 2011          Aug 
205.8 3,008.4 2,930.1 2,832.6 1,099.5 271.9 42.5 804.8 510.1 103.9          Sep 
207.6 3,009.6 2,934.1 2,844.1 1,109.9 274.3 43.5 802.7 509.9 103.8          Oct 
209.1 3,030.2 2,954.6 2,858.9 1,128.2 272.4 44.5 801.4 510.4 102.0          Nov 
212.6 3,038.9 2,962.5 2,867.9 1,130.2 276.1 44.9 799.8 515.8 101.2          Dec 
209.6 3,040.0 2,961.3 2,864.8 1,130.9 274.7 44.8 796.2 518.1 100.3 2012          Jan 
209.4 3,049.0 2,965.8 2,864.0 1,138.8 265.6 45.4 793.2 521.0 100.0          Feb 
209.3 3,041.1 2,968.3 2,857.2 1,143.7 259.8 44.8 788.4 521.4 99.2          Mar 
210.3 3,054.1 2,981.2 2,867.5 1,156.8 260.2 44.1 787.2 520.2 98.9          Apr 
212.3 3,072.2 2,998.5 2,874.4 1,170.8 257.5 43.8 784.0 520.2 98.1          May
215.2 3,094.3 3,019.5 2,863.0 1,182.2 252.1 43.4 768.1 520.1 97.1          June
216.9 3,104.4 3,034.0 2,878.4 1,205.8 249.6 43.0 763.1 520.7 96.2          July
215.9 3,111.3 3,040.9 2,888.5 1,220.9 247.7 42.4 761.2 521.5 94.8          Aug 
214.7 3,117.3 3,045.7 2,891.7 1,237.8 239.2 41.8 757.8 521.9 93.3          Sep 
214.4 3,150.2 3,077.3 2,926.3 1,291.6 229.9 41.2 749.0 522.0 92.5          Oct 
214.2 3,162.1 3,088.7 2,929.4 1,311.1 220.5 40.6 743.5 522.4 91.2          Nov 
216.3 3,131.3 3,060.2 2,930.4 1,307.2 222.8 40.0 742.2 528.6 89.6          Dec 
212.7 3,116.1 3,045.2 2,928.9 1,315.4 216.1 39.6 740.4 529.6 87.8 2013          Jan 
212.1 3,103.6 3,034.1 2,921.3 1,320.1 209.7 38.4 736.0 530.9 86.2          Feb 
214.7 3,093.1 3,026.7 2,905.9 1,311.8 207.3 37.1 734.8 529.5 85.4          Mar 
217.1 3,112.2 3,047.8 2,928.5 1,340.3 208.8 36.1 730.7 528.9 83.8          Apr 
217.9 3,120.7 3,051.1 2,925.7 1,343.8 205.7 35.4 730.0 529.0 81.8          May
219.6 3,113.0 3,041.2 2,911.2 1,340.2 198.5 34.3 728.4 528.8 81.0          June
221.0 3,110.3 3,040.5 2,916.4 1,353.3 198.9 33.3 722.9 528.2 79.9          July
220.7 3,111.9 3,051.4 2,924.9 1,365.3 200.3 32.8 719.1 528.4 79.0          Aug 
220.9 3,113.9 3,050.1 2,925.5 1,378.3 193.4 32.5 715.0 528.1 78.2          Sep 
of euro banknotes put into circulation by the Bundesbank in accordance with the Bundesbank can be calculated by adding to this total the item “Intra-Eurosystem
accounting regime chosen by the Eurosystem (see also footnote 2 on banknote liability/claim related to banknote issue“ (see “Other liability items“). 5Excluding
circulation in Table III.2). The volume of currency actually put into circulation by the central governments’ deposits. 6 In Germany, only savings deposits. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
12  Monthly Report
November 2013
II Overall monetary survey in the euro area
 
2 Consolidated balance sheet of monetary financial institutions (MFIs) (cont’d) *
 
 
 
Liabilities (cont’d)
Deposits of non-banks (non-MFIs) in the euro area (cont’d)  
 
General government Repo transactions Debt securities
with non-banks
Other general government in the euro area
With agreed At agreed
maturities of notice of 2 
Money
over of which market of which
Central 1 year and Enterprises fund denom-
End of govern- up to up to over up to over and shares inated
year/month ments Total Overnight 1 year 2 years 2 years 3 months 3 months Total households (net)  3 Total in euro
 Euro area (€ billion) 1
 
2011          Aug 256.6 255.2 125.1 82.1 4.6 29.3 7.3 6.8 494.8 492.7 560.6 2,995.9 2,304.4
         Sep 261.5 254.0 122.6 83.8 4.7 29.2 7.1 6.6 517.7 515.1 549.2 3,014.9 2,314.2
         Oct 261.9 249.9 125.9 76.5 4.8 29.3 7.0 6.4 495.1 492.4 540.8 2,979.5 2,301.8
         Nov 266.1 262.5 135.1 79.8 4.9 29.3 7.2 6.2 467.0 464.2 547.0 2,999.0 2,312.1
         Dec 259.3 247.4 117.9 81.6 5.2 29.5 7.4 5.9 397.3 394.6 520.4 3,006.1 2,296.9
2012          Jan 319.2 256.4 124.7 81.8 5.3 29.7 7.5 7.4 414.5 411.7 510.6 2,989.7 2,298.4
         Feb 342.2 260.5 122.3 87.9 5.5 29.8 8.0 7.1 428.1 425.7 500.9 2,982.0 2,303.7
         Mar 328.5 275.0 129.4 94.8 5.7 29.8 8.3 6.9 413.6 410.9 511.4 2,988.0 2,312.7
         Apr 289.9 273.2 123.1 99.4 5.6 29.6 8.7 6.8 419.8 417.3 521.0 2,981.4 2,289.3
         May 316.1 289.1 131.3 106.4 5.9 30.0 9.0 6.6 428.4 422.5 533.6 2,983.8 2,272.0
         June 333.3 317.9 134.8 117.9 6.6 42.8 9.3 6.5 428.9 425.1 510.1 2,975.4 2,275.4
         July 300.7 321.1 136.0 119.9 6.2 43.0 9.5 6.4 433.9 428.0 508.8 2,997.1 2,276.0
         Aug 261.3 310.8 124.6 120.9 6.3 42.9 9.9 6.3 418.0 412.8 513.2 2,966.0 2,265.1
         Sep 294.5 310.8 127.4 117.8 6.2 43.0 10.3 6.2 427.9 423.9 492.5 2,938.6 2,251.8
         Oct 271.7 319.8 140.0 113.7 6.0 43.1 11.1 6.0 407.1 403.5 497.3 2,914.6 2,226.3
         Nov 312.3 325.1 143.7 114.0 6.1 43.5 11.9 5.9 414.8 411.0 495.5 2,889.6 2,206.8
         Dec 252.1 288.7 134.9 86.7 6.0 43.9 11.6 5.6 372.2 368.2 467.9 2,853.6 2,183.6
2013          Jan 286.0 282.9 129.2 83.5 6.0 43.4 14.4 6.4 383.6 379.8 459.7 2,808.1 2,172.7
         Feb 291.6 283.3 129.3 83.6 6.0 43.5 14.6 6.3 411.9 406.6 465.9 2,807.4 2,152.0
         Mar 302.3 288.2 126.0 91.0 6.6 44.0 14.4 6.2 436.4 430.3 459.6 2,776.0 2,122.5
         Apr 251.7 289.7 130.1 87.7 6.9 43.7 15.1 6.1 424.7 417.3 459.1 2,747.8 2,102.5
         May 314.3 302.1 137.1 91.8 7.3 44.6 15.3 6.0 435.7 428.8 455.6 2,721.9 2,077.0
         June 344.6 310.6 142.5 95.5 7.6 44.3 14.9 5.9 458.4 452.0 435.9 2,694.9 2,062.1
         July 318.5 299.0 131.9 94.1 7.2 45.1 14.9 5.8 410.8 405.0 435.0 2,655.4 2,031.9
         Aug 262.8 298.8 130.7 95.2 7.4 44.5 15.1 5.8 333.3 327.0 444.4 2,645.6 2,013.6
         Sep 272.8 303.3 133.5 96.7 7.5 44.8 15.0 5.8 317.4 311.7 418.4 2,641.6 2,004.2
 German contribution (€ billion) 
2011          Aug 39.4 132.8 41.6 61.1 2.8 24.8 2.1 0.4 101.9 101.9 5.7 682.6 412.4
         Sep 42.9 132.9 41.1 61.8 3.0 24.7 2.0 0.4 107.0 107.0 5.8 687.1 406.9
         Oct 40.1 125.3 39.9 55.3 3.1 24.6 2.0 0.4 105.7 105.7 5.8 678.9 407.9
         Nov 39.9 131.4 43.3 57.9 3.2 24.6 2.0 0.4 111.1 111.1 4.9 689.5 411.6
         Dec 40.1 130.8 40.2 60.3 3.3 24.6 2.0 0.4 97.1 97.1 4.8 691.1 404.5
2012          Jan 44.1 131.1 40.0 60.6 3.4 24.8 1.8 0.4 86.7 86.2 4.5 663.1 384.3
         Feb 47.6 137.4 41.5 65.1 3.6 24.9 1.9 0.4 96.6 96.5 4.4 667.4 389.9
         Mar 36.9 147.0 45.4 70.6 3.7 24.9 1.9 0.4 93.1 93.0 4.1 660.3 379.3
         Apr 36.4 150.2 42.9 76.6 3.7 24.8 1.9 0.4 102.9 102.9 4.2 664.4 380.6
         May 36.4 161.4 47.2 82.8 3.9 25.1 2.0 0.4 108.3 105.0 4.2 666.3 373.8
         June 38.1 193.1 53.6 94.5 4.6 37.9 2.1 0.4 98.9 97.7 4.4 662.6 374.1
         July 32.9 193.1 50.9 97.0 4.3 38.1 2.3 0.5 106.6 103.2 4.4 668.8 371.1
         Aug 31.9 190.9 47.6 98.0 4.4 38.0 2.4 0.5 108.1 105.4 4.0 658.6 366.5
         Sep 32.6 193.0 53.8 93.9 4.4 38.1 2.4 0.5 98.0 97.3 3.8 654.1 367.7
         Oct 30.5 193.4 55.6 92.6 4.3 38.0 2.4 0.5 107.8 107.3 4.2 649.9 362.0
         Nov 31.9 200.9 62.0 93.4 4.5 38.1 2.5 0.5 107.0 106.6 4.1 644.4 357.6
         Dec 29.2 171.7 58.5 67.5 4.4 38.2 2.5 0.5 80.4 80.1 4.3 627.0 350.3
2013          Jan 30.1 157.0 47.6 64.2 4.4 37.7 2.5 0.6 83.1 82.6 4.4 610.1 345.1
         Feb 27.2 155.1 46.0 63.8 4.4 37.7 2.6 0.6 99.7 98.7 4.6 620.0 346.1
         Mar 25.4 161.9 44.8 70.8 4.9 38.1 2.6 0.6 97.0 95.8 4.7 610.5 338.4
         Apr 22.7 161.0 45.7 69.1 5.1 37.8 2.6 0.6 98.9 96.6 5.3 605.6 340.1
         May 27.8 167.2 47.2 72.6 5.4 38.5 2.8 0.6 98.0 96.7 5.3 593.2 330.7
         June 28.9 172.9 50.1 75.6 5.4 38.3 2.9 0.6 113.3 112.8 4.8 581.3 326.4
         July 27.1 166.7 45.7 73.5 5.0 39.0 2.9 0.6 89.8 89.7 4.8 574.5 322.1
         Aug 18.2 168.9 46.8 74.8 5.1 38.4 3.0 0.7 3.0 2.8 4.8 567.8 316.2
         Sep 19.2 169.2 46.4 75.4 5.1 38.6 3.0 0.7 3.7 3.2 4.3 566.4 316.5
*Monetary financial institutions (MFIs) comprise banks (including building and loan paper. 5Excluding liabilities arising from securities issued. 6After deduction of
associations), money market funds, and the European Central Bank and national inter-MFI participations. 7The German contributions to the Eurosystem’s monetary
central banks (the Eurosystem). 1Source: ECB. 2In Germany, only savings aggregates should on no account be interpreted as national monetary aggregates
deposits. 3Excluding holdings of MFIs; for the German contribution, excluding and are therefore not comparable with the erstwhile German money stocks M1, M2
German MFIs’ portfolios of securities issued by MFIs in the euro area. 4In Germany, or M3. 8including DM banknotes still in circulation (see also footnote 4 on
bank debt securities with maturities of up to one year are classed as money market p 10    )9For the German contribution, the difference between the volume of

Deutsche Bundesbank
13  Monthly Report
November 2013
II Overall monetary survey in the euro area
 
   
 
 Memo item
 Other liability items Monetary aggregates  7 
 (From 2002, German contribution
issued (net) 3 excludes currency in circulation)
With maturities of
of which Monetary
Intra- liabilities
Eurosystem- of centralliability/ govern-
over Liabilities Excess claim Monetary ments1 year and to non- Capital of related to capital (Post
up to up to over euro-area and inter-MFI banknote forma- Office, End of1 year 
4 2 years 2 years residents 5 reserves 6 liabilities Total 8 issue 9 M1 10 M2 11 M3 12 tion 13 year/month Treasury)  14 
Euro area (€ billion) 1
 
97.5 77.7 2,820.7 4,160.8 2,203.4 − 5.0 4,662.3 − 4,732.8 8,530.7 9,446.1 7,650.6 107.4 2011          Aug 
94.8 75.8 2,844.3 4,218.0 2,182.2 − 15.7 5,141.6 − 4,758.5 8,568.0 9,466.0 7,668.9 106.6          Sep 
95.5 75.3 2,808.6 4,125.5 2,185.0 − 34.5 4,950.4 − 4,765.5 8,555.9 9,436.9 7,658.4 105.2          Oct 
90.9 82.3 2,825.8 4,149.7 2,198.7 − 25.4 4,905.7 − 4,782.4 8,565.2 9,448.4 7,679.8 108.8          Nov 
122.9 83.7 2,799.5 4,089.5 2,219.1 − 17.9 5,020.5 − 4,866.6 8,671.2 9,535.4 7,687.9 116.0          Dec 
109.0 91.6 2,789.2 4,104.0 2,273.3 − 63.8 5,145.6 − 4,815.7 8,640.9 9,495.8 7,731.6 107.7 2012          Jan 
115.6 98.8 2,767.7 4,068.1 2,290.8 − 39.6 5,054.7 − 4,781.8 8,648.7 9,505.8 7,721.2 106.5          Feb 
135.2 103.5 2,749.3 4,139.1 2,271.1 − 58.0 4,852.1 − 4,831.8 8,718.7 9,606.2 7,656.7 107.0          Mar 
119.4 107.7 2,754.3 4,178.1 2,268.7 − 56.3 5,011.8 − 4,837.2 8,721.7 9,608.6 7,656.8 107.8          Apr 
114.2 107.3 2,762.3 4,285.5 2,276.0 − 54.5 5,809.0 − 4,883.1 8,752.8 9,646.5 7,642.0 109.1          May
128.7 102.1 2,744.6 4,158.3 2,312.3 − 56.5 5,260.6 − 4,958.3 8,810.9 9,683.8 7,646.4 111.0          June
136.3 96.2 2,764.6 4,201.6 2,353.7 − 56.4 5,537.2 − 4,982.8 8,834.7 9,713.1 7,654.7 113.5          July
122.9 96.4 2,746.7 4,115.4 2,361.9 − 40.9 5,458.0 − 4,979.1 8,827.4 9,688.9 7,646.3 113.0          Aug 
120.1 92.6 2,725.9 4,047.4 2,405.7 − 61.1 5,325.9 − 5,022.9 8,868.1 9,702.1 7,665.0 113.1          Sep 
113.8 93.5 2,707.2 4,020.6 2,394.2 − 73.4 4,857.2 − 5,056.5 8,930.4 9,757.2 7,621.2 112.1          Oct 
96.3 91.2 2,702.0 3,939.7 2,408.7 − 69.6 4,944.7 − 5,091.7 8,957.6 9,761.4 7,627.1 114.6          Nov 
87.6 93.8 2,672.2 3,789.6 2,395.9 − 52.0 4,729.4 − 5,171.7 9,048.7 9,812.3 7,577.7 120.0          Dec 
70.4 92.3 2,645.4 3,770.7 2,387.6 − 37.1 4,932.0 − 5,112.8 9,005.3 9,752.3 7,536.4 112.0 2013          Jan 
62.0 88.2 2,657.2 3,808.8 2,378.2 − 49.4 4,982.0 − 5,122.6 9,021.7 9,760.6 7,529.7 111.1          Feb 
59.5 84.1 2,632.4 3,794.7 2,414.4 − 58.8 4,955.5 − 5,174.5 9,086.0 9,810.3 7,557.5 110.9          Mar 
62.7 81.6 2,603.5 3,828.8 2,390.0 − 44.3 5,122.0 − 5,244.2 9,132.6 9,859.7 7,495.6 111.2          Apr 
63.2 74.4 2,584.3 3,751.2 2,377.7 − 50.7 4,824.9 − 5,270.0 9,144.2 9,861.9 7,467.5 111.9          May
64.9 68.4 2,561.6 3,648.4 2,336.6 − 55.5 4,506.0 − 5,314.5 9,170.8 9,854.7 7,398.7 113.0          June
62.8 65.6 2,527.1 3,595.3 2,368.0 − 53.0 4,409.7 − 5,304.5 9,161.0 9,847.4 7,389.3 116.5          July
66.7 63.2 2,515.7 3,568.9 2,392.1 − 54.0 4,310.2 − 5,327.6 9,187.2 9,879.5 7,393.7 115.9          Aug 
75.5 58.0 2,508.1 3,503.3 2,371.0 − 43.2 4,381.2 − 5,348.1 9,184.8 9,842.9 7,355.7 116.6          Sep 
 German contribution (€ billion) 
25.2 13.6 643.8 699.8 483.8 − 542.9 1,720.9 167.5 1,131.9 2,011.7 2,158.1 2,065.6 − 2011          Aug 
21.8 11.9 653.4 738.9 476.2 − 600.2 1,871.4 170.7 1,140.5 2,031.7 2,178.3 2,063.4 −          Sep 
18.8 11.2 648.9 746.8 478.0 − 608.3 1,751.4 170.7 1,149.9 2,037.9 2,179.4 2,058.5 −          Oct 
22.5 11.7 655.3 769.8 478.8 − 639.8 1,744.5 170.9 1,171.5 2,061.9 2,212.1 2,062.5 −          Nov 
22.8 9.7 658.6 696.1 473.6 − 607.5 1,835.9 170.5 1,170.4 2,072.8 2,207.2 2,058.1 −          Dec 
19.7 10.3 633.1 801.2 486.8 − 614.9 1,825.4 171.0 1,170.9 2,074.3 2,195.5 2,041.5 − 2012          Jan 
20.2 11.4 635.8 815.9 493.4 − 670.9 1,783.3 172.2 1,180.3 2,082.8 2,215.4 2,047.8 −          Feb 
19.9 9.8 630.5 873.9 492.0 − 710.2 1,730.8 175.5 1,189.1 2,091.3 2,218.3 2,035.5 −          Mar 
16.6 11.5 636.3 889.0 497.3 − 733.8 1,772.5 177.6 1,199.7 2,106.4 2,241.6 2,044.8 −          Apr 
13.4 9.9 643.0 919.2 495.5 − 796.5 2,029.9 179.3 1,218.0 2,128.2 2,264.1 2,046.1 −          May
13.8 10.5 638.3 913.8 501.1 − 829.7 1,868.1 181.0 1,235.7 2,152.5 2,280.1 2,042.9 −          June
15.5 11.2 642.1 937.5 512.6 − 840.9 1,954.6 184.5 1,256.7 2,173.6 2,311.3 2,052.6 −          July
14.6 10.3 633.7 951.4 513.4 − 857.1 1,918.4 188.5 1,268.5 2,184.9 2,322.0 2,041.6 −          Aug 
16.2 10.4 627.5 900.0 521.5 − 806.5 1,872.9 191.9 1,291.6 2,195.0 2,323.4 2,038.7 −          Sep 
17.3 10.3 622.3 889.1 515.3 − 822.5 1,820.3 194.7 1,347.2 2,239.6 2,379.2 2,017.6 −          Oct 
17.8 10.8 615.8 857.9 516.9 − 813.3 1,801.6 197.3 1,373.1 2,257.0 2,396.7 2,005.9 −          Nov 
16.0 10.3 600.7 780.0 510.2 − 759.5 1,784.7 200.3 1,365.7 2,231.6 2,342.6 1,981.4 −          Dec 
13.5 8.9 587.7 783.8 507.3 − 715.8 1,678.5 199.4 1,363.0 2,219.5 2,329.4 1,961.3 − 2013          Jan 
14.1 10.0 595.9 782.3 503.7 − 719.8 1,668.6 201.4 1,366.1 2,215.9 2,344.3 1,960.1 −          Feb 
13.5 8.9 588.1 768.2 517.6 − 696.6 1,681.0 203.8 1,356.6 2,208.8 2,332.9 1,964.6 −          Mar 
14.9 9.5 581.1 764.4 508.0 − 696.5 1,689.7 204.1 1,386.1 2,236.6 2,365.2 1,942.0 −          Apr 
14.6 9.0 569.7 740.9 506.2 − 693.4 1,591.5 207.0 1,391.0 2,242.0 2,368.8 1,926.8 −          May
12.3 8.5 560.5 731.8 495.3 − 696.9 1,503.6 208.2 1,390.3 2,235.9 2,374.8 1,904.0 −          June
15.8 8.8 549.9 722.1 503.6 − 681.6 1,490.7 211.5 1,399.1 2,240.8 2,360.0 1,895.9 −          July
13.9 7.8 546.1 719.8 509.3 − 696.3 1,422.0 214.8 1,412.2 2,256.5 2,286.0 1,892.6 −          Aug 
11.8 7.8 546.8 676.6 502.4 − 694.5 1,466.6 218.0 1,424.8 2,262.2 2,289.8 1,881.7 −          Sep 
euro banknotes actually issued by the Bundesbank and the amount disclosed in years and at agreed notice of up to 3 months (excluding central governments’
accordance with the accounting regime chosen by the Eurosystem (see also footnote deposits) and (for the euro area) central governments’ monetary liabilities with such2 on banknote circulation in Table III.2). 10Overnight deposits (excluding central maturities. 12M2 plus repo transactions, money market fund shares, money market
governments’ deposits), and (for the euro area) currency in circulation, central paper and debt securities up to 2 years. 13Deposits with agreed maturities of over 2
governments’ overnight monetary liabilities, which are not included in the years and at agreed notice of over 3 months, debt securities with maturities of over 2consolidated balance sheet. 11M1 plus deposits with agreed maturities of up to 2 years, capital and reserves. 14 Non-existent in Germany. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
14  Monthly Report
November 2013
II  Overall monetary survey in the euro area
  
3  Banking system’s liquidity position  * 
Stocks
  
€ billion; period averages of daily positions
Liquidity-providing factors Liquidity-absorbing factors
Monetary policy operations of the Eurosystem
Credit
institutions‘
currentaccount
Net assets Longer- Other Other balances
Reserve in gold Main term Marginal liquidity- liquidity- Banknotes Central Other (including
maintenance and foreign refinancing refinancing lending providing Deposit absorbing in government factors minimum Base
period currency operations operations facility facility deposits (net)  
6 reserves) 7 money 8 operations 3 operations 4 circulation 5 
ending in 1 
Eurosystem  2  
  
2011          Apr 544.1 97.3 335.4 0.8 137.6 23.0 79.5 824.4 73.1 − 95.2 210.5 1 057.9
         May 525.9 109.2 320.5 0.4 136.6 22.8 76.8 833.9 61.3 − 111.6 209.5 1 066.1
         June 526.8 114.7 317.9 0.0 135.5 18.4 76.2 836.6 62.6 − 107.9 209.0 1 064.0
         July 533.6 146.0 311.6 0.2 134.2 29.5 76.9 846.2 73.4 − 111.2 210.9 1 086.6
         Aug 541.3 171.7 321.5 0.1 133.9 56.7 79.2 854.2 71.4 − 104.5 211.5 1 122.4
         Sep 540.3 135.1 389.8 0.3 178.0 121.8 109.8 853.2 52.3 − 103.0 209.5 1 184.5
         Oct 571.0 193.0 373.6 1.5 217.4 168.7 162.9 854.9 50.0 − 88.5 208.7 1 232.2
         Nov 612.1 196.1 387.1 2.8 231.9 204.6 178.0 861.4 57.9 − 80.8 208.9 1 274.8
         Dec 622.1 238.0 389.0 4.4 260.3 253.7 200.5 869.4 63.8 − 85.9 212.2 1 335.3
2012          Jan 683.9 169.4 627.3 6.0 278.6 399.3 210.8 883.7 67.7 − 8.7 212.3 1 495.3
         Feb 698.3 120.6 683.6 2.3 282.4 489.0 218.5 870.1 100.1 1.6 108.1 1 467.1
         Mar 688.2 89.1 860.1 2.2 288.1 621.0 219.5 868.8 129.0 − 19.4 108.9 1 598.6
         Apr 667.6 56.4 1 093.4 3.0 280.6 771.3 215.8 871.2 146.3 − 13.3 109.6 1 752.1
         May 659.3 47.0 1 088.7 1.0 281.3 771.4 214.0 872.7 137.1 − 28.5 110.5 1 754.6
         June 656.8 58.1 1 071.0 1.6 281.1 770.8 212.8 880.8 117.8 − 24.2 110.8 1 762.3
         July 666.7 160.7 1 074.9 1.8 280.7 770.6 210.9 892.5 138.8 60.6 111.5 1 774.6
         Aug 678.9 146.0 1 079.9 0.8 281.0 343.1 211.5 897.7 130.7 93.5 510.2 1 751.0
         Sep 676.8 130.6 1 076.8 0.8 279.7 328.6 210.5 897.6 107.0 81.0 540.0 1 766.2
         Oct 681.5 117.6 1 062.8 1.1 279.6 305.4 209.0 892.7 101.4 96.0 538.1 1 736.2
         Nov 708.5 84.4 1 053.8 1.0 278.9 256.1 209.3 890.0 95.7 146.4 529.2 1 675.3
         Dec 708.0 74.0 1 044.1 1.6 277.3 231.8 208.5 889.3 121.1 144.5 509.9 1 631.0
2013          Jan 683.9 78.2 1 036.8 3.7 276.8 238.4 206.6 903.5 100.1 141.7 489.0 1 630.9
         Feb 656.5 127.5 960.3 0.3 273.4 184.3 207.8 883.4 90.8 185.6 466.3 1 534.0
         Mar 655.7 130.5 843.2 0.9 269.9 145.3 205.5 880.5 78.8 187.1 403.0 1 428.8
         Apr 656.8 123.7 782.9 0.5 269.1 133.8 205.5 889.2 89.7 168.7 346.0 1 369.0
         May 657.3 113.0 749.9 0.9 265.7 114.5 204.3 897.1 82.5 166.2 322.2 1 333.8
         June 656.0 104.7 728.4 0.5 259.9 90.5 199.4 904.1 83.1 172.3 300.3 1 294.9
         July 615.9 108.8 708.0 1.3 256.4 92.1 195.0 909.3 92.5 115.1 286.5 1 287.9
         Aug 532.3 104.5 698.6 0.2 255.0 82.6 195.5 917.6 97.1 28.2 269.6 1 269.8
         Sep 531.8 97.5 692.3 0.4 251.1 79.2 191.7 920.4 72.6 34.7 274.5 1 274.2
         Oct 538.2 96.2 674.6 0.2 248.2 58.9 189.8 918.3 80.1 41.9 268.4 1 245.6
Deutsche Bundesbank
2011          Apr 146.6 24.1 45.5 0.0 31.9 13.6 38.9 205.2 0.2 − 61.5 51.7 270.4
         May 142.4 17.9 47.7 0.2 31.9 10.8 38.2 207.6 0.4 − 68.2 51.4 269.8
         June 142.5 10.6 41.5 0.0 31.7 8.1 33.4 208.7 0.3 − 75.8 51.7 268.4
         July 144.3 22.8 35.8 0.0 31.4 11.1 36.4 211.1 0.3 − 77.3 52.6 274.8
         Aug 146.7 13.6 36.5 0.0 31.3 15.4 35.2 213.0 0.2 − 88.4 52.7 281.1
         Sep 146.7 6.6 33.6 0.0 42.3 27.8 60.2 213.4 0.3 − 124.3 51.8 293.0
         Oct 155.5 10.7 20.8 0.0 52.3 41.5 86.8 213.5 0.3 − 155.0 52.2 307.2
         Nov 167.5 4.0 18.0 0.1 55.7 55.0 87.9 213.8 0.2 − 164.5 53.0 321.8
         Dec 168.7 3.0 17.6 0.1 63.2 60.4 126.2 216.3 0.7 − 205.5 54.4 331.2
2012          Jan 182.3 4.4 40.3 0.1 67.2 101.7 117.0 219.8 0.8 − 199.6 54.5 376.0
         Feb 183.2 1.8 46.7 0.0 69.2 141.9 130.5 216.9 0.8 − 217.6 28.3 387.1
         Mar 183.6 1.2 59.4 0.0 69.2 192.6 142.2 217.0 0.8 − 266.8 27.7 437.3
         Apr 182.0 1.2 73.8 0.1 68.8 257.2 142.7 218.1 0.7 − 321.6 28.8 504.1
         May 181.3 1.3 73.4 0.1 68.8 260.5 144.6 217.8 0.7 − 327.5 28.9 507.2
         June 180.4 3.8 74.6 0.5 68.7 276.9 150.3 219.8 0.8 − 349.1 29.3 526.0
         July 180.3 3.1 76.5 0.1 68.6 293.3 152.1 222.3 1.0 − 369.8 29.6 545.2
         Aug 179.6 2.5 76.3 0.2 68.8 102.0 162.9 225.1 4.2 − 351.5 184.8 511.9
         Sep 177.7 1.6 75.4 0.0 68.6 112.1 134.6 224.6 6.0 − 349.1 195.2 531.9
         Oct 181.8 1.7 74.5 0.2 68.7 108.2 124.0 223.4 6.8 − 325.3 189.9 521.4
         Nov 190.7 1.9 72.9 0.1 68.2 76.7 126.2 222.4 7.1 − 291.0 192.5 491.5
         Dec 190.8 1.8 70.5 0.2 67.5 61.3 124.6 222.0 8.9 − 277.5 191.5 474.8
2013          Jan 185.1 2.1 69.7 0.1 67.4 56.1 117.2 225.3 10.0 − 242.5 158.2 439.6
         Feb 176.8 0.7 58.9 0.0 66.3 34.2 109.9 219.2 2.5 − 207.3 144.2 397.5
         Mar 176.4 0.7 34.9 0.0 65.3 30.4 107.3 219.7 2.1 − 203.2 121.0 371.1
         Apr 177.1 0.1 21.8 0.0 65.0 24.4 95.7 221.6 1.9 − 189.2 109.7 355.8
         May 176.7 0.3 16.2 0.0 64.3 26.8 88.2 223.2 1.0 − 182.0 100.3 350.4
         June 175.4 0.2 13.0 0.0 63.0 23.9 93.0 226.0 0.7 − 189.0 97.0 346.9
         July 161.3 0.6 11.7 0.0 61.8 26.1 79.2 226.3 0.8 − 194.0 97.0 349.4
         Aug 136.9 0.6 11.3 0.0 61.1 27.5 73.6 228.6 0.7 − 207.5 87.0 343.1
         Sep 136.3 0.2 10.6 0.0 59.7 22.3 72.2 229.2 0.7 − 206.2 88.7 340.3
         Oct 138.3 0.2 10.1 0.1 58.9 15.8 63.4 229.2 1.3 − 195.0 92.9 337.9
Discrepancies may arise from rounding. *The banking system’s liquidity position is includes liquidity absorbed as a result of the Eurosystem’s foreign exchange swap
defined as the current account holdings in euro of euro-area credit institutions with operations. 5From 2002, euro banknotes and other banknotes which have been
the Eurosystem. Amounts are derived from the consolidated financial statement of issued by the national central banks of the Eurosystem and which are still in cir-the Eurosystem and the financial statement of the Bundesbank. 1Figures are daily av- culation. In accordance with the accounting procedure chosen by the Eurosystem for
erages for the reserve maintenance period ending in the month indicated. 2Source: the issue of euro banknotes, 8% of the total value of the euro banknotes in cir-
ECB. 3Includes liquidity provided under the Eurosystem’s covered bond purchase culation are allocated on a monthly basis to the ECB. The counterpart of this
programme and the Eurosystem’s securities markets programme. 4From Aug. 2009,

Deutsche Bundesbank
15  Monthly Report
November 2013
II  Overall monetary survey in the euro area
  
  
Flows
  
Liquidity-providing factors Liquidity-absorbing factors
Monetary policy operations of the Eurosystem
Credit
institutions‘
currentaccount
Net assets Longer- Other Other balances
in gold Main term Marginal liquidity- liquidity- Banknotes Central Other (including Reserve
and foreign refinancing refinancing lending providing Deposit absorbing in government factors minimum Base maintenance
currency operations operations facility facility deposits (net)  
6 reserves) 7 money 8 period operations 3 operations 4 circulation 5 
ending in 1 
Eurosystem  2  
  
− 5.9 − 37.1 + 14.4 − 6.8 − 0.3 − 3.9 − 0.8 + 3.5 − 16.7 − 15.3 − 2.4 − 2.8 2011          Apr 
− 18.2 + 11.9 − 14.9 − 0.4 − 1.0 − 0.2 − 2.7 + 9.5 − 11.8 − 16.4 − 1.0 + 8.2          May
+ 0.9 + 5.5 − 2.6 − 0.4 − 1.1 − 4.4 − 0.6 + 2.7 + 1.3 + 3.7 − 0.5 − 2.1          June
+ 6.8 + 31.3 − 6.3 + 0.2 − 1.3 + 11.1 + 0.7 + 9.6 + 10.8 − 3.3 + 1.9 + 22.6          July
+ 7.7 + 25.7 + 9.9 − 0.1 − 0.3 + 27.2 + 2.3 + 8.0 − 2.0 + 6.7 + 0.6 + 35.8          Aug 
− 1.0 − 36.6 + 68.3 + 0.2 + 44.1 + 65.1 + 30.6 − 1.0 − 19.1 + 1.5 − 2.0 + 62.1          Sep 
+ 30.7 + 57.9 − 16.2 + 1.2 + 39.4 + 46.9 + 53.1 + 1.7 − 2.3 + 14.5 − 0.8 + 47.7          Oct 
+ 41.1 + 3.1 + 13.5 + 1.3 + 14.5 + 35.9 + 15.1 + 6.5 + 7.9 + 7.7 + 0.2 + 42.6          Nov 
+ 10.0 + 41.9 + 1.9 + 1.6 + 28.4 + 49.1 + 22.5 + 8.0 + 5.9 − 5.1 + 3.3 + 60.5          Dec 
+ 61.8 − 68.6 + 238.3 + 1.6 + 18.3 +145.6 + 10.3 + 14.3 + 3.9 + 77.2 + 0.1 + 160.0 2012          Jan 
+ 14.4 − 48.8 + 56.3 − 3.7 + 3.8 + 89.7 + 7.7 − 13.6 + 32.4 + 10.3 − 104.2 − 28.2          Feb 
− 10.1 − 31.5 + 176.5 − 0.1 + 5.7 +132.0 + 1.0 − 1.3 + 28.9 − 21.0 + 0.8 + 131.5          Mar 
− 20.6 − 32.7 + 233.3 + 0.8 − 7.5 +150.3 − 3.7 + 2.4 + 17.3 + 6.1 + 0.7 + 153.5          Apr 
− 8.3 − 9.4 − 4.7 − 2.0 + 0.7 + 0.1 − 1.8 + 1.5 − 9.2 − 15.2 + 0.9 + 2.5          May− 2.5 + 11.1 − 17.7 + 0.6 − 0.2 − 0.6 − 1.2 + 8.1 − 19.3 + 4.3 + 0.3 + 7.7          June
+ 9.9 + 102.6 + 3.9 + 0.2 − 0.4 − 0.2 − 1.9 + 11.7 + 21.0 + 84.8 + 0.7 + 12.3          July
+ 12.2 − 14.7 + 5.0 − 1.0 + 0.3 −427.5 + 0.6 + 5.2 − 8.1 + 32.9 + 398.7 − 23.6          Aug 
− 2.1 − 15.4 − 3.1 + 0.0 − 1.3 − 14.5 − 1.0 − 0.1 − 23.7 − 12.5 + 29.8 + 15.2          Sep 
+ 4.7 − 13.0 − 14.0 + 0.3 − 0.1 − 23.2 − 1.5 − 4.9 − 5.6 + 15.0 − 1.9 − 30.0          Oct 
+ 27.0 − 33.2 − 9.0 − 0.1 − 0.7 − 49.3 + 0.3 − 2.7 − 5.7 + 50.4 − 8.9 − 60.9          Nov 
− 0.5 − 10.4 − 9.7 + 0.6 − 1.6 − 24.3 − 0.8 − 0.7 + 25.4 − 1.9 − 19.3 − 44.3          Dec 
− 24.1 + 4.2 − 7.3 + 2.1 − 0.5 + 6.6 − 1.9 + 14.2 − 21.0 − 2.8 − 20.9 − 0.1 2013          Jan 
− 27.4 + 49.3 − 76.5 − 3.4 − 3.4 − 54.1 + 1.2 − 20.1 − 9.3 + 43.9 − 22.7 − 96.9          Feb 
− 0.8 + 3.0 − 117.1 + 0.6 − 3.5 − 39.0 − 2.3 − 2.9 − 12.0 + 1.5 − 63.3 − 105.2          Mar 
+ 1.1 − 6.8 − 60.3 − 0.4 − 0.8 − 11.5 +
 0.0 + 8.7 + 10.9 − 18.4 − 57.0 − 59.8          Apr 
+
0.5 − 10.7 − 33.0 + 0.4 − 3.4 − 19.3 − 1.2 + 7.9 − 7.2 − 2.5 − 23.8 − 35.2          May
− 1.3 − 8.3 − 21.5 − 0.4 − 5.8 − 24.0 − 4.9 + 7.0 + 0.6 + 6.1 − 21.9 − 38.9          June
− 40.1 + 4.1 − 20.4 + 0.8 − 3.5 + 1.6 − 4.4 + 5.2 + 9.4 − 57.2 − 13.8 − 7.0          July
− 83.6 − 4.3 − 9.4 − 1.1 − 1.4 − 9.5 + 0.5 + 8.3 + 4.6 − 86.9 − 16.9 − 18.1          Aug − 0.5 − 7.0 − 6.3 + 0.2 − 3.9 − 3.4 − 3.8 + 2.8 − 24.5 + 6.5 + 4.9 + 4.4          Sep 
+ 6.4 − 1.3 − 17.7 − 0.2 − 2.9 − 20.3 − 1.9 − 2.1 + 7.5 + 7.2 − 6.1 − 28.6          Oct 
Deutsche Bundesbank
− 1.8 − 7.2 + 0.9 + 0.0 + 0.1 − 1.0 − 9.5 + 0.3 + 0.0 + 2.2 − 0.0 − 0.7 2011          Apr 
− 4.2 − 6.2 + 2.2 + 0.2 + 0.0 − 2.8 − 0.7 + 2.4 + 0.1 − 6.7 − 0.3 − 0.7          May
+ 0.2 − 7.3 − 6.3 − 0.2 − 0.2 − 2.7 − 4.7 + 1.1 − 0.1 − 7.6 + 0.2 − 1.4          June
+ 1.7 + 12.2 − 5.7 + 0.0 − 0.3 + 3.0 + 3.0 + 2.4 + 0.0 − 1.5 + 0.9 + 6.4          July
+ 2.4 − 9.2 + 0.7 − 0.0 − 0.0 + 4.3 − 1.2 + 1.9 − 0.1 − 11.1 + 0.1 + 6.3          Aug 
+ 0.0 − 6.9 − 2.9 + 0.0 + 11.0 + 12.4 + 25.0 + 0.4 + 0.1 − 35.9 − 0.9 + 12.0          Sep 
+ 8.8 + 4.1 − 12.8 + 0.0 + 9.9 + 13.7 + 26.6 + 0.1 − 0.0 − 30.7 + 0.3 + 14.2          Oct 
+ 12.0 − 6.7 − 2.8 + 0.1 + 3.5 + 13.5 + 1.1 + 0.3 − 0.0 − 9.5 + 0.9 + 14.6          Nov 
+ 1.2 − 1.0 − 0.4 + 0.0 + 7.5 + 5.5 + 38.4 + 2.5 + 0.5 − 41.0 + 1.4 + 9.4          Dec 
+ 13.6 + 1.4 + 22.7 − 0.0 + 4.0 + 41.3 − 9.2 + 3.5 + 0.1 + 5.9 + 0.1 + 44.8 2012          Jan 
+ 0.9 − 2.6 + 6.4 − 0.1 + 2.0 + 40.2 + 13.5 − 2.9 − 0.1 − 18.0 − 26.2 + 11.1          Feb + 0.4 − 0.6 + 12.7 + 0.0 +
 0.0 + 50.7 + 11.7 + 0.1 + 0.0 − 49.3 − 0.6 + 50.2          Mar 
−
1.6 + 0.0 + 14.4 + 0.1 − 0.4 + 64.7 + 0.5 + 1.1 − 0.0 − 54.7 + 1.1 + 66.8          Apr 
− 0.7 + 0.1 − 0.4 − 0.0 − 0.0 + 3.3 + 1.8 − 0.3 − 0.0 − 5.9 + 0.1 + 3.1          May
− 0.9 + 2.5 + 1.1 + 0.4 − 0.1 + 16.4 + 5.7 + 2.0 + 0.1 − 21.6 + 0.4 + 18.8          June
− 0.1 − 0.7 + 1.9 − 0.4 − 0.1 + 16.4 + 1.8 + 2.5 + 0.3 − 20.7 + 0.3 + 19.2          July
− 0.6 − 0.5 − 0.2 + 0.2 + 0.2 −191.3 + 10.9 + 2.8 + 3.1 + 18.3 + 155.2 − 33.2          Aug 
− 1.9 − 0.9 − 0.9 − 0.2 − 0.2 + 10.0 − 28.3 − 0.4 + 1.8 + 2.4 + 10.4 + 20.0          Sep 
+ 4.1 + 0.1 − 0.9 + 0.1 + 0.1 − 3.9 − 10.6 − 1.3 + 0.8 + 23.8 − 5.3 − 10.5          Oct 
+ 8.9 + 0.2 − 1.6 − 0.1 − 0.5 − 31.5 + 2.2 − 1.0 + 0.3 + 34.4 + 2.6 − 29.9          Nov 
+ 0.2 − 0.1 − 2.4 + 0.1 − 0.7 − 15.3 − 1.6 − 0.4 + 1.8 + 13.5 − 1.0 − 16.7          Dec 
− 5.8 + 0.3 − 0.8 − 0.1 − 0.1 − 5.2 − 7.4 + 3.3 + 1.1 + 35.0 − 33.3 − 35.2 2013          Jan 
− 8.3 − 1.3 − 10.8 − 0.1 − 1.0 − 21.9 − 7.3 − 6.1 − 7.5 + 35.3 − 14.0 − 42.1          Feb 
− 0.3 − 0.1 − 23.9 − 0.0 − 1.0 − 3.8 − 2.6 + 0.6 − 0.4 + 4.1 − 23.2 − 26.4          Mar 
+ 0.7 − 0.5 − 13.1 + 0.0 − 0.3 − 6.0 − 11.6 + 1.9 − 0.3 + 14.0 − 11.2 − 15.4          Apr 
− 0.4 + 0.2 − 5.6 − 0.0 − 0.8 + 2.5 − 7.6 + 1.6 − 0.8 + 7.2 − 9.4 − 5.4          May− 1.3 − 0.2 − 3.2 + 0.0 − 1.3 − 3.0 + 4.8 + 2.8 − 0.3 − 7.0 − 3.3 − 3.5          June
− 14.2 + 0.4 − 1.3 − 0.0 − 1.1 + 2.3 − 13.8 + 0.3 + 0.1 − 5.0 − 0.0 + 2.5          July
− 24.4 + 0.0 − 0.5 − 0.0 − 0.7 + 1.4 − 5.6 + 2.3 − 0.2 − 13.5 − 9.9 − 6.3          Aug 
− 0.5 − 0.4 − 0.7 + 0.0 − 1.4 − 5.2 − 1.4 + 0.6 − 0.0 + 1.3 + 1.7 − 2.8          Sep 
+ 2.0 + 0.0 − 0.5 + 0.0 − 0.8 − 6.6 − 8.8 − 0.0 + 0.6 + 11.2 + 4.2 − 2.4          Oct 
adjustment is shown under “Other factors”. The remaining 92% of the value of the “Other factors”. From 2003 euro banknotes only. 6Remaining items in the
euro banknotes in circulation is allocated, likewise on a monthly basis, to the NCBs, consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem and the financial statement of
with each NCB showing in its balance sheet the percentage of the euro banknotes in the Bundesbank. 7Equal to the difference between the sum of liquidity-providing
circulation that corresponds to its paid-up share in the ECB’s capital. The difference factors and the sum of liquidity-absorbing factors. 8Calculated as the sum of the
between the value of the euro banknotes allocated to an NCB and the value of the “deposit facility”, “banknotes in circulation” and “credit institutions’ current accounteuro banknotes which that NCB has put into circulation is likewise shown under holdings”. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
16  Monthly Report
November 2013
III Consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem
 
1 Assets *
 
 
€ billion
Claims on non-euro area Claims on non-euro area residents denominated
in foreign currency residents denominated in euro
Balances with
Claims on banks, security
On investments, euro area Balances Claims
reporting external loans residents with banks, arising from
date/ Gold and other denominated security the credit
End of Total and gold Receivables external in foreign investments facility under
month 1 assets receivables Total from the IMF assets currency Total and loans ERM II
 Eurosystem 2
 
2013 Mar                  1 2,680.6 438.7 252.9 86.6 166.3 30.8 21.5 21.5 −
                                8 2,665.9 438.7 252.6 86.6 166.0 30.0 22.3 22.3 −
                              15 2,647.8 438.7 251.4 86.5 164.9 28.7 22.1 22.1 −
                              22 2,642.7 438.7 251.6 86.5 165.1 30.0 23.0 23.0 −
                              29 2,648.1 435.3 254.4 87.1 167.2 31.6 22.1 22.1 −
         Apr                  5 2,647.1 435.3 254.6 87.1 167.5 34.3 21.8 21.8 −
                              12 2,634.5 435.3 254.6 87.0 167.6 34.5 22.2 22.2 −
                              19 2,617.3 435.3 253.7 86.9 166.7 34.9 21.2 21.2 −
                              26 2,611.3 435.3 253.1 86.9 166.2 35.6 21.7 21.7 −
         May                  3 2,608.1 435.3 254.5 86.9 167.6 35.4 22.5 22.5 −
                              10 2,606.3 435.3 256.0 86.6 169.5 35.6 22.8 22.8 −
                              17 2,577.4 435.3 253.7 86.5 167.2 35.5 22.5 22.5 −
                              24 2,560.2 435.3 254.0 86.4 167.5 28.6 21.7 21.7 −
                              31 2,549.4 435.3 255.1 86.4 168.7 27.3 19.9 19.9 −
         June                  7 2,546.6 435.3 255.1 86.7 168.4 28.2 18.9 18.9 −
                              14 2,550.7 435.3 255.6 87.1 168.6 29.3 18.3 18.3 −
                              21 2,545.3 435.3 256.2 86.9 169.3 29.3 18.3 18.3 −
                              28 2,430.4 320.0 247.6 85.3 162.3 27.5 18.1 18.1 −
         July                  5 2,420.3 320.0 248.0 85.3 162.7 26.4 20.4 20.4 −
                              12 2,403.3 320.0 248.3 85.3 163.0 26.6 21.6 21.6 −
                              19 2,399.0 320.0 247.2 85.1 162.1 26.2 20.7 20.7 −
                              26 2,396.2 320.0 247.7 85.1 162.6 25.9 20.8 20.8 −
2013 Aug                  2 2,391.1 320.0 247.3 85.3 162.0 25.8 21.7 21.7 −
                                9 2,379.3 320.0 250.1 85.6 164.5 24.2 20.8 20.8 −
                              16 2,368.5 320.0 250.1 84.7 165.4 22.7 21.9 21.9 −
                              23 2,360.8 320.0 250.4 84.7 165.8 22.8 22.3 22.3 −
                              30 2,360.6 320.0 249.6 84.6 165.1 24.0 22.3 22.3 −
         Sep                  6 2,356.7 320.0 251.4 84.7 166.8 23.2 22.3 22.3 −
                              13 2,350.1 320.0 251.0 84.6 166.4 23.7 22.3 22.3 −
                              20 2,346.6 320.0 250.7 84.7 166.0 22.7 23.1 23.1 −
                              27 2,338.0 320.0 250.0 84.6 165.4 22.7 23.3 23.3 −
         Oct                  4 2,350.6 343.9 245.4 83.5 161.9 21.5 23.6 23.6 −
                              11 2,340.4 343.9 245.7 83.5 162.2 20.9 22.8 22.8 −
                              18 2,328.0 343.9 244.7 83.3 161.4 21.2 21.5 21.5 −
                              25 2,318.7 343.9 245.4 83.1 162.3 21.3 21.7 21.7 −
         Nov                  1 2,314.4 343.9 244.8 83.2 161.6 22.2 21.5 21.5 −
 Deutsche Bundesbank
2011          Dec 837.6 132.9 51.7 22.3 29.4 18.1−−−
2012          Jan 860.1 132.9 51.9 22.3 29.6 11.6−−−
         Feb 910.9 132.9 52.4 22.6 29.8 14.3−−−
         Mar 1 002.8 135.8 50.9 22.2 28.7 8.9−−−
         Apr 1 031.3 135.8 51.4 22.4 29.1 8.3−−−
         May 1 087.0 135.8 51.6 22.3 29.3 6.9−−−
         June 1 119.4 136.1 54.2 23.3 30.8 6.2−−−
         July 1 112.9 136.1 54.1 23.3 30.8 3.2−−−
         Aug 1 135.4 136.1 54.5 23.5 31.0 1.7−−−
         Sep 1 090.9 150.4 53.0 23.3 29.7 1.5−−−
         Oct 1 110.0 150.2 53.1 23.3 29.8 1.8−−−
         Nov 1 098.6 150.2 52.8 23.0 29.8 2.3−−−
         Dec 1 026.0 137.5 51.1 22.3 28.8 3.3−−−
2013          Jan 964.1 137.5 51.6 22.5 29.1 1.6−−−
         Feb 934.9 137.5 51.3 22.2 29.0 3.2−−−
         Mar 906.7 136.5 52.0 22.4 29.6 3.4−−−
         Apr 916.9 136.5 52.0 22.4 29.7 2.8−−−
         May 891.6 136.5 52.0 22.3 29.7 0.8−−−
         June 839.7 100.3 50.5 21.9 28.6 0.9−−−
         July 838.1 100.3 49.9 21.9 28.0 0.7−−−
         Aug 832.2 100.3 50.3 21.5 28.8 0.2−−−
         Sep 835.0 107.8 48.6 21.3 27.3 0.4−−−
         Oct 823.5 107.7 48.4 21.1 27.3 0.1−−−
 
*The consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem comprises the financial national central banks of the euro area member states (NCBs). The balance sheet
statement of the European Central Bank (ECB) and the financial statements of the items for foreign currency, securities, gold and financial instruments are valued at the

Deutsche Bundesbank
17  Monthly Report
November 2013
III Consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem
 
   
 
Lending to euro area credit institutions related to monetary policy operations Securities of euro area residents
denominated in euro in euro
 Other claims on euro area
Longer- Fine-  credit Securities General    On
Main re- term re- tuning Structural Credits institutions held for government    reportingfinancing financing reverse reverse Marginal related denomi- monetary debt deno-    date/opera- opera- opera- opera- lending to margin nated in policy Other minated in Other    End of
Total tions tions tions tions facility calls euro Total purposes securities euro assets    month  
1 
Eurosystem 2
 
946.1 131.1 814.5 − − 0.5 − 73.6 608.0 269.6 338.5 29.9 279.2 2013 Mar                  1
931.8 129.8 802.0 − − 0.0 − 73.4 607.9 269.5 338.4 29.9 279.3                                 8
920.8 127.3 793.5 − − 0.0 − 70.2 605.9 269.2 336.7 29.9 280.2                               15
906.2 119.4 786.7 − − 0.2 − 80.0 606.4 269.1 337.3 29.9 276.9                               22
903.6 123.2 778.9 − − 1.5 − 88.5 618.1 269.3 348.7 29.9 264.7                               29
896.8 124.9 771.9 − − 0.0 − 90.1 619.0 269.3 349.6 29.9 265.4          Apr                  5
884.2 119.3 764.3 − − 0.6 − 93.3 618.0 269.0 348.9 29.9 262.5                               12
869.9 116.4 753.5 − − 0.1 − 97.7 613.1 265.6 347.5 29.9 261.5                               19
852.2 110.4 741.8 − − 0.0 − 107.3 611.6 265.6 346.0 29.9 264.5                               26
846.4 105.0 739.5 − − 1.9 − 111.8 608.6 263.4 345.2 29.0 264.6          May                  3
850.5 110.3 739.0 − − 1.2 − 103.2 608.7 263.2 345.5 29.0 265.2                               10
836.6 103.8 732.6 − − 0.1 − 96.6 609.1 263.2 345.9 29.0 259.1                               17
835.4 103.4 731.5 − − 0.5 − 96.0 604.5 259.2 345.4 29.0 255.6                               24
824.1 103.2 720.9 − − 0.0 − 91.5 605.6 259.0 346.6 29.0 261.5                               31
821.9 103.0 717.8 − − 1.1 − 90.2 604.3 256.6 347.6 29.0 263.7          June                  7
821.8 108.3 713.2 − − 0.2 − 95.0 606.0 256.5 349.5 29.0 260.4                               14
815.6 102.0 710.1 − − 3.5 − 92.4 606.9 256.5 350.4 29.0 262.1                               21
822.7 117.3 705.4 − − 0.0 − 92.1 609.5 256.8 352.6 28.4 264.6                               28
811.4 107.7 703.3 − − 0.4 − 91.8 608.4 256.4 352.0 28.4 265.5          July                  5
803.3 102.1 701.1 − − 0.1 − 87.7 606.9 256.1 350.8 28.4 260.5                               12
804.4 104.4 699.9 − − 0.0 − 88.3 606.6 255.7 350.9 28.4 257.2                               19
800.6 102.3 697.5 − − 0.7 − 86.0 607.6 255.4 352.3 28.4 259.3                               26
804.9 109.2 695.7 − − 0.0 0.0 86.8 600.7 252.5 348.2 28.4 255.5 2013 Aug                  2
793.6 99.4 694.0 − − 0.2 − 84.3 602.7 252.5 350.2 28.4 255.2                                 9
790.9 97.6 693.3 − − 0.1 − 82.1 603.9 252.5 351.4 28.4 248.6                               16
790.3 97.7 692.6 − − 0.0 − 80.8 602.5 250.6 351.9 28.4 243.3                               23
790.5 97.1 693.3 − − 0.1 − 79.7 603.1 250.1 353.0 28.4 243.1                               30
786.5 95.6 688.6 − − 2.2 − 75.2 604.2 250.1 354.1 28.4 245.6          Sep                  6
779.5 97.2 682.3 − − 0.1 − 77.1 604.3 250.1 354.2 28.4 243.9                               13
775.4 96.2 678.9 − − 0.2 − 76.1 604.0 249.8 354.3 28.4 246.2                               20
767.3 97.0 670.2 − − 0.1 − 81.3 600.1 246.7 353.4 28.4 245.1                               27
761.6 94.5 667.0 − − 0.1 0.0 74.1 599.9 247.0 352.9 28.3 252.3          Oct                  4753.0 93.4 659.3 − − 0.3 − 76.0 599.7 246.6 353.1 28.3 250.1                               11
749.7 91.2 658.5 − − − 0.0 73.5 599.6 246.6 353.0 28.3 245.6                               18743.9 90.6 653.3 − − − 0.0 77.3 595.0 245.7 349.2 28.3 241.9                               25
740.2 89.3 650.8 − − 0.0 0.0 80.4 593.4 241.6 351.7 28.3 239.8          Nov                  1
 Deutsche Bundesbank
55.8 8.6 47.1 − − 0.0 − 8.5 71.9 67.0 4.9 4.4 494.3 2011          Dec 
48.6 2.0 46.6 − − 0.0 − 8.4 74.1 69.2 4.9 4.4 528.2 2012          Jan 
48.0 0.9 46.6 0.5 − 0.0 − 8.5 73.9 69.1 4.8 4.4 576.4          Feb 74.6 1.2 73.2 − − 0.1 − 9.4 73.5 68.7 4.8 4.4 645.3          Mar 
74.9 1.2 73.7 − − 0.0 − 10.1 73.5 68.7 4.8 4.4 672.8          Apr 
79.7 3.6 76.1 − − 0.0 − 8.0 73.4 68.6 4.8 4.4 727.0          May79.5 2.5 77.0 − − 0.1 − 8.8 73.1 68.7 4.3 4.4 757.2          June
78.6 2.9 75.7 − − 0.0 − 7.6 73.2 68.8 4.3 4.4 755.7          July
76.8 1.7 75.1 − − 0.0 − 9.4 72.8 68.4 4.3 4.4 779.6          Aug 76.1 1.7 73.9 − − 0.5 − 8.9 68.8 68.8 − 4.4 727.8          Sep 
76.6 1.6 73.9 − − 1.1 − 5.0 67.9 67.9 − 4.4 751.0          Oct 
72.4 1.9 69.7 − − 0.8 − 2.5 67.4 67.4 − 4.4 746.6          Nov 73.1 2.9 69.7 − − 0.6 − 1.4 67.5 67.5 − 4.4 687.5          Dec 
49.5 0.3 49.1 − − 0.0 − 4.9 66.2 66.2 − 4.4 648.3 2013          Jan 
25.8 0.8 24.9 − − 0.0 − 5.0 65.2 65.2 − 4.4 642.5          Feb 21.8 0.1 21.6 − − 0.2 − 5.7 65.0 65.0 − 4.4 617.9          Mar 
14.8 0.5 14.3 − − 0.0 − 5.8 63.8 63.8 − 4.4 636.7          Apr 
12.3 0.1 12.1 − − 0.0 − 4.9 62.9 62.9 − 4.4 617.8          May12.8 0.9 11.8 − − 0.0 − 4.8 61.9 61.9 − 4.4 604.1          June
12.2 1.0 11.2 − − 0.0 − 4.5 61.1 61.1 − 4.4 605.0          July
10.8 0.2 10.6 − − 0.0 − 4.6 59.5 59.5 − 4.4 602.1          Aug 10.8 0.2 9.9 − − 0.7 − 4.9 58.6 58.6 − 4.4 599.5          Sep 
9.3 0.2 8.7 − − 0.4 − 5.0 57.6 57.6 − 4.4 591.0          Oct 
 
end of the quarter. 1For the Eurosystem: financial statements for specific weekly  
dates; for the Bundesbank: end of month financial statement. 2 Source: ECB. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
18  Monthly Report
November 2013
III Consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem
 
2 Liabilities *
 
 
€ billion
Liabilities to euro area credit institutions related to Liabilities to
monetary policy operations denominated in euro other euro area residents
denominated in euro
 
Other
Current liabilities
accounts to euro-
On (covering Fine- area credit
reporting the tuning Deposits institutions Debt
date/ Banknotes minimum Fixed- reverse deno- certifi- General related to
End of Total in circu- reserve Deposit term opera- margin minated cates govern- Other
month 1 liabilities lation 2 Total system) facility deposits tions calls in euro issued Total ment liabilities
 Eurosystem 4
 
2013 Mar                  1 2,680.6 881.9 724.5 374.2 144.7 205.5 − 0.1 6.8 − 115.4 80.4 35.0
                                8 2,665.9 883.0 695.3 354.8 134.1 205.5 − 0.9 6.3 − 123.0 82.9 40.2
                              15 2,647.8 882.8 705.8 366.5 132.6 205.5 − 1.1 6.6 − 108.4 81.5 26.9
                              22 2,642.7 884.5 684.8 351.7 126.8 205.5 − 0.9 5.9 − 114.2 91.9 22.3
                              29 2,648.1 896.4 669.9 319.3 144.6 205.5 − 0.4 6.5 − 120.6 96.3 24.3
         Apr                  5 2,647.1 895.2 677.4 336.9 134.9 205.5 − 0.1 6.3 − 110.7 88.6 22.2
                              12 2,634.5 894.5 669.1 343.1 119.9 206.0 − 0.1 6.1 − 110.2 87.7 22.5
                              19 2,617.3 894.1 641.6 329.8 105.6 206.0 − 0.2 5.8 − 120.7 90.1 30.6
                              26 2,611.3 897.0 628.1 316.0 109.7 202.5 − 0.0 6.1 − 116.5 83.3 33.3
         May                  3 2,608.1 904.6 623.1 296.2 124.1 202.5 − 0.3 6.1 − 104.9 72.3 32.5
                              10 2,606.3 905.0 630.0 333.7 95.3 201.0 − − 5.5 − 95.2 65.6 29.5
                              17 2,577.4 905.2 603.6 319.5 83.0 201.0 − 0.0 5.7 − 106.6 80.8 25.8
                              24 2,560.2 901.4 576.7 294.6 81.0 201.0 − − 6.1 − 128.1 99.2 28.9
                              31 2,549.4 905.2 556.1 273.4 85.6 197.0 − 0.1 6.6 − 135.2 102.7 32.5
         June                  7 2,546.6 906.9 578.0 280.0 100.9 197.0 − 0.1 6.7 − 106.8 70.7 36.1
                              14 2,550.7 906.6 594.8 309.8 90.0 195.0 − 0.0 6.4 − 99.7 61.8 37.9
                              21 2,545.3 906.3 557.5 279.5 83.0 195.0 − 0.0 6.8 − 134.4 106.4 28.0
                              28 2,430.4 911.0 564.0 276.3 92.2 195.0 − 0.5 7.1 − 135.3 114.4 20.9
         July                  5 2,420.3 915.8 570.1 271.3 103.9 195.0 − 0.0 6.2 − 109.6 89.3 20.4
                              12 2,403.3 917.0 565.5 275.3 94.6 195.5 − 0.0 6.4 − 105.5 84.3 21.2
                              19 2,399.0 916.8 536.6 264.7 76.4 195.5 − 0.0 6.4 − 135.4 111.0 24.4
                              26 2,396.2 916.7 530.6 255.8 79.2 195.5 − 0.0 6.7 − 137.1 114.4 22.7
2013 Aug                  2 2,391.1 922.3 555.4 272.3 87.3 195.5 − 0.2 6.5 − 99.7 75.6 24.2
                                9 2,379.3 922.9 553.6 284.0 77.0 192.5 − 0.0 6.4 − 91.2 68.6 22.6
                              16 2,368.5 924.2 555.3 281.5 81.2 192.5 − 0.0 6.5 − 81.4 57.7 23.7
                              23 2,360.8 918.3 535.9 256.1 87.2 192.5 − 0.1 6.1 − 109.5 86.7 22.8
                              30 2,360.6 919.4 533.5 272.3 70.6 190.5 − 0.1 5.6 − 108.8 86.4 22.3
         Sep                  6 2,356.7 920.4 539.6 269.2 79.9 190.5 − 0.0 6.3 − 94.6 70.4 24.2
                              13 2,350.1 919.3 537.8 275.8 71.4 190.5 − 0.1 6.3 − 94.5 67.4 27.1
                              20 2,346.6 916.7 515.1 274.5 50.1 190.5 − 0.0 6.1 − 112.8 84.9 27.9
                              27 2,338.0 917.7 502.2 258.8 52.9 190.5 − 0.0 6.2 − 119.6 94.9 24.7
         Oct                  4 2,350.6 921.7 508.2 265.4 55.3 187.5 − 0.0 6.0 − 103.8 76.6 27.2
                              11 2,340.4 920.1 508.6 268.0 52.6 188.0 − 0.0 5.9 − 94.1 73.4 20.8
                              18 2,328.0 918.6 502.8 269.1 45.7 188.0 − 0.0 5.5 − 101.5 70.7 30.8
                              25 2,318.7 917.9 469.7 230.2 51.3 188.0 − 0.2 5.5 − 119.0 88.8 30.3
         Nov                  1 2,314.4 924.5 467.1 226.9 52.1 188.0 − 0.0 5.7 − 110.3 62.7 47.7
 Deutsche Bundesbank
2011          Dec 837.6 221.3 228.9 76.4 66.1 86.4 − − − − 5.5 0.7 4.8
2012          Jan 860.1 216.3 294.1 34.6 119.7 139.7 − − − − 1.4 0.7 0.7
         Feb 910.9 216.0 342.5 29.9 166.4 146.2 − − − − 2.8 0.8 2.0
         Mar 1 002.8 216.6 424.5 30.9 248.2 145.4 − − − − 3.4 0.8 2.6
         Apr 1 031.3 217.6 452.3 33.0 276.9 142.4 − − 0.0 − 2.0 0.7 1.3
         May 1 087.0 219.9 464.8 33.4 275.0 156.3 − − 0.0 − 2.6 0.6 2.0
         June 1 119.4 222.5 457.1 33.3 262.9 160.9 − − − − 3.2 1.2 2.0
         July 1 112.9 223.6 421.7 178.3 88.1 155.2 − − − − 19.5 7.3 12.2
         Aug 1 135.4 223.2 442.5 201.4 111.4 129.7 − − − − 17.6 5.5 12.1
         Sep 1 090.9 222.2 385.8 173.1 78.4 134.2 − − − − 17.3 7.0 10.2
         Oct 1 110.0 222.0 372.3 177.9 59.0 135.5 − − − − 50.7 5.1 45.7
         Nov 1 098.6 221.5 361.9 184.1 51.9 125.9 − − − − 47.2 11.4 35.9
         Dec 1 026.0 227.2 300.0 129.6 40.5 129.9 − − 0.0 − 39.9 11.9 28.1
2013          Jan 964.1 219.7 260.4 128.3 39.1 93.0 − − − − 25.9 2.3 23.6
         Feb 934.9 219.1 240.8 100.8 23.9 116.0 − − − − 22.4 0.5 21.8
         Mar 906.7 223.1 222.9 108.7 20.8 93.3 − − − − 10.9 0.5 10.4
         Apr 916.9 224.5 215.5 102.9 30.8 81.8 − − − − 28.7 0.9 27.7
         May 891.6 225.4 198.3 88.3 20.6 89.4 − − − − 20.6 0.6 20.1
         June 839.7 226.9 195.1 89.6 23.5 82.1 − − − − 8.1 0.5 7.6
         July 838.1 227.9 187.0 90.2 20.1 76.7 − − − − 12.5 0.5 12.0
         Aug 832.2 228.1 179.2 90.8 15.1 73.4 − − − − 10.6 0.5 10.0
         Sep 835.0 227.9 173.7 97.7 17.5 58.5 − − − − 13.5 1.9 11.6
         Oct 823.5 229.3 139.0 61.5 12.3 65.3 − − − − 33.0 1.4 31.5
 
*The consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem comprises the financial specific weekly dates; for the Bundesbank: end-of-month financial statements.
statement of the European Central Bank (ECB) and the financial statements of the 2According to the accounting regime chosen by the Eurosystem on the issue of euro
national central banks of the euro area member states (NCBs). The balance sheet banknotes, a share of 8% of the total value of the euro banknotes in circulation is
items for foreign currency, securities, gold and financial instruments are valued at allocated to the ECB on a monthly basis. The counterpart of this adjustment ismarket rates at the end of the quarter. 1For Eurosystem: financial statements for disclosed as an “Intra-Eurosystem liability related to euro banknote issue". The

Deutsche Bundesbank
19  Monthly Report
November 2013
III Consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem
 
   
 
Liabilities to non-euro area
residents denominated inforeign currency
Intra-  Eurosystem  
Liabilities Liabilities Liabilities Counterpart liability     Onto non-euro to euro area Deposits, arising of special related to     reportingarea residents residents balances from the drawing euro  Capital    date/denominated in foreign and other rights allocated Other banknote Revaluation and    End of credit facility
in euro currency Total liabilities under ERM II by the IMF issue  
2 accounts reserves    month 1 liabilities 3 
Eurosystem 4
 
165.5 2.6 7.5 7.5 − 55.0 226.2 − 407.4 87.9 2013 Mar                  1
168.1 2.4 7.0 7.0 − 55.0 230.4 − 407.4 88.1                                 8
157.7 1.6 5.8 5.8 − 55.0 228.6 − 407.4 88.2                               15
162.0 2.8 6.2 6.2 − 55.0 231.7 − 407.4 88.2                               22
157.7 4.1 5.3 5.3 − 55.1 237.1 − 406.6 88.9                               29
158.7 4.5 7.0 7.0 − 55.1 236.4 − 406.6 88.9          Apr                  5
155.0 6.5 6.2 6.2 − 55.1 236.2 − 406.6 88.9                               12
153.9 5.6 6.5 6.5 − 55.1 238.5 − 406.6 88.9                               19
163.0 5.4 5.5 5.5 − 55.1 239.0 − 406.6 88.9                               26
166.8 5.6 6.4 6.4 − 55.1 239.9 − 406.6 88.9          May                  3
165.4 7.1 6.5 6.5 − 55.1 240.8 − 406.6 89.0                               10
163.3 4.2 6.5 6.5 − 55.1 231.8 − 406.6 88.8                               17
157.3 2.8 5.7 5.7 − 55.1 231.5 − 406.6 88.8                               24
151.6 2.5 6.0 6.0 − 55.1 235.7 − 406.6 88.8                               31
153.1 1.3 7.7 7.7 − 55.1 234.5 − 406.6 89.8          June                  7
145.2 3.1 6.3 6.3 − 55.1 236.9 − 406.6 89.8                               14
146.8 4.2 6.0 6.0 − 55.1 230.7 − 406.6 90.8                               21
141.6 4.0 4.9 4.9 − 54.2 233.2 − 284.7 90.4                               28
145.0 2.6 5.6 5.6 − 54.2 236.0 − 284.7 90.4          July                  5
140.9 2.9 5.5 5.5 − 54.2 230.3 − 284.7 90.4                               12
136.4 1.7 5.3 5.3 − 54.2 231.0 − 284.7 90.4                               19
136.4 1.6 5.4 5.4 − 54.2 232.4 − 284.7 90.4                               26
135.9 1.4 4.8 4.8 − 54.2 235.7 − 284.7 90.4 2013 Aug                  2
135.8 1.9 5.2 5.2 − 54.2 233.0 − 284.7 90.4                                 9
136.8 1.4 5.8 5.8 − 54.2 227.8 − 284.7 90.4                               16
131.8 1.6 5.9 5.9 − 54.2 222.4 − 284.7 90.4                               23
135.0 1.8 5.8 5.8 − 54.2 221.5 − 284.7 90.4                               30
136.4 1.7 6.6 6.6 − 54.2 221.8 − 284.7 90.4          Sep                  6
132.0 3.0 5.5 5.5 − 54.2 222.5 − 284.7 90.4                               13
134.8 2.6 4.4 4.4 − 54.2 224.8 − 284.7 90.4                               20
134.9 2.5 3.8 3.8 − 54.2 221.8 − 284.7 90.4                               27
129.2 2.1 4.0 4.0 − 53.6 227.0 − 304.5 90.4          Oct                  4
131.1 2.4 3.3 3.3 − 53.6 226.3 − 304.5 90.4                               11
124.2 1.8 3.4 3.4 − 53.6 221.6 − 304.5 90.4                               18
126.7 1.7 4.6 4.6 − 53.6 225.2 − 304.5 90.4                               25
123.5 1.2 5.0 5.0 − 53.6 228.5 − 304.5 90.4          Nov                  1
 Deutsche Bundesbank
46.6 0.0 − − − 14.3 16.2 170.5 129.4 5.0 2011          Dec 
11.9 0.0 0.0 0.0 − 14.3 16.5 171.0 129.4 5.0 2012          Jan 
11.7 0.0 0.3 0.3 − 14.3 16.7 172.2 129.4 5.0          Feb 
15.9 0.0 0.2 0.2 − 14.0 16.9 175.5 130.8 5.0          Mar 
14.2 0.0 0.4 0.4 − 14.0 17.5 177.6 130.8 5.0          Apr 
52.0 0.0 0.4 0.4 − 14.0 18.2 179.3 130.8 5.0          May
83.2 0.0 0.2 0.2 − 14.5 19.5 181.0 133.3 5.0          June
90.9 0.0 0.0 0.0 − 14.5 19.9 184.5 133.3 5.0          July
89.9 0.0 0.3 0.3 − 14.5 20.6 188.5 133.3 5.0          Aug 
86.3 0.0 − − − 14.4 21.6 191.9 146.5 5.0          Sep 
82.1 0.0 0.2 0.2 − 14.4 22.3 194.7 146.5 5.0          Oct 
81.8 0.0 0.3 0.3 − 14.4 22.8 197.3 146.5 5.0          Nov 
83.3 0.0 0.1 0.1 − 14.1 23.6 200.3 132.6 5.0          Dec 
83.0 0.0 0.5 0.5 − 14.1 23.5 199.4 132.6 5.0 2013          Jan 
74.4 0.0 0.7 0.7 − 14.1 24.5 201.4 132.6 5.0          Feb 
70.2 0.0 0.6 0.6 − 14.1 24.0 203.8 132.1 5.0          Mar 
67.9 0.0 0.6 0.6 − 14.1 24.4 204.1 132.1 5.0          Apr 
63.5 0.0 0.6 0.6 − 14.1 25.0 207.0 132.1 5.0          May
61.5 0.0 0.7 0.7 − 13.9 25.3 208.2 95.0 5.0          June
59.7 0.0 0.1 0.1 − 13.9 25.5 211.5 95.0 5.0          July
58.9 0.0 0.7 0.7 − 13.9 26.0 214.8 95.0 5.0          Aug 
54.7 0.0 0.2 0.2 − 13.7 26.6 218.0 101.6 5.0          Sep 
54.6 0.0 0.1 0.1 − 13.7 27.0 220.2 101.6 5.0          Oct 
 
remaining 92 % of the value of the euro banknote in circulation is also allocated to according to the aforementioned accounting regime and the value of euro bank-
the NCBs on a monthly basis, and each NCB shows in its balance sheet the share of notes put into circulation is also disclosed as an “Intra-Eurosystem claim/ liabilitythe euro banknotes issued which corresponds to its paid-up share in the ECB’s related to banknote issue“. 3For the Deutsche Bundesbank: including DM banknotes
capital. The difference between the value of the euro banknotes allocated to the NCB still in circulation. 4 Source: ECB. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
20  Monthly Report
November 2013
IV Banks
 
1 Assets and liabilities of monetary financial institutions (excluding the Bundesbank) in Germany *
  Assets
 
€ billion
Lending to banks (MFIs) in the euro area Lending to non-banks (non-MFIs) in the
to banks in the home country to banks in other member states to non-banks in the home country
Enterprises and house-
holds
Secur- Secur-
Balance ities ities
sheet Cash issued issued
Period total 1 in hand Total Total Loans by banks Total Loans by banks Total Total Total Loans
 End of year or month
 
2004 6,617.4 15.1 2,174.3 1,750.2 1,122.9 627.3 424.2 306.3 117.9 3,358.7 3,083.4 2,479.7 2,223.8
2005 6,859.4 15.3 2,276.0 1,762.5 1,148.4 614.1 513.5 356.3 157.2 3,407.6 3,085.2 2,504.6 2,226.3
2006 7,154.4 16.4 2,314.4 1,718.6 1,138.6 580.0 595.8 376.8 219.0 3,462.1 3,085.5 2,536.1 2,241.9
2007 7,592.4 17.8 2,523.4 1,847.9 1,290.4 557.5 675.4 421.6 253.8 3,487.3 3,061.8 2,556.0 2,288.8
2008 7,892.7 17.8 2,681.8 1,990.2 1,404.3 585.8 691.6 452.9 238.8 3,638.2 3,163.0 2,686.9 2,357.3
2009 7,436.1 17.2 2,480.5 1,813.2 1,218.4 594.8 667.3 449.5 217.8 3,638.3 3,187.9 2,692.9 2,357.5
2010 8,304.8 16.5 2,361.6 1,787.8 1,276.9 510.9 573.9 372.8 201.0 3,724.5 3,303.0 2,669.2 2,354.7
2011 8,393.3 16.4 2,394.4 1,844.5 1,362.2 482.2 550.0 362.3 187.7 3,673.5 3,270.5 2,709.4 2,415.1
2012 8,226.6 19.2 2,309.0 1,813.2 1,363.8 449.4 495.9 322.2 173.7 3,688.6 3,289.4 2,695.5 2,435.7
2011          Dec 8,393.3 16.4 2,394.4 1,844.5 1,362.2 482.2 550.0 362.3 187.7 3,673.5 3,270.5 2,709.4 2,415.1
2012          Jan 8,517.7 14.5 2,470.6 1,921.9 1,444.6 477.3 548.7 362.6 186.1 3,702.0 3,298.2 2,729.8 2,437.1
         Feb 8,526.0 14.4 2,534.4 1,981.0 1,499.7 481.3 553.4 369.7 183.7 3,695.5 3,291.4 2,723.7 2,437.0         Mar 8,522.7 15.4 2,577.6 2,037.3 1,559.1 478.2 540.3 358.1 182.2 3,698.3 3,292.5 2,722.7 2,427.8
         Apr 8,599.6 15.3 2,593.3 2,049.9 1,574.4 475.5 543.4 365.1 178.2 3,719.9 3,314.2 2,739.4 2,430.9
         May 8,859.6 15.5 2,605.1 2,060.4 1,585.9 474.5 544.7 365.3 179.4 3,692.5 3,288.7 2,722.4 2,434.0         June 8,636.4 15.5 2,566.1 2,041.1 1,571.3 469.8 525.0 351.0 174.1 3,699.4 3,297.2 2,692.7 2,432.4
         July 8,726.8 14.8 2,531.1 2,000.3 1,530.8 469.5 530.8 359.0 171.8 3,731.2 3,327.5 2,724.4 2,467.2
         Aug 8,695.6 15.7 2,538.3 2,016.4 1,547.5 468.9 522.0 349.7 172.2 3,725.2 3,321.8 2,723.8 2,464.9
         Sep 8,567.6 16.0 2,463.9 1,947.5 1,481.5 466.0 516.4 346.1 170.3 3,730.1 3,322.3 2,720.6 2,458.6
         Oct 8,489.2 15.9 2,426.0 1,916.6 1,456.5 460.1 509.4 340.1 169.3 3,748.2 3,340.1 2,728.3 2,471.5
         Nov 8,440.0 15.6 2,411.8 1,904.4 1,448.5 455.9 507.4 337.2 170.2 3,741.9 3,334.9 2,722.7 2,465.5         Dec 8,226.6 19.2 2,309.0 1,813.2 1,363.8 449.4 495.9 322.2 173.7 3,688.6 3,289.4 2,695.5 2,435.7
2013          Jan 8,110.4 15.0 2,284.4 1,784.1 1,337.9 446.2 500.3 325.9 174.4 3,717.9 3,313.3 2,721.2 2,454.3
         Feb 8,094.4 15.0 2,268.2 1,755.8 1,312.0 443.8 512.4 339.6 172.8 3,711.7 3,307.1 2,718.4 2,457.6         Mar 8,063.0 16.9 2,228.8 1,727.6 1,290.0 437.6 501.1 332.8 168.3 3,710.8 3,302.6 2,715.8 2,451.0
         Apr 8,080.3 15.7 2,220.5 1,715.6 1,281.3 434.3 504.9 337.1 167.8 3,736.2 3,329.5 2,732.4 2,446.6
         May 7,937.6 16.0 2,196.9 1,692.8 1,258.9 433.9 504.1 335.6 168.5 3,713.8 3,302.1 2,720.5 2,451.6         June 7,833.2 15.8 2,189.1 1,676.4 1,243.9 432.5 512.7 344.5 168.2 3,713.6 3,307.8 2,727.1 2,464.1
         July 7,752.9 15.1 2,149.0 1,650.0 1,223.2 426.9 499.0 333.5 165.5 3,708.9 3,300.7 2,711.5 2,449.8
         Aug 7,684.9 16.4 2,256.6 1,752.4 1,327.1 425.3 504.2 336.9 167.2 3,604.4 3,197.1 2,613.8 2,351.7
         Sep 7,681.3 15.3 2,247.5 1,739.1 1,315.1 424.0 508.4 342.6 165.9 3,601.5 3,199.8 2,617.6 2,354.9
 Changes 3
2005 187.9 0.1 93.0 10.4 22.8 − 12.5 82.6 44.6 38.1 59.7 14.2 37.2 15.5
2006 356.8 1.1 84.2 0.5 28.0 − 27.6 83.7 22.4 61.3 56.0 1.5 32.5 13.3
2007 518.3 1.5 218.9 135.5 156.3 − 20.8 83.4 47.4 36.0 54.1 − 1.0 38.7 53.2
2008 313.3 − 0.1 183.6 164.3 127.5 36.9 19.3 33.7 − 14.4 140.4 102.6 130.9 65.5
2009 −454.5 − 0.5 −189.0 −166.4 −182.2 15.8 − 22.5 − 1.8 − 20.7 17.4 38.3 17.0 6.6
2010 −136.3 − 0.7 −111.6 − 15.6 58.5 − 74.1 − 95.9 − 80.9 − 15.1 96.4 126.0 − 13.7 0.7
2011 54.1 − 0.1 32.6 58.7 91.7 − 33.0 − 26.0 − 12.1 − 13.9 − 51.8 − 35.3 38.7 56.7
2012 −129.2 2.9 − 81.9 − 28.4 3.0 − 31.4 − 53.5 − 39.7 − 13.8 27.5 27.7 17.0 28.8
2012          Jan 132.8 − 1.9 78.4 78.4 83.0 − 4.7 0.1 0.8 − 0.8 34.8 31.1 23.8 24.2
         Feb 20.7 − 0.1 65.8 60.4 56.0 4.4 5.5 7.8 − 2.3 − 3.2 − 4.6 − 4.1 1.7
         Mar − 7.0 0.9 42.3 55.8 59.1 − 3.3 − 13.5 − 11.8 − 1.6 3.0 1.5 − 0.5 − 8.9
         Apr 68.9 − 0.1 17.5 15.1 17.9 − 2.7 2.4 6.5 − 4.2 18.0 18.8 13.9 0.1
         May 226.6 0.2 6.4 7.4 9.1 − 1.7 − 1.0 − 1.8 0.9 − 33.0 − 29.2 − 20.4 − 0.4
         June −214.5 0.0 − 37.7 − 18.6 − 14.0 − 4.6 − 19.2 − 13.9 − 5.3 10.7 11.6 − 6.6 1.4         July 85.2 − 0.7 − 37.3 − 42.0 − 41.4 − 0.6 4.7 7.1 − 2.4 29.8 29.3 30.9 33.9
         Aug − 16.8 0.9 9.4 17.2 17.5 − 0.4 − 7.8 − 8.5 0.7 − 3.5 − 3.9 1.2 − 0.7
         Sep −115.5 0.3 − 72.0 − 67.4 − 65.3 − 2.1 − 4.7 − 2.9 − 1.8 7.3 2.2 − 0.6 − 4.0
         Oct − 75.9 − 0.1 − 38.7 − 31.8 − 26.6 − 5.3 − 6.8 − 5.8 − 1.0 19.2 18.6 9.1 14.3         Nov − 29.4 − 0.3 − 14.3 − 12.3 − 8.0 − 4.3 − 1.9 − 2.8 0.8 − 5.2 − 4.6 − 4.9 − 5.3         Dec −204.3 3.6 −101.8 − 90.5 − 84.2 − 6.3 − 11.3 − 14.5 3.2 − 50.5 − 43.1 − 24.8 − 27.5
2013          Jan − 97.7 − 4.2 − 21.9 − 27.6 − 24.8 − 2.8 5.7 5.0 0.7 35.4 28.8 30.4 23.3
         Feb − 27.1 0.0 − 15.6 − 26.4 − 23.7 − 2.7 10.8 12.6 − 1.8 − 8.1 − 7.4 − 4.0 2.0         Mar − 44.2 1.9 − 41.3 − 29.2 − 22.7 − 6.5 − 12.1 − 6.8 − 5.3 − 2.4 − 5.1 − 3.2 − 7.3
         Apr 27.6 − 1.3 − 6.9 − 11.2 − 8.1 − 3.1 4.3 4.9 − 0.5 27.6 28.4 18.1 − 2.8
         May −142.7 0.3 − 23.5 − 22.8 − 22.4 − 0.5 − 0.7 − 1.4 0.7 − 22.0 − 27.1 − 11.6 5.5
         June −102.1 − 0.2 − 7.2 − 16.1 − 14.9 − 1.1 8.8 9.1 − 0.3 1.1 6.6 7.3 12.9
         July − 72.5 − 0.6 − 38.9 − 25.6 − 20.3 − 5.4 − 13.2 − 10.5 − 2.8 − 2.8 − 6.0 − 14.6 − 13.1
         Aug − 87.5 1.2 7.7 5.7 7.3 − 1.6 2.0 0.3 1.7 − 12.1 − 11.6 − 5.9 − 6.4
         Sep − 3.6 − 1.1 − 9.1 − 13.3 − 12.0 − 1.3 4.2 5.6 − 1.4 0.8 5.9 7.0 6.7
*This table serves to supplement the “Overall monetary survey“ in section II. Unlike by banks (including building and loan associations) − data from money market
the other tables in section IV, this table includes − in addition to the figures reported funds. 1See footnote 1 in Table IV.2. 2Including debt securities arising from the

Deutsche Bundesbank
21  Monthly Report
November 2013
IV Banks
 
   
 
euro area Claims on
non-euro-area
to non-banks in other member states residents
 General Enterprises and General government households government
Secur- Secur- of which Secur- of which Other
ities Total Loans ities 
2 Total Total Loans Total Loans ities Total Loans assets  1   Period
End of year or month
 
255.9 603.8 423.0 180.8 275.3 140.6 61.9 134.7 25.7 109.0 897.8 730.4 171.4 2004
278.2 580.7 408.7 171.9 322.4 169.1 65.0 153.3 30.7 122.6 993.8 796.8 166.7 2005
294.1 549.5 390.2 159.2 376.6 228.1 85.2 148.5 26.1 122.4 1,172.7 936.2 188.8 2006267.3 505.8 360.7 145.0 425.5 294.6 124.9 130.9 26.0 104.9 1,339.5 1,026.9 224.4 2007329.6 476.1 342.8 133.4 475.1 348.1 172.1 127.0 27.6 99.4 1,279.2 1,008.6 275.7 2008335.4 495.0 335.1 160.0 450.4 322.2 162.9 128.2 23.5 104.7 1,062.6 821.1 237.5 2009
314.5 633.8 418.4 215.3 421.6 289.2 164.2 132.4 24.8 107.6 1,021.0 792.7 1,181.1 2010
294.3 561.1 359.8 201.2 403.1 276.9 161.2 126.2 32.6 93.6 995.1 770.9 1,313.8 2011259.8 594.0 350.3 243.7 399.2 275.1 158.1 124.1 30.4 93.7 970.3 745.0 1,239.4 2012
294.3 561.1 359.8 201.2 403.1 276.9 161.2 126.2 32.6 93.6 995.1 770.9 1,313.8 2011          Dec 292.8 568.3 363.6 204.8 403.8 277.7 157.6 126.1 32.3 93.8 1,016.2 794.5 1,314.3 2012          Jan 
286.7 567.7 361.3 206.4 404.1 278.1 158.1 126.1 32.4 93.7 996.6 778.9 1,285.0          Feb 295.0 569.8 359.9 209.9 405.8 279.9 159.9 125.9 31.5 94.3 1,004.1 782.1 1,227.4          Mar 
308.5 574.8 365.3 209.6 405.7 282.6 163.2 123.1 31.4 91.7 1,008.5 786.8 1,262.6          Apr 
288.3 566.3 359.8 206.5 403.8 279.3 160.7 124.6 31.5 93.0 1,027.6 804.5 1,518.8          May260.4 604.5 370.2 234.3 402.2 278.2 160.3 124.0 31.8 92.2 992.6 772.1 1,362.8          June
257.2 603.1 367.0 236.1 403.7 282.5 162.1 121.2 31.1 90.1 1,005.2 786.0 1,444.5          July
258.9 598.1 359.6 238.4 403.4 281.3 161.0 122.1 31.7 90.4 1,007.4 787.3 1,408.9          Aug 262.1 601.7 359.8 241.9 407.8 283.5 161.4 124.3 31.4 92.9 1,005.3 788.1 1,352.2          Sep 
256.9 611.8 366.5 245.3 408.0 282.2 160.0 125.8 31.9 93.9 1,003.5 784.8 1,295.6          Oct 
257.2 612.2 360.2 252.0 407.1 282.8 160.3 124.3 32.0 92.3 996.2 778.1 1,274.5          Nov 259.8 594.0 350.3 243.7 399.2 275.1 158.1 124.1 30.4 93.7 970.3 745.0 1,239.4          Dec 
266.8 592.1 352.2 239.9 404.6 277.6 157.0 127.0 30.3 96.8 955.4 728.8 1,137.7 2013          Jan 
260.8 588.7 347.3 241.4 404.6 280.2 157.0 124.4 30.3 94.1 959.5 739.4 1,140.0          Feb 264.8 586.8 345.2 241.6 408.1 284.8 157.6 123.4 30.1 93.2 965.3 740.5 1,141.2          Mar 
285.8 597.1 355.2 241.9 406.6 282.3 158.7 124.4 30.8 93.5 964.2 736.2 1,143.8          Apr 
268.9 581.6 344.6 237.0 411.8 282.3 155.8 129.5 30.7 98.8 962.8 733.7 1,048.1          May262.9 580.8 342.3 238.5 405.7 278.1 152.3 127.6 29.9 97.7 951.9 723.2 962.7          June
261.7 589.2 347.3 241.9 408.2 279.2 151.0 129.0 29.9 99.1 937.8 706.4 942.0          July
262.1 583.3 340.6 242.8 407.2 275.1 149.8 132.1 30.7 101.5 934.2 703.9 873.3          Aug 262.8 582.2 340.0 242.2 401.7 273.6 147.5 128.0 30.2 97.8 912.8 681.8 904.2          Sep 
Changes 3
21.7 − 23.0 − 14.3 − 8.6 45.5 27.4 2.2 18.2 4.7 13.5 57.1 31.2 − 22.2 200519.3 − 31.0 − 18.6 − 12.4 54.5 59.6 20.9 − 5.1 − 1.3 − 3.8 205.7 165.7 9.8 2006
− 14.6 − 39.6 − 29.3 − 10.3 55.1 73.6 41.5 − 18.6 0.0 − 18.6 222.7 136.5 21.1 2007
65.4 − 28.4 − 16.9 − 11.5 37.8 42.3 40.4 − 4.5 1.6 − 6.1 − 40.3 − 7.6 29.7 200810.5 21.3 − 5.1 26.4 − 20.9 − 20.9 − 7.1 0.0 − 3.9 3.9 −182.5 −162.3 − 99.8 2009
− 14.3 139.7 83.4 56.3 − 29.6 − 36.4 0.2 6.8 3.1 3.7 − 74.1 − 61.9 − 46.3 2010− 18.0 − 74.0 − 59.1 − 14.9 − 16.6 − 13.8 − 5.5 − 2.7 8.0 − 10.7 − 39.5 − 34.9 112.9 2011− 11.8 10.7 − 10.5 21.2 − 0.2 − 0.7 − 1.5 0.5 − 2.2 2.7 − 15.5 − 17.7 − 62.2 2012
− 0.3 7.3 3.8 3.5 3.7 1.7 − 2.9 2.0 − 0.2 2.2 28.7 29.3 − 7.3 2012          Jan 
− 5.8 − 0.5 − 2.2 1.7 1.5 1.3 1.3 0.2 0.1 0.2 − 12.0 − 8.4 − 30.0          Feb 
8.4 2.0 − 1.4 3.4 1.5 1.7 1.7 − 0.2 − 0.9 0.6 4.9 0.8 − 58.2          Mar 
13.8 4.8 5.3 − 0.5 − 0.8 2.0 2.9 − 2.8 − 0.1 − 2.7 − 0.6 0.3 34.1          Apr 
− 19.9 − 8.8 − 5.6 − 3.2 − 3.9 − 5.1 − 4.4 1.2 0.1 1.1 − 2.6 − 2.5 255.6          May− 8.0 18.2 10.4 7.8 − 0.9 − 0.9 0.2 − 0.0 0.2 − 0.3 − 29.4 − 27.1 −158.0          June
− 3.0 − 1.6 − 3.3 1.8 0.5 3.4 0.9 − 2.9 − 0.7 − 2.2 2.6 5.2 90.7          July
1.9 − 5.1 − 7.4 2.3 0.4 − 0.5 − 0.2 1.0 0.6 0.3 12.0 10.2 − 35.6          Aug 
3.4 2.8 − 0.6 3.4 5.1 2.9 1.3 2.2 − 0.4 2.6 6.7 9.1 − 57.7          Sep 
− 5.2 9.5 6.7 2.8 0.7 − 0.9 − 1.1 1.6 0.6 1.0 0.9 − 0.8 − 57.3          Oct 
0.4 0.3 − 6.3 6.6 − 0.7 0.8 0.4 − 1.5 0.1 − 1.6 − 6.8 − 6.3 − 2.8          Nov 2.7 − 18.3 − 9.9 − 8.5 − 7.3 − 7.2 − 1.6 − 0.2 − 1.6 1.4 − 19.8 − 27.4 − 35.8          Dec 
7.1 − 1.6 2.0 − 3.5 6.6 3.6 0.1 3.0 − 0.1 3.1 − 3.1 − 4.8 −103.9 2013          Jan 
− 6.0 − 3.4 − 4.9 1.5 − 0.7 2.0 − 0.5 − 2.7 0.0 − 2.7 − 2.4 1.6 − 1.1          Feb 
4.1 − 2.0 − 2.1 0.2 2.8 3.9 0.0 − 1.1 − 0.2 − 0.9 − 3.1 − 7.1 0.6          Mar 
20.9 10.3 10.1 0.2 − 0.8 − 1.8 1.9 0.9 0.7 0.3 5.7 2.1 2.5          Apr 
− 17.1 − 15.5 − 10.5 − 4.9 5.1 − 0.1 − 3.0 5.1 − 0.1 5.2 − 1.9 − 2.8 − 95.6          May
− 5.6 − 0.7 − 2.3 1.6 − 5.6 − 3.8 − 3.3 − 1.8 − 0.7 − 1.1 − 8.4 − 8.8 − 87.3          June
− 1.4 8.5 5.1 3.5 3.3 1.8 − 0.5 1.5 − 0.0 1.5 − 9.2 − 11.8 − 21.0          July
0.5 − 5.7 − 6.7 1.0 − 0.5 − 3.5 − 1.1 3.1 0.8 2.3 − 14.4 − 13.3 − 69.9          Aug 
0.4 − 1.1 − 0.6 − 0.5 − 5.2 − 1.1 − 1.9 − 4.1 − 0.5 − 3.6 − 21.1 − 21.8 26.9          Sep 
exchange of equalisation claims. 3Statistical breaks have been eliminated from
the flow figures (see also footnote * in Table II.1). 

Deutsche Bundesbank
22  Monthly Report
November 2013
IV Banks
 
1 Assets and liabilities of monetary financial institutions (excluding the Bundesbank) in Germany *
  Liabilities
 
€ billion
Deposits of banks (MFIs) Deposits of non-banks (non-MFIs) in the euro area
in the euro area
Deposits of non-banks in the home country Deposits of non-banks
With agreed At agreed
of banks maturities notice
Balance in the in other of which of which
sheet home member Over- up to up to Over-
Period total 1 Total country states Total Total night Total 2 years Total 3 months Total night
 End of year or month
 
2004 6,617.4 1,528.4 1,270.8 257.6 2,264.2 2,148.5 646.2 898.9 239.9 603.5 515.5 71.9 8.8
2005 6,859.4 1,569.6 1,300.8 268.8 2,329.1 2,225.4 715.8 906.2 233.4 603.4 519.1 62.2 9.6
2006 7,154.4 1,637.7 1,348.6 289.0 2,449.2 2,341.6 745.8 1,009.3 310.1 586.5 487.4 62.0 13.9
2007 7,592.4 1,778.6 1,479.0 299.6 2,633.6 2,518.3 769.6 1,193.3 477.9 555.4 446.0 75.1 19.6
2008 7,892.7 1,827.7 1,583.0 244.7 2,798.2 2,687.3 809.5 1,342.7 598.7 535.2 424.8 74.2 22.4
2009 7,436.1 1,589.7 1,355.6 234.0 2,818.0 2,731.3 997.8 1,139.1 356.4 594.4 474.4 63.9 17.7
2010 8,304.8 1,495.8 1,240.1 255.7 2,925.8 2,817.6 1,089.1 1,110.3 304.6 618.2 512.5 68.4 19.3
2011 8,393.3 1,444.8 1,210.3 234.5 3,033.4 2,915.1 1,143.3 1,155.8 362.6 616.1 515.3 78.8 25.9
2012 8,226.6 1,371.0 1,135.9 235.1 3,091.4 2,985.2 1,294.9 1,072.8 320.0 617.6 528.4 77.3 31.2
2011          Dec 8,393.3 1,444.8 1,210.3 234.5 3,033.4 2,915.1 1,143.3 1,155.8 362.6 616.1 515.3 78.8 25.9
2012          Jan 8,517.7 1,475.9 1,221.1 254.8 3,038.6 2,912.4 1,144.4 1,150.7 360.9 617.2 517.4 82.8 29.3
         Feb 8,526.0 1,484.7 1,232.3 252.4 3,046.2 2,915.6 1,147.2 1,148.6 361.0 619.8 520.2 83.7 31.0         Mar 8,522.7 1,501.9 1,232.1 269.8 3,037.7 2,924.1 1,157.4 1,147.3 363.0 619.4 520.6 77.3 28.9
         Apr 8,599.6 1,501.9 1,222.4 279.5 3,052.2 2,938.9 1,170.0 1,151.0 368.0 617.9 519.4 77.4 28.3
         May 8,859.6 1,494.1 1,219.3 274.8 3,069.6 2,955.6 1,185.8 1,152.7 372.2 617.1 519.5 78.2 30.1         June 8,636.4 1,469.5 1,207.6 262.0 3,091.1 2,975.0 1,203.3 1,155.7 378.1 616.0 519.4 78.9 30.3
         July 8,726.8 1,454.7 1,190.5 264.1 3,084.9 2,974.1 1,207.7 1,151.3 378.6 615.9 520.1 78.5 30.1
         Aug 8,695.6 1,447.9 1,185.3 262.6 3,092.7 2,985.4 1,221.5 1,149.6 378.2 615.3 521.0 76.3 30.3         Sep 8,567.6 1,428.2 1,175.5 252.8 3,100.1 2,991.1 1,241.8 1,135.2 366.7 614.1 521.3 77.5 33.6
         Oct 8,489.2 1,415.4 1,161.0 254.4 3,099.5 2,993.8 1,265.7 1,114.7 355.4 613.5 521.5 76.3 32.1
         Nov 8,440.0 1,413.7 1,160.3 253.5 3,114.9 3,006.6 1,293.1 1,100.7 346.7 612.8 522.0 76.8 33.1         Dec 8,226.6 1,371.0 1,135.9 235.1 3,091.4 2,985.2 1,294.9 1,072.8 320.0 617.6 528.4 77.3 31.2
2013          Jan 8,110.4 1,371.5 1,127.0 244.6 3,090.1 2,983.1 1,305.1 1,061.3 310.2 616.7 529.3 77.0 32.1
         Feb 8,094.4 1,348.4 1,103.4 245.0 3,081.2 2,977.9 1,310.2 1,051.2 303.2 616.6 530.7 76.3 33.7         Mar 8,063.0 1,333.9 1,093.6 240.3 3,082.3 2,979.7 1,310.5 1,054.7 307.1 614.4 529.3 77.2 35.3
         Apr 8,080.3 1,348.6 1,089.7 258.9 3,083.6 2,984.0 1,322.3 1,049.5 305.9 612.3 528.7 77.0 35.4
         May 7,937.6 1,320.9 1,071.5 249.4 3,100.0 2,998.0 1,337.7 1,049.6 306.6 610.7 529.1 74.3 32.7         June 7,833.2 1,301.2 1,060.2 241.1 3,104.9 2,997.9 1,345.3 1,043.0 302.4 609.6 528.9 78.2 37.1
         July 7,752.9 1,292.8 1,050.1 242.7 3,097.8 2,994.5 1,351.7 1,034.7 298.3 608.1 528.3 76.3 34.9
         Aug 7,684.9 1,388.6 1,148.9 239.7 3,101.4 3,006.8 1,367.7 1,031.7 298.5 607.4 528.6 76.5 34.0         Sep 7,681.3 1,386.7 1,146.7 240.0 3,100.4 3,005.5 1,375.9 1,023.3 293.7 606.3 528.2 77.3 36.9
 Changes 4
2005 187.9 32.8 27.0 5.9 65.0 75.5 69.4 7.3 − 6.9 − 1.2 2.9 − 8.0 0.5
2006 356.8 105.6 81.5 24.1 122.9 118.6 30.4 105.0 77.1 − 16.8 − 31.7 0.4 4.4
2007 518.3 148.4 134.8 13.6 185.1 177.3 24.5 183.9 167.8 − 31.1 − 41.4 13.6 5.6
2008 313.3 65.8 121.7 − 55.8 162.3 173.1 38.7 154.6 123.5 − 20.2 − 21.2 − 7.5 − 0.1
2009 −454.5 −235.4 −224.6 − 10.8 31.9 43.9 205.0 −220.4 −259.3 59.3 50.3 − 9.6 − 4.1
2010 −136.3 − 75.2 − 99.4 24.2 72.3 59.7 88.7 − 53.0 − 52.2 24.0 38.3 − 4.4 2.2
2011 54.1 − 48.4 − 28.8 − 19.6 102.1 97.4 52.4 47.6 58.8 − 2.6 1.3 4.8 6.5
2012 −129.2 − 68.7 − 70.0 1.3 57.8 67.1 156.1 − 90.4 − 50.2 1.5 14.1 − 1.4 5.4
2012          Jan 132.8 32.1 11.5 20.7 5.7 − 2.4 1.5 − 5.0 − 1.7 1.1 2.1 4.1 3.5
         Feb 20.7 10.2 12.2 − 2.0 8.2 3.7 6.7 − 5.6 − 3.3 2.6 3.8 1.0 1.7
         Mar − 7.0 16.7 − 0.6 17.3 − 8.6 8.4 10.1 − 1.3 1.9 − 0.4 0.4 − 6.4 − 2.1
         Apr 68.9 1.8 − 7.6 9.4 14.0 12.1 12.5 1.1 2.4 − 1.5 − 1.2 0.0 − 0.6
         May 226.6 − 11.5 − 5.4 − 6.1 15.7 15.2 14.8 1.2 3.8 − 0.8 0.0 0.5 1.7
         June −214.5 − 23.7 − 11.2 − 12.5 21.9 19.8 17.7 3.2 6.0 − 1.1 − 0.1 0.8 0.2         July 85.2 − 16.3 − 17.9 1.7 − 7.0 − 1.6 4.0 − 5.4 − 0.4 − 0.2 0.7 − 0.5 − 0.2
         Aug − 16.8 − 5.4 − 4.4 − 1.0 8.5 11.9 14.3 − 1.8 − 0.5 − 0.5 0.9 − 2.1 0.3
         Sep −115.5 − 18.4 − 9.1 − 9.3 7.2 5.1 21.0 − 14.7 − 11.8 − 1.2 0.3 1.3 3.4
         Oct − 75.9 − 15.5 − 17.2 1.7 − 0.4 3.0 24.0 − 20.5 − 11.3 − 0.6 0.2 − 1.1 − 1.5
         Nov − 29.4 − 1.3 − 0.7 − 0.6 15.5 12.8 27.5 − 13.9 − 8.7 − 0.7 0.6 0.4 1.0         Dec −204.3 − 37.3 − 19.4 − 17.9 − 22.8 − 20.8 2.1 − 27.7 − 26.6 4.8 6.3 0.6 − 1.8
2013          Jan − 97.7 2.3 − 7.4 9.8 − 0.2 − 1.2 10.9 − 11.2 − 9.7 − 0.8 1.0 − 0.1 1.0
         Feb − 27.1 − 24.8 − 24.6 − 0.2 − 9.8 − 5.9 4.5 − 10.3 − 7.2 − 0.1 1.4 − 0.9 1.5         Mar − 44.2 − 15.5 − 10.3 − 5.3 − 0.0 0.8 − 0.4 3.4 3.8 − 2.2 − 1.4 0.8 1.5
         Apr 27.6 15.8 − 3.2 19.1 1.9 4.9 12.5 − 5.4 − 1.4 − 2.1 − 0.6 − 0.2 0.1
         May −142.7 − 27.7 − 18.1 − 9.6 16.0 14.0 15.5 0.1 0.7 − 1.6 0.4 − 3.1 − 2.2
         June −102.1 − 19.8 − 11.6 − 8.2 5.4 0.3 7.6 − 6.2 − 4.6 − 1.1 − 0.2 4.0 4.5
         July − 72.5 − 7.7 − 9.6 2.0 − 6.6 − 3.0 6.8 − 8.2 − 4.0 − 1.5 − 0.6 − 1.8 − 2.1
         Aug − 87.5 12.9 18.5 − 5.7 3.5 12.2 15.9 − 3.0 0.2 − 0.7 0.2 0.1 − 1.0         Sep − 3.6 − 1.9 − 2.2 0.3 − 1.0 − 1.3 8.2 − 8.4 − 4.8 − 1.1 − 0.3 0.8 3.0
*This table serves to supplement the “Overall monetary survey“ in section II. Unlike by banks (including building and loan associations) − data from money market
the other tables in section IV, this table includes − in addition to the figures reported funds. 1See footnote 1 in Table IV.2. 2Excluding deposits of central

Deutsche Bundesbank
23  Monthly Report
November 2013
IV Banks
 
   
 
 Debt securities
issued 3 
in other member states 2 Deposits ofcentral governments
With agreed At agreed Liabilitiesmaturities notice arising
of which from Money of which Liabilities
domestic market with to non- repos with
of which of which central non-banks fund euro- Capital maturities
up to up to govern- in the shares of up to area and Other
Total 2 years Total 3 months Total ments euro area issued  
3 Total reserves   Period 2 years 3 residents Liabilities 1 
End of year or month
 
59.8 9.8 3.3 2.7 43.8 41.4 14.8 31.5 1,554.8 116.9 577.1 329.3 317.2 2004
50.2 9.8 2.4 2.0 41.6 38.8 19.5 31.7 1,611.9 113.8 626.2 346.9 324.5 2005
45.9 9.3 2.3 1.9 45.5 41.9 17.1 32.0 1,636.7 136.4 638.5 389.6 353.7 200653.2 22.0 2.3 1.8 40.1 38.3 26.6 28.6 1,637.6 182.3 661.0 428.2 398.2 200749.5 24.9 2.4 1.8 36.6 34.8 61.1 16.4 1,609.9 233.3 666.3 461.7 451.5 200843.7 17.0 2.5 2.0 22.8 22.2 80.5 11.4 1,500.5 146.3 565.6 454.8 415.6 2009
46.4 16.1 2.8 2.2 39.8 38.7 86.7 9.8 1,407.8 82.3 636.0 452.6 1,290.2 2010
49.6 18.4 3.3 2.5 39.5 37.9 97.1 6.2 1,345.7 75.7 561.5 468.1 1,436.6 201142.3 14.7 3.8 2.8 28.9 25.9 80.4 7.3 1,233.1 56.9 611.4 487.3 1,344.7 2012
49.6 18.4 3.3 2.5 39.5 37.9 97.1 6.2 1,345.7 75.7 561.5 468.1 1,436.6 2011          Dec 50.1 19.0 3.4 2.6 43.4 40.9 86.7 5.9 1,311.1 74.3 702.3 468.9 1,428.2 2012          Jan 
49.2 18.6 3.4 2.6 46.9 45.2 96.6 5.7 1,316.9 75.6 719.2 471.8 1,384.9          Feb 44.9 16.0 3.5 2.6 36.3 35.6 93.1 5.5 1,305.7 72.7 772.9 476.9 1,329.2          Mar 
45.6 16.7 3.5 2.6 35.8 33.4 102.9 5.5 1,303.7 68.5 788.9 477.2 1,367.2          Apr 
44.5 15.9 3.6 2.7 35.8 31.5 108.3 5.5 1,304.1 63.6 775.2 482.5 1,620.2          May44.9 16.5 3.8 2.8 37.2 33.8 98.9 5.7 1,291.7 62.9 737.8 489.4 1,452.5          June
44.6 16.1 3.8 2.9 32.3 30.0 106.6 5.7 1,296.0 65.5 748.5 497.0 1,533.4          July
42.1 14.3 3.9 2.9 31.0 27.7 108.1 5.3 1,285.6 62.8 769.0 492.5 1,494.5          Aug 40.0 12.5 3.9 2.9 31.5 26.7 98.0 5.1 1,277.2 61.0 726.4 487.8 1,444.8          Sep 
40.4 12.6 3.9 2.9 29.3 26.6 107.8 5.4 1,264.6 60.7 719.3 488.1 1,389.0          Oct 
39.9 12.3 3.8 2.9 31.5 26.6 107.0 5.4 1,255.2 60.8 685.8 490.6 1,367.4          Nov 42.3 14.7 3.8 2.8 28.9 25.9 80.4 7.3 1,233.1 56.9 611.4 487.3 1,344.7          Dec 
41.2 14.2 3.7 2.8 30.0 24.0 83.1 7.4 1,212.4 52.0 613.2 489.8 1,242.9 2013          Jan 
38.9 13.1 3.7 2.8 27.1 23.6 99.7 6.8 1,215.9 51.7 612.0 499.8 1,230.6          Feb 38.3 13.0 3.6 2.8 25.4 23.4 97.0 6.8 1,201.5 49.5 600.1 502.9 1,238.6          Mar 
38.0 13.1 3.6 2.8 22.6 21.8 98.9 7.4 1,192.5 50.2 602.5 502.7 1,244.1          Apr 
38.0 12.5 3.6 2.8 27.7 22.5 98.0 7.3 1,177.8 48.5 585.4 506.6 1,141.6          May37.5 11.5 3.6 2.8 28.8 21.9 113.3 5.7 1,166.0 45.5 574.3 517.2 1,050.5          June
37.8 12.4 3.6 2.8 27.0 23.5 89.8 5.7 1,149.8 49.5 565.9 518.3 1,032.7          July
39.0 14.5 3.5 2.8 18.1 16.7 3.0 5.7 1,142.8 46.2 560.2 522.6 960.6          Aug 36.8 12.7 3.5 2.8 17.6 15.4 3.7 5.3 1,139.6 43.8 523.1 521.4 1,001.0          Sep 
Changes 4
− 7.7 − 0.3 − 0.9 − 0.7 − 2.5 − 3.0 4.7 0.2 38.7 − 9.9 22.0 14.8 9.7 2005− 3.9 − 0.3 − 0.1 − 0.2 3.9 3.1 − 3.3 0.3 34.8 22.1 32.4 27.5 36.6 2006
8.0 12.9 0.0 − 0.1 − 5.8 − 4.3 8.1 − 3.4 20.9 49.3 48.7 42.3 68.3 2007
− 7.5 0.6 0.1 − 0.0 − 3.3 − 3.2 36.1 − 12.2 − 33.9 50.2 − 0.1 39.3 56.1 2008− 5.7 − 7.7 0.1 0.2 − 2.4 − 0.8 19.4 − 5.0 −104.6 − 87.1 − 95.3 − 0.3 − 65.0 2009
− 6.8 − 5.8 0.3 0.3 17.0 16.5 6.2 − 1.6 −106.7 − 63.2 54.4 − 7.1 − 78.6 2010
− 2.2 1.7 0.5 0.3 − 0.1 − 0.7 10.0 − 3.7 − 76.9 − 6.6 − 80.5 13.7 137.8 2011− 7.2 − 3.6 0.5 0.3 − 7.9 − 9.2 − 19.6 1.2 −107.0 − 18.6 54.2 21.0 − 68.5 2012
0.6 0.7 0.1 0.0 3.9 3.0 − 10.8 − 0.3 − 31.4 − 1.3 143.6 1.4 − 7.9 2012          Jan 
− 0.8 − 0.3 0.1 0.0 3.5 4.4 10.0 − 0.2 11.6 1.4 20.7 3.9 − 43.7          Feb − 4.3 − 2.7 0.0 0.0 − 10.6 − 9.7 − 3.6 − 0.2 − 12.5 − 3.0 52.5 4.9 − 56.2          Mar 
0.7 0.7 − 0.0 − 0.0 1.9 0.2 7.2 − 0.0 − 5.8 − 4.3 13.8 − 0.3 38.3          Apr 
− 1.3 − 0.9 0.1 0.1 0.0 − 1.9 5.3 0.0 − 13.8 − 5.4 − 24.4 2.8 252.6          May
0.4 0.7 0.2 0.1 1.3 2.3 − 9.4 0.2 − 8.7 − 0.6 − 34.7 7.6 −167.7          June
− 0.3 − 0.4 0.1 0.0 − 4.9 − 3.8 7.6 0.1 − 2.7 2.4 6.3 6.3 90.8          July− 2.4 − 1.8 0.0 0.0 − 1.3 − 2.3 1.7 − 0.4 − 4.1 − 2.5 25.2 − 3.3 − 39.0          Aug − 2.1 − 1.8 0.0 0.0 0.8 − 0.8 − 10.1 − 0.2 − 3.2 − 1.7 − 38.1 − 3.2 − 49.4          Sep 
0.4 0.1 0.0 0.0 − 2.3 − 0.0 9.9 0.4 − 10.5 − 0.2 − 5.8 0.7 − 54.6          Oct 
− 0.5 − 0.4 − 0.0 − 0.0 2.2 0.0 − 0.8 − 0.0 − 8.4 0.2 − 33.4 2.7 − 3.6          Nov 
2.5 2.5 − 0.1 − 0.1 − 2.6 − 0.7 − 26.5 1.9 − 17.6 − 3.7 − 71.5 − 2.5 − 28.1          Dec 
− 1.0 − 0.5 − 0.1 − 0.0 1.1 − 2.0 2.7 0.1 − 12.0 − 4.6 7.3 5.0 −102.9 2013          Jan − 2.4 − 1.1 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 2.9 − 0.4 16.6 − 0.5 − 2.2 − 0.5 − 5.5 8.4 − 9.4          Feb − 0.6 − 0.1 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 1.7 − 0.2 − 2.7 − 0.1 − 19.8 − 2.3 − 16.3 1.8 8.4          Mar 
− 0.3 0.1 − 0.0 0.0 − 2.8 − 1.6 1.9 0.7 − 4.3 0.8 6.0 0.9 4.7          Apr 
− 0.9 − 0.6 − 0.0 0.0 5.1 0.7 − 0.9 − 0.1 − 14.7 − 1.7 − 17.6 4.0 −101.7          May− 0.5 − 1.0 − 0.0 − 0.0 1.1 − 0.6 15.4 − 1.6 − 10.8 − 3.0 − 10.1 10.8 − 91.2          June
0.3 0.9 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 1.8 1.5 − 23.5 − 0.0 − 12.7 4.0 − 5.7 2.0 − 18.3          July1.2 2.2 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 8.9 − 6.8 − 9.4 0.0 − 8.4 − 3.4 − 17.6 3.6 − 72.1          Aug 
− 2.2 − 1.8 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.5 − 1.3 0.7 − 0.5 − 4.0 − 3.1 − 37.1 − 0.4 40.5          Sep 
governments. 3In Germany, debt securities with maturities of up to one year are published together with money market fund shares. 4Statistical breaks have been
classed as money market paper; up to the January 2002 Monthly Report they were eliminated from the flow figures (see also footnote * in Table II.1). 

Deutsche Bundesbank
24  Monthly Report
November 2013
IV Banks
 
2 Principal assets and liabilities of banks (MFIs) in Germany, by category of banks*
 
 
€ billion
  Lending to banks (MFIs)  Lending to non-banks (non-MFIs)
 
 of which of which
 
Loans
 Cash in
 hand and
 credit
Number of balances for
reporting Balance with Balances up to and for Partici- Securities Securities
End of institu- sheet central and issued by including more than issued by pating Other
month tions total 1 banks Total loans banks Total 1 year 1 year Bills non-banks interests assets  1 
All categories of banks
 
2013          Apr 1,867 8,165.6 119.4 2,635.1 1,990.3 637.4 3,998.2 506.8 2,743.5 0.6 735.4 135.7 1,277.2
         May 1,867 8,020.8 105.6 2,624.5 1,979.8 637.5 3,973.4 494.8 2,745.5 0.6 719.1 138.2 1,179.1
         June 1,867 7,915.5 107.6 2,612.1 1,968.1 636.5 3,966.8 497.7 2,741.5 0.6 716.0 137.4 1,091.5
         July 1,866 7,834.4 105.3 2,560.7 1,923.9 629.3 3,961.6 482.4 2,743.7 0.5 722.9 137.2 1,069.5
         Aug 1,864 7,764.1 108.1 2,669.3 2,031.3 630.9 3,850.8 376.2 2,740.6 0.5 718.9 137.4 998.5
         Sep 1,858 7,760.8 113.2 2,642.0 2,006.4 628.0 3,840.0 376.7 2,730.5 0.5 720.9 137.2 1,028.4
Commercial banks 6
2013          Aug 276 2,869.1 69.3 975.5 884.9 89.8 1,058.2 187.7 658.3 0.2 201.3 71.8 694.3
         Sep 275 2,867.5 75.7 945.0 854.7 88.9 1,049.7 183.8 655.2 0.2 203.6 71.7 725.4
   Big banks 7
2013          Aug 4 1,808.9 26.8 583.2 535.6 47.0 476.2 108.1 253.2 0.2 104.6 64.7 658.0
         Sep 4 1,821.6 38.9 563.8 516.5 46.1 465.0 101.9 250.0 0.2 106.5 64.5 689.4
   Regional banks and other commercial banks
2013          Aug 164 832.2 29.0 238.3 197.4 40.7 527.3 61.5 373.1 0.0 92.4 6.5 31.0
         Sep 163 819.1 28.0 224.3 183.2 41.0 529.5 63.3 373.2 0.0 92.8 6.5 30.7
   Branches of foreign banks
2013          Aug 108 228.1 13.5 154.0 151.8 2.1 54.7 18.1 32.0 0.0 4.3 0.7 5.3
         Sep 108 226.8 8.8 156.8 155.0 1.8 55.2 18.5 32.0 0.0 4.4 0.7 5.3
Landesbanken
2013          Aug 9 1,139.8 9.2 408.4 298.5 107.8 567.8 71.7 381.5 0.1 111.6 14.5 140.0
         Sep 9 1,138.8 7.5 413.4 304.6 106.7 563.7 71.7 376.9 0.1 111.8 14.5 139.6
Savings banks
2013          Aug 422 1,099.4 15.0 223.6 81.5 141.7 827.6 56.7 647.8 0.1 122.9 16.1 17.2
         Sep 422 1,098.8 15.0 220.3 78.5 141.4 830.1 58.6 648.1 0.1 123.1 16.0 17.5
 
Regional institutions of credit cooperatives  
 
2013          Aug 2 278.3 0.5 164.5 131.0 33.5 62.8 10.7 22.0 0.0 29.8 14.5 36.1
         Sep 2 278.4 0.3 162.1 128.4 33.7 64.3 12.2 21.7 0.0 30.2 14.5 37.2
Credit cooperatives
2013          Aug 1,096 753.4 10.3 177.9 57.2 120.4 533.5 32.3 423.2 0.1 77.8 12.0 19.6
         Sep 1,091 753.0 10.5 175.5 54.9 120.3 535.2 33.5 424.2 0.1 77.3 12.0 19.7
Mortgage banks
2013          Aug 18 472.6 2.7 126.4 72.5 50.7 327.1 5.3 246.5 − 75.3 0.6 15.8
         Sep 18 465.6 0.4 125.5 72.4 50.0 323.9 5.3 243.7 − 74.9 0.6 15.2
Building and loan associations
2013          Aug 22 204.2 0.3 60.5 43.3 16.9 136.5 1.6 118.0 . 17.0 0.4 6.5
         Sep 22 204.2 0.3 60.0 42.8 16.9 137.0 1.6 118.4 . 16.9 0.4 6.5
Special purpose banks
2013          Aug 19 947.4 0.9 532.6 462.4 70.0 337.4 10.1 243.4 − 83.3 7.5 69.0
         Sep 19 954.6 3.5 540.3 470.0 70.1 336.1 10.0 242.3 − 83.1 7.5 67.2
Memo item: Foreign banks 8
2013          Aug 144 859.9 42.1 332.8 290.6 41.7 394.8 63.6 239.5 0.1 88.8 5.7 84.5
         Sep 144 848.0 33.6 327.5 285.6 40.8 395.5 64.4 238.2 0.1 90.3 5.4 85.9
  of which:  Banks majority-owned by foreign banks 9
2013          Aug 36 631.9 28.6 178.9 138.7 39.5 340.2 45.5 207.5 0.1 84.5 5.0 79.2
         Sep 36 621.2 24.8 170.7 130.6 38.9 340.3 45.9 206.1 0.0 86.0 4.8 80.6
*Assets and liabilities of monetary financial institutions (MFIs) in Germany. The assets meaning of section 340e (3) sentence 1 of the German Commercial Code (Handels-
and liabilities of foreign branches, of money market funds (which are also classified gesetzbuch) read in conjunction with section 35 (1) No 1a of the Credit Institutionas MFIs) and of the Bundesbank are not included. For the definitions of the respective Accounting Regulation (Verordnung über die Rechnungslegung der Kreditinstitute)items, see the footnotes to Table IV.3. 1Owing to the Act Modernising Accounting are classified under "Other assets and liabilities" as of the December 2010 reporting
Law (Gesetz zur Modernisierung des Bilanzrechts) of 25 May 2009, derivative date. Trading portfolio derivatives are listed separately in the Statistical Supplementfinancial instruments in the trading portfolio (trading portfolio derivatives) within the to the Monthly Report 1, Banking statistics, in Tables I.1 to I.3. 2For building and

Deutsche Bundesbank
25  Monthly Report
November 2013
IV Banks
 
   
 
Deposits of banks (MFIs) Deposits of non-banks (non-MFIs) Capital
 including  
of which of which published
reserves,
Time deposits 2 Savings deposits 4 partici-pation
Memo rights
item Bearer capital,
for for of which debt Liabilities
funds for
up to and more arising At three Bank general Other securities
Sight Time Sight including than from savings out- banking liabi-   End of months’
Total deposits deposits Total deposits 1 year 1 year 2 repos 3 Total notice bonds risks lities 1   month standing 5 
All categories of banks
 
1,777.7 432.7 1,345.0 3,356.0 1,466.9 397.3 767.4 172.6 622.6 536.8 101.7 1,271.4 423.2 1,337.3 2013          Apr 
1,727.7 419.7 1,308.0 3,376.8 1,495.6 391.8 768.7 177.3 621.0 537.2 99.7 1,254.8 429.1 1,232.6          May1,708.7 394.5 1,314.2 3,385.2 1,496.3 404.6 766.9 186.1 619.8 536.9 97.5 1,246.8 435.8 1,139.0          June
1,690.6 399.5 1,291.2 3,355.8 1,501.2 378.4 762.4 161.8 618.2 536.3 95.6 1,231.9 435.7 1,120.4          July
1,776.1 394.6 1,381.5 3,277.2 1,502.2 311.9 750.8 74.3 617.5 536.5 94.9 1,228.5 436.3 1,045.9          Aug 1,748.6 419.5 1,329.1 3,267.4 1,502.5 306.8 747.9 64.7 616.3 536.2 93.9 1,223.9 436.6 1,084.3          Sep 
Commercial banks 6
722.2 265.4 456.7 1,187.9 677.2 158.7 207.0 54.4 117.0 103.0 27.9 152.8 140.5 665.8 2013          Aug 690.9 267.6 423.3 1,184.3 678.5 156.0 206.5 44.4 115.8 102.2 27.6 152.1 140.7 699.4          Sep 
Big banks 7
473.2 194.2 279.0 534.6 288.7 75.8 85.7 54.2 74.0 71.7 10.4 114.4 80.4 606.2 2013          Aug 458.3 197.4 260.9 527.4 284.0 75.1 85.0 44.3 73.0 70.7 10.3 114.6 80.4 640.9          Sep 
Regional banks and other commercial banks
145.0 44.1 100.9 545.6 319.1 66.6 100.7 0.2 42.9 31.3 16.3 37.8 51.9 51.9 2013          Aug 135.1 41.4 93.7 543.0 320.5 64.2 99.4 0.1 42.7 31.4 16.1 36.9 51.9 52.2          Sep 
Branches of foreign banks
104.0 27.1 76.9 107.7 69.4 16.3 20.7 − 0.1 0.1 1.2 0.6 8.3 7.6 2013          Aug 
97.5 28.8 68.8 113.9 74.0 16.7 22.0 − 0.1 0.1 1.2 0.6 8.4 6.3          Sep 
Landesbanken
338.4 42.1 296.3 306.5 102.5 57.4 131.5 16.5 14.9 10.6 0.2 284.6 61.7 148.5 2013          Aug 342.0 52.9 289.1 306.3 103.8 56.8 130.6 16.0 14.9 10.6 0.2 281.7 61.7 147.1          Sep 
Savings banks
157.8 16.4 141.3 796.6 402.7 30.4 15.7 − 298.3 255.9 49.4 15.9 84.2 45.0 2013          Aug 158.8 19.3 139.4 793.4 400.8 29.6 15.8 − 298.2 256.3 49.0 15.9 84.3 46.5          Sep 
 
Regional institutions of credit cooperatives
 
136.3 27.8 108.5 34.6 10.0 10.6 11.7 2.7 − − 2.2 59.3 13.8 34.3 2013          Aug 133.7 30.5 103.2 36.5 11.7 11.0 11.6 3.2 − − 2.2 58.1 13.8 36.2          Sep 
Credit cooperatives
101.6 7.1 94.5 552.1 289.3 39.3 22.7 − 186.7 166.4 14.1 12.2 54.5 32.9 2013          Aug 102.1 8.4 93.7 550.1 288.2 38.5 22.6 − 186.9 166.6 13.9 12.0 54.6 34.2          Sep 
Mortgage banks
121.0 5.4 115.6 163.9 10.2 9.2 144.1 0.0 0.2 0.2 . 150.2 17.6 19.9 2013          Aug 119.7 6.0 113.7 160.1 8.2 8.6 143.0 − 0.2 0.2 . 148.2 17.6 20.0          Sep 
Building and loan associations
23.7 2.2 21.5 151.1 0.5 0.6 148.8 − 0.3 0.3 0.9 4.2 9.0 16.1 2013          Aug 23.1 2.3 20.8 151.6 0.5 0.6 149.2 − 0.3 0.3 0.9 4.2 9.0 16.3          Sep 
Special purpose banks
175.1 28.1 147.0 84.6 9.8 5.6 69.1 0.7 − − . 549.4 54.9 83.4 2013          Aug 178.2 32.4 145.8 85.1 10.9 5.6 68.6 1.0 − − . 551.8 55.0 84.6          Sep 
Memo item:   Foreign banks 8
238.7 79.2 159.5 449.0 279.6 62.1 73.8 9.3 21.0 20.7 12.5 32.7 46.2 93.3 2013          Aug 221.2 75.3 145.8 453.7 284.3 61.6 74.3 8.0 21.0 20.7 12.5 30.4 46.4 96.4          Sep 
of which:   Banks majority-owned by foreign banks 9
134.7 52.1 82.6 341.3 210.1 45.8 53.1 9.3 20.9 20.7 11.4 32.1 38.0 85.7 2013          Aug 123.7 46.6 77.1 339.7 210.4 44.9 52.2 8.0 20.9 20.7 11.3 29.8 38.0 90.0          Sep 
loan associations: Including deposits under savings and loan contracts (see Table Nov. 2009), Commerzbank AG, UniCredit Bank AG (formerly Bayerische Hypo- und
IV.12). 3Included in time deposits. 4Excluding deposits under savings and loan Vereinsbank AG) and Deutsche Postbank AG. 8Sum of the banks majority-owned by
contracts (see also footnote 2). 5Including subordinated negotiable bearer debt foreign banks and included in other categories of banks and the category ”Branches
securities; excluding non-negotiable bearer debt securities. 6Commercial banks (with dependent legal status) of foreign banks”. 9Separate presentation of the banks
comprise the sub-groups ”Big banks”, ”Regional banks and other commercial banks” majority-owned by foreign banks included in other banking categories. and ”Branches of foreign banks”. 7Deutsche Bank AG, Dresdner Bank AG (up to

Deutsche Bundesbank
26  Monthly Report
November 2013
IV Banks
 
3 Assets and liabilities of banks (MFIs) in Germany vis-à-vis residents *
 
 
€ billion
Lending to domestic banks (MFIs) Lending to domestic non-banks (non-MFIs)
Treasury
Cash in Negotiable bills and
hand Credit money negotiable
balances market Memo money mar- (euro-area Securities
banknotes with the Credit paper item ket paper issued Securities
and Bundes- balances issued by issued by Fiduciary issued by by non-
Period coins) bank Total and loans Bills banks banks loans Total Loans Bills non-banks banks  1 
End of year or month *
 
2003 17.0 46.7 1,643.9 1,064.0 0.0 8.8 571.0 2.3 2,995.6 2,677.0 3.7 3.4 309.6
2004 14.9 41.2 1,676.3 1,075.8 0.0 7.4 592.9 2.1 3,001.3 2,644.0 2.7 2.6 351.0
2005 15.1 47.9 1,684.5 1,096.8 0.0 6.7 580.9 2.1 2,995.1 2,632.7 2.4 2.4 357.6
2006 16.0 49.4 1,637.8 1,086.3 − 9.3 542.2 1.9 3,000.7 2,630.3 1.9 2.0 366.5
2007 17.5 64.6 1,751.8 1,222.5 0.0 25.3 504.0 2.3 2,975.7 2,647.9 1.6 1.5 324.7
2008 17.4 102.6 1,861.7 1,298.1 0.0 55.7 507.8 2.0 3,071.1 2,698.9 1.2 3.1 367.9
2009 16.9 78.9 1,711.5 1,138.0 − 31.6 541.9 2.2 3,100.1 2,691.8 0.8 4.0 403.5
2010 16.0 79.6 1,686.3 1,195.4 − 7.5 483.5 1.8 3,220.9 2,770.4 0.8 27.9 421.8
2011 15.8 93.8 1,725.6 1,267.9 − 7.1 450.7 2.1 3,197.8 2,774.6 0.8 6.4 415.9
2012 18.5 134.3 1,655.0 1,229.1 − 2.4 423.5 2.4 3,220.4 2,785.5 0.6 2.2 432.1
2012          Apr 14.5 55.4 1,968.9 1,518.5 − 6.6 443.8 2.0 3,244.7 2,795.6 0.5 5.7 442.8
         May 14.8 76.4 1,959.2 1,509.0 − 5.9 444.3 2.0 3,219.1 2,793.4 0.5 4.5 420.7
         June 14.7 89.2 1,927.0 1,481.6 − 6.1 439.3 2.1 3,227.6 2,802.1 0.5 6.1 418.9
         July 14.0 185.5 1,789.7 1,344.8 − 6.3 438.6 2.1 3,257.8 2,833.8 0.5 5.2 418.3
         Aug 14.6 203.4 1,788.0 1,343.7 − 5.4 438.8 2.1 3,252.3 2,824.1 0.5 5.1 422.7
         Sep 14.9 175.1 1,748.0 1,306.1 − 4.1 437.8 2.1 3,253.0 2,817.9 0.5 5.6 429.0
         Oct 15.0 178.6 1,713.5 1,277.5 − 3.6 432.3 2.1 3,271.1 2,837.5 0.5 6.5 426.7
         Nov 14.7 185.4 1,695.0 1,262.7 − 2.8 429.5 2.1 3,265.5 2,825.2 0.5 5.8 433.9
         Dec 18.5 134.3 1,655.0 1,229.1 − 2.4 423.5 2.4 3,220.4 2,785.5 0.6 2.2 432.1
2013          Jan 14.4 131.5 1,629.0 1,206.0 − 2.0 421.0 2.4 3,243.1 2,806.0 0.5 2.1 434.4
         Feb 14.4 103.5 1,628.4 1,207.8 − 2.2 418.5 2.3 3,237.4 2,804.4 0.5 2.0 430.6
         Mar 16.0 112.8 1,591.0 1,176.5 − 2.0 412.5 2.3 3,234.0 2,795.7 0.5 1.9 435.9
         Apr 14.9 103.3 1,588.2 1,176.9 − 2.1 409.1 2.3 3,260.9 2,801.4 0.4 2.9 456.2
         May 15.1 89.3 1,578.5 1,168.8 − 2.1 407.6 2.3 3,232.1 2,795.8 0.4 2.9 433.0
         June 14.9 91.7 1,560.6 1,151.6 − 1.9 407.2 2.4 3,238.0 2,806.0 0.4 1.3 430.3
         July 14.5 89.9 1,536.2 1,132.8 0.0 2.0 401.4 2.3 3,230.8 2,796.7 0.4 2.0 431.7
         Aug 15.1 91.5 1,637.1 1,235.3 − 1.9 399.9 2.3 3,127.2 2,691.9 0.4 1.9 433.1
         Sep 14.7 97.8 1,620.4 1,219.6 − 1.7 399.0 2.2 3,127.8 2,692.2 0.4 2.1 433.1
Changes *
2004 − 2.1 − 5.5 + 35.9 + 15.1 + 0.0 − 1.4 + 22.1 − 0.2 + 3.3 − 35.0 − 1.0 + 1.1 + 39.2
2005 + 0.2 + 6.7 + 8.4 + 21.0 − 0.0 − 0.8 − 11.9 − 0.0 − 6.7 − 11.8 − 0.3 − 0.2 + 6.6
2006 + 0.9 + 1.5 − 3.6 + 24.5 − 0.0 + 2.6 − 30.6 − 0.2 − 12.4 − 20.3 − 0.5 − 0.4 + 8.8
2007 + 1.5 + 15.2 + 114.8 + 137.6 + 0.0 + 17.0 − 39.8 + 0.4 − 15.9 + 12.1 − 0.3 − 0.5 − 27.2
2008 − 0.1 + 39.4 + 125.9 + 90.1 + 0.0 + 30.6 + 5.2 − 0.8 + 92.0 + 47.3 − 0.4 + 1.8 + 43.3
2009 − 0.5 − 23.6 − 147.2 − 157.3 − 0.0 − 24.1 + 34.3 + 0.2 + 25.7 − 11.2 − 0.4 + 1.4 + 35.9
2010 − 0.9 + 0.6 − 19.3 + 61.5 + 0.0 − 24.0 − 56.8 − 0.3 + 130.5 + 78.7 + 0.0 + 23.8 + 28.0
2011 − 0.2 + 14.2 + 47.3 + 80.5 − − 0.4 − 32.8 − 0.1 − 30.6 − 3.2 + 0.0 − 21.5 − 5.9
2012 + 2.7 + 40.5 − 68.6 − 37.5 − − 4.6 − 26.5 + 0.1 + 21.0 + 9.8 − 0.2 − 4.3 + 15.7
2012          Apr + 0.0 − 20.4 + 36.1 + 38.8 − − 0.3 − 2.4 − 0.0 + 18.6 + 5.4 − 0.0 + 0.8 + 12.5
         May + 0.3 + 21.0 − 9.7 − 9.5 − − 0.7 + 0.5 + 0.0 − 25.6 − 2.2 − 0.0 − 1.1 − 22.2
         June − 0.1 + 12.8 − 32.2 − 27.4 − + 0.2 − 5.1 + 0.1 + 10.2 + 10.4 − 0.0 + 1.6 − 1.8
         July − 0.6 + 96.3 − 137.2 − 136.8 − + 0.3 − 0.7 − 0.0 + 30.5 + 32.0 + 0.0 − 0.9 − 0.6
         Aug + 0.6 + 17.9 − 1.7 − 1.1 − − 0.9 + 0.2 + 0.1 − 5.5 − 9.7 − 0.0 − 0.2 + 4.4
         Sep + 0.3 − 28.3 − 40.0 − 37.7 − − 1.3 − 1.0 − 0.1 + 0.5 − 6.4 + 0.0 + 0.5 + 6.3
         Oct + 0.1 + 3.6 − 35.7 − 30.3 − − 0.5 − 4.9 + 0.0 + 17.4 + 19.6 + 0.0 + 0.9 − 3.0
         Nov − 0.3 + 6.8 − 18.4 − 14.8 − − 0.8 − 2.8 + 0.0 − 5.5 − 12.0 − 0.0 − 0.7 + 7.3
         Dec + 3.8 − 51.2 − 40.0 − 33.7 − − 0.4 − 6.0 + 0.1 − 45.1 − 39.8 + 0.2 − 3.7 − 1.8
2013          Jan − 4.0 − 2.8 − 26.1 − 23.1 − − 0.4 − 2.6 − 0.0 + 22.7 + 20.5 − 0.1 − 0.0 + 2.4
         Feb − 0.0 − 27.9 + 2.5 + 4.8 − + 0.1 − 2.5 − 0.0 − 5.7 − 1.6 − 0.1 − 0.2 − 3.9
         Mar + 1.6 + 9.3 − 37.4 − 31.3 − − 0.2 − 5.9 − 0.0 − 3.4 − 8.7 − 0.0 − 0.0 + 5.4
         Apr − 1.1 − 9.5 − 2.8 + 0.5 − + 0.2 − 3.4 − 0.0 + 26.9 + 5.7 − 0.0 + 1.0 + 20.3
         May + 0.3 − 14.0 − 9.8 − 8.2 − − 0.0 − 1.5 − 0.0 − 28.8 − 5.6 − 0.0 + 0.0 − 23.2
         June − 0.2 + 2.5 − 17.9 − 17.2 − − 0.2 − 0.5 + 0.0 + 5.9 + 10.2 + 0.0 − 1.3 − 3.1
         July − 0.4 − 1.8 − 24.5 − 18.8 + 0.0 + 0.1 − 5.8 − 0.1 − 7.2 − 9.3 − 0.0 + 0.7 + 1.4
         Aug + 0.6 + 1.4 + 3.4 + 5.0 − 0.0 − 0.1 − 1.4 + 0.0 − 10.7 − 12.0 − 0.0 − 0.2 + 1.4         Sep − 0.4 + 6.3 − 16.7 − 15.6 − − 0.2 − 0.9 − 0.1 + 0.5 + 0.3 − 0.0 + 0.2 + 0.0
*See Table IV.2, footnote*; statistical breaks have been eliminated from the changes. (see also footnote 2). 2Including debt securities arising from the exchange of
The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as provisional. Subsequent equalisation claims. 3Including liabilities arising from registered debt securities,
revisions which appear in the following Monthly Report, are not specially registered money market paper and non-negotiable bearer debt securities; including
marked. 1Excluding debt securities arising from the exchange of equalisation claims subordinated liabilities. 4Including liabilities arising from monetary policy operations

Deutsche Bundesbank
27  Monthly Report
November 2013
IV Banks
 
   
 
 Deposits of domestic banks (MFIs)  3 Deposits of domestic non-banks (non-MFIs)
Partici-
patinginterestsin
Memo domestic Memo Memo
item banks Sight Time Redis- item Sight Time Savings Bank item Equalisa-tion Fiduciary and deposits deposits counted Fiduciary de- deposits de- savings Fiduciaryclaims 
2 loans Total 4 4 bills 5 loans Total posits 6 posits 7 bonds 8 loans   Period enterprises
End of year or month *
 
2.0 56.8 109.2 1,229.6 116.8 1,112.6 0.2 27.8 2,140.3 624.0 825.7 590.3 100.3 40.5 2003
1.0 61.8 99.6 1,271.2 119.7 1,151.4 0.1 30.3 2,200.0 646.9 851.2 603.5 98.4 43.7 2004
− 56.6 108.5 1,300.0 120.5 1,179.4 0.1 26.5 2,276.6 717.0 864.4 603.4 91.9 42.4 2005− 53.0 106.3 1,348.2 125.4 1,222.7 0.0 22.3 2,394.6 747.7 962.8 586.5 97.5 37.8 2006− 51.1 109.4 1,478.6 122.1 1,356.5 0.0 20.0 2,579.1 779.9 1,125.4 555.4 118.4 36.4 2007− 47.2 111.2 1,582.5 138.5 1,444.0 0.0 41.6 2,781.4 834.6 1,276.1 535.2 135.4 32.3 2008− 43.9 106.1 1,355.1 128.9 1,226.2 0.0 35.7 2,829.7 1,029.5 1,102.6 594.5 103.2 43.4 2009
− 33.7 96.8 1,238.3 135.3 1,102.6 0.0 13.8 2,935.2 1,104.4 1,117.1 618.2 95.4 37.5 2010
− 36.3 94.6 1,210.5 114.8 1,095.3 0.0 36.1 3,045.5 1,168.3 1,156.2 616.1 104.8 36.5 2011− 34.8 90.0 1,135.5 132.9 1,002.6 0.0 36.3 3,090.2 1,306.5 1,072.5 617.6 93.6 34.9 2012
− 35.3 91.7 1,222.4 135.0 1,087.2 0.0 35.7 3,071.3 1,197.7 1,153.2 617.9 102.5 35.5 2012          Apr 
− 35.3 90.9 1,219.1 137.8 1,081.1 0.0 36.4 3,091.6 1,216.8 1,155.6 617.1 102.0 35.5          May− 35.2 91.1 1,207.3 134.1 1,073.0 0.0 36.3 3,104.7 1,233.8 1,153.5 616.1 101.3 35.2          June
− 34.9 91.4 1,190.1 128.0 1,062.0 0.0 36.4 3,105.8 1,235.4 1,154.2 615.9 100.3 35.1          July
− 35.2 91.5 1,184.9 124.8 1,059.9 0.0 36.5 3,118.3 1,247.0 1,156.8 615.4 99.1 35.1          Aug − 35.0 90.6 1,175.0 129.2 1,045.5 0.0 36.1 3,112.2 1,262.9 1,137.3 614.1 97.9 35.0          Sep 
− 34.7 90.3 1,160.8 124.6 1,035.9 0.0 36.3 3,124.7 1,292.7 1,121.9 613.6 96.6 34.9          Oct 
− 35.0 90.2 1,160.0 136.1 1,023.7 0.0 36.4 3,137.0 1,317.7 1,111.8 612.8 94.6 35.2          Nov − 34.8 90.0 1,135.5 132.9 1,002.6 0.0 36.3 3,090.2 1,306.5 1,072.5 617.6 93.6 34.9          Dec 
− 34.5 90.8 1,126.1 125.9 1,000.2 0.0 35.4 3,087.3 1,326.2 1,053.6 616.8 90.7 35.0 2013          Jan 
− 34.5 90.5 1,102.3 129.5 972.8 0.0 35.6 3,097.1 1,336.2 1,055.8 616.6 88.5 34.9          Feb − 34.2 89.3 1,092.4 130.8 961.5 0.0 35.8 3,096.3 1,330.3 1,064.7 614.5 86.8 34.8          Mar 
− 33.7 89.3 1,088.3 130.5 957.8 0.0 35.4 3,100.3 1,344.5 1,058.4 612.3 85.1 34.6          Apr 
− 33.5 91.8 1,070.5 126.2 944.2 0.0 35.3 3,115.4 1,363.4 1,058.3 610.7 83.0 34.5          May− 33.2 91.0 1,059.4 124.9 934.5 0.0 34.8 3,129.7 1,369.8 1,069.2 609.7 81.0 34.4          June
− 32.8 91.0 1,049.2 121.8 927.4 0.0 34.1 3,105.2 1,374.8 1,042.7 608.1 79.6 34.4          July
− 32.6 91.0 1,148.5 140.4 1,008.2 0.0 34.0 3,023.6 1,372.9 964.4 607.5 78.8 34.4          Aug − 31.9 91.1 1,147.2 146.3 1,000.9 0.0 33.9 3,020.6 1,379.4 956.9 606.4 78.0 33.5          Sep 
Changes *
− 1.1 + 3.0 − 9.6 + 41.3 + 2.9 + 38.5 − 0.1 + 2.4 + 62.0 + 24.4 + 25.9 + 13.1 − 1.5 + 1.2 2004
− 1.0 − 4.9 + 8.9 + 28.9 + 0.8 + 28.0 + 0.0 − 3.5 + 76.6 + 70.7 + 12.4 − 1.2 − 5.4 − 1.2 2005
− − 3.7 − 2.2 + 79.0 + 8.6 + 70.5 − 0.1 − 4.5 + 118.0 + 30.0 + 97.7 − 16.8 + 7.2 − 4.1 2006
− − 2.3 + 3.1 + 132.0 − 3.3 + 135.3 − 0.0 − 2.3 + 181.1 + 31.6 + 160.5 − 31.1 + 20.1 − 2.0 2007− − 5.4 + 7.8 + 124.3 + 23.0 + 101.3 − 0.0 − 3.6 + 207.6 + 54.3 + 156.6 − 20.2 + 17.0 − 1.3 2008− − 4.2 + 0.7 − 225.4 − 9.7 − 215.7 − 0.0 − 5.7 + 59.7 + 211.4 − 179.3 + 59.3 − 31.6 − 0.9 2009
− − 2.1 − 9.2 − 96.5 + 22.3 − 119.1 − 0.0 − 0.2 + 77.8 + 76.0 − 18.9 + 24.0 − 3.3 − 1.7 2010
− − 1.1 − 2.2 − 25.0 − 20.0 − 5.1 − 0.0 + 0.1 + 111.2 + 63.7 + 40.9 − 2.6 + 9.3 − 1.1 2011− − 1.3 − 4.1 − 70.8 + 21.5 − 91.9 − 0.0 + 0.2 + 42.2 + 138.7 − 86.7 + 1.5 − 11.2 − 1.6 2012
− + 0.5 − 0.2 − 7.1 + 0.2 − 7.3 + 0.0 + 0.4 + 20.4 + 9.0 + 13.5 − 1.5 − 0.5 + 0.2 2012          Apr 
− + 0.0 − 0.8 − 3.3 + 2.8 − 6.1 + 0.0 + 0.8 + 20.2 + 19.2 + 2.4 − 0.8 − 0.5 − 0.0          May− − 0.2 + 0.2 − 11.8 − 3.7 − 8.1 − − 0.1 + 13.1 + 16.9 − 2.0 − 1.1 − 0.7 − 0.3          June
− − 0.2 + 0.3 − 17.2 − 6.1 − 11.0 − 0.0 + 0.1 + 1.1 + 1.6 + 0.7 − 0.2 − 1.1 − 0.1          July
− + 0.3 + 0.1 − 5.2 − 3.2 − 2.0 − + 0.1 + 12.5 + 11.5 + 2.6 − 0.5 − 1.1 − 0.0          Aug − − 0.2 − 0.3 − 9.9 + 5.3 − 15.2 + 0.0 − 0.4 − 5.8 + 16.2 − 19.6 − 1.2 − 1.2 − 0.1          Sep 
− − 0.3 − 0.4 − 17.2 − 7.6 − 9.6 − 0.0 + 0.2 + 12.5 + 29.8 − 15.4 − 0.6 − 1.3 − 0.2          Oct 
− + 0.3 − 0.1 − 0.8 + 11.4 − 12.2 − + 0.1 + 12.2 + 25.0 − 10.0 − 0.7 − 2.0 + 0.3          Nov − + 0.0 − 0.2 − 19.9 + 1.4 − 21.1 − − 0.1 − 46.5 − 11.2 − 39.1 + 4.8 − 1.0 − 0.3          Dec 
− − 0.3 + 0.9 − 9.0 − 6.8 − 2.2 − − 0.8 − 2.9 + 19.7 − 18.8 − 0.8 − 2.9 − 0.0 2013          Jan 
− − 0.0 − 0.4 − 23.9 + 3.5 − 27.4 − + 0.2 + 9.8 + 10.0 + 2.2 − 0.1 − 2.2 − 0.0          Feb − − 0.3 − 1.2 − 9.6 + 1.6 − 11.3 − 0.0 + 0.2 − 1.2 − 6.2 + 8.9 − 2.2 − 1.8 − 0.1          Mar 
− − 0.5 + 0.1 − 4.1 − 0.8 − 3.3 + 0.0 − 0.4 + 4.1 + 14.6 − 6.7 − 2.1 − 1.6 − 0.2          Apr 
− − 0.2 + 2.5 − 17.8 − 5.1 − 12.7 + 0.0 − 0.1 + 15.0 + 18.9 − 0.1 − 1.6 − 2.2 − 0.1          May− − 0.3 − 0.8 − 11.4 − 1.4 − 10.0 − 0.0 − 0.5 + 14.6 + 6.4 + 11.3 − 1.1 − 2.0 − 0.1          June
− − 0.5 − 0.1 − 10.2 − 3.0 − 7.1 + 0.0 − 0.7 − 24.5 + 5.0 − 26.5 − 1.5 − 1.5 − 0.0          July
− − 0.2 + 0.1 + 15.0 + 2.8 + 12.2 − − 0.1 + 0.1 + 13.3 − 11.8 − 0.7 − 0.7 + 0.0          Aug − − 0.7 + 0.1 − 1.3 + 5.9 − 7.3 + 0.0 − 0.5 − 3.0 + 6.4 − 7.5 − 1.1 − 0.9 − 0.5          Sep 
with the Bundesbank. 5Own acceptances and promissory notes outstanding. 6Since savings and loan contracts (see also footnote 8). 8Including liabilities arising from
the inclusion of building and loan associations in January 1999, including deposits non-negotiable bearer debt securities. 
under savings and loan contracts (see Table IV.12). 7Excluding deposits under

Deutsche Bundesbank
28  Monthly Report
November 2013
IV Banks
 
4 Assets and liabilities of banks (MFIs) in Germany vis-à-vis non-residents *
 
 
€ billion
Lending to foreign banks (MFIs) Lending to foreign non-banks (non-MFIs)
Treasury
Cash in bills and
hand Loans and bills negotiable Credit balances and loans, bills Negotiable
(non- money money
euro-area Medium market Memo Medium market
banknotes and paper item and paper Securities Securities
and Short- long- issued by issued by Fiduciary Short- long- issued by issued by
Period coins) Total Total term term banks banks loans Total Total term term non-banks non-banks
End of year or month *
 
2003 0.3 769.6 675.8 515.7 160.1 1.5 92.3 1.6 576.3 344.8 110.9 233.9 6.0 225.4
2004 0.2 889.4 760.2 606.5 153.7 2.8 126.3 1.5 629.5 362.5 136.6 225.9 10.9 256.1
2005 0.2 1,038.8 860.0 648.5 211.5 5.8 173.0 1.5 712.0 387.9 132.8 255.1 9.3 314.8
2006 0.4 1,266.9 1,003.2 744.5 258.7 13.3 250.4 0.8 777.0 421.0 156.0 264.9 7.2 348.9
2007 0.3 1,433.5 1,105.9 803.6 302.4 13.4 314.2 0.5 908.3 492.9 197.5 295.4 27.5 387.9
2008 0.3 1,446.6 1,131.6 767.2 364.3 15.6 299.5 1.9 908.4 528.9 151.4 377.5 12.9 366.6
2009 0.3 1,277.4 986.1 643.5 342.6 6.2 285.0 2.9 815.7 469.6 116.9 352.7 9.8 336.3
2010 0.5 1,154.1 892.7 607.7 285.1 2.1 259.3 1.8 773.8 461.4 112.6 348.8 10.1 302.3
2011 0.6 1,117.6 871.0 566.3 304.8 4.6 241.9 2.6 744.4 455.8 102.0 353.8 8.5 280.1
2012 0.8 1,046.0 813.5 545.5 268.1 5.4 227.0 2.6 729.0 442.2 105.1 337.1 9.0 277.8
2012          Apr 0.7 1,119.5 876.5 588.8 287.8 6.4 236.6 2.6 750.1 470.0 122.6 347.4 9.0 271.1
         May 0.7 1,129.6 886.9 596.5 290.4 7.5 235.3 2.6 757.0 475.2 119.8 355.4 9.3 272.6
         June 0.8 1,090.3 853.7 566.5 287.2 7.1 229.5 2.6 740.2 461.4 109.7 351.7 7.5 271.4
         July 0.8 1,103.0 870.2 583.3 286.9 6.8 226.0 2.6 746.8 467.9 113.7 354.2 6.9 272.0
         Aug 1.1 1,096.3 863.0 580.5 282.5 6.9 226.4 2.6 745.7 466.6 116.2 350.3 8.0 271.1
         Sep 1.1 1,096.0 864.6 583.8 280.8 6.4 225.0 2.6 743.6 462.3 116.5 345.8 8.6 272.7
         Oct 0.9 1,087.8 857.6 579.4 278.2 6.4 223.8 2.6 742.9 459.1 116.8 342.4 9.2 274.6
         Nov 0.9 1,067.9 837.2 561.9 275.3 5.9 224.8 2.6 753.2 470.4 127.9 342.5 7.5 275.4
         Dec 0.8 1,046.0 813.5 545.5 268.1 5.4 227.0 2.6 729.0 442.2 105.1 337.1 9.0 277.8
2013          Jan 0.6 1,033.1 798.8 535.3 263.5 6.3 228.0 2.5 731.5 441.4 110.5 330.9 10.0 280.0
         Feb 0.6 1,056.0 822.8 562.2 260.6 5.7 227.5 2.5 729.7 443.5 110.6 332.9 9.4 276.9
         Mar 1.0 1,045.3 810.6 548.3 262.3 5.6 229.1 2.5 739.3 450.6 116.6 334.0 8.6 280.1
         Apr 0.8 1,046.9 813.3 557.4 256.0 5.2 228.3 2.5 737.3 449.1 118.9 330.2 9.0 279.2
         May 0.8 1,046.0 811.0 552.8 258.2 5.1 229.9 2.5 741.3 444.6 118.0 326.6 10.6 286.1
         June 0.8 1,051.5 816.5 563.5 253.0 5.6 229.4 2.5 728.8 433.3 109.8 323.6 9.7 285.8
         July 0.7 1,024.5 791.2 542.0 249.2 5.4 228.0 2.5 730.8 429.4 108.9 320.6 10.1 291.3
         Aug 1.3 1,032.2 796.0 548.1 247.9 5.2 230.9 2.5 723.6 425.0 108.6 316.4 12.7 285.9
         Sep 0.6 1,021.7 786.8 542.1 244.7 5.8 229.0 2.5 712.2 415.1 102.2 312.8 9.4 287.8
Changes *
2004 − 0.1 + 128.3 + 89.4 + 95.3 − 5.9 + 1.3 + 37.6 − 0.1 + 65.8 + 29.5 + 31.7 − 2.2 + 5.1 + 31.1
2005 + 0.0 + 127.3 + 78.9 + 26.3 + 52.6 + 2.9 + 45.4 − 0.0 + 59.4 + 7.3 − 9.4 + 16.7 − 1.8 + 54.0
2006 + 0.1 + 238.3 + 153.5 + 109.7 + 43.8 + 7.5 + 77.2 − 0.7 + 81.4 + 51.6 + 25.9 + 25.8 − 1.8 + 31.5
2007 − 0.0 + 190.3 + 123.7 + 72.9 + 50.8 + 7.5 + 59.1 − 0.4 + 167.7 + 94.3 + 50.1 + 44.2 + 20.1 + 53.3
2008 + 0.0 + 8.5 + 20.2 − 43.0 + 63.2 + 2.1 − 13.7 − 0.0 + 4.3 + 45.1 − 31.9 + 77.0 − 14.5 − 26.3
2009 − 0.0 − 170.0 − 141.3 − 122.5 − 18.8 − 10.3 − 18.4 − 0.2 − 72.8 − 43.8 − 31.7 − 12.1 − 3.3 − 25.7
2010 + 0.1 − 141.5 − 116.2 − 47.3 − 68.9 − 4.8 − 20.4 − 0.2 − 62.0 − 24.5 − 12.6 − 11.9 + 0.4 − 38.0
2011 + 0.1 − 48.4 − 32.6 − 45.3 + 12.7 + 2.5 − 18.4 + 0.0 − 38.9 − 13.6 − 12.8 − 0.9 − 1.6 − 23.6
2012 + 0.1 − 70.1 − 56.8 − 23.1 − 33.7 + 0.9 − 14.1 − 0.1 − 9.4 − 7.5 + 8.3 − 15.9 + 0.6 − 2.5
2012          Apr − 0.1 + 2.2 + 5.6 + 7.2 − 1.7 − 0.0 − 3.4 − 0.0 − 0.0 + 3.9 + 6.1 − 2.2 − 1.5 − 2.4
         May − 0.0 − 3.6 − 3.0 + 0.7 − 3.7 + 1.1 − 1.7 + 0.0 − 6.1 − 5.8 − 5.7 − 0.1 + 0.2 − 0.6         June + 0.1 − 39.5 − 33.6 − 32.1 − 1.6 − 0.4 − 5.5 + 0.0 − 9.9 − 7.2 − 5.4 − 1.8 − 1.8 − 0.9
         July − 0.0 + 6.2 + 10.2 + 13.4 − 3.2 − 0.3 − 3.7 + 0.0 + 0.6 + 1.5 + 3.0 − 1.5 − 0.6 − 0.3
         Aug + 0.3 − 0.7 − 1.4 + 0.3 − 1.7 + 0.1 + 0.6 − 0.0 + 4.2 + 3.1 + 3.5 − 0.4 + 1.1 − 0.0
         Sep − 0.0 + 5.4 + 7.1 + 6.4 + 0.7 − 0.5 − 1.2 + 0.0 + 2.9 + 0.1 + 1.3 − 1.3 + 0.6 + 2.2
         Oct − 0.2 − 6.5 − 5.3 − 3.5 − 1.9 − 0.0 − 1.2 − 0.0 + 0.8 − 2.0 + 0.5 − 2.5 + 0.6 + 2.2
         Nov − 0.0 − 19.5 − 20.1 − 17.4 − 2.7 − 0.4 + 1.0 + 0.0 + 10.7 + 11.4 + 11.1 + 0.3 − 1.8 + 1.0
         Dec − 0.1 − 18.0 − 19.8 − 14.3 − 5.5 − 0.5 + 2.3 − 0.0 − 21.0 − 25.6 − 22.2 − 3.4 + 1.6 + 3.0
2013          Jan − 0.2 − 4.6 − 6.7 − 5.8 − 0.9 + 0.8 + 1.2 − 0.0 + 9.1 + 4.5 + 6.5 − 2.0 + 1.0 + 3.6
         Feb + 0.1 + 16.5 + 17.8 + 23.4 − 5.6 − 0.6 − 0.7 + 0.0 − 6.8 − 2.1 − 0.6 − 1.5 − 0.7 − 4.0
         Mar + 0.3 − 15.9 − 16.6 − 16.6 − 0.0 − 0.1 + 0.7 + 0.0 + 4.3 + 2.7 + 4.7 − 2.1 − 0.7 + 2.3
         Apr − 0.2 + 6.1 + 7.2 + 11.5 − 4.4 − 0.4 − 0.7 − 0.0 + 1.8 + 1.6 + 2.9 − 1.4 + 0.4 − 0.1
         May + 0.0 − 0.9 − 2.4 − 4.6 + 2.2 − 0.1 + 1.7 + 0.0 + 3.8 − 4.8 − 1.0 − 3.7 + 1.6 + 6.9         June + 0.0 + 6.7 + 6.8 + 11.4 − 4.6 + 0.5 − 0.5 − 0.0 − 11.4 − 10.3 − 8.0 − 2.3 − 0.9 − 0.1
         July − 0.2 − 23.3 − 21.8 − 19.5 − 2.2 − 0.1 − 1.4 − 0.0 + 4.9 − 1.6 − 0.4 − 1.3 + 0.4 + 6.1
         Aug + 0.6 − 5.5 − 8.2 − 6.1 − 2.1 − 0.2 + 2.8 + 0.0 − 8.0 − 5.0 − 0.6 − 4.4 + 2.6 − 5.6
         Sep − 0.6 − 7.1 − 5.9 − 4.1 − 1.8 + 0.6 − 1.8 + 0.0 − 9.0 − 8.1 − 6.2 − 2.0 − 3.3 + 2.4
*See Table IV.2, footnote*; statistical breaks have been eliminated from the changes.   
The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as provisional. Subsequent   
revisions, which appear in the following Monthly Report, are not specially marked.      
  

Deutsche Bundesbank
29  Monthly Report
November 2013
IV Banks
 
   
 
 Deposits of foreign banks (MFIs) Deposits of foreign non-banks (non-MFIs) Partici- Time deposits (including
pating Time deposits (including bank savings deposits and bank
interests savings bonds) savings bonds)in foreign
Memo banks Medium Memo Medium Memo
item and and item and item
Fiduciary enter- Sight Short- long- Fiduciary Sight Short- long- Fiduciaryloans prises Total deposits Total term term loans Total deposits Total term term loans   Period
End of year or month *
 
11.6 41.4 590.7 95.1 495.6 387.7 107.9 0.4 307.3 32.2 275.1 102.4 172.7 3.6 2003
9.8 39.3 603.3 87.0 516.2 403.2 113.0 0.5 311.2 36.6 274.7 123.4 151.2 0.8 2004
10.6 37.2 651.7 102.9 548.8 420.4 128.4 0.6 316.4 62.0 254.4 119.4 135.0 1.2 2005
5.8 50.4 689.7 168.1 521.6 397.3 124.3 0.4 310.1 82.1 228.0 111.5 116.5 1.5 2006
5.7 48.3 738.9 164.7 574.1 461.2 113.0 0.2 303.1 76.0 227.1 122.3 104.8 3.1 2007
25.5 45.1 703.3 218.1 485.1 362.3 122.9 0.3 286.1 92.2 193.9 95.1 98.8 2.5 200832.1 45.4 652.6 213.6 439.0 307.4 131.6 0.2 216.3 78.1 138.2 73.7 64.5 1.9 2009
15.6 48.8 741.7 258.7 483.0 349.3 133.6 0.1 227.6 84.8 142.7 76.7 66.0 1.5 2010
32.9 45.0 655.7 242.6 413.1 289.4 123.7 0.1 225.9 92.3 133.6 66.9 66.6 1.3 201132.6 46.4 691.1 289.4 401.7 284.6 117.0 0.1 237.6 107.2 130.3 69.1 61.2 1.2 2012
32.4 46.7 905.9 364.8 541.1 416.2 125.0 0.1 246.4 115.3 131.1 67.9 63.2 1.2 2012          Apr 
33.1 47.9 890.3 410.3 480.0 353.8 126.2 0.1 246.3 115.1 131.2 67.6 63.6 1.2          May32.7 48.0 847.4 359.3 488.0 364.5 123.5 0.1 238.0 109.6 128.4 65.1 63.3 1.1          June
33.1 48.1 852.0 402.5 449.5 325.8 123.7 0.1 247.6 115.4 132.2 68.9 63.3 1.3          July
33.0 49.2 869.9 389.0 480.9 359.2 121.7 0.1 245.9 118.7 127.2 65.0 62.2 1.3          Aug 32.7 48.9 816.2 369.2 446.9 323.2 123.8 0.1 249.4 122.8 126.6 64.9 61.7 1.3          Sep 
33.1 49.0 812.6 371.9 440.7 320.6 120.2 0.1 244.0 118.7 125.2 63.2 62.0 1.4          Oct 
33.1 49.0 780.0 353.5 426.5 307.5 119.0 0.1 244.5 120.2 124.3 62.7 61.6 1.3          Nov 32.6 46.4 691.1 289.4 401.7 284.6 117.0 0.1 237.6 107.2 130.3 69.1 61.2 1.2          Dec 
32.1 49.6 702.8 318.1 384.7 268.8 115.9 0.1 241.9 116.4 125.5 65.5 60.0 1.2 2013          Jan 
32.3 46.7 695.3 306.3 389.0 280.1 109.0 0.1 246.6 122.9 123.8 64.4 59.3 1.2          Feb 32.6 45.8 681.2 278.8 402.4 296.2 106.2 0.1 243.6 116.1 127.5 65.2 62.3 1.1          Mar 
32.5 46.3 689.5 302.2 387.2 283.1 104.1 0.1 255.6 122.4 133.3 71.9 61.4 1.1          Apr 
32.5 46.4 657.2 293.5 363.7 259.4 104.4 0.1 261.4 132.2 129.2 67.9 61.2 1.1          May32.1 46.4 649.3 269.6 379.7 275.1 104.6 0.1 255.5 126.6 128.9 67.9 61.0 1.1          June
32.0 46.3 641.4 277.6 363.8 260.3 103.5 0.1 250.6 126.4 124.2 63.7 60.5 1.1          July
32.0 46.3 627.6 254.2 373.3 269.3 104.0 0.1 253.6 129.3 124.3 65.0 59.3 1.1          Aug 31.7 46.1 601.4 273.2 328.2 225.5 102.7 0.1 246.8 123.1 123.7 63.6 60.0 1.1          Sep 
Changes *
+ 0.7 − 1.5 + 19.8 − 6.1 + 25.9 + 21.1 + 4.8 + 0.1 + 13.0 + 5.4 + 7.6 + 22.8 − 15.2 − 0.3 2004
+ 0.8 − 3.5 + 28.6 + 12.6 + 16.0 + 4.9 + 11.1 + 0.1 − 4.9 + 23.9 − 28.8 − 7.7 − 21.1 + 0.4 2005
− 5.1 + 13.8 + 56.2 + 68.3 − 12.1 − 13.7 + 1.6 − 0.2 − 0.8 + 21.2 − 22.0 − 5.1 − 17.0 − 0.2 2006− 0.1 − 0.8 + 67.3 + 1.5 + 65.8 + 74.0 − 8.3 − 0.1 + 4.6 − 5.5 + 10.2 + 16.6 − 6.4 + 1.6 2007+ 0.7 − 3.1 − 50.1 + 52.2 − 102.3 − 120.7 + 18.5 + 0.1 − 12.4 + 16.1 − 28.5 − 19.4 − 9.1 − 0.6 2008− 3.2 + 0.1 − 81.4 − 2.1 − 79.3 − 57.5 − 21.7 − 0.2 − 33.5 − 13.3 − 20.1 − 17.0 − 3.1 − 0.6 2009
+ 0.2 + 1.4 + 895.4 + 42.0 + 542.4 + 38.1 + 136.8 − 0.1 − 1.6 + 6.0 − 7.6 − 3.3 − 4.4 − 0.4 2010
− 0.1 − 3.9 − 88.8 − 13.8 − 75.0 − 61.8 − 13.1 − 0.0 − 9.3 + 6.4 − 15.7 − 10.4 − 5.3 − 0.2 2011− 0.3 + 1.5 + 38.2 + 51.7 − 13.5 − 7.5 − 6.0 − 0.0 + 12.6 + 15.2 − 2.6 + 2.5 − 5.1 − 0.1 2012
+ 0.1 − 0.8 + 19.5 − 3.9 + 23.4 + 26.6 − 3.1 − + 4.8 + 0.4 + 4.4 + 4.6 − 0.2 − 0.0 2012          Apr 
+ 0.7 + 1.0 − 25.4 + 42.3 − 67.7 − 67.1 − 0.6 − 0.0 − 3.4 − 1.7 − 1.7 − 1.2 − 0.4 + 0.0          May− 0.4 + 0.2 − 40.6 − 49.3 + 8.8 + 11.0 − 2.3 − 0.0 − 7.6 − 5.2 − 2.3 − 2.3 − 0.0 − 0.1          June
+ 0.4 − 0.0 + 0.6 + 41.9 − 41.3 − 40.5 − 0.8 − + 8.3 + 5.2 + 3.0 + 3.4 − 0.4 + 0.2          July
− 0.2 + 1.2 + 21.8 − 12.2 + 33.9 + 35.1 − 1.2 − 0.0 − 0.3 + 4.0 − 4.3 − 3.5 − 0.8 + 0.0          Aug − 0.3 − 0.2 − 50.1 − 17.8 − 32.4 − 35.1 + 2.8 − 0.0 + 4.8 + 4.7 + 0.1 + 0.3 − 0.2 − 0.1          Sep 
+ 0.4 + 0.1 − 2.5 + 3.0 − 5.5 − 2.1 − 3.3 − 0.0 − 5.0 − 3.9 − 1.1 − 1.5 + 0.4 + 0.1          Oct 
+ 0.1 − 0.0 − 32.1 − 18.3 − 13.8 − 13.0 − 0.8 − 0.0 + 0.6 + 1.4 − 0.8 − 0.5 − 0.3 − 0.1          Nov − 0.5 − 2.5 − 86.4 − 63.2 − 23.2 − 21.8 − 1.4 − 0.0 − 6.1 − 12.5 + 6.4 + 6.6 − 0.2 − 0.1          Dec 
− 0.5 + 3.2 + 16.2 + 30.1 − 13.9 − 14.1 + 0.1 − + 5.9 + 9.8 − 3.9 − 3.2 − 0.7 − 0.0 2013          Jan 
+ 0.1 − 2.9 − 11.5 − 13.4 + 2.0 + 9.9 − 7.9 − + 3.4 + 5.9 − 2.5 − 1.5 − 1.0 − 0.0          Feb + 0.4 − 1.0 − 14.6 − 29.0 + 14.4 + 14.5 − 0.1 − 0.0 − 7.8 − 7.4 − 0.4 + 0.4 − 0.8 − 0.0          Mar 
− 0.1 + 0.6 + 11.4 + 24.6 − 13.1 − 11.6 − 1.5 − + 13.2 + 6.8 + 6.4 + 7.0 − 0.6 − 0.0          Apr 
− 0.0 + 0.1 − 32.5 − 9.1 − 23.5 − 23.7 + 0.2 − + 5.2 + 10.3 − 5.1 − 4.0 − 1.1 − 0.0          May− 0.4 − 0.0 − 7.0 − 23.5 + 16.5 + 16.1 + 0.3 − 0.0 − 5.5 − 5.4 − 0.1 + 0.1 − 0.2 − 0.0          June
− 0.1 − 0.1 − 5.7 + 8.9 − 14.6 − 13.9 − 0.6 − − 4.0 + 0.3 − 4.2 − 4.0 − 0.3 + 0.0          July
− 0.0 + 0.0 − 24.9 − 34.0 + 9.1 + 8.8 + 0.3 − − 0.5 − 0.4 − 0.1 + 1.2 − 1.3 − 0.0          Aug − 0.3 − 0.2 − 23.9 + 19.5 − 43.5 − 42.4 − 1.1 − 0.0 − 7.3 − 5.9 − 1.4 − 1.1 − 0.3 − 0.0          Sep 

Deutsche Bundesbank
30  Monthly Report
November 2013
IV Banks
 
5 Lending by banks (MFIs) in Germany to domestic non-banks (non-MFIs) *
 
 
€ billion
Lending to domestic Short-term lending Medium and long-term
non-banks, total
      to enterprises and households to general government to enter-
 
including excluding Negoti-
negotiable money able
market paper, Loans money
Period securities, and market Treasury
equalisation claims Total Total bills paper Total Loans bills Total Total
End of year or month *
 
2003 2,995.6 2,680.6 355.2 315.0 313.4 1.6 40.2 38.4 1.8 2,640.4 2,096.1
2004 3,001.3 2,646.7 320.9 283.8 283.0 0.8 37.1 35.3 1.8 2,680.4 2,114.2
2005 2,995.1 2,635.1 309.7 273.5 272.9 0.6 36.2 34.4 1.8 2,685.4 2,141.3
2006 3,000.7 2,632.2 303.1 269.8 269.3 0.6 33.3 31.9 1.4 2,697.6 2,181.8
2007 2,975.7 2,649.5 331.2 301.8 301.5 0.3 29.4 28.2 1.2 2,644.6 2,168.3
2008 3,071.1 2,700.1 373.0 337.5 335.3 2.2 35.5 34.5 1.0 2,698.1 2,257.8
2009 3,100.1 2,692.6 347.3 306.3 306.2 0.1 41.0 37.1 3.9 2,752.8 2,299.7
2010 3,220.9 2,771.3 428.0 283.0 282.8 0.2 145.0 117.2 27.7 2,793.0 2,305.6
2011 3,197.8 2,775.4 383.3 316.5 316.1 0.4 66.8 60.7 6.0 2,814.5 2,321.9
2012 3,220.4 2,786.1 376.1 316.8 316.3 0.5 59.3 57.6 1.7 2,844.3 2,310.9
2012          Apr 3,244.7 2,796.1 402.9 329.6 328.7 0.9 73.3 68.5 4.8 2,841.8 2,341.9
         May 3,219.1 2,793.9 393.6 325.6 324.4 1.2 68.0 64.6 3.3 2,825.5 2,328.8
         June 3,227.6 2,802.6 404.9 324.4 323.9 0.5 80.5 74.9 5.6 2,822.6 2,300.2
         July 3,257.8 2,834.2 429.4 351.6 351.2 0.4 77.8 72.9 4.8 2,828.4 2,304.6
         Aug 3,252.3 2,824.5 415.9 344.6 344.2 0.4 71.3 66.6 4.7 2,836.4 2,310.8
         Sep 3,253.0 2,818.4 413.9 340.9 340.4 0.4 73.1 67.9 5.2 2,839.1 2,311.5
         Oct 3,271.1 2,838.0 430.6 351.1 350.6 0.5 79.6 73.6 6.0 2,840.5 2,309.7
         Nov 3,265.5 2,825.7 410.4 338.2 337.8 0.4 72.1 66.8 5.4 2,855.1 2,316.4
         Dec 3,220.4 2,786.1 376.1 316.8 316.3 0.5 59.3 57.6 1.7 2,844.3 2,310.9
2013          Jan 3,243.1 2,806.5 399.6 338.2 337.4 0.8 61.4 60.1 1.4 2,843.4 2,314.1
         Feb 3,237.4 2,804.9 396.1 338.4 337.5 0.9 57.7 56.6 1.1 2,841.3 2,311.6
         Mar 3,234.0 2,796.2 387.5 332.7 331.7 1.0 54.8 53.9 0.9 2,846.5 2,315.9
         Apr 3,260.9 2,801.8 391.4 326.7 325.5 1.2 64.7 63.0 1.7 2,869.5 2,338.4
         May 3,232.1 2,796.2 380.3 325.9 324.9 1.1 54.3 52.5 1.9 2,851.9 2,325.8
         June 3,238.0 2,806.4 389.9 338.8 338.2 0.6 51.1 50.4 0.7 2,848.2 2,319.6
         July 3,230.8 2,797.1 376.1 319.9 319.3 0.6 56.1 54.7 1.4 2,854.8 2,323.0
         Aug 3,127.2 2,692.3 269.9 220.6 220.1 0.6 49.3 48.0 1.3 2,857.3 2,324.5
         Sep 3,127.8 2,692.6 277.0 226.3 225.6 0.8 50.7 49.4 1.3 2,850.8 2,320.5
Changes *
2004 + 3.3 − 36.0 − 31.7 − 30.5 − 29.7 − 0.8 − 1.2 − 3.2 + 1.9 + 35.0 + 15.6
2005 − 6.7 − 12.1 − 11.5 − 10.6 − 10.4 − 0.2 − 0.9 − 0.9 + 0.0 + 4.8 + 26.8
2006 − 12.4 − 20.8 − 7.1 − 4.5 − 4.4 − 0.0 − 2.7 − 2.3 − 0.4 − 5.2 + 23.6
2007 − 15.9 + 11.8 + 27.6 + 31.5 + 31.7 − 0.2 − 3.9 − 3.7 − 0.3 − 43.5 − 7.1
2008 + 92.0 + 46.9 + 43.1 + 36.8 + 34.9 + 1.8 + 6.3 + 6.3 − 0.0 + 48.9 + 83.4
2009 + 25.7 − 11.6 − 26.1 − 31.5 − 30.0 − 1.5 + 5.5 + 2.5 + 2.9 + 51.8 + 36.6
2010 + 130.5 + 78.7 + 80.4 − 23.4 − 23.5 + 0.1 + 103.8 + 80.1 + 23.7 + 50.1 + 14.9
2011 − 30.6 − 3.2 − 45.2 + 33.6 + 33.3 + 0.2 − 78.7 − 57.0 − 21.7 + 14.6 + 9.4
2012 + 21.0 + 9.6 − 9.7 − 1.6 − 1.7 + 0.1 − 8.2 − 3.8 − 4.3 + 30.7 + 10.9
2012          Apr + 18.6 + 5.3 + 3.4 − 2.6 − 2.6 − 0.0 + 6.0 + 5.2 + 0.8 + 15.2 + 16.3
         May − 25.6 − 2.3 − 8.9 − 3.6 − 3.9 + 0.3 − 5.3 − 3.8 − 1.5 − 16.7 − 13.5
         June + 10.2 + 10.4 + 11.4 − 1.1 − 0.5 − 0.7 + 12.5 + 10.3 + 2.2 − 1.2 − 6.9
         July + 30.5 + 32.0 + 24.5 + 27.3 + 27.4 − 0.1 − 2.7 − 2.0 − 0.7 + 6.0 + 4.7
         Aug − 5.5 − 9.7 − 13.5 − 6.9 − 7.0 + 0.0 − 6.5 − 6.3 − 0.2 + 8.0 + 6.2
         Sep + 0.5 − 6.4 − 2.4 − 3.5 − 3.5 − 0.0 + 1.2 + 0.6 + 0.5 + 2.8 + 1.1
         Oct + 17.4 + 19.6 + 16.7 + 10.2 + 10.2 + 0.0 + 6.5 + 5.7 + 0.8 + 0.7 − 1.9
         Nov − 5.5 − 12.1 − 20.3 − 12.8 − 12.8 − 0.0 − 7.4 − 6.8 − 0.6 + 14.8 + 6.9
         Dec − 45.1 − 39.6 − 34.3 − 21.4 − 21.4 + 0.0 − 12.9 − 9.2 − 3.7 − 10.8 − 5.5
2013          Jan + 22.7 + 20.4 + 24.4 + 22.3 + 22.0 + 0.3 + 2.2 + 2.5 − 0.3 − 1.7 + 2.3
         Feb − 5.7 − 1.7 − 3.6 + 0.1 + 0.0 + 0.1 − 3.7 − 3.4 − 0.3 − 2.2 − 2.5
         Mar − 3.4 − 8.7 − 8.6 − 5.7 − 5.8 + 0.1 − 2.9 − 2.8 − 0.1 + 5.3 + 4.4
         Apr + 26.9 + 5.7 + 3.9 − 6.0 − 6.2 + 0.2 + 9.9 + 9.1 + 0.8 + 23.0 + 22.5
         May − 28.8 − 5.6 − 11.1 − 0.7 − 0.6 − 0.1 − 10.4 − 10.5 + 0.1 − 17.6 − 12.6
         June + 5.9 + 10.2 + 10.0 + 13.2 + 13.3 − 0.1 − 3.2 − 2.1 − 1.1 − 4.1 − 6.6
         July − 7.2 − 9.3 − 13.8 − 18.8 − 18.8 + 0.0 + 5.1 + 4.3 + 0.7 + 6.6 + 3.3
         Aug − 10.7 − 12.0 − 16.4 − 9.6 − 9.5 − 0.1 − 6.8 − 6.7 − 0.1 + 5.6 + 4.7         Sep + 0.5 + 0.3 + 7.1 + 5.8 + 5.6 + 0.2 + 1.3 + 1.4 − 0.0 − 6.6 − 4.1
*See Table IV.2, footnote*; statistical breaks have been eliminated from the changes. marked. 1Excluding debt securities arising from the exchange of equalisation claims
The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as provisional. Subsequent (see also footnote 2). 2Including debt securities arising from the exchange of
revisions, which appear in the following Monthly Report, are not specially equalisation claims. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
31  Monthly Report
November 2013
IV Banks
 
   
 
lending
prises and households to general governmentLoans Loans
Memo Memo
item Equal- item
Medium- Long- Fiduciary Medium- Long- Secur- isation Fiduciary
Total term term loans Total Total term term ities 
1 claims 2 loans   Period Securities
End of year or month *
 
1,927.7 195.0 1,732.8 168.3 49.9 544.3 401.0 34.6 366.4 141.3 2.0 7.0 2003
1,940.8 194.3 1,746.5 173.5 55.3 566.1 387.7 32.9 354.8 177.5 1.0 6.5 2004
1,953.4 194.7 1,758.8 187.9 52.1 544.1 374.4 32.9 341.4 169.7 − 4.5 2005
1,972.7 194.5 1,778.1 209.1 48.2 515.8 358.4 31.7 326.6 157.4 − 4.8 20061,987.3 207.7 1,779.6 181.1 46.5 476.2 332.5 31.9 300.6 143.7 − 4.7 20072,022.0 222.0 1,800.0 235.8 42.8 440.3 308.2 29.7 278.5 132.1 − 4.5 20082,051.3 242.7 1,808.6 248.4 39.6 453.1 298.0 32.2 265.8 155.1 − 4.3 2009
2,070.0 238.1 1,831.8 235.7 30.7 487.3 301.2 36.1 265.1 186.1 − 3.1 2010
2,099.5 247.9 1,851.7 222.4 32.7 492.6 299.1 41.1 258.0 193.5 − 3.6 2011
2,119.5 249.7 1,869.8 191.4 31.4 533.4 292.7 39.4 253.3 240.7 − 3.5 2012
2,102.2 247.1 1,855.1 239.7 31.7 499.9 296.8 40.6 256.2 203.1 − 3.6 2012          Apr 
2,109.6 248.6 1,861.1 219.2 31.7 496.7 295.2 40.1 255.1 201.5 − 3.6          May
2,108.5 248.3 1,860.1 191.8 31.5 522.4 295.3 39.8 255.5 227.1 − 3.6          June
2,116.0 249.7 1,866.3 188.6 31.4 523.8 294.1 39.7 254.4 229.7 − 3.6          July
2,120.7 249.6 1,871.1 190.1 31.6 525.6 293.0 39.3 253.7 232.6 − 3.5          Aug 2,118.1 249.0 1,869.1 193.4 31.5 527.6 291.9 39.1 252.8 235.7 − 3.5          Sep 
2,120.9 249.8 1,871.1 188.7 31.2 530.8 292.9 39.9 253.0 237.9 − 3.5          Oct 
2,127.7 251.3 1,876.4 188.7 31.5 538.7 293.4 40.1 253.4 245.2 − 3.5          Nov 2,119.5 249.7 1,869.8 191.4 31.4 533.4 292.7 39.4 253.3 240.7 − 3.5          Dec 
2,116.9 249.6 1,867.3 197.2 31.0 529.4 292.1 39.7 252.4 237.3 − 3.5 2013          Jan 
2,120.1 249.3 1,870.8 191.5 31.0 529.7 290.6 39.3 251.4 239.1 − 3.4          Feb 2,119.3 249.6 1,869.7 196.6 30.8 530.6 291.3 40.5 250.8 239.3 − 3.4          Mar 
2,121.1 249.8 1,871.3 217.3 30.4 531.1 292.2 40.8 251.4 238.9 − 3.3          Apr 
2,126.7 252.0 1,874.7 199.1 30.3 526.1 292.2 40.3 251.8 233.9 − 3.2          May2,125.9 250.5 1,875.4 193.7 30.0 528.6 292.0 40.5 251.4 236.6 − 3.2          June
2,130.5 252.0 1,878.5 192.4 29.6 531.8 292.6 41.2 251.4 239.2 − 3.1          July
2,131.7 249.5 1,882.2 192.8 29.5 532.8 292.6 41.2 251.3 240.3 − 3.1          Aug 2,127.1 247.6 1,879.4 193.4 29.3 530.3 290.6 40.7 249.9 239.7 − 2.7          Sep 
Changes *
+ 10.7 + 0.2 + 10.5 + 4.9 + 3.6 + 19.4 − 13.8 − 0.9 − 12.9 + 34.3 − 1.1 − 0.6 2004
+ 12.5 + 1.7 + 10.8 + 14.3 − 3.0 − 22.1 − 13.4 + 0.9 − 14.2 − 7.7 − 1.0 − 2.0 2005
+ 2.3 + 0.2 + 2.2 + 21.2 − 3.9 − 28.8 − 16.4 − 1.4 − 15.0 − 12.4 − + 0.3 2006+ 9.6 + 10.1 − 0.6 − 16.7 − 2.2 − 36.3 − 25.8 + 0.1 − 26.0 − 10.5 − − 0.1 2007+ 28.8 + 12.0 + 16.8 + 54.7 − 5.3 − 34.5 − 23.2 − 2.3 − 20.8 − 11.4 − − 0.1 2008+ 23.5 + 17.3 + 6.3 + 13.1 − 3.9 + 15.2 − 7.6 + 2.5 − 10.2 + 22.8 − − 0.2 2009
+ 18.6 − 4.0 + 22.6 − 3.8 − 1.7 + 35.2 + 3.5 + 3.5 − 0.0 + 31.7 − − 0.3 2010
+ 22.6 + 2.2 + 20.4 − 13.2 − 1.0 + 5.2 − 2.1 + 4.9 − 7.0 + 7.3 − − 0.2 2011+ 21.6 + 1.5 + 20.1 − 10.7 − 1.1 + 19.8 − 6.6 − 1.9 − 4.7 + 26.4 − − 0.2 2012
+ 2.6 + 0.7 + 1.9 + 13.7 + 0.3 − 1.1 + 0.2 − 0.3 + 0.5 − 1.2 − + 0.2 2012          Apr 
+ 7.1 + 1.2 + 5.9 − 20.6 + 0.0 − 3.2 − 1.6 − 0.4 − 1.2 − 1.6 − − 0.0          May+ 0.5 − 0.1 + 0.6 − 7.4 − 0.2 + 5.7 + 0.1 − 0.4 + 0.5 + 5.6 − − 0.0          June
+ 7.8 + 1.5 + 6.3 − 3.2 − 0.2 + 1.4 − 1.2 − 0.1 − 1.1 + 2.6 − − 0.1          July
+ 4.7 − 0.1 + 4.8 + 1.5 + 0.3 + 1.8 − 1.1 − 0.4 − 0.7 + 2.9 − − 0.0          Aug − 2.2 − 0.9 − 1.3 + 3.3 − 0.2 + 1.8 − 1.3 − 0.4 − 0.9 + 3.0 − − 0.0          Sep 
+ 2.8 + 0.8 + 2.0 − 4.6 − 0.2 + 2.6 + 1.0 + 0.8 + 0.2 + 1.6 − − 0.0          Oct 
+ 7.0 + 1.5 + 5.5 − 0.0 + 0.3 + 7.9 + 0.6 + 0.2 + 0.4 + 7.3 − −          Nov − 8.2 − 1.6 − 6.6 + 2.7 + 0.0 − 5.3 − 0.7 − 0.6 − 0.1 − 4.6 − − 0.0          Dec 
− 3.5 − 0.9 − 2.5 + 5.7 − 0.3 − 4.0 − 0.6 + 0.2 − 0.9 − 3.4 − − 0.0 2013          Jan 
+ 3.2 − 0.3 + 3.5 − 5.7 − 0.0 + 0.4 − 1.5 − 0.4 − 1.0 + 1.8 − − 0.0          Feb − 0.8 + 0.3 − 1.0 + 5.1 − 0.2 + 0.9 + 0.7 + 1.3 − 0.6 + 0.3 − − 0.0          Mar 
+ 1.8 + 0.2 + 1.6 + 20.7 − 0.3 + 0.5 + 0.9 + 0.3 + 0.6 − 0.4 − − 0.2          Apr 
+ 5.6 + 2.2 + 3.3 − 18.2 − 0.2 − 5.1 − 0.0 − 0.5 + 0.4 − 5.0 − − 0.0          May− 0.8 − 1.5 + 0.7 − 5.8 − 0.2 + 2.5 − 0.2 + 0.2 − 0.4 + 2.7 − − 0.0          June
+ 4.5 + 1.2 + 3.3 − 1.2 − 0.4 + 3.3 + 0.7 + 0.7 − 0.0 + 2.6 − − 0.1          July
+ 4.3 + 0.6 + 3.7 + 0.4 − 0.1 + 1.0 − 0.1 + 0.0 − 0.1 + 1.0 − − 0.0          Aug − 4.7 − 2.0 − 2.7 + 0.6 − 0.2 − 2.5 − 2.0 − 0.5 − 1.4 − 0.6 − − 0.5          Sep 

Deutsche Bundesbank
32  Monthly Report
November 2013
IV Banks
 
6 Lending by banks (MFIs) in Germany to domestic enterprises and households, housing loans,
sectors of economic activity *
 
€ billion
Lending to domestic enterprises and households (excluding holdings of negotiable money market paper and excluding securities portfolios) 1 
of which  
 
Housing loans Lending to enterprises and self-employed persons
 
Whole-sale and Electricity,gas and retail Financial
Mortgage water trade; Agri- Transport- intermedi-
loans supply; repair of culture, ation and ation
secured refuse motor forestry, storage; (excluding
by disposal, vehicles fishing post and MFIs) and
Mortgage residen- Other of which mining and and telecom- insurance
loans, tial real housing Housing Manufac- and Construc- motor- aqua- munica- com-
Period Total total Total estate loans Total loans turing quarrying tion cycles culture tions panies
Lending, total End of year or quarter *
 
2011 2,415.7 1,167.3 1,114.0 914.0 200.0 1,368.0 305.0 134.6 84.4 59.6 124.0 42.7 80.1 196.4
2012          Sep 2,458.6 1,167.3 1,126.6 917.8 208.8 1,404.2 309.8 133.9 90.8 60.3 127.4 44.8 78.4 213.9
         Dec 2,435.9 1,170.6 1,135.0 922.4 212.6 1,377.6 311.2 131.1 92.7 59.6 126.1 44.5 76.7 195.4
2013          Mar 2,451.1 1,173.5 1,136.8 926.0 210.8 1,394.1 311.9 133.2 94.6 60.3 126.9 44.7 76.2 208.8
         June 2,464.2 1,173.0 1,143.3 928.7 214.6 1,402.0 314.0 131.9 94.6 60.1 124.8 45.6 74.0 219.9         Sep 2,352.7 1,177.9 1,152.6 933.4 219.2 1,282.8 316.6 130.3 95.7 60.1 124.9 46.2 72.0 104.5
 Short-term lending
2011 316.2 − 7.7 − 7.7 276.7 3.9 33.8 6.0 11.9 41.8 3.3 7.0 111.0
2012          Sep 340.5 − 7.8 − 7.8 301.5 3.9 36.4 6.8 12.9 44.7 3.9 7.4 127.8
         Dec 316.4 − 7.9 − 7.9 277.7 3.8 34.8 6.9 12.0 43.0 3.3 6.8 112.8
2013          Mar 331.7 − 7.8 − 7.8 294.9 3.9 37.5 7.5 13.1 43.6 3.6 7.0 125.4
         June 338.2 − 8.0 − 8.0 301.4 3.9 37.4 6.7 12.9 41.8 4.1 6.3 135.1
         Sep 225.6 − 8.1 − 8.1 187.8 4.0 35.9 6.5 13.0 42.2 4.0 6.2 23.9
 Medium-term lending
2011 247.9 − 34.5 − 34.5 176.7 11.8 28.2 6.0 9.4 15.5 4.0 11.8 35.4
2012          Sep 249.0 − 35.3 − 35.3 176.3 11.9 25.9 6.8 9.3 16.0 4.1 11.1 36.2
         Dec 249.7 − 35.3 − 35.3 176.7 11.8 25.6 7.0 9.3 16.5 4.0 11.0 35.9
2013          Mar 249.6 − 34.9 − 34.9 176.5 11.6 25.8 6.8 9.2 16.6 3.9 11.3 37.0
         June 250.5 − 35.7 − 35.7 176.6 12.3 24.7 6.7 9.4 16.9 3.9 11.2 37.7
         Sep 247.6 − 35.7 − 35.7 173.1 12.3 24.8 6.6 9.4 16.5 4.0 11.3 34.5
 Long-term lending
2011 1,851.7 1,167.3 1,071.8 914.0 157.8 914.6 289.3 72.6 72.4 38.3 66.7 35.4 61.2 49.9
2012          Sep 1,869.1 1,167.3 1,083.5 917.8 165.7 926.5 294.0 71.6 77.3 38.1 66.7 36.8 59.9 49.9         Dec 1,869.8 1,170.6 1,091.8 922.4 169.4 923.2 295.6 70.7 78.8 38.3 66.6 37.2 58.9 46.7
2013          Mar 1,869.7 1,173.5 1,094.0 926.0 168.0 922.7 296.5 69.8 80.4 38.1 66.7 37.2 58.0 46.4
         June 1,875.4 1,173.0 1,099.7 928.7 170.9 924.0 297.8 69.9 81.2 37.8 66.1 37.6 56.5 47.1         Sep 1,879.4 1,177.9 1,108.9 933.4 175.4 922.0 300.3 69.6 82.6 37.7 66.2 38.2 54.5 46.1
 
Lending, total Change during quarter *
 
2012          Q3 + 27.2 + 3.3 + 8.9 + 5.2 + 3.6 + 20.1 + 2.6 − 2.7 + 2.1 − 0.3 + 2.0 + 0.7 − 1.7 + 17.1         Q4 − 22.5 + 2.9 + 6.2 + 3.5 + 2.7 − 26.2 + 1.4 − 2.8 + 1.8 − 0.7 − 1.2 − 0.3 − 1.8 − 18.5
2013          Q1 + 15.1 − 0.2 + 1.7 + 0.9 + 0.7 + 16.4 + 0.9 + 2.1 + 1.8 + 0.7 + 0.8 + 0.2 − 0.4 + 13.4
         Q2 + 13.1 − 0.5 + 5.9 + 2.2 + 3.8 + 7.8 + 1.8 − 1.2 + 0.0 − 0.2 − 2.1 + 0.9 − 2.2 + 10.9         Q3 − 18.7 + 2.4 + 9.1 + 4.7 + 4.4 − 26.5 + 2.4 − 1.5 + 1.1 − 0.1 + 0.0 + 0.6 − 2.0 − 22.6
 Short-term lending
2012          Q3 + 16.9 − + 0.2 − + 0.2 + 16.6 + 0.1 − 0.9 − 0.1 − 0.4 + 1.9 − 0.1 − 0.0 + 16.8         Q4 − 24.1 − + 0.0 − + 0.0 − 23.5 − 0.1 − 1.6 + 0.0 − 0.9 − 1.5 − 0.6 − 0.5 − 15.0
2013          Q1 + 16.1 − − 0.1 − − 0.1 + 17.2 + 0.0 + 2.8 + 0.5 + 1.0 + 0.6 + 0.3 + 0.2 + 12.6
         Q2 + 6.5 − + 0.2 − + 0.2 + 6.5 + 0.1 − 0.1 − 0.8 − 0.1 − 1.8 + 0.5 − 0.7 + 9.8         Q3 − 22.8 − + 0.1 − + 0.1 − 23.7 + 0.0 − 1.4 − 0.2 + 0.1 + 0.4 − 0.1 − 0.1 − 21.4
 Medium-term lending
2012          Q3 + 0.5 − + 0.5 − + 0.5 − 0.3 + 0.3 − 1.0 + 0.5 + 0.0 + 0.1 + 0.1 − 0.4 − 0.2         Q4 + 0.7 − + 0.0 − + 0.0 + 0.4 − 0.1 − 0.4 + 0.2 − 0.0 + 0.5 − 0.1 − 0.1 − 0.3
2013          Q1 − 1.0 − − 0.4 − − 0.4 − 0.3 − 0.2 + 0.2 − 0.3 − 0.1 + 0.2 − 0.1 + 0.3 + 1.1
         Q2 + 0.9 − + 0.6 − + 0.6 + 0.1 + 0.6 − 1.2 − 0.1 + 0.2 + 0.4 − 0.0 − 0.1 + 0.5         Q3 − 0.2 − − 0.1 − − 0.1 − 0.6 − 0.1 + 0.2 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.4 + 0.1 + 0.1 − 0.1
 Long-term lending
2012          Q3 + 9.9 + 3.3 + 8.1 + 5.2 + 2.9 + 3.8 + 2.2 − 0.8 + 1.8 + 0.0 − 0.0 + 0.6 − 1.2 + 0.5         Q4 + 0.8 + 2.9 + 6.1 + 3.5 + 2.6 − 3.1 + 1.6 − 0.8 + 1.5 + 0.2 − 0.2 + 0.4 − 1.1 − 3.2
2013          Q1 − 0.1 − 0.2 + 2.1 + 0.9 + 1.2 − 0.5 + 1.0 − 0.9 + 1.6 − 0.2 + 0.1 − 0.0 − 0.9 − 0.3
         Q2 + 5.7 − 0.5 + 5.2 + 2.2 + 3.0 + 1.2 + 1.1 + 0.1 + 0.9 − 0.2 − 0.6 + 0.4 − 1.5 + 0.6         Q3 + 4.3 + 2.4 + 9.0 + 4.7 + 4.4 − 2.3 + 2.5 − 0.3 + 1.3 − 0.2 + 0.0 + 0.6 − 2.0 − 1.0
*Excluding lending by foreign
branches. Breakdown of lending by building and loan from the changes. The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as pro-
associations by areas and sectors estimated. Statistical alterations have been eliminated visional; subsequent alterations, which will appear in the following Monthly Report,

Deutsche Bundesbank
33  Monthly Report
November 2013
IV Banks
 
   
 
 
 
 Lending to
 Lending to employees and other individuals non-profit institutions
Memo items Other lending Services sector (including the professions)
of which of which
Debitbalanceson wage,
Other Lending salaryreal to self- Lending and of which
Housing Holding estate employed to craft Housing pension Housing Instalment
Total companies Total loans Total loans 
3 accounts Total loans   Period enterprises activities persons 2 enterprises
End of year or quarter * Lending, total 
 
646.3 180.0 42.9 177.9 382.9 51.7 1,034.3 805.6 228.7 147.8 13.5 13.4 3.5 2011
654.7 182.8 42.4 179.3 388.0 51.8 1,040.8 813.3 227.5 148.5 13.4 13.6 3.5 2012          Sep 
651.6 184.6 39.0 178.5 388.4 51.0 1,044.9 820.3 224.6 147.2 13.0 13.4 3.5          Dec 
649.4 184.6 38.5 178.7 387.3 51.3 1,043.6 821.3 222.3 146.5 12.6 13.3 3.5 2013          Mar 
651.2 186.7 38.5 178.1 388.0 51.1 1,048.6 825.8 222.9 147.7 12.4 13.5 3.6          June649.1 187.4 37.4 176.0 388.7 50.7 1,056.5 832.6 223.9 147.0 12.5 13.4 3.5          Sep 
Short-term lending
61.9 9.6 11.1 13.2 30.4 7.2 38.5 3.9 34.7 2.5 13.5 0.9 0.0 2011
61.7 9.5 10.9 13.0 30.0 7.7 37.8 3.9 33.9 1.9 13.4 1.2 0.0 2012          Sep 
58.0 9.3 7.9 12.9 30.0 7.2 37.7 4.0 33.7 2.1 13.0 1.1 0.0          Dec 
57.3 9.0 8.2 12.8 30.1 7.8 35.9 3.9 32.0 2.0 12.6 1.0 0.0 2013          Mar 
57.1 9.4 7.8 12.5 29.9 7.6 35.8 4.0 31.8 1.9 12.4 1.0 0.0          June56.0 9.2 7.4 12.3 28.8 7.4 36.9 4.1 32.8 1.7 12.5 1.0 0.0          Sep 
Medium-term lending
66.3 8.1 8.4 20.4 31.2 3.6 70.6 22.7 47.9 42.8 − 0.6 0.0 2011
66.9 8.4 8.2 19.9 32.0 3.6 72.2 23.4 48.8 43.9 − 0.5 0.0 2012          Sep 
67.5 8.9 7.9 20.2 32.2 3.5 72.5 23.5 49.0 44.1 − 0.5 0.0          Dec 
65.9 8.6 7.2 19.9 31.9 3.6 72.6 23.3 49.3 43.8 − 0.5 0.0 2013          Mar 
66.2 8.7 7.1 19.8 32.0 3.7 73.4 23.3 50.0 44.7 − 0.5 0.0          June
65.9 9.1 7.0 19.5 32.2 3.6 74.0 23.4 50.7 45.4 − 0.5 0.0          Sep 
Long-term lending
518.1 162.4 23.4 144.3 321.3 40.9 925.2 779.1 146.1 102.5 − 11.9 3.4 2011
526.1 164.9 23.4 146.4 326.0 40.5 930.8 786.0 144.8 102.7 − 11.8 3.5 2012          Sep 
526.1 166.4 23.2 145.5 326.2 40.3 934.7 792.8 142.0 100.9 − 11.8 3.5          Dec 
526.3 167.0 23.1 146.0 325.3 39.9 935.1 794.1 141.0 100.7 − 11.9 3.5 2013          Mar 
527.9 168.6 23.6 145.7 326.1 39.8 939.4 798.4 141.0 101.1 − 12.0 3.5          June
527.2 169.1 23.0 144.2 327.6 39.6 945.6 805.1 140.5 99.9 − 11.9 3.4          Sep 
 
Change during quarter * Lending, total 
 
+ 2.9 + 1.6 − 0.8 + 1.2 + 0.2 − 0.1 + 7.2 + 6.3 + 0.8 + 1.1 + 0.1 − 0.0 − 0.0 2012          Q3− 2.8 + 1.8 − 3.3 − 0.7 + 0.3 − 0.8 + 3.8 + 4.8 − 1.0 − 0.3 − 0.4 − 0.2 − 0.0          Q4
− 2.2 − 0.0 − 0.6 + 0.0 − 1.2 + 0.3 − 1.3 + 0.8 − 2.1 − 0.7 − 0.4 − 0.1 + 0.0 2013          Q1
+ 1.8 + 1.9 + 0.0 − 0.6 + 0.7 − 0.2 + 5.1 + 4.1 + 1.0 + 1.3 − 0.3 + 0.2 + 0.0          Q2− 2.1 + 1.0 − 1.1 − 2.2 + 1.2 − 0.4 + 8.0 + 6.8 + 1.2 + 1.1 + 0.2 − 0.1 − 0.1          Q3
Short-term lending
− 0.6 + 0.1 − 0.9 + 0.2 − 0.9 − 0.1 + 0.1 + 0.1 − 0.1 − 0.2 + 0.1 + 0.2 + 0.0 2012          Q3− 3.4 − 0.2 − 3.0 − 0.1 + 0.0 − 0.5 − 0.4 + 0.1 − 0.5 − 0.0 − 0.4 − 0.2 + 0.0          Q4
− 0.7 − 0.4 + 0.3 − 0.0 + 0.1 + 0.6 − 1.0 − 0.1 − 0.9 − 0.1 − 0.4 − 0.1 − 2013          Q1
− 0.2 + 0.5 − 0.4 − 0.3 − 0.2 − 0.2 − 0.1 + 0.1 − 0.2 − 0.1 − 0.3 + 0.0 + 0.0          Q2− 1.0 − 0.2 − 0.4 − 0.2 − 1.0 − 0.2 + 1.0 + 0.1 + 0.9 − 0.2 + 0.2 − 0.0 −          Q3
Medium-term lending
+ 0.6 + 0.3 + 0.1 + 0.0 + 0.1 − 0.0 + 0.9 + 0.2 + 0.6 + 0.7 − − 0.1 − 2012          Q3+ 0.6 + 0.5 − 0.3 + 0.3 + 0.2 − 0.1 + 0.3 + 0.1 + 0.2 + 0.2 − − 0.0 − 0.0          Q4
− 1.7 − 0.3 − 0.7 − 0.3 − 0.4 + 0.1 − 0.7 − 0.2 − 0.5 − 0.3 − + 0.0 − 2013          Q1
+ 0.4 + 0.1 − 0.1 − 0.0 + 0.1 + 0.1 + 0.8 + 0.0 + 0.8 + 0.9 − − 0.0 + 0.0          Q2
− 0.3 + 0.4 − 0.1 − 0.3 + 0.2 − 0.0 + 0.3 + 0.0 + 0.3 + 0.4 − + 0.0 − 0.0          Q3
Long-term lending
+ 2.9 + 1.2 − 0.0 + 0.9 + 1.0 + 0.1 + 6.2 + 5.9 + 0.3 + 0.5 − − 0.2 − 0.0 2012          Q3
+ 0.1 + 1.5 − 0.1 − 0.9 + 0.2 − 0.2 + 3.9 + 4.6 − 0.7 − 0.5 − + 0.0 − 0.0          Q4
+ 0.2 + 0.7 − 0.1 + 0.3 − 0.9 − 0.4 + 0.4 + 1.1 − 0.6 − 0.2 − + 0.0 + 0.0 2013          Q1
+ 1.6 + 1.3 + 0.5 − 0.3 + 0.8 − 0.1 + 4.4 + 4.0 + 0.4 + 0.5 − + 0.1 + 0.0          Q2
− 0.7 + 0.8 − 0.6 − 1.7 + 2.0 − 0.1 + 6.7 + 6.7 + 0.0 + 0.9 − − 0.1 − 0.1          Q3
are not specially marked. 1 Excluding fiduciary loans. 2 Including sole proprietors. 
3 Excluding mortgage loans and housing loans, even in the form of instalment credit. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
34  Monthly Report
November 2013
IV Banks
 
7 Deposits of domestic non-banks (non-MFIs) at banks (MFIs) in Germany*
 
 
€ billion
Time deposits 1,2   Memo item
  
 for more than 1 year 2 Subordinated
 liabilities
for up for up (excluding
to and to and for more Bank negotiable Liabilities
Deposits, Sight including including than Savings savings Fiduciary debt arising
Period total deposits Total 1 year Total 2 years 2 years bonds  4 loans securities) from repos deposits 3 
Domestic non-banks, total End of year or month*
 
2010 2,935.2 1,104.4 1,117.1 329.3 787.8 25.1 762.7 618.2 95.4 37.5 35.7 80.9
2011 3,045.5 1,168.3 1,156.2 386.1 770.2 31.5 738.7 616.1 104.8 36.5 34.3 97.1
2012 3,090.2 1,306.5 1,072.5 341.3 731.2 32.0 699.2 617.6 93.6 34.9 31.7 82.9
2012          Oct 3,124.7 1,292.7 1,121.9 384.0 737.9 32.5 705.4 613.6 96.6 34.9 32.1 106.0
         Nov 3,137.0 1,317.7 1,111.8 378.1 733.8 32.3 701.4 612.8 94.6 35.2 31.8 105.4
         Dec 3,090.2 1,306.5 1,072.5 341.3 731.2 32.0 699.2 617.6 93.6 34.9 31.7 82.9
2013          Jan 3,087.3 1,326.2 1,053.6 322.4 731.2 32.5 698.7 616.8 90.7 35.0 31.2 81.9
         Feb 3,097.1 1,336.2 1,055.8 326.7 729.1 32.2 696.9 616.6 88.5 34.9 30.7 98.0
         Mar 3,096.3 1,330.3 1,064.7 335.4 729.3 32.2 697.2 614.5 86.8 34.8 30.4 94.3
         Apr 3,100.3 1,344.5 1,058.4 333.6 724.7 32.3 692.5 612.3 85.1 34.6 30.2 95.6
         May 3,115.4 1,363.4 1,058.3 332.0 726.2 32.9 693.4 610.7 83.0 34.5 30.1 96.8
         June 3,129.7 1,369.8 1,069.2 344.8 724.4 32.2 692.3 609.7 81.0 34.4 30.1 110.9
         July 3,105.2 1,374.8 1,042.7 322.8 719.9 31.2 688.8 608.1 79.6 34.4 30.4 88.5
         Aug 3,023.6 1,372.9 964.4 254.9 709.5 29.2 680.3 607.5 78.8 34.4 30.4 1.2
         Sep 3,020.6 1,379.4 956.9 251.2 705.7 29.0 676.7 606.4 78.0 33.5 30.2 1.2
Changes*
2011 + 111.2 + 63.7 + 40.9 + 57.0 − 16.1 + 6.5 − 22.6 − 2.6 + 9.3 − 1.1 − 1.4 + 16.0
2012 + 42.2 + 138.7 − 86.7 − 47.7 − 39.0 + 0.6 − 39.6 + 1.5 − 11.2 − 1.6 − 2.6 − 16.8
2012          Oct + 12.5 + 29.8 − 15.4 − 6.1 − 9.3 − 0.6 − 8.7 − 0.6 − 1.3 − 0.2 − 0.2 + 10.0
         Nov + 12.2 + 25.0 − 10.0 − 5.9 − 4.1 − 0.1 − 4.0 − 0.7 − 2.0 + 0.3 − 0.3 − 0.6         Dec − 46.5 − 11.2 − 39.1 − 36.8 − 2.4 − 0.3 − 2.0 + 4.8 − 1.0 − 0.3 − 0.2 − 22.4
2013          Jan − 2.9 + 19.7 − 18.8 − 19.0 + 0.2 + 0.5 − 0.2 − 0.8 − 2.9 − 0.0 − 0.5 − 1.0
         Feb + 9.8 + 10.0 + 2.2 + 4.3 − 2.1 − 0.3 − 1.8 − 0.1 − 2.2 − 0.0 − 0.5 + 16.1         Mar − 1.2 − 6.2 + 8.9 + 8.7 + 0.2 − 0.0 + 0.3 − 2.2 − 1.8 − 0.1 − 0.3 − 3.7
         Apr + 4.1 + 14.6 − 6.7 − 2.1 − 4.6 + 0.1 − 4.7 − 2.1 − 1.6 − 0.2 − 0.2 + 1.3
         May + 15.0 + 18.9 − 0.1 − 1.6 + 1.5 + 0.6 + 0.9 − 1.6 − 2.2 − 0.1 − 0.1 + 1.2         June + 14.6 + 6.4 + 11.3 + 12.2 − 0.9 − 0.6 − 0.3 − 1.1 − 2.0 − 0.1 − 0.0 + 14.1
         July − 24.5 + 5.0 − 26.5 − 21.9 − 4.6 − 1.0 − 3.6 − 1.5 − 1.5 − 0.0 + 0.3 − 22.5
         Aug + 0.1 + 13.3 − 11.8 − 3.3 − 8.4 − 0.2 − 8.2 − 0.7 − 0.7 + 0.0 + 0.0 − 6.1         Sep − 3.0 + 6.4 − 7.5 − 3.7 − 3.8 − 0.2 − 3.6 − 1.1 − 0.9 − 0.5 − 0.2 − 0.0
Domestic government End of year or month*
2010 153.4 46.1 103.0 47.7 55.3 2.6 52.7 2.8 1.5 34.7 6.2 0.4
2011 168.5 46.2 118.4 69.5 48.8 3.8 45.0 2.4 1.5 34.0 5.9 3.1
2012 186.2 50.8 130.7 73.0 57.7 4.5 53.1 3.1 1.6 32.7 5.9 3.1
2012          Oct 216.6 57.4 154.9 95.6 59.4 4.4 54.9 2.9 1.3 32.8 5.9 0.9
         Nov 216.8 56.6 155.8 96.3 59.5 4.6 55.0 3.0 1.4 32.8 5.9 0.8
         Dec 186.2 50.8 130.7 73.0 57.7 4.5 53.1 3.1 1.6 32.7 5.9 3.1
2013          Jan 179.1 50.6 124.0 67.1 56.9 4.6 52.3 3.1 1.3 32.7 5.9 1.1
         Feb 179.0 50.6 124.0 67.0 57.0 4.5 52.4 3.2 1.3 32.6 5.9 2.2
         Mar 185.9 49.5 131.9 74.1 57.8 5.0 52.8 3.3 1.2 32.6 5.8 1.3
         Apr 184.1 51.5 128.1 71.7 56.4 5.2 51.2 3.3 1.2 32.3 5.8 2.3
         May 190.2 52.1 133.4 76.0 57.4 5.5 51.9 3.5 1.2 32.3 5.8 2.1
         June 194.8 54.0 135.9 78.9 57.1 5.5 51.5 3.5 1.3 32.0 5.8 0.5
         July 189.8 49.2 135.7 78.5 57.2 5.1 52.1 3.6 1.3 32.0 5.8 0.3
         Aug 185.1 50.7 129.3 77.9 51.4 5.1 46.3 3.7 1.4 32.1 5.8 0.2
         Sep 184.4 49.5 129.9 78.9 51.0 5.1 45.9 3.7 1.4 31.2 5.8 0.8
Changes*
2011 + 14.6 + 0.1 + 15.0 + 21.4 − 6.5 + 1.2 − 7.7 − 0.4 + 0.0 − 0.7 − 0.2 + 2.7
2012 + 2.2 + 2.9 − 1.6 + 2.7 − 4.3 + 0.7 − 5.0 + 0.7 + 0.1 − 1.4 − 0.1 + 0.1
2012          Oct + 2.2 + 3.9 − 1.7 − 1.0 − 0.7 − 0.0 − 0.6 + 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.1 + 0.0 + 0.1         Nov + 0.2 − 0.8 + 0.8 + 0.7 + 0.1 + 0.1 + 0.0 + 0.1 + 0.0 + 0.0 + 0.0 − 0.1         Dec − 30.6 − 5.9 − 25.0 − 23.2 − 1.8 − 0.0 − 1.8 + 0.1 + 0.2 − 0.2 − 0.0 + 2.3
2013          Jan − 7.1 − 0.1 − 6.7 − 6.1 − 0.6 + 0.0 − 0.6 + 0.0 − 0.3 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 2.0
         Feb − 0.1 − 0.1 − 0.1 − 0.1 + 0.1 − 0.0 + 0.1 + 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.0 + 1.1         Mar + 5.6 − 1.5 + 7.0 + 6.9 + 0.2 + 0.2 − 0.0 + 0.1 − 0.0 − 0.1 − 0.1 − 0.9
         Apr − 1.7 + 2.1 − 3.8 − 2.4 − 1.4 + 0.2 − 1.6 + 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.2 − 0.0 + 1.0
         May + 6.1 + 0.6 + 5.3 + 4.3 + 1.0 + 0.4 + 0.7 + 0.2 + 0.0 − 0.1 − 0.0 − 0.2         June + 4.6 + 2.0 + 2.5 + 2.8 − 0.3 + 0.0 − 0.3 + 0.0 + 0.1 − 0.2 − 0.0 − 1.6
         July − 5.0 − 4.9 − 0.3 − 0.4 + 0.1 − 0.4 + 0.6 + 0.1 + 0.0 − 0.0 + 0.0 − 0.2
         Aug − 4.0 + 1.6 − 5.7 − 0.6 − 5.1 − 0.0 − 5.1 + 0.1 + 0.0 + 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.1         Sep − 0.7 − 1.2 + 0.6 + 1.0 − 0.4 − 0.0 − 0.4 − 0.0 + 0.0 − 0.5 + 0.0 + 0.6
*See Table IV.2, footnote *; statistical breaks have been eliminated from the specially marked. 1Including subordinated liabilities and liabilities arising from
changes. The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as provisional. registered debt securities. 2Including deposits under savings and loan contracts (see
Subsequent revisions, which appear in the following Monthly Report, are not

Deutsche Bundesbank
35  Monthly Report
November 2013
IV Banks
 
7 Deposits of domestic non-banks (non-MFIs) at banks (MFIs) in Germany * (cont’d)
 
 
€ billion
Time deposits 1,2   Memo item
  
 for more than 1 year 2 Subordinated
 liabilities
for up for up (excluding
to and to and for more Bank negotiable Liabilities
Deposits, Sight including including than Savings savings Fiduciary debt arising
Period total deposits Total 1 year Total 2 years 2 years bonds  4 loans securities) from repos deposits 3 
Domestic enterprises and households End of year or month*
 
2010 2,781.8 1,058.3 1,014.1 281.6 732.5 22.5 710.0 615.4 93.9 2.9 29.5 80.5
2011 2,877.0 1,122.0 1,037.9 316.5 721.3 27.7 693.7 613.8 103.3 2.5 28.4 94.02012 2,904.0 1,255.7 941.7 268.3 673.5 27.5 646.0 614.5 92.0 2.2 25.8 79.8
2012          Oct 2,908.1 1,235.2 966.9 288.4 678.5 28.0 650.5 610.7 95.3 2.0 26.2 105.0
         Nov 2,920.2 1,261.1 956.1 281.8 674.3 27.8 646.5 609.8 93.3 2.3 25.9 104.6         Dec 2,904.0 1,255.7 941.7 268.3 673.5 27.5 646.0 614.5 92.0 2.2 25.8 79.8
2013          Jan 2,908.2 1,275.5 929.6 255.3 674.3 27.9 646.4 613.6 89.5 2.3 25.3 80.9
         Feb 2,918.2 1,285.6 931.9 259.7 672.1 27.7 644.5 613.4 87.3 2.3 24.8 95.8         Mar 2,910.4 1,280.8 932.9 261.3 671.5 27.2 644.4 611.2 85.5 2.3 24.6 93.0
         Apr 2,916.2 1,293.0 930.2 261.9 668.4 27.1 641.3 609.0 83.9 2.3 24.4 93.3
         May 2,925.1 1,311.3 924.8 256.0 668.8 27.3 641.5 607.3 81.7 2.3 24.4 94.7         June 2,934.9 1,315.7 933.3 265.9 667.4 26.6 640.7 606.2 79.7 2.3 24.3 110.4
         July 2,915.4 1,325.6 907.0 244.3 662.7 26.1 636.7 604.5 78.2 2.3 24.6 88.2
         Aug 2,838.5 1,322.2 835.1 177.0 658.1 24.1 634.0 603.8 77.5 2.3 24.6 1.1         Sep 2,836.2 1,329.9 827.0 172.3 654.7 23.9 630.7 602.7 76.6 2.3 24.5 0.4
Changes*
2011 + 96.6 + 63.6 + 25.9 + 35.5 − 9.6 + 5.2 − 14.9 − 2.2 + 9.3 − 0.3 − 1.2 + 13.3
2012 + 40.1 + 135.8 − 85.1 − 50.4 − 34.7 − 0.1 − 34.6 + 0.8 − 11.3 − 0.3 − 2.6 − 16.8
2012          Oct + 10.3 + 25.9 − 13.7 − 5.1 − 8.6 − 0.5 − 8.1 − 0.6 − 1.3 − 0.0 − 0.2 + 9.9
         Nov + 12.0 + 25.8 − 10.9 − 6.6 − 4.3 − 0.2 − 4.0 − 0.8 − 2.1 + 0.3 − 0.3 − 0.5         Dec − 15.9 − 5.3 − 14.1 − 13.5 − 0.5 − 0.3 − 0.2 + 4.7 − 1.2 − 0.1 − 0.1 − 24.8
2013          Jan + 4.2 + 19.8 − 12.1 − 12.9 + 0.8 + 0.5 + 0.4 − 0.9 − 2.6 − 0.0 − 0.5 + 1.0
         Feb + 9.9 + 10.1 + 2.2 + 4.4 − 2.2 − 0.3 − 1.9 − 0.2 − 2.2 − 0.0 − 0.5 + 15.0         Mar − 6.8 − 4.7 + 1.9 + 1.8 + 0.1 − 0.2 + 0.3 − 2.3 − 1.7 − 0.0 − 0.2 − 2.8
         Apr + 5.8 + 12.5 − 2.9 + 0.2 − 3.1 − 0.0 − 3.1 − 2.2 − 1.6 + 0.0 − 0.2 + 0.2
         May + 8.9 + 18.3 − 5.4 − 5.9 + 0.4 + 0.2 + 0.2 − 1.8 − 2.2 − 0.0 − 0.1 + 1.4         June + 10.1 + 4.4 + 8.8 + 9.4 − 0.6 − 0.6 − 0.0 − 1.1 − 2.1 + 0.1 − 0.0 + 15.7
         July − 19.5 + 9.8 − 26.2 − 21.5 − 4.7 − 0.5 − 4.2 − 1.6 − 1.5 + 0.0 + 0.3 − 22.2
         Aug + 4.1 + 11.7 − 6.1 − 2.7 − 3.3 − 0.2 − 3.1 − 0.8 − 0.8 − 0.0 + 0.0 − 6.0         Sep − 2.4 + 7.6 − 8.0 − 4.6 − 3.4 − 0.2 − 3.2 − 1.1 − 0.9 − 0.0 − 0.2 − 0.7
of which:  Domestic enterprises End of year or month*
2010 1,124.4 344.6 755.5 196.0 559.5 7.5 552.0 6.3 17.9 2.8 21.4 80.5
2011 1,156.5 374.8 758.9 222.9 536.0 9.4 526.7 5.6 17.3 2.5 20.3 94.0
2012 1,105.3 414.2 668.5 185.9 482.5 10.4 472.2 6.5 16.1 2.2 18.2 79.8
2012          Oct 1,134.2 419.7 692.0 202.3 489.7 10.3 479.4 6.6 15.9 2.0 18.6 105.0
         Nov 1,131.1 425.2 683.6 198.0 485.6 10.3 475.4 6.5 15.8 2.3 18.3 104.6
         Dec 1,105.3 414.2 668.5 185.9 482.5 10.4 472.2 6.5 16.1 2.2 18.2 79.8
2013          Jan 1,109.2 428.0 658.5 175.7 482.8 10.7 472.2 6.6 16.0 2.3 17.8 80.9
         Feb 1,112.0 427.9 661.5 181.0 480.5 10.9 469.6 6.8 15.9 2.3 17.3 95.8
         Mar 1,104.5 418.0 664.0 184.3 479.7 10.7 469.0 6.8 15.7 2.3 17.2 93.0
         Apr 1,108.9 424.0 662.5 185.6 476.8 11.1 465.8 6.9 15.5 2.3 17.0 93.3
         May 1,110.2 430.2 657.4 180.5 476.9 11.5 465.4 7.1 15.5 2.3 17.1 94.7
         June 1,116.9 426.8 667.6 192.0 475.6 11.4 464.2 7.2 15.3 2.3 17.1 110.4
         July 1,096.9 430.4 644.1 172.1 472.0 11.6 460.4 7.3 15.2 2.3 17.4 88.2
         Aug 1,013.2 417.2 573.4 106.0 467.4 10.0 457.4 7.4 15.3 2.3 17.5 1.1
         Sep 1,013.2 424.3 566.4 102.4 464.0 10.1 453.9 7.4 15.2 2.3 17.3 0.4
Changes*
2011 + 33.6 + 29.1 + 5.1 + 27.6 − 22.5 + 1.9 − 24.4 − 0.3 − 0.3 − 0.3 − 1.1 + 13.3
2012 − 37.3 + 42.6 − 79.6 − 39.2 − 40.4 + 1.1 − 41.5 + 0.9 − 1.2 − 0.2 − 2.1 − 16.8
2012          Oct + 10.0 + 20.7 − 10.5 − 2.3 − 8.2 + 0.0 − 8.2 + 0.1 − 0.2 − 0.0 − 0.1 + 9.9
         Nov − 2.8 + 5.5 − 8.1 − 4.2 − 3.9 + 0.1 − 4.0 − 0.1 − 0.1 + 0.3 − 0.2 − 0.5         Dec − 25.6 − 11.0 − 14.9 − 12.1 − 2.9 + 0.1 − 3.0 − 0.0 + 0.3 − 0.1 − 0.1 − 24.8
2013          Jan + 3.7 + 13.8 − 10.1 − 10.3 + 0.1 + 0.3 − 0.2 + 0.1 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.4 + 1.0
         Feb + 2.8 − 0.1 + 3.0 + 5.3 − 2.3 + 0.2 − 2.5 + 0.1 − 0.2 − 0.0 − 0.4 + 15.0         Mar − 6.5 − 9.9 + 3.4 + 3.6 − 0.1 + 0.2 − 0.3 + 0.1 − 0.2 − 0.0 − 0.1 − 2.8
         Apr + 4.4 + 6.3 − 1.9 + 1.0 − 2.9 + 0.3 − 3.2 + 0.1 − 0.2 + 0.0 − 0.2 + 0.2
         May + 1.3 + 6.2 − 5.1 − 5.2 + 0.1 + 0.4 − 0.3 + 0.2 − 0.0 − 0.0 + 0.1 + 1.4         June + 7.0 − 3.4 + 10.5 + 11.0 − 0.4 + 0.0 − 0.5 + 0.1 − 0.2 + 0.1 − 0.0 + 15.7
         July − 20.0 + 3.6 − 23.5 − 19.8 − 3.7 + 0.2 − 3.8 + 0.1 − 0.1 − 0.0 + 0.3 − 22.2
         Aug − 2.6 + 1.9 − 4.8 − 1.6 − 3.2 + 0.2 − 3.3 + 0.1 + 0.1 − 0.0 + 0.1 − 6.0         Sep − 0.2 + 7.0 − 7.1 − 3.5 − 3.6 + 0.1 − 3.7 + 0.0 − 0.1 − 0.0 − 0.2 − 0.7
Table IV.12). 3Excluding deposits under savings and loan contracts (see also foot-   
note 2). 4 Including liabilities arising from non-negotiable bearer debt securities.   
   
  

Deutsche Bundesbank
36  Monthly Report
November 2013
IV Banks
 
8 Deposits of domestic households and non-profit institutions at banks (MFIs) in Germany*
 
 
€ billion
Sight deposits Time deposits 1,2 
by creditor group by creditor group
Deposits of Domestic households Domestic households
domestic
householdsand Domestic
non-profit Self- non-profit Self-
employed Other institu- employed Other institutions,
Period total Total Total persons Employees tions Total Total persons Employees individuals individuals
End of year or month*
 
2010 1,657.4 713.7 692.4 123.8 471.2 97.4 21.3 258.6 241.4 21.2 203.7 16.4
2011 1,720.4 747.3 724.9 131.5 490.4 103.0 22.4 278.9 261.1 23.3 218.5 19.3
2012 1,798.7 841.5 816.5 147.1 548.6 120.8 25.0 273.3 256.6 18.8 219.3 18.6
2013          Apr 1,807.3 869.1 841.4 150.3 565.3 125.8 27.6 267.8 252.1 17.5 216.5 18.2
         May 1,814.9 881.1 853.0 152.5 572.8 127.7 28.2 267.4 252.0 17.2 216.5 18.3
         June 1,818.0 889.0 860.9 150.0 582.8 128.0 28.1 265.7 250.5 16.9 215.8 17.8
         July 1,818.5 895.2 867.4 155.4 582.9 129.2 27.9 263.0 247.8 16.7 213.6 17.5
         Aug 1,825.3 905.0 876.8 158.4 588.8 129.7 28.1 261.7 246.6 16.6 212.8 17.2
         Sep 1,822.9 905.6 877.3 156.7 593.1 127.4 28.3 260.6 245.5 16.4 212.9 16.2
Changes*
2011 + 63.0 + 34.5 + 33.5 + 7.8 + 19.7 + 6.0 + 1.1 + 20.8 + 20.3 + 2.1 + 15.2 + 3.0
2012 + 77.3 + 93.2 + 90.5 + 14.0 + 57.2 + 19.3 + 2.7 − 5.6 − 4.4 − 4.5 − 0.4 + 0.5
2013          Apr + 1.4 + 6.2 + 6.3 + 3.3 + 2.8 + 0.2 − 0.1 − 1.1 − 1.2 − 0.3 − 1.0 + 0.1
         May + 7.6 + 12.1 + 11.5 + 2.2 + 7.4 + 1.8 + 0.5 − 0.4 − 0.1 − 0.2 + 0.0 + 0.1
         June + 3.1 + 7.8 + 7.9 − 2.5 + 10.1 + 0.4 − 0.1 − 1.7 − 1.6 − 0.4 − 0.7 − 0.5
         July + 0.5 + 6.2 + 6.5 + 5.4 + 0.0 + 1.1 − 0.2 − 2.7 − 2.6 − 0.2 − 2.1 − 0.3
         Aug + 6.8 + 9.8 + 9.5 + 3.0 + 5.9 + 0.5 + 0.3 − 1.3 − 1.3 − 0.1 − 0.8 − 0.3
         Sep − 2.2 + 0.6 + 0.4 − 1.6 + 1.9 + 0.2 + 0.1 − 0.9 − 1.0 − 0.2 − 0.5 − 0.4
*See Table IV.2, footnote*; statistical breaks have been eliminated from the changes. revisions, which appear in the following Monthly Report, are not specially
The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as provisional. Subsequent marked. 1Including subordinated liabilities and liabilities arising from registered debt
 
  
9 Deposits of domestic government at banks (MFIs) in Germany, by creditor group
*
 
€ billion
Deposits
   
Federal Government and its special funds  1 State governments
Time deposits Time deposits
Savings Savings
for up deposits Memo for up deposits Memo
Domestic to and for more and bank item to and for more and bank item
government, Sight including than savings Fiduciary Sight including than savings Fiduciary
Period total Total deposits 1 year 1 year bonds 2 loans Total deposits 1 year 1 year bonds 2 loans
End of year or month*
 
2010 153.4 38.7 5.7 3.3 29.6 0.1 17.0 28.2 8.5 6.7 12.9 0.2 17.2
2011 168.5 37.9 6.2 9.4 22.2 0.1 16.9 34.8 11.4 10.7 12.5 0.2 16.8
2012 186.2 25.9 3.7 6.0 16.2 0.1 16.4 47.2 9.1 13.7 24.2 0.2 15.9
2013          Apr 184.1 21.8 4.4 2.8 14.5 0.1 16.4 49.6 12.0 14.1 23.4 0.2 15.6
         May 190.2 22.5 4.3 3.6 14.6 0.1 16.4 46.9 9.6 13.7 23.4 0.2 15.5
         June 194.8 21.9 3.9 3.4 14.5 0.1 16.2 50.7 12.3 14.9 23.3 0.2 15.5
         July 189.8 23.5 3.8 5.2 14.4 0.1 16.2 48.1 11.0 13.7 23.1 0.2 15.5
         Aug 185.1 16.7 4.3 3.3 9.0 0.1 16.2 44.7 8.8 12.6 23.1 0.2 15.5
         Sep 184.4 15.4 3.1 3.6 8.5 0.1 16.2 49.0 11.0 14.7 23.0 0.2 14.6
Changes*
2011 + 14.6 − 0.7 + 0.5 + 6.3 − 7.5 + 0.0 − 0.2 + 6.6 + 2.9 + 4.0 − 0.4 + 0.0 − 0.5
2012 + 2.2 − 9.2 − 2.5 − 0.7 − 6.0 + 0.0 − 0.5 − 2.3 − 3.9 + 2.7 − 1.1 − 0.0 − 0.9
2013          Apr − 1.7 − 1.4 + 0.4 − 0.4 − 1.3 + 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.2 + 2.1 − 1.9 − 0.3 + 0.0 − 0.2
         May + 6.1 + 0.7 − 0.1 + 0.8 + 0.0 − − 0.0 − 2.7 − 2.4 − 0.3 − 0.0 + 0.0 − 0.0
         June + 4.6 − 0.6 − 0.3 − 0.2 − 0.1 + 0.0 − 0.2 + 3.8 + 2.7 + 1.2 − 0.1 + 0.0 − 0.0
         July − 5.0 + 1.5 − 0.1 + 1.7 − 0.1 − − 0.0 − 2.6 − 1.3 − 1.2 − 0.1 + 0.0 + 0.0
         Aug − 4.0 − 6.8 + 0.5 − 1.9 − 5.4 + 0.0 + 0.0 − 3.4 − 2.2 − 1.1 − 0.1 + 0.0 + 0.0
         Sep − 0.7 − 1.3 − 1.2 + 0.4 − 0.5 − + 0.0 + 4.3 + 2.2 + 2.1 − 0.0 + 0.0 − 0.5
*See Table IV.2, footnote *; excluding deposits of the Treuhand agency and its Telekom AG, and of publicly owned enterprises, which are included in ”Enterprises”.
successor organisations, of the Federal Railways, east German Railways and Federal Statistical breaks have been eliminated from the changes. The figures for the latest
Post Office, and, from 1995, of Deutsche Bahn AG, Deutsche Post AG and Deutsche date are always to be regarded as provisional. Subsequent revisions, which appear in

Deutsche Bundesbank
37  Monthly Report
November 2013
IV Banks
 
   
 
 Savings deposits 3  Memo item
 
 by maturity
 more than 1 year 2 
Subordinated
of which liabilities
Domestic Domestic (excluding
up to and up to and Bank negotiable Liabilities non-profit non-profit
institu- including including more than Domestic institu- savings Fiduciary debt arising
tions 1 year Total 2 years 2 years Total tions bonds  4 loans from repos   Period households securities) 5 
End of year or month*
 
17.3 85.7 173.0 15.0 158.0 609.1 599.2 9.9 76.0 0.1 8.2 − 2010
17.8 93.6 185.3 18.3 167.0 608.2 599.0 9.2 86.1 0.1 8.1 − 201116.7 82.3 190.9 17.1 173.8 608.0 597.8 10.2 76.0 0.0 7.6 − 2012
15.6 76.2 191.6 16.0 175.5 602.1 591.7 10.4 68.4 0.0 7.4 − 2013          Apr 
15.4 75.5 191.9 15.8 176.1 600.2 589.9 10.3 66.2 0.0 7.2 −          May15.2 74.0 191.7 15.2 176.5 599.0 588.7 10.3 64.4 0.0 7.2 −          June
15.2 72.2 190.8 14.5 176.3 597.3 587.1 10.2 63.1 0.0 7.2 −          July
15.1 71.0 190.6 14.1 176.5 596.4 586.2 10.2 62.2 0.0 7.1 −          Aug 15.1 69.9 190.7 13.9 176.8 595.3 585.2 10.1 61.4 0.0 7.2 −          Sep 
Changes*
+ 0.5 + 8.0 + 12.9 + 3.3 + 9.5 − 1.8 − 1.1 − 0.7 + 9.5 − 0.0 − 0.1 − 2011
− 1.1 − 11.2 + 5.6 − 1.3 + 6.9 − 0.2 − 1.1 + 1.0 − 10.1 − 0.0 − 0.5 − 2012
+ 0.2 − 0.8 − 0.2 − 0.4 + 0.1 − 2.3 − 2.2 − 0.0 − 1.4 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 2013          Apr 
− 0.3 − 0.7 + 0.3 − 0.2 + 0.6 − 1.9 − 1.8 − 0.1 − 2.1 − 0.0 − 0.1 −          May
− 0.2 − 1.6 − 0.2 − 0.6 + 0.4 − 1.2 − 1.2 − 0.0 − 1.8 + 0.0 − 0.0 −          June
− 0.1 − 1.7 − 1.0 − 0.7 − 0.3 − 1.7 − 1.6 − 0.1 − 1.3 + 0.0 − 0.1 −          July
− 0.0 − 1.2 − 0.1 − 0.4 + 0.2 − 0.9 − 0.8 − 0.0 − 0.8 + 0.0 − 0.0 −          Aug 
+ 0.1 − 1.1 + 0.2 − 0.3 + 0.4 − 1.1 − 1.0 − 0.1 − 0.8 − 0.0 + 0.0 −          Sep 
securities. 2Including deposits under savings and loan contracts (see Table 2). 4Including liabilities arising from non-negotiable bearer debt
IV.12). 3Excluding deposits under savings and loan contracts (see also foot-note securities. 5 Included in time deposits. 
 
     
 
Local government and local government associations
(including municipal special-purpose associations) Social security funds
Time deposits 3 Time deposits
Savings Savings
for up deposits Memo for up deposits Memo
to and for more and bank item to and for more and bank item
Sight including than savings Fiduciary Sight including than savings Fiduciary
Total deposits 1 year 1 year bonds 2,4 loans Total deposits 1 year 1 year bonds 2 loans   Period
End of year or month*
 
37.4 19.5 9.9 4.5 3.5 0.4 49.1 12.3 27.9 8.3 0.6 0.0 2010
39.3 18.1 13.0 5.0 3.2 0.4 56.5 10.5 36.4 9.1 0.4 0.0 201143.8 23.0 11.3 5.9 3.6 0.4 69.3 15.0 42.0 11.4 0.8 0.0 2012
41.2 19.9 11.5 6.1 3.7 0.4 71.4 15.3 43.3 12.3 0.6 0.0 2013          Apr 
45.0 22.9 12.0 6.2 3.8 0.4 75.8 15.4 46.6 13.2 0.7 0.0          May43.4 21.8 11.4 6.3 3.9 0.4 78.8 16.0 49.1 13.1 0.7 0.0          June
41.9 20.4 11.2 6.3 4.0 0.4 76.4 14.0 48.4 13.3 0.7 0.0          July
46.1 23.6 11.9 6.5 4.1 0.4 77.7 14.0 50.1 12.8 0.7 0.0          Aug 43.2 21.5 11.2 6.5 4.1 0.4 76.9 13.9 49.3 13.0 0.7 0.0          Sep 
Changes*
+ 1.8 − 1.4 + 2.9 + 0.5 − 0.2 − 0.0 + 7.0 − 1.9 + 8.2 + 0.9 − 0.2 − 0.0 2011+ 4.3 + 4.8 − 1.7 + 0.7 + 0.4 − 0.0 + 9.4 + 4.5 + 2.4 + 2.1 + 0.4 − 0.0 2012
− 0.1 − 0.0 + 0.1 − 0.1 + 0.0 − − 0.1 − 0.4 − 0.1 + 0.3 − 0.0 − 2013          Apr 
+ 3.7 + 2.9 + 0.5 + 0.1 + 0.1 − + 4.4 + 0.1 + 3.4 + 0.9 + 0.1 −          May− 1.6 − 1.1 − 0.6 + 0.0 + 0.1 − + 2.9 + 0.7 + 2.4 − 0.1 + 0.0 −          June
− 1.6 − 1.5 − 0.2 + 0.1 + 0.1 − 0.0 − 2.4 − 2.0 − 0.7 + 0.3 + 0.0 −          July
+ 4.2 + 3.3 + 0.7 + 0.1 + 0.1 − + 1.9 + 0.1 + 1.7 + 0.2 + 0.0 −          Aug − 2.9 − 2.1 − 0.7 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.8 − 0.1 − 0.8 + 0.1 + 0.0 − 0.0          Sep 
the following Monthly Report, are not specially marked. 1Federal Railways Fund, non-negotiable bearer debt securities. 3Including deposits under savings and loan
Indemnification Fund, Redemption Fund for Inherited Liabilities, ERP Special Fund, contracts. 4 Excluding deposits under savings and loan contracts (see also footnote 3). 
German Unity Fund, Equalisation of Burdens Fund. 2Including liabilities arising from

Deutsche Bundesbank
38  Monthly Report
November 2013
IV Banks
 
10 Savings deposits and bank savings bonds of banks (MFIs) in Germany sold to non-banks (non-MFIs)*
 
 
€ billion
Savings deposits 1 Bank savings bonds 3  , sold to
of residents of non-residents domestic non-banks
at three months’ at more than three Memo
notice months’ notice item of which
Interest With
of which of which of which credited maturities
Special Special At three on of more
savings savings savings non-banks, than foreign months’
Period Total Total Total Total Total notice deposits total Total 2 years facilities 2 facilities 2 non-banks
End of year or month*
 
2010 628.2 618.2 512.5 412.3 105.7 96.6 9.9 7.7 10.9 113.1 95.4 70.5 17.7
2011 626.3 616.1 515.3 413.7 100.8 91.3 10.2 7.8 10.0 122.5 104.8 74.6 17.7
2012 628.2 617.6 528.4 418.1 89.2 77.7 10.6 8.1 9.8 110.5 93.6 68.6 16.9
2013          May 621.0 610.7 529.1 414.8 81.6 69.7 10.2 8.0 0.3 99.7 83.0 63.2 16.7
         June 619.8 609.7 528.9 413.9 80.8 68.7 10.1 8.0 0.2 97.5 81.0 61.8 16.5
         July 618.2 608.1 528.4 413.1 79.8 67.7 10.1 7.9 0.3 95.6 79.6 61.1 16.1
         Aug 617.5 607.5 528.6 413.0 78.9 66.6 10.0 7.9 0.2 94.9 78.8 60.8 16.0
         Sep 616.3 606.4 528.3 412.4 78.1 65.8 9.9 7.9 0.2 93.9 78.0 60.4 15.9
Changes*
2011 − 2.4 − 2.6 + 1.3 + 0.2 − 3.9 − 4.3 + 0.2 + 0.1 . + 9.4 + 9.3 + 4.0 + 0.2
2012 + 1.9 + 1.5 + 14.1 + 5.6 − 12.6 − 14.6 + 0.4 + 0.3 . − 12.0 − 11.2 − 6.1 − 0.7
2013          May − 1.6 − 1.6 + 0.4 + 0.2 − 2.0 − 2.1 − 0.1 − 0.0 . − 2.0 − 2.2 − 1.3 + 0.1
         June − 1.1 − 1.1 − 0.2 − 0.8 − 0.8 − 0.9 − 0.1 − 0.0 . − 2.2 − 2.0 − 1.3 − 0.2
         July − 1.6 − 1.5 − 0.6 − 0.8 − 1.0 − 1.1 − 0.1 − 0.0 . − 1.9 − 1.5 − 0.8 − 0.4
         Aug − 0.8 − 0.7 + 0.2 − 0.1 − 0.9 − 1.0 − 0.1 − 0.0 . − 0.8 − 0.7 − 0.2 − 0.0
         Sep − 1.1 − 1.1 − 0.3 − 0.6 − 0.8 − 0.9 − 0.0 − 0.0 . − 1.0 − 0.9 − 0.5 − 0.1
*See Table IV.2, footnote*; statistical breaks have been eliminated from the changes. as time deposits. 2Savings deposits bearing interest at a rate which exceeds the
The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as provisional. Subsequent minimum or basic rate of interest. 3Including liabilities arising from non-negotiable
revisions, which appear in the following Monthly Report, are not specially bearer debt securities. 
marked. 1Excluding deposits under savings and loan contracts, which are classified
 
  
11 Debt securities and money market paper outstanding of banks (MFIs) in Germany
*
 
€ billion
Negotiable bearer debt securities and money market paper Non-negotiable
bearer debt
of which securities and
money market
with maturities of paper 6 Subordinated
up to more than 1 year up to
and including 1 year of which and including 2 years
with
Certifi- of which of which non- maturities
Floating Zero Foreign cates without without more of more negotiable negotiable
rate coupon currency of a nominal a nominal than than debt debt
Total bonds 1 deposit Total Total 2 years Total 2 years securities securities bonds 1,2 bonds 3,4 guarantee 5 guarantee 5 
Period
End of year or month*
 
2010 1,435.1 342.0 40.7 366.5 82.8 97.0 4.6 56.8 6.5 1,281.4 0.7 0.6 43.9 1.5
2011 1,375.4 352.6 37.2 373.9 75.3 95.2 3.0 53.6 4.5 1,226.6 0.6 0.4 43.2 1.5
2012 1,265.1 346.8 31.6 362.3 58.9 76.4 3.0 51.3 4.4 1,137.4 0.3 0.3 38.6 1.1
2013          May 1,217.2 331.6 30.2 354.5 71.1 83.6 2.5 42.1 4.4 1,091.5 0.3 0.3 37.6 1.1
         June 1,209.2 329.1 30.1 355.3 73.1 86.2 2.9 40.3 4.6 1,082.7 0.3 0.2 37.6 1.1
         July 1,194.7 325.4 30.5 352.1 76.5 90.4 3.0 41.4 4.8 1,062.9 0.2 0.2 37.2 1.1
         Aug 1,191.1 324.9 29.5 353.7 78.9 91.9 2.8 40.1 4.7 1,059.1 0.2 0.2 37.4 1.1
         Sep 1,185.6 322.9 28.6 350.7 74.4 89.2 2.6 39.1 4.5 1,057.3 0.2 0.2 38.3 1.1
Changes*
2011 − 59.0 + 10.6 − 5.2 + 8.4 − 7.5 − 2.1 − 1.6 − 2.9 − 2.0 − 54.0 − 0.0 − 0.2 − 0.8 − 0.0
2012 − 111.0 − 7.4 − 6.3 − 12.0 − 16.4 − 19.5 − 0.0 − 2.3 − 0.3 − 89.2 + 0.3 − 0.1 − 4.6 − 0.5
2013          May − 17.8 − 3.6 − 1.1 − 5.9 + 0.4 − 1.3 − 0.6 − 2.3 − 0.3 − 14.2 − 0.0 − 0.0 + 1.1 − 0.0
         June − 8.0 − 2.5 − 0.0 + 0.8 + 2.0 + 2.6 + 0.4 − 1.7 + 0.3 − 8.8 − 0.0 − 0.0 + 0.0 − 0.0
         July − 14.6 − 3.7 + 0.4 − 3.2 + 3.4 + 4.1 + 0.1 + 1.1 + 0.1 − 19.8 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.3 −
         Aug − 3.6 − 0.6 − 1.0 + 1.7 + 2.4 + 1.6 − 0.2 − 1.3 − 0.1 − 3.9 − 0.0 − 0.0 + 0.2 −         Sep − 5.5 − 1.9 − 1.0 − 3.0 − 4.5 − 2.8 − 0.2 − 1.0 − 0.2 − 1.8 + 0.0 + 0.0 + 0.9 − 0.0
*See Table IV.2, footnote*; statistical breaks have been eliminated from the coupon bonds denominated in foreign currencies. 4Bonds denominated in
changes. The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as provisional. non-euro-area currencies. 5Negotiable bearer debt securities respectively money
Subsequent revisions, which appear in the following Monthly Report, are not market paper with a nominal guarantee of less than 100%. 6Non-negotiable
specially marked. 1Including debt securities denominated in foreign bearer debt securities are classified among bank savings bonds (see also Table IV.10,
currencies. 2Issue value when floated. 3Including floating rate notes and zero footnote 2). 

Deutsche Bundesbank
39  Monthly Report
November 2013
IV  Banks
  
12 Building  and  loan  associations (MFIs) in Germany *)
Interim statements
  
€ billion
Lending to banks (MFIs)
Lending to non-banks (non-MFIs) Deposits of banks Deposits of non-
(MFIs) 5 banks (non-MFIs)
Credit Building loans Secur- Memo
bal- item ities (in-
ances cluding Bearer New
and Loans Treasury Deposits Deposits debt Capital con-
Num- loans under bills under under secur- (includ- tractsber (ex- Bank savings Interim and savings savings ities ing pub- enteredof Balance cluding debt and loan and Other Treasury and loan Sight and loan Sight and out- lished into in
End of sheet building Building secur- con- bridging building discount con- and time con- time de- stand- re- year or associ-
year/month ations loans 
2 ities 3 tracts loans loans tracts deposits tracts posits  6 ing month 8 total 13 loans) 1 paper) 4 serves) 7 
All  building  and  loan  associations
2011 23 197.5 41.4 0.0 17.6 27.1 74.2 15.9 13.0 0.7 22.8 136.7 6.9 5.4 8.3 99.2
2012 22 200.6 42.2 0.0 17.5 24.0 78.3 16.0 14.5 1.3 21.0 141.9 6.4 4.9 8.7 101.8
2013          July 22 203.7 43.0 0.0 17.7 22.1 80.3 16.9 16.8 1.5 21.6 145.1 5.9 4.2 9.0 8.7
         Aug 22 204.2 43.6 0.0 17.2 21.8 80.8 17.0 17.0 1.5 22.2 145.4 5.8 4.2 9.0 8.1
         Sep 22 204.2 43.1 0.0 17.1 21.6 81.5 17.0 16.9 1.5 21.6 145.8 5.7 4.2 9.0 8.0
Private  building  and  Ioan  associations
  
2013          July 12 144.5 25.4 0.0 11.3 15.0 63.6 14.6 8.6 1.0 18.3 96.0 5.8 4.2 6.0 5.6
         Aug 12 144.7 26.1 0.0 10.6 14.9 63.9 14.6 8.6 1.0 18.7 96.2 5.7 4.2 6.0 5.3         Sep 12 144.4 25.7 0.0 10.6 14.8 64.4 14.6 8.3 1.1 18.0 96.6 5.6 4.2 6.0 5.3
Public  building  and  Ioan  associations
  
2013          July 10 59.2 17.6 0.0 6.4 7.0 16.8 2.3 8.2 0.5 3.4 49.1 0.1 − 3.0 3.1
         Aug 10 59.5 17.5 0.0 6.6 6.9 16.9 2.3 8.4 0.5 3.5 49.2 0.1 − 3.0 2.8         Sep 10 59.8 17.5 0.0 6.6 6.8 17.1 2.3 8.6 0.5 3.6 49.3 0.1 − 3.0 2.8
Trends in building and loan association business
  
€ billion
Changes in deposits
Capital promised Capital disbursed Disbursement Interest and
under savings and commitments repayments
loan contracts Allocations outstanding at received on
end of period building loans 10 
Deposits under Loans under
Repay- savings and savings and
ments loan contracts loan contracts 9 Newly
Interest of granted
credited interim deposits of which of which
on under Applied Applied and ofwhich of Memo Amounts deposits
cancelled to settle- to settle- bridging
under savings of ment of ment of loans Under which item paid intosavings savings and which interim interim and alloc- Repay- Housing
and and loan loan Net and and other ated ments bonuses
loan ac- con- con- alloca- bridging bridging building con- during re-
Period tracts tracts Total Total Total loans Total loans loans Total tracts Total quarter counts 
9 tions 11 ceived 12 
All  building  and  loan  associations
2011 27.6 2.5 6.1 46.2 31.0 40.9 18.1 4.4 8.2 4.1 14.6 12.1 7.5 11.0 9.3 0.5
2012 28.5 2.6 6.8 48.3 31.0 40.8 18.3 4.1 6.8 3.7 15.7 13.2 7.7 12.1 10.1 0.4
2013          July 2.4 0.0 0.7 5.0 3.0 4.1 1.9 0.4 0.6 0.3 1.7 14.7 8.2 1.0 0.0
         Aug 2.3 0.0 0.6 4.1 2.5 3.5 1.5 0.3 0.6 0.3 1.5 14.8 8.2 0.9 0.0
         Sep 2.3 0.0 0.5 3.9 2.3 3.4 1.3 0.3 0.5 0.3 1.6 14.7 8.2 0.9 ... 0.0
Private  building  and  Ioan  associations
  
2013          July 1.6 0.0 0.4 3.6 2.1 3.1 1.4 0.3 0.4 0.2 1.3 9.7 4.5 0.7 0.0
         Aug 1.5 0.0 0.3 2.9 1.6 2.6 1.1 0.3 0.4 0.2 1.1 9.8 4.5 0.6 0.0
         Sep 1.6 0.0 0.3 2.8 1.6 2.5 0.9 0.2 0.4 0.2 1.2 9.8 4.5 0.7 ... 0.0
Public  building  and  Ioan  associations
  
2013          July 0.8 0.0 0.3 1.4 0.9 1.1 0.5 0.1 0.2 0.1 0.4 4.9 3.7 0.3 0.0
         Aug 0.8 0.0 0.3 1.2 0.8 0.9 0.4 0.1 0.1 0.1 0.3 5.0 3.7 0.3 0.0
         Sep 0.8 0.0 0.2 1.1 0.8 0.9 0.4 0.1 0.1 0.1 0.4 4.9 3.7 0.3 ... 0.0
*Excluding assets and liabilities and/or transactions of foreign branches. The figures 8Total amount covered by the contracts; only contracts newly entered into, for
for the latest date are always to be regarded as provisional. Subsequent revisions, which the contract fee has been fully paid. Increases in the sum contracted count aswhich appear in the following Monthly Report, are not specially marked. 1Including new contracts. 9For disbursements of deposits under savings and loan contracts
claims on building and loan associations, claims arising from registered debt arising from the allocation of contracts see “Capital disbursed“. 10Including housing
securities and central bank credit balances. 2Loans under savings and loan contracts bonuses credited. 11Only allocations accepted by the beneficiaries; including
and interim and bridging loans. 3Including money market paper and small amounts allocations applied to settlement of interim and bridging loans. 12The amounts
of other securities issued by banks. 4Including equalisation claims. 5Including already credited to the accounts of savers or borrowers are also included in
liabilities to building and loan associations. 6Including small amounts of savings “Amounts paid into savings and loan accounts“ and “Interest and repayments
deposits. 7Including participation rights capital and fund for general banking risks. received on building loans“. 13 See Table IV.2, footnote 1. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
40  Monthly Report
November 2013
IV  Banks
  
13 Assets and liabilities of the foreign branches and foreign subsidiaries of German banks (MFIs) *
  
  
€ billion
Number of Lending to banks (MFIs) Lending to non-banks (non-MFIs) Other  assets 7 
Loans Credit  balances and loans
German   
banks(MFIs)   with of which
foreign foreign Derivative
branches Money Money financial
branches  1 
and/or and/or market to to market instruments
foreign foreign Balance paper, German foreign paper, in the
subsi- subsi- sheet German Foreign secur- non- non- secur- trading
Period diaries diaries total 7 Total Total banks banks Total Total banks banks ities  2 Total portfolio ities 2,3 
Foreign  branches End of year or month *
  
2010 55 212 2,226.3 591.4 564.8 232.0 332.8 26.6 696.7 532.5 27.5 505.0 164.2 938.2 633.9
2011 56 209 2,316.6 603.9 584.9 199.1 385.8 19.0 642.5 504.3 23.2 481.0 138.2 1,070.2 885.0
2012 55 210 2,042.7 552.1 537.9 179.5 358.4 14.2 550.2 427.1 16.9 410.2 123.1 940.4 671.8
2012          Nov 55 208 2,145.2 554.5 539.7 180.3 359.4 14.9 587.2 461.7 22.1 439.6 125.5 1,003.4 709.5
         Dec 55 210 2,042.7 552.1 537.9 179.5 358.4 14.2 550.2 427.1 16.9 410.2 123.1 940.4 671.8
2013          Jan 55 209 2,048.5 554.7 539.9 182.7 357.2 14.8 560.1 436.2 15.6 420.6 123.8 933.8 633.7
         Feb 55 209 2,052.3 547.0 531.9 165.9 366.0 15.1 578.8 456.2 14.6 441.7 122.5 926.5 650.9
         Mar 55 209 2,007.7 541.0 525.3 162.4 362.9 15.7 580.6 454.3 14.7 439.6 126.3 886.2 636.8
         Apr 55 207 2,034.7 537.8 522.2 163.0 359.1 15.6 578.8 458.2 13.7 444.6 120.6 918.1 656.3
         May 55 208 2,003.3 534.1 518.7 160.6 358.2 15.3 595.4 468.8 13.0 455.7 126.6 873.8 613.0
         June 55 207 1,909.3 528.0 512.8 162.1 350.6 15.2 563.0 446.7 12.8 433.9 116.3 818.3 605.9
         July 54 206 1,845.8 511.4 497.0 156.7 340.3 14.5 540.5 431.2 12.0 419.2 109.3 793.9 544.3
         Aug 54 206 1,812.6 506.8 492.3 147.6 344.6 14.6 533.5 422.8 12.2 410.6 110.7 772.3 508.3
Changes *
2011 + 1 − 3 + 56.9 − 4.6 + 3.2 − 32.9 + 36.2 − 7.9 − 68.9 − 40.9 − 4.3 − 36.7 − 28.0 + 130.4 + 251.0
2012 − 2 + 1 − 261.8 − 45.7 − 41.0 − 19.6 − 21.4 − 4.7 − 86.9 − 73.0 − 6.4 − 66.7 − 13.9 − 129.3 − 213.2
2012          Dec − + 2 − 90.2 + 3.2 + 3.7 − 0.7 + 4.5 − 0.6 − 31.4 − 30.1 − 5.2 − 24.9 − 1.3 − 62.0 − 37.7
2013          Jan − − 1 + 27.9 + 12.4 + 11.7 + 3.1 + 8.6 + 0.7 + 20.9 + 18.2 − 1.3 + 19.5 + 2.7 − 5.4 − 38.1
         Feb − − − 14.1 − 16.9 − 17.1 − 16.8 − 0.3 + 0.2 + 11.5 + 14.2 − 1.0 + 15.3 − 2.8 − 8.7 + 17.2
         Mar − − − 61.2 − 13.7 − 14.1 − 3.5 − 10.6 + 0.4 − 6.1 − 8.5 + 0.1 − 8.7 + 2.5 − 41.5 − 14.1
         Apr − − 2 + 41.3 + 4.1 + 4.1 + 0.6 + 3.5 + 0.0 + 4.4 + 9.0 − 1.0 + 10.1 − 4.6 + 32.7 + 19.5
         May − + 1 − 31.5 − 4.0 − 3.8 − 2.5 − 1.3 − 0.3 + 16.8 + 10.7 − 0.6 + 11.3 + 6.1 − 44.3 − 43.3
         June − − 1 − 89.8 − 4.0 − 3.9 + 1.6 − 5.4 − 0.1 − 30.5 − 20.6 − 0.2 − 20.4 − 9.9 − 55.3 − 7.1
         July − 1 − 1 − 54.0 − 12.0 − 11.4 − 5.4 − 6.0 − 0.6 − 17.9 − 11.7 − 0.8 − 10.9 − 6.3 − 24.0 − 61.6
         Aug − − − 36.5 − 5.8 − 5.8 − 9.1 + 3.2 + 0.0 − 8.9 − 10.0 + 0.2 − 10.3 + 1.1 − 21.8 − 36.0
    
Foreign  subsidiaries End of year or month *
  
2010 37 93 495.1 220.9 178.7 98.8 79.9 42.1 218.3 168.8 37.7 131.2 49.5 55.9 −
2011 35 87 478.6 210.3 172.8 95.3 77.5 37.5 210.5 165.1 35.6 129.5 45.5 57.7 −
2012 35 83 458.7 199.5 166.3 94.5 71.8 33.2 204.7 162.1 30.6 131.5 42.5 54.6 −
2012          Nov 35 83 467.5 211.3 178.7 101.8 76.9 32.6 201.5 158.1 31.6 126.4 43.4 54.7 −
         Dec 35 83 458.7 199.5 166.3 94.5 71.8 33.2 204.7 162.1 30.6 131.5 42.5 54.6 −
2013          Jan 35 83 443.3 194.6 161.1 92.8 68.3 33.6 195.8 153.4 29.9 123.5 42.4 52.9 −
         Feb 35 83 444.4 194.1 161.2 93.6 67.7 32.9 197.3 154.2 29.7 124.5 43.1 53.0 −
         Mar 35 83 455.7 194.6 161.8 95.4 66.4 32.8 205.8 163.0 29.4 133.6 42.9 55.3 −
         Apr 35 83 444.6 188.8 156.6 91.1 65.5 32.1 201.5 158.3 28.5 129.8 43.3 54.3 −
         May 35 83 438.4 193.0 161.6 96.5 65.1 31.4 196.2 154.3 28.9 125.4 41.9 49.2 −
         June 34 81 436.5 189.5 158.7 94.8 63.9 30.8 193.9 153.7 28.4 125.3 40.1 53.1 −
         July 33 78 430.7 190.0 159.2 97.3 61.9 30.8 187.8 148.6 28.6 119.9 39.3 52.8 −
         Aug 33 78 435.0 193.9 163.3 97.8 65.5 30.6 187.4 148.2 28.5 119.7 39.2 53.7 −
Changes *
2011 − 2 − 6 − 20.1 − 12.2 − 7.2 − 3.5 − 3.7 − 5.0 − 9.6 − 5.5 − 2.1 − 3.4 − 4.0 + 1.6 −
2012 − − 4 − 18.2 − 9.9 − 5.9 − 0.8 − 5.1 − 4.1 − 5.2 − 2.3 − 5.0 + 2.7 − 2.9 − 3.1 −
2012          Dec − − − 7.3 − 11.0 − 11.8 − 7.3 − 4.5 + 0.8 + 3.8 + 4.6 − 1.0 + 5.7 − 0.8 − 0.1 −
2013          Jan − − − 12.4 − 3.4 − 4.1 − 1.8 − 2.4 + 0.7 − 7.4 − 7.2 − 0.7 − 6.5 − 0.2 − 1.6 −
         Feb − − − 1.3 − 1.8 − 0.8 + 0.8 − 1.7 − 1.0 + 0.6 − 0.1 − 0.2 + 0.1 + 0.7 + 0.0 −
         Mar − − + 9.4 − 0.4 − 0.3 + 1.8 − 2.1 − 0.1 + 7.5 + 8.0 − 0.3 + 8.3 − 0.5 + 2.3 −
         Apr − − − 9.3 − 4.9 − 4.5 − 4.3 − 0.2 − 0.4 − 3.4 − 3.8 − 0.9 − 2.9 + 0.4 − 1.0 −
         May − − − 6.2 + 4.2 + 4.9 + 5.4 − 0.5 − 0.7 − 5.3 − 3.9 + 0.4 − 4.3 − 1.4 − 5.1 −
         June − 1 − 2 − 1.6 − 3.3 − 2.7 − 1.7 − 1.0 − 0.6 − 2.2 − 0.4 − 0.4 + 0.0 − 1.8 + 3.8 −
         July − 1 − 3 − 4.6 + 1.1 + 1.0 + 2.5 − 1.5 + 0.2 − 5.5 − 4.6 + 0.2 − 4.8 − 0.9 − 0.2 −
         Aug − − + 4.0 + 3.7 + 4.0 + 0.6 + 3.4 − 0.3 − 0.6 − 0.5 − 0.1 − 0.4 − 0.1 + 0.9 −
*In this table “foreign“ also includes the country of domicile of the foreign branches the flow figures for the foreign subsidiaries.) The figures for the latest date are
and foreign subsidiaries. Statistical revisions have been eliminated from the changes. always to be regarded as provisional; subsequent revisions, which appear in the
(Breaks owing to changes in the reporting population have not been eliminated from following Monthly Report, are not specially marked. 1Several branches in a given

Deutsche Bundesbank
41  Monthly Report
November 2013
IV  Banks
  
      
  
Deposits Other  liabilities 6,7 
of banks (MFIs) of non-banks (non-MFIs)
German non-banks 4 
Money
market of whichpaper Derivativeand debt financial
Medium Working instruments
securities
and out- capital in the
German Foreign Short- long- Foreign stand- and own trading
Total Total banks Total Total term term ing 5 funds Total portfolio   Period banks non-banks
End of year or month * Foreign  branches
  
1,131.3 751.9 398.2 353.7 379.4 44.9 39.2 5.7 334.5 187.1 34.7 873.3 648.7 2010
1,179.6 814.0 406.6 407.4 365.6 35.9 30.3 5.6 329.7 141.2 38.6 957.2 880.2 20111,054.8 727.7 371.2 356.5 327.1 34.7 26.9 7.8 292.4 127.0 39.9 821.1 670.8 2012
1,122.7 757.9 364.3 393.6 364.7 34.3 27.1 7.2 330.4 128.4 38.2 855.9 706.9 2012          Nov 
1,054.8 727.7 371.2 356.5 327.1 34.7 26.9 7.8 292.4 127.0 39.9 821.1 670.8          Dec 
1,086.1 722.9 351.6 371.3 363.2 35.4 27.8 7.5 327.8 128.2 40.1 794.1 637.8 2013          Jan 
1,081.6 706.5 347.4 359.1 375.1 29.4 21.7 7.8 345.7 140.1 40.9 789.7 657.4          Feb 1,054.5 711.5 340.1 371.4 343.0 30.5 23.0 7.5 312.5 137.3 41.2 774.7 653.1          Mar 
1,067.1 702.0 332.0 370.0 365.1 30.3 23.1 7.2 334.8 135.3 41.0 791.2 663.1          Apr 
1,079.0 692.0 338.8 353.2 387.0 28.7 21.6 7.1 358.3 140.3 41.0 743.0 614.7          May1,012.4 675.9 351.9 324.0 336.5 27.8 21.2 6.5 308.7 133.5 40.7 722.8 603.3          June
1,008.1 651.8 323.6 328.2 356.4 27.8 21.4 6.4 328.6 134.3 40.1 663.2 544.5          July
1,010.3 652.1 324.2 327.8 358.3 24.2 19.0 5.2 334.1 125.7 40.1 636.4 528.9          Aug 
Changes *
+ 27.0 + 50.1 + 8.4 + 41.7 − 23.1 − 9.0 − 8.9 − 0.0 − 14.2 − 45.8 + 3.9 + 71.9 + 231.5 2011− 114.6 − 80.1 − 35.3 − 44.8 − 34.5 − 1.3 − 3.4 + 2.1 − 33.2 − 14.3 + 1.4 − 134.3 − 209.4 2012
− 58.7 − 24.8 + 6.9 − 31.7 − 34.0 + 0.4 − 0.2 + 0.6 − 34.3 − 1.5 + 1.7 − 31.8 − 36.0 2012          Dec 
+ 45.7 + 3.2 − 19.6 + 22.8 + 42.5 + 0.7 + 1.0 − 0.2 + 41.8 + 1.3 + 0.2 − 19.2 − 33.0 2013          Jan 
− 17.7 − 24.0 − 4.3 − 19.7 + 6.3 − 6.0 − 6.2 + 0.2 + 12.2 + 11.9 + 0.8 − 9.1 + 19.6          Feb − 39.0 − 0.6 − 7.3 + 6.7 − 38.4 + 1.1 + 1.3 − 0.3 − 39.4 − 2.9 + 0.3 − 19.7 − 4.3          Mar 
+ 22.1 − 4.0 − 8.1 + 4.1 + 26.1 − 0.1 + 0.1 − 0.3 + 26.2 − 1.9 − 0.2 + 21.3 + 9.9          Apr 
+ 11.4 − 10.5 + 6.8 − 17.3 + 21.8 − 1.7 − 1.6 − 0.1 + 23.5 + 5.0 − 0.1 − 47.8 − 48.4          May− 63.8 − 14.6 + 13.0 − 27.7 − 49.2 − 0.9 − 0.3 − 0.6 − 48.3 − 6.8 − 0.3 − 18.9 − 11.4          June
+ 1.9 − 20.8 − 28.3 + 7.5 + 22.7 + 0.0 + 0.1 − 0.1 + 22.6 + 0.8 − 0.5 − 56.1 − 58.8          July
+ 0.2 − 0.6 + 0.6 − 1.3 + 0.8 − 3.6 − 2.4 − 1.2 + 4.4 − 8.6 − 0.0 − 28.2 − 15.6          Aug 
  
  
End of year or month * Foreign  subsidiaries
  
387.4 221.1 136.4 84.7 166.3 31.0 23.6 7.3 135.3 28.9 31.8 46.9 − 2010
377.5 229.6 142.4 87.2 147.9 26.7 19.8 6.9 121.2 25.1 30.8 45.2 − 2011356.8 207.7 120.4 87.2 149.2 22.0 17.8 4.2 127.1 24.9 32.1 44.9 − 2012
362.6 210.5 122.6 87.9 152.0 24.7 20.3 4.3 127.4 25.5 32.2 47.3 − 2012          Nov 
356.8 207.7 120.4 87.2 149.2 22.0 17.8 4.2 127.1 24.9 32.1 44.9 −          Dec 
344.2 195.6 115.6 80.0 148.7 22.2 18.1 4.1 126.4 24.3 32.3 42.5 − 2013          Jan 
345.1 194.6 113.1 81.5 150.4 22.3 18.2 4.1 128.1 24.6 32.9 41.9 −          Feb 
355.7 200.6 115.7 84.9 155.1 22.3 18.2 4.1 132.8 24.5 32.4 43.1 −          Mar 
345.1 194.6 114.3 80.4 150.5 22.3 18.2 4.1 128.2 23.9 32.7 42.8 −          Apr 
340.1 189.5 111.0 78.6 150.6 22.0 17.7 4.3 128.6 23.7 32.6 41.9 −          May
341.5 190.0 108.8 81.2 151.4 20.5 16.2 4.3 130.9 23.1 32.1 39.8 −          June
336.8 188.4 109.8 78.6 148.4 21.4 17.3 4.1 127.1 22.5 31.8 39.6 −          July
341.8 191.8 112.4 79.3 150.0 22.5 18.4 4.1 127.6 22.4 32.0 38.8 −          Aug 
Changes *
− 12.5 + 7.1 + 6.0 + 1.1 − 19.6 − 4.2 − 3.8 − 0.4 − 15.3 − 3.8 − 1.0 − 2.8 − 2011
− 19.6 − 21.3 − 22.0 + 0.7 + 1.7 − 4.7 − 2.0 − 2.7 + 6.4 − 0.2 + 1.3 + 0.3 − 2012
− 4.6 − 2.2 − 2.2 − 0.0 − 2.4 − 2.6 − 2.5 − 0.1 + 0.2 − 0.6 − 0.1 − 2.1 − 2012          Dec 
− 10.4 − 11.0 − 4.8 − 6.2 + 0.6 + 0.2 + 0.3 − 0.1 + 0.4 − 0.6 + 0.2 − 1.6 − 2013          Jan 
− 1.0 − 1.8 − 2.5 + 0.6 + 0.9 + 0.1 + 0.1 + 0.0 + 0.8 + 0.2 + 0.6 − 1.1 −          Feb 
+ 9.1 + 5.2 + 2.6 + 2.6 + 3.9 − 0.0 − 0.1 + 0.0 + 3.9 − 0.0 − 0.5 + 0.9 −          Mar 
− 9.1 − 5.2 − 1.4 − 3.8 − 3.9 − 0.0 + 0.0 − 0.0 − 3.9 − 0.6 + 0.3 + 0.1 −          Apr 
− 5.1 − 5.2 − 3.3 − 1.8 + 0.1 − 0.2 − 0.4 + 0.2 + 0.3 − 0.2 − 0.1 − 0.8 −          May
+ 1.7 + 0.7 − 2.1 + 2.8 + 1.0 − 1.5 − 1.5 − 0.0 + 2.5 − 0.6 − 0.5 − 2.1 −          June
− 3.6 − 1.2 + 1.0 − 2.2 − 2.4 + 0.9 + 1.1 − 0.2 − 3.3 − 0.6 − 0.3 − 0.1 −          July
+ 4.7 + 3.3 + 2.7 + 0.6 + 1.4 + 1.1 + 1.1 − 0.0 + 0.3 − 0.1 + 0.3 − 0.9 −          Aug 
country of domicile are regarded as a single branch. 2Treasury bills, Treasury securities. 5Issues of negotiable and non-negotiable debt securities and money
discount paper and other money market paper, debt securities. 3Including own debt market paper. 6 Including subordinated liabilities. 7 See also Table IV.2, footnote  1. 
securities. 4Excluding subordinated liabilities and non-negotiable debt

Deutsche Bundesbank
42  Monthly Report
November 2013
V  Minimum reserves
 
1  Reserve ratios
Germany Euro area
 
% of liabilities subject to reserve requirements % of reserve base  1 
Sight Time
Applicable from liabilities liabilities Savings deposits Applicable from Ratio
1995  Aug 1 2    2    1.5    1999  Jan 1 2    
 2012  Jan 18 1    
 
  
1Article 3 of the Regulation of the European Central Bank on the application of
minimum reserves (excluding liabilities to which a reserve ratio of 0% applies pur-
suant to Article 4 (1)). 
 
  
2  Reserve maintenance in Germany up to the end of 1998
− pursuant to the Minimum Reserves Order of the Bundesbank 
 
DM million
Liabilities subject to reserve requirements Excess reserves 4 
Monthly Required % of the
average 1 Total Sight liabilities Time liabilities Savings deposits reserves  2 Level Deficiencies Actual reserves 3 required  reserves
1995          Dec 2,066,565 579,337 519,456 967,772 36,492 37,337 845 2.3 3.1
1996          Dec 2,201,464 655,483 474,342 1,071,639 38,671 39,522 851 2.2 4.3
1997          Dec 2,327,879 734,986 476,417 1,116,477 40,975 41,721 745 1.8 3.3
1998          Dec 2,576,889 865,444 564,878 1,146,567 45,805 46,432 627 1.4 3.8
1Pursuant to sections 5 to 7 of the Minimum Reserves Order. 2Amount after tutions subject to reserve requirements on their giro accounts at the Bundesbank.
applying the reserve ratios to the liabilities subject to reserve requirements (section 5 4 Actual reserves less required reserves. 
(1) of the Minimum Reserves Order). 3Average credit balances of the credit insti-
  
3  Reserve maintenance in the euro area
− from 1999, pursuant to the ECB Regulation on the application of minimum reserves in accordance with
Article 19.1 of the Statute of the ESCB 
 
Maintenance Required reserves
period before deduction Required reserves
beginning in 1 of lump-sum Lump-sum after deduction of
Reserve base 2 allowance 3 allowance 4 lump-sum allowance Current account 5 Excess reserves 6 Deficiencies 7 
Euro area (€ billion)
 
2013          Mar 10,537.0 105.4 0.5 104.9 346.0 241.1 0.0
         Apr 10,535.0 105.4 0.5 104.9 322.2 217.3 0.0
         May 10,577.9 105.8 0.5 105.3 300.3 195.0 0.0
         June 10,554.5 105.5 0.5 105.1 286.5 181.4 0.0
         July 10,494.9 104.9 0.5 104.5 269.6 165.1 0.0
         Aug 10,541.8 105.4 0.5 104.9 274.5 169.6 0.0
         Sep 10,422.7 104.2 0.5 103.8 268.4 164.7 0.0
         Oct  p 10,423.3 104.2 0.5 103.8 ... ... ...
         Nov  p ... ... ... ... ... ... ...
Of which:  Germany (€ million)
2013          Mar 2,775,049 27,750 180 27,570 109,742 82,172 1
         Apr 2,767,454 27,675 180 27,494 100,324 72,830 0
         May 2,770,161 27,702 180 27,521 97,004 69,483 0
         June 2,767,670 27,677 180 27,496 96,958 69,462 0
         July 2,754,066 27,541 180 27,361 87,020 59,659 1
         Aug 2,758,601 27,586 179 27,407 88,737 61,330 0
         Sep 2,749,459 27,495 178 27,317 92,920 65,603 20
         Oct  p 2,759,639 27,596 178 27,419 ... ... ...
         Nov  p 2,741,870 27,419 177 27,241 ... ... ...
1From March 2004, the reserve maintenance period will start on the settlement day to the reserve base. 4Article 5 (2) of the Regulation of the European Central Bank on
of the main refinancing operation immediately following the meeting of the the application of minimum reserves. 5Average credit balances of the credit insti-
Governing Council of the ECB for which the monthly discussion of the monetary tutions at the national central banks. 6Average credit balances less required reserves
policy stance is scheduled. 2Article 3 of the Regulation of the European Central Bank after deduction of the lump-sum allowance. 7Required reserves after deduction of
on the application of minimum reserves (excluding liabilities to which a reserve ratio the lump-sum allowance. 
of 0% applies, pursuant to Article 4 (1)). 3Amount after applying the reserve ratios

Deutsche Bundesbank
43  Monthly Report
November 2013
VI Interest rates
 
1 ECB interest rates 2 Base rates
 
 
% per annum % per annum
Main refinancing Main refinancing
operations operations Base Base
Mar- Mar- rate rateginal ginal as per as per
Minimum Minimum
Applicable Deposit Fixed bid lending Applicable Deposit Fixed bid lending Applicable Civil Applicable Civilfrom facility rate rate facility from facility rate rate facility from Code  
1 from Code 1 
2005 Dec                  6 1.25 − 2.25 3.25 2009 Jan                21 1.00 2.00 − 3.00 2002 Jan                1 2.57 2007 Jan                1 2.70
         Mar                11 0.50 1.50 − 2.50          July                1 2.47          July                1 3.19
2006 Mar                  8 1.50 − 2.50 3.50          Apr                  8 0.25 1.25 − 2.25
         June                15 1.75 − 2.75 3.75          May                13 0.25 1.00 − 1.75 2003 Jan                1 1.97 2008 Jan                1 3.32         Aug                  9 2.00 − 3.00 4.00          July                1 1.22          July                1 3.19
         Oct                11 2.25 − 3.25 4.25 2011 Apr                13 0.50 1.25 − 2.00         Dec                13 2.50 − 3.50 4.50          July                13 0.75 1.50 − 2.25 2004 Jan                1 1.14 2009 Jan                1 1.62
         Nov                  9 0.50 1.25 − 2.00          July                1 1.13          July                1 0.12
2007 Mar                14 2.75 − 3.75 4.75          Dez                14 0.25 1.00 − 1.75         June                13 3.00 − 4.00 5.00 2005 Jan                1 1.21 2011 July                1 0.37
2012 July                11 0.00 0.75 − 1.50          July                1 1.17
2008 July                  9 3.25 − 4.25 5.25 2012 Jan                1 0.12
         Oct                  8 2.75 − 3.75 4.75 2013 May                  8 0.00 0.50 − 1.00 2006 Jan                1 1.37         Oct                  9 3.25 3.75 − 4.25          Nov                13 0.00 0.25 − 0.75          July                1 1.95 2013 Jan                1 −0.13
         Nov                12 2.75 3.25 − 3.75          July                1 −0.38
         Dec                10 2.00 2.50 − 3.00
1 Pursuant to section 247 of the Civil Code.  
 
  
3 Eurosystem monetary policy operations allotted through tenders 
*
 
 
Fixed rate tenders Variable rate tenders
Bid Allotment Minimum Weighted
amount amount Fixed rate bid rate Marginal rate  1 average rate
Date of Running for
settlement € million % per annum ... days
Main refinancing operations
2013 Oct                  9 93,366 93,366 0.50−−−7
         Oct                16 91,234 91,234 0.50−−−7
         Oct                23 90,605 90,605 0.50−−−7
         Oct                30 89,319 89,319 0.50−−−7
         Nov                  6 89,524 89,524 0.50−−−7
         Nov                13 87,744 87,744 0.25−−−7
Longer-term refinancing operations
2013 Sep                26 8,607 8,607 2 ... − − − 84
         Oct                  9 3,447 3,447 0.50−−− 3 5
         Oct                31 1,930 1,930 2 ... − − − 91
         Nov                13 3,194 3,194 0.25−−− 2 8
*Source: ECB. 1Lowest or highest interest rate at which funds were allotted or average minimum bid rate of the main refinancing operations over the life of this
collected. 2Interest payment on the maturity date; the rate will be fixed at the operation. 
 
  
4 Money market rates, by month 
*
 
 
% per annum
EONIA Swap Index 2 EURIBOR 3 
Monthly One-week One-month Three-month Six-month One-week One-month Three-month Six-month Twelve-month Twelve-month
average EONIA 1 funds funds funds funds funds funds funds funds funds funds
2013          Apr 0.08 0.08 0.08 0.08 0.08 0.09 0.08 0.12 0.21 0.32 0.53
         May 0.08 0.08 0.08 0.07 0.06 0.06 0.08 0.11 0.20 0.30 0.48         June 0.09 0.09 0.09 0.09 0.10 0.13 0.09 0.12 0.21 0.32 0.51
         July 0.09 0.09 0.10 0.10 0.11 0.14 0.10 0.13 0.22 0.34 0.53
         Aug 0.08 0.09 0.10 0.10 0.11 0.16 0.10 0.13 0.23 0.34 0.54         Sep 0.08 0.08 0.09 0.10 0.11 0.16 0.10 0.13 0.22 0.34 0.54
         Oct 0.09 0.09 0.09 0.11 0.13 0.17 0.10 0.13 0.23 0.34 0.54
*Averages are Bundesbank calculations. Neither the Deutsche Bundesbank nor act/360 method and published via Reuters. 2EONIA Swap Index: published rate
anyone else can be held liable for any irregularity or inaccuracy of the EONIA rate, since 20 June 2005 by Reuters as a reference rate for euro-money market-derivatives.
the EURIBOR rate and the EONIA Swap rate. 1Euro OverNight Index Average: As a Spot-figure (T+2) it is calculated according to the act/360 method. 3Euro Inter-
weighted average overnight rate for interbank operations calculated by the European bank Offered Rate: unweighted average rate calculated by Reuters sinceCentral Bank since 4 January 1999 on the basis of real turnover according to the 30 December 1998 according to the act/360 method. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
44  Monthly Report
November 2013
VI Interest rates
 
5 Interest rates and volumes for outstanding amounts and new business of German banks (MFIs) *
(a) Outstanding amounts o
 
 
Households’ deposits Non-financial corporations’ deposits
with an agreed maturity of
up to 2 years over 2 years up to 2 years over 2 years
Effective Effective Effective Effective
End of interest rate 1 Volume 2 interest rate 1 Volume 2 interest rate 1 Volume 2 interest rate 1 Volume 2 
month % pa € million % pa € million % pa € million % pa € million
2012          Sep 1.72 131,046 2.27 228,970 0.95 90,793 3.41 21,373
         Oct 1.66 127,314 2.20 228,315 0.91 87,278 3.38 21,082
         Nov 1.61 124,114 2.18 227,048 0.86 84,081 3.36 21,367
         Dec 1.57 121,482 2.16 228,742 0.78 81,845 3.33 21,289
2013          Jan 1.51 118,094 2.13 227,465 0.72 79,925 3.31 21,296
         Feb 1.47 115,772 2.11 226,984 0.69 79,483 3.30 21,367
         Mar 1.43 112,731 2.10 226,940 0.64 79,303 3.30 21,000
         Apr 1.38 110,618 2.09 226,550 0.60 80,849 3.25 20,869
         May 1.35 108,839 2.06 225,847 0.58 78,814 3.23 20,652
         June 1.30 106,091 2.04 225,027 0.57 77,887 3.23 20,352
         July 1.22 103,026 2.03 224,111 0.55 79,887 3.16 20,464
         Aug 1.16 101,003 2.02 223,993 0.52 80,986 3.14 20,406
         Sep 1.12 99,322 2.01 223,957 0.53 79,626 3.11 20,377
 
 
Housing loans to households 3 Loans for consumption and other purposes to households  4, 5 
with a maturity of
over 1 year and over 1 year and
up to 1 year 6 up to 5 years over 5 years up to 1 year 6 up to 5 years over 5 years
Effective Effective Effective Effective Effective Effective
interest interest interest interest interest interest
End of rate 1 Volume 2 rate 1 Volume 2 rate 1 Volume 2 rate 1 Volume 2 rate 1 Volume 2 rate 1 Volume 2 
month % pa % pa % pa % pa % pa % pa € million € million € million € million € million € million
2012          Sep 3.59 5,351 3.52 28,910 4.33 948,590 7.98 63,666 5.22 75,456 5.34 314,885
         Oct 3.50 5,351 3.47 29,062 4.30 951,931 7.88 62,816 5.19 75,715 5.29 314,779
         Nov 3.48 5,334 3.44 29,210 4.28 955,995 7.60 61,696 5.16 75,919 5.27 313,967
         Dec 3.43 5,411 3.41 29,153 4.26 957,142 7.77 63,468 5.13 75,716 5.25 310,974
2013          Jan 3.35 5,441 3.39 29,130 4.23 956,829 7.64 60,580 5.22 76,521 5.22 310,092
         Feb 3.32 5,358 3.37 28,985 4.21 957,811 7.56 60,776 5.22 75,576 5.21 310,001
         Mar 3.32 5,380 3.34 28,892 4.19 959,296 7.59 61,732 5.19 75,792 5.19 308,862
         Apr 3.35 5,429 3.31 28,943 4.17 960,434 7.57 60,887 5.17 76,405 5.17 309,418
         May 3.34 5,513 3.28 28,887 4.15 962,645 7.51 60,234 5.15 76,791 5.15 309,610
         June 3.33 5,484 3.26 28,964 4.12 965,019 7.56 61,368 5.13 76,634 5.14 308,931
         July 3.28 5,653 3.22 28,977 4.09 968,047 7.53 59,608 5.12 77,021 5.12 309,175
         Aug 3.25 5,525 3.20 28,947 4.07 971,598 7.49 58,961 5.10 77,302 5.10 309,848
         Sep 3.29 5,599 3.18 29,072 4.05 973,596 7.67 61,196 5.07 77,547 5.08 308,299
  
Loans to non-financial corporations with a maturity of
up to 1 year 6 over 1 year and up to 5 years over 5 years
End of Volume 2 Volume 2 Volume 2 Effective interest rate 1 Effective interest rate 1 Effective interest rate 1 
month % pa € million % pa € million % pa € million
2012          Sep 3.26 142,543 3.21 125,674 3.51 577,371
         Oct 3.19 137,982 3.13 125,803 3.46 577,814
         Nov 3.16 138,994 3.10 126,756 3.44 580,329
         Dec 3.17 134,186 3.03 126,718 3.41 579,210
2013          Jan 3.10 133,611 3.02 126,056 3.36 579,904
         Feb 3.11 136,265 3.01 125,664 3.34 581,316
         Mar 3.14 138,467 3.00 125,754 3.33 580,544
         Apr 3.13 135,048 2.96 125,073 3.32 582,836
         May 3.09 135,366 2.93 125,949 3.31 583,258
         June 3.14 136,903 2.92 124,651 3.30 582,718
         July 3.10 133,507 2.89 125,709 3.29 583,497
         Aug 3.05 132,912 2.87 125,631 3.28 581,882
         Sep 3.12 135,677 2.87 123,722 3.28 580,156
*The MFI interest rate statistics are based on the interest rates applied by MFIs and interest rates or as narrowly defined effective rates. Both calculation methods cover
the related volumes of euro-denominated deposits and loans to households and non- all interest payments on deposits and loans but not any other related charges which
financial corporations domiciled in the euro area. The household sector comprises may occur for enquiries, administration, preparation of the documents, guaranteesindividuals (including sole proprietors) and non-profit institutions serving households. and credit insurance. 2Data based on monthly balance sheet statistics. 3Secured
Non-financial corporations include all enterprises other than insurance companies, and unsecured loans for home purchase, including building and home improvements;banks and other financial institutions. The interest rate statistics gathered on a including loans granted by building and loan associations and interim credits as wellharmonised basis in the euro area from January 2003 are collected in Germany on a as transmitted loans granted by the reporting agents in their own name and for theirsample basis. The most recent figures are in all cases to be regarded as provisional. own account. 4Loans for consumption are defined as loans granted for the purpose
Subsequent revisions appearing in the following Monthly Report are not specially of personal use in the consumption of goods and services. 5For the purpose of these
marked. Further information on the MFI interest rate statistics can be found on the statistics, other loans are loans granted for other purposes such as business, debtBundesbank’s website (Statistics / Reporting system / Banking statistics / MFI interest consolidation, education etc. 6Including overdrafts (see also footnotes 13 to 15
rate statistics). oThe statistics on outstanding amounts are collected at the end of p 47
   ). 
the month. 1The effective interest rates are calculated either as annualised agreed

Deutsche Bundesbank
45  Monthly Report
November 2013
VI Interest rates
 
5 Interest rates and volumes for outstanding amounts and new business of German banks (MFIs) *  (cont’d)
(b) New business +
 
 
Households’ deposits
with an agreed maturity of redeemable at notice of  8 
Overnight up to 1 year over 2 years up to 3 months over 3 months over 1 year and up to 2 years
Effective Effective Effective Effective Effective Effective
interest interest interest interest interest interest
Reporting rate 1 Volume 2 rate 1 Volume 7 rate 1 Volume 7 rate 1 Volume 7 rate 1 Volume 2 rate 1 Volume 2 
period % pa % pa % pa % pa % pa % pa € million € million € million € million € million € million
2012          Sep 
0.64 810,487 1.29 9,216 1.98 934 2.16 1,305 1.14 521,677 1.72 93,164
         Oct 0.61 815,493 1.07 10,129 1.92 1,090 1.93 1,483 1.09 521,818 1.66 92,409
         Nov 0.59 836,097 1.06 8,513 1.95 1,670 1.83 1,721 1.07 522,244 1.57 91,114
         Dec 0.57 841,703 0.79 8,557 1.74 1,212 1.67 1,463 1.03 528,458 1.50 89,519
2013          Jan 0.54 847,786 0.92 8,877 1.80 1,616 1.77 1,715 0.96 529,365 1.43 87,663
         Feb 0.51 857,813 0.94 7,887 1.45 745 1.68 1,605 0.93 530,687 1.38 86,114
         Mar 0.50 862,900 0.79 7,753 1.37 620 1.52 1,501 0.96 529,260 1.33 85,257
         Apr 0.47 869,149 0.80 7,655 1.37 796 1.38 1,567 0.90 528,646 1.26 83,717
         May 0.46 881,098 0.82 7,485 1.47 868 1.53 1,545 0.90 528,835 1.21 81,737
         June 0.44 888,922 0.77 6,939 1.41 633 1.46 1,345 0.87 528,594 1.18 80,868
         July 0.43 895,155 0.74 8,578 1.26 765 1.37 1,475 0.86 527,971 1.14 79,828
         Aug 0.42 904,740 0.75 7,310 1.17 546 1.36 1,130 0.85 528,142 1.12 78,869
         Sep 0.41 905,458 0.73 7,130 1.16 586 1.45 1,237 0.85 527,842 1.09 78,103
 
 
Non-financial corporations’ deposits
with an agreed maturity of
Overnight up to 1 year over 1 year and up to 2 years over 2 years
Effective Effective Effective Effective
Reporting interest rate 1 Volume 2 interest rate 1 Volume 7 interest rate 1 Volume 7 interest rate 1 Volume 7 
period % pa € million % pa € million % pa € million % pa € million
2012          Sep 
0.29 289,877 0.27 15,215 0.85 505 2.00 225
         Oct 0.26 300,920 0.19 22,907 1.04 523 1.53 410
         Nov 0.24 305,458 0.20 15,992 1.09 490 1.87 483
         Dec 0.22 311,043 0.15 20,225 0.74 546 1.74 381
2013          Jan 0.22 306,757 0.20 22,534 0.95 364 1.09 315
         Feb 0.21 301,494 0.21 16,085 0.97 413 1.65 218
         Mar 0.20 298,710 0.19 19,875 0.77 507 1.30 266
         Apr 0.19 305,231 0.22 16,608 0.77 417 1.17 526
         May 0.18 308,618 0.19 23,572 0.74 508 1.53 202
         June 0.17 300,393 0.21 14,370 0.60 408 1.21 247
         July 0.16 305,708 0.20 15,631 0.96 460 1.60 538
         Aug 0.16 312,892 0.17 16,639 0.73 516 1.62 191
         Sep 0.16 318,322 0.17 17,489 0.72 463 1.38 224
 
 
Loans to households
Loans for other purposes to households with an initial rate fxation of  5 
of which loans to sole proprietors 10 
floating rate or over 1 year and floating rate or over 1 year and
up to 1 year 9 up to 5 years over 5 years up to 1 year  9 up to 5 years over 5 years
Effective Effective Effective Effective Effective Effectiveinterest interest interest interest interest interest
Reporting rate 
1 Volume 7 rate 1 Volume 7 rate 1 Volume 7 rate 1 Volume 7 rate 1 Volume 7 rate 1 Volume 7 
period % pa % pa % pa % pa % pa % pa € million € million € million € million € million € million
2012          Sep 
1.94 4,454 4.19 860 3.07 2,252 2.14 2,565 4.35 589 3.02 1,399
         Oct 1.82 5,535 3.69 1,122 3.04 2,634 2.18 3,011 4.09 780 3.03 1,420
         Nov 1.75 4,142 3.86 966 2.98 2,443 2.09 2,229 3.99 736 2.96 1,452
         Dec 1.84 4,698 3.78 916 2.77 2,376 2.03 2,888 3.98 676 2.71 1,530
2013          Jan 1.97 5,099 3.77 1,171 2.96 2,735 2.27 2,973 3.87 818 2.87 1,602
         Feb 1.84 4,102 3.54 920 2.96 2,125 2.05 2,452 3.73 657 2.91 1,248
         Mar 1.90 4,698 3.80 900 2.88 2,574 2.10 2,636 3.95 717 2.88 1,432
         Apr 1.99 5,235 3.57 1,181 2.95 2,815 2.33 2,916 3.70 882 2.88 1,734
         May 1.80 3,726 3.62 864 2.91 2,318 2.04 2,255 3.80 670 2.88 1,325
         June 1.84 4,485 3.65 886 2.81 2,651 2.01 2,768 3.85 657 2.76 1,497
         July 1.92 5,623 3.30 1,332 3.01 3,583 2.20 3,201 3.41 999 3.00 2,019
         Aug 1.93 4,052 3.55 961 3.03 2,398 2.04 2,464 3.75 628 2.97 1,568
         Sep 1.93 4,695 3.56 900 3.03 2,472 2.08 2,756 3.67 669 2.96 1,331
For footnotes * and 1 to 6, see p 44  .+In the case of deposits with an agreed for the sake of simplicity. This means that all outstanding deposit and lending
maturity and all loans excluding revolving loans and overdrafts, credit card debt, new business at the end of the month has to be incorporated in the calculation of averagebusiness covers all new agreements between households or non-financial corpor- rates of interest. 7Estimated. The volume of new business is extrapolated to form
ations and the bank. The interest rates are calculated as volume-weighted average the underlying total using the Horvitz-Thompson estimator. 8Including non-financial
rates of all new agreements concluded during the reporting month. In the case of corporations’ deposits; including fidelity and growth premia. 9Excluding over-
overnight deposits, deposits redeemable at notice, revolving loans and overdrafts, drafts. 10 Collected from June 2010. 
credit card debt, new business is collected in the same way as outstanding amounts

Deutsche Bundesbank
46  Monthly Report
November 2013
VI Interest rates
 
5 Interest rates and volumes for outstanding amounts and new business of German banks (MFIs) *  (cont’d)
(b) New business +
 
 
Loans to households (cont’d)
Loans for consumption with an initial rate fixation of  4 
Total floating rate or over 1 year and
Total up to 1 year 9 up to 5 years over 5 years (including charges)
Effective Effective Effective Effective Annual percentage
Reporting Volume 7 Volume 7 Volume 7 Volume 7 rate of charge  11 interest rate 1 interest rate 1 interest rate 1 interest rate 1 
period % pa % pa € million % pa € million % pa € million % pa € million
Total loans
2012          Sep 6.46 6.11 4,599 4.37 525 5.12 2,091 7.60 1,983
         Oct 6.37 6.10 5,362 4.13 707 5.10 2,374 7.74 2,281
         Nov 6.30 5.98 4,977 4.63 744 4.98 2,229 7.61 2,004
         Dec 5.99 5.73 3,747 3.88 556 4.90 1,766 7.48 1,425
2013          Jan 6.72 6.47 5,140 4.85 508 5.22 2,314 8.08 2,318
         Feb 6.54 6.23 4,781 4.61 620 5.10 2,161 7.95 2,000
         Mar 6.33 6.15 5,186 4.56 488 5.00 2,503 7.81 2,195
         Apr 6.30 6.18 5,658 4.89 554 4.94 2,725 7.91 2,379
         May 6.39 6.29 5,325 5.60 697 5.00 2,401 7.89 2,227
         June 6.41 6.29 5,396 5.46 618 5.03 2,399 7.77 2,379
         July 6.52 6.42 5,990 5.28 480 5.15 2,708 7.84 2,802
         Aug 6.44 6.34 5,253 5.40 554 5.09 2,288 7.73 2,411
         Sep 6.40 6.32 4,759 5.79 379 5.02 2,195 7.71 2,185
of which: collateralised loans 12
2012          Sep . 3.90 361 2.99 114 5.15 129 3.42 118
         Oct . 3.75 409 2.57 152 5.25 139 3.51 118
         Nov . 3.88 358 2.98 140 5.28 114 3.56 104
         Dec . 3.81 294 2.92 100 5.01 103 3.40 91
2013          Jan . 4.00 271 3.06 57 5.01 111 3.42 103
         Feb . 3.56 426 2.90 239 4.93 116 3.56 71
         Mar . 4.10 278 3.43 49 4.70 140 3.52 89
         Apr . 3.92 316 2.96 60 4.55 165 3.40 91
         May . 3.95 273 3.19 41 4.57 141 3.32 91
         June . 4.15 274 3.65 43 4.66 155 3.41 76
         July . 4.09 334 3.27 60 4.74 171 3.48 103
         Aug . 4.16 259 3.49 44 4.69 137 3.60 78
         Sep . 4.28 246 3.47 33 4.68 143 3.86 70
 
 
Loans to households (cont’d)
Housing loans with an initial rate fixation of  3 
Total floating rate or over 1 year and over 5 years and
Total up to 1 year 9 up to 5 years up to 10 years over 10 years (including charges)
Effective Effective Effective Effective Effective Annual percentage
Reporting Volume 7 Volume 7 Volume 7 Volume 7 Volume 7 rate of charge  11 interest rate  1 interest rate  1 interest rate  1 interest rate  1 interest rate  1 
period % pa % pa % pa % pa % pa % pa € million € million € million € million € million
Total loans
2012          Sep 2.97 2.89 15,109 2.85 1,971 2.63 2,013 2.85 5,885 3.03 5,240
         Oct 2.96 2.88 17,328 2.87 2,600 2.62 2,243 2.84 7,027 3.06 5,458
         Nov 2.92 2.84 16,415 2.86 2,122 2.54 2,415 2.82 6,400 2.99 5,478
         Dec 2.91 2.82 14,190 2.88 2,222 2.55 1,747 2.78 5,776 2.94 4,445
2013          Jan 2.86 2.79 17,268 2.79 3,178 2.51 2,236 2.75 7,138 3.00 4,716
         Feb 2.86 2.79 14,470 2.80 2,124 2.44 1,802 2.74 6,100 3.00 4,444
         Mar 2.87 2.81 15,659 2.75 2,291 2.54 2,045 2.77 6,235 2.99 5,088
         Apr 2.90 2.83 18,191 2.87 2,887 2.50 2,364 2.74 7,590 3.08 5,350
         May 2.79 2.71 15,740 2.91 2,281 2.38 2,004 2.64 6,498 2.84 4,957
         June 2.71 2.64 16,804 2.79 2,317 2.31 2,054 2.57 6,758 2.78 5,675
         July 2.78 2.71 21,404 2.80 3,304 2.39 2,727 2.67 9,161 2.85 6,212
         Aug 2.87 2.79 16,749 2.81 2,302 2.45 2,166 2.74 7,027 2.97 5,254
         Sep 2.92 2.86 15,567 2.86 2,266 2.46 2,017 2.82 6,594 3.07 4,690
of which: collateralised loans 12
2012          Sep . 2.83 7,092 2.70 845 2.54 965 2.83 2,811 2.99 2,471
         Oct . 2.82 8,239 2.67 1,071 2.54 1,132 2.80 3,420 3.03 2,616
         Nov . 2.77 7,508 2.80 834 2.46 1,055 2.75 3,049 2.92 2,570
         Dec . 2.72 6,729 2.65 976 2.40 888 2.71 2,777 2.90 2,088
2013          Jan . 2.71 7,856 2.63 1,244 2.44 1,153 2.68 3,320 2.97 2,139
         Feb . 2.73 6,711 2.58 824 2.34 919 2.71 2,873 2.98 2,095
         Mar . 2.71 7,343 2.56 929 2.34 1,012 2.70 2,980 2.95 2,422
         Apr . 2.79 8,545 2.73 1,170 2.39 1,181 2.66 3,591 3.16 2,603
         May . 2.61 7,361 2.69 907 2.23 998 2.58 3,117 2.80 2,339
         June . 2.53 8,137 2.49 958 2.18 1,039 2.51 3,326 2.70 2,814
         July . 2.60 10,324 2.65 1,236 2.27 1,392 2.58 4,435 2.76 3,261
         Aug . 2.69 7,910 2.51 979 2.33 1,045 2.68 3,307 2.91 2,579
         Sep . 2.76 7,391 2.65 860 2.36 1,045 2.76 3,193 2.99 2,293
For footnotes * and 1 to 6, see p 44  . For footnotes +, 7 to 10, see p 45  . For related charges which may occur for enquiries, administration, preparation of the
footnote 12, see p 47  .11Annual percentage rate of charge, which contains other documents, guarantees and credit insurance. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
47  Monthly Report
November 2013
VI Interest rates
 
5 Interest rates and volumes for outstanding amounts and new business of German banks (MFIs) *  (cont’d)
(b) New business +
 
 
Loans to households (cont’d) Loans to non-financial corporations
of which of which
Revolving loans 13 Revolving loans 13 
and overdrafts 14 Revolving loans 13 Extended and overdrafts 14 Revolving loans 13 
credit card debt 15 and overdrafts 14 credit card debt credit card debt 15 and overdrafts 14 
Effective Effective Effective Effective Effective
Reporting Volume 16 Volume 16 Volume 2 Volume 16 Volume 16 interest rate 1 interest rate 1 interest rate 1 interest rate 1 interest rate 1 
period % pa € million % pa € million % pa € million % pa € million % pa € million
2012          Sep 
9.89 47,852 9.86 41,116 14.81 4,422 4.37 71,170 4.39 70,889
         Oct 9.83 46,695 9.75 39,918 14.69 4,531 4.29 68,054 4.31 67,784
         Nov 9.70 45,120 9.56 38,345 14.67 4,581 4.19 69,241 4.21 68,968
         Dec 9.73 47,253 9.62 40,409 14.62 4,615 4.35 69,303 4.36 69,044
2013          Jan 9.62 44,805 9.60 39,081 14.64 3,708 4.19 68,528 4.21 68,280
         Feb 9.54 44,964 9.61 38,999 14.68 3,698 4.22 70,639 4.24 70,383
         Mar 9.55 45,946 9.60 39,869 14.69 3,774 4.24 72,271 4.26 72,031
         Apr 9.52 45,107 9.62 38,827 14.70 3,846 4.25 69,020 4.26 68,777
         May 9.50 45,021 9.60 38,709 14.70 3,891 4.18 69,112 4.20 68,890
         June 9.50 46,126 9.52 39,588 14.65 4,127 4.32 69,789 4.34 69,530
         July 9.55 44,772 9.51 38,381 14.58 4,136 4.30 66,621 4.31 66,406
         Aug 9.44 44,307 9.49 37,586 14.60 4,183 4.22 66,681 4.24 66,472
         Sep 9.50 46,647 9.56 39,833 14.63 4,254 4.29 69,234 4.31 68,982
 
 
Loans to non-financial corporations (cont’d)
Loans up to €1 million with an initial rate fixation of  17 Loans over €1 million with an initial rate fixation of  17 
floating rate or over 1 year and floating rate or over 1 year and
up to 1 year 9 up to 5 years over 5 years up to 1 year  9 up to 5 years over 5 years
Effective Effective Effective Effective Effective Effectiveinterest interest interest interest interest interest
Reporting rate 
1 Volume 7 rate 1 Volume 7 rate 1 Volume 7 rate 1 Volume 7 rate 1 Volume 7 rate 1 Volume 7 
period % pa % pa % pa % pa % pa % pa € million € million € million € million € million € million
Total loans
2012          Sep 3.07 7,039 3.76 1,282 2.99 1,248 2.12 42,277 2.81 1,324 2.87 4,367
         Oct 2.96 7,708 3.70 1,489 2.85 1,311 1.98 47,072 2.84 1,676 2.81 4,416
         Nov 2.90 6,646 3.67 1,495 2.78 1,258 2.00 37,601 3.25 2,080 2.71 4,791
         Dec 2.94 6,940 3.56 1,665 2.75 1,361 1.89 43,968 2.54 4,465 2.70 7,203
2013          Jan 2.84 7,381 3.50 1,484 2.83 1,177 1.88 43,240 2.94 1,212 2.76 4,860
         Feb 2.92 6,264 3.58 1,204 2.87 926 1.72 32,114 3.16 1,111 2.89 4,347
         Mar 2.92 7,360 3.58 1,322 2.88 1,144 1.83 38,944 2.63 2,000 2.81 4,220
         Apr 2.92 7,813 3.50 1,509 2.85 1,170 1.80 37,523 2.85 1,491 2.77 4,495
         May 3.00 7,028 3.51 1,197 2.67 1,076 1.68 33,009 2.77 1,239 2.52 4,020
         June 2.97 7,849 3.62 902 2.67 1,260 1.75 41,928 2.58 2,153 2.80 5,651
         July 2.95 8,387 3.57 1,131 2.80 1,489 1.71 43,328 2.84 2,497 3.00 6,045
         Aug 2.80 6,715 3.66 830 2.80 1,275 1.70 32,698 2.51 1,386 2.83 4,394
         Sep 2.97 7,696 3.69 822 2.82 1,074 1.80 38,460 2.84 1,757 2.85 4,841
of which: collateralised loans 12
2012          Sep 2.86 1,151 2.92 150 2.76 330 2.13 8,526 2.84 441 3.07 932
         Oct 2.77 1,288 3.12 156 2.70 351 2.05 9,007 2.97 669 2.74 1,261
         Nov 2.82 998 3.17 127 2.62 325 1.95 6,715 3.42 1,066 2.48 1,015
         Dec 2.79 1,060 2.88 189 2.54 346 2.12 8,861 2.20 2,043 2.82 1,963
2013          Jan 2.68 1,329 2.93 157 2.68 351 2.01 9,850 2.91 334 2.98 1,146
         Feb 2.81 960 3.08 128 2.83 245 2.07 5,702 3.63 362 2.86 1,752
         Mar 2.86 1,027 3.04 127 2.78 319 2.04 7,793 2.45 861 2.70 1,161
         Apr 2.70 1,305 3.03 175 2.71 337 2.19 7,219 2.61 560 2.98 1,458
         May 2.85 961 2.79 134 2.48 321 2.04 5,488 2.82 474 2.78 1,322
         June 2.82 948 2.82 124 2.50 336 2.10 6,829 2.51 1,058 2.55 1,344
         July 2.83 1,301 2.85 184 2.63 468 2.20 7,145 2.98 985 2.95 1,621
         Aug 2.82 799 3.08 130 2.61 404 2.14 4,994 2.60 459 2.86 1,245
         Sep 2.87 904 2.80 138 2.65 318 2.10 5,972 3.08 926 2.71 1,439
For footnotes * and 1 to 6, see p 44  . For footnotes + and 7 to 10, see p 45  . For they are within or beyond the limits agreed between customers and the
footnote 11, see p 46  .12Collected from June 2010. For the purposes of the bank. 15From June 2010 including convenience and extended credit card debt.
interest rate statistis, a loan is considered to be secured if collateral (among others Convenience credit is defined as the credit granted at an interest rate of 0% in thefinancial collateral, real estate collateral, debt securities) in at leat the same value as period between payment transactions effectuated with the card during one billingthe loan amount has been posted, pledged or assigned. 13From June 2010 cycle and the date at which the debt balances from this specific billing cycle become
including revolving loans which have all the following features: (a) the borrower may due. 16From January 2003 up to May 2010 estimated. The volume of outstanding
use or withdraw the funds to a pre-approved credit limit without giving prior notice amounts reported was extrapolated to form the underlying total using theto the lender; (b) the amount of available credit can increase and decrease as funds Horvitz-Thompson estimator. From June 2010 the data are based on monthlyare borrowed and repaid; (c) the loan may be used repeatedly; (d) there is no balance sheet statistics. 17The amount refers to the single loan transaction
obligation of regular repayment of funds. 14Overdrafts are defined as debit considered as new business. 
balances on current accounts. They include all bank overdrafts regardless of whether

Deutsche Bundesbank
48  Monthly Report
November 2013
VII Insurance corporations and pension funds
 
1 Assets *
 
 
 € billion
Assets
Financial assets
Cash and Debt securi- Ceded share
deposits with ties (inclu- Shares and Investment of insurance Other
End of banks ding financial Loans other fund technical financial Non-financial
year/quarter Total Total (MFIs) 1 derivatives) granted 2 equity 3 shares/units reserves assets assets
Insurance corporations and pension funds 4
  
2005 1,696.9 1,634.5 486.8 152.7 240.8 240.3 357.5 79.6 76.9 62.3
2006 1,781.9 1,719.7 524.1 149.8 244.8 261.6 385.5 74.5 79.2 62.3
2007 1,840.0 1,781.6 558.3 156.5 248.6 275.4 409.5 70.2 63.1 58.5
2008 1,769.2 1,713.5 574.5 159.4 242.7 228.9 379.2 65.6 63.2 55.8
2009 1,836.2 1,779.1 588.9 173.9 259.3 210.6 426.9 58.5 61.1 57.1
2010 1,958.8 1,897.4 570.9 210.2 267.0 221.0 501.2 59.9 67.3 61.4
2011 2,008.7 1,945.4 576.2 230.7 271.8 223.8 515.2 62.2 65.5 63.3
2012 2,151.4 2,085.2 560.0 297.7 277.9 224.8 597.1 61.8 65.8 66.3
2011          Q1 1,975.7 1,914.3 576.3 213.3 269.4 223.1 504.8 60.4 66.9 61.4
         Q2 1,988.3 1,926.8 578.5 218.9 270.8 223.8 507.4 61.0 66.5 61.4
         Q3 1,999.2 1,937.4 581.7 225.8 272.1 222.6 507.3 61.5 66.4 61.7
         Q4 2,008.7 1,945.4 576.2 230.7 271.8 223.8 515.2 62.2 65.5 63.3
2012          Q1 2,056.8 1,992.9 572.3 254.7 275.4 224.0 538.9 62.1 65.4 63.9
         Q2 2,075.4 2,010.6 568.8 266.6 275.4 222.9 549.4 62.0 65.5 64.9
         Q3 2,120.7 2,055.2 565.9 285.2 276.7 225.0 574.7 61.9 65.7 65.5
         Q4 2,151.4 2,085.2 560.0 297.7 277.9 224.8 597.1 61.8 65.8 66.3
2013          Q1 2,191.6 2,124.4 559.8 312.2 279.9 226.7 615.0 63.7 67.0 67.2
         Q2 2,186.4 2,118.5 554.1 314.5 280.2 226.5 612.6 63.5 67.0 67.9
Insurance corporations
2005 1,436.9 1,391.5 384.8 130.5 221.3 234.2 272.0 78.6 70.2 45.3
2006 1,499.8 1,455.2 410.3 127.5 224.7 254.2 292.7 73.1 72.6 44.6
2007 1,528.2 1,487.5 432.9 131.9 226.7 267.2 304.0 68.2 56.6 40.7
2008 1,453.5 1,415.2 436.7 133.7 221.2 221.4 283.9 63.2 55.1 38.2
2009 1,489.8 1,451.7 440.4 146.2 236.0 202.9 317.6 55.5 53.1 38.1
2010 1,550.3 1,510.0 419.9 170.7 243.0 208.2 356.4 56.4 55.4 40.3
2011 1,580.3 1,538.7 419.6 190.6 245.9 210.3 361.2 58.4 52.7 41.6
2012 1,691.7 1,648.5 402.0 249.2 251.2 210.6 425.1 57.7 52.5 43.3
2011          Q1 1,565.1 1,525.0 425.7 173.4 244.4 210.3 359.5 56.9 54.7 40.1
         Q2 1,572.6 1,532.5 426.9 178.2 245.5 210.8 359.6 57.3 54.2 40.1
         Q3 1,579.5 1,539.3 428.4 184.2 246.7 209.5 358.9 57.8 53.8 40.2
         Q4 1,580.3 1,538.7 419.6 190.6 245.9 210.3 361.2 58.4 52.7 41.6
2012          Q1 1,620.1 1,578.2 414.7 212.0 249.3 210.3 381.3 58.2 52.4 41.9
         Q2 1,634.3 1,591.7 411.4 221.7 249.2 209.0 390.0 58.0 52.5 42.7
         Q3 1,669.3 1,626.3 408.0 238.1 250.3 210.9 408.6 57.9 52.6 43.0
         Q4 1,691.7 1,648.5 402.0 249.2 251.2 210.6 425.1 57.7 52.5 43.3
2013          Q1 1,723.9 1,680.2 400.4 263.2 253.2 212.1 438.2 59.5 53.6 43.8
         Q2 1,718.1 1,673.8 395.5 263.9 253.5 211.9 436.2 59.3 53.5 44.3
Pension funds 4
2005 260.0 243.0 102.0 22.2 19.5 6.1 85.5 1.0 6.6 17.0
2006 282.2 264.5 113.8 22.3 20.1 7.3 92.8 1.5 6.7 17.7
2007 311.9 294.1 125.4 24.6 21.9 8.2 105.5 1.9 6.6 17.8
2008 315.8 298.2 137.8 25.7 21.5 7.4 95.2 2.4 8.1 17.5
2009 346.5 327.4 148.4 27.7 23.3 7.7 109.3 3.0 8.0 19.1
2010 408.6 387.4 151.0 39.5 24.0 12.8 144.8 3.5 11.9 21.1
2011 428.4 406.7 156.6 40.1 25.9 13.4 154.1 3.8 12.8 21.7
2012 459.7 436.7 158.0 48.5 26.7 14.2 171.9 4.1 13.3 23.0
2011          Q1 410.6 389.3 150.5 40.0 25.1 12.8 145.3 3.5 12.1 21.2
         Q2 415.7 394.3 151.6 40.6 25.3 13.1 147.8 3.6 12.3 21.4
         Q3 419.7 398.1 153.3 41.6 25.4 13.2 148.4 3.7 12.6 21.5
         Q4 428.4 406.7 156.6 40.1 25.9 13.4 154.1 3.8 12.8 21.7
2012          Q1 436.7 414.7 157.7 42.7 26.2 13.7 157.6 3.9 13.0 22.0
         Q2 441.1 418.9 157.4 44.9 26.2 13.9 159.4 3.9 13.0 22.2
         Q3 451.4 428.9 158.0 47.1 26.4 14.1 166.0 4.0 13.2 22.5
         Q4 459.7 436.7 158.0 48.5 26.7 14.2 171.9 4.1 13.3 23.0
2013          Q1 467.6 444.2 159.4 49.0 26.8 14.6 176.8 4.2 13.5 23.4
         Q2 468.3 444.7 158.6 50.6 26.7 14.7 176.5 4.2 13.5 23.6
Source: Bundesbank calculations based on supervisory data of the Federal Financial surance corporations and pension funds“ of the European System of Accounts. Pen-
Supervisory Authority (BaFin). *Valuation of securities based on current market sion funds thus comprise company pension schemes (“Pensionskassen“, pension
values; valuation of other items based on book values. 1Including registered bonds, funds supervised by BaFin, Contractual Trust Arrangements (CTAs; included as from
borrower’s note loans and Pfandbriefe of monetary financial institutions. 2Including 2010) and public, church and municipal supplementary pension funds) and occupatio-
deposits retained on assumed reinsurance. 3Including participation certificates nal pension schemes for the self-employed. Social security funds are not included. 
(“Genuss-Scheine“). 4The term “pension funds“ refers to the institutional sector “in-

Deutsche Bundesbank
49  Monthly Report
November 2013
VII Insurance corporations and pension funds
 
2 Liabilities *
 
 
€ billion
Liabilities
Insurance technical reserves
Net equity of
households in
Unearned
Debt securities life insurance premiums and
(including and pension reserves for
End of financial Loans Shares and fund outstanding Other
year/quarter Total derivatives) received 1 other equity 2 Total reserves 3 claims liabilities Net worth 4 
Insurance corporations and pension funds 5
  
2005 1,696.9 6.7 89.8 186.0 1,263.8 989.0 274.8 83.9 66.6
2006 1,781.9 8.4 91.6 210.0 1,318.8 1,049.1 269.6 81.3 71.92007 1,840.0 11.7 88.9 214.8 1,377.9 1,119.2 258.7 78.2 68.62008 1,769.2 14.7 75.1 136.0 1,394.8 1,141.2 253.6 74.6 74.02009 1,836.2 16.2 71.5 136.2 1,459.5 1,211.6 248.0 72.7 80.0
2010 1,958.8 17.8 71.8 137.6 1,573.2 1,319.1 254.1 71.3 87.1
2011 2,008.7 17.0 72.1 111.8 1,626.5 1,362.1 264.4 71.5 109.8
2012 2,151.4 22.1 77.3 158.9 1,699.4 1,432.0 267.4 71.2 122.5
2011          Q1 1,975.7 17.1 72.7 146.1 1,598.0 1,337.1 260.9 71.9 69.8
         Q2 1,988.3 18.1 71.7 137.8 1,610.4 1,348.8 261.7 71.8 78.5
         Q3 1,999.2 17.5 71.6 108.3 1,621.5 1,358.6 262.8 71.8 108.5
         Q4 2,008.7 17.0 72.1 111.8 1,626.5 1,362.1 264.4 71.5 109.8
2012          Q1 2,056.8 19.2 73.1 134.6 1,652.5 1,384.1 268.4 71.8 105.5
         Q2 2,075.4 18.5 75.6 123.0 1,666.9 1,399.3 267.6 71.5 119.9
         Q3 2,120.7 18.9 77.5 141.1 1,682.7 1,415.7 267.0 71.3 129.2
         Q4 2,151.4 22.1 77.3 158.9 1,699.4 1,432.0 267.4 71.2 122.5
2013          Q1 2,191.6 21.0 78.4 169.7 1,736.2 1,461.5 274.7 72.7 113.6
         Q2 2,186.4 17.4 79.3 172.1 1,749.0 1,474.6 274.3 73.0 95.7
Insurance corporations
2005 1,436.9 6.7 88.4 178.9 1,025.7 751.3 274.4 82.0 55.2
2006 1,499.8 8.4 89.8 202.1 1,061.3 792.0 269.2 79.1 59.1
2007 1,528.2 11.7 86.4 206.7 1,090.1 831.7 258.4 75.7 57.6
2008 1,453.5 14.7 72.3 130.7 1,094.5 841.3 253.2 72.2 69.0
2009 1,489.8 16.2 68.3 130.7 1,135.4 887.8 247.5 70.8 68.3
2010 1,550.3 17.8 68.2 131.8 1,190.9 937.3 253.7 69.2 72.3
2011 1,580.3 17.0 68.3 107.0 1,224.0 960.1 263.9 69.6 94.3
2012 1,691.7 22.1 73.2 151.9 1,276.1 1,009.2 266.9 69.3 99.0
2011          Q1 1,565.1 17.1 69.1 140.0 1,210.6 950.1 260.5 69.8 58.5
         Q2 1,572.6 18.1 68.0 132.1 1,218.3 957.1 261.2 69.7 66.5
         Q3 1,579.5 17.5 67.8 103.7 1,224.6 962.3 262.4 69.7 96.1
         Q4 1,580.3 17.0 68.3 107.0 1,224.0 960.1 263.9 69.6 94.3
2012          Q1 1,620.1 19.2 69.2 128.8 1,243.8 975.9 267.9 69.9 89.1
         Q2 1,634.3 18.5 71.7 117.7 1,254.3 987.2 267.2 69.6 102.6
         Q3 1,669.3 18.9 73.5 134.9 1,265.5 999.0 266.6 69.4 107.1
         Q4 1,691.7 22.1 73.2 151.9 1,276.1 1,009.2 266.9 69.3 99.0
2013          Q1 1,723.9 21.0 74.2 162.2 1,305.3 1,031.0 274.3 70.8 90.4
         Q2 1,718.1 17.4 75.1 164.4 1,314.5 1,040.6 273.9 71.0 75.6
Pension funds 5
2005 260.0 − 1.3 7.2 238.1 237.7 0.4 2.0 11.4
2006 282.2 − 1.8 8.0 257.5 257.1 0.4 2.1 12.8
2007 311.9 − 2.4 8.1 287.8 287.5 0.3 2.5 11.0
2008 315.8 − 2.8 5.3 300.3 299.9 0.4 2.4 5.0
2009 346.5 − 3.2 5.5 324.2 323.7 0.4 1.9 11.6
2010 408.6 − 3.6 5.8 382.2 381.8 0.4 2.1 14.8
2011 428.4 − 3.8 4.8 402.4 402.0 0.5 1.9 15.4
2012 459.7 − 4.1 7.0 423.3 422.8 0.5 1.9 23.4
2011          Q1 410.6 − 3.6 6.1 387.4 387.0 0.4 2.1 11.3
         Q2 415.7 − 3.7 5.8 392.2 391.7 0.5 2.1 12.0
         Q3 419.7 − 3.7 4.6 396.8 396.4 0.5 2.1 12.4
         Q4 428.4 − 3.8 4.8 402.4 402.0 0.5 1.9 15.4
2012          Q1 436.7 − 3.9 5.8 408.7 408.2 0.5 1.9 16.4
         Q2 441.1 − 3.9 5.4 412.6 412.1 0.5 1.9 17.3
         Q3 451.4 − 4.0 6.2 417.2 416.7 0.5 1.9 22.2
         Q4 459.7 − 4.1 7.0 423.3 422.8 0.5 1.9 23.4
2013          Q1 467.6 − 4.1 7.5 430.9 430.4 0.5 1.9 23.2
         Q2 468.3 − 4.2 7.6 434.5 434.0 0.5 2.0 20.0
Source: Bundesbank calculations based on supervisory data of the Federal Financial maining liability items. Own funds are the sum of net worth and “shares and other
Supervisory Authority (BaFin). *Valuation of securities based on current market equity“. 5The term “pension funds“ refers to the institutional sector “insurance corpo-
values; valuation of other items based on book values. Quarterly data and data as rations and pension funds“ of the ESA. Pension funds thus comprise company pen-from 2013 are partially estimated. 1Including deposits retained on ceded business. sion schemes (“Pensionskassen“, pension funds supervised by BaFin, Contractual
2Including participation certificates (“Genuss-Scheine“). 3Including ageing provi- Trust Arrangements (CTAs; included as from 2010) and public, church and municipal
sions of health insurance schemes and premium reserves of accident insurance sche- supplementary pension funds) and occupational pension schemes for themes with guaranteed premium refund. 4As defined in the European System of self-employed. Social security funds are not included. 
Accounts (ESA 1995), net worth is the difference between total assets and the re-

Deutsche Bundesbank
50  Monthly Report
November 2013
VIII Capital market
 
1 Sales and purchases of debt securities and shares in Germany
 
 
€ million
Debt securities
Sales Purchases
Domestic debt securities 1 Residents
Credit in-
Sales stitutions
= Public Foreign including
total Bank Corporate debt debt building
pur- debt bonds secur- secur- and loan Deutsche Other Non-
Period chases Total securities ities 3 ities 4 Total 5 Bundesbank sectors 7 residents 8 (non-MFIs) 2 associations 6 
2001 180,227 86,656 55,918 14,473 16,262 93,571 111,281 35,848 . 75,433 68,946
2002 175,396 124,035 47,296 14,506 62,235 51,361 60,476 13,536 . 46,940 114,920
2003 184,679 134,455 31,404 30,262 72,788 50,224 105,557 35,748 . 69,809 79,122
2004 233,890 133,711 64,231 10,778 58,703 100,179 108,119 121,841 . − 13,723 125,772
2005 252,658 110,542 39,898 2,682 67,965 142,116 94,718 61,740 . 32,978 157,940
2006 242,006 102,379 40,995 8,943 52,446 139,627 125,423 68,893 . 56,530 116,583
2007 217,798 90,270 42,034 20,123 28,111 127,528 − 26,762 96,476 . − 123,238 244,560
2008 76,490 66,139 − 45,712 86,527 25,322 10,351 18,236 68,049 . − 49,813 58,254
2009 71,224 − 538 − 114,902 22,709 91,655 71,763 91,170 12,973 8,645 69,552 − 19,945
2010 147,209 − 1,212 − 7,621 24,044 − 17,635 148,420 97,342 − 103,271 22,967 177,646 49,867
2011 36,526 13,575 − 46,796 850 59,521 22,952 − 17,872 − 94,793 36,805 40,117 54,398
2012 53,791 − 21,419 − 98,820 − 8,701 86,103 75,208 8,821 − 42,017 − 3,573 54,409 44,970
2012          Nov 9,989 2,214 14 4,790 − 2,590 7,775 − 15,749 3,024 − 858 − 17,915 25,738
         Dec − 33,222 − 39,386 − 20,125 5,495 − 24,756 6,163 − 15,056 − 11,575 − − 3,481 − 18,167
2013          Jan 1,151 − 14,311 − 8,884 − 5,543 115 15,462 3,366 − 2,621 − 1,846 7,833 − 2,214
         Feb 22,401 17,420 869 7,068 9,483 4,981 866 − 5,501 − 1,773 8,140 21,535
         Mar − 10,100 − 15,782 − 19,212 5,979 − 2,549 5,682 − 1,617 − 6,735 − 511 5,629 − 8,483
         Apr 7,750 917 − 5,520 2,476 3,960 6,833 12,671 − 2,027 − 1,400 16,098 − 4,921
         May 17,315 − 2,884 − 9,809 421 6,504 20,199 2,426 − 3,962 − 1,050 7,438 14,890
         June − 14,964 − 17,431 − 9,542 − 5,473 − 2,416 2,466 9,797 3,451 − 1,280 7,626 − 24,761         July − 19,328 − 28,318 − 12,903 − 2,594 − 12,821 8,990 − 3,087 − 3,106 − 796 815 − 16,241
         Aug 810 − 6,470 − 12,968 70 6,428 7,280 − 2,162 1,447 − 1,568 − 2,041 2,972
         Sep − 701 − 4,784 − 560 − 1,743 − 2,481 4,084 − 1,862 − 6,077 − 351 4,566 1,161
 
 
€ million
Shares
Sales Purchases
Sales Residents
=
total Domestic Foreign Credit insti- Non-
Period purchases shares 9 shares 10 Total 11 tutions 6 Other sectors 12 residents 13 
2001 82,665 17,575 65,091 − 2,252 − 14,714 12,462 84,918
2002 39,338 9,232 30,106 18,398 − 23,236 41,634 20,941
2003 11,896 16,838 − 4,946 − 15,121 7,056 − 22,177 27,016
2004 − 3,317 10,157 − 13,474 7,432 5,045 2,387 − 10,748
2005 32,364 13,766 18,597 1,036 10,208 − 9,172 31,329
2006 26,276 9,061 17,214 7,528 11,323 − 3,795 18,748
2007 − 5,009 10,053 − 15,062 − 62,308 − 6,702 − 55,606 57,299
2008 − 29,452 11,326 − 40,778 2,743 − 23,079 25,822 − 32,194
2009 35,980 23,962 12,018 30,496 − 8,335 38,831 5,484
2010 36,448 20,049 16,398 41,347 7,340 34,007 − 4,900
2011 25,549 21,713 3,835 39,081 670 38,411 − 13,533
2012 18,808 5,120 13,688 17,663 10,259 7,404 1,144
2012          Nov 1,759 134 1,625 1,870 − 843 2,713 − 111
         Dec 10,124 387 9,737 10,879 6,052 4,827 − 755
2013          Jan 4,679 732 3,947 10,340 5,842 4,498 − 5,661
         Feb − 1,675 306 − 1,981 − 5,405 − 5,352 − 53 3,730
         Mar 5,921 40 5,881 9,432 7,851 1,581 − 3,511
         Apr 34 93 − 59 22,020 18,391 3,629 − 21,986
         May 10,665 5,560 5,105 − 3,214 − 10,712 7,498 13,879
         June 2,369 1,544 825 − 7,533 − 8,772 1,239 9,902
         July 7,449 109 7,340 6,177 4,697 1,480 1,272
         Aug 918 158 760 − 271 − 855 584 1,189
         Sep 1,582 188 1,394 158 3,053 − 2,895 1,424
1Net sales at market values plus/minus changes in issuers’ portfolios of their own values. 9Excluding shares of public limited investment companies; at issue prices.
debt securities. 2Including cross-border financing within groups from January 2011. 10Net purchases or net sales (−) of foreign shares (including direct investment)  by  
3Including Federal Railways Fund, Federal Post Office and Treuhand agency. 4Net residents;  transaction  values. 11Domestic and foreign shares. 12Residual; also
purchases or net sales (−) of foreign debt securities by residents; transaction including purchases of domestic and foreign securities by domestic mutual funds.values. 5Domestic and foreign debt securities. 6Book values; statistically adjusted. 13Net purchases or net sales (−) of domestic shares (including direct investment) by
7Residual; also including purchases of domestic and foreign securities by domestic non-residents; transaction values. — The figures for the most recent date are
mutual funds. Up to end-2008, data comprise Deutsche Bundesbank. 8Net pur- provisional; revisions are not specially marked. 
chases or net sales (−) of domestic debt securities by non-residents; transaction

Deutsche Bundesbank
51  Monthly Report
November 2013
 VIII Capital market
 
2 Sales of debt securities issued by residents *  
 
 
€ million nominal value
Bank debt securities 1 Memo item
 Foreign  DM/euro
bonds issued Debt securities
Corporate by German- issued by special
Mortgage Public purpose credit Other bank bonds Public managed
Period Total Total Pfandbriefe Pfandbriefe institutions (non-MFIs)  2 syndicates debt securities debt securities 3 
Gross sales  4 
2001 687,988 505,646 34,782 112,594 106,166 252,103 11,328 171,012 10,605
2002 818,725 569,232 41,496 119,880 117,506 290,353 17,574 231,923 10,313
2003 958,917 668,002 47,828 107,918 140,398 371,858 22,510 268,406 2,850
2004 990,399 688,844 33,774 90,815 162,353 401,904 31,517 270,040 12,344
2005 988,911 692,182 28,217 103,984 160,010 399,969 24,352 272,380 600
2006 925,863 622,055 24,483 99,628 139,193 358,750 29,975 273,834 69
2007 1,021,533 743,616 19,211 82,720 195,722 445,963 15,043 262,872 −
2008 1,337,337 961,271 51,259 70,520 382,814 456,676 95,093 280,974 −
2009 1,533,616 1,058,815 40,421 37,615 331,566 649,215 76,379 398,423 −
2010 1,375,138 757,754 36,226 33,539 363,828 324,160 53,654 563,731 −
2011 1,337,772 658,781 31,431 24,295 376,876 226,180 86,615 592,376 −
2012 1,340,568 702,781 36,593 11,413 446,153 208,623 63,259 574,529 −
2013          Feb 118,387 77,846 2,008 460 60,566 14,812 5,392 35,149 −
         Mar 117,189 63,353 1,361 663 47,045 14,284 8,041 45,795 −
         Apr 133,541 83,249 3,213 1,275 61,207 17,553 6,296 43,997 −
         May 124,909 77,880 2,159 919 54,712 20,090 5,770 41,259 −
         June 116,746 74,753 3,072 1,595 57,201 12,885 7,268 34,725 −
         July 135,973 93,607 1,571 1,292 73,092 17,652 5,442 36,923 −
         Aug 112,069 71,290 2,809 2,970 50,358 15,153 3,725 37,054 −
         Sep 110,040 61,322 1,038 644 45,215 14,426 3,476 45,242 −
of which: Debt securities with maturities of more than four years  5 
2001 299,751 202,337 16,619 76,341 42,277 67,099 7,479 89,933 6,480
2002 309,157 176,486 16,338 59,459 34,795 65,892 12,149 120,527 9,2132003 369,336 220,103 23,210 55,165 49,518 92,209 10,977 138,256 2,8502004 424,769 275,808 20,060 48,249 54,075 153,423 20,286 128,676 4,320
2005 425,523 277,686 20,862 63,851 49,842 143,129 16,360 131,479 400
2006 337,969 190,836 17,267 47,814 47,000 78,756 14,422 132,711 692007 315,418 183,660 10,183 31,331 50,563 91,586 13,100 118,659 −2008 387,516 190,698 13,186 31,393 54,834 91,289 84,410 112,407 −2009 361,999 185,575 20,235 20,490 59,809 85,043 55,240 121,185 −
2010 381,687 169,174 15,469 15,139 72,796 65,769 34,649 177,863 −
2011 368,039 153,309 13,142 8,500 72,985 58,684 41,299 173,431 −2012 421,018 177,086 23,374 6,482 74,386 72,845 44,042 199,888 −
2013          Feb 27,437 8,802 1,237 151 2,554 4,860 4,175 14,459 −
         Mar 25,973 8,027 744 115 2,094 5,074 5,527 12,419 −
         Apr 35,644 14,295 2,370 843 5,349 5,733 3,483 17,866 −
         May 33,273 16,385 1,140 619 6,906 7,719 3,763 13,125 −         June 33,900 16,014 2,823 1,270 6,479 5,442 5,659 12,228 −
         July 28,732 10,135 791 767 2,816 5,761 4,382 14,215 −
         Aug 28,577 11,793 1,891 2,931 1,909 5,062 1,789 14,996 −         Sep 31,256 13,633 474 401 6,944 5,814 2,127 15,496 −
Net sales  6 
2001 84,122 60,905 6,932 − 9,254 28,808 34,416 8,739 14,479 − 30,6572002 131,976 56,393 7,936 − 26,806 20,707 54,561 14,306 61,277 − 44,5462003 124,556 40,873 2,700 − 42,521 44,173 36,519 18,431 65,253 − 54,9902004 167,233 81,860 1,039 − 52,615 50,142 83,293 18,768 66,605 − 22,124
2005 141,715 65,798 − 2,151 − 34,255 37,242 64,962 10,099 65,819 − 35,963
2006 129,423 58,336 − 12,811 − 20,150 44,890 46,410 15,605 55,482 − 19,2082007 86,579 58,168 − 10,896 − 46,629 42,567 73,127 − 3,683 32,093 − 29,7502008 119,472 8,517 15,052 − 65,773 25,165 34,074 82,653 28,302 − 31,6072009 76,441 − 75,554 858 − 80,646 25,579 − 21,345 48,508 103,482 − 21,037
2010 21,566 − 87,646 − 3,754 − 63,368 28,296 − 48,822 23,748 85,464 − 10,904
2011 22,518 − 54,582 1,657 − 44,290 32,904 − 44,852 − 3,189 80,289 − 5,9892012 − 85,298 − 100,198 − 4,177 − 41,660 − 3,259 − 51,099 − 6,401 21,298 − 2,605
2013          Feb 8,971 162 − 5,231 − 4,895 14,206 − 3,918 3,656 5,153 − 1,165
         Mar − 21,212 − 21,021 − 1,130 − 3,626 − 5,449 − 10,816 4,029 − 4,220 − 358
         Apr − 17,136 − 6,083 253 − 1,676 − 3,704 − 956 3,073 − 14,127 − 51
         May 5,999 − 8,363 − 2,268 − 2,090 − 3,310 − 695 − 2,038 16,400 −         June − 25,069 − 12,488 375 − 873 − 2,120 − 9,869 − 3,102 − 9,479 − 9
         July − 23,544 − 11,919 − 1,224 − 1,029 − 5,673 − 3,993 − 2,324 − 9,301 − 201
         Aug 1,865 − 11,635 − 2,962 − 1,543 423 − 7,552 346 13,154 −         Sep − 5,438 − 3,138 − 1,208 − 1,649 5,047 − 5,328 − 1,167 − 1,134 − 994
*For definitions, see the explanatory notes in the Statistical Supplement 2 Capital Railways Fund, Federal Post Office and Treuhand agency. 4Gross sales means only
market statistics on p 21 ff. 1Excluding registered bank debt securities. 2Including initial sales of newly issued securities. 5Maximum maturity according to the terms of
cross-border financing within groups from January 2011. 3Including Federal issue. 6 Gross sales less redemptions. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
52  Monthly Report
November 2013
VIII Capital market
 
3 Amounts outstanding of debt securities issued by residents  * 
 
 
€ million nominal value
Bank debt securities 1 Memo item
 Foreign  DM/euro
End of year Debt securities bonds issued
or month/ issued by Corporate by German-
Maturity Mortgage Public special purpose Other bank bonds Public managed
in years Total Total Pfandbriefe Pfandbriefe credit institutions debt securities (non-MFIs) debt securities syndicates
2001 2,349,243 1,506,640 147,684 675,868 201,721 481,366 22,339 820,264 292,199
2002 2,481,220 1,563,034 155,620 649,061 222,427 535,925 36,646 881,541 247,655
2003 2,605,775 1,603,906 158,321 606,541 266,602 572,442 55,076 946,793 192,666
2004 2,773,007 1,685,766 159,360 553,927 316,745 655,734 73,844 1,013,397 170,543
2005 2,914,723 1,751,563 157,209 519,674 323,587 751,093 83,942 1,079,218 134,580
2006 3,044,145 1,809,899 144,397 499,525 368,476 797,502 99,545 1,134,701 115,373
2007 3,130,723 1,868,066 133,501 452,896 411,041 870,629 95,863 1,166,794 85,623
2008 3,250,195 1,876,583 150,302 377,091 490,641 858,550 178,515 1,195,097 54,015
2009 3,326,635 1,801,029 151,160 296,445 516,221 837,203 227,024 1,298,581 32,978
2010 3,348,201 2 1,570,490 147,529 232,954 544,517 2 645,491 250,774 2 1,526,937 22,074
2011 3,370,721 1,515,911 149,185 188,663 577,423 600,640 247,585 1,607,226 16,085
2012 3,285,422 2 1,414,349 145,007 147,070 574,163 2 548,109 2 220,456 2 1,650,617 13,481
2013          Mar 3,234,379 1,381,812 136,763 125,006 589,606 530,437 223,348 1,629,219 11,958
         Apr 3,217,243 1,375,729 137,016 123,330 585,903 529,481 226,422 1,615,092 11,907
         May 3,223,242 1,367,366 134,747 121,239 582,593 528,786 224,384 1,631,492 11,907
         June 3,198,173 1,354,878 135,122 120,366 580,473 518,917 221,281 1,622,013 11,898
         July 3,174,629 1,342,959 133,898 119,337 574,800 514,925 218,958 1,612,712 11,697
         Aug 3,176,418 1,331,248 130,935 117,794 575,223 507,296 219,303 1,625,866 11,697
         Sep 3,170,979 1,328,110 129,728 116,145 580,270 501,968 218,137 1,624,732 10,702
Breakdown by remaining period to maturity  3 Position at end-September 2013 
1,184,364 563,739 51,544 60,343 234,782 217,069 50,889 569,737 4,155    less than 2
748,735 371,013 42,420 30,059 143,989 154,545 35,225 342,498 2,973 2 to less than 4
413,635 167,817 19,441 13,949 84,661 49,766 30,322 215,496 273 4 to less than 6
277,616 98,747 11,199 4,889 60,615 22,043 21,803 157,066 179 6 to less than 8
215,974 48,655 3,833 3,742 23,274 17,806 13,114 154,205 523 8 to less than 10
75,867 18,537 1,180 2,431 6,754 8,172 5,307 52,023 1,602 10 to less than 15
46,430 15,781 11 263 10,120 5,387 2,479 28,171 30 15 to less than 20
208,354 43,820 100 468 16,074 27,179 58,997 105,537 967 20 and more
*Including debt securities temporarily held in the issuers’ portfolios. 1Excluding maturity for debt securities falling due en bloc and until mean maturity of the
debt securities handed to the trustee for temporary safe custody. 2Sectoral residual amount outstanding for debt securities not falling due en bloc. 
reclassification of debt securities. 3Calculated from month under review until final
  
4 Shares in circulation issued by residents
 * 
  
€ million nominal value
Change in domestic public limited companies’ capital due to
Memo item
Share circulationat market values
contribution (market capita- cash 
payments
Share capital = Net increase or and ex- contribution of shares, merger reduction lisation)
circulation at net decrease (−) change of of claims mining shares, and of capital level at end
end of period during period convertible issue of and other GmbH shares, transfer change of and of period
Period under review under review bonds 1 bonus shares real assets etc of assets legal form liquidation under review  2 
2001 166,187 18,561 7,987 4,057 1,106 8,448 1,018 − 905 − 3,152 1,205,613
2002 168,716 2,528 4,307 1,291 486 1,690 − 868 − 2,152 − 2,224 647,492
2003 162,131 − 6,585 4,482 923 211 513 − 322 − 10,806 − 1,584 851,001
2004 164,802 2,669 3,960 1,566 276 696 220 − 1,760 − 2,286 887,217
2005 163,071 − 1,733 2,470 1,040 694 268 − 1,443 − 3,060 − 1,703 1,058,532
2006 163,764 695 2,670 3,347 604 954 − 1,868 − 1,256 − 3,761 1,279,638
2007 164,560 799 3,164 1,322 200 269 − 682 − 1,847 − 1,636 1,481,930
2008 168,701 4,142 5,006 1,319 152 0 − 428 − 608 − 1,306 830,622
2009 175,691 6,989 12,476 398 97 − − 3,741 − 1,269 − 974 927,256
2010 174,596 − 1,096 3,265 497 178 10 − 486 − 993 − 3,569 1,091,220
2011 177,167 2,570 6,390 552 462 9 − 552 − 762 − 3,532 924,214
2012 178,617 1,449 3,046 129 570 − − 478 594 − 2,411 1,150,188
2013          Mar 178,805 − 162 33 − 5 − − 81 − 2 − 117 1,185,828
         Apr 173,571 − 5,234 81 − − − − 15 8 − 5,307 1,200,874
         May 170,978 − 2,593 879 275 1 − − 1,175 − 13 − 2,559 1,247,031
         June 171,830 851 667 248 332 − − 7 − 163 − 225 1,202,614
         July 171,798 − 33 101 19 1 − − 1 − 79 − 73 1,242,630
         Aug 171,488 − 310 153 43 9 − − 1 7 − 522 1,237,272
         Sep 171,651 163 149 113 1 − − 56 − 24 − 20 1,291,028
*Excluding shares of public limited investment companies. 1Including shares issued ket segment was closed down on 24 March 2003) are included as well as enterprises
out of company profits. 2Enterprises listed on the Regulated Market (the introduc- listed on the Open Market. Source: Bundesbank calculations based on data of the
tion of which marked the end of the division of organised trading segments into an Herausgebergemeinschaft Wertpapier-Mitteilungen and the Deutsche Börse AG. official and a regulated market on 1 November 2007) or the Neuer Markt (stock mar-

Deutsche Bundesbank
53  Monthly Report
November 2013
 VIII Capital market
 
5 Yields and indices on German securities
 
 
               
Yields on debt securities outstanding issued by residents  1 Price indices 2,3 
Public debt securities Bank debt securities Debt securities Shares
Listed
Federal securities
With a residual With a residual
maturity of maturity of Corporate German German
9 and more than 9 bonds bond iBoxx CDAX share
including and including (non- index share price index € Germany
Total Total Total 10 years 4 Total 10 years MFIs) (REX) price index index (DAX)
Average End-1998 End-1987 End-1987
Period % per annum daily rate = 100 = 100 = 1000
2001 4.8 4.7 4.7 4.8 4.9 5.3 5.9 113.12 94.16 319.38 5,160.10
2002 4.7 4.6 4.6 4.8 4.7 5.1 6.0 117.56 97.80 188.46 2,892.632003 3.7 3.8 3.8 4.1 3.7 4.3 5.0 117.36 97.09 252.48 3,965.162004 3.7 3.7 3.7 4.0 3.6 4.2 4.0 120.19 99.89 268.32 4,256.08
2005 3.1 3.2 3.2 3.4 3.1 3.5 3.7 120.92 101.09 335.59 5,408.26
2006 3.8 3.7 3.7 3.8 3.8 4.0 4.2 116.78 96.69 407.16 6,596.922007 4.3 4.3 4.2 4.2 4.4 4.5 5.0 114.85 94.62 478.65 8,067.322008 4.2 4.0 4.0 4.0 4.5 4.7 6.3 121.68 102.06 266.33 4,810.202009 3.2 3.1 3.0 3.2 3.5 4.0 5.5 123.62 100.12 320.32 5,957.43
2010 2.5 2.4 2.4 2.7 2.7 3.3 4.0 124.96 102.95 368.72 6,914.19
2011 2.6 2.4 2.4 2.6 2.9 3.5 4.3 131.48 109.53 304.60 5,898.352012 1.4 1.3 1.3 1.5 1.6 2.1 3.7 135.11 111.18 380.03 7,612.39
2013          May 1.1 1.1 1.1 1.3 1.0 1.8 2.9 134.63 109.44 407.33 8,348.84
         June 1.3 1.3 1.3 1.5 1.3 2.1 3.2 133.13 108.15 388.91 7,959.22
         July 1.4 1.3 1.3 1.6 1.3 2.1 3.4 133.63 108.21 404.77 8,275.97
         Aug 1.5 1.5 1.5 1.7 1.4 2.2 3.5 132.71 106.92 398.50 8,103.15         Sep 1.6 1.6 1.6 1.9 1.5 2.3 3.9 133.66 107.48 421.41 8,594.40
         Oct 1.5 1.5 1.5 1.8 1.4 2.2 3.8 134.19 107.74 443.20 9,033.92
1Bearer debt securities with maximum maturities according to the terms of issue of ding of the debt securities included in the calculation. Monthly figures are calculated
over 4 years if their mean residual maturities exceed 3 years. Convertible debt on the basis of the yields on all the business days in a month. The annual figures are
securities, etc. debt securities with unscheduled redemption, zero-coupon bonds, the unweighted means of the monthly figures. 2End of year or month. 3Source:
floating-rate notes and bonds not denominated in euro are not included. Group Deutsche Börse AG. 4Only debt securities eligible as underlying instruments for
yields for the various categories of securities are weighted by the amounts outstan- futures contracts; calculated as unweighted averages. 
 
 
6 Sales and purchases of mutual fund shares in Germany
  
€ million
Sales Purchases
Domestic mutual funds 1  (sales receipts) Residents
Mutual funds open to the Credit institutions
general public including building
Other sectors 3 and loan associations 2 
of which
Sales Open- of which of which
= Secur- end Foreign Foreign
total Money ities- real Special- mutual mutualpur- market based estate ised Foreign fund fund Non-resi-
Period chases Total Total funds funds funds funds funds  
4 Total Total shares Total shares dents 5 
2001 97,077 76,811 35,522 12,410 9,195 10,159 41,289 20,266 96,127 10,251 2,703 85,876 17,563 951
2002 66,571 59,482 25,907 3,682 7,247 14,916 33,575 7,089 67,251 2,100 3,007 65,151 4,082 − 6802003 47,754 43,943 20,079 − 924 7,408 14,166 23,864 3,811 49,547 − 2,658 734 52,205 3,077 − 1,7932004 14,435 1,453 − 3,978 − 6,160 − 1,246 3,245 5,431 12,982 10,267 8,446 3,796 1,821 9,186 4,168
2005 85,268 41,718 6,400 − 124 7,001 − 3,186 35,317 43,550 79,252 21,290 7,761 57,962 35,789 6,016
2006 47,264 19,535 − 14,257 490 − 9,362 − 8,814 33,791 27,729 39,006 14,676 5,221 24,330 22,508 8,2582007 55,778 13,436 − 7,872 − 4,839 − 12,848 6,840 21,307 42,342 51,309 − 229 4,240 51,538 38,102 4,4692008 2,598 − 7,911 − 14,409 − 12,171 − 11,149 799 6,498 10,509 11,315 − 16,625 − 9,252 27,940 19,761 − 8,717
2009 49,929 43,747 10,966 − 5,047 11,749 2,686 32,780 6,182 38,132 − 14,995 − 8,178 53,127 14,361 11,796
2010 106,464 84,906 13,381 − 148 8,683 1,897 71,345 21,558 102,867 3,873 6,290 98,994 15,270 3,5982011 47,064 45,221 − 1,340 − 379 − 2,037 1,562 46,561 1,843 40,416 − 7,576 − 694 47,992 2,538 6,6472012 111,502 89,942 2,084 − 1,036 97 3,450 87,859 21,560 115,372 − 3,062 − 1,562 118,434 23,122 − 3,869
2013          Mar 12,579 9,075 676 − 103 100 469 8,399 3,504 12,773 343 715 12,430 2,789 − 194         Apr 9,788 7,517 524 − 63 167 334 6,993 2,272 15,598 798 418 14,800 1,854 − 5,809
         May 4,487 2,175 499 − 40 − 47 386 1,676 2,312 − 1,181 34 − 472 − 1,215 2,784 5,668         June 4,279 4,779 497 175 474 772 4,282 − 499 4,941 − 803 − 982 5,744 483 − 661
         July 17,120 12,845 3,863 − 2 2,856 631 8,983 4,274 16,515 − 141 − 232 16,656 4,506 605
         Aug 3,262 1,764 − 1,122 22 − 524 − 608 2,885 1,498 3,312 − 1,227 − 1,316 4,539 2,814 − 50         Sep 6,126 4,206 498 − 88 419 19 3,708 1,920 5,481 − 14 435 5,495 1,485 645
1Including public limited investment companies. 2Book values. 3Residual. 4Net transaction values. — The figures for the most recent date are provisional; revisions
purchases or net sales (−) of foreign fund shares by residents; transaction values. are not specially marked. 
5Net purchases or net sales (−) of domestic fund shares by non-residents;

Deutsche Bundesbank
54  Monthly Report
November 2013
IX  Financial accounts
  
1  Acquisition of financial assets and financing of private non-financial sectors
(non-consolidated)
  
  € billion
2011 2012 2013 
Item 2010 2011 2012 Q3 Q4 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 Q1 Q2
Households  1 
  I  Acquisition of financial assets
Currency and deposits 72.7 66.7 86.4 15.6 27.3 21.1 22.2 19.9 23.3 8.3 17.9
Debt securities 2 − 11.4 − 1.9 − 17.0 − 4.0 − 2.2 − 2.8 − 2.4 − 4.7 − 7.2 − 4.6 − 5.5
Shares 13.4 16.1 − 3.4 6.1 6.2 − 1.0 0.5 − 0.5 − 2.5 2.6 − 0.6
Other equity 3.0 3.0 3.1 0.8 0.7 0.8 0.7 0.8 0.8 0.8 0.8
Mutual funds shares 10.0 − 14.5 0.2 − 7.0 − 4.0 − 1.6 − 2.1 − 1.1 5.0 10.5 3.9
Claims on insurance
corporations 3 71.4 45.7 71.1 8.1 10.5 24.6 16.6 12.9 17.0 24.8 16.9
short-term claims − 1.3 0.6 2.3 0.4 − 0.7 0.6 0.6 0.6 0.5 0.8 0.7
longer-term claims 72.7 45.2 68.8 7.7 11.1 23.9 16.0 12.3 16.5 24.0 16.3
Claims from companypension commitments 7.8 11.1 11.9 2.8 2.8 2.9 3.0 2.9 3.0 2.9 3.0
Other claims 
4 − 12.6 17.5 0.3 7.0 − 7.2 5.9 − 0.1 − 0.3 − 5.3 1.6 0.1
Total 154.3 143.8 152.5 29.4 34.1 49.9 38.5 30.0 34.1 47.0 36.5
  II Financing
Loans 5.1 11.5 15.0 6.7 3.7 − 1.1 6.7 6.1 3.2 − 3.7 5.8
short-term loans − 2.3 − 2.1 − 1.0 − 0.9 − 1.6 − 0.1 0.8 − 0.9 − 0.8 − 1.5 − 0.3
longer-term loans 7.3 13.6 16.0 7.6 5.3 − 1.0 5.9 7.0 4.0 − 2.1 6.1
Other liabilities 0.2 1.6 1.0 0.0 1.2 0.4 0.1 0.1 0.4 − 0.1 0.1
Total 5.3 13.1 16.0 6.8 4.9 − 0.6 6.8 6.2 3.6 − 3.7 5.9
Corporations
I   Acquisition of financial assets
Currency and deposits 7.3 14.1 17.9 − 3.3 24.9 − 21.6 − 10.0 15.2 34.3 − 42.0 − 9.8
Debt securities 2 − 0.1 4.9 − 2.6 0.9 1.2 0.2 − 0.0 − 0.6 − 2.2 1.4 − 2.1
Financial derivatives 27.8 14.7 10.1 3.9 3.8 − 0.3 4.2 2.2 4.0 1.5 3.2
Shares 24.9 17.1 19.9 − 2.0 6.9 4.8 − 7.2 6.5 15.8 10.6 5.9
Other equity 54.1 29.3 24.4 − 2.2 8.4 7.5 11.2 9.7 − 4.1 11.5 3.5
Mutual funds shares 8.8 8.2 − 0.2 1.5 4.1 − 5.2 1.0 0.7 3.3 4.5 − 1.0
Loans 32.5 11.0 − 6.5 − 0.1 8.2 3.5 0.4 − 8.9 − 1.4 5.2 − 1.3
short-term loans 12.2 9.1 − 8.9 − 1.7 4.0 1.7 2.0 − 9.5 − 3.0 10.2 − 2.0
longer-term loans 20.2 1.9 2.4 1.6 4.2 1.8 − 1.6 0.6 1.7 − 4.9 0.7
Claims on insurancecorporations 
3 − 0.6 0.6 1.4 0.2 − 0.0 0.3 0.3 0.4 0.3 0.4 0.4
short-term claims − 0.6 0.6 1.4 0.2 − 0.0 0.3 0.3 0.4 0.3 0.4 0.4
longer-term claims . . . . . . . . . . .
Other claims 38.2 23.2 31.3 − 34.0 4.4 4.9 − 30.0 32.1 24.3 24.0 − 1.4
Total 192.7 123.1 95.6 − 35.0 61.9 − 6.0 − 30.1 57.4 74.3 17.2 − 2.6
  II Financing
Debt securities 2 4.2 7.6 18.7 7.0 − 1.0 3.1 3.9 7.1 4.7 9.1 3.2
Financial derivatives . . . . . . . . . . .
Shares 7.2 7.4 2.9 − 0.3 1.9 0.6 1.0 0.4 1.0 0.6 0.1
Other equity 13.1 13.8 2.2 2.1 4.0 2.1 1.3 − 5.1 3.9 1.8 2.3
Loans 7.6 33.4 − 12.4 14.6 20.7 − 6.8 3.1 16.4 − 25.1 24.9 19.3
short-term loans − 10.4 18.0 − 17.7 11.4 10.3 − 3.9 − 1.6 − 3.9 − 8.3 11.9 10.2
longer-term loans 18.0 15.3 5.3 3.1 10.4 − 3.0 4.7 20.3 − 16.8 13.0 9.0
Claims from companypension commitments 2.6 5.8 6.6 1.5 1.5 1.6 1.6 1.6 1.7 1.6 1.6
Other liabilities 66.1 42.0 8.7 13.0 14.3 − 13.2 1.7 9.6 10.7 − 0.6 − 16.0
Total 100.8 109.9 26.7 37.8 41.3 − 12.7 12.5 30.0 − 3.1 37.4 10.5
1Including non-profit institutions serving households. 2Including money market and supplementary pension funds. 4Including accumulated interest-bearing surplus
paper. 3Including private pension funds, burial funds, occupational pension schemes shares with insurance corporations. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
55  Monthly Report
November 2013
IX  Financial accounts
  
2  Financial assets and liabilities of private non-financial sectors
(non-consolidated)
  
  End-of-year level, end-of-quarter level; € billion
2011 2012 
2013 
Item 2010 2011 2012 Q3 Q4 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 Q1 Q2
Households  1 
  I  Financial assets
Currency and deposits 1,860.8 1,927.5 2,014.9 1,900.2 1,927.5 1,948.6 1,971.4 1,991.4 2,014.9 2,023.0 2,040.9
Debt securities 2 254.1 247.1 238.2 247.8 247.1 249.6 245.4 244.8 238.2 231.7 221.9
Shares 243.5 221.5 259.2 206.3 221.5 252.4 229.9 250.0 259.2 267.8 264.4
Other equity 182.3 189.0 198.7 186.9 189.0 190.5 196.9 197.9 198.7 199.6 201.8
Mutual funds shares 435.4 394.9 420.1 389.2 394.9 410.9 401.7 414.8 420.1 435.0 430.8
Claims on insurance
corporations 3 1,358.1 1,401.1 1,475.7 1,389.4 1,401.1 1,420.7 1,437.7 1,455.2 1,475.7 1,500.5 1,517.4
short-term claims 70.8 71.4 73.7 72.1 71.4 72.0 72.6 73.2 73.7 74.5 75.2
longer-term claims 1,287.3 1,329.6 1,401.9 1,317.3 1,329.6 1,348.6 1,365.1 1,382.0 1,401.9 1,425.9 1,442.2
Claims from company
pension commitments 284.3 295.4 307.3 292.6 295.4 298.3 301.4 304.3 307.3 310.2 313.3
Other claims 4 39.0 38.4 37.1 38.6 38.4 38.3 38.2 37.9 37.1 37.0 37.0
Total 4,657.6 4,714.8 4,951.0 4,650.9 4,714.8 4,809.2 4,822.7 4,896.3 4,951.0 5,004.8 5,027.3
  II Liabilities
Loans 1,523.1 1,538.6 1,552.5 1,535.1 1,538.6 1,536.7 1,543.0 1,549.0 1,552.5 1,548.9 1,554.7
short-term loans 75.6 73.9 72.6 75.0 73.9 73.8 74.4 73.1 72.6 70.2 69.9
longer-term loans 1,447.5 1,464.7 1,479.9 1,460.1 1,464.7 1,463.0 1,468.7 1,475.9 1,479.9 1,478.6 1,484.7
Other liabilities 11.7 13.4 14.8 13.5 13.4 15.3 15.1 15.0 14.8 16.0 15.6
Total 1,534.8 1,551.9 1,567.4 1,548.6 1,551.9 1,552.0 1,558.1 1,564.1 1,567.4 1,564.9 1,570.3
Corporations
I   Financial assets
Currency and deposits 450.1 460.5 506.5 429.9 460.5 452.6 453.1 468.3 506.5 461.8 452.7
Debt securities 2 48.1 52.6 51.9 51.6 52.6 53.9 53.6 53.9 51.9 53.0 50.3
Financial derivatives . . . . . . . . . . .
Shares 917.0 811.8 952.3 781.3 811.8 906.4 841.6 898.4 952.3 986.1 949.0
Other equity 352.7 389.8 428.0 378.6 389.8 398.8 422.0 432.2 428.0 439.9 446.4
Mutual funds shares 119.3 123.1 129.0 117.6 123.1 120.5 119.6 123.9 129.0 134.1 131.9
Loans 376.6 387.6 381.2 379.4 387.6 391.1 391.5 382.5 381.2 386.4 385.1
short-term loans 255.6 264.6 255.8 260.6 264.6 266.3 268.3 258.8 255.8 265.9 263.9
longer-term loans 121.0 123.0 125.4 118.8 123.0 124.8 123.2 123.7 125.4 120.4 121.2
Claims on insurance
corporations 3 41.3 41.9 43.3 41.9 41.9 42.2 42.6 42.9 43.3 43.6 44.0
short-term claims 41.3 41.9 43.3 41.9 41.9 42.2 42.6 42.9 43.3 43.6 44.0longer-term claims . . . . . . . . . . .
Other claims 766.1 814.6 832.3 769.2 814.6 818.5 814.4 826.3 832.3 864.4 844.3
Total 3,071.1 3,082.1 3,324.4 2,949.6 3,082.1 3,184.0 3,138.3 3,228.4 3,324.4 3,369.4 3,303.7
  II Liabilities
Debt securities 
2 134.8 110.7 130.9 111.9 110.7 115.6 117.2 124.6 130.9 139.6 141.3
Financial derivatives . . . . . . . . . . .
Shares 1,301.8 1,110.5 1,373.6 1,046.6 1,110.5 1,282.5 1,166.3 1,294.9 1,373.6 1,430.9 1,389.6
Other equity 716.9 730.7 732.9 726.7 730.7 732.8 734.1 729.0 732.9 734.7 737.0
Loans 1,338.0 1,385.3 1,382.6 1,357.0 1,385.3 1,378.9 1,381.3 1,391.5 1,382.6 1,402.3 1,421.7
short-term loans 419.1 433.3 414.6 422.9 433.3 429.0 426.7 422.7 414.6 426.2 436.5
longer-term loans 918.9 952.0 968.0 934.1 952.0 949.8 954.5 968.8 968.0 976.1 985.3
Claims from companypension commitments 229.2 235.0 241.5 233.5 235.0 236.6 238.2 239.9 241.5 243.2 244.8
Other liabilities 871.6 879.7 891.4 864.7 879.7 877.6 891.2 896.9 891.4 905.4 869.3
Total 4,592.3 4,451.9 4,752.9 4,340.4 4,451.9 4,623.9 4,528.4 4,676.8 4,752.9 4,856.1 4,803.7
1Including non-profit institutions serving households. 2Including money market and supplementary pension funds. 4Including accumulated interest-bearing surplus
paper. 3Including private pension funds, burial funds, occupational pension schemes shares with insurance corporations. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
56  Monthly Report
November 2013
X Public finances in Germany
 
1 General government: deficit and debt level as defined in the Maastricht Treaty
 
 
 
Social Social
General Central State Local security General Central State Local security
government government government government funds government government government government funds
Period € billion as a percentage of GDP
Deficit/surplus1
2007 + 5.8 − 18.6 + 2.5 + 11.1 + 10.8 + 0.2 − 0.8 + 0.1 + 0.5 + 0.4
2008 − 1.9 − 16.6 − 1.2 + 9.0 + 6.9 − 0.1 − 0.7 − 0.0 + 0.4 + 0.3
2009 − 73.7 − 38.6 − 18.4 − 2.5 − 14.3 − 3.1 − 1.6 − 0.8 − 0.1 − 0.6
2010 2, p − 104.2 − 82.9 − 20.1 − 5.2 + 4.1 − 4.2 − 3.3 − 0.8 − 0.2 + 0.2
2011 p − 22.0 − 27.3 − 11.3 + 1.4 + 15.2 − 0.8 − 1.0 − 0.4 + 0.1 + 0.6
2012 p + 2.4 − 14.4 − 6.8 + 5.2 + 18.3 + 0.1 − 0.5 − 0.3 + 0.2 + 0.7
2011          H1  p − 3.7 − 15.5 − 1.0 + 1.9 + 10.9 − 0.3 − 1.2 − 0.1 + 0.1 + 0.9
         H2  p − 17.7 − 11.4 − 10.2 − 0.4 + 4.3 − 1.3 − 0.9 − 0.8 − 0.0 + 0.3
2012          H1  p + 8.1 − 8.0 − 0.0 + 4.3 + 11.8 + 0.6 − 0.6 − 0.0 + 0.3 + 0.9
         H2  p − 5.8 − 6.5 − 6.7 + 1.0 + 6.5 − 0.4 − 0.5 − 0.5 + 0.1 + 0.5
2013          H1  pe + 8.5 − 2.2 + 1.2 + 5.3 + 4.3 + 0.6 − 0.2 + 0.1 + 0.4 + 0.3
Debt level3 End of year or quarter
2007 1,583.7 978.1 497.8 123.4 1.6 65.2 40.3 20.5 5.1 0.1
2008 1,652.8 1,007.8 536.7 123.6 1.5 66.8 40.7 21.7 5.0 0.1
2009 1,769.9 1,075.9 578.5 130.0 1.3 74.5 45.3 24.4 5.5 0.1
2010 p 2,057.3 1,313.6 625.1 135.1 1.3 82.5 52.7 25.1 5.4 0.1
2011 p 2,086.8 1,323.6 640.2 139.3 1.3 80.0 50.7 24.5 5.3 0.1
2012 p 2,160.2 1,368.8 664.2 142.9 1.2 81.0 51.3 24.9 5.4 0.0
2011          Q1 p 2,061.4 1,318.1 622.0 137.6 1.7 81.3 52.0 24.5 5.4 0.1
         Q2 p 2,073.6 1,321.7 628.9 138.7 2.7 80.9 51.5 24.5 5.4 0.1
         Q3 p 2,089.7 1,334.5 633.3 138.9 1.3 80.6 51.5 24.4 5.4 0.0
         Q4 p 2,086.8 1,323.6 640.2 139.3 1.3 80.0 50.7 24.5 5.3 0.1
2012          Q1 p 2,116.7 1,344.5 646.8 142.6 1.3 80.5 51.1 24.6 5.4 0.1
         Q2 p 2,162.6 1,373.5 665.8 141.9 1.3 81.9 52.0 25.2 5.4 0.0
         Q3 p 2,153.3 1,356.9 671.9 141.3 1.3 81.1 51.1 25.3 5.3 0.1
         Q4 p 2,160.2 1,368.8 664.2 142.9 1.2 81.0 51.3 24.9 5.4 0.0
2013          Q1 pe 2,148.3 1,368.8 656.3 144.0 1.2 80.5 51.3 24.6 5.4 0.0
         Q2 pe 2,146.8 1,376.4 645.7 142.2 1.1 79.8 51.1 24.0 5.3 0.0
Sources: Federal Statistical Office and Bundesbank calculations. 1Unlike the fiscal bal- counts. 2Including the €4.4 billion proceeds received from the 2010 frequency auc-
ance as shown in the national accounts, the deficit as defined in the Maastricht tion. 3Quarterly GDP ratios are based on the national output of the four preceding
Treaty includes interest flows from swaps and forward rate agreements. The quarters. 
half-year figures correspond to the deficit/surplus according to the national ac-
 
 
2 General government: revenue, expenditure and fiscal deficit/surplus as shown in the national accounts*
  
 
Revenue Expenditure
of which of which
Compen- Gross Memo item
Social con- Social sation of capital Deficit/ Total tax
Period Total Taxes tributions Other Total benefits employees Interest formation Other surplus burden  1 
€ billion
2007 1,062.3 558.4 400.9 103.0 1,056.8 579.4 178.2 68.5 36.0 194.6 + 5.5 971.3
2008 1,088.6 572.6 408.3 107.7 1,090.5 590.3 182.6 68.3 38.9 210.5 − 1.8 993.8
2009 1,072.7 548.1 410.8 113.8 1,146.3 623.6 191.0 63.5 41.6 226.6 − 73.6 969.1
2010 p 1,089.8 549.9 421.2 118.7 2 1,194.1 633.2 195.7 63.5 41.6 2 260.2 2 − 104.3 981.3
2011 p 1,157.2 592.8 437.0 127.4 1,178.7 633.2 199.5 65.7 43.6 236.7 − 21.5 1,040.3
2012 p 1,193.8 617.7 448.9 127.1 1,191.5 643.4 203.8 63.8 41.4 239.1 + 2.3 1,077.3
as a percentage of GDP
2007 43.7 23.0 16.5 4.2 43.5 23.9 7.3 2.8 1.5 8.0 + 0.2 40.0
2008 44.0 23.1 16.5 4.4 44.1 23.9 7.4 2.8 1.6 8.5 − 0.1 40.2
2009 45.2 23.1 17.3 4.8 48.3 26.3 8.0 2.7 1.8 9.5 − 3.1 40.8
2010 p 43.7 22.0 16.9 4.8 2 47.9 25.4 7.8 2.5 1.7 2 10.4 2 − 4.2 39.3
2011 p 44.3 22.7 16.7 4.9 45.2 24.3 7.6 2.5 1.7 9.1 − 0.8 39.9
2012 p 44.8 23.2 16.8 4.8 44.7 24.1 7.6 2.4 1.6 9.0 + 0.1 40.4
Percentage growth rates
2007 + 5.1 + 8.9 + 0.1 + 5.4 + 0.7 − 0.2 + 0.6 + 3.6 + 6.7 + 1.5 . + 5.0
2008 + 2.5 + 2.5 + 1.8 + 4.6 + 3.2 + 1.9 + 2.5 − 0.4 + 7.9 + 8.2 . + 2.3
2009 − 1.5 − 4.3 + 0.6 + 5.6 + 5.1 + 5.6 + 4.6 − 6.9 + 7.2 + 7.7 . − 2.5
2010 p + 1.6 + 0.3 + 2.5 + 4.3 + 4.2 + 1.6 + 2.5 − 0.1 − 0.2 + 14.8 . + 1.3
2011 p + 6.2 + 7.8 + 3.7 + 7.3 − 1.3 + 0.0 + 1.9 + 3.5 + 4.9 − 9.0 . + 6.0
2012 p + 3.2 + 4.2 + 2.7 − 0.2 + 1.1 + 1.6 + 2.2 − 2.8 − 5.2 + 1.0 . + 3.6
Source: Federal Statistical Office. *Figures in accordance with ESA 1995. In the website. 1Taxes and social contributions plus customs duties and the EU share in
Monthly Reports up to December 2006, customs duties, the EU share in VAT revenue VAT revenue. 2Including the €4.4 billion proceeds received from the 2010 frequency
and EU subsidies were included in the national accounts’ data (without affecting the auction, which are deducted from other expenditure in the national accounts. 
fiscal deficit/surplus). This information can still be found on the Bundesbank’s

Deutsche Bundesbank
57  Monthly Report
November 2013
X Public finances in Germany
 
3 General government: budgetary development (as per government’s financial statistics)
 
 
€ billion
Central, state and local government  1 Social security funds 2 General government, total
Revenue Expenditure
of which of which 3 
Finan- Person- Fixed Finan-
cial nel asset cialtransac- expend- Current forma- transac- Deficit / Rev- Expend- Deficit / Rev- Expend- Deficit /
Period Total 
4 Taxes tions 5 Total 4 iture grants Interest tion tions 5 surplus enue 6 iture surplus enue iture surplus
2005 pe 568.9 452.1 31.3 620.6 172.1 245.3 64.0 33.0 14.3 − 51.7 467.8 471.3 − 3.4 947.4 1,002.5 − 55.1
2006 pe 590.9 488.4 18.8 626.2 169.7 252.1 64.4 33.7 11.6 − 35.3 486.3 466.6 + 19.7 988.2 1,003.8 − 15.6
2007 pe 644.8 538.2 17.7 644.2 182.2 250.0 66.2 34.6 9.5 + 0.6 475.3 466.5 + 8.8 1,025.6 1,016.2 + 9.4
2008 pe 668.9 561.2 13.4 677.4 187.3 259.9 67.3 36.4 18.6 − 8.5 485.5 479.0 + 6.5 1,058.2 1,060.3 − 2.0
2009 pe 631.4 524.0 9.2 720.9 194.9 271.1 63.7 40.4 38.0 − 89.5 492.0 506.0 − 14.0 1,021.7 1,125.3 − 103.6
2010 pe 650.7 530.6 12.7 732.4 199.8 294.2 60.1 42.0 18.0 − 81.7 516.5 512.8 + 3.7 1,049.7 1,127.7 − 78.0
2011 pe 712.5 573.4 30.6 736.9 208.3 283.5 60.0 42.4 22.9 − 24.4 526.3 511.3 + 15.0 1,127.1 1,136.5 − 9.4
2012 pe 744.8 600.0 14.6 770.5 218.8 285.7 70.4 43.3 25.5 − 25.7 535.5 519.2 + 16.3 1,170.3 1,179.7 − 9.4
2011          Q1 p 162.4 134.9 4.1 183.1 49.7 73.8 21.2 6.3 4.6 − 20.7 127.3 127.2 + 0.1 260.5 281.0 − 20.5
         Q2 p 189.5 145.6 18.6 172.6 50.0 68.0 10.9 8.7 8.7 + 16.9 130.3 126.2 + 4.1 292.4 271.4 + 21.0
         Q3 p 162.6 136.6 2.7 182.6 50.9 67.2 18.8 10.8 4.5 − 20.0 127.9 125.8 + 2.0 264.3 282.2 − 17.9
         Q4 p 196.1 156.3 5.0 196.6 55.8 72.6 8.9 15.3 5.0 − 0.6 140.1 132.0 + 8.1 307.6 300.1 + 7.6
2012          Q1 p 174.0 142.9 2.5 192.5 51.7 75.6 28.0 6.9 3.4 − 18.5 129.1 128.5 + 0.7 274.8 292.6 − 17.8
         Q2 p 190.4 150.4 2.7 179.8 52.8 68.0 17.2 8.2 3.2 + 10.6 132.2 128.0 + 4.2 296.2 281.5 + 14.7
         Q3 p 178.1 147.5 4.3 182.4 53.7 63.6 17.7 10.4 3.9 − 4.3 130.2 128.9 + 1.3 282.6 285.6 − 3.0
         Q4 p 200.3 159.4 4.9 213.8 58.7 76.6 7.2 16.5 14.9 − 13.6 143.4 133.3 + 10.1 314.5 318.0 − 3.5
2013          Q1 p 177.8 149.0 2.6 187.2 53.5 74.8 20.6 5.9 2.9 − 9.3 128.5 132.3 − 3.8 281.2 294.3 − 13.1
Source: Bundesbank calculations based on the data from the Federal Statistical here is influenced in part by statistical changeovers. 4Including discrepancies in clear-
Office. 1Including subsidiary budgets, from 2012 also including bad bank FMSW. ing transactions between central, state and local government. 5On the revenue side,
Unlike the annual figures based on the annual calculations of the Federal Statistical this contains proceeds booked as disposals of equity interests and as loan repay-Office, the quarterly figures do not include municipal special purpose associations ments. On the expenditure side, this contains the acquisition of equity interests andand various special accounts. 2The annual figures do not tally with the sum of the loans granted. 6Including Federal Government liquidity assistance to the Federal
quarterly figures, as the latter are all provisional. The quarterly figures for some insur- Labour Office. ance sectors are estimated. 3The development of the types of expenditure recorded
4 Central, state and local government: budgetary development (as per government’s financial statistics)
 
 
€ billion
Central government
State government  2,3 Local government 3,4 
Period Revenue 1 Expenditure Deficit / surplus Revenue Expenditure Deficit / surplus Revenue Expenditure Deficit / surplus
2005 250.0 281.5 − 31.5 237.4 259.6 − 22.2 151.3 153.2 − 1.9
2006 254.6 282.8 − 28.2 250.3 260.1 − 9.8 161.1 157.4 + 3.72007 
pe 277.4 292.1 − 14.7 275.9 267.5 + 8.4 171.3 162.4 + 8.9
2008 pe 292.0 303.8 − 11.8 279.3 278.1 + 1.2 176.9 169.0 + 7.9
2009 pe 282.6 317.1 − 34.5 265.9 293.4 − 27.5 172.0 178.9 − 6.9
2010 pe 288.0 332.4 − 44.4 278.5 302.1 − 23.6 176.5 183.9 − 7.4
2011 pe 307.1 324.8 − 17.7 304.0 315.4 − 11.4 185.6 187.0 − 1.4
2012 pe 312.5 335.3 − 22.8 312.0 321.2 − 9.2 199.8 198.6 + 1.2
2011          Q1 p 65.4 84.5 − 19.1 74.1 75.6 − 1.5 37.1 42.5 − 5.3
         Q2 p 76.6 73.5 + 3.1 76.0 75.8 + 0.2 45.4 44.3 + 1.1
         Q3 p 72.6 84.8 − 12.2 71.9 75.1 − 3.2 46.4 46.6 − 0.2
         Q4 p 92.5 82.0 + 10.5 81.2 87.5 − 6.3 54.7 51.9 + 2.8
2012          Q1 p 65.4 83.1 − 17.7 74.6 76.2 − 1.7 39.6 44.6 − 4.9
         Q2 p 78.0 72.2 + 5.8 75.8 74.4 + 1.4 48.8 47.0 + 1.8
         Q3 p 77.1 85.0 − 8.0 77.5 78.7 − 1.2 50.7 48.9 + 1.8
         Q4 p 91.9 94.9 − 2.9 83.2 90.7 − 7.5 58.7 56.5 + 2.3
2013          Q1 p 67.3 80.2 − 13.0 77.4 77.9 − 0.5 42.1 46.4 − 4.3
         Q2 p 78.4 77.5 + 0.9 81.5 78.1 + 3.3 51.7 48.3 + 3.3
Source: Bundesbank calculations based on the data from the Federal Statistical Berlin, Bremen and Hamburg. 3Unlike the annual figure based on the annual calcu-
Office. 1Any amounts of the Bundesbank’s profit distribution exceeding the refer- lations of the Federal Statistical Office, the quarterly figures do not include various
ence value that were used to repay parts of the debt of central government’s special special accounts and municipal special purpose associations. 4From 2012 core
funds are not included here. 2Including the local authority level of the city-states budgets and off-budget entities; previously, only core budgets. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
58  Monthly Report
November 2013
X Public finances in Germany
 
5 Central, state and local government: tax revenue
 
 
€ million
Central and state government and European Union
Memo item
Balance of Amounts deducted
Central State Local untransferred in the federal
Period Total Total government 1 government 1 European Union 2 government 3 tax shares 4 budget 5 
2006 488,444 421,151 225,634 173,374 22,142 67,316 − 22 21,742
2007 538,243 465,554 251,747 191,558 22,249 72,551 + 138 21,643
2008 561,182 484,182 260,690 200,411 23,081 77,190 − 190 21,510
2009 524,000 455,615 252,842 182,273 20,501 68,419 − 34 24,846
2010 530,587 460,230 254,537 181,326 24,367 70,385 − 28 28,726
2011 573,352 496,738 276,598 195,676 24,464 76,570 + 43 28,615
2012 600,046 518,963 284,801 207,846 26,316 81,184 − 101 28,498
2011          Q1 135,590 115,878 60,579 46,582 8,717 13,640 + 6,071 6,989
         Q2 145,636 126,086 71,530 50,289 4,266 19,544 + 6 7,102
         Q3 136,382 117,812 66,277 45,938 5,598 18,916 − 346 7,662
         Q4 155,744 136,962 78,212 52,866 5,883 24,469 − 5,688 6,863
2012          Q1 143,334 122,846 62,467 50,558 9,821 13,945 + 6,543 6,831
         Q2 150,393 129,545 72,573 51,679 5,293 20,978 − 131 6,878
         Q3 147,755 127,189 70,803 50,981 5,404 20,522 + 44 7,643
         Q4 158,564 139,383 78,958 54,628 5,798 25,739 − 6,558 7,145
2013          Q1 148,936 126,532 63,351 52,078 11,103 15,051 + 7,353 6,494
         Q2 155,507 133,820 72,708 54,570 6,542 21,933 − 246 6,914
         Q3 ... 130,589 71,238 52,601 6,750 ... ... 7,554
2012          Sep . 47,271 25,963 19,120 2,188 . . 2,281
2013          Sep . 51,003 27,907 20,820 2,276 . . 2,251
Sources: Federal Ministry of Finance, Federal Statistical Office and Bundesbank calcu- and gross national income accruing to the EU from central government tax rev-
lations. 1Before deducting or adding supplementary central government grants, enue. 3Including local government taxes in the city-states Berlin, Bremen and Ham-
shares in energy tax revenue, compensation for the transfer of motor vehicle tax to burg. 4Difference between local government’s share in the joint taxes received by
central government and consolidation aid, which central government remits to state the state government cash offices in the period in question (see Table X. 6) and thegovernment. See the last column for the volume of these amounts which are amounts passed on to local government in the same period. 5Volume of the pos-
deducted from tax revenue in the federal budget. 2Custom duties and shares in VAT itions mentioned under footnote 1. 
 
 
6 Central and state government and European Union: tax revenue, by type
  
€ million
Joint taxes
Memo
Income taxes 2 Turnover taxes 5 item
Local
Local govern-
Invest- business Central State ment
Assessed ment Turnover tax govern- govern- EU share in
Wage income Corpora- income Turnover tax on trans- ment ment customs joint
Period Total 1 Total tax 3 tax tion tax tax 4 Total tax imports fers 6 taxes 7 taxes 7 duties taxes
2006 446,139 182,614 122,612 17,567 22,898 19,537 146,688 111,318 35,370 7,013 84,215 21,729 3,880 24,988
2007 493,817 204,698 131,774 25,027 22,929 24,969 169,636 127,522 42,114 6,975 85,690 22,836 3,983 28,263
2008 515,498 220,483 141,895 32,685 15,868 30,035 175,989 130,789 45,200 6,784 86,302 21,937 4,002 31,316
2009 484,880 193,684 135,165 26,430 7,173 24,916 176,991 141,907 35,084 4,908 89,318 16,375 3,604 29,265
2010 488,731 192,816 127,904 31,179 12,041 21,691 180,042 136,459 43,582 5,925 93,426 12,146 4,378 28,501
2011 527,255 213,534 139,749 31,996 15,634 26,155 190,033 138,957 51,076 6,888 99,133 13,095 4,571 30,517
2012 551,785 231,555 149,065 37,262 16,934 28,294 194,635 142,439 52,196 7,137 99,794 14,201 4,462 32,822
2011          Q1 123,131 50,328 32,478 6,755 2,485 8,611 47,389 35,528 11,861 366 20,515 3,408 1,124 7,253
         Q2 133,727 57,624 34,144 9,366 4,215 9,900 46,091 33,082 13,010 1,692 24,026 3,207 1,087 7,641
         Q3 125,021 47,420 33,590 7,111 3,028 3,691 47,161 34,232 12,929 1,735 24,309 3,229 1,169 7,209
         Q4 145,376 58,162 39,538 8,764 5,907 3,954 49,392 36,115 13,276 3,096 30,284 3,251 1,191 8,414
2012          Q1 130,623 56,569 34,106 8,456 5,471 8,537 48,966 36,340 12,626 275 20,059 3,629 1,126 7,777
         Q2 137,597 59,832 36,148 10,010 4,995 8,679 46,600 32,871 13,730 1,661 25,235 3,255 1,013 8,052
         Q3 135,170 54,841 36,582 8,877 2,532 6,850 49,147 36,232 12,915 1,841 24,423 3,718 1,200 7,981
         Q4 148,394 60,313 42,230 9,919 3,936 4,228 49,922 36,995 12,926 3,360 30,077 3,600 1,123 9,011
2013          Q1 135,026 59,835 36,468 10,750 6,014 6,603 49,167 37,466 11,701 125 20,971 3,889 1,039 8,493
         Q2 142,450 64,448 38,827 11,084 5,427 9,110 47,136 35,052 12,083 1,799 24,355 3,762 950 8,630
         Q3 138,958 56,791 38,008 9,815 3,309 5,659 50,033 37,661 12,372 1,875 25,011 4,111 1,137 8,369
2012          Sep 50,779 24,278 11,187 9,665 2,026 1,399 16,694 12,247 4,448 1 8,251 1,124 431 3,508
2013          Sep 54,748 27,444 11,873 10,552 3,921 1,098 16,825 12,803 4,022 0 8,773 1,295 410 3,745
Source: Federal Ministry of Finance and Bundesbank calculations. 1This total, unlike deducting child benefit and subsidies for supplementary private pension
that in Table X. 5, does not include the receipts from the equalisation of burdens plans. 4Final withholding tax on interest income and capital gains, non-assessed
levies, local business tax (less local business tax transfers to central and state govern- taxes on earnings. 5The allocation of revenue to central, state and local govern-
ment), real property taxes and other local government taxes, or the balance of un- ment, which is adjusted at more regular intervals, is regulated in section 1 of the Rev-transferred tax shares. 2Respective percentage share of central, state and local enue Adjustment Act. Respective percentage share of central, state and local govern-
government in revenue: wage tax and assessed income tax 42.5:42.5:15, corpor- ment in revenue for 2012: 53.4:44.6:2.0. The EU share is deducted from centralation tax and non-assessed taxes on earnings 50:50:-, final withholding tax on inter- government’s share. 6Respective percentage share of central and state government
est income and capital gains, non-assessed taxes on earnings 44:44:12. 3After for 2012: 22.2:77.8. 7 For the breakdown, see Table X. 7. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
59  Monthly Report
November 2013
X Public finances in Germany
 
7 Central, state and local government: individual taxes  
 
 
€ million
Central government taxes 1 State government taxes 1 Local government taxes
Tax on of which
the acqui-
Soli- Motor Motor sition of Inherit- Local Real
Period Energy Tobacco darity Insurance vehicle Electri- Spirits vehicle land and ance business property
tax tax surcharge tax tax 2 city tax tax Other tax 2 buildings tax Other 3 Total tax taxes
2006 39,916 14,387 11,277 8,775 . 6,273 2,160 1,428 8,937 6,125 3,763 2,904 49,319 38,370 10,399
2007 38,955 14,254 12,349 10,331 . 6,355 1,959 1,488 8,898 6,952 4,203 2,783 51,401 40,116 10,7132008 39,248 13,574 13,146 10,478 . 6,261 2,126 1,470 8,842 5,728 4,771 2,596 52,468 41,037 10,8072009 39,822 13,366 11,927 10,548 3,803 6,278 2,101 1,473 4,398 4,857 4,550 2,571 44,028 32,421 10,936
2010 39,838 13,492 11,713 10,284 8,488 6,171 1,990 1,449 . 5,290 4,404 2,452 47,780 35,712 11,315
2011 40,036 14,414 12,781 10,755 8,422 7,247 2,149 3,329 . 6,366 4,246 2,484 52,984 40,424 11,6742012 39,305 14,143 13,624 11,138 8,443 6,973 2,121 4,047 . 7,389 4,305 2,508 55,398 42,345 12,017
2011          Q1 4,457 2,893 3,072 4,869 2,349 1,785 574 516 . 1,555 1,170 683 12,825 9,948 2,631
         Q2 10,002 3,300 3,450 2,017 2,215 1,960 482 599 . 1,464 1,129 614 13,601 10,366 3,031         Q3 10,058 3,418 2,879 2,145 2,006 1,763 541 1,499 . 1,581 1,039 609 13,095 9,386 3,473         Q4 15,519 4,803 3,379 1,723 1,852 1,739 553 715 . 1,766 907 578 13,463 10,724 2,540
2012          Q1 4,406 2,305 3,308 5,180 2,328 1,714 576 241 . 1,876 1,057 696 12,986 9,981 2,717
         Q2 9,707 3,550 3,644 2,011 2,258 1,966 490 1,610 . 1,683 972 601 14,457 11,166 3,048         Q3 10,015 3,610 3,183 2,161 2,005 1,567 506 1,376 . 1,913 1,210 594 14,426 10,545 3,604         Q4 15,177 4,678 3,489 1,785 1,852 1,727 549 820 . 1,917 1,066 617 13,529 10,652 2,648
2013          Q1 4,672 2,141 3,473 5,429 2,304 1,797 580 575 . 2,144 1,007 738 14,035 10,912 2,803
         Q2 9,472 3,504 3,843 2,050 2,284 2,009 471 721 . 1,942 1,137 683 14,856 11,377 3,205         Q3 10,101 3,858 3,314 2,255 2,053 1,602 507 1,320 . 2,203 1,261 647 ... ... ...
2012          Sep 3,431 1,097 1,439 459 588 574 168 496 . 616 301 207 . . .2013          Sep 3,538 1,295 1,611 520 616 532 180 481 . 694 377 223 . . .
Sources: Federal Ministry of Finance, Federal Statistical Office and Bundesbank calcu- enue is attributable to central government. Postings to state government shown there-
lations. 1For the sum total, see Table X. 6. 2As of 1 July 2009, motor vehicle tax rev- after relate to the booking of cash flows. 3 Notably betting, lottery and beer tax.   
 
 
8 German pension insurance scheme: budgetary development and assets*
  
€ million
Revenue 1,2 Expenditure 1,2 Assets 1,5 
of which of which
Equity
Payments interests, Memo
from Pen- mort- item
central sioners’ gages Adminis-
Contri- govern- Pension health Deficit/ and other Real trative
Period Total butions 3 ment Total payments insurance 4 surplus Total Deposits 6 Securities loans 7 estate assets
2006 241,231 168,083 71,773 233,668 200,459 13,053 + 7,563 10,047 9,777 115 46 109 4,912
2007 236,642 162,225 72,928 235,459 201,642 13,665 + 1,183 12,196 11,270 765 46 115 4,819
2008 242,770 167,611 73,381 238,995 204,071 14,051 + 3,775 16,531 16,313 36 56 126 4,6452009 244,689 169,183 74,313 244,478 208,475 14,431 + 211 16,821 16,614 23 64 120 4,525
2010 250,133 172,767 76,173 248,076 211,852 14,343 + 2,057 19,375 18,077 1,120 73 105 4,464
2011 254,968 177,424 76,200 250,241 212,602 15,015 + 4,727 24,965 22,241 2,519 88 117 4,3792012 259,700 181,262 77,193 254,604 216,450 15,283 + 5,096 30,481 28,519 1,756 104 102 4,315
2011          Q1 60,804 41,608 18,902 62,188 53,176 3,742 − 1,384 18,063 17,069 819 74 101 4,482
         Q2 63,452 44,307 18,855 62,058 52,920 3,731 + 1,394 19,704 18,507 1,019 78 100 4,475         Q3 62,354 43,109 18,902 62,844 53,341 3,761 − 490 19,959 19,266 519 79 94 4,445         Q4 67,748 48,391 19,030 62,823 53,371 3,774 + 4,925 25,339 22,226 2,919 79 114 4,410
2012          Q1 62,038 42,411 19,318 62,883 53,747 3,779 − 845 24,261 21,839 2,219 88 116 4,366
         Q2 64,721 45,318 19,086 62,885 53,532 3,772 + 1,836 26,026 23,950 1,869 92 115 4,356         Q3 63,669 44,188 19,193 64,275 54,788 3,866 − 606 25,968 23,265 2,509 94 100 4,328         Q4 68,656 49,337 19,059 64,262 54,683 3,858 + 4,394 30,935 28,483 2,256 95 101 4,336
2013          Q1 62,211 42,779 19,173 64,193 54,940 3,871 − 1,982 28,616 26,044 2,356 106 110 4,292
         Q2 64,751 45,399 19,090 64,188 54,660 3,858 + 563 29,380 26,938 2,221 111 110 4,294         Q3 63,610 44,194 19,155 64,775 55,169 3,898 − 1,165 28,647 25,262 3,161 113 110 4,291
Sources: Federal Ministry of Labour and Social Affairs and German pension insurance cluding investment spending and proceeds. 3Including contributions for recipients
scheme. *Excluding the German pension insurance scheme for the mining, railway of government cash benefits. 4Including long-term care insurance for pensioners
and maritime industries. 1The final annual figures do not tally with the quarterly fig- until 2004 Q1. 5Largely corresponds to the sustainability reserves. End of year or
ures, as the latter are all provisional. 2Including financial compensation payments. Ex- quarter. 6 Including cash. 7 Excluding loans to other social security funds. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
60  Monthly Report
November 2013
X Public finances in Germany
 
9 Federal Employment Agency: budgetary development*
 
 
€ million
Revenue Expenditure
Deficit
of which of which offsetting
grant or
Adminis- loan from
Insolvency Central Unemploy- Short-time Re- Insolvency trative central
Contri- compen- government ment working Job integration benefit expend- Deficit/ govern-
Period Total 1 butions sation levy subscriptions Total benefit 2 benefits 3 promotion 4 payment 5 payment iture 6 surplus ment
2006 55,384 51,176 920 . 44,169 22,899 350 9,258 3,282 836 3,740 + 11,215 0
2007 42,838 32,264 674 6,468 36,196 16,934 533 8,259 1,945 696 3,896 + 6,642 −
2008 38,289 26,452 673 7,583 39,407 13,864 544 8,586 5,000 654 4,495 − 1,118 −
2009 34,254 22,046 711 7,777 48,057 17,291 5,322 9,849 4,866 1,617 5,398 − 13,804 −
2010 37,070 22,614 2,929 7,927 45,213 16,602 4,125 9,297 5,256 740 5,322 − 8,143 5,207
2011 37,563 25,433 37 8,046 37,524 13,776 1,324 8,369 4,510 683 5,090 + 40 −
2012 37,429 26,570 314 7,238 34,842 13,823 828 6,699 3,822 982 5,117 + 2,587 −
2011          Q1 10,259 5,853 46 3,666 9,583 4,157 685 2,255 − 186 1,205 + 676 −
         Q2 8,802 6,358 − 5 1,605 8,246 3,477 353 2,134 − 175 1,213 + 556 −
         Q3 7,467 6,205 − 4 305 7,450 3,177 168 1,857 26 187 1,229 + 17 −
         Q4 11,036 7,017 − 1 2,470 12,245 2,965 119 2,122 4,484 134 1,443 − 1,210 −
2012          Q1 9,709 6,175 69 2,693 8,452 3,773 449 1,924 − 0 211 1,185 + 1,257 −
         Q2 8,331 6,620 78 872 7,816 3,457 229 1,762 0 329 1,191 + 515 −
         Q3 7,501 6,508 80 70 7,539 3,307 82 1,462 368 218 1,249 − 37 −
         Q4 11,888 7,267 86 3,603 11,035 3,286 68 1,551 3,454 223 1,493 + 853 −
2013          Q1 7,762 6,429 276 245 8,612 4,301 494 1,493 . 194 1,193 − 850 −
         Q2 8,041 6,870 310 − 8,230 3,969 384 1,498 . 204 1,266 − 189 −
         Q3 7,898 6,708 303 − 7,580 3,644 109 1,420 . 228 1,284 + 318 −
Source: Federal Employment Agency. *Excluding pension fund. 1Excluding central compensation top-up payments and promotion of business start-ups. 5Until 2012.
government deficit offsetting grant or loan. 2Unemployment benefit in case of un- From 2005 to 2007: compensatory amount. 6Including collection charges to other
employment. 3Including seasonal short-time working benefits and restructuring statutory social security funds, excluding administrative expenditure within the frame-
short-time working benefits, restructuring measures and refunds of social security con- work of the basic allowance for job seekers. tributions. 4Vocational training, measures to encourage job take-up, rehabilitation,
 
 
10 Statutory health insurance scheme: budgetary development
  
€ million
Revenue 1 Expenditure 1 
of which of which
Central Thera- Adminis-
govern- peutical trative
Contri- ment Hospital Pharma- Medical Dental treatment Sickness expend- Deficit/
Period Total butions 2 funds 3 Total treatment ceuticals treatment treatment  4 and aids benefits iture 5 surplus
2006 149,929 142,183 4,200 148,297 50,327 25,835 23,896 10,364 8,303 5,708 8,319 + 1,632
2007 156,058 149,964 2,500 154,314 50,850 27,791 24,788 10,687 8,692 6,017 8,472 + 1,744
2008 162,516 155,883 2,500 161,334 52,623 29,145 25,887 10,926 9,095 6,583 8,680 + 1,182
2009 169,758 158,594 7,200 170,823 55,977 30,696 27,635 11,219 9,578 7,258 8,947 − 1,065
2010 6 179,524 160,792 15,700 175,803 56,697 30,147 28,432 11,419 10,609 7,797 9,553 + 3,721
2011 189,034 170,860 15,300 179,597 58,501 28,939 29,056 11,651 11,193 8,529 9,486 + 9,437
2012 193,291 176,366 14,000 184,289 60,157 29,156 29,682 11,749 11,477 9,171 9,711 + 9,002
2011          Q1 45,339 40,871 3,825 44,392 15,075 7,158 7,361 2,893 2,528 2,210 2,173 + 947
         Q2 46,887 42,370 3,825 44,955 14,601 7,239 7,372 3,001 2,834 2,106 2,263 + 1,931
         Q3 46,865 42,298 3,825 44,432 14,594 7,236 7,160 2,768 2,762 2,069 2,292 + 2,433
         Q4 49,866 45,291 3,825 45,878 14,418 7,382 7,161 2,997 3,117 2,125 2,682 + 3,988
2012          Q1 46,433 42,249 3,500 45,971 15,579 7,424 7,502 2,971 2,664 2,336 2,195 + 462
         Q2 47,942 43,739 3,500 46,178 15,115 7,419 7,515 3,015 2,874 2,281 2,244 + 1,764
         Q3 47,653 43,648 3,499 45,842 15,049 7,221 7,342 2,843 2,872 2,220 2,283 + 1,811
         Q4 51,162 46,727 3,501 46,576 14,548 7,305 7,465 2,989 3,065 2,333 2,936 + 4,586
2013          Q1 47,115 43,645 2,875 48,030 15,955 7,445 8,258 3,139 2,786 2,518 2,256 − 915
         Q2 48,604 45,199 2,875 48,577 15,815 7,486 8,227 3,142 3,007 2,465 2,336 + 26
Source: Federal Ministry of Health. 1The final annual figures do not tally with the penses for levying contributions incurred by other social insurance funds. Including ad-
sum of the quarterly figures, as the latter are all provisional. Excluding revenue and ministrative expenditure on disease management programmes. 6Data on individual
expenditure as part of the risk structure compensation scheme. 2Including contri- expenditure categories for 2010 only partly comparable with prior-year figures owing
butions from subsidised low-paid part-time employment. 3Federal grant and liquid- to a change in the statistical definition. 
ity assistance. 4Including dentures. 5Net, ie after deducting reimbursements for ex-

Deutsche Bundesbank
61  Monthly Report
November 2013
X Public finances in Germany
 
11 Statutory long-term care insurance scheme: budgetary development
 
 
€ million
Revenue 1 Expenditure 1 
of which
Contributions to
of which Non-cash In-patient Nursing pension insur- Administrative Deficit/
Period Total Contributions 2 Total care benefits care benefit ance scheme 3 expenditure surplus
2006 17,749 17,611 18,064 2,437 8,671 4,017 862 886 − 315
2007 18,036 17,858 18,385 2,475 8,831 4,050 861 896 − 3502008 19,785 19,608 19,163 2,605 9,054 4,225 868 941 + 6222009 21,300 21,137 20,314 2,742 9,274 4,443 878 984 + 986
2010 21,864 21,659 21,539 2,933 9,567 4,673 869 1,028 + 325
2011 22,294 22,145 21,962 3,002 9,700 4,735 881 1,034 + 3312012 23,082 22,953 22,988 3,135 9,961 5,073 881 1,083 + 95
2011          Q1 5,306 5,269 5,457 750 2,408 1,165 216 277 − 150
         Q2 5,519 5,496 5,396 713 2,417 1,173 210 263 + 123         Q3 5,513 5,486 5,551 774 2,442 1,191 221 255 − 38         Q4 5,904 5,877 5,526 742 2,442 1,216 223 240 + 378
2012          Q1 5,493 5,450 5,700 774 2,469 1,248 223 283 − 207
         Q2 5,713 5,686 5,656 758 2,478 1,254 217 276 + 57         Q3 5,726 5,694 5,774 783 2,507 1,269 219 262 − 49         Q4 6,113 6,087 5,811 791 2,511 1,310 225 265 + 302
2013          Q1 5,907 5,871 5,916 803 2,489 1,344 212 294 − 9
         Q2 6,229 6,207 6,037 827 2,498 1,436 217 289 + 192
Source: Federal Ministry of Health. 1The final annual figures do not tally with the special contributions for childless persons (0.25% of income subject to insurance
sum of the quarterly figures, as the latter are all provisional. 2Since 2005 including contributions). 3 For non-professional carers. 
 
 
12 Central government: borrowing in the 13 Central, state and local government: debt by creditor*
market
 
€ million € million
T
otal new borrowing 1 of which of which Banking system Domestic non-banks
Change Change
in money in money Period Socialmarket market (End of year Bundes- Credit security Foreign
Period Gross 
2 Net loans deposits or quarter) Total bank institutions funds Other  1 creditors pe 
2006 + 221,873 + 32,656 + 3,258 + 6,308 2006 1,533,697 4,440 496,800 72 329,585 702,800
2007 + 214,995 + 6,996 + 1,086 − 4,900 2007 1,540,381 4,440 456,900 68 317,473 761,5002008 + 233,356 + 26,208 + 6,888 + 9,036 2008 1,564,590 4,440 435,600 62 314,588 809,9002009 + 312,729 + 66,821 − 8,184 + 106 2009 1,657,842 4,440 438,700 59 317,743 896,900
2010 + 302,694 + 42,397 − 5,041 + 1,607 2010 1,732,531 4,440 400,100 21 385,070 942,900
2011 + 264,572 + 5,890 − 4,876 − 9,036 2011 1,752,476 4,440 356,800 102 411,934 979,2002012 + 263,334 + 31,728 + 6,183 + 13,375 2012 1,791,406 4,440 426,900 70 290,596 1,069,400
2011          Q1 + 76,394 + 15,958 − 607 − 5,206 2011          Q1 1,750,580 4,440 413,000 87 370,453 962,600
         Q2 + 77,158 + 10,392 − 49 + 26,625          Q2 1,763,413 4,440 405,100 82 361,391 992,400
         Q3 + 59,256 − 8,152 − 4,177 − 22,608          Q3 1,759,638 4,440 388,600 82 380,316 986,200
         Q4 + 51,764 − 12,308 − 42 − 7,847          Q4 1,752,476 4,440 356,800 102 411,934 979,200
2012          Q1 + 72,603 + 12,524 + 8,251 − 2,380 2012          Q1 1,766,324 4,440 399,000 91 353,793 1,009,000
         Q2 + 68,851 + 13,623 + 2,836 + 19,969          Q2 1,780,408 4,440 410,800 92 324,176 1,040,900
         Q3 + 60,504 − 8,627 − 8,281 − 14,911          Q3 1,772,573 4,440 430,300 92 284,242 1,053,500
         Q4 + 61,376 + 14,208 + 3,376 + 10,697          Q4 1,791,406 4,440 426,900 70 290,596 1,069,400
2013          Q1 + 62,030 + 9,538 + 1,303 − 11,879 2013          Q1 
p 1,801,773 4,440 430,100 20 260,713 1,106,500
         Q2 + 73,126 + 8,483 + 11,024 + 9,979          Q2 pe 1,805,465 4,440 424,400 23 286,303 1,090,300
         Q3 + 48,764 − 11,984 − 13,555 − 18,090
Source:  Federal  Republic  of  Germany − Finance Agency. Source:  Bundesbank  calculations  based  on  data   from  the  Federal  Statistical 
1 Including  the  Financial  Market  Stabilisation Fund,  the In- Office. * Excluding direct intergovernmental borrowing. 1 Calculated as a residual. 
vestment and  Repayment Fund  and  the  Restructuring Fund for Credit Institutions. 2 After deducting repurchases. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
62  Monthly Report
November 2013
X Public finances in Germany
 
14 Central, state and local government: debt by category*
 
 
€ million
Loans from non-banks Old debt
Direct
Treasury Five-year lending
Period discount Federal Federal Federal by credit Social Equal-
(End of year paper Treasury notes savings bonds institu- security isation
or quarter) Total (Bubills) 1 notes 2,3 (Bobls) 2 notes (Bunds) 2 Day-bond tions 4 funds Other 4 claims 5 Other 5,6 
Central, state and local government
2007 1,540,381 39,510 329,108 177,394 10,287 574,512 . 329,588 68 75,396 4,443 76
2008 1,564,590 44,620 337,511 172,037 9,649 584,144 3,174 325,648 62 83,229 4,443 73
2009 1,657,842 105,970 361,727 174,219 9,471 594,999 2,495 300,927 59 103,462 4,442 71
2010 1,732,531 87,042 391,851 195,534 8,704 628,757 1,975 302,596 21 111,609 4,440 2
2011 1,752,476 60,272 414,250 214,211 8,208 644,694 2,154 292,379 102 111,765 4,440 2
2012          Q2 1,780,408 55,392 410,186 224,607 7,518 663,495 2,137 296,110 92 116,431 4,440 2
         Q3 1,772,573 53,325 409,957 237,746 7,110 654,313 1,893 287,023 92 116,673 4,440 2
         Q4 1,791,406 57,172 417,469 234,355 6,818 666,998 1,725 288,993 70 113,364 4,440 2
2013          Q1 p 1,801,773 56,911 416,586 248,589 6,354 666,722 1,580 289,055 20 111,515 4,440 2
         Q2 pe 1,805,465 57,919 415,548 234,612 5,890 679,194 1,516 294,688 23 111,634 4,440 2
Central government7,8,9,10,11
2007 939,988 37,385 102,083 177,394 10,287 574,156 . 22,829 − 11,336 4,443 75
2008 966,197 40,795 105,684 172,037 9,649 583,930 3,174 35,291 − 11,122 4,443 72
2009 1,033,017 104,409 113,637 174,219 9,471 594,780 2,495 18,347 − 11,148 4,442 70
2010 1,075,415 85,867 126,220 195,534 8,704 628,582 1,975 13,349 − 10,743 4,440 2
2011 1,081,304 58,297 130,648 214,211 8,208 644,513 2,154 9,382 − 9,450 4,440 2
2012          Q2 1,107,451 52,578 122,937 224,607 7,518 663,314 2,137 20,827 − 9,092 4,440 2
         Q3 1,098,824 51,638 120,240 237,746 7,110 654,132 1,893 12,646 − 8,979 4,440 2
         Q4 1,113,032 56,222 117,719 234,355 6,818 666,775 1,725 16,193 − 8,784 4,440 2
2013          Q1 1,122,570 54,962 113,866 248,589 6,354 666,499 1,580 17,469 − 8,811 4,440 2
         Q2 1,131,053 56,494 111,826 234,612 5,890 678,971 1,516 28,735 − 8,568 4,440 2
         Q3 1,119,069 54,539 110,074 247,942 4,970 671,692 1,464 15,246 − 8,702 4,440 2
State government
2007 484,373 2,125 227,025 .... 194,956 2 60,264 . 1
2008 483,875 3,825 231,827 .... 179,978 3 68,241 . 1
2009 505,359 1,561 248,091 .... 167,310 8 88,389 . 1
2010 528,619 1,176 265,631 .... 167,353 1 94,459 . 1
2011 537,491 1,975 283,601 .... 154,465 62 97,387 . 1
2012          Q2 536,354 2,814 287,249 .... 143,830 52 102,409 . 1
         Q3 537,827 1,687 289,717 .... 143,606 52 102,764 . 1
         Q4 540,822 950 299,750 .... 138,684 52 101,386 . 1
2013          Q1 p 541,322 1,949 302,720 .... 137,141 2 99,510 . 1
         Q2 p 538,301 1,425 303,722 .... 133,278 5 99,871 . 1
Local government12
2007 115,920 . − . . 256 . 111,803 66 3,796 . .
2008 114,518 . − . . 214 . 110,379 60 3,866 . .
2009 119,466 . − . . 219 . 115,270 52 3,925 . .
2010 128,497 . − . . 175 . 121,895 20 6,407 . .
2011 133,681 . − . . 181 . 128,531 40 4,929 . .
2012          Q2 136,603 . − . . 181 . 131,452 40 4,930 . .
         Q3 135,922 . − . . 181 . 130,771 40 4,930 . .
         Q4 137,552 . − . . 223 . 134,116 18 3,195 . .
2013          Q1 p 137,881 . − . . 223 . 134,445 18 3,195 . .
         Q2 pe 136,111 . − . . 223 . 132,675 18 3,195 . .
Special funds7,8,13
2007 100 . − − . 100 . − − − . .
2008 − . − − . − . − − − . .
2009 − . − − . − . − − − . .
2010 − . − − . − . − − − . .
2011 − . − − . − . − − − . .
2012          Q2 − . − − . − . − − − . .
         Q3 − . − − . − . − − − . .
         Q4 − . − − . − . − − − . .
2013          Q1 − . − − . − . − − − . .
         Q2 − . − − . − . − − − . .
         Q3 − . − − . − . − − − . .
Source: Bundesbank calculations based on data from the Federal Statistical portfolios. 7In contrast to the capital market statistics, the debt incurred through the
Office. *Excluding direct intergovernmental borrowing. 1Including Treasury finan- joint issuance of Federal securities is recorded here under central government and its
cing paper. 2Excluding issuers’ holdings of their own securities. 3Treasury notes special funds in accordance with the agreed allocation ratios. 8On 1 July 2007 cen-
issued by state government include long-term notes. 4Mainly loans against bor- tral government assumed joint responsibility for the debts of the ERP Special Fund.
rowers’ notes and cash advances. Including loans raised abroad. Other loans from From that date on, the aforementioned special fund is recorded under central govern-
non-banks, including loans from public supplementary pension funds and liabilities ment. 9From December 2008, including debt of the Financial Market Stabilisation
arising from the investment assistance levy. 5Excluding offsets against outstanding Fund. 10From March 2009, including debt of the Investment and Repayment
claims. 6Old debt mainly denominated in foreign currency, in accordance with the Fund. 11From January 2011, including debt of the Restructuring Fund for Credit Insti-
London Debts Agreement, old liabilities arising from housing construction and liabil- tutions. 12Including debt of municipal special purpose associations. Data other than
ities arising from housing construction by the former GDR’s armed forces and from year-end figures have been estimated. 13ERP Special Fund (up to the end of June
housing construction in connection with the return of the troops of the former USSR 2007), German Unity Fund (up to the end of 2004) and Indemnification Fund. stationed in eastern Germany to their home country; excluding debt securities in own

Deutsche Bundesbank
63  Monthly Report
November 2013
XI Economic conditions in Germany
  
1 Origin and use of domestic product, distribution of national income
  
  
  
  2011   2012   2013
  2010   2011   2012   2010   2011   2012   Q4   Q1   Q2   Q3   Q4   Q1   Q2
Item Index 2005=100 Annual percentage change
At  constant  prices,  chained
  I Origin of domestic product
Production sector
(excluding construction) 107.0 112.8 112.3 16.5 5.5 − 0.4 − 0.4 2.2 − 0.8 − 1.4 − 1.7 − 4.9 0.4Construction 102.0 106.7 104.2 8.7 4.6 − 2.4 7.3 1.6 − 2.4 − 2.1 − 6.4 − 9.4 − 0.5Wholesale/retail trade, transportand storage, hotel and restaurantservices 101.3 104.0 104.6 − 4.9 2.7 0.6 1.3 2.8 1.1 − 0.9 − 0.3 − 2.4 1.0Information and communication 135.6 146.9 149.9 − 0.2 8.4 2.0 9.7 2.8 2.2 2.7 0.5 1.9 2.3Financial and insuranceactivities 115.4 117.9 120.0 1.3 2.2 1.8 0.9 − 0.5 0.3 1.1 6.5 2.8 − 3.5Real estate activities 107.1 110.8 112.6 0.1 3.5 1.6 4.0 1.4 1.8 1.8 1.2 1.2 1.3Business services 
1 103.8 107.0 110.1 5.5 3.1 2.9 1.9 3.4 3.0 3.1 2.0 1.7 3.5
Public services, education and
health 108.9 110.5 111.5 2.1 1.5 0.9 1.6 0.8 1.0 1.0 0.6 0.2 0.2Other services 104.9 105.2 106.7 0.3 0.2 1.4 1.3 2.2 2.0 1.7 − 0.1 − 1.3 − 0.3
Gross value added 107.6 111.1 112.0 4.4 3.3 0.8 1.6 1.9 0.8 0.4 − 0.0 − 1.5 0.7Gross domestic product 
2 106.8 110.4 111.1 4.0 3.3 0.7 1.6 1.8 0.6 0.4 0.0 − 1.6 0.9
 II Use of domestic product
Private consumption 3 103.4 105.7 106.5 1.0 2.3 0.8 1.6 1.7 0.8 0.0 0.5 − 0.4 1.1
Government consumption 110.2 111.3 112.3 1.3 1.0 1.0 1.4 1.8 0.5 1.1 0.6 0.3 1.3
Machinery and equipment 108.0 114.2 109.6 10.0 5.8 − 4.0 0.9 1.6 − 4.1 − 6.6 − 6.2 − 9.4 − 1.2Premises 104.2 112.3 110.8 3.2 7.8 − 1.4 8.5 0.6 − 1.9 − 0.8 − 3.1 − 7.9 1.2Other investment 
4 123.3 129.7 134.1 2.3 5.1 3.4 6.4 3.0 3.6 3.9 3.3 2.3 3.1
Changes in inventories 5, 6 . . . 0.4 − 0.1 − 0.5 − 0.1 − 0.3 − 0.9 − 0.6 − 0.3 0.4 0.0
Domestic use 105.9 108.9 108.6 2.4 2.8 − 0.3 2.1 1.3 − 0.8 − 0.9 − 0.7 − 1.2 1.0Net exports 
6 . . . 1.7 0.7 0.9 − 0.3 0.5 1.3 1.3 0.8 − 0.5 − 0.1
Exports 125.9 136.0 140.3 15.2 8.0 3.2 3.6 4.6 4.6 3.2 0.5 − 2.6 1.1Imports 126.5 135.8 137.8 12.5 7.4 1.4 5.0 4.0 2.2 0.7 − 1.0 − 2.0 1.4
Gross domestic product 
2 106.8 110.4 111.1 4.0 3.3 0.7 1.6 1.8 0.6 0.4 0.0 − 1.6 0.9
At  current  prices  (€ billion)
III Use of domestic product
Private consumption 3 1,435.1 1,498.4 1,533.9 3.1 4.4 2.4 3.6 3.5 2.1 1.7 2.2 1.1 2.9
Government consumption 487.2 499.6 514.4 2.5 2.5 3.0 2.8 3.3 2.4 3.1 3.1 3.4 4.2Machinery and equipment 170.6 181.2 175.0 10.2 6.2 − 3.4 1.5 2.1 − 3.5 − 5.9 − 5.5 − 8.8 − 0.6Premises 237.1 263.3 266.1 4.5 11.1 1.1 12.1 3.5 0.6 1.5 − 0.9 − 6.2 3.1Other investment 
4 27.4 28.6 29.4 1.9 4.5 2.6 5.0 1.9 2.7 2.8 2.8 2.0 2.1
Changes in inventories 5 − 2.5 3.2 − 10.3 . . . . . . . . . .
Domestic use 2,354.8 2,474.3 2,508.5 4.3 5.1 1.4 4.2 3.0 0.7 0.8 1.1 0.6 2.9Net exports 140.2 135.7 157.9 . . . . . . . . . .
Exports 1,188.6 1,321.4 1,381.0 17.9 11.2 4.5 5.6 6.0 6.0 4.5 1.7 − 2.6 0.8Imports 1,048.4 1,185.8 1,223.1 17.6 13.1 3.1 8.9 6.3 3.9 2.3 0.3 − 2.8 − 0.5
Gross domestic product 
2 2,495.0 2,609.9 2,666.4 5.1 4.6 2.2 2.8 3.1 1.9 1.9 1.8 0.4 3.4
IV Prices (2005=100)
Private consumption 106.2 108.4 110.2 2.0 2.1 1.6 2.0 1.8 1.3 1.6 1.7 1.6 1.8Gross domestic product 105.0 106.3 107.9 1.0 1.2 1.5 1.2 1.2 1.3 1.5 1.8 2.0 2.5Terms of trade 99.5 97.3 96.9 − 2.1 − 2.3 − 0.4 − 1.7 − 0.9 − 0.3 − 0.3 − 0.1 0.8 1.6
V  Distribution of national income
Compensation of employees 1,270.4 1,325.9 1,377.6 3.0 4.4 3.9 3.9 3.8 4.1 3.9 3.8 3.1 2.5Entrepreneurial and propertyincome 651.8 686.1 676.6 12.4 5.3 − 1.4 0.4 1.5 − 1.5 − 1.9 − 4.0 − 4.2 6.9
National income 1,922.2 2,012.0 2,054.3 6.0 4.7 2.1 2.8 2.9 2.3 1.8 1.5 0.4 3.9
Memo item: Gross national
income 2,549.4 2,668.9 2,730.1 4.8 4.7 2.3 3.0 3.0 2.3 2.0 1.9 0.5 3.5
Source: Federal Statistical Office; figures computed in August 2013. 1Professional, sci- stitutions serving households. 4Intangible fixed asset formation (inter alia, computer
entific, technical, administration and support service activities. 2Gross value added software and entertainment, literary or artistic originals) and cultivated assets. 5In-
plus taxes on products (netted with subsidies on products). 3Including non-profit in- cluding net increase in valuables. 6 Contribution of growth to GDP. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
64  Monthly Report
November 2013
 XI Economic conditions in Germany
 
2 Output in the production sector*
 
 
Adjusted for working-day variations  o 
Industry
by main industrial grouping of which: by economic sector
Manu-
Manu- facture of
facture of computers,basic metals Motor
electronic
and vehicles, and optical
Production Inter- Non- fabricated products Machinery trailers
sector, Construc- mediate Capital Durable durable metal and and semi- and electrical
total 1 tion 2 Energy 3 Total goods goods goods goods products equipment equipment trailers
2010=100  
  
% of total 4 100.00 11.24 10.14 78.62 31.02 33.31 2.49 11.80 10.41 10.37 12.17 11.62
Period
2009 90.2 . 96.9 89.0 86.7 88.0 91.0 97.7 85.5 85.3 90.1 79.5
2010 99.5 99.3 100.1 99.4 99.5 99.3 99.4 99.5 99.4 99.3 99.3 99.1
2011 106.2 107.0 95.5 107.5 106.1 111.4 104.0 100.7 107.9 111.0 112.7 112.1
2012 105.7 105.8 97.2 106.8 103.8 112.8 100.3 99.2 106.1 108.6 114.7 112.2
 
2012          Q3 106.8 116.1 91.5 107.5 105.7 112.3 99.4 100.4 107.1 111.1 113.6 111.3
         Q4 107.4 116.3 100.1 107.0 99.5 115.7 100.3 103.4 103.5 107.5 119.8 107.6
2013          Q1 100.3 76.3 101.5 103.6 101.5 108.3 100.5 96.6 104.5 103.9 105.7 112.6
         Q2 x 105.8 107.4 89.3 107.7 105.6 113.8 97.9 97.9 109.2 105.0 113.6 116.0
         Q3 x 107.1 116.6 91.0 107.8 105.8 112.9 97.9 101.0 108.8 106.5 112.4 113.8
 
2012          Sep 111.1 119.0 92.4 112.4 107.2 120.1 112.8 104.0 110.9 113.9 119.8 123.3
         Oct 110.4 119.9 99.3 110.5 107.9 114.2 107.3 107.4 110.8 111.6 112.3 115.3
         Nov 111.4 119.4 100.3 111.7 105.5 120.2 106.8 104.8 109.6 113.0 117.9 120.4
         Dec 100.3 109.5 100.6 98.9 85.2 112.8 86.9 98.1 90.2 97.8 129.3 87.1
2013          Jan 93.0 64.2 101.4 96.1 97.2 95.0 93.7 96.6 98.3 97.9 92.0 95.8
         Feb 97.3 72.9 96.1 101.0 97.9 107.3 98.1 92.0 101.6 99.6 104.2 113.8
         Mar 5 110.6 5 91.9 107.0 113.8 109.3 122.6 109.7 101.3 113.5 114.3 120.9 128.1
         Apr 6,x 5 104.7 5 103.5 92.2 106.5 103.8 113.0 97.6 97.2 107.4 101.7 111.5 118.4
         May x 5 103.4 5 106.0 87.3 105.1 105.2 108.4 91.7 98.1 107.1 103.0 106.9 110.9
         June x 5 109.2 5 112.6 88.3 111.4 107.7 119.9 104.5 98.4 113.0 110.4 122.3 118.8
         July x 5 107.5 5 119.2 92.4 107.7 107.6 111.5 96.4 99.9 110.2 104.9 113.2 109.0
         Aug x 5 101.6 5 112.5 89.0 101.7 101.5 104.3 85.1 98.7 102.4 102.7 102.9 104.7
         Sep x,p 5 112.2 5 118.1 e 91.7 114.0 108.3 122.8 112.3 104.3 113.8 112.0 121.2 127.8
 
Annual percentage change  
  
2009 − 15.5 . − 5.1 − 17.4 − 18.2 − 21.3 − 15.7 − 3.6 − 23.5 − 21.7 − 26.0 − 21.5
2010 + 10.3 . + 3.3 + 11.7 + 14.8 + 12.8 + 9.2 + 1.8 + 16.3 + 16.4 + 10.2 + 24.7
2011 + 6.7 + 7.8 − 4.6 + 8.1 + 6.6 + 12.2 + 4.6 + 1.2 + 8.6 + 11.8 + 13.5 + 13.1
2012 − 0.5 − 1.1 + 1.8 − 0.7 − 2.2 + 1.3 − 3.6 − 1.5 − 1.7 − 2.2 + 1.8 + 0.1
 
2012          Q3 − 0.7 + 0.0 + 3.7 − 1.2 − 3.1 + 0.5 − 3.0 − 1.0 − 2.7 − 3.9 − 0.8 + 0.5
         Q4 − 2.3 − 4.0 + 0.1 − 2.3 − 3.4 − 2.2 − 7.2 + 0.8 − 3.6 − 5.4 − 1.5 − 4.4
2013          Q1 − 2.4 − 6.5 − 3.5 − 1.8 − 2.3 − 2.1 − 2.0 + 0.2 − 0.9 − 3.3 − 4.8 − 3.3
         Q2 x − 0.2 − 1.7 − 2.9 + 0.3 − 0.7 + 1.0 − 1.1 + 1.5 + 0.9 − 3.1 − 0.7 + 2.3
         Q3 x + 0.2 + 0.4 − 0.5 + 0.3 + 0.1 + 0.5 − 1.5 + 0.6 + 1.6 − 4.1 − 1.1 + 2.2
 
2012          Sep − 0.4 + 0.6 + 5.1 − 1.0 − 3.1 + 0.6 − 2.3 + 0.1 − 1.7 − 4.6 − 0.3 + 0.3
         Oct − 2.6 − 2.2 + 2.0 − 3.2 − 3.3 − 4.0 − 8.4 + 1.0 − 4.2 − 5.3 − 2.4 − 7.8
         Nov − 3.0 − 4.3 + 0.7 − 3.1 − 3.9 − 2.8 − 7.5 − 1.3 − 5.2 − 6.1 − 3.8 − 2.4
         Dec − 1.3 − 5.7 − 2.3 − 0.5 − 2.9 + 0.4 − 5.0 + 3.0 − 0.8 − 4.6 + 1.6 − 2.5
2013          Jan − 2.7 − 6.8 − 4.3 − 2.0 − 2.4 − 3.5 − 3.9 + 3.5 − 1.8 − 3.2 − 4.5 − 8.1
         Feb − 1.6 + 5.7 − 8.1 − 1.5 − 2.6 − 0.9 − 1.8 + 0.0 − 1.4 − 5.0 − 1.7 − 2.9
         Mar 5 − 2.9 5 − 14.0 + 2.0 − 2.0 − 2.0 − 2.1 − 0.4 − 2.6 + 0.4 − 1.9 − 7.5 + 0.2
         Apr 6,x 5 + 0.6 5 − 1.3 − 3.0 + 1.2 − 1.1 + 3.0 − 0.4 + 3.1 + 1.8 − 3.2 + 1.0 + 4.6
         May x 5 − 1.9 5 − 2.4 − 4.8 − 1.5 − 0.8 − 2.7 − 7.1 + 1.1 − 1.0 − 3.6 − 4.7 − 1.2
         June x 5 + 0.7 5 − 1.5 − 0.7 + 1.3 − 0.2 + 2.6 + 4.0 + 0.3 + 1.8 − 2.6 + 1.4 + 3.4
         July x 5 − 1.1 5 + 0.5 + 1.8 − 1.6 − 0.7 − 3.2 − 1.2 + 0.8 + 0.4 − 7.6 − 3.7 − 5.1
         Aug x 5 + 0.9 5 + 1.5 − 2.5 + 1.2 + 0.1 + 2.7 − 3.2 + 0.7 + 1.9 − 3.0 − 0.6 + 9.3
         Sep x,p 5 + 1.0 5 − 0.8 e − 0.8 + 1.4 + 1.0 + 2.2 − 0.4 + 0.3 + 2.6 − 1.7 + 1.2 + 3.6
Source of the unadjusted figures: Federal Statistical Office. *For explanatory notes, Statistical Office (on average +3%). 6From April 2013, the values submitted by the re-
see Statistical Supplement Seasonally adjusted business statistics, Tables II.10 to porting enterprises are deflated by industrial producer prices and construction prices
II.12. oUsing the Census X-12-ARIMA method, version 0.2.8. 1Until December with 2010 as the base year. Previously, with 2005 as the base year. xAdjusted in ad-
2009 excluding, from January 2010 including specialised construction activi- vance by the Federal Statistical Office, by way of estimates, to the results of the quar-ties.2Data available from 2010. 3From January 2010 including electric power gene- terly production survey (from July onward). Specialised construction industry (and
ration from renewable resources (wind- and solar power stations). 4Weights from therefore construction and total) adjusted to the results of the quarterly survey for
January 2010 onwards: Share of gross value added at factor cost of the production specialised construction industry (from April onward). eUnadjusted figure estimated
sector in the base year 2010. 5Preliminary; preadjusted on the basis of estimations by the Federal Statistical Office. 
to the results of the total annual survey in the construction sector by the Federal

Deutsche Bundesbank
65  Monthly Report
November 2013
XI Economic conditions in Germany
 
3 Orders received by industry *
 
 
Adjusted for working-day variations  o 
Industry Intermediate goods Capital goods Consumer goods Durable goods Non-durable goods
Annual Annual Annual Annual Annual Annual
percent- percent- percent- percent- percent- percent-age age age age age age
Period 2010=100 change 2010=100 change 2010=100 change 2010=100 change 2010=100 change 2010=100 change
Total
2008 105.5 − 6.1 105.6 − 3.2 105.1 − 8.4 107.8 − 3.4 101.5 − 6.2 110.1 − 2.5
2009 79.8 − 24.4 77.8 − 26.3 79.4 − 24.5 94.6 − 12.2 86.8 − 14.5 97.2 − 11.7
2010 99.5 + 24.7 99.5 + 27.9 99.5 + 25.3 99.6 + 5.3 99.5 + 14.6 99.6 + 2.5
2011 109.9 + 10.5 109.1 + 9.6 111.2 + 11.8 103.8 + 4.2 105.3 + 5.8 103.3 + 3.7
2012 106.9 − 2.7 104.2 − 4.5 109.2 − 1.8 103.8 + 0.0 99.4 − 5.6 105.3 + 1.9
2012          Sep 
104.7 − 2.4 100.5 − 5.4 107.2 − 0.7 107.2 − 0.5 111.6 − 6.9 105.6 + 2.1
         Oct 108.1 − 0.3 103.9 − 2.3 111.0 + 0.7 107.8 + 1.4 102.4 − 9.5 109.7 + 5.5
         Nov 107.2 + 0.1 103.1 − 1.2 110.6 + 1.0 104.0 + 0.0 97.8 − 8.3 106.1 + 3.0
         Dec 
102.0 − 1.0 89.7 − 3.3 112.1 + 0.4 92.5 + 1.0 83.4 − 5.0 95.6 + 2.9
2013          Jan 103.4 − 1.9 103.9 − 5.6 103.3 + 0.9 100.9 − 1.2 95.9 − 3.8 102.6 − 0.4
         Feb 106.2 − 0.1 101.6 − 4.2 109.3 + 2.6 106.4 + 0.6 93.1 − 2.0 111.0 + 1.3
         Mar 119.1 − 0.3 114.3 + 0.3 123.9 − 0.3 109.1 − 3.5 109.1 − 2.7 109.0 − 3.9
         Apr 105.9 − 0.5 102.7 − 3.6 108.6 + 0.6 101.7 + 6.5 98.6 − 0.3 102.7 + 8.9
         May 104.9 − 2.3 103.0 − 3.8 106.9 − 1.7 100.6 + 0.2 95.7 − 3.3 102.3 + 1.3
         June 115.6 + 4.8 104.2 − 1.7 125.5 + 9.7 102.2 + 0.0 106.0 + 5.3 100.9 − 1.8
         July
108.9 + 1.6 104.1 − 1.3 112.3 + 3.8 109.6 − 0.1 97.3 − 2.8 113.8 + 0.6
         Aug 99.9 + 2.1 95.9 − 1.8 102.3 + 5.7 103.4 − 1.6 90.9 − 1.8 107.7 − 1.6
         Sep p 112.2 + 7.2 102.0 + 1.5 119.7 + 11.7 109.5 + 2.1 108.4 − 2.9 109.9 + 4.1
From the domestic market
2008 107.7 − 4.7 104.6 − 2.3 109.3 − 7.2 116.8 − 2.8 113.4 − 2.2 118.0 − 3.0
2009 83.8 − 22.2 77.2 − 26.2 88.0 − 19.5 98.2 − 15.9 95.1 − 16.1 99.2 − 15.9
2010 99.5 + 18.7 99.5 + 28.9 99.5 + 13.1 99.6 + 1.4 99.4 + 4.5 99.6 + 0.4
2011 109.8 + 10.4 109.7 + 10.3 110.8 + 11.4 103.5 + 3.9 110.2 + 10.9 101.1 + 1.5
2012 104.0 − 5.3 103.3 − 5.8 105.4 − 4.9 99.2 − 4.2 101.9 − 7.5 98.2 − 2.9
2012          Sep 102.3 − 5.3 100.9 − 5.0 103.6 − 4.9 102.9 − 9.7 114.7 − 14.5 98.7 − 7.6
         Oct 103.2 − 4.4 102.7 − 5.5 103.4 − 3.4 104.5 − 4.4 112.1 − 9.9 101.8 − 2.1
         Nov 104.1 − 4.6 103.9 − 3.3 105.1 − 5.7 98.7 − 6.2 103.6 − 11.7 97.0 − 3.9
         Dec 92.6 − 3.6 86.5 − 2.0 100.4 − 4.7 81.8 − 6.0 80.4 − 9.5 82.3 − 4.7
2013          Jan 101.9 − 3.7 103.9 − 4.8 100.6 − 2.8 97.1 − 2.3 97.6 − 8.1 96.9 − 0.1
         Feb 103.3 − 1.1 101.3 − 1.9 105.1 − 0.3 104.1 − 2.5 96.9 − 5.6 106.6 − 1.6
         Mar 115.4 − 0.9 113.2 + 0.3 119.2 − 1.7 105.4 − 2.8 109.2 − 6.2 104.0 − 1.5
         Apr 102.5 − 3.6 101.2 − 6.0 105.0 − 1.8 94.6 + 0.6 97.3 − 3.0 93.6 + 2.0
         May 100.2 − 4.4 101.6 − 4.3 99.7 − 5.1 94.4 − 0.7 91.2 − 5.4 95.5 + 0.8
         June 106.3 + 0.9 102.6 − 1.3 111.6 + 2.9 96.4 + 2.0 98.1 + 3.7 95.8 + 1.4
         July 106.0 + 0.3 103.8 − 1.1 108.6 + 1.5 104.0 + 1.4 94.5 − 4.0 107.3 + 3.1
         Aug 100.2 + 3.9 96.6 − 1.0 103.8 + 10.0 100.8 − 0.5 90.1 − 6.8 104.6 + 1.7
         Sep p 105.7 + 3.3 101.0 + 0.1 110.9 + 7.0 103.2 + 0.3 105.6 − 7.9 102.3 + 3.6
From abroad
2008 103.7 − 7.2 106.8 − 4.1 102.5 − 9.2 100.2 − 4.0 91.2 − 10.0 103.4 − 2.0
2009 76.7 − 26.0 78.5 − 26.5 74.1 − 27.7 91.5 − 8.7 79.5 − 12.8 95.6 − 7.5
2010 99.6 + 29.9 99.6 + 26.9 99.6 + 34.4 99.6 + 8.9 99.5 + 25.2 99.6 + 4.2
2011 109.9 + 10.3 108.4 + 8.8 111.4 + 11.8 104.1 + 4.5 101.0 + 1.5 105.2 + 5.6
2012 109.2 − 0.6 105.2 − 3.0 111.6 + 0.2 107.7 + 3.5 97.3 − 3.7 111.3 + 5.8
2012          Sep 106.6 − 0.1 100.1 − 5.7 109.5 + 1.9 110.8 + 8.2 108.9 + 1.3 111.4 + 10.7
         Oct 112.1 + 3.1 105.4 + 1.9 115.7 + 3.2 110.7 + 6.6 94.0 − 8.9 116.5 + 12.0
         Nov 109.8 + 4.1 102.2 + 1.5 114.0 + 5.3 108.5 + 5.4 92.8 − 4.6 113.9 + 8.7
         Dec 109.7 + 1.0 93.4 − 4.9 119.3 + 3.2 101.6 + 6.3 86.0 − 1.0 106.9 + 8.5
2013          Jan 104.6 − 0.4 104.0 − 6.5 105.0 + 3.1 104.1 − 0.4 94.5 + 0.4 107.4 − 0.6
         Feb 108.5 + 0.6 102.0 − 6.8 111.9 + 4.4 108.4 + 3.2 89.7 + 1.6 114.8 + 3.7
         Mar 122.1 + 0.1 115.5 + 0.3 126.8 + 0.5 112.2 − 4.2 109.0 + 0.6 113.3 − 5.7
         Apr 108.6 + 2.0 104.5 − 0.5 110.8 + 2.0 107.8 + 11.4 99.8 + 2.1 110.5 + 14.5
         May 108.8 − 0.7 104.6 − 3.2 111.3 + 0.3 105.9 + 0.9 99.6 − 1.6 108.0 + 1.5
         June 123.1 + 7.7 106.0 − 2.2 134.0 + 13.5 107.1 − 1.6 112.9 + 6.4 105.2 − 4.1
         July 111.3 + 2.6 104.4 − 1.6 114.6 + 5.2 114.3 − 1.3 99.7 − 1.9 119.4 − 1.1
         Aug 99.7 + 0.8 95.1 − 2.8 101.3 + 3.1 105.6 − 2.5 91.6 + 2.8 110.4 − 4.0
         Sep p 117.4 + 10.1 103.1 + 3.0 125.2 + 14.3 114.9 + 3.7 110.9 + 1.8 116.3 + 4.4
Source of the unadjusted figures: Federal Statistical Office. *For explanatory notes, II.16. o Using the Census X-12-ARIMA method, version 0.2.8. 
see Statistical Supplement Seasonally adjusted business statistics, Tables II.14 to

Deutsche Bundesbank
66  Monthly Report
November 2013
 XI Economic conditions in Germany
 
4 Orders received by construction *   
 
 
Adjusted for working-day variations  o 
Breakdown by type of construction Breakdown by client  1 
 Building    
Housing Industrial Public sector Civil Public
Total Total construction construction construction engineering Industry sector
Annual Annual Annual Annual Annual Annual Annual Annual
percent- percent- percent- percent- percent- percent- percent- percent-
age age age age age age age age
Period change change change change change change change change 2010 = 100 2010 = 100 2010 = 100 2010 = 100 2010 = 100 2010 = 100 2010 = 100 2010 = 100
2009 98.3 − 5.3 94.2 − 12.2 90.9 − 0.4 95.3 − 21.3 97.0 − 1.1 102.5 + 2.2 94.3 − 14.9 105.4 + 3.6
2010 99.7 + 1.4 99.7 + 5.8 99.6 + 9.6 99.7 + 4.6 99.9 + 3.0 99.7 − 2.7 99.7 + 5.7 99.8 − 5.3
2011 107.2 + 7.5 112.2 + 12.5 120.5 + 21.0 113.6 + 13.9 91.8 − 8.1 102.2 + 2.5 112.9 + 13.2 96.1 − 3.7
2012 114.5 + 6.8 121.4 + 8.2 132.4 + 9.9 124.2 + 9.3 91.6 − 0.2 107.6 + 5.3 118.5 + 5.0 103.2 + 7.4
 
2012          Aug 125.2 + 10.8 140.7 + 20.3 136.8 + 9.2 150.1 + 22.9 120.5 + 41.1 109.8 + 0.7 133.8 + 12.4 111.8 + 9.7
         Sep 120.1 + 2.7 129.4 + 8.6 138.7 + 12.5 131.1 + 6.2 106.0 + 7.6 110.8 − 3.3 126.8 + 5.3 105.8 − 4.5
         Oct 132.1 + 27.5 131.8 + 14.9 136.1 + 10.7 137.6 + 13.3 105.9 + 35.2 132.4 + 43.1 138.1 + 19.7 124.3 + 48.3
         Nov 91.4 − 6.0 101.0 − 5.7 122.0 + 2.8 98.7 − 7.4 66.7 − 22.4 81.8 − 6.3 94.1 − 10.6 76.3 − 5.1         Dec 93.4 − 3.0 108.1 + 2.2 122.6 + 2.5 113.5 + 9.6 63.8 − 25.0 78.7 − 9.3 105.2 − 0.7 69.6 − 9.7
2013          Jan 82.1 + 0.4 90.4 − 0.2 102.0 + 2.4 92.6 + 1.3 61.0 − 13.6 73.8 + 1.1 86.5 − 6.8 69.5 + 9.6
         Feb 98.2 + 2.1 100.8 − 1.3 108.3 − 3.6 104.3 + 3.2 75.6 − 10.7 95.7 + 6.0 104.3 + 5.2 88.0 + 1.6
         Mar 131.1 − 3.4 133.2 − 9.7 151.2 + 2.5 131.3 − 17.7 103.3 − 7.6 129.1 + 4.1 129.9 − 8.1 124.3 − 0.7
         Apr 123.5 − 0.6 130.2 + 2.8 145.2 + 2.2 125.5 − 4.1 114.4 + 36.7 116.9 − 4.2 117.8 − 3.7 120.6 + 1.2
         May 125.5 + 5.6 135.3 + 14.0 142.1 + 9.5 140.4 + 16.6 106.7 + 16.1 115.8 − 2.8 127.2 + 6.4 117.1 + 3.0         June 145.9 + 11.7 157.6 + 15.3 182.0 + 12.0 158.1 + 22.0 108.0 + 0.8 134.2 + 7.8 151.3 + 18.5 126.0 + 4.3
         July 142.4 + 14.4 141.9 + 14.6 158.2 + 14.1 142.3 + 12.2 108.9 + 26.8 142.8 + 14.1 133.0 + 9.4 145.5 + 19.4
         Aug 123.8 − 1.1 124.1 − 11.8 144.8 + 5.8 121.1 − 19.3 92.4 − 23.3 123.5 + 12.5 119.3 − 10.8 119.9 + 7.2
Source of the unadjusted figures: Federal Statistical Office. *Values exclusive of adjusted business statistics, Tables II.21. oUsing the Census X-12-ARIMA method,
value-added tax; for explanatory notes, see Statistical Supplement Seasonally version 0.2.8. 1 Excluding housing construction orders. 
 
 
5 Retail trade turnover, sales of motor vehicles *
  
Adjusted for calendar variations o 
Retail trade
of which: by enterprises main product range  1 
Construction Retail sale of
and flooring pharmaceutical Wholesale
Textiles, Information materials, and medical and retail trade
clothing and household goods, cosmetic and repair of
Food, beverages, foodwear and communications appliances, and toilet motor vehicles
Total tobacco 2 leather goods equipment furniture articles and motorcycles  3 
At current At prices in
prices year 2010 At current prices
Annual Annual Annual Annual Annual Annual Annual Annual
percent- percent- percent- percent- percent- percent- percent- percent-
age age age age age age age age
Period change change change change change change change change 2010 = 100 2010 = 100 2010 = 100 2010 = 100 2010 = 100 2010 = 100 2010 = 100 2010 = 100
2009 97.7 − 3.4 98.8 − 2.8 99.4 − 1.9 95.6 − 3.1 97.0 + 0.6 97.6 − 2.7 96.5 + 2.7 104.2 + 1.1
2010 100.1 + 2.5 100.0 + 1.2 100.2 + 0.8 99.8 + 4.4 99.9 + 3.0 100.0 + 2.5 100.2 + 3.8 99.3 − 4.7
2011 102.6 + 2.5 101.1 + 1.1 102.5 + 2.3 101.6 + 1.8 99.4 − 0.5 103.7 + 3.7 100.5 + 0.3 107.0 + 7.8
2012 4 104.5 + 1.9 100.9 − 0.2 105.2 + 2.6 102.2 + 0.6 98.9 − 0.5 104.5 + 0.8 100.4 − 0.1 106.2 − 0.7
 
2012          Sep 103.4 + 1.9 99.3 − 0.1 102.4 + 4.3 112.5 + 8.7 93.2 − 0.3 103.7 + 0.9 95.9 − 4.1 106.2 − 2.1
         Oct 108.6 + 0.6 104.0 − 1.5 106.8 + 2.0 117.3 − 5.1 98.7 − 1.3 112.0 − 0.4 101.9 − 0.7 113.0 − 4.8
         Nov 109.4 + 2.5 104.8 + 0.5 106.9 + 2.9 103.7 − 1.9 108.2 + 0.0 112.0 + 0.4 103.3 − 0.3 109.5 − 4.6
         Dec 121.3 − 1.1 116.8 − 3.1 122.3 + 0.9 121.7 − 2.6 147.5 − 4.6 106.6 − 6.0 108.1 − 6.4 94.1 − 4.7
2013          Jan 97.8 + 4.3 94.5 + 2.8 99.8 + 5.5 88.5 + 1.8 100.6 − 1.8 89.4 + 0.1 101.1 + 3.8 85.9 − 4.1
         Feb 93.4 + 2.2 89.6 + 1.0 97.9 + 3.8 77.3 + 1.3 85.0 − 2.0 88.5 + 0.3 96.8 + 2.7 91.0 − 5.6
         Mar 108.3 + 0.9 103.1 − 0.4 111.6 + 4.5 98.3 − 9.8 97.7 + 2.3 107.9 − 6.4 106.1 + 1.7 114.5 − 8.4
         Apr 107.3 + 1.8 101.9 + 0.4 108.4 + 1.5 111.2 + 5.4 85.1 − 6.1 108.4 − 1.4 102.9 + 1.3 112.1 − 0.5
         May 108.0 + 2.9 102.5 + 1.4 110.2 + 2.8 105.0 + 2.3 83.7 − 2.9 107.8 + 0.9 102.2 + 1.5 110.6 + 0.1         June 104.6 + 1.4 99.4 − 0.3 110.0 + 4.2 100.5 + 5.9 85.1 − 10.5 101.7 + 0.1 99.5 + 0.9 111.0 − 0.3
         July 106.3 + 2.1 101.5 + 0.2 111.6 + 6.5 102.9 + 0.4 86.2 − 6.9 103.3 − 1.6 106.6 + 3.9 107.0 − 1.2
         Aug 103.4 + 1.8 99.0 + 0.7 108.0 + 4.0 98.0 + 5.5 88.8 − 1.8 98.1 − 5.8 99.8 + 3.7 98.7 + 0.8         Sep 104.7 + 1.3 99.6 + 0.3 104.0 + 1.6 114.5 + 1.8 93.9 + 0.8 102.0 − 1.6 101.7 + 6.0 . .
Source of the unadjusted figures: Federal Statistical Office. *Excluding value-added advance returns for turnover tax (Umsatzsteuervoranmeldung) and primary data
tax;  For explanatory notes, see Statistical Supplement Seasonally adjusted business collection, before based on sample survey. 4Figures from January 2012 are provision-
statistics, Tables II.24. oUsing the Census X-12-ARIMA method, version 0.2.8. 1In al, in some cases revised, and particularly uncertain in recent months owing to esti-
stores. 2Including stalls and markets. 3From January 2011 based on data from mates for missing reports. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
67  Monthly Report
November 2013
 XI Economic conditions in Germany
 
6 Labour market * 
 
 
 
Employment 1 Employment subject to social contributions  2,3 Short time workers 4 Unemployment 5 
Total of which: of which: of which:
Solely
jobs
Services exempt Recipients
excluding from of insured
Produc- temporary social unem- Unem- Temporary
tion employ- employ- contri- Cyclically ployment ploy- Vacan-
 Annual Annual sector ment ment butions 2 Total induced Total benefits ment cies, 5,7 
Thou- percentage Thou- rate 5,6 thou- percentage
sands change sands change Thousands in % sands
2008 40,348 + 1.2 27,510 + 2.1 8,659 17,958 679 4,866 102 58 3,258 1,006 7.8 389
2009 40,372 + 0.1 27,493 − 0.1 8,521 18,210 549 4,905 1,144 1,078 8 3,415 8 1,190 8 8.1 301
2010 40,587 + 0.5 27,757 + 1.0 8,426 18,438 679 4,883 503 429 3,238 1,075 7.7 3592011 41,152 + 1.4 28,440 + 2.5 8,583 18,836 798 4,865 148 100 2,976 892 7.1 4662012 41,607 + 1.1 28,991 + 1.9 8,731 19,250 775 4,805 112 67 2,897 902 6.8 478
2010          Q3 40,791 + 0.9 27,886 + 1.5 8,469 18,454 740 4,889 265 239 3,132 1,003 7.5 395
         Q4 41,058 + 1.1 28,242 + 1.9 8,548 18,710 767 4,905 242 188 2,959 920 7.0 392
2011          Q1 40,588 + 1.4 27,944 + 2.3 8,428 18,578 740 4,852 291 158 3,290 1,088 7.8 412
         Q2 41,064 + 1.4 28,266 + 2.4 8,535 18,721 786 4,867 121 107 2,977 850 7.1 470         Q3 41,343 + 1.4 28,566 + 2.4 8,638 18,862 836 4,865 76 64 2,893 843 6.9 497         Q4 41,611 + 1.3 28,983 + 2.6 8,732 19,184 830 4,874 102 72 2,743 787 6.5 486
2012          Q1 41,145 + 1.4 28,638 + 2.5 8,623 19,036 760 4,797 201 82 3,074 998 7.3 472
         Q2 41,545 + 1.2 28,860 + 2.1 8,696 19,149 773 4,798 77 65 2,876 847 6.8 499         Q3 41,779 + 1.1 29,077 + 1.8 8,770 19,265 799 4,803 56 43 2,856 885 6.7 493         Q4 41,961 + 0.8 29,391 + 1.4 8,835 19,550 767 4,823 113 76 2,782 878 6.6 446
2013          Q1
r 41,413 r + 0.7 29,016 + 1.3 8,689 19,405 702 4,765 234 102 3,131 1,109 7.4 427
         Q2 r 41,796 r + 0.6 9 29,219 9 + 1.2 9 8,738 9 19,512 9 726 9 4,786 ... 9 87 2,941 945 10 6.8 438
         Q3 11 42,032 11 + 0.6 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 2,903 934 6.7 445
2010          June 40,626 + 0.7 27,710 + 1.2 8,414 18,365 707 4,916 420 390 3,148 983 7.5 370
         July 40,658 + 0.8 27,691 + 1.4 8,419 18,320 732 4,915 313 286 3,186 1,029 7.6 391         Aug 40,745 + 0.9 27,976 + 1.6 8,493 18,508 752 4,864 244 219 3,183 1,030 7.6 397         Sep 40,971 + 0.9 28,269 + 1.7 8,573 18,700 766 4,859 237 214 3,026 948 7.2 398         Oct 41,116 + 1.0 28,296 + 1.8 8,566 18,738 769 4,886 231 209 2,941 907 7.0 401         Nov 41,128 + 1.1 28,277 + 2.0 8,562 18,723 779 4,932 215 194 2,927 903 6.9 395         Dec 40,931 + 1.1 28,033 + 2.0 8,460 18,635 743 4,931 279 162 3,011 949 7.1 380
2011          Jan 40,527 + 1.3 27,863 + 2.3 8,399 18,540 732 4,842 322 177 3,345 1,146 7.9 375
         Feb 40,559 + 1.5 27,912 + 2.5 8,416 18,560 738 4,831 305 155 3,313 1,107 7.9 418         Mar 40,679 + 1.5 28,080 + 2.5 8,477 18,632 759 4,836 246 143 3,211 1,010 7.6 442         Apr 40,908 + 1.5 28,214 + 2.4 8,518 18,703 771 4,857 133 117 3,078 907 7.3 461         May 41,092 + 1.4 28,354 + 2.5 8,559 18,768 798 4,880 122 107 2,960 839 7.0 470         June 41,192 + 1.4 28,381 + 2.4 8,580 18,753 821 4,894 110 96 2,893 804 6.9 480         July 41,209 + 1.4 28,357 + 2.4 8,591 18,712 831 4,890 81 68 2,939 859 7.0 492         Aug 41,303 + 1.4 28,658 + 2.4 8,660 18,922 843 4,840 71 59 2,945 867 7.0 497         Sep 41,518 + 1.3 28,984 + 2.5 8,746 19,149 845 4,833 76 65 2,796 802 6.6 502         Oct 41,656 + 1.3 29,039 + 2.6 8,750 19,206 839 4,851 81 70 2,737 778 6.5 500         Nov 41,679 + 1.3 29,024 + 2.6 8,744 19,207 835 4,901 85 76 2,713 769 6.4 492         Dec 41,498 + 1.4 28,787 + 2.7 8,655 19,128 784 4,909 140 72 2,780 813 6.6 467
2012          Jan 41,140 + 1.5 28,580 + 2.6 8,613 18,995 758 4,813 206 82 3,084 1,011 7.3 452
         Feb 41,091 + 1.3 28,580 + 2.4 8,601 19,012 752 4,743 230 87 3,110 1,028 7.4 473         Mar 41,203 + 1.3 28,719 + 2.3 8,653 19,077 758 4,763 167 78 3,028 955 7.2 491         Apr 41,395 + 1.2 28,836 + 2.2 8,687 19,144 765 4,784 83 71 2,963 893 7.0 499         May 41,584 + 1.2 28,924 + 2.0 8,713 19,185 780 4,812 77 65 2,855 831 6.7 499         June 41,655 + 1.1 28,921 + 1.9 8,723 19,163 792 4,834 71 58 2,809 817 6.6 499         July 41,689 + 1.2 28,910 + 2.0 8,730 19,137 806 4,829 54 42 2,876 885 6.8 500         Aug 41,740 + 1.1 29,154 + 1.7 8,789 19,321 802 4,777 47 34 2,905 910 6.8 493         Sep 41,908 + 0.9 29,414 + 1.5 8,863 19,512 789 4,775 66 54 2,788 862 6.5 485         Oct 42,044 + 0.9 29,470 + 1.5 8,863 19,579 782 4,803 85 70 2,753 846 6.5 468         Nov 42,034 + 0.9 29,424 + 1.4 8,840 19,580 767 4,851 98 85 2,751 864 6.5 451         Dec 41,804 + 0.7 29,143 + 1.2 8,739 19,471 715 4,854 156 72 2,840 924 6.7 421
2013          Jan 
r 41,390 r + 0.6 28,965 + 1.3 8,678 19,372 699 4,762 234 104 3,138 1,121 7.4 405
         Feb r 41,388 r + 0.7 28,981 + 1.4 8,674 19,387 700 4,736 245 104 3,156 1,132 7.4 431
         Mar r 41,461 r + 0.6 29,062 + 1.2 8,692 19,439 700 4,740 222 98 3,098 1,072 7.3 444
         Apr r 41,638 r + 0.6 29,201 + 1.3 8,735 19,505 719 4,761 113 100 3,020 1,001 7.1 441
         May r 41,839 r + 0.6 9 29,290 9 + 1.3 9 8,754 9 19,551 9 735 9 4,812 ... 9 74 2,937 935 10 6.8 437
         June r 41,910 r + 0.6 9 29,273 9 + 1.2 9 8,759 9 19,518 9 749 9 4,829 ... 9 87 2,865 897 6.6 437
         July r 41,946 r + 0.6 9 29,270 9 + 1.2 9 8,767 9 19,486 9 773 9 4,838 ... 9 66 2,914 943 6.8 444
         Aug r 41,991 r + 0.6 9 29,507 9 + 1.2 9 8,822 9 19,663 9 776 9 4,783 ... 9 56 2,946 956 6.8 445
         Sep 11 42,158 11 + 0.6 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 2,849 904 6.6 446
         Oct ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 2,801 870 6.5 439
Sources: Federal Statistical Office; Federal Employment Agency. *Annual and private employment agencies. 9Unadjusted figures estimated by the Federal Employ-
quarterly figures: averages; calculated by the Bundesbank; deviations from the offi- ment Agency. In 2011 and 2012, the estimated values for Germany deviated from
cial figures are due to rounding. 1Workplace concept; averages. 2Monthly figures: the final data by a maximum of 0.2 % for employees subject to social contributions,
end of month. 3From January 2012, excluding all persons taking up federal by a maximum of 1.0 % for persons solely in jobs exempt from social contributions,
voluntary service or a year of social or ecological work. 4Number within a given and by a maximum of 30.8 % for cyclically induced short-time work. 10From May
month. 5Mid-month level. 6Relative to the total civilian labour force. 7Excluding 2013, calculated on the basis of new labour force figures. 11Initial preliminary esti-
government-assisted forms of employment and seasonal jobs, including jobs located mate by the Federal Statistical Office. abroad. 8From May 2009, unemployed excluding persons formally on the books of

Deutsche Bundesbank
68  Monthly Report
November 2013
 XI Economic conditions in Germany
 
7 Prices
 
 
 
Consumer price index HWWI
Indices of Index of World Market
of which foreign trade prices Prices of Raw Materials 4 
Other Index of
durable producer
and non- prices of
durable industrial Index of
consumer Services Con- products producer
goods excluding prices of sold on the struction
excluding house House price domestic agricultural Other raw
Total Food energy 1 Energy 1 rents 2 rents 2 index market 3 products 3 Exports Imports Energy 5 materials  6 
Period 2010 = 100 2005 = 100 2010 = 100
Index level  
  
2008 98.6 99.9 98.1 101.7 98.0 97.8 97.9 102.8 124.3 99.2 102.1 109.7 92.0
2009 98.9 98.6 99.4 96.2 99.5 98.8 99.1 98.5 100.7 97.0 93.4 72.8 74.5
2010 100.0 100.0 100.0 100.0 100.0 100.0 100.0 100.0 114.9 100.0 100.0 100.0 100.0
2011 7 102.1 102.2 100.8 110.1 101.0 101.3 102.9 105.3 129.7 103.3 106.4 132.2 113.5
2012 7 104.1 105.7 102.0 116.4 102.4 102.5 105.7 107.0 135.8 104.9 108.7 141.9 110.4
 
2011          Dec 102.9 103.2 101.3 111.5 102.1 101.8 105.6 128.7 103.7 107.4 134.9 103.7
2012          Jan 7 102.8 104.3 100.8 113.7 100.9 102.0 106.1 127.8 104.4 108.7 141.2 109.4
         Feb 103.5 105.6 101.2 115.4 101.9 102.1 104.8 106.5 130.6 104.7 109.5 148.4 109.3
         Mar 104.1 106.0 102.1 117.2 102.2 102.1 107.1 132.9 104.8 110.0 155.0 110.5
         Apr 103.9 105.7 102.1 117.7 101.3 102.2 107.3 134.0 105.1 109.7 148.6 110.2
         May 103.9 105.4 102.3 115.9 101.7 102.3 105.5 107.0 132.1 105.0 109.2 140.5 110.1
         June 103.7 105.8 101.9 114.2 102.0 102.4 106.6 130.0 104.8 107.7 124.5 108.9
         July 104.1 105.2 101.2 115.4 103.6 102.5 106.6 130.8 105.0 108.2 136.5 116.8
         Aug 104.5 105.1 101.6 118.0 103.5 102.6 106.0 107.0 134.3 105.2 109.2 149.1 114.2
         Sep 104.6 105.0 102.5 119.3 102.6 102.7 107.3 r 138.2 105.2 108.5 143.2 111.9
         Oct 104.6 105.7 103.0 118.1 102.4 102.8 107.4 140.0 105.0 108.0 139.9 108.7
         Nov 104.7 107.0 102.8 116.7 102.7 102.9 106.3 107.4 142.7 105.1 108.0 138.5 107.0
         Dec 105.0 108.0 102.7 115.5 104.0 102.9 107.1 141.7 104.8 107.4 136.2 106.5
2013          Jan 104.5 109.0 101.7 118.1 101.9 103.2 107.7 141.3 104.8 107.3 138.6 106.2
         Feb 105.1 108.9 102.2 119.5 103.0 103.3 107.1 107.5 141.7 104.7 107.6 141.7 106.9
         Mar 105.6 109.9 103.2 117.8 103.7 103.4 107.2 r 141.1 104.9 107.6 136.3 107.7
         Apr 105.1 110.0 103.3 118.2 101.8 103.5 107.1 142.1 104.7 106.4 127.8 104.0
         May 105.5 111.1 103.2 117.7 103.2 103.6 107.7 106.8 142.2 104.5 106.0 129.0 103.3
         June 105.6 111.5 102.9 117.6 103.7 103.7 106.7 140.5 104.1 105.3 127.1 100.7
         July 106.1 111.2 102.4 118.8 105.1 103.9 106.6 r 138.4 104.2 105.4 133.7 99.9
         Aug 106.1 110.3 102.4 118.6 105.3 104.0 108.2 106.5 r 138.3 104.2 105.5 135.3 98.1
         Sep 106.1 109.9 103.4 119.1 104.3 104.1 106.8 p 138.4 104.2 105.5 135.7 97.3
         Oct 105.9 110.1 103.9 117.5 103.6 104.1 ... ... ... ... 130.1 95.3
Annual percentage change  
  
2008 + 2.6 + 6.4 + 0.8 + 9.6 + 1.9 + 1.2 + 3.4 + 5.4 + 3.7 + 1.7 + 4.6 + 27.6 + 5.1
2009 + 0.3 − 1.3 + 1.3 − 5.4 + 1.5 + 1.0 + 1.2 − 4.2 − 19.0 − 2.2 − 8.5 − 33.6 − 19.0
2010 + 1.1 + 1.4 + 0.6 + 4.0 + 0.5 + 1.2 + 0.9 + 1.5 + 14.1 + 3.1 + 7.1 + 37.4 + 34.2
2011 7 + 2.1 + 2.2 + 0.8 + 10.1 + 1.0 + 1.3 + 2.9 + 5.3 + 12.9 + 3.3 + 6.4 + 32.2 + 13.5
2012 7 + 2.0 + 3.4 + 1.2 + 5.7 + 1.4 + 1.2 + 2.7 + 1.6 + 4.7 + 1.5 + 2.2 + 7.3 − 2.7
 
2011          Dec + 2.0 + 2.0 + 0.9 + 7.9 + 1.2 + 1.3 + 3.5 + 0.6 + 2.0 + 3.7 + 16.6 − 10.7
2012          Jan 7 + 2.1 + 2.9 + 1.1 + 7.3 + 1.2 + 1.3 + 2.9 − 0.7 + 1.9 + 3.6 + 16.6 − 9.9
         Feb + 2.2 + 3.3 + 1.2 + 8.3 + 1.3 + 1.3 + 2.9 + 2.6 − 1.3 + 1.9 + 3.5 + 17.3 − 11.0
         Mar + 2.2 + 3.7 + 1.4 + 6.7 + 1.4 + 1.2 + 2.6 + 0.5 + 1.7 + 2.8 + 14.4 − 6.1
         Apr + 2.0 + 3.4 + 1.2 + 5.8 + 1.0 + 1.2 + 1.9 − 0.4 + 1.8 + 2.4 + 5.4 − 6.5
         May + 2.0 + 2.6 + 1.5 + 5.1 + 1.4 + 1.2 + 2.8 + 1.6 − 2.3 + 1.5 + 2.4 + 6.0 − 4.8
         June + 1.7 + 3.5 + 1.4 + 3.9 + 1.0 + 1.2 + 1.1 − 3.1 + 1.5 + 1.6 − 4.6 − 4.5
         July + 1.9 + 3.1 + 1.2 + 4.3 + 1.4 + 1.2 + 0.6 − 0.5 + 1.4 + 1.6 + 1.0 + 1.6
         Aug + 2.2 + 3.2 + 1.1 + 7.6 + 1.3 + 1.2 + 2.5 + 1.1 + 3.1 + 1.7 + 3.0 + 16.9 + 1.2
         Sep + 2.0 + 2.8 + 1.0 + 7.1 + 1.4 + 1.2 + 1.2 r + 6.0 + 1.6 + 2.0 + 5.5 − 1.9
         Oct + 2.0 + 3.3 + 1.4 + 5.6 + 1.5 + 1.2 + 1.1 + 8.4 + 1.6 + 1.6 + 6.0 + 3.4
         Nov + 1.9 + 4.3 + 1.1 + 3.8 + 1.8 + 1.2 + 2.5 + 1.2 + 9.5 + 1.5 + 1.0 + 3.0 + 3.9
         Dec + 2.0 + 4.7 + 1.4 + 3.6 + 1.9 + 1.1 + 1.4 + 10.1 + 1.1 + 0.0 + 1.0 + 2.7
2013          Jan + 1.7 + 4.5 + 0.9 + 3.9 + 1.0 + 1.2 + 1.5 + 10.6 + 0.4 − 1.3 − 1.8 − 2.9
         Feb + 1.5 + 3.1 + 1.0 + 3.6 + 1.1 + 1.2 + 2.2 + 0.9 + 8.5 + 0.0 − 1.7 − 4.5 − 2.2
         Mar + 1.4 + 3.7 + 1.1 + 0.5 + 1.5 + 1.3 + 0.1 r + 6.2 + 0.1 − 2.2 − 12.1 − 2.5
         Apr + 1.2 + 4.1 + 1.2 + 0.4 + 0.5 + 1.3 − 0.2 + 6.0 − 0.4 − 3.0 − 14.0 − 5.6
         May + 1.5 + 5.4 + 0.9 + 1.6 + 1.5 + 1.3 + 2.1 − 0.2 + 7.6 − 0.5 − 2.9 − 8.2 − 6.2
         June + 1.8 + 5.4 + 1.0 + 3.0 + 1.7 + 1.3 + 0.1 + 8.1 − 0.7 − 2.2 + 2.1 − 7.5
         July + 1.9 + 5.7 + 1.2 + 2.9 + 1.4 + 1.4 + 0.0 r + 5.8 − 0.8 − 2.6 − 2.1 − 14.5
         Aug + 1.5 + 4.9 + 0.8 + 0.5 + 1.7 + 1.4 + 2.1 − 0.5 r + 3.0 − 1.0 − 3.4 − 9.3 − 14.1
         Sep + 1.4 + 4.7 + 0.9 − 0.2 + 1.7 + 1.4 − 0.5 p + 0.1 − 1.0 − 2.8 − 5.2 − 13.0
         Oct + 1.2 + 4.2 + 0.9 − 0.5 + 1.2 + 1.3 ... ... ... ... − 7.0 − 12.3
Source: Federal Statistical Office and Bundesbank calculation based on data provided value-added tax. 4For the euro area, in euro. 5Coal and crude oil (Brent). 6Food,
by the Federal Statistical Office; for the Index of World Market Prices of Raw beverages and tobacco as well as industrial raw materials. 7From May 2011 and
Materials: HWWI. 1Electricity, gas and other fuels. 2Net rents. 3Excluding from January 2012, increase in tobacco tax. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
69  Monthly Report
November 2013
XI Economic conditions in Germany
  
8 Households’ income *
  
  
  
Gross wages and Net wages and Monetary social Saving
salaries 1 salaries 2 Mass income 4 Saving 6 ratio 7 benefits received 3 Disposable income 5 
Annual Annual Annual Annual Annual Annual
percent- percent- percent- percent- percent- percent- Asage age age age age age percent-
Period change change change change change change age € billion € billion € billion € billion € billion € billion
2005
922.1 − 0.3 625.5 − 0.4 359.8 0.1 985.3 − 0.2 1,463.9 2.0 156.9 3.3 10.7
2006 935.0 1.4 627.8 0.4 358.5 − 0.4 986.3 0.1 1,502.0 2.6 162.5 3.6 10.8
2007 965.9 3.3 646.2 2.9 353.6 − 1.4 999.8 1.4 1,524.8 1.5 168.1 3.4 11.0
2008 1,002.6 3.8 664.0 2.7 356.2 0.7 1,020.1 2.0 1,569.9 3.0 180.3 7.3 11.5
2009 1,003.8 0.1 667.7 0.6 384.1 7.8 1,051.8 3.1 1,562.9 − 0.4 170.3 − 5.5 10.9
2010 1,033.2 2.9 696.7 4.4 387.8 1.0 1,084.5 3.1 1,609.9 3.0 174.9 2.7 10.9
2011 1,081.7 4.7 723.4 3.8 384.2 − 0.9 1,107.6 2.1 1,672.0 3.9 173.6 − 0.7 10.4
2012 1,126.6 4.2 751.9 3.9 389.2 1.3 1,141.1 3.0 1,710.3 2.3 176.5 1.6 10.3
2012          Q1 261.5 4.1 174.9 4.0 97.8 0.5 272.7 2.7 425.7 3.5 58.1 3.1 13.6
         Q2 275.5 4.4 180.1 4.2 96.6 1.4 276.7 3.2 423.9 2.2 42.5 2.6 10.0
         Q3 277.9 4.1 189.1 3.8 97.4 1.7 286.6 3.1 431.3 1.6 37.9 1.1 8.8
         Q4 311.7 4.0 207.9 3.7 97.3 1.6 305.2 3.0 429.5 1.9 38.0 − 1.1 8.8
2013          Q1 270.0 3.3 180.2 3.0 100.1 2.3 280.3 2.8 428.0 0.5 56.2 − 3.2 13.1
         Q2 283.0 2.7 183.8 2.1 98.7 2.2 282.5 2.1 433.9 2.4 41.6 − 2.2 9.6
Source: Federal Statistical Office; figures computed in August 2013. *Households in- salaries plus monetary social benefits received. 5Mass income plus operating surplus,
cluding non-profit institutions serving households. 1Residence concept. 2After mixed income, property income (net), other current transfers received, income of
deducting the wage tax payable on gross wages and salaries and employees’ non-profit institutions serving households, less taxes (excluding wage tax andcontributions to the social security funds. 3Social security benefits in cash from the consumption-related taxes) and other current transfers paid. Including the increase in
social security funds, central, state and local government and foreign countries, claims on company pension funds. 6Including the increase in claims on company pen-
pension payments (net), private funded social benefits, less social contributions on sion funds. 7 Saving as a percentage of disposable income. 
social benefits, consumption-related taxes and public charges. 4Net wages and
  
  
  
9 Negotiated pay rates (overall economy)
    
  
Index of negotiated wages 1 
On a monthly basis
Memo item:
Total excluding Wages and salaries
On an hourly basis Total one-off payments Basic pay rates  2 per employee 3 
Annual Annual Annual Annual Annual
Period percentage percentage percentage percentage percentage
2005=100 change 2005=100 change 2005=100 change 2005=100 change 2005=100 change
2005 100.0 0.8 100.0 1.0 100.0 0.9 100.0 1.0 100.0 0.3
2006 101.0 1.0 101.2 1.2 100.8 0.8 100.8 0.8 100.8 0.82007 102.2 1.2 102.5 1.3 102.2 1.5 102.2 1.4 102.2 1.42008 105.0 2.7 105.4 2.8 105.3 3.0 105.5 3.2 104.6 2.32009 107.1 2.0 107.5 2.0 107.7 2.2 108.1 2.4 104.5 − 0.0
2010 108.8 1.6 109.4 1.7 109.4 1.7 110.0 1.8 106.9 2.3
2011 110.7 1.8 111.4 1.8 111.4 1.8 112.0 1.8 110.4 3.32012 113.7 2.7 114.3 2.6 114.6 2.9 115.1 2.8 113.6 2.9
2012          Q2 106.8 2.7 107.3 2.7 107.7 3.0 114.9 2.8 111.4 3.0
         Q3 116.0 2.8 116.6 2.8 117.0 2.9 115.9 3.0 111.8 2.9         Q4 127.1 3.0 127.8 2.9 128.2 3.0 116.1 2.9 124.3 3.0
2013          Q1 107.8 2.8 108.4 2.8 108.7 2.9 117.0 2.9 109.1 2.4
         Q2 109.0 2.1 109.6 2.1 109.9 2.1 117.3 2.1 113.5 1.9         Q3 118.7 2.3 119.3 2.3 119.8 2.4 118.6 2.4 . .
2013          Mar 107.9 2.6 108.5 2.6 108.8 2.5 117.0 2.6 . .
         Apr 109.3 2.7 109.9 2.7 110.0 2.5 117.1 2.5 . .
         May 109.5 1.8 110.0 1.8 110.5 2.0 117.4 2.1 . .
         June 108.4 1.9 108.9 1.9 109.3 1.8 117.5 1.8 . .
         July 137.3 2.1 138.0 2.0 138.4 2.2 118.3 2.2 . .
         Aug 109.5 2.6 110.1 2.6 110.5 2.6 118.7 2.5 . .
         Sep 109.4 2.5 110.0 2.5 110.4 2.5 118.8 2.4 . .
1Current data are normally revised on account of additional reports. 2Excluding and retirement provisions). 3Source: Federal Statistical Office; figures computed in Au-
one-off payments and covenants (capital formation benefits, special payments, such gust 2013. 
as annual bonuses, holiday pay, Christmas bonuses (13
thmonthly salary payment)

Deutsche Bundesbank
70  Monthly Report
November 2013
XII External sector
 
1 Major items of the balance of payments of the euro area *
 
 
€ million
2012 r 2013
Item 2010 r 2011 r 2012 r Q4 Q1 r Q2 r June r July r Aug
Current account + 5,277 + 8,178 + 126,214 + 61,892 + 24,597 + 52,817 + 29,064 + 26,116 + 11,954 A
1 Goods
Exports (fob) 1,576,077 1,789,051 1,919,530 489,469 470,550 489,733 161,210 168,053 147,518
Imports (fob) 1,560,473 1,786,705 1,824,602 454,490 439,859 437,639 142,757 148,365 139,259
Balance + 15,605 + 2,348 + 94,931 + 34,979 + 30,692 + 52,094 + 18,453 + 19,688 + 8,260
2 Services
Receipts 544,361 584,312 626,637 161,841 144,873 164,124 58,106 58,517 54,339
Expenditure 483,984 511,598 537,926 139,710 127,324 135,508 45,934 47,091 46,848
Balance + 60,380 + 72,717 + 88,713 + 22,133 + 17,550 + 28,617 + 12,172 + 11,427 + 7,491
3 Income + 38,040 + 39,416 + 49,331 + 18,737 + 18,498 + 3,803 + 9,000 + 4,455 + 7,607
4 Current transfers
Transfers from non-residents 88,210 94,829 97,330 33,344 27,751 19,829 7,035 7,837 4,916
Transfers to non-residents 196,951 201,131 204,089 47,302 69,892 51,524 17,595 17,290 16,320
Balance − 108,740 − 106,302 − 106,757 − 13,957 − 42,141 − 31,695 − 10,560 − 9,453 − 11,404
Capital account + 5,478 + 11,019 + 4,971 + 6,262 + 1,780 + 5,312 + 1,007 + 2,284 + 1,414 B
Financial account (net capital exports: − + 6,025 − 44,168 − 140,949 − 100,160 − 25,129 − 56,327 − 25,984 − 29,642 − 15,527 C)
1 Direct investment − 79,021 − 85,790 − 3,557 − 27,563 − 23,983 − 48,730 − 20,726 − 2,899 − 7,794
By resident units abroad − 352,585 − 524,034 − 329,878 − 112,787 − 56,721 − 63,133 − 30,002 − 9,300 − 22,733
By non-resident units in the euro area + 273,565 + 438,247 + 326,321 + 85,224 + 32,738 + 14,404 + 9,276 + 6,400 + 14,939
2 Portfolio investment + 109,200 + 231,074 + 72,346 + 72,949 + 16,530 + 67,117 + 28,594 − 41,461 + 20,114
By resident units abroad − 130,909 + 53,205 − 186,367 − 81,506 − 104,486 − 20,995 + 42,530 − 26,676 + 6,538
Equity − 75,169 + 66,024 − 57,583 − 60,520 − 62,696 − 12,659 + 16,973 − 11,276 + 5,720
Bonds and notes − 100,391 + 21,357 − 126,480 − 39,757 − 34,418 − 9,188 + 19,041 − 14,268 + 3,133
Money market instruments + 44,653 − 34,176 − 2,303 + 18,772 − 7,373 + 852 + 6,517 − 1,132 − 2,314
By non-resident units in the euro area + 240,109 + 177,871 + 258,717 + 154,456 + 121,015 + 88,112 − 13,936 − 14,785 + 13,576
Equity + 125,362 + 73,770 + 144,102 + 80,768 + 57,395 + 81,478 + 17,294 + 8,395 + 23,052
Bonds and notes + 161,104 + 151,685 + 119,276 + 50,939 + 27,271 + 7,363 − 33,348 − 39,280 − 13,865
Money market instruments − 46,358 − 47,583 − 4,662 + 22,748 + 36,349 − 729 + 2,118 + 16,100 + 4,389
3 Financial derivatives + 10,327 − 5,330 + 3,413 + 25,384 + 8,362 + 2,364 + 15,291 − 661 + 6,899
4 Other investment − 23,962 − 173,855 − 199,237 − 168,081 − 26,049 − 75,942 − 48,581 + 15,125 − 32,781
Eurosystem + 12,297 + 137,729 + 13,824 − 5,940 − 25,456 − 10,442 − 6,319 − 8,571 + 93
General government + 23,377 + 69,721 − 970 − 24,318 + 9,899 + 3,685 + 5,179 + 6,093 − 653
MFIs (excluding the Eurosystem) − 18,793 − 339,639 − 112,181 − 100,285 − 12,301 − 105,931 − 41,620 + 9,503 − 35,187
Long-term + 47,197 − 15,876 + 12,599 + 22,518 − 2,085 + 26,527 + 11,854 − 3,359 + 4,801
Short-term − 65,993 − 323,763 − 124,777 − 122,802 − 10,216 − 132,457 − 53,474 + 12,863 − 39,988
Other sectors − 40,843 − 41,664 − 99,910 − 37,535 + 1,809 + 36,746 − 5,822 + 8,098 + 2,965
5 Reserve assets (Increase: −) − 10,516 − 10,266 − 13,921 − 2,850 + 12 − 1,138 − 563 + 255 − 1,965
Errors and omissions − 16,783 + 24,966 + 9,759 + 32,006 − 1,248 − 1,801 − 4,087 + 1,242 + 2,159 D
* Source: European Central Bank. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
71  Monthly Report
November 2013
XII External sector
 
2 Major items of the balance of payments of the Federal Republic of Germany
(balances)
 
 
Current account Capital trans- Financial account
fers andacquisition/ of whichdisposal of Change in
Supple- non- reserve assets
Balance mentary produced at trans- Errorson current Foreign trade Current non-financial action and
Period account trade 
1 items 2 Services 3 Income transfers assets Total 4 value 5 omissions
DM million
1999 − 50,528 + 127,542 − 15,947 − 90,036 − 24,363 − 47,724 − 301 − 20,332 + 24,517 + 71,161
2000 − 69,351 + 115,645 − 17,742 − 95,848 − 16,956 − 54,450 + 13,345 + 66,863 + 11,429 − 10,8572001 − 23 + 186,771 − 14,512 − 97,521 − 22,557 − 52,204 − 756 − 23,068 + 11,797 + 23,847
€ million
1999
− 25,834 + 65,211 − 8,153 − 46,035 − 12,457 − 24,401 − 154 − 10,396 + 12,535 + 36,384
2000 − 35,459 + 59,128 − 9,071 − 49,006 − 8,670 − 27,840 + 6,823 + 34,187 + 5,844 − 5,5512001 − 12 + 95,495 − 7,420 − 49,862 − 11,533 − 26,692 − 387 − 11,794 + 6,032 + 12,1932002 + 42,669 + 132,788 − 8,552 − 35,728 − 18,888 − 26,951 − 212 − 38,448 + 2,065 − 4,0102003 + 40,525 + 129,921 − 11,148 − 34,506 − 15,677 − 28,064 + 311 − 61,758 + 445 + 20,921
2004 + 102,368 + 156,096 − 16,470 − 29,375 + 19,681 − 27,564 + 435 − 122,984 + 1,470 + 20,181
2005 + 112,591 + 158,179 − 14,057 − 27,401 + 24,391 − 28,522 − 1,369 − 129,635 + 2,182 + 18,4132006 + 144,739 + 159,048 − 12,888 − 17,346 + 44,460 − 28,536 − 258 − 175,474 + 2,934 + 30,9922007 + 180,914 + 195,348 − 9,816 − 14,852 + 42,918 − 32,685 + 104 − 210,151 − 953 + 29,1332008 + 153,633 + 178,297 − 13,628 − 10,258 + 32,379 − 33,157 − 210 − 173,910 − 2,008 + 20,487
2009 + 141,537 + 138,697 − 16,020 − 7,220 + 59,025 − 32,944 + 28 − 158,391 + 3,200 + 16,826
2010 + 155,992 + 154,863 − 12,397 − 2,062 + 53,877 − 38,289 − 575 − 140,144 − 1,613 − 15,2732011 + 161,196 + 158,702 − 20,520 − 2,279 + 59,016 − 33,723 + 673 − 162,610 − 2,836 + 7402012 
r + 187,206 + 189,841 − 27,313 − 2,873 + 64,373 − 36,822 + 40 − 233,829 − 1,297 + 46,583
2010          Q4 + 51,979 + 40,982 − 3,486 + 4,327 + 17,099 − 6,943 − 413 − 52,524 − 506 + 958
2011          Q1 + 45,384 + 40,902 − 2,257 + 2,887 + 17,445 − 13,592 + 950 − 67,319 − 1,393 + 20,985
         Q2 + 32,308 + 38,562 − 4,927 − 1,372 + 4,755 − 4,710 − 282 − 50,687 − 438 + 18,660         Q3 + 35,723 + 39,609 − 6,551 − 5,658 + 17,960 − 9,637 + 103 − 13,513 − 639 − 22,313         Q4 + 47,781 + 39,630 − 6,784 + 1,864 + 18,856 − 5,784 − 98 − 31,091 − 366 − 16,592
2012          Q1 
r + 46,622 + 46,229 − 3,550 + 957 + 18,019 − 15,034 + 191 − 42,769 − 963 − 4,044
         Q2 r + 41,431 + 48,058 − 8,897 + 1,391 + 7,301 − 6,422 + 394 − 49,203 − 769 + 7,377
         Q3 r + 45,383 + 50,775 − 7,710 − 7,227 + 18,983 − 9,437 + 67 − 62,092 − 59 + 16,642
         Q4 r + 53,770 + 44,780 − 7,155 + 2,005 + 20,069 − 5,929 − 613 − 79,765 + 494 + 26,608
2013          Q1 r + 45,168 + 49,292 − 6,720 − 227 + 18,659 − 15,836 + 345 − 40,684 − 86 − 4,829
         Q2 r + 45,930 + 48,634 − 3,791 + 351 + 8,310 − 7,575 + 341 − 65,241 − 72 + 18,970
         Q3 p + 43,988 + 49,880 − 7,052 − 6,894 + 18,326 − 10,272 + 99 − 70,138 + 784 + 26,051
2011          Apr + 10,343 + 10,835 − 1,954 − 159 + 3,169 − 1,549 − 201 − 21,914 − 563 + 11,771
         May + 9,344 + 14,833 − 1,108 + 641 − 4,440 − 583 − 64 − 20,156 + 24 + 10,877         June + 12,621 + 12,893 − 1,866 − 1,854 + 6,026 − 2,578 − 17 − 8,617 + 101 − 3,987
         July + 9,447 + 10,555 − 1,541 − 1,997 + 5,900 − 3,470 − 144 + 4,546 − 428 − 13,850
         Aug + 8,404 + 11,740 − 2,347 − 3,923 + 5,982 − 3,049 + 380 − 13,078 + 109 + 4,294         Sep + 17,872 + 17,314 − 2,663 + 262 + 6,078 − 3,118 − 133 − 4,982 − 320 − 12,757
         Oct + 10,828 + 11,000 − 2,131 − 955 + 6,414 − 3,500 − 181 − 16,424 + 55 + 5,777
         Nov + 16,922 + 16,110 − 1,947 + 330 + 6,055 − 3,626 + 120 − 7,177 + 263 − 9,865         Dec + 20,031 + 12,520 − 2,706 + 2,489 + 6,387 + 1,342 − 37 − 7,490 − 684 − 12,504
2012          Jan  
r + 11,370 + 13,536 − 1,346 − 1,605 + 5,039 − 4,254 − 32 − 12,275 − 140 + 938
         Feb  r + 14,103 + 15,418 − 1,736 + 1,204 + 6,503 − 7,286 + 211 − 7,423 − 547 − 6,891
         Mar  r + 21,149 + 17,275 − 468 + 1,359 + 6,477 − 3,494 + 12 − 23,071 − 276 + 1,909
         Apr  r + 11,843 + 14,358 − 3,209 + 1,658 + 1,735 − 2,698 + 310 − 17,917 − 581 + 5,764
         May r + 10,102 + 15,702 − 3,017 − 660 − 495 − 1,429 + 239 − 18,277 − 207 + 7,936
         June r + 19,486 + 17,998 − 2,672 + 393 + 6,062 − 2,295 − 155 − 13,009 + 19 − 6,323
         July r + 14,703 + 17,169 − 2,870 − 3,297 + 6,240 − 2,539 − 223 − 6,612 + 48 − 7,868
         Aug  r + 13,658 + 16,747 − 2,529 − 3,072 + 6,195 − 3,683 + 168 − 22,050 − 389 + 8,224
         Sep  r + 17,022 + 16,859 − 2,311 − 859 + 6,548 − 3,215 + 123 − 33,431 + 281 + 16,286
         Oct  r + 15,531 + 15,967 − 2,523 − 1,592 + 6,918 − 3,240 − 195 − 21,997 − 176 + 6,662
         Nov  r + 17,817 + 16,872 − 2,657 + 224 + 6,509 − 3,131 + 165 − 27,569 + 308 + 9,588
         Dec  r + 20,422 + 11,941 − 1,975 + 3,373 + 6,642 + 441 − 582 − 30,198 + 362 + 10,359
2013          Jan  r + 9,684 + 13,622 − 2,071 − 1,583 + 5,504 − 5,789 + 26 + 6,080 − 493 − 15,790
         Feb  r + 15,032 + 16,811 − 1,668 + 343 + 6,426 − 6,880 − 26 − 16,265 + 321 + 1,259
         Mar  r + 20,452 + 18,858 − 2,981 + 1,013 + 6,729 − 3,167 + 346 − 30,499 + 86 + 9,701
         Apr  r + 16,720 + 17,995 − 1,103 + 787 + 1,595 − 2,554 + 184 − 24,547 − 56 + 7,643
         May r + 11,275 + 13,623 − 952 − 657 + 1,409 − 2,147 + 111 − 14,317 + 23 + 2,931
         June r + 17,935 + 17,016 − 1,735 + 222 + 5,307 − 2,875 + 46 − 26,377 − 38 + 8,396
         July r + 14,243 + 16,252 − 2,548 − 2,093 + 6,099 − 3,465 + 39 − 12,216 + 654 − 2,066
         Aug + 10,096 + 13,256 − 2,451 − 3,574 + 6,610 − 3,745 − 76 − 29,147 − 425 + 19,127
         Sep  p + 19,649 + 20,373 − 2,053 − 1,226 + 5,617 − 3,061 + 136 − 28,774 + 556 + 8,989
1Special trade according to the official foreign trade statistics: imports cif, exports deduction of goods returned. 3Excluding the expenditure on freight and insurance
fob. From January 2007 onwards, excluding supplies of goods for/after included in the cif import figure. 4Financial account balance including change in
repair/maintenance, which, up to December 2006, were deducted via supplementary reserve assets. Capital exports: − . 5 Increase: − . 
trade items. 2Inter alia warehouse transactions for the account of residents and

Deutsche Bundesbank
72  Monthly Report
November 2013
 XII External sector
 
 3 Foreign trade (special trade) of the Federal Republic of Germany,
 by country and group of countries *
 
 € million
 2013
Country / group of countries  2010  2011  2012 r May r Jun r Jul r Aug r Sep p Jan / Aug r 
All countries 1 Exports 951,959 1,061,225 1,095,766 723,346 88,222 92,384 93,072 84,978 94,658
Imports 797,097 902,523 905,925 595,912 74,599 75,368 76,821 71,722 74,285Balance + 154,863 + 158,702 + 189,841 + 127,433 + 13,623 + 17,016 + 16,252 + 13,256 + 20,373
I Exports 675,024 752,295 751,071 496,244 60,610 64,162 62,865 56,724 ... European countries
Imports 541,720 622,870 629,305 420,286 53,481 53,986 53,718 49,643 ...
Balance + 133,305 + 129,425 + 121,766 + 75,958 + 7,130 + 10,176 + 9,146 + 7,081 ...
Exports 572,919 629,953 622,674 411,271 50,089 53,354 51,861 46,766 ... 1 EU member states (28)
Imports 445,090 506,211 504,494 340,566 43,686 43,679 43,536 39,512 ...
Balance + 127,829 + 123,742 + 118,180 + 70,704 + 6,403 + 9,675 + 8,325 + 7,254 ...
Euro-area (17) Exports 388,103 420,522 406,232 266,050 32,314 34,666 33,441 29,115 ...
countries Imports 300,135 338,330 338,393 228,568 29,535 29,639 29,739 25,929 ...
Balance + 87,968 + 82,192 + 67,839 + 37,482 + 2,779 + 5,027 + 3,702 + 3,186 ...
of which
Austria Exports 52,156 57,671 56,591 37,026 4,466 4,745 4,710 4,551 ...
Imports 33,013 37,028 36,419 24,434 2,973 3,144 3,202 2,880 ...
Balance + 19,144 + 20,643 + 20,172 + 12,592 + 1,492 + 1,601 + 1,508 + 1,671 ...
Belgium and Exports 50,545 53,161 49,424 32,170 3,909 3,946 3,794 3,523 ...
Luxembourg Imports 36,026 41,302 40,528 27,927 3,571 3,664 3,548 3,280 ...
Balance + 14,519 + 11,859 + 8,896 + 4,242 + 338 + 282 + 246 + 243 ...
France Exports 89,582 101,444 102,911 65,947 7,475 8,927 8,474 6,796 ...
Imports 60,673 65,948 64,035 43,021 5,511 5,735 5,628 4,570 ...
Balance + 28,909 + 35,496 + 38,875 + 22,925 + 1,964 + 3,192 + 2,846 + 2,226 ...
Italy Exports 58,589 62,044 55,529 35,623 4,447 4,646 4,661 3,388 ...
Imports 41,977 47,844 47,957 31,477 4,092 4,087 4,378 3,284 ...
Balance + 16,611 + 14,200 + 7,572 + 4,147 + 355 + 559 + 283 + 104 ...
Netherlands Exports 62,978 69,423 70,381 46,927 5,821 5,963 5,769 5,564 ...
Imports 67,205 81,804 85,738 59,477 7,727 7,719 7,509 7,223 ...
Balance − 4,227 − 12,382 − 15,357 − 12,550 − 1,906 − 1,756 − 1,740 − 1,660 ...
Spain Exports 34,222 34,811 31,047 20,720 2,787 2,768 2,643 2,024 ...
Imports 21,955 22,491 23,206 15,935 2,108 2,077 2,032 1,523 ...
Balance + 12,267 + 12,320 + 7,841 + 4,785 + 680 + 691 + 611 + 501 ...
Other EU member Exports 184,816 209,430 216,442 145,221 17,775 18,688 18,420 17,651 ...
states Imports 144,955 167,881 166,100 111,998 14,151 14,041 13,797 13,583 ...
Balance + 39,860 + 41,550 + 50,341 + 33,223 + 3,624 + 4,648 + 4,623 + 4,068 ...
of which
United Exports 58,666 65,570 73,283 50,056 5,913 6,310 6,716 5,860 ...
Kingdom Imports 37,923 44,741 42,820 28,142 3,562 3,221 3,298 3,380 ...
Balance + 20,743 + 20,829 + 30,462 + 21,914 + 2,351 + 3,089 + 3,419 + 2,480 ...
Exports 102,105 122,342 128,398 84,973 10,521 10,808 11,003 9,958 ... 2 Other European
Imports 96,630 116,660 124,811 79,720 9,795 10,306 10,182 10,131 ... countries
Balance + 5,476 + 5,683 + 3,586 + 5,254 + 726 + 501 + 821 − 173 ...
of which
Switzerland Exports 41,659 47,875 48,933 31,739 3,733 3,870 4,090 3,706 ...
Imports 32,507 36,996 37,775 25,419 3,351 3,528 3,357 2,912 ...
Balance + 9,152 + 10,879 + 11,158 + 6,320 + 382 + 342 + 733 + 795 ...
II Exports 276,635 308,193 340,980 225,790 27,396 27,999 29,985 27,980 ... Non-European
Imports 255,377 279,653 276,620 175,627 21,119 21,382 23,102 22,079 ... countries
Balance + 21,258 + 28,541 + 64,360 + 50,163 + 6,277 + 6,616 + 6,883 + 5,902 ...
Exports 19,968 20,717 21,920 15,211 1,927 1,990 1,988 1,720 ... 1 Africa
Imports 17,040 21,944 24,145 16,142 1,651 2,260 1,854 2,097 ...
Balance + 2,929 − 1,227 − 2,224 − 931 + 277 − 270 + 134 − 378 ...
Exports 99,464 110,424 128,703 86,310 10,343 10,462 11,338 10,675 ... 2 America
Imports 71,680 80,568 80,549 50,117 6,526 6,234 6,378 5,812 ...
Balance + 27,784 + 29,856 + 48,154 + 36,193 + 3,816 + 4,227 + 4,960 + 4,862 ...
of which
Exports 65,574 73,776 86,971 57,583 6,862 7,015 7,566 7,316 ... United States
Imports 45,241 48,531 51,070 32,634 4,371 3,984 4,107 3,943 ...
Balance + 20,333 + 25,244 + 35,901 + 24,949 + 2,491 + 3,031 + 3,458 + 3,373 ...
Exports 148,231 167,574 179,630 117,540 14,322 14,671 15,775 14,756 ... 3 Asia
Imports 163,523 173,115 167,873 106,878 12,566 12,554 14,606 13,875 ...
Balance − 15,293 − 5,541 + 11,757 + 10,662 + 1,756 + 2,117 + 1,169 + 880 ...
of which
Middle East Exports 28,138 28,711 32,503 20,658 2,847 2,714 2,488 2,600 ...
Imports 6,878 8,874 8,134 5,363 643 627 1,012 755 ...
Balance + 21,260 + 19,837 + 24,369 + 15,294 + 2,204 + 2,087 + 1,476 + 1,845 ...
Japan Exports 13,149 15,115 17,138 10,997 1,217 1,339 1,534 1,464 ...
Imports 22,475 23,595 21,910 12,981 1,510 1,616 1,647 1,543 ...
Balance − 9,326 − 8,480 − 4,772 − 1,983 − 293 − 277 − 113 − 79 ...
Exports 53,791 64,863 66,746 44,092 5,214 5,489 6,116 5,680 ... People‘s Republic
Imports 77,270 79,528 78,529 48,408 5,633 5,560 6,502 6,490 ... of China 
2 
Balance − 23,479 − 14,665 − 11,783 − 4,316 − 419 − 72 − 386 − 810 ...
Exports 38,183 41,569 45,651 30,620 3,764 3,766 4,092 3,711 ... Emerging markets
Imports 39,562 39,546 37,428 24,570 3,026 2,871 3,230 2,949 ... in South-East Asia 3 
Balance − 1,379 + 2,023 + 8,223 + 6,049 + 738 + 894 + 862 + 762 ...
Exports 8,972 9,479 10,727 6,730 804 876 885 830 ... 4 Oceania and
Imports 3,134 4,026 4,054 2,491 376 334 264 294 ... polar regions
Balance + 5,838 + 5,453 + 6,672 + 4,239 + 428 + 542 + 621 + 537 ...
 
*Source: Federal Statistical Office. Exports (fob) by country of destination, imports ships and aircraft and other data not classifiable by region. 2Excluding Hong Kong.
(cif) by country of origin. Individual countries and groups of countries according to 3Brunei Darussalam, Hong Kong, Indonesia, Malaysia, Philippines, Republic of
the current position. EU including Croatia. 1Including fuel and other supplies for Korea, Singapore, Taiwan and Thailand. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
73  Monthly Report
November 2013
XII External sector
 
4 Services and income of the Federal Republic of Germany
(balances)
 
€ million
Services
Other services
of which
 
Patents
Compen- Services  of Construction
Trans- Financial and sation of Investment Government self-employed and  assembly
Period Total Travel 1 services licences Total income portation 2 services  3 persons  4 work,  repairs employees 5 
2008 − 10,258 − 34,718 + 8,319 + 3,936 − 1,313 + 2,376 + 11,142 − 1,641 + 3,229 + 216 + 32,164
2009 − 7,220 − 33,341 + 7,048 + 4,320 + 154 + 2,644 + 11,955 − 1,261 + 3,062 + 541 + 58,4842010 − 2,062 − 32,775 + 8,092 + 4,281 + 1,225 + 2,863 + 14,252 − 1,154 + 3,500 + 1,564 + 52,3142011 − 2,279 − 33,762 + 8,562 + 3,891 + 1,189 + 2,939 + 14,903 − 1,201 + 3,413 + 1,885 + 57,1312012 − 2,873 − 35,278 + 8,733 + 5,096 + 1,290 + 3,070 + 14,217 − 1,350 + 2,015 + 1,940 + 62,433
2012          Q1 + 957 − 5,297 + 1,799 + 1,038 − 408 + 756 + 3,069 − 355 + 595 + 978 + 17,041
         Q2 + 1,391 − 8,338 + 2,572 + 1,042 + 177 + 821 + 5,118 − 256 + 472 + 401 + 6,901         Q3 − 7,227 − 15,569 + 2,387 + 1,975 + 752 + 767 + 2,461 − 412 + 493 − 118 + 19,101         Q4 + 2,005 − 6,075 + 1,975 + 1,041 + 768 + 727 + 3,569 − 326 + 455 + 678 + 19,391
2013          Q1 − 227 − 5,058 + 1,736 + 837 + 758 + 796 + 704 − 288 + 229 + 988 + 17,671
         Q2 + 351 − 8,107 + 2,225 + 709 + 1,301 + 921 + 3,302 − 308 + 375 + 408 + 7,902         Q3 − 6,894 − 15,250 + 1,869 + 873 + 1,593 + 760 + 3,261 − 68 + 164 − 113 + 18,439
2012          Nov + 224 − 1,538 + 711 + 308 + 270 + 223 + 250 − 97 + 99 + 192 + 6,317
         Dec + 3,373 − 371 + 610 + 464 + 200 + 228 + 2,243 − 126 + 286 + 289 + 6,353
2013          Jan − 1,583 − 1,603 + 541 + 418 + 286 + 266 − 1,491 − 119 + 84 + 331 + 5,173
         Feb + 343 − 1,266 + 668 + 269 + 275 + 256 + 142 − 45 + 4 + 328 + 6,097         Mar + 1,013 − 2,189 + 527 + 150 + 198 + 273 + 2,054 − 125 + 140 + 329 + 6,400
         Apr + 787 − 1,687 + 759 + 285 + 512 + 271 + 646 − 126 + 134 + 136 + 1,459
         May − 657 − 2,737 + 765 + 188 + 403 + 311 + 414 − 74 + 127 + 135 + 1,274         June + 222 − 3,683 + 702 + 236 + 386 + 338 + 2,242 − 108 + 114 + 137 + 5,170
         July − 2,093 − 3,968 + 800 + 272 + 487 + 261 + 54 − 30 + 77 − 37 + 6,136
         Aug − 3,574 − 6,198 + 568 + 461 + 724 + 235 + 636 − 23 − 5 − 38 + 6,649         Sep − 1,226 − 5,084 + 501 + 140 + 382 + 264 + 2,571 − 15 + 92 − 37 + 5,654
1From 2001 expenditure is based on household samples. 2Excluding the other technical services, research and development, commercial services, etc.
expenditure on freight included in the cif import figure. 3Including the receipts 5 Wages and salaries. 
from foreign military agencies for goods and services supplied. 4Engineering and
5 Current transfers of the Federal Republic of Germany 6 Capital transfers
(balances) (balances)
€ million € million
Public 1 Private 1 
International
organisations 2 
 
of which Other Other
European current Workers’ current
Period Total Total Total Communities Total remittances transfers Total  4 Public 1 Private 1 transfers 3 
2008 − 33,157 − 16,834 − 18,746 − 16,644 + 1,911 − 16,322 − 3,079 − 13,243 − 210 − 1,853 + 1,642
2009 − 32,944 − 18,575 − 19,037 − 16,573 + 462 − 14,370 − 2,995 − 11,375 + 28 − 1,704 + 1,7322010 − 38,289 − 23,369 − 22,899 − 19,473 − 471 − 14,919 − 3,035 − 11,885 − 575 − 2,039 + 1,4642011 − 33,723 − 20,197 − 22,303 − 19,105 + 2,106 − 13,526 − 2,977 − 10,549 + 673 − 2,326 + 2,9992012 − 36,822 − 23,826 − 24,367 − 21,098 + 541 − 12,997 − 3,080 − 9,917 + 40 − 2,648 + 2,687
2012          Q1 − 15,034 − 11,827 − 11,243 − 10,134 − 585 − 3,207 − 770 − 2,437 + 191 − 398 + 589
         Q2 − 6,422 − 3,125 − 6,101 − 5,128 + 2,975 − 3,297 − 770 − 2,527 + 394 − 375 + 769         Q3 − 9,437 − 6,042 − 5,519 − 5,033 − 523 − 3,395 − 770 − 2,625 + 67 − 556 + 624         Q4 − 5,929 − 2,831 − 1,504 − 803 − 1,327 − 3,098 − 770 − 2,328 − 613 − 1,318 + 706
2013          Q1 − 15,836 − 12,628 − 12,348 − 11,005 − 280 − 3,208 − 826 − 2,382 + 345 − 306 + 651
         Q2 − 7,575 − 4,124 − 7,148 − 6,422 + 3,024 − 3,451 − 826 − 2,625 + 341 − 478 + 819         Q3 − 10,272 − 7,104 − 7,130 − 6,465 + 26 − 3,167 − 826 − 2,341 + 99 − 329 + 428
2012          Nov − 3,131 − 2,176 − 1,547 − 1,456 − 629 − 955 − 257 − 699 + 165 − 259 + 424
         Dec + 441 + 1,743 + 2,033 + 2,465 − 290 − 1,302 − 257 − 1,045 − 582 − 647 + 64
2013          Jan − 5,789 − 4,649 − 4,543 − 3,734 − 106 − 1,140 − 275 − 865 + 26 − 87 + 113
         Feb − 6,880 − 5,801 − 5,551 − 5,055 − 250 − 1,079 − 275 − 804 − 26 − 103 + 77         Mar − 3,167 − 2,178 − 2,254 − 2,216 + 76 − 989 − 275 − 714 + 346 − 117 + 462
         Apr − 2,554 − 1,397 − 2,563 − 2,165 + 1,166 − 1,157 − 275 − 882 + 184 − 157 + 341
         May − 2,147 − 883 − 2,207 − 2,095 + 1,325 − 1,264 − 275 − 989 + 111 − 140 + 251         June − 2,875 − 1,845 − 2,378 − 2,162 + 533 − 1,030 − 275 − 755 + 46 − 182 + 227
         July − 3,465 − 2,369 − 2,214 − 2,054 − 155 − 1,096 − 275 − 821 + 39 − 162 + 202
         Aug − 3,745 − 2,744 − 2,599 − 2,203 − 146 − 1,000 − 275 − 725 − 76 − 151 + 74         Sep − 3,061 − 1,991 − 2,318 − 2,208 + 327 − 1,070 − 275 − 795 + 136 − 16 + 152
1The classification of “public” and “private” transfers depends on the sector to transfers). 3Payments to developing countries, pension payments, tax revenue and
which the participating domestic body belongs. 2Current contributions to the refunds, etc. 4 Where identifiable; in particular, debt forgiveness. 
budgets of international organisations and to the EU budget (excluding capital

Deutsche Bundesbank
74  Monthly Report
November 2013
XII External sector
 
7 Financial account of the Federal Republic of Germany
 
 
€ million
2012 2013
Item 2010 2011 2012 Q4 Q1 Q2 Q3 July Aug Sep
I Net German investment abroad
(Increase/capital exports: −) − 408,675 − 226,210 − 355,772 + 32,811 − 28,397 − 36,643 + 12,209 + 20,000 − 3,512 − 4,279
1 Direct investment 1 − 91,757 − 37,527 − 52,088 − 4,512 − 19,699 − 4,953 − 8,105 + 3,492 − 8,618 − 2,979
Equity capital − 55,147 − 21,739 − 34,637 − 9,864 − 5,736 − 5,401 − 1,302 + 320 − 1,114 − 508
Reinvested earnings 2 − 19,962 − 25,161 − 27,080 − 5,446 − 9,975 − 5,797 − 9,777 − 3,076 − 3,941 − 2,759
Other capital transactions
of German direct investors − 16,649 + 9,373 + 9,629 + 10,798 − 3,988 + 6,245 + 2,973 + 6,248 − 3,563 + 288
2 Portfolio investment − 171,333 − 22,665 − 107,955 − 45,825 − 46,658 − 36,835 − 36,826 − 20,198 − 9,266 − 7,361
Shares 3 − 1,355 + 2,130 − 11,186 − 13,259 − 9,822 − 3,252 − 8,780 − 6,934 − 489 − 1,357
Mutual fund shares 4 − 21,558 − 1,843 − 21,560 − 12,558 − 10,710 − 4,085 − 7,693 − 4,274 − 1,498 − 1,920
Bonds and notes 5 − 154,540 − 18,014 − 75,947 − 23,754 − 21,089 − 30,132 − 19,933 − 7,296 − 5,464 − 7,173
Money market instruments + 6,120 − 4,938 + 738 + 3,745 − 5,036 + 634 − 420 − 1,694 − 1,816 + 3,089
3 Financial derivatives 6 − 17,616 − 27,511 − 17,885 − 4,236 − 3,880 − 6,090 − 2,329 − 1,270 + 676 − 1,735
4 Other investment − 126,356 − 135,670 − 176,548 + 86,890 + 41,926 + 11,307 + 58,684 + 37,322 + 14,121 + 7,241
MFIs 7,8 + 138,406 + 44,070 + 62,184 + 60,942 + 15 + 523 + 49,722 + 22,994 + 12,229 + 14,498
Long-term + 77,572 − 12,957 + 47,870 + 15,002 + 11,538 + 13,408 + 13,225 + 3,289 + 6,376 + 3,560
Short-term + 60,833 + 57,027 + 14,315 + 45,940 − 11,523 − 12,884 + 36,496 + 19,705 + 5,854 + 10,938
Enterprises and households − 59,426 − 20,612 + 1,985 + 21,570 − 29,128 − 3,984 + 7,389 + 14,926 + 2,773 − 10,310
Long-term − 41,464 + 5,169 − 1,763 − 534 + 1,097 + 89 − 1,209 − 820 − 466 + 77
Short-term 7 − 17,962 − 25,780 + 3,748 + 22,104 − 30,225 − 4,073 + 8,598 + 15,746 + 3,239 − 10,387
General government − 57,702 − 21,056 − 48,038 − 35,092 + 4,087 + 1,523 − 3,579 + 350 − 3,722 − 208
Long-term − 47,492 − 2,226 − 48,048 − 27,785 − 451 − 4,604 − 3,168 − 231 − 3,451 + 513
Short-term 7 − 10,209 − 18,829 + 10 − 7,307 + 4,538 + 6,126 − 411 + 580 − 271 − 721
Bundesbank − 147,633 − 138,073 − 192,679 + 39,469 + 66,953 + 13,246 + 5,153 − 948 + 2,841 + 3,260
5 Change in reserve assets at
transaction values (Increase: −) − 1,613 − 2,836 − 1,297 + 494 − 86 − 72 + 784 + 654 − 425 + 556
II Net foreign investment in Germany
(Increase/capital imports: +) + 268,531 + 63,600 + 121,943 − 112,576 − 12,287 − 28,598 − 82,347 − 32,216 − 25,636 − 24,495
1 Direct investment 1 + 43,361 + 35,203 + 5,109 + 3,143 + 7,697 − 7,065 + 4,654 − 153 + 1,743 + 3,063
Equity capital + 14,009 + 10,856 − 1,971 + 4,994 − 922 − 685 + 358 + 161 + 114 + 83
Reinvested earnings 2 + 3,330 + 2,534 + 7,402 + 2,281 + 4,821 − 883 + 2,546 + 419 + 1,100 + 1,028
Other capital transactionsof foreign direct investors + 26,022 + 21,813 − 323 − 4,132 + 3,799 − 5,497 + 1,750 − 732 + 530 + 1,953
2 Portfolio investment + 47,318 + 49,627 + 42,250 + 12,362 + 5,527 − 12,777 − 6,984 − 14,350 + 4,111 + 3,255
Shares 
3 − 6,147 − 11,418 + 1,148 − 227 − 5,384 + 2,818 + 3,925 + 1,287 + 1,189 + 1,449
Mutual fund shares + 3,598 + 6,647 − 3,869 + 644 + 73 − 802 + 1,200 + 605 − 50 + 645
Bonds and notes 5 + 59,620 + 50,314 + 52,925 + 10,966 − 1,480 − 20,675 − 5,487 − 18,221 + 6,816 + 5,918
Money market instruments − 9,753 + 4,084 − 7,954 + 978 + 12,317 + 5,883 − 6,622 + 1,979 − 3,844 − 4,757
3 Other investment + 177,852 − 21,231 + 74,584 − 128,081 − 25,511 − 8,756 − 80,017 − 17,714 − 31,490 − 30,814
MFIs 7,8 + 76,302 − 96,708 + 51,508 − 130,954 − 8,840 − 14,206 − 65,185 − 9,480 − 24,705 − 31,000
Long-term − 5,750 − 18,368 − 10,250 − 5,479 − 10,147 − 2,544 − 2,826 − 691 − 852 − 1,283
Short-term + 82,052 − 78,340 + 61,758 − 125,475 + 1,307 − 11,662 − 62,359 − 8,789 − 23,853 − 29,717
Enterprises and households + 1,992 + 25,006 − 6,034 − 10,279 + 9,452 + 8,384 − 3,045 − 8,270 + 1,189 + 4,037
Long-term − 6,261 − 11,899 − 9,633 − 281 − 4,996 − 3,155 − 4,901 − 1,506 − 492 − 2,903
Short-term 7 + 8,253 + 36,905 + 3,599 − 9,999 + 14,448 + 11,539 + 1,856 − 6,764 + 1,681 + 6,939
General government + 94,040 + 18,519 − 30,826 + 2,410 + 60 + 8,253 − 8,602 − 1,927 − 5,951 − 723
Long-term + 610 + 5,083 + 36,179 + 10,210 + 687 + 6,043 + 1,353 − 39 + 1,083 + 310
Short-term 7 + 93,430 + 13,436 − 67,005 − 7,799 − 627 + 2,210 − 9,955 − 1,888 − 7,034 − 1,033
Bundesbank + 5,518 + 31,952 + 59,936 + 10,742 − 26,183 − 11,187 − 3,185 + 1,964 − 2,022 − 3,127
III Financial account balance 9 
(Net capital exports: −) − 140,144 − 162,610 − 233,829 − 79,765 − 40,684 − 65,241 − 70,138 − 12,216 − 29,147 − 28,774
1From 1996, new definition for direct investment. 2Estimated. 3Including from changes in stocks. Purely statistical changes have been eliminated as far as
participation rights. 4From 1991, including retained earnings. 5From 1975, possible. 8Excluding the Deutsche Bundesbank. 9Financial account balance
excluding accrued interest. 6Options, whether evidenced by securities or not, and including change in reserve assets. 
financial futures contracts. 7The transaction values shown here are mostly derived

Deutsche Bundesbank
75  Monthly Report
November 2013
XII External sector
 
8 External position of the Bundesbank up to end-1998 *
 
 
DM million
Reserve assets and other claims on non-residents Liabilities vis-à-vis non-residents
Reserve assets
Reserve
positionin theInter- Liabilitiesnational arising Net Liabilities
Monetary arising from externalFund and Claims Loans and from Treasury position
Foreign special on the external discount (col 1 other claims
End of year currency drawing ECB 
2 on non- trans- liquidity less
or month Total Total Gold rights (net) Total paper col 8) balances 1 residents 3 actions 4 
1234567891 0 1 1
1997 127,849 126,884 13,688 76,673 13,874 22,649 966 16,931 16,931 − 110,918
1998 135,085 134,005 17,109 100,363 16,533 − 1,079 15,978 15,978 − 119,107
*Valuation of the gold holdings and the claims on non-residents in accordance with claims on the European Monetary Cooperation Fund (EMCF)). 3Including loans to
section 26 (2) of the Bundesbank Act and the provisions of the Commercial Code, the World Bank. 4Including liquidity paper sold to non-residents by the Bundesbank;
especially section 253. In the course of the year, valuation at the preceding year’s excluding the Treasury discount liquidity paper sold to non-residents between March
balance sheet rates. 1Mainly US dollar assets. 2European Central Bank (up to 1993, 1993 and March 1995, as shown in column 10. 
  
 
9 External position of the Bundesbank since the beginning of European monetary union o
€ million
Reserve assets and other claims on non-residents
Reserve assets
Reserveposition
Other in the Inter-national
claims on Net
Monetary Other residents external
Fund and claims on Claims in other position
Gold special Foreign non-euro- within the euro-area (col 1 Liabilities
End of year and gold drawing currency area Eurosystem member less vis-à-vis non-
or month Total Total rights reserves (net) 2 states col 9) receivables residents 1,3 residents 3,4 
1234567891 0
1999          Jan  5 95,316 93,940 29,312 8,461 56,167 140 1,225 11 8,169 87,146
1999 141,958 93,039 32,287 8,332 52,420 9,162 39,746 11 6,179 135,779
2000 100,762 93,815 32,676 7,762 53,377 313 6,620 14 6,592 94,170
2001 76,147 93,215 35,005 8,721 49,489 312 − 17,385 5 8,752 67,396
2002 103,948 85,002 36,208 8,272 40,522 312 18,466 167 9,005 94,942
2003 95,394 76,680 36,533 7,609 32,538 312 17,945 456 10,443 84,951
2004 93,110 71,335 35,495 6,548 29,292 312 20,796 667 7,935 85,175
2005 130,268 86,181 47,924 4,549 33,708 350 42,830 906 6,285 123,983
2006 104,389 84,765 53,114 3,011 28,640 350 18,344 931 4,819 99,570
2007 179,492 92,545 62,433 2,418 27,694 350 84,064 2,534 16,005 163,488
2008 230,775 99,185 68,194 3,285 27,705 350 128,668 2,573 30,169 200,607
2009 323,286 125,541 83,939 15,969 25,634 350 189,936 7,460 9,126 314,160
2010 524,695 162,100 115,403 18,740 27,957 50 337,869 24,676 14,620 510,075
2011 714,662 184,603 132,874 22,296 29,433 50 475,942 54,067 46,557 668,106
2012 921,002 188,630 137,513 22,344 28,774 50 668,617 63,706 106,496 814,506
2012          July 1,000,019 199,419 144,217 23,769 31,434 50 739,837 60,713 101,674 898,345
         Aug 1,023,617 197,776 143,507 23,520 30,749 50 764,080 61,711 101,494 922,123
         Sep 974,478 203,337 150,373 23,295 29,669 50 708,090 63,002 95,757 878,721
         Oct 991,439 196,910 144,172 23,154 29,585 50 731,983 62,496 123,787 867,652
         Nov 988,534 197,486 145,110 22,771 29,606 50 727,755 63,242 112,190 876,344
         Dec 921,002 188,630 137,513 22,344 28,774 50 668,617 63,706 106,496 814,506
2013          Jan 878,587 184,947 134,745 21,953 28,249 50 629,884 63,707 103,899 774,688
         Feb 871,508 183,222 132,131 22,011 29,079 50 625,519 62,717 96,300 775,208
         Mar 852,611 188,447 136,454 22,403 29,590 50 601,669 62,446 80,341 772,271
         Apr 857,433 173,980 122,844 22,096 29,040 50 620,813 62,590 94,482 762,951
         May 832,746 169,105 118,228 21,984 28,893 50 602,136 61,456 82,781 749,965
         June 798,888 150,825 100,280 21,926 28,618 50 588,423 59,590 69,145 729,743
         July 807,165 158,611 109,338 21,650 27,623 50 589,372 59,133 71,106 736,059
         Aug 808,649 164,477 114,714 21,434 28,330 50 586,531 57,591 69,088 739,560
         Sep 796,646 156,452 107,819 21,296 27,337 50 583,271 56,874 65,950 730,697
         Oct 785,449 154,486 106,477 20,922 27,086 50 574,400 56,514 85,712 699,737
oClaims and liabilities vis-à-vis all countries within and outside the euro area. Up to From November 2000, including the TARGET positions which were previously shown
December 2000, the levels at the end of each quarter are shown, owing to (in columns 6 and 9) as bilateral assets and liabilities vis-à-vis national central banksrevaluations, at market prices; within each quarter, however, the levels are computed outside the Eurosystem. 3See footnote 2. 4Excluding allocations of special drawing
on the basis of cumulative transaction values. From January 2001, all end-of-month rights (SDR) by the International Monetary Fund (IMF) for an amount of SDR 12,059levels are valued at market prices. 1Including loans to the World Bank. 2Including million. 5 Euro opening balance sheet of the Bundesbank as at 1 January 1999. 
the balances in the Bundesbank’s cross-border payments within the Eurosystem.

Deutsche Bundesbank
76  Monthly Report
November 2013
XII External sector
 
10 Assets and liabilities of enterprises in Germany (other than banks)
vis-à-vis non-residents *
 
€ million
Claims on non-residents Liabilities vis-à-vis non-residents
Claims on foreign non-banks Liabilities  vis-à-vis foreign non-banks
from trade credits from trade credits
Balances Loans
with from Credit Advance from from Credit Advance
End of year foreign financial terms payments foreign financial terms payments
or month Total banks Total Total granted effected Total banks Total Total used received operations operations
All countries
 
2009 593,591 209,729 383,862 240,727 143,135 130,605 12,530 754,355 159,667 594,688 457,468 137,220 80,759 56,461
2010 670,695 242,028 428,667 272,426 156,241 143,032 13,209 807,185 162,091 645,094 498,310 146,784 88,288 58,496
2011 698,599 242,387 456,212 285,123 171,089 155,392 15,697 871,795 172,099 699,696 538,839 160,857 95,131 65,726
2012 747,469 274,802 472,667 298,059 174,608 158,836 15,772 910,840 170,265 740,575 578,392 162,183 94,291 67,892
2013          Apr 803,011 300,397 502,614 323,962 178,652 162,511 16,141 950,589 188,067 762,522 604,255 158,267 88,185 70,082
         May 801,477 300,108 501,369 327,910 173,459 157,050 16,409 948,665 182,833 765,832 609,132 156,700 87,340 69,360         June 817,432 303,078 514,354 333,215 181,139 163,291 17,848 959,277 189,004 770,273 611,884 158,389 90,268 68,121
         July 789,196 289,671 499,525 324,104 175,421 159,571 15,850 950,276 182,792 767,484 608,832 158,652 88,618 70,034
         Aug 776,947 276,054 500,893 329,056 171,837 157,022 14,815 932,467 167,777 764,690 608,525 156,165 85,375 70,790         Sep 792,954 282,635 510,319 329,235 181,084 165,884 15,200 943,934 170,717 773,217 607,824 165,393 96,350 69,043
Industrial countries 1
 
2009 531,796 208,571 323,225 220,778 102,447 93,566 8,881 684,984 157,343 527,641 431,525 96,116 68,912 27,204
2010 598,167 240,915 357,252 249,497 107,755 98,428 9,327 725,644 159,522 566,122 464,105 102,017 73,987 28,030
2011 615,925 240,265 375,660 258,453 117,207 104,915 12,292 785,925 169,535 616,390 502,139 114,251 80,491 33,760
2012 659,800 272,400 387,400 269,072 118,328 104,985 13,343 824,182 167,856 656,326 542,994 113,332 79,123 34,209
2013          Apr 712,644 298,371 414,273 292,966 121,307 107,374 13,933 863,884 186,457 677,427 568,042 109,385 74,233 35,152
         May 711,444 297,975 413,469 296,987 116,482 102,475 14,007 862,791 181,198 681,593 572,878 108,715 73,755 34,960         June 725,177 300,712 424,465 302,127 122,338 106,939 15,399 872,929 187,406 685,523 576,845 108,678 75,421 33,257
         July 699,521 287,724 411,797 294,599 117,198 103,534 13,664 864,536 181,041 683,495 573,712 109,783 74,615 35,168
         Aug 686,029 274,141 411,888 297,891 113,997 101,543 12,454 845,587 166,242 679,345 572,562 106,783 71,004 35,779         Sep 701,704 279,335 422,369 300,148 122,221 109,258 12,963 856,730 169,208 687,522 571,605 115,917 81,012 34,905
EU member states 1
 
2009 443,431 200,400 243,031 165,986 77,045 70,051 6,994 579,596 141,633 437,963 367,980 69,983 48,977 21,006
2010 494,360 230,746 263,614 184,862 78,752 71,525 7,227 618,145 150,817 467,328 395,566 71,762 50,035 21,727
2011 508,071 225,583 282,488 196,132 86,356 76,472 9,884 660,137 157,465 502,672 421,679 80,993 54,370 26,623
2012 547,557 250,191 297,366 212,698 84,668 74,190 10,478 695,214 156,552 538,662 458,505 80,157 53,623 26,534
2013          Apr 587,110 271,727 315,383 228,428 86,955 76,276 10,679 738,135 176,310 561,825 483,676 78,149 51,034 27,115         May 586,363 271,349 315,014 231,347 83,667 72,821 10,846 736,373 171,562 564,811 487,182 77,629 50,941 26,688         June 602,070 278,044 324,026 235,290 88,736 76,411 12,325 742,006 176,682 565,324 488,916 76,408 51,620 24,788
         July 579,794 265,588 314,206 229,961 84,245 73,667 10,578 735,969 169,555 566,414 488,420 77,994 51,167 26,827
         Aug 573,795 260,380 313,415 231,907 81,508 72,128 9,380 718,162 155,106 563,056 487,173 75,883 48,653 27,230         Sep 583,499 265,554 317,945 230,762 87,183 77,199 9,984 725,230 158,941 566,289 484,781 81,508 54,958 26,550
of which: Euro-area member states 2
 
2009 321,991 159,740 162,251 114,378 47,873 43,179 4,694 466,064 91,792 374,272 332,280 41,992 28,397 13,595
2010 366,774 184,299 182,475 130,430 52,045 47,239 4,806 497,433 98,177 399,256 351,352 47,904 33,444 14,460
2011 372,493 171,907 200,586 142,530 58,056 52,125 5,931 529,244 103,827 425,417 370,898 54,519 37,188 17,331
2012 396,816 189,865 206,951 152,060 54,891 48,992 5,899 572,523 110,052 462,471 408,502 53,969 36,754 17,215
2013          Apr 432,655 207,971 224,684 167,561 57,123 51,042 6,081 611,911 130,368 481,543 428,570 52,973 35,102 17,871         May 435,136 210,647 224,489 170,045 54,444 48,240 6,204 614,061 129,147 484,914 432,597 52,317 35,168 17,149         June 446,909 217,914 228,995 171,821 57,174 50,609 6,565 619,937 133,105 486,832 434,940 51,892 35,247 16,645
         July 430,839 207,800 223,039 168,612 54,427 48,371 6,056 616,842 127,440 489,402 437,104 52,298 35,317 16,981
         Aug 423,976 202,514 221,462 168,575 52,887 46,853 6,034 606,856 122,401 484,455 433,578 50,877 33,187 17,690         Sep 425,286 203,030 222,256 166,830 55,426 49,244 6,182 610,391 123,618 486,773 432,759 54,014 36,517 17,497
Emerging economies and developing countries 3
 
2009 61,795 1,158 60,637 19,949 40,688 37,039 3,649 69,371 2,324 67,047 25,943 41,104 11,847 29,257
2010 72,528 1,113 71,415 22,929 48,486 44,604 3,882 81,541 2,569 78,972 34,205 44,767 14,301 30,466
2011 82,674 2,122 80,552 26,670 53,882 50,477 3,405 85,870 2,564 83,306 36,700 46,606 14,640 31,966
2012 87,669 2,402 85,267 28,987 56,280 53,851 2,429 86,658 2,409 84,249 35,398 48,851 15,168 33,683
2013          Apr 90,367 2,026 88,341 30,996 57,345 55,137 2,208 86,705 1,610 85,095 36,213 48,882 13,952 34,930         May 90,033 2,133 87,900 30,923 56,977 54,575 2,402 85,874 1,635 84,239 36,254 47,985 13,585 34,400         June 92,255 2,366 89,889 31,088 58,801 56,352 2,449 86,348 1,598 84,750 35,039 49,711 14,847 34,864
         July 89,675 1,947 87,728 29,505 58,223 56,037 2,186 85,740 1,751 83,989 35,120 48,869 14,003 34,866
         Aug 90,918 1,913 89,005 31,165 57,840 55,479 2,361 86,880 1,535 85,345 35,963 49,382 14,371 35,011         Sep 91,250 3,300 87,950 29,087 58,863 56,626 2,237 87,204 1,509 85,695 36,219 49,476 15,338 34,138
* Up to and including November 2009 the assets and liabilities vis-à-vis non-residents Croatia. 2From January 2009 including Slovakia; from January 2011 including
of households in Germany. The assets and liabilities vis-à-vis non-residents of banks Estonia. 3All countries that are not regarded as industrial countries. Up to
(MFIs) in Germany are shown in Table 4 of Section IV, “Banks”. Statistical increases December 2010 including Niederländische Antillen; from January 2011 including
and decreases have not been eliminated; to this extent, the changes in totals are not Bonaire, St.Eustatius, Saba and Curacao and St.Martin (Dutch part); up to June 2013comparable with the figures shown in Table XI.7. 1From July 2013 including including Croatia. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
77  Monthly Report
November 2013
XII External sector
 
11 ECB euro reference exchange rates of selected currencies *
 
 
EUR 1 = currency units ...
Yearly Australia Canada China Denmark Japan Norway Sweden Switzerland United States United Kingdom
or monthly       
average AUD CAD CNY 1 DKK JPY NOK SEK CHF GBP USD
1999 1.6523 1.5840 . 7.4355 121.32 8.3104 8.8075 1.6003 0.65874 1.0658
2000 1.5889 1.3706 2 7.6168 7.4538 99.47 8.1129 8.4452 1.5579 0.60948 0.9236
2001 1.7319 1.3864 7.4131 7.4521 108.68 8.0484 9.2551 1.5105 0.62187 0.8956
2002 1.7376 1.4838 7.8265 7.4305 118.06 7.5086 9.1611 1.4670 0.62883 0.94562003 1.7379 1.5817 9.3626 7.4307 130.97 8.0033 9.1242 1.5212 0.69199 1.13122004 1.6905 1.6167 10.2967 7.4399 134.44 8.3697 9.1243 1.5438 0.67866 1.2439
2005 1.6320 1.5087 10.1955 7.4518 136.85 8.0092 9.2822 1.5483 0.68380 1.2441
2006 1.6668 1.4237 10.0096 7.4591 146.02 8.0472 9.2544 1.5729 0.68173 1.25562007 1.6348 1.4678 10.4178 7.4506 161.25 8.0165 9.2501 1.6427 0.68434 1.37052008 1.7416 1.5594 10.2236 7.4560 152.45 8.2237 9.6152 1.5874 0.79628 1.47082009 1.7727 1.5850 9.5277 7.4462 130.34 8.7278 10.6191 1.5100 0.89094 1.3948
2010 1.4423 1.3651 8.9712 7.4473 116.24 8.0043 9.5373 1.3803 0.85784 1.3257
2011 1.3484 1.3761 8.9960 7.4506 110.96 7.7934 9.0298 1.2326 0.86788 1.39202012 1.2407 1.2842 8.1052 7.4437 102.49 7.4751 8.7041 1.2053 0.81087 1.2848
2012          June 1.2550 1.2874 7.9676 7.4325 99.26 7.5401 8.8743 1.2011 0.80579 1.2526
         July 1.1931 1.2461 7.8288 7.4384 97.07 7.4579 8.5451 1.2011 0.78827 1.2288
         Aug 1.1841 1.2315 7.8864 7.4454 97.58 7.3239 8.2805 1.2011 0.78884 1.2400         Sep 1.2372 1.2583 8.1273 7.4539 100.49 7.3945 8.4929 1.2089 0.79821 1.2856
         Oct 1.2596 1.2801 8.1390 7.4582 102.47 7.4076 8.6145 1.2098 0.80665 1.2974
         Nov 1.2331 1.2787 7.9998 7.4587 103.94 7.3371 8.6076 1.2052 0.80389 1.2828         Dec 1.2527 1.2984 8.1809 7.4604 109.71 7.3503 8.6512 1.2091 0.81237 1.3119
2013          Jan 1.2658 1.3189 8.2698 7.4614 118.34 7.3821 8.6217 1.2288 0.83271 1.3288
         Feb 1.2951 1.3477 8.3282 7.4598 124.40 7.4232 8.5083 1.2298 0.86250 1.3359         Mar 1.2537 1.3285 8.0599 7.4553 122.99 7.4863 8.3470 1.2266 0.85996 1.2964
         Apr 1.2539 1.3268 8.0564 7.4553 127.54 7.5444 8.4449 1.2199 0.85076 1.3026
         May 1.3133 1.3257 7.9715 7.4536 131.13 7.5589 8.5725 1.2418 0.84914 1.2982         June 1.3978 1.3596 8.0905 7.4576 128.40 7.7394 8.6836 1.2322 0.85191 1.3189
         July 1.4279 1.3619 8.0234 7.4579 130.39 7.8837 8.6609 1.2366 0.86192 1.3080
         Aug 1.4742 1.3853 8.1477 7.4580 130.34 7.9386 8.7034 1.2338 0.85904 1.3310         Sep 1.4379 1.3817 8.1690 7.4579 132.41 7.9725 8.6758 1.2338 0.84171 1.3348
         Oct 1.4328 1.4128 8.3226 7.4592 133.32 8.1208 8.7479 1.2316 0.84720 1.3635
*Averages: Bundesbank calculations based on the daily euro reference exchange Statistical Supplement 5, Exchange rate statistics. 1Up to March 2005, ECB indicative
rates published by the ECB; for additional euro reference exchange rates, see rates. 2 Average from 13 January to 29 December 2000. 
12 Euro-area member states and irrevocable euro conversion rates in the third stage
of European Economic and Monetary Union
From Country Currency ISO currency code EUR 1 = currency units ...
1999  January 1 Austria Austrian schilling ATS 13.7603
Belgium Belgian franc BEF 40.3399
Finland Finnish markka FIM 5.94573
France French franc FRF 6.55957
Germany Deutsche Mark DEM 1.95583
Ireland Irish pound IEP 0.787564
Italy Italian lira ITL 1,936.27
Luxembourg Luxembourg franc LUF 40.3399
Netherlands Dutch guilder NLG 2.20371
Portugal Portuguese escudo PTE 200.482
Spain Spanish peseta ESP 166.386
2001  January 1 Greece Greek drachma GRD 340.750
2007  January 1 Slovenia Slovenian tolar SIT 239.640
2008  January 1 Cyprus Cyprus pound CYP 0.585274
Malta Maltese lira MTL 0.429300
2009  January 1 Slovakia Slovak koruna SKK 30.1260
2011  January 1 Estonia Estonian kroon EEK 15.6466
2014  January 1 Latvia Latvian lats LVL 0.702804

Deutsche Bundesbank
78  Monthly Report
November 2013
XII  External sector
 
13  Effective exchange rates of the Euro and indicators of the German economy’s price competitiveness *
 
 
1999 Q1=100
Effective exchange rate of the Euro Indicators of the German economy’s price competitiveness
EER-21  1 EER-40  2 Based on the deflators of total sales  3 Based on consumer price indices
24 selected industrial countries  4 In real terms
In real terms based on
In real based on unit In real
24 terms the deflators labour terms
based on of gross costs of based on Non- selected
37 37 56 consumer domestic national consumer Euro-area euro-area industrial
Period Nominal price indices product  3 economy  3 Nominal price indices Total countries countries countries  5 countries  4 countries  5 countries  6 
1999 96.2 96.1 96.0 96.3 96.5 95.8 97.8 99.5 95.7 97.6 98.2 98.0 97.7
2000 87.0 86.6 86.1 85.6 87.9 85.8 91.7 97.1 85.2 90.7 92.9 91.9 90.9
2001 87.7 87.2 86.5 84.7 90.4 87.1 91.2 96.0 85.7 89.9 92.9 91.4 90.8
2002 90.1 90.4 89.6 87.9 94.9 90.7 91.9 95.1 88.2 90.5 93.5 91.9 91.8
2003 100.6 101.5 100.6 98.6 106.8 101.6 95.2 94.0 97.2 94.6 97.0 96.5 96.7
2004 104.4 105.2 103.4 102.5 111.4 105.2 95.5 92.9 99.5 94.9 98.4 98.0 98.2
2005 102.9 103.7 101.5 100.3 109.4 102.7 94.4 91.5 98.8 92.9 98.4 96.9 96.5
2006 102.8 103.7 100.7 99.1 109.4 102.0 93.3 90.0 98.4 91.3 98.5 96.4 95.8
2007 106.2 106.4 102.6 100.7 112.8 104.0 94.2 89.2 102.4 91.5 100.8 97.8 96.9
2008 109.3 108.4 103.8 103.3 117.0 105.9 94.3 87.8 105.4 90.5 102.2 97.7 97.0
2009 110.6 109.0 104.6 105.2 119.8 106.8 93.9 87.9 104.0 90.5 101.7 97.9 97.4
2010 103.6 101.5 96.5 97.9 111.5 98.1 91.6 87.7 97.8 87.2 98.8 93.8 92.2
2011 103.4 100.6 95.0 p 96.2 112.2 97.6 91.4 87.5 97.6 86.6 98.2 93.1 91.7
2012 97.9 95.5 89.7 p 90.5 107.1 92.8 89.5 87.4 92.5 84.2 96.0 90.3 88.8
2010          May 101.8 99.9 95.4 96.7 109.1 96.3 91.2 87.5 96.8 86.6 98.2 93.0 91.2
         June 99.8 97.9 107.0 94.4 97.2 92.1 90.3
         July 101.6 99.7 109.2 96.3 97.8 92.9 91.2
         Aug 101.2 99.2 94.4 95.2 108.9 95.9 90.8 87.7 95.4 86.3 97.6 92.6 90.9
         Sep 101.5 99.4 109.3 96.0 97.7 92.7 91.0
         Oct 104.9 102.5 113.0 99.0 99.1 94.2 92.6
         Nov 103.7 101.1 95.7 98.0 111.8 97.7 91.5 87.7 97.6 87.0 98.8 93.6 92.0
         Dec 101.7 99.1 109.4 95.6 97.9 92.8 91.0
2011          Jan 101.4 98.9 109.4 95.5 97.8 92.4 90.7
         Feb 102.4 99.8 94.6 96.3 110.7 96.5 91.5 87.8 97.3 86.7 98.1 92.8 91.2
         Mar 104.1 101.5 112.4 98.1 98.6 93.5 91.9
         Apr 105.8 103.3 114.1 99.7 99.6 94.3 92.8
         May 104.9 102.0 96.8 98.7 113.3 98.6 92.4 87.6 100.1 87.6 99.0 93.7 92.1
         June 105.0 102.0 113.5 98.7 99.0 93.7 92.2
         July 104.0 101.0 112.4 97.7 98.6 93.3 91.7
         Aug 103.9 100.8 94.9 97.0 113.0 98.1 91.3 87.4 97.3 86.4 98.1 93.0 91.8
         Sep 102.8 99.9 112.1 97.4 97.7 92.7 91.5
         Oct 103.0 100.2 112.6 97.8 97.9 92.9 91.8
         Nov 102.6 99.8 93.7 p 92.7 112.1 97.3 90.5 87.3 95.5 85.7 97.7 92.8 91.6
         Dec 100.8 98.1 110.3 95.7 96.9 91.8 90.6
2012          Jan 99.0 96.3 108.1 93.7 96.2 90.8 89.4
         Feb 99.7 97.2 91.4 p 92.4 108.4 94.2 89.9 87.3 93.7 84.8 96.8 91.3 89.7
         Mar 99.9 97.3 108.7 94.3 96.8 91.1 89.6
         Apr 99.5 97.1 108.5 94.2 96.7 91.1 89.5
         May 98.1 95.6 90.2 p 91.3 107.3 93.0 89.6 87.4 92.7 84.4 96.0 90.4 88.9
         June 97.2 94.8 106.7 92.4 95.5 89.9 88.6
         July 95.4 93.1 104.3 90.6 94.8 89.1 87.5
         Aug 95.3 93.1 87.8 p 89.1 104.5 90.6 88.8 87.4 90.5 83.3 94.9 89.0 87.5
         Sep 97.2 94.9 106.6 92.5 95.6 89.9 88.5
         Oct 97.8 95.5 107.3 92.9 95.9 90.1 88.6
         Nov 97.3 94.9 89.5 p 89.3 106.7 92.3 89.7 87.4 93.0 84.2 95.9 90.0 88.5
         Dec 98.7 96.2 108.3 93.5 96.6 90.6 89.2
2013          Jan 100.4 97.9 109.9 94.8 97.4 91.5 89.9
         Feb 101.7 99.0 p 92.1 p 92.5 111.2 95.7 91.0 87.5 96.6 85.6 98.1 92.0 90.4
         Mar 100.2 97.8 109.5 94.4 97.7 91.5 89.7
         Apr 100.5 97.8 109.8 94.3 97.5 91.2 89.5
         May 100.6 98.0 p 92.6 p 92.0 110.0 p 94.5 91.7 87.8 97.7 86.0 98.1 91.7 p 89.9
         June 101.6 98.8 112.0 p 96.1 98.2 92.2 p 90.8
         July 101.5 p 98.8 112.0 p 96.1 98.4 p 92.2 p 90.8
         Aug 102.2 p 99.5 ... ... 113.4 p 97.3 ... ... ... ... 98.5 p 92.4 p 91.3
         Sep 102.0 p 99.1 113.3 p 97.0 p 98.5 p 92.3 p 91.3
         Oct 102.9 p 99.9 114.2 p 97.6 p 98.9 p 92.7 p 91.6
*The effective exchange rate corresponds to the weighted external value of the Where price and wage indices were not available, estimates were used. 2ECB
currency concerned. The method of calculating the indicators of the German calculations. Includes countries belonging to the EER-21 group (see footnote 1) and
economy’s price competitiveness is consistent with the procedure used by the ECB to additional Algeria, Argentina, Brazil, Chile, Iceland, India, Indonesia, Israel, Malaysia,compute the effective exchange rates of the euro (see Monthly Report, November Mexico, Morocco, New Zealand, Philippines, Russian Federation, South Africa,2001, pp  50-53, May 2007, pp  31-35, February 2012, pp  34-35 and August 2013, Taiwan, Thailand, Turkey and Venezuela. 3Annual and quarterly averages.
pp  50-52). For more detailed information on methodology see the ECB’s Occasional 4Euro-area countries (from 2001 including Greece, from 2007 including Slovenia,
Paper No  134 (www.ecb.int). A decline in the figures implies an increase in compe- from 2008 including Cyprus and Malta, from 2009 including Slovakia, from 2011titiveness. 1ECB calculations are based on the weighted averages of the changes in including Estonia) as well as Canada, Denmark, Japan, Norway, Sweden, Switzerland,
the bilateral exchange rates of the euro against the currencies of the following the United Kingdom and the United States. 5Euro-area countries and countries
countries: Australia, Bulgaria, Canada, China, Croatia, Czech Republic, Denmark, belonging to the EER-21 group. 6Euro-area countries and countries belonging to the
Hong Kong, Hungary, Japan, Latvia, Lithuania, Norway, Poland, Romania, Singapore, EER-40 group (see footnote 2). South Korea, Sweden, Switzerland, the United Kingdom and the United States.

Overview of publications by the  
Deutsche Bundesbank
This overview provides information about selected recent economic and statistical publica -
tions by the Deutsche Bundesbank. Unless otherwise indicated, these publications are avail -
able in both English and German, in printed form and on the Bundesbank’s website.
The publications are available free of charge from the Communication Division. For a small 
fee to cover costs, a file which is updated monthly and contains approximately 40,000 time series published by the Bundesbank can be obtained on CD-ROM from the Division Statis -
tical data processing, mathematical methods or downloaded from the Bundesbank-ExtraNet site. Orders should be sent, in writing, to one of the addresses listed on the reverse of the title page. Selected time series can also be downloaded from the internet.
Annual Report
Financial Stability ReviewMonthly Report
For information on the articles published be -
tween 2000 and 2012 see the index attached 
to the January 2013 Monthly Report.
Monthly Report articles
December 2012
– Outlook for the German economy – macro -
economic projections for 2013 and 2014
– German enterprises’ profitability and finan -
cing in 2011
– Calendar effects on economic activity
January 2013
– Current developments in the mutual funds 
market: demand, structural changes and 
 investor behaviour– Current and projected development of coin 
circulation in Germany
February 2013
– The current economic situation in Germany
March 2013
– Germany’s balance of payments in 2012
– Banks’ internal methods for assessing and maintaining internal capital adequacy and 
their relevance to supervision
April 2013
– The US economy in the current economic 
upturn
– Macroprudential oversight in Germany: 
framework, institutions and tools
May 2013
– The current economic situation in Germany
June 2013
– Outlook for the German economy – macro -
economic projections for 2013 and 2014
– Household wealth and finances in Germany: results of the Bundesbank surveyDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report 
November 2013  
79•

– Household finances, saving and inequality: 
an international perspective – conference 
held by the Bundesbank and the Max Planck Institute for Social Law and Social Policy
– Implementing Basel  III in Eur opean and na -
tional law
July 2013
– European Single Supervisory Mechanism for 
banks – a first step on the road to a banking 
union
– Estimating yield curves in the wake of the 
financial crisis
– Differences in money and credit growth in 
the euro area and in individual euro-  ar ea 
countries
August 2013
– The current economic situation in Germany
September 2013
– The performance of German credit institu -
tions in 2012
– The development of government interest 
 expenditure in Germany
– Forecasting models in short-  term business 
cycle analysis – a workshop report
October 2013
– The determinants and regional dependen -
cies of house price increases since 2010
– Macroeconomic approaches to assessing 
price competitiveness
– International cooperation in the area of 
 financial sector policy – the Financial Stabil -
ity Board (FSB)
November 2013
– The current economic situation in GermanyStatistical Supplements to the 
Monthly Report
 1 Banking statistics 1, 2
 2 C apital market statistics 1, 2
 3 Balance of payments statistics 1, 2
 4 Seasonal ly adjusted business statistics 1, 2
 5 Exchange rate statistics 2
Special Publications
Makro-ökonometrisches Mehr-Länder-Modell, 
November 1996 3
Europäische Organisationen und Gremien im Bereich von Währung und Wirtschaft, May 
1997 3
Die Zahlungsbilanz der ehemaligen DDR 1975 
bis 1989, August 1999 3
The market for German Federal securities, 
May 2000
Macro-Econometric Multi-Country Model: MEM -
MOD, June 2000
Bundesbank Act, September 2002
Weltweite Organisationen und Gremien im Be -
reich von Währung und Wirtschaft, March 
2003 3
Die Europäische Union: Grundlagen und Politik-
bereiche außerhalb der Wirtschafts- und Wäh -
rungsunion, April 2005 3
Die Deutsche Bundesbank – Aufgabenfelder, 
rechtlicher Rahmen, Geschichte, April 2006 3
European economic and monetary union, April 
2008
For footnotes, see p 82•.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report 
November 2013  
80•

Special Statistical Publications
 1 Banking statistics guidelines, July 20132, 4
 2 Bankenstatistik Kundensystematik,  
July 20132, 3
 3 Aufbau der bankstatistischen Tabellen,  
July 20132, 3
 4 Financial accounts for Germany 2 007 to 
2012, June 20132
 5 Hochgerechnete Angaben aus Jahres -
abschlüssen deutscher Unternehmen von 
1997 bis 2007 , November 20092, 3
 6 V erhältniszahlen aus Jahresabschlüssen 
deutscher Unternehmen von 2009 bis 
2010, May 20132, 3
 7 Notes on the coding list for the balance of 
payments statistics, September 2013 2
 8 The balance of payments statistics of the  
Federal Republic of Germany, 2nd edition, 
February 1991o
 9 Securities deposits, August 2005
 1 0 F oreign direct investment stock statistics, 
April 20131, 2
 1 1 Balance of payments by region,  
July 2013
 1 2 T echnologische Dienstleistungen in der 
Zahlungsbilanz, June 20113Discussion Papers*
35/ 2013  
Modelling and measuring business risk and the 
resiliency of retail banks
36/ 2013  
Asset prices, collateral, and unconventional 
monetary policy in a DSGE model
37/ 2013  
Bayesian estimation of a DSGE model with 
asset prices
38/ 2013  
Precautionary motives in short-term cash man -
agement – evidence from German POS transac -
tions
39/ 2013  
Uncertainty and bank wholesale funding
40/ 2013  
How stressed are banks in the interbank mar -
ket?
41/ 2013  
Interest rate risk and the Swiss solvency test
42/ 2013  
Is proprietary trading detrimental to retail in -
vestors?
43/ 2013  
Disentangling economic recessions and depres-
sions
44/ 2013  
Collateral requirements and asset prices
45/ 2013  
Monetary policy and stock market volatility
o Not available on the website.
* As of 2000 these publications have been made available on the Bundesbank’s website in German and English. Since the beginning of 2012, no longer subdivided into series 1 and series 2.For footnotes, see p 82•.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report 
November 2013  
81•

Banking legislation
 1 Bundesbank A ct and Statute of the Euro -
pean System of Central Banks and of the 
European Central Bank, June 1998
 2 Gesetz über das Kreditwesen, January 
20083 2a Solvabilitäts- und Liquiditätsverordnung, 
February 20083
1 Only the headings and explanatory notes to the data con -
tained in the German originals are available in English.
2 Available on the website only.3 Available in German only.
4 Only some parts of the Special Statistical Publications are 
provided in English. The date refers to the German issue, 
which may be of a more recent date than the English one.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report 
November 2013  
82•

