Monthly Report
August 2013
Vol 65  
No 8

Deutsche Bundesbank  
Wilhelm-Epstein-Strasse 14  
60431 Frankfurt am Main  
Germany
Postal address  
Postfach 10 06 02  
60006 Frankfurt am Main  
Germany
Tel +49 69 9566-0
Fax +49 69 9566 3077
http://www.bundesbank.de
Reproduction permitted only if source is stated.
ISSN 0418-8292 (print edition)  
ISSN 1862-1325 (online edition)
The German original of this Monthly Report  
went to press at 11 am on 16 August 2013.Annual and weekly publishing schedules for 
 selected statistics of the Deutsche Bundes-  
bank can be downloaded from our website. 
The statistical data are also published on the 
website.
The Monthly Report  is published by the 
 Deutsche Bundesbank, Frankfurt am Main,  
by virtue of section  18 of the Bundesbank  
Act. It is available to interested parties free of 
charge.
This is a translation of the original German-
language version, which is the sole authorita -
tive text.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2013  
2

Contents
The current economic situation in Germany  ................................................  5
Overview  ........................................................................................................................  6
Global and European setting  ..................................................................................  11
Macroeconomic implications of Japan’s new economic policy  ...........................................  16
The problem of high youth unemployment in the euro-area crisis countries  .......................  22
Monetary policy and banking business  ..............................................................  29
Forward guidance – an indication of monetary policy stance in the future  .........................  30
Money market management and liquidity needs  ................................................................  33
Statistical focus on insurance corporations and pension funds  ...........................................  40
The structure of corporate financing amid weak loan growth in Germany and  
the euro area  .....................................................................................................................  42
Financial markets  ........................................................................................................  46
Adjustments in the calculation of effective exchange rates and indicators  
of price competitiveness in August 2013  .............................................................................  50
Economic conditions in Germany  .........................................................................  57
Public finances  .............................................................................................................  67
Recent decisions of the Ecofin Council regarding the  excessive deficit procedures  
for euro-area countries  .......................................................................................................  70Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2013  
3

Statistical Section ....................................................................................................  1 •
Key economic data for the euro area  ..................................................................................  5 •
Overall monetary survey in the euro area  ............................................................................  8 •
Consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem  ............................................................  16 •
Banks  ..................................................................................................................................  20 •
Minimum reserves  ...............................................................................................................  42 •
Interest rates  .......................................................................................................................  43 •
Insurance corporations and pension funds  ..........................................................................  48 •
Capital market  ....................................................................................................................  50 •
Financial accounts  ...............................................................................................................  54 •
Public finances in Germany  .................................................................................................  56 •
Economic conditions in Germany  ........................................................................................  63 •
External sector  ....................................................................................................................  70 •
Overview of publications by the Deutsche Bundesbank  ..........................  79 •
Abbreviations and symbols
e Estimated
p Provisional
pe Partly estimated
r Revised
… Data available at a later date
. Data unknown, not to be published or not meaningful
0 Less than 0.5 but more than nil
– Nil
Discrepancies in the totals are due to rounding.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2013  
4

The current economic situation  
in GermanyDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2013  
5

Overview
Strong second- quarter 
growth in German economy
Global economic output is likely to have in -
creased moderately in the second quarter of 
2013. This growth was dampened by a rela -
tively weak expansion in the emerging econ -
omies, largely because of still- sluggish external 
demand and structural problems in these coun -
tries – including infrastructure constraints and 
China’s very export and investment- driven 
growth model, which is reaching its limits. 
Growth in the industrial countries as a whole 
accelerated distinctly. Among this group, Ja -
pan’s previously strong growth lost steam, 
while the US economy picked up slightly and 
the UK economy markedly. In addition, aggre -
gate output in the euro area improved distinctly 
on its subdued first- quarter level, which could 
mark an end to the recession which began in 
autumn 2011. The strong expansion in the Ger -
man economy, the return to significant growth 
in French real gross domestic product (GDP) 
and a slower fall in output in Italy and Spain 
were all important factors in this development.
The global economy could remain on this up -
ward path in the third quarter of 2013. Certain 
factors will probably bar the way to a stronger 
recovery, including growth constraints caused 
by a slight rise in the previously very low capital 
market yields, and the gradual nature of im -
provements in the euro area. In addition, the 
large emerging economies still face structural 
growth problems. Furthermore, the central 
banks of several emerging economies which re -
quire large capital inflows to fund their current 
account deficits have been forced to tighten 
their monetary policy stance in response to de -
preciation pressures on their currencies, which 
could also hold back growth. The main reason 
for this situation was that comments by the US 
Federal Reserve led the markets to expect that 
it might phase out its very expansionary monet -ary policy measures earlier than had generally 
been thought.
Changes in economic indicators and in expect -
ations regarding the future US monetary policy 
stance – the latter shifts being closely related to 
the former – had a major impact on the inter -
national financial markets from late March 
2013 onwards. In addition, some major central 
banks continued to loosen their already expan -
sionary monetary policy stance. The Bank of 
Japan1 outlined its new monetary easing policy 
framework, and the ECB lowered its key inter -
est rates. The expansionary measures initially 
drove down yields on long- dated bonds around 
the world. In May, however, yields began to 
climb again worldwide in view of positively re -
ceived economic data. Subsequently, expect -
ations that US monetary policy might be tight -
ened more rapidly than previously thought also 
took a firmer hold. Towards the end of the 
period under review, however, the Federal Re -
serve stressed that it would maintain an ac -
commodative stance for the foreseeable fu -
ture, which curtailed and partly reversed the 
rise in interest rates. The situation in Germany 
was affected not only by the interest rate link -
age between Germany and the United States 
but also by a slight improvement in leading 
economic indicators. The higher yields on gov -
ernment bonds put pressure on the stock mar -
kets for a time. Yet the low price uncertainty, 
largely positive quarterly financial results from 
US enterprises and budding hopes of an end to 
the euro- area recession gave the stock markets 
enough of a boost for distinct price rises over -
all. On the foreign exchange markets, the euro 
appreciated against the other major currencies, 
making particularly strong gains against the 
yen.Global economy Financial 
 markets
1 For more information on Japanese monetary and eco -
nomic policy, see pp 16ff.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2013  
6

Since lowering the main refinancing rate 
to 0.50% and the marginal lending rate 
to 1.00% in May 2013, the ECB Governing 
Council has left the key interest rates un -
changed. This decision is based on the Govern -
ing Council’s expectation that underlying price 
pressures in the euro area will remain subdued 
over the medium term. The ongoing accom -
modative monetary policy stance is intended to 
support the gradual recovery in economic ac -
tivity expected for the remainder of this year 
and for 2014.
Yet short- term money market rates have, on 
average, been marginally above first- quarter 
levels since April despite the ECB lowering its 
key interest rates on 2 May 2013. In view of 
this situation, the ECB Governing Council an -
nounced after its meeting on 4 July 2013 that it 
expected the key ECB interest rates to remain 
at present or lower levels for an extended 
period of time, and repeated this phrase fol -
lowing its meeting on 1 August. The ECB Gov -
erning Council has thus issued “forward guid -
ance”2 on its macroeconomic expectations and 
future monetary policy stance. However, this is 
not an unconditional commitment and does 
not mark a change in the ECB’s monetary pol -
icy strategy: the actual key ECB interest rates 
will continue to depend on the medium- term 
outlook for inflation, which is based on expect -
ations regarding future developments in the 
real economy and on credit and monetary ag -
gregates.
As in the preceding quarters, the main factors 
influencing euro- area monetary dynamics in 
the second quarter were the economic situ -
ation, inflows from abroad, low interest rates 
and a flat yield curve. As a result, growth in the 
monetary aggregate M3 continued to lose 
pace in the second quarter, as growing cut -
backs in loans to the private sector increasingly 
outweighed expansionary factors.
The German economy grew strongly in the 
second quarter of 2013. According to the flash 
estimate by the Federal Statistical Office, second- quarter real GDP was up 0.7% on the 
quarter after seasonal and calendar adjust -
ment. However, this high quarter- on- quarter 
growth must be viewed in the context of the 
stagnant economic output seen in the first 
quarter of 2013, when an incipient pick- up in 
the economy was held back by particularly bad 
weather. The strong expansion in activity in the 
second quarter is likely to have brought the 
German economy back to a normal level of 
capacity utilisation, which had fallen temporar -
ily in the second half of 2012 as a result of the 
escalating euro- area debt crisis and the dip in 
global economic growth.
German enterprises’ foreign business picked up 
again somewhat after the slump recorded in 
the final quarter of 2012 and the first quarter of 
2013, although without yet making good all 
of last autumn’s losses. Growth in external de -
mand remained fairly subdued, mainly because 
of a substantial decline in exports of aircraft, 
ships and railway vehicles. Meanwhile, Ger -
many imported a much larger volume of goods 
than in the previous two quarters, with imports 
from other euro- area countries increasing 
much more sharply than those from elsewhere.
Enterprises’ investment in machinery and 
equipment, which had stabilised at a low level 
at the beginning of 2013 following a significant 
fall in 2012, gathered little momentum in the 
spring despite the sharp increase in economic 
output. Capital formation in the domestic cor -
porate sector remained largely subdued despite 
enterprises having ample own funds and ac -
cess to cheap sources of funding. This was 
probably mainly due to the long- standing 
gloomy sales outlook, above all in the euro 
area, and the ongoing uncertainty about the 
economic policy situation in view of the debt 
crisis. By contrast, construction investment in -
creased considerably in the second quarter fol -
lowing a weather- related fall in the winter. 
Catch- up effects played a role in this develop -Monetary policy
German 
 economy
2 For more information on “forward guidance”, see also 
pp 30ff.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2013  
7

ment, yet additional demand also created mo -
mentum, as a very large number of permits for 
residential construction have been issued since 
the beginning of the year. Private consumption 
also boosted demand, although with a differ -
ent emphasis to the first quarter of the year. 
While retail sales did not rise any further on the 
quarter according to provisional statistical data, 
new private passenger car registrations in -
creased distinctly.
Developments in lending were in line with the 
profile for domestic demand. Loans to non-  
financial corporations in Germany declined 
sharply in the second quarter of 2013, reflect -
ing the German economy’s weakness towards 
the end of 2012 and the increased use of alter -
native sources of finance. By contrast, loans to 
households rose perceptibly, mainly as a result 
of continued high demand for housing loans, 
but also because of a slight increase in con -
sumer loans, which can be explained by 
brighter income prospects.
The labour market moved sideways in the 
second quarter of the year. The number of per -
sons in work in Germany grew slightly. How -
ever, new jobs subject to social security contri -
butions – which caused this increase – were 
now created in just a few services sectors. Ger -
many’s labour supply is still being boosted by 
immigration, with workers increasingly coming 
from southern Europe. The after- effects of the 
economic weakness are evident in the slight 
rise in underemployment. However, unemploy -
ment started to drop in June. In July the sea -
sonally adjusted unemployment rate remained 
unchanged at 6.8%. Leading indicators sug -
gest that the labour market could remain calm 
in the coming months.
The pace of wage increases weakened tempor -
arily in the second quarter. Negotiated rates of 
pay overall climbed by just 2.2% year on year, 
compared to 2.9% in the first quarter. This was 
because several of the new wage agreements 
did not include any pay increases at the begin -
ning of their validity period and no agreement has yet been reached in retail despite months 
of negotiations. The latest settlements in the 
insurance industry, in wholesale and foreign 
trade and at Volkswagen continued the trend 
in this year’s pay round towards fairly balanced 
wage increases.
With the global economy muted and especially 
given the gloomier economic outlook for the 
emerging markets, seasonally adjusted prices in 
upstream branches of the economy fell notice -
ably in the second quarter. The decline was 
particularly pronounced for energy prices, 
which are directly linked to oil prices. However, 
prices for intermediate goods, too, dropped 
considerably. By contrast, prices for capital 
goods, which had previously fallen, stabilised, 
and consumer goods prices even edged up 
slightly. On the real estate market, prices con -
tinued to rise unabated in the second quarter 
of 2013, while the prices charged for construc -
tion services remained fairly subdued despite 
extremely lively demand. Consumer prices 
picked up somewhat in the second quarter of 
the year. This is noteworthy in that energy 
prices eased slightly after rising sharply at the 
beginning of the year. A key reason for the 
slightly higher rate of price increase was the 
ongoing perceptible food price inflation. More -
over, the state lottery operator raised ticket 
prices dramatically. The rate of price increase 
for industrial goods (excluding energy), by con -
trast, was within the normal range, as was the 
rise in housing rents. The national Consumer 
Price Index (CPI) was 1.5% year on year, un -
changed from the first quarter. By contrast, the 
year- on- year rate of the Harmonised Index of 
Consumer Prices (HICP), whose basket of goods 
does not contain gambling, fell from 1.9% 
to 1.5%. Over the course of the quarter, infla -
tion increased to 1.8% (CPI) and 1.9% (HICP) 
respectively. In July, the annual CPI rate climbed 
slightly to 1.9%, and was thus on a par with 
the HICP . Over the next few months, the rate of 
consumer price inflation is likely to ease some -
what. Food prices, which have reached a very 
high level, in part due to the weather, will no 
longer exhibit the same pace of growth and Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2013  
8

the favourable price trends on the import side 
are likely to have a moderating impact on in -
dustrial goods.
In the second half of 2013, economic growth in 
Germany is likely to return to normal and 
steady rates. The expected increase, more or 
less equalling that of potential growth, will en -
sure that capacity utilisation remains good; it is 
doubtful, however, whether this will be enough 
to noticeably revive investment activity. Add -
itional demand for German industrial enter -
prises’ products largely comes from third coun -
tries, where firms tend to expand their produc -
tion capacities. This curtails fixed capital forma -
tion at domestic production sites and the 
growth of exports to third countries. Domestic 
investment is unlikely to pick up discernibly 
until there is a long- term improvement in the 
economic prospects for Germany’s neighbours 
and the uncertainty surrounding economic 
 policy is further checked through suitable 
measures to combat the debt crisis in the euro 
area.
Germany’s government budget looks set to be 
virtually unchanged this year and thus to be 
close to balance again, as in 2012. Given the 
stable development of important macroeco -
nomic aggregates for government finances 
(gross wages, unemployment, private con -
sumption), this only partially reflects this year’s 
economic slowdown, and the cyclically ad -
justed fiscal balance, too, is unlikely to change 
much. The fiscal policy stance is therefore more 
or less neutral. The debt ratio (2012: around 
82%) is likely to decline perceptibly given a fur -
ther portfolio reduction among the 
government- owned “bad banks” and the 
growth of the GDP in the denominator.
The situation could remain largely unchanged 
next year, though there is considerable uncer -
tainty as to how the debt crisis will develop, 
and new financial policy decisions could be 
taken after the general elections. As things 
stand at present, the currently advantageous 
conditions for public finances, characterised by relatively low unemployment and interest rates 
as well as a revenue- rich GDP structure, could 
continue. Based on the fiscal stance currently 
mapped out in budget plans, which on balance 
includes only limited new budgetary burdens, 
the fiscal balance would improve slightly, not 
least because of a further decline in interest ex -
penditure, and the debt ratio would continue 
to drop.
In the supplementary budget for the current 
year, central government’s net new borrowing 
was raised to €25 billion. Half of the deficit is 
being used to finance the aid fund set up to 
repair the damage caused by the floods of this 
spring and to cover the net burden from tem -
porary financial transactions (in particular, fur -
ther capital transfers to the European Stability 
Mechanism (ESM)). Net borrowing in the draft 
budget for 2014 is to drop significantly as com -
pared to the supplementary budget for 2013, 
to €6 billion, in part because the above-  
described temporary burdens will disappear or 
decrease significantly. Other specific key factors 
include (alongside a stable rise in tax revenue) 
declining interest expenditure and a slightly 
greater reduction in transfers to the health in -
surance fund. In structural terms, a small sur -
plus will therefore be reported for 2014. This 
picture appears too positive, however, as a sig -
nificant cyclical deficit is factored into these cal -
culations, which is difficult to reconcile with 
the fairly favourable situation for the macro -
economic variables of particular relevance to 
the budget. The fiscal plan to 2017 outlines a 
further steady improvement culminating in a 
(structural) surplus of just over €9 billion. How -
ever, the draft budget for 2014 will be revised 
following the elections in September, and the 
current budgetary and financial planning does 
not include measures that might be promised 
in election manifestos.
As regards general government, the German 
government’s medium-  term projection cur -
rently anticipates continued structural surpluses 
of ½% of GDP . The planned fiscal policy stance 
is thus largely neutral and complies with Euro -Public financesDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2013  
9

pean rules, although it forecasts that the debt 
ratio should still be 69% in 2017. It would be 
recommendable to achieve perceptible struc -
tural surpluses in a timely manner, not least 
given the imminent budgetary burdens caused 
by an ageing population and the currently fa -
vourable conditions. In addition, planning 
should generally include clear safety margins vis- à- vis the deficit limits under the debt brake. 
What will ultimately be decisive is that sur -
pluses are not merely outlined in plans but that 
they are in fact achieved. Sound public finances 
and policymakers’ plans for the future are not 
contradictory aims; they must complement one 
another.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2013  
10

Global and European setting
World economic activity
Global economic output is likely to have in -
creased moderately in the second quarter of 
2013. Although worldwide industrial produc -
tion rose markedly in April- May compared with 
the first quarter (+½% in seasonally adjusted 
terms), the rate of growth remained well below 
the previous trend rate. Moreover, the global 
Purchasing Managers’ Index for the services 
sector again indicated a moderate increase in 
activity during the second quarter. In regional 
terms, the subdued pace of global economic 
activity owed much, as in the first quarter, to 
the relatively flat expansion path in the emer -
ging economies. Their slacker dynamics are 
largely due to structural problems, such as in -
frastructural constraints and – in China’s case – 
the fact that its heavily investment and export- 
driven growth model is reaching its natural 
limits. Sluggish external demand also played a 
role.
Growth in the industrial countries as a whole 
accelerated distinctly. Aggregated real gross 
domestic product (GDP) across the United 
States, Japan, the United Kingdom and the 
euro area rose by just under ½% after seasonal 
adjustment. Their combined year-  on- year 
growth was slightly larger. Breaking down the 
group of industrial countries, Japan’s economic 
output lost momentum, while growth picked 
up slightly in the USA and accelerated markedly 
in the UK. In addition, the euro area’s aggre -
gate output improved distinctly on its subdued 
first- quarter level, which might signal the end 
of the recession that began in autumn 2011. 
This was driven by strong expansion in the Ger -
man economy, a jump in French real GDP and 
a decelerating decline in Italy and Spain.
The global economy could remain on this up -
ward path in the third quarter of 2013. The 
slight improvement in the global Purchasing 
Managers’ Index for the manufacturing indus -try and the fairly sharp rise in the index for the 
services sector after mid- year suggest a moder -
ate uplift in growth. However, a stronger re -
covery may be impeded by growth constraints 
caused by a slight pick- up in capital market 
yields and by the fact that the euro area is only 
gradually starting to improve. In addition, the 
large emerging economies still face structural 
growth problems. Another handicap could be 
that the central banks of several developing 
economies that require large capital inflows to 
fund their current account deficits have had to 
tighten their monetary policy stance in re -
sponse to downward pressure on the currency. 
This was prompted by comments by the US 
Federal Reserve, which led the markets to ex -
pect that it might phase out its very expansion -
ary monetary policy measures earlier than had 
generally been thought.
At the beginning of July, the International Mon -
etary Fund (IMF) once more revised its growth 
outlook for the global economy downwards 
due to the deeper- than- predicted recession in 
the euro area vis- à- vis the IMF’s spring forecast, 
the ongoing government spending cuts in the 
USA and, not least, the disappointing perform -
ance of the major emerging and developing 
economies. The IMF lowered its global growth 
projection for 2013 by 0.2 percentage point to 
+3.1%, matching the 2012 figure, and its pro -
jection for 2014 by the same amount to 3.8%. 
The downward revisions covered a wide geo -
graphical spread. Thus the IMF cut its predicted 
aggregate growth rates for the advanced coun -
tries for this year and next year by 0.1 and 
0.2 percentage point to +1.2% and 2.1% re -
spectively on the basis of adjustments made for 
the USA and the euro area, within which the 
IMF prognosis for German GDP growth was 
clipped to +0.3% for 2013 and +1.3% for 2014. 
By contrast, the IMF raised its projections for 
the current year for Japan, the UK and Canada. 
The expansion rates for the emerging market 
and developing economies based on the IMF’s Moderate global 
growth in 2013 Q2 …
… and probably 
also in Q3Further down-ward revision of IMF forecastDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2013  
11

projections for the individual countries were 
cut by 0.3 percentage point in both years to 
+5.0% and +5.4%. The IMF’s downward revi -
sions for Russia, South Africa, Brazil and Mex -
ico were especially sharp. It lowered its assess -
ment of the outlook for the Chinese economy 
by 0.3 percentage point to 7.8% in 2013 and 
by 0.6 percentage point to 7.7% for 2014. The 
projected increase in the volume of world trade 
during the current year was likewise reduced 
markedly to 3.1%. As before, the IMF considers 
that downside risks to growth prospects pre -
dominate. The new estimate is primarily based 
on the assumption that the increase in financial 
market volatility at the end of May and the ac -
companying rise in yields will partially reverse.
Developments on the commodities markets 
also confirmed the impression that global eco -
nomic expansion remained sluggish in the re -
porting period. As measured by the HWWI 
index on a US dollar basis, the prices of indus -
trial commodities slipped by an average of 
7¼% in the second quarter compared with the 
first three months, while prices for food, bever -
ages and tobacco continued their previous 
downward movement and fell by 3¼%. Brent 
crude oil quotations simultaneously dropped by 
8% on the spot market. As futures prices did 
not fall as sharply, forward discounts also nar -
rowed markedly for a time. However, the in -
tensification of the political crisis in the Middle 
East and lower oil production in the OPEC 
countries triggered a countermovement in July. 
As this report went to press, a barrel of Brent 
crude oil cost US$ 108½, which was just over 
US$5 more than the average price during the 
second quarter.
The decline in crude oil prices, in particular, ini -
tially further dampened the headline rate of 
consumer price inflation in the second quarter. 
In April, a price index covering the industrial 
countries showed the smallest year- on- year 
change since October 2009 (+0.9%). But look -
ing at monthly changes, the seasonally ad -
justed index subsequently rose distinctly. At 
1.6% in June, year- on- year headline inflation Across- the- 
board fall in commodity prices
Consumer price 
inflation more stable of lateAggregate output in industrial countries*
Sources: National statistics, Eurostat and Bundesbank calcula-
tions. * The United States, euro area, United Kingdom and Ja-
pan.
Deutsche Bundesbank2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 201332101
–––+
–3–2–10+1+2
32101
–––+
–3–2–10+1
43210123
––––+++Seasonally adjusted, quarter-on-quarter percentage change
United States
Euro area
United KingdomIndustrial countries
JapanDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2013  
12

was again slightly higher than in March. The 
core inflation rate, which is based on the bas -
ket of consumer goods excluding energy and 
food, proved more stable, standing at +1.3% at 
the end of both the first two quarters of 2013.
Selected emerging market 
economies
In the second quarter of 2013, real Chinese 
GDP was up 7½% on the year, marking the 
second slight fall in the year-  on- year figure in 
succession. According to the official seasonally 
adjusted estimate, second- quarter output was 
1¾% higher than between January and March, 
thus matching the first- quarter increase. On the 
supply side, the flatter year- on- year expansion 
rate was due chiefly to slower growth in indus -
trial production. This is suffering, in particular, 
from weak export momentum, which almost 
came to a halt in the second quarter on a US 
dollar basis.1 In addition to depressed growth 
in key sales markets, the fact that China’s price 
competitiveness appears less favourable than in 
the past (see the box on pages 50 to 52) may 
also have played a role. The rise in Chinese do -
mestic demand also seems to have slowed 
somewhat in recent months, but is still likely to 
have been fairly strong. Consumer price infla -
tion remained moderate in the past few 
months; the inflation rate of 2.4% in the 
second quarter equalled the rate of price in -
crease recorded in the first quarter.
In India, real gross value added, which the In -
dian authorities use as the main measure of ag -
gregate output, expanded in the first quarter of 
2013 by 4¾% year on year. Although no na -
tional accounts data for the last quarter are 
available yet, the leading indicators show that 
growth is likely to have remained on a fairly flat 
path by India’s standards. The rupee has depre -
ciated sharply over the last few weeks in the 
wake of monetary policy statements made by 
the US Federal Reserve in conjunction with In -
dia’s high current account deficit. The central 
bank responded by taking various measures to reduce liquidity, which may also slow the pace 
of economic activity. The central bank has not 
yet changed its policy rate, however. In the last 
few months, consumer price inflation showed 
a slight downward tendency from a high level 
and in July stood at 9.6%.
Economic output in Brazil is likely to have 
grown at a fairly subdued pace again in the 
second quarter, for which no official GDP data 
are yet available. Although industrial output in -
creased by 1% in seasonally adjusted terms 
compared to the first- quarter average, various 
indicators for the services sector suggest that 
growth remains sluggish. Consumer price infla -
tion increased again slightly in the second Slightly slower 
growth in China
India affected 
by subdued growth and marked currency depreciationEconomic growth still moderate in BrazilWorld market prices for crude oil,industrial commodities and food,beverages and tobacco
Sources:  Thomson  Reuters  and  HWWI.  • Average  of  1  to 
9 August or 1 to 14 August 2013 (crude oil).
Deutsche Bundesbank2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 201360708090100120140160US dollar basis, 2010 = 100,
monthly averages, log scale
Crude oil (Brent)
Industrial
commoditiesFood, beverages
and tobacco
1 China’s foreign trade statistics indicate that, after rising 
sharply during the first quarter, the increase in exports year 
on year levelled off significantly. However, the official 
growth rates for the beginning of the year were probably 
strongly overstated as it is assumed that, during this period, 
exporters imported a large amount of capital into China by 
invoicing for goods that were not delivered in order to 
evade the capital controls currently in place.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2013  
13

quarter; the inflation rate rose to 6.6%, ex -
ceeding the central bank’s upper tolerance 
threshold of 6.5%. It therefore felt compelled 
to maintain the tighter monetary policy stance 
it had introduced in April.
Russia’s macroeconomic momentum remained 
lacklustre in the second quarter. According to 
an initial estimate by the Russian Federal State 
Statistics Service, real GDP grew by 1¼% on 
the year, compared with +1½% in the first 
quarter. The monthly indicators appear to show 
that the rate of growth in private consumption 
diminished somewhat in the second quarter, 
while gross fixed capital formation, which was 
stagnant at the beginning of the year, may 
even have contracted slightly. In light of the 
persistent weak economic momentum, which 
has now spilled over onto the labour market, 
the government has recently announced vari -
ous measures designed to stimulate the econ -
omy. These include additional funds for improv -
ing transport infrastructure and a subsidised 
loan programme for new car purchases. Given 
that inflation remains high – it stood at 7.2% in 
the second quarter – the Bank of Russia has left 
the key interest rates unchanged in the last few 
months. However, at the end of July, it began 
to conduct 12-month refinancing operations in 
order to improve the supply of liquidity to com -
mercial banks.
USA
Following a comprehensive revision of the na -
tional accounts data, the US macroeconomic 
picture of the last few years appears somewhat 
brighter. First, the recent recession now seems 
a little less severe, and second, the subsequent 
recovery was stronger at times, particularly in 
late 2011 and the early part of 2012. On bal -
ance, real GDP in the first quarter of 2013 ex -
ceeded its level in the final quarter of 2007, the 
last cyclical peak, by 4% and not by 3% as pre -
viously thought. Furthermore, there are signs 
of a cyclical improvement at the current end. 
According to an initial estimate, aggregate out -put in the second quarter was ½% up in sea -
sonally adjusted terms on the previous quarter, 
in which it grew by ¼%. This was driven by an 
upswing in fixed business investment that off -
set the first- quarter fall. Growth in private con -
sumption remained robust. Overall, consumers 
coped well with the extensive increases in taxes 
and duties at the beginning of the year and 
proved flexible in terms of their saving behav -
iour. In the second quarter, households used 
their considerable income growth to markedly 
increase their saving ratio.2 Notwithstanding 
the central government spending cuts, which 
came into force in March, there were barely 
any new retarding effects stemming from pub -
lic demand. The previous substantial cutbacks 
may have exaggerated the underlying down -
ward trend.
The marked rising tendency in employment 
continued in the second quarter. Between April 
and June, 188,000 (non- farm) jobs were cre -
ated on average, just slightly fewer than the 
number created in the first quarter (+207,000). 
Nonetheless, the decline in the unemployment 
rate, which is calculated on the basis of a sep -
arate survey, came to a halt over the course of 
the second quarter. In light of the labour mar -
ket situation, which has been improving since 
late last summer, the US Federal Reserve an -
nounced a potential timeframe in mid-  June for 
gradually tapering off its bond- buying pro -
gramme. Moreover, participants at the meeting 
of the US Federal Open Market Committee re -
vised their forecasts for the unemployment rate 
downwards. This rate fell to 7.4% in July, its 
lowest level since the end of 2008. Just as in 
most industrial countries, the US inflation rate 
measured by the consumer price index went up 
during the second quarter. Reaching 1.8% in 
June, it exceeded both the core rate (+1.6%) 
and its level of March 2013.Growth dynam-
ics in Russia still slack
Slightly better 
picture following data revisionContinuing  labour market upturn
2 The level of the saving ratio increased markedly in the 
course of the revision of the national accounts as it had in 
previous revision rounds, rising from 2½% to 4% in the first 
quarter of 2013. In the following three- month period, it 
then rose to 4½%.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2013  
14

Japan
The Japanese economy’s buoyant start to 2013 
continued in the second quarter. Although, at 
just over ½% after adjustment for seasonal 
variations and inflation, GDP growth was dis -
tinctly slower than in the first quarter, final do -
mestic demand accelerated slightly. The slower 
overall growth was in fact due to greater de -
stocking of inventories and a weaker growth 
contribution from foreign trade. Private con -
sumption increased substantially, although 
monthly indicators are already showing the first 
signs of a waning propensity to purchase. By 
contrast, enterprises again failed to lift their in -
vestment spending. However, the govern -
ment’s expansionary economic policy boosted 
public sector investment demand. Simulations 
carried out using the global macroeconomic 
model NiGEM suggest that while the package 
of monetary and fiscal policy measures may 
help to stimulate the Japanese economy in the 
short term, there is a risk that their positive im -
pact may prove short- lived if these measures 
are not supported by profound structural re -
forms (see the box on pages 16 to 19). In June, 
buoyed by the current upturn, the seasonally 
adjusted unemployment rate fell to its lowest 
level since October 2008 (3.9%), though owing 
more to a decrease in the labour force than to 
an increase in employment. In the same month, 
the year- on- year rate of change in the con -
sumer price index turned positive (+0.2%) due, 
in particular, to the rise in import prices for en -
ergy as a result of the yen’s depreciation. By 
contrast, the core inflation rate remained nega -
tive in June (-0.2%), although less so than in 
March.
United Kingdom
The upturn in the UK economy strengthened in 
the second quarter. After adjustment for sea -
sonal influences, real GDP increased by ½% on 
the quarter, which was twice as much as in the 
first three months. The economy finally began 
to pull out of the subdued level of activity in which it had stagnated since summer 2011, 
though output still fell well short of the cyclical 
peak it reached in winter 2008. One encour -
aging sign is that the upturn evident in the re -
porting period was broadly based across the 
sectors. Not only services, which form the 
backbone of the British economy, but also 
manufacturing recorded a clear increase in out -
put. Although gross value added grew even 
faster in the construction sector, this was due 
to a catch- up effect following the production 
stoppages caused by the inclement winter 
weather. Hence the pick- up in the construction 
industry should be seen more as marking the 
end of the downturn rather than the beginning 
of an upturn. However, this special factor had 
no impact on aggregate output. Buoyant retail 
sales figures indicate that it was chiefly private 
consumption that boosted GDP growth on the 
demand side. The outlook on the labour mar -
ket brightened. Although the unemployment 
rate in the second quarter equalled the rate 
seen between January and March (7.8%), the 
number of recipients of unemployment bene -
fits dropped markedly in the course of the 
second quarter. Year- on- year inflation as meas -
ured by the Harmonised Index of Consumer 
Prices (HICP) almost matched the first- quarter 
average (+2.7%). Even after stripping out en -
ergy and (unprocessed) food, the inflation rate 
did not ease (+2.4%).Economic 
 activity remains buoyant
Strengthening 
recoveryReal GDP in the United States
Sources: Bureau of Economic Analysis and Bundesbank calcula-
tions.
Deutsche Bundesbank2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 201395969798991001011021031041052007 Q4 = 100, seasonally adjusted, log scale
After revision
Before revisionRecession
according
to NBERDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2013  
15

Macroeconomic implications of Japan’s 
new economic policy
Japan’s economic policy was reoriented fol-
lowing the change of government in De-
cember 2012. The new policy mix was dubbed “Abenomics” in popular parlance. This term refers to a strategy comprising 
three components (or “arrows” as the Jap-
anese administration also calls them) – a 
loosening of both monetary policy and fi  s-
cal policy, and measures to increase the 
growth potential of the Japanese economy.
A central plank of the new monetary policy 
is the 1 percentage point increase in the in-fl  ation target to 2%, announced in January 
2013.1 An open- ended asset purchase pro-
gramme was concurrently established and 
then replaced by an even more expansion-
ary policy of “quantitative and qualitative easing” from April 2013.
2 The second 
“arrow” is aimed at providing temporary fi  s-
cal support for the economy. Associated 
measures were put in train in February 2013 
by the passing of a supplementary budget 
which envisages new expenditure totalling 
¥13.1 trillion.3 The resulting fi  scal stimulus, 
after deducting regular elements and those 
not affecting demand and taking account of concomitant spending cuts, is likely to 
amount to just over 1¼% of Japanese gross 
domestic product (GDP).4 Finally, the gov-
ernment presented a growth strategy in June 2013 through which it hopes to 
achieve a considerable increase in the Jap-
anese economy’s trend rate of expansion. 
This is to be attained through structural re-forms as well as elements of industrial pol-icy, for both of which quantifi  ed interim tar-gets have been set.
5 
The keen national and international interest 
attracted by Abenomics doubtless derives to a signifi  cant extent from the ambitious 
goals for the domestic economy which Ja-pan’s new economic policy has set itself. 
However, with the yen depreciating sharply following the initial policy announcements, there are also widespread fears of negative 
spillover effects. But attempts to quantify the spillover effects solely on the basis of 
exchange rate reactions while disregarding 
the stimulus effects in Japan and other transmission channels would be incom-
plete. With this in mind, this article presents 
the results of a simulation analysis which 
takes these factors into account. The analy-sis is based on the  NiGEM global economic 
model developed by the National Institute of Economic and Social Research (NIESR), 
which has the dual advantage of providing a detailed model of the Japanese economy and capturing international economic inter-
dependencies. The simulated policy im-
pulses are based on the monetary and fi  scal measures taken by the Japanese authorities. Accordingly, the central bank’s infl  ation tar-
get is permanently raised by 1 percentage 
point. It is also assumed that the quantita-
1 See Bank of Japan, Introduction of the “Price Stabil-
ity Target” and the “Open- Ended Asset Purchasing 
Method”, press release of 22 January 2013.
2 This policy entails the Bank of Japan signifi  cantly ex-
panding its monthly asset purchases, increasing the 
average residual maturity of its bond portfolio and rais-
ing the share of riskier securities (ETFs and REITs). In addition, the monetary base has replaced the over-
night money market rate as the operational target for 
monetary policy. See Bank of Japan, Introduction of the “Quantitative and Qualitative Monetary Easing”, 
press release of 4 April 2013.
3 See Abe government, Emergency Economic Meas-
ures for the Revitalization of the Japanese Economy, 
Cabinet decision of 11 January 2013.4 This estimate is in line with the IMF’s analysis, which puts the size of the stimulus at 1.4% of GDP . See Inter-national Monetary Fund, Spillover Report 2013, pp 10-11.
5 See Abe government, Japan Revitalization Strategy 
– JAPAN is BACK, overview set out on 14 June 2013, 
http://www.kantei.go.jp/jp/singi/keizaisaisei/pdf/en_saikou_jpn.pdf.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2013  
16

tive and qualitative easing policy adopted 
will temporarily lower risk premiums.6 On 
the fi  scal policy side, the individual com-
ponents of the stimulus package are appor-tioned to a two- year implementation period 
and then assigned to the government rev-
enue and expenditure components mod-elled in NiGEM. By contrast, the growth 
strategy (the third “arrow”) is not included 
in the simulation, not least because the 
likely effects of the measures announced on key macroeconomic variables are unclear.
Overall, the simulations suggest that the re-
orientation of Japanese policy is likely to 
provide a considerable temporary stimulus 
to the country’s economy. On average over 2013, the GDP growth rate will be raised by 
almost 1¼% compared to the baseline. A positive, albeit smaller, growth effect is likely in 2014, too. But over the medium 
term this economic stimulus will peter out 
and will tend to weigh on the economy from 2015. However, a far more enduring 
impact is apparent for the headline infl  ation rate. A wage- price spiral sets in almost im-
mediately, which means that, after initially 
overshooting the new target, infl  ation will 
be permanently 1 percentage point above 
the baseline rate.7
If the stimulus effect is decomposed into its 
individual components, it becomes clear that fi  scal easing is mostly responsible for the initial positive reaction in aggregate economic growth. In the short term, not only is government demand boosted but 
business investment increases as well on ac-count of the subsidy components of the fi  s-
cal package. However, this effect reverses already in 2014 and then puts a marked brake on growth. By comparison, the im-pact of monetary easing is more gradual. 
Per se it lifts real GDP growth from 2013 for 
three years, before a counterswing sets in. 
The main boost to the economy comes ini-tially from foreign trade, the growth contri-
bution from which increases distinctly in 
response to the immediate depreciation of 
the yen. In addition, a sharp rise in share 
prices creates positive wealth effects, which 
are refl  ected in higher expansion rates in private consumption. It should be noted 
6 Specifi  cally, it is assumed, beginning in the fi  rst quar-
ter of 2013, that looser monetary policy per se reduces for two years the yield spread between the long- term and short- term interest rate by 9.5 basis points and the 
spread between corporate and government bonds 
with the same maturity by 2.5 basis points.7 The changes in the infl  ation rate which show up in the simulations do not refl  ect the infl  ationary effects of the planned increases in consumption tax, as these are already factored into the baseline rate.Effects of expansionary monetary and fiscal policy on Japan's economy
1 Year-on-year change.
Deutsche Bundesbank2013 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 20230.500.51.01.52.0
–++++Deviations from baseline
Percentage
points
Percentagepoints –1.5–1.0–0.50+0.5+1.0+1.5+2.0
0.500.51.01.52.0
–++++Effect on inflation rate1Effect on GDP
Contribution of monetary policy
Contribution of fiscal policyOverall effect
Effect on GDP growth1%Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2013  
17

that the price movements on the fi  nancial 
and foreign exchange markets in the model, 
which in qualitative terms largely follow the 
pattern observed in reality, refl  ect the re-sponse of rational, forward- looking eco-
nomic agents and not additional shocks or assumptions about irrational behaviour.
8
In comparison to the considerable impact 
on the domestic economy, the international spillover effects from Abenomics shown by the NiGEM model are small. Despite a sharp depreciation of the yen, there is no marked 
drop in output in Germany or any other 
major economic area; in fact, the spillover 
effects are often positive. This is explained, fi  rst, by the fact that the dampening effect on exports caused by the change in the ex-
change rate is offset, at least in the short 
run, by an initial rise in Japanese import de-
mand. Second, the appreciation of other countries’ currencies lowers their import prices, leading to purchasing power gains and a boost to domestic demand. The ef-
fect is amplifi  ed by the endogenous policy 
reaction of central banks, which in the model respond to declining infl  ationary 
pressure by cutting interest rates. This boost to domestic economic activity is predomin-
ant in the United States, which has a rela-
tively closed economy. In contrast, China 
experiences a fall in GDP , because the cen-tral bank, on the basis of the exchange rate 
target vis- à- vis the US dollar posited in the 
model, cannot suffi   ciently counteract the 
weakening of aggregate demand. Under an alternative assumption of a purely domestic 
monetary policy focus, China likewise 
shows positive spillover effects on balance. The simulation results indicate that German 
8 The simulations also show a reaction in terms of 
long- term government bond yields, which rise immedi-
ately. This rise in yields refl  ects the expectation of a 
permanently higher level of nominal short- term inter-
est rates resulting from the monetary policy response 
to a higher equilibrium infl  ation rate.Effects of the stimulus on equity and 
foreign exchange markets in Japan
1 Nominal. A downward movement indicates a depreciation of 
the Japanese yen.
Deutsche Bundesbank2013 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 202320151050510152025
––––+++++Deviations from baseline in %
Share prices 
Effective exchange rate 1Effect of expansionary fiscal policyEffect of all measures
Effect of all
measures
Effect of expansionary fiscal policy
Reaction of real GDP in selected 
economic areas to the stimulus in Japan
Deutsche Bundesbank2013 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 20230.150.100.0500.050.100.150.200.25
–––+++++Deviations from baseline in %
with an exchange
rate peg in Chinawith domestically oriented monetary 
policy in China
USA
GermanyChina
ChinaDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2013  
18

foreign trade is only moderately dampened 
by Japan’s new economy policy, because in 
general the two countries are not close competitors.
9 However, this does not rule 
out the possibility of an appreciable stiffen-
ing of competitive pressure for German 
suppliers of specifi  c products such as motor vehicles, particularly in third markets, and of 
losses in market share in these markets in 
the longer term.
All in all, it may be stated that, according to 
the simulation model, the measures taken 
by the Japanese government are well suited 
to aligning the infl  ation rate with the new 
infl  ation target in the long term and to 
stimulating the economy in the short term. 
As is usual in quantitative analysis, these re-sults naturally refl  ect the model’s structure. 
For instance, in NiGEM the assumption of unreserved credibility of monetary policy decision- makers ensures that infl  ation ex-
pectations can be anchored in line with the target. Thus, it rules out scenarios in which either the wage- price spiral is failing to op-erate or in which galloping infl  ationary pro-
cesses set in. Whether these assumptions 
can be met in reality in Japan is by no means certain. First, it is open to question whether 
the requisite strengthening in Japanese wage growth can actually be generated 
within the space of a few years, in view of 
the relative weakness of the trade unions and the very high proportion of workers who are now employed under precarious employment contracts. Second, govern-
ment infl  uence on Japan’s monetary policy 
stance might also lead to a shift in expect-ations on the part of economic agents. His-
torical experience shows that central bank 
independence is of crucial importance for 
lasting price stability and growth. Once this 
independence is thrown into doubt, the 
prevailing expectation formation processes 
(eg with regard to future infl  ation) may 
undergo fundamental change. This possibil-ity is not captured in the NiGEM model. For this reason, too, the simulation results need to be interpreted with caution.
The decision to implement a fi  scal stimulus 
programme can likewise be questioned, 
particularly given that the fi  scal packages 
were decided upon at a point in time when 
there were already increasing signs of a self- sustaining upturn. In addition, the ex-
pected phase- out of the GDP- boosting 
measures coincides with the fi  rst stage of 
the increase in consumption tax, planned 
for April 2014. Overall, fi  scal policy might 
therefore further magnify rather than re-
duce the cyclical swings. Furthermore, any 
positive effects on growth need to be weighed against increasing fi  scal risks, 
which arise from a further expansion in the 
already very high level of public debt and 
which also reduce the scope for future ex-
pansionary programmes. This makes the 
success of the growth strategy (which was 
not incorporated into the simulations) all the more important. However, the very vague description of this strategy when it was presented in June 2013 disappointed 
general expectations. It remains to be seen 
whether more far- reaching reform meas-ures will be announced, and, above all, 
swiftly implemented, now that the govern-ing parties enjoy a stronger position follow-ing the elections to the upper house of par-liament in July 2013.
9 This is also revealed in the fact that Japan has a 
weight of only 3.8% in the indicator of Germany’s 
price competitiveness vis- à- vis 37 trading partners 
based on the defl  ators of total sales, which also cover competition on third markets.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2013  
19

New EU member states
Business activity in the new EU member states 
(EU-7)3 improved markedly in the second quar -
ter. This was mainly due to stronger quarter-  
on- quarter growth in Poland’s real GDP and 
the end of the recession in the Czech Republic. 
Both countries appear to have benefited signifi -
cantly from positive stimuli from the euro area. 
However, the labour market remained difficult 
in many of the new EU states. The unemploy -
ment rate in the region as a whole remained 
high in recent months at 9.8%. Aggregate 
HICP inflation, which at the start of 2013 had 
already sunk to a multi- year low, fell further in 
the second quarter, ranging from -0.1% in Lat -
via and +0.6% in Poland to +4.4% in Romania. 
Given that inflationary pressure is declining and 
capacity utilisation remains low, several central 
banks in the region have lowered their key 
interest rates in recent months.
Macroeconomic trends  
in the euro area
The recession that has dogged the euro area 
since the end of 2011 may have come to an 
end in the second quarter of 2013. Between 
April and June, aggregate output, which had 
contracted markedly at the beginning of the 
year, increased perceptibly on the first quarter 
after seasonal and calendar adjustment (+¼%). 
However, this was due in part to weather-  
related catch- up effects in the northern mem -
ber states, where output in the first three 
months, especially in the construction industry, 
had been severely affected by the long, cold 
winter. At the end of the period under review, 
real GDP in the euro area was still ¾% down 
on the year and 1¼% lower than in summer 
2011, before the latest downturn began. 
Broken down by country, the modest rise in 
output was mainly driven by Germany which, 
together with Finland, recorded the second-  
highest growth rate (+¾%) in comparison to 
the previous quarter after Portugal (+1%). 
France also reported a clear increase in macro -economic activity (+½%). Among the crisis 
countries, Italy and Spain saw their fall in out -
put decelerate considerably. In total, real GDP 
expanded in eight of the 12 member states 
which have already published preliminary sea -
sonally adjusted data but continued to de -
crease in the remaining four. In Greece, where 
the Statistical Authority has ceased to publish 
seasonally adjusted figures until further notice, 
the economy contracted by 4½% on the year 
after shrinking by 5½% in the first quarter.
The latest survey- based indicators suggest that 
the economic upturn in the euro area con -
tinued into the second half of the year. The 
composite Purchasing Managers’ Index for 
manufacturing was just above the expansion 
threshold in July. The output subcomponent 
jumped in the reporting month and is clearly in 
growth territory. Furthermore, business senti -
ment, as measured by a survey conducted on 
behalf of the European Commission, continued 
to improve, though it remained well below its 
long- term average. The new ECB indicator on 
euro- area industrial new orders4 shows that the 
intake of orders in April- May was unchanged 
compared to the first quarter. The sub- indicator 
for new orders from non- euro- area countries 
has been pointing upwards since February, 
while orders from the euro area, taken to -
gether, declined up to the end of the reporting 
period.
In sectoral terms, the strongest contribution to 
growth in the second quarter appears to have 
come from industry. Output in this sector be -
tween April and June rose by a seasonally ad -
justed 1¼% on the first quarter but was down 
½% on the year. Manufacturers of capital 
goods recorded the highest expansion rate Marked upturn
Cyclical down-
turn haltedSigns of 
 continuing 
growth in Q3
Industry a 
growth driver
3 This group comprises the non- euro- area countries that 
joined the EU in 2004 and 2007.
4 In March 2012, Eurostat stopped producing statistics on 
new orders in the euro area. In order to fill this gap, the 
ECB has developed a new monthly indicator on euro area 
industrial new orders. For information on the methodo -
logical approach, see Introducing the ECB indicator on 
euro area industrial new orders, Monthly Bulletin, July 
2013, pp 65-68.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2013  
20

among the major branches of industry during 
the reporting period with a seasonally adjusted 
+3¼%. Energy producers also reported signifi -
cant growth (+1%). Consumer goods produc -
tion rose by ¼%, with non- durables expanding 
distinctly while the output of durables remained 
unchanged. The manufacture of intermediate 
goods grew by ½%. Capacity utilisation in 
manufacturing was markedly higher in July 
than in April but remained below its long- term 
average. Construction output in April- May was 
down ¼% on the first quarter, in which it had 
fallen by 3¾%. The aforementioned positive 
catch- up effects in some of the northern mem -
ber states, including Germany, therefore merely 
served to slow down the pace of contraction in 
the euro area as a whole. It should also be 
noted that output in the construction sector 
has shrunk by an average of 1¼% per quarter 
over the last five years.
In the second quarter, exports are likely to have 
generated positive stimuli on the demand side. 
After adjustment for seasonal and calendar 
variations, (nominal) sales to non- euro- area 
countries in April- May were up 1¼% on their 
level between January and March and 4¼% up 
on the year. At the same time, imports fell by 
1% in comparison to the first three months of 
2013. Although falling commodity prices con -
tributed to this, foreign trade may again have 
made a positive contribution to real GDP 
growth in the second quarter in statistical 
terms. Furthermore, it seems that private con -
sumption stabilised at a low level in the second 
quarter. After adjustment for seasonal and cal -
endar variations, real retail turnover was slightly 
up on the previous quarter, although they were 
still ½% down on the year. In addition, the 
number of new car registrations rose by 3% in 
the reporting period. The fact that consumer 
confidence has improved markedly from a low 
level in recent months also suggests that 
household consumption is beginning to 
strengthen. The slide in gross fixed capital for -
mation appears to have slowed, at any rate. 
This is indicated both by the smaller contrac -
tion in construction output and the higher pro -duction of capital goods. However, it should be 
noted that, at least in April – up to when data 
are available – the corresponding exports in -
creased markedly in comparison to the first 
quarter.
The fact that the standardised unemployment 
rate did not rise in the second quarter but re -
mained at the same level as in March (12.1%) is 
consistent with the rise in aggregate output in 
the euro area. One especially positive sign is 
that unemployment has recently been falling in 
most of the crisis countries. It continued to rise 
sharply only in Greece and Cyprus. The erosion 
of employment in the euro area as a whole, 
which begin in the second quarter of 2011, 
persisted in the first quarter of 2013, the latest 
period for which data are available. The sea -
sonally adjusted number of people in work re -
ceded by an average of ½% between January 
and March compared with the fourth quarter 
of 2012 and by 1% on the year.Exports up, 
 private  consumption stable
Unemployment rate unchanged since MarchReal GDP in selected euro-area countries
90929496981001022008 Q1 = 100, seasonally adjusted, log scale
2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013
Deutsche BundesbankEuro area
Germany
France
ItalySpain
Netherlands
PortugalDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2013  
21

The problem of high youth unemployment 
in the euro-area crisis countries
The high level of youth unemployment in 
many EU member states, especially the 
euro- area crisis countries, currently tops the 
economic policy agenda. At its meeting at 
the end of June 2013, the European Council 
endorsed the Youth Employment Initiative, 
a comprehensive package aimed at com-bating youth unemployment. One of its main components is the Youth Guarantee scheme, which promises all young people an apprenticeship, traineeship or a job 
within four months of leaving formal edu-
cation or becoming unemployed. In add-
ition, the quality of vocational training and 
work placements is to be improved and 
youth mobility promoted.
Although the Youth Guarantee scheme is 
likely to make a dent in the unemployment 
statistics, its effect is likely to be limited. 
Moreover, past experience has shown that 
such programmes rarely lead to new com-
petitive jobs being created or to young 
people starting vocational training in areas 
where there is real demand.1 Another prob-
lem is that the funds earmarked for the pro-ject are relatively small, and the crisis coun-tries lack the budgetary resources to signifi  -cantly extend the programme.
2 By contrast, 
the pledge to promote measures aimed at 
improving vocational training and mobility 
is likely to be more effective. However, re-
forming vocational training is a time- 
consuming process and needs to be under-
pinned by labour market reforms – as is explained below. In the short term, the 
most promising way of permanently redu-
cing youth unemployment in the crisis 
countries is probably to promote youth mo-bility.The statistical picture: youth unemployment rate versus youth unemployment ratio
In June 2013, 3.5 million persons aged be-
tween 15 and 24 were unemployed in the 
euro area; this represents slightly more than 
18% of the total number of unemployed.3 
Youth unemployment has risen by 1 million, 
or nearly 40%, since its cyclical low in 
March 2008. Developments in the individ-
ual countries have been very heteroge-
neous. While the number of unemployed in 
this age group dropped to below its pre- 
global recession level in Germany, it experi-
enced above- average growth in the periph-
eral countries as well as the Netherlands, Slovakia and in Estonia. At last count, the 
six crisis countries Italy, Spain, Portugal, Ire-
land, Greece and Cyprus – which are the focus of this article – alone accounted for 56% of youth unemployment in the euro 
area. The increase in this group of countries since March 2008 accounts for 71% of the 
total gain, although Germany was not in-
cluded in the calculation because the num-
1 See K Brenke, Europäische Jugendgarantie: Enttäu-
schungen für junge Arbeitslose garantiert, DIW Wo-
chenbericht, 30 2013, p 16.
2 As things currently stand, the Community budget 
will allocate a total of €26 billion to combating youth 
unemployment over the next few years.
3 Eurostat’s unemployment fi  gures are standardised 
rates intended to ensure international comparability. In all EU countries, information on employment status is gathered using standardised surveys (Labour Force Sur-veys, LFS). Whether a person is classifi  ed as being un-employed is based on the International Labour Organ-
ization (ILO) defi  nition. In its monthly press releases, Eurostat quotes not only the overall unemployment rate, it also gives separate unemployment rates for men and women and for persons aged 15 to 24. It 
should be noted that in Spain persons must be at least 
16 years of age to be counted towards the working- 
age population, while the threshold in the other euro-area countries is 15 years.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2013  
22

ber of unemployed young persons dropped 
there, as mentioned earlier.4
However, overall unemployment in the euro area has grown much faster, by 69%, than 
youth unemployment. This can largely be attributed to a surge in unemployment among 25 to 34-year olds and among 35 
to 44-year olds in the peripheral countries. 
As a result, the share of young people in overall unemployment in these countries 
has either dropped slightly or remained un-
changed since the onset of the crisis.
Since March 2008, the youth unemploy-
ment rate in the euro area has increased by 
almost 9 percentage points to 24%. At last 
count, the national youth unemployment rates in the crisis countries ranged from 
26% in Ireland, 38% in Cyprus, 39% in Italy 
and 41% in Portugal to 56% in Spain and 
63% in Greece. Youth unemployment was 
usually more than twice as high as the over-all unemployment rate. The high youth un-
employment rates in these countries are often interpreted as meaning that every 
third or every second young person there is 
out of work. That is not correct, however. 
The youth unemployment rate shows what 
percentage of the labour force aged 15 
to 24 is jobless. However, the labour force 
only includes people who are available for 
work, ie the employed and the unemployed. It excludes many young people who are still 
in school or at university.5 When interpret-
ing youth unemployment rates, it should 
also be noted that the labour force as a per-
centage of the population may vary over the business cycle. If, for instance, young people opt to remain in education for 
longer during a recession as they see little 
prospect of fi  nding work, this may repre-sent hidden unemployment, which is not 
captured by the statistics. With the excep-
tions of Spain and Ireland, labour force par-ticipation did not, however, drop exception-ally in the crisis countries in the period 2007 to 2012. It should also be noted that there 
is an upward trend in the percentage of 
young people in secondary or tertiary edu-
cation throughout the EU. Moreover, the sharp decline in labour force participation 
among young people in Spain and Ireland 
can be interpreted as something of a nor-
malisation, as the participation rate was 
relatively high in both countries before the 
crisis and is now much closer to levels in the 
other crisis countries and also to the aver-
age of the other euro- area countries ex-
cluding Germany and Austria (see footnote 5) of 38%.
6
In order to better assess the extent of youth unemployment in a country, it makes sense 
to look not only at the traditional un-
employment rate but also at the number of 
unemployed young people in relation to the population in this age group; Eurostat 
4 The crisis countries are responsible for as much as 
79% of the increase in overall unemployment in the 
euro area (excluding Germany).
5 The labour force participation rate of young people, ie employed and unemployed as a share of the popu-lation in this age group, was just 42% in the euro area in 2012 compared with 72% in the working- age popu-
lation as a whole. In the crisis countries, labour force 
participation by young people ranged from 29% in 
Greece and Italy to 41% in Ireland. It was thus similar 
in magnitude to other euro- area countries such as 
France (38%) and Belgium (32%). The markedly higher 
participation rates in Germany (51%) and Austria 
(60%) can be explained, for one, by their distinctly bet-
ter overall labour market situation. Another factor is that apprentices in the two- track vocational training 
system, which is very common in these two countries, 
are counted as being employed, whereas young 
people in school- based vocational training, which pre-dominates in other euro- area countries, are not. How-
ever, in the crisis countries, 6% of young people in 
training also work, meaning that they are counted as 
being employed.
6 Labour force participation in Ireland fell by 15 per-
centage points to 41% between 2007 and 2012, and 
dropped by 9 percentage points to 39% in Spain. A partial explanation for this could be that during the 
boom it was comparatively lucrative for young people 
in Spain and Ireland to start work in the construction 
industry or other sectors without lengthy vocational 
training. Now that the boom has ended, more young 
people are obviously again deciding to undertake vo-
cational training or to study.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2013  
23

Youth unemployment in the euro-area crisis countries
1 Unemployment rate according to ILO definition. 2 Share of unemployed persons in the respective age group.
Deutsche Bundesbank1999 00 01 02 03 04 05 06 07 08 09 10 11 12%
99 00 01 02 03 04 05 06 07 08 09 10 11 20120102030405060
0102030405060
0102030400102030405060
0102030405060
010203040
0102030
0102030PortugalSpain
Cyprus
Memo item
GermanyMemo itemEuro areaIrelandGreeceItalyUnemployment rate1 (15-24 years)
compared with
Unemployment ratio 2 (aged 15-64)Unemployment ratio 2 (aged 15-24)Share of youth unemployment (aged 15-24) in total unemploymentDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2013  
24

has proposed calling this ratio the “youth 
unemployment ratio”.7 Since the onset of 
the global recession, the youth unemploy-
ment ratio in the crisis countries has risen 
roughly in line with the unemployment ratio in the working- age population as a whole. 
Last year, fewer than 10% of all young 
people in the euro area were unemployed. Looking at the crisis countries, the ratio was slightly higher in Italy, Ireland and Cyprus, at between 10% and 12%, while 14% to 16% of all young people were jobless in Portugal 
and Greece. The ratio was signifi  cantly 
higher in Spain, at 21%.
Reasons for the high youth unemploy-
ment and possible reforms
Although the difference between the un-employment ratios for the age groups 15 
to 24 and 25 to 64 is considerably smaller 
than the difference in the respective un-
employment rates, it is still marked, except 
for Greece. The higher unemployment among young people, which can be ob-served in virtually all industrialised coun-tries, can predominantly be explained by 
structural factors. In the southern euro- area 
countries, one of the main factors is the long- standing and pronounced segmenta-
tion of the labour market, featuring a high degree of job protection for older workers. 
As a consequence, a large proportion of young people are offered only temporary employment contracts, which are easy to 
terminate when economic activity slackens. 
(The same applies to 25 to 34-year olds 
entering the labour market for the fi  rst time 
after a lengthy education.) Moreover, legal 
or negotiated minimum or entry- level wages for young workers are often rela-tively high in these countries, which pre-
vents apprentices from receiving a distinctly 
lower starting wage, as is customary in Ger-
many. Another reason for the diffi   culties 
young people have fi  nding a permanent job is that vocational training is primarily school- 
based and is often not tailored to the la-
bour market’s needs, which can result in 
long job hunting. At the same time, several 
of these countries still have a rather high 
percentage of low- skilled young people by 
European standards – although the level of education has risen considerably compared 
with earlier decades.8 Whereas in the pre- 
crisis boom years many of these young 
people found a job or may even have delib-erately foregone the opportunity to acquire 
higher education qualifi  cations given the 
buoyant labour market situation, in the cur-rent recession their low skill level represents 
a particularly high hurdle to their rapid re-
integration into the labour market.
In recent years, several peripheral countries 
have carried out reforms to improve the 
functioning of their labour market, which could potentially increase young people’s 
employment prospects. These include redu-
cing job protection for older employees in 
Spain and Portugal and signifi  cantly lower-
ing minimum wages for young people in Greece. There is doubt, however, as to 
whether the reform efforts to date will be 
enough to bring about a signifi  cant drop in 
unemployment in general and youth un-employment in particular. In addition, the 
positive effect that these measures are ex-
pected to have is unlikely to have much of 
an impact on employment trends until the 
economy picks up. Even if the majority of 
crisis countries experience a cyclical recov-
ery in late 2013/early 2014, as is generally 
anticipated, unemployment overall and 
7 See Federal Employment Agency, Jugendarbeitslosig-
keit in Europa: Vom Umgang mit unterschiedlichen 
Quoten, press release 031 of 29 May 2013, and Euro-
stat, The measurement of youth unemployment – an 
overview of the key concepts, press release of 12 July 
2013.8 See J R Garcia, Youth unemployment in Spain: causes 
and solutions, BBVA Research Working Paper No 11/ 
31, September 2011.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2013  
25

among young people will probably be slow 
to come down.
In the current debate on reforming voca-
tional training in the crisis countries, obser-vers, especially in Germany, frequently stress the advantages of the two- track vocational training system – in which theoretical teach-
ing alternates with practical training in en-
terprises  – as this appears to ensure that vocational training is better tailored to in-
dustry’s real needs than is the school- based 
vocational training prevalent in non- German- speaking countries. In addition, the fairly low wages paid to apprentices 
and trainees make it easier for young people to fi  nd a job. The effectiveness of the dual system is evident, not least, in the fact that 
youth unemployment in Germany, Austria 
and Switzerland is among the lowest in the entire OECD. It is open to debate, however, whether this system, which has a very long tradition and is deeply rooted in the above- mentioned countries, can be transferred to other countries to similar effect.
9 A key obs-
tacle is that the network between enter-
prises, employment agencies and vocational schools necessary for an effi   cient organisa-tion of the dual system would fi  rst need to 
be established. Another precondition for a 
successful implementation would be a sub-
stantial lowering of minimum wages for 
young people in some countries. Taking all 
this into consideration, it might be more 
promising and more cost- effective to match the existing school- based training in the cri-
sis countries more closely to the actual re-
quirements of the job market.
Migration as an alternative option
Important as they are, further reforms to 
the labour market and the education sys-tem, even if implemented quickly, could 
only improve the employment prospects for 
young people in the crisis countries in the longer term and would therefore come too 
late to help many of today’s unemployed. In this situation, an alternative option for young people looking for work is to mi-
grate to countries that need labour, at least 
for a time. This applies more to well- 
educated young people and less so for the 
low- skilled, for whom jobs tend to be 
scarce, even abroad.
In Ireland, the number of young emigrants 
has already increased sharply in recent 
years. In the years 2010 and 2011, ie after 
the onset of the sovereign debt crisis (more recent data are not yet available), net emi-
gration amounted to 24,000 persons, or 
4.2% of the population aged 15 to 24. This probably partly explains why the youth un-
employment rate in Ireland is currently the 
lowest in the group of six peripheral coun-
tries. In the southern European countries, 
by contrast, emigration would have to swell 
markedly to ease the situation on the la-bour markets to any signifi  cant degree. In 
Spain, for instance, net emigration of young 
people in those two years was just 2,500, 
or 0.1% of that age segment of the popula-
tion, though the number of young people 
leaving the country is likely to have shot up 
in 2012. Net emigration of young people from Italy in 2010-11 was even lower, at 1,500 (such data are not available for the 
other peripheral countries).10
Taking up work abroad generally not only improves the personal situation of young 
people who have been unsuccessful in their 
attempt to fi  nd a job in their home country 
9 See H Dietrich, Jugendarbeitslosigkeit: Aktive Arbeits-
marktpolitik, Wirtschaftsdienst, volume 6 (2013), 
pp 358f.
10 Including young foreigners in the calculation, both 
Spain and Italy experienced net immigration totalling 
62,000 and 147,000 persons respectively in 2010 and 2011. However, these fi  gures probably include not only 
an infl  ux of refugees but also many people entering 
the country to study.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2013  
26

The high level of youth unemployment in the 
euro area is considered a particularly pressing 
problem. Since its cyclical low in March 2008, 
the standardised unemployment rate among 
15 to 24 year- olds has risen by 8.8 percentage 
points to reach 23.9% in June 2013. This was 
primarily due to starkly negative developments 
in the crisis countries, where the corresponding 
jobless rates recently stood at 26.5% in Ireland, 
56.1% in Spain and 62.9% in Greece (for a de -
tailed analysis of this topic and the identifica -
tion of potential policy measures to combat 
high youth unemployment in the crisis coun -
tries, see the box on pages 22 to 27). However, 
when interpreting the very high youth un -
employment rates in these countries compared 
with the overall unemployment rates, it should 
be noted that the defined youth labour force 
with which the number of unemployed young 
people is compared is relatively small in relation 
to the total population in the 15 to 24 age 
group as many young people are not available 
for work. Furthermore, the high rates of youth unemployment in the crisis countries obscure 
the fact that the number of young people out 
of work in proportion to the total number of 
unemployed persons is not unusually high in 
comparison to other member states. In the 
second quarter of 2013, it was only marginally 
above the euro- area average of 18.3% in Ire -
land (18.9%) and moderately higher in Italy 
(20.7%) and Cyprus (21.5%). The percentage 
shares in some of the other peripheral coun -
tries were well below the average, with Greece 
at the bottom end of the scale at 13.5% (April- 
May). Finland was at the top with 31.7%.
Between April and June 2013, the rate of in -
crease in consumer prices in the euro area 
largely came to a halt, with a quarter- on- 
quarter rise in the HICP inflation index of just 
0.1% in seasonally adjusted terms. This was 
due to a significant decline in energy prices, es -
pecially in April and May. At the same time, the 
traditional spike in service prices over Easter 
was largely shifted from April into March as Youth 
 unemployment has various facets
Inflation slowed by energy and early Easterbut also eases the strain on public fi  nances 
in their home country, by, for instance, cut-ting the volume of social transfers. There is 
little foundation for concerns that the mi-gration of young people could damage a 
country’s growth potential in the long term, as there is nothing to prevent them return-
ing to their home country when economic 
conditions there pick up again. In fact, 
many returning emigrants are likely to bring with them valuable know- how from abroad. 
Stronger migration within the euro area 
would be desirable also because it can take 
on an important economic adjustment function in a currency union, which by its very nature precludes exchange rate 
changes. Overall therefore, there is much to 
be said for stepping up efforts to encour-age youth mobility at national and EU 
level.11 An important starting point could be 
promoting foreign language skills, as the low mobility within the EU –  especially compared with the United States – is prob-ably largely connected with Europe’s plural-ity of different languages.
11 See M Barslund and D Gros, Unemployment is the 
scourge, not youth unemployment per se – The mis-
guided policy preoccupation with youth, Centre for 
European Policy Studies (CEPS), Discussion Paper No 294, June 2013, pp 7ff, and W Eichhorst et al, Youth Unemployment in Europe: What to Do about 
It?, IZA Policy Paper No 65, July 2013.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2013  
27

Easter fell early this year. This partly explains the 
first- quarter jump of 0.4% in the inflation rate. 
The prices of unprocessed foods accelerated 
throughout the second quarter, partly because 
of the poor weather. By contrast, the prices of 
processed food and other industrial goods re -
mained on a steady, moderate upward curve. 
Year- on- year HICP inflation fell from 1.9% in 
the first three months of 2013 to 1.4% in the 
second quarter.The generally subdued price movement seen in 
May and June continued into July. Food prices 
continued to rise, while energy prices increased 
fairly sharply for the first time in several months 
in the wake of the higher cost of oil. By con -
trast, the prices of other industrial goods fell 
slightly in seasonally adjusted terms. The year- 
on- year rate of increase in the HICP amounted 
to 1.6%, just as in June.Ongoing 
 moderate price pressure in JulyYouth unemployment * in the euro area
* Aged 15 to 24, unemployment rate according to ILO definition. 1 Data for Greece and Estonia up to May 2013.
Deutsche Bundesbank0102030405060As at 2013 Q21, seasonally adjusted
051015202530
GR CY LU SK IT EE IE EMU PT SI ES DE FI MT NL AT FR BEYouth unemployment rate
compared with
Overall unemployment rate
Share of youth unemployment in total unemployment%
%Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2013  
28

Monetary policy and banking business
Monetary policy and money 
market developments
Since the main refinancing rate and the mar -
ginal lending rate were lowered by 25 and 50 
basis points respectively in May 2013, the Gov -
erning Council of the ECB has left key interest 
rates unchanged. The interest rate on main re -
financing operations therefore remains un -
changed at 0.50%. The rates for the deposit 
facility and the marginal lending facility stand 
firm at 0.00% and 1.00% respectively.
These decisions are based on the ECB Govern -
ing Council’s unaltered expectation that under -
lying price pressures in the euro area will re -
main subdued over the medium term. This is 
also indicated by the still subdued monetary 
and credit growth. The ongoing accommoda -
tive monetary policy stance is intended to sup -
port the gradual recovery in economic activity 
for the remainder of the year and for 2014.
After its meeting on 4 July 2013, the ECB Gov -
erning Council made it clear that it expected to 
keep key interest rates at present or lower 
levels for an extended period of time. This must 
be seen against the backdrop of the fact that, 
despite the reduction in policy rates at the be -
ginning of May, the level of money market for -
ward rates had not fallen permanently. The ECB 
Governing Council has thus provided “forward 
guidance” on the future orientation of its mon -
etary policy (see box on pages 30 to 32). This 
assessment depends on the medium- term out -
look for inflation, which is based on expect -
ations regarding future developments in the 
real economy and on the dynamics of credit 
and monetary aggregates. The ECB Governing 
Council underlined that the forward guidance 
on its future monetary policy stance is entirely 
compatible with the primary objective of price 
stability and the Eurosystem’s monetary policy 
strategy. Following its meeting on 1  August, 
the ECB Governing Council repeated the phrase it had first used in July regarding its expect -
ations on the development of key ECB interest 
rates.
On 18 July 2013, the ECB Governing Council 
published several modifications to its risk con -
trol framework for the acceptance of collateral. 
These modifications included adjusting valu -
ation haircuts for marketable instruments and 
tightening risk control measures for retained 
covered bonds. In addition, the rating require -
ments for six classes of asset- backed securities 
(ABS), which are subject to loan level reporting 
requirements, were lowered from two “triple 
A” ratings to two “single A” ratings, and valu -
ation haircuts for ABS, which serve as collateral 
for monetary policy operations within the 
standard or temporary collateral framework, 
were reduced. Finally, the eligibility criteria and 
haircuts applied by the national central banks Key interest 
rates remain at historical low
ECB Governing 
Council provides forward guid-ance on its fu-ture monetary policy stanceModifications to the ECB’s risk control frame-work
Money market interest ratesin the euro area
1 Monthly averages. 2 Three-month Euribor less three-month 
Eurepo. • Average 1 to 14 August 2013.
Deutsche Bundesbank2010 2011 2012 201300.51.01.52.02.53.0
050100150Difference between unsecured and secured
three-month interbank lending rates 1 ,  2Basis
points% Marginal lending rate
Three-month Euribor 1
EONIA 1
Minimum bid rate or fixed interest rate
for main refinancing operations
Deposit rateDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2013  
29

Forward guidance – an indication of monetary policy stance 
in the future
Essentially, a stability- oriented monetary 
policy infl  uences price developments by im-
pacting on aggregate demand. One central 
transmission channel leads from the key interest rates, feeding through short- term 
money market rates to longer- term interest 
rates, which are ultimately key variables in 
the borrowing and purchase decisions of households and enterprises. However, this 
means of indirectly infl  uencing longer- term 
interest rates may be weakened if, for  example, key interest rates cannot be lowered further  – perhaps because they have reached their lower bound, or other factors are affecting developments in 
longer- term interest rates. Such factors may be infl  uences from abroad, for instance, or 
uncertainty- induced changes of the risk 
premiums in these interest rates.
One basic option a central bank has for 
 exercising more direct infl  uence on longer- 
term interest rates is forward guidance. This refers, above all, to indications which a cen-
tral bank provides regarding the future de-
velopment of its key interest rates. If such 
indications contain new information or re-
duce uncertainty about how the key rates will develop in future, this should have a 
corresponding impact on longer- term inter-
est rates. Against this backdrop, it is not surprising that central banks around the world have in recent years adopted this  approach to communicate their monetary 
policy orientation for the future.
Forward guidance 
issued by the Eurosystem
The Eurosystem recently used such a tool for steering expectations, too. After its 
meetings on 4 July and 1 August 2013, the ECB’s Governing Council voiced the expect-ation that the key interest rates for the euro 
area would remain at present or lower 
levels for an extended period of time.1
To interpret this forward guidance correctly, however, it is crucial to understand that it is 
conditional on the Eurosystem’s unchan-
ging commitment to its mandate, which is 
to maintain price stability by keeping infl  a-
tion rates below, but close to, 2% in the 
medium term.2 Thus, in issuing this forward 
guidance, the Eurosystem is not making an 
unconditional promise with regard to the future development of key interest rates, but is describing its monetary policy re-
sponse – in light of the current data set and 
based on its two- pillar strategy  – to the 
 expected infl  ation developments.
The ECB’s Governing Council has therefore 
not committed itself: its forward guidance 
does not rule out a rise in key interest rates 
if signs emerge that price pressures are 
more pronounced than currently estimated. By the same token, a weaker development would not rule out a cut in the key interest 
rates. It was to stress the conditionality of 
this forward guidance and to avoid any mis-understandings that a specifi  c time horizon was not given.
Thus, the indication of the future monetary 
policy stance is given in the context of the 
current mandate and is consistent with the 
current monetary policy strategy. The add-
itional information concerning the future 
monetary policy stance supplements previ-
1 See European Central Bank, Editorial, Monthly Bul-
letin, July 2013, pp 5-9.
2 See also European Central Bank, The monetary pol-icy of the ECB, 2011.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2013  
30

ous communication with the public, which 
has grown more diffi   cult, particularly in 
times of heightened uncertainty, and there-
fore more challenging. The aim is to explain 
the monetary policy orientation even more 
simply and clearly in order that it is under-
stood by as many market participants as 
possible, and that the Eurosystem’s forward 
guidance is adequately refl  ected in longer- 
term interest rates.
Forward guidance 
by the US Federal Reserve
The US Federal Reserve (Fed) has provided 
the markets with an indication of its future 
monetary policy for some time now. How-
ever, the Fed’s variant of forward guidance 
differs from that of the Eurosystem. On 12 December 2012, it specifi  ed thresholds for infl  ation and unemployment to the  effect that the federal funds rate (US key interest rate) would remain at its current  exceptionally low level at least as long as the unemployment rate remains above 
6½%, infl  ation between one and two years 
ahead is projected to be no more than 
½ percentage point above its 2% goal, and 
the longer- term infl  ation expectations con-
tinue to be well anchored.3
In issuing this forward guidance the Fed, too, is not changing its monetary policy 
strategy, but is merely spelling out in more 
precise terms its approach to carrying out its dual mandate, which is to ensure price stability and high employment levels. And 
much like the Eurosystem, this is not an un-conditional commitment to a specifi  c inter-est rate path. The Fed may deviate from the path it set out if any of the three above pre-
conditions with regard to unemployment, 
infl  ation and infl  ation expectations are not 
fulfi  lled. Thus, its monetary policy decisions 
are likewise subject to how economic de-
velopments actually turn out.Forward guidance as provided by these two 
central banks is, therefore, based on their respective monetary policy strategy and 
 depends on their respective data set, mak-
ing it primarily an instrument for improving 
communication with market participants. The main difference between the forward guidance given by the two central banks probably lies in the use of specifi  c thresh-
olds. For the Eurosystem, the present quan-
titative defi  nition of price stability repre-
sents the value for the overarching object-
ive of price stability in keeping with its man-
date. Reference values such as the growth 
of money and credit supply are not monet-ary policy objectives in their own right.
Forward guidance 
at the lower bound of interest rates
Providing forward guidance on the future path of key interest rates is, in principle, also a means of dampening longer- term 
interest rates at the lower bound of interest 
rates, ie when there is de facto no further 
scope for key interest rate cuts. A credible 
announcement to the effect that key inter-est rates are to remain at a low level longer 
than the above- described monetary policy 
strategies imply would be the simplest way of committing to a phase of higher infl  ation 
for the future. The infl  ation expectations 
that are increased by such an unconditional 
commitment have the effect of lowering – on the basis of a given nominal interest 
rate – the ex- ante real interest rate, and of stimulating macroeconomic demand.
However, central banks can only achieve 
their aim of higher infl  ation expectations by 
generating a temporary increase in infl  a-tionary expectations over and above the 
present price stability mark. This is likely to 
3 See Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve Sys-
tem, Press Release, 12 December 2012.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2013  
31

for pools of credit claims and certain types of 
additional credit claims (ACC) were adjusted. 
The ECB Governing Council stated that these 
measures, taken together, would have a neu -
tral effect on the overall amount of eligible col -
lateral available.
In the second quarter of 2013, the Eurosystem 
again did not make any purchases as part of 
monetary policy- based bond purchase pro -
grammes. In particular, purchases were still not 
being made in the form of Outright Monetary 
Transactions (OMT). The Eurosystem’s holdings 
of securities acquired under the Securities Mar -
ket Programme (SMP), which was discontinued 
in 2012, amounted to €192.6 billion in mid-  
August; holdings totalling €59.9 billion were 
accounted for by the two covered bond pur -
chase programmes, which have likewise been 
discontinued in the meantime.
Recourse to monetary policy refinancing oper -
ations by euro- area banks declined further in the second quarter of 2013. This was once 
again mainly due to early repayments of the li -
quidity provided in the two outstanding three- 
year refinancing operations. The monetary pol -
icy counterparties to these two operations have 
voluntarily repaid to the Eurosystem around 
€320 billion in total and around €82 billion 
since April. The sum of repayments has de -
creased from month to month. It is likely that 
the lower incentive for early repayments of 
 excess liquidity to the Eurosystem –  which 
 resulted from the interest rate corridor being 
narrowed in May 2013 – contributed to this. 
The volume of liquidity outstanding from the 
two three- year refinancing operations currently 
stands at €672 billion of an original €1,019 bil -
lion. Excess liquidity dropped to €248 billion of 
late on average over the reserve period that 
ended on 6 August 2013. This was still an un -
usually high figure compared with the period 
prior to the allotment of the two three- year 
tenders.Still no bond 
purchases in the form of Outright Monetary Trans-actions (OMT)Monetary policy refinancing vol-ume and excess liquidity downgreatly impair central banks’ credibility, 
however, particularly when monetary policy 
is going through a diffi   cult period, as the 
impression would arise that central banks are willing to change their strategy and their mandate to attain short- term object-
ives. The central banks would then risk los-
ing their means of systematically steering 
expectations at the lower bound of interest 
rates. This also explains why no central 
bank engages in this form of unconditional forward guidance.
ConclusionTo sum up, the forward guidance provided 
by the Eurosystem must be seen in the con-text of its mandate and its unchanged mon-etary policy strategy. For this reason, its for-
ward guidance indications are not likely to 
affect medium to long- term infl  ation ex-pectations either. Particularly in times of heightened uncertainty, the form of for-
ward guidance the Eurosystem has chosen 
can enhance communication with market participants, spell out its monetary policy stance in clearer terms and check expect-
ations about the future path of short- term 
interest rates which the ECB’s Governing 
Council considers wide of the mark.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2013  
32

Money market management and liquidity needs
Liquidity provision to credit institutions in 
the euro area was still well above the calcu-
lated liquidity needs during the three main-
tenance periods from 10  April to 9  July 2013. At the same time, excess liquidity ( deposit facility plus current account hold-ings minus the reserve requirement) fell 
from, on average, €332 billion in the April- 
May period to €274 billion in the June- July 
period. This was mainly due to the early  repayment of the liquidity allotted in the 
three- year tenders, amounting to €64.8 bil-
lion. Other contributing factors included 
lower tender demand, maturities under the securities purchase programmes initiated as 
part of the ECB’s monetary policy and an increase in autonomous factors. Liquidity- providing open market operations con-tinued to be carried out as fi  xed- rate ten-ders with full allotment of the submitted 
bids (see table on page 35). In addition, at its meeting on 2 May 2013, the Governing Council of the ECB decided to continue this 
full allotment policy both in main and 
longer- term refi  nancing operations at least 
until the end of the June- July 2014 mainten-
ance period. Given the generous liquidity 
conditions, overnight rates remained in line 
with the deposit facility rate of 0% during 
the review period but were, on average, 
nonetheless marginally higher than the val-ues observed in the fi  rst three maintenance periods of 2013.
The net increase of €10.2 billion in liquidity 
needs stemming from autonomous factors 
in the three maintenance periods was 
mainly owing to the volume of banknotes 
in circulation which, on balance, grew by 
€20.1 billion. This, in turn, absorbed a simi-
lar amount of liquidity as in the comparable 
2012 period, in which liquidity needs went 
up by €21.3 billion on the back of a grow-
ing volume of banknotes in circulation. 
Government deposits increased by €2.8 bil-lion and therefore also absorbed liquidity. The sum of changes in net foreign assets and other factors, which are looked at  together in order to eliminate valuation 
 effects with no impact on liquidity, had the opposite effect. It swelled by €12.7 billion in the period under review, thus reducing the 
need for central bank liquidity. Liquidity 
needs stemming from the minimum reserve requirements remained virtually unchanged 
on balance over the three maintenance 
periods.
In the period under review, maturities lowered balance sheet holdings under the Securities Markets Programme (SMP) by €10.4 billion to €195.5 billion – including revaluations. The weighted allotment rate in the customary weekly fi  ne- tuning oper-ations to absorb the liquidity provided under the SMP increased from 0.04% to 0.09%. Maturities and  revaluations re-duced balance sheet securities holdings under the Covered Bond Purchase Pro-
grammes (CBPP1 and CBPP2) by €2.1 billion to €44.9 billion and by €0.2 billion to €16.0 billion, respectively, over the same period.
The April- May 2013 maintenance period was characterised by a perceptible period- 
on- period decline in the outstanding liquid-
ity- providing tender volume by around €44 
billion to €863 billion on average over the period. Of this, €33 billion was accounted for by longer- term refi  nancing operations (LTROs), which declined primarily because 
funds allotted in three- year tenders were re-
paid. Excess liquidity amounted to around 
€332 billion on average over the period, and was evident in recourse to the deposit facil-
ity of, on average, €115 billion and in the 
excess reserves held by commercial banks in 
central bank current accounts, which reached €217 billion. Thus, credit institu-
tions held, on average, 65% of their  excess Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2013  
33

liquidity on central bank current accounts 
and 35% in the deposit facility, with current 
account holdings higher than average at the 
beginning of the period and falling almost 
constantly over the course of the mainten-
ance period. Banks also engaged in this kind 
of frontloading in the other two mainten-ance periods. Over the June-July mainten-ance period, EONIA averaged 0.08%, 67 
basis points below the main refi  nancing rate 
(previous period: 68 basis points). There were some deviations, with EONIA slightly higher at the end of the month and the benchmark rate falling at the end of the maintenance period. At around €21 billion on average, EONIA volumes were low and remained virtually unchanged compared 
with the previous period. Secured overnight 
money on Eurex Repo’s GC Pooling (ECB 
basket) was traded at an even lower rate of, 
on average, 0.045%, with average turn-
overs of €10.8 billion.
The new main refi  nancing rate of 0.50% was applied for the fi  rst time in the May- June 2013 maintenance period. Excess  liquidity fell by €46 billion to €286 billion over the period, a somewhat sharper de-cline than in the previous maintenance period (-€43 billion). The generous, albeit further reduced, liquidity supply was still 
mainly refl  ected in high excess reserves. The average volume of the main refi  nancing op-
erations (MROs) and LTROs amounted to €833 billion, down roughly €30 billion on the previous period. Overnight rates re-
mained fairly stable, averaging 0.08% over 
the period for EONIA and 0.05% for Over-
night GC Pooling, ECB basket. EONIA vol-
umes fell by €3.5 billion to €17.5 billion on average during the maintenance period. By contrast, GC Pooling overnight turnover re-
mained unchanged from the previous 
period.
In addition to increasing on the previous maintenance period, autonomous factors 
also became more volatile in the June- July 
2013 period. They moved in a range be-tween €472 billion and €526 billion, with Factors determining bank liquidity1
€ billion; changes in the daily averages of the reserve maintenance periods vis-à-vis the previous period
Item2013
10 Apr to
7 May8 May to11 June12 June to 9 July
I Provision (+) or  absorption (–) of  
central bank balances due to changes 
in autonomous factors1 Banknotes in  circulation (increase: –) –  7.9 –  7.0 –  5.2
2 Government  deposits with the Eurosystem ( increase: –) +  7.2 –  0.6 –  9.4
3 Net foreign assets
2 +  0.5 –  1.3 – 40.1
4 Other factors 2 +  2.5 –  6.1 + 57.2
Total +  2.3 – 15.0 +  2.5
II Monetary policy  operations of the Eurosystem
1 Open market  operations
(a) Main refi  nancing operations – 10.7 –  8.3 +  4.1
(b) Longer-term refi  nancing  operations – 33.0 – 21.5 – 20.4
(c) Other operations –  2.2 –  0.9 +  0.9
2 Standing facilities
(a) Marginal lending facility +  0.4 –  0.4 +  0.8
(b) Deposit facility (increase: –) + 19.3 + 24.0 –  1.6
Total – 26.2 –  7.1 – 16.2
III Change in credit  institutions’  current accounts (I + II) – 23.8 – 21.9 – 13.8
IV Change in the  minimum reserve requirement ( increase: –) +  0.0 –  0.4 +  0.2
1 For longer-term trends and the Deutsche Bundesbank’s contribution, see pp 14 • and 15 • of the Statistical Section of this 
Monthly Report. 2 Including end-of- quarter liquidity-neutral valuation adjustments.
Deutsche BundesbankDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2013  
34

general government deposits being the 
main contributor to the volatility. The June- 
July period was also characterised by greater 
recourse to the marginal lending facility of 
up to €6.5 billion between 19 and 25 June 
2013. This was the result of a collateral- 
related, temporary shift from the main refi  -nancing operations to the marginal lending 
facility. The willingness to repay three- year 
tenders fell over the observation period and 
meant that the outstanding volume from  liquidity- providing tender operations did 
not change as much as in the two previous 
maintenance periods, standing at around €817 billion on average over the period. 
Main refi  nancing operations contributed an 
average of 13% to this total, unchanged from the previous two maintenance periods. With average excess liquidity down €12 bil-
lion to €274 billion, EONIA continued to 
average 0.08% in this maintenance period 
(excluding the last day of the fi  rst half year, 
for which the benchmark rate exhibited a typical pattern, increasing by 12 basis points). The difference between the aver-
age EONIA rate and the GC Pooling secured overnight rate narrowed from 3 basis points 
in the previous period to 2 basis points in the June- July maintenance period due to 
the slight upward tendency in secured over-night money; this suggests that the secured rate reacted more strongly to the fall in ex-cess liquidity.Open market operations of the Eurosystem*
 
Value 
dateType of transaction
1Maturity in daysActual 
 allotment 
in € bil-lionDeviation from the 
bench-
mark in € billion
2Marginal rate/fi  xed 
rate
%Allot-ment 
ratio
%Weighted 
rate
%Cover ratio
3Numberof bid-
ders
10.04.2013 MRO (FRT) 7 119.3 115.3 0.75 100.00 – 1.00 70
10.04.2013 FTO (–) 7 – 206.0 – 0.06 12.88 0.04 1.40 91
10.04.2013 S-LTRO (FRT) 28 5.2 – 0.75 100.00 – 1.00 17
17.04.2013 MRO (FRT) 7 116.4 117.9 0.75 100.00 – 1.00 70
17.04.2013 FTO (–) 7 – 206.0 – 0.05 89.91 0.04 1.28 82
24.04.2013 MRO (FRT) 8 110.4 78.9 0.75 100.00 – 1.00 71
24.04.2013 FTO (–) 8 – 202.5 – 0.14 87.30 0.05 1.25 77
25.04.2013 LTRO (FRT) 98 3.0 – 
4 0.53 100.00 – 1.00 40
02.05.2013 MRO (FRT) 6 105.0 46.5 0.75 100.00 – 1.00 70
02.05.2013 FTO (–) 6 – 202.5 – 0.10 16.73 0.05 1.26 79
08.05.2013 MRO (FRT) 7 110.3 99.8 0.50 100.00 – 1.00 65
08.05.2013 FTO (–) 7 – 201.0 – 0.08 32.37 0.05 1.33 95
08.05.2013 S-LTRO (FRT) 35 5.2 – 0.50 100.00 – 1.00 17
15.05.2013 MRO (FRT) 7 103.8 108.8 0.50 100.00 – 1.00 64
15.05.2013 FTO (–) 7 – 201.0 – 0.08 19.60 0.05 1.24 95
22.05.2013 MRO (FRT) 7 103.4 66.9 0.50 100.00 – 1.00 62
22.05.2013 FTO (–) 7 – 201.0 – 0.08 93.15 0.06 1.26 96
29.05.2013 MRO (FRT) 7 103.2 16.7 0.50 100.00 – 1.00 63
29.05.2013 FTO (–) 7 – 197.0 – 0.15 12.93 0.07 1.19 89
30.05.2013 LTRO (FRT) 91 5.8 – 4 … 100.00 – 1.00 36
05.06.2013 MRO (FRT) 7 103.0 – 3.5 0.50 100.00 – 1.00 70
05.06.2013 FTO (–) 7 – 197.0 – 0.09 89.67 0.07 1.40 106
12.06.2013 MRO (FRT) 7 108.3 72.3 0.50 100.00 – 1.00 70
12.06.2013 S-LTRO (FRT) 28 3.6 – 0.50 100.00 – 1.00 20
12.06.2013 FTO (–) 7 – 195.0 – 0.08 63.51 0.07 1.43 101
19.06.2013 MRO (FRT) 7 102.0 99.5 0.50 100.00 – 1.00 73
19.06.2013 FTO (–) 7 – 195.0 – 0.08 64.49 0.07 1.29 102
26.06.2013 MRO (FRT) 7 117.3 65.8 0.50 100.00 – 1.00 99
26.06.2013 FTO (–) 7 – 195.0 – 0.45 28.63 0.18 1.10 83
27.06.2013 LTRO (FRT) 91 9.5 – 4 … 100.00 – 1.00 50
03.07.2013 MRO (FRT) 7 107.7 64.2 0.50 100.00 – 1.00 78
03.07.2013 FTO (–) 7 – 195.0 – 0.13 41.26 0.09 1.23 91
* For more information on the Eurosystem’s operations from 16 January 2013 to 9 April 2013, see Deutsche Bundesbank, Monthly  Report, May 2013, p 23. 1 MRO: main refi  nancing operation, LTRO: longer-term refi  nancing operation, S-LTRO: sup-
plementary longer-term refi  nancing operation, FTO: fi  ne-tuning operation (+: liquidity providing operation, –: liquidity ab-sorbing operation), FRT: fi  xed-rate tender. 2 Calculation according to publication after MRO allotment. 3 Ratio of total bids to 
the allotment amount. 4 The interest rate corresponds to the average minimum bid rate or main refi  nancing rate of the MROs 
conducted over the life of this operation (may be rounded to two decimal places in the table).
Deutsche BundesbankDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2013  
35

Short- term money market rates have, on aver -
age, been marginally above the levels of the 
first quarter of 2013 since April despite key ECB 
interest rates being lowered on 2 May 2013. 
This is because the short end of the euro area’s 
money market yield curve is currently shaped in 
particular by the unchanged deposit rate and 
the still high – yet declining – excess liquidity. 
Above all, money market forward rates,1 which 
reflect market expectations on the future devel -
opment of money market rates, witnessed a 
rising trend and greater fluctuations from May. 
These developments essentially reflect clear 
changes at the long end of the yield curve in 
the major currency areas, which must be seen 
inter alia  in the context of changing expect -
ations regarding further prospects of uncon -
ventional monetary policy measures of major 
central banks around the world.
Like their US counterparts, euro- area money 
market forward rates briefly peaked in the 
second half of June but declined again consid -
erably – in parallel with the corresponding US 
rates – at the end of June. In response to the 
ECB Governing Council’s forward guidance, the 
sharp decline in European forward rates was 
temporarily even more considerable. However, 
a sustainable decoupling from the develop -
ment of US forward rates has not yet taken 
place, which is also to be seen against the backdrop of the recent improvement in leading 
economic indicators for the euro area.
Monetary developments  
in the euro area
As in the preceding quarters, the main factors 
influencing euro- area monetary dynamics in 
the second quarter of 2013 were the economic 
situation and, above all, inflows from abroad 
and the interest rate constellation. Given the 
low opportunity cost of holding money and the 
relatively low level of attractiveness of longer-  
term investments, overnight deposits kept 
growing considerably in the reporting quarter 
and –  coupled with the renewed increase in 
non- residents’ willingness to transfer funds to 
the euro area – fuelled growth of M3. How -
ever, the factors supporting M3 growth were 
increasingly dominated by growing cutbacks in 
loans to the private sector as a result of weak 
macroeconomic developments.
Against this backdrop, the second quarter of 
2013, too, was characterised by an –  albeit 
only slight – expansion of M3 alongside con -Macroeconomic 
setting
Monetary 
 developments subduedConsolidated balance sheet of the MFI sector in the euro area*
Changes in € billion, seasonally adjusted
Liabilities 2013 Q2 2013 Q1
Central government deposits 11.5 –  6.3
Monetary aggregate M3 4.7 50.8
of which: Components
Currency in circulation and 
overnight deposits (M1) 53.5 95.3
Other shorter-term bank deposits 
(M2-M1) – 18.2 0.5
Marketable instruments (M3-M2) – 30.6 – 44.9
Monetary capital – 31.3 2.5
of which
Capital and reserves 36.4 54.0
Other longer-term fi  nancial  liabilities – 67.7 – 51.5Assets 2013 Q2 2013 Q1
Credit to private non-MFIs in the euro area – 91.9 12.1
Loans
1 – 99.5 0.5
Securities 15.5 17.4
Credit to general government in the euro area 23.2 24.6
Loans – 35.5 – 20.1
Securities 58.8 44.7
Net external assets 89.1 63.8
Other counterparts of M3 – 43.5 – 59.3
* Adjusted for statistical changes. 1 Adjusted for loan sales and securitisation.
Deutsche Bundesbank
1 Implicit forward rates derived from swap rates for the 
unsecured interbank overnight rate EONIA and interest 
rates of exchange- traded futures on three- month Euribor.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2013  
36

tracting volumes of loans to the domestic pri -
vate sector. The renewed flattening of the yield 
curve continued to stimulate substantial out -
flows of non-  overnight deposits included in 
M3. Monetary capital, which had been record -
ing outflows almost continuously since the be -
ginning of 2012, posted yet another decline. 
However, in contrast to the previous quarters, 
overnight deposits benefited less from invest -
ors’ portfolio shifts in the spring quarter, which 
had the effect that M3 growth, too, weak -
ened: the sustained increase in money supply 
since the beginning of 2010, which had already 
lost a great deal of momentum at the begin -
ning of 2013, was therefore yet again markedly 
weaker in the reporting quarter. However, the 
annual growth rate dropped only slightly 
to 2.3%.
The annual growth rate of lending to the pri -
vate sector (adjusted for loan sales and securi -
tisation) slid even deeper into negative territory 
and stood at -1.0% at the end of the second 
quarter of 2013. This meant that, although the 
annualised rates of monetary and credit growth 
were moving in the same direction, they did 
not converge.2
The substantial decline in loans in the euro area 
was, above all, a reflection of the still weak 
economic situation and the persistently great 
need for deleveraging in the euro- area periph -
eral countries. Spain in particular recorded a 
strong reduction in lending to the private sec -
tor, although loans in the other peripheral 
countries were down, too. Moreover, banks in 
the euro- area core countries posted a lower 
level of growth in lending business than one 
quarter earlier.
Net redemptions mainly affected the non-  
financial private sector, and there almost exclu -
sively lending to non- financial corporations, Decline in lend-
ing to the pri-vate sector, …
… amidst 
 heterogeneous developments in the euro areaComponents and counterparts of the money stock in the euro area
1 Year-on-year  change  in  per  cent.  2 In  percentage  points. 
3 Adjusted for loan sales and securitisation. 4 Taken in isol-
ation, an increase curbs M3 growth. 5 Adjusted for loan sales 
and  securitisation  from  2010  Q1.  6 Non-monetary  financial 
corporations.
Deutsche Bundesbank2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013505101520
–++++
–10–50+5+10+15+20+25
505101520
–++++Seasonally adjusted, end-of-quarter data
... components of the money stock
... counterparts
Sectoral growth contributions 2of which
Loans to the private sector 5Growth rate 1 of M3 and the
contributions to growth 2 of the ...
M3–M2
M2–M1
M1
Remaining balance
sheet items
Longer-term financial
liabilities to other non-MFIs 4
Net external
asset position
Credit to theprivate sector 3
Financialcorporations 6
Non-financialcorporations 
HouseholdsM3 
M3
Growth rate1
2 For an in-  depth analysis of the heterogeneous develop -
ments of money and credit growth in the euro area, see 
Deutsche Bundesbank, Differences in money and credit 
growth in the euro area and in individual euro- area coun -
tries, Monthly Report, July 2013, p 47ff.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2013  
37

which declined especially in the peripheral 
countries – though also in Germany. Added to 
this was the fact that non- financial corpor -
ations in some euro- area countries have substi -
tuted loans in part with market financing or by 
making greater use of internal funding (see box 
on pages 42 to 43).
This is consistent with the banks interviewed in 
the second quarter of 2013 as part of the Bank 
Lending Survey (BLS) reporting a marked de -
cline in demand for bank loans. Although 
bank- imposed constraints cannot be ruled out, 
the results of the latest survey round do not 
attribute great importance to them with regard 
to the weak credit developments in the euro 
area: the majority of countries did not adjust 
their credit standards at all and the remaining 
countries tightened them only moderately in 
most cases. The main reason for these adjust -
ments, according to the institutions surveyed, 
was the deterioration in the perception of risks 
regarding the business cycle and borrowers. 
With regard to their funding options, the banks 
yet again reported improvements in most of 
the surveyed sub- markets and indicated that 
the sovereign debt crisis continued to have no 
marked impact on their funding conditions and 
lending policies. However, the surveyed banks 
stated that the introduction of stricter capital 
requirements had prompted them to reduce 
their risk- weighted assets.
The economic situation and the continued 
need for deleveraging in some countries were 
also reflected in net redemptions in loans to 
households. Although these were extremely 
moderate in absolute terms, it is striking that 
loans for house purchase, which had supported 
lending to households on the whole, did not 
this time offset the further decline in consumer 
loans and other credit. This, too, is evidence of 
the heterogeneous developments between 
euro- area core countries and peripheral coun -
tries: while housing loans receded discernibly in 
particular as a result of the need to reduce the 
high level of indebtedness in Spain, but also in 
the other peripheral countries, they continued to grow moderately in Germany and France, 
probably not least as a result of the persistently 
low interest rate level.
The substantial reduction in credit to the pri -
vate sector was countered by a moderate ex -
pansion in lending by euro- area MFIs to gen -
eral government. Italy and Spain in particular 
saw demand focussed mainly on securities of 
their domestic public sectors. By contrast, loans 
to general government experienced net re -
demptions. This development was observed al -
most throughout all euro- area countries. How -
ever, it was particularly pronounced in Spain, 
where current shifts from loans to securities 
must also be regarded as a counter- movement 
to the preceding opposite substitution, which 
was triggered by market access being made 
more difficult for the public sector.
The largest contribution to money growth was 
made – as in the past three quarters – by net 
claims of the banking sector on non- residents. 
As in the past, the renewed increase was driven 
by both sustained current account surpluses 
and additional net capital inflows in portfolio 
investment from abroad. Although euro area 
investors, too, increasingly acquired foreign se -
curities, which had a dampening effect on the 
banking sector’s net external assets, this was 
outweighed by the persistently extensive pur -
chases of securities by investors outside the 
euro area. This is probably also attributable to 
the reversal of capital outflows seen up until 
mid-2012 due to the high level of uncertainty 
regarding further euro- area developments.
Overall, the analysis of money and its counter -
parts suggests that underlying inflation- relevant 
monetary growth remains subdued. On aver -
age, inflation forecasts based on various mon -
etary indicators (monetary aggregates, short-  
term deposits, loans) also currently signal bal -
anced risks for price stability over the next three 
years. However, the uncertainty associated 
with these forecasts remains high.Substantial net 
redemptions among non- financial corpor-ations
According to 
BLS, slight tight -
ening of stand-
ards and 
marked decline 
in demand
Moderate de-
cline in lending to householdsContinued ex-
pansion in credit 
to general gov-
ernment sup-ports money growth along 
with …
… another con-
siderable rise in the net external asset position
Money- based 
forecasts with balanced infla-tion risksDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2013  
38

German banks’ deposit  
and lending business with 
domestic customers
Against the backdrop of historically low inter -
est rate levels and the flat yield curve, the re -
duction of long- term deposits and riskier other 
assets in favour of more liquid deposits con -
tinued in Germany in the second quarter of 
2013. Hence, developments in Germany did 
not contribute to the slow- down in growth of 
deposits included in M3 that was observed in 
the euro area. Given their high flexibility and 
the narrow interest rate spread on other invest -
ment forms, it was once again overnight de -
posits that benefited most. The fact that their 
share of all German deposits included in M3 
has continuously risen in the last five years 
from 29½% to just over 43½% reflects cur -
rently very liquid money holdings in Germany.
Particularly the declining risk aversion observed 
in European financial markets since the begin -
ning of the year has not yet had a dampening 
effect on German investors’ build-  up of de -
posits. Most of the inflow of short- term de -
posits stemmed from households; their usually 
rather interest rate- induced shifts even re -
gained momentum in the last two quarters. 
However, the corporate sector showed no 
signs of a shift in investment behaviour either. 
Over the last few quarters, the currently cash- 
rich non- financial corporations have not altered 
the pace with which they accumulate short-  
term deposits. At the same time, insurance 
companies and pension funds continued to re -
duce their long- term time deposits and invest 
the funds that were freed up in investment 
forms outside the monetary aggregates.
German lending business stagnated in the re -
porting quarter and therefore did not offset the 
reduction in lending in the rest of the euro 
area. This was mainly the result of a steep fall 
in loans to non- financial corporations, espe -
cially in the short- term but also in the medium- 
term maturity segment. Given that the devel -
opment in loans to non-  financial corporations typically lags behind both macroeconomic de -
velopments and investment by around three 
quarters,3 most of the decline in loans to enter -
prises can be explained by the phase of weak 
economic growth towards the end of 2012 and 
subdued investment by German enterprises. It 
therefore remains to be seen in the quarters 
ahead whether the German enterprises’ pro -
pensity to invest continues to be weighed 
down by the gloomy outlook for European 
sales markets and the uncertainty induced by 
the euro- area debt crises. Moreover, the rise in 
non- financial corporations’ internal funding 
and their recourse to alternative forms of exter -
nal financing –  such as the issuance of debt 
securities – made a discernible contribution to 
the net redemptions of loans to enterprises 
(see box on pages 42 to 43). The results of the 
BLS from the second quarter of 2013 are in line Increase in 
 deposits driven primarily by overnight  deposits, …
… especially 
owing to port -
folio shifts of households
Lending to non- 
financial corpor-ations recedes substantiallyLending and deposits of monetary  fi  nancial institutions (MFIs) in Germany
*
Changes in € billion, seasonally adjusted
Item2013
Q1 Q2
Deposits of domestic non-MFIs 1
Overnight 38.2 30.1
With agreed maturities
of up to 2 years – 0.9 – 11.8
of over 2 years – 5.7 –  7.0
Redeemable at notice
of up to 3 months – 1.3 4.8
of over 3 months – 3.9 –  3.8
Lending
to domestic general government
Loans – 3.8 –  3.7
Securitised lending – 5.7 –  4.2
to domestic enterprises and 
households
Loans 2 2.3 –  1.8
of which to households 3 4.2 3.6
to non-fi  nancial  corporations
4 0.5 –  5.2
Securitised lending – 1.8 6.2
* As well as banks (including building and loan associations, but 
excluding the Bundesbank), monetary fi  nancial institutions 
(MFIs) here also include money market funds. End-of-quarter 
data, adjusted for statistical changes. 1 Enterprises, households 
and general government excluding central government. 
2  Adjusted for loan sales and securitisation. 3 Including non-profi  t institutions serving households. 4 Corporations and quasi- 
corporations.
Deutsche Bundesbank
3 See Deutsche Bundesbank, German banks’ lending to the 
domestic private sector since summer 2009, Monthly Re -
port, September 2011, p 64 ff.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2013  
39

Statistical focus on insurance corporations and 
pension funds 
In the wake of the fi  nancial crisis, domestic 
insurers are facing challenges with consid-
erable economic ramifi  cations. Against this 
background, the Deutsche Bundesbank is 
making available additional information on 
the insurance sector, for instance by includ-
ing for the fi  rst time tables containing data on the assets and liabilities of insurance cor-
porations and pension funds resident in Germany in the Statistical Section of the 
Monthly Report (Tables VII 1 and 2).
The balance sheet data compiled under-
score the signifi  cance of insurance corpor-
ations and pension funds in their function 
as fi  nancial intermediaries. With an aggre-
gate balance sheet total of more than €2 trillion at the end of 2012, the insurance 
sector plays a key role in the accumulation 
and routing of long- term funding, in par-
ticular. Two- thirds of these funds stem from 
savings accumulated by households with life insurers and pension funds. Insurance 
corporations place this capital principally in 
deposits with monetary fi  nancial institu-
tions (often in the form of borrower’s note loans), or in debt securities and investment 
fund shares/units (comprising mostly debt securities) and, in so doing, provide the  issuing banks, enterprises and general 
 government with – for the most part long- term – capital.
The sustained low interest rate environment 
poses a particular challenge for the insur-
ance industry. For one thing, long- term fi  -
nancial investments in the form of endow-
ment policies are losing their appeal. For 
another, insurance corporations are search-ing for alternative investment opportunities 
beyond the scope of traditional long- term maturity debt securities. Up to now, the growth in balance sheet assets and liabil-ities has primarily refl  ected the valuation 
 effect of declining interest rates. The ques-
tion of whether there will also be strong 
volume effects and how durable these may 
be will require careful analysis. In this 
 regard, the additional statistics provided in 
the Monthly Report will create a valuable 
source of information.
The Bundesbank is compiling the data on the assets and liabilities of insurance cor-porations and pension funds contained in 
the new statistical tables as a preliminary to 
the ESCB’s planned introduction of har-monised European insurance statistics. As 
the data meet the methodological require-
ments of the European System of Accounts 
(ESA), they are, in principle, comparable 
with national account fi  gures, especially the fi  nancial accounts. The source data used in the Bundesbank calculations are derived for the most part from insurance supervisors.
The intention is to broaden the data base in 
collaboration with insurance supervisors 
over the coming years. This work will focus 
particularly on the more detailed capture of 
portfolio investment on a security- by- 
security basis. Furthermore, in view of the 
future supervisory standard Solvency II, the statistical coverage of insurance groups will become ever more important.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2013  
40

with the above: the participating institutions in -
dicated that enterprises’ demand for loans had 
dropped markedly because they were making 
use of other financing sources.
The fact that – despite the major reduction in 
loans to non- financial corporations – loans to 
the German private sector declined only slightly 
on balance in the reporting quarter is due to 
the distinct rise in lending to households. A de -
cisive factor in this was –  as in the previous 
quarters  – the demand for private housing 
loans, which is being driven not only by favour -
able financing conditions but also, at present, 
by uncertainty- induced portfolio shifts into tan -
gible assets. The BLS results, too, confirm that 
the rise in demand for private housing loans 
observed since the spring of 2010 continued in 
the second quarter of 2013 – albeit in a less 
pronounced manner. According to the sur -
veyed bank managers, the main reason for this 
development was that households continued 
to have a positive outlook on the housing 
 market.
In addition, improved income prospects and re -
duced job uncertainty in Germany were re -
flected in an – albeit only slight – increase in 
consumer loans. Correspondingly, the banks 
surveyed as part of the BLS reported a distinct 
increase in the demand for consumer loans for 
the first time in around two years. Overall, 
however, lending to households in the second 
quarter can still be regarded as moderate: the 
annual growth rate of loans to domestic house -
holds was low, remaining unchanged at 1.2%; 
the absence of a faster pace of growth of late 
was also found in the case of private housing 
loans, the annual growth rate of which stood 
at 2.1% at the end of June.
On the supply side, the weak growth in domes -
tic lending to the private sector was matched 
by merely a slight change in lending policies on 
the whole. The German results of the BLS indi -
cate that the surveyed institutions did not on 
balance adjust their standards for loans to en -
terprises in the second quarter of 2013. Thus, the period of little overall change in lending 
policies, which has lasted for four years now, 
continued. The balanced result in the past 
quarter is the outcome of two opposing ef -
fects: on the one hand, banks’ equity costs 
were slightly higher and on the other hand, the 
increased competition between the institutions 
had the effect of slightly relaxing credit stand -
ards. By contrast, cyclical and industry or firm- 
specific factors per se had no impact. At the 
same time, the surveyed banks moderately 
widened their margins for loans to enterprises.
Lending practices for loans to households did 
not change a great deal either. The standards 
for housing loans were tightened moderately 
given the surveyed banks’ pessimistic assess -
ment of the outlook on the housing market – 
unlike the outlook of households, which in the 
bank managers’ opinion do not expect any de -
terioration. However, the margins in this credit 
segment remained constant. The surveyed 
banks left the standards for consumer loans Marked increase 
in lending to households
German banks’ 
credit standards for enterprises unchangedCredit standards vis- à- vis house-holds virtually unchangedLoans of German banks toselected sectors
1 Year-on-year rate of change. 2  Non-monetary financial cor-
porations.  3 Non-financial  corporations  and  quasi-corporati-
ons.
Deutsche Bundesbank2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 201321012345
––+++++Growth contributions in percentage pointsSeasonally adjusted and adjusted for loan sales and securitisation, end-of-quarter data
HouseholdsFinancial corporations 2
Non-financial corporations 3Growth rate 1 in %Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2013  
41

The structure of corporate fi  nancing amid weak loan 
growth in Germany and the euro area
According to data from the fi  nancial ac-
counts, the overall fi  nancing volume of non- fi  nancial corporations in Germany 
picked up again noticeably in the fi  rst quar-
ter of 2013 following rather weak growth 
towards the end of 2012.1 The quite high 
and stable level of internal fi  nancing, which 
has been a typical feature of the German 
corporate landscape for years, was accom-
panied by a surge in external fi  nancing. 
There was a particular increase in capital market fi  nancing: by issuing bonds, non- 
fi  nancial corporations managed to procure 
funds which, in nominal terms, matched 
levels last seen about ten years ago. Loans 
granted by German and foreign non- MFIs 
(especially by other non- fi  nancial corpor-
ations in the (inter)national corporate net-
work as well as by other fi  nancial institu-
tions and insurers), which had seen net re-ductions at the end of 2012, also bounced back to a marked degree. By contrast, lend-
ing by domestic MFIs experienced less dy-namic growth. Moreover, share issuance played no more than a minor role during 
the fi  rst quarter of 2013.
Overall, these fi  nancial accounts fi  gures for 
the fi  rst quarter serve to underline the trend towards a growing substitution of domestic bank loans by other forms of fi  nancing and 
recourse to alternative lenders, which has 
been observable for several years in the cor-porate sector. In particular, there has been a 
shift to intra- group loans and capital mar-
ket- based funding, as well as trade credits.2 
This trend decline in the signifi  cance of MFI 
loans as a source of external fi  nancing is 
probably due not just to the growing com-
petition from non- MFI lenders but also to 
efforts by borrowers to diversify their fund-
ing options so as to be less vulnerable to developments in individual market seg-
ments in the future. At times, bank- imposed restrictions are likely to have contributed to 
1 The fi  nancial accounts fi  gures usually become avail-
able with a time lag of just more than one quarter. 
Consequently, the results for the fi  rst quarter of 2013 
represent the situation at the current end. The delay is 
due to the large number of incoming primary sources and the associated complexity of the calculations.2 It is not possible to derive from the aggregated data 
the extent to which this observation applies to all 
branches and fi  rm sizes.Structure of external financing*
of non-financial corporations
Source: ECB and Bundesbank calculations. * External financing 
excluding other liabilities.
Deutsche Bundesbank2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 201320246
–+++As a percentage of GDP; moving sum of the four preceding quarters
–20+2+4+6+8+10+12+14+16+18Euro area (excluding Germany)GermanyInsurance technical reserves
Total amount of external financingLoans from domestic MFIsOther loans (domestic and from abroad)Equity
Debt securitiesDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2013  
42

largely unchanged on balance and even ad -
justed their margins somewhat in favour of 
their borrowers.
In the second quarter, the survey contained ad 
hoc questions on the impact of the financial 
and sovereign debt crisis on banks’ funding 
conditions and credit standards as well as on 
the more stringent capital requirements. As in 
the two preceding quarters, the surveyed insti -
tutions reported a slight overall improvement 
of the funding environment and stated that the 
sovereign debt crisis was still not having any 
impact on their lending policies. German banks 
scaled back their risk- weighted assets in the 
first half of 2013 in preparation for the stricter 
capital requirements pursuant to CRR / CRD IV, 
and strengthened their capital position primar -
ily by retaining profits. Taken in isolation, the 
new capital requirements in lending business 
were reflected in tighter credit standards and 
higher margins – especially in the case of loans 
to large enterprises.Bank lending rates on new loans are likely to 
have had on the whole a supporting effect on 
domestic lending to the private sector. Whereas 
interest rates in the capital markets moved 
moderately upwards again, bank lending rates 
either stagnated or receded at a low level 
across all the relevant business areas, maturities 
and volumes in the second quarter. With re -
gard to loans to enterprises, interest rate 
changes were predominantly relatively negli -
gible, but mixed. The reporting institutions 
were charging interest for short- term funds of 
3.0% for small- scale and 1.7% for large- scale 
loans of late. The interest rates on long- term 
loans to domestic non- financial corporations 
stood at 2.7% and 2.8% respectively.
Unlike the heterogeneous developments in 
interest rates on loans to enterprises, housing 
loans of virtually all maturities were around 20 
basis points lower than one quarter earlier. For 
instance, interest rates on long-  term loans for 
house purchase dropped to a new historical Sovereign debt 
crisis alone has no impact on lending policiesBank lending rates do not fol-low interest rate hike in the cap-ital marketthe declining popularity of MFI loans, not 
least in 2009.3 At present, however, these 
factors are proving of negligible importance in Germany.
The picture is somewhat different for exter-
nal fi  nancing in the euro area as a whole 
(excluding Germany). Here, too, the past 
few quarters have seen adjustments which 
have induced a distinct increase in fi  nancing 
via non- MFI loans and the issuance of se-curities (in particular unquoted shares and 
debt securities).4 Nevertheless, the extent of 
these substitution effects was much less pronounced, causing the cutback in loans to lead to an overall decline in debt. This 
has to be seen, above all, against the back-
drop of the continued need for non- 
fi  nancial corporations to deleverage and of the weak macroeconomic environment. On 
top of this, a more restrictive approach to lending by banks has, at times, also im-pacted on loan growth in the euro area. Despite poor turnover results, it has also been possible to boost internal fi  nancing 
signifi  cantly since 2009 thanks to increased cost savings.
3 The temporary tightening of credit standards in eco-
nomic downturns as well as more stringent regulatory 
requirements are likely to play a role in this develop-
ment. See Deutsche Bundesbank, Long- term develop-
ments in corporate fi  nancing in Germany – evidence based on the fi  nancial accounts, Monthly Report, 
January 2012, pp 13-27, and B Blaes, Bank- related loan 
supply factors during the crisis: an analysis based on the German bank lending survey, Deutsche Bundes-
bank Discussion Paper, Series 1, No 31/ 2011.
4 For a detailed country- specifi  c analysis, see Task 
Force Eurosystem, Structural Issues Report 2013, Cor-
porate Finance and Economic Activity in the Euro Area, ECB Occasional Paper, No 151.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2013  
43

Banking conditions in Germany
1 New business. According to harmonised MFI interest rate statistics. 2 According to the Bank Lending Survey, difference between the 
number of respondents reporting “tightened considerably” and “tightened slightly” and the number of respondents reporting “eased 
somewhat” and “eased considerably” as a percentage of the responses given. 3 Expectations for 2013 Q3.
Deutsche Bundesbank05 06 07 08 09 10 11 12 20132.53.03.54.04.55.05.56.06.57.07.58.08.59.0
–300+30–300+30
–60–300+30+60–60–300+30+60
2005 06 07 08 09 10 11 12 131.52.02.53.03.54.04.55.05.56.06.5
3003060
–++
9060300306090
–––+++Credit to non-financial corporations
% pa
%
%% pa
%
%
Riskier loans
Average loans
Average loansRiskier loans%%
Average loansChange in margins 2
for loans to enterprises... with an initial rate fixation of
    over 1 year and up to 5 yearsBank interest rates for consumer credit1...
... with an initial
    rate fixation of over 5 years
... consumer credit... up to €1 million
3Bank interest rates for loans to enterprises1...
... with an initial rate fixation of up to
    1 year ...
Riskier loans... consumer credit
2.53.03.54.04.55.05.56.0
... house purchase... up to €1 million
... over €1 million
3... house purchaseBank interest rates on
loans for house purchase1
with an initial rate fixation of
over 10 years
Change in credit standards 2
for loans to enterprises
3... with an initial rate fixation of over
    5 years ...Credit to households
Change in credit standards 2  for loans for ...
Change in margins 2 for loans for ...Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2013  
44

low and amounted to a mere 2.8% of late. 
Once again, deposits of households and non-  
financial corporations, too, almost consistently earned less interest compared with the previ -
ous quarter.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2013  
45

Financial markets
Financial market setting
Changes in economic indicators and in expect -
ations regarding the future US monetary policy 
stance – the latter shifts being closely related to 
the former – had a major impact on the inter -
national financial markets from late March 
2013 onwards. In addition, some major central 
banks continued to loosen their already expan -
sionary monetary policy stance. The Bank of 
Japan outlined its new monetary easing policy 
framework,1 and the ECB lowered its key inter -
est rates. The expansionary measures initially 
drove down yields on long- dated bonds around 
the world. In May, however, yields began to 
climb again worldwide in view of positively re -
ceived economic data. Subsequently, expect -
ations that US monetary policy might be tight -
ened more rapidly than previously anticipated 
also took a firmer hold. Towards the end of the 
period under review, however, the Federal Re -
serve stressed that it would maintain an ac -
commodative stance for the foreseeable fu -
ture, which curtailed and partly reversed the 
rise in interest rates. The situation in Germany 
was affected not only by the interest rate link -
age between Germany and the United States 
but also by a slight improvement in leading 
economic indicators. The higher yields on gov -
ernment bonds put pressure on the stock mar -
kets for a time. Yet the low price uncertainty, 
largely positive quarterly financial results from 
US enterprises and budding hopes of an end to 
the euro- area recession gave the stock markets 
enough of a boost for distinct price rises over -
all. On the foreign exchange markets, the euro 
appreciated against the other major currencies, 
making particularly strong gains against the 
yen.
Exchange rates
These shifting influences were reflected in the 
euro’s exchange rate against the US dollar. On balance, the single currency appreciated 
against the US dollar by 4% on its value at the 
end of March, but it fluctuated noticeably dur -
ing the period under review.
At the beginning of April, weaker- than-  
expected US economic data and labour market 
figures initially bolstered the euro, but the re -
duction in the ECB’s key interest rates in early 
May put the single currency under pressure and 
by the middle of the month, it had relinquished 
a large part of its gains. The euro then em -
barked on an upbeat trend on the back of fa -
vourable economic indicators for the euro area, 
a movement that was temporarily interrupted 
when remarks by US Fed Chairman Ben Ber -
nanke on 19  June 2013 were interpreted as 
suggesting that the US Fed was considering the 
possibility of scaling back its quantitative easing 
measures more quickly. The euro also came 
under pressure when US labour market data re -
leased at the beginning of July held some posi -
tive surprises in store, sparking market specula -
tion that the Fed might potentially pare back its 
bond- buying programme sooner than originally 
expected. The publication of the minutes to the 
Federal Reserve’s meeting and Mr Bernanke’s 
clarifying statements that what the US econ -
omy needed was highly accommodative mon -
etary policy for the foreseeable future put the 
euro back on a steady upward trajectory in 
mid- July. Improved economic indicators for 
Germany and the euro area gave the single 
currency further impetus against the US dollar. 
As this report went to press, the euro was trad -
ing at US$1.33.
The euro gained greater ground against the 
yen from the end of March onwards and even 
touched a new three- year high. Even though 
the single currency had already exhibited a 
marked upward tendency ahead of the Bank of Financial mar-
kets marked by monetary policy and mixed eco-nomic indicatorsEuro exchange rate develop-ment against the US dollar, …
… the yen …
1 More information on Japanese monetary and economic 
policy can be found on p 16ff.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2013  
46

Japan’s monetary policy decision at the begin -
ning of April, the announcement of measures 
that exceeded expectations drove the euro sig -
nificantly higher, with the single currency ap -
preciating by more than 8% in under a week. 
The euro- yen exchange rate subsequently 
moved sideways, trading in a range between 
¥125 and ¥133. As this report went to press, 
the euro was trading at ¥130, which was up by 
around 8% on its level at the end of March.
The period under review also saw the euro ap -
preciate against the pound sterling, but at 
around 1%, the single currency’s gains paled 
beside its performance against the US dollar 
and the yen. One factor at play was conjecture 
among some market participants that the 
changing of the guard at the Bank of England 
might usher in an even more expansionary 
monetary policy stance. This drove the euro 
higher against the pound sterling. Yet this 
boost was offset by an unexpectedly sharp rise 
in the UK purchasing managers’ index. The 
Bank of England left its official Bank Rate un -
changed at the beginning of July but in its 
comments following its decision, the Bank sug -
gested that the markets were expecting an 
interest rate hike too soon. These remarks 
strengthened the single currency which was 
trading at £0.85 against the pound sterling 
when this report went to press.
Croatia’s accession to the European Union on 
1 July 2013 broadened the group of countries 
against which the effective euro exchange rate 
is measured from 20 to 21 countries (see the 
box on pages 50 to 52 for details on this and 
one other adjustment made to the method 
used for calculating certain real effective ex -
change rates). The euro likewise appreciated in 
value against the currencies of these 21 major 
trading partners during the period under re -
view. Most recently, the single currency was 
around 2½% firmer than it had been at the end 
of March and 1% down on its value at the 
launch of monetary union. In real terms, too, ie 
taking account of the inflation differentials be -
tween the euro area and its major trading part -ners, the effective euro exchange rate rose in 
the period under review. This diminished the 
price competitiveness of euro- area exporters 
accordingly, which was assessed as being 
somewhat worse than the long- term average 
when this report went to press.
Securities markets and 
 portfolio transactions
Yields on the international bond markets de -
clined initially before accelerating sharply in the 
second quarter of the year. The United States 
saw a particularly robust rise in yields, with the … and against 
the pound  sterling
Effective euro 
exchange rate
International bond markets marked by rising interest rates in the USA, …Exchange rate of the euro
1 Exchange rate at the start of monetary union on 4 Janu-
ary 1999. 2 As calculated by the ECB against the currencies of 
21 countries.
Deutsche BundesbankA MJ JASON D JF M A MJ JAS
2012 20131.21.31.4
95100110120130140
0.700.750.800.850.90
95100105110115Daily data; log scale
US$
¥
£against the ...
... US dollar
US$1.1789 1
... yen
¥133.73 1
... pound sterling
£0.7111 1
Nominal effective exchange rate 2
1999 Q1 = 100
103.11 1Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2013  
47

remuneration on ten-  year Treasuries climbing 
from 1.6% in May and June to a peak of just 
under 2.8%. This was mostly likely fuelled by 
the aforementioned speculation regarding the 
US monetary policy orientation, which also led 
some to reason that the future path of US pol -
icy rates might be steeper than previously an -
ticipated. The rise in yields coincided with an 
increase in term premiums which had hitherto 
languished at historically low levels under the 
influence of the non- standard monetary policy 
measures. But when the US Fed stressed in July 
that it intended to maintain its accommodative 
monetary stance, stating that it would con -
tinue its agreed monthly bond purchases at the 
existing volume of US$85 billion until further 
notice, US government bonds responded by 
initially recouping some of their earlier losses. 
Yields received a distinct boost recently from 
generally positively received US economic data, 
however, and had returned to 2.8% as this re -
port went to press. Measured in terms of ten- 
year nominal consensus growth expectations (4¾%), this yield level still appears to be rela -
tively low, however.
The interest rate linkage with the United States 
meant that prices of ten- year Bunds (and core 
euro- area country bonds) followed those of US 
Treasuries with comparable maturities to some 
extent. German capital market interest rates 
immediately responded to the ECB’s interest 
rate move by easing initially to just over 1.1% at 
the beginning of May before yields clawed 
back more than half a percentage point to 
close the half- year at more than 1.7%. Added 
to this, some improved economic indicators 
tended to bolster yields per se  in Germany and 
the euro area. Overall, the USA’s yield spread 
over Germany widened by 35 basis points to 
just under 105 basis points.
Longer- term interest rates in the larger periph -
eral countries likewise receded when the ECB 
cut its key interest rates and even hit their low -
est levels since 2010 initially. But the impetus 
provided by US Treasuries also influenced the 
prices of peripheral sovereign bonds, whose 
yields surged by more than 100 basis points 
within a short space of time before giving up 
ground since mid- year. As this report went to 
press, yields on euro- area periphery debt, apart 
from Portuguese government bonds, were 
short of their levels at the end of March 2013. 
This situation owed something to the Eurosys -
tem’s operational, but not yet activated Out -
right Monetary Transactions (OMT) programme, 
but was also attributable to the slightly brighter 
economic outlook in the euro area as a whole, 
which saw market participants perceiving a de -
cline in the risk of default. At least this is what 
the simultaneous narrowing of CDS spreads for 
the programme and reform countries (with the 
exception of Portugal) would appear to sug -
gest. Persistent doubts surrounding the imple -
mentation of necessary political reforms, not -
ably in the peripheral countries, took some -
thing of a back seat. Against this backdrop, the 
rating downgrades suffered by Italy and France 
barely had any impact on the markets.… in Germany 
and the core euro- area coun-tries and …
… declining 
yields in euro- 
area peripheral 
countriesBond yields in Germany
and the USA
Deutsche BundesbankJ FMAM J J A
20131.001.251.501.752.002.252.502.75
0+0.25+0.50+0.75+1.00+1.25Daily data
%
Percentage
points
Spread between
US and Germangovernment bond yieldsYield on ten-year
government bondsoutstanding
USA
GermanyDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2013  
48

At the end of the reporting period, the GDP-  
weighted yield spread between government 
bonds of the other euro- area countries and 
Bunds with comparable maturities stood at 170 
basis points, that is, around 70 basis points 
down on the end of the first quarter and thus 
even slightly below its five- year average. The 
interest rate dispersion between long- term 
government bonds within the euro area has 
likewise narrowed overall.
International interest rate linkages are tradition -
ally less pronounced with Japan, where domes -
tic economic factors tend to take the upper 
hand. But the adoption of a bundle of fiscal 
and monetary measures aimed at combating 
deflation and fostering sustained growth also 
drove up long- term interest rates in Japan. Ten- 
year Japanese government bonds were yielding 
just under 0.8% of late, which is around 20 
basis points more than at the end of March. 
This is largely consistent with Japan’s long- term 
growth expectations calculated between April 
and July on the basis of survey data (Consensus 
Forecasts).
The German term structure estimated using 
Federal securities steepened as the quarter pro -
gressed. The spread of just under 170 basis 
points between ten- year and two- year bonds is 
roughly 30 basis points up on the end of March 
and almost 45 basis points higher than the 
average since the launch of monetary union. 
This was chiefly driven by the upward pressure 
on interest rates that had been emanating from 
the United States since early May, which not -
ably affected the long end of the maturity 
spectrum where it triggered an increase of just 
under 60 basis points. Among maturities of be -
tween one and three years, yields remained 
negative into May but are now clearly back in 
positive territory, reflecting the fact that many 
tension indicators are persistently rather low 
overall and some of them are well below their 
five- year averages.
Real interest rates measured in terms of 
inflation- indexed bonds have climbed more strongly than nominal yields since the end of 
March. This difference in gradient is particularly 
evident in the five- year term segment which, 
against the backdrop of lower spot break- even 
inflation rates (BEIR), led to higher forward in -
flation expectations for the European Harmon -
ised Index of Consumer Prices excluding to -
bacco. The forward BEIR calculated from Ger -
man and French indexed bonds increased from 
1.9% at the end of March to 2.0% of late for 
the five to ten- year segment. Inflation swaps 
traded between banks, which are less affected 
by safe haven flows into nominal bonds, do 
not indicate any noteworthy changes in the 
forward inflation rate.
Enterprises’ financing conditions in the capital 
market remained favourable. The increase in 
Bund yields had a knock- on effect on corporate 
bonds with residual maturities of between 
seven and ten years and a BBB rating, sending 
their yields slightly higher to 3.7% (+20 basis 
points), but despite this modest increase, yields 
remain very low in comparison with preceding 
years and are also well below their pre- crisis 
levels. Bonds issued by financial corporations 
continued to offer a higher remuneration 
(4.9%) than those of non-  financial enterprises Yield spreads in 
the euro area narrower still overall
Yields on the 
rise in Japan, too
German yield 
curve steeperForward infla-tion expect -
ations up
Favourable 
 financing condi-tions for enter-prisesYield curve on theGerman bond market
 *
* Interest rates for (hypothetical) zero-coupon bonds (Svensson 
method), based on listed Federal securities.
Deutsche Bundesbank0123456789 1 000.51.01.52.0
Residual maturity in years14 August 2013
3 May 2013%Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2013  
49

Adjustments in the calculation of effective exchange rates 
and indicators of price competitiveness in August 2013
Commencing with this edition, the effective 
euro exchange rates and indicators of the 
German economy’s price competitiveness 
shown in the Monthly Report will be based on a calculation method which has been re-vised in two respects. First, Croatia – which 
joined the European Union (EU) on 1 July 2013  – has been added to the medium- sized group of countries. This adjustment affects a whole raft of effective euro ex-change rates and indicators of price com-
petitiveness. However, its general impact is 
negligible owing to the minor weight of Croatia. Second, it is now possible to ap-proximate the defl  ator of total sales for China which had thus far been lacking. While this adjustment affects only a few 
( albeit key) indicators of price competitive-
ness, it has resulted in some substantial changes to the relevant indicators, includ-
ing those for Germany.
Table XII.13 of the Statistical Section of the 
Monthly Report (up to July 2013, Table 
XI.13) presents effective euro exchange 
rates and indicators of the German econo-
my’s price competitiveness. The nominal ef-
fective euro exchange rate depicts the 
weighted average of the bilateral euro ex-
change rates against the currencies of 
major trading partners. Real effective euro 
exchange rates and indicators of Germany’s 
price competitiveness are likewise calcu-lated against the weighted average of 
major trading partners; however, they take 
account not just of nominal exchange rates but also of price developments in Germany 
and abroad. A nominal effective depreci-ation of the euro works in favour of Ger-
many’s international price competitiveness, 
as do lower domestic price increases rela-
tive to the weighted average of Germany’s major trading partners.Croatia joins the European Union
Croatia’s accession to the EU on 1 July 2013 
made it necessary to adjust a number of in-
dicators. By default, the existing group of 20 trading partners, against which several effective euro exchange rates used to be calculated (EER-20), also includes all those 
EU countries that do not belong to the euro 
area. In incorporating Croatia, this group has now grown to a total of 21 trading 
partners (EER-21), a development which af-fects not just the nominal effective euro ex-change rate but all three real effective euro 
exchange rates reported in the Monthly 
 Report table.
Adjustments have been made to those indi-
cators of Germany’s price competitiveness 
which previously were calculated vis- à- vis a 
group of 36 countries. Up to now, this 
group of countries comprised not just all 
the other member states of European mon-etary union (EMU) but also those belonging 
to the EER-20. Mirroring this group’s en-largement, Croatia will henceforth be in-cluded when the corresponding competi-tiveness indicator is measured against 37 
trading partners. Owing to Croatia’s minor 
weight in terms of the euro area’s foreign 
trade (at last count, 0.63% in the EER-21) or Germany’s (most recently, 0.23% within the 
mentioned group of 37 countries), this change only affects the relevant effective euro exchange rates and Germany’s com-
petitiveness indicators to a very limited ex-
tent.
Deﬂ  ator of total sales for ChinaThe situation is different with regard to the 
second adjustment. Of the time series listed 
in Table XII.13 of the Monthly Report, this Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2013  
50

adjustment solely affects the indicator of 
Germany’s price competitiveness that is 
based on the defl  ators of total sales vis- à- vis 
37 (previously 36) countries. China counts among those trading partners included in 
this group of countries. With regard to this particularly informative indicator, China was not included in the past owing to a lack of 
data. While China published data on its 
nominal imports it did not disclose data on its real imports, and the latter information is 
vital for calculating the defl  ator of total 
sales. This defi  cit is now to be countered by 
using real import data reported in the 
“World Economic Outlook” (WEO), which is 
published by the International Monetary Fund. To this end, China’s offi   cial nominal 
imports are adjusted using an import defl  a-tor.
1
The chart at the top shows the develop-ment of the relevant indicator of the Ger-
man economy’s price competitiveness. The 
grey curve depicts the previously used indi-
cator which disregarded China, while the blue curve represents the new one which takes China into account.
2 The difference 
between the two time series was compara-tively small until 2007 on account of China’s relatively limited weight up to that point in time. From 2007 onwards, however, China 
–  with a weight of 9.7%, and surpassed 
only by France (9.9%) – has been included 
in the group of countries under review owing to its greatly increased trading vol-
ume.3 According to the new indicator, Ger-
many’s price competitiveness has since im-
proved even more favourably than the old 
indicator showed. At the current end, the 
difference is 3 percentage points.
The blue curve in the bottom chart refl  ects 
the development of the indicator of the 
Chinese economy’s price competitiveness 
against 37 other countries based on the de-
fl  ators of total sales. This indicator points to 1 Up to 2004, this is done by applying the WEO im-
port defl  ator, taking the form of a weighted average of 
the export prices of China’s main trading partners and of world market prices for China’s imports of raw ma-terials. From 2005 onwards, use is made of the offi   cial 
import defl  ator for goods imports as set out by the Chinese customs authorities. The task of calculating the defl  ator of total sales can, however, only be ac-
complished on an annual basis owing to a lack of data. 
The necessary quarterly series are then interpolated 
from this. Missing quarterly values at the current end 
are extrapolated using the Chinese defl  ator of GDP which developed along broadly similar lines in the 
past.
2 Croatia is not taken into account in either of the 
curves.3 The weights used are regularly adjusted in line with 
trade patterns. See Deutsche Bundesbank, Recalcu-
lated weights for indicators of the German economy’s price competitiveness, Monthly Report, February 2012, pp 34-35.Price competitiveness of the German economy vis-à-vis 36 other countries
1 Inverted scale: rising curve (decline in values) denotes an in-
crease in competitiveness. 2 In the past, the indicator did not 
include China, with the effect that it only denoted the German 
economy’s price competitiveness vis-à-vis 35 other countries.
Deutsche Bundesbank1996 00 05 10 1380
85
90
95
100
105
1101999 Q1 = 100, quarterly, log scale 1
Indicator based on deflators of total sales 2
Including China
Excluding China
Price competitiveness of the Chinese economy and nominal effective exchange rate of the renminbi vis-à-vis 37 other countries
1 Inverted  scale:  rising  curve  (decline  in  values)  denotes  an 
increase  in  economic  competitiveness/depreciation  of  the 
renminbi.
Deutsche Bundesbank1996 00 05 10 1380
90
100110120
130
140150
1601999 Q1 = 100, quarterly, log scale1
Indicator based on
deflators of total sales RenminbiDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2013  
51

(3.3%).2 Yield spreads over Bunds with com -
parable maturities narrowed to 330 basis points 
for bonds issued by financial corporations and 
to 165 basis points for non- financial corporate 
debt. The narrowing spreads, which are both 
below their five- year average, are consistent 
with the development of credit default swap 
premiums (iTraxx) and liquidity premiums, 
which have likewise diminished. They indicate 
that the search for yield is still relevant for in -
vestors, even though risk-  free interest rates 
have increased.
Gross issuance in the German bond market 
stood at €396 billion in the second quarter of 
2013, and was therefore up on the previous-  
quarter level (€379½ billion). After deducting 
the higher redemptions and taking account of 
changes in issuers’ holdings of their own 
bonds, net redemptions amounted to €19½ 
billion. In addition, foreign borrowers placed 
debt securities worth €28½ billion in the Ger -
man market. Thus, funds totalling a net €9½ billion were raised in the German bond market 
in the period under review.
The public sector raised €8 billion in the bond 
market in the second quarter, compared with 
€7 billion one quarter earlier. The figures also 
include issues from resolution agencies of Ger -
man banks which are ascribed to the public 
sector for statistical purposes. Central govern -
ment primarily issued ten- year bonds (€18½ 
billion). This contrasted with net redemptions 
of Federal notes (Bobls) in the amount of €12 
billion while the state governments redeemed 
a net €4 billion of their own bonds in the quar -
ter under review.
Domestic enterprises redeemed debt securities 
with a net value of €2½ billion in the second 
quarter. On balance, these were chiefly debt in -
struments running for terms of more than one Net bond mar-
ket issuancePublic sector borrowing
Net redemptions 
of corporate bondsa rapid deterioration of around 60% from 
the fi  rst quarter of 2005 to the second quarter of 2013. The grey curve, mean-while, (see the bottom chart on page 51) 
depicts movements in the nominal effective 
exchange rate of the renminbi. It reveals 
that no more than roughly half of the shift 
in the indicator of China’s price competi-
tiveness since the fi  rst quarter of 2005 has 
been attributable to a nominal effective ap-
preciation of the renminbi. To a similar 
 extent, the change is therefore also due to 
steeper infl  ation within China compared 
with abroad.
Conclusion
Indicators of price competitiveness should 
be interpreted with caution, however. In 
the case at hand, it is particularly important 
to bear in mind that the most recently ob-
served group of countries also includes emerging market economies and former 
transition countries such as China which are 
still in the process of catching up with the 
industrial countries. When interpreting the 
relevant indicators it is therefore wise to 
also consider the productivity growth of the 
countries involved. In this regard, it should 
be noted that productivity in China in re-
cent years has also increased at a stronger 
rate than the weighted average of its part-ner countries. For this reason, the indicator 
is inclined to overstate both the depicted 
improvement in Germany’s competitiveness (see top chart on page 51, blue curve) and the decline in China’s price competitiveness (see bottom chart on page 51, blue curve). 
In the case of Germany, however, the dis-
torting effect remains rather limited.
2 Based on corporate bond yields included in the various 
iBoxx bond indices for different rating grades.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2013  
52

year. Developments at non-  financial corpor -
ations contrasted with those at other financial 
institutions and insurers.
Non-  financial corporations issued bonds worth 
€4 billion in the second quarter of this year and 
have thus already placed €12½ billion in securi -
tised debt so far this year, which is almost twice 
as much as in the corresponding prior-  year  
period (€6½ billion). Many enterprises appear 
to be taking advantage of the historically fa -
vourable financing conditions.
By contrast, domestic credit institutions, which 
had recorded strong growth in deposits as well 
as inflows of funds from abroad during the fi -
nancial crisis, further pared back their capital market debt during the quarter under review 
(€25 billion, compared with €27 billion in the 
first quarter), following on from reductions 
seen in earlier quarters. Redemptions centred 
around debt securities issued by specialised 
credit institutions (€11 billion), but also other 
bank debt securities (€8½ billion), which allow 
flexible structuring, as well as public Pfand -
briefe (€4½ billion) and mortgage Pfandbriefe 
(€1 billion).
German non-  b anks were the sole buyers on 
the domestic bond market in the second quar -
ter. They added paper worth €28 billion to their 
portfolios, focusing primarily on foreign debt 
instruments (€23 billion) but also showing 
some interest in public sector bonds (€10 bil -
lion). Domestic credit institutions, meanwhile, 
offloaded €2½ billion in interest-  bearing paper . 
The Bundesbank reduced its bond holdings 
mainly by redeeming debt securities that had 
been acquired as part of the purchase pro -
grammes in the euro area. Unlike domestic 
non- banks, for eign investors scaled back their 
net holdings of German bonds, shedding paper issued by the private sector (€13½ billion) and also holding back on purchasing Bunds, which 
are considered to be very safe, on account of 
the calmer financial market setting overall. The 
€1 billion net of German government bonds 
they added to their portfolios was in any case well down on the quarterly average witnessed 
since the outbreak of the financial and sover -
eign debt crisis in mid-2007 (€16½ billion). This 
is also consistent with the upturn shown by 
German yields overall.
The international equity markets put in an up -
beat performance overall in the second quarter 
of 2013, with neither bullish nor bearish factors 
gaining the upper hand until the end of June. 
As the quarter got under way, a global low-  
interest rate environment that encouraged 
portfolio shifts into equities combined with im -
proved economic data, especially in the United 
States, drove up equity prices around the Net issuance by 
non-
 
financial 
corporations …
… 
contrasts 
with net 
 
redemptions  
by credit 
 
institutions
Pur
chases of 
debt securities
Equity markets 
uneven until the end of JuneFinancing conditions for euro-area enterprises
1 Euro-denominated BBB-rated bonds with a residual maturity 
of  seven  to  ten  years,  included  in  the  bond  market  indices 
(iBoxx) of the International Index Company. Source: Thomson Reuters. 2 Spreads on five-year credit default swap (CDS) con-
tracts, replicated in the indices (iTraxx) of the International In-dex Company. Source: Bloomberg.
Deutsche Bundesbank2009 2010 2011 2012 2013036912151821242730
50100150200250300350Weekly averages
%
Basis pointsYields 1
Credit default swap spreads 2
iTraxx Europe
Financials
iTraxx Europe 125iTraxx EuropeNon-FinancialsiBoxx Non-FinancialsiBoxx Financials
iBoxxCorporatesDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report 
August 2013  
53

world. Japanese stocks were also shored up by 
the massive increase in the Bank of Japan’s 
monetary easing programme and the rosier 
prospects for Japanese exporters. The price 
gains posted in this environment were reversed 
initially when the US Fed made the comments 
referred to earlier in this article about tapering 
its bond purchases. The resulting rise in govern -
ment bond yields, which increased the discount 
factor and thus diminished the present value of 
future corporate earnings, making investments 
in government bonds more attractive, put 
equity prices worldwide under pressure. An -
other factor weighing down on the inter -
national equity markets was the tension in the 
Chinese money market, which fuelled fears of 
restrictions in the credit supply in China.
However, as the quarter drew to a close, sig -
nals by the US Fed that it intended to maintain 
its expansionary monetary stance for some 
time to come, relatively upbeat US labour mar -
ket figures and positive quarterly financial re -
sults from US enterprises reignited investor op -
timism. In the euro area, equity prices were 
bolstered by budding hopes of an end to the 
recession, improved economic indicators for 
Germany and entrenched expectations of low 
policy rates in the future. On balance, the 
CDAX rose by 5.0%, with the Euro Stoxx and 
the S&P500 up by 8.0% and 5.9% respectively 
since the end of March. Meanwhile, Japanese 
shares included in the Nikkei index appreciated 
by as much as 10.9%. European bank stocks 
gained 19.8%, distinctly outperforming the 
total market, chiefly on account of Irish and 
Italian credit institutions which also partici -
pated in price gains recorded by government 
bonds of euro- area peripheral countries.
Price uncertainty among equity market partici -
pants was largely unchanged overall in the 
second quarter. Measured in terms of the im -
plied volatility of equity options, price uncer -
tainty thus remained below the five- year aver -
age on both sides of the Atlantic. While the 
price/earnings ratio of European stocks (Euro 
Stoxx) climbed to 12.0, the equity risk premium Price gains 
 towards the end 
of the reporting period
Implied volatili-
ties almost  unchangedInvestment activity in the German securities markets
€ billion
Item2012 2013
Q2 Q1 Q2
Debt securities
Residents – 16.0 2.6 21.8
Credit institutions – 21.6 – 14.9 –  2.5
of which
Foreign debt securities – 14.8 –  2.7 8.9
Deutsche Bundesbank –  1.2 –  4.1 –  3.7
Other sectors 6.8 21.6 28.1
of which
Domestic debt securities – 12.2 –  8.7 5.3
Non-residents 16.6 10.8 – 12.6
Shares
Residents – 15.0 14.4 11.3
Credit institutions – 11.4 8.3 –  1.1
of which
Domestic shares – 11.9 4.4 –  1.3
Non-banks –  3.7 6.0 12.4
of which
Domestic shares 3.7 2.1 6.8
Non-residents 9.7 –  5.4 1.8
Mutual fund shares
Investment in specialised funds 15.8 24.5 13.0
Investment in retail funds –  0.4 5.0 1.5
of which
Equity funds –  1.4 0.0 –  1.0
Deutsche Bundesbank
Prices on major equity markets*
Sources: Deutsche Börse AG, Thomson Reuters and Bundes-
bank calculations. * Price indices (without inclusion or reinvest-
ment of dividends). 1 Expected volatility in the next 30 days, 
calculated from prices of options on the DAX.
Deutsche Bundesbank2009 2010 2011 2012 201380100120140160180200Weekly averages
%
0204060 Memo item, lin scale
Implied volatility of DAX
(VDAX NEW) 1S&P 500
Nikkei 225
Dow Jones
Euro StoxxCDAXprice indexEnd of 2008 = 100, log scaleDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2013  
54

demanded by investors and based on a divi -
dend discount model was virtually unchanged 
at 9.0%. This reflects the fact that analysts have 
taken stock of rising equity prices and hopes of 
improvements in economic activity and upped 
their medium and long- term corporate earn -
ings estimates (IBES) slightly.
Issuing activity in the German equity market 
picked up marginally in the second quarter. Do -
mestic enterprises issued new shares totalling 
€7 billion, the bulk of which were listed equi -
ties. The lion’s share came from an initial public 
offering and capital increases at larger financial 
corporations. All in all, however, a slight trend 
has been emerging of late which suggests that 
equity issues are lagging behind those of debt 
securities. The volume of foreign equities out -
standing on the German market rose by €6 bil -
lion. Equities were purchased chiefly by domes -
tic non- banks (€12½ billion), which tended to 
invest primarily in domestic securities on bal -
ance (€7 billion). Foreign investors, meanwhile, 
purchased equities for €2 billion. By contrast, 
domestic credit institutions offloaded shares in 
the amount of €1 billion.
During the reporting period, domestic invest -
ment companies recorded inflows of €14½ bil -
lion, after raising funds totalling €29½ billion in 
the previous three- month period. The fresh 
funds mainly accrued to specialised funds re -
served for institutional investors (€13 billion). 
Among the asset classes, mixed securities-  
based funds were the main issuers of new 
shares (€7 billion), but open- end real estate 
funds and mixed funds (€2½ billion each) were 
also active in the market. Foreign funds traded 
in the German market attracted inflows total -
ling €4 billion net in the first quarter of 2013. 
Domestic non- banks were the main buyers, 
adding €19½ billion worth of mutual fund 
shares to their portfolios. This was domestic 
paper for the most part. By contrast, foreign 
investors offloaded mutual fund shares worth a 
net €1 billion. Domestic credit institutions 
played only a marginal role in the mutual fund 
market overall.Stock market 
funding and stock purchases
Sales and 
 purchases of 
mutual fund 
sharesMajor items of the balance of payments
€ billion
Item2012 2013
Q2 Q1 Q2
I Current account 1, 2 + 41.4 + 45.1 + 45.3
Foreign trade 1, 3 + 48.0 + 49.3 + 48.5
Services 1 +  1.4 –  0.2 +  0.0
Income 1 +  7.3 + 18.7 +  8.0
Current transfers 1 –  6.4 – 15.8 –  7.5
II Capital transfers 1, 4 +  0.4 +  0.3 +  0.3
III Financial account 1
(Net capital exports: –) – 49.2 – 40.7 – 61.5
1 Direct investment –  6.0 – 12.0 – 12.5
German investment 
abroad – 11.4 – 19.7 –  5.5
Foreign investment
in Germany +  5.4 +  7.7 –  7.0
2 Portfolio investment + 23.5 – 41.1 – 46.6
German investment abroad –  0.4 – 46.7 – 36.0
Shares –  1.4 –  9.8 –  3.3
Mutual fund shares +  3.7 – 10.7 –  4.1
Debt securities –  2.8 – 26.1 – 28.7
Bonds and notes
5 –  3.8 – 21.1 – 29.8
of which
Euro-denominated 
bonds and notes –  4.6 – 20.9 – 22.8
Money market  instruments +  1.0 –  5.0 +  1.1
Foreign investmentin Germany + 23.9 +  5.5 – 10.6
Shares +  9.7 –  5.4 +  2.8
Mutual fund shares –  2.4 +  0.1 –  0.8
Debt securities + 16.6 + 10.8 – 12.6
Bonds and notes
5 + 10.5 –  1.5 – 18.3
of which
Public bonds and 
notes + 22.9 +  6.8 +  2.7
Money market  instruments +  6.1 + 12.3 +  5.7
3 Financial derivatives
6 –  7.5 –  3.9 –  6.1
4 Other investment 7 – 58.5 + 16.4 +  3.8
Monetary fi  nancial
institutions 8 – 12.7 –  8.8 – 13.7
of which short-term – 16.7 – 10.2 – 24.5
Enterprises and
households + 10.8 – 19.7 +  5.9
of which short-term +  9.6 – 15.8 +  8.2
General government – 10.9 +  4.1 +  9.4
of which short-term – 11.9 +  3.9 +  8.3
Bundesbank – 45.7 + 40.8 +  2.1
5 Change in reserve assets 
at transaction values ( increase: –)
9 –  0.8 –  0.1 –  0.1
IV Errors and omissions +  7.4 –  4.8 + 15.9
1  Balance. 2  Including supplementary trade items. 3  Special 
trade according to the offi   cial foreign trade statistics (source: 
Federal Statistical Offi   ce). 4 Including the acquisition/disposal of non-produced non-fi  nancial assets. 5 Original maturity of more 
than one year. 6 Securitised and non-securitised options as well 
as fi  nancial futures contracts. 7
  Includes fi  nancial and trade 
credits, bank deposits and other assets. 8 Excluding the Bundes-bank. 9 Excluding allocation of SDRs and excluding changes due 
to value adjustments.
Deutsche BundesbankDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2013  
55

Direct investment
As with cross- border portfolio investment, 
which recorded net outflows of €46½ billion, 
the direct investment account likewise saw net 
capital exports in the second quarter of 2013. 
At €12½ billion, these were roughly unchanged 
overall on the quarter, largely on account of 
German enterprises increasing their investment 
at foreign subsidiaries (€5½ billion) and foreign 
firms withdrawing capital from their German 
affiliates (€7 billion) during the quarter under 
review.
During the second quarter of the year, German 
parent companies provided their foreign affili -
ates with equity capital and re- invested earn -
ings (€6 billion each), and also saw capital in -
flows of €6½ billion in the form of intra- group 
credit transactions. The decisive factor at play 
here was the €22½ billion of predominantly long- term loans extended by non- resident 
branches to affiliated enterprises in Germany. 
By far the most significant source of these kinds 
of “reverse loans” during the reporting period 
was the Netherlands (€17½ billion), which is 
traditionally home to the financial subsidiaries 
of German multinationals. Conversely, North 
American subsidiaries were the main recipients 
of German enterprises’ credit facilities (€6 bil -
lion), while Luxembourg was a major destin -
ation for equity top- ups (€3½ billion).
Foreign investors withdrew capital mostly by 
way of intra-  group credit transactions (€5 bil -
lion) and to a lesser extent in the form of profit 
distributions and equity capital reductions. 
Owners from Italy (€2 billion), Spain and the 
United States (€1½ billion each) and the Ara -
bian Gulf states (€1 billion) played a significant 
role here.Capital exports 
in direct invest -
ment
German direct 
investment abroadForeign direct 
investment  
in GermanyDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2013  
56

Economic conditions in Germany
Macroeconomic situation
The German economy expanded sharply in the 
second quarter of 2013. According to the flash 
estimate by the Federal Statistical Office, 
second- quarter real GDP was up 0.7% on the 
quarter after seasonal and calendar adjust -
ment. This high quarter- on- quarter growth is 
to be seen in connection with the stagnant 
economic output in the first quarter of 2013, 
when the incipient upturn was being held back 
by the very unfavourable weather. The strong 
expansion in activity in the second quarter is 
likely to have brought the German economy 
back to a normal level of capacity utilisation, 
following the temporary decline in the second 
half of 2012 due to the escalation of the euro- 
area debt crisis and the global dip in economic 
growth.
The weather- related losses in building activity, 
which had hampered growth in the winter, 
were largely recovered, contributing to the 
strong expansion in economic output in the 
second quarter. Private consumption also 
boosted demand. By contrast, there was still a 
lack of major impetus from export demand in 
the wake of the difficult adjustment processes 
in some euro- area countries and the slowdown 
in economic growth in various emerging mar -
kets. As a result, business investment remained 
subdued. This was reflected in the modest in -
crease in employment.
German enterprises’ export business picked up 
again somewhat after the slump in the final 
quarter of 2012 and the first quarter of 2013, 
but failed to recover all of last autumn’s losses 
and lagged the longer- term growth path. A 
positive factor is that exports of goods to the 
USA and to Japan showed a substantial rise. In 
addition, exports to the OPEC countries in -
creased considerably. By contrast, exports to 
other euro- area countries exerted a dampening 
impact and, despite a certain stabilisation of activity, German exports to central and east 
European EU accession countries tailed off dis -
tinctly. Sales in the United Kingdom likewise 
lacked upward momentum in spite of the 
stable economic recovery. There was only very 
little stimulus from trade with China and the 
other Asian industrial countries and emerging 
market economies as well as Russia. The mod -
erating pace of growth and feeble macroeco -
nomic development are reflected here.
Growth in foreign demand, although it covered 
broad areas of the range of products made by 
German exporters, remained quite moderate, 
which was due mainly to a considerable de -
cline in exports of aircraft and ships. This should 
just be seen as a brief lull, however, since for -
eign sales of other transport equipment held 
up a high level even during the recent eco -
nomic downturn. Exports of chemical and Sharp GDP 
growth in 2013 Q2
Stronger 
 demand from  
non- euro- area countries drives slight increase  
in exportsBroad- based rise in exports
Overall output
Deutsche Bundesbank2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013102104106108110112
–8–6–4–20+2+4+62005 = 100, price and seasonally adjusted
Log scale
GDP
%
Lin scaleYear-on-year changeDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2013  
57

pharmaceutical products only just matched the 
level of the first quarter. By contrast, exports of 
IT products, electronic and optical equipment 
as well as electrical equipment picked up 
sharply. It is notable that, after a lean period of 
almost one year, exports of machinery also 
went up significantly. Motor vehicles and motor 
vehicle parts were also in greater demand 
again from foreign customers. In addition, 
more metals and metal products were ex -
ported.
Enterprises’ investment in new machinery and 
equipment, which had stabilised at a low level 
at the beginning of 2013 following the pro -nounced decline in 2012, gathered little mo -
mentum in the spring despite the sharp in -
crease in economic output. Capital formation 
in the domestic corporate sector remained sub -
dued despite ample own funds and access to 
cheap sources of funding. This was probably 
mainly due to the persistently gloomy sales 
outlook, above all in the euro area, and on -
going economic policy uncertainty in connec -
tion with the debt crisis. Furthermore, capacity 
utilisation in industry had not yet regained a 
normal level, with procurement of new plants 
being largely confined to the need for replace -
ment. Imports of machinery and equipment in -
creased markedly in some subsectors and more 
commercial vehicles were being registered 
again. However, domestic sales of machinery 
and equipment failed to move away from the 
depressed level of the previous quarter.
Construction investment rose steeply in the 
second quarter of 2013. Backlog and catch- up 
effects played a major role in this respect, given 
that construction activity shrank considerably in 
the first quarter due to adverse weather condi -
tions. Added to this was momentum created 
by additional demand. A very large number of 
permits for residential construction have been 
issued since the beginning of the year. There 
was a clear rise in public sector construction 
projects and accompanying contracts in the 
first few months of the year. Even demand for 
commercial construction picked up somewhat 
recently.
Private consumption is likely to have increased 
significantly in the second quarter of 2013, sup -
ported by the favourable labour market condi -
tions and the wage increases contained in the 
collective wage agreements, albeit with differ -
ent points of emphasis compared with the first 
quarter. While retail sales showed no further 
increase according to the provisional statistical 
data, new private passenger car registrations 
increased distinctly. In addition, many house -
holds replenished their oil tanks after the per -
sistently cold weather, with the fall in heating Investment in 
machinery and equipment still lacking momen-tum
Substantial 
growth in  construction  
investment
Robust growth 
of private con-sumption90100110120Underlying trends in foreign trade
1 Adjusted for the price indices for foreign trade.
Deutsche Bundesbank2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013Apr-
May95100110120130140
Apr-
May
100110120130Seasonally adjusted, quarterly
To euro-area countries2005 = 100, log scale
Exports of goods
price-adjusted 1
Total
0204060Lin scaleForeign trade balanceImports of goodsprice-adjusted
 1100110120130140150
€ bnTo non-euro area countriesDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2013  
58

fuel costs arriving at an opportune time for 
them.
Germany imported a much larger volume of 
goods in the second quarter than in the previ -
ous two quarters, with imports from other 
euro-  area countries increasing much more 
sharply than those from countries outside the 
euro area. In particular demand were capital 
goods, mainly ICT products and electrical 
equipment. There were also more purchases of 
motor vehicles and motor vehicle parts. By con -
trast, imports of machinery declined again fol -
lowing a weak rebound in the previous quarter. 
Intermediate goods imports increased only 
slightly. Imports of consumer goods from other 
countries rose significantly in line with positive 
consumption activity. This also applies to im -
ports of energy.
Sectoral trends
German industry picked up momentum in the 
second quarter following weakness in the 
fourth quarter of 2012 and first quarter of 
2013. According to the provisional data of the 
Federal Statistical Office, production increased 
by a seasonally adjusted 2½% on the first quar -
ter. According to the Ifo business survey, cap -
acity utilisation rose from just under 82% in 
April to 83% in July, which was only 1 percent -
age point below the multi- year average.
The steep rise in output was mainly driven by 
the manufacturers of capital goods, as the 
motor vehicle industry stepped up output again 
after the lull in late 2012 and early 2013. The 
Federal Statistical Office reports a seasonally 
adjusted 11% increase in output on the quarter. 
However, according to the motor vehicle indus -
try association statistics, there was quarter- on- 
quarter growth of only 2¼% and 2% on the 
basis of sales statistics. Orders received did not 
show any strong increase in the past few 
months either. Usually, the different data col -
lection methods indicate very similar rates of 
change. Output was also stepped up in other segments of the capital goods sector, with the 
quarter-  on- quarter increase in mechanical en -
gineering turning out to be quite considerable 
at 2%. Furthermore, somewhat more inter -
mediate goods were produced. Capacity util -
isation also improved in this sector, without 
matching the multi- year average. In spite of the 
very positive consumer sentiment in Germany, 
output of consumer goods stagnated at a low 
level following a decline in the previous quar -
ter, which meant that there was no increase in 
capacity utilisation in this sector. This shows 
that positive consumption activity does not ne -
cessarily have a direct impact on domestic in -
dustrial production owing to the high percent -
age of services in private consumption and the 
major significance of imported consumer 
goods.
Main construction industry output was in -
creased far above the normal level of capacity 
utilisation following the end of the very persist -
ent cold winter weather this year. Given the al -Pronounced 
growth  
in imports
Clear rise in in-
dustrial output, capacity utilisa-tion up consid-erablyOutput in industry andin construction
Deutsche Bundesbank2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013Industry
859095100105110115
9095100105110115
ConstructionMain construction2010 = 100, seasonally adjusted, quarterly, log scaleDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2013  
59

ready favourable situation with regard to order 
books, construction firms strove to catch up 
quickly with the processing backlog. As a re -
sult, output in the main construction industry 
rose by a seasonally adjusted 12% on the first 
quarter and, according to the Ifo survey, the 
utilisation of construction equipment reached a 
peak of 74% in June. The catch- up effects were 
most pronounced (+15%) in civil engineering, 
which generally suffers more from cold wea -
ther conditions than other construction subsec -
tors. Building construction work in the main 
construction industry increased by just over 
one- tenth. After seasonal adjustment, the fin -
ishing trades saw a decline in output of 4% 
compared with the first quarter. This may have 
been caused by cutbacks in production in the 
main construction industry during the winter 
months. Nevertheless, when interpreting the 
figures, it has to be borne in mind that the in -
formation available for the finishing trades is 
subject to considerable uncertainty. Energy pro -
duction showed a distinct seasonally adjusted 
rise of 2¼% in the period under review.
The available indicators suggest that the ser -
vices sector grew again in the second quarter. 
Even so, the individual sectors present a mixed 
picture. The transport sector probably bene -
fited from higher industrial output and the 
weather-  related catch-  up effects in the con -
struction sector. This is signalled by the sharp 
increase in the mileage of domestic heavy 
goods vehicles on toll roads. Furthermore, ac -
cording to the Ifo surveys, business- related ser -
vice providers continued to view their business 
situation as positive in the second quarter. By 
contrast, the general tendency to stagnation in 
the wholesale trade continued. Trade in motor 
vehicles flourished, mainly due to demand for 
private passenger cars, whereas commercial 
sales declined. The retail trade, which benefited 
from strong consumer sentiment, maintained 
the elevated sales level of the preceding few 
months. Hotels and restaurants saw a decline 
in turnover, however, possibly as a result of the 
cold weather in early spring.Employment and labour 
 market
Employment continued to grow in the second 
quarter of 2013, albeit at a moderate pace, in 
line with the slight underutilisation of aggre -
gate capacity for extended periods during the 
first half of the year and the subdued formation 
of fixed capital. According to estimates by the 
Federal Statistical Office, the seasonally ad -
justed number of persons in work in Germany 
went up by no more than 52,000, or 0.1%, in 
the second quarter of 2013 compared with the 
first quarter. Once again, the newly created 
positions were exclusively regular jobs subject 
to social security contributions. At the same 
time, there was no further decline in self-  
employed positions. Prior to this, self-  
employment is likely to have been substituted 
by employment contracts. This is implied at 
least by the sharp increase in employment sub -
ject to social security contributions amongst 
east European immigrants, who were subject 
to restrictions until spring 2011. At the same 
time, there were considerable cuts in incentives 
to move from unemployment to become self-  
employed. The number of persons working ex -
clusively in low- paid part- time employment 
stagnated in spite of the raising of the wage 
ceiling to €450 per month at the beginning of 
the year.
Employment subject to social security contribu -
tions went up by 60,000 persons, or 0.2%, in 
seasonally adjusted terms in April and May ac -
cording to the Federal Employment Agency. 
Nevertheless, only a few branches of economic 
activity, all in the tertiary sector, recorded a 
marked increase in jobs. Employment increased 
primarily in the business- related services (ex -
cluding temporary agency employment), health 
and education, and the logistics sector. By con -
trast, job growth in manufacturing and con -
struction virtually ground to a halt.
Temporary agency employment likewise saw a 
stagnation, although this can be viewed as an 
improvement following quite a considerable Sharp surge in 
construction  activity due to 
catch- up effects, energy output also higher
Growth in ser-
vices but differ-ences between the sectorsSubdued 
 increase in 
 employment in 
second quarter
Jobs subject to 
social security contributions grow only in services sector
Waning 
 significance of temporary  employmentDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2013  
60

decline in both employment and the number of 
reported job vacancies during 2012. This may 
have been related to the pick- up in industrial 
activity, especially as the adjustment in the level 
of temporary employment, which was linked to 
the introduction of a minimum wage and wage 
add- ons for increased length of contract in 
some industrial sectors, was likely to be largely 
complete in the interim. Data from the tempor -
ary employment agency statistics, now avail -
able up until the end of 2012, show a particu -
larly sharp decline in production and manufac -
turing activities assigned to the manufacturing 
sector, where more than one in eight jobs was 
cut within the space of 12 months. By contrast, 
temporary employment in the area of health, 
welfare and education sectors continued to 
 increase.
The supply of labour in Germany continues to 
be boosted by immigration, with workers in -
creasingly originating from southern Europe. 
According to Federal Statistical Office data, 
78,000 persons moved to Germany on balance 
in the first three months of 2013. The year- on- 
year increase of 4,500 can mainly be explained 
by increased immigration from Italy and Spain. 
This suggests that the effects stemming from 
the labour market differentials in the euro area 
are shaping net immigration to Germany in 
2013 to a large extent.
The after- effects of economic weakness are 
evident in the slight rise in underemployment. 
After seasonal adjustment, the number of 
registered unemployed rose by 18,000 persons 
to 2.94 million in the second quarter, after a 
marginal decline in the previous quarter. The 
official unemployment figure went up by 
65,000 on the year. The unemployment rate 
remained almost unchanged at 6.8% over the 
past 12 months, as there was a proportional 
increase in the labour force. The rise in un -
employment was concentrated mostly on the 
number of unemployed persons claiming insur -
ance benefits. Unemployment went down 
somewhat in July, as it had done in June; the Strong immigra-
tion also at  beginning of 2013
Slight rise in 
registered  unemploymentLabour market
1 Not seasonally adjusted. 2 Excluding seasonal jobs and jobs 
located abroad.  3 From May 2009, unemployed excluding per-
sons  newly  registered  on  the  books  of  private  employment 
agencies.
Deutsche Bundesbank2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013Juli40.040.541.041.542.0
27.027.528.028.529.029.5–5000+500+1,000
2.53.03.54.0
–1,000–5000+500JulySeasonally adjusted, quarterly
JulyMillion
Apr-
MayMillion
Million200300400500Thou-
sand
Thou-
sand
Thou-
sand Year-on-year change1Officially unemployed 3UnemployedTotalEmployed
Unsubsidised vacancies 2
(scale enlarged)Occupied positionsJobs subject to social security
contributionsYear-on-year change1Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2013  
61

unemployment rate remained unchanged at 
6.8%.
Leading indicators suggest that the labour mar -
ket could remain calm in the coming months. 
The Ifo employment barometer, which provides 
information on the employment plans of trade 
and industry and business- related services over 
the coming three months, does point to a 
slight increase in employment, but shows 
greater caution in terms of firms’ recruitment 
plans compared with the final quarter of 2012 
and first quarter of 2013. The Federal Employ -
ment Agency’s BA-  X job index also showed a 
fairly sharp decline again in the second quarter, 
as both the level and intake of reported vacan -
cies decreased more rapidly than in the winter. 
This is predominantly a result of the decline in 
temporary agency employment. Job vacancies 
in all other sectors decreased only slightly on 
the whole. A similar picture is also revealed by 
the quarterly Job Vacancy Survey of the IAB In -
stitute for Employment Research.
Wages and prices
There was a temporary easing in negotiated 
wage increases in the second quarter of 2013. 
Basic rates of pay went up by no more than 
2.2% year- on- year and thus considerably less 
sharply than in the first quarter (+3.0%). Includ -
ing all one- off payments and ancillary agree -
ments, the 2.2% increase in negotiated rates of 
pay was weaker than in the winter (+2.9%). 
This was because some of the newly agreed 
settlements involved pay increases only with a 
time lag and there is still no agreement in retail 
despite months of negotiations.
The latest settlements in the insurance industry, 
in wholesale and foreign trade and at Volkswa -
gen continued the tendency towards fairly bal -
anced wage increases in this year’s pay round. 
The pay agreements amounted to a volume of 
between 2% and 3% in annualised terms, with 
the increases mainly taking place on two dates. 
Overall, the contract periods of around 21 months on average are somewhat longer than 
last year.
The minimum wage system, which differs by 
sector, currently includes minimum wage levels 
for 13 sectors throughout Germany, of which 
11 have been declared to be generally binding; 
most recently on 1 August 2013, €10 per hour 
was agreed for the first time for the scaffolding 
trade. The sector- specific minimum wages cur -
rently range from €7.50 in temporary employ -
ment and the security services industry of some 
federal states to €13.70 for skilled construction 
workers in the west German construction sec -
tor. The minimum wage agreement is poten -
tially valid for around 3.6 million employees 
and thus 12% of employees subject to social 
security contributions overall.1
Given muted global economic activity and, es -
pecially, the gloomier economic outlook for 
emerging markets, prices at the upstream 
stages of the economy eased noticeably in sea -
sonally adjusted terms in the second quarter. 
The decline was particularly pronounced in the 
case of energy prices, which are directly de -
pendent on oil prices. However, prices of inter -
mediate goods fell too. The prices of capital 
goods also declined somewhat. By contrast, 
consumer goods prices increased slightly. Due 
to the particularly high share of energy, the de -
cline in the prices of imports overall, at a sea -
sonally adjusted 1.9% on the quarter, clearly 
exceeded that for domestic products (-0.7%) 
and exports (-0.6%). Accordingly, the year- on- 
year decline in import prices widened to 2.8%. 
The terms of trade continued to improve on 
the back of the prices of export goods, only 
declining slightly in year- on- year terms at 
-0.4%. German manufacturers managed to 
achieve somewhat higher prices in domestic 
sales in fact compared with the previous year.Little momen-
tum on the  labour market to be expected over next few months
Temporary 
 easing in growth 
of negotiated rates of pay
Balanced pay 
agreements con-tinue to run for longer periodsFurther min-imum wage agreements
Declining prices 
in upstream branches
1 As there is no reporting requirement for wage groupings, 
there is no official information on the percentage of those 
receiving minimum wages in each of the sectors.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2013  
62

Property prices continued to rise at an un -
changed pace in the second quarter of 2013. 
According to the Association of German Pfand -
brief Banks (Verband deutscher Pfandbriefban -
ken), the price index for owner- occupied hous -
ing went up by 1.2% on the quarter. In year-  
on- year terms, house prices rose by 3.3%. In 
spite of extremely buoyant demand, the in -
crease in prices for construction work remained 
quite moderate at 2.1% on the year. The de -
cline in the cost of building materials in the 
wake of the slump in commodity prices is likely 
to have played a part in this.
Notwithstanding declining prices at the up -
stream stages of the economy, consumer prices 
showed a slight rise in the second quarter of 
2013. The seasonally adjusted quarterly rate 
went up from 0.3% to 0.6%. This is note -
worthy in that energy prices eased somewhat 
again after rising sharply at the start of the 
year. One key reason for the slightly acceler -
ated price increase was the fact that food 
prices went up again perceptibly. This is true of 
fruit and vegetables in particular, with un -
favourable weather conditions in some parts of 
Europe being a contributory factor. However, 
prices for dairy products also continued to rise 
steeply. Furthermore, the state lottery oper -
ators raised ticket prices dramatically; in purely 
mathematical terms, this contributed 0.2 per -
centage points to the overall rate. The prices of 
services therefore showed a substantial rise on 
the first quarter. The rate of inflation for indus -
trial goods (excluding energy), by contrast, was 
within the normal range, as was the increase in 
housing rents.
As in the first quarter, the annual rate of the 
national consumer price index (CPI) remained 
unchanged at 1.5% due to the rise in lottery 
charges, and despite declining energy inflation 
and the Easter effect being shifted into the first 
quarter. By contrast, the annual rate of the Har -
monised Index of Consumer Prices (HICP), 
whose basket of goods does not contain 
games of chance, fell from 1.9% to 1.5%. This 
continues to reflect the fact that the annual rate is biased upwards due to chain- linking 
problems in the hotel services sub- index. 2 This 
effect amounted to 0.3 percentage point in the 
second quarter of this year. Over the course of 
the quarter, the inflation rate went up to 1.8% 
(CPI) and 1.9% (HICP) respectively. The annual 
rate of the Consumer Price Index (CPI) rose 
slightly to 1.9% in July, moving more closely 
into line with the HICP rate. The rise in con -
sumer prices is likely to ease somewhat over 
the next few months. Food prices, which have 
also reached a very high level due to weather 
conditions, will not go on increasing at the 
same pace, and favourable price developments 
on the import side are likely to have a moderat -
ing effect on industrial goods.
Orders received and outlook
According to the Ifo surveys, business expect -
ations in trade and industry continue to be 
characterised by cautious optimism. It should 
be borne in mind that most enterprises assess 
their current situation as good or at least satis -
factory, which is consistent with the fact that 
normal aggregate capacity utilisation has now Rise in property 
prices continues
Consumer price 
inflation strengthens somewhat
Distinctly more 
foreign 
orders …Negotiated rates of pay
1 Excluding additional benefits and lump-sum payments.
Deutsche Bundesbank2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 201300.51.01.52.02.53.03.5Year-on-year percentage change, on monthly basis
Negotiated
rates of pay,
total
Basic pay 1H1
2 See Deutsche Bundesbank, The contribution of the hotel 
services sub- index to explaining the current deviations be -
tween CPI and HICP inflation measures, Monthly Report, 
April 2013, p 7.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2013  
63

been achieved again. In manufacturing, opti -
mism is mainly founded on firms’ expectations 
of better business on the international markets. 
In the second quarter, industrial export orders 
were 3% up on the quarter in seasonally ad -
justed terms. Additional demand is mainly fo -
cused on capital goods. There was a clear in -
crease in orders of intermediate goods from 
non- euro- area countries in the second quarter. 
There was little further rise in demand from 
other euro area countries. Whilst the increase 
in the volume of orders from the rest of the 
world can be viewed as the return to a moder -
ate underlying upward trend, it remains to be 
seen whether the rise in demand from the euro 
area is already pointing to a trend reversal.
In the period under review, domestic orders fell 
1¼% short of their prior- quarter level in sea -
sonally adjusted terms, although they were 
higher than the average three-  month volume 
of the weak second half of 2012. The picture 
presented by the first half of 2013 overall is 
thus that of no more than a moderate upward 
movement. This applies to domestic orders of 
both intermediate and capital goods, which 
suggests that German industry is taking a cau -
tious view of the shorter and medium- term 
outlook. In terms of domestic industrial output, 
the larger volume of orders overall suggests a 
likely further increase in the third quarter. How -
ever, this will probably not be enough either to 
raise capacity utilisation above the long- term 
average or to give a marked boost to invest -
ment activity.
The construction industry presents a brighter 
outlook. Housing demand is still providing 
powerful stimuli. A sizeable number of multiple- 
family dwellings was approved in the second 
quarter. Moreover, the number of one- family 
and two- family houses to be approved has 
shown a clear increase since the beginning of 
the year. In the period from January to June 
2013, approvals for new housing rose by a sea -
sonally adjusted 7½% compared with the 
second half of 2012. Households’ continued 
positive earnings prospects, immigration and … but weaker 
domestic orders
Major stimuli 
from housing construction …Export pricesImport, export, producer, construction and consumer prices
1 Producer price index for industrial products in domestic sales. 
2 Not  seasonally  adjusted,  quarterly.  3 National  consumer 
price index.
Deutsche Bundesbank2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013100105110115120125
105110115120
110115120 120125
95100105110
10123
–+++Seasonally adjusted, monthly
Lin scale
Consumer prices
Year-on-year change 22010 = 100Consumer prices
 3Constructionprices
2Producer prices1Import prices2005 = 100, log scale
%
July100105110115Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2013  
64

highly favourable financing conditions fuelled 
the additional demand for homes and apart -
ments. There was a pause in the placing of 
public sector construction orders in the second 
quarter. However, indicators continue to sug -
gest an upturn in demand from this sector, as a 
large number of approvals for public sector 
construction projects was granted in the winter 
months, which is likely to be reflected in the 
construction firms’ order books in the foresee -
able future. By contrast, demand in commercial 
construction was subdued in line with firms’ 
hesitance to invest in machinery and equip -
ment.
Private consumption is probably continuing to 
make a significant contribution to economic 
growth. This is suggested by the extremely fa -
vourable consumer climate, which has been 
steadily improving over the past few months. It 
is related to a steep rise in income expectations 
based on a positive earnings outlook and the 
continuing positive labour market. The ex -
tremely positive assessment of the prospects 
for earnings stands in contrast to a very cau -
tious optimism with regard to the outlook for 
the economy. Consumers also seem to be 
aware that the times of excessive wage moder -
ation are over. This is reflected in the continued 
exceptionally high propensity to purchase. The 
fall in deposit and mortgage rates possibly 
played a part both in reducing the incentive to 
build up financial assets and in boosting the in -
centive to buy residential property or to con -
sume.
Following the second quarter, which was char -
acterised by catch- up and backlog effects, eco -
nomic growth is likely to return to normal and 
stabilise again in the second half of the year. 
The expected increase in economic activity 
around the level of potential growth will ensure 
that capacity remains well utilised, though it is 
doubtful whether this will be enough for a 
marked revival in investment activity. Additional 
demand for German industrial products is com -
ing predominantly from non- euro- area coun -
tries. German enterprises which have pos -Very good con-
sumer climate
Economic ex-
pansion returns to normal pace in second halfDemand for industrial goods and construction work
1 Only calendar-adjusted.
Deutsche Bundesbank2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013758090100110120
–40–30–20–1000+10+20+30
708090100110120
Apr-
May8090100110
Apr-
May90100110120
–20–100+10+20Volume, seasonally adjusted, quarterly
DomesticForeignof whichLog scaleMain industrial orders
2005 = 100
Main construction orders2010 = 100, log scale
Lin scale
Year-on-year
change 1
Lin scale
Year-on-year change 1%
%Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2013  
65

itioned themselves internationally are therefore 
often expanding their production capacities lo -
cally. This limits domestic investment in tan -
gible fixed assets and the growth of exports to 
non- euro- area countries. Domestic investment 
activity is unlikely to pick up sustainably until 
there is a long- term improvement in the eco -
nomic prospects for the euro-area countries 
and uncertainty surrounding economic policy is 
further contained by suitable measures to com -
bat the debt crisis in the euro area. Until then, 
economic activity in Germany will be sustained 
to a large extent by private consumption and 
housing construction. The necessary conditions for this are in place by virtue of consumers’ 
purchasing power and the very favourable fi -
nancing conditions. Such a change of emphasis 
to the forces of domestic growth is desirable in 
terms of economic policy, as it will correct par -
ticular developments of the past decade and 
strikes a better balance between foreign and 
domestic economic activity. In terms of steady 
growth, the historical and successful patterns 
of specialisation developed by the Germany 
economy with its high degree of integration 
into the international division of labour also call 
for neighbouring countries to generate enough 
demand for German products, however.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2013  
66

Public finances*
General government budget
General government looks set to record an -
other broadly balanced budget in 2013,1 after 
posting a small surplus of 0.1% of gross domes -
tic product (GDP) in 2012. The macroeconomic 
slowdown in 2013 will probably only be re -
flected to a limited extent in the general gov -
ernment budget figures as a result of stable 
developments in key macroeconomic reference 
variables (gross wages, unemployment, private 
consumption). There will probably also be 
hardly any change in the fiscal balance after 
adjustment for cyclical effects. Although fiscal 
policy measures – notably the significant cut in 
the pension contribution rate and the abolition 
of the surgery visit charge  – will produce 
budgetary burdens on balance, interest ex -
penditure is likely to provide further relief and 
additional revenue from fiscal drag2 is ex -
pected.
The debt ratio is likely to decline perceptibly 
(end of 2012: 81.9%). This is due, first, to a 
 further portfolio reduction among the 
government- owned “bad banks”, which is 
lowering government debt. Second, the in -
crease in nominal GDP in the denominator is 
reducing the debt ratio. These two factors 
more than offset the ratio- raising effect of the 
ongoing deficits in many government budgets 
and the euro- area stabilisation measures. At 
the end of the first quarter of 2013, the debt 
ratio stood at 81.2%.
Economic activity is currently expected to have 
hardly any impact on the state and develop -
ment of the general government budget in 
2014. Overall, however, general government 
 finances are likely to continue to benefit from 
favourable conditions, characterised by low un -
employment figures and interest rates as well 
as a relatively revenue- rich GDP structure. The 
fiscal policy stance currently mapped out in the 
budget plans envisages only limited new budgetary burdens (on balance). Under these 
circumstances, the fiscal balance would im -
prove slightly – not least because of a further 
decline in interest expenditure – and the debt 
ratio would continue to fall.
According to central government’s current pro -
jections, general government is set to record 
consistent structural surpluses of ½% of GDP . 
Even under this assumption, which would be 
an exceptionally favourable outcome by histor -
ical standards, central government expects the 
debt ratio to stand at nearly 70% in 2017. This 
includes the effects of support measures for 
German financial institutions and euro- area 
countries. So far, only a small proportion of the 
various measures have been recorded as trans -
fers affecting the deficit; in most cases, the fi -
nancial assets acquired at the same time (eg 
credit claims) were recorded in addition to the 
associated liabilities. Nonetheless, these assets 
carry considerable risks.
The budgetary stance envisaged at present is 
more or less neutral and complies with Euro -
pean rules. Since the level of debt is still high 
and the underlying conditions for public fi -
nances are very favourable, it would be advis -
able to rapidly achieve significant structural sur -
pluses. It would also be sensible to include 
such surpluses in the budget plans to ensure 
that central and state government achieve size -
able safety margins vis- à- vis the respective na -
tional deficit ceilings, which can then be used 
in case of need. Another factor to be con -General govern-
ment budget  
still broadly  balanced in 2013
Debt ratio 
 declining
2014: slight 
budgetary  improvement if  
policy stance unchangedGoal: moderate 
structural 
 surpluses
Marked sur-
pluses advisable given challenges
* The analysis in the “General government budget” section 
is based on data contained in the national accounts and on 
the Maastricht ratios. The subsequent reporting on the 
budgets of the various levels of government and the social 
security funds is based on the figures as defined in the gov -
ernment’s financial statistics (which are generally in line 
with the budget accounts).
1 The following analysis is based on the assumption that 
the euro- area debt crisis will not escalate again.
2 In this context, the term “fiscal drag” encompasses the 
(positive) revenue effect of bracket creep in income tax -
ation and the (negative) impact of the fact that specific 
excise duties are largely independent of prices.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2013  
67

sidered is that demographic change will result 
in greater burdens for government budgets 
from around the middle of this decade. Deci -
sion-  makers should therefore use the current 
“demographic lull” – during which the elderly 
dependency ratio has temporarily stabilised – 
as an opportunity for resolute action to signifi -
cantly reduce the debt ratio and thus lower the 
interest burden on a permanent basis. The suc -
cess of this undertaking will ultimately hinge on 
ensuring that surpluses are not just projected in 
budget plans but actually achieved in practice. 
Sound public finances and policies shaping the 
country’s future are not contradictory aims; 
they must complement one another.
Budgetary development  
of central, state and local 
government
Tax revenue
Tax revenue3 was up by 3½% on the year in the 
second quarter (see chart above and the table 
on page 69). Revenue from income- related 
taxes rose by 7½%, thereby mirroring growth 
in wage tax. The latter is largely attributable to 
the positive developments in gross wages and 
salaries. However, the effects of tax bracket 
creep and stagnant deduction amounts (sub -sidies for supplementary private pension plans 
and child benefit) also played a role. Revenue 
from profit- related taxes likewise recorded 
strong growth (8%) and so far the macroeco -
nomic slowdown has hardly had any impact on 
this figure either. The somewhat sharper rise in 
assessed taxes is primarily attributable to 
weaker growth in income tax refunds to em -
ployees. Revenue from consumption- related 
taxes went up by only just over ½%. Although 
receipts from turnover tax increased at a signifi -
cantly weaker pace than their macroeconomic 
reference variables, there are often large intra- 
year fluctuations in turnover tax revenue.4
According to the official tax estimate in May, 
tax receipts for 2013 as a whole are expected 
to rise by 2½% (including local government 
taxes). This growth chiefly reflects the assump -
tion that macroeconomic developments will be 
subdued yet still provide a relatively favourable 
structure for public finances. Furthermore, fis -
cal drag is expected to generate additional rev -
enue on balance, while legislative changes are 
not likely to have any notable net impact. How -
ever, various special factors are slowing growth 
in revenue.5 Overall, receipts developed some -
what more favourably in the first half of the 
year than originally assumed. Nonetheless, 
there is generally a great deal of uncertainty 
surrounding the sometimes sharp fluctuations 
in revenue from profit- related taxes, which has 
been high to date. Furthermore, turnover tax 
revenue, which has been weak so far, has been 
very volatile in recent months.
Robust tax 
 revenue growth in Q2Robust growth for year as a 
whole tooTax revenue*
* Including  EU  shares  in  German  tax  revenue  but  excluding 
receipts from local government taxes.
Deutsche Bundesbank2011 2012 2013024681012
++++++Year-on-year percentage change, quarterly
3 Including EU shares in German tax revenue but excluding 
receipts from local government taxes, which are not yet 
known for the quarter under review.
4 Fluctuations in revenue may stem in particular from the 
sometimes large refunds or supplementary payments that 
are due when advance payments made during the course 
of the year deviate from the final amount of tax payable.
5 Above all, tax refunds due under the ruling by the Euro -
pean Court of Justice on the taxation of dividends paid to 
EU/EEA companies (ruling of 20  October 2011 on case 
C-284/ 09).Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2013  
68

Central government budget
The central government budget recorded a sur -
plus of €1 billion in the second quarter, which 
was €5 billion lower than at the same time last 
year. Revenue rose by only ½% (€½ billion). Tax 
revenue stagnated, not least because deduc -
tions for transfers to the EU budget increased 
by €1½ billion. By contrast, expenditure rose 
sharply (by 7½%, or €5½ billion). Transfers to 
the social security funds were €1½ billion lower 
owing to the abolition of the turnover- tax- 
financed grant to the Federal Employment 
Agency and the cut in payments to the health 
insurance fund. However, above all the €4½ 
billion capital injections into the European Sta -
bility Mechanism (ESM) placed a strain on the 
budget. Furthermore, the payments made to 
state government were €1 billion higher, not 
least because of central government’s in -
creased contribution to the basic allowance for 
the elderly. In addition, spending on personnel and other operating expenditure were both up 
by €½ billion on the year.
Central and state government have agreed to 
establish an €8 billion assistance fund to repair 
the severe damage caused by floods in some 
regions of Germany in the spring. The fund will 
be financed upfront by an advance payment 
from central government in 2013. To this end, 
a supplementary budget was approved at short 
notice, raising the permissible level of net bor -
rowing by €8 billion to €25.1 billion. The sup -
plementary budget did not contain any further 
amendments, even though some major devi -
ations vis- à- vis the 2013 budget have occurred 
or come onto the horizon since the budget 
was approved in autumn 2012. For example, 
the Bundesbank’s profit distribution in March 
2013 was €1 billion lower than projected, in 
the May tax estimate the revenue forecast for 
central government was revised downwards by 
€2 billion, and additional assistance for Greece 
was agreed at the end of November 2012. Sharp drop in 
surplus in Q2 due to ESM  financingSupplementary budget to  finance €8 bil-
lion allotment for flood assis-tance fundTax revenue
 
Type of taxH1Estimate 
for 2013 1,2Q2
2012 2013 2012 2013
Year-on-year changeYear-on-year change Year-on-year change
€ billion € billion as % as % € billion € billion as %
Tax revenue, total
2 268.2 277.5 + 9.3 +  3.5 +  2.5 137.6 142.5 + 4.9 +  3.5
of which
Wage tax 70.3 75.3 + 5.0 +  7.2 +  5.4 36.1 38.8 + 2.7 +  7.4
Profi  t-related taxes 3 46.1 49.0 + 2.8 +  6.2 +  1.2 23.7 25.6 + 1.9 +  8.2
Assessed income tax 18.5 21.8 + 3.4 + 18.2 +  8.4 10.0 11.1 + 1.1 + 10.7
Corporation tax 10.5 11.4 + 1.0 +  9.3 + 11.4 5.0 5.4 + 0.4 +  8.7
Investment income 
tax4 17.2 15.7 – 1.5 –  8.7 – 14.5 8.7 9.1 + 0.4 +  5.0
Turnover taxes 5 95.6 96.3 + 0.7 +  0.8 +  1.8 46.6 47.1 + 0.5 +  1.1
Energy tax 14.1 14.1 + 0.0 +  0.2 +  0.5 9.7 9.5 – 0.2 –  2.4
Tobacco tax 5.9 5.6 – 0.2 –  3.6 –  1.4 3.5 3.5 – 0.0 –  1.3
1 According to offi   cial tax estimate of May 2013. 2 Including EU shares in German tax revenue but excluding receipts from local govern-
ment taxes. 3 Employee refunds, homebuyers’ grant and investment grant deducted from revenue. 4 Withholding tax on interest income 
and capital gains, non-assessed taxes on earnings. 5 Turnover tax and import turnover tax.
Deutsche BundesbankDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2013  
69

Recent decisions of the Ecofi  n Council regarding the 
 excessive defi  cit procedures for euro-area countries
At its meeting on 21 June 2013, the Eco-
nomic and Financial Affairs Council of the 
European Union (Ecofi  n) adopted a number 
of decisions regarding the excessive defi  cit 
procedure (EDP). Twelve of the 17 euro- area 
member states are still subject to an EDP . The Council closed its procedure against Italy after it managed to reduce its defi  cit ratio below the 3% ceiling last year and 
both Ecofi  n and the European Commission expect that it will keep its defi  cit below this 
benchmark in the coming years. An EDP 
was, however, reopened for Malta – just a 
few months after the old procedure had been closed – after it exceeded the refer-
ence value for 2012.
Belgium was the only country where the procedure was stepped up, ie the Council gave notice to take measures,
1 with 2013 
being set as the new deadline for correcting the excessive defi  cit. Belgium failed to meet 
the 3% defi  cit limit in 2012 within the set deadline without an invocable excuse for 
this under the terms of the EDP . The Com-
mission did, however, refrain from making a 
recommendation to the Council to impose 
a fi  ne on Belgium, even though this is the 
measure envisaged following the amend-ment of the Stability and Growth Pact in 
2011.
Six other euro- area countries (Cyprus, 
France, the Netherlands, Portugal, Slovenia 
and Spain) which also failed, or are ex-
pected to fail, to achieve the correction by 
the set deadline were excused under the 
terms of the EDP . Their respective correction 
deadlines were extended by one or more 
years without this resulting in a stepping- up of their EDP . These decisions were based on 
analyses carried out by the Commission to 
ascertain whether previous recommenda-tions made under the EDP have been ob-
served by the member states in question.The European fi  scal rules allow deadline ex-
tensions without stepping up the EDP pro-
vided that two conditions are met: fi  rst,  effective action must have been taken to 
correct the excessive defi  cit by the set dead-
line and, second, unexpected adverse eco-
nomic events must have occurred with 
major unfavourable consequences for gov-
ernment fi  nances.
In order to assess whether effective action 
has been taken, the Commission considers 
whether the measured structural improve-ment meets, as a minimum, the require-ments specifi  ed in the recommendation. 
This now includes taking special factors into account, which involves examining to what extent the Commission’s assessment of po-
tential growth and revenue elasticities has 
changed since it issued its initial recommen-dation. The associated impact on the struc-tural balances is factored out of the calcula-tion. This adjustment has the effect, for ex-
ample, that lower structural revenues than 
expected by the European Commission, 
which do not result from legislative changes, 
are disregarded almost automatically. In a further step, the individual consolidation 
measures taken are considered in assessing the structural improvement (bottom- up ap-proach).
1 If the Council decides in accordance with Article 126 
(8) of the Treaty on the Functioning of the European 
Union (TFEU) that no effective action has been taken, 
it shall decide within two months to give notice to the 
member state to take measures to reduce the defi  cit. 
Pursuant to Article 126 (9) TFEU, it sets out measures 
conducive to achieving the defi  cit targets. A new re-
form package (Two Pack regulations) which entered 
into force in May 2013 foresees a more comprehensive reporting requirement than in the previous procedural 
step (Article 126 (7) TFEU) and also quarterly, instead 
of bi- annual, reviews. If a member state fails to comply 
with a decision taken in accordance with Article 126 
(9) TFEU, the Council may impose sanctions (Article 
126 (11) TFEU).Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2013  
70

On the one hand, the intent underlying this 
approach is understandable – that is, not to 
blame the member state for unexpected (negative) shocks to the defi  cit ratio, pro-
vided that these were not brought about by the member state itself. On the other hand, this approach confl  icts with the aim of the 
fi  scal rules, which is to prevent unsound budgetary developments. In critical situ-
ations, in particular, it is the objective results and fi  scal sustainability that are paramount, and not so much the subjective responsibil-ity of the government in question. This is all the more important given that the require-
ments are often formulated as minimum targets, which implies a responsibility on 
the part of governments to ensure suffi   cient 
safety margins. Bearing that in mind, it is worrying that this approach continues the 
tendency towards reducing the signifi  cance 
of straightforward and comprehensible cri-
teria for the decision- making process. 
Moreover, the increasing complexity of the rules gives the Commission and the Council 
considerable discretionary latitude. This ar-
bitrary leeway encourages greater political 
bargaining and is likely to lead governments 
to expect a “generous” interpretation, es-
pecially where precedents exist. This fl  aw is 
compounded by insuffi   cient transparency. Thus, the Commission’s assessment as to whether effective action has been taken cannot be completely validated as the ne-cessary information required for this was not made fully available.
2 The bottom- up 
approach, in particular, is diffi   cult to verify, 
it potentially considers only part of the 
structural developments and opens up con-siderable ad hoc discretionary leeway.
For all the countries concerned, with the 
exception of Belgium and France, the Com-
mission reports improvements in the struc-
tural balance adjusted for the aforemen-tioned factors that exceed the level re-
quired.3 The fact that France was neverthe-
less judged as having taken effective measures is considered to be justifi  ed on the basis of a supplementary analysis of the results of the bottom- up approach. Further-
more, the approach taken in the case of 
France differs from that taken in a number 
of other countries. The Commission itself 
also alludes elsewhere to the fact that this 
approach is not particularly suitable for measuring a country’s fi  scal consolidation 
efforts.4
Given the earlier, mostly much more opti-
mistic forecasts of economic developments 
(second requirement for a deadline exten-
sion without stepping up the EDP) and the currently poor cyclical conditions, it also ap-
pears justifi  able under the existing rules to 
refrain from demanding the full short- term 
offsetting of the missed fi  scal targets, and 
hence to tolerate a certain extension of the adjustment paths. The Stability and Growth Pact generally foresees an extension of the deadline by one year. In the case of Spain, 
France, Slovenia and Cyprus, this provision 
was overridden in favour of granting an ex-tension of two years, and four years in the 
case of Cyprus, for these countries to re-
duce their defi  cits below the 3% limit. Such a waiving of the standard rule should be re-
served for substantiated exceptional cases. 
Extending deadlines generally results in a slackening of the structural consolidation requirements and corrective action being put off. For those countries with compre-hensive assistance programmes, this can also delay progress towards regaining ac-cess to the capital markets. Although this could possibly help to reduce the fear of short- term growth losses, it could, at the 
2 With regard to the calculation of the adjusted struc-
tural balance, for instance, it is not clear to what ex-
tent deviations of revenue elasticity from the longer- 
term average that were already known at the time of 
the initial recommendation (and which therefore can-not be disregarded ex post) were taken into account.3 According to the Commission’s spring forecast, Por-tugal achieves the required improvement for 2012 and 2014, but not for 2013.
4 See European Commission: “Measuring the fi  scal 
 effort”, in the “Report on Public fi  nances in EMU, Euro-pean Economy 4/ 2013”.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2013  
71

Central government appears to be operating 
on the assumption that the burdens can be off -
set by lower interest expenditure in particular. 
The downward revision of expected nominal 
GDP growth in the spring forecast has in -
creased the cyclical burden by €3 billion to 
€6½ billion in the supplementary budget.6 
With burdens from financial transactions un -
changed at €5 billion, structural borrowing 
thus amounts to €13½ billion (prescribed upper 
limit as defined by the budgetary legislator: 
€33 billion).7
As in previous years, the 2014 draft budget, 
which was passed by central government at 
the end of June (but which will, of course, 
need to be resubmitted after the general elec -
tions), was based on the benchmark figures 
adopted in March. Compared with these fig -
ures, the budgeted amount for borrowing was 
reduced slightly by €0.2 billion to €6.2 billion. 
A new grant to compensate for the deficit that 
the Energy and Climate Fund is expected to re -cord as a result of the very low CO2 emission 
certificate prices will place a burden on the 
budget. Furthermore, the estimates for privat -
2014 draft 
budget balance virtually un-changed vis- à- vis benchmark figures, …same time, further erode confi  dence in the 
binding effect of the fi  scal framework and 
in the sustainability of public fi  nances, and 
also prolong the vulnerability to unexpected 
negative shocks.
The amendments to the Stability and Growth Pact and to the Fiscal Compact have signifi  cantly strengthened the Com-
mission’s role in many Council decisions by 
introducing reverse qualifi  ed majority vot-
ing. As the guardian of the EU treaties, the Commission could now more effectively en-
force strict compliance with the budgetary 
rules than was previously the case. The rules have, however, become increasingly 
complex and allow considerable discretion-
ary scope in many areas. So far, the Com-
mission has not made all of the necessary 
information available to make its decisions 
comprehensible. In order to ensure the 
 effectiveness of the rules and broad public 
acceptance of the decisions, it is also essen-tial to apply the same assessment criteria to 
all countries. This includes ensuring that the 
underlying method of analysis is not only 
applied in an appropriate manner, but also 
consistently across all countries. Excessive 
complexity is likely to have an adverse im-
pact on the effectiveness of the rules. A 
core component of the common fi  scal 
framework is, not least, the speedier impos-ition of sanctions introduced with the 2011 
reform, although these can only achieve 
the desired preventive effect if they are ap-
plied rigorously. However, a general ten-dency is becoming apparent towards pro-
longing the consolidation processes. If the 
rules are relaxed too much by means of ex-ceptions and discretionary leeway, their dis-ciplinary effect risks being lost.
6 The Bundesbank, however, considers the German econ -
omy to be within the range of normal capacity utilisation, 
and the cyclical adjustment procedure employed by the 
Bundesbank and the ESCB (which also takes the growth 
structure into account) presents the cyclical component as 
largely neutral from today’s perspective.
7 Central government is contributing €1½ billion to the €8 
billion flood assistance fund in order to rebuild federal in -
frastructure. The remaining amount is being funded equally 
by central and state government. However, central govern -
ment will initially finance the full amount and, according to 
the supplementary budget, this will be included in its entir -
ety in its structural borrowing figure for 2013. State gov -
ernment will pay its cumulative contribution of €4 billion 
(including interest) over a period of 20 years. Between 
2014 and 2019, the federal states will transfer state gov -
ernment turnover tax shares to central government. From 
2020 onward (the year in which, as stated in the German 
constitution, the debt brake will apply to state govern -
ment, too) state government is to switch to booking con -
tributions on the expenditure side (probably as repayments, 
which could still be financed by new borrowing) until 
2033. Overall, it would appear appropriate, in consolidated 
terms, to count the actual outflows from the fund for tack -
ling flood damage, which have an impact on the general 
government deficit, towards central government’s debt 
brake limit (after deducting the part formally attributable to 
the federal states where applicable).Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2013  
72

isation proceeds have apparently been re -
duced. However, this is to be offset by consid -
erable relief stemming above all from interest 
expenditure (€1½ billion) as well as the Federal 
Ministry of Labour and Social Affairs (€1 bil -
lion).
Compared with the target figure in the 2013 
supplementary budget, the 2014 draft budget 
envisages a sharp reduction of €19 billion in 
net borrowing. This is predominantly due to 
temporary burdens in 2013 no longer applying 
in 2014 (€8 billion flood assistance fund and 
€4½ billion increase in capital contributions to 
the ESM), lower interest expenditure (€2½ bil -
lion) and a further cut in transfers to the health 
insurance fund (€1 billion). On the revenue 
side, projected tax receipts are up by €8 billion, 
although the introduction of a financial trans -
action tax generating €2 billion in receipts, 
which was announced in the 2010 consolida -
tion package, was once again postponed to 
the following year. By contrast, hardly any pri -
vatisation proceeds are envisaged for 2014 
( estimate for 2013: €4½ billion).
In structural terms, central government pro -
jected that it would record a surplus of €2 bil -
lion in 2014. However, this is based on a calcu -
lated cyclical burden of €4½ billion. Given the 
macroeconomic forecast, which can at least 
hardly be considered unfavourable, as well as 
the positive growth structure for public fi -
nances, it is likely that this paints too rosy a 
picture of the structural budgetary situation. 
Moreover, the budget envisages net expend -
iture of €3½ billion on financial transactions. In 
the area of development aid, the plans to book 
more than €1 billion –  formerly recorded as 
promotional loans (which often have uncertain 
repayment prospects) – as investment grants in 
future are to be welcomed. The fact that such 
payments are consequently counted towards 
the debt brake limit amounts to an appropriate 
tightening of the budgetary rules. In this con -
text, the plan to wipe out the existing balance 
on the control account at the end of 2015, 
which has now been agreed as part of the package of measures implementing the Fiscal 
Compact, is also a very positive move.
The fiscal plan up to 2017, which does not in -
clude any of the measures promised in election 
manifestos, foresees a continual improvement 
in the fiscal balance, resulting in a surplus of 
€9½ billion in 2017. In structural terms, a grad -
ual improvement is planned, and a structural 
surplus of €9 billion is projected for 2017 under 
the assumption that the forecasted economic 
circumstances are normal in cyclical terms at 
that point in time. Interest expenditure is ex -
pected to return to notable growth – a cau -
tious assumption which is also advisable given 
the current financing conditions. If the EU 
budget is slimmed down as planned, the asso -
ciated financing burdens might be lower from 
2016 onward. On the other hand, there are still 
budgetary risks, not least with regard to rev -
enue from the financial transaction tax, which 
is now assumed from 2015 onwards, as well as 
the planned cutbacks in defence expenditure. … but sharp fall 
in deficit vis- à- 
vis 2013 supple-mentary budget target
Slight structural 
surplus in 2014
Fiscal plan envis-ages gradual  increase in structural  surplusCentral government fiscal balance
Deutsche BundesbankQ1 Q2 Q3 Q420151050510
––––++
–30–25–20–15–1020132011Quarterly results
Cumulated from start of year
20122013
20112012€ billionDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2013  
73

Furthermore, there is considerable uncertainty 
in connection with the debt crisis. There are 
risks associated with guarantees on assistance 
loans as well as the indirect impact of the crisis 
via macroeconomic developments. In such an 
environment, the targets set for surpluses 
should be reaffirmed after the general elec -
tions. It would even be advisable to try to 
achieve the safety margin vis- à- vis the perman -
ent structural borrowing limit, which is cur -
rently planned from 2017 onwards, ahead of 
schedule.
At €2 billion, the surplus recorded by central 
government’s off- budget entities in the second 
quarter was up by €½ billion on the year ac -
cording to quarterly data from the Federal Min -
istry of Finance (ie in particular excluding the 
bad bank FMS Wertmanagement, for which 
data are not yet available). SoFFin posted a sur -
plus of €1½ billion following repayment of the 
final portion of its silent participation in Com -
merzbank. The pension reserves recorded minor surpluses, as had been the case one year 
previously. Whereas a year ago the precaution -
ary fund for final payments for inflation- indexed 
Federal securities recorded a surplus of €1½ bil -
lion owing to rules- based transfers, in the 
second quarter of 2013, the first repayment of 
an inflation- indexed five- year Federal note 
(Bobl) was due, producing a burden of €1½ bil -
lion and thus a slight deficit. For the year as a 
whole, the revenue surplus of the off- budget 
entities as reported in the Federal Ministry of 
Finance’s quarterly data (and furthermore ex -
cluding the loss compensation paid to FMS 
Wertmanagement, which does not affect the 
general government budget balance) is likely to 
significantly exceed the figure recorded one 
year earlier (€2½ billion) owing to the advance 
payment made to the flood assistance fund, as 
most of these resources will probably not be 
paid out until the coming years. Central gov -
ernment expects the surplus of the flood assis -
tance fund alone to amount to around €6 bil -
lion, while the other off- budget entities, taken Central govern-
ment’s off- budget entities record some-what higher  surplusCentral government’s medium-term fi  scal planning from 2013 to 2017 and structural net borrowing under the debt brake
€ billion
ItemActual
2011Actual2012Target2013
1Draft2014Fiscal plan
2015 2016 2017
Expenditure
2 296.2 306.8 310.0 295.4 299.4 303.1 308.1
of which
  Investment 3 25.4 27.6 26.1 25.4 25.2 24.9 24.7
Revenue 2, 4 278.9 284.3 284.9 289.2 299.6 308.3 317.7
of which
Tax revenue 2 248.1 256.1 260.6 268.7 279.4 292.9 300.5
Net borrowing 17.3 22.5 25.1 6.2 – 0.2 – 5.2 – 9.6
plus cyclical component 5 1.1 – 7.1 – 6.3 – 4.7 – 3.3 – 1.5 0.0
plus balance of fi  nancial transactions 6 2.0 – 7.4 – 5.2 – 3.7 0.7 0.6 0.5
Structural net borrowing 20.4 7.9 13.6 – 2.2 – 2.8 – 6.1 – 9.1
as a percentage of GDP 7 0.9 0.3 0.5 – 0.1 – 0.1 – 0.2 – 0.3
Memo item
Structural net borrowing 8
Upper limit according to Federal Ministry of Finance 45.6 39.4 33.2 25.6 17.8 9.8 10.1
1 Including supplementary central government budget for 2013. 2 After deducting supplementary central government grants, shares in 
energy tax revenue, compensation under the 2009 motor vehicle tax reform and consolidation assistance from 2011 onwards, which are 
all remitted to state government. 3 Excluding participating interests in the ESM. 4 Including proceeds from coin seigniorage. 5 Figures for 
2011 and 2012 are taken from the 2012 budgetary accounts. Figure for 2013 as stated in the supplementary budget. For 2014 to 2017, 
as stated in central government’s 2013 spring forecast. 6 As defi  ned for the respective fi  scal year. 7 Nominal GDP in the year preceding the drafting of the budget (data for fi  scal plan years as stated in 2013 spring forecast). 8 The defi  cit reduction path from 2011 to 2015 is 
based on the June 2010 estimate of the starting structural defi  cit value for 2010 (2.2% of GDP) and a reduction of 0.31% of GDP per year.
Deutsche BundesbankDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2013  
74

as a whole, could roughly match the figure 
posted one year previously.
State government budgets8
In the second quarter of 2013, state govern -
ment core budgets once again recorded a 
more favourable result in year- on- year terms. 
Their combined surplus went up by €1½ billion 
to €3 billion. This is due, in particular, to the 
sharp rise in revenue (7½%, or €5½ billion), 
which is attributable in almost equal measure 
to robust tax growth and significantly higher 
current transfers. The latter include, not least, 
central government’s increased contribution to 
the basic allowance for the elderly, which is 
transferred to local government via state gov -
ernment. Expenditure also recorded strong 
growth (6%, or €4 billion). Central government 
payments for the basic allowance, passed on 
via state government, contributed to the in -
crease in current transfers to local government 
(+€2 billion). Furthermore, spending on person -
nel in particular rose (+€1 billion). This is due 
inter alia  to the 2.65% wage increase for salar -
ied employees, which was paid with retroactive 
effect from the beginning of 2013.
The deficit for the year as a whole is likely to 
once again be considerably lower than planned 
(€13 billion), although it will nevertheless prob -
ably be only moderately below the figure re -
corded for the previous year (€5½ billion). Ac -
cording to the May tax estimate, state govern -
ment tax revenue is expected to record more 
subdued growth during the remainder of the 
year. By contrast, expenditure is forecast to 
carry on growing strongly. Payments to local 
government in particular are expected to con -
tinue to increase significantly, above all as a re -
sult of state government increasing its general 
grants and passing on more funds from central 
government. In addition to this, the rise in 
spending on personnel is set to continue as a 
result of the pay agreement being extended to 
public sector employees with civil servant sta -
tus and retired civil servants, albeit with a time lag in many cases and with further restrictions 
in some federal states.
At its seventh meeting in May, the Stability 
Council found that the five federal states re -
ceiving consolidation assistance (Berlin, 
Bremen, Saarland, Saxony-  Anhalt and Schles -
wig- Holstein) all complied with their structural 
deficit limits in 2012. Most of the federal states’ 
deficits were even significantly below the limits, 
with Berlin recording the greatest gap vis- à- vis 
the ceiling (€1½ billion). However, it will also 
be important for these five states to make suf -
ficient progress in catching up with the average 
budgetary position of the other federal states. 
If this does not happen, there is a danger that 
the financially- better- off majority in the Bun -
desrat will pass budget- burdening measures for 
all federal states, and those states that have 
not caught up with the others will have prob -
lems adhering to the debt brake requirements. 
The Stability Council monitored the implemen -
tation of the agreed restructuring measures in 
the four federal states previously found to have 
looming budgetary emergencies (all recipients 
of consolidation assistance except Saxony-  
Anhalt). The Council criticised Bremen and 
Saarland for having made limited progress 
overall and highlighted the need for them to 
intensify their consolidation efforts during the 
period up to 2016.
Further progress has been made in implement -
ing the debt brake in state constitutions. In 
Bavaria, a constitutional rule based closely on 
the national constitution (Basic Law) was ap -
proved by the state parliament with a broad 
majority. However, the rule is not due to enter 
into force until 2020. Furthermore, it is still sub -
ject to a referendum in September 2013. In 
Saxony, a constitutional debt brake including 
the state’s special funds was passed by the 
state parliament with a broad majority and will 
already apply from 2014 onward. In order to Moderate rise in 
surplus in Q2
Moderate deficit 
reduction in 2013 as a wholeStability Council 
highlights need 
for greater con-
solidation in 
Bremen and 
Saarland
Progress in en-
shrining debt brake in consti-tution in Saxony and Bavaria; im-plementation act in Hesse
8 The development of local government finances in the 
first quarter of 2013 was analysed in the short article in the 
Bundesbank Monthly Report of July 2013. These are the 
most recent data available.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2013  
75

take account of cyclical effects, it was agreed 
to permit borrowing if tax revenue lags at least 
3% behind the average value for the preceding 
four years. Then, tax receipts may be supple -
mented up to an upper limit of 99% of this 
average value through borrowing. Future re -
payments of this borrowing are to be made 
using additional tax revenue. Further borrow -
ing under a broader exemption clause would 
have to be approved by the state parliament 
with a two-  thirds majority and would be sub -
ject to a repayment plan lasting no more than 
eight years. This all- round approach is likely to 
keep debt tightly in check.9 Furthermore, an 
implementation act was passed for the debt 
brake in Hesse. This also requires a two- thirds 
majority for exemptions. In this case, repay -
ments would, as a rule, have to be envisaged 
within seven years. In addition to a control ac -
count for possible deviations from a structurally 
balanced budget outturn, a control account is 
also to be introduced for cyclical effects com -
puted when calculating the budgetary accounts. This makes it easy to monitor whether the sym -
metry requirement stipulated in the German 
constitution has been complied with and, 
where necessary, to take targeted corrective 
steps. Moreover, the rule requiring debt waivers 
that do not affect on- budget payment flows to 
also be counted towards the structural deficit is 
both in line with European law and advisable. 
A minimum deficit reduction path was set for 
the structural deficit, requiring a structurally 
balanced budget to be achieved by 2019.
Social security funds10
Statutory pension insurance 
scheme
The statutory pension insurance scheme re -
corded a surplus of just over €½ billion in the 
second quarter of 2013, which was more than 
€1 billion lower than at the same time last year. 
While revenue did not exceed the figure re -
corded a year earlier, expenditure rose by just 
over 2%. Contribution receipts and transfers 
from the central government budget stag -
nated.11 In both cases, this was primarily due to 
the cut in the contribution rate from 19.6% 
to 18.9% on 1 January 2013. Adjusted for this 
effect, contribution receipts would have in -
creased sharply by just under 4% and central 
government grants, which are linked to the con -
tribution rate, would also have been consider -
ably higher. On the expenditure side, the rise 
roughly corresponds to the impact of the mid-
2012 pension increase. By contrast, there was Financial deteri-
oration in Q2 due to cut in contribution rateFinances of the German statutory pension insurance scheme
Deutsche Bundesbank2011 2012 2013606264666870
–20+2+4+6€ billion, quarterly
Lin scale
Surplus (+) or deficit (–)ExpenditureLog scale
Revenue
9 Like the debt brake rule envisaged in Bavaria, there is of 
course some potential for conflict with the European 
budgetary rules. The unlimited use of reserves to balance 
the budget (as is apparently envisaged in both federal 
states) could cause general government to overstep its 
structural deficit limit of ½% of GDP , which has to be safe -
guarded by the national budgetary rules. It would therefore 
be worth considering an explicit limit.
10 The financial development of the statutory health and 
public long- term care insurance schemes in the first quarter 
of 2013 was analysed in the short articles of the June and 
July Monthly Report editions. These are the most recent 
data available.
11 General and additional central government grant as 
well as central government contributions to cover child-  
rearing periods.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2013  
76

hardly any change overall in the number of pen -
sions paid out. This is attributable to a slight de -
cline in retirement pensions and an increase in 
pensions for persons with reduced earning cap -
acity. Developments in retirement pensions cur -
rently reflect the low birth rates during and 
straight after the Second World War (persons 
who are now 65 or older). Furthermore, in 2012 
the special age limit for women allowing them 
to retire at 60 (with a reduced pension) was 
abolished. The sharper rise in pensions for per -
sons with reduced earning capacity is due to the 
fact that those born from around 1950 onwards, 
when birth rates were significantly higher, have 
now reached an age where there is a relatively 
high risk of reduced earning capacity. From the 
middle of the current decade onwards, those 
born during the post-war baby boom will start 
to reach the regular retirement age and place a 
considerably greater strain on expenditure.
In the first half of 2013, the statutory pension 
insurance scheme recorded a deficit of just 
under €1½ billion, which constitutes a year- on- 
year financial deterioration of just under €2½ 
billion. When the current contribution rate of 
18.9% was set, a sizeable deficit was expected 
(after a €5 billion surplus in 2012) owing to the 
need to scale back the reserves to their upper 
limit of 1.5 times the scheme’s monthly ex -
penditure. However, it is now becoming in -
creasingly likely that a surplus will be posted for 
2013 and the reserves will continue to exceed 
the statutory upper limit. This is due not least 
to the low pension increase of 0.25% in west -
ern Germany with effect from 1 July 2013. The 
contribution rate would consequently have to 
be cut significantly again in 2014. However, 
next year certain statistical particularities will no 
longer apply and, in particular, pension cuts 
waived in previous years will largely have been 
clawed back, meaning that considerable pen -
sion increases are likely again in 2014. The cur -
rent favourable situation will have hardly any 
impact on the longer- term financial outlook, 
particularly as the present high level of employ -
ment is a medium- term goal anyway. It would 
actually become more difficult to finance pen -sion payments if, in the future, there were not 
more contribution payers than assumed in the 
projections to cover the employment- induced 
higher pension entitlements at the current end. 
Given the demographic trend, the contribution 
rate is set to increase in the future anyway. 
Overall, the large reserves at present certainly 
do not provide any long-term financial scope 
for spending increases. If they were not funded 
from the central government budget, such 
spending increases would make it necessary to 
push the contribution rate up even further in 
the future. This would also endanger compli -
ance with the legal requirement that the contri -
bution rate must not exceed 22% before 2030.Further contribu-
tion rate cut in 2014 increas-ingly likely, …
… but no scope 
for spending  increases over longer termFinances of theFederal Employment Agency
1 Including transfers to the civil servants' pension fund. 2 Ex-
cluding central government liquidity assistance.
Deutsche Bundesbank2011 2012 201368101214
1.52.03.04.05.06.0–20+2+4€ billion, quarterly
Log scale
Total expenditure 1
Revenue 2
Log scale
Expenditure on ...
... vocational training... unemployment benefits
    and short-time    working benefitsLin scale
Surplus (+) or deficit (–)Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2013  
77

Federal Employment Agency
The Federal Employment Agency recorded a 
slight deficit in the second quarter of 2013, 
compared with a surplus of €½ billion one year 
previously. This deterioration is due entirely to 
the termination of the central government 
grant at the start of 2013, which had amounted 
to nearly €1 billion during the same period of 
2012. Overall, revenue was down by 3½% on 
the year, whereas expenditure rose by almost 
5½%. On the revenue side, growth in contribu -
tion receipts (just under 4%) was only slightly 
weaker than during the first quarter. Further -
more, there was substantial additional revenue 
from insolvency benefit contributions, after this 
contribution rate was increased from 0.04% 
to 0.15% at the beginning of 2013. However, 
the termination of the central government 
grant outweighed the above factors. On the 
expenditure side, the strong growth is mainly 
attributable to an increase in unemployment 
insurance benefit (I) of close to 15%, which 
was slightly faster than the pace of growth in 
the first quarter. Although spending on active 
labour market policy measures fell by 15%, this 
amounts to a marked deceleration in the de -
cline compared with the first quarter.
The Federal Employment Agency expects to re -
cord a deficit of just under €1 billion for the 
year as a whole. This figure could improve if, as has often occurred in the past, spending on ac -
tive labour market policy measures turns out to 
be lower than estimated in the budget plan. 
Nevertheless, compared with the previous year, 
a long- term deterioration in its financial situ -
ation is likely owing to the termination of the 
central government grant being only partially 
offset by the abolition of the reintegration pay -
ment. Consequently, tasks facing society as a 
whole that have been entrusted to the Federal 
Employment Agency (such as facilitation meas -
ures for trainees from disadvantaged back -
grounds), the costs of which the Agency itself 
estimates at almost €4 billion in total, will be 
financed from contributions and not from gen -
eral tax revenue. Alongside central govern -
ment’s refunds of administrative costs, particu -
larly for support for the long- term unemployed, 
the financial relations between central govern -
ment and the Federal Employment Agency 
now essentially only allow loans to be granted 
if the Federal Employment Agency’s own rev -
enue no longer covers its expenditure in a 
downturn. The Federal Employment Agency 
might lose approximately €1½ billion a year on 
balance as a result of the new financial ar -
rangements. There is consequently an increased 
risk that, with the current contribution rate of 
3.0%, the Federal Employment Agency’s own 
receipts will not be sufficient in structural terms 
to cover its expenditure.Deterioration 
due to termin-ation of central government grantFederal Employ-
ment Agency’s 
finances prob-
ably better than recently ex-pected, but 
long- term de-
terioration from 
using it as budgetary  stopgapDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2013  
78

Statistical 
SectionDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report 
August 2013  
1•

Contents
I Key economic data for the euro area
 1 Monetary developments and interest rates  ..................................................................  5•
 2 External transactions and positions  ..............................................................................  5•
 3 Gener al economic indicators  .......................................................................................  6•
II Overall monetary survey in the euro area
 1 The money stock and its counterparts  .........................................................................  8•
 2 Consolidated balance sheet of monetary financial institutions (MFIs)  ...........................  10•
 3 Banking system’s liquidity position  ...............................................................................  14•
III Consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem
 1 Assets  ..........................................................................................................................  16•
 2 Liabilities  .....................................................................................................................  18•
IV Banks
 1 A ssets and liabilities of monetary financial institutions (excluding the Bundesbank)  
in Germany  .................................................................................................................  20•
 2 Principal assets and liabilities of banks (MFIs) in Germany, by category of banks  ..........  24•
 3 A ssets and liabilities of banks (MFIs) in Germany vis-à-vis residents  ..............................  26•
 4 A ssets and liabilities of banks (MFIs) in Germany vis-à-vis non-residents  .......................  28•
 5 Lending by banks (MFIs) in Germany to domestic non-banks (non-MFIs)  .....................  30•
 6 Lending by banks (MFIs) in Germany to domestic enterprises and households, 
 housing loans, sectors of economic activity  .................................................................  32•
 7 Deposits of domestic non-banks (non-MFIs) at banks (MFIs) in Germany  .....................  34•
 8 Deposits of domestic households and non-profit institutions at banks (MFIs) in 
 Germany  .....................................................................................................................  36•
 9 Deposits of domestic government at banks (MFIs) in Germany, by creditor group ........  36•
 1 0 Savings deposits and bank savings bonds of banks (MFIs) in Germany sold to  
non-banks (non-MFIs) ..................................................................................................  38•
 1 1 Debt securities and money market paper outstanding of banks (MFIs) in Germany  ...... 38•
 1 2 Building and loan associations (MFIs) in Germany  ........................................................  39•
 1 3 A ssets and liabilities of the foreign branches and foreign subsidiaries of  
German banks (MFIs)  ...................................................................................................  40•Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report 
August 2013  
2•

V Minimum reserves
 1 Reserve ratios  ..............................................................................................................  42•
 2 Reserve maintenance in Germany up to the end of 1998  ............................................  42•
 3 Reserve maintenance in the euro area  .........................................................................  42•
VI Interest rates
 1 ECB interest rates  ........................................................................................................  43•
 2 Base rates  ....................................................................................................................  43•
 3 Eur osystem monetary policy operations allotted through tenders  ................................  43•
 4 Money market rates, by month  ...................................................................................  43•
 5 Inter est rates and volumes for outstanding amounts and new business of  
German banks (MFIs)  ...................................................................................................  44•
VII Insurance corporations and pension funds
 1 Assets  ..........................................................................................................................  48•
 2 Liabilities  .....................................................................................................................  49•
VIII Capital market
 1 Sales and purchases of debt securities and shares in Germany  .....................................  50•
 2 Sales of debt securities issued by residents  ..................................................................  51•
 3 Amounts outstanding of debt securities issued by residents .........................................  52•
 4 Shar es in circulation issued by residents  .......................................................................  52•
 5 Y ields and indices on German securities  ......................................................................  53•
 6 Sales and purchases of mutual fund shares in Germany  ...............................................  53•
IX Financial accounts
 1 A cquisition of financial assets and financing of private non-financial sectors  ................  54•
 2 Financial assets and liabilities of private non-financial sectors  ......................................  55•
X Public finances in Germany
 1 Gener al government: deficit and debt level as defined in the Maastricht Treaty  ..................  56•
 2 Gener al government: revenue, expenditure and fiscal deficit/surplus as shown in  
the national accounts  ..................................................................................................  56•
 3 Gener al government: budgetary development (as per government’s financial 
 statistics)  .....................................................................................................................  57•
 4 Centr al, state and local government: budgetary development (as per government’s 
 financial statistics)  ........................................................................................................  57•Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report 
August 2013  
3•

 5 Centr al, state and local government: tax revenue  ........................................................  58•
 6 Centr al and state government and European Union: tax revenue, by type  .......................  58•
 7 Centr al, state and local government: individual taxes  ..................................................  59•
 8 German pension insurance scheme: budgetary development and assets  ......................  59•
 9 F ederal Employment Agency: budgetary development  .................................................  60•
 1 0 S tatutory health insurance scheme: budgetary development  .......................................  60•
 1 1 S tatutory long-term care insurance scheme: budgetary development  ..........................  61•
 1 2 Centr al government: borrowing in the market  .............................................................  61•
 1 3 Centr al, state and local government: debt by creditor  .................................................  61•
 1 4 Centr al, state and local government: debt by category  ................................................  62•
XI Economic conditions in Germany
 1 Origin and use of domestic product, distribution of national income  ...........................  63•
 2 Output in the production sector  ..................................................................................  64•
 3 Or ders received by industry  .........................................................................................  65•
 4 Or ders received by construction  ..................................................................................  66•
 5 Retail trade turnover, sales of motor vehicles  ...............................................................  66•
 6 Labour market  .............................................................................................................  67•
 7 Prices  ..........................................................................................................................  68•
 8 Households’ income  ....................................................................................................  69•
 9 Negotiated pay rates (overall economy)  .......................................................................  69•
XII External sector
 1 Major items of the balance of payments of the euro area  ...........................................  70•
 2 Major items of the balance of payments of the Federal Republic of Germany  ..............  71•
 3 F oreign trade (special trade) of the Federal Republic of Germany, by country and 
group of countries  .......................................................................................................  72•
 4 Services and income of the Federal Republic of Germany  ............................................  73•
 5 C urrent transfers of the Federal Republic of Germany  ..................................................  73•
 6 C apital transfers  ..........................................................................................................  73•
 7 Financial account of the Federal Republic of Germany  .................................................  74•
 8 External position of the Bundesbank up to end-1998  ..................................................  75•
 9 External position of the Bundesbank since the beginning of the  
European monetary union  ...........................................................................................  75•
 1 0 A ssets and liabilities of enterprises in Germany (other than banks) vis-à-vis  
non-residents  ..............................................................................................................  76•
 1 1 ECB euro reference exchange rates of selected currencies  ...........................................  77•
 1 2 Eur o-area member states and irrevocable euro conversion rates in the third stage  
of European Economic and Monetary Union  ...............................................................  77•
 1 3 Effective exchange rates of the euro and indicators of the German economy’s price 
competitiveness  ...........................................................................................................  78•Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report 
August 2013  
4•

Deutsche Bundesbank
5  Monthly Report
August 2013
I Key economic data for the euro area 
 
1 Monetary developments and interest rates
 
 
 
 
 Money stock in various definitions 1,2 Determinants of the money stock 1 Interest rates
 M 3 3 
MFI lending to Yield on Euro-
 3-month enterprises Monetary pean govern-
MFI lending, and capital 3-month ment bonds moving  average
M1 M2 (centred) total households formation  4 Eonia 5,7 Euribor 6,7 outstanding 8 
Period Annual percentage change % Annual percentage as a monthly average
2011          Oct 1.7 1.9 1.3 1.5 1.6 2.1 4.3 0.96 1.58 4.2
         Nov 2.2 2.1 1.5 1.5 0.8 1.0 3.4 0.79 1.48 4.7         Dec 1.9 1.9 1.6 1.7 1.0 0.5 2.9 0.63 1.43 4.7
2012          Jan 2.3 2.3 2.0 2.1 1.4 0.7 2.7 0.38 1.22 4.5
         Feb 2.6 2.8 2.5 2.5 1.4 0.4 2.1 0.37 1.05 4.3
         Mar 2.8 2.9 2.8 2.6 1.8 0.5 1.3 0.36 0.86 3.9
         Apr 2.0 2.5 2.4 2.7 1.4 − 0.1 0.8 0.35 0.74 3.9
         May 3.4 2.8 2.9 2.8 1.5 − 0.3 − 0.1 0.34 0.68 4.0
         June 3.5 2.9 3.0 3.1 1.5 − 0.4 − 0.2 0.33 0.66 4.0
         July 4.7 3.4 3.5 3.1 1.3 − 0.6 − 1.1 0.18 0.50 3.8
         Aug 4.9 3.1 2.8 3.0 0.8 − 1.0 − 1.2 0.11 0.33 3.7
         Sep 5.2 3.1 2.7 3.1 0.9 − 0.9 − 1.3 0.10 0.25 3.5
         Oct 6.4 4.3 3.9 3.5 0.6 − 1.3 − 1.8 0.09 0.21 3.3
         Nov 6.4 4.4 3.8 3.7 0.5 − 1.3 − 1.8 0.08 0.19 3.2
         Dec 6.4 4.5 3.5 3.6 0.7 − 0.5 − 1.5 0.07 0.19 3.0
2013          Jan 6.5 4.4 3.4 3.3 0.2 − 0.8 − 1.7 0.07 0.20 2.9
         Feb 7.0 4.3 3.1 3.0 0.1 − 0.7 − 1.6 0.07 0.22 3.0
         Mar 7.1 4.2 2.5 2.9 0.3 − 0.5 − 1.2 0.07 0.21 2.9
         Apr 8.7 4.9 3.2 2.9 0.3 − 0.5 − 1.4 0.08 0.21 2.7
         May 8.4 4.7 2.9 2.8 0.2 − 0.6 − 0.9 0.08 0.20 2.6
         June 7.5 4.1 2.3 ... 0.1 − 0.5 − 0.9 0.09 0.21 2.9
         July ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 0.09 0.22 3.0
1 Source: ECB. 2 Seasonally adjusted. 3 Excluding money market fund shares/units, OverNight Index Average. 6 Euro Interbank Offered Rate. 7 See also footnotes to
money market paper and debt securities with a maturity of up to two years held by Table VI.4, p 43  8 GDP-weighted yield on ten-year government bonds. Countries
non-euro-area residents. 4 Longer-term liabilities to euro-area non-MFIs. 5 Euro include:DE,FR,NL,BE,AT,FI,IE,PT,ES,IT,GR,SK. 
 
 
2 External transactions and positions  * 
  
 
Selected items of the euro-area balance of payments Euro exchange rates  1 
Current account Capital account Effective exchange rate 3 
of which Direct Securities Other Reserve
Balance Trade balance Balance investment investment assets Dollar rate Nominal Real  4 transactions 2 
Period € million Euro/US-$ Q1 1999 = 100
2011          Oct + 3,786 + 380 − 3,895 − 233 − 11,658 + 9,084 − 1,088 1.3706 103.0 100.1
         Nov + 9,570 + 5,589 − 15,300 − 30,458 + 14,072 + 1,319 − 233 1.3556 102.6 99.8
         Dec + 22,540 + 8,507 − 23,034 + 15,967 − 59,684 + 26,097 − 5,414 1.3179 100.8 98.1
2012          Jan − 10,300 − 7,727 + 11,877 + 789 − 48,889 + 61,126 − 1,149 1.2905 99.0 96.3
         Feb − 2,557 + 3,229 + 9,327 + 8,249 + 16,999 − 14,308 − 1,614 1.3224 99.7 97.2
         Mar + 10,015 + 11,274 − 19,169 − 12,614 − 50,231 + 43,022 + 655 1.3201 99.9 97.3
         Apr + 2,936 + 4,423 − 2,441 − 2,559 + 5,075 − 1,975 − 2,982 1.3162 99.5 97.1
         May − 2,759 + 7,360 − 359 + 3,505 + 22,611 − 25,014 − 1,461 1.2789 98.1 95.6
         June + 18,167 + 13,896 − 16,657 − 16,124 + 60,986 − 57,009 − 4,510 1.2526 97.2 94.8
         July + 21,787 + 14,543 − 17,466 + 2,541 + 3,097 − 23,591 + 487 1.2288 95.4 93.1
         Aug + 8,843 + 5,588 − 7,736 + 12,582 − 12,829 − 5,917 − 1,573 1.2400 95.3 93.1
         Sep + 10,218 + 10,158 − 16,419 − 20,012 − 2,243 + 4,870 + 967 1.2856 97.2 94.9
         Oct + 15,026 + 10,450 − 18,958 − 7,744 + 70,718 − 79,289 − 2,644 1.2974 97.8 95.4
         Nov + 22,437 + 13,979 − 34,310 + 11,077 + 25,642 − 69,985 − 1,044 1.2828 97.3 94.8
         Dec + 28,624 + 11,777 − 34,496 − 43,771 + 17,258 − 8,701 + 718 1.3119 98.7 96.2
2013          Jan − 4,157 − 2,274 − 3,884 − 10,036 + 29,767 − 18,816 − 4,799 1.3288 100.4 97.9
         Feb + 11,908 + 11,876 − 8,975 + 11,031 − 15,409 − 7,157 + 2,560 1.3359 101.7 99.0
         Mar + 24,774 + 22,901 − 24,895 − 24,626 + 5,601 − 8,119 + 2,248 1.2964 100.2 97.8
         Apr + 16,596 + 16,269 − 18,513 − 6,854 − 1,876 − 9,713 − 70 1.3026 100.5 97.8
         May + 9,316 + 17,321 − 9,798 + 239 + 32,054 − 41,529 − 563 1.2982 100.6 98.0
         June + 26,147 + 18,576 − 24,771 − 5,078 + 37,174 − 56,534 − 332 1.3189 101.6 98.9
         July ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 1.3080 101.5 98.7
*  Source: ECB. 1  See also Tables XI.12 and 13, pp 75−76   2  Including
financial derivatives. 3  Vis-à-vis the currencies of The-EER-21 group. 4  Based on
consumer prices. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
6  Monthly Report
August 2013
I  Key economic data for the euro area 
 
3  General economic indicators
 
 
                   
 
Period Euro area Belgium Germany Estonia Finland France Greece Ireland Italy
 
Real gross domestic product 1,2
 
2010 2.0 2.4 4.0 3.3 3.4 1.7 − 4.9 − 1.1 1.7
2011 1.5 1.8 3.3 8.3 2.7 2.0 − 7.1 2.2 0.4
2012 − 0.6 − 0.3 0.7 3.2 − 0.8 0.0 − 6.4 0.2 − 2.4
2012          Q1 − 0.1 0.2 1.8 3.4 1.5 0.6 − 6.7 1.8 − 1.4
         Q2 − 0.4 − 0.4 0.6 2.2 − 0.7 − 0.3 − 6.4 0.4 − 2.8
         Q3 − 0.7 − 0.5 0.4 3.5 − 1.5 − 0.1 − 6.7 − 0.5 − 2.7
         Q4 − 0.9 − 0.5 0.0 3.8 − 2.4 − 0.2 − 5.7 − 1.0 − 2.6
2013          Q1 − 1.1 − 0.6 − 1.6 1.1 − 2.5 − 1.0 − 5.6 − 0.9 − 2.8
         Q2 − 0.7 ... 0.9 ... ... 0.3 − 4.6 ... ...
 
Industrial production 1,3
 
2010 7.3 11.2 10.9 22.9 5.1 4.8 − 6.6 7.5 6.7
2011 3.2 4.4 6.6 19.7 2.1 2.1 − 8.0 0.0 1.1
2012 − 2.4 − 3.3 4 − 0.3 0.3 − 1.5 − 2.6 − 3.7 − 1.3 − 6.5
2012          Q1 − 1.9 − 2.4 4 1.3 0.0 − 2.6 − 2.7 − 8.7 1.3 − 6.5
         Q2 − 2.3 − 5.4 0.3 − 0.7 − 2.4 − 2.6 − 2.3 2.9 − 7.3
         Q3 − 2.2 − 3.4 − 0.8 0.0 − 1.2 − 2.1 − 3.2 − 3.3 − 5.1
         Q4 − 3.1 − 1.8 − 2.1 1.7 − 0.1 − 3.1 − 0.5 − 6.6 − 7.0
2013          Q1 − 2.3 − 3.1 5 − 2.1 5.1 − 3.7 − 2.3 − 3.2 − 2.9 − 4.3
         Q2 − 0.5 ... 6,p 0.9 4.9 − 6.6 0.0 p − 1.5 p − 2.4 − 3.7
 
Capacity utilisation in industry 7
 
2010 76.1 77.9 79.7 67.1 75.6 77.9 68.1 − 68.3
2011 80.7 80.5 86.1 73.3 80.5 83.4 67.9 − 72.6
2012 78.9 77.7 83.5 70.2 78.8 82.2 64.9 − 70.1
2012          Q2 80.1 78.4 85.2 69.0 79.9 83.4 64.9 − 71.0
         Q3 78.2 76.9 82.6 71.3 80.1 82.0 63.9 − 69.7
         Q4 77.2 76.6 80.7 70.1 77.4 80.4 65.1 − 69.0
2013          Q1 77.6 75.5 82.2 70.5 78.3 82.3 65.3 − 68.5
         Q2 77.5 76.4 81.5 70.8 77.4 80.9 64.0 − 68.4
         Q3 78.3 76.4 82.5 71.5 80.3 80.7 64.9 − 71.3
 
Standardised unemployment rate 8,9
 
2010 10.1 8.3 7.1 16.9 8.4 9.7 12.6 13.9 8.4
2011 10.2 7.2 6.0 12.5 7.8 9.6 17.7 14.7 8.4
2012 11.4 7.6 5.5 10.2 7.7 10.3 24.3 14.7 10.7
2013          Feb 12.0 8.3 5.6 9.3 8.1 10.8 26.6 13.7 11.8
         Mar 12.1 8.5 5.5 8.7 8.1 10.8 26.8 13.6 11.9
         Apr 12.1 8.6 5.5 8.3 8.1 10.8 27.0 13.5 12.0
         May 12.1 8.6 5.5 8.0 8.1 10.9 27.6 13.6 12.2
         June 12.1 8.7 5.6 ... 8.0 11.0 ... 13.5 12.1
         July ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ...
 
Harmonised Index of Consumer Prices 1
 
2010 1.6 2.3 1.2 2.7 1.7 1.7 4.7 − 1.6 1.6
2011 10 2.7 3.4 2.5 5.1 3.3 2.3 3.1 1.2 2.9
2012 2.5 2.6 2.1 4.2 3.2 2.2 1.0 1.9 3.3
2013          Feb 1.8 1.4 1.8 4.0 2.5 1.2 0.1 1.2 2.0
         Mar 1.7 1.3 1.8 3.8 2.5 1.1 − 0.2 0.6 1.8
         Apr 1.2 1.1 1.1 3.4 2.4 0.8 − 0.6 0.5 1.3
         May 1.4 1.1 1.6 3.6 2.5 0.9 − 0.3 0.5 1.3
         June 1.6 1.5 1.9 4.1 2.3 1.0 − 0.3 0.7 1.4
         July e 1.6 1.6 1.9 3.9 2.5 1.2 − 0.5 0.7 e 1.2
 
General government financial balance 11
 
2010 − 6.2 − 3.8 − 4.1 0.2 − 2.5 − 7.1 − 10.7 − 30.8 − 4.5
2011 − 4.1 − 3.7 − 0.8 1.2 − 0.8 − 5.3 − 9.5 − 13.4 − 3.8
2012 − 3.7 − 3.9 0.1 − 0.3 − 1.9 − 4.8 − 10.0 − 7.6 − 3.0
 
General government debt 11
 
2010 85.4 95.5 82.4 6.7 48.6 82.4 148.3 92.1 119.3
2011 87.3 97.8 80.4 6.2 49.0 85.8 170.3 106.4 120.8
2012 90.7 99.6 81.9 10.1 53.0 90.2 156.9 117.6 127.0
Sources: National data, European Commission, Eurostat, European Central Bank. 4  Positively influenced by late reports. 5  Positively influenced by changes in the
Latest data are partly based on press reports and are provisional. 1  Annual percen- reporting population. 6  Provisional; adjusted in advance by the Federal Statistical
tage change. 2  GDP of the euro area calculated from seasonally adjusted data. Office by way of estimates to the results of the Quarterly Production Survey and the
3  Manufacturing, mining and energy; adjusted for working-day variations. Quarterly Survey in the specialised construction industry. 7  Manufacturing, in %;

Deutsche Bundesbank
7  Monthly Report
August 2013
I   Key economic data for the euro area  
 
   
                   
 
Luxembourg Malta Netherlands Austria Portugal Slovakia Slovenia Spain Cyprus   Period
 
Real gross domestic product 1,2
 
2.9 3.2 1.5 1.8 1.9 4.4 1.2 − 0.3 1.3 2010
1.7 1.8 0.9 2.8 − 1.6 3.2 0.6 0.4 0.5 20110.3 1.0 − 1.2 0.9 − 3.2 2.0 − 2.3 − 1.4 − 2.4 2012
− 0.6 − 0.9 − 1.1 1.9 − 0.8 2.9 0.0 − 0.8 − 1.6 2012          Q1
0.5 1.4 − 0.7 − 0.3 − 4.2 2.6 − 3.2 − 1.4 − 2.7          Q2
− 0.3 1.8 − 1.7 0.5 − 2.5 2.1 − 3.1 − 1.5 − 1.9          Q3
1.7 1.7 − 1.5 1.3 − 5.4 0.7 − 3.0 − 1.9 − 3.6          Q4
0.9 1.6 − 1.8 − 0.5 − 4.1 0.6 − 4.8 − 2.3 − 4.4 2013          Q1
... ... − 1.8 0.3 ... ... ... ... ...          Q2
 
Industrial production1,3
 
8.7 − 7.8 6.7 1.6 8.1 7.0 0.8 − 1.1 2010
− 1.9 − − 0.7 6.6 − 2.0 5.3 1.9 − 1.4 − 5.2 2011− 5.4 − − 0.5 0.3 − 5.0 8.1 − 0.6 − 6.0 − 10.5 2012
− 7.2 − − 1.7 − 0.8 − 5.5 6.9 − 0.7 − 5.8 − 13.4 2012          Q1
− 5.4 − 1.6 0.8 − 6.4 9.8 0.1 − 7.1 − 11.2          Q2
− 6.2 − − 2.3 1.1 − 4.1 11.4 0.4 − 5.5 − 5.7          Q3
− 2.4 − 0.4 0.1 − 3.7 4.7 − 2.3 − 5.7 − 11.1          Q4
− 6.4 − 2.6 0.2 − 1.3 2.7 − 0.8 − 4.1 − 12.7 2013          Q1
− 4.6 −
p 0.6 ... 3.1 p 2.6 p − 1.2 − 1.7 ...          Q2
 
Capacity utilisation in industry 7
 
78.5 77.7 78.9 81.9 75.0 58.0 76.0 71.1 62.7 201083.2 78.7 80.3 85.4 74.4 61.6 80.4 73.3 61.4 201176.4 75.2 78.4 84.6 73.8 69.6 79.1 72.1 56.5 2012
82.7 75.9 78.6 84.7 74.2 71.1 80.6 72.7 57.2 2012          Q2
78.1 76.2 78.3 84.9 74.2 71.2 79.4 70.7 58.2          Q3
65.7 74.3 77.0 83.6 72.6 68.4 76.6 72.5 53.7          Q4
66.9 77.2 77.0 84.9 73.5 60.7 77.8 68.7 52.2 2013          Q1
62.3 76.2 75.9 83.5 73.9 72.3 78.4 74.6 43.7          Q2
63.1 76.1 76.6 83.5 73.2 55.2 78.2 76.2 50.5          Q3
 
Standardised unemployment rate 8,9
 
4.6 6.9 4.5 4.4 12.0 14.5 7.3 20.1 6.3 20104.8 6.5 4.4 4.2 12.9 13.7 8.2 21.7 7.9 20115.1 6.4 5.3 4.3 15.9 14.0 8.9 25.0 11.9 2012
5.4 6.2 6.2 5.0 17.6 14.2 10.6 26.4 14.7 2013          Feb 
5.5 6.2 6.4 4.8 17.6 14.1 11.0 26.4 15.0          Mar 
5.6 6.0 6.5 4.8 17.8 14.2 11.2 26.5 16.0          Apr 
5.7 6.1 6.6 4.7 17.6 14.3 11.3 26.4 16.5          May
5.7 6.1 6.8 4.6 17.4 14.5 11.2 26.3 17.3          June
... ... 7.0 ... ... ... ... ... ...          July
 
Harmonised Index of Consumer Prices 1
 
2.8 2.0 0.9 1.7 1.4 0.7 2.1 2.0 2.6 20103.7 2.5 2.5 3.6 3.6 4.1 2.1 3.1 3.5 20112.9 3.2 2.8 2.6 2.8 3.7 2.8 2.4 3.1 2012
2.4 1.8 3.2 2.6 0.2 2.2 2.9 2.9 1.8 2013          Feb 
2.0 1.4 3.2 2.4 0.7 1.9 2.2 2.6 1.3          Mar 
1.7 0.9 2.8 2.1 0.4 1.7 1.6 1.5 0.1          Apr 
1.4 0.8 3.1 2.4 0.9 1.8 1.6 1.8 0.2          May
2.0 0.6 3.2
p 2.2 1.2 1.7 2.2 2.2 0.8          June
1.8 0.9 p 3.1 ... 0.8 1.6 2.8 1.9 0.7          July
 
General government financial balance 11
 
− 0.9 − 3.6 − 5.1 − 4.5 − 9.8 − 7.7 − 5.9 − 9.7 − 5.3 2010− 0.2 − 2.8 − 4.5 − 2.5 − 4.4 − 5.1 − 6.4 − 9.4 − 6.3 2011− 0.8 − 3.3 − 4.1 − 2.5 − 6.4 − 4.3 − 4.0 − 10.6 − 6.3 2012
 
General government debt 11
 
19.2 67.4 63.1 72.0 94.0 41.0 38.6 61.5 61.3 201018.3 70.3 65.5 72.5 108.3 43.3 46.9 69.3 71.1 201120.8 72.1 71.2 73.4 123.6 52.1 54.1 84.2 85.8 2012
seasonally adjusted; data are collected in January, April, July and October. 8  As a Statistical Office. 10  Including Estonia from 2011 onwards. 11  As a percentage of
percentage of the civilian labour force; seasonally adjusted. 9  Standardised unemploy- GDP; euro-area aggregate: European Central Bank (ESA 1995), member states:
ment rate of Germany: calculation based on unadjusted data from the Federal European Commission (Maastricht Treaty definition). 

Deutsche Bundesbank
8  Monthly Report
August 2013
II Overall monetary survey in the euro area 
 
1 The money stock and its counterparts *
(a) Euro area 
  
€ billion
I Lending to non-banks (non-MFIs) II Net claims on III Monetary capital formation at monetary
in the euro area non-euro-area residents financial institutions (MFIs) in the euro area
Enterprises General
and households government Debt
Deposits securities
Liabil- with an Deposits with
Claims ities to agreed at agreed maturities
on non- non-euro- maturity notice of of over Capital
of which of which euro-area area of over over 2 years and
Period Total Total Total Total residents residents Total 2 years 3 months (net)  2 Securities Securities reserves  3 
2011          Nov 28.3 − 12.0 8.2 40.3 41.2 − 24.2 − 64.7 − 40.5 − 3.2 − 11.1 − 0.9 − 10.6 19.5
         Dec − 94.3 −111.3 − 15.8 17.1 2.1 17.4 − 21.0 − 38.4 − 3.7 13.9 − 0.7 − 42.7 25.8
2012          Jan 125.2 58.3 17.6 67.0 69.1 − 40.6 19.0 59.6 6.3 0.5 0.6 − 4.4 9.6
         Feb 15.8 − 15.8 4.3 31.6 47.8 20.4 18.4 − 1.9 − 10.6 − 3.4 − 1.2 − 7.2 1.2
         Mar 36.6 2.9 1.2 33.7 36.5 − 26.3 33.4 59.7 − 34.8 − 26.4 − 0.6 − 18.5 10.7
         Apr 12.2 7.8 15.9 4.4 − 2.6 − 29.8 − 14.2 15.5 − 5.7 − 3.9 − 0.1 − 7.0 5.3
         May 23.3 − 7.4 − 10.2 30.7 29.0 14.0 27.6 13.5 − 41.9 − 32.5 − 0.9 − 23.2 14.8
         June 8.4 − 35.2 − 59.6 43.6 18.3 20.6 − 82.1 − 102.6 11.0 − 12.4 − 1.0 − 13.0 37.4
         July − 33.9 − 17.8 − 42.4 − 16.1 − 15.4 9.8 6.5 − 3.2 − 33.6 − 53.3 − 1.1 6.1 14.7
         Aug − 77.5 − 60.6 − 15.2 − 16.9 − 7.6 21.8 − 24.0 − 45.8 3.3 2.9 − 1.3 − 1.0 2.7
         Sep 65.4 32.4 − 3.6 33.0 30.7 − 6.7 − 41.2 − 34.5 − 0.4 − 7.6 − 1.4 − 3.7 12.3
         Oct − 4.7 − 20.5 − 6.1 15.8 1.1 20.4 7.3 − 13.2 − 25.0 − 12.6 − 0.7 − 12.7 0.9
         Nov 13.9 − 3.7 − 0.5 17.7 27.2 64.5 − 12.4 − 76.9 − 2.5 − 4.6 − 0.7 − 1.4 4.2
         Dec − 69.8 − 4.4 66.6 − 65.4 − 50.6 32.2 − 91.6 − 123.8 17.0 − 4.2 − 1.8 − 19.3 42.4
2013          Jan 48.6 18.0 − 2.4 30.6 26.5 32.2 60.0 27.9 − 6.8 − 4.3 − 1.0 − 7.1 5.5
         Feb − 5.3 − 10.0 − 3.4 4.6 43.8 − 10.5 − 10.5 − 0.0 − 4.4 − 8.4 − 2.0 − 1.0 7.0
         Mar 64.4 29.3 21.9 35.1 29.6 11.9 − 42.1 − 54.0 − 0.8 14.8 − 1.5 − 33.7 19.7
         Apr 13.3 11.0 34.7 2.2 − 7.7 − 4.6 60.0 64.6 − 19.7 − 5.3 − 1.9 − 16.2 3.6
         May 10.2 − 14.1 1.6 24.3 49.8 74.9 − 2.1 − 77.0 − 4.8 4.5 − 2.1 − 19.4 12.2
         June − 4.9 − 32.1 − 27.5 27.2 35.1 42.8 − 60.6 − 103.4 8.4 4.1 − 1.3 − 28.9 34.5
  
  
(b) German contribution
 
I Lending to non-banks (non-MFIs) II Net claims on III Monetary capital formation at monetary
in the euro area non-euro-area residents financial institutions (MFIs) in the euro area
Enterprises General
and households government Debt
Deposits securities
Liabil- with an Deposits with
Claims ities to agreed at agreed maturities
on non- non-euro- maturity notice of of over Capital
of which of which euro-area area of over over 2 years and
Period Total Total Total Total residents residents Total 2 years 3 months (net)  2 Securities Securities reserves  3 
2011          Nov 3.7 4.2 1.7 − 0.5 2.1 − 13.7 − 0.1 13.6 − 7.3 − 1.4 − 0.9 − 3.8 − 1.3
         Dec − 54.4 − 48.0 − 4.8 − 6.4 − 9.5 72.3 − 9.7 − 82.0 − 8.0 − 0.3 − 0.8 − 4.3 − 2.6
2012          Jan 36.8 25.6 4.3 11.2 7.7 − 79.5 29.1 108.7 − 26.2 − 3.4 − 0.9 − 22.7 0.9
         Feb − 3.1 − 2.8 − 5.8 − 0.3 1.9 − 30.3 − 10.6 19.7 9.1 − 2.8 − 1.2 8.2 4.9
         Mar 2.1 1.2 8.4 0.9 3.2 − 51.5 5.1 56.6 − 6.8 − 4.9 − 0.8 − 6.2 5.1
         Apr 18.0 16.0 12.9 2.0 − 3.2 − 12.4 − 0.5 11.9 1.4 − 1.4 − 0.3 2.3 0.8
         May − 33.7 − 25.5 − 20.6 − 8.2 − 2.7 − 21.2 − 5.0 16.2 − 12.6 − 3.0 − 0.8 − 6.0 − 2.7
         June 10.1 − 7.5 − 9.2 17.6 7.0 − 27.1 − 28.9 − 1.8 1.7 − 3.0 − 1.0 − 1.3 7.0
         July 29.8 34.2 − 0.6 − 4.5 − 0.4 − 16.1 1.5 17.6 − 5.5 − 4.9 − 0.8 − 2.2 2.5
         Aug − 4.1 0.6 1.6 − 4.7 2.1 − 7.0 13.2 20.2 − 5.0 − 1.9 − 1.4 − 2.4 0.7
         Sep 7.3 2.3 5.0 5.1 6.1 52.6 7.0 − 45.7 − 5.7 − 3.2 − 1.6 − 1.4 0.5
         Oct 18.7 8.2 − 5.0 10.5 3.2 10.1 0.9 − 9.2 − 14.0 − 8.9 − 0.7 − 3.8 − 0.6
         Nov − 5.2 − 4.1 0.8 − 1.2 5.0 23.7 − 7.2 − 30.9 − 12.5 − 5.4 − 1.3 − 5.4 − 0.4
         Dec − 50.5 − 32.0 − 2.8 − 18.5 − 7.0 53.7 − 20.2 − 73.9 − 12.5 − 1.0 − 1.6 − 10.6 0.8
2013          Jan 34.9 34.0 10.6 0.9 − 1.0 − 13.7 − 2.1 11.6 − 7.9 − 2.0 − 1.8 − 4.9 0.8
         Feb − 8.7 − 2.0 − 3.5 − 6.7 − 1.8 4.4 − 3.2 − 7.6 − 2.8 − 4.4 − 1.5 1.4 1.8
         Mar − 2.4 0.7 7.9 − 3.0 − 0.7 16.7 − 3.4 − 20.1 − 7.2 − 0.9 − 0.8 − 10.8 5.3
         Apr 26.3 16.3 17.2 10.0 − 0.7 5.0 6.1 1.2 − 5.3 − 4.4 − 1.5 − 2.6 3.3
         May − 22.9 − 11.7 − 14.2 − 11.2 − 0.5 21.9 − 2.0 − 23.9 − 11.0 − 0.9 − 2.0 − 11.5 3.4
         June 0.0 3.4 − 6.2 − 3.4 − 0.4 − 0.5 − 8.3 − 7.8 − 2.4 − 1.0 − 0.9 − 8.7 8.2
*The data in this table are based on the consolidated balance sheet of monetary MFIs’ portfolios. 3After deduction of inter-MFI participations. 4Including the counter-
financial institutions (MFIs) (Table II.2); statistical breaks have been eliminated from parts of monetary liabilities of central governments. 5Including the monetary
the flow figures (see also the “Notes on the figures“ in the “Explanatory notes“ in the liabilities of central governments (Post Office, Treasury). 6In Germany, only savings
Statistical Supplement to the Monthly Report 1, p 30  ).1Source: ECB. 2Excluding deposits. 7Paper held by residents outside the euro area has been eliminated.

Deutsche Bundesbank
9  Monthly Report
August 2013
II Overall monetary survey in the euro area
 
 
 
(a) Euro area 
 
V Other factors VI Money stock M3 (balance I plus II less III less IV less V)
Money stock M2 Debt secur-
of which ities with
Intra- Money stock M1 maturities
Eurosystem Deposits of up to
liability/ with an Deposits Money 2 years
IV De- claim agreed at agreed market (incl money
posits of related to Currency maturity notice of Repo fund market    
banknote in circu- Overnight of up to up to 3 transac- shares paper)    central  gov-
ernments Total 4 issue Total Total Total lation deposits 5 2 years 5 tions (net) 2,7  Period (net) 2,7,8 months  5,6 
4.2 − 0.2 − 3.2 1.4 15.5 3.9 11.6 − 11.2 − 3.0 − 28.4 6.5 2.0 2011          Nov 
− 6.9 − 156.7 − 90.4 99.1 80.1 16.1 63.9 6.1 12.9 − 67.2 − 4.7 19.0          Dec 
59.9 38.4 − − 19.9 − 27.7 − 49.2 − 14.3 − 34.8 4.4 17.0 17.3 10.7 − 10.1 2012          Jan 
23.2 − 1.4 − 25.1 11.3 − 31.4 − 0.4 − 31.0 35.0 7.7 13.8 2.0 13.6          Feb 
− 13.8 − 42.5 − 101.4 69.1 49.3 2.4 46.9 9.8 10.0 − 14.5 10.6 25.9          Mar 
− 36.3 21.8 − 2.6 − 1.7 3.7 2.7 1.0 − 9.9 4.5 3.4 9.7 − 6.6          Apr 
26.2 27.5 − 25.5 19.8 39.1 8.7 30.4 − 25.9 6.6 27.3 12.6 − 6.4          May
17.2 − 35.3 − 36.0 59.0 74.3 11.4 62.9 − 21.9 6.6 − 0.0 − 23.3 6.7          June
− 32.6 16.1 − 26.0 20.3 22.7 3.8 19.0 − 8.0 5.6 4.6 − 1.3 2.0          July− 39.6 − 8.1 − − 11.3 − 3.6 1.8 − 1.3 3.1 − 13.7 8.3 − 13.5 4.3 − 10.4          Aug 
33.5 7.7 − 17.8 43.1 47.2 − 3.5 50.7 − 6.3 2.2 14.2 − 20.7 − 4.2          Sep 
− 22.8 6.6 − 57.0 63.6 34.0 − 2.4 36.4 18.3 11.3 − 20.7 5.3 − 5.1          Oct 
40.5 33.1 − 7.3 29.6 35.4 − 0.2 35.6 − 13.9 8.1 7.6 − 1.2 − 19.6          Nov 
− 60.6 − 53.2 − 59.2 98.5 85.6 12.7 72.9 − 12.2 25.2 − 42.3 − 26.9 − 6.1          Dec 
33.9 77.8 − − 24.1 − 34.8 − 53.4 − 19.8 − 33.6 − 5.4 24.1 11.8 7.2 − 6.6 2013          Jan 
5.6 − 18.0 − 1.0 9.6 4.8 − 1.2 5.9 − 3.4 8.2 28.0 6.3 − 13.3          Feb 
10.8 20.3 − 46.0 59.1 48.4 11.7 36.6 5.1 5.6 24.2 − 6.0 − 5.4          Mar 
− 50.7 25.6 − 53.5 51.4 73.3 7.2 66.1 − 28.3 6.4 − 11.6 − 3.7 3.2          Apr 
62.5 26.5 − 0.9 11.9 26.1 4.9 21.2 − 17.2 3.0 10.8 − 2.2 − 9.2          May32.4 4.3 − − 7.2 17.2 41.9 6.3 35.6 − 24.5 − 0.3 22.7 − 21.7 7.7          June
 
 
 (b) German contribution 
 
V Other factors VI Money stock M3 (balance I plus II less III less IV less V)  10 
of which Components of the money stock
Intra- Debt securities
Eurosystem Deposits with
liability/ with an Deposits Money maturities
IV De- claim agreed at agreed market of up to 2 yearsposits of related to Currency maturity notice of Repo fund (incl money    
banknote in circu- Overnight of up to up to 3 transac-
shares market    central  gov-
ernments Total issue 9,11 lation Total deposits 2 years months  6 tions (net) 7,8 paper)(net) 7  Period
− 0.2 − 32.7 0.1 1.5 30.2 20.4 1.7 − 0.1 5.3 − 0.9 3.9 2011          Nov 
0.2 31.9 − 0.4 3.5 − 6.2 − 1.8 6.2 5.5 − 14.1 − 0.1 − 2.0          Dec 
4.0 − 8.9 0.5 − 3.1 − 11.7 0.8 − 1.0 2.1 − 10.8 − 0.3 − 2.4 2012          Jan 
3.5 − 67.7 1.2 − 0.1 21.7 9.8 − 3.6 3.9 10.0 − 0.2 1.8          Feb 
− 10.7 − 34.6 3.2 − 0.2 2.7 8.7 − 0.8 0.4 − 3.6 − 0.2 − 1.9          Mar 
1.9 − 15.6 2.1 1.0 17.9 10.4 3.1 − 1.2 7.2 0.0 − 1.7          Apr 
− 0.0 − 62.6 1.7 2.1 20.3 17.2 2.9 0.1 5.3 0.0 − 5.1          May
1.7 − 36.9 1.7 2.8 16.5 18.0 6.6 0.1 − 9.4 0.2 1.0          June
− 5.2 − 5.9 3.5 1.7 30.3 20.4 − 0.8 0.8 7.6 0.0 2.3          July− 1.1 − 15.8 3.9 − 0.9 10.8 12.4 − 2.1 0.9 1.7 − 0.4 − 1.6          Aug 
1.0 62.5 3.4 − 1.2 2.1 23.9 − 13.5 0.3 − 10.1 − 0.2 1.7          Sep 
− 2.1 − 11.2 2.8 − 0.3 56.1 55.8 − 11.1 0.2 9.9 0.4 1.1          Oct 
1.3 12.0 2.6 − 0.1 17.5 25.9 − 9.0 0.5 − 0.8 − 0.0 1.1          Nov 
− 2.6 71.8 3.0 2.0 − 53.4 − 7.0 − 24.2 6.3 − 26.5 0.2 − 2.2          Dec 
0.9 40.4 − 0.9 − 3.6 − 12.1 − 1.9 − 10.2 0.9 2.7 0.1 − 3.6 2013          Jan 
− 2.9 − 12.4 2.0 − 0.6 13.8 2.5 − 8.3 1.4 16.6 0.3 1.5          Feb − 1.7 35.1 2.4 2.5 − 11.8 − 10.3 3.6 − 1.4 − 2.7 0.1 − 1.1          Mar 
− 2.7 6.2 0.3 2.5 33.1 30.2 − 1.3 − 0.6 1.9 0.6 2.2          Apr 
5.0 1.0 2.9 0.7 4.0 5.4 0.1 0.4 − 0.9 − 0.0 − 0.9          May
3.1 − 4.8 1.3 1.7 3.5 − 0.6 − 7.7 − 0.2 15.4 − 0.5 − 2.9          June
8Less German MFIs’ holdings of paper issued by euro-area MFIs. 9Including money stocks M1, M2 or M3. 11The difference between the volume of euro
national banknotes still in circulation. 10The German contributions to the Euro- banknotes actually issued by the Bundesbank and the amount disclosed in
system’s monetary aggregates should on no account be interpreted as national accordance with the accounting regime chosen by the Eurosystem (see also footnote
monetary aggregates and are therefore not comparable with the erstwhile German 2 on banknote circulation in Table III.2). 

Deutsche Bundesbank
10  Monthly Report
August 2013
II Overall monetary survey in the euro area
 
2 Consolidated balance sheet of monetary financial institutions (MFIs) *
 
 
 
Assets
Lending to non-banks (non-MFIs) in the euro area
Enterprises and households General government
Claims
Total Shares and on non-
End of assets or Debt other Debt euro-area Other
year/month liabilities Total Total Loans securities  2 equities Total Loans securities  3 residents assets
 Euro area ( € billion) 1
 
2011          May 25,736.9 16,550.0 13,511.6 11,201.4 1,510.2 800.1 3,038.3 1,173.4 1,865.0 5,131.3 4,055.6
         June 25,432.4 16,557.5 13,499.1 11,225.8 1,483.8 789.5 3,058.4 1,169.7 1,888.7 4,982.2 3,892.7
         July 25,798.8 16,550.3 13,510.5 11,239.7 1,488.2 782.6 3,039.8 1,174.2 1,865.6 5,028.2 4,220.3
         Aug 26,379.1 16,557.2 13,487.0 11,240.5 1,480.7 765.7 3,070.2 1,161.9 1,908.3 5,117.2 4,704.7
         Sep 26,973.2 16,608.4 13,521.0 11,297.5 1,470.6 752.8 3,087.4 1,163.4 1,924.0 5,190.1 5,174.7
         Oct 26,619.2 16,622.0 13,550.1 11,268.0 1,530.0 752.1 3,071.9 1,162.6 1,909.3 5,028.0 4,969.2
         Nov 26,619.5 16,626.4 13,541.3 11,253.0 1,533.8 754.5 3,085.2 1,162.1 1,923.0 5,063.3 4,929.9
         Dec 26,718.7 16,562.9 13,432.5 11,164.1 1,527.4 741.0 3,130.4 1,177.6 1,952.8 5,032.7 5,123.1
2012          Jan 26,895.4 16,673.6 13,478.2 11,196.6 1,532.2 749.3 3,195.5 1,174.8 2,020.6 5,046.6 5,175.2
         Feb 26,832.1 16,686.8 13,451.7 11,165.7 1,539.0 747.0 3,235.1 1,158.9 2,076.2 5,015.7 5,129.6
         Mar 26,693.6 16,707.5 13,448.0 11,164.1 1,526.6 757.3 3,259.5 1,155.5 2,104.0 5,034.0 4,952.1
         Apr 26,862.1 16,703.8 13,447.2 11,157.9 1,520.8 768.6 3,256.5 1,159.5 2,097.0 5,056.0 5,102.3
         May 27,825.2 16,721.1 13,448.6 11,175.9 1,520.6 752.1 3,272.5 1,161.2 2,111.3 5,205.5 5,898.6
         June 27,211.7 16,728.9 13,386.5 11,190.9 1,463.1 732.5 3,342.4 1,186.8 2,155.5 5,089.7 5,393.1
         July 27,534.0 16,699.7 13,371.0 11,218.1 1,416.1 736.8 3,328.7 1,186.4 2,142.3 5,183.4 5,651.0
         Aug 27,305.0 16,627.2 13,304.9 11,165.0 1,400.8 739.1 3,322.3 1,177.0 2,145.3 5,104.1 5,573.7
         Sep 27,159.9 16,695.6 13,325.3 11,188.4 1,386.6 750.3 3,370.3 1,180.1 2,190.2 5,045.6 5,418.6
         Oct 26,627.4 16,695.4 13,300.3 11,168.3 1,384.2 747.8 3,395.1 1,194.7 2,200.4 5,013.0 4,918.9
         Nov 26,695.0 16,718.2 13,292.7 11,161.0 1,370.3 761.5 3,425.5 1,185.1 2,240.3 4,996.6 4,980.2
         Dec 26,243.4 16,612.2 13,246.6 11,045.9 1,433.7 767.0 3,365.6 1,170.3 2,195.3 4,844.2 4,787.0
2013          Jan 26,384.8 16,641.6 13,244.4 11,047.8 1,415.9 780.7 3,397.2 1,174.2 2,223.0 4,798.1 4,945.1
         Feb 26,504.1 16,629.1 13,232.0 11,037.4 1,418.7 775.8 3,397.1 1,135.6 2,261.6 4,824.6 5,050.4
         Mar 26,566.9 16,699.0 13,263.1 11,047.0 1,431.4 784.7 3,435.9 1,141.2 2,294.7 4,843.2 5,024.7
         Apr 26,707.5 16,730.1 13,268.8 11,013.6 1,439.8 815.4 3,461.3 1,151.0 2,310.4 4,819.0 5,158.4
         May 26,369.7 16,729.5 13,251.6 10,994.7 1,446.7 810.2 3,477.9 1,125.4 2,352.6 4,796.5 4,843.7
         June 25,925.7 16,695.9 13,207.2 10,982.9 1,431.9 792.4 3,488.7 1,117.0 2,371.7 4,663.2 4,566.6
 German contribution ( € billion) 
2011          May 5,944.1 3,731.5 2,982.7 2,537.9 189.2 255.6 748.8 408.5 340.3 1,192.1 1,020.6
         June 5,793.3 3,706.7 2,968.3 2,536.0 187.5 244.9 738.4 404.9 333.4 1,145.1 941.6
         July 5,929.3 3,709.0 2,969.1 2,540.8 185.6 242.7 739.9 410.3 329.6 1,158.0 1,062.2
         Aug 6,140.9 3,729.5 2,988.1 2,565.9 183.4 238.8 741.4 400.7 340.8 1,190.0 1,221.3
         Sep 6,294.6 3,744.9 3,001.5 2,584.8 181.4 235.4 743.4 400.3 343.1 1,193.9 1,355.7
         Oct 6,167.9 3,767.6 3,022.8 2,609.4 179.0 234.4 744.8 396.1 348.7 1,157.5 1,242.8
         Nov 6,189.0 3,771.3 3,030.2 2,615.1 181.7 233.3 741.1 393.6 347.5 1,179.7 1,238.0
         Dec 6,229.9 3,720.7 2,986.3 2,576.3 183.2 226.8 734.4 396.9 337.5 1,180.4 1,328.9
2012          Jan 6,292.8 3,751.9 3,007.6 2,594.7 182.4 230.4 744.4 400.3 344.0 1,212.0 1,328.9
         Feb 6,239.0 3,746.7 3,001.7 2,595.0 179.9 226.8 745.0 398.1 346.9 1,193.1 1,299.2
         Mar 6,185.1 3,751.3 3,002.6 2,587.7 182.1 232.9 748.7 395.8 352.9 1,191.6 1,242.1
         Apr 6,250.5 3,775.2 3,022.0 2,594.1 179.8 248.0 753.3 401.1 352.2 1,198.9 1,276.4
         May 6,499.3 3,745.2 3,001.6 2,594.7 178.2 228.7 743.5 395.8 347.7 1,221.4 1,532.7
         June 6,313.4 3,752.8 2,970.9 2,592.7 156.5 221.7 781.8 406.4 375.4 1,183.7 1,377.0
         July 6,448.1 3,784.2 3,006.9 2,629.3 154.0 223.6 777.3 402.5 374.8 1,205.4 1,458.5
         Aug 6,408.2 3,779.1 3,005.1 2,625.9 153.0 226.2 774.0 395.7 378.2 1,206.3 1,422.8
         Sep 6,361.1 3,785.2 3,004.1 2,620.0 153.3 230.8 781.1 395.6 385.5 1,209.7 1,366.2
         Oct 6,314.2 3,803.4 3,010.6 2,631.5 147.6 231.5 792.8 402.8 390.0 1,201.4 1,309.5
         Nov 6,280.7 3,798.0 3,005.5 2,625.8 148.3 231.4 792.5 396.6 395.9 1,194.7 1,288.1
         Dec 6,158.5 3,745.1 2,970.5 2,593.8 147.9 228.9 774.6 385.1 389.5 1,159.8 1,253.7
2013          Jan 6,067.4 3,774.6 2,998.7 2,611.3 146.5 240.9 775.9 386.9 389.0 1,140.9 1,151.9
         Feb 6,062.6 3,765.7 2,998.6 2,614.6 148.2 235.8 767.1 382.0 385.1 1,143.4 1,153.5
         Mar 6,075.5 3,766.8 3,000.8 2,608.8 150.0 242.0 765.9 379.8 386.2 1,154.8 1,154.0
         Apr 6,087.6 3,792.2 3,014.9 2,605.5 148.6 260.7 777.3 390.5 386.9 1,139.0 1,156.4
         May 5,962.4 3,768.8 3,003.0 2,607.6 146.3 249.0 765.9 379.8 386.1 1,132.8 1,060.8
         June 5,846.2 3,766.8 3,005.2 2,616.6 148.4 240.2 761.6 376.7 384.9 1,103.7 975.7
*Monetary financial institutions (MFIs) comprise banks (including building and loan enterprises. 3Including Treasury bills and other money market paper issued by
associations), money market funds, and the European Central Bank and national general government. 4Euro currency in circulation (see also footnote 8 on p 12  )
central banks (the Eurosystem). 1Source: ECB. 2Including money market paper of Excluding MFIs‘ cash in hand (in euro). The German contribution includes the volume

Deutsche Bundesbank
11  Monthly Report
August 2013
II Overall monetary survey in the euro area
 
   
 
Liabilities
Deposits of non-banks (non-MFIs) in the euro area
Enterprises and households
With agreed At agreed
maturities of notice of 6 
over
Currency 1 year and
in of which up to up to over up to over  End of
Total in euro 5 Total Overnight 1 year 2 years 2 years 3 months 3 months year/month circulation 4 
Euro area (€ billion) 1
 
810.4 10,480.9 9,895.4 9,942.1 3,695.2 1,452.2 298.8 2,473.4 1,910.6 111.9 2011          May
819.7 10,555.9 9,918.0 9,956.0 3,733.4 1,424.1 300.7 2,477.1 1,908.8 111.9          June
828.2 10,524.0 9,913.5 9,957.2 3,717.0 1,437.4 306.9 2,472.7 1,911.2 112.0          July
823.4 10,482.9 9,931.6 9,971.1 3,702.8 1,448.4 313.0 2,478.6 1,916.6 111.9          Aug 831.2 10,534.1 9,962.8 10,018.6 3,724.1 1,463.7 312.8 2,495.3 1,911.6 111.3          Sep 
837.5 10,539.9 9,973.9 10,028.0 3,722.8 1,458.4 308.5 2,517.6 1,909.4 111.5          Oct 
841.4 10,536.4 9,961.3 10,007.8 3,722.8 1,437.6 312.5 2,509.9 1,915.2 109.8          Nov 857.5 10,626.2 10,052.5 10,119.6 3,800.1 1,446.8 310.5 2,524.5 1,928.2 109.4          Dec 
843.0 10,678.5 10,051.3 10,103.0 3,765.6 1,445.1 315.4 2,523.6 1,944.9 108.5 2012          Jan 
842.5 10,704.6 10,055.2 10,101.9 3,735.2 1,464.1 325.6 2,517.3 1,951.1 108.5          Feb 844.9 10,731.3 10,103.3 10,127.9 3,775.3 1,469.1 323.2 2,491.3 1,960.9 108.1          Mar 
847.6 10,689.8 10,094.2 10,126.8 3,783.4 1,468.8 312.1 2,489.1 1,965.2 108.2          Apr 
856.3 10,707.1 10,079.2 10,101.9 3,811.1 1,440.0 312.0 2,459.6 1,971.8 107.4          May867.7 10,754.8 10,113.0 10,103.6 3,870.0 1,411.5 304.0 2,433.5 1,978.1 106.6          June
871.5 10,686.8 10,067.9 10,065.0 3,886.5 1,405.2 302.9 2,381.5 1,983.4 105.5          July
870.2 10,643.2 10,063.3 10,071.2 3,896.2 1,391.5 301.5 2,384.1 1,993.5 104.4          Aug 866.7 10,716.3 10,109.4 10,110.9 3,940.4 1,390.3 300.8 2,381.1 1,995.3 103.1          Sep 
864.3 10,745.5 10,155.5 10,153.9 3,965.3 1,405.5 306.6 2,368.1 2,005.9 102.5          Oct 
864.1 10,807.7 10,183.5 10,170.3 3,994.3 1,386.1 309.5 2,365.1 2,013.4 101.9          Nov 876.8 10,815.9 10,251.5 10,275.0 4,066.6 1,392.7 312.8 2,359.7 2,042.8 100.5          Dec 
857.0 10,828.4 10,229.8 10,259.5 4,041.9 1,380.3 319.7 2,354.8 2,064.1 98.6 2013          Jan 
855.8 10,843.0 10,225.8 10,268.1 4,053.3 1,367.3 330.8 2,347.7 2,072.3 96.7          Feb 
867.5 10,921.5 10,292.0 10,330.9 4,097.0 1,357.1 339.8 2,363.3 2,078.3 95.3          Mar 
874.7 10,901.9 10,329.6 10,360.5 4,154.7 1,320.7 350.3 2,357.2 2,084.1 93.5          Apr 
879.6 10,973.8 10,337.1 10,357.4 4,167.7 1,286.2 363.2 2,361.8 2,087.1 91.5          May
885.9 11,016.1 10,340.5 10,360.9 4,195.6 1,254.0 370.4 2,363.3 2,087.3 90.3          June
 German contribution (€ billion) 
200.9 2,951.3 2,881.4 2,787.4 1,071.8 252.3 40.0 803.2 515.4 104.7 2011          May
203.5 2,960.1 2,884.6 2,787.0 1,078.0 247.9 39.6 803.5 513.6 104.5          June
205.5 2,966.7 2,893.1 2,798.5 1,078.4 259.7 40.1 803.3 512.4 104.5          July
204.5 2,989.1 2,916.1 2,816.9 1,090.2 260.9 41.9 808.3 511.0 104.4          Aug 
205.8 3,008.4 2,930.1 2,832.6 1,099.5 271.9 42.5 804.8 510.1 103.9          Sep 
207.6 3,009.6 2,934.1 2,844.1 1,109.9 274.3 43.5 802.7 509.9 103.8          Oct 
209.1 3,030.2 2,954.6 2,858.9 1,128.2 272.4 44.5 801.4 510.4 102.0          Nov 
212.6 3,038.9 2,962.5 2,867.9 1,130.2 276.1 44.9 799.8 515.8 101.2          Dec 
209.6 3,040.0 2,961.3 2,864.8 1,130.9 274.7 44.8 796.2 518.1 100.3 2012          Jan 
209.4 3,049.0 2,965.8 2,864.0 1,138.8 265.6 45.4 793.2 521.0 100.0          Feb 
209.3 3,041.1 2,968.3 2,857.2 1,143.7 259.8 44.8 788.4 521.4 99.2          Mar 
210.3 3,054.1 2,981.2 2,867.5 1,156.8 260.2 44.1 787.2 520.2 98.9          Apr 
212.3 3,072.2 2,998.5 2,874.4 1,170.8 257.5 43.8 784.0 520.2 98.1          May
215.2 3,094.3 3,019.5 2,863.0 1,182.2 252.1 43.4 768.1 520.1 97.1          June
216.9 3,104.4 3,034.0 2,878.4 1,205.8 249.6 43.0 763.1 520.7 96.2          July
215.9 3,111.3 3,040.9 2,888.5 1,220.9 247.7 42.4 761.2 521.5 94.8          Aug 
214.7 3,117.3 3,045.7 2,891.7 1,237.8 239.2 41.8 757.8 521.9 93.3          Sep 
214.4 3,150.2 3,077.3 2,926.3 1,291.6 229.9 41.2 749.0 522.0 92.5          Oct 
214.2 3,162.1 3,088.7 2,929.4 1,311.1 220.5 40.6 743.5 522.4 91.2          Nov 
216.3 3,131.3 3,060.2 2,930.4 1,307.2 222.8 40.0 742.2 528.6 89.6          Dec 
212.7 3,116.1 3,045.2 2,928.9 1,315.4 216.1 39.6 740.4 529.6 87.8 2013          Jan 
212.1 3,103.6 3,034.1 2,921.3 1,320.1 209.7 38.4 736.0 530.9 86.2          Feb 
214.7 3,093.1 3,026.7 2,905.9 1,311.8 207.3 37.1 734.8 529.5 85.4          Mar 
217.1 3,112.2 3,047.8 2,928.5 1,340.3 208.8 36.1 730.7 528.9 83.8          Apr 
217.9 3,120.7 3,051.1 2,925.7 1,343.8 205.7 35.4 730.0 529.0 81.8          May
219.6 3,113.0 3,039.2 2,911.2 1,340.2 198.5 34.3 728.4 528.8 81.0          June
of euro banknotes put into circulation by the Bundesbank in accordance with the Bundesbank can be calculated by adding to this total the item “Intra-Eurosystem
accounting regime chosen by the Eurosystem (see also footnote 2 on banknote liability/claim related to banknote issue“ (see “Other liability items“). 5Excluding
circulation in Table III.2). The volume of currency actually put into circulation by the central governments’ deposits. 6 In Germany, only savings deposits. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
12  Monthly Report
August 2013
II Overall monetary survey in the euro area
 
2 Consolidated balance sheet of monetary financial institutions (MFIs) (cont’d) *
 
 
 
Liabilities (cont’d)
Deposits of non-banks (non-MFIs) in the euro area (cont’d)  
 
General government Repo transactions Debt securities
with non-banks
Other general government in the euro area
With agreed At agreed
maturities of notice of  2 
Money
over of which market of which
Central 1 year and Enterprises fund denom-
End of govern- up to up to over up to over and shares inated
year/month ments Total Overnight 1 year 2 years 2 years 3 months 3 months Total households (net)  3 Total in euro
 Euro area ( € billion) 1
 
2011          May 287.4 251.5 128.6 74.6 3.7 29.9 7.3 7.3 466.5 464.8 566.8 2,972.2 2,303.1
         June 339.0 260.9 135.0 77.7 3.8 29.9 7.3 7.1 455.0 453.4 546.0 2,991.4 2,315.7
         July 317.0 249.8 123.9 77.6 4.6 29.6 7.2 7.0 449.2 447.8 538.8 3,009.3 2,314.6
         Aug 256.6 255.2 125.1 82.1 4.6 29.3 7.3 6.8 494.8 492.7 560.6 2,995.9 2,304.4
         Sep 261.5 254.0 122.6 83.8 4.7 29.2 7.1 6.6 517.7 515.1 549.2 3,014.9 2,314.2
         Oct 261.9 249.9 125.9 76.5 4.8 29.3 7.0 6.4 495.1 492.4 540.8 2,979.5 2,301.8
         Nov 266.1 262.5 135.1 79.8 4.9 29.3 7.2 6.2 467.0 464.2 547.0 2,999.0 2,312.1
         Dec 259.3 247.4 117.9 81.6 5.2 29.5 7.4 5.9 397.3 394.6 520.4 3,006.1 2,296.9
2012          Jan 319.2 256.4 124.7 81.8 5.3 29.7 7.5 7.4 414.5 411.7 510.6 2,989.7 2,298.4
         Feb 342.2 260.5 122.3 87.9 5.5 29.8 8.0 7.1 428.1 425.7 500.9 2,982.0 2,303.7
         Mar 328.5 275.0 129.4 94.8 5.7 29.8 8.3 6.9 413.6 410.9 511.4 2,988.4 2,313.1
         Apr 289.9 273.2 123.1 99.4 5.6 29.6 8.7 6.8 419.8 417.3 521.0 2,981.8 2,289.7
         May 316.1 289.2 131.3 106.4 5.9 30.0 9.0 6.6 428.4 422.5 533.6 2,984.2 2,272.3
         June 333.3 317.9 134.9 117.9 6.6 42.8 9.3 6.5 428.9 425.1 510.1 2,975.8 2,275.8
         July 300.7 321.1 136.0 119.9 6.2 43.0 9.5 6.4 433.9 428.0 508.8 2,997.1 2,276.0
         Aug 261.3 310.8 124.6 120.9 6.3 42.9 9.9 6.3 418.0 412.8 513.2 2,966.0 2,265.1
         Sep 294.5 310.8 127.4 117.8 6.2 43.0 10.3 6.2 427.9 423.9 492.5 2,938.6 2,251.8
         Oct 271.7 319.8 140.0 113.7 6.0 43.1 11.1 6.0 407.1 403.5 497.3 2,914.6 2,226.3
         Nov 312.3 325.1 143.7 114.0 6.1 43.5 11.9 5.9 414.8 411.0 495.5 2,889.6 2,206.8
         Dec 252.1 288.7 134.9 86.7 6.0 43.9 11.6 5.6 372.2 368.2 467.9 2,853.5 2,183.5
2013          Jan 286.0 282.9 129.2 83.5 6.0 43.4 14.4 6.4 383.6 379.8 459.7 2,808.0 2,172.7
         Feb 291.6 283.3 129.3 83.6 6.0 43.5 14.6 6.3 411.9 406.6 465.9 2,807.3 2,151.9
         Mar 302.4 288.2 126.0 91.0 6.6 44.0 14.4 6.2 436.5 430.2 459.9 2,775.9 2,122.4
         Apr 251.8 289.6 130.1 87.7 6.9 43.7 15.1 6.1 424.6 417.1 456.1 2,749.8 2,103.9
         May 314.3 302.1 137.1 91.8 7.3 44.6 15.3 6.0 435.4 428.6 453.8 2,721.8 2,076.8
         June 346.6 308.6 142.4 93.5 7.6 44.3 14.9 5.9 458.1 451.6 432.0 2,700.0 2,064.6
 German contribution ( € billion) 
2011          May 37.7 126.3 44.2 52.1 1.9 25.2 2.3 0.5 105.2 105.2 8.0 681.7 417.9
         June 40.7 132.3 46.1 56.4 2.1 25.2 2.2 0.5 104.8 104.8 7.8 682.3 415.4
         July 39.5 128.7 41.3 57.0 2.8 25.1 2.1 0.5 91.8 91.8 5.3 684.4 410.9
         Aug 39.4 132.8 41.6 61.1 2.8 24.8 2.1 0.4 101.9 101.9 5.7 682.6 412.4
         Sep 42.9 132.9 41.1 61.8 3.0 24.7 2.0 0.4 107.0 107.0 5.8 687.1 406.9
         Oct 40.1 125.3 39.9 55.3 3.1 24.6 2.0 0.4 105.7 105.7 5.8 678.9 407.9
         Nov 39.9 131.4 43.3 57.9 3.2 24.6 2.0 0.4 111.1 111.1 4.9 689.5 411.6
         Dec 40.1 130.8 40.2 60.3 3.3 24.6 2.0 0.4 97.1 97.1 4.8 691.1 404.5
2012          Jan 44.1 131.1 40.0 60.6 3.4 24.8 1.8 0.4 86.7 86.2 4.5 663.1 384.3
         Feb 47.6 137.4 41.5 65.1 3.6 24.9 1.9 0.4 96.6 96.5 4.4 667.4 389.9
         Mar 36.9 147.0 45.4 70.6 3.7 24.9 1.9 0.4 93.1 93.0 4.1 660.3 379.3
         Apr 36.4 150.2 42.9 76.6 3.7 24.8 1.9 0.4 102.9 102.9 4.2 664.4 380.6
         May 36.4 161.4 47.2 82.8 3.9 25.1 2.0 0.4 108.3 105.0 4.2 666.3 373.8
         June 38.1 193.1 53.6 94.5 4.6 37.9 2.1 0.4 98.9 97.7 4.4 662.6 374.1
         July 32.9 193.1 50.9 97.0 4.3 38.1 2.3 0.5 106.6 103.2 4.4 668.8 371.1
         Aug 31.9 190.9 47.6 98.0 4.4 38.0 2.4 0.5 108.1 105.4 4.0 658.6 366.5
         Sep 32.6 193.0 53.8 93.9 4.4 38.1 2.4 0.5 98.0 97.3 3.8 654.1 367.7
         Oct 30.5 193.4 55.6 92.6 4.3 38.0 2.4 0.5 107.8 107.3 4.2 649.9 362.0
         Nov 31.9 200.9 62.0 93.4 4.5 38.1 2.5 0.5 107.0 106.6 4.1 644.4 357.6
         Dec 29.2 171.7 58.5 67.5 4.4 38.2 2.5 0.5 80.4 80.1 4.3 627.0 350.3
2013          Jan 30.1 157.0 47.6 64.2 4.4 37.7 2.5 0.6 83.1 82.6 4.4 610.1 345.1
         Feb 27.2 155.1 46.0 63.8 4.4 37.7 2.6 0.6 99.7 98.7 4.6 620.0 346.1
         Mar 25.4 161.9 44.8 70.8 4.9 38.1 2.6 0.6 97.0 95.8 4.7 610.5 338.4
         Apr 22.7 161.0 45.7 69.1 5.1 37.8 2.6 0.6 98.9 96.6 5.3 605.6 340.1
         May 27.8 167.2 47.2 72.6 5.4 38.5 2.8 0.6 98.0 96.7 5.3 593.2 330.7
         June 30.9 170.9 50.1 73.6 5.4 38.3 2.9 0.6 113.3 112.8 4.8 581.1 326.4
*Monetary financial institutions (MFIs) comprise banks (including building and loan paper. 5Excluding liabilities arising from securities issued. 6After deduction of
associations), money market funds, and the European Central Bank and national inter-MFI participations. 7The German contributions to the Eurosystem’s monetary
central banks (the Eurosystem). 1Source: ECB. 2In Germany, only savings aggregates should on no account be interpreted as national monetary aggregates
deposits. 3Excluding holdings of MFIs; for the German contribution, excluding and are therefore not comparable with the erstwhile German money stocks M1, M2
German MFIs’ portfolios of securities issued by MFIs in the euro area. 4In Germany, or M3. 8including DM banknotes still in circulation (see also footnote 4 on
bank debt securities with maturities of up to one year are classed as money market p 10    )9For the German contribution, the difference between the volume of

Deutsche Bundesbank
13  Monthly Report
August 2013
II Overall monetary survey in the euro area
 
   
 
 Memo item
 Other liability items Monetary aggregates  7 
 (From 2002, German contribution
issued (net) 3 excludes currency in circulation)
With maturities of
of which Monetary
Intra- liabilities
Eurosystem- of centralliability/ govern-
over Liabilities Excess claim Monetary ments1 year and to non- Capital of related to capital (Post
up to up to over euro-area and inter-MFI banknote forma- Office, End of1 year 
4 2 years 2 years residents 5 reserves 6 liabilities Total 8 issue 9 M1 10 M2 11 M3 12 tion 13 year/month Treasury)  14 
Euro area (€ billion) 1
 
74.5 84.8 2,813.0 4,338.9 2,070.9 − 22.5 4,052.6 − 4,714.7 8,488.1 9,392.0 7,506.6 106.8 2011          May
96.1 80.4 2,814.8 4,119.7 2,086.2 − 5.3 3,863.7 − 4,769.3 8,518.0 9,404.4 7,527.1 107.4          June
95.1 83.1 2,831.0 4,139.3 2,151.0 − 7.5 4,166.5 − 4,751.4 8,522.3 9,405.9 7,603.4 108.3          July
97.5 77.7 2,820.7 4,159.0 2,205.1 − 5.0 4,662.3 − 4,732.8 8,530.7 9,446.1 7,652.3 107.4          Aug 
94.8 75.8 2,844.3 4,216.3 2,183.9 − 15.7 5,141.6 − 4,758.5 8,568.0 9,466.0 7,670.6 106.6          Sep 
95.5 75.3 2,808.6 4,123.8 2,186.8 − 34.5 4,950.4 − 4,765.5 8,555.9 9,436.9 7,660.2 105.2          Oct 
90.9 82.3 2,825.8 4,147.9 2,200.5 − 25.4 4,905.7 − 4,782.4 8,565.2 9,448.4 7,681.6 108.8          Nov 
122.9 83.7 2,799.5 4,087.7 2,220.8 − 17.9 5,020.5 − 4,866.6 8,671.2 9,535.4 7,689.7 116.0          Dec 
109.0 91.6 2,789.2 4,102.3 2,275.1 − 63.8 5,145.6 − 4,815.7 8,640.9 9,495.8 7,733.4 107.7 2012          Jan 
115.6 98.8 2,767.7 4,066.4 2,292.5 − 39.6 5,054.7 − 4,781.8 8,648.7 9,505.8 7,722.9 106.5          Feb 
135.2 103.5 2,749.7 4,137.4 2,272.8 − 58.3 4,852.1 − 4,831.8 8,718.7 9,606.2 7,658.7 107.0          Mar 
119.4 107.7 2,754.7 4,176.3 2,270.4 − 56.6 5,011.8 − 4,837.2 8,721.7 9,608.6 7,658.8 107.8          Apr 
114.2 107.3 2,762.7 4,283.8 2,277.7 − 54.8 5,809.0 − 4,883.1 8,752.8 9,646.5 7,644.0 109.1          May
128.7 102.1 2,745.0 4,156.6 2,314.0 − 56.8 5,260.6 − 4,958.3 8,810.9 9,683.8 7,648.3 111.0          June
136.3 96.2 2,764.6 4,199.8 2,355.4 − 56.4 5,537.2 − 4,982.8 8,834.7 9,713.1 7,656.4 113.5          July
122.9 96.4 2,746.7 4,113.7 2,363.6 − 40.9 5,458.0 − 4,979.1 8,827.4 9,688.9 7,648.0 113.0          Aug 
120.1 92.6 2,725.9 4,045.6 2,407.5 − 61.1 5,325.9 − 5,022.9 8,868.1 9,702.1 7,666.8 113.1          Sep 
113.8 93.5 2,707.2 4,018.9 2,396.0 − 73.4 4,857.2 − 5,056.5 8,930.4 9,757.2 7,622.9 112.1          Oct 
96.3 91.2 2,702.0 3,937.9 2,410.4 − 69.6 4,944.7 − 5,091.7 8,957.6 9,761.4 7,628.9 114.6          Nov 
87.6 93.8 2,672.2 3,788.3 2,398.3 − 52.0 4,722.5 − 5,174.0 9,051.0 9,814.6 7,580.1 120.0          Dec 
70.4 92.3 2,645.4 3,769.4 2,389.3 − 37.0 4,926.4 − 5,115.5 9,008.0 9,755.0 7,538.0 112.0 2013          Jan 
62.0 88.2 2,657.2 3,807.5 2,379.9 − 49.1 4,981.8 − 5,124.9 9,024.0 9,762.9 7,531.4 111.1          Feb 
59.4 84.1 2,632.3 3,793.3 2,416.1 − 58.3 4,954.6 − 5,177.0 9,088.6 9,813.2 7,557.3 110.9          Mar 
63.9 82.3 2,603.6 3,828.6 2,391.6 − 44.1 5,124.3 − 5,246.8 9,135.5 9,861.2 7,495.9 111.2          Apr 
63.2 74.4 2,584.2 3,751.8 2,379.3 − 50.6 4,824.8 − 5,272.5 9,147.1 9,862.6 7,467.5 111.9          May
71.4 73.2 2,555.4 3,638.3 2,334.6 − 47.2 4,507.8 − 5,313.3 9,051.6 9,855.6 7,393.9 113.0          June
 German contribution (€ billion) 
19.3 14.0 648.4 698.7 456.2 − 455.5 1,498.4 161.6 1,116.0 1,980.1 2,126.5 2,038.2 − 2011          May
18.7 14.3 649.2 638.7 455.5 − 480.5 1,424.7 163.1 1,124.1 1,985.8 2,131.5 2,038.3 −          June
22.2 14.0 648.2 647.7 467.3 − 484.9 1,550.9 164.9 1,119.7 1,993.8 2,127.1 2,048.9 −          July
25.2 13.6 643.8 699.8 483.8 − 542.9 1,720.9 167.5 1,131.9 2,011.7 2,158.1 2,065.6 −          Aug 
21.8 11.9 653.4 738.9 476.2 − 600.2 1,871.4 170.7 1,140.5 2,031.7 2,178.3 2,063.4 −          Sep 
18.8 11.2 648.9 746.8 478.0 − 608.3 1,751.4 170.7 1,149.9 2,037.9 2,179.4 2,058.5 −          Oct 
22.5 11.7 655.3 769.8 478.8 − 639.8 1,744.5 170.9 1,171.5 2,061.9 2,212.1 2,062.5 −          Nov 
22.8 9.7 658.6 696.1 473.6 − 607.5 1,835.9 170.5 1,170.4 2,072.8 2,207.2 2,058.1 −          Dec 
19.7 10.3 633.1 801.2 486.8 − 614.9 1,825.4 171.0 1,170.9 2,074.3 2,195.5 2,041.5 − 2012          Jan 
20.2 11.4 635.8 815.9 493.4 − 670.9 1,783.3 172.2 1,180.3 2,082.8 2,215.4 2,047.8 −          Feb 
19.9 9.8 630.5 873.9 492.0 − 710.2 1,730.8 175.5 1,189.1 2,091.3 2,218.3 2,035.5 −          Mar 
16.6 11.5 636.3 889.0 497.3 − 733.8 1,772.5 177.6 1,199.7 2,106.4 2,241.6 2,044.8 −          Apr 
13.4 9.9 643.0 919.2 495.5 − 796.5 2,029.9 179.3 1,218.0 2,128.2 2,264.1 2,046.1 −          May
13.8 10.5 638.3 913.8 501.1 − 829.7 1,868.1 181.0 1,235.7 2,152.5 2,280.1 2,042.9 −          June
15.5 11.2 642.1 937.5 512.6 − 840.9 1,954.6 184.5 1,256.7 2,173.6 2,311.3 2,052.6 −          July
14.6 10.3 633.7 951.4 513.4 − 857.1 1,918.4 188.5 1,268.5 2,184.9 2,322.0 2,041.6 −          Aug 
16.2 10.4 627.5 900.0 521.5 − 806.5 1,872.9 191.9 1,291.6 2,195.0 2,323.4 2,038.7 −          Sep 
17.3 10.3 622.3 889.1 515.3 − 822.5 1,820.3 194.7 1,347.2 2,239.6 2,379.2 2,017.6 −          Oct 
17.8 10.8 615.8 857.9 516.9 − 813.3 1,801.6 197.3 1,373.1 2,257.0 2,396.7 2,005.9 −          Nov 
16.0 10.3 600.7 780.0 510.2 − 759.5 1,784.7 200.3 1,365.7 2,231.6 2,342.6 1,981.4 −          Dec 
13.5 8.9 587.7 783.8 507.3 − 715.8 1,678.5 199.4 1,363.0 2,219.5 2,329.4 1,961.3 − 2013          Jan 
14.1 10.0 595.9 782.3 503.7 − 719.8 1,668.6 201.4 1,366.1 2,215.9 2,344.3 1,960.1 −          Feb 
13.5 8.9 588.1 768.2 517.6 − 696.6 1,681.0 203.8 1,356.6 2,208.8 2,332.9 1,964.6 −          Mar 
14.9 9.5 581.1 764.4 508.0 − 696.5 1,689.7 204.1 1,386.1 2,236.6 2,365.2 1,942.0 −          Apr 
14.6 9.0 569.7 740.9 506.2 − 693.4 1,591.5 207.0 1,391.0 2,242.0 2,368.8 1,926.8 −          May
12.1 8.5 560.5 732.0 495.3 − 696.9 1,503.6 208.2 1,390.3 2,233.9 2,372.6 1,904.0 −          June
euro banknotes actually issued by the Bundesbank and the amount disclosed in years and at agreed notice of up to 3 months (excluding central governments’
accordance with the accounting regime chosen by the Eurosystem (see also footnote deposits) and (for the euro area) central governments’ monetary liabilities with such2 on banknote circulation in Table III.2). 10Overnight deposits (excluding central maturities. 12M2 plus repo transactions, money market fund shares, money market
governments’ deposits), and (for the euro area) currency in circulation, central paper and debt securities up to 2 years. 13Deposits with agreed maturities of over 2
governments’ overnight monetary liabilities, which are not included in the years and at agreed notice of over 3 months, debt securities with maturities of over 2consolidated balance sheet. 11M1 plus deposits with agreed maturities of up to 2 years, capital and reserves. 14 Non-existent in Germany. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
14  Monthly Report
August 2013
II  Overall monetary survey in the euro area
  
3  Banking system’s liquidity position  * 
Stocks
  
€ billion; period averages of daily positions
Liquidity-providing factors Liquidity-absorbing factors
Monetary policy operations of the Eurosystem
Credit
institutions‘
current
account
Net assets Longer- Other Other balances
Reserve in gold Main term Marginal liquidity- liquidity- Banknotes Central Other (including
maintenance and foreign refinancing refinancing lending providing Deposit absorbing in government factors minimum Base
period currency operations operations facility facility deposits (net)  6 reserves)  7 money  8 operations  3 operations  4 circulation  5 
ending in  1 
Eurosystem  2  
  
2011          Jan 527.5 197.0 316.6 0.5 140.9 66.5 73.5 833.9 81.3 − 85.1 212.4 1 112.8
         Feb 549.7 185.4 318.2 0.1 137.2 39.2 81.3 822.0 101.2 − 66.7 213.6 1 074.8
         Mar 550.0 134.4 321.0 7.6 137.9 26.9 80.3 820.9 89.8 − 79.9 212.9 1 060.7
         Apr 544.1 97.3 335.4 0.8 137.6 23.0 79.5 824.4 73.1 − 95.2 210.5 1 057.9
         May 525.9 109.2 320.5 0.4 136.6 22.8 76.8 833.9 61.3 − 111.6 209.5 1 066.1
         June 526.8 114.7 317.9 0.0 135.5 18.4 76.2 836.6 62.6 − 107.9 209.0 1 064.0
         July 533.6 146.0 311.6 0.2 134.2 29.5 76.9 846.2 73.4 − 111.2 210.9 1 086.6
         Aug 541.3 171.7 321.5 0.1 133.9 56.7 79.2 854.2 71.4 − 104.5 211.5 1 122.4
         Sep 540.3 135.1 389.8 0.3 178.0 121.8 109.8 853.2 52.3 − 103.0 209.5 1 184.5
         Oct 571.0 193.0 373.6 1.5 217.4 168.7 162.9 854.9 50.0 − 88.5 208.7 1 232.2
         Nov 612.1 196.1 387.1 2.8 231.9 204.6 178.0 861.4 57.9 − 80.8 208.9 1 274.8
         Dec 622.1 238.0 389.0 4.4 260.3 253.7 200.5 869.4 63.8 − 85.9 212.2 1 335.3
2012          Jan 683.9 169.4 627.3 6.0 278.6 399.3 210.8 883.7 67.7 − 8.7 212.3 1 495.3
         Feb 698.3 120.6 683.6 2.3 282.4 489.0 218.5 870.1 100.1 1.6 108.1 1 467.1
         Mar 688.2 89.1 860.1 2.2 288.1 621.0 219.5 868.8 129.0 − 19.4 108.9 1 598.6
         Apr 667.6 56.4 1 093.4 3.0 280.6 771.3 215.8 871.2 146.3 − 13.3 109.6 1 752.1
         May 659.3 47.0 1 088.7 1.0 281.3 771.4 214.0 872.7 137.1 − 28.5 110.5 1 754.6
         June 656.8 58.1 1 071.0 1.6 281.1 770.8 212.8 880.8 117.8 − 24.2 110.8 1 762.3
         July 666.7 160.7 1 074.9 1.8 280.7 770.6 210.9 892.5 138.8 60.6 111.5 1 774.6
         Aug 678.9 146.0 1 079.9 0.8 281.0 343.1 211.5 897.7 130.7 93.5 510.2 1 751.0
         Sep 676.8 130.6 1 076.8 0.8 279.7 328.6 210.5 897.6 107.0 81.0 540.0 1 766.2
         Oct 681.5 117.6 1 062.8 1.1 279.6 305.4 209.0 892.7 101.4 96.0 538.1 1 736.2
         Nov 708.5 84.4 1 053.8 1.0 278.9 256.1 209.3 890.0 95.7 146.4 529.2 1 675.3
         Dec 708.0 74.0 1 044.1 1.6 277.3 231.8 208.5 889.3 121.1 144.5 509.9 1 631.0
2013          Jan 683.9 78.2 1 036.8 3.7 276.8 238.4 206.6 903.5 100.1 141.7 489.0 1 630.9
         Feb 656.5 127.5 960.3 0.3 273.4 184.3 207.8 883.4 90.8 185.6 466.3 1 534.0
         Mar 655.7 130.5 843.2 0.9 269.9 145.3 205.5 880.5 78.8 187.1 403.0 1 428.8
         Apr 656.8 123.7 782.9 0.5 269.1 133.8 205.5 889.2 89.7 168.7 346.0 1 369.0
         May 657.3 113.0 749.9 0.9 265.7 114.5 204.3 897.1 82.5 166.2 322.2 1 333.8
         June 656.0 104.7 728.4 0.5 259.9 90.5 199.4 904.1 83.1 172.3 300.3 1 294.9
         July 615.9 108.8 708.0 1.3 256.4 92.1 195.0 909.3 92.5 115.1 286.5 1 287.9
Deutsche Bundesbank
2011          Jan 141.9 55.2 34.1 0.1 31.2 28.2 42.0 207.7 0.3 − 66.9 51.3 287.2
         Feb 148.1 44.6 44.0 0.0 31.6 19.8 43.0 204.6 0.2 − 51.0 51.8 276.2
         Mar 148.4 31.3 44.7 0.0 31.7 14.6 48.4 204.8 0.2 − 63.7 51.8 271.2
         Apr 146.6 24.1 45.5 0.0 31.9 13.6 38.9 205.2 0.2 − 61.5 51.7 270.4
         May 142.4 17.9 47.7 0.2 31.9 10.8 38.2 207.6 0.4 − 68.2 51.4 269.8
         June 142.5 10.6 41.5 0.0 31.7 8.1 33.4 208.7 0.3 − 75.8 51.7 268.4
         July 144.3 22.8 35.8 0.0 31.4 11.1 36.4 211.1 0.3 − 77.3 52.6 274.8
         Aug 146.7 13.6 36.5 0.0 31.3 15.4 35.2 213.0 0.2 − 88.4 52.7 281.1
         Sep 146.7 6.6 33.6 0.0 42.3 27.8 60.2 213.4 0.3 − 124.3 51.8 293.0
         Oct 155.5 10.7 20.8 0.0 52.3 41.5 86.8 213.5 0.3 − 155.0 52.2 307.2
         Nov 167.5 4.0 18.0 0.1 55.7 55.0 87.9 213.8 0.2 − 164.5 53.0 321.8
         Dec 168.7 3.0 17.6 0.1 63.2 60.4 126.2 216.3 0.7 − 205.5 54.4 331.2
2012          Jan 182.3 4.4 40.3 0.1 67.2 101.7 117.0 219.8 0.8 − 199.6 54.5 376.0
         Feb 183.2 1.8 46.7 0.0 69.2 141.9 130.5 216.9 0.8 − 217.6 28.3 387.1
         Mar 183.6 1.2 59.4 0.0 69.2 192.6 142.2 217.0 0.8 − 266.8 27.7 437.3
         Apr 182.0 1.2 73.8 0.1 68.8 257.2 142.7 218.1 0.7 − 321.6 28.8 504.1
         May 181.3 1.3 73.4 0.1 68.8 260.5 144.6 217.8 0.7 − 327.5 28.9 507.2
         June 180.4 3.8 74.6 0.5 68.7 276.9 150.3 219.8 0.8 − 349.1 29.3 526.0
         July 180.3 3.1 76.5 0.1 68.6 293.3 152.1 222.3 1.0 − 369.8 29.6 545.2
         Aug 179.6 2.5 76.3 0.2 68.8 102.0 162.9 225.1 4.2 − 351.5 184.8 511.9
         Sep 177.7 1.6 75.4 0.0 68.6 112.1 134.6 224.6 6.0 − 349.1 195.2 531.9
         Oct 181.8 1.7 74.5 0.2 68.7 108.2 124.0 223.4 6.8 − 325.3 189.9 521.4
         Nov 190.7 1.9 72.9 0.1 68.2 76.7 126.2 222.4 7.1 − 291.0 192.5 491.5
         Dec 190.8 1.8 70.5 0.2 67.5 61.3 124.6 222.0 8.9 − 277.5 191.5 474.8
2013          Jan 185.1 2.1 69.7 0.1 67.4 56.1 117.2 225.3 10.0 − 242.5 158.2 439.6
         Feb 176.8 0.7 58.9 0.0 66.3 34.2 109.9 219.2 2.5 − 207.3 144.2 397.5
         Mar 176.4 0.7 34.9 0.0 65.3 30.4 107.3 219.7 2.1 − 203.2 121.0 371.1
         Apr 177.1 0.1 21.8 0.0 65.0 24.4 95.7 221.6 1.9 − 189.2 109.7 355.8
         May 176.7 0.3 16.2 0.0 64.3 26.8 88.2 223.2 1.0 − 182.0 100.3 350.4
         June 175.4 0.2 13.0 0.0 63.0 23.9 93.0 226.0 0.7 − 189.0 97.0 346.9
         July 161.3 0.6 11.7 0.0 61.8 26.1 79.2 226.3 0.8 − 194.0 97.0 349.4
Discrepancies may arise from rounding. *The banking system’s liquidity position is includes liquidity absorbed as a result of the Eurosystem’s foreign exchange swap
defined as the current account holdings in euro of euro-area credit institutions with operations. 5From 2002, euro banknotes and other banknotes which have been
the Eurosystem. Amounts are derived from the consolidated financial statement of issued by the national central banks of the Eurosystem and which are still in cir-
the Eurosystem and the financial statement of the Bundesbank. 1Figures are daily av- culation. In accordance with the accounting procedure chosen by the Eurosystem for
erages for the reserve maintenance period ending in the month indicated. 2Source: the issue of euro banknotes, 8% of the total value of the euro banknotes in cir-
ECB. 3Includes liquidity provided under the Eurosystem’s covered bond purchase culation are allocated on a monthly basis to the ECB. The counterpart of this
programme and the Eurosystem’s securities markets programme. 4From Aug. 2009,

Deutsche Bundesbank
15  Monthly Report
August 2013
II  Overall monetary survey in the euro area
  
  
Flows
  
Liquidity-providing factors Liquidity-absorbing factors
Monetary policy operations of the Eurosystem
Credit
institutions‘
currentaccount
Net assets Longer- Other Other balances
in gold Main term Marginal liquidity- liquidity- Banknotes Central Other (including Reserve
and foreign refinancing refinancing lending providing Deposit absorbing in government factors minimum Base maintenance
currency operations operations facility facility deposits (net)  
6 reserves) 7 money 8 period operations 3 operations 4 circulation 5 
ending in 1 
Eurosystem  2  
  
+ 16.4 + 17.5 − 19.7 − 1.4 + 10.5 + 21.8 + 2.7 + 18.0 − 13.1 − 6.0 − 0.1 + 39.7 2011          Jan 
+ 22.2 − 11.6 + 1.6 − 0.4 − 3.7 − 27.3 + 7.8 − 11.9 + 19.9 + 18.4 + 1.2 − 38.0          Feb 
+ 0.3 − 51.0 + 2.8 + 7.5 + 0.7 − 12.3 − 1.0 − 1.1 − 11.4 − 13.2 − 0.7 − 14.1          Mar 
− 5.9 − 37.1 + 14.4 − 6.8 − 0.3 − 3.9 − 0.8 + 3.5 − 16.7 − 15.3 − 2.4 − 2.8          Apr 
− 18.2 + 11.9 − 14.9 − 0.4 − 1.0 − 0.2 − 2.7 + 9.5 − 11.8 − 16.4 − 1.0 + 8.2          May
+ 0.9 + 5.5 − 2.6 − 0.4 − 1.1 − 4.4 − 0.6 + 2.7 + 1.3 + 3.7 − 0.5 − 2.1          June
+ 6.8 + 31.3 − 6.3 + 0.2 − 1.3 + 11.1 + 0.7 + 9.6 + 10.8 − 3.3 + 1.9 + 22.6          July
+ 7.7 + 25.7 + 9.9 − 0.1 − 0.3 + 27.2 + 2.3 + 8.0 − 2.0 + 6.7 + 0.6 + 35.8          Aug 
− 1.0 − 36.6 + 68.3 + 0.2 + 44.1 + 65.1 + 30.6 − 1.0 − 19.1 + 1.5 − 2.0 + 62.1          Sep 
+ 30.7 + 57.9 − 16.2 + 1.2 + 39.4 + 46.9 + 53.1 + 1.7 − 2.3 + 14.5 − 0.8 + 47.7          Oct 
+ 41.1 + 3.1 + 13.5 + 1.3 + 14.5 + 35.9 + 15.1 + 6.5 + 7.9 + 7.7 + 0.2 + 42.6          Nov 
+ 10.0 + 41.9 + 1.9 + 1.6 + 28.4 + 49.1 + 22.5 + 8.0 + 5.9 − 5.1 + 3.3 + 60.5          Dec 
+ 61.8 − 68.6 + 238.3 + 1.6 + 18.3 +145.6 + 10.3 + 14.3 + 3.9 + 77.2 + 0.1 + 160.0 2012          Jan 
+ 14.4 − 48.8 + 56.3 − 3.7 + 3.8 + 89.7 + 7.7 − 13.6 + 32.4 + 10.3 − 104.2 − 28.2          Feb − 10.1 − 31.5 + 176.5 − 0.1 + 5.7 +132.0 + 1.0 − 1.3 + 28.9 − 21.0 + 0.8 + 131.5          Mar 
− 20.6 − 32.7 + 233.3 + 0.8 − 7.5 +150.3 − 3.7 + 2.4 + 17.3 + 6.1 + 0.7 + 153.5          Apr 
− 8.3 − 9.4 − 4.7 − 2.0 + 0.7 + 0.1 − 1.8 + 1.5 − 9.2 − 15.2 + 0.9 + 2.5          May
− 2.5 + 11.1 − 17.7 + 0.6 − 0.2 − 0.6 − 1.2 + 8.1 − 19.3 + 4.3 + 0.3 + 7.7          June
+ 9.9 + 102.6 + 3.9 + 0.2 − 0.4 − 0.2 − 1.9 + 11.7 + 21.0 + 84.8 + 0.7 + 12.3          July
+ 12.2 − 14.7 + 5.0 − 1.0 + 0.3 −427.5 + 0.6 + 5.2 − 8.1 + 32.9 + 398.7 − 23.6          Aug 
− 2.1 − 15.4 − 3.1 + 0.0 − 1.3 − 14.5 − 1.0 − 0.1 − 23.7 − 12.5 + 29.8 + 15.2          Sep 
+ 4.7 − 13.0 − 14.0 + 0.3 − 0.1 − 23.2 − 1.5 − 4.9 − 5.6 + 15.0 − 1.9 − 30.0          Oct 
+ 27.0 − 33.2 − 9.0 − 0.1 − 0.7 − 49.3 + 0.3 − 2.7 − 5.7 + 50.4 − 8.9 − 60.9          Nov 
− 0.5 − 10.4 − 9.7 + 0.6 − 1.6 − 24.3 − 0.8 − 0.7 + 25.4 − 1.9 − 19.3 − 44.3          Dec 
− 24.1 + 4.2 − 7.3 + 2.1 − 0.5 + 6.6 − 1.9 + 14.2 − 21.0 − 2.8 − 20.9 − 0.1 2013          Jan 
− 27.4 + 49.3 − 76.5 − 3.4 − 3.4 − 54.1 + 1.2 − 20.1 − 9.3 + 43.9 − 22.7 − 96.9          Feb 
− 0.8 + 3.0 − 117.1 + 0.6 − 3.5 − 39.0 − 2.3 − 2.9 − 12.0 + 1.5 − 63.3 − 105.2          Mar 
+ 1.1 − 6.8 − 60.3 − 0.4 − 0.8 − 11.5 +
 0.0 + 8.7 + 10.9 − 18.4 − 57.0 − 59.8          Apr 
+
0.5 − 10.7 − 33.0 + 0.4 − 3.4 − 19.3 − 1.2 + 7.9 − 7.2 − 2.5 − 23.8 − 35.2          May
− 1.3 − 8.3 − 21.5 − 0.4 − 5.8 − 24.0 − 4.9 + 7.0 + 0.6 + 6.1 − 21.9 − 38.9          June− 40.1 + 4.1 − 20.4 + 0.8 − 3.5 + 1.6 − 4.4 + 5.2 + 9.4 − 57.2 − 13.8 − 7.0          July
Deutsche Bundesbank
+ 5.5 − 5.4 + 1.5 − 0.0 + 1.9 + 7.0 + 1.1 + 4.3 + 0.0 − 9.2 + 0.4 + 11.6 2011          Jan 
+ 6.2 − 10.6 + 9.9 − 0.1 + 0.3 − 8.4 + 0.9 − 3.1 − 0.0 + 15.9 + 0.5 − 11.0          Feb 
+ 0.3 − 13.3 + 0.7 − 0.0 + 0.2 − 5.2 + 5.5 + 0.3 − 0.0 − 12.7 − 0.1 − 5.0          Mar 
− 1.8 − 7.2 + 0.9 + 0.0 + 0.1 − 1.0 − 9.5 + 0.3 + 0.0 + 2.2 − 0.0 − 0.7          Apr 
− 4.2 − 6.2 + 2.2 + 0.2 + 0.0 − 2.8 − 0.7 + 2.4 + 0.1 − 6.7 − 0.3 − 0.7          May
+ 0.2 − 7.3 − 6.3 − 0.2 − 0.2 − 2.7 − 4.7 + 1.1 − 0.1 − 7.6 + 0.2 − 1.4          June
+ 1.7 + 12.2 − 5.7 + 0.0 − 0.3 + 3.0 + 3.0 + 2.4 + 0.0 − 1.5 + 0.9 + 6.4          July
+ 2.4 − 9.2 + 0.7 − 0.0 − 0.0 + 4.3 − 1.2 + 1.9 − 0.1 − 11.1 + 0.1 + 6.3          Aug 
+ 0.0 − 6.9 − 2.9 + 0.0 + 11.0 + 12.4 + 25.0 + 0.4 + 0.1 − 35.9 − 0.9 + 12.0          Sep 
+ 8.8 + 4.1 − 12.8 + 0.0 + 9.9 + 13.7 + 26.6 + 0.1 − 0.0 − 30.7 + 0.3 + 14.2          Oct 
+ 12.0 − 6.7 − 2.8 + 0.1 + 3.5 + 13.5 + 1.1 + 0.3 − 0.0 − 9.5 + 0.9 + 14.6          Nov + 1.2 − 1.0 − 0.4 + 0.0 + 7.5 + 5.5 + 38.4 + 2.5 + 0.5 − 41.0 + 1.4 + 9.4          Dec 
+ 13.6 + 1.4 + 22.7 − 0.0 + 4.0 + 41.3 − 9.2 + 3.5 + 0.1 + 5.9 + 0.1 + 44.8 2012          Jan 
+ 0.9 − 2.6 + 6.4 − 0.1 + 2.0 + 40.2 + 13.5 − 2.9 − 0.1 − 18.0 − 26.2 + 11.1          Feb 
+ 0.4 − 0.6 + 12.7 + 0.0 +
 0.0 + 50.7 + 11.7 + 0.1 + 0.0 − 49.3 − 0.6 + 50.2          Mar 
−
1.6 + 0.0 + 14.4 + 0.1 − 0.4 + 64.7 + 0.5 + 1.1 − 0.0 − 54.7 + 1.1 + 66.8          Apr 
− 0.7 + 0.1 − 0.4 − 0.0 − 0.0 + 3.3 + 1.8 − 0.3 − 0.0 − 5.9 + 0.1 + 3.1          May
− 0.9 + 2.5 + 1.1 + 0.4 − 0.1 + 16.4 + 5.7 + 2.0 + 0.1 − 21.6 + 0.4 + 18.8          June
− 0.1 − 0.7 + 1.9 − 0.4 − 0.1 + 16.4 + 1.8 + 2.5 + 0.3 − 20.7 + 0.3 + 19.2          July
− 0.6 − 0.5 − 0.2 + 0.2 + 0.2 −191.3 + 10.9 + 2.8 + 3.1 + 18.3 + 155.2 − 33.2          Aug 
− 1.9 − 0.9 − 0.9 − 0.2 − 0.2 + 10.0 − 28.3 − 0.4 + 1.8 + 2.4 + 10.4 + 20.0          Sep 
+ 4.1 + 0.1 − 0.9 + 0.1 + 0.1 − 3.9 − 10.6 − 1.3 + 0.8 + 23.8 − 5.3 − 10.5          Oct 
+ 8.9 + 0.2 − 1.6 − 0.1 − 0.5 − 31.5 + 2.2 − 1.0 + 0.3 + 34.4 + 2.6 − 29.9          Nov 
+ 0.2 − 0.1 − 2.4 + 0.1 − 0.7 − 15.3 − 1.6 − 0.4 + 1.8 + 13.5 − 1.0 − 16.7          Dec 
− 5.8 + 0.3 − 0.8 − 0.1 − 0.1 − 5.2 − 7.4 + 3.3 + 1.1 + 35.0 − 33.3 − 35.2 2013          Jan 
− 8.3 − 1.3 − 10.8 − 0.1 − 1.0 − 21.9 − 7.3 − 6.1 − 7.5 + 35.3 − 14.0 − 42.1          Feb − 0.3 − 0.1 − 23.9 − 0.0 − 1.0 − 3.8 − 2.6 + 0.6 − 0.4 + 4.1 − 23.2 − 26.4          Mar 
+ 0.7 − 0.5 − 13.1 + 0.0 − 0.3 − 6.0 − 11.6 + 1.9 − 0.3 + 14.0 − 11.2 − 15.4          Apr 
− 0.4 + 0.2 − 5.6 − 0.0 − 0.8 + 2.5 − 7.6 + 1.6 − 0.8 + 7.2 − 9.4 − 5.4          May
− 1.3 − 0.2 − 3.2 + 0.0 − 1.3 − 3.0 + 4.8 + 2.8 − 0.3 − 7.0 − 3.3 − 3.5          June
− 14.2 + 0.4 − 1.3 − 0.0 − 1.1 + 2.3 − 13.8 + 0.3 + 0.1 − 5.0 − 0.0 + 2.5          July
adjustment is shown under “Other factors”. The remaining 92% of the value of the “Other factors”. From 2003 euro banknotes only. 6Remaining items in the
euro banknotes in circulation is allocated, likewise on a monthly basis, to the NCBs, consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem and the financial statement of
with each NCB showing in its balance sheet the percentage of the euro banknotes in the Bundesbank. 7Equal to the difference between the sum of liquidity-providing
circulation that corresponds to its paid-up share in the ECB’s capital. The difference factors and the sum of liquidity-absorbing factors. 8Calculated as the sum of the
between the value of the euro banknotes allocated to an NCB and the value of the “deposit facility”, “banknotes in circulation” and “credit institutions’ current accounteuro banknotes which that NCB has put into circulation is likewise shown under holdings”. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
16  Monthly Report
August 2013
III Consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem
 
1 Assets *
 
 
€ billion
Claims on non-euro area Claims on non-euro area residents denominated
in foreign currency residents denominated in euro
Balances with
Claims on banks, security
On investments, euro area Balances Claims
reporting external loans residents with banks, arising from
date/ Gold and other denominated security the credit
End of Total and gold Receivables external in foreign investments facility under
month  1 assets receivables Total from the IMF assets currency Total and loans ERM II
 Eurosystem 2
 
2012 Nov                30 3,033.3 479.1 259.5 89.5 170.0 36.8 16.6 16.6 −
         Dec                  7 3,030.4 479.1 259.6 89.5 170.1 36.9 17.7 17.7 −
                              14 3,024.8 479.1 259.5 89.5 170.1 35.1 17.4 17.4 −
                              21 3,011.2 479.1 258.0 89.0 169.0 33.7 19.1 19.1 −
                              28 3,018.2 479.1 258.8 89.0 169.8 33.6 19.2 19.2 −
2013 Jan                  4 2,956.2 438.7 250.7 87.0 163.7 32.3 19.0 19.0 −
                              11 2,952.5 438.7 251.3 87.0 164.3 31.4 21.7 21.7 −
                              18 2,942.2 438.7 256.4 87.7 168.7 31.5 22.4 22.4 −
                              25 2,928.8 438.7 253.9 87.4 166.5 31.2 22.0 22.0 −
         Feb                  1 2,769.7 438.7 255.1 87.3 167.7 28.7 22.0 22.0 −
                                8 2,767.6 438.7 253.3 87.0 166.3 28.2 21.3 21.3 −
                              15 2,755.7 438.7 254.0 86.7 167.4 28.5 19.9 19.9 −
                              22 2,748.8 438.7 253.1 86.7 166.4 28.1 20.5 20.5 −
         Mar                  1 2,680.6 438.7 252.9 86.6 166.3 30.8 21.5 21.5 −
                                8 2,665.9 438.7 252.6 86.6 166.0 30.0 22.3 22.3 −
                              15 2,647.8 438.7 251.4 86.5 164.9 28.7 22.1 22.1 −
                              22 2,642.7 438.7 251.6 86.5 165.1 30.0 23.0 23.0 −
                              29 2,648.1 435.3 254.4 87.1 167.2 31.6 22.1 22.1 −
         Apr                  5 2,647.1 435.3 254.6 87.1 167.5 34.3 21.8 21.8 −
                              12 2,634.5 435.3 254.6 87.0 167.6 34.5 22.2 22.2 −
                              19 2,617.3 435.3 253.7 86.9 166.7 34.9 21.2 21.2 −
                              26 2,611.3 435.3 253.1 86.9 166.2 35.6 21.7 21.7 −
2013 May                  3 2,608.1 435.3 254.5 86.9 167.6 35.4 22.5 22.5 −
                              10 2,606.3 435.3 256.0 86.6 169.5 35.6 22.8 22.8 −
                              17 2,577.4 435.3 253.7 86.5 167.2 35.5 22.5 22.5 −
                              24 2,560.2 435.3 254.0 86.4 167.5 28.6 21.7 21.7 −
                              31 2,549.4 435.3 255.1 86.4 168.7 27.3 19.9 19.9 −
         June                  7 2,546.6 435.3 255.1 86.7 168.4 28.2 18.9 18.9 −
                              14 2,550.7 435.3 255.6 87.1 168.6 29.3 18.3 18.3 −
                              21 2,545.3 435.3 256.2 86.9 169.3 29.3 18.3 18.3 −
                              28 2,430.4 320.0 247.6 85.3 162.3 27.5 18.1 18.1 −
         July                  5 2,420.3 320.0 248.0 85.3 162.7 26.4 20.4 20.4 −
                              12 2,403.3 320.0 248.3 85.3 163.0 26.6 21.6 21.6 −
                              19 2,399.0 320.0 247.2 85.1 162.1 26.2 20.7 20.7 −
                              26 2,396.2 320.0 247.7 85.1 162.6 25.9 20.8 20.8 −
         Aug                  2 2,391.1 320.0 247.3 85.3 162.0 25.8 21.7 21.7 −
 Deutsche Bundesbank
2011          Sep 764.6 131.9 49.5 20.9 28.7 −−−−
         Oct 772.8 131.7 49.5 20.9 28.6 0.5−−−
         Nov 812.7 131.7 49.2 20.9 28.3 0.5−−−
         Dec 837.6 132.9 51.7 22.3 29.4 18.1−−−
2012          Jan 860.1 132.9 51.9 22.3 29.6 11.6−−−
         Feb 910.9 132.9 52.4 22.6 29.8 14.3−−−
         Mar 1 002.8 135.8 50.9 22.2 28.7 8.9−−−
         Apr 1 031.3 135.8 51.4 22.4 29.1 8.3−−−
         May 1 087.0 135.8 51.6 22.3 29.3 6.9−−−
         June 1 119.4 136.1 54.2 23.3 30.8 6.2−−−
         July 1 112.9 136.1 54.1 23.3 30.8 3.2−−−
         Aug 1 135.4 136.1 54.5 23.5 31.0 1.7−−−
         Sep 1 090.9 150.4 53.0 23.3 29.7 1.5−−−
         Oct 1 110.0 150.2 53.1 23.3 29.8 1.8−−−
         Nov 1 098.6 150.2 52.8 23.0 29.8 2.3−−−
         Dec 1 026.0 137.5 51.1 22.3 28.8 3.3−−−
2013          Jan 964.1 137.5 51.6 22.5 29.1 1.6−−−
         Feb 934.9 137.5 51.3 22.2 29.0 3.2−−−
         Mar 906.7 136.5 52.0 22.4 29.6 3.4−−−
         Apr 916.9 136.5 52.0 22.4 29.7 2.8−−−
         May 891.6 136.5 52.0 22.3 29.7 0.8−−−
         June 839.7 100.3 50.5 21.9 28.6 0.9−−−
         July 838.1 100.3 49.9 21.9 28.0 0.7−−−
 
*The consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem comprises the financial national central banks of the euro area member states (NCBs). The balance sheet
statement of the European Central Bank (ECB) and the financial statements of the items for foreign currency, securities, gold and financial instruments are valued at the

Deutsche Bundesbank
17  Monthly Report
August 2013
III Consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem
 
   
 
Lending to euro area credit institutions related to monetary policy operations Securities of euro area residents
denominated in euro in euro
 Other claims on euro area
Longer- Fine-  credit Securities General    On
Main re- term re- tuning Structural Credits institutions held for government    reportingfinancing financing reverse reverse Marginal related denomi- monetary debt deno-    date/opera- opera- opera- opera- lending to margin nated in policy Other minated in Other    End of
Total tions tions tions tions facility calls euro Total purposes securities euro assets    month  
1 
Eurosystem 2
 
1 117.4 74.6 1 040.8 − − 1.9 0.1 233.7 586.1 277.1 309.0 30.0 274.1 2012 Nov                30
1 112.1 70.8 1 040.8 − − 0.6 − 229.5 585.9 277.1 308.9 30.0 279.6          Dec                  7
1 113.7 73.2 1 040.2 − − 0.3 0.0 229.0 585.6 277.0 308.6 30.0 275.4                               14
1 122.3 72.7 1 035.8 − − 13.9 0.0 208.3 585.2 276.8 308.4 30.0 275.4                               211 128.8 89.7 1 035.8 − − 3.4 − 206.3 585.1 276.8 308.3 30.0 277.2                               28
1 117.0 81.1 1 035.8 − − 0.1 − 203.8 584.9 276.9 308.0 30.0 279.7 2013 Jan                  4
1 113.6 77.7 1 035.8 − − 0.2 0.0 200.1 585.6 276.6 309.0 30.0 280.1                               111 163.2 131.2 1 030.9 − − 1.0 0.0 138.0 582.6 276.2 306.5 30.0 279.4                               181 156.2 125.3 1 030.9 − − 0.0 − 131.3 582.8 275.2 307.5 30.0 282.7                               25
1 015.5 124.1 891.3 − − 0.0 − 127.3 576.0 270.9 305.1 29.9 276.6          Feb                  1
1 017.2 129.3 887.8 − − − − 87.2 576.8 270.6 306.2 29.9 315.1                                 81 010.6 128.7 880.2 − − 1.8 − 83.7 607.1 270.5 336.5 29.9 283.3                               151 008.5 132.2 876.4 − − 0.0 − 80.1 607.5 269.9 337.6 29.9 282.4                               22
946.1 131.1 814.5 − − 0.5 − 73.6 608.0 269.6 338.5 29.9 279.2          Mar                  1
931.8 129.8 802.0 − − 0.0 − 73.4 607.9 269.5 338.4 29.9 279.3                                 8920.8 127.3 793.5 − − 0.0 − 70.2 605.9 269.2 336.7 29.9 280.2                               15906.2 119.4 786.7 − − 0.2 − 80.0 606.4 269.1 337.3 29.9 276.9                               22903.6 123.2 778.9 − − 1.5 − 88.5 618.1 269.3 348.7 29.9 264.7                               29
896.8 124.9 771.9 − − 0.0 − 90.1 619.0 269.3 349.6 29.9 265.4          Apr                  5
884.2 119.3 764.3 − − 0.6 − 93.3 618.0 269.0 348.9 29.9 262.5                               12869.9 116.4 753.5 − − 0.1 − 97.7 613.1 265.6 347.5 29.9 261.5                               19852.2 110.4 741.8 − − 0.0 − 107.3 611.6 265.6 346.0 29.9 264.5                               26
846.4 105.0 739.5 − − 1.9 − 111.8 608.6 263.4 345.2 29.0 264.6 2013 May                  3
850.5 110.3 739.0 − − 1.2 − 103.2 608.7 263.2 345.5 29.0 265.2                               10836.6 103.8 732.6 − − 0.1 − 96.6 609.1 263.2 345.9 29.0 259.1                               17835.4 103.4 731.5 − − 0.5 − 96.0 604.5 259.2 345.4 29.0 255.6                               24824.1 103.2 720.9 − − 0.0 − 91.5 605.6 259.0 346.6 29.0 261.5                               31
821.9 103.0 717.8 − − 1.1 − 90.2 604.3 256.6 347.6 29.0 263.7          June                  7
821.8 108.3 713.2 − − 0.2 − 95.0 606.0 256.5 349.5 29.0 260.4                               14815.6 102.0 710.1 − − 3.5 − 92.4 606.9 256.5 350.4 29.0 262.1                               21822.7 117.3 705.4 − − 0.0 − 92.1 609.5 256.8 352.6 28.4 264.6                               28
811.4 107.7 703.3 − − 0.4 − 91.8 608.4 256.4 352.0 28.4 265.5          July                  5
803.3 102.1 701.1 − − 0.1 − 87.7 606.9 256.1 350.8 28.4 260.5                               12804.4 104.4 699.9 − − 0.0 − 88.3 606.6 255.7 350.9 28.4 257.2                               19800.6 102.3 697.5 − − 0.7 − 86.0 607.6 255.4 352.3 28.4 259.3                               26
804.9 109.2 695.7 − − 0.0 0.0 86.8 600.7 252.5 348.2 28.4 255.5          Aug                  2
 Deutsche Bundesbank
31.1 12.6 18.4 − − 0.0 − 9.7 57.8 52.9 4.9 4.4 480.2 2011          Sep 
21.3 3.5 17.7 − − 0.1 − 8.5 60.8 55.9 4.9 4.4 496.1          Oct 
21.6 3.8 17.7 − − 0.1 − 9.2 70.1 65.2 4.9 4.4 525.9          Nov 55.8 8.6 47.1 − − 0.0 − 8.5 71.9 67.0 4.9 4.4 494.3          Dec 
48.6 2.0 46.6 − − 0.0 − 8.4 74.1 69.2 4.9 4.4 528.2 2012          Jan 
48.0 0.9 46.6 0.5 − 0.0 − 8.5 73.9 69.1 4.8 4.4 576.4          Feb 74.6 1.2 73.2 − − 0.1 − 9.4 73.5 68.7 4.8 4.4 645.3          Mar 
74.9 1.2 73.7 − − 0.0 − 10.1 73.5 68.7 4.8 4.4 672.8          Apr 
79.7 3.6 76.1 − − 0.0 − 8.0 73.4 68.6 4.8 4.4 727.0          May79.5 2.5 77.0 − − 0.1 − 8.8 73.1 68.7 4.3 4.4 757.2          June
78.6 2.9 75.7 − − 0.0 − 7.6 73.2 68.8 4.3 4.4 755.7          July
76.8 1.7 75.1 − − 0.0 − 9.4 72.8 68.4 4.3 4.4 779.6          Aug 76.1 1.7 73.9 − − 0.5 − 8.9 68.8 68.8 − 4.4 727.8          Sep 
76.6 1.6 73.9 − − 1.1 − 5.0 67.9 67.9 − 4.4 751.0          Oct 
72.4 1.9 69.7 − − 0.8 − 2.5 67.4 67.4 − 4.4 746.6          Nov 73.1 2.9 69.7 − − 0.6 − 1.4 67.5 67.5 − 4.4 687.5          Dec 
49.5 0.3 49.1 − − 0.0 − 4.9 66.2 66.2 − 4.4 648.3 2013          Jan 
25.8 0.8 24.9 − − 0.0 − 5.0 65.2 65.2 − 4.4 642.5          Feb 21.8 0.1 21.6 − − 0.2 − 5.7 65.0 65.0 − 4.4 617.9          Mar 
14.8 0.5 14.3 − − 0.0 − 5.8 63.8 63.8 − 4.4 636.7          Apr 
12.3 0.1 12.1 − − 0.0 − 4.9 62.9 62.9 − 4.4 617.8          May12.8 0.9 11.8 − − 0.0 − 4.8 61.9 61.9 − 4.4 604.1          June
12.2 1.0 11.2 − − 0.0 − 4.5 61.1 61.1 − 4.4 605.0          July
 
end of the quarter. 1For the Eurosystem: financial statements for specific weekly  
dates; for the Bundesbank: end of month financial statement. 2 Source: ECB. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
18  Monthly Report
August 2013
III Consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem
 
2 Liabilities *
 
 
€ billion
Liabilities to euro area credit institutions related to Liabilities to
monetary policy operations denominated in euro other euro area residents
denominated in euro
 
Other
Current liabilities
accounts to euro-
On (covering Fine- area credit
reporting the tuning Deposits institutions Debt
date/ Banknotes minimum Fixed- reverse deno- certifi- General related to
End of Total in circu- reserve Deposit term opera- margin minated cates govern- Other
month  1 liabilities lation  2 Total system) facility deposits tions calls in euro issued Total ment liabilities
 Eurosystem 4
 
2012 Nov                30 3,033.3 889.7 937.7 489.9 237.8 208.5 − 1.5 7.1 − 180.2 133.2 47.0
         Dec                  7 3,030.4 895.8 932.2 486.9 235.3 208.5 − 1.5 7.4 − 173.1 122.7 50.4
                              14 3,024.8 898.8 939.6 504.9 225.1 208.5 − 1.1 6.7 − 163.9 115.6 48.3
                              21 3,011.2 910.8 928.0 489.7 229.4 208.5 − 0.5 7.2 − 145.7 105.9 39.7
                              28 3,018.2 913.7 915.8 456.1 261.7 197.6 − 0.5 6.8 − 150.6 108.2 42.4
2013 Jan                  4 2,956.2 904.4 924.0 462.3 252.6 208.5 − 0.6 6.5 − 137.2 96.9 40.4
                              11 2,952.5 893.6 939.5 507.7 222.6 208.5 − 0.7 6.5 − 134.9 97.1 37.7
                              18 2,942.2 887.0 945.3 540.0 196.4 208.5 − 0.4 6.1 − 117.2 83.9 33.4
                              25 2,928.8 881.9 895.6 479.5 207.2 208.5 − 0.4 6.6 − 162.5 126.1 36.4
         Feb                  1 2,769.7 883.9 797.9 408.2 181.0 208.5 − 0.3 6.8 − 107.6 72.5 35.0
                                8 2,767.6 883.4 806.3 443.1 157.2 205.5 − 0.5 6.7 − 104.0 66.6 37.4
                              15 2,755.7 881.1 803.9 466.5 131.9 205.5 − 0.0 6.8 − 103.0 67.9 35.1
                              22 2,748.8 878.3 788.0 416.0 166.4 205.5 − 0.1 6.4 − 118.9 82.5 36.4
         Mar                  1 2,680.6 881.9 724.5 374.2 144.7 205.5 − 0.1 6.8 − 115.4 80.4 35.0
                                8 2,665.9 883.0 695.3 354.8 134.1 205.5 − 0.9 6.3 − 123.0 82.9 40.2
                              15 2,647.8 882.8 705.8 366.5 132.6 205.5 − 1.1 6.6 − 108.4 81.5 26.9
                              22 2,642.7 884.5 684.8 351.7 126.8 205.5 − 0.9 5.9 − 114.2 91.9 22.3
                              29 2,648.1 896.4 669.9 319.3 144.6 205.5 − 0.4 6.5 − 120.6 96.3 24.3
         Apr                  5 2,647.1 895.2 677.4 336.9 134.9 205.5 − 0.1 6.3 − 110.7 88.6 22.2
                              12 2,634.5 894.5 669.1 343.1 119.9 206.0 − 0.1 6.1 − 110.2 87.7 22.5
                              19 2,617.3 894.1 641.6 329.8 105.6 206.0 − 0.2 5.8 − 120.7 90.1 30.6
                              26 2,611.3 897.0 628.1 316.0 109.7 202.5 − 0.0 6.1 − 116.5 83.3 33.3
2013 May                  3 2,608.1 904.6 623.1 296.2 124.1 202.5 − 0.3 6.1 − 104.9 72.3 32.5
                              10 2,606.3 905.0 630.0 333.7 95.3 201.0 − − 5.5 − 95.2 65.6 29.5
                              17 2,577.4 905.2 603.6 319.5 83.0 201.0 − 0.0 5.7 − 106.6 80.8 25.8
                              24 2,560.2 901.4 576.7 294.6 81.0 201.0 − − 6.1 − 128.1 99.2 28.9
                              31 2,549.4 905.2 556.1 273.4 85.6 197.0 − 0.1 6.6 − 135.2 102.7 32.5
         June                  7 2,546.6 906.9 578.0 280.0 100.9 197.0 − 0.1 6.7 − 106.8 70.7 36.1
                              14 2,550.7 906.6 594.8 309.8 90.0 195.0 − 0.0 6.4 − 99.7 61.8 37.9
                              21 2,545.3 906.3 557.5 279.5 83.0 195.0 − 0.0 6.8 − 134.4 106.4 28.0
                              28 2,430.4 911.0 564.0 276.3 92.2 195.0 − 0.5 7.1 − 135.3 114.4 20.9
         July                  5 2,420.3 915.8 570.1 271.3 103.9 195.0 − 0.0 6.2 − 109.6 89.3 20.4
                              12 2,403.3 917.0 565.5 275.3 94.6 195.5 − 0.0 6.4 − 105.5 84.3 21.2
                              19 2,399.0 916.8 536.6 264.7 76.4 195.5 − 0.0 6.4 − 135.4 111.0 24.4
                              26 2,396.2 916.7 530.6 255.8 79.2 195.5 − 0.0 6.7 − 137.1 114.4 22.7
         Aug                  2 2,391.1 922.3 555.4 272.3 87.3 195.5 − 0.2 6.5 − 99.7 75.6 24.2
 Deutsche Bundesbank
2011          Sep 764.6 213.5 205.5 69.8 56.8 78.8 − − − − 0.9 0.3 0.6
         Oct 772.8 215.2 212.1 59.9 58.4 93.9 − − − − 1.1 0.4 0.7
         Nov 812.7 216.1 249.8 49.6 58.2 142.0 − − − − 1.5 0.8 0.7
         Dec 837.6 221.3 228.9 76.4 66.1 86.4 − − − − 5.5 0.7 4.8
2012          Jan 860.1 216.3 294.1 34.6 119.7 139.7 − − − − 1.4 0.7 0.7
         Feb 910.9 216.0 342.5 29.9 166.4 146.2 − − − − 2.8 0.8 2.0
         Mar 1 002.8 216.6 424.5 30.9 248.2 145.4 − − − − 3.4 0.8 2.6
         Apr 1 031.3 217.6 452.3 33.0 276.9 142.4 − − 0.0 − 2.0 0.7 1.3
         May 1 087.0 219.9 464.8 33.4 275.0 156.3 − − 0.0 − 2.6 0.6 2.0
         June 1 119.4 222.5 457.1 33.3 262.9 160.9 − − − − 3.2 1.2 2.0
         July 1 112.9 223.6 421.7 178.3 88.1 155.2 − − − − 19.5 7.3 12.2
         Aug 1 135.4 223.2 442.5 201.4 111.4 129.7 − − − − 17.6 5.5 12.1
         Sep 1 090.9 222.2 385.8 173.1 78.4 134.2 − − − − 17.3 7.0 10.2
         Oct 1 110.0 222.0 372.3 177.9 59.0 135.5 − − − − 50.7 5.1 45.7
         Nov 1 098.6 221.5 361.9 184.1 51.9 125.9 − − − − 47.2 11.4 35.9
         Dec 1 026.0 227.2 300.0 129.6 40.5 129.9 − − 0.0 − 39.9 11.9 28.1
2013          Jan 964.1 219.7 260.4 128.3 39.1 93.0 − − − − 25.9 2.3 23.6
         Feb 934.9 219.1 240.8 100.8 23.9 116.0 − − − − 22.4 0.5 21.8
         Mar 906.7 223.1 222.9 108.7 20.8 93.3 − − − − 10.9 0.5 10.4
         Apr 916.9 224.5 215.5 102.9 30.8 81.8 − − − − 28.7 0.9 27.7
         May 891.6 225.4 198.3 88.3 20.6 89.4 − − − − 20.6 0.6 20.1
         June 839.7 226.9 195.1 89.6 23.5 82.1 − − − − 8.1 0.5 7.6
         July 838.1 227.9 187.0 90.2 20.1 76.7 − − − − 12.5 0.5 12.0
 
*The consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem comprises the financial specific weekly dates; for the Bundesbank: end-of-month financial statements.
statement of the European Central Bank (ECB) and the financial statements of the 2According to the accounting regime chosen by the Eurosystem on the issue of euro
national central banks of the euro area member states (NCBs). The balance sheet banknotes, a share of 8% of the total value of the euro banknotes in circulation is
items for foreign currency, securities, gold and financial instruments are valued at allocated to the ECB on a monthly basis. The counterpart of this adjustment is
market rates at the end of the quarter. 1For Eurosystem: financial statements for disclosed as an “Intra-Eurosystem liability related to euro banknote issue". The

Deutsche Bundesbank
19  Monthly Report
August 2013
III Consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem
 
   
 
Liabilities to non-euro area
residents denominated inforeign currency
Intra-  Eurosystem  
Liabilities Liabilities Liabilities Counterpart liability     Onto non-euro to euro area Deposits, arising of special related to     reportingarea residents residents balances from the drawing euro  Capital    date/denominated in foreign and other rights allocated Other banknote Revaluation and    End of credit facility
in euro currency Total liabilities under ERM II by the IMF issue  
2 accounts reserves    month 1 liabilities 3 
Eurosystem 4
 
176.8 4.5 6.5 6.5 − 56.2 236.0 − 452.8 85.6 2012 Nov                30
176.6 4.8 6.4 6.4 − 56.2 239.4 − 452.8 85.6          Dec                  7
174.9 4.0 5.8 5.8 − 56.2 236.4 − 452.8 85.6                               14
178.5 2.5 6.9 6.9 − 56.2 237.1 − 452.8 85.6                               21
186.3 3.5 6.4 6.4 − 56.2 240.5 − 452.8 85.6                               28
185.5 3.4 5.8 5.8 − 55.0 241.4 − 407.4 85.6 2013 Jan                  4
180.3 3.6 5.7 5.7 − 55.0 240.3 − 407.4 85.7                               11
186.4 8.8 5.0 5.0 − 55.0 238.4 − 407.4 85.6                               18
185.1 4.9 6.5 6.5 − 55.0 237.8 − 407.4 85.6                               25
179.1 4.5 7.5 7.5 − 55.0 234.4 − 407.4 85.6          Feb                  1
174.3 3.4 6.6 6.6 − 55.0 235.1 − 407.4 85.6                                 8
170.8 3.5 7.7 7.7 − 55.0 230.6 − 407.4 86.0                               15
166.0 3.2 7.7 7.7 − 55.0 232.0 − 407.4 86.0                               22
165.5 2.6 7.5 7.5 − 55.0 226.2 − 407.4 87.9          Mar                  1
168.1 2.4 7.0 7.0 − 55.0 230.4 − 407.4 88.1                                 8
157.7 1.6 5.8 5.8 − 55.0 228.6 − 407.4 88.2                               15
162.0 2.8 6.2 6.2 − 55.0 231.7 − 407.4 88.2                               22
157.7 4.1 5.3 5.3 − 55.1 237.1 − 406.6 88.9                               29
158.7 4.5 7.0 7.0 − 55.1 236.4 − 406.6 88.9          Apr                  5
155.0 6.5 6.2 6.2 − 55.1 236.2 − 406.6 88.9                               12
153.9 5.6 6.5 6.5 − 55.1 238.5 − 406.6 88.9                               19
163.0 5.4 5.5 5.5 − 55.1 239.0 − 406.6 88.9                               26
166.8 5.6 6.4 6.4 − 55.1 239.9 − 406.6 88.9 2013 May                  3
165.4 7.1 6.5 6.5 − 55.1 240.8 − 406.6 89.0                               10
163.3 4.2 6.5 6.5 − 55.1 231.8 − 406.6 88.8                               17
157.3 2.8 5.7 5.7 − 55.1 231.5 − 406.6 88.8                               24
151.6 2.5 6.0 6.0 − 55.1 235.7 − 406.6 88.8                               31
153.1 1.3 7.7 7.7 − 55.1 234.5 − 406.6 89.8          June                  7
145.2 3.1 6.3 6.3 − 55.1 236.9 − 406.6 89.8                               14
146.8 4.2 6.0 6.0 − 55.1 230.7 − 406.6 90.8                               21
141.6 4.0 4.9 4.9 − 54.2 233.2 − 284.7 90.4                               28
145.0 2.6 5.6 5.6 − 54.2 236.0 − 284.7 90.4          July                  5
140.9 2.9 5.5 5.5 − 54.2 230.3 − 284.7 90.4                               12
136.4 1.7 5.3 5.3 − 54.2 231.0 − 284.7 90.4                               19
136.4 1.6 5.4 5.4 − 54.2 232.4 − 284.7 90.4                               26
135.9 1.4 4.8 4.8 − 54.2 235.7 − 284.7 90.4          Aug                  2
 Deutsche Bundesbank
13.6 0.0 0.2 0.2 − 13.9 14.3 170.7 127.1 5.0 2011          Sep 
12.9 0.0 0.2 0.2 − 13.9 14.4 170.7 127.1 5.0          Oct 
13.5 0.0 0.0 0.0 − 13.9 14.9 170.9 127.1 5.0          Nov 
46.6 0.0 − − − 14.3 16.2 170.5 129.4 5.0          Dec 
11.9 0.0 0.0 0.0 − 14.3 16.5 171.0 129.4 5.0 2012          Jan 
11.7 0.0 0.3 0.3 − 14.3 16.7 172.2 129.4 5.0          Feb 
15.9 0.0 0.2 0.2 − 14.0 16.9 175.5 130.8 5.0          Mar 
14.2 0.0 0.4 0.4 − 14.0 17.5 177.6 130.8 5.0          Apr 
52.0 0.0 0.4 0.4 − 14.0 18.2 179.3 130.8 5.0          May
83.2 0.0 0.2 0.2 − 14.5 19.5 181.0 133.3 5.0          June
90.9 0.0 0.0 0.0 − 14.5 19.9 184.5 133.3 5.0          July
89.9 0.0 0.3 0.3 − 14.5 20.6 188.5 133.3 5.0          Aug 
86.3 0.0 − − − 14.4 21.6 191.9 146.5 5.0          Sep 
82.1 0.0 0.2 0.2 − 14.4 22.3 194.7 146.5 5.0          Oct 
81.8 0.0 0.3 0.3 − 14.4 22.8 197.3 146.5 5.0          Nov 
83.3 0.0 0.1 0.1 − 14.1 23.6 200.3 132.6 5.0          Dec 
83.0 0.0 0.5 0.5 − 14.1 23.5 199.4 132.6 5.0 2013          Jan 
74.4 0.0 0.7 0.7 − 14.1 24.5 201.4 132.6 5.0          Feb 
70.2 0.0 0.6 0.6 − 14.1 24.0 203.8 132.1 5.0          Mar 
67.9 0.0 0.6 0.6 − 14.1 24.4 204.1 132.1 5.0          Apr 
63.5 0.0 0.6 0.6 − 14.1 25.0 207.0 132.1 5.0          May
61.5 0.0 0.7 0.7 − 13.9 25.3 208.2 95.0 5.0          June
59.7 0.0 0.1 0.1 − 13.9 25.5 211.5 95.0 5.0          July
 
remaining 92 % of the value of the euro banknote in circulation is also allocated to according to the aforementioned accounting regime and the value of euro bank-
the NCBs on a monthly basis, and each NCB shows in its balance sheet the share of notes put into circulation is also disclosed as an “Intra-Eurosystem claim/ liabilitythe euro banknotes issued which corresponds to its paid-up share in the ECB’s related to banknote issue“. 3For the Deutsche Bundesbank: including DM banknotes
capital. The difference between the value of the euro banknotes allocated to the NCB still in circulation. 4 Source: ECB. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
20  Monthly Report
August 2013
IV Banks
 
1 Assets and liabilities of monetary financial institutions (excluding the Bundesbank) in Germany *
  Assets
 
€ billion
Lending to banks (MFIs) in the euro area Lending to non-banks (non-MFIs) in the
to banks in the home country to banks in other member states to non-banks in the home country
Enterprises and house-
holds
Secur- Secur-
Balance ities ities
sheet Cash issued issued
Period total  1 in hand Total Total Loans by banks Total Loans by banks Total Total Total Loans
 End of year or month
 
2004 6,617.4 15.1 2,174.3 1,750.2 1,122.9 627.3 424.2 306.3 117.9 3,358.7 3,083.4 2,479.7 2,223.8
2005 6,859.4 15.3 2,276.0 1,762.5 1,148.4 614.1 513.5 356.3 157.2 3,407.6 3,085.2 2,504.6 2,226.3
2006 7,154.4 16.4 2,314.4 1,718.6 1,138.6 580.0 595.8 376.8 219.0 3,462.1 3,085.5 2,536.1 2,241.9
2007 7,592.4 17.8 2,523.4 1,847.9 1,290.4 557.5 675.4 421.6 253.8 3,487.3 3,061.8 2,556.0 2,288.8
2008 7,892.7 17.8 2,681.8 1,990.2 1,404.3 585.8 691.6 452.9 238.8 3,638.2 3,163.0 2,686.9 2,357.3
2009 7,436.1 17.2 2,480.5 1,813.2 1,218.4 594.8 667.3 449.5 217.8 3,638.3 3,187.9 2,692.9 2,357.5
2010 8,304.8 16.5 2,361.6 1,787.8 1,276.9 510.9 573.9 372.8 201.0 3,724.5 3,303.0 2,669.2 2,354.7
2011 8,393.3 16.4 2,394.4 1,844.5 1,362.2 482.2 550.0 362.3 187.7 3,673.5 3,270.5 2,709.4 2,415.1
2012 8,226.6 19.2 2,309.0 1,813.2 1,363.8 449.4 495.9 322.2 173.7 3,688.6 3,289.4 2,695.5 2,435.7
2011          Sep 8,489.4 15.4 2,412.6 1,831.2 1,349.4 481.8 581.4 385.6 195.7 3,708.6 3,285.3 2,713.5 2,413.7
         Oct 8,353.9 15.4 2,407.5 1,830.0 1,347.6 482.3 577.5 385.1 192.4 3,728.0 3,311.1 2,742.8 2,445.3
         Nov 8,406.6 14.8 2,450.5 1,876.1 1,396.6 479.5 574.4 382.6 191.8 3,727.2 3,315.3 2,747.9 2,450.0
         Dec 8,393.3 16.4 2,394.4 1,844.5 1,362.2 482.2 550.0 362.3 187.7 3,673.5 3,270.5 2,709.4 2,415.1
2012          Jan 8,517.7 14.5 2,470.6 1,921.9 1,444.6 477.3 548.7 362.6 186.1 3,702.0 3,298.2 2,729.8 2,437.1
         Feb 8,526.0 14.4 2,534.4 1,981.0 1,499.7 481.3 553.4 369.7 183.7 3,695.5 3,291.4 2,723.7 2,437.0
         Mar 8,522.7 15.4 2,577.6 2,037.3 1,559.1 478.2 540.3 358.1 182.2 3,698.3 3,292.5 2,722.7 2,427.8
         Apr 8,599.6 15.3 2,593.3 2,049.9 1,574.4 475.5 543.4 365.1 178.2 3,719.9 3,314.2 2,739.4 2,430.9
         May 8,859.6 15.5 2,605.1 2,060.4 1,585.9 474.5 544.7 365.3 179.4 3,692.5 3,288.7 2,722.4 2,434.0
         June 8,636.4 15.5 2,566.1 2,041.1 1,571.3 469.8 525.0 351.0 174.1 3,699.4 3,297.2 2,692.7 2,432.4
         July 8,726.8 14.8 2,531.1 2,000.3 1,530.8 469.5 530.8 359.0 171.8 3,731.2 3,327.5 2,724.4 2,467.2
         Aug 8,695.6 15.7 2,538.3 2,016.4 1,547.5 468.9 522.0 349.7 172.2 3,725.2 3,321.8 2,723.8 2,464.9
         Sep 8,567.6 16.0 2,463.9 1,947.5 1,481.5 466.0 516.4 346.1 170.3 3,730.1 3,322.3 2,720.6 2,458.6
         Oct 8,489.2 15.9 2,426.0 1,916.6 1,456.5 460.1 509.4 340.1 169.3 3,748.2 3,340.1 2,728.3 2,471.5
         Nov 8,440.0 15.6 2,411.8 1,904.4 1,448.5 455.9 507.4 337.2 170.2 3,741.9 3,334.9 2,722.7 2,465.5
         Dec 8,226.6 19.2 2,309.0 1,813.2 1,363.8 449.4 495.9 322.2 173.7 3,688.6 3,289.4 2,695.5 2,435.7
2013          Jan 8,110.4 15.0 2,284.4 1,784.1 1,337.9 446.2 500.3 325.9 174.4 3,717.9 3,313.3 2,721.2 2,454.3
         Feb 8,094.4 15.0 2,268.2 1,755.8 1,312.0 443.8 512.4 339.6 172.8 3,711.7 3,307.1 2,718.4 2,457.6
         Mar 8,063.0 16.9 2,228.8 1,727.6 1,290.0 437.6 501.1 332.8 168.3 3,710.8 3,302.6 2,715.8 2,451.0
         Apr 8,080.3 15.7 2,220.5 1,715.6 1,281.3 434.3 504.9 337.1 167.8 3,736.2 3,329.5 2,732.4 2,446.6
         May 7,937.6 16.0 2,196.9 1,692.8 1,258.9 433.9 504.1 335.6 168.5 3,713.8 3,302.1 2,720.5 2,451.6
         June 7,833.2 15.8 2,189.1 1,676.4 1,243.9 432.5 512.7 344.5 168.2 3,713.4 3,307.7 2,726.9 2,464.1
 Changes 3
2005 187.9 0.1 93.0 10.4 22.8 − 12.5 82.6 44.6 38.1 59.7 14.2 37.2 15.5
2006 356.8 1.1 84.2 0.5 28.0 − 27.6 83.7 22.4 61.3 56.0 1.5 32.5 13.3
2007 518.3 1.5 218.9 135.5 156.3 − 20.8 83.4 47.4 36.0 54.1 − 1.0 38.7 53.2
2008 313.3 − 0.1 183.6 164.3 127.5 36.9 19.3 33.7 − 14.4 140.4 102.6 130.9 65.5
2009 −454.5 − 0.5 −189.0 −166.4 −182.2 15.8 − 22.5 − 1.8 − 20.7 17.4 38.3 17.0 6.6
2010 −136.3 − 0.7 −111.6 − 15.6 58.5 − 74.1 − 95.9 − 80.9 − 15.1 96.4 126.0 − 13.7 0.7
2011 54.1 − 0.1 32.6 58.7 91.7 − 33.0 − 26.0 − 12.1 − 13.9 − 51.8 − 35.3 38.7 56.7
2012 −129.2 2.9 − 81.9 − 28.4 3.0 − 31.4 − 53.5 − 39.7 − 13.8 27.5 27.7 17.0 28.8
2011          Oct −116.4 − 0.0 − 1.4 1.1 0.2 0.9 − 2.4 0.7 − 3.2 24.7 29.5 32.9 34.1
         Nov 31.1 − 0.6 39.9 44.3 47.5 − 3.2 − 4.5 − 3.7 − 0.8 − 4.4 2.1 3.1 2.7
         Dec − 27.9 1.6 − 52.5 − 33.6 − 36.0 2.4 − 18.9 − 14.8 − 4.1 − 55.7 − 46.7 − 39.8 − 36.4
2012          Jan 132.8 − 1.9 78.4 78.4 83.0 − 4.7 0.1 0.8 − 0.8 34.8 31.1 23.8 24.2
         Feb 20.7 − 0.1 65.8 60.4 56.0 4.4 5.5 7.8 − 2.3 − 3.2 − 4.6 − 4.1 1.7
         Mar − 7.0 0.9 42.3 55.8 59.1 − 3.3 − 13.5 − 11.8 − 1.6 3.0 1.5 − 0.5 − 8.9
         Apr 68.9 − 0.1 17.5 15.1 17.9 − 2.7 2.4 6.5 − 4.2 18.0 18.8 13.9 0.1
         May 226.6 0.2 6.4 7.4 9.1 − 1.7 − 1.0 − 1.8 0.9 − 33.0 − 29.2 − 20.4 − 0.4
         June −214.5 0.0 − 37.7 − 18.6 − 14.0 − 4.6 − 19.2 − 13.9 − 5.3 10.7 11.6 − 6.6 1.4
         July 85.2 − 0.7 − 37.3 − 42.0 − 41.4 − 0.6 4.7 7.1 − 2.4 29.8 29.3 30.9 33.9
         Aug − 16.8 0.9 9.4 17.2 17.5 − 0.4 − 7.8 − 8.5 0.7 − 3.5 − 3.9 1.2 − 0.7
         Sep −115.5 0.3 − 72.0 − 67.4 − 65.3 − 2.1 − 4.7 − 2.9 − 1.8 7.3 2.2 − 0.6 − 4.0
         Oct − 75.9 − 0.1 − 38.7 − 31.8 − 26.6 − 5.3 − 6.8 − 5.8 − 1.0 19.2 18.6 9.1 14.3
         Nov − 29.4 − 0.3 − 14.3 − 12.3 − 8.0 − 4.3 − 1.9 − 2.8 0.8 − 5.2 − 4.6 − 4.9 − 5.3
         Dec −204.3 3.6 −101.8 − 90.5 − 84.2 − 6.3 − 11.3 − 14.5 3.2 − 50.5 − 43.1 − 24.8 − 27.5
2013          Jan − 97.7 − 4.2 − 21.9 − 27.6 − 24.8 − 2.8 5.7 5.0 0.7 35.4 28.8 30.4 23.3
         Feb − 27.1 0.0 − 15.6 − 26.4 − 23.7 − 2.7 10.8 12.6 − 1.8 − 8.1 − 7.4 − 4.0 2.0
         Mar − 44.2 1.9 − 41.3 − 29.2 − 22.7 − 6.5 − 12.1 − 6.8 − 5.3 − 2.4 − 5.1 − 3.2 − 7.3
         Apr 27.6 − 1.3 − 6.9 − 11.2 − 8.1 − 3.1 4.3 4.9 − 0.5 27.6 28.4 18.1 − 2.8
         May −142.7 0.3 − 23.5 − 22.8 − 22.4 − 0.5 − 0.7 − 1.4 0.7 − 22.0 − 27.1 − 11.6 5.5
         June −104.4 − 0.2 − 7.6 − 16.2 − 15.1 − 1.2 8.6 8.9 − 0.3 0.6 6.4 7.1 12.8
*This table serves to supplement the “Overall monetary survey“ in section II. Unlike by banks (including building and loan associations) − data from money market
the other tables in section IV, this table includes − in addition to the figures reported funds. 1See footnote 1 in Table IV.2. 2Including debt securities arising from the

Deutsche Bundesbank
21  Monthly Report
August 2013
IV Banks
 
   
 
euro area Claims on
non-euro-area
to non-banks in other member states residents
 General Enterprises and General government households government
Secur- Secur- of which Secur- of which Other
ities Total Loans ities 
2 Total Total Loans Total Loans ities Total Loans assets  1   Period
End of year or month
 
255.9 603.8 423.0 180.8 275.3 140.6 61.9 134.7 25.7 109.0 897.8 730.4 171.4 2004
278.2 580.7 408.7 171.9 322.4 169.1 65.0 153.3 30.7 122.6 993.8 796.8 166.7 2005
294.1 549.5 390.2 159.2 376.6 228.1 85.2 148.5 26.1 122.4 1,172.7 936.2 188.8 2006267.3 505.8 360.7 145.0 425.5 294.6 124.9 130.9 26.0 104.9 1,339.5 1,026.9 224.4 2007329.6 476.1 342.8 133.4 475.1 348.1 172.1 127.0 27.6 99.4 1,279.2 1,008.6 275.7 2008335.4 495.0 335.1 160.0 450.4 322.2 162.9 128.2 23.5 104.7 1,062.6 821.1 237.5 2009
314.5 633.8 418.4 215.3 421.6 289.2 164.2 132.4 24.8 107.6 1,021.0 792.7 1,181.1 2010
294.3 561.1 359.8 201.2 403.1 276.9 161.2 126.2 32.6 93.6 995.1 770.9 1,313.8 2011259.8 594.0 350.3 243.7 399.2 275.1 158.1 124.1 30.4 93.7 970.3 745.0 1,239.4 2012
299.9 571.8 365.2 206.6 423.3 288.0 171.2 135.3 30.7 104.6 1,011.7 786.7 1,341.1 2011          Sep 
297.4 568.3 361.3 207.0 417.0 280.0 164.0 137.0 30.3 106.6 974.8 754.2 1,228.2          Oct 
297.8 567.5 358.2 209.3 411.9 282.3 165.1 129.6 31.0 98.5 991.0 770.1 1,223.1          Nov 294.3 561.1 359.8 201.2 403.1 276.9 161.2 126.2 32.6 93.6 995.1 770.9 1,313.8          Dec 
292.8 568.3 363.6 204.8 403.8 277.7 157.6 126.1 32.3 93.8 1,016.2 794.5 1,314.3 2012          Jan 
286.7 567.7 361.3 206.4 404.1 278.1 158.1 126.1 32.4 93.7 996.6 778.9 1,285.0          Feb 295.0 569.8 359.9 209.9 405.8 279.9 159.9 125.9 31.5 94.3 1,004.1 782.1 1,227.4          Mar 
308.5 574.8 365.3 209.6 405.7 282.6 163.2 123.1 31.4 91.7 1,008.5 786.8 1,262.6          Apr 
288.3 566.3 359.8 206.5 403.8 279.3 160.7 124.6 31.5 93.0 1,027.6 804.5 1,518.8          May260.4 604.5 370.2 234.3 402.2 278.2 160.3 124.0 31.8 92.2 992.6 772.1 1,362.8          June
257.2 603.1 367.0 236.1 403.7 282.5 162.1 121.2 31.1 90.1 1,005.2 786.0 1,444.5          July
258.9 598.1 359.6 238.4 403.4 281.3 161.0 122.1 31.7 90.4 1,007.4 787.3 1,408.9          Aug 262.1 601.7 359.8 241.9 407.8 283.5 161.4 124.3 31.4 92.9 1,005.3 788.1 1,352.2          Sep 
256.9 611.8 366.5 245.3 408.0 282.2 160.0 125.8 31.9 93.9 1,003.5 784.8 1,295.6          Oct 
257.2 612.2 360.2 252.0 407.1 282.8 160.3 124.3 32.0 92.3 996.2 778.1 1,274.5          Nov 259.8 594.0 350.3 243.7 399.2 275.1 158.1 124.1 30.4 93.7 970.3 745.0 1,239.4          Dec 
266.8 592.1 352.2 239.9 404.6 277.6 157.0 127.0 30.3 96.8 955.4 728.8 1,137.7 2013          Jan 
260.8 588.7 347.3 241.4 404.6 280.2 157.0 124.4 30.3 94.1 959.5 739.4 1,140.0          Feb 264.8 586.8 345.2 241.6 408.1 284.8 157.6 123.4 30.1 93.2 965.3 740.5 1,141.2          Mar 
285.8 597.1 355.2 241.9 406.6 282.3 158.7 124.4 30.8 93.5 964.2 736.2 1,143.8          Apr 
268.9 581.6 344.6 237.0 411.8 282.3 155.8 129.5 30.7 98.8 962.8 733.7 1,048.1          May262.8 580.8 342.3 238.5 405.7 278.1 152.3 127.6 29.9 97.7 951.9 723.2 962.9          June
Changes 3
21.7 − 23.0 − 14.3 − 8.6 45.5 27.4 2.2 18.2 4.7 13.5 57.1 31.2 − 22.2 200519.3 − 31.0 − 18.6 − 12.4 54.5 59.6 20.9 − 5.1 − 1.3 − 3.8 205.7 165.7 9.8 2006
− 14.6 − 39.6 − 29.3 − 10.3 55.1 73.6 41.5 − 18.6 0.0 − 18.6 222.7 136.5 21.1 2007
65.4 − 28.4 − 16.9 − 11.5 37.8 42.3 40.4 − 4.5 1.6 − 6.1 − 40.3 − 7.6 29.7 2008
10.5 21.3 − 5.1 26.4 − 20.9 − 20.9 − 7.1 0.0 − 3.9 3.9 −182.5 −162.3 − 99.8 2009
− 14.3 139.7 83.4 56.3 − 29.6 − 36.4 0.2 6.8 3.1 3.7 − 74.1 − 61.9 − 46.3 2010
− 18.0 − 74.0 − 59.1 − 14.9 − 16.6 − 13.8 − 5.5 − 2.7 8.0 − 10.7 − 39.5 − 34.9 112.9 2011− 11.8 10.7 − 10.5 21.2 − 0.2 − 0.7 − 1.5 0.5 − 2.2 2.7 − 15.5 − 17.7 − 62.2 2012
− 1.2 − 3.4 − 3.8 0.4 − 4.8 − 7.0 − 6.1 2.2 − 0.4 2.6 − 24.0 − 20.8 −115.8 2011          Oct 
0.4 − 1.0 − 3.3 2.3 − 6.5 1.2 − 0.2 − 7.7 0.6 − 8.3 1.2 2.3 − 4.9          Nov 
− 3.4 − 6.9 1.6 − 8.5 − 9.0 − 8.2 − 6.7 − 0.8 1.5 − 2.4 − 9.5 − 11.7 88.2          Dec 
− 0.3 7.3 3.8 3.5 3.7 1.7 − 2.9 2.0 − 0.2 2.2 28.7 29.3 − 7.3 2012          Jan 
− 5.8 − 0.5 − 2.2 1.7 1.5 1.3 1.3 0.2 0.1 0.2 − 12.0 − 8.4 − 30.0          Feb 
8.4 2.0 − 1.4 3.4 1.5 1.7 1.7 − 0.2 − 0.9 0.6 4.9 0.8 − 58.2          Mar 
13.8 4.8 5.3 − 0.5 − 0.8 2.0 2.9 − 2.8 − 0.1 − 2.7 − 0.6 0.3 34.1          Apr 
− 19.9 − 8.8 − 5.6 − 3.2 − 3.9 − 5.1 − 4.4 1.2 0.1 1.1 − 2.6 − 2.5 255.6          May− 8.0 18.2 10.4 7.8 − 0.9 − 0.9 0.2 − 0.0 0.2 − 0.3 − 29.4 − 27.1 −158.0          June
− 3.0 − 1.6 − 3.3 1.8 0.5 3.4 0.9 − 2.9 − 0.7 − 2.2 2.6 5.2 90.7          July
1.9 − 5.1 − 7.4 2.3 0.4 − 0.5 − 0.2 1.0 0.6 0.3 12.0 10.2 − 35.6          Aug 
3.4 2.8 − 0.6 3.4 5.1 2.9 1.3 2.2 − 0.4 2.6 6.7 9.1 − 57.7          Sep 
− 5.2 9.5 6.7 2.8 0.7 − 0.9 − 1.1 1.6 0.6 1.0 0.9 − 0.8 − 57.3          Oct 
0.4 0.3 − 6.3 6.6 − 0.7 0.8 0.4 − 1.5 0.1 − 1.6 − 6.8 − 6.3 − 2.8          Nov 2.7 − 18.3 − 9.9 − 8.5 − 7.3 − 7.2 − 1.6 − 0.2 − 1.6 1.4 − 19.8 − 27.4 − 35.8          Dec 
7.1 − 1.6 2.0 − 3.5 6.6 3.6 0.1 3.0 − 0.1 3.1 − 3.1 − 4.8 −103.9 2013          Jan 
− 6.0 − 3.4 − 4.9 1.5 − 0.7 2.0 − 0.5 − 2.7 0.0 − 2.7 − 2.4 1.6 − 1.1          Feb 
4.1 − 2.0 − 2.1 0.2 2.8 3.9 0.0 − 1.1 − 0.2 − 0.9 − 3.1 − 7.1 0.6          Mar 
20.9 10.3 10.1 0.2 − 0.8 − 1.8 1.9 0.9 0.7 0.3 5.7 2.1 2.5          Apr 
− 17.1 − 15.5 − 10.5 − 4.9 5.1 − 0.1 − 3.0 5.1 − 0.1 5.2 − 1.9 − 2.8 − 95.6          May
− 5.7 − 0.7 − 2.3 1.6 − 5.7 − 3.9 − 3.4 − 1.8 − 0.7 − 1.1 − 10.2 − 10.4 − 87.2          June
exchange of equalisation claims. 3Statistical breaks have been eliminated from
the flow figures (see also footnote * in Table II.1). 

Deutsche Bundesbank
22  Monthly Report
August 2013
IV Banks
 
1 Assets and liabilities of monetary financial institutions (excluding the Bundesbank) in Germany *
  Liabilities
 
€ billion
Deposits of banks (MFIs) Deposits of non-banks (non-MFIs) in the euro area
in the euro area
Deposits of non-banks in the home country Deposits of non-banks
With agreed At agreed
of banks maturities notice
Balance in the in other of which of which
sheet home member Over- up to up to Over-
Period total  1 Total country states Total Total night Total 2 years Total 3 months Total night
 End of year or month
 
2004 6,617.4 1,528.4 1,270.8 257.6 2,264.2 2,148.5 646.2 898.9 239.9 603.5 515.5 71.9 8.8
2005 6,859.4 1,569.6 1,300.8 268.8 2,329.1 2,225.4 715.8 906.2 233.4 603.4 519.1 62.2 9.6
2006 7,154.4 1,637.7 1,348.6 289.0 2,449.2 2,341.6 745.8 1,009.3 310.1 586.5 487.4 62.0 13.9
2007 7,592.4 1,778.6 1,479.0 299.6 2,633.6 2,518.3 769.6 1,193.3 477.9 555.4 446.0 75.1 19.6
2008 7,892.7 1,827.7 1,583.0 244.7 2,798.2 2,687.3 809.5 1,342.7 598.7 535.2 424.8 74.2 22.4
2009 7,436.1 1,589.7 1,355.6 234.0 2,818.0 2,731.3 997.8 1,139.1 356.4 594.4 474.4 63.9 17.7
2010 8,304.8 1,495.8 1,240.1 255.7 2,925.8 2,817.6 1,086.5 1,112.9 307.2 618.2 512.5 68.4 19.3
2011 8,393.3 1,444.8 1,210.3 234.5 3,033.4 2,915.1 1,139.6 1,159.4 366.2 616.1 515.3 78.8 25.9
2012 8,226.6 1,371.0 1,135.9 235.1 3,091.4 2,985.2 1,294.9 1,072.8 320.0 617.6 528.4 77.3 31.2
2011          Sep 8,489.4 1,430.6 1,176.1 254.6 3,007.5 2,884.0 1,111.5 1,159.1 361.4 613.4 509.7 80.7 28.3
         Oct 8,353.9 1,419.0 1,162.8 256.2 3,008.5 2,888.5 1,120.4 1,155.0 359.1 613.0 509.5 80.0 28.4
         Nov 8,406.6 1,427.1 1,177.3 249.8 3,028.6 2,912.1 1,145.2 1,155.4 360.5 611.5 509.8 77.3 25.3
         Dec 8,393.3 1,444.8 1,210.3 234.5 3,033.4 2,915.1 1,139.6 1,159.4 366.2 616.1 515.3 78.8 25.9
2012          Jan 8,517.7 1,475.9 1,221.1 254.8 3,038.6 2,912.4 1,140.8 1,154.3 364.5 617.2 517.4 82.8 29.3
         Feb 8,526.0 1,484.7 1,232.3 252.4 3,046.2 2,915.6 1,147.2 1,148.6 361.0 619.8 520.2 83.7 31.0
         Mar 8,522.7 1,501.9 1,232.1 269.8 3,037.7 2,924.1 1,157.4 1,147.3 363.0 619.4 520.6 77.3 28.9
         Apr 8,599.6 1,501.9 1,222.4 279.5 3,052.2 2,938.9 1,170.0 1,151.0 368.0 617.9 519.4 77.4 28.3
         May 8,859.6 1,494.1 1,219.3 274.8 3,069.6 2,955.6 1,185.8 1,152.7 372.2 617.1 519.5 78.2 30.1
         June 8,636.4 1,469.5 1,207.6 262.0 3,091.1 2,975.0 1,203.3 1,155.7 378.1 616.0 519.4 78.9 30.3
         July 8,726.8 1,454.7 1,190.5 264.1 3,084.9 2,974.1 1,207.7 1,150.5 377.8 615.9 520.1 78.5 30.1
         Aug 8,695.6 1,447.9 1,185.3 262.6 3,092.7 2,985.4 1,221.5 1,148.5 377.1 615.3 521.0 76.3 30.3
         Sep 8,567.6 1,428.2 1,175.5 252.8 3,100.1 2,991.1 1,241.8 1,135.2 366.7 614.1 521.3 77.5 33.6
         Oct 8,489.2 1,415.4 1,161.0 254.4 3,099.5 2,993.8 1,265.7 1,114.7 355.4 613.5 521.5 76.3 32.1
         Nov 8,440.0 1,413.7 1,160.3 253.5 3,114.9 3,006.6 1,293.1 1,100.7 346.7 612.8 522.0 76.8 33.1
         Dec 8,226.6 1,371.0 1,135.9 235.1 3,091.4 2,985.2 1,294.9 1,072.8 320.0 617.6 528.4 77.3 31.2
2013          Jan 8,110.4 1,371.5 1,127.0 244.6 3,090.1 2,983.1 1,305.1 1,061.3 310.2 616.7 529.3 77.0 32.1
         Feb 8,094.4 1,348.4 1,103.4 245.0 3,081.2 2,977.9 1,310.2 1,051.2 303.2 616.6 530.7 76.3 33.7
         Mar 8,063.0 1,333.9 1,093.6 240.3 3,082.3 2,979.7 1,310.5 1,054.7 307.1 614.4 529.3 77.2 35.3
         Apr 8,080.3 1,348.6 1,089.7 258.9 3,083.6 2,984.0 1,322.3 1,049.5 305.9 612.3 528.7 77.0 35.4
         May 7,937.6 1,320.9 1,071.5 249.4 3,100.0 2,998.0 1,337.7 1,049.6 306.6 610.7 529.1 74.3 32.7
         June 7,833.2 1,301.2 1,060.2 241.1 3,104.9 2,995.9 1,345.3 1,041.0 300.4 609.6 528.9 78.2 37.1
 Changes 4
2005 187.9 32.8 27.0 5.9 65.0 75.5 69.4 7.3 − 6.9 − 1.2 2.9 − 8.0 0.5
2006 356.8 105.6 81.5 24.1 122.9 118.6 30.4 105.0 77.1 − 16.8 − 31.7 0.4 4.4
2007 518.3 148.4 134.8 13.6 185.1 177.3 24.5 183.9 167.8 − 31.1 − 41.4 13.6 5.6
2008 313.3 65.8 121.7 − 55.8 162.3 173.1 38.7 154.6 123.5 − 20.2 − 21.2 − 7.5 − 0.1
2009 −454.5 −235.4 −224.6 − 10.8 31.9 43.9 205.0 −220.4 −259.3 59.3 50.3 − 9.6 − 4.1
2010 −136.3 − 75.2 − 99.4 24.2 72.3 59.7 88.7 − 53.0 − 52.2 24.0 38.3 − 4.4 2.2
2011 54.1 − 48.4 − 28.8 − 19.6 102.1 97.4 52.4 47.6 58.8 − 2.6 1.3 4.8 6.5
2012 −129.2 − 68.7 − 70.0 1.3 57.8 67.1 156.1 − 90.4 − 50.2 1.5 14.1 − 1.4 5.4
2011          Oct −116.4 − 9.6 − 12.0 2.4 2.0 5.2 9.6 − 3.9 − 2.2 − 0.4 − 0.3 − 0.5 0.2
         Nov 31.1 5.7 13.1 − 7.4 19.0 22.7 23.7 0.1 1.2 − 1.1 − 0.2 − 2.9 − 3.2
         Dec − 27.9 20.1 31.4 − 11.2 5.1 3.5 − 6.3 5.2 5.5 4.6 5.4 1.3 0.5
2012          Jan 132.8 32.1 11.5 20.7 5.7 − 2.4 1.5 − 5.0 − 1.7 1.1 2.1 4.1 3.5
         Feb 20.7 10.2 12.2 − 2.0 8.2 3.7 6.7 − 5.6 − 3.3 2.6 3.8 1.0 1.7
         Mar − 7.0 16.7 − 0.6 17.3 − 8.6 8.4 10.1 − 1.3 1.9 − 0.4 0.4 − 6.4 − 2.1
         Apr 68.9 1.8 − 7.6 9.4 14.0 12.1 12.5 1.1 2.4 − 1.5 − 1.2 0.0 − 0.6
         May 226.6 − 11.5 − 5.4 − 6.1 15.7 15.2 14.8 1.2 3.8 − 0.8 0.0 0.5 1.7
         June −214.5 − 23.7 − 11.2 − 12.5 21.9 19.8 17.7 3.2 6.0 − 1.1 − 0.1 0.8 0.2
         July 85.2 − 16.3 − 17.9 1.7 − 7.0 − 1.6 4.0 − 5.4 − 0.4 − 0.2 0.7 − 0.5 − 0.2
         Aug − 16.8 − 5.4 − 4.4 − 1.0 8.5 11.9 14.3 − 1.8 − 0.5 − 0.5 0.9 − 2.1 0.3
         Sep −115.5 − 18.4 − 9.1 − 9.3 7.2 5.1 21.0 − 14.7 − 11.8 − 1.2 0.3 1.3 3.4
         Oct − 75.9 − 15.5 − 17.2 1.7 − 0.4 3.0 24.0 − 20.5 − 11.3 − 0.6 0.2 − 1.1 − 1.5
         Nov − 29.4 − 1.3 − 0.7 − 0.6 15.5 12.8 27.5 − 13.9 − 8.7 − 0.7 0.6 0.4 1.0
         Dec −204.3 − 37.3 − 19.4 − 17.9 − 22.8 − 20.8 2.1 − 27.7 − 26.6 4.8 6.3 0.6 − 1.8
2013          Jan − 97.7 2.3 − 7.4 9.8 − 0.2 − 1.2 10.9 − 11.2 − 9.7 − 0.8 1.0 − 0.1 1.0
         Feb − 27.1 − 24.8 − 24.6 − 0.2 − 9.8 − 5.9 4.5 − 10.3 − 7.2 − 0.1 1.4 − 0.9 1.5
         Mar − 44.2 − 15.5 − 10.3 − 5.3 − 0.0 0.8 − 0.4 3.4 3.8 − 2.2 − 1.4 0.8 1.5
         Apr 27.6 15.8 − 3.2 19.1 1.9 4.9 12.5 − 5.4 − 1.4 − 2.1 − 0.6 − 0.2 0.1
         May −142.7 − 27.7 − 18.1 − 9.6 16.0 14.0 15.5 0.1 0.7 − 1.6 0.4 − 3.1 − 2.2
         June −104.4 − 20.0 − 11.7 − 8.3 5.2 − 1.8 7.5 − 8.3 − 6.7 − 1.1 − 0.2 4.0 4.5
*This table serves to supplement the “Overall monetary survey“ in section II. Unlike by banks (including building and loan associations) − data from money market
the other tables in section IV, this table includes − in addition to the figures reported funds. 1See footnote 1 in Table IV.2. 2Excluding deposits of central

Deutsche Bundesbank
23  Monthly Report
August 2013
IV Banks
 
   
 
 Debt securities
issued 3 
in other member states 2 Deposits ofcentral governments
With agreed At agreed Liabilitiesmaturities notice arising
of which from Money of which Liabilities
domestic market with to non- repos with
of which of which central non-banks fund euro- Capital maturities
up to up to govern- in the shares of up to area and Other
Total 2 years Total 3 months Total ments euro area issued  
3 Total reserves   Period 2 years 3 residents Liabilities 1 
End of year or month
 
59.8 9.8 3.3 2.7 43.8 41.4 14.8 31.5 1,554.8 116.9 577.1 329.3 317.2 2004
50.2 9.8 2.4 2.0 41.6 38.8 19.5 31.7 1,611.9 113.8 626.2 346.9 324.5 2005
45.9 9.3 2.3 1.9 45.5 41.9 17.1 32.0 1,636.7 136.4 638.5 389.6 353.7 200653.2 22.0 2.3 1.8 40.1 38.3 26.6 28.6 1,637.6 182.3 661.0 428.2 398.2 200749.5 24.9 2.4 1.8 36.6 34.8 61.1 16.4 1,609.9 233.3 666.3 461.7 451.5 200843.7 17.0 2.5 2.0 22.8 22.2 80.5 11.4 1,500.5 146.3 565.6 454.8 415.6 2009
46.4 16.1 2.8 2.2 39.8 38.7 86.7 9.8 1,407.8 82.3 636.0 452.6 1,290.2 2010
49.6 18.4 3.3 2.5 39.5 37.9 97.1 6.2 1,345.7 75.7 561.5 468.1 1,436.6 201142.3 14.7 3.8 2.8 28.9 25.9 80.4 7.3 1,233.1 56.9 611.4 487.3 1,344.7 2012
49.4 17.7 3.0 2.3 42.7 40.8 107.0 7.2 1,352.4 76.1 644.6 459.4 1,480.7 2011          Sep 48.5 17.1 3.1 2.4 40.0 37.9 105.7 7.2 1,341.7 74.0 650.4 462.7 1,358.7          Oct 
48.8 17.6 3.2 2.5 39.2 35.8 111.1 6.3 1,348.4 79.7 668.9 466.6 1,349.6          Nov 49.6 18.4 3.3 2.5 39.5 37.9 97.1 6.2 1,345.7 75.7 561.5 468.1 1,436.6          Dec 
50.1 19.0 3.4 2.6 43.4 40.9 86.7 5.9 1,311.1 74.3 702.3 468.9 1,428.2 2012          Jan 
49.2 18.6 3.4 2.6 46.9 45.2 96.6 5.7 1,316.9 75.6 719.2 471.8 1,384.9          Feb 44.9 16.0 3.5 2.6 36.3 35.6 93.1 5.5 1,305.7 72.7 772.9 476.9 1,329.2          Mar 
45.6 16.7 3.5 2.6 35.8 33.4 102.9 5.5 1,303.7 68.5 788.9 477.2 1,367.2          Apr 
44.5 15.9 3.6 2.7 35.8 31.5 108.3 5.5 1,304.1 63.6 775.2 482.5 1,620.2          May44.9 16.5 3.8 2.8 37.2 33.8 98.9 5.7 1,291.7 62.9 737.8 489.4 1,452.5          June
44.6 16.1 3.8 2.9 32.3 30.0 106.6 5.7 1,296.0 65.5 748.5 497.0 1,533.4          July
42.1 14.3 3.9 2.9 31.0 27.7 108.1 5.3 1,285.6 62.8 769.0 492.5 1,494.5          Aug 40.0 12.5 3.9 2.9 31.5 26.7 98.0 5.1 1,277.2 61.0 726.4 487.8 1,444.8          Sep 
40.4 12.6 3.9 2.9 29.3 26.6 107.8 5.4 1,264.6 60.7 719.3 488.1 1,389.0          Oct 
39.9 12.3 3.8 2.9 31.5 26.6 107.0 5.4 1,255.2 60.8 685.8 490.6 1,367.4          Nov 42.3 14.7 3.8 2.8 28.9 25.9 80.4 7.3 1,233.1 56.9 611.4 487.3 1,344.7          Dec 
41.2 14.2 3.7 2.8 30.0 24.0 83.1 7.4 1,212.4 52.0 613.2 489.8 1,242.9 2013          Jan 
38.9 13.1 3.7 2.8 27.1 23.6 99.7 6.8 1,215.9 51.7 612.0 499.8 1,230.6          Feb 38.3 13.0 3.6 2.8 25.4 23.4 97.0 6.8 1,201.5 49.5 600.1 502.9 1,238.6          Mar 
38.0 13.1 3.6 2.8 22.6 21.8 98.9 7.4 1,192.5 50.2 602.5 502.7 1,244.1          Apr 
38.0 12.5 3.6 2.8 27.7 22.5 98.0 7.3 1,177.8 48.5 585.4 506.6 1,141.6          May37.5 11.5 3.6 2.8 30.8 23.9 113.3 5.7 1,165.8 45.4 574.3 517.4 1,050.5          June
Changes 4
− 7.7 − 0.3 − 0.9 − 0.7 − 2.5 − 3.0 4.7 0.2 38.7 − 9.9 22.0 14.8 9.7 2005− 3.9 − 0.3 − 0.1 − 0.2 3.9 3.1 − 3.3 0.3 34.8 22.1 32.4 27.5 36.6 2006
8.0 12.9 0.0 − 0.1 − 5.8 − 4.3 8.1 − 3.4 20.9 49.3 48.7 42.3 68.3 2007
− 7.5 0.6 0.1 − 0.0 − 3.3 − 3.2 36.1 − 12.2 − 33.9 50.2 − 0.1 39.3 56.1 2008− 5.7 − 7.7 0.1 0.2 − 2.4 − 0.8 19.4 − 5.0 −104.6 − 87.1 − 95.3 − 0.3 − 65.0 2009
− 6.8 − 5.8 0.3 0.3 17.0 16.5 6.2 − 1.6 −106.7 − 63.2 54.4 − 7.1 − 78.6 2010
− 2.2 1.7 0.5 0.3 − 0.1 − 0.7 10.0 − 3.7 − 76.9 − 6.6 − 80.5 13.7 137.8 2011− 7.2 − 3.6 0.5 0.3 − 7.9 − 9.2 − 19.6 1.2 −107.0 − 18.6 54.2 21.0 − 68.5 2012
− 0.8 − 0.5 0.1 0.0 − 2.7 − 2.9 − 1.2 − 0.0 − 2.8 − 1.8 12.0 4.7 −121.4 2011          Oct 
0.2 0.4 0.1 0.1 − 0.7 − 2.1 5.3 − 0.9 − 4.2 5.3 11.0 2.3 − 7.2          Nov 
0.7 0.7 0.1 0.1 0.3 2.0 − 14.1 − 0.1 − 11.3 − 4.2 −113.8 − 0.0 86.1          Dec 
0.6 0.7 0.1 0.0 3.9 3.0 − 10.8 − 0.3 − 31.4 − 1.3 143.6 1.4 − 7.9 2012          Jan 
− 0.8 − 0.3 0.1 0.0 3.5 4.4 10.0 − 0.2 11.6 1.4 20.7 3.9 − 43.7          Feb 
− 4.3 − 2.7 0.0 0.0 − 10.6 − 9.7 − 3.6 − 0.2 − 12.5 − 3.0 52.5 4.9 − 56.2          Mar 
0.7 0.7 − 0.0 − 0.0 1.9 0.2 7.2 − 0.0 − 5.8 − 4.3 13.8 − 0.3 38.3          Apr 
− 1.3 − 0.9 0.1 0.1 0.0 − 1.9 5.3 0.0 − 13.8 − 5.4 − 24.4 2.8 252.6          May
0.4 0.7 0.2 0.1 1.3 2.3 − 9.4 0.2 − 8.7 − 0.6 − 34.7 7.6 −167.7          June
− 0.3 − 0.4 0.1 0.0 − 4.9 − 3.8 7.6 0.1 − 2.7 2.4 6.3 6.3 90.8          July− 2.4 − 1.8 0.0 0.0 − 1.3 − 2.3 1.7 − 0.4 − 4.1 − 2.5 25.2 − 3.3 − 39.0          Aug − 2.1 − 1.8 0.0 0.0 0.8 − 0.8 − 10.1 − 0.2 − 3.2 − 1.7 − 38.1 − 3.2 − 49.4          Sep 
0.4 0.1 0.0 0.0 − 2.3 − 0.0 9.9 0.4 − 10.5 − 0.2 − 5.8 0.7 − 54.6          Oct 
− 0.5 − 0.4 − 0.0 − 0.0 2.2 0.0 − 0.8 − 0.0 − 8.4 0.2 − 33.4 2.7 − 3.6          Nov 
2.5 2.5 − 0.1 − 0.1 − 2.6 − 0.7 − 26.5 1.9 − 17.6 − 3.7 − 71.5 − 2.5 − 28.1          Dec 
− 1.0 − 0.5 − 0.1 − 0.0 1.1 − 2.0 2.7 0.1 − 12.0 − 4.6 7.3 5.0 −102.9 2013          Jan − 2.4 − 1.1 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 2.9 − 0.4 16.6 − 0.5 − 2.2 − 0.5 − 5.5 8.4 − 9.4          Feb − 0.6 − 0.1 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 1.7 − 0.2 − 2.7 − 0.1 − 19.8 − 2.3 − 16.3 1.8 8.4          Mar 
− 0.3 0.1 − 0.0 0.0 − 2.8 − 1.6 1.9 0.7 − 4.3 0.8 6.0 0.9 4.7          Apr 
− 0.9 − 0.6 − 0.0 0.0 5.1 0.7 − 0.9 − 0.1 − 14.7 − 1.7 − 17.6 4.0 −101.7          May− 0.5 − 1.0 − 0.0 − 0.0 3.1 1.4 15.4 − 1.6 − 12.2 − 3.4 − 11.1 11.0 − 91.1          June
governments. 3In Germany, debt securities with maturities of up to one year are published together with money market fund shares. 4Statistical breaks have been
classed as money market paper; up to the January 2002 Monthly Report they were eliminated from the flow figures (see also footnote * in Table II.1). 

Deutsche Bundesbank
24  Monthly Report
August 2013
IV Banks
 
2 Principal assets and liabilities of banks (MFIs) in Germany, by category of banks*
 
 
€ billion
  Lending to banks (MFIs)  Lending to non-banks (non-MFIs)
 
 of which of which
 
Loans
 Cash in
 hand and
 credit
Number of balances for
reporting Balance with Balances up to and for Partici- Securities Securities
End of institu- sheet central and issued by including more than issued by pating Other
month tions total  1 banks Total loans banks Total 1 year 1 year Bills non-banks interests assets  1 
All categories of banks
 
2013          Jan 1,867 8,194.1 148.4 2,662.1 2,004.8 649.0 3,974.5 507.3 2,739.9 0.7 714.5 140.4 1,268.7
         Feb 1,868 8,179.7 118.7 2,684.4 2,030.6 645.9 3,967.1 504.1 2,743.6 0.6 707.4 137.2 1,272.3
         Mar 1,867 8,149.3 129.8 2,636.3 1,987.1 641.6 3,973.4 501.6 2,744.6 0.6 716.0 135.1 1,274.7
         Apr 1,867 8,165.6 119.4 2,635.1 1,990.3 637.4 3,998.2 506.8 2,743.5 0.6 735.4 135.7 1,277.2
         May 1,867 8,020.8 105.6 2,624.5 1,979.8 637.5 3,973.4 494.8 2,745.5 0.6 719.1 138.2 1,179.1
         June 1,866 7,915.5 107.6 2,612.1 1,968.1 636.5 3,966.8 497.7 2,741.5 0.6 715.7 137.4 1,091.5
Commercial banks 6
2013          May 274 3,054.9 64.4 959.0 866.2 92.3 1,126.7 257.8 657.2 0.2 202.3 71.6 833.2
         June 273 2,988.5 63.0 964.5 872.9 90.7 1,120.3 257.7 655.9 0.2 199.0 71.8 768.8
   Big banks 7
2013          May 4 1,975.8 20.0 561.2 512.0 49.0 538.1 170.0 254.5 0.2 105.1 64.3 792.1
         June 4 1,894.2 14.5 555.5 507.4 47.5 529.7 168.1 253.8 0.2 101.1 64.5 730.0
   Regional banks and other commercial banks
2013          May 163 842.9 35.1 234.2 193.0 40.9 531.5 69.0 369.6 0.0 92.3 6.6 35.5
         June 163 838.2 34.5 229.7 188.4 41.1 533.8 70.0 369.6 0.0 93.6 6.6 33.5
   Branches of foreign banks
2013          May 107 236.2 9.3 163.6 161.2 2.4 57.1 18.8 33.1 0.0 5.0 0.7 5.5
         June 106 256.1 14.0 179.3 177.1 2.2 56.8 19.6 32.6 0.0 4.3 0.7 5.3
Landesbanken
2013          May 9 1,191.1 7.8 400.5 288.9 109.2 600.3 92.7 389.7 0.1 114.7 15.1 167.4
         June 9 1,171.0 11.9 400.1 289.2 108.4 591.2 87.9 387.0 0.1 113.3 14.6 153.3
Savings banks
2013          May 423 1,095.1 14.8 224.7 82.1 141.9 821.6 59.3 642.0 0.1 120.1 16.5 17.5
         June 423 1,094.2 14.4 222.7 79.9 142.2 823.8 60.4 642.4 0.1 120.8 16.1 17.4
 
Regional institutions of credit cooperatives  
 
2013          May 2 284.6 2.4 160.7 126.1 34.5 65.7 14.1 22.2 0.0 29.1 14.5 41.4
         June 2 280.0 0.6 160.7 125.5 35.2 66.6 14.4 22.3 0.0 29.7 14.5 37.7
Credit cooperatives
2013          May 1,101 747.6 10.5 179.4 58.1 121.1 525.9 32.8 416.1 0.1 76.8 12.0 19.7
         June 1,101 745.9 10.6 175.5 54.5 120.7 528.3 33.8 417.2 0.1 77.1 12.0 19.5
Mortgage banks
2013          May 18 489.6 2.6 132.6 78.2 51.4 337.5 5.6 256.0 − 75.9 0.6 16.1
         June 18 484.8 1.6 130.3 75.1 52.1 336.4 5.6 255.4 − 75.4 0.6 15.8
Building and loan associations
2013          May 22 202.4 0.3 60.3 43.2 17.0 134.7 1.7 117.1 . 15.9 0.4 6.8
         June 22 203.0 0.4 60.1 43.0 17.0 135.4 1.6 117.5 . 16.3 0.4 6.8
Special purpose banks
2013          May 18 955.5 2.9 507.4 436.9 70.1 360.9 30.8 245.1 − 84.3 7.5 76.8
         June 18 948.0 5.2 498.3 428.0 70.1 364.8 36.2 244.0 − 84.1 7.4 72.3
Memo item: Foreign banks 8
2013          May 143 883.7 44.1 329.3 287.1 42.1 411.3 80.8 239.7 0.1 88.7 5.7 93.2
         June 142 889.3 40.6 348.0 305.9 41.6 407.7 78.9 238.7 0.1 87.8 5.7 87.3
  of which:  Banks majority-owned by foreign banks 9
2013          May 36 647.4 34.9 165.7 125.9 39.7 354.2 62.0 206.6 0.1 83.7 5.0 87.7
         June 36 633.2 26.6 168.7 128.7 39.3 350.9 59.3 206.1 0.1 83.5 5.0 82.0
*Assets and liabilities of monetary financial institutions (MFIs) in Germany. The assets meaning of section 340e (3) sentence 1 of the German Commercial Code (Handels-
and liabilities of foreign branches, of money market funds (which are also classified gesetzbuch) read in conjunction with section 35 (1) No 1a of the Credit Institution
as MFIs) and of the Bundesbank are not included. For the definitions of the respective Accounting Regulation (Verordnung über die Rechnungslegung der Kreditinstitute)
items, see the footnotes to Table IV.3. 1Owing to the Act Modernising Accounting are classified under "Other assets and liabilities" as of the December 2010 reporting
Law (Gesetz zur Modernisierung des Bilanzrechts) of 25 May 2009, derivative date. Trading portfolio derivatives are listed separately in the Statistical Supplement
financial instruments in the trading portfolio (trading portfolio derivatives) within the to the Monthly Report 1, Banking statistics, in Tables I.1 to I.3. 2For building and

Deutsche Bundesbank
25  Monthly Report
August 2013
IV Banks
 
   
 
Deposits of banks (MFIs) Deposits of non-banks (non-MFIs) Capital
 including  
of which of which published
reserves,
Time deposits 2 Savings deposits 4 partici-pation
Memo rights
item Bearer capital,
for for of which debt Liabilities
funds for
up to and more arising At three Bank general Other securities
Sight Time Sight including than from savings out- banking liabi-   End of months’
Total deposits deposits Total deposits 1 year 1 year 2 repos 3 Total notice bonds risks lities 1   month standing 5 
All categories of banks
 
1,828.9 443.9 1,384.9 3,329.2 1,442.5 379.7 772.3 152.5 627.2 537.4 107.4 1,285.2 416.4 1,334.4 2013          Jan 
1,797.6 435.8 1,361.8 3,343.8 1,459.1 383.0 769.5 171.7 627.0 538.7 105.3 1,296.6 418.6 1,323.2          Feb 1,773.5 409.6 1,363.9 3,339.8 1,446.4 392.5 772.8 159.0 624.7 537.4 103.5 1,284.1 419.7 1,332.1          Mar 
1,777.7 432.7 1,345.0 3,356.0 1,466.9 397.3 767.4 172.6 622.6 536.8 101.7 1,271.4 423.2 1,337.3          Apr 
1,727.7 419.7 1,308.0 3,376.8 1,495.6 391.8 768.7 177.3 621.0 537.2 99.7 1,254.8 429.1 1,232.6          May1,708.7 394.5 1,314.2 3,385.2 1,496.3 404.6 766.9 186.1 619.8 536.9 97.5 1,246.8 435.8 1,139.0          June
Commercial banks 6
704.6 292.5 412.1 1,249.2 687.8 203.5 209.7 117.1 119.0 103.9 29.2 152.8 140.3 808.0 2013          May705.4 271.4 434.1 1,248.7 672.8 218.8 210.5 118.2 118.4 103.8 28.1 152.8 140.4 741.2          June
Big banks 7
441.6 212.5 229.1 599.5 312.8 113.5 87.4 110.1 75.0 72.6 10.8 113.3 80.4 740.9 2013          May430.2 193.3 237.0 591.7 288.6 130.9 86.8 110.5 74.9 72.5 10.5 114.2 80.4 677.7          June
Regional banks and other commercial banks
145.1 46.7 98.4 548.2 309.8 75.6 101.7 6.9 43.8 31.3 17.3 39.0 51.8 58.9 2013          May139.9 44.9 94.9 552.8 316.4 73.7 102.9 7.7 43.4 31.2 16.4 38.1 51.8 55.6          June
Branches of foreign banks
117.9 33.3 84.6 101.5 65.1 14.5 20.6 − 0.1 0.1 1.2 0.5 8.1 8.2 2013          May135.4 33.2 102.2 104.1 67.8 14.2 20.8 − 0.1 0.1 1.2 0.5 8.1 7.9          June
Landesbanken
320.0 41.8 278.2 335.8 105.5 80.0 135.3 44.1 14.7 10.5 0.2 295.6 62.6 177.2 2013          May307.4 40.7 266.7 346.1 118.2 78.2 134.6 49.1 14.8 10.6 0.2 293.3 62.9 161.4          June
Savings banks
160.3 17.1 143.1 790.3 391.9 31.3 15.7 0.2 299.5 256.0 52.0 16.8 79.9 47.8 2013          May160.3 19.2 141.1 788.9 392.0 30.9 15.7 0.5 299.1 255.9 51.2 16.6 83.2 45.2          June
 
Regional institutions of credit cooperatives
 
134.0 31.9 102.1 37.8 11.6 12.0 11.9 4.2 − − 2.2 59.3 13.8 39.7 2013          May132.9 29.7 103.2 38.1 11.6 12.6 11.6 5.1 − − 2.2 59.2 13.8 36.0          June
Credit cooperatives
100.6 6.6 94.0 547.0 280.4 40.7 23.7 0.3 187.2 166.2 15.0 13.2 51.7 35.0 2013          May101.4 8.0 93.5 545.1 280.7 39.4 23.4 0.1 187.0 166.1 14.7 12.5 54.2 32.7          June
Mortgage banks
120.2 6.5 113.7 179.9 11.0 15.2 153.4 7.2 0.2 0.2 . 151.0 17.2 21.2 2013          May118.1 5.3 112.8 177.7 10.1 15.4 151.9 7.3 0.2 0.2 . 150.8 17.6 20.5          June
Building and loan associations
22.3 1.7 20.6 150.9 0.5 0.7 148.5 − 0.4 0.3 0.9 4.2 9.0 16.1 2013          May22.1 1.9 20.2 151.3 0.5 0.6 148.9 − 0.4 0.3 0.9 4.2 9.0 16.4          June
Special purpose banks
165.7 21.6 144.1 85.9 7.0 8.4 70.5 4.3 − − . 561.9 54.6 87.5 2013          May161.1 18.4 142.7 89.3 10.4 8.6 70.3 5.8 − − . 557.5 54.6 85.6          June
Memo item:   Foreign banks 8
234.5 88.9 145.6 465.9 274.1 82.7 74.4 31.1 21.1 20.8 13.6 33.1 46.1 104.1 2013          May243.9 82.7 161.2 469.1 278.0 83.2 74.2 31.7 21.0 20.7 12.8 33.1 46.1 97.1          June
of which:   Banks majority-owned by foreign banks 9
116.6 55.7 60.9 364.4 209.0 68.3 53.8 31.1 21.0 20.7 12.4 32.6 37.9 95.9 2013          May108.5 49.5 59.1 365.0 210.2 69.0 53.3 31.7 20.9 20.7 11.6 32.6 37.9 89.2          June
loan associations: Including deposits under savings and loan contracts (see Table Nov. 2009), Commerzbank AG, UniCredit Bank AG (formerly Bayerische Hypo- und
IV.12). 3Included in time deposits. 4Excluding deposits under savings and loan Vereinsbank AG) and Deutsche Postbank AG. 8Sum of the banks majority-owned by
contracts (see also footnote 2). 5Including subordinated negotiable bearer debt foreign banks and included in other categories of banks and the category ”Branches
securities; excluding non-negotiable bearer debt securities. 6Commercial banks (with dependent legal status) of foreign banks”. 9Separate presentation of the banks
comprise the sub-groups ”Big banks”, ”Regional banks and other commercial banks” majority-owned by foreign banks included in other banking categories. and ”Branches of foreign banks”. 7Deutsche Bank AG, Dresdner Bank AG (up to

Deutsche Bundesbank
26  Monthly Report
August 2013
IV Banks
 
3 Assets and liabilities of banks (MFIs) in Germany vis-à-vis residents *
 
 
€ billion
Lending to domestic banks (MFIs) Lending to domestic non-banks (non-MFIs)
Treasury
Cash in Negotiable bills and
hand Credit money negotiable
balances market Memo money mar- (euro-area Securities
banknotes with the Credit paper item ket paper issued Securities
and Bundes- balances issued by issued by Fiduciary issued by by non-
Period coins) bank Total and loans Bills banks banks loans Total Loans Bills non-banks banks  1 
End of year or month *
 
2003 17.0 46.7 1,643.9 1,064.0 0.0 8.8 571.0 2.3 2,995.6 2,677.0 3.7 3.4 309.6
2004 14.9 41.2 1,676.3 1,075.8 0.0 7.4 592.9 2.1 3,001.3 2,644.0 2.7 2.6 351.0
2005 15.1 47.9 1,684.5 1,096.8 0.0 6.7 580.9 2.1 2,995.1 2,632.7 2.4 2.4 357.6
2006 16.0 49.4 1,637.8 1,086.3 − 9.3 542.2 1.9 3,000.7 2,630.3 1.9 2.0 366.5
2007 17.5 64.6 1,751.8 1,222.5 0.0 25.3 504.0 2.3 2,975.7 2,647.9 1.6 1.5 324.7
2008 17.4 102.6 1,861.7 1,298.1 0.0 55.7 507.8 2.0 3,071.1 2,698.9 1.2 3.1 367.9
2009 16.9 78.9 1,711.5 1,138.0 − 31.6 541.9 2.2 3,100.1 2,691.8 0.8 4.0 403.5
2010 16.0 79.6 1,686.3 1,195.4 − 7.5 483.5 1.8 3,220.9 2,770.4 0.8 27.9 421.8
2011 15.8 93.8 1,725.6 1,267.9 − 7.1 450.7 2.1 3,197.8 2,774.6 0.8 6.4 415.9
2012 18.5 134.3 1,655.0 1,229.1 − 2.4 423.5 2.4 3,220.4 2,785.5 0.6 2.2 432.1
2012          Jan 13.8 49.8 1,846.4 1,394.4 − 7.3 444.6 2.1 3,226.6 2,800.0 0.7 4.9 421.1
         Feb 13.6 50.8 1,904.6 1,448.5 − 6.8 449.4 2.1 3,220.3 2,797.7 0.5 5.6 416.4
         Mar 14.5 75.8 1,936.0 1,482.9 − 6.8 446.2 2.1 3,222.9 2,787.1 0.5 4.9 430.4
         Apr 14.5 55.4 1,968.9 1,518.5 − 6.6 443.8 2.0 3,244.7 2,795.6 0.5 5.7 442.8
         May 14.8 76.4 1,959.2 1,509.0 − 5.9 444.3 2.0 3,219.1 2,793.4 0.5 4.5 420.7
         June 14.7 89.2 1,927.0 1,481.6 − 6.1 439.3 2.1 3,227.6 2,802.1 0.5 6.1 418.9
         July 14.0 185.5 1,789.7 1,344.8 − 6.3 438.6 2.1 3,257.8 2,833.8 0.5 5.2 418.3
         Aug 14.6 203.4 1,788.0 1,343.7 − 5.4 438.8 2.1 3,252.3 2,824.1 0.5 5.1 422.7
         Sep 14.9 175.1 1,748.0 1,306.1 − 4.1 437.8 2.1 3,253.0 2,817.9 0.5 5.6 429.0
         Oct 15.0 178.6 1,713.5 1,277.5 − 3.6 432.3 2.1 3,271.1 2,837.5 0.5 6.5 426.7
         Nov 14.7 185.4 1,695.0 1,262.7 − 2.8 429.5 2.1 3,265.5 2,825.2 0.5 5.8 433.9
         Dec 18.5 134.3 1,655.0 1,229.1 − 2.4 423.5 2.4 3,220.4 2,785.5 0.6 2.2 432.1
2013          Jan 14.4 131.5 1,629.0 1,206.0 − 2.0 421.0 2.4 3,243.1 2,806.0 0.5 2.1 434.4
         Feb 14.4 103.5 1,628.4 1,207.8 − 2.2 418.5 2.3 3,237.4 2,804.4 0.5 2.0 430.6
         Mar 16.0 112.8 1,591.0 1,176.5 − 2.0 412.5 2.3 3,234.0 2,795.7 0.5 1.9 435.9
         Apr 14.9 103.3 1,588.2 1,176.9 − 2.1 409.1 2.3 3,260.9 2,801.4 0.4 2.9 456.2
         May 15.1 89.3 1,578.5 1,168.8 − 2.1 407.6 2.3 3,232.1 2,795.8 0.4 2.9 433.0
         June 14.9 91.7 1,560.6 1,151.6 − 1.9 407.2 2.4 3,238.0 2,806.0 0.4 1.7 429.9
Changes *
2004 − 2.1 − 5.5 + 35.9 + 15.1 + 0.0 − 1.4 + 22.1 − 0.2 + 3.3 − 35.0 − 1.0 + 1.1 + 39.2
2005 + 0.2 + 6.7 + 8.4 + 21.0 − 0.0 − 0.8 − 11.9 − 0.0 − 6.7 − 11.8 − 0.3 − 0.2 + 6.6
2006 + 0.9 + 1.5 − 3.6 + 24.5 − 0.0 + 2.6 − 30.6 − 0.2 − 12.4 − 20.3 − 0.5 − 0.4 + 8.8
2007 + 1.5 + 15.2 + 114.8 + 137.6 + 0.0 + 17.0 − 39.8 + 0.4 − 15.9 + 12.1 − 0.3 − 0.5 − 27.2
2008 − 0.1 + 39.4 + 125.9 + 90.1 + 0.0 + 30.6 + 5.2 − 0.8 + 92.0 + 47.3 − 0.4 + 1.8 + 43.3
2009 − 0.5 − 23.6 − 147.2 − 157.3 − 0.0 − 24.1 + 34.3 + 0.2 + 25.7 − 11.2 − 0.4 + 1.4 + 35.9
2010 − 0.9 + 0.6 − 19.3 + 61.5 + 0.0 − 24.0 − 56.8 − 0.3 + 130.5 + 78.7 + 0.0 + 23.8 + 28.0
2011 − 0.2 + 14.2 + 47.3 + 80.5 − − 0.4 − 32.8 − 0.1 − 30.6 − 3.2 + 0.0 − 21.5 − 5.9
2012 + 2.7 + 40.5 − 68.6 − 37.5 − − 4.6 − 26.5 + 0.1 + 21.0 + 9.8 − 0.2 − 4.3 + 15.7
2012          Jan − 2.0 − 44.0 + 120.7 + 126.5 − + 0.2 − 6.1 − 0.1 + 29.0 + 25.3 − 0.1 − 1.5 + 5.3
         Feb − 0.2 + 1.0 + 58.3 + 54.1 − − 0.5 + 4.7 + 0.0 − 6.4 − 2.3 − 0.1 + 0.7 − 4.7
         Mar + 0.9 + 25.1 + 31.3 + 34.4 − + 0.1 − 3.2 − 0.0 + 2.7 − 10.6 − 0.0 − 0.7 + 14.0
         Apr + 0.0 − 20.4 + 36.1 + 38.8 − − 0.3 − 2.4 − 0.0 + 18.6 + 5.4 − 0.0 + 0.8 + 12.5
         May + 0.3 + 21.0 − 9.7 − 9.5 − − 0.7 + 0.5 + 0.0 − 25.6 − 2.2 − 0.0 − 1.1 − 22.2
         June − 0.1 + 12.8 − 32.2 − 27.4 − + 0.2 − 5.1 + 0.1 + 10.2 + 10.4 − 0.0 + 1.6 − 1.8
         July − 0.6 + 96.3 − 137.2 − 136.8 − + 0.3 − 0.7 − 0.0 + 30.5 + 32.0 + 0.0 − 0.9 − 0.6
         Aug + 0.6 + 17.9 − 1.7 − 1.1 − − 0.9 + 0.2 + 0.1 − 5.5 − 9.7 − 0.0 − 0.2 + 4.4
         Sep + 0.3 − 28.3 − 40.0 − 37.7 − − 1.3 − 1.0 − 0.1 + 0.5 − 6.4 + 0.0 + 0.5 + 6.3
         Oct + 0.1 + 3.6 − 35.7 − 30.3 − − 0.5 − 4.9 + 0.0 + 17.4 + 19.6 + 0.0 + 0.9 − 3.0
         Nov − 0.3 + 6.8 − 18.4 − 14.8 − − 0.8 − 2.8 + 0.0 − 5.5 − 12.0 − 0.0 − 0.7 + 7.3
         Dec + 3.8 − 51.2 − 40.0 − 33.7 − − 0.4 − 6.0 + 0.1 − 45.1 − 39.8 + 0.2 − 3.7 − 1.8
2013          Jan − 4.0 − 2.8 − 26.1 − 23.1 − − 0.4 − 2.6 − 0.0 + 22.7 + 20.5 − 0.1 − 0.0 + 2.4
         Feb − 0.0 − 27.9 + 2.5 + 4.8 − + 0.1 − 2.5 − 0.0 − 5.7 − 1.6 − 0.1 − 0.2 − 3.9
         Mar + 1.6 + 9.3 − 37.4 − 31.3 − − 0.2 − 5.9 − 0.0 − 3.4 − 8.7 − 0.0 − 0.0 + 5.4
         Apr − 1.1 − 9.5 − 2.8 + 0.5 − + 0.2 − 3.4 − 0.0 + 26.9 + 5.7 − 0.0 + 1.0 + 20.3
         May + 0.3 − 14.0 − 9.8 − 8.2 − − 0.0 − 1.5 − 0.0 − 28.8 − 5.6 − 0.0 + 0.0 − 23.2
         June − 0.2 + 2.5 − 17.9 − 17.2 − − 0.2 − 0.5 + 0.0 + 5.9 + 10.2 + 0.0 − 1.3 − 3.1
*See Table IV.2, footnote*; statistical breaks have been eliminated from the changes. (see also footnote 2). 2Including debt securities arising from the exchange of
The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as provisional. Subsequent equalisation claims. 3Including liabilities arising from registered debt securities,
revisions which appear in the following Monthly Report, are not specially registered money market paper and non-negotiable bearer debt securities; including
marked. 1Excluding debt securities arising from the exchange of equalisation claims subordinated liabilities. 4Including liabilities arising from monetary policy operations

Deutsche Bundesbank
27  Monthly Report
August 2013
IV Banks
 
   
 
 Deposits of domestic banks (MFIs)  3 Deposits of domestic non-banks (non-MFIs)
Partici-
patinginterestsin
Memo domestic Memo Memo
item banks Sight Time Redis- item Sight Time Savings Bank item Equalisa-tion Fiduciary and deposits deposits counted Fiduciary de- deposits de- savings Fiduciaryclaims 
2 loans Total 4 4 bills 5 loans Total posits 6 posits 7 bonds 8 loans   Period enterprises
End of year or month *
 
2.0 56.8 109.2 1,229.6 116.8 1,112.6 0.2 27.8 2,140.3 624.0 825.7 590.3 100.3 40.5 2003
1.0 61.8 99.6 1,271.2 119.7 1,151.4 0.1 30.3 2,200.0 646.9 851.2 603.5 98.4 43.7 2004
− 56.6 108.5 1,300.0 120.5 1,179.4 0.1 26.5 2,276.6 717.0 864.4 603.4 91.9 42.4 2005− 53.0 106.3 1,348.2 125.4 1,222.7 0.0 22.3 2,394.6 747.7 962.8 586.5 97.5 37.8 2006− 51.1 109.4 1,478.6 122.1 1,356.5 0.0 20.0 2,579.1 779.9 1,125.4 555.4 118.4 36.4 2007− 47.2 111.2 1,582.5 138.5 1,444.0 0.0 41.6 2,781.4 834.6 1,276.1 535.2 135.4 32.3 2008− 43.9 106.1 1,355.1 128.9 1,226.2 0.0 35.7 2,829.7 1,029.5 1,102.6 594.5 103.2 43.4 2009
− 33.7 96.8 1,238.3 135.3 1,102.6 0.0 13.8 2,935.2 1,104.4 1,117.1 618.2 95.4 37.5 2010
− 36.3 94.6 1,210.5 114.8 1,095.3 0.0 36.1 3,045.5 1,168.3 1,156.2 616.1 104.8 36.5 2011− 34.8 90.0 1,135.5 132.9 1,002.6 0.0 36.3 3,090.2 1,306.5 1,072.5 617.6 93.6 34.9 2012
− 35.3 93.8 1,221.4 137.1 1,083.9 0.0 35.4 3,035.3 1,181.1 1,133.1 617.2 103.8 35.8 2012          Jan 
− 35.1 93.4 1,232.3 141.0 1,091.2 0.0 35.2 3,053.7 1,187.1 1,143.5 619.8 103.3 35.6          Feb − 34.8 91.8 1,232.1 135.9 1,096.1 0.0 35.3 3,048.3 1,188.9 1,136.9 619.4 103.0 35.3          Mar 
− 35.3 91.7 1,222.4 135.0 1,087.2 0.0 35.7 3,071.3 1,197.7 1,153.2 617.9 102.5 35.5          Apr 
− 35.3 90.9 1,219.1 137.8 1,081.1 0.0 36.4 3,091.6 1,216.8 1,155.6 617.1 102.0 35.5          May− 35.2 91.1 1,207.3 134.1 1,073.0 0.0 36.3 3,104.7 1,233.8 1,153.5 616.1 101.3 35.2          June
− 34.9 91.4 1,190.1 128.0 1,062.0 0.0 36.4 3,105.8 1,235.4 1,154.2 615.9 100.3 35.1          July
− 35.2 91.5 1,184.9 124.8 1,059.9 0.0 36.5 3,118.3 1,247.0 1,156.8 615.4 99.1 35.1          Aug − 35.0 90.6 1,175.0 129.2 1,045.5 0.0 36.1 3,112.2 1,262.9 1,137.3 614.1 97.9 35.0          Sep 
− 34.7 90.3 1,160.8 124.6 1,035.9 0.0 36.3 3,124.7 1,292.7 1,121.9 613.6 96.6 34.9          Oct 
− 35.0 90.2 1,160.0 136.1 1,023.7 0.0 36.4 3,137.0 1,317.7 1,111.8 612.8 94.6 35.2          Nov − 34.8 90.0 1,135.5 132.9 1,002.6 0.0 36.3 3,090.2 1,306.5 1,072.5 617.6 93.6 34.9          Dec 
− 34.5 90.8 1,126.1 125.9 1,000.2 0.0 35.4 3,087.3 1,326.2 1,053.6 616.8 90.7 35.0 2013          Jan 
− 34.5 90.5 1,102.3 129.5 972.8 0.0 35.6 3,097.1 1,336.2 1,055.8 616.6 88.5 34.9          Feb − 34.2 89.3 1,092.4 130.8 961.5 0.0 35.8 3,096.3 1,330.3 1,064.7 614.5 86.8 34.8          Mar 
− 33.7 89.3 1,088.3 130.5 957.8 0.0 35.4 3,100.3 1,344.5 1,058.4 612.3 85.1 34.6          Apr 
− 33.5 91.8 1,070.5 126.2 944.2 0.0 35.3 3,115.4 1,363.4 1,058.3 610.7 83.0 34.5          May− 33.2 91.0 1,059.4 124.9 934.5 0.0 34.8 3,129.7 1,369.8 1,069.2 609.7 81.0 34.4          June
Changes *
− 1.1 + 3.0 − 9.6 + 41.3 + 2.9 + 38.5 − 0.1 + 2.4 + 62.0 + 24.4 + 25.9 + 13.1 − 1.5 + 1.2 2004
− 1.0 − 4.9 + 8.9 + 28.9 + 0.8 + 28.0 + 0.0 − 3.5 + 76.6 + 70.7 + 12.4 − 1.2 − 5.4 − 1.2 2005
− − 3.7 − 2.2 + 79.0 + 8.6 + 70.5 − 0.1 − 4.5 + 118.0 + 30.0 + 97.7 − 16.8 + 7.2 − 4.1 2006
− − 2.3 + 3.1 + 132.0 − 3.3 + 135.3 − 0.0 − 2.3 + 181.1 + 31.6 + 160.5 − 31.1 + 20.1 − 2.0 2007− − 5.4 + 7.8 + 124.3 + 23.0 + 101.3 − 0.0 − 3.6 + 207.6 + 54.3 + 156.6 − 20.2 + 17.0 − 1.3 2008− − 4.2 + 0.7 − 225.4 − 9.7 − 215.7 − 0.0 − 5.7 + 59.7 + 211.4 − 179.3 + 59.3 − 31.6 − 0.9 2009
− − 2.1 − 9.2 − 96.5 + 22.3 − 119.1 − 0.0 − 0.2 + 77.8 + 76.0 − 18.9 + 24.0 − 3.3 − 1.7 2010
− − 1.1 − 2.2 − 25.0 − 20.0 − 5.1 − 0.0 + 0.1 + 111.2 + 63.7 + 40.9 − 2.6 + 9.3 − 1.1 2011− − 1.3 − 4.1 − 70.8 + 21.5 − 91.9 − 0.0 + 0.2 + 42.2 + 138.7 − 86.7 + 1.5 − 11.2 − 1.6 2012
− − 1.0 − 0.8 + 10.9 + 22.3 − 11.3 + 0.0 − 0.7 − 10.4 + 12.9 − 23.4 + 1.1 − 1.0 − 0.7 2012          Jan 
− − 0.3 − 0.5 + 10.9 + 3.9 + 7.3 − 0.0 − 0.2 + 18.3 + 5.9 + 10.3 + 2.6 − 0.5 − 0.2          Feb − − 0.3 − 1.6 − 0.2 − 5.1 + 4.9 − 0.0 + 0.1 − 5.4 + 1.9 − 6.5 − 0.4 − 0.3 − 0.2          Mar 
− + 0.5 − 0.2 − 7.1 + 0.2 − 7.3 + 0.0 + 0.4 + 20.4 + 9.0 + 13.5 − 1.5 − 0.5 + 0.2          Apr 
− + 0.0 − 0.8 − 3.3 + 2.8 − 6.1 + 0.0 + 0.8 + 20.2 + 19.2 + 2.4 − 0.8 − 0.5 − 0.0          May− − 0.2 + 0.2 − 11.8 − 3.7 − 8.1 − − 0.1 + 13.1 + 16.9 − 2.0 − 1.1 − 0.7 − 0.3          June
− − 0.2 + 0.3 − 17.2 − 6.1 − 11.0 − 0.0 + 0.1 + 1.1 + 1.6 + 0.7 − 0.2 − 1.1 − 0.1          July
− + 0.3 + 0.1 − 5.2 − 3.2 − 2.0 − + 0.1 + 12.5 + 11.5 + 2.6 − 0.5 − 1.1 − 0.0          Aug − − 0.2 − 0.3 − 9.9 + 5.3 − 15.2 + 0.0 − 0.4 − 5.8 + 16.2 − 19.6 − 1.2 − 1.2 − 0.1          Sep 
− − 0.3 − 0.4 − 17.2 − 7.6 − 9.6 − 0.0 + 0.2 + 12.5 + 29.8 − 15.4 − 0.6 − 1.3 − 0.2          Oct 
− + 0.3 − 0.1 − 0.8 + 11.4 − 12.2 − + 0.1 + 12.2 + 25.0 − 10.0 − 0.7 − 2.0 + 0.3          Nov − + 0.0 − 0.2 − 19.9 + 1.4 − 21.1 − − 0.1 − 46.5 − 11.2 − 39.1 + 4.8 − 1.0 − 0.3          Dec 
− − 0.3 + 0.9 − 9.0 − 6.8 − 2.2 − − 0.8 − 2.9 + 19.7 − 18.8 − 0.8 − 2.9 − 0.0 2013          Jan 
− − 0.0 − 0.4 − 23.9 + 3.5 − 27.4 − + 0.2 + 9.8 + 10.0 + 2.2 − 0.1 − 2.2 − 0.0          Feb − − 0.3 − 1.2 − 9.6 + 1.6 − 11.3 − 0.0 + 0.2 − 1.2 − 6.2 + 8.9 − 2.2 − 1.8 − 0.1          Mar 
− − 0.5 + 0.1 − 4.1 − 0.8 − 3.3 + 0.0 − 0.4 + 4.1 + 14.6 − 6.7 − 2.1 − 1.6 − 0.2          Apr 
− − 0.2 + 2.5 − 17.8 − 5.1 − 12.7 + 0.0 − 0.1 + 15.0 + 18.9 − 0.1 − 1.6 − 2.2 − 0.1          May− − 0.3 − 0.8 − 11.4 − 1.4 − 10.0 − 0.0 − 0.5 + 14.6 + 6.4 + 11.3 − 1.1 − 2.0 − 0.1          June
with the Bundesbank. 5Own acceptances and promissory notes outstanding. 6Since savings and loan contracts (see also footnote 8). 8Including liabilities arising from
the inclusion of building and loan associations in January 1999, including deposits non-negotiable bearer debt securities. 
under savings and loan contracts (see Table IV.12). 7Excluding deposits under

Deutsche Bundesbank
28  Monthly Report
August 2013
IV Banks
 
4 Assets and liabilities of banks (MFIs) in Germany vis-à-vis non-residents *
 
 
€ billion
Lending to foreign banks (MFIs) Lending to foreign non-banks (non-MFIs)
Treasury
Cash in bills and
hand Loans and bills negotiable Credit balances and loans, bills Negotiable
(non- money money
euro-area Medium market Memo Medium market
banknotes and paper item and paper Securities Securities
and Short- long- issued by issued by Fiduciary Short- long- issued by issued by
Period coins) Total Total term term banks banks loans Total Total term term non-banks non-banks
End of year or month *
 
2003 0.3 769.6 675.8 515.7 160.1 1.5 92.3 1.6 576.3 344.8 110.9 233.9 6.0 225.4
2004 0.2 889.4 760.2 606.5 153.7 2.8 126.3 1.5 629.5 362.5 136.6 225.9 10.9 256.1
2005 0.2 1,038.8 860.0 648.5 211.5 5.8 173.0 1.5 712.0 387.9 132.8 255.1 9.3 314.8
2006 0.4 1,266.9 1,003.2 744.5 258.7 13.3 250.4 0.8 777.0 421.0 156.0 264.9 7.2 348.9
2007 0.3 1,433.5 1,105.9 803.6 302.4 13.4 314.2 0.5 908.3 492.9 197.5 295.4 27.5 387.9
2008 0.3 1,446.6 1,131.6 767.2 364.3 15.6 299.5 1.9 908.4 528.9 151.4 377.5 12.9 366.6
2009 0.3 1,277.4 986.1 643.5 342.6 6.2 285.0 2.9 815.7 469.6 116.9 352.7 9.8 336.3
2010 0.5 1,154.1 892.7 607.7 285.1 2.1 259.3 1.8 773.8 461.4 112.6 348.8 10.1 302.3
2011 0.6 1,117.6 871.0 566.3 304.8 4.6 241.9 2.6 744.4 455.8 102.0 353.8 8.5 280.1
2012 0.8 1,046.0 813.5 545.5 268.1 5.4 227.0 2.6 729.0 442.2 105.1 337.1 9.0 277.8
2012          Jan 0.7 1,141.0 892.7 595.1 297.6 5.9 242.3 2.6 739.1 454.4 101.4 353.0 11.2 273.5
         Feb 0.8 1,136.0 890.0 599.6 290.4 6.3 239.8 2.6 729.2 449.1 99.6 349.5 10.0 270.1
         Mar 0.9 1,114.2 867.7 579.8 287.9 6.4 240.0 2.6 747.1 463.8 116.4 347.4 10.6 272.8
         Apr 0.7 1,119.5 876.5 588.8 287.8 6.4 236.6 2.6 750.1 470.0 122.6 347.4 9.0 271.1
         May 0.7 1,129.6 886.9 596.5 290.4 7.5 235.3 2.6 757.0 475.2 119.8 355.4 9.3 272.6
         June 0.8 1,090.3 853.7 566.5 287.2 7.1 229.5 2.6 740.2 461.4 109.7 351.7 7.5 271.4
         July 0.8 1,103.0 870.2 583.3 286.9 6.8 226.0 2.6 746.8 467.9 113.7 354.2 6.9 272.0
         Aug 1.1 1,096.3 863.0 580.5 282.5 6.9 226.4 2.6 745.7 466.6 116.2 350.3 8.0 271.1
         Sep 1.1 1,096.0 864.6 583.8 280.8 6.4 225.0 2.6 743.6 462.3 116.5 345.8 8.6 272.7
         Oct 0.9 1,087.8 857.6 579.4 278.2 6.4 223.8 2.6 742.9 459.1 116.8 342.4 9.2 274.6
         Nov 0.9 1,067.9 837.2 561.9 275.3 5.9 224.8 2.6 753.2 470.4 127.9 342.5 7.5 275.4
         Dec 0.8 1,046.0 813.5 545.5 268.1 5.4 227.0 2.6 729.0 442.2 105.1 337.1 9.0 277.8
2013          Jan 0.6 1,033.1 798.8 535.3 263.5 6.3 228.0 2.5 731.5 441.4 110.5 330.9 10.0 280.0
         Feb 0.6 1,056.0 822.8 562.2 260.6 5.7 227.5 2.5 729.7 443.5 110.6 332.9 9.4 276.9
         Mar 1.0 1,045.3 810.6 548.3 262.3 5.6 229.1 2.5 739.3 450.6 116.6 334.0 8.6 280.1
         Apr 0.8 1,046.9 813.3 557.4 256.0 5.2 228.3 2.5 737.3 449.1 118.9 330.2 9.0 279.2
         May 0.8 1,046.0 811.0 552.8 258.2 5.1 229.9 2.5 741.3 444.6 118.0 326.6 10.6 286.1
         June 0.8 1,051.5 816.5 563.5 253.0 5.6 229.4 2.5 728.8 433.3 109.8 323.6 9.7 285.8
Changes *
2004 − 0.1 + 128.3 + 89.4 + 95.3 − 5.9 + 1.3 + 37.6 − 0.1 + 65.8 + 29.5 + 31.7 − 2.2 + 5.1 + 31.1
2005 + 0.0 + 127.3 + 78.9 + 26.3 + 52.6 + 2.9 + 45.4 − 0.0 + 59.4 + 7.3 − 9.4 + 16.7 − 1.8 + 54.0
2006 + 0.1 + 238.3 + 153.5 + 109.7 + 43.8 + 7.5 + 77.2 − 0.7 + 81.4 + 51.6 + 25.9 + 25.8 − 1.8 + 31.5
2007 − 0.0 + 190.3 + 123.7 + 72.9 + 50.8 + 7.5 + 59.1 − 0.4 + 167.7 + 94.3 + 50.1 + 44.2 + 20.1 + 53.3
2008 + 0.0 + 8.5 + 20.2 − 43.0 + 63.2 + 2.1 − 13.7 − 0.0 + 4.3 + 45.1 − 31.9 + 77.0 − 14.5 − 26.3
2009 − 0.0 − 170.0 − 141.3 − 122.5 − 18.8 − 10.3 − 18.4 − 0.2 − 72.8 − 43.8 − 31.7 − 12.1 − 3.3 − 25.7
2010 + 0.1 − 141.5 − 116.2 − 47.3 − 68.9 − 4.8 − 20.4 − 0.2 − 62.0 − 24.5 − 12.6 − 11.9 + 0.4 − 38.0
2011 + 0.1 − 48.4 − 32.6 − 45.3 + 12.7 + 2.5 − 18.4 + 0.0 − 38.9 − 13.6 − 12.8 − 0.9 − 1.6 − 23.6
2012 + 0.1 − 70.1 − 56.8 − 23.1 − 33.7 + 0.9 − 14.1 − 0.1 − 9.4 − 7.5 + 8.3 − 15.9 + 0.6 − 2.5
2012          Jan + 0.1 + 27.0 + 25.1 + 29.4 − 4.3 + 1.3 + 0.5 − 0.0 − 2.2 + 1.2 + 0.6 + 0.6 + 2.8 − 6.1
         Feb + 0.1 + 0.1 + 2.1 + 7.1 − 5.0 + 0.3 − 2.4 − 0.0 − 5.6 − 1.8 − 1.0 − 0.8 − 1.2 − 2.6
         Mar + 0.1 − 23.0 − 23.6 − 20.4 − 3.2 + 0.2 + 0.5 − 0.0 + 16.2 + 13.5 + 16.4 − 2.9 + 0.5 + 2.1
         Apr − 0.1 + 2.2 + 5.6 + 7.2 − 1.7 − 0.0 − 3.4 − 0.0 − 0.0 + 3.9 + 6.1 − 2.2 − 1.5 − 2.4
         May − 0.0 − 3.6 − 3.0 + 0.7 − 3.7 + 1.1 − 1.7 + 0.0 − 6.1 − 5.8 − 5.7 − 0.1 + 0.2 − 0.6
         June + 0.1 − 39.5 − 33.6 − 32.1 − 1.6 − 0.4 − 5.5 + 0.0 − 9.9 − 7.2 − 5.4 − 1.8 − 1.8 − 0.9
         July − 0.0 + 6.2 + 10.2 + 13.4 − 3.2 − 0.3 − 3.7 + 0.0 + 0.6 + 1.5 + 3.0 − 1.5 − 0.6 − 0.3
         Aug + 0.3 − 0.7 − 1.4 + 0.3 − 1.7 + 0.1 + 0.6 − 0.0 + 4.2 + 3.1 + 3.5 − 0.4 + 1.1 − 0.0
         Sep − 0.0 + 5.4 + 7.1 + 6.4 + 0.7 − 0.5 − 1.2 + 0.0 + 2.9 + 0.1 + 1.3 − 1.3 + 0.6 + 2.2
         Oct − 0.2 − 6.5 − 5.3 − 3.5 − 1.9 − 0.0 − 1.2 − 0.0 + 0.8 − 2.0 + 0.5 − 2.5 + 0.6 + 2.2
         Nov − 0.0 − 19.5 − 20.1 − 17.4 − 2.7 − 0.4 + 1.0 + 0.0 + 10.7 + 11.4 + 11.1 + 0.3 − 1.8 + 1.0
         Dec − 0.1 − 18.0 − 19.8 − 14.3 − 5.5 − 0.5 + 2.3 − 0.0 − 21.0 − 25.6 − 22.2 − 3.4 + 1.6 + 3.0
2013          Jan − 0.2 − 4.6 − 6.7 − 5.8 − 0.9 + 0.8 + 1.2 − 0.0 + 9.1 + 4.5 + 6.5 − 2.0 + 1.0 + 3.6
         Feb + 0.1 + 16.5 + 17.8 + 23.4 − 5.6 − 0.6 − 0.7 + 0.0 − 6.8 − 2.1 − 0.6 − 1.5 − 0.7 − 4.0
         Mar + 0.3 − 15.9 − 16.6 − 16.6 − 0.0 − 0.1 + 0.7 + 0.0 + 4.3 + 2.7 + 4.7 − 2.1 − 0.7 + 2.3
         Apr − 0.2 + 6.1 + 7.2 + 11.5 − 4.4 − 0.4 − 0.7 − 0.0 + 1.8 + 1.6 + 2.9 − 1.4 + 0.4 − 0.1
         May + 0.0 − 0.9 − 2.4 − 4.6 + 2.2 − 0.1 + 1.7 + 0.0 + 3.8 − 4.8 − 1.0 − 3.7 + 1.6 + 6.9
         June + 0.0 + 6.7 + 6.8 + 11.4 − 4.6 + 0.5 − 0.5 − 0.0 − 11.4 − 10.3 − 8.0 − 2.3 − 0.9 − 0.1
*See Table IV.2, footnote*; statistical breaks have been eliminated from the changes.   
The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as provisional. Subsequent   
revisions, which appear in the following Monthly Report, are not specially marked.   
   
  

Deutsche Bundesbank
29  Monthly Report
August 2013
IV Banks
 
   
 
 Deposits of foreign banks (MFIs) Deposits of foreign non-banks (non-MFIs) Partici- Time deposits (including
pating Time deposits (including bank savings deposits and bank
interests savings bonds) savings bonds)in foreign
Memo banks Medium Memo Medium Memo
item and and item and item
Fiduciary enter- Sight Short- long- Fiduciary Sight Short- long- Fiduciaryloans prises Total deposits Total term term loans Total deposits Total term term loans   Period
End of year or month *
 
11.6 41.4 590.7 95.1 495.6 387.7 107.9 0.4 307.3 32.2 275.1 102.4 172.7 3.6 2003
9.8 39.3 603.3 87.0 516.2 403.2 113.0 0.5 311.2 36.6 274.7 123.4 151.2 0.8 2004
10.6 37.2 651.7 102.9 548.8 420.4 128.4 0.6 316.4 62.0 254.4 119.4 135.0 1.2 2005
5.8 50.4 689.7 168.1 521.6 397.3 124.3 0.4 310.1 82.1 228.0 111.5 116.5 1.5 2006
5.7 48.3 738.9 164.7 574.1 461.2 113.0 0.2 303.1 76.0 227.1 122.3 104.8 3.1 2007
25.5 45.1 703.3 218.1 485.1 362.3 122.9 0.3 286.1 92.2 193.9 95.1 98.8 2.5 200832.1 45.4 652.6 213.6 439.0 307.4 131.6 0.2 216.3 78.1 138.2 73.7 64.5 1.9 2009
15.6 48.8 741.7 258.7 483.0 349.3 133.6 0.1 227.6 84.8 142.7 76.7 66.0 1.5 2010
32.9 45.0 655.7 242.6 413.1 289.4 123.7 0.1 225.9 92.3 133.6 66.9 66.6 1.3 201132.6 46.4 691.1 289.4 401.7 284.6 117.0 0.1 237.6 107.2 130.3 69.1 61.2 1.2 2012
32.6 47.6 813.6 327.1 486.5 363.7 122.8 0.1 233.8 103.1 130.7 64.7 66.0 1.3 2012          Jan 
32.3 47.4 828.4 357.6 470.8 348.3 122.5 0.1 233.4 106.2 127.2 62.1 65.1 1.3          Feb 32.3 47.5 884.3 368.3 516.0 388.5 127.6 0.1 240.9 114.6 126.3 63.1 63.2 1.2          Mar 
32.4 46.7 905.9 364.8 541.1 416.2 125.0 0.1 246.4 115.3 131.1 67.9 63.2 1.2          Apr 
33.1 47.9 890.3 410.3 480.0 353.8 126.2 0.1 246.3 115.1 131.2 67.6 63.6 1.2          May32.7 48.0 847.4 359.3 488.0 364.5 123.5 0.1 238.0 109.6 128.4 65.1 63.3 1.1          June
33.1 48.1 852.0 402.5 449.5 325.8 123.7 0.1 247.6 115.4 132.2 68.9 63.3 1.3          July
33.0 49.2 869.9 389.0 480.9 359.2 121.7 0.1 245.9 118.7 127.2 65.0 62.2 1.3          Aug 32.7 48.9 816.2 369.2 446.9 323.2 123.8 0.1 249.4 122.8 126.6 64.9 61.7 1.3          Sep 
33.1 49.0 812.6 371.9 440.7 320.6 120.2 0.1 244.0 118.7 125.2 63.2 62.0 1.4          Oct 
33.1 49.0 780.0 353.5 426.5 307.5 119.0 0.1 244.5 120.2 124.3 62.7 61.6 1.3          Nov 32.6 46.4 691.1 289.4 401.7 284.6 117.0 0.1 237.6 107.2 130.3 69.1 61.2 1.2          Dec 
32.1 49.6 702.8 318.1 384.7 268.8 115.9 0.1 241.9 116.4 125.5 65.5 60.0 1.2 2013          Jan 
32.3 46.7 695.3 306.3 389.0 280.1 109.0 0.1 246.6 122.9 123.8 64.4 59.3 1.2          Feb 32.6 45.8 681.2 278.8 402.4 296.2 106.2 0.1 243.6 116.1 127.5 65.2 62.3 1.1          Mar 
32.5 46.3 689.5 302.2 387.2 283.1 104.1 0.1 255.6 122.4 133.3 71.9 61.4 1.1          Apr 
32.5 46.4 657.2 293.5 363.7 259.4 104.4 0.1 261.4 132.2 129.2 67.9 61.2 1.1          May32.1 46.4 649.3 269.6 379.7 275.1 104.6 0.1 255.5 126.6 128.9 67.9 61.0 1.1          June
Changes *
+ 0.7 − 1.5 + 19.8 − 6.1 + 25.9 + 21.1 + 4.8 + 0.1 + 13.0 + 5.4 + 7.6 + 22.8 − 15.2 − 0.3 2004
+ 0.8 − 3.5 + 28.6 + 12.6 + 16.0 + 4.9 + 11.1 + 0.1 − 4.9 + 23.9 − 28.8 − 7.7 − 21.1 + 0.4 2005
− 5.1 + 13.8 + 56.2 + 68.3 − 12.1 − 13.7 + 1.6 − 0.2 − 0.8 + 21.2 − 22.0 − 5.1 − 17.0 − 0.2 2006− 0.1 − 0.8 + 67.3 + 1.5 + 65.8 + 74.0 − 8.3 − 0.1 + 4.6 − 5.5 + 10.2 + 16.6 − 6.4 + 1.6 2007+ 0.7 − 3.1 − 50.1 + 52.2 − 102.3 − 120.7 + 18.5 + 0.1 − 12.4 + 16.1 − 28.5 − 19.4 − 9.1 − 0.6 2008− 3.2 + 0.1 − 81.4 − 2.1 − 79.3 − 57.5 − 21.7 − 0.2 − 33.5 − 13.3 − 20.1 − 17.0 − 3.1 − 0.6 2009
+ 0.2 + 1.4 + 895.4 + 42.0 + 542.4 + 38.1 + 136.8 − 0.1 − 1.6 + 6.0 − 7.6 − 3.3 − 4.4 − 0.4 2010
− 0.1 − 3.9 − 88.8 − 13.8 − 75.0 − 61.8 − 13.1 − 0.0 − 9.3 + 6.4 − 15.7 − 10.4 − 5.3 − 0.2 2011− 0.3 + 1.5 + 38.2 + 51.7 − 13.5 − 7.5 − 6.0 − 0.0 + 12.6 + 15.2 − 2.6 + 2.5 − 5.1 − 0.1 2012
− 0.3 + 2.6 + 159.9 + 87.4 + 72.6 + 73.0 − 0.4 − + 8.7 + 11.1 − 2.4 − 2.0 − 0.4 + 0.0 2012          Jan 
− 0.2 − 0.0 + 17.9 + 31.6 − 13.7 − 14.1 + 0.4 − 0.0 + 0.5 + 3.4 − 2.9 − 2.3 − 0.6 − 0.0          Feb + 0.0 + 0.0 + 55.6 + 10.3 + 45.3 + 40.5 + 4.8 − 0.0 + 7.3 + 8.3 − 1.0 + 0.9 − 1.9 − 0.1          Mar 
+ 0.1 − 0.8 + 19.5 − 3.9 + 23.4 + 26.6 − 3.1 − + 4.8 + 0.4 + 4.4 + 4.6 − 0.2 − 0.0          Apr 
+ 0.7 + 1.0 − 25.4 + 42.3 − 67.7 − 67.1 − 0.6 − 0.0 − 3.4 − 1.7 − 1.7 − 1.2 − 0.4 + 0.0          May− 0.4 + 0.2 − 40.6 − 49.3 + 8.8 + 11.0 − 2.3 − 0.0 − 7.6 − 5.2 − 2.3 − 2.3 − 0.0 − 0.1          June
+ 0.4 − 0.0 + 0.6 + 41.9 − 41.3 − 40.5 − 0.8 − + 8.3 + 5.2 + 3.0 + 3.4 − 0.4 + 0.2          July
− 0.2 + 1.2 + 21.8 − 12.2 + 33.9 + 35.1 − 1.2 − 0.0 − 0.3 + 4.0 − 4.3 − 3.5 − 0.8 + 0.0          Aug − 0.3 − 0.2 − 50.1 − 17.8 − 32.4 − 35.1 + 2.8 − 0.0 + 4.8 + 4.7 + 0.1 + 0.3 − 0.2 − 0.1          Sep 
+ 0.4 + 0.1 − 2.5 + 3.0 − 5.5 − 2.1 − 3.3 − 0.0 − 5.0 − 3.9 − 1.1 − 1.5 + 0.4 + 0.1          Oct 
+ 0.1 − 0.0 − 32.1 − 18.3 − 13.8 − 13.0 − 0.8 − 0.0 + 0.6 + 1.4 − 0.8 − 0.5 − 0.3 − 0.1          Nov − 0.5 − 2.5 − 86.4 − 63.2 − 23.2 − 21.8 − 1.4 − 0.0 − 6.1 − 12.5 + 6.4 + 6.6 − 0.2 − 0.1          Dec 
− 0.5 + 3.2 + 16.2 + 30.1 − 13.9 − 14.1 + 0.1 − + 5.9 + 9.8 − 3.9 − 3.2 − 0.7 − 0.0 2013          Jan 
+ 0.1 − 2.9 − 11.5 − 13.4 + 2.0 + 9.9 − 7.9 − + 3.4 + 5.9 − 2.5 − 1.5 − 1.0 − 0.0          Feb + 0.4 − 1.0 − 14.6 − 29.0 + 14.4 + 14.5 − 0.1 − 0.0 − 7.8 − 7.4 − 0.4 + 0.4 − 0.8 − 0.0          Mar 
− 0.1 + 0.6 + 11.4 + 24.6 − 13.1 − 11.6 − 1.5 − + 13.2 + 6.8 + 6.4 + 7.0 − 0.6 − 0.0          Apr 
− 0.0 + 0.1 − 32.5 − 9.1 − 23.5 − 23.7 + 0.2 − + 5.2 + 10.3 − 5.1 − 4.0 − 1.1 − 0.0          May− 0.4 − 0.0 − 7.0 − 23.5 + 16.5 + 16.1 + 0.3 − 0.0 − 5.5 − 5.4 − 0.1 + 0.1 − 0.2 − 0.0          June

Deutsche Bundesbank
30  Monthly Report
August 2013
IV Banks
 
5 Lending by banks (MFIs) in Germany to domestic non-banks (non-MFIs) *
 
 
€ billion
Lending to domestic Short-term lending Medium and long-term
non-banks, total
      to enterprises and households to general government to enter-
 
including excluding Negoti-
negotiable money able
market paper, Loans money
Period securities, and market Treasury
equalisation claims Total Total bills paper Total Loans bills Total Total
End of year or month *
 
2003 2,995.6 2,680.6 355.2 315.0 313.4 1.6 40.2 38.4 1.8 2,640.4 2,096.1
2004 3,001.3 2,646.7 320.9 283.8 283.0 0.8 37.1 35.3 1.8 2,680.4 2,114.2
2005 2,995.1 2,635.1 309.7 273.5 272.9 0.6 36.2 34.4 1.8 2,685.4 2,141.3
2006 3,000.7 2,632.2 303.1 269.8 269.3 0.6 33.3 31.9 1.4 2,697.6 2,181.8
2007 2,975.7 2,649.5 331.2 301.8 301.5 0.3 29.4 28.2 1.2 2,644.6 2,168.3
2008 3,071.1 2,700.1 373.0 337.5 335.3 2.2 35.5 34.5 1.0 2,698.1 2,257.8
2009 3,100.1 2,692.6 347.3 306.3 306.2 0.1 41.0 37.1 3.9 2,752.8 2,299.7
2010 3,220.9 2,771.3 428.0 283.0 282.8 0.2 145.0 117.2 27.7 2,793.0 2,305.6
2011 3,197.8 2,775.4 383.3 316.5 316.1 0.4 66.8 60.7 6.0 2,814.5 2,321.9
2012 3,220.4 2,786.1 376.1 316.8 316.3 0.5 59.3 57.6 1.7 2,844.3 2,310.9
2012          Jan 3,226.6 2,800.6 409.1 339.2 338.7 0.6 69.8 65.5 4.4 2,817.6 2,320.7
         Feb 3,220.3 2,798.2 406.9 338.2 337.4 0.8 68.7 63.8 4.9 2,813.4 2,315.9
         Mar 3,222.9 2,787.6 396.8 329.5 328.6 0.9 67.3 63.3 4.0 2,826.1 2,325.3
         Apr 3,244.7 2,796.1 402.9 329.6 328.7 0.9 73.3 68.5 4.8 2,841.8 2,341.9
         May 3,219.1 2,793.9 393.6 325.6 324.4 1.2 68.0 64.6 3.3 2,825.5 2,328.8
         June 3,227.6 2,802.6 404.9 324.4 323.9 0.5 80.5 74.9 5.6 2,822.6 2,300.2
         July 3,257.8 2,834.2 429.4 351.6 351.2 0.4 77.8 72.9 4.8 2,828.4 2,304.6
         Aug 3,252.3 2,824.5 415.9 344.6 344.2 0.4 71.3 66.6 4.7 2,836.4 2,310.8
         Sep 3,253.0 2,818.4 413.9 340.9 340.4 0.4 73.1 67.9 5.2 2,839.1 2,311.5
         Oct 3,271.1 2,838.0 430.6 351.1 350.6 0.5 79.6 73.6 6.0 2,840.5 2,309.7
         Nov 3,265.5 2,825.7 410.4 338.2 337.8 0.4 72.1 66.8 5.4 2,855.1 2,316.4
         Dec 3,220.4 2,786.1 376.1 316.8 316.3 0.5 59.3 57.6 1.7 2,844.3 2,310.9
2013          Jan 3,243.1 2,806.5 399.6 338.2 337.4 0.8 61.4 60.1 1.4 2,843.4 2,314.1
         Feb 3,237.4 2,804.9 396.1 338.4 337.5 0.9 57.7 56.6 1.1 2,841.3 2,311.6
         Mar 3,234.0 2,796.2 387.5 332.7 331.7 1.0 54.8 53.9 0.9 2,846.5 2,315.9
         Apr 3,260.9 2,801.8 391.4 326.7 325.5 1.2 64.7 63.0 1.7 2,869.5 2,338.4
         May 3,232.1 2,796.2 380.3 325.9 324.9 1.1 54.3 52.5 1.9 2,851.9 2,325.8
         June 3,238.0 2,806.4 390.2 339.1 338.2 0.9 51.1 50.4 0.7 2,847.8 2,319.3
Changes *
2004 + 3.3 − 36.0 − 31.7 − 30.5 − 29.7 − 0.8 − 1.2 − 3.2 + 1.9 + 35.0 + 15.6
2005 − 6.7 − 12.1 − 11.5 − 10.6 − 10.4 − 0.2 − 0.9 − 0.9 + 0.0 + 4.8 + 26.8
2006 − 12.4 − 20.8 − 7.1 − 4.5 − 4.4 − 0.0 − 2.7 − 2.3 − 0.4 − 5.2 + 23.6
2007 − 15.9 + 11.8 + 27.6 + 31.5 + 31.7 − 0.2 − 3.9 − 3.7 − 0.3 − 43.5 − 7.1
2008 + 92.0 + 46.9 + 43.1 + 36.8 + 34.9 + 1.8 + 6.3 + 6.3 − 0.0 + 48.9 + 83.4
2009 + 25.7 − 11.6 − 26.1 − 31.5 − 30.0 − 1.5 + 5.5 + 2.5 + 2.9 + 51.8 + 36.6
2010 + 130.5 + 78.7 + 80.4 − 23.4 − 23.5 + 0.1 + 103.8 + 80.1 + 23.7 + 50.1 + 14.9
2011 − 30.6 − 3.2 − 45.2 + 33.6 + 33.3 + 0.2 − 78.7 − 57.0 − 21.7 + 14.6 + 9.4
2012 + 21.0 + 9.6 − 9.7 − 1.6 − 1.7 + 0.1 − 8.2 − 3.8 − 4.3 + 30.7 + 10.9
2012          Jan + 29.0 + 25.2 + 25.8 + 22.7 + 22.6 + 0.2 + 3.1 + 4.7 − 1.7 + 3.2 − 1.1
         Feb − 6.4 − 2.4 − 2.2 − 1.1 − 1.2 + 0.2 − 1.1 − 1.7 + 0.5 − 4.2 − 4.8
         Mar + 2.7 − 10.6 − 10.1 − 8.7 − 8.8 + 0.1 − 1.4 − 0.6 − 0.9 + 12.8 + 9.4
         Apr + 18.6 + 5.3 + 3.4 − 2.6 − 2.6 − 0.0 + 6.0 + 5.2 + 0.8 + 15.2 + 16.3
         May − 25.6 − 2.3 − 8.9 − 3.6 − 3.9 + 0.3 − 5.3 − 3.8 − 1.5 − 16.7 − 13.5
         June + 10.2 + 10.4 + 11.4 − 1.1 − 0.5 − 0.7 + 12.5 + 10.3 + 2.2 − 1.2 − 6.9
         July + 30.5 + 32.0 + 24.5 + 27.3 + 27.4 − 0.1 − 2.7 − 2.0 − 0.7 + 6.0 + 4.7
         Aug − 5.5 − 9.7 − 13.5 − 6.9 − 7.0 + 0.0 − 6.5 − 6.3 − 0.2 + 8.0 + 6.2
         Sep + 0.5 − 6.4 − 2.4 − 3.5 − 3.5 − 0.0 + 1.2 + 0.6 + 0.5 + 2.8 + 1.1
         Oct + 17.4 + 19.6 + 16.7 + 10.2 + 10.2 + 0.0 + 6.5 + 5.7 + 0.8 + 0.7 − 1.9
         Nov − 5.5 − 12.1 − 20.3 − 12.8 − 12.8 − 0.0 − 7.4 − 6.8 − 0.6 + 14.8 + 6.9
         Dec − 45.1 − 39.6 − 34.3 − 21.4 − 21.4 + 0.0 − 12.9 − 9.2 − 3.7 − 10.8 − 5.5
2013          Jan + 22.7 + 20.4 + 24.4 + 22.3 + 22.0 + 0.3 + 2.2 + 2.5 − 0.3 − 1.7 + 2.3
         Feb − 5.7 − 1.7 − 3.6 + 0.1 + 0.0 + 0.1 − 3.7 − 3.4 − 0.3 − 2.2 − 2.5
         Mar − 3.4 − 8.7 − 8.6 − 5.7 − 5.8 + 0.1 − 2.9 − 2.8 − 0.1 + 5.3 + 4.4
         Apr + 26.9 + 5.7 + 3.9 − 6.0 − 6.2 + 0.2 + 9.9 + 9.1 + 0.8 + 23.0 + 22.5
         May − 28.8 − 5.6 − 11.1 − 0.7 − 0.6 − 0.1 − 10.4 − 10.5 + 0.1 − 17.6 − 12.6
         June + 5.9 + 10.2 + 10.0 + 13.2 + 13.3 − 0.1 − 3.2 − 2.1 − 1.1 − 4.1 − 6.6
*See Table IV.2, footnote*; statistical breaks have been eliminated from the changes. marked. 1Excluding debt securities arising from the exchange of equalisation claims
The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as provisional. Subsequent (see also footnote 2). 2Including debt securities arising from the exchange of
revisions, which appear in the following Monthly Report, are not specially equalisation claims. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
31  Monthly Report
August 2013
IV Banks
 
   
 
lending
prises and households to general governmentLoans Loans
Memo Memo
item Equal- item
Medium- Long- Fiduciary Medium- Long- Secur- isation Fiduciary
Total term term loans Total Total term term ities 
1 claims 2 loans   Period Securities
End of year or month *
 
1,927.7 195.0 1,732.8 168.3 49.9 544.3 401.0 34.6 366.4 141.3 2.0 7.0 2003
1,940.8 194.3 1,746.5 173.5 55.3 566.1 387.7 32.9 354.8 177.5 1.0 6.5 2004
1,953.4 194.7 1,758.8 187.9 52.1 544.1 374.4 32.9 341.4 169.7 − 4.5 2005
1,972.7 194.5 1,778.1 209.1 48.2 515.8 358.4 31.7 326.6 157.4 − 4.8 2006
1,987.3 207.7 1,779.6 181.1 46.5 476.2 332.5 31.9 300.6 143.7 − 4.7 2007
2,022.0 222.0 1,800.0 235.8 42.8 440.3 308.2 29.7 278.5 132.1 − 4.5 2008
2,051.3 242.7 1,808.6 248.4 39.6 453.1 298.0 32.2 265.8 155.1 − 4.3 2009
2,070.0 238.1 1,831.8 235.7 30.7 487.3 301.2 36.1 265.1 186.1 − 3.1 2010
2,099.5 247.9 1,851.7 222.4 32.7 492.6 299.1 41.1 258.0 193.5 − 3.6 2011
2,119.5 249.7 1,869.8 191.4 31.4 533.4 292.7 39.4 253.3 240.7 − 3.5 2012
2,098.4 246.8 1,851.6 222.3 31.8 496.9 298.1 40.9 257.2 198.8 − 3.5 2012          Jan 
2,099.5 245.9 1,853.7 216.4 31.6 497.4 297.5 41.1 256.4 200.0 − 3.5          Feb 
2,099.2 246.4 1,852.7 226.1 31.3 500.9 296.6 40.9 255.8 204.2 − 3.5          Mar 
2,102.2 247.1 1,855.1 239.7 31.7 499.9 296.8 40.6 256.2 203.1 − 3.6          Apr 
2,109.6 248.6 1,861.1 219.2 31.7 496.7 295.2 40.1 255.1 201.5 − 3.6          May2,108.5 248.3 1,860.1 191.8 31.5 522.4 295.3 39.8 255.5 227.1 − 3.6          June
2,116.0 249.7 1,866.3 188.6 31.4 523.8 294.1 39.7 254.4 229.7 − 3.6          July
2,120.7 249.6 1,871.1 190.1 31.6 525.6 293.0 39.3 253.7 232.6 − 3.5          Aug 2,118.1 249.0 1,869.1 193.4 31.5 527.6 291.9 39.1 252.8 235.7 − 3.5          Sep 
2,120.9 249.8 1,871.1 188.7 31.2 530.8 292.9 39.9 253.0 237.9 − 3.5          Oct 
2,127.7 251.3 1,876.4 188.7 31.5 538.7 293.4 40.1 253.4 245.2 − 3.5          Nov 2,119.5 249.7 1,869.8 191.4 31.4 533.4 292.7 39.4 253.3 240.7 − 3.5          Dec 
2,116.9 249.6 1,867.3 197.2 31.0 529.4 292.1 39.7 252.4 237.3 − 3.5 2013          Jan 
2,120.1 249.3 1,870.8 191.5 31.0 529.7 290.6 39.3 251.4 239.1 − 3.4          Feb 2,119.3 249.6 1,869.7 196.6 30.8 530.6 291.3 40.5 250.8 239.3 − 3.4          Mar 
2,121.1 249.8 1,871.3 217.3 30.4 531.1 292.2 40.8 251.4 238.9 − 3.3          Apr 
2,126.7 252.0 1,874.7 199.1 30.3 526.1 292.2 40.3 251.8 233.9 − 3.2          May2,125.9 250.5 1,875.4 193.3 30.0 528.5 292.0 40.5 251.4 236.6 − 3.2          June
Changes *
+ 10.7 + 0.2 + 10.5 + 4.9 + 3.6 + 19.4 − 13.8 − 0.9 − 12.9 + 34.3 − 1.1 − 0.6 2004
+ 12.5 + 1.7 + 10.8 + 14.3 − 3.0 − 22.1 − 13.4 + 0.9 − 14.2 − 7.7 − 1.0 − 2.0 2005
+ 2.3 + 0.2 + 2.2 + 21.2 − 3.9 − 28.8 − 16.4 − 1.4 − 15.0 − 12.4 − + 0.3 2006
+ 9.6 + 10.1 − 0.6 − 16.7 − 2.2 − 36.3 − 25.8 + 0.1 − 26.0 − 10.5 − − 0.1 2007
+ 28.8 + 12.0 + 16.8 + 54.7 − 5.3 − 34.5 − 23.2 − 2.3 − 20.8 − 11.4 − − 0.1 2008
+ 23.5 + 17.3 + 6.3 + 13.1 − 3.9 + 15.2 − 7.6 + 2.5 − 10.2 + 22.8 − − 0.2 2009
+ 18.6 − 4.0 + 22.6 − 3.8 − 1.7 + 35.2 + 3.5 + 3.5 − 0.0 + 31.7 − − 0.3 2010
+ 22.6 + 2.2 + 20.4 − 13.2 − 1.0 + 5.2 − 2.1 + 4.9 − 7.0 + 7.3 − − 0.2 2011
+ 21.6 + 1.5 + 20.1 − 10.7 − 1.1 + 19.8 − 6.6 − 1.9 − 4.7 + 26.4 − − 0.2 2012
− 1.1 − 1.1 − 0.0 + 0.1 − 0.9 + 4.3 − 1.0 − 0.2 − 0.8 + 5.3 − − 0.1 2012          Jan 
+ 1.1 − 0.9 + 2.0 − 5.9 − 0.2 + 0.6 − 0.6 + 0.2 − 0.8 + 1.2 − − 0.0          Feb 
− 0.4 + 0.6 − 0.9 + 9.7 − 0.2 + 3.4 − 0.8 − 0.2 − 0.6 + 4.3 − − 0.0          Mar 
+ 2.6 + 0.7 + 1.9 + 13.7 + 0.3 − 1.1 + 0.2 − 0.3 + 0.5 − 1.2 − + 0.2          Apr 
+ 7.1 + 1.2 + 5.9 − 20.6 + 0.0 − 3.2 − 1.6 − 0.4 − 1.2 − 1.6 − − 0.0          May
+ 0.5 − 0.1 + 0.6 − 7.4 − 0.2 + 5.7 + 0.1 − 0.4 + 0.5 + 5.6 − − 0.0          June
+ 7.8 + 1.5 + 6.3 − 3.2 − 0.2 + 1.4 − 1.2 − 0.1 − 1.1 + 2.6 − − 0.1          July
+ 4.7 − 0.1 + 4.8 + 1.5 + 0.3 + 1.8 − 1.1 − 0.4 − 0.7 + 2.9 − − 0.0          Aug 
− 2.2 − 0.9 − 1.3 + 3.3 − 0.2 + 1.8 − 1.3 − 0.4 − 0.9 + 3.0 − − 0.0          Sep 
+ 2.8 + 0.8 + 2.0 − 4.6 − 0.2 + 2.6 + 1.0 + 0.8 + 0.2 + 1.6 − − 0.0          Oct 
+ 7.0 + 1.5 + 5.5 − 0.0 + 0.3 + 7.9 + 0.6 + 0.2 + 0.4 + 7.3 − −          Nov 
− 8.2 − 1.6 − 6.6 + 2.7 + 0.0 − 5.3 − 0.7 − 0.6 − 0.1 − 4.6 − − 0.0          Dec 
− 3.5 − 0.9 − 2.5 + 5.7 − 0.3 − 4.0 − 0.6 + 0.2 − 0.9 − 3.4 − − 0.0 2013          Jan 
+ 3.2 − 0.3 + 3.5 − 5.7 − 0.0 + 0.4 − 1.5 − 0.4 − 1.0 + 1.8 − − 0.0          Feb 
− 0.8 + 0.3 − 1.0 + 5.1 − 0.2 + 0.9 + 0.7 + 1.3 − 0.6 + 0.3 − − 0.0          Mar 
+ 1.8 + 0.2 + 1.6 + 20.7 − 0.3 + 0.5 + 0.9 + 0.3 + 0.6 − 0.4 − − 0.2          Apr 
+ 5.6 + 2.2 + 3.3 − 18.2 − 0.2 − 5.1 − 0.0 − 0.5 + 0.4 − 5.0 − − 0.0          May
− 0.8 − 1.5 + 0.7 − 5.8 − 0.2 + 2.5 − 0.2 + 0.2 − 0.4 + 2.7 − − 0.0          June

Deutsche Bundesbank
32  Monthly Report
August 2013
IV Banks
 
6 Lending by banks (MFIs) in Germany to domestic enterprises and households, housing loans,
sectors of economic activity *
 
€ billion
Lending to domestic enterprises and households (excluding holdings of negotiable money market paper and excluding securities portfolios)  1 
of which  
 
Housing loans Lending to enterprises and self-employed persons
 
Whole-
sale and Electricity,
gas and retail Financial
Mortgage water trade; Agri- Transport- intermedi-
loans supply; repair of culture, ation and ation
secured refuse motor forestry, storage; (excluding
by disposal, vehicles fishing post and MFIs) and
Mortgage residen- Other of which mining and and telecom- insurance
loans, tial real housing Housing Manufac- and Construc- motor- aqua- munica- com-
Period Total total Total estate loans Total loans turing quarrying tion cycles culture tions panies
Lending, total End of year or quarter *
 
2011 2,415.7 1,167.3 1,114.0 914.0 200.0 1,368.0 305.0 134.6 84.4 59.6 124.0 42.7 80.1 196.4
2012          June 2,432.4 1,164.7 1,118.0 912.4 205.6 1,385.2 307.6 136.8 88.6 60.6 125.4 44.2 80.3 196.1
         Sep 2,458.6 1,167.3 1,126.6 917.8 208.8 1,404.2 309.8 133.9 90.8 60.3 127.4 44.8 78.4 213.9
         Dec 2,435.9 1,170.6 1,135.0 922.4 212.6 1,377.6 311.2 131.1 92.7 59.6 126.1 44.5 76.7 195.4
2013          Mar 2,451.1 1,173.5 1,136.8 926.0 210.8 1,394.1 311.9 133.2 94.6 60.3 126.9 44.7 76.2 208.8
         June 2,464.2 1,173.0 1,143.3 928.7 214.6 1,402.0 314.0 131.9 94.6 60.1 124.7 45.6 74.0 219.9
 Short-term lending
2011 316.2 − 7.7 − 7.7 276.7 3.9 33.8 6.0 11.9 41.8 3.3 7.0 111.0
2012          June 324.0 − 7.6 − 7.6 285.0 3.8 37.5 6.8 13.3 42.8 4.0 7.4 110.4
         Sep 340.5 − 7.8 − 7.8 301.5 3.9 36.4 6.8 12.9 44.7 3.9 7.4 127.8
         Dec 316.4 − 7.9 − 7.9 277.7 3.8 34.8 6.9 12.0 43.0 3.3 6.8 112.8
2013          Mar 331.7 − 7.8 − 7.8 294.9 3.9 37.5 7.5 13.1 43.6 3.6 7.0 125.4
         June 338.2 − 8.0 − 8.0 301.4 3.9 37.4 6.7 12.9 41.8 4.1 6.3 135.1
 Medium-term lending
2011 247.9 − 34.5 − 34.5 176.7 11.8 28.2 6.0 9.4 15.5 4.0 11.8 35.4
2012          June 248.4 − 34.9 − 34.9 176.7 11.7 26.9 6.3 9.3 15.8 4.0 11.6 36.2
         Sep 249.0 − 35.3 − 35.3 176.3 11.9 25.9 6.8 9.3 16.0 4.1 11.1 36.2
         Dec 249.7 − 35.3 − 35.3 176.7 11.8 25.6 7.0 9.3 16.5 4.0 11.0 35.9
2013          Mar 249.6 − 34.9 − 34.9 176.5 11.6 25.8 6.8 9.2 16.6 3.9 11.3 37.0
         June 250.5 − 35.6 − 35.6 176.5 12.3 24.7 6.7 9.4 16.8 3.9 11.2 37.7
 Long-term lending
2011 1,851.7 1,167.3 1,071.8 914.0 157.8 914.6 289.3 72.6 72.4 38.3 66.7 35.4 61.2 49.9
2012          June 1,860.1 1,164.7 1,075.5 912.4 163.1 923.5 292.0 72.4 75.5 38.0 66.8 36.2 61.3 49.5
         Sep 1,869.1 1,167.3 1,083.5 917.8 165.7 926.5 294.0 71.6 77.3 38.1 66.7 36.8 59.9 49.9
         Dec 1,869.8 1,170.6 1,091.8 922.4 169.4 923.2 295.6 70.7 78.8 38.3 66.6 37.2 58.9 46.7
2013          Mar 1,869.7 1,173.5 1,094.0 926.0 168.0 922.7 296.5 69.8 80.4 38.1 66.7 37.2 58.0 46.4
         June 1,875.4 1,173.0 1,099.7 928.7 170.9 924.0 297.8 69.9 81.2 37.8 66.1 37.6 56.5 47.1
 
Lending, total Change during quarter *
 
2012          Q2 + 3.2 + 3.2 + 4.5 + 1.1 + 3.4 − 1.5 + 1.9 − 0.2 + 2.3 + 0.5 − 0.5 + 1.0 + 2.6 − 9.8
         Q3 + 27.2 + 3.3 + 8.9 + 5.2 + 3.6 + 20.1 + 2.6 − 2.7 + 2.1 − 0.3 + 2.0 + 0.7 − 1.7 + 17.1
         Q4 − 22.5 + 2.9 + 6.2 + 3.5 + 2.7 − 26.2 + 1.4 − 2.8 + 1.8 − 0.7 − 1.2 − 0.3 − 1.8 − 18.5
2013          Q1 + 15.1 − 0.2 + 1.7 + 0.9 + 0.7 + 16.4 + 0.9 + 2.1 + 1.8 + 0.7 + 0.8 + 0.2 − 0.4 + 13.4
         Q2 + 13.1 − 0.5 + 5.9 + 2.2 + 3.7 + 7.7 + 1.7 − 1.2 + 0.0 − 0.2 − 2.2 + 0.9 − 2.2 + 11.0
 Short-term lending
2012          Q2 − 7.0 − + 0.1 − + 0.1 − 7.2 − 0.0 + 0.9 + 0.1 + 0.7 − 0.2 + 0.5 + 0.3 − 9.9
         Q3 + 16.9 − + 0.2 − + 0.2 + 16.6 + 0.1 − 0.9 − 0.1 − 0.4 + 1.9 − 0.1 − 0.0 + 16.8
         Q4 − 24.1 − + 0.0 − + 0.0 − 23.5 − 0.1 − 1.6 + 0.0 − 0.9 − 1.5 − 0.6 − 0.5 − 15.0
2013          Q1 + 16.1 − − 0.1 − − 0.1 + 17.2 + 0.0 + 2.8 + 0.5 + 1.0 + 0.6 + 0.3 + 0.2 + 12.6
         Q2 + 6.5 − + 0.2 − + 0.2 + 6.5 + 0.1 − 0.1 − 0.8 − 0.1 − 1.8 + 0.5 − 0.7 + 9.8
 Medium-term lending
2012          Q2 + 1.8 − + 0.3 − + 0.3 + 0.7 − 0.1 − 0.6 + 0.3 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.0 + 0.1 + 0.3
         Q3 + 0.5 − + 0.5 − + 0.5 − 0.3 + 0.3 − 1.0 + 0.5 + 0.0 + 0.1 + 0.1 − 0.4 − 0.2
         Q4 + 0.7 − + 0.0 − + 0.0 + 0.4 − 0.1 − 0.4 + 0.2 − 0.0 + 0.5 − 0.1 − 0.1 − 0.3
2013          Q1 − 1.0 − − 0.4 − − 0.4 − 0.3 − 0.2 + 0.2 − 0.3 − 0.1 + 0.2 − 0.1 + 0.3 + 1.1
         Q2 + 0.9 − + 0.6 − + 0.6 + 0.0 + 0.6 − 1.2 − 0.1 + 0.2 + 0.3 − 0.0 − 0.1 + 0.6
 Long-term lending
2012          Q2 + 8.3 + 3.2 + 4.2 + 1.1 + 3.0 + 5.0 + 2.0 − 0.6 + 1.9 − 0.2 − 0.3 + 0.6 + 2.1 − 0.2
         Q3 + 9.9 + 3.3 + 8.1 + 5.2 + 2.9 + 3.8 + 2.2 − 0.8 + 1.8 + 0.0 − 0.0 + 0.6 − 1.2 + 0.5
         Q4 + 0.8 + 2.9 + 6.1 + 3.5 + 2.6 − 3.1 + 1.6 − 0.8 + 1.5 + 0.2 − 0.2 + 0.4 − 1.1 − 3.2
2013          Q1 − 0.1 − 0.2 + 2.1 + 0.9 + 1.2 − 0.5 + 1.0 − 0.9 + 1.6 − 0.2 + 0.1 − 0.0 − 0.9 − 0.3
         Q2 + 5.7 − 0.5 + 5.2 + 2.2 + 3.0 + 1.2 + 1.1 + 0.1 + 0.9 − 0.2 − 0.6 + 0.4 − 1.5 + 0.7
*Excluding lending by foreign branches. Breakdown of lending by building and loan from the changes. The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as pro-
associations by areas and sectors estimated. Statistical alterations have been eliminated visional; subsequent alterations, which will appear in the following Monthly Report,

Deutsche Bundesbank
33  Monthly Report
August 2013
IV Banks
 
   
 
 
 
 Lending to
 Lending to employees and other individuals non-profit institutions
Memo items Other lending Services sector (including the professions)
of which of which
Debitbalanceson wage,
Other Lending salaryreal to self- Lending and of which
Housing Holding estate employed to craft Housing pension Housing Instalment
Total companies Total loans Total loans 
3 accounts Total loans   Period enterprises activities persons 2 enterprises
End of year or quarter * Lending, total 
 
646.3 180.0 42.9 177.9 382.9 51.7 1,034.3 805.6 228.7 147.8 13.5 13.4 3.5 2011
653.3 181.6 43.3 178.8 387.9 51.9 1,033.6 806.9 226.8 147.3 13.3 13.6 3.5 2012          June
654.7 182.8 42.4 179.3 388.0 51.8 1,040.8 813.3 227.5 148.5 13.4 13.6 3.5          Sep 651.6 184.6 39.0 178.5 388.4 51.0 1,044.9 820.3 224.6 147.2 13.0 13.4 3.5          Dec 
649.4 184.6 38.5 178.7 387.3 51.3 1,043.6 821.3 222.3 146.5 12.6 13.3 3.5 2013          Mar 
651.2 186.6 38.5 178.1 387.9 51.1 1,048.7 825.8 223.0 147.8 12.4 13.5 3.6          June
Short-term lending
61.9 9.6 11.1 13.2 30.4 7.2 38.5 3.9 34.7 2.5 13.5 0.9 0.0 2011
62.8 9.4 11.8 13.1 30.9 7.9 38.0 3.8 34.2 2.2 13.3 1.0 0.0 2012          June
61.7 9.5 10.9 13.0 30.0 7.7 37.8 3.9 33.9 1.9 13.4 1.2 0.0          Sep 58.0 9.3 7.9 12.9 30.0 7.2 37.7 4.0 33.7 2.1 13.0 1.1 0.0          Dec 
57.3 9.0 8.2 12.8 30.1 7.8 35.9 3.9 32.0 2.0 12.6 1.0 0.0 2013          Mar 
57.1 9.4 7.8 12.5 29.9 7.6 35.8 4.0 31.8 1.9 12.4 1.0 0.0          June
Medium-term lending
66.3 8.1 8.4 20.4 31.2 3.6 70.6 22.7 47.9 42.8 − 0.6 0.0 2011
66.6 8.1 8.1 20.0 31.9 3.6 71.0 23.1 47.9 42.9 − 0.6 0.0 2012          June
66.9 8.4 8.2 19.9 32.0 3.6 72.2 23.4 48.8 43.9 − 0.5 0.0          Sep 
67.5 8.9 7.9 20.2 32.2 3.5 72.5 23.5 49.0 44.1 − 0.5 0.0          Dec 
65.9 8.6 7.2 19.9 31.9 3.6 72.6 23.3 49.3 43.8 − 0.5 0.0 2013          Mar 
66.2 8.6 7.1 19.9 31.9 3.7 73.5 23.3 50.1 44.8 − 0.5 0.0          June
Long-term lending
518.1 162.4 23.4 144.3 321.3 40.9 925.2 779.1 146.1 102.5 − 11.9 3.4 2011
523.9 164.1 23.4 145.7 325.0 40.5 924.6 779.9 144.7 102.2 − 12.0 3.5 2012          June
526.1 164.9 23.4 146.4 326.0 40.5 930.8 786.0 144.8 102.7 − 11.8 3.5          Sep 
526.1 166.4 23.2 145.5 326.2 40.3 934.7 792.8 142.0 100.9 − 11.8 3.5          Dec 
526.3 167.0 23.1 146.0 325.3 39.9 935.1 794.1 141.0 100.7 − 11.9 3.5 2013          Mar 
527.9 168.6 23.6 145.7 326.1 39.8 939.4 798.4 141.0 101.1 − 12.0 3.5          June
 
Change during quarter * Lending, total 
 
+ 2.6 + 1.1 + 0.3 − 0.0 + 1.9 − 0.1 + 4.7 + 2.7 + 2.0 + 1.5 − 0.1 − 0.0 − 0.0 2012          Q2+ 2.9 + 1.6 − 0.8 + 1.2 + 0.2 − 0.1 + 7.2 + 6.3 + 0.8 + 1.1 + 0.1 − 0.0 − 0.0          Q3− 2.8 + 1.8 − 3.3 − 0.7 + 0.3 − 0.8 + 3.8 + 4.8 − 1.0 − 0.3 − 0.4 − 0.2 − 0.0          Q4
− 2.2 − 0.0 − 0.6 + 0.0 − 1.2 + 0.3 − 1.3 + 0.8 − 2.1 − 0.7 − 0.4 − 0.1 + 0.0 2013          Q1
+ 1.7 + 1.7 + 0.0 − 0.6 + 0.6 − 0.2 + 5.2 + 4.1 + 1.1 + 1.4 − 0.3 + 0.2 + 0.0          Q2
Short-term lending
+ 0.4 + 0.3 − 0.1 − 0.2 + 0.4 − 0.0 + 0.3 + 0.1 + 0.1 − 0.0 − 0.1 − 0.0 − 2012          Q2− 0.6 + 0.1 − 0.9 + 0.2 − 0.9 − 0.1 + 0.1 + 0.1 − 0.1 − 0.2 + 0.1 + 0.2 + 0.0          Q3− 3.4 − 0.2 − 3.0 − 0.1 + 0.0 − 0.5 − 0.4 + 0.1 − 0.5 − 0.0 − 0.4 − 0.2 + 0.0          Q4
− 0.7 − 0.4 + 0.3 − 0.0 + 0.1 + 0.6 − 1.0 − 0.1 − 0.9 − 0.1 − 0.4 − 0.1 − 2013          Q1
− 0.2 + 0.4 − 0.4 − 0.3 − 0.2 − 0.2 − 0.1 + 0.1 − 0.2 − 0.1 − 0.3 + 0.0 + 0.0          Q2
Medium-term lending
+ 0.6 − 0.0 + 0.2 + 0.0 + 0.4 − + 1.1 + 0.4 + 0.7 + 0.9 − + 0.0 − 0.0 2012          Q2+ 0.6 + 0.3 + 0.1 + 0.0 + 0.1 − 0.0 + 0.9 + 0.2 + 0.6 + 0.7 − − 0.1 −          Q3
+ 0.6 + 0.5 − 0.3 + 0.3 + 0.2 − 0.1 + 0.3 + 0.1 + 0.2 + 0.2 − − 0.0 − 0.0          Q4
− 1.7 − 0.3 − 0.7 − 0.3 − 0.4 + 0.1 − 0.7 − 0.2 − 0.5 − 0.3 − + 0.0 − 2013          Q1
+ 0.4 + 0.0 − 0.1 − 0.0 + 0.0 + 0.1 + 0.9 + 0.0 + 0.9 + 1.0 − − 0.0 + 0.0          Q2
Long-term lending
+ 1.6 + 0.8 + 0.1 + 0.1 + 1.1 − 0.1 + 3.3 + 2.1 + 1.2 + 0.6 − − 0.0 − 0.0 2012          Q2
+ 2.9 + 1.2 − 0.0 + 0.9 + 1.0 + 0.1 + 6.2 + 5.9 + 0.3 + 0.5 − − 0.2 − 0.0          Q3
+ 0.1 + 1.5 − 0.1 − 0.9 + 0.2 − 0.2 + 3.9 + 4.6 − 0.7 − 0.5 − + 0.0 − 0.0          Q4
+ 0.2 + 0.7 − 0.1 + 0.3 − 0.9 − 0.4 + 0.4 + 1.1 − 0.6 − 0.2 − + 0.0 + 0.0 2013          Q1
+ 1.5 + 1.2 + 0.5 − 0.3 + 0.8 − 0.1 + 4.4 + 4.0 + 0.4 + 0.5 − + 0.1 + 0.0          Q2
are not specially marked. 1 Excluding fiduciary loans. 2 Including sole proprietors. 
3 Excluding mortgage loans and housing loans, even in the form of instalment credit. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
34  Monthly Report
August 2013
IV Banks
 
7 Deposits of domestic non-banks (non-MFIs) at banks (MFIs) in Germany*
 
 
€ billion
Time deposits  1,2   Memo item
  
 for more than 1 year  2 Subordinated
 liabilities
for up for up (excluding
to and to and for more Bank negotiable Liabilities
Deposits, Sight including including than Savings savings Fiduciary debt arising
Period total deposits Total 1 year Total 2 years 2 years bonds  4 loans securities) from repos deposits  3 
Domestic non-banks, total End of year or month*
 
2010 2,935.2 1,104.4 1,117.1 329.3 787.8 25.1 762.7 618.2 95.4 37.5 35.7 80.9
2011 3,045.5 1,168.3 1,156.2 386.1 770.2 31.5 738.7 616.1 104.8 36.5 34.3 97.1
2012 3,090.2 1,306.5 1,072.5 341.3 731.2 32.0 699.2 617.6 93.6 34.9 31.7 82.9
2012          July 3,105.8 1,235.4 1,154.2 402.7 751.6 33.5 718.1 615.9 100.3 35.1 32.9 102.3
         Aug 3,118.3 1,247.0 1,156.8 406.6 750.2 33.4 716.8 615.4 99.1 35.1 32.7 105.7
         Sep 3,112.2 1,262.9 1,137.3 390.1 747.2 33.0 714.2 614.1 97.9 35.0 32.3 95.9
         Oct 3,124.7 1,292.7 1,121.9 384.0 737.9 32.5 705.4 613.6 96.6 34.9 32.1 106.0
         Nov 3,137.0 1,317.7 1,111.8 378.1 733.8 32.3 701.4 612.8 94.6 35.2 31.8 105.4
         Dec 3,090.2 1,306.5 1,072.5 341.3 731.2 32.0 699.2 617.6 93.6 34.9 31.7 82.9
2013          Jan 3,087.3 1,326.2 1,053.6 322.4 731.2 32.5 698.7 616.8 90.7 35.0 31.2 81.9
         Feb 3,097.1 1,336.2 1,055.8 326.7 729.1 32.2 696.9 616.6 88.5 34.9 30.7 98.0
         Mar 3,096.3 1,330.3 1,064.7 335.4 729.3 32.2 697.2 614.5 86.8 34.8 30.4 94.3
         Apr 3,100.3 1,344.5 1,058.4 333.6 724.7 32.3 692.5 612.3 85.1 34.6 30.2 95.6
         May 3,115.4 1,363.4 1,058.3 332.0 726.2 32.9 693.4 610.7 83.0 34.5 30.1 96.8
         June 3,129.7 1,369.8 1,069.2 344.8 724.4 32.2 692.3 609.7 81.0 34.4 30.1 110.9
Changes*
2011 + 111.2 + 63.7 + 40.9 + 57.0 − 16.1 + 6.5 − 22.6 − 2.6 + 9.3 − 1.1 − 1.4 + 16.0
2012 + 42.2 + 138.7 − 86.7 − 47.7 − 39.0 + 0.6 − 39.6 + 1.5 − 11.2 − 1.6 − 2.6 − 16.8
2012          July + 1.1 + 1.6 + 0.7 + 5.2 − 4.6 − 0.2 − 4.4 − 0.2 − 1.1 − 0.1 − 0.3 + 4.8
         Aug + 12.5 + 11.5 + 2.6 + 4.0 − 1.4 − 0.1 − 1.3 − 0.5 − 1.1 − 0.0 − 0.2 + 3.5
         Sep − 5.8 + 16.2 − 19.6 − 16.6 − 3.0 − 0.4 − 2.6 − 1.2 − 1.2 − 0.1 − 0.4 − 9.8
         Oct + 12.5 + 29.8 − 15.4 − 6.1 − 9.3 − 0.6 − 8.7 − 0.6 − 1.3 − 0.2 − 0.2 + 10.0
         Nov + 12.2 + 25.0 − 10.0 − 5.9 − 4.1 − 0.1 − 4.0 − 0.7 − 2.0 + 0.3 − 0.3 − 0.6
         Dec − 46.5 − 11.2 − 39.1 − 36.8 − 2.4 − 0.3 − 2.0 + 4.8 − 1.0 − 0.3 − 0.2 − 22.4
2013          Jan − 2.9 + 19.7 − 18.8 − 19.0 + 0.2 + 0.5 − 0.2 − 0.8 − 2.9 − 0.0 − 0.5 − 1.0
         Feb + 9.8 + 10.0 + 2.2 + 4.3 − 2.1 − 0.3 − 1.8 − 0.1 − 2.2 − 0.0 − 0.5 + 16.1
         Mar − 1.2 − 6.2 + 8.9 + 8.7 + 0.2 − 0.0 + 0.3 − 2.2 − 1.8 − 0.1 − 0.3 − 3.7
         Apr + 4.1 + 14.6 − 6.7 − 2.1 − 4.6 + 0.1 − 4.7 − 2.1 − 1.6 − 0.2 − 0.2 + 1.3
         May + 15.0 + 18.9 − 0.1 − 1.6 + 1.5 + 0.6 + 0.9 − 1.6 − 2.2 − 0.1 − 0.1 + 1.2
         June + 14.6 + 6.4 + 11.3 + 12.2 − 0.9 − 0.6 − 0.3 − 1.1 − 2.0 − 0.1 − 0.0 + 14.1
Domestic government End of year or month*
2010 153.4 46.1 103.0 47.7 55.3 2.6 52.7 2.8 1.5 34.7 6.2 0.4
2011 168.5 46.2 118.4 69.5 48.8 3.8 45.0 2.4 1.5 34.0 5.9 3.1
2012 186.2 50.8 130.7 73.0 57.7 4.5 53.1 3.1 1.6 32.7 5.9 3.1
2012          July 218.3 53.6 160.6 100.1 60.5 4.4 56.1 2.8 1.3 33.0 5.9 2.1
         Aug 216.6 51.2 161.2 101.1 60.1 4.5 55.6 2.9 1.3 33.0 5.9 3.0
         Sep 214.3 53.5 156.5 96.6 60.0 4.5 55.5 2.9 1.3 33.0 5.9 0.8
         Oct 216.6 57.4 154.9 95.6 59.4 4.4 54.9 2.9 1.3 32.8 5.9 0.9
         Nov 216.8 56.6 155.8 96.3 59.5 4.6 55.0 3.0 1.4 32.8 5.9 0.8
         Dec 186.2 50.8 130.7 73.0 57.7 4.5 53.1 3.1 1.6 32.7 5.9 3.1
2013          Jan 179.1 50.6 124.0 67.1 56.9 4.6 52.3 3.1 1.3 32.7 5.9 1.1
         Feb 179.0 50.6 124.0 67.0 57.0 4.5 52.4 3.2 1.3 32.6 5.9 2.2
         Mar 185.9 49.5 131.9 74.1 57.8 5.0 52.8 3.3 1.2 32.6 5.8 1.3
         Apr 184.1 51.5 128.1 71.7 56.4 5.2 51.2 3.3 1.2 32.3 5.8 2.3
         May 190.2 52.1 133.4 76.0 57.4 5.5 51.9 3.5 1.2 32.3 5.8 2.1
         June 194.8 54.0 135.9 78.9 57.1 5.5 51.5 3.5 1.3 32.0 5.8 0.5
Changes*
2011 + 14.6 + 0.1 + 15.0 + 21.4 − 6.5 + 1.2 − 7.7 − 0.4 + 0.0 − 0.7 − 0.2 + 2.7
2012 + 2.2 + 2.9 − 1.6 + 2.7 − 4.3 + 0.7 − 5.0 + 0.7 + 0.1 − 1.4 − 0.1 + 0.1
2012          July − 9.4 − 10.7 + 1.1 + 1.2 − 0.1 − 0.3 + 0.2 + 0.2 − 0.0 − 0.1 − 0.0 + 0.6
         Aug − 1.6 − 2.4 + 0.6 + 1.0 − 0.4 + 0.1 − 0.5 + 0.1 + 0.0 − 0.0 + 0.0 + 1.0
         Sep − 2.3 + 2.3 − 4.6 − 4.5 − 0.1 − 0.0 − 0.1 + 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 2.3
         Oct + 2.2 + 3.9 − 1.7 − 1.0 − 0.7 − 0.0 − 0.6 + 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.1 + 0.0 + 0.1
         Nov + 0.2 − 0.8 + 0.8 + 0.7 + 0.1 + 0.1 + 0.0 + 0.1 + 0.0 + 0.0 + 0.0 − 0.1
         Dec − 30.6 − 5.9 − 25.0 − 23.2 − 1.8 − 0.0 − 1.8 + 0.1 + 0.2 − 0.2 − 0.0 + 2.3
2013          Jan − 7.1 − 0.1 − 6.7 − 6.1 − 0.6 + 0.0 − 0.6 + 0.0 − 0.3 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 2.0
         Feb − 0.1 − 0.1 − 0.1 − 0.1 + 0.1 − 0.0 + 0.1 + 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.0 + 1.1
         Mar + 5.6 − 1.5 + 7.0 + 6.9 + 0.2 + 0.2 − 0.0 + 0.1 − 0.0 − 0.1 − 0.1 − 0.9
         Apr − 1.7 + 2.1 − 3.8 − 2.4 − 1.4 + 0.2 − 1.6 + 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.2 − 0.0 + 1.0
         May + 6.1 + 0.6 + 5.3 + 4.3 + 1.0 + 0.4 + 0.7 + 0.2 + 0.0 − 0.1 − 0.0 − 0.2
         June + 4.6 + 2.0 + 2.5 + 2.8 − 0.3 + 0.0 − 0.3 + 0.0 + 0.1 − 0.2 − 0.0 − 1.6
*See Table IV.2, footnote *; statistical breaks have been eliminated from the specially marked. 1Including subordinated liabilities and liabilities arising from
changes. The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as provisional. registered debt securities. 2Including deposits under savings and loan contracts (see
Subsequent revisions, which appear in the following Monthly Report, are not

Deutsche Bundesbank
35  Monthly Report
August 2013
IV Banks
 
7 Deposits of domestic non-banks (non-MFIs) at banks (MFIs) in Germany * (cont’d)
 
 
€ billion
Time deposits 1,2   Memo item
  
 for more than 1 year 2 Subordinated
 liabilities
for up for up (excluding
to and to and for more Bank negotiable Liabilities
Deposits, Sight including including than Savings savings Fiduciary debt arising
Period total deposits Total 1 year Total 2 years 2 years bonds  4 loans securities) from repos deposits 3 
Domestic enterprises and households End of year or month*
 
2010 2,781.8 1,058.3 1,014.1 281.6 732.5 22.5 710.0 615.4 93.9 2.9 29.5 80.5
2011 2,877.0 1,122.0 1,037.9 316.5 721.3 27.7 693.7 613.8 103.3 2.5 28.4 94.02012 2,904.0 1,255.7 941.7 268.3 673.5 27.5 646.0 614.5 92.0 2.2 25.8 79.8
2012          July 2,887.5 1,181.8 993.6 302.6 691.1 29.1 662.0 613.1 98.9 2.1 27.0 100.2
         Aug 2,901.6 1,195.8 995.6 305.5 690.1 28.9 661.2 612.5 97.8 2.1 26.8 102.7         Sep 2,897.9 1,209.4 980.8 293.5 687.2 28.5 658.7 611.3 96.6 2.1 26.4 95.1
         Oct 2,908.1 1,235.2 966.9 288.4 678.5 28.0 650.5 610.7 95.3 2.0 26.2 105.0
         Nov 2,920.2 1,261.1 956.1 281.8 674.3 27.8 646.5 609.8 93.3 2.3 25.9 104.6         Dec 2,904.0 1,255.7 941.7 268.3 673.5 27.5 646.0 614.5 92.0 2.2 25.8 79.8
2013          Jan 2,908.2 1,275.5 929.6 255.3 674.3 27.9 646.4 613.6 89.5 2.3 25.3 80.9
         Feb 2,918.2 1,285.6 931.9 259.7 672.1 27.7 644.5 613.4 87.3 2.3 24.8 95.8         Mar 2,910.4 1,280.8 932.9 261.3 671.5 27.2 644.4 611.2 85.5 2.3 24.6 93.0
         Apr 2,916.2 1,293.0 930.2 261.9 668.4 27.1 641.3 609.0 83.9 2.3 24.4 93.3
         May 2,925.1 1,311.3 924.8 256.0 668.8 27.3 641.5 607.3 81.7 2.3 24.4 94.7         June 2,934.9 1,315.8 933.3 265.9 667.4 26.6 640.7 606.2 79.7 2.3 24.3 110.4
Changes*
2011 + 96.6 + 63.6 + 25.9 + 35.5 − 9.6 + 5.2 − 14.9 − 2.2 + 9.3 − 0.3 − 1.2 + 13.3
2012 + 40.1 + 135.8 − 85.1 − 50.4 − 34.7 − 0.1 − 34.6 + 0.8 − 11.3 − 0.3 − 2.6 − 16.8
2012          July + 10.5 + 12.3 − 0.4 + 4.1 − 4.5 + 0.1 − 4.6 − 0.3 − 1.1 − 0.0 − 0.3 + 4.2
         Aug + 14.1 + 13.9 + 2.0 + 3.0 − 1.0 − 0.2 − 0.8 − 0.6 − 1.2 + 0.0 − 0.2 + 2.5         Sep − 3.5 + 13.9 − 15.0 − 12.1 − 2.9 − 0.4 − 2.5 − 1.2 − 1.2 − 0.1 − 0.4 − 7.5
         Oct + 10.3 + 25.9 − 13.7 − 5.1 − 8.6 − 0.5 − 8.1 − 0.6 − 1.3 − 0.0 − 0.2 + 9.9
         Nov + 12.0 + 25.8 − 10.9 − 6.6 − 4.3 − 0.2 − 4.0 − 0.8 − 2.1 + 0.3 − 0.3 − 0.5         Dec − 15.9 − 5.3 − 14.1 − 13.5 − 0.5 − 0.3 − 0.2 + 4.7 − 1.2 − 0.1 − 0.1 − 24.8
2013          Jan + 4.2 + 19.8 − 12.1 − 12.9 + 0.8 + 0.5 + 0.4 − 0.9 − 2.6 − 0.0 − 0.5 + 1.0
         Feb + 9.9 + 10.1 + 2.2 + 4.4 − 2.2 − 0.3 − 1.9 − 0.2 − 2.2 − 0.0 − 0.5 + 15.0         Mar − 6.8 − 4.7 + 1.9 + 1.8 + 0.1 − 0.2 + 0.3 − 2.3 − 1.7 − 0.0 − 0.2 − 2.8
         Apr + 5.8 + 12.5 − 2.9 + 0.2 − 3.1 − 0.0 − 3.1 − 2.2 − 1.6 + 0.0 − 0.2 + 0.2
         May + 8.9 + 18.3 − 5.4 − 5.9 + 0.4 + 0.2 + 0.2 − 1.8 − 2.2 − 0.0 − 0.1 + 1.4         June + 10.1 + 4.4 + 8.8 + 9.4 − 0.6 − 0.6 − 0.0 − 1.1 − 2.1 + 0.1 − 0.0 + 15.7
of which:  Domestic enterprises End of year or month*
2010 1,124.4 344.6 755.5 196.0 559.5 7.5 552.0 6.3 17.9 2.8 21.4 80.5
2011 1,156.5 374.8 758.9 222.9 536.0 9.4 526.7 5.6 17.3 2.5 20.3 94.0
2012 1,105.3 414.2 668.5 185.9 482.5 10.4 472.2 6.5 16.1 2.2 18.2 79.8
2012          July 1,125.0 390.5 712.0 210.2 501.8 10.2 491.6 6.2 16.3 2.0 19.2 100.2
         Aug 1,132.6 394.5 715.6 214.8 500.7 10.2 490.5 6.4 16.2 2.1 19.0 102.7
         Sep 1,124.2 399.0 702.6 204.6 497.9 10.3 487.6 6.5 16.1 2.0 18.7 95.1
         Oct 1,134.2 419.7 692.0 202.3 489.7 10.3 479.4 6.6 15.9 2.0 18.6 105.0
         Nov 1,131.1 425.2 683.6 198.0 485.6 10.3 475.4 6.5 15.8 2.3 18.3 104.6
         Dec 1,105.3 414.2 668.5 185.9 482.5 10.4 472.2 6.5 16.1 2.2 18.2 79.8
2013          Jan 1,109.2 428.0 658.5 175.7 482.8 10.7 472.2 6.6 16.0 2.3 17.8 80.9
         Feb 1,112.0 427.9 661.5 181.0 480.5 10.9 469.6 6.8 15.9 2.3 17.3 95.8
         Mar 1,104.5 418.0 664.0 184.3 479.7 10.7 469.0 6.8 15.7 2.3 17.2 93.0
         Apr 1,108.9 424.0 662.5 185.6 476.8 11.1 465.8 6.9 15.5 2.3 17.0 93.3
         May 1,110.2 430.2 657.4 180.5 476.9 11.5 465.4 7.1 15.5 2.3 17.1 94.7
         June 1,116.9 426.8 667.6 192.0 475.6 11.4 464.2 7.2 15.3 2.3 17.1 110.4
Changes*
2011 + 33.6 + 29.1 + 5.1 + 27.6 − 22.5 + 1.9 − 24.4 − 0.3 − 0.3 − 0.3 − 1.1 + 13.3
2012 − 37.3 + 42.6 − 79.6 − 39.2 − 40.4 + 1.1 − 41.5 + 0.9 − 1.2 − 0.2 − 2.1 − 16.8
2012          July + 6.2 + 5.7 + 0.5 + 4.9 − 4.4 + 0.4 − 4.8 + 0.1 − 0.1 − 0.0 − 0.2 + 4.2
         Aug + 7.6 + 4.0 + 3.6 + 4.7 − 1.1 + 0.1 − 1.2 + 0.2 − 0.1 + 0.0 − 0.2 + 2.5         Sep − 8.2 + 4.9 − 13.1 − 10.3 − 2.8 + 0.1 − 2.9 + 0.1 − 0.1 − 0.1 − 0.3 − 7.5
         Oct + 10.0 + 20.7 − 10.5 − 2.3 − 8.2 + 0.0 − 8.2 + 0.1 − 0.2 − 0.0 − 0.1 + 9.9
         Nov − 2.8 + 5.5 − 8.1 − 4.2 − 3.9 + 0.1 − 4.0 − 0.1 − 0.1 + 0.3 − 0.2 − 0.5         Dec − 25.6 − 11.0 − 14.9 − 12.1 − 2.9 + 0.1 − 3.0 − 0.0 + 0.3 − 0.1 − 0.1 − 24.8
2013          Jan + 3.7 + 13.8 − 10.1 − 10.3 + 0.1 + 0.3 − 0.2 + 0.1 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.4 + 1.0
         Feb + 2.8 − 0.1 + 3.0 + 5.3 − 2.3 + 0.2 − 2.5 + 0.1 − 0.2 − 0.0 − 0.4 + 15.0         Mar − 6.5 − 9.9 + 3.4 + 3.6 − 0.1 + 0.2 − 0.3 + 0.1 − 0.2 − 0.0 − 0.1 − 2.8
         Apr + 4.4 + 6.3 − 1.9 + 1.0 − 2.9 + 0.3 − 3.2 + 0.1 − 0.2 + 0.0 − 0.2 + 0.2
         May + 1.3 + 6.2 − 5.1 − 5.2 + 0.1 + 0.4 − 0.3 + 0.2 − 0.0 − 0.0 + 0.1 + 1.4         June + 7.0 − 3.4 + 10.5 + 11.0 − 0.4 + 0.0 − 0.5 + 0.1 − 0.2 + 0.1 − 0.0 + 15.7
Table IV.12). 3Excluding deposits under savings and loan contracts (see also foot-   
note 2). 4 Including liabilities arising from non-negotiable bearer debt securities.   
   
  

Deutsche Bundesbank
36  Monthly Report
August 2013
IV Banks
 
8 Deposits of domestic households and non-profit institutions at banks (MFIs) in Germany*
 
 
€ billion
Sight deposits Time deposits  1,2 
by creditor group by creditor group
Deposits of Domestic households Domestic households
domestic
households
and Domestic
non-profit Self- non-profit Self-
employed Other institu- employed Other institutions,
Period total Total Total persons Employees tions Total Total persons Employees individuals individuals
End of year or month*
 
2010 1,657.4 713.7 692.4 123.8 471.2 97.4 21.3 258.6 241.4 21.2 203.7 16.4
2011 1,720.4 747.3 724.9 131.5 490.4 103.0 22.4 278.9 261.1 23.3 218.5 19.3
2012 1,798.7 841.5 816.5 147.1 548.6 120.8 25.0 273.3 256.6 18.8 219.3 18.6
2013          Jan 1,799.0 847.5 820.5 149.3 547.8 123.4 27.0 271.1 255.1 18.4 218.5 18.2
         Feb 1,806.1 857.7 830.4 149.9 555.1 125.4 27.3 270.4 254.7 18.0 218.4 18.3
         Mar 1,805.9 862.9 835.2 147.0 562.5 125.7 27.7 268.8 253.3 17.8 217.4 18.1
         Apr 1,807.3 869.1 841.4 150.3 565.3 125.8 27.6 267.8 252.1 17.5 216.5 18.2
         May 1,814.9 881.1 853.0 152.5 572.8 127.7 28.2 267.4 252.0 17.2 216.5 18.3
         June 1,818.0 889.0 860.9 150.0 582.8 128.0 28.1 265.7 250.5 16.9 215.8 17.8
Changes*
2011 + 63.0 + 34.5 + 33.5 + 7.8 + 19.7 + 6.0 + 1.1 + 20.8 + 20.3 + 2.1 + 15.2 + 3.0
2012 + 77.3 + 93.2 + 90.5 + 14.0 + 57.2 + 19.3 + 2.7 − 5.6 − 4.4 − 4.5 − 0.4 + 0.5
2013          Jan + 0.5 + 6.0 + 4.0 + 2.1 − 0.7 + 2.5 + 2.0 − 2.0 − 1.5 − 0.4 − 0.8 − 0.3
         Feb + 7.1 + 10.2 + 9.9 + 0.7 + 7.1 + 2.1 + 0.3 − 0.8 − 0.4 − 0.4 − 0.1 + 0.1
         Mar − 0.3 + 5.2 + 4.8 − 2.9 + 7.4 + 0.3 + 0.4 − 1.5 − 1.4 − 0.3 − 0.8 − 0.3
         Apr + 1.4 + 6.2 + 6.3 + 3.3 + 2.8 + 0.2 − 0.1 − 1.1 − 1.2 − 0.3 − 1.0 + 0.1
         May + 7.6 + 12.1 + 11.5 + 2.2 + 7.4 + 1.8 + 0.5 − 0.4 − 0.1 − 0.2 + 0.0 + 0.1
         June + 3.1 + 7.8 + 7.9 − 2.5 + 10.1 + 0.4 − 0.1 − 1.7 − 1.6 − 0.4 − 0.7 − 0.5
*See Table IV.2, footnote*; statistical breaks have been eliminated from the changes. revisions, which appear in the following Monthly Report, are not specially
The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as provisional. Subsequent marked. 1Including subordinated liabilities and liabilities arising from registered debt
 
 
 
9 Deposits of domestic government at banks (MFIs) in Germany, by creditor group*
 
€ billion
Deposits
   
Federal Government and its special funds  1 State governments
Time deposits Time deposits
Savings Savings
for up deposits Memo for up deposits Memo
Domestic to and for more and bank item to and for more and bank item
government, Sight including than savings Fiduciary Sight including than savings Fiduciary
Period total Total deposits 1 year 1 year bonds  2 loans Total deposits 1 year 1 year bonds  2 loans
End of year or month*
 
2010 153.4 38.7 5.7 3.3 29.6 0.1 17.0 28.2 8.5 6.7 12.9 0.2 17.2
2011 168.5 37.9 6.2 9.4 22.2 0.1 16.9 34.8 11.4 10.7 12.5 0.2 16.8
2012 186.2 25.9 3.7 6.0 16.2 0.1 16.4 47.2 9.1 13.7 24.2 0.2 15.9
2013          Jan 179.1 24.0 4.9 3.1 15.9 0.1 16.4 47.2 11.3 11.9 23.8 0.2 15.9
         Feb 179.0 23.6 4.2 3.4 15.9 0.1 16.4 44.8 8.5 12.4 23.7 0.2 15.8
         Mar 185.9 23.2 4.0 3.3 15.9 0.1 16.4 49.8 9.8 16.0 23.8 0.2 15.8
         Apr 184.1 21.8 4.4 2.8 14.5 0.1 16.4 49.6 12.0 14.1 23.4 0.2 15.6
         May 190.2 22.5 4.3 3.6 14.6 0.1 16.4 46.9 9.6 13.7 23.4 0.2 15.5
         June 194.8 21.9 3.9 3.4 14.5 0.1 16.2 50.7 12.3 14.9 23.3 0.2 15.5
Changes*
2011 + 14.6 − 0.7 + 0.5 + 6.3 − 7.5 + 0.0 − 0.2 + 6.6 + 2.9 + 4.0 − 0.4 + 0.0 − 0.5
2012 + 2.2 − 9.2 − 2.5 − 0.7 − 6.0 + 0.0 − 0.5 − 2.3 − 3.9 + 2.7 − 1.1 − 0.0 − 0.9
2013          Jan − 7.1 − 2.0 + 1.3 − 2.9 − 0.3 − 0.0 − 0.0 + 0.0 + 2.2 − 1.8 − 0.4 − 0.0 − 0.0
         Feb − 0.1 − 0.4 − 0.7 + 0.3 + 0.1 + 0.0 − 0.0 − 2.4 − 2.8 + 0.5 − 0.1 − 0.0 − 0.0
         Mar + 5.6 − 0.2 − 0.2 + 0.1 − 0.1 + 0.0 − 0.0 + 4.5 + 1.0 + 3.5 + 0.0 + 0.0 − 0.1
         Apr − 1.7 − 1.4 + 0.4 − 0.4 − 1.3 + 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.2 + 2.1 − 1.9 − 0.3 + 0.0 − 0.2
         May + 6.1 + 0.7 − 0.1 + 0.8 + 0.0 − − 0.0 − 2.7 − 2.4 − 0.3 − 0.0 + 0.0 − 0.0
         June + 4.6 − 0.6 − 0.3 − 0.2 − 0.1 + 0.0 − 0.2 + 3.8 + 2.7 + 1.2 − 0.1 + 0.0 − 0.0
*See Table IV.2, footnote *; excluding deposits of the Treuhand agency and its Telekom AG, and of publicly owned enterprises, which are included in ”Enterprises”.
successor organisations, of the Federal Railways, east German Railways and Federal Statistical breaks have been eliminated from the changes. The figures for the latest
Post Office, and, from 1995, of Deutsche Bahn AG, Deutsche Post AG and Deutsche date are always to be regarded as provisional. Subsequent revisions, which appear in

Deutsche Bundesbank
37  Monthly Report
August 2013
IV Banks
 
   
 
 Savings deposits 3  Memo item
 
 by maturity
 more than 1 year 2 
Subordinated
of which liabilities
Domestic Domestic (excluding
up to and up to and Bank negotiable Liabilities non-profit non-profit
institu- including including more than Domestic institu- savings Fiduciary debt arising
tions 1 year Total 2 years 2 years Total tions bonds  4 loans from repos   Period households securities) 5 
End of year or month*
 
17.3 85.7 173.0 15.0 158.0 609.1 599.2 9.9 76.0 0.1 8.2 − 2010
17.8 93.6 185.3 18.3 167.0 608.2 599.0 9.2 86.1 0.1 8.1 − 201116.7 82.3 190.9 17.1 173.8 608.0 597.8 10.2 76.0 0.0 7.6 − 2012
16.0 79.7 191.5 17.3 174.2 607.0 596.8 10.2 73.4 0.0 7.5 − 2013          Jan 
15.7 78.8 191.6 16.8 174.8 606.7 596.3 10.4 71.4 0.0 7.4 −          Feb 15.5 77.0 191.8 16.4 175.4 604.3 593.9 10.4 69.8 0.0 7.4 −          Mar 
15.6 76.2 191.6 16.0 175.5 602.1 591.7 10.4 68.4 0.0 7.4 −          Apr 
15.4 75.5 191.9 15.8 176.1 600.2 589.9 10.3 66.2 0.0 7.2 −          May15.2 74.0 191.7 15.2 176.5 599.0 588.7 10.3 64.4 0.0 7.2 −          June
Changes*
+ 0.5 + 8.0 + 12.9 + 3.3 + 9.5 − 1.8 − 1.1 − 0.7 + 9.5 − 0.0 − 0.1 − 2011
− 1.1 − 11.2 + 5.6 − 1.3 + 6.9 − 0.2 − 1.1 + 1.0 − 10.1 − 0.0 − 0.5 − 2012
− 0.4 − 2.7 + 0.7 + 0.2 + 0.6 − 1.0 − 1.0 + 0.1 − 2.5 + 0.0 − 0.1 − 2013          Jan 
− 0.4 − 0.9 + 0.2 − 0.5 + 0.6 − 0.3 − 0.5 + 0.2 − 2.1 − 0.0 − 0.1 −          Feb 
− 0.2 − 1.7 + 0.2 − 0.4 + 0.6 − 2.3 − 2.3 − 0.0 − 1.6 + 0.0 − 0.1 −          Mar 
+ 0.2 − 0.8 − 0.2 − 0.4 + 0.1 − 2.3 − 2.2 − 0.0 − 1.4 − 0.0 − 0.0 −          Apr 
− 0.3 − 0.7 + 0.3 − 0.2 + 0.6 − 1.9 − 1.8 − 0.1 − 2.1 − 0.0 − 0.1 −          May
− 0.2 − 1.6 − 0.2 − 0.6 + 0.4 − 1.2 − 1.2 − 0.0 − 1.9 + 0.0 − 0.0 −          June
securities. 2Including deposits under savings and loan contracts (see Table 2). 4Including liabilities arising from non-negotiable bearer debt
IV.12). 3Excluding deposits under savings and loan contracts (see also foot-note securities. 5 Included in time deposits. 
 
     
 
Local government and local government associations
(including municipal special-purpose associations) Social security funds
Time deposits 3 Time deposits
Savings Savings
for up deposits Memo for up deposits Memo
to and for more and bank item to and for more and bank item
Sight including than savings Fiduciary Sight including than savings Fiduciary
Total deposits 1 year 1 year bonds 2,4 loans Total deposits 1 year 1 year bonds 2 loans   Period
End of year or month*
 
37.4 19.5 9.9 4.5 3.5 0.4 49.1 12.3 27.9 8.3 0.6 0.0 2010
39.3 18.1 13.0 5.0 3.2 0.4 56.5 10.5 36.4 9.1 0.4 0.0 201143.8 23.0 11.3 5.9 3.6 0.4 69.3 15.0 42.0 11.4 0.8 0.0 2012
38.7 17.9 11.2 5.9 3.6 0.4 69.2 16.5 40.8 11.3 0.6 0.0 2013          Jan 
41.7 20.4 11.6 6.0 3.7 0.4 68.9 17.4 39.6 11.3 0.6 0.0          Feb 41.3 20.0 11.4 6.2 3.7 0.4 71.6 15.6 43.4 12.0 0.6 0.0          Mar 
41.2 19.9 11.5 6.1 3.7 0.4 71.4 15.3 43.3 12.3 0.6 0.0          Apr 
45.0 22.9 12.0 6.2 3.8 0.4 75.8 15.4 46.6 13.2 0.7 0.0          May43.4 21.8 11.4 6.3 3.9 0.4 78.8 16.0 49.1 13.1 0.7 0.0          June
Changes*
+ 1.8 − 1.4 + 2.9 + 0.5 − 0.2 − 0.0 + 7.0 − 1.9 + 8.2 + 0.9 − 0.2 − 0.0 2011+ 4.3 + 4.8 − 1.7 + 0.7 + 0.4 − 0.0 + 9.4 + 4.5 + 2.4 + 2.1 + 0.4 − 0.0 2012
− 5.1 − 5.1 − 0.1 + 0.0 + 0.0 − − 0.1 + 1.5 − 1.4 + 0.1 − 0.3 − 2013          Jan 
+ 3.0 + 2.5 + 0.4 + 0.0 + 0.0 − − 0.3 + 0.9 − 1.3 + 0.0 + 0.0 −          Feb − 0.4 − 0.5 − 0.2 + 0.2 + 0.0 − 0.0 + 1.8 − 1.8 + 3.5 − 0.0 + 0.0 −          Mar 
− 0.1 − 0.0 + 0.1 − 0.1 + 0.0 − − 0.1 − 0.4 − 0.1 + 0.3 − 0.0 −          Apr 
+ 3.7 + 2.9 + 0.5 + 0.1 + 0.1 − + 4.4 + 0.1 + 3.4 + 0.9 + 0.1 −          May− 1.6 − 1.1 − 0.6 + 0.0 + 0.1 − + 2.9 + 0.7 + 2.4 − 0.1 + 0.0 −          June
the following Monthly Report, are not specially marked. 1Federal Railways Fund, non-negotiable bearer debt securities. 3Including deposits under savings and loan
Indemnification Fund, Redemption Fund for Inherited Liabilities, ERP Special Fund, contracts. 4 Excluding deposits under savings and loan contracts (see also footnote 3). 
German Unity Fund, Equalisation of Burdens Fund. 2Including liabilities arising from

Deutsche Bundesbank
38  Monthly Report
August 2013
IV Banks
 
10 Savings deposits and bank savings bonds of banks (MFIs) in Germany sold to non-banks (non-MFIs)*
 
 
€ billion
Savings deposits  1 Bank savings bonds  3  , sold to
of residents of non-residents domestic non-banks
at three months’ at more than three Memo
notice months’ notice item of which
Interest With
of which of which of which credited maturities
Special Special At three on of more
savings savings savings non-banks, than foreign months’
Period Total Total Total Total Total notice deposits total Total 2 years facilities  2 facilities  2 non-banks
End of year or month*
 
2010 628.2 618.2 512.5 412.3 105.7 96.6 9.9 7.7 10.9 113.1 95.4 70.5 17.7
2011 626.3 616.1 515.3 413.7 100.8 91.3 10.2 7.8 10.0 122.5 104.8 74.6 17.7
2012 628.2 617.6 528.4 418.1 89.2 77.7 10.6 8.1 9.8 110.5 93.6 68.6 16.9
2013          Feb 627.0 616.6 530.7 416.6 85.9 74.4 10.4 8.0 0.3 105.3 88.5 65.8 16.8
         Mar 624.7 614.5 529.4 415.2 85.1 73.4 10.3 8.0 0.3 103.5 86.8 65.1 16.7
         Apr 622.6 612.3 528.7 414.6 83.6 71.7 10.3 8.0 0.3 101.7 85.1 64.5 16.6
         May 621.0 610.7 529.1 414.8 81.6 69.7 10.2 8.0 0.3 99.7 83.0 63.2 16.7
         June 619.8 609.7 528.9 413.9 80.8 68.7 10.1 8.0 0.2 97.5 81.0 61.8 16.5
Changes*
2011 − 2.4 − 2.6 + 1.3 + 0.2 − 3.9 − 4.3 + 0.2 + 0.1 . + 9.4 + 9.3 + 4.0 + 0.2
2012 + 1.9 + 1.5 + 14.1 + 5.6 − 12.6 − 14.6 + 0.4 + 0.3 . − 12.0 − 11.2 − 6.1 − 0.7
2013          Feb − 0.2 − 0.1 + 1.4 − 0.4 − 1.5 − 1.6 − 0.1 − 0.0 . − 2.1 − 2.2 − 1.2 + 0.1
         Mar − 2.2 − 2.2 − 1.4 − 1.4 − 0.8 − 0.9 − 0.1 − 0.0 . − 1.8 − 1.8 − 0.7 − 0.1
         Apr − 2.2 − 2.1 − 0.6 − 0.6 − 1.5 − 1.7 − 0.0 + 0.0 . − 1.8 − 1.6 − 0.6 − 0.1
         May − 1.6 − 1.6 + 0.4 + 0.2 − 2.0 − 2.1 − 0.1 − 0.0 . − 2.0 − 2.2 − 1.3 + 0.1
         June − 1.1 − 1.1 − 0.2 − 0.8 − 0.8 − 0.9 − 0.1 − 0.0 . − 2.2 − 2.0 − 1.3 − 0.2
*See Table IV.2, footnote*; statistical breaks have been eliminated from the changes. as time deposits. 2Savings deposits bearing interest at a rate which exceeds the
The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as provisional. Subsequent minimum or basic rate of interest. 3Including liabilities arising from non-negotiable
revisions, which appear in the following Monthly Report, are not specially bearer debt securities. 
marked. 1Excluding deposits under savings and loan contracts, which are classified
 
 
 
11 Debt securities and money market paper outstanding of banks (MFIs) in Germany*
 
€ billion
Negotiable bearer debt securities and money market paper Non-negotiable
bearer debt
of which securities and
money market
with maturities of paper  6 Subordinated
up to more than 1 year up to
and including 1 year of which and including 2 years
with
Certifi- of which of which non- maturities
Floating Zero Foreign cates without without more of more negotiable negotiable
rate coupon currency of a nominal a nominal than than debt debt
Total bonds  1 deposit Total Total 2 years Total 2 years securities securities bonds  1,2 bonds  3,4 guarantee  5 guarantee  5 
Period
End of year or month*
 
2010 1,435.1 342.0 40.7 366.5 82.8 97.0 4.6 56.8 6.5 1,281.4 0.7 0.6 43.9 1.5
2011 1,375.4 352.6 37.2 373.9 75.3 95.2 3.0 53.6 4.5 1,226.6 0.6 0.4 43.2 1.5
2012 1,265.1 346.8 31.6 362.3 58.9 76.4 3.0 51.3 4.4 1,137.4 0.3 0.3 38.6 1.1
2013          Feb 1,259.4 341.6 31.5 369.8 69.6 85.8 3.0 46.8 4.4 1,126.8 0.3 0.3 37.2 1.1
         Mar 1,247.0 338.5 30.3 370.6 72.5 86.8 2.9 45.7 4.5 1,114.5 0.3 0.3 37.2 1.1
         Apr 1,235.0 335.3 31.3 360.4 70.7 84.9 3.0 44.4 4.7 1,105.7 0.3 0.3 36.4 1.1
         May 1,217.2 331.6 30.2 354.5 71.1 83.6 2.5 42.1 4.4 1,091.5 0.3 0.3 37.6 1.1
         June 1,209.2 329.1 30.1 355.3 73.1 86.2 2.9 40.3 4.6 1,082.7 0.3 0.2 37.6 1.1
Changes*
2011 − 59.0 + 10.6 − 5.2 + 8.4 − 7.5 − 2.1 − 1.6 − 2.9 − 2.0 − 54.0 − 0.0 − 0.2 − 0.8 − 0.0
2012 − 111.0 − 7.4 − 6.3 − 12.0 − 16.4 − 19.5 − 0.0 − 2.3 − 0.3 − 89.2 + 0.3 − 0.1 − 4.6 − 0.5
2013          Feb + 11.4 − 2.3 + 1.1 + 17.3 + 7.9 + 8.9 + 0.1 − 1.3 + 0.0 + 3.8 − 0.0 − 0.0 + 0.0 −
         Mar − 12.4 − 3.1 − 1.3 + 0.8 + 3.0 + 1.0 − 0.0 − 1.1 + 0.1 − 12.3 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.0
         Apr − 12.0 − 3.2 + 1.0 − 10.2 − 1.9 − 1.8 + 0.1 − 1.3 + 0.2 − 8.8 + 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.8 −
         May − 17.8 − 3.6 − 1.1 − 5.9 + 0.4 − 1.3 − 0.6 − 2.3 − 0.3 − 14.2 − 0.0 − 0.0 + 1.1 − 0.0
         June − 8.0 − 2.5 − 0.0 + 0.8 + 2.0 + 2.6 + 0.4 − 1.7 + 0.3 − 8.8 − 0.0 − 0.0 + 0.0 −
*See Table IV.2, footnote*; statistical breaks have been eliminated from the coupon bonds denominated in foreign currencies. 4Bonds denominated in
changes. The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as provisional. non-euro-area currencies. 5Negotiable bearer debt securities respectively money
Subsequent revisions, which appear in the following Monthly Report, are not market paper with a nominal guarantee of less than 100%. 6Non-negotiable
specially marked. 1Including debt securities denominated in foreign bearer debt securities are classified among bank savings bonds (see also Table IV.10,
currencies. 2Issue value when floated. 3Including floating rate notes and zero footnote 2). 

Deutsche Bundesbank
39  Monthly Report
August 2013
IV  Banks
  
12 Building  and  loan  associations (MFIs) in Germany *)
Interim statements
  
€ billion
Lending to banks (MFIs)
Lending to non-banks (non-MFIs) Deposits of banks Deposits of non-
(MFIs) 5 banks (non-MFIs)
Credit Building loans Secur- Memo
bal- item ities (in-
ances cluding Bearer New
and Loans Treasury Deposits Deposits debt Capital con-
Num- loans under bills under under secur- (includ- tractsber (ex- Bank savings Interim and savings savings ities ing pub- enteredof Balance cluding debt and loan and Other Treasury and loan Sight and loan Sight and out- lished into in
End of sheet building Building secur- con- bridging building discount con- and time con- time de- stand- re- year or associ-
year/month ations loans 
2 ities 3 tracts loans loans tracts deposits tracts posits  6 ing month 8 total 13 loans) 1 paper) 4 serves) 7 
All  building  and  loan  associations
2011 23 197.5 41.4 0.0 17.6 27.1 74.2 15.9 13.0 0.7 22.8 136.7 6.9 5.4 8.3 99.2
2012 22 200.6 42.2 0.0 17.5 24.0 78.3 16.0 14.5 1.3 21.0 141.9 6.4 4.9 8.7 101.8
2013          Apr 22 201.9 43.5 0.0 16.9 22.9 79.0 16.6 15.6 1.4 20.7 144.4 6.1 4.2 9.0 10.1
         May 22 202.4 43.5 0.0 17.0 22.6 79.2 16.9 15.9 1.5 20.8 144.9 6.0 4.2 9.0 9.4         June 22 203.0 43.5 0.0 17.0 22.4 79.9 16.9 16.3 1.5 20.6 145.4 6.0 4.2 9.0 8.5
Private  building  and  Ioan  associations
  
2013          Apr 12 143.8 25.9 0.0 10.9 15.5 62.5 14.3 8.1 1.0 18.0 95.5 5.9 4.2 6.0 7.0
         May 12 143.9 25.9 0.0 10.8 15.3 62.7 14.6 8.2 1.0 18.0 95.9 5.9 4.2 6.0 6.0         June 12 144.0 25.8 0.0 10.7 15.2 63.2 14.5 8.3 1.0 17.5 96.2 5.8 4.2 6.0 5.4
Public  building  and  Ioan  associations
  
2013          Apr 10 58.2 17.6 0.0 6.0 7.4 16.4 2.3 7.6 0.4 2.7 48.9 0.1 − 2.9 3.2         May 10 58.5 17.6 0.0 6.2 7.3 16.5 2.3 7.7 0.5 2.8 49.1 0.1 − 2.9 3.5         June 10 58.9 17.6 0.0 6.3 7.2 16.7 2.3 8.0 0.5 3.1 49.1 0.1 − 3.0 3.1
Trends in building and loan association business
  
€ billion
Changes in deposits
Capital promised Capital disbursed Disbursement Interest and
under savings and commitments repayments
loan contracts Allocations outstanding at received on
end of period building loans 10 
Deposits under Loans under
Repay- savings and savings and
ments loan contracts loan contracts 9 Newly
Interest of granted
credited interim deposits of which of which
on under Applied Applied and ofwhich of Memo Amounts deposits
cancelled to settle- to settle- bridging
under savings of ment of ment of loans Under which item paid intosavings savings and which interim interim and alloc- Repay- Housing
and and loan loan Net and and other ated ments bonuses
loan ac- con- con- alloca- bridging bridging building con- during re-
Period tracts tracts Total Total Total loans Total loans loans Total tracts Total quarter counts 
9 tions 11 ceived 12 
All  building  and  loan  associations
2011 27.6 2.5 6.1 46.2 31.0 40.9 18.1 4.4 8.2 4.1 14.6 12.1 7.5 11.0 9.3 0.5
2012 28.5 2.6 6.8 48.3 31.0 40.8 18.3 4.1 6.8 3.7 15.7 13.2 7.7 12.1 10.1 0.4
2013          Apr 2.6 0.0 0.6 4.5 3.0 3.8 1.7 0.5 0.7 0.4 1.4 13.7 8.0 1.1 0.0
         May 2.6 0.0 0.5 4.0 2.6 3.3 1.5 0.4 0.5 0.3 1.3 13.9 8.1 1.0 0.0
         June 2.4 0.0 0.5 4.3 2.4 3.4 1.4 0.3 0.5 0.3 1.5 14.3 8.1 1.0 ... 0.0
Private  building  and  Ioan  associations
  
2013          Apr 1.8 0.0 0.3 3.2 2.1 2.8 1.2 0.4 0.5 0.4 1.1 8.9 4.3 0.7 0.0
         May 1.6 0.0 0.3 2.8 1.6 2.4 1.0 0.3 0.4 0.2 1.0 9.1 4.3 0.7 0.0
         June 1.6 0.0 0.3 3.0 1.6 2.4 1.0 0.2 0.4 0.2 1.1 9.4 4.4 0.7 ... 0.0
Public  building  and  Ioan  associations
  
2013          Apr 0.9 0.0 0.3 1.3 0.9 1.0 0.5 0.1 0.2 0.1 0.3 4.7 3.7 0.3 0.0
         May 0.9 0.0 0.3 1.3 0.9 0.9 0.5 0.1 0.1 0.1 0.3 4.9 3.8 0.3 0.0
         June 0.8 0.0 0.3 1.3 0.9 1.0 0.5 0.1 0.2 0.1 0.3 4.9 3.8 0.3 ... 0.0
*Excluding assets and liabilities and/or transactions of foreign branches. The figures 8Total amount covered by the contracts; only contracts newly entered into, for
for the latest date are always to be regarded as provisional. Subsequent revisions, which the contract fee has been fully paid. Increases in the sum contracted count aswhich appear in the following Monthly Report, are not specially marked. 1Including new contracts. 9For disbursements of deposits under savings and loan contracts
claims on building and loan associations, claims arising from registered debt arising from the allocation of contracts see “Capital disbursed“. 10Including housing
securities and central bank credit balances. 2Loans under savings and loan contracts bonuses credited. 11Only allocations accepted by the beneficiaries; including
and interim and bridging loans. 3Including money market paper and small amounts allocations applied to settlement of interim and bridging loans. 12The amounts
of other securities issued by banks. 4Including equalisation claims. 5Including already credited to the accounts of savers or borrowers are also included in
liabilities to building and loan associations. 6Including small amounts of savings “Amounts paid into savings and loan accounts“ and “Interest and repayments
deposits. 7Including participation rights capital and fund for general banking risks. received on building loans“. 13 See Table IV.2, footnote 1. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
40  Monthly Report
August 2013
IV  Banks
  
13 Assets and liabilities of the foreign branches and foreign subsidiaries of German banks (MFIs) *
  
  
€ billion
Number of Lending to banks (MFIs) Lending to non-banks (non-MFIs) Other  assets  7 
Loans Credit  balances and loans
German   
banks
(MFIs)   
with of which
foreign foreign Derivative
branches Money Money financial branches  1 
and/or and/or market to to market instruments
foreign foreign Balance paper, German foreign paper, in the
subsi- subsi- sheet German Foreign secur- non- non- secur- trading
Period diaries diaries total  7 Total Total banks banks Total Total banks banks ities  2 Total portfolio ities 2,3 
Foreign  branches End of year or month *
  
2010 55 212 2,226.3 591.4 564.8 232.0 332.8 26.6 696.7 532.5 27.5 505.0 164.2 938.2 633.9
2011 56 209 2,316.6 603.9 584.9 199.1 385.8 19.0 642.5 504.3 23.2 481.0 138.2 1,070.2 885.0
2012 55 210 2,042.7 552.1 537.9 179.5 358.4 14.2 550.2 427.1 16.9 410.2 123.1 940.4 671.8
2012          Aug 57 210 2,206.0 539.7 524.2 192.0 332.2 15.5 614.0 483.8 19.8 464.1 130.2 1,052.3 811.7
         Sep 57 211 2,178.7 559.0 544.6 183.7 360.8 14.4 625.1 496.7 19.0 477.8 128.3 994.6 776.3
         Oct 56 210 2,137.1 555.9 541.3 188.8 352.5 14.6 581.1 457.8 18.1 439.8 123.2 1,000.0 744.6
         Nov 55 208 2,145.2 554.5 539.7 180.3 359.4 14.9 587.2 461.7 22.1 439.6 125.5 1,003.4 709.5
         Dec 55 210 2,042.7 552.1 537.9 179.5 358.4 14.2 550.2 427.1 16.9 410.2 123.1 940.4 671.8
2013          Jan 55 209 2,048.5 554.7 539.9 182.7 357.2 14.8 560.1 436.2 15.6 420.6 123.8 933.8 633.7
         Feb 55 209 2,052.3 547.0 531.9 165.9 366.0 15.1 578.8 456.2 14.6 441.7 122.5 926.5 650.9
         Mar 55 209 2,007.7 541.0 525.3 162.4 362.9 15.7 580.6 454.3 14.7 439.6 126.3 886.2 636.8
         Apr 55 207 2,034.7 537.8 522.2 163.0 359.1 15.6 578.8 458.2 13.7 444.6 120.6 918.1 656.3
         May 55 208 2,003.3 534.1 518.7 160.6 358.2 15.3 595.4 468.8 13.0 455.7 126.6 873.8 613.0
Changes *
2011 + 1 − 3 + 56.9 − 4.6 + 3.2 − 32.9 + 36.2 − 7.9 − 68.9 − 40.9 − 4.3 − 36.7 − 28.0 + 130.4 + 251.0
2012 − 2 + 1 − 261.8 − 45.7 − 41.0 − 19.6 − 21.4 − 4.7 − 86.9 − 73.0 − 6.4 − 66.7 − 13.9 − 129.3 − 213.2
2012          Sep − + 1 − 13.6 + 25.1 + 26.1 − 8.3 + 34.4 − 1.0 + 18.0 + 18.6 − 0.8 + 19.4 − 0.5 − 56.7 − 35.4
         Oct − 1 − 1 − 35.9 − 0.8 − 1.0 + 5.1 − 6.1 + 0.2 − 40.9 − 36.3 − 0.9 − 35.4 − 4.5 + 5.8 − 31.6
         Nov − 1 − 2 + 9.6 − 0.9 − 1.2 − 8.5 + 7.4 + 0.3 + 6.9 + 4.5 + 4.0 + 0.5 + 2.5 + 3.6 − 35.1
         Dec − + 2 − 90.2 + 3.2 + 3.7 − 0.7 + 4.5 − 0.6 − 31.4 − 30.1 − 5.2 − 24.9 − 1.3 − 62.0 − 37.7
2013          Jan − − 1 + 27.9 + 12.4 + 11.7 + 3.1 + 8.6 + 0.7 + 20.9 + 18.2 − 1.3 + 19.5 + 2.7 − 5.4 − 38.1
         Feb − − − 14.1 − 16.9 − 17.1 − 16.8 − 0.3 + 0.2 + 11.5 + 14.2 − 1.0 + 15.3 − 2.8 − 8.7 + 17.2
         Mar − − − 61.2 − 13.7 − 14.1 − 3.5 − 10.6 + 0.4 − 6.1 − 8.5 + 0.1 − 8.7 + 2.5 − 41.5 − 14.1
         Apr − − 2 + 41.3 + 4.1 + 4.1 + 0.6 + 3.5 + 0.0 + 4.4 + 9.0 − 1.0 + 10.1 − 4.6 + 32.7 + 19.5
         May − + 1 − 31.5 − 4.0 − 3.8 − 2.5 − 1.3 − 0.3 + 16.8 + 10.7 − 0.6 + 11.3 + 6.1 − 44.3 − 43.3
  
  
Foreign  subsidiaries End of year or month *
  
2010 37 93 495.1 220.9 178.7 98.8 79.9 42.1 218.3 168.8 37.7 131.2 49.5 55.9 −
2011 35 87 478.6 210.3 172.8 95.3 77.5 37.5 210.5 165.1 35.6 129.5 45.5 57.7 −
2012 35 83 458.7 199.5 166.3 94.5 71.8 33.2 204.7 162.1 30.6 131.5 42.5 54.6 −
2012          Aug 35 86 468.1 207.2 175.3 97.7 77.6 32.0 207.6 163.7 32.8 130.9 43.9 53.2 −
         Sep 35 86 479.8 215.6 183.5 101.1 82.4 32.2 207.0 163.7 31.7 131.9 43.3 57.2 −
         Oct 35 84 468.5 209.0 176.5 99.6 76.9 32.5 204.9 161.7 32.0 129.7 43.3 54.6 −
         Nov 35 83 467.5 211.3 178.7 101.8 76.9 32.6 201.5 158.1 31.6 126.4 43.4 54.7 −
         Dec 35 83 458.7 199.5 166.3 94.5 71.8 33.2 204.7 162.1 30.6 131.5 42.5 54.6 −
2013          Jan 35 83 443.3 194.6 161.1 92.8 68.3 33.6 195.8 153.4 29.9 123.5 42.4 52.9 −
         Feb 35 83 444.4 194.1 161.2 93.6 67.7 32.9 197.3 154.2 29.7 124.5 43.1 53.0 −
         Mar 35 83 455.7 194.6 161.8 95.4 66.4 32.8 205.8 163.0 29.4 133.6 42.9 55.3 −
         Apr 35 83 444.6 188.8 156.6 91.1 65.5 32.1 201.5 158.3 28.5 129.8 43.3 54.3 −
         May 35 83 438.4 193.0 161.6 96.5 65.1 31.4 196.2 154.3 28.9 125.4 41.9 49.2 −
Changes *
2011 − 2 − 6 − 20.1 − 12.2 − 7.2 − 3.5 − 3.7 − 5.0 − 9.6 − 5.5 − 2.1 − 3.4 − 4.0 + 1.6 −
2012 − − 4 − 18.2 − 9.9 − 5.9 − 0.8 − 5.1 − 4.1 − 5.2 − 2.3 − 5.0 + 2.7 − 2.9 − 3.1 −
2012          Sep − − + 13.7 + 9.4 + 8.9 + 3.4 + 5.5 + 0.5 + 0.3 + 0.8 − 1.1 + 1.9 − 0.5 + 4.0 −
         Oct − − 2 − 10.7 − 6.4 − 6.8 − 1.5 − 5.2 + 0.4 − 1.8 − 1.7 + 0.3 − 2.0 − 0.0 − 2.6 −
         Nov − − 1 − 0.9 + 2.3 + 2.2 + 2.2 − 0.0 + 0.2 − 3.4 − 3.5 − 0.3 − 3.2 + 0.1 + 0.2 −
         Dec − − − 7.3 − 11.0 − 11.8 − 7.3 − 4.5 + 0.8 + 3.8 + 4.6 − 1.0 + 5.7 − 0.8 − 0.1 −
2013          Jan − − − 12.4 − 3.4 − 4.1 − 1.8 − 2.4 + 0.7 − 7.4 − 7.2 − 0.7 − 6.5 − 0.2 − 1.6 −
         Feb − − − 1.3 − 1.8 − 0.8 + 0.8 − 1.7 − 1.0 + 0.6 − 0.1 − 0.2 + 0.1 + 0.7 + 0.0 −
         Mar − − + 9.4 − 0.4 − 0.3 + 1.8 − 2.1 − 0.1 + 7.5 + 8.0 − 0.3 + 8.3 − 0.5 + 2.3 −
         Apr − − − 9.3 − 4.9 − 4.5 − 4.3 − 0.2 − 0.4 − 3.4 − 3.8 − 0.9 − 2.9 + 0.4 − 1.0 −
         May − − − 6.2 + 4.2 + 4.9 + 5.4 − 0.5 − 0.7 − 5.3 − 3.9 + 0.4 − 4.3 − 1.4 − 5.1 −
*In this table “foreign“ also includes the country of domicile of the foreign branches the flow figures for the foreign subsidiaries.) The figures for the latest date are
and foreign subsidiaries. Statistical revisions have been eliminated from the changes. always to be regarded as provisional; subsequent revisions, which appear in the
(Breaks owing to changes in the reporting population have not been eliminated from following Monthly Report, are not specially marked. 1Several branches in a given

Deutsche Bundesbank
41  Monthly Report
August 2013
IV  Banks
  
      
  
Deposits Other  liabilities 6,7 
of banks (MFIs) of non-banks (non-MFIs)
German non-banks 4 
Money
market of whichpaper Derivativeand debt financial
Medium Working instruments
securities
and out- capital in the
German Foreign Short- long- Foreign stand- and own trading
Total Total banks Total Total term term ing 5 funds Total portfolio   Period banks non-banks
End of year or month * Foreign  branches
  
1,131.3 751.9 398.2 353.7 379.4 44.9 39.2 5.7 334.5 187.1 34.7 873.3 648.7 2010
1,179.6 814.0 406.6 407.4 365.6 35.9 30.3 5.6 329.7 141.2 38.6 957.2 880.2 20111,054.8 727.7 371.2 356.5 327.1 34.7 26.9 7.8 292.4 127.0 39.9 821.1 670.8 2012
1,112.1 765.5 373.3 392.2 346.6 26.8 19.6 7.3 319.8 143.0 39.1 911.8 813.1 2012          Aug 
1,128.3 768.0 382.4 385.7 360.2 27.8 20.6 7.1 332.4 138.4 38.9 873.2 774.2          Sep 
1,121.3 779.2 379.9 399.4 342.1 28.0 20.9 7.1 314.0 130.0 38.8 847.0 745.5          Oct 
1,122.7 757.9 364.3 393.6 364.7 34.3 27.1 7.2 330.4 128.4 38.2 855.9 706.9          Nov 1,054.8 727.7 371.2 356.5 327.1 34.7 26.9 7.8 292.4 127.0 39.9 821.1 670.8          Dec 
1,086.1 722.9 351.6 371.3 363.2 35.4 27.8 7.5 327.8 128.2 40.1 794.1 637.8 2013          Jan 
1,081.6 706.5 347.4 359.1 375.1 29.4 21.7 7.8 345.7 140.1 40.9 789.7 657.4          Feb 1,054.5 711.5 340.1 371.4 343.0 30.5 23.0 7.5 312.5 137.3 41.2 774.7 653.1          Mar 
1,067.1 702.0 332.0 370.0 365.1 30.3 23.1 7.2 334.8 135.3 41.0 791.2 663.1          Apr 
1,079.0 692.0 338.8 353.2 387.0 28.7 21.6 7.1 358.3 140.3 41.0 743.0 614.7          May
Changes *
+ 27.0 + 50.1 + 8.4 + 41.7 − 23.1 − 9.0 − 8.9 − 0.0 − 14.2 − 45.8 + 3.9 + 71.9 + 231.5 2011− 114.6 − 80.1 − 35.3 − 44.8 − 34.5 − 1.3 − 3.4 + 2.1 − 33.2 − 14.3 + 1.4 − 134.3 − 209.4 2012
+ 26.8 + 8.6 + 9.1 − 0.4 + 18.2 + 1.0 + 1.1 − 0.1 + 17.2 − 4.7 − 0.2 − 35.5 − 38.9 2012          Sep 
− 2.7 + 13.6 − 2.5 + 16.0 − 16.2 + 0.3 + 0.3 − 0.0 − 16.5 − 8.3 − 0.1 − 24.7 − 28.7          Oct 
+ 2.7 − 20.5 − 15.5 − 4.9 + 23.1 + 6.3 + 6.2 + 0.1 + 16.9 − 1.6 − 0.6 + 9.1 − 38.6          Nov − 58.7 − 24.8 + 6.9 − 31.7 − 34.0 + 0.4 − 0.2 + 0.6 − 34.3 − 1.5 + 1.7 − 31.8 − 36.0          Dec 
+ 45.7 + 3.2 − 19.6 + 22.8 + 42.5 + 0.7 + 1.0 − 0.2 + 41.8 + 1.3 + 0.2 − 19.2 − 33.0 2013          Jan 
− 17.7 − 24.0 − 4.3 − 19.7 + 6.3 − 6.0 − 6.2 + 0.2 + 12.2 + 11.9 + 0.8 − 9.1 + 19.6          Feb − 39.0 − 0.6 − 7.3 + 6.7 − 38.4 + 1.1 + 1.3 − 0.3 − 39.4 − 2.9 + 0.3 − 19.7 − 4.3          Mar 
+ 22.1 − 4.0 − 8.1 + 4.1 + 26.1 − 0.1 + 0.1 − 0.3 + 26.2 − 1.9 − 0.2 + 21.3 + 9.9          Apr 
+ 11.4 − 10.5 + 6.8 − 17.3 + 21.8 − 1.7 − 1.6 − 0.1 + 23.5 + 5.0 − 0.1 − 47.8 − 48.4          May
  
  
End of year or month * Foreign  subsidiaries
  
387.4 221.1 136.4 84.7 166.3 31.0 23.6 7.3 135.3 28.9 31.8 46.9 − 2010
377.5 229.6 142.4 87.2 147.9 26.7 19.8 6.9 121.2 25.1 30.8 45.2 − 2011356.8 207.7 120.4 87.2 149.2 22.0 17.8 4.2 127.1 24.9 32.1 44.9 − 2012
358.9 211.6 124.4 87.1 147.3 24.7 17.7 7.0 122.6 24.8 33.5 50.9 − 2012          Aug 
371.3 214.4 122.2 92.2 156.9 25.2 18.2 7.0 131.7 24.5 32.3 51.7 −          Sep 
364.1 211.0 120.8 90.2 153.1 25.2 20.8 4.4 128.0 24.0 32.1 48.3 −          Oct 
362.6 210.5 122.6 87.9 152.0 24.7 20.3 4.3 127.4 25.5 32.2 47.3 −          Nov 
356.8 207.7 120.4 87.2 149.2 22.0 17.8 4.2 127.1 24.9 32.1 44.9 −          Dec 
344.2 195.6 115.6 80.0 148.7 22.2 18.1 4.1 126.4 24.3 32.3 42.5 − 2013          Jan 
345.1 194.6 113.1 81.5 150.4 22.3 18.2 4.1 128.1 24.6 32.9 41.9 −          Feb 
355.7 200.6 115.7 84.9 155.1 22.3 18.2 4.1 132.8 24.5 32.4 43.1 −          Mar 
345.1 194.6 114.3 80.4 150.5 22.3 18.2 4.1 128.2 23.9 32.7 42.8 −          Apr 
340.1 189.5 111.0 78.6 150.6 22.0 17.7 4.3 128.6 23.7 32.6 41.9 −          May
Changes *
− 12.5 + 7.1 + 6.0 + 1.1 − 19.6 − 4.2 − 3.8 − 0.4 − 15.3 − 3.8 − 1.0 − 2.8 − 2011
− 19.6 − 21.3 − 22.0 + 0.7 + 1.7 − 4.7 − 2.0 − 2.7 + 6.4 − 0.2 + 1.3 + 0.3 − 2012
+ 13.9 + 3.6 − 2.3 + 5.9 + 10.3 + 0.5 + 0.5 − 0.0 + 9.8 − 0.3 − 1.3 + 1.4 − 2012          Sep 
− 6.8 − 3.1 − 1.4 − 1.8 − 3.6 − 0.0 + 2.6 − 2.6 − 3.6 − 0.5 − 0.2 − 3.3 −          Oct 
− 1.5 − 0.4 + 1.8 − 2.3 − 1.1 − 0.5 − 0.5 − 0.0 − 0.6 + 1.4 + 0.1 − 0.9 −          Nov 
− 4.6 − 2.2 − 2.2 − 0.0 − 2.4 − 2.6 − 2.5 − 0.1 + 0.2 − 0.6 − 0.1 − 2.1 −          Dec 
− 10.4 − 11.0 − 4.8 − 6.2 + 0.6 + 0.2 + 0.3 − 0.1 + 0.4 − 0.6 + 0.2 − 1.6 − 2013          Jan 
− 1.0 − 1.8 − 2.5 + 0.6 + 0.9 + 0.1 + 0.1 + 0.0 + 0.8 + 0.2 + 0.6 − 1.1 −          Feb 
+ 9.1 + 5.2 + 2.6 + 2.6 + 3.9 − 0.0 − 0.1 + 0.0 + 3.9 − 0.0 − 0.5 + 0.9 −          Mar 
− 9.1 − 5.2 − 1.4 − 3.8 − 3.9 − 0.0 + 0.0 − 0.0 − 3.9 − 0.6 + 0.3 + 0.1 −          Apr 
− 5.1 − 5.2 − 3.3 − 1.8 + 0.1 − 0.2 − 0.4 + 0.2 + 0.3 − 0.2 − 0.1 − 0.8 −          May
country of domicile are regarded as a single branch. 2Treasury bills, Treasury securities. 5Issues of negotiable and non-negotiable debt securities and money
discount paper and other money market paper, debt securities. 3Including own debt market paper. 6 Including subordinated liabilities. 7 See also Table IV.2, footnote  1. 
securities. 4Excluding subordinated liabilities and non-negotiable debt

Deutsche Bundesbank
42  Monthly Report
August 2013
V  Minimum reserves
 
1  Reserve ratios
Germany Euro area
 
% of liabilities subject to reserve requirements % of reserve base  1 
Sight Time
Applicable from liabilities liabilities Savings deposits Applicable from Ratio
1995  Aug 1 2    2    1.5    1999  Jan 1 2    
 2012  Jan 18 1    
 
 
 
1Article 3 of the Regulation of the European Central Bank on the application of
minimum reserves (excluding liabilities to which a reserve ratio of 0% applies pur-
suant to Article 4 (1)). 
 
 
 
2  Reserve maintenance in Germany up to the end of 1998
− pursuant to the Minimum Reserves Order of the Bundesbank 
 
DM million
Liabilities subject to reserve requirements Excess reserves  4 
Monthly Required % of the
average  1 Total Sight liabilities Time liabilities Savings deposits reserves  2 Level Deficiencies Actual reserves  3 required  reserves
1995          Dec 2,066,565 579,337 519,456 967,772 36,492 37,337 845 2.3 3.1
1996          Dec 2,201,464 655,483 474,342 1,071,639 38,671 39,522 851 2.2 4.3
1997          Dec 2,327,879 734,986 476,417 1,116,477 40,975 41,721 745 1.8 3.3
1998          Dec 2,576,889 865,444 564,878 1,146,567 45,805 46,432 627 1.4 3.8
1Pursuant to sections 5 to 7 of the Minimum Reserves Order. 2Amount after tutions subject to reserve requirements on their giro accounts at the Bundesbank.
applying the reserve ratios to the liabilities subject to reserve requirements (section 5 4 Actual reserves less required reserves. 
(1) of the Minimum Reserves Order). 3Average credit balances of the credit insti-
 
 
3  Reserve maintenance in the euro area
− from 1999, pursuant to the ECB Regulation on the application of minimum reserves in accordance with
Article 19.1 of the Statute of the ESCB 
 
Maintenance Required reserves
period before deduction Required reserves
beginning in  1 of lump-sum Lump-sum after deduction of
Reserve base  2 allowance  3 allowance  4 lump-sum allowance Current account  5 Excess reserves  6 Deficiencies  7 
Euro area ( € billion)
 
2012          Dec 10,648.6 106.5 0.5 106.0 489.0 383.0 0.0
2013          Jan 10,591.4 105.9 0.5 105.4 466.3 360.9 0.0
         Feb 10,609.2 106.1 0.5 105.6 403.0 297.4 0.0
         Mar 10,537.0 105.4 0.5 104.9 346.0 241.1 0.0
         Apr 10,535.0 105.4 0.5 104.9 322.2 217.3 0.0
         May 10,577.9 105.8 0.5 105.3 300.3 195.0 0.0
         June 10,554.5 105.5 0.5 105.1 286.5 181.4 0.0
         July  p 10,494.9 104.9 0.5 104.5 269.6 165.1 0.0
         Aug  p ... ... ... 104.9 ... ... ...
Of which:  Germany ( € million)
2012          Dec 2,874,716 28,747 180 28,567 158,174 129,607 1
2013          Jan 2,864,858 28,649 180 28,468 144,153 115,685 1
         Feb 2,801,456 28,015 180 27,834 120,988 93,154 0
         Mar 2,775,049 27,750 180 27,570 109,742 82,172 1
         Apr 2,767,454 27,675 180 27,494 100,324 72,830 0
         May 2,770,161 27,702 180 27,521 97,004 69,483 0
         June 2,767,670 27,677 180 27,496 96,958 69,462 0
         July  p 2,754,066 27,541 180 27,361 87,020 59,659 1
         Aug  p 2,758,601 27,586 179 27,407 ... ... ...
1From March 2004, the reserve maintenance period will start on the settlement day to the reserve base. 4Article 5 (2) of the Regulation of the European Central Bank on
of the main refinancing operation immediately following the meeting of the the application of minimum reserves. 5Average credit balances of the credit insti-
Governing Council of the ECB for which the monthly discussion of the monetary tutions at the national central banks. 6Average credit balances less required reserves
policy stance is scheduled. 2Article 3 of the Regulation of the European Central Bank after deduction of the lump-sum allowance. 7Required reserves after deduction of
on the application of minimum reserves (excluding liabilities to which a reserve ratio the lump-sum allowance. 
of 0% applies, pursuant to Article 4 (1)). 3Amount after applying the reserve ratios

Deutsche Bundesbank
43  Monthly Report
August 2013
VI Interest rates
 
1 ECB interest rates 2 Base rates
 
 
% per annum % per annum
Main refinancing Main refinancing
operations operations Base Base
Mar- Mar- rate rateginal ginal as per as per
Minimum Minimum
Applicable Deposit Fixed bid lending Applicable Deposit Fixed bid lending Applicable Civil Applicable Civilfrom facility rate rate facility from facility rate rate facility from Code  
1 from Code 1 
2005 Dec                  6 1.25 − 2.25 3.25 2009 Jan                21 1.00 2.00 − 3.00 2002 Jan                1 2.57 2007 Jan                1 2.70
         Mar                11 0.50 1.50 − 2.50          July                1 2.47          July                1 3.19
2006 Mar                  8 1.50 − 2.50 3.50          Apr                  8 0.25 1.25 − 2.25         June                15 1.75 − 2.75 3.75          May                13 0.25 1.00 − 1.75 2003 Jan                1 1.97 2008 Jan                1 3.32         Aug                  9 2.00 − 3.00 4.00          July                1 1.22          July                1 3.19
         Oct                11 2.25 − 3.25 4.25 2011 Apr                13 0.50 1.25 − 2.00
         Dec                13 2.50 − 3.50 4.50          July                13 0.75 1.50 − 2.25 2004 Jan                1 1.14 2009 Jan                1 1.62
         Nov                  9 0.50 1.25 − 2.00          July                1 1.13          July                1 0.12
2007 Mar                14 2.75 − 3.75 4.75          Dez                14 0.25 1.00 − 1.75
         June                13 3.00 − 4.00 5.00 2005 Jan                1 1.21 2011 July                1 0.37
2012 July                11 0.00 0.75 − 1.50          July                1 1.17
2008 July                  9 3.25 − 4.25 5.25 2012 Jan                1 0.12
         Oct                  8 2.75 − 3.75 4.75 2013 May                  8 0.00 0.50 − 1.00 2006 Jan                1 1.37         Oct                  9 3.25 3.75 − 4.25          July                1 1.95 2013 Jan                1 −0.13
         Nov                12 2.75 3.25 − 3.75          July                1 −0.38
         Dec                10 2.00 2.50 − 3.00
1 Pursuant to section 247 of the Civil Code.  
 
  
3 Eurosystem monetary policy operations allotted through tenders 
*
 
 
Fixed rate tenders Variable rate tenders
Bid Allotment Minimum Weighted
amount amount Fixed rate bid rate Marginal rate  1 average rate
Date of Running for
settlement € million % per annum ... days
Main refinancing operations
2013 July                10 102,064 102,064 0.50−−−7
         July                17 104,427 104,427 0.50−−−7
         July                24 102,302 102,302 0.50−−−7
         July                31 109,163 109,163 0.50−−−7
         Aug                  7 99,413 99,413 0.50−−−7
         Aug                14 97,561 97,561 0.50−−−7
Longer-term refinancing operations
2013 June                12 3,591 3,591 0.50−−− 2 8
         June                27 9,477 9,477 2 ... − − − 91
         July                10 3,536 3,536 0.50−−− 2 8
         Aug                  1 2,683 2,683 2 ... − − − 91
         Aug                  7 3,910 3,910 0.50−−− 3 5
*Source: ECB. 1Lowest or highest interest rate at which funds were allotted or average minimum bid rate of the main refinancing operations over the life of this
collected. 2Interest payment on the maturity date; the rate will be fixed at the operation. 
 
  
4 Money market rates, by month 
*
 
 
% per annum
EONIA Swap Index 2 EURIBOR 3 
Monthly One-week One-month Three-month Six-month One-week One-month Three-month Six-month Twelve-month Twelve-month
average EONIA 1 funds funds funds funds funds funds funds funds funds funds
2013          Jan 0.07 0.07 0.08 0.09 0.10 0.14 0.08 0.11 0.20 0.34 0.58
         Feb 0.07 0.08 0.08 0.10 0.12 0.16 0.08 0.12 0.22 0.36 0.59         Mar 0.07 0.07 0.08 0.08 0.08 0.09 0.08 0.12 0.21 0.33 0.54
         Apr 0.08 0.08 0.08 0.08 0.08 0.09 0.08 0.12 0.21 0.32 0.53
         May 0.08 0.08 0.08 0.07 0.06 0.06 0.08 0.11 0.20 0.30 0.48         June 0.09 0.09 0.09 0.09 0.10 0.13 0.09 0.12 0.21 0.32 0.51
         July 0.09 0.09 0.10 0.10 0.11 0.14 0.10 0.13 0.22 0.34 0.53
*Averages are Bundesbank calculations. Neither the Deutsche Bundesbank nor act/360 method and published via Reuters. 2EONIA Swap Index: published rate
anyone else can be held liable for any irregularity or inaccuracy of the EONIA rate, since 20 June 2005 by Reuters as a reference rate for euro-money market-derivatives.
the EURIBOR rate and the EONIA Swap rate. 1Euro OverNight Index Average: As a Spot-figure (T+2) it is calculated according to the act/360 method. 3Euro Inter-
weighted average overnight rate for interbank operations calculated by the European bank Offered Rate: unweighted average rate calculated by Reuters sinceCentral Bank since 4 January 1999 on the basis of real turnover according to the 30 December 1998 according to the act/360 method. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
44  Monthly Report
August 2013
VI Interest rates
 
5 Interest rates and volumes for outstanding amounts and new business of German banks (MFIs) *
(a) Outstanding amounts o
 
 
Households’ deposits Non-financial corporations’ deposits
with an agreed maturity of
up to 2 years over 2 years up to 2 years over 2 years
Effective Effective Effective Effective
End of interest rate  1 Volume  2 interest rate  1 Volume  2 interest rate  1 Volume  2 interest rate  1 Volume  2 
month % pa € million % pa € million % pa € million % pa € million
2012          June 1.82 138,295 2.29 229,269 1.16 92,613 3.48 22,722
         July 1.79 136,532 2.28 229,047 1.09 93,203 3.46 22,303
         Aug 1.76 133,856 2.28 229,010 1.01 93,589 3.43 22,163
         Sep 1.72 131,046 2.27 228,970 0.95 90,793 3.41 21,373
         Oct 1.66 127,314 2.20 228,315 0.91 87,278 3.38 21,082
         Nov 1.61 124,114 2.18 227,048 0.86 84,081 3.36 21,367
         Dec 1.57 121,482 2.16 228,742 0.78 81,845 3.33 21,289
2013          Jan 1.51 118,094 2.13 227,465 0.72 79,925 3.31 21,296
         Feb 1.47 115,772 2.11 226,984 0.69 79,483 3.30 21,367
         Mar 1.43 112,731 2.10 226,940 0.64 79,303 3.30 21,000
         Apr 1.38 110,618 2.09 226,550 0.60 80,849 3.25 20,869
         May 1.35 108,839 2.06 225,847 0.58 78,814 3.23 20,652
         June 1.30 106,091 2.04 225,028 0.57 77,887 3.23 20,352
 
 
Housing loans to households  3 Loans for consumption and other purposes to households  4, 5 
with a maturity of
over 1 year and over 1 year and
up to 1 year  6 up to 5 years over 5 years up to 1 year  6 up to 5 years over 5 years
Effective Effective Effective Effective Effective Effective
interest interest interest interest interest interest
End of rate  1 Volume  2 rate 1 Volume  2 rate 1 Volume  2 rate 1 Volume  2 rate 1 Volume  2 rate 1 Volume  2 
month % pa % pa % pa % pa % pa % pa € million € million € million € million € million € million
2012          June 3.80 5,206 3.61 28,620 4.39 940,699 8.19 64,670 5.30 74,576 5.41 314,970
         July 3.70 5,302 3.57 28,775 4.37 942,529 7.99 63,767 5.28 75,103 5.39 315,554
         Aug 3.64 5,278 3.54 28,844 4.34 945,754 8.00 62,298 5.24 75,464 5.36 316,273
         Sep 3.59 5,351 3.52 28,910 4.33 948,590 7.98 63,666 5.22 75,456 5.34 314,885
         Oct 3.50 5,351 3.47 29,062 4.30 951,931 7.88 62,816 5.19 75,715 5.29 314,779
         Nov 3.48 5,334 3.44 29,210 4.28 955,995 7.60 61,696 5.16 75,919 5.27 313,967
         Dec 3.43 5,411 3.41 29,153 4.26 957,142 7.77 63,468 5.13 75,716 5.25 310,974
2013          Jan 3.35 5,441 3.39 29,130 4.23 956,829 7.64 60,580 5.22 76,521 5.22 310,092
         Feb 3.32 5,358 3.37 28,985 4.21 957,811 7.56 60,776 5.22 75,576 5.21 310,001
         Mar 3.32 5,380 3.34 28,892 4.19 959,296 7.59 61,732 5.19 75,792 5.19 308,862
         Apr 3.35 5,429 3.31 28,943 4.17 960,434 7.57 60,887 5.17 76,405 5.17 309,418
         May 3.34 5,513 3.28 28,887 4.15 962,645 7.51 60,234 5.15 76,791 5.15 309,610
         June 3.33 5,484 3.26 28,964 4.12 965,019 7.56 61,273 5.13 76,730 5.14 308,931
 
 
Loans to non-financial corporations with a maturity of
up to 1 year  6 over 1 year and up to 5 years over 5 years
End of Volume  2 Volume  2 Volume  2 Effective interest rate  1 Effective interest rate  1 Effective interest rate  1 
month % pa € million % pa € million % pa € million
2012          June 3.48 141,449 3.41 126,567 3.66 573,352
         July 3.35 140,569 3.32 126,973 3.60 576,961
         Aug 3.26 138,764 3.29 126,115 3.56 578,675
         Sep 3.26 142,543 3.21 125,674 3.51 577,371
         Oct 3.19 137,982 3.13 125,803 3.46 577,814
         Nov 3.16 138,994 3.10 126,756 3.44 580,329
         Dec 3.17 134,186 3.03 126,718 3.41 579,210
2013          Jan 3.10 133,611 3.02 126,056 3.36 579,904
         Feb 3.11 136,265 3.01 125,664 3.34 581,316
         Mar 3.14 138,467 3.00 125,754 3.33 580,544
         Apr 3.13 135,048 2.96 125,073 3.32 582,836
         May 3.09 135,366 2.93 125,949 3.31 583,258
         June 3.14 136,905 2.92 124,651 3.30 582,718
*The MFI interest rate statistics are based on the interest rates applied by MFIs and interest rates or as narrowly defined effective rates. Both calculation methods cover
the related volumes of euro-denominated deposits and loans to households and non- all interest payments on deposits and loans but not any other related charges which
financial corporations domiciled in the euro area. The household sector comprises may occur for enquiries, administration, preparation of the documents, guarantees
individuals (including sole proprietors) and non-profit institutions serving households. and credit insurance. 2Data based on monthly balance sheet statistics. 3Secured
Non-financial corporations include all enterprises other than insurance companies, and unsecured loans for home purchase, including building and home improvements;
banks and other financial institutions. The interest rate statistics gathered on a including loans granted by building and loan associations and interim credits as well
harmonised basis in the euro area from January 2003 are collected in Germany on a as transmitted loans granted by the reporting agents in their own name and for their
sample basis. The most recent figures are in all cases to be regarded as provisional. own account. 4Loans for consumption are defined as loans granted for the purpose
Subsequent revisions appearing in the following Monthly Report are not specially of personal use in the consumption of goods and services. 5For the purpose of these
marked. Further information on the MFI interest rate statistics can be found on the statistics, other loans are loans granted for other purposes such as business, debt
Bundesbank’s website (Statistics / Reporting system / Banking statistics / MFI interest consolidation, education etc. 6Including overdrafts (see also footnotes 13 to 15
rate statistics). oThe statistics on outstanding amounts are collected at the end of p 47   ). 
themonth. 1The effective interest rates are calculated either as annualised agreed

Deutsche Bundesbank
45  Monthly Report
August 2013
VI Interest rates
 
5 Interest rates and volumes for outstanding amounts and new business of German banks (MFIs) *  (cont’d)
(b) New business +
 
 
Households’ deposits
with an agreed maturity of redeemable at notice of  8 
Overnight up to 1 year over 2 years up to 3 months over 3 months over 1 year and up to 2 years
Effective Effective Effective Effective Effective Effective
interest interest interest interest interest interest
Reporting rate 1 Volume 2 rate 1 Volume 7 rate 1 Volume 7 rate 1 Volume 7 rate 1 Volume 2 rate 1 Volume 2 
period % pa % pa % pa % pa % pa % pa € million € million € million € million € million € million
2012          June
0.77 785,236 1.25 10,609 1.74 573 2.11 1,349 1.24 519,919 1.85 97,049
         July 0.71 791,644 1.38 13,617 2.07 1,261 2.20 1,636 1.21 520,534 1.81 96,163
         Aug 0.68 801,510 1.28 10,091 2.09 1,261 2.08 1,426 1.16 521,324 1.77 94,750
         Sep 0.64 810,487 1.29 9,216 1.98 934 2.16 1,305 1.14 521,677 1.72 93,164
         Oct 0.61 815,493 1.07 10,129 1.92 1,090 1.93 1,483 1.09 521,818 1.66 92,409
         Nov 0.59 836,097 1.06 8,513 1.95 1,670 1.83 1,721 1.07 522,244 1.57 91,114
         Dec 0.57 841,703 0.79 8,557 1.74 1,212 1.67 1,463 1.03 528,458 1.50 89,519
2013          Jan 0.54 847,786 0.92 8,877 1.80 1,616 1.77 1,715 0.96 529,365 1.43 87,663
         Feb 0.51 857,813 0.94 7,887 1.45 745 1.68 1,605 0.93 530,687 1.38 86,114
         Mar 0.50 862,900 0.79 7,753 1.37 620 1.52 1,501 0.96 529,260 1.33 85,257
         Apr 0.47 869,149 0.80 7,655 1.37 796 1.38 1,567 0.90 528,646 1.26 83,717
         May 0.46 881,098 0.82 7,485 1.47 868 1.53 1,545 0.90 528,835 1.21 81,737
         June 0.44 888,922 0.77 6,939 1.41 633 1.46 1,345 0.87 528,594 1.18 80,868
 
 
Non-financial corporations’ deposits
with an agreed maturity of
Overnight up to 1 year over 1 year and up to 2 years over 2 years
Effective Effective Effective Effective
Reporting interest rate 1 Volume 2 interest rate 1 Volume 7 interest rate 1 Volume 7 interest rate 1 Volume 7 
period % pa € million % pa € million % pa € million % pa € million
2012          June
0.40 270,503 0.45 22,861 1.54 312 1.58 382
         July 0.34 280,460 0.37 21,829 1.31 638 1.70 596
         Aug 0.30 288,016 0.33 17,086 1.43 405 1.58 413
         Sep 0.29 289,877 0.27 15,215 0.85 505 2.00 225
         Oct 0.26 300,920 0.19 22,907 1.04 523 1.53 410
         Nov 0.24 305,458 0.20 15,992 1.09 490 1.87 483
         Dec 0.22 311,043 0.15 20,225 0.74 546 1.74 381
2013          Jan 0.22 306,757 0.20 22,534 0.95 364 1.09 315
         Feb 0.21 301,494 0.21 16,085 0.97 413 1.65 218
         Mar 0.20 298,710 0.19 19,875 0.77 507 1.30 266
         Apr 0.19 305,231 0.22 16,608 0.77 417 1.17 526
         May 0.18 308,618 0.19 23,572 0.74 508 1.53 202
         June 0.17 300,393 0.21 14,370 0.60 408 1.33 277
 
 
Loans to households
Loans for other purposes to households with an initial rate fxation of  5 
of which loans to sole proprietors 10 
floating rate or over 1 year and floating rate or over 1 year and
up to 1 year 9 up to 5 years over 5 years up to 1 year  9 up to 5 years over 5 years
Effective Effective Effective Effective Effective Effectiveinterest interest interest interest interest interest
Reporting rate 
1 Volume 7 rate 1 Volume 7 rate 1 Volume 7 rate 1 Volume 7 rate 1 Volume 7 rate 1 Volume 7 
period % pa % pa % pa % pa % pa % pa € million € million € million € million € million € million
2012          June
2.25 4,835 4.32 1,213 3.33 2,603 2.50 2,768 4.54 794 3.28 1,577
         July 1.97 5,557 4.07 1,450 3.27 2,930 2.56 2,929 4.21 910 3.20 1,682
         Aug 1.99 4,414 3.97 966 3.16 2,588 2.20 2,297 4.22 677 3.08 1,599
         Sep 1.94 4,454 4.19 860 3.07 2,252 2.14 2,565 4.35 589 3.02 1,399
         Oct 1.82 5,535 3.69 1,122 3.04 2,634 2.18 3,011 4.09 780 3.03 1,420
         Nov 1.75 4,142 3.86 966 2.98 2,443 2.09 2,229 3.99 736 2.96 1,452
         Dec 1.84 4,698 3.78 916 2.77 2,376 2.03 2,888 3.98 676 2.71 1,530
2013          Jan 1.97 5,099 3.77 1,171 2.96 2,735 2.27 2,973 3.87 818 2.87 1,602
         Feb 1.84 4,102 3.54 920 2.96 2,125 2.05 2,452 3.73 657 2.91 1,248
         Mar 1.90 4,698 3.80 900 2.88 2,574 2.10 2,636 3.95 717 2.88 1,432
         Apr 1.99 5,235 3.57 1,181 2.95 2,815 2.33 2,916 3.70 882 2.88 1,734
         May 1.80 3,726 3.62 864 2.91 2,318 2.04 2,255 3.80 670 2.88 1,325
         June 1.84 5,512 3.65 886 2.81 2,651 2.01 2,768 3.85 657 2.76 1,497
For footnotes * and 1 to 6, see p 44  .+In the case of deposits with an agreed for the sake of simplicity. This means that all outstanding deposit and lending
maturity and all loans excluding revolving loans and overdrafts, credit card debt, new business at the end of the month has to be incorporated in the calculation of averagebusiness covers all new agreements between households or non-financial corpor- rates of interest. 7Estimated. The volume of new business is extrapolated to form
ations and the bank. The interest rates are calculated as volume-weighted average the underlying total using the Horvitz-Thompson estimator. 8Including non-financial
rates of all new agreements concluded during the reporting month. In the case of corporations’ deposits; including fidelity and growth premia. 9Excluding over-
overnight deposits, deposits redeemable at notice, revolving loans and overdrafts, drafts. 10 Collected from June 2010. 
credit card debt, new business is collected in the same way as outstanding amounts

Deutsche Bundesbank
46  Monthly Report
August 2013
VI Interest rates
 
5 Interest rates and volumes for outstanding amounts and new business of German banks (MFIs) *  (cont’d)
(b) New business +
 
 
Loans to households (cont’d)
Loans for consumption with an initial rate fixation of  4 
Total floating rate or over 1 year and
Total up to 1 year  9 up to 5 years over 5 years (including charges)
Effective Effective Effective Effective Annual percentage
Reporting Volume  7 Volume  7 Volume  7 Volume  7 rate of charge  11 interest rate  1 interest rate  1 interest rate  1 interest rate  1 
period % pa % pa € million % pa € million % pa € million % pa € million
Total loans
2012          June 6.48 6.08 5,408 3.64 672 5.30 2,488 7.68 2,248
         July 6.81 6.38 5,868 4.45 654 5.35 2,570 7.85 2,644
         Aug 6.65 6.20 5,348 4.51 683 5.23 2,334 7.65 2,331
         Sep 6.46 6.11 4,599 4.37 525 5.12 2,091 7.60 1,983
         Oct 6.37 6.10 5,362 4.13 707 5.10 2,374 7.74 2,281
         Nov 6.30 5.98 4,977 4.63 744 4.98 2,229 7.61 2,004
         Dec 5.99 5.73 3,747 3.88 556 4.90 1,766 7.48 1,425
2013          Jan 6.72 6.47 5,140 4.85 508 5.22 2,314 8.08 2,318
         Feb 6.54 6.23 4,781 4.61 620 5.10 2,161 7.95 2,000
         Mar 6.33 6.15 5,186 4.56 488 5.00 2,503 7.81 2,195
         Apr 6.30 6.18 5,658 4.89 554 4.94 2,725 7.91 2,379
         May 6.39 6.29 5,325 5.60 697 5.00 2,401 7.89 2,227
         June 6.41 6.29 5,396 5.46 618 5.03 2,399 7.77 2,379
of which: collateralised loans 12
2012          June . 4.16 439 2.62 105 5.56 185 3.52 149
         July . 4.50 387 3.70 57 5.39 196 3.54 134
         Aug . 3.95 450 3.34 152 5.12 155 3.32 143
         Sep . 3.90 361 2.99 114 5.15 129 3.42 118
         Oct . 3.75 409 2.57 152 5.25 139 3.51 118
         Nov . 3.88 358 2.98 140 5.28 114 3.56 104
         Dec . 3.81 294 2.92 100 5.01 103 3.40 91
2013          Jan . 4.00 271 3.06 57 5.01 111 3.42 103
         Feb . 3.56 426 2.90 239 4.93 116 3.56 71
         Mar . 4.10 278 3.43 49 4.70 140 3.52 89
         Apr . 3.92 316 2.96 60 4.55 165 3.40 91
         May . 3.95 273 3.19 41 4.57 141 3.32 91
         June . 4.15 274 3.65 43 4.66 155 3.41 76
 
 
Loans to households (cont’d)
Housing loans with an initial rate fixation of  3 
Total floating rate or over 1 year and over 5 years and
Total up to 1 year  9 up to 5 years up to 10 years over 10 years (including charges)
Effective Effective Effective Effective Effective Annual percentage
Reporting Volume  7 Volume  7 Volume  7 Volume  7 Volume  7 rate of charge  11 interest rate  1 interest rate  1 interest rate  1 interest rate  1 interest rate  1 
period % pa % pa % pa % pa % pa % pa € million € million € million € million € million
Total loans
2012          June 3.15 3.06 16,401 3.08 2,175 2.80 2,079 3.04 6,297 3.17 5,850
         July 3.10 3.02 18,647 3.17 2,644 2.81 2,468 2.98 7,782 3.09 5,753
         Aug 3.03 2.95 17,424 3.07 2,332 2.68 2,117 2.88 7,073 3.08 5,902
         Sep 2.97 2.89 15,109 2.85 1,971 2.63 2,013 2.85 5,885 3.03 5,240
         Oct 2.96 2.88 17,328 2.87 2,600 2.62 2,243 2.84 7,027 3.06 5,458
         Nov 2.92 2.84 16,415 2.86 2,122 2.54 2,415 2.82 6,400 2.99 5,478
         Dec 2.91 2.82 14,190 2.88 2,222 2.55 1,747 2.78 5,776 2.94 4,445
2013          Jan 2.86 2.79 17,268 2.79 3,178 2.51 2,236 2.75 7,138 3.00 4,716
         Feb 2.86 2.79 14,470 2.80 2,124 2.44 1,802 2.74 6,100 3.00 4,444
         Mar 2.87 2.81 15,659 2.75 2,291 2.54 2,045 2.77 6,235 2.99 5,088
         Apr 2.90 2.83 18,191 2.87 2,887 2.50 2,364 2.74 7,590 3.08 5,350
         May 2.79 2.71 15,740 2.91 2,281 2.38 2,004 2.64 6,498 2.84 4,957
         June 2.71 2.64 16,804 2.79 2,317 2.31 2,054 2.57 6,758 2.78 5,675
of which: collateralised loans 12
2012          June . 2.97 7,321 2.91 862 2.67 1,011 2.97 2,982 3.13 2,466
         July . 2.92 8,668 2.99 1,104 2.69 1,218 2.91 3,673 3.01 2,673
         Aug . 2.88 8,296 2.96 981 2.56 1,080 2.82 3,388 3.03 2,847
         Sep . 2.83 7,092 2.70 845 2.54 965 2.83 2,811 2.99 2,471
         Oct . 2.82 8,239 2.67 1,071 2.54 1,132 2.80 3,420 3.03 2,616
         Nov . 2.77 7,508 2.80 834 2.46 1,055 2.75 3,049 2.92 2,570
         Dec . 2.72 6,729 2.65 976 2.40 888 2.71 2,777 2.90 2,088
2013          Jan . 2.71 7,856 2.63 1,244 2.44 1,153 2.68 3,320 2.97 2,139
         Feb . 2.73 6,711 2.58 824 2.34 919 2.71 2,873 2.98 2,095
         Mar . 2.71 7,343 2.56 929 2.34 1,012 2.70 2,980 2.95 2,422
         Apr . 2.79 8,545 2.73 1,170 2.39 1,181 2.66 3,591 3.16 2,603
         May . 2.61 7,361 2.69 907 2.23 998 2.58 3,117 2.80 2,339
         June . 2.53 8,137 2.49 958 2.18 1,039 2.51 3,326 2.70 2,814
For footnotes * and 1 to 6, see p 44  . For footnotes +, 7 to 10, see p 45  . For related charges which may occur for enquiries, administration, preparation of the
footnote 12, see p 47  .11Annual percentage rate of charge, which contains other documents, guarantees and credit insurance. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
47  Monthly Report
August 2013
VI Interest rates
 
5 Interest rates and volumes for outstanding amounts and new business of German banks (MFIs) *  (cont’d)
(b) New business +
 
 
Loans to households (cont’d) Loans to non-financial corporations
of which of which
Revolving loans 13 Revolving loans 13 
and overdrafts 14 Revolving loans 13 Extended and overdrafts 14 Revolving loans 13 
credit card debt 15 and overdrafts 14 credit card debt credit card debt 15 and overdrafts 14 
Effective Effective Effective Effective Effective
Reporting Volume 16 Volume 16 Volume 2 Volume 16 Volume 16 interest rate 1 interest rate 1 interest rate 1 interest rate 1 interest rate 1 
period % pa € million % pa € million % pa € million % pa € million % pa € million
2012          June
10.07 48,231 10.02 41,837 14.82 4,305 4.53 72,118 4.54 71,876
         July 9.94 46,964 9.94 40,326 14.80 4,349 4.41 69,679 4.42 69,432
         Aug 9.95 46,374 9.89 39,796 14.78 4,392 4.32 68,627 4.33 68,387
         Sep 9.89 47,852 9.86 41,116 14.81 4,422 4.37 71,170 4.39 70,889
         Oct 9.83 46,695 9.75 39,918 14.69 4,531 4.29 68,054 4.31 67,784
         Nov 9.70 45,120 9.56 38,345 14.67 4,581 4.19 69,241 4.21 68,968
         Dec 9.73 47,253 9.62 40,409 14.62 4,615 4.35 69,303 4.36 69,044
2013          Jan 9.62 44,805 9.60 39,081 14.64 3,708 4.19 68,528 4.21 68,280
         Feb 9.54 44,964 9.61 38,999 14.68 3,698 4.22 70,639 4.24 70,383
         Mar 9.55 45,946 9.60 39,869 14.69 3,774 4.24 72,271 4.26 72,031
         Apr 9.52 45,107 9.62 38,827 14.70 3,846 4.25 69,020 4.26 68,777
         May 9.50 45,021 9.60 38,709 14.70 3,891 4.18 69,112 4.20 68,890
         June 9.50 46,126 9.52 39,588 14.65 4,127 4.32 69,799 4.34 69,530
 
 
Loans to non-financial corporations (cont’d)
Loans up to €1 million with an initial rate fixation of  17 Loans over €1 million with an initial rate fixation of  17 
floating rate or over 1 year and floating rate or over 1 year and
up to 1 year 9 up to 5 years over 5 years up to 1 year  9 up to 5 years over 5 years
Effective Effective Effective Effective Effective Effectiveinterest interest interest interest interest interest
Reporting rate 
1 Volume 7 rate 1 Volume 7 rate 1 Volume 7 rate 1 Volume 7 rate 1 Volume 7 rate 1 Volume 7 
period % pa % pa % pa % pa % pa % pa € million € million € million € million € million € million
Total loans
2012          June 3.37 7,267 4.14 1,469 3.16 1,357 2.39 43,154 2.89 2,333 3.07 5,764
         July 3.11 7,597 4.04 1,548 3.15 1,441 2.25 45,910 2.96 2,641 3.09 5,868
         Aug 2.97 6,767 3.82 1,380 3.01 1,448 2.14 37,722 2.82 1,375 2.77 4,616
         Sep 3.07 7,039 3.76 1,282 2.99 1,248 2.12 42,277 2.81 1,324 2.87 4,367
         Oct 2.96 7,708 3.70 1,489 2.85 1,311 1.98 47,072 2.84 1,676 2.81 4,416
         Nov 2.90 6,646 3.67 1,495 2.78 1,258 2.00 37,601 3.25 2,080 2.71 4,791
         Dec 2.94 6,940 3.56 1,665 2.75 1,361 1.89 43,968 2.54 4,465 2.70 7,203
2013          Jan 2.84 7,381 3.50 1,484 2.83 1,177 1.88 43,240 2.94 1,212 2.76 4,860
         Feb 2.92 6,264 3.58 1,204 2.87 926 1.72 32,114 3.16 1,111 2.89 4,347
         Mar 2.92 7,360 3.58 1,322 2.88 1,144 1.83 38,944 2.63 2,000 2.81 4,220
         Apr 2.92 7,813 3.50 1,509 2.85 1,170 1.80 37,523 2.85 1,491 2.77 4,495
         May 3.00 7,028 3.51 1,197 2.67 1,076 1.68 33,009 2.77 1,239 2.52 4,020
         June 2.97 7,413 3.44 1,333 2.68 1,262 1.75 41,904 2.58 2,153 2.80 5,651
of which: collateralised loans 12
2012          June 3.19 1,142 3.29 133 3.05 385 2.33 7,835 2.27 936 3.03 1,848
         July 2.99 1,343 3.31 157 3.01 424 2.33 9,627 2.86 1,097 3.15 1,896
         Aug 2.88 1,141 3.26 127 2.86 398 2.15 6,985 3.09 526 2.97 1,064
         Sep 2.86 1,151 2.92 150 2.76 330 2.13 8,526 2.84 441 3.07 932
         Oct 2.77 1,288 3.12 156 2.70 351 2.05 9,007 2.97 669 2.74 1,261
         Nov 2.82 998 3.17 127 2.62 325 1.95 6,715 3.42 1,066 2.48 1,015
         Dec 2.79 1,060 2.88 189 2.54 346 2.12 8,861 2.20 2,043 2.82 1,963
2013          Jan 2.68 1,329 2.93 157 2.68 351 2.01 9,850 2.91 334 2.98 1,146
         Feb 2.81 960 3.08 128 2.83 245 2.07 5,702 3.63 362 2.86 1,752
         Mar 2.86 1,027 3.04 127 2.78 319 2.04 7,793 2.45 861 2.70 1,161
         Apr 2.70 1,305 3.03 175 2.71 337 2.19 7,219 2.61 560 2.98 1,458
         May 2.85 961 2.79 134 2.48 321 2.04 5,488 2.82 474 2.78 1,322
         June 2.82 948 2.82 124 2.50 336 2.10 6,829 2.51 1,058 2.55 1,344
For footnotes * and 1 to 6, see p 44  . For footnotes + and 7 to 10, see p 45  . For they are within or beyond the limits agreed between customers and the
footnote 11, see p 46  .12Collected from June 2010. For the purposes of the bank. 15From June 2010 including convenience and extended credit card debt.
interest rate statistis, a loan is considered to be secured if collateral (among others Convenience credit is defined as the credit granted at an interest rate of 0% in thefinancial collateral, real estate collateral, debt securities) in at leat the same value as period between payment transactions effectuated with the card during one billingthe loan amount has been posted, pledged or assigned. 13From June 2010 cycle and the date at which the debt balances from this specific billing cycle become
including revolving loans which have all the following features: (a) the borrower may due. 16From January 2003 up to May 2010 estimated. The volume of outstanding
use or withdraw the funds to a pre-approved credit limit without giving prior notice amounts reported was extrapolated to form the underlying total using theto the lender; (b) the amount of available credit can increase and decrease as funds Horvitz-Thompson estimator. From June 2010 the data are based on monthlyare borrowed and repaid; (c) the loan may be used repeatedly; (d) there is no balance sheet statistics. 17The amount refers to the single loan transaction
obligation of regular repayment of funds. 14Overdrafts are defined as debit considered as new business. 
balances on current accounts. They include all bank overdrafts regardless of whether

Deutsche Bundesbank
48  Monthly Report
August 2013
VII Insurance corporations and pension funds
 
1 Assets *
 
 
 € billion
Assets
Financial assets
Prepayments of
Cash and insurance
deposits with Debt securi- premiums, ceded
monetary ties (inclu- Shares and Investment share of in- Other
End of financial in- ding financial Loans other fund surance tech- financial Non-financial
year/quarter Total Total stitutions  1 derivatives) granted  2 equity  3 shares/units nical reserves assets assets
Insurance corporations and pension funds 4
  
2005 1,696.9 1,634.5 486.8 152.7 240.8 240.3 357.5 79.6 76.9 62.3
2006 1,781.9 1,719.7 524.1 149.8 244.8 261.6 385.5 74.5 79.2 62.3
2007 1,840.0 1,781.6 558.3 156.5 248.6 275.4 409.5 70.2 63.1 58.5
2008 1,769.2 1,713.5 574.5 159.4 242.7 228.9 379.2 65.6 63.2 55.8
2009 1,836.2 1,779.1 588.9 173.9 259.3 210.6 426.9 58.5 61.1 57.1
2010 1,958.8 1,897.4 570.9 210.2 267.0 221.0 501.2 59.9 67.3 61.4
2011 2,007.4 1,943.5 576.2 231.7 271.4 224.0 512.5 62.2 65.3 63.9
2012 2,174.0 2,106.5 560.0 304.4 282.2 225.1 598.9 65.9 70.0 67.5
2010          Q4 1,958.8 1,897.4 570.9 210.2 267.0 221.0 501.2 59.9 67.3 61.4
2011          Q1 1,975.9 1,914.2 576.3 213.7 269.4 223.2 504.2 60.4 67.0 61.8
         Q2 1,988.4 1,926.3 578.5 219.4 270.6 224.0 506.1 61.0 66.6 62.0
         Q3 1,998.6 1,936.3 581.7 226.6 271.9 222.9 505.3 61.6 66.4 62.4
         Q4 2,007.4 1,943.5 576.2 231.7 271.4 224.0 512.5 62.2 65.3 63.9
2012          Q1 2,062.4 1,997.6 572.4 255.6 275.3 224.3 539.8 64.0 66.3 64.8
         Q2 2,079.4 2,013.5 568.8 267.1 275.2 223.2 548.2 64.1 66.8 65.9
         Q3 2,132.8 2,066.1 565.9 288.5 277.9 225.3 575.2 64.8 68.5 66.7
         Q4 2,174.0 2,106.5 560.0 304.4 282.2 225.1 598.9 65.9 70.0 67.5
2013          Q1 2,230.3 2,161.8 559.8 329.2 284.7 230.6 618.2 68.3 70.9 68.5
Insurance corporations
2005 1,436.9 1,391.5 384.8 130.5 221.3 234.2 272.0 78.6 70.2 45.3
2006 1,499.8 1,455.2 410.3 127.5 224.7 254.2 292.7 73.1 72.6 44.6
2007 1,528.2 1,487.5 432.9 131.9 226.7 267.2 304.0 68.2 56.6 40.7
2008 1,453.5 1,415.2 436.7 133.7 221.2 221.4 283.9 63.2 55.1 38.2
2009 1,489.8 1,451.7 440.4 146.2 236.0 202.9 317.6 55.5 53.1 38.1
2010 1,550.3 1,510.0 419.9 170.7 243.0 208.2 356.4 56.4 55.4 40.3
2011 1,580.3 1,538.7 419.0 191.2 245.9 210.3 361.2 58.4 52.7 41.6
2012 1,712.4 1,668.5 401.9 255.1 256.1 210.6 426.3 61.8 56.7 43.9
2010          Q4 1,550.3 1,510.0 419.9 170.7 243.0 208.2 356.4 56.4 55.4 40.3
2011          Q1 1,565.5 1,525.1 425.6 173.6 244.4 210.3 359.5 56.9 54.8 40.4
         Q2 1,573.0 1,532.7 426.6 178.6 245.5 210.8 359.6 57.4 54.3 40.3
         Q3 1,579.9 1,539.5 428.0 184.6 246.7 209.5 358.9 57.9 53.9 40.4
         Q4 1,580.3 1,538.7 419.0 191.2 245.9 210.3 361.2 58.4 52.7 41.6
2012          Q1 1,625.4 1,583.2 414.1 212.5 249.5 210.3 383.4 60.1 53.5 42.2
         Q2 1,638.1 1,595.1 410.7 221.9 249.4 209.0 390.1 60.2 53.9 43.0
         Q3 1,680.4 1,636.9 407.5 240.9 251.9 210.9 409.4 60.8 55.4 43.5
         Q4 1,712.4 1,668.5 401.9 255.1 256.1 210.6 426.3 61.8 56.7 43.9
2013          Q1 1,760.3 1,715.9 400.5 279.3 258.5 215.3 440.6 64.2 57.5 44.4
Pension funds 4
2005 260.0 243.0 102.0 22.2 19.5 6.1 85.5 1.0 6.6 17.0
2006 282.2 264.5 113.8 22.3 20.1 7.3 92.8 1.5 6.7 17.7
2007 311.9 294.1 125.4 24.6 21.9 8.2 105.5 1.9 6.6 17.8
2008 315.8 298.2 137.8 25.7 21.5 7.4 95.2 2.4 8.1 17.5
2009 346.5 327.4 148.4 27.7 23.3 7.7 109.3 3.0 8.0 19.1
2010 408.6 387.4 151.0 39.5 24.0 12.8 144.8 3.5 11.9 21.1
2011 427.1 404.8 157.2 40.5 25.5 13.7 151.3 3.8 12.7 22.3
2012 461.6 438.0 158.1 49.2 26.2 14.5 172.6 4.1 13.3 23.6
2010          Q4 408.6 387.4 151.0 39.5 24.0 12.8 144.8 3.5 11.9 21.1
2011          Q1 410.5 389.1 150.7 40.1 25.0 12.9 144.7 3.5 12.1 21.4
         Q2 415.3 393.6 151.9 40.9 25.2 13.2 146.5 3.6 12.3 21.7
         Q3 418.8 396.8 153.7 41.9 25.2 13.4 146.4 3.7 12.5 21.9
         Q4 427.1 404.8 157.2 40.5 25.5 13.7 151.3 3.8 12.7 22.3
2012          Q1 437.0 414.4 158.3 43.1 25.8 14.0 156.5 3.9 12.9 22.6
         Q2 441.2 418.4 158.2 45.2 25.8 14.2 158.1 3.9 12.9 22.8
         Q3 452.4 429.2 158.4 47.6 26.0 14.4 165.8 4.0 13.1 23.2
         Q4 461.6 438.0 158.1 49.2 26.2 14.5 172.6 4.1 13.3 23.6
2013          Q1 470.0 445.9 159.3 50.0 26.2 15.2 177.6 4.1 13.4 24.1
Source: Bundesbank calculations based on supervisory data of the Federal Financial Su- to the institutional sector “insurance corporations and pension funds“ of the Europe-
pervisory Authority (BaFin). *Valuation based on current market values; book values an System of Accounts. Pension funds thus comprise company pension schemes (“Pen-
for items “Cash and deposits with monetary financial institutions“ and “Loans gran- sionskassen“, pension funds supervised by BaFin, Contractual Trust Arrangements
ted“. 1Including registered bonds, borrower’s note loans and Pfandbriefe of moneta- (CTAs; included as from 2010) and public, church and municipal supplementary pen-
ry financial institutions. 2Including deposits retained on assumed reinsurance. 3Inclu- sion funds) and occupational pension schemes for the self-employed. Social security
ding participation certificates (“Genuss-Scheine“). 4The term “pension funds“ refers funds are not included. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
49  Monthly Report
August 2013
VII Insurance corporations and pension funds
 
2 Liabilities *
 
 
€ billion
Liabilities
Insurance technical reserves
Net equity of
households in
Unearned
Debt securities life insurance premiums and
(including and pension reserves for
End of financial Loans Shares and fund outstanding Other
year/quarter Total derivatives) received 1 other equity 2 Total reserves 3 claims liabilities Net worth 4 
Insurance corporations and pension funds 5
  
2005 1,696.9 6.7 89.8 186.0 1,263.8 989.0 274.8 83.9 66.6
2006 1,781.9 8.4 91.6 210.0 1,318.8 1,049.1 269.6 81.3 71.92007 1,840.0 11.7 88.9 214.8 1,377.9 1,119.2 258.7 78.2 68.62008 1,769.2 14.7 75.1 136.0 1,394.8 1,141.2 253.6 74.6 74.02009 1,836.2 16.2 71.5 136.2 1,459.5 1,211.6 248.0 72.7 80.0
2010 1,958.8 17.8 71.8 137.6 1,573.2 1,319.1 254.1 71.3 87.1
2011 2,007.4 17.0 72.1 111.8 1,625.1 1,360.4 264.7 71.7 109.72012 2,174.0 22.1 77.0 158.9 1,715.2 1,432.5 282.6 75.4 125.4
2010          Q4 1,958.8 17.8 71.8 137.6 1,573.2 1,319.1 254.1 71.3 87.12011          Q1 1,975.9 17.1 72.4 146.1 1,597.2 1,337.1 260.1 71.8 71.4
         Q2 1,988.4 18.1 70.9 137.8 1,608.4 1,348.4 260.0 71.6 81.6         Q3 1,998.6 17.5 71.0 108.3 1,619.3 1,357.7 261.7 71.6 110.8         Q4 2,007.4 17.0 72.1 111.8 1,625.1 1,360.4 264.7 71.7 109.7
2012          Q1 2,062.4 19.2 72.9 134.6 1,656.6 1,386.0 270.5 72.9 106.2
         Q2 2,079.4 18.5 73.6 123.0 1,669.6 1,398.2 271.4 73.3 121.3         Q3 2,132.8 18.9 75.4 141.1 1,691.8 1,415.5 276.3 74.3 131.4         Q4 2,174.0 22.1 77.0 158.9 1,715.2 1,432.5 282.6 75.4 125.4
2013          Q1 2,230.3 21.0 79.6 169.7 1,756.6 1,461.5 295.0 77.6 125.8
Insurance corporations
2005 1,436.9 6.7 88.4 178.9 1,025.7 751.3 274.4 82.0 55.2
2006 1,499.8 8.4 89.8 202.1 1,061.3 792.0 269.2 79.1 59.1
2007 1,528.2 11.7 86.4 206.7 1,090.1 831.7 258.4 75.7 57.6
2008 1,453.5 14.7 72.3 130.7 1,094.5 841.3 253.2 72.2 69.0
2009 1,489.8 16.2 68.3 130.7 1,135.4 887.8 247.5 70.8 68.3
2010 1,550.3 17.8 68.2 131.8 1,190.9 937.3 253.7 69.2 72.3
2011 1,580.3 17.0 68.3 107.0 1,224.3 960.1 264.2 69.6 94.1
2012 1,712.4 22.1 73.0 152.1 1,290.1 1,008.0 282.1 73.2 102.0
2010          Q4 1,550.3 17.8 68.2 131.8 1,190.9 937.3 253.7 69.2 72.3
2011          Q1 1,565.5 17.1 68.7 140.0 1,209.8 950.2 259.6 69.7 60.1
         Q2 1,573.0 18.1 67.2 132.0 1,216.7 957.2 259.5 69.4 69.6
         Q3 1,579.9 17.5 67.3 103.7 1,223.5 962.3 261.2 69.5 98.4
         Q4 1,580.3 17.0 68.3 107.0 1,224.3 960.1 264.2 69.6 94.1
2012          Q1 1,625.4 19.2 69.0 128.8 1,247.9 977.8 270.0 70.8 89.8
         Q2 1,638.1 18.5 69.7 117.6 1,257.2 986.3 270.9 71.1 104.0
         Q3 1,680.4 18.9 71.4 135.0 1,273.8 998.0 275.8 72.1 109.3
         Q4 1,712.4 22.1 73.0 152.1 1,290.1 1,008.0 282.1 73.2 102.0
2013          Q1 1,760.3 21.0 75.5 162.6 1,323.8 1,029.3 294.5 75.4 102.1
Pension funds 5
2005 260.0 − 1.3 7.2 238.1 237.7 0.4 2.0 11.4
2006 282.2 − 1.8 8.0 257.5 257.1 0.4 2.1 12.8
2007 311.9 − 2.4 8.1 287.8 287.5 0.3 2.5 11.0
2008 315.8 − 2.8 5.3 300.3 299.9 0.4 2.4 5.0
2009 346.5 − 3.2 5.5 324.2 323.7 0.4 1.9 11.6
2010 408.6 − 3.6 5.8 382.2 381.8 0.4 2.1 14.8
2011 427.1 − 3.8 4.8 400.7 400.3 0.5 2.1 15.6
2012 461.6 − 4.0 6.8 425.1 424.6 0.5 2.2 23.4
2010          Q4 408.6 − 3.6 5.8 382.2 381.8 0.4 2.1 14.8
2011          Q1 410.5 − 3.6 6.1 387.3 386.9 0.4 2.1 11.3
         Q2 415.3 − 3.7 5.8 391.7 391.3 0.5 2.1 12.0
         Q3 418.8 − 3.7 4.6 395.8 395.4 0.5 2.1 12.5
         Q4 427.1 − 3.8 4.8 400.7 400.3 0.5 2.1 15.6
2012          Q1 437.0 − 3.9 5.9 408.7 408.2 0.5 2.2 16.4
         Q2 441.2 − 3.9 5.4 412.4 411.9 0.5 2.2 17.4
         Q3 452.4 − 4.0 6.1 418.0 417.5 0.5 2.2 22.1
         Q4 461.6 − 4.0 6.8 425.1 424.6 0.5 2.2 23.4
2013          Q1 470.0 − 4.1 7.1 432.7 432.2 0.5 2.3 23.7
Source: Bundesbank calculations based on supervisory data of the Federal Financial Su- difference between total assets and the remaining liability items. Own funds are the
pervisory Authority (BaFin). *Valuation based on current market values; book values sum of net worth and “shares and other equity“. 5The term “pension funds“ refers
for item “Loans received“. Quarterly data and data as from 2012 are partially estima- to the institutional sector “insurance corporations and pension funds“ of the ESA. Pen-ted.1Including deposits retained on ceded business. 2Including participation certifi- sion funds thus comprise company pension schemes (“Pensionskassen“, pension
cates (“Genuss-Scheine“). 3Including ageing provisions of health insurance schemes funds supervised by BaFin, Contractual Trust Arrangements (CTAs; included as from
and premium reserves of accident insurance schemes with guaranteed premium re- 2010) and public, church and municipal supplementary pension funds) and occupatio-fund. 4As defined in the European System of Accounts (ESA 1995), net worth is the nal pension schemes for the self-employed. Social security funds are not included. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
50  Monthly Report
August 2013
VIII Capital market
 
1 Sales and purchases of debt securities and shares in Germany
 
 
€ million
Debt securities
Sales Purchases
Domestic debt securities  1 Residents
Credit in-
Sales stitutions
= Public Foreign including
total Bank Corporate debt debt building
pur- debt bonds secur- secur- and loan Deutsche Other Non-
Period chases Total securities ities  3 ities 4 Total 5 Bundesbank sectors  7 residents  8 (non-MFIs)  2 associations  6 
2001 180,227 86,656 55,918 14,473 16,262 93,571 111,281 35,848 . 75,433 68,946
2002 175,396 124,035 47,296 14,506 62,235 51,361 60,476 13,536 . 46,940 114,920
2003 184,679 134,455 31,404 30,262 72,788 50,224 105,557 35,748 . 69,809 79,122
2004 233,890 133,711 64,231 10,778 58,703 100,179 108,119 121,841 . − 13,723 125,772
2005 252,658 110,542 39,898 2,682 67,965 142,116 94,718 61,740 . 32,978 157,940
2006 242,006 102,379 40,995 8,943 52,446 139,627 125,423 68,893 . 56,530 116,583
2007 217,798 90,270 42,034 20,123 28,111 127,528 − 26,762 96,476 . − 123,238 244,560
2008 76,490 66,139 − 45,712 86,527 25,322 10,351 18,236 68,049 . − 49,813 58,254
2009 71,224 − 538 − 114,902 22,709 91,655 71,763 91,170 12,973 8,645 69,552 − 19,945
2010 147,209 − 1,212 − 7,621 24,044 − 17,635 148,420 97,342 − 103,271 22,967 177,646 49,867
2011 36,526 13,575 − 46,796 850 59,521 22,952 − 17,872 − 94,793 36,805 40,117 54,398
2012 53,791 − 21,419 − 98,820 − 8,701 86,103 75,208 8,821 − 42,017 − 3,573 54,409 44,970
2012          Aug 5,161 2,245 − 5,350 − 3,685 11,280 2,915 − 799 2,868 − 589 − 3,078 5,959
         Sep − 15,540 − 24,453 − 13,112 − 1,342 − 9,999 8,913 − 9,575 1,204 − 78 − 10,701 − 5,964
         Oct 8,950 2,879 − 3,950 − 5,702 12,532 6,070 4,577 − 8,766 − 1,512 14,855 4,373
         Nov 9,989 2,214 14 4,790 − 2,590 7,775 − 15,749 3,024 − 858 − 17,915 25,738
         Dec − 33,222 − 39,386 − 20,125 5,495 − 24,756 6,163 − 15,056 − 11,575 − − 3,481 − 18,167
2013          Jan 1,151 − 14,311 − 8,884 − 5,543 115 15,462 3,366 − 2,621 − 1,846 7,833 − 2,214
         Feb 22,401 17,420 869 7,068 9,483 4,981 866 − 5,501 − 1,773 8,140 21,535
         Mar − 10,100 − 15,782 − 19,212 5,979 − 2,549 5,682 − 1,617 − 6,735 − 511 5,629 − 8,483
         Apr 7,750 917 − 5,520 2,476 3,960 6,833 12,671 − 2,027 − 1,400 16,098 − 4,921
         May 17,315 − 2,884 − 9,809 421 6,504 20,199 2,426 − 3,962 − 1,050 7,438 14,890
         June − 15,813 − 17,431 − 9,542 − 5,473 − 2,416 1,618 6,719 3,446 − 1,280 4,553 − 22,532
 
 
€ million
Shares
Sales Purchases
Sales Residents
=
total Domestic Foreign Credit insti- Non-
Period purchases shares  9 shares  10 Total 11 tutions  6,12 Other sectors  13 residents  14 
2001 82,665 17,575 65,091 − 2,252 − 14,714 12,462 84,918
2002 39,338 9,232 30,106 18,398 − 23,236 41,634 20,941
2003 11,896 16,838 − 4,946 − 15,121 7,056 − 22,177 27,016
2004 − 3,317 10,157 − 13,474 7,432 5,045 2,387 − 10,748
2005 32,364 13,766 18,597 1,036 10,208 − 9,172 31,329
2006 26,276 9,061 17,214 7,528 11,323 − 3,795 18,748
2007 − 5,009 10,053 − 15,062 − 62,308 − 6,702 − 55,606 57,299
2008 − 29,452 11,326 − 40,778 2,743 − 23,079 25,822 − 32,194
2009 35,980 23,962 12,018 30,496 − 8,335 38,831 5,484
2010 36,448 20,049 16,398 41,347 7,340 34,007 − 4,900
2011 25,549 21,713 3,835 39,081 670 38,411 − 13,533
2012 18,808 5,120 13,688 17,663 10,259 7,404 1,144
2012          Aug − 2,393 101 − 2,494 − 2,103 2,109 − 4,212 − 290
         Sep 2,136 549 1,587 2,990 4,196 − 1,206 − 854
         Oct 7,928 131 7,797 7,406 3,024 4,382 522
         Nov 1,759 134 1,625 1,870 − 843 2,713 − 111
         Dec 10,124 387 9,737 10,879 6,052 4,827 − 755
2013          Jan 4,679 732 3,947 10,340 5,842 4,498 − 5,661
         Feb − 1,675 306 − 1,981 − 5,405 − 5,352 − 53 3,730
         Mar 5,921 40 5,881 9,432 7,851 1,581 − 3,511
         Apr 34 93 − 59 22,020 18,391 3,629 − 21,986
         May 10,665 5,560 5,105 − 3,214 − 10,712 7,498 13,879
         June 2,411 1,544 867 − 7,461 − 8,772 1,311 9,872
1Net sales at market values plus/minus changes in issuers’ portfolios of their own values. 9Excluding shares of public limited investment companies; at issue prices.
debt securities. 2Including cross-border financing within groups from January 2011. 10Net purchases or net sales (−) of foreign shares (including direct investment)  by  
3Including Federal Railways Fund, Federal Post Office and Treuhand agency. 4Net residents;  transaction  values. 11Domestic and foreign shares. 12Up to end-1998,
purchases or net sales (−) of foreign debt securities by residents; transaction excluding syndicated shares. 13Residual; also including purchases of domestic and
values. 5Domestic and foreign debt securities. 6Book values; statistically adjusted. foreign securities by domestic mutual funds. 14Net purchases or net sales (−) of
7Residual; also including purchases of domestic and foreign securities by domestic domestic shares (including direct investment) by non-residents; transaction values. —
mutual funds. Up to end-2008, data comprise Deutsche Bundesbank. 8Net pur- The figures for the most recent date are provisional; revisions are not specially
chases or net sales (−) of domestic debt securities by non-residents; transaction marked. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
51  Monthly Report
August 2013
 VIII Capital market
 
2 Sales of debt securities issued by residents *  
 
 
€ million nominal value
Bank debt securities 1 Memo item
 Foreign  DM/euro
bonds issued Debt securities
Corporate by German- issued by special
Mortgage Public purpose credit Other bank bonds Public managed
Period Total Total Pfandbriefe Pfandbriefe institutions (non-MFIs)  2 syndicates debt securities debt securities 3 
Gross sales  4 
2001 687,988 505,646 34,782 112,594 106,166 252,103 11,328 171,012 10,605
2002 818,725 569,232 41,496 119,880 117,506 290,353 17,574 231,923 10,313
2003 958,917 668,002 47,828 107,918 140,398 371,858 22,510 268,406 2,850
2004 990,399 688,844 33,774 90,815 162,353 401,904 31,517 270,040 12,344
2005 988,911 692,182 28,217 103,984 160,010 399,969 24,352 272,380 600
2006 925,863 622,055 24,483 99,628 139,193 358,750 29,975 273,834 69
2007 1,021,533 743,616 19,211 82,720 195,722 445,963 15,043 262,872 −
2008 1,337,337 961,271 51,259 70,520 382,814 456,676 95,093 280,974 −
2009 1,533,616 1,058,815 40,421 37,615 331,566 649,215 76,379 398,423 −
2010 1,375,138 757,754 36,226 33,539 363,828 324,160 53,654 563,731 −
2011 1,337,772 658,781 31,431 24,295 376,876 226,180 86,615 592,376 −
2012 1,340,568 702,781 36,593 11,413 446,153 208,623 63,259 574,529 −
2012          Nov 129,112 65,796 1,587 167 38,536 25,505 9,741 53,576 −
         Dec 69,448 44,404 1,223 699 31,232 11,250 8,186 16,858 −
2013          Jan 120,536 79,518 3,050 783 59,173 16,512 3,081 37,937 −
         Feb 118,387 77,846 2,008 460 60,566 14,812 5,392 35,149 −
         Mar 117,189 63,353 1,361 663 47,045 14,284 8,041 45,795 −
         Apr 133,541 83,249 3,213 1,275 61,207 17,553 6,296 43,997 −
         May 124,909 77,880 2,159 919 54,712 20,090 5,770 41,259 −
         June 116,746 74,753 3,072 1,595 57,201 12,885 7,268 34,725 −
of which: Debt securities with maturities of more than four years  5 
2001 299,751 202,337 16,619 76,341 42,277 67,099 7,479 89,933 6,480
2002 309,157 176,486 16,338 59,459 34,795 65,892 12,149 120,527 9,2132003 369,336 220,103 23,210 55,165 49,518 92,209 10,977 138,256 2,8502004 424,769 275,808 20,060 48,249 54,075 153,423 20,286 128,676 4,320
2005 425,523 277,686 20,862 63,851 49,842 143,129 16,360 131,479 400
2006 337,969 190,836 17,267 47,814 47,000 78,756 14,422 132,711 692007 315,418 183,660 10,183 31,331 50,563 91,586 13,100 118,659 −2008 387,516 190,698 13,186 31,393 54,834 91,289 84,410 112,407 −2009 361,999 185,575 20,235 20,490 59,809 85,043 55,240 121,185 −
2010 381,687 169,174 15,469 15,139 72,796 65,769 34,649 177,863 −
2011 368,039 153,309 13,142 8,500 72,985 58,684 41,299 173,431 −2012 421,018 177,086 23,374 6,482 74,386 72,845 44,042 199,888 −
2012          Nov 45,295 16,232 1,167 48 1,047 13,969 7,044 22,018 −
         Dec 21,311 8,884 782 189 3,672 4,242 6,122 6,305 −
2013          Jan 41,288 21,439 2,120 558 12,205 6,556 1,734 18,116 −
         Feb 27,437 8,802 1,237 151 2,554 4,860 4,175 14,459 −         Mar 25,973 8,027 744 115 2,094 5,074 5,527 12,419 −
         Apr 35,644 14,295 2,370 843 5,349 5,733 3,483 17,866 −
         May 33,273 16,385 1,140 619 6,906 7,719 3,763 13,125 −         June 33,900 16,014 2,823 1,270 6,479 5,442 5,659 12,228 −
Net sales  6 
2001 84,122 60,905 6,932 − 9,254 28,808 34,416 8,739 14,479 − 30,6572002 131,976 56,393 7,936 − 26,806 20,707 54,561 14,306 61,277 − 44,5462003 124,556 40,873 2,700 − 42,521 44,173 36,519 18,431 65,253 − 54,9902004 167,233 81,860 1,039 − 52,615 50,142 83,293 18,768 66,605 − 22,124
2005 141,715 65,798 − 2,151 − 34,255 37,242 64,962 10,099 65,819 − 35,963
2006 129,423 58,336 − 12,811 − 20,150 44,890 46,410 15,605 55,482 − 19,2082007 86,579 58,168 − 10,896 − 46,629 42,567 73,127 − 3,683 32,093 − 29,7502008 119,472 8,517 15,052 − 65,773 25,165 34,074 82,653 28,302 − 31,6072009 76,441 − 75,554 858 − 80,646 25,579 − 21,345 48,508 103,482 − 21,037
2010 21,566 − 87,646 − 3,754 − 63,368 28,296 − 48,822 23,748 85,464 − 10,904
2011 22,518 − 54,582 1,657 − 44,290 32,904 − 44,852 − 3,189 80,289 − 5,9892012 − 85,298 − 100,198 − 4,177 − 41,660 − 3,259 − 51,099 − 6,401 21,298 − 2,605
2012          Nov 3,189 240 − 4,129 − 2,724 596 6,497 5,836 − 2,888 −
         Dec − 39,422 − 24,895 − 382 − 2,308 − 11,116 − 11,088 3,163 − 17,691 −
2013          Jan − 38,802 − 11,677 − 1,883 − 13,543 6,687 − 2,938 − 4,793 − 22,331 −
         Feb 8,971 162 − 5,231 − 4,895 14,206 − 3,918 3,656 5,153 − 1,165         Mar − 21,212 − 21,021 − 1,130 − 3,626 − 5,449 − 10,816 4,029 − 4,220 − 358
         Apr − 17,136 − 6,083 253 − 1,676 − 3,704 − 956 3,073 − 14,127 − 51
         May 5,999 − 8,363 − 2,268 − 2,090 − 3,310 − 695 − 2,038 16,400 −         June − 25,069 − 12,488 375 − 873 − 2,120 − 9,869 − 3,102 − 9,479 − 9
*For definitions, see the explanatory notes in the Statistical Supplement 2 Capital Railways Fund, Federal Post Office and Treuhand agency. 4Gross sales means only
market statistics on p 21 ff. 1Excluding registered bank debt securities. 2Including initial sales of newly issued securities. 5Maximum maturity according to the terms of
cross-border financing within groups from January 2011. 3Including Federal issue. 6 Gross sales less redemptions. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
52  Monthly Report
August 2013
VIII Capital market
 
3 Amounts outstanding of debt securities issued by residents  * 
 
 
€ million nominal value
Bank debt securities  1 Memo item
 Foreign  DM/euro
End of year Debt securities bonds issued
or month/ issued by Corporate by German-
Maturity Mortgage Public special purpose Other bank bonds Public managed
in years Total Total Pfandbriefe Pfandbriefe credit institutions debt securities (non-MFIs) debt securities syndicates
2001 2,349,243 1,506,640 147,684 675,868 201,721 481,366 22,339 820,264 292,199
2002 2,481,220 1,563,034 155,620 649,061 222,427 535,925 36,646 881,541 247,655
2003 2,605,775 1,603,906 158,321 606,541 266,602 572,442 55,076 946,793 192,666
2004 2,773,007 1,685,766 159,360 553,927 316,745 655,734 73,844 1,013,397 170,543
2005 2,914,723 1,751,563 157,209 519,674 323,587 751,093 83,942 1,079,218 134,580
2006 3,044,145 1,809,899 144,397 499,525 368,476 797,502 99,545 1,134,701 115,373
2007 3,130,723 1,868,066 133,501 452,896 411,041 870,629 95,863 1,166,794 85,623
2008 3,250,195 1,876,583 150,302 377,091 490,641 858,550 178,515 1,195,097 54,015
2009 3,326,635 1,801,029 151,160 296,445 516,221 837,203 227,024 1,298,581 32,978
2010 3,348,201 2 1,570,490 147,529 232,954 544,517 2 645,491 250,774 2 1,526,937 22,074
2011 3,370,721 1,515,911 149,185 188,663 577,423 600,640 247,585 1,607,226 16,085
2012 3,285,422 2 1,414,349 145,007 147,070 574,163 2 548,109 2 220,456 2 1,650,617 13,481
2012          Dec 3,285,422 1,414,349 145,007 147,070 574,163 548,109 220,456 1,650,617 13,481
2013          Jan 3,246,621 1,402,672 143,124 133,527 580,850 545,171 215,663 1,628,286 13,481
         Feb 3,255,592 1,402,833 137,892 128,633 595,056 541,253 219,319 1,633,439 12,316
         Mar 3,234,379 1,381,812 136,763 125,006 589,606 530,437 223,348 1,629,219 11,958
         Apr 3,217,243 1,375,729 137,016 123,330 585,903 529,481 226,422 1,615,092 11,907
         May 3,223,242 1,367,366 134,747 121,239 582,593 528,786 224,384 1,631,492 11,907
         June 3,198,173 1,354,878 135,122 120,366 580,473 518,917 221,281 1,622,013 11,898
Breakdown by remaining period to maturity  3 Position at end-June 2013 
1,187,867 555,896 56,440 61,073 229,048 209,333 50,514 581,460 5,200    less than 2
768,066 391,029 41,907 35,196 146,339 167,586 35,817 341,222 3,119 2 to less than 4
411,347 177,929 19,040 12,003 89,694 57,191 31,023 202,396 278 4 to less than 6
264,815 91,449 13,497 5,708 50,918 21,325 21,290 152,075 179 6 to less than 8
228,854 54,150 3,717 2,791 32,021 15,622 13,721 160,981 523 8 to less than 10
61,749 16,347 410 2,655 6,693 6,589 4,634 40,768 1,602 10 to less than 15
57,850 16,126 11 240 9,758 6,117 2,428 39,296 30 15 to less than 20
217,626 51,955 100 698 16,001 35,156 61,856 103,817 967 20 and more
*Including debt securities temporarily held in the issuers’ portfolios. 1Excluding maturity for debt securities falling due en bloc and until mean maturity of the
debt securities handed to the trustee for temporary safe custody. 2Sectoral residual amount outstanding for debt securities not falling due en bloc. 
reclassification of debt securities. 3Calculated from month under review until final
 
 
4 Shares in circulation issued by residents  * 
 
 
€ million nominal value
Change in domestic public limited companies’ capital due to
Memo item
Share circulation
at market values
contribution (market capita- cash payments
Share capital = Net increase or and ex- contribution of shares, merger reduction lisation)
circulation at net decrease (−) change of of claims mining shares, and of capital level at end
end of period during period convertible issue of and other GmbH shares, transfer change of and of period
Period under review under review bonds  1 bonus shares real assets etc of assets legal form liquidation under review  2 
2001 166,187 18,561 7,987 4,057 1,106 8,448 1,018 − 905 − 3,152 1,205,613
2002 168,716 2,528 4,307 1,291 486 1,690 − 868 − 2,152 − 2,224 647,492
2003 162,131 − 6,585 4,482 923 211 513 − 322 − 10,806 − 1,584 851,001
2004 164,802 2,669 3,960 1,566 276 696 220 − 1,760 − 2,286 887,217
2005 163,071 − 1,733 2,470 1,040 694 268 − 1,443 − 3,060 − 1,703 1,058,532
2006 163,764 695 2,670 3,347 604 954 − 1,868 − 1,256 − 3,761 1,279,638
2007 164,560 799 3,164 1,322 200 269 − 682 − 1,847 − 1,636 1,481,930
2008 168,701 4,142 5,006 1,319 152 0 − 428 − 608 − 1,306 830,622
2009 175,691 6,989 12,476 398 97 − − 3,741 − 1,269 − 974 927,256
2010 174,596 − 1,096 3,265 497 178 10 − 486 − 993 − 3,569 1,091,220
2011 177,167 2,570 6,390 552 462 9 − 552 − 762 − 3,532 924,214
2012 178,617 1,449 3,046 129 570 − − 478 594 − 2,411 1,150,188
2012          Dec 178,617 − 305 130 1 0 − − 31 − 164 − 242 1,150,188
2013          Jan 178,836 219 278 3 − − − 30 23 − 55 1,183,779
         Feb 178,967 131 199 4−−− − 2 8 − 4 5 1,181,378
         Mar 178,805 − 162 33 − 5 − − 81 − 2 − 117 1,185,828
         Apr 173,571 − 5,234 81 − − − − 15 8 − 5,307 1,200,874
         May 170,978 − 2,593 879 275 1 − − 1,175 − 13 − 2,559 1,247,031
         June 171,830 851 667 248 332 − − 7 − 163 − 225 1,202,614
*Excluding shares of public limited investment companies. 1Including shares issued ket segment was closed down on 24 March 2003) are included as well as enterprises
out of company profits. 2Enterprises listed on the Regulated Market (the introduc- listed on the Open Market. Source: Bundesbank calculations based on data of the
tion of which marked the end of the division of organised trading segments into an Herausgebergemeinschaft Wertpapier-Mitteilungen and the Deutsche Börse AG. 
official and a regulated market on 1 November 2007) or the Neuer Markt (stock mar-

Deutsche Bundesbank
53  Monthly Report
August 2013
 VIII Capital market
 
5 Yields and indices on German securities
 
 
               
Yields on debt securities outstanding issued by residents  1 Price indices 2,3 
Public debt securities Bank debt securities Debt securities Shares
Listed
Federal securities
With a residual With a residual
maturity of maturity of Corporate German German
9 and more than 9 bonds bond iBoxx CDAX share
including and including (non- index share price index € Germany
Total Total Total 10 years 4 Total 10 years MFIs) (REX) price index index (DAX)
Average End-1998 End-1987 End-1987
Period % per annum daily rate = 100 = 100 = 1000
2001 4.8 4.7 4.7 4.8 4.9 5.3 5.9 113.12 94.16 319.38 5,160.10
2002 4.7 4.6 4.6 4.8 4.7 5.1 6.0 117.56 97.80 188.46 2,892.632003 3.7 3.8 3.8 4.1 3.7 4.3 5.0 117.36 97.09 252.48 3,965.162004 3.7 3.7 3.7 4.0 3.6 4.2 4.0 120.19 99.89 268.32 4,256.08
2005 3.1 3.2 3.2 3.4 3.1 3.5 3.7 120.92 101.09 335.59 5,408.26
2006 3.8 3.7 3.7 3.8 3.8 4.0 4.2 116.78 96.69 407.16 6,596.922007 4.3 4.3 4.2 4.2 4.4 4.5 5.0 114.85 94.62 478.65 8,067.322008 4.2 4.0 4.0 4.0 4.5 4.7 6.3 121.68 102.06 266.33 4,810.202009 3.2 3.1 3.0 3.2 3.5 4.0 5.5 123.62 100.12 320.32 5,957.43
2010 2.5 2.4 2.4 2.7 2.7 3.3 4.0 124.96 102.95 368.72 6,914.19
2011 2.6 2.4 2.4 2.6 2.9 3.5 4.3 131.48 109.53 304.60 5,898.352012 1.4 1.3 1.3 1.5 1.6 2.1 3.7 135.11 111.18 380.03 7,612.39
2013          Feb 1.3 1.3 1.3 1.5 1.3 2.0 3.3 134.63 110.15 389.64 7,741.70
         Mar 1.2 1.1 1.1 1.4 1.1 1.9 3.1 135.85 110.99 391.56 7,795.31
         Apr 1.1 1.0 1.0 1.2 1.0 1.8 3.0 135.75 111.36 392.40 7,913.71
         May 1.1 1.1 1.1 1.3 1.0 1.8 2.9 134.63 109.44 407.33 8,348.84         June 1.3 1.3 1.3 1.5 1.3 2.1 3.2 133.13 108.15 388.91 7,959.22
         July 1.4 1.3 1.3 1.6 1.3 2.1 3.4 133.63 108.21 404.77 8,275.97
1Bearer debt securities with maximum maturities according to the terms of issue of ding of the debt securities included in the calculation. Monthly figures are calculated
over 4 years if their mean residual maturities exceed 3 years. Convertible debt on the basis of the yields on all the business days in a month. The annual figures are
securities, etc. debt securities with unscheduled redemption, zero-coupon bonds, the unweighted means of the monthly figures. 2End of year or month. 3Source:
floating-rate notes and bonds not denominated in euro are not included. Group Deutsche Börse AG. 4Only debt securities eligible as underlying instruments for
yields for the various categories of securities are weighted by the amounts outstan- futures contracts; calculated as unweighted averages. 
 
 
6 Sales and purchases of mutual fund shares in Germany
  
€ million
Sales Purchases
Domestic mutual funds 1  (sales receipts) Residents
Mutual funds open to the Credit institutions
general public including building
Other sectors 3 and loan associations 2 
of which
Sales Open- of which of which
= Secur- end Foreign Foreign
total Money ities- real Special- mutual mutualpur- market based estate ised Foreign fund fund Non-resi-
Period chases Total Total funds funds funds funds funds  
4 Total Total shares Total shares dents 5 
2001 97,077 76,811 35,522 12,410 9,195 10,159 41,289 20,266 96,127 10,251 2,703 85,876 17,563 951
2002 66,571 59,482 25,907 3,682 7,247 14,916 33,575 7,089 67,251 2,100 3,007 65,151 4,082 − 6802003 47,754 43,943 20,079 − 924 7,408 14,166 23,864 3,811 49,547 − 2,658 734 52,205 3,077 − 1,7932004 14,435 1,453 − 3,978 − 6,160 − 1,246 3,245 5,431 12,982 10,267 8,446 3,796 1,821 9,186 4,168
2005 85,268 41,718 6,400 − 124 7,001 − 3,186 35,317 43,550 79,252 21,290 7,761 57,962 35,789 6,016
2006 47,264 19,535 − 14,257 490 − 9,362 − 8,814 33,791 27,729 39,006 14,676 5,221 24,330 22,508 8,2582007 55,778 13,436 − 7,872 − 4,839 − 12,848 6,840 21,307 42,342 51,309 − 229 4,240 51,538 38,102 4,4692008 2,598 − 7,911 − 14,409 − 12,171 − 11,149 799 6,498 10,509 11,315 − 16,625 − 9,252 27,940 19,761 − 8,717
2009 49,929 43,747 10,966 − 5,047 11,749 2,686 32,780 6,182 38,132 − 14,995 − 8,178 53,127 14,361 11,796
2010 106,464 84,906 13,381 − 148 8,683 1,897 71,345 21,558 102,867 3,873 6,290 98,994 15,270 3,5982011 47,064 45,221 − 1,340 − 379 − 2,037 1,562 46,561 1,843 40,416 − 7,576 − 694 47,992 2,538 6,6472012 111,502 89,942 2,084 − 1,036 97 3,450 87,859 21,560 115,372 − 3,062 − 1,562 118,434 23,122 − 3,869
2012          Dec 24,135 19,061 624 − 51 1,393 68 18,437 5,074 23,631 42 − 864 23,589 5,938 5042013          Jan 15,323 11,875 1,355 − 145 739 738 10,519 3,449 15,436 2,901 886 12,535 2,563 − 113
         Feb 12,296 8,539 2,933 − 148 2,435 393 5,606 3,757 11,916 − 1,527 159 13,443 3,598 380         Mar 12,579 9,075 676 − 103 100 469 8,399 3,504 12,773 343 715 12,430 2,789 − 194
         Apr 9,788 7,517 524 − 63 167 334 6,993 2,272 15,598 798 418 14,800 1,854 − 5,809
         May 4,487 2,175 499 − 40 − 47 386 1,676 2,312 − 1,181 34 − 472 − 1,215 2,784 5,668         June 4,257 4,779 497 175 474 772 4,282 − 522 4,928 − 803 − 982 5,731 460 − 671
1Including public limited investment companies. 2Book values. 3Residual. 4Net transaction values. — The figures for the most recent date are provisional; revisions
purchases or net sales (−) of foreign fund shares by residents; transaction values. are not specially marked. 
5Net purchases or net sales (−) of domestic fund shares by non-residents;

Deutsche Bundesbank
54  Monthly Report
August 2013
IX  Financial accounts
  
1  Acquisition of financial assets and financing of private non-financial sectors
(non-consolidated)
  
  € billion
2011 2012 2013 
Item 2010 2011 2012 Q2 Q3 Q4 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 Q1
Households  1 
  I  Acquisition of financial assets
Currency and deposits 72.7 66.7 86.4 17.4 15.6 27.3 21.1 22.2 19.9 23.3 8.6
Debt securities  2 − 11.4 − 1.9 − 17.0 1.8 − 4.0 − 2.2 − 2.8 − 2.4 − 4.7 − 7.2 − 4.6
Shares 13.4 16.1 − 3.4 0.5 6.1 6.2 − 1.0 0.5 − 0.5 − 2.5 2.6
Other equity 3.0 3.0 3.1 0.7 0.8 0.7 0.8 0.7 0.8 0.8 0.8
Mutual funds shares 10.0 − 14.5 0.2 − 0.1 − 7.0 − 4.0 − 1.6 − 2.1 − 1.1 5.0 10.5
Claims on insurance
corporations  3 71.4 44.3 65.1 9.8 7.8 11.0 21.7 15.7 11.5 16.3 22.3
short-term claims − 1.3 1.2 − 0.1 0.4 0.4 − 0.1 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.1 − 0.1 0.1
longer-term claims 72.7 43.2 65.3 9.4 7.4 11.0 21.6 15.7 11.6 16.4 22.2
Claims from company
pension commitments 7.8 11.1 11.3 2.8 2.8 2.8 2.8 2.9 2.8 2.9 2.8
Other claims  4 − 11.7 23.3 11.6 2.3 8.5 − 6.8 9.6 2.5 2.5 − 3.0 3.9
Total 155.2 148.2 157.2 35.4 30.6 35.0 50.5 40.0 31.2 35.5 47.0
  II Financing
Loans 5.1 10.6 15.1 4.9 6.7 2.8 − 1.0 6.7 6.1 3.3 − 3.7
short-term loans − 2.3 − 2.1 − 1.0 1.0 − 0.9 − 1.6 − 0.1 0.8 − 0.9 − 0.8 − 1.5
longer-term loans 7.3 12.7 16.1 3.9 7.6 4.4 − 0.9 5.9 7.1 4.1 − 2.2
Other liabilities 0.2 1.6 0.7 0.1 0.0 1.2 0.4 0.1 0.1 0.1 − 0.1
Total 5.3 12.2 15.8 4.9 6.8 4.0 − 0.6 6.8 6.2 3.4 − 3.8
Corporations
I   Acquisition of financial assets
Currency and deposits 7.3 14.0 17.9 − 16.0 − 3.3 24.9 − 21.6 − 10.0 15.2 34.3 − 42.3
Debt securities  2 − 0.1 4.9 − 2.6 − 0.7 0.9 1.2 0.2 − 0.0 − 0.6 − 2.2 1.4
Financial derivatives 27.8 14.7 9.8 2.1 4.2 4.4 − 1.1 2.4 2.2 6.3 1.6
Shares 24.9 17.0 19.9 12.8 − 2.0 6.9 4.8 − 7.2 6.5 15.8 10.6
Other equity 53.9 28.8 23.6 24.9 − 2.3 8.1 7.3 11.1 9.5 − 4.3 14.1
Mutual funds shares 8.8 8.2 − 0.2 1.7 1.5 4.1 − 5.2 1.0 0.7 3.3 4.5
Loans 32.4 11.0 − 8.2 − 7.0 − 0.4 8.7 3.2 − 0.3 − 9.4 − 1.7 6.2
short-term loans 12.2 9.1 − 9.6 − 4.0 − 1.9 4.3 1.5 1.6 − 9.8 − 3.0 10.5
longer-term loans 20.2 1.9 1.4 − 3.0 1.5 4.4 1.7 − 1.9 0.4 1.3 − 4.3
Claims on insurance
corporations  3 − 0.6 0.6 − 0.7 0.2 0.2 − 0.0 − 0.2 − 0.2 − 0.2 − 0.2 − 0.2
short-term claims − 0.6 0.6 − 0.7 0.2 0.2 − 0.0 − 0.2 − 0.2 − 0.2 − 0.2 − 0.2
longer-term claims . . . . . . . . . . .
Other claims 33.5 − 11.7 23.2 − 4.7 − 35.6 − 35.5 − 9.6 − 23.5 38.7 17.5 26.4
Total 187.8 87.6 82.7 13.4 − 36.7 22.8 − 22.2 − 26.7 62.8 68.8 22.3
  II Financing
Debt securities  2 4.2 7.6 18.7 − 2.9 7.0 − 1.0 3.1 3.9 7.1 4.7 9.1
Financial derivatives . . . . . . . . . . .
Shares 7.2 7.4 2.9 5.5 − 0.3 1.9 0.6 1.0 0.4 1.0 0.6
Other equity 13.1 13.8 2.2 3.3 2.1 4.0 2.1 1.3 − 5.1 3.9 1.8
Loans 7.3 36.0 − 5.1 6.1 17.7 21.8 − 6.6 3.8 29.9 − 32.1 24.7
short-term loans − 10.1 19.0 − 7.4 3.1 11.5 10.5 − 4.0 − 2.1 6.0 − 7.3 11.5
longer-term loans 17.4 16.9 2.3 3.0 6.2 11.4 − 2.6 5.8 23.9 − 24.7 13.1
Claims from company
pension commitments 2.6 5.8 5.8 1.5 1.5 1.5 1.5 1.5 1.5 1.5 1.5
Other liabilities 66.4 45.2 32.2 9.3 12.4 9.5 3.7 7.9 10.1 10.5 2.0
Total 100.8 115.8 56.8 22.8 40.3 37.7 4.3 19.2 43.8 − 10.5 39.6
1Including non-profit institutions serving households. 2Including money market and supplementary pension funds. 4Including accumulated interest-bearing surplus
paper. 3Including private pension funds, burial funds, occupational pension schemes shares with insurance corporations. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
55  Monthly Report
August 2013
IX  Financial accounts
  
2  Financial assets and liabilities of private non-financial sectors
(non-consolidated)
  
  End-of-year level, end-of-quarter level; € billion
2011 2012 
2013 
Item 2010 2011 2012 Q2 Q3 Q4 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 Q1
Households  1 
  I  Financial assets
Currency and deposits 1,860.8 1,927.5 2,014.9 1,884.6 1,900.2 1,927.5 1,948.6 1,971.4 1,991.4 2,014.9 2,023.3
Debt securities 2 254.1 247.1 238.2 258.3 247.8 247.1 249.6 245.4 244.8 238.2 231.7
Shares 243.5 221.5 259.2 260.1 206.3 221.5 252.4 229.9 250.0 259.2 267.8
Other equity 179.1 185.2 193.8 175.6 179.8 185.2 186.6 193.3 194.1 193.8 195.2
Mutual funds shares 435.4 394.9 420.1 421.1 389.2 394.9 410.9 401.7 414.8 420.1 435.0
Claims on insurance
corporations 3 1,358.1 1,400.2 1,468.9 1,379.3 1,389.4 1,400.2 1,423.1 1,439.6 1,451.7 1,468.9 1,491.2
short-term claims 70.8 72.0 71.9 71.7 72.1 72.0 72.0 72.0 71.9 71.9 72.0
longer-term claims 1,287.3 1,328.2 1,397.0 1,307.6 1,317.3 1,328.2 1,351.0 1,367.6 1,379.8 1,397.0 1,419.2
Claims from company
pension commitments 284.3 295.4 306.7 289.9 292.6 295.4 298.2 301.0 303.8 306.7 309.5
Other claims 4 39.0 38.4 37.9 38.9 38.6 38.4 38.3 38.3 38.1 37.9 37.9
Total 4,654.4 4,710.2 4,939.5 4,707.9 4,643.9 4,710.2 4,807.6 4,820.7 4,888.6 4,939.5 4,991.6
  II Liabilities
Loans 1,523.1 1,537.7 1,551.7 1,523.9 1,535.1 1,537.7 1,535.8 1,542.1 1,548.1 1,551.7 1,548.1
short-term loans 75.6 73.9 72.6 75.8 75.0 73.9 73.8 74.4 73.1 72.6 70.2
longer-term loans 1,447.5 1,463.8 1,479.1 1,448.1 1,460.1 1,463.8 1,462.1 1,467.8 1,475.0 1,479.1 1,477.8
Other liabilities 11.8 13.6 14.7 13.1 13.6 13.6 15.5 15.3 15.3 14.7 15.8
Total 1,534.8 1,551.2 1,566.4 1,537.0 1,548.6 1,551.2 1,551.3 1,557.4 1,563.4 1,566.4 1,563.9
Corporations
I   Financial assets
Currency and deposits 450.1 460.5 506.5 425.5 429.9 460.5 452.6 453.1 468.3 506.5 461.8
Debt securities 2 48.1 52.6 51.9 51.1 51.6 52.6 53.9 53.6 53.9 51.9 53.0
Financial derivatives . . . . . . . . . . .
Shares 919.9 817.0 963.5 945.5 785.2 817.0 911.5 846.7 903.5 963.5 997.2
Other equity 346.7 382.2 417.4 360.2 364.6 382.2 390.9 414.4 424.0 417.4 432.8
Mutual funds shares 119.3 123.1 129.0 120.0 117.6 123.1 120.5 119.6 123.9 129.0 134.1
Loans 376.6 387.6 379.4 379.3 379.0 387.6 390.9 390.6 381.2 379.4 385.7
short-term loans 255.6 264.6 255.0 262.2 260.3 264.6 266.2 267.8 258.0 255.0 265.5
longer-term loans 121.0 123.0 124.4 117.1 118.6 123.0 124.7 122.8 123.2 124.4 120.1
Claims on insurance
corporations 3 41.3 41.9 41.2 41.7 41.9 41.9 41.7 41.6 41.4 41.2 41.1
short-term claims 41.3 41.9 41.2 41.7 41.9 41.9 41.7 41.6 41.4 41.2 41.1longer-term claims . . . . . . . . . . .
Other claims 766.1 814.6 857.8 805.7 774.9 814.6 835.6 837.9 856.0 857.8 892.6
Total 3,068.0 3,079.6 3,346.7 3,129.0 2,944.6 3,079.6 3,197.7 3,157.4 3,252.2 3,346.7 3,398.4
  II Liabilities
Debt securities 
2 134.8 110.7 130.9 98.9 111.9 110.7 115.6 117.2 124.6 130.9 139.6
Financial derivatives . . . . . . . . . . .
Shares 1,301.8 1,110.5 1,373.6 1,357.5 1,046.6 1,110.5 1,282.5 1,166.3 1,294.9 1,373.6 1,430.9
Other equity 716.9 730.7 732.9 724.6 726.7 730.7 732.8 734.1 729.0 732.9 734.7
Loans 1,337.3 1,387.0 1,391.8 1,339.9 1,357.8 1,387.0 1,381.0 1,384.1 1,407.8 1,391.8 1,411.3
short-term loans 419.4 434.6 426.2 412.9 424.0 434.6 430.2 427.4 433.3 426.2 437.4
longer-term loans 918.0 952.4 965.7 927.0 933.8 952.4 950.8 956.6 974.5 965.7 973.9
Claims from companypension commitments 229.2 235.0 240.8 232.1 233.5 235.0 236.5 237.9 239.4 240.8 242.3
Other liabilities 872.7 880.4 915.1 883.0 870.6 880.4 892.4 912.1 905.7 915.1 928.8
Total 4,592.7 4,454.3 4,785.2 4,635.9 4,347.1 4,454.3 4,640.7 4,551.7 4,701.4 4,785.2 4,887.5
1Including non-profit institutions serving households. 2Including money market and supplementary pension funds. 4Including accumulated interest-bearing surplus
paper. 3Including private pension funds, burial funds, occupational pension schemes shares with insurance corporations. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
56  Monthly Report
August 2013
X Public finances in Germany
 
1 General government: deficit and debt level as defined in the Maastricht Treaty
 
 
 
Social Social
General Central State Local security General Central State Local security
government government government government funds government government government government funds
Period € billion as a percentage of GDP
Deficit/surplus1
2007 + 5.8 − 18.6 + 2.5 + 11.1 + 10.8 + 0.2 − 0.8 + 0.1 + 0.5 + 0.4
2008 − 1.9 − 16.6 − 1.2 + 9.0 + 6.9 − 0.1 − 0.7 − 0.0 + 0.4 + 0.3
2009 p − 73.2 − 38.4 − 18.4 − 2.2 − 14.2 − 3.1 − 1.6 − 0.8 − 0.1 − 0.6
2010 2, p − 103.4 − 82.6 − 19.8 − 5.3 + 4.3 − 4.1 − 3.3 − 0.8 − 0.2 + 0.2
2011 p − 20.2 − 26.7 − 11.3 + 1.9 + 15.9 − 0.8 − 1.0 − 0.4 + 0.1 + 0.6
2012 pe + 2.5 − 14.1 − 6.8 + 5.1 + 18.3 + 0.1 − 0.5 − 0.3 + 0.2 + 0.7
2011          H1  p − 3.9 − 15.2 − 1.4 + 1.9 + 10.8 − 0.3 − 1.2 − 0.1 + 0.1 + 0.9
         H2  p − 15.8 − 11.2 − 9.7 + 0.0 + 5.1 − 1.2 − 0.8 − 0.7 + 0.0 + 0.4
2012          H1  pe + 8.2 − 7.8 − 0.1 + 4.2 + 11.9 + 0.6 − 0.6 − 0.0 + 0.3 + 0.9
         H2  pe − 5.8 − 6.4 − 6.8 + 1.0 + 6.4 − 0.4 − 0.5 − 0.5 + 0.1 + 0.5
Debt level3 End of year or quarter
2007 1,583.7 978.0 497.8 123.4 1.6 65.2 40.3 20.5 5.1 0.1
2008 1,652.6 1,007.6 536.7 123.6 1.5 66.8 40.7 21.7 5.0 0.1
2009 p 1,768.9 1,075.7 577.8 130.0 1.3 74.5 45.3 24.3 5.5 0.1
2010 p 2,056.1 1,313.4 624.1 135.1 1.3 82.4 52.6 25.0 5.4 0.1
2011 p 2,085.2 1,323.5 638.6 139.3 1.3 80.4 51.0 24.6 5.4 0.1
2012 pe 2,166.3 1,370.9 669.6 143.4 1.2 81.9 51.8 25.3 5.4 0.0
2011          Q1  p 2,060.3 1,318.1 620.6 137.9 1.7 81.4 52.1 24.5 5.5 0.1
         Q2  p 2,075.4 1,324.5 627.5 139.0 2.7 81.2 51.8 24.6 5.4 0.1
         Q3  p 2,088.5 1,334.4 631.7 139.3 1.3 81.0 51.8 24.5 5.4 0.0
         Q4  p 2,085.2 1,323.5 638.6 139.3 1.3 80.4 51.0 24.6 5.4 0.1
2012          Q1  pe 2,118.4 1,344.5 648.3 143.3 1.3 81.1 51.5 24.8 5.5 0.1
         Q2  pe 2,163.2 1,373.5 666.0 142.9 1.3 82.5 52.4 25.4 5.4 0.0
         Q3  pe 2,152.8 1,356.9 670.3 142.5 1.3 81.7 51.5 25.4 5.4 0.1
         Q4  pe 2,166.3 1,370.9 669.6 143.4 1.2 81.9 51.8 25.3 5.4 0.0
2013          Q1  pe 2,150.5 1,368.8 657.3 145.2 1.2 81.2 51.7 24.8 5.5 0.0
Sources: Federal Statistical Office and Bundesbank calculations. 1Unlike the fiscal bal- counts. 2Including the €4.4 billion proceeds received from the 2010 frequency auc-
ance as shown in the national accounts, the deficit as defined in the Maastricht tion. 3Quarterly GDP ratios are based on the national output of the four preceding
Treaty includes interest flows from swaps and forward rate agreements. The quarters. 
half-year figures correspond to the deficit/surplus according to the national ac-
 
 
2 General government: revenue, expenditure and fiscal deficit/surplus as shown in the national accounts*
 
 
 
Revenue Expenditure
of which of which
Compen- Gross Memo item
Social con- Social sation of capital Deficit/ Total tax
Period Total Taxes tributions Other Total benefits employees Interest formation Other surplus burden  1 
€ billion
2007 1,062.3 558.4 400.9 103.0 1,056.8 579.4 178.2 68.5 36.0 194.6 + 5.5 971.3
2008 1,088.6 572.6 408.3 107.7 1,090.5 590.3 182.6 68.3 38.9 210.5 − 1.8 993.8
2009 p 1,071.7 547.5 410.8 113.5 1,144.7 622.9 191.0 63.6 41.6 225.8 − 73.0 968.4
2010 p 1,087.4 548.8 421.1 117.5 2 1,191.0 633.0 195.3 63.4 41.9 2 257.4 2 − 103.6 980.1
2011 p 1,154.9 589.5 436.9 128.5 1,174.5 633.3 199.7 65.9 42.7 233.0 − 19.7 1,037.0
2012 pe 1,193.6 618.3 448.7 126.6 1,191.3 644.5 203.5 63.5 40.8 239.0 + 2.4 1,077.7
as a percentage of GDP
2007 43.7 23.0 16.5 4.2 43.5 23.9 7.3 2.8 1.5 8.0 + 0.2 40.0
2008 44.0 23.1 16.5 4.4 44.1 23.9 7.4 2.8 1.6 8.5 − 0.1 40.2
2009 p 45.1 23.1 17.3 4.8 48.2 26.2 8.0 2.7 1.7 9.5 − 3.1 40.8
2010 p 43.6 22.0 16.9 4.7 2 47.7 25.4 7.8 2.5 1.7 2 10.3 2 − 4.1 39.3
2011 p 44.5 22.7 16.9 5.0 45.3 24.4 7.7 2.5 1.6 9.0 − 0.8 40.0
2012 pe 45.1 23.4 17.0 4.8 45.1 24.4 7.7 2.4 1.5 9.0 + 0.1 40.8
Percentage growth rates
2007 + 5.1 + 8.9 + 0.1 + 5.4 + 0.7 − 0.2 + 0.6 + 3.6 + 6.7 + 1.5 . + 5.0
2008 + 2.5 + 2.5 + 1.8 + 4.6 + 3.2 + 1.9 + 2.5 − 0.4 + 7.9 + 8.2 . + 2.3
2009 p − 1.6 − 4.4 + 0.6 + 5.4 + 5.0 + 5.5 + 4.6 − 6.9 + 6.9 + 7.3 . − 2.6
2010 p + 1.5 + 0.2 + 2.5 + 3.5 + 4.0 + 1.6 + 2.3 − 0.3 + 0.8 + 14.0 . + 1.2
2011 p + 6.2 + 7.4 + 3.7 + 9.4 − 1.4 + 0.0 + 2.3 + 3.9 + 2.0 − 9.5 . + 5.8
2012 pe + 3.4 + 4.9 + 2.7 − 1.5 + 1.4 + 1.8 + 1.9 − 3.6 − 4.5 + 2.6 . + 3.9
Source: Federal Statistical Office. *Figures in accordance with ESA 1995. In the website. 1Taxes and social contributions plus customs duties and the EU share in
Monthly Reports up to December 2006, customs duties, the EU share in VAT revenue VAT revenue. 2Including the €4.4 billion proceeds received from the 2010 frequency
andEU subsidies were included in the national accounts’ data (without affecting the auction, which are deducted from other expenditure in the national accounts. 
fiscal deficit/surplus). This information can still be found on the Bundesbank’s

Deutsche Bundesbank
57  Monthly Report
August 2013
X Public finances in Germany
 
3 General government: budgetary development (as per government’s financial statistics)
 
 
€ billion
Central, state and local government  1 Social security funds 2 General government, total
Revenue Expenditure
of which of which 3 
Finan- Person- Fixed Finan-
cial nel asset cialtransac- expend- Current forma- transac- Deficit / Rev- Expend- Deficit / Rev- Expend- Deficit /
Period Total 
4 Taxes tions 5 Total 4 iture grants Interest tion tions 5 surplus enue 6 iture surplus enue iture surplus
2005 pe 568.9 452.1 31.3 620.6 172.1 245.3 64.0 33.0 14.3 − 51.7 467.8 471.3 − 3.4 947.4 1,002.5 − 55.1
2006 pe 590.9 488.4 18.8 626.2 169.7 252.1 64.4 33.7 11.6 − 35.3 486.3 466.6 + 19.7 988.2 1,003.8 − 15.6
2007 pe 644.8 538.2 17.7 644.2 182.2 250.0 66.2 34.6 9.5 + 0.6 475.3 466.4 + 8.9 1,025.6 1,016.1 + 9.5
2008 pe 668.9 561.2 13.4 677.4 187.3 259.9 67.3 36.4 18.6 − 8.5 485.5 478.9 + 6.6 1,058.5 1,060.5 − 1.9
2009 pe 631.4 524.0 9.2 720.9 194.9 271.1 63.7 40.4 38.0 − 89.5 492.0 505.9 − 13.9 1,021.4 1,124.9 − 103.4
2010 pe 650.5 530.6 12.7 732.7 199.8 293.9 60.1 40.1 19.4 − 82.2 516.9 512.9 + 4.0 1,049.7 1,127.9 − 78.2
2011 pe 712.5 573.4 30.6 737.3 208.3 283.6 60.0 42.4 22.9 − 24.8 526.6 511.6 + 15.0 1,127.2 1,137.0 − 9.8
2011          Q1 p 162.4 134.9 4.1 183.1 49.7 73.8 21.2 6.3 4.6 − 20.7 127.3 127.2 + 0.1 260.5 281.0 − 20.5
         Q2 p 189.5 145.6 18.6 172.6 50.0 68.0 10.9 8.7 8.7 + 16.9 130.3 126.2 + 4.1 292.4 271.4 + 21.0
         Q3 p 162.6 136.6 2.7 182.6 50.9 67.2 18.8 10.8 4.5 − 20.0 127.9 125.8 + 2.0 264.3 282.2 − 17.9
         Q4 p 196.1 156.3 5.0 196.9 55.9 72.8 8.9 15.3 5.0 − 0.8 140.1 132.0 + 8.1 307.6 300.3 + 7.3
2012          Q1 p 168.2 142.9 2.5 185.5 51.7 75.5 21.0 6.9 3.4 − 17.2 129.1 128.5 + 0.7 269.0 285.6 − 16.6
         Q2 p 182.8 150.4 2.7 172.6 52.8 68.0 10.1 8.2 3.2 + 10.3 132.2 128.0 + 4.2 288.6 274.2 + 14.4
         Q3 p 176.8 147.5 4.3 182.6 53.7 63.6 18.0 10.4 3.9 − 5.8 130.2 128.9 + 1.3 281.2 285.8 − 4.6
Source: Bundesbank calculations based on the data from the Federal Statistical latter are all provisional. The quarterly figures for some insurance sectors are esti-Office. 1Including subsidiary budgets, from 2007 also including the post office pen- mated. 3The development of the types of expenditure recorded here is influenced in
sion fund; excluding the special fund ”Provision for final payments for inflation-in- part by statistical changeovers. 4Including discrepancies in clearing transactions be-
dexed Federal securities”, which was set up in 2009. Unlike the annual figures based tween central, state and local government. 5On the revenue side, this contains pro-
on the annual calculations of the Federal Statistical Office, the quarterly figures do ceeds booked as disposals of equity interests and as loan repayments. On the expend-not include municipal special purpose associations and various special ac- iture side, this contains the acquisition of equity interests and loans granted. 6In-
counts. 2The annual figures do not tally with the sum of the quarterly figures, as the cluding Federal Government liquidity assistance to the Federal Labour Office. 
4 Central, state and local government: budgetary development (as per government’s financial statistics)
 
 
€ billion
Central government
State government  2,3 Local government 3,4 
Period Revenue 1 Expenditure Deficit / surplus Revenue Expenditure Deficit / surplus Revenue Expenditure Deficit / surplus
2005 250.0 281.5 − 31.5 237.4 259.6 − 22.2 151.3 153.2 − 1.9
2006 254.6 282.8 − 28.2 250.3 260.1 − 9.8 161.1 157.4 + 3.72007 
pe 277.4 292.1 − 14.7 275.9 267.5 + 8.4 171.3 162.4 + 8.9
2008 pe 292.0 303.8 − 11.8 279.3 278.1 + 1.2 176.9 169.0 + 7.9
2009 pe 282.6 317.1 − 34.5 265.9 293.4 − 27.5 172.0 178.9 − 6.9
2010 pe 288.0 332.4 − 44.4 278.5 302.1 − 23.6 176.5 183.9 − 7.4
2011 pe 307.1 324.8 − 17.7 304.0 315.4 − 11.4 185.6 187.0 − 1.4
2012 pe 312.5 335.3 − 22.8 312.0 321.2 − 9.2 199.8 198.6 + 1.2
2011          Q1 p 65.4 84.5 − 19.1 74.1 75.6 − 1.5 37.1 42.5 − 5.3
         Q2 p 76.6 73.5 + 3.1 76.0 75.8 + 0.2 45.4 44.3 + 1.1
         Q3 p 72.6 84.8 − 12.2 71.9 75.1 − 3.2 46.4 46.6 − 0.2
         Q4 p 92.5 82.0 + 10.5 81.1 87.7 − 6.6 54.7 51.9 + 2.8
2012          Q1 p 65.4 83.1 − 17.7 74.6 76.2 − 1.7 39.6 44.6 − 4.9
         Q2 p 78.0 72.2 + 5.8 75.8 74.4 + 1.4 48.8 47.0 + 1.8
         Q3 p 77.1 85.0 − 8.0 77.5 78.7 − 1.2 50.7 48.9 + 1.8
         Q4 p 91.9 94.9 − 2.9 83.2 90.7 − 7.5 58.7 56.5 + 2.3
2013          Q1 p 67.3 80.2 − 13.0 77.4 77.9 − 0.5 42.1 46.4 − 4.3
Source: Bundesbank calculations based on the data from the Federal Statistical Berlin, Bremen and Hamburg. 3Unlike the annual figure based on the annual calcu-
Office. 1Any amounts of the Bundesbank’s profit distribution exceeding the refer- lations of the Federal Statistical Office, the quarterly figures do not include various
ence value that were used to repay parts of the debt of central government’s special special accounts and municipal special purpose associations. 4From 2012 core
funds are not included here. 2Including the local authority level of the city-states budgets and off-budget entities; previously, only core budgets. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
58  Monthly Report
August 2013
X Public finances in Germany
 
5 Central, state and local government: tax revenue
 
 
€ million
Central and state government and European Union
Memo item
Balance of Amounts deducted
Central State Local untransferred in the federal
Period Total Total government  1 government  1 European Union  2 government  3 tax shares  4 budget  5 
2006 488,444 421,151 225,634 173,374 22,142 67,316 − 22 21,742
2007 538,243 465,554 251,747 191,558 22,249 72,551 + 138 21,643
2008 561,182 484,182 260,690 200,411 23,081 77,190 − 190 21,510
2009 524,000 455,615 252,842 182,273 20,501 68,419 − 34 24,846
2010 530,587 460,230 254,537 181,326 24,367 70,385 − 28 28,726
2011 573,352 496,738 276,598 195,676 24,464 76,570 + 43 28,615
2012 600,046 518,963 284,801 207,846 26,316 81,184 − 101 28,498
2011          Q1 135,590 115,878 60,579 46,582 8,717 13,640 + 6,071 6,989
         Q2 145,636 126,086 71,530 50,289 4,266 19,544 + 6 7,102
         Q3 136,382 117,812 66,277 45,938 5,598 18,916 − 346 7,662
         Q4 155,744 136,962 78,212 52,866 5,883 24,469 − 5,688 6,863
2012          Q1 143,334 122,846 62,467 50,558 9,821 13,945 + 6,543 6,831
         Q2 150,393 129,545 72,573 51,679 5,293 20,978 − 131 6,878
         Q3 147,755 127,189 70,803 50,981 5,404 20,522 + 44 7,643
         Q4 158,564 139,383 78,958 54,628 5,798 25,739 − 6,558 7,145
2013          Q1 148,936 126,532 63,351 52,078 11,103 15,051 + 7,353 6,494
         Q2 ... 133,820 72,708 54,570 6,542 ... ... 6,914
2012          June . 53,479 30,305 21,944 1,230 . . 2,293
2013          June . 55,652 30,347 23,133 2,172 . . 2,305
Sources: Federal Ministry of Finance, Federal Statistical Office and Bundesbank calcu- and gross national income accruing to the EU from central government tax rev-
lations. 1Before deducting or adding supplementary central government grants, enue. 3Including local government taxes in the city-states Berlin, Bremen and Ham-
shares in energy tax revenue, compensation for the transfer of motor vehicle tax to burg. 4Difference between local government’s share in the joint taxes received by
central government and consolidation aid, which central government remits to state the state government cash offices in the period in question (see Table X. 6) and the
government. See the last column for the volume of these amounts which are amounts passed on to local government in the same period. 5Volume of the pos-
deducted from tax revenue in the federal budget. 2Custom duties and shares in VAT itions mentioned under footnote 1. 
 
 
6 Central and state government and European Union: tax revenue, by type
 
 
€ million
Joint taxes
Memo
Income taxes  2 Turnover taxes  5 item
Local
Local govern-
Invest- business Central State ment
Assessed ment Turnover tax govern- govern- EU share in
Wage income Corpora- income Turnover tax on trans- ment ment customs joint
Period Total  1 Total tax  3 tax tion tax tax  4 Total tax imports fers  6 taxes 7 taxes 7 duties taxes
2006 446,139 182,614 122,612 17,567 22,898 19,537 146,688 111,318 35,370 7,013 84,215 21,729 3,880 24,988
2007 493,817 204,698 131,774 25,027 22,929 24,969 169,636 127,522 42,114 6,975 85,690 22,836 3,983 28,263
2008 515,498 220,483 141,895 32,685 15,868 30,035 175,989 130,789 45,200 6,784 86,302 21,937 4,002 31,316
2009 484,880 193,684 135,165 26,430 7,173 24,916 176,991 141,907 35,084 4,908 89,318 16,375 3,604 29,265
2010 488,731 192,816 127,904 31,179 12,041 21,691 180,042 136,459 43,582 5,925 93,426 12,146 4,378 28,501
2011 527,255 213,534 139,749 31,996 15,634 26,155 190,033 138,957 51,076 6,888 99,133 13,095 4,571 30,517
2012 551,785 231,555 149,065 37,262 16,934 28,294 194,635 142,439 52,196 7,137 99,794 14,201 4,462 32,822
2011          Q1 123,131 50,328 32,478 6,755 2,485 8,611 47,389 35,528 11,861 366 20,515 3,408 1,124 7,253
         Q2 133,727 57,624 34,144 9,366 4,215 9,900 46,091 33,082 13,010 1,692 24,026 3,207 1,087 7,641
         Q3 125,021 47,420 33,590 7,111 3,028 3,691 47,161 34,232 12,929 1,735 24,309 3,229 1,169 7,209
         Q4 145,376 58,162 39,538 8,764 5,907 3,954 49,392 36,115 13,276 3,096 30,284 3,251 1,191 8,414
2012          Q1 130,623 56,569 34,106 8,456 5,471 8,537 48,966 36,340 12,626 275 20,059 3,629 1,126 7,777
         Q2 137,597 59,832 36,148 10,010 4,995 8,679 46,600 32,871 13,730 1,661 25,235 3,255 1,013 8,052
         Q3 135,170 54,841 36,582 8,877 2,532 6,850 49,147 36,232 12,915 1,841 24,423 3,718 1,200 7,981
         Q4 148,394 60,313 42,230 9,919 3,936 4,228 49,922 36,995 12,926 3,360 30,077 3,600 1,123 9,011
2013          Q1 135,026 59,835 36,468 10,750 6,014 6,603 49,167 37,466 11,701 125 20,971 3,889 1,039 8,493
         Q2 142,450 64,448 38,827 11,084 5,427 9,110 47,136 35,052 12,083 1,799 24,355 3,762 950 8,630
2012          June 57,169 32,087 13,077 9,163 5,235 4,611 14,663 10,414 4,249 2 9,019 1,060 338 3,690
2013          June 59,650 33,511 14,216 9,814 5,690 3,792 15,754 11,910 3,844 4 8,886 1,186 308 3,998
Source: Federal Ministry of Finance and Bundesbank calculations. 1This total, unlike deducting child benefit and subsidies for supplementary private pension
that in Table X. 5, does not include the receipts from the equalisation of burdens plans. 4Final withholding tax on interest income and capital gains, non-assessed
levies, local business tax (less local business tax transfers to central and state govern- taxes on earnings. 5The allocation of revenue to central, state and local govern-
ment), real property taxes and other local government taxes, or the balance of un- ment, which is adjusted at more regular intervals, is regulated in section 1 of the Rev-
transferred tax shares. 2Respective percentage share of central, state and local enue Adjustment Act. Respective percentage share of central, state and local govern-
government in revenue: wage tax and assessed income tax 42.5:42.5:15, corpor- ment in revenue for 2012: 53.4:44.6:2.0. The EU share is deducted from central
ation tax and non-assessed taxes on earnings 50:50:-, final withholding tax on inter- government’s share. 6Respective percentage share of central and state government
est income and capital gains, non-assessed taxes on earnings 44:44:12. 3After for 2012: 22.2:77.8. 7 For the breakdown, see Table X. 7. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
59  Monthly Report
August 2013
X Public finances in Germany
 
7 Central, state and local government: individual taxes  
 
 
€ million
Central government taxes 1 State government taxes 1 Local government taxes
Tax on of which
the acqui-
Soli- Motor Motor sition of Inherit- Local Real
Period Energy Tobacco darity Insurance vehicle Electri- Spirits vehicle land and ance business property
tax tax surcharge tax tax 2 city tax tax Other tax 2 buildings tax Other 3 Total tax taxes
2006 39,916 14,387 11,277 8,775 . 6,273 2,160 1,428 8,937 6,125 3,763 2,904 49,319 38,370 10,399
2007 38,955 14,254 12,349 10,331 . 6,355 1,959 1,488 8,898 6,952 4,203 2,783 51,401 40,116 10,7132008 39,248 13,574 13,146 10,478 . 6,261 2,126 1,470 8,842 5,728 4,771 2,596 52,468 41,037 10,8072009 39,822 13,366 11,927 10,548 3,803 6,278 2,101 1,473 4,398 4,857 4,550 2,571 44,028 32,421 10,936
2010 39,838 13,492 11,713 10,284 8,488 6,171 1,990 1,449 . 5,290 4,404 2,452 47,780 35,712 11,315
2011 40,036 14,414 12,781 10,755 8,422 7,247 2,149 3,329 . 6,366 4,246 2,484 52,984 40,424 11,6742012 39,305 14,143 13,624 11,138 8,443 6,973 2,121 4,047 . 7,389 4,305 2,508 55,398 42,345 12,017
2011          Q1 4,457 2,893 3,072 4,869 2,349 1,785 574 516 . 1,555 1,170 683 12,825 9,948 2,631
         Q2 10,002 3,300 3,450 2,017 2,215 1,960 482 599 . 1,464 1,129 614 13,601 10,366 3,031         Q3 10,058 3,418 2,879 2,145 2,006 1,763 541 1,499 . 1,581 1,039 609 13,095 9,386 3,473         Q4 15,519 4,803 3,379 1,723 1,852 1,739 553 715 . 1,766 907 578 13,463 10,724 2,540
2012          Q1 4,406 2,305 3,308 5,180 2,328 1,714 576 241 . 1,876 1,057 696 12,986 9,981 2,717
         Q2 9,707 3,550 3,644 2,011 2,258 1,966 490 1,610 . 1,683 972 601 14,457 11,166 3,048         Q3 10,015 3,610 3,183 2,161 2,005 1,567 506 1,376 . 1,913 1,210 594 14,426 10,545 3,604         Q4 15,177 4,678 3,489 1,785 1,852 1,727 549 820 . 1,917 1,066 617 13,529 10,652 2,648
2013          Q1 4,672 2,141 3,473 5,429 2,304 1,797 580 575 . 2,144 1,007 738 14,035 10,912 2,803
         Q2 9,472 3,504 3,843 2,050 2,284 2,009 471 721 . 1,942 1,137 683 ... ... ...
2012          June 3,300 1,163 1,769 549 687 843 164 544 . 563 294 203 . . .2013          June 3,486 991 1,878 554 663 829 149 336 . 612 343 231 . . .
Sources: Federal Ministry of Finance, Federal Statistical Office and Bundesbank calcu- enue is attributable to central government. Postings to state government shown there-
lations. 1For the sum total, see Table X. 6. 2As of 1 July 2009, motor vehicle tax rev- after relate to the booking of cash flows. 3 Notably betting, lottery and beer tax.   
 
 
8 German pension insurance scheme: budgetary development and assets*
  
€ million
Revenue 1,2 Expenditure 1,2 Assets 1,5 
of which of which
Equity
Payments interests, Memo
from Pen- mort- item
central sioners’ gages Adminis-
Contri- govern- Pension health Deficit/ and other Real trative
Period Total butions 3 ment Total payments insurance 4 surplus Total Deposits 6 Securities loans 7 estate assets
2006 241,231 168,083 71,773 233,668 200,459 13,053 + 7,563 10,047 9,777 115 46 109 4,912
2007 236,642 162,225 72,928 235,459 201,642 13,665 + 1,183 12,196 11,270 765 46 115 4,8192008 242,770 167,611 73,381 238,995 204,071 14,051 + 3,775 16,531 16,313 36 56 126 4,6452009 244,689 169,183 74,313 244,478 208,475 14,431 + 211 16,821 16,614 23 64 120 4,525
2010 250,133 172,767 76,173 248,076 211,852 14,343 + 2,057 19,375 18,077 1,120 73 105 4,464
2011 254,968 177,424 76,200 250,241 212,602 15,015 + 4,727 24,965 22,241 2,519 88 117 4,3792012 259,700 181,262 77,193 254,604 216,450 15,283 + 5,096 30,481 28,519 1,756 104 102 4,315
2011          Q1 60,804 41,608 18,902 62,188 53,176 3,742 − 1,384 18,063 17,069 819 74 101 4,482
         Q2 63,452 44,307 18,855 62,058 52,920 3,731 + 1,394 19,704 18,507 1,019 78 100 4,475         Q3 62,354 43,109 18,902 62,844 53,341 3,761 − 490 19,959 19,266 519 79 94 4,445         Q4 67,748 48,391 19,030 62,823 53,371 3,774 + 4,925 25,339 22,226 2,919 79 114 4,410
2012          Q1 62,038 42,411 19,318 62,883 53,747 3,779 − 845 24,261 21,839 2,219 88 116 4,366
         Q2 64,721 45,318 19,086 62,885 53,532 3,772 + 1,836 26,026 23,950 1,869 92 115 4,356         Q3 63,669 44,188 19,193 64,275 54,788 3,866 − 606 25,968 23,265 2,509 94 100 4,328         Q4 68,656 49,337 19,059 64,262 54,683 3,858 + 4,394 30,935 28,483 2,256 95 101 4,336
2013          Q1 62,211 42,779 19,173 64,193 54,940 3,871 − 1,982 28,616 26,044 2,356 106 110 4,292
         Q2 64,751 45,399 19,090 64,188 54,660 3,858 + 563 29,380 26,938 2,221 111 110 4,294
Sources: Federal Ministry of Labour and Social Affairs and German pension insurance cluding investment spending and proceeds. 3Including contributions for recipients
scheme. *Excluding the German pension insurance scheme for the mining, railway of government cash benefits. 4Including long-term care insurance for pensioners
and maritime industries. 1The final annual figures do not tally with the quarterly fig- until 2004 Q1. 5Largely corresponds to the sustainability reserves. End of year or
ures, as the latter are all provisional. 2Including financial compensation payments. Ex- quarter. 6 Including cash. 7 Excluding loans to other social security funds. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
60  Monthly Report
August 2013
X Public finances in Germany
 
9 Federal Employment Agency: budgetary development*
 
 
€ million
Revenue Expenditure
Deficit
of which of which offsetting
grant or
Adminis- loan from
Insolvency Central Unemploy- Short-time Re- Insolvency trative central
Contri- compen- government ment working Job integration benefit expend- Deficit/ govern-
Period Total  1 butions sation levy subscriptions Total benefit  2 benefits  3 promotion  4 payment  5 payment iture  6 surplus ment
2006 55,384 51,176 920 . 44,169 22,899 350 9,258 3,282 836 3,740 + 11,215 0
2007 42,838 32,264 674 6,468 36,196 16,934 533 8,259 1,945 696 3,896 + 6,642 −
2008 38,289 26,452 673 7,583 39,407 13,864 544 8,586 5,000 654 4,495 − 1,118 −
2009 34,254 22,046 711 7,777 48,057 17,291 5,322 9,849 4,866 1,617 5,398 − 13,804 −
2010 37,070 22,614 2,929 7,927 45,213 16,602 4,125 9,297 5,256 740 5,322 − 8,143 5,207
2011 37,563 25,433 37 8,046 37,524 13,776 1,324 8,369 4,510 683 5,090 + 40 −
2012 37,429 26,570 314 7,238 34,842 13,823 828 6,699 3,822 982 5,117 + 2,587 −
2011          Q1 10,259 5,853 46 3,666 9,583 4,157 685 2,255 − 186 1,205 + 676 −
         Q2 8,802 6,358 − 5 1,605 8,246 3,477 353 2,134 − 175 1,213 + 556 −
         Q3 7,467 6,205 − 4 305 7,450 3,177 168 1,857 26 187 1,229 + 17 −
         Q4 11,036 7,017 − 1 2,470 12,245 2,965 119 2,122 4,484 134 1,443 − 1,210 −
2012          Q1 9,709 6,175 69 2,693 8,452 3,773 449 1,924 − 0 211 1,185 + 1,257 −
         Q2 8,331 6,620 78 872 7,816 3,457 229 1,762 0 329 1,191 + 515 −
         Q3 7,501 6,508 80 70 7,539 3,307 82 1,462 368 218 1,249 − 37 −
         Q4 11,888 7,267 86 3,603 11,035 3,286 68 1,551 3,454 223 1,493 + 853 −
2013          Q1 7,762 6,429 276 245 8,612 4,301 494 1,493 . 194 1,193 − 850 −
         Q2 8,041 6,870 310 − 8,230 3,969 384 1,498 . 204 1,266 − 189 −
Source: Federal Employment Agency. *Excluding pension fund. 1Excluding central compensation top-up payments and promotion of business start-ups. 5Until 2012.
government deficit offsetting grant or loan. 2Unemployment benefit in case of un- From 2005 to 2007: compensatory amount. 6Including collection charges to other
employment. 3Including seasonal short-time working benefits and restructuring statutory social security funds, excluding administrative expenditure within the frame-
short-time working benefits, restructuring measures and refunds of social security con- work of the basic allowance for job seekers. 
tributions. 4Vocational training, measures to encourage job take-up, rehabilitation,
 
 
10 Statutory health insurance scheme: budgetary development
 
 
€ million
Revenue  1 Expenditure  1 
of which of which
Central Thera- Adminis-
govern- peutical trative
Contri- ment Hospital Pharma- Medical Dental treatment Sickness expend- Deficit/
Period Total butions  2 funds  3 Total treatment ceuticals treatment treatment  4 and aids benefits iture  5 surplus
2006 149,929 142,183 4,200 148,297 50,327 25,835 23,896 10,364 8,303 5,708 8,319 + 1,632
2007 156,058 149,964 2,500 154,314 50,850 27,791 24,788 10,687 8,692 6,017 8,472 + 1,744
2008 162,516 155,883 2,500 161,334 52,623 29,145 25,887 10,926 9,095 6,583 8,680 + 1,182
2009 169,758 158,594 7,200 170,823 55,977 30,696 27,635 11,219 9,578 7,258 8,947 − 1,065
2010 6 179,524 160,792 15,700 175,803 56,697 30,147 28,432 11,419 10,609 7,797 9,553 + 3,721
2011 189,034 170,860 15,300 179,597 58,501 28,939 29,056 11,651 11,193 8,529 9,486 + 9,437
2012 193,291 176,366 14,000 184,289 60,157 29,156 29,682 11,749 11,477 9,171 9,711 + 9,002
2011          Q1 45,339 40,871 3,825 44,392 15,075 7,158 7,361 2,893 2,528 2,210 2,173 + 947
         Q2 46,887 42,370 3,825 44,955 14,601 7,239 7,372 3,001 2,834 2,106 2,263 + 1,931
         Q3 46,865 42,298 3,825 44,432 14,594 7,236 7,160 2,768 2,762 2,069 2,292 + 2,433
         Q4 49,866 45,291 3,825 45,878 14,418 7,382 7,161 2,997 3,117 2,125 2,682 + 3,988
2012          Q1 46,433 42,249 3,500 45,971 15,579 7,424 7,502 2,971 2,664 2,336 2,195 + 462
         Q2 47,942 43,739 3,500 46,178 15,115 7,419 7,515 3,015 2,874 2,281 2,244 + 1,764
         Q3 47,653 43,648 3,499 45,842 15,049 7,221 7,342 2,843 2,872 2,220 2,283 + 1,811
         Q4 51,162 46,727 3,501 46,576 14,548 7,305 7,465 2,989 3,065 2,333 2,936 + 4,586
2013          Q1 47,115 43,645 2,875 48,030 15,955 7,445 8,258 3,139 2,786 2,518 2,256 − 915
Source: Federal Ministry of Health. 1The final annual figures do not tally with the penses for levying contributions incurred by other social insurance funds. Including ad-
sum of the quarterly figures, as the latter are all provisional. Excluding revenue and ministrative expenditure on disease management programmes. 6Data on individual
expenditure as part of the risk structure compensation scheme. 2Including contri- expenditure categories for 2010 only partly comparable with prior-year figures owing
butions from subsidised low-paid part-time employment. 3Federal grant and liquid- to a change in the statistical definition. 
ity assistance. 4Including dentures. 5Net, ie after deducting reimbursements for ex-

Deutsche Bundesbank
61  Monthly Report
August 2013
X Public finances in Germany
 
11 Statutory long-term care insurance scheme: budgetary development
 
 
€ million
Revenue 1 Expenditure 1 
of which
Contributions to
of which Non-cash In-patient Nursing pension insur- Administrative Deficit/
Period Total Contributions 2 Total care benefits care benefit ance scheme 3 expenditure surplus
2006 17,749 17,611 18,064 2,437 8,671 4,017 862 886 − 315
2007 18,036 17,858 18,385 2,475 8,831 4,050 861 896 − 3502008 19,785 19,608 19,163 2,605 9,054 4,225 868 941 + 6222009 21,300 21,137 20,314 2,742 9,274 4,443 878 984 + 986
2010 21,864 21,659 21,539 2,933 9,567 4,673 869 1,028 + 325
2011 22,294 22,145 21,962 3,002 9,700 4,735 881 1,034 + 3312012 23,082 22,953 22,988 3,135 9,961 5,073 881 1,083 + 95
2011          Q1 5,306 5,269 5,457 750 2,408 1,165 216 277 − 150
         Q2 5,519 5,496 5,396 713 2,417 1,173 210 263 + 123         Q3 5,513 5,486 5,551 774 2,442 1,191 221 255 − 38         Q4 5,904 5,877 5,526 742 2,442 1,216 223 240 + 378
2012          Q1 5,493 5,450 5,700 774 2,469 1,248 223 283 − 207
         Q2 5,713 5,686 5,656 758 2,478 1,254 217 276 + 57         Q3 5,726 5,694 5,774 783 2,507 1,269 219 262 − 49         Q4 6,113 6,087 5,811 791 2,511 1,310 225 265 + 302
2013          Q1 5,907 5,871 5,916 803 2,489 1,344 212 294 − 9
Source: Federal Ministry of Health. 1The final annual figures do not tally with the special contributions for childless persons (0.25% of income subject to insurance
sum of the quarterly figures, as the latter are all provisional. 2Since 2005 including contributions). 3 For non-professional carers. 
 
 
12 Central government: borrowing in the 13 Central, state and local government: debt by creditor*
market
 
€ million € million
T
otal new borrowing 1 of which of which Banking system Domestic non-banks
Change Change
in money in money Period Socialmarket market (End of year Bundes- Credit security Foreign
Period Gross 
2 Net loans deposits or quarter) Total bank institutions funds Other  1 creditors pe 
2006 + 221,873 + 32,656 + 3,258 + 6,308 2006 1,533,697 4,440 496,800 72 329,585 702,800
2007 + 214,995 + 6,996 + 1,086 − 4,900 2007 1,540,381 4,440 456,900 68 317,473 761,5002008 + 233,356 + 26,208 + 6,888 + 9,036 2008 1,564,590 4,440 435,600 62 314,588 809,9002009 + 312,729 + 66,821 − 8,184 + 106 2009 1,657,842 4,440 438,700 59 321,943 892,700
2010 + 302,694 + 42,397 − 5,041 + 1,607 2010 1,732,531 4,440 400,100 21 389,470 938,500
2011 + 264,572 + 5,890 − 4,876 − 9,036 2011 1,752,546 4,440 356,600 102 413,404 978,0002012 + 263,334 + 31,728 + 6,183 + 13,375 2012 
p 1,798,639 4,440 432,100 92 287,807 1,074,200
2011          Q1 + 76,394 + 15,958 − 607 − 5,206 2011          Q1 1,750,918 4,440 413,300 87 374,591 958,500
         Q2 + 77,158 + 10,392 − 49 + 26,625          Q2 1,763,754 4,440 405,400 82 360,332 993,500
         Q3 + 59,256 − 8,152 − 4,177 − 22,608          Q3 1,759,983 4,440 388,900 82 379,261 987,300
         Q4 + 51,764 − 12,308 − 42 − 7,847          Q4 1,752,546 4,440 356,600 102 413,404 978,000
2012          Q1 + 72,603 + 12,524 + 8,251 − 2,380 2012          Q1 p 1,767,428 4,440 399,800 91 355,198 1,007,900
         Q2 + 68,851 + 13,623 + 2,836 + 19,969          Q2 p 1,782,227 4,440 412,300 92 325,595 1,039,800
         Q3 + 60,504 − 8,627 − 8,281 − 14,911          Q3 p 1,775,104 4,440 432,500 92 285,672 1,052,400
         Q4 + 61,376 + 14,208 + 3,376 + 10,697          Q4 p 1,798,639 4,440 432,100 92 287,807 1,074,200
2013          Q1 + 62,030 + 9,538 + 1,303 − 11,879 2013          Q1 pe 1,804,662 4,440 430,900 42 258,280 1,111,000
Source:  Federal  Republic  of  Germany − Finance Agency. Source:  Bundesbank  calculations  based  on  data   from  the  Federal  Statistical 
1 Including  the  Financial  Market  Stabilisation Fund,  the In- Office. * Excluding direct intergovernmental borrowing. 1 Calculated as a residual. 
vestment and  Repayment Fund  and  the  Restructuring Fund 
for Credit Institutions. 2 After deducting repurchases. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
62  Monthly Report
August 2013
X Public finances in Germany
 
14 Central, state and local government: debt by category*
 
 
€ million
Loans from non-banks Old debt
Direct
Treasury Five-year lending
Period discount Federal Federal Federal by credit Social Equal-
(End of year paper Treasury notes savings bonds institu- security isation
or quarter) Total (Bubills)  1 notes  2,3 (Bobls)  2 notes (Bunds)  2 Day-bond tions  4 funds Other  4 claims  5 Other  5,6 
Central, state and local government
2007 1,540,381 39,510 329,108 177,394 10,287 574,512 . 329,588 68 75,396 4,443 76
2008 1,564,590 44,620 337,511 172,037 9,649 584,144 3,174 325,648 62 83,229 4,443 73
2009 1,657,842 105,970 361,727 174,219 9,471 594,999 2,495 300,927 59 103,462 4,442 71
2010 1,732,531 87,042 391,851 195,534 8,704 628,757 1,975 302,596 21 111,609 4,440 2
2011          Q4 1,752,546 60,272 414,250 214,211 8,208 644,701 2,154 292,091 102 112,116 4,440 2
2012          Q1  p 1,767,428 54,692 410,585 226,486 7,869 646,884 2,134 304,136 91 110,109 4,440 2
         Q2  p 1,782,227 55,392 410,186 224,607 7,518 663,502 2,137 297,572 92 116,781 4,440 2
         Q3  p 1,775,104 53,325 409,957 237,746 7,110 654,320 1,893 289,197 92 117,023 4,440 2
         Q4  p 1,798,639 57,172 417,469 234,355 6,818 666,963 1,725 294,155 92 115,449 4,440 2
2013          Q1  pe 1,804,662 56,911 416,586 248,589 6,354 666,687 1,580 289,873 42 113,600 4,440 2
Central government7,8,9,10,11
2007 939,988 37,385 102,083 177,394 10,287 574,156 . 22,829 − 11,336 4,443 75
2008 966,197 40,795 105,684 172,037 9,649 583,930 3,174 35,291 − 11,122 4,443 72
2009 1,033,017 104,409 113,637 174,219 9,471 594,780 2,495 18,347 − 11,148 4,442 70
2010 1,075,415 85,867 126,220 195,534 8,704 628,582 1,975 13,349 − 10,743 4,440 2
2011          Q4 1,081,304 58,297 130,648 214,211 8,208 644,513 2,154 9,382 − 9,450 4,440 2
2012          Q1 1,093,828 52,161 126,956 226,486 7,869 646,696 2,134 17,894 − 9,190 4,440 2
         Q2 1,107,451 52,578 122,937 224,607 7,518 663,314 2,137 20,827 − 9,092 4,440 2
         Q3 1,098,824 51,638 120,240 237,746 7,110 654,132 1,893 12,646 − 8,979 4,440 2
         Q4 1,113,032 56,222 117,719 234,355 6,818 666,775 1,725 16,193 − 8,784 4,440 2
2013          Q1 1,122,570 54,962 113,866 248,589 6,354 666,499 1,580 17,469 − 8,811 4,440 2
State government
2007 484,373 2,125 227,025 .... 194,956 2 60,264 . 1
2008 483,875 3,825 231,827 .... 179,978 3 68,241 . 1
2009 505,359 1,561 248,091 .... 167,310 8 88,389 . 1
2010 528,619 1,176 265,631 .... 167,353 1 94,459 . 1
2011          Q4 537,551 1,975 283,601 .... 154,526 62 97,387 . 1
2012          Q1  p 535,898 2,531 283,629 .... 154,047 51 95,639 . 1
         Q2  p 537,161 2,814 287,249 .... 144,637 52 102,409 . 1
         Q3  p 539,038 1,687 289,717 .... 144,817 52 102,764 . 1
         Q4  p 547,464 950 299,750 .... 145,327 52 101,386 . 1
2013          Q1  p 542,937 1,949 302,720 .... 138,756 2 99,510 . 1
Local government12
2007 115,920 . − . . 256 . 111,803 66 3,796 . .
2008 114,518 . − . . 214 . 110,379 60 3,866 . .
2009 119,466 . − . . 219 . 115,270 52 3,925 . .
2010 128,497 . − . . 175 . 121,895 20 6,407 . .
2011          Q4 133,691 . − . . 188 . 128,183 40 5,280 . .
2012          Q1  p 137,703 . − . . 188 . 132,195 40 5,280 . .
         Q2  p 137,615 . − . . 188 . 132,108 40 5,280 . .
         Q3  p 137,241 . − . . 188 . 131,734 40 5,280 . .
         Q4  p 138,143 . − . . 188 . 132,635 40 5,280 . .
2013          Q1  pe 139,156 . − . . 188 . 133,648 40 5,280 . .
Special funds7,8,13
2007 100 . − − . 100 . − − − . .
2008 − . − − . − . − − − . .
2009 − . − − . − . − − − . .
2010 − . − − . − . − − − . .
2011          Q4 − . − − . − . − − − . .
2012          Q1 − . − − . − . − − − . .
         Q2 − . − − . − . − − − . .
         Q3 − . − − . − . − − − . .
         Q4 − . − − . − . − − − . .
2013          Q1 − . − − . − . − − − . .
Source: Bundesbank calculations based on data from the Federal Statistical portfolios. 7In contrast to the capital market statistics, the debt incurred through the
Office. *Excluding direct intergovernmental borrowing. 1Including Treasury finan- joint issuance of Federal securities is recorded here under central government and its
cing paper. 2Excluding issuers’ holdings of their own securities. 3Treasury notes special funds in accordance with the agreed allocation ratios. 8On 1 July 2007 cen-
issued by state government include long-term notes. 4Mainly loans against bor- tral government assumed joint responsibility for the debts of the ERP Special Fund.
rowers’ notes and cash advances. Including loans raised abroad. Other loans from From that date on, the aforementioned special fund is recorded under central govern-
non-banks, including loans from public supplementary pension funds and liabilities ment. 9From December 2008, including debt of the Financial Market Stabilisation
arising from the investment assistance levy. 5Excluding offsets against outstanding Fund. 10From March 2009, including debt of the Investment and Repayment
claims. 6Old debt mainly denominated in foreign currency, in accordance with the Fund. 11From January 2011, including debt of the Restructuring Fund for Credit Insti-
London Debts Agreement, old liabilities arising from housing construction and liabil- tutions. 12Including debt of municipal special purpose associations. Data other than
ities arising from housing construction by the former GDR’s armed forces and from year-end figures have been estimated. 13ERP Special Fund (up to the end of June
housing construction in connection with the return of the troops of the former USSR 2007), German Unity Fund (up to the end of 2004) and Indemnification Fund. 
stationed in eastern Germany to their home country; excluding debt securities in own

Deutsche Bundesbank
63  Monthly Report
August 2013
XI Economic conditions in Germany
  
1 Origin and use of domestic product, distribution of national income
  
  
  
  2011   2012   2013
  2010   2011   2012   2010   2011   2012   Q3   Q4   Q1   Q2   Q3   Q4   Q1
Item Index 2005=100 Annual percentage change
At  constant  prices,  chained
  I Origin of domestic product
Production sector
(excluding construction) 104.9 111.4 111.0 15.8 6.2 − 0.4 6.1 0.7 1.8 − 0.9 − 1.2 − 1.1 − 4.5Construction 99.0 103.6 100.9 6.9 4.6 − 2.6 1.4 6.7 1.0 − 2.6 − 2.4 − 6.1 − 7.2Wholesale/retail trade, transportand storage, hotel and restaurantservices 110.6 114.0 114.9 1.7 3.1 0.8 2.4 1.8 2.5 1.2 − 0.4 0.2 − 1.2Information and communication 135.7 138.2 143.1 − 0.2 1.9 3.5 2.1 1.9 3.5 2.9 3.8 4.0 2.8Financial and insuranceactivities 115.5 117.1 118.9 1.4 1.4 1.5 3.4 1.4 1.9 1.9 1.6 0.5 0.9Real estate activities 105.3 105.9 107.3 − 1.7 0.6 1.4 0.5 1.1 1.6 1.6 1.5 0.9 0.9Business services 
1 100.8 105.0 108.1 2.6 4.2 2.9 3.7 3.4 4.1 3.2 2.7 1.6 1.2
Public services, education and
health 108.5 109.5 110.2 1.7 0.9 0.6 0.8 1.1 0.7 0.8 0.7 0.3 0.0Other services 104.0 103.5 104.6 − 0.5 − 0.5 1.1 − 0.7 0.3 1.4 1.4 1.5 − 0.1 − 1.2
Gross value added 107.7 110.9 111.8 4.6 3.0 0.8 2.7 1.4 1.9 0.8 0.4 − 0.0 − 1.4Gross domestic product 
2 107.0 110.2 111.0 4.2 3.0 0.7 2.6 1.4 1.8 0.5 0.4 0.0 − 1.4
 II Use of domestic product
Private consumption 3 103.2 104.9 105.7 0.9 1.7 0.8 2.1 0.9 1.9 0.8 − 0.0 0.4 − 0.4
Government consumption 110.6 111.7 113.0 1.7 1.0 1.2 0.9 1.3 1.8 0.7 1.2 0.9 0.3
Machinery and equipment 108.5 116.1 110.5 10.3 7.0 − 4.8 5.6 2.3 2.4 − 3.8 − 7.2 − 9.3 − 10.3Premises 104.2 110.3 108.6 3.2 5.8 − 1.5 2.5 6.5 0.3 − 2.0 − 1.0 − 3.1 − 6.2Other investment 
4 124.6 129.5 133.5 3.3 3.9 3.2 3.6 4.7 2.6 3.6 3.5 2.9 2.8
Changes in inventories 5, 6 . . . 0.6 0.2 − 0.4 0.4 0.1 − 0.2 − 0.9 − 0.7 − 0.2 0.1
Domestic use 106.0 108.8 108.5 2.6 2.6 − 0.3 2.6 1.7 1.5 − 0.8 − 1.0 − 0.8 − 1.4Net exports 
6 . . . 1.7 0.6 0.9 0.1 − 0.3 0.3 1.3 1.4 0.7 − 0.1
Exports 124.5 134.2 139.4 13.7 7.8 3.8 7.3 3.9 4.0 5.2 4.4 1.8 − 1.9Imports 124.6 133.8 136.8 11.1 7.4 2.2 7.9 5.1 3.8 3.0 1.8 0.4 − 2.0
Gross domestic product 
2 107.0 110.2 111.0 4.2 3.0 0.7 2.6 1.4 1.8 0.5 0.4 0.0 − 1.4
At  current  prices  (€ billion)
III Use of domestic product
Private consumption 3 1,433.2 1,487.7 1,523.7 3.0 3.8 2.4 4.0 2.9 3.8 2.2 1.7 2.1 1.1
Government consumption 487.6 499.8 515.2 2.6 2.5 3.1 2.3 2.7 3.3 2.5 3.1 3.4 3.3Machinery and equipment 170.8 183.2 175.0 10.3 7.3 − 4.5 5.9 2.6 2.8 − 3.8 − 6.9 − 9.0 − 9.9Premises 236.8 258.1 260.4 4.4 9.0 0.9 5.6 10.1 3.1 0.5 1.3 − 1.0 − 4.4Other investment 
4 27.6 28.5 29.2 2.8 3.3 2.4 3.1 3.6 2.4 2.5 2.5 2.3 2.0
Changes in inventories 5 1.3 3.7 − 8.5 . . . . . . . . . .
Domestic use 2,357.3 2,460.9 2,494.9 4.4 4.4 1.4 4.3 3.5 3.2 0.7 0.7 1.0 0.3Net exports 138.9 131.7 149.3 . . . . . . . . . .
Exports 1,173.3 1,300.8 1,364.7 16.6 10.9 4.9 9.5 5.7 5.2 6.5 5.5 2.5 − 1.7Imports 1,034.4 1,169.2 1,215.3 16.3 13.0 3.9 11.9 8.9 6.1 4.7 3.5 1.7 − 2.9
Gross domestic product 
2 2,496.2 2,592.6 2,644.2 5.1 3.9 2.0 3.5 2.2 3.0 1.8 1.8 1.5 0.7
IV Prices (2005=100)
Private consumption 106.3 108.5 110.3 2.0 2.1 1.7 1.9 2.0 1.8 1.4 1.7 1.7 1.5Gross domestic product 104.9 105.8 107.1 0.9 0.8 1.3 0.9 0.8 1.2 1.2 1.4 1.5 2.1Terms of trade 99.2 97.0 96.3 − 2.1 − 2.2 − 0.7 − 1.6 − 1.9 − 1.1 − 0.4 − 0.6 − 0.6 1.1
V  Distribution of national income
Compensation of employees 1,271.0 1,328.0 1,377.6 3.0 4.5 3.7 4.3 3.9 3.7 3.8 3.8 3.7 3.4Entrepreneurial and propertyincome 648.3 656.7 657.4 12.0 1.3 0.1 2.3 − 3.4 4.2 1.8 − 1.2 − 4.4 − 3.8
National income 1,919.3 1,984.6 2,035.1 5.9 3.4 2.5 3.6 1.7 3.9 3.1 1.9 1.3 0.8
Memo item: Gross national
income 2,546.7 2,640.9 2,707.9 4.7 3.7 2.5 3.7 2.1 3.6 2.9 2.1 1.6 0.8
Source: Federal Statistical Office; figures computed in May 2013. 1Professional, sci- stitutions serving households. 4Intangible fixed asset formation (inter alia, computer
entific, technical, administration and support service activities. 2Gross value added software and entertainment, literary or artistic originals) and cultivated assets. 5In-
plus taxes on products (netted with subsidies on products). 3Including non-profit in- cluding net increase in valuables. 6 Contribution of growth to GDP. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
64  Monthly Report
August 2013
 XI Economic conditions in Germany
 
2 Output in the production sector*
 
 
Adjusted for working-day variations  o 
Industry
by main industrial grouping of which: by economic sector
Manu-
Manu- facture of
facture of computers,
basic metals Motor electronic
and vehicles, and optical
Production Inter- Non- fabricated products Machinery trailers
sector, Construc- mediate Capital Durable durable metal and and semi- and electrical
total 1 tion 2 Energy  3 Total goods goods goods goods products equipment equipment trailers
2010=100  
  
% of total  4 100.00 11.24 10.14 78.62 31.02 33.31 2.49 11.80 10.41 10.37 12.17 11.62
Period
2008 106.8 . 102.1 107.7 106.0 111.8 108.0 101.3 111.8 109.0 121.7 101.3
2009 90.2 . 96.9 89.0 86.7 88.0 91.0 97.7 85.5 85.3 90.1 79.5
2010 99.5 99.2 100.1 99.4 99.5 99.3 99.4 99.5 99.4 99.3 99.3 99.1
2011 106.2 107.0 95.4 107.4 106.1 111.4 104.0 100.7 107.9 111.0 112.7 112.1
2012 105.8 105.9 97.2 106.8 103.8 112.8 100.3 99.2 106.1 108.6 114.7 112.2
 
2012          Jan 95.6 68.9 106.0 98.1 99.6 98.4 97.5 93.3 100.1 101.1 96.3 104.3
         Feb 99.0 69.0 105.4 102.5 100.5 108.3 99.9 92.0 103.0 104.8 106.0 117.2
         Mar 5 113.9 106.9 104.9 5 116.1 111.5 5 125.2 110.1 104.0 113.1 116.5 5 130.7 127.9
         Apr 104.1 104.8 95.1 105.2 105.0 109.7 98.0 94.3 105.5 105.1 110.4 113.2
         May 105.4 108.6 91.7 106.7 106.0 111.4 98.7 97.0 108.2 106.9 112.2 112.3
         June 108.4 114.3 88.9 110.0 107.9 116.9 100.5 98.1 111.0 113.3 120.6 114.9
         July 108.7 118.6 90.8 109.5 108.4 115.2 97.6 99.1 109.8 113.5 117.6 114.9
         Aug 100.7 110.8 91.3 100.5 101.4 101.5 87.9 98.0 100.5 105.9 103.5 95.7
         Sep 111.1 119.0 92.5 112.4 107.2 120.2 112.8 104.0 110.9 114.0 119.8 123.4
         Oct 110.4 119.9 99.3 110.5 107.9 114.2 107.3 107.4 110.8 111.6 112.3 115.3
         Nov 111.4 119.4 100.2 111.7 105.5 120.2 106.8 104.8 109.6 113.0 117.9 120.3
         Dec 100.4 110.4 100.6 98.9 85.2 112.9 86.9 98.1 90.2 97.9 129.3 87.2
2013          Jan 92.9 64.2 100.8 96.0 97.2 94.9 93.7 96.6 98.4 97.7 91.9 95.8
         Feb 97.2 72.9 95.6 100.9 98.0 106.9 98.1 92.0 101.6 99.8 104.1 112.7
         Mar 6 110.9 6 91.9 106.4 114.2 109.2 123.7 109.7 101.3 113.4 114.5 121.0 131.2
         Apr x 6 105.0 6 103.7 92.1 106.9 102.9 115.1 97.2 96.1 106.3 101.6 111.1 125.7
         May x 6 104.1 6 106.0 87.2 106.1 104.4 112.1 91.4 96.9 106.0 103.0 106.7 122.6
         June  x,p 6 110.6 6 113.4 e 88.3 113.0 107.0 124.8 104.5 97.0 111.2 111.0 121.7 135.3
 
Annual percentage change  
 
2008 + 0.0 . − 2.8 + 0.2 − 0.4 + 1.6 − 4.1 − 1.4 + 0.4 + 3.6 + 4.3 − 4.8
2009 − 15.5 . − 5.1 − 17.4 − 18.2 − 21.3 − 15.7 − 3.6 − 23.5 − 21.7 − 26.0 − 21.5
2010 + 10.3 . + 3.3 + 11.7 + 14.8 + 12.8 + 9.2 + 1.8 + 16.3 + 16.4 + 10.2 + 24.7
2011 + 6.7 + 7.9 − 4.7 + 8.0 + 6.6 + 12.2 + 4.6 + 1.2 + 8.6 + 11.8 + 13.5 + 13.1
2012 − 0.4 − 1.0 + 1.9 − 0.6 − 2.2 + 1.3 − 3.6 − 1.5 − 1.7 − 2.2 + 1.8 + 0.1
 
2012          Jan + 1.6 + 5.0 − 3.9 + 2.1 − 0.1 + 6.0 + 0.1 − 2.6 + 1.4 + 1.2 + 7.0 + 7.5
         Feb + 0.2 − 10.9 + 2.7 + 1.1 − 0.8 + 4.8 − 2.8 − 4.0 + 1.0 + 1.0 + 6.6 + 3.8
         Mar 5 + 1.9 + 5.7 − 0.5 5 + 1.7 − 1.2 5 + 5.3 − 3.3 − 0.5 − 0.4 + 1.3 5 + 8.4 + 3.0
         Apr − 0.4 − 0.9 + 3.9 − 0.8 − 1.9 + 1.9 − 5.3 − 5.7 − 1.6 − 0.6 + 3.1 + 0.4
         May + 0.4 − 1.0 + 5.4 + 0.1 − 1.1 + 2.0 − 1.7 − 2.3 − 0.7 + 0.1 + 4.0 − 2.5
         June + 0.9 + 1.1 + 6.1 + 0.3 − 1.1 + 2.3 + 2.4 − 2.4 − 0.6 + 0.7 + 1.9 + 1.9
         July − 1.1 + 0.1 + 1.5 − 1.6 − 2.8 + 0.5 − 6.9 − 3.5 − 3.1 − 2.7 + 0.9 − 0.4
         Aug − 0.7 − 0.8 + 4.5 − 1.2 − 3.3 + 0.3 + 0.6 + 0.4 − 3.3 − 4.6 − 3.0 + 1.9
         Sep − 0.4 + 0.6 + 5.4 − 1.0 − 3.1 + 0.7 − 2.3 + 0.1 − 1.7 − 4.5 − 0.3 + 0.4
         Oct − 2.6 − 2.2 + 1.8 − 3.2 − 3.3 − 4.0 − 8.4 + 1.0 − 4.2 − 5.4 − 2.4 − 7.8
         Nov − 2.9 − 4.4 + 0.7 − 3.0 − 3.9 − 2.7 − 7.5 − 1.3 − 5.2 − 6.1 − 3.8 − 2.4
         Dec − 1.2 − 4.3 − 2.3 − 0.5 − 2.9 + 0.5 − 5.0 + 3.0 − 0.8 − 4.5 + 1.6 − 2.4
2013          Jan − 2.8 − 6.8 − 4.9 − 2.1 − 2.4 − 3.6 − 3.9 + 3.5 − 1.7 − 3.4 − 4.6 − 8.1
         Feb − 1.8 + 5.7 − 9.3 − 1.6 − 2.5 − 1.3 − 1.8 + 0.0 − 1.4 − 4.8 − 1.8 − 3.8
         Mar 6 − 2.6 6 − 14.0 + 1.4 − 1.6 − 2.1 − 1.2 − 0.4 − 2.6 + 0.3 − 1.7 − 7.4 + 2.6
         Apr x 6 + 0.9 6 − 1.0 − 3.2 + 1.6 − 2.0 + 4.9 − 0.8 + 1.9 + 0.8 − 3.3 + 0.6 + 11.0
         May x 6 − 1.2 6 − 2.4 − 4.9 − 0.6 − 1.5 + 0.6 − 7.4 − 0.1 − 2.0 − 3.6 − 4.9 + 9.2
         June  x,p 6 + 2.0 6 − 0.8 e − 0.7 + 2.7 − 0.8 + 6.8 + 4.0 − 1.1 + 0.2 − 2.0 + 0.9 + 17.8
Source of the unadjusted figures: Federal Statistical Office. *For explanatory notes, sector in the base year 2010. 5Positively influenced by late reports. 6Preliminary;
see Statistical Supplement Seasonally adjusted business statistics, Tables II.10 to preadjusted on the basis of estimations to the results of the total annual survey in the
II.12. oUsing the Census X-12-ARIMA method, version 0.2.8. 1Until December construction sector by the Federal Statistical Office (on average +3%). xProvision-
2009 excluding, from January 2010 including specialised construction activi- al; adjusted in advance by the Federal Statistical Office, by way of estimates, to the re-
ties.2Data available from 2010. 3From January 2010 including electric power gene- sults of the Quarterly Production Survey and the Quarterly Survey in the specialised
ration from renewable resources (wind- and solar power stations). 4Weights from construction industry. e Unadjusted figure estimated by the Federal Statistical Office. 
January 2010 onwards: Share of gross value added at factor cost of the production

Deutsche Bundesbank
65  Monthly Report
August 2013
XI Economic conditions in Germany
 
3 Orders received by industry *
 
 
Adjusted for working-day variations  o 
Industry Intermediate goods Capital goods Consumer goods Durable goods Non-durable goods
Annual Annual Annual Annual Annual Annual
percent- percent- percent- percent- percent- percent-age age age age age age
Period 2010=100 change 2010=100 change 2010=100 change 2010=100 change 2010=100 change 2010=100 change
Total
2008 105.5 − 6.1 105.6 − 3.2 105.1 − 8.4 107.8 − 3.4 101.5 − 6.2 110.1 − 2.5
2009 79.8 − 24.4 77.8 − 26.3 79.4 − 24.5 94.6 − 12.2 86.8 − 14.5 97.2 − 11.7
2010 99.5 + 24.7 99.5 + 27.9 99.5 + 25.3 99.6 + 5.3 99.5 + 14.6 99.6 + 2.5
2011 109.9 + 10.5 109.1 + 9.6 111.2 + 11.8 103.8 + 4.2 105.3 + 5.8 103.3 + 3.7
2012 106.9 − 2.7 104.2 − 4.5 109.2 − 1.8 103.8 + 0.0 99.4 − 5.6 105.3 + 1.9
2012          June
110.3 − 6.0 106.0 − 4.8 114.4 − 7.8 102.2 + 2.4 100.7 − 3.6 102.7 + 4.7
         July 107.2 − 3.6 105.5 − 7.0 108.2 − 1.0 109.7 − 2.5 100.1 − 9.0 113.1 − 0.3
         Aug 97.8 − 3.3 97.7 − 5.6 96.8 − 2.4 105.1 + 2.7 92.6 − 1.8 109.4 + 4.1
         Sep 104.7 − 2.4 100.5 − 5.4 107.3 − 0.6 107.1 − 0.6 111.6 − 6.9 105.5 + 1.9
         Oct 108.1 − 0.3 103.9 − 2.3 111.0 + 0.7 107.8 + 1.4 102.4 − 9.5 109.7 + 5.6
         Nov 107.2 + 0.1 103.1 − 1.2 110.6 + 1.0 104.0 + 0.0 97.8 − 8.3 106.1 + 3.0
         Dec 
102.1 − 0.9 89.7 − 3.3 112.1 + 0.4 92.4 + 0.9 83.4 − 5.0 95.5 + 2.7
2013          Jan 103.4 − 1.8 103.9 − 5.6 103.3 + 0.9 100.9 − 1.2 95.9 − 3.8 102.6 − 0.4
         Feb 106.2 − 0.1 101.6 − 4.2 109.3 + 2.6 106.4 + 0.6 93.1 − 2.0 111.0 + 1.3
         Mar 119.2 − 0.3 114.3 + 0.3 124.0 − 0.2 109.0 − 3.6 109.1 − 2.7 109.0 − 3.9
         Apr 105.9 − 0.6 102.7 − 3.6 108.6 + 0.6 101.8 + 6.6 98.6 − 0.3 102.8 + 9.0
         May 104.9 − 2.3 103.0 − 3.8 106.9 − 1.7 100.5 + 0.0 95.7 − 3.3 102.2 + 1.2
         June p 114.3 + 3.6 104.2 − 1.7 123.1 + 7.6 102.6 + 0.4 106.8 + 6.1 101.1 − 1.6
From the domestic market
2008 107.7 − 4.7 104.6 − 2.3 109.3 − 7.2 116.8 − 2.8 113.4 − 2.2 118.0 − 3.0
2009 83.8 − 22.2 77.2 − 26.2 88.0 − 19.5 98.2 − 15.9 95.1 − 16.1 99.2 − 15.9
2010 99.5 + 18.7 99.5 + 28.9 99.5 + 13.1 99.6 + 1.4 99.4 + 4.5 99.6 + 0.4
2011 109.8 + 10.4 109.7 + 10.3 110.8 + 11.4 103.5 + 3.9 110.2 + 10.9 101.1 + 1.5
2012 103.9 − 5.4 103.3 − 5.8 105.4 − 4.9 99.2 − 4.2 101.9 − 7.5 98.2 − 2.9
2012          June 105.3 − 4.8 103.9 − 5.3 108.5 − 4.3 94.5 − 4.5 94.6 − 9.4 94.5 − 2.7
         July 105.7 − 7.5 105.0 − 10.0 107.0 − 5.0 102.6 − 6.6 98.4 − 13.7 104.1 − 4.0
         Aug 96.4 − 7.1 97.6 − 8.1 94.4 − 6.6 101.3 − 4.3 96.7 − 8.3 102.9 − 3.0
         Sep 102.3 − 5.3 100.9 − 5.0 103.6 − 4.9 102.9 − 9.7 114.7 − 14.5 98.7 − 7.6
         Oct 103.2 − 4.4 102.7 − 5.5 103.4 − 3.4 104.5 − 4.4 112.1 − 9.9 101.8 − 2.1
         Nov 104.1 − 4.6 103.9 − 3.3 105.1 − 5.7 98.7 − 6.2 103.6 − 11.7 97.0 − 3.9
         Dec 92.6 − 3.5 86.5 − 2.0 100.4 − 4.7 81.8 − 6.0 80.4 − 9.5 82.3 − 4.7
2013          Jan 101.9 − 3.6 103.9 − 4.8 100.6 − 2.7 97.1 − 2.3 97.6 − 8.1 96.9 − 0.1
         Feb 103.3 − 1.1 101.3 − 1.9 105.1 − 0.3 104.1 − 2.5 96.9 − 5.6 106.6 − 1.6
         Mar 115.4 − 0.9 113.2 + 0.3 119.2 − 1.7 105.4 − 2.8 109.2 − 6.2 104.0 − 1.5
         Apr 102.5 − 3.6 101.2 − 6.0 105.0 − 1.8 94.6 + 0.6 97.3 − 3.0 93.6 + 2.0
         May 100.2 − 4.4 101.6 − 4.3 99.7 − 5.1 94.4 − 0.7 91.2 − 5.4 95.5 + 0.8
         June p 106.1 + 0.8 102.5 − 1.3 111.3 + 2.6 96.8 + 2.4 98.4 + 4.0 96.2 + 1.8
From abroad
2008 103.7 − 7.2 106.8 − 4.1 102.5 − 9.2 100.2 − 4.0 91.2 − 10.0 103.4 − 2.0
2009 76.7 − 26.0 78.5 − 26.5 74.1 − 27.7 91.5 − 8.7 79.5 − 12.8 95.6 − 7.5
2010 99.6 + 29.9 99.6 + 26.9 99.6 + 34.4 99.6 + 8.9 99.5 + 25.2 99.6 + 4.2
2011 110.0 + 10.4 108.4 + 8.8 111.4 + 11.8 104.1 + 4.5 101.0 + 1.5 105.2 + 5.6
2012 109.3 − 0.6 105.2 − 3.0 111.6 + 0.2 107.7 + 3.5 97.3 − 3.7 111.3 + 5.8
2012          June 114.3 − 7.1 108.4 − 4.5 118.1 − 9.6 108.8 + 8.4 106.1 + 1.5 109.7 + 10.8
         July 108.5 − 0.1 106.1 − 3.3 108.9 + 1.6 115.8 + 0.9 101.6 − 4.7 120.7 + 2.5
         Aug 98.9 + 0.0 97.8 − 2.5 98.3 + 0.2 108.4 + 9.2 89.1 + 5.4 115.0 + 10.3
         Sep 
106.6 − 0.1 100.1 − 5.7 109.6 + 2.0 110.6 + 8.0 108.9 + 1.3 111.3 + 10.5
         Oct 112.1 + 3.0 105.4 + 1.9 115.7 + 3.2 110.7 + 6.8 94.0 − 8.9 116.5 + 12.1
         Nov 109.8 + 4.1 102.2 + 1.5 114.0 + 5.3 108.5 + 5.4 92.8 − 4.6 113.9 + 8.7
         Dec 109.8 + 1.1 93.4 − 4.9 119.3 + 3.2 101.5 + 6.2 86.0 − 1.0 106.8 + 8.3
2013          Jan 104.6 − 0.4 104.0 − 6.5 104.9 + 3.0 104.1 − 0.4 94.5 + 0.4 107.5 − 0.6
         Feb 108.5 + 0.6 102.0 − 6.8 111.9 + 4.4 108.4 + 3.2 89.7 + 1.6 114.7 + 3.6
         Mar 122.2 + 0.2 115.5 + 0.3 126.9 + 0.6 112.1 − 4.3 109.0 + 0.6 113.2 − 5.7
         Apr 108.6 + 1.9 104.5 − 0.5 110.8 + 2.0 107.9 + 11.5 99.8 + 2.1 110.6 + 14.6
         May 108.8 − 0.7 104.6 − 3.2 111.4 + 0.4 105.8 + 0.7 99.6 − 1.6 107.9 + 1.4
         June p 121.0 + 5.9 106.2 − 2.0 130.3 + 10.3 107.6 − 1.1 114.1 + 7.5 105.3 − 4.0
Source of the unadjusted figures: Federal Statistical Office. *For explanatory notes, II.16. o Using the Census X-12-ARIMA method, version 0.2.8. 
see Statistical Supplement Seasonally adjusted business statistics, Tables II.14 to

Deutsche Bundesbank
66  Monthly Report
August 2013
 XI Economic conditions in Germany
 
4 Orders received by construction *   
 
 
Adjusted for working-day variations  o 
Breakdown by type of construction Breakdown by client  1 
 Building    
Housing Industrial Public sector Civil Public
Total Total construction construction construction engineering Industry sector
Annual Annual Annual Annual Annual Annual Annual Annual
percent- percent- percent- percent- percent- percent- percent- percent-
age age age age age age age age
Period change change change change change change change change 2005 = 100 2005 = 100 2005 = 100 2005 = 100 2005 = 100 2005 = 100 2005 = 100 2005 = 100
2009 107.4 − 5.3 100.6 − 12.3 94.1 − 0.3 100.6 − 21.3 115.4 − 1.1 114.4 + 2.1 104.9 − 14.9 115.5 + 3.7
2010 108.9 + 1.4 106.6 + 6.0 103.0 + 9.5 105.3 + 4.7 118.9 + 3.0 111.3 − 2.7 111.0 + 5.8 109.3 − 5.4
2011 117.0 + 7.4 119.9 + 12.5 124.7 + 21.1 119.9 + 13.9 109.2 − 8.2 114.0 + 2.4 125.6 + 13.2 105.2 − 3.8
2012 125.1 + 6.9 129.8 + 8.3 137.0 + 9.9 131.2 + 9.4 109.0 − 0.2 120.1 + 5.4 131.9 + 5.0 113.1 + 7.5
 
2012          May 129.8 + 2.3 126.9 − 5.7 134.3 − 8.8 127.1 + 0.2 109.5 − 17.2 132.9 + 11.8 133.1 + 6.0 124.7 + 4.2
         June 142.6 + 4.4 146.1 + 5.6 168.1 + 29.4 136.8 − 0.1 127.4 − 21.3 139.0 + 3.1 142.0 + 0.9 132.4 − 2.1
         July 135.9 − 1.0 132.3 + 6.2 143.3 + 6.5 133.8 + 15.9 102.3 − 23.0 139.7 − 7.2 135.2 + 4.2 133.5 − 8.6
         Aug 136.8 + 10.9 150.4 + 20.2 141.6 + 9.2 158.5 + 22.9 143.5 + 41.2 122.6 + 0.8 148.8 + 12.4 122.6 + 9.8
         Sep 131.1 + 2.7 138.2 + 8.4 143.4 + 12.4 138.4 + 6.1 126.1 + 7.6 123.6 − 3.4 141.1 + 5.3 115.7 − 4.8
         Oct 144.3 + 27.6 140.9 + 14.9 140.9 + 10.9 145.3 + 13.3 126.0 + 35.2 147.9 + 43.2 153.6 + 19.5 136.4 + 48.7
         Nov 99.8 − 5.9 108.0 − 5.7 126.3 + 2.9 104.2 − 7.4 79.3 − 22.6 91.3 − 6.3 104.7 − 10.5 83.7 − 5.0
         Dec 102.1 − 2.9 115.7 + 2.4 127.1 + 2.9 119.9 + 9.6 76.0 − 25.0 87.8 − 9.3 117.1 − 0.6 76.3 − 9.7
2013          Jan 89.6 + 0.2 96.6 − 0.3 105.5 + 2.3 97.8 + 1.3 72.6 − 13.6 82.4 + 1.1 96.3 − 6.7 76.3 + 9.6
         Feb 107.3 + 2.1 107.7 − 1.3 112.0 − 3.7 110.1 + 3.1 89.9 − 10.8 106.8 + 6.0 116.1 + 5.3 96.4 + 1.4
         Mar 143.2 − 3.4 142.3 − 9.7 156.3 + 2.4 138.7 − 17.6 122.8 − 7.7 144.0 + 4.0 144.7 − 8.0 136.1 − 0.8
         Apr 134.9 − 0.7 139.1 + 2.7 150.3 + 2.2 132.4 − 4.2 136.2 + 36.9 130.4 − 4.2 130.9 − 3.9 132.3 + 1.4
         May 137.1 + 5.6 144.6 + 13.9 147.0 + 9.5 148.3 + 16.7 127.0 + 16.0 129.2 − 2.8 141.6 + 6.4 128.3 + 2.9
Source of the unadjusted figures: Federal Statistical Office. *Values exclusive of adjusted business statistics, Tables II.21. oUsing the Census X-12-ARIMA method,
value-added tax; for explanatory notes, see Statistical Supplement Seasonally version 0.2.8. 1 Excluding housing construction orders. 
 
 
5 Retail trade turnover, sales of motor vehicles *
 
 
Adjusted for calendar variations  o 
Retail trade
of which:  by enterprises main product range  1 
Construction Retail sale of
and flooring pharmaceutical Wholesale
Textiles, Information materials, and medical and retail trade
clothing and household goods, cosmetic and repair of
Food, beverages, foodwear and communications appliances, and toilet motor vehicles
Total tobacco  2 leather goods equipment furniture articles and motorcycles  3 
At current At prices in
prices year 2010 At current prices
Annual Annual Annual Annual Annual Annual Annual Annual
percent- percent- percent- percent- percent- percent- percent- percent-
age age age age age age age age
Period change change change change change change change change 2010 = 100 2010 = 100 2010 = 100 2010 = 100 2010 = 100 2010 = 100 2010 = 100 2010 = 100
2009 97.8 − 3.3 98.8 − 2.8 99.4 − 1.9 95.6 − 3.1 97.0 + 0.6 97.6 − 2.7 96.5 + 2.7 104.2 + 1.1
2010 100.0 + 2.2 100.0 + 1.2 100.2 + 0.8 99.8 + 4.4 99.9 + 3.0 100.0 + 2.5 100.2 + 3.8 99.3 − 4.7
2011 102.6 + 2.6 101.0 + 1.0 102.5 + 2.3 101.6 + 1.8 99.4 − 0.5 103.7 + 3.7 100.5 + 0.3 107.0 + 7.8
2012 4 104.5 + 1.9 100.9 − 0.1 105.2 + 2.6 102.1 + 0.5 98.9 − 0.5 104.5 + 0.8 100.4 − 0.1 106.2 − 0.7
 
2012          June 103.2 + 3.3 99.7 + 1.2 105.5 + 2.2 95.2 − 1.0 95.8 + 8.4 101.4 + 1.2 98.3 + 0.6 111.3 + 1.6
         July 104.2 + 1.0 101.4 − 0.8 105.1 + 1.7 101.6 − 1.4 93.2 − 0.6 104.0 + 0.9 102.7 + 0.3 108.3 − 1.8
         Aug 101.4 + 1.7 98.1 − 0.3 103.7 + 3.1 92.3 − 0.4 91.3 − 1.8 102.8 + 2.2 96.5 − 1.6 97.6 − 1.2
         Sep 103.3 + 1.8 99.2 − 0.2 102.2 + 4.1 112.6 + 8.8 93.6 + 0.1 104.4 + 1.6 95.8 − 4.2 106.4 − 1.9
         Oct 108.7 + 0.6 104.0 − 1.5 106.8 + 2.0 118.2 − 4.4 98.4 − 1.7 111.4 − 1.0 102.7 + 0.1 113.2 − 4.6
         Nov 109.3 + 2.4 104.8 + 0.5 106.7 + 2.6 103.1 − 2.5 108.8 + 0.6 112.0 + 0.4 103.6 + 0.0 109.4 − 4.7
         Dec 121.0 − 1.3 116.5 − 3.3 122.0 + 0.7 122.0 − 2.3 148.5 − 3.9 107.9 − 4.9 108.8 − 5.8 94.1 − 4.7
2013          Jan 98.0 + 4.5 94.6 + 2.9 99.4 + 5.1 85.8 − 0.5 101.2 − 0.4 90.6 + 1.3 101.4 + 4.8 85.6 − 4.1
         Feb 93.8 + 2.4 90.0 + 1.2 97.9 + 3.7 75.9 − 1.0 84.8 − 1.4 89.0 + 0.6 97.8 + 3.9 91.0 − 5.4
         Mar 108.9 + 1.5 103.7 + 0.2 112.1 + 4.9 97.2 − 11.4 97.9 + 3.9 107.8 − 6.6 106.4 + 2.6 114.8 − 8.2
         Apr 107.8 + 2.2 102.5 + 0.9 109.1 + 2.0 109.9 + 4.4 86.9 − 3.1 108.3 − 1.7 102.9 + 1.6 112.2 − 0.5
         May 108.2 + 3.0 102.7 + 1.6 110.7 + 3.2 103.8 + 1.3 85.4 − 0.2 107.2 + 0.2 103.0 + 2.3 111.3 + 0.7
         June  5 104.5 + 1.3 99.3 − 0.4 109.4 + 3.7 100.4 + 5.5 84.9 − 11.4 101.1 − 0.3 99.6 + 1.3 ... ...
Source of the unadjusted figures: Federal Statistical Office. *Excluding value-added advance returns for turnover tax (Umsatzsteuervoranmeldung) and primary data
tax;  For explanatory notes, see Statistical Supplement Seasonally adjusted business collection, before based on sample survey. 4Figures from January 2012 are provision-
statistics, Tables II.24. oUsing the Census X-12-ARIMA method, version 0.2.8. 1In al, and particularly uncertain in recent months owing to estimates for missing re-
stores. 2Including stalls and markets. 3From January 2011 based on data from ports. 5 Unadjusted figures partially estimated by the Federal Statistical Office. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
67  Monthly Report
August 2013
 XI Economic conditions in Germany
 
6 Labour market * 
 
 
 
Employment 1 Employment subject to social contributions  2,3 Short time workers 4 Unemployment 5 
Total of which: of which: of which:
Solely
jobs
Services exempt Recipients
excluding from of insured
Produc- temporary social unem- Unem- Temporary
tion employ- employ- contri- Cyclically ployment ploy- Vacan-
 Annual Annual sector ment ment butions 2 Total induced Total benefits ment cies, 5,7 
Thou- percentage Thou- rate 5,6 thou- percentage
sands change sands change Thousands in % sands
2008 40,348 + 1.2 27,510 + 2.1 8,659 17,958 679 4,866 102 58 3,258 1,006 7.8 389
2009 r 40,372 r + 0.1 27,493 − 0.1 8,521 18,210 549 4,904 1,144 1,078 8 3,415 8 1,190 8 8.1 301
2010 r 40,587 r + 0.5 27,757 + 1.0 8,426 18,438 679 4,883 503 429 3,238 1,075 7.7 359
2011 r 41,152 r + 1.4 28,440 + 2.5 8,583 18,836 798 4,865 148 100 2,976 892 7.1 466
2012 r 41,607 r + 1.1 28,991 + 1.9 8,731 19,250 775 4,805 112 67 2,897 902 6.8 478
2010          Q2 r 40,486 r + 0.4 27,592 + 0.8 8,377 18,346 648 4,885 517 485 3,261 1,053 7.8 354
         Q3 r 40,791 r + 0.9 27,886 + 1.5 8,469 18,454 740 4,889 265 239 3,132 1,003 7.5 395
         Q4 r 41,058 r + 1.1 28,242 + 1.9 8,548 18,710 767 4,905 242 188 2,959 920 7.0 392
2011          Q1 r 40,588 r + 1.4 27,944 + 2.3 8,428 18,578 740 4,852 291 158 3,290 1,088 7.8 412
         Q2 r 41,064 r + 1.4 28,266 + 2.4 8,535 18,721 786 4,867 121 107 2,977 850 7.1 470
         Q3 r 41,343 r + 1.4 28,566 + 2.4 8,638 18,862 836 4,865 76 64 2,893 843 6.9 497
         Q4 r 41,611 r + 1.3 28,983 + 2.6 8,732 19,184 830 4,874 102 72 2,743 787 6.5 486
2012          Q1 r 41,145 r + 1.4 28,638 + 2.5 8,623 19,036 760 4,797 201 82 3,074 998 7.3 472
         Q2 r 41,545 r + 1.2 28,860 + 2.1 8,696 19,149 773 4,798 77 65 2,876 847 6.8 499
         Q3 r 41,779 r + 1.1 29,077 + 1.8 8,770 19,265 799 4,803 56 43 2,856 885 6.7 493
         Q4 r 41,961 r + 0.8 29,391 + 1.4 8,835 19,550 767 4,823 113 76 2,782 878 6.6 446
2013          Q1 r 41,410 r + 0.6 9 29,020 9 + 1.3 9 8,691 9 19,406 9 703 9 4,766 ... 9 100 3,131 1,109 7.4 427
         Q2 10 41,787 10 + 0.6 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 2,941 945 11 6.8 438
2010          Mar r 40,092 r − 0.1 27,398 + 0.2 8,318 18,277 596 4,846 874 709 3,560 1,285 8.5 320
         Apr r 40,320 r + 0.2 27,553 + 0.6 8,371 18,335 627 4,875 632 599 3,399 1,140 8.1 335
         May r 40,511 r + 0.4 27,667 + 1.0 8,395 18,382 665 4,898 499 467 3,236 1,036 7.7 356
         June r 40,626 r + 0.7 27,710 + 1.2 8,414 18,365 707 4,916 420 390 3,148 983 7.5 370
         July r 40,658 r + 0.8 27,691 + 1.4 8,419 18,320 732 4,915 313 286 3,186 1,029 7.6 391
         Aug r 40,745 r + 0.9 27,976 + 1.6 8,493 18,508 752 4,864 244 219 3,183 1,030 7.6 397
         Sep r 40,971 r + 0.9 28,269 + 1.7 8,573 18,700 766 4,859 237 214 3,026 948 7.2 398
         Oct r 41,116 r + 1.0 28,296 + 1.8 8,566 18,738 769 4,886 231 209 2,941 907 7.0 401
         Nov r 41,128 r + 1.1 28,277 + 2.0 8,562 18,723 779 4,932 215 194 2,927 903 6.9 395
         Dec r 40,931 r + 1.1 28,033 + 2.0 8,460 18,635 743 4,931 279 162 3,011 949 7.1 380
2011          Jan r 40,527 r + 1.3 27,863 + 2.3 8,399 18,540 732 4,842 322 177 3,345 1,146 7.9 375
         Feb r 40,559 r + 1.5 27,912 + 2.5 8,416 18,560 738 4,831 305 155 3,313 1,107 7.9 418
         Mar r 40,679 r + 1.5 28,080 + 2.5 8,477 18,632 759 4,836 246 143 3,211 1,010 7.6 442
         Apr r 40,908 r + 1.5 28,214 + 2.4 8,518 18,703 771 4,857 133 117 3,078 907 7.3 461
         May r 41,092 r + 1.4 28,354 + 2.5 8,559 18,768 798 4,880 122 107 2,960 839 7.0 470
         June r 41,192 r + 1.4 28,381 + 2.4 8,580 18,753 821 4,894 110 96 2,893 804 6.9 480
         July r 41,209 r + 1.4 28,357 + 2.4 8,591 18,712 831 4,890 81 68 2,939 859 7.0 492
         Aug r 41,303 r + 1.4 28,658 + 2.4 8,660 18,922 843 4,840 71 59 2,945 867 7.0 497
         Sep r 41,518 r + 1.3 28,984 + 2.5 8,746 19,149 845 4,833 76 65 2,796 802 6.6 502
         Oct r 41,656 r + 1.3 29,039 + 2.6 8,750 19,206 839 4,851 81 70 2,737 778 6.5 500
         Nov r 41,679 r + 1.3 29,024 + 2.6 8,744 19,207 835 4,901 85 76 2,713 769 6.4 492
         Dec r 41,498 r + 1.4 28,787 + 2.7 8,655 19,128 784 4,909 140 72 2,780 813 6.6 467
2012          Jan r 41,140 r + 1.5 28,580 + 2.6 8,613 18,995 758 4,813 206 82 3,084 1,011 7.3 452
         Feb r 41,091 r + 1.3 28,580 + 2.4 8,601 19,012 752 4,743 230 87 3,110 1,028 7.4 473
         Mar r 41,203 r + 1.3 28,719 + 2.3 8,653 19,077 758 4,763 167 78 3,028 955 7.2 491
         Apr r 41,395 r + 1.2 28,836 + 2.2 8,687 19,144 765 4,784 83 71 2,963 893 7.0 499
         May r 41,584 r + 1.2 28,924 + 2.0 8,713 19,185 780 4,812 77 65 2,855 831 6.7 499
         June r 41,655 r + 1.1 28,921 + 1.9 8,723 19,163 792 4,834 71 58 2,809 817 6.6 499
         July r 41,689 r + 1.2 28,910 + 2.0 8,730 19,137 806 4,829 54 42 2,876 885 6.8 500
         Aug r 41,740 r + 1.1 29,154 + 1.7 8,789 19,321 802 4,777 47 34 2,905 910 6.8 493
         Sep r 41,908 r + 0.9 29,414 + 1.5 8,863 19,512 789 4,775 66 54 2,788 862 6.5 485
         Oct r 42,044 r + 0.9 29,470 + 1.5 8,863 19,579 782 4,803 85 70 2,753 846 6.5 468
         Nov r 42,034 r + 0.9 29,424 + 1.4 8,840 19,580 767 4,851 98 85 2,751 864 6.5 451
         Dec r 41,804 r + 0.7 29,143 + 1.2 8,739 19,471 715 4,854 156 72 2,840 924 6.7 421
2013          Jan r 41,384 r + 0.6 28,965 + 1.3 8,678 19,372 699 4,762 234 104 3,138 1,121 7.4 405
         Feb r 41,379 r + 0.7 9 28,993 9 + 1.4 9 8,677 9 19,394 9 702 9 4,736 ... 9 101 3,156 1,132 7.4 431
         Mar r 41,468 r + 0.6 9 29,060 9 + 1.2 9 8,694 9 19,434 9 701 9 4,743 ... 9 95 3,098 1,072 7.3 444
         Apr r 41,647 r + 0.6 9 29,208 9 + 1.3 9 8,736 9 19,509 9 720 9 4,765 ... 9 102 3,020 1,001 7.1 441
         May r 41,827 r + 0.6 9 29,290 9 + 1.3 9 8,755 9 19,548 9 737 9 4,799 ... 9 80 2,937 935 11 6.8 437
         June 10 41,888 10 + 0.6 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 2,865 897 6.6 437
         July ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 2,914 943 6.8 444
Sources: Federal Statistical Office; Federal Employment Agency. *Annual and private employment agencies. 9Unadjusted figures estimated by the Federal Employ-
quarterly figures: averages; calculated by the Bundesbank; deviations from the offi- ment Agency. In 2011 and 2012, the estimated values for Germany deviated from
cial figures are due to rounding. 1Workplace concept; averages. 2Monthly figures: the final data by a maximum of 0.2 % for employees subject to social contributions,
end of month. 3From January 2012, excluding all persons taking up federal by a maximum of 1.0 % for persons solely in jobs exempt from social contributions,
voluntary service or a year of social or ecological work. 4Number within a given and by a maximum of 30.8 % for cyclically induced short-time work. 10Initial pre-
month. 5Mid-month level. 6Relative to the total civilian labour force. 7Excluding liminary estimate by the Federal Statistical Office. 11From May 2013, calculated on
government-assisted forms of employment and seasonal jobs, including jobs located the basis of new labour force figures. abroad. 8From May 2009, unemployed excluding persons formally on the books of

Deutsche Bundesbank
68  Monthly Report
August 2013
 XI Economic conditions in Germany
 
7 Prices
 
 
 
Consumer price index HWWI
Indices of Index of World Market
of which foreign trade prices Prices of Raw Materials  4 
Other Index of
durable producer
and non- prices of
durable industrial Index of
consumer Services Con- products producer
goods excluding prices of sold on the struction
excluding house House price domestic agricultural Other raw
Total Food energy  1 Energy  1 rents 2 rents 2 index market  3 products  3 Exports Imports Energy  5 materials  6 
Period 2010 = 100 2005 = 100 2010 = 100
Index level  
  
2008 98.6 99.9 98.1 101.7 98.0 97.8 113.0 112.7 124.3 104.8 109.9 109.7 92.0
2009 98.9 98.6 99.4 96.2 99.5 98.8 114.4 108.0 100.7 102.5 100.5 72.8 74.5
2010 100.0 100.0 100.0 100.0 100.0 100.0 115.4 109.7 114.9 106.0 108.3 100.0 100.0
2011 7 102.1 102.2 100.8 110.1 101.0 101.3 118.7 115.9 129.7 109.9 117.0 132.2 113.5
2012 7 104.1 105.7 102.0 116.4 102.4 102.5 122.0 118.3 135.8 111.8 119.4 141.9 110.4
 
2011          Sep 102.5 102.1 101.5 111.4 101.2 101.5 116.8 130.4 110.2 117.3 135.7 114.1
         Oct 102.5 102.3 101.6 111.8 100.9 101.6 117.0 129.2 110.0 116.9 132.0 105.1
         Nov 102.7 102.6 101.7 112.4 100.9 101.7 119.7 117.1 130.3 110.2 117.4 134.5 103.0
         Dec 102.9 103.2 101.3 111.5 102.1 101.8 116.6 128.7 110.3 117.7 134.9 103.7
2012          Jan 7 102.8 104.3 100.8 113.7 100.9 102.0 117.3 127.8 111.2 119.2 141.2 109.4
         Feb 103.5 105.6 101.2 115.4 101.9 102.1 121.1 117.8 130.5 111.5 120.4 148.4 109.3
         Mar 104.1 106.0 102.1 117.2 102.2 102.1 118.5 132.9 111.7 121.2 155.0 110.5
         Apr 103.9 105.7 102.1 117.7 101.3 102.2 118.7 134.0 111.9 120.6 148.6 110.2
         May 103.9 105.4 102.3 115.9 101.7 102.3 121.8 118.3 132.1 111.8 119.8 140.5 110.1
         June 103.7 105.8 101.9 114.2 102.0 102.4 117.8 130.0 111.5 118.0 124.5 108.9
         July 104.1 105.2 101.2 115.4 103.6 102.5 117.8 130.8 111.8 118.8 136.5 116.8
         Aug 104.5 105.1 101.6 118.0 103.5 102.6 122.4 118.4 134.3 112.2 120.3 149.1 114.2
         Sep 104.6 105.0 102.5 119.3 102.6 102.7 118.8 138.2 112.1 119.4 143.2 111.9
         Oct 104.6 105.7 103.0 118.1 102.4 102.8 118.8 139.9 111.9 118.7 139.9 108.7
         Nov 104.7 107.0 102.8 116.7 102.7 102.9 122.7 118.7 142.6 111.9 118.7 138.5 107.0
         Dec 105.0 108.0 102.7 115.5 104.0 102.9 118.4 141.6 111.5 118.1 136.2 106.5
2013          Jan 104.5 109.0 101.7 118.1 101.9 103.2 119.3 r 141.1 111.5 118.2 138.6 106.2
         Feb 105.1 108.9 102.2 119.5 103.0 103.3 123.5 119.2 r 141.5 111.6 118.5 141.7 106.9
         Mar 105.6 109.9 103.2 117.8 103.7 103.4 119.0 141.8 111.7 118.4 136.3 107.7
         Apr 105.1 110.0 103.3 118.2 101.8 103.5 118.8 r 141.9 111.5 116.8 127.8 104.0
         May 105.5 111.1 103.2 117.7 103.2 103.6 124.3 118.5 142.2 111.2 116.3 129.0 103.3
         June 105.6 111.5 102.9 117.6 103.7 103.7 118.5 p 139.7 110.8 115.4 127.1 100.7
         July 106.1 111.2 102.4 118.8 105.1 103.9 ... ... ... ... 133.7 99.9
Annual percentage change  
  
2008 + 2.6 + 6.4 + 0.8 + 9.6 + 1.9 + 1.2 + 3.4 + 5.5 + 3.7 + 1.7 + 4.6 + 27.6 + 5.1
2009 + 0.3 − 1.3 + 1.3 − 5.4 + 1.5 + 1.0 + 1.2 − 4.2 − 19.0 − 2.2 − 8.6 − 33.6 − 19.0
2010 + 1.1 + 1.4 + 0.6 + 4.0 + 0.5 + 1.2 + 0.9 + 1.6 + 14.1 + 3.4 + 7.8 + 37.4 + 34.2
2011 7 + 2.1 + 2.2 + 0.8 + 10.1 + 1.0 + 1.3 + 2.9 + 5.7 + 12.9 + 3.7 + 8.0 + 32.2 + 13.5
2012 7 + 2.0 + 3.4 + 1.2 + 5.7 + 1.4 + 1.2 + 2.8 + 2.1 + 4.7 + 1.7 + 2.1 + 7.3 − 2.7
 
2011          Sep + 2.4 + 2.6 + 1.4 + 11.3 + 1.1 + 1.3 + 5.5 + 8.5 + 2.9 + 6.9 + 37.1 + 7.0
         Oct + 2.3 + 3.0 + 1.1 + 11.4 + 0.9 + 1.3 + 5.3 + 6.9 + 3.0 + 6.8 + 33.5 + 1.0
         Nov + 2.4 + 2.5 + 1.3 + 11.3 + 0.9 + 1.3 + 3.1 + 5.2 + 5.4 + 2.9 + 6.0 + 29.0 − 4.7
         Dec + 2.0 + 2.0 + 0.9 + 7.9 + 1.2 + 1.3 + 4.0 + 0.6 + 2.1 + 3.9 + 16.6 − 10.7
2012          Jan 7 + 2.1 + 2.9 + 1.1 + 7.3 + 1.2 + 1.3 + 3.4 − 0.7 + 2.1 + 3.7 + 16.6 − 9.9
         Feb + 2.2 + 3.3 + 1.2 + 8.3 + 1.3 + 1.3 + 3.2 + 3.2 − 1.4 + 2.0 + 3.5 + 17.3 − 11.0
         Mar + 2.2 + 3.7 + 1.4 + 6.7 + 1.4 + 1.2 + 3.3 + 0.5 + 1.9 + 3.1 + 14.4 − 6.1
         Apr + 2.0 + 3.4 + 1.2 + 5.8 + 1.0 + 1.2 + 2.4 − 0.4 + 1.8 + 2.3 + 5.4 − 6.5
         May + 2.0 + 2.6 + 1.5 + 5.1 + 1.4 + 1.2 + 2.8 + 2.1 − 2.3 + 1.6 + 2.2 + 6.0 − 4.8
         June + 1.7 + 3.5 + 1.4 + 3.9 + 1.0 + 1.2 + 1.6 − 3.1 + 1.4 + 1.3 − 4.6 − 4.5
         July + 1.9 + 3.1 + 1.2 + 4.3 + 1.4 + 1.2 + 0.9 − 0.5 + 1.4 + 1.2 + 1.0 + 1.6
         Aug + 2.2 + 3.2 + 1.1 + 7.6 + 1.3 + 1.2 + 2.6 + 1.6 + 3.1 + 1.8 + 3.2 + 16.9 + 1.2
         Sep + 2.0 + 2.8 + 1.0 + 7.1 + 1.4 + 1.2 + 1.7 + 6.0 + 1.7 + 1.8 + 5.5 − 1.9
         Oct + 2.0 + 3.3 + 1.4 + 5.6 + 1.5 + 1.2 + 1.5 + 8.3 + 1.7 + 1.5 + 6.0 + 3.4
         Nov + 1.9 + 4.3 + 1.1 + 3.8 + 1.8 + 1.2 + 2.5 + 1.4 + 9.4 + 1.5 + 1.1 + 3.0 + 3.9
         Dec + 2.0 + 4.7 + 1.4 + 3.6 + 1.9 + 1.1 + 1.5 + 10.0 + 1.1 + 0.3 + 1.0 + 2.7
2013          Jan + 1.7 + 4.5 + 0.9 + 3.9 + 1.0 + 1.2 + 1.7 r + 10.4 + 0.3 − 0.8 − 1.8 − 2.9
         Feb + 1.5 + 3.1 + 1.0 + 3.6 + 1.1 + 1.2 + 2.0 + 1.2 r + 8.4 + 0.1 − 1.6 − 4.5 − 2.2
         Mar + 1.4 + 3.7 + 1.1 + 0.5 + 1.5 + 1.3 + 0.4 + 6.7 + 0.0 − 2.3 − 12.1 − 2.5
         Apr + 1.2 + 4.1 + 1.2 + 0.4 + 0.5 + 1.3 + 0.1 r + 5.9 − 0.4 − 3.2 − 14.0 − 5.6
         May + 1.5 + 5.4 + 0.9 + 1.6 + 1.5 + 1.3 + 2.1 + 0.2 + 7.6 − 0.5 − 2.9 − 8.2 − 6.2
         June + 1.8 + 5.4 + 1.0 + 3.0 + 1.7 + 1.3 + 0.6 p + 7.5 − 0.6 − 2.2 + 2.1 − 7.5
         July + 1.9 + 5.7 + 1.2 + 2.9 + 1.4 + 1.4 ... ... ... ... − 2.1 − 14.5
Source: Federal Statistical Office and Bundesbank calculation based on data provided value-added tax. 4For the euro area, in euro. 5Coal and crude oil (Brent). 6Food,
by the Federal Statistical Office; for the Index of World Market Prices of Raw beverages and tobacco as well as industrial raw materials. 7From May 2011 and
Materials: HWWI. 1Electricity, gas and other fuels. 2Net rents. 3Excluding from January 2012, increase in tobacco tax. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
69  Monthly Report
August 2013
XI Economic conditions in Germany
  
8 Households’ income *
  
  
  
Gross wages and Net wages and Monetary social Saving
salaries 1 salaries 2 Mass income 4 Saving 6 ratio 7 benefits received 3 Disposable income 5 
Annual Annual Annual Annual Annual Annual
percent- percent- percent- percent- percent- percent- Asage age age age age age percent-
Period change change change change change change age € billion € billion € billion € billion € billion € billion
2005
922.1 − 0.3 625.5 − 0.4 359.8 0.1 985.3 − 0.2 1,463.9 2.0 156.9 3.3 10.7
2006 935.0 1.4 627.8 0.4 358.5 − 0.4 986.3 0.1 1,502.0 2.6 162.5 3.6 10.8
2007 965.9 3.3 646.2 2.9 353.6 − 1.4 999.8 1.4 1,524.8 1.5 168.1 3.4 11.0
2008 1,002.6 3.8 664.0 2.7 356.2 0.7 1,020.1 2.0 1,569.9 3.0 180.3 7.3 11.5
2009 1,004.0 0.1 668.0 0.6 383.4 7.7 1,051.4 3.1 1,561.7 − 0.5 170.1 − 5.6 10.9
2010 1,034.1 3.0 697.7 4.4 387.1 1.0 1,084.8 3.2 1,607.9 3.0 174.7 2.7 10.9
2011 1,083.9 4.8 725.8 4.0 384.0 − 0.8 1,109.8 2.3 1,660.2 3.3 172.6 − 1.2 10.4
2012 1,126.8 4.0 751.5 3.5 389.7 1.5 1,141.1 2.8 1,699.0 2.3 175.3 1.6 10.3
2011          Q4 299.8 4.3 200.8 4.0 95.6 0.4 296.3 2.8 418.0 2.8 38.2 1.2 9.1
2012          Q1 261.9 4.0 175.1 3.8 97.9 0.5 273.0 2.6 423.5 3.7 57.8 3.3 13.6
         Q2 275.3 4.0 179.6 3.6 96.7 1.5 276.3 2.8 421.5 2.3 42.3 2.6 10.0
         Q3 278.1 3.9 189.1 3.4 97.6 1.8 286.7 2.9 428.6 1.6 37.7 1.5 8.8
         Q4 311.6 3.9 207.6 3.4 97.6 2.1 305.2 3.0 425.4 1.8 37.5 − 1.9 8.8
2013          Q1 271.4 3.6 181.5 3.6 100.1 2.2 281.5 3.1 425.6 0.5 55.9 − 3.3 13.1
Source: Federal Statistical Office; figures computed in May 2013. *Households includ- salaries plus monetary social benefits received. 5Mass income plus operating surplus,
ing non-profit institutions serving households. 1Residence concept. 2After mixed income, property income (net), other current transfers received, income of
deducting the wage tax payable on gross wages and salaries and employees’ non-profit institutions serving households, less taxes (excluding wage tax andcontributions to the social security funds. 3Social security benefits in cash from the consumption-related taxes) and other current transfers paid. Including the increase in
social security funds, central, state and local government and foreign countries, claims on company pension funds. 6Including the increase in claims on company pen-
pension payments (net), private funded social benefits, less social contributions on sion funds. 7 Saving as a percentage of disposable income. 
social benefits, consumption-related taxes and public charges. 4Net wages and
  
  
  
9 Negotiated pay rates (overall economy)
    
  
Index of negotiated wages 1 
On a monthly basis
Memo item:
Total excluding Wages and salaries
On an hourly basis Total one-off payments Basic pay rates  2 per employee 3 
Annual Annual Annual Annual Annual
Period percentage percentage percentage percentage percentage
2005=100 change 2005=100 change 2005=100 change 2005=100 change 2005=100 change
2005 100.0 0.9 100.0 1.1 100.0 0.9 100.0 1.1 100.0 0.3
2006 100.9 0.9 101.2 1.2 100.8 0.8 100.8 0.8 100.8 0.82007 102.1 1.2 102.5 1.3 102.2 1.5 102.2 1.4 102.2 1.42008 105.0 2.8 105.4 2.9 105.3 3.0 105.5 3.2 104.6 2.32009 107.1 2.0 107.6 2.0 107.7 2.2 108.1 2.4 104.6 − 0.0
2010 108.8 1.6 109.4 1.7 109.4 1.6 110.0 1.7 107.0 2.3
2011 110.7 1.7 111.3 1.8 111.4 1.8 111.9 1.8 110.6 3.32012 113.7 2.7 114.2 2.6 114.6 2.8 115.1 2.8 113.6 2.7
2012          Q1 104.8 2.0 105.3 1.9 105.6 2.5 113.6 2.6 106.7 2.6
         Q2 106.8 2.8 107.3 2.7 107.6 3.0 114.9 2.8 111.2 2.7         Q3 116.1 2.8 116.6 2.8 117.0 2.9 115.8 3.0 111.8 2.7         Q4 127.0 3.0 127.6 2.9 128.0 2.9 116.1 2.9 124.2 2.8
2013          Q1 107.9 2.9 108.4 2.9 108.7 3.0 117.0 3.0 109.5 2.6
         Q2 109.1 2.2 109.6 2.2 109.9 2.1 117.4 2.2 . .
2012          Dec 109.8 3.2 110.3 3.1 110.5 3.0 116.2 2.9 . .
2013          Jan 107.8 3.0 108.3 3.0 108.7 3.1 117.0 3.2 . .
         Feb 107.8 3.1 108.3 3.1 108.7 3.1 117.0 3.2 . .
         Mar 108.0 2.7 108.5 2.7 108.8 2.6 117.1 2.6 . .
         Apr 109.4 2.7 109.9 2.7 110.0 2.5 117.1 2.5 . .
         May 109.5 1.9 110.1 1.9 110.5 2.0 117.4 2.1 . .
         June 108.4 1.9 108.9 1.9 109.3 1.8 117.5 1.8 . .
1Current data are normally revised on account of additional reports. 2Excluding and retirement provisions). 3Source: Federal Statistical Office; figures computed in
one-off payments and covenants (capital formation benefits, special payments, such May 2013. 
as annual bonuses, holiday pay, Christmas bonuses (13
thmonthly salary payment)

Deutsche Bundesbank
70  Monthly Report
August 2013
XII External sector
 
1 Major items of the balance of payments of the euro area *
 
 
€ million
2012 2013
Item 2010 2011 2012 Q3 Q4 Q1 Mar Apr May
Current account + 3,500 + 14,867 + 122,437 + 40,848 + 66,087 + 32,525 + 24,774 + 16,596 + 9,467A
1 Goods
Exports (fob) 1,576,860 1,787,867 1,918,301 480,118 489,546 471,005 167,517 165,386 162,811
Imports (fob) 1,559,613 1,781,064 1,819,352 449,829 453,340 438,501 144,615 149,117 145,715
Balance + 17,246 + 6,803 + 98,950 + 30,289 + 36,206 + 32,503 + 22,901 + 16,269 + 17,096
2 Services
Receipts 543,943 581,520 626,047 167,187 161,474 144,964 51,262 50,941 52,329
Expenditure 487,483 508,357 533,823 140,176 139,184 126,064 43,471 43,439 44,316
Balance + 56,458 + 73,164 + 92,225 + 27,011 + 22,290 + 18,900 + 7,791 + 7,501 + 8,014
3 Income + 38,951 + 42,081 + 38,454 + 12,958 + 21,550 + 22,720 + 6,818 + 2,351 − 7,024
4 Current transfers
Transfers from non-residents 87,145 94,509 98,132 17,312 33,497 27,959 6,263 6,546 6,948
Transfers to non-residents 196,299 201,691 205,325 46,723 47,457 69,558 19,000 16,071 15,568
Balance − 109,156 − 107,179 − 107,194 − 29,412 − 13,960 − 41,600 − 12,737 − 9,525 − 8,620
Capital account + 5,663 + 11,181 + 15,054 + 4,024 + 6,387 + 1,683 + 388 + 1,342 + 2,302B
Financial account (net capital exports: − + 9,088 − 42,661 − 146,807 − 41,621 − 87,764 − 37,754 − 24,895 − 18,513 − 17,018C)
1 Direct investment − 88,763 − 118,657 − 64,081 − 4,889 − 40,438 − 23,631 − 24,626 − 6,854 + 363
By resident units abroad − 362,398 − 447,047 − 268,375 − 52,565 − 70,030 − 65,935 − 24,909 − 12,904 − 109
By non-resident units in the euro area + 273,636 + 328,390 + 204,294 + 47,678 + 29,591 + 42,305 + 283 + 6,051 + 472
2 Portfolio investment + 119,460 + 252,512 + 90,398 − 14,793 + 85,302 + 10,667 + 4,375 + 1,517 + 29,762
By resident units abroad − 134,204 + 55,887 − 184,133 − 39,955 − 79,719 − 105,600 − 31,290 − 41,863 − 17,887
Equity − 77,321 + 70,815 − 58,298 − 4,369 − 59,663 − 62,129 − 27,241 − 17,337 − 9,125
Bonds and notes − 102,979 + 15,713 − 123,375 − 34,441 − 38,540 − 34,992 − 6,711 − 5,679 − 5,464
Money market instruments + 46,097 − 30,641 − 2,465 − 1,148 + 18,483 − 8,479 + 2,662 − 18,846 − 3,298
By non-resident units in the euro area + 253,665 + 196,624 + 274,533 + 25,163 + 165,022 + 116,268 + 35,665 + 43,380 + 47,650
Equity + 123,074 + 78,665 + 154,435 + 21,844 + 95,704 + 51,861 + 15,023 + 11,574 + 44,874
Bonds and notes + 175,107 + 165,442 + 120,435 + 44,957 + 44,008 + 31,253 + 10,709 + 27,897 − 1,987
Money market instruments − 44,518 − 47,484 − 339 − 41,639 + 25,310 + 33,153 + 9,933 + 3,909 + 4,763
3 Financial derivatives + 18,375 − 5,306 + 17,796 + 2,818 + 28,316 + 9,292 + 1,226 − 3,393 − 7,120
4 Other investment − 29,468 − 161,017 − 176,771 − 24,638 − 157,975 − 34,092 − 8,119 − 9,713 − 39,461
Eurosystem + 12,297 + 137,729 + 8,293 + 14,840 − 5,940 − 26,340 + 5,919 + 2,096 − 6,150
General government + 23,625 + 69,671 − 271 + 4,512 − 24,019 + 10,650 + 1,037 − 3,151 + 2,553
MFIs (excluding the Eurosystem) − 18,793 − 339,470 − 117,474 − 48,974 − 101,865 − 11,155 − 8,352 − 10,328 − 57,931
Long-term + 47,197 − 17,168 + 12,163 − 3,882 + 21,494 − 1,011 − 1,789 + 11,171 + 1,060
Short-term − 65,993 − 322,304 − 129,631 − 45,089 − 123,357 − 10,144 − 6,563 − 21,499 − 58,990
Other sectors − 46,592 − 28,943 − 67,322 + 4,981 − 26,150 − 7,248 − 6,723 + 1,670 + 22,066
5 Reserve assets (Increase: −) − 10,516 − 10,190 − 14,150 − 119 − 2,970 + 9 + 2,248 − 70 − 563
Errors and omissions − 18,251 + 16,613 + 9,317 − 3,250 + 15,290 + 3,547 − 266 + 575 + 5,249D
* Source: European Central Bank. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
71  Monthly Report
August 2013
XII External sector
 
2 Major items of the balance of payments of the Federal Republic of Germany
(balances)
 
 
Current account Capital trans- Financial account
fers andacquisition/ of whichdisposal of Change in
Supple- non- reserve assets
Balance mentary produced at trans- Errorson current Foreign trade Current non-financial action and
Period account trade 
1 items 2 Services 3 Income transfers assets Total 4 value 5 omissions
DM million
1999 − 50,528 + 127,542 − 15,947 − 90,036 − 24,363 − 47,724 − 301 − 20,332 + 24,517 + 71,161
2000 − 69,351 + 115,645 − 17,742 − 95,848 − 16,956 − 54,450 + 13,345 + 66,863 + 11,429 − 10,8572001 − 23 + 186,771 − 14,512 − 97,521 − 22,557 − 52,204 − 756 − 23,068 + 11,797 + 23,847
€ million
1999
− 25,834 + 65,211 − 8,153 − 46,035 − 12,457 − 24,401 − 154 − 10,396 + 12,535 + 36,384
2000 − 35,459 + 59,128 − 9,071 − 49,006 − 8,670 − 27,840 + 6,823 + 34,187 + 5,844 − 5,551
2001 − 12 + 95,495 − 7,420 − 49,862 − 11,533 − 26,692 − 387 − 11,794 + 6,032 + 12,193
2002 + 42,669 + 132,788 − 8,552 − 35,728 − 18,888 − 26,951 − 212 − 38,448 + 2,065 − 4,010
2003 + 40,525 + 129,921 − 11,148 − 34,506 − 15,677 − 28,064 + 311 − 61,758 + 445 + 20,921
2004 + 102,368 + 156,096 − 16,470 − 29,375 + 19,681 − 27,564 + 435 − 122,984 + 1,470 + 20,181
2005 + 112,591 + 158,179 − 14,057 − 27,401 + 24,391 − 28,522 − 1,369 − 129,635 + 2,182 + 18,413
2006 + 144,739 + 159,048 − 12,888 − 17,346 + 44,460 − 28,536 − 258 − 175,474 + 2,934 + 30,992
2007 + 180,914 + 195,348 − 9,816 − 14,852 + 42,918 − 32,685 + 104 − 210,151 − 953 + 29,133
2008 + 153,633 + 178,297 − 13,628 − 10,258 + 32,379 − 33,157 − 210 − 173,910 − 2,008 + 20,487
2009 + 141,537 + 138,697 − 16,020 − 7,220 + 59,025 − 32,944 + 28 − 158,391 + 3,200 + 16,826
2010 + 155,992 + 154,863 − 12,397 − 2,062 + 53,877 − 38,289 − 575 − 140,144 − 1,613 − 15,273
2011 + 161,196 + 158,702 − 20,520 − 2,279 + 59,016 − 33,723 + 673 − 162,610 − 2,836 + 740
2012 r + 185,619 + 188,254 − 27,313 − 2,873 + 64,373 − 36,822 + 40 − 233,829 − 1,297 + 48,170
2010          Q3 + 34,610 + 38,895 − 3,160 − 5,752 + 15,402 − 10,775 + 9 − 27,401 + 344 − 7,218         Q4 + 51,979 + 40,982 − 3,486 + 4,327 + 17,099 − 6,943 − 413 − 52,524 − 506 + 958
2011          Q1 + 45,384 + 40,902 − 2,257 + 2,887 + 17,445 − 13,592 + 950 − 67,319 − 1,393 + 20,985
         Q2 + 32,308 + 38,562 − 4,927 − 1,372 + 4,755 − 4,710 − 282 − 50,687 − 438 + 18,660         Q3 + 35,723 + 39,609 − 6,551 − 5,658 + 17,960 − 9,637 + 103 − 13,513 − 639 − 22,313         Q4 + 47,781 + 39,630 − 6,784 + 1,864 + 18,856 − 5,784 − 98 − 31,091 − 366 − 16,592
2012          Q1 + 45,810 + 45,418 − 3,550 + 957 + 18,019 − 15,034 + 191 − 42,769 − 963 − 3,233
         Q2 + 41,367 + 47,994 − 8,897 + 1,391 + 7,301 − 6,422 + 394 − 49,203 − 769 + 7,441         Q3 + 44,684 + 50,076 − 7,710 − 7,227 + 18,983 − 9,437 + 67 − 62,092 − 59 + 17,341         Q4 
r + 53,757 + 44,767 − 7,155 + 2,005 + 20,069 − 5,929 − 613 − 79,765 + 494 + 26,621
2013          Q1 r + 45,140 + 49,263 − 6,720 − 227 + 18,659 − 15,836 + 345 − 40,684 − 86 − 4,801
         Q2 p + 45,270 + 48,468 − 3,739 + 36 + 8,049 − 7,544 + 342 − 61,513 − 72 + 15,901
2011          Jan + 9,711 + 9,926 − 1,226 + 344 + 4,730 − 4,063 + 536 − 10,406 − 182 + 159         Feb + 12,655 + 12,090 + 241 + 809 + 6,124 − 6,610 + 527 − 23,783 − 23 + 10,602         Mar + 23,019 + 18,886 − 1,272 + 1,734 + 6,591 − 2,919 − 114 − 33,129 − 1,188 + 10,224
         Apr + 10,343 + 10,835 − 1,954 − 159 + 3,169 − 1,549 − 201 − 21,914 − 563 + 11,771
         May + 9,344 + 14,833 − 1,108 + 641 − 4,440 − 583 − 64 − 20,156 + 24 + 10,877         June + 12,621 + 12,893 − 1,866 − 1,854 + 6,026 − 2,578 − 17 − 8,617 + 101 − 3,987
         July + 9,447 + 10,555 − 1,541 − 1,997 + 5,900 − 3,470 − 144 + 4,546 − 428 − 13,850
         Aug + 8,404 + 11,740 − 2,347 − 3,923 + 5,982 − 3,049 + 380 − 13,078 + 109 + 4,294         Sep + 17,872 + 17,314 − 2,663 + 262 + 6,078 − 3,118 − 133 − 4,982 − 320 − 12,757
         Oct + 10,828 + 11,000 − 2,131 − 955 + 6,414 − 3,500 − 181 − 16,424 + 55 + 5,777
         Nov + 16,922 + 16,110 − 1,947 + 330 + 6,055 − 3,626 + 120 − 7,177 + 263 − 9,865         Dec + 20,031 + 12,520 − 2,706 + 2,489 + 6,387 + 1,342 − 37 − 7,490 − 684 − 12,504
2012          Jan + 11,022 + 13,188 − 1,346 − 1,605 + 5,039 − 4,254 − 32 − 12,275 − 140 + 1,285
         Feb + 13,550 + 14,864 − 1,736 + 1,204 + 6,503 − 7,286 + 211 − 7,423 − 547 − 6,338         Mar + 21,238 + 17,365 − 468 + 1,359 + 6,477 − 3,494 + 12 − 23,071 − 276 + 1,820
         Apr + 11,954 + 14,468 − 3,209 + 1,658 + 1,735 − 2,698 + 310 − 17,917 − 581 + 5,653
         May + 9,959 + 15,559 − 3,017 − 660 − 495 − 1,429 + 239 − 18,277 − 207 + 8,079         June + 19,454 + 17,966 − 2,672 + 393 + 6,062 − 2,295 − 155 − 13,009 + 19 − 6,291
         July + 14,420 + 16,886 − 2,870 − 3,297 + 6,240 − 2,539 − 223 − 6,612 + 48 − 7,585
         Aug + 13,201 + 16,290 − 2,529 − 3,072 + 6,195 − 3,683 + 168 − 22,050 − 389 + 8,681         Sep + 17,063 + 16,899 − 2,311 − 859 + 6,548 − 3,215 + 123 − 33,431 + 281 + 16,245
         Oct  
r + 15,276 + 15,711 − 2,523 − 1,592 + 6,918 − 3,240 − 195 − 21,997 − 176 + 6,917
         Nov  r + 17,884 + 16,940 − 2,657 + 224 + 6,509 − 3,131 + 165 − 27,569 + 308 + 9,520
         Dec  r + 20,597 + 12,116 − 1,975 + 3,373 + 6,642 + 441 − 582 − 30,198 + 362 + 10,183
2013          Jan  r + 9,680 + 13,618 − 2,071 − 1,583 + 5,504 − 5,789 + 26 + 6,080 − 493 − 15,786
         Feb  r + 15,027 + 16,806 − 1,668 + 343 + 6,426 − 6,880 − 26 − 16,265 + 321 + 1,264
         Mar  r + 20,433 + 18,839 − 2,981 + 1,013 + 6,729 − 3,167 + 346 − 30,499 + 86 + 9,720
         Apr  r + 16,703 + 17,978 − 1,103 + 787 + 1,595 − 2,554 + 184 − 24,547 − 56 + 7,660
         May + 11,245 + 13,592 − 952 − 657 + 1,409 − 2,147 + 111 − 14,317 + 23 + 2,961
         June p + 17,322 + 16,897 − 1,684 − 94 + 5,046 − 2,844 + 47 − 22,649 − 38 + 5,281
1Special trade according to the official foreign trade statistics: imports cif, exports deduction of goods returned. 3Excluding the expenditure on freight and insurance
fob. From January 2007 onwards, excluding supplies of goods for/after included in the cif import figure. 4Financial account balance including change in
repair/maintenance, which, up to December 2006, were deducted via supplementary reserve assets. Capital exports: − . 5 Increase: − . 
trade items. 2Inter alia warehouse transactions for the account of residents and

Deutsche Bundesbank
72  Monthly Report
August 2013
 XII External sector
 
 3 Foreign trade (special trade) of the Federal Republic of Germany,
 by country and group of countries *
 
 € million
 2013
Country / group of countries  2010  2011  2012 r Jan r Feb r Mar r Apr r May r Jun p 
All countries  1 Exports 951,959 1,061,225 1,097,346 88,533 88,645 94,569 94,340 88,557 92,766
Imports 797,097 902,523 909,091 74,915 71,839 75,731 76,362 74,964 75,869
Balance + 154,863 + 158,702 + 188,254 + 13,618 + 16,806 + 18,839 + 17,978 + 13,592 + 16,897
I Exports 675,024 752,295 755,933 62,118 61,895 64,940 64,329 60,944 ...European countries
Imports 541,720 622,870 634,461 51,407 51,052 54,387 54,180 53,906 ...
Balance + 133,305 + 129,425 + 121,471 + 10,711 + 10,843 + 10,553 + 10,150 + 7,038 ...
Exports 570,879 627,698 625,617 51,950 51,489 53,749 52,679 50,225 ... 1 EU member states (27)
Imports 444,375 505,363 509,168 41,388 41,243 44,813 43,946 44,051 ...
Balance + 126,504 + 122,335 + 116,450 + 10,561 + 10,246 + 8,936 + 8,733 + 6,174 ...
Euro-area (17) Exports 388,103 420,522 410,549 34,119 33,798 35,313 34,410 32,556 ...
countries Imports 300,135 338,330 341,497 27,568 27,430 30,275 29,490 29,829 ...
Balance + 87,968 + 82,192 + 69,052 + 6,551 + 6,369 + 5,038 + 4,920 + 2,727 ...
of which
Austria Exports 52,156 57,671 57,535 4,500 4,520 4,840 4,784 4,525 ...
Imports 33,013 37,028 36,984 2,878 2,992 3,205 3,217 3,024 ...
Balance + 19,144 + 20,643 + 20,551 + 1,622 + 1,528 + 1,635 + 1,566 + 1,501 ...
Belgium and Exports 50,545 53,161 50,109 4,181 3,977 4,676 4,297 3,945 ...
Luxembourg Imports 36,026 41,302 41,083 3,327 3,417 3,558 3,569 3,604 ...
Balance + 14,519 + 11,859 + 9,026 + 853 + 561 + 1,118 + 728 + 341 ...
France Exports 89,582 101,444 104,367 8,621 8,829 8,802 8,531 7,534 ...
Imports 60,673 65,948 64,614 5,144 5,074 6,256 5,416 5,480 ...
Balance + 28,909 + 35,496 + 39,752 + 3,476 + 3,755 + 2,546 + 3,115 + 2,055 ...
Italy Exports 58,589 62,044 55,863 4,683 4,497 4,730 4,688 4,490 ...
Imports 41,977 47,844 48,848 3,784 3,915 4,144 3,940 4,135 ...
Balance + 16,611 + 14,200 + 7,014 + 899 + 581 + 585 + 747 + 355 ...
Netherlands Exports 62,978 69,423 70,895 5,952 5,931 6,124 5,963 5,863 ...
Imports 67,205 81,804 86,519 7,316 6,885 7,635 7,803 7,863 ...
Balance − 4,227 − 12,382 − 15,624 − 1,365 − 955 − 1,511 − 1,841 − 2,000 ...
Spain Exports 34,222 34,811 31,181 2,696 2,609 2,646 2,593 2,796 ...
Imports 21,955 22,491 22,866 2,024 2,029 2,104 2,054 2,120 ...
Balance + 12,267 + 12,320 + 8,315 + 672 + 580 + 541 + 539 + 676 ...
Other EU member Exports 182,775 207,176 215,068 17,830 17,691 18,436 18,269 17,669 ...
states Imports 144,240 167,033 167,670 13,820 13,813 14,538 14,456 14,222 ...
Balance + 38,536 + 40,143 + 47,398 + 4,011 + 3,878 + 3,898 + 3,813 + 3,447 ...
of which
United Exports 58,666 65,570 72,930 6,340 6,461 6,375 6,299 5,944 ...
Kingdom Imports 37,923 44,741 43,642 3,869 3,610 3,726 3,616 3,601 ...
Balance + 20,743 + 20,829 + 29,288 + 2,471 + 2,852 + 2,649 + 2,683 + 2,342 ...
Exports 104,145 124,597 130,316 10,168 10,406 11,191 11,651 10,719 ... 2 Other European
Imports 97,345 117,507 125,294 10,018 9,809 9,574 10,234 9,855 ... countries
Balance + 6,800 + 7,090 + 5,022 + 150 + 596 + 1,616 + 1,417 + 864 ...
of which
Switzerland Exports 41,659 47,875 48,830 4,067 3,813 4,238 4,222 3,733 ...
Imports 32,507 36,996 37,686 2,915 2,968 3,012 3,361 3,344 ...
Balance + 9,152 + 10,879 + 11,144 + 1,151 + 845 + 1,226 + 861 + 389 ...
II Exports 276,635 308,193 340,151 26,408 26,625 29,532 29,865 27,396 ...Non-European
Imports 255,377 279,653 274,630 23,509 20,787 21,343 22,182 21,058 ... countries
Balance + 21,258 + 28,541 + 65,522 + 2,899 + 5,838 + 8,189 + 7,683 + 6,338 ...
Exports 19,968 20,717 21,784 1,758 1,816 2,005 2,006 1,927 ... 1 Africa
Imports 17,040 21,944 23,971 1,949 2,196 1,980 2,137 1,644 ...
Balance + 2,929 − 1,227 − 2,187 − 191 − 380 + 25 − 131 + 284 ...
Exports 99,464 110,424 128,461 10,138 10,385 11,537 11,433 10,343 ... 2 America
Imports 71,680 80,568 79,998 6,483 5,515 6,604 6,567 6,507 ...
Balance + 27,784 + 29,856 + 48,463 + 3,655 + 4,870 + 4,933 + 4,866 + 3,836 ...
of which
Exports 65,574 73,776 86,831 6,913 6,939 7,279 7,694 6,862 ... United States
Imports 45,241 48,531 50,604 4,149 3,612 4,404 4,050 4,363 ...
Balance + 20,333 + 25,244 + 36,227 + 2,763 + 3,327 + 2,875 + 3,643 + 2,499 ...
Exports 148,231 167,574 179,183 13,756 13,643 15,071 15,547 14,322 ... 3 Asia
Imports 163,523 173,115 166,617 14,805 12,736 12,514 13,112 12,548 ...
Balance − 15,293 − 5,541 + 12,566 − 1,049 + 907 + 2,557 + 2,435 + 1,774 ...
of which
Middle East Exports 28,138 28,711 32,498 2,260 2,486 2,718 2,545 2,847 ...
Imports 6,878 8,874 7,960 531 655 580 547 639 ...
Balance + 21,260 + 19,837 + 24,538 + 1,728 + 1,831 + 2,138 + 1,998 + 2,209 ...
Japan Exports 13,149 15,115 17,101 1,425 1,282 1,338 1,398 1,217 ...
Imports 22,475 23,595 21,814 1,725 1,520 1,734 1,700 1,520 ...
Balance − 9,326 − 8,480 − 4,713 − 300 − 238 − 395 − 302 − 303 ...
Exports 53,791 64,863 66,629 5,089 4,959 5,526 6,020 5,214 ... People‘s Republic
Imports 77,270 79,528 77,698 7,067 5,934 5,637 5,528 5,623 ... of China  2 
Balance − 23,479 − 14,665 − 11,070 − 1,978 − 976 − 111 + 493 − 409 ...
Exports 38,183 41,569 45,460 3,628 3,562 4,008 4,089 3,764 ... Emerging markets
Imports 39,562 39,546 37,410 3,476 2,775 2,812 3,397 3,020 ... in South-East Asia  3 
Balance − 1,379 + 2,023 + 8,050 + 152 + 787 + 1,196 + 692 + 744 ...
Exports 8,972 9,479 10,723 756 781 920 879 804 ... 4 Oceania and
Imports 3,134 4,026 4,043 271 340 245 365 359 ... polar regions
Balance + 5,838 + 5,453 + 6,680 + 485 + 441 + 675 + 513 + 444 ...
 
*Source: Federal Statistical Office. Exports (fob) by country of destination, imports other data not classifiable by region. 2Excluding Hong Kong. 3Brunei Darussalam,
(cif) by country of origin. Individual countries and groups of countries according to Hong Kong, Indonesia, Malaysia, Philippines, Republic of Korea, Singapore, Taiwan
the current position. 1Including fuel and other supplies for ships and aircraft and and Thailand. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
73  Monthly Report
August 2013
XII External sector
 
4 Services and income of the Federal Republic of Germany
(balances)
 
€ million
Services
Other services
of which
 
Patents
Compen- Services  of Construction
Trans- Financial and sation of Investment Government self-employed and  assembly
Period Total Travel 1 services licences Total income portation 2 services  3 persons  4 work,  repairs employees 5 
2008 − 10,258 − 34,718 + 8,319 + 3,936 − 1,313 + 2,376 + 11,142 − 1,641 + 3,229 + 216 + 32,164
2009 − 7,220 − 33,341 + 7,048 + 4,320 + 154 + 2,644 + 11,955 − 1,261 + 3,062 + 541 + 58,484
2010 − 2,062 − 32,775 + 8,092 + 4,281 + 1,225 + 2,863 + 14,252 − 1,154 + 3,500 + 1,564 + 52,314
2011 − 2,279 − 33,762 + 8,562 + 3,891 + 1,189 + 2,939 + 14,903 − 1,201 + 3,413 + 1,885 + 57,131
2012 − 2,873 − 35,278 + 8,733 + 5,096 + 1,290 + 3,070 + 14,217 − 1,350 + 2,015 + 1,940 + 62,433
2011          Q4 + 1,864 − 5,931 + 2,127 + 1,581 + 465 + 704 + 2,919 − 379 + 1,070 + 584 + 18,271
2012          Q1 + 957 − 5,297 + 1,799 + 1,038 − 408 + 756 + 3,069 − 355 + 595 + 978 + 17,041
         Q2 + 1,391 − 8,338 + 2,572 + 1,042 + 177 + 821 + 5,118 − 256 + 472 + 401 + 6,901
         Q3 − 7,227 − 15,569 + 2,387 + 1,975 + 752 + 767 + 2,461 − 412 + 493 − 118 + 19,101
         Q4 + 2,005 − 6,075 + 1,975 + 1,041 + 768 + 727 + 3,569 − 326 + 455 + 678 + 19,391
2013          Q1 − 227 − 5,058 + 1,736 + 837 + 758 + 796 + 704 − 288 + 229 + 988 + 17,671
         Q2 + 36 − 8,107 + 2,207 + 722 + 1,303 + 921 + 2,989 − 305 + 373 + 408 + 7,641
2012          Aug − 3,072 − 6,541 + 795 + 1,404 + 362 + 258 + 652 − 168 + 164 − 40 + 6,235
         Sep − 859 − 5,175 + 669 + 284 + 238 + 252 + 2,873 − 61 + 252 − 39 + 6,587
         Oct − 1,592 − 4,166 + 655 + 269 + 299 + 276 + 1,076 − 103 + 69 + 197 + 6,722
         Nov + 224 − 1,538 + 711 + 308 + 270 + 223 + 250 − 97 + 99 + 192 + 6,317         Dec + 3,373 − 371 + 610 + 464 + 200 + 228 + 2,243 − 126 + 286 + 289 + 6,353
2013          Jan − 1,583 − 1,603 + 541 + 418 + 286 + 266 − 1,491 − 119 + 84 + 331 + 5,173
         Feb + 343 − 1,266 + 668 + 269 + 275 + 256 + 142 − 45 + 4 + 328 + 6,097         Mar + 1,013 − 2,189 + 527 + 150 + 198 + 273 + 2,054 − 125 + 140 + 329 + 6,400
         Apr + 787 − 1,687 + 759 + 285 + 512 + 271 + 646 − 126 + 134 + 136 + 1,459
         May − 657 − 2,737 + 765 + 188 + 403 + 311 + 414 − 74 + 127 + 135 + 1,274         June − 94 − 3,683 + 684 + 249 + 388 + 338 + 1,930 − 105 + 113 + 137 + 4,909
1From 2001 expenditure is based on household samples. 2Excluding the other technical services, research and development, commercial services, etc.
expenditure on freight included in the cif import figure. 3Including the receipts 5 Wages and salaries. 
from foreign military agencies for goods and services supplied. 4Engineering and
5 Current transfers of the Federal Republic of Germany 6 Capital transfers
(balances) (balances)
€ million € million
Public 1 Private 1 
International
organisations 2 
 
of which Other Other
European current Workers’ current
Period Total Total Total Communities Total remittances transfers Total  4 Public 1 Private 1 transfers 3 
2008 − 33,157 − 16,834 − 18,746 − 16,644 + 1,911 − 16,322 − 3,079 − 13,243 − 210 − 1,853 + 1,642
2009 − 32,944 − 18,575 − 19,037 − 16,573 + 462 − 14,370 − 2,995 − 11,375 + 28 − 1,704 + 1,732
2010 − 38,289 − 23,369 − 22,899 − 19,473 − 471 − 14,919 − 3,035 − 11,885 − 575 − 2,039 + 1,464
2011 − 33,723 − 20,197 − 22,303 − 19,105 + 2,106 − 13,526 − 2,977 − 10,549 + 673 − 2,326 + 2,999
2012 − 36,822 − 23,826 − 24,367 − 21,098 + 541 − 12,997 − 3,080 − 9,917 + 40 − 2,648 + 2,687
2011          Q4 − 5,784 − 2,567 − 1,681 − 867 − 886 − 3,216 − 744 − 2,472 − 98 − 961 + 863
2012          Q1 − 15,034 − 11,827 − 11,243 − 10,134 − 585 − 3,207 − 770 − 2,437 + 191 − 398 + 589
         Q2 − 6,422 − 3,125 − 6,101 − 5,128 + 2,975 − 3,297 − 770 − 2,527 + 394 − 375 + 769
         Q3 − 9,437 − 6,042 − 5,519 − 5,033 − 523 − 3,395 − 770 − 2,625 + 67 − 556 + 624
         Q4 − 5,929 − 2,831 − 1,504 − 803 − 1,327 − 3,098 − 770 − 2,328 − 613 − 1,318 + 706
2013          Q1 − 15,836 − 12,628 − 12,348 − 11,005 − 280 − 3,208 − 826 − 2,382 + 345 − 306 + 651
         Q2 − 7,544 − 4,124 − 7,151 − 6,424 + 3,027 − 3,420 − 826 − 2,594 + 342 − 477 + 820
2012          Aug − 3,683 − 2,463 − 2,159 − 1,956 − 304 − 1,220 − 257 − 963 + 168 − 229 + 396
         Sep − 3,215 − 2,200 − 2,245 − 2,121 + 46 − 1,016 − 257 − 759 + 123 − 170 + 292
         Oct − 3,240 − 2,399 − 1,991 − 1,812 − 408 − 841 − 257 − 584 − 195 − 413 + 217
         Nov − 3,131 − 2,176 − 1,547 − 1,456 − 629 − 955 − 257 − 699 + 165 − 259 + 424         Dec + 441 + 1,743 + 2,033 + 2,465 − 290 − 1,302 − 257 − 1,045 − 582 − 647 + 64
2013          Jan − 5,789 − 4,649 − 4,543 − 3,734 − 106 − 1,140 − 275 − 865 + 26 − 87 + 113
         Feb − 6,880 − 5,801 − 5,551 − 5,055 − 250 − 1,079 − 275 − 804 − 26 − 103 + 77         Mar − 3,167 − 2,178 − 2,254 − 2,216 + 76 − 989 − 275 − 714 + 346 − 117 + 462
         Apr − 2,554 − 1,397 − 2,563 − 2,165 + 1,166 − 1,157 − 275 − 882 + 184 − 157 + 341
         May − 2,147 − 883 − 2,207 − 2,095 + 1,325 − 1,264 − 275 − 989 + 111 − 140 + 251         June − 2,844 − 1,845 − 2,381 − 2,164 + 536 − 999 − 275 − 724 + 47 − 181 + 228
1The classification of “public” and “private” transfers depends on the sector to transfers). 3Payments to developing countries, pension payments, tax revenue and
which the participating domestic body belongs. 2Current contributions to the refunds, etc. 4 Where identifiable; in particular, debt forgiveness. 
budgets of international organisations and to the EU budget (excluding capital

Deutsche Bundesbank
74  Monthly Report
August 2013
XII External sector
 
7 Financial account of the Federal Republic of Germany
 
 
€ million
2012 2013
Item 2010 2011 2012 Q3 Q4 Q1 Q2 Apr May June
I Net German investment abroad
(Increase/capital exports: −) − 408,675 − 226,210 − 355,772 − 25,443 + 32,811 − 28,397 − 34,492 − 39,101 + 3,342 + 1,266
1 Direct investment  1 − 91,757 − 37,527 − 52,088 − 9,665 − 4,512 − 19,699 − 5,526 − 1,574 + 5,628 − 9,580
Equity capital − 55,147 − 21,739 − 34,637 − 10,812 − 9,864 − 5,736 − 6,137 − 2,639 − 1,971 − 1,526
Reinvested earnings  2 − 19,962 − 25,161 − 27,080 − 8,309 − 5,446 − 9,975 − 5,797 − 2,615 − 840 − 2,341
Other capital transactions
of German direct investors − 16,649 + 9,373 + 9,629 + 9,456 + 10,798 − 3,988 + 6,408 + 3,681 + 8,440 − 5,713
2 Portfolio investment − 171,333 − 22,665 − 107,955 − 28,031 − 45,825 − 46,658 − 36,011 − 7,098 − 27,195 − 1,717
Shares 3 − 1,355 + 2,130 − 11,186 − 2,415 − 13,259 − 9,822 − 3,298 + 2,007 − 4,684 − 621
Mutual fund shares  4 − 21,558 − 1,843 − 21,560 − 6,465 − 12,558 − 10,710 − 4,062 − 2,272 − 2,312 + 522
Bonds and notes  5 − 154,540 − 18,014 − 75,947 − 17,664 − 23,754 − 21,089 − 29,750 − 8,114 − 17,961 − 3,675
Money market instruments + 6,120 − 4,938 + 738 − 1,486 + 3,745 − 5,036 + 1,100 + 1,281 − 2,238 + 2,057
3 Financial derivatives  6 − 17,616 − 27,511 − 17,885 − 3,765 − 4,236 − 3,880 − 6,069 − 2,580 − 5,687 + 2,197
4 Other investment − 126,356 − 135,670 − 176,548 + 16,076 + 86,890 + 41,926 + 13,185 − 27,792 + 30,574 + 10,404
MFIs 7,8 + 138,406 + 44,070 + 62,184 − 21,323 + 60,942 + 15 + 523 − 9,615 + 6,981 + 3,157
Long-term + 77,572 − 12,957 + 47,870 + 7,109 + 15,002 + 11,538 + 13,408 + 5,431 + 1,371 + 6,606
Short-term + 60,833 + 57,027 + 14,315 − 28,432 + 45,940 − 11,523 − 12,884 − 15,046 + 5,611 − 3,449
Enterprises and households − 59,426 − 20,612 + 1,985 − 562 + 21,570 − 29,128 − 3,823 + 1,021 + 4,874 − 9,718
Long-term − 41,464 + 5,169 − 1,763 − 2,938 − 534 + 1,097 + 145 − 917 − 1,363 + 2,426
Short-term  7 − 17,962 − 25,780 + 3,748 + 2,376 + 22,104 − 30,225 − 3,968 + 1,938 + 6,237 − 12,144
General government − 57,702 − 21,056 − 48,038 + 4,853 − 35,092 + 4,087 + 3,239 − 55 + 42 + 3,253
Long-term − 47,492 − 2,226 − 48,048 + 667 − 27,785 − 451 − 2,888 + 767 − 4,090 + 435
Short-term  7 − 10,209 − 18,829 + 10 + 4,186 − 7,307 + 4,538 + 6,126 − 823 + 4,132 + 2,817
Bundesbank − 147,633 − 138,073 − 192,679 + 33,108 + 39,469 + 66,953 + 13,246 − 19,143 + 18,677 + 13,712
5 Change in reserve assets at
transaction values (Increase: −) − 1,613 − 2,836 − 1,297 − 59 + 494 − 86 − 72 − 56 + 23 − 38
II Net foreign investment in Germany
(Increase/capital imports: +) + 268,531 + 63,600 + 121,943 − 36,649 − 112,576 − 12,287 − 27,021 + 14,554 − 17,660 − 23,915
1 Direct investment  1 + 43,361 + 35,203 + 5,109 − 6,115 + 3,143 + 7,697 − 7,006 − 1,502 − 6,410 + 906
Equity capital + 14,009 + 10,856 − 1,971 − 6,147 + 4,994 − 922 − 1,160 + 192 − 1,121 − 230
Reinvested earnings  2 + 3,330 + 2,534 + 7,402 + 2,190 + 2,281 + 4,821 − 863 + 1,302 − 2,677 + 511
Other capital transactions
of foreign direct investors + 26,022 + 21,813 − 323 − 2,158 − 4,132 + 3,799 − 4,982 − 2,996 − 2,612 + 625
2 Portfolio investment + 47,318 + 49,627 + 42,250 + 1,286 + 12,362 + 5,527 − 10,586 − 32,753 + 35,488 − 13,322
Shares  3 − 6,147 − 11,418 + 1,148 + 506 − 227 − 5,384 + 2,790 − 22,022 + 14,930 + 9,882
Mutual fund shares + 3,598 + 6,647 − 3,869 − 1,100 + 644 + 73 − 812 − 5,809 + 5,668 − 671
Bonds and notes  5 + 59,620 + 50,314 + 52,925 + 16,255 + 10,966 − 1,480 − 18,312 − 8,182 + 10,305 − 20,435
Money market instruments − 9,753 + 4,084 − 7,954 − 14,375 + 978 + 12,317 + 5,749 + 3,261 + 4,585 − 2,097
3 Other investment + 177,852 − 21,231 + 74,584 − 31,819 − 128,081 − 25,511 − 9,429 + 48,809 − 46,738 − 11,500
MFIs 7,8 + 76,302 − 96,708 + 51,508 − 15,090 − 130,954 − 8,840 − 14,194 + 24,427 − 26,647 − 11,974
Long-term − 5,750 − 18,368 − 10,250 − 319 − 5,479 − 10,147 − 2,532 − 2,119 − 624 + 212
Short-term + 82,052 − 78,340 + 61,758 − 14,770 − 125,475 + 1,307 − 11,662 + 26,546 − 26,022 − 12,186
Enterprises and households + 1,992 + 25,006 − 6,034 − 10,574 − 10,279 + 9,452 + 9,744 + 8,209 − 8,479 + 10,014
Long-term − 6,261 − 11,899 − 9,633 − 3,268 − 281 − 4,996 − 2,397 − 3,171 + 1,005 − 231
Short-term  7 + 8,253 + 36,905 + 3,599 − 7,306 − 9,999 + 14,448 + 12,141 + 11,380 − 9,484 + 10,245
General government + 94,040 + 18,519 − 30,826 − 17,033 + 2,410 + 60 + 6,209 + 2,020 + 93 + 4,096
Long-term + 610 + 5,083 + 36,179 + 1,272 + 10,210 + 687 + 3,998 − 263 + 4,256 + 5
Short-term  7 + 93,430 + 13,436 − 67,005 − 18,305 − 7,799 − 627 + 2,210 + 2,283 − 4,163 + 4,091
Bundesbank + 5,518 + 31,952 + 59,936 + 10,877 + 10,742 − 26,183 − 11,187 + 14,153 − 11,705 − 13,635
III Financial account balance  9 
(Net capital exports: −) − 140,144 − 162,610 − 233,829 − 62,092 − 79,765 − 40,684 − 61,513 − 24,547 − 14,317 − 22,649
1From 1996, new definition for direct investment. 2Estimated. 3Including from changes in stocks. Purely statistical changes have been eliminated as far as
participation rights. 4From 1991, including retained earnings. 5From 1975, possible. 8Excluding the Deutsche Bundesbank. 9Financial account balance
excluding accrued interest. 6Options, whether evidenced by securities or not, and including change in reserve assets. 
financial futures contracts. 7The transaction values shown here are mostly derived

Deutsche Bundesbank
75  Monthly Report
August 2013
XII External sector
 
8 External position of the Bundesbank up to end-1998 *
 
 
DM million
Reserve assets and other claims on non-residents Liabilities vis-à-vis non-residents
Reserve assets
Reserve
positionin theInter- Liabilitiesnational arising Net Liabilities
Monetary arising from externalFund and Claims Loans and from Treasury position
Foreign special on the external discount (col 1 other claims
End of year currency drawing ECB 
2 on non- trans- liquidity less
or month Total Total Gold rights (net) Total paper col 8) balances 1 residents 3 actions 4 
1234567891 0 1 1
1997 127,849 126,884 13,688 76,673 13,874 22,649 966 16,931 16,931 − 110,918
1998 135,085 134,005 17,109 100,363 16,533 − 1,079 15,978 15,978 − 119,107
*Valuation of the gold holdings and the claims on non-residents in accordance with claims on the European Monetary Cooperation Fund (EMCF)). 3Including loans to
section 26 (2) of the Bundesbank Act and the provisions of the Commercial Code, the World Bank. 4Including liquidity paper sold to non-residents by the Bundesbank;
especially section 253. In the course of the year, valuation at the preceding year’s excluding the Treasury discount liquidity paper sold to non-residents between March
balance sheet rates. 1Mainly US dollar assets. 2European Central Bank (up to 1993, 1993 and March 1995, as shown in column 10. 
  
 
9 External position of the Bundesbank since the beginning of European monetary union o
€ million
Reserve assets and other claims on non-residents
Reserve assets
Reserveposition
Other in the Inter-national
claims on Net
Monetary Other residents external
Fund and claims on Claims in other position
Gold special Foreign non-euro- within the euro-area (col 1 Liabilities
End of year and gold drawing currency area Eurosystem member less vis-à-vis non-
or month Total Total rights reserves (net) 2 states col 9) receivables residents 1,3 residents 3,4 
1234567891 0
1999          Jan  5 95,316 93,940 29,312 8,461 56,167 140 1,225 11 8,169 87,146
1999 141,958 93,039 32,287 8,332 52,420 9,162 39,746 11 6,179 135,779
2000 100,762 93,815 32,676 7,762 53,377 313 6,620 14 6,592 94,170
2001 76,147 93,215 35,005 8,721 49,489 312 − 17,385 5 8,752 67,396
2002 103,948 85,002 36,208 8,272 40,522 312 18,466 167 9,005 94,942
2003 95,394 76,680 36,533 7,609 32,538 312 17,945 456 10,443 84,951
2004 93,110 71,335 35,495 6,548 29,292 312 20,796 667 7,935 85,175
2005 130,268 86,181 47,924 4,549 33,708 350 42,830 906 6,285 123,983
2006 104,389 84,765 53,114 3,011 28,640 350 18,344 931 4,819 99,570
2007 179,492 92,545 62,433 2,418 27,694 350 84,064 2,534 16,005 163,488
2008 230,775 99,185 68,194 3,285 27,705 350 128,668 2,573 30,169 200,607
2009 323,286 125,541 83,939 15,969 25,634 350 189,936 7,460 9,126 314,160
2010 524,695 162,100 115,403 18,740 27,957 50 337,869 24,676 14,620 510,075
2011 714,662 184,603 132,874 22,296 29,433 50 475,942 54,067 46,557 668,106
2012 921,002 188,630 137,513 22,344 28,774 50 668,617 63,706 106,496 814,506
2012          Apr 909,192 189,556 137,380 22,624 29,551 50 656,813 62,773 15,312 893,879
         May 964,557 193,057 138,000 23,400 31,658 50 711,198 60,252 53,949 910,608
         June 992,341 190,248 136,094 23,320 30,834 50 741,198 60,845 84,880 907,461
         July 1,000,019 199,419 144,217 23,769 31,434 50 739,837 60,713 101,674 898,345
         Aug 1,023,617 197,776 143,507 23,520 30,749 50 764,080 61,711 101,494 922,123
         Sep 974,478 203,337 150,373 23,295 29,669 50 708,090 63,002 95,757 878,721
         Oct 991,439 196,910 144,172 23,154 29,585 50 731,983 62,496 123,787 867,652
         Nov 988,534 197,486 145,110 22,771 29,606 50 727,755 63,242 112,190 876,344
         Dec 921,002 188,630 137,513 22,344 28,774 50 668,617 63,706 106,496 814,506
2013          Jan 878,587 184,947 134,745 21,953 28,249 50 629,884 63,707 103,899 774,688
         Feb 871,508 183,222 132,131 22,011 29,079 50 625,519 62,717 96,300 775,208
         Mar 852,611 188,447 136,454 22,403 29,590 50 601,669 62,446 80,341 772,271
         Apr 857,433 173,980 122,844 22,096 29,040 50 620,813 62,590 94,482 762,951
         May 832,746 169,105 118,228 21,984 28,893 50 602,136 61,456 82,781 749,965
         June 798,888 150,825 100,280 21,926 28,618 50 588,423 59,590 69,145 729,743
         July 807,165 158,611 109,338 21,650 27,623 50 589,372 59,133 71,106 736,059
oClaims and liabilities vis-à-vis all countries within and outside the euro area. Up to From November 2000, including the TARGET positions which were previously shown
December 2000, the levels at the end of each quarter are shown, owing to (in columns 6 and 9) as bilateral assets and liabilities vis-à-vis national central banksrevaluations, at market prices; within each quarter, however, the levels are computed outside the Eurosystem. 3See footnote 2. 4Excluding allocations of special drawing
on the basis of cumulative transaction values. From January 2001, all end-of-month rights (SDR) by the International Monetary Fund (IMF) for an amount of SDR 12,059levels are valued at market prices. 1Including loans to the World Bank. 2Including million. 5 Euro opening balance sheet of the Bundesbank as at 1 January 1999. 
the balances in the Bundesbank’s cross-border payments within the Eurosystem.

Deutsche Bundesbank
76  Monthly Report
August 2013
XII External sector
 
10 Assets and liabilities of enterprises in Germany (other than banks)
vis-à-vis non-residents *
 
€ million
Claims on non-residents Liabilities vis-à-vis non-residents
Claims on foreign non-banks Liabilities  vis-à-vis foreign non-banks
from trade credits from trade credits
Balances Loans
with from Credit Advance from from Credit Advance
End of year foreign financial terms payments foreign financial terms payments
or month Total banks Total Total granted effected Total banks Total Total used received operations operations
All countries
 
2009 593,591 209,729 383,862 240,727 143,135 130,605 12,530 754,355 159,667 594,688 457,468 137,220 80,759 56,461
2010 670,695 242,028 428,667 272,426 156,241 143,032 13,209 807,185 162,091 645,094 498,310 146,784 88,288 58,496
2011 698,599 242,387 456,212 285,123 171,089 155,392 15,697 871,795 172,099 699,696 538,839 160,857 95,131 65,726
2012 747,469 274,802 472,667 298,059 174,608 158,836 15,772 910,840 170,265 740,575 578,392 162,183 94,291 67,892
2013          Jan 768,041 297,340 470,701 299,784 170,917 154,945 15,972 909,918 171,780 738,138 579,647 158,491 89,441 69,050
         Feb 775,347 302,209 473,138 298,999 174,139 158,126 16,013 909,930 173,705 736,225 576,365 159,860 90,904 68,956
         Mar 793,038 301,176 491,862 311,143 180,719 164,901 15,818 929,715 180,631 749,084 586,461 162,623 93,324 69,299
         Apr 803,011 300,397 502,614 323,962 178,652 162,511 16,141 950,589 188,067 762,522 604,255 158,267 88,185 70,082
         May 801,477 300,108 501,369 327,910 173,459 157,050 16,409 948,665 182,833 765,832 609,132 156,700 87,340 69,360
         June 817,432 303,078 514,354 333,215 181,139 163,291 17,848 959,277 189,004 770,273 611,884 158,389 90,268 68,121
Industrial countries 1
 
2009 531,796 208,571 323,225 220,778 102,447 93,566 8,881 684,984 157,343 527,641 431,525 96,116 68,912 27,204
2010 598,167 240,915 357,252 249,497 107,755 98,428 9,327 725,644 159,522 566,122 464,105 102,017 73,987 28,030
2011 615,925 240,265 375,660 258,453 117,207 104,915 12,292 785,925 169,535 616,390 502,139 114,251 80,491 33,760
2012 659,800 272,400 387,400 269,072 118,328 104,985 13,343 824,182 167,856 656,326 542,994 113,332 79,123 34,209
2013          Jan 682,191 295,304 386,887 270,983 115,904 102,411 13,493 822,737 169,868 652,869 543,379 109,490 74,875 34,615
         Feb 688,659 300,298 388,361 269,509 118,852 105,072 13,780 822,105 171,738 650,367 540,049 110,318 75,713 34,605
         Mar 703,958 299,246 404,712 280,670 124,042 110,343 13,699 840,868 178,808 662,060 549,632 112,428 77,776 34,652
         Apr 712,644 298,371 414,273 292,966 121,307 107,374 13,933 863,884 186,457 677,427 568,042 109,385 74,233 35,152
         May 711,444 297,975 413,469 296,987 116,482 102,475 14,007 862,791 181,198 681,593 572,878 108,715 73,755 34,960
         June 725,177 300,712 424,465 302,127 122,338 106,939 15,399 872,929 187,406 685,523 576,845 108,678 75,421 33,257
EU member states 1
 
2009 443,431 200,400 243,031 165,986 77,045 70,051 6,994 579,596 141,633 437,963 367,980 69,983 48,977 21,006
2010 494,360 230,746 263,614 184,862 78,752 71,525 7,227 618,145 150,817 467,328 395,566 71,762 50,035 21,727
2011 508,071 225,583 282,488 196,132 86,356 76,472 9,884 660,137 157,465 502,672 421,679 80,993 54,370 26,623
2012 547,557 250,191 297,366 212,698 84,668 74,190 10,478 695,214 156,552 538,662 458,505 80,157 53,623 26,534
2013          Jan 570,217 271,121 299,096 215,603 83,493 73,073 10,420 699,247 161,433 537,814 459,910 77,904 51,126 26,778
         Feb 575,337 275,347 299,990 214,551 85,439 74,851 10,588 697,060 162,294 534,766 456,096 78,670 51,959 26,711
         Mar 588,831 275,633 313,198 223,673 89,525 78,997 10,528 714,250 169,132 545,118 464,997 80,121 53,525 26,596
         Apr 587,110 271,727 315,383 228,428 86,955 76,276 10,679 738,135 176,310 561,825 483,676 78,149 51,034 27,115
         May 586,363 271,349 315,014 231,347 83,667 72,821 10,846 736,373 171,562 564,811 487,182 77,629 50,941 26,688
         June 602,070 278,044 324,026 235,290 88,736 76,411 12,325 742,006 176,682 565,324 488,916 76,408 51,620 24,788
of which:  Euro-area member states 2
 
2009 321,991 159,740 162,251 114,378 47,873 43,179 4,694 466,064 91,792 374,272 332,280 41,992 28,397 13,595
2010 366,774 184,299 182,475 130,430 52,045 47,239 4,806 497,433 98,177 399,256 351,352 47,904 33,444 14,460
2011 372,493 171,907 200,586 142,530 58,056 52,125 5,931 529,244 103,827 425,417 370,898 54,519 37,188 17,331
2012 396,816 189,865 206,951 152,060 54,891 48,992 5,899 572,523 110,052 462,471 408,502 53,969 36,754 17,215
2013          Jan 416,564 205,388 211,176 156,350 54,826 48,813 6,013 573,817 110,576 463,241 410,284 52,957 35,450 17,507
         Feb 420,134 208,941 211,193 155,468 55,725 49,672 6,053 570,230 115,053 455,177 401,658 53,519 35,813 17,706
         Mar 429,618 208,471 221,147 162,710 58,437 52,428 6,009 591,064 124,542 466,522 413,212 53,310 35,866 17,444
         Apr 432,655 207,971 224,684 167,561 57,123 51,042 6,081 611,911 130,368 481,543 428,570 52,973 35,102 17,871
         May 435,136 210,647 224,489 170,045 54,444 48,240 6,204 614,061 129,147 484,914 432,597 52,317 35,168 17,149
         June 446,909 217,914 228,995 171,821 57,174 50,609 6,565 619,937 133,105 486,832 434,940 51,892 35,247 16,645
Emerging economies and developing countries 3
 
2009 61,795 1,158 60,637 19,949 40,688 37,039 3,649 69,371 2,324 67,047 25,943 41,104 11,847 29,257
2010 72,528 1,113 71,415 22,929 48,486 44,604 3,882 81,541 2,569 78,972 34,205 44,767 14,301 30,466
2011 82,674 2,122 80,552 26,670 53,882 50,477 3,405 85,870 2,564 83,306 36,700 46,606 14,640 31,966
2012 87,669 2,402 85,267 28,987 56,280 53,851 2,429 86,658 2,409 84,249 35,398 48,851 15,168 33,683
2013          Jan 85,850 2,036 83,814 28,801 55,013 52,534 2,479 87,181 1,912 85,269 36,268 49,001 14,566 34,435
         Feb 86,688 1,911 84,777 29,490 55,287 53,054 2,233 87,825 1,967 85,858 36,316 49,542 15,191 34,351
         Mar 89,080 1,930 87,150 30,473 56,677 54,558 2,119 88,847 1,823 87,024 36,829 50,195 15,548 34,647
         Apr 90,367 2,026 88,341 30,996 57,345 55,137 2,208 86,705 1,610 85,095 36,213 48,882 13,952 34,930
         May 90,033 2,133 87,900 30,923 56,977 54,575 2,402 85,874 1,635 84,239 36,254 47,985 13,585 34,400
         June 92,255 2,366 89,889 31,088 58,801 56,352 2,449 86,348 1,598 84,750 35,039 49,711 14,847 34,864
* Up to and including November 2009 the assets and liabilities vis-à-vis non-residents Croatia. 2From January 2009 including Slovakia; from January 2011 including
of households in Germany. The assets and liabilities vis-à-vis non-residents of banks Estonia. 3All countries that are not regarded as industrial countries. Up to
(MFIs) in Germany are shown in Table 4 of Section IV, “Banks”. Statistical increases December 2010 including Niederländische Antillen; from January 2011 including
and decreases have not been eliminated; to this extent, the changes in totals are not Bonaire, St.Eustatius, Saba and Curacao and St.Martin (Dutch part); up to June 2013
comparable with the figures shown in Table XI.7. 1From July 2013 including including Croatia. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
77  Monthly Report
August 2013
XII External sector
 
11 ECB euro reference exchange rates of selected currencies *
 
 
EUR 1 = currency units ...
Yearly Australia Canada China Denmark Japan Norway Sweden Switzerland United States United Kingdom
or monthly       
average AUD CAD CNY 1 DKK JPY NOK SEK CHF GBP USD
1999 1.6523 1.5840 . 7.4355 121.32 8.3104 8.8075 1.6003 0.65874 1.0658
2000 1.5889 1.3706 2 7.6168 7.4538 99.47 8.1129 8.4452 1.5579 0.60948 0.9236
2001 1.7319 1.3864 7.4131 7.4521 108.68 8.0484 9.2551 1.5105 0.62187 0.8956
2002 1.7376 1.4838 7.8265 7.4305 118.06 7.5086 9.1611 1.4670 0.62883 0.94562003 1.7379 1.5817 9.3626 7.4307 130.97 8.0033 9.1242 1.5212 0.69199 1.13122004 1.6905 1.6167 10.2967 7.4399 134.44 8.3697 9.1243 1.5438 0.67866 1.2439
2005 1.6320 1.5087 10.1955 7.4518 136.85 8.0092 9.2822 1.5483 0.68380 1.2441
2006 1.6668 1.4237 10.0096 7.4591 146.02 8.0472 9.2544 1.5729 0.68173 1.25562007 1.6348 1.4678 10.4178 7.4506 161.25 8.0165 9.2501 1.6427 0.68434 1.37052008 1.7416 1.5594 10.2236 7.4560 152.45 8.2237 9.6152 1.5874 0.79628 1.47082009 1.7727 1.5850 9.5277 7.4462 130.34 8.7278 10.6191 1.5100 0.89094 1.3948
2010 1.4423 1.3651 8.9712 7.4473 116.24 8.0043 9.5373 1.3803 0.85784 1.3257
2011 1.3484 1.3761 8.9960 7.4506 110.96 7.7934 9.0298 1.2326 0.86788 1.39202012 1.2407 1.2842 8.1052 7.4437 102.49 7.4751 8.7041 1.2053 0.81087 1.2848
2012          Mar 1.2538 1.3121 8.3326 7.4354 108.88 7.5315 8.8873 1.2061 0.83448 1.3201         Apr 1.2718 1.3068 8.2921 7.4393 107.00 7.5698 8.8650 1.2023 0.82188 1.3162
         May 1.2825 1.2916 8.0806 7.4335 101.97 7.5655 8.9924 1.2012 0.80371 1.2789         June 1.2550 1.2874 7.9676 7.4325 99.26 7.5401 8.8743 1.2011 0.80579 1.2526
         July 1.1931 1.2461 7.8288 7.4384 97.07 7.4579 8.5451 1.2011 0.78827 1.2288
         Aug 1.1841 1.2315 7.8864 7.4454 97.58 7.3239 8.2805 1.2011 0.78884 1.2400         Sep 1.2372 1.2583 8.1273 7.4539 100.49 7.3945 8.4929 1.2089 0.79821 1.2856
         Oct 1.2596 1.2801 8.1390 7.4582 102.47 7.4076 8.6145 1.2098 0.80665 1.2974
         Nov 1.2331 1.2787 7.9998 7.4587 103.94 7.3371 8.6076 1.2052 0.80389 1.2828         Dec 1.2527 1.2984 8.1809 7.4604 109.71 7.3503 8.6512 1.2091 0.81237 1.3119
2013          Jan 1.2658 1.3189 8.2698 7.4614 118.34 7.3821 8.6217 1.2288 0.83271 1.3288
         Feb 1.2951 1.3477 8.3282 7.4598 124.40 7.4232 8.5083 1.2298 0.86250 1.3359         Mar 1.2537 1.3285 8.0599 7.4553 122.99 7.4863 8.3470 1.2266 0.85996 1.2964
         Apr 1.2539 1.3268 8.0564 7.4553 127.54 7.5444 8.4449 1.2199 0.85076 1.3026
         May 1.3133 1.3257 7.9715 7.4536 131.13 7.5589 8.5725 1.2418 0.84914 1.2982         June 1.3978 1.3596 8.0905 7.4576 128.40 7.7394 8.6836 1.2322 0.85191 1.3189
         July 1.4279 1.3619 8.0234 7.4579 130.39 7.8837 8.6609 1.2366 0.86192 1.3080
*Averages: Bundesbank calculations based on the daily euro reference exchange Statistical Supplement 5, Exchange rate statistics. 1Up to March 2005, ECB indicative
rates published by the ECB; for additional euro reference exchange rates, see rates. 2 Average from 13 January to 29 December 2000. 
12 Euro-area member states and irrevocable euro conversion rates in the third stage
of European Economic and Monetary Union
From Country Currency ISO currency code EUR 1 = currency units ...
1999  January 1 Austria Austrian schilling ATS 13.7603
Belgium Belgian franc BEF 40.3399
Finland Finnish markka FIM 5.94573
France French franc FRF 6.55957
Germany Deutsche Mark DEM 1.95583
Ireland Irish pound IEP 0.787564
Italy Italian lira ITL 1,936.27
Luxembourg Luxembourg franc LUF 40.3399
Netherlands Dutch guilder NLG 2.20371
Portugal Portuguese escudo PTE 200.482
Spain Spanish peseta ESP 166.386
2001  January 1 Greece Greek drachma GRD 340.750
2007  January 1 Slovenia Slovenian tolar SIT 239.640
2008  January 1 Cyprus Cyprus pound CYP 0.585274
Malta Maltese lira MTL 0.429300
2009  January 1 Slovakia Slovak koruna SKK 30.1260
2011  January 1 Estonia Estonian kroon EEK 15.6466

Deutsche Bundesbank
78  Monthly Report
August 2013
XII  External sector
 
13  Effective exchange rates of the Euro and indicators of the German economy’s price competitiveness *
 
 
1999 Q1=100
Effective exchange rate of the Euro Indicators of the German economy’s price competitiveness
EER-21  1 EER-40  2 Based on the deflators of total sales  3 Based on consumer price indices
24 selected industrial countries  4 In real terms
In real terms based on
In real based on unit In real
24 terms the deflators labour terms
based on of gross costs of based on Non- selected
37 37 56 consumer domestic national consumer Euro-area euro-area industrial
Period Nominal price indices product  3 economy  3 Nominal price indices Total countries countries countries  5 countries  4 countries  5 countries  6 
1999 96.2 96.1 95.9 96.2 96.5 95.8 97.8 99.5 95.7 97.6 98.2 98.0 97.7
2000 87.0 86.6 86.3 85.5 87.9 85.8 91.7 97.2 85.2 90.8 92.9 91.9 90.9
2001 87.7 87.2 86.8 84.6 90.4 87.1 91.3 96.0 85.7 89.9 92.9 91.4 90.8
2002 90.1 90.4 89.8 87.7 94.9 90.7 91.9 95.1 88.2 90.5 93.5 91.9 91.8
2003 100.6 101.5 100.8 98.4 106.8 101.6 95.2 94.0 97.2 94.7 97.0 96.5 96.7
2004 104.4 105.2 103.6 102.2 111.4 105.2 95.5 92.9 99.5 94.9 98.4 98.0 98.2
2005 102.9 103.7 101.6 100.0 109.4 102.7 94.4 91.5 98.8 92.9 98.4 96.9 96.5
2006 102.8 103.7 100.8 99.0 109.4 102.0 93.3 90.1 98.4 91.3 98.5 96.4 95.8
2007 106.2 106.4 102.7 100.6 112.8 104.0 94.2 89.2 102.4 91.6 100.8 97.8 96.9
2008 109.3 108.4 103.8 103.2 117.0 105.9 94.3 87.8 105.4 90.5 102.2 97.7 97.0
2009 110.6 109.0 104.7 105.3 119.8 106.8 93.9 87.9 104.0 90.5 101.7 97.9 97.4
2010 103.6 101.5 96.7 98.1 111.5 98.1 91.6 87.6 97.8 87.2 98.8 93.8 92.2
2011 103.4 100.6 95.0 p 96.1 112.2 97.6 91.0 87.1 97.2 86.2 98.2 93.1 91.7
2012 97.9 95.5 89.7 p 90.9 107.1 92.8 89.0 86.8 92.1 83.7 96.0 90.3 88.8
2010          Feb 106.9 104.7 100.9 102.2 115.5 101.7 93.0 87.8 101.6 89.0 100.1 95.5 94.3
         Mar 106.2 104.2 114.3 100.8 100.2 95.2 93.8
         Apr 104.9 103.0 112.6 99.3 99.5 94.3 92.7
         May 101.8 99.9 95.5 96.8 109.1 96.3 91.1 87.5 96.7 86.6 98.2 93.0 91.2
         June 99.8 98.0 107.0 94.4 97.2 92.1 90.2
         July 101.6 99.7 109.2 96.4 97.8 92.9 91.2
         Aug 101.2 99.3 94.4 95.4 108.9 96.0 90.8 87.7 95.4 86.3 97.6 92.7 91.0
         Sep 101.5 99.4 109.3 96.0 97.7 92.7 91.0
         Oct 104.9 102.5 113.0 99.0 99.1 94.2 92.6
         Nov 103.7 101.1 95.9 97.9 111.8 97.7 91.4 87.5 97.5 86.9 98.8 93.6 92.0
         Dec 101.7 99.1 109.4 95.6 97.8 92.7 91.0
2011          Jan 101.4 98.9 109.4 95.5 97.8 92.4 90.7
         Feb 102.4 99.8 94.6 96.3 110.7 96.5 91.2 87.4 97.0 86.4 98.1 92.8 91.2
         Mar 104.1 101.5 112.4 98.1 98.6 93.5 91.9
         Apr 105.8 103.3 114.1 99.7 99.6 94.4 92.8
         May 104.9 102.0 96.8 98.7 113.3 98.6 92.0 87.3 99.7 87.2 99.0 93.7 92.1
         June 105.0 102.1 113.5 98.7 98.9 93.7 92.2
         July 104.0 101.0 112.4 97.7 98.6 93.3 91.8
         Aug 103.9 100.9 94.8 96.7 113.0 98.1 90.9 87.0 97.0 86.0 98.1 93.1 91.9
         Sep 102.8 99.9 112.1 97.4 97.8 92.7 91.6
         Oct 103.0 100.1 112.6 97.8 97.9 92.9 91.8
         Nov 102.6 99.8 93.5 p 92.8 112.1 97.3 90.1 86.8 95.1 85.2 97.6 92.8 91.6
         Dec 100.8 98.1 110.3 95.7 96.8 91.8 90.6
2012          Jan 99.0 96.3 108.1 93.7 96.2 90.8 89.4
         Feb 99.7 97.2 91.2 p 92.5 108.4 94.2 89.5 86.8 93.3 84.5 96.8 91.2 89.7
         Mar 99.9 97.3 108.7 94.3 96.9 91.2 89.6
         Apr 99.5 97.1 108.5 94.2 96.7 91.1 89.5
         May 98.1 95.6 90.2 p 91.3 107.3 93.0 89.2 87.0 92.3 84.0 96.0 90.4 89.0
         June 97.2 94.8 106.7 92.4 95.5 89.9 88.5
         July 95.4 93.1 104.3 90.6 94.8 89.1 87.5
         Aug 95.3 93.1 87.9 p 89.0 104.5 90.6 88.3 86.8 90.2 82.9 95.0 89.1 87.5
         Sep 97.2 94.9 106.6 92.5 95.6 89.9 88.5
         Oct 97.8 95.4 107.3 92.8 95.9 90.1 88.7
         Nov 97.3 94.8 89.5 p 90.6 106.7 92.3 89.1 86.7 92.5 83.6 95.9 90.0 88.5
         Dec 98.7 96.2 108.3 93.5 96.5 90.6 89.1
2013          Jan 100.4 97.9 109.9 94.8 97.4 91.4 89.9
         Feb 101.7 99.0 p 92.1 p 93.5 111.2 95.7 90.6 87.0 96.3 85.2 98.0 92.0 90.3
         Mar 100.2 97.8 109.5 94.4 97.7 91.5 89.7
         Apr 100.5 p 97.8 109.8 p 94.3 97.5 p 91.3 p 89.5
         May 100.6 p 98.0 ... ... 110.0 p 94.6 ... ... ... ... 98.1 p 91.7 p 89.9
         June 101.6 p 98.9 112.0 p 96.1 p 98.2 p 92.1 p 90.8
         July 101.5 p 98.7 112.0 p 96.0 p 98.2 p 92.0 p 90.7
*The effective exchange rate corresponds to the weighted external value of the and wage indices were not available, estimates were used. 2ECB calculations.
currency concerned. The method of calculating the indicators of the German Includes countries belonging to the EER-21 group (see footnote 1) and additional
economy’s price competitiveness is consistent with the procedure used by the ECB to Algeria, Argentina, Brazil, Chile, Iceland, India, Indonesia, Israel, Malaysia, Mexico,
compute the effective exchange rates of the euro (see Monthly Report, November Morocco, New Zealand, Philippines, Russian Federation, South Africa, Taiwan,
2001, pp  50-53, May 2007, pp  31-35 and February 2012, pp  34-35). For more Thailand, Turkey and Venezuela. 3Annual and quarterly averages. 4Euro-area
detailed information on methodology see the ECB’s Occasional Paper No  134 countries (from 2001 including Greece, from 2007 including Slovenia, from 2008
(www.ecb.int). A decline in the figures implies an increase in competitiveness. 1ECB including Cyprus and Malta, from 2009 including Slovakia, from 2011 including
calculations are based on the weighted averages of the changes in the bilateral Estonia) as well as Canada, Denmark, Japan, Norway, Sweden, Switzerland, the
exchange rates of the euro against the currencies of the following countries: Austra- United Kingdom and the United States. 5Euro-area countries and countries
lia, Bulgaria, Canada, China, Croatia, Czech Republic, Denmark, Hong Kong, belonging to the EER-21 group. 6Euro-area countries and countries belonging to the
Hungary, Japan, Latvia, Lithuania, Norway, Poland, Romania, Singapore, South EER-40 group (see footnote 2). 
Korea, Sweden, Switzerland, the United Kingdom and the United States. Where price

Overview of publications by the  
Deutsche Bundesbank
This overview provides information about selected recent economic and statistical publica -
tions by the Deutsche Bundesbank. Unless otherwise indicated, these publications are avail -
able in both English and German, in printed form and on the Bundesbank’s website.
The publications are available free of charge from the Communication Division. For a small 
fee to cover costs, a file which is updated monthly and contains approximately 40,000 time series published by the Bundesbank can be obtained on CD-ROM from the Division Statis -
tical data processing, mathematical methods or downloaded from the Bundesbank-ExtraNet site. Orders should be sent, in writing, to one of the addresses listed on the reverse of the title page. Selected time series can also be downloaded from the internet.
Annual Report
Financial Stability ReviewMonthly Report
For information on the articles published be -
tween 2000 and 2012 see the index attached 
to the January 2013 Monthly Report.
Monthly Report articles
September 2012
– The performance of German credit institu -
tions in 2011
– Innovations in payment systems
– The International Monetary Fund in a 
changed global environment
October 2012
– The financial crisis and balance of payments developments within the euro area
– The development of state government 
 finances in Germany since 2005– The importance of trade credit for  corpor ate 
financing in Germany – evidence from finan -
cial statements statistics
– The use of cash and cashless payment 
 instruments: a microeconomic analysis
November 2012
– The current economic situation in Germany
December 2012
– Outlook for the German economy – macro -
economic projections for 2013 and 2014
– German enterprises’ profitability and finan -
cing in 2011
– Calendar effects on economic activity
January 2013
– Current developments in the mutual funds market: demand, structural changes and 
 investor behaviour
– Current and projected development of coin 
circulation in Germany
February 2013
– The current economic situation in GermanyDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report 
August 2013  
79•

March 2013
– Germany’s balance of payments in 2012
– Banks’ internal methods for assessing and 
maintaining internal capital adequacy and 
their relevance to supervision
April 2013
– The US economy in the current economic 
upturn
– Macroprudential oversight in Germany: 
framework, institutions and tools
May 2013
– The current economic situation in Germany
June 2013
– Outlook for the German economy – macro -
economic projections for 2013 and 2014
– Household wealth and finances in Germany: 
results of the Bundesbank survey
– Household finances, saving and inequality: 
an international perspective – conference 
held by the Bundesbank and the Max Planck 
Institute for Social Law and Social Policy
– Implementing Basel  III in Eur opean and na -
tional law
July 2013
– European Single Supervisory Mechanism for banks – a first step on the road to a banking 
union
– Estimating yield curves in the wake of the 
financial crisis
– Differences in money and credit growth in 
the euro area and in individual euro-  ar ea 
countries
August 2013
– The current economic situation in GermanyStatistical Supplements to the 
Monthly Report
 1 Banking statistics 1, 2
 2 C apital market statistics 1, 2
 3 Balance of payments statistics 1, 2
 4 Seasonal ly adjusted business statistics 1, 2
 5 Exchange rate statistics 2
Special Publications
Makro-ökonometrisches Mehr-Länder-Modell, 
November 1996 3
Europäische Organisationen und Gremien im Bereich von Währung und Wirtschaft, May 
1997 3
Die Zahlungsbilanz der ehemaligen DDR 1975 
bis 1989, August 1999 3
The market for German Federal securities, 
May 2000
Macro-Econometric Multi-Country Model: MEM -
MOD, June 2000
Bundesbank Act, September 2002
Weltweite Organisationen und Gremien im Be -
reich von Währung und Wirtschaft, March 
2003 3
Die Europäische Union: Grundlagen und Politik-
bereiche außerhalb der Wirtschafts-und Wäh-
rungsunion, April 2005 3
Die Deutsche Bundesbank – Aufgabenfelder, 
rechtlicher Rahmen, Geschichte, April 2006 3
European economic and monetary union, April 
2008
For footnotes, see p 82•.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report 
August 2013  
80•

Special Statistical Publications
 1 B anking statistics guidelines, January 
20132, 4
 2 Bankenstatistik Kundensystematik,  
January 20132, 3
 3 Aufbau der bankstatistischen T abellen, 
June 20112, 3
 4 Financial accounts for Germany 2 007 to 
2012, June 20132
 5 Hochgerechnete Angaben aus Jahres -
abschlüssen deutscher Unternehmen von 
1997 bis 2007 , November 20092, 3
 6 V erhältniszahlen aus Jahresabschlüssen 
deutscher Unternehmen von 2009 bis 
2010, May 20132, 3
 7 Notes on the coding list for the balance of 
payments statistics, March 2009 2
 8 The balance of payments statistics of the  
Federal Republic of Germany, 2nd edition, 
February 1991o
 9 Securities deposits, August 2005
 1 0 F oreign direct investment stock statistics, 
April 20131, 2
 1 1 Balance of payments by region,  
July 2013
 1 2 T echnologische Dienstleistungen in der 
Zahlungsbilanz, June 20113Discussion Papers*
19/2013  
Banking across borders
20/2013  
The price impact of CDS trading21/2013  
Chatharsis – The real effects of bank insolvency 
and resolution  
22/2013  
Evaluation of minimum capital requirements for 
bank loans to SMEs
23/2013  
Reconciling narrative monetary policy disturb -
ances with structural VAR model shocks?24/2013  
Testing the O-ring theory for FDI25/2013  
Estimation of linear dynamic panel data models 
with time-invariant regressors
26/2013  
Potential labour force in full-time equivalents: 
measurement, projection and applications 
(auch in deutsch)
27/2013  
Households’ disagreement on inflation expect-
ations and socioeconomic media exposure in 
Germany
28/2013  
The evolution of economic convergence in the 
European Union
o Not available on the website.
* As of 2000 these publications have been made available on the Bundesbank’s website in German and English. Since the beginning of 2012, no longer subdivided into series 1 and series 2.For footnotes, see p 82•.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report 
August 2013  
81•

Banking legislation
 1 Bundesbank A ct and Statute of the Euro -
pean System of Central Banks and of the 
European Central Bank, June 1998
 2 Gesetz über das Kreditwesen, January 
20083 2a Solvabilitäts- und Liquiditätsverordnung, 
February 20083
1 Only the headings and explanatory notes to the data con -
tained in the German originals are available in English.
2 Available on the website only.3 Available in German only.
4 Only some parts of the Special Statistical Publications are 
provided in English. The date refers to the German issue, 
which may be of a more recent date than the English one.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report 
August 2013  
82•

